Encyclopaedia Biblica, Vol. 1 (Thomas Kelly Cheyne and John Sutherland Black, 1899)
Public domain. Scanned from the Internet Archive copy (https://archive.org/details/encyclopaediabib01cheyuoft): the 1899 Toronto (Morang) edition, vol. 1 of 4 (A–D), ed. Cheyne & Black — complete through END OF VOL. I.
Hosted by the Tower of Babel library, antarctic-labs.com.

==============================================================================

ENCYCLOPEDIA BIBLICA

A DICTIONARY OF THE BIBLE


VOLUME I


•J^)^'


ENCYCLOPEDIA
BIBLICA


A  CRITICAL  DICTIONARY  OF  THE  LITERARY

POLITICAL AND RELIGIOUS HISTORY

THE  ARCHAEOLOGY  GEOGRAPHY

AND NATURAL HISTORY

OF THE BIBLE


EDITED BY

The Rev. T. K. CHEYNE, M.A., D.D.

ORIEL PROFESSOR OF THE INTERPRETATION OF HOLY SCRIPTL:RE AT OXFORD

AND FORMKKI.Y FELLOW OF BALI.IOL COLLEGE

CANON OF ROCHESTER


J.  SUTHERLAND  BLACK,  M.A.,  LL.D.

FORMERLY ASSISTANT EDITOR OF THE '  ENCYCLOPEDIA BRITANNICA  '


VOLUME I
A  to  D


TORONTO
GEORGE N. MORANG & COMPANY, Limited

1899


(3S


Copyright,  1899,

By  the  macmillan  company.


NortDooU  iPtfSB

J.  8.  CuBhing  fc  Co.  -  Berwick  &  Smith

Norwood  Ma«i.  U.S.A.


TO  THE


MEMORY


WILLIAM ROBERTSON SMITH


PREFACE


The  idea  of  preparing  a  new  Dictionary  of  the  Bible  on  critical  lines  for the

benefit  of  all  serious  studencs,  both  professional  and  lay,  was  prominent  in  the

, , mind  of  the many-sided scholar to whose beloved memory the
Genesis  of  the  ^ ,  • • -u  j t^  •  ^u >. i

p , ,. present volume  is  inscribed. It  is  more  than  twelve  years  since

Prof.  Robertson  Smith  began  to  take  steps  towards  realising  this
idea.  As  an  academical  teacher  he  had  from  the  first  been  fully  aware  of  the
importance  of  what  is  known  as  Biblical  Encyclopaedia,  and  his  own  earliest
contributions  to  the  subject  in  the  EncyclopcBdia  Britannica  carry  us  as  far  back
as  to  the  year  1875.  If  for  a  very  brief  period  certain  untoward  events  arrested
his  activity  in  this  direction,  the  loss  of  time  was  speedily  made  up,  for  seldom
perhaps  has  there  been  a  greater  display  of  intellectual  energy  than  is  given  in
the  series  of  biblical  articles  signed  '  W.  R.  S.'  which  appeared  in  the  E^icyclopcedia
Britaiinica  between  1875  and  1888.  The  reader  who  is  interested  in  Bible
study  should  not  fail  to  examine  the  Hst,  which  includes  among  the  longer  articles
Bible,  Canticles,  Chronicles,  David,  Hebrew  Language,  Rosea,  Jeru-
salem, Joel,  Judges,  Kings,  Levites,  Malachi,  Messiah,  Micah,  Philis-
tines, Priest,  Prophet,  Psalms,  Sacrifice,  Temple,  Tithes,  Zephaniah  :
and  among  the  shorter.  Angel,  Ark,  Baal,  Decalogue,  Eli,  Eve,  Haggai,
Lamentations,  Melchizedek,  Moloch,  Nabat^ans,  Nahum,  Nazarite,  Nine-
veh, Obadiah,  Paradise,  Ruth,  Sabbath,  Sadducees,  Samuel,  Tabernacle,
Vow.

Nor  should  the  students  of  our  day  overlook  the  service  which  this  far-
seeing  scholar  and  editor  rendered  to  the  nascent  conception  of  an  international
biblical  criticism  by  inviting  the  co-operation  of  foreign  as  well  as  English  con-
tributors. That  names  Hke  those  of  Noldeke,  Tiele,  Welhausen,  Harnack,  Schiirer,
Gutschmid,  Geldner,  appeared  side  by  side  with  those  of  well-known  and  honoured
British  scholars  in  the  list  of  contributors  to  the  Encyclopcedia  was  a  guarantee  of
freedom  from  dangerous  eccentricity,  of  comprehensiveness  of  view,  of  thorough-
ness and  accuracy  of  investigation.

Such  a  large  amount  of  material  illustrative  of  the  Bible,  marked  by  unity
of  aim  and  consistency  of  purpose,  was  thus  brought  together  that  the  EncyclopcB-
dia  Britannica  became,  inclusively,  something  not  unlike  an  Encyclopedia  Biblica.
The  idea  then  occurred  to  the  editor  and  his  publishers  to  republish,  for  the
guidance  of  students,  all  that  might  be  found  to  have  stood  the  test  of  time,  the
lacunae  being  filled  up,  and  the  whole  brought  up,  as  far  as  possible,  to  the  high
level  of  the  most  recent  scholarship.  It  was  not  unnatural  to  wish  for  this ;  but
there  were  three  main  opposing  considerations.  In  the  first  place,  there  were
other  important  duties  which  made  pressing  demands  on  the  time  and  energy  of


viii  PREFACE

the  editor.  Next,  the  growing  maturity  of  his  biblical  scholarship  made  him  less
and  less  disposed  to  acquiesce  in  provisional  conclusions.  And  lastly,  such  con-
stant progress  was  being  made  by  students  in  the  power  of  assimilating  critical
results  that  it  seemed  prudent  to  wait  till  biblical  articles,  thoroughly  revised  and
recast,  should  have  a  good  chance  of  still  more  deeply  influencing  the  student  world.

The  waiting-time  was  filled  up,  so  far  as  other  occupations  allowed,  by
pioneering  researches  in  biblical  archaeology,  some  of  the  results  of  which  are
admirably  summed  up  in  that  fruitful  volume  entitled  The  Religion  of  the  Semites
(1889).  More  and  more,  Robertson  Smith,  like  other  contemporary  scholars,
saw  the  necessity  of  revising  old  work  on  the  basis  of  a  more  critical,  and,  in  a
certain  sense,  more  philosophical  treatment  of  details.  First  of  all,  archaeological
details  had  their  share  —  and  it  was  bound  to  be  a  large  share  —  of  this  scholar's
attention.  Then  came  biblical  geography  —  a  subject  which  had  been  brought
prominently  into  notice  by  the  zeal  of  English  explorers,  but  seemed  to  need  the
collaboration  of  English  critics.  A  long  visit  to  Palestine  was  planned  for  the
direct  investigation  of  details  of  biblical  geography,  and  though  this  could  not  be
carried  out,  not  a  little  time  was  devoted  to  the  examination  of  a  few  of  the  more
perplexing  geographical  problems  and  of  the  solutions  already  proposed  (see  e.g.
Aphek,  below,  col.  191/.).  This  care  for  accuracy  of  detail  as  a  necessary  pre-
liminary to  a  revision  of  theories  is  also  the  cause  of  our  friend's  persistent  refusal
to  sanction  the  republication  of  the  masterly  but  inevitably  provisional  article
Bible  in  the  Encyclopcedia  Britannica,  to  which  we  shall  return  later.  The  reader
will  still  better  understand  the  motive  of  that  refusal  if  he  will  compare  what
is  said  on  the  Psalter  in  that  article  (1875)  with  the  statements  in  the  first  edition
of  The  Old  Testament  in  the Jeiuish  Chnrch{iS^o),  in  the  Encyclopcsdia  Britatmica,
article  Psalms  (1885),  and  in  the  second  edition  of  The  Old  Testament  in  the
Jeiuish  Chnrch  (1892).

It  is  only  just,  however,  to  the  true  'begetter'  of  this  work  to  emphasise  the
fact  that,  though  he  felt  the  adequate  realisation  of  his  idea  to  be  some  way  off,
he  lost  no  time  in  pondering  and  working  out  a  variety  of  practical  details  —  a
task  in  which  he  was  seconded  by  his  assistant  editor  and  intimate  friend,  Mr.
J.  S.  Black.  Many  hours  were  given,  as  occasion  offered,  to  the  distribution  of
subjects  and  the  preparation  of  minor  articles.  Some  hundreds  of  these  were
drafted,  and  many  were  the  discussions  that  arose  as  to  the  various  difficult  practi-
cal points,  which  have  not  been  without  fruit  for  the  present  work.

In  September,  1892,  however,  it  became  only  too  clear  to  Prof.  Smith  that
he  was  suffering  from  a  malady  which  might  terminate  fatally  after  no  very  dis-
tant term.  The  last  hope  of  active  participation  in  his  long-cherished  scheme  of
a  Bible  Dictionary  had  well-nigh  disappeared,  when  one  of  the  present  editors,
who  had  no  definite  knowledge  of  Prof.  Smith's  plan,  communicated  to  this  friend
of  many  years'  standing  his  ideas  of  what  a  critical  Bible  Dictionary  ought  to  be,
and  inquired  whether  he  thought  that  such  a  project  could  be  realised.  Prof.
Smith  was  still  intellectually  able  to  consider  and  pronounce  upon  these  ideas,
and  gladly  recognised  their  close  affinity  to  his  own.  Unwilling  that  all  the
labour  already  bestowed  by  him  on  planning  and  drafting  articles  should  be  lost,
he  requested  Prof.  Cheyne  to  take  up  the  work  which  he  himself  was  compelled
to  drop,  in  conjunction  with  the  older  and  more  intimate  friend  already  mentioned.
Hence  the  combination  of  names  on  the  title-page.  The  work  is  undertaken  by  the
editors  as  a  charge  from  one  whose  parting  message  had  the  force  of  a  command.


PREFACE  ix

Such  is  the  history  of  the  genesis  of  the  Eiicyc lopes dia  Biblica,  which  is  the
result  primarily  of  a  fusion  of  two  distinct  but  similar  plans  —  a  fusion  desired  by
^  .  .  ,  ,  ,  Prof.  Robertson  Smith  himself,  as  the  only  remaining  means  of
p,  ^,  ,.  realising  adequately  his  own  fundamental  ideas.  With  regard  to
details,  he  left  the  editors  entirely  free,  not  from  decline  of  physical
strength,  but  from  a  well-grounded  confidence  that  religion  and  the  Bible  were
not  less  dear  to  them  than  to  himself,  and  that  they  fully  shared  his  own  uncom-
promisingly progressive  spirit.  The  Bible  Dictionary  which  he  contemplated  was
no  mere  collection  of  useful  miscellanea,  but  a  survey  of  the  contents  of  the  Bible,
as  illuminated  by  criticism  —  a  criticism  which  identifies  the  cause  of  religion
with  that  of  historical  truth,  and,  without  neglecting  the  historical  and  archaeo-
logical setting  of  religion,  loves  best  to  trace  the  growth  of  high  conceptions,
the  flashing  forth  of  new  intuitions,  and  the  development  of  noble  personalities,
under  local  and  temporal  conditions  that  may  often  be,  to  human  eyes,  most
adverse.  The  importance  of  the  newer  view  of  the  Bible  to  the  Christian  com-
munity, and  the  fundamental  principles  of  the  newer  biblical  criticism,  have  been
so  ably  and  so  persuasively  set  forth  by  Prof.  Robertson  Smith  in  his  Lectures
that  his  fellow-workers  may  be  dispensed  from  repeating  here  what  he  has  said  so
well  already.  'There  remaineth  yet  very  much  land  to  be  possessed.'  Let  us
assume,  then,  that  the  readers  of  this  EncyclopcBdia,  whatever  be  their  grade  of
knowledge  or  sphere  of  work,  are  willing  to  make  an  effort  to  take  this  widely
extended  land  in  possession.

Every  year,  in  fact,  expands  the  narrow  horizons  which  not  so  long  ago
limited  the  aspirations  of  the  biblical  scholar.  It  is  time,  as  Prof.  Robertson
Smith  thought,  to  help  students  to  realise  this,  and  to  bring  the  standard  books  on
which  they  rely  more  up  to  date.  It  may  seem  hopeless  to  attempt  this  with  an
alphabetically  arranged  encyclopaedia,  which  necessarily  involves  the  treatment
of  points  in  an  isolated  way.  By  an  elaborate  system  of  cross  references,
however,  and  by  interspersing  a  considerable  number  of  comprehensive  articles
(such  as,  in  Part  I,  Apocalyptic  Literature,  Cainites,  Dragon),  it  has
been  sought  to  avoid  the  danger  of  treating  minute  details  without  regard  to
their  wider  bearings.  Many  of  the  minor  articles,  too,  have  been  so  constructed
as  to  suggest  the  relation  of  the  details  to  the  larger  wholes.  Altogether  the
minor  articles  have,  one  ventures  to  hope,  brought  many  direct  gains  to  biblical
study.  Often  the  received  view  of  the  subject  of  a  '  minor  article '  proved  to  be
extremely  doubtful,  and  a  better  view  suggested  itself.  Every  endeavour  has
been  used  to  put  this  view  forward  in  a  brief  and  yet  convincing  manner,  without
occupying  too  much  space  and  becoming  too  academic  in  style.  The  more  com-
prehensive articles  may  here  and  there  be  found  to  clash  with  the  shorter  articles.
Efforts,  however,  have  been  made  to  mitigate  this  by  editorial  notes  in  both
classes  of  articles.

It  will  also  doubtless  be  found  that  on  large  questions  different  writers  have
sometimes  proposed  different  theories  and  hypotheses.  The  sympathies  of  the
editors  are,  upon  the  whc^le,  with  what  is  commonly  known  as  'advanced  '  criticism,
not  simply  because  it  is  advanced,  but  because  such  criticism,  in  the  hands  of  a
circumspect  and  experienced  scholar,  takes  account  of  facts  and  phenomena  which
the  criticism  of  a  former  generation  overlooked  or  treated  superficially.  They
have  no  desire,  however,  to  '  boycott '  moderate  criticism,  when  applied  by  a  critic
who,  either  in  the  form  or  in  the  substance  of  his  criticism,  has  something  original

a2


X  PREFACE

to  say.  An  *  advanced '  critic  cannot  possibly  feel  any  arrogance  towards  his
more  '  moderate '  colleague,  for  probably  he  himself  held,  not  very  long  ago,  views
resembling  those  which  the  '  moderate '  critic  holds  now,  and  the  latter  may  find
his  precautionary  investigations  end  in  his  supporting,  with  greater  fulness  and
more  complete  arguments,  as  sound  the  views  that  now  seem  to  him  rash.  Prof.
Robertson  Smith's  views  of  ten  years  ago,  or  more,  may,  at  the  present  day,  appear
to  be  '  moderate  '  criticism  ;  but  when  he  formulated  them  he  was  in  the  vanguard
of  critics,  and  there  is  no  reason  to  think  that,  if  he  had  lived,  and  devoted  much
of  his  time  to  biblical  criticism,  his  ardour  would  have  waned,  and  his  precedence
passed  to  others.

There  are,  no  doubt,  some  critical  theories  which  could  not  consistently  have
been  represented  in  the  present  work ;  and  that,  it  may  be  remarked,  suggests
one  of  the  reasons  why  Prof.  Robertson  Smith's  early  EncyclopcBdia  Britajinica
article,  Bible,  could  not  have  been  republished,  even  by  himself.  When  he  wrote
it  he  was  still  not  absolutely  sure  about  the  chronological  place  of  P  (Priestly
Code).  He  was  also  still  under  the  influence  of  the  traditional  view  as  to  the
barrenness  and  unoriginality  of  the  whole  post-exilic  period.  Nor  had  he  faced
the  question  of  the  post-exilic  redaction  of  the  prophetic  writings.  The  funda-
mental principles  of  biblical  criticism,  however,  are  assumed  throughout  that  fine
article,  though  for  a  statement  of  these  we  must  turn  to  a  more  mature  production
of  his  pen.  See,  for  example.  The  Old  Testament  in  the  JewisJi  ChurcJi^-\  pp.  i6
ff.  (cp  1st  ed.  pp.  24.  ff.),  and  notice  especially  the  following  paragraph  on  p.  17  :  —

*  Ancient  books  coming  doivn  to  us  from  a  period  many  centuries  before  the  invention  of
printing  have  necessarily  undergone  many  vicissitudes.  Some  of  them  are  preserved  only  in
imperfect  copies  made  by  an  ignorant  scribe  of  the  dark  ages.  Others  have  been  disfigured  by
editors,  7vho  mixed  up  foreign  matter  with  the  original  text.  Very  often  an  important  book
fell  altogether  out  of  sight  for  a  long  time,  and  when  it  came  to  light  again  all  knowledge  of  its
origin  was  gone  ;  for  old  books  did  not  generally  have  title-pages  and  prefaces.  And,  when
such  a  nafneless  roll  was  again  brought  into  notice,  some  half-informed  trader  or  transcriber
7vas  not  unlikely  to  give  it  a  new  title  of  his  own  devising,  which  was  handed  down  thereafter
as  if  it  had  been  original.  Or  again,  the  true  meaning  and  purpose  of  a  book  often  became
obscure  in  the  lapse  of  centuries,  and  led  to  false  interpretations.  Once  more,  antiquity  has
handed  down  to  us  many  writings  7vhich  are  sheer  forgeries,  like  some  of  the  Apocryphal  books,
or  the  Sibylline  oracles,  or  those  famous  Epistles  of  Phalaris,  which  formed  the  subject  of
Bentlefs  great  critical  essay.  In  all  such  cases  the  historical  critic  must  destroy  the  received
view,  in  order  to  establish  the  truth.  He  must  review  doubtful  titles,  purge  out  interpolations,
expose  forgeries  ;  but  he  does  so  only  to  manifest  the  truth,  and  exhibit  the  genuine  remains  of
antiquity  in  their  real  character.  A  book  that  is  really  old  and  really  valuable  has  nothing  to
fear  from  the  critic,  whose  labours  can  only  put  its  worth  in  a  clearer  light,  and  establish  its
authority  on  a  surer  basis.''

The  freedom  which  Prof.  Robertson  Smith  generously  left  to  his  successors
has,  with  much  reluctance,  yet  without  hesitation,  on  the  part  of  the  editors,  been
exercised  in  dealing  with  the  articles  which  he  wrote  for  the  Ejicyclopcedia
Britaniiica.  The  editors  are  well  assured  that  he  would  have  approved  their
conduct  in  this  respect.  Few  scholars,  indeed,  would  refrain  from  rewriting,  to  a
large  extent,  the  critical  articles  which  they  had  produced  some  years  previously ;
and  this,  indeed,  is  what  has  been  done  by  several  contributors  who  wrote  biblical
articles  for  the  former  Encyclopaedia.  The  procedure  of  those  who  have  revised
our  friend's  articles  has  in  fact  been  as  gentle  and  considerate  as  possible.  Where
these  articles  seemed  to  have  been  destined  by  himself  for  some  degree  of  per-


PREFACE  xi

manencc,  they  have  been  retained,  and  carefully  revised  and  brought  up  to  date.
Some  condensation  has  sometimes  been  found  necessary.  The  original  articles
were  written  for  a  public  very  imperfectly  imbued  with  critical  principles,  whereas
now,  thanks  to  his  own  works  and  to  those  of  other  progressive  scholars,  liible
students  are  much  more  prepared  than  formerly  to  benefit  by  advanced  teaching.
There  is  also  a  certain  amount  of  a  new  material  from  Prof.  Smith's  pen  (in  two  or
three  cases  consisting  of  quotations  from  the  MS  of  the  second  and  third  courses
of  Burnett  Lectures),  but  much  less,  unfortunately,  than  had  been  expected.

Freedom  has  also  been  used  in  taking  some  fresh  departures,  especially  in
two  directions  —  viz.,  in  that  of  textual  criticism  of  the  Old  Testament,  and  in  that
of  biblical  archaeology.  The  object  of  the  editors  has  been,  with  the  assistance
of  their  contributors,  not  only  to  bring  the  work  up  to  the  level  of  the  best
published  writings,  but,  wherever  possible,  to  carry  the  subjects  a  little  beyond
the  point  hitherto  reached  in  print.  Without  the  constant  necessity  of  investi-
gating the  details  of  the  text  of  the  Old  Testament,  it  would  be  hard  for  any  one
to  realise  the  precarious  character  of  many  details  of  the  current  biblical  archae-
ology, geography,  and  natural  history,  and  even  of  some  not  unimportant  points
in  the  current  Old  Testament  theology.  Entirely  new  methods  have  not  indeed
been  applied ;  but  the  methods  already  known  have  perhaps  been  applied  with
somewhat  more  consistency  than  before.  With  regard  to  archaeology,  such  a
claim  can  be  advanced  only  to  a  slight  extent.  More  progress  perhaps  has  been
made  of  late  years  in  the  field  of  critical  archaeology  than  in  that  of  texual  criti-
cism. All,  therefore,  that  was  generally  necessary  was  to  make  a  strong  effort
to  keep  abreast  of  recent  archaeological  research  both  in  Old  Testament  and  in
New  Testament  study.

The  fulness  of  detail  with  which  the  data  of  the  Versions  have  been  given
may  provoke  some  comment.  Experience  has  been  the  guide  of  the  editors,  and
they  believe  that,  though  in  the  future  it  will  be  possible  to  give  these  data  in  a
more  correct,  more  critical,  and  more  condensed  form,  the  student  is  best  served
at  present  by  being  supplied  as  fully  as  possible  with  the  available  material.  It
may  also  be  doubted  by  some  whether  there  is  not  too  much  philology.  Here,
again,  experience  has  directed  the  course  to  be  pursued.  In  the  present  transi-
tional stage  of  lexicography,  it  would  have  been  undesirable  to  rest  content  with
simply  referring  to  the  valuable  new  lexicons  which  are  now  appearing,  or  have
already  appeared.

With  regard  to  biblical  theology,  the  editors  are  not  without  hope  that  they
have  helped  to  pave  the  way  for  a  more  satisfactory  treatment  of  that  important
subject  which  is  rapidly  becoming  the  hi.story  of  the  movement  of  religious  life  and
thought  within  the  Jewish  and  the  Christian  church  (the  phrase  may  be  inaccurate,
but  it  is  convenient).  Systems  of  Prophetic,  Pauline,  Petrine,  Johannine  theology
have  had  their  day ;  it  is  perhaps  time  that  the  Bible  should  cease  to  be  regarded
as  a  storehouse  of  more  or  less  competing  systems  of  abstract  thought.  Unfor-
tunately the  literary  and  historical  criticism  of  the  New  Testament  is  by  no  means
as  far  advanced  as  that  of  the  Old  Testament.  It  may  not  be  long  before  a  real
history  of  the  movement  of  religious  life  and  thought  in  the  earlier  period  will
be  possible.  For  such  a  history  for  the  later  period  we  shall  have  to  wait  longer,  if
we  may  infer  anything  from  the  doubtless  inevitable  defects  of  the  best  existing
handbook  of  New  Testament  theology,  that  of  the  able  veteran  critic,  H.  J.  Holtz-
mann. The  editors  of  the  present  work  are  keenly  interested  in  the  subject  at


xii  PREFACE

present  called  '  Biblical  Theology '  ;  but,  instead  of  attempting  what  is  at  present
impossible,  they  have  thought  it  better  to  leave  some  deficiencies  which  future
editors  will  probably  find  it  not  difficult  to  supply.  They  cannot,  however,  con-
clude this  section  without  a  hearty  attestation  of  the  ever-increasing  love  for  the
Scriptures  which  critical  and  historical  study,  when  pursued  in  a  sufficiently  com-
prehensive sense,  appears  to  them  to  produce.  The  minutest  details  of  biblical
research  assume  a  brightness  not  their  own  when  viewed  in  the  light  of  the  great
truths  in  which  the  movement  of  biblical  religion  culminates.  May  the  reader  find
cause  to  agree  with  them  !  This  would  certainly  have  been  the  prayerful  aspira-
tion of  the  beloved  and  lamented  scholar  who  originated  this  Encyclopcsdia.

To  the  contributors  of  signed  articles,  and  to  those  who  have  revised  and
brought  up  to  date  the  articles  of  Prof. Robertson  Smith,  it  may  seem  almost

superfluous  to  render  thanks  for  the  indispensable  help  they  have  so
^"  courteously and generously given. It constitutes a fresh bond

between  scholars  of  different  countries  and  several  religious  com-
munities which  the  editors  can  never  forget.  But  the  special  services  of  the
various  members  of  the  editorial  staff  require  specific  acknowledgment,  which  the
editors  have  much  pleasure  in  making.  Mr.  Hope  W.  Hogg  became  a  contributor
to  the  Eiicyclopcedia  Biblica  in  1894,  and  in  1895  became  a  regular  member  of  the
editorial  staff.  To  his  zeal,  energy,  and  scholarship  the  work  has  been  greatly
indebted  in  every  direction.  In  particular,  Mr.  Hogg  has  had  the  entire  responsi-
bility for  the  proofs  as  they  passed  in  their  various  stages  through  the  hands  of  the
printer,  and  it  is  he  who  has  seen  to  the  due  carrying  out  of  the  arrangements  —
many  of  them  of  his  own  devising  —  for  saving  space  and  facilitating  reference
that  have  been  specified  in  the  subjoined  '  Practical  Hints  to  the  Reader.'  Mr.
Stanley  A.  Cook  joined  the  staff  in  1896,  and  not  only  has  contributed  various
signed  articles,  which  to  the  editors  appear  to  give  promise  of  fine  work  in  the
future,  but  also  has  had  a  large  share  in  many  of  those  that  are  of  composite
authorship  and  unsigned.  Finally,  Mr.  Maurice  A.  Canney  joined  the  staff  in
1898;  he  also  has  contributed  signed  articles,  and  has  been  eminently  helpful  in
every  way,  especially  in  the  reading  of  the  proofs.  Further,  the  editors  desire  to
acknowledge  their  very  special  obligations  to  the  Rev.  Henry  A.  Redpath,  M.A.,
editor  of  the  Concordance  to  the  Septnagint,  who  placed  his  unrivalled  experience
at  their  disposal  by  controlling  all  the  proofs  at  a  certain  stage  with  special
reference  to  the  LXX  readings. He  also  verified  the  biblical  references.

T.  K.  Cheyne.

J.  Sutherland  Black.
20th  September  1899.


PRACTICAL HINTS TO THE READER

Further  Explanations.  —  The  labour  that  has  been  bestowed  on  even  minor  matters  in  the
preparation  of  this  Eucvciflpccdia  has  seemed  to  be  warranted  by  the  hope  that  it  may  be
found  useful  as  a  students'  handbook.  Its  value  from  this  point  of  view  will  be  facilitated  by
attention  to  the  following  points :  —

1.  Classes  of  Articles.  —  The  following  notes  will  give  a  general  idea  of  what  the  reader  may
expect  to  find  and  where  to  look  for  it :  —

i.  Proper  A'U/ncs.  —  Every  proper  name  in  the  Old  and  the  New  Testament  canons  and  the
OT  Apocrypha  (Authorised  Version  or  Revised  Version,  text  or  margin)  is  represented  by  an
article-heading  in  Clarendon  type,  the  substantive  article  being  usually  given  under  the  name  as
found  in  the  AV  text.  Aiioraim,  on  the  .same  line  as  Adora  (col.  71).  and  Adidlamite,  three
lines  below  Adullam  (col.  73),  are  examples  of  space-.saving  contrivances.

ii.  Books.  —  Every  book  in  the  OT  and  the  NT  canons  and  the  OT  Apocrypha  is  discussed
in  a  special  article  —  e.i^.  Acts,  Chronicles,  Deuteronomy.  The  'Song  of  Solomon'  is  dealt  with
under  the  title  Canticles,  and  the  last  book  in  the  NT  under  Apocalvpse.

iii.  General  Articles.  —  With  the  view,  amongst  other  things,  of  securing  the  greatest  pos-
sible brevity,  many  matters  have  been  treated  in  general  articles,  the  minor  headings  being  dealt
with  concisely  with  the  help  of  cross-references.  Such  general  articles  are :  Abi  and  Ahi,
names  in  Agriculture,  Apocalyptic  Literature,  Apocrypha,  Army,  Bakemeats,  Bread,
Canon.  Cattle,  Chronology,  Clean  and  Unclean,  Colours,  Conduits,  Cuttings  of  the
Flesh,  Dispersion,  Divination,  Dress.

iv.  Other  Subjects. — The  following  are  examples  of  important  headings:  —  Ada.m  and  Eve,
Angels,  Antichrist,  Blessings  and  Cursings,  Christian,  Na.me  of.  Circumcision,  Com-
munity OF  Goods,  Council  of  Jerusalem.  Creation,  Deluge,  De.mons,  Dragon.

V.  Things.  —  The  Encyclopcedia  Biblica  is  professedly  a  dictionary  of  things,  not  words,  and
a  great  effort  has  been  made  to  adhere  rigidly  to  this  principle.  Even  where  at  first  sight  it
seems  to  have  been  neglected,  it  will  generally  be  found  that  this  is  not  really  the  case.  The
only  way  to  tell  the  English  reader  what  has  to  be  told  about  {e.g.')  Chain  is  to  distinguish  the
various  things  that  are  called,  or  should  have  been  called,  •  chain '  in  the  English  Version,  and
refer  him  to  the  articles  where  they  are  dealt  with.

vi. Mere  Cross-references  (see  above,  1,  i. ;  and  below,  2).

2.  Method  of  Cross-Ref erences.  —  A  very  great  deal  of  care  has  been  bestowed  on  the
cross-references,  because  only  by  their  systematic  use  could  the  necessary  matter  be  adequately
dealt  with  within  the  limits  of  one  volume.  They  have  made  possible  a  conciseness  that  is  not
attained  at  the  expense  of  incompleteness,  repetition  of  the  same  matter  under  different  headings
being  reduced  to  a  minimum.  For  this  reason  the  articles  have  been  prepared,  not  in  alphabetical
order,  but  simultaneously  in  all  parts  of  the  alphabet,  and  have  been  worked  up  together  con-
stantly and  kept  up  to  date.  The  student  may  be  assured,  therefore,  that  the  cross-references
have  not  been  inserted  at  random  ;  they  have  always  been  verified.  If  any  be  found  to  be
unwarranted  (no  such  is  known),  it  must  be  because  it  has  been  found  necessary,  after  the
reference  was  made,  to  remove  something  from  the  article  referred  to  to  another  article.  The
removed  matter  will  no  doubt  be  repre.sented  by  a  cross-reference  (cp,  <f.^.,  ).

The  method  of  reference  employed  is  as  follows :  —

i.  Identification  of  Article.  {a)  Long  Names.  —  To  save  space  long  headings  have  been
curtailed  in  citations  —  ^.^.,  Apocalyptic  Literature  is  cited  as  Apocalyptic.

{b)  Synonymous  Articles.  —  Persons  of  the  same  name  or  places  of  the  same  name  are
ranged  as  i.  2,  3,  etc.,  under  a  common  heading  and  cited  accordingly.  In  other  cases  (and
even  in  the  former  case  when,  as  in  Adnah  in  col.  67,  one  English  spelling  represents  different


xiv  PRACTICAL  HINTS  TO  THE  READER

Hebrew  spellings  (the  articles  usually  have  separate  headings,  in  which  case  they  are  cited  as
i.,  ii.,  iii.,  etc,  although  they  are  not  so  marked.  Usually  geographical  articles  precede  bio-
graphical, and  persons  precede  books.  Thus  Samuel  i.,  2  is  the  second  person  called  Samuel;
Sa.mukl  ii.  is  the  article  Samuel,  B00K.S  of.  If  a  wrong  number  should  be  found  the  reason
is  not  that  it  was  not  verified,  but  that  the  article  referred  to  is  one  of  a  very  small  number  in
which  the  original  order  of  the  articles  had  to  be  changed  and  the  cross-reference  was  not
detected. Thus  in  the  article  Alusii  the  reference  to  Beked  ii.,  i,  ought  to  be  to  Bered  i.,  i.

ii.  Indication  of  Place  in  Article  Cited.  —  Articles  of  any  length  are  divided  into  numbered
sections  ({;§  i,  2,  etc.)  indicated  by  insets  containing  a  descriptive  word  or  phrase.  As  con-
venience of  reference  is  the  great  aim,  the  descriptive  phrases  are  limited  to,  at  most,  three  or
four  words,  and  the  sections  are  numbered  consecutively.  Logical  subordination  of  sections,
therefore,  cannot  appear.  Divisions  larger  than  sections  are  sometimes  indicated  in  the  text  by
I.,  11.,  etc,  and  subdivisions  of  sections  by  letters  and  numbers  («,  b,  c,  a.  /?,  y,  i.,  ii.,  iii.).
References  like  (Be.N'JAMIN,  §  9,  ii.  (3)  are  freely  used.  Most  of  the  large  articles  have  prefi.xed
to  them  a  table  of  contents.

iii.  A/anner  0/  Citation.  —  The  commonest  method  is  (see  David,  §  11,  (c)  ii.).  Ezra  (g.T.,
ii.  §  9)  means  the  article  Ezra-Nehemiah,  Book  of,  §  9.  Sometimes,  however,  the  capitals  or
the  g.v.  may  be  dispensed  with.  Chain  printed  in  small  capitals  in  the  middle  of  an  article
would  mean  that  there  is  an  article  on  that  term,  but  that  it  hardly  merits  g.v.  from  the  present
point  of  view.  In  articles  (generally  on  RV  names)  that  are  mere  cross-references  g'.v.  is  generally
omitted  ;  so,  e.g.,  in  Abadias  in  col.  3.

3.  Typographical  Devices,  i.  Size  of  Type.  —  {a)  Letters  —  Two  sizes  of  type  are  used,
and  considerable  care  has  been  devoted  to  the  distribution  of  the  small-type  passages.  Usually
the  general  meaning  of  an  article  can  be  caught  by  reading  simply  the  large-type  parts.  The
small-type  passages  generally  contain  such  things  as  proofs  of  statements,  objections,  more  techni-
cal details.  In  these  passages,  and  in  footnotes  and  parenthesis,  abbreviations  (see  below,  8).
which  are  avoided  as  much  as  possible  elsewhere,  are  purposely  used.  (J))  Numbers.  —  Two
sizes  of  Arabic  numerals  are  used.  (Note  that  the  smallest  6  and  8  are  a  different  shape  from
the  next  larger  (5  and  is).  In  giving  references,  when  only  the  volume  is  given,  it  is  usually
cited  by  a  Roman  number.  Pages  are  cited  by  Arabic  numbers  except  where  (as  is  often  the
case)  pages  of  a  preface  are  marked  with  Roman  numbers.  When  numbers  of  two  ranks  are
required,  two  sizes  of  Arabic  numbers  (.")  5)  are  used  irrespectively  of  whether  the  reference  be  to
book  and  chapter,  volume  and  page,  or  section  and  line.  If  three  ranks  are  needed,  Roman
numbers  are  prefixed  (v.  5  5).

ii.  Italics.  —  Italic  type  is  much  used  in  citing  foreign  words.  In  geographical  articles,  as  a
rule,  the  printing  of  a  modern  place-name  in  italics  indicates  that  the  writer  of  the  article  identifies
it  with  the  place  under  di.scussion.  For  the  significance  of  the  different  kinds  of  type  in  the  map
of  Assyria  see  the  explanations  at  the  foot  of  the  map.  On  the  two  kinds  of  Greek  type  see
below.  4  ii.  {b).

iii.  Small  Capitals.  —  Small  Roman  capitals  are  used  in  two  ways:  (i)  in  giving  the  equiva-
lent in  RV  for  the  name  in  AV.  or  vice  7>ersa,  and  (2)  in  giving  a  cross-reference  (see  above,  2  iii.).
On  the  use  of  small  italic  capitals  see  below,  4  ii.  (1^).

iv.  Symbols.  —  {a)  Index  Fii^nres.  —  In  'almost  always  ^  clear,'  '6'  indicates  footnote  6.  In
'  Introd.'^','  '(6)'  means  sixth  edition. In  '  D2'  '2'  means  a  later  development  of  D  (see  below, ).

{b)  Asterisk.  —  B*  means  the  original  scribe  of  codex  B.  *'"'nho  means  that  the  consonants
are  known  but  the  vowels  are  hypothetical, v.  5*  means  7/.  5  (partly).

(f)  Dagger.  —  A  dagger  f  is  used  to  indicate  that  all  the  passages  where  a  word  occurs  are
cited. The  context  must  decide  whether  the  English  word  or  the  original  is  meant.

{d)  Sign  of  Equality.  —  'Aalar,  i  Esd.  ')  36  AV  =  Ezra  '2  59  Immer,  i..'  means  that  the  two
verses  quoted  are  recensions  of  the  same  original,  and  that  what  is  called  Aalar  in  the  one  is
called  Immer  in  the  other,  as  will  be  explained  in  the  first  of  the  articles  entitled  Immer.

{e)  Sign  of  Parallelism.  —  ||  is  the  adjective  corresponding  to  the  verb  =.  Thus 'Aalar  of
I  Esd.  o  36  AV  appears  as  Immer  in  |1  Ezra  2  59.'

(/)  Other  devices.  —  '99  means  1899.  i  Ch.  681  [6^]  means  that  verse  81  in  the  English
version  is  the  translation  of  that  numbered  66  in  Hebrew  texts.  V  is  used  to  indicate  the  'root'
of  a  word.

v.  Punctuation.  —  No  commas  are  used  between  citations,  thus:  2  K.  6121 25  Is.  'Jl  7.
Commas  are  omitted  and  semicolons  or  colons  inserted  whenever  ambiguity  seems  thus  to  be
avoided  — <?.;f.,  the  father  Achbor  [i]  is  called  'Father  of  Baal-hanan  [i]  king  of  Edom,'  and  the
son  Baal-hanan  [1]  is  called  'ben  Achbor  [i]  ;  one  of  the  kings  of  Edom.'

4.  Text-Critical  Apparatus.  —  As  all  sound  investigation  must  be  based,  not  on  the  ancient


PRACTICAL  HINTS  TO  THE  READER  xv

texts  as  they  lie  before  the  student,  but  on  what  he  believes  to  be  the  nearest  approach  he  can  make
to  their  original  reading,  the  soundness  of  every  text  is  weighed,  and  if  need  be,  discussed  before
it  is  used  in  the  Encyclopadia  Bihlica.

i.  Traditional  Original  Text.  —  In  quoting  the  traditional  Hebrew  text  the  editions  of  Baer
and  of  Ginsburg  have  been  relied  on  as  a  rule ;  similarly  in  the  case  of  the  New  Testament,  the
texts  of  Tischendorf  and  of  Westcott  and  Hort  (see  below, ).

ii.  Evidence  of  Versions.  —  The  Vulgate  (ed.  Heyse-Tischendorff)  and  the  Peshitta  (ed.  Lee
and  London  Polyglott)  and  the  minor  Greek  versions  (Field,  Hexapla :  Hatch-Redpath,  Con-
cordance) have  been  quoted  quite  freely ;  the  testimony  of  the  Septuagint  has  been  attended  to  on
every  point.

In  exceptional  cases  'Holmes  and  Parsons'  has  been  consulted;  ordinarily  Swete's  manual
edition  (including  the  variants)  and  Lagarde's  Tars  Trior  have  been  considered  sufficient.  In
general  (for  the  main  exception  see  next  paragraph)  only  variations  of  some  positive  interest  or  im-
portance have  been  referred  to.  Almost  invariably  a  quotation  from  the  LXX  is  followed  by  sym-
bols indicating  the  documents  cited  (thus  vtot  [BAL]).  This  does  not  necessarily  imply  that  in
some  other  MS  or  MSS  a  ditTerent  reading  is  found;  it  is  simply  a  guarantee  that  Lagarde  and
Swete's  digest  of  readings  have  both  been  consulted.  The  formula  [BAL]  standing  alone  means
that  the  editors  found  no  variant  in  Lagarde  or  Swete  to  report.  In  the  parts,  therefore,  where
Swete  cites  K  or  other  MSS  as  well  as  BA,  BAL  includes  them  unless  the  context  indicates  other-
wise ;  BAL  might  even  be  used  where  B  was  lacking.  When  BAL  stands  alone  the  meaning  is
everywhere  the  same;  it  is  a  summary  report  of  agreement  in  Lagarde  and  Swete.

Proper  names  have  been  felt  to  demand  special  treatment ;  the  aim  has  been  to  give  under
each  name  the  readings  of  Lagarde  and  all  the  variants  of  BxA  as  cited  in  Swete.  The  com-
monest, or  a  common  form  for  each  witness  is  given  at  the  head  of  the  article,  and  this  is  followed
at  once  or  in  the  course  of  the  article  by  such  variants  as  there  are.  Where  all  the  passages  con-
taining a  given  name  are  cited  in  the  article,  the  apparatus  of  Greek  readings  (as  in  Swete  and
Lagarde)  may  be  considered  absolutely  complete.  In  other  cases,  completeness,  though  aimed  at,
has  not  been  found  possible.

The  distinction  between  declinable  and  indeclinable  forms  has  generally  been  observed ;  but
different  cases  of  the  same  declinable  form  have  not  as  a  rule  (never  in  the  case  of  common  nouns)
been  taken  note  of.  Where  part  of  one  name  has  been  joined  in  the  LXX  to  the  preceding  or  suc-
ceeding name,  the  intniding  letters  have  usually  been  given  in  square  brackets,  though  in  some  very
obvious  cases  tliey  may  have  been  ignored.

When  MSS  differ  only  in  some  giving  i  and  others  ci  that  is  indicated  concisely  thus:  *a/?£ia
[B],  a^  a  [AL],'  becomes  'tty3[e]ta  [BAL].' Similarly,  -t.,  -tt.  becomes  -\t'\t.

A  great  deal  of  pains  has  been  bestowed  on  the  readings,  and  every  effort  has  been  made  to
secure  the  highest  attainable  accuracy.  In  this  connection  the  editors  desire  to  acknowledge  their
very  special  obligations  to  the  Rev.  Henry  A.  Redpath,  M.A.,  editor  of  the  Concordance  to  the
Septuagint,  who  has  placed  his  unrivalled  experience  in  this  department  at  their  disposal  by  con-
trolling the  proofs  from  the  beginning  with  special  reference  to  the  LXX  readings.  He  has  also
verified  the  biblical  references.

Unfortunately,  misprints  and  other  inaccuracies  —  inaccuracies  sometimes  appearing  for  the
first  time  after  the  last  proof  reading  —  cannot  be  avoided.  Corrections  of  errors,  however  minute,
addressed  to  the  publishers,  will  always  be  gratefully  received.

Some  typographical  details  require  to  be  explained :  —

(a)  In  giving  proper  names  initial  capitals,  breathings,  and  accents  are  dispensed  with ;  they
were  unknown  in  the  oldest  MSS  (see  Swete,  i  p.  xiii  2).

(J))  The  Greek  readings  at  the  head  of  an  article  are  given  in  uncials,  and  the  Vulgate  read-
ings in  small  italic  capitals  ;  elsewhere  ordinary  type  is  used.

(c)  The  first  Greek  reading  is  given  in  full;  all  others  are  abbreviated  as  much  as  possible.
Letters  suppressed  at  the  beginning  of  a  word  are  represented  by  a  dash,  letters  at  the  end  by  a
period.  In  every  case  the  abbreviated  form  is  to  be  completed  by  reference  to  the  Greek  form
immediately  preceding,  whether  that  is  given  in  full  or  not.  Thus,  e.g.,  '  afitXaaTreifx,  (3.  ■  .  .  rri/i,
-TTctv,  /SeAo-a.'^  means  ^  af^cXcraTTei/x,  ^(.XaaTTLfx,  jSeXaaTTCiv,  (itXcramLv .''  That  is  to  say,  the
abbreviated  form  repeats  a  letter  (or  if  necessary  more)  of  the  form  preceding.  Two  exceptions
are  sometimes  made.  The  dash  sometimes  represents  the  whole  of  the  preceding  form  —  e.g.,  in
cases  like  afiui,  -s,  —  and  one  letter  has  sometimes  been  simply  substituted  for  another :  e.g.,  v  for
Ii.  in  ei/i,  -V. These  exceptions  can  hardly  lead  to  ambiguity.

{d)  The  following  are  the  symbols  most  commonly  quoted  from  Swete's  digest  with  their
meaning :  —

1  This  is  a  misprint  in  the  art.  ABEL-SHiniM. *  /3eX(7a."  should  be  '  ^e\<Ta  \  without  the  period.


PRACTICAL  HINTS  TO  THE  READER


•  =  original  scribe.

1 =  his  own  corrections.

«,  b,  c  =  other  correctors.

«b =  first  corrector  confirmed  by  second.

a?  b?  =  a  or  b.

»?  b =  b,  perhaps  also  a.

•(vid)=  prob.  a.

•  vid  =  a,  if  it  be  a  bona  fide  correction  at  all.


D  =  testimony  of  the  Grabe-Owen  collation  of  D  before
U  was  partly  destroyed  (see  Swete,  i  p.  xxiv).

Z?«" =  readings  inferred  from  the  collation  (D)e  silentio.

K=»  =  a  corrector  of  K  belonging  to  the  7th  cent  (Sw.,
2  p.  viii ;  cp  1,  p.  xxi).

Bedit  =  e.g.,  on  Sirach  461,  p.  471.

j<c.b.  =  see  Sw.,  2  p.  viii.

K<^'-  =  e.g.,  Sir.  107,  p.  663.


{e)  The  following  are  the  MSS  most  commonly  cited


K  Sinaiticus  (see  Swete,  i  p.  xx).

A  Aiexandrinus  (Swete,  p.  xxii).

B  Vaticanus  (Swete,  i  p.  xvii).

C  Cod.  Eplirttmi  (Swete,  2  p.  xiii).

D  Cod.  Cottonianus  Gcneseos  (Swete,  i  p.  xxiii).

E  Cod.  Bodleianus  Geneseos  (Swete,  i  p.  xxvi).


F  Cod.  Ambrosianus  (Swete,  i  p.  xxvi).

87  Cod.  Chisianus  (Swete,  3  xii).

Syr.  Cod.  Syro.  Hexaplaris  Ambrosianus  (3  xiii).

V  Cod.  Venetus  (=  23,  Parsons  ;  Swete,  3  p.  xiv).

Q.  Cod.  Marchalianus  (Swete,  3  p.  vii).

r  Cod.  rescriptus  Cryptoferratensis  (Swete,  3  p.  ix  /).


5.  Proper  Name  Articles.  —  Proper  name  articles  usually  begin  thus.  The  name  is  followed
by  a  parenthesis  giving  (i)  the  original;  (2)  where  necessary,  the  number  of  the  section  in  the
general  article  Names  where  the  name  in  question  is  discussed  or  cited;  (3)  a  note  on  the  ety-
mology or  meaning  of  the  (personal)  name  with  citation  of  similar  names;  (4)  the  readings  of
the  versions  (see  above,  4  ii.)-

6.  Geographical  Articles,  —  The  interpretation  of  place-names  is  discussed  in  the  article
Names.  The  maps  that  are  issued  with  Part  I.  are  the  district  of  Damascus,  the  environs  of
Babylon,  and  'Syria,  Assyria,  and  Babylonia'  (between  cols.  and  ).  The  last-mentioned
is  mainly  designed  to  illustrate  the  non-Palestinian  geography  of  the  Old  Testament.  It  is  made
use  of  to  show  the  position  of  places  outside  of  Palestine  mentioned  in  Part  I.  which  happen  to
fall  within  its  bounds.

In  all  maps  biblical  names  are  assigned  to  sites  only  when  the  article  discussing  the  question
regards  the  identification  as  extremely  probable  (the  degree  of  probability  must  be  learned  from  the
article).

The  following  geographical  terms  are  used  in  the  senses  indicated  :  —


Der,  deir,  '  monastery.'
Haj(j),  '  pilgrimage  to  Mecca.
yede/  (}.),  '  mountain."
A'e/r,  kafr,  '  village.'
Khan,  '  caravanserai.'


Khirbet-(Kh?),  'ruins  of — .'

Nahr  (N.),  '  river."

Tell, '  mound "  (often  containing  ruins).

Wiidi  (W.),  'valley,'  'torrent-course.'

Well,  wely, '  Mohammedan  saint,'  '  saint's  tomb."


7.  Transliteration,  etc. —  Whilst  the  Encydopc^dia  Biblica  is  meant  for  the  student,  other
readers  have  constantly  been  kept  in  view.  Hence  the  frequent  translation  of  Hebrew  and  other
words,  and  the  transliteration  of  words  in  Semitic  languages.  In  certain  cases  transliteration  also
saves  space.  No  effort  has  been  made  at  uniformity  for  its  own  sake.  Intelligibility  has  been
thought  sufficient.  When  pronunciation  is  indicated  —  e.g..,  Behemoth,  Leviathan  —  what  is  meant
is  that  the  resulting  form  is  the  nearest  that  we  can  come  to  the  original  as  represented  by  the
traditional  Hebrew,  so  long  as  we  adhere  to  the  English  spelling.

In  the  case  of  proper  names  that  have  become  in  some  degree  naturalised  in  an  incorrect  form,
that  form  has  been  preserved :  e.g.,  Shalmaneser,  Tiglath-pileser.  Where  there  is  an  alternative,
naturally  the  closer  to  the  original  is  selected :  therefore  Nebuchadrezzar  (with  r  as  in  Ezek.,  etc.),
Nazirite.  Where  there  is  no  naturalised  form  an  exact  transliteration  of  the  original  has  been
given  —  e.g.,  Asur-res-isi  —  and  the  component  parts  of  Assyrian  names  are  thus  separated  by
hyphens,  and  begin  with  a  capital  when  they  are  divine  names.

In  the  case  of  modern  (Arabic)  place-names  the  spelling  of  the  author  whose  description  has
been  most  used  has  generally  been  retained,  except  when  it  would  have  been  misleading  to  the
student.  The  diacritical  marks  have  been  checked  or  added  after  verification  in  some  Arabic
source  or  list.

On  the  Assyrian  alphabet  see  Babylonia,  §  6,  and  on  the  Egyptian,  Egypt,  §  12.  One
point  remains  to  be  explained,  after  which  it  will  suffice  to  set  forth  the  schemes  of  transliteration
in  tabular  form.  The  Hebrew  h  (n)  represents  phijologically  the  Arabic  h  and  h,  which  are
absolutely  distinct  sounds.  The  Hebrew  spoken  language  very  likely  marked  the  distinction.
As  the  written  language,  however,  ignores  it,  n  is  always  transliterated  h.  The  Assyrian  guttural
transliterated  with  an  h,  on  the  other  hand,  oftenest  represents  the  Arabic  h,  and  is  therefore
always  transliterated  h  (in  Muss. -Am.  Did.,  x\  for  x)»  never  h.  There  is  no  h  .in  transliterated
Assyrian;  for  the  written  language  did  not  distinguish  the  Arabic  h  from  the  Arabic  h  'g  or',
representing  them  all  indifferently  by  '.  which  accordingly  does  not,  in  transliterated  Assyrian,
mean  simply  K  but  K  or  n  or  h  or  U  or  g. Hence  e.g.,  Nabu-nahid  is  simply  one  interpretation


PRACTICAL  HINTS  TO  THE  READER  xvii

of  Nabu-na'id. Egyptian,  lastly,  requires  not  only  h,  h,  and  h,  like  Arabic,  but  also  a  fourth
symbol  h  (see  Egypt,  § ).


TRANSLITERATION Oh

HEBREW  (AND A

RABIC)  CONSONANTS

.

K

>

z

T

;

1

b

J

s

2:

u©

b

a

«^

h

n

r

h

m

D

r

k(q)

P

O

bh(b)

g

gh(g)

3

:

:

c

j.g

t

IS

t

Jo

h

n
s

3
D

r
s
sh,  i

-1

;

d

dh(d)

h

1
n

y
kh  (k)

3

v5

P
phi

t

g

f

t
th(t)

n
n

CJ

W,  V

)

Extra  Arabic  Consonants:  <i5,  th,  /;  (3,  dh,  <f ;  ^jfl,  d;  ja,


'  long  •
Heb.  a  e  i  o  u

VOWELS.

'  short  • very  short
aeiou S.t-dor'^eo

mere  glide
&or'or'

At. a  1  u  a  (e)

Ar.  diphthongs :  ai,  ay,  ei,  ey,  e ;  aw,  au,  5.


i(e)


u(o)


8.  Abbreviations,  Symbols,  and  Biographical  Notes.  —  The  following  pages  explain  the
abbreviations  that  are  used  in  the  more  technical  parts  (see  above  Si-C'^:))  of  the  EncyclopcEdia.
The  list  does  not  claim  to  be  exhaustive,  and  for  the  most  part  it  takes  no  account  of  well-established
abbreviations,  or  such  as  have  seemed  to  be  fairly  obvious.  The  bibliographical  notes  will  be  not
unwelcome  to  the  student.

The  Canonical  and  Apocryphal  books  of  the  Bible  are  usually  referred  to  as  Gen.,  Ex..  Lev.,
Nu.,  Dt.,  Jos.,  Judg.,  Ruth,  S(a.),  K(i.),  Ch[r.],  Ezr.,  Neh.,  Est.,  Job,  Ps.,  Pr.,  Eccle.s.,  C(an)t.,
Is.,  Jer.,  Lam.,  Ezek.,  Dan.,  Hos.,  Joel,  Am.,  Ob.,  Jon.,  Mi.,  Nah.,  Hab.,  Zeph.,  Hag.,  Zech.,  Mai. ;
I  Esd.,  4  Esd.  {i.e.  2  Esd.  of  EV),  Tob.,  Judith,  Wisd.,  Ecclus.,  Baruch,  cap.  6  {i.e..  Epistle  of
Jeremy),  Song  of  the  Three  Children  (Dan.  823),  Susanna.  Bel  and  the  Dragon,  Prayer  of  Manasses,
1-4  Mace. ;  Mt.,  Mk.,  Lk.,  Jn.,  Acts,  Rom.,  Cor.,  Gal.,  Eph.,  Phil.,  Col.,  Tlies.,  Tim.,  Tit.,  Philem.,
Heb.,  Ja[s.],  Pet.,  1-3  Jn.,  Jude,  Apoc.  [or  Rev.] .  An  explanation  of  some  of  the  symbols  (A,  K,  B.
etc.),  now  generally  used  to  denote  certain  Greek  MSS  of  the  Old  or  New  Testaments,  will  be  found
above,  at  p.  vx.  It  may  be  added  that  the  bracketed  index  numerals  denote  the  edition  of  the  work
to  which  they  are  attached  ;  thus  OTJCC-^  =  The  Old  Testament  in  the  Jewish  Church,  2nd  edition
(exceptions  RP^'-\  AOF^-^ :  see  below).  The  unbracketed  numerals  above  the  line  refer  to  footnotes  ;
for  those  under  the  line  see  below  under  D^,  etc.

When  a  foreign  book  is  cited  by  an  English  name  the  reference  is  to  the  English  translation.

It  is  suggested  that  the  Encyclopedia  Biblica  itself  be  cited  as  EBi.  It  will  be  observed  that
all  the  larger  articles  can  be  referred  to  by  the  numbered  sections ;  or  any  pa.ssage  can  readily  be
cited  by  column  and  paragraph  or  line.  The  columns  will  be  numbered  continuously  to  the  end  of
the  work.


ABBREVIATIONS, SYMBOLS, AND BIBLIOGRAPHICAL

NOTES

The  following  pages  explain  the  abbreviations  that  are  used  in  the  more  technical  parts  (see
above,  p.  xiv.  3  i.  [«])  of  the  Encyclopiedia.  The  list  does  not  claim  to  be  exhaustive,  and,  for  the
most  part,  it  takes  no  account  of  well-established  abbreviations,  or  such  as  have  seemed  to  be  fairly
obvious. The  bibliograpiiical  notes  will,  it  is  hoped,  be  welcome  to  the  student.

The  Canonical  and  Apocryphal  books  of  the  Bible  are  usually  referred  to  as  Gen.,  Ex.,  Lev.,
Nu.,  Dt.,  Josh.,  Judg.,  Ruth,  S(a.),  K(i.),  Ch[r.],  Ezra,  Neh.,  Esth.,  Job,  Ps.,  Pr.,  Eccles.,
C(an)t.,  Is.,  Jer.,  Lam.,  Ezek.,  Dan.,  Hos.,  Joel,  Am.,  Ob.,  Jon.,  Mi.,  Nah.,  Hab.,  Zeph.,  Hag.,
Zech.,  Mai.  ;  i  Esd.,  4  Esd.  (/.^.,  2  Esd.  of  EV),  Tob.,  Judith.  Wi.sd.,  Ecclus.,  Baruch,  Epistle  of
Jeremy  {i.e.,  Bar.  ch.  6),  Song  of  the  Three  Children  (Dan.  823),  Susanna,  Bel  and  the  Dragon,
Prayer  of  Manasses,  1-4  Mace. ;  Mt.,  Mk.,  Lk.,  Jn.,  Acts,  Rom.,  Cor.,  Gal.,  Eph.,  Phil.,  Col.,  Thess.,
Tim.,  Tit.,  Philem.,  Heb.,  Ja[s.],  Pet.,  1-3  Jn.,  Jude,  Rev.  [or  Apoc].

An  explanation  of  some  of  the  symbols  (A,  K,  B,  etc.),  now  generally  used  to  denote  certain
Greek  MSS  of  the  Old  or  New  Testaments,  will  be  found  above,  at  p.  xvi.  It  may  be  added  that
the  bracketed  index  numerals  denote  the  edition  of  the  work  to  which  they  are  attached :  thus
OT/C^-'>  =  T/ie  Old  I'estameiit  in  the  JeivisJi  C/iurc/i,  2nd  edition  (exceptions  RP^^'',  AOF'^-^ ;  see
below).  The  unbracketed  numerals  above  the  line  refer  to  footnotes;  for  those  under  the  line  see
below  under  D2,  E.>,  J-.-,  Pj.

When  a  foreign  book  is  cited  by  an  English  name  the  reference  is  to  the  English  translation.

It  is  suggested  tliat  this  work  be  referred  to  as  the  Encyclopcedia  Biblica,  and  that  the
name  may  be  abbreviated  thus:  Ency.  Bib.  or  EBi.  It  will  be  observed  that  all  the  larger
articles  can  be  referred  to  by  the  numbered  sections  (§§)  ;  or  any  passage  can  readily  be  cited
by  column  and  paragraph  or  line.  The  columns  will  be  numbered  continuously  to  the  end
of  the  work.


Abuhv. .

Abulwalld,  the  Jewish  grammarian
(b.  circa  990),  author  of  Book  of

A  T,  A  Tliche

Roots,  etc.

A  T  Unters.

Acad.

The  Academy  :  A  Weekly  Pevietv

of  Literature,  Science,  and  Art.

AV.  .

London,  '69^.

AF. .

Sec  A  OP.

b. .

AHT. .

Ancient  Hebrew Tradition. See
Ilonimcl.

Ba. .

Altltest\. Unt.  .

See  Winckler.

Anter.  Journ.  of

American Journal of  Philology,

Bab.  .

Phil.

'80^.

Baed.,  or

A\jiier.'\J[ourn.'\

Amertcan  lournal  of  Semitic  Lan-

Baed.  Pal.

S\_em.'\  L[ang.] guages and Li/erature}  (^con\.m\i-

ing  Hebraica  ['84-'95]),  '95/".

Baethg.,  or

Am.  Tab.  .

IheTell-cl-Amarna  Letters(  =  A'jy5)

Buethg.Beitr.

Ant.  .

Josephus,  Antiquities.

BAG

AOF

Altorientalische  Porschungen. See

Winckler.

Ba.NB. .

Apocr.  Anecd. .

Apocrypha  Anecdota,  1st  and  2nd
series, published under the

general  title  '  Texts  and  Studies '

Baraitha .

at the Cambridge University
Press.
Aquila, Jewish proselyte (temp.

BDB  Lex.

Aq. . . .

revolt  against  Hadrian),  author

of  a  Greek  translation  of  the  Old

Testament. See  Text.

Ar. .

Arabic.

Aram.

Aramaic. See  Aramaic.

Be. .

ArcA.

Archeology or  Archciologie. See
Benzinger,  Novvack.

Ar.  Des. .

Doughty,  Arabia  Deserta,  '88.

Ar.  Heid.,  or

Keste  arabischen  Heidentums. See

Heid

Wellhausen.

Beitr.

Arm.

Armenian.

Ass.  .

Assyrian.

Beitr.  z.  Ass.

Ass.  HWB

Assyrisches  Handwdrterbuch. See
Delitzsch.

As.  u.  Eur.

W.  M. Muller,  Asien u.  Europa

nach  altdgyptischen  Denkm'dlern,

Benz.  HA.

'93-

Das  Alte  Testament,  Alttestament-

liche. Old  Testament.
Alttestamentliche Untersuchungen.

See  Winckler.
Authorised  Version.

ben,  b'ne  (son,  sons,  Hebrew).
Baer  and  Delitzsch's  critical  edition

of  the  Massoretic  Text,  Leipsic,

'69,  and  following  years.
Babylonian.

Baedeker, Palestine (ed. Socin),
(2),  '94; i3)^ 'gg  (Benzinger)  based
on  4th  German  ed.
Baethgen,  Beitrdge  zur  seniitischen

Peligions-geschichte,  '88.
C.  P.  Tiele,  Babylonische-assyrische

Geschichte,  pt.  i.,  '86; pt.  ii.,  '88.
Barth,  Die  Nominalbildung  in  den

seniitischen  Sprachen,  i.,  '89; ii.,


(i!)


94-


See  Law  Liter.\ture.

[Brown,  Driver,  Briggs,  Lexicon'\
A  Hebre~v  and  English  lexicon
of  the  Old  'J'estament,  based  on
the  Lexicon  of  Gesenius,  by  F.
Brown,  with  the  co-operation  of
S.  R.  Driver  and  C.  A.  Briggs,
Oxford,  '92,  and  following  vears.

E-Bertheau  (1812-88).  InKGH;
Pichter  u. Ruth, '45  ; W '83;


Chronik,


'54;


(2).


73; Esra,


Nehemia  u.  Ester,  '62;  <2),  by
Ryssel,  '87.

Beitrdge,  especially  Baethgen  (as
above).

Beitrdge  zur  Assyriologie  u.  senii-
tischen Sprachwissenschaft :  ed.
Fried.  Delitzsch  and  Paul  Haupt,
{.,'90;  ii., '94;  iii., '98;  iv.  I, '99.

I.  Benzinger,  Jlehrdische  Archd-
ologie,  '94.


ABBREVIATIONS,  SYMBOLS,  AND  BIBLIOGRAPHICAL  NOTES xix


K'dn.  . Konige  in  KIIC,  '99.

Ikrthulct, Stel- A.  Bertlu)lct,  Die  Stellung  lit-r  Is-
lung  raeliUn u. tier  Jtulcn zu dt-n

Fremden,  '96.
Bi. . . . Gu«Uv  Bickell :

Grundriss der hebriiiscken
Craiiiiitatik,  '69/; ;  KT,  '77.
Car  mi  nil  I'T  metriceetc,  '82.
Diclituugcn  der  Ilehrder,  '82/
Kritische Bearbeitung der
Frav.,  '90.
Biblioth.  Sac. . Bibliot/ucn  Sacra,  '43^.
B/ . . . J)e  Hello  Judaico. See  Josephus.
BL . . . Schcnkcl, Bibel- Lexicon ; Real-
\v6rterl)uch  zuin Handgebrauch
fiir Cleistliclie u. Gemeiiule-
glieder,  5  vols.,  '69-'75.
Boch.  . . S.  Bochart  (1599-1667)  :

Geograpkia Sacra, 1646  ;
Ilicrozoicon,  sivc  de  Animali-
bus  Script II nr  Surra;  1663.
Boeckh . . AngAk^ccVh,  Corpus /nscr.  Griic,

4  vols.,  '28-'77.
BOR  . . Babylonian  and  Oriental  Record,

Bottch. .  . Friedrich Bottcher, Ausfiihrliches

Lehrbucli  dt-r  hebrdischen  Spra-
che,  '66-'68.
Bottg.  Lex. . Bottger,  Lexicon  z.  d.  Schriften  des

Fl.  Josephus,  '79.
BR . . . Biblical  Researches.  See  Robinson.
Bu. . . . Karl  Budde :

Urgesch. . Die biblische Urgeschichte (Gen.

I-124).  '83.
Rt.Sa. . Die  Richer  Richter  und  Samuel,
ihre  Quellen  und  ihr  Aufbau,'^0.
Sam. . . Samuel  in  SHOT  (Heb.),  '94.
Das  Buck  Hiob  in  //A',  '96.
Klagelieder  and  Hohelied  in  KUC,  '98.


Buhl

Buxt.  Syn.  Jud.

Bu.\t.  Lex.


c.,  cir.
Calwer  Bib.
Lex.


c.  Ap.
CII .


Chald.  Gen.


Che.


Proph.  Is.
Job  and  Sol.
Ps. .

OPs.  .

Aids  .
Founders
Intr.  Is.


See  Pal.

Johann Buxtorf (i  564-1629),

Synagoga  Judaica, 1603,  etc.
Joliann Buxtorf,  son  (1599-1644),

Lexicon Chaldaicum, I'almudi-

cum  et  RaN'inicum,  1639,  folio.

Reprint with ailditions by B.

Fischer, 2  vols.,  '69  and  '74.

circa.

Cahver Kirchelexikon, I'heologi-
sches Llandworterbuch, ed. P.
Zfller,  '89-'93.
contra  Apionem. See  Josephus.
Composition  des  llexateuchs. See

Wfllhausen.
The  Chaldean  Account  of  Genesis,
by  George Smith. \  new  edi-
tion, thoroughly  revised  and  cor-
rected by  A.  li.  Sayce,  '80.
T.  K.  Cheyne :

The  Prophecies  0/ Isaiah,  2  vols.
('8o-'8i; revised,  <«),  '89).
Job  and  Solomon,  ox  7'he  IVisdom
of  the  Old  Testament  ('87).
The Book of Psalms, transl.
with comm. ('88); <-'), re-
written  (forthcoming).
The  Origin  and  Religious  Con-
tents of  the  Psalter  (Bampton
Lectures,  '89),  '91.
Aids to the Devout Study of

Criticism,  '92.
Founders of Old Testament

Criticism,  '94.
Introduction to the Book of
Isaiah  ('95).


Class.  Rev.
Cl.-tian. .
Rec. .
Co. .


Is.SBOT.  Isaiah in SBOT [Eng.],

(•97); [Heb.J,  (-99).
Jeremiah,  his  Life  and  Times  in  *  Men  of  the

Bible'  ('88).
Jew.  Rel.  Life Jewish  Religious  Life  after  the
Exile,  '98.
CIG  . . Corpus  Inscriptionum  Gracarum

(ed. Dittenberger),  '82^. See
also  Boeckh.
CIL  . . Corpus  Inscriptionum  Latinarum,

Berlin,  '63,  and  following  years,
14  vols.,  with  supplements.
CLS  . . Corpus Inscriptionum Semttica-

rutn,  Paris,  "6\  ff. Pt.  i.,  Phccni-
cian  and  Punic  inscriptions; pt.
ii.,  Aramaic  inscriptions; pt.  iv.,
S.  Arabian  inscriptions.
The  Classical  Rez'iew,  "i"]  ff.
Clermnnt-(ianneau:

Recueil  d\4rchiologie,  '85 _^.
Cornill :
Ezek.  .  Das Buck des Propheten

Ezechiel,  '86.
Einl.  .  Einleilung  in  das  Alte  Testa-

ment, '91  ; ••'*,  '<)6.
Hist.  .  History  of  the  People  of  Israel

from  the  earliest  times,  '98.
COT .  . TheCuneiform  Inscriptions  and  the

Old  I'estament.  See  Schrader.
Crit.  Man.  .  A.  H.  Sayce,  The  Higher  Criticism
and  the  Verdict  of  the  Monu-
ments, '94,
Cr.  Rcz>.  .  .  Critical  Re-'ieiv  of  Theological  and
Philosophical  Literature  [ed.
Salmond],  '91^.

D . . . Author  of  Deuteronomy;  also  used

Deuteronomistic  passages.
D2 . . . Later  Deuteronomistic  editors.  See

Historical  Ln kkatlke.
Dalni.  Gram. . Dalman,  Grammatik  des  jiidisch-
paldstinischen  .iramdisch,  '94.
IVorte Jesu  Die  IVorle Jesu,\.,\)'i.

Aram,  Lex.  Arainaisch - Xeuhebrdisches

IV'nrtcrbuch zu Targum,
'fa  I'll  lid, mid .Midrasch,
Teil  i.,  '97.
Dav.  . . A.  B.  D.ividson:

Job . .  /;(W-<y'>/'inCamb.  Bible,'S4.

Ezek.  .  Book  of  Ezekiel  in  Cambridge

Bible,  '92.

DB  . .  . W. Smith, .-/ Diitionary of  the

Bible,  comprising  its  .4ntii]uities,

Biography,  Geography,  and Xat-

ural History,  3  vols.,  '63;  DB^'^\

2nd  ed.  of  vol.  i.,  in  two  parts,

'93-
or,  J. Hastings,  ,/ Dictionary  of
the  Bible,  dealing  with  its  Lan-
guage, Literature,  and  Contents,
including  the  Biblical  Theology,
vol.  i.,  '98; vol.  ii.,  '99.
or,  F.  Vigouroux,  Dictionnaire  de
la  Bible,  '95  y.
de  C.  Orig. . Alph. de C'andolle, Origine des
Plantes Cultivees,  '82; *<>,  '96.
ET  in  the  International  Scien-
tific Series.
De  Gent.  . . De  Gentibus. See  Wellhausen.
Del.  . . Delitzsch,  Franz  (1813-90),  author

of  many  commentaries  on  books
of  the  OT,  etc.
or,  Delitzsch,  Friedrich,  son  of  pre-
ceding, author  of:
Par.. .  Wo  lag  das  Raradies?  i'^x).

Heb.  Lang.  Tlu  Hebrew  Language  viewed


ABBREVIATIONS, SYMBOLS, AND BIBLIOGRAPHICAL

NOTES

The  following  pages  explain  the  abbreviations  that  are  used  in  the  more  technical  parts  (see
above,  p.  xiv.  3  i-  [a])  of  the  Encyclopiedia.  The  list  does  not  claim  to  be  exhaustive,  and,  for  the
most  part,  it  takes  no  account  of  well-established  abbreviations,  or  such  as  have  seemed  to  be  fairly
obvious. The  bibliographical  notes  will,  it  is  hoped,  be  welcome  to  the  student.

The  Canonical  and  Apocryphal  books  of  the  Bible  are  usually  referred  to  as  Gen.,  Ex.,  Lev.,
Nu.,  Dt.,  Josh.,  Judg.,  Ruth,  S(a.),  K(i.),  Ch[r.],  Ezra,  Neh.,  Esth.,  Job,  Ps.,  Pr.,  Eccles.,
C(an)t.,  Is.,  Jer.,  Lam.,  Ezek.,  Dan.,  Hos.,  Joel,  Am.,  Ob.,  Jon.,  Mi.,  Nah.,  Hab.,  Zeph.,  Hag.,
Zech.,  Mai. ;  i  Esd.,  4  Esd.  {i.e.,  2  Esd.  of  EV),  Tob.,  Judith.  Wisd.,  Ecclus.,  Baruch,  Epistle  of
Jeremy  {i.e..  Bar.  ch.  6),  Song  of  the  Three  Children  (Dan.  823),  Susanna,  Bel  and  the  Dragon,
Prayer  of  Manasses,  1-4  Mace. ;  Mt.,  Mk.,  Lk.,  Jn.,  Act.s,  Rom.,  Cor.,  Gal.,  Eph.,  Phil.,  Col.,  Thess.,
Tim.,  Tit.,  Philem.,  Heb.,  Ja[s.],  Pet.,  1-3  Jn..  Jude.  Rev.  [or  Apoc].

An  explanation  of  some  of  the  symbols  (.A,  N,  B,  etc.),  now  generally  used  to  denote  certain
Greek  MSS  of  the  Old  or  New  Testaments,  will  be  found  above,  at  p.  xvi.  It  may  be  added  that
the  bracketed  index  numerals  denote  the  edition  of  the  work  to  which  they  are  attached :  thus
OTJC^-'i—'r/ie  Old  lestaiiteid  in  t/ie  Jewish  Clitirch,  2nd  edition  (exceptions  RP^'^\  AOF^-^  \  see
below).  The  unbracketed  numerals  above  the  line  refer  to  footnotes;  for  those  under  the  line  see
below  under  D2,  E-,  J.-,  P...

When  a  foreign  book  is  cited  by  an  English  name  the  reference  is  to  the  English  translation.

It  is  suggested  that  this  work  be  referred  to  as  tlie  Encyclopcedia  Hiblica,  and  that  the
name  may  be  abbreviated  thus:  Ency.  Bib.  or  EBi.  It  will  be  observed  that  all  the  larger
articles  can  be  referred  to  by  the  numbered  sections  (§§)  ;  or  any  passage  can  readily  be  cited
by  column  and  paragraph  or  line.  The  columns  will  be  numbered  continuously  to  the  end
of  the  work.


Abulw.


Acad.


AF. .
ANT.

All\_Ust']. Unt.  .
A/ner.  Journ.  of

Phil.
Almer.}/[ourK.]

Slem.]  Liang.]

Am.  Tab.  . .  T

Am.  .

AOF

Apocr.  Anecd. .


Aq.


At.  .
Aram.
AreA.

Ar.  Des. .
Ar.  //eid.,  or

Heid.
Arm.
Ass.  .
Ass.  HWB

As.  u.  Eur.


Abulwalld,  the  Jewish  grammarian
(b.  circa  990),  author  of  Book  of
A'oo/s,  etc.
T/ie  .lea demy  :  A  li/^eekly  Bevie7u
of  Literature,  Science,  and  Art.
London,  '69^.

See/^O/-;

Ancient  Lfebrew  Tradition.  See
Hommel.

See  Winckler.

American  Journal  of  Philology,
'80/:

American  Journal  of  Semitic  Lan-
guages and  Literature}  (continu-
ing Hebraica  ['84-'95]),  '95/;

heTell-el-Amarna  Letters(=A'iy5)

Josephus,  .Antiquities.

Allorientalische  Forschungen.  See
Winckler.

Apocrypha  Anecdota,  1st  and  2nd
series,  published  under  the
general  title  '  Texts  and  Studies '
at  the  Cambridge  University
Press.

Aquila,  Jewish  proselyte  (temp,
revolt  against  Hadrian),  author
of  a  Greek  translation  of  the  Old
Testament. See  Tkxt.

Arabic.

Aramaic. See  Aramaic.

Archeology  or  Archaologie.  See
Hen/.inger,  Nowack.

Doughty,  Arabia  Deserta,  '88.

Peste  arabischen  Ileidentutns.  See
Wellhausen.

Armenian.

Assyrian.

Assyrisches  ILandw'drterbuch.  See
Delitzsch.

W.  M.  Miiller,  Asien  u.  Europa
nach  alt'dgyptischen  Denkm'dlern,
'93-


A  T,  A  Tliche
A  T  Unters.


AV.


Bab.  .
Baed.,  or
Baed.  Pal.

Baethg.,  or

Baethg.^^iVr.
BAG

^2..NB. .


Baraitha .
BDB  Lex.


Be.


Beitr.
Beitr.  z.  Ass.


Benz.  HA.


Das  Alte  Testament,  Alttestament-

liche. Old  Testament.
Alttestumentliche Untersuchungen.

See  Winckler.
Authorised  Version.

ben,  li'ne  (son,  sons,  Hebrew).
Baer  and  Delitzsch's  critical  edition

of  the  Massorctic  Text,  Leipsic,

'69,  and  following  years.
Babylonian.

Baedeker, L\ilestine (ed. Socin),
(2),  '94; ('i*, '98  (Benzinger)  based
on  4th  German  ed.
Baetligen,  Beitr'dge  zur  semitischen

Peligions-geschichte,  '88.
C.  P.  Tiele,  Babylonische-assyrische

Geschichte,  pt.  i.,  '86; pt.  ii.,  '88.
Barth,  Die  A'ominalbildung  in  den

semitischen  Sprachen,  i.,  '89; ii.,


'91;


94-


See  Law  LrrERATURE,

[Brown,  Driver,  Briggs,  Lexicon]
A  Llebre-M  and  English  Lexicon
of  the  Old  Testament,  based  on
the  Lexicon  of  Gesenius,  by  F.
Brown,  with  the  co-operation  of
S.  R.  Driver  and  C.  A.  Briggs,
Oxford,  '92,  and  following  vears.

KBertheau  (1812-88).  In  KGLL;
Pichter  u.  Ruth,  '45  ;  (2)  'g^.
Chronik,  '54;  *2)^  y^.  Esra,
Nehemia  u.  Ester,  '62;  <2)^  by
Ryssel,  '87.

Beitr'dge,  especially  Baethgen  (as
above).

Beitrd^e  zur  Assyriologie  u.  semi-
tischen Sprach7vissenschaft ;  ed.
Fried.  Delitzsch  and  PaulHaupt,
i., '90;  ii., '94;  iii., '98;  iv.  i,'99.

I.  Benzinger,  LLebrdische  .Archa-
ologie, '94.


ABBREVIATIONS,  SYMBOLS,  AND  BIBLIOGRAPHICAL  NOTES xix

Is.  SHOT.  Isaiah in 5^07" [Eng.l,

(•97): [Heb.J,  ('99).
Jeremiah,  his  Life  and  Times  m  '  Men  of  the

Hible'  ('88).
Jnv.  A'el.  Life Jewish  Keli^ous  Life  after  the
Exile,  '98.
CIG  . . Corpus  fnsiriptionum  Gracarum

(ed. Dittenbergcr),  '%z  ff. Sec
also  Boeckh.
CIL  . . Corpus  Inscriplionum  Latinarum,

licrlin,  '63,  and  following  years,
14  vols.,  with  supi)lements.
CIS  . . Corpus Inscriplionum Semttica-

rum,  Paris,  "61  ff.  Pt.  i.,  Ph<cni-
cian  and  I'unic  inscriptions;  pt.
ii.,  Aramaic  inscriptions;  pt.  iv.,
S.  Arabian  inscriptions.
The  Classical  Review,  '87 _^.
Clcrniont-danneau:

Kecueil  J'ArchMogie,  '85^.
Cornill :

Das Buch des Propheten

Kzechiel,  '86.
Einleilutig  in  das  Alle  Testa-


K'dn,  . Konige  in  KIIC,  '99.

Bertholct, Siel- A.  Bertholet,  Die  Stellung  der  Is-
lung  raeliten u. der  Juden zu di-n

Fremden,  '96.
Bi. . . . Gustav  Bickell :

Grundriss der hehriiischen
Granimatik,  '69/; ;  Kl',  '77.
Carmina  VT  tnetrice  etc.,  '82.
Dichtungen  der  llehr'der,  '82/
Kritische Bearbeitnng der
Prov.,  '90.
Biblioth.  Sac. . Bihliotheca  Sacra,  '43^.
BJ . . . De  Hello  Judaico. See  Joseph  us.
BL . . . Schcnkel, BiM- lexicon; Real-
wortcrbuch  /urn Handgebrauch
fiir Cieistliche u. Gemeinde-
glieder,  5  vols.,  '69-'75.
Boch.  . . S.  Bochart  (1599-1667) :

Geographia Sacra, 1646  ;
Hicrozoicon,  sivc  de  Animali-
bus  Script uriT  Sncrie,  1663.
Boeckh . . K\s^.V>otcV\\^,  Corpus  Inscr.Grtec,

4  vols.,  '28-'77.
BOR  . . Baltylonian  and  Oriental  Record,

Bottch. .  . Friedrich Bottcher, .iusjiihrliches

Lehrbuch  der  hcbr'dischen  Spra-
che,  '66-'68.

Bottg.  Lex. . Bottger,  Lexicon  z.  d.  Schriften  des
Fl.  Joseplius,  '79.

BR . . . Biblical  Researches.  See  Robinson.

Bu. . . . Karl  Budde :

Urgescli. . Die biblische Urgeschichte (Gen.

I-I24).'83.

Rt.Sa. . Die  Hiicher  Richter  und  Samuel,
ihre  Quellen  und ihr  Ai(fbau,'<^.
Sam.  . . Samuel  in  SHOT  (Heb.),  '94.
Das  Buch  Hiob  in  HK,  '96.
Klagelieder  and  Llohelied  in  KHC,  '98.


Buhl

Buxt.  Syn.  Jud.

Buxt.  Lex.


c,  cir.
Calwer  Bib.
Lex.

c.  Ap.  .

C/L  .

Chald.  Gen.


Che.


Proph.  Ls.
Job  and  Sol.
Ps. .

OPs.  .

Aids  .
Founders
Intr.  Ls.


See  Pal.

Johann Buxtorf (1564-1629),

Synagoga  Judaica, 1 603,  etc.
Johann Huxtorf,  son  (1599-1644),

L.exicon Chaldaicum, Talinudi-

cum  et  Rabhinictiin,  1639,  folio.

Reprint with additions by B.

Fischer, 2  vols.,  '69  and  '74.

circa.

Calwer Kirchelexikon, Theologt-
sches ILandivortcrbuch, ed. P.
Zfller,  '89-'93.
cojitra  Apionein. See  Josephus.
Composition  des  LLexateuchs. See

Wcllhausen.
The  Chaldean  Account  of  Genesis,
by  George Smith. .\  new  edi-
tion, thoroughly  revised  and  cor-
rected by  A.  H.  Sayce,  '80.
T.  K.  Cheyne :

I'he  Prophecies  of  Isaiah,  2  vols.
('8o-'8i; revised.  <«>,  '89).
Job  and  Solomon,  ox  The  Wisdom
of  the  Old  Testament  ('87).
7he Book of Psalms, transl.
with comni. ('88); <'->, re-
written  (forthcoming).
The  Origin  and  Religious  Con-
tents of  the  Psalter  (Bampton
Lectures,  '89),  '91.
Aids to the Devout Study of

Criticism,  '92.
Founders of Old Testament

Criticism,  '94.
Introduction to the Book of
Isaiah  ('95).


Class.  Rev.
Cl.-(ian. ,

Rec.  .
Co. .

Fzek.


Einl.


LList.
COT
Crit.  A/on.

Cr.  Rev. .

D . . .

D2 . . .

Dalni.  Grain. .

IVorte  Jesu
Aram,  Lex.


ment, 91


.,6.


Dav.


Job
Ezek.


DB


de  C.  Orig.


De  Gent.
Del.


Par.  .
Heb.  Lang.


History  of  the  People  of  Lsrael
from  the  earliest  times,  '98.

The  Cuneiform  Lnscriptions  and  the
Old  'Testament. See  Schrader.

A.  H.  Sayce,  The  LLigher  Criticism
and  the  Verdict  of  the  Monu-
ments, '94.

Critical  Revino  of  Theological  and
Philosophical  L.iterature  [ed.
Salmond],  '91^.

Author  of  Deuteronomy;  also  used

1  )euteronomistic  passages.
Later  Deuteronomistic  editors.  See

Historical  Li ikratlke.
Dalman,  Grammatik  des  Jiidisch-
palditinischen  .Aramiiisch,  '94.
Die  Worle  Jesu,  i.,  '98.
Aramiiisch - Xcuhcbriiisches
IVorlcrbuch zu Tar  gum,
Tal'niid, und .Midrascli,
Teil  i.,  '97.
A.  B.  Davidson  :

Book  of  Job  in  Camb.  Bible,  '84.

Book  of  Ezekiel  in  Cambridge

Bible,  '92.

W. Smith, .-/ Diitionary of  the

Bible,  comprising  its  .4ntii]uities,

Biography,  Geography,  and Xat-

ural  LLt story,  3  vols.,  ''63 ;  ZW  ->,

2nd  ed.  of  vol.  i.,  in  two  parts,

'93-

or,  J.  Hastings,  ./  Dictionary  of
the  Bible,  dealing  with  its  L^an-
guage.  Literature,  and  Contents,
including  the  Biblical  Iheology,
vol.  i.,  '98; vol.  ii.,  '99.

or,  F.  Vigouroux,  Dictionnaire  de
la  Bible,  '95^.

Alph.  de  Candolle,  Origine  des
LHantes  Cultivces,  '82;  i-",  '96.
ET  in  the  Lnternational  Scien-
tific Series.

De  Gentibus. .See  Wellhausen.

Delitzsch,  Franz  (1813-90),  author
of  many  commentaries  on  books
of  the  OT,  etc.

or,  Delitzsch,  Friedrich,  son  of  pre-
ceding, author  of:

Wo  lag  das  Paradiesf  ('Si).
The  LLebre^v  Language  viewed


XX ABBREVIATIONS,  SYMBOLS,  AND  BIBLIOGRAPHICAL  NOTES


in  the  light  of  Assyrian  Re-
search, '>i^.
Prol.  .  Prolegomena  cines  neuen  hehr.-

aram.  IVorterhuchszuin  A  'I\
'86.
Ass.  HWB  Assyrisches Handworterbuch,

'96.
DHM  Ep.  Denk. D.  H.  Muller,  Epigraphische  Denk-
vi'dler  aus  Arabien,  '89.
Die  Propheten  in  ihren  ursprUnglichen  Form.
Die Grundgesetze der ursemi-
tischen  Foesie,  2  Bde.,  '96.
Di. . . . Dillmann, August (1823-94),
in  KGH : Genesis,  yA  ed.  of
Knobel,'75;  **>, '82  ;  C", '92  (LT
by  Stevenson,  '97)  ;  Exodus  und
Leviticus, 2nd ed. of Knobel,
'80; 3rd ed. by Ryssel, '97;
Numb.,  Dent.,  Josh.,  2nd  ed.  of
Knobel,  "id;  Isaiah,  <•'',  '90;  (edd.
1-3  by  Knobel; 4th  ed.  by  Uie-
stel; 6th  ed.  by  Kittel,  '98).
Did.  . . Didache. See  APOCRVi'HA,  §  31,  i.

Dozy,  Suppl. . Supplement aux Dictionnaires

Arabes,  'T)ff.
Dr. . . . Driver,  S.  R. :

IIT.  .  A Treatise  on  the  Use  of  the


lenses  in  Hebrew,  '74;
'81; (•■», '92.


(2).


TBS  .  Notes  on  the  Hebrew  Text  of

the  Books  of  Samuel,  '90.

Introd. .  An  Introduction  to  the  Litera-

ture of  the Old  Testament,

(I),  'gi; (6)^  'g7_

Par.  Ps. .  Parallel  Psalter,  '98.

Dent.  .  Deuteronomy in 7 he Inter-

national Critical  Commen-
tary, '95.
Joel  and  Amos in  the  Cambridge  Bible,  '97.
Lev.  SPOT  SB  or  (Eng.),  Leviticus,  as-

sisted by  H.  A.  White,  '98.
'  Hebrew  Authority '  in  Authority  and  Archteology,
Sacred  and  Profane,  ed.
David  G.  Hogarth,  London,
'99.
Is. . .  Lsaiah,  /lis  Life  and  Times,  in

'  Men  of  the  Bible,'  (2),  '93.
Drus.  . . Drusius (1550-1616) in Critici

Sacri.
Du. . . . Bernhard  Duhm :

Proph. .  Die I heologie  der  Propheten

als  Grundlage  fiir  die  innere
Entivicklungsgeschichte der
israelitischen  Religion,  '75.
Is. . .  Das  Buch  Jesaia  in  HK,  '92.

Ps. . .  Die  Psalmen  erklart,  in  KHC,

'99.
E . . . Old  Hebrew  historical  document.
E2 . . . Later  additions  to E. See  His-
torical Literature.
^^(3) . . Encyclopa:dia  Britannica,  9th  ed.,

'75-'88.
Ebers,  Aeg.  BM Georg  Ebers  ('37-'98),  Aegypten  u.

die  Bi'uher  Mose's,  i.,  '68.
Einl. . . Einleitung (Introduction). See

Cornill,  etc.
Eng.  Hist.  Rev. The English Historical Review,

'86/:

Ent\^st^. . . Die Entstehung  des  Judenthums.

See  Ed.  Meyer.
ET . . . English  translation.
Eth.  . . Ethiopic.

Eus.  . . Eusebius  of  Cnesarea  (2nd  half  of

3rd  to  1st  half  of  4th  cent.  A.D.)  :

Onom.  or  OS  Onomasticon  ;  '  On  the  Names

of  Places  in  Holy  Scripture.'


LIE  .

P\_ra-p.-\E[v.]

Chron.


EV
Ew.


L.ehrb.
Gesch.


Dichter

Proph.

L^xpos.

Exp\^os'\.  T{imes'\
/and/-. . .
FFP

Field,  Hex.


F[r.-\HG  .

Fl.  and  Hanb.

I'harm.
Floigl,  GA

Founders .

Fr. .

Fra.  .

Frankenb.
Frazer


Fund.
<@ .

GA .

GA .
GBA

GASm.
GAT

Gei.  Urschr.


Ilistoria  Ecclesiastica.

Praparatio  Evangelica.

Chronicon.
English  version  (where  authorised

and  revised  agree).
Hcinrich  Ewald  (1803-75)  =

Lehrbuch der hebr'dischcn


Sprache,  '44;


{«).


'70.


Ges.


Thes.
Gramm.
Lex. .


Ges..Bu.


Geschichte  des Volkes Israel ;

(3'  i.-vii,  •64-'68  ;  ET  C^')  5

vols.  (jire-Christian  period),

'69-'8o.

Die  Dichter  des  Alien  Bundei

(3),  '66/
Die  Propheten,  '40/; <2),  '67
/; ET'76/
Expositor,  5th  ser.,  '95/
Expository  'Times,  '89-'90/.
following  (verse,  or  verses,  etc.).
Fauna and Flora of  Palestine.

See  Tristram.

F.  Field,  Origenis  Hexaplorum  qua

supersuntsive  Veterum  Inter pre-

tum  GriEcorum in  totum Vetus

7'estamentum  Fragmenta  ('75).

Fragmenta Historicorum Grcsco-

ruin,  ed.  Muller,  5  vols.,  '4i-'72,

F.  A.  Fluckiger  and  D.  Hanbury,

Pharmacographia.
P"loigl, Geschichte des semitischcn

Altertums  in  'Tabellen,  '82.
I'ounders  of  Old  7'estament  Criti-
cism. See  Cheyne.
O.  F. Fritzsche (1812-96), com-
mentaries on  books  of  the  Apo-
crypha in  A'lIG.
Sigismund Friinkel,  Die aramdi-
schen Fremdivorter im Arabi-
schcn,  '86.
\V.  Frankenberg,  Die  Spriiche  in

KII,  '98.
J.  G.  Frazer :

Totemism  ('87).

Golden  Bough  ('90);  (-'  in  prep.

Pausanias's Description of

Greece (translation and

notes,  6  vols.,  '98).

J.  Marcjuart,  Fundamente  israeliti-

scher  u.  Jiidischer  Geschichte,  '96.

Greek  Version,  see  above,  p.  xv./

and  Text  and  Versions.
Geschichte d. Alterthums (see

Meyer, Floigl).
Geschichte  Agyptens  (see  Meyer).
Gesch. Babyloniens u. Assyriens

(see  Winckler,  Hommel)^
George  Adam  Smith. See  Smith.
Reuss,  Geschichte  des  Alien  Testa-
ments, '81; <->,  '90.
A. Geiger, Urschrift  und  Ueber-
setzungen  der  Bibel  in  ihrer  Al>-
h'iingigkeit  von  der  inneren  Ent-
wickluiig  des  Judenthums,  '57.
F.  H.  W.  Gesenius  (i  786-1842):
Thesaurus  Philologicus  Criti-
cus Ling. Ilebr.  et Chald.
Veteris  Testamenti,  '35-'42.
Hebrdische Grammatik,  '13;
(2«),  by  E. Kautzsch, '96;
ET  '98.
Hebraisches u. chalddisches
Llandiv'drterbttch, '12  ; <">
(Muhlauu.Volck), '90;  <»«
(Buhl,  with  Socin  and  Zim-
mern),'95; C^)  (jjuhl), '99.
Gesenius  Buhl. See  above,  Ges.


ABBREVIATIONS,  SYMBOLS,  AND  BIBLIOGRAPHICAL  NOTES xxi


Geuh.
GGA

GGN

GI .
Gi[nsb].


GJV

Glaser

Skizze


Gr.
Gra.


Gesch.
Ps. .


Gr.  Ven.
GVI


HA  or  Hebr.

Arch.
Hal.


Mil.  .
Hamburger

Harper,  ABL


HC


Heh.

Hebraica

Heid.

HersL


Herzog,  RE
Ifet  Herstel
Hex.

Iltxap.

no  .

Ilierob.
Hilgf. .

Hist.

Hist.  Proph.
Man.


Geschichle  (History).
G'dttitiffisc/ie GeUhrte Anzeigen,

GottiHt^ische  Gelehrte  jVachrichten,

'45  f-

Geschichle  Israels. See  Winckler.

Giiisburg,  Massoretico-critical  Edi-
tion of  the  Hebrew  Bible,  '94,  In-
troduction, '97.

Geschichle  des  jiidischen  Volkes.
See  Schiirer.

Eduanl  Cilaser :

Skizze der Gesch. u. Ceogr.
Arabiens,  '90.

K.  Grimiii  (1807-91).  Maccabees
('53)  and  \Visdoin(^(M)  mA'GH.

Heiiirich  Gratz :

Geschichle  der  Juden,  i.-x.,  '74
ff.\ ET  i.-v.,  '9i-'92.

Kritischer Commentar zi
Psalmen,  '82/

Versio  Veneta. See  Text.

Gesch. des Volkes Israel.
EvvakI,  Stade,  etc.


den


See


HiO].


HK


'The  Law  of  Holiness'  (Lev.  17-
26). See  Leviticus.

Hebraische  Arch'dologie.  See  Ben-
zinger,  Nowack.

Joseph  Ilalevy.  The  inscriptions
in  Rapport  stir  tine  Mission  Ar-
chi-ologiqiie  dans  le  Yemen  ('72)
are  cited  : Hal.  535,  etc.

Melanges d^  Epigraphie et
d '  A  rchcologie  Sew  itiques, '  74.

Hamburger,  Realencyclopadie  fiir
Bibel  tind  Talmud,  \.  '70,  (2)  '92;
ii.  '83,  suppl.  '86,  '91/,  '97.

R.  F.  Harper,  Assyrian  and  Baby-
lonian letters  belonging  to  the
A'[Kuyunjik]  collection  of  the
British  Museum,  '93^.

Hand-Corn  mentar  zutn  Neuen
Testament,  bearbeitet  von  H.  J.
Holtzmann,  R.  A.  Lipsius,  P.  W.
Schmiedel,  H.  v.  Soden,  'Sg-'gi.

Hebrew.

Continued  as  AJSL  {q.v.).

Reste  arabischen  Ileidentums.  See
Wellhausen.

Kosters,  Ilet  Herstel  7'an  Israel  in
het Perzische  I'ijdvak.  '93;  Germ,
transl.  Die  iViederherstellung
Israels,  '95.

See  PRE.

See  Ilerst.  . *

Hexateuch  (see  Kuenen,  Ilolzinger,
etc.).

See  Field.

Historical  Geography  of  the  Holy
Land. See  Smith,  G.  A.

See  Bochart.

A.  Hilgenfeld,  NT  scholar  {Einl.,
etc.),  and  ed.  since  '58  of  Z  WT.

See  Schiirer,  Ewald,  Kittel,  etc.

J.  F.  M'Curdy,  History,  Prophecy,
and  the  Monuments:  i.  To  the
Downfall  of  Samaria  ('94) ;  ii.
To  the  Fall  of  Nineveh  ('96).

F.  Hitzig  (1807-75),  in K'GII:  Pre-
diger  ('47),  Ilohelied  {'^^),  Die
kleinen  Propheten  ('38;  '^\  '63),
Jeremias{\l;  (-'','66).  WsoDie
Psalmen  ('35-'36;  <•'",  '63-'65).

Handkommentar  zum  Allen  Testa-
ment, ed.  Nowack,  '92  ff.


Holz.  Einl.


Hommel .
AHT


GBA


Hor.  Hebr.
HP .


IIPN

HPSm. .

Samuel  in
HS .
HWB .


IJG  . ,

Intr[od].  .
Intr.  Is. .

It. .

It.  Anton.


J • •
h • •

Jlourn.']  A[m.;\
0[r.-\  S[oc.^
Jastrow,  Did.


yl^ourn.']  As.
JBL

JBIV

JDT

JE . .

Jensen,  Kosm.

Jer.
Jon.
Jos.

/[(!«/-«.]  Phil.

JPT

JQR
JRAS


JSBL
KAT


Kau.


Gram.
HS .


IL  Holzinger, Einleilung  in den
Hexateuch  ('93),  Genesis  in  the
A' lie  ('98).
Fritz  Hommel:

Die  allisraelitische  Ueberliefer-
ung; El",  Ancient  Hebrew
I  radition,  '97.
Geschichle  Babyloniens  u.  As-
syriens,  '85/:
Liglitfuot,  Horn  Ilebraicw,  1684.
Ilohiies  and  Parsons,  Vetus  Testa-
mentum Griccum cum variis
Icctionibus,  179.S-1827.
G. ii. Gray, Studies in Hebrew

Proper  Aames,  '9O.
Henry  Preserved  Smith.
International  Critical  Commentary.
Die  Ileilige  Schrift. See  Kautzsch.
Richm's  Iland'toorterbuch  des  bibli-
schen Alterlhtims, 2 vols.,  '84;
'-',  '93-'94. See  also  Delitzsch
(Friedr.).

Israelitische  u.ji'idische  Geschichle.

See  Wellhausen.
Introduction.
Introduction to Isaiah. See

Cheyne.
Itala. See  TEXT  AND VERSIONS.
Ilineraium  Antornini,  Fortiad'Ur-

ban,  '45.

Old  Hebrew  historical  document.
Later  additions  to  J.
Journal  of  the  American Oriental

Society,  '5 1  ^f.
M.  Jastrow,  Dictionary  of  the  I'ar-

gumim,  the I'almud  Babli,  etc.,

and  Midrashim,  '^6fjf.
Journal .Isiatiquc, '53  ff.; 7th

ser.,'73;  8thser., '83;  9thser.,'93.
Journal  of  Biblical  literature  and

Exegesis,  'go  Jf.; formerly  ('82-

'88)  caWed  Journal  of  the  Society

of  Biblical  lit.  and  Exeg.
Jahrbiicher  der  bibl. Wissenschaft

('49-'65)-
Jahrbiicher  fi'tr  dcutsche Theologie,

'56-'7S.
The  '  Prophetical '  narrative  of  the

He.xateuch,  composed  of  J  and  E.
P. Jensen, Die Kosmologie der

Babylonier,  '90.
Jerome,  or  Jeremiah.
Jonathan. .See  Targum.
Flavius  Josephus  (b.  37  A.D.),  Anti-

quitales Judaicic, De Bella

Judaico, Vita,  contra  .Apionem

(ed.  Niese,  3  vols.,  '87-'94).
Journal  of  Philology,  i.  (Nos.  I  and

2,  '68),  ii.  (Nos.  3  and  4,  '69), etc.
Jahrbiicher  fur  protestantische  1  heo-

k^>'^  'IS- 92.

Jewish  Quarterly  Review,  'SS-'Sq^.

Journal  of  Royal  .tsialic  Society
(vols.  1-20,  '34^.;  new  ser.,
vols.  i-24,'65-'92;  currentseries,
•93/".).

See  JBL.

Die  Keilinschriftenu.  d.  .lite  Testa-
ment. See  Schrader,
E.  Kautzsch  :

Grammalik des Biblischen-

Aramaischen,  '84.
Die  heilige  Schrift  des  Allen
Teslauienls,  '94.


xxii ABBREVIATIONS,  SYMBOLS,  AND  BIBLIOGRAPHICAL  NOTES

Apokr. .  .  Die  Apokryphen  u.  Pseudepi-

graphen des alien I'esia-
ments,  '98/!
KB.  . . Keilinschrifdiche  Bihliothek,

Satntulungvon  ass.  u.  hah.  1  exlen
in Umschrift  u.  Uehersetzung,  5
vols,  (i,  2,  3  <7,  ^,  4,  5),  '89-'y6.
Edited  by  Schrader,  in  coUaljora-
tion with L. Abel,  C. Bezold,
P. Jensen, F. E. Peiser, and
H.  Winckler.
Ke. . . . K.  F.  Keil  (d.  '88).
Kenn. . . B. Kennicott (1718-83), Velus
Teslanienlum Hehraicuin cum
variis  lectionihus,  2  vols.,  1776-
80.
KG  . . . Kirchengeschichle.
KGF . . Keilinschriften  u.  Geschichtsforsch-

ung. See  Schrader.
KGH . . Kurzgefasstes exegetisches Hand-
Inu/i. See  Di.,  Hitz.,  Knob.,  Ol.
KGK . . Kurzgefasster  Kommentar  zu  den
hciligen  Schriften  Alten  u.  Neuen
I'estavienls sowie  zu  den Apo-
kryphen, ed, H. Strack and
O.  Zockler,  '87^^.
KHC . . Kurzer Hand-cotnmentar zum
Alten  Testament,  ed.  Marti,  '97_^
Ki. .  .  . Rudolf  Kittel  :

Gesch. .  Geschichte  de}-  Hebt(ier,2\o\s.,

'88,  '92; Eng.  transl.,  I/is-
tory of  the  Hehrews, '95-
'96.
Ch.  SBOT  TheBookofChronicles,<Zx\\:\cz\

Edition  of  the  Hebrew  text,
'95  (translated  by  Bacon).
Kim.  . . R.  David  Kimhi,  f/;ra 1200  A.n.,

the famous  Jewish scholar  and
lexicographer,  by  whose  exegesis
the  AV  is  mainly  guided.
A'?«[j3. . . Kinship  and  Marriage  in  Early

Arahia. See  W.  R.  Smith.
Kl.  Proph. . Kleine  Propheten  ( Minor  Prophets) .

See  Wellhausen,  Nowack,  etc.
KIo[st]. . . Aug. Klostermann, Die Pitcher
Samuelisundder  K'onige  ('87)  in
KGK.
G  VI . .  Geschichte  des  Volkes  Israel  his

zur  A'estauration  unterEsra
und  Nehetnia,  '96.
Kn[ob], . . Aug.  Knobel(i8o7-63)  in  A'G'//.-
Exodus  und  leviticus,  <-'  by  Dill-
mann,  '80; Der  Prophet  Jcsaia,
'43.  ^^'.  '6i. See  Dillmann.
K6. . . . F.  E.  Konig,  Ilistorisch-Kritisches
Lehrgeh'dude der Ilehrdischen
Sprache,  3  vols.,  '8l-'97.
Koh.  . . Aug.  Kohler.

Kr. . . . Kre  (lit.  'to  be  read '),  a  marginal

reading which the Massoretes

intended  to  supplant  that  in  the

text  (Kethib); see  below.

Kt. . . . Kethib  (lit.  'written'),  a  reading

in  the  MT; see  above.
Kue  . . . Abr.  Kuenen  (1828-91)  :

Ond  . .  Historisch-critisch Onderzoek

naar  het  ontstaan  en  de
verzameling  van  de  Boeken
des  Ouden  Verhonds,  3  vols.,
'6i-'65;  <2','85-'89;  Germ,
transl.,  Ilistorisch-kritische
Einleitting  in  die  Biicher
des  Alten  Testaments,  '87-
'92;  vol.  i.,  I  he  Ilexateuch,
translated  by  Philip  Wick-
steed,  '86.


Godsd.

De  Godsdienst  van  Israel,  '69— '70;

Eng.  transl.,  3  vols.,  "73-'75.

De  Profeten

en  der  Profetie  onder  Israel,  '75;

ET,  '77.

Ges.Ahh. .

Gesammelte  Abhandlungen  zur

bibl. Wissenschaft,  Cierman

by  Budde,  '94.

L . . .

de Lagarde, librorum Veteris

Testatncnti Canonicorum,  Pars

Prior  Greece,  ^'i'i,.

Lag. . .

Paul  de  Lagarde  ('27-'9i)  :

Hag.

Hagiographa  Chaldaice,  '73.

Syr. . .

Libri  Veteris  Testamenti  Apo-

cryphi  Syriace,  '61.

Ges.  Abh. .

Gesammelte  Ahhandlungen,''66.

Mitt.

Mitteilungen,  i.-iv.,  '84-"89.

Sym.

Symmicta,  ii.,  '80.

Prov.

Proverbien,  '63.

Uhers.

Uehersicht  iiher  die  itn  Ara-

or  BN

maischen,  Arahischen, und

Ilehrdischen  iihliche  Bildung

der  Nomina,  '89.

Beitr.

Bcitrdge  z.  haktrischen  lexiko-

graphie,  '68.

Proph.

Prophetie  Chaldaice,  '72.

Sem.

Semi  tic  a,  'jSf.

Arm.  St. .

Armenische  Studien.

Or. .

Oricntalia,  i.,  '79.

Lane

E.  W. Lane,  An  Arabic-English

lexicon,  '63^.

Z  [and]  B .

W. M.  Thomson, The  land  and

the  Book,  '59; new  ed.  '94.

LBR

Later Biblical Researches. See

Robinson.

Levy,  NHWB

J. Levy, Neuhehrdisches  u.  chal-

ddischcs  Worterhnch,  '76-'89.

Chald.  lex.

Chalddisches  IVorterhuch  iiher

die  Targumim,  '67^.

Lehrgeh. .

See  Konig.

Leps.  Denkm. .

R.  Lepsius,  Denkvidler  aus  Aegyp-

ten  u.  Aethiopien,  '49-'6o.

Lightf. .

John Lightfoot (1602-75),  Horce

Ilehraicce  (1684).

Joseph B. Lightfoot ('28-'89);

commentaries on Galatians

((*), '74); Philippians (<»),

'73); Colossians and  Phile-

mon ('75).

Lips.  I  / .

Lipsius,  Die  Apokryphen  A  paste  l-

geschichten u. Apostellegenden,

'83-'90.

Low  .

J. Low,  Aramdische  PJianzenna-

men,  '81.

Luc.

SeeL.

LXX  or  (5

Septuagint. See above,  p.  xv  f.,

and  Text  and  Versions.

Maimonides


Mand.
Marq.  Fund.


Moses  Maimonides  (1131-1204).
Exegete,  author  of  Mishneh
Torah,  More  Nebokhim,  etc.


Mandaean. See  Aramaic,  5


10.


J.  Marquart,  Fundamente  israeliti-
scher  u.  jiidischer  Geschichte,  '96.
K.  Marti :

Kurzgefasste Gramtnatik d.
bihlisch-Aramdischen
Sprache,  '96.
Geschichte  der  Israeli tischen  Peligion^^\  '97  (a
revision  of  A. Kayser,  Die
Theol.  des  AT).
Das  Buchjesaia,  in  KHC,  '99.
J.  Maspero :

Daivn  of  Civilisation,  Egypt

and  Chaldea  ((2),  '96).
Les premieres Melees des
Peuples ; ET by McClure.


Marti

Gram.


Jes
Masp.


ABBREVIATIONS,  SYMBOLS,  AND  BIBLIOGRAPHICAL  NOTES


MBBA
MDPV

Merx

Mey  .
GA


Entstleh\
Meyer

MGWJ .
MH  .


MI


Midr.
Mish.


I


The  Struggle  of  the  Nations

— ^-SyP^'  Syr  id, and  Assyria.

Ilistoire  Ancienne  des  Feuples

de  V  Orient  ('99#.)-

Monatshericht  der  Berliner  Aka-

demic,
Mittheilungen  und Nachrichten  des
Deutschen Paldsttna-  Vereins,

'95  #•
A. Merx, Archiv  f,  wissenschaft-
liche  Erforschung d.  AT  ('69).
Ed.  Meyer :

Geschichte des Alter thums ;
i.,  Gesch.  d.  Orients  bis  ztir
Ben-iindung  des  Perserreichs
('04)  ; ii.,  Gesch.  des  Abend-
landes bis auf  die Per-
serkriege  ('93).
Die hnislehung des Juden-
tliums,  '96.
H. A. W. Meyer (1800-73),
founder  of  the  series  Kritisch-
exegctischer  Kotnmentar  i'tber  das
Neue  'J'eslainenk
Monatsschrifl  fur  Gesch,  u.  Wiss.

des  Judenthunis,  '51^.
Mishnic  Hebrew,  the  language  of
the Mishna, Tosephta, Mid-
rashim,  and  considerable  parts  of
the  Talmud.
Mesha Inscription, commonly
known  as  the  '  Moabite  Stone.'
See  Mesha.
Midrash. See  Chroxici.es,  §  6  (2).
Mishna, the standard collection
(completed,  according  to  tradi-
tion, by  R.  Judah  the  I  loly,  about
200  A.D.)  of  sixty-three  treatises
(representing  the  Jewish  tradi-
tional or  unwritten  law  as  devel-
oped by the second century
A.D.),  arranged  in  six  groups  or
Seders thus:  —  i. Zerd'lm (11
tractates), ii. Mo' id (12), iii.
Ndshim  (7),  iv.  Nezlkln  (10),  v.
Koddshim  ( 1 1 ),  vi .  Tohoroth  (12).
Aboda  zara,  iv.  8 Mikwa'oth,  vi.  6
Aboth,  iv.  9  Moed  Katan,  ii.  11

'Arakhin,  v.  5  Nazir,  iii.  ^

Baba  Bathra,  iv.  3 N6darim,  iii.  3
V.  I Nega'im,  vi.  3
Nidda,  vi,  7
Ohaloth,  VI.  2
'Orla,  i 10
Para,  vi.  4
Pe'a,  i.  2
Pgsachim,  ii.  3
Rosh  Ha(sh)shana,


Baba  Kamma
Baba  Mesia,  iv.  2
Bekhoroth,  v.  4
Berakhoth,  i.  i
Be  a,  ii.  7
Bikkurim,  i.  11
ChSgiga,  ii.  12
Challa,  i.  9
ChuUin,  V.  3
Demai,  i.  3
'Eduyoth,  IV.  7
'Erubiiij  ii.  2
Gittin,  iii.  6.
Horayoth,  iv.  lo
Kelim,  vi.  i
Kgrithoth,  V.  7
Kgthuboth,  iii.  2
Kiddushin,  iii.  7
Kil'dyim,  1.  4
Kinnim,  v.  11
Ma'Sser  Shemi,  i.
Ma'Sseroth,  i.  7
Makh.shirin,  vi.  8.
Makkoth,  iv.  5
Mggilla,  ii.  10
Mg'ila,  V.  8
M6nachoth,  v.  2
Middoth,  V.  10


MT  .


Sanhedrin,  iv.  4
Shabbath,  ii.  i
Shgbu'oth,  iv.  6
Shebi'ith,  i.  5
Shelfalim,  ii.  4
Sota,  iii.  5
Sukka,  ii.  6
Ta'Snith,  ii.  9
Tamjd,  v.  9.
T6bul  Yom,  vi.  10
Tgmura,  v.  6
Tgrumoth,  i.  6
Tohoroth,  vi.  s
•Uksin,  vi.  12
Yadayim,  vi.  11
Yfbamoth,  iii.  i
Yoma,  ii.  5
Zabim,  vi.  9
ZSbachira,  v.  1

Massoretic  text,  the  Hebrew  text  of
the  or  substantially  as  it  was  in
the  early  part  of  the  second
century  A.D.  (temp.  Mishna).
It remained unvocalised until


n.
Nab.

NB  .
Nestle,  Eig.

Marg.
Neub.  Geogr.

NHB .

NHWB .

no. .

N6[ld]. .
Unters.

about the end of the seventh
century  a.d. See  Text.
Murray . . A New English Dictionary on
Historical  Principles,  ed.  J.  A.
H. Murray, '88  ff.; also H.
Bradley,  '97^.
Muss- Am.  W.  M  uss-Arnolt,  A  Concise  Diction-

ary of  the  Assyrian Language,
'94-'99  (a-.mag).
MVG . . Mittheilungen der Vorderasiat-
ischen  Gesellschaft,  '97^.
note.

Nabataean. See  Aramaic,  §  4.
Notninalbildung,  Barth ; sec  Ba.
Die israelitischen Eigeniiamen
nach Hirer religionsgeschicht-
lichen  Bedeutung,  '76.
Maj-ginalien  u.  Materialien,  '93.
A  Neubauer,  Geographic  du  'Pal-
mud,  '68.
Natural  History  of  the  Bible. See

Tristram.
Neu-hebr.  u.  chaldTiisches  Worter-

buch. .See  Levy,
number.
Th.  Noldeke :

Untersuchungen z. Kritik d.

Alien  7'estaments,  '69.
Altteslamentliche  Litteratur,  '68.
Now.  . . W.  Nowack :

Hlebr.']  A[rch.] Lehrbuch d. Hebraischen
Archaologie, '  94.
Die Kleinen Propheten (in
//A-Q,  '97.
New  Testament,  Xeues  Testament.
Justus  Olshausen :

Die  Psalinen,  '53.
Lehrbuch der hebr. Sprache,
'61  [incomplete].
OLZ  (or  Or.  LZ) Orientalistische Litteratur- Zei-
tung,  ed.  Peiser,  '98/
L/istorisch-critisch  Onderzoek. See

Kuenen.
Onkelos,  Onqelos. See  Targ.
See"  OS.

Origin  of  the  Psalter.  See  Cheyne.
Onontastica  Sacra,  containing  the
'  name-lists '  of  Eusebius  and
Jerome  (Lagarde,  <-*,  '87;  the
pagination  of  i^)  printed  on  the
margin  of  (2)  is  followed).
OT  .  .  .  Old  Testament.
OTJC  .  .  Old  Testament  in  the  Jewish
Church. See  W.  R.  Smith.


Kl.  Proph.

NT .

Ol[sh].  .
Ps.  .
Lehrb.


Ond.

Onk.,  Onq
Onom,
OPs.
OS.  .


P
P2
Pal.


Palm.
Pal.  Syr.

PA  OS


Pat.  Pal. .
PE .

PEEQiu.  5/.]


PEFMlem.-]


Priestly  Writer. See  Hist.  Lit.

Secondary  Priestly  Writers.

F.  Buhl,  Geographic  des  alien  Pal-
astina,  '96.  See  also  Baedeker
and  Reland.

Palmyrene. See  Aramaic,  §  4.

Palestinian  Syriac  or  Christian
Palestinian. See  Aramaic,  §  4.

Proceedings  of  American  Oriental
Society,  'S^ff-  (printed  annually
at  end  of/.-/ (95).

Wo  lag  das  Paradies  ?  See
Delitzsch.

Sayce,  Patriarchal  Palestine,  '95.

Pmparatio  I-'.vangelica.  See  Euse-
bius.

Palestine  Exploration  Fund
[founded  '65]  Quarterly  State-
ment, '69^.

Palestine  /exploration  Fund  Me-
moirs, 3  vols.,  '8 1 -'83.


ABBREVIATIONS.  SYMBOLS.  AND  BIBLIOGRAPHICAL  NOTES


Per.-Chip.


Pers.
Pesh.


Ph.,  Phoen.
PRE


Preuss.  Jahrbb.
Prim.  Cult.

Proph.  Is.

Prol.
Prot.  KZ  .


PSBA

PS  Thes.
Pun.

R .

RjE .

Rd  .
Rp  .
1-5R


Rab.
Rashi


Rec.  Trav.

REJ

Rel.  Pfl/.  .

Rev.

Rev.  Sem.
Ri.  Sa. .


Rob.


BR


LBR  or  BR  iv.
or  ^y?(2)  iii.


Perrot  and  Chipiez :

Histoire  de  PArt  dans  Panti-
quite.  Agypte  —  Assyrie  —
Perse  —  Asie  Mineuere  —
Grece  —  £trurie  — Rome;

'81  #.
ET:  Ancient  Egypt,  '83;
Chaldaa  and  Assyria,  '84;
Phcenicia  and  Cyprus,  '85;
Sardinia,  Judaa,  etc.,  '90;
Primitive  Greece,  '94.

Persian.

Peshltta,  the  Syriac  vulgate  (2nd-
3rd  cent.).  Vetus  1  estatnentum
Syriace,  ed.  S.  Lee,  '23,  0 1'  and
NT,  '24.

W.  E.  Barnes,  An  Apparatus  Cri-
ticus  to  Chronicles  in  the  Peshitta
Version,  '97.

Phcenician.

Real- F.ncyklopadie  fi'ir  protestan-
tise he  J  heologie  u.  K  ire  he,  ed,
J.  J.  Ilerzog,  22  vols.,  '54-'68;
<2),  ed.  J.  J.  Herzog,  G.  L.
Plitt,  Alb.  Hauck,  18  vols.,  '77-
'88;  (3),  ed.  Alb.  Hauck,  vol.
i.-vii.  [A-Hau],  '96-'99.

Preussische  Jahrbiicher,  '''J'2.  jf.

E.  B.  'i'ylor.  Primitive  Culture,
'71; (3),  '91.

The  Prophecies  of  Isaiah.  See
Cheyne.

Prolegomena. See  Wellhausen.

Protestantische  Kirchenzeitung  fi'ir
das  Evangelische  Deutschland
(vols.i -xliii.,'54-'96);  continued
as  Prot.  Alonatshffte  ('97  _^.).

Proceedings  of  the  Society  of  Bibli-
cal Archaology,  ^"J^ff-

Payne  Smith,  1  liesaurus  Syriacus.

Punic.

Redactor  or  Editor.

Redactor  (s)  of  JE.

Deuteronomistic  Editor(s).

Priestly  Redactor(s).

H.  C.  Ravvlinson,  I'he Cuneiform

Inscriptions of Western Asia,

i.-v.  ('61-84; iv.  t-'),  '91).
Rabbinical.
i.e. Rabbenu Shelomoh Yishaki

(1040- 1 1 05), the celebrated

Jewish  commentator.
Recueil  de travaux relatifs  a  la

philol.  et  a V Archeol.  egypt. et

assyr.  '-joff.
Revue  des  Etudes  jtiives,  \.,  '80;  ii.

and  iii.,  '81; and  so  on.
Reland,  Pahsstina  ex  Monumentis

veteribus  illustrata,  2  vols.,  1714.
Revue,

Revue  semitique,  '93 _^.
Die Biicher Richter u. Samuel.

See  Budde.
Edward  Robinson:

Biblical  Researches  in  Pales-
tine, Alt.  Sinai,  and  Arabia
Petraa,  a  journal  of  travels
in  the  year  1838  (i.-iii.,  '41
=  i^/v'<-'),  i.-ii.,  '56).
Later  Biblical  Researches  in  Pales-
tine and  the  adjacent  Regions,  a

journal  of  travels in  the  year

1852  ('56).
Physical Geography  of  the  Holy

Land,  '65.


Rys.
Saad.


Sab.


Sab.  Denkm.


Sam.
SB  AW


Roscher  .  .  Ausfiihrliches  Lexikon  d.  Griech-
ischen  u.  Romischen  Mythologie
('84/:).

RP  .  .  .  Records  of  the  Past,  being  English
translations  of  the  Ancient  Monu-
ments of  Egypt  and  Western
Asia,  ed.  S.  Birch,  vols,  i.-xii.
('73-'8i ).  New  series  [A'/A-')]  ed.
A.  H.  Sayce,  vols,  i.-vi.,  '88-92.
See  A.SSYRIA,  §  35.

RS  or  Rel.  Sem.  Religion  of  the  Semites.  See  W.
R.  Smith.

RV  .  .  .  Revised  Version  (NT,  '80;  OT,
'84; Apocrypha,  '95).

RWB  .  .  G.B.  Winer(i789-i858),5?Mjf//d'i
Real-worterbuch,  '20; (3)^  2  vols.,

'47/
Ryssel; cp.  Dillmann,  Bertheau.

R.  Sa'adya  (Se'adya;  Ar.  Sa'Id),
the  tenth  century  Jewish  gram-
marian and  lexicographer  (b,
892);  Explanationsofthe//rt/tf.v-
legomena  in  the  0 1',  etc.
Sabaean,  less  fittingly  called
Himyaritic;  the  name  given  to
a  class  of  S.  Arabian  inscrip-
tions.
Sabaische  Denkm'dler,  edd.  Miiller

and  Mordtmann.
Samaritan.

Sitzungsberichte der  Berlinischen
Akademie  der  Wissenschaften.
SBE  . . The Sacred Books of  the East,

translated  by  various  scholars
and  edited  by  the  Rt.  Hon.  F.
Max  Miiller,  50  vols.  1879^.
SBOT  {Yxig.')  [Otherwise  known  as  the  Poly-
chrome Bible']  The  Sacred  Books
of  the  Old  Testament,  a  new  Eng.
transl.,  with  Explanatory  Notes
and  Pictorial  Illustrations  ;  pre-
pa  red  by  em  inent  biblical  schola  rs
of  Europe  and  of  America,  and
edited,  with  tJie  assistance  of
Horace  Iloiuard Eurness,  by  Paul
Haupt,  '97/:
SBOT  (Heb.)  ,  Haupt..  The  Sacred  Books  of  the  Old
Testament ;  a  critical  edition  of
the  Hebreio  text,  printed  in
colours,  with  notes,  prepared  by
eminent  biblicalscholars  of  Europe
and  America,  under  the  editorial
direction  of  Paul  Haupt,  '93^.
Sch'opf. . . Gunkel,  Schopfung  und  Chaos  in

Urzeit  u.  Endzeit,  '95.
Schr.  . . E. Schrader ; editor of KB

iq.v.-]  :
KGF .  Keilinschriften  u.  Geschichts-

forschung,  '78.
KA  T .  D  '  Keilinschriften  u.  d.  Alte

Testament,'' ■]2; ''-'>, ''?>},.

COT  .  Eng. transl. of  KAT(^-^ by

O. C. Whitehouse, The

Cuneiform  Inscriptions  and

*  the  Old  Testament,  2  vols.,

'85,  '88  (the  pagination  of

the  German  is  retained  in

the  margin  of  the  Eng.  ed.).

Schiir. . . E.  Schurer:

GJV  . Geschichte des jiidischen Volkes

im  Zeitalter  Jesu  Christi  ;
i.  Einleitung  u.  Politische  Ge-
schichte, '90;  ii.  Die  Inneren
Zustande  Paliistinas  u.  des
Judischen Volkes im Zeitalter


ABBREVIATIONS,  SYMBOLS,  AND  BIBLIOGRAPHICAL  NOTES


Hist.


Selden


Sem.

Sin.

Smend,  Listen

Smith

GASm.
HG


WRS.


OTJC
Proph.


Kin.

KleL'\Slem.


SP


Spencer
SS .


St.,  Sta. .
GVI .


Abh.


St.  Kr. .
Stad.  m.  m.


Stud.  Bibl.


Sw.  .


SWAW


Jesu  Christi,  '86; new  ed.  vol.

ii. Die Inneren  Zustande,  '98,

vol.  iii.  Das  Judenthum  in  der

Zerstrcuung  u.  die  jiidische  Lite-

ratur,  '98.
ET  of  above  {'90  ff.). Vols.  1/

{i.e ,  Div.  i.  vols,  i  /)  =  vol. i

of  German; vols.  3-5  (/.<•.,  Div.

ii.  vols.  1-3)  =  vol.  2  of  German

[=  vols,  ii.,  iii  of  (3)].
, J. Selden, de  Jure naturali et

gentium  juxta  disciplinatn  Ebnc-

oruin,  7  i)ks.,  1665.

de  Diis  Syr  is,  1 61 7.
Semitic.

Sinaitic;  see  Aramaic,  §  4.
Smend, Die Listen der  Biicher

Esra  u.  A'ehemia/i,  '81.

George  .Vdani  Smith :

T/ie  LListorical  Geography  of
the  Holy  L.and,  especially  in
relation to the History  of
Lsrael and of the Early
Church,  '94  (additions  to  <••',
'96).
William  Robertson  Smith  C'46-'94 :
The  Old  Testament  in  the  Jewish
Church,'2,\ ;  <-',  revised  and  much
enlarged,  '92; (Germ,  transl.  by
Rothstein,  '94).
The  Prophets  of  Lsrael  and  their
place  in  LListory,  to  the  close  of
the  eighth  century  B.C.,  '82; (-',
with introduction and addi-
tional  notes  by  T. K.  Cheyne,
'95-
Kinship  and  Marriage  in  Early
Arabia,  '85.
]  Lectures  on the Peligion of the
Semites: 1st  ser.. The Funda-
mental Institutions, '89; new
and  revised  edition  {PS(-1),  '94;
Germ,  transl.  by  Stube,  '99.
[The  MS  notes  of  the  later  Burnett
Lectures — on  Priesthood,  Divina-
tion and  Prophecy,  and  Semitic
Polytheism and Cosmogony  —
remain unpublished, but are
occasionally  cited  by  the  editors
in  the  Encyclopiedia  Biblica  as
'  Burnett  Lects.  MS '].

A.  P.  Stanley,  Sinai  and  Palestine
in  connection  with  their  history,
'56,  last  ed.  '96.

De  Legibus  LLebrivorum  Ritualibus

(2  vols.  1727).
Siegfried and Stade, LLebrdischcs

Worterbuch zum Alien Testa-

mente,  '93.

B.  Stade  :

Gesch.  d. Volkes  Lsrael,  '81-
'88.

Ausgewdhlte  Akademische  Re-
den  u.  Abhandlungen,  '99.
Studien  und  Kritiken,  '22>ff.
Stadiasmus magni maris (Mar-

cianus).
Studia  Biblica,  Essays  in  Biblical
ArcluFology  and Criticism and
kindred  subjects,  4  vols.,  '85-'9i.
H.  B.  Swete, The  Old  Testament
in  Greek  according  to  the  Septua-
gint;  (»,  '87-'94; (2),  '95-'99.
Sitzungsberichte d. IViener  Aka-
demie  d.  IVissenschaften.


Sym[m]  .  .  Symmachus,  author  of  a  Greek
version  of  the  Old  Testament
{circa  200  A.D.). See  Text.

Syr.  • . . Syriac. See  Aramaic,  §11/

Tab.  Peut.  . Tabula  Peutingeriana,  Desjardins,

'68.

Talm.  Bab.  Jer.  Talmud,  Babylonian  or  Jerusalem,
consisting  of  the  text  of  the
Mishna  broken  up  into  small
sections,  each  followed  by  the  dis-
cursive comment  called  Gemara.
See  Law  Litkratlre.

T[ar]g. . . Targum. See  Text.

Jer. . . The (fragmentary) Targum  Jeru-

shalmi.
Jon. . . Targum  Jonathan,  the  name  borne
by the Babylonian Targum to
the  Prophets.
Onk.  .  . Targum  Onkelos, the  Babylonian

Targum  to  the  Pentateuch
(towards  end  of  second  century

A.D.).

ps.-Jon. . The Targ. to the Pentateuch,
known  by  the  name  of  Jonathan.

TBS  . . Der 'Text  der  Biicher  Samuelis  :

see  Wellhausen;  or  Azotes  on  the
Hebre-M  'Lext  of  the  Books  of
Samuel :  see  Driver.

temp. . . tempore  (in  the  time  [of]).

T[e.\tus]  R[e- The 'received text' of  the NT.
ceptus]  See  Text.

Th[e].  .  .  Thenius,  die  Biicher  Samuelis  in
A'G/L  '42;  (-'',  '64;  (3),  Lohr,  '98.

Theod.  .  .  Theodotion  (end  of  second  cen-
tury), author  of  a  Greek  version
of  the  Old  Testament  ('  rather  a
revision  of  the  LXX  tiian  a  new
translation'). See  Text.

Theol.  Studien  . Studien,  published in connection
with  Th.  T  (see  Deutero.nomy,
§  33^)-

LVies.  . . See  Gesenius.

R.  Payne  Smith,  Thesaurus  Syria-
ciis,  '(ySff.

Th.  T . . Theologisch  Tijdschrift,  '67^.

Ti.  or  Tisch.  .  Tischendorf,  iVovum  'Lestamentum
Gncce,  editio  octava  critica
maior,  '69-'72.

TLZ  . . Theoloi^ische  LJteraturzeitung,

Tosephta  . . See  Law  Litkkatire.
Treg.  .  . S. P. Tregelles, The Greek  Xezu

Testament ;  edited  from  ancient
authorities,  '57-'72.
Tristram . . II.  B.  Tristram :

LLP. . 77te  Eauna  and  Flora  of  Palestine,

'89.
ATHB  . The  Xatural  History  of  the  Bible,

<«>,  '89.
TSBA .  . Transactions  of  Soc.  Bib.  Archieol.,

vols,  i.-ix.,  '72^.
Tiib.  Z.  f  Theol. Tiibingen  Zeitschrift  f Theologie,
'34  #

Untersuch.  . Untersuchungen. See Xoldeke,

Winckler.
Ur gesch. , . Die biblische Urgachichte. See

Budde.

V. . . . verse.

Var.  Apoc. . The  Apocrypha  (AV)  edited  with

various  renderings,  etc.,  by  C.  J.

Ball.
Var.  Bib.  . The  OldandNe-.u  Testaments{.\\)

edited  with  various  renderings,

etc., by T. K. Cheyne, S. R.


xxvi ABBREVIATIONS,  SYMBOLS,  AND  BIBLIOGRAPHICAL  NOTES


Vet.  Lat.  .


Vs.  .


We.,  Wellh
De  Gent.


TBS


Phar.  u.
Sadd.


Gesch.
Prol.


IJG .


lAr.lHeid.
Kl.  Proph.
CH .


Weber


Wetstein
Wetz.


WF .

WH  [W  &  H]


Driver  (OT),  and  R.  L.  Clarke,
A.  Goodwin,  W.  Sanday  (NT)
[otherwise  known  as  the  Queen's
printers'  BibW].

VersioVctus  Latina;  the  old-Latin
version  (made  from  the  (Ireek);
later  superseded  by  the  Vulgate.
.See  Text  and  Vkusions.

Vulgate,  Jerome's  Latin  Bible:
or  from  Heb.,  NT  a  revision
of  Vet.  Lat.  (end  of  4th  and  be-
ginning of  5th  cent.).  See  Text.

Julius  Wellhausen.

De  Gentilnis  et Fa7tiiliis Judceis
qtuc  hi I C7ir. 2  4  nume-
raniur  Dissertatio  ('70).
Der  7  'ext  der  Biicher  Sa»i  uelis

('70-
Die  Pharts'deru.  d.Snddiicaer;
eine  Uiiterstichtmg  ziir  in-
neren  judischen Geschicht

('74).
Gescliichte  Israels,  vol.  i.  ('78).
2nd ed. of Gesch., entitled
Prolegomena  ziir  Gesch.  Is-
raels, '83; ET '85; 4th
Germ.  ed.  '95.
Israelitische u.  Ji'idischc Ge-
scliichte, '94; <''^', '97; an
amplification  of  Ahriss  der
Gesch.  Israels  u.  Juda's  in
'  Skizzen u. Vorarbeiten,'
'84. The Ahriss  was  sub-
stantially a  reproduction  of
'Israel'  in /s'^gW ('81; re-
pulilished in ET of  Prol.
['85] and separately as
Sketch  of  Hist.  0/ Israel  and
Judah,  (3),  '91).
Reste  Arabischen  Heidcntums
(in  '  Skizzen  u.  Vorarbeiten')
('87; <^', '97).
Die  Kletnen  PropJieten  iiber-
selzt, niit  A'oten ('92; (^\
'98).
Die Composition des Hexa-
teuchs  und  der  historischen
Biicher  des  Alten  Testaments
('85; Zweiter Druck, mit
Nachtragen,  '89; originally
published  in  JD  T  21  39^  ff.,
['76],  1'2  407  ['77],  and  in
Bleek,  Am/.  (4', '78).
System  der  Altsynagogalen  Paldsti-
nischen  Ilieologie  ;  ox  Die  lehren
des  Talmud,  '80  (edited  by  Franz
Delitzsch  and Georg  Schneder-
mann); (2)^  JUdische Ilieologie
auf Grund des Talmud und
verwandter Schriften, '97 (ed.
Schnedermann).
J.  J.  Wetstein,  Novum  Testamen-
tum  Gracum,  etc.,  2  vols,  folio  ;
1751-1752.
Wetzstein,  Ausgewdhlte  grtechische
und  lateinische Inschriften,  ge-
sammelt auf Keisen in den
Trachonen und  um das  Ilau-
rdnge/>irge,'(>T, ;  Reisehericht iiber
Ilaurdn  und  Trachonen,  '60.
Wellhausen- Furness, The  book  of
Psalms  ('98)  in  SPOT  {Eng.).
Westcott  and  Hort,  The  New  Tes-
tament in  tfie Original Greek,
'81.


Wilk.


Winer

RWB


Gram.


WMM .
Wr. .

Comp.
Gram.


Hugo  Winckler:
Unters. .  Untersuchungenz.  Altoriental-

ischen  Gcschichte,  '89.
A/tltestl.  Alttestamentliche Untersuch-

Unt.  ungen,  '92.

GBA  .  Geschichte  Bahyloniens  u.  As-

syriens,  '92.
A  OF  or  AF  Altorientalische Forschungen,

1st  ser.  i.-vi.,  '93-'97; 2nd
ser.  (/^/<-'))i.^'g8y;
GI . .  Geschichte Israels in einzel-

darstellungen,  i.  '95.
Sarg.  .  Die  Keilschrifttexte  Sargons,

'89.
KBs . .  Die Thontafeln von Tell-el-

Amarna  (ET  Metcalf).
J. G. Wilkinson, Manners and
Customs  of  the  Ancient  Egyptians,
'37-'4i ;  (^>  by  Birch,  3  vols.,  '78.
G.B.Winer:

Bibl. Realworterbuch ; see

R  WB.
Grammatik  des  neutestament-
lichen  Sprachidioms(^\  neu
bearbeitet  von Paul  Wilh.
Schmiedel, '94^; ET  of
6th  ed.,  W.  F.  Moulton,  '70.
See  As.  u.  Eur.
W.  Wright :

Lectures  on  the Comparative
Grammar of  the Semitic
Languages,  '90.
Ar.  Gram.  A Grammar  of  the Arabic

Language,  translated  from
the  German  of  Caspari  and
edited,  with  numerous  addi-
tions and  corrections  by  W.
Wright;  (2)  2  vols.,  '74-'75 ;
(3)  revised  by  W.  Robertson
Smith  and  M.  J.  de  Goeje,
vol.  i.  '96,  vol.  ii.  '98.
WRS . . William Robertson Smith, See

Smith.
WZKM . . Wiener  Zeitschrift  filr  d.  Kunde

des  Morgenlandes,  ^']  ff-
Yakut  .  .  The  well-known  Arabian  geo-
graphical writer  (i  179-1229).
Kitab  Mdjam  el-Bulddn  edited
by  ¥.  Wiistenfeld  {Jacufs  Geo-
graphisches  VVorterbuch,  '66-'7o).

Z . . . Zeitschrift  (Journal).

ZA .  . . Zeitschrift  fiir  Assyriologie  u.  ver-

wandte Gebiete,  '86^.
ZA . . . Zeitschrift  fiir  Agyptische  Sprache

u.  Alterthumskunde,  '63^.
ZATW . . Zeitschrift  fUr  die  Alttestamentliche

IVissenschaft,  '81/".
ZDMG . . Zeitschrift  der  Deutschen  Morgen-

Idndischen  Gesellschaft,  '46^.
ZDPV .  . Zeitschrift  des  Deutschen  Paldstina-

vereins,  'j?>ff-
ZKF .  . Zeitschrift  fur  Keilschriftforschung

und  verwandte Gebiete, '84  f,

continued  as  ZA.
ZKM . . See  WZKM.
ZKW . . Zeitschrift  fiir  kirchliche Wissen-

schaft  u.  kirchliches  Lehen  (ed.

Luthardt),  i.-ix.,  'So-'Sg/".
ZLT . . Zeitschrift  fur  die  gesammte  luther-

ische  Theologie  und  Kirche,  '40-

'78.
ZTK . . Zeitschrift fiir Theologie und

Kirche,  '91  ff.
ZWT . ■ Zeitschrift fiir wissenschaftliche

Theologie  (ed.  Hilgenfeld),  '587?".


CONTRIBUTORS TO VOLUME I


Arranged  according  to  the  alphabetical  order  of  the  signatures  appended  to  their  articles.
Joint  authorship  is  where  possible  indicated  thus :  A.  b.  §§  1-5;  c.  D.  §§6-io.


A.  A.  B.


A.  J.

A.  K.

A.  R.  S.  K.

C.  C.
C.  F.  B.

C.  H.  W.  J.
C.  J.  B.

C.  P.  T.

E.  M.

F.  B.


G.  A.  Si.
G.  B.G.

G.  F.  M.

H.  G.

H.  V.  S.

H.  W.  H.

H.  Z.

LA.

I.E.
J.  A.  R.


J.  M.


Bevan,  Anthony  Ashley,  Lord
Almoner's  Professor  of  Arabic,  Cam-
bridge.

Shipley,  A.  E.,  M.A.,  F.Z.S..  Fellow,
Tutor,  and  Lecturer  at  Christ's  College,
Cambridge.

JiJi.iCHEK,  ADOLF,  Professor  of  Church
History  and  New  Testament  Exegesis,
Marburg.

Kamphausen,  Adolf,  Professor  of  Old
Testament  Exegesis,  Bonn.

Kennedy,  Akchihald,  R.  S.,  M.A.,
D.D.,  Professor  of  Hebrew  and
Semitic  Languages,  Edinburgh.

Creigh  roN,  C,  M.U.,  34  Great  Ormund
Street,  London.

Burnev,  Rev.  C.  F.,  M.A.,  Lecturer  in
Hebrew,  and  Fellow  of  St.  John's
College,  Oxford.

JOHNS,  Rev.  C.  H.  W.,  M.A.,  Queen's
College,  Cambridge.

Ball,  Rev.  C.  J.,  M.A.,  Chaplain  to
the  Honourable  Society  of  Lincoln's
Inn,  London.

TlELE,  C.  P.,  Professor  of  Comparative
History  and  Philosophy  of  Religion,
Leyden.

Meyer,  Eduard,  Professor  of  Ancient
History,  Halle.

Brown,  Rev.  Francis,  D.D.,  Daven-
port Professor  of  Hebrew  and  the
cognate  Languages  in  the  Union
Theological  Seminary,  New  York.

Smith,  Rev.  Georce  Adam,  D.D.,
LL.D.,  Professor  of  Hebrew  and  Old
Testament  Exegesis,  Free  Church
College,  Glasgow.

SIMCOX,  G.  A.,  M.A.,  Queen's  College,
Oxford.

Gray,  G.  Buchanan,  M.A.,  Lecturer
in  Hebrew  and  Old  Testament  The-
ology, Mansfield  College,  Oxford.

Moore,  Rev.  George  F.,  D.D.,  Pro-
fessor of  Hebrew  in  Andovcr  Theo-
logical Seminary,  Andover,  Mass.

Guthe.  Hermann,  a.o.  Professor  of
Old  Testament  Exegesis,  Leipsic.

Soden,  Baron  Hermann  von.  Profes-
sor of  New  Testament  Exegesis,  Berlin.

Hogg,  Hope  W.,  M.A.,  4  Winchester
Road,  Oxford.

ZlMMERN,  Heinrich,  a.o.  Professor  of
Assyriology,  Leipsic.

Abrahams,  Israel,  London,  Editor  of
the  Jewish  Quarterly  Review.

Benzingek,  Dr.  IMMANUEL,  Berlin.

Robinson,  Rev.  J.  Armitage,  D.D.,
Canon  of  Westminster.

Massie,  John,  M.A.,  Yates  Professor  of
New  Testament  Exegesis  in  Mansfield
College,  Oxford ;  formerly  scholar  of
St.  John's  College,  Cambridge.

BUDDE,  Karl,  Professor  of  Old  Testa-
ment Exegesis,  Strassburg.


K.

M.

Lu

.G.

L.

W.K.

M

A.  C.

M

J-  (Jr.)

M.

R.J.

N.M.

N.  S.


0.  C.  W.


P.  W.  S.
R.  H.  C.


R.  W.  R.


s

A.  C.

s.

R.D.

T.  G.  P.

T.  K.  C.

T.

N.

T.

W.D

W.B.


Marii,  Karl,  Professor  of  Old  Testa-
ment Exegesis  and  the  Hebrew  Lan-
guage, Berne.

Gautier,  Lucien,  Professor  of  Old
Testament  Exegesis  and  History,
Lausanne.

King,  Leonard  William,  M.A.,  F.S.A.,
Assistant  to  the  Keeper  of  Egyptian
and  Assyrian  Antiquities,  British
Museum.

Canney,  Maurice  A.,  M.A.  (Oxon.).
St.  Peter's  Rectory,  Saffron  Hill,  Lon-
don, E.C.

Jastrow,  Jun.,  Morris,  Ph.D.,  Pro-
fessor of  Semitic  Languages  in  the
University  of  Pennsylvania.

James,  Montague  RiiqDP:s,  Litt.D.,
Fellow  and  Dean  of  King's  College,
Cambridge.

M'Lean,  Norman,  M.A.,  Lecturer  in
Hebrew,  and  Fellow  of  Christ's  College,
Lecturer  in  Semitic  Languages  at  Cams
College,  Cambridge.

Schmidt,  Nathanael,  Professor  of
Semitic  Languages  and  Literatures,
Cornell  University,  Ithaca,  New
York.

Whitehouse,  Rev.  Owen  C,  M.A.,
Principal  and  Professor  of  Biblical
Exegesis  and  Theology  in  the  Countess
of  Huntingdon's  College,  Cheshunt,
Herts.

SCHMIEDEL,  Paul  W.,  Professor  of
New  Testament  Exegesis,  Zurich.

Charles,  Rev.  R.  H.,  M.A.,  D.D.,
Professor  of  Biblical  Greek  in  Trinity
College,  Dublin;  17  Bradmore  Road,
Oxford.

Rogers,  Rev.  Robert  W.,  Ph.D.,
D.D.,  Professor  of  Hebrew,  Drew
Theological  Seminary,  Madison,  New
Jersey.

Cook,  Stanley  A.,  M.A.  (Cantab.),
Ferndale,  Rathcoole  Avenue,  Homsey,
London,  N.

Driver,  Rev.  Samuel  Rolles,  D.D.,
Regius  Professor  of  Hebrew,  Canon
of  Christ  Church,  Oxford.

Pinches,  Theophilus  G.,  M.R.A.S.,
Egyptian  and  Assyrian  Department,
British  Museum.

Cheyne,  Rev.  T.  K.,  M.A.,  D.D.,  Oriel
Professor  of  the  Interpretation  of  Holy
Scripture  at  Oxford,  Canon  of  Ro-
chester.

NoLDEKE,  Theodor,  Professor  of  Se-
mitic Languages,  Strassburg.

DAVIF.S,  T.  W.,  Ph.D.,  Professor  of  Old
Testament  Literature,  North  Wales
Baptist  College,  Bangor;  Lecturer  in
Semitic  Languages,  University  College,
Bangor.

BOUSSET,  W..  a.o.  Professor  of  New
Testament  Exegesis,  Gottingen.


CONTRIBUTORS TO VOLUME I


W.  E.  A.  Addis,  Rev.  W. E.. M.A., Lecturer in

Old  Testament  Criticism,  Manchester
College,  Oxford.

W.  H.  B.  Bennktt,  Rev.  W,  H..  M.A.,  Professor

of  Biblical  Languages  and  Literature,
Hackney  College,  London,  and  Pro-
fessor of  Old  Testament  Exegesis,  New
College,  London.

W.  H.  K.  KosTERS,  The  late  W.  H.,  Professor  of

Old  Testament  Exegesis,  Leyden.

W.  J.  W.  WooDHOUSE,  W.  J.,  M.A.,  Lecturer  in

Classical  Philology,  University  College
of  North  Wales,  Bangor.


W.  M.  M,  MULLER,  W. Max, Professor of Old

Testament  Literature,  Reformed  Epis-
copal Church  Seminary,  Philadelphia.

W.  R.  RiDGEWAY, William, Professor of

Archaeology,  Cambridge.

W.  R.  S.  Smith, The  late  W.  Robertson,  Pro-

fessor of  Arabic,  Cambridge.

W.  S.  Sanday,  Rev.  William,  D.D.,  LL.D.,

Lady  Margaret  Professor  of  Divinity,
Canon  of  Christ  Church,  Oxford.

W.  T.  T.-D.  Thisei.ton-Dyer,  Sir  William  Tur-
ner, C.M.G.,  LL.D.,  F.R.S.,  Director
Royal  Gardens,  Kew.


MAPS IN VOLUME I


SYRL\,  ASSYRIA,  AND  BABYLONLV
PLAN OF  BABYLON .
DISTRICT  OF  DAMASCUS .


between  cols.  352  and  353

"  414  and  41J

987/


ENCYCLOPEDIA BIBLICA


A


AALAR (&A\Ap  [B]), i  Esd.536t  AV  =  Ezra259.
Immek,  i. ;  cp  albo  Chkkub,  2.

AARON  (pnN,  §  7;  see  also  below,  §4,  end;  A^pcoN
[BAL],  a^p,  [A]  ;  AARON).  In  the  post-exilic  parts  of  the
or  (including  Ezra,  Neh. ,  Ch. ,  and  for  our  present  pur-
pose some  of  the  I'salms)  Aaron  is  the  ancestor  of  all
lawful  priests,^  and  himself  the  first  and  typical  high-
_  p  priest.  This  view  is  founded  upon  the  priestly
document  in  the  Hexaleuch,  according  to
which  Aaron,  the  elder  brother  of  Moses,  took  a  promi-
nent part,  as  Moses'  prophet  or  interpreter,  in  the  negotia-
tions with  Pharaoh,  and  was  ultimately,  together  with  his
sons,  consecrated  by  Moses  to  the  priesthood.  The  rank
and  inlluence  which  are  assigned  to  him  are  manifestly
not  equal  to  those  of  Moses,  who  stood  to  Pharaoh
as  a  god  ( Ex.  7  1).  He  does,  indeed,  perform  miracles
before  Pharaoh — he  changes  his  rod  into  a  serpent
which  swallows  up  the  rods,  similarly  transformed,  of
the  Egyptian  sorcerers  ;  and  with  the  same  rod  he
changes  the  waters  of  Egypt  into  blood,  and  brings  the
plagues  of  frogs  and  lice — but  the  order  to  execute  the
marvel  is  in  each  case  communicated  to  him  through
Moses  (Ex.7/).  It  is  Moses,  not  Aaron,  who  disables
the  sorcerers  by  boils  {Ex.98/.),  and  causes  the  tinal
destruction  of  the  Egyptians  in  the  Red  Sea  (14  15-18).
Through  his  consecration  by  Moses,  Aaron  became
'  the  priest '  (so  usually)  or,  as  he  is  elsewhere  called,
'the  anointed  priest'  (Lev.  43  5 16  6  15)  or  'the  high-
priest'  (Lev.  21 10  Nu.  352528).  His  sons,  representing
the  common  priests,  act  under  him  (Nu.  84).  As  high-
priest  he  has  splendid  vestments,  different  from  those  of
his  sons  (Ex.  28);  he  alone  is  anointed  (Ex.297)-;  he
alone,  once  a  year,  can  enter  the  holy  of  holies  (Lev.  16).
He  is  the  great  representative  of  the  tribe  of  Levi  ;  and
his  rod,  unlike  the  rods  taken  to  rei^rcsent  the  other  tribes,
buds  miraculously,  and  is  laid  up  for  ever  by  the  ark
(Nu.  176/  [21/]).  Within  this  tribe,  however,  it  is  only
the  direct  descendants  of  Aaron  who  may  approach  the
altar,  so  that  Korah  the  Levite,  when  he  claims  the
power  of  the  priesthood,  is  consumed  by  fire  from
Yahwe  (Xu.  I635).  Aaron  occasionally  receives  the
law  directly  from  Yahwe  (Nu.  18).  Even  his  civil
authority  is  great,  for  he,  with  Moses,  numbers  the
people  (Nu.  1  317),  and  it  is  against  him  as  well  as  against
Moses  that  the  rebellion  of  the  Israelites  is  directed
(Ex.  lt)2  Nu.  142526  I63).  This  authority  would  have
been  greater  but  for  the  exceptional  position  of  Moses,
for  in  the  priestly  portions  of  Joshua  the  name  of
Eleazar  (^.i'.  i),  the  next  high -priest,  is  placed  before

_  J  In  I  Ch.  1227,  if  MT  is  correct,  Aaron  (AV  AARONtTEs)
is  .ilmnst  .-i  C'llfctive  term  for  priests  s.-iici  liy  the  Chronicler
to  have  joined  David  ac  Hebron.  In  27  lyf  RV  rightly  reads
'.■\aron.'

-  On  pa.ssages  in  P  which  seem  to  conflict  with  this,  see  the
circumspect  and  conclusive  note  of  Di.  on  Lev.  8 12.

1  I


3.  In  E.


that  of  Joshua.  The  '  priestly '  writer  mentions  only
one  blot  in  the  character  of  .Aaron  :  viz. ,  that  in  some
way,  which  cannot  be  clearly  ascertained  in  the  present
state  of  the  text,  he  reljelled  against  Yahwe  in  the  wilder-
ness of  Zin,  when  told  to  '  speak  to  the  rock '  and  bring
forth  water  (Nu.  2O12).  In  penalty  he  dies,  outside
Canaan, at Mount Hor, on the borders of Edom

(Z..22/).

As  we  ascend  to  the  exilic  and  pre-exilic  literature,
Aaron  is  still  a  prominent  figure  ; but  he  is  no  longer
.J  .. either  the  high-priest  or  the  ancestor  of

-t^rs  "^^  legitimate  priests.  Ezekicl  traces  the
origin  of  the  priests  at  Jerusalem  no  farther
back  than  to  Z.vuoK  {<].v.  i,  §  3),  in  Solomon's  time.
Dt.  106  (which  mentions  Aaron's  death,  not  at  Hor  but
at  Moserah,  and  the  fact  that  Eleazar  succeeded  him  in
the  priesthood)  is  generally  and  rightly  regarded  as  an
interpolation.  In  Mic.  64  (time  of  Manasseh  ?)  .Aaron  is
mentioned  between  Moses  and  Miriam  as  instrumental
in  the  redemption  of  Israel.  In  the  Elo-
histic  document  of  the  Hexateuch  (E)  he
is  mentioned  as  the  brother  of  Miriam  the  prophetess
(Ex.  If) 20;  for  other  references  to  him  see  Ex.  17 12
24 1 9 10 14,  Nu.  12i);  but  it  is  Joshua,  not  .Aaron,  who
is  the  minister  of  Moses  in  sacred  things,  and  keeps
guard  over  the  tent  of  meeting  (Ex.  3:3 11),  antl  'young
men  of  the  children  of  Israel '  offer  sacrifice,  while  the
solenm  act  of  sprinkling  the  blood  of  the  covenant
is  reserved  for  Moses  (Ex.2456).  Aaron,  however,
seems  to  have  counted  in  the  nnnd  of  E  as  the
ancestor  of  the  priests  at  'the  hill  of  Phinehas'  (Josh.
24  33)  and  perhaps  of  those  at  Bethel.  At  all  events,
the  author  of  a  section  added  in  a  later  edition  of  E
speaks  of  Aaron  as  yielding  to  the  people  while  Moses
is  absent  on  Mount  Horeb,  and  taking  the  lead  in  the
worship  of  Yahwe  under  the  form  of  a  golden  calf.  The
narrator,  influenced  by  prophetic  teaching,  really  means
to  attack  the  worship  carried  on  at  the  great  sanctuary
of  Bethel,  and  looks  back  to  the  di  ?iruction  of  Samaria
by  the  Assyrians  in  721  as  Yahwe's  '  visitation'  of  the
idolatrous  worship  maintained  in  N.  Israel  (Ex.  32  ;  see
especially  v.  34).

It  is  extremely  probable  that  Aaron's  name  was  absent
altogether  from  the  earliest  document  of  the  Hexateuch
(J)  in  its  original  form.  In  it  Aaron
*  ^'  appears  only  to  disappear.  For  example,
according  to  our  present  text,  Pharaoh  sends  for  Moses
and  .Aaron  that  they  may  entreat  Yahwe  to  remove
the  plague  of  frogs  ;  but  in  the  course  of  the  narrative
Aaron  is  ignored,  and  the  plague  i^  withdrawn  simply  at
•  the  word  of  Moses '  (Ex.  88-15  a  [4-11  «]).  Apparently,
therefore,  the  name  of  Aaron  has  l)een  introduced  here
and  there  into  J  by  the  editor  who  united  it  to  E  (cp
Exonus,  §  3  n. ).  If  that  is  so  we  may  perhaps  agree
with  Oort  that  the  legend  of  Aaron  belonged  orignnally


AARONITES

to  the  'house  of  Joseph,'  which  regarded  Aaron  as
the  ancestor  of  the  priests  of  Hethel,  and  that  single
members  of  this  clan  succeeded,  in  spite  of  Kzekiel,  in
oi:)taining  recognition  as  priests  at  Jerusalem.  So,
doubtfully,  Stade  {(U7  i.  583),  who  points  out  that  no
strict  proof  of  this  hypothesis  can  be  offered.

As  to  the  derivation  of  'Aaron,'  kedslob's  ingenious
conjecture  that  it  is  but  a  more  flowing  pronunciation
of  /lil'dnm.  'the  ark,"  is  worth  considering  only  if  we
can  regard  .-Xaron  as  the  mythical  ancestor  of  the  priests
of  Jerusalem  {hue  hii'drdn  =  bni  Aharon).  So  Land,
De  Ciiis,  Nov. 1 87 1,  p.  271.

See  1'kif.sts  ;  and  cp,  besides  the  works  of  We.,  St.,  and
Ki.,  Oorts  essay  '  De  Aaronieden  '  in  7"/j '/"  xviii.  289-^5  ['84]-

\V.  E.  A.

AARONITES,  RV  '[the  house  of]  Aaron'  (pHN'?;

TU) AAPCON [H], TOON A- [A], TOON yiWN A- [I']:

yO»«i?  ali>.:>jjw?;  vf-  sTiRPE  .lARON),  iCh.  1227.
See  .\AK()N,  note  i.

ABACUC  {.niAcra,  4l-:sd.  l4ot. See  Habakkik.

ABADDON  (fl"^3X,  but  in  Prov.  272o  Kr.  H^X,  by
contraction '  or  misreading,  though  the  full  form  is  also
cited by Gi., for Kt. maX  ;- &nu>A[e]iA [BNA],

but job31i2 TT&NTCON TOJN Mepu)N [BNAJ, . . .

AepooN  [«=•'=];  Rev.9ii,  aBaAAcon  [XA,  etc.],
aB&aA.  [B  etc.],  aBBaaA.  [some  curss.]  etc.;  \j^(;
PFRDiTio,  but  Rev.  9 II  ABADDO.v),  RV  Job  266,  Prov.
15ii272o;  RV  mg.  Job282231i2,  Ps.  8811  [12],  else-
where EV  Dkstkuction  ;  in  Rev.  9ii  Abaddon  is
stated  to  be  the  Hebrew  equivalent  of  Apollvos  (  ahoA"
AY<j^N  [XA]|.  Etymologically  it  means  '(placcof )  destruc-
tion." We  find  it  parallel  to  Sheol  in  Job  2G6  28  22  ;  Prov.
15  II  2720  (see  readings  above).  In  these  cases  RV  makes
it  a  proper  name,  either  Abaddon  or  Destruction,  as
being  parallel  to  the  proper  names  Sheol  or  Death.
In  Ps.  88 II  [12]  '  Destruction  '  is  parallel  to  '  the  grave ' ;
in  Job 31 12  the  same  term  (in  RV)  is  equivalent  to
'  utter  ruin. '  Thus  Abaddon  occurs  only  in  the  Wisdom-
Literature.  There  is  nothing  in  the  usage  to  indicate
that  in  OT  it  denotes  any  place  or  state  different
from  Sheol  (q.v.),  though  by  its  obvious  etymology  it
emphasises  the  darker  aspects  of  the  state  after  death.
An  almost  identical  word  (prx)  is  used  in  Esth.  9s
(constr.  p3K  ;  86)  for  '  destruction  '  in  its  ordinary  sense
as  a  common  noun.  In  later  Hebrew  jnax  is  used
for  'perdition'  and  'hell'  (jastrow.  DicL  s.-\),  and
is  explained  in  Targ.  on  Job  26  6  as  k:i2N  n"3,  house
of  perdition — i.e.,  hell.  The  Syriac  equivalent  word
(Ij^^'')  has  the  meaning  'destruction,'  and  is  used  to
translate  'n.

Rev.  9 1 1  mentions  a  king  or  angel  of  the  abyss,  whose
name  in  Hebrew  is  .Abaddon,  and  in  Greek  Apollyon
('AiroXXi^ou',  Destroyer),  the  -o?i  being  supposed  to  be  a
personal  ending  in  Hebrew,  as  it  is  in  Greek.  This  is,
of  course,  poetic  personification  (cp  Rev.  68  20 14),  and
may  be  paralleled  in  the  OT  (Job2822;cp  Ps.  49i4
[15]),  and  in  Rabbinical  writers  (Schottgen,  Horcr  Hehr.
Apoc.  ix.  II,  and  PRE^-^'i s.v.).  The  identification  with
the  ASMODEUS  of  the  Book  of  Tobit  is  a  mistake.
Apollyon  has  Ix'come  familiar  to  the  world  at  large
through  the  Pilgrim's  Progress,  but  Abaddon  may  be
said  not  to  exist  outside  of  the  Apocalypse. W.  H.  B.

ABADIAS (aBaAiac [B.\]), lEsd.  Bast  =  Ezra  89.

OnADIAII. II.

ABAGTHA  iXJlJlX.  etymology  doubtful,  but  see
BlGVAi,  BAf;()AS  ;  according  to  Marq.  [Fund.  71]  the
corresponding  Cir.  is.  aBataza  [BX.\],  which  [reading
a/3a^ara]  he  regards  as  presupposing  XOTSX.  cp
BiGTHA  ; the fifth name in  the  iist as it stands is

t  Ko.  Hebr.  .'\f>rache,  ii.  479  7,  gives  parallel  contractions  ;  cp
BDB.
2  On  the  several  forms  see  Ba.  NB  g  194  n.  2,  S  224  b.


ABARIM

ZAeoABA  [BX],  ZHBAGAeA  [A]),  a  chamberlain  of
Ahasuerus  (Est.  1  lot). See  Esther,  ii.  §  3.

ABANA,  R\'  Abanah  (HjaX,  2  K.Sizt  Kt.,
n:OX  [Kr.];  aBana  [BL],  ApB.'[(p  superscr.)  3"].
ana8.[B^""k],  NAeB.[A];  ^jj«/;  abaka),  one  of  the
'  rivers  '  (ni^HJ)  of  Damascus.  The  name,  which  occurs
nowhere  else,  should  probably  be  read  Amana  (  AV  mg. )
or  Amanah  (RV  mg. ;  see  further  Amana,  2)  ;  in  this
form,  as  meaning  '  constant,'  it  would  be  equally  suitable
to  a  river  and  to  a  mountain,  though  it  was  first  of  all
given  to  the  mountain  range  of  Antilibanus,  from  which,
near  Zebedani,  the  Nahr  Barada  ('  the  cold  ')  descends  to
refresh  with  its  sparkling  waters  the  city  and  the  gardens
of  Damascus.^  The  romantically  situated  ' Aiu  Fijeh
(irriy^),  a  little  to  the  S.  of  S/ii  Wddy  Barada  (the
ancient  Abila),  appears  from  its  name  to  have  been
regarded  as  the  chief  source  of  the  Barada.  It  is  not,
certainly,  the  most  distant  one  ;  but  it  does,  at  any  rate,
'  supply  that  stream  with  twice  as  much  water  as  it
contains  before  it  is  thus  augmented  '  (Baed.  A;/. '2'  336).
Qo.se  to  it  are  the  remains  of  a  small  temple,  which
was  presumably  dedicated  to  the  river-god.  The  clear
waters  of  the  Nahr  Barada  have  a  charm  which  is
wanting  to  the  Jordan  through  the  greater  part  of  its
course.  This  explains  Naaman's  question  in  2  K.  5 12,
as  far  as  the  Amana  is  concerned.  It  is  the  fate  of  the
Barada  to  disappear  in  the  swamps  called  the  Meadow
Lakes,  about  18  m.  to  the  E.  of  Damascus,  on  the  verge
of  the  desert. See  Pharpar.  T.  K.  C.

ABARIM,  THE  (Dnnj^il  ;  aBapcim  [B.\L],  -in
[BL],  and  phrases  with  iripav  [B.-\L],  see  below  ;  Jos.
ABApeic).  literally  '  Those -on -the -other -side  ' — i.e.,
of  the  Jordan — is  employed  by  the  latest  documents  of
the  Pentateuch  (P  and  R)  in  the  phrase,  Mt.  or  Mts.
of  the  Abarim,  to  describe  the  edge  of  the  great
Moabite  plateau  overlooking  the  Jordan  valley,  of  which
Mt.  Nf.bo  was  the  most  prominent  headland  : — Nn.  27i2

[Rl  TO  0009  TO  iv  T(3  TTfpav  [BAl,  T.  6  ...  IT.  [toG  iof^avov]
[LI;  Dt.  3249  (P[K]),  T.  6.  T.  a^apt^v  [BL],  .  .  .  ei^  [A],
'this  Mt.  of  the  ..\l,arim,  Mt.  Nebo' ;  Nu.  8847  /  (l'(Ri  in
Israel's  itinerary  between  the  Moab  plateau  and  the  plains  of
Shittim),  'Mts.  of  the  Abarim'  (to.  opy)  to.  aftoLptifi,  opiujv  o.
[BAL]).  In  Nu.  3344  we  find  Ije-ha-abarim  (AV
Ijk-Abarim),  'heaps  of  the  Abarim'  (to  distinguish  it
from  the  Ijim  of  Judah,  Josh.  1029  ;  see  Il.vi,  i),  on  the
extreme  SF..  of  Kloab.  Since  the  employment  of  the
name  thus  confined  to  Moab  occurs  only  in  late  docu-
ments, it  is  probably  due  to  the  fact  that  at  the  time
these  were  written  the  Jews  were  settled  only  over
against  Moab.  Josephus,  too,  uses  the  word  m  the
same  limited  application  (.1^/.  iv.  848,  ^iri  tij  6fxi  t(^
A^ap€i),  and  Eusebius  (05<2>2164.  'A^apeifi)  so  quotes
it  as  employed  in  his  own  day.  But  there  are  traces
in  the  OT  of  that  wider  application  to  the  whole  trans-
Jordanic  range  which  the  very  general  meaning  of
Abarim  justifies  us  in  supposing  to  have  been  its  original
application.  In  Jer.  222o  (RV),  Abarim  (AV  'the
passages '  ;  ©"*«<0,  dividing  the  word  in  two,  t6  n^pav
T^s  ea\d(rar]i)  is  ranged  with  Lebanon  and  Bashan —
that  is  to  say,  is  probably  used  as  covering  both  Gilead
and  Moab; — and  in  the  corrupt  text  of  Ez.  39ii,
'  the  valley  of  the  passengers,'  as  AV  gives  it  (similarly
RV),  most  probably  should  rather  be  '  a  valley  of  [Mt.]
Abarim  '  (nnnv  for  D-iny  ;  so  Hi.,  Co.,  Siegfr.,  Bu. ).
If  so,  that  extends  the  name  to  Ba.shan.  Thus  the
plural  noun  Abarim  would  denote  the  K.  range  in  its
entire  e.vtent— being,  in  fact,  practically  equiv.alent  to
the  preposition  -i^y  (originally  a  singular  noun  from  the

1  Rev.  William  Wright,  formerly  of  Damascus,  states  that
•the  river  whose  water  is  most  prized  is  called  the  Abanias,
doubtless  the  Abana '  (Leisure  Hour,  1874,  p.  284  ;  so  Exf>ositor,
Oct.  1896,  p.  204).  Is  the  name  due  to  a  confusion  wuh  Nahr
Banias  (certainly  not  the  ancient  Amana)?  No  Abanias  is  men-
tioned in  Porter's  FtTe  Years  in  Damascus  or  in  Barton  and
Drake's  Umxplortd  Syria.


ABBA

same  root). There  is  no  instance  of  the  name  earlier
than Jeremiah. Targ. Nu.  27  la  Ut.  3249  g'ves units

As  seen  from  W.  Palestine  this  range  forms  a  con-
tinuous mountain-wall,  at  a  pretty  constant  level,  which
is  broken  only  by  the  valley  -  mouths  of  the  Yarmuk,
Zerka  or  Jabbok,  and  Arnon.  Across  the  gulf  of  the
Jordan  valley  it  rises  with  great  iiuprcssiveness,  and
constitutes  the  eastern  horizon  (cp  Stanley,  SP ;
GASm,  //(/'  53,  519,  548).  The  hardly  varying  edge
masks  a  considerable  difference  of  level  l)ehind.  On
the  whole  the  level  is  maintained  from  the  foot  of
Hermon  to  the  S.  end  of  the  Dead  Sea  at  a  height  of  from
2000  to  3000  feet  alxjvc  the  ocean.  The  Ijasis  through-
out is  limestone.  N.  of  the  Yarmuk  this  is  deeply
covered  by  volcanic  deposits,  and  there  are  extinct  craters
NE.  of  the  I^ake  of  Galilee.  Hetween  the  Yarmak
and  the  Wady  Hesbiin,  at  the  N.  end  of  the  Dead  Sea,
run  transverse  ridges,  cut  by  dt«p  wadies,  and  well
wooded  ;is  far  S.  as  the  Zerka.  S.  of  Wady  Hesban
rolls  the  breezy  treeless  plateau  of  Moal ,  indented  in
its  western  edge  by  short  wadies  rising  cjuickly  to  the
plateau  level,  with  the  headlands  that  are  more  properly
the  Mts.  of  Abarim  between  them  ;  and  cut  right  through
to  the  desert  by  the  great  trenches  of  the  wadies,  Zerka,
Main,  and  Mojib  or  Arnon.  Kor  details  see  A.sui:)OTH-
PlSG.Ml,  B.\M()T1I-BAAI.,  Beth-Feor,  Moab,  Nkbo,
PiSGAH,  Zoi'HiM,  etc.,  with  authorities  quoted  there.
On  .\u.  .3347  see  Wandkkings,  §11.  G.  A.  s.

ABBA  (aBBa  [Ti-  WH],  i.e.  N3S,  Ab,  'father,"  in
the  'emphatic  stale'),  an  Aram,  title  of  God  used  by
Jesus  and  his  contemporaries,  and  retained  by  Greek-
speaking  Christian  Jews.  See  Mk.  14  36  Kom.  815  Gal.
46t  ; where  in  each  case  6  van/jp  is  subjoined.

ABDA  (Nl^y,  §  51,  frequent  in  Phoen.  and  Aram.
On  the  form  cp  Kenan,  A'/i/  v.  i65y.  ['82],  and  see
Na.mes,  §§  37,  51).

1.  Father  of  Adoiiiram  (i  K.  46  ;  afiam  [A]  ;  tApa  [B] ;  ejoofi
(Lj).

2.  Levite  in  list  of  inh.ibitants  of  Jerusalem  (see  EzR.\,  ii.  $  5/',
f  I5[i|rt),  Neh.  ni7(a/M«[i<ca.inK.  ^\>],  LU,pT,p[t(*],  ^^P  [B],
lui.  [Al,  a^iiasll.j) iCh.  yi6,  OBAL)rAH,9(r/.r'.).

ABDEEL  (^S'^^y,  §  21,  'servant  of  God),  father
of  Shelemiah,  Jer.  3()26t. (Not  in  ©.)

ABDI  O^^y,  §  52.  abbr.  for  'servant  of  Yahw6'?
cp  I'ahii.  n^y,  and  see  Okadiah  ; aBAia  [I-])-

1 .  Father  of  Kish,  a  Levite  under  Hezekiah,  mentioned
in  the  genealogy  of  ETHAN  [^.i'.],  1  Ch.  644  [29]  2  Ch.
29.2: a/i5[6>  [BAL].

2.  One  of  the  bne  Ei.AM  [f.v.  ii.  i],  in  list  of
those  with  foreign  wives  (see  EZKA,  i.  §  5  end),  Ezral026
(a/33[€]ta  [BXA],  -s[L])=  i  Esd.  927  (RVOabuils,  AV
om. ,  u;a/i5[eJtoj  [B.A]).

ABDIAS  (.iBD/.is).  4  Esd.l39t. See  Obauiah,  i.

ABDIEL  (V^9V.  i?i^  21,  37,  'servant  of  God ' ;
ABAeH\ [B]; -AihA [AL]), in genealogy  of  Gad,

I  Ch.  i.st.

ABD0N(l"n3y;  aBAujn  [AL],  see  also  below).
one  of  the  four  Lcvitical  cities  within  the  tribe
of  Asher  ;  Josh.  21  30  i  Ch.  674(59)1-  The  site  has
not  been  identified,  but  Gudrin  has  suggested  that  of
'Abdch,  10  m.  N.  from  'Akka  (Acre).  The  same  city  is
referred  to  in  Josh.  I928,  where  t^'^V.  (AV  Hkbrun  ;
RV  Ebron)  is  a  graphical  error  for  p3y.  Abdon,  which,
in  fact,  some  MSS.  read  (Josh.  21  30,  Safi^uv  [B] ;  1  Ch.
674[59].  aliapaif  [B],  om.  [L];  josh.  I928,  eXjSwi' [B],
axpau  [ALjI.

ABDON  (fn3y.§  77;  dim.  ofEsED;  ABAa)N[BAL]).

I.  b.  Hillel,  one  of  the  six  minor  judges  (see
Judges,  §  ).  After  judging  Israel  eight  years,
he was buried at Pirathon in Ephraim, his native

5


ABEL-BETH-MA  ACHAH

place.  He  had  forty  sons  and  thirty  grandsons,  '  that
rode  on  three-score  and  ten  ass  colts  ' — i.e. ,  was  head  of
a  large  and  wealthy  family  (cp  Judg.  610).  Judg.  12 131$!
{XafiSufi.  [.AL],  i:  15  -w  [A])  ;  on  Ew.'s  conjecture  that
his  name  should  be  restored  in  i  S.  12 11.  see  Bkdan, 1.


2. b.  Sha.shok,  a  Kciijaiiiitc  (i  Ch.  823!,  afiaSuiy  [H]).
). b.  Jeiel the  father  of  Gibeon  ; i  Ch.  I
Ch.  U  36  (^trafiaimv  [ii],  cafiiutv  |  A]).


Mi<ah,  ;i  courtier  of  King  Josiah  (2  Ch.  34  30
[H)),  elsewhere  called  AcHlioK  {q.v.  2).  5.  .Sec  JJtnA.v

ABEDNEGO  (133  nay  or  NUi  131?,  §  86 ;  a
corruption  of  133  13y,  '  servant  of  Nebo.'  which
occurs  in  an  Aisyrio-Arain.nic  inscription,  CC>7"2i26;
ABAeNArw  [BA  87];  q^. ">"%>! ;  AnoEyAGo),  th^
court  name  given  to  .Xzariah  [\6],  the  friend  of  Daniel
(Dan.  I7,  etc.). On  name  see  al.so  Nkrgai_

ABEL  (ban,  §  6;  aBcA  [ADL] ;  abei).  Gen.  42
ff.  There  are  three  phases  in  Jewish  beliefs  respecting
Abel.  The  second  and  the  third  may  be  mentioned  first
The  catastrophe  of  the  Exile  shifted  the  mental  horizon,
and  made  a  right  view  of  the  sior)-  of  .\bel  impossible.
Abel  was  therefore  at  first  (as  it  would  seem  from  P)
neglected.  -Afterwards,  however,  he  was  restored  to
more  than  his  old  position  by  devout  though  uncritical
students  of  Scripture,  who  saw  in  him  the  type  of  the
highest  saintliness,  that  sealed  by  a  martyr's  death  (cp
Kohler, /(^A"  v.  413  ['93]).  The  same  view  appears  in
parts  of  the  NT  (Mt.  2335=Lk.  llsi  ;  Heb.  II4;  I224  ;
I  John  3 12).  God  lx>re  witness,  we  are  told  ( Heb.  1 1  4),
that  Abel  was  rigliteous — i.e.,  a  possessor  of  true  faith,
— and  it  was  by  faith  that  Alx-1  offered  irXdova  (Cobet
conjectures  ^5/oi'a)  dvalav.  Hence  Magee  assumes  that
Abel  had  received  a  revelation  of  the  Atonement  (Adnt-
mcnl  and  Sacrijice,  i.  50-53).  The  original  narrator  (J ),
however,  would  certainly  wish  us  to  regard  .\brahan>  as
the  first  believer  ;  the  story  of  Cain  and  Aljel  is  an  early
Israelitish  legend  retained  by  J  as  having  a  profitable
tendency. On  this  earliest  phase  of  l^elief,  see  Cain,  §  4/

Meaning  qf  the  nanu. — The  Massorites  understood  .Abel
(Hebel)  to  mean  'a  breath,"  'vanity'  (cp  Ps.  35*6  [7]):  but
the  true  meaning,  I)oth  of  Abel  and  of  the  collateral  form  Jalal,
must  be  something  concrete,  and  a  right  view  of  the  stnry
favours  the  meaning  "  shepherd,'  or,  more  generally,  '  herdman."
This  is  supjjortcd  by  the  e.\islence  of  a  group  of  .Semitic  words,
some  of  which  denote  domesticated  animals,  while  others  are  the
corresponding  words  for  their  herdnien.  Cp,  £r.(/.,  -Vss.  ibilu,
'  ram,  camel,  ass  '  (but  some  e.xplain  'wild  sheep':  see  Muss-
Arn.  s.7>.);  Aram.  /laAdd/d,  'herdman'  (used  widely;  see  PS,
S.7'.) ;  At.  ihii,  'camels,'  abhat,  'camel-herrl.'  The  attempt  of
I-cnormant  (/,«  origines,  i.  161)  and,  ranre  definitely,  Sayce
{Hibbert  Li-cts.  186,  236,  249),  to  find  in  the  name  a  trace
of  a  n.iture-myth,  Aliel  (  =  Bab.  ab/u,  '  son  ')  being  originally  '  the
only  son  Tammuz,  who  was  a  shepherd  like  Jabal  and  .•\l)el '
(Sayce),  and  whom  Lenormant  regards  as,  like  Abel  in  early
theology,  a  kind  of  type  of  Christ,  is  adventurous.  The  name
'son'  is  insufficient  as  a  title  of  Tammuz  (./i^a/wa//}/;) ;  and
there  is  nothing  said  of  a  mourning  for  Abel's  death.  The
title  of  'shepherd  '  applied  to  Tammu/  in  4  R  i~  i  is  explained
by  the  following  word  'lord'  (see  Jercniias,  Izciubi^r  .\imroti,
50).  In  the  Testament  0/  .■ibtaJtam  (ed.  James)  Alicl  plays
the  part  of  Judge  of  the  nether  world,  like  the  Jama  (Vima)  of
the  .\r>ans.  T.  K.  C.

ABEL  (73X,  §§  89-100)  occurs,  apparently  in
the  sense  of  '  meadow,'  in  the  place-names  dealt  with  in
the  following  si.x  articles.  .\s  a  i>lace-name  it  is  to  be
struck  out  of  I  S.  618^,  where  for  MT  H^Hin  ^3K  TV
(so  also  Pesh.)  ©"^  reads  iuK  [i.  too  [L  )  \l$ov  toO
HtydXov,  with  which  the  Targ.  Jon.  agrees  (so  also
RV).  Ew.,  We.,  and  others  further  change  the  points
so  as  to  read  :  '  and  a  w  itness  is  the  great  stone. '  Dr.
suggests  as  an  alternative  :  '  and  still  the  great  stone,
whereon '  -etc.  On  Abel  in  2  S.  20 18,  see  Abei.-
Betii-Maachah.  g.  a.  s.

ABEL  -  BETH  -  MAACHAH.  RV  Abel -Beth -
Maacah  (2S. -20.4:  nayp  n'31  nJ>3N.  to  Al)el
and  Beth-niaacali,'  RV  unto  Abel  and  to  Beth-
maac(h)ah'  [many  strike  out  the  conjunction,  but  the
places  may  have  been  different;  cp  a  S.  20 15  I-
6


ABEL-CHERAMIM

2  K.  1529  BAL],  eic  ABe\  km  eic  BaiOm&xa  [^l
.  ■  ■ BhGm&xa  t-"^]'  K.  aBhXa  k.  BaiGmakko)  [L])-

Cp  2S.2O15,  nrj*"?.!  n'3  •"'^pnKa,  EV  'in  Abel  of  Beth-
maac(h)ah,'<>'  A/3eA  ttji/  Baid^iaxa  [  H ],  (f  A.  ei/  B>)9/uiaxa  [A],  tv  nj
A.  (t.  BaiO^oucxu  [LI;  I  K.  l.>20,  'a-'z'yiK,  XStKfjLoB  [B],  \P€K
ovKov  (sic)  Maaxa  [A],  \Pe\^aaxa  [L] :  2  K.ir)2q,  'c'lhlK,
.\^e\  K.  T>)f  Ma^aa^a  115),  Ka/3eA  ic.  t.  B«pjnaax<i  [A],  A^eA  ic.  T.
Baifl/xaaxa  [L);  2  S. 'JOiS  (on  which  see  Aram,  §  5),  73K,
EV  AuEi.,  (tt,)  A/3<rA  [iis  BAL].

This  place,  mentioned,  although  in  now  mutilated
form  [A]-bi-il,  by  Tiglath-pileser  III.  (cp  Schr.  COT
on  2  K.  1529),  is  the  present  Afii/ — called  also  Abil  el-
Kamh  ( '  of  the  wheat ' )  to  distinguish  it  from  Abiles-Siik
(see  .\bile.\e) — a  small  village  inhabited  by  Christians  on
the  Ndhr  Bareighit,  on  a  hill  1074  ft.  above  the  sea,
overlooking  the  Jordan  valley,  almost  directly  opposite
to  Danids,  and  on  the  main  road  thence  to  Sidon  and
the  coast.  It  is  a  strong  site,  with  a  spring  and  a
(probably  artificial)  mound  ;  below  is  a  broad  level
of  good  soil,  whence  the  modern  name.  See  Yakut
I56;  Rob.  LBR  ■372/.  (who  argues  against  Ibel  el-
Hawd,  a  site  8  m.  farther  north)  ;  PEF  Mem.  i.  85  107;
Merrill,  East  of  the  Jordan,  309,  315.  In  2  Ch.  I64,
we  have,  instead  of  the  Abel  -  beth  -  maacah  of  the
parallel  passage  (i  K.  152o),  Abel-mai.m  (c;d  Sax,
A^eXfjiaiv  [A],  -/lav  [B],  -/xaeiix  [L]  ;  cp  Jos.  Ant.  viii.
124,  A^eXavrj),  or  '  .\bel  of  Waters,"  a  name  suitable
for  so  well-watered  a  neighbourhood.  On  Judith  44X3
where  Pesh.  reads  .\belmeholah,  and  K  apparently  .Abel-
maim,  see  Bklmkn  (cp  also  Bek.Ai).  On  the  ancient
history  of  the  place  see  Akam,  §  5.  c.  A.  s.

ABEL-CHERAMIM  (D^OnS  ^3N,  '  meadow  of  vine-
yards,' §  103;  eBeAxAp/weiN  [B] ;  ABe\  AMneAco-
NCON  [AL]  :  Judg.  Il33t  KV),  the  limit  of  Jephthah's
pursuit  and  slaughter  of  the  Ammonites.  Eus.  and  Jer.
(OS(->  2255  96  10,  'A/SeX  afxiriXuv ,  Abe/  uinearuin)  iden-
tify it  with  a  village  of  their  day,  named  "A/SeX,  7  R.
m.  from  Philadelphia.  This  Abel  may  be  any  of  the
many  fertile  levels  among  the  rolling  hills  around
'Amman,  on  which  the  remains  of  vineyards  and  of
terraces  are  not  infrequent.  G.  A.  S.

ABEL-MAIM  (D^D  ^2^.  2  Ch.  I(i4),  see  Abel-
Beth-Maachah.

ABEL-MEHOLAH  (nbinO  "plN*.  i.e.,  'dancing
meadow'; eBeXMACoAA, ABcoMCOyAa, eBAAMAO-

[B];  ABeXMAOYA(A),BAceX/weo.[A];  ABeXMeoyAiA).
-AAA(jO\a  [L]  ;  ABii!..MJ:(H)L-L.4  :  Jos.  Ant.  viii.  187,
aBgAa).  t'le  home  of  Elisha  the  prophet  (i  K.  19i6),
and  probably  also  of  .\driel  b.  Barzillai  '  the  Meholathite'
(i  S.  1819  ;  2  S.  218),  is  mentioned  in  conjunction  with
Bethshean  as  defining  the  province  of  one  of  Solomon's
officers  (i  K.412).  Gideon  pursued  the  Midianites  'as
far  as  Beth-shittah  towards  Zererah  as  far  as  the  bor-
der'— lit.  '  lip,'  probably  the  high  bank  which  marks  the
edge  of  the  Jordan  valley  proper — '  of  Abel-meholah,  by
Tabbath  '  (Judg.  722).  According  to  Eus.  and  Jer.  [OS
97"  22735),  Abelmaula  (or  ' A^eXfiaeXai)  lay  in  the
GAdr,  10  R.  m.  to  the  south  of  Scythopolis  (Bethshean),
and  was  still  an  inhabited  village  in  their  time,  with  the
name  Bethaula,  lir]0/j.aeX6.  (though  they  mention  also
an  Abelmea,  'A^eXyued).  This  points  to  a  locality  at  or
near  the  ]il.ace  where  the  IV.  Mdlih,  coming  down
from  ' .\\\\  M:dih,  joins  the  Jordan  valley.

ABEL-MIZRAIM(DnyO  ij^S  [see  below],  neNGoc
AirYHTOY  [BAL];  so  Pesh.  Vg.).  Gen.  50iit  (Jj.
otherwise  \v.  10/  )  called  GOREN  ha-ATAD  (IDXH  p]|  ;

AXcONI  ATAA  [B'AL],  a.  TAA  [B*  vi<l.],  A.  ATATii])
or  'the  threshing-floor  of  the  thorn-shrub"  (EV  'of
Atah,"  see  Brambi.k,  i),  and  said  to  be  situated
'  beyond  Jordan  "  (cp  v.  10  J).  It  was  there  that  Joseph
made  a  second  mourning  for  his  father,  whence  the


ABEL-SHITTIM

etymological  play  on  the  name  {v.  n).  After  this,
Joseph  and  his  brethren  carried  the  embalmed  body  of
Jacob  to  Machpelah  for  burial,  and  then  returned  to
Egypt  {v.  13/.  J  and  P).  The  words  '  which  is  beyond
Jordan'  (v.  10/.),  however,  cannot  be  accurate:  the
original  text  of  J  must,  it  would  seem,  have  been  altered,
owing  to  a  misreading  or  an  editorial  misunderstanding.
The  circuitous  route  round  the  north  end  of  the  Dead
Sea  has  no  obvious  motive  :  had  it  really  been  meant,
something  more  would  have  been  said  about  it  (cp
Nu.  1425).  For  p-iM,  '  the  Jordan,' J  nmst  have  written
either  nna'n  (less  probably  nK;n) — /. ^. ,  the  most  easterly
arm  of  the  Nile  (a  frontier  of  Canaan,  according  to
Josh.  183) — or  n,i3,i,  'the  stream' — i.e.,  the  Wddy  el-
'Arish,  the  usual  SW.  boundary  of  Canaan  (cp  Gen.
15 18,  where  J  calls  this  Wady,  not  the  Vm  but  the
n,i3  of  Egypt — i.e.,  '  the  stream  on  the  border  of  Egypt*
(Kautzsch-Socin),  on  which  see  Egyi'T,  River  of).

The  meaning  of  the  narrative  is  this.  At  the  first
Canaanite  village  (the  first  after  the  border  had  been
crossed)  the  'great  company'  (v.g)  halted,  while
Joseph  and  his  fellow- Hebrews  mourned  in  their  own
way  (cpi'.  3^)  in  the  very  place  where  wedding  and
funeral  ceremonies  are  still  performed  in  the  Syrian
villages  (Wetz. ).  The  repetition  of  'which  is  beyond
Jordan  '  must  be  due  to  the  editor.

It  is  remarkable  that  Jer.  (OS  85  15),  though  he  does  not
question  the  reading  'beyond  Jordan,'  identifies  Area  Atath
with  Bethagta — i.e.,  Beth-hoglah  (q.v.),  which  is  certainly
on  the  west  bank  of  the  Jordan.  Dillm.  is  more  consistently-
conservative,  and,  followed  by  Sayce  (Crit.  and  Man.  ^y/l),
finds  in  the  trans-Jordanic  Abel-Mizraiin  a  testimony  to  the
Egyptian  empire  in  Palestine  in  the  pre-Mosaic  age,  proved  by
the  Am.irna  tablets.  The  exegetical  difficulties  of  this  view,
however,  are  insuperable.

As  to  the  name  Abel-mizraim  it  is  not  improbable  that
its  original  meaning  was  'meadow  of  Musri "  (in  X.
Arabia,  see  Mizkaim),  but  that  before  J's  time  it  had
come  to  be  understood  as  meaning  '  meadow  [on  the
border]  of  Egypt."  Cp  Wi.  A/tor.  Forsch.  34,  and
see  Egypt,  River  of.  t.  k.  c.

ABEL-SHITTIM  (D^t2:rn  bzN*.  §  100,  i.e.,  'the
meadow  of  the  acacias ' ;  Saniar.  omits  the  article  ;  aBgX-
CATTel^^  [L].  B  .  .  ttim  [A],  -ttgin  \y\  BeAcA  [B] ;
ABiu.-s.-iTiM,  Num.3349),  or,  more  briefiy,  Shittim
(D^t^tf'H,  'the  acacias, cATTeiN [BA], -m  [L]  ; but

Nu.  25  I  CATTeiM  [F],  -N  [L]  ;  Josh.  2i  eK  CATTGI  [A],
e^ATTeiN  [I'M.  3i  CKATTeiN  [1  ]  ;  Mic.  BstTCON  cxoi-
NCON  [B.AQ]  (for  CXINCON  ?  cp  Sus.  54),  in  the  Arabah
or  Jordan  basin  at  the  foot  of  Mount  Peor  and  opposite
Jericho.  In  the  time  of  Jos.  {Ant.  iv.  81,  v.  1 1)  a  town
named  Abila  {'A^iXri),  rich  in  palm  trees,  occupied  such
a  site  at  a  distance  of  60  stadia  (7^  R.  m. )  from  the
river.  Cp  B/  iv.  7  6,  where  it  is  described  as  near  the
Dead  Sea,  and  Jer.  (Comm.  on  Joel),  who  locales  it
6  R.  m.  from  Livias.  This  seems  to  point  to  the
neighbourhood  of  Khirbet  el-Kefrein,  where  the  Wady
Kefrein  enters  the  Jordan  valley,  and  there  are  ruins,
including  those  of  a  fortress.  It  was  at  Abila,  according
to  Jos.,  that  Moses  delivered  the  exhortations  of  Dt.
The  palm  trees  have  disappeared,  but  there  is  an
acacia  grove  at  no  great  distance  (Tristram,  Conder).
According  to  A'/'(-*v.  50,  this  is  the  Aubal  or  '  Abel '  men-
tioned among  the  places  conquered  by  Thotnies  III.

In  Joel  3  [4]  18  d'cc  should  perhaps  be  treated  as  a
common  noun  and  translated  '  acacias '  (so  RV  mg. ,  and
Marti  in  HS ;  cp  rcD;'  axo^vusv  [BNAQ]).  At  all  events
the  reference  is  not  to  Abel-shittim  across  the  Jordan.
Some  (We.,  Now.)  think  the  name  has  been  preserved
in  the  Wddy  es-Sant  (see  Elah,  Valley  of),  but
the  latter  does  not  recjuire  the  watering  of  which  Joel
speaks  ;  and  he  intends,  rather,  some  dry  gorge  nearer
Jerusalem,  perhaps  (like  Ez.  47 1-12)  some  part  of  the
Kedron  valley,  Wddy  en-Ndr  (cp  Dr.  ad  loc. ;  GASm.
HG  511  ;  also,  for  acacias  on  W.  of  Dead  Sea,  Tristr.
Land  of  I sr.  280,  298).


ABEZ

ABEZ,  RVEbezO'nN  ;  peBec  [B],  agmc  [A],  -mic
[L] ;  .ti!i:s;  Josh.  lOaot),'  one  of  the  sixteen  cities  of
Issachar.  The  site  is  unknown,  but  the  name  is
evidently  connected  with  that  of  the  judge  Ibzan  (i/.v.)
of  Bethlehem — i.e.,  the  northern  liethlehem.  This
Bethlehem,  it  is  true,  is  Zebulunite,  while  P'bez  is
assigned  to  Issachar  ;  but  the  places  must  have  liccn
very  close  to  each  other,  and  the  frontiers  doubtless
varied.  Conder's  identification  with  F.l  lieidd,  2  m.  from
Beit  Lahm,  might  suit  as  to  position,  but  'the  while
village '  can  have  nothing  to  do  with  the  old  name.

W.  R.  S.

ABI  (*3N.  so  Targ.  Jon.  ;  abbrev.  of  abijah  ;
aBoy[BA],  -efM;  Jos.  'A/3/a  ;  abi),  daughter  of  Zecha-
riah,  wife  of  King  .Aiiaz,  and  mother  of  King  Hczekiah
(2  K.  ISst).  In  the  parallel  jiassage  (2  Ch. '29i)  the
name  is  given  as  Abijah  (n;3K,  a/3pla  [B  :  see  Swete],
ap^aOve  [A],  a/9ta  [L]  ;  wj/  t«'^]  :  ^^i^).  but  the
probability  is  perhaps  in  favour  of  the  contracted  form
in  K. (.SotJray,  //PA' 24.)

ABI,  Names  with.  There  has  l)een  much  discussion
as  to  the  interpretation  of  the  names  compounded
with  iifii,  ii/ii,  and  some  other  words  denoting  relation-
ship' (cp  Ammi-,  Hami'-,  Dod-).  Without  assuming
that  this  discussion  is  in  all  points  closed  (cp  Namks,
§  44),  the  writer  thinks  it  best  to  state  the  theory  which
he  has  himself  long  held,  adopting  certain  points  (with
acknowletlgnient)  from  Gray's  very  lucid  and  thorough
exposition,  and  then  to  consider  the  religious  and
archivological  aspects  of  the  subject.

The  question  whether  these  names  are  sentences  has
long  l)een  answered  by  some  critics  in  the  affirniative,
anti  the  arguments  of  Gray  {//P.\  75-86)


1.  Are  the
names


sentences  ?


put  the  student  in  possession  of  all  the
points  to  be  urged.  He  also  ably  criticises
the  alternative  view  (viz. ,  that  the  two
elements  in  Abimelech,  Ammiel,  etc. ,  are  related  as
construct  and  genitive).  It  is  usual  to  refer  on  this
side  to  such  Phci-nician  names  as  -j^cnnN,  in  which  the
term  of  relation  is  always  fern,  in  names  of  women  and
niasc.  in  those  of  men.  But  this  is  decisive  only  for
Ph(cnician  names,  atul  even  in  their  case  only  for  names
in  'nx  and  nnK  ('brother'  and  'sister').  Compounds
with  ab  ('father')  are  used  indifferently  of  men  and
women  in  Phuenician,  just  as  they  are  in  Hebrew.  In
the  latter  case,  therefore,  at  least,  the  term  of  relation
cannot  refer  to  the  bearer  of  the  name — i.e. ,  cannot  be  in
the  construct  state.  No  doubt  in  Ps.  110  4  Melchizedek
(which  suffers,  along  with  other  compound  names  con-
taining a  connective  i  [see  below,  §  3],  from  the  same
ambiguity  as  names  containing  a  term  of  kinship)  is
understood  as  a  construct  relation,  '  king  of  righteous-
ness,' and  the  phrase  ii.n  'ax — as  we  should  certainly  read
in  Is.  95  [6]  for  ly  <3k'- — obviously  means  for  the  writer
'glorious  father'  (i.e.,  glorious  ruler  of  the  family  of
Israel;  cp  Is.  222i).  It  would  seem,  therefore,  that
in  the  post-exilic  age  some  names  of  this  type  were  so
understood.  But  we  nmst  remember  that  in  later  times
the  original  sense  of  a  formation  may  be  forgotten.
Gray's  main  objections  to  taking  abi  etc.  as  originally
constructs  are  as  follows :  ( i )  The  theory  will  not
account  for  names  like  Eliab,  Joah,  etc.  Eliab  clearly
stands  to  Abiel  as  Elijah  to  Joel  ;  in  the  latter  case  the

'  On  some  possible  hut  by  no  means  clear  instances  of  em,
'mother,'  in  compound  names,  see  Gray,  ///'.V'64  n.  1.

2  The  intcrpret.-ition  of  i>»  'an  as  'everlasting  one'  stands  or
falls  with  the  interpretation  of,  e.g.,  Abinoam  as  'father  of
graciousness,"  and  of  Abitub  as  'father  of  goodness.'  Though
defended  by  reference  to  such  names  by  Guthe  {^/.ukun/tshild
ties  Jfs.  41  ('85]),  it  is  now  generally  rejected  in  favour  of
'perpetual  father  (of  his  people),'  or  'father  (/.c.  proilucer)  of
booty.'  Hut  neither  of  these  explanations  gives  a  satisfactory
parallel  to  '  prince  of  peace.'  We  must  read  11:7  «3(c  'Prince
of  peace  'suggests  a  reminiscence  of  AbSalom,  which  the  writer
probablyinterpreted  'father  of  peace,'/.^.,  peaceful  (or  prosperous)
ruler.


ABI

genitive  relation  is  excluded  ;  inferentially  it  is  equally
so  in  the  former.  (2)  The  u.se  of  ab  with  a  nouti
denoting  a  quality  is  a  pure  Arabism,'  which  should  not
be  lightly  admitted,  while  such  an  interpretation  as
'  father  of  Yah'  for  Abijah  is  unlikely. (3)  A  woman's

I  name  like  '  brother  of  graciousness '  (Ahinoam)  is  incon-
ceivable.''* In  favour  of  taking  the  names  compounded

I  with  a  term  of  relationshij)  as  sentences  Cj ray  urges  that,
though  ab,  ah,  'am,  etc.,  all  denote  a  male  relative,  the
proper  names  compounded  with  them  are  u.sed  in-
differently of  men  and  women  ;  while,  on  the  other
hand,  nouns  with  ben  (son)  prefixed  are  used  exclusively
of  men,  the  corresponding  names  of  women  having  bath
(daughter)  for  ben.  He  infers,  therefore,  that,  while  in
the  case  of  names  in  bin  and  bath  the  element  denoting
kindred  refers  to  the  bearer  of  the  name,  in  the  case  of
ab  etc.  it  does  not.

Assuming  that  these  compound  names  are  sen-
tences, are  there  grounds  for  determining  which  of  the
XtThi  Vi  r*  *^^"  elements  is  .subject  and  which  is
.  Wlicn  paiX  predicate?  (1)  In  cases  like  Abijah,
18  predicate  7  ^y^^;^^^^  o„,y  j^g  fir^t  part  can  be
regarded  as  indefinite*  and  therefore  as  predicate.  We
must,  therefore,  render  '  Yahw^  is  father,"  etc.  The
same  principle  would  apply  to  Joab,  Joah  (if  these  are
really  compounds).  Quite  generally,  therefore,  when-
ever one  element  is  a  proper  name  it  must  \x  subject.*
But  (2)  a  divine  proper  name  may  give  place  to  Sn  (el)  or
some  divine  title — e.g..  Lord.  Hence  Abiel,  Abimelech,
will  be  best  explained  on  the  analog}'  of  Abijah — i.e.,
'  God  is  father,'  '  the  divine  king  is  father.'  Lastly  (3)
the  divine  name  or  title  may  give  place  to  an  epithet,
such  as  ram,  'lofty.'  Here  the  syntax  is  at  first  sight
open  to  doubt.  The  usages  of  the  terms  of  relation-
ship in  the  cases  just  considered  would  suggest  that
-ram  in  Abi-ram  is  subject  ;  but  the  fact  that  ram
nowhere  occurs  by  itself  designating  Yahwe  seems  to
the  writer  to  show  that  it  must  be  predicate.  Abrani,
therefore,  means,  not  'the  exalted  one  is  father,'  but
'the  (divine)  father  is  e.xalted."  Cp  Adomram,
Jkhor.vm.

The  question  whether  the  connective  /",  which  occurs
in  most  of  the  forms,  is  the  suffix  of  the  first  [x-rs.  sing. ,
or  an  old  ending,  has  been  variously
answered.  Should  Abinoam,  Ahinoam
be  rendered  '  my  father  (or  my  brother)  is  graciousness  "
(so  Olshausen,  Lehrb.  d.  hebr.  Spr.  §  277  e),  or  '  the
(divine)  father,  or  brother,  is  graciousness "  ?  Gray
well  expounds  the  reasons  for  holding  the  latter  view .
Thus,  there  are  certain  forms  in  which  •  does  not  occur —
e.g.,  Abram,  Absalom,  beside  Abiram,  Abisalom.  We
also  find  Abiel  beside  Eliab.  Lastly,  the  analogy  of
in'DT  (Jeremiah),  iri'pin'  (Hezekiah),  etc.,  favours  the
theory  that  the  names  before  us  contain  utterances
respecting  the  relation  of  a  deity  to  all  the  members  of
the  tribe  or  clan  which  worships  him.  To  some  this
may  appear  a  slight  argument ;  but  to  the  writer  it  has
long  tx^en  an  infiuential  consideration.  An  argument
on  the  opposite  side  offered  by  Boscawen  and  Honmiel
will  be  considered  later  (see  §  5).

It  is  not  easy  at  first  to  appreciate,  or  even  to  under-
stand, the  conception  which  underlies  compound  names
„  ,. . of  this  chiss. The representation of  a
4.  KellglOUS  g^^ ^ jj^^.  j-j^j^^.^  ^f  ^  j^ij^  Q^  j,,^,,  „,.^y

conception.  ^  j^^^  repulsive  to  us  than  the  representa-
tion of  him  as  a  brother  or  as  some  other  kinsman.
Even  a  prophet  does  not  object  to  the  expression  '  sons
of  the  living  God  '  ( Hos.  1 10  [li  1]  :  see  the  commentators) ;
but  any  one  can  see  that  to  substitute  some  other  relation

1  R.nre  in  ancient  Arabic  (see  Names,  |  45).

2  Kvin  if  in  modern  Ar.  aim  is  so  used  of  a  woman  (see
Namks,  g  45,  third  note).

3  This  assumes  that  the  connective  I  is  not  pronominal  (see
below §  3).

♦  The  same  principle  will  apply  to  other  compounds  contammg,
instead  of  a  term  of  kinship,  a  title,  e.g.y  as  in  Melchizedbk
(y.7'.),  Adonijah,  etc.,  or  a  concrete  noun,  as  in  Uriah.


3.  Connective  <


ABIA

for  sonship  would  in  such  a  context  be  impossible.
Names  in  Abi-,  Ammi-,  etc.,  are,  in  fact,  of  primitive
origin,  and  must  be  explained  in  connection  with
primitive  ideas  of  the  kinship  of  gods  and  men  (see
WRS  /^S(->  Lcct.  2).  Names  like  Ahijah,  Ahinoam,
etc. ,  imply  a  time  when  the  god  was  regarded  as  brother.
The  question  then  arises,  May  we  take  'brother'  in  a
wide  sense  as  kinsman  ?  or  did  such  formations  descend
from  a  remote  age  when  society  was  polyandrous?
Strabo  (16 4)  wrote  of  a  polyandrous  society  in  Arabia
Feli.x  that  'all  are  brothers  of  all,'  and  Robertson  Smith
{A'in.  167/)  was  of  opinion  that  far  back  in  the  Sfx.ial
development  of  Hebrew  life  lay  a  form  of  fraternal
polyandry.  Now,  sup[X)sing  that  the  Hebrews  when
in  this  stage  conceived  themselves  to  be  related  to  a
male  deity,  it  is  difficult  to  see  under  what  other  form
than  brotherhood  such  relationship  could  be  conceived.
Of  course,  if  names  expressing  this  conception  were
retained  in  later  ages,  they  would  receive  a  vaguer  and
more  satisfactory  meaning,  such  as  '  Yahw6  is  a  kins-
man,' or  '  protector.'  ^

I^astly,  to  supplement  the  Hebraistic  arguments  in  §  3,
we  must  briefly  consider  the  argument  in  favour  of  the

5.  Relationship  \^P^ff^^  \ll^' ^f^""'  ^-  ^■'''''•'  ^°'
individual •^'^'shalom, My  father is gracious-


or  tribal  ?


ness' for Abinoam, etc., based  on


early  Babylonian  and  S.  Arabian
names.  Boscawen  {Afigration  of  Abraham,  Victoria
Institute,  Jan.  1886)  long  ago  pointed  out  a  series  of
primitive  Babylonian  names  such  as  Ilusu-abisu,  '  his
god  is  his  father,'  Ilusu-ibnisu,  '  his  god  made  him,'
which,  in  complete  correspondence  with  the  Babylonian
penitential  psalms,  indicate  a  sense  of  the  relation  of  a
protective  god  not  merely  to  a  clan  but  to  a  person;
and  Hommel,  in  the  interest  of  a  too  fascinating  historical
theory,  has  more  recently  given  similar  lists  [AHT
Ti.  ff-),  to  which  he  has  added  a  catalogue  of  S.  Arabian
names  {ib.  83,  85/)  compounded  with  Hi,  abi,  where
these  elements  appear  to  mean  '  my  God,'  '  my  father,*
etc.  The  present  writer,  however,  must  confess  that,
though  aware  of  the  names  collected  by  Boscawen,  he
has  long  been  of  opinion  that  the  course  of  the  develop-
ment of  Israelitish  thought  and  society  is  entirely  adverse
to  the  view  that  the  relation  of  the  deity  described  by
abi,  ahi,  etc. ,  was  primarily  to  the  individual.  This  is  a
question  of  historical  method— on  which  no  compromise
is  possible — and  not  of  Assyriology.  We  cannot  argue
that  because  the  Babylonians,  even  in  remote  ages,  bore
names  which  imi>ly  a  tendency  to  individualistic  religion,
the  Israelites  also — who,  as  far  as  our  evidence  goes,  were
much  less  advanced  in  all  kinds  of  culture  than  the  early
Babylonians — had  a  similar  tendency,  and  gave  expres-
sion to  it  in  their  names.  It  is,  therefore,  wise  to  use
these  Babylonian  and  S.  Arabian  names,  not  as  suggest-
ing a  theory  to  be  followed  in  interpreting  Israelitish
names,  but  as  monuments  of  early  attainments  of
Semitic  races  which  foreshadow  those  of  the  choicest
part  of  the  Jewish  people  at  a  much  more  recent  period.
The  value  of  these  names  for  explaining  the  formation
of  Hebrew  proper  names  may  be  comparatively  slight  ;
but  they  suggest  the  idea  that  it  was  only  the  want  of
the  higher  spiritual  prophecy  (as  known  in  Israel),  as  a
teaching  and  purifying  agent,  and  of  somewhat  different
historical  circumstances,  which  prevented  the  Baby-
lonians from  rivalling  the  attainments  in  spiritual
religion  of  the  later  Jewish  church.  T.  K.  C.

ABIA  (n»3N),  RV  Abijah.  For  i  Ch.3io  Mt.  1  7
see  .Ahij.-^h, i  ; for  Lk.  1  sf,  ibid.,  6.

ABIAH,  an  English  variant  of  Abijah  [q.v.)  in  AV
of  I.Sam.  82  iCh.  224  628[i3]  78,  corrected  in  RV
to  the  more  usual  form,  except  in  i  Ch.  224628f  13].

ABIALBON,  the  Arbathite  ('na-iyn  pSSinaK,  §  4.

1  Cp  Barton,  '  Kinship  of  god.s  and  men  among  the  ancient
Semites,' /A'Z,  xv.  168^,  especially  179^  ('96).


ABIATHAR

[rAA]ABiH\  Y'oc  TOY  apaBcoBaioy  [B].  AcieABcoN
o  ApcoBooGeiAC  [A],  [taAcJaBihc  o  caraiBaBi
[L]),  2  S.  2331,  the  name  of  one  of  David's  'thirty,'
should  in  all  probability  be  '  Abibaal  a  man  of  Beth-
arabah'  (so  Bu.,  and  partly  Klo.  and  Ki. ),  the  al  (^j;)
in  Abi-albon  being  a  relic  of  Baal  (7y3),  and  the  final
syllable  bon  a  corruption  of  Beth  (71^3).  ©'"-,  it  is
true,  agrees  with  iCh.  II32  (-nanyn  sk-^n  ;  o,3i7j\  6
yapa^aiddi  [B],  a.  6  yapafieff  [X],  a.  6  ffapafifdOa  [A],
o.  6  apajiadi  [L])  in  supporting  the  name  Abiel  (see
Dr.  TBS  283)  ;  but  we  know  that  early  names  of
persons  contained  the  name  baal  as  a  title  of  Yahsve
where  later  writers  would  have  preferred  to  see  el  (see
Beeli.\ua).  t.  k.  c.

ABIASAPH  (^DK^3N,  §  44  ;  '  the  (divine)  father
gathers  '  or  '  removes '  or  [if  the  X  be  not  original,  see
below]  '  adds'  [cp  the  popular  etymologies  of  Joskph],
unless  it  be  supposed  that  P  and  the  Chronicler  adopted
an  ancient  name  indeed  [Gray,  BPN  244],  but  under-
stood it  in  the  sense  '  father  of  Asaph  '  [077C'-'  204  n.] ;
aBiacap  [B],  -cA<j>  [FL]),  Ex.624  [P],  one  of  the
three  sons  of  Korah,  i.e.  eponym  of  one  of  the  three
divisions  of  the  Korahite  guild  of  Levites,  see  AsAPH,
3.  In  I  Ch.  623  [8]  [a^iaOap  [B],  -acra0  [AL],  .^mjld/
[sic-].  Abiasaph),  637  [22]  (alSiaaap  [BA],  -acra^  [B^'-  '^"'-'b.
L],  ,^^j!as(  ;  Abiasaph),  9i9  (a/3ia(Ta<^[BAL],  ,a*^Lo/,
Asaph)  the  name  occurs  also,  without  consonantal  k  as
Ebias.\ph,  f|D^3N  (Samar.  text  omits  k  in  Ex.  624),  which
name  ought  to  be  read  for  that  of  Asaph  also  in  i  Ch.
26  I  (.-jCN  ;  a(3La<Ta(f>ap  [B],  a(ra.<p  [AL],  .a  «m7»  . .  Asaph).

ABIATHAR  ("in^aX,  §  44,  i.e.,  'the  (divine)  father
is  pre-eminent';  cp  Ithkkam  ;  aBiaGar  [BXAL];
in  I  Ch.  18 16,  ABieAOep  [N*]  ;  aBiaGapoc.  Jos.  [A^i/.
vi.  146]),  the  son  of  Ahimelech  and  descendant  of  Eli ;
the  priestly  guild  or  clan  to  which  he  belonged  seems  to
have  claimed  to  trace  back  its  origin  through  Phinehas
and  Eliezer  to  Moses,  who,  in  the  early  tradition  (E.x.
337,  E),  guards  the  sanctuary  of  Yah  we  and  delivers
his  oracles.  It  was  Abiathar's  father,  Ahimelech,  who
officiated  as  chief  priest  in  the  sanctuary  of  Nob  when
David  came  thither,  fleeing  from  the  jealous  fury  of
Saul.  Having  no  other  bread  at  hand,  Ahimelech  gave
the  fugitives  the  holy  loaves  from  the  sanctuary.  One
of  the  royal  couriers,  however  (see  i  S.  21 7  [8],  with  Dr.  's
note),  saw  the  act,  and  betrayed  Ahimelech  to  Saul,
who  forthwith  put  the  priests  to  death.  No  less  than
eighty-five  (according  to  MT)  ^  fell  by  Doeg's  hands,
and  of  the  whole  number  Abiathar  alone  escaped.
It  may  be  inferred  from  i  S.  22 15  that  David
had  before  this  contracted  friendship  and  alliance  with
the  house  of  Eli,  and  we  can  readily  believe  that,
just  as  Samuel  marked  out  Saul  as  the  destined  leader
of  Israel,  so  the  priests  at  Nob,  noting  the  tendency
of  the  king  to  melancholy  madness,  and  his  inability
to  cope  with  the  difficulties  of  his  position,  selected
David  as  the  future  king  and  gave  a  religious
sanction  to  his  prospective  claims  (cp  David,  §  3).
Certain  it  is  that  the  massacre  of  the  priests  at  Nob  told
strongly  in  David's  favour.  The  odium  of  sacrilegious
slaughter  clung  to  Saul,  while  David  won  the  prestige  of
close  friendship  with  a  great  priestly  house.  Henceforth
David  was  the  patron  of  Abiathar,  and  Abiathar  was
bound  fast  to  the  interests  of  David  — '  Abide  thou  with
nie,'  said  the  warrior  to  the  priest,  'for  he  that  seeketh
my  life  seeketh  thy  life'  (i  S.  2223).  Moreover,
Abiathar  carried  the  ephod  or  sacred  image  into  the
camp  of  David  :  it  was  in  the  presence  of  this  image
that  the  lot  was  cast  and  answers  were  obtained  from
Yahw6  :  nor  does  it  need  much  imagination  to  under-
stand the  strength  infused  into  David's  band  by  the
confidence  that  they  enjoyed  supernatural  direction  in
1  See  David,  fan.


ABIB

their  perplexities.  Abiathar  was  faithful  to  David
through  every  change  of  fortune.  It  was  with  the
sanction  of  the  sacred  oracle  that  David  settled  at
Hebron  and  became  king  of  Judah  {2  S.  21-3).  and  it  was
Abiathar  who  carried  the  ark.  that  palladium  of  Israel,
which  David  used  to  consecrate  Jerusalem,  the  capital  of
his  united  kingdom  ( i  K.  '226).  Abiathar  maintained  his  j
sacerdotal  dignity  amidst  the  splendour  of  the  new
court,  though  later  (we  do  not  know  when)  others  were
added  to  the  list  of  the  royal  chaplains— viz.,  Zadok,  of
whose  origin  we  have  no  certain  information,  and  Ira,
from  the  Manassite  clan  of  Jair,' — while  David's  sons
also  officiated  as  priests  (2S.  817/  '2026).  Zadok
and  Abiathar  both  continued  faithful  to  their  master
during  Absalom's  revolt,  and  by  means  of  their  sons
conveyed  secret  intelligence  to  the  king  after  he  had  left
the  city.

When  David  was  near  his  end,  Abiathar  along  with
Joab  supported  the  claim  of  Adonijah  to  the  throne,
and  consequently  incurred  the  enmity  of  Solomon,  the
younger  but  successful  aspirant.  Solomon  spared  Abi-
athar's  life,  remembering  how  long  and  how  faithfully
he  had  served  David.  But  he  was  banished  from  the
court  to  Anathoth,  his  native  place,  and  Zadok,  who
had  chosen  the  winning  side,  became  chief  priest  in  his
stead.  To  the  men  of  the  time,  or  even  long  after  the
time  at  which  it  happened,  such  a  proceeding  needed  no
explanation.  It  was  quite  in  order  that  the  king  should
place  or  displace  the  priests  at  the  royal  sanctuary.  But
in  a  later  age  the  writer  of  i  S.  227-36,''^  who  lived  after
the  publication  of  D,  did  not  think  it  so  light  a  matter
that  the  house  of  Eli  should  be  deprived,  at  a  monarch's
arbitrary  bidding,  of  the  priesthood  which  they  had
held  by  immemorial  right.  Therefore,  he  attributes  the
forfeiture  to  the  guilt  of  Eli's  sons.  A  'man  of  God,'
he  says,  had  told  Eli  himself  of  the  punishment  waiting
for  his  descendants,  and  had  announced  Yahwe's  pur[)ose
to  substitute  another  priestly  line  which  was  to  officiate
before  God's  '  anointed  ' — i.e. ,  in  the  royal  presence.  A
late  gloss  inserted  in  i  K.  227  calls  attention  to  the  fulfil-
ment of  this  prediction.

A  sjiecial  point  which  has  occasioned  some  difficulty
remains  to  be  noticed.  In  2  S.  8  17  [MT  ©ual  and
Vg.]  and  I  Ch.  I816  [tb.  and  Pesh.  ;  MT.  however,
reading  .Akimki.kch],  instead  of  Abiathar  b.  Ahimelech
it  is  .Ahimelech  b.  Abiathar  that  is  mentioned  as  priest
along  with  Zadok.  In  i  Ch.  2-1631  as  well.  MT  has
this  reading,  in  v.  6  also  ©"al  pesh. — except  that  ©**
reads  viol  ;  in  v.  3  these  versions  all  read  '  .Ahimelech  of
the  sons  of  Ithamar,'  while  in  v.  31  MT  (^''^l  V'g.  omit
the  phrase  '  b.  Abiathar,  and  Pesh.  the  whole  passage.
It  is  reasonable  to  suppose  that  this  confusion  is  due  to
an  early  corruption  of  the  text,  and  that  in  2  S.  817
we  should  read  with  the  Pesh.  '  Abiathar  b.  Ahimelech  '
(so  The.  ad  loc.  ;  Baudissin,  A  T  Pr tester  I  hum,  195  ;
Dr.  ad  loc. ).  The  Chronicler,  however,  must  have  had
2  S.  817  before  him  in  its  present  corrupt  form.  In

Mk.  226,  by  a  similar  confusion.  David  is  said  to  have
gone  into  the  house  of  God  and  received  the  shew-
bread  'when  Abiathar  was  high-priest.'  In  reporting
our  Lord's  words  the  evangelist  has  confused  Abiathar
with  Ahimelech,  a  mistake  into  which  he  was  led  by  the
constant  association  of  David's  name  with  that  of
Abiathar.  Suggestions  made  to  evade  thedifficulty — e.g. .
that  father  and  son  each  bore  the  same  double  name,  or
that  Abiathar  officiated  during  his  father's  lifetime  and
in  his  father's  stead — are  interesting  when  we  remember
the  great  names  which  have  supported  them,  but  are
manifestly  baseless  (see  Zadok.  i  ). See  Bu.  RiSa  195/.

W. E. A.

ABIB  (3*3K,  i.e.,  '  [month  of]  young  ears  of  barley ').
See  Month,  §§  2,  5.

1  See,  however,  Ira,  3,  where  a  Judahite  orifjin  is  suggested.

•  The  section  in  its  present  form  is  from  the  school  of  the
Deuteronomist.  But  the  expression  '  walk  before  my  anointed  '
proves  conclusively  that  there  is  an  older  substratum.


ABIGAIL

ABIDA,  and  (AV  in  Gen.)  Abidah  (jn'3K, §  44.

'  the  (divine)  father  knoweth  '  ?  c])  llliada,  Bccliada,
Jehoiada;  &B[e]lAA  [BAL],  aBira  [AZ^],  aBia  [E].
aBi<\^&  [I-]  ;  ^»ii)a),  one  of  the  five  '  sons  '  of  Midian,
and  grandson  of  Abraham  by  Keturah  ((jen.  264
I  Ch.  1  33+).  Unexplained,  as  yet.  except  that  the  same
name  occurs  in  Sab.  inscriptions  (yrzK.  cp  also  auyr,
Hal. 192,  202,  etc.).

ABIDAN  (p^3N,  §  44,  'the  (divine)  father  is  judge' ;
cp  Daniel;  ABleliAAN  [HAL];  ahid.is),  chief  of
Benjamin  in  the  time  of  Moses  (Nu.  In  222  76o6s
1024!).  On  the  age  of  the  name  see  Gray,  UJ'N
202,  244.  Possibly  P  had  a  consciousness  that  -dan
was  archaic  (cp  Dan,  §1).  and  therefore  suitable  in
the  name  of  a  tribal  chief  at  the  time  of  the  I'^xodus.
To  infer  with  Hommel  [AHT  298-301)  from  such  a
name  as  Abidan  that  P's  record  is  itself  ancient,  is  critic-
ally unjustifiable.  P  also  gives  the  names  SJIAI'HAT  and
SniriiT.\N,  which  are  scarcely  archaic.

ABIEL  (bx^SN,  §§  4,  44.  'God  is  father'  (of  the
clan?); AB[e]iHA  [BAL]  ;  AKni.).

1.  Father  of  Ner  and  Kish  (i.S.  9i.  also  14  sif,
-■t]p  [B])  ;  see  Abnek.

2.  One  of  David's  thirty  mighty  men  (iCh.  II32);
see  A  Bi  A  I,  BON.

ABIEZER,  A\-  Abi-ezer  ("lir^K.  §  44.  *  the  (divine)
father  is  help,'  cp  Ahiezer ;  ABiezep  [BAL]:  Judg.
634  etc.).

1.  The  clan  from  which  Gideon  sprang  belonged  to
the  Gileadite  branch  of  the  tribe  of  Manasseh.  In
Gideon's  time  its  seat  was  at  Ophrah  (Judg.  624),  an
unidentified  site,  but  apparently  on  the  west  side  of
Jordan.  It  is  probable  that  the  first  settlements  of  the
Manassites  lay  to  the  west  of  that  river,  but  the  date  at
which  their  conquests  were  extended  to  the  eastward  is
not  known  (Josh.  172  tefet  [B],  ax'er«/>  [A],  ajiu^ep
[L]  ;  Judg.  61124).  In  Nu. '2630  the  name  Abiczer
appears,  not  as  in  the  parallel  i  Ch.  7 18,  but  in  an
abbreviated  form  as  Iezek  (ni^'ht,  AV  Jeezer,  axifj'ep
[BAL]),  and  the  gentilic  as  Iezerite  (niy-K,  AV
Jeezerite,  6  axi-fi'fi-pfi  [B],  -fepi  [.AL]).  In  i  Ch.
7  18  Abiezer  finds  a  place  in  the  Manassite  genealogy  as
son  of  Hamniolecheth  the  sister  of  Machir  b.  Manasseh.
The  patronymic  Abi-ezrite  AV,  Abiezkite  RV  (•;«
nturt),  occurs  in  Judg.  611 24  (irarpbi  toO  eaSpei  [B]  ;  ir.
a/sJfpi,  7r.  T.  iefpi[A];  7r.(r.)  efpei  [L])  and  (j>erhaps
as  a  gloss,  see  Moore,  ad  loc.)  832  (ajiifaSpi  [B],  rrps
o^iefpet  [A],  Trarpds  a.  [L]).

2.  Of  Anathoth,  one  of  David's  heroes  (2  S.  23  27,
a^eiftfp  [B]  ; i  Ch.  11  28  27. 2!).  see  David,  §  11  (a)  i.

ABIGAIL  (usually  ^'J'^K,  but  ^^JUK  in  i  S.25i8
Kt.,and^r3K  in  i  S.2532.  2  S.33Kt..  and  [so  RV
Abigal]  in  1725  ;  and,  perhaps  with  *  and  i  transposed,
?''33N  in  I  S.  25336  ;  possibly  we  should  point  /'^DS,  §
45  ;  so  oftenest  ^^,^*»( .  sometimes  M^q^J  ;  cp
BDB  Lex.  s.v.  ;  AB[e]ir<MA  [BAL],  but  in  i  S.253
ABipAiA  [A];  meaning  uncertain;  '  Abi '  is  a  divine
title  (see  Names.  §  44.  and  cp  HPN77.  85).

1.  Wife  of  Nabai,  (q.v.),  and.  after  his  death,  of
David  ( I  S.  25).  Her  tactful  speech  against  the  causeless
sheddingofblood(  i  S.  25  22-31)  is  noteworthy  for  the  hi.story
of  Israelitish  morality.  Like  Ahinoam.  she  accompanied
David  to  Gath  and  Ziklag.  and  was  taken  capme  by  the
Amalekites,  but  was  recovered  by  David  ( i  S.  27  3  30s '8).
While  at  Hebron  she  bore  David  a  son  (see  Daniel,  4).

2.  A  sister  of  David,  who  married  Jether  or  Ithra,
and  became  the  mother  of  Amasa,  2  S.  17  25  (see  above),
I  Ch.  2  i6i  17. In  M  T  of  the  former  passage,  her  father

1  B  omits  Abigail  in  v.  16,  and  BA  read  ai«A^»j  for  aJcA^'
of  L.

14


ABIGAL

is  called  Nahash  (an  error  also  found  in  ©"*,  and
clearly  produced  by  the  proximity  of  that  name  in  v.  27  ;
©'■  gives  the  correct  reading,  'Jesse,'  tf<r<rai),  and  her
husband  is  called  '  the  Israelite '  (so  MT  ;  iapar)\fiT-qs
[B],  }..\  ;«rs.^)  which,  however,  seems  to  be  a  corrup-
tion from  '  the  Jezreelite '  (tefpaTjXiTT?^  [L],  de  iesraeli
[ed.  Rom.],  de  Hiesreli  [cod.  Amiat.]),  just  as  '  Ahinoam
the  Jezreelitess  ■  (i  S.  273)  becomes  in  B  axfivaafi  7)
iffparjXfiTii.  It  is  true,  in  i  Ch.  /.r.  Jether  is  called
•the  Ishmaelite'  (t<r/ia7;\(f)iTr;s  [BA],  ismahelites),  but
this  is  plainly  a  conjectural  emendation  of  '  the  Israelite'
(L  indeed  has  LOpa.;  Pesh.  om. ).  InaS.  17 25  the  same
emendation  appears  in  ©*  (jo-^a. ).  David's  sister  was
not  likely  to  marry  an  Ishmaelite.  Heyse  wonders
to  what  town  Jerome's  reading  can  refer.  We  can  easily
answer  the  question.  It  was  the  Jezreel  situated  in  Judah
(Josh.  1556),  from  which  not  only  David's  brother-in-law
but  also  his  first  wife  Ahinoam  probably  came  (so  Marq.
Fund.  24  ;  see  Jezreel,  i.  2).  T.  K.  c.

ABIGAL  l/'i'^S),  2  S.  1725  RVf. See  Abigail,  2.

ABIHAIL  (^"H'^S,  §  45,  'the  (divine)  father  is
strength,'  cp  Sab.  ^^PIDS  :">'!  th^  ^-  Arabian  woman's
name,  Ili-hail  [Hommel,  .-///r  320]  ;  written  ^'•nnX
[Gi.  Ba.]  in  2  and  4  ;  Hommel  [in  the  Ebers  Festschrift,
29  ;  cp  AHT  320]  compares  the  same  name  [with  11]
in  S.  Arabian  inscriptions  from  Ghazzat  (Gaza)  ;  but
h'^rVI^  is  supported  by  ©;  AB[e]lX<MA  [BAL],
^jtA^^-  --IBIHAirj.,  abihail).

1.  Father  of  Zuriel  (Xu.  Ssst.  a/3txaiai  [F"]).

2.  Wife  of  Abishur  the  Jerahmeelite  (i  Ch.  229+
Sm'IN  [Gi.  Ba.]  ; a/3etxa'a  ^  [B],  OL'^i-y.  [A],  a/StrjX  [L]).

3.  A  Gadite  (i Ch. 5 14!. a)3[ejixa'a [BA], a/3n?\

4.  Daughter  of  Eliab,  David's  brother,  and  wife  of
Rehoboam  (2  Ch.  11  iSf,  S'.tdx  [f^i.  Ba.],  ^a.iav\\\\  a/3.
[B^b.  vid.]_  a^iataX  [A],  rov  warpos  avTou  [L,  who
reads  3N''7n  d-hh  irrnn]).

5.  Father  of  Esther,  whose  name  however  is  given
as  Aminadab  by  C  (Esth.  2 15  929t,  afi[€]ivaoa^
[BNALP],  and  -5a^  [N]).

ABIHU  (Xin^nX,  §  44.  "my  father  is  he '  ;  aBiOyA
[B.\L],  i.e.  ABiHCDr'  ABiCOyp  [A  i"  Ex.  623],  abh-).
See  N.\i).\B  AXD  Abihu.

ABIHXJD  (nin''3X,  §  45,  'the  (divine)  father  is
glory,'  a  name  probably  appearing  in  contracted  form
in  Ehud  [i/.z'.  i.  and  ii.],  cp  Ammihud,  Ishhod,  as
also  nin  ^3X  \'ibi  hud],  an  almost  certain  correction  of
ny  *3N  [EV  '  everlasting  father  ']  in  Is.  95,  which,  how-
ever, is  to  be  treated  as  an  Arabic  ktinya,  '  father  of
glory'  [Che.  'Isaiah,'  in  SHOT];  aBioyA*  [BAL];
>Oo*<o/  ;  abivd),  a  Benjamite  (i  Ch.  Sst)-

ABIJAH  (in»3N,  n^'3SI,  §  44,  'Yahwe  is  father';
on  names  ending  in  n\  -IH^,  see  Names,  §24;  AB[e]lA
[BAL]).

I.  Son  of  Rehoboam  by  a  '  daughter  of  Absalom '
(see  M.^ACAH,  3),  and  for  three  years  king  of  Judah
(somewhere  about  900  B.C.  ;  see  Chronology,  §
32).  The  writer  of  the  '  epitome'  in  Kings  (see  Dr.

Introd.  178)  only  tells  us  (i  K.  15 1-57)*  that  he  con-
tinued  his father's war against Israel, and that he

1  A  mere  scribal  error,  A  for  A  ;  so  invariably  in  the  case  of
Abigail.

2  Yet  BA  have  oPiou  (;.f.  in'^K)  5  times  for  Abijam.  See
AnijAH,  I  end.

3  In  ©BAi-  this  name  is  regularly  substituted  for  Abihu  of
MT  exc.  Ex.623  [A]. See  Ahihu.

4  According  to  Klo.  i  K.  15s/  should  run  thus,  'Because
David  had  done  that  which  was  right  ...  all  the  days  of  his
life.'  From  '  all  the  days  of  his  life '  to  '  Abijam  (so  read  in
accordance  with  the  correction  in  T'.  7)  and  Jeroboam '  is  probably
a  late  gloss  from  the  margin.  The  notice  resi>ecting  the  war
between  Abijah  and  Rehoboam  seems  to  be  derived  from  2  Ch.
13  2,  where  alone  it  is  in  point.


ABILENE

'  walked  in  all  the  sins  of  his  father  ; '  and,  since  the  first
of  these  notices  is  very  possibly  due  to  an  interpolator,
we  may  confine  our  attention  to  the  second.  Why
then  does  the  epitomist  take  this  unfavourable  view  of
Abijah?  As  Stade  points  out,  he  must  have  read  in
the  Annals  of  the  kings  of  Judah  statements  respecting
this  king  which,  if  judged  by  the  standard  of  his
later  day,  involved  impiety,  such  as  that  Abijah,
unlike  his  son  Asa,  tolerated  foreign  worships.  It  is
surprising  to  find  that  the  Chronicler  (2  Ch.  13)  draws
a  highly  edifying  portrait  of  Abijah,  whom  he  repre-
sents as  delivering  an  earnest  address  to  Jeroboam's
army  (for  '  there  was  war  between  Abijah  and  Jeroboam  ')
on  the  sin  of  rebellion  and  schism,  and  as  gaining  a
great  victory  over  the  Israelites,  because  he  and  liis
people  'relied  on  Yahw6  the  God  of  their  fathers.'
This,  however,  is  a  late  Midrash,  and  has  no  historical
value.  The  Chronicler  (or  his  authority)  wished  to
emphasize  the  value  of  the  true  ritual,  and  did  this  by
introducing  an  artificial  episode  into  an  empty  reign.
Cp  Bennett,  Chron.  2>'^6  ff.  (Pesh.  always  J^/ ;  Jos.
a|3ias  :  in  1  K.  14  31  \hiff.,  MT  has  five  times  the
corrupt  reading  c'lN  Abijam, '  a/3ioi/^  [B-A],  -ta  [L]. )

2.  A  son  of  Jeroboam  I.,  king  of  Israel,  who  died  in
his  father's  lifetime.*  The  account  of  his  illness  is  given
in  I  K.  14  1-18  (MT  ©'^),  and  in  another  recension  in
©■*'-  immediately  after  the  narrative  of  Jeroboam's
return  from  l'".gypt  on  the  death  of  Solomon  (3  K.  12  24  gff.
[Swete],  13 1-13  [L]).  If  we  accept  the  former  version  as
original,  we  are  bound  to  bring  it  down  to  the  age  which
was  under  the  influence  of  Dt. ,  for  the  prophecy  in  i  K.
147-16  is  in  tone  and  phraseology  closely  akin  to  similar
predictions  in  I61-4,  21  20-24,  2  K.  97-10,  the  Deutero-
nomistic  affinities  of  which  are  unmist.ikable.  Nor  is  it
possible  to  simplify  the  narrative  without  violence.  The
©"'-  version,  on  the  other  hand,  can,  without  arbitrari-
ness, be  brought  into  a  simple  and  very  natural  form.
Jeroboam  is  not  yet  king.  His  wife,  not  being  queen,
has  no  occasion  to  disguise  herself,  and  Ahijah  simply
predicts  the  death  of  the  sick  child,  without  any  refer-
ence to  sins  of  Jeroboam  which  required  this  punish-
ment. The  writers  who  supplemented  and  expanded
the  older  narrative  were  men  of  Judah  ;  the  original
story,  however,  is  presumably  Israelitish.  (See  Kue.
Einl.  25;  St.  GVI\.  350  n.  ;  Wi.  ATUnters.  12  f.)
Cp  Jeroboam,  i.

3.  A  Benjamite,  i  Ch.  7  8t  (AV  AniAH  ;  a/3io««  [B],  -ou  [A]).

4.  Wife  of  Hezron,  i  Ch.  2  24!  (EV  Abiah).

5.  Son  of  the  prophet  Samuel,  iS.  82  (AV  Abiah  ;  a^ripa
[L]),  I  Ch.  628  [islt  (EV  Abiah).

6.  The  eighth  of  the  twenty-four  courses  of  Priests  (i^.v.)—
that  to  which  Zechariah,  father  of  John  the  Baptist,  belonged,
I  Ch.  -'i  10  (AV  Ahijah);  Lk.  1  5!  (AV  Asia).

7.  Mother  of  King  Hezekiah,  2Ch.  29  I. See  Am.

8.  Priest  ill  Zerubbabel's  band  (see  Ezka,  ii.  §  6^),  Neb.  12  4
(a/3ias  (L],  17  fB  om.  Zf.]);  perhaps  =  No.  6.

9.  Priestly  signatory  to  the  covenant(see  Ezra,  i.  g  7),  Neh.  10
7  [8].  T.  K.  c. — w.  E.  A.

ABIJAM  (D»njf).  I  K.  14  /.f See  Abijah,  i.

ABILENE  (aB6iAhnh  [BA ;  W.  and  H.],  aBiA.
[N-'' ;  Ti]),  given  in  Lk.  3 1  as  the  tetrarchy  of  Lysanias,
at  the  time  when  Christ's  ministry  began,  was  a  territory
round  Abila  (aBiAa).  a  town  of  some  importance  in
Antilibanus,  and  known  to  both  Josephus  and  Ptolemy
as  Abila  of  Lysanias  ("A.  17  Avaavlov),  to  distinguish
it  from  others  of  the  same  name,  especially  Abila  of  the
Decapolis  i^.v.).  The  Antonine  and  Peutinger
Itinei;aries  place  it  18  R.  m.  from  Damascus  on  the  way
to  Heliopolis  or  Baalbek,  which  agrees  with  that  portion
of  the  gorge  of  the  Abana  in  which  the  present  village,
Sfik  Wady  Barada,  lies.  Not  only  are  there  remains  of
a  large  temple  on  the  precipitous  heights  to  the  E.  of
this  village,  with  ancient  aqueducts  and  a  Roman  road,

1  It  is  defended,  however,  by  Jastrow,  /BL  xiii.  114  ("94).

2  I.e.  '"I'^N,  see  Abihu.

3  Josephus  calls  this  son  *0^i>r)«  (Ant.  viii.  11).

16


ABIMABL

tombs  and  other  ruins  on  IxDth  sides  of  the  river,  but
inscriptions  have  been  discovered,  one  of  which  records
the  making  of  the  road  by  '  a  freedman  of  Lysanias  the
tetrarch,'  and  another  its  repair  '  at  the  expense  of  the
Abilenians."  Moreover,  a  Moslem  legend  places  on  the
temple  height  the  tomb  of  Abel  or  Nebi  Habil,  doubtless
a  confused  memory  of  the  ancient  name  of  Abila,  which
probably  meant  'meadow'  (cp  Abici,,  Ahkl-Hkth-
Maacicau).  The  place  was  in  fact,  still  called  Abil  es-
Siik  by  Arabic  geographers  (Yakut,  1  57  ;  Mardsi' ,  1  4).
The  site  is,  therefore,  certain  (cp.  Rob.  LHh'  478^  and
Porter,  Five  Years  in  Damascus,  i.  261  ff.,  where  there
is  a  plan  of  the  gorge).  On  the  political  relations  of
Abilene,  see  Lysanias.  g.  a.  s.

ABIMAEL  (i'S0'3N.  "God  is  a  father,*  cp  Sab.
name  -innj?D3S,  '^i  father  is  'Attar'  [inC'y],  Hal.
Mt'l.;  ZDMii,  xx.wii.  18  ['83],  and  see  JKKAHMKKI,,  in.
I  ;  ABiMenA  [AL] ;  B  om.  or  wanting),  a  descendant  of
JoKTAN  (Gen.  IO28;  ABiMeAeHA  [K]:  iCh.  l22t.
-AAeeiA  [I'])-  Tribal  connection  uncertain,  but  see
(jlaser,  Skizze,  ii.  426.

ABIMELECH  (^l^O^as  ;  &B[€]iMeAex  [BAL],  -AeK
[B*  Judf,'.  928],  i.e.,  most  proliably,  '  Melech  (Milk),  the
divine  kin.ij,  is  father."  Al)imilki  and  Ahimilki  occur  as
names  of  princes  of  Arvad  in  the  Annals  of  Asurbanipal
(A'/?  ii.  172 /. );  the  former  name,  which  is  e\idently
C'anaanitish,  also  belongs  to  the  Egyptian  governor  of
Tyre  in  the  Aniarna  tablets.

1.  A  Philistine,  king  of  Gerar  (see  below),  Gen.
26  I  7-1116,  who,  according  to  a  folk-story  in  J,  took
Ri'bckah  to  be  Isaac's  sister,  and  reproved  Isaac  for
having  caused  this  mistake,  and  so  very  nearly  brought
guilt  uix)n  the  Philistines.  The  same  tradition  is
preserved  in  !•:  (Cien.  20),  but  without  the  anachronistic
reference  to  the  Philistines.  The  persons  concerned  are
.\bimelech,  king  of  Gerar,  Abraham,  and  Sarah.  The
details  are  here  much  fuller,  and  the  differences  from  J's
narrative  are  striking.  There  is  reason,  however,  to
think  that  the  narrative  of  E  in  its  original  form  made
no  mention  of  Gerar.  In  this  case  the  principality  of
Abimelech  was  described  by  E  simply  as  being  '  between
Kadesh  and  Shur '  (omitting  the  following  words).  In
J's  account  (Gen.  26)  there  are  traces  of  a  confusion
between  two  Gerars,  the  more  southerly  of  which  (the
true  seat  of  Abimelech's  principality)  was  probably  in
the  N.  .Arabian  land  of  Musri  (for  particulars  on  this
region  see  Mizraim,  §  2  [^]).  J's  account  also  refers
to  disputes  between  the  herdsmen  of  .Abimelech  and  those
of  Isaac  about  wells,  which  were  terminated  by  a  covenant
between  Isaac  and  Abimelech  at  Beersheba  (Gen.  26  17
19-33).  The  Elohistic  form  of  this  tradition  passes  lightly
over  the  disputes,  and  lays  the  chief  stress  on  the  deference
shown  to  Abraham  by  Abimelech  when  the  oaths  of
friendship  were  exchanged.  The  scene  of  the  treaty  is,
as  in  J,  Beersheba  (Gen.  21  22-323).  On  Ps.  34,  title,
see  AcmsH.  T.  K.  c.

2.  Son  of  Jerubbaal  (Gideon).  His  history,  as
related  in  Judg.  9,  is  of  very  great  value  for  the  light
which  it  throws  on  the  relations  between  the  Israelites
and  the  older  population  of  the  land  in  this  early
period.  His  mother  was  a  Shechemite,  and  after  his
father's  death  he  succeeded,  through  his  mother's
kinsmen,  in  persuading  the  Canaanite  inhabitants  of
Shechem  to  submit  to  his  rule  rather  than  to  that  of  the
seventy  sons  of  Jerubbaal.  With  silver  from  the  temple-
treasure  of  Baal-hekith  (q.v.)  he  hired  a  band  of
bravos  and  slaughtered  his  brothers, — Jotham,  the
youngest,  alone  escaping, — and  was  acclaimed  king  by
the  people  of  .Shechem  and  Beth-millo,  at  the  sacred
tree  near  Shechem.  From  a  safe  height  on  Mt.
Geri/.im,  Jotham  cried  in  the  ears  of  the  assembly  his
fable  of  the  trees  who  went  about  to  make  them  a  king
(see  Jotham,  i),  and  predicted  that  the  partners  in  the
crime  against  Jerubbaal's house would destroy each

2  T7


ABINBR

other,  a  prophecy  which  was  signally  fulfilled.  After
a  short  time  (three  years,  J'.  22),  the  Shecliemitcs  rose
against  Abimelech.  Of  the  way  in  which  this  came

about,  and  of  Abimelech's  vengeance,  the  chapter
contains  two  accounts.  According  to  the  first  of  these
(jT.  23-25,  42-45),  an  evil  spirit  froni  Vahwe  sows  discord
between  the  Shechemites  and  Abimelech,  who  takes  the
city  by  a  stratagem  and  totally  destroys  it.  According
to  the  other  account  (i/7'.  26-41),  the  insurrection  is
fomented  by  a  certain  Gaal  b.  Obed  (sec  Gaal,  §  i ),
who  shrewdly  appeals  to  the  pride  of  the  old  Shechemite
aristocracy  against  the  Israelite  half-breed,  Abimelech.'
Abimelech,  appri.sed  of  tlie  situation  by  Zebul,  his
lieutenant  in  the  city,  marches  against  it ;  Gaal,  at  the
head  of  the  Shechemites,  gotJS  out  to  meet  him,  but  is
beaten  and  driven  back  into  the  city,  from  which  he,
with  his  partizans,  is  expelled  by  Zebul  (on  this  episode,
C[)  G.\AL).  Abimelech,  carrying  the  war  against  other
places'^  which  had  taken  part  m  the  revolt,  destroys
Migdal-Shechem  {vr.  46-49,  .swjuel  of  ft'.  42-451.  While
leading  the  assault  upon  Theliez  he  is  niortally  hurt
by  a  mill-stone  which  a  woman  throws  from  the  wall.
To  save  himself  from  the  disgrace  of  dying  by  a
woman's  hand,  he  calls  on  his  armour-bearer  to
despatch  him  {in).  50-55  ;  cp  i  S.  31  4).

Many  recent  scholars  gather  from  the  story  of
Abimelech  that  Israel  was  already  feeling  its  way
towards  a  stronger  and  more  stable  form  of  govern-
ment. Jerubbaal,  it  is  said,  was  really  king  at  Ophrah,
as  appears  from  Judg.  92;*  his  son  Abimelech  reij;ned
not  only  over  the  Canaanites  of  Shechem,  but  over
Israelites  also  (v.  55).  A  short-lived  Manassite
kingdom  thus  preceded  the  Benjamite  kingdom  of
Saul  (We.,  St.,  Ki.).  This  theory  rests,  however,  on
very  insecure  foundations.  That  Jerubbaal's  power
descended,  if  Abimelech's  representation  is  true,  to  his
seventy  sons  (92),  not  to  one  chosen  successor  among
them,  does  not  prove  that  he  was  king,  but  rather  the
opposite.  Abimelech  was  king  of  Shechem,  to  whose
Canaanite  people  the  city-kingdom  was  a  familiar  form
of  government ;  that  he  ruled  in  that  name  over
Israelite  towns  or  clans  is  not  intimated  in  the  narrative,
and  is  by  no  means  a  necessary  inference  from  the  fact
that  he  had  Israelites  at  his  back  in  his  effort  to
suppress  the  revolt  of  the  Canaanite  cities  (9 55)-  Cp
GiDKON.  G. V. M.

3.  iCh.  I816.  A  scribe's  error  for  Ahimklech.
See  .Xhiathar  (end).

ABINADAB  (3nj^3K,  'my  father  apportions,'  see
N.XMKS,  §5;  44,  46,  or  '  the  father  (i.e.,  god  of  the  clan)
is  numitKcnl,'  cp  Jehonadab  ;  amLcJinaAaB  [BNA],
aBin.  [E])-

1.  David's  second  brother,  son  of  Jesse ;  i  S.  168
17  13.  also  iCh.  2 13  {ifi-'-v.  [L]). See  David,  §  i  (a).

2.  Son  of  Saul,  slain  upon  Mt.  Gilboa,  according  to
iS.  3I2.  The  name  .Abinadab,  however,  is  not
given  in  the  list  in  i  S.  11 49.  There  may  have  been  a
mistake  ;  Jesse's  second  son  was  named  Abinadab.  So
Marq.  Fund.  25  (twva5a/3  [B]— /.<•. ,  JONAliAB  [q.v.  3]).
iCh.  833 939; also iCh.102 (afupi'aSafi  [B  •»•""•],

3.  Of  Kirjath-jearim,  in  whose  house  the  ark  is  said
to  have  been  kept  for  twenty  years  (iS.  7i/.  2  S.
63/  I  Ch.  137). See  Ark.  §  5.

4.  I  K.  4ii,  see  Be.n-.Abinaoab.

ABINER  (i:''3S),  I  S.  14  sot.  AV  mg. See  Abner.

1  Judg.  0  2S  :  '  Who  is  Abimelech,  and  who  is  Shechem,  that
we  should  bt  subject  to  him?  Were  not  the  son  of  Jcrubb.ial,
and  Zobul  his  lieutenant,  subjects  cf  Hamor(the  blue  blood  of
Shechem)?  Why  should  «■<•  be  subject  to  him?'  For  other
interpretations  and  emendations  of  this  much-vexed  verse,  see
Moore,  y«</iVi,  257.

2  On  the  statement  (Judg.  922)  that  'Abimelech  ruled  over
Israel  three  years,"  see  Sloore,  Jutiges,  253.

S  Judg.  SaayC  is  considered  under  Gideon.  Cp  also  Moore,
J  urges,  aag  /


ABINOAM

ABINOAM  (DJ?i''3«,  §  45.  'the  (divine)  father  is
pleasiintntss,'  cp  Ahiiioam,  Elnaam  ;  &B[e]lNeeM
[HAL],  iaBin.  [A  iti  Jiidg.  412];  abinof.m).  father  of
Barak  (Judg.  46  1201  laf).

ABIRAM  (ny3X,  §  44— '•«•.  'the  Father  is  the
High  One.'  cp  Aui,  NAMES  with,  §  2;  ABeipcoN
[BA],  aBhp.  [1>]  ; v-ual  !  ABiRos),  another  form  of

Abu-ram,  which  (Abu-ramu)  is  a  well -attested  Baby-
lonian and  Assyrian  name  (it  occurs,  ct;.,  in  a  contract-
tablet  of  the  time  of  Abil-sin,  2324-2300  B.C.,  and  in
the  Assyrian  cponym-canon  under  B.C.  677).'  The
second  element  in  the  name  (-ram)  is  a  divine  title  (cp
'Paulas  6  vfiffTos  Oeds,  Hcsych. ),  but  is  also  used,  in  the
plur. ,  of  all  heavenly  beings  (Job  21 22).  Parallel
Hebrew  names  .are  Ahi-ram,  Adoni-ram,  Jeho-ram,
Malchi-ram  (see  also  Abram).  Ahiramu  is  the  name
of  a  petty  Babylonian  king  under  Asur-nasir-pal,  and
Malik-ram-mu  that  of  a  king  of  Edom  in  the  time  of
Sennacherib  (C'O 7"  i.  95,  281).

1.  A  fellow  conspirator  of  Dathan  {i/.v.),  Nu.  16
{aSapwv  [A  once],  ojSjp.  [F  twice]);  Ut.  116  Ps.  IOG17
and  (AV  Abikon)  Ecclus.  45 18,  4  Mace.  217!  (afi^puv
[V-J]).

2.  Eldest  son  of  Hiel  the  Bethelite,  who  died  when
his  father  laid  the  foundation  of  Jericho  anew  ;  i  K.
1634!  (.4B1RAM ;  L  om.  verse),  cp  Josh.  626  (5"'^'-.
See  HiEi,.  T.  K.  c.

ABIR0N(DT3N),  Ecclus.  45i8t  AV.  SccAbiram,  i.

ABISEI  (./AV55/r/  etc  ),  4  Esd.  1  2t. See  Abishua,  2.

ABISHAG  (Jk?'''?^'  §45.  meaning  obscure  ;  ^BeiCA
[B],  ABiCAr  [■■^i'  -C&K  [I-];  *^*s/  ;  ■n^'s.ic)  the
Shunammite,  David's  concubine  (i  !<..  1 1-4),  afterwards
sought  in  marriage  (2iT,ff.)  by  Adonijaii,  i.

ABISHAI  ('tr^N,  §  45,  written  ^IfbX^  in  2  S.
10  lo  and  always  [five  times]  in  Ch.,  where  moreover
A  omits  final  t  ;  meaning  doubtful,  cp  Je.sse,  Amasa,
and  for  Lag. 's  view  see  Abnek  ;  ABeiCA.[Bt<;  A  once],
aBiCAI  [A],  -Aei  [A  three  times],  ABecCA[L,  also  seven
times  B,  and  three  times  A],  -Bicc-  [A,  iCh.  2i6],
AC&l  [A,  2.S.  330],  AMecCA  [L,  2S.  206]),  the  brother
of  Joab,  is  mentioned  immediately  after  the  '  first  three'
and  at  the  head  of  '  the  thirty  '  in  the  list  of  David's
worthies  (2S.  23i8/;;  iCh.  II20/.  ;  reading  'thirty'
for  '  three  '  with  SBOT  etc. ,  after  Pesh. ).  He  was  one
of  David's  close  associates  during  his  outlawry,  and  was
his  companion  in  the  visit  to  Saul's  camp  on  the  hill
of  Hachilah  (iS.  266).  He  was  faithful  to  him  in
Absalom's  rebellion  (2S.  I69),  commanded  a  third
part  of  the  army  (2S.  I82),  saved  David's  life  when
it  was  threatened  by  a  Philistine  (2S.2I1617),  and,
according  to  the  Chronicler  (iCh.  I812),  slew  18,000
Edomites  in  the  \'al!ey  of  Salt  (but  see  Joab,  i).

ABISHALOM  (niy^r-aX),  iK.  152iot.  See
Absalom,  i.

ABISHUA  (yV^aX,  §  44,  for  view  of  Lag.  see  Abner  ;
'the  (divine)  father  is  opulence'?  cp  Malchishua,
and  Abi-isua,  Wi.  Gl  130  n.  3.  See  also  Horn.  AHT
liii.  108  n.  209  n.  i,  ZDMG  .xli.x.  525  ['95]).

1.  A  son  of  Bela  (q.v.  ii.  2),  iCh.84  (a/3et(7-a.aaj '
[B],  a^iffove  [AL] ; -^OAAsi';  .-is/sra).

2.  b.  I'liinehas,  b.  Eleazar,  b.  Aaron  (iCh.  64/  [5
30/].  5o[35].a/3[e]i(roi;[B.A],  a^iovd, -t(70va[L];  Ezra7s.

1  See  Hommel,  PS/i.4  xvi.  212  ['941:  Schr.  COTW.  187.

2  Krmnn  and  Maspcro  connect  this  name  with  Ab-sha,
the  Egyptian  form  of  the  name  of  the  Asiatic  chief  repre-
sented on  a  famous  wall -painting  at  Beni- Hasan.  But  sub-
sidiary evidence  is  wanting.  .See  Joseph,  i,  §  io,  and  cp  WMM,
Ms.  u.  Eur.  36  n.  2.  Hommel  (AHT  53)  connects  Ab-sha  or
Ebshu'a  with  Abishua.

3  This  presupposes  ViyO'^Vi,  a  name  for  which  there  is  no
parallel  in  the  OT,  cp  Samso.n,  Shimshai.


ABNER

a^[e]Krove  [B.-\L]=i  Esd.  82,  Abisum  [.AV],  i.e.,
a^iaovfi  [343,  248],  RV  Abi.sue  {ajieia-ai  [B],  a^iaovau
[A],  afii<Tove  [L]).  Called  Abisei  in  4  Esd.  Izf  {Abissei
[ed.  Bensly],  Abisaei  [cod.  Amb.]).

ABISHUE  (>V>nN,  §  44.  '  the  (divine)  father  is
(as)  a  wall' ?cp  Sab.  "lliJ'^N,  Assvr.  Abudiiru;  AB[e]l-
COYP  [J^A],  aBiac.  [E] ;  ahisvr),  b.  Shammai  the
Jerahmeelite  (i  Cii.  228/.t).  Derenbourg  [RI-.J,  1880.
p.  58)  gives  -iiB-aK  as  a  Himyaritic  divine  title  (Hal.
148,  5).  But  the  second  part  of  Abi-shur  may  be  a
corruption  of  nns* ;  cp  Ahishah.\r.

ABISUM,  RV  Abisue  (aBicoym  [243  etc.]),  i  Esd.
82t-E/.r.  75,  Abishua,  2.

ABITAL  (Vi?^3X.  §  45,  'my  father  is  dew'?  cp
HAMriAi, ;  but  should  not  these  names  be  Abitub
[Qp-aX],  Hamutub  [cp  Ahitub]?  A  name  com-
pounded with  7t3  seems  very  improbable.  7  and  3
might  be  confounded  in  Palmyrene  characters ;  abitai.)  ;
wife  of  David,  mother  of  Shephatiah  ;  2.S.  84,  i  Ch.
Sat  (aBgitaA,  thc  caB.  [B]  ;  aBit.  [A] ;  -taaA,
-TAAA  [E]).  In  2  Ch.  3t)2,  ©"  reads  A^eiraX  for
Ha.mut.vi,,  the  name  of  Jehoahaz's  mother. T.  K.  c.

ABITUB  (3"1D''2X  :  perhaps  properly,  as  in  versions,
Abitob,  'the  (divine)  father  is  good,'  see  N.vmes,  §
45  ;  cp  Aram.  aO^QX  I  aBitcoB  [BAL] ;  abitob),  b.
Shaharaim  (iCh.  8iit).

ABIUD  (aBioyA  [BA],  -oyt  [X*],  i.e.,  Abihud,  or
Abihu),  son  of  Zerubbabel,  and  ancestor  of  Joseph,
husband  of  Mary  (Mt.  1 13),  see  Ge.vealogies  of  Jesus,
§  2  c.

ABNER  (inX.  §  44.  but  in  iS.  1450  l.^aX ;
aBgnnhp  [BAL],  -CNH-  [A  five  times],  aBainhr  [A
twice];  abner.  Lag.  Uebers.  75,  holds  that  Abner  =
"13  prX]  =  '  son  of  Ner. '  This  is  suggested  by  the  (5
form  'Abenner';  but  cp  ,n|^3T  = 'Pe^Se/cKa,  n^s^  =
Bo<ro^pa.  'Abner'  or  'Abiner'  might  mean  'my
(divine)  father  is  (as)  a  lamp').  Captain  of  the
host  under  Saul  and  under  Ishbaal.  As  a  late  but
well-informed  writer  states,  he  was  Saul's  first  cousin
(iS.  1450,  cp  9i),  Ner  the  father  of  Abner  and  Kish
the  father  of  Saul  being  both  sons^  of  Abiel.  The
fortunes  of  Saul  and  Abner  were  as  necessarily  linked
together  as  those  of  David  and  Joab,  but  tradition
has  teen  even  less  kind  to  Abner  than  to  his  master.
Of  his  warlike  exploits  we  hear  nothing,  though  there
was  '  sore  war  against  the  Philistines  all  the  days
of  Saul'  (i  S.  1452),  and  tradition  loved  to  e.xtol  the
prowess  of  individual  heroes.  Even  at  the  battle  of
Gilboa  there  is  no  mention  of  Abner,  though  it  was  a
part  of  his  duty,  according  to  David,  or  at  least  an  early
narrator,  to  guard  the  sacred  person  of  the  king  (iS.
2615).  All  that  we  hear  of  him  in  Saul's  reign  is  that
he  sat  next  to  the  king  at  table  (i  S.  2O25),  that,  accord-
ing to  one  tradition,  he  introduced  David  to  the  presence
of  Saul  (i  S.  1757).  and  that  he  accompanied  the  king
in  his  pursuit  of  David  (iS.  265^).  It  was  natural
that  upon  Saul's  death  he  should  take  up  the  cause  of
Ishbaal  (David,  §  6).  It  suffices  to  mention  here  some
personal  incidents  of  that  unhappy  time.  That  Abner
slew  his  pursuer  Asahel  (one  of  Joab's  brothers)  was,
doubtless,  not  his  fault  but  his  misfortune.  But  his
motive  in  passing  over  from  Ishbaal  to  David  was  a
shameful  one.  Ishbaal  may  indeed  have  been  wrong  in
interpreting  Abner's  conduct  to  Rizpah.  Saul's  concu-
bine, as  an  act  of  treason  (cp  2.S.  I621  1K.222);
but  to  give  up  the  cause  of  the  Benjamite  kingdom  on
this  account,  and  transfer  his  allegiance  to  David,  was

1  In  1  S.  1451  read  '}3  for  -fa  with  Jos.  Ant.  vi.  6  6,
followed  by  Dr.,  Bu.,  KIo.  The  text  of  i  Ch.  833  =  8  39  should
doubtless  run,  'And  Ner  begat  Abner,  and  Kish  begat  Saul
(see  Kau.  note  in  US).


ABOMINATION

ifl^oble.  The  result  was  not  what  he  had  expected —
the  highest  place  undrr  a  grati-ful  king.  He  had  just
left  David  with  the  view  of  prtK'uring  a  popular  a.sseinl)]y
for  the  recognition  of  David  as  king  of  all  Israel,  when
Joah  enticed  him  back,  and  treacherously  assassinated
him  beside  the  gale  of  Hebron  (sec  Sikau,  Well  ok),
partly  jx-'rhaps  from  jealousy,  partly  in  revenge  for  the
death  of  Asahel  (2  S.  830).

Abnir's  death  was  regarded  by  David  as  a  national
calamity.  '  Know  ye  not,"  he  said,  'that  a  prince  and
a  great  man  is  fallen  this  day  in  Israel?"  He  ordered
a  public  mourning  for  Abner,  and  himself  sang  an  elegy
over  his  grave,  a  fragment  of  which  is  preserved  (2S.
831-39) :  see  Poetical  Literatuke,  §4,  iii.  (h).  The
Chronicler  gives  Abner  a  son  named  JAASIEL  ((j.v.  2).

T. K. C.

ABOMINATION,  a  word  occurring  over  a  hundred
limes  in  the  OT  as  a  rendering  of  four*  somewhat
technical  expressions  (sometimes  paraphrased  '  abomin-
able thing,'  etc. ).

1.  Vua  (pi.i^ul)  occurs  four  times  in  exilic  and  post-
exilic  writings  (Ilz.  414  ['s -vra].  Lev.  7i8/ita(r/«i ;  19?
ILdxTov  ;  Is.  604!  [C'S;9  pTD,  'broth,'  Xwfibv  .  .  .
fi.eixo\vfjiiu.eva  ;  Kt.  's  pis,  '  scraps '])  as  a  technical  term
for  sacrificial  flesh  become  stale  (/c/j^aj  ?wXov  or  ^((iT)\ou
in  Ez.  [HAQ]),  which  it  was  unlawful  to  eat.  See
Sackikice.  In  the  last  passage  WRS  regarded  pijCiCUl
as  carrion,  or  flesh  so  killed  as  to  retain  the  blood  in  it
(A\S"(*-'I  343  n.  3).

2.  j-pr  [sekfs),  also  confined  to  exilic  and  post-exilic
writings^  (Ez.  8  10  Lev.  7  21  11  10-42  Isa.  66  lyt  ;
(i5i\i'-yna  [B.\]),  is  a  term  for  what  is  taboo.  See
Clean  and  Unclean.

3-  y\f)v{^'kkus,  variously  rendered  ^5^\ii7/ia,  eWojXoi',
etc. ),  a  much  commoner  word,  of  the  same  form  as  ( i ),
and  from  the  same  root  as  (2),  occurring  once  in  the
present  text  of  Hos.  9io,  is  freely  used  (over  twenty
times),  chiefly  from  the  E.xile  onwards,  as  a  contemptuous
designation  ofu-nest  of  images  of  deitfcs  or  of  foreign
deities  themselves.  See  below,  ABOMINATION  OF
Desolation  and  Idol,  §  2/.

4.  n^vin  {to'ebdh  ;  fideXvyfjia),  a  word  of  uncertain  ety-
mology frequently  occurring  from  Dt.  onwards  (esp.  in
Ezek. ),  is  by  far  the  commonest  of  these  terms.  It
designates  what  gives  offence  to  God  (Dt.  I231)  or  man
(Pr.  2927),  especially  the  violation  of  established  custom.
The  former  usage  is  the  more  common  ;  it  applies  to
such  things  as  rejected  cults  in  general,  Dt.  1231  (see
Idol,  §  2/. ),  child-sacrifice  (Jer.  3235),  ancestral  worship
(Ez.  438),  images  (Dt.  27i5).  imperfect  sacrificial
victims  {Dt.  17 1),  sexual  irregularities  (Ezek.  22 n),  false
weights  and  measures  (Dt.  25  16),  etc.  The  latter  us;ige,
however,  is  not  rare  (esp.  in  Prov. ).  Thus  J  tells  us
eating  with  foreigners  (Gen.  4832),  shepherds  (4634),
Hebrew  sacrifices  (Ex.826  [22]),  were  an  abomination
to  the  Egyptians  (see  Egypt,  §§  19,  31).

ABOMINATION OF DESOLATION. THE (to

BAeAyr^A  thc  epHMUicecoc).  an  onit;matical  expres-
sion in  the  apocalyptic  section  (Mt.  2415-28)  of  the
discourse  of  Christ  respecting  HisnApoyciAlMt-  24  15  =
Mk.  1314)-  The  passage  containing  the  phrase  runs
thus  in  Mt. — '  When  therefore  ye  see  the  atomination  of
desolation,  which  was  sjx)kcn  of  by  Daniel  the  prophet.
Standing  (e^Toj)  in  the  holy  place  (let  him  that  readeth
understand),  then  let  them  that  are  in  Judaia  flee  unto
the  mountains.'  The  reference  to  Daniel,  however,
which  is  wanting  in  Mk.,  is  clearly  an  addition  of
Mt.  (cp  Mt.  223  4 14,  etc. ),  and  Mark's  fffrrjKirra  (masc. ),

'  It  is  also  used  in  1S.I34  for  PKaj,  the  word  rendered
'  sunk  ■  in  2  S.  106  (AV).

2  But  in  Is.  /.c.  Duhm  and  Cheyne  read  j*^C  ;  so  also
Sam.  and  some  MSS.  at  l^v.7ai.  In  I.ev.llio^  we  may
point  |-|3r,  and  in  Ez.810  read  D'xpt?  (with  O,  Co.).


ABOMINATION  OF  DESOLATION

being  more  peculiar  than  Matthew's  iffrdt  (neut.),
is  to  be  preferred.  Eioth  reports  agree  in  inserting
the  parenthetic  appeal  to  the  trained  intelligence  of
the  reader,  which,  being  both  natural  and  in  accordance
with  usage  in  an  ap<jcalyptic  context,  it  would  be  un-
ruxsonable  to  set  aside  as  an  'ecclesiastical  note*
(Alford).  There  is  an  exact  parallel  to  the  clause  in
Rev.  13 18  (cp  179),  '  Here  is  wisdom  :  let  him  that  hath
understanding  count  the  number  of  the  beast,*  and  a
parallel  of  sense  in  Rev.  2;  189  :  '  He  that  hath  an  ear
(or,  if  any  man  have  an  ear),  let  him  hear,'  i.e.,  let  him
understand  (as  Is.  33 19) ;  the  Ijest  commentary  on  which
is  a  terzinu  in  Dante  (/«/.  961-63),  'O  voi,  che  avete
gl'  intelletti  sani,"  etc.  In  fact,  the  whole  section  is  a
fivarripiov,  not  of  the  class  in  which  Jesus  delighted
(Mt.  13ii),  nor  expressed  in  his  highly  original  style,
and  is  easily  separable  from  its  context.  It  is  [irobably
(apart  from  some  editorial  changes)  the  work  of  a  Jewish
writer,  and  was  inserted  to  adapt  the  discourse,  which
had  been  handed  down  (itself  not  unaltered)  by  tradition,
to  the  wants  of  the  next  generation.

Some  light  is  thrown  upon  it  by  the  '  little  apocalypse  •
in  2  Thess.  2 1-12,  which  evidently  presupposes  an
eschatological  tradition  (see  AnticukI.st).  It  is  there
explained  how  the  irapovala.  of  Christ  must  be  preceded
by  a  great  apostasy  and  by  the  manifestation  of  the
'man  of  sin,'  whose  irapovaia  is  'with  lying  signs  and
wonders,'  and  who  '  opposcth  and  exalteth  himself
against  all  that  is  called  God  or  that  is  worshipix-d,  so
that  he  sitteth  in  the  s;inctuary  (va6^)  of  God,  selling
himself  forth  as  (Jod,'  but  whom  'the  Lord  Jesus  will
slay  with  the  breath  of  his  mouth. '  The  resemblance
between  the  two  Apocalypses  is  strong,  and  we  can
hardly  avoid  identifying  the  '  abomination  of  desolation  '
in  Mt.  and  Mk.  with  the  '  man  of  sin'  in  2  Thess.  'I  iiat
the  one  stands  and  the  other  sits  in  the  sanctuary  con-
stitutes but  a  slight  difference.  In  both  cases  a  statue
is  obviously  meant.  The  claimant  of  divinity  would  not,
of  course,  be  tied  to  one  place,  and  it  was  Ix-lievcd  that
by  spells  a  portion  of  the  divine  life  could  be  cc  m-
niunicated  to  idols,  so  that  the  idol  of  ihe  false  god  was
the  false  god  himself.  In  both  ca>cs,  loo,  there  is  a
striking  resemblance  to  the  dr}pia  of  Rev.  13,  the  second
of  whom,  indeed,  is  said  to  be  represented  by  an
image  which  can  speak,  trickery  coming  to  the  help  of
su(>erstilion  (Rev.  13  15).  In  fact,  the  'abomination  '  or
'  the  man  of  sin  '  is  but  a  humanised  form  of  the  original
of  these  dT)fiLa — viz.,  the  apocalyptic  dragon,  who  in  his
turn  is  but  the  Hebraised  version  of  the  mythical  dragon
Tiamat,  which  was  destroyed  by  the  liabylonian  light
god  (see  C'reation,  §  2).  We  can  now  recover  the
meaning  of  t%  ipyfutlxreu^.  The  '  alKimination  '  which
thrusts  itself  into  the  '  holy  place '  has  for  its  nature
'desolation' — i.e.,  finds  its  pleasure  in  undoing  the
divine  work  of  a  holy  Creator.'

But  why  this  particular  title  for  the  expected  opponent
of  God  ?  It  was  derived  from  the  first  of  the  great
apocalypses.  In  Dan.  927  11  31  12ii,  according  to  the
cxegetical  tradition  in  ©,  mention  is  made  (combining
the  details  of  the  several  {passages)  of  an  apostasy,  of  an
'abomination  of  desolation'  (or  '  of  desolations ')  in  the
sanctuary,  of  a  time  of  unparalleled  tribulation,  of  resur-
rection, and  of  glory.  That  the  original  writer  meant
'  abomination  '  to  be  taken  in  the  sense  descrilx^l  above,
and  the  appended  qualification  to  Ix-  rendered  '  desolat-
ing'  or  'of  desolation,*  cannot  indeed  Ix-  said,  ppv
as  used  in  Daniel  means  '  image  of  a  false  god '  (cp  i  K.
II5;  2  K.  2813),  and  the  most  natural  rendermg  of
DEC'  and  (if  the  text  be  correct)  cpitrp  or  ccrs  is  '  appal-

1  It  is  no  objection  that  in  I.k.  21  20  the  iprnmai^  is  referred
to  thc  hemming  in  of  Jerusalem  by  Ronuin  armies  ;  cp  Jos.  Ant.
X.  11  7,  where  the  passages  in  Dan.  are  explained  of  the  desola-
tion by  the  Romans.  The  true  meaning  must  be  decided  by
Matthew  and  Mark,  where  nothing  is  said  bf  injuries  from
invaders.  "The  memory  of  the  experiences  of  70  a.d.  suggested
to  Luke  a  new  interpretation  of  the  traditional  phrase.


ABRAHAM

ling.  ■  The  phrase  appears  to  be  an  intentional  alteration
of  DDE'  hv2  (Baal  skiimim),  'heaven's  lord.'  That  this
was  a  current  title  of  Zeus  may  be  inferred  from  the
Syri<ic  of  2  Mace.  62,  where  the  temple  at  Jerusalem  is
called  by  the  emissary  of  Antiochus  '  the  temple  of  be'el
shemin'  (see  Nestle,  ZATW  iv.  248  ['84];  cp  his
Marginalien  u.  Matenalien,  35  /  ;  G.  Hoffmann,
Ueb.  ein.  phon.  Inschr.  1889,  p.  29  ;  Bevan,  Daniel,
193).  The  author  of  Daniel  (whose  meaning  is  correctly
given  by, l/T")  contemptuously  says,  'Call  it  not  "heaven's
lord,"  but  "an  appalling  abomination  "  ' ;  and  the  object
to  which  he  refers  is  an  image  of  Olympian  Zeus,  which,
together  with  a  small  jiiofidi,  the  agents  of  Antiochus  set
up  on  the  great  altar  (dvcriaaTrjpioi')  of  burnt  offerings.
The  statement  in  i  Mace.  1  59  is  not  destructive  of  this
theory,  for  altars  and  idols  necessarily  went  together,
and  the  phrase  of  the  Greek  translator  of  the  Hebrew
original  in  v.  54  ^  (|35Ai»7^a  epTyyuuxrews  ;  cp  rb  (id4\vyfia,
67)  might  be  used  equally  well  of  both  or  of  either.''^
All  this,  however,  had  been  forgotten  when  the  apoca-
lyptic section  in  Mt.  24  and  Mk.  13  was  written.

Another  (a  highly  plausible)  interjjretation  of  the
little  evangelical  apocalypse  is  given  by  Spitta  (IJie  Offen-
bafung  Jo/iaruiis,  493-497),  who  thinks  that  it  was
written  in  apprehension  of  the  erection  of  a  statue  of
Caligula  in  the  temple  (see  Schiir.  IJist.  ii. ).  This
implies  that  rb  §8i\.  rrjs  iptifi.  means  the  statue  of  a
historical  king  who  claimed  to  be  the  supreme  God,
which,  considering  the  nature  of  the  context,  is  im-
probable, and  is  not  supported  by  the  use  of  the
Hebrew  phrase  in  Daniel.  It  is,  no  doubt,  highly
probable  that  apocalyptic  writers  regarded  the  mad
Caligula  as  a  precursor  of  the  expected  embodiment  of
the  principle  of  '  lawlessness '  [avoixia,  2  Thess.  2?) ;  but,
without  putting  some  violence  on  their  inherited  eschato-
logical  phrases,  they  could  not  have  said  that  he  was
ipr)fj.w(n%  or  dvo/j-la  in  person.  For,  after  all,  a  Roman
emperor  could  not  be  a  purely  destructive  or  lawless
agent.  Spitta's  view,  however,  is  preferable  to  that
of  Weiss,  wlio,  appealing  to  Lk.  21 20,  understands
the  '  abomination '  to  be  the  Roman  armies  ;  and  to
that  of  Bleek  and  Alford,  who  explain  it  of  the  desecra-
tion of  the  holy  place  by  the  Zelots  (Jos.  B/  iv.  36-8).
For  the  criticism  and  exegesis  of  the  difficult  passages,
iJan.  927  11  31,  see  the  commentary  of  Bevan  and  the
translation  and  critical  notes  in  Kau.  NS  ;  cp  also  Van
Lennep's  treatise  on  the  seventy  year- weeks  of  Daniel
(Utrecht,  i888),  where  it  is  proposed,  on  amply  sufficient
grounds,  to  change  the  impossible  r^:3  h^)  (927)  into
iir'Syi,  'and  instead  thereof.'  The  greatest  problem  is
how  to  explain  or  rather  correct  cctrp  D'sijSB' ;  in  ppa'n
C2TO  (11  31)-  for  c?rp  we  should  perhaps  read  Dtxn.  or
delete  ','2  as  a  gloss  from  9  27.  There  is  a  similar  problem
in  813.  T.  K.  c.

ABRAHAM  (DHn^N,  §  44;  aBra&m  [BAL]  ;
once  ABpAM  [-^J)-  The  name  has  no  meaning  in
1  Name  etc  ^^^'"^^^'  ^^^  seems  to  be  another  form
'  ■  of  Abram  (g.v.),  due  probably  to  a
misunderstanding  of  an  early  orthography.*  In  J  and
P,  however,  the  latter  is  represented  as  the  original
name,  which  was  changed  at  a  critical  point  in  the
patriarch's  life  into  Abraham  (Gen.  17  s,  P.  where  the
etymology  is  a  mere  word-play  ;  on  J's  narrative,  see
Fripp,  Gen.  53). It  is  only  from  the  time  of  Ezekiel

1  See  Ko.  Finl.  482.

2  Ges.,  Berthi)ldt,  Griitz,  and  others  explain  the  'abomination'
ofa  statue  of  Zeus;  Hitz.,  HilKenfeld,  Bleek,  Kue.,  of  an  altar.
The  insertion  of  the  did.-ictic  story  of  Nebuchadrezzar's  golden
image  slightly  confirms  the  former  view.

3  Honimel  maintains  that  n  in  the  Minsean  (S.  Arabian)
alphabet  represents  a  (a)  or,  in  some  cases,  /.  The  same
peculiarity  (n  for  a)  characterises  the  Moabite,  the  Hebrew,  and
the  Samalite  script.  cmaK,  therefore,  was  originally  pronounced
AbrSm  (Hommel,  Das  graphische  ,t  itn  Mindischcn,  22-24).
WMM  {As.  u.  Eur.  309  n.  3)  finds  an  Egjptian  proper  name
B-'-rj-ru-m^y  =  Baal-ram.

23


ABRAHAM

(see  Ez.  3824)!  that  Abraham  was  reverenced  by  the
Jews  as  their  greatest  ancestor  ;  cp  Is.  41  8/  51 12  63 16
Neh.97/.  2Ch.207  306  Fs.  479  ['o]  1056942  Ecclus.
44 19  I  Mace.  252I221  Mt.  Ii39  Lk.  IG2430  lOg  Jn.
8395356  Acts72l326  Rom.  411216  Heb.  6131117  Jas.
221,  cp  Gal.  37-9.  But  to  give  time  for  this  general
reverence  to  have  arisen,  we  cannot  help  supposing
that  the  name  and,  in  some  form,  the  story  of  Abraham
were  current  in  certain  circles  considerably  earlier.
Local  traditions  respecting  him  doubtless  existed  before
the  glory  of  the  southern  kingdom  departed,  and  these
traditions  form  the  basis  of  the  composite  niSinor  '  family
history"  of  Abraham  (P  for  a  special  reason  substitutes
Terah)  contained  in  Gen.  11 27-25 18.  That  these  tradi-
tions are  legends,  and  not  historical  records  of  the  times
which  the  '  family  history  '  appears  to  describe,  is  certain
(see  Historical  Literature).  But  that  in  their
]iresent  setting  they  are  much  more  than  legends  needs
to  be  not  less  firmly  held.  They  have  been  purified  both
by  abridgment  and  by  expansion  ;  and,  since  the  fusion
of  the  original  and  of  the  added  elements  is  by  no  means
complete,  it  is  not  impossible  to  study  the  one  from  the
point  of  view  of  prehistoric  research,  and  the  other  from
that  of  the  history  of  religion.  Let  us,  then,  briefly  con-
sider these  two  questions  :  (i)  What  did  the  Abraham
narratives  of  Genesis  mean  to  their  first  editors  and
readers  ?  and  ( 2 )  may  any  of  them  be  regarded  as  contain-
ing a  historical  element  ?

I. The first question can be readily answered.
Abraham  to  J  and  E  is  not  so  much  a  historical  per-
sonage as  an  ideal  type  of  character.


2.  Story  of  J
and  £.


This  theory  alone  will  account  for  the
'  dreamy,  grand,  and  solemn  '  impres-
sion which  this  patriarch  makes  upon  us.  The  frame-
work of  the  narrative  may  be  derived  from  myths  and
legends,  but  the  spirit  comes  from  the  ideals  stored  up
in  the  minds  of  the  narrators.  A  school  of  writers  (for
J  and  E  are  not  merely  individuals)  devoted  them-
selves to  elaborating  a  typical  example  of  that  unworldly
goodness  which  was  rooted  in  faith  and  fervently
preached  by  the  prophets.  That  typical  example  was
Abraham,  who  might,  with  a  better  right  than  the  old
Babylonian  king,  Hammurabi,  have  called  himself  the
prophet  of  the  heaven-god,  and  indeed  is  actually  recog-
nised by  the  Pharaoh  (Gen.  2O7  E)  as  a  prophet  of
Elohim.  The  '  dreaminess '  which  has  been  noticed  in
him  is  caused  by  his  mental  attitude.  The  Moliam-
medans  appropriately  call  him  'the  first  Moslem.'
He  goes  through  life  listening  for  the  true  tora,  which
is  not  shut  up  in  formal  precepts,  but  revealed  from
time  to  time  to  the  conscience  ;  and  this  leaning  upon
God's  word  is  declared  to  be  in  Yahwe's  sight  a  proof
of  genuine  righteousness  (15  6  J).  The  Pirqe  Aboth
[c.  5  ;  cp  Ber.  rabba,  par.  56)  reckons  ten  trials  of
Abraham's  faith,  '  in  all  of  which  he  stood  firm  '  ;  but
this  simply  marks  the  intense  Jewish  reverence  for  the
'father  of  the  faithful.'  The  word  ,id3,  '  (he)  tried,'
occurs  only  once  in  the  narratives  (Gen.  22 1),  but  from
the  first  the  faith  of  Abraham  was  tried  like  gold  in  the
fire.  He  marries  a  woman  who  is  '  barren  '  ( 1 1 30 1 8  n  /.
both  J  ;  152_/;  JE).  He  leaves  his  home  at  the  divine
bidding  to  seek  an  unknown  land  (12i  J).  As  the
climax,  he  is  commanded  to  offer  up  the  child  of
promise  as  a  sacrifice  (22 1-13  E).  It  is  characteristic
of  the  pre-exilic  age  that  this  privileged  life  presents  no
reverses  of  fortune  (contrast  Job).  But  prosperity  does
no  moral  harm  to  Abraham.  He  retains  a  pure  and
disinterested  philanthropy,  which  would  even,  if  possible,
have  saved  wicked  Sodom  (1822^-330,  a  late  Yahwistic
passage). '^  Once,  indeed,  he  appears  as  trusting  in  an
arm  of  flesh,  and  defeating  mighty  kings  (Gen.  I41-17) ;

1  This  is  the  earliest  mention  of  Abraham  outside  the  Hexa-
teuch  ;  for  Is.  29  22  Jcr.  33  26  Mic.  7  20  belong  to  passages  inserted
after  the  F.xile.

2  See  We.  CH»)  27/ ;  Documents  o/the  Hex.  i.  26 ;  Fripp,
Gen.  48-50.


ABRAHAM

but  this  unique  narrative,  so  flattering  to  the  pride  of
the  later  Jews,  is  evidently  a  fragment  of  a  post-exilic
midrash  on  the  life  of  Abraham.'  It  even  contains  a
specimen  of  the  mystic  reckoning  called  'gematria,'
the  number  318  in  14  14  being  suggested  by  the  name
of  Abraham's  servant  Eliezer,-  of  which  it  is  the
numerical  equivalent,  just  as  it  is  stated  in  the  Haggada
that  Abraham  served  God  from  his  third  year,  Ixjcause
apy  in  nyctr*  -afftt  ipu  (2'2i8)  is  equivalent  to  172  (he  was
175  when  he  offered  up  Isaac,  according  to  the  Midrash
Tanchuma),  and  as  the  '  number  of  the  beast '  in  Rev.
13i8  is  666  (or  616).

The  narratives  of  P  differ,  it  is  true,  in  some  respects

from  those  of  J  and  E. This  writer,  who  is  a  lover  of

„.  ,  p gradual,  orderly  progress,  even  in  the

■ ^  **  history of revelation, represents the

mii^ration  into  ('anaan  as  having  been  planned,  without
any  express  divine  command,  by  Terah  (CJen.  II31),
and  admits  no  tlieopliany  before  that  in  Abraham's
ninety-ninth  year  (17 1)-  He  introduces,  also,  some
important  modifications  into  the  character  of  the  patri-
arch. The  friendly  intimacy  between  Yahw^  and
Abraham  has  disappeared  ;  when  Yahw6  at  length
manifests  himself,  Abraham  falls  upon  his  face  (17  3 17).
A  legal  element,  too,  finds  its  way  into  his  righteousness,
the  rite  of  circumcision  having  been  undergone,  accord-
ing to  P,  by  Abraham  and  all  the  males  of  his  house-
hold. Still,  it  may  be  said  of  P  as  truly  as  of  his  prede-
cessors that  he  regards  Abraham  as  the  greatest  of  men,
and  exhibits  him  as  the  ])attern  for  Israelitish  piety.
■With  this  object  in  view,  he  has  no  scruple  in  dealing
very  freely  with  the  traditional  material.  Since  all
things  are  best  at  their  Ijeginnings,  he  asserts  that  the
ancestor  of  Israel  was  all,  and  more  than  all,  that  his
own  sober  imagination  can  devise.  Later  writers
attempted  to  supply  his  deficiencies.  Even  in  the  OT
we  have  a  strange  reference  in  Is.  2922  (i)ost-exilic)  to
dangers  incurred  by  Abraham,  which  agrees  with  the
hints  dropped  in  the  Book  of  Jubilees  [c.  VI),  and
points  the  way  to  the  well-known  legend  of  the  furnace
of  N'imrod.  Not  less  did  the  enigmatical  war-chronicle
in  Gen.  14  stimulate  later  writers.  Nicolaus  of
Damascus,  the  court  historian  of  Herod  the  Great,
related  (Jos.  Ant.  \.l-2\  cp  Justin,  862)  that  Abraham
came  with  an  army  out  of  Chalda;a  and  reigned  in
Damascus,  after  which  he  settled  in  Canaan  ;  he  adds
that  lh(Te  still  exists  a  village  called  'Afipdfwv  olKrjffLi
(see  Hobah).  The  only  Biblical  trace  of  such  a  story  is
in  Gen.  152,  where,  however,  '  Damascus'  appears  to  be
a  gloss  (see  Elikzkk,  i).  It  is  bold  in  Ew.  {Htsf.  i.  312)
to  assume  on  such  a  basis  that  Damascus  was  a
traditional  link  in  the  chain  of  the  Hebrew  migration.
More  i^robably  these  stories  were  invented  by  the  Jews
of  Damascus  (who  were  a  numerous  body)  to  glorify
the  national  ancestor.  The  Moslems  took  up  the
tradition  with  avidity  (see  Ew.  I.e. ),  and  still  point  to
the  village  of  Berza,  or  Bcrzat  el  Halll  ( '  the  marriage-
tent  of  .Abraham '),  one  hour  N.  from  Damascus,  where
the  marriage  of  the  p:Uriarch  furnishes  the  occasion  of
an  annual  festival  (Wetz.  /Z>.V/f7  xxii.  105  ['68]).

2.  What  historical  element  (if  any)  do  these  narratives
contain  ?  The  Abraham  traditions  are  twofold.  Some
4  Historica.1  '^*^''^"K  exclusively  to  the  great  patri-
Kpm  1  ^^^^  '  °'^'^''^  '^''^  ^'^°  attached  to  one

or  another  of  his  successors.  The
latter  we  can  disregard  :  the  foundation  of  the  sanc-
tuaries of  Shechem  and  Bethel  has  a  better  tra-
ditional connection  with  Jacob  (Gen.33i8-2o  2811-22),
and  that  of  Bt;cr.->hcba  with  Isaac  (2624/.),  while  the

^  Much  confusion  has  been  caused  by  the  uncritical  use  of
cuneiiorm  research  (see  Che.  Foutuiers,  i-yj  j^.).  That  the
writer  of  Gen.  14  i-ii  had  access,  directly  or  indirectly,  to  Baby-
lonian sources  for  some  of  his  statements  is  denied  by  none.
But  this  does  not  make  him  a  historian.  See  Kue.  Hex.
»43.  324 ;  We.  r//*'!  26 ;  E.  Mey.  GA  i.  165/:  and  cp  Chedor-

LAOMKK, MeLCHIEKDRK,  g  4.

*  So,  long  ago,  Hitzig,  following  Btr.  ratia,  par.  43.
25


ABRAHAM

story  of  the  imperilled  wife  has  at  least  as  good  (or  as

bad )  a  claim  to  be  connected  with  Isaac  ( 26  i-i i ). There

] remain — (a)  the migration from Harran or from Or

Kasdlni  ; (b)  the  close  affinity  between  Abraham  and

; Sarah,  Abraham  and Hagar  (and Keturah),  Abraham

and Lot ;  {c)  the  abode  and burial of  Abraham  near

' Hebron  ;  *  and, underlying  all  these,  (</)  the  existence

' of  an  ancestor  of  the  people  of  Israel  bearing  the  name

; of  Abraham  or  Abram. Let  us  first  briefly  consider  (c)

I and  (</).

i.  Existence  of  Abraham  and  connection  with
Hebron. — The  tradition,  as  it  stands,  is  doubtless
inadmissible.  So  much  may  lie  conceded  to  that
destructive  criticism  which,  denying  that  the  old  rever-
ence for  the  story  of  .Abraham  has  any  justification,
would  throw  that  story  aside  as  an  outworn  and  useless
myth.  But  the  view  taken  by  the  patient  reconstructive
criticism  of  our  day  is  that,  not  only  religiously,  but  even,
in  a  qualified  sense,  historically  also,  the  narratives  of
Abraham  have  a  claim  on  our  attention.  The  religious
value  is  for  all  ;  the  historical  or  quasi -historical  for
students  only.  In  the  present  connection  it  is  enough
to  say  (but  see  further  Historical  Litkk.vturk)  that,
since  Abraham  may  be  a  genuine  personal  name,  it
cannot  be  unreasonable  to  hold  that  there  is  a  kernel  of
tradition  in  the  narratives.  Hebrew  legend  may  have
told  of  an  ancient  hero  (in  the  Greek  sense  of  the  word)
bearing  this  name  and  connected  specially  with  Hebron.
I  This  supposed  hero  (whose  real  existence  is  as  doubtful
I  as  that  of  other  heroes)  cannot  originally  have  been
'  grouped  with  Jacob  or  Israel,  for  the  name  Abraham
has  a  different  linguistic  colouring  from  the  two  latter.
It  was  natural,  however,  that  when  Hkbkon  [q.v.)
became  Israelitish  the  southern  hero  Abraham  should
be  grouped  with  the  northern  hero  Jacob- Israel,  and
that  the  spirits  of  both  heroes  should  be  regarded  as
having  a  special  connection  with  their  people,  and  even
as  entitled  to  a  kind  of  national  cultus  (cp  Idolatry),
I  which,  though  discouraged  by  the  highest  religious
teachers,  has  left  traces  of  itself  both  in  early  and  in
late  books,  and  is  characteristically  Semitic.'-*  The  cuUus
was  no  doubt  performed  at  Machpelah,  on  the  posses-
sion of  which  P  lays  such  great  stress  (f.  23)  ;  but  that
the  traditional  hero  was  actually  buried  there  cannot
Ix;  affirmed.  Even  among  the  Arabs  there  is  hardly  one
well -authenticated  case  of  a  tribe  which  possessed  a
really  ancient  tradition  as  to  the  place  where  the  tribal
ancestor  was  interred.'

ii.  Relation  of  Abraham  to  Sarah,  Hagar,  Lot. —
With  regard  to  {b)  it  should  be  noted  that,  though  an
assertion  of  relationship  may  be  literally  correct,  it  may
also  merely  mean  that  two  particular  trilx-s  or  peoples
have  been  politically  connected.  If,  with  Robertson
Smith,  we  may  regard  Sarah  as  a  feminine  corresponding
to  Israel,  we  may  take  the  marriage  between  .\braham
and  .Sarah  (or  rather  Sarai)  to  symbolise  the  political
fusion  between  a  southern  Israelitish  tribe  and  non-
Israelitish  clans  to  the  south  of  Hebron  (see,  however,
Sakah,  i.  §  2).  The  relationshi[)  lx>tween  .Abraham  and
Hai;ar  may  also  have  a  political  meaning,  for  the  close
intercourse,  and  at  times  jiolitical  union,  between  Egypt*
and  Palestine  and  parts  of  .Arabia  is  well  attested.  The
story  of  the  separation  between  .Abraham  and  Lot '  may

1  It  is  unnecessary  to  discuss  here  P's  account  of  the  origin  of
circumcision  (see  Cikcumcision,  §  4),  or  the  story  of  the  defeat  of
the  four  kings  in  Gen.  14  (see  above,  8  2),  or  the  birth  and  subse-
quent offering  up  of  Isa.ic  (see  Isaac,  S$  \/.\

2  See  i.S.--'8i3  ('I  saw  Klohim '),  ls.63i^  Jer.SlM,  cp  I.k.
16 22  In.  8 56,  and  cp  Che  Intr.  Is.  352/  For  parallel  Arabian
beliefs,  see  Goldziher,  Ka:  ete  thist.  des  rd.  1884,  p.  336/,
and  for  the  later  Jewish  belief  in  the  pr.iyers  of  the  fathers,
see  2  Mace.  1613/;,  and  Talmudic  references  in  Castelli,  //
Messitx,  184  /

8  WRS  Kin.  18.

*  We  assume  provisionally  th.it  Hagar  is  correctly  regarded,
from  the  point  of  view  of  the  original  tradition,  as  an  Egyptian.
See,  howtver,  Hagar,  and  especially  Mizkaim,  f  a  (b),  Ueek-
Lahai-Roi,  8  2.

8  On  the  details  of  the  story,  cp  WRS  Kin.  n/.

26


ABRAHAM

be  but  a  foreshadowing  of  the  separation  between  Israel
and  Moab  and  Amnion  ;  but,  if  Lot  is  to  be  explained
by  Lotan  (the  eponym  of  an  Edomilish  clan,  Gen.  36
20-29),  the  asserted  relationship  between  Abraham  and
Lot  accords  with  the  theory  of  the  original  non-Israelitlsh
character  of  Abraham.

iii.  Connection  with  Harrdn  or  Or. — As  to  {a),  even
if  we  reject  the  theory  of  the  migration  of  a  clan  called
after  Abraham  from  Harran  or  Ur  Kasdim,  it  does
not  at  once  follow  that  the  tradition  is  altogether
unhistorical.  Not  only  Abraham,  but  the  wives  of
Isaac  and  Jacob  also,  are  declared  to  have  come  from
Harran.  This  cannot  be  a  baseless  tradition.  Critics,
it  is  true,  are  divided  as  to  its  historical  value,  nor
can  we  discuss  the  matter  here.  But  there  is,  at
any  rate,  as  Stade  admits,  nothing  a  priori  improb-
able in  the  view  that  certain  Hebrew  clans  came
from  the  neighbourhood  of  Harran  to  Palestine.  The
fluctuation  of  the  tradition  between  Harran  and  Ur
Kasdim  need  not  detain  us  (see  special  articles).  Both
Harran  and  Uru  were  seats  of  the  worship  of  the  moon-
god  under  different  names,  and  we  can  well  believe  that
at  some  unknown  period  the  moon-worship  of  Harran
affected  the  Hebrew  clans  (cp  Sarah,  i.  §  2,  Milcah,  1 ).
For  what  critic  of  to-day  can  venture  to  assume  that  it
was  repugnance  to  this  worship,  and  in  general  to  idolatry
(cp  Josh.  242/ ),^  that  prompted  the  Hebrew  clans  to
leave  their  early  homes  ?  Surely  this  asserted  religious
movement  is  a  specimen  of  that  antedating  of  religious
conditions  which  is  characteristic  of  the  OT  narrators,
and  was  copied  from  them  by  Mohammed.  First,  the
insight  of  Isaiah  is  ascribed  to  Moses  ;  then,  as  if  this
were  not  wonderful  enough,  it  is  transferred  to  Abraham.
But  how  recent  is  the  evidence  for  either  statement,  and
how  inconsistent  is  the  spiritual  theism  ascribed  to
Abraham  with  sound  views  of  historical  development  !
Instead  therefore  of  speaking  of  '  that  life  of  faith  which
historically  began  with  Abraham'  (H.  S.  Holland,  Lux
Mundi,  41),  should  we  not  rather  say  '  that  life  of  faith
which,  though  germinally  present  from  the  earliest
times,  first  found  clear  and  undoubted  expression  in  the
writings  of  the  prophets  and  in  the  recast  legends  of
Abraham '  ?

Hommel's  ambitious  attempt  to  prove  the  strictly
historical  character  of  the  Abraham  narratives  from  the
Arabian  personal  names  of  the  dynasty  of  Hammurabi
is,  critically  regarded,  a  failure.  The  existence  in
early  Semitic  antiquity  of  personal  names  expressing
lofty  ideas  of  the  divine  nature  in  its  relation  to  man
has  long  been  known,  though  it  is  only  in  recent  years
that  such  names  have  been  discovered  so  far  back  in  the
stream  of  history.  But  hitherto  scholars  have  with  good
reason  abstained  from  inferring  the  extreme  antiquity  of
Hebrew  narratives  in  which  similar  names  occurred,
because  the  age  of  these  narratives  had  necessarily  to  be
first  of  all  determined  by  the  ordinary  critical  methods,
and  the  existence  of  such  a  phrase  as  '  in  the  days  of
Amraphel '  (Hammurabi?)  proves  only  that  the  writer
may  have  been  acquainted  with  documents  in  which
events  of  this  period  were  referred  to,  not  that  his  own
narrative  is  strictly  historical.

For  the  later  Haggadic  stories  concerning  Abraham
see  Beer,  Leben  Abrahams  tiach  Anffassung  der  jiid.
Sage,  1859;  Hamburger,  RE  fiir  Bib.  u.  Talm.W
(s.v.  'Abraham');  also  Griinbaum,  Neue  Beitr.  zur
sent.  Sagenkunde,  1893,  pp.  89-131  (Jewish  and
Mohammedan  legends)  ;  and,  especially,  a  late  apocry-
phal book  called  The  Testament  of  Abraham  (  Texts
and  Studies,  Cambridge,  1892),  which  presents  perhaps
the  finest  imaginable  glorification  of  the  character  of  the
patriarch. All  that  he  needs  is  to  see  the  retributions

1  The  words,  '  and  worshipped  other  gods,'  belong  lo  R.  But
the  sense  of  the  earlier  narrators  is  correctly  given  (cp.  Gen.
31 1953354).  And,  of  course,  Israel's  point  of  religious  departure
must,  considering  primitive  circumstances,  have  been  in  some
sense  polytheistic  (cp  Reinach,  R EJ  xv.  311  ['87];  Boscawen,
The  Migration  0/ Abram,  m/.).

27


ABRECH

of  heaven  and  hell  that  he  may  learn  (like  Jonah)  to
have  pity  on  sinners  (see  Aix:)CRYPiia,  §  11).  For  the
archaeological  aspects  of  the  life  of  the  patriarch  see
Tomkins,  Studies  on  the  Times  of  Abraham  ('78  ;
second  ed.  '97).  The  best  critical  literature  is  cited
by  Ki.  Hist.  i.  ;  add  to  his  list  Hal.  REJ  xv.  161^
{'87);  Rev.  s^m.  \.  \  ff.  ('93);  Renan,  Hist,  du  peuple
d Israel,  i.  (1887)  ;  and  reviews  of  Renan  by  Reinach,
RE:Jx\.  302^/  and  by  WRS,  Eng.  Hist.  Rev.  iii.  128/.
('88).  Renan's  statements  that  the  Abraham  of  Genesis
is  the  type  of  an  Arab  sheikh,  and  that  the  ancient
Hebrews,  represented  by  Abraham,  worshipped  a  '  patri-
archal, just,  and  universal  God,'  from  whom  the  worship
of  Yahw6  was  a  falling  away,  are  fantastically  erroneous.
For  Nold.'s  view  that  Abraham  and  Sarah  are  divine
names,  see  his  essay  on  the  patriarchs  in  Im  neuen
Reich,  1 87 1,  p.  508 J^,  and  on  the  other  side  Baethg.
Beitr.  z.  sent.  Rel.-gesch.  154^  See  also  EDO M  (§2;
supposed  divine  character  of  Abraham)  and  Hoii.'\H
(his  connection  with  Damascus).  T.  K.  c.

ABRAHAM'S  BOSOM  (Lk.  1622!). See  Hades.

ABRAM  (D-i:3X,  §  44,  Gen.  11  27-I7  s'l  i  Ch.
I27  Neh.  97t ;  aBRAM  [BADL],  but  -p^N  [A  twice  in
Gen.],  -pAAM  [A  once  in  Gen.;  B  in  Ch.  and  B*  ^'''•
NL  in  Neh. ;  p;.^/;  ^ibram),  i.e.  probably,  in  the  mind
of  the  priestly  writer  (Gen.  ITs),  'high  father"  (patriarch),
to  which  the  name  Sarai,  if  taken  as  another  form  of
Sarah  [^.^'.  ],  would  be  a  suitable  companion.  If,
however,  the  name  Abram  be  a  genuine  traditional
one,  it  will  be  related  to  Abiram  [y.t'.],  as  Abni:r
[^.t'.]  is  to  Abiner,  and  be  explained  similarly  (cp
Abraham,  §1).

ABRECH  ("^"!?N),  Gen.  4l43t.  'Then  he  made
him  ride  in  the  chariot  next  in  rank  to  his  own,  and
they  cried  before  him  Abrech.  So  he  set  him  over
all  Egypt '  (Kau.  HS).  The  passage  occurs  in  E's  (or
Eg's)  version  of  the  appointment  of  Joseph  to  be
grand-vizier,  and  the  strange  word  Abrech  greatly
puzzled  the  ancient  interpreters.  ®*^'-  gives  Kal
iKqpv^ev  .  .  .  Krjpv^  ;  the  Targums  NsSdS  N3N,  while
Pesh. ,  omitting  jhji,  paraphrases  f  V  -V,^  n  \^^  [cp458
Pesh.],  and  Vg.  clamante  pro-cone  ut  omnes  coram  eo
genu  flecterent.  Jerome  himself,  however  {Quccst.  in
Gen. ),  remarks,  '  Mihi  videtur  non  tam  praeco  sive
adgeniculatio  .  .  .  intelligenda,  quam  illud  quod
Hebrsei  tradunt,  dicentes  "  pat  rem  tenerum,"  .  .  .
significante  Scripture  quod  juxta  prudentiam  quidem
pater  omnium  fuerit,  sed  juxta  aetatem  tenerrimus
adolescens  et  puer.'  So,  in  fact,  the  Midrash  [Ber.
rabba,  par.  90)  and  the  two  later  Targums  (as  an
appendage  to  '  father  of  the  king ' )  expressly  interpret,
and  in  Bab.  Bathra,  4a  we  even  find  this  justified  by
the  combination  of  -p  and  rex.  In  Jubilees  40;  (Charles)
the  form  is  Ablrer,  i.e.  Abirel  ('  God  is  a  mighty  one,"
or,  being  an  imaginary  form,  '  mighty  one  of  God  ').

The  different  views  of  modern  senolars  can  only  be
glanced  at  here.  Luther  is  content  with  Landesvater,
EV  with  '  bow  the  knee. '  RV  mg.  adopts  the  view-
that  the  original  word  was  '  similar  in  sound  to  the
Hebrew  word  meaning  to  kneel '  (so  Benfey,  Brugsch,
Chabas).  The  Mas.  vocalisation,  however,  is  guess-
work, and  the  Hiphil  of  713  occurs  only  once  again
(Gen.  24ii),  and  then  in  the  sense  of  'to  cause  (the
camels)  to  kneel  down.'  If  we  look  at  the  context,  we
sharll  find  reason  to  doubt  whether  any  outward  display
of  reverence  at  all  (prostration  would  be  more  natural
than  kneeling)  can  be  meant  by  Abrech.  An  official
title  is  what  the  context  most  favours,  not,  however,
such  a  title  as  '  chief  of  the  wise  men  ' '  (ap-rex-u)  ;  but
rather  '  great  lord,"  or  some  other  equivalent  to  '  grand-

J  Harkavy,  J  As.,  mars-avril  1870,  pp.  161-163.  I-e  Page
Renouf's  e.xplanation  {P.SB.l  xi.  s  Jf.  ['88]),  'tliy  command  is
our  desire  '  (ai(-u)-reh),  i.e.,  '  we  are  at  thy  service,'  is  much  less
suitable  to  the  context.


ABRONAH

vizier.'  No  such  title  including  the  letters  b-r-k  is
quoted  from  the  pure  Egyptian  vocabulary  ;  but  may
it  not  be  really  a  loan-word  ?  This  might  account
for  the  fact  that  Abrech  is  passed  over  in  <S-  It
is  well  known  that  from  the  fifteenth  century  onwards
there  was  close  intercourse  iKjtvveen  the  l-Igyptians  and
the  Semitic  peoples,  and  that  many  technical  words
were  borrowed  from  the  latter.  This  being  the  case,  it
aj^pears  reasonable  to  connect  Abrech  with  the  Ass.  -Bab.
abarakku  (fern,  aharakkatii),  which  is  applied  to  one  of
the  five  highest  dignitaries  in  the  empire. '  Schrader,
who  once  opposed  this  view  [COT  \.  139),  now  thinks
th.1t  the  Amarna  discoveries  (1888)  have  made  it
much  more  probable  ;  and  Briinnow  has  expressed  the
opinion  that  'the  Assyrian a-ba-rak-ku  seem  undoubtedly
to  be  the  prototype  of  Abrech  '  ^  (private  letter).  In
spite  of  Dillmann's  peremptory  denial  (1892),  it  has
become  very  difficult  to  think  otherwise.  We  might,
indeed,  correct  the  word  out  of  existence  ;  but  Ball's  text
[SDOT)  is  hardly  an  improvement  except  in  the  substi-
tution of  the  Nip'i  of  the  Sam.  text  (cp  ©  Pesh. )  for
iNip'i,  which  is  justified  by  the  context,  and  had  already
been  made  by  Geiger  (Urschr.  463).  T.  K.  C.

ABRONAH,  AV  Ebronah  (nriaj?),  one  of  the  stages
in  the  w.-mdering  in  the  wilderness  (Nu.  3334/.f,  P;
ceBpWNA  [B].  eB.  [AFL]).  See  Wandkki.ng.s,  §§  12,
14. On  afip(j}va  [AB]  in  Judith  224,  see  Akbo.vai.

ABSALOM  (Di7w'?X, § 45,  or— less  correctly, as

Nold.  thinks — as  in  i  K.  152io  Di?'J"3X,  Abish.alom,
ytBHSSALOAf ;  probably  '  the  [divine]  father  is  peace,'
cp  Yahwe-shaloin  Judg.  624,  a  title  of  Yahwe,  but
not  Ps.  I2O7;  ABecCAAcOM  [B.A,  and  in  2  S.  83,
and  I  Ch.,  also  L],  -ecA-  [A.  2S.I815],  -eCA.  [L ;
but  in  I  K.  228  COAOAAOONTOC,  where  also  f%>f\.\-j
sjiMfONKM]  ■  ^o\^.->/  ;  ABecAcoM  [A],  2S.  I815  ;
Jos.  ABecCAAcOMOC  and  AyAAwMOC  I  ABSALOM)  was
D.ivid's  third  son,  his  mother  being  Maacah,  daughter  of
Talmai,  king  of  Gkshuk  (q.v.  2).  Born  at  Hebron,  he
grew  up  at  Jerusalem,  the  idol  of  his  father,  and  popular
from  his  manly  beauty  and  his  winning  manners.  His
tragic  history  is  faithfully  recorded  by  an  ancient  and
well-informed  writer  in  2  S.  13-18.

We  first  hear  of  him  in  connection  with  the  outrage
on  his  sister  Tamar  by  her  half-brother  Aninon,  whom
David,  out  of  weak-minded  affection  for  his  first-
born (2  S.  1321,  ©'''^'•),  omitted  to  chastise.  Absalom
soothed  his  sister,  and  silently  bode  his  time.  Then,
after  two  years,  he  lured  Amnon  with  the  other  princes
to  a  feast  of  sheep-shearing  on  Absalom's  estate  at
Baal-hazor  (see  H.AZOR,  2),  and  at  a  concerted  sign  his
servants  slew  Amnon  during  the  banquet.  The  next
three  years  Ab.salom  passed  in  exile  in  Geshur  (q.v.  2),
till  Joab,  knowing  that  the  king  pined  for  the  fugitive,
contrived  by  the  help  of  a  '  wise  woman  '  from  Tekoa  to
bring  him  back.  The  form  of  the  parable  (2S.  14 5-7)
may  belong  to  the  'wise  woman,'  but  the  ideas  which
it  suggested  came  froni  Joab.  Why  was  the  king  so
willing  to  mitigate  the  custom  of  blood-vengeance  for  a
stranger,  and  so  hard  towards  his  own  son  ?  We  die,
and  are  like  water  spilt  on  the  ground  ;  but  God  spares
the  life  of  him  whose  thoughts  are  bent  on  the  restora-
tion of  the  banished  (2  S.  14 14  with  Ewald's  emenda-
tion). The  king  gave  way  to  this  gentle  pressure,  and
allowed  his  son  to  come  back  to  Jerusalem,  but  refused
to  see  him  for  two  whole  years.  Nor  would  Joab  take
any  further  step,  till  the  impetuous  prince  set  his  barley
field  on  fire,  and,  when  Joab  came  in  person  to
complain, declared that death  was  better  than con-

1  Friedr.  Del.,  /feh.  in  the  tight  of  Assyrian  Restarth
(1883),  p.  25./:;  cp  rar.  225;  .4m.  hub  12.  This  l.riUiant
suggestion  w.us  temporarily  adopted  by  the  present  writer
(Acitd.  i2ih  Apr.  1884),  who  has,  since  the  Amarna  discoveries,
returned  to  it.

a  So  also  Sayce  (,Acad.  7th  May  189a;  Crit.  Mon.  ^n /.),
but  with  an  interpretation  which  needs  fuller  evidence.

■  29


ABSALOM

tinued  disgrace.  He  had  his  way.  The  king  kissed
him  and  restored  him  to  full  favour.

Four  years  followed  (2  S.  I07,  L.  Pesh.  and  Jos. ;  MT
©"'^  \'g.  have  '  forty  ')  during  which  Absalom  prepared
men's  minds  for  coming  events.  He  let  his  hair  grow
enormously  long  (2  S.  14  26),  in  token,  as  Kol)crtson
Smith  thinks  (A'6'<-'  484),  of  the  sacredness  of  his  person,
though  the  ordinary  view  that  it  was  merely  a  proof
of  vanity  possesses  the  recommendation  of  simplicity.
He  rode  in  a  chariot  with  horses  (then  scarcely
known  in  Israel)  and  was  accompanied  by  a  guard
of  fifty  men.  He  made  every  suitor's  cause  his  own,
and  lamented  aloud  that  his  jxiwer  did  not  match
his  desire  to  help  (2  S.  15 1-6).  At  last  he  fired  the
train  which  had  been  so  long  and  so  carefully  laid.
On  pretence  of  a  sacrificial  feast,  he  withdrew  to
Hebron,  accompanied  by  200  men,  doubtless  needy
dependents,  who  followed  him  in  ignorance  of  his
plan.  Here,  at  the  old  capital  of  Judah,  amidst  a
people  who  were  still  unreconciled  to  their  absorption
in  a  larger  state,  he  raised  the  standard  of  revolt.
Ahithophel,  a  man  of  southern  Judah,  he  made  his
principal  counsellor  ;  Aniasa,  Absalom's  cousin,  also
from  Judah,  took  command  of  the  troops  (cp  Gkshur,
2).  But  an  ai^peal  was  also  made  to  the  centrifugal
forces  always  at  work  in  the  N.  tribes,  for,  as  he  set  out
for  Hebron,  the  rebel  prince  sent  men  through  the  land
of  Israel.  At  the  sound  of  the  trumpet  these  were  to
proclaim  the  accomplished  fact,  '  Absalom  has  been
made  king  in  Hebron.'

David,  once  the  darling  of  the  nation,  was  compelled
to  fly  from  the  capital.  Absalom  as  quickly  entered
it,  and  gave  that  public  sign  of  his  accession  to  the
throne  which  the  crafty  Ahithophel  recommended.
The  number  of  his  counsellors  was  now  increased  by
the  addition  of  Hushai,  '  David's  friend'  (on  the  epithet
see  Hush.'M),  whose  flattery  he  failed  to  see  through.
In  reality  Hushai  only  pretended  to  join  the  rebels.  His
object  was  twofold — to  frustrate  the  counsel  of  .Ahitho-
phel, and  to  betray  Absalom's  plans  to  the  priests,  Zadok
and  Abiathar.  These  trusty  friends  of  David  were  to
coninumicatc  with  a  maid,  and  she  was  to  impart  her
knowledge  to  two  sons  of  the  priests,  who  waited  to
bear  it  to  the  king.  This  counterplot  attained  its  end.
Ahithophel,  who  knew  how  deceptive  was  the  popular
enthusiasm,  wished  Absalom  to  'strike  David  before
there  was  time  for  second  thoughts'  (WkS).  But
Hushai  persuaded  the  pretender  to  wait,  and  so  David,
who  was  informed  of  all  that  happened  at  Jerusalem,
safely  crossed  the  Jordan  and  established  himself  at
Mahanaim,  once  Ishbaal's  cai)ital.

Thence,  in  three  divisions,  David's  army  sallied  forth,
and  in  the  neighbouring  forest  (see  Ei'HR.MM,  Wood
ok)  the  rebel  troops  were  routed.  In  the  flight
Absalom's  head  (hair?;  Heb.  cin,  cp  2  S.  I426)  was
caught  in  the  branches  of  a  terebinth  tree,  and  his  mule
left  him  hanging  between  heaven  and  earth.  '  Not  for  a
thousand  shekels '  would  the  soldier  who  saw  him  hanging
have  taken  his  life.  How  could  he  venture  to  disregard
the  king's  charge  to  watch  over  the  young  man  Ab-
salom? If  he  had  treacherously  attempted  Absalom's
life,  would  not  the  king  have  found  it  out.  and  would
not  Joab  himself  have  stood  aloof?  But  Joab,  who  felt
his  courage  called  in  question  (2  S.  18 14,  ©"'^'- ;  see
Bu.  SHOT),  with  an  emphatic  denial  of  the  statement,
plunged  three  javelins  into  Absalom's  body.  The
corpse  of  the  ill-fated  prince  was  flung  into  a  pit,  and
the  soldiers  cast  stones  upon  it,  that  the  restless  spirit
might  trouble  them  no  more.*  Meantime  the  old  king
was  waiting  at  the  gate  of  Mahanaim.  The  pathetic
story  of  his  broken-hearted  grief  at  hearing  the  news  of
his  dearly  loved  son's  death  is  enshrined  in  all  memories.

.Such  was  the  close  of  the  sad  tragedy  which  opened
with  the  barbarous  outrage  upon  Tamar.  Just  eleven
years  had  passed  since  that  event,  so  that  if  Absalom
1  See  Tylor's  Prim.  Cult.  ii.  29.


ABUBUS

was  about  twenty  when  he  took  up  his  sister's  cause,
he  must  have  died  a  little  over  thirty.  Apparently
his  three  sons  died  before  him  (2  S 14  27  18 18).  On
his  'daughter,'  see  Tamar,  3,  and  Maacah,  3,  4.
The  notice  respecting  Absalom's  monument  in  2SI818
is  not  very  clear,  perhaps  owing  to  some  confusion  in
the  text  of  z'v.  17-19  (so  Klo. ).  It  is  evidently  paren-
thetical, and  reminds  the  reader  that  Absalom  had  a
suitable  monument  (erected,  according  to  Klo.'s  read-
ing, by  David)  in  the  King's  Vale  (see  Shavkh,  i.,
Mkixhizedek,  §  3).  The  building  close  to  Jerusalem,
now  known  as  Absalom's  tomb,  is  of  very  late  origin,  as
its  Ionic  pillars  prove.  w.  E.  A.

2.  Father  of  Mattathias  (i  Mace.  11  70;  'Ai/zoAw^os  [AV],
i^aA/Li(uJo«  [xD-  Zdckler  proposes  to  read  'Jonathan'  for
'Mattathias'  here;  or  else  to  read  Mattathias  in  i  Mace.
13  II  also.

3.  Father  of  Jonathan  (i  Mace.  13  11:  'Ai/zoAiojaos  [AVn]),
probably  the  same  as  (2).

4.  An  ambassador  to  Lysias  ;  2  Mace.  11 17  (APe<roraXu/u.  [A],
/xeacroAal  A  [sic  V]). Possibly  also  to  be  identified  with  (2).

ABUBUS  (aBoyBoc  [A>«V];  )-sr.^.,.  cp  Hubbah,
iCh.  734  Kr.  ;  Ano/ius),  father  of  Ptolemy,  captain  of
the  plain  of  Jericho,  and  son-in-law  to  Simon  the
Maccahee  (i  Mace.  16  n  ist).

ABYSS,  THE  (h  aByccoc),  the  term  substituted  in
RV  of  NT  for  the  '  deep  '  and  the  '  bottomless  pit '  of
AV;  see  Lk.831;  Rom.107;  Rev.9i/ii  II7
178  20 1  3t.  In  the  second  of  these  passages,  by
an  inexact  use  of  the  term,  '  the  abyss  '  is  equivalent
to  Sheol ;  '  over  the  sea  '  in  Dt.  30 13  is  taken  to  mean
'  over  the  world-encircling  ocean  into  which  the  "  rivers  "
of  the  underworld  (Ps.  184[5].  V'?^  -hm)  discharge
themselves  to  "  the  place  where  all  flesh  wanders  "  {i.e. ,
Sheol;  EnocklK,).'  Elsewhere  it  means  the  deeply-
placed  abode  of  the  'dragon'  or  devil,  of  the  'beast'
his  helper,  and  of  the  5ai/x6;'ia,— whether  this  abode  be
taken  to  be  the  '  deep  (/<%(>/«)  that  coucheth  beneath'
(Gen.  4925  RV),  or  the  '  waste  place  '  with  '  no  firmament
above  and  no  foundation  of  earth  beneath,'  by  which
the  fire-filled  chasm  was  thought  to  be  bordered  {Enoch
18 12;  cp  21 27).  The  former  view  is  in  accordance
with  OT  usage,  the  tt^hom  of  MT  and  the  d^vacxos  of
(5  being  the  flood  or  ocean  which  once  enfolded
the  earth,  but  is  now  shut  up  in  subterranean  store-
chambers  (Ps.  337);  and  it  is  favoured  by  the  use  of
OaXaffcra  in  Rev.  1-3 1  as  synonymous  with  S-^vaaos.
But  the  latter  is  more  probably  right  in  the  Apocalypse,
which  agrees  with  Enoch  in  asserting  the  existence  of  a
lake  of  fire,  destined  for  the  final  punishment  of  the
devil  and  his  helpers.  This  fiery  lake  is  not  in  either
book  technically  called  'the  abyss'  ;  in  Enoch  10 13  the
Greek  has  rd  xaoj  rod  nvpos,  and  in  21  7  5LaK0Trr]v  elxf
6  rdTTOs  tuis  TTJs  a^vaaov.  The  angelic  overseer  of  this
region  is  Uriel,  who  is  described  in  Enoch'10-z  (Gizeh
Gk. )  as  6  eTTt  toO  Kbdjiov  koX  toO  Taprdpov.  '  Tartarus  '
occurs  also  in  Job4l23,  ©,  in  the  phrase  rbv  Taprapov
Trji  dfiiKTcrov  [BN.-\],  which,  being  used  in  connection  with
Leviathan,  is  doubtless  to  be  taken  of  the  subterranean
abode  of  Yahwe's  enemy,  the  dragon  (see  Dragon,
§  4  / ).  Cp  Taprapdjaas,  used  of  the  fallen  angels,
2  Pet.  24.  T.  K.  C.

ACACIA  (na*^),  E.K.  25  5  etc.,  RV.  See  Shittah
Trki:.

ACATAN  (&KAT&N  [B.\]),  iEsd.838t  .W=Ezr.
812,  Hakkatan.

ACCABA  (akkaBa  [B]),  i  Esd.530  RV=Ezra246,

HAf;AB.

ACCAD  (nSX;  arx^A  [AL].  ax-  [DE]  ;  ->/ ;
yicn.tD)  is  one  of  the  four  cities  mentioned  in  Gen,
10 10  as  forming  the  beginning  of  the  kingdom  of
Nimrod  in  the  land  of  Shinar  or  Babylonia.  In  the
cuneiform  inscriptions  the  name  of  Akkad  is  most  fre-

^  If  a  Hebrew  original  could  have  been  supposed  for  2  Mace.
lie<T(Ta\a  might  have  represented  a  transliteration  of  part  of  a
participle  of  n'?t!'  (o'  irtii<f>6evTtt  follows).

31


ACELDAMA

quently  met  with  in  the  title  /ugai  ICingi{ki)  Uri(ki),
which  is  rendered  in  Semitic  hy  .(ar  (mdiu)  humeri  u
{mt'itu)  Akkadi.  This  title,  which  implied  dominion
over  the  whole  of  Babylonia,  was  borne  from  the  earliest
times  by  the  Babylonian  kings,  and  was  adopted  by
those  kings  of  Assyria  who  conquered  Babylon  (cp  Bahy-
I.O.NIA,  §1).  The  Akkad  referred  to  in  Gen.  10  lo  has
lieen  identified  by  some  with  the  ancient  city  of  Agade
which  was  situated  in  northern  Babylonia  and  attained
a  position  of  supremacy  over  the  rest  of  the  country  under
Sargon  I.  about  3800  B.C.  This  identification,  however,
is  entirely  hypothetical,  and  is  based  only  on  the  super-
ficial resemblance  of  the  names.  L.  W.  K.

ACCARON  (AKK&pcoN  [A*]),  I  Macc.l089t  AV  =
RV  Ekron  {q.v.).

ACCHO,  RV  Acco  (iSJ?),  Judg.  1 31  and  (see  Ummah)
Josh.  IQsof  ;  see  Ptolemais.

ACCOS  (akxojc  [A],  AKKOOC  [N],  iakk.  [V] ;  same
as  Hakkoz  \_q.v.'\],  grandfather  of  Eupolemus  ;  i  Mace.
8.7t.

ACCOZ  (akBcoc  [B]),  iEsd.53St  AV=Ezra26i
RV,  Hakkoz,  i.

ACCUSER  (KATHrwp  [Ti.,  \V  &  H  following  A],
KATHropoc  [BN,  etc.].  The  form  of  word  found  in
the  best  texts  is  simply  a  Hebraised  form  pi3'*Pi5]  of  the
common  word  KATHfOpOC-  For  Rabbinic  usage  see
e.g.  Buxt.  Lex.),  Rev.  12iot. See  Satan,  §§  6  (3)  7.

ACELDAMA  AV ;  RV  Akeldama  (axeAAamax'
[Tisch.  A,  etc.],  aciieldemach  [96  lat.j,  <\Ke.  [B  fol-
lowed by  W  &  H],  -Aaim.  [D],  aceldemach  [d]),
the  name  according  to  Acts  1 19  of  a  field  bought
by  Judas  Iscariot  for  some  unknown  purpose.  The  vet.
Lat.  of  Mt.  278  applies  the  name  (not,  as  in  the  Gk.
MSS. ,  merely  in  translation,  but  in  the  original)  also
to  a  field  bought  by  the  priests  of  Jerusalem  to  bury
strangers  in.

MS.  evidence  is  so  overwhelmingly  in  favour  of  some

such  form  as  Akeldaniach  that  the  RV  is  quite  unjusii-

„.  fied in  rejecting  it,  especially  when it

1.  ine  name,  ^.^^rects  the  c  into  k.  Acts  1,9  states
that  in  the  language  of  the  dwellers  at  Jerusalem  this
name  meant  'the  field  of  blood'  {x^^piov  ai/xaros).
~01  hpn  {hdkel  dlmdkh),  however,  is  obviously  'the  field
of  Ml' blood, '  an  impossible  expression.  Klostermann
has  therefore  argued  with  great  acuteness  [Probleme  im
Apostcltexte,  1-8  ['83])  that  -jai  (DMKh)  is  one  word —
viz. ,  the  well-known  Aram,  root  '  to  sleep. '  All  we  ha\  e
to  do,  then,  is  to  understand  it  of  the  sleep  of  death,  a
usage  known  in  Syr. ,  and  '  field  of  sleep '  will  mean
cemetery,  which,  as  Mt.  tells  us,  was  what  the  priests
meant  to  make  of  the  potter's  field.  Klostermann's
argument  is  very  strong  —  it  is  certainly  natural  to
suppose  that  the  name  originated  in  some  fact  known
to  the  people  at  large,  as  the  transformation  of  a
potter's  field  into  a  burying  place  would  be — and  his
view  was  adopted  by  Wendt  (MeyerC'  ad  loc. ).  But  we
have  no  instance  of  a  noun  "im  so  used,  and  ch,  x.  may
=  K  (cp  iu3<jy)X  [Lk.  326,  BN.  etc.]  =  'Dr  ;  2et/)ax,  Sirach
=  NTD,  Sira).  Hence,  whatever  may  have  been  the  real
origin  of  the  name — we  can  never  know — its  form  was
probably  n,'3t  "jpri  (Dalm.  Gram.  161  and  105  n.  i  re-
spectively), '''  the  field  of  blood  '  (so  Dalm.  161  n.  6  ;  Am.
Mey.  Jesu  Muttersprache,  49  n.  i).  On  the  questions
who  bought  the  field  and  why  it  was  called  Aceldama
see  also  AcT.s,  §  14. Cp  Judas,  9.

Tradition  which  goes  as  far  back  as  to  the  fourth
century  has  placed  .Aceldama  on  a  level  overhanging  the
- m_  j-i- 1  Valley  of  the  Son  of  Hinnom  on  the

2.  Traditional  ^^  ^^^^  ^^^^^  hjh  ^f  £,,41  counsel.

site.  — ^  tradition  which  rests  precariously

on  Jer.  18/,  where  the  situation  of  the  potter's  house  in

Jeremiah's  day  is  thought to  be  indicated. Potter's

1  On  this  form  see  Dalm.  (Gram.  304  n.  2),  Kau.  (Gram.  8).


ACHAIA

material  is  still  <lug  out  in  the  neighlxjurhood.  The
traditional  Aceldama  was  used  to  bury  Christian  pilgrims
in  at  least  from  570  {Anton.  Plac.  I  tin.  26)  :  especially
during  the  Crusades,  but,  according  to  Maundrell,  who
says  it  was  then  called  Campo  Santo,  even  as  late  as
1697.  A  charnel  house  into  which  the  bodies  were  let
down  from  above  has  stood  here  from  very  early  times.
The  best  history  and  description  of  the  site  (with  plans)
is  that  by  Schick,  PEFQ,  1892,  pp.  283^

G.  A.  s.— H.  w.  H.

ACHAIA  (axaia  [Ti.WH]).  It  is  a  fact  of  some
interest  that  both  at  the  beginning  and  at  the  end  of  their
history  the  word  '  Achaian'  was  used  as  the  general  de-
signation of  the  inhabitants  of  (irecce  proper.  During
the  classical  pxTJod  Achaia  denoted  only  the  narrow  strip
of  coastland  and  the  adjoining  mountain  stretching  along
the  S.  shore  of  the  Ciorinthian  gulf  from  the  river
Sythas  (mod.  Trikalitikos)  20  m.  west  of  Corinth,  to  the
river  Larisus  near  Cape  .Xraxus  (mod.  Kalogria).  In  the
time  of  Paul,  Achaia signifietl  the  Roman  province — i.e.,
the  whole  country  south  of  Macedonia  and  Ulyricum,  in-
cluding some  of  the  adjacent  islands.  The  'lanie  Achaia
was  given  to  it  in  consetjuence  of  the  part  played  by  the
Acho-MU  League  in  the  last  spasmodic  effort  which
occasioned  the  sack  of  Corinth  and  the  downfall  of  Greek
independence,  146  B.C.  (Paus.  vii.  I610).  Whether  the
formation  of  the  province  dates  from  that  year,  or  not,  is
of  no  consequence  to  the  student  of  the  Bible.  It  was  in
27  B.C.  that  Augustus  definitely  settled  the  boundaries  of
Achaia,  assigning  to  it  Thessaly,  /J'ltolia,  Acarnania,  and
part  of  Epirus  (.Strabo,  p.  840).  The  Achaia  of  Paul  is,
therefore,  practically  synonymous  with  the  modern
kingdom  of  Greece,  but  a  little  more  extensive  towards
the  north-west.  The  combination  '  Macedonia  and
.-\chaia '  embraces  the  whole  of  European  (ireece,  as  in
Acts  19 21,  5u\dij.)v  TT]i>  "MoLKedoviav  Kal  'Axo-iav  (see
also  Rom.  l.'')26  i  Thess.  1  7/. ).  From  27  B.C.  Achaia

naturally  ranked  as  a  senatorial  province — /.  e. ,  its  governor
was  an  ex-jjra^tor,  with  the  title  proconsul  (Strabo,  /.c. ).
In  15  A.I).,  however,  owing  to  their  financial  embarrass-
ments, both  Achaia  and  Macedonia  were  taken  charge
of  by  Tiberius  ;  and  it  was  not  until  44  A.  D.  that  Claudius
restored  them  to  the  Senate  (Tac.  Ann.  i.  76  ;  Suet.
Claud.  25).  The  writer  of  ActslS  12  is  thus  quite  correct
in  speaking  of  Gallio  in  53  or  54  A.d.  as  avQi-Kcro-i — •
i.e. ,  i^roconsul.  The  fiasco  of  Nero's  proclamation  made
all  Greece  free,  but  this  state  of  things  lasted  only  a
short  time.  With  this  exception,  a  proconsular  governor
was  stationed  in  Corinth,  the  capital  of  Achaia,  until
the  time  of  Justinian.

In  the  NT  we  hear  of  only  three  towns  of  Achaia —
Athens,  Corinth,  and  Ck.nchrka  ;— but  the  Saluta-
tions of  the  two  Corinthian  Epistles  (esp.  2  Cor.  1 1  iv
6\ri  TTj  'Axa^ff)  imply  other  Christian  communities  in
the  province.  In  i  Cor.  16 15  the  '  house  of  Stephanas  '
is  called  the  'first-fruits  of  Achaia'  {dirapxv''^^  'Axo-io-s).
In  this  place,  for  '  .Vchaia  '  we  should  expect  '  Corinth' ;
for,  according  to  Acts  17  34,  Dionysius  the  Areopagite
and  other  .Athc^nians  must  have  been  the  first-fruits  of
teaching  in  the  province  of  Achaia.  In  Rom.  16  5,  where,
according  to  the  Text.  Rec. ,  Epaenetus  is  spoken  of  as
the  d.irapxv  ttjs  'Axat'aj,  the  best  texts  read  'Aaias  [Ti.
W  &  H,  following  B.\N,  etc.].  The  charity  of  Achajan
converts  is  praised  in  2  Cor.  92  Rom.  1026;  but  the
reference  may  be  merely  to  the  church  at  Corinth  (cp
2  Cor.  810).  \v.  J.  w.

ACHAICUS  (axaikoc  [Ti.WH]),  a  member  of  the
Corinthian  church,  who,  along  with  .Stejihanas  and  For-
tunatus,  had  carried  to  Paul  at  Ephesus  news  of  the
Corinthians  which  had  gladdened  and  refreshed  him
(i  Cor.  16 17/. ).  He  is  enumerated  as  one  of  the
Seventy  (Lk.  10 1)  in  Chron.  Pasc.  (Bonn  ed.  i.  402).

ACHAN (IPV- Josh.  7),  called  Achar  (13];— «.^.,
'  troubled  '— ,  cp  OCR  AN,  n^y)  in  i  Ch.  27  and  {achar
[ed.  Bensly])  in  4  Esd.  737  [107]  RV. 6's  readings  are
3  33


ACHIACHARUS

AXAp[ni'"-ind(exc<-ptJosh.  7i,  &xan)IO.  AXAN  [A  ;  but
AXApin  Josh.724  iCh.  27]);  thesonofCarniib.  Zalxlib.
Zerah  b.  Judah,  who  unlawfully  took  possession  of  some
of  the  '  devoted  '  spoil  of  Jericho  (si-e  liAN ).  His  breach
of  a  talxK)  had  involved  the  whole  host  in  guilt  {RS^'^
162),  and  the  conununity  had  to  free  itself  of  responsi-
bility by  destroying  not  only  Achan  but  also  his  whole
family  (Josh.  7).  This  is  quite  in  accordance  with
primitive  notions  (A'.S'W  421),  although  our  present  text
is  due  to  later  insertions  in  v.  24/  With  the  variety
in  the  form  of  the  name  is  to  be  connected  the  word-
play in  Josh.  725. Cp  Cakmi,  i.

ACHAZ  (axaz  [Ti],  Ax&C  [\VH],  .\It.l9),  KV
Aha/  (</.?■.  i).

ACHBOR  (li33y,  §  68,  i.e.,  Mol.sk  [y.z'.];  cp  Ph.
-I32y,  N-iaDy,  D-I33y;  AXoBoopfBAL]).

1.  Father  of  Baal-hnnan  [  i]  king  of  Edom  ((Jen.  ;}6  38,
Xofioip  [A*Z>]  ;  39  ;  I  *^h.  1  49,  liry  [Ba.  CJinsb.  ],  ax<«'/iwp
U^l  X-  [L])  ;  a'so  V.  50  in  ©"'^. See  Edom,  §  4.

2.  b.  Micah  ;  a  courtier  of  King  Josiah  (2  K.  212 1214  ;
Jer.  2622,  MT  and  Thcod.  in  (J  nig.  [I5.\N  om.]  ;  Jer.
36  12,  aKXojiujp  [BK'],  -(iv  [N*].  aKofiwp  [Q])  ;  in  2  Ch.
3-4  20  named  Abdon  [</.;.  ,4]  (ajioooofj.  [li],  a(i8u}t>  [.\L]).

ACHIACHARUS  (axiaXAROC  [HA];  see  further
below).

I.  The  prosperous  nephew  of  Tobit  (see  Tobit).
He  was  cup-bearer,  signet-keeper,  steward,  and  overseer
of  accounts  to  Esarhaddon  at  Nineveh  (Tob.  1  21/).

In  i88o  George  Hoffmann  pointed  out*  the  identity
of  the  Achiacharus  of  Tob.  I21/.  lli8l4iot  with
Ahikar  (on  the  name  see  below),  a  legendary  sage  and
vezir  of  Sennacherib,  who  is  the  hero  of  a  romance  found
in  certain  Syriac  and  Arabic  MS.S.  According  to  this
romance,  he  almost  lost  his  life  through  the  base
treachery  of  his  sister's  son  (cp  Pesh.  in  Tob.  11 18),
Nadan  (  =  Aman  of  Tob.  14  10 — cp  [ewoiria-fi']  a5ajtt  [B],
vaSafi  (N);  see  Aman — and  probably  =  Nabal  [or  I.al  an
or  other  form]  of  Tob.  11 18  ;  see  Nasbas),  whom  he
had  adopted.  Restored  to  favour,  he  gave  sundry
proofs  of  his  marvellous  wisdom,  especially  in  connec-
tion with  a  mission  to  a  foreign  king.  Assemanni  had
already  observed  {Bifi.  Or.  3,  pt.  I286  <?)  that  in  the
Arabic  story  '  de  Hicaro  eadem  fere  narrantnr  quae
de  .Esopo  Phryge  '  ;  chaps.  23-32  of  the  legendary  IJ/e
of  yEsop  (Maximus  Planudes)  in  fact  tell  of  /Esop  and
his  kinsman  Ennos  a  quite  similar  story.  There  can
be  little  doubt  that  the  story  is  oriental  in  origin  ;  but
it  has  been  argued  by  Meissner  (see  below)  that  the
^■Esop  romance  has  preserved  in  some  respects  a  more
original  form.  The  Greek  recension,  however,  that
must  be  assumed  as  the  basis  of  certain  Roumanian
and  Slavonic  versions  still  surviving,  was  probably  an
independent  version  now  lost,  made  from  the  Syriac.
Allusions  to  an  eastern  sage  axai'^apoy  are  found
elsewhere  {e.^^.,  Strabo,  p.  762)  ;  and  traces  of  his  story
seem  to  have  made  their  way  into  the  Talnmd  {ZD.MG
48194/  ['94])-  The  nmtual  relations  of  these  various
recensions  are  still  obscure ;  but  there  seems  little
reason  to  question  that  the  allusions  in  Tobit  are  to
an  already  well-known  story.  M.  R.  James  (Guardian,
Feb.  2,  1898,  pp.  163/. )  suggests  parallels  to  the  same
story  in  the  NT.

Of  the  allusions,  that  in  11  18  is  wanting  in  the  It.;  these  in
11  18  and  14  10  are  absent  from  the  '  Chaldee '  and  Heb.  te.xts  ;
while  the  Vg.  omits  all  s.ive  that  in  11 13  (Acltior) — jwrhaps  the
allusions  were  felt  to  have  little  to  do  with  the  .story  of  Tobit.

(Ircek  variants  of  the  name  are  ax(i\apov  [j<  in  c.  1,  •"ax-
once  in  J<<^-''1,  axcli]*-  Ik  in  !■*  'oJ.  ax«iKop  [K'  in  11  18,  ax'ia-
Xo^f  K<^-^1,  cp  It.  Achicarus,  and  in  14 10  Acktcar.  The
equivalent  Hebrew  would  be  -pTK.  and  Meissner  has  pointed
out  that  Pesh.  has  i.Q«'a(  for  •|?3  in  iCh.  05.  The  name
remains  obscure  however.  Pesh.  has  ;  f*  -  f*  ^  ;  '  Chald.'  H3,
•\p-p» ;  Hi  |nnK  'ntt:  Vg-  Achior,  and  Pesh.  in  I21/.  >Q*-(.
1  '  Ausziige  aus  syrischen  Akten  persischen  Martyrer,'  in
Ahhatuil.f.  d.  Kunde  d.  Morgtnlandes,  7,  no.  3,  p.  t8a.


ACHIAS

In  the  romance  the  forms  are  ,\  p  -  «^  ;  ^^ft  -^  [cod.  Sach.];
lf*-,'(  [cod.  in  Brit.  Mus.].

Published  texts— ([)  Semitic:  Arabic,  A.  galhani,  Carifes
araies,  2-20 (Beyrouth,  1890)  ;  Ar.  and  Neo-Syr.,  M.  Lidzbarski,
from  cod.  Sachau  339,  in  K>xiinzungsh,-fte  zur  /.A  Hefte  4-5,  1
Teil,  with  Germ,  traiisl.;  English  transl.  of  Syriac  (compared  with
Ar.  and  Neo.-Syr.),  E.  J.  Dillon,  Contevip.  Ktv.  March  '98,  p.
369-386;  cp  also  versions  of  the  .Arabian  Nights— <f.^^.,  Sir  R.  F.
Burton,  Alf  Laylah  7va  Lay/ah,  supplemental  volumes,  6  3-38  ;
iEthiopic  (precepts),  C.  H.  Cornill,  Vas  Buck  der  veiseu  Fhilo-
sophen,  19-21,  40-44.  (2)  Slavonic:  Germ,  transl.  V.  Jagic,
Byzant.  Zeitsch.  1  11 1-126.  (j)  Armenian,  printed  at  Constanti-
nople, in  1708,  1731,  and  1862.I  (4)  Tlu  Story  0/ A hikar,  Cony-
beare,  Harris,  and  Lewis,  Camb.  1898  (Glc.  text  ;  Armen.,  Syr.,
and  Arab,  texts  and  transl.;  Slav,  and  Eth.  transl.)  appeared
as  these  sheets  were  being  passed  for  press.

Discussions  :  Bruno  Meissner,  ZDMG  48  171-197  ['94) ;  Jagic
(op.  cit.  107-111);  Ernst  Kuhn  (/A  127-130);  Lidzbarski  {I.e.
■x/-);  Bickell,  Atheturum,  22nd  Nov.  1890,  p.  700,  and  24th
Jan.  1891,  p.  123;  cp  also  20th  Nov.  1897,  p.  711,  and  27th
Nov.,  p.  750;  J.  R.  Harris  in  Story  o/A/i/iar  (see  above),  pp.
vii.-lxxxviii.

2.  'King  of  Media'  (Tob.  14  15  [.y*] ;  It.  .^r///e<ir)=  Nebu-
chadnezzar (/.'^  [B])  =  Ahasuerus  (/A  [A]).  See  ToBiT,
Book  (>f.

ACHIAS  [ach/as),  4  Esd.  1 2!. See  Ahijah,  i.

ACHIM  (AxeiM  [BN*],  -j^,  a^in,  -hn  [A  etc.],
AXiM  [N''  etc.],  cp  AxeiM  =  DN^nN,  Aiiiam,  i  Ch.
11 35  [BN*A],  and  =  pr,  J.-vcm.v,  Gen.  46io  [.A*"'i-],  i  Ch.
24  i7[i<3]  [B]),  a  name  in  the  ancestry  of  Joseph  (Mt.  1 14).
See  Gk.nkai.ogiks  of  Jesus,  §  2  c.

ACHIOR  (Ax[e]ia)p  [BXA],  §  44),  in  the  romance
of  Judith  {q.v.),  'captain  of  all  the  sons  of  Ammon."
Having  dared  to  warn  Holofernes  of  the  danger  of
attacking  the  Israelites,  he  was  handed  over  to  them  to
share  their  fate  on  the  expected  triumph  of  the  Assyrian
arms  (65^).  He  was  hospitably  received,  and  ultimately
became  a  Jewish  proselyte — no  doubt  to  the  great
edification  of  Jewish  readers  of  the  story.

In  some  versions  of  'lobit  his  name  t.ikes  the  place  of  that  of
AcHiACHARus  {q.v.)—nn  error  due  to  the  similarity  of /t  and  w
in  Svri.ac.


ACHIPHA (AxeiB<\ [B]),

251, HAKll'liA.


Esd.Ssit RV  =  Ezra


ACHISH  (""3X,  ArXOYC  [BA],  akx-  [L]),  a  Phihs-
tine,  .son  of  Maoch  (i  S.  272)  or  Maachah  (i  K.  239/ ;
AfXiC  [A])  ;  a  king  of  Oath,  with  whom  David  and  i
his  band  took  refuge  from  the  persecution  of  Saul  (see
D.Win,  §  5).  He  is  described  as  a  credulous  man
whom  David  found  it  easy  to  deceive,  representing  that  |
his  raids  against  Bedouin  tribes  were  really  directed  [
against  the  Judahites  and  their  allies,  and  taking  care
not  to  leave  any  of  his  captives  alive  to  reveal  the  truth
to  Achish.  At  Ziklag,  which  had  been  assigned  to
him  as  his  place  of  residence,  David  hved  as  a  freebooter
in  vas.salage  to  Achish  for  a  year  and  four  months
(©only  four  months).  The  confidence,  however,  with
which  his  suzerain  regarded  him  was  not  shared  by
the  Philistine  lords,  who  prevailed  upon  Achish  to
dismiss  David  from  his  army  when  starting  to  meet
Saul  at  Gilboa.  See  i  S.  27^-282  29i-ii,  a'connected
passage  of  date  prior  to  800  {SBOT).  In  another  passage
(1K.239/),  where  the  execution  of  Shimei  [i]  is  ac-
counted for  by  his  having  gone  to  Gath  in  search  of
some  runaway  slaves,  it  is  said  that  the  fugitives  went
to  Achish.  No  doubt  the  same  king  is  meant  (son  of
Maacah,  v.  39),  though  the  reference  to  Achish  has  the
appearance  of  being  a  later  ornamental  insertion  made
in  oblivion  of  chronology.

To  a  very  much  later  writer  (see  i  S.  21 10-15  [11-16])
the  account  in  i  S.  27-29  seemed  to  reflect  on  David's
patriotism.  He  therefore  devised  an  entertaining  and
unobjectionable  story,  in  the  style  of  the  Midrash,
which  he  hoped  would  supplant  the  no  longer  intelligible
historical  tradition.  According  to  him,  David  went
alone,  and  was  compelled  to  feign  madness  for  safety

1  According  to  information  received  from  Mr.  F.  C.  Cony-
beare,  there  are  two  Armenian  recensions,  the  earlier  of  which
appears  to  be  in  some  respects  more  primitive  than  the  Syriac.
There  is  also,  probably,  a  Georgian  version.

35


ACHSAH

till  he  could  escape.  The  author  of  the  title  of  Ps.  34
accepted  this  story,  but  by  mistake  (thinking  of  Gen.
2O2)  wrote  'Abimelech'  for  'Achish'  (a/3[e]i/ie\ex
[BN.VR],  ax«M-  [U],  Achimelech  ;  Pesh.  quite  different).

T.  K.  c.

ACHITOB  (AxeiTOoB  [B]),  iEsd.82  =  4  Esd.  lif
AV  =  Ezra  72,  Ahitub,  2.

ACHMETHA  (NnpnX),  Ezra  6  2t,  the  capital  of
Media  ;  see  Ecbatana.

ACHOR  ("1133^;  axwP  [BAL]),  a  valley  on  the
N.  boundary  of  Judah  (Josh.  15 7),  which,  as  we  may
infer  from  josh.  7  (E/ie/cax^p  [BAL])  combined  with
Hos.  2i5[i7],  led  up  from  Jericho  into  the  highlands  of
Judah.  In  Is.  65 10  it  represents  the  E.  portion  of  Canaan
on  this  side  the  Jordan.  To  an  Israelite  its  name  natur-
ally suggested  gloomy  thoughts.  Hosea  promises  that
in  the  future,  when  Israel  has  repented,  the  evil  omen
shall  be  nullified,  and  a  much  later  prophetic  writer
(Is.  I.e.)  that  the  valley  of  Achor  shall  become  a
resting-place  of  flocks.  Early  legend  connected  the
name  with  the  sin  of  Achan  the  '  troubler '  of  Israel
(Josh.  724-26t,  JE).  Many  (^.^.  Grove,  very  positively,
in  Smith's  DB)  have  identified  the  valley  with  the
Wady  el-Kelt,  which  leads  down  through  a  stupendous
chasm  in  the  mountains  to  the  plain  of  the  Jordan,  and
is,  to  unromantic  observers,  dark  and  dismal.  This
wady,  however,  is  scarcely  lifeless  enough  to  be  Achor,
for  its  slender  torrent-stream  rarely  dries  up.  It  is
also  scarcely  broad  enough  ;  it  would  never  have
occurred  to  the  most  ecstatic  seer  that  flocks  could
lie  down  in  the  Wady  el-Kelt.  Some  other  valley
must  be  intended.  According  to  the  05(21725  8934)
the  valley  was  to  the  N.  of  Jericho,  and  its  old  name
still  clung  to  it.  This  cannot  be  reconciled  with  the
statement  in  Josh.  I.e.  respecting  the  N.  boundary  of
J  udah.

ACHSAH  (nppy,  §  71,  'anklet-  ;  ^CXA  [B],  axca
[.\L]),  according  to  Josh.  I516-19,  and  (aza  [B],
ACXA  [B^'i-'-'g-A])  Judg.l  12-15  (cp  iCh.  249;  AV
Achsa,  o2a  [L]).  a  daughter  of  Caleb,  who  offered
her  in  marriage  to  the  conqueror  of  Kirjath-sepher.  She
was  won  by  his  younger  brother  Othniel.  At  her  peti-
tion, because  her  home  was  to  be  in  the  dry  southland
(Negeb),  Caleb  bestowed  upon  her  certain  coveted  waters
called  the  Upper  and  the  Lower  Golath  (see  below).
The  simple  grace  of  the  narrative  holds  us  spell-bound  ;
but  we  must  not,  with  Kittel  [Hist.  1  299),  pronounce
the  story  historical  on  this  account.  That  some  clans
should  have  been  named  after  individuals  is  not  incon-
ceivable ;  but  it  is  most  improbable  that  we  have  any
true  traditions  respecting  the  fortunes  of  such  possible
individuals,  and  it  would  be  throwing  away  the  lessons
of  experience  to  admit  the  lifelikeness  of  a  narrative  as
an  argument  for  its  historicity.  According  to  analogy,
Achsah  must  represent  a  Kenizzite  clan,  allied  in  the
first  instance  to  the  Calebites  of  Hebron,  but  also,  very
closely,  to  the  clan  settled  at  Debir  and  called  Othniel  ;
and  the  story  arose  in  order  to  justify  the  claim  of  the
Achsah  clan  to  the  possession  of  certain  springs  which
lay  much  nearer  to  Hebron  than  to  Debir  (so  Prof
G.  F.  Moore,  on  Judg.l).  That  the  cause  is  amply
sufficient,  can  hardly  be  denied  (cp  the  Beersheba  and
Rehoboth  stories  in  Genesis).  It  only  remains  to  discover
the  right  springs.  We  know  where  to  look,  having
identified  Debir  with  the  highest  degree  of  probability.
And  our  search  is  rewarded.  In  all  other  parts  of  the
district  the  water  supply  is  from  cisterns  ;  no  streams  or
springs  occur.  But  about  seven  miles  (Conder)  N.  of
ed-Ddheriyeh  (the  true  Debir),  and  near  Van  de  Velde's
site  for  Debir  (A7^.  ed-Dilheh),  are  beautiful  springs
(worthy  of  being  Achsah's  prize),  which  feed  a  stream
that  runs  for  three  or  four  miles,  and  does  not  dry  up.*
The  springs,  which  are  fourteen,  are  in  three  groups,
1  PEF Mem.Z->pi;  see  also  GASm.  Hist.  Geog.  279  (cp
p.  78),  who  speaks  of  only  two  springs.

36


ACHSHAPH

and  the  two  which  are  nearest  to  the  head  of  the
valley  may  be  presumed  to  lie  the  Upper  and  Lower
Golath.  The  identification  is  certainly  a  valuable  one.
Sec,  further,  Goi.A th-Maim.

ACHSHAPH  (fli;ON.  i.e.  'sorcery';  &z€l(J)  [B],
AXCACJ)  [A].  &XAC-  [1-]).  one  of  the  unknown  sites
in  the  hook  of  Joshua.  It  lay,  according  to  P,  on  the
Ixjrdcr  of  the  .\slierite  territory  (Josh.  I925  ;  Kea(p  [H]).
Its  king  (if  the  s;\me  Achshaph  is  meant)  joined  the
northern  confederation  under  Jabin,  king  of  Hazor  (11  i ;
ox'<^  [A],  ax«t/i  [1'"].  [fiacuXta]  x'^<'°-'t>  ['-])  i  and
shared  the  defeat  of  his  allies  (I220).  Rob.  (liRAss)
connects  it  with  the  modern  Kesaf,  a  village  near  the
bend  of  the  river  Litany  where  there  are  some  ruins  of
uncertain  date;  this  identification  would  suit  Josh.  11 1,
but  not  1925.  Maspero,  on  the  other  hand,  followed
by  WNLVI  (As.  u.  Eur.  154,  cp  173),  identifies
Achshaph  with  the  Aksap  of  the  name-list  of  Thotmes
III.  (A'/'IS*,  546).  In  this  part  of  the  li^t.  however,
there  are  names  of  localities  in  the  region  of  Jezreel,
which  is  outside  the  land  of  Asher.  Flinoers  Petrie
(Hist,  of  Eg.  2326)  connects  Aksap  with  '  Asdfek,  9  m.
SSW.  of  Jeba,  which  is  hazardous.  At  any  rate  there
were  probably  several  places  noted  anciently  for  their
sorcerers  and  therefore  called  Achshaph.  The  form  Kea(^
(see  above)  has  suggested  a  most  improbable  identification
with  Haifa  (FEE  Mem.  1 165).  The  statement  of  Eus.
in  OS,  21854^  (o.Kaa.<l>)  is  geographically  impossible.

ACHZIB  (3'T3X  ; probably  'winter-torrent').

I.  .\  town  of  Judah  in  the  Shephelah,  mentioned  with
Ke'ilah  and  Mareshah,  Jos.  I544  (aKtefei  «:.  *cefet/i  [B],
axf«  \.-^\  axf"/*  [I-]),  also  Mic.  1  ^f,  where  ©"'W,
losing  the  intended  paronomasia,  renders  '  the  houses
of  .Achzib  '  oXkovs  fiaraiovs.  The  name  becomes  Chkzib
(3*13;  Samar.  te.xt,  Chazbah;  x°-<^^'-  [''^^L])  in  Gen.  38 st,
where  the  legend  presupposes  that  Chezib  is  the  centre
of  the  clan  of  Shelah  ;  and  since  in  i  Ch.  4  22t  '  the
men  of  Cozeba '  (n3I3  ;  x^fvi^a  [AL]  ;  but  ffuixn^o-
[R],  cp  ffwxa  =  Socoh)  are  said  to  belong  to  the  same
clan,  we  may  safely  recognise  COZKBA  (so  RV  ;  AV
Chozeba)  as  another form of  the  same  name. The


ACTS  OF  THE  APOSTLES

name  may  perhaps  linger  in  'Ain  el  h'etbeh,  between
Yarmuk  (Jarmuth)  and  Shuweikeh  (Socoh),  but  to  tlie
E.  of  both  (So  GASm. ,  after  PEE  Mem.  3  36).  Conders
identification  of  Cozeba  with  the  ruin  of  Kuweiziba,  2^
ni.  NE.  of  Halhul  towards  Hebron  (PEE Mem. '6^)
is  therefore  superfiuous.  IJuhl  wi.scly  doubts  the  pro-
posal to  identify  it  with  Kus.sabe  SE.  of  Tell  el-Hesy
(J'al.  192).

2.  A  Canaanite  town,  9  m.  to  the  north  of  Accho,
like  which  city  it  was  claimed  but  not  conquered  by  the
irilje  of  Asher,  Josh.  19 29  {(xo^ofi  [li],  axf<»«^  [A'].
af«^  [A*],  axaf«^  [L]),  Judg.  Ijif  (a<rxaf*i  [HL],
■XivSn  [.A]).  Sennacherib  mentions  Akzibi  and  Akku
together  in  the  Taylor  inscription  (P/''->  688).  Achzib
(Aram.  AcMifi)  is  the  Ecdippa,  fKSiTrira,  of  O.S,  95i3
2'24  77,  the  (KSi-mrwi'  [/y/l  134],  exSetTrocj  (.-////.  v.  1  22,
where  it  is  said  to  have  been  also  called  ipKrj)  of  Jos. ,
the  modern  ez-'/.lb.  i .  k.  (  .


ACIPHA  (AXeiBA  [B]).
Hakui>iia.


Esd.  53it  AV  =  Ezra2  5i


ACITHO  (AKiBca  [A]),  Judiths. f.  RV,  Ahitub
(q.v.,  4).

ACRA(<\KpA  [ ANV]),  I  Mace.  1  33  etc.,  AV  '  strong-
hold,' KV  'citadel.' See  jKKrsALEM.

ACEABBIM  (D*3npy).  Josh.  153t.  RV  Akkabbim.

ACRE  ("ip'ii,  zeYPOC  in  Is. ;  for  ©  in  i  Sam.  cp
We.  Dr.  ad  he.).  Is.  5  10,  i  S.  14i4  AV  mg.  RV.  The
Heb.  word  seems  to  denote  the  amount  of  land  which  a
span  or  Yoke  \q.~'.~\  of  o.xen  could  plough  in  the  course
of  a  day  (cp  below)  ;  perhaps,  like  the  Egyptian  dpovpa,
it  ultimately  became  a  fixed  quantity  (cp  Now.  Arch.  1
202).  Even  at  the  present  day  the  fellahin  of  Palestine
measure  by  the  fadddn  (  =  Syr.  paddand  '  yoke  '  ;  cp
ZZ?/'/' 4 79)  ;  cp  also  \^aX.  Ji/i^i/nt ,  jugcrum.  The  term
is  not  restricted  to  arable  land,  being  applied  in  Is.  I.e.
to  a  vineyard.  Winckler,  however  (AUE,  2nd  scr. ,  2
90),  derives  semed  from  Bab.  samddu  {=:Iai'd/u)  to
weigh,  properly  to  measure  off  (which  is  at  any  rate
barely  possible),  and  attempts  to  show  that  seined  in
Is.  can  denote  only  a  liquid  measure  (which  is  by  no
means  obvious). See  Weights  and  Measures.


ACTS OF THE APOSTLES^

CONTENTS

T/u  HVe'  sect  ions  distinct  in  characier/roiu  rest  o/i>ook(%  i);  inaccuracies  (%  2);  '  Tendency '(^i  3-7);  '  Journey  Record' (%  &/.)',
Ot/ier  Sources  {^  10/);  Trust2uorthi>u'ss  {%%  i2-n);  Authorship  {^  15);  Date  {%  16)  ;  Blasss  hypothesis (%  17/.);  Religious
Value  o/Acts  (§  19)  ;  Literature  (§  20).


Apart  from  scanty  notices  supplied  by  the  NT  epistles,
this  book  is  our  only  source  for  the  history  of  Christianity
during  its  first  thirty  or  thirty-five  years.  The  question
of  its  trustworthiness  is,  therefore,  of  fundamental  im-
portance.

The  sections  in  which,  as  an  eye-witness,  the  writer
gives  his  narrative  in  the  first  person  plural  (16 10-17  -0


1.  The  '  We '
sections

or  Journey
Record.


5-15  21 1-18  27  1-28  16)  may  be  implicitly
accepted.  But  it  may  be  regarded  as
ecjually  certain  that  they  are  not  by  the
same  writer  as  the  other  parts  of  the
book.  In  the  sections  named,  the  book
shows  acquaintance  with  the  stages  of  travel  of  almost
every  separate  day,  and  with  other  very  unimportant
details  (2O13  2I2/.  16  28ii,  etc.);  outside  these  limits
it  has  no  knowledge  even  of  such  an  important  fact  as
that  of  Paul's  conflicts  with  his  opponents  in  Galatia  and
Corinth,  and  mentions  only  three  of  the  twelve  adventures
catalogued  so  minutely  in  2  Cor.  11 24/.  cp  23  (Acts  14  19
16  22  23/  ).  Even  had  the  writer  of  the  book  as  a  whole
(assuming  him  to  have  been  a  companion  of  Paul)  been
separated  from  the  apostle — remaining  behind,  e.g. ,  in
Macedonia  during  the  interval  between  1617  and  20  5 —
he  would  surely  afterwards  have  gathered  the  needful
details  from  eye-witnesses  and  embodied  them  in  his I

37


book,  instead  of  satisfying  himself  with  such  extra-
ordinarily meagre  notes  as  we  have  in  I821-232O1-3  or
16 5-8.  Even  were  he  following  an  old  journal,  he
could  never  have  passed  over  so  many  important  matters
in  silence  simply  because  they  were  not  to  be  found  in
his  notes.  P'urther,  he  contradicts  the  Epi-^tle  to  the
Galatians  so  categorically  (see  Gai.ATI.^ns,  Epistle  to,
§  5/.,  and  Coi;nc:l  ok  Jekusali.m)  th.at,  if  we  assume
his  identity  with  the  eye-witness  who  writes  in  the  first
I  person,  we  are  compelled  (see  below,  §  6)  to  adopt  one  of
j  two  courses.  We  must  either  make  Galatians  non-Pauline
I  or  pronounce  the  writer  of  Acts  as  a  whole  to  be  a
'  tendency  '  writer  of  the  most  marked  character — hardly
less  so  than  a  post-apostolic  author  who  should  have
simply  invented  the  '  we '  sections.  To  suppose  that
the  'we'  sections  were  invented,  however,  is  just  as
inadmissible  as  to  question  the  genuineness  of  Galatians.
If  the  sections  had  been  invented,  they  would  not
have  been  so  different  from  the  rest  of  the  took.  We
must  therefore  conclude  that  the  sections  in  question
come  from  a  document  written  by  an  eye-witness,  the
so-called  '  we '  source,  and  that  this  was  used  by  a  later
writer,  the  compiler  of  the  whole  book.

It  is  upon  this  assumption  of  a  distinct  authorship  for
1  On  title  see  below,  Ian.
38


ACTS  OF  THE  APOSTLES


the  '  we '  sections  that  we  are  best  able  to  pass  a  compara-
tively favourable  judgment  on  the  compiler's  deviations
from  historical  facts  in  other  parts  of  the  book.  But
there  is  one  charge  from  which  he  cannot  be  freed,  viz. ,
that  he  has  followed  the  method  of  retaining  the  '  we '
without  change.  In  the  case  of  so  capable  a  writer,
in  whom  hardly  a  trace  can  be  detected,  either  in
vocabul.-iry  or  in  style,  of  the  use  of  documents,  this  fact
is  not  to  be  explained  by  lack  of  skill,  such  as  is  some-
times met  with  in  the  Mediceval  chroniclers.  The
inference  is  inevitable  that  he  wished — what  has  actually
happened — that  the  whole  book  should  be  regarded  as
the  work  of  an  eye-witness.  An  analogous  case  is  to
be  found  in  the  '  I '  taken  over  from  the  Memoirs  of
Ezra  and  Nehemiah  (Ezra  727-834  Qi-is;  Neh.  li-7s
I231I36-31  ;  also  in  Tob.  I3-36,  and  in  Protevangclium
Jacobi,  -i.if.).  Just  as  EzralO  and  Neh.  8,  as  well  as
the  sections  just  mentioned,  must  be  held  to  rest  on
those  Memoirs,  although  modilied  and  with  the  '  I '
dropped  out,  so  in  Acts  we  may  assume  much  other
matter  to  have  been  drawn  from  the  source  from  which
the  'we'  sections  are  derived.  Any  attempt,  however,
to  assign  to  this  source  whole  sections  of  the  book  not
having  the  '  we,'  and  to  use  the  conclusion  so  gained  as
a  proof  of  the  trustworthiness  of  everything  thus  assumed
to  belong  to  it,  must  be  postponed  until  this  trustworthi-
ness has  been  investigated  by  the  means  otherwise  at  our
command.

In  this  investigation  we  begin  with  certain  obvious
inaccuracies — first of  all  with those  which cannot  be

..  . traced  to  the  influence  of  any  tendency.

2.  inaccuracies ^^^  ^^  ^^^^  j,^^  manifestation  of  Christ

b^T d  ^^^ to  Paul  near  Damascus. According  to

■'  ^' 229  his  companions  see  the  light  from

heaven  but  do  not  hear  the  voice  of  Jesus  ;  according
to  97  they  hear  the  voice  but  see  no  one  and  do  not  fall
down  ;  according  to  26  12-18  they  fall  down  indeed  with
Paul,  but  it  is  he  alone  who  sees  the  heavenly  light,
and  hears  the  voice.  This  last  account,  moreover,
represents  him  as  having  received  at  the  time  an  ex-
planation of  what  had  occurred  ;  according  to  22n  f.,
he  did  not  receive  the  explanation  until  afterwards,
through  Ananias.

Further  inconsistencies  of  statement  are  to  be  found  when  we
compare  the  explanation  of  the  departure  from  Jerusalem  in
926-30  with  that  in  2'2  17-21  ;  the  account  in  IO44  (en)  with  that
in  11  15  (a.p^(x<idai) ;  the  explanation  of  the  offering  in  21  20-26
with  that  in  24  177^  ;  the  accounts  in  21  31-34  2223-29  2827  with
2817,  according  to  which  Paul  was,  in  Jerusalem,  a  prisoner  of
the  Jews  and  not  as  yet  of  the  Romans  ;  the  occasion  of  the
appeal  to  Caesar  in  2.59-11  with  that  in  28  iSy;  The  liberation
of  Paul  and  .Silas  from  prison  at  Philippi  (1023-40)  is  not  only  a
very  startling  mir.icle  (with  resemblances  to  what  we  read  in
Euripides,  Bacchie,  436-441,  5027^,  606-628  [cp  Nonnus,  Diony-
siaca,  45262-285],  ^"J  ^^  regards  Acts  10  35-J9,  in  Lucian,
Toxaris,  27-33),  b'lt  is  scarcely  reconcilable  with  i  Thess.  2  2,
where  the  language  of  the  apostle  hardly  suggests  that  his
'  boldness  in  God '  was  in  any  measure  due  to  an  occurrence  of
this  kind.

So  much  for  inaccuracies  that  cannot  be  attributed  to
any  tendency  on  the  part  of  the  writer.  There  are
others — and  these  of  much  greater  importance — which
can  only  be  so  explained.  Before  discussing  these,  let  us
ascertain  clearly  what  the  tendency  of  the  writer  is.

Every  historian  who  is  not  simply  an  annalist  must

have '  tendency ' in the wider sense  of  that  word.

Tflniiencv ^'^ trustworthiness is not  necessarily

*  XI. 1, 1 affected  thereby  :  indeed,  it  has  actually

of  tne  book. ,  ..  r..  i-.r

been  urged  by  one  of  the  apologists  for

Acts,*  as  an  argument  for  the  trustworthiness  of  the  book,
that  it  was  designed  to  be  put  in  as  a  document  at  the
trial  of  Paul,  and  was  written  entirely  with  this  view — a
position  that  cannot,  however,  be  made  good.  Now,  it
is  clear  that  the  book  does  not  profess  to  be  a  history  of
the  first  extension  of  Christianity,  or  of  the  Church  in  the
apostolic  age  :  it  covers  really  only  a  small  portion
of  this  field.  It  is  equally  certain  that  the  title  irpa^eis
irCJvf)  dwoffrbXwv  does  not  express  the  purpose  of  its
1  Aberle,  Tiib.  Theol.  Quartahchr.  1863,  pp.  84-134.
39


author,  who  relates  hardly  anything  of  James  and  John,
and  of  nine  of  the  apostles  mentions  nothing  but  the
names.  1  Neither  is  the  book  a  history  of  Peter  and
Paul,  for  it  tells  also  of  John,  of  both  the  Jameses,  of
the  deacons,  of  Stephen,  Philip,  Apollos,  and  others.
Nor  is  it  a  history  of  the  spread  of  the  gospel  from
Jerusalem  to  Rome  ;  for  the  founding  of  the  Roman
church  is  not  described  but  presupposed  (2815),  and  all
that  has  any  interest  for  the  writer  is  the  arrival  there
of  Paul  (1921  23 11).  It  is  often  supposed  that  the  aim
of  the  book  is  expressly  formulated  in  18,  and  that
the  purpose  of  the  author  was  to  set  forth  the  spread  of
Christianity  from  Jerusalem,  through  Samaria,  and  to
the  ends  of  the  earth.  This  is  much  too  indefinite  to
account  either  for  the  difference  in  scale  of  the  various
narratives,  sometimes  so  minutely  detailed  and  some-
times so  very  vague,  or  for  their  marked  divergences
from  actual  history.

It  is,  therefore,  no  prejudice  on  the  part  of  critics,
but  the  nature  of  the  book  itself,  that  leads  us  to  ascribe
tendency  to  the  writer.  Only  (i)  we  must  not,  with  the
Tiibingen  School,  consider  it  'conciliatory.'  According
to  tiiat  view,  Acts  was  an  attempt  from  the  Pauline  side,
by  means  of  concessions,  to  bring  Judaism  to  a  recogni-
tion of  Gentile  Christianity.  A  reconciliation  of  the
two  was  thus  to  be  effected  in  face  of  the  danger  that
threatened  both,  from  Gnosticism  on  the  one  side  and
from  state  persecution  on  the  other.  This  cannot  have
been  the  purpose.  Acts  is  much  too  harsh  towards  non-
Christian  Jews,  for  whom  Christian  Jews  continued  to
retain  a  certain  sympathy  (223  751-53  I85/  12-17  1913-16
21  27-36  23  12-15,  etc. )  ;  besides,  most  of  the  details  which
it  gives  have  no  relation  to  any  such  purpose.  The
main  point  on  which  the  supposed  reconciliation  turns,
the  Apostolic  Decree  (1528/. ),  is  to  be  explained  other-
wise (see  Council  ok  Jerusalem,  §  10).  (2)  On  the
other  hand,  the  book  is  not  a  mere  apology  for  Paul.
If  it  were,  much  of  its  contents  would  be  unsuitable  {e.g. ,
the  enumeration  of  the  conditions  required  in  an  apostle
[121/],  which  were  not  fulfilled  in  Paul);  it  does  not
even  give  such  a  view  of  the  personality  of  Paul  as  the
facts  known  to  us  from  the  epistles  demand  (see  below,
§§  7,  14).  There  remains  only  (3)  one  other  possible
view  of  the  author's  tendency.  His  aim  is  to  justify  the
Gentile  Christianity  of  himself  and  his  time,  already  on
the  way  to  Catholicism,  and  he  seeks  to  do  this  by
means  of  an  account  of  the  origin  of  Christianity.  The
apostles,  including  Paul,  are  the  historical  foundation
of  Christianity,  and  432  a,  where  we  are  told  that  all
Christians  were  of  one  heart  and  soul,  may  be  regarded
as  forming  a  motto  for  the  book.

A  whole  series  of  demonstrable  inaccuracies  becomes
J  . comprehensible  when  viewed  as  result-

4.  inaccuracies  j^^  ^^^^^  ^^-^  tendency.  Paul  never
resulting  irom  ^^^^^^  .^^^^  conHict  with  the  original
tnis  tenaency.  j^p^gties  or  their  followers  as  he  does
in  Gal.  4 17  57  10  12  ;  2  Cor.  10 14/.  11 13-15  18-23.

The  one  misunderstanding  (Acts  15)  that  arises  is  cleared
away  by  the  original  apostles ;  the  attempt  to  enforce  the  cir-
cumcision of  Titus  (Gal.  2  3-5)^nay,  the  whole  personality  of
Titus — is  just  as  carefull>r  passed  over  in  silence  as  are  the  dis-
pute with  Peter  at  Antioch  (Gal.  2 11-21;  see  Council  of
Jerusalem,  §  3)  and  the  Judaising  plots  to  impose  on  the
Galatians  and  Corinthians  another  Gospel,  that  of  circumcision
(Gal.  Isy:  612/),  and  another  Christ  (2  Cor.  11  4/). Apart

1  It  is  not  to  be  inferred  from  the  absence  of  the  article  from
the  title  in  good  MSS  (irpa|eis  ano<TTo\uv  [BD])  that  the  author
me^nt  to  say  that  it  wa.s  with  the  acts  of  only  some  of  the  apostles
that  he  proposed  to  deal ;  for  it  would  be  very  strange  that  he
should  admit  such  an  incompleteness  in  the  very  title  of  his
work.  The  article  before  aTroo-ToAoji/  is  omitted  because  irpofeis
is  without  it  ;  and  that  is  so  simply  bec.iuse  such  is  the  usual
practice  at  the  beginning  of  books  (cp  Mt.  1  1  Acts  1  i,  and  see
Winer  (8),  g  1!>4,  10).  Since  therefore  no  form  of  the  title  can
be  assigned  to  the  author  of  the  book,  we  conclude  that  the  title
must  date  from  the  time  when  the  book  was  first  united  with
others  in  one  collection— its  first  occurrence  is  in  the  last  third  of
the  second  century  (Mur.  Fragm.  Tert.  Clem.Al.).  The  simple
npa^tii  [k],  common  since  Origen,  is  meaningless  as  an  original
title,  and  intelligible  only  as  an  abbreviation.


ACTS  OF  THE  APOSTLES


from  the  Gentiles,  who  seldom  show  hostility  to  Paul  (14  s
Id  16-33  ld3-4>).  >(  is  (notwithstandinK  the  end  of  3  Cor.  II36)
only  at  the  hands  of  non-Christian  Jews  that  Paul  meets  with
difficulties  (13  45  18  6  HI  9  28  34)  or  persecutions  (1»  23/ 39  13  50
14  3  5  19  17  5-8  13  IS  lay.  20  3  19  21  27-36  23  12-21  24  1-9  25  2-9  24).
For  further  illustrntiuns  of  the  operation  of  this  tendency  in  the
writer  of  Acts  see  Simo.n  and  Bakjksus.

On  the  other  hand,  Paul  brings  forward  nothing
whatever  in  which  the  original  apostles  had  not  led  the
way :  far  from  going  beyond  them  at  all,  he  appears
to  Ix'  entirely  dependent  on  them.

His  journeys  to  .Arabia,  Syria,  and  Cilicia  (Gal.  1 17  31)  are
passed  over  in  silence,  and  thus  it  is  made  out  that  not  he  but
Peter  gains  the  first  Gentile  convert,  for  Cornelius,  in  opposi-
tion to  10  3  23  35,  where  he  is  a  senii-proselyte,  is  represented  in
102845  11  I  18  157  as  a  pure  Gentile.  (Historically,  however,
after  Peter  had,  in  face  of  the  doubts  of  the  primitive  church,  so
completely,  and  as  a  question  of  general  pruiciple,  justified  the
reception  of  Cornelius  into  the  Christian  comniunily  without
his  being  subjected  to  the  requirements  of  the  Mosaic  law,
as  is  related  m  11  1-18,  the  question  that  led  to  the  Council  of
Jerusalem  could  never  again  have  sprung  up.)

Again,  whenever  Paul  comes  into  a  strange  city,  he  seeks  (as
we  should  expect  him  to  do)  to  establish  relations  first  of  all  with
the  synagogue,  since,  tliroufih  the  proselytes  w)io  might  be
looked  for  there,  he  could  obtain  access  to  the  Gentiles:  our
view  agrees  also  with  Rom.  10  18-21.  According  to  Acts,  how-
ever, in  almost  every  place  where  Paul  betakes  himself  with
his  message  to  the  llentiles  as  distinct  from  the  Jews,  he  has
to  purchase  anew  the  right  to  do  so,  by  first  of  all  preaching
to  the  Jews  and  being  rejected  by  them  (13i4  45yC  IS4-6  I'.l8_/C
281724-28).  The  only  exceptions  to  this  rule  are  Benta  (17
10-12),  Paphos,  Lystra,  and  Athens  (13  6  14  7  17  17) — where  the
narrative  passes  at  once  to  a  quite  singular  incident— and  towns
so  summ.-irily  dealt  with  as  Derbe  and  Perga  (14  21  25),  along
with  Iconium,  where  Gentiles  are  brought  to  Christianity
through  the  sermon  in  the  synagogue  (14  i).  In  28  17-28,  in
order  to  make  the  right  to  preach  to  the  Gentiles  dependent
on  the  rejection  of  the  gospel  by  the  Jews,  the  very  existence
of  the  Christian  church,  already,  according  to  2.S  15,  to  be  found
in  Rome,  is  ignored.  Such  a  dependence  of  Paul's  life-work
— his  mission  to  the  f".cntile>  -cm  the  ilcpurtiuent  of  the  Jews,
arid  that  too  in  rwry  in.iivi.iual  city,  is  ,|iiilc  iriL-cnncilable
with  Gal.l  1627  /;,  ami  with  the  iiii>tivc-s  wliii  h  llic  author  him-
self indicates  in  .Acts  i:i  47  L's  •.(■',,  as  ul-II  a^  with  '.'  is-''  \T  f.

After  the  appciraiK.-  ..f  Ksus  hinis.lf"  to  I'.ii;!  mai  1  ),iiii.iscus,
the  apostle  lias  vet  linthcr  to  be  iiitn..iui:.  .1  to  hi-  work  by
human  agency  (in  tlie  tii-t  in--tan.  e  l.y  Ananias  j'.i »,  10-19 'Jl' 10
14-16],  and  suhscinioiitly  111  25I  l>y  IIaknahas  \<i.~'.\,  a  nieniljer
of  the  original  cluircli).  and  this  happens  after  the  church  of
Antioch— the  first  Gentile  Christi.an  Church,  and  Paul's  first
important  coiiijregation— had  already  been  founded  by  Chris-
tians from  Jerusalem  (11  20-24).  (Both  of  these  statements  are
contradicted  by  Cial.  I16;  the  latter  of  them  vi'so  by  the
order  in  which  Syria  and  Cilicia  are  taken  in  (lal  1  21.)
Moreover,  at  the  Council  of  Jekusali-;m  (^.7'.  §  6)  Paul  has  only
to  give  in  a  report  and  to  accept  the  decisions  of  the  primitive
church.

The  tendency  we  have  pointed  out  throws  ligjht  also
on  the  parallel  (which  is  tolerably  close,  especially  where
miracles  are  concerned)  between  the  acts  and  experiences
of  Peter  and  of  Paul.

Both  begin  by  healing  a  man  lame  from  birth  (3  2-10=  14  8-10),
and  go  on  to  the  cure  of  another  sick  man  (9  33^^  =  28  8);  they
heal  many  men  at  once,  both  directly  (.1 16  =  289)  ^"^^  mediately
(5  15  =  19  12),  besides  doing  signs  and  wonders  generally  (243
5  12  =  14315  12  19  11);  both  bring  a  dead  person  to  life  (936-42  =
2O9-12);  both  perform  a  miracle  of  judgment  (5  i-io  =  13  6-11I ;
both,  by  the  laying-on  of  hands,  confer  the  gift  of  the  Holy
Ghost  (814-17  =  191-7),  and  in  doing  .so  also  impart  the  gift  of
tongues  (1044-46  =  196);  both  have  a  vision  corresponding  with
one  experienced  by  another  man  (101-22  =  93-16);  both  are
mir.-iculi>usly  delivered  from  prison  (5  i8y;  12  3-11  =  1023-34)  ;
both  are  scourged  (540=  1('>  227C)  ;  both  decline  divine  honours
in  almost  identical  words  (10  25^1  =  14  ii-iS,  cp  28  6).

The  life  of  Paul  included  many  more  incidents  of  this
kind  than  that  of  Peter  ;  but  from  what  we  have  already
observed  we  can  understand  how  the  author's  wish  not
to  allow  r'eter  to  fall  behind  Paul  must  have  influenced
the  narrative.  Still,  he  has  by  no  means  wholly  sacrificed
history  to  his  imagination  ;  had  this  been  so,  he  would
certainly  have  brought  his  narrative  into  much  closer
agreement  with  his  own  ideals.  He  has  not,  for  ex-
ample, introduced  in  the  case  of  Peter,  as  in  that  of
Paul,  a  stoning  (14 19),  or  threats  against  life  (923/.
29145),  or  an  exorcism  (I616-18).  And  in  like  manner
the  omission  of  many  of  the  items  enumerated  in  2  Cor.
11  23-27  12  12  may  be  explained,  at  least  in  part,  by  the
supposition  that  he  had  no  definite  knowledge  alxjut
them. He  has,  it  would  seem,  at  least  in  the  main.


confined  himself  to  matter  preserved  by  tradition,  merely
making  a  selection  and  putting  it  into  shape.
B SubBidiarv ^^'^  ^"'''"'' ^^  '*°  tendencies  in
tendencies *^^'''°" '° ^^^ religious  -  theological
one.

1.  There  is  first  \hc  polilicul  tendency,  the  desire  to
say  as  little  as  possible  unfavourable  to  the  Roman  civil
power.

In  the  Third  Gospel  we  already  find  Pilate  declaring  that  he
finds  no  fault  in  Jesus,  and  he  has  this  judgmcm  confirmed  by
Herod,  who  in  the  other  gospels  is  not  mentioned  at  all  in  con-
nection with  the  examination  of  Jesus.  Pilate  declares  thrice
over  that  he  will  relea.se  Jesus,  and  he  is  prevailed  upon
to  pass  adverse  sentence  only  by  the  insistence  of  the  Jews
(I.k.  23  1-25).  In  Acts  (which  has  even  been  regarded  by  some
as  an  apology  for  Christianity  intended  to  be  laid  tieforc
Gentiles  ;  see  above,  §  3  n.),  the  first  converts  of  Peter  and  Paul
are  Roman  officers  (10  i  13  7),  while  it  is  the  Roman  authorities
who  definitely  declare  Paul  to  be  no  political  criminal  as  the
Jews  would  have  it  (18  14^;  19  37  23  29  25  iSyT  2ri3iy:);  it  is  by
them  also  that  he  is  protected  (in  more  than  one  instance  at
any  rate)  from  conspiracies  (18  12-17  I931  21  31-36  23  1023-33
25  2-4).

When  this  political  tendency  is  recognised,  the  con-
clu.sion  of  the  book  becomes  intelligible.  Other\vise
it  is  a  riddle.  Even  if  the  author  meant  to  add  still
a  TpLros  X670S  (third  treatise) — which  is  pure  con-
jecture— he  could  not  suitably  have  ended  the  divrepoi
\670s  (second  treatise)  otherwise  than  with  the  death  of
Paul  :  that  he  did  not  survive  Paul  is  even  less  likely
than  that  he  was  otherwise  interrupted  at  this  point  of
his  work.  When  we  take  account  of  this  political  ten-
dency, however,  '  none  forbidding  him  '  (dKwXvTws)  is
really  a  skilfully  devised  conclusion.  The  very  last
word  thus  says  something  favourable  to  the  Roman
authorities,  and,  in  order  not  to  efface  this  impression,
the  writer  leaves  the  death  of  Paul  unnientioned.

2.  Secondly,  he  has  in  his  mode  of  narration  an
esthetic  as  well  as  a  political  tendency  :  he  aims  at
beiitg  graphic.

Thisend  is  promoted  very  specially  by  the  'we,'  and  thedetails,
otherwise  purposeless,  appropriated  from  the  Journey  Record  ;
but  it  is  also  served  by  much  in  chaps.  1-12  that,  without  having
any  claim  to  be  regarded  as  historical,  contributes  to  the  en-
livening of  the  picture  of  the  primitive  Christian  community
(see  below,  §  13);  also  by  the  speeches  (see  §  14),  and  par-
ticularly by  the  miracle- narratives,  which  in  almost  every
case  where  they  are  not  lUriM'i  ir-  ni  the  'we'  doeutnent  (see
§  8)  are  characterised  by  to  a  hcs  ni  remarkable  vigour  (I9-11
^'-134331-11  5  i-ii  12  15/.  17-.5  I' -Soy:  13397:  9  3-1933-42
IO1-22  123-11  13  It  14  38-13  10  23-34  19  iiy:).

The  total  influence  of  all  these  tendencies  not  having
been  so  great  as  to  lead  the  author  wholly  to  disregard

/. m  1.  1 .IT i.  the  matter  supplied  to  him  by  tradition,
, ,  It  has  often  been  supposed  possible  to

. , .  affirm  that  he  had  no  such  tendencies

th  h"r  ""^  -'"'  ^'"-  '^''''-'  '"^'^^"'••'^'^i^^  «f  the  book
^'  are  in  this  case  explained  simply  by
the  assumption  that  the  writer  was  not  in  pos-
session of  full  information,  and  that,  in  a  naive  yet
still  unbiassed  way,  he  first  represented  to  himself  the
conditions  of  the  apostolic  age,  and  afterwards  described
them,  as  if  they  had  been  similar  to  those  of  his  own,
when  the  conflict  of  tendencies  in  the  primitive  Christian
Church  had  already  been  brought  to  an  end.  Certain
it  is  that  in  his  uncjuestioning  reverence  for  the  a|xjstles,
it  was  impossible  for  him  to  conceive  the  idea  of  their
having  ever  been  at  variance  with  one  another.  On
the  other  hand,  it  cannot  possibly  be  denied  that  he
must  at  the  same  time  have  either  passed  over  accounts
that  were  very  well  known  to  him  or  completely  changed
them.  It  is  hard  to  understand  how  any  one  can  airily
say  that  to  this  writer,  a  Paulinist,  the  Pauline  epistles
remained  unknown.  Paradoxical  as  it  sounds,  it  is
certainly  the  fact  that  such  a  lack  of  acquaintance  would
be  more  easily  explicable  had  he  Ijeen  a  companion  of
Paul  (a  supjxjsition  which,  however,  it  is  impossible  to
accept  ;  see  above,  §  i )  than  it  is  on  the  assumption
that  he  lived  in  post-apostolic  times.  It  is  conceivable,
though  not  probable,  that  Paul  might  sometimes  have
been  unable  to  communicate  his  epistles  to  his  companions


ACTS  OF  THE  APOSTLES


before  sending  them  off.  But  a  companion  of  Paul
would  at  least  be  familiar  with  the  events  which  are
recorded  in  the  epistles — events  with  which  the  represen-
tation in  Acts  is  inconsistent.  If  we  are  not  prepared
to  declare  the  whole  mass  of  the  Pauline  epistles  to
be  spurious,  and  their  statements  about  the  events  to
which  they  allude  unhistorical,  there  is  no  way  of
acquitting  the  writer  of  Acts  from  the  charge  of  having
moukied  history  under  the  influence  of  'tendency.'
Only  this  tendency  must  be  understood  as  being  simply
a  consistent  adherence  to  the  view  of  the  history  that  he
had  before  he  studied  his  sources.

The tendencies of  the author once  established in
regard  to  points  where  his  historical  inaccuracy  admits


7.  Possible
further  influ-
ences of
tendency.


of  definite  proof  from  a  trustworthy
source,  one  may  perhaps  found  on
them  presumptions  in  regard  to  matters
that  admit  of  no  such  control.  Did

Paul  circumcise  Timothy  (16 3)?  Since
Timothy's  mother  is  called  a  Jewess,  and  Paul  held
the  principle  laid  down  in  i  Cor.  920,  it  is  impossible
to  deny  categorically  that  he  did.  Nevertheless,  it
remains  in  the  highest  degree  improbable,  especially
after  Paul  had,  just  before  (Gal.  23-5),  so  triumphantly
and  as  a  question  of  principle,  opjxjsed  the  circum-
cision of  Titus.  The  difficulty  of  the  case  is  not  much
relieved  even  by  the  supposition  that  the  circumcision
happened  before  the  Council  of  Jerusalem,  and  only  on
account  of  the  Jews  of  that  place  (16 3)  and  therefore,
notwithstanding  the  statement  of  the  same  verse,  not
with  a  view  to  the  missionary  journeys.  Again,  did

Paul  take  a  Nazirite  vow?  We  leave  18 18  out  of
account,  since  the  text  does  not  enable  us  clearly  to
decide  whether  that  assertion  concerns  Paul  or  Aquila,
and  since  a  Nazirite  could  shave  his  head  only  in
Jerusalem.  In  21  20-26,  however,  Paul  is  represented  as
having  taken  such  a  vow,  not  only  without  waiting  for
the  minimum  ])eriod  of  thirty  days  required  by  tradi-
tional law  (21 27  24 1  II,  cp  Jos.  Bf\\.  15  i  [§  313]  ;  Num.
613-21;  see  N.\zikite),  but  also,  and  above  all,  with
the  expressly  avowed  purpose  of  proving  that  the  report
of  his  having  exempted  the  Jewish  Christians  of  the
Diaspora  from  obligation  to  the  ceremonial  law  was
not  true,  and  that  he  himself  constantly  observed  that
law  (cp28i7).  This  would,  for  Paul,  have  been  simply
an  untruth,  and  that,  too,  on  a  point  of  his  religious
conviction  that  was  fundamental  (Gal.  49-11  ;  Rom.  IO4,
etc. ).  Just  as  questionable,  morally,  would  it  have  been
had  he  really  described  himself,  especially  before  a  court
of  justice  (236,  cp  24  21  265-8  2820),  simply  as  a
Pharisee,  asserted  that  he  was  accused  only  on  account
of  the  doctrine  of  the  resurrection  of  the  dead,  and
held  his  peace  about  his  Christianity.

In  view  of  the  tendencies  that  have  been  pointed  out,
there  is, unhappily,  some  room  for  the  suspicion  that
the  author  has  not  held  himself  bound


8.  The  Journey
Record :  a.  its


treatment.


to  appropriate  the  '  we '  source  in  its
integrity.  This  is  indeed  made  ante-
cedently probable  by  the  fact  that  he
has  already  in  the  Third  Gospel  passed  over  much  that
lay  before  him  in  his  sources,  and  that  the  sections
of  the  Journey  Record  actually  adopted  supply  for
the  most  part  only  superficial  notices  of  the  stages
pa.ssed,  or  miracle  stories.  And  just  in  proportion  to
the  freedom  of  the  latter  from  legendary  embellishments
(16 16-18  2O9-12  283-9),  and  to  their  credibility  even  in
the  eyes  of  those  who  wholly  reject  the  supernatural
(although,  of  course,  the  narrators  thought  them
miraculous),  must  be  our  regret  at  every  instance  in
which  the  Journey  Record  has  been  set  aside,  or  even  in
which  its  words  (as  has  been  conjectured  to  be  some-
times the  case ;  see  above,  §  i )  are  not  reproduced
e.xactly.

This  free  treatment  of  the  Journey  Record  increases
the  difficulty  of  ascertaining  who  was  its  author.
Had  the  record  been  adopted  intact,  we  should  have


been  certain  that  it  was  not  composed  by  any  of  those
who  appear  among  the  companions  of  Paul  in  the
sections  where  the  narrative '  we ' does


9.  b. Its
author.


not  occur.  But  this  means  of  solution  is
out  of  the  question.  And  if  the  source
came  into  the  hands  of  the  author  of  Acts  as  (let  us
,  say)  an  anonymous  document,  or  if,  in  the  interest  of
greater  vividness,  he  used  the  '  we '  without  regard  to
the  person  originally  meant,  he  may  also  at  the  same
time  have  spoken  of  the  writer  of  the  Journey  Record
in  the  third  jxjrson,  even  when  he  was  otherwise
following  the  document.  Yet  20  5  is  a  strong  indica-
tion that  by  the  '  we '  he  does  not  wish  us  to
understand  any  one  at  least  of  the  seven  mentioned  in
the  immediately  preceding  verse.  Thus  the  text  at  all
events  gives  nowhere  any  ground  for  thinking  of
Timothy,  who,  moreover,  is  mentioned  in  17 14/.  18  5
in  the  third  jierson.  If  we  are  to  regard  the  record  as
coming  from  Silas,  the  author  of  Acts  must  have  used
it  without  the  'we,'  and,  in  a  very  fragmentary  way
indeed,  for  long  periods  during  which,  according  to  his
own  statement  (I540  16 19  25  29  174  10  I85),  Silas  was
with  Paul.  This,  though  not  quite  impossible,  is  very
unlikely.  Moreover,  Silas  is  never  again  mentioned  in
Acts  after  18  5  ;  neither,  from  the  same  period — that  of
Paul's  first  stay  in  Corinth  (2  Cor.  1 19) — is  he  again
mentioned  in  the  Pauline  Epistles  ;  and  in  i  Pet.  5  12,
he  appears  by  the  side  of  Peter.  Whoever  attributes
the  Journey  Record  to  Titus  must  in  like  manner
assume  that  much  of  it  has  been  either  not  used  at  all
or  used  without  the  'we.'  For  Titus  was  with  Paul
at  the  time  of  the  Council  of  Jerusalem  (Gal.  2i),  and
continued  to  be  his  companion  at  least  during  the  latter
part  of  the  three  years'  stay  at  Ephesus,  as  also  during
the  subsequent  stay  in  Macedonia  (2  Cor.  2  13  76  8  idf.  23
12i8i).  Besides,  the  writer  of  Acts  would  use  a  work
of  Titus  somewhat  unwillingly,  for  he  completely  sup-
presses his  name  (see  above  §  4-).  Still,  if  so  valuable
a  writing  by  Titus  had  been  really  available,  the  author
of  Acts  would  scarcely  have  completely  neglected  it.
If  it  is  thus  just  possible  that  Titus  wrote  the
Journey  Record,  it  is  perhaps  still  more  conceivable
that  it  wa^  written  by  Luke.  In  this  way  we  should
best  be  able  to  explain  how,  ever  since  the  time  of  the
Muratorian  Fragment  and  Irenaeus  [Adv.  Haer.  iii.  14  i),
the  entire  book  of  Acts  as  well  as  the  Third  Gospel  came
to  be  ascribed  to  him.  It  is  true  that,  in  the  Pauline
Epistles,  the  first  mention  of  Luke  is  in  Col.  4 14  ;  Phil.
24;  2  Tim.  4 II  —  in  other  words,  not  before  Paul's
imprisonment  and  the  closing  years  of  his  life.  Never-
theless, he  may  have  been  one  of  Paul's  companions  at
an  earlier  period,  if  we  are  allowed  to  suppose  that  he
occupied  a  subordinate  position.  The  most  suspicious
fact  is  that,  whilst  Luke  (see  Luke),  if  we  may  trust
Col.  4 II  14,  was,  like  Titus  (Gal.  23),  uncircumcised,  the
writer  of  the  Journey  Record  not  only  uses  Jewish
specifications  of  date  (Actsl6i3  206/  279),  and  goes
to  the  synagogue  or  the  Jewish  place  of  prayer  (16  16),
but  also  includes  himself  (16 13)  among  those  who  taught
there  i^lovhaXoi.,  16  20,  must  not  be  pressed,  as  it  may
rest  on  an  error  on  the  part  of  the  speakers ;  cp
16  37).  We  must  thus,  perhaps,  abandon  all  attempt  to
ascribe  the  Journey  Record  to  any  known  companion
of  Paul.

Other sources for Acts, in addition to that just
meptioned, have long been conjectured : e.g. a
Barnabas  source  for  chap.  13/! Here  the


10.  Other
Sources.


naming  over  again  of  Barnabas  and  Saul,
and  the  omission of  John Mark  (13 1),
notwithstanding  12  25,  are  indeed  remarkable,  as  are  also

1  Add  to  this  that,  if  2  Tim.  4  10  is  to  \x  taken  as  accurately
preserving  an  incident  in  Paul's  imprisonment  at  Caesarea,  it
could  hardly  have  been  Titus  that  accompanied  Paul  to  Rome
(.■Vets  27  28).  The  notices  in  the  epistle  to  Titus  are  too  un-
trustworthy to  sen-e  as  a  foundation  for  historical  combiiiations.

2  It  is  just  as  incorrect  to  suppose  that  he  is  named  in  Acts
18  7  as  it  is  to  identify  him  with  Silas.


ACTS  OP  THE  APOSTLES


the  circumstance  that,  apart  from  II30  1225  15i33s,  it
is  precisely  in  these  two  chapters  that  Barnabas  is  often
(1^27  1414;  contrast  18434650  14  ao)  mentioned  before
I'aul,  and  that  it  is  only  here  (I4414)  that  I'aul  (with
Barnabas)  is  called  an  'apostle'  (see  Aposti.k).

Of  primary  importance  would  be  the  establishment  of
sources  for  chaps.  1-12.

.Many  traces  of  distinct  .sources  can  be  detected.  In  addition
to  what  is  iaid  utider  (liK  1  s,  Simkituai.,  and  under  Communitv
OK  (JdODs,  $$  1-4,  two  themes  had  been  long  recognised
as  running  through  the  speech  of  Steplien  :  viz.  refutation
of  the  idea  that  the  blessing  of  Cjod  depended  on  the
possession  of  the  temple  (748-50),  and  censure  of  the  national
rebellion  of  the  people  against  the  divine  will  (751-53).  The
stoning  of  Stephen,  moreover,  is  narr.-jted  twice  (7  58^1  and  59a),
in  a  very  confusing  way,  and  his  burial  does  not  follow  lifi  8  2,
after  the  mention  of  the  great  persecution  and  the  flight  of  all
the  Christians  except  the  :ii)ostles(8  lic).  In  8  3,  the  persecution
is  resumed,  but,  as  in  S  la,  only  Satil  is  thought  of  as  persecutor.
The  mention  of  Saul  seems  thus  throughout  (7  58^  8  la  3)  to  be
a  Liter  insertion  into  a  source  in  wliich  he  was  not  originally
named.  Besides,  811^1:  seems  also  to  be  an  interpolation  into
the  account  of  the  last  hours  of  .Stephen.  In  as  far  as  this
interpolation  speaks  of  the  dispersion  of  the  Christians,  it  is  con-
tinued in  11  19,  while  84  may  easily  be  an  ingenious  transition
of  some  editor  leading  up  to  the  story  of  Philip.  11  ig  is
further  followed  by  the  statement  (11  22)  that  the  church  at
Jerusalem  elected  a  ^jV/^^^rt/A  This  representation  of  the  right
of  the  church  to  elect  delegates,  which  is  found  also  in  6  5,  seems
to  be  more  primitive  than  that  in  8  14,  according  to  which  such
an  election  was  made  by  the  apostles.  Further,  in  8  15-17  the
apostles  are  raised  to  a  rank  unknown  to  the  earliest  times.
For,  that  Christians  did  not  receive  the  Holy  ('.host  by  baptism,
but  only  through  subsequent  l.iying-on  of  hands,  ami  those  the
hands  of  the  .Tposlles,  is  disproved  by  (;al.3  2  46,  and  even  by
the  presupposition  underlying  Acts  1!'2_/C,  although  the  s.ime
notion  reappc.Trs  shortly  afterw.irds  (11»6).  In  like  manner,
finally,  the  words  'except  the  :i|)<.stlcs '  (8  i)  may  have  been
subsequently  inserted,  to  prescrxc  ihc  di-nity  of  the  apostles
arid  tlie  continuity  of  their  rule  in  Jriu-altm.  In  1 1  30  the
friendly  gifts  destined  for  distril)Uti<;n  during  the  famine  come
into  the  hands  of  the  presbyters,  nut,  as  0  1-6  would  have  led  us
to  expect,  into  those  of  the  deacons.

Observations  such  as  the  preceding  have  of  late  been
11.  Theories  as •^^'P'^"'.'*^^  '"'^  comprehensive  theories

to  Sources assir;ning  the  whole  book  to  one  source
or  to  several  sources,  with  additions
by  one  editor  or  by  several  editors.

So  B.  Weiss,  Em/,  in  Jas  NT  (1886,  3rd  ed.  '97),  8  50,  and  .//.-
gesrli.,  1893  (vol.  0,  pts.  3  and  4,  of  Gebhardt  and  Harnack's
Textt-  u. L'nUrs.);  Sorof, KntsUltutiir  <ftr  ' ; 1  );

van  .\Ianen,  J^auius,  i  :  de  hatvielingen  d,  ,  ) ;

Feine, F.inf  vork-anonischtr Ucberlie/eruii.  i  "gi

(onlyon  chaps.  1-1'2);  Spitta,  y^/.-i'^f^fA.,  180T  :  I  v/,i/.

der  Paulin.  lir.  1893  and  (for  chaps.  1-.^)  in  .S7.  A';-.,  1895,
pp.  297-357;  Joh.  Weiss,  Si.  Kr.,  1893,  pp.  480-540,  'Das
Judenchristenthum  in  der  Ap.-gesch.',  etc.,  and  1895,  pp.  252-269,
DieChronol.  der  Paulin.  Br.'  :  (iercke  in /A-rwct,  1894,  pp.  373-
392  (only  on  the  first  chapters);  jiingst.  Die  Qucllen  der  Ap.-
gesch.,  1895;  Hilgenfeld,  Z\l  7',  1805,  pp.  65-115,  186-217,  384-
447.  481-517:  1896,  pp.  24-79,  177-216,  351-386,  5I7-558-

No  satisfactory  conclusion  has  as  yet  been  reached
along  these  lines ;  but  the  agreement  that  has  been
arrived  at  upon  a  good  many  points  warrants  the  hope
that  at  least  some  conclusions  will  ultimately  gain  general
recognition.  It  is  certainly  undeniable  that  this  kind
of  work  has  sharpened  the  wits  of  the  critics,  and  rendered
visible  certain  inec|ualities  of  representation,  joints  and
seams,  even  in  places  where  they  are  not  so  conspicuous
as  in  758-84.

_  Thus  the  tumult  In  Thessalonica  is  told  in  178  for  a  second
time  after  17  5  in  a  disturbing  way  that  leaves  it  impossible  to
say  who  it  was  that  the  Jews  were  trying  (17  5)  to  drag  before
the  people,  or  why  it  was  that  J.-ison  (17  $/■),  whose  part  in  the
affair  does  not  become  clear  till  17  7,  was  brought  before  the
authorities.  It  is  proliable  that  13  52  originally  followed  im-
mediately on  1349.  Similarly,  the  account  of  the  wholesale
miracles  of  the  original  apostles  (.*)  i-2a  -f,/.)  is  interrupted  by
the  interpolation  of^  a  fragment  (012^14)  w'lich  is  itself  not
homogeneous.  The  least  that  could  be  done  here  would  l>e  to
arrange  as  follows:  5  12a  15  16  14  121^  13.  But  that  the  text
should  have  Iwcome  so  greatly  disarranged  by  transposition  is
much  less  likely  than  the  supposition  of  several  successive  inter-
polations. On  1824-28  15  1-34,  see  AroLi.os,  and  Council  of
jERi'SALKM,  {!$  4  5.  In  the  latter  passage  (15  1-34)  the  attempt
has  been  made,  by  separation  of  sources,  to  solve  questions  to
which  otherwise  only  tendency-criticism  seemed  to  provide  an
answer.  Simil.irly  in  the  case  of  21  20^-26.  After  the  presbyters
have  just  praised  God  for  the  success  of  Paul's  mission  to  the
Gentiles  ('21  20a)  the  proposal  that  he  should  put  it  in  evidence
how  strictly  legal  he  is  in  his  views  follows  with  but  little  fitness.

45


I  And  had  Paul  been  engaged  in  carryinR  out  a  Nazirile  vow,  it
I  is  hardiv  likely  that  his  presence  in  the  temple  ('21  27-29)  could
I  have  led  to  an  attempt  on  his  life.  A  reason  for  this  attempt
is  found  ('21  28^:)  in  the  alleged  introduction  of  a  Gentile  within
the  sacred  precincts  of  the  temple,  a  proceeding  which  no  one
would  guess  to  be  simultaneous  with  the  presentation  of  an
offering.  Since,  moreover,  for  a  Nazirite  vow  at  least  thirty
days  are  necessary  (see  alx>ve,  i  7),  it  has  l>een  projx.scd  to
detach  21  20(^-26,  and  to  lefer  the  seven  days  of  21  27  to  the
duration  of  the  feast  of  Pentecost  which  I'aul,  according  to  '20  16,
was  to  spend  in  Jerusalem.  21  19  2ort  27^  would  then  also,
along  with  20  lO  and  '21  1-18,  Iwlong  to  the  Journey  Record.

We  come  now  to  the  question  how  far  this  distribu-
tion  of  the matter  among  various  sources  affects  the
12.  Bearing  of  '^^'■"'"^['i^y  .^^  »h«  ^^^; ''  ^^  indeed
these  theories  IJ,""'  ^^l''  '"  ^.^^  ''^'^  ^,"^'  mentioned.
on  trust  archa-ological  mistake  of  assigning

worthines's. °."'y ''"'T, t^'" ^'"^ '^^ ^'"'"'''^
rites would become more comj)re-

hensible  if  we  recognised  a  variety  of  sources  ;  yet
even  .so  we  should  liave  to  admit  that  there  is  an
error,  and  that  the  editor  had  been  guilty  of  the  over-
sight of  incautiously  bringing  the  two  accounts  together.
And  he,  as  well  as  the  source  from  wliich  21  2.^^-26  is
perhaps  taken,  would  still  remain  o{>en  to  the  reproach
of  having,  under  the  inHuence  of  a  tendency  of  the  kind
described  above  (ij  6),  ascrilx'd  to  I'aul  a  repudiation  of
his  principles  of  freedom  from  the  law.  It  cannot  Ije
too  strongly  insisted  that  in  as  far  as  Acts,  viewed
as  a  homogeneous  work,  has  to  be  regarded  as  a
tendency  writing,  it  is  imjiossible  to  free  it  wholly  of
this  character  by  distributing  the  matter  among  the
various  sources  :  the  most  that  can  be  done  is  in  cases  of
excessive  misrepresentation  to  put  this  in  a  softer  light.
In  general,  however,  the  editor  has  dealt  with  his  sources
in  so  masterful  a  manner  that  an  unlucky  hit  in  the
selection  and  arrangement  of  the  pieces  has  but  rarely
to  be  noted.  It  has  been  a  practice  among  some  of
the  scholars  enumerated  above  to  claim  absolute  trust-
worthiness for  the  whole  of  an  assumed  source  wliich
they  suppose  themselves  to  have  made  out,  irre-
spectively of  the  nature  of  some  of  the  contents,
as  soon  as  they  have  found  it  trustworthy  in  some
particulars.  Such  an  abuse  of  discrimination  of  sources
in  the  interest  of  apologetics  is  not  only  illegitimate:
it  speedily  revenges  itself.  These  very  critics  for  the
most  part  find  themselves  compelled  to  attribute
to  their  secondary  sources  and  their  editors  an  extra-
ordinary amount  of  ignorance  and  awkwardness.  In  par-
ticular, all  theories  according  to  w  hich  a  single  assumed
source  (of  which  the  'we'  sections  form  part)  is  taken
as  a  basis  for  the  whole  of  Acts  nmst  from  the  outset
be  looked  upon  with  distrust.  There  is  nothing  to
suggest  that  any  diary-writing  companion  of  Paul  also
wrote  on  the  beginnings  of  the  church  at  Jerusalem,
and.  even  if  there  were,  any  assumption  that  his  in-
formation on  such  a  subject  would  be  as  trustworthy  as
his  assertions  founded  on  his  own  experience,  would  be
quite  unwarranted.

The  results  then  with  reference  to  the  tmstworthiness

of  Acts, as far  as  its  facts  are  concerned, are  these.

_„ TVi f Apart  from  the  'we'  sections  no  state-

'.,.  ,  ment  merits  immediate  acceptance  on

or iness  o ^j^^  ^^^^^.^  ground  of  its  presence  in  the

narrative.  y^^^  j^„  ^^^^  contradicts  the  Pauline
epistles  must  be  absolutely  given  up,  unless  we  are  to
regard  these  as  spurious.  Positive  proofs  of  the  trust-
worthiness of  Acts  must  be  tested  with  the  greatest
caution.

Ramsay  thinks  he  has  discovered  such  proofs  in  the
accuracy  with  which  geographical  names  and  con-
temporary conditions  are  reproduced  in  the  journeys
of  Paul  (Church,  1894,  1-168  ;  S/.  Paul,  1895).
Some  of  the  most  important  of  these  points  will  be
considered  elsewhere  ((Jai..\TIA,  §§  0-13.  22I.  Of  the
other  detailed  instances  many  will  be  found  to  break
down  on  closer  examination.

For  example,  Ramsay  goes  so  far  as  to  say  (St.  Paul,  chap. II,
4) :  '  Aquila,  a  man  of  Pontus,  settled  in  Rome,  bears  a  I-atin

46


ACTS  OF  THE  APOSTLES


name  ;  and  must  therefore  have  belonged  to  the  province  and  not
to  non-Roman  Pontus.  This  is  a  good  example  of  Luke's  prmciple
to  use  the  Roman  provincial  divisions  for  purposes  of  classifica-
tion.' As  if  a  Jew  from  non-Roman  Ponlus,  settled  in  Rome,
could  not  have  assumed  a  subsidiary  Roman  name,  as  countless
other  Jews  are  known  to  have  done!  And  as  if  Luke  would
not  have  found  it  necessary  to  call  him  nofTticds  even  if  he  were
from  non-Roman  Pontus  !

I?ut  it  is  not  necessary  to  go  thus  into  details  which
might  be  adduced  as  proving  the  author's  accurate
acquaintance  with  localities  and  conditions.  For
Ramsay  attributes  the  same  accuracy  of  local  knowledge
also  to  one  of  the  revisers  of  the  text,  assigned  by  him  to
the  second  century  A.D.,  whose  work  is  now  preserved
to  us  in  D,  and  also  to  the  author  of  one  source  of  the
Ac/a  Paiili  ct  Thcchr  (§  3),  assigned  by  him  to  the  second
half  of  the  first  century,  whose  work,  however,  he
declares  to  be  pure  romance  [Church.'lsf^ a,).  If  so,
surely  any  person  acquainted  with  Asia  Minor  could,
even  without  knowing  very  much  about  the  experiences
of  Paul,  have  been  fairly  accurate  about  matters  of
geography,  provided  he  did  not  pick  up  his  information
so  late  in  tlie  second  century  as  to  betray  himself  by  his
language,  as  according  to  Ramsay  (2364  [end]  5  [end]
759  83-6;  St.  Paul,  see  Index  under  '  Hezan  Text')
the  above  mentioned  reviser,  whose  work  lies  at  the
foundation  of  D,  has  done.  In  point  of  fact,  Weiz-
siicker  {Ap.  Zeitaltcr,  239/.,  2nd  ed.  230/;  ET
I274/. )  thinks  that  in  Acts  13/  the  account  of  the
route  followed  does  come  from  an  authentic  source,
but  yet  that  the  contents  of  the  narrative  are  almost
legendary.

Such,  for  example,  are  the  incidents  at  Paphos  in  Cyprus,
13  6-12  (see  Bakjesus)  ;  also  13  14  46/  14  !_/,  spoken  of  above
(§  4) ;  the  .speech  in  13  16-41  (see  below,  §  14) ;  the  healing  of  a
lame  man,  148-io,  recorded  after  the  model  of  3  i-ii  ;  the
paying  of  divine  honours  to  Barnabas  and  Paul,  I411-13,  after
the  manner  of  the  heathen  fables  (^Philemon  and  Baucis,  in
adjacent  Phrygia,  .see  Ov.  Met.,  8621  626/:);  and  the  institu-
tion of  the  presbyterial  organisation,  14  23.  In  the  first  main
division  of  the  booK  (1-T-'),  great  improbability  attaches  to  the
publicity  with  whicli  the  Christian  community  comes  to  the
front,  to  the  sympathy  that  it  meets  with  even  among  the
masses,  although  not  joined  by  them  (247  4  21  5  13),  and  to  the
assertion  that  only  the  Sadducees  had  anything  against  it,  and
they  only  on  account  of  the  doctrine  of  the  resurrection  (4  z/.\
-while  the  Pharisees  had  given  up  all  the  enmity  they  had  dis-
played against  Jesus,  adopting  a  slightly  expectant  attitude.
See,  further,  Barnabas,  Barsabas,  Gifts,  Community  of
Goods,  Philip.  Pkter.  Cornelius,  Christian,  and  also,  for
thejourneysof  Paul  to  Jerusalem,  and  the  attempted  rearrange-
ment of  them.  Council  OF  Jerusalem,  §  i.

But,  after  every  deduction  has  been  made,  Acts
certainly  contains  many  data  that  are  correct,  as,  for
example,  especially  in  the  matter  of  proper  names  such  as
Jason  (I75),  Titius  Justus,  Crispus,  Sosthenes  (I87/  17),
or  in  little  touches  such  as  the  title  iroKiTapxa-i  (176),
which  is  verified  by  inscriptions  ^  for  Thessalonica,  as  is
the  title  of  TrpcDros  (287)  for  Malta,  and  probably  the
name  of  Sergius  Paulus  as  proconsul  for  Cyprus  (187).
Only,  unfortunately,  we  do  not  possess  the  means  of
recognising  such  data  as  these  with  certainty,  where
confirmation  from  other  sources  is  wanting.

With  regard  to  tlie  speeches,  it  is  beyond  doubt  that
the 'author  constructed  them  in  each  case  according  to
14 T f ^'^  """^  conception  of  the  situation. In
■ ,  . ' doing  so  he  simply  followed  the  acknow-
wortniness j^^jg^j practice of ancient historians.
Ot  speecnes.  (-rhucydides[i.  22 1]  expresses  himself  dis-
tinctly on this point  ; the others adopt the  custom
tacitly  without  any  one's  seeing  in  it  anything  morally
questionable. ) This  is  clearly  apparent  at  the  very  out-
set, in  Acts  1 16-22.

It  is  not  Peter  who  needs  to  recount  these  events  to  the
primitive  Church  already  familiar  with  them  :  2  it  is  the  author
of  Acts  who  feels  called  on  to  tell  his  readers  of  them.  And  it
was  only  for  the  readers  of  the  book  that  there  could  have  been
any  need  of  the  note  that  the  Aramaic  expression  Aceldama
belonged  to  the  Jerusalem  dialect,  for  that  was  the  very  dialect

1  A  detailed  discussion  by  De  Witt  Burton  will  be  found  in  the
Amer.  Joum.  o/TheoL,  i8p8,  pp.  598-632.

2  Unless  the  passage  be  indeed  a  legendary  development  of
Mt.  273-10.

47


which  the  supposed  hearers  were  using  (cp.  further  Theudas,
and  Judas  of  Galilee).

The  speeches  of  Paul  in  Acts  embody  a  theology  quite
different  from  that  of  his  epistles.

A  thought  like  Acts  17  28  is  nowhere  to  be  found  in  the
epistles.  Paul  derives  idolatry,  not,  as  in  Acts  17  29,/^,  from  excus-
able ignorance,  but  from  deliberate  and  criminal  rejection  of  God
(Rom.  1  18-32).  Only  in  Acts  13  38/  lt>  31  20  28,  do  some  really
Pauline  principles  begin  to  make  themselves  heard.  The  most
characteristically  Pauline  utterances  come,  in  fact,  from  Peter
(157-11),  or  even  James  (1619;  see  Council  of  Jkkusalem,
§  8).  'The  speeches  of  Paul,  especially  that  in  13  16-41,  are  so
like  those  of  Peter  in  idea,  construction,  and  mode  of  expression,
that  the  one  might  easily  be  taken  for  the  other.  For  example,
Paul's  speech  in  13  38/  resembles  Peter's  in  10  43.  Or  cp
3  17  13/ (Peter)  with  13  27/ (Paul) ;  2  25-31  with  1835-37;  or
6  6iKaios  for  '  Christ '  in  3  14  with  22  14,  but  also  with  Stephen's
in  752.  For  the  speeches  of  Paul,  especially  13  16-41,  show
affinities  also  with  that  of  Stephen  :  see  13  17-19  22  as  compared
with  7  2  6_/I  36  45y^  In  like  manner,  the  apologetic  discourses  of
Paul  in  his  own  defence  betray  clearly  an  unhistorical  origin
(see  §  7).

In  short,  almost  the  only  element  that  is  historically
important  is  the  Christology  of  the  speeches  of  Peter.
This,  however,  is  important  in  the  highest  degree.  Jesus
is  there  called  ttois  0eoO — that  is  to  say,  according  to
425,  not  '  son,'  but  '  servant '  of  God  (3  13  26), — holy  and
righteous  (814  427  227);  he  was  not  constituted  Lord
and  Messiah  before  his  resurrection  (236)  ;  his  death
was  not  a  divine  arrangement  for  the  salvation  of  men,
but  a  calamity  the  guilt  of  which  rested  on  the  Jews
(3 13-15  530),  even  if  it  was  (according  to  223  428)  fore-
ordained of  God  ;  on  earth  he  was  anointed  by  God  (427)
with  holy  spirit  and  with  strength,  and  he  went  about
doing  good  and  performing  cures,  but,  according  to
10  38,  only  upon  demoniacs  ;  his  qualification  for  this  is
in  the  same  passage  traced  to  the  fact  that  God  was
with  him.  God  performed  miracles  through  him  (222).
A  representation  of  Jesus  so  simple,  and  in  such  exact
agreement  with  the  impression  left  by  the  most  genuine
passages  ^  of  the  first  three  gospels,  is  nowhere  else  to
be  found  in  the  whole  NT.  It  is  hardly  possible  not
to  believe  that  this  Christology  of  the  speeches  of  Peter
must  have  come  from  a  primitive  source.  It  is,  never-
theless, a  fact  sufficiently  surprising  that  it  has  been
transmitted  to  us  by  a  writer  who  in  other  places  works
so  freely  with  his  sources.  At  the  same  time,  however,
the  DidacM  or  Teaching  of  the  Twelve  Apostles,
especially  9/!,  also  bears  evidence  that  in  the  second
century,  in  spite  of  Paul,  and  of  the  Epistles  to  the
Hebrews,  to  the  Colossians,  and  to  the  Ephesians,  and
of  the  Gospel  of  John,  an  equally  simple  Christology
still  reappieared  at  least  in  many  Christian  circles.  That
the  writer  of  Acts  also  respected  it  may  be  conjectured
from  the  fact  that  he  has  not  put  into  the  mouth  even
of  Paul  any  utterances  that  go  beyond  it  (1823  2214).

It  has  already  been  repeatedly  assumed  in  the  pre-
ceding sections  that  the  writer  of  Acts  is  identical  with
the writer  of the Third Gospel. The


15.  Author-
ship.


similarity  of  language,  style,  and  idea,
constantly  leads  back  to  this  conclusion.
Differences  of  spirit  between  the  two  writings  are  so
difficult  to  find  that  their  existence  at  any  time  can  be
held  only  on  the  assumption  of  a  subsequent  revision  of
the  Gospel,  with  a  view  to  their  removal,  by  the  author
of  Acts.  The  most  important  divergence  between

the  two  books  is  that  according  to  Acts  1  3  (cp  1831)  the
ascension  of  Jesus  did  not  occur  till  forty  days  after
his  resurrection,  while  according  to  Lk.  24 13  29  33  36  50/ ,
as  also  the  F2pistle  of  Barnabas  (109)  and  probably  even
Jn.  29^17,  it  was  on  the  very  evening  of  the  resurrection.
According  to  the  original  view,  as  indicated  by  the
absence  of  any  special  separate  mention  of  the  ascension,
in  I  Cor.  154-12;  Rom.  834;  Heb.  I3  IO12  122  ;  Eph.
I20  25/49/  ;  I  Pet.  81922,  and  perhaps  even  also  in
Acts  232-35  (see  olv  233)  the  resurrection  and  the  ascen-
1  Such  passages  as  Mk.l0i7y:32i  I33265;  Lk.ll29-32;
Mt.  1(15-12  11  5/  1231/  as  contrasted  with  those  in  the  same
gospels  which  already  present  secondary  reproductions  of  the
same  facts— viz.,  Mt.  19  16/  12  23  (efiVracTO  :  see  below,  §  17  ».)
24  36  13  58  12  40  14 15-21  ;  Lk.  7  21  ;  Mk.  3  28-30.

48


ACTS  OP  THE  APOSTLES


sion  were  the  same  act,  and  all  appearances  of  the  risen
Jesus  were  thoiiglit  of  as  being  made  from  heaven.
Whether  this  follows  also  from  '  goeth  before'  {irpodyei)  in
Mk.  16  7  and  in  Mt.  28  7,  may  be  doubted.  In  any  case  the
forty  days  indicate  a  significant  development  of  the  idea,
already  at  work  in  the  Third  Gospel,  that  Ijefore  his
ascension  Jesus  must  have  contiimed  on  earth  to
maintain  intercourse  with  his  disciples,  in  order  that  he
might  instruct  them  as  to  matters  which  he  had  not
been  able  to  take  up  before  his  death.  A  develop-
ment of  this  kind  in  the  story  of  the  ascension  recjuire<l
time.  Even  the  repetition  of  the  list  of  apostles  in  1 13
from  Lk.  614-16  marks  Acts  as  a  new  work.  It  is,
accordingly,  very  rash  to  suppose  that  Lk.  1 1-4  applies
to  -Vets  also,  or  to  draw  conclusions  from  this.

.•\s  the  book  is  dedicated  to  Thcophilus,  Blas.s  thinks  {Neue
kirchliche  Zeitsch.,  1895,  pp.  720-725)  that  the  latter  must,
according  to  the  custom  that  prevailed  in  antiquity,  have  been
named  in  the  title  (that  the  title  Trpiifti?  Ttof  ajroo'ToAwi'  is  not
original,  see  al)ove,  %  3  n.).  The  same  custom,  too,  he  argues,
would  require  the  author  to  mention  his  own  name  in  the  title.
Accordingly  as,  since  the  end  of  the  second  centu'y,  the  author
has  been  believed  to  l)e  l.uke  (see  above,  §  9),  lil.iss  thinks  he  is
justified  in  restoring  the  title  thus — Aovica  'Ai/Ttoxf'ws  Trpb?
©fo<^iAoi/  Aoyos  Sfiirepo?.  Hut  this  pure  conjecture  cannot  over-
throw the  proof  that  the  book  does  not  come  from  a  companion
of  I'aul.  On  the  contrary,  had  the  title  really  run  thus,  it
must  have  licen  regarded  as  a  fiction.  We  should  have  had  to
suppose  that  the  author,  not  content  with  suggesting  (by  retain-
ing the  '«e'  of  his  source  [see  §  i])  that  he_  had  been  a  com-
panion of  Paul  on  his  missionary  journeys,  desired  to  make  this
claim  e.xpressly  in  the  title.

The  date  of  composition  of  Acts  thus  falls  at  least
some  time  later  than  that  of  the  Third  Gospel.  The
_  .  latter  is  now,  on  account  of  its  accurate
■  allusions  to  actual  incidents  in  the  destruc-
tion of  Jerusalem  (Lk.  1943/!  21  20),  almost  universally
set  clown  to  a  date  later  than  70  A.d.  ,  and  on  some
other  grounds,  which,  however,  it  must  be  said,  are
less  definite,  even  considerably  later  (see  Gosi'Kl.s).
Similarly,  for  Acts,  the  dying  out  of  all  recollection  of
the  actual  conditions  of  apostolic  times — in  particular,
the  ignorance  as  to  the  gift  of  tongues  (see  GiKTS,
Si'iRiTU.M.)  and  the  approaches  to  hierarchical  ideas
(I1720  814-17  1028  2O28) — [)oints  only  in  a  general  way
to  a  late  period.  Hence  the  surest  datum  is  the  author's
acquaintance  with  the  writings  of  Josephus.^  For  an
instance  see  THf:UDAS.  Josephus  comi^Ieted  \\\%Je2uish
War  shortly  before  79  h.Y>. ,  his  Antiquities  in  93  or  94,
the  work  Against  Apiun  after  that,  and  his  Autobiography
somewhat  after  100.  As  to  the  inferior  limit,  Marcion
about  140  A.D.  had  the  Third  Gospel,  but  not  Acts,
in  his  collection  ;  but  we  are  not  aware  whether  he
rejected  it  or  whether  it  was  wholly  unknown  to  him.
As  for  the  Apostolic  Fathers,  i  Clem.  18 1,  if  it  have
any  literary  connection  with  Acts  1822,  can  just  as  easily
be  the  earlier  as  the  later  ;  and  as  regards  the  rest  of
their  writings,  apart  from  Polycarpl2  (=Acts224),
dating  from  about  150  A.D.,  we  can  find  traces  only  of
the  speech  of  Stephen,  in  the  Epistle  of  Barnabas  (16  2
94/  5ii  48  143  =  Acts  750  51  52  40-43),  which  in  I64
speaks  of  Hadrian's  projected  building,  about  130  A.U.,
of  a  heathen  temple  in  place  of  the  Jewish  temple  as
imminent.'-^  In  Justin,  about  152  A.i>.  (not  137  ;  see
Acad.  1896,  No.  1239,  p.  98),  the  points  of  contact  are
more  marked.  If  Acts  20 18-35  has  many  ideas  in
common  with  those  of  the  Pastoral  Epistles,  the  in-
discriminate use  of  irp€(T^VTfpoL  and  iirl<TKOiroi  (20  17  28)
shows  that  the  author  has  not  yet  reached  the  stage  in
the  development  of  church  government  which  character-
izes the  First  I'3pistle  to  Timothy,  the  latest  of  the
Pastoral  Epistles,  which  wishes  to  see  the  bishop,
conceived  of  as a  sole  ruler  and represented in the

1  The  evidence  for  this  has  of  late  been  brought  together  with
very  great  completeness  by  Krenkel  {Josephus  und  Lucas,
1894)  :  see  also  the  Fortnightly  Rev.  22  485-509  ('77].

2  The  reference  cannot  l>e  to  the  (historically  very  doubtful)
rebuilding  of  the  Jewish  temple  (about  120-125  ?)■  The  itoi  after
auToi  must  be  deleted,  a-cording  to  the  best  MSS  and  indeed
as  the  connection  demands.

4  49


l)erson  of  Timothy  as  apostolic  vicar,  set  over  the
Ijresbytery  (i  Tim.  5 119).  The  date  of  Acts  must,
accordingly,  tie  set  down  as  somewhere  between  105
and  130,  or,  if  the  gospel  of  Luke  already  presupix)ses
acquaintance  with  all  the  writings  of  Josephus.  Ijetwccn
no  and  130  A.D.

The  conclusions reached in the  foregoing  sections
would  have  to  be  withdrawn,  however,  and  the  author
17 Bla ' ^^  '^^^^  regarded  as  an  eye-witness,  if  the
,4,,  views  recently  put  forth  by  Hlass '  should

^'  prove  to  be  correct.  According  to  Hlass,
the  markedly  divergent  readings  of  D,  and  those  of
the  .same  character  found  in  some  other  authorities,*
all  came  from  the  author's  rough  draft  of  the  lx)ok
(which  he  calls  ^),  while  the  ordinary  text,  o,  found  in
B,  N,  A,  C,  etc.,  comes  from  the  fair  copy  of  this
intended  for  Thcophilus,  which  the  author  (Ix-ing  a  jjoor
man)  made  with  his  own  hand.  In  doing  so  he
changed  his  original — without  special  tendency  or
motive— and,  still  more,  abridged  it  as  only  authors  do
in  cojjying  their  own  work.  And  here,  as  we  have
intimated,  Blass  says,  the  author  can  be  no  other  than
the  eye-witness  who  can  give  his  narrative  in  the  first
person  with  'we. '-^  To  pronounce  uj)on  this  certainly
interesting  hypothesis  is,  however,  not  nearly  so  simple
a  matter  as  Blass  allows  himself  to  suppose.

(a)  Blass  himself  says  that  D  and  the  additions  or
marginal  readings  in  Syr.  hi.  in  many  cases  already  exhibit
a  combination  of  a  and  j3,  and  that — as  is  witnessed  by
15  5  18  19,  etc.,  where  both  sources  coincide  —  this
occurred  even  in  the  archetype  itself  from  which  both
(directly  or  indirectly)  are  derived.

But  there  are  many  cases  where  Blass  ought  to  have  expressly
recognised this combination,  where, instead of  (inin;: sn, he
simply  deletes  something  in  ^  without  giviiiL;  f' '
tion. For  example,  eK0afiPoL  at  the  end  of  ?■  1  r.

alongside  of  oi  Si  9a/ut/3t)6eVTes  ea-rri<Tav  iv  in  p.  ;

but  Blass  does  not recognise  the  eKdaiJ.fioL  as
^  (i.e.,  by  the  process  of  combinatinn  just  nic:
it  is  supported  by  the  best  witnesses  for  tliis  t
TTicTTeucrao-H' eiri xbi' Ku'pioi' 'IrjcroOi' Xpicrror i
from  a,  is  an  expression  p;irailel  to  inuTixxTaan ■... .,  . -^  ....-i
ToC  /irj  ioiivai.  aurois  ■nvfv^j.a.  ixyiov  in  fi  at  the  end  uf  the  vcr^e.
Here  Blass  wrongly  questions  the  well-supported  in<TrivcraL<i\.v
in  auT(p.

He  points  out  other  corruptions  also  in  the  zuitncsses
to  ^.  _

For  example,  in  cod.  137  and  Syr.hl.  after  '\pi(TTap\ov
MaKeSdi-os  (27  2),  instead  of  ©eero-aAoriice'a)?,  the  words  0ecr<ra-
XovLKftav  5i  '\pi(rTapxo<;  Kal  SeicoOi'So?,  which  can  originally
have  taken  their  place  in  the  margin  only  as  a  reiiiiiiisc-nco  of
i!04  and  not  as  a  variant.  He  does  well  to  put  all  such  things  on
one  side  when  trying  to  reconstruct  an  old  recension  ^  as
distinct  from  a.

1  St.A'r.  1894,  pp.  86-iiq;  j^c/a  Apost^Ui^niiir,  ediiio  philo-
logica,  GiUt.,  1895  :  anil  Acta  Apostoloruiii  sccuiuitDiiforiitam
.  .  Uoiiiaiiaiu,  Leipzig,  1S96.  'I'iie  tlic.ry  of  i'.hi>s  finds  a
supporter  in  Joh.  Bclscr,  Ih-itr.  zur  J.>li,ir.  d.  Ap.-^^csch.  auf
Crund  d,->-  I.tsartc-n  di-s  Cod.  D  u.  sclnvr  Ccnosscn  (Freiburg
ini  Breisgau,  1S97)  ;  it  is  argued  against  by  Bernhard  Weiss,  Der
Codc.v  n  in  dcr  Ap.-i;es</i.,  iSg;,  vol.  17  part  i  of  Gebh.
and  Harnack's  Textc'  u.  Untosuchungen  (well  worthy  of
attention,  though  not  comprehensive  enough).  On  Ramsay,  see
above,  §  13.

2  The  additions  and  marginal  readings  of  the  Harklensian
version  (syr.hl.)  ;  the  Fleury  palimpsest  (ed.  Sam.  Berger,  18S9);
an  Old  Latin  text  of  Acts  1 1-136  and  28  16-31,  inserted  in  a  MS
of  the  Vg.  from  Perpignan  (also  edited  by  Berger;  L'n  nncien
textc  latin  des  actes  dcs  apdtres,  1895,  reprinted  from  Notices  ft
ex  traits  des  manuscrits  de  la  bihliotluque  nationalc,  B.-iris,
tome  35,  i  partie);  Cyprian,  and  Augustine,  and  in  a  .>.ccon.;ary
degree  the  composite  texts  E,  137,  Gigas  Librorum  (ed.  Bels-
heim,  1879),  Sahid.,  Irenaus,  etc.

3  In  his  second  book  Blass  no  longer  calls  0  the  rough  draft
of  Luke  himself,  but  says  :  'Actorum  primum  exempl.arpostiiuain
Romje  confectum  est  vel  mansit  ibidem  vel  Christianis  Komanis
ah  auctore  ad  describendum  commodatum  est ;  altera  autem
forma  orientis  ab  initio  fuit  ubi  Theophilum  ilium  vixisse  .  .  .
puto'(pp.  vii./.).  In  support  ofthis,heappealsespecially(p.xi.)  to
the  more  detailed  description  in  a  of  the  journey  on  the  coast  of
Crete  (.Acts  27),  which  would  be  more  interesting  in  the  East  than
in  Rome,  and  on  the  other  hand  to  the  greater  precision  in  0
with  regard  to  the  journey  by  sea  to  Malta  and  to  Italy,  w-hich
would  be  interesting  to  people  at  Rome.  This  seems,  how-
ever, to  he  no  improvement  on  his  earlier  view,  siiice  (to  mention
no  other  reason)  the  dedication  to  Theophilus  is  to  be  found
also  in  |3.

SO


ACTS  OF  THE  APOSTLES


(i)  Further,  before  putting  forward  this  alleged
recension  as  the  original  draft  of  Luke  the  eye-witness,
he  ought  to  have  established  it  from  the  witnesses  on
objective  principles  ;  but  there  is  often  no  indication
of  his  having  done  so.

From  the  verj;  witnesses  in  which  he  gets  his  readings  for  fi —
reailings  often  indeed  found  in  only  one  of  them— he  omits  a
great  many  additiDns  and  readings  which,  judged  by  the  criteria
mentioned  above  under  (a),show  no  signs  of  a  secondary  character
but  stand  on  exactly  the  same  footing  with  those  which  he
adopts.  It  is  very  misleading  when  in  .SV.  A>.  (where  he  deals
with  only  a  selection  of  instances)  it  is  made  to  appear  (p.  117)
as  if  there  were  strictly  only  four  p-ossages  (227  839  94272)
which  from  their  attestation  should  belong  to  0,  but  are  open  to
the  suspicion  of  having  been  iruerpolatcd,  and  value  is  attached
to  the  fact  that  D  and  the  Fleury  palimpsest  are  free  of  them.
For  although  Hlass,  in  his  second  edition,  admits  such  additions
as  airdcTToAoi  after  ovv  (041),  tmv  iiadr)Tuiv  before  Ka'i  efeAtfai/TO
(fis),  Toj  ayt'o)  after  irvevtiaTi.  (liio),  which  these  two  authorities
agree  in  supporting,  he  still,  in  spite  of  the  attestation  of  the
same  documents,  rejects  the  addition  ev  KopivBu)  before  evmvTOv
(18  11),  and  the  re.iding  aTrb  toO  '.Vxu'Aa  instead  of  iKfiOey  (18  7).
Moreover,  in  spite  of  weighty  testimony,  Hlass  rejects^  for
example,  the  Hebraism  aiTiAeyoiTf?  kol  before  ^Aao-c^rj^oiu'Tts
in  1345,  which  even  Tischendorf  (in  a)  accepts  (in  his  second
edition  he  substitutes  on  the  authority  of  the  Latin  of  the  Gigas
a  reading,  ovTiTacrcrofiei'oi,  for  which  there  is  no  support  in
Greek  MSS) ;  on  the  single  testimony  of  Augustine  he  adds
before  <cal  Trpijrjj?  in  1  18  the  words  '  ef  colhun  sihi  alligavit ';  on
that  of  the  t  leury  palimpsest  alone  he  deletes  9  12.  In  tliese

last  two  cases,  as  well  as  in  many  others,  it  is  difficult  to  repress
a  suspicion  that  Hlass  allowed  his  decision  to  be  intluenced  by
his  hypothesis.  The  credibility  of  the  author  and  the  possibility
of  making  him  out  to  have  been  Luke  would  have  been  called
in  question  had  he  not  intended  to  convey,  in  agreement  with
Mt.  275,  that  Judas  had  hanged  himself,  with  the  additional
implication  that  the  rope  had  broken,  and  had  he  recorded  in
9  12  a  vision  of  so  remarkable  a  character  that  even  Blass  finds
it  too  marvellous.  This  last,  therefore,  he  questions  even  in  a.
That  it  might  also  have  struck  the  scribe  of  the  Palimpsest  or  one
of  his  predecessors  as  too  marvellous,  and  that  Augustine  or  one
of  his  predecessors  could  have  hit  upnn  the  reconciliation  be-
tween Mt.  and  Acts  adopted  by  P.lass  is  not  taken  into  con-
sideration. It  is,  however,  a  reconciliation  that  cannot  be
maintained,  for  assuredly  Luke  would  not  have  left  out  the  most
important  particulars  of  all — namely,  that  the  rope  had  broken,
and  that  Judas  h.nd  han<;ed  himself  over  the  edge  of  a  precipice
— without  which  his  fall  could  not  have  had  the  consequences
described.  Enough  has  been  said  to  show  what  caution  re(]uircs
to  be  exercised  with  respect  to  the  establishment  of  Blass's  /3
tevt,  quite  apart  from  any  judgment  as  to  the  manner  of  its
origin.

{c)  The  very  greatest  difficulties  present  themselves
when  it  is  attempted  to  establish  /3  in  a  really  objective
way.  In  many  cases,  more  than  two  readings  present
themselves — so  many  sometimes  that  Blass  in  his  first
edition  silently  gives  up  the  attempt  to  settlers  ;  though
in  the  second  edition,  as  he  (here)  prints  only  /3,  he
has  been  compelled  to  determine  its  te.vt  throughout.

Take,  for  example,  14  18  or  10  1 1.  Cases  such  as  these  are  the
first  indication  we  meet  with  that  we  have  to  deal  not  7i<ith  tiuo
hut  ivith  severitl/orins  of  the  text,  and  thus  that  Blass's  hypo-
thesis is  false  because  insufficient.  But,  more  particularly,  there
is  an  entire  group  of  MSS— HLP— which  on  Blass's  own  ad-
mission contains,  if  not  so  many  various  readings,  readings
quite  as  independent  in  character  as  those  in  fi:  e.g.,  16  6  the
SieAflofTe?  etc.,  which  has  found  its  way  into  the  TR,  and
plays  so  important  a  part  in  the  criticism  of  the  epistle  to  the
Galatians  (see  Galatia,  §  9;  also  below,  under  >«).  In  its
divergent  readings  E  comes  still  closer  than  HLP  to  D  ;  in  D
and  E  the  substance  is  often  the  same,  and  only  the  expression
different.  Blass  conjectures,  therefore,  that  in  the  text  from  which
E  was  copied  additions  from  |3  had  once  been  inserted  in  Greek
and  Latin,  and  that  the  Greek  had  afterwards  faded  :  they  had
therefore  to  be  restored  by  translating  back  from  the  Latin.  In
point  of  fact,  this  would  explain  very  well  why  the  addition  of
D  in  147  (icai  (Kii'rj'h]  oAov  to  ttAtjAo?)  liecomes  in  E  Koi  efejrA7J(r-
o-ETO  na(Ta  ri  iroAuirA^Seia,  and  would  apply  equally  well  to  some
ten  other  examples  poiiited  out  by  P.lass.  But  such  readings  as
the  TOUTuiv  KexjI^vTiov  of  E  in  1  23  after  the  first  Kai  ;  or  the
subj.  (cal  'pv<TBi>itTiv  in  E  instead  of  the  ind.  aTrijAAao-eroi'TO  yap
(a.TTO  JTOOTJS  aTBeveiai)  m  D's  addition  after  5  15;  or  i^eK86vTe<:
Si  tK  rrjv  AuAaicii?  in  E  instead  of  a.Kov<TavT(^  Sf  in  .')2i — such
readings  do  not  admit  of  this  explanation  :  they  are  simply
instances  of  the  same  kind  of  freedom  as  that  with  which  a
changes  ^  (or  ^  changes  a).  The  same  freedom  m.ay  have
manifested  itself  in  other  cases  where  Blass's  hypothesis  about
E  would  in  itself  be  considered  adequate  enough  ;  the  hypothesis
therefore  dem.Tnds  fuller  investiirationl  '


therefore  demands  fuller  investigatK
(see  further  below,  imder  e).


before  it  can  be  accepted


I  In  Acts  2,  which  we  have  specially  examined  with  this  view,
we  find  that  Blass  omits  no  fewer  than  seven  readings  of  E
which  on  his  principles  ought  to  have  been  noted  as  variants ;


{d)  On  the  other  hand,  it  is  proved  that  ike  Greek
text  of  D  rests  partly  on  retranslation  from  the  Latin.

Of  the  many  passages  adduced  in  support  of  this  by  Rendel
H.arris,  m<\ccA(!CoJex  Bezirm  Texts  and  Studies,  ed  Robinson,
ii.  1,  1891),  the  present  writer  holds  only  nine  to  be  really  valid
proofs.  But  it  IS  surely  worthy  of  remark  that  three  of  these
(326632  I82)  are  not  even  mentioned  by  Blass  in  his  list  of
variants — where  so  much  that  is  less  important  is  to  be  found —
but  simply  passed  over  as  et  vitiosa  et  emendatu/acitia  ;  while
of  two  others,  one  (146)  is  mentioned  only  in  the  first  ed.,  and
theother(1626)only  in  the  second;  Harris's  hypothesis  is  merely
mentioned  by  Blass,  and  not  taken  into  further  account.  This
would  from  his  point  of  view  have  been  excusable  if  the  Latini.sms
in  D  had  been  merely  such  as  even  an  author  writing  in  Greek
might  himself  have  employed,  and  in  point  of  fact  has  employed
in,  for  example,  I79  (in  a  and  /3  Aa^^aveci/  to  'iKav6v  =  satis
accipere).  It  is  to  this  category  that  the  oidy  in.stances  from
IJ  discussed  by  Blass  belong  :  «7rtfl«Vres  =  iinpontntes  for
(TTi/SaAdi'Tes  (18 12),  eli/at  for  ovaav  (li'35),  and,  especially,
Keil>a\rj  =  caput  for  irpuirri  (10  12).  But  these  last  two  Blass  him-
self does  not  venture  to  attribiUe  to  Luke.  Thus  we  are  led,
according  to  his  own  view,  to  the  much  more  serious  result  that
there  are  Latinisms  in  D  which  cannot  have  proceeded  from«he
author  of  Acts.  The  same  holds  good  of  all  Harris's  nine
passages  referred  to  above.  In  1829  21 21,  we  find  an  el<rCv
meaninglessly  added  to  an  expression  in  which  to  or  tou's  occurs,
because  the  original  expression  had  been  rendered  into  Latin  by
a  sentence  with  sunt  (in  like  manner  .538 — only,  the  sunt  is  now
w.anting  in  the  Latin  text);  in  826  I82,  the  infinitive  preceded
by  the  article  has  its  subject  in  the  nominative  instead  of  ihe
accusative,  because  the  construction  had  been  changed  in  the
Latin  by  the  employment  of  a  subordinate  clause  ;  in  15  26  we
have  napaSeSioKaa-iv  instead  of  Trapa&eStaK6<Tt.t>,  because  the
participle  had  been  rendered  by  fui  tradideritnt ;  14  6  has
<TvviS6vTe%  Ka'i.  KaTe<^vyov  —  intellexerunt  et fiigeriint ;^  632  has
Ttvevfx.tx  Of  {\ns,tii:iA  of  6)-spiritus  guetit.  Lastly.  I'.'2i  directly
concerns  one  of  the  readings  of /3.  According  to  Blass  this  runs  :
KoX  (Tvvexodr\  oArj  77  TrdAis,  instead  of  (cal  67rA>j<r9i)  i)  ir6\i<;  rffi
crv7xvo"6u>9  (so  a).  But  this  is  found  only  in  the  Gig.is  -a
secondary  authority — and  in  Pesb.,  which  according  to  Blass  is
to  a  still  less  extent  an  authority  for  /3.  D,  in  this  case  the  sole
authority  (in  the  proper  sense  of  the  word)  for  fi,  has  :  (cat
avvex"^^  o-^l  17  toAis  aio-xui'jjs.  As  Harris  has  pointed  out,  this
aicrx^fis  can  only  be  a  retranslation  from  the  Latin  text  of  D:
et  repleta  est  tota  civitas  confiisione(nt).  This  is  a  correct
rendering  of  the  Greek  of  a  as  above.  But  con/usio  is  also  used
for  oX<Tx\>vT\ — compare,  for  example,  Lk.  14  9  —  and  confundi
(often)  for  oj.iTx\ivt<TSa.\..  aio-vvi'Tjs,  however,  could  in  the  present
instance  have  been  employed  in  retranslation  only  if  the  verb
was  7-eplcta  est  (en-A>/<r0i)>.  a-vve\\>6i],  therefore,  can  only  have
come  in  later,  from  another  copy,  to  take  the  place  of  k-n\T\cT&i\.
One  sees  how  precarious  a  proceeding  it  is  to  seek  for  the  most
original  form  of  Acts  in  a  MS  the  text  of  which  has  passed
throuiih  such  vicissitudes.  If  Harris  has  in  any  instances
proved  retranslation  from  the  Latin,  the  other  instances  also,
though  in  themselves  incapable  of  proof,  gain  in  probability.
We  mention  only  kfLOX)  for  e/xe  (822),  r\v  for  ^s  (825),  and  the
additions  (cai  before  TrpocTKapTepui' (S 1 3),  atTt'ai'(4  2i),  >)<rai'(4  34),
avrovi  (752),  as  also  ical  iKe\cv<Te  Kripv<T<reii>  to  evayyeXiov
(1  2),  the  last  four  again  being  like  19 29  readings  of  0.  In  fact,
it  becomes  a  possibility  that  even  such  passages  as  reveal  no
error  in  retranslation  were  nevertheless  originally  Latin,  and
the  suspicion  falls  naturally  in  the  first  instance  upon  the
additions  in  /3.

(f)  Other  passages  in  /3  we  cannot  accept  as  original,
for  the  reason  that  they  are  plainly  derived  from  a  fusion
of  two  texts.

Is  it  possible  that  Luke  can  actually  have  written  :  (16  39)
■napiKoXftrav  a.vTOv<;  e^e\9eiv  eiTToi/Tf?'  -qyvo-^crafiev  to.  KaO'  viiaf,
OTt  k{TT€  avSpi*;  StKaioi.  *tat  i^ayayovre^  TrapfKd\e(rai'  avToit^
\f'yovTei-  €K  nis  iroAeuis  Taur>)9  efe'ASaTe,  ic.t.A.  ?  Cod.  137  and
the  interpolation  in  .Syr.hl.  prove  conclusively  the  inadmissibil-
ity of  this  repetition,  by  omitting  (<cai)  e^ayayovrei;  nap(Ka\e(rav
avTOvi  Aeyoi/Tes.  The  probability  is  rather  that  jrapeicaA«<rai'
stood,  in  the  one  MS  with  indirect  speech,  and  in  the  other
with  direct  (so  also,  for  example,  in  21  36  direct  varies  with  in-
direct narration  in  the  MSS)  ;  in  this  case  ef  eAdeiv  had  reference
originally  to  the  city,  like  e^fKBart,  and  not,  as  now,  to  the
prison.  In  20  18  the  addition  in  /3 — 6ii6<Te  oi^iav  avriiv — wholly
tautological  as  it  is  after  <os  Si  napeyevovTO  rrpbs  avrov,  is
certainly  not  to  be  attributed  to  the  author :  it  is  a  variant  of
cos  fie  (c.T.A.  which  was  at  first  noted  in  the  margin  and  after-

beside^  three  others  which  he  does  notice  (2334147),  four  of
these  seven  (2  22  irfieif  navTe^  instead  of  outoi  ;  2  24  Si  avToii  after
Awcras;  243  ov  fitxpa.  after  cnj/Lcfia,  and  Tcii»  ;(ccp<iic  before  rdv
arro<TT6\tav)  are  unsusceptible  of  expl.anation  by  means  of  his
hypothesis.

1  .'Xs  another  instance  we  may  add  Siappj^^ayre^  .  .  .  »cai
i((mqSr](Tav  (\in)  =  consciderunt  et  e.rilirrunt .  So  also  .")  2iyr
7  4  13  29 16 17  34  20  10.  Moreover  o«  (for  o)  AciA^cras  (4  25)  is  due
to  retr.anslation  of  <7ui  [locutus  est];  similarly  3ii4i2lli
And  the  co?  of  \\  1^  (i^rikOtv  ava^-qruv  avrov  icac  ix;  irvvTvxotv
ira.pfKd\e<rev  i\9eii>)  can  hardly  be  explained  otherwise  than  as
derived  from  the  parallel  Latin  text :  cufu  (inveMissrlH]t
deprecat>a[n]tur  venire).


ACTS  OP  THE  APOSTLES


ward*  crept  into  the  text  of  DA  Vg.  G!gM,  but  in  E,  on  the
other  hand,  with  skilful  avoidance  of  lautolocj',  was  changed  to
buoOvixaiov.  The  case  is  similar  with  the  addition  in  5  31  (found
only  in  I))— «y«ptffWet  to  »rp«i»f-an  addition  which,  moreover,
comes  in  very  awkwardly  after  irapayivanti'ov  6i  6  apx"P*^f  ***
ot  aiiy  avrm,  especially  as,  instead  of  trvftKaXfo-av,  I)  Koc'ion  to
say  Koi  <rvyKa\Ki<ifiti^i.  Here  even  lllass  asks  whether  perhaps
irapayivofitm^  iiuty  have  been  wanting  in  fi.

Yet,  it  may  \)c  said  that,  in  this  and  in  the  similar
cases  here  passed  over,  the  hypothesis  of  Blass  is  simply
deprived  of  one  of  the  arjjfumeiits  on  which  its  demon-
stration rests,  while  there  appear  to  be  enough  of
thent  left.

(/)  Decisive,  however,  against  this  appearaiKe,  is  the
fact  that  precisdy  the  most  characteristic  of  the  variations
of  text  between  a  and  fi  hear  witness  against  Blass  s  theory.
This  confutation  of  liis  hypothesis  follows  inevitably  from
the  hypothesis  itself.

Just  in  prop<irtion  to  the  clearness  and  pointedness  of  /3  and
the  weakness  of  a  in  these  respects,  is  the  improbahility  of  the
author's  having  with  his  own  hands  obscured  and  perverted  the
sense.  And  here  in  the  meantime  we  can  leave  altoj^ctlier  out
of  account  the  ciuestion  whether  or  not  he  w.-.s  also  the  eye-
wimess.  In  any  case,  after  writing  in  his  draft  of  '.M  27  that  it
was  on  account  of  his  wife  Drusilla  that  Felix  left  Paul  Ijound,
he  would  not  have  said  in  his  fair  copy  simply  that  it  was  on
account  of  the  Jews— even  if,  as  Blass  thinks,  both  statements
were  correct.  If  in  his  draft  he  had  stated  that  Paul  had
proclaimed  the  apostolic  decree,  not  only  in  the  later  course
(1('>4),  but  also  at  the  outset,  of  his  new  missionary  journey
(I541),  he  would  not  in  his  fair  copy  have  omitted  to  state  this
in  the  first  and  therefore  more  iiniJortant  of  the  places.  In
this  instance  even  lilass  considers  an  interpolation  m  /3  as  con-
ceivable in  1541,  but  chiefly  because  the  expression  seems  to  him
to  be  somewhat  obscure.  In  'Hit)/.,  although  the  officer  is  in
fear  because  a  Roman  citizen  has  been  bound,  Paul  is  not
rele.Tsed,  according  to  a.  till  the  following  day,  not — as  in  /3,
immediately  (jrapaxp>)M<»)-  Riass  himself  says  (St.  Kr.  108) ;
'  one  cannot  but  be  astonished  at  the  carelessness  of  the  abridg-
ment in  a.'  .'\U  the  more  readily  might  it  have  occurred  to  him
that  it  was  the  writer  of  ^  that  perceived  and  corrected  the
defects  of  a.  In  his  Editio  philoloi;ica  Blass  wishes  rp  iita-vpiov
without  any  authority  either  deleted  or  changed  to  t^  iairecxf.
This  would  be  justifiable  only  if  it  were  perfectly  certain  that
the  narrative,  even  in  a,  is  all  of  one  piece  and  absolutely  to  the
point.  But  such  critics  as  .Spitta,  Clemen,  and  Jiingst  have
assii^ned  -2 29  and  'M  jo  to  two  separate  sources.  If  it  is  only
the  aiUlilion  o  6i  Kiipios  eSajxef  Ta^u  fi()>(»Tji' after  14  2  in  the
draft  that  enables  us  to  understand  how  it  was  that  in  spite  of
the  disturbance  (or,  according  to  fi,  jwrsecution)  mentioned  in
14  2,  Paul  and  P.arnalias  remained  in  Icoiiium,  why  docs  the
author  omit  the  words  in  his  fair  copy?  More  accurately  con-
sidered, they  are  toW  regarded  as  an  interixilation,  designed  to
do  away  with  the  contradiction,  an  interpolation  which  carried
with  it  the  fiirther  change  of  <<rx'Ve7}6e(144)  into  ^cieeo'Y'O'MeVov
and,  in  14  5^,  the  interpolation  of  itettim  and  secundo.  It  is  not
in  f ),  hosvever,  that  this  interpolation  occurs,  but  only  in  Syr.hl.,
which  elsewhere  also  smoothes  away  the  evidences  of  the  work
of  various  hands  in  I)— as  for  example,  in  19  14  by  the  introduc-
tion of  qui  before  t'flo*  t\\ov,  in  1S6  by  the  omission  of  5<  after
airiTaao-o/ieVtoi',  and  in  14  2  by  omitting  the  last  two  words  in
the  cpiile  tautological  expression  oi  a.p\i<Tvva.yuiyoi  ■nof'Iovfiatoji'
Kai  oi  apxoi'Tf?  T179  (ruj-ayioyrj?.  If,  as  Blass  supposes,  it  were
necessary  to  hold  that  .Syr.hl.  has  preserved  the  origin.il,  whom
could  we  possibly  imagine,  for  example,  to  have  added  the  words
Tr\t  (j-ufayuiy^s,  or  omitted  the  words  i/ettmi  and  si-ciindo'l
But,  moreover,  in  14  2-5  the  changes  mentioned  above  would
not  have  Ijeen  at  all  necessary  unless  first  14  2  had  been  wrongly
interpolated  between  14  1  and  I43.  Even  though  it  may  perhaps
be  a  fragment  from  another  source,  142  has  its  immediate  con-
tinuation in  144.  Here  even  Ramsay  supposes  a  'corruption  ' :
only  it  is  I43  which  he  takes  for  a  gloss.  Thus  we  come  ag.ain
upon  one  of  the  many  cises  in  which  Blass  holds  /3  to  be  the
original  simply  because  it  never  occurs  to  him  to  bring  the  unity
of  Acts  into  question.  Similarly,  for  example,  he  drops  from  fi,
and  also  even  from  a,  the  ima  of  19  14,  which  is  irreconcilable
with  the  atA.<f>oTefMv  of  19 16,  on  the  sole  authority  of  D,  without
recognising  that  the  omission  in  I)  may  have  been  a  late
exiiedient  for  removing  the  contradiction  just  xs  much  as  the  duo
for  eirra  in  (Jigas.  If  the  author  in  his  draft  had  already  written,
after  "louioi'as  in  15 1,  the  words  ntv  rctitKrrevKOTtov  awo  Tiijs
a'lptiTtiai  tCiv  4>apt(Tac'uii>,  and  in  15  5  had  referred  to  this  (by  a
simple  oi  Si),  why  is  it  that  in  the  clean  copy  his  first  use  of  the
expression  is  in  165,  so  as  almost  inevitably  to  suggest  the  thought
that  a  piece  derivetl  from  another^ource  begins  at  this  point  1  (see
Council  or  Jp.kusaiem,  §  4).  If,  according  to  the  rough
draft  (not  only  in  166y;,  but  also  in  17  15  11>  i  2O3),  the  journeys
of  Paul  were  determined  by  inspiration,  why  in  his  clean  copy
does  the  author  leave  this  out  in  the  last  three  of  these  passages?
Here.too,  wecan  seethe  inapplicability  of  another  of  Blass'sasser-
tions,  viz.  that  nowhere  in  a  or  0  is  the  narrative  changed  so  as
to  l)ecome  more  interesting  or  more  marvellous.  Further,  the
author  of  this  three-fold  mentiim  of  divine  inspiration  has
fallen  into  an  oversight— that,  namely,  of  attributing  to  Paul

S3


(19 1)  the  intention  of  making  a  journey  to  Jerusalem  ju»t  after
he  hitd  returned  from  th^t  city,  without  even  the  slightest
reference  to  what  h.id  \>cen  said  immediately  Ijcfore.  For  it  is
not  possible  to  agree  with  Hla.ss  in  regarding  the  j>jurney  of  19 1
as  identical  with  that  which  had  been  intended  by  Paul,  accord-
ing to  the  addition  of  fi  in  I821  (found  also  in  TR).  This  last
wa.H  actually  carried  out  (IU22,  sec  Council  ok  Jkmcsalkm,
J  i).  And  even  if  it  had  not  been,  the  inspiration  which
hindered  it  must  have  )>een  mentioned  in  18 si,  and  not  in  Hli,
after  he  had  already  got  back  to  Phrygia  from  Ca:.sarea,  which
is  only  a  few  miles  Irom  Jerusalem. Cp  further  Bakjesus,  |  i  ^.

{g)  Over  against  these  instances,  the  list  of  which
could  Ix;  greatly  increased,  there  are  a  few  rare  cases
in  which  /i  might  really  be  held  to  he  the  original.

The  additions  KaTtfirja-av  Toiit  c  jrra  ^aBfiovt  Kai  Ijefore  irpoijAfloi'
(12  10),  rf  6<  inavptov  Ixrfore  10  1 1  and  in  27  i,  anb  iopa^  iiiii.nTr)%
iia%  itKa-nji  after  I'.'o,  »tal  fidVai/Tf?  iv  "VpiayiKiia  after  'i.afLoy
(2O15),  ii  rtixfpC>v  StKanetrre  before  icttT^ASo^frC.'T  5)do  not  seem
to  be  inventions.  And  yet  Blass  not  only  op|Mjscii,  at  least  in
his  first  edition,  the  quite  similar  addition  of  «ai  Miipa  after
!laTapa(21  i)  in  I>,  Sail.,  and  tligas,  inasmuch  as  it  could  have
been  introduced  from  27  5,  bi't  also  refused  to  accept  the
sei/ucnii  autiin  die  which  we  find  in  d  (21  5)  instead  of  6t«
hi  iyivfjo  ^p.a.<i  i^apTivai  ra^  irj/if^?  (the  Creek  text  of  I)  is
wanting  here).  (Jii  the  other  hand,  in  21  16  the  text  of  a  is  not
materially  inferior  to  that  of  /3,  to  which  Blass  attaches  a  very
high  value  ;  for  the  impcrf.  ofe^aiVo^cc  of  21  15  does  not  mean
"  we  went  and  arrived  at  Jerusalem  "  (this  follows  in  21  17),  but
"  we  took  the  road  fir  Jerusalem,"  and  thus,  even  accordiiii;  to
a„Mnason  may  very  well  be  thought  of  as  living  in  a  village
between  Ca;sarea  and  Jerusalem,  as  is  expressly  stated  in  p.
The  author— in  this  instance  the  author  ol  the  'we'  source —
has  here  quite  naturally  taken  for  granted  that  the  journey  from
CsEsarea  to  Jerusalem  cannot  well  be  made  in  a  single  day.

(h)  After  what  has  been  said,  it  is  clear  that  there
is  not  the  slightest  necessity  for  assuming  the  hulk  of  the
remaining  variations  in  j3,  which  are  indecisive,  to  be
original.

They  consist  partly  of  what  are  simply  changes  in  the  con-
struction, or  periphrases  without  changing  the  sense  (f.jr  Injth
see  for  cx.-imph-  !'  ■  'V  •  — N-  nf  a  .somewhat  more  vivid  way  of
expressin.;  tip  .  however,  in  the  cases  we  have  in

view— null  h  11:  ■. -could  li.-ive  been  derived  by  a

simplecopyi^t  t;  .;conte\t. Compare,  for  example,

the  very  wtll-dcv  iscd  adtlitioii  roii?  Aoiiroi/s  a<r^aAt(ro^c»'0?  after
eftt)  in  10  50.

(?)  But  do  not  these  changes— materially  so  unim-
portant, but  in  form  so  considerable — at  least  prove  that
both  forms  of  the  text,  no  matter  which  is  the  earlier,
emanate  from  the  author  of  the  book  itself?  They  do
not.

After  having  seen  that  precisely  in  the  most  significant  pas-
sages of  the  book  (sec  above,  <rand/)  this  does  not  hold,  one
must  further  remember  that  in  HLP,  and  also  in  F2,  equ.-jlly
important  variations  are  met  with  (see  ab.ne,  <).  These,  like
those  in  |3,  resemble  the  variation  by  which  one  gospel  is  dis-
tinguished from  another.  Here,  accordingly,  transcribers  have
allowed  themselves  liberties  which  are  usually  regarded  as  jier-
missible  only  to  the  authors  of  independent  works.  However
surjirising  this  may  seem  to  us,  the  fact  cannot  be  denied.  When
in  Mk.  321,  for  oji.  i^taTi\  (a  reading  which  is  a  stumbling-
block  to  many  theologians  even  of  the  present  day)  V)  substi-
tutes oTi  efe'o-TaTot  auTou?,  '  that  he  has  ev.^ded  them,'  or  at  least
'that  he  has  stirred  them  up,'— is  not  the  lil)erty  taken  with  the
text  just  as  bold  as  .Mt.'s  in  the  exactly  corresponding  place,
1223  (i.e.,  just  before  the  reference  to  a  league  with  Beelze-
bub), when  he  changes  it  to  efio-Tavro?  But  this  freedom
of  treatment  is  by  no  means  without  analogies  elsewhere  in  the
literature  of  the  time.  The  text  of  Plato  in  the  Flinders- Petrie
papyri  (Cunningham  Mtmoirs  0/  the  Academy  of  DuhtiH,
1891)  shows  similarly  pronounced  deviations  from  the  ordinary
text — deviations  which,  according  to  l'scncr(A'<i<//r.  d.  Geselisck.
der  Wiss.  tu  GStt.,  1892,  pp.  25-50,  181-215),  are  to  lie  attributed
to  the  copyists  of  the  papyri,  perhaps  as  early  as  within  120  years
after  Plato's  death.  In  the  papyrus  text  of  Hyperides,  Against
Philippides  (Classical  Te.xts  from  Papyri  in  Brit.  Mus.,  ed.
Kenyon,  i8gi),  Blass  himself  discovers  'very  often  .  .  .  inter-
polation and  arbitrary  emendation,'  and  in  the  third  Demo-
sthenes letter  published  in  the  same  collection,  'extensive
variation  '(/o^jr^i./  class.  Philol.,  1892,  p.  42,  and  1894,  p.  447X

In  order  more  easily  to  comprehend  the  possibility  of
changes  in  the  te.\t  on  the  part  of  a  transcrilx^r,  it
may  be  allowable  to  conjecture  that  he  may  have  been
accustomed  to  hear  the  book  recited  or  even  himself  to
recite  it  (with  variations  of  the  kind  e.vemplified),  on  the
basis  of  a  perusal  of  it,  but  without  its  being  committed
to  memory.  Such  recital  was  by  no  means  impossible
in  the  second  century.

{k)  The  question  whether  D  shows  in  the  gospels  Ike
same  variations  as  in  Acts  may  be  left  out  of  account.

54


ACTS  OF  THE  APOSTLES


It  would  be  important  only  if  it  could  be  answered  in  the
affirmative  for  Mt.,  Mk.,  and  In.  For,  that  in  these  cases
also  the  rough  draft  should  have  gone  into  circulation  as
well  as  the  clean  copy  is  really  very  improbable.  Hut  the
independent  variations  are  too  few  to  warrant  an  affirmative
answer.  If  the  same  be  the  c.ise  with  the  Third  Gospel,  then,
according  to  HIass's  hypothesis,  we  must  assume  that  the  draft  of
it  was  not  copied  ;  but  if  they  are  sufficiently  numerous,  as  lilass
has  recently  declared  {Hermathena,  21,  1895,  pp.  121-143  ;  and
22,  1896,  pp.  291-313  ;  E7>angetiutn  secumiuni  Lucaiii  .  .  .
secundum  Jonnam  quie  videtur  Ronianam,  1897;  Pliilology
o/tfu  Gospels, \Z<)%\  there  is  nothing  to  hinder  our  applying  to
them  the  judgment  applied  to  those  in  Acts,  however  that
judgment  m.iy  go.

Neither  is  it  decisive  of  the  question  that  |3  is  frequently
not  fuller  but  briefer  than  a  {e.g.,  2626  74).

(/)  Very  important,  on  the  other  hand,  is  Blass's
assertion  that  the  uniformity  of  expression  in  a  and  fi  is
a  '  very  strong  proof '  that  both  recensions  come  from
the  hand  of  the  author.  But  it  is  sufficiently  met  by
Blass's  own  inde.x.

According  to  this,  there  occur  in  the  divergent  passages  of  /3
(which  are  by  no  means  of  great  compass)  64  words  never  else-
where met  with  in  Acts  or  the  Third  Gospel.  If  we  deduct  from
these,  besides  5  proper  names,  the  9  vouched  for  only  by  the
Latin  text  (although  Hlass  himself  has  not  succeeded  in  giving
them  a  Greek  form  that  suggests  the  authorship  of  Luke),  there
still  remain  50  (not  44,  as  is  stated  in  HIass's  Editio  philologica,
p.  334).  After  deduction  of  4  numbers,  and  the  expressions
la-riov  and  (rTpaT07re5ap;(r)?,  for  which  no  other  word  could
possibly  have  been  chosen,  the  number  stands  at  44.  So  also  in
his  second  edition  (see  the  enumeration  in  his  Kvang.  sec.  Luc.
p.  xxvii.),  although,  from  the  somewhat  different  form  of  text
adopted,  the  words  that  appear  to  be  peculiar  to  (3  are  not  quite
the  same.

(/«)  In  support  of  Blass's  highly  important  assertion
that  the  eye-witness  Luke  alone  could  have  given  his  work
in  both  the  forms  which  we  have  in  a  and  (3,  the  most
that  can  be  adduced — out  of  all  that  has  been  remarked
on  in  the  course  of  the  section — are  the  passages  referred
to  under  (g).  But  of  the  '  seven  steps '  in  Jerusalem,  Luke,
according  to  Blass's  own  view,  gained  his  knowledge
not  from  personal  observation,  but  only  from  the  written
(or  oral)  testimony  of  an  eye-witness.

All  the  same  he  takes  the  liberty,  according  to  Blass,  of  leaving
the  note  out  in  writing  his  fair  copy.  This  being  so,  the  omission
of  the  five  other  details,  even  if  with  Hlass  one  carries  this  back
to  the  author  of  the  book,  does  not  prove  that  they  had  formed
part  of  his  own  experience;  he  m.iy  equally  well  have  obtained
them  from  a  written  source.  Four  of  them  (Itiii  2O152715)
belong,  in  point  of  fact,  to  the  'we'  source.  It  is  not  at  all
easy  to  see  why  a  transcriber  might  not  have  ventured  to  omit
them,  with  so  much  else,  as  of  inferior  interest.  We  may  there-
fore thankfully  accept  tliem,  as  well  as  other  data  in  p  which
have  been  shown  or  may  ultimately  appear  to  be  more  original
than  a,  as  contributions  to  our  historical  knowledge  ;  but  they
do  not  prove  more  than  this— that  in  such  cases  /3  has  drawn
more  fiiithfully  from  a  true  source  than  a  has.  There  remains,
accordingly,  in  favour  of  the  eye-witness  as  author  of  Acts,  only
11 28,  where  D  (.along  with,  essentially,  the  Perpignan  Latin
text,  and  Augustine),  instead  of  araaras  Se,  has  riv  Si  noKKri
oyoAAtatris'  (Tuvea-rpafifjievuii'  Si  i^/nioc  i<j)r),  and  then  <Tr)iJ.a.ivu>v
instead  o^iayiixavfv.  This  might  possibly  be  from  the  'we'  source  ;
but  the  inference  is  not  that  it  can  only  have  been  by  an  eye-
witness that  the  '  we  '  in  a  was  set  aside.  Or  why  is  it  that  '  we  '
is  set  aside  by  L  in  16  17,  by  X*  (and  differently  by  ABCH)  in
21 10,  by  H  in  2S  16,  by  P  and  Vg.  in  27  i  (tows  rrepi  to;/  IlaiJAof ,
or  eum,  for  i^M-as).  by  HLP  in  2O7  ilia  28  i  IO13,  by  C^  also
in  28  I,  by  D  also  in  Iti  13  {iSoKfi  for  ivofj-i^ofj^^v)'!  And  why,  on
the  other  hand,  in  27  19  does  it  stand  only  m  HLP  Pesh.  ?  In
all  of  these  cases  (except  27  i,  see  below)  Blass  has  the  same
reading  in  ^  as  in  a.  (In  Iti  13,  he  has,  it  is  true,  in  /3  the  cSoicet
mentioned  above,  but  he  likewise  obtains  in  o  also  [by  the  con-
jecture €i'd>ii^oi/«i'7rpoo-€uxn  "•'o-']  a  reading  in  the  third  person.)
He  thus  acknowledges  that  it  is  copyists,  not  the  eye-witness,  .
that  allowed  themselves  to  remove  the  '  we,'  or  to  introduce  it.
Only  in  11  28  does  Blass  assume  that  it  was  Luke  himself  who
changed  into  the  third  person  in  a  the  '  we  '  which  he  had  written
in  /S.  .So  also  it  is  only  in  one  place,  and  even  that  only  in  his
second  edition,  that  Hlass  regards  the  third  person  in  placeof '  we'
as  a  reading  of^ — namely,  in  20 5  (on  the  authority  of  D),  for  in
27  I  it  is  only  through  a  change  of  the  whole  of  the  first  part  of
the  verse,  rendering  ^/xas  impossible,  that  the  third  person  is
introduced.  At  all  events,  it  is  impossible  that  11  30  as  well  as
11  28  can  be  derived  from  the  'we'  source  (see  Council  of
Jerusalem,  $  i).  Even  the  'we'  of  11 28  may  possibly  have
been  the  insertion  of  a  transcriber  who  knew  (with  Eus.  HE
iii.  46,  Jer.  De  Vir.  III.  7,  and  the  Prologue  [earlier  than  Jerome]
to  the  Third  Gospel  in  codd.  Corbeiensis,  Colberlinus,  Amiatiims,
Fuldensis,  Aureus,  etc.)  that  Luke  was  understood  to  have  been  a
native  of  Anlioch.  Or  has  Blass  himself  not  recognised  that
Irena;us  also  (iii.  14  i),  or  one  of  Irena;us's  predecessors,  has  per-
mitted himself  on  his  own  responsibility  to  say  nos  venimus  instead

55


of  KartfiriiTav  in  168?  The  insertion  of  '  we  '  in  11 28  would  not  be
boUler  than  the  other  infelicitous  changes  in  fi.  It  ought  to  be
noted  th.at  Syr.hl.  is  not  implicated  in  this  insertion;  and  the
text  of  D  is  by  no  means  in  order,  for  it  has  €</>i)  without  telling
what  it  was  that  Agabus  did  say  (in  the  sense  of  cAoArt),  while
in  the  whole  of  the  NT  it  is  direct  speech,  or,  as  in  four  isolated
exceptions  in  the  ca.se  of  Paul,  at  least  indirect  speech,  that  is
connected  with  <j)r]nC.  In  Acts  11  28  the  indirect  speech  depends
rather  on  oTj/naii'ui'.

(«)  A  very  dangerous  support  to  the  theory  of  Blass
has  been  contributed  by  Nestle.^

In  his  view  t'/Sapui^are  in  D  {Ircnxushas  ag-gya7'asiis),  instead
of  ripvTi<Ta<T8e  in  314,  comes  from  a  confusion  of -133  (Job  35  16
15  10)  and  -123  in  the  Semitic  source  0/  Acts  1-12  (similarly,
before  him,  Harris,  p.  187,  but  otherwise  pp.  162^!),  and  in  like
manner  k6<j\i.o%,  instead  of  Aaos  in  2  47,  from  confusion  of  oVy  and
Dy  (or  in  Aramaic  Nd'?:^  and  NSy).  In  itself  considered,  all  evi-
dence for  the  existence  of  a  source  (now  pretty  generally  con-
jectured ;  see  above,  §8  10/.)  for  Acts  1-12  cannot  be  otherwise
than  welcome  ;  but  in  the  form  thus  suggested  the  evidence
points  rather  to  the  conclusion  (which  Nestle  leaves  also  open)
that  some  person  other  than  the  author  himself  had,  in  tran-
scribing, adopted  another  translation  of  the  Semitic  text.

(o)  No  happier  is  an  attempt  of  Conybeare  to  provide
a  new  prop  for  Blass's  theory.

He  points  out  in  the  American  Joum.  of  Philology  (172
[1896],  pp.  135-171)  the  most  interesting  fact  that  the  Greek
commentary  of  Chrysostom,  and,  to  an  even  greater  extent,  the
many  extracts  from  it  in  an  Armenian  Catena  on  Acts,  follow
or  at  least  presuppose  a  series  of  ^  readings  to  be  found  partly
in  D  (and  other  witnesses  for  the  ^  text),  partly  only  in
Syr.hl.  or  in  cod.  137.  He  thinks  he  can  thus  prove  that
originally  all  the  ^  readings  were  united  in  a  single  cod.,
in  the  copying  of  which  they  were  partly  removed  to  secure
greater  agreement  with  the  prevailing  text.  Hut  the  number
of  /3  readings  used  by  Chrysostom  is  insignificantly  small
when  compared  with  those  of  which  he  shows  no  trace  ;  and
0/ such  as  do  not  appear  in  D  Conybeare  has  adduced  only
five.  Chry.sostom  accordingly  furnishes  no  stronger  support
for  Conybeare's  thesis  than  any  other  witness  for  0  would,  for
each  of  them  shares  some  of  its  readings  with  D  and  some  with
other  witnesses  for  ^.  But  to  explain  this  there  is  no  need  of
Conybeare's  assumption  that  all  ^  readings  are  from  one  hand  :
it  would  be  explained  equally  well  by  suppo.sing  them  due  to
the  labours  of  successive  copyists  (or  editors).  Conybeare,
however,  goes  much  further,  and  asserts  that  Luke  himself  is  the
author  of  all  these  ^  readings.  He  ventures  to  rest  this
assertion  on  a  single  passage— a  very  small  foundation  for  such
a  structure.  Moreover,  it  would  have  been  just  as  easy  for
another  as  for  Luke  to  add  '  so  natural  a  phrase  '  as,  according  to
Conybeare,  uvvTt-f^ylTai.  is  in  19  25.

Blass's  theory,  then,  it  would  seem,  is  so  inadequately

proved  that  it  cannot  l>e  held  to  have  subverted  any  of

18.  Estimate  of  ''^'^ ^o-^clusions regarding Acts in

Rlnqs'R  thporv l^^ecedrng  sections  of  this  article. It

uiass  s  uneory. ^^^  ^^^  ^^^^j^ however,  of  having

called  attention  in  a  very  emphatic  way  to  the  im-
portance of  ^.  It  has  also  raised  new  problems  for  the
science  of  textual  criticism — not  to  s[3eak  of  the  many
valuable  contributions  it  has  itself  made  to  that  science
and  to  the  interpretation  of  the  Book  of  Acts.

The  value  of  Acts  as  a  devout  and  edifying  work,

cannot be impaired by  criticism. Indeed, the  book

19 Relisious '^ helped by criticism, which leads

value  of  Acts.  "°'  °"'>'  ^^""^  ^  T'''^  ^^'"^ u''^  '"
Its  contents, but  also  beyond  the  un-

historical  assumption  that  one  is  entitled  to  impose
on  the  author  the  demands  of  strict  historical  accuracy
and  objectivity.  Its  very  ideal,  in  apostolic  times  un-
happily not  reached,  according  to  which  the  company
of  believers  were  of  one  heart  and  one  mind  (4  32),
shows  that  the  author  knew  where  the  true  worth  of
Christianity  was  to  be  found.  The  early  Christians
pray  everywhere  with  and  for  one  another  ;  they  ac-
company the  apostles  and  take  pathetic  farewells  of
them  ;  "they  distribute  their  possessions  and  have  all
things  in  common.  Particularly  beautiful  figures  .are
those  of  Stephen,  Cornelius,  Lydia,  and  the  jailer  at
Philii)pi.  The  jailer  knows  that  most  important  question
of  religion,  '  What  must  I  do  to  be  saved?'  (I630),  and
Peter  also  (4 12),  as  well  as  Paul,  expresses  the  con-
viction that  Christianity  alone  has  a  satisfactory  answer
to  give. The  writer  of  Acts  is  able  to  rise  above  all

1  Expositor,  Sept.  1895,  pp.  235-239  ;  St.  Kr.,  1896,  pp.
102-104.

56


ACUA

narrowness  of  sympathy  (10  15  34/  15  »») ;  and  the  con-
ception of  cjod  in  1728,  which  cannot  be  attributed  to
Paul,  is  really  much  more  apt,  and  is  more  closely
in  accord  with  the  results  of  philosophically  purified
thought,  than  that  apostle's,  still  hampered  as  it  was  by
Jewish  moflcs  of  thinking.  Lastly,  sayings  such  as  we
tind  in  24i6  4  2o2024  14  22  21 13/  are  of  the  deepest
that  can  be  said  about  the  inner  Christian  life.

As  Liglitfoot  rciiKirks,  the  literature  which  has  gathered
round  Acts  is  too  larne  to  cataloj-uc  profitably.  To  his  own
list  (Smith's  OJi-)  may  tic  added  Holtzmanii's
20.  Literature,  comm.  in  the  Hatui-comnt.  zum  NT(ii&<),  2nd
ed.  1892).  In  the  criticism  of  the  book  the  most
important  landmarks  are  as  follows  :  Schneckcnburgcr  (Ztveck
der  Ap.-gcich.y  1841),  whilst  maintaining  its  absolute  trustworthi-
ness, credited  it  with  tendency  to  vindicate  Paul  against
Judaisers.  Uaur  (/'<»«/»x,  1845)  and  Zeller  (.-?/.  AVi^rA.,  1854)
regarded  its  tendency  as  '  reconciling  '  {unionistisch)  in  its  scope,
and  its  contents  as  untrustworthy.  Bruno  Bauer  (Ap.-gesch.,
1850),  whilst  holding  the  .same  view  as  to  its  tendency,  went
much  further  as  regarded  its  contents,  taking  them  to  be  free
and  often  even  purposeless  invention.  Overbeck,  in  his  revised
4th  edition  of  De  Wette's  Hamlhuch  (1870),  propounded  a
modification  of  the  tendency  theory  substantially  identical  with
that  which  has  Ixien  set  forth  in  the  present  article.  Pfleidercr
{Paulinismus,  1873,  2nd  ed.  1890;  Urchristenthum,  1887),  Weiz-
sacker  (.■)/.  Zeitalter,  18S6,  2nd  ed.  1892  ;  ET,  1894-95),  and
JuIicher(A";«/.  in  das  NT,  1894)  "•'Kc.  often  with  justice,  that  the
author  wrote  in  simple  faith,  and  has  much  that  is  trustworthy.
The  most  thorough-goingapologistshavebeen  Mich.  Baumgarten
(A/>.-g;fsclt.,  1852,  2nd  ed.  1859),  Karl  Schmidt  {Ap.-gesch.  i.
1882).  and  Nosgen  (Comtn.,  1882).  The  most  promising  new
phase  of  the  criticism  of  the  book  is  that  which  has  for  its  task  a
separation  of  the  sources  (see  above,  §  11).  In  this  connection
mention  must  be  made  of  a  very  remarkable  return  to  tendency-
criticism  in  a  Marburg  University  Program  of  Johannes  Weiss
(which  appeared  after  the  present  article  was  in  type)  entitled
Ueherdie  Ahsicht  u.  den  literar.  Char,  der  Afi.-^esch.  (18^7).
Weiss  regards  Acts  as  'an  apology  for  the  Christian  religion
(against  the  accusation  of  the  Jews)  addressed  to  pagans,  showing
how  it  has  come  about  that  Christianity  has  taken  over  from
Jud.iism  its  world-mission.'  p.  \v.  s.


Esd.  f)  3ot  =  Ezra


ACUA,  RV  Acud  (akoyA  [BA]),
245,  .\kkub,  4.

ACUB  (&KOY<t)[B]).  iEsd.53it  =  Ezra25i,  B.vkbuk.

ACUD,  see  above,  AcuA.

ADADAH  (m;;nV),  josh.  1522t,  probably  (We..  Di.)
a  corrupt  re.iditiij  for  iTTjny  'Ar'drah — i.e.,  Aroer
("liny) ;  see  Akokk,  3.

(A£a£a  [ALj;  apouijA  [B],  implying  '^yny  ",  cp  payou.  [iS.  30
28,  ©L].)

ADAH  (nn^;  aAa  [.\DKL],  w/).-/).

1.  Wife  of  Laiiiech  (Gen.  4i9-23t,  a55a  [L]).  See
Cainitks,  §  9.

2.  Daughter  of  Elon  the  Hittite,  and  wife  of  Esau
(Gen.  362  4  10  12  16  [R  ?])  ;  called  Basemath  in  Gen.  2634

[I'J. .SlC HASHKM.VTH, I.

ADAIAH  (r\''.;iV,  §  35.  once  -innyCNo.  8];  'Yahw^
passes  by,'  cp.  AuiKi. ; aA&ia,  [B.VL]).

1.  Clrandfather  of  king  Josiah,  2  K.  22  i  {tteiva.  (B);  teSiJa,
[.\],  i.e. ."ITT^  the  name  of  Josiah's  mother  ;  ofiou  [I.]).

2.  I  Ch.  641  [26],  see  Ii>i)o,  iii.  2.

1.  b.  Shimei,  in  genealogy  of  Benjamin  (g  9  ii.  P),  i  Ch.  821
(a^.alBl,  aAa.a[.\]).

4.  A  priest  in  list  of  inhabitants  of  Jerusalem  (see  Ezra,  ii.
SsFH  8  15  ['l-?),  '  Ch.9i2(<ro5tas(A])=Neh.  11  12  (BK*  om.,
a5ata{  [L]).  This  name  should  perhaps  be  read  instead  of
Jeuaiah  (g.v.  i.  i)  in  Neh.  12  6  or  7.

5  and  6.  Two  members  of  the  b'ne  Ban  I  \q.7'.  2)  in  list  of
those  with  foreign  wives  (Ezka,  i.  g  5,  end),  Ezra  10  29  (a.&a.  (B],
a£ata«  [.•\I,])=i  Esd.  830,  Jkoeus  (t««aios  (BA),  alaia.^  [L]),
and  Ezra  10  39  (aStiofi.  [K],  aScua^  [.\L])=i  Esd.  9  34  (a&Satai
(L),  om.  (BA;  EV]).

7.  b.  Joiarib,  in  list  of  Judahite  inhabitants  of  Jerusalem  (see
Ezra,  h.  $  5  |/.],  8  15  [il  «).  Neh.  11  5  (ioA.a  [B],  ax<ua  [A]).

8.  The  father  of  M.iaseiah  [4],  2  Ch.  23  i  (.^rin^,  o^fto  [B],
aStia  [Bab],  aJatov  (gen.)  [I.]).

ADAUA  (X'VnK).  son  of  Haman,  Est.  98t  (Barca
[B],  BApe\  [N.\],  -eA  [L]). See  Esther,  §§  3,  7.

ADAM  (DnX,  to  which  Kt.  prefixes  3,  Kr.  D[so®'-
Symm.  Targ.  Pesh.  Vg. ,  and  many  MSS  and  editions] ;

57


ADAM  AND  EVE

Kt.  is  to  be  preferred  ;  see  Di.'s  note')  is  mentioned  once,
if  not  twice.  In  Josh.  3 16  it  is  the  name  of  the  place
beside  or  near  which  the  descending  w.aters  of  the  Jordan
'  stood  and  rose  up  in  one  heap ' ;  here  it  is  followed  by
the  worils  (which  may  possibly  be  a  gloss)  '  the  city  that
is  beside  Zarethan.'  An  echo  of  this  name  may  very
plausibly  Ije  found  in  Tf//  ed-Dumich  and  Jiir  ed-
Ddinith,  names  of  a  hill  and  bridge  at  the  confluence  of
the  Jabtx)k  {/.erkd)  with  the  Jordan,  some  16  m.  in  a
direct  line  above  the  ford  opposite  Jericho.  Indeed  it
is  possible  that  for  cjk  (.Adam)  we  should  read  ,icik
(Adamfih),  the  r\  having  dropped  out  owing  to  the
circumstance  that  the  following  word  lx;gins  with  n  (so
KampfTmeyer,  ADl'VX'a  14).  In  this  case  the  resem-
blance of  the  ancient  and  the  modern  name  will  Ijc
closer.  The  same  s|X)t  seems  to  be  refc-rred  to  in  1  K.
746,  where,  for  "in  the  thickness  of  the  ground"-  (.\V
mg. ),  we  should  prob.ibly  re.ad,  'at  the  crossing  of
Adamah,'^  the  name  of  some  definite  locality,  not
a  description  of  the  soil,  being  plainly  re<|uired  by  the
context  (so  G.  F.  Moore  and  C'lermont-fjanneau).*  This
gives  us  a  definition  of  the  site  of  Adam  or  Adamah.  It
was  at  a  ford  of  the  Jordan  between  .Succoth  and  /;irethan.
Putting  all  the  evidence  together,  we  may  hold  that  the
Succoth  of  I  K.746  was  K.  of  the  Jordan  on  or  near
the  Jablx)k  ;  while  Zarethan  was  W.  of  the  river,  in  the
valley  opposite  Succoth.  Beside  Zarethan ,  at  the  '  cross-
ing '  or  ford,  was  a  town  called  Adam  or  Adamah  (cp
Succoth,  2  ;  Zakkthan,  §1).

The  second  mention  of  a  place  of  this  name  is  in
Hos.  67  where,  for  k'Add7n{\<V  'like.Vdam,'  RV  mg.
'  like  men  '  ;  w-i  AvOpwiros  [B.A(J]),  we  must  at  any
rate  read  i  \iddm — i.t: ,  '  at  Adam ' — to  suit  '  there  '  in  the
ne.xt  clause,  and  to  correspond  to  the  localisation  of
Israel's  sin  in  z'.  8  (so  in  the  main  We.).  ■  There  '  the
Israelites  '  were  traitors  to  Yahwe '  and  '  broke  his
covenant. '  Of  course  there  may  \x;  a  doubt  \n  hich  of  the
places  called  Adam  or  Adamah  is  meant,  and  it  may
even  be  surmised  that  the  letters  ciK  (ad.m)  .are  in-
correct. ■''  The  fact,  how  ever,  that  the  ford  of  Ddmieh  is  on
the  direct  route  (so  we  must  iK'lieve)  to  the  place  called
Gilead  in  v.  8,  suggests  that  the  '  city  Adam  '  of  Josh.  3  16
is  intended.  The  confluence  of  two  inij)ortant  streams
may  well  have  been  marked  by  a  sanctuary.

ADAM  AND  EVE.s  The  use  of  Adam  ami  Eve  as
proper  names  within  the  Reformed  Churches  symbolises
, T»  r  i- a  theory  of  the  Paradise  story  which

1.  Information j^ distiiictively  modern and  western,
antipathy  to ,^^^^ Reformers, alwavs hostile to


allegory.


allegory,  atid  in  this  matter  especially


influcnccil  by  the  Augustinian  anthropology,  adhered
strictly  to  the  literal  interpret.ation,  which  has  continued
to  be  generally  identified  with  Protestant  ortho(lo.\y."
This  w.as  a  necessary  reaction  against  that  Hellenistic
allegorising  which  transmuted  evtTything  that  seemed
low  or  trivial  in  the  early  narr.atives  into  some  spiritu.al  or
theological  truth.  The  reaction  had  begun  no  doubt  in
pre-reformaiion  days.  Honaventura,  for  instance,  s.ays
that  '  under  the  rind  of  the  letter  a deep  and mjstic

1  The  <T<t>6Spa  <7(^oSpaKt  of  (p"  may  be  s.-ifely  neglected,  (hough
if  (TtfmSpia^  (which  is  wanting  in  A)  l>e  correct,  it  testifies  to  the
antitjuity  of  the  inferior  re.iding  (c>1KC-  Syinm.,  according
to  Held's  restoration  from  the  Syr.  Hex.,  gives  an'o  oJo/x  ;
®I-  ajrb  aSofij)  (interpolated);  Vg.  «/  ur/>e  quir  vacatur
Adorn.  Bennett  in  .SBOTifirW.  notes) regards  the  name  '  Adam '
and  the  description  of  it  a.s  'the  city, '.is  suspicious.  But  '.Adam'
should  perhaps  rather  be  'Adamah,'  and  'the  city,'  etc.  looks
like  a  glos.s. The  text  on  the  whole  is  correct.

2  .nDIKn  7\-1^1- The  II  2  Ch.  4  17  has  Ttcn.»r\  'ai'S.

['95] ;  Clermont-
Ganneau,  PEFQu.St.,  Ian.  1896,  p.  80.

5  One  might  conjecturally  read  Dum.ih — i.e.,  the  Eduma  of  the
<^.V  ('J.').')  74 ;  119  22,  cp  (Juirin,  .SViw.  2  14/),  which  is  described
as  a  village  about  12  R.  m.  E.  from  Neapolis  (Nablus),  and  is
the  modern  PautHfk  (see  Rob.  BR  4  292/.).  This  is  obviously
not  the  '  city '  intended  in  Josh.  3 16.  It  is  also  not  very  likely
to  be  meant  by  Hosca.

*  On  the  names  see  below,  |  3.

58


2.  NT  views.


ADAM  AND  EVE

meaning  is  hidden,"  but  states  also  that  'he  who
despises  the  letter  of  sacred  Scripture  will  never  rise  to
its  spiritaal  meanings.'  Still  the  completion  of  the
movement  (within  certain  limits)  was  reserved  for  the
great exegetesof  the  Reformation — Luther,  Melanchthon,
and  Calvin.  Thus  Luther  explicitly  says — '  It  were
better  to  read  mere  poetic  fables  than  attach  one's  self  to
the  so-called  spiritual  and  living  sense  to  the  exclusion
of  the  literal  ; '  and  again,  '  We  should  stay  by  the  dry
clear  words,  except  where  the  Scripture  itself,  by  the
absurdity  of  the  simple  meaning,  comijcls  us  to  under-
stand some  sayings  figuratively'  (quoted  by  Diestel,
Gesch.  lies  A  T  in  der  clir.  Kirche).  This  predilection
for  a  grammatical  and  historical  interpretation  was
closely  connected  with  the  revival  of  classical  studies,
but  had  its  primary  justification  in  the  endorsement
which  the  NT  api>e*rcd  to  give  to  the  historical  accuracy
of  the  story  of  Paradise.  It  is  the  correctness  of  the
historical  acceptation  of  that  story  which  criticism  denies,
and  before  proceeding  to  consider  the  results  of  criticism
(see  Creation,  §  i  and  Pak.vuise),  Protestant  students
may  ask  whether  Jesus  Christ  and  the  NT  writers  really
attached  importance  to  the  story  of  Eden  as  a  piece  of
history.  Our  conclusion  will  of  course  have  a  direct
bearing  on  the  interpretation  of  the  other  early
narratives.

Let  us  turn  to  (i. )  passages  spoken  or  written  from  a
purely  Jewish  point  of  view,  (a)  In  Mk.  106-8  (Mt.  19
4-6)  we  have  a  combined  quotation  from
Gen.  1  27  224.  Jesus  passes  over  the  facts
of  the  Paradise  story  altogether,  and  fastens  attention
on  the  statement  that  man  was  from  the  beginning
differentiated  sexually,  and  that,  by  divine  ordinance  (so
no  doubt  Jesus  interprets  Gen.  224),  the  marriage  union
was  to  be  complete.  His  silence  about  the  facts  may  no
doubt  be  explained  by  the  circumstances  ;  elsewhere
Jesus  appears  to  many  to  accept  the  historical  character
of  the  deluge  story  (Mt.  2437-39  1  Lk.  I72627).  But
one  must  be  cautious  ;  the  reference  to  the  deluge  story
presupposes  the  typical  character  of  the  early  narratives,
a  theory  which  is  inconsistent  with  a  strictly  historical
point  of  view,  [b)  In  Rev.  2722214,  a  literalistic  view
of  the  tree  of  life  is  presujiposed.  But  these  passages
are  undeniably  based,  not  so  much  on  Gen.  2,  as  on  the
apocalyptic  descri])tion  in  Enoch  24  /  (<r)  In  Rev.
129 2O2  we  have  a  description  of  Satan  (q.v.  §  6)  as
'  the  ancient  serpent,'  alluding  to  Gen.  3 1  ;  it  is  also
said  that  he  will  '  deceive  '  the  world  as  he  deceived  the
first  man.  It  is  certain,  however,  that  the  writer  also
draws  from  a  well  of  popular  belief,  enriched  from  a
wider  Oriental  source,  to  which  he  gives  as  implicit  a
belief  as  to  the  biblical  statement.

Passing  to  (ii.)  the  Pauline  writings,  we  find  {d)  and
{e)  in  Rom.  5 14  and  i  Cor.  102245  references  to  details
in  the  story  of  .-Vdam  ;  but  the  reference  is  made  in
a  didactic  interest.  Paul  accepts  (as  also  probably
does  Luke)  the  .-Mexandrian  idea  of  the  typical  character
of  the  early  narratives,  and  of  the  double  creation
of  a  heavenly  and  an  earthly  Adam.  The  latter  doc-
trine, which  the  Alexandrian  theology  founded  on
the  two  separate  accounts  of  creation  in  Gen.  1  and
2,  Paul  professes  to  base  on  the  language  of  Gen.  2?.
There  are  also  other  anthropological  ideas  which  he
supports  by  reference  to  the  fall  of  Adam.  His  real
interest  is  in  these  ideas,  not  in  the  story  of  Paradise.
He  did  not  deduce  them  from  the  Eden  story,  and
only  resorts  to  that  narrative  as  containing  material
which  may,  by  the  methods  of  Christian  Gnosis,  be
made  to  furnish  arguments  for  his  ideas.  (/)  In
Phil.  26  we  have  probably  a  contrast  between  the  first
Adam  who  thought  equality  with  God  an  kpira-yixbi
(an  object  of  grasping)  and  the  second  Adam  who,
thinking  far  otherwise,  humbled  himself  even  to  the
death  of  the  cross,  and  thereby  actually  reached  equality
with  God  (Hilgenfeld).  Here  the  story  of  Eden  is  only
illustrative  of  an  idea,  though  the  illustration  is  suggested

59


ADAM  AND  EVE

by  the  favourite  typical  view  already  referred  to.  {g)
In  2  Cor.  11 3  there  is  a  mere  casual  illustration.

(iii.)  Other  NT  writers,  (h)  In  Lk.  838  Adam  is  the
last  human  link  in  the  genealogy  of  the  Saviour.  Tiie
evangelist  suggests  a  contrast  between  the  first  and  the
second  Adam  (see  Lk.  3) ;  but,  scholasticism  apart,  what
he  really  values  is,  not  the  historical  character  of  Adam,
but  the  universal  Saviourship  of  Jesus.  (<)  John 844
contains  a  reference  to  Satan  which  presupposes  the
reality  of  the  temptation  and  fall  of  the  first  man,  but
is  simply  and  solely  dogmatic,  anil  belongs  to  the
peculiar  dualism  of  the  Fourth  Gospel,  (k)  In  i  Tim.
2 12-14  the  social  doctrine  of  the  subordination  of  women
is  apparently  inferred  from  the  story  of  the  first  woman's
temptation.

The  conclusion  to  which  these  phenomena  point  could
be  fully  confirmed  by  a  similar  examination  of  (iv. )
Apocrypha  passages — even  the  references  in  4  Esd. ,
which  imply  so  much  brooding  over  the  Paradise
story,  being  in  close  connection  with  the  typical  theory
of  the  early  narratives,  and  the  whole  system  of  thought
being  quite  as  much  based  on  the  imaginative  book  of
Enoch  as  on  the  sober  narrative  in  Gen.  2-3.  As
a  final  proof  that  a  historical  character  could  not  be
assigned  to  the  latter  in  the  early  Christian  age,  it  is
enough  to  refer  to  the  Book  of  Jubilees  (first  cent.
A.D.,  but  before  70),  which,  at  any  rate  in  its  view  of
the  biblical  narratives,  represents  the  mental  attitude
of  the  times.  Here  the  biblical  stories  are  freely
intermixed  with  legendary  and  interpretative  matter  (see
Charles's  translation).

We  conclude,  therefore,  that  the  NT  writers,  whether
purely  Jewish  or  touched  by  Greek  influences,  regard
traditional  facts  chiefly  from  a  didactic  point  of  view,
as  furnishing  either  plausible  evidence  for  theories
derived  from  other  sources  or  at  any  rate  homiletical
illustrations.

The  literal  and  historical  acceptation  of  the  story
in  Gen.  24(^-4,  which  strong  church  authority  still  con-


3.  Names

'  Adam '  and

'  Eve.'


siders  '  nearer  to  the  truth  than  any
other  interpretation  as  yet  propounded, '  *
may  be  supposed  to  be  reiiuired  by  the
phenomena  of  the  narrative  itself.  Is
this  the  case  ?  First,  are  the  proper  names  Adam  and
Eve  found  in  the  original  story  of  Eden  ?  The  facts  are
these.

(a)  Adam  (din  ;  adafi),  as  a  quasi  proper  name  for  the
first  man  (cp  Enosh),  belongs  with  certainty  only  to
Po  ((jen.  53-5),*  who  has  used  it  just  before  generically,
in  the  sense  of  'man'  or  'men'  (Gen.  5i  avOpwtrwv
[AL])  followed  by  tov  ASafi  [ib.']  (cp  I2627).  The
Yahvvist  (J)  habitually  uses  the  term  Dixn,  '  the  man.
Once,  however,  if  the  text  be  correct,*  we  find  din  (adam)
used  generically  for  '  man  '  or  '  men  '  (220^),  and  once  in
lieu  of  a  proper  name  subsequently  to  the  birth  of  Cain
and  Abel  (425),  if  we  should  not  rather  refer  425/.  to
an  editor.  The  conclusion  is  obvious.  It  is  a  true
insight  which  is  expressed  in  the  quaint  old  couplet  in
Exeter  Cathedral,

Primus  Adam  sic  pressit  Adam,  salvet  Deus  ilium,

Is  qui  venit  Adam  quierere  factus  Adam.
'  Adam '  can  be  used  only  in  one  of  two  senses  ( i )  man-
kind, (2)  the  first  man  (apart  from  all  historical  refer-
ence), and  to  compare  a  supjxjsed  proper  name  Adam*

1  Bp.  John  Wordsworth,  The  One  Religion  (Rampton
Lectures  for  1881),  p.  138.  .So  Bp.  H.  Browne  in  the  S/eal-er's
Comm.'and  Dr.  Leathes  in  .Smith's  DB>^).

2  In  Gen.  219-2388/204,  RV  has  rightly  'the  man
(  =  ^l??)  'o''  ®  •'^V  '  Adam '  ;  so  in  Dt.  82  8  '  children  of  men  for
'  sons  of  Adam '  :  so  EV  mg.  in  Job  31  ^3  '  after  the  manner  of
men'  for  'as  [like]  Adam'  ((S  otherwi.se  1  25).  In  €5ai.  the
article  is  omitted  in  Gen.  2  19*  20a  23  3  I2[L]  20  4  i  25  Dt.  328
1  Ch.  1  I  ((SB  also  in  the  last  two  passages).

8  In  2  20^817  21  read  DlljS  'for  the  man  '  (t<3  ASaji  [AEL])
with  Schr.,  Dillm.,  .ind  Kau.  /AS'.

*  The  present  writer  can  see  no  probability  in  the  view  of
Homme!  (PSBA,  7th  March  1893,  pp.  244y:)that  Adam  in  Gen

60


ADAM  AND  EVE

to  that  of  the  Babylonian  divine  hero  Adapa  (Sayce,
Crit.  and  Mon.  94).  or,  stranger  still,  to  the  Egyptian
Atuni  (I-ef«?bure,  TSBA  9«)  are  s|)cciineiis  of  e(|ual
audacity.  The  word  Wdatn  is  of  course  earlier  than
any  dcvelo[)ed  creation-myth  (j»7  venia  verba),  though
it  implies  (cp  Ass.  admu,  '  child  ' — i.e. ,  '  one  made  '  by
God),'  the  existence  of  the  central  element  of  all  such
mythic  stories  (see  ("kkation.  §§  ao/).

{i)  We  must  now  [jroceed  to  consider  the  name  Eve
(Hawwah  ,nin  ;  Gen.  3ao  AV  mg.  Chavah,  RV  mg.
Havvah.  far»7  [.M.].  Aq.  Ai>o,  Symm.  Zwoy6vo^,  else-
where ei'o  [M.\L]  ;  Jcu*  ;  m-y-i).  This  undoubtedly
occurs  as  a  proper  name  (820  4  i)  ;  but  it  is  most  probable
that  ;i2o  formed  no  part  of  the  original  story,  and  that  in
4  I  the  name  Kve  is  a  later  insertion.-  Can  its  meaning
be  recovered?  According  to  820  Eve  w-as  so  called
'because  she  was  the  mother  of  all  living'  (-n).  This
suggests  the  meaning  '  a  living  being,'  or,  less  probably,
because  an  abstract  conception,  '  life'  (O'^'''- Zw^).'  It
is  also  possible,  no  doubt,  to  compare  iS.  I818  (Kau.
HS)  and  render  '  niother  of  every  kindred,'*  in  which
case  Eve  (.i5n)  will  mean  'kinship,'  or  more  strictly
'mother-kinship,'  the  primitive  type  of  marriage  being
supjxjsed  to  l)e  based  on  mother-kinship  (cp  Gen.  820).
It  is  l)est,  however,  to  adhere  to  the  first  explanation,
if  we  qualify  this  with  the  admission  that  Hawwah  may
possibly  be  a  Hebraised  form  of  a  name  in  a  non-
Hebraic  story.

Next, did  the  writer  of  the  Eden  story  understand

it  historically  ? There  are  at  least  three  points  which

. m,  must  be  regarded  as  decisive  against  this

Narratives  ^.''^'^'  /'^  ^*^*''  "'^'''"'^  ^'^  .''^^  descrip-
tion. The  same  writer  (J),  in  Nu.  2228,
ascrilx;s  the  speaking  of  Balaam's  ass  to  a  special
divine  interference  ;  but  the  speaking  serpent  and  the
enchanted  trees  in  Gen.  2/.  appear  as  if  altogether
natural.  Why?  Because  the  author  h,as  no  fear  of
being  misunderstood.  He  knows,  and  his  readers  know,
that  he  is  not  dealing  with  the  everyday  world,  but
with  a  world  in  which  the  natural  and  the  supernatural
are  one.  (2)  The  idealism  of  the  narratives.  The  writer
chiefly  values  certain  ideas  which  the  narrative  is  so
arranged  as  to  suggest.  (3)  The  total  disregard  of
the  contents  of  these  stories  in  the  subseciuent  narratives
of  the  Yahwist.  To  these  most  critics  will  add  (4)  the
licence  which  the  Yahwist  appears  to  have  taken  of
adding  certain  features  to  the  [)rimitive  story,  e.g.  at
any  rate  the  tree  of  the  knowledge  of  good  and  evil.  It
is  not  safe  to  add  (5)  the  poetical  form  of  the  story  in
Gen.  24'^-3  (Briggs),  for  all  that  seems  probable  is
that  this  story  is  ultimately  based  to  some  e.vtent  on
lost  poetical  traditions.

It  is  equally  certain,  however,  that  the  writer  of  our
Eden  story  did  not  explain  it  allegoriailly.  Reverence
for  tradition  must  have  assured  him  that  the  kernel  of  it
at  any  rate  was  trustworthy.  After  purifying  the
traditional  story  by  the  criticism  of  his  religious  sense,
he  nmst  have  supposed  it  to  give  an  adecjuate  impression
of  what  actually  took  place  once  upon  a  time.  Kant,
among  his  other  services  in  refutation  of  the  unhistorical

6  1-5  is  altered  from  Adon,  i.e.  Yahu  or  Ea.  We  have  no  right
to  take  our  critical  starting-iioint  in  a  list  given  to  us  only  in  P ;
apart  from  this,  the  theory  that  the  lists  of  the  patriarchs  in
Gen.  4  and  5  are  derived,  as  they  stand,  from  liabylonian  lists  is
scarcely  tenable  (see  Cainites,  g$  \Jf.).

I  To  the  proposal  of  Wi.  (,AOF -i^i,,  following  Stucken)
to  connect  DIK  with  Ar.  adamat"",  adhn'"',  'skin,'  Del.'s  note
on  (Jen.  2  7  (Cc«.(5)  77)  will  suggest  a  probable  answer.

a  Cp  Ru.  Urgcsch.  141,  212/  ;  St.  ZA  Tit',  1894,  pp.  266 ^f.

*  NOld.  however  (with  We.  [see  now  l/eid.i-)  154]  and  St.),
thinks  that  njn  properly  meant 'serpent  "(Aram.  H.^)n),  ZDMG
42487.  The  Midrash  {Her.  rah.  par.  21,  on  Gen.  820)  actually
compares  the  same  .Aram,  word,  explaining  the  name  thus,
'She  was  given  to  Adam  to  glorify  his  life,  but  she  counselled
him  like  a  serpent." This  hardly  favours  NTild.'s  suggestion.

*  WRS  Kin.  177.  But  note  that  'rrVs  and  'n.T'?3  mre
standing  Hebrew  phrases  (see  BDB  Lex.).


ADAMAH

I  rationalism  of  the  last  century,  has  the  merit  of
having  forcibly  recalled  attention  to  the  fact  that  the
narrative  of  (ienesis,  even  if  we  do  not  take  it  Ittei^illy,
must  Ije  regarded  as  p-esenting  a  view  of  the  lieginnings
of the history of the human race [Muthmasilicher

I Anfiing der  Menschengeichichte,  1786).

What,  then,  is  the  Eden  story  to  be  called?  It  is  a
problem  which  there  is  a  growing  disjxjsition  to  solve
by  adopting,  in  one  form  or  another,  what  is  called  the
mythical  theory.  The  story  camiol  indeed  Ix;  called  a
myth  in  the  strict  sense  of  the  word,  unless  we  are  pre-
pared to  place  it  on  one  litie  with  the  myths  of
heathenism,  produced  by  the  unconscious  play  of  plastic
fancy,  giving  shajx;  to  the  impressions  of  natural
phenomena  on  primitive  observers.  Such  a  course  is
to  be  deprecated.  The  story  of  Gen.  24^-3  h.as  Ix.-en
too  nmch  affected  by  conscious  art  and  reflection  to  l^e
combined  with  truly  popular  myths.  Hermann  .Schultz
has  coined  the  expression  '  revelation-myth  ' ;  but  this  is
cumbrous,  and  may  suggest  to  some  an  entirely
erroneous  view  of  the  pre-D<uteronomic  conception  of
revelation  (cp  Smend,  AT  Rel.-gesch.  86,  292).  The
truth  is  that  the  story  of  ICden  cannot  be  descrilx-d  by  a
single  phrase.  The  mythic  elements  which  it  contains
have  been  moralised  far  enough  for  practical  neetis,  but
not  so  far  as  to  rob  it  of  it.'*  primeval  colouring.  The
parallel  story  in  the  Zoroastrian  Scripture  called  Vendi-
dad  (I'argard  ii.)  is  dry  and  pale  by  comfjarison.  In
its  union  of  primitive  concreteness  with  a  nascent  sense
of  spiritual  realities  our  Eden  story  stands  alone.

There  is  therefore  no  reason  for  shutting  our  eyes  to
the  plain  results  of  historical  criticism.  It  is  only
when,  .as  was  the  ca.se  when  the  late  George  Smith
made  his  great  discoveries  (see  his  Chaldean  Genesis),
Babylonian  myths  are  adduced  as  proofs  of  the  his-
toricity of  Gen.  1-11,  th.1t  they  may  truly  Ix;  called
Adwpa  dwpa.  It  is  not  the  mythic  basis,  but  the  infused
idealism  of  the  Eden  story,  that  constitutes  its  abiding
interest  for  religious  men  ;  and  it  was  owing  to  a  sense
of  this,  ciuite  as  much  as  to  a  tlesire  to  harmonise  Greek
philosophy  with  Scripture,  that  the  allegoric  spiritualism
of  .Alexandria  found  so  much  fiivour  in  Greek  Christen-
dom. From  the  point  of  view  of  the  pre-critical  j)eriod
this  system  could  not  but  conmieiul  it.self  to  earnest  and
devout  thinkers.  Who,  said  I'hilo,  could  take  the
story  of  the  creation  of  Eve,  or  of  the  trees  of  life  and
knowledge  literally  ?  The  ide.as,  however,  which  the  sage
derives  from  the  stories  are  Greek,  not  early  Jewish.
For  instance,  his  interpretation  of  the  creation  of  Eve  is
plainly  suggested  by  a  I'latonic  myth.  The  longing  for
reunion  which  love  imjjlants  in  the  divided  halves  of  the
original  dual  man  is  the  source  of  sensual  {ileasure
(symbolised  by  the  serpent),  which  in  turn  is  the  begin-
ning of  all  transgression.  Eve  represents  the  sensuous
or  perceptive  part  of  man's  nature,  Adam  the  rea.son.
The  serpent  therefore  does  not  venture  to  attack  Adam
directly.  It  is  sense  which  yields  to  ple-.isure,  and  in
turn  enslaves  the  reason  and  destroys  its  inunortal  virtue.
Ihese  ideas  are  not  precisely  those  which  advocates  of  a
mystical  interpretation  would  put  forw.ard  to-day.  There
is  an  efjual  danger,  however,  of  arbitrariness  in  motlern
allegorising,  even  though  it  be  partly  veiled  by  reverence
for  exegetical  tradition.  It  is  only  by  applying  critical
methods  to  the  story,  and  distinguishing  the  different
elements  of  which  it  is  comjxjseil,  that  we  can  do  justice
to  the  ideas  which  the  Later  editor  or  editors  may  have
sought  to  convey.

For  a  discussion  of  '  Biblical  Mythus '  sec  Schultr,  O  T  Theol.,
c.  2,  and  cp  Smend,  AT  Rel.-gesck.  113,  119-122;  WRS
^.Vl2|  19,  446.  On  the  Avesta  parallels,  see  r>armestetcr,  Le
ZentiaTtsia,  tome  3,  pp.  %T  ff.,  and  Kohut,  '  The  Zcndavesta  and
Gen.  1-11,'  JQU  l'9o],  223-229.  On  apocrj-phal  romance  of
Adam  and  Eve,  see  below,  AroCRVPiiA,  g  10.  T.  K.  c'

ADAMAH  ( HDIN).  i ,  One  of  the  '  fenced  cities '  of
Napht.ali  (Josh.  1936t  ARMAiB  [B],  AAA/v\[e]i  [AL]).

1  The  above  article  is  written  on  the  lines  and  Mmetimes  in
the  words  of  WRS.

62


ADAMANT

Apart  from  its  being  mentioned  along  with  Chinnereth
and  Ramah  and  Hazor  we  have  no  clue  to  its  site  (cp
Di.  ad  loc. ). Cp  AuAMl'.

2,  see  AuAM,  i.

ADAMANT  ("1*0^',  adamas ;  see  below,  §  4).  In
modern  English  poetry  and  rhetorical  prose  —  for  the
word  is  now  not  otherwise  used — adamant
J  is  simply  a  term  for  '  the  embodiment  of
corundum,  .^^^passing  hardness.'  In  the  EV  of  OT
it  can  1)6  retained  only  if  understood  in  the  sense  in
which  it  is  employed  liy  Theophrastifi  —  i.e.,  in  the
sense  of  corundum  (see  §  2).  This  is  crystallised
alumina  (.-VUDj),  an  excessively  tough  and  difficultly
frangible  mineral ;  transparent  or  translucent ;  vitreous,
but  pearly  to  metallic  on  basal  face.  Emery  is  a  com-
pact, crystalline,  granular  variety — grey  to  indigo-blue.
In  a  purer  state  corundum  occurs  in  transparent  crystals
of  various  tints  of  colour — red  (Ruby),  blue  (Sapphire),
green  (Oriental  Emerald),  yellow  (Oriental  Topaz),
purple  (Oriental  Amethyst),  colourless  (White  Sapphire)
— little  inferior  to  the  diamond  in  brilliancy,  though
they  do  not  disperse  rays  of  light  to  the  same  extent.

The  term  dSd/iaj,  which  is  not  known  to  Homer,  was
applied by  the  Cireeks  to  that  substance  which  from
time  to  time  was  the  hardest  known. In


2.  adamas  of
the  Greeks.


Hesiod  it  means  hardened  iron  or  steel,
and  the  adamantine  bonds  by  which
Prometheus  was  fastened  to  a  peak  of  the  Caucasus
(^sch.  /^;'6,  64)  must  have  been  of  this  material,  for
the  manufacture  of  which  the  tribes  near  the  Caucasus,
such  as  the  Colchians  and  the  Chalybes,  were  famous.
The  aMfxas  of  Theophrastus,  however,  though  it  is  not
included  in  his  list  of  twelve  stones  used  for  engraving
on,  nor  mentioned  as  employed  in  the  art  of  engraving
• — was  (i)  a  stone  and  (2)  probably  the  white  sapphire
(a  corundum).  This  is  probable  from  the  fact  that  a
particular  kind  of  carbuncle  (duffpa^)  found  near  Miletus
and  described  as  hexagonal  {yuvLwdrjs  iv  (^wep  Kal  to,
i^dyiova)  was  compared  to  it.  For  noble  corundums
(sapphires,  rubies,  oriental  topaz,  and  oriental  emerald)
are,  as  a  matter  of  fact,  found  as  hexagonal  prisms.
It  is  most  unlikely  that  Theophrastus  meant  the  true
diamond  (see  Diamond,  §1),  though  F^liny  (^V^yxxxvii.
415)  confuses  with  this  his  adamas,  which  —  being
hexagonal  (whereas  the  diamond  would  be  rather  de-
scribed as  octohedral,  or  a  double  pyramid) — was,  like
that  of  Theophrastus,  the  white  sapphire.  As,  however,
Manilius  ( ist  cent.  A.  D. )  knows  the  real  diamond-
he  says  '  sic  adamas,  punctum  lapidis,  pretiosior  auro
est"  (Astronotn.  iv.  926)  —  it  is  quite  possible  that
Jerome  (in  the  Vg. )  meant  by  adamas  the  actual  diamond ;
though  in  that  case  he  was  almost  certainly  wrong  (see
Diamond,  §  i).

In  the  three  places  where  Vg.  uses  adamas,  adaman-
tinits,  it  is  to  render  the  Hebrew  shdmir,  a  word  which
_  OL  ■  .c^m  may  mean  either  '  sharp  -  pointed  '  or
3.S//a/n/rofOT.J„^^i^^3. ^^ each passage the

^  ' reference  is  not  to  a  brilliant  gem  but

to  something  extremely  hard :  '  harder  than  flint '  (Ezek.
89);  parallel  to  'a  pen  of  iron'  (Jer.  17i);  similarly
Zech.7i2.  In  the  Pesh.  shdmir  appears  in  the  Sjt.
form  lamm/rd.  Although  the  Arabic  forms  sdmur""
and  lammtir""  are  identified  by  the  native  lexicographers
with  'almds,  'diamond,'  the  Syriac  sammird  is  used
not  only  of  dSd/xas  as  the  '  hardest  stone ' — employed
in  cutting  others  (Bar  Bahlul,  Ij:x.  col.  39  /.  14,  col.
863  /.  i),  or  in  similes,  for  something  hard  (Isaac  of
Antioch,  ed.  G.  Bickell,  2  62.  /.  39)— but  also  definitely
as  =  fl-juiv/Jts  or  fffxlpn,  .<vt,j .  x^fft  (Duval -Berthelot,
La  Chimie  au  moycn  as^e,  2  9,  /.  5).  There  is  some
probability,  therefore,  in  Bochart's  suggested  connection
of  TDB-  with  (T^i'pis  (whence  the  English  emery),  which
meant  both  corundum  itself  and  granulated  corundum,
emery.  Diosc.  (v.  166)  says: — ' ffixipa  is  a  stone
with  which  gem-engravers  polish  gems,"  and  Hesychius

63


4.  The  versions.


ADASA

{s.v.  ff/xiLipii),  'a  kind  of  sand  with  which  hard  stones
are  polished.'  The  afiipLTjjs  Xidos  of  (S  (Job  41 7  [15]
[BXC]  ;  -Tos  X.  [A]  ■,=-)^  omn  of  MT—  •  a  close  seal '  of
EV,  V.  15)  is  the  same  as  the  crfiupis  of  Dioscorides,
by  which  he  meant  corundum  in  mass.  Hesychius
plainly  means  corundum  in  grains  —  i.e.  emery.  The
latter,  called  Naxium  by  the  Romans  (Pliny,  /yNxxwi.
7  10)  from  the  island  of  Naxos,  where  it  is  still  produced
in  great  quantities,  was  much  used  by  the  Greek  gem-
engravers  of  the  fourth  century  B.C.  Indeed  corundum
and  emery  were  the  only  means  of  cutting  gems  known
to  them  up  to  that  time.  For  Theophrastus  {La/>.  44),
writing  in  313  B.C.,  speaks  of  it  alone  as  used  by  the
engravers.  He  identifies  it  with  the  stone  from  which
whetstones  were  made,  and  says  that  the  best  came
from  Armenia.  Both  corundum  and  emery  are  found
in  many  places  in  Asia  Minor,  as  well  as  in  several  of
the  Greek  islands.

EV  renders  shdmir  by  adamant  only  in  Ezek.  89  and
Zech.  7i2.  In  the  remaining  passage,  Jer.  17 1,  it  less
happily  renders  it  diamond.  The
word  adamant  occurs  also  in  Ecclus.
16 16  AV;  but  RV,  following  ©bka_  o^jts  the  passage.

Vg.  and  Pesh.  have  been  already  dealt  with  (§  3).  ©  in
Ezek.  39  (Sia  navT6<;  [BAQ])  and  Zech.  7  12  (ijreiei  [BKAQr]
represents  another  readinR,  while  in  the  case  of  Jer.  17  i  it  omits
the  whole  passage  [B.'VNQ]  (though  the  verses  appear  in  the
Conipl.  Pofygl.  and,  following  Orig.  and  Theod.,  on  the  mg.
of  Q,  where  TCt;  is  rendered  by  [oioixi]  afia^ai-TtVu)).  With
Zech.  7  12  cp  4  Mace.  16  13.  Strangely  ©  renders  TJJN  by  aSaiiai
in  Am.  7,  EV  Plumbline.  In  the  Targura  tsc  is  identified
with  r-aSn  (see  Flint),  although  the  Talm.  regards  it  as  a
worm,  about  which  extraordinary  legends  are  told  (see  reff.  in
Buxt.  Le.r.  or  Levy  (N//  IF-B  s.v.),^  and  Paul  Cassel  in  a
monograph  ('56)  tried  to  show  that  "I'DC  was  an  excessively
fine,  dust-like  substance.  w.  K.

ADAMI. See  below,  Adami-Xekkb.

ADAMI-NEKEB,  as  RV,  or  more  correctly,  Adami-
Hannkkkb  (2p3n  'pnN),  i.e.  the  pass  Adam i,  on  the
frontier  of  Naphtali,  Josh.  1933!  ;  cp  Vg.  Adami  qucB  est
Neceb.  AV  makes  two  names,  '  Adami,  Nekeb.'  So
<5,  Ap/we KAi naBook  [B],  or  apmai kai nakcB

[A];  L,  however,  aAgmmh  ANNEkB-  The  Jer.
Talm.  (.lA',^'-.  1 1)  also  divides  the  expression,  Adami
being  represented  as  Ddinin,  and  Hannekeb  as
Caidatah.  Neub.  {La  Gdog.  dii  Talm.  222)  and
GASm.  [HG  396)  identify  Adami  with  Damieh.  5  m.
W.  of  Tiberias,  the  site  which  the  PE  Survey  proposes
for  the  'fenced  city"  Adamah  of  v.  36  (.l/^/«.  I384).
This,  however,  seems  much  too  far  S.  when  we  con-
sider that  the  'tree  of  Bezaanim '  (see  Bezaanannim)
was  close  to  Kedesh,  while  Jabneee  [q.v.  n.  2)  appears
to  have  been  a  north  Galilfean  fortress.  These  are  the
two  localities  between  which  Adami-nekeb  is  mentioned
in  Josh.  1933.  It  is  probable  that  the  name  Nkbu  in
the  Karnak  list  of  Thotmes  III.  {RPy^^  5  4?)  means
the  pass  Adami.  T.  K.  C.

ADAR,  RV,  more  correctly.  Addar  ("T^N  ;  [eic]
CAPAAa  [B],  a2^Aapa  [AL]),  an  unknown  site  men-
tioned after  Hezron  [q.v.)  as  one  of  the  points  on  the
southern  frontier  of  Judah  (Josh,  lost)-

ADAR  ("l"TNI  [Aram.].  EzraSist;  "ll^  [Heb.]),
Esth.  .3713  812  91-19;  iMacc.74349;  2  Mace.  1036).
See  Month,  §§  3,  5.

ADASA  (a2^aca  [ANV]),  the  scene  of  the  victory  of
Judas  the  Maccabee  over  Nicanor  (i  Mace.  74045).  lay.
as  is  implied  in  the  narrative,  not  very  far  from  Beth-
horon.  Josephus  [Ant.  xii.  IO5)  makes  its  distance  from
Beth-horon  30  stadia,  and  Jer.  and  Eus.  call  it  a  village
near  Gophna  ( OS,  93  3  220  6).  Gophna  being  obviously
the  modern  Jifna  between  Jerusalem  and  Shechem,  it
is  reasonable  to  identify  Adasa  with  the  ruin  'Adaseh,
on  a  bare  shapeless  down,  8  m.  S.  of  that  place  {PEP

J  Cp  Leopold  Low,  '  Graphische  Requisiten  u.  Erzeugnisse
bei  den  Juden'  ('70),  pp.  181-83,  in  Beitr.  z.  jfut.  Alterthums-
kunde,  Bd.  1  of  the  Leipzig  'Institut  zur  FOrderung  d.  Israel.
Literatur.'

64


ADBEEL

A/rm.Sio6).  The  remark  of  Kus.  that  Adasa  belonped
to  Judah,  at  which  Jcr.  expresses  so  muclj  surprise,
rests  oil  a  confusion  between  aSaffa,  the  <?*  reading
of  IIadashah  (i/.v.)  in  Josh.  1. '137,  and  the  place  of
like  name  in  the  passage  before  us.

ADBEEL  (^N3"|N.  n&BAehA  [AKI>  in  (Jen.,  A  in
Cli];  -Aaih\  [/^  in  Gen.,  H  inCh.];  aBAihA  [L  in
<  li-  ] ;  aBAch Aoc  [Jos. .-/«/.  i.  12  4] ;  cp  Sab.  7mX  ;  see
Ges. -Hu.  s.r.),  one  of  the  twelve  sons  of  Ishmael
(Gen.  2r>i3;  iCh.  129!).  Doubtless  the  Arabian  trilx;
Idibiil,  mentioned  by  Tiglath-pileser  III.  (A'/iiio/.  56)
with  Tenia,  Sheba,  and  Kphah,  but  distinct  from  the
Idibi'ilu  named  in  in.scriptions  of  the  same  king,  who
was  a  A'i/>u — i.e.,  not  'warden  of  the  marches'  but
'governor'  (of  the  N.  Arabian  land  of  Musri.  See
MiZKAiM  II.  {/«]).  CpWi.  ./M.r.  /■WscA.  25'.  For  a
sli!,'Iitl\-  (iiflereiit  view,  see  Lsn.MAKl,,  §  4  (3).

ADDAN  (I'J'X,  §  57,  connected  with  the  divine  name
.\cUlu  ;  SCO  HadaI),  Adoniua.m),  the  name,  or  part  of
the  name,  of  an  uiiidentitied  town  or  district  in  Hahy-
lonia,  mentioned  in  the  great  post-e.\ilic  list  (see  Kzka,
ii.  §  9):  Kzra259  (hA&n  [B.\L])  =  Neh.  76i,  Addon
(hrcoN  [MN.\],  hAan  [L])=iEsd.5  36,  where  pS  is
represented  by  -alir,  -alan  of  AV  CilAKA.V niAl.AK,
KV  CJIAKAATHAI.AN  (.  .  .  o.\av  [B],  [A^]  oXap  [.\],
. . . ibav  [L]). Cp  Cherub,  ii.

ADDAR  (TIN),  Josh.  ISst  RV,  AV  Auar  [q.v. ).
ADDAR  (TIX ),  I  Ch.  8  at- See  Ard.
ADDER. The  details  are  given  under  Skri'KNT  (§  i,
nos.  2,  4,  5,  6,  7). The  Hebrew  names  are  :

1.  2vj':v,  \ik'u,b  (Ps.  I4O3  [4]!),  generally  believed
to  be  a  kind  of  adder. See  Serpk.nt,  §  r  (4).

2.  fns,  pfthen  (Ps.  f;84[5]  91  13.  AV  nig.  'asp,'  like
AV  elsewhere),  also  believed  to  be  some  species  of  adder
or  viper. See  Skrpent,  §1(5).

3-  'Ji'Es,  J//A'(;///(Pr.2332  ;  nig.  like  text  elsewhere,
AV  'cockatrice,'  RV  '  basilisk,'  ©»ka,  Kfpi.ary)%;  also
Is.  11  8  595  E\'  nig. ),  likewise  some  kind  of  viper.  See
Skkpknt,  §  I  (7).

4-  I'SS.  sepha  (Is.  14 29  EV  mg. ).  See  Serpk.nt,  g  i,
no.  6.

5.  fSi'Sr,  ifphiphon  (Gen.  49i7t,  AV  mg.  'arrow-
snake,' RV  mg. 'horned  snake'), the cerastes. See

SKRI'KNT.  §  2  (2).

ADDI.  I.  The  sons  of  Addi  in  lEsd.  931  [aZhdv
[B],  a5ot  [.\],  thva  [L])  appear  to  take  the  place  of
the  b'ne  Pahath  Moab  of  Ezral03o;  but  the  name
probably  represents  Adna  [q.v.,  no.  i),  the  first  in  the
group.  In  ©■-  the  missing  name  is  restored,  but
without  <S5''s  usual  rryovfi^vov  (see  Pah.\TH-Moab).

!•.  Twenty-fourth  in  the  ascending  gene.-ilogical  series,  which
hci^ins  with  Joseph,  Mary's  husb.ind,  in  Lk.  3  23-38  (aSSti
[Ti.  WFI  f.illowing  UNA]). See  Genealogies  of  Jesls,  §  3.

ADDO  (  aAAu)  [A],  etc. ),  i  Esd.  6 1. See  Iddo,  iii.  3.

ADDON  (I'nX),  Neh.  76i  =  Ezra  2s9,  Addas.

ADrUS.  I.  The  sons  of  .\ddus,  one  of  the  groups
added  in  i  Esd.  534[B.\]  (ai55oi's,  see  Swete  ;  perhaps
corresponding  to  ArrtX  [\.])  to  the  '  .sons  of  the  servants
of  Solomon'  (see  I.evitks)  in  the  gre.at  post-exilic  list,
Ezra2  =  Neh.  7  =  i  Esd.  5  ;  see  Ezra,  ii.  §  8.

2. I  Esd.  538. RVjADDi-s. See  Bakzii.lai,  3.

ADER  nyj).  I  Ch.  8i5t,  RV  Eder  (,/.v.,  ii.  i).

ADIDA (aAiAa [A]), 1 Mace.  1238 1813. See

IlADID.

ADIEL  {hn'iy,  §38,  '  God  passes  by '?—cpAdaiah).

I.  One  of  the  Simeonite  chieftains  who  dispossessed
the  Meunim  (see  RV).  i  Ch.  4  36t  {eSiv\  [A],  o5ai7X  [L],
perhaps  awtraX  [B]).  See  Geixjr,  2.  and  Ham,  ii.  ;  and
cp  .Amai.ek,  §  4.

2.  A priest in the genealogy  of  Maasai  (iCh.  9i2t aSiijA


ADMAH

3.  Ancestor  of  Azmavktu,  </.v.,  ii.  4  (iCh.  27a5t  atJcifA
(HAL)).

4.  .See  Adlkl.

ADIN(P1J^,  §  57,  perhaps  shortetied  from  jnyW.
'  Yahwe  is  pleasant,'  cpjKHOADUAN,  Eui-.S  i  ;  aA[€]iN
[B.\],  AAAei  [E].  .//v.v).

The  b'ne  Adin,  a  family  in  the  great  post-exilic  list  (see  Kzka,  ii.
I9);  Kzra2i5  (oil.- [HI,  aa«.  [A],  «Mti  (Lj)- Neh.  72o(T,«lf)i./
1BA1)=I  Esd.  5  14  (aietAiou  or-iav(I!J,  a«iM>i;IAl,  KV  AuiNi).
A  hand  of  fifty  males  of  this  family  came  up  with  Kzra  ;  Kzra86
=  I  Ksd.  8  32  (At)A.v  a^ifa&ap  |  L],  /.<•.,  Adin  and  KU-d,  the  name
of  their  head),  '^he  family  was  represented  among  tlic  signa-
tories to  the  covenant,  Neh.  10  16I17]  (ijitrjif  [liKA],  oieic  [I,]).
See  K/KA.  i.  S  7.

ADINA  (K:ny,  '  blissful,'  cp  under  Adi.n  ;  AA[eJiN&
[BAL]  ;  .i/i/.v.i ),  a  Reubenite  chieftain  in  David's  service
(i  Ch.  ]l42t). See  DAVID,  §  11  u,  ii.

ADINO,  '  the  I'ziiite,'  is  aiJ[x.'nded  unexpectedly  in
EVof  2  S.  238  to  the  description  of  D.avid's  princi|)al  hero.

The  readings  of  (D  are.:  aSavuiv  o  aauivaioi  [U],  aittv  o  -coot
[A],  with  the  doublet  {ovTOi)  etriraaaTO  Triv  f>Ofj.(f)aiav  avTou|in  |{,
though  not  in  A]  from  i  Ch.  11  11  (I5KAL),  where  A*  has  ttTvaro
....  ©L,  however,  gives  the  single  rendering  (of  a  different
text],  OUTOS  &t(KO<rtiti  tijv  6ia<T<ffui)»'  avTwv.

A  comparison  of  z'.  18  shows  that  what  is  required  to
make  sense  is  '  brandished  his  spear,'  in":n-nK  ttj',  and
these  words  are  actually  given  in  iCh.  llii  in  lieu  of
I3i'>'.i  ijnv.  the  words  out  of  w  hich  MT  (reading  •jsj,-.-)  and
its  followers  including  E\'  vainly  atlemiJt  to  extract  sense.
Modern  critics  (except  Klo. )  correct  .MT  in  accordance
with  iCh.

Klo.'s  correction,  'He  is  our  pride,  he  is  our  terrible  one'
(.ifter  which  he  ventures  to  render  Vj?  'because  o{')-'iy-j^  K?n
13;i"i;^'  N'^,  words  which  are  supposed  to  be  a  quotation  from  a
warlike  song  referring  to  this  hero,  is  too  ingenious.  The  words
niigbt,  it  is  true,  be  viewed  as  a  misplaced  marginal  quot.itii  ti
relative  to  I)n7-iti ;  but  then  we  should  still  have  to  supply  sonm
verb  as  a  predicate  to  complete  the  account  of  David  s  warrior.
See  ISHIIAAI.  ;  Jashobea.m.

ADINU  (aAinoY  [A]).  I  Esd.  5i4  RV  ;  AV,  RV  m-r.
.\dkn.

ADINUS,  RV  lAOiNLS  (iAA[e]iNOC  [BA]),  i  Esd.

94S  ^  Nth.  S7, JAMIN.

ADITHAIM  (D^n""!!? ;  on  form  of  name  see  Names,
§  107  ;  AreeOAlM  [E];  B.V  om.,  but  in  r.  34  A  h.as
AAlAGAeiM  and  B  has  lAoyecoe  for  'Tajjpuah'),  an
unknown  site  in  the  ShephClah  of  Judah,  apjjarentiy
somewhere  in  its  NE.  portion  (Josh.  ir»36t).

ADLAI  ('"p-iy;  aAai  [BA] ;  aAAi  [L]  ;  .v/v/,-
I  Ch.  27  29t),  see  Shapiiat,  5.

ADMAH  (npiN,  aAama  [BAL])  and  Zeboim
(Hos.  118  EV,  Gen.  10 19  AV,  Dt.  2923  [22]  AV),  or,  as
in  (ien.  1428  ICV  ami  everywhere  RV  except  in  Hos.,
Zeboiim  (Hos.  118  Kt.  CNis.  probably  =  c-yis  [see
below];  Gen.  IO19  Kt.  op^i  142  8  Dt.2923  [22]  all
Kt.  c"2s  ;  Kr.  everywhere  d;i:v  :  ceBcoeiM  [B.\E] ;
.Samar.  textom.  both  names  in  (Jen.  10 19;  aabana.  [E]  in
Gen.  142),  are  mentioned  togetheriii  passagesof  the  Penta-
teuch and  in  Hos.  118.  In  (ien.  14  2  8  they  are  slated  to
have  had  kings  of  tlTeir  own(see  Shin  ab)  who  joined  in  the
revolt  of  certain  southern  |)eoples  against  Chedorlaoiiier
king  of  Elam  ;  in  Dt.  2923  [22]  {(Xfjiufiv  [AV])  to  have
shared  the  fate  of  Sodom  and  Gomorrah.  In  Gen.
10:9  {(Tt^m/M  [A])  they  are  mentioned  in  the  definition
of  the  boundaries  of  Can-aan  proper — ;.<'.,  the  land  W.
of  the  Jordan.  P2xcept  in  Hos.  118  the  names  Admah
and  Zelx)im  are  always  preceded  by  those  of  Sodom  and
Gomorrah.  Of  the  Pentateuch  passages  all  except
Gen.  10 19  are  certainly  post-exilic,  and  it  is  very  possible
that  Kautzsch  and  Socin  are  right  in  regarding  the
mention  of  Gomorrah,  .Admah,  and  Zeboim  in  Gen.  10  lo
as  interpolated.  In  this  case  we  have  no  right  to
assume  it  as  certain  that  Admah  and  Zeboim  were
among  the  cities  which  an  early  Hebrew  tradition  stated
to  have  been  destroyed  by  brimstone  and  fire  out  of
66


ADMATHA

heaven.  Hos.  118  (imitated  perhaps  in  Is.  159^)  only
implies  that  Admah  and  Zeboim  had  suffered  some
terrible  destruction.  As  to  the  mode  of  their  destruc-
tion and  as  to  their  locality  no  information  is  given.  It
is,  in  fact,  not  at  all  likely  that  the  least  famous  of  the
'  cities  of  the  plain  '  should  have  been  selected  by  Hosea
as  representatives;  Amos  (4ii)  and  Isaiah  (I910)
mention  only  Sodom  and  Gomorrah.  It  is  possible
that  there  was  once  some  distinct  legend  respecting  the  >
destruction  of  Admah  and  Zeboim.  Possibly,  too,
Zeboim  was  not  a  town,  but  the  name  of  the  district  in
which  Admah  was  situated.  Against  this  we  must  not
appeal  to  Uen.  14  2,  since  the  names  of  the  kings  there
given  are  probably  unhistorical.  Nor  can  one  help  con-
jecturing that  (if,  as  Rodiger,  in  Ges.  Thes.  suggests,
n'N3s  =  n'5;3!i)  Hosea  alludes  to  a  story  which  accounted
for  the  dreary  character  of  the  Valley  of  Zeboim  (now
the  Wddy  el-Kclt ;  see  Zkboim,  i),  analogous  to  that
connected  with  the  valley  of  Achor.  Such  stories  of
overthrown  villages  are  not  uncommon.  See  Sodom
AND  Gomorrah.  t.  k.  c.

ADMATHA  (NnOHX),  one  of  the  'seven  princes'
(cp  Ezra 7 14)  at  the  court  of  Ahasuerus  (Est.  Ii4t;
[BAN,  L  om.  ]).  According  to  Marquart,  however,  these
seven  names  have  arisen  from  an  original  three  (cp  the
three  satraps,  Dan.  61  /  )  of  which  Carshena  [q.v. )  is
one,  Shethar  and  Tarshish  are  corrupt  variations  of  the
second  (see  SHi:Tii.\R),  and  Meres  and  Marsena  corrup-
tions of  the  third  (see  Marsena).  Admatha  (or  rather
Nmcn)  would  then  be  the  father  of  Haman,  and  for
'31CD  (cp  note  to  Memucan)  should  be  substituted  '::xn
(the  designation  applied  to  Haman).  See,  further,  Fund,
b^ff. Cp  Esther,  §  3.

ADMIN  (AAA\eiN  [I^N]),  a  link,  in  the  genealogy
of  Joseph,  between  ^Vniiiiinadab  and  Arni  (Aram),
in  Lk.  833  RV  mg.  and  W&H.  See  Genealogies
OFjESL-S,  §3.

ADMINISTRATION. See  Government.

ADNA.  I.  (X3-|y  [Ginsb.  q.v.\  Hiiy  [Ba.]. )  One  of
the  b'ne  Pahath-moah  in  the  list  of  those  with  foreign
wives  (see  Ezra,  i.  §  5  end),  F:zral0  3o  {aiSaive  [B],  e5.
[B^''],  fdve  [A],  aiavaatjie  [L  combining  with  next  name,
which  in  i  Esd.  9  31  (L)  is  (Ti8ia\,  eSevex  rjk  [n  =
Adna -I- following  name,  Chelae])  =  1  Esd.  931  [eSva
[L]),  Addi,  I.  With  this  name  should  be  compared
Hadauna,  a  Jewish  name  of  the  fifth  century  R.  C. ,
mentioned  by  Hilprccht  as  found  at  Nippur  (cp  Hazitu

2.  (n:"!);  [Ginsb.  Bii.]),  priest  temp.  Joiakim  (see  Ezra,  ii.  §§,6  b,
11),  Neh.  1-2  15  (aSam?  [H^-^  "'«■  '"f],  om.  [BN*A],  eSi/a?  [L]).

ADNAH  [ry-nV;  eANAAc[BA],  -NAc[L]),  a  cap-
tain in  Jehoshaphat's  army  (2  Ch.  17 14).

ADNAH  (n^ny  [Ginsb.  Ba.].  other  readings  mny,
n:*!!?;  eANA  [BAXL],  Ednas).  A  Manassite,  who
deserted  from  Saul  to  David  (i  Ch.  I220  [21]).  See
David,  §  ii  a  iii.

ADONAI  CnX). See  Names,  §§  119,  109  n.

ADONI-BEZEK  (pH  "•yiX,  in  v.  7  with  makkef;
AAtONiBezeK  [B.VL]  Judg.  I4-7  ;  ©  has  AAoiNlBezCK
also  in  Josh.  10  13  where  MT  has  Adoni-zedek;  a  third
variation  is  AAcoNizeBeK  [Jos.  Procop.  ©™dd.-]  .  the
change  may  be  accidental  or  harmonistic),  a  Canaanite
king  whom  Judah  and  Simeon,  invading  southern  Pales-
tine, encountered  and  defeated  at  Bezek.  Adoni-bezek
fled,  but  was  overtaken,  made  prisoner,  and  mutilated.
He  was  afterwards  carried  to  Jerusalem,  where  he  died
(Judg.  I4-7).  The  name  Adoni-bezek  is  commonly
interpreted 'Lord of  (the  city)  Bezek'; but such  a

1  0  closes  this  verse  thus,  koi  to  Kutakoi-nov  "XSafia  [I5NA;
ft  sup.  ras.  «1],  i.e.,  'and  the  remnant  of  Admah.'  This  may
possibly  be  correct  (see  Duhm,  /es.  105,  Ch.  /ntr.  Is.  91V
Moab  may  be  figuratively  called  Admah,  just  as  Jerusalem  IS
figuratively  called  Sodom  (Is.  1  10).

67


ADONIJAH

formation  is  entirely  anomalous.  In  similar  compounds
(Adoni  with  proper  name)  the  second  element  is
regularly  the  name  of  a  god,  never  of  a  place  (there
are,  in  fact,  no  Hebrew  or  Canaanite  proper  names  of
persons  in  the  OT  thus  compounded  with  the  name  of
a  locality) ;  nor  is  'lidon  used  of  the  sovereign  of  a  city
or  country.  In  Jos.  lOi  /;,  which,  in  spite  of  radical
differences,  is  based  on  a  source  closely  akin  to  that  of
Judg.  1,  if  not  identical  with  it,  the  head  of  the  native
kings  who  first  made  front  against  the  Israelite  invasion
of  the  S.  is  Adoni-zedek,  king  of  Jerusalem  (see  Adoni-
ZEDEC)  ;  and  it  is  to  Jerusalem  that  Adoni-bezek  is
taken  (?  by  his  own  servants)  to  die  (Judg.  1  7).  Hence
the  conjecture  offered  under  Adoni-ZEDEC  appears  very
probable. See  also  Bezek.  g.  F.  M.

ADONIJAH  (n»nN,  2S.  34;  1K.I5718228;  iCh.
82;  Neh.  10i6[i7]^elsewhere-"in*nN;  '  Yah  we  is  lord,"
§36;  cp  Phoen.  Si'njiK,  ic::wnN ;  AAooN[e]iAC  [I^A],
OPNIA  [L])-

I.  David's  fourth  son  (in  i  Ch.  82  a5wv[e]ia  [BA  ;  so
also  in  2  K.  2  21^],  opuias  [L]).  Nothing  is  known  of  his
mother,  Haggith.  Like  Absalom,  he  was  born  at  Hebron
(2  S.  84 ;  opv€t.\  [B],  -j/ias  [A]) ;  like  him  he  was  conspic-
uous by  his  graceful  presence,  while  like  all  David's  sons
he  never  felt  the  constraint  of  his  father's  authority.  Ab-
salom's death  left  him  heir  to  the  throne,  and  '  all  Israel,"
as  he  said  himself,  '  expected  that  he  would  become  king '
(iK.  215).  He  therefore,  in  the  manifest  failure  of
the  old  king's  faculties,  thought  it  time  to  assume  a
semi-royal  state,  like  Absalom  before  him  (iK.  I5).
On  his  side  were  the  old  and  tried  servants  of  David —
Joab,  the  commander  of  the  forces,  Abiathar,  who  repre-
sented the  old  priestly  family  of  Eli,  and  had  been  the  com-
panion of  David's  wanderings — followed  by  the  pcoplfe
as  a  whole  (see  i  K.  215).  The  '  new  men,'  however,
Benaiah,  captain  of  the  body-guard,  and  Zadok,  a  priest
of  origin  comparatively  obscure,  looked  with  evil  eyes
on  his  pretensions,  and  with  the  powerful  aid  of  the
prophet  Nathan  espoused  the  cause  of  the  son  of
Bathsheba.  The  chance  of  each  party,  unless  David's
death  was  to  be  followed  by  civil  war,  lay  in  a  sudden
stroke  which  would  put  their  claimant  in  possession  and
overawe  his  opponents.

The  storj'  is  graphically  told,  though  perhaps  with
a  secret  sympathy  with  Adonijah.  Nor  can  we  doubt
that,  like  the  other  narratives  of  the  same  writer,  it  is
in  the  main  trustworthy.  Adonijah  made  the  first
move.  He  invited  all  the  royal  princes  save  Solomon,
together  with  Job  and  Abiathar  and  '  all  the  men  of
Judah,'  to  a  sacrificial  feast  at  a  well-known  sacred
stone  (see  Zoheeeth)  close  to  Jerusalem  (r  K.  I9/. ).
They  had  left  the  weak  old  king,  however,  exposed  to  the
machinations  of  their  enemies,  while  the  fortress  was  in
the  hands  of  Benaiah  and  his  trained  soldiers.  Nathan
was  quick  to  seize  the  opportunity.  By  the  help  of
Bathsheba,  and  with  a  presentation  of  facts  which  may
or  may  not  have  been  perfectly  accurate,  ^  he  obtained
from  David  an  order  for  the  immediate  enthronement
of  Solomon.  Adonijah's  banquet  was  disturbed  by
news  that  Solomon  reigned  by  his  father's  will,  and
was  protected  by  Benaiah  and  the  foreign  guard.  The
company  broke  up  in  dismay,  and  Adonijah  sought  an
asylum  at  the  horns  of  the  altar.  The  clemency

of  Solomon,  however,  spared  his  life,  and  but  for  an
ill-timed  revival  of  his  ambitious  dreams  he  might  have
rei^iained  in  a  happy  obscurity.  The  cause  of  his  ruin
was  a  petition  to  be  allowed  to  marry  Abishag,  for
which  he  obtained  the  support  of  Bathsheba.  Appar-
ently the  queen-mother  did  not  detect  his  secret  political

1  The  question  is  whether  the  promise  of  Solomon  asserted
by  Nathan  in  i  K.  1  24  is  a  clever  fiction  of  Nathan,  or  not,  and
whether  the  description  of  the  doings  of  Adonijah  is,  or  is  not,
exaggerated.  The  former  point  is  the  more  important  of  the
tvvo.  We.  (C//261  n.)and  Ki.  (Hist.  ii.  180/)  take  different
sides.  We.'s  reply  is,  of  course,  to  us  the  less  palatable  one;
but  we  must  consider  Semitic  craftiness,  and  the  improbability
of  a  merely  private  promise  of  Solomon. See  i  K.  1  12  13.

68


ADONIKAM

motive ;  indeed  Abishag  had  only  nominally  been
David's  concubine.  Solomon,  however,  regarded  the
pro(K)saI  as  virtually,  if  not  expressly,  a  claim  to  the
throne,  and  Adonijah  perished  by  Solomon's  sentence
and  Benaiah's  sword.

Compare  the  narrative  of  Stade  ((7/i.  bk.  v.  c.  2),
with  the  somewhat  different  treatment  of  the  matter
by  Kittfl  (/Hit.  ii.  c.  4).  w.  e.  a.

2.  A  signatory  to  the  covenant  (see  Ezra,  i.  $  7),  Neh.  10 16
[17]  ((jafia  [HK  (tliDUgh  the  names  are  otherwise  divided)],
ooi'aa  [A],  aScDi'ia?  [1,)).  In  the  great  post-exilic  list,  Ezra'2  =
Neh.  7  =  I  Esd.  5  (see  Ezra,  ii.  §  9),  and  in  the  list  (Ezra  8)  of
those  who  came  with  Ezra,  the  name  appears  {zm.  13  18  14  13
respectively)  perhaps  more  correctly  (so  Gray,  HPN  137,  n.  2)
as  Adonikam  (^.?'.).

3.  A  Levite,  temp.  Jehoshaphat  :  2  Ch.  17  8  (aiiaviav  [BA1,
-.-.a[L]).

4.  See  Arau NAH.

5.  See  Aknan.

ADONIKAM  (D|'^"»jhK;  'the  Lord  is  risen  up,'  cp
Ahikam  ; AA^N[eliK&M[BAL]).

The  b'ne  Adoiiikani,  a  family  in  the  great  post-exilic  list
(see  EzKA,  ii.  §§  9,  St);  Ezra  2  13  {a&uviKav  [Bl)=Xeh.  7i8
(aJetxa^  [B],  ofiffiKa^i  [J<J)=  i  P2sd.  5  14  ;  represented  in  Ezra's
caravan  (see  Ezra,  i.  §  2,  ii.  §  15  (i)  tf),  Ezra  8  13  (aSoveiKa/n
[B])=  1  Esd.  8  39  {aStoviaKaifi.  [B]);  and  prol>ably  among  the
signatories  to  the  covenant  (see  Ezra,  i.  §  7),  Neh.  10 16  [17] ;
see  Adonijah,  2.

ADONIRAM  (D-rnX,  §  40,  'the  Lord  is  high';
AAa)N[e]ipAM  [H.-\.L]  ;  apoaikam).  chief  receiver  of
tribute  under  David  (2  S.  2O24),  Solomon  (iK.  46;
5r4  [2S]),  and  Rehoboam,  on  whose  deposition  he  was
stoned  to  death  by  the  Israelites  ( i  K.  12 18  ;  2  Ch.  10  i8t
Diin,  Hadokam,  aSojpafi  [A]).

'in  2  S.  20  24  (ititSpaflh])  and  i  K.  12  t8  (apafi  [B]  ;  Aiiuram),
it  is  incorrectly  (cp  We.  Dr.  TL'S)  written  Adoram  (Cl'lN).
Hilprecht  (PEF  Qu.  Si.,  Jan.  '98,  p.  55),  indeed,  attempts  to
explain  the  form  by  connecting  it  with  Adduramu  ('Addu  is
high'),  a  Jewish  name  on  a  tablet  from  Nippur;  notice,  how-
e\or,  that  1  is  not  expressed  and  that  (Rbal  reads  'Adonirain.'

ADONIS  only  in  the  phrase  D*pDW  "ytpj  (a  double
plur. ),  Is.l'ioRVmg.  'plantings  of  Adonis '^  (EV  has

1.  OT  reference,  'f^"^^^"^]  ^^^^'^  ')■  }}}  Justification  of
the  rendering  see  Che.  Is.^^^  1  108,
Kittel  in  Di.  /«.(«'  To  Ewald  (Proph.  2  116,  Lekrb.  d.
lu'br.  S/>r.  718,  n.  3)  and  still  more  to  Lag.  {Semitica,
1  31,  llcbers.  205,  n.)  is  due  this  important  correction
of  the  rendering.  Clermont -Ganneau  should  also
be  consulted  (Etudes  d'airht'ol.  orientale  1,  1880,  pp.
26^).  also  WRS  Eng.  Hist.  Re^K,  1887,  p.  307;  but
cp  We.  Ar.  Heid.^^'i  7  n.  Na'aman  (  =  pleasant,
gracious)  was  doubtless  a  title  of  the  '  Lord  '  (Adon,
whence  Adonis),  and  Adonis -worship  seems  to  have
penetrated  under  this  title  into  Syria  and  Palestine,  as
we  gather  from  the  OT  name  Xa.aman  {q.v.\  from  the
names  Numana  and  Namana  in  S.  Palestine  in  pre-
Israelitish  times  (Thotmes  III.),  and  from  the  Nahr
Na'man  (N.  of  Carmel),  which  seems  to  be  the  Belus
of  the  ancients.  That  Adonis-worship  flourished  in  Pales-
tine when  Isaiah  wrote  can  easily  be  believed.  The
N.  Israelites  were  at  this  time  specially  of)en  to  Syrian
influences.  They  '  forgot '  Yahwe  because  he  seemed
unable  to  protect  them.  So  Isaiah  indignantly  exclaims,
'  Therefore,  though  thou  plantest  (little  gardens  with)
shoots  of  Adonis,  and  stockest  them  with  scions  (dedi-
cated) to  a  foreign  god  .  .  .  the  harvest  shall  vanish
in  a  day  of  sickness  and  desperate  pain.'  The  phrase
'  shoots  of  Adonis  '  points  to  the  so-called  '  gardens  of
Adonis,'  baskets  containing  earth  sown  with  various
plants,  which  quickly  sprang,  up  and  as  quickly
withered.  In  reality  they  were  symbols  of  the  life  and
death  of  Adonis  ;  but  Isaiah  takes  the  withering  as  an
image  of  the  withered  hopes  of  Israel.  On  these
'  gardens '  see  Frazer,  Golden  Bough  1  2S4  /  ;  WRS
Rel.  Sem.i"^)  414;  Ohnefalsch  Richter,  Kvpros  1^2/. ;
and  cp  Che. 'Isaiah,'  in  SBOT  (Eng.),  146.

Adonis  was  one  of  those  local  gods  who  live  with
and in nature, who  suffer  in sunmier's drought, die

1  0  <;(^;Tev^oa7^l<^T0»' [BKAQr].


ADONI-ZEDEC

with  the  winter,  and  live  again  with  the  early  spring.
Legend,  however,  explained  the  death  of  the  god  as
2  Leeeiid  ^"  event  of  far-off  times.  Adonis,  it  said,
and  cult  ^^''^  '^'"''"'^  ^*"'^'  hunting  the  Xxxit  in  Leb-
anon, and  accordingly  in  the  heat  of  summer
was  solemnised  the  great  mourning  festival  (cp  WRS
Ril.  Scm.*->  411),  at  which  his  corpse  was  exhibited
resting  upon  a  bed  of  flowers — the  quickly  fading
Adonis-garden.  Far  up  in  I^-banon,  near  the  fountain
of  'Afka,  death  suddenly  overtook  him  ;  whereupon
the  spring  became  red  with  his  blood.  By  Afka  was
an  ancient  temple  of  the  goddess  Aphrodite  (so  Luc.
Dea  Syr.  9  ;  l':us.  I'it.  Const.  3  55,  Sozom.  HE  2  5),
of  which  the  ruins  still  remain  ;  probably  it  contained
the  grave  of  the  god.  This  legend,  and  the  cult  con-
nected with  it,  must  be  very  ancient.  Indeed,  in  a
source  as  early  as  the  papyrus  Anast.  I.,  mention  is
made  of  the  goddess  of  the  '  mysterious  '  city  of  Byblus.
In  its  origin  it  was  distinct  from  the  Babyh^nian  legend
of  the  loves  of  Istar  and  Tammuz,  though  at  an  early
date  both  this  legend  and  the  Egyptian  story  of  Osiris
were  combined  with  it  (Plut.  de  Is.  15,  Luc.  Dea  Syr.  7;
cp  Apollodor.  ii.  1,  3,  7,  etc. ).  The  cult  spread  through
all  the  Phoenician  colonies,  especially  to  Cyprus,  whence
in  the  seventh  century  it  was  imported  into  Greece.
Adonis,  however,  is  not  to  be  taken  as  the  true  name
of  the  god  ;  every  god  can  be  called  '  Adon,'  lord,  just
as  every  goddess  is  entitled  to  Ije  called  Rabbath,  'the
lady.'  At  Byblus  (see  Gehal,  i. )  the  favourite  of  the
goddess  of  Byblus  was  invoked  as  the  '  lord  '  par  excel-
lence, and  thus  it  was  that  the  Greeks  came  to  call  him
Adonis.  What  his  real  name  was  we  do  not  know  ;
for  the  name  Tammuz,  which  he  also  bears,  is  Baby-
lonian, and  it  is  doubtful  whether  it  ever  becanje
naturalised  in  Phoenicia.

Possibly  his  name  survives,  unsuspected,  among  the  many
divine  names.  Or  perhaps  the  recollection  of  his  sad  fate  may  have
hindered  the  formation  of  prof)er  names  derived  from  his  :  nor  is  it
impossible  that  in  the  worship  he  never  received  a  real  name  at
all.l  For  in  point  of  fact  Philo,  who  never  mentions  Adonis,  says
of  a  certain  Eliun  (r\'^];)  =  v\\ii.<no';,  that  he  lived  with  a  woman
named  Berut  in  Byblus,  that  he  was  slain  by  wild  beasts,  and
was  afterwards  deilied,  and  that  'his  children  brought  him  liba-
tions and  offerings.'  This  seems  to  be  the  euhemeristic  version
of  the  Adonis  legend.  Now  in  'Abedat  in  the  neighbourhood  of
Byblus,  where  doubtless  the  village  Saarna  lay,  there  has  Iwen
found  an  altar  Aii  ovpavito  vi/ziVto)  'S.aa.pvaii^  enriKom  (Kenan,
234),  and  although  such  attributes  are  of  frequent  occurrence  in
Syria,  Renan  is  probably  right  in  recognising  in  this  'highest
god'  the  Eliiin  of  Philo,  and  .Adonis.  Moreover,  according  to
Philo  (ii.  10),  the  god  'A-ypoiijjpos  rj  'Ayporn^,  '  'he  farmer,"  whose
brother  is  called  '.\yp6i,  'field'  {i.e.,  rrir)*  and  who  'had  a
sacrosanct  image  and  a  temple  carried  about  Phoenicia  on
wheels,'  was  honoured  in  Byblus  as  Beuiv  6  iieyiaroi.  He  also
recurs  in  the  Greek  inscriptions.  In  Byblus  a  temple  was
erected  under  .Augustus  Aii  vn/rio-Tai  (Renan,  223;  cp  232  fiecji
All  .  .  .  )  and  the  same  god  had  a  temple  deep  in  the  recesses
of  the  mountains  near  Kal'at  Fakra  to  the  SE.  of  Byblus
(CIG  4525  ...  tic  Tioi'  ToO  MeYi'cTTov  6(ov  (UKo£o/Li7J^).  The
Phoenician  name  represented  by  'Aypovijpo?  is  unknown.  See
Tam.miz.  t.  k.c.  §I-li.  m.  §2.

ADONI-ZEDEC,  or  rather  -Zedek,  as  R\'  (p'lV-'nX,
'Sedek  is  lord,'  cp  Meixhizedek,  though  to  later
readers  the  name  very  probably  meant  '  lord  of  right-
eousness' ;  AAcoNiBezeK  [BAL]  ;  .iinKWiSHDHc),  a  king
of  Jerusalem  at  the  time  of  the  Israelitish  invasion.  See
Josh.  \Qijf.,  where  he  leads  a  confederation  of  five
kings  of  S.  Canaan.  According  to  Josh.  10,  Joshua
came  from  Gilgal  to  the  relief  of  the  Gibconites  threatened
by  the  coalition  ;  surprised  and  completely  routed  the
army  of  the  Amorite  kings  near  Gibeon  ;  captured  the
five  kings  in  the  cave  of  Makkedah  ;  put  them  to  death
and  impaled  their  bodies  ;  then,  turning  back,  razed
Lachish,  E^glon,  and  Hebron,  with  many  other  cities  in
the  region. This  story  stands in  a  narrative  of the

1  The  inscription  from  the  district  of  Hippo  Diarrhytus  {CIL
viii.  I1211)  sacerdos  Adoni  (sic)  proves  nothing  as  to  the
cultus-name  of  the  god  ;  Adonis  has  here,  as  among  the  Greeks,
become  a  proper  name.

2  From  the  time  of  Scaliger  it  has  been  assumed  that  this
name  arose  from  a  corruption  or  misunderstanding  of  "yff  (see
Shaddai). This  is  possible,  but  very  far  from  certain.


ADOPTION

conquest  of  all  Palestine  by  Joshua  in  two  great
campaigns  (Josh.  10/)  which  cannot  be  historical.  A
much  more  credible  account  is  to  be  found,  though  in
an  ai:)ridged  form,  in  Judg.  1  (see  JosHU.\,  §  8  ;  JfDGKS,
§  3).  Here  Adoni-liezck  is  the  king  who  opjxssos  the
first  resistance  to  the  advance  of  the  tribes  of  Judah
and  Simeon  against  the  Canaanites  of  the  S.  It  is
therefore  in  Hudde's  opinion  (/.-/ yiT  7  148  ['87])  not
improbable  that  the  ©  reading  '  Adoni-bezek,  king
of  Jerusalem"  in  Josh.  HU  3  is  correct,  especially  as
Judg.  1 7  may  be  understood  as  saying  that  his  own
followers  carried  Adoni-bezek  to  Jerusalem,  and  so  as
iniplying  that  that  city  was  his  capital.  The  objection
to  this  view  is  that  the  second  element  in  Adoni-bezek
ought  to  be  a  god,  and  we  know  of  no  god  named
Bezek.  Hence  it  is  very  possible  that  Adoni-bezek
in  Josh.  10  [©"*'-]  is  a  scribe's  error,  and  that  the
original  narrative  of  Judg.  1  had  not  Adoni-lx:zek,  king
of  some  nameless  city,  but  Adoni-zedek,  king  of
Jerusalem  (see  Auoni-hkzkk).  w.  k.  s. — g.  K.  m.

ADOPTION  (yioeeciA).  Ro.  8  .5  23  94  Gal.  45  Eph.
Isf. .See  I-AMII.V.

ADORA  (see  below)  or  Adoraim  (D'^'llX  ;  on  form
of  name  see  Xamks,  §  107  ;  aAcoRAI  [H].  -M  [A  and
Jos.  .Inf.  viii.  10  1],  -pAM  [1-]  ;  .i/Ha'.i.u),  mentioned
with  Mareshah,  Zijih,  and  Lachish  among  the  cities
fortified  by  Hehoboam  (2  Ch.  11  gt).  The  sites  of  all
these  places  having  been  securely  fixed,  there  can  be  no
hindrance  to  identifying  Adoraim  with  the  modern  Diira,
which  is  5  m.  W.  by  .S.  from  Hebron,  and  is  described
by  Robinson  (2215)  as  'one  of  the  largest  (villages)
in  the  district.'  The  site  is  well  adapted  for  a  town,
being  '  on  the  gradual  eastern  slope  of  a  cultivated
hill,  with  olive  groves  and  fields  of  grain  all  round  '
(cp  PEF  Mem.  3  304).  Under  the  new  Egyptian
empire  an  Adoraim  is  perhaps  mentioned  twice  (V\'MM.
As.  u.  I'.iir.  167,  174) ;  but  it  is  not  clear  that  Rehoboam's
city  is  intended.  At  any  rate,  Adoraim  is  doubtless
the  Adora  or  Dora  of  Josephus  (^Aiit.  .xiii.  I54  and  else-
where abiiipa,  aoujpeoi,  8. ;  C.  Ap.  9  Scupa),  and  the  ADC)k.\
of  I  Mace.  l:32o(a5ajpa  [.\NV]).  In  the  latter,  .Vdora  is  a
point  on  the  route  by  which  Tryphon  entered  Juda;a  ;
in  the  former,  it  is  usually  coupled  as  an  ldum:ean  city,
with  Marissa  (.Mareshah),  the  fate  of  which  it  shared,
being  captured  by  John  Hyrcanus  and  compelled  to
accejJt  circumcision  and  the  Jewish  law  (Jos.  Ant.  xiii.
9i  ;  BJ  \.  26).  T.  K.  c.

ADORAM (D'lnX), 2S.  2O24; i  K.  12i8t. See

A  DOM  RAM.

ADRAMMELECH  ("?]^r3^1X,  aAramgAcx  [«L],
-A6k[A];  Jos.  -Aexoc,  ANApoMAXOc)-

I.  A  Babylonian  deity.  According  to  2  K.  iTsi,
after  'the  king  of  Assyria,'  i.e.,  Sargon  (see  Sakgon),
had  transplanted  the  Sepharvites  into  Samaria,  they
there  continued  to  worship  Adrammelech  and  Anam-
MKi.Kcii  {q.v. ),  the  gods  of  Sepharvaim.  This  passage
presents  two  difficulties.  In  the  first  place,  according
to  the  biblical  account  the  worship  of  Adrammelech
was  accompanied  with  the  sacrifice  of  children  by
fire  :  '  they  burnt  their  children  in  fire  to  Adrammelech
and  Anammelech.'  Throughout  the  cuneiform  inscrip-
tions, however,  there  is  no  allusion  to  human  sacri-
fice, and  in  the  scul[)tures  and  reliefs  no  representa-
tion of  the  rite  has  lieen  discovered.  The  second
difficulty  concerns  the  explanation  of  the  name  Adram-
melech and  its  identification  with  some  known  divinity
of  Babylonia.  The  name  was  originally  explained  as
Adar-malik,  '  Adar  the  prince,'  Adar  being  regarded
as  the  phonetic  rendering  of  the  name  of  the  god  Ninib.
This  identification,  however,  was  unsupported  by  any
evidence,  and  has  now  Iieen  abandoned.  A  clue  to  the
solution  of  the  problem,  however,  is  afforded  by  the
statement  that  Adrammelech  was  a  god  of  Sepharvaim,
a  city  that  is  generally  identified  with  Sippar  (cp
Sepharvaim). The  god  whose  worship  was  especially

7»


ADRIA

centred  at  Sippar  was  §ama§  the  Sun-god.  That  this
was  the  case  is  abundantly  proved  by  references  through-
out the  historical  and  religious  texts  of  the  Babylonians
and  Assyrians,  and  the  remains  of  the  great  temple  of
the  sun-god  exist  in  the  mounds  of  Abu-1.4abbah  at  the
pi-esent  day.  Some  scholars,  therefore,  would  see  in
Adrammelech  a  subsidiary  name  or  title  of  the  Sun-god
himself  Others,  however,  do  not  accept  this  view.
They  strike  at  its  chief  support  by  repudiating  the
identification  of  c'nsD  with  Sippar,  suggesting  that  it  is
to  1^  identified  with  Sahara  in,  a  city  mentioned  in  the
Babylonian  Chronicle.  No  satisfactory  explanation  of
the  name,  therefore,  has  yet  been  offijred.  But  cp
N  is  KOCH.  L.  W.  K.

2.  A  son  of  the  Assyrian  king  Sennacherib,  who,
according  to  2  K.  1^37  (aSpe/ifXex  [-'^])  fi'id  Is.  3738
(aSpa/ifXex  [BX'AOQ],  avSpafj..  [ii*]),  in  conjunction
with  his  brother  Shakkzek  {</.v.),  slew  his  father  while  he
was  woishipjjiiig  in  the  tem])le  of  Xisroch  at  Nineveh,
and  thence  escaped  into  Armenia.  In  the  Babylonian
Chronicle  mention  is  made  of  this  r-evolt,  in  which  Sen-
nacherib met  his  death  ;  but  the  only  trace  of  the  name
Adrammelech  hitherto  found  is  in  Abydenus  under  the
form  Adramelus,  and  in  Polyhistor  under  that  of  Ardu-
musanus.  Scheil  however  thinks  that  Adkmlk  and
Adramelus  are  corruptions  of  Assur-MU-M-iK  (or
-G.\l),  the  idiographic  reading  of  the  name  pronounced
Asur-sum-usabsi.  This  is  the  name  of  a  son  of  Sen-
nacherib for  whom  his  father  erected  a  house  amidst
the  gardens  of  Nineveh.  For  analogies  cp  the  royal
name  Sammiighes  =  Samas-MU-Gl-NA.  The  Ardumu-
sanus  of  Polyhistor  nray  be  a  corruption  of  the  phonetic
form  given  above,  just  as  2aoo-5ot''X'«'os  is  .Samas-sum-
ukin,  the  phonetic  reading  of  Samas-MU-Gl-.\.\.  (.Sec
Scheil,  ZA  12  i  ;  J^fv.  bib.,  April  1897.)  Cp  Esak-
haddon,  Nisroch.

ADRAMYTTIUM  (aAramytiON  or  atr.  :  the  ad-
jective, which  alone  occurs  in  the  .\T,  is,  as  in  some
cursive  MSS  of  Acts,  aAramythnoc  or  atr.;  neither
inscriptions  nor  coins  give  the  form  -JTHNOC  of  Tisch.
following  NB^  ;  W  &  H  -yNTH.  after  AH*).  .\  seaport
of  Mysia,  which  gave,  and  still  gives,  its  name  to  the
gulf,  a  great  triangular  indentation  along  the  S.  foot
of  Mt.  Ida,  whence  it  was  called  also  the  '  Id;tan."
Adramyteum,  in  the  E.  recess  of  the  gulf,  was  always
important.  It  would  profit  by  the  trade  in  timl^er  from
Ida.  There  were  also  copper  mines  in  the  neighbourhood,
and  iron  mines  at  Andeira  not  far  to  the  N\V.  Strabo
(p.  606)  describes  it  accurately  as  '  a  colony  of  Athens,
a  city  with  a  harbour  and  roadstead  '  ;  but  its  importance
goes  back  to  a  much  earlier  epoch  if,  as  Olshausen  asserts
{Rhein.  .Mus.  f.  Phil.  '53,  p.  322  ;  cp  Hazar-maveth),
the  name  points  to  foundation  by  the  Phoenicians.  Of
necessity  Adramyteum  was  intimately  connected  with
the  road  system  of  NW.  Asia.  The  coast  road  from
Ephesus  and  the  inland  road  from  Pergamus  converged
to  Adramyteum,  whence  they  diverged,  on  the  one  hand,
across  the  Mysian  peninsula  to  Cyzicus  on  the  sea  of
Marmora,  and,  on  the  other,  to  Assos,  Troas,  and  the
Hellespont.  Consequently,  it  became  an  assize  town,  or
head  o{a.conventus  juridicus.  .-\draniytian  coasters  such
as  that  in  which  Paul  performed  the  first  stage  of  his
journey  to  Rome  (Acts272t)  must  have  been  familiar
visitors  to  Caesarea  and  the  Syrian  harbours.  Adramyti
{Rdrcmid),  which  preserves  the  old  name,  is  5  m.  from
the  sea.  Thus,  Kiepert  is  perhaps  right  in  putting  the
ancient  town  on  an  eminence  by  the  sea,  8  m.  S\V'.
of  the  modern  Adramyti  (Z.  d.  Geselhch.f.  Erdk.,  1889,
292/. ).  Nevertheless,  Edremid  is  heir  to  the  importance
of  .'\diamyteum.  Silver  mines  are  now  worked  in  the
hills  behind  the  town.  w.  j.  vv.

ADRIA  (eN  TOO  aAria.  Acts2727  [BX.A],  .//m/../.s/
'stony  sea,'  Wiclif),  the  division  of  the  Mediterranean
which  lies  between  Sicily  and  Malta  o\\  the  W.  and
Crete  on  the  E.  So  the  name  is  applied  by  Paus.  v.  203
(speaking  of  the  straits  of  Messina),  «  toO  'ASpiov  Kal
73


ADRIEL

^f  iripov  irf\ti7ouj  t  KaXfirai.  Tvp<rr]v6v.  Cp  id.  viii.  54  3.
I'rocopius  considers  Malta  as  lying  on  the  boundary
(/?ri.  14:  Tai/Xcf;  re  Kal  'MfXirr)  irpoaiaxop,  at  rdre
'ASptaTiKbv  Kal  Tvpprji/iKdv  ir^Xayos  Siopi^ovaiv).  Ptolemy
distinguishes  between  the  Adriatic  sea  and  the  Adriatic
/^u//.  Acts  reproduces  the  language  of  the  sailors.
For  this  extended  application  of  the  name  cp  Strabo,
who,  writing  about  19  A.u. ,  says  that  the  Ionian  Sea  is
'part  of  what  is  now  called  Adrias '  (p.  123).  This
implies  that  the  ancient  use  of  the  word  had  l^jen  more
limited.  In  medi;i!val  times  the  name  was  still  more
widely  extended,  lx;ing  practically  =  '  Levant, '  as  opposed
to  '/Egean'  (cp  Ram.  Pm^/  298.  See  Myra).  The
question  is  connected  with  the  identification  of  the
island  upon  which  Paul  was  cast  ( Acts  28  i)  after  fourteen
days'  drifting  in  Adria  (see  Mei,it.\).  We  may  com-
pare the  shipwreck  of  Josephus  '  in  the  middle  of  the
Adria'  (Kara  fiiuov  t6v  'ASpiav)  :  he  was  picked  up  by
a  ship  sailing  from  Cyrene  to  Puteoli  (  Vif.  3).

w.  J.  w.
ADRIEL  (PX^iny,  not  'God's  flock,' out  either  (a)

miswritten  for  ?X*"lTy,  'God  is  helper'  [cp  forms  of
name  in  (5,  2S.  218  below];  or  (/')  the  Aram,  form  ^
of  Heb.  ^S'^TJ?.  The  former  view  is  adopted  in
Names,  §  28  ;  the  latter  by  Nestle,  ZDPT 15  257  ;  cp
Barzill.m  ;  see  also  HPN  266  n.  i,  309  n.  8).  Son
of  Barzillai  (</.!'. ,  n.  4)  the  Meholathite,  to  whom  Saul
married  his  daughter  Mkrab  [q.v. ) ;  i  S.  18  19  (om.  B  ;
irj\  (usually  =  t(r/)a7;\)  [A],  e8pi7j\  [L]),  2S.  21  8  (aepei  [B],
eaSpt  [A],  etpi  [L]).

ADUEL  (aAoyhA  [BX],  nayh  [A] ;  ^^(o?J).  the

great  grandfather  of  Tobit  (Tob.  1 1 ).  No  doubt  another
form  of  AuiKL  ((/.J'. ).

ADULLAM  (D^ny.  oAoAAam  [BAL],  oAoAam  [R.
2  Ch.  ;  Bavi.i^  Mi.;  A,  i  S.].  oAoAAa  [A,  Josh.  I535],
aAaA&m  [L  /6.];  onor./.AAf,  variants  adu{i,)lam,
ODOL.iM,  odcllam;  gentilic  "'Dpiy,  AduUamite,
oAoAAAAA[e]iTHC  [ADI':l],  -mhthc,  oGoAAamithc
[K]),  a  town  in  the  Shephelah  (Josh.  1.') 33  35),  with
a  changeful  history.  For  a  considerable  time  it  seems
to  have  remained  Canaanitish.  We  still  have  a  legend
in  Gen.  38  i/.  (J)  which  describes  the  fusion  of  Judahite
clans  with  a  Canaanitish  clan  whose  centre  was  AduUam.
This  fusion  had  apparently  not  been  accomplished  in
David's  time,  for  Adullam  was  still  outside  the  '  land  of
Judah '  when  David  took  refuge  there  ( i  S.  22 1  ;  cp  v.
5).  We  cannot  therefore  accept  the  editorial  statement
in  Josh.  12 15  (cp  I'.  7)  that  Joshua  'smote'  the  king  of
Adullam.  The  Chronicler  speaks  of  Rehoboam  as
having  fortified  Adullam  (2Ch.  II7).  He  names  the
place  in  conjunction  with  Soco  (Shuweikeh),  which
harmonises  geographically  with  Micah's  combination  of
it  (Mic.  I15,  if  the  text  be  correct)  with  Mareshah
(Merash).  It  is  included  in  the  list  of  cities  which  are
stated  to  have  been  occupied  by  the  Jews  in  the  time  of
Nehemiah  or  Zerubbabel  ( Neh.  1 1 30  ;  so  N'=-''  '"'•'•  '"f-  L  ;
BNA  om. )  ;  but  the  list  in  Neh.  11 25-36  appears  to  be
an  archaeological  fiction  of  the  Chronicler.  Judas  the
Maccaljee,  at  any  rate,  in  a  raid  into  '  Idumaea,'  occupied
Adullam  and  kept  the  sabbath  there  (2  Mace.  1238).

The  chief  interest  of  Adullam,  however,  lies  in  its  con-
nection with  David  {q.v.,  §  3).  Here,  not  in  some
enormous  cave  (such  as  that  fixed  upon  by  tradition  at
Khareitun),*  but  in  the  '  stronghold  '  of  the  town,  David
on  two  occasions  found  a  safe  retreat  ( i  S.  22 1  ;  2  S.  5 17  ;
cp23i3).

Where  was  Adullam? The  authority  of  the  Pales-

1  The  word  is  found  both  with  d  and  with  z  on  Aramaic  seals  ;
e-S- ,  yinin  (C/S  2,  n<3.  1 24)  bu  t  -ny-in,  '  Horus  is  a  help  '  (//>.  77).

2  The  Magharct  Khareilfin  enters  historj-,  not  with  David,
but  with  an  ascetic  named  Chariton,  who,  after  having  been
taken  by  robbers  on  the  way  to  Jerusalem,  founded  one  of  his
two  lauras  here,  and  died  in  the  cave  about  410  a.d.

73


AGABUS

tine  Survey  has  led  many  recent  writers  to  adopt  the
identification  of  Adullam  with  'Id-el-mS,  proposed  in
1871  by  M.  Clermont-Ganneau.  This  is  the  name  of
a  steep  hill  on  which  are  '  ruins  of  indeterminate  date,'
with  an  ancient  well  at  the  foot,  and,  near  the  top,  on
both  sides,  caves  of  moderate  size.  The  site  is  in  the
east  of  the  Shephelah,  about  3  m.  UK.  of  Soco,  and
8  from  Mareshah  ;  and,  though  it  is  much  more  from
Bethlehem,  '  the  journey  would  be  nothing  for  the  light-
footed  mountaineers  who  surrounded  David  '  (Clermont-
(ianneau,  PEI-'Q  i-j-j  ['75]).  The  identification,  how-
ever, is  only  conjectural.  The  caves  are  unimportant  ( i )
because  the  MT  (cp  Jos.  Aut.  vi.  12  3)  speaks  of  a  single
cave,  and  (2)  teeause  with  We.,  Ki. ,  Bu. ,  and  Kau.
we  should  correct  ,n-i;'c, 'cave,' in i  S.  22i 2  S.  23 13

1  Ch.  II15, into ,-insp. 'stronghold'; cp i  S.  224/

2  S.  23 14.  Nor  does  the  position  of 'Id-el-ma  exactly
agree  with  that  assigned  to  Adullam  in  the  Ono-
masticon.  On  the  very  slight  resemblance  of  the  name
to  Adullam  no  reliance  can  be  placed.  Other  sites  are
quite  possible.  Cp  GASm. //C  229 /.  See  MiCAii,
§  2  a,  n.  T.  K.  c.

I ADULTERY. See  Marriage,  §  4.

ADUMMIM,  The  Ascent  of  (D'P"1N  n'pyp  ;  Josh.
1^7  AAAAMeiN  [H],  aAommi  [A],  aAammein  [I-]:
I817 AiGAMeiN [l^].  eAcoMi  [A\ eAcoweiAA  [I-];

; adom.ujm),  a  point  marking  the  frontier  between  Judah

\ and  Benjamin. The  sharp  rise  near  the  middle  of  the

• road  from  Jericho  to  Jerusalem  ajjpears  to  be  intended  ;

the name (connected with mx, 'red') was  perhaps

; suggested  by  the  ruddy  hue  of  the  chalk  rocks  in  that

I neighbourhood,  to  which  appears  to  be  due  the  name

j of  the  khan  el-Ahmar  ( '  the  red  '),  the  traditional  '  inn  '

of  the  (jood  Samaritan, and  that  of Tula  at  ed-Dam

('the  hill of  blood'), NE. of  the khhn. With the

latter  spot  the  ascent  of  Adummim  has  been  plausibly

identified  [PEF  Mem.  3  172).

ADVERSARY.  The  word  so  translated  in  1  S.  1  6t
(J\yi  sdra,  RV  'rival,'  &nti2hAoc  [L].^  cp  Lev.  I818
[B.VL])  is  the  technical  term  for  a  fellow-wife,  answer-
ing to  Ass.  sirritu,  Ar.  4arrat"",  Syr.  'artha  (\irra).
All  these  forms  are  dialectal  variations  of  a  single
Old-Semitic  word.  Similarly,  in  Lev.  18 18  the  words
'  to  vex  her '  are  better  rendered  by  RV  '  to  be  a  rival
to  her.'  The  words  that  follow  may  be  rendered,  in-
terpreting the  metaphor,  '  marrying  the  second  sister,  in
addition  to  the  first,  in  the  lifetime  of  the  latter.'

The  sense  of  the  metaphor  is  given  by  the  Arabic  Utakiina
darrataha.  See  Dr.  TKS,  ad  loc.  and  especially  Lag.'s
'Mittheitungen  1  125/  (GGN,  1882,  no.  13).  w.  K.  s.

ADVOCATE  (n&RAKAHTOc), i  Jn.  2i,  see  Par.\-

CI.ETK.

AEDIAS  (ahAciac  [B]),  I  Ksd.  9 27  =  Ezra  10 26,  RV
Elijah,  3.

^NEAS  (aincac  [BNA]),  a  paralytic  at  Lydda
healed  by  Peter  (Acts933t).  The  form  of  the  name,
.(^neas,  not  as  in  Homer  /l-".ncas,  is  noteworthy.  It  is
met  with  in  Thucydides,  Xenophon,  and  Pindar.

.ffiNON  (aincon  [Ti.WH]),  Jn.323t. See  Salim.

^SORA  (aicoora  [BA],  etc.),  Judith44t  RV  =  AV

ESOKA  (./.f.  ).

AFFINITY. See  Family,  Ki.nship.

AGABA,  RV  AccABA  (akk&Ba  [B]).  i  Esd.  530  =
Ezra  2  46,  Hagab.

AGABUS  (apaBoc  [Ti.  WH] ;  §  68).  one  of  the
'  projihits '  w ho  came  from  Jerusalem  to  Antioch  at  the
time  of  the  dispersion  from  Jerusalem  '  upon  the  tribula-
tion that  rose  about  Stephen'  (Acts  11 19,  cp  84)-  He
predicted  a  great  fanune  over  all  the  world,  '  which  came
to  pass  in  the  days  of  Claudius'  (.Nets  11  27  28).  The
reference,  doubtless,  is  to  the  great  dearth  which  visited
Judtea  and  the  surrounding  districts — especially  Jerusa-
lem— between  44  and  48  A.D.  (Jos.  Ant.  xx.  26;  5a;
I  The  text  of  BA  differs.
74


AGAG

Kus. HE  ii.  11 3). For  other  famines  in  the  reign  of
Claudius,  see  Suet.  Claud.  18;  Tac.  Ann.  xii.  43.

The  next  mention  of  Agabus  is  in  Acts  21 10/.,  where
it  is  said  that  he  *  came  down  from  Judaea '  to  Cajsarea
when  Paul  was  there,  and,  taking  Paul's  girdle,  bound
his  own  feet  and  hands  with  it  to  symbolise  the  captivity
of  the  apostle.  As  this  leference  looks  like  a  first
mention  of  Agabus,  those  who  ascribe  the  whole  of
Acts  to  one  writer  regard  it  as  an  indication  that  the
second  half  of  the  book  was  written  first.  By  others
the  passage  is  naturally  regarded  as  one  of  the  indications
that  the  author  of  Acts  did  not  himself  write  the  '  we '
passages,  but  adopted  them  from  an  earlier  source.
On  the  other  hand,  Overbeck  and  Van  Manen  legard
vj.  10-14  ^s  an  interpolation,  and  suppose  that  the
'we'  was  introduced  by  the  last  redactor.  Jiingst
thinks  that  the  prophecy  cannot  originally  have  lx.'en
ascribed  to  Agabus,  but  must  have  been  assigned  to  one
of  Philip's  prophesying  daughters,  or  these  would  not
have  tjeen  mentioned.  At  all  events,  it  is  to  be  noted
that  '  from  Juda-a'  (21  10)  does  not  harmonise  with  218,
for  Caesarea  belonged  to  Judtea.

Agabus  is  included  in  the  lists  of  the  '  seventy  disciples  of  our
Lord'  by  pseudo-Dorotheus  and  pseudo- Hippolylus,  and  is
commemorated  in  the  great  Clieek  Menaai  (.Apr.  8),  along  with
Rufu';,  Herodion,  and  Asynciilus.

AGAG  (3^X,  33X,  cp  Ass.  agagu,  'be  powerful,
vehement,  angry'  ;  Igigi,  the  spirits  friendly  to  man,
Maspero,  DawnofCiv.  634  ;  e^rA,p[B.\L]),  akingof  the
Amalekites,  so  celebrated  in  early  tradition  that  the
Yahwist  makes  Balaam  say,  by  an  obvious  anachronism,
of  the  future  Israelitish  kingdom,  '  His  king  shall  be
higher  than  Agag '  (Nu.  247;  r^^r  [^--^L],  following
Samar.  text).  Saul,  after  his  successful  campaign  against
the  Amalekites,  exempted  Agag  from  the  general  doom  of
devotion  to  the  deity  by  slaughter,  and  brought  him  to
Gilgal,  where  Samuel  hewed  him  in  pieces  before  Vahwe
— i.e.,  at  the  great  sanctuary  where  festal  sacrifices
were  offered  ( i  S.  158/.  20/.  32/  ).  Making  allowance
for  the  endeavour  of  the  narrator  to  harmonise  an  old
tradition  with  later  ideas  (see  S.\UL,  §  3),  and  throwing
ourselves  back  into  the  barbarous  period  which  begins
to  pass  away  under  David,  we  cannot  doubt  that  the
slaughter  of  Agag  was  a  eucharistic  sacrifice  (see
S.\ckifice),  akin  to  that  of  the  nakl'a  (lit.  'victim
rent  in  pieces'),  which  was  in  use  among  the  Arabs
after  a  successful  fray,  and  which  might  be  a  human
sacrifice  (WRS  ES^-)  491,  cp  363;  We.  Ar.  Held.
1.2  [87]).

AGAGITE('33X  ;  for  Greek  readings  see  below),
a  mcniber  of  the  family  of  Agag  ;  a  title  applied  ana-
chronistically  to  Haman  (Ksth.  3i  10835).  Haman,  as
an  Anialekite,  is  opposed  to  Mordecai,  the  descendant
of  Kish  (Esth.  25).  Neither  description  is  to  be  taken
literally  (see  Esther,  §  i,  end).  The  meaning  is
that  there  is  an  internecine  struggle  between  the  Jews
and  their  enemies,  like  that  between  Saul  and  Agag  of
old.  Similarly,  Haman  is  called  a  '  Macedonian '  in
the  Greek  parts  of  Esther  ;  126  {n.Q.Kehova  [L"]  ;  but
/Soi'voios  [BN.\L3] ;  AV  Agagite  ;  RV  Bugean)  I610
(EV  Macedonian;  fiUKeowv  [BNAL^];  but  ^ovyaios
[L"]),  and  the  name  has  made  its  way  back  into
924(iJ.aKf5t.jv  [BSALfl]);  cp  Esthek,  §  10.  Elsewhere
the  0  reading  is  ^ovyaios  [BN-AL^^]  (only  in  3i  85
[■j^c.a  mg.])^  ()erhaps  a  corruption  of  raryoios  (in  Nu.  24;,
the  same  version  has  Tory  for  A7a7).

AGAR  (AfAP  [I^A]).  I.  The  sons  of  Agar,  Bar.  3
as  kV  ;  A\'  Agarenes. See  H.vgak,  §  2,  n.

2. Gal.  424/.  KV  Hagar  (<^.v.,  end).

AGATE  {n5-]3.  Is.  54.2,  lAcnic  [BNj\Q] ;  n'S*]?,
Ez.  27i6  [Ba.  Ginsb.],  xopxop  [BQ],  KOpxopyC  [A],
etc.  ;  i2C',  axathc  [B.AL])  occurs  four  limes  in  AV,
twice  for  Heb.  kadkod,  RV  '  rubies '  and  twice
for  shlbo.  On  the  identification  of  these  stones,
see Chalcedony. On the question whether the

75


AGRICULTURE

agate,  which  is  a  variegated  chalcedony  (translucent
quartz)  with  layers  or  spots  of  jasper,  was  known  to
Israel,  see  Precious  Sto.nes.

AGEE  (N:X.  apoaLA];  &c&  [B]  ;  hAa  [L] ;  Jos.
hAoy  [g'^n-];  -^f-^).  father  of  Shammah  {q.v.,  3);
2  S.  23ii.  His  name  should  doubtless  be  cor-
rected to  Ela  {<?N  (so  Marq.  Fund.  17)  ;  3  and  7  in
the  older  character  were  very  similar.  He  is  mentioned
again  in  i  K.  4 18. See  Elah,  6.

AGGABA  (ArrABA[B='»""e- A]),  i  Esd.  Szgf  RV  =
Ezra 245,  Hagahah.

AGG^US,  AV  Aggeus  {Aggci  [ed.  Bensly]),  i  Esd.
6  1 73,  4  Esd.  l^of. See  H.\GGAI.

AGIA  (AflA  [BA]),  I  Esd.  534t  RV=Ezra257.
Haiti  L.

AGRICULTURE. — Agriculture  is  here  considered
(i)  as  conditioned  by  the  land  (§  i),  (2)  as  conditioned
by  the  people  (§§  2-10),  (3)  as  a  factor  in  the  life  of  the
people  (§§  11-15);  a  concluding  paragraph  (§  16)  will
contain  some  notes  on  historical  points.

I.  The  great  variety  of  the  conditions  in  the  different
natural  divisions  of  Palestine  (Dt.  I7)  must  be  kept  in

« j-i- J mind.i The  various  local products,
1.  Conditioned ^^^^^^^^  ^,^^ industrial, of  these  dis-
by  land.  ^^.j^.^^^ ^^ ^^^^^^ alluded to by the

Old  Testament  writers,  the  most  important  of  which
are  wheat  and  barley,  olive  and  vine  and  fig,  will  be  de-
scribed in  special  articles  [qq.v.).  On  the  seasons  see
Rain,  Dew.  We  simply  note  here — First,  the  long
dry  season  (Apr.-Oct. ),  including  all  the  harvests,  the
dates  of  which  vary  slightly  in  the  different  districts
(cp  Feasts,  §  10) :  the  Tsp  in  spring,  when  rain
seemed  miraculous  (rS.  12x6/)  and  the  steady  W.
wind  every  evening  made  it  possible  to  winnow  with
ease,  barley  beginning  in  April,  wheat  about  a  fort-
night later ;  the  j'>p,  summer  fruits  and  vegetables,
in  summer ;  olives  in  autumn ;  the  -\-iZ,  vines,  from
August  onwards.  Second,  the  wet  season  (Oct. -Apr. ),
the  earlier  part  of  which  saw  the  preparation  of  the  soil
by  the  early  rain  (mv,  rrk£)  for  the  winter  crops,  to  be
brought  to  maturity  by  the  succeeding  showers,  especially
those  in  March-.April  (rip':';;),  before  which  was  the
time  for  sowing  the  summer  crops.

With  such  stable  conditions,  all  that  seems  to  be
needed  is  a  fair  amount  of  intelligent  industry  ;  and  the
lack  of  this,  rather  than  any  great  change  of  climate,  is
probably  the  cause  of  the  retrogression  of  modern  times. -
The  productivity,  however,  was  not  uniform  (cp  parable
of  sower),  and  there  seems  to  be  a  somewhat  periodic
diminution  in  the  amount  of  rainfall.  Agriculture  is
also  exposed  to  pests  ;  the  easterly  wind  c'lp,  drought.
Mildew,  and  Locusts  (</</••?'.  :  see  also  Ant,  §  4).

II.  We  consider  now,  more  in  detail,  agriculture  as
dependent  on  the  energy,  skill,  and  general  condition

_  f ^'^  ^^^  inhabitants. Our  account  must

infoSfon naturally  be  fragmentary.3 The  minute
prescriptions  of  the Mishna must  of
course  be  used  with  caution. We  begin  with —

I.  Technical  details  of  agricultural  procedure.  (For
the  most  part  we  shall  deal  only  with  the  raising  of  grain
crops.  For  other  departments  see  Vines,  Garden,
Cattle,  etc. )  Incidentally  the  biblical  records  de-
scribe many  agricultural  processes,  and  mention  by  name
some  of  the  implements  used.  Of  these  implements,
however,  they  give  no  description  ;  and  the  only  speci-
mens found,  up  to  the  present  time,  are  of  sickles  (see
below,  §  7).

For  Egypt,  however,  we  have  fuller  sources — many  pictures
of  processes  and  implements,  and  some  actual  specimens. And

1  .See  Palestine  for  details  on  (leology  (§  3),  Physical
divisions  (§  ^ff-).  Hydrography  (g  13),  Climate  and  Vegetation
(§  '4  A)-

2  See  however  Fraas,  Aus  dent  Orient  199.

3  There  is  no  Hebrew  word  corresponding  to  our  termy&r»w.
Tilling  the  soil  is  .TDlun  miy  \  husbandman  is  laK,  etc.  ;  field
is  ,mL~.


AGRICULTURE

since  modern  Egypt  and  modern  I'alestine  are  very  similar,
these  ancient  Egyptian  remains  may  be  used  to  illustrate  ancient
Palestine.  Further,  since  modern  implements  and  methods
are,  in  Egypt,  very  like  those  of  antiquity,  the  same  is  probably
true  of  Palestine.  Hence  it  is  reasonable  to  hold  that,  m  Pales-
tine also,  modern  may  be  taken  to  illustrate  ancient.

Our  main  side-lights,'  therefore,  are  modern  Palestine
and  ancient  Kgypt  ;  and  they  are  best  used  in  this  order,
subordinated  always  to  the  actual  data  of  the  OT  itself.

We  shall  take  the  processes  in  natural  order.

Sometimes  land  had  to  be  cleared  of  wood  or  shrub
(xna  Josh.  17  18),  or  of  stone  Cjpo).  chiefly  in  vineyards.
For  loosening  or  otherwise  moving  the
soil many words are used, such as


3.  Prepar-
ing soil.


t:.


nn,  nSs.  nPB,  p?y,  my: ;  nit-,  nc',  of


which  the  first  group denotes ploughing, the  second,
breaking  up  the  soil  (hcik)  or  the clods (nimJS Joel
1 17)  with  the  mattock  or  hoe,  while  the  third  as  clearly
means  levelling  off  the  surface  with  something  serving
for  a  harrow. Of  the  names  of  the  instruments  '^  we  have
riw'tnc  or  n-b:^inc.  nx.  -\ii;r2,  of  which  the  first  pair  probably
representsthe  plough  ( NT  di/joTpoj');  the  last,  a  sort  of  mat-
tock ;  while  riN  must  remain  undetermint- J,  ploughshare
or  hoe. It  is  clear,  therefore,  that  we  have  at  least  three
processes  —  ploughing, hoeing, and harrowing. We
cannot  be  sure  that  there  was  of  old  in  different  parts
of  the  country  any  more  uniformity  than  there  is  now.
It  is  not  likely  that  the  shallow  soil  would  ever  be  much
more deeply ploughed
than  now,  when  a  depth
of  5-6  inches  is  consid-
ered sufficient. Perhaps
ploughing  would  some-
times (as now), after
sufficient rain, be dis-
pensed with.^ Hoeing
would  probably  take  the
place of ploughing in
steep  places  (Is.  725),  as
now in stony  ground.*
In  modern  Juda;a  there
is no ploughing before
sowing except where
manure is used. In
Galilee, on the other
Fig. i.-Eg>'ptian Hoe (/?r/V. ^^"^1- ^h^^e is one
Mus.). For  picture  of  hoe  in ploughing,  and  in  some
use  .see  fig.  3,  and  cp  Egypt, districts  more  than  one.
^  34.  n-  \\'hen  ground  has  been

left  unsown with grain  and  is overgrown  with  weed,
this  is  ploughed  in.

Turning now to the implements used for these

purposes, and beginning  with  the less important, we

4.  Implements  "°'f  "'^'  '"''^  Egyptian  //-..^  (fig.  ,),  ^f

for  nrenar ^ '^  nuportance  m  ancient  Kgypt  as  to

in?  soil ^^  ^^^  natural  symbol  of  agriculture,  as

° ■ the  goad  is  in  modern  Palestine,^  has  no

representative  in modern  Syria  ;  but  neither  has  it  in

1  Babylonia,  as  well  as  Egypt,  no  doubt  presented  points  of
contact  with  Palestine  ;  but  in  the  department  of  agriculture  our
direct  knowledge  of  Babylonia  is  very  slight.  See  A'/'(2)  3  94^,
and  Meissner,  Beitr.  z.  althah.  Privatrccht.

2  See  partial  list  of  Talmudic  names  in  Hamburger  and
Ugolinus,  and  now  also  a  very  full  collection  in  Vogelstein's
work  (see  below,  §  17).

•<  In  Egypt  two  ploughs  seem  generally  to  have  been  used,
the  one  behind  the  other  ;  perhaps  the  second  turned  up  the
soil  between  the  furrows  made  by  the  first  (cp,  however,  next
note).  On  the  other  hand,  at  least  in  later  times,  the  Egyptians
sometimes  used  a  lighter  plough,  drawn  by  men  or  boys.

*  If  we  could  regard  the  Egyptian  agricultural  pictures  as
representations  of  actual  scenes  we  should  have  to  conclude  that
in  Egypt  the  hoe  was  used  sometimes  before  (so  always  [?]  in
the  Old  Empire),  sometimes  after,  or  both  before  and  after  the
plough,  to  break  up  the  great  clods  of  earth.  The  depicting  of
the  various  operations  side  by  side,  however,  is  very  likely  a  mere
convention  designed  to  represent  in  one  view  all  kinds  of  field
work.  So  Prof.  W.  Max  Muller  in  a  private  communication  to
the  present  writer.

6  The  illustration  (fig.  i)  needs  only  the  explanation  that
the  twisted  cord  adjusts  the  acuteness  of  the  angle  of  the  two
other  p.-irts.

•*  Cp  Wetzstein's  note  on  Judg.  3  31  (/.r.  below,  §  17).

77


AGRICULTURE

modern  Egypt.  A  modern  Syrian  hoe  may  be  seen  in
PEFQ,  1891,  pp. 110-115;  as  also  mattock,  spade,  etc.

'I"he  harnnv  does  not  seem  to  have  been  used  by  the
ancient  Egyptians,  although  their  modern  representatives
use  a  weighted  plank  or  a  totjthcd  roller.  In  modern
Palestine  a  bush  of  thorns  is  sometimes  used.  The
writer  of  Job  39 10,  however,  seems  to  have  known  of
some  implement  drawn  by  beasts  following  the  labourer  ;
but  this  throws  little  light  on  general  usage.

ThQ  plough,  although  it  is  probably,  strictly  speaking,
an  inferior  substitute  for  the  spade,  is  in  common
practice  a  very  important  implement,  and  merits  more
detailed  treatment.

Of  the  Israelitish  plough  we  know  only  that  it  had,  at
least  sometimes,  an  iron  share  that  needed  sharpening
(roS,  I  S.  1820,  editorial  comment  in  corrupt  text).
That  the  Syrian  plough  was  light '  we  have  the  testimony
of  Theophrastus.  The  modern  Syrian  plough,  which  is
light  enough  to  be  carried  by  the  ploughman  on  hLs
shoulcfer,  and  is  simpler  than  the  usual  ancient  Egyptian  2
plough  (tig.  3)  in  having  only  one  handle  and  therefore


Fig.  2. — a.  Babylonian  Plough  (from  cylinder  seal,  ciic.  2000
B.C.,  belonging  to  Dr.  Hays  Ward).  /■.  Syrian  Plough  and
Goad  (after  I'l^FQ,  1891).


1.  cs-sikka  jp:,-?-^

2.  cd-dakar,  dhckr,  3-^-

3.  cl-kahnsa,  kdlmsa.

9.  eUara,  skcr'.

io.i//)-,0'./i(Post).

4.  el-buruk,  burk,  -T13.

i2.'/.Ar/J;,(Post).

5.  .■^-^«7cv7;7r(.Schum.),  n'T3-

6.  cl-wufla,  7uasl,  ':'is'.'*

7.  kofrib  (Post),  mnp.

8.  halaka  (Post).

ii,.jciizlr.

14.  nu-ssns  or  minsds.

15.  ,mkuza.

16.  'a/'a,  s.MUt.

not  needing  two  men  to  manage  it,  may  safely  be  taken
to  illustrate  that  used  by  the  Israelites.  There  is  no  more
uniformity  in  its  construction  than  in  any  other  matter
relating  to  agriculture,  and  it  would  seem  to  be  at  its
simplest  in  Southern  Palestine.  The  woodcut  (fig.  2)
illustrates  its  general  form.  It  is  of  wood,  often  oak.  The
stake  on  to  which  the  pointed  metal  sheath  that  serves  for
ashareis  thrust,  passes  up  through  ahole  in  the  pole,  toend
in  a  cross  handle  piece.  The  pole  is  of  two  pieces,  joined
end  to  end.  T\\g  yoke  {S'y,  ,ij:ic  more  rarely  cic.  nifiio
Vyn  ;  ^vyov,  ^i>y6s)  is  repeatedly  mentioned  in  the  OT.
It  varied  in  weight  according  to  circumstances  ( r  K.
124).  It  is  now  made  as  light  as  possible,  often  of
willow.  Two  pegs,  joined  below  by  thongs  or  by  hair
string,  form  a  collar  for  each  of  the  o.xen,  and  two
smaller  pegs  in  the  middle  keep  in  position  the  ring
or  other  arrangement  for  attaching  the  plough  pole.
Repairs  are  attended to  once  a  jear  by  a  travelling

1  The  simplest  plough  would  be  made  of  one  piece  of  a  tree,
bent  while  growing.  See  N'erg.  GVor:.'-.  1  169,  and  illustration  in
Graevius,  T/ics.  Antiq.  Koiii.  11,  p.  1674.

■-  The  ancient  Egyptian  plough,  which  underwent  little
modification  in  the  course  of  millenniums,  was  all  of  wood,
although,  perhaps,  the  share  w.-is  of  a  wood  (harder?)  different
from  the  rest  of  the  plough,  and  may  .sometimes  have  been
sheathed  in  metal  (Wilkinson).  Of  the  .As-syrian  plough  we
know  from  an  embossed  relief  found  ne.ir  Mosul,  that  it  (some-
times) had  4  board  for  turning  over  the  earth,  and  just  in  front
of  it  a  drill  that  let  the  seed  down,  to  be  covered  by  the  soil
as  it  turned  over.

3  Where  two  forms  of  the  .-Xrabic  name  are  given,  the  first  is
from  .Schumacher,  and  the  second  from  Post  (of',  cit.  below,  8  17X
The  Hebrew  names  are  from  Vogelstein  (pp.  cit.  below,  §  17).

78


AGRICULTURE

expert.  The  ploughman  holds  in  his  left  hand  a
goad  (messds  =  ic^c.  pni,^  n'uaTn)  some  eight  or  nine  feet
in  length,  having  at  one  end  a  metal  point,  and  at  the
other  a  metal  blade  to  clean  the  share.

The /I'a/n (ics, i;(uyos) would, as now, oftenest
consist  of  oxen  (Am.  G12),  but  sometiuies  of  cows  (Job


6.  Sowing.


Fig.  3. — Ploughing,  hoeing,  and  sowing. From  the  ma^faba  of  Ti  at  Sakkara
(Old  Empire). After  Baedeker.


1  14,  Heb.  text),  and  perhaps  sometimes  of  asses  (Is.
30  24;  Dt.  2"2io).  Even  camels  and  mules  may  now
be  seen  occasionally.  In  Armenia  many  pairs  of  o.xen
draw  one  plough,  the  driver  sitting  on  the  yoke  ;  but
this  is  hardly  the  meaning  of  i  K.  19 19.

'Y\iG.  furrows  were  called  □'70,  n^ya^  (n'3i'c)-  They
are  now  sometimes  very  carefully  drawn  (cp  ?3"ii<n,
Ps.  120  3),  and  are  some  nine  to  ten  inches  apart.

Irrigation  {7\\-\7\.  npc'n  ;  see  G.\KnKN)  must  have  been

.. . one  of  the  processes  used  by  Israel.  ^ Pales-

C.  imga-  ^jj^g indeed, differed  from  Egvpt(Dt.  11 10/..

tion.  etc.  ,  •  ,  T-  o  \  • 1 ■

'  on  which  see  Egypt, §  34,  n. )  m  havmg

a  copious  supply  of  rain  and  in  having  natural  springs
(Deut. 8  7)  :


gation, and  there  may  have  been  districts  under  culti-
vation which  were  entirely  dependent  on  it. It  would  not
be  safe  to  assign  an  early  date  to  the  elaborate  methods
and  regulations  of  Mishna  times ; and  it  is  difficult  to
determine  whether  by  the  streams  that  were  so  highly
prized  (Dt.  87  ; Nu.  246,  Cant.  415),*  and  without  which
a  garden  could  not live  (Is.  I30), artificial  canals  are
meant, and  whether, e.g., the bucket  (-St,, Is. 40 15;
Num.  247)  was  used  in  irrigation. The  Mishna  has '
regulations  concerning  manuring  (Ssi),  and  there  may '
be  a  reference  to  it  in  such  passages  as Ps. 8-3 10  [n]
(toin'?  P~)  or  Is.  2.5 10  (Kthib). In  NT  times,  at  least,
manure  was  used for  trees  (Lk.  138; /3d\w Koirpia),
as  now  for  figs, olives, etc.  ;  it  was  worked  in  at  the
last  yearly  ploughing, which  was  after  the  first  winter
rain. For  grain  crops  the  use  of  manure  is  exceptional
(e.g., at  Hebron). Remains  show  that in the  hilly j
country  ferraa'f/g  (c^np'VD  niSiJS. Cant.  5 13?)  was  used 1
even more than now,  especially  for  vine  cultivation  ; :
but the  wider terraces are still  used  for grain, the
clearing  of  the  soil  being  called  »ak/>.

Fences  (nj)  were  employed, perhaps  only  in  vine-

1  Vogelstein  argues  from  Kelim,  96  that  this  is  the  n.ame  of
the  metal  he.-id.

2  Cp,  however,  Del.  on  Ps.  120  3,  Ges.-Buhl  sub  voc.  etc.

3  See  now  the  account  in  Vogelstein,  §  4.

4  Cp.ff.bM2)  ,06.

6  The  prophets  delight  to  speak  of  the  copious  supplies  of
water  that  will  refresh  even  the  most  unlikely  places  in  the  ideal
future  (see  Cheyne  on  Is.  30  25).


AGRICULTURE

yards  (Is.  5s  ;  Ecclus.  2828),  where  hedges  (.isicvo  Is.
5  5 )  were  also  in  use  ;  and  there  was  sometimes  a  border,
e.g.,  of  nDD3  (see  Fitches,  2)  (Is.  2825).  Between
grain-fields,  however,  the  commonest  practice  was  to
set  up  sloncs  to  mark  the  line  of  partition  Cj^^j  Hos.
5 10) ;  on  the  strong  sentiment  that  prevailed  as  to  the
unrighteousness  of  tampering  with  these,
see  below  (g§  12,  14).

Whether  the  various  words  used  for
sowing  the  seed  were  technical  terms  we
cannot  tell,  jm  is  a  word
of  general  significance.  In
Is.  2825  three  words  are  used  in  one
verse  :  pEn  and  ^■^v  of  scattering  n:ip  (see
FiTCiiKS,  i)  and  cummin  with  the  hand  ;
Cb,^  of  setting  wheat  and  barley  in  the
straight  furrows.^  Nowadays  a  drill  is
sometimes  used.  The  common  practice
is,  whether  the  land  has  been  already  ploughed  or  not,
to  plough  in  the  seed.^  This  protects  it  from  ants  and
from  dryness  due  to  intermission  of  the  early  rain.'*
As  to  protection  from  man  and  beast,  see  HuT.

To  reap  is  -jiip.  Two  names  of  implements  have
been  preserved  ( eo-in,  only  in  Dt.  [16  9  ;  2326t]  ;  V-:c.  only
in  Jer.  [50  16  ;  AV  mg.  scythe*]  and  Joel
[3  (4)13];  ^pi-Kdvov)  ;  but  whether  they
refer  to  the  same  thing  or  to  varieties,  we  do  not
know.  Perhaijs  the  commonest  method  was  to  pull
up  by  the  root  (see  fig.  5),  a  practice  confined  in
ancient  Egypt  to  certain  crops,  but  still  followed
both  in  Egypt  and  in  Palestine. The  use  of  sickles  in

Canaan  in  very
early  times
is,  however,
pro\ed  by  the
finding  of
sickle  Hints  "at
Tell-el-Hesy
in  the  earliest
and  all  suc-
ceedinglayers,
while  the  use
of  iron  sickles
by  the  Jews  in
at  least  pre-
Hellenis  t  i  c
times  is  proved
by  the  finding  of  the  specimen  represented  in  fig.  7.

By  putting  together  different  allusions,"  we  can  follow
the various steps. The reaper (":'j'p) filled his hand


7.  Reaping.


taha  of  Ti. After  Baedeker.


Fig.  5. — Pulling  up  grain. After  Erman.


1  In  Am.  0  13  jnt.T  7]-vo  is  used  of  the  process  of  sowing.

2  It  is  not  unlikely  that  .Tiib-  is  to  be  dropped,  with  We.  Che.
and  Du.  (against  IM.),  as  =  ri-)ij,'C'.

3  Accordmg  to  Strabo,  this  w.is  done  also  in  Babylon  (cp
above,  col.  78,  n.  2),  and  in  ancient  Egypt  the  seed  was  sometimes,
especially  m  the  Old  Empire,  trodden  in  by  sheep  (Erman,
Life  in  Ancient  Egypt,  ET  429;  not  goats),  in  the  time  of
Herodotus  by  swine.

*  On  the  stages  and  accidents  of  growth  cp  Vogelstein,  §  10.
"  For  '"I^Cja,  which  AV  mg.  thrice  renders  'scythe,'  EV  has,
more  correctly,  Pki^N'ING-hooks  (y.r'.).

6  The  method  of  setting  the  sickle  flints  is  shown  by  the
specimens  found  by  Dr.  Petrie  in  Egypt  (Illahun,  etc.  pi.  7
no.  27  ;  see  above,  fig.  6).

7  E.g.,  Ruth223;  Ps.1297;  Is.  17s  ;  Job24a4  :  Jer.  922[2i].


AGRICULTURE

(12)  with  ears  (o'Vac')  of  the  standing  corn  (ncp).  and
with  his  arm  (yi'ii)  reajjud  thcin  (nsp)-  i'he  stalks  (nzp)
were,  in  I't^ypt,  and  still  are,  in  Palestine,  cut  pretty
high  up  (Anderlind  ;  knee  high).  They  must  some-
times have  been  cut,
whether  at  this  or  at
a  later  stage,  very
near  the  ear  (^jin
nSas*  Job  2424).
The  armfuls  (nay)
would  fall  (Jen
922  [21])  in  a  heap
("I""!')  behind  the
reaper,  to  be  ga-
thered by  the  navn
ID.xc,  in  his  bosom
(ir-.T:2)  and  tied
(c'^.n::)  into  sheaves
(rf^Sx)  and  set  in  heaps  (cnr^)'

In  Kgypt  the  sheaf  consisted  of  two  bundles,  with
their  heads  in  opposite  directions.  In  modern  ^yria  fii.'-
quently  the  sheaves  are  not  tied  at all. It  has  l)r>ii


Fio.  6. — Sickle  with  cutting  edge  of
flints  found  at  lllahun. After  IVtrie.


Fig.  7.— Iron  sickle  found  at  Tell  el  Hesl. After  ^£FQ.


•.pposcd- that already in An;
;:;•)  may  sometimes  have  bee


time the bundles
:aped  into  a  heavy


AGRICULTURE

(Is.  2827)  it  was  usual  to  beat  out  cummin  and  rap(see
Fitches,  i)  with  /vi/s{nt:D  and  ear  res|>cctively).  The
other  processes  were  probably  more  conunon  in  later
times.  For  these  was  needed  a  threshing-Jhor  (pS,'  4Xwy,
fiXwc),  for  which  was  selected  some  spot  freely  exposed
to  the  wind,  often  a  well-known  place  (2  S.  24i6).'
Beating  the  floor  hard  for  use  may  be  alluded  to  in
Jer.  5I33  (Heb.  Te.xt  ;  .rionnn).  Sometimes  the  wheat
heads  may  have  been  struck  off  the  straws  by  the  sickle
onto  the  threshing-floor  (Job  21  24),  as  Tristram
describes  {East.  Cust.  125);  but  usually  the  bundles
would  be  first  piled  in  a  heap  (crna)  on  the  floor,  and
thiMi  from  this  a  convenient  cjuantity  (ntrno)^  from  time
to  time  spread  over  the  floor.

The  threshing  then  seems  to  have  been  done  in  two
ways  :  either  {h)  by  driving  cattle  round  the  floor  on  the
loosely  scattered  stalks  till  their  hoofs  gradually  trampled
(c'n)  out  the  grain  (12).  for  which  purpose  o.xen'*  were
used  (Hos.  lOii),''^  or  {c)  by  special  imphments.^

The  instruments  mentioned,  which  were  drawn  usually
by  o.xen,  are  [a)  j-nn',  j-nn*  (?),  (pin)  Jiic ; "  {b)  .^^jy
with  pini"  (wheel)  prefixed  (Is.  2827),  and  perhaps
alone  (Am.  2i3t;  .see,  however.  We.  ad  Ivc).  These
two  sets  of  expressions  probably  correspond  pretty
closely  to  l.vo  instruments  stili  in  use  in  Palestine,  and
a  description  of  them  and  llicir  use  will  be  the  nearest
we  can  come  to  an  account  of  their  ancient  representa-
tives.

a.  The  .Sj'rian  inn-aif  (inic)  is  a  \\ooden  drag'^  (see
fig.  10)  with  a  rough  under-surface,  which  when  drawn
over  the  stalks  chops  them  up.  The  illustration
needs  few  explanations.  The  roughness  is  produced  by
the  skilful  insertion  in  holes,  a  cubic  inch  in  size,  of
blocks  of  basalt  (nvB'S  Is.  41  15)  which  protrude  (when
nc>v)  some  inch  and  a  half.  The  sledge  is  weighted  by
heavy  stones,  or  by  the  weight  of  the  driver,  who,  when
tired,  lies  down  and  even  sleeps,  or  sits  on  a  three-
legged  stool.


8. — Sickling  and  bundling. .Xfter  l.cpsius


load  on  a  cart  (rhvj  .^m.  213) ;  but  the  reference  mr.y
very  well  be  to  the  threshing  wain.^  In  Kgypt  they
were  conveyed  in  baskets  or  bags,  by  men  or  on  donkeys,
to  the  threshing-Uoor.


Threshing  was called


t;nn, pp-^, en,


S-hi  ccn ;  of


which  the  first  describes  beating  with  a  rod,  the  second
ft  TVironTiititr  '''  indefinite  (to  break  \x\>  fine),  and  the
».  inresnmg.  ^^^^^^  j^  literally  to  tram])le.  {a)  The
first  of  these  evidently  represents  the  most  primitive
practice,  still  followed  sometimes  in  both  Palestine
and  I'.gvpt.  Naturally,  gleaners  (cpSo)  and  apparently
others  in  certain  circumstances — e.g.,  Gideon  in  time
of  danger — beat  out  the  grain  ;  and  in  much  later  times

1  It  is  hardly  possible  to  determine  how  many  of  these  terms
«re  practically  synonyms.  .-Vccording  to  Vogelstein  op.  cit.
dijjf.,  the  loose  D'HrS  were  tied  into  fliaSx  and  piled  into  C"1J^^
while  TDU  (see  Excurs,  I.)  is  an  entirely  distinct  word  meaning
hav.

2  E.g-.,  by  Wellhausen.

*  So,  e.g.,  Hoffman  and  Wetzstein  in  Z.4  TW.

6  81


/3. The  Jlrlan  of  Northern  Syria,  called  in  Egypt  by

1  '  T'.arn-floor,'  2  K.  (''27  .W.

2  lUit  in  I  K.  'I'l  iopj2  is  probably  dittography  for  C■^j3•
•"'  So  written,  without  dagesh,  by  Raer.

■^  It  is  not  clear  how  the  horses  of  Is.  C82S  are  supposed  to


sed. Du.  proposes  to  read  VE'IEI  ^s  a  ^


i:rb.


•''  In  Eg>-pt  in  later  times  o.\en  were  so  used,  three  in  a  line,
with  their  heads  bound  together  at  the  horns  by  a  Inam  (see
fig.  0),  or  in  the  ancient  empire,  donkeys,  ten  in  a  line  ;  so  in
modern  Syria,  the  line  being  called  a  iaran.

•>  Just  as  several  rods  are  used  together  in  method  (.a),  so
there  could  be  duplicates  of  ffaran  {^,  or  of  implement  (r),  or
mi.xtures  of  (i^)  and  (r)  used  simultaneously,  as  now  in  Hauran.

7  '  Threshing-wain,'  Job  41  30  [22]  RV.

**  Cle.irly  some  kind  of  sharp  instrument  of  iron  (2  S.  12  31  =
I  Ch.  •-'0  3f),  EV  'harrow,'  HofTm.  (/T.-/  7'// "266)  'pick.'

"  Perhaps  by  a  gloss  we  have  here  independent  names  for  one
thing  (Is.  41  15).  Ry  D"3pi3(Iudg.  87,  i6t),  which  some  would
add  here,  the  Talmud  (with  ipL  [once];  «5ual  (on«)  trans-
literates)  understands  'thistles':  a  view  that  is  confirmed  by
the  existence  in  modern  Egyptian  .\rabic  of  a  word  terkdn  as
the  name  of  a  thorny  plant. See  Bkiek,  i.

10  jrjit,  alone = (threshing)  wheel,  Prov.  20  26  RV

"  Some  7  ft.  X  3  ft.  X  2  in.

82


AGRICULTURE

the  name  of  the  unused  nora/  (see  fig.  1 1 ) ,  and  known  to
ttie  Romans  as  plcstcllum  Foenicum,  has  in  place  of  sharp
stones  revolving  metal  discs,  which,  when  pressed  down
by  the  weight  of  the  driver  seated  in  a  rude  arm-chair,
eflectually  cut  up  the  straw


AGRICULTURE

The  process  of  winnowing  (.-iit)  is  often  mentioned.
Two  names  of  instruments  are  preserved,  the  nnio  (EV
fan')  in  Is.  (3O24)  and  Jer.  (loy),  and


9.  Winnowing.


the  nm  (EV  '  shovel ')  in  Is.  alone  (30


24).  1 They  seem  to  refer  to  different  things  :  perhaps  to


Fig.  9. — Carrying  from  harvest-field,  and  threshing. After  Rosellini.


The  work  is  done  sometimes  by  horses,  but  most
commonly,  as  of  old,  by  oxen,  either  singly  or  (oftener)
in  pairs,  sometimes  muzzled,  contrary  to  ancient  Egyptian
usage  and  Hebrew  maxim.  ^

The  modern  tioor  is  a  circle  some  fifty  feet  in  diameter.


■^i^


Fig.  10.— S>Tian  threshing-sledge. After  Beiizinger.

with  the  heap  [kadis)  in  the  centre,  from  which  a  supply
(far/ia)  is  from  time  to  time  spread  all  round  in  ring
form,  some  two  feet  deep  and  seven  or  eight  feet  broad.
When  one  farAa  has  been  thoroughly  threshed — to
insiu^e  which,  it  is  from  time  to  time  stirred  up  with  the


-Modern  Egyptian  threshing-machine  (norag).
.\fter  Wilkinson.


handle  of  the  winnowing  instrument,  or  even  with  a
special  two-pronged  fork  (deikal,  5i\-eX\a) — the  mixed
mass  (darts)  of  grain  {^aM),  chopped  straw  {(ii/i  [zn),  and
chaff  etc.  {favydr),  is  formed  into  a  heap  ( 'arama),  to
make  room  for  a  new  tarha.


1  The  Mishna  seems  to  assume  the  practice  in  KelI»t\<S-j
iSr  CIDn.T — i-e.,  np3  '^v-  I'  •»  douhtful  whether  the  preceding
phrase  "npa  Sc*  CpScn  refers  to  a  practice,  reported  by  some
travellers,  of  banaaging  the  eyes  of  the  oxen  in  threshing.
Philological  consider.-itions  would  give  the  preference  to
Maimonides's  explanation  :  '  Sacculus  fielliceus  in  quern  colligunt
stercus  jumenti  ne  pereat  triticum  dum  trituratur.'

83


the  implements  still  called  by  similar  names  in  Palestine  ^
— the  fork  and  the  shovel.  The  products  are  grain
(ns),  choppedstraw(pn),andchaff(j'b,  zx'r\,  my,  dx^'P'"')-
The  first  is  heaped  up  in  round  heaps  (,^D-|J;  Ru.  87;
Cant.  73,  Heb.  Text).  The  second  is  kept  for  pro-
vender (Is.  11 7).  The  third  is  blown  away  by  the
wind  (Ps.  I4).

In  modern  SjTia  the  7nidrd  (see  fig.  given  in  Wetzstein,
op.  cit.  below,  §  17)  is  a  wooden  fork  almost  6  ft.  in
length,  with  some  at  least  of
its  five  or  six  prongs  separate-
ly inserted,  so  that  they  are
easily  repaired.  The  prongs
are  bound  together  by  fresh
hide,  which  on  shrinking  forms
a  tight  band.  The  raht  is  a
kind  of  wooden  shovel  (see
fig.  in  Wetzstein,  I.e.),  with
a  handle  4  ft.  long.  It  is
used  chiefly  for  piling  the
grain,  but  also  for  winnowing
leguminous  plants  and  certain
parts  of  the  daris  that  have
had  to  be  re-threshed.  The
winnowers  stand  to  th,e  E.  of
the '(/ra/«rt  heap,  and  (some-
times first  with  a  two-pronged
fork  called  shaul  and  then),
with the midrd, either toss

the  darls  against  the  wind  or  straight  up,  or  simply
let  it  fall  from  the  inverted  fork,  according  to  the
strength  of  the  evening  W.  breeze.  Wltile  the  chaff
is  blown  away  some  10  to  15
ft.  or  more,  the  straw  [tihn)
falls  at  a  shorter  distance,
and  is  preserved  for  fodder  ;
the  heavy  grain,  unbruised
ears,  and  joints  of  stems,  fall
almost  where  they  were,  ready
for  sifting.

Strange  to  say,  in  the  case
of  sifting  it  is  the  names  of
the  implement  that  are  best

10.  Sifting,  etc. PI"'^':^^^-
°  The  siei-e  is

called  Krbhdrak  (,^^;2,^  Am.

Pgt) and ndphah (nsj, Is.

30  28).  In  the  former  case
probably  the  good  grain,  in  the  latter  probably  the
refuse, passes  through. In  modern Sjria there are

1  ©  omits  these  words  ;  but  rm;oi'_  occurs  repeatedly  in  the  NT.

2  Fleischer  denies  any  philological  connection  between  Ar.
raht  and  nm,  regarding  the  former  as  a  Persian  word,  borrowed
in  the  sense  of  tool.

3  But  ©  KKKp.6<i.


Fig.  12. — Winnowing.
After  Erman.


FiG.  13.— Sifting. After
Lepsius.


AGRICULTURE

two  main  kinds  of  sieve  used  on  the  threshing-floor.
They  are  made  of  a  hoop  of  wood  with  a  niesh-work
of  strips  of  camel-hide  put  on  fresh,  and  become
tight  in  drying.  The  coarser  meshed  kirbdl  is  like  the
kebhdrah  of  Amos.  When  the  winnowed  heap  is  sifted
with  it,  the  grains  of  wheat  pass  through,  while  the
unbruised  ears  etc.  remain  in  the  sieve,'  and  are  flung
back  into  the  tarha  to  be  re-threshed.  The  finer  meshed
ghirbdl  is  like  the  he:  of  Is.  30  28;  all  dust,  bruised  j
grains,  etc.  pass  through,  but  none  of  the  good  wheat.

When  the  grain  has  been  finally  separated,  it  is
heaped  with  the  raljt  in  hemispherical  piles  (sodba),
which  probably  represent  the  'arema  (nany)  of  the
metaphor  in  Cant.  7  3  (Heb. ).  By  this  Boaz  slept  (Ru.
87),  as  do  the  owners  still,  while  (as  a  further  pre-
caution) private  marks  are  made  on  the  surface,  and  a
scarecrow  is  set  up.

Storage.— In  Jen,  Dt. ,  Joel,  Ps.,  2Ch.,  there  are
names  of  places  for  keeping  stores  of  grain  ;  -  but  we  do
not  know  anything  about  them.^  In  the  dark  days  of
Gedaliah  corn  and  other  stores  were  hidden  in  the  ground
(Jer.  41 8) ;  dry  cisterns  hewn  out  of  the  rock  are  still  so
used.  For  a  representation  of  an  ancient  cistern  see
ZDPyS,  opp.  p.  69.  The  mouth  is  just  wide  enough
to  admit  a  man's  body,  and  can  be  carefully  covered
over. Grain  will  keep  in  these  cisterns  for  years.

2.  Ne.xt  falls  to  be  considered  the  dependence  of
agriculture  on  the  general  condition  of  the  people,  a
dependence  that  is  very  obvious  from  tlie  present  state
of  agriculture  in  Palestine.

In  the  days  of  Israel's  greatness,  when  agriculture
was  the  chief  occupation  of  the  people,  the  population,

., _  , whatever may have been  its numerical

11.  General


conditions.


strength, was  certainly  enough  to  bring


the  country,  even  in  pl.aces  that  are  now
quite  barren,  into  a  state  of  cultivation.  The  land
would  be  full  of  husbandmen  tilling  their  fields  by  day,
and  returning  to  their  villages  at  night.  Yet,  down  to
the  end  of  the  monarchy,  the  old  nomadic  life  still  had  its
admirers  (Jer.  35),  who,  like  the  Bedouin  of  to-day,
would  despise  the  settled  tiller  of  the  soil.  At  the
other  extreme  also,  in  such  a  society  as  is  described,
e.g.,  by  Amos  and  Isaiah,  there  was  an  aristocracy  that
had  little  immediate  connection  with  the  land  it  owned.
Slave  labour  would  doubtless,  as  elsewhere,  be  a  weak
point  in  the  agricultural  system,  tending  to  lower  its
status  (Zech.  13  5  ;  Ecclus.  7  15  [16])  ;  though  this  would
not  preclude  the  e.xistence,  at  some  period  or  other,  of
honourable  offices  such  as  those  attributed  by  the
Chronicler  to  the  age  of  David  (i  Ch.  2725-31).  After
making  allowance  for  homiletic  colouring,  we  are  bound
to  suppose  that  agricultural  enterprise  must  have  suffered
grie\'ously  from  a  sense  of  insecurity  in  regard  to  the
claims  of  property,  and  from  the  accumulation  of  debts,
with  their  attendant  horrors.  Civil  disturbances  (such
as  those  abounding  in  the  later  years  of  Hosea)  and
foreign  wars  would,  in  later  times,  take  the  place  of
exposure  to  the  inroads  of  nomadic  tribes.  The  burden
of  taxation  and  forced  labour  (i  S.  812)  would,  as  now
in  many  eastern  lands,  foster  the  feelings  that  find  ex-
pression in  the  narrative  of  the  great  schism  (i  K.  I24)
and  in  some  of  the  accounts  of  the  rise  of  the  kingdom
(on  the  'king's  mowings,"  Am.  7i,  see  MOWINGS  and
Government,  §  -20).

The  existence  of  an  effort  to  ameliorate  evils  of  the

kind  to  which  allusion  has  just been  made,  and  of  a

y  consciousness  of  their  inconsistency  with

. aws. ^j^g  ^^^^  national  life,  is  attested  by  the

inclusion  in  the  Pentateuchal  codes  of  a  considerable

number  of  dicta  on  agricultural  matters,  in  which  we  see

1  For  lins  is  most  likely  stones.

2  D'D2K0,  DTDX,  nr.siN,  nnaSD,  »'.11^p,  rfasps,  NT  afro9^<nf.

3  In  Egypt  corn  was  stored  in  buildings  with  a  flat  roof
reached  by  an  outside  stair.  There  were  two  openings,  or  sets
of  openings,  near  the  top,  for  pouring  in  the  grain,  and  near  the
bottom,  for  withdrawing  it  (see  model  in  Brit.  Mus.).

85


AGRICULTURE

how  religious  sanctions  became  attached  to  traditional
agricultural  practices.

Already  in  the  Book  of  the  Covenant  a  fallow  year
(Ex.  23 11),  once  in  seven,  is  prescribed  for  the  sake  of
the  poor  and  the  Ixast,  and  a  day  of  rest  [v.  12).  once
in  seven,  for  the  sake  of  the  cattle  and  the  slave  ;  while
the  principle  is  laid  down  that  for  damage  done  to  a
neighbour's  field  reparation  must  be  made  (Ex.  22s/.
[4/.]).  In  the  Deuteroiiomic  Code,  if  there  is  already
the  precept  against  sowing  in  a  vineyard  two  kinds  of
seed  (229),  or  ploughing  with  an  ox  and  an  ass  together
(22 10),  and  the  requirement  of  a  tithe  (14 22),  there  are
still  such  maxims  as  the  sacredness  of  property  (19 14,
landmarks  ;  =  Prov.  22 28  =  23 lort  [cp  Job242],  and,  in
the  form  of  a  curse,  Dt.  27i7)  on  the  one  hand,  and,
on  the  other,  generous  regard  for  the  needs  of  others
(2325  [26],  plucking  ears;  24 19,  sheaf;  20,  olive;
21  2324 [23],  grapes),  even  of  beasts  (254,  mu/zle),  with
a  provision  against  abuse  of  the  privilege  (2325  [26],
no  sickle;  2324  [25J,  no  vessel);  while  an  effort  is
made  to  moderate  the  damage  done  to  agriculture
by  war  (2O7,  exemption  from  conscription;  2019/".,
preserve  trees).  In  the  Priestly  Code  there  is  still,
in  the  remarkable  collection  preceding  the  last  chapter
of  Leviticus,  a  further  development  of  the  provision
for  the  poor  at  harvest  time  (19  9,  corners  =  23  22),
with  a  repetition  of  the  charitable  maxims  (I99/. ) ;  but
there  is  on  the  whole  an  emphasising  of  such  prescrip-
tions as  non-mixture  of  seeds  (19  19),  defilement  of  seed
(II37/. ),  uncircumcision  of  fruit-trees  (I923-25),  strict
calculation  of  dates  of  agricultural  year  (23 16);  while
the  Jubile  year  makes  its  appearance.  Here  we  are
appreciably  nearer  the  details  of  such  discussions  as
those  in  Zera'im  etc.  Of  course,  the  c|uestion  how  far
such  maxims  made  themselves  felt  in  actual  practice,  or
even  as  a  moral  directive  force,  is  not  answered  by
pointing  out  their  existence  in  literary  form.

III.  We  pass  now  to  the  consideration  of  agriculture
as  a  factor  in  the  life  of  the  people.

That  agriculture  was  an  important  element  in  popular
life is very  evident. Land was measured by yokes
S.  14 14  ; Is.  5 10)  and  valued  by  the


13.  Common
life.


amount  of  seed  it  needed  (Lev.  27 16).

Time  was  measured  by  harvests  (Judith
227  1),  and  places  were  identified  by  the  crops  growing
on  them  (2  S.  23ii,  lentils  ;  i  Ch.  11 13,  barley).  Tilling
the  soil  was  proverbially  the  source  of  wealth  (Pr.  12  ti
28 19) ;  implements  not  needed  for  other  purposes  would
as  a  matter  of  course  be  turned  to  agricultural  use
(Is.  24) — and  so  on.  That  work  in  the  fields  was  not
confined  to  slaves  and  jjeople  of  no  culture  is  evident,
not  only  from  the  existence  of  such  narratives  as  that
of  Joseph's  dream,  but  also  from  what  is  told  of  Saul
(1S.II5),  and  Elisha  (1K.I919),  and  Amos  (714)
before  they  appeared  on  the  stage  of  history.  On  the
other  hand,  the  narrator  of  the  story  of  Ruth  seems
to  represent  neither  Boaz  himself  nor  his  deputy  as
doing  more  than  overseeing  and  encouraging  the
labourers  (Ru.  2s);  and  in  the  time  of  the  writer  of
Zech.  13s  (RV)  a  tiller  of  the  soil  seemed  to  be  most
naturally  a  purchased  slave,  while  the  ideal  of  the  writer
of  Is.  61 5  is  that  ploughmen  and  vine-dressers  should  be
aliens.

At  all  times,  howe%'er,  even  the  rich  owner  entered
naturally  into  the  spirit  of  the  agricultural  life.  If  it
was  perhaps  only  in  the  earlier  times  that  he  actually
ploughed  or  even  followed  the  oxen,  he  would  at  all
times  be  present  on  the  cheerful  harvest  field  and  visit
his  vineyard  to  see  the  work  of  the  labourers  (Mt.  208),
his  sons'  included  (Mt.  21 28),  and  give  directions  about
the  work  (Lk.  187).  when  he  would  listen  respectfully
to  the  counsel  of  his  men  (Lk.  138/. ).  It  was  not
derogatory,  in  the  mind  of  the  Chronicler,  to  kingly
dignity  to  interest  one's  self  in  agriculture  (2  Ch.  26 10),*

1  The  text  of  a  S.  23  13  is  verj-  doubtful ;  cp  Dr.  ad  loc.

2  The  meaning  of  Eccles.  6  9  [81  is  obscure.

86


14.  Sentiment.


AGRICULTURE

and  a  proverb-writer  points  out  the  superiority  of  the
quiet  prosperity  of  the  husbandman  to  an  insecure
diadem  (Prov.  2723-27).

Not  unnaturally  it  is  the  life  of  harvest-time  that  has
been  most  fully  preserved  to  us.  We  can  see  the  men,
especially  the  younjjer  men  (Ru.  29),  cutting  the
grain,  the  young  children^  going  out  to  their  fathers
(2  K.  4  18)  in  the  field,  the  jealousies  that  might  spring
up  between  the  reapers  ((ien.  37?),  and  the  dangers  that
young  men  and  maidens  might  be  exposed  to(Ru.  29
perh.  Hos.  9  \f. ),  the  simple  fare  of  the  reapers  ( Ru.  2 14),
and  the  unrestrained  joviality  of  the  evening  meal  ( Ru.
87)  after  the  hot  day's  work  (2  K.  4  19),  the  poor  women
and  girls  gleaning  behind  the  reapers  and  usually  finding
more  than  they  seem  sometimes  to  find  nowadays,
beating  out  the  grain  (Ru.  217)  in  the  evening  and
carrying  it  away  in  a  mantle  to  the  older  ones  at  home
(Ru.  815),  not  only  the  labourers  but  also  the  owners
sleeping  by  the  corn  heaps  at  night  (Ru.  87),  so  that
the  villages  would,  as  now  in  Palestine  and  Egj'pt,  l)e
largely  emptied  of  inhabitants.  The  Egyptian  monu-
ments could  be  drawn  on  for  further  illustrations.

Such  a  mode  of  life  had  naturally  a  profound  effect
on  the  popular  sentiment,  the  religious  conscience,  and,
in  time,  the  literary  thought  of  the
people  ;  and,  to  complete  our  survey  of
the  subject,  a  few  words  must  be  said  here  on  these
matters.

That  the  agricultural  mode  of  life  was  regarded  as
originating  in  the  earliest  ages  is  evident  from  Gen.  3
and  4  ;  '^  but  it  was  sometimes  regarded  as  a  curse
(817/.),  or  at  least  as  inferior  to  pastoral  life  (43/.),
while  at  other  times  nomadic  life  was  a  curse  (4  12),
instead  of  being  a  natural  stage  (4  20).  These  two
sides  are  perhaps  reflected  in  the  glowing  descriptions
in  which  certain  writers  delight — e.g. ,  Dt.  8828  :  a  tilled
land  of  corn  and  wine  and  oil  (Dt.  87-9),  a  pasture  land
flowing  with  milk  and  honey  (Ezek.  2(16).  This  land,
which  is  lovingly  contrasted  with  other  lands  (I'^zek.
206  15),  was  felt  to  be  a  gift  of  Yahwe  to  his
people,  and  specially  under  his  watchful  care  (Ut.
11 12).  The  agricultural  life  was,  therefore,  also  of  his
appointment  (Gen.  823;  Ecclus.  7  15  [»6]),  and  indeed
lay  as  the  basis  of  his  Torah.  From  him  the  husband-
man received  the  principles  of  his  practice  (Is.  2826),
as  also,  he  depended  absolutely  on  Yahwe  for  the  bringing
into  operation  of  the  natural  forces  (Dt.  11 14)  without
which  all  his  labour  would  be  in  vain  [v.  17).  This,  how-
ever, was  only  a  ground  of  special  security  (Dt.  11  12),  for
no  other  god  could  give  such  blessings  as  rain  ( Jer.  14  22),
and  Yahwe  did  give  them  (Jer.  024).  If  they  were  not
forthcoming,  therefore,  it  was  because  Yahwe  had  with-
held them  (Am.  47),  and  this  was  Ix.'cause  of  his  people's
sins  (Jer.  525),  which  also  brouLjht  more  special  curses
( Dt.  28  38-40).  The  recognition  of  N'ahw^  had,  therefore,
a  prominent  place  in  connection  with  the  stages  of
agricultural  industry  (see  Feast.s,  §  4),  the  success  of
which  was  felt  to  depend  on  the  nation's  rendering  him
in  general  loyal  obedience  (Dt.  11 8-17);  the  land  itself
was  Yahw^'s  ;  the  people  were  but  tenants  (Lev.  2523)  ;
and  the  moving  of  the  ancient  landmarks,  though  not
unknown,  was  a  great  wrong  (Job  24  2).  Some  of  the
moral  aspects  of  agricultural  life  have  been  already
sufficiently  touched  on.  It  is  probable  that  many  of  the
maxims  referred  to  were  widely  observed,  being  congruent
with  the  better  spirit  of  the  people.  Thus  Amos  records
it  as  an  outrage  on  the  ordinary  sentiments  of  common
charity,  that  even  the  refuse  of  the  wheat  should  be  sold
for  gain  (Am.  86).  Other  maxims,  again,  can  be  little
traced  in  practice.

In  this  description  of  Hebrew  ideas  we  have  taken  no
note  of  the  differences  between  earlier  and  later  times.
Deuteronomy  and the prophets  have been the  main

1  Several  children  may  .sometimes  now  be  .seen  weighting  and
driving  the  threshing-sledge.

2  Cp  also  Gen.  1 28/  and  WRS  RS'!^)  307.

87


AGRICULTURE

authority.  In  the  public  consciousness,  however,  there
lived  on  much  of  the  old  Canaanitish  popular  belief,  in
which  the  liA'alim  hold  the  place  here  assigned  to
Yahwe,  so  that,  e.g.,  the  fertile  spot  is  the  Baal's  plot  of
land,  who  waters  it  from  unseen  sources,  underground  or
in  the  heavens  (see  B.\AL,  §  i) — a  mode  of  expression
that  lived  on  into  Mishna  times,  although  its  original
meaning  had  been  long  forgotten.

The  influence  on  Hebrew  literature  was  very  deep.
The  most  cursory  reader  ^  must  have  observed  how  much


16.  Literature.


the  modes  of  expression  reflect  the
agricultural  life.  Prophetic  descrip-
tions of  an  ideal  future  abound  in  scenes  conceived  in
agricultural  imagery.^  Great  joy  is  likened  to  the  joy
of  harvest  (Is.  Kig/. );  what  is  evanescent  is  like  chaflf
that  is  burned  uj)  or  blown  away  ;  something  unexpected
is  like  cold  ( I'r.  25  13),  or  rain  ( Pr.  26 1),  in  harvest — and
so  on.  Lack  of  sjjace  prevents  proof  in  detail  of  how,
on  the  one  hand,  figures  and  modes  of  speech  are  drawn
from  all  the  operations  and  natural  phenomena  of  agri-

j  culture,  while,  on  the  other  hand,  every  conceivable
subject  is  didactically  or  artistically  illustrated  by  ideas
and  expressions  from  the  same  source.  It  is  a  natural
carrying  forward  in  the  NT  of  this  mode  of  thought,  to
find  Jesus  publishing  his  epoch-making  doctrines  of  the

i  '  kingdom  '  so  largely  through  the  help  of  the  same
imagery.  No  doubt  the  commonest  general  expression
is  '  kingdom  '  ;  but  even  this  often  becomes  a  vineyard,
or  a  field,  or  a  tree,  or  a  seed  ;  and  it  is  extended  by
sowing  etc.  It  is  unnecessary  to  pursue  the  subject
farther.  The  whole  mode  of  thought  has  passed  over
into  historical  Christianity,  and  thus  into  all  the
languages  of  the  world.

1  c TT*  ♦• ■ 1 ^^  shall  now  in  closing  give  some
■  fragmentary  notes  towards  a  historical
outline  of  the  subject.

The  traditional  account  of  the  mode  of  life  of  the
ancestors  of  Israel  in  the  earliest  times  introduces  agri-
cultural activity  only  as  an  exceptional  incident.  Agri-
culture must  be  rudimentary  in  the  case  of  a  nomadic
people.  That  Canaan,  on  the  other  hand,  was  for  the
most  part  well  under  cultivation,-'  when  the  Israelites
settled  in  the  highlands,  there  can  be  no  doubt.  The
Egyptian  Mohar  found  a  garden  at  Joppa,'*  and  of  the
agricultural  produce  claimed  by  Thotmes  III.  at  the
hands  of  the  Rutennu ®  some  at  least  must  ha\e  been
grown  in  Palestine.  Israel  doubtless  learned  from  the
Canaanite  not  only  the  art  of  war  (Judg.  82),  but  also
the  more  peaceful  arts  of  tilling  the  soil,  which,  as  the
narratives  of  Judges  and  Samuel  prove,  were  practised
with  success,  while  it  is  even  stated  that  Solomon  sent
to  Hiram  yearly  20,000  Kor  of  wheat  and  20,000
Bath  of  oil  (i  K.  5ii  [25]  Var.  Bible).  Later,  Ezekiel
(27  17  ;  see  Cornill)  tells  us  how  Judah  bartered  wheat
with  Tyre,^  as  well  as  honey,  oil,  balm,  and  jjs  (see
Pannag)  ;  which  illustrates  the  tradition  in  iK.  2O34
(see  COT)  that  there  were  bazaars  (see  Tk.\de  ;
Stk.\nger,  §  2)  for  Israelitish  merchants  in  Damascus,
and  for  those  of  Damascus  in  Samaria.  It  is  strange,
but  true,  that  in  the  very  period  to  which  this  last  notice
refers,  there  arose  a  popular  reaction  against  the  precious
legacies  of  Canaanitish  civilisation  (see  Rpxhaisites).
The  Assyrian  conquest  of  Samaria  naturally  checked
for  a  time  the  cultivation  of  the  soil  (2  K.  17  25,  lions),
the  colonists  introduced  by  Sargon  and  Asur-bani-pal
being  imperfectly  adapted  to  their  new  home.  In  Judaea
under  Gedaliah  the  Jews  '  gathered  wine  and  summer

1  Even  of  the  English  version,  which  .sometimes  hides  such
metaphors  as,  f.c.  ,  'ploughing  evil' — tran.slated  'deviseth,'
Prov.  0  14.

2  Am.  9  tj,_ff:  ;  Ho.s.  14 ey:  [t/.]  ;  Mic.  44  ;  Jer.  31 12  ;  Zech.
812;  Mai.  3  II.

^  The  implements  found  at  Tell-el-Hesy  appear  to  carry  us
back  to  the  earliest  days.
*  Cp  RP  ist  ser.,  '1 113.

5  //'/(/.  23  and  cp  Brugsch,  Jigy/'t  under  tlie  Pharaohs  ('91),
p.  167.

6  Cp  a  similar  relation  in  the  time  of  Herod  (Acts  12  20).


AGRIPPA

fruits  very  nuich  '  (Jtr. 4O12),  and  liaci  stores  of  wheat,
barley,  oil,  and  honey,  carefully  hidden  in  the  ground  j
(Jer.  41  8).  In  Is.  41 15  mention  is  for  the  first  time  j
explicitly  made  of  a  threshing  instrument  with  teeth
(nvB'S)  ;  hut  whether  this  was  of  recent  introduction  it  is
impossible  to  determine.  On  the  fall  of  the  Babylonian
[K)wer  the  old  relations  with  Tyre  were  doubtless  renewed
(Kzra37;  cp  Is.  23 15 18).  The  imperial  tribute,  however,
is  regarded  as  heavier  than  the  agricultural  resourcesof  the
country  could  then  well  bear  (Neh.  63/. ).  This  tribute
may  have  been  partly  in  money  (54),  but  also  apparently
to  a  considerable  e.xtent  in  produce  (Neh.  937,  nKOn)-
In  Joel,  of  course,  there  is  a  description  of  agricultural
distress,  but  in  such  a  way  as  to  imply  that  agriculture
was  in  general  receiving  full  attention.  In  Eccles.  (25/. )
there  is  acquaintance,  as  in  other  things,  so  in  agri-
culture, with  several  artificial  contrivances.  To  go  into
the  detailed  accounts  of  the  Mishna  is  beyond  the
present  purpose.

I'"or  complete  bibliographies  see  the  larger  Cyclopaedias,
liililical  and  Classical. Of  special  treatises  may  be  mentioned

that  in  vol.  29  of  the  V'/us.  of  Ugolinus ;
17. Literature, ofspecial  articles,  on  ajj^r/cw/Zwre"  in  general,

in  Mod.  Palestine,  Anderlind,  /.DPy^  \ff.;
Klein,  //'.  3100-115  OSi-ioi,  but  especially  457-84;  Post,
PEFQ,  1891,  p.  1107?;  ;  on  the  plough,  Schumacher,  /.DPVVl
157-166  ;  on  sickles,  V.  C.  J.  Spurrell  in  Archieolog.  Jourti.  A9,
no.  igj,  iS.^2,  p.  54^  and  Plate  I.,  fig.  i  ;  on  tlinshing  sledge,
Wcti-striii.  /..  f.  l\ihnoloi;ie,  1873,  p.  q-jo  Jf.  ;  on  ■niintwiving,
Wit/.t.  i!i  ii.  I  )<  1.  /.v«.(2)  709/  ;  on  the  .f/Wv,  Wctzstein,  /.DPl^
14  I  //.  :  .ill  i>la,.-  in  OT  literature,  O.  I'ngewitter,  Die  land
ivir:i:.Jt.i/':iiJ:c>i  lUlder  u.  Metaphern  i.  d.  poet.  Biicli.  d.
--I /' ( K.r)nigsbg.,  1885);  on  later  usage,  Hermann  Vogelstein,
Die  Liiiiii'.virt/isclia/t  in  /^allistitia  zur  Zeit  der  Mischna,  I.
(Berlin,  1894),  a  clissertiilinn  that  did  not  reach  the  writer  till
this  article  had  been  written.  H.  w.  H.

AGRIPPA  (AfPinnA),  -Vets 25 /.f  See  Herodian
Family,  7.

AGUR  (1-liK;  so  Pesh. ;  ia,^/;  but  ©  and  Vg. ,
translating,  ct)OBHaHTl  [r5AS]  ;  Congrcgantis),  h.
Jakeh,  an  author  of  moral  verses  (Prov.  30i).  His
name  is  variously  explained  as  '  hireling '  of  wisdom
(Bar  Bahlul)  and  'collector'  of  words  of  Torah  (Midr.  |
Shfiiioth  K'.,Yyar.6).  Such  theories  assume  that  Solomon  j
is  the  author  of  the  verses,  which  (see  Provkrbs)  is
impossible.  All  the  description  given  of  him  in  the
heading  is  'the  author  of  wise  poems'  (read,  not  Nb'Sn,
but  'rc'E.i,  with  Griitz,  Cheyne,  Bickell).  Very  possibly
the  name  is  a  pseudonym.  The  poet  who  '  takes  up
his  parable'  in  7^.5  expresses  sentiments  very  different
from  those  of  .Xgur  ;  he  seeks  to  counteract  the  bold
and  scarcely  Israelitish  sentiments  of  his  predecessor.

See  Ew.,  Salotn.  Seliri/ten  250^;  Che.,  /ol'  ami  Solomon
1497?:,  Jewish  Rel.  Li/e,  Lect.  V.  ;  Sniend,  A  I'  Rel.-gesch.
479y?  ;  and,  with  cautton,  Dillon,  Sceptics  0/ the  OT  131^
26977; Cp  also  Proverbs  ;  Ithiei,  ii.;  Lemukl.  t.  k.  c.

AHAB  (2NnN,  §  65,1  'father's  brother,'  cp  Ahiam
and  the  Assyr.  woman's  narne,  Ahnt-abisu,  and  see  \\\.
/.A',  1898,  Heft  I  ;  also  3Nn  [for  ^XflN]  on  an  inscrip-
tion from  Safa  [Jonrn.  As.  188 1,  19  463]).  i.  (Axaa^
[B.AL],  -oa/t4  [A  once]  ;  Achab  ;  Assyr.  .lijahbu.)  Son
of  Omri,  and  king  of  Israel  (875-853?  B.C.  Cp
ChK()NOLO<;y,  §  32,  and  table  in  §  37).  The  im-
portance of  this  king's  reign  is  shown  by  the  large
„  space  devoted  to  it  in  the  Book  of  Kings.

.  bources.  ^^  obtain  a  just  idea  of  his  character,
however,  is  not  easy,  the  Israelitish  traditions  being
derived  from  two  very  different  sources,  in  one  of
which  the  main  interest  was  the  glorification  of  the
pro[)hcts,  while  the  other  was  coloured  by  patriotic  feel-
ngs,  and  showed  a  strong  partiality  for  the  brave  and
bold  king.  To  the  former  belong  i  K.  1 7-19  and  21 ;  to
the  latter,  chaps.  20  and  22.-  Both  groujis  of  narratives
are  very  old  ;  but  the  former  is  more  difficult  than  the
latter  to  understand  historically. In  chaps.  20  and  22  we

1  Cp  Niildeke,  '  Verwandtschaftsn.amen  als  Personenn.imen '
in  Kleini^keitcn  zur  seinitisc/u-n  Onotiiatologie  (ll'ZA'.M  0  307-
316  (•92I):

2  .See  Kings,  §  8,  .-ind  cp  Ki.  Gesch.  •.'  184-186  [ET.  2214-216].

89


AHAB

seem  to  get  nearer  to  the  facts  of  history  than  in  chaps.
17-19,  21  ;  at  the  same  time  we  nmst  rememljer  that
even  here  we  have  to  deal,  not  with  extracts  from  the
royal  annals,  but  with  popular  traditions  which  are
liable  to  exaggeration,  es[x--cially  at  the  hands  of  well-
meaning  interiX)lators. '  The  story  of  Ahab  in  his
relation  to  Elijah  has  lx;en  considered  elsewhere  (see
Elijah,  §1/:).  We  can  hardly  deny  that  the  writer
exalts  the  prophet  to  the  disadvantage  of  the  king. Ahab

2.  Ahab's


policy.


was  not  an  irreligious  man,  but  his  interests
were  mainly  secular.  He  wished  to  see
Israel  free  and  prosjjerous,  and  he  did  not
believe  that  the  road  to  political  salvation  and  physical
ease  lay  through  the  isolation  of  his  [Kjople  from  all
foreign  nations.  The  most  pressing  danger  to  Israel
seemed  to  him  to  lie  in  its  being  slowly  but  surely
Araniaised,  which  would  involve  the  depression  and  per-
haps the  ultimate  extinction  of  its  national  peculiarities.
Both  under  Baashaand  under  Omri,  districts  of  Israelitish
territory  had  been  annexed  to  the  kingdom  of  Damas-
cus, and  it  seemed  to  ,\hab  to  be  his  life's  work  to  guide
him.self,  not  by  the  re(|uirements  of  Yahwe's  prophets,
but  by  those  of  political  prudence.  Hence  he  not  only
maintained  a  fiim  hold  on  Moab,  but  also  made  himself
indispensable  as  an  ally  to  the  king  of  Judah,  if  he  did
not  even  become,  in  a  (|ualified  sense,  his  suzerain  (see
jKHOSiiAi'iiAT,  i).  Besides  this,  he  formed  a  close
alliance  with  Ethbaal,  king  of  Tyre  (Jos.  Artl.  viii.  13 1),
whose  daughter  Jezebel  (Baalizebel  ?)  he  married.  The
object  of  this  alliance  was  doubtless  the  improvement  of
Israel's  commerce.  The  drawback  of  it  was  that  it
required  on  -Ahab's  part  an  official  recognition  of  the
Tyrian  BaaP  (commonly  known  as  Melkart),  which
was  the  more  offensive  because  the  contrast  between  the
cultus  even  of  the  Canaanitish  Baalim  and  that  of  the
God  of  Israel  was  becoming  stronger  and  stronger,  owing
to  the  prophetic  reaction  against  the  earlier  fusion  of  wor-
ships. -Ahab  himself  had  no  thought  of  apostatising
from  Yahwe,  nor  did  he  destroy  the  altars  of  Yahwe
and  slay  his  prophets.  Indeed,  four  hundred  prophets
of  Yahwe  are  said  to  have  prophesied  before  him  when
he  set  out  on  his  fatal  journey  to  Ramath  Gilead.  His
children,  too,  receive  the  significant  names  of  Athaliah,
Ahaziah,  and  Jehoram.

We  can  understand  Ahab's  point  of  view.  But  for
its  moral  dangers,  we  might  call  it  thoroughly  justifi-
able. It  was  of  urgent  im[X)rtance  to  recover  the
lost  Israelitish  territory  and  to  secure  the  kingdom  of
Israel  against  foreign  invasion.  If  Israel  were  absorbed
by  Damascus,  what  would  become  of  the  \\ 01  ship  of
Yahwe?  To  this  question  E,lijah  would  have  given  the
answer  which  Amos  (i/.t-. ,  §  18)  gave  after  him  :  '  Perish
Israel,  rather  than  that  the  commandments  of  Yahwe
should  be  dishonoured.'  Jezebel's  judicial  murder  of
Naboth  and  -Ahab's  tame  acquiescence  show  ed  El  ijah  what
might  be  expected  from  the  continued  combination  of
two  heterogeneous  religions.  It  was  for  the  nmrder  of
Naboth  that  Elijah  threatened  king  Ahab  with  death, ^

1  We  must  begin,  however,  with  an  analysis  of  the  narratives.
Van  Doorninck  ( ///- /'.  iSo:;.  on.  ^76-584)  has  m.ade  it  highly
probable  that  til  .if  Samaria  and  the  battle

ofAphekin  i  K  interpolations  tending  to

make  thedeli\'  ,,wre  wonderful,  in  addition

to  those  alre.-iu\ jiumieu i.ui ..> .w-.  (C//  285/),  and  Kue.
(Einl.  §  25,  n.  10).

'^  Of  H.aalath,  the  fem.ile  counterpart  of  Baal,  the  Hebrew
tradition  m.akes  no  mention.  It  is  an  interpolator  who  has
introduced  into  1  K.  IS  19  thewords  'and  the  prophets  of  the
Ashera,  400,'  which  are  wanting  in  the  MT  of  r'.  22,  though
-supplied  in  <P"i  1(P'-  omits  400  in  r.  22]  (cp  WKS,  A".S'(2(
189;  We.  Cll  281  ;  Klo.  Sa.  Kff.  367;  Ki.  in  Kau.  /IS).  Of
course,  Paalath  may  have  had  her  cultus  by  the  side  of  P..ial,
but  not  in  such  a  way  as  to  strike  Israelitish  observers.  Nor
could  either  Haalath  or  Astarte  (Jezebel's  father  had  been  a
priest  of  Astarte,  Jos.  c.  A  p.  1 18)  have  been  called  '  the  Asherah  '
Dy  a  contemporary  writer.

3  Note  that  i  K.  21  20^-26— in  which  (i)  the  whole  house  of
Ahab  is  threatened,  and  (2)  the  punishment  is  connected  with
Ahab's  religious  policy— forms  no  part  of  the  old  narrative  (see
Ki.  in  Kau.  US).

90


AHAB

and  it  was  probably  for  this,  or  for  other  unrecorded
moral  offences  of  Ahab  and  the  partizans  of  Baal,  that
the  uncourtly  prophet  Micaiah  '  never  prophesied  good
concerning  Ahab,  but  evil '  ( i  K.  228).

To  what  precise  period  of  Ahab's  reign  his  encounters
with  Elijah  belong,  we  are  not  told.  Nor  is  it  at  all
certain  to  which  years  the  events  recorded  in  i  K.  20  are  to
be  referred.  To  the  popular  traditions  further  reference
is  made  elsewhere  (see  Israel,  History  ok,  §  29).
Suffice  it  to  say  here  that  they  show  us  Ahab's  better
side  ;  we  can  understand  from  them  that  to  such  a  king
„ . much  could  be  forgiven. Our  remaining

Inscriptio^n.  ^^'""' '"'"  ^  '^^^"'''''^  '°  '^"^  '7  ''""^fK
^  tions  relative to  episodes m the life  of

Ahab.  The  earliest  record  comes  from  MoAB  (g.v-).
King  Mesha  informs  us  in  his  famous  inscription  (/.  8)
that  Moab  had  been  made  tributary  to  Israel  by  Omri,
and  that  this  subjection  had  continued  '  during  Omri's
days  and  half  of  his  son's  days,  forty  years,"  after  which
took  place  the  great  revolt  of  Moab.^  How  this  state-
ment is  to  be  reconciled  with  that  in  2  K.  1 1  84  need  not
be  here  considered.  It  is,  at  any  rate,  clear  that  the  loss  of
the  large  Moabitish  tribute,  and  of  the  contingent  which
Moab  would  have  to  furnish  to  Israelitish  armies,  must
_. .  have  been  felt  by  Ahab  severely. The

■^  , ' second  mention  of  this  king  occurs  in
neser .  s ^j^^  Monolith  Inscription  of  Sh.^lma-
Inscription. ^.^^^.^ jj ^^^  .,  ^ j^  ^^^  ^^^ ^^^^^

given  of  the  allied  kings  of  .Syria  whose  forces  were
defeated  by  Shalmancbcr  at  the  battle  of  Karkar  (near
the  river  Orontes)  in  854  k.c.  occurs  the  name  of
Ahabbu  Sir'Iai,  which,  as  most  scholars  are  now  agreed,
can  only  mean  Ahab-  of  Israel*  (or,  as  Hommel  thinks,
of  Jezreel).  Two  important  questions  arise  out  of  this
__,  record. (i) Did Ahab join Bir'idri

Ahab^t^^ (Benhadad I. ) of Damascus of his
^ ,  own accord,  jealousies being  neutral-

ised by  dread  of  a  common  foe?
or  was  he  a  vassal  of  Bir'idri,  bound  to  accept  the
foreign  policy  of  his  suzerain  and  to  support  it  with
(or  at  any  rate  through)  his  warriors  on  the  field  of
battle?  The  former  alternative  is  adopted  by  Kittel'*
and  M' Curdy  ;  the  latter  by  Wellhausen  and  Winckler.
To  discuss  this  here  at  length  is  impossible.  The
remarks  of  Wellhausen  will  seem  to  most  students  very
cogent.  '  If  feelings  of  hostility  e.\isted  at  all  between
Ahab  and  Benhahad,  then  Ahab  could  not  do  otherwise
than  congratulate  himself  that  in  the  person  of  Shalma-
neser  II.  there  had  arisen  against  Benhadad  an  enemy
who  would  be  able  to  keep  him  effectually  in  check.
That  Shalmaneser  might  prove  dangerous  to  himself
probably  did  not  at  that  time  occur  to  him  ;  but  if  it
had,  he  would  still  have  chosen  the  remote  in  preference
to  the  immediately  threatening  evil.  For  it  was  the
political  existence  of  Israel  that  was  at  stake  in  the
struggle  with  Damascus.'* Cp  Ben-hadad,  §  2.

It  does  not  follow,  however,  that  we  must  give  Well-

hausen's  answer  to  the  second  question,  which  is  (2)  Are

RpI  f '^"^ events related in i  K.  20 22, with

Ht V^* the  exception  of  the  contest  for  Ramath

_ ^  ®  ° J  Gilead,  to  be  placed  before  or  after  the

1  K 20^ battle  of  Karkar  (854  B.C.)? It  is, no

"  ■ doubt, highly  plausible  to  suppose  that

J  For  a  somewhat  different  view,  see  Chronologv,  §  29,  n.  i.

2  Against  Kamph.'s  view,  that  Ahab  is  mentioned  by  a  mis-
take of  the  Assyrian  scribe  instead  of  Joram,  cp  Schr.  A'GF  370.

3  The  form  Sir'Iai  may  be  illustrated  by  the  vocalisation
^fOr-K  Asarel,  i  Ch.  4  16,  which  Lag.  {Uebers.  132)  thinks  may
represent  the  original  pronunciation  rather  than  7l*Tip\

*  Ki.,  however,  after  adopting  this  view  of  the  course  of  events
in  his  narrative,  turns  round,  and  with  some  hesitation  indicates
his  preference  for  the  view  of  Kamph.  {Chronologic  der  fuhr.
Kdn.  80),  held  also  formerly  by  We.,  according  to  which  the  As-
syrian scribe  confounds  Ahab  with  his  son  Jehoram  {Hist.  2  273X
On  the  whole  question  cp  Schr.  A'^Ji"^  356-371.

8  //isi.i^l  61.  So  the  conservative  critic  KShler  {Bii/.  Gesch.
8379X On  the  other  side,  see M 'Curdy,  Hist.  Proph.  Man.


AHAB

Ahab  took  advantage  of  the  blow  dealt  to  the  power
of  Damascus  at  Karkar  to  shake  off  the  suzerainty  of
Benhadad  :  so  far,  at  least,  it  seems  reasonable  to
follow  Wellhausen.  But  it  is  not  likely  that,  consider-
ing the  threatening  attitude  of  Assyria,  Benhadad
would  have  thought  it  prudent  to  fritter  away  his
strength  on  those  '  furious  attacks '  on  Isr.ael  to  which
Wellhausen  refers  ;  ^  it  is  not  likely,  in  short,  that  the
siege  of  Samaria  and  the  battle  of  Aphek  are  to
be  placed  after  854  n.c.  It  may  be  asked,  if  they
are  not  placed  thus,  where  are  we  to  find  room  for
them  ?  In  i  K.  20  23-34,  Ahab  is  represented  as  gaining
the  mastery  over  Benhadad,  who  has  to  make  most
humiliating  concessions  to  him.  After  such  a  success,
how  can  we  account  for  Ahab's  enforced  presence  at
Karkar  as  vassal  of  Benhadad?  The  answer  is  that
tradition  selects  its  facts,  and  that  the  facts  which
it  selects  it  idealises  as  an  artist  would  idealise  them.
We  may  admit  that  Ahab,  in  his  obstinate  and  patriotic
resistance  to  Damascus,  was  not  unvisited  by  gleams
of  good  fortune ;  but  the  fact,  which  tradition  itself
records,  that  he  was  once  actually  besieged  in  his
capital,  cannot  have  stood  alone.  Of  Ahab's  other
misfortunes  in  war  tradition  is  silent ;  but  we  can  easily
imagine  that  the  fxswer  which  was  too  strong  for  Omri
was  at  last  able  to  force  his  son  to  send  a  large  con-
tingent to  the  army  which  was  to  meet  Shalmaneser  at
Karkar.

That  the  siege  of  Samaria,  at  any  rate,  was  before
854  n.C.  is  rendered  probable  b)'  the  criticism  given
elsewhere  (see  Jkhgr.am,  i,  §  2)  of  the  narrative  in
2  K.  7.  In  particular,  the  kings  of  the  Hittites  and  of
Musri,  who  are  referred  to  in  f.  6,  are  just  those  with
whom  Benhadad  would  have  to  deal  before  854  B.C.,
while  Shalmaneser  was  still  occupied  at  a  distance.

The  above  solution  of  the  historical  problem  is  that
of  Winckler,  which  unites  elements  of  Wellhausen's
view  and  of  that  of  Kittel.

_  The  last-named  critic  deserves  credit  for  an  ingenious  explana-
tion ((JwcA.  2232)  of  the  magnanimity  attributed  to  Ahab  in
I  K.  20  31-34.  It  will  be  remembered  that,  according  to  Kittel,
Ahab  sent  forces  to  Karkar  of  his  own  accord,  not  as  a  vassal  of
Benhadad.  This  enables  him  to  suggest  that  the  king  of  Israel
may  have  spared  his  rival's  life  in  order  to  enlist  him  in  a
coalition  against  Assyria,  the  idea  of  which  (according  to  this
hypothesis)  was  Ahab's.  It  must  be  confessed,  however,  that
this  view  ascribes  more  foresight  to  Ahab  than,  according;  to
Amos  {q.v.,  §  5),  was  possessed  by  the  Israelites  even  at  a  later
day,  and  it  was  certainly  unknown  to  the  compiler  of  our
traditions,  who  makes  no  mention  of  the  battle  of  Karkar.

We  may  regard  it,  then,  as  highly  probable  that  the
battle  of  Karkar  was  fought  at  some  time  in  the  '  three  (?)
years  without  war  between  Syria  and  Israel '  mentioned
in  I  K.  22  I.

The  numbers  of  the  force  assigned  by  Shalmaneser

in  his  inscription  to  Ahab  (2000  chariots,  10,000  men),

_ ., ,,  as  compared  with those  assigned to

7.  AuAD  s  amiv. ,,■.)>  •

'' other kings,- deserve attention. It

is  possible,  no  doubt,  as  Winckler  suggests,  that
contingents  from  Judah  and  Moab  were  reckoned
among  the  warriors  of  Ahab. ^  This  does  not,  however,
greatly  diminish  the  significance  of  the  numljers.  After
all,  the  men  of  Judah  were  southern  Israelites.  Even
if  Moabitish  warriors  were  untrustworthy  against  a  foe
such  as  Benhadad,  there  is  no  reason  to  doubt  that  the
men  of  Judah  would  sooner  see  Israel  free  from  Benhadad
than  swallowed  up  by  its  deadly  foe.  Ahab  was
8  Hia  death  '^^'"tainly  no  contemptible  anUigonist  in
respect  to  the  number  of  warriors  he
could  bring  into  the  field.  He  himself,  like  David
(2S.  I83),  was  'worth  ten  thousand,"  and  the  dread
with  which  he  inspired  the  Syrians  is  strikingly  shown
in  the  account  of  his  last  campaign. We  read  that

1  IJC  50 ;  and  and  3rd  ed.  p.  71.

2  Hir'idri  (Benhadad)  h.ns  1200  chariots,  1200  horsemen,
»o,ooo  men  (.Schrader,  COT  1  186).

3  That  Jehoshaphat's  military  support  of  .\hab  was  not
altogether  voluntary  is  surmised  by  We.  and  i>ositively  .-usserted
by  Wi.  That  it  only  began  at  the  expedition  to  Ramath
Gilead  is  too  hastily  supposed  by  Ki.  {Gesch.  2  232  (ET,  2  272]).


AHARAH

Benhadad  charged  the  captains  of  his  chariots  to  '  fight
neither  with  small  nor  great,  save  only  with  the  king
of  Israel,"  and  that  when  they  thought  they  had  found
him  they  'surrounded  him  (0)  to  tight  against  him'
(i  K.2231/).  It  was  not,  however,  by  a  device  of
human  craft  that  the  great  warrior  was  to  die.  A  chance
shot  from  a  bow  pierced  Ahab's  armour.  The  grievous
wound  prompted  the  wish  to  withdraw  ;  but  for  the
king  in  his  disguise  (t-.  30)  withdrawal  was  impossible,
for  the  battle  became  hot  and  the  warriors  pressed  on
from  behind.  The  dying  king  stood  the  whole  day
through,  upright  and  armed  as  he  was,  in  his  chariot.
At  sunset  he  died,  and  when  the  news  spread  '  The  king
is  dead'  (2  K.  2237,  ®),  the  whole  Israelitish  army
melted  away.  In  Micaiah's  language,  it  became  '  scat-
tered abroad,  as  sheep  that  had  no  shepherd  '  (2  K.  22 17).
The  dead  body  of  the  king  was  carried  to  Samaria  and
buried  there.  ^

A  brief  reference  is  made  in  iK.  2239  to  Ahab's
luxury,  wliich  confirms  the  reading  of  (5''  in  Jer.  22 15  :
'  Art  thou  a  true  king  because  thou  vicst  with  Ahab  ? '
(if  Axaaji  [A],  ey  axaf  [BSg],  *ce5pw  [g  "'e].  Ml'
iTxa).  an  indignant  protest  addressed  by  Jeremiah  to
Jehoiachin  (so  Cornill  in  SHOT,  who  enters  into  tlie
te.\t-critical  points  more  thoroughly  than  Giesebrecht).

2.  (Axtd/3  [BNAg],  perhaps  the  most  correct  form  ;
see  N.\MES,  §  65.  In  Jer.  2922  anw  is  clearly  a  scribe's
error  ;  Eastern  MSS  ha\e  a  Kr  3KnN. )  Son  of  Kolaiah
and  fellow-exile  of  Jehoiachin  (Jer.  2O21 /. ).  He  and
another  exile  (Zedekiah)  fed  the  fanaticism  of  the  Jews
with  false  hopes  of  a  speedy  return.  They  were
denounced  by  Jeremi.ih.  who  predicted  for  them  a
violent  death  at  the  hands  of  Nebuchadrezzar.  We
learn  more  about  them  from  the  writer  (probably  the
editor  of  the  Book  of  Jeremiah)  who  inserted  z-v.  ■21b-
3i(Z.  It  was  in  his  time,  perhaps,  a  matter  of  notoriety
that  Ahab  and  Kolaiah  had  suffered  the  cruel  punish-
ment of  being  burned  alive  (cp  Saulmugina's  fate,  RP"^)
I77).  Therefore,  he  makes  Jeremiah  refer  to  this,  and
at  the  same  time  accuse  the  false  prophets  of  having
led  a  profligate  life,  in  accordance  with  the  idea
which  underlies  Gen.  8824  ;  Lev.  20 14  21 9.  Cp  Cornill,
Jeremiah  {SHOT,  Heb.  text).  T.  K.  c.

AHARAH  {Vrm,  [Ba]),  or  Ahrah  (mnN  [Ginsb.]),
third son of  Benjamin  (§  9  ii.  /3), iCh.  Sif. See

AlIIKAM.

AHABHEL  (^n-^riN  ;  &A6A(})0Y  RhxaB  [BA],
APAihA  AAeA4)OY  PhxaB  [L.]  ;  AUARnnEi.),  a  name
in  an  obscure  part  of  the  genealogy  of  JuDAii  ( r  Ch.  48t).

AHASAI,  or  rather  as  RV,  Ahzai  (*TnX  ;  in  some
MSS  and  edd.  ^THN  ;  a  shortened  form  of  Ahaziah  ;
om.  B.\,  AZAXIOY  [X='* ■">-'■  '"f],  ZAKXIOY  [L]).  a  priest-
ly name  in  a  list  of  inhabitants  of  Jerusalem  (see  Ezra,  ii.
§§  5  \P\  IS  [t]'').  Neh.  Ili3t=l  Ch.  9i2t  Jahzkkah
(J\-\\n\  ■  leAeiOY  [^l  lezpiOY  [A],  ezepA  [L]),  which
is  probably  a  corruption  of  Jahzeiah  (see  J.'\h.\ZIAH).

AHASBAI  ('2pnt<),  2  S.  2834. See  Ei.iphf.i.et,  2.

AHASUERUS  (Cnil^rnN  ;  in  Kt.  of  Esth.  10.,  the
edd.,  following  the  Palestinian  reading,  have  BnUTlS).
I.  An  Ahasuerus  is  mentioned  in  MT  in  Ezra  46  and
Dan.  9 1  ;  and  in  ILsther  he  is  one  of  the  leading  dramatis
person  (P.

In  MT  of  Esther  he  is  mentioned  in  1  if.^f.  i^*/*  192  i*  12*
1621:  Z\(iff.  \i\  f.2  "5*  817*;  io»:  1292*2030*101*3.2  The
readings  of  ®  are  :  Ezra  4  6,  ao-#7)pou  [B],  ao-crouJj.  [.^1,  airinrq.

t  In  22  38,  the  words  '  They  w.ashed  his  chariot  in  the  pool  of
Samaria  and  the  dogs  licked  his  blood,'  etc.,  are  an  interpolation
intended  to  explain  how  the  dogs  could  lick  Ahab's  blood  (which
must  have  been  dried  up  in  the  long  journey  from  Ramah)  and
so  fulfil  the  prediction  of  21  19.  But  this  was  to  happen  at
Jezreel,  not  at  Samaria  (We.  C//  360).

2  The  asterisks  (*)  indicate  that  (P»al  omits  the  proper  name,
which  is  sometimes  inserted  by  Kca  hir.  The  double-daggers ({)
indicate  that  the  editions  following  the  Palestinian  reading  omit
the  second  v


AHASUERUS

[L] ;  Dan.  9  i,  avovyfpov  [Thcod.l,  but  tfp(ov  (87,  i.e.,  the  LXX  ;
also  Syr.  mg.j ;  in  Esther  aatrviipou  la  text  of  ©'-,  on  which  see
below],  but  opTuftpfou  [p  text  of  ®l-  and  ©I'KA],  .(,(.  [W  "d.
once],  aTap(tp(tts  (.A*  once],  aprapitpifj^  (A  thrice].

In  Ezra  4  6,  where  he  is  a  king  of  I'ersia  whose
reign  fell  between  that  of  Koresh  (Cyrus)  and  that
of  Artahsasta  (Artaxerxes  Longimanus),  he  can  hardly
be  any  other  than  the  king  called  Khshaydrshd  in  the
Persian  inscriptions  (Persep. ,  Elvend,  Van),  c'IKTH  in
an  Aramaic  inscription  [481  B.C.]  from  Egypt  (CIS
ii.  Ii22),  and  A^p^rji  by  the  Greeks  (cp  above,  readings
of  Dan.  9 1 ).  This  name,  which  to  Semites  presented
difficulties  of  pronunciation,  was  distorted  likewise
by  the  Babylonians  in  a  variety  of  ways.  As  I'rof.
Bezold  has  informed  the  writer  of  the  present  article,
we  find  on  Babylonian  tablets  not  only  such  fornis  as
Khishiarshu,  Akhshiyarslni,  Akkasliiarshi,  Akkisharshti,
but  also  Akhshiyaivarsliu,  Akhshuwarshi,  and  Akhshi-
ivarsku,  with  the  substitution  of  ^u  for/,  as  in  pmcnK.^
In  other  cases  also  the  OT  uses  'c'rK  to  represent  the
Persian  khsh,  at  the  beginning  of  words.  The  inser-
tion of  ()  lx;fore  the  final  sh  rendered  the  pronunciation
easier  to  the  Hebrews  ;  but  whether  the  vowel  was
contained  in  the  original  form  of  the  Hebrew  texts  we
cannot  determine.^

The  Ahasuerus  of  the  Book  of  Esther  is  a  king  of
Persia  and  Media  (I318/. ),  whose  kingdom  extends
from  India  to  Ethiopia  and  consists  of  127  satrapies
(1  I  89  930).  He  has  his  capital  at  Shushan  in  Elam.
He  is  fond  of  splendour  and  display,  entertaining
his  nobles  and  princes  for  180  days,  and  afterwards
the  people  of  his  capital  for  seven  ((5'"**-  six)  days
(I3-8).  He  keeps  an  extensive  harem  (2314/.),  his
wives  being  chosen  from  among  all  the  '  fair  young
virgins'  of  the  empire  (22-412-14).  As  a  ruler  he
is  arbitrary  and  unscrupulous  (38-ii,  and/flw/w).  All
this  agrees  well  enough  with  what  is  related  of  Xerxes
by  classical  authors,  according  to  whom  he  was  an
effeminate  and  extravagant,  cruel  and  capricious  despot
(see  Esther,  §  i).  This  is  the  prince,  son  of  Darius
Hystaspis  (Vishtaspa),  whom  the  author  of  Esther
seems  to  have  had  in  mind.  There  has  been  an  attempt
to  show,  from  the  chronological  data  which  he  gives,  that
he  knew  the  history  of  Xerxes  accurately.  He  tells  us
that  Esther  was  raised  to  the  throne  in  the  tenth  month
of  the  seventh  year  of  Ahasuerus  (2  16  /. ),  after  having
spent  twelve  months  in  the  '  house  of  the  women '
(2 12).  The  command  to  assemble  all  the  '  fair  young
virgins'  in  his  palace  (2 1-4)  must,  therefore,  have  been
promulgated  in  his  sixth  year.  But,  in  what  is  usually
reckoned  as  the  sixth  year  of  his  reign — viz.  480  B.C. —
he  was  still  in  Greece.  He  could  not,  therefore,  issue  a
decree  from  Shushan  till  the  following  year.  This  can
be  regarded  as  the  sixth  of  his  reign  only  by  not  counting
the  year  of  his  accession,  and  taking  484  as  the  first  of
his  reign.  It  is  not  impossible  that  the  Persians  may
have  taken  over  from  the  Babylonians  the  practice  (see
Chronology,  §  9)  of  reckoning  the  whole  of  the  year,
in  the  course  of  which  a  change  of  ruler  occurred,  to
the  late  king  ;  but  it  is  not  known  as  a  fact.  In  this
uncertainty  we  shall  do  well  to  suppose  that  the  author
of  F",sther  has  arbitrarily  assumed  his  chronological  data,
and  that  his  occasional  coincidences  with  historv-  are
accidental  merely.

2.  Eor  the  Ahasuerus  who  is  called  the  father  of
Darius  the  Mede  in  Dan.  9i,  see  Darics,  i.

3.  Tobias  heard  (Tob.  ]4i5t)  of  the  destruction  of
Nineveh  by  '  Nebuchadnezzar  and  Ahasuerus'  (so  RV.
AV  AssuERU.s  :  a<Tvi\po%  [B],  a<j<J\'.  [N'^'^].  MOv.  [A],
but  '  Achiacharus,  king  of  Media '  [N*],  cp  AcHlA-
CHARUS,  2). See  ToBiT,  Book  of.

C.  p.  T.-W.  H.  K.

»  Cp  Strassmaier,  Actes  du  viiit  congres  dcs  oricntalisits,
sect.  s^m.  18  /  for  a  form  corresponding  to  v^ysTM  (Ahsha-
warsh?)  found  on  Babylonian  contract  tablets.

a  See  further  Bevan,  Daniel  149,  where  Ahas>-ar!>  or
AhSayarJ  is  proposed  as  the  original  Jewish  form-

94


AHAVA

AHAVA  (XinX).  a  place  (EzraSis;  eyeiM  [B],
eyei  [AL])  or,  as  in  the  parallel  i  I^sd.  841  (TuEKAS;
om.  H;  Gf/Kif,  accus.  [A];  eeiA  [L])  antl  Kzra  82131
(eoye  [H].  AOye  [li'A  ;  in  v.  31  sup.  ras.].  Aa()YA6
[L])=  I  Ksd.  8  50  ('  for  the  young  men,'  ron  ytavianois
[HAL],  ».<•.,  apparently  cini  for  ki.ik  in:)  861  (Theras,
G€Pa[RA],  £eiA[L]),ariver,  near  which  Ezra  assembled
his  caravan  before  its  departure  for  Jerusalem.  The
site  and  the  river  remain  unidentified.  We  know  that
both  were  in  the  Euphrates  basin,  and  that  CasiI'HIA
{f.v.;  cp.  Jos.  Ant.  xi.  5  2  ;  see  He-Rys,  £sra,  ad  lor.)
was  not  very  far  off.  The  form  Theras  (see  al)ove)
seems  to  have  arisen  from  Kin(K)  for  kihk,  which  is  the
rc.-iding  of  some  MSS  for  nlik  in  I-".zra8.

AHAZ  (THN,  a  shortened  form  of  JKUOAIIAZ,  the
Jauhazi  of  the  inscriptions: see  h'B  22o). 1. (&XAZ

,  _  T.  .  •  rBNAorLl  see  also  below,  is  4
Ssh  wa^""  -"■  Jos.'Axar..  AcnAz[Vg.  lA
lusn  war.  ^^  ^^  ^^.^  ^ j^^^^  ^^  Jotham  and

eleventh  king  of  Judah  (733?-72i,  cp  Chronology,
§  34  ^  and  table  in  §  37).  He  was  young,  perhaps
only  twenty  years  of  age  '  (2  K.  10  2),  when  he  ascended
the  throne,  and  apJx^^rs  already  to  have  struck  keen
observers  such  ns  Isaiah  bya  want  of  manliness  which  was
quite  consistent  with  tyranny  (Is.  3 12a).  The  event
seems  to  have  lx;en  regarded  by  Rezin  (or  rather  Rezon)
of  Damascus  as  favourable  to  his  plan  for  uniting  Syria
and  Palestine  in  a  league  against  .Assyria.  Pekah,  who
had  just  become  king  of  Israel  by  rclx?llion  and
assassination,  was  only  too  glad  to  place  himself  at  the
disposal  of  Rezin,  who  alone  could  defend  him  from
Tiglath-pilcser's  wrath  at  the  murder  of  an  Assyrian
vassal.  Rezin  and  Pekah,  therefore,  marched  southward,
— being  safe  for  the  moment  from  an  Assyrian  in\  asion
— with  the  object  of  forcing  Judah  to  join  their  league
(2K.  16 5;  Is.  81-9;  cp  Isaiah,  i.  §  11).  They  could
feel  no  confidence,  however,  in  any  promise  wliich  they
might  e.xtort  from  Ahaz.  For  Ahaz,  who,  unlike  Rezin,
had  no  personal  motive  for  closing  his  eyes  to  the
truth,  was  conscious  of  the  danger  of  provoking  Assyria.
Let  us,  then,  said  Rezin  and  Pekah,  place  a  creature
of  our  own,  who  can  be  trusted  to  serve  us,  on  t^ie
throne  of  Judah  (Is.  76).  Tiieir  nominee  is  called  ten-
Tahfl  (see  Tahkki,,  i  ),  whom  the  language  ascrilx-'d  to
the  allies  hardly  allows  us  to  identify  with  Rezin. ^  He
w.as  probably  one  of  Rezin's  courtiers,  and  thus  (what  a
disgrace  to  Judah!)  a  mere  Syrian  governor  with  the
title  of  king.  The  attempt  to  lake  Jerusalem  was  a
failure.  The  fortress  proved  too  strong  to  be  taken  by
storm,  and  to  have  prolonged  the  siege,  in  view  of  the
provocation  given  to  Assyria  and  the  terrible  prompt-
ness of  Assyrian  vengeance,  would  have  been  imprudent.
Ahaz,  too,  in  his  .alarm  (which  was  fully  shared  by  the
citizens).'  had  already  made  this  vengeance  doubly
certain  hy  sending  an  embassy  to  Tiglath-pileser  with
the  message,  '  I  am  thy  slave  and  thy  .son  :  come  up  and
deliver  me'  (2K.  I67  ;  this  verse  should  be  read  im-
mediately after  v.  5).*

1  In  2  Ch.  28i  some  MSS  of  ®  and  Pesh.  read  'twenty-
five'  for  'twenly.'  'iliis  is  more  natural,  in  view  of  the  age
assigned  to  Hezckiah  M.  his  accession.  The  '  five  '  may,  however,
have  crept  in  from  •-'7  i  •2'.»  i. (&"•*'-  reads  '  twenty.'

2  Wi.  W  7"  Vntersuch.  73-75;  cp,  however,  Israi:!.,  Hist,  of,
832-

S  See  Is.  7  a  8  6.  The  latter  passage  is  partly  corrupt ;  but
it_  is  clear,  at  least,  that  the  people  of  Judah  are  reproved  for
distrusting  Yahwc's  power  to  save  his  people,  anil  'desponding'
because  of  '  Rezin  and  hcn-kenialiah.'  The  '  waters  of  Shiloah  '
are  a  symbol  of  V'ahwe  (cp  I's.  4t>  4  ;  Is.  33  21).  Sec  Che.
'  Isaiah  '  (SHOT).  The  interpretation  of  (B,  which  paraphrases
"UK  jri«rp  (.\V  and  RV,  ungrammatically,  '  rejoice  in ')  by
SovAeo^ai  <x">'  ^a<rtA(a,  is  certainly  wrong,  though  supported
by  .some  eminent  names  (Gcs.,  Ew.,  Kue.,  St.),  for  it  is  opposed
to  Is.  72812.  Even  were  the  supposition  that  there  was  a
large  party  in  the  capital  favourable  to  Rezin  and  Ptkah  more
plausible  th.an  it  is,  it  would  still  be  unwi.se  to  b.-i.se  the  sup-
position on  a  passage  so  strangely  expressed  and  of  such  question-
able accuracy  as  Is.  85.

*  If  the  statement  of  the  compiler in  2  K.  10  3  that  Ahaz

95


AHAZ

One  man,  Isaiah  ben  Anioz,  had  kept  his  head  cool
amid  this  excitement.  He  assured  Ahaz  on  the
_  -  .  ,  ,  authority  of  the  God  of  prophecy  that
*f aian  S  ^j^^  attempt  of  Rezin  and  Pekah  would
Ixj  al)orti\e  and  that  Damascus  and
Samaria  themselves  would  almost  immediately  become
a  prey  to  the  Assyrian  soldiery  (Is.  7 4-9 168 1-4 17
i-ii).  He  bade  Ahaz  be  wary  and  preserve  his  composure
(tspc'rii  TOffn) — to  take  no  rash  step,  but  quietly  perform
his  regal  duties,  trusting  in  Yahw6.  When  the
news  came  that  .\haz  had  hurriedly  offered  himself  as
a  humble  vassal  to  Assyria  in  return  for  protection
from  Rezin,  Isaiah  changed  his  tone.  He  declared
that  Judah  itself,  having  despised  the  one  means  of
safety  (faith  in  Yahw6  and  olxjdience  to  his  commands),
could  not  escape  puni.shment  at  the  hands  of  the
Assyrians.  Under  a  variety  of  figures  he  described  the
ha\oc  which  those  dreaded  warriors  would  produce  in
Judah — a  description  to  which  a  much  later  writer  has
added  some  touches  of  his  own  {vz'.  21-25  '<  see  SHOT).
Was  .Ahaz  right  or  wrong  in  seeking  the  protection
of  Assyria  ?  Stade  has  remarked  that  '  he  acted  as  any
_ ,, , ,. other  king  would  have  acted  in  his

3.  Ahazspohcy.  p^^iji,^,^,. ^^ the other hand,

RolKTtson  Smith  thought  that  '  the  advice  of  Isaiah
displayed  no  less  political  sagacity  than  elevation  of
faith.'  '  If  .\ha/  had  not  called  in  the  aid  of  Tiglath-
pileser,  his  own  interests  v.ouid  soon  have  compelled
the  Assyrian  t)  strike  at  Damascus;  and  so,  if  the
Juda-an  king  had  had  faith  to  accept  the  prophet's
assurance  that  the  immediate  danger  could  not  prove
fatal,  he  would  have  reajxjd  all  the  advantages  of  the
Assyrian  alliance  without  finding  himself  in  the  perilous
position  of  a  vassal  to  the  robtx.'r  emjjiru.  As  yet  the
schemes  of  Assyria  hardly  reached  as  far  as  Southern
Palestine."  "•*  There  is  some  force  in  this.  The  sending
of  tribute  to  Assyria  was  justifiable  only  as  a  last
resource.  To  take  such  a  step  prematurely  would
show  a  disregard  of  the  interests  of  the  poorer  class,
which  would  suffer  from  Assyrian  exactions  severely.
It  is  doubtful,  however,  whether  the  plans  of  Assyria
were  as  narrowly  limited  as  is  supposed.  Tiglath-pileser
did  not,  even  after  receiving  the  petition  of  Ahaz,  attack
Damascus  instantly.  First  of  all  he  invaded  Philistia  and
Northern  Arabia.

We  shall  have  occasion  to  refer  again  to  the  important
chapter  of  Isaiah  which  descril)es  the  great  eni  i;nter
between  the  king  and  the  prophet  (see  IsAlAH,  i.  Jj  2  (^).
Suffice  it  to  say  that  we  misimderstand  Isaiah  if
we  connect  his  threat  of  captivity  in  chap.  7/.  too  closely
with  the  foreign  policy  of  Ahaz.  It  was  not  the  foreign
policy  but  the  moral  weakness  of  ,\haz  and  his  nobles
which  had  in  the  first  instaiice  drawn  forth  this  threat
from  Isaiah  (Is.  5 8-16).  Nor  can  we  venture  to  doubt
that,  if  .Ahaz  had  satisfied  the  moral  standards  of  Isaiah,
this  would  have  had  some  effect  on  the  prophet's  picture
of  the  future.  '  \'isions  '  and  '  tidings  '  of  men  of  God
such  as  Isaiah  are  not  merely  political  forecasts  :  they
are  adjusted  to  the  mural  and  mental  state  both  of
him  who  speaks  and  of  those  who  hear.

It  is  not  to  Isaiah  or  to  a  disciple  of  Isaiah,  but  to
the  royal annalist, that we  owe  the notice that the

. „ „ »-„ tribute  of  Ahaz  was derived from

4.  Consequences.  ^^^  ^^^^^^^^  ^^  ^^^  p^,^^^  ^^^  ^^

the  temple,  and  that  .Ahaz  did  not  sjiare  even  the  sacred
furniture  (2  K.  168  17).*  It  would  be  interesting  to
know  whether  he  sent  the  brazen  oxen  on  which  the
brazen  'sea'  had  hitherto  rested  (they  were  copies  of
Babylonian  sacretl  objects,  and  properly  symbolised
Marduk)  to  Tiglath-pileser,  or  whether  he  melted  them
offered  up  his  son  (©l-  and  Symm.  say  'his  sons,'  with
2  Ch.  2S  3)  is  correct,  we  may  perhaps  assigii  the  fearful  act  to
this  period.

1  CI  7  1  -^95.

«  WHS  }'ro/>h.^  26s  ;  cp  Kittel,  Hist.  1  346  (near  foot).

»  On  the  text  of  z  K.  1(5 17,  which  is  corrupt,  see  St.  ZA  Tll^
6163.

96


AHAZIAH

down  for  himself.  It  is  more  important,  however,  to
notice  that  this  time,  apparently,  the  tribute  for  Assyria
was  provided  without  any  increase  in  the  taxation.
Isaiah,  we  may  suppose,  would  have  approved  of  this.

Isaiah's  forecasts  were  verified,  not,  indeed,  to  such
an  extent  as  much  modern  speculation  about  the  prophetic
books  demands,  but  as  far  as  his  own  generation  re(|uired.
Danuiscus  fell  in  732  ;  Samaria  had  a  breathing  time
till  722  ;  and,  according  to  Sennacherib,  there  was  a
partial  captivity  of  Judah  in  the  next  reign.  It  was  after
the  first  of  these  events  that  Ahaz  first  came  in  contact
with  an  .Assyrian  kitig.  In  734  the  name  of  Jauhazi  of
Judah  occurs  among  the  names  of  the  kings  who  had
paid  tribute  to  Tiglath-pileser  ;  but  we  have  no  reason
to  supiwse  that  he  paid  it  in  person.  It  was  in  732,
after  the  fall  of  Damascus,  that  he  paid  homage  in  [person
to  his  suzerain.  On  this  occasion  he  '  saw  the  altar  that
was  at  Damascus'  (2  K.  16 10),  and,  on  aesthetic  grounds,
liked  it  better  than  the  bronze  altar  which  had  hitherto
been  used  at  Jerusalem  for  burnt  offerings.  It  was
probably  an  .Assyrian  altar,  for  the  Assyrians  on
principle  introduced  their  own  cultus  into  conquered
cities.  So  .Ahaz  sent  a  model  of  the  altar  to  the  chief
priest  Uriah  (cp  Is.  82),  who  at  once  made  an  altar
upon  the  pattern,  and  transferred  the  old  altar  to  a  new
position.  This  was,  doubtless,  against  the  will  of  Isaiah,
who  in  his  earliest  extant  prophecy  so  strongly  denounces
the  love  of  foreign  fashions.  Possibly  at  tlie  same
time  .Ahaz  borrowed  the  sun-dial  (if  EV  rightly  para-
phrases the  expression,  '  the  steps  of  .Ahaz'  ;  see,  how-
ever, Dial).  .N'or  is  it  likely  that  .Ahaz  paused  here.^
A  suggestive  allusion  to  the  addiction  of  .Ah;xz  to  foreign
worship  is  traceable  in  2  K.  23i2;  but  there  is  a  textual
difficultv  in  the  passage  (see  Kamphausen's  note  in  Kau.
HS).-

The  reign  of  .Ahaz  was  inglorious,  but  on  the  w  hole
peaceful.  It  was  a  severe  blow  to  the  connnerce  of
Judah  when  Rezin,  on  the  accession  of  .Ahaz,  attacked
and  captured  l-'.lath  (on  the  Arabian  (nilf),  and  restored
it  to  its  former  possessors,  the  Edoniites  ;  but  at  the
close  of  .Ahaz's  reign  Isaiah  was  able  to  contrast  the
peace  enjoyed  by  '  the  poor  of  Yahwe's  peo|)le '  with
the  chastisement  inflicted  by  Assvria  on  the  restless
Philistines. »


Othe


;aclinj;s  of  <E5  are  :  a-xa.^  [B  often,  A'?  vcl  I


A  once,  Qa  once],  -xaa^  [.A  twice],  axa/3  [.\,  2  Ch.  IS).  In  Jer.
2215  tpHKQ  '.Ahaz'  takes  the  place  of  the  true  reading  '.Ahab'
of  <pA(see  .Ahau,  i  [eiKl]).

2.  (xaaf  [A]  ;  a^ai  [L]),  a  descendant  of  .Saul  ;  i  Ch.  835/
«■(«  [li])  =  9  4i  (om.  KV  .MT  ©ba  ;  but  correctly  inserted  by  ©t-
Pesh.),  i>42  (axai  [1?]). See  Benja.min,  §  9  ii.  p.

T.  K.  C. — W.  E.  .X.

AHAZIAH  (-in^.TriX,  iTTHN,  '  he  whom  Yahw6  sup-
ports';  0X02[ejl<\C  [B.AL]  ;  for  other  readings  see
end  of  no.  2).  i.  Son  of  .Ahab  and  Jezebel,
and  king  of  Israel  (853-851  ?  B.C.  Cp  Chkonoi.ogy,
§  28  and  table  in  §  37).  A  poor  successor  to
the  heroic  Ahab.  Once  more  Israel  must  have  been
de|x;ndent  on  Damascus,  while  Moab  (see  .Ahab,  §  2)
continued  to  enjoy  its  recovered  independence.  The
single  political  action  reported  of  him  is  his  offer  to
jKiiosiiAi'H.VT  (q.v.,  i)  to  join  in  a  trading  ex-
pedition to  Ophir  (i  K.2250).  The  close  of  his  life
is  described  in  a  prophetic  legend  of  very  late  origin
(see  Elijah,  §  3).  He  fell  through  the  lattice  of  an
up[x;r  room  in  his  palace  in  Samaria,  and  though  he
lingered  on  a  sick-bed  for  some  time,  did  not  recover.
The  story  (2  K.  1 2-17)  is  a  painful  one,  and  was  used  by
Jesus  to  point  the  contrast  between  the  unchastened
zeal  of  his  disciples  and  the  true  evangelical  spirit  ( Lk.  9
54-56).  The  one  probably  historical  element  is  the
consultation  by  .Ahaziah  of  the  oracle  of  Baal-zebub  of
Ekron. To most of .Ahaziah's contemporaries his

1  Schr.  COT\  249  25  s  ;  Wi.  GBA  234.

2  For  CInS  read  CIn'^  ;  cp  the  Kre.  D*0nK1  for  D'OIIKV

3  The  heading  of  Is.  1428-32  is  probably  correct.  See  Che.
Inir.  Is.  80/  ;  but  cp  Duhm  ad  loc.

7  97


AHIEZER

action  would  have  seemed  tiuite  natural '  (cp  2  K.  5
87./ )•

2.  Son  of  Jehoram  (or  Jorani)  and  Ahab's  daughter
Athaliah,  king  of  Judah  (843-842?  u.c".  Cp  Chkono-
LCKiV,  §  28  and  table  in  <^  37).  He  was  only  twenty-
two  when  he  ascended  the  throne,'-  and  only  one  event
in  his  brief  reign  has  lx.'en  recorded — the  part  which
he  took  with  Jehoram  king  of  Israel  in  a  campaign
against  Hazael  of  Damascus.  The  kings  of  Israel
and  Judah  laid  siege  to  Ramah  in  Gilead  (the
place  before  which  Ahab  lost  his  life  in  battle)
which  was  still  held  by  the  Arama;ans.  Jehoram
withdrew  wounded.  Ahaziah  also  went  to  his  home,
but  afterwards  visited  his  sick  kinsman  at  Jezrc-el.
During  this  visit  jKiiu  {i^.v.)  revolted,  and  the  two
kings  (ec|ually  obnoxious  to  Jehu)  went  forth  in  their
chariots  to  meet  him.  Ahaziah  saw  his  uncle  Jehoram
pierced  by  an  arrow,  and  took  to  flight.  As  he  fled
in  the  direction  of  Hi;rii-iiA<;(;A.\  (q.v.;  2  K.927,  0)
Jehu  dashed  after  him  with  the  cry,  'Him  too.'  .At
the  ascent  of  (iiir  by  Ibleain,  on  the  road  to  Jerusalem,
he  too  was  struck  by  an  arrow.  Thereupon  he  turned
his  horse  northwest,  and  reached  Megiddo,  but  died
there  of  his  wound.  He  was  buried  in  the  royal
cemetery  at  Jerusalem.  The  conflicting  account  in
2Ch.  "229,  from  whatever  late  source  derived,  is  of
no  historical  value

(Otlier  rc-idings — 2K.  S29!t2i  oxo^et  [B] ;  2  K.  14  13  nuavai
[B],  aa^.a  [A],  L  om.  ;  i  Ch.  3  11  ofe.a  [B],  o^.at  [A].)  In  2Ch.
21  17 he is called Jchuahaz, and in 22  6 Azariah. See

jEHt)AHAZ, 3.  W.  K.  A.

AHBAN  (i3nS,  §  45,  meaning  obscure,  for  form
cp  Eshban,  'brother  of  an  intelligent  one'  [HUH],  or
less  improbably  '  brother  has  giv<'n  heed,'  so  (iray,  HI'N
83,  n.  2,  who  suggests  the  vocalisation  |5nv>).  a  Jerah-
meelite  family  name,  i  Ch.  229t  (ax&Bar  [1^].  02A  [A],

NAAaB  [I>. cp  IT'. 2830], AHOHH.l.X).

AHER  (inX;  ^ep  [B],  aor  [A],  om.  [L  Pesh.] ;
.■iiiHR),  a  very  doubtful  Benjamite  name  (iCh.  7i2t).
See  HusHi.M,  2  ; I)A.\,  §  9  ; Benjami.n,  §  9  ii.  a.

Be.  (/«  he.')  explains  the  name  as  meaning  'the  other  one,'
and  conjectures  it  to  be  a  euphemism  for  Dan,  the  express
niention  of  the  name  of  this  tribe  seeming  in  more  than  one
instance  to  h.-ive  l)een  dcliberatLly  avoided.  (See  however  Dan,
§  9.)  On  the  other  hand  (pUAi.  rc.ids  '  his  son '  for  '  the  sons  of
(133  f<Jr  'j^X  and  the  name  is  entirely  wanting  in  Ipt-  and  Posh.,
the  former  (and  perhaps  originally  also  the  latter)  connecting
Hnshim  (te<r(rou5,  /;«/«)  with  what  goes  before  (see  Iri).  See
also  .\HAKAH.

AHI  (^n^,  §  52,  probably  abbrev.  from  Ahijah).

1.  In  genealogy  of  Gaii,  iCh.  .Tist  (Vg.  wrongly  trans-
lates, fratres  qtioquc;  IVsh.  and  (P'oni.  ;  «P"A  CDmhines  with
the  preceding  name  l!uz^|^a/3]ouxa/ii  IB],  axiOovi)  |A1).

2.  In  genealogy  of  Ashkk(§  4  n.),  I  Ch.  V  ;4t.  (P'^A,  attach-
ing part  of  the  following  name  (see  KomjAH),  produces
Axt(ovpa)  [.\],  or  Ax<(outa)  [B] ;  but  ®i-  has  Tjfty.

AHI,  NAMES  WITH. See  Am,  Namks  with.

AHIAH,  frequently  in  AV  and  once  (Neh.  10  26  [25])
inconsistently  in  RV. See  .Amj All,  1/  4.

AHIAM  (DX'nK,  §65,  for  which  we  should  i^obably
point  DX'riN,  '  mother's  brother  '  [cp  .Ahab],  analogous
to  the  Sab.  pr.n.  innxnfiX,  '  sister  of  his  mother  ' ;  cp
fIPN6.\,  n.  2),  one  of  I  )avid's  heroes,  2  S.  23  ^3  (amnan
[B.A],  om.  [L])=iCh.  Il35t  (AXeiM  [BNJ,  AXl&M
[AL]). SeeDAVin,  §  11,2  i.  ^

AHIAN  (}*nN.  §  65,  'relative,  cousin,'  cp  M^l  :
l&AIM  [B],  AeiN  [A].  &ei/v\  [E];  ^///v).  a  Mannssiie
name  ( i  Ch.  7  i9t). See  SllKMiDA.

AHIEZER  (1Tl"nN,  §  44,  '  the  [divine]  brother  is
help,'  cp  .Abiezer,  P21iezer  ; &x'£2ep  [BAFE]).

1.  b.  .Ammish-addai,  chief  of  the  Danites,  temp.  Moses  (P)
(Nu.  I12  2  25«x'-  [fl:  "6671  1025)t.

2.  One  of  David's  archers  (i  Ch.  12  3!). See  Davih,  811a  iii.

1  S^mmtl,  AT Rel.-gesch.  157.

a  .So  2  K.  S26.  In  2  Ch.  22  2  his  age  is  given  as  forty-two
(0BA  20) ;  but  this  is  clearly  miswrittcn  for  twenty-two  (so  9^ ;
cp  21  5  20).

98


AHIHUD

AHIHUD  (lirrnX,  'the  [divine]  brother  is  praise.'
cp  Amiiui) ;  AyitoB  [A],  -lop  [HKL].  auihvd).  an
Asherite  selected  to  assist  Joshua  and  Eleazer  in  the
division  of  Canaan  (Nu.  342?  P+).

AHIHUD  (irrnjj: ;  i&xeiXCoA  [B].  -xixaA  [A],  OYA
[L]  ;  .niiUD),  in  genealogy  of  BENJAMIN  (§  9  ii.  /3),
iCh.  87t. Cp  UzzA.  1.

AHIJAH  (n»nj<.  'Yahw^  is  brother"  \i.e.,  protector];
cp  Abijah  and  the  Babylonian  name  A-hi-ia-a  ;  Jastrow,
JUL,  1894.  p.  105  : AxWiA  [BAL]).

1.  b.  Ahilub,  priest  at  Shiloh,  bore  the  ephod,  temp.  Saul ;
iS.  143  (Jos.  "Exio?,  'Axios,  AV  Ahiah).  In  4  Esd.  1  2t  he
appears  as  AcniAs  (.4cA/Vu  [ed.  Bensly])  between  Ahitub  and
Amariah  of  Ezra 7  -i/.,  or  i  Ch.  67.

2.  In  genealogy  of  Benjamin  (§  o  ii.  0),  one  of  those  who  were
'carried  captive  (1  Ch.8  7  ;  AV  .\hiah),  whose  name  should
perhaps  be  read  in  v.  4  for  Ahoah  (ninK ;  auio.  [L],  Ahoc ;  but
oxta  [B],  jLucf  ;  .^  oni.);  see  further  Ahiihite.

3.  The  Pelonite  ;  a  corruption  of  Ahithophel  the  Gilonitc,  the
name  of  his  son  (one  of  David's  heroes)  being  omitted  (iCh.
11  36;  see  E1.IAM,  1  ;  Ahithoi'HEl).

4.  b.  Shi>ha  (Shavsha),  .and  brother  of  Ki.ihoreph  (^.v.);
one  of  Solomon's  secretaries  of  state  (i  K.  4  3  ;  .W  Ahiah).  See
Ben-hesei>,  §  3.

5.  A  Levite,  who  owes  his  existence  to  a  demonstrable  text-
corruption  (i  Ch. -'620;  read  with  B.\L,  a5cA<^o't  ovtwi',  'and
the  Levites  their  brethren").

6.  .\ccording  to  AV  (which  with  (8'-  prefixes  'and "),  the  fifth
son  of  Jerahmeel  (q.v.,  i),  i  Ch.  2  25.  But  ©«*  gives  cor-
rectly a5eA(^6«  a'v-tav,  i.e.,  H'nN  (so  Ki.).  We.  iDe  Gent.  15)
prefers  VriK,  '  his  brothers." (L  ax"»^.)

7.  .An  Issach.-irite,  father  of  King  B.a.-isha  (i  K.  15  27  33,  etc.).

8.  Signatory  to  the  covenant;  Neb.  10  26  [25]  (apo  [B] ;  aio
[»{Tid.  A],  a.htia.%  [L] ;  F.CHAI.X). See  EZKA,  i.  §  7.

9.  A  Shilonite  ;  the  prophet  who  foretold  to  Jero-
boam {q.v.,  i)  the  disruption  of  Solomon"s  kingdom
(iK.  II29,  etc.;  ax[e]'OS  [B.\  twice]).  In  2Ch.  IO15
(xta  A*  but  not  in  ],  i  K.  12 15),  and  in  the  storj'  of  his
meeting  with  Jeroboam's  wife  (i  K.  144i'7-i8),  the  name
appears  in  the  form  r-rnx  (Ahiyyahu),  on  which  see
Abijah  (beginning).

AHIKAM  (Di^'nX,  §  44.  '  the  [divine]  brother  riseth
up,'  cp  .\clonikam  and  Phoen.  Dp3X ;  ax[c]ikam
[BSAQL];  xeiK&M  [N*  once]:  Jos.  axikamoc,  IK..
AHICA.m),  like  his  father  Sh.\phan  [q.v.)  a  courtier  of
Josiah.  He  appears  to  have  belonged  to  the  party
favourable  to  religious  reforms.  Hence  he  was  included
in  the  royal  deputation  to  Huldah  (2  K.  221214,=
aCh.  34  20 ;  cp  Hui.d.\h),  and  was  foremost  in  the  defence
of  Jeremiah  on  a  critical  occasion  (Jer.  2624).  He  was
the  father  of  Gedaliah  [q.v.,  i]  (2  K.  2522  Jer.  39 14
4O5).

AHILUD  (n-l'^'n^S.  §  45)-  1-  Father  of  Jehoshaphat.
Davids  'recorder'  or  vizier  (2S.  816;  axf«a  [B],
ax'Mf^fX  [A],  ax'^aaitt  [L],  Jos.  'Ax'Xoj  ;  2O24,
ax[«]»Xoi'^  [BA],  axi^aXaa  [L]  ;  i  K.  43,  axetXiaS  [BX],
ox'Aia  [A];  ax^^aXa/x  [L] ;  iCh.  I815,  oxeia  [BS],
ax'Xoi»5  [.AL]).  The  name  does  not  mean  'child's
brother  "  (BDB  with  a  ?),  nor  is  it  connected  with  the  Ar.
tribal  name  Laudhan  (Hommel?  see  Exp.  Times  8
283  ['97])-  It  is  difficult  not  to  suggest  that  niS-nK  =
nynK  =  ~':{a]"nK  =  -^himelech  (cp  above  2S.  816  [.\],  and
below  [2],  iK.  4i2  [B]).  For  his  vizier  David  would
naturally  choose  some  one'  from  a  family  well  known  to
him.  (Dne  son  of  .^himelech  (.Abiathar)  was  a  priest  of
David  ;  another  might  well  have  been  his  vizier.  See
Jehoshaphat,  2  ;  Ahimelech,  i.

2.  Father  of  Baana,  one  of  Solomon's  prefects  or
governors  of  departments,  i  K.  4  12  (axf'/MiX  [B].  fkovh
[A],  axta^S  [L]).  The  governor  of  N'aphtali  {v.  15)  is
called  Ahimaaz — no  doubt  the  son  of  Zadok  who  bore
this  name.  Probably  therefore  this  Ahilud  is  the  same
as  no.  I.  Solomon  provided  well  for  the  families  of  his
father's  friends — Zadok,  Ahimelech,  Hushai,  and  Nathan
(cp  Ahihaaz,  I,  2;  Baana,  2;  Azariah,  6).

T.  K.  c.

99


AHINOAM

AHIMAAZ  ()*yp*nK,  §  45,  meaning  uncertain,  cp
Maa/.  ; AxlejiMAAC  [BAL]).

1.  b.  Zadok;  2  S.  1627  (ax«/«"as  [B]),  36  (axiM*'''-
<ruios[.\*;  (r2'*ras.  A'*'''-]);  17i72o(oxf'Mas[B]),  18 19-29,
and,  according  to  the  Chronicler,  eleventh  in  descent
from  Aaron  in  the  line  of  Eleazar,  i  Ch.  68/ ,  and  53
(axfKraytia  [B]).  Along  with  his  father  and  brother  he
remained  faithful  to  David  during  the  revolt  of  .Absalom,
and  brought  important  information  from  Jerusalem  to
the  king  as  to  the  enemy's  plans  ;  he  was  also  the  first
courier  to  reach  the  king  after  the  battle  in  which  Absalom
was  killed. Most  probably  identical  with

2.  One  of  Solomon's  prefects  (see  Government,  §  18.
end),  governor  of  Naphtali ; 1  K.  4 15. Cp  Ahuxd,  2.

3.  Father  of  Ahinoam  (i),  Saul's  wife;  iS.  Hsof
(ax[e]u'aas  [B]).

AHIMAN  (p^riN,'  §  45  ;  achiman,  ahimas).  '  Ahi,'
as  usual,  is  a  divine  title,  and  'man'  may  be  the
name  of  a  dt-ity  (MCni  ;  see  FORTUNE).

I.  One  of  the  sons  of  the  ANAK(y.  J/.;  cpalso  Sheshai,
Talmai)  ;  Nu.  1322  (ax[«]iM«''  [BFL],  ax'^a/u  [.A]);
Josh.  15  14  (ax[e>Ma  [B.\L])  ;  Judg.  1 10  (axfaaK  [B],
axW'Ma"  [B-'"^-^'"*-'-  L],  tov  axifJ^aan  [A]).

2.  One  of  the 'porters  for  the  camps  of  the  Levites' ;  iCh.  9i7
(ai^a^  [H],  -i'l.\i.] ;  A/iiinam,  Cod.  Am.  A/timan  [i|  Neh.ll  19
om.  everj-where])  in  list  of  those  with  foreign  wives(EzRA,  L  §  5,
end)=Ezra  IO24  (where  he  is  called  Uki)=i  Esd.925  (EV
oni.). The  name  in  i  Ch.  is  probably  corrupt. See  Uri,  3.

AHIMELECH  (^^p"•^^<l,  '  the  [divine]  king  is  brother, "
see  AiiiMKi.KCH  and  cp  Phoen.  "jTOn,  Ass.  Af^imilki ;
a.y^i\fxt\ix  [B.AL]).

1.  Father  of  Abiathar,  erroneously  described  in  2  S.
817  as  son  of  Abiathar,  also  in  four  places  in  i  Ch. ,  in
the  first  of  which,  moreover,  the  name  in  MT  is
Abimi;i.kcii  ;  see  Abiathar  (last  paragraph).  For  a
conjecture  that  Jehoshaphat,  David"s  vizier,  and  Baana,
Solomon's  prefect,  were  also  sons  of  this  Ahimelech,  see
Ahu.ui),  I  and  2.

©A  reads  ajii^cAex  in  i  S.  21  \a  229  and  a/3ifi.  in  i  S  21  1/^2  ;
B  h.-is  ajSeifieAcx  invariably  except  in  i  S.  21  \a,  and  Ps.  52
title,'-  a/3i^.  ;  and  in  1  S.  30  7  and  the  five  corrupt  passages,
oxfiM- '.  ^'g-  Achiiuelech,  but  in  i  Ch.,  though  not  in  2S.  S17,
Ahim.  The  Vg.  and  (5U  read  Ahimelech  also  in  Ps.  34,  title  ;
.see  .\cHisH  (end).

2.  .\  Hittite  companion  of  David  in  the  time  of  his  outlawry,
I  S.  2.>6t  (ax[e]t,xeAex  [B^L],  ap[.]i^.  [BA]).

AHIMOTH  (niD^riN,  §  45,  AAeiMcoe  [B],  oxiM-
[A],  A/VMCO0  [I-]),  fi  name  in  the  genealog)-  of  Kohath
(i  Ch.  625  [10]).  If  the  reading  of  MT  and  Versions  is
correct,  -7noth  should  \y&  a  divine  name  or  title.  Barton
compares  the  cosmogonic  Mwt  in  Philo  of  Byblus  ;  but
this  is  too  doubtful  (see  Creation,  §  7),  and  though
mo,  'death,"  in  Ps.  49i4  [15]  and  elsewhere  is  personi-
fied, a  name  like  '  Death  is  (our)  brother "  or  '  protector,'
is  improbable.  Possibly  Ahimoth  should  be  Ahimahath
(see  -■.  35  [20],  cp  2  Ch.  29 12)  ;  see  Mahath,  1.

AHINADAB  (2"7ynNI,  §  44;  'the  [divine]  brother
apportions,"  but  cp  further  Abinadab  ;  &X€INA<^B
[B],  ainaAaB  [A],  axinaA&B  [L];  AHIS-ADAB),  Solo-
mon's prefect  over  the  district  of  Mahanaim  beyond
Jordan  (i  K.  4i4t). See  Government,  §  18  (end).

AHINOAM  (DymNt,  §  45,  '  the  [divine]  brother  is
plea-santness,' Ax[e]iNA&M[B.AL];  Jos.  axina;  achi-
NOA^t).  I.  Daughter  of  .Ahimaaz  and  wife  of  Saul,
1  Sam.  14  sot  [a.-)^f\.vooy.  [B.A]).

2.  Of  Jezreel  in  Judah  (see  Abigail,  2)  whom  David
married  during  his  outlawry.  Like  Abigail,  she  was
carried  off  by  the  Amalckites  when  they  plundered  Ziklag.
At  Hebron  she  bore  to  David  his  eldest  son,  Amnon,
I S. '2543 (axetvaai' [B]) ; 273; SOs  (axeivooM [B],

1  A  better  pointing  would  be  fDTIK  ;  the  present  vocalisa-
tion, jO'nR,  is  based  on  a  popular  etymology;  JD'nK,  frater
meus  quis? (Jer.  in  OS'^)  \hi\,  etc.).

-  Other  readings  here,  o^cifi.  [«];  Achimehch;  Pesh.  quite
different.


AHIO

ox"'aaM  [A.  o/x. sup. ras.  A']), cp  v. i8  ;  a  Sam.  2a
{ax^foofi  [BA]).  3  J  (ax""©©/*  [H]) ; r  Ch.  Sif.

AHIO  (VnX,  §§  24,  43,  possibly,  if  MT  is  correct,
'brother  of  Yahwe,'  or  '  Yah\v6  is  brother.'  The
analogy  of  other  names  ending  in  0  seems  against  this
view  ;  Jastrow,  //i/.,  1894,  p. loi).

1.  1).  .\binailab,  brother  of  I' zzAri  (y.7'.,  i),  aS.  63/;  ||  i  Ch.  18  7
has 'his  brethren,"  and  We.  reads  VriK,  'his  brother';  see  Dr.
(in  each  case,  however,  ©bal  has  oi  o3«A^t  avroO,  i.e.,  VnK,

in  2  S.).

a.  In  genealogy  of  Bknjamin  (89  ii.  /3),  one  of  the  sotis  of
Ueriah,  who  put  to  flight  the  inhabitants  of  Gath,  i  Ch.  S  i4(a£rA-
^t  aiiTou,  '  his  brother  '  [B],  oi  ai«Ac/>ot  aii.,  '  his  brethren  "  [A],  oi
o.  airrmv,  '  their  brethren  '  [L] ;  Be.  and  Kau.  vnK  ;  We.  VnK
[DeCent.  f.  so];  Ki.  OH'nK)-  ,  ^.  ,

3.  In  genealogy  of  Benjamin  (8  9  u.  P),  son  of  Jehiel,  the
'  father  'of  (".ibeon  ;  i  Ch.  8  31  aitK^o^  auToO  [B],  -<;>ol  av.  [A],  oi
i5.  av.  [I.l)  =  i)37t  ("A  om.  auroO).

AHIRA  [Vrrn^:,  AxCelipe  [BAFL];  -^^  :
AHIK.4).  A  Naphtalite  family-name  reported  in  P
(Nu.  1 15  229  77883  1027!).  The  old  interpretation  '  my
brother  is  evil '  must  be  abandoned.  Either  y  is  mis-
written  for  n  (see  the  Palmyrene  characters),  in  which
case  we  get  the  good  Heb.  name  Ahiram,'  or  we  have
here  a  half-Kgyptian  name  meaning  '  Ra'  (or  Re' — i.e.,
the  Egj'ptian  sun-god)  is  brother  or  protector'  (so  C!he.
/m.  2144).  The  latter  view  is  quite  possible  (cp  the
Egv'ptian  name  Pet-baal).  The  Canaanites,  who  were
strong  in  the  territory  of  Naphtali,  were  very  receptive
of  foreign  religious  influences.^  Cp  AsHUR,  Hi"K,
Haknepiikr.  The  reading  of  Pesh.  (uniformly  Ahida')
is  no  doubt  either  merely  a  natural  variant,  or  a  copyist's
substitution  of  a  more  normal  for  a  rarer  form  ;  cp
Amioa.  t.  k.  c.

AHIRAM  (D"^*nN,  §44,  cp  Jehoram  ;  AxCel'PAN
[AL].  lAX.  [B],'  AXiAN  [F];  aiuram).  i.  In  the
gcnealogj'  of  Benjamin  (§  9  i. );  Nu.  2638  (where
we  have  also  the  gentilic  Ahiramite  ;  'STnt* ;  axf'pa«"
[1.],  10.  .  .  vei  [B],  axipai  [.\],  -lavei  [F])  =  Gen.  4621,
where  '  .Xhiram,  .Shei)hupham '  ought  no  doubt  to
be  read  for  '  Khi  and  Rosh,  Muppim '  (cEiErCTHN  for
C*rcrN-ivnN),  cp  Rosii.  In  the  similar  list  in  i  Ch.  8
we  find  in  ?■.  i  .Aiiarah  [i/.t.]  (mnx),  and  in  that  in
iCh.  76^  in  I'.  12,  Aher  y.v.](^nK),  cp  Hushim,  2  ;
Dan,  §  9.

2.  Perhaps  we  should  read  Ahiram  also  for  Ahir.\
(17. f.)  in  Xu.  I5,  etc.

AHISAMACH  ("^^p^^^{,  '  the  [divine]  brother  sus-
tains'  ;  axiC(\mak[B],  -max  [AFL];  Jos.  ic&maxoc,
IC&XA'WOC).  aDanite;  E.x.  316  (axiCAMAX  C^])  3534
3823  [P]. See  Dan,  §  9  n.

AHISHAHAR  (in;"'nN,  §§  35,  44,  'the  [divine]
brother  is  dawning  light,'  cp  Abner,  Shehariah  ;  d,\e\-
CA^^AP  [1^].  AXICAAP  [A],  ACCAeip  [L]).  in  genealogy
of  Bkniamin  (§  9  ii.  a),  1  Ch.  7  lof- See  Jeuiael,  1.

AHISHAB  (">V"'nX,  §  44),  Solomon's  comptroller
of  the  palace  (iK.  46t).  The  name,  however,  is
suspicious.

ipB  gives  the  double  rendering,  ox«i  V  o'lKovofiof,  and  eAiax
o  n'tK.,  and  perhaps  even  a  third  rendering  f\iap  uib«  cra<f>  iirX
■n't'i  Trarpio? ;  eKiax  should  be  ayiTjA,  which  (P'-  has,  and  may
In:  the  true  (S  re.ading.  But  MT  (®a  axio-op)  has  yet  to  be
accounted  for.  For  1C"nj«1_  we  should  probably  read  "ij?  VriN.
Zabud,  who  has  just  been  mentioned,  is  descriljed  as  not  merely
a  priest  but '  the  officer  (placed)  over  the  palace  '  (so  Klc).  See
Zabud,  I.  T.  K.  c.

AHITHOPHEL  (^Sh^HJ^,  §  45,  meaning  uncertain  ;
Ax[eliTO(})e\  [B.VL],  -Aoc,  Jos.),  a  Gilonite  (see
Giloh),  a  counsellor  of  David  nmch  esteemed  for  his

1  Aveip*  in  3  K.  2  46  A  [B]  answers  to  Adoniram  (cp  i  K.  4  6)
of  MT.

2  On  names  of  foreign  deities  in  Israelite  names,  see  under
Elidad,  and  Names,  gg  4a,  81,  83.

lOI


AHLAB

unerring  in.sight  (aS.  15i2  16a3).  His  son  Eliam
{^■v.,  i)  was,  like  Uriah,  a  member  of  David's  body-
guard (2  S.  2334  ;  cp  David,  §  ii  a  i),  and  since  H.ith-
sheba,  the  wife  of  Uriah,  is  described  as  the  daughter
of  Eliam  (2S.  II3),  it  has  been  conjectured  that  Ahi-
thophel  was  her  grandfather,  and  that  indignation  at
Davids  conduct  to  Bathsheba  led  Ahithophel  to  cast  in
his  lot  with  Absalom's  rebellion.  This,  however,  is  a
mere  possibility,  and  ambition  would  Ix;  a  sufficient
motive  for  Ahithophel's  tri-ason  to  David,  just  as  the
slight  involved  in  .Absalom's  preference  of  Hushai's
counsel  to  his  own  was  certainly  one  chief  cause  of  his
final  withdrawal  from  .Absalom.  At  first,  indeed,  he
had  full  possession  of  the  ear  of  the  pretender.  It
was  by  his  advice  that  .Absalom  took  public  possession
of  his  father's  concubines,  and  so  pledged  himself  to
a  claim  to  the  throne,  from  which  there  was  no  retreat
(2  S.  1620^).  Ahithophel  was  also  eager  in  his  own
person  to  take  another  bold  and  decisive  ste[).  He
wished  to  pursue  David  with  12,000  men  and  cut  the
old  king  down  in  the  first  confusion  and  entanglement
of  his  flight  towards  the  Jordan  (2  S.  17 1-4).  This
plan  was  defeated  by  Hushai,  whereupon  Ahithophel,
seeing  that  all  hope  was  gone,  went  to  Giloh  and
strangled  himself.

In  iCh.  II36  'Ahithophel  the  Gilonite'  has  been  corrupted
into  'Ahijah  the  Pelonitc,"  'i^S:^  n^r.H  for  'j'^i.T  "?En'nK ;  cp
Klo.  Sam.,  ad  he.  (axlejta  [B.AKL]),  and  see  Giloh,  end.

W.  E.  A.

AHITOB  (AXeiTCoB  [B],  etc. ),  i  Esd.  82  RV,  4  Esd.
lit  RV. See  below,  Ahitub,  2.

AHITUB  (n-in^nX  or  n-"mnN  [i  S.  143  2292°],  §  45  ;
cp  Ahi-labu  KB  5,  no.  11  14,  aXleJitooB  [B.AL]).

I.  .A  member  of  the  family  in  which  the  priest-
hood, first  at  Shiloh,  then  at  Nob,  appears  for  some
generations  to  have  been  hereditary.  He  was  grandson
of  Eli,  son  of  Phinehas,  and  elder  brother  of  Ichabod
(iS.  143;  cp4i9-2i).  His  son,  .Ahijah,  is  mentioned  as
priest  in  iS.  I43;  another  son,  Ahimelech,  api>ears
as  priest  in  i  .S.  229  n  12  20.  It  is  unnecessary  with
Thenius  and  Bertheau  to  identify  Ahimelech  with
Ahijah  ;  but  that  .Ahitub,  the  father  of  Ahimelech,  is
identical  with  .Ahitub,  the  father  of  Ahijah,  is  clear  from
iK.  227,  which  implies  that  Abiathar,  the  son  of
Ahimelech  (iS.  222o),  was  of  the  house  of  Eli.
Nothing  further  is  directly  told  of  Ahitub ;  but,  if
Wellhausen's  suggestion  that  the  destruction  of  .^hiloh
(Jer.  7i2)  took  place  after  the  battle  of  Aphek  (i.S.  4)
be  accepted,  the  transference  of  the  priestly  centre
from  Shiloh  to  Nob  (IS.  229-11),  will  have  taken  place;
under  him.

The  description  of  Ahitub  as  father  of  Zadok  (2  S.  S  17  =  i  Ch.
18  16,  iCh.  6  8  [634]  53  [38])  is  due  to  an  intentional  early  cor-
ruption of  the  text  in  S.imuel,  which  originally  r.in  '  .Abiathar,
the  son  of  .Xhimelech,  the  son  of  Ahitub,  and  Z.-idok  were  priests  '
(for  the  argiunent  see  We.  TUS  176 /).

2  and  3.  Father  of  a  (later)  Zadok,  mentioned  in  1  Ch.  6  i\/.
[537/1,  and  in  pedigree  of  Ezra  (see  Ezra,  i.  §  1)  Ezra72  =
I  Esd.S2  =  2Esd.  1  I  (in  the  last  two  passages  AV  Achitob,
R\'  .AHnciii);  and  a  priest,  father  of  Meraioth  and  grandfather
of  Z.adok,  in  tbe  list  of  inhabitants  of  Jerusalem  (Ezra,  ii.  §§  5  {b\,
15  [r]  a),  iCh.  9ii  =  Neh.  11  11  (aira>/3<ux  [l''i,  ajro^toic  [N],  a»Tw/f
[Al).  These  references,  however,  are  probably  due  to  inten-
tion.al  or  accidental  amplification  of  the  original  genealogj-,  .ind
do  not  refer  to  any  actual  person.  Kyle,  app.irently  takes
another  view  ;  see  his  notes  on  EzraT  1-5,  and  Neh.  11  11.

4.  Ancestor  of  Judith;  Judith  8  if  RV,  AV  following  0a  <ueifla
AciTHo,  Ac/titoh ;  so  also  It.,  Syr.  ;  om.  B.  g.  b.  g.

AHLAB  (n'pnX,  ».^.,  'fat.'  'fruitful'  ;  Aa\a<J>[BAL],
»•'•.  AaAA(}>  [Clermont  Ganne.au  points  out  the  place-
name  M.ahaleb,  N.  of  Tyre  (yV*^'.  Crit.  1897,  p.  503)]),
a  Canaanite  town  claimed  by  Asher  (Judg.  I31),  and
referred  to  probably  in  Josh.  19 29,  at  the  end  of  which
verse  there  appears  to  have  been  originally  a  list  of
names  including  (by  a  correction  of  the  te.xt)  Ahlab  and
Achzib.' See  Helbah.

1  Josh.  1929  ends  'bus,  na'nK  VniTD  nS'n,  which  AV  renders
'  at  the  sea  from  the  coast  to  Achzib,"  and  RV  '  at  the  sea  by  the


AHLAI

Many(r.c-.,  Neubauer,  Grove,  Fursl)  identify  either  Ahlab  or
Hdbah  with  the  Gu5  Hnmb  (aSn  ri3.  'fat  clods')  of  the
Talmuds— the  Giscala  of  Josephus.  But  this  place  {el  Jish),
which  is  mentioned  with  Meron  (AfeifUn),  and  Biri  (h'e/r
Blr'im),  must  have  lain  on  Naphtalite  ground.  The  statement
inTalm.  Mcnachoth  85  b,  that  tlush  Halab  belonged  to  Asher  is
a  mere  gue>s,  suggested  by  the  blessing  of  Asher  in  Dt.  3824.
Fur  a  sounder  view  see  Hklbah.

AHLAI  C^riX,  ace.  to  Olsh.  IHeb.  Gr.  (>\6\  =  uti,uim.
Del.,  Prol.  210,  compares  Bab.  'v\X^x].-'n^m^  Ahulalpia,

•  O  that  I  at  last. '  More  probably  the  name  is  a  cor-
ruption of  ?X*nX,  or  the  like).

1.  Son,  or  (.-in  inference  from  -.'.  34  which  comes  from  a  later
hand)  daughter  of  Sheshan  b.  Isha,  a  Jerahmeelite  ;  i  Ch.  2  31
(axai  (H),  aa&ai  [A],  ouAaei  [L]). See  Jehahmkkl,  I.

2.  Father  (or  moilier?)  of  Zauad  (t^.Z'.);  1  Ch.  n4it  (oX""*
(H).  axea  [K].  oAi  |.\],  <ra^aaAi  [L],  i.e.,  a  combination  of  part
of  ^afXfxa  or  ^a/maia  with  aoAi).  T.  K.  C.

AHOAHlHinX).  iCh.  84t.  See  Ahij.vh,  2,  Ben-
J,\.MIN,  §  9  ii-  i3.

AHOHITE,  THE  ("nnxn,  i.e.,  a  man  of  the  family
of  Ahoah  or  AuijAii?  (^.v.,  2).  The  designation  (i)
of  Zalmon  (2S.  232St,  awfiTtji  [B],  eXco.  [A],  a\-axt
[L];  Jfcs.»d  joJ  ^joj)  =  Ii.Ai  [see  Zalmon,  2]  (i  Ch.
II29:  avax^f(L  [Is*],  ax-  I BN'],  final  x  tieing  con-
founded with  v  ;  ax^^p  [A*  sup.  las.  seq.  ras.],  aKaOi
[LI;  t,.sCU3  ^>).

Also  (2)  of  Dodai,  or  of  Elcazar  b.  Dodai  (as  in
I  Ch.  27  and  in  2  S.  and  i  Ch.  11  respectively  ;  see
Dodai,  Eleazar,  3),  one  of  David's  heroes  (see
Ei.EAZAR,  3)  in  the  list  iCh.  274  (f^'XwX  [^J-  "<-^^'
[A],  axcoxt  [L])  =  iCh.lli2  (apx^^""  [H  S'X-  W-
ax^X'  [A^.  i''6s  Aw5at  irarpad^Xcpov  avrov  [!-])  =
2S.  239  (that  is,  if  with  AV  we  treat  -nnx-p  as  =
•nnxn  of  the  parallel  passages,  and  do  not  [with  Marq.
Fu/uf.  16/]  correct  the  whole  expression  everywhere
into  'cnVn  na  '  the  Bethlehemite '  [cp  v.  24],  the  corrup-
tion in  the  Heb.  text  of  Sam.  being  accounted  for  by  the
half-effacement  of  the  letters,  which  the  scribe  lead  in
the  false  light  of  i:  28).  ©  evidently  omits,  since  the
forms  aovati,  [B],  dovSei  [B*'^''^-L],  awaei  [A]  must  be
corruptions  for  ^-n,  Dod(a)i.

AHOLAH,  RV  correctly  Ohdlah  (H^HX  ;  ooAa  [B
indecl.  and  decl.,  and,  except  f.  44,  Q:  but  B,  not  B»
-KK.  V-  4].  oAAa  [A  and  in  v.  44  g]).  a  symbolical
name  equivalent  to  Oholibah  (see  Aholibah),  given
by  Ezekiel  to  Samaria  (284/.  644!).

AHOLIAB,  R\^  correctly  Ohdliab  (aS'-briX  ;  cAiaB
[B.M'L]),  the  associate  of  Bezai.ekl  {i/.v.)  in  the  work
of  the  tabernacle  in  P  (Ex.  316  3.") :?4  36  1  2  38  23  [(5
372it]). See  Da.n.  §  8  n.,  and  cp  Hiram,  2.

AHOLIBAH,  RV  correctly  OhOlibah  (na^^HN,  i.e.,

•  she  in  whom  are  tents ' — alluding  to  the  worship  at
the  high  places;  cp  Ezek.  I618;  ogXiBa  [BQr],  o\.
[A,  V.  22  Q,  c>.  36  B]),  a  symbolical  name,  equivalent  to
Oholah  (see  Aikjlah),  given  by  Ezekiel  to  Jerusalem
(234  112236  44t )■

AHOLIBAMAH,  RV  correctly  OhOUbamah
(npivHX,  §  61,  /.<•.,  'tent  of  the  high  place,"  cp  Phoen.

l^obnX  C/S  1,  no.  50,  and  see  Hiram,  2.

1.  Wife  of  Esau  {oXi^efia  [ADE] ;  eXt/Sa^o  [L]  ;
aXt.iafxrjv  [}os.  ;  cod.  Laur.  oX.]);  Gen.  862  (oXi^aifia
[E]),  514  (eXt^ejua  [A],  18  (eXi/3f/ua  [A  once],  oXi^f/j-fxa
and  (Xi^afia  [D]),  25t  (oXt^a  [E],  eXi^efmO  [L  ;  before
6vya.Tr)p]). See  Bashe.math,  i  ;  Anah,  3  (end).

2.  An  Edomite  chief  {eX[f]i^afiai  [D>''<'L],  eXt^fyuas
region  of  .■\chzib,'  but  in  the  margin  'at  the  .sea  from  He  he  i.  to
Achzib.'  0,  however,  points  the  way  to  a  correction  of  the
text  (17  0a\a<T(Ta  Koi  anb  Af^  «"  (XO^oP  [H],  rj  0.  k.  a.  toO
iTXOivCtriiaTOi  (X°ioP  t-^l.  V-  *•  «■  'CTai  a-  r.  cr.  oxaf«i|S  [b]).
This  implies  the  reading  zSnC-  which  is  not  improbably  a
corruption  of  2h~H-  n:*ipN,  which  should  rather  be  3'J3N1,  was
an  attempt  to  make  sense  with  27np.

103


AI

[A]),  Gen.  3641.  and  (eX[e]a/3oAtas  [BA],  eXifiafia  [L]),
I  Ch.  1  s't. See  EuoM,  §  4.

AHUMAI  ('J?-in><,i§65;  AyeiMei  [BA*].  aximai
[A^ sup.  ras.  et  in  mg.],  aXIMAN  [E],  ..v^.m/  ;  Ahuiiiai
[cod.  am.  AAimni]),  the  eponym  of  a  clan  of  Judah
(i  Ch.4  2+). Should  we  read  Ahiman  (L)?

AHUZAM,  RV  correctly  Ahuzzam  (D-THt*.  perh.
=  '  possession  '  ;  for  pr.  names  in  am  see  Names,  §  77),
one  of  the  sons  of  Ashhur '  father  of  Tekoa '  ; i  Ch.

4Dt  (COXAIA  [B]. COXAZAM  [A], OZA  [L]).

AHUZZATH  (nrriN,  ■  possession  '  ;  oxozaG  [AEL],
-ZAX  W]''  <-'cnoy..iTH),  the  'friend'  (©,  wrongly,
v\>ix<pa.'yii}'^'j<i)  of  Abimelech,  king  of  Gerar  (Gen.  2626t).
'  Friend  '  =  minister  ;  cp  1  Ch.  2733,  and  see  HUSHAI.

The  name  with  the  title  6  i^fK^o-ytuybs  aiiToCis  introduced  al.so
in  (pAUL  in  the  similar  narrative  of  Gen.  21  22-34.  For  the
termination  -aih  thereare  parallels  in  Ba.semath  (fern.),  Gen.  2034  ;
M.ihalath  (fem.),  (;en.2S9;  Goliath  (the  Philistine),  1S.I74;
Gciiuhalh,  iK.  II20;  cp  names  in  -ath  in  Aram,  inscriptions
(Cook,  Gloss.  Aram.  Inscr.  under  n). Cp  Dr.  //T^^)  236,  n.  2.

AHZAI  ("THN),  Xeh.  11  i3t  RV,  AV  Ahasai  {q.v. ).

AI  (i)  Cyn,  always  thus  with  def.  article,  i.e.,  'the
stone  heap";  f^l  [B.XL,  etc.];  wriiicn  Hai  in  Gen.
123]33tAV;  Arr<>'l  i^-"^^^])-  ^^^  name  appears  also
in  various  other  forms.

AijA,  or  lather  Ayya  (N'j; ;  om.  BN*A,  oiu  [Nc-a  mg.  inf.],
•yai  [L],  Neh.  Il3it);  Ayvah,  RV  mg.(.i;j;  [Ba  Gil,  not  r\X]}
as  in  most  edd.,  AV  Gaza  \q."\_  2],  RV  Azzah  ;  yaiaf  [B],  ya^ijs
(genit.)[A],  aaia[L];aca;  b»X.X;  1  Ch.728);  Ai  ath,  or  rather
Ayyath  (ri;j^:  ayyat  [BNAQ],  Is.  10  28+).

As  to  the  site  of  .-\i,  we  learn  from  Josh.  72  (in  clause
b  7TJI'  [-AKL]  ;  in  w.  3  701  sup.  ras.  [B-])  that  it  was
situated  '  beside  Beth-aven,  on  the  east  of  Bethel,"  and,
from  the  account  of  Joshua's  stratagem,  that  it  lay  on
the  S.  side  of  a  steep  valley  (Josh.  811),  while  from
the  description  in  Gen.  128,  it  appears  that  there  was
a  '  mountain  '  or  flat  ridge  with  a  wide  view  between
Ai  and  Bethel.  That  there  was  a  close  connection
between  the  two  places  appears  also  from  the  expression
'the  men  of  Bethel  and  Ai '  (Ezra228;  aia  [B.V])-
With  the  position  thus  suggested,  Isaiahs  graphic
picture  of  an  .Assyrian  invasion  from  the  north  (Is.  10
28/:;  arya-i.  [B'S'^''-':b.\Q];  0776  [X*]  =  Geha  in
V.  28)  entirely  agrees.  Where,  then,  shall  we  place  Ai
on  the  map?  Scarcely  at  et-Tell  (Sir  C.  W.  Wilson,
PEFQ,  1869,  123-6,  and  Smith's  /)/;i->)  — there
are  no  signs  that  et-Tell  was  ever  the  site  of  a  city —
but  at  some  other  spot  in  the  neighbourhood  of  Dcr
Dr«hin  (a  village  twenty  minutes  .SE.  of  et-Tell).
Robinson,  with  some  hesitation,  fixed  on  a  low  hill,
just  S.  of  this  place,  where  there  are  still  foundations
of  large  hewn  stones,  and  on  the  W. ,  ancient  reser-
voirs, mostly  dug  out  of  the  rock.  The  spot  (called
Kliirbet  Haiydn)  is  'an  hour  distant  from  Bethel,
having  near  by,  on  the  N. ,  the  deep  Wady  el-Matyah,
and  towards  the  SW.  other  smaller  wadys,  in  which
the  ambuscade  of  the  Israelites  might  easily  have  been
concealed"  (/?A'23i3).  To  Tristram  in  1863,  this  con-
jecture '  carried  with  it  the  weight  of  evidence,"  particu-
larly because  it  would  be  difficult  to  assign  a  site  to
Abraham"s  camp  between  Beitin  and  Tell  el-Hajar
(et-Tell),  and  because  Robinson"s  site  affords  such
ample  space  for  the  military  evolutions  described  in
Josh.  8,  over  which,  however,  some  uncertainty  is
thrown  by  the  variations  of  0  in  it\  11-13.  Both
Gu6rin  and  the  PEF  Survey  corroborate  this  view,
which,  if  not  proved,  is  at  any  rate  probable.

As  to  the  history  of  Ai  :  it  was  a  royal  Canaanitish
city,  and  was  the  second  city  conquered  by  Jo.shua,
who  destroyed  it  and  doomed  it  to  be  '  a  mound  for
ever"  (cSii'-Sn).  By  Isaiah"s  time,  however,  it  had
been  rebuilt  (Is.  10 28),  and  after  the  Exile  it  was  re-
1  See  Gray,  HPN62,  279,  n.  10.
104


AIAH

occupied  by  Benjamites  ;  Ezra228  (ota  [BA])  =  Neh.
732  {aXeta  [HX],  at  [A])=  i  lisd. Sai  (©»*  and  KV
om.  ;  7CU  [L]).  In  the  time  of  Kusebius  (05  181,  76,
Ayyai}  it  was  once  more  deserted  ;  but  its  situation  was
still  pointed  out.  Its  name  was  jjrophetic  of  its  history.
Or  had  it  some  other  name  before  its  destruction  by
I  oshua  ?

2.  ('g;  without  article  ;  Tat  [Q] ;  Symm.  ^  Zo-xt's)  an
Ammonite  city,  if  the  text  in  Jer.  49  st  is  correct  ((S'"**
omits  :  Rothstein  in  Kau.  //S  and  Co.  in  SHOT,
after  (Jraf, read  '  Ar  n^).  T.  K.  c.

AIAH,  more  strictly  Ayyah  (H'X,  'falcon').  i.
.\n  Ixlomite  tribal  name  individualised,  Gen.  8624
(.W  Aj.Mi  ;  Aie  [AD],  N.  [l''- ;  N  precedes],  a^iAi  [L])  =
I  Ch.  l4o(i^ie  [li],  <MA  [AL]).  The  tribe  seems  to  have
broken  off  from  that  of  Zibeon,  and  to  have  been  less
important  than  that  of  Anau  {q.v.).  To  identify  this
insigniticant  Aiah  with  the  'goodly  land'  in  which  Se-
nuhvt  the  ligyptian  e.xile  found  a  home,  according  to
the 'old  story  (so  Masjiero,  RPC'^  21723;  PSBA  18
106  [96])  is  unsafe.  On  the  laa  (Maspero,  Aia)  of  the
story  of  Se-nuhyt,  see  WMM  As.  u.  Kur.  47.

2.  Father  of  Saul's  concubine  Rizpah  (28.87,  'a^
vel  forte  10.0.  [H*],  io5  vel  forte  io\  [B'],  Io\  [A],  2i^a  [L],
^t,iJaTos[Jos.]  ;218^,  Aia  [BA],  Acrata  [L]).  To  draw
a  critical  inference  (with  Mez,  Der  Bihel  dcs  Jos.  35/-),
from  L's  2(/3a  in  3  7  seems  unwise.  We  must  not  assume
that  Ziba  is  the  original  reading  rather  than  Aiah.  k
and  ^;  could  very  easily  be  confounded,  and  from  2ia
to  :it/3a  was  but  a  step.  The  name  of  one  of  Rizpah's
sons  was  Mephibosheth  (Meribaal),  and  the  son  of
Jonathan,  whose  steward  was  Ziba,  was  also  called
Mephibosheth  (Meribaal).  The  question  as  to  the  source
or  sources  of  the  passages  in  which  Rizi'Aii  {q.v.)  is
referred  to,  lemains  therefore  where  it  was.

AIATH  (n*y),  Is.  1028t. See  Ai,  1.

AIJAlkSj];),  Neh.  II31. See  Ai,  i.

AIJALON,  or  (Josh.  10 12  19  42;  2  Ch.  28i8+,  all  AV)
less  correctly  AjALON  (P?*X  from  ?*X  'hart';  mAooN
[HALj).

1.  A  town  in  the  Shephelah,  assigned  to  Dan  m
Josh.  1942  {aiM/uiuv  [li],  laaXajv  [A],  eX.  [L  ;  but  with
laXajj/  V.  43  for  Elon]),  and  named  as  a  Danite  Levitical
city  in  2l24[P]  (laXuv  [A])=iCh.  669  [54]  (corrected
text,  see  Ball  ad loc.  in  Ellicott's  Bible;  t-yKo-ii  [B],
7j/\wi/  [A]).  It  is  the  modern  Yalo,  situated  on  a  ridge
on  the  south  side  of  the  broad  level  valley  of  Aijalon,
well  known,  from  Joshua's  poetical  speech  (Josh.  10 12  ;
a:\w/Lt  [L]),  and  now  called  Merj  (the  meadow  of)  Ibn
'i'lnar.  It  is  about  5  m.  from  Lower  Beth-horon,  and
14  from  Jerusalem.  In  the  time  of  the  Judges  it
w\T,s  still  in  the  hands  of  the  Amorites  (Judg.  I35;
apparently  misread  ai  dpKoi.  [B.\L],  and  translated  a
second  time  fjLX'paivusv  [B],  which,  however,  stands  for
HKKK.S  in  L),  but  was  afterwards  occupied  by
Benjamites,  iCh.  813  (aiXa/j.  [B],  aSafi  [A],  aXw>'
[L]);  cp.  2Ch.  llio.  The  Chronicler  states  that
Rehoboam  fortified  it  (2Ch.  llio,  aXduv  [B],  aiaXuv
[AL]),  and  that  Ahaz  lost  it  to  the  Philistines  (2Ch.
28 18,  aiXw  [K]).  o"  whose  territory  it  bordered.  In
I  S.  1431,  the  occurrence  of  the  word  is  doubtful.  For
'to  Aijalon'  Klost.  and  Budde  (SBOT)  read  'until
night."  ©"'^■-  omits  altogether.  Some  fresh  references
to  Aijalon  are  derived  from  Egyptian  sources.  For
instance,  Shishak  (Sheshonk  I. )  mentions  Aiyurun — i.e. ,
Aijalon — among  the  conquered  cities  of  Judah  in  his
Karnak  list,  and  there  is  an  earlier  mention  still  in  the
Amarna  tablets,  where  Aialuna  appears  as  one  of  the
first  cities  wrested  from  the  Egyptian  governors.  A
vivid  sketch  of  the  battle-scenes  of  the  valley  of
Aijalon  will  be  found  in  GA.Sm.  f/G  210-13.

2.  (Judg.  12 12  ;  AiXwfi  [B],  -X[e]tya  [AL]),  a  locality
in  Zebulun, the burial-place of Elon  {^.v.,  ii.  ly. ).


AIN

Its  name  ought  probably  to  be  pointed  [iV'K  (Elon),
and  etymologically  connected  with  ps^  or  ,iSk,  '  oak '
or  '  terebinth  '  (see  Tkkkbinth,  §  i),  indicating  a  sacred
spot. Cp  Al.l.ON,  2.  T.  K.  c.

AIJELETH-SHAHAR,  UPON,  RV  '  set  to  Aijeleth
hash-Shahax  ("int|'n  fl^'N,  [Ow^p]  t^s  d^'TiXTj/xt/'ewj
Tijs  iujOiuTJs  ^BSAj  ;  Atj.  [virip]  rij^  eXatpov  ttjs  dpOpcv^s),
Vs.  22,  title.  If  we  consider  the  tendency  of  the  phrase,
'  Upon  Al.AMOTH  {i/.v. ),'  to  get  corrupted,  it  seemshighly
probable  that  '  Aijeleth  '  should  rather  be  read  '  Alamoth  '
(n  and  y  confounded),  while  Shahar  should  perhaps  rather
be  B'nn  re',  '  a  new  song.'  (The  article  prefixed  to  Shahar
may  be  in  the  interests  of  an  exegetical  theory. )  The
latter  corruption  has  very  probably  taken  place  in  Ps.
579  (see  Che.  /^j. ('-').  A  'new  song'  would  be  a  song
u[)oii  a  new  model.

AIN  (yV).  I.  If  MT  may  be  followed,  this  is  the
name  of  a  city  in  the  Xcgeb  of  Judah  (Josh.  1032)
assigned  to  Simeon  (19?;  cp  i  Ch.  432).  According
to  Josh.  21 16  it  was  one  of  the  priests'  cities  ;  but  the
parallel  list  in  i  Ch.  659  [44]  probably  correctly  substitutes
AsuAN  ((/.I'.)  which  is  mentioned  in  Josh.  I97  [MT
@uALj  alongside  of  Ain  as  a  distinct  place.  The  name
being  thus  removed  from  this  list,  Ain  always  appears
in  close  conjunction  with  Rinunon,  and  Miihlau  {HIVB  t^'
s.v.  'Ain')  suggests  that  the  two  places  may  have  lain
so  close  together  that  in  course  of  time  they  joined.
Hence  he  would  account  for  the  En-klmmon  (pan  pj; ;
om.  BNA  ;  k.  ev  pe/uLpnov  [X'^-''  '"*>'•  '"^■]  ;  k.  tv  pe/i/xiov  []^])
of  Neh.  11  29.  But  ifweconsider  the  phenomena  of  ©(see
below),  and  the  erroneous  summation  (if  M  T  be  adhered
to)  in  Josh.  1532,  it  becomes  evident  that  Bennett's
thorough  revision  of  the  readings  in  his  Joshua  {SHOT)
is  critically  justified  (cp  AsuAN),  and  that  the  real  name
is  En-RIMMON  '  {q.v.).

How,  indeed,  could  a  place  dedicated  to  the  god
Rimmon  (Ramman)  have  been  without  a  sacred
fountain  ?

Josh.  15  32,  leat  epuDtnaQ  [Bl,  Kai  pefi/xwi'  [A],  Kai  aiv  Kai.  pefiixMv
[LI  ;  Josh.  197,  aiv  K.  pffifxcoS  [\].  ai.u  k.  pe/x/iior  [LJ,  but  epefifj-iov
[B] ;  Josh.  21 16,  ao-a  [B]  which  favours  j-^'y  '  Ash.\n  '  ig'.?'.),  ate
[A],  raeir  [L],  which  h.armonise  witli  MT.  In  i  Ch.432(it.
pen/Ltoji'  IB],  K.  r)i'  [sic]  I'e  sup.  las.  [A-'V|  followed  by  -fifiwr  [.A]  ;
K.  ei'pe/u./LLwi/  [LJ)  we  should  also,  with  Ki.,  read  En-rimmou.

2.  (i'VlSl,  the  article  being  included  ;  (firl)  irriyds
[BAL]  ;  Vg.  [contra)  fontcm  Daphnim ;  Tg.  Onk.  as
MT  ;  for  the  rest  see  below. )  A  place  mentioned  in
Nu.  34  1 1  to  define  the  situation  of  one  of  the  points  on
the  ideal  eastern  frontier  of  Canaan  :  '  to  Harbel  on  the
east  side  of  Ain '  is  the  phrase.  Though  both  AV
and  RV  sanction  this  view  of  j'y.i,  it  is  more  natural  to
render  'the  fountain,'  and  to  find  here  a  reference  to
some  noted  spring.  Jerome  thought  of  the  spring
which  rose  in  the  famous  grove  of  Daphne,  near  Antioch  ;
in  this  he  followed  the  Targums  of  Ps.  Jon.  and  Jerus.
which  render  '(the)  Riblah '  (.iSa-irj)  by  'Daphne,'  and
'the  fountain'  (pyn)  by  'Ainutha.  Robinson ^  and
Conder  prefer  the  fountain  which  is  the  source  of  the
Orontes.  Both  these  views  rest  on  the  assumption  that
Riblah  on  the  Orontes  has  just  been  referred  to,  which
is  a  pure  mistake  (see  Rini.AH).  The  fountain  must  at
any  rate  be  not  too  far  N.  of  the  Lake  of  Gennesaret
which  is  mentioned  at  the  end  of  the  verse.  Most
probably  it  is  the  source  of  the  Xahr  Hasbany,  one  of
the  streams  which  unite  to  form  the  Jordan  (see  Ribi.AH).
From  this  fountain  to  the  '  east  shoulder '  of  the  Lake
of  Gennesaret  a  straight  line  of  water  runs  forming  the
clearest  of  boundaries.  If,  however,  we  place  Baal-gad
at  Banias,  we  shall  then,  of  course,  identify  '  the  fountain  '

1  Except  of  course  in  Josh.  21 16  (see  above).  In  Zech.  14  lot
the  first  half  of  the  name  is  omitted  (see  En-rimmon).

2  See  A' A"  4534.  Kob.'s  view  (p.  393)  on  the  Daphnis  of  Vg.
(connecting  it  with  the  spring  at  Djfneh,  near  Tell  el-lf  ady)
seems  erroneous.

106


AIRUS

with  that  which  springs  from  the  fiinious  and  romantic
cavern  at  the  southern  base  of  the  Hermon  mountains.
It  sliouUl  be  added  that  it  is  not  impossible  to  alter  the
poiniinii  and  read  j-yS  '  (eastward)  of  IjON,'  Ijon  being
mentioned  elsewhere  as  on  the  N.  frontier  of  the  land
of  Israel.  But  then  why  did  the  writer  introduce  it
merely  incidentally?  T.  K.  C.

AIRUS (lAipoc [A]), iEsd.531 AV  =  Ezra247
Reai.vii,  3.

AJAH  (n»N).  Oen.  3624!  AV=RV  Aiah  {q.v.,  i).

AJALON  ((iS'X),  Josh.  10 12  AV  =  RV  Aijalon,  i.

Ch.  I42  AV  JAKAN.

I Esd.  838!  RV=Ezra


AKAN (ii^V),  Gen.  3()27t  =


Acts  1  i9t  RV,  AV


AKATAN  (akatan  [BA]).

812 HakKA  TAN.

AKELDAMA  (akcAAamax  i^])'

ACKl.DAMA.

AKKOS  (akBcoc  [B]),  i  Esd.  SsSf  RV  =  Ezra26i
Hakki)/.,  I.

AKKUB  (^-Ipy,  'posthumous,'  but  the  name  seems
corrupt  ;  AKOyB  [BA],  akk-  [1>])-  i-  b.  Elioenai,  si.\
generations  removed  from  Zerubbabel :  i  Ch.  824  {laKow
[B],  aKKovli  [A],  oiKovv  [L]).

2.  The  B'ne  ."Vkkub,  a  group  of  doorkeepers  in  the  great  post-
exilic  list  (see  Ezka,  ii.  §  9);  Ezra 'J 42  (axoufi  [HA],  a/cx.  IL])  =
Neh.  745  {<^ov  [H),  -um'  [XA],  -v^  [L])=i  Esd.  028  (Dacoiu  ;
RV  Dacuhi  ;  aaxou^i  [A],  KaKov^Tov  [I!]).  Akkub  is  a  porter
in  the  list  of  inhabitants  of  lerusalem  (see  Ezka,  ii.  §  5  [/'],  §  15
[i]a\  iCh. '.>i7  (dKov^  lB|")=Neh.  Uig  (aKovfi  [L]),  cp  Ezra
10 24,  =  I  Esd.  it  25  (where,  however,  the  name  is  omitted  between
Shallum  and  Telem).  He  is  mentioned  also  in  Neh.  V2,2$  (aicou^
KCa  ing.  sup.]; om.  BN*A).

3.  An  expounder  of  the  Law  (see  Ezra,  ii.  §  13  [/.] ;  cp  i.
§  8,  ii.  §g  16  [5],  15  [>]  c).  Neh.  87  (aKov^  [L],  om.  HAK)  =
I  Esd.  948  (EV,  Jacuhus  ;  laxou^os  [A],  lapaou/Soo?  [B]).

4.  The  li'ne  .\kkub,  a  family  of  Nkthinim  iff.''.)  in  the  great
post-exilic  list  (see  Ezka,  ii.  §  9),  Ezra245  (a.Ka.^u>6  [l!])=Neh.
748(aKou5[Al, -oua[N];  om.  B  with  MT,  EV)=  i  Esd.  53o(a(covS
[BA] ;  AV  acua  ;  RV  akud).

AKRABATTINE,  RV  ;  AV  incorrectly  Ararattine
I  Mace.  5  3t,  Jos.  .-////.  .\ii.  81  ;  akraBatthnh  [NA]  ;
-ATTANH  IN^-''  V];  Acrahattene  [Cod.  Am.];
)^».ayXite'^P  J^'^'^h  7 18,  below),  adistrict  where  Judas  the
Maccal>ec  fought  against  the  Edomites,  situated  'in
Idumaia  '  [NV  Jos.]  or  '  in  Judasa '  [A].  The  district  in-
tended is  no  doubt  that  to  the  SE.  of  Judnea,  in  Idumcea
(see  Akrabrim).  There  is  no  sufficient  ground  for  the
opinion  of  Ewald  that  the  Edomites  had  settled  as  far  N.
as  another  Akrabatta,  a  toparchy  or  district  in  Central
Palestine,  to  the  N.  of  Juda;a  [Akrabatta,  aKpa^era,
etc.  [Jos.  B/  iii.  3  5  II  PI-  //-V  v.  14  iv.  939];  aKpa^^eiv
[Eus.  05C'''2146i]),  apparently  represented  by  the
modern  'Akrabeh,  8  m.  SE.  of  Nablus.  (The  reading
iv  TouSat?  in  i  Mace,  must  therefore  be  rejected.)  See
Schiir.  Hist.  I220  n.  2,  3  158.

Doubtless,  however,  we  should  identify  with  'Akrabeh
the  Ekkerel  {fype^rjX  [BN],  €Kpe^i]\  [A]  ;  K..^;"ftv  ).
near  Chusi,  on  the  brook  Mochmur  (Judith  7  iSf),  the
names  being  almost  the  same  in  the  Syr.  (=Talm.
na-pv)-  T.  K.  c.

AKRABBIM,  Ascent  of,  so  always  in  RV ;  also
Nu.  344  in  AV,  which  has  in  Judg.  I36  'going  up  to
Akrabbim,'  in  Josh.  15  3t  mg.  '.  .  .to  Acrabrim,"
text  Maaleh-Acrahbim  (D^3"lpy  n7j?p,  i.e.,  'ascent  of
Scorpions,"  [npoc]ANABACic'^  AKRABeiN  [BAL]  ;  as-
census  scorpion  um),  mentioned  in  Josh.  I53  (akraBBGIAA
[sup.  ras.  A'"''],  CKRABeiN  [L])  as  one  of  the  localities
marking  the  southern  frontier  of  Judah.

It  must  have  been  one  of  the  passes  leading  up  from
the  southern  continuation  of  the  Ghor  into  the  waste
mountain country  to the west. Knobel identifies it

1  Cp  Bakbuk.

2  titavia  for  oiro  Trjt  ai^o^atreuf  in  Judg.  1  36  [AL  ;  Lag.  points
iw'  an,\.


ALAMMELECH

with  the  pass  of  es-Safa,  leading  up  towards  Hebron
out  of  the  W.  el-Kikreh  on  the  road  from  Petra.
Robinson  (/M'"*'  2i8o/. )  descrilies  this  pass  as  being  '  as
steep  as  a  man  can  readily  climb.'  'The  rock  is  in
general  porous  and  rough,  but  yet  in  many  spots  smooth
anil  dangerous  for  animals.  In  such  places  a  path  has
been  hewn  in  the  rock  in  former  days  ;  the  slant  of  the
rock  being  sometimes  levelled,  and  sometimes  overcome
by  steps  cut  in  it.  The  vestiges  of  this  road  are  more
frequent  near  the  top.  The  appearance  is  that  of  a
very  ancient  pass'  (Z/A'<^'229i).  Robinson,  however,
identifies  this  Nakb  es-.Safa  with  Zephath  or  Hormah,
and  not  with  Akrabbim  (see  also  Hai.ak,  Mount).
Scorpions  arc  of  frequent  occurrence  throughout  this
neighbourhood.

AKUD  (akoyA  [B]),  I  Esd.  530  RV=Ezra245
Akkur,  4.

ALABASTER  (aAaBactron  [accus.  Ti  WH]  Mk.
14  3,  also  with  art.,  thn  A.  [W  &  H  after  BX'^].
TON  A.  [Ti.  after  N*A],  jO  A.  [TR  after  G,  etc.  ;  also  F
in  Lk.737]:  cp  o  aAa.  [B],  to  a\a.  [A]  2  K.  21 13
[for  nnSs  '  dish,'  '  cup  '])  was  found  in  large  quantities  in
Mesopotamia,  and  from  it  are  made  the  huge  bulls  which
are  to  be  seen  in  the  British  Museum  and  in  the  Louvre.
The  alabaster  of  the  ancients  was  a  stalagmitic  carbonate
of  lime  hence  called  by  mineralogists  '  Oriental  alabaster '
to  distinguish  it  from  the  modern  alabaster,  which  is  the
sulphate  of  lime.  See  ED*^^\  s.v.  Alabaster.  In
Greek  the  word  dXd/Sacrros  or  d.\d(3airTpoi  is  frequently
used  of  vases  or  vessels  made  to  hold  unguents,  as
these  were  generally  fashioned  out  of  this  material,
which  was  thought  by  many  (cp  e.^.,  PL  //A' xiii.  3)
to  preserve  the  aroma  of  the  ointment :  Theocritus  (/</.
16114)  is  able  to  speak  of  'golden  alabasters.'  Many
alabaster  vases  have  been  found  in  Egypt,  and  the
specialised  sense  given  to  nn':'!£  in  the  Egyptian  Greek
version  of  Kings  (see  above)  is  natural  enough.
The  town  of  Alabastron,  near  the  famous  quarries  of
Hat-nub^  (cp  Erman,  Anc.  Eg.  470,  n.  3),  was  well
known  for  the  manufacture  of  such  articles  (in  fact  it
seems  to  have  derived  its  name  from  the  material  ).'-
Many  of  these  go  back  to  nearly  4000  B.  c.  and  often
show  fine  workmanship.  Similar  articles  have  been
found  in  Assyria  dating  from  the  time  of  Sargon  (8th
cent.  B.C.).

Such  a  vessel  was  the  '  alabaster  cruse '  which  was
emptied  upon  Jesus's  head  by  the  woman  at  the  house
of  Simon  the  Leper  at  Bethany  (Mt.  26;=  Mk.  I43
Lk.  737t)-  The  expression  'brake'  in  Mark  does  not
refer,  it  would  seem,  to  the  breaking  of  a  seal  or  of  the
neck  of  the  vessel  ;  the  object  was  to  prevent  profana-
tion of  the  vessel  by  subsequent  use  for  any  commoner
purpose  (cp  Comm. ,  ad  loc. ).

ALAMETH  (HD^;?),  i  Ch.  78  AV,  RV  Alemeth.

ALAMMELECH,  RV  Allammelech  ('^I'pO^N  [Ba.].
'^N  [Gi.],  •^7^'PX  [v.d.  Hooght];  eXet^eXe/c  [B],
eX/ieXex  [L  ;  om.  A]),  a  place  in  Asher  on  the  border  of
Zebulun  (Josh.  1926t),  the  name  of  which  is  possibly
echoed  in  that  of  the  Wddy  el-melek,  which  drains  the
plain  of  the  Buttauf  (Asochis),  and  joins  the  Nahr  el-
Mukatta'  (Kishon).  So  Di.,  Buhl.  The  pointing  of
the  Heb.  is  peculiar:  tiSsVk  is  usually  explained  as  if
TiSp  dVn,  "sacred  tree  of  Melech' ;  but  n  can  hardly  have
been  assimilated  to  c,  nor  is  this  the  best  reading.
Possibly  the  real  name  was  ijSo  "?«  (^J*),  El  Melech  ;
cp  El  Paran.  The  authors  of  the  points  may  have
wished  to  avoid  confusion  with  the  personal  name
Eli  melech.  Or  the  name  might  be  a  corruption  of
elammak  (see  Almug  Trees),  if  Solomon  was  able  to
naturalise  this  tree.  t.  K.  C.

1  Near  Tell  el-"Amama  (see  PSBAlGji  ["04]).

*  The  reverse  supposition  is  sometimes  held,  viz.  that  the
material  is  derived  from  the  place-name.  The  ultimate  origin  of
the  word  is  unknown.

108


ALAMOTH

[OTH,  UPON  {nVDbV'hv.).  a  technical  musical
phrase  of  uncertain  meaning  ;  cp  Mi;sic,  §  6.

(a)  Ps.4t5  title  [i]  (ujrip  rmv  Kpv4>imv  [IiKRTl  =  niD'?;r'?j;;  om.
A;  Aq.  «irl  i'«a»'iOT»JTu>»'  =  rii'p':'jr'7y  ;  Symm.  vnip  luv  alutvitov)  ;
(/')  I  Ch.lSao  (iitX  aAai/iwfl  [H],  .  .  oAf/ui.  [K],  .  .  oAij/i.  [A],  wtpl
Tiii'  (tpiM^i'ioK  [L]:  two  anonymous  C.k.  versions  have  iiri  tuii/
avafiaeixujv  [niVyc]  nnd  «n'"i  Tiii/  aloivCuv  InicSvD-  '"  '*"  other
passages,  (f)  Ps.  9  title  [i]  (vnip  r.  Kp.  [BNAK] ;  Aq.  vfaviortiTot,
Syniin.  ntpi  toO  6avaT0U  -  n^D'*?]},  Th.,  Quint,  vnip  aKixiji;,  Sext.
i/«a>'iico7T)«) ;  ((/)  in  Ps.48i4  [isKei?  tou?  oiuiia?  [KAR'l],  /.f.,  ap-
parently niaH'  f"l  •  ""*•  *'^1-  "^"»"»<^''<».  Symm.  tis  to  iiijuicei)  it
appears  in  the  corrupt  form  n?S"'?{,',  which  Tg.  talces  to  he  n'D^J/
'  youth  •  (?).

Thus  we  find  it  three  times  forming  part  of  a  heading
of  a  psahn  (for  niB'^j;  in  d  should  be  restored  as  nic'^fSy
from  its  present  position  to  the  heading  of  Fs.  49,  on  the
analogy  of  Ps.  4(.)).  Of  the  two  half-translations  of  AV
and  RV  respectively  ( '  upon  Alanioth, '  '  set  to  Alamoth ' ),
the  former  presupposes  that  the  phrase  denotes  the
particular  instrumental  accompaniment  ;  the  latter,  that
Alamoth  is  the  name  of  a  tune.  Most  moderns  explain
'for  sopranos,' 'alamoth  having  the  constant  meaning
'  maidens.'  Whether  soprano  voices  would  be  suitable
for  Ps.  46,  the  nmsical  reader  may  judge.  Gratz  and
Wellhausen  suppose  a  reference  to  some  Elamite
instrument.  There  is,  however,  a  more  probable
solution. See Psalms, and cp Muth-labben,

M.MIALATH, NkHILOTH,  and  AlJELETH-SHAHAR.

ALCIMUS  (aAkiaaoC  [AN],  occasional  forms  -|n.
-eiM.  'Xi.  [A],  -|CM.  [N]  ;  in  several  cursive  MSS  of  i
and  2  ^Iacc.  and  in  Jos.  Ant.\\\.%^  with  add.  [kai  or
O  K.l  l[co]<NK[e]lMOC  ;  in  Ant.  .\x.  IO3,  and  one  cursive
at  I  Mace.  79  simply  i[a)]AK[e]l/V\OC  ;  «•<■•.  D^"5*=F:iia-
kiin  or  Jehoiakim,  for  which  he  adopted  the  like-sound-
ing Greek  name  by  which  he  is  known  ;  cp  Names,  §  86),
a  priest  '  of  the  race  of  Aaron  '  ^  {Ant.  xx.  IO3,  admitted
by  the  inimical  '^  writer  of  i  Mace.  ;  '  of  the  seed  of
Aaron,'  ^  7 14),  i.e. ,  a  Zadokite,  though  not  of  the  family
of  Onias  ('  not  of  this  house,'  ■*  Ant.  xxlOs).

Ant.  xii.  97,  indeed  equates  '  another  house  '  ((TepovolKov)  with
'not  of  the  stock  of  the  high  priests  [at  all]'  (oiiK  ofri  ttjs  riav
apxiepetav  yei/ea?) ;  but  the  source  here  followed  by  Jos.  is  on
other  grounds  apparently  inferior,  and  we  may  conclude  that
Alcimus  was  really  more  eligible 5  to  the  high  priest's  office  than
his  enemies  the  house  of  Hasmon,  who  were  ordinary  priests.

When,  therefore,  the  victorious  king  of  Syria,
Demetrius  I.  {^.v.,  i)  determined  (i  Mace.  79)  to
support  his  claim  to  the  high  priest's  office  (v.  5)  with
force,  Alcimus  was  accepted,  not  only  by  the  Hellenising
party  but  also  (v.  13)  largely  by  the  legitimist  party,  the
Assideans  (i/.v.).

The  treaty  (i  Mace.  6 59)  of  Lysias  (and  the  youthful  Antio-
chus  V.  Eupator)  in  162  B.C.,  which  satisfied  the  aims  of  the
Assideans  and  made  it  unnecessary  for  them  further  to  identify
themselves  with  the  '  friends  of  Judas'  (i  Mace.  026  ;  cp  28),  had
been  immediately  followed,  if  we  may  trust  -^«^.  xii.97,  by  the
execution  of  the  now  '  impossible  '  high  priest  Menei.aus  (y.r'.)
(i  Mace,  our  most  important  source,  not  having  mentioned
Menelaus  at  all,  says  nothing  of  what  took  place  between  his
tenure  of  office  and  the  effective  appointment  [e<m)<rai'  auToJ  T.
Itpoxrui^v,  "9;  cp  2  Mace.  14 13  (caTacr-njo-ai]  of  Alcimus  by
Demetrius).  According  to  the  same  passage  in  Jos.,  which
states  also  that  a  young  Onias,  son  of  Onias  III.,  made  his  way
to  Egypt  on  the  death  of  his  father  (on  which,  however,  .see
Onias;  Lsrael,  §  69),  Alcimus  l)ecame  (tyeVero)  high  priest
on  (/xera)  the  death  of  Alenelaus,  the  office  being  indeed  bestowed
(SeSuiKtv)  on  him  by  the  king  (Antiochus  V.  according  to  the
present  context).  According  to  2  Mace.  14  3,  too,  Alcimus  had
Deen  at  some  time  high  priest  before  his  appointment  by  Demetrius.
We  know  really  nothing  certain  about  the  events  of  this  short
interval.  We  first  reach  firm  ground  with  the  intervention  of
Demetrius.

Demetrius  did  not  mean  to  resume  the  hopeless  policy
of  his  uncle  P'piphanes  (or  the  Assideans  would  have

1  ytfov^  pLtv  ToO  'Aapiavof.  2  See  i  Mace.  7  9.

3  fK  TOv  trWpfiaTO?  '.\aptav.  *  T179  otictaf  ravTTj^.

5  Although  we  cannot  of  course  trust  2  Mace.  14 7,  'mine
ancestral  glory '  (,tt)v  jrpoyoi'Kcrji'  S6(av).  According  to  2  Maec.
Alcimus's  fault  was  his  voluntary  Hellenising  (cKovai'iot,  14  3  ;
contrast  'by  compulsion,'  Kara  a.va.yKi{v,  15  2).  Cp  Kosters,
r/4.  7-12538  ['78].

109


ALCIMUS

held  aloof)  ;  but  he  wanted  .Mcinuis  and  his  friends  to
help  him  in  crippling  the  Hasmoncan  party  of  political
independence.

There  would  be  a  special  rea.son  for  Alcimus  being  active
against  the  Hasmoneans  if  he  was  shrewd  enough  to  foresee
(what  we  now  know)  that  their  ultimate  goal  must  lie  the  high
priesthood.  (On  the  other  hand  the  'calumny '  li'.  27I  put  into
his  mouth  by  the  author  of  2  Mace.  [14  26]  that  Judas  had  already
been  made  nigh  priest  .seems  historically  impo.ssible  ;  it  belongs
to  the  distorted  story  of  2  Mace,  see  next  note.)

Bacchides  (q.v.)  was  the  agent  selected  for  the  task.'
At  first  the  presence  of  Alcimus  was  a  great  help  ;  his
legitimacy  was  a  source  of  strength.

This  would  have  special  weight  if  his  predeces.sor  Menelaus
is  really  to  be  regarded,  with  2  Maec.  (84-^429)  as  a  '  IJenjamite,"
and  with  Wellhausen  (//6"  200,  n.  i,  2nd  ed.  235,  n.  i)  as  one
of  the  Tobiada;  (see,  however,  Lucius,  Der  Kssenismui  77,  and
cp  Israel,  §  6y).  If  we  could  trust  the  Talmud  there  would  !«
a  special  point  tn  his  favour  in  his  connection  with  Jose  b.  Joezer,
leader  of  the  Sanhedrin  (his  uncle,  Ber.  Rabba,  ch.  06  ;  his  father,
Bab.  Bathta,  133  a).

The  mass  of  the  people  seem  to  have  followed  the
Assideans,  in  accepting  Alcimus  (i  Mace.  7  13  'first';
cp  We.  Pilar,  u.  Sad.  84,  n.  2)  ;  Vjut  the  severity  of  the
measures  taken  by  the  representatives  of  Demetrius,*
sixty  men  (perhaps  those  that  had  been  till  now  much
implicated  with  the  Hasnionean  party)  •*  being  slain  in
one  day  (i  Mace.  7 16),  in  face  of  solenm  pledges  of
peaceable  intentions,  entirely  changed  the  situation.
Fear  and  dread  fell  on  all  the  people  (i  Mace.  7 18).
After  some  further  severities  Bacchides  considered  his
task  accomplished  and  returned  to  Antioch.  The  late
severities,  however,  had  turned  the  heart  of  the  people
again  to  Judas,  who  was  trying  to  strengthen  his  position
(i  Mace.  724),  and  Alcimus  judged  it  prudent  to  with-
draw {v.  25).  He  had  of  course  no  difficulty  in  bringing
further  incriminating  charges  against  Judas  [ibid,  and
Ant.  xii.  IO3).  This  time  XiCANOK  {ij.v. )  was  entrusted
with  the  task  of  restoring  Alcimus.  During  the  various
exciting  incidents  of  the  next  interval, — the  diplomacy,
battles,  and  death  of  Nicanor, — we  hear  nothing  of
Alcimus  ■•  (i  Mace.  726-50).

Of  course  in  the  rejoicings  over  Nicanor 's  day  and  the  recovery
of  the  Maccabean  party  he  had  no  part ;  perhaps  he  was  absent.
(It  is  at  this  point,  indeed,  that  .-<«/.  xii.  106  makes  Alcimus
die  ;>''  but  this  belongs  to  the  storj-  there  followed  of  Judas's  suc-
ceeding to  the  high-priesthood,  on  which  see  Maccahee.s,  i.  8  4
and  cp  below.)

When  Bacchides  came  a  second  time  (i  Mace.  9i)  to
carry  through  what  Nicanor  had  been  unable  to  accom-
plish, Judas  failed  to  find  adequate  support  and  fell
(160  B.C.),  and  the  Maccabean  party  were  without  a
leader.  Alcimus  was  once  more  installed,  and  probably
accepted  by  all  except  the  Maccal^eans,  who  ere  long
chose  Jonathan  as  successor  to  his  brother.

How  far  the  Hellenistic  tendencies  of  Alcimus  carried
him  we  do  not  know.  At  his  death  (159  B.C.")  he  seems
to  have  been  engaged  on  some  changes  in  the  temple
enclosure,  the  nature  and  even  the  object  of  which  we
do  not  know  with  any  certainty.

According  to  Josephus  he  hail  '  formed  the  intention  of  pulling
down  the  wall  of  the  temple '  (^ovk<\divTi  KoSiKtiv  to  tfi\o<i  toO
oyt'ou.  Ant.  xii.  106  beg.),  i  Mace,  states  ('.'54)  that  itwas  the
wall  of  the  inner  court  of  the  temple  (to.  t.  ttj?  ovAijs  tuiv  ayiur
Tijs  «<r(uT€pas)  that  he  commanded  ((ireTa^ev)  to  pull  down,
adds  that  he  pulled  down  the  works  (rd  ipya)  of  the  prophets,
and  then  appends  the  peculiar  statement  that  he  began  the  pulling

1  So  I  Mace.  "8;  on  the  distorted  account  in  2  Maec,  where
14x2  has  to  do  duty  for  both  i  Maec.  "sand  T26,  see  Kosters,
r/r.  7-12  533  535,  and  on  the  displacement  of  Bacchides  to
2  Mace.  830,  ib.  504 y;  (cp  the  place  of  liacchides  in  Jos.  BJi.  1 1).

■-  How  far  these  transactions  are  to  be  attributed  directly  to


Alcimus  (.so  apparently  i  Maec.  7  14  i?:  23),  and  how  far  they
were  due  to  Haeehides  (so  apparently  Ant.  XU.IO2  ;  cp  t  Mace
7  19)  we  cannot  .say.

3  His  uncle  being,  according  to  Ber.  Rabba  and  Baba  Batkra
Ul-cc),  of  the  number.

*  On  the  motive  of  the  author  of  2  Mace,  in  representing
Nicanor  as  untrue  to  his  master  (2  Mace.  14  28-35)  a"d  thus
bringing  Alcimus  again  on  the  scene  (v.  26)  see  Kosters,  p.  J35.

*  And  when  he  was  de.-xd  the  people  bestowed  the  high-
priesthood  on  Judas,  who,  hearing  of  the  power  of  the  Romans,'
etc.  (=1  Mace.  8).

«  Josephus  assigns  him  variously  three  years  {Ant.  xx.  IO3)  or
four  years  {ib.  xii.  lOe)  of  office.


ALCOVE

down.  _  It  seems  rash  to  assume  that  this  confused  account  is  in
its  original  form.  If  the  last  clause  is  not  an  interpolation  (and
there  IS  cursive  MS  authority  for  its  omission,  see  H  &  P),  and
even  perhaps  if  it  is,  should  «  c  not  perhaps  read  '  to  pull '  for
'he  pulled ((cafltAeii'  for  KoOtiAtf)'!

The  much  discussed  question  what  the  wall  (rtlxoi)  referred
to  w;us,  we  havu  really  not  the  means  of  determining.  Its  identi-
fication with  a  low  barrier  in  the  Herodian  temple  beyond  which
Cientiles  must  not  pass,  the  sBn-g  (J^1^)  described  in  Mitiiiath
'1 3  is  at  the  best  precarious  1  (see  the  remarks  of  Schiirer,  Gjy  1
176,  n.  5  and  the  discussions  there  referred  to).

The  somewhat  sudden  death  of  Alcimus  ( i  Mace,
355/  ;  cp  however,  Ant.\\\.\(i(i,  o-i-xvas  im^pas)  was
naturally  treated  by  his  enemies  as  a  sign  of  divine  dis-
pleasure. The  moderation  (such  as  it  is)  of  the  writer  of
I  Mace,  was  not  at  all  to  the  taste  of  the  later  rabbis
(see  the  stories  in  Hamburger,  A* A'  428/'.,  Derenbourg,
///j/.  Pai.  52,  n.  2).  That  on  the  whole,  however,
Alcimus  did  not  interfere  nmch  with  ritual  and  practice
is  plain,  or  at  least  probable,  from  this  last  act  being  all
that  is  mentioned  against  him,  and  even  in  this  case
we  do  not  know  his  motive  (cp  Grimm  ad  loc,  and
We.  216, //(/••''262).  Still,  ifhe  has  been  rather  severely
judged,  even  for  the  evidence  supplied  by  the  opposite
party,  W'ellhausen  {I.e.)  seems  to  go  to  the  other
e.xtreme.

The  historical  importance  of  this,  perhaps  in  himself
somewhat  insignificant  character  (who  figures  all  the
more  strikingly  on  the  scene  that  we  cannot  find  very
clear  traces  of  any  immediate  predecessor  or  successor  ^),
lies  in  the  fact  that  his  tenure  of  office  formed  a  turning-
point  in  the  development  of  Jewish  parlies.*  The
Assideans  refused  to  follow  the  Hasmoneans.  Two
generations  later,  the  meaning  of  this  became  more
apparent  (see  Asside.vns,  Ph.akiskks,  ICssk.mcs).

The  primary  source  is  i  Mace.  7-9.  Cp  Jos.  ^-Jh/.  xii.  O7-II  2,
XX.  10 3,  and  on  the  relation  of  these  see  Maccahees,  Fiksi',  i.
§  9  ;  on  the  relative  value  of  2  Mace.  14  .see  the  elaborate  article  of
Kosters,  '  De  polemiek  van  het  tweede  l)oek  der  Makkabeen,'
j'h.  712491-552  ['78I,  especially  as  cited  al>ove  ;  on  parties.  We.
J'/iar.  u.  Sad.  §  v.,  y6ff.  Lucius  I.e.;  on  later  Jewish  sentiment
concerning  -Mcimus,  Hamburger,  KF.\  ^2?,/.\  on  3113,  etc.
Schurer,  GJl'  %  6,  n.  5,  and  Griitz  in  MGH'J,  1876,  pp.  385-397  ;
on  festival  of  23rd  Marchesvan  in  Meg^.  Taan.,  Derenbourg,  I.e.,
and  Gratz,  OV.ft/i.  3(^1 564 j!?!  H.  \v.  n.

ALCOVE  y  niip),  Xu.  25  Sf  RV  mg. ,  AV  Tent  {q.  v. ).

ALEMA  (cN  aAaaaoic  [A],  -Ae/w.  [N*],  -A[e]iM.
j^c.a  c.b  (vni.)  V],  Syr.  y^\^,  ill  Alimis),  a  place  men-
tioned along  with  Bosora,  Carnaim,  etc.  (i  Mace.  526).
Being  in  Gilead  it  cannot  be,  as  some  say,  the  Beer-
elim  spoken  of  in  Is.  158  as  belonging  to  Moab,  and
the  Beer  of  Nu.  21 16  (see  Bosor).  It  has  been  placed
by  Merrill  at  Alma,  S.  of  Kdrei,  and  by  Schumacher
at  Kefr  el-Ma,  E.  of  Lake  of  Galilee  ;  but  it  is  probably
' Ilmd,  10  m.  SW.  of  the  Leja,  and  of  Busr  el-Hariri,  which
is  i^robably  liosor.  (Cp  Buhl  Topog.  des  A'.  Osfjordan-
landes  13  ;  We.  IJG  ■2\'2.  [3rd  ed.  257]  n. ) c.  .\.  s.

ALEMETH  or  ALLEMETH  {Vxhyi^ ;  so  everywhere
[Ba  Gi],  except  i  Ch.  7  8  '  in  j^ause '  FIP  ?y,  .Xlameth,
reMeee  [H].  eAMeBe/W  ^\]  ;  ordinary  edd.  have
np?y,  whence  RV  Alle.mkth  in  i  Ch.  660  [45]  =
josh.  21 18,  where  the  form  is  Almon,  pD?y,  pamaAa
[H],  aAmcon  [A],  cAm.  [L]  ;  usually  (-&AeMee  [I5.\],
&AAAAa)9  [L]).  a  Levitical  town  in  Benjamin  (i  Ch.  660
[451-  fA^H^^Q  [-'^l)-  the  name  of  which  appears  in
iCh.836  (caAaimaB  [B],  ^A^€M.  [A],  AAe4)  [!>])  =
942!  (r&McAee  [B],  AAetJ)  [I-^)  fis  that  of  a  descendant,
or  family  of  Bknj.\.\iin  (§  9,  ii.  j3). See  also  Zalmon,

1  The  seventeenth  of  the  thirty-five  festivals  prescribed  in
MegiUath  'J'aantth — viz.  on  23rd  Marchesvan — has  by  some,  e.g.,
Gratz,  Ijeen  brought  into  connection  with  the  i(7r<y  and  Alcimus.
This  is  however  contested,  f.^.,  by  Derenbourg,  Hist.  Pal.  6oyC
(see  text  of  iV/-^.  Taan.,  ih.  ^^-i^.).

2  Josephus,  Ignoring  his  previous  irreconcilable  statement  in
xii.  106,  already  quoted  above,  expressly  says  {^Ant.  xx.  10)  that
on  the  death  of  Alcimus  the  office  of  high  priest  was  vacant  for
sevc-n  years.

3  Cp  We.  Phar.  u.  Sad.  8  v.  ;  I^ucius  Der  F.ssenisvtus,  etc.
Tiff.  l'8i),  with  Schiirer's  review  (  TLZ  ['81],  especially  col.  494).


ALEXANDER

ii.  (end),  El.\M,  ii.  i.  Robinson's  identification  (Z.5.^)
with  the  modern  'Almif,  i  m.  XE.  from  'Andta
(Anathoth),  is  generally  accepted.

ALEXANDER  (aAcI&nApoc  [ANV],  'helper  of
men).  1.  .\le\ander  HI.,  king  of  Macedon  (336-
323  K.c),  surnamed  the  Great.  The  victories  of
Alexander  powerfully  impressed  the  Jewish  imagination  ;
yet  the  only  biblical  passages  in  which  he  is  mentioned
by  name  are  i  Mace.  1 1-8  62.  The  writer  of  Daniel
(166  or  164  B.C.)  recalls  a  '  mighty  king'  ruling  '  with
great  dominion,'  whose  kingdom  is  'broken'  after  his
death  (Dan.  11  3/).  In  the  vision  of  chap.  7,  it  is  the
fourth  of  a  series  of  '  beasts '  ;  it  is  '  dreadful  and
terrible,'  and  'devoured  and  brake  in  pieces,  and
stamped'  the  rest.  Xaturally,  it  was  the  destructive
siile  of  Alexanders  work  that  impressed  the  imagina-
tion ;  the  fall  of  Tyre  and  Gaza  would  bring  that
aspect  into  prominence.  His  Palestinian  conquests
are  thought  to  be  alluded  to  in  Zech.  9i-8  (see
ZiccHARi.\n,  Book  of);  and  in  Is.  25/,  the  fate  of
Tyre  may  be  contrasted  tacitly  with  that  of  Jerusalem
(see  IsAi.\H,  ii.  §  13).  It  is  during  the  seven
months'  siege  of  Tyre  that  Jewish  history  comes  into
connection  with  Alexander  (333-332  B.C.).  The  tradi-
tion is  given  by  Jos.  Ant.  xi.  83^  (cp  Yoma,  69a).

The  Jews  refused  compliance  with  Alexander's  requisitions.
After  the  two  months'  siege  of  Gaza  he  advanced  on  Jerusalem  ;
but  Jatldua  (Jaddus),  the  high  priest  (cp  Neh.  12  11  22),  warned
by  a  dream  how  to  avert  his  anger,  met  the  conqueror  at  Scopus.
Alexander  worshipped  the  Name  on  the  high  priest's  mitre,  and
entering  Jerusalem  s.acrificed  in  the  Temple,  heard  Daniel's
prophecies  relating  to  himself,  and  gave  the  Jews  autonomy,  not
only  in  Jerusalem  but  also  in  liabylon.

As  to  all  this  other  writers  preserve  absolute  silence,
and  the  story  in  Josephus  seems  inconsistent  with  the
statement  in  Arr.  iii.  1,  that  in  seven  days  from  Gaza  Alex-
ander was  at  Pelusium  in  Egypt.  Vet  Just.  xi.  lOsays  that
'many  kings  wearing  fillets  met  him' ;  and  Curt.  iv.  517,
that  he  visited  some  who  refused  to  submit.  Jewish
soldiers  were  certainly  in  his  armies,  even  on  his  most
distant  expeditions ;  and  in  Alexandria,  founded  im-
mediately after  the  supposed  visit,  the  Jewish  element
was  large.  The  privileges  conferred  on  the  Jews  are
a  feature  of  subsec)uent  history.  It  is  possible  that
Alexander  derived  from  the  Jews  much  valuable  in-
formation about  the  interior  of  Asia  (Mahaffy,  Greek
Life,  chap.  20).  Whether  true  or  false,  the  episode  strikes
a  true  note  in  Alexander's  character.  Xevertheless,
it  raises  suspicion  to  find  the  story  appropriated  by  the
Samaritans.  Still  more,  to  remember  the  visit  to
Gordium  before  the  battle  of  Issus,  and  that  to  the
oracle  of  Amnion  before  the  Persian  expedition.
Finally,  the  king's  action  at  Babylon  is  a  curious
parallel  (Arr.  iii.  16).  He  there  rebuilt  the  shrines
destroyed  by  Xerxes,  especially  that  of  Belus — t6l  re
fiXXa  Kal  T(j5  BiyXtf)  Kada  €Kdvoi  i^rpfovvro  idvaev.

The  Jerusalem  ej)isode  must  be  characterised  as  an
attempt  to  secure  Jerusalem  a  place  in  the  cycle  of
Alexander -legends,  on  the  model  of  the  visit  to  the
Egyptian  Amnion.  (Cp  H.  Bois,  Rev.  de  //it'o.
et  phil.,  Lausanne,  1891  ;  Henrichsen,  St.  Kr.,  1871).

w.  J.  \v.

2.  Alexander  Balas,  a  man  of  low  origin,  who  passed
himself  off  as  the  son  of  Alexander  Epiphanes  (cp  i  Mace.
10 1,  'A.  6  Tov  'AvTtdxov  6  'ETri^avrj^  [ANV],  see  Mac-
CAiiKKS,  First  Bcwk  ok,  §  2) ;  'A\4^avdos  [A]  in  t.  58.
His  real  name  was  Balas  (so  Strabo  [p.  751],  rbv  BdXai'
'A\^^avSpov  ;  Jos.  [A /it.  xiii.  4  8],  on  the  other  hand,  'A.  6
BdXas  \fyofj.ei>oi),  which  may  possibly  be  connected  with
N'rya.  '  Lord. '  The  additional  name  '  Alexander '  seems
to  have  been  given  him  by  Attains  II.  of  Pergamum,  who
was  one  of  the  first  to  support  him  against  Dkmetrius.
In  rivalry  with  the  latter  Balas  exerted  himself  to  secure
an  alliance  with  Jonathan  (i  Mace.  lOi  ^),  and  by
conferring  upon  him  the  title  of  '  high  priest  of  the
nation  and  friend  of  the  king,'  was  successful  (7'.  20).
After  a  varying  career  he  was  compelled  to  flee  to  Arabia,


ALEXANDRIA

where  he  was  killed  at  Abse  after  a  reign  of  five  years,
150-145  B.C.  ( I  Mace.  11 13  18).  For  classical  references
see  Diet.  Class,  liiog.  ,s.v.\  SchQrer,  GJV\l^^,v\.\o■,  and
for  the  history  of  the  time  see  Israel,  §  76,  Mac-
CABKKS,  i.  §  5.

3.  Son  of  Simon  of  Cyrene,  mentioned  together  with  lii.s
brother,  Rukls  Ijr.r/.j  (Mk.  15 21).

4.  A  member  of  the  family  of  the  high  priest  in  Act.s46,
probably  to  l)e  iclentifie<l  with  the  third  son  of  Annas,  called
Kleasar  by  Josephus  {Ant.  xviii.  'J  2). See  Annas.

5.  Uf  Kphcsus,  a  Jew,  who  was  '  brouj/ht  forth  '  (7rpo«/3ij3a(Tac
(I'ext.  Reel)  from  the  nuiltilude,  or  'brought  down  '  ((care/S.
1 1),  etc.])  or  (more  probably)  'instructed'  (ot/k/S.  115KA],  cp
KV  mg.)  bv  the  Jews,  and  unsuccessfully  attempted  their
defence  in  the  theatre,  on  the  occasion  of  the  tumult  excited
by  Demetrius,  the  silversmith  (Acts  19  33).  There  is  no  con-
clusive reiLson  either  for  or  against  identifying  him  with  :

6.  The  coppersmith  (6  xaXK(v<;),  who  is  described  (2  Tim.
4  14)  as  haying  done  Paul  'much  evil '  (at  his  trial  ?).

7.  Mentioned  with  HvMi;.N*:i;s  (7.7/.)  as  having  '  made  .ship-
wreck concerning  the  faith  '  (i  Tim.  I  \()/.\  and  as  having  been,
in  consequence,  delivered  by  the  apostle  unto  Satan.  Whether
or  not  he  is  to  be  identified  with  no.  6  above,  we  cannot  tell.
In  .some  texts  of  the  .Apocryphal  Acts  0/  Paul  and  Thecla,
he  appears  with  Demas  and  Hermogenes  xs  a  hypocritical
companion  of  I'aul  ;  in  others  it  is  '  Alexander  the  Syriarch  '
who  is  mentioned. See  Lipsius,  Apokr.  A/>.  Gesch.  ii.  1  462  466.

ALEXANDRIA  (AAe?ANAp[e]iA  [VA],  sMacc.  3i ;
gcntilicAAeiANApeYc[HNA].  Acts69l824+).  The  site
of  the  city  was  chosen  by  Alexander  the  Great  during  his


1.  The  city.


pas.sage from Memphis down the


Canobic  (Canopic),  or  most  westerly,
branch  of  the  Nile,  on  his  way  to  the  Oracle  of  Amnion
(331  «c.).

Holm  remarks  that  it  was  a  nnveltv  to  call  a  city  after  its
founder,  this  particular  form  ..t'  . 1. ,,:..■' h.n  in-  nrevi.'nisly  been
m.ade  only  from  names  of  .i._i;i,  (,■.-..  ,\i>-ilania) ;  it  indicates
Alex.ander's  desire  fur  divine  hon..i;r-,  a  1  laiiu  supported  by  the
prn:sts  of  Amnion  (Holm,  (,X-.  J/ist.  8384  VA).  The  city  was
laid  out  by  Deinocrates  under  the  king's  supervision,  12  m.  W.
ot  tlie  Nile,  and  thus  its  harbours  were  not  choked  by  the  Nile
nmd,  which  is  carried  east  by  the  current.

It  lay  on  the  neck  of  land,  2  m.  broad,  interposed
between  the  Mareotis  lagoon  and  the  sea.  A  mile  dis-
tant, parallel  with  the  coast,  lay  the  island  of  Pharos,
connected  with  the  city  by  a  dam  (which  served  also  as
an  aqueduct  to  sup[)ly  the  island),  seven  stades  in
length  (hence  called  the  Heptastadium),  pierced  with
two  openings.  Two  harlx)urs  were  thus  created,  both
protected  by  projections  from  the  mainland.

The  western  harbour  was  called  that  of  Eunostus,  after  a
kiiiL;  of  Soli,  son-in-law  of  Ptolemy  I.  (but  see  Mahaffy,  Crcik
LiJ,-  16^,  for  another  suggestion).  The  eastern  harbour  was
then  the  more  important,  although  it  is  not  so  to-day.  Its
entrance  was  marked  by  the  huge  lighthouse  (built  on  the  island
by  the  Cnidian  Sostratus)  which  g.ave  its  name  {pharos)  to  all
similar  structures. Opposite  to  it  ran  out  the  point  of  Lochias.

Bordering  on  the  great  (eastern)  harbour  was  the
palace-quarter  (Hrucheium),  the  abode  of  the  Mace-
donians. The  western  division  of  the  city,  occupied
previously  by  the  village  Rhacotis,  continued  to  be  the
Egyptian  quarter.  The  Jewish  colony  was  in  the  east
of  the  city.

Lake  Mareotis  was  connected  with  the  sea  by  a
canal,  and  as  it  communicated  also  with  the  Nile,  the
periodical  flood  prevented  the  accunmlation  of  silt  and
the  formation  of  morass.  To  this,  and  to  the  constant
Etesian  winds,  Strabo  traces  the  salubrity  of  the  site
(P-  793)-  The  lake  was  the  haven  for  the  products  of
upiJcr  l-.gypt  coming  directly  from  Syene,  as  well  as  for
those  of  India  and  the  East,  brought  by  way  of  Arsino6
on  the  Red  Sea  and  the  royal  canal  to  the  Nile,  or  through
Herenice  or  Myos  Hormos,  lower  down  the  coast.
Hence  the  commerce  of  the  lake  was  more  valuable
than  that  of  the  outer  ports,  whose  exports  largely
exceeded  their  imports  (.Str. ,  p.  793).  Alexandria  became
the  great  port  of  transshipment  for  eastern  commodities,
while  Egypt,  under  the  Ptolemies,  also  took  the  place
of  the  Black  Sea  coast  as  a  grain-producing  countrv.
Most  of  her  grain  went  to  Italy  (cp  Acts  276  28 11  ;  Jo's.
Z//vii.  2 1  ;  Suet.  Tit.  5).  Near  Ostia  was  a  sanctuary
modelled  on  the  Alexandrian  temple  of  Sarapis,  with  a


ALEXANDRIA

mariners*  guild  (C//.I447).  Even  under  the  Lagids
Alexandria  contained  a  large  colony  of  Italians  engaged
in  the  trade  with  the  West  (cp  /<ph.  £/>igr.  1 60^}  603).
For  the  imjwrtance  of  Egypt  to  Rome  see  Momnis.
J^rov.  of  Rom.  limp.  2252  ET.

Alexandria  was  not  organised  as  a  vb\i.%—i.e.,  it  pos-
sessed neither  delil>erative  assembly  nor  senate  {^ov\i\),—

2.  Its  constitu- ^'"'.  1"''°'"  ^^^^  '"""'■'  '^'"^^  ">*^''^"'y  -"^  '  '■•^y-'^l
|.JQj^  residence  of  the  satrap  king,  never  a

foundation  of  Gntco- Macedonians
with  city  privileges  in  a  foreign  land'  (Mahaffy,  Emp.
of  J'tol.  76).  The  burgess  Iwdy  was  (jreek  (primarily
Macedonian), — standingalongsideof  the  native Egyptiaii
and  the  foreign  elements  not  reckoned  Hellenic,  in
somewhat  the  same  way  as  the  English  in  India  along-
side of  the  natives  (Momm.  Prov.  of  Rom.  Emp.  2262
ET).  Chief  among  the  non-Hellenes  were  the  Jews,
occupying  two  out  of  the  five  wards,  apparently  here
not  on  the  Ghetto  system,  but  on  the  basis  of  original
settlement  ;  they  were  naturally  attracted  by  the  com-
mercial advantages  of  the  city,  and  were  also  dclil)er-
ately  settled  there  by  the  founder  (Jos.  c.  Ap.  24,  ///
ii.  187).  Josephus  asserts  that  the  Alexandrian  Jews
had  equal  rights  with  the  Macedonians  and  other
Greeks.  This,  though  technically  an  exaggerati(jn,  was
probably  practically  true,  seeing  that  such  rights  can
only  have  been  jjrivileges  enjojed  by  the  (Jreeks  over
the  natives  ;  but  it  is  doubtful  whether  the  Jews  were
free  from  the  poll-tax.  Of  all  the  non-Hellenes,  the  Jews
alone  were  allowed  to  form  a  comnmnity  within  that  of
the  city,  with  a  certain  amount  of  self-government.
'The  Jews,'  says  Strabo  (quoted  by  Jos.  ^^Z.  xiv.  7  2),
'  have  in  Ale.xandria  a  national  head  of  their  ow  n
(eOudpxv^).  who  presides  over  the  people  and  decides
processes  and  disposes  of  contracts  as  if  he  ruled  an
independent  community'  (ws  8.i>  TroXiret'as  dpxujy  avro-
TeXoCs).  Josephus  traces  their  legal  position  to  Alex-
ander ;  but  it  was  apparently  Ptolemy  I.  who  settled
them  in  Egypt  in  large  numbers  (Jos.  Ant.  xii.  1  ;  App.
S_}'r.  :iO).  The  general  result  was  that  'in  acknow-
ledged independence,  in  repute,  culture,  and  wealth,
the  body  of  Alexandrian  Jews  was,  even  before  the
destruction  of  Jerusalem,  the  first  in  the  world  '  (Momm.
op.  cit.  2267  ET). Cp  Disi'KKSiON,  §§  7,  15/7:

Of  the  development  of  the  city,  and  especially  of  the
foundation  of  the  institutions  which  gave  it  its  place  in
3  Letters  "''^  history  of  literature  and  science,  little
is  known.  The  famous  Museum  was
probably  founded  by  Ptolemy  I.,  aided  by  the  advice  of
Demetrius  of  PhalCrum,  who  migrated  to  Egypt  on  his
expulsion  from  Athens  (307  K.  c).

"The  name  (Moixreioi')  points  to  an  Attic  origin.  No  detailed  de-
scription can  here  Ijegiven.  Kesides,  thematerialsareveryscanty.
It  was  a  royal  foundation,  with  a  common  hall,  porticoes,  and
gardens,  for  the  exclusive  use  of  literary  and  scientific  workers
dependent  on  royal  bounty,  under  the  presidency  of  a  priest  who
was  the  king's  nominee  ;  it  was  the  'first  example  of  a  per-
manent institution  for  the  cultivation  of  pure  science  founded  by
a  government '  (Holm,  op.  cit.  4  317  ET).  It  was  not  a  tc.iching
establishment  or  training-place  for  youth,  but  a  home  of  research
adequately  endowed.  Attached  to  it  was  the  Library,  with  more
than  500,000  volumes  (Jos.  Ant.  xii.  2  1).

The  Museum  and  the  Library  combined  were  essenti-
ally a  centre  of  learning,  not  of  creative  power.  In  their
artificial  atmosphere  exact  science  and  literary  criticism
flourished  with  brilliant  results  ;  but  literature  decayed —
perhaps  the  uninspiring  environment  of  the  city  had  no
slight  effect  upon  its  art  and  poetrv  (Mahaffy,  Greek
Life  165).

The  Museum  served  as  a  model  for  subsequent  foundations—
e.g.,  that  of  the  emjjeror  Claudius  ;—lx)th  Jews  and  Christians
at  a  later  time  had  smiilar  centres  of  learning  in  the  city.  The
fate  of  the  library  is  uncertain  ;  it  is  doubtful  whether  it  was
accidentally  burnt  along  with  the  arsenal  in  48  B.C.  (Ca;s.  BC
3  III).  _  The  words  of  Dio,  43  38— oio-re  dAAa  t«  (tol  to  lYtuptov,
Tois  T«  OTTotfrjKas  <tai  toO  atirov  xat  noi'  pi^Kiuv, — iT\fi<TTiov  it)  <tai
a(ti(TTiov,  oj?  (j)a(Ti,  ytvofiei'iov, — KauSjji'at, —  perhaps  refer  only  to
stores  of  books  for  sale  (.Mahaffy,  Emp.  0/ Eto!.  454).

Ptolemy II. established  a  supplementary  library  in
the  Sarapieion,  in  the  quarter  Rhacotis. In  science,
114


ALEXANDRIA

especially,  Alexandria  maintained  a  sort  of  primacy
throughout  the  imperial  period,  and  residence  in  the
Museum  was  the  hall-mark  of  learning  (cp  Acts  18 24,
and  a  <pi\6(To<pos  airb  Moucreioi;,  in  Halicarnassus,  Bu//.
de  Corr.  Hell.  \  405.  Alexandrian  physicians,  in  par-
ticular, were  regarded  as  the  best  in  the  empire  ;  cp
ot  iv  'Ei^(r<f»  airb  tov  Mouffejoi'  iarpol  [Wood,  Epiuius,
Appendix,  Inscriptions  from  Tombs,  etc.,  7,  /.  6]).

In  Roman  times  Alexandria  was  the  second  city  in
the  empire,  and  the  first  commercial  city  in  the  world
4  rhnrnrtj.r  (^tr^bo,  p.  798  ;  M^7t(rTov  e/x7r6pioi' r^s
«.  UDaxacTier.  o,-^.^,,^^^^, )  At  the  end  of  the  Ptole-
maic period  she  numbered  upwards  of  300,000  free
inhabitants,  and  in  imperial  times  still  more  (Uiod.
1752)-  Mommsen  [op.  cit.  2  262  KT)  develops  the  com-
parison between  her  and  Antioch— both  '  monarchical
cre;itions  out  of  nothing  "  (Paus.  viii.  383).

The  latter  excelled  in  beauty  of  site  and  in  the  magnificence  of
her  imperial  buildings;  the  former  in  her  suitability  for  world-
trade.  In  the  character  of  their  population  and  their  attitude
towards  their  respective  national  religions,  the  similarity  between
the  two  cities  is  close.  The  .■Mexandnan  mob,  like  that  of
Antioch,  was  capricious  .^nd  turbulent ;  the  smallest  spark
kindled  a  conflagration  to  Ije  quenched  only  with  blood  (Diod.
I84,  Dio39  57).

Poljbius  (3414)  says  that  a  personal  visit  to  the  city  filled
him  with  disgust  at  the  demoralisation  produced  by  the  constant
presence  of  masses  of  mercenaries  necessary  for  keeping  under
control  the  mongrel  mob,  the  degenerate  descendants  of  the
Greeks  ;  compared  with  these  two,  the  native  Egyptian  element
struck  him  as  acute  and  educatetl.'  C.'csar  draws  a  similar  picture
(A'C3iio).  .A  vivid  illustration  is  found  in  the  bloody  scenes
which  heralded  the  .accession  of  Ptolemy  V.  (Pol.  1530-33).  .\
point  of  similarity  with  the  ,\ntiochians  was  the  fondness  of  the
Alexandrians  for  giving  nicknames  (cp  Paus.  v.  21  12:  (tat  iria%
(coi  iiTix^piov  TO  «'«  Tas  ciriKAijo-^tt  roij  'Wf^ai'SpfiiirCv  ((Ttlv.  Id.
i.  9  I  ;  .Sen.  (ul  Helv.  19  6:  '  Loquax  et  in  contumelias  prsefec-
torum  ingeniosa  provincia  .  .  .  etiam  periculosi  sales  placent ').
The  Ptolemies  had  each  a  nickname,  and  even  Vespasian,  for  his
tax  on  salt  fish,  was  called  the  '  sardine-dealer '  (Suet.  Vesf>.  19  :
Ku/SioaoxTTjv).  As  regards  the  status  of  tlie  highly  composite

population,  the  Roman  emperors  mostly  retained  the  old  state
of  things.  The  .Mexandrians  continued  to  stand  quite  apart
from  the  rest  of  the  country  in  character  and  in  privileges  (cp
Philo,  in  Flacc.  10 ;  CIG  4957),  so  much  so  that  the  Alex-
andrian franchise  was  a  necessary  preliminary  to  the  acquire-
ment of  Roman  citizenship  (Pliny,  K/>.ad  Tr.  (i  \1i\:  '.\dmonitus
sum  a  peritioribus  debuisse  me  ante  ei  .Alexandrinam  civitatem
inpetrare,  deinde  Romanam,  quoniam  esset  .itgyptius,' — Jos.  c.
Ap.'li^.  The  Egyptians  of  the  Xomes  were  unable  to  gain
Roman  citizenship,  like  other  provincials,  by  enlistment  in  the
legions.

The  greatness  of  Alexandria  has  led  some  to  speak
of  its  founder  as  though  he  were  endowed  with  more

_ Ti.- than human foreknowleclirc, and  had

C IbS  SUCC6SS. r  , ^  ,- .  .

foreseen the future  of  the  city  as a

centre  of  Hellenism  and  queen  of  the  Levant. Others

regard  the  city  as  merely  a  Greek  emporium,  a  second

and more  successful Naucnltis, owing  to  accident  its

rise  to  the  position  of  a  cosmopolitan  capital.

Nevertheless,  it  nuisl  have  l>een  evident  to  Alexander  that,
after  the  destruction  of  Tyre,  'the  great  trading  area  of  the
Levant  was  for  the  moment  without  focus '  (Hogarth,  Philip  and
Alex.  1S8),  and  the  site  actually  selected  was  the  only  one
possible  on  the  Egyptian  coast  (though  .Mahaffy,  Kmp.  0/ Ptol.
12,  calls  this  in  question).  Egypt,  further,  ottered  peculiar
facilities  for  that  amalgamation  of  Greeks  and  Macedonians
which  he  desired,  and,  owing  to  its  support  of  his  secret  belief
in  his  divinity,  it  had  a  special  place  in  his  affections.  The
success  of  Nauciatis  undoubtedly  exerted  an  influence  in  the
way  of  directing  attention  to  the  W.  of  the  Delta ;  and  it  is  not
without  reason  that  Cleomenes,  a  native  of  Naucriitis,  created
financial  governor  of  Egypt,  is  called  one  of  the  architects  of
Alexandria  (Justin  184).  Nor  should  we  fail  to  take  account
of  the  fact  that  the  island  of  Pharos  wxs  the  traditional  landing-
place  of  Odysseus  (Hom.  iW.  4355).  This  influence  is  dis-
tinctly asserted  in  the  story  of  the  dream  which  directed  the
king  to  the  site  opposi'.c  Pharos  (Plut.  Alex.  •_'<)).

In  fine,  considering  -Me.xander's  economic  designs  and

achievements in the far East,  and  the  success  of  his

eastern  colonies, we cannot venture  to  deny  that  he

consciously  created  a  centre  for  a  new  mixed  race,  with

a  definite  dream  of  the  possibilities  afterwards  realised.

Much  has  been  hoped  from  systematic  exploration.

The  modern  town  stands  mainly  on  the  silt  gathered  on  either

side  of  the  Heptastadium,  which  has  thus  con-

6.  Sites  not verted  the  island  of  Pharos  into  a  peninsula.

recoverable. •'^"  'h*  great  monuments  of  the  Ptolemaic  age

seem  to  nave  stood  within  the  present  inhabited

"5


ALMON-DIBLATHAIM

area,  or  on  ground  now  absorbed  by  the  sea  ;  but  the  site  of  no
ancient  building  is  known,  except  that  of  the  Ciesareum,  which
was  near  the  sea.  The  Sema  or  Soma,  in  which  Alexander's
body  was  deposited,  may  perhaps  be  represented  by  the  mosaue
of  Nebi  Danial,  the  most  sacred  locality  in  Alexandria.  1  he
l.ist  person  known  to  have  seen  the  body  was  the  emperor  Sep-
timius  Severus  (Dio,  70  13).

The  general  result  is  that,  owing  to  subsidence,  the
remains  of  Ptolemaic  Alexandria  are  now  below  water
level,  and  that  nothing  is  to  be  hoped  for  from  the
site  (Egypt. Expl. Fund  Report, 1894-5). See,  also,

DiSPKKSION,  §  7.

Literature. — Strabo,  pp.  791-799;  Herondas,  Mim.  1  28  /.;
Kiepert,  7.ur  Topogr.  des  alien  Alex.  (Perl.  1872);  Weniger,
Das  Alex.  Museum  (y,^t\.  1875):  Pauly-Wissowa's  .A^<?a/<-«<-_)'f.,
'  Alcxandreia'  (Puchstein),  and  '  Alexandrinische  Litteratnr'
(Knaack).  w.  j.  w.

ALGUM  ( D^e-ia^X),  2  Ch.  2  8  9 10/.  t See  Almug.

ALIAH  (n;^J?.  Kt. ),  Gen.  8640=  i  Ch.  I51  Alvah.

ALIAN  {'fp^),  I  Ch.l4o  =  Gen.  3623t  Alvan.

ALIEN  (nni,  Job  19  IS  Ps.69  8;  -)33  |3,  Is.  61 5;
13,  Ex.  I83,  RV  'sojourner,'  Dt.  142it,  RV  'foreigner').
See  Stranger.

ALLAMMELECH  ("^^^i'N  [v.  d.  Hooght],  etc.).
Josh.  1926t  RV  =  AV  Alammklech.

ALLAR (aAAar  [B]), i  Esd.  536t RV  =  Ezra259
j IMMER,  2  ;  cp  also  Cherub,  2.

! ALLEGORY (AAAHropoyMeNA [Ti.WH]), Gal.
424t. See  Parahi.es,  §§  I,  3,  5.

ALLELUIA (aAAhAoyTa  [Ti.], -ia  [\VH]), Rev.

19 1  3/.  of. See  Hallelujah.

ALLEMETH  (flD^y;  but  Ba.  Gi.  Hlp^J?),  i  Ch.  660
[45]  kV  =  .\V  Alemeth.

ALLOM.  RV  Allen  (aAAoon  [B]),  i  Esd.  5  34  =
Neh.  759  Amo.n",  3.

!  ALLON  ()1?X),  Josh.  19 33  AV.  As  a  proper  name
j  this  rightly  disappears  from  RV.  See  Bezaanaxxi.M
j (Greek  readings  at  end).

1  ALLON  (|i?N  ;  cp  Elon  and  see  Aijalon,  2 ;  amcon
I [B],  aAAcon  i-^X  ChA.  [Lj),  a  Simconite  (i  Ch.  437!).

ALLON -BACHUTH. RV Allon-Bacuth (p-'N

1 n-"l23, i.e., 'the  oak  of  weeping,' see  also  Bochim  ;

BaAanoc  rreNeoyc  [B.\L]) ;  the  spot  'below  Bethel'

1 where  Deborah,  Rebekah's  nurse,  was  buried  (Gen.  35

8t  E). According  to  another  tradition  (cp  Debor.vh,

i), however,  it  seems  to  have  been  a  palm  tree  (Judg.

45); or rather, perhaps, allCm could be  used of a

palm  tree, just  as  the  cognate  words  el  (in  Elparan)

: and elath are undoubtedly used. In i S.  IO3 it

j seems  to  be  called  '  the  terebinth  [?]  (fi'^N,  Spi'os  [B.AL])

j of  Tabor,'  where 'Tabor' (da^cjp  [B.A],  ttjs  iKXfKrrji

! [L])  may  be  a  bad  reading  for  '  Deborah'  (Thenius).

I  T.  K.  c.

1 ALLOY  (^Jna), Is.  I25 RV mg.,  EV 'tin.' See

I Metals.

j  ALMODAD  (Tl'lD^K,  or  rather  as  in  (5*^  and  Vg.
I  T110?X,  Elmodad,  i.e.,  'God  loves';  a  Sab.-ean  name
I  [ZD.UG  37  13  18]  ;  eAMCoA&A  [AL]),  one  of  the  de-
scendants of  JOKTAN  (tf.v.);  Gen.  10 26  (eAMOoAA/W
1  [E].  icAmcoAaA  [L1)=i  Ch.  l2ot.  See  Glaser,
j  Siizse  280,  425,  and  cp  Afudadi  on  a  primitive
, Bab. -contract-tablet  (Hommel,  AHT  113).

ALMON  (jiO^y),  Josh.  21  iSf  =1  Ch.  6  60  [45]
Alemeth  {g.v.).

ALMON-DIBLATHAIM  (nn*n5'?'l-;b^y  ;  on  form
of name  see  Na.mks,  §  107  ; reAwojN AeBAABAlAA
[BALj),  a  station  of  the  Israelites  between  Dibon-gad
and  the  mountains  of  Abarim,  Nu.  8846  and  (p.  A Ai fi-
nd


ALMOND

A&6&IN  [A])  V. 47t ; apparently  the  same  as  Beth-

DIBI.ATHAIM  (^.V.).

ALMOND,  M.MOND  TREE,  ALMOND  BLOSSOM

0?'>;'^  KAPYON  ;aUL;  (.<•!..  ■1;{...  Num.  17s  ^23]
k&ROIaL'^J;  amyt^A'^on  [l^^^AC,,  Ecclcs.  125;  as  an
adjective  KApyiNHN  [HQ  and  practically  NA],  Jer.
1  nf  ;  l|3w*P=  '  made  like  almond  blossoms,"  €KT€TY"
nooMGNOl  K&PYICKOYC  [BAKL],  Ex.2533/;  KAPY"
COTA  i^BAL]  37i9/.t)-  Ihe  Hebrew  root  means  to
'  w  ake  '  or  '  watch  '  ;  and  the  tree  is  said  to  be  so  named
because  it  is  the  first  to  awake  from  the  sleep  of  winter.  ^
The  etymology  is  alluded  to  in  Jer.  In/.

The  almond  is  referred  to  in  the  story  of  Jacob,  who
(Gen.  43 II,  J)  instructs  his  sons  to  take  with  them  into
Egypt  a  present  of  the  fruits  of  Palestine  including
almonds.  The  verisimilitude  of  this  detail  cannot  be
questioned.  It  was  natural  for  a  Hebrew  to  presume
that  Palestinian  almonds  would  be  prized  in  Egypt,
nor  need  we  trouble  ourselves  as  to  the  exact  date  of
the  acclimatisation  of  the  almond  tree  on  the  banks  of
the  Nile.*

The  original  natis'e  country  of  the  almond  [Prtinus
Amvi^iialus,  Stokes)  was  W.  .Asia,  from  which  it  has
gradually  spread,  in  the  main  probably  by  human
intervention,  throughout  the  Mediterranean  region.
Almonds  are  still  an  important  article  of  commerce  in
the  Persian  Gulf,  nor  is  there  anything  improbable  in
their  being  exjiorted  from  Syria  into  Egypt  in  early  or
even  in  more  recent  times.  No  ancient  writer,  accord-
ing to  Celsius  {Hicrob.  I298),  mentions  them  as  grown
in  Egypt.

The  '  cups  made  like  almond  blossoms '  on  the
branches  of  the  golden  candlestick,  consisting  each  of
'a  knop'  or  knob  'and  a  flower'  (Ex.  2033/  37i9/. )
represented,  says  Dillm.  {ad  loc. ),  '  not  the  corolla
but  the  calyx  of  the  almond  flower.'  Some  have
proposed  to  translate  n'^pu'D  'awakened'  i.e.,  fully
opened  (as  opposed  to  closed  buds)  ;  but  this  is
certainly  untenable.  In  Jer.  1  n  an  almond  staff  seen
by  the  prophet  becomes,  from  the  associations  of  its
name,  a  symlxil  of  Yahwe's  watchfulness.  The  most
interesting  reference  is  in  the  difficult  passage  Eccles.
125.  There  are  three  clauses  in  the  verse,  and  in
each  unfortunately  there  is  some  obscurity.  It  is  the
first,  rendered  by  .\V,  '  The  almond  tree  shall  flourish,
[RV  blossom],'  which  now  concerns  us.  As  regards
this,  it  has  been  doubted,  (i)  whether  ^pIr  by  itself  can
mean  the  almond  tree  ;  (2)  whether  the  pinkish-white
blossoms  are  a  likely  metaphor  (according  to  the  ordinary
view)  for  an  old  man's  white  hairs  ;  and  (3)  what  is  the
meaning  of  the  verb  (fxr).  The  consonants  of  the
Heb.  text  support  the  meaning  '  he  will  reject  the
almond,'  i.e. ,  will  be  unable  to  eat  it,  though  a  delicacy  ;
but  the  vowel-points  and  all  the  ancient  versions  have
the  same  rendering  as  EV.  This  seems  on  the  whole
more  probable.  Though  Jer.  In  is  not  sufficient  to
prove  that  npr  can  mean  the  tree,  the  equivalent  form
in  Syriac,  !Se_^dd,  appears  to  have  this  sense.  The
metaphor  is  possible  if  we  rememlwr  that  the  flowers
come  out  as  a  pale  flash  on  the  dark  leafless  branches  ;
if  the  metaphor  is  to  be  pressed  closer,  the  flowers  are,
as  Koch  describes  them,  '  white  or  of  a  pale  red."  ^

(2)  See  Hazel.  n.  m. — w.  t.  t.-d.

ALMS. The English  word  is  derived  through  the


2.  OT  estimate.


1.  Terms.


A.S. form  '  aslmfesse '  from  the  eccl. Lat.
eleemosyna,  which  again  is  borrowed  from

1  Syriac  has  the  same  word  in  the  form  tegdii; the  Arabic
for  almond  is  lauz=  Hebrew  y^  (see  Hazel).
^ 2  Lag.  Uebers.  45. Cp  Plin.  1625  (quoted  by  Celsius):  'Ex
lis  quae  hieme  aquila  exoriente  concipiunt,  fforet  prima  omnium
amygdala  mense  Januario  ;  Martio  vero  pomum  maturat."


ALMS

the  Greek  AojAMWiJn?.  The  Greek  word,  which  is
exceedingly  rare  in  classical  authors,  means  pity,  and
in  the  Greek  of  the  NT(Lk.ll4i  I233  ActsSa/.  10936
10 4 31)  signifies  also  a  special  result  of  pity — viz.,  relief
given  in  money  or  kind  to  the  poor.  In  biblical
Hebrew  there  is  no  corresponding  word,  and  it  is  not
even  quite  certain  that  the  technical  and  restricted  use
of  the  word  iXctjfioavvq  occurs  in  ©.  No  doubt  in
such  passages  as  Ecclus.  7  10  and  Tob.  4;  128-ii,  the
author  or  translator  has  almsgiving  chiefly  or  even
exclusively  in  view.  Still  irouiv  (XfrjfjLOffvvrjv  does  not
in  itself  mean  more  than  icn  nbi',  '  to  do  that  which  is
merciful  or  kindly.'  On  the  other  hand,  the  NT  use  of
'to  give  iXfTifjLoavvai,'  etc.,  is  quite  decisive  for  the
specialised  sense  of  the  word.

The  close  connection  lx;tween  religion  and  deeds  of
mercy  frecjuently  appears  in  ancient  religion.  The
Bedouin  Arabs,  maintaining  therein
a  primeval  usage,  regard  the  way-
farer as  '  the  guest  of  Allah,'  to  whom  hospitality  is
due  (Doughty,  Ar.  IJes.'[22S).  The  sacrificial  meal
often  included  an  act  of  charity  to  the  poor.  'I'hus
the  poor  were  allowed  to  take  handfuls  from  the  meal-
offering  made  to  the  Arab  god,  al-'Okai.sir  (WkS  A'e/.
Setn.^-^  223),  and  the  same  use  of  sacrifice  was  familiar
to  the  Greeks  (see,  e.g.,  Xen.  Anad.wSg).  Indeed
the  general  law  of  sacrificial  feasts  was  open-handed
hospitality in  which  the  poor  shared.  The  OT,

however,  carries  this  lx:neficent  tendency  farther  than
any  other  ancient  religion.  It  made  systematic  pro-
vision for  the  poor,  and  institutions  of  this  kind  can  Ije
traced  throughout  the  religious  history  of  Israel,  from
the  eighth  century  onwards.  Indeed  it  is  significant
that  in  the  OT  scarcely  a  trace  of  beggars  and  begging
in  the  strict  sense  is  to  be  found  (see,  however,  i  S.  236
Ps.  109io).  In  the  'Book  of  the  Covenant'  (see
Exodus,  ii.  §  3),  Ex.  23  10/. ,  the  Hebrew  landowner  is
directed  to  leave  his  land  fallow  each  seventh  year  '  that
the  poor  of  thy  people  may  eat.'  The  merciful  spirit
of  the  Deuteronomist  is  conspicuous  in  the  stress  he
lays  on  the  care  for  the  poor.  Every  third  year  the
owner  was  to  bring  forth  a  tenth  from  his  granaries  and
bestow  it  exclusively  on  the  poor,  including  the  Levites
(Dt.  1-1  28/. ).  According  to  a  custom  still  preserved  in
Palestine,  every  Israelite  was  free  to  pick  and  eat  grapes
from  his  neighbour's  vineyard,  or  to  pluck  ears  from
the  cornfield,  as  he  passed  along  (Dt.  2824/.  [25/.]).
Out  of  consideration  for  the  poor,  the  owner  nmst
not,  in  a  grasping  spirit,  glean  to  the  uttermost  his
cornfield,  vineyard,  or  oliveyard  (Dt.  24 19-22).  The
j  earliest  part  of  the  Priestly  Code,  viz. ,  the  '  Law  of
Holiness'  (see  Leviticus),  reflects  the  same  precept
i  (Lev.  199/.  2322) ;  besides  this,  in  Deuteronomy  and
!  generally  in  the  later  writers  of  the  OT,  private  and
I  voluntary  almsgiving  is  especially  commended.  On  the
whole  it  may  be  said  that  the  prophets  plead  the  rights
of  the  poor  as  their  advocates,  while  in  Deuteronomy
and  in  post-exilic  literature,  the  needy  Israelite  is  com-
mended to  the  charity  of  his  brethren.  See,  among
passages  too  numerous  to  quote,  Is.  ffS;  (a  very  late
passage)  Prov.  I421  19i7  Ps.  II29  Job  29i2/.  One
reference  to  almsgiving — vi^.  Dan.  427  [24]  —  deserves
special  notice.  Probably  the  force  of  the  Aramaic
words  is  '  redeem  '  or  '  make  good  thine  iniquities  .  .  .
by  showing  mercy  to  the  poor,'  and  if  this  interpretation
of  p-\3  be  correct,  we  have  here  a  clear  implication  of
the  later  Jewish  doctrine  that  alms  had  a  redemptive  or
atoning  power.

In  the  OT  Apocrypha  and  in  Rabbinical  literature

almsgiving  assumes  a  new  and  excessive  prominence.

.  V, ^°  much  was  this  the  case  that  .-ipnx,

3.  Apocrypna  ^j^j^^^ ^^ ^^^ ^j^j^^. ^.mings means


*  Cp  Maspero,  Dawn  o/Ch:  27.

*  Prof. Cheyne  informs  us


»  .^.. ^if^,,,^  ..I..-,  i.^  that  the  wild  almond,  now  rare,

was  noticed  in  a  gla<le  of  Hermon  by  Robertson  .Smith,  who
found  its  blossoms  distinctly  white.  "Tristram  speaks  of  many
wild  almond  trees  on  Mt.  Carmel  {A'HB  332).

117


and  Rabbin,
literature.


kTitmgs  means
'righteousness'  in  general,  came  to
be  used for  almsgiving  in  particular,


and  this  use  of  the  word  has  been  naturalised  in  the
Arab,  sadakaf"  'alms  for  God"  (h'or.  Sur.  9 104,  etc.;


ALMUG  OR  ALGUM  TREES

Doughty,  Ar.  £)«.  I446),  and  the  Syr.  zedkftha  (Pesh.
Lk.  1141.  etc.).

The  following  ciwtions  furnish  examples  of  the  propitiatory
virtue  ascribed  to  alms  in  later  Judaism:  'Shut  up  mercy
((Aerj/xoirurrji',  perh.  '  alms ')  in  thy  treasuries,  and  it  sh.all  deliver
thee  from  all  affliction"  (Ecclus.  •-'9  12) ;  'Mercy'  (or  'alms')
'  delivereth  from  death  '  (Tob.  4  10)  ;  '  Through  alms  a  man
partakes  of  eternal  life  '  (Rosh  haskshanah  3) ;  'He  who  says,'  I
give  this  piece  of  money  as  alms,  that  I  or  my  sons  may  inherit
eternal  life,  is  a  perfectly  righteous  man  *  (Pesachin,  5  ;  Keff.
from  Weber,  Altsynag.  Theot.  ^^(> /.)\  '  Almsdeeds  are  more
meritorious  than  all  sacrifices  '  (San.  49  h)  ;  '  As  sin-offering  makes
atonement  for  Israel,  so  alms  for  the  Gentiles  '  {Baia  Bath.  10  b  ;
Reff.  from  Levy,  NHIVB,  s.v.  npns)-

Alms  were  systematically  collected  in  the  synagogue
of  the  Di;ispora  for  poor  Jews  in  Palestine  (this  custom
is  mentioned  by  Jerome  as  existing  in  his  time),  and
also  every  week  for  the  poor  of  the  synagogue  itself.
Officers  were  appointed  to  make  the  collection,  and
boxes  for  the  reception  of  alms  also  were  placed  in  the
synagogues  (Vitring.  Syn.  J  'et.  iii.  1 13).  In  Mk.  I241/. ,
however,  the  reference  is  not  to  alms-chests  but  to  one  of
thirteen  trumpet-shaped  boxes,  placed  in  the  court  of
the  women  to  receive  contributions  towards  the  expenses
of  the  temple  worship  (.Schur.  G/r22o<)).

Jesus,  then,  did  not  need  to  awaken  zeal  for  alms-
giving among  his  countrymen  :  it  was  there  already  ;
_p  and  there  was  apparently  more  occasion  for
it,  since  in  the  NT  we  meet  with  persons  who
were,  in  consecjuence  of  V>odily  infirmity,  beggars  by
profession  (.\Ik.  IO46  Lk.  1835'jn.  9/ ,  and  note  the
technical  term  Trpoa-atxTjs).  He  purified  it  from  the
ostentation  which  often  corrupted  it  (Mt.  62-4);  he  ac-
centuated the  feeling  of  compassion,  without  which  it  is
worthless  (Lk.  IO33)  ;  above  all,  he  taught  that  the  dis-
position which  gives  alms  by  mechanical  rule  and
bargains  with  God  for  compensation  here  or  hereafter
should  yield  to  that  impulse  of  the  new  heart  which  sees
the  supreme  reward  in  likeness  to  a  heavenly  Father
(Mt.  545).  We  cannot  wonder  then  that,  in  the  infant
church  at  Jerusalem,  without  compulsion  or  rigid  com-
munistic system  (see  Acts  5  4),  there  was  an  ideal
charity  which  made  'all  things  conunon '  (.\cts432),
and  prompted  rich  men  like  Barnabas  to  sell  their
property  for  the  sake  of  the  needy  (.Acts  436/.).  No
doubt  the  expectation  that  Christ's  second  coming  was
at  hand  stimulated  this  uncalculating  generosity  ;  but
low  esteem  of  worldly  goods  and  love  of  the  brethren
were  the  mainsprings  of  this  new  development.  It  is
also  significant  that  the  first  election  of  Christian
officers  was  made  to  secure  a  due  distribution  of  alms.
The  Gentile  churches,  moreover,  were  bound  to  the
mother  church  at  Jerusalem  by  the  offerings  which  they
made  for  the  poor  in  that  city  (Rom.  15 26/.  i  Cor.  16 1-3
2  Cor.  9 1 /.  .Acts '24  17).  Of  course  almsgiving  found
other  channels.  The  author  of  the  epistle  to  the  Hebrews
assumes  that  it  is  a  necessary  feature  of  the  Christian
life,  and  speaks  of  it  as  a  sacrifice  of  thanksgiving
which  continues  after  the  Jewish  altar  has  been  done
away  with.  From  very  early  days  each  church  had  its
lists  of  poor  ( I  Tim.  59)  and  its  common  fund  (Ignat.
Ad  Polvc.  4)  ;  and  whereas  in  heathen  clubs  '  charity
was  an  accident,  in  Christian  associations  it  was  of  the
essence'  (Hatch,  Or^an.  of  Early  Christ.  Church  36).
Cp  Co.M.MU.N-iTV  OF  GOODS,  especially  §  5.  w.  k.  a.
ALMUG  or  ALGUM  1  TREES  (D'SO^N,  TTe\eKHT<\

[BA],  An.  [L],  iK.  lOii/.t;  D'Oia'pN.  neyKiNA
[B.VL],  2  Ch. '28  [7]  9 10/  [n.  AneAcKHTA.  L,  v.  10;
AneA.,  L,  V.  ii]t)  yielded  a  precious  wood,  which  was
brought  to  Solomon,  along  with  gold  and  gems,
from  Ophir  {q.v.  ;  cp  .Solomon)  by  the  ships
of  Hiram,  and  was  used  to  make  'pillars'  (IVDO,
viro(TTT}pLyfuiTa  [BAL],  RV  mg.  '  a  railing,"  i  K.
10i2  =  2Ch.9ii ni7DD, dtra^daeis [B.\L]. EV

1  The  two  forms,  though  differently  rendered  by  ®  and
other  versions,  are  obviously  variants  of  the  same  word.  The
etymology  is  unknown.


ALOES

■terraces')  for  the  temple  and  the  palace,  as  well  as
'harps  and  psalteries."  In  aCh.  28[7],  these  trees
appear  along  with  cedars  and  firs  among  the  products
of  Lebanon,  with  which  .Solomon  asks  Hiram  to  furnish
him  ;  but  there  is  no  mention  of  them  in  the  parallel
passage  in  Kings.  ^

The  very  various  opinions  that  have  been  held  as  to
the  identity  of  the  tree  are  enumerated  by  Celsius
[nierob.\  111  ff.).

Three  may  be  mentioned  :  (i)  The  Jewish  traditional  rendering
is  ' coral ' ;  but  this  is  obviously  unsuitable,  unle.ss  we  ma>|
understand  by  'coral-wood'  simply  a  red  wood.  (2)  IjLimhi
takes  it  to  be  'brazil-wood,'  the  bakkani  of  the  Arabs,  a  red
dye-wood  found  in  India.  (3)  Most  moderns,  following  Celsius
(see  his  reasons,  op.  cit.  1  179^),  believe  it  to  be  'sandalwood,'
probably  of  the  redder  sort  i^Pterocarpus  Santalinus,  Linn.),
which  is  still  used  in  India  for  purposes  similar  to  those  recorded
in  Chronicles.  The  ancient  versions  yield  no  light  ;  but  see
below.''^

The  evidence  appears  to  point  to  some  valuable
Oriental  wood  brought  (like  lign  aloes  and  cassia)  into
the  Eastern  Mediterranean  by  the  ancient  commerce
of  the  Red  Sea.  If  we  may  assume  it  to  be  a  red
wood  adapted  for  carving,  it  may  well  be  either  (i)
brazil-wood  (a  name  of  uncertain  origin  ;  the  French
braise,  a  glowing  coal,  has  been  suggested  ;  it  was
transferred  to  the  S.  American  country)  =  Oj(z///// /a
Sappaii,  Linn.,  a  tree  of  India  and  the  Malay  Isles,
apparently  the  bakkam  of  the  Arabs  ;  or  it  may  be
(2)  red  sandalwood,  Pterocarpus  Santalinus,  Linn.,
an  inodorous  dye-wood,  still  surviving  as  a  colouring
matter  in  pharmacy, •■•  a  native  of  Southern  India,  w^here
it  is  much  valued  for  temple  pillars.  Possibly  both
species  may  be  included  under  the  expression.

[©  in  2  Ch.  "2  8  9  10/  gives  ^v\a  irfVKiva,  which  agrees
with  the  Chronicler's  statement  that  the  algum-wood
came  from  Lebanon.  Cheyne,  therefore,  proposes  to
identify  '  almug '  (the  form  attested  by  the  earlier  record,
that  in  Kings)  with  i-lammaku,  the  name  of  one  of  the
trees  used  l)y  Sennacherib  in  building  his  palaces.  The
tree  seems  from  its  name  to  have  been  of  Klamite
origin  ;  but  so  useful  a  tree  may  have  been  planted  in
Hernion  and  Lebanon.  For  tend  in  i  K.  10  n,  it  is
possible  to  read  TjbC.  Less  probably  we  may  suppose
with  Hommel  that  this  hard  and  rare  wood  was  '  a  pro-
duct of  the  trade  of  Ophir. '  See  Exp.  T.  9  470^
525  ('98),  and  cp  Alammelech.] n.  m. — \v.  T.  t.-d.

ALNATHAN (eANAOAN [A]), iEsd.844. RV

El.N.VrilAN, 2.

ALOES  and  (once)  Lign  Aloes*  (D^'?n>?  ;  Num.  246

CKHNAI  [B.VLl,  KV  'lign  aloes'; Pr..7  17 TON  OIKON

1.  Substance.  ^^Y  [I^^A]  ; or  nit'^^«  Ps.  458 [9],

CTAKTH  [Aq.  aAcoO].  Cant.  4i4AA60e
[B.\],  <\AOH  [K]  (Aq.  a\oh,  Sym.  Gymiama).  Jn-
1939t  aAoh  [BX.V]),'' the  vi\o(\Q.xx\eagle-u<ood,  a  precious
wood  exported  from  SE.  Asia,  which  yields  a  fragrant
odour  w  hen  burnt.  It  is  entirely  distinct  from  ( i )  the
common  bitter  '  aloe '  used  in  medicine,  to  which  alone
the  name  was  given  by  classical  writers  ;®  (2)  the  plant

1  The  Chronicler  h.is  probably  mistaken  an  imported  article
of  merchandise  for  a  native  product  of  Phoenicia.

2  Jerome  renders  thyina — i.e.,  'citron  wood  '  {Callitris  qucul-
rtTahis,  Vent.) — an  Algerian  tree  inordinately  valued  by  the
Romans  for  tables,  not  likely  to  have  been  known  in  biblical
times  or  to  biblical  people.

3  It  was  the  '  sanders  '  used  in  mediaeval  cookery  for  colouring
sauces.

*  I.e.,  lignum  oAoj)?,  a  hybrid  phrase ;  vide  Skeat,  Etyin.
Diet:,  s.v.

*  (The  critical  student  will  not  fail  to  observe  that  three  of  the
four  OT  pass.iges  in  which  c'SriN  or  n^S.IK  occurs  l)elong  to
books  or  parts  of  books  which  eminent  critics  have  regarded  as
post-e.xilic,  and  may  be  reminded  here  that  the  occurrence  of
rare  plant -n.imes  is  one  of  the  phenomena  which  have  to  be
considered  in  fixing  the  period  of  .such  documents.  He  will
also  notice  that  the  reading  of  the  fjurth  p.issage  has  on  good
grounds  been  amended. .'See  the  close  of  this  article. — Ed.]

6  This  latter  is  described,  among  ancient  writers,  by  Pliny
(//iV27  4)  and  Dioscorides  (822),  and  its  bitterness  alluded  to  by
Juvenal  (0  iSi ;  '  plus  aloes  quam  uiellis  habet ').


ALOES

commonly  known  as  the  American  aloe  (Agave  ameri-
cana),  celebrated  for  the  long  period  which  elapses
before  its  flowering.  The  biblical  wood  most  probably
corresponds  to  that  dcscriljed  by  Dioscorides  (I21)
under  the  name  dvdXXoxoi' *  (cp  Ges.  Thcs.  c''?nK) — 'a
wood  imported  from  India  and  Arabia,  resembling
thyine  wood  (Rev.  18 12),  compact,  aromatic,  in  taste
astringent  and  rather  bitter,  with  a  skin -like  and
somewhat  variegated  bark. '  He  speaks  of  its  medicinal
use — sweetening  the  breath  and  improving  the  internal
condition  of  the  body — -and  adds  that  it  is  burned  instead
of  frankincense  (cp  Ar.  kutdr  and  see  Incknsk).

The Hebrew  name d'Six  or  niSnN  and the  (jreek
ayaWoxov'  are  almost  certainly,  and  the  Greek  i\&t)
^  and  English  aloe  not improbably,  derived

from  the  same  Sanskrit  word  rt^«r«  =  eagle-
wood  (see  especially  Yule's  Hobson-Jobson,  art.  '  Eagle-
wood  ' ).

This  appears  in  Pali  as  agaru  or  aealu,  in  Alahratti  as  agaru
or  agara  ;  probably  another  form  is  the  Malayalam  agil,  whence
Portug.  agitila,  Kr.  hois  itaigle,  and  Eng.  eagle-ivood.  '  The
Malays  call  it  Kayii  (wood)  -gakru,  evidently  the  same  name,
though  which  way  the  etymology  flowed  it  i?  difficult  to  say '
(Yule,  /.(■.).  (Hommel,  Exfi.  T.  0525,  compares  aigalluhu
(var.  akarhu'f)m  Am.  Tab.]

It  is,  however,  possible  that  Or.  oXIyt],  Syr.  'alwai
(or  'ehi'iii),  Pers.  alwa^  have  an  entirely  separate
origin  :  the  Syriac  word  oftener  means  the  bitter
medicinal  aloes  (so  in  the  majority  of  references  quoted
in  PS  T/ics. ,  s.  V. ),  and  the  Persian  word  is  so  explained  by
the  lexicographers.'*  In  that  case  we  have  an  instance  of
what  is  not  uncommon  in  language,  viz.,  that  two  things
have  arrived  at  the  same  name  from  different  starting-
points.

The  '  aloes '  and '  lign  aloes '  of  the  Bible  are  thus

identified  with  the  product  of  some  tree  of  the  genus

» o » Aquilaria, the chief home of which is

3.  Source. •  ' ,..- ,  . , ,.  A 1

m  Sh. Asia. According to  Arab writers

there  were  many  different  varieties  of  the  aghdliiji  or

'//(/  found  in  different  parts  of  India  and  Ceylon,  differing

from  one  another  in  value  according  to  the  greater  or

less compactness of the wood, though all had the

property  of  yielding  a  fragrant  vapour  if  burned  when

dry.' They  speak  of  its  use  in  perfuming  clothes  and

persons, thus illustrating Ps.  45S [9] and Cant.  414;

and there are parallels to the usage mentioned in

Fr.7.7.

It  would  seem  that  the  kind  of  eagle- wood  most  likely  to  be
introduced  into  Kurope  in  classical  times  was  that  yielded  by  a
tree  generally  distributed  throu'zli  the  Maliyan  region,  which  in
early  Eastern  commerce  wouUi  thcnloix-  iiatunillv  be  associated
with  cassia.  This  is  A.juilar-a  ii:,i/,i,  r.-nsis.  u'liich  is  figured
by  Rumphius  under  the  name  of  (.lar.i.  ami  has  from  ancient
times  been  esteemed  by  the  Chine.se.  To  this  day  'it  is  the
most  important  product  of  the  forests  of  S.  Ten.-isserim  and  the
Mergui  Archipelago.'  Another  eagle- wood  is  obtained  in  NE.
\nA\a.hom  Aqui/ana  Agaliocha ;  but  it  is  less  likely  that  this
should  have  formed  an  article  of  commerce  in  biblical  times.
Other  kinds  were  obtained  from  the  East  in  the  Middle  Ages :
what  the  early  .\rab  tr.-ivellers  have  to  say  about  them  may
be  seen  in  IJymock,  Phannacograpliia  Ituiica  3  218  220.
They  were  similar  but  no  doubt  inferior  products  derived  from
different  trees,  and  are  probably  to  be  regarded  as  comparatively
modern  substitutes.

Eagle-wood  consists  of  diseased  wood,  infiltrated
with  odoriferous  oil  and  resin.  It  occurs  in  irregular
pieces  varying  in  colour  from  grey  to  dark  brown. It

1  In  later  Greek  .also  called  fuAoAoT).

2  This  latter  p.assed  into  Arabic  as  aghaliijl  <yc  aghdlukht ;
but  Arab  writers  usually  call  it  al-'iid  '  the  wood  '  f>ar  exceUcnce,
ox  al-'ud al- Hindi,  'the  Indian  wood.'

3  These  three  .ire  evidently  forms  of  the  same  word  ;  but  here
again  it  is  difficult  to  say  %yhich  way  the  etymology  flowed.

••  On  the  other  hand,  in  the  single  instance  mentioned  by
Dozy  {Sufifil.)  of  the  occurrence  of  the  same  word  {alwiy)  in
Arabic— viz.,  in  a  poem  quoted  by  .\1-Makkarl  (tfist.  and  Lit.
of  Arabs  in  Spain,  ed.  Dozy,  etc.  '-'776,  /.  15) — it  seems  to  have
the  same  meaning  as  the  biblical  word.  Describing  the  pride
of  certain  people,  the  poet  says,  with  allusion  to  the  old  .Arab
custom  of  lighting  fires  in  prominent  places  ne.ir  their  dwellings
to  attract  wanderers  to  hospitable  entertainment,  '  and  they  throw
on  the  fire  of  hospitality,  from  pride,  their  ahuiy  and  their
kiba  '  (the  latter  also  is  said  to  be  a  species  of  agallochuni).

S  See  the  Arabic  references  discussed  at  length  in  Celsius,
Hie  robot.  1 135-171.


ALPH^US

is  found  in  the  centre  of  the  tree,  and  the  search  for  it
is  laborious.  The  account  of  Dioscorides  (see  above,
§  I )  is  accurate.  The  exterior,  w  hich  cannot  of  course
be  the  bark,  is  veined  with  a  darker  colour.

As  regards  the  importation  of  this  substance  into  W.
Asia  no  difficulty  arises  when  we  remember  the  un-
doubted fact  of  a  trade  carried  on  by  China  with  India
and  .Arabia  in  early  times,  of  which  Ceylon  was  probably
a  chief  depot.  See  on  this  subject  Fluckiger  and
Hanbury,  Phartnacoi^raphia,  2nd  ed.,  p.  520/'.  A
difficulty,  however,  appears  when  we  consider  Balaam's
words  (Num.  24s/  ) : —

'  How  good  arc  thy  tents,  O  Jacob,

Thy  dwelling-places,  O  Israel  I

As  valleys  stretched  forth,

As  gardens  beside  a  river.

As  lign  aloes  |  which  Yahwe  has  planted.

As  cedars  beside  waters.'
The  wood  may,  indeed,  have  been  imported  by  the
Phoenicians,  and  thus  be  mentioned  side  by  side  with
myrrh,  cassia,  cinnamon,  etc.,  the  spices  of  Arabia  and
India  ;  but  how  could  a  Palestinian  writer  use,  as  a
suggestive  simile  for  the  expansion  of  Israel,  the  growth
of  a  tree  which  ex  hypothesi  was  never  seen  in  Palestine,
but  only  far  away  in  SE.  Asia?  The  difficulty  is
pointed  out  by  Dillmann,  who  remarks,  '  Perhaps  the
original  reading  was  cS'N  (palms,  Ex.  1027  ;  Gen.  146).'
The  word  suggested,  however,  seems  generally  to  mean
'  terebinths '  ;  Prof.  Cheyne  points  out  the  parallel
in  Is.  61  3.'-  Pistacia  Terebinthus,  though  often  only  a
bush,  may  be  a  tree  of  from  twenty  to  forty  feet.

N.  M. — w.  T.  T.-D.
ALOTH  (ni^j;).  According  to  i  K.  4  16  Solomon
had  a  prefect,  Baanah,  '  in  Asher  and  in  .Moth '  (cN  TH
AAAaAa  [B],  .  .  .  ta^AaA  [I']  omitting  '  Asher '  ;
CN  ACHp  KAI  eN  maaAcot  [A]).  It  is  better,  as  in
RV  and  Kau.  HS,  to  read  'in  Asher  and  Bealoth.'
See  Baai,.\th-beer.  Klostermann,  recognising  that  a
more  northerly  place  is  desirable,  suggests  the  emenda-
tion '  Zebulun  '  (notice  '  Naphtali,'  v.  i  s,  and  '  Issachar,'
-.■.  17).

ALPHA  AND  OMEGA  (to  AA<t)A  kai  to  go
[Ti.  WH]  Rev.  18  216  and  [to  a  in  B]  2'2i3).  For
similar  use  of  first  and  last  letters  of  the  alphabet  in
Rabbinic  writings  see  Schottgen,  Hora:  Hebraiccr  1 1086/

ALPHABET. See  Writing.

ALPH.5:US  (aA(1)AI0C  [Ti-  WH] ;  Heb.  [Aram.]
^B?n  [''Spn],  either  a  contraction  from  H'^Sbn  or  a
gentilicimn  from  the  place-name  Heleph  ;  on  account
of  the  n  W  &  H  write  'AX</)atos).

1.  Father  of  Levi  the  publican,  named  only  in  Mark
(Mk.  2i4  =  Lk.  527  =  Wt.  99  [where  Matthew  is  usually
identified  with  Levi]).

2.  Father  of  the  second  James  in  the  lists  of  apostles
(Mt.  IO3  Mk.  3i8  Lk.  615,  Acts  1  13  ;  see  Aposti.e,
§  i),  not  to  be  identified  with  Clopas  and  so  made  a
brother  of  Joseph  the  father  of  Jesus. See  Ci.oi'AS,  §  3.

There  is  no  reason  for  identifying  (i)  and  (2).  The
Itala,  it  is  true,  and  apparently  also  the  more  important
of  the  MSS  known  to  Origen,  as  well  as  D,  read
'laKu^ov  instead  of  Aeveiv  in  Mk.  2 14  ;  but  if  this  had
been  the  original  reading,  it  would  be  impossible  to
account  for  the  subsequent  substitution  for  James  of  a
quite  unknown  Levi.  The  reading  'Iolkw^ov  arose
simply  because,  at  a  very  early  date,  a  copyist  knew
of  no  son  of  Alphaeus  but  James,  and  therefore
took  AeueiJ'  for  an  error  which  he  was  bound  to
correct.  If  the  .Mph;i"us  of  Mk.  2 14  were  to  be
identified  with  the  .Alph.neus  of  the  lists  of  apostles,  on
the  assumption  that  Levi  and  the  second  James  were
brothers, then we should expect to find these two

1  Instead  of  C"^nN  ©"af  reads  D'Sni<,  '  tents ' ;  but  this  is
obviously  unsuitable. Cp  its  rendering  in  Pr.  7 17  (toi/  5i  oIk6v

fiOv).

2  But  see  SBOT,  Heb.  on  Is.  I.e.,  and  cp  Cedar.


ALTANEUS

brothers  forming  a  pair  in  the  lists  just  as  Peter  and
Andrew  do,  or  John  and  the  tirst  James.  This  objection
to  the  identification,  however,  is  vahd  only  on  the
assumption  that  Levi  under  the  name  of  Matthew  was
admitted  into  the  number  of  the  twelve.

The  Syrian  writer  Amrus  in  the  14th  cent,  makes  Alphseus
accompany  Nathanael  ^identilitd  with  Bartholomew)  on  his
journeyings  throujjh  Nisihis,  Mesopotamia,  and  the  rest  of
Western  Asia  (Lipsius,  Apocr.  Ap.-gesch.  ii.  2 61/). v.  w.  s.

ALTANEUS  (aAtannmoc  [A]).  KV  Maltan-
NEUS, I  Esd.  933t=Iizral033  Mattenai,  2.

ALTAR.^ The  Heb.  nSTQ  means  literally  '  a  place

of  slaughter  or  sacrifice' (cp  Ar. Madbah,"^  and  Syr.

Madhfha). The Gk. and Lat. terms.

1.  Names.  ^^^^^  ^^.^  ^owb-i),  ara  (cp  deipw),  altare
(cp  altus),  on  the  other  hand,  descrilie  the  form  of  the
altar  as  a  raised  structure  without  reference  to  its
purpose.  Occasionally  (23  times)  ©  uses  the  Gk.
word  /3w/u5j  ;  as  a  rule,  however,  naio  i^  rendered
by  Qvai.a.(yTripi.ov.  The  translation  thus  effected  is  close
and  e.xact  ;  but  dvixiaffT-qpiov  is  unknown  in  classical
literature,  being  apparently  confined  to  biblical,  Jewish,^
and  ecclesiastical  writers.  In  the  NT  jBojfxds  occurs  only
once  (Acts  17  23).  and  there  the  writer  is  speaking  of  an
altar  used  for  heathen  worship.  Elsewhere  dvcTiaarripiov
is  always  employed.

We have, then, in the Hebrew word an  accurate

definition  of  the  altar  :  it  is  a  place  of  sacrifice. Why

_  . ... an  altar  should  l)e  reciuired  in  order  that

2.  Primitive ^^^^  victim  may  be  slain  in  a  manner  ac-

^"®**  ceptable  to  the  deity,  and  advantageous  to
the  worshipper,  is  not  so  obvious  as  we  might  at  first  be
inclined  to  think.  We  might  deem  it  a  sufficient  explana-
tion to  say  that  the  altar  served  ends  of  obvious  con-
venience. "  The  flesh  of  the  victim  being  placed  on  a  raised
platform  specially  appropriated  to  this  object,  the  sacri-
fice was  separated  from  contact  with  common  things
and  from  contamination,  while  a  means  was  provided
for  performing  the  rite  with  due  solemnity  and  in  full
sight  of  those  who  desired  to  associate  themselves  with
the  sacred  offering.  There  is  evidence,  however,  that
in  primitive  times  the  altar  possessed  a  much  deeper
significance  than  this.  (The  development  of  this
primitive  idea  is  traced  elsewhere.  See  Idolatry,  §  2  ;
Sacrifice  ;  M.\ssebah.  )

To  the  .\rabs  any  stone  might  become  for  the  nonce
an  altar,  and  evidently  their  Hebrew  kinsfolk  followed
_  originally the same ancient  way. Thus,

3.  Usage,  ^j-j^^  jj^g  victory  of  Michmash,  when  Saul
was  told  that  his  hungry  warriors  were  devouring  the
flesh  meat  which  they  had  taken  as  booty,  without
reserving  the  blood  as  an  offering  to  Yahwe,  he  com-
manded his  people  to  roll  a  great  stone  towards  him,
and  on  this  natural  altar  the  blood,  the  mysterious  seat
of  the  soul,  was  poured  out,  so  that  all  was  in  order
(i  S.  1432-35).  It  is  to  be  observed  that  here  there  is  no
question  of  burning.  In  Gideon's  sacrifice,  of  which  we
have  an  account  in  Judg.  611^,  the  offering  of  cooked
flesh  and  unleavened  cakes  is  indeed  consumed  by  fire
miraculously  kindled  ;  but  the  altar  on  which  the  gifts
are  placed  is  simply  a  rock,  and  the  broth  of  the
cooked  flesh  is  poured  out  upon  it  or  at  its  base.

According  to  Ex.  2O24-26,  on  the  other  hand — a
passage  which,  whatever  be  its  date  (see  Exodus,  ii.  §  3),
may  represent  an  ancient  usage — the  altar  is  to  be  of
earth — a  material  used  in  early  times  by  other  nations —
e.^'.,  Carthaginians,  Romans,  and  Greeks  (for  references
see  Di. ,  ad  loc. ) — or,  if  of  stone,  then  of  unhewn  stone,
the  reason  given  being  that  an  iron  instrument  would

1  On  references  to  Greek  altars  see  Unknown  God  and
Abomination,  ii.

2  The  Arabic  Madhak  does  not  mean  '  altar."  It  has  acquired
that  meaning  through  translations  of  the  Bible.  It  is  also  used
in  the  sense  of  'trench'  (on  which  see  WR.S  Rel.  Scm.(^  341,
n.  I  ;  cp  the  remarks  on  ^haighah,  op.  cit.  -^^o/.  198  228).

3  Prof.  Moore  has  pomted  out  that  it  occurs,  not  only  as  is
sometimes  stated,  in  Philo,  but  also  in  Eupolemus,  Ep.  Arist.,
Jos.,  and  other  Jewish  authors.

123


ALTAR

destroy  the  sanctity  01  the  altar.  Originally,  it  can
scarcely  be  doubted,  the  idea  was  that  changing  the
form  of  the  sacred  stone  would  drive  the  deity  from  his
abode  (cp  Idolatry,  §  4)  ;  but  such  ideas  had  passed
away  when  the  compiler  wrote,  and  iron  tools  continued
to  be  forbidden  in  deference  to  ancient  custom  no  longer
understood.  Further,  the  altar  here  prescribed  was  to
have  no  steps.  In  this  way  the  person  of  the  sacrificer
was  to  Ije  saved  from  exposure,  an  object  secured  by
the  priestly  legislator  in  a  very  different  way— viz. ,  by
making  •  linen  breeches,'  or  drawers,  part  of  the  priestly
attire.  Altars  so  constructed  might  be  erected  all  over
Israel :  see  High  Place,  §  2/  On  the  recognition  of
the  altar  as  a  sanctuary  for  homicides  see  WRS  /ieL
i:^;«.  183/.,  and  cp  Asylum.

Very  different  was  the  altar  erected  in  the  fore-
court of  Solomon's  temple  at  Jerusalem.  The  first
,  Book  of  Kings  (925)  makes  direct  men-
4.  Solomon  S  ^-^^^  ^^  ^y^^  f^^^  ^^^^^  Solomon  built  an
temple.  ^j^^^.  ^^  which  he  offered  sacrifice  three
times  a  year.  So,  too,  in  864,  reference  is  made  to  the
altar  which  'stood  l)efore  Yahwe'— i.e.,  in  front  01  the
temple  proper — and  it  is  described  as  the  '  brazen  altar '
(r\cm  naic)-  Thus  the  material  itself  offers  a  striking
contrast  to  the  altars  of  earth  and  stone  which  had  teen
in  use  previously.  Like  the  rest  of  the  temple  and  its
furniture,  it  was  the  work  of  a  Phoenician  artist,
Huram-.Jibi  (2Ch.  2i3,  perhaps  rightly;  see,  however,
HiRA.M,  2).  Unfortunately,  the  account  of  the  altar,
which  we  should  expect  before  i  K.  723.  "s  wanting.

The  text  of  the  passage  has  been  mutilated  because  a  later
editor,  misinterpreting  1K.84  (itself  a  very  late  insertion),
supposed  that  the  furniture  of  the  tabernacle,  includmg,  of
course,  the  brazen  altar,  had  been  moved  by  Solomon  into  his
temple,  so  that  no  further  altar  of  this  kind  was  needed.  The
excision  of  the  passage  describing  Solomon's  brazen  altar  must
have  been  effected  in  comparatively  modern  times,  for  the
Chronicler  shows  that  he  had  it  before  him  in  the  text  of  the
Books  of  Kings  which  he  used  (see  St.  in  ^^A  7";r3  157  ['83]).

The  Chronicler  (2Ch.  4i)  gives  its  dimensions.  It
was  20  cubits  long  and  broad  by  10  cubits  high.  Now,
these  are  precisely  the  measurements  of  the  altar  in
Ezekiel's  temple  (Ez.  43i3#).  The  prophet  really
constructs  his  ideal  temple  of  the  future  from  his  re-
collections of  the  old  temple  in  which  he  may  very  well
have  served  as  a  priest.  We  shall,  therefore,  not  go  far
WTong  if,  with  most  modern  archreologists,  we  take
Ezekiel's  description  as  applicable  to  Solomon's  altar.  On
that  supposition,  although  the  altar  was  20  cubits  broad
and  long  at  the  base,  the  altar-hearth  ^  was  only  12  cubits
by  12.  The  altar  consisted  of  three  platforms  or  ledges,
the  higher  being  in  each  case  two  ells  narrower  than  the
lower  ledge.  At  the  base  was  a  gutter  (EV  'the
bottom,"  RV  mg.  'the  hollow,'  Ez.  4813)  one  ell
broad  (p«n,  KdXirwfxa,  KoiXw/xa,  KVKXuina  in  @),  intended
apparently  for  the  reception  of  the  sacrificial  blood  ;  and
there  was  a  similar  gutter  at  the  top  round  the  altar-
,  hearth.  At  the  four  corners  on  the  top
'*•  ^°"^^  °'  were  four  projections  called  'horns."
altar,  etc.  pogsj^y  they  represent,  as  Stade  has
suggested,  the  teginning  of  an  attempt  to  carve  the
altar  stone  into  the  form  of  an  ox,  which  symbolised  the
power  of  Yahwe 2  (Nu.  '2322  '24  8).  Be  that  as  it  may,
down  to  the  latest  times  the  horns  of  the  altar  were
regarded  as  specially  sacred,  so  that  in  the  consecration
of  priests  (Ex.  29 12)' and  in  the  ritual  of  the  sin  offering
(Lev.  47^)  the  blood  was  sprinkled  upon  them.  It
has  been  inferred  from  Ps.  II827  that  at  one  time  the
horns  were  used  also  for  fastening  the  victim  ;  but  the
meaning  of  the  words  is  exceedingly  obscure,  and  no
conclusion  of  any  value  can  be  deduced  from  them.
The  ascent  to  the  altar  was  made  by  a  flight  of  steps

1  The  word  for  hearth  or  place  for  burning,  which  should
probably  be  written  St<nN  (see  Ariel,  2).  occurs  not  only  in  Is.
29  !_/?:,  but  also  on  the  stone  of  Mesha  (//.  12  17/).

2  Robertson  Smith,  however,  regards  the  '  horns  of  the  altar
as  a  modern  substitute  for  the  actual  horns  of  .s.icrificial  victims,
such  as  the  heads  of  oxen  which  are  common  symbols  on  Greek
altars  (A'.S- 436).

124


ALTAR

on  the  E.  side,  and  it  is  plain  that  an  arrangement  of
this  kind  was  absolutely  necessary,  when  we  consider  the
great  height  of  the  structure.

On  the  whole  matter  we  must  remember  that  Solomon

had  no  strict  ruletofollow  :  hesimply  desired,  with  the  help

., , of  I'hoL'nician  art,  to  consult  for  the  splendour

azB  ofihe  royal  worship. We  need  not,  therefore,

*  ^^"  wonder  that  one  of  his  successors,  Ahaz
(2  K.  16 10^  ),  with  the  co-operation  of  Uriah  the  priest,
constructed  a  new  altar  after  the  pattern  of  one  that
he  had  seen  at  Damascus,  and  made  it  the  chief  place  of
sacrifice.

Solomon's  altar  was  placed,  as  has  been  already
implied,  in  front — /'.<•.,  on  the  K.  side — of  the  temple
„..  proper.  Can  we  identify  the  exact  site  ?  Not
■  perhaps  with  anything  like  certainty  ;  but  it  is
worth  while  to  mention  the  theory  advocated  by  Willis,
and  more  recently  by  Nowack.  The  Kubbet  es-sahra,
or  dome  of  the  rock,  which  stands  on  the  temple  area,
covers  a  great  rock  pierced  by  a  channel  which  passes
into  a  sink  beneath,  and  is  connected  with  a  water-
pipe.  The  rock  has  been  an  oV)ject  of  the  highest
veneration  to  Christians,  and  (especially)  to  Moslems.  It
has  been  supposed  that  the  rock  stood  on  the  threshing-
floor  of  Araunah  the  Jehusite  (on  the  name  see
Ar.\lnah),  that  it  was  there  David  saw  the  angel
(2  S.  24  16^)  and  erected  his  altar,  and  that  Solomon
(2Ch.  Szjf.)  afterwards  included  the  ground  within  the
temple  site.  Solomon  would  naturally  build  his  altar
on  the  spot  already  chosen  by  his  father  and  hallowed
by  the  apparition  ;  nor  is  it  incredible,  when  we  consider
how  tenaciously  Orientals,  under  changed  modes  of  belief,
cling  to  the  old  sacred  places,  that  David  and  Solomon
built  their  altars  on  the  rock  now  covered  by  the  Kubbet
es-sahra.  The  story  of  the  apparition  to  David  would,  on
this  hypothesis,  find  a  parallel  in  the  apparition  to  Gideon
(Judg.  Oii^),  and  in  that  to  Manoah  (Judg.  ISig).
The  perforation,  the  water,  and  the  sink  would  be
explained  as  means  for  carrying  off  blood  and  offal
from  the  altar.  It  is  true,  as  Dean  Stanley  has  pointed
out,  that  the  rugged  form  of  the  rock  would  make  it
unsuitable  for  a  threshing-floor  ;  but  that  is  no  reason
why  the  rock  should  not  have  stood  '  by  the  threshing-
floor  '  and  been  the  place  where  the  angel  appeared.
Cp  Ak.mnah.

Within  the  temple  proper,  and  in  front  of  the  Debir  or

innermost  shrine, stood another altar, mentioned in

... , iK.  620/. The  te.xt, which  is  corrupt,

y,  \^^  ^ii  slioultl  be  emended  thus,  with  the  help  of
snewDreaa.  ^^  (^.^5^0,,) .  .he  made  an  altar  of  cedar
in  front  of  the  Debir. '  From  Ez.  4I22  we  learn  that  it
was  3  cubits  high  by  2  cubits  broad,  and  that  the  altar
had  '  corners '  which  took  the  place  of  the  horns  of
the  brazen  altar.  Ezekiel  speaks  of  it  also  as  a  '  table. '
Upon  it,  from  ancient  times  (i  S.  21[6]7),  the  shewbread
was  placed  before  Yahw^,  to  be  afterwards  consumed  by
the  priests.

We  assume  here  that  the  Tabernacle  (^.v.),  as
described  by  the  'priestly  writer,'  is  an  ideal  structure.
Said  to  have  been  made  at  Sinai,  it  was  in
reality  an  imaginary  modification  of  the
temple,  suitable  (so  it  was  supposed)  to  the
circumstances  of  the  time  when  the  Israelites  wandered
in  the  wilderness.

(a)  The  altar,  called  simply  '  the  altar'  (Ex.  27 1  30 18
4O732,  etc.).  'the  altar  of  burnt  offering'  (Ex.  30  28
3I9,  etc.),  or  'the  brazen  altar'  (Ex.38303939),  stood
in  the  outer  court,  and  was  square,  5  cubits  broad
and  long,  by  3  high.  Instead  of  being  wholly  of
brass,  it  was  a  hollow  framework  of  acacia  planks  over-
laid with  brass.  It  was  thus  small  and  portable.  It
had  four  '  horns '  ;  midway  between  top  and  bottom
ran  a  projecting  ledge  (so  RV,  AV  'compass';
2313  ;  275),  intended,  perhaps,  as  a  place  for  the  priests
to  stand  upon  when  they  ministered,  though  the  meaning
of  the  word  and  the  purpose  intended are  disputed.

125


9.  P's  brazen

altar.


ALTAR

Below  this  ledge  there  was  a  brazen  grating  (so  RV,
AV  'grate,'  274)  or  Network  {</.v.).  nen  .ncyo  -1330
ptrm,  which  may  havelx.-en  a  device  to  support  the  ledge
and  admit  the  passage  of  the  blood  poured  out  at  the  l«se
of  the  altar.  There  were  four  brazen  rings  at  the  corners
of  this  network,  and  into  them  the  staves  for  carrying
the  altar  were  inserted.  These  staves,  like  the  altar
itself,  were  of  acacia  wood,  overlaid  with  brass.  So,
too,  the  altar  utensils— viz. ,  nh'D  or  pans  for  clearing
away  ashes,  c'y*  or  shovels,  n'ipitp  basons  or  saucers
for  catching  the  blood  and  sprinkling,  nijStp  fleshhooks
for  forks,  ninno  or  fire-pans  for  removing  coals,  etc. —
were  all  of  brass.  Perpetual  fire  was  to  burn  on  this
altar  (Lev.  612/.).

(/3)  Ezekiel,  as  we  have  seen,  mentions  an  altar
within  the  'holy  place,'  which  he  also  calls  'the  table
10  P'a  •  tabiA '  ^^'*^^  stands  before  Yahw6. '  The
'  priestly  writer '  calls  it  '  the  table '
(Ex.2523  37 10),  'the  table  of  the  face  or  presence'
(Nu.  47,  c'3S  cnS  cp  Ritual,  §  2),  because  it  stood
before  Yahw6  (Ezek.  41  22).  '  the  pure  table '  (Lev.  246).
In  2  Ch.  29 18  it  is  spoken  of  as  '  the  table  of  shewbread,'
n3ni'5n  jnStr — lit. ,  the  table  on  which  rows  (of  loaves)
were  laid — to  describe  the  purpose  for  which  it  was
intended.  It  was  of  acacia  wood  overlaid  with  gold,
and  was  2  cubits  long,  i  cubit  broad,  i^  high.  It
was  surrounded  by  a  golden  rim  or  moulding  (nt,  Ex.
25 1 1  ;  see  Crown),  and  at  the  bottom  there  was  a
border  or  ledge  (rrijpsn,  Ex.  2025,  EV  '  border  '),  with  a
golden  rim  of  its  own.  Where  the  feet  of  the  tafjle
joined  the  ledge,  golden  rings  were  placed  for  the
insertion  of  staves.  The  table  was  furnished  with  deep
plates  (n'n^'p,  Ex.2529,  EV  'dishes'),  'spoons'  or
saucers  (niss)  for  the  incense  (Lev.  247),  'flagons'
(niw'p,  Ex.2529  [see  Flagon])  for  the  wine,  'bowls'
(so  EV, nvp:p  2529)  for  pouring  the  wine  in  libations.

(7)  The  altar  of  incense  (n^fap  ^Bpp  nsip,  Ex.  30i,
or  nnbp naip),  also  called  '  the  golden  altar'  (Ex.  3938),


11.  P's  incense
altar.


belongs  only  to  the  secondary  sections
of  the  Priestly  Code. Ezekiel  knows  of


no  altar  within  the  temple  proper  save
the  altar  of  the  shewbread,  and  originally  '  the  golden
altar '  was  only  another  name  for  this  table.  The
Priestly  Code,  in  its  original  form,  speaks  of  the  brazen
altar  as  '  ike  altar ' ;  and,  whilst  in  Ex.  30 10  the  high  priest
on  the  day  of  atonement  is  to  place  blood  on  the  horns
of  the  altar  of  incense,  in  Lev.  16,  where  the  solemn
ritual  of  that  great  day  is  minutely  prescribed,  nothing
is  said  of  an  altar  of  incense.  The  mention  of  the
altar  in  the  books  of  Chronicles  and  Maccabees  (as
also  in  the  interpolated  passage  i  K.  748)  is  due  simply
to  the  influence  of  these  novellae  in  the  '  Priestly
Code.  •

This  altar  was  to  be  made  of  acacia  wood  ;  it  was  to
be  2  cubits  high,  i  cubit  broad  and  long  ;  the  tlat
surface  on  the  top  (33,  Ez.  43i3,  AV  'higher  place,"
RV  '  base  '),  and  the  sides  and  horns,  were  overlaid  with
gold.  It  had  a  golden  moulding  round  it  (11),  and
beneath  this  at  the  four  corners  were  golden  rings  for
the  staves,  which  also  were  overlaid  with  gold.

In  the  reign  of  Darius  a  new  altar  of  burnt  offering
was  built,  probaV)ly  on  the  old  site  (cp  Hagg.  215),
,/.  T«  i  •!•  l^ut,  in  accordance  with  the  law  in
12.  Post-exillC.  j.^  2O25,  of  unhewn  stone  (i  Mace.
444^).  It  was  desecrated,  and,  according  to  Josephus
(Anf.xii.o^),  removed  by  Antiochus  Epiphanes.  A
new  altar,  also  of  unhewn  stone,  was  built  by  Judas
Maccabaius.  Within  the  temple  proper  were  the  table
for  the  shewbread  and  the  golden  altar  of  incense
(i  Mace.  1 21  449/.);  but  the  latter,  as  far  as  it  was
distinct  from  the  table,  seems  to  have  been  introduced
late,  for  Hecat^eus  (Jos.  c.  Ap.lai)  mentions  only  the
126


AL-TASCHITH

candlestick  and  one  altar  (or  table)  as  the  furniture  of
the  holy  place.

In  Herod's  temple  the  altar  of  burnt  offering  in  the
court  of  the  priests  was  still  of  unhewn  stones.  The
--  ,,  .\Iishna  {Middoth  3i)  states  that  it  was
.  ero  s  ^^  t-uiiits  scjuare  at  the  base,  and  gradually
^mp  e.  „;^rrowe<l  to  24  cubits  at  the  top  ;  but  the
dimensions  are  differently  given  by  Josephus  (///v.  56),
and,  before  him,  by  Hecatajus  (Miiller,  /-Va^w.  2394).
The  priests  approached  it  by  an  a.seent  of  unhewn
stone.  There  was  <i  pipe  to  receive  the  blood,  which
was  afterwards  carried  by  a  sulnerrane.m  passage  into
the  Jordan,  and  there  was  a  cavity  beneath  the  altar  for
the  drink  offerings.  On  the  N.  side  were  brazen  rings
for  securing  the  victims.  A  red  thread  marked  the
place  for  sprinkling  the  blood.  The  altar  of  incense
stood  within  the  holy  place,  Ijetween  the  golden  candle-
stick and  the  table  of  shevvbread.

As  we  have  seen  (§1),  the  word  OvaiaffTT^piov  is  fre-
quently used  in  the  NT  for  the  Jewish  altars  ;  and  the
NT  ••^PO'-'^lypse  speaks  of  the  '  golden  altar'  (83,  and
'  altar  '  in  the  same  sense /i/.o/w),  because  the
writer  pictures  the  worship  of  heaven  under  forms  drawn
from  the  old  temple  worship.  In  apassage  which  is  uniciue,
the  author  of  Hebrews  (13 10)  speaks  of  a  Christian
altar.  The  altar  is,  of  course,  not  material  but  spiritual  ;
it  is  the  cross  on  which  Christ  offered  himself,  and  the
author  is  following  the  same  line  of  thought  when  he
e.xhorts  believers  '  to  do  good  and  communicate,  since
with  such  sacrifices  God  is  well  pleased.'

For  the  origin  of  .iltars  see  luoi.Ariiv,  §  2  ;  Sackifice;  H|(;h
Place,  §  3,  and  WK.S  AV-/.  Sfiii.  ;  for  the  Hebrew  altars  in
later  times  Henzinger's  and  No^v.^ck's  //c/'.  Arch,  (both  works
'94).  See  also  Stade,  '  Text  d.  lierichtes  iib.  Salomes  Hauten '
{ZATlV?,i-2()jr.),  Smend's  EzMel  C&o),  Cornill's  critical  text
of  Ezekiel  ('86),  and  the  comm.  of  Hertholet  in  KHC.  For  an
account  of  the  older  literature  on  the  archjeology  of  Ezekiel's
temple  see  Buttcher,  J'roben  ATlichi:r  Scliriftcrklarting,  1833.


RV


Al  -  Tashheth ( nni"ri"^N  ;


AL-TASCHITH,

©BN  Aq.,  Symm.,  mH  AlA(t)eeipHC  ;  Symm.  Ps.  I'm,
nepi  &(t)0<\pCIAc)-  It  is  usual  to  supply  ^y  or  '^n
before  the  phrase  (Ps.  57-59  75t,  headings  [f.  1]),  and
to  explain  '  To  the  tune  of  "  Destroy  not "  '  (cp  Is.  t)58  ;
so  WRS  O'rjO")  209).  If,  however,  the  view  of  the
musical  notes  in  the  headings  taken  in  P.s.m.ms  is
correct,  there  can  be  no  doubt  that  the  phrase  is  corrupt,
and  that  we  should  read  with  Griitz  ri"r2:j'n-'7i;,  '  on  the
Sheminith"  (see  Sheminith).

ALUSH  (C'-I^N  ;  Sam.  \y>^^  ■  AiAoyc  [AFL],-AeiM^
[B]  ;  Ai.us),  a  desert  station  of  the  Israelites  between
Dophkah  and  Rephidim  (Nu.  33i3/.t  [P])-  Not
identified  with  certainty  ;  but  see  Di.  on  Ex.  17 1.  The
Ar.  (ed.  Lag.)  reads  al-wathanain,  'the  two  idols,'
probably  because  the  translator  understood  by  Alush
the  heathen  temple  at  Elusa  (see  Berkd,  i.  i,  and
cp.  WRS  A7«.  293/.). See  W.-\nderi.\gs,  §§  12,  14.

ALVAH  (ni^y.  i-ojAa  [ADEL]  =  nW ?  Alva),
Gen.  3640=1  Ch.  Isit,  Kr.  (EV  Aliah  after  Kt.
riyV  ;  B.\  as  above  ;  aXova.  [L]),  one  of  the  '  dukes '  (?)
of  Edo.m  ((/.I'. ,  §  4). Cp  Alvan.

ALVAN  {\h;^;  rcoAcoN  [A],  -com  [DE],  -^.m  [L]
transposing  ^  and  •)),  Gen.  3623=1  Ch.  l4ot  Alian
(|Vy,  but  in  many  MSS  }1?y  ;  so  aAoyan  [L].  but
CcoAam  [B],  icoAam  [A]),  a  name  in  the  genealogy
of  Seir. Cp  .Xi.vah.

AMAD  (■Ij;py;  amihA  [B],  &m&A  [A],  aAcIjaaA
[L]),  an  unidentified  point  in  the  border  of  Asher  (Josh.
1926t).  ©•*  presupposes  Ammiel.  There  are  several
other  place-names  compounded  with  dj;.  See  Gray,
HPN 48/., who  rightly  declines the  explanation of

1  ©B  points  to  a  reading  dS'K,  Elim.  Perhaps  the  writer,
wishing  to  fill  tip  the  interval  between  the  wilderness  of  Sin  and
Rephidim  (cp  Ex.  17 1),  repeated  Elim,  the  name  of  an  earlier
station. See  Elim.


AMALEK

Am'ad  as  '  people  of  eternity.'  C-'s  aX^aaS  may  point
to  Vi'eSk  (ICi.p.VAI,)  for  which  ®"  in  i  Ch.  811  gives
o.\<po.ah. This  may  Ix;  correct.  T.  K.  C.

AMADATHA,  RV  Amadathus  (&maAa0oy  [B]).

Esth.  16 10,  etc. See  Ha.mmkua  ruA.

AMAL  (?D^  ;  a/v\(\a[B.\],  aAam  [L]),  in  genealogy
of  ASHKK  (§4ii-). lCh.735t.

AMALEK  {\hl^%  amaAhk  [BAL],  but  -hx  i  S.  I525
[.\]; gentilic, Amalekite,  ""P^Oj^in,  amaAhk  [BAL],

1  Seat  ^^^  '^'^^  -K[e]iTHC  [BAL]),  a  tribe  with
■  which  the  ancient  Israelites,  at  several  periods
of  their  history,  were  engaged  in  warfare.  According
to  two  passages,  each  of  which  confirms  the  other,
there  appears  to  have  been  a  time  when  Amalekites
dwelt  even  in  Central  Palestine :  in  the  Song  of
Deborah  we  read  of  '  liphraim  whose  root  is  in
Amalek'  (Judg.  514;  (5'^'-,  however,  iv  koCKoZi),  and
Pirathon  in  Kphraim  (the  modern  Feratd,  about  6  m.
W.SW.  of  N'abulus)  was  situated  '  on  the  mountains
of  the  Amalekite,'  or  'of  the  Amalekites'  (Judg.  12 15,
\a.va.K  [.\I>]).  Of  these  northern  Amalekites  nothing
further  is  known.  According  to  several  passages  of  the
OT,  the  home  of  Amalek  was  in  the  desert  of  the
Sinaitic  peninsula,  the  modern  Tih,  S.  and  SW.  of
Juckta.  It  is  scarcely  safe  to  conclude  from  Nu.  1829
1425  43  45  that  they  once  had  settlements  also  in
southern  Jud.ea  ;  still  less  can  we  build  any  such  theory
upon  Gen.  1-1 7,  although  the  geographical  allusions  in
this  chapter  have  more  authority  than  the  legendary
P  ,  narrative  itself.  When  the  Israelites
■  came  out  of  Egypt  into  the  desert  of
Sinai,  they  had  an  encounter  with  the  Amalekites  at
Rephidim  (P2x.  178-i6),  which  is  not  very  far  from
Mount  Sinai  (Nu.  3815).  It  was  natural  enough  that
the  nomads,  who  lived  on  the  scanty  products  of  this
region,  should  do  their  utmost  to  expel  the  intruders,
nor  can  we  wonder  at  the  mortal  hatred  with  which
the  Israelites  thenceforth  regarded  Amalek.  That  the
narrative,  in  spite  of  its  legendary  features,  has  a
historical  foundation  cannot  be  doubted.  The  story
of  an  encounter  in  the  desert  of  Paran — i.e.,  the  Tih
itself  (Nu.  14254345)— is  probably  nothing  more  than
a  less  accurate  version  of  the  same  struggle,  which,  it
is  true,  can  hardly  have  been  limited  to  a  single  skirmish.
Whether  the  account  of  the  Deuteronomist  (Dt.  2517-19)
was  derived  from  any  other  source  besides  Ex.  178  _^
is  not  quite  clear,  although  he  mentions  one  additional
circumstance,  namely  '  the  cutting  off  of  those  who  were
wounded  (?) ' — the  term  c'Srm  was  perhaps  suggested
by  B*'?n'i  in  Ex.  17  13.  The  verbal  repetition  of  the  curse
is  worthy  of  note.  In  iS.  152,  there  is  an  obvious
allusion  to  the  passage  in  Exodus.

The  mention  of  the  Amalekites  in  Judg.  813  is  perhaps
due  only  to  an  ancient  dittography  (p'?Dj;i  |icj'.  ^  reading
which,  at  all  events,  must  have  been  known  to  the
author  of  the  Maccabean  Psalm  83 — see  v.  7  [S])  ;  but
it  may  be  questioned  whether  Budde  is  justified  in  con-
sidering the  reference  to  the  Amalekites  in  connection
with  the  Midianites  (Judg.  6333  7 12)  as  a  mere  gloss  ;  it
is  in  fact  by  no  means  improbable  that  besides  the
Midianites  various  other  nomadic  tribes  made  inroads
upon  the  Israelite  peasantry  at  the  period  in  question.

The  account  of  the  wars  of  Saul  against  the  Amalekites

(iS.  15) is unfortunately not  altogether trustworthy.

_ . J Even  in  its  original  form  it  must  have  con-

'  _  . ,  tained  many  exaggerations  ;  and  it  has
been  subjected  to  considerable  revision.
The  high  figures  which  appear  in  the  narrative  have  no
historical  value.  The  same  may  be  said  of  the  vast  extent
attributed  to  the  Amalekite  territory  in  a  passage  imitated
from  Gen.  25 18  ( i  S.  156).  We  may  with  some  certainty,
however,  conclude  that  the  very  first  king  of  Israel
inflicted  severe  losses  upon  the  wild  nomads  (cpSAUL,
§  3). In  this  connection  we  read  of  King  Agag  (the  only


4.  Later  times.


AMALEK

Anialekite  proper  name  known  to  us,  it  may  be  noticed
in  passing),  to  whom  the  words  of  Balaam  in  Nu. '24  7
refer.  The  description  of  the  death  of  Agag,  obscure
as  it  is,  has  a  very  antique  colouring,  and  reminds  us
of  Judg.  818-21.  Popular tradition has strangely

interwoven  the  fate  of  the  .\nialekitcs  with  that  of  .Saul.
According  to  one  story,  which  does  not  agree  with  the
narrative  in  iS.  31,  .Saul  was  slain  by  an  Amalekite,
who  forthwith  carried  the  news  to  David,  but  instead  of
being  rewarded  w;is  put  to  death.  Even  in  the  book  of
Estlier,  coniiiosed  many  centuries  later,  reference  is  made
to  the  enmity  Ix-'tween  .Saul  and  Agag,  as  the  kabhiiis
long  ago  observed  :  the  righteous  Mordecai  is  descended
from  the  one,  and  the  wicked  Ilaman  from  the
other.

.\t  the  moment  when  Saul  fell  on  Mount  Gilboa,  the
Amalckites,  as  it  happened,  were  signally  defeated  by
David.  An  ancient  and  well-informed  narrator  tells  us
how  David,  an  exile  at  the  court  of  the  king  of  Gath,
while  professing  to  be  very  differently  occujjicd  (see
Atiiisii,  D.wii),  §  5),  was  in  reality  carrying  on  a
war  of  extermination  against  the  aboriginal  tribes,  in
particular  the  .Xmalckiles  ( i  S.  278).  On  one  occasion
the  Amalekites  profited  by  his  absence  to  seize  his
residence,  Ziklag,  and  carried  off  all  its  inhabitants.
He  pursued  them,  however,  made  a  sudden  .attack  with
a  band  of  only  600  nien,  rescued  the  whole  of  the  spoil,
and  slew  them  all,  with  the  exception  of  400  who
escaped  on  their  camels  (iS.  30).  Even  the  details  of
this  narrative  may,  for  the  most  part,  \x  regarded  as
historical  ;  it  is  obvious  that  the  struggles  here  described
were  not  wars  on  a  large  scale  but  mere  raids  such  as
are  usual  in  the  desert.

In  after  times  .\malek  does  not  come  into  prominence.
The  words  of  Halaatn,  which  descrilje  it  as  '  the  first-
born of  nations'  {i.e. ,  primeval  nation?),
and  at  the  same  time  foretell  its  over-
throw, are  spoken  rather  from  the  point  of  view  of  the
age  in  which  Balaam  is  pLaced  than  from  the  point  of
view  of  the  real  author,  who  seems  to  have  lived  about
the  eighth  century  n.c.  (cp  Bala.\m).  According  to  the
remarkable  notice  contained  in  i  Ch.  442^,  500  men  of
the  tribe  of  .Simeon,  under  leaders  whose  names  are
specified,  exterminated  the  last  renmant  of  the  Amalekites
in  the  mountain  country  of  Seir  and  settled  down  in  their
place.  Hence  it  would  appear  that  the  last  Amalekites
dwelt  in  the  mountains  of  Edom.  With  this  it  agrees
that  Gen.  36,  the  substance  of  which  must  be  at  all
events  jjre-cxilic,  represents  Amalek  as  the  son  of  I".sau's
first-born,  I-.liphaz,  by  a  concubine — i.e.,  .as  an  Edoniite
tribe  of  inferior  rank  :  see  Gen.  36 12  (of  which  i  Ch.  1  36
is  an  incorrect  version),  and  compare  i:  16.  The  con-
cubine in  question  is  Timna,  according  to  i'.  22  (  =  i  Ch.
I39),  a  sister  of  Lotan  of  -Seir,  and  according  to  the
second  list  in  v.  40  J^.  (where  Amalek  is  omitted),  an
Edomite  tribe  or  settlement.  Thus  the  renmants  of
Amalek  are,  to  some  extent,  reckoned  as  members  of
the  Edoniite  race.

The  mention  of  Amalek  among  the  contemporaneous
enemies  of  Israel,  by  a  psalmist  of  the  Maccabean
6.Latewriter8.  P^""'^  (^\S3  7[8]),  is  merely  an
example  of  the  poetical  licence
whereby  an  ancient  name  is  applied  to  a  modern
people,  just  as,  e.o-. ,  Greek  writers  of  the  sixth  century
A.u.  call  (ioths  'Scythians.'  As  far  as  we  can  judge,
the  Amalekites  were  never  a  very  important  trilx; ;  at
their  first  appearance  in  history  they  are  threatened
with  total  destruction,  and  it  would  seem  that  neither
Egyptian  nor  Assyrian  records  allude  to  their  existence.
Ancient  Arabic  authors,  indeed,  descrilje  them  as  a
mighty  nation  which  dwelt  in  Arabia,  Egypt,  and  other
countries,  and  lasted  down  into  post-Christian  times.
The  present  writer,  however,  thinks  that  in  his  short
essay  'On  the  Amalekites'  (Gottingen,  1864),  he  has
succeeded  in  proving  that  these  and  other  similar
statements  are  either  fancies  suggested  by  passages  in
9  129


AMALEK

the  OT,  or  else  deliberate  fictions,  and  therefore  have
no  historical  value.  At  the  present  day  this  opinion
seems  to  be  generally  accejjted.

One  branch  of  the  .Amalekites,  it  is  true,  apjjears  to
have  lasted  somewhat  hunger  than  the  rest.  \\  hen  Saul
^ ..  attacked the Amalekites  he  ordered  the

■  h'cnilcs  to  separate  themselves  from  the
doomed  people,  on  the  ground  that  they  had  shown
kindness  to  Israel  at  the  time  of  the  exodus  (i  .S.  Uib).
The  Kenites  must  therefore  have  lx:longed  to  Amalek,  or
must,  at  least,  have  stood  in  close  connection  with  them
(cp  Judg.  1 16  as  in  SliO  T).  Thus  we  find  that  the  oracle
of  Bala.im  (Xu. '24  2i^)  mentions  this  people,  under  the
name  of  Kain  [v.  22,  I^V  mg. ),  immediately  after  Amalek.
Their  friendly  relations  with  Isr.ael  are,  moreover,
shown  by  the  fact  that,  according  to  Judg.  1  16,  the  father-
in-law  of  Moses  was  a  Kenite  (elsewhere  a  Midianite),
and  also  by  the  fact  that  his  descendants  entered
Palestine  in  company  with  the  tribe  of  Judah.  Hence
the  Kenites  are  reckoned  as  a  part  of  Judah  (i  S.  3O29,
cp  I  Ch.  255)  ;  but  according  to  the  more  accurate  view
they  were  a  distinct  people,  though  they  dwelt  in  the
south  of  Judtea,  and  were  recognised  as  kinsmen  by
D.avid  ( I  S.  27  10).  From  i  Ch.  255,  it  would  apjx-ar  that
the  kechabites,  with  whom  the  nomadic  life  had  Ijecome
a  religious  institution,  were  included  among  the  Kenites
(Jcr.  3.') 2K.  IO1523).  In another  district, the

great  plain  of  S.  Galilee,  we  meet  with  Helxr  the  Kenite
(Judg.  4  / ).  For  VV.  Max  Miiller  is  mistaken  when  he
derives  the  name  from  a  city  called  Khi  {As.  u.  Eur.
174)  ;  the  Song  of  Deborah  reckons  Jael,  the  wife  of
Hcber,  among  'women  in  the  tent'  (Judg.  524),  whicli
shows  that  the  people  in  question  are  nomads.
Accordingly  we  have  rfo  right  to  regard  these  Kenites
as  wholly  distinct  from  those  in  the  South.  The

oracle  of  Balaam  mentions  Kenites  in  the  rocky  hills  of
the  South,  foretelling  that  they  will  be  carried  away
captive  by  the  Assyrians.  Gen.  15 19  includes  the
Kenites  among  the  ten  nations  whose  land  God  will
give  to  Israel.

This  people  must  therefore  have  been  a  nomadic
tribe,  which,  at  least  in  part,  belonged  to  Amalek,  in
part  was  absorbed  into  Isr.ael,  and  in  part,  it  may  be,
maintained  a  separate  existence  for  some  time  longer.
It  is  not  impossible  that  the  Bedouin  tribe,  Kain,
which  dwelt  in  the  desert  of  Sinai  and  the  neighbouring
districts  about  six  centuries  after  Christ,  may  be  con-
nected with  the  Kenites  (Kain)  of  the  OT,  as  the
present  writer,  following  Ewald,  has  stated  {op.  cit.).
At  the  present  time,  some  further  arguments  might  be
brought  forward  in  favour  of  this  hypothesis,  which,
however,  is  still  very  far  from  being  absolutely  proved.

On  the  other  hand,  there  are  many  objections  to  the
theory  that  Cain,  the  fratricide,  is  a  representative  of  the
p  .  Bedouin  tribe  of  the  Kenites,  as  well  as  to
7.  Oain.  ^jj^^.j.  h^.potheses  of  Stade  (/.-/ 7TF 14 250-318
['94]),  great  as  is  the  acuteness  with  which  they  are
supported.  A  few  points  alone  can  be  here  referred  to.
C:ain,  the  brother  of  Abel  the  shepherd,  is  expressly
described  as  a  hushamimati.  After  his  evil  deed  he
becomes  '  a  wanderer  and  a  fugitive  ' — i.e. ,  an  outlawed,
homeless  criminal.  This  is  something  quite  different
from  a  nomad,  who  regularly  goes  to  and  fro  within  the
same  pastures  in  the  '  desert. '  That  the  Kenites,  from
among  whom  Moses  fetched  a  wife,  and  who  have  a
good  name  almost  everywhere  in  the  OT,  were  a  trilx;
of  smiths'  (and  therefore  of  pariahs),  has  no  evidence
in  its  favour,  nor  can  we  find  any  indication  that  the
later  Arabian  tribe  of  Kain  (Bal-Kain)  was  of  such  a
character.  In  the  Ar.  kaiti,  which,  it  is  true,  also
means  'smith,  craftsman,'  several  words  appear  to  be
combined.  Besides,  blood  -  vengeance,  which  is  first
mentioned in the story  of  Cain, is  by no means  a

1  Similarly  Sayce,  Races  0/  OT  118.  'They  formed  an
important  guild  in  an  .ige  when  the  art  of  metallurgy  w.os
confined  to  a  few.' See  however  Doughty,  Ar.  Des.  1  xSo-sd:.


AMAM

peculiarity  of  nomad  tribes  ;  it  prevailed  also  among  the
ancient  Israelites,  who  of  course  were  agriculturists
(see  also  C.MN,  §  4/  ).  TH.  N.

AMAM (DDN; chn [B]  ; amam lAL]),  an un-
identified site  in  the  Negcb  of  Judah  (Josh.  ISabf).

AMAN. I. (am&n [A], aA&m  [B], naA&B  M)
Ward of  Tobit's nephew Achiacharus  (Sennacherib's j
vezir, Tob.  I22). who basely ill-used his benefactor, I
but came  to grief  himself  while his victim escaped
(Tob.  14  10); called Nadan  in  romance  of  Ahikar  (see j
ACHIACIIAKUS),  and  no  doubt,  therefore,  the  same  as |
NASB.\s(i/0(r/3ay[B.\],  j'ada5[N] ; •n'^: nada/AlVg.], \
nabal [It.]), the (^d5f\(pos (EV 'brother's  son') of I
Achiacharus (Tob.  lliSf), probably to be rendered,
in accordance with the romance, '  sister's son ' (cp
accompanying  table). See  AcHiACHAKUS.

Tobiel


Tobit


Achiacharus  (Tob.  1  21/.)


Nasba-s  (Tob.  11  18)
i.e.,  Nadan  (romance)
prob.  =  .\man  (Tob.  14  lo).

2.  (a/xav  [B.X.VL])  '  Rest  of  Esther  '  10  7,  etc.  See  H  aman.
AMANA  (n:pN  'firm,  constant";  (5i*na  translates
'  from  the  top  of  Amana '  avb  dpTJs  r-iareu^  ;  ]Ll.ao{  ;
Amaiia).  i.  The  name  of  a  mountain,  in  Cant. -18,
where  '  the  top  of  Amana '  is  introduced  parallel  to  '  the
top  of  Senir  and  Hermon.'

'With  me  from  I>ebanon,  O  bride,  with  me  from  Lebanon  come  ;
From  the  summit  of  Amana,  from' the  summit  of  Senir  and
Hermon.'

In  the  preceding  distich  reference  is  made  to  Lebanon.
Evidently  the  poet  means  some  part  of  the  range  of
Antilibanus,  probably  the  Jebel  ez-Zebedani,  below
which  is  the  beautiful  village  of  Zebedani  and  the  source
of  the  Xahr  Barada  (the  Heb.  Abana,  q.v.).  In  in-
scriptions of  Tiglath-ijileser  III.  and  Sennacherib  the
mountain  ranges  Libnana  and  Ammanana  are  coupled
(Del.  Par.  103/).

2.  Considering  how  well  the  form  .Amana  is  attested,
it  becomes  a  question  whether  in  2  K.  f)  12  we  should
not  adopt  the  Kr.  in  preference  to  the  Kt.,  and  read
•  Amana '  (so  AV  mg. )  or  Amanah  (so  RV  mg. )  as  the
old  Hebrew  name  of  the  Nahr  Barada  (see  Ab.vna).

Many  MSS  with  the  two  Soncino  and  the  Brescia  editions
have  this  reading  in  the  text  in  Kings;  Targ.  and  Pesh.,  with
the  Complut.  ed.  of  <5  and  the  Syro-Hex.  te.xt,  also  presuppose  it.

T.  K.  C.

AMANAH  (njOS'  Kr.),  2  K.  5  i2t  RV  =  AV
Amana,  2.

AMARIAH  (nnOvS  [and  -innJON,  see  nos.  5,  6,  7]
'  Yahwe  hath  spoken  '  [see  Namks,  §  33]  or  '  promised.'
Less  probably  '  man  of  Yahwe '  on  analogy  of  Palm.
n.  pr.  KccnoK  'man  of  the  sun,'  see  Baethg.  Beitr.
89  n. ;  1  &MAp[e]i  A  [B.VL]),  a  name  occurring  frequently,
but  with  the  exception  of  (i)  only  in  post-e.xilic
literature.

I.  b.  Hezekiah,  an  ancestor  of  Zephaniah  (Zeph.  1 1,
a/Liop[e]toi;  [B.A],  afx/j-optov  [N*],  -piov  [N'-^^'J],  o/uo-
piov  [X<=<=  ^'''-  Q]).  The  readings  with  '  o  '  as  the  .second
vowel  suggest  the  pronunciation  '  Amori '  =  .\morite.
Another  ancestor  is  called  '  Cushi ' — i.e.,  the  Cushite.

2.  In  list  of  Judahite  inhabitants  of  Jerusalem  (see  Ezra,  ii.
S  5  W  §  "5  [•]  «),  Neh.  11  4  (Ta,iap[«]ia  [HA],  a^.  [«],  -lou  [L])
=  I  Ch.  i>4,  Imki,  abbreviated  form  ("pK,  anp[e]i  [B.A.],  -/3pi  [L]).

3.  One  of  the  b'ne  Hani  in  list  of  those  with  foreign  wives
(Ezra,  i.  8  send),  Ezral0  42(Mopia  [HN],  a^apios  (AL]).

4.  A  priest  in  Zeriibbal)ei's  band  (Ezka,  li.  §6/^),  Neh.  12a
([«rSpa/i]apiafi[aAovA]  (B),  fiaptia  [k1,  a/ii.  [j<'=-^l,  a^apias  [L]),
cp  V.  13  (oipajiio  («♦]),  and  in  list  of  signatories  to  the  covenant
(see  Ezra,  i.  §  7),  Neh.  10 3  [4]  (a/napiaj  [L]). A  comparison  of

1  For  another  suggested  compound  of  x(k]  see  Mkribbaal.


AMASAI

the  lists  in  Neh.  with  i  Ch.  24  makes  it  plausible  to  identify
'Amariah'  with  the  priestly  house  of  'Immer'  (?'.  14)  whose
institution  is  a.scribed  to  David's  time  (see  ImiMEK,  2).

In  the  following  (nos.  5-8),  the  unhistorical  nature  of  the
context  strongly  suggests  that  the  name  is  introduced  merely  to
give  an  air  of  antiquity  to  this  priestly  family.

5.  Chief  priest,  temp.  Jehoshaphat  (aCh.  19ii  M'TCK ;  Jos.
a^acriaf).

6.  A  Levite,  temp.  Hezekiah,  aCh.  31is  (?nnCN ;  /nopia?
[BA],  a,ji.  [L]).

7.  One  of  the  b'ne  Hebron,  a  Kohathite  Levite  {aixaSia  [B]);
I  Ch.  23  19  ;  in  24  23  ^nnZH  (a^apios  [A]).

8.  Amariah  occurs  twice  in  the  genealogy  of  the  high  priests,
(a)  as  son  of  Meraioth  ;  1  Ch.  67  [633]  (a^xapiat  [.\]:  Jos.
'Apo<^aios)  =  ti52  [37]  (ixAiapeia  [B,  i.e.,  MA  misread  AlA]),  and
(/')  as  a  son  of  Azariah,  On  {■) -^j]  (ofiapia;  [AL]),  cp  Ezra
73  (<Ta/xapeia  [B.\]  afiapiov  [L])  =  i  Esd.  « 2  (afxapeeiov  [B]
ofj-aptov  [.\L],  EV  .Xmakias,  as  in  4  Ksd.  I2,  Atller^t^  [ed.
Bensley]),  probably  the  same  as  5  above  (cp  Be.).  See  further
Hic.H  Pkiest  and  note  the  su.spicious  recurrence  of  the
sequence  Amariah,  Ahitub,  and  Zadok  (cp  We.  Prol.^M  222).
See  Mhkaiah.

AMARIAS (aaaarioy [A]), i Esd.  8 2  =  Ezra  7 a

AmAKIAH  {q.v.,  4).

AMASA  (i^b'py  ;  rather,  perhaps,  ^^"TS^  Ammishai,
cp  AMecCAGi  [B  in  2  S.  19,  BA  in  c.  20,  .\  in  c.  17],
-eCAl  [A],  -eccA  [L  always  ;  .K  occasionally],  and  other
variants,  see  below  ;  cp  Ablshai,  Amasai.  The  form
Amasa  rests  on  a  false  etymology  [from  j;-,-;;' =  C3J?]  ;  cp
AmasH-SAI  ;  so  Marq.  Fund.  24).

1.  Son  of  Abigail,  the  sister  of  Zeruiah  and  David
(i  Ch.  2 16/.  2  S.  1725  afxfcraei.  [B],  -(xaaei  [A]).  His
father  was  Jether  a  Jezreelite — not  an  '  Israelite'  or  an
'Ishmaelite'  (see  Abigail,  2).  He  was  among  those
that  fell  away  from  David  to  Absalom  (q.v.),  who
entrusted  him  with  the  command  of  his  forces  (2  S.
1725).  In  spite  of  this,  David  thought  it  prudent  to
conciliate  Amasa  by  a  promise  of  the  same  position  in
his  own  army,  JoAB  {q.z'.)  having  earned  the  king's  dis-
pleasure (2  S.  19 13  [14]  a/MLffffai  [A]).  On  the  ronewal
of  revolt  under  Sheba  (2  S.  20 1),  in  which  according  to
one  view  he  was  implicated,  Amasa  was  entrusted  with
mustering  the  men  of  Judah  (z'.  4).  Joab  soon  took
his  revenge  upon  his  rival.  Amasa  having  failed  to
appear  at  the  appointed  time,  David  commissioned
Abishai  (2  S.  206)  Mo  go  with  his  men  in  pursuit  of  the
rebels,  and  Joab  naturally  joined  the  party.  The  cousins
met  at  Gibeon,  and  while  Joab  was  pretending  to  give
Amasa  a  friendly  salute,  he  gave  him  a  deadly  blow^
(2  S.  20  8-10).  The  narrator  is  not  interested  enough  in
the  unfortunate  man  to  tell  us  whether  he  ever  received
an  honourable  burial  (i'.  12  a^eaaaei  [B  once],  afifffai
[A  once]). See  SiiEBA,  ii.  i  (end).

His  death  is  referred  to  in  iK.  25  a/ite(7<roia  [B],  -<rja  i(L],
ajUAi.fO'a  [A]  and  r.  32  (a/netro-a  [1?L;  A  omits]).  (The  P  of
a^l^o•(ra^  in  i  Ch.  2i7'[B]  may  come  from  the  following  Hebrew
word.)

2.  {aixa<T[e]M^  [B.\L]),  an  Ephramite,  temp.  Ahaz  (2  Ch.
28i2t).  T.  K.  C.

AMASAI  (^bW,  perhaps  rather  to  be  read  ''CW,
Ammishai  [so  We.  //(7(-'  24,  n.  2],  cp  u«  X>  V  taA.QJO
in  I  Ch.  62535  Abishai;  amacai  [B.\L],  -ce  [N])-
I.  A  name  in  the  genealogy  of  Kohath  (i  Ch.  625  [to],
a/Mcraei  [B],  -fM(n  [A],  -aa  [L]  ;  i  Ch.  6  35  [20],  afiaOeiov
[B],  .;x«  [A]).

2.  Chief  of  David's  'thirty,'  i  Ch.  12i8  [19];  see
David,  §  ii  a  iii. ,  to  whom  the  Chronicler  ascribes  an
obviously  not  very  ancient  poetic  speech.

He  has  been  variou.sly  identified  with  Amasa  (e.g:,  by  E\v.)
and  with  Abish.-xi,  who  is  called  .'Mishai  in  i  Ch.  II20.  Ki.
even  corrects  to  '  .\bishai '  (SBO  T,  ati  ioc.\  Neither  .\masa
nor  Abishai,  however,  occupied  the  rank  of  chief  of  the  thirty,
according  to  the  lists  in  2  S.  23  and  i  Ch.  11.  'The  matter  is
of  no  great  moment,  since  the  connection  in  which  .\ma.sai  is
mentioned  in  i  Ch.  12  does  not  permit  us  to  use  the  passage
for  historical  purposes.  The  Chronicler's  conception  of  Saul's
fugitive  son-in-law  is  dominated  by  the  later  view  of  David  as

1  Most  critics  change  Abishai  here  and  in  v.  7  to  'Joab'  (the
reading  of  Pesh.),  but  perhaps  mistakenly.  See  Bu.  SBOT,
ad  loc.

2  See  Dr.,  or  Bu.,  for  restoration  of  the  text.

132


AMASHAI

the  'anointed '  of  Yahwc  ami  the  founder  of  the  one  legitimate
dynasty  (We.  ProlA'i^  i8o).

3.  A  priest,  temp.  Daviil  (i  Ch.  I524).

4.  Ancestor  of  Mahath,  a  Kohathite  Levite,  temp.
Hezekiah  ;  probably  a  family  name  ;  cp  no.  i  (2  Ch.
29i--  :  ixaai  [M.\],  an«rai  [I.]).

5.  Soo  Ik-Iow,  Amash.m.

AMASHAI.  or  rather,  as  in  R\',  Amashsai  ('PLI^Jf.
wlicrc  D  implies  a  reading  'DDV  based  on  a  false  deriva-
tion from  DOy  ;  i)erha])s  really  to  tx,-  read  ,\mmishai,  see
Amasai),  a  priestly  name  in  the  post-e.xilic  list  of  in-
habitants of  Jerusalem  (see  I''ZKA,  ii.  §  15  a),  N'eh.  11 13
(AMAclellA  [HN].  -CM  [I'].  -Mec&l  [A])=iCh.9i2
where  the  name  is  Maasai,  AV  Maasiai  ('CTD
[Hii.  Gi.],  some  authorities  'Jjp  [CJi.];  maacaia  [U].
-an  fL],  MACAl  [A|; ■-'v*'  «^ in  Neh.  t«fn..n.^).

AMASIAH  (H'Dpr,  §  29,  ■  Vahwe  Ix-ars,'  cp  Amos  ;

MACAIAC ['VL -AIIAC [A], AMACIAC [L]). One of
Jehoshaphafs  captains  (2  Ch.  17i6t).

AMATHEIS  (cMAeeic  [B]),  i  Esd.  1^29  AV  =  Ezra
10 2S  Atiii.ai.

AMATHIS  (AAXAGeiTlN  [A]),  i  Mace.  12 25!  AV,
RV  IlAMATll  (y.r. ).

AMAZIAH  (-in^'VPS*,  and  in  nos.  2-4,  n;ypN,  §  29,
'Yahwc  is  mighty,'  cp  A.Moz  ;  AMecc[e]iAC  L^AL],
-eci.  [ALJ,  -MAc[e]|.  [H.A(J],  -MACCI-  [L]).

I.  b.  Joash  ;  father  of  Uzziah  and  king  of  Judah  circa
796-790  B.C.  (see  Chro.noi.ogy,  §§  35,  37)  2  K.  14  1-20
2  Ch.  25.  Two  points  in  his  favour  are  mentioned  in
Kings — viz.,  that  he  punished  his  father's  nunclerers
and  that  he  reconquered  the  l-xlomites  who  had  revolted
(see  Kdom,  §  8  ;  Joktiikki.,  2).  Whether  he  was
to  any  extent  successful  against  that  restless  and  war-
like people  has  indeed  lx»en  doubted,  but  on  grounds
which  will  not  bear  examination.

.\m.  1  iiyr  is,  in  fact,  more  than  probably  a  later  insertion
(see  Amos,  §  9),  so  that  the  inference,  drawn  from  this  passage
by  Stade  (in  '87)  and  Kittel,  that  Amos  knew  of  no  great  calamity
befalling  Kdom  in  recent  times,  falls  to  the  ground.

Amaziah's  unfortunate  challenge  to  Joash  king  of
Israel  (who  treated  him,  according  to  the  narrative,  '  as
a  good-natured  giant  might  treat  a  dwarf,'  2  K.  14  8^)
ended  seriously  enough,  in  the  strengthening  of  the  old
supremacy  of  northern  over  southern  Israel  (see  IsK.\EL,
§  31).  It  is  quite  possible  that  the  Kdomites  took
advantage  of  the  weakness  of  Judah  to  recover  in  some
degree  their  independence  ;  but  of  this  we  have  no
information.

The  Chronicler  assures  us  (2  Ch.  2.5  14)  that,  on  his  return  from
the  s.inguinary  battle  in  the  'valley  of  .salt'  (cp  2  K.  I47),
Amaziah  adopted  the  worship  of  the  Eclomitish  deities,  forgetting
that  such  an  act  would  be  possible  only  if  the  Kdomites  were
either  the  masters  or  the  allies  of  the  people  of  Judah.

Like  his  father,  .Amaziah  died  a  violent  death ;  possibly,
as  Wellhausen,  Stade,  and  Kittel  suppose,  the  con-
spiracy against  him  was  not  unconnected  with  the
disgrace  which  he  had  l)rought  on  his  country.  The
Chronicler's  treatment  of  Amaziah's  reign  is  of  special
significance  for  the  Chronicler's  period  (see  Bennett,
Chron.  413-417,  and  cp  Kue.  Einl.  §  51,  n.  4).

Sources.  The  account  given  in  Kings  is  of  composite  origin.
2  K.  148-14  comes  from  a  somewhat  unfriendly  source,  which
may  be  of  N.  Israelitish  origin.  The  rest  of  ch.  14  belongs  to
the  Deuteronomistic  compiler,  who  lays  stre.ss  on  Amaziah's
better  side,  and  who  at  the  close  of  his  stor>'  probably  makes
use  of  the  royal  annals.

2.  Priest  of  liethel,  temp.  Amos  (.\m.  7  10  12). See  Amos,  §  i.

3.  A  Simeonite  (i  Ch.  4  34  a^a<j{(]t.a  (HAl,  -(t<ti.ov  [\.]).

4.  .\  Merarite,  temp.  David  (i  Ch.  64SI30)  ofieaatia  (?)  [B],
-oaia  [LI,  /ia«ro-ia  [A]).  T.  K.  C.

AMBASSADOR,  the  FA'  rendering  of  the  following
three  Hebrew  words  : —

1.  .l/<=//^ (j-Sg) in  2  Ch.  3231  (irp«(r^vTT)«), more  properly  'inter-
preter '  (as  E'V  in  Gen.  42  23  [ipivrtvtvTri<i],  in  Is.  43  27  [RV  mg.
anib.-issador,  a.pxovTt<t  (Pbnaoi-,  \■,^^^  .\q.  Syni.  epfi7)i/«t?],  and
in  Job  33  2:5  ((pHj«A  have  Oafanjifropoi ]).

2.  Marrikh  (^kSc)  in  2  Ch.  3a2i  Is.  3O433  7  Ez.  17  15  (\^^
to  send ;  cp  BDB  Lex. ,  ad loc. ;  ayyeAos),  a  word  used  indefinitely

133


AMBER

ot  any  me.sscnger  ;  so,  e.g.,  of  a  priest  (cp  Mai.  27),  a  prophet

(Is.  4'2  19  ;  oi  Kupicvoi^rft), or  (a.s  fre(|ucnilj)  an  .niigel. Alara/t/i,

accordingly,  often  approximates  to  the  idea  of  '  ambavsadur '  :

cp  the  emissaries  sent  to  Kdom,  Sihon  king  of  the  Anioritcs,  and

Ammon  (NU.2O142I21  >rp«r^tt«,  Judg.  U  12;  EV  ' messengers 7.

3.  .S7r(T!<)'"  Is.  lS2(o^^pall5KAQr  and  Th.,  but  Aq.  irp«<r.

fiv-nn,  Sym.  an-ocTToAo*,  '  hostages.'cp  i  Mace.  1  10 8 7!* 51, etc.]).

Is.  67q KV (AV  'messengers'; np(<rPv^), jer.  4ili4 Fr.  l.J  17

25  13  (EV  in  the  last,  mes.sengcr,  iyytXoK)  and  Ob.  1  i  (wtpioxn,

a  confusion  with  ^^^  or  lisC). The  dcnom.  vb.  TCxn,  'to

feign  one's  self  an  ambassador,'  found  in  .\IT  of  Jos.  9  (cp  EV)

should  be  read  n*B!J.li '  'akc  provision '  (so  RV  mg.  after  most

:  cp  Bennett,  .SHOT,  ati  loc.).^

the Apocrypha 'ambassador' represents npr<Tpvi,npt<T-

j /3|t]uT7)S  in 1  Mace. '.)70  11  9  14  21 (trpeo-flvT^poi  (KVJ)  40  (jrpto-

PvTtpoii[V])V,,7  2  Mace.  11  34 (in 1 Mace.  13  14  21 AV has

j 'messengers'),  and  ayyrAm  in  Judith  3i  AV  (RV  licre  and  EV

i elsewhere  'messenger). In NT  the  word  occurs  in  2  Cor.  620

Eph.  0  20  (jrp«r/3<i;tu),  Philem.  9  RV  mg.  (npttrfivTrii).

j A distinction between messengers and diplomatic

agents naturally jiresupposes an acquaintance with

! state-craft  hardly  ix)ssible  in  Israel  lx.'fore  the  monarchy,

I and  even  in  David's  time  emissaries  from  one  court  to

another  were  liable  to  Ije  abused,  although  the  punish-

I meiit inflicted upon the oflenders may suggest that

; ambassadorial  rights  were  beginning  to  be  recogni.sed

(see  2  .S.  10  I  ^). The  first  use  of  s/r,  apparently  the

only approach to  a specific word for 'ambassador,'

naturally  belongs to the time  when Israel had Ijeen

forced  into  diplomatic  relations  with  H^gypt  and  Assyria

(of  whose  fre(iuent  intercomnuinication  at  a  nuich  earlier

period  the  Amarna  tablets  tell  us  so  much). I-'rom  the

' nature of the case  sir is i^resumably a loan-word. ^

[ The  employment  of  the  term  i/ie/is,  '  interpreter,'  is  the

more interesting since  Aramaic was the language  of

[ diplomacy  for  .Assyrians  and  Hebrews; cp  Is.  3(3ii,  and

see  Aramaic  La.nguagk,  §2. .See  Post,  Kahsiiakkh.

s.  a.  c.
AMBER  C'Crn; in  pause  [Kz.  82,  where, however,
Co.  regards  it  as  a  gloss]  .I'^rrrn).

Cp  Kgyp.  hsmn,  'electriim'?  or  'bronze';  see  E(;vi"T,  §  361

last note,  also  Lag. Uehers. ii\  ; but  cp  Erman,  /Cl>.MC  4(5

115  ['92],  and  also  Ebcrs,  ih. 31  454; again-st

1.  Hashmal the  usual  explanation  of 'n  see  Konig,  Lehrgtb.

=  amber. 1 9>. Fr. Del. in Hii. -Del. Kzckiel xii.

identifies  the  Egypti.in  word  quoted,  and  also

Heb.  ^•zxin,  with  Ass.  Hmnru,  which  he  defines  in  Ass.  HUB

as  a  costly  brilliant  metal  (?). So  Hommel,  Die  Seiuit.  I'olker

1  450.

The  Heb.  hashmal  occurs  thrice  (or  twice ;  see  above)
in  ICzek.'',  and  is  rendered  by  the  I':V  'aml)er.'  ©"-^Q
has  -ffKiKxpov,  \'g.  •*  clcctrum,  a  rendering  which  most
scholars  {e.g.,  Smend)  have  adopted,  supposing,  from
the  context,  that  some  metallic  substance  is  meant,  and
understanding  ijXeKTpov  to  mean  here  a  certain  alloy  of
gold  and  silver  (Egyptologists  have  given  the  same
meaning  to  the  apparently  related  Egyptian  word).
This  interpretation,  however,  rests  upon  a  mistake  as
to  the  ancient  use  of  the  term  ■fjXeKTpov  (see  also  Egyi'T,
§  36,  last  note).

It  is  true  the  n.-ime  is  sometimes  used  of  a  metallic  substance.
Thus,  to  cite  the  e.arliest  c.-i-se,  Sophocles  (.1 11 1 ig.  1036-38)  makes
Creon  speak  of  electrum  from  Sardis(Tb»'  jrpos  ^dpSfoif  ijXfKTpov)
and  Indian  gold  («tal  r'ov  '\vSikov  xpv<t6v),  doubtless  mc.ining  by
the  former  what  the  Greeks  commonly  called  pale  gold  (Afvit6«
Xpva-6^),  a  natural  alloy  of  gold  and  silver  (one  part  silver  to  three
or  four  parts  of  gold)  found  native  in  great  abundance  in  I.ydia.
That  electrum,  however,  was  not  a  term  commonly  applied
to  such  an  alloy  seems  indicated  by  the  pains  which  Strabo
takes  to  expl.-iin  the  term  as  used  in  metallurgy  of  the  residuum
(KoBapijLa)  left  .after  the  first  smelting  of  gold  ore  (t/rcvj  14li). He

J  TSi  'amha.ssador,'  appears  in  ©  in  four  other  place.v  in  Is,^
viz.  13  8  (for  Ts,  'a  pang')  21  2  ("lO  "1'S  for  "TO  'T'S)  39 1
(between  cnSD  and  rmZl)  and  689  (for  ^S  compare  Du.,  ad  loc.,
Che.  Intr.  Isa.  350).

2  The  connection  with  Ar.  far,  'to  go '  (Ges.-Bu.),  docs  not
commend  itself.  It  may  perhaps  be  compared  with  As,s.  iirraiu,
'stick'  or  '  sceptre  ■  (see  Del.  .\ss.  ///r/.',f. 7'.)— the  official  derives
his  name  from  the  tmblem  of  office,  originally  the  courier's
stick  (?).

3  1  4  27,  'and  out  of  the  midst  thereof  as  the  colour  of  amber,'
'I  saw  as  the  colour  of  amber';  82  'as  the  appearance  of
brightness  .as  the  colour  of  amtier.'

*  For  a  rendering  <pi%  in  Ezek.  1  4  see  Field,  Hexa^la.

134


AMBER

himself  usually  employs  the  expression  '  pale  gold '  when  he
alludes  to  the  native  alloy.  Sophocles,  too  (/.c),  shows  that
he  is  eiiiploving  the  word  in  an  unusual  and  extended  way,  by
appending  the  iiualifying  phrase  'from  Sardis.'

Usually  the  word  has  quite  another  meaning.
In  Homer,  e.g^.,  where  the  word  occurs  thrice  and  is  signifi-
cantly applied  to  an  article  trafficked  in  by  Phtxviicians,  the
trader  who  captured  l'".iinia;us  is  described  (('</.  I.")  460)  as  having
a  golden  necklace  (jitTo.  S'  ri\iKTpoi<Tif  itpro)  strung  with  pieces
of  electrum  (similarly  in  Ot/.  IS  296,  ijAe'xTpoio-ii'  itptLtvov).  '1  he
use  of  the  term  in  the  plural  in  these  passages  forbids  us  by
any  possibility  taking  it  as  meaning  the  gold  and  silver  alloy.

If,  then,  by  electrum  the  versions  do  not  mean  metallic
electrum  they  must  mean  amber.  There  are,  however,
two  kinds  of  amber,  and  it  remains  to  consider  which  is
meant.  The  one,  usually  a  dark  red  (rarely  of  a  light
colour),  is  found  in  the  south  of  luiroix:  (Catatiia,
Reggio)  and  in  the  Lebanon  ;  the  other,  usually  of  a
yellow  or  golden  colour,  but  occasionally  darker  in
hue.  has  from  ancient  times  lx.'cn  met  with  in  great
abundance  on  the  shores  of  the  Baltic  (whence  our
chief  modern  supjily  is  derived),  and  also  occurs  on  the
co.ists  of  the  North  Sea.  As  the  Ph(X'nician  had  red
amber  thus  at  his  very  door,  he  may  early  have  learned
to  employ  it  for  purposes  of  art  and  ornament,  just  as
he  learned  his  art  of  dyeing  with  purple  from  having
the  mure.\  in  abundance  by  his  shores.  Moreover,  red
amber  is,  as  stated  above,  also  to  be  found  in  Sicily,
and  may  have  been  procured  thence.  As  increased
demand  called  for  an  increased  supply,  traders,  sailing
round  the  coast  of  the  .,Kgean  in  quest  of  new  fishing
grounds  for  the  purple-fish,  would  naturally  search
keenly  for  fresh  supplies  of  the  precious  substance,  for
the  ancients  prized  amber  far  l^eyond  its  modern  value.
Its  power  of  attr.-icting  light  substances,  and  the  fact  that
when  warmed  it  emitted  a  faint  perfume,  invested  it  for  them
with  .an  element  of  mystery.  How  far  they  actually  .-uscribed
to  it  certain  medicinal  properties,  as  is  still  the  case  in  the  East
with  ambergris  —  an  animal  substance  that  has  lent  its  name
(adopted  by  us  from  the  Arabs)  to  amber — it  is  impossible  to
say.  .\s  these  two  substances,  which  have  really  nothing  in
common  save  the  power  to  emit  a  kind  of  perfume,  h.ive  been
called  l)y  the  same  name,  the  fact  that  ambergris  is  prized  as
an  aphrodisiac  may  perhaps  indicate  that  there  was  some
belief  that  amber  (electrum)  possessed  some  similar  potency.
This  is  actually  stated  by  Pliny  (AV/xxxvii.  3 11),  who  tells
us  that  in  his  own  time  the  peasant  women  in  the  regions  north
of  the  I'o  wore  amber  necklaces,  chiefly  as  an  ornament,  but
also  for  medical  re.isons,  and  goes  on  to  enumerate  .1  number
of  ailiii^^nts  for  which  it  was  regarded  as  a  specific,  either  taken
as  a  potion  or  applied  externally.  That  its  property  of  attrac-
tion (whence  our  modern  word  electricity)  was  early  known  to
the  Greeks  is  proved  by  the  notice  of  Thales.

But  how  would  red  amber  naturally  give  a  name  to
a  met.allic  electrum  ?  To  the  eye  of  the  Greek  the
essential  difference  Ix-'tween  pure  gold
and  the  alloy  (to  which  we  have  in
English  confined  the  name  electrum)
being  the  pale  colour  of  the  latter  {XevKbs  xp^'<^^^)'  ^"X
name  which  he  would  apply  to  it  to  differentiate  it  from
pure  gold  would  naturally  Ije  one  which  would  indicate
this  paleness.  The  reddish  amber  of  the  South  would
not  furnish  such  a  name,  having  no  resemblance  in  hue
to  metallic  electrum.  But  the  yellow  Baltic  amber,
varying  as  it  does  in  shade  from  almost  white  to  a
bright  golden,  would  give  a  fairly  accurate  description
of  the  alloy,  whose  hue  varies  with  the  proportion  of
its  component  parts.  .Similarly  when,  in  the  second
passage  quoted  above  from  the  Odyssey,  a  necklace  of
gold  set  with  pieces  of  amber  is  likened  to  the  sun
{■q^Xiov  <js),  the  golden  (Baltic)  amber  answers  to  the
description  far  letter  than  the  red.  We  may  assume,
then,  that  from  remote  ages  supplies  of  Baltic  (yellow)
amber  as  well  as  of  red  aml)er  were  available.

Nor  is  this  a  mere  hypothesis.  It  has  been  removed
from  the  realm  of  probability  into  that  of  established
fact,  by  the  finding  of  amber  in  the  tombs  discovered
at  Mycenne  by  D.  Schliemann  in  1876,  and  of  beads
of  the  same  material  in  his  more  recent  excavations
at  Tiryns.  As  the  red  amber  and  the  Baltic  amlier
differ  essentially  in  chemical  composition,  Dr.  Helm,
an  eminent  chemist  of  Uantzig,  has  been  able  to  prove

13s


2.  Perhaps
yellow  amber.


AMEN

by  actual  analysis  that  this  amber  is  the  Baltic  variety
(Schliemann's  Tiryns,  1886,  App.  p.  372).

It  was,  doubtless,  from  the  German  tribes  along  one
of  the  highways  which  were  in  constant  use  in  historic
times  that  the  ancient  supplies  of  Baltic  amber  were
obtained.  We  know  that  down  to  the  time  of  Herodotus
(at>out  430  B.C. )  the  Greeks  had  not  as  yet  opened  up
any  line  of  communication  with  the  amber  coasts  from
the  side  of  the  Euxine.

Herodotus  visited  Olbia,  and  though  he  has  given  a  pretty
full  account  of  those  regions,  mentioning  a  trade-route  leading
towards  the  East,  and  though  we  know  from  his  own  words
(8115)  that  the  amber  trade  was  a  subject  which  had  excited
his  attention,  he  expresses  the  commonly  received  opinion  that
it  was  obtained  at  the  mouth  of  the  Eridanus  [I'o].

Neither  does  Baltic  amber  seem  to  have  reached
Greece  in  his  time  by  any  Russian-Balkan  route  (5  9).
Down  to  the  time  of  Theophrastus  (315  B.C.)  it  was
entirely  through  northern  Italy  that  the  Greeks  got
their  sup|3ly  of  it.^  The  lake-dwellings  of  .Switzerland
and  the  valley  of  the  Po  have  yielded  abundance  of
Ix-ads  of  Baltic  amlser,  and  similar  lx;ads  are  well  known
in  the  tombs  of  central  Italy.  We  need  have  little
hesitation,  therefore,  in  believing  the  statement  of  Pliny -
( AW.xxxvii.  844)  that  it  was  brought  by  the  CJermans  into
Pannonia  and  thence  reached  the  Veneti,  who  dwelt
at  the  head  of  the  Adriatic'  As  the  main  lines  of
commerce  change  but  little  through  the  ages,  it  was
probably  by  this  route  that  the  amlx:r  lx;ads  reached
MycenfE  and  Tiryns  in  the  bronze  age,  and  articles  of
the  same  kind  may  even  have  reached  Palestine.  The
l)ead  found  at  Lachish,  however,  has  teen  proved,  since
this  article  was  in  print,  to  be  not  Baltic  amber,  but,
like  that  found  at  Tell-Zakarlya  [PF.FQ,  -April  1899,
p.  107),  a  resin,  and  no  trace  of  amljer  has  yet  been
found  in  Mesopotamia  (Per. -Chip. ,  Art.  Chald.  2362).
Nevertheless  it  is  possible  that  even  the  yellow  variety
may  have  reached  Palestine  in  the  sixth  century  B.C.,
and  the  view  of  the  ancient  versions  that  the  Hebrew
hashmal  indicates  this  substance  may  be  correct.

w.  K.

AMEN  (lOX;-*  in  ©  usually  -^ivoiTO  \'^  in  work  of
Chronicler  d/UJ^i',  and  so  in  NT  very  often),'"'  an  adj."
.J.  _.„  signifying  stability,  used  only  as  an  interjec-
■  tion  expressive  of  assent  of  one  kind  or
another."  Three  stages  may  be  distinguished:  (i)
Initial  Amen,  referring  back  to  words  of  another  speaker  :
probably  the  earliest  usage,  occurring  even  in  common
speech"  ( I  K.  1  36  Jer.286ll  5,  the  only  certainly  pre-exilic
Aniens).  1"  (2)  Detached  Amen,  the  complementary  sen-
tence being  suppressed  (Dt.  il  15-26  Neh.  5 13  ;  double  in

1  They  appear  to  have  confused  with  it  a  stone  called  Xiy-
yovpiQV  or  ti^uritis ;  as  so  often  occurs  they  mistook  the  region
whence  the  article  was  transmitted  to  them  for  the  actual  place
of  production  (Theophr.  De  I.af>.  16).

2  Pliny's  statement  is  confirmed  by  a  remark  of  Herodotus
(1  196)  from  which  it  appe.irs  that  the  only  knowletlge  then
obtainable  respecting  central  Europe  came  by  way  of  the  Veneti,


a  fact  which  shows  that  the  Greeks  knew  of  a  line  of  1
cation  in  this  direction.

*  Pytheas  of  Massilia  had,  in  the  fourth  century  B.C.,  found
the  Guttones  gathering  it  and  giving  it  in  trade  to  the  Tutones.

••  It  prob.-ibly  occurs  in  twelve  places  in  the  Hebrew,  for  in
Is.  05  16,  although  Aq.  (TrtTri o-nofieViov),  .Sym.,  Pesh.,  and  Vg.
have  amen,  it  should  probably  (so  Che.  Di.  Du.  Rys.  in  US,
and  perhaps  Targ.  Jon.  (!5"X'*0'"  [oAiTflu-oi'])  be  vocalised  other-
wise, perhaps  |"JN  (as  in  Is.  2.5  i,  where  indeed  the  Gk.  Vss.  [but
Sym.  not,  as  usual,  o.y.r^v,  but  TTi'orei]  and  Vg.  read  amen).
^BKAQ  j.gjjj  [j  jjIj^q^  Jjj  jj  corrupt  text,  in  Jer.  15  11  and  in  Jer.
819.  EV  has  rtw/fw  always ;  RV  even  in  Jer.  11  5.  It  occurs
in  six  places  in  ©  Apocr.'(for  Judg.  13  20  cp  Eth.  Pesh.).  Vg.
adds-Tob.  J"  12  13  23  and  2  Esd.  [Neh.]  13  31  ;  in  Ecclus.  50 2 j  it
is  probably  late.

o  Eight  (eleven)  times,  oArjflai?  once.

6  There  is  much  variety  of  text.  TR  has  it  in  some  119  places,
of  which  RV  rejects  19  (see  below,  g  2).

7  See,  however,  Barth,  NR  |8  sc  and  7/^.

8  For  three  kinds  see  Shehu'oth  36<i  (mid.).

9  It  seems  most  likely  that  in  Jer.  3  19  ®  re.-id  "'«  as  '-;'>'k  =

1"  ©  has  it  also  in  Jer.  3 19  15  11  (Is.  25  1  is  not  pre-exilic).
136


AMEN

Nu.  5aa  and  in  Neh.86=  i  Ksd.947).  Amen  must  have
been  in  liturgical  use  in  the  time  of  the  Chronicler  ( 1  Ch.  16
36=  Ps.  IO648).  I^ter,  but  very  similar,  are  Judith  132o
Tob.  9 12  (Vg. ),  and  lob.  88.  With  the  fact  that  none  of
these  relates  to  temple  service  may  be  compared,  e.g.,
Jer.  lit-nuh.  14  r.  The  Chronicler,  however,  appends
Amen  {I.e.)  to  extracts  from  Pss.  105  and  96.'  (3)  An
apparent  />"«(//  Amen,  there  being  no  change  of  sjx;aker  ;
frequent  from  NT  I''pp.  onwards,  but  in  OT  only  (a)
in  subscription  to  first  three  (four)  divisions  of  i'salter  and
3  and  4  Mace.  ;  and  {/>)  at  end  of  praver,  Neh.  1831  and
Tob.  13i8  (both  only  in  Vg. ).  In  Tob.  I415  (BNA)  we  ,
have  almost  a  fourth  stage  :  (4)  a  siniple  subscriptional  \
Amen,  like  that,  e.g.,  of  theTR  of  Lk.,  without,  strictly
speaking,  any  preceding  doxology.'*

Just  as  0  translates,  as  we  have  seen,  by  y^voiro
in  the  Law,  the  Prophets,  and  even  the  Psalter,  but  has
2  In  NT  "-f^^"  '"  ^'^^  Chronicler  and  Apocrypha, ■*
so  in  NT  Lk.  often  avoids  (omits  or  trans-
lates) Amen,  and  so  even  Mt.  and  to  a  /ess  extent  Mk.
Stage  (i)  is  represented  by  only  Rev.  Tu*  194  222o  ;
(2)  by  Rev.  5 14  and  the  usage  testified  to  by  i  Cor.
14 16  ;  (3)  by  usage  of  Epistles  (fifteen  do.xologies,  mostly
well-attested  ;  *  nineteen  blessings,  mostly  ill-attested).**
There  is  no  real  instance  of  (4).

The  Aniens  of  the  Gospels  (fifty-two  in  Synopt.,
twenty-five  in  Jn. )  are  a  peculiar  class,  declared  by
Delitzsch  ^  unparalleled  in  Hebrew  literature  :  initial
Aniens  *  like  group  ( i ),  but  lacking  the  backward  refer-
ence. The  sayings  that  they  introduce  are  only  some-
times at  all  related  to  what  now  precedes  them.  The
double  afir)y  (twenty-five  times)  of  the  Fourth  Gospel,
whichoccursevenin  Jn.  1338(  =Mk.  I430,  etc. ),  Delitzsch
tried  (/.<r. )  to  explain  as  =  Aram.  amen  amena  {—ameti
a»ter'n(i=:dfiTjf  X^7w),  which  sounded  like  d/j.rji'  d/xriv  ;
but  Dalman  argues  strongly  against  this."  F"or  a
suggestion  of  a  different  kind  see  Gosi'KL.s,  §  50  n.^**

The  key  to  Rev.  814  (6  duriv),  '  the  faithful  and  true
witness,'  is  doubtless  the  traditional  Massoretic  pointing
of  Is.  65 16  (at  least  as  old  as  Syni. )  with  possibly  a
reminiscence  of  the  practice  of  Jesus  and  of  2  Cor.  1 20.
Here,  again,  dfx,rjv  is  neut. ,  and  the  meaning  is  not  quite
so  clear  ;  but  probably  d/xTiv  has  about  the  same  mean-
ing as  in  I  Cor.  1 4 16.

The  liturRical  use  of  .\men,  vouched  for  in  apostolic  times  hy

this  List  pass.^ge,  is  attested,  as  regards  the  Kucharist,  by  Justin

Martyr  for  the  second  century  (^Apol.  i.  65,

3.  ElS6Wh6r6. 6  napiov  Aao? eireiK^Tj/iti  Af-y«ui/  'Ajiuji'),  and,

e.g^.,  l>y  Jerome  two  centuries  later  (preface  to
Bk.  ii.  of  Com.  in  A"/,  at/  Gal.,  'ad  similitudinem  .  .  .  tonitrui
amen  reboat '),  while  the  introduction  of  Amen  in  the  baptismal
ser\'ice  is  probably  later.  Post-biblical  Judaism  greatly  de-
veloped the  theory  of  the  use  of  Amen.^'  He  who  pronounced
it  was  greater  than  he  who  blessed.  It  opened  the  gates  of
heaven."  It  must  not  be  uttered  in  a  slovenly  or  careless  way,
nor  yet  prolonged  too  much.  1*  The  synagogue  still  uses  itjl^'and
Mohammedans  are  in  the  habit  of  adding  it  after  reciting  the
first  Sura  of  the  Koran.

For  references  to  older  literature  see,  e.g:,  Vigouroux,  Bii.
Diet.,  s.v.  ;  for  references  to  passages  in  Talm.  see,  e.g.,  Kohut's

Ar-uch,  s.v.;  for  usage  of  temple  doxology

4.  Literature.  Onitz, mgif/, 1872, pp. 481-96, and

I'saimen  ti /.  ^1  ff. ;  for  Rabbinic  treat-
ment, e.g.,  Jehuda  Khalas,  Se/er  lia-Afusdr,  Pereq.  4  (ed.
Mantua, 42); V'osef  Caro, Beth Yosef  (Orach- IJajiiti)  ed.

1  Ciratz  accordingly  argues  that  our  Psalms  are  a  synagogue
arrangement.

2  This  is  hardly  true  of  K.

3  Kxcept  Judith  13  20.

*  VV  &  H  give,  in  .square  brackets,  also  a  final  '  Amen.'
»  All  except  2  Pet.  3  18.

•  Also  Rev.  1  7  (after  i-ai ;  neither  doxology  (?)  nor  benedic-
tion). Rev.  1  18  ijn.  5  21  2jn.  13  are  excluded  in  RV.  Cp
yd^98,  n.  2.

' 'Talm.  Stud.  ix.  lni.r\v  aiir)v'  in  ZLTh.,  1856,  pp.  422-4.

8  All  in  sayings  of  Jesus.  The  five  finals  (.Mt.  t>  13  2820  Lk.
2-*  S3  Jn.  21  25  Mk.  16  20)  are  wanting  in  the  best  MSS.

9  See  Dalm.  Gram.  T93  (cp  71  77  4",  228  146).
1'  See  now  also  Dalman  as  cited  below,  g  4.

11  See  Shebu'oth  as  above  and  many  other  places. For  an
example  of  '  Amen  '  in  conversation  see  Aboda  Zara  65  a.
'2  Sliahhath  \iab  mid.  of  p.
"iJ^r.  47  a.
"  Authorised  Daily  Prayer-Book,  N.  M.  Adler,  1891.

137


AMMI

Venice,  1550,  1  fol.  84^85^.  On  the  whole  subject  see  H.  W.
Hogg,  '  Amen,  notes  on  its  Significance  and  Use  in  Hiblical  and
Post-biblical  times,"  /('A'l»i-2i  (061,  and  in  connection  there-
with Nestle,  '  The  Last  Word  in  the  Hible,'  Exfiositorv  Timet,
January  1897,  p.  190/;  To  the  above  must  now  be  added
Dalman,  Die  Irorte  Jesu  185-7  ('98).  11.  W.  H.

AMETHYST  (nDJjnX,  AMceYCTOC  [BAF],  -coc
[L],  ,imfl//\'s,'i/s.  Il,^W  *^^)-  The  amethyst  is  a  variety
of  (juartz  (SiOo)  or  rock-crystal  (see  Crvstai.)  of  a  clear
purple  or  bluish  violet  colour  (from  iron  jxiroxide  or
manganese),  often  marked  by  zigzag  or  undulating  lines
(the  colour  being  disposed  in  clouds).  The  Greek  name
(Rev.  '21  20  ;  cp  Kx.  '28i9  =  39i2  [8619  in  ©]),  which  was
adopted  into  Latin,  implies  an  ancient  belief  that  the
wearer  of  an  amethyst  could  drink  wine  freely  without
fear  of  intoxication.  The  source  of  the  Ijelief  is  found
in  Theophrastus  {Lap.  31),  who  is  the  earliest  Greek
writer  to  mention  the  stone,  which  he  calls  rd  dfxidvaov.
It  is  a  simple  case  of  sympathetic  magic,  for  Theophrastus
says  {Lap.  31)  rb  bi  dfjiiOvaov  olvwirbv  ttj  xP^I-  '■  '^  's
wine-coloured,  hence  its  amuletic  potency  against  the
effects  of  wine.  Greek  engravers,  accordingly,  not  in-
frequently cut  Bacchanalian  subjects  on  this  stone.
Hence  the  point  of  several  epigrams  in  the  Anthologia
Gncca  {e.g.,  ix.  752,  on  the  ring  of  Cleopatra,  adorned
with  Methe,  Drunkenness ;  and  ix.  748,  on  a  gem
engraved  with  a  figure  of  Bacchus).  It  seems  also  to
have  been  believed  that  the  amethyst  caused  those  who
wore  it  to  dream,  or  to  have  propitious  dreams  (cp  the
extract  from  Burhan  in  Lag.  Mitth.  1 236).  Hence
the  engraved  ahldmd  of  the  '  Breastplate '  of  P  ( Ex.
28 19  =  39 12  ;  explained  by  Kimchi  as  the  dream-stone  ;
.ncSnK  from  oSn  'to  dream')  has  been  commonly
identified  with  the  amethyst  (thus  apparently  (5),  so
much  engraved  by  the  Greeks. Cp  Pkixiou.s  .Stones.

Del.,  on  the  other  hand  {Ifeb.  Lang.  36  n.),  derives  the  name
from  .-Ihlamu,  an  Armenian  people  and  district  often  mentioned
in  Babylonian  and  Assyrian  texts,  supporting  the  suggestion  by
referring  to  Sennacherib's  repeated  mention  of  .\rmenia  and  its
neighbourhood  'as  a  rich  mine  of  certain  precious  stones.
Bond!  considers  it  an  Egyptian  loan-word  {ekhnome),  while  Di.
connects  it  with  n'cSn,  the  mallow,  and  adopts  the  explanation
'green  malachite.'  \V.  R.

AMI  (*PN),  Ezra257t=Neh.  759  Amon  {q--'-.  s)-

AMINADAB  (aminaAaB  [Ti.  WH]),  Mt.  I4  and
(AAMeiN [WH], mg. aAam) Lk.333t AV  =  RV

AMMIN.\I).\R ((/.7'.  , l).

AMITTAI  ("npN,  §  52,  from  nON,  '  truth,'  perhaps  a
theophorous  compound  ;  AMA6[e]l  [B.\L]),  father  of
the  prophet  Jonah  (2  K.  I425  Jonahl  if).

AMMAH, The  Hill  of  (HSX ny25  ;  o  BoyNOC

AMMAN  [B],  -MA  [-^j.  EMMAG  [L],  OMMATON  or  AMM.
[Jos.  ^///.  vii.  I3]),  an  unknown  hill  'that  lieth  before
(jiah'(?),  where  Joab  and  .Xbishai  stayed  their  pursuit
after  Abner  (2S.  224!).  From  a  comparison  of  tf.  24
and  25  it  is  probable  that  we  should  restore  the  name
also  in  v.  25  for  '  one  hill,'  AV  '  an  hill"  (nnK  7\^z\).

So  Bu.  (SBOT),  Sam.  ati  loc,  following  We.'s  suggestion  that
the  two  hills  are  the  same.  Otherwise  Klo.,  who  in  v.  25  con-
jectures D'a^K  (n^i*;;),  the  ascent  of  Adummim.

In  V.  24  Sym.  (yiirn,  gully)  Theod.  (ii6p<iytoY<>0  and  Vg.
{aqutedtictus)  give  the  word  a  meaning  which  it  l>ears  only  in
post-biblical  Heb.;  moreover,  since  the  word  ,^^^{  has  no  article
prefixed,  it  cannot  be  an  appell.ative  here.

AMMI  (Hos.  2i,  and,  in  Lo-ammi,  223[25]).  See
Lt)-I<rii.\M.\n.

AMMI,  Names  with. The  element  'ammi  ('Oy)  or.

at  the  entl  of  words,  'am  {WO)  has  been  interpreted  in

_ ... . three  different  w.ays— viz. ,  as  meaning  (i)

1.  initial  i^j^j^.j  people or  (2)  [my]  kinsman  or  uncle,

*™™^'  ~. or  else  as  being  (3)  the  proper  name  of  a

" . god.

'"^  So  long  as this  group  of names* was

regarded  by  itself  in  the  light  of  Hebrew  philologj'  alone,

1  The  exact  limits  of  the  group  are  uncertain  ;  for  in  the  case
of  several  names  that  have  been  included  in  it,  it  is  open  to  doubt

138


AMMT

the  interpretation  of  \iiiuni  or  'am  by  '  people '  seemed
the  most  olivious,  aiul  was  most  generally  adopted  for
all  names  alike.  The  result  was  not  quite  satisfactory  ;
for  '  the  people  of  Cj<k1  '  or  '  my  peo]jle  is  God  '  ('am mid)
was,  to  say  the  least,  an  improbable  meaning  for  the
name  of  an  individual.  In  the  light  of  comparative
philology  and  newly  recovered  parallel  names  in  other
languages,  it  became  clear  that  '  people '  was  not  the  real
meaning  of  the  element  in  at  least  some  of  the  names.

Names  containing  'aiiimi  are  common  in  the  S.  .Arabian
inscriptions;  hut  in  Araliic  'amm  signifies  not  'people,'  hut
'  paternal  uncle ' ;  the  latter,  therefore,  is  the  most  reasonable
interpretation  of  the  element  in  .Arabic  words.'  A  closely
similar  interpretation  is  also  thoroughly  justifiable  in  Hebrew
names  ;  for  the  sense  '  uncle,'  or  perhaps  rather  the  wider  meaning
'kinsman,'  is  secured  for  'am  in  Hebrew  by  a  comparison  of  the
parallel  phrases  vni3K  hvK  «1DK:  and  ITIV  7K  ' V.I  \  cp  the  use  of
Ass.  aww/ for  '  relatives  '  irl  Am.  TaJ>.  4b  32  ;  A'S:>io6.  Such
an  interpretation  oCammi  in  Semitic  names  generally  is  further
supported  by  the  fact  that  names  of  this  type  are  found  side  by
.side  in  the  same  languages  with  names  identical  in  form  contain-
ing another  element  (see  Am,  Names  wiTH)denoting  a  kinsman  ;
thus,  e.g:,  in  Helirew  we  have  the  series  Am»ti-e\,  A/>i-e\,  Jfi-c\
(  =  .-f/»7-el) ;  Ammi-nax\i\h,  W/i/-nadab,  W/'/'-nadab  ;  and,  in  S.
Aral)!an  (following  CIS  4,  'e.g.,  no.s.  73  lo'.'O  i  6956  i),  'Am-
karlb,  >f*«-karlb,  Akhu-Vaxlh,  Z?,W-karib.2

The  interpretation  oVammi  by  'uncle'  (or  'kinsman')
in  the  S.  Arabian  names  and  in  several  at  least  of  the
Hebrew  instances  (.\mmiel,  .\mminadab,  Eliam,  .Ammi-
shaddai  (?).  .\mmihud,  .Anmiizabad,  Ben-anmii)  is  now
generally  adopted ;  and  this  much  at  least  may  be
regardetl  as  well  established, — that  names  in  .\mmi
originated  from  the  same  circle  of  ideas  as  names  in
Abi,  Ahi.

On  certain  ambiguities  common  to  all  the.se  classes  see  Am,
ii.  (viz.  on  their  syntactical  interpretation,  §  i^  ;  on  the  lium.-in
or  divine,  §  4,  and  on  the  general  or  .special  character  of  the  refer-
ence, g  5).

With  regard  to  the  present  group  in  particular  a
further  question  has  arisen,  viz.,  whether  Ammi  be  not
2 Not  — d' ■ p 'he  proper  name  of  a  deity,  and  whether,


in  consec|uence,  we  ought  not  to  assume
the  worship of  this deity  where such


proper  name.

names  are  found.  The  facts  which  have  raised  this
question  are  these  : —

(i)  Compounds  with  'atitmi  are  parallel  not  only  to  compounds
with  ahi,  ahi,  but  also  to  compounds  with  divine  proper  names  ;
thus  in  Hebrew  we  have  Ammiel,  /oel ;  Kliam,  Eli/a/( ;  Atntiii-
n.idab,  J '('//^nadab  (cp  Moabite  CA('w<»j.//nadal)),  Rehab '«>«
(Rehoboam),  and  Rehab_)'a/t.  (2)  The  chief  god  of  the  Kataban
(or  -valad  'amm — a  S.  Arabian  people)  was  called  '.-Vmm,  and
Kmu  was  a  name  given  to  the  god  Xergal  by  the  Shuhites  on
the  W.  of  the  Euphrates;  cp  also  the  name  .\m.mon  (q.v.,  §  i).

These  facts,  however,  are  insufficient  to  warrant  us  in
separating  names  in  'ammi,  at  least  so  far  as  their  origin
is  concerned,  from  names  in  Abi,  .\hi.  Still,  it  is  clear
that  'amm{i),  originally  an  appellative,  aijplicable  and
applied  by  different  clans  or  peoples  to  different  gods,
became  in  certain  cases  the  projjer  name  of  a  deity  ;
and,  where  this  usage  can  be  independently  proved  to
have  lieen  current,  it  is  reasonable  to  interpret  'am  in
such  cases  as  the  proper  name  of  a  deity  (cp  the  parallel
case  of  Baal)  ;  but  we  are  scarcely  justified  in  inferring
from  the  mere  existence  of  names  in  'ammi  among  a
certain  people  that  the  proper  name  of  their  deity  was
'Amm;  in  particular  it  is  very  hazardous  to  conclude  |
that  the  Hebrews  worshipped  a  distinct  deity  'Amm.

The  compound  personal  and  local  names  m'am  (final)

present some considerable difficulties, which require

„ T.- 1- further  consideration. Is  the  sense  '  kins-

3.  rina.1  am.  . /• . ,

man for am  always  the most natural

whether  the  text  is  sound,  sometimes  even  in  its  consonants.
The  apparent  ca.ses  of  initial  'ammi  are  the  following  six  : —
Ammiel,  Ammihud,  .'\mmihur,  Amminadab,  Ammishaddai,
Ammizabad,  and  the  place-name  Amad ;  those  of  final  'am  the
following  .seven: — Ani.am,  Kliam,  Ithream,  Ja.shobeam,  leka-
meam,  Jeroboam,  Rehoboam.  and  the  five  place-names  Jibleam,
Jokdeam,  Jokmeam,  Jokneam,  Jorkeam.  Cp  also  Ben-ammi.
See  Jekoboam  ;  al.so  Amasa,  Amasai,  Amashai.

1  Glaser  produces  evidence  from  the  Minsan  inscriptions  to
show  that  ammi,'  as  a  term  for  God,  was  long  in  use,  though
at  a  distance  from  Palestine  :  see  Hommel,  ZDMGi^i^d  ('95).
Cp,  however,  Gray's  remark,  HPN  53.

3  But  cp  DoD,  Names  with,  where  a  different  view  is  taken.

139


AMMIHUR

one?  Or  may  we  in  some  cases  prefer  the  sense
'people,'  'kinsfolk,'  on  the  grounds  put  forward  in
HP.V  59  (cp  215)  ?  The  question  is  sometimes  compli-
cated by  the  uncertainty  of  the  form  in  MT.  It  must
also  be  remembered  that  Kehoboani  (Rehab' am)  was  the
son  of  an  .Ammonitish  mother,  and  that  the  eponym  of  the
Ammonites  is  called  I5en-ammi  (see  Ammon,  §  i);  also
that  some  have  conjectured  that  Jeroboam  was  of  foreign
origin.  Cp  Ibi.kam,  Ithkicam,  Jashohkam,  Jkka-
MK.v.M.  Ji.KOHoAM,  JoKNEAM,  etc.  (see  col.  138,  n.  1).
As  to  the  history  of  the  names.  Actual  usage  proves
_.  -  that, like  compounds  with  abi  and  ahi,

IS  ry  Semitic  compounds  with '(/otw/  (=kins-
man)  are  of  a  very  ancient  origm.
We  find  at  least  two  names  (.Ammi-satana,  Ammi-zaduga)  of
the  type  among  the  kings  of  Babylon  belonging  to  the  ^ammu-
rfibi  dynasty  (c/>r  (I  faooo  B.C.),  and  not  improbably  a  third  in  the
name  Hammurabi  itself.  1  The  non-Iiabylonian  character  of
these  names  has  gained  general  acceptance  in  .spite  of  Jen.sen's
criticism  (/?^  10342^  ['95]);  according  to  Winckler  (C/130)
they  are  of  Canannitish,  according  to  Sayce  (A'/'(2) 3  io_^.)  and
Hommel  {A  H  T  <)i  jff'.),  of  Arabian  origin.

Names  of  the  type  are  certainly  common  in  the  early
S.  Arabian  inscriptions  ;  and  Hommel  goes  so  far
as  to  assert  that  the  biblical  names  Ijeginning  with
'ammi  are,  like  those  of  the  kings  of  the  Hanmiurabi
dynasty,  of  Arabian  origin,  and  were  introduced  among
the  Hebrews  at  the  time  when  they  had  close  intercourse
with  the  Arabs  in  Sinai  (Z/Al/V;  49525.  n-  i  ['95])-
However  this  may  be,  it  is  clear  not  only  that  these
names  are  of  ancient  origin,  but  also  that  at  a  still  com-
paratively early  period  they  fell  into  disuse  among  the
Hebrews,  and  also,  according  to  Hommel  (AIIT  86),
among  the  S.  Arabians.  The  only  question  with

regard  to  the  Hebrew  instances  is  whether  one  or  two
of  them  (especially  Ammi-sh.\ddai,  q.v. )  are  late — i.e.,
post-e.xilic — artificial  formations.  Hommel  has  recently
defended  the  genuine  anticjuity  of 'Ammi-shaddai  on  the
ground  of  its  virtual  equivalence  to  Animi-satana  (see
above)  ;  but,  even  granting  his  premises,  his  conclusion
does  not  necessarily  follow,  and,  as  a  matter  of  fact,
the  equivalence  is  questionable  ;  for  ( i )  the  translitera-
tion of  Ammi-satana  is  uncertain:  some — c./^.,  Sayce
(PSBA,  Nov.  '97,  p.  292) — transliterate  .'\mmiditana  ;
and  (2),  if  it  be  correct,  the  word  is  quite  as  possibly  a
3rd  sing.  pf.  (so  Winckler,  I.e.)  as='our  mountain.'
Cp  Shaddai,  §  2.

The  most  recent  discussions  of  these  names  (together  with
references  to  the  literature,  which  is  considerable)  will  be  found
in  firay,  Jl/'.V 41-60  198./!  245  253^  323,  Expositor,  Sept.  1897,
173-190,  and  Hommel,  AJIT  afiZ^ff.  ic6ff.  g.  B.  G.

AMMIDIOI,  AV  Ammidoi  (ammiAioi  [B]),  i  Esd.
520. See  Ch.\di.\.sai.

AMMIEL  ("piCpj;,  §  46,  'El  is  my  [?]  kinsman,'  cp
Eliam  and  Amad,  and  see  Ammi,  §  i/,  amLcJihA
[BAL]).

1.  Danite'spy'(Nu.  13i2[P]).

2.  Father  of  Machir,  2  S.  94  (a/jLarip  [P.],  -/h^it/A  [L]),  5,  17  27
(a^ijjp  [A]).

3.  Doorkeeper  (i  Ch.  26  5).

4.  Father  of  Hathsheba,  iCh.35  (TjAa  [L]),  called  in  2  S.
II3ELIAM,  2. See  AniTHOPHEL.

AMMIHUD  (n-in^rsy,  •  my  [?]  kinsman  is  glory,"  §  46,

see  Am.mi,  §  i,  cp  also  Ahiiiud  ; e/VMOyA  [BA],  ^M.

[L])-

1.  Father  of  Talmai,  king  of  Ge.shur ;  2  S.  1837  Kr.,  Kt.
■nn-cr.  .A.MMmuR  (,a.v.).

2.  Father  of  Elishama  (i),  temp.  Moses  ;  Nu.  I1021874853
1022t  [P]  (e|aiou«  [FL],  <7€fi.  [AF  in  1  10,  and  F  in  748  IO22J);
I  Ch.  726  (AMtoueii  [B],  -ov«  [A]).

3.  Father  of  Shemuel  (2),  temp.  Joshua;  Nu.  34  2o  [P]
(o-t/oiiovJ  [B],  tfj..  [Pv'l'AFL]).

4.  Father  of  Pedahel,  temp.  Joshua;  Nu.34a8  [P]  (^tvia-
Ml«ltov«  [B],  a/iioui  lAFL]).

5.  F"ather  of  Uthai,  one  of  the  b'ne  Perez;  iCh.  94
(craiu./oiiou  [Bl,  afiiovS  [AL]).  The  name  is  not  found  in  the  ||
NVh.  II4. See  .Xthaiah.

AMMIHUR  (-l-in-Ci;).  father  of  Talmai,  king  of
Geshur  (2S.I337  Kt.  ;  Kr.  [ace.  to  Gi.  also  Kt.  in  some

1  Cp  HPN  56,  and  see  Ham  (i.).  But  cp  references  in  Muss-
Arnolt,  Ass.  Diet.  320,  s.v,  xammu.

140


AMMINADAB

textsj ;  0"*^,  etc. .  Ammihuij  [^.v.  ,  i]).  Kr.  may  be  a
niiscorrection,  since  a  compound  of  ^1^  would  l)e  not
unlikely  for  a  native  of  the  S.  Palestinian  Geshur  (sec
Gksiilu,  2).  Cp  perhaps  the  Nab.  and  Sin.  nin  ;  and
sec  UUK.

AMMINADAB  (^n^'Oy,  §  46,  'my  kinsman
apportions,'  or  'the  [divine]  kinsni;ui  is  munificent';
AM[e]lNAA<\BlHAL]).

1.  K.ithfr  of  I'^isheba,  .Aaron's  wife,  and  of  Nahshon  '  head  '  of
Iu<l:ill  (scL-  Kl-IMlhRAl  (Kx.  1)2^,  a^ivaBafi  (.\) ;  Nu.  1  7,  -«a/Lt  [F];
23  7  12  17  10  14  1 1')  aL^iva£ap[V\i).  The  names  of  father  and  son
have  been  introduced  into  the  genealogy  of  iJavid  (Ruth  4  19  A
iCh. 'iio;  also  Mt.  I4  Lk.333,  where  AV  .\minaoab  (on  the
variations  .\minadani,  .\d.in,  see  Tisch.] ;  cp  We.  De  Gent.  17).

2.  \  Levite,  temp.  iJavid  (i  Ch.  15  10/;).

3.  b.  Kohath,  i  Ch.  022(7]  (lo-o-oap  U\],  i.e.,  Izhar,  the  MT
reading  in  the  II  v.  38). See  Izhar  (i),  Elisheua.

4.  See  .\bihaii,,  5.

AMMINADIB,  an  imaginary  name  in  Cant.  C 12  AV,

=  3''"I3''py,  a  reading  .sui)ported  by  (D  (AM[e]iNAA(\B
[BNa/),  and  the  St.  I'eter.sburg  Heb.  MS  (Strack)  and
other  codices. To  be  consistent,  however,  AV  should
have  recognised  the  existence  of  a  proper  name  also  in I
7 1  [2] CSVV  butk-naiiil' ; EV 'prince's daughter'; d. I
vaSa/S  [BNJI,  and  rendered  'O  daughter  of  Nadib,'  or
with  ©'^  (^.  aMt''<^^tt/i)  '  of  Anmiinadib. ' The  dramatis \
persoiur  of  the  pastoral  poem  or  drama  will  then  receive 1
the  addition  of  the  fiither  of  the  heroine  (so  (jriitz). It |
has  iK-en  shown  elsewhere, however  (see Cantici.KS, |
§  6/. ),  that  the  supposed  drama  or  pastoral  poem  and
its  i)lot  are  non-c.xistent  ; we  are  not  in want  of  an
'  .Anmiinadil). ' In 7i[2], the rendering of YN , 'O I
prince's  daughter,'  is  suflicient,  and  3•^:  {»<uiib)  at  the
end  of  6 12  probably  means  '  prince,'  as  in  7i[2]. That |
'  aninii  and  nddJb  in  612  are  separate  words  is  expressly
stated in the  Massora, and  most  of  our  MSS follow
this  rule  (so,  too,  Rashi  and  Ibn  Ezra). On  the  right ,
reading  and  translation  of  6121*,  and  the  right  position
of  611/. ,  see  Canticlks,  §  16.  T.  k.  c. |

AMMISHADDAI  (^^rSV.  §§42,  46.  &M[e]ic<\AAi
[B.VF],  -Ae  [I']),  father  of  Ahiezer  (i),  temp.  Mose.s
[P];  Nu.  I12225  (cam.  [A]).  76671  10 25  (mi.  [A])t.
The  name  seems  to  be  a  genuine  old  Semitic  per-
sonal name  (cp,  perhaps,  Ammi-satana  at  Babylon,
2161-2148  B.C.),  and  may  mean  'The  divine  kinsman
is  n\y  Lord.' Cp  Sii.\uij,\l,  §  2^  (end); AMMt,  §  i.

T. K.  C.

AMMIZABAD  (inrsy  ;  see  Ammi.  §  i),  apparently
son  and  lieutenant  of  Bknaiah,  i  (i  Ch.  276)  ;  but  the
passage  is  obscure  and  certainly  corrupt  (AaiBaza6
[B],  AMI  PAZ.  [A],  amCINAZABaA  [I-.  pointing  to  the
reading  .Vniinadab],  i^JuJ»f  )-^ See  D.WID,  §  11  r.

AMMON,  ammonites!  The  people  are  called
'Children  of  .\mmon '  (pDJ/  ''221)  or  '.\mmonites'
CJItSy,  etc. ) ;  only  twice  is  the  tribe  referred
to  as  '  .\mmon  '  ( i  .S.  11 11  [but  see  ©J,  Ps.
837).  For  2  Ch.  20 1  see  Meum.M  {c),  and  for  2  Ch.  2G8,
ib.  (b)  n.

<P HAL ajii/iiwi/ but  ofi/iai;  in  Gen.  19  38  [ ADE],  Nu.  21  24  [B  once,
AF  twice];  Deut.  21937  [BatbA]  3  11  [HaJi'AFL]  i6[l'.AFL];
Ofifxuv  Zeph.28[K*].  The  Ethnic  a/ji/u.ai'[<]iTTjs,  or  a/ia.  [A
in  2  S.  H  I  y^  23  37,  I  K.  14  21]  ;  and  afjiiiuv[t]i  Ezra  9  i
Neh.  2  10,  but  a^/iio»'tn)v  [L]  Nell.  /.c.  and  in  13 1.  The
Ammonite  persons  mentioned  in  OT  are  Raalis,  Hanun,
Naamah  (2),  Nahash,  Shimeath,  Shobi,  Tobiah,  and  Zelck ;
and  in  .Vpocr.  .Achior  and  Timotheus.

In  the  cuneiform  inscriptions  the  land  of  Ammon  is
called  Bit-Amman  (shortened  into  Ammdn),  on  the
analogy  of  BIt-Humri  (Omri)  =  Samaria,  us  if  Ammon
were  a  person.  The  ancestor  of  the  tribe,  however,  is
not  said,  in  the  Hebrew  Genesis,  to  be  Anmion,  as  the
ancestor  of  the  Moabites  is  .styled  Moab,  but  Ben-ammi
(■a>'"|2  ;  Gen.  19 38  [J]).  The  name  of  the  reputed
ancestor  is  indeed  given  in  Gen.  19  38  (B.AL  ;  with  which
Vg. agrees) as Ammon ; (KdXtffev rb ivofxa ainou

1  See  Barnes,  The  Peshitta  Text  0/ Chronicles.
141


AMMON

'kufxiv  ,bvlb%Tou  ftvovi  fiov.  The  received  Hebrew  text ,
however,  appears  to  regard  the  name  of  the  father  of
the  Ammonites  as  Ben-ammi  ('son  of  my  kinsman'),
and  it  should  be  noted  in  this  connection  that  ©'*'*'- (not
\'g. )  of  V.  37  inserts  an  etymology  for  Moab,  viz.  '  from
my  father.'  The  Yahwists  etymologies  are,  as  they
stand,  examples  of  pojxilar  jjaronomasia.  llicy  may
point  the  way,  however,  to  more  prol^able  explanations,
and  we  may  safely  regard  Ixjth  ab  '  father '  and  'am
('  uncle,'  '  kinsman  ')  as  divine  names.

Gesenius  long  ago  compared  the  compound  proper  names
Amniiel,  Amminad.-ib,t  and  J.  Derenbourg  in  1880  suKKested
(AV-.y  1  123)  th:it  .\mmi  may  be  a  name  of  the  i<x;al  divinity
of  the  .Xnimonitcs,  comparing  the  Annnuiiitish  royal  n.ime
Amminad.ib  (Del.  /'ar.  294),  which  on  the  analogy  of  Kammu.5-
nadab  =  Chemosh-nadab,  should  contain  a  divine  name.  .\
comp.irison  with  the  parallel  names  shows  however  that  Ammi,
if  a  divine  name  at  all,  was  clearly  known  as  such  over  a  much
wider  area  than  the  narrow  territory  of  Ammon  (cp  Names,  {  46;'''
Am.mi,  ii.  §  2).

According  to  Judg.  1 1 13  22,  the  land  '  from  Arnon  unto

Jabbok and fronj the wilderness unto Jcjrdan,' was

- , originally  occupied  by  the  Ammonites,  who
z.  ijana ,• ,.,..,  ,,.,  .... _■,..„  , ._


and


were  dispossessed by the Amorites under


1.  Name.


p  ,  Sihon,  some  time  before  the  Israelitish  in-
"  ■  vasion.  This  evidence,  however,  is  of  doubt-
ful value,  since  the  section  Judg.  11 12-29  's  of  uncertain
origin,  and  may  be  no  longer  in  its  original  form  (see
Bu.  Comm.  81  ;  and  cp  Bu.  A"/.  Sa.  125  ;  Ki.  Gisch.  2
So).  At  any  rate,  all  that  Nu.  2I24  (cp  Judg.  II21/. )
affirms  is  that  the  Israelites  concjuered  the  land  of
the  .Amorites  'from  .\rnon  unto  Jabbok,  (that  is)  unto
(the  land  of)  the  Ammonites,'  and,  as  the  same  verse
continues,  'the  border  of  the  Ammonites  was  Jazer"
(so  Ew.,  Di. ,  NOld.  reading  -iij?'  with  ©"ail  i,istea<I
of  vj) — i.e.,  the  frontier  town  of  the  .Amorites  towarr.s
Anmion  was  Jazer  (see  v.  32).  According  to  this  state-
ment, the  .Anunonites  occujjied  the  east  of  the  district
now  called  Belka,  a  view  which  accords  excelleiuly
with  the  e.isterly  position  of  the  ancient  capital  city
Rabbah  or  Rabbath-.Xnmion,  and  is  no  doubt  accurate
for  the  period  to  which  ]E  belongs.

Little  is  known  of  the  social  condition  of  this  people  ;
but  there  is  nothing  to  suggest  a  high  degree  of  cixiiisa-
tion.  There  were  no  doubt  other  '  cities'  lx;sides  Rabbah
(Judg.  11  33  2  S.  1231) ;  but  they  were  too  insignificant  to
be  mentioned  by  name.  Although  the  district  of
Rabbah  (see  R.\HB.\h)  was  exceptionally  well  irrigated,
the  total  area  of  tillage  lx?tween  the  Israelite  frontier
and  the  arid  steppes  to  the  east  was  narrow.  Some  of
the  Ammonitish  clans  must  have  ranged  over  these
steppes  as  nomads.  Their  population,  too,  must  have
been  comparatively  small.  According  to  all  analogies
they  would  enter  frcmi  time  to  time  into  loose  and
shifting  alliances  with  the  neighbouring  tribes  ;  so  that
their  fighting  strength  would  be  subject  to  great  and
sudden  fluctuations.

The  real  history  of  the  Ammonites  does  not  iK'giii
till  the  time  of  Saul,  though  we  ha\e
one  very  interesting  and  probable  tradi-
tion from  the  legendary  period  of  the  Judges  (see  below
on  Jephthah).

We  do  indeed  hear,  in  a  passage  that  sounds  like  history
(Gen.  14  5),  of  a  people,  called  Zuzim,  whom  Chedorl.iomer  '  smote
in  Ham'  (CnZ) — a  name  which  is  most  probably  corrupt  (see
Ham,  ii.),  but  which  .some  regard  as  another  form  of  Amnion  ;
and  it  is  tempting  to  identify  the  2uzim  with  the  Zamzumrnim,
whom,  according  to  Deut.  'I10/.,  the  .\mmonitts  in  early  times
dispossessed,  liut  what  we  he.ir  of  the  Z.;uTiziimmim  ha.s  a
family  likeness  to  the  legends  of  other  aboriginal  r.ices  which
were  expelled  by  more  powerful  invaders,  and  the  author  of
Dt.  1-440  (D^)  did  not  write  till  .ifter  597  B.C.  (K.ue.  Hex.
270).  In  his  time  there  were  various  influences  at  work  to
hinder  the  accurate  writing  of  history,  .-ind  it  is  even  doubtful
whether we can  safely  accept what  he  tells  us  of  the  early

1  Cp  also  Nestle,  Eig.  50.  187  (n.).  _

2  For  further  evidence  in  favour  of  a  Semitic  god  Ammu,
Ammi,  see  Hommel's  review  of  Meissner's  '  Beitr.  zum  altbab.
Privatrecht,'  ZDMGi^siiff.  ['95]:  but  cp  Jensens  cnticism
{.ZA  10342/ ['9S])-

143


3.  Traditions.


AMMON

relations  between  the  Israelites  on  the  one  hand  and  the
Moabites  and  the  Ammonites  on  the  other  (Dt.  291937).
All  we  can  say  is  that  the  story  in  Gen.  19  36-38  (J)  proves  an
early  Israelitish  sense  of  kinship  (combined  however  with  moral


repugnance)  to  the  Moabilcs  and  Ammonites,  so  that  it  is  not  in
itself  incredible  that  the  Israelites  should  have  refrained  from
attacking  these  two  peoples.  True,  in  Jos.  13  25  (I')  we  are  told
that  'half  the  land  of  the  Ammonites'  was  assigned  to  the  tribe
of  Gad  ;  but  the  district  intended  here  may  be  the  .\nioritish
kingdom  of  Sihon,  and  so  prc-suppose  the  view  of  history  given
in  Judg.  11  13-22  (see  above,  §  2).

Dt.  234  [3]  affirms  that  the  Ammonites  and  Moabites
hired  Balaam  to  curse  Israel,  and  did  not  supply  Israel
with  provisions,  as  a  punishment  for  which  they  are  to
be  excluded  from  the  Israelitish  community  to  the  tenth
generation.

The  spirit  and  purport  of  this  passagej  however,  is  at  variance
witli  that  of  Dt.  227,  and  the  narrative  of  lialaam  in  Nu.
22-25  (mainly  JE)  speaks  only  of  the  Moabites.  For  several
reasons  it  is  very  probable  that  Dt.  23i-8  [2-9]  (see  Hai.aam,
I  7)  is  a  record,  not  of  the  pre -exilic,  but  of  the  post -exilic
period  when  '  the  problem  as  to  who  should  and  who  should  not
be  admitted  into  the  community  wxs  a  burning  question  '  (Ku.
Hex.  265).  At  any  rate  the  view  which  this  passage  presents
of  the  Ammonites  cannot  be  accepted.

It  is  of  more  historical  interest  that  in  Nu.  22  we
have  a  combination  of  two  distinct  traditions  (E  and  J)
respecting  the  origin  of  Balaam,  one  of  which  represents
him  as  an  Ammonite  (see  B.\l.\.\m,  §  i).

The  settlement  of  Israelitish  tribes  in  Gilead  and
Bashan  (see  Manas.skh)  could  not  but  excite  the
animosity  of  the  neighbouring  peoples.  No  doubt
there  was  a  chronic  border-warfare  sometimes  develop-
ing into  more  serious  hostilities,  sometimes  mitigated
by  truce,  alliances,  or  the  subjection  of  one  or  oilier  of
the  combatants.  In  Judg.  IO6-I27  we  have  an  account
of  the  deliverance  of  the  Israelites  of  (jilead  from
Ammonitish  oppressors  by  a  recalled  outlaw  named
Jephthah.  The  traditional  stories  have  Ijeen  much
edited  (see  Judgks,  §  17)  and  tell  us  naturally  more
about  Jephthah  (who  was  one  of  the  actors  in  a  most
4  Saul  and  '"°^''"S tragedy) than about the Am-

■  jj .  , monites.  \\'e  are  ujjon  safer  ground

^  ■  in  the  story  of  Saul.  The  victory  of  this
heroic  chieftain  over  the  Ammonitish  king  Nahash,  who,
encouraged  by  the  weakness  of  cis-Jordanic  Israel,  had
besieged  Jabesh-gilead,  and  displayed  his  deep  contempt
for  his  foes,  is  doubtless  historical  (iS.  11).  It  is  also
thoroughly  credible  that  David,  when  out  of  favour  with
Saul,  received  friendly  treatment  from  Nahash  (so  we
must  interpret  2S.  IO2).  Equally  intelligible  is  it  that
a  change  ensued  in  the  relations  between  David  and  the
Ammonitish  court  when  the  former  had  taken  up  the
work,  interrupted  by  the  death  of  Saul,  of  liberating
and  u.iiting  the  Israelitish  tribes.  Only  we  must  not,
it  would  seem,  place  the  war  with  the  Ammonites  too
late.  The  gross  insult  offered  by  Hanun,  the  son  of
Nahash,  to  the  ambas.sad()rs  of  David  implies  that  the
power  of  the  latter  had  not  yet  been  so  consolidated  as
to  wipe  out  the  recollection  of  the  days  of  Israel's
humiliation.  The  insult  was  bitterly  avenged.  Amnion
and  its  allies  were  defeated,  and  the  power  of  the  former
was,  for  the  time,  broken  (see  2  S.  I231).

It  is  noteworthy  that  .Shobi,  son  of  Nahash,  of  Rabbath-
ammon,  was  friendly  to  David  during  Absalom's  revolt  (2  S.  17
27),  that  Zelkk,  an  Ammonite,  was  amon^  David's  'thirty'
(2  S.  2337),  and  that  Solomon  had  an  Ammonitish  wife(NAAMAH,
2)  whom  one  account  (.see  Klostermann)  makes  the  grand-
daughter of  Nahash,  and  who  became  the  mother  of  Rehoboam
(i  K.  14  21  ;  the  details  in  i  K.  11 1-8  are  untrustworthy).  See
Nahash,  3.

It  is  probable  that  the  Ammonites  recovered  their
independence  after  Solomon's  death. Later, like  the

6  Assyrian  '''"^^  °'^  ^'- '^'''^^''  '^^^'  became  tribu-
Ae-e  t^riL's  of  the  Assyrians  ;  this  is  e.xpressly

°  ■  mentioned  by  Shalmaneser  II.,  Tiglath-
pileser  III.,  Sennacherib,  and  Esarhaddon  (Schr.  KGF
and  COT).  So  far  as  our  oldest  evidence  goes,  they
caused  no  serious  trouble  again  to  the  Israelites  till  the
time  of  Jeroboam  II. ,  when,  as  Amos  tells  us  (Am.  1 13),
they  made  incursions  into  Gilead,  and  displayed  great

143


AMMON

inhumanity,  which  probably  from  their  own  point  of
view  was  but  justifiable  revenge.  The  Chronicler,
indeed,  relates  victories  over  the  Ammonites  won  by
Jehoshaphat  and  Jotham  (2  Ch.  20  275.  cp  268) ;  but
these,  according  to  Robertson  Smith  {OTJO")  146),
are  Midrash.  From  Jer.  49i,  we  may  infer  that  after
the  deportation  of  the  trans-Jordanic  Israelites  in  734
the  Ammonites  occupied  the  land  of  Gad  ;  and,  even  if
Jer.  49  be  post-exilic,  the  fact  is  too  probable  to  be
doubted.  It  is  this  outrage  upon  '  Yahwe's  people '
which  seems  to  be  alluded  to  in  Zeph.  28-ii  Jer.  926  [25]
2521.  Once  again  the  vindictiveness  of  the  Ammonites
was  manifested  when,  in  the  reign  of  Jehoiakim,  they
madp  incursions  into  Judah  as  the  auxiliaries  of
Nebuchadrezzar  (2K.  242).  This  is  probably  referred
to  in  Ezek.  2I28/.  [25/.].  Later,  however,  the  general
fear  of  the  Babylonian  rule  seems  to  have  altered  the
policy  of  the  Ammonites,  for  Jer.  27  3  brings  before  us  the
king  of  .\mmon  entering  into  a  league  against  Babylon
with  Zedekiah  and  other  princes.  It  is  to  this  act  of
rebellion  that  Ezekiel  refers  (21 18-32  [13  _^])  when  he
anticipates  the  punishment  of  the  Ammonites,  while  in
25  1-7  he  threatens  the  same  people  with  destruction  for
their  malicious  demeanour  at  the  captivity  of  the  Jews.
Did  the  Anmionites  withdraw  in  time  from  the  anti-
Babylonian  league?  It  is  a  verj'  probable  conjecture,
and,  strange  as  it  may  seem,  Jewish  fugitives  are  said  to
have  sought  refuge  with  Baalis,  king  of  Ammon,  who
instigated  them  basely  to  assassinate  the  noble
Gkdai.i.mi,  I  (Jer.  40 14).

In  later  times  we  find  an  Ammonite'  among  the  chief
ojjponents  of  Nehemiah,  and  at  the  same  time  con-
p  .  nected  by  marriage  with  distinguished
andSeek.  \^^  (N'eh.  618  134 ;  cp  T.,.ua„,  ,Y
Other  Ammonitish  women  had  married
into  Jewish  families  (EzraDi/. )  —  i.e.,  according  to
Kosters,  into  families  which  had  remained  on  Jewish
soil  and  not  been  touched  by  the  reforming  spirit  of
Ezra  (see  Ezra,  ii.  §  12).  This  would  be  all  the  easier
if  we  are  right  in  inferring  from  Jos.  18  24  {z'v.  12-28
belong  to  P)  that  in  post-exilic  times  there  was  in
Benjamin  a  place  called  '  Village  of  the  Ammonites '
(CnKi'iiAK-H.XAMMONAi).  It  is  to  this  period  of  mixed
marriages  that  we  should  not  improbably  refer  the  com-
position of  Dt.  23 1-8  (see  above),  in  \\hich  passage  are
mentioned  the  same  three  peoples  as  in  Ezra 9  2. '^

Nearly  three  hundred  years  later  the  Ammonites
(Tiniotheus)  are  among  the  enemies  defeated  by  Judas
IMaccabaiUS  (i  Mace.  56-iS)  ;  they  are  also  mentioned  in
a  psalm  assigned  by  some  to  the  same  critical  period
(Ps.  887).*  Up  to  this  time,  then,  Ezekiel's  threat
(ICzek.  25)  against  the  Ammonites  as  well  as  against
the  Moabites  and  (virtually)  the  Edomites  that  they
should  be  dispossessed  by  the  '  sons  of  the  East '
{i.e.,  the  Arabian  nomads)  had  not  been  fulfilled  so
far  as  the  Ammonites  are  concerned.  Their  fate,
however,  cannot  have  been  very  long  delayed.  In  the
fifth  century  B.C.  we  already  find  'Arabians'  among
the  enemies  of  Nehemiah  (Neh.  219  47  [i]),  and  we  can
hardly  doubt  that  by  degrees  the  Ammonites,  like  the
Moabites  before  them,  had  to  amalgamate  with  the
land-hungry  intruders.

It  is  true,  Justin  Martyr,  who  died  i66  A.D.,  states  (cp  7"r)7»//.
119)  that  the  Ammonites  were  still  numerous  in  his  time;  but
Josephus  {.4nt.  i.  11  5)  once  says  precisely  the  same  thing  of  the
Moabites,  though  elsewhere  he  speaks  of  the  Moabites  and
Gileadites  as  .Arabians  (.-!«/.  xiii.  9  :),  which  agrees  with  the
statement  of  Origen  {in  Jolnim  1  i)  that  the  term  Ammonites
had  become  merged  in  that  of  Arabs.  This  makes  it  probable
that  the-omission  of  'Ammonites'  in  i  Esd.  869  (  =  Ezra".t  i)
was  not  accidental  but  deliberate.

The  close  connection  of  Ammon  with  Moab,  and,  in

1  See,  however,  Reth-horon,  4.

2  Prof.  Ryle  (Ezra  and  Neh.  115)  thinks  that  '  the  mention  of
the  Ammonite,  Moabite,  and  Egyptian  together,  suggests  the
influence  of  Deut.  283-7  UffV  Outhe  XSBOT)  assigns  the
enumeration  of  the  peoples  to  the  Chronicler.

•'  Cp  also  AcHlOK.


AMMONITES

a  less  degree,  with  Israel,  and  the  fact  that  the  Moabites


7.  Language.


spokea  dialect  of  Hebrew(see  Hkhkevv,
§  6)  renders  it  almost  certain  that  the
Ammonites  also  si>oke  the  '  language  of  Canaan. '  This
view  is  confirmed  by  Ammonitish  proper  names,  e.g.,
Hanun,  2S.  lOi  (j»n  'treated  graciously ') ;  Nahash,
iS.  Ill  (c^m  'serix;nt');  Naamah,  iK.  Hai  (noya
'pleasant');  and  the  royal  names  Amminadab  (see
alwve,  §  i),  Puduilu  =  Abdeel  (Jer.  3G26),  and  Ba'sa=:
Haasha  (Schr.  CO T  li^y).  Bacthgcn's  argu-

ment (in  his  licit riige)  for  the  polytheism  of  the
_-  ..  .  Ammonites  is  based  partly  on  Judg.  106,
^*"^'  partly  on  the  analogy  of  Moahitish
religion.  The  only  extant  Ammonitish  proper  name,
however,  which  can  be  held  to  be  compounded  with
a  tlivine  name  other  than  that  of  the  supreme  God,
is  Haalis  (see  B.\Al,ls).  At  any  rate  Milcom  was
as  much  the  great  national  god  of  Amnion  as
Chcmosh  was  of  Moab  (see  Moi.ocii)  ;  the  strange
slip  by  which  Jephthah  is  made  to  speak  of  Chcmosh
as  the  god  of  Ammon  suggests  that  '  Anmion  '  has  been
substituted  by  an  editor  for  '  Moab '  in  the  passage
(Judg.  11 12-28)  in  which  it  occurs.  In  2  S.  12 30  where
Nlilcom  [q-v.)  should  be  read  instead  of  vialkdni
'their  king,"  reference  seems  to  be  made  to  a  huge
statue  of  Milcom  in  the  capital  city.  The  statement
that  Solomon  became  a  worshipper  of  Milcom  in
Ills  old  age  rests  on  no  good  authority  (see  Soi.o.mo.n").
When  we  pass  to  later  times,  it  is  tempting  to  infer  with
A\'o.  (//(7(-'  156,  n.  i)  from  the  name  of  Nehemiah's
Ammonitish  enemy  that  the  worship  of  Yahwe  had
begun  to  attract  the  Ammonites.  The  dissolution  of  the
old  national  bonds  may  have  favoured  the  growth  of  a
monotheistic  tendency.  t.  k.c.  (w.  h.B.  )

AMMONITES  (D"'3ir3r),  2Ch.20i,  RV'e-  Meunim
(y.t-.,  M).

AMMONITESS (D^Jby), iK.  14  21  31 2Ch.  1213


2\.


.Sou  Am.mom.


AMNON  (|i:pN*,  in  2S.  132ot  pJ^pS^,  i.e.,  'safe'?,
by  some  regarded  as  a  diminutive  used  in  a  con-
temptuous sense  [cp  Dr.  TBS,  ad  loc.  W'r.  Ar.  Gra»i.(-^
I.  §269;  Ges.  Heb.  Gram.  [ET  98]  250.  n.  i]  ;  We.
[//(7'-' 24,  n.  2]  explains  as  |-13*t3S,  '  my  mother  is  the
serpent,"  see  Nun  ;  amnoon  [BAL],  ammcon  [A,  2S.
13 1-6  lort]).

1.  David's  elJcst  son  (see  David,  §  11  iii.  <i),  slain  by
Absalom  in  revenge  for  his  outr.ige  on  Tamar  (2.S.  82  Viiff.  ;
iCh.Sit).

2.  In  genealogy  of  J  I' UAH  (iCli.42ot).

AMOK  (piO]^,  '  deep,  inscrutable  ' ),  post-exilic  priestly
family; Neh.  12720  (om. BN*A  ; AMOyK  [L  and. in

V.  7, X^-'  "'t-'-  '"!'•, in V. 20 X-:-^  ""K-  '"f- AMOy])- '"^ee

I';ZKA, 2, §  6  i^, § II.

AMOMUM  (AMtoMON  [Ti.  WH  following  N*AC]),
an  unidentified  aromatic  substance,  mentioned  only
in  RV  mg..  Rev.  18 13  (RV  Spice,  AV  om.  with
BX'^  ;  Wyclif,  however,  gives  '  amome").  The  classical
'  amomum  '  ( =  '  blameless  '  ?)  was  a  shrub  of  Eastern
origin  ( '  Assyrium  vulgo  nascetur  amomum,'  Verg.
/;V/.  425),  from  which  were  made  oil  for  funeral  rites
and  unguents  for  the  hair.  As,  however,  it  is  used
also  of  any  odour  pure  and  sweet  (Salm.  ad  So/in.
284),  its  identification  is  uncertain.  It  may  possibly  be
the  vine  Cis.ut.t  vi/igena  (Linn.),  a  native  of  Armenia.
The  modern  term  is  applied  to  a  genus  of  aromatic
plants  (X.O.  Zingibraceae),  including  the  cardamon  and
seeds  of  Paradise.

AMON  (pON),  Jer.  4625  RV. See  Xo-.\M()N.

AMON  (Jinx,  |bX,  §  67  ; '  firm '  ?  '  workmaster '  ?  but

see  below), i.  (a/iiws  [BA],  -wj/  [L]  ; .CUO(.) Fairly

well  attested  as  the  name  of  the  son  of  king  Manasseh,

himself  also  king  of  Judah  ;  2  K.  21 18-26  (a/x/jiuv  [A]),

10  145


AMORITES

iCh.  3i4  (afjivwy  [B»A»,  see  Swete]),  aCh.  3820-25.
After  a  reign  of  'two  years'  {drca  638  B.C.  ;  see
CnKONOLOcy,  §  36)  he  was  assassinated  by  certain  of
his  courtiers  (see  Kittel,  //;j/.  2378).  The  event  pro-
duced a  profound  sensation.  Amon,  though  disliked
by  religious  reformers,  was  a  favourite  with  the  people,
who  avenged  his  death.  If  his  name  is  derived  from
the  Egyptian  (Theban)  sun-god,  it  is  an  interesting
proof  of  the  fluctuations  of  [xjlitical  party  (Egyptian  and
Assyrian)  in  the  reign  of  .Manasseh  (cp  Israel,  §  36).

2.  (arfintip  [AL])  less  certainly,  the  name  of  a  governor  of
Samaria  under  Aliab ;  iK.-''J26  (^rfinp  [H],  Aniiutv  1AJ)  =
2Ch.  IS25  (l>t/p  11'.]).  ©  pleads  strongly  against  the  correct-
ness of  the  form  Amon.  Semer  or  Semmer,  indeed,  can
hardly  be  correct,  but  Knier  or  Kmmer  is  the  ©  form  for  the
Immerof  MT  in  Jer.  20  i  and  elsewhere  (see  Immkk),  and  out
of  this  form  both  Amon  and  Semer  (TCC')  can  easily  have  arisen
as  misreadings. See  Sta.  ZATIV  t>  173-175  ('851.

3.  {aixtei  [1^].)  The  b'ne  Amon  (so  Sl'I),  a  group  of
'Solomon's  servants'  (see  Nethinim)  in  the  great  post-exilic
list  (see  Ezra,  ii.  §  9);  Neh.  759  (i)>ifi/ui  IR«<A])=Kzra257
Ami  ('ON;  cp  ©■-  everywhere;  rj/iet  [U.\])=i  Ksd..'i34  Allo.m,
RV  Allon  (oAAwi/  [H],  o«A.  [A],  i.e.,  AA  and  AA  for  M).

T.  K-.  c.

AMORITES  (*lip,X,  collective,  and  always  with
article, except  Nu.  2l29Ezek.  I645;  AMOPRAIOI  [BAI,]).

Other  ©  readings  are  :— a/u/iiopp«oi  (Is.  \~  g  »],  afjiappaioi  |l)t.
1  4  F,  2  K.  21  II  A,  I  Ch.  1  14  I.],  Ofioppei  [Judg.  108  li],  a^opis
[Gen.  14  13  A],  aiJ.op[e]i  [Kzra  t)  i  I'AJ,  a/i/xopaiot  [i  K.  7  14  .A],
A  )ui»/ /</■).

In  the  List  of  Peoples  '  the  .\morite  '  apjx^ars  among
sons  '  begotten  '  by  Canaan  (Gen.  10  16  J  =  i  Ch.  1 14I.

The  term  is  used  :  (1)  of  a  pre-lsraelitish  people  living  L.  of
the  Jordan,  Nu.  21  13  21  25  Josh.  24  8  (all  E),  .also  Josh.  2  10  '.» 10
OE),  Dt.  I4  3289  Judg.  108  II  I  K.419  (©HLom.),  Ps.  13.".  11
130  19,  and  elsewhere  ;  (2)  of  a  people  on  the  W.  of  Jordan,
Josh.  10  5/.  24  12  15  18  (.all  E),  also  Josh.  7  7  (JE),  5  i  10  i2(both
D),  Judg.  1  34-36  0  10  ;  I  K.  21  26,  2  K.  21  1 1,  i  ,S.  7  14,  2  S.  21  2  ;
(3)  of  a  southern  people,  Dt.  1  7-44,  cp  C.en.  14  7  ;  (4)  of  the  ancient
population  of  Canaan  in  general,  Gen.  1.'.  16  (J  or  R),  4S22  (E),
Am.  29/:,  andls.  179(Lag.  WRS  Che.  following  ©"KAor)  with
the  Hiviles.

The  Amorites  are  mentioned  also  in  the  lists  of
Canaanitish  peoples  subjugated  by  the  Isr.aelites  (Gen.
15  21  E.v.  3  8  and  elsewhere).  The  lists  commonly
include  the  Canaanites,  Girgashites,  Hittites,  Hivites,
Jebusites,  and  Perizzites,  and  once,  in  Gen.  15  19-21,
the  Kenites,  Kenizzites,  Kadmonites,  and  Rephaim,
for  which  reference  must  Ix;  made  to  the  separate
articles.  On  the  variation  in  the  order  of  these  enumer-
ations, which  are  obviously  '  rhetorical  rather  than
geographical  or  historical,'  cp  Dr.  Dent,  qb  ff.

The  passage  in  Amos  (29/^)  is  remarkable,  because
Amorite  is  used,  precisely  as  by  the  Elohist  (E),  as  a
general  term  for  the  primitive  population  of  Canaan,  and
because  the  Amorites,  as  an  extinct  race,  are  invested
with  a  half-mythical  character  (like  the  Anakim).

Wellhausen  (C//341  f.)  regards  the  designation
'Amorites'  as  substantially  synonymous  with  that  of
Canaanites,  though  not  cjuite  so  comprehensive.
According  to  this  view,  the  Canaanites,  in  the  time  of
the  biblical  narrators,  are  still  living  in  the  land  (/.<'. ,
in  the  cities  of  the  plain  which  were  not  occupied  by  the
Israelites).  The  Amorites,  on  the  other  hand,  are
thought  of  as  the  old  inhabitants  of  the  hill-country  E.
and  W.  of  the  Jordan,  now  inhabited  by  the  Israelites.
Thus  the  Amorites  belonged  exclusively  to  the  past  ;
they  had  their  day  and  ceased  to  Ix;  (Gen.  151.  This
explains  how  it  is  that,  although  under  ordinary  peace-
ful circumstances  the  Canaanites  are  sjwktn  of  as  the
old  inhabitants  of  the  land,  whenever  mention  is  made
j  of  war  and  conquest,  the  Amorites  at  once  take  their
place  (Gen.  48  22).  So  Moses'  adversaries,  Sihon  and
Og,  are  kings  of  the  'Amorites'  ;  and,  similarly,  it  is
with  the  twelve  kings  of  the  .Amorites  that  Joshua  has  to
deal  W.  of  the  Jordan.  Winckler  however  (Gl  1  ^"2  ff.)
disputes  the  synonymity  of  the  terms  '  Canaanites '
and  '  -Amorites '  on  the  ground  that,  as  the  Amarna
letters  show,  the  coast -land  as  far  N.  as  Sidon  or
even  farther,  was  called  Kinahi  (=  Canaan),  and  that


1.  Prophetic
activity.


AMOS

the  Amorite  population  had  its  seat  in  the  interior.  He
explains  the  distinction  in  the  nomenclatures  from  the
different  local  origin  of  the  two  writers  (an  Ephraimite
and  a  Judahite  rcsijectivcly).  On  the  e.xtra-biblical
facts,  and  on  the  inferences  to  be  drawn,  see  Canaan,

§^  3-9  and  cp  I'HtK.MCIA.

AMOS  (DV^y.  §  56,  'borne  [by  God]';  cp  Ama-
SiAii.  Ar.  -OmJis.  Phcen.  DDyjO'J'X ;  amcoC  [B.\g]).
.\mos  is  the  earliest  of  the  projjhets  of
whose  discourses  and  predictions  we
possess  written  records  with  an  ac-
comfianying  statement  of  their  authorship.  Of  the
external  facts  of  his  life  we  should  know  little  but  for
the  narrative  digression  in  7  10-17,  which  interrupts  the
series  of  prophetic  visions  on  the  fall  of  Israel.  From
a  statement  there  iissigned  to  Am.aziah,  '  the  land  is
not  able  to  bear  all  his  words,'  we  may  reasonably
infer  that  .Anios's  ministry  in  the  northern  kingdom  had
lasted  for  some  time,  when  it  w.-is  brought  to  an  abrujjt
close  by  an  act  worthy  of  the  heroic  1-^lijah.  Amos,  it
appears,  came  forward  at  length  in  a  place  where
success  was  more  difficult  than  anywhere  else,  and
uttered  a  prophecy  to  this  effect — 'Jeroboam  shall  die
by  the  sword,  and  Israel  shall  tie  carried  away  from  its
land."  It  was  in  Bethel,  the  seat  of  the  royal  temijle
corresfxjnding  to  that  of  Jerusalem  in  the  south,  and
probably  at  some  great  festival,  that  Amos  said  this  ;
and  the  priesthood,  faithful  to  its  royal  head,  took  the
al.arm.  S'ot  so  much  because  the  prophet  had  threatened
the  reigning  dynasty  (for  he  had  not  done  so  in  the
interests  of  any  upstart  noble)  as  because  he  h.ad  begun
to  weaken  the  moral  courage  of  the  Israelitish  people
(Jer.  .384).  With  the  half-contemptuous  s[)eech,  '  Carry
thy  prophecies  to  those  in  the  neighlK>uring  country
who  may  think  them  worth  paying  for,'  .\ma/.iah,  the
head  priest  of  liethel,  by  the  royal  authority,  bade
Amos  fly  from  the  land  of  Israel.  Amos  would  not
retire  without  a  parting  lestiinony.  These  are  his
significant  words :  '  No  prophet,  no  member  of  a
guild  of  prophets,  am  1  ' ;  that  is,  I  am  no  ecstatic
enthusiast,  like  the  prophets  of  Bethel,  whose  pro-
phesying is  a  trade,  and  whose  oracles  are  mere
heathenish  divinati<jn  (cp  Mic.  :jii).  'But  a  sheep-
breeder  am  I,'^  he  continues,  'and  one  who  lends
sycomore  figs'  (see  Shf.kp,  Sycomork)  :  that  is,  I  am
above  the  sordid  temptation  to  take  fees.  '  Yahwe
took  me  from  following  the  flcx:k  ;  Yahwe  said  unto
me,  (jo,  prophesy  unto  my  people  Israel.'  That  is,
My  prophesying  has  an  immediate  practical  object
which  concerns  the  whole  nation,  and  it  is  due  to  a
moral  impulse  which  has  come  straight  from  Israel's
God.  Then,  in  answer  to  the  command.  Prophesy
not  against  Israel,  .^mos  repeats  his  message  with  a
startling  person.al  application  (cp  Is.  22 17  18).

Such  was  .-Vmos — a  strange  phenomenon  to  the  head
priest  of  Bethel,  as  representing  an  entirely  new  type  of
2  Home  prophecy.  Whence  then  did  this  projihet
come?  Was  he  a  native  of  Israel  or  a
'  sojourner  '  from  Judah  ?  The  heading  of  the  book  (on
the  origin  of  which  see  below,  §  4 )  at  first  sight  appears  to
be  decisive  in  favour  of  the  latter  view.  Budde  has
made  it  probable  ^  that  we  should  render  '  Amos,  who
had  been  among  the  sheep-breetlers,  (a  man)  of  Tekoa.'
In  any  case,  Amos  is  represented  asa  Tekoite.  Now,  there
is  no  trace  in  ancient  or  in  modern  nomenclature  of  more
than  one  Tekoa  (iJ.v.).  That  Amos  Ix^longed  to  the
southern kingdom has, nevertheless, been doubted, ^

1  Read  ^pi3  with  Oort,  We.  (©UAg,  aliroAot) ;  cp  1  i.  Mesha
is  also  called ^p■1J  (2  K.  3  4). The  word  refers to  a  breed of

stunted  sheep,  valued  for  their  fine  wool  (see  Shkei>\.

2  Kohut,  Semitic  Stu<iies  jo  laSJT.

3  According  to  Oort,  Atnos  was  an  Israelite  who  cultivated
sycomores  in  his  own  country,  but  after  his  expulsion  dwelt
among  the  shepherds  of  Tekoa  (Th.  T'2b  lai,  etc  ['91]).  Gratz
(and  so  formerly  Oort),  following  Kimhi,  supposes  a  second
Tekoa  in  the  north.

147


AMOS

on  the  twofold  ground  ( i )  that  the  interest  of  Amos  is
absorbed  by  (northern)  Israel,  and  (2)  that  Tekoa  lies  too
high  for  sycomores  to  be  grown  there.  As  to  the  first
point,  Amos,  though  deeply  interested  in  Israel,  is  not,
like  the  native  Israelitish  prophet  Hosea,  a  sympathetic
observer  of  the  life  and  manners  of  the  north.  The
inner  impulse  from  above  sending  him  to  Israel  is
psychologically  accountetl  for  by  the'  vastly  greater
importance  of  Israel  as  compared  with  Judah  in  religion,
in  politics,  and,  we  may  add,  in  literature.  As  to
the  second,  Amos  may  very  well  have  possessed  a
plantation  of  sycomores  in  some  low-lying  district  in
the  Shephelah  or  in  the  Jordan  valley  (see  Syco.mokk).
We  may  accept  it,  then,  as  a  fact,  that  Amos  was  a
Judahite,  and  sprang  from  a  place  famous  in  the  time
of  David  for  the  quick  wits  of  its  inhabitants  (2  S.  Ha).
9  'D-anoKofi/.n  ^^^  situation,  too,  of  Tekoa,  was
6.  rreparauon.  ^.^,j  ^^^^^^  ^^  develop  the  future  pro-
phet's cap.-icities.  From  the  extensive  view  which  his
own  hill  commanded,  he  would  gain,  at  any  rate,  a
sense  of  natural  grandeur,  though  we  must  not  infer
from  this  that  he  was  capable  as  a  Tekoite  of  writing
Am.  4 13  and  the  parallel  pa.ssages.i  Not  far  off,
he  would  meet  with  the  caravans  of  the  Dedanites
(Is.  21 13)  and  other  Arabian  peoples,  and  would
imbitxj  from  them  a  longing  to  see  other  men  and
maimers.  Possibly,  too,  such  an  idiom  as  CTD'Q  'ac*  c;?
(4 10)  may  be  explained  from  Arabian  influence  (so
We.  ).'^  Whatever  the  social  position  of  Amos  may  have
been,  he  was  not  tied  to  the  soil,  and  may,  before
his  journey  to  Samaria,  have  wandered,  either  on
business  or  from  curiosity,  far  away  from  home,  and
have  seen  and  heard  much  of  which  his  neighbours  were
ignorant.  To  suppose  this  is  not  to  deny  that  even
the  stayer  at  home  had  opportunities  of  hearing  news,^
but  to  try  to  understand  the  alertness  of  Anios's
intellect,  the  width  of  his  knowledge,  and  the  striking
culture  and  refinement  of  his  style.  At  any  rate,  it  is
plain  that  he  studied  thoroughly,  on  the  spot,  the  con-
dition of  life  and  thought  in  the  northern  kingdom,  and
we  must  regret  that  we  have  no  further  contemporary
traditions  respecting  him,  than  that  contained  in  710-17.
One  very  singular  tradition,  indeed,  we  have,  which
appears  to  be  a  very  late  distortion  of  his  story.  It  is
the  story  (i  K.  13)  of  the  man  of  God  from  Judah,  who
went  to  Bethel  in  the  reign  of  Jeroboam  I.  and  threatened
the  altar  there  with  destruction  by  an  earthquake ■•  (cp
Am.  3 147991).  Though  this  teaches  us  much  con-
cerning a  late  view  of  prophecy,  however,  it  affords  no
fresh  glimpse  of  Amos.

A  post-exilic  editor  says  (Am.  li)  that  Amos  pro-
phesied during the  contemporary  reigns  of  Uzziah  of
4.  Notes  of  J"'^'''^^'  ^^'^  Jeroboam  II.  of  Israel. Of
date  Uzziah there  is no express mention  in

the  book ;  but  the  description  of  the  care-
less ease  of  Jerusalem  in  6i(Z  accords  with  the  circum-
stances of  his  reign  ;  to  Jeroboam  II.  the  prophet  refers
in  79,  and  his  biographer  in  7ioy".  The  heading  also
states  that  the  prophecy  as  a  whole  was  delivered  (i.e.,
in  its  original  form)  'two  j'ears  before  the  earthquake."
Unfortunately,  our  only  other  authority  for  this  earth-
quake* in  Uzziah's  reign  is  about  as  late  as  this  note
(Zech.  144).  It  is  no  doubt  plausible  to  defend  its  his-
torical character  by  referring  to  4  n  ( '  I  wrought  an  over-
throw among  you'),  and  by  our  prophet's  vivid  idea  of
earthquakes  as  one  of  God's  means  of  punishment  (88;  cp
Is.  21921).  Am.  88,  however,  is  certainly  an  interpola-
\ion,  and  it  is  not  impossible  that  the  rather  too  precise

1  G._  A.  Smith  {HG  315)  has  given  eloquent  expression  to
this  view.  In  T7ve/ve  Prophets,  however,  he  admits  the  late
origin  of  the  passages.

2  On  the  intellectual  opportunities  of  Tekoa  see  Stickel
{Hiofi  269-276),  who  makes  Job  to  have  been  written  in  this
district.

S  Robertson,  Early  Religion  0/ Israel  510.

*  Klo.  Sam.  u.  KSn.  J40,  and  cp  Kings,  {  8,  note.

8  Jos.  (Ant.  ix.  IO4)  gives  a  long  fabulous  story  about  it.


AMOS

statement  in  1 1  is  merely  an  exegetical  inference  from
736  (cp  78  8a).  which  seemed  to  the  editor  to  imply
that  Israel's  punishment  had  been  twice  postponed,  and
that  each  postponement  nuant  a  year's  grace  (so  (i.
Hoffmann  ;  cp  Chronolocjv,  §  3).  It  is  remarkable
that  the  author  of  the  heading,  if  he  had  access  to
tradition,  did  not  rather  refer  to  the  solar  eclijisc  pro-
phcsie<l  in  89  (in  its  i)resent  form).  This  seems  to  be
the  eclipse  which  an  Assyrian  list  of  eixjnyms  assigns
to  the  month  Sivan  763  B.C.'  It  is  less  important
that,  according  to  the  same  list,  i^estilenccs  ravaged
Assyria  in  765  (the  year  of  a  campaign  in  the  land
of  Hadrach,  near  Damascus  and  Hamath)  and
in  759.  Pestilence  in  the  land  of  Israel  is  indeed
mentioned  in  Am.  4  10  ;  but  it  is  described  as  '  after  the
manner  of  Kgypt. '  The  Egyptian  Delta  was  of  course
not  the  only  source  of  pestilences  :  the  Assyrian  plague
_.  may  have  germinated  elsewhere. Still,  it

.  ircum-  ^^.„^.^jp5  tpye  t^at  the  period  indicated  by
these  last  dates  sufficiently  accords  with
hints  dropped  in  the  Book  of  Amos.  For  e.xample,  the
Israelites,  according  to  Amos,  have  no  -ipprohensipn
of  a  Sfjeedy  attack  from  .Assyria.  The  circumstances  of
the  period  just  mentioned  enable  us  fully  to  account  for
this.  Shalmaneser  III.  (783-773)  had  too  nmch  trouble
with  the  land  of  Urartu(see  Ararat,  §  2,  As.syria,  §32),
and  his  successor  Asur-dAn  III.  (772-755)  had  too
many  revolts  at  home  to  put  down,  to  tje  dangerous  to
the  kingdom  of  Israel.  .Assyria  t>eing  thus  occupied,
it  was  easy  for  Jerotx)am  II.  to  recover  from  Damascus
(repeatedly  humiliated  of  late  by  A.ssyria)  the  districts
which  Hazael  had  taken  from  Israel.  Hence,  when
Amos  wrote,  the  e.\tent  of  the  Israelitish  dominion  was
'  from  the  point  where  the  Hamathile  territory  begins
(non  Ki3^)  to  the  torrent  of  the  Arilbah,'  a  definition
which  is  presumably  equivalent  to  that  in  2  K.  14  25,  which
gives  '  the  sea  of  the  Arabah  ' — i.e. ,  the  Dead  Sea.  The
prophet's  hearers  delighted  to  sun  themselves  in  this
new  prosperity,  and  boasted  of  the  capture  of  Lodeb.xr
and  K.\RN.\IM  in  Gilead  as  a  great  military  feat  (see
LoDEHAR,  and  We.  on  Am.  613).  True,  melancholy
thoughts  of  the  past  would  sometimes  intrude — thoughts
of  the  recent  terrible  earthquake,  of  the  famines  and
{jestilences,  of  the  friends  and  neighbours  lost  in  battle,
and  of  the  revolting  cruelties  of  the  Syrians  and  their
Ammonitish  allies  in  Gilead  (I31346-11).  Nor  is  it
arbitrary  to  connect  the  splendour  and  fulness  of
Israelitish  ritual  in  the  prophet's  time  with  the  popular
anxiety  lest  Yahwe  should  renew  the  troubles  of  the
past.  On  the  whole,  however,  the  tone  of  Israelitish
society  is  joyous  and  optimistic.  As  in  Isaiah's  earliest
discourses,  the  upper  classes  appear  as  self-indulgent
and  luxurious,  and,  as  in  Isaiah,  the  women  come  in
for'  a  share  of  the  blame  (4i  ;  cp  Is.  3 16).  Not  only
the  king  (i  K.2239)  but  also  the  nobles  have  houses
inlaid  with  ivory  (815  cp  64(2).  Feasting  is  habitual
(64-6),  and  the  new  custom  of  half-reclining  on  tl\e
divan*  has  lieen  introduced  at  Samaria  (3i2iJ).  The
good  old  sentiment  of  brotherliness  is  dying  away ;
oppression  and  injustice  are  rampant  (26-8  89  end,  10
4 1  5 11/.  846).  This  indicates  that  great  economic
changes  are  going  on  (Isaiah  makes  the  same  com-
plaint. Is.  5).  Side  by  side  with  this  we  notice  a
keen  interest  in  the  ritual  side  of  religion  (44/.  521-23
814  9i).  Jubilant  worshippers  sing  the  praises  of  the
incomparable  'God  of  Jeshumn'  (023  ;  cp  Deut.  8826),
and,  as  they  think  of  his  deliverances  in  the  past,  they
even  'desire  the  battle  day  of  Yahw6'  (5 18).  Amos,  a
stranger,  alone  sees  below  the  surface  of  things.  He
does  not,  indeed,  once  name  Assyria,*  and  seems  to  have

1  -See  Schr.  COT  2  193;  Sayce,  TSBASng;  Schr.  A'GF
338 yC,  and  cp  Chron(>lo<;v,  §  24.

■■*  In  3  12  render  '  that  sit  in  Samaria  in  the  corner  of  a  couch,
and  on  the  cushion  of  a  divan  '  (for  peTJl  read  arcs,  an  obvious
correction,  which  We.  has  somehow  not  made). See/(7^  10  572.

•  According  to  ©uaq^  however,  there  is  once  an  express
mention  of  Assyria  (89,  -nrK  =  "lirK,  for  TlPKi  Ashdod).


AMOS

no  clear  idea  of  the  geograjjhy  of  the  region  '  beyond
Damascus  '  ;  but  every  one  knows  what  he  means  when
he  warns  his  hearers  that  Yahw6  '  will  raise  up  against
them  a  nation '(614  ;  cp  Is.  626,  where  read  'ijS).  and
'  will  carry  them  into  captivity  Ijeyond  Damascus '  (52?).
On  the  whole,  we  may  prolxibly  date  the  original  pro-
phecies of  Amos  between  765  and  750  n.c.  *

'ITiere  are  only  two  passages  which  may  Ix;  regarded
as  inconsistent  with  this  date,  as  referring  to  later
6  Obi  actions  '^^'^"'^-  (a)  In  1  5*  it  is  predicted  that
i  ■  »„-  „.«  «  ^  'the  iieople  of  Aram  shall  go  into
to  766-760  B.O.  eaptivity  unto  Kir,'  which  was  ful-
filled,  according  to  2  K.  IG9,  on  the  capture  of  Dam.ascus
by  Tiglath-l'ileser  III.  in  732.  The  prediction,  how-
ever, was  not  meant  to  be  taken  so  literally.  '  Unto
Kir'  is  evidently  suggested  by  the  tradition  (97)  that
the  Aramteans  came  from  Kir  ;  the  prophet  cannot
mean  to  lay  stress  upon  such  points  as  the  locality  of  a
captivity  ;  ■*  otherwise,  why  does  he  describe  the  scene  of
Israel's  captivity  so  vaguely?  The  'fulfilment'  in
2K.I69  is  obviously  due  to  interpolation;  the  later
view  of  prophecy  differed  from  that  held  by  the  great
prophets  themselves.  (/>)  The  other  passage  is  62,  which,
as  emended  by  Geiger''  (to  make  sense),  reads  thus,
'  Pass  ye  to  Calneh,  and  look  ;  and  go  thence  to  Great
Hamath,  and  go  down  to  Philistian  Gath  ;  are  ye
better  than  these  kingdoms,  or  is  your  region  greater
than  theirs?"  These  places,  says  the  writer,  have
already  succumbed  to  the  common  enemy  :  how  can
Israel  ho[3e  to  escape?  Calneh  (not  the  Calneh
of  Gen.  10 10,  but  the  N.  Syrian  city  Kullani)  was
conquered  by  Tiglath-pileser  III.  in  738,  Hamath  by
Sargon  in  720,  and  Gath  by  the  same  king  in  711  ;*
and  the  passage  breaks  the  connection  Ijctween  6  i  and  5,
and  is  not  in  the  rhythm  which  is  so  closely  adhered
to  in  61 3-7.  The  verse  must,  therefore,  be  a  later
insertion,  by  a  scribe  or  editor  who  had  read  Is.  IO9
(Calno  =  Calneh),  and  is  properly  a  marginal  gloss  on
the  words,  '  Woe  to  them  that  are  at  ease  in  Zion  '  (♦^i  i ).
Observe  that  Great  Hamath  (H.  Rabba)  contr;ibts  v.ith
the  simple  Hamath  of  v.  14.

A  strict  analysis  is  indispensable, both  for  a  sound

view  of  the  origin  of  this  book,  and  for  a  clue  compre-

... hension of the great proi)het himself.

■  -  „*  ^^^  We  nmst,  therefore,  test  the  common
assertion  that  the  lx)ok  possesses  such  a
true  literary  unity  as  Amos,  when  in  retirement,  might
naturally  wish  to  give  to  his  remembered  prophecies.
5>o  much,  at  any  rate,  is  clear,  that,  as  it  now  stands,
the  book  has  three  well-marked  divisions.  (1)  Chaps.
1  2-2 16  present  a  series  of  judgments  on  the  peoples  of
Syria  and  Palestine,  each  framed  on  the  same  plan,
and  coupling  the  description  of  an  unpardonable  moral
fault  with  the  declaration  of  punishment.  The  most
detailed  of  the  accusations  is  that  brought  against
Israel,  which  forms  a  striking  culmination  of  the  series.
The  vaguest  and  least  impressive  is  Judahs,  which
comes  next  before  Israel's,  and  somewhat  spoils  its
effect.  ( 2 )  Chaps.  3-6  seem  at  first  sight  to  contain  three
discourses,  each  introduced  by  '  Hear  ye  this  word '
and  closing  with  a  prediction  of  national  ruin.  Upon
a  closer  examination,  however,  none  of  the  '  discourses'

1  The  reason  offered  for  a  later  date  (745-744)  by  Zeydner
and  Valeton  (in  Wildebocr,  A7«/.  no)  is  insufficient.  Any
observer  who  was  not  blinded  by  a  fanatical  rcllK'ous  belief
could  see  that  the  inactivity  of  Assyria  was  only  temporary,  not
to  mention  that  the  year  765  saw  the  .Assyrians  on  the  northern
border  of  Palestine.  Resides,  the  events  which  accomp.-\nied
the  accession  of  Tifilath-pileser  III.  in  74s  w'ere  of  too  exciting
a  nature  not  to  have  suggested  to  .Amos  a  fuller  and  more  precLse
threatening  than  we  find  in  his  prophecies.

2  On  the  former  part  of  this  verse  see  Beth -EDEN  and
AvEN,  3.

*  On  0's  readings  see  KiR.

*  Urschri/l  g6/.  Torreys  hesitation  to  remove  v.  a  from
the  context  which  it  distorts  (J^L,  1894,  p.  62 yC)  seems  very
needless.

5  Schr.'s  view  of  Calneh  {COT  2143/  ;  HIVB  I254)  seems
untenable  (see  Calnbh).

ISO


AMOS

proves  to  hiive  more  than  a  semblance  of  unity.  The
section  may  be  analysed  into  ten  loosely  connected
passages — 3i/  83-8  89-15  41-344/.  46-13  5i-i7*  518-27
61-768-14.  (3)  Chaps.  7-9. This  is  a  series  of  live

visions,  interrupted,  first  by  a  short  biographical  elucida-
tion of  the  third  vision  (7  10-15),  and  then  by  a  threatening
address  (84-14),  and  followed  by  an  evidently  composite
discourse,  closing  with  most  unexpected  promises  of  the
regeneration  of  Judah.

Now,  if  this  summary  is  correct,  it  becomes  im-
possible to  maintain  the  true  literary  unity  of  the  book.
More  than  one  editor  must  have  been  concerned
in  its  arrangement,  and  the  latest  editor  has  had
considerable  difficulty  in  so  disposing  his  material
as  to  produce  three  portions,  each  one  of  a  reason-
able length.  Considering  that  the  book  of  the  Twelve
Minor  Prophets  comes  to  us  from  the  post-exilic
age  (see  C.\NON,  §  39),  and  that  the  primary  object
of the later editors was not critical accuracy but

o Ti J. -T edification,  we  are  bound  to  look  out
8.  Ir ost-exilic  > ■ ,-  •,• •

.  very  sharply  for  post-exilic  msertions.


^P.l2.


Such  an  insertion  we  find  at  the  very
outset.  The  opening  verse  (I2)  has
been  often  viewed  as  the  te.xt  of  the  following  dis-
course ;  but  it  seems  very  ill-adapted  for  that  purpose,
for  the  object  of  the  discourse  is  not  to  exhibit  the
connection  between  Yahw^  and  a  privileged  sanctuary,
but  to  show  that  even  Israel  (which  has  so  many  altars
of  Yahwe,  28)  shall  be  punished  like  the  other  nations.
Nor  is  the  elegiac  tone  of  1  2b  at  all  in  harmony  with
the  cycle  of  stern  declarations  which  follows.  The
truth  is  that  1  2rt  is  borrowed  from  Joel  3  [4]  16a,  where
alone  the  words  suit  the  context,  and  1  2b  has  a  close
phraseological  affinity  to  Joel  and  other  late  writings.'*
It  is  no  argument  to  the  contrary  that  in  38  Yahw^  is
said  to  '  roar '  and  that  the  phrase  '  the  top  of  Carmel '
is  used  by  Amos  in  93  :  the  editor  had  naturally  made
some  slight  study  of  the  language  of  Amos.  The
reason  of  the  insertion  will  be  clear  if  we  compare
(a)  I9/.  with  Joel  82-6,  {b)  In  /.  with  Joel  819,  and
(c)  9 13  with  Joel  3[4]i8.  These  passages  can  all  be
shown  to  be  late  insertions,  and  1 2  can  be  understood
only  in  connection  with  them.

First,  as  to  (a)  and  {b)  it  will  be  noticed  that  I9/.
differs  from  16/.  only  in  the  substitution  of  '  Tyre'  for
-  ,  ,  ,  y.  'Gaza,'  and  in  the  addition  of  the
ap.  9/.  11/.  ^yQ^jjg_  •  ^x\d  remembered  not  the
covenant  of  brethren.'  (Even  if,  with  Winckler,  we
correct  ns  in  v.  9/  into  n;>s — i.e.,  the  N.  Arabian
Musri  [see  MiZK-MM], — part  of  the  following  argument
is  still  applicable. )  It  seems  incredible  that  Amos
should  have  condescended  to  repeat  himself  in  this
way,  and  doubtful  whether  the  early  Israelitish  prophets
knew  anything  about  such  an  act  as  is  imputed  to  Tyre
in  1 9.  And  what  can  be  the  meaning  of  '  the  covenant
of  brethren'  in  Amos's  mouth?  Many  critics,  indeed,
have  found  in  the  phrase  an  allusion  to  the  alliance
between  Solomon  and  Hiram  (RV  mg.  refers  to  i  K.  5i
911-14)  ;  but  this  was  a  purely  personal  connection,  and
lay  far  back  in  the  past.  We  might  also  think  of  the
covenant  between  the  kings  of  Israel  and  Tyre  pre-
supposed in  I  K.  I631/.  ;  but  would  the  Elijah-like
prophet  Amos  have  been  the  man  to  recognise  this?
Moreover,  this  was  a  personal  or  family  covenant,
whereas  the  charge  against  Edom  in  In,  that  he
'pursued  his  brother  with  the  sword,'  presupposes  a
true  national  covenant  resting  on  kinship  (cp  Mai.  I2).

1  Observe  that  between  Am.  615  and  16  something  analogous
to  w.  7  10  must  have  fallen  out  (jrzi.  8  9  are  an  interpolation).
Vv.  14-17  should  correspond  to  7iv.  4-7  10-13.

^  Vax  metaphorically,  as  Joel  1 10  ;  n'lKJ,  as  Joel  1  19  /  2  22  ;
ITT  as  Joel  1  12.  Cp  also  1  2/^  as  a  whole  with  Jer.  9  [10]  9  23  10
2537:  Is.  339;  Nah.  1  4  (all  post-exilic  passages  except  the
first).  See  Che.  Introd.  to  WRS's  i^n  Isr.  xv./.  [Volz.  has
lately  expressed  the  same  view  (/)/>  vorexil.  Jah7<ef>ro/etie
p.  i9j/C),  which  Nowack  (A7.  Proph.,  ad  loc.)  does  not  refute.]


AMOS

This  view  is  confirmed  by  Obad.  12,  where  '  in  the  day
of  thy  brother '  implies  the  same  charge  that  is  brought
against  Edom  in  the  words  quoted  from  Am.  In.
Thus,  the  fault  imputed  to  Tyre  is  that  it  co-oijerated
with  Edom  in  the  time  of  Israel's  distress,  by  making
raids  into  Israelitish  territory  and  selling  captive
Israelites  to  their  unnatural  'brethren.'  Was  there
ever  such  a  time  of  distress  for  Israel  between  the  age
of  David  and  that  of  Amos?  It  is,  of  course,  the
history  of  Judah,  not  that  of  N.  Israel,  that  we  have
to  search,  for  the  claim  to  the  overlordship  of  Edom
was  maintained  by  the  Davidic  family.  The  answer
depends  primarily  on  the  results  of  our  criticism  of
Chronicles.  If  we  can  regard  the  Chronicler  as  an
only  slightly  prejudiced  recorder  of  old  traditions,
we  may  believe  that  the  Philistines  and  Arabians  broke
into  and  plundered  Jerusalem  (2  Ch.  21 16/ ),  and
conjecture  that  Tyrian  slave -merchants  drew  their
profit  from  the  circumstances.  F'urther,  if,  some  time
before  that,  the  Edomites  revolted  from  Judah  and
defeated  King  Joram  (this,  happily,  is  a  fact  attested  not
only  in  2  Ch.  but  also  in  2  K.  820-22),  it  is  easily  con-
ceivable that  Edomitish  passion  vented  itself  in  a  great
slaughter  of  fugitive  Israelites.  Is  it  worth  while,  how-
ever, to  defend  the  integrity  of  Am.  1  and  the  accuracy
of  the  Chronicler  by  such  a  lavish  use  of  conjectures  ?
A  prophet  such  as  Amos  was  could  not  have  fastened  on
such  an  offence  of  the  Edomites  to  the  exclusion  of  the
cruel  treatment  of  I'^domites  by  Judahites  referred
to  in  2  K.  147  (cp  2Ch.  25i2),  and  we  ought  not  to
imagine  a  case  of  special  barbarity  in  the  ninth  century
when  there  is  a  well  attested  one  in  the  sixth.  It  was,
in  fact,  at  the  fall  of  Jerusalem  in  586  that  the  P3domites,
who  had  no  such  stern  moralists  as  Amos  and  Isaiah  to
reprove  them,  filled  up  the  measure  of  their  revenge,  to
the  indignation  of  Jewish  writers,  who  forgot  the  cruelties
of  their  own  ancestors.  Hence,  to  explain  Am.  1 11-12
aright,  we  must  refer  to  Ezek.  25  12  35  5  Is.  84  Obad.
10-14  Ps.  1377,  together  with  Joel  8[4]i9  ;  and,  to  under-
stand I9/. ,  we  must  compare  (besides  the  passages  just
mentioned)  the  description  of  the  offence  of  Tj're  in
Joel  3(4)2-6  (subsidiary  evidence  for  the  late  date  of
Am.  In/,  is  given  below ).'  If  it  be  asked,  when
these  judgments  on  Tyre  and  Edom  were  inserted,  the
answer  is,  during  (or  much  more  probably  after)  the
Exile,  at  a  time  when  some  fresh  insult  on  the  part  of
the  Edomites  reminded  Jewish  writers  of  earlier  and
deeper  injuries  (see  Is.MAH,  ii.  §  14).

Next  as  to  (c).  Plainly,  Joel  3(4)i8rt  is  the  original  of
Am.  9i3<5.  Theopposite  view  would  be  inconsistent  with
K  Qfi  the  fact  that  Am.  9 13(1  is  dependent  on
10.  Chap.  y8-i5.  ^j^g  j^jg  passage  Lev.  265«  (see  Levi-
ticus). Am.  9 13,  however,  is  not  a  later  insertion  in  the
section  in  which  it  occurs.  From  9n  (or  rather  from
98)  onwards,  we  are  struck  by  affinities  in  expression
or  idea  to  works  of  the  Babylonian  and  Persian  periods,
and  by  corresponding  divergences  from  the  st)le  and
thought  of  Amos.  "^  That  v.  7  cannot  have  been  the
conclusion  of  the  prophecy  is  certain  ;  but  we  have  to
regard  w.  8-15  as  a  post-exilic  substitute  for  the  original
close.  The  editor  cannot  endure  the  idea  of  the  final
destruction  of  the  whole  house  of  Israel,  and  so  he
makes  Amos  declare  in  a  strangely  softened  mood  that
only  the  'sinful  kingdom'  [i.e.,  that  of  Ephraim)  will
be  wiped out, whereas  the less  guilty  Judahites  will

1  Notice  (1)  the  vague  description  of  the  offence  of  Edom.
Does  it  consist  in  the  purchase  of  Israelitish  slaves  from  the  Tyrian
slave-merchants?  or  in  the  slaughter  of  Israelitish  fugitives?  or,
more  probably,  did  Edom  prove  that  'he  kept  his  wrath  for
ever'  in  both  these  ways?  (2)  The  mention  of  '  Teman '  and
'  Bozrah,'  which  names  seem  first  to  occur  in  Jer.  487  13.  Cp
the  threat  in  1  12  with  that  in  Obad.  9.

2  For  the  evidence,  which  is  singularly  strong,  see  Cheyne,
'Notes  on  the  Prophets,'  Expositor,  Jan.  1897,  pp.  44-47.  On
Am.  98-15  see  also  Preuschen,  ZATW\h2^.2^  (95);  Torrey,
'Notes  on  Am.  27  etc.,' JBL  168-172  ('96);  T>r'\\er,  Joel  and
Amos  120  jff.,  who  vainly  endeavours  to  diminish  the  force  of
the  arguments.


AMOS

suffer  the  milder  doom  of  dispersion  among  the  nations.
Even  this  will  Ix;  only  for  a  time.  Israel  shall  return,
the  old  Davidic  kingdom  shall  lie  restored,  and  the
sweet  commonplaces  of  prophetic  idylls  shall  be  fulfilled.

Now,  can  we  not  see  the  reason  of  the  insertion  of  the
opening  verse  or  prologue?  It  was  to  assure  the  post-
e.xilic  readers  of  Amos  that  the  threats  of  the  prophet
had  long  since  been  fulfilled,  and  that  restored  Zion
should  be  safe  under  the  care  of  its  lion-like  divine
protector.  In  other  words,  Amos  was  to  be  read  in  the
light  of  the  concluding  portion  of  Joel.  The  insertion
of  the  epilogue  (98-15),  in  which  we  ought  to  note  the
reference  to  Kdom  (cp  Joel  819),  has  a  similar  reason.'

Here,  then,  are  already  four  certain  |K)st-exilic  inser-
tions. The  companion  passages  now  to  lje  enumerated
are  eciually  noteworthy.  No  .satisfactory  ])icture  of  the
prophet  Amos  is  possible  till  we  have  recognised  them.

Kirst,  Am.  2^f>  is  too  deficient  in  concreteness  to
be the work of Amos, and is, on phraseological

11.  chap.  24/ F°""''''  '^''-'•'  ,  ^\^°'  l^""  '"*"^f  °[  "^^

^ '■' judgment  upon  Judah  also  must  be  late.

This  is  e%-ery  way  a  gain.  In  particular,  we  can  now
see  lietter  how  thoroughly  Amos  was  ab.^orlxid  in  his
mi.ssion  to  N.  Israel.  He  cannot  perhaps  forget  Judah  ;
but  his  native  country  is  only  a  fragment  :  the  national
pulse  beats  most  vigorously  in  Kphraim  (cp  Is.  98/.
[7/.]).  The  post-e.\ilic  editor,  however,  felt  the  need
of  a  distinct  reference  to  the  sin  and  punishment  of
Judah,  which  he  meant  to  Ije  taken  in  combination
with  the  encouraging  statements  of  1 2  and  9 11-15.
It  was  a  different  feeling  which  prompted  the  insertion

12.  chaps.  4 12^13 °'^  ^  '3  ^''''^  ''■'^''''^  •*  "''  '^.  connected)
rofa f 5  ^f-  9  sf. The  conception  of  God

■''  ■''  had  become  deeper  and  fuller  ;  the
germs  long  ago  deposited  by  the  preaching  of  Amos
and  Isaiah  had,  through  a  widened  experience,  develojjed
into  the  rich  theology  of  II.  Isaiah  and  the  Hook  of
Job.  Not  only  by  the  wonders  of  history  but  also  by
those  of  nature  was  the  sole  divinity  of  Yahwe  proved,
and  an  ordinary  reader  of  .\mos  inserted  these  doxologies
(as  we  may  call  them)  to  relieve  the  gloom  of  the  pro-
phetic pictures.  3  Another  such  insertion  was  made
(according  to  the  text  used  by  ©)  in  Hos.  184.

We  now  pass  on  to  .-\m.  .'126.  The  construction  and
rendering  of  this  passage  have  been  much  disputed.
13.  chaps.  52662.  ""  the  assumption  that  Am.  525-27
was  all  written  by  .Amos,  it  is
perhaps  easiest  (see  Driver)  to  render  cnurr,  '  So  ye
shall  take  up  .  .  .  (Saccuth'  your  king  and  Kaiwan
your  god,  which  ye  made  for  yourselves),'  'nS^ni.
'and  I  will  carry  (you)  into  exile.''*  But  how
unnatural  this  is !  Nowhere  else  does  the  prophet
mention  an  inclination  of  the  Israelites  to  the  worship
of  Assyrian  gods,  and  the  carrying  of  .Assyrian  gods  by
Israelites  into  Assyria  is  a  very  strange  feature  in  a
threat. Hence  the  whole  verse  is  more  than  probably

1  There  are  similar  interpolations  in  Hosea  {e.g.,  I7  1  io-2  i
[2i-3]and  the  words' D.-ivid  their  king 'in  3  5). See  Hosea,  §  4.

i'  Cp  2  K.  IO15,  Deiiteronomistic.  Critics  on  the  other  side
quote  Is.  624;  Hos.  2  2  [4];  Ex.  18  16  ;  Deut.  30io;  but  they
do  not  meet  the  argument  from  weakness  of  style,  and  produce
no  parallel  for  the  second  part  of  the  description  of  Judah's  sin.
Moreover,  the  two  Pentateuch  pas.sages  are  not  in  point.  Nor
have  critics  realised  the  consequences  of  admitting  the  post -exilic
origin  of  the  prophetic  books  in  their  present  form.

3  The  style  is  that  of  II.  Isaiah  .and  the  later  poets  (cp  Stickel,
Hiob  p.  276),  not  that  of  Amos.  The  strings  of  participles
remind  us  of  Is.  40  22./:  ;  Job  12  17-24  ;  Zech.  12  i  ;  D.-in.  221/
Notice  also  ((13  (cp  Cheyne, /nt. Isa.  xxi.  252),  'nsa^Sj;  Tn

pK,  no'D,  S'Ds,  mo'^'i-,  j'Saa,  mSvo  nj3n. In  95  nixasn  ''-

violates  the  us.ige  of  Amos  (but  cp  (P).  The  ideas  are  equally
late,  though  they  are  such  as  .\mos,  h.id  he  met  with  them,
would  have  owned.  Inter  alia,  comn.  the  third  descrip-
tive phr.-ise  in  4  13  with  Ps.  13!t  2.  It  is  prob.-ible  that  bif.
originally  stood  after  413.  Am.  fls/,  however,  presumably
retains  its  original  position.

■•  On  the  text  see,  besides  the  comment.iries,  N.  Schmidt,
JBL,  1894,  p.  I  _/?:  ;  Torrey.  ib.  p.  61  ;  WRS  .-ind  Che.,
Profih.  Isr.i'ii  y^ff.\  G.  Hoffmann,  ;?^ /"/r  3  112/ :  Tiele,
Gesch.  van  het  godsdienst  315.  On  the  construction  see  Dr.
in  Smith,  /?5(2)  122  (art.  Amos).


513-15  629


AMOS

a  later  insertion,  which  took  th<;  place  of  a  passage
that  had  become  illegible.  The  case  of  Is.  104rf
seems  exactly  parallel  (see  SHOT,  ad  U>c.).  Whether
or  no  Succoth-iienoth,  the  name  of  a  god  in  2  K.  17  30,
contains  the  divine  name  .Saccuth,'  we  may  suppose  that
the  writer  of  the  inserted  passage  merely  antedates  a
worship  introduced  into  .Samaria  by  the  Babylonian
colonists  after  722  ».< .  The  awkwardness  of  the  con-
nection need  not  surprise  us  (this  against  Konig,  Synt.
§  368  (^)  ;  the  1  in  cnKrji  is  simply  the  Waw  explica-
tivitm  so  often  prefixed  to  glosses.  Render,  '  That  is,
ye  carried  in  procession  ' ;  cp  Is.  45  20. See  Chiun  A.nd

SUCCOTH.

Am.  62,  another  insertion,  has  been  treated  of
already  (see  §  6  \b\f.  We  pass  on  to  8811/  Verse  8
.  . ,  o 1 is  not  at  all  suitable  as  a  description  of

r  'P^'  '4  jj^g  threatened  punishment  (see  We.,
Nowack).  The  comparison  with  the
Nile  recurs  in  an  interpolated  verse
(95).  Passing  on,  we  note  that  v.  13  speaks  of  literal
thirst  (suggested  by  the  mention  of  the  festivals  in
V.  10)  ;  but  in  v.  11  the  hunger  and  thirst  are  meta-
phorical. Verses  9/.  13/.  announce  a  sudden  cata-
strophe; but  in  V.  II  f.  a  lengthened  time  of  misery  is
descritied.  The  passage  is  clearly  late,  and  is  parallel  to
Is.  820/.  (partly  late).  The  silence  of  prophecy  is
spoken  of  as  a  sore  trial  in  Ps.  74  9.  Other  probable
late  insertions  are  814^513-15  (cp  Mic.  76),  and  the
expression  Tn^  in  65  (see  David,  §  13) ;  and  69/  is
at  any  rate  misplaced.  To  these  it  is  plausible  to  add
the  reference  to  '  those  who  are  at  ease  in  Zion '  in  6  i
(but  it  may  he  better  to  correct  p's  into  ,-ii-in  ;  so  Che.
/(^A' 10573)  I  also  87,  which,  as  Duhm  points  out,  may
be  a  gloss  on  v.  Z  ;  certainly  it  interrupts  a  noble
passage  {v.  8  for  K33'  read  nnn-  with  We. ,  or,  much  better,
3K3'). The  last  insertion  is  98-15  (see  §  10).

After  these  insertions  have been  removed, may  we

safely  suppose  that  the  rest  of  the  book  represents  what

IB Pre  exilic  '^""o^  ^''^''^' '"  P"^''ic  ? No  :  the  analogy


editing.


of  the  prophecies  of  Isaiah  makes  such


a  supposition  highly  improbable.  Let
us  be  content  with  knowing  that  we  have  a  truthful
record  of  the  prophetic  certainties  of  .Amos,  even  though
he  did  not  always  utter  them  in  public.  The  manner
and  the  contents  of  the  passages  into  which  the  true
Book  of  Amos  falls  must  he  our  guide  in  determining
the  class  (whether  that  of  public  or  of  private  prophecies)
to  which  they  severally  belong.  It  is  both  inherently
difl^cult  and  contrary  to  analog)'  to  suppose  that  1  2-
2 16  was  ever  really  uttered  ;  at  any  rate,  l2-'J6,7  s  is
more  adapted  to  produce  an  effect  on  readers  than  on
hearers.  Nor  can  we  possibly  imagine  that  the  visions
in  chaps.  7-9  were  used  by  the  prophet  as  texts  of  spoken
addresses  ;  passages  from  discourses  are  no  doubt  here
and  there  introduced,  but  they  come  from  the  arranging
hand  of  the  editor  of  this  part.

It  is  a  further  question  whether  the  arrangement  of
the  different  sections  may  be  due  to  .Amos  himself.  In
answering  it  we  must  leave  sufficient  room  for  the  f^rmvih
of  the  book.  It  is  not  unreasonable  to  suppose  that  on
his  expulsion  from  Bethel  the  prophet  paid  a  visit  (per-
haps a  second  visit;  cp6i)  to  Jerusalem,  and  there
'noted'  his  prophecies  'in  (on)  a  book  for  a  later
day'  (Is.  808),  when  the  judgment  upon  Israel  should
have  been  .accomplished.  There,  too,  he  may  have
committed  his  record  (enriched  with  some  never-spoken
prophetic  certainties)  to  the  custody  of  those  '  disciples  '
of  Yahwe  and  of  his  prophets  (see  Is.  816),  who  l)egan
the  long  succession  of  students  and  editors  of  the  re-
ligious literature.  In  their  hands  we  may  suppose  that
the  book  assumed  by  degrees  its  present  form.  .At  any
rate,  a  written  record  of  .Amos  must  have  become
quickly  known  ;  for  Isaiah,  it  is  clear,  steeped  himself  in
the  originality  of  Amos  before  displaying  his  own  truly

1  So  Del.  Par.  21s/.,  but  see  Succoth-Benoth.
154


AMOS

original  genius.  To  Hosea,  however,  such  a  record
cannot  be  proved  to  have  Ix-cn  known  (see  We.  on  Hos.
814  4  IS  IO58) :  in  other  words,  the  circulation  of  Amos's
prophecies  was,  originally  at  least,  confined  to  Judah.
The  latest  editor  of  the  book,  as  we  have  seen,  was
post-exilic.

A  special  interest  attaches  to  the  description  of  the
visions,  together  with  the  historical  interludes  in  chaps.
7-9,  partly  because  they  exhibit  the  growth  of  Amos's
prophetic  certainty  resj^ecting  the  fall  of  Samaria,  and
partly  because,  like  Is.  6  7 1-8 18,  and  20  (in  their
original  form),  they  appear  to  come  from  a  partly
biographic,  partly  prophetic,  work,  written  or  dictated
by  the  prophet  himself.

Some  have  been  surprised  to  find  'a  plain  country-
man '  like  Amos  possessed  of  such  a  refined  and  yet
.  ,  vigorous  style.*  They  forget  that  the
16.  ^niOS  S  differences  of  culture  in  the  East  are  still
^  ■  sometimes  comparatively  trifling,  and  that
a  man  of  low  rank  may  express  himself  with  considerable
elegance.  It  is  still  more  in  point  to  remark  that  the
most  classic  Arabic  poems  are  the  work  of  men  who
had  a  calling  similar  to  that  of  .Amos,  while,  even
under  the  new  Moslem  empire,  sons  of  the  desert  were
wont  to  appear  at  court  and  win  a  rich  guerdon  by  the
finished  style  of  their  improvisations.  Such  critics  have
also  forgotten  the  opportunities  of  self-culture  which,  both
at  Tekoa  and  elsewhere,  Amos  must  have  enjoyed  ;  and
when  even  G.  Baur  and  Ewald  point  to  certain  '  sole-
cisms in  pronunciation  and  orthography  '  as  evidences  of
provincialism,  it  may  be  replied  that  the  errors  in  ques-
tion may  reasonably  be  ascribed  to  late  copyists.-  That
Amos  delights  in  images  drawn  from  nature  is  clearly
no  fault  (see,  e.g.,  2934/812519,  and  the  first,  second,
and  fourth  visions).  Only  one  of  them  is  distinctively
the  comparison  of  a  shepherd  (812) ;  and  Amos  is  just
as  willing  to  speak  of  wonders  of  which  he  knows  only
by  hearsay — such  as  the  giant  cedar  trees  (29),  and  (if
the  text  be  correct)  the  inundation  of  the  Nile  (88) — or
of  which  he  has  a  true  Israelitish  dread — such  as  an
earthquake  or  a  solar  eclipse  (88/),  or  the  mysterious
sea  which  yields  no  harvest  (G12;  cp  arpvyeTos),  and
which  somewhere  hides  the  terrible  serpent  of  primitive
mythology  (93  ;  see  Skri'knt,  §  3/ ).  It  is  a  pity  that,
for  reasons  already  given,  we  cannot  speak  of  Amos  as
a  sympathetic  observer  of  the  sky* — fhat  is  an  essential
characteristic  of  a  much  later  poet  (see  Job).  As  a
literary  craftsman  he  ranks  high.  In  1 3-2:6  we  have  a
literary  prophecy,  which,  until  .\mos  forgets  his  art  in  his
grief  at  the  manifold  offences  of  Israel,  is  marked  by  great
regularity  of  structure.  .So  in  46-ii  we  have  the  literary
model  of  an  equally  symmetrical  passage  in  Isai.ah  (Is.
98-21  [7-20]  526-30  10 1-4),  and  in  62  we  have  a  short
but  strictly  rhythmical  elegy.  .Altogether,  the  Book  of
D  crrpft  of  -^'"^^  forms  a  literary  as  well  as  a  pro-

0  "cinaditv P'^*^'"'^ phenomenon. It is true that
orig  y. ^^Yx  as  a  writer  and  as  a  speaker  he

must  have  had  models  ;  J  and  E  were,  of  course,  not  the
only  writers  of  the  pre-Amosian  period,  and  Elijah  and
Elisha  (of  whose  doings  a  faint  echo  has  reached  us)
were  not  the  only  prophetic  reformers  (.Am.  2 11/ 87).
There  is  no  occasion,  however,  to  suppose  that  there  were
prophets  of  precisely  .Amos's  type  before  him — prophets
who  had  exactly  his  conception  of  their  duties,  and
were  also,  in  a  qualified  sense,  writers.  It  would  be  a
mistake  to  infer,  from  Amos's  use  of  formula,  that  he
was  acquainted  with  earlier  written  prophecies.  Pro-
phetic formulae  could  be  transmitted  by  word  of  mouth

1  Against  Jerome's  application  of  Paul's  self- depreciating
language  in  a  Cor.ll  6  to  Amos  sec  Lowth,  Prerlect.  21  (Lectures,
ET,2  97/).

2  Take,  e.g.,  pn^*'  ("9)  for  P"^'.  The  same  form  occurs  in
Jer.  3326,  Ps.  1059,  l)oth  post -exilic  passages.  In  5  11  0P13
is  not  a  '  dialect  form '  for  doi3  \  the  scribe  wrote  x!  by  an  error,
and  then  corrected  it  by  writing  o- Read  simply  nn  with  We.

3  GASm.  (HG  3.5).


AMOS

as  well  as  by  the  pen.  That  Amos  had  left  Tekoa  at
intervals  before  his  prophetic  call  is  not  only  inherently
probable,  but  also  follows  from  such  a  passage  as  87/  (if
correct),  which  .Amos  could  hardly  have  written  unless  he
had  had  the  most  vivid  and  direct  ocular  evidence  of  the
effects  of  a  true  prophetic  impulse  even  before  his  own
turn  came  to  receive  one.  His  originality  is  shown,
not  only  in  his  prophetic  message,  but  also  in  his  being
(probably)  the  first  to  conceive  the  idea  of  using  the  \>&\\
in  aid  of  the  voice.  The  /Jra-literature  of  the  priests
had  already  taken  a  considerable  development  (Hos.
812);  Amos  was,  it  appears,  the  first  prophet  who
followed  the  exanipie  of  the  literary  priests.  The  im-
portance of  this  step  it  was  Ijeyond  his  i)ower  to  esti-
mate. Within  a  generation  h.;  expected  Israel  as  a
nation  to  disappear  ;  but  he  thought  it  worth  while  to
gather  disciples  who,  like  himself,  could  praise  Yahwe
even  in  the  midst  of  ruin  ;  and,  after  all,  who  could  tell
but  Yahw6  might  have  some  other  secret  to  reveal  to
one  of  these — to  a  Hosea  or  to  an  Isaiah  ? See  §  18.

That  Amos's  message  is  a  gloomy  one  is  in  accord-
ance with his  conception  of  the  divine  character. In

18.  Pessimism.  •''"  ^f  'I'^'^J^'^'  ^^e  divine  purpose
could  not  be  one  of  peace,  though
it  required  an  immense  devotion  to  Yahwe  to  be  able
to  declare,  seemingly  unmoved,  that  He  purposed  the
complete  destruction  of  Israel  (or,  as  we  should  say,  of
Israel  and  Judali).  In  spite  of  the  universal  scepticism
which  meets  him  (for  how,  it  is  said,  can  Yahwe  be  con-
ceived of  apart  from  his  people?),  .Amos  persists  in  his
message,  and  even  conceives  the  possibility  that  legend-
ary supernatural  agencies  may  be  used  to  make  the
destruction  more  complete  (93).  It  is  not,  therefore,
open  to  us  to  account  for  the  confidence  of  Amos  simply
by  the  advance  of  the  Assjxian  power.  He  does,  indeed,
regard  Assyria  as  the  chief  destructive  agent  (614  7  17) ;
but  Assyria,  when  Amos  spoke  and  wrote,  was  passing
through  a  period  of  decline  ;  consequently  his  conviction
must  have  some  other  ground  which  naturally  sharpens
his  eyes  for  the  still  present  danger  from  Assyria.
To  this  it  must  be  added  that,  according  to  Amos,  it
would  be  easy  for  A'^ahwe,  if  the  agency  of  Assyria
were  not  available,  to  bring  some  other  hostile  nation
from  some  corner  of  the  earth,  just  as  he  '  brought
up  the  Philistines  from  Caphtor,  and  the  Arama^ns
from  Kir'  (97).  The  real  ground  of  Amos's  prophetic
fjessimism  is  the  increasingly  unsound  religious  con-
dition of  his  people.  He  may  very  possibly  have  ad-
mitted that  there  were  fifty  or  at  least  ten  Israelites
who  lived  by  the  same  pure  religion  as  himself ;  but
he  could  not  conceive  of  Yahw^'s  saying,  '  I  will  not
destroy  the  land  for  ten's  sake. '  The  righteous  must,
according  to  him,  suffer  with  the  wicked  (9 10  was  in-
serted to  correct  this  idea),  though  he  might  perhaps
have  left  a  door  of  hop>e  open  for  those  who,  like  him-
self and  his  disciples,  had  close  personal  contact  with
the  true  God  :  the  nation  might  perish  ;  but  when  this
had  happened,  God  nught  have  some  secret  purpose  for
those  who  '  knew  '  him.

Of  this  vague  hope  we  hear  nothing  from  Amos
(cp  Isaiah).  What  the  popular  religion  was,  we
know  but  too  well.  Whatever  the  nobler  minds
may.  have  believed,  'the  mass  of  the  people,'  as
Robertson  Smith  well  says,  '  still  thought  of  Him  as
exclusively  concerned  with  the  affairs  of  Israel,'  and  the
connection  between  Yahwe  and  Israel  had  a  non-moral,
natur.al,  basis.  Ritual  tended  to  make  morality  almost
superfluous,  and  by  its  increasing  costliness  actually
promoted  that  injustice  and  inhumanity  which  Yahw^
abhorred.  There  were  also  immoral  superstitions  at
which  Amos  glances  less  (see  27)  than  Hosea.  To  this
19  Idea  of  P^''"''^'0"s  system  the  religion  of  Amos
Ood  '^  diametrically  opposed. Once,  at  any

rate,  he  uses  the  striking  title,  '  Yahwe,
the  God  of  the  Hosts'  (627  is  admittedly  a  genuine
passage) — i.e.,  the  God  of  celestial  as  well  as  earthly

156


AMOS

legions — together  with  '  the  Lord  Yahwi '  (perhaps  nine-
teen times),  in  antithesis  to  tlic  nationalistic  expression,
'  Yahwir,  the  God  of  Israel.'  The  Vahwe  whom  he
himself  worshipped  was,  in  virtue  of  his  perfect  moral
nature,  the  Sovereign  alike  of  nature  and  of  nations.
Amos  had  not,  indeeil,  fathonicd  the  depths  of  this
conception  as  had  the  Second  Isaiah  and  the  author
of  Job  (.\m.  4i3  and  the  parallel  passages  are  later
insertions  :  see  alx)ve,  §  12) ;  but  he  is  already  to
all  intents  and  purposes  an  ethical  monotheist,  and
his  conviction  of  the  impending  destruction  of  Israel
does  but  intensify  his  sense  of  the  majesty  of  the  one
Gotl.  He  does  not,  indeed,  reject  the  old  belief  in  the
connection  lx:t\veen  Yihwe  and  Israel  altogether  (cp
7  15  "my  people  Israel'):  he  moralises  it.  For  some
wise  object,  Yahwe  brought  Israel  out  of  Egypt  (3i  S>7),
and  enteretl  into  a  [XMsonal  moral  relation  to  it  ;  but  his
will,  at  any  rate,  is  not  unknown  to  the  other  nations,  and
their  history  is  equally  uiuler  his  direction.  Once,  in-
deed, under  the  stress  of  moral  passion,  Amos  even
places  the  '  sons  of  Israel '  on  a  level  w  ith  the  '  sons  of
the  Cushites'-  ;  this  occurs  near  the  end  of  his  prophecy
(y?),  and  is  evidently  intended  as  a  final  wiiiulrawal  of  a
temporary  and  conditional  privilege.  It  is  not,  how-
ever, on  all  the  nations  of  the  earth,  but  only  on  those
which  are  in  close  pro.ximity  to  Israel,  that  judgment  is
pronounced  by  Amos,  as  the  spokesman  of  Yahw6  ;  he
aims  at  no  theoretic  consistency.  These  nations  are  to
suffer  the  same  doom  as  Israel  at  the  hand  of  Assyria,
b<_'cause  they,  like  Israel,  have  violated  the  unwritten
law  of  justice  and  humanity.  [Thus  we  can  divine
Amos's  free  attitude  towards  the  lately  written  cthico-
religidus  priestly  laws  (see  I'2xoi)US,  §  3).  He  is  prob-
ably acquainted  with  such  laws  (28  ;  cp  Ex.  2225/. )  ;  but
he  docs  not  recognise  them  as  of  primary  authority,  for
lie  nowhere  appeals  to  them.']  And  if  by  many  favours,
including  the  crowning  favour  of  prophecy  (2ii),  Yahwe
has  made  himself  specially  known  to  the  Israelites,  it
follows  that  he  will  judge  Israel  more  strictly  than  he
will  judge  the  other  nations  (3 12).  As  a  faithful  friend,
Amos  assures  his  people  that  if  they  would  only  '  seek  '
the  true  Yahw^  they  would  'live'  (5414) — :.c.,  would
escape  captivity  and  enjoy  prosjx;rity  in  their  own  land
(cp  Hos.  62/).  He  has  no  ho|>e,  however,  that  they
will  do  so :  the  false  pojiular  religion  is  loo  deeply  rooted.
Indeed,  Am.  5  has  been  so  much  interfered  with  by
editors  that  it  is  doubtful  whether  vv.  4  14  can  l>e
appealed  to  as  authorities  on  such  a  point  ;  ?■.  14,  at  all
events,  appears  to  belong  to  an  inserted  section  (see
Nowack).

It  is  not  idolatry  that  Amos  complains  of.  When  he
says,  ironically,  'Go  to  Bethel  and  transgress'  (44),  he

20.  Denuncia-  "''"^"f'  ^'  ^'^  expressly  tells  us,  '  Carr>'
. .  out the prescriptions  of  jour  wilfully

devised  ritual  law. '  Nor  can  we  venture
to  say  that  a  protest  against  the  '  golden  calves '  is  im-
plied,* for  no  prophet  is  more  explicit  than  Amos  in
mentioning  the  sins  of  his  people.  The  two  passages
in  which  a  reproof  of  Israelitish  idolatry  does  apjjear  to
occur  are  certainly  interpolations.  In  814,  for  '  the  sin
of  Samaria"'  we  should  read  'the  god  of  Bethel'  (cp
Gen.  31 13),  in  parallelism  to  'thy  god  (t;',^Sn),  O  Dan,'
and  '  thy  patron  (read  ;;-it  with  W'i.  and  see  Uod),
O  Beersheba,'  and  the  whole  of  526  is  a  later  insertion,

1  'Thy  Cod  (O  Israel)'  is  put  into  Amos's  mouth  by  a  later
editor  (4  12/' ;  see  atiove,  §  12).

'^  Who  these  Cushites  are,  is  uncertain  (see  Ci  SH  i.  8  2  A).
Apparently  they  had  recently  experienced  some  calamity.

*  Here  he  contrasts  with  Hosea,  who  clearly  invests  the
written  tlirflth  which  arose  in  certain  priestly  circles  with  primary
authority  (Hos.  8  12).  Perhaps,  as  Duhm  suggests,  Hosea  was
himself  a  priest.

••  .So  Davidson  {Expositor,  1887  (i),  p.  175).  To  .say  that
Amos  docs  not  protest  against  the  'golden  calves,'  is  of  course
not  10  assert  that  he  thinks  them  worthy  syml>ols  of  Yahwfe.  Cp
St.  Gl'f  1  579;  WRS,  /'n>//«.  575/

0  "The  text  appears  to  have  been  altered^  by  the  same  editor
who  inserted  the  reference  to  '  the  two  iniquities '  in  Hos.  10 10.

157


AMPHIPOLIS

I  and  is  not  true  to  the  facts  of  the  age  of  Amos  (see
above,  §  12).  What  Amos  most  vehemently  denounces
I  is  sacrifice.  One  may  perhaps  be  tempted  to  suppose
j  that  he  says  more  than  he  means,  and  that  he  docs  not
object  to  sacrifices  altogether,  but  only  to  the  Ix-'lief  that
when  duly  performed  they  can  change  the  mind  of  the
Deity.  His  language,  however,  seems  too  strong  to  Xx:
I  thus  explained  away,  especially  when  we  find  him  ap-
:  pealing  in  support  of  his  statement  to  the  fact  that  in
the  olden  time,  when  Yahwe  w;is  so  near  to  Israel,  no
sacrifices  were  offered  (625).  Is  there,  then,  no  form
of  worship  in  which  ^'ahwe  delights?  None,  except
the  practice  of  righteousness — i.e.,  justice  and  humanity
(see  021  24).  liut,  alas,  the  Israelite  will  not  recognise
this.  Pilgrims  who  are  wholly  indifferent  to  plain
moral  duties  crowd  to  the  sanctuaries  of  Bethel  and
Gilgal,  and  even  to  the  far-off  southern  shrine  of  Beer-
sheba' (55  814,  cp  Hosea4i5),  and  parade  their  devo-
tion to  the  different  local  forms  of  Yahwe  in  i)ious
o;iths,  as  if  the  true  Yahwe  could  Ije  pleased  with  the
offerings  or  the  oaths  of  such  worshippers.  How
painful  will  be  the  awakening  from  this  moral  sleei),
when  the  greatest  of  all  realities  makes  its  existence
known,  annihilating  at  one  blow  the  sanctuaries  of
Israel  and  their  worshippers  (9i)!  Such  was  the  an-
nouncement of  the  shepherd  of  Tekoa.


21.  Estimate


Taken  in  connection  with  the  ideas  on


which  it  is  based,  it  seems  to  justify  us
I  in  calling  him  a  surprising  phenomenon.  'Ihat  the
phenomenon  can  be  partly  explained  there  is  no  doubt.
Neither  Amos  nor  his  special  follower  Isaiah  is  so
entirely  abnormal  a  product  as  an  unthinking  study  of
the  works  of  either  might  suggest  (see  rKoi'Hixv).
But  not  the  most  comprehensive  study  of  the  history  of
Israel  will  altogether  account  for  their  appearance.  And
if  they  neither  of  them  saw  the  whole  truth,  and  lx)th
needed  the  correction  of  history  and  of  later  prophets
and  sages,  we  may  still  pay  them  the  reverence  which
belongs  to  those  who  first  uttered  great  moral  and
religious  truths  with  the  power  that  lx;longs  to  God-
possessed  men.

See  references  in  art.  and  cp  also  We.  Die  kleinen  Prophcten

(for  a  corrected  text),  1892,  and  his  Hist.  0/  Isr.  and  Juii.  KT,

. , 1891,  pp.  81-E6 ;  WR.S  Proph.  A.(2)  120-143,  194.

22.  Special 401; l)r.,art. '  Amos,' /JAV-'i  (with  full biblio-

helps. graphy) ;  also /<)(■/  atui  Amos  (Camhr. I'ible),

1897  ;  Duhm,  Die Tluol.  ti.  Pto/>li.,  1875,  pp.

109-125;  Smend,  Alt-test.  Ki/.-gcsch., 1893,  pp. 159-188;  \\  i.

C/  <)\ff.\  Oort  (on  the  home  of  Amos,  and  on  tlie  genuineness  of

413589956),  Th.T,  1891,  pp. 121-126;  G. Hoffmann  (on  the

text  of  Amos),  ZA7II',  1883,  pp.  87-126;  Schmidt,  y/f/,,  1894,

Fp.  1-15;  (j.VSm.,  Tivelve  Prophets  \(i\--i\o\  Nowack,  AV.  Pr.
97]  (thorough  and  judicious).  T.  K.  c.

2.  .Vmos  (.\|xa>f  [XBCD])  is  the  best  supported  reading  in
Mt.  1  to,  where,  however,  King  Anion  (^.T'.)  is  plainly  intended  ;
so  TR  and  EV. It  is  a  constant  variation  in  ©ah.

3.  An  ancestor  of  Joseph,  Mary's  husband  (Lk.  825  [BKA]).
On  the  two  lists  see  Ge.nealogies  ok  Ji:sls.

AMOZ  (pDX,  §  57.  '  strong' ;  amcoc  [BNAOQFL],
AMM.  [A  in  2K.  192  20 1  Is.  372];  amos),  father  of
I.S.\I.\H,  I  (Is.  li  A/V\OCrGIN]  =  AMOC  HN  [N*"''],  2O2
[NAQ  om.],  2  Ch.  2622  [BA  oin.]).

AMPHIPOLIS  (AMcjJinoAiN  [Ti.  WH],  ttoAin
[N*]).  one  of  the  most  important  }K)sitions  in  northern
Greece  ;  it  stands  on  a  Ijend  of  the  river  Strynion,
between  the  lower  end  of  lake  Cercinitis  and  the  head  of
the  Strymonic  gulf,  thus  commanding  the  pass  leading
from  the  east  into  Macedonia  ( Li  v.  45  30).  Consequently
it  was  a  station  on  the  ]'ia  l-.i^iatia,  '  the  great  military
road  which  ran  through  Macedonia  and  connected
Rome  with  the  Hellespont'  (Cic.  De  fnn:  cons.  2
§  4). Paul, therefore, '  passed through '  Amphipolis

'  Hal.  thinks  that  a  northern  Beer-sheba  (perhaps  Beeroth)  is
intended  (A'A/ 11  72-77) ;  but  if  Klijah  went  on  pilgrimage  to
Horeb,  which  was  not  even  in  Palestine,  why  should  not  N.
Israelites  have  gone  to  a  venerated  spot  in  S.  Israel?  n3^  is
precisely  the  right  word  to  use  of  a  sanctuary  across  the  border
(cp  6  2).

158


AMPLIAS

on  his  %v;iv  Irom  Philippi  to  Thessalonica  (SioSfVffavrfs,
Acts  17  it).

The  site  was  intimately  connected  with  some  of  the  most
interesting  passages  in  Greek  history  ;  but  it  would  he  a  mistake
to  imagine  that  the  apostle  or  his  companions  cither  knew  or
caicd  for  these  things.  It  is  now  Ntochori.  [l.cake,  North.
6>.  3i8i/.)  w.  J.  w.

AMPLIAS.  or  rather  as  in  RV  Ampliatus  (AAAnXr-
ATOC  [•"'■  ^^'H]),  saluted  as  '  my  lieloved  in  the  Lord'
(Rom.  168t)  ; not  otherwise  known.

The  name  was  not  unfrcquently  borne  by  slaves.  In  the
list  of  the  seventy  disciples  (Pscudo-I)orotheus)  Aniplias  is
represented  as  having  been  bishop  of  Odessus  or  Odyssus  (on
the  Hlack  Sea,  near  the  site  of  the  modern  Varna).

AMRAM  (D"ipy,  §  77,  '  in  good  condition  '  ?  or,  'the
[(li\  ino]  kinsman  is  e.xalted  '  ;  AMBpAM  [BL  ;  A  in  Ex.
Nu.J,  AMp.  [.VF; Bin  Xu.]).

1.  b.  Kohath,  head  of  a  Levitical  subdivision,  and
father  of  Moses,  Aaron,  and  Miriam  (Ex.  G 1820  ;  Nu.  3  19
a/x^pa/x  [-M"].  -/3pa;'[L];  2658/  i  Ch.  62  [628]) ;  from
him  come  the  Amramites  (■dt.cV'^  ^'"-  32?,  0  a/ipafxeis
[B],  a/xjipaa/x'  fis  [.\],  -pan'  «j  [K],  -pav  eis  [L]  ;  i  Ch.
2623,  a/J-pa/j-i  [.\J). -See  Licvi.

2.  One  of  the  b'ne  Hani,  2,  in  list  of  those  with  foreign  wives
(KZRA  i.  8  5  end)  Ezra  10  34  (fiapleli  [H],  an^pa/oi  [N],  aixppaiJi
(cat  (.\l.l)=iEsd.!>34  Omakkus,  RV  Ismaickus  (jxaripo';  [15],
i(r/0L.  [.\],  aiipafi  [L]). See  Ezka,  ii.  g  14  /'.

3.  I  Ch.  1 41  (["ran),  RV  Hamkan. See  Hemdan.

AMRAPHEL  (^a^PS  ;  amap^&A  [ADEL]  ;  Jos.
'Afxapa  ^I'iSrjs),  king  of  Shinar  ((}en.  14  i  9!)  =  Ham-
murabi, king  of  Babylon,  who,  according  to  trustworthy
cuneiform  data,  may  have  flourished  about  2250  n.c.
This  assumes  that  iBiZH  is  corrupted  from  "msn  or  ( Lindl,
Savce)  sk  ^-cn  ;  but  sec  Ciikdori.aomkk  (§  4/),
and  op  Schr.  COT  2299/:;  Hommel,  Ji.4(?  169,  .-I'/fT
193;  Wi.  JOF  iJ,3f.\  Bezold,  FSBA  1188  ['88].
Targ.  Jon.  ingeniously,  if  uncritically,  identifies  Am-
raphel  with  Nimrod,  who  'commanded  Abram  to
be  cast  into  the  furnace.'  If  the  identification  with
Hammurabi  be  accepted,  we  may  be  reminded  that
Nabopolassar  and  Nebuchadrezzar  delighted  to  imitate
this  founder  of  Babylonian  greatness,  both  in  his
building  plans  and  in  his  niclliods  of  administration
(see  B.\BVI,0.\'IA,§  66,  and  cp  Rogers,  Outlines  of  Early
Dab.  Hist.  27-30).  It  m.ay  be  that  some  Jewish
favourite  at  the  Babylonian  court,  who  had  received  a
Babj'lonian  education  (Sanabassar  or  Sheshbazzar  for  in-
stance— note  the  Babylonian  name),  heard  Hammurabi
spoken  of.  and  made  historical  notes  from  cuneiform
tablets  on  events  which  had  happened  '  in  the  days  of
Amraphel,'  also  that  one  of  these  was  adopted  by  later
writers  as  the  basis  of  a  Midrash  on  Abraham  and
Melchizedek.  On  the  other  hand,  those  who  identify
NiMKOi)  (</.  J'. )  with  Nazi-maraddas  (Nazi-maruttas)  may
incline  to  think  that  the  setting  of  contemporary  history
may  be  derived  from  an  early  pre-exilic  traditional
source,  though  the  narrative  in  its  present  form  is  un-
doubtedly the  production  of  post-exilic  writers.  The
latter  view  is  the  more  difficult  one,  but  not  therefore
to  be  hastily  rejected.  Cp  Lehmann,  Z~wci  Haupt-
probleme  der  altoricnt.  Chronologic  (1898)  84,  and  see
Abr.\h.\m,  §  4,  Chkuoki-.xomkr  (g§  2,  4  end),  H.\m
(i. ),  Mki.cmizeukk  (§  2),  Sh.weh,  i.  t.  k.  c.

AMULETS  is  the  RV  rendering  of  fiha^im.  D^'t^'n'?,
Is.  820,  a  word  used  elsewhere  of  any  charm  (Is.  83,
C'n?  p33  ,  RV  '  skilful  enchanter' — not  'eloquent  orator '
or  '  skilful  of  sjxiech '  as  in  ,\V  and  AV  mg. ),  or,  more
specifically,  of  a  charm  against  serpents  (Jer.  8 17  I'ccles.
lOii).  In  Is.  820  some  sort  of  female  ornament  is
meant,  most  probably  earrings  (so  .\V),  which  seem
to  be  treated  as  idolatrous  in  Gen.  354.  Doubtless,  as
WR.S  suggests  ( '  Divination  and  Magic '  in  /.  Phil.
14  122  ['85]),  the  amulet  is  worn  in  the  ear  to  prevent
an incantation from taking effect. Among early

159


ANAHARATH

peoples  amulets  and  ornaments  are  closely  connected
(cp  We.  Heid.'^^  165).  When  the  early  significance
of  the  protective  power  of  the  object  is  forgotten  it
serves  as  a  simple  adornment.'  The  Syr.  equivalent
kfdilM  is  proix;rly  '  a  holy  thing,'  and  the  same  idea  is
seen  in  the  occurrence  of  the  root  in  the  old  Yemenite
htdts,  'pearls';  cp  WRS  Rel.  Sem.i^)  453;  and  see
M.\Gic,  §  3  (3).  cp  also  Ring,  §  2.

AMZI  (*VPX,  §  52,  perhaps  abbrev.  from  Amaziah).

1.  In  the  genealogy  of  Ethan  :  i  Ch.  O46  [31]  (afie<r(r«ta  [B],
fLataaia  [.\],  atiaaia  (L]). See  also  Lkvi.

2.  In  genealogy  of  .\daiah,  3,  the  priest  (see  Malchijah,  3);
Neh.  11  12  (ajia(r(e]i  [H.X],  -<riou  (Lj,  o/xco-art  [K]),  omitted,  how-
ever, in  the  il  i  Ch.  9  12.

ANAB  (23J?.  ANCOB  [AL]).  a  hill-town  of  Judah,
Josh.  1050  (anoon  [B],  anaB  [L]),  one  of  the  seats  of
the  Anakim  ;  Josh.  II21  (anaBcoG  [f^D-  I'  is  doubt-
less to  be  connected  with  Hinianabi  (3jj'-['v),  mentioned
in  Am.  Tab.  237,  26  with  M.ngdali  (see  Migdai.-G.\d)
and  other  cities  of  the  land  of  Gar  (.SW.  Judah).  There
is  still  a  place  of  the  name  ('Andb)  on  the  west  side
of  the  Wady  el-Khalil,  about  14  miles  to  the  SW.  of
Hebron,  and  4  or  5  m.  W.  from  Shuweikeh  (Rob.  BR
2  159  ;  so  P E.Mem.  8392/  ). See  also  Anub.

ANAEL  (anahA  [BXA],  i.e.,  ^N33i^,  Hananeel).
brother  of  Tobit  and  father  of  ACHIACHARUS  (Tob.  I21).
See  also  Aman.

ANAH  (njy,  meaning  uncertain,  cp  Gray,  HPN
no  ;  ANA  [B.ADEL]),  a  Horite  clan-name  (Gen.  36).
As  the  text  stands  the  descent  of  Anah  is  represented
in  three  ways. Anah  is

1.  Daughter  of  Zibeon(aiva«'[L]),  \nvv.  214,  'Hivite'
in  V.  2  being  obviously  an  old  error  of  the  text  for
'  Horite.'

2.  .Son  of  Seir  and  brother  of  Zibeon,  v.  20  {a.i.vav
[L]),  I  Ch.  l38(A»'a^[L]).

3.  Son  of  Zibeon,  v.  24  bis  (ojvav  [.AD],  atcac  [L],
uva  [E],  uvas  [AE]),  also  i  Ch.  140/.  (^uvav  [B],  wvafj.
[A  ;  T'.  41  ova],  avav  [L]),  25  bis  29.

The  first  of  these  may,  however,  safely  be  disregarded.
'Daughter  of  Zibeon'  is  a  variant  (based  on  v.  24)  of
'  daughter  of  Anah  '  (dependent  on  w.  20  25),  which  has
intruded  into  the  text  ( so  Di. ,  Kau. ).  As  to  ( 2 )  and  ( 3 1 ,
the  differences  of  statement  need  not  surprise  us,  for
the  genealogy  only  symbolises  tribal  relations.  Anali
was  originally  a  sub-clan  of  the  clan  called  Zibeon,  and
both  alike  were  '  sons  of  Seir ' — i.e. ,  Horites.  A  twofold
tradition,  therefore,  could  easily  arise.  The  '  mules '
which,  from  v.  24  AV,  Anah  would  appear  to  have
'  found  in  the  wilderness '  are  an  invention  of  the  Mid-
rash,  some  Rabbis  explaining  cc"  (lafifiv  [ADE],
eafiiv  [L])  by  ijfj.lovos,  others  by  tj/ulktv  {Her.  rabba,
par.  Ixxxii. ).  The  '  hot  springs '  of  Vg.  and  RV  are
purely  conjectural ;  the  word  cc'.ri  is  evidently  corrupt.
As  Ball  points  out  (SDOT  Gen.  crit.  notes,  93),  it
may  have  come  in  from  v.  22  (cp'rr).  In  -^v.  2  14  and
18  (where  ®ael  omits),  Anah  is  called  the  father  of
Oholibamah,  the  wife  of  Esau. See  Bashemath.

T.  K.  c.

ANAHARATH  (JTinJX ;  peHpcoG  k.  ANAxepeG
[B],  P6NAG  K.  AppANeG  [A],  AancrgG  [L]),  -1  site
on  the  border  of  IssACiiAR  (Josh.  19 19)!.  The  reading
seems  corrupt  (note  the  conflate  readings  of  €^"A).
Perhaps  we  should  read  mrnx  and  identify  with
'Arrdneh,  a  village  on  rising  ground  in  the  plain  of
Esdraelon,  a  little  northward  of  Jenin  ( =  En-gannim).
So  Schenkel's  Bib.-Lex.  and  Riehms  NIVBC^)  (after
Knobel).

Knobel's  alternative  view  (adopted  from  de  Saulcy  by  Conder)
identifies  Anaharath  with  en-Na  fira,  which  is  not  far  from  Iksal
(Chesulloth)and  .S,-,l."in\  (Shunem),  and  is  therefore  not  altogether
unsuitable,  but  somewhat  remote  from  every  attested  form  of  the
ancient  name.

1  For  analogies  cp  Cuttings  of  the  Flesh.

160


ANAIAH

ANAIAH  (n;3y,  §  33.  -Yahwi  has  answered';
ANANia(c>  L'*^-^'']>  *hus  identifying  the  name  with
Anamaii).

1.  In  list  of  Ezra's  supporters  (sec  Ezra,  ii.  f  i^f.  ;  cp  i.  |  8)
at  ihe  reading  of  the  law  (Neh.  84  =  1  Esti.043  Ananias,  4).

2.  Signatory  to  the  covenant ;  Neh.  1022  [23J  (Ata  [B] ;  Acaia
[An'I). See  EZKA,  i.  §  7.

ANAK. See  Anakim.

ANAKIM  kV  ;  W ,  less  correctly,  Anakims  (D^pjr  ;
aiul  D'pjrn  ;  in  Targg.  generally  rendered  N*^33
'  giants '-.'eNAKLellMCBAFL],  but  -n  [l-»'"Dt.  'iio]';
es.icim).

The  Anakim  are  mentioned  in  Dt. '2ioyC2i  Josh.  ll2xyC
14  12  15  Jer.  475  ((B"Kaij;  Heb.  reads  'of  their  valley');  else-
where called  'sons  of  Anak '  (?:>',  ivolk  [BAL])  Nu.  1823  {tvax
IBFl) ;  Dt.  92/*  and  (MT  '  sons  of  the  Anak  ')  Josh.  15 14a  ;  Judg.

1  20  ;  'sons  of  the  Anakim,'  l)t.  1  28)  uioi  yfyofTtoi/  (BALJ)  92a
(viol  'Y.vaK)  ;  '  the  children  CT'?:)of  Anak  '  (MT  '  the  Anak  ')  Nu.
1323a  28  ((va\  (B),  ai.v(LK  [A]),  Josh.  15  14^.  The  phrases  are
ex.ictly  parallel  to  '  Rephaim '  and  'children  of  the  Kapha'  (see
Rki'haim);  indeed  in  Dt.  "in  a  writer  of  the  Deuteronomic
school,  '  interested  in  history  and  archaeology '  (Kue.),  makes
the  .Anakim  a  branch  of  the  Rephaim.

These  and  other  descriptive  terms  (which  are  not  to
be  mistaken  for  race-names)  are  given  at  any  rate  to
some  portions  of  the  pre-Israelitish  pojjulation  of
Palestine,  whoni,  like  the  Amorites,  tradition  endowed
with  colossal  height  (cp  Nu.  ]333).^  On  the  inhabitants
of  Palestine  generally  see  C.\NAAN.

.According  to  Josh.  11 21  (D.^),  the  .Anakim  were  to  Ijc
found  in  the  mountains  about  Hebron,  in  the  fenced
cities  Debir  and  .Anab,  and,  in  general,  in  the  mountains
of  Judah  and  Israel,  whence  Joshua  and  Israel  drove
them  out.  Verse  22  also  states  that  a  remnant  of  them
survived  in  the  Philistine  cities  of  Gaza,  Gath,  and
Ashdod  (cpjer.  47$®  ;  oi  KaraXonroi  fi>aK(ifi[Bi<AQ],
where  MT  has  'the  remnant  of  their  valley').  The
oldest  narrator,  however,  gives  the  credit  of  their  expul-
sion to  Caleb,  who  drove  out  from  Kirjath-arba  the
three  sons  of  .Anak :  Sheshai,  Ahinian,  and  Talmai — i.e. ,
the  three  triljes  or  clans  which  bore  those  names  (Josh.
1514).  The  editor  of  Judg.  1,  quoting  this  passage,
refers  the  deed  to  the  tribe  of  Judah  {v.  10)  ;  see
Hkhkon.  In  later  times,  a  too  literal  interpretation  of
'sons,'  and  genealogical  interest,  led  to  the  transforma-
tion of  .Anak,  and — what  is  still  stranger — of  Arba'
('four')  in  the  place-name  Kirjath-arba,  into  personal
names.  Thus  .Anak  (virtually  a  personal  name  where
it  has  the  article)  becomes  father  of  .SuKSH.M,  .Ahiman
( I ),  and  Tai.mai  ( i ),  and  son  of  Kirjath-arba  ;  cp  Josh.
21 II  (MT  piji-rt),  1513/  Judg.  lio  {evafji  [A]).

The  proof  of  this  is  supplied  by  ©bal,  which  in  Josh.  15 13
21 II  instead  of  '  father  of  Anak  '  has  fxrjTpdiroAii'  [Tuif]  tuax.
This  no  doubt  represents  the  original  text,  which  stated  that
Kirjath-.-irba,  or  Hebron,  was  .^n  important  city  (a  '  mother,'  cp

2  S.  2O19)  of  the  Anakim.  A  later  scribe,  prepared  to  find  a
genealogical  notice  and  therefore  surprised  to  find  the  word
'mother'  in  apposition  to  Arba,  altered  'mother'  (CN)  into
'father'  ('an).  Thus  he  obtained  the  statement  that  Hebron
was  the  city  of  one  Arba,  who  was  the  father  of  '(the)  Anak.'
In  Josh.  14  15,  however,  lie  took  a  different  course.  'I'he  true
reading  must  be  that  of  (EJHal  which  gives  (ne.-irly  as  in  the
parallel  pass,iges)  n-oAtt  ap/3«  ([L],  ap^o  [A],  opyojS  [B]),  fiTjrpo-
no\i^  TUiv  ei'aKle]in  auTij.  For  this  the  scribe  substituted  'the
city  of  .Arba,  the  greatest  man  among  the  An.ikim.'  The  con-
sequence was  that  Sheshai,  Ahiman,  and  Talm.-ii  (the  three
Anakites  mentioned  in  Josh.  15 14)  became,  literally,  'sons  of
(the)  Anak,' and  grandsonsof  Arba— no  contemptible  acquisition
for  genfcalogists.  So  virtually  Schleusner|(lhes.,  j.z/.  /uujTpo-
iroAn);  but  see  especially  Moore,  Judges  ■2x /.  Cp  also
Sclnv.illy,  Z.l  Tir,  1898,  p.  139^  T.  K.  c.

ANAMIM  (0*03^),  one  of  the  peoples  of  Mizraim,
Gen.  10 13  =  I  Ch.  1  nf ;  unidentified.  See  GEOGRAPHY,
§  15(2)-

ANAMMELECH  {•r\hjp;]},  anhmcAex  [B].  amh-
[A]  ;  om.  L  ; (.i3*^A.V.  ;  Auamelech),  a  Babylonian

J  Anak,  'long-necked'  (St.  and  most),  or  'those  with  neck-
laces' (KIo.),  with  which  cp  Heb.  'dndk,  'a  chain  for  the  neck,'
Aram,  'unak,  Ar.  'unk,  '  neck.'

11  161


ANANIAS

deity,  whose  worship  was  carried  by  the  Sepharvites
into  Samaria  when,  along  with  the  inhabitants  of  other
Babylonian  cities,  they  were  transplanted  thither  by
Sargon.  As  in  the  case  of  the  kindred  deity  Adramnie-
lech  (see,  however,  .AUKA.M.MHl.Kcii,  i),  the  worship  of
Ananmielech  was  accompanied  by  the  rite  of  human
sacrifice  (2  K.  I731).  The  name  Anammelech  is
probably  to  be  explained"  as  Anu-malik  '  Anu  is  the
decider  or  prince '  1  (Schr.,  Del.),  although  there  is  no
evidence  that  Anu  enjoyed  any  special  veneration  in
Sippara  (see  SeI'HARVAIM).  a  city  that  was  especially
devoted  to  the  worship  of  Samas  the  Sun-god.

It  is  very  possible,  however,  that  the  text  is  corrupt  (Hommcl
proposes  a  rather  elaliorate  restoration  [A>/.  T.  H  \y>/.\).  It
IS  also  possible  (see  Nisroch)  that  Anammelech  is  merely  a
faulty  variant  of  .Adrammelech  (rather  Adarmelech).  ©I-  in
2  K.  17  31  has  only  aSpaixf^tx-

Anu  was  the  god  of  Heaven,  and  with  him  were
identified  a  number  of  gods  representing  personifications
of  powers  or  localities  of  the  upper  region,  such  as
Ural,  Ansargal,  Atilar,  Etnur,  Du'ur,  Liihma,  Ekiir,
A  lata,  Alala-alam,  and  Enuriila.  He  stood  at  the
head  of  the  Babylonian  pantheon,  forming  one  of  the
supreme  triad  of  Babylonian  divinities,  in  which  he  was
associated  with  licl,  the  god  of  Earth  and  of  created
things,  and  Ea,  the  god  of  the  Abyss  and  all  that  is
beneath  the  earth.  See  B.\hylonia,  §  26.  According
to  G.  Hoffmann  {'/.A,  1896,  p.  258),  however,  the
name  is  •i'?c[n]3V  —  '•<'-.  Anath-malk.  Cp  .Astar[t]-
Kemosh  and  Melk[at]-.Astart.  Anath  (Anta)  was  the
consort  of  .Anu  (see  .An'.\th).  l.  w.  k.

ANAN  (|3J?,  §  50;  shortened  from  A.vaniah).
I.  Signatory  to  the  covenant  (see  Ezra,  i.  §  7) ;  Neh.
1026[27]  {y\va.\x  [B],  ■f)va.  [k].  -ac  [.A],  r)i.va.v  [Lj).

2.  .Anan  (a.v\v\av  [BAL])  in  i  Esd.  630  =  Hanan,  3  ([jn)
Ezra  2  46.

ANANI  CpiJ?,  §  50,  abbr.  from  Ananiah,  cp  -Sab.
p:y  and  Palm,  'jjy ;  manci  [B],  anani  [AJ,  -iac
[L]),  descendant  of  Zkkuhhahki,  (i  Ch.  824).

ANANIAH  (n;^JV,  BN*A  om.,  anania  [N^-*"'*-''"^],
AN  I A  [I'])  in  Benjamin,  mentioned  (:■.  32t)  in  the  list
of  villages,  Neh.  11  20-36  (see  E/.KA,  2,  §  ^b,  §  15  {i)a),
along  with  Nob  and  Ramah  (Neh.  II32),  and  possibly
represented  by  the  modern  Beit-Hanina,  3 J  ni.
NNW.  of  Jerusalem.

ANANIAH  {T\im,  §§  33.  50;  anania  [BAL]).
ancestor  of  one  of  Nehemiah's  builders  (Neh.  823).

ANANIAS  (ananiac  [BAL]),  the  Gk.  form  of
Hanamah  or  Anamaii.

1.  RV  -Ann IS,  nig.  Annias,  a  family  in  the  great  post-exilic
list  (see  Ezka,  ii.  §  9),  mentioned  only  in  i  Esd.  5  16  (oi'vcit
[B],  aivvia.%  [.A],  om.  L).  The  name  has  probably  arisen  from  a
misreading  of  Hodiah  (nnn  read  n'jn)  I  cp  Neh.  10  17  y?,  and
see  HouiAH,  2. Cp  also  Meyer,  EJ  143,  155.

2.  I  Esd.  9 21  =  Ezra  10  20  Hanani,  3.

3.  I  Esd.  9  29  =  Ezra  10 28  Hananiah,  7.

4.  I  Esd.  9  43  =  Neh.  8  4  An  Ai  ah,  i.

5.  iEsd.9  48(a>'i/ias[B])=Neh.8  7  Hanan,  4.

6.  A  kinsrn.-in  of  Tobit.  The  .irchangel  Raphael,  while  in
disguise,  cKiimed  to  be  his  son  (Tob.  5  12).  He  is  designated
Ananias  '  the  great,'  son  of  Semeus  or  Semelius  (see  Shemaiah,
23),  also  called  'the  great.'

7.  b.  Gideon,  ancestor  of  Judith  (Judith  8  i,  om.  B).

8.  In  Song  of  Three  Children,  v.  66  (®  Theod.  Dan.  3  8k)  ;  see
Hananiah,  i.

9.  Son  of  Nedebaios  {Ant.  x.v.  52,  Ne/3e5ai6j  in
some  MSS  [AE]  ytSe^aioi  ;  cp  Nedabiah),  high
priest,  circa  47-59  A.D. ,  under  Herod  Agrippa  II.,
king  of  Ch.alcis.  He  is  mentioned  in  Acts  232^  24  i  as
the  high  priest  before  whom  Paul  was  accused  during
the  procuratorship  of  Felix.  He  flourished  in  the
degenerate  days  of  the  priesthood,  and,  though
Josephus  says  {An(.  xx.  92)  that  after  his  retirement
he  'increased  in  glory  every  day,'  allusion  is  made
to  him  in  the  Talnmd  (Pesahim)  in  terms  of  the
greatest  contempt. Cp  Annas  (end).

1  In  which  case  cp  Anu(m)  Sarru  =  Anu  the  king,  the  usual
title  of  the  god  Anu  (Muss-Arn.  Ass.  Diet.  65).


ANANIEL

lo.  Husband  of  Sapphira  (f.v.),  Acts 5 1.  See
Community  of  Goods,  §  3.

ir. A  'disciple'  at  Damascus,  who  was  the  means
of introducing l^aul, after his conversion, to the
Christian  community  there  (Acts  9 10-19).
, ANANIEL  (ananihA[BSA];  Heb.  [ed.  Neubauer]
7NJ:n,  Hananccl),  Tobit's  grandfather  (I'ob.  li).

ANATH  (r\2V,;  anaG  [HAL]),  a  divine  name,
mentioned  in  connection  with  Shamgar  in  Judg.  831
(AeiN&x  [B])  '"'d  56t  (KCNAe  [A]).  If  Shamgar
ig.v.)  were  an  Israelite,  and  b.  Anath  ('  son  of  Anath')
his  second  name,  it  would  be  tempting  to  take  '  Anath  '
in  '  ben  Anath '  as  shortened  from  Ebed  Anath  '  servant
of  Anath"  (so  Baethgen,  Ilei/r.  141  ;  but  see  Noldeke,
ZZ?.l/(;  42479  ['88]).  More  probably,  however,  Ren-
anath  is  a  Hebraised  form  of  the  name  of  a  foreign
oppressor  who  succeeded  Shamgar'  (certainly  a  foreign
name),  and  in  this  case  Anath  must  designate  a  foreign
deity.  Who  then  was  this  deity  ? Evidently  the

well-known  goddess  worshipped  in  very  early  times  in
Syria  and  Palestine  (as  appears,  e.g.,  from  the  names
mentioned  below),  and  adopted,  as  the  growing
evidence  of  early  Babylonian  influence  on  Palestine
scarcely  permits  us  to  doubt,  from  the  Babylonian
pantheon.  An(a)tu  was  in  fact  the  daughter  of  the
primitive  god  .Anu,  whose  name  is  mentioned  as  that
of  a  Syrian  deity  in  2K.  I731  (see  Anammei.kch,
Seph.^RV.^im).  Of  her  character  as  a  war-deity  there
can  be  no  doubt.  In  ancient  Egypt,  where  her  cultus
was  introduced  from  Syria,  she  was  frequently  coupled
with  the  terrible  war-goddess  Astart,  and  on  an  Egyptian
stele  in  the  British  Museum  she  ap[5ears  with  a  helmet  on
the  head,  with  a  shield  and  a  javelin  in  the  right  hand,  and
brandishing  a  battle-axe  in  the  left.  She  was,  therefore,
a  fit  patron-deity  for  Shamgar  or  for  Sisera.  That  the
fragmentary  Israelitish  traditions  make  no  direct  refer-
ence to  her  cultus,  need  not  be  matter  for  surprise.
The  names  Anathoth,  Bi:th-an.\th,  Beth-anoth,
compensate  us  for  this  omission.  Wellhausen  thinks
that  we  have  also  one  mention  of  Anath  in  Hos.  148[9],
where  he  renders  an  emended  te.xt  '  I  am  his  Anath  and
his  Asherah'  (in  clause  2) — surely  an  improbable  view.
For  a  less  difficult  correction  see  Che.  Exp.  Times,
April  1898.

For  ArchsEology  see  Jensen,  Kos)n.  193  ■211/.  \  E.  Meyer,
ZDMG  31  717  ['77];  Tiele,  Gesch.  van  den  Godsdienst  in  die
oudheid,  etc.  ('93),  224  ;  WMM  As.  u.  Eur.  313.  t.  k.  c.

ANATHEMA. See  Ban,  §  3.

ANATHOTH  (ninsy,  anaGcoG  [RAL]),  a  town  of
Benjamin  (cp  below,  2),  theoretically  included  by  later
writers  among  the  so-called  I^vitical  cities  (see
Levites),  Josh.  21 18  P;  i  Ch.  66o[45]  (AfX^ox  [B],
-toe  and  anaGcoG  [A],  cnaGcoG  [L].  Neh.  727
NAGcoG  [A  ;  om.  B]).

The  form  of  the  ethnic  varies  in  edd.  and  versions2(cp  also
Antothijah).  -Abiezek,  2,  is  called  'nh|yn,  28.2827,  AV
the  Anethothite  (awodeiTTjs  [B],  a.va6uS.  [A],  -loCi  [L]),
'n"in3j;n,  iCh.  2712  (AV,  Anetothite,  6  ef  o^aea>9  [BAL]),
and  finally  'nhjy^,  i  Ch.  11 28  (AV  Antothite,  ofafliodteli
[BA],  -<oflm7?  [L]).  The  last-mentioned  form  is  used  to  designate
Jehu,  5,  in  i  Ch.  Vl  3  (o  ameu>e[«]i  [BAL],  -)3u>9ei  [«] ;  4,  ava6<ad«.
[({]  not  in  Heb.  or  ®i'a). RV  in  each  case  Anathothite.

The  name  appears  to  be  the  plural  of  An.\th,  and
may  refer  to  some  images  of  that  goddess  which  once
stood  there.  Under  the  form  Anath  the  place  seems
to  be  once  referred  to  in  the  Talmud  (  Yoma  \oa),
where  its  building  is  assigned  to  Ahiman  the  Anakite.
Tradition  said  that  Abiathar,  the  priest  in  David's
time, had 'fields' at Anathoth (1K.226); and

1  Reading  in  Judg.  56,  'In  the  days  of  Shamgar  and  Ben
Anath.'  The  notice  in  3  31,  which  is  much  later  than  the  song
(see  Moore)  is,  of  course,  valueless.

2  Ba.  and  Ginsb.,  however,  read  everywhere  'DIDij;  (cp  the
former's  note  on  i  Ch.  11  28). '  Exceptionally  in  Sam.  I.e.  Ginsb.

163


ANDRONICUS

Jeremiah  was  born  of  a  priestly  family  which  had
property  there  (Jer.  1 1  2927  827-9,  o-vavo.Owd  [A*t'.  7]
37  12).  It  is  once  referred  to  by  Isaiah  (Isa.  IO30),  and
is  mentioned  in  the  great  post-exilic  list  (see  Ezra,  ii.
§  9),  Ezra  223  =  Neh.  7 27  =  i  Esd.  5 18  {ivarov  [B]).

The  connection  of  Anathoth  with  Jeremiah  gives  a
special  interest  to  its  identification.  A  tradition,  not
older  than  the  15th  century,  fixes  it  at  Kariet  el-'Enab
(Robinson's  Kirjaih-jearim) ;  but,  as  Robinson  has
shown,  it  can  only  be  the  village  now  called  'Atiata,
which  is  situated  NE.  of  Jerusaleni,  just  at  the
distance  required  by  the  Onomasticon,  and  by  the
reference  in  Isa.  IO30.  'Anata  is  well-placed,  but  only
froin  a  strategical  point  of  view.  Eastward  and  south-
eastward its  inhabitants  look  down  on  the  Dead  Sea  and
the  Lower  Jordan — ^striking  elements  in  a  landscape,  no
doubt,  but  depressing.  Jerusalem  is  quickly  accessible
by  the  Wady  Sulem  and  Scopus,  but  is  not  within
sight.  Here  the  saddest  of  the  prophets  presumably
spent  his  earlier  years.

2.  b.  Becher  (q.v.)  in  genealogy  of  Benjamin  [§  9,  ii.  a],
iCh.7  8(ai'ae<oi'[BAL]).

3.  Signatory  to  the  covenant  (Neh.  10 19  [20]).  See  Ezra,
i.  §  7-  I-  K.  c.

ANCHOR  (AfKYPA).  Acts2729. See  Ship.

ANDREW  (AN^peAC  [Ti.  WH]  'manly'),  one  of
Chri.st's  twelve  disciples.  Like  Philip,  he  bore  a
Greek  name  ;  but  so  did  many  Jews  of  his  time,  and
in  Dio  Cassius  (6832)  we  meet  with  another  instance
of  a  Jew  called  Andrew.

Besides  the  account  of  his  call  (see  Peter),  and
his  inclusion  in  the  lists  of  the  apostles  (see  Apostle,
§  i),  nothing  is  said  of  Andrew  in  the  Synoptics,  except
that,  in  Mk.  183,  he  appears  as  one  of  the  inner  circle
within  the  twelve,  for  he  is  one  of  the  four  who  question
Christ  '  privately '  about  the  impending  ruin  of  the
temple.

In  the  Fourth  Gospel  the  picture  is  more  fully  drawn,
and  in  one  respect  completes  and  explains  the  account
of  Andrew's  call  given  in  the  Synoptics.  We  read  that
he  belonged  originally  to  Bethsaida  (Jn.  1 44),  that  he
was  a  disciple  of  the  Baptist  and  heard  his  witness  to
Christ,  that  he  and  a  companion  (no  doubt  John)  asked
the  wandering  teacher  where  he  dwelt,  and  went  with
him  to  his  temporary  home.  Then,  having  '  found
the  Messiah,'  Andrew  made  his  brother,  Simon  Peter,  a
sharer  in  his  joy.  We  next  meet  with  Andrew,

on  the  E.  of  the  lake  of  Galilee,  at  the  miraculous
feeding  of  the  multitude,  on  which  occasion  it  is  he  that
tells  our  Lord  (68/)  of  the  lad  in  the  crowd  who
has  '  five  barley  loaves  and  two  fishes. '  Once  more,
when  the  end  is  near,  he  shows  in  a  memorable  scene
his  special  intimacy  with  the  Master.  When  Greeks
approach  Philip  with  the  'desire  to  see  Jesus,'  it  is  to
Andrew  first  that  Philip  communicates  the  request
which  they  together  lay  before  Christ  (Jn.  12 22).

The  rest  of  the  NT,  apart  from  the  list  of  the
disciples  in  Actsl  13,  is  absolutely  silent  alx)ut  Andrew.
Such  other  tradition  as  we  have  is  worthless.

Eusebius  (^i5'iii.)speaksof  him  as  preaching  in  Scythia,  and
we  have  in  Andrew's  'Acts'  the  story  of  his  martyrdom,  at
Patrae  in  Achaia,  on  a  cross  shaped  like  the  letter  X.  Acts

of  Andrew  the  Apostle  were  in  circulation  among  the  Gnostics
of  the  second  century,  but  survived  only  in  various  Catholic
recensions  of  much  later  date.  Harnack  enumerates  (i)  Acta
AndrtiF  et  Matthiie  (and  their  mission  to  the  Anthropophagi)
in  Greek  (edited  by  Tisch.  Act.  A/>ost.  Af>ocrypli.),  Syriac
(edited  by  Wright,  Apoc.  .Acts  0/  the  A/>ostlcs),  Ethiopic,  and
Coptic  (fragmentary).  The  Latin  version  survives  only  in  its
influence  on  the  Anglo-Saxon  Andreas  and  Elene  by  Cyne-
wulffand  in  the  Mi> acuta  />.  Andreir  by  Gregory  of  Tours;
see  Lips.  A/>okr.  Af: -gesch.  1  543^,  cpp.  27.  (i)  Acta  Petri  et
Andretr,  in  Greek  (fragments  edited  by  Tisch.)  as  well  as  in  an
Ethiopic  recension  and  a  Slavonic  translation  (cp  Lips.  1  553^/^).
(3)  Martyriunt  Andreie  in  various  Greek  recensions  (one  edited
by  Tisch.),  and  in  Latin  (Harnack,  Altchrist.  Lit.  1  t^y  /.,  cp
Lips.  1  564  y?;).  A  'gospel  of  Andrew'  is  mentioned  in  the
Decretum  Gelasii.

ANDRONICUS  (anAronikoc  [VA  ;  anAroyion]
2  Mace.  4  38  A*). 1.  The  Deputy  of  Antiochus  Epiphanes

164


AN  EM

ill  Antioch,  who  (according  to  a  Mace.  431^),  at  the
instigation  of  Menelaus,  put  to  death  the  deposed  high
priest  Onias — a  deed  for  which  he  was  himself  slain  with
ignominy  on  the  return  of  the  king.  See  MACCABEES,
Second,  §  3,  end.

2.  Deputy  of  Antiochus  at  (Jerizim  (a  Mace.  623).
See  Maccabees,  Second,  §  3,  end.

3.  Andronicus  and  Junias  are  named  in  Rom.  I67  as
kinsmen  and  fellow-prisoners  of  I'aul,  as  of  note  among
the  apostles,  and  as  having  been  '  in  Christ '  before  him.
The  expression  'kinsmen,'  if  taken  literally,  seems  to
imply  that  they  were  Jesvs  by  birth  ;  '  fellow-prisoners,'
on  the  hypothesis  tliat  Rom.  16  3-20  Ix^longs  really  to
an  Ephesian  Epistle,  has  l)een  conjectured  by  Weiz-
siicker  to  allude  to  an  imprisonrm-nt  which  they  shared
with  Paul  in  Ephesus,  most  likely  in  connection  with
the  great  'affliction'  (2  Cor.  1 8-11),  which  uhimately
led  to  his  leaving  that  city  (.\cts  1923-20 1)  ;  on  the
application  of  the  term  '  apf)stle '  to  them  see
ApoSTLii,  §  3.  The  name  Andronicus  was  not  un-
common among  Greek  slaves  ;  and  it  has  been  con-
jectured that  this  Andronicus  may  ha- e  been  the
Jewish  freedman  of  a  Greek  master.

In  the  lists  of  'the  seventy  disciples'  which  we  owe  to  the
Pscudo-Dorotheus  and  the  Pseudo-Hippolytu.s  Andronicus  is
spoken  of  as  bishop  of  '  Pannonia,'  or  of  'Spain.'  In  the  frag-
ments of  the  (( Inostic)  n-ept'oioi  '\utdvt'Ov,  he  and  his  wife  Drusiana
figure  prominently  as  hosts  of  the  apostle  John  at  Kphesus,  and
he  is  represented  as  having  been  made  by  that  apostle  rrpoe&pov,
or  president,  of  the  church  of  Smyrna.  In  the  Greek  church
Andronicus  is  commemorated,  along  with  Crescens,  Silas,  and
Epsnetus,  on  30th  July.  See  Lipsius,  Apokr.  Ap.-gesch.
(Index,  p.  i8^).

ANEM  (D:V)'  iCh.673[58]-Josh.l92i  En-gannim

[q.v.).

ANER  (i:^).  I-  (Sam.  Dljy ;  avvav  [AZ?EL] ;
Jos.  eNNHpoc.  a  Hebronite)  Gen.  14i324t.  Perhaps
a  local  name;  cp  Nelr,  a  hill  near  Hebron  {ZDMG
l'-i479  L'sSj).  The  correctness  of  the  name  Aner,  how-
ever, is  doubtful.  The  at'vai'  of  (S  points  to  jry,  Enan
(/.(•.,  place  of  a  spring),  a  name  which  may  refer  to
one  of  the  si.x  springs  near  Hebron — e.g. ,  the  deep
spring  of  Sarah  called  'Ain  Jedideh  (Baed.*^)  137),  at
the  E.  foot  of  the  hill  on  which  ancient  Hebron  lay.

2.  (a^ua/)  [B],  (.vr\p  [A],  a.v.  [L])  a  city  in  Western
Manasseh  ( i  Ch.  670  [55!)  — perhaps  a  corruption  of
T.XANACII  (-Ji-n)  ; cp  Josh.  21  25.  t.  k.  c.

ANETHOTHITE, ANETOTHITE. See Ana-

TIIOTH, I.

ANGEL.  The  English  word  '  angel '  is  a  transcrip-
tion of  d77fXoy, ©'s translation of Heb. mal'dkh

1.  Names.  nf<?D)-  The  English  word  denotes
primarily  superhuman  beings  ;  but  both
the  Hebrew  and  the  Greek  terms  are  quite  general,
and,  signifying  simply  messenger,  are  used  indifferently
of  human  or  superhuman  beings.  ^  Other  terms,  less
ambiguous  in  this  particular  respect,  also  occur.

These  are  :  '  gods '  (dmVk.  cp  Ps.  8  5  [6],  and  see  AV,  RV
mg.  ih.  8'2i6  97  7  138  i),  'sons  of  [the]  god[s]' (o'^Wrtl  'J',
cpGen.624  Jobl62i  387,  or  d'Sk  •:2,  Ps.  20  i  89  6f7],  EV
text),  '  (sons  of]  the  mighty,'  '  mighty  ones '  (oTax.  Ps.  "8  25,  cp
Ih.  103  20,  nj  "123),  '  holy  ones  '  (c>C*ip.  Jb.  5  i  Ps.  89  5  [6]  Zech.
145  Dan.  4  14  [17]  8  13),  'watchers'  (VTy,  Dan.  4  14  [17]),  'host
of  lieaven  (□<2ci;i  x^s,  i  K.  22  19  Dt.  17  3),  '  host  of  the  height '
(cha  xas.  Is.  2421),  or  'host  of  Y.ihwc'(nirT  Ka^i,  Josh. 5  14,
cp  use  of  Kas  in  Ps.  1032i  1482  Neh.96,  and  'God's  camp,'
Cm':;N nmr:,  Gen.  32  2  [3]). Iti  the  case  of  Ps.fi8i7  [18]  (<sSk

IKJC*)  we  owe  the  AV  rendering  'thousands  of  angels'  to  old
leb.  tradition  (Targ.  S.aad.  and  Abulw.),  which  treated  the
difficult  jKjc-  as  a  synonym  of  -jnSs  (cp  Del.,  ad  he).  RV
'  thousands  upon  thousands '  is  equally  hazardous  ;  cp  Dan.  7  10.
In  the  NT  also  we  find  other  terms  in  use  :  '  spirits  '  (n-i-eu^ara,
Heb.  1  14),  '  principalities' (apx<»'',  Rom. 838),  'powers'  (iufo/ifiS

'  Karppe  {Joum.  As.  ser.  ix.,  9  128)  reads  -jVo.  a  derivative
of  -^Sn,  as  if  '  the  walker '  =  '  the  messenger,"  or  Yahwi  marching
(Is.  03 1,  SBOT)  as  opposed  to  Yahwi  mounted  on  the  cherub
(Ps.  18  10  [I  I]).  "^^^

165


ANQEL

ii.,  i^oytrlax, Eph.  O12), 'thrones' (0poi/oi, Col.  1  16X and

'donunions'  (icupi6t>)t««,  i/'.):  ip  further  Cremer,  Lex.  ATO
20^  237,  and  the  Heb.  and  NT  Lexicons,  i.jv.

The  earhest  OT  writings  contain  no  definite  or
systematic  angelology, but indicate  a  prevalent  Ijclief

2  Pre-exilic  '"  ^^^'^^  superhtiman  beings  Ix^sides
Yaliwe.  These  were  (i)  the  'other
gods'  or  '  gods  of  the  nations,'  who  were  credited  with
real  existence  and  activity  ;  cp,  e.g.,  Nu.  21  29  Judg.  1 1  24
and  V.  Baudissin,  Slud.  155-79-  (2)  Closely  connc-cied
with  these  were  the  'sons  of  God'  — j.<r. ,  memlx-rs  of
tlie  divine  guild.  There  is  but  one  pre-exilic  reference
to  these  (Gen.  62  4),  whence  it  api)ears  that  they  were
not  subject  to  Yahw^,  but  might  break  through  the
natural  order  of  his  world  with  impunity.  (3)
Attendants  on  Yahw6 — in  Is.  6  some  of  these  attendants
are  termed  Seraphim  (see  Serai'HIM),  but  others
distinct  from  these  seem  to  be  implied  ;  cp  v.  8.  In  a
similar  scene  (i  K. '2219-22),  those  who  attend  Yahwe
and  form  his  council  are  termed  collectively  '  the  host
of  heaven.'  Such  divine  councils  are  also  implied  in
Gen.  322  11  7  (both  J )  ;  cp  the  plurals  in  these  passages
with  that  in  Is.  68,  and  the  question  in  i  K.  222o.  In
another  passage  (Jos.  5 14^)— the  pre-exilic  origin  of
which,  however,  has  Ijeen  questioned  (Kue.  Hex.  248
ET)^ — the  host  of  Yahwe  appears  as  disciplined  and
under  a  captain.  According  to  some,  the  '  hosts '  in
the  phrase  '  Yahw^  (God  of)  hosts ' — a  phrase  current
in  early  times — were  angels  (Che.  Frofh.  /s.*^'  \\\ff.\
see  further  Names,  §  123).  The  original  text  of
Deut.  33  2/.  contained  no  reference  to  angels  (see
Dillm.  Comrn.;  cp  also  Driver).  Another  element  in
early  Hebrew  folklore  worthy  of  notice  in  the  present
connection  is  the  belief  in  the  horsemen  of  the  air
(2  K.  2  12  617).  For  a  parallel  in  modern  Bedouin
folklore  cp  Doughty,  Ar.  De.  1  449.  '  The  melaika
are  seen  in  the  air  like  horsemen,  tilting  to  and  fro.'
Angelic  horsemen  play  a  considerable  part  in  later
literature — e.g.,  in  Zech. ,  Apoc.

The  most  noteworthy  features,  then,  of  the  pre-exilic
angelology  are  the  following  ; — (i)  except  in  Gen.  28  32,
these  beings  are  never  termed  '  angels.'  '  Angel '  occurs
frequently  in  the  singular,  but  only  in  the  ■  jihrase
'angel  of  Yahwe'  (more  rarely,  'of  God'),  which
denotes,  not  a  messenger  of,  and  distinct  from,  Yahwe,
but  a  manifestation  of  Yahwe  himself  in  human  form
(see  TiiKOPiiANiES,  §  4).  Kostcrs  treats  even  Cien.
2810-1217  32i[2]  I81/.  19i/.  as  statements  of  the
manifestation  of  the  one  God  in  many  forms  (cp  W'KS
Rel.  Sem.  426/.,  2nd  ed.  445/),  and  concludes  that,
before  the  Exile,  -jh^d  was  used  exclusivel}-  of  appear-
ences  of  Yahwe.  Against  this,  Schultz's  reference
{OT  TheoL2^ig)  to  i  S.  299  2  S.14  17  1927[28]  is  not
quite  conclusive.  (2)  These  attendants  on  Yahwe  are
not  also  messengers  to  men.  Even  if  the  angels  of
Gen.  28  32  be  distinct  from  God,  they  bring  no
message.  For  such  a  function  there  was  no  need  so
long  as  Yahw6  himself  appeared  to  men.  (3)  Beside
these  .sulxjrdinate  divine  beings  that  attend  Yahwe,
but  have  no  relations  with  men,  there  are  other  beings
('other  gods,'  'sons  of  the  gotls')  which  are  not
subject  to  Yahw^,  and  do  enter  into  relations  with  men.

Comparatively  few  as  are  the  early  references  to
angels  or  kindred  beliefs  (cp  Demons,  §  1),  they  are
...  3'et  such  as  to  justify  us  in attributing  a

■  comparatively  rich  folk-lore  on  these  matters
to  the  early  Hebrews  ;  but  it  is  not  until  the  exilic  and
post-exilic  periods  that  angels  come  into  prominence
theologically.  They  do  so  then  in  consequence  of  the
maturing  belief,  on  the  one  hand,  in  the  transcendence
of  Yahw^,  on  the  other,  in  his  supremacy.  The  develop-
ment of  angelology  at  this  time  must  also  have  been
favoured  by  the  contact  of  the  Jews  with  the  Persians  ;
and  some  details  of  the  later  doctrine  may  be  due  to
the  same  influence — e.g. ,  the  naming  of  angels,  although
the  great  majority  of  the  names  themselves  (as  in
166


ANGEL

Enoch  6  69)  are  quite  clearly  Hebraic,  though  of  a  late
type  (cp  JIPN,  p.  2IO).

With  the  growing  sense  of  Yahw^'s  transcendence,
belief  in  his  self-manifestation  in  human  form  ceased  ;
and  thus  the  phrase  'angel  of  Yahwe,'  set  free  from
its  old  meaning,  now  came  to  denote  one  of  the  lieings
intermediate  between  Yahw6  and  men.  At  first  it  was
apparently  the  title  of  a  particular  angel  (Zech.  1  ii/. ),  but
subsequently  it  Ijccame  a  quite  general  term  (note  the  pi.
Ps.  10320,  cp  347[8]  and  NT  passim).  It  is  now  by
angels,  and  no  longer  directly,  that  Yahwe  communicates
with  men — even  prophets.  The  e.xperience  of  Ezekiel
marks  the  transition — Yahwe  speaks  to  him,  sometimes
directly  (44  2),  sometimes  through  another  (40 3).  With
Zechariah  the  change  is  complete.  He  never  sees
Yahw6 ;  he  receives  all  divine  instructions  through  angels
(contrast  Am.  7/. ).  Daniel  receives  the  explanation  of
his  visions  in  the  same  way  ;  and  in  NT,  warnings  or
other  conmiunications  of  the  divine  will  are  given  by
angels  (Mt.  1  20 '2 13,  Lk.  1 19,  ActslOsso).  The  angels
thus  become  the  intermediaries  of  Yahwe's  revelation  ;
but  they  are  also  the  instruments  of  his  aid  (Ps.  91ii
Dan.  828,  and  frequently  ;  cp  later,  2  Mace.  1]  6  3  Mace.
61S,  Susan.  42^  [in  LXX,  but  not  in  Theod.],  Bel
and  Drag.  34-39  ;  cp  Acts  82639/  Tobit,  passim.  Acts
\llff.,  and  especially  Heb.  1 14),  or  punishment  (Ps.
7849355/  Enoch  533  6Ti62ii  63i  Apoc.  Bar.  21 23
Rev.  6/,  also  in  ©  Job20is  8823  40ii  \z<.  6  in  Heb.
and  EV]  and  see  further  below,  §  5).  Especially
prominent  in  the  apocaly[)tic  literature  is  the  cognate
t)>lief  in  the  intercession  of  angels  with  God,  in  behalf
of  the  righteous,  or  against  the  unrighteous  :  see,  e.g. ,
Enoch  9 10  152  406  (where  the  function  is  specially
referred  to  Gabriel,  4O69  ;  yet  cp  also  Tob.  12 12  15  where
Raphael  intercedes)  99316  104  i  Rev.  83/  Cp  also  in
or,  Zech.  1 12  Job  5  I  8823  Eccles.  56[5],  and  perhaps
in  N'T,  Mt.  I810,  unless  this  be  a  case  of  angelic
i^uardianship.

In  other  respects  also,  the  later  angelologv  shows  the
influence  of  the  growing  sense  of  Yahwe's  transcendence  ;
the  angels, exalted  far  above  men  by


4.  Supremacy
of  Yahwe.


the  functions  just  mentioned,  are  them-
selves aba.sed  before  God  (Job  4  18).
The  awful  exaltation  of  even  angels  above  men,  is
prominent  in  Daniel  (Dan.  816-18  IO16/).  The  count-
less number  of  the  angels  is  emphasised  (Job  8823,  Dan.  7
10,  and  later,  Enoch  40 1  718  Mt.  2653  Heb.  12 22  Apoc.
Bar.  48io  51  n  59ii),  and  they  are  divided  into  ranks.
Even  in  Zech.  the  angel  of  Yahw6  is  a  '  kind  of  grand
vizier  receiving  the  report  of  (less  exalted)  angels'
(Smend).  This  conception  of  ranks  becomes,  later,
more  detailed'  (see  Dan.  10 13  12 1  Tob.  12 15,  and
Enoch — e.g.,  chap.  40),  and  creates  in  Gk.  the  term
d/)xa77fXos  (see  Charles,  Book  of  Enoch,  p.  67  ;  i  Thcs.
4 16  Judeg);  it  may  be  traced  farther,  in  NT, in  the

J  [The  influence  of  non-Jewish  upon  Jewish  beliefs  can  here
scarcely  be  denied.  These  are  the  facts  of  the  case  :  In  Daniel
(1013)  we  hear  of  a  class  of  'chief  princes,'  two  of  whom
(Gabriel  and  Michael,  11)  are  named  (chaps.  10-12 ;  cp  also
Raphael  and  Ukiel).  In  Tob.  (12  15)  the  number  of  the  'holy
angels  who  present  the  prayers  of  the  saints,  and  go  in  before
the  glory  of  the  Holy  One,'  is  given  as  seven  (if  the  text  is
correct).  In  Enoch  the  number  of  the  chief  angels  varies
between,  three,  four,  .six,  and  seven  (see  chaps.  20  40  z  78  i  89  i
90  21  31,  and  other  passages).  Manifestly  this  highest  class  of
angels  was  suggested  by  the  Zoroastrian  Amesha  Spentas
or  Amsha.spands  ('  immortal  holy  ones  '),  who  (like  the  counsel-
lors of  the  king  of  Persia,  Ezra  7  14)  are  seven  ;  and  this  seems  to
be  confirmed  by  the  reference  to  the  archangels  in  the  Book  of
Tobit,  which  also  mentions  the  Zend  name  of  the  chief  demon
(see  AsMODEUs).  In  referring  to  this  Iranian  belief,  however,  we
must  not  forget  the  possibility  that  it  is  to  some  extent
historically  connected  with  Babylonian  .spirit-lore.  The  cultus
of  the  seven  planets  is  no  doubt  primeval  in  Babylonia,  and
may  have  spread  thence  to  the  Iranian  peoples.  To  explain
the  belief  in  the  archangels  soleljj  from  Babylonian  sources  would
be  plausible  only  if  the  Zoroastrian  Gathas,  which  are  pervaded
by  the  belief  in  the  Amshaspands,  were  not  earlier  than  the
time  of  Philo.  For  this  bold  theory  see  Darmesteter,  Le
ZendaveUa  3  56  ('93),  etc.  ;  but  contrast  the  same  writer's
earlier  theory  in  SBE  (ZcnJavcsta,  i.  Introd.).— t.k.c]

167


ANGEL

references  to  the  'seven  spirits  of  God'  (Rev.  4s  cp
82),  and  to  Michael  (Judeg  Rev.  \1^)  and  Gabriel  (Lk.
1 19) ;  probably  also  in  the  use  of  several  terms  together,
in  certain  passages  [e.g. ,  thrones,  dominions,  principali-
ties, [jowers,  C'ol.  1 16),  and  perhaps  in  the  term  '  elect
angels'  (i  Tim.  hi\).

The  doctrine  of  Yahwe's  supremacy  involved  either
an  absolute  denial  of  the  existence  of  other  super-
human Ixiings  or  their  subordination  to  him.  To  the
latter  method  of  acconmiodation  post-exilic  angelology
owes  some  striking  features.  Thus,  the  patron  angels
of  nations  (clearly  referred  to  in  Dan.  IO1320  12i,
probably  also  in  Is.  24  21/:  Joel  3 [4]  11  Pss.  82  58 10  ;  see
Che.  Book  of  Fsahns^^'i  229^  and  comm.)  are  merely
the  ancient  'gods  of  the  nations' — for  which,  in  this
connection,  cp  especially  Dt.  419  292$  f  338  © — trans-
formed to  suit  the  new  doctrine.  Again,  the  'sons  of
the  lilohim  '- — formerly  independent  of  Yahwe,  whose
laws  they  broke  with  impunity — now  become  identified
with  the  angels  (cp  Ps.  29 1  with  1032o,  and  @'s  transla-
tion of  Gen.  62  [not  L]  Job  16  etc.,  cp  also  Lk.  20 36)  ;
as  such  they  constitute  his  council  and  do  his  bidding
(Jobl6  2i;  cp  Zech.  In/).  Similarly,  the  host  of
heaven,  which  in  the  later  years  of  the  monarchy  had  been
favourite  objects  of  worship  (cp,  e.g.,  Zeph.  I5  Jer.  82
Dt.  4 19),  and  therefore  rivals  of  Yahwe,  now  again
become  subject  to  him  and  do  him  homage  ( Neh.  9  6)  ;  he
is  as  supreme  over  them  as  over  men  (Is.  45 12,  cp  40 26) ;
he  is  equally  supreme  over  all  gods  (e.g. ,  cp  Ps.  964).

On  the  other  hand,  the  difficulty  with  which  Yahwe's
claim  to  universal  w^orship  against  all  others  was
B Suuremacv  "^^^^^^I'^hed  is  also  reflected  in  the  new

"incomDlete  ^"g^'lology.  Yahwe's  supremacy  over
^  '  the  'gods,'  or  the  'host  of  heaven,"
was  won  and  maintained  only  by  force  (Job  252  cp
2I22  Is.  2421  3445;  cp  27 1 — for  the  passages  in  Job
see  Davidson's,  for  those  in  Isaiah,  Cheyne's  Comm.).
This  incomplete  assimilation  of  the  '  other  gods '  etc.
to  beings  wholly  subservient  to  Yahw^,  combined  with
a  growing  dislike  to  attribute  evil  or  disorder  directly
to  him,  led  to  the  differentiation  of  angels  as  beneficent
or  maleficent  (see  Demons,  §  5,  Satan,  §  3)  ;  but  the
or  nowhere  lays  stress  on  the  moral  character  of
angels,  or  knows  anything  of  their  'fall.'  Conse-
quently, angels  were  divided  not  into  good  and  bad,
but  into  those  who  worked  wholly,  and  those  who  worked
only  partly,  in  obedience  to  God.  This  latter  division
still  seems  to  hold  its  own  in  NT  alongside  of  the  former  ;
and,  for  this  reason,  in  passages  such  as  Rom.  838
I  Cor.  1024/,  the  question  'Are  the  angels  referred  to
good  or  bad?'  is  probably  out  of  place  (cp  Everling).

For  several  centuries  after  the  Exile  the  lx;lief  in
angels  did  not  gain  equal  prevalence  in  all  circles  :  thus
G Schools  ''  "*^^''^''  mentions  them  (on  Gen.  1 26  2r  see


of  belief.


Di


)  ;  the  Priestly  Chronicler  does  so  but


rarely — save  when  quoting  directly  from  hi
sources  —  and  Esther,  Ecclesiasticus,  Wisdom,  and
Maccabees,  are  marked  more  by  the  absence  than  by
the  presence  of  such  references ;  '  Angel '  does  not
occur  in  the  Hebrew  of  Ecclus.  4821.  Still  later  the
differences  become  conspicuous  ;  the  Sadducees  were
credited  with  complete  scepticism  (Acts238);  the
EssENES  {t/.v. ,  §  3)  attached  an  exaggerated  importance
to  the  doctrine  ;  the  popular  Pharisaic  party  and  all
the  NT  writers  share,  in  general,  the  popular  beliefs.
Yet  in  John  angels  are  alluded  to  only  in  20 12  I51
(a  pa.ssage  based  on  an  OT  narrative),  I229  (a  saying  of
the  populace),  and  the  intrusive  verse  54;  the  epistles
contain  no  mention  of  them  (cp  the  comparative
infrequency  of  references  in  John  to  demons  {i^.v. ,  §  6).
Several  features  of  NT  angelology  have  been  already
incidentally  discussed  ;  they  are  common  to  both  Jewish
7  Annr>a1vnaaa  '"^"^  Christian  Writings.  Scarcely  less
S  NT  influential  over  the  writers  of  the  NT
than  the  OT  were  the  apocalypses  then
already  extant — especially  Enoch.  It  is  in  Enoch  we
168


8.  Jesus.


ANGEL

first  see  elaborated  a  doctrine  of  the  '  fall '  of  angels.
The  fall  is  regarded  as  the  punishment  for  the  intercourse
mentioned  in  (ien.  62-4.  !i"d  for  an  improper  revelation
of  'the  secret  things  of  the  world'  (cp  in  NT  Jude  6
2lVt.  24).  Through  their  fall  they  Ijecome  inferior
to  men,  who  therefore  judge  them  (En.  I44-7  102;  cp
I  Cor.  63  Heb.  2).  Enoch  .should  be  especially  com-
pared with  Revelation.

The  influence  of  the  OT  may  be  clearly  seen  in  the
NT  angelophanies,  which  seem  moflelled  on  those  of
the  early  OT  narratives, — only  that  now,  under  the
influence  of  the  later  development,  the  angel  is  quite
distinct  from  God  (ActslOs/  is  not  an  exception).
These  angelophanies  abound  in  the  nativity  and  re-
surrection narratives  and  in  Acts  (519826-40  10  3-7  30-32
127-11  2723),  but  are  conspicuous  by  their  absence  from
the  narratives  of  the  life  of  Christ — the  badly  attested
passage  Lk.  2243  being  unitiuc,  except  so  far  as  Mt.
4ii  =  Mk.  I13  (contrast  Lk.iijf.)  may  be  considered
parallel.

Jesus  accepts  the  popular  belief  in  the  existence  of
angels,  but  never  (even  in  Mt.  I810  or  2653)  counte-  ■
nances  the  l>elief  that  they  influence  life  in  j
the  present — perhaps  in  the  parable  of  the  i
wheat  and  the  tares  (,Mt.  1824-30  37-40)  he  directly
discountenances  it.  All  he  says  of  them  has  reference
to  themselves  alone,  or  to  their  relations  to  men  after
life.  Thus,  at  the  second  coming  they  will  accompany
the  Son  of  Man  (Mt.  I627  and  parallels  ;  Jn.  I51),  and
will  then  separate  the  good  from  the  evil  {e.^. ,  Mt.  1841  ;  I
cp  Lk.  I622).  They  do  not  marry  (Mt.  2230,  and  |
parallels);  their  knowledge  is  limited  (Mt.  24  36  =  Mk.
I032)  ;  and  they  rejoice  over  repentant  sinners  (Lk.
1 .')  10 ;  cp  Lk.  1 2 8/  ,  with  w hich  contrast  Mt.  1 0  32/  ,  and
cp  earlier,  Job  8823).  In  particular,  Jesus  breaks  away
from  the  prevailing  tendency  to  make  angels  the  inter-
mediaries of  revelation  :  he  himself  liecomes  the  sole
revealer  (Mt.  11  27  Jn.  176  ;  cp  146^),  he  will  himself
always  be  with  his  disciples  (Mt.  2820),  and  will  instruct  [
them  directly  (Lk.  2I15),  or  through  the  Spirit  whom  '
he  sends  (Jn.  1326  I41726).  Thus  this  part  of  the
doctrine  of  angels  was  doomed  to  give  way  to  the
Christian  doctrines  of  the  abiding  presence  of  Christ
and  of  the  Holy  Spirit.  It  still  survives,  however,  in
Revelation  (li  17i2l9;  cp  also  in  the  contemporary
Jewish  .'Ipoc.  Bar.  55 3,  'The  angel  Ramid  who  pre-
sides over  true  visions');  also  in  Acts  (103^  2723?)
— yet  here  alongside  of  the  new  belief  (10 13-16).  Paul
p  .  already  shows  the  influence  of  the  teaching  of  i
■  Jesus — he  claims  to  receive  his  gospel  direct
from  him  (Gal.  I1215/:  cp  Acts93-6)— but  still  shares
((jal.819)  the  common  belief  (Acts  753  Heb.  22  Jos.
.•I///.  XV.  03  ;  cp  Dt.  882  ©)  in  the  past  instrumentality
of  angels  in  revelation,  perhaps  also  in  the  present
possibility  ofthe  same  (Gal.  18;  cp?4i4).  With  him,  too,
angels  still  play  a  large  part  in  human  life  ;  his  own
practice  and  practical  exhortations  are  governed  by
this  l)elief  (i  Cor.  49  63  11 10).  An  emphatic  warning,
however,  is  uttered  against  a  practice  (which  was
springing  up  in  some  quarters)  of  worshipping  angels
(Col.  2 18  cp  Rev.  19 10).  In  the  same  epistle  the
creation  of  angels  is  asserted  (I16) — a  point  to  which,
as  might  be  expected,  no  reference  had  been  made  in
OT,  where  they  are  once  mentioned  as  being  present  at
the  creation  of  the  world.  Job  887  (in  Jewish  literature,
cp  Jub.  2  2  Apoc.  Bar.  216).  The  question  whether
Paul  associated  angels  with  cosmical  forces  turns  on
the  interpretation  of  ra  <TT0ix^7a  rod  Kde/xov,  Gal.  4  3
Col.  2820  (see,  on  the  one  hand,  Lightfoot,  in  loc,  on
the  other,  Everling,  as  cited  Iielow,  and  cp  lu.KMENT.s).
Such  an  association  would,  at  least,  have  accorded  with
the  tendency  of  the  time  :  note  the  angels  of  winds,
sun,  fire,  and  water,  etc.  (Rev.  7i  19i7  14i8  16  cp
Heb.  1 7  and  Jn.  54,  and,  somewhat  earlier,  Enoch
60 11/;  61 10).  The  tendency  began  much  earlier;  in  j
the  or  angels  and  stars  are  closely  associated  (cp  Job !

169


ANKLETS

387  Is.  344,  and,  in  general,  the  double  meaning
attaching  to  the  phrase  'host  of  heaven');  and  the
transition  from  Ps.  IO44  to  a  fixed  belief  in  elemental
angels  is  easy. See  Persia.

The  literature  of  the  subject  is  large  ;  all  the  Old  and  New
Testament  Theologies  contain  discussions  ;  on  the  OT,  Fie|)en-
bring's  Thiol,  de  Cancien  Test.  1888  (KT,
10.  Literature.  New  York,  93)  and  Smend's  A  T  KeL-geuh.
(•<V3)  are  soecially  helpful.  The  chief  mono-
graphs for  the  OT  are  by  Kosters  (' De  Mal'ach  Yahwe '  and
'  Het  ontstaan  en  de  onlwikkeling  dtr  Angelologie  onder  Israel '
rZ/.Tit  367-415  ['75],  10  34-69  113-141  ['76];  for  the  Pauline
Doctrine,  by  Everling  (Pie  Paulinische  Angelologie  und
Daiitonologie  ['881).  On  the  vocabulary  of  the  subject  see  M.
Schwab,  /  'ocahu/aire  de  C angelologie  (tapris  maniiscrits
hel>reu.r  (Paris,  '97).  The  question  of  foreign  influence  is  dis-
cus.sed  by  Kohut  (Ueher  d.  jiid.  Angelologie  u.  I>,'monologie  in
ihrer  Abluingigkeit  voin  I'arsismus);  for  further  literature  on
this  point  see  Che.  OI's  282.  See  further  the  valuable  discus-
sions of  Montefiore  (///^(i.  Led.  viii.,  esp.  p.  429^),  and  Clicyne
ipPs  322-327,  334-337)1  and  cp  Lueken,  Michael  <^()9i).

G.  c.  G.

ANGLE  (Is.  198Hab.  I15). See  Hook,  3,  Fisii.  §  3.

ANIAM  (DJ/^3N,  surely  not  '  mourning  of  the  people '
[Ges.],  but  miswritten  [see  ©"]  for  c^-Vk.  see  Eliam  ;
differently  Gray,  ///*.V  44  n.  i,  who  would  omit  .,  and
derive  from  cy: ;  aAiaAeim  [H].  aniaaa  [A],  eN.  [L]),
in  genealogy  of  Manasskh  (i  Ch.  7i9t). T.  K.  c.

ANIM  (D'JV'  AiCAM  [B],  <^NelA^  [A],  -iB  [L]).
Josh,  losof,  a  hill  town  of  Judah,  mentioned  after
Eshtemoa  (a  name  etjually  distorted  in  ©").  I'erhaps
the  modern  el-Ghuwein,  which  lies  to  the  south  of
el-Khalil  (Hebron)  between  es-Semu"  and  Tell  'Arad.

ANISE  (anhBon  [Ti.  WH],  Mt.  2323t)or  Diu.(RV
mg. )  is  the  plant  Ancthuvi  ^raveolens.^  The  correct
rendering  is  'dill,'^  and  the  plant  is  distinct  from
Pimpinella  Anisum,  which  is  the  modern  '  anise.'  The
biblical  plant  is  described  (Fluckiger  and  H anbury's
Pharmacop-aphia  '-'  327  /. ),  as  '  an  erect,  glaucous
annual  plant,  with  finely  striated  stems,  usually  one  foot
to  one  foot  and  a  half  in  height,  pinnate  leaves  with
setaceous  linear  segments,  and  yellow  flowers.  It  is
indigenous  to  the  Mediterranean  region.  Southern  Russia,
and  the  Caucasian  provinces,  but  is  found  as  a  corn-
field weed  in  many  other  countries,  and  is  frequently
cultivated  in  gardens. '  ^

It  is  mentioned  in  Mt.  2823,  along  with  mint
and  cunmiin,^  as  being  subjected  by  the  scribes  and
Pharisees  to  tithe.  This  practice  accords  with  the
general  principle  stated  at  the  commencement  of  the
Mishnic  tract  on  'tithes'  ('Whatsoever  is  food,  and  is
private  possession,  and  has  its  increase  out  of  the  earth,
is  subject  to  tithe ' — a  rule  based  on  the  precept  of
Deut.  1422,  'Thou  shalt  surely  tithe  all  the  increase  of
thy  seed,  that  which  cometh  forth  of  the  field  year  by
year'),  and  the  liability  of  dill  in  particular  to  tithe  is,
in  the  Talmud,  specially  mentioned  (see  the  references
in  Celsius,  Hierobot.  1  497).  N.  -M.— W.  T.  T.-D.

ANKLETS  and  ANKLE -CHAINS.  These  have
ever  been  favourite  ornaments  among  Orientals.'  Prob-
ably the  oldest  specimens  are  some  in  gold  and
silver  which  have  been  found  in  Egypt,  where  they
appear  to  have  been  worn  by  men  as  well  as  women.
The  chains  obliged  the  wearers  to  take  short  and
tripping  steps. To  enhance  the  effect, bells  were  (at

1  The  Syriac  and  the  Ar.abic  versions  correctly  render  by  the
word  sitehhetid,  shihitt—a  name  for  this  plant  which  is  probably
derived  from  Persian  (see  Liiw,  373).  t^ r  l

2  This,  though  supplanted  by  'anise'  in  all  the  English
versions  from  Wyclif  onwards,  is  the  word  used  in  the  A.S.
version,  '  myntan  and  dile  and  cymmyn."

3  Virgil  gives  it  a  place  in  the  flower-garden  (h.cl.  2 48),  and
Pliny  in  the  veget.ible-garden  (//A'  xix.  8  52).  Cp  the  Creek  reff.
in  Liddell  and  Scott.  .  . ,

•«  In  the  parallel  passage  in  Lk.  (11  42)  dill  is  not  mentioned—
'mint  and  rue  and  every  herb  (jrofAoxai'Oi').'  >. .

»  Cp  Ar.  halhal,  and  Ok.  ntpic^vfu.ov  and  ir«fM(Tit»Ai«,  the
latter  of  which  is  0s  rendering  of  the  Heb.  DjaO  (in  the  plur.
or  dual)  '  breeches.'


ANNA

any  rate,  in  later  times)  attached  to  the  chain — a  practice
which  is  alluded  to  in  terms  of  disapproval  in  the  Koran
(5«r.  2431).  Ornaments  of  this  nature  are  referred  to
in  Is.  3 18.

They  are  here  called  C'03}/|,1  RV  '  anklets,'  AV  '  tinkling  orna-
ments'  (®  e/xn-Xdicia),  a  word  from  which  comes  the  denominative
verb  in  7'.  16  (r!:D3yn  □rf'i'Jin  '  they  make  a  tinkling  with  their
feet,'  ®  irai^ovcrai).  Similar  is  ^^{?"i  Is.  3  2ot,  RV  '  ankle
chains,'  AV  '  ornaments  of  the  legs,'  ©  uncertain  (cp  Targ.
K'SjT  'Tc)  ;  cp  mi'SK.  ^Jn-  31  5°.  RV  as  above,  AV  '  chains,'  ©
^KiSuyy.  In  spite  of  its  apparently  obvious  connection  with  ty^
'to  walk,'  rnys  's  applied  also  to  ornaments  worn  on  the  arms  :
see  Bkacelet,  5.

ANNA  (anna  [BNA]),  the  Greek  form  of  the  name
Hannah.

1.  Wife  of  Tobit  (Tob.  Igf.).

2.  Daughter  of  Phanuel,  of  the  tribe  of  Asher  (Lk.
236-38).  Like  Simeon,  she  represents  the  class  of
those  who  '  waited  for  the  consolation  of  Israel,'  and,
like  him,  she  is  said  to  have  had  the  gift  of  prophecy.
Being  constantly  in  the  temple,  and  prepared  for  the
honour  by  fastings  and  prayers,  she  was  enabled  to
meet  the  child  Jesus  and  his  parents,  when,  like
Simeon,  she  burst  into  a  prophetic  song  of  praise.
She  is  also,  it  would  seem,  a  prototype  of  the
'  widows  indeed '  (see  Widow)  of  the  early  Christian
community  (i  Tim.  659):  hence  the  particularity  with
which  the  circumstances  of  her  widowhood  are  described.

The  name  Anna  or  Anne  became  common  among  Christians
from  the  tradition  that  the  mother  of  the  Virgin  Mary  was  so
called.

ANNAAS  (c&NAAC  [A]),  lEsd.  523  AV  =  Ezra235
Sen  A  AH.

ANNAS  (ANN AC  [A]).  lEsd.  932  RV  [Heb.  J^H,
§  5o]  =  Ez.  10  31  Harim.

ANNAS  and  CAIAPHAS  (annac  [Ti.  WH] ;  kai-
A4)Ac[li-  ^^IIJ)-  ln6.\.i).  Quirinius,  who  on  the  de-
position of  Archelaus  became  governor  of  Syria,  followed
the  custom  of  the  Herodian  family  and  appointed  a  new
high  priest.  His  choice  fell  on  a  certain  Ananos  (so  in
Josephus)  or  Annas  (so  in  NT),  son  of  Sethi  (Jos.  Ze^i)
who  continued  to  hold  the  office  until  the  change  of
government  in  15  .•\.  I).  Valerius  Gratus,  who  succeeded
Quirinius,  gave  the  post  in  succession  to  three  men,  none
of  whom,  however,  held  it  for  more  than  a  year.  The
second  of  the  three  was  a  son  of  Annas,  called
Eleazar  by  Josephus  {An/,  .xviii.  22).  Atlast,  in  18  A.D.,
Valerius  found  in  Joseph,  called  Caiaphas,  one  who  was
strong  enough  to  hold  the  office  till  36  A.  U.  Then
Vitellius  (35-39  .A.D. )  once  more,  in  36  and  37,
appointed,  one  after  the  other,  two  sons  of  Annas
named  Jonathan  and  Theophilus  (^«/.  xviii.  4353).
Jonathan  still  held  a  prominent  position  in  50-52  {/i/
ii.  12  sy.),  a  point  of  which  we  have  good  proof  in  the
fact  that  Peli.x  caused  him  to  be  assassinated  (B/h.  IS3
Anf.  -xx.  8s).  As  in  Acts  46,  Annas,  Caiaphas,  Jonathas
(so  D  ;  the  other  MSS  have  Joannes,  EV  John),  and
Alexander  are  assigned  high-priestly  rank,  and  the  first
three  can  be  identified  from  Josephus,  Jonathan  being  a
son,  andC.MAPHAS,  according  to  Jn.  18 13,  a  son-in-law,
of  Annas,  we  seem  to  have  good  reason  for  conjecturing
Alexander  to  be  the  Graecised  name  of  Eleazar  the  son
of  Annas. .

Cai.M'H.as,  then,  was  the  acting  high  priest  at  the
time  of  the  trial  of  Jesus.  His  long  term  of  office  shows
that  in  his  relations  with  the  Romans  he  nmst  have
been  oljsequious  and  adroit.  Mk.  and  Lk.  do  not
mention  him  in  their  account  of  the  passion  ;  but  in
Jn.  II49I813/  2428  and  Mt.  26357,  we  read  that  he
presided  over  the  proceedings  of  the  Synedrium  ;  he
therefore  it  was  who  rent  his  clothes. According  to

1  Cp  03?  a  fetter  (?)  in  Pr.  7  22,  the  pr.  name  HMV  (see
AcHsAii)  and  the  Ar.  'ikds,  a  chain  connecting  the  head  and
forefoot  of  a  camel — the  usual  method  of  hobbling  the  animal.


ANOINTING

Jn.  11  49-52,  he  became  also  an  involuntary  prophet  as  to
what  the  death  of  Jesus  meant.'  With  regard  to  his
character  in  general,  the  accounts  accessible  to  us  give
no  details.

The  most  important  personality  in  the  group  would
appear  to  have  been  old  Annas.  This  seems  to  be
sufficiently  implied  in  the  fact  that  four  of  his  sons'
and  a  son-in-law  successively  held  the  high  -  priestly
office^whether  we  assume  that  Annas  expressly  wrought
for  this  end,  or  whether  it  was  simply  because  those  in
power  sought  by  this  means  to  win  him  over  to  them-
selves. Only  on  the  assumption  that  he  was,  in  truth,
the  real  manager  of  affairs,  can  we  account  for  it  that,
according  to  Jn.  I813-24,  he  gave  a  private  hearing  in
the  case  of  Jesus,  as  also  that  Lk.  (Lk.  82)  names  him
as  colleague  with  Caiaphas,  and  (.'\cts46)  enumerates
him  in  the  first  place,  along  with  Caiaphas  and  two
of  his  high-priestly  sons,  as  holding  high-priestly  rank.
Other  instances,  however,  of  a  similar  co-ordination  of
past  high  priests  are  not  unknown  ;  for  example,  in
the  case  of  Jonathan,  son  of  Annas  (/?/  ii.  I25/. ),  of
Ananias  son  of  Nedebaios  (Ant.  xx.  92-9;  see  AnaniA-S,
9),  and  of  the  younger  Ananos  and  Jesus  son  of  Gamaliel,
both  of  whom  were  high  priests  for  some  time  during
the  years  62-65,  and  had  the  conduct  of  affairs  in  their
hands  during  the  first  period  of  the  Jewish  wars.

The  Annas  (Ananos)  just  mentioned,  son  of  Annas,
appointed  in  62  A.D.  by  Agrippa  II.,  availed  himself  of
the  confusion  following  on  the  death  of  Festus  to  procure
the  death  of  his  enemies  by  tumultuary  sentence.  Among
the  victims  of  his  tyranny  was,  it  would  seem,  James,
the  brother  of  the  Lord.  The  passage  relating  to  it  in
Josephus  (20  91),  however,  may  perhaps  be  a  Christian
interpolation  (see  James,  §  3,  end).  In  any  case,  the
king  himself,  even  before  the  arrival  of  the  new  pro-
curator, put  an  end  to  Annas's  reign  of  terror  by
deposing  him  from  the  high-priesthood  after  a  tenure  of
three  months.  H.  v.  s.

ANNIS.  (anngic  [B]).  I  Esd.  5 16  RV,  RVmg.
Annias,  AV  Ananias  [q.v.,  i).

ANNTJUS  (annoynon  [A],  om.  BL),  i  Esd.  848,  a
name  not  in  Ezra  8  19 — in  Ezra's  caravan  (see  Ezra,  i.
§  2,  ii.  §  15  (i)  d) — supposed  by  some  to  be  a  corruption
of  '  with  him  '  (IDX)  in  Ezra,  which  may  itself  be  a  mis-
read sign  of  the  accusative  (so  ©"*'-).

ANOINTING. In  the  OT  two  distinct  Hebrew  terms,
j frequently  occurring,  are  translated  in  EV  by  'anoint,'


1.  Terms.


,hile  a  third  (-;o:)  is  mcorrectly  so  under-
stood in  Ps.  2  6  by  Targ.  and  Sym.  and
also  by  Ewald  (cp  We.  Heid.K^^  118).  [a)  tjio  {siik)
is  always  (Dt.  2840  Ruth  83  2S.I220I42  2Ch.28i5
Ezek.  I69  Dan.  IO3  Mic.  615)  used  of  the  application  of
unguents  to  the  human  body  as  a  matter  of  toilet,  and
hence  Ex.  30  32  means  that  the  holy  anointing  oil
shall  not  be  used  for  ordinary  toilet  purposes,  (b)  nc'D
(vidshah)  and  its  derivatives.^  In  this  case  we  have  to
distinguish  between  the  primary  physical,  and  a  secondary
and  metaphorical  use.  In  its  physical  sense  nao  is  used
(1)  rarely,  probably  with  the  retention  of  the  original
meaning  of  the  root,  of  rubbing  an  unguent  or  other
substance on  an object,—*.^'., oil  on  shields  (Is.  21 5

t  It  has  been  suggested  that  the  reference  to  his  prophesying
may  have  arisen  out  of  a  popular  etymology  of  Caiaphas,  cp  Ar.
*«'//■=  soothsayer  ('qui  movit  vestigia  et  indicia  rerum,  physio-
gnomus,'  Freyt.)  ;  cp  Nestle,  /?/''7"/r.  40 149,  and  see  Palm.  Gram.
127,  n.  4.  Blass  thinks  that  Nestle  has  upset  the  etymology
from  KS'3  'stone'  and  KB'3  'oppression,'  by  showing  that  the
name  in  .\r.-imaic  is  written  with  p,  not  3.

2  The  fourth,  .Matthias,  was  appointed  to  the  oflfice  for  a
short  time,  between  41  and  44,  by  Agrippa ;  perhaps  .\nnas  did
not  live  to  .see  this,  and  certainly  he  did  not  survive  to  see  the
priesthood  held  by  his  fifth  son,  .Ananos  II.  (in  62  a.d.).

•'  On  the.se,  as  well  as  on  several  matters  referred  to  in  the
course  of  this  article,  Weinel's  study  '  nrO  und  seine  Derivate '
(/.ATli^  18  1-82  ['98])  should  be  consulted.  Unfortunately,  it
appeared  too  late  to  be  used  in  the  preparation  of  the  present
article.


ANOINTING

aS.  l2i),  paint  on  a  ceiling,  Jer.  22i4  (here  translated
in  EV  by  '  painted  '), — and  probably  we  should  interpret
the  word  similarly  in  the  recurring  phrase  {e.g. ,  in  Ex.
292)  'wafers  unleavened  anointed  with  oil'  ;  (2)  of  the
application  of  unguents  to  persons  or  things  as  a  religious
rite ;  for  details  see  below  (§  iff.),  but  observe  that,
with  the  possible'  exception  of  Am. 66,  npo  's  never
used  in  the  sense  of  :jic-  In  its  metaphorical  sense
na'O  is  used  of  the  divine  appointment  or  selection  of  a
man  for  a  particular  purjKDse — viz. ,  for  the  kingship
(iS.  lOi  15i7  2S.  127  2  K.  93612  Fs.  457[8]  892o[2i]
2  ('h.  227  ;  cp  below,  §  5).  For  the  relation  of  the  term
n'ro  to  the  usages  under  discussion  see  Messiah,  §  i.
'Anoint'  in  Ps.  92io[ii]  corresponds  to  Heb.  SSj,'^  in
Ps.  235  it  corresponds  to  jb*!  ;  '  anointing"  in  the  prob-
ably corrupt  passage  Is.  10 27  corresponds  to  ice*  (©"•*'^Q
oni. )  and  '  anointed  ones  '  in  Zech.  4  14  (AV  ;  but  RV
'  sons  of  oil '  ;  ©"K-^O  viol  r^j  TrtirTjros)  to  •\r\-i'r\  "33.

In  NT  the  EV  also  confuses  two  sharply  distinguished
terms.  XP"^'  which  in  the  LXX,  as  in  classical  Greek,
may  be  used  in  a  physical  sense,  is  in  the  NT  used  ex-
clusively (Lk.  4  iS  [cp  Is.  61 1]  Acts  427  IO38  2  Cor.  1  21)
of  (jod  in  a  metaphorical  sense  ;  for  we  can  hardly
regard  the  quotation  from  Ps.  457[8]  in  Heb.  I9  as  an
e.xception.  The  derivatives  xpiatx-o.  (ijn.  22027)  and
XptcT^s  are  used  similarly  ;  but  the  compounds  fjxploj
(Rev.  3 18  also  Tob.  68  [9]  11  8)  and  fVtxpiw  (Jn.  96ii)
retain  the  original  physical  sense.

Thus  the  NT  use  of  XP"^  resembles  the  meta-
phorical use  of  nro-  The  other  NT  term,  d\ei(po},  is
ahc'iiys  used  of  the  application  of  unguents  to  the  body,
whether  (like  the  Heb.  rj^o  which  it  frequently  represents,
e.g.,  Ruth  3 3  Micah6i5,  cp  also  2  K.  4  2  0"'^'-)  for
toilet  purposes  (Mt.  617  Lk.  73846  Jn.  11  2),  or  medicin-
ally (.VIk.  613  Ja.  514),  or  as  a  tribute  of  respect  to
the  dead  (Mk.  16 1  cp  Jn.  1237).^

From  the  foregoing  analysis  of  the  terms,  it  will
be  clear  that  '  anointing '  was  practised  by  the
Hebrews  both  for  secular  and  for  sacred
purposes.  The  unguent  used  was  olive  oil,
with  or  without  the  addition  of  aromatic  spices  ;  for
details  see  On..  Anointing  formed  among  the  Hebrews,
as  among  many  other  peoples  (cp,  d'._o'.,  PI.  NN  xVd.  1-6),
a  regular  part  of  a  full  toilet,  being  in  particular
associated  with  washing  (Ruth  83  Ezek.  I69  Sus.  17)  ;
the  omission  of  it  was  a  sign  of  mourning,  the
resumption  of  the  practice  a  sign  that  mourning  was
over  (2  S.  142  Dan.  10 3  [cp  Mt.  617]  2  S.  1220  Judith  IO3
cp  Is.  61  3  Eccl.  98)  ;  and  hence  '  to  anoint '  is  a  suitable
figure  for  'to  make  glad'  (Ps.  23$  cp  457  [8]).  The
head  and  face  appear  to  have  been  most  usually  anointed
(Ps.  104i5  Judith  16io  Mt.617  Lk.  738  cp  Ps.235  I4I5
Eccles.  98),  and  the  anointing  of  the  feet  to  have  been  a
special  luxury  (Lk.  746  Jn.  12 3).  The  medicinal  use  of
unguents  is  referred  to  not  only  in  Ja.  5 14  Mk.  613,
but  also  in  Is.  16  Lk.  IO34.  On  anointing  the  dead
see  Embalming.

Leaving  the  significance  of  anointing  as  a  religious
rite  to  a  final  section,  we  will  here  simply  classify  the

-i Rplie-iniK? persons or objects which were so

H+» a-nnlnH^o.  anointed  ;  and  first  the  persons, (a)

"'0"  p^ri"^ l'^  ^'>^- '" '^«  OT,%eciallySr!

'^  the  earlier  wntmgs,  there  are  numerous

references  to  the  anointing  of  kings  (cp,  e.g.,  1  S.  1631a

1  Possible,  but  hardly  probable  (cp  Gcs.-Ru.,  J.7'.  riUS)-  The
feast  described  in  the  context  is  sacrificial:  see  i'.  4"and  cp
WRS  AV/.  Sem.^'i)  241,  258,  430  n.  4,  and  note  that  the  word
used  in  7/.  6  for  bowl  (pnta)  is  elsewhere  exclusively  used  in
connection  with  .sacrifice  ;  cp  Driver  (ad  loc.\  who,  however,
takes  the  passage  as  a  description  of  effeminate  luxury.

*  The  text,  however,  is  very  questionable.  Many  (r^.  Cheyne,
Psalms  (1»,  Baethgen),  following  ®ujiart  Sym.  Jer.,  point  'n^3
instead  of  'n?3,  and  translate  '  my  old  age '  or  '  my  wasting
strength'  instead  ot  'I  am  anointed.'  In  Psalmsi")  Che.
reads  ■n'?0  =  nxS3.

3  In  Mk.  14  8t  '  anoint '  is  iivpi^ut  (see  Myrrh,  a).
173


2.  Toilet.


ANOINTING

9 16  2  K.  23  30  Ecclus.  4613),  and  so  fre()uently  of  the
Hebrew  kings  to  whom  the  term  'Messiah  of  Yahwe'
belonged  pre-eminently,  if  not  exclusively,  in  the  days
of  the  monarchy  and  even  later  (Lam.  4 20)  ;  for  the
anointing  of  a  Syrian  king  (by  a  Hebrew  prophet)  see

1  K.19i5.  and  cp  the  general  reference  in  Judg.  9815,
and  ^w.  7V/I*.  376  '  Manahbi(r)ia,  king  of  Egypt,  .  .  .
established  my  father  .  .  .  over  the  kingdom,  and
poured  oil  on  his  head.'  {b)  The  prophet.  How  far  it
was  usual  to  anoint  a  prophet  we  cannot  say  ;  but  we
have  one  allusion  (in  a  narrative  of  the  9ih  or  8th
cent. )  to  such  an  anointing  which  camiot  be  reasonably
explained  away  ;  if  '  anoint '  in  i  K.  19 15^  i6</  Ix;  literal,
it  would  be  unnatural  to  consider  it  in  i'.  16^  (as  in
Is.  61 1 )  metaphorical  ;  cp  Ecclus.  488.  (c)  The  priest.
References  to  the  anointing  of  priests,  as  part  of  the
rite  of  consecration,  are  numerous  in  P.  We  have  to
distinguish,  however,  Ijetween  those  passages  which  refer
to  the  anointing  of  the  high  priest  (Aaron)  alone,  and
those  which  refer  to  the  anointing  of  the  priests  in  general
(for  the  former  cp  Ex.  29?  Lev.  812  6  2o[i3],  and,  outside
P,  Ps.  1332  Ecclus.  4015;  for  the  latter,  E.x.  3O30
40:3-15).  It  seems  proliable  that  passages  of  the
latter  class  are  secondary  (cp  We.  CH  141/.  ;  Di.  on
Lev.  8to-i2;  Nowack,  Arch.  2  124).  In  this  case  the
anointing  of  the  high  priest  may  be  inferred  to  have
been  an  earlier  custom  than  that  of  anointing  all
priests.  This  would  account  for  the  origin  of  the  term
n'tiicn  pan,  'the  anointed  priest'  a|)plied  to  the  high
priest (Lev.  43516 622[i5]; cp Nu.  3^25 Lev.  21 1012

2  Mace.  1 10,  and  perhaps  Uan.  925/  ),  and  for  its  subse-
quent disappearance  when  all  priests  were  anointed  (cp
D'na'Dn  C':rT2.T  Nu.  33).  We  may  infer  from  Zech.  4  14  that
the  custom  of  anointing  the  high  priest  was  at  least  as
ancient  as  the  close  of  the  sixth  century  ;  but  we  have
no  earlier  evidence.  On  the  other  hand,  the  contrast
between  a  priest  and  '  Yahwe's  anointed  (iS.  235 — a
Deuteronomic  passage),  and  the  different  terms  in
which  the  Chronicler  (iCh.  2922)  and  the  earlier
historian  (iK.  235)  refer  to  Zadok's  appointment,  are
worthy  of  attention.  Cp  further  (for  some  differences  of
view)  Haudissin,  Die  Gesch.  des  AT Priesterthums  25/.
48/ 140  253.

Lifeless objects also  were  anointed, [a)  Gen.  28 18
31 13  35x4 are, as far as OT  is concerned, isolated
references  to  the  anointing  o{  sacred  pillars


4.  Lifeless
objects.


(see  Massebah)  ;  but  the  custom  was  well-
known  in  antiquity  (cp  Di.  on  Gen.  28 18;
WRS  Rel.  Sem.i'^^  232).  {f>)  The  tabernacle  and  its
appurtenances.  P  contains  directions  or  statements
about  anointing  '  the  tent  of  meeting '  and  all  its  furniture
(which  is  mentioned  in  detail,  Ex.  30  26),  or  'the
tabernacle  and  all  that  is  therein'  (Ex.  4O9  Lev.  8 10
Nu.  7i),  as  part  of  the  rite  of  consecration.  Special
reference 'is  made  to  the  anointing  of  the  altar  (Nu.
7108488).  In  Dan.  924  we  find  an  allusion  to  the
anointing  of  'the  most  holy'  (probably  =  the  altar)  in
the  reconsecration  after  the  pollution  of  the  temple  by
Antiochus  h^piphanes.

NT  contains  no  reference  to  anointing  as  a  religious
rite,  unless,  indeed,  we  ought  to  infer  from  Mk.  613
Ja.  5  14  that  magical  —  and  so  far  religious  —  pro-
perties were  attributed  to  the  oil  used  in  anointing
the  sick  (as  distinct  from  the  wounded,  Lk.  IO34) ;
but  before  the  close  of  the  second  century  A.  u.  it  had
come  to  form  part  of  the  ceremony  of  baptism.  See
Smith  and  Cheetham,  Diet,  of  Christ.  Antiq.,  j.tt'.
'Chrism,'  'Unction';  Mayor's  Comni.  on  James
(on  514).

Anointing  occurs  repeatedly  as  a  metaphorical  term

to  express  a  religious  idea. As  we  have  seen  (1)  the

K  Twr  ♦ 1,  Heb.  term  (nrc)  is  sometimes  ani  the

0.  metapnors.  ^.p  ^^^^  ^^^,^^  ^,^.3^.^  ^^^  j^^,^.

phorically  with  God  as  subject.  The  metaphor  may
have  originated  in,  as  it  was  certainly  subsequently
used  to  express,  the  idea  of  God  pouring  out  his  spirit


ANOS

on  a  man  (or  people)  for  a  particular  purpose — e.g. ,  on
Saul  to  smite  the  Amalekitts  (iS.  15i7),  on  Jehu  to
smite  the  house  of  Ahab  (2  K.  96/  ),  on  '  the  Servant '
'  to  preach  good  tidings  '  (Is.  (il  i).  Thus,  after  Yahw6
has  anointed  Saul  (i  S.  lOi),  the  spirit  of  Yahwe  comes
mightily  upon  him  {v.  6),  cp  i  S.  I613;  and  the  con-
nection lx;t\veen  the  outpouring  of  the  spirit  and
anointing  is  clear  in  Is.  61 1  (Lk.  4  18)  2  Cor.  1  21.  and
especially  in  Acts  10 38.  Similarly,  '  the  anointing  from
the  holy  one'  (ijn.  22027)  is  the  illumination  of  the
Holy  Spirit,  which  teaches  those  that  receive  it  con-
cerning all  things.  Hence,  the  term  '  anointed '  could
suitably  Ix;  applied  to  Israel  as  a  people — e._i,^. ,  Hab.  3  13  ;
see  further  Messiah,  §  3.  In  Ps.  tf)?  892o,  the
whole  phrase  '  to  anoint  with  oil '  is  used  with  CJod  as
subject  ;  in  these  cases  either  the  whole  phrase  is  a
metaphor,  or  mdla/i  has  accjuired  a  quasi-causative
sense.

On  the  relation of  the  various terms  and customs
to  one  another  there have  been  different  views,  some

fi Primiti a  °^ which  must te briefly referred to.
._  Some  {f.£: ,  Kamjihausen  in  the  article

sigmncance. .  ,.^„^.  ■  j,^  // , ,  -/j  ,2, ,  j,^.,i,.(.  ,he  religious

from  the  toilet  use,  seeing  in  the  rite  of  anointing
both  the  means  of  setting  apart  to  (Jod  some  person  or
thing  as  clean  and  sweet-smelling,  and  also  the  symbol
of  such  a  condition.  But  (i)  it  may  Ix:  questioned
whether  the  sharp  distinction  of  terms  relative  to
the  two  uses  (cp  §  i)  lie  not  against  this  view;  (2)
there  is  no  positive  evidence  that  the  Hebrews  in-
terpreted the  rite  in  this  way,  unless  we  so  regard  the
custom  of  mi.xing  sweet -smelling  substances  in  the
anointing  oil — a  custom  which  cannot  be  traced  liefore
P  ;  and  (3)  the  metaphorical  use  cannot  be  satisfactorily
explained  in  this  way.  Reasons  have  l>een  given  in  the
preceding  section  for  thinking  that  the  religious  rile  of
anointing  men  was  at  any  rate  understood  at  an  early
period  to  symboJi.se  the  outpouring  of  the  divine  spirit  ;
but  it  is  possible  that  this  symbolism  is  not  original,
even  in  the  case  of  persons.  It  certainly  does  not
e.\plain  the  anointing  of  things — particularly  the  pillar
at  Bethel.  This  custom  Roliertson  Smith  {ke/.  Sem.(^>
233  379#.  especially  313  ^,  cp  S.\ckikick)  seeks
to  explain  as  a  sacrifice,  the  oil  being  a  substitute
for  the  animal  fat  which  was  smeared  (smearing,  it  is
to  be  remembered,  being  the  original  sense  of  ne'e)
by  the  Arabs  on  similar  pillars,  and  played  a  consider-
able part  in  many  other  forms  of  sacrifice.  Fat  being,
according  to  ancient  thought,  one  of  the  great  seats
of  life,  was  peculiarly  fitted  for  the  food  of  the  gods
(hence  the  anointing  of  the  pillar),  and  also  for  imparting
living  virtue  to  the  persons  to  whom  it  might  be  applied
(hence  the  anointing  of  things  or  other  persons).  In
this  case  the  view  that  anointing  symbolised  the  impart-
ing of  the  divine  spirit,  is  a  refinement  of  the  idea  in
which  the  custom  may  l)e  presumed  to  have  originated
(cp  CovKN.VNT,  §  5  end).  The  anointing  of  the  temple
and  sacred  furniture  will  then  l>e  a  survival  similar  to
that  of  sprinkling  them with  blood.  G.  n.  o.

ANOS  (ancoc  [B.\  ;  om.  L]),  i  Esd.  934.  apparently
V.AM.Mi  of  l';zral036.

ANT(n^p?,'MYpMH?[B*<A];>r;;/?Vrt,Pr.663025t).
Classical  writers  often  refer  to  the
industry,  forethought,  and  ingenuity
of  the  ant,  and  especially  to  its  habit
1  The  etymoloRy  of  this  word  is  very  doubtful.  It  has  been
proposed  to  derive  it  (i)  from  a  doubtfid  Heb.  verb  ^j^^  (cp  Sio)
'  to  cut,'  referring  tither  to  the  shape  of  the  ant's  body  (  =  '  in-
sect '),  or  to  its  habit  of  cutting  seeds  from  the  corn-ears,  or  to  the
incision  it  is  supposed  to  make  in  the  seeds  themselves  to  prevent
their  .sproutine  (though  this  la.st  was  hardly  known  to  the  ancient
Hebrews);  (2)  from  .\r.  namala  'to  creep'  or  'to  ascend  by
creeping ' ;  (3)  from  asuppo.sed  root  akin  to  Heb.  ck:.  '  to  make  a
slight  sound '.  The  connection  with  Ar.  namaltt  is  certain  ;
but  pos.sibly  the  meaning  of  the  verb  may  be  derived  from  the
noun.  A  kindred  word  is  Ar.  anmul,  '  fingertip  '  (Lag.  Uebers.
21).  The  Syr.  equivalent  is  JfKj»»a«a('  keen-scented "?) ;  Ar.
has  the  same  word  as  Wch.—nanila.


1.  Name  and
allusions.


2.  Species.


ANT

of  storing grain -seixls beneath the ground in time
of  harvest. '

Thus  ifllian  tells  us  that  so  great  is  the  industry  of  ants  that,
when  there  is  moonlight,  they  work  by  night  as  well  as  by  day.
It  was  noticed  how  carefully  their  work  was  organised;  they
were  descrilied  as  marching  like  an  army,  the  oldest  acting
as  generals ;  when  they  reached  the  cornfield,  the  older  ants
ascended  the  stalks  and  threw  down  the  grains  to  the  others,
who  stood  around  the  fix)t.  Each  took  its  part  in  carrying
away  the  food  to  their  .subterranean  homes,  which  were  care-
fully constructed  with  several  chamliers,  and  protected  above  by
walls  of  earth  to  keep  out  the  rain.  The  seeds  were  divided
into  two,  .sometimes  uito  four, segments,  and in other  cases

Ceeled,  to  prevent  their  sprouting ;  if  wetted  by  rain,  they  were
rought  out  and  carefully  dried  in  the  sun.  The  ant  showed
a  weather-knowledge  far  surpas.sing  man's.  It  was  in  all  respects
a  TToAiTiKov  ^(^v,  and  is  so  classed  by  Aristotle  along  with  the
cmne  and  the  bee.

The  same  observations  are  repeated  in  later  times  by
Arabic  and  Jewish  writers.

The  Mohammed.ins  .seem  to  have  a.ssociated  the  ant  with
.Solomon:  the  27th  chapter  of  the  Koran  is  styled  'the  ant,"
becau.se  it  mentions  that  Solomon,  on  his  march,  once  entered
'the  valley  of  ants,'  whereupon  an  ant  said,  'O  ants,  enter
into  your  habitations,  lest  Solomon  and  his  army  tread  you
underfoot  and  perceive  it  not.'  It  was  a  custom  with  the  Arabs,
.says  lioL-hart,  to  place  an  ant  in  the  hand  of  a  new-born  child,
with  a  prayer  that  he  might  grow  up  wise  ami  .sagaciou.s.

The  only  two  passages  in  the  OT  which  mention  the
ant  obviously  refer  to  some  species  of  Harvesting  Ant
— probably  either  to  Aphanogaster  (for-
merly called  Attn)  barhara,  or  to  A.
stnictor,  or  to  Pheidole  7negacephala,  which  are  to  this
d.ay  found  in  Syria,  and,  indeed,  all  round  the  Mediter-
ranean basin.

Numerous  other  species  of  ant  have  been  descril)ed  in
Palestine  ;  but,  as  far  as  is  known,  they  resemble  in  their  habits
the  ants  of  temperate  and  colder  climates,  and  do  not  lay  up  any
store  of  provi.sions  against  the  winter :  it  is  po.ssible  that,  like
the  latter,  they  pa.ss  the  cold  season  in  a  torpor  or  winter  sleep.

The  harvesting  ants  all  belong  to  the  genus
Aphnenogaster,  or  are  closely  allied  to  it.  Their  habits
_  .. were  well  known  to  the  ancients  and

arves  mg  ^^  niedineval  writers.  These  observers,
generalising  on  insufficient  data,  as-
sumed that  all  ants  stored  up  food  for  winter  con-
sumption. When,  however,  the  centre  of  learning
shifting  farther  N.  from  the  shores  of  the  Mediterranean,
the  leaders  of  science  were  found  in  central  and  northern
Europe,  the  position  of  things  was  reversed.

Naturalists,  noticing  that  the  ants  whose  habits
they  observed  did  not  store  grain  and  seeds,  arrived
at  the  conclusion  that  no  ants  did,  and  attem]5ted  to
explain  the  accounts  of  the  earlier  writers  by  pointing
out  that  they  had  probably  mistaken  for  seeds  the
pupre  which,  when  anything  disturbs  the  ants'  nest,  are
at  once  seized  and  Iwrne  to  a  place  of  safety.  The
consensus  of  opinion,  accordingly,  until  about  a  quarter  of
a  century  ago,  was  that  ants  never  lay  up  stores  of  food.

The  investigations  of  Moggridge  and  Lespes,  how-
ever, showed  that,  although  this  opinion  is  probably
correct  as  far  as  ants  in  more  northern  climates  are
concerned,  many  of  the  ants  in  the  countries  bordering  on
the  Mediterranean  store  up  seeds  collected  from  different
plants.  Not  only  do  they  collect  seeds  that  have  fallen,
but  they  also  frecjuently  tear  the  fruit  or  seed-pod  off  the
plants  and  bear  them  to  the  formicarium  or  nest.
They  will,  moreover,  travel  considerable  distances  to
obtain  their  food,  marching  in  two  nearly  continuous
parallel  lines,  the  length  of  the  column  sometimes
measuring  24  yards  or  more.  The  two  lines  are  moving
in  contrary  directions — the  one  toiling  laden  with  spoils
towards  the  nest,  the  other  hurrying  back  with  empty
mouths  to  the  harvest  ground.

Thenests  both  of  .4.  harbara  and  of  A.  structor  are
simply  excavations  in  the  ground — long  cylindrical  pas-
4  N tu  •  sages  or  rounded  hollows,  the  floors  of  which

storintr  ■^'^'''  '°  some  extent  smoothed  and  cemented.
°' In  these  hollows,  about  the  size  of  a  billiard

J  Seethe  list  ofpa-ssaees  quoted  in  Bochart,  Hier. — among
them  Hor.  Sat.  i.  1  3j  ;  Virg.  Ain.  4  402  ;  Plin.  NH  11  30 ;  itiian,
2  25  4  43  6  43.  A  brief  account  of  the  Jewish  notices  by  Rev.
A.  Lowy  in  PSBA  868  [1880-81].

176


ANTELOPE

ball,  the  seeds  are  stored.  In  one  nest  Moggridge
counted  seeds  from  twelve  different  species  of  plant,  and
he  enumerates  eighteen  distinct  tx}tanical  families  con-
taining plants  which  furnish  ants  with  seeds.  .  /.  structor
is  frequently  found  in  the  neighl)ourhood  of  towns  or
villages,  and  even  in  the  streets  ;  A.  barbara,  usually  in
the  country.

The  ants"  nests  are  entered  by  one  or  two  holes,
whose  presence  is  usually  indicated  by  small  heaps  of
refuse,  partly  composed  of  the  earth  excavated  from  the
nest,  and  |Kirtly  built  up  of  tiie  husks  and  other  useless
matter,  w  hich  is  carefully  removeil  from  the  seeds  Ixifore
the  latter  are  stored  up.  All  this  refuse  is  scrupulously
removed  from  the  nest,  which  is  kept  very  clean.  The
ants  do  not  allow  the  seeds  to  sprout  ;  possibly  by
making  an  incision  in  them.

The  amount  of  seed  collected  and  stored  in  the
granaries  is  very  considerable  and  may  cause  serious
loss  to  the  agriculturist  ;  from  one  nest  an  amount  of
seed  estimated  at  i  lb.  in  weight  was  taken,  and  there
nmst  be  many  hundreds  of  nests  to  the  acre.  The  seed
stores  of  the  ants  of  Palestine  are  suflicie'itly  important
to  l)e  mentioned  in  the  Mishna,  which  records  the  rules
adopted  as  to  their  ownershij).

The  industry  of  the  harvesting  ants,  and  the  amount
of  work  they  .accomplish,  justify  their  being  held  up  as
e.xamples  of  untiring  energy.  They  begin  work  early  in
the  morning  and  keep  at  it  far  into  the  night,  working
as  hard  in  the  dark  as  in  the  sunlight.  Meer  Hasan
.\li  in  his  History  of  the  Mussulmans  describes  how-
eight  or  twelve  very  small  harvesting  ants  will  find  it
difticult  to  nune  a  grain  of  wheat,  and  yet  they  manage
to  transport  such  grains  over  a  distance  of  looo  yards
to  their  nest.  Their  great  sagacity  is  shown  in
numerous  ways — the  complexity  of  the  organisation
of  their  colonies  (involving  the  differentiation  of
individuals  to  jjcrform  different  duties),  their  powers  of
communicating  one  with  another,  and  their  slave-
making  pro|x;nsities.  Their  habit  of  laying-up  food
for  the  future,  and  even  (in  some  South -American
species)  of  actually  cultivating  certain  fuTigi  for  food,
places  them  with  the  Ijees  and  wasps,  as  regards  intelli-
gence, second  only  to  man  in  the  animal  kingdom.

The  ants  belong  to  the  order  Hymenoptera  (which
includes  l)ees,  wasps,  and  saw-flies),  and  to  the  family
Forniicida-.  N.  m. — a.  IC.  S.

ANTELOPE  (ixri  t'o,  Dt.  Hs;  Nin /J',  Is.  51 20  ;
Opyi  L©"-^'-  •»  J^>t.  ;  and  Aq.  Syni.  Theod.  in  Is.];
ceyTAlON  [O'*'*'^-''  in  Is.]), an  unclean  animal  mentioned
along  w  ith  the  pygarg  and  chamois.  The  above  is  the
rendering  of  R\'  and  is  much  preferable  to  .W  Wild  O.X,
\\'ii.i)  Bui-i.  (which  is  based  upon  Targ.  Gr.  Ven.,  and
is  accepted  by  Kim. ),  although  wild  o.xen  and  wild
bulls  were  common  enough  throughout  Palestine  and
Mesopotamia  (see  Catti.k,  §  4).  The  allusion  in  Is.
{I.e.)  to  the  capture  of  the  animal  by  nieans  of  a  net
wholly  agrees  with  what  is  known  of  the  manner  in
which  antelojxis,  gazelles,  etc.  were  usually  captured.

The  species  here  intended  may  be  the  Antilope
leucoryx  (or  ory.x,  cp  (S),  or  the  A.  huhalis.  Against
the  former  proposal  the  objection  has  been  raised  that
the  ory.x  is  called  in  the  modern  vernacular  of  N.  Africa
yuhmur,  which  =  Heb.  Tcn'  'fallow-deer'  (see  Rok)  ;
but  it  is  not  uncommon  for  the  same  name  to  be  given
to  memlx-TS  of  different  species  by  different  peoples.  ^
On  Ox-.\n  iKi.oi'K  see  U.NicoRN  (beg.).  S.  A.  C.

ANTHOTHIJAH  (n^»nh3y)  I  Ch.  824t  RV,  AV
Antothijah  (./.T.  ).

ANTICHRIST  (antixPICTOC  [Ti. WH]). History

1  History  •  "^  ^^"^  Question.-  Researches  into
Earlv  Per^d ''^'^ meaning of '  Antichrist ' have

■'  ' always started from the exegesis of

• I'or  oilier  ex.imples  see  Unicorn,  note.

2  Cp.  Liicke,  /./«/.  in  d.  OJTfnb.  Jolt.  35-)  ff.  \  Bornemann,
'  Die  Thessalonicherbriefe  '  in  Aleyer's  Handbuch  ^oojff'.

l'-2  .77


ANTICHRIST

3  Thess.  2 1-I3  and  certain  jxissages  in  the  Apocalypse
(chap.  13).

The  first  period  of  the  history  of  the  discussion  em-
braces the  Greek  and  I^atin  ecclesiastical  writers  down
to  the  l>eginning  of  the  Middle  Ages.  Within  this
}x.'riod  the  tradition  is  unusually  stable.  The  Antichrist
is  taken  to  l)e  a  manifestation  which  is  to  be  made  at
the  end  of  time— a  definite  personality,  as  to  whose
origin,  career,  and  end,  perfectly  definite  and  tradition-
ally fixed  views  are  set  forth,  which  rest  but  partially
on  the  NT.  This  exegetical  tradition,  the  importance
of  which  is  greatly  undervalued  by  recent  commentators
such  as  Hornemann,  is,  for  reasons  which  w ill  afterwards
apjjcar,  of  the  utmost  value.  To  say  that  the  naive
dogmatic  lx;lief  of  the  church-fathers  in  '  the  truth  of
this  eschatological  phant.isy  dow  n  to  its  least  detail '
was  absolute  does  not  in  any  way  disprove  the  correct-
ness of  their  e.xegesis.

Of  the  two  methods  that  came  into  vogue  during  the
Middle  Ages — the  ecclesiastico-political  method  with
jx)lemical  purpose  (since  Joachim  of  Floris,  .afterwards
in  chief  favour  with  Protestant  scholars,  especially  in
the  form  hostile  to  papal  claims)  and  the  universal-
historical  (perhaps,  since  Nicolas  de  Lyra)  —  neither
advanced  the  cjuestion  in  the  le.ast.

The  beginnings  of  a  truly  scientific  maimer  of  looking

at  these  as  well  ,as  at other  eschatological traditions

_ TUT. J  were  made  by  certain  .Spanish  and  l-Vench

2.  Modem. , .. . .u ..  ,  ,

Jesuits, who threw themselves mto the

polemic  against  Protestant  attacks  with  great  learning
and  acumen.  Their  first  step  was  to  revert  to  the
tradition  of  the  church  fathers,  which  they  endxxiied  in
extensive  works. '  Thus  the  futurist  method  w.as
restored  to  its  ascendency.

This  method  maintained  its  ground,  until  quite  recently,
among  all  scientific  interpreters  of  the  apologetic  scIkxiI.  There
is  one  point,  however,  in  which  the  exegesis  of  the  moderns— as,
for  example,  Hofman  (Si/iri/t/h-itvis)  and  Luthardt  {Ou-  l.ihrc
von  den  letzten  Dingen)  ami  ahiiost  tlie  whole  boily  of  Kiiglish
writers  on  the  sulyect  falls  far  l>elow  that  of  the  church
fathers:  the  concrete  eschatological  figures  are  more  or  less
spiritualised.  Thus,  Antichrist  becomes  an  impersonal  general
tendency;  the  'temple '(2  'I'liess.  24)  is  interpreted  as  meaning
Christendom  ;  and  the  Ka.f(\usv,  as  law  and  order.

It  is  in  the  work  of  Ludovicus  Alcas.ar  {I'estigatio
arcani  sensus  in  Apocal. ,  Antwerp,  161 4)  that  we  find  the
earliest  indications  of  a  thoroughly  scientilic,  historical,
and  critical  handling  of  this  ciuestion.  The  labours  and
the  method  of  the  Jesuit  scholars,  however,  were  afti-r-
wards  made  available  for  the  Protestant  Church  by  Hugo
GroUus  {A nnotiit/ones,  Paris,  1644),  who  in  the  treatment
of  Antichrist  may  l)e  regarded  as  the  founder  of  the
'historical'  or  '  preterist '  method.  He  interpreted
2  Thess.  2i-i2,  point  by  point,  as  referring  to  the
occurrences  of  the  reign  of  Caligula.  In  this  method
he  was  followed  by  Wetstein,  Hammond,  Clericus,  and
Harduin  ;  and,  since  Kern  (  Ti/b.  Z.  f.  Theol. ,  1833.  i. ),
the  preterist  interpretation  of  the  Antichrist  has  lx.'come
almost  univers.al,  but  as  referring  to  Nero  redivivus  (so
F.  C.  B.aur,  Theol.  Jahrbb.,  1855  ;  Holtzmann,  in  BL  ;
Hilgenfeld,  ZWT,  1862,  1866;  H.ausrath  ;  and  many
others,  including  Renan,  L Antichrist.  1876).  Follow-
ing an  example  partly  given  by  Kl6pjx;r,  however,
Spitta  {Zum  Gesch.  u.  Lilt,  iles  I'nhristenthums
\oc)  ff.)  h.as  again  sought  the  explanation  of  the  prcnlic-
tions  reg.arding  Antichrist  in  the  circumstances  of  the
reign  of  Caligula.

Abandoning  this  (on  the  whole,  mistaken)  line,  a  few-
scholars  have  sought  an  interpretation  of  Antichiist  in  a

_ ^.  . Jewish  tradition  dating  farther  Ixick  than

^  ^  '  the  Christian  era  and  not  resting  on  any
historical  events.

Among  these  scholars  may  l>e  named  Reiche,  I)e  Welte,  Lilne-
mann,  and  Horneinann  (in  their  respective  commentaries)  and
Kahler  (in  /'A'A*).  Ewald's  observations  in  Jahrb.  /.  bibl.
Il'iss., 1851,  p.  250,  and  i860,  p.  241,  are  of  special  interest:

1  Malvenda's  De  Aniichrisfo  (Lvons,  1647)  being  perhaps  the
fullest.  The  commentaries  of  Rilwira  (Salamanca.  1591)  and
Ulasius  Yiegas  (Ebora,  1601)  were  specially  inlluential.


4.  NT.


ANTICHRIST

for  the  first  time  he  combined  2  Thess.  2  with  Mt.  24is^  and
Rev.  11  "iff.,  and  thus  the  problem  ceased  to  be  one  of  exegesis
merely.  The  best  work  in  this  direction  has  been  that  of
Schncckenburger  (see  HOhmen's  survey  of  his  writings  in /<i/«/-^.
f.  (ieutsche  'I  keol.,  1859),  who  endeavoured  systematically  (as
the  only  true  method)  to  ascertain  the  kindred  Jewish  tradition
that  lay  at  the  basis  of  the  NTpassages.  (Prelimmary  researches
in  the  same  sense  had  been  contributeil  by  Corrodi,  Krit.  Gcsch.
des  Cliiliasmus  1781^  ;  Hertholdt,  Christol.  Juti.,  1811,  §  16;
and  GfrOrer,  JahrhuiuUrt  des  Heils  ii^d  ff.  ^o^  ff-  436.)
Schnerkenburger  also  brought  Mt.  24  Rev.  11  ami  jn.  643  into
the  field  of  his  survey,  and  his  view  may  be  said  on  the  whole  to
have  stood  the  test  of  time.l

Still  more  recently  Bousset  {Der  Antichrist  in  der
Ueberlieferung  des  Judenthttms,  dcs  NT.  u.  der  Alien
Kirche,  1895),  following  up  the  suggestions  of  Gunkel's
Schopfung  71.  Chaos  (1895),  and  the  method  then  for  the
first  time  securely  laid  down,  has  souglu  to  supplement
these  investigations  in  two  directions:  (i)  by  a  com-
prehensive induction  based  on  all  the  eschatological
portions  of  the  NT  that  belong  to  the  same  circle  of
idciis,  and  the  careful  exclusion  of  all  that  do  not
so  belong;  and  (2)  by  an  attempt  at  a  comprehensive
and  complete  presentation  of  the  tradition  (which  comes
before  us  in  the  NT  only  in  a  fragmentary  way)  as  it
is  to  l)c  met  with  in  the  Jewish  sources,  and,  still  more,
in  the  later  Christian  exegetical  and  apocalyptic  tradition.
This  tradition  is  in  great  measure  quite  independent  of
the  NT,  and  in  all  probabilitj'  dates,  as  far  as  its  sources
are  concerned,  from  pre-Christian  times. '■'

The  NT  Tradition.  The  name  avrLxpiffroi  occurs
in  the  NT  only  in  the  Johannine  l-^[)istlcs  ( i  Jn.  2  18  22  :
43:  2  Jn.  7),  and  thus  in  all  probability  its
formation  belongs  to  the  late  NT  period.
For  an  answer  to  the  question  who  or  what  is
meant  by  the  name,  it  is  best  to  start  from  tlie  well-
known  (probably  Pauline)  passage  in  2  Thess.  2i-i2,
where  we  read  that  before  the  end  of  all  things  the  man
of  sin,  or,  rather,  of  lawlessness  (6  AvOpcoiros  rijs  duo/uLias),
the  lawless  one  (6  ivofws),  the  son  of  perdition  (6  vibs  rrjs
djrwXeias),  nmst  be  revealed.  This  '  man  of  sin,'  it  is
clear,  is  to  make  his  appearance  as  a  false  Messiah — an
observation  which,  from  the  outset,  precludes  us  from
referring  the  expression  to  any  foreign  potentate  such  as
Caligula  ••  or  Nero.  He  is  sent  to  '  them  that  are
perishing'  (namely  the  Jews),  because  they  received
not  the  love  of  the  truth  (the  true  Messiah).''  He  does
not  employ  any  outward  force,  but  accomplishes  his
work  by  means  of  false  signs  and  lying  wonders  (cp  the
tradition  of  the  Church  fathers,  as  continued  by  De
Wette,  Ewald,  Schneckenburger,  B.  Weiss,  Lunemann,
Bornemann).  He  will  make  his  appearance  in  Jeru-
salem. In  this  account  of  the  Antichrist  the  specially
perplexing  assertions  are  that  he  is  to  seat  himself
in  the  temple  of  God  and  that  he  is  to  declare  himself
to  be  God.  This  last  act,  at  any  rate,  does  not  belong
to  the  ro/e  of  a  ftilse  Messiah.  It  is  also  doubtful
who  or  what  ought  to  be  understood  by  6  Karix'^",
rb  Kar^x^"-  ^^'^  power  that  stands  in  the  way  of
the  manifestation  of  .Antichrist.  If  once  a  reference  in
the  passage  to  a  Jewish  false  Messiah  be  accepted,  the
mystery  of  iniquity  (lawlessness  :  rb  /jlvctt.  rrji  dvofxias)
will  most  probably  mean  the  cruelty  which  the  Jews
as  a  whole  had  begun  to  show  towards  the  Christians
(same  authorities  as  above).  At  this  point  we  obtain
a  clear  light  ufKjn  Rev.  11.  The  perplexing  fact
that  there  the  beast  rises  out  of  the  deep  and  makes
its  appearance  in  Jerusalem  (a  view  of  the  passage  that
appears  certain — not  only  from  11 8,  but  also  from  the
connection  of  11 12  with  11  3 — as  against  the  other  inter-
pretations referring  it  to  Rome)  is  explained  by  2  Thess.
2. The  beast  that  rises  out  of  the  deep  and  appears  in

1  This  applies  also  to  the  first  part  of  the  Apocalyptische
Studien  of  B.  Weiss,  1869.

2  Attempts  in  this  direction  had  already  been  made  by
Bertholdt  and  Schneckenburger.

3  a  Thes.s.  24  does  not  at  all  fit  in  with  Spitta's  interpretation
of  the  pa.ssage  as  referring  to  Caligula's  proposal  to  set  up  a
statue  of  himself  in  Jerusalem.

«  CpJn.643.

179


ANTICHRIST

Jerusalem  is  the  Antichrist.  If  this  be  so,  we  are
supplied  with  the  following  additional  elements  in  the
tradition  :  ( i )  a  great  drought  that  comes  over  the
world  in  the  last  times  (in  Rev.  through  the  two
witnesses)  ;  (2)  the  two  witnesses,  their  slaughter  by
the  .Antichrist,  and  their  resurrection  ;  (3)  a  previous
assemblage  of  many  nations  in  the  neighbourhood  of
Jerusalem.  The  dim  and  fragmentary  character  of  the
whole  narrative,  however,  is  striking.  In  .another  pKace
in  the  .Apocalypse  we  find  another  parallel  to  the  figure
of  the  -Antichrist — in  Rev.  \'6\\  ff.  The  beast  that  '  had
two  horns  like  unto  a  lamb'  (RV)  is  designated  by  the
author  of  Revelation  himself  as  a  False  Prophet.  When
it  is  spoken  of  as  'coming  up  from  the  land'  (not
'earth'  as  in  EV),  we  may  reasonably  understand
Palestine  to  be  meant.  This  false  proj>het  also  does
his  work  by  means  of  signs  and  wonders.  Here  we
meet  w  ith  a  new  and  rather  perplexing  consideration  :  the
sealing  on  their  foreheads  anil  hands  of  those  whom  he
has  led  astray,  and  the  buying  and  selling  of  them  th.at
is  thus  made  possible.  To  the  same  great  group  of
traditions  a  part  of  the  eschatological  discourse  in  the
Synoptic  (iospels  (especially  in  Mt. )  also  appears  to
belong.  Older  theories  of  the  ^diXvyfia  ttjs  ip-qfiilianci
of  Mt.  24  15  having  broken  down,  and  Spitta's  explana-
tion of  it  as  referring  to  Caligula  being  beset  with
difficulties  (indeed,  an  apocalypse  which  arose  only  in
40-41  A.I),  could  surely  not  have  found  its  way  among
utterances  of  the  Lord  which  were  already  Ixiconiing
fixed),  we  seem  comp>elIed  to  fall  back  on  an  older
tradition,  and  to  explain  the  strange  phrase  of  the  Anti-
christ of  2  Thess.  24  sitting  in  the  Temple  (on  these
points  cp  .AuoMiN.VTioN  OF  Uk.soi..\tion).  In  this  case
we  arrive  at  new  elements  in  the  tradition  :  the  subsequent
flight  of  those  who  have  lx;lieved,  the  shortening  of  the
days  (  Mt.  2422),  and  the  picture  of  the  end  of  the  world
and  of  the  final  judgment  (.Mt.  24  2gff.).  Here  again
the  fragmentary  brevity  of  the  tradition  is  surprising.

If  we  now  survey  these  eschatological  fragments  as  a
whole,  two  conjectures  immediately  force  themselves  on

5.  Results.  "'=  <'!  *^^'  all' these  eschatological
ph.antasies  were  not  independently  con-
ceived by  the  various  authors  from  whom  we  derive
them  ;  ^  that,  on  the  contrar)-,  the  authors  are  mostly
reproducing  a  tradition  which  already  lay  before  them  ;
and  (2)  that  it  is  a  single  consistent  tradition  that
underlies  all  these  (partly  coincident,  partly  com-
plementary) fragments.  If  the  second  conjecture
be  true,  we  may  venture  to  think  that  the  tradition
in  question  has  not  been  lost  beyond  all  possibility  of
recovery.  In  point  of  fact,  our  very  first  glance  at  later
Christian  apocalyptic  literature  satisfies  us  that  this
literature  rests  upon  a  tradition  which  is  but  partially
dependent  on  the  NT.

The  Tradition  0/ the  Early  Church  regarding  Antichrist.

Sources."^ The  tradition  becomes  tangible  as  soon  as  we  have  a

Christian  literature  copious  enough. The

6.  Early  Church influence  of  this  tradition  is  already  visible

tradition.  '" '^e Teaching  of  the 'Twelr'e  Apostles

(chap.  Hi).  Irenacus  (Ad7'.  haer.  5 25-3o)also
presents  himself  in  this  connection.  Special  importance,  how-
ever, among  the  earlier  witnesses,  attaches  to  Hippolytus's
airojeift;  ittpX  toC  ai'TixPiVrov,  the  Cantten  A/>ologeticum  of
Commodian,  I.actantiuss  Inst.  Div.l  \^  ff.  (Commodian  and
Lactantius  have  a  place  of  their  own  in  the  tradition),  and  the
Commentary  on  the  Apocalypse  of  Victorinus.  A  further  group
of  writings  ascribed  to  an  ecclesiastical  writer  of  very-  great
influence,  Ephraim  Syrus,  must  be  mentioned.  Under  his  name
are  current  three  Homilies  on  the  .Antichrist :  (i)  One  in  Syriac
(De  L.imy,  3187^, — all  of  it  genuine  with  the  exception  of  a  few
chapters);  (2)  one  in  Greek  (.Assemani,  2222-30  3 134-143),
perh.-ips  genuine  ;  and  (•<)  one  in  Latin  (Caspari,  ut  sup.  ic&jf.).
The  historical  event  from  which  all  these  prophecies  start  is  the

1  See  the  detailed  argument  for  the  impossibility  of  this  in
Gunkel,  SchSpf.  u.  Chaos.

^  .See  .Malvenda,  De  Ant/chri>to{i6^j):  Ebert,  'On  Com-
modian's  "  Carmen  Apologeticum  "  '  in  Arh.  d.  kdn.  Sachs.  Ges.
d.  Wissensch.h-),iT ff,\  Caspari,  Brie/e  und  Abhandlun^en
('90)  2oZff.  429_^  and,  for  the  Liter  period,  Zezschwitz,  /  om
rSmischen  Kaiserthum  deutscher  Nation,  1877  ;  Gutschmid,
Kleine  Schri/tenhy>%ff.  :  W.  Meyer,  Ludus  de  Antichristo,


180


ANTICHRIST

beginning  of  the  great  barturian  migrations,  the  invasion  of
the  eastward  regions  of  the  Kninan  Kmpire  hy  the  Huns  (Gog
and  MiiKog).  Allied  in  character  to  the  foregoing  are

Cyril's  Catechesis  (xv),  the  psctido-Johannine  Apocalypse
('lisch.  AfHX.  afocr.),  and  the  Commenlary  on  the  Apocalypse
by  Andrew  of  Cxsiirca.  Dependent  on  Kphraim's  (ircck
homily  are  the  irrpi  njt  <rurr<A«ia«  toO  Koaiiou  (cd.  Lagarde)  of
the  pscudo- Hippoljlus,  and  the  Dioptra  of  I'hilip  Solitariu:t
{^\off.;  Migne,  /'.  (,>.  127).  This  whole  moss  of  tradition  is
exceedingly  valuable  on  account  of  its  archaic  oriental  ch;tractcr.
Of  the  older  church  fathers,  Jerome  also  {AJ  Algasiaui,  Quaist.
xi.  ;  /«  Danieltm  vii.  and  xi.)  and  Thcodoret  {ffieret.  /al>.
623),  but  not  Augustine,  and,  of  the  later,  John  Damascenus
(«ite«rn  427)  claim  special  attention.

As,  in  the  uniform  view  of  these  apocalyptic  interpreters,  the
advent  of  the  Antichrist  is  after  the  downfall  of  Rome,  one  might
reckon  almost  with  certainty  on  finding  evidence  of  the  currency
of  the  tradition  about  the  time  of  that  downfall.  Such  evidence
we  actually  possess  in  the  primary  document  which  was  the  com-
mon source  of  both  the  so-cillcd  Apocalypses  of  Daniel,  the  Greek
(ed.  Klostermann,  Analtrta),  ancl  the  .Armenian  (cli.  Kalemkiar,
H'ivm-r  /..  ti  1277;  \  cp  Zahn,  Forschungcn  5  119^^).  Atjain,

at  the  time  of  the  Slohamniedan  conquests  a  new  rallying-point
was  given  for  this  eschatolojjical  tradition,  as  we  see  in  the  apoca-
lypse of  the  pseudo-.\Iethodius(7th  century,  OrthoiioxografhaK-),
Basel,  1569),  closely  connected  with  which  is  the  later  .Apocalypse
of  Peter,  now  extant  in  Syriac,  .\rabic,  and  llthiopic  redactions
(Hratke,  ZIVT,  1892),  and  also  a  series  of  late  Byzantine
(V'assiliev,  Aneciioia  Gra-co- liyzantina  i,  Moscow,  1893),
and  late  Jewish  apocalypses  (Jellinek,  lict-ha-Muirash;  cp
Bousset,  i^ff.  iT\Jf.').  This  l)ody  of  tradition  reached  the  west
through  a  compilation  (/V  Antichristo)  by  the  monk  -Adso
(Migne,  /'.  Lat.  101  1291^.),  b:ised  on  the  l>ook  of  Methodius
and  on  a  .Sibylline  book,  which  last  is  to  be  found  also  (in  a
red.icted  form)  in  the  works  of  Heda  (.Migne,  90  1183)  and  dates
perhaps  from  the  fourth  century.  Lastly,  an  isolated  and  very
archaistic  source  is  to  be  found  also  in  the  Apocalypse  of
Zephaniah  (Stern,  ZA,  xS86).

7 He  '  who ^ii''j"'"ecl is a brief  summary of this
letteth  ' tradition  as  it  occurs, almost  uniformly,

in  the  sources  that  have  Ijeen  named.  ^
In  the  first  place,  the  universally  prevalent  conviction  is  that
the  (toTe'xioi' (2  Thess.  27)  is  the  Roman  empire.  This,  we  may
be  sure,  was  the  view  of  Paul  also :  if  he  expected  a  Jewish
false  Messiah,  then  the  one  power  left  which  could  '  hinder  '  was
the  Roman  empire  (cp  on  this  point  4  Esd.  4t_^.).  The
political  rrf/f-  played  by  this  idea  in  the  history  of  Christianity
may  be  seen  in  Tertullian  (A/'o/.  32,  ad  Sca/>.  2)  and  Lactantius
{/nst. div.  7  25).  Of  equally universal prevalence is the

conception  of  .\ntichrist,  not  as  a  Roman  or

8.  Antichrist,  foreign  ruler,  but  as  a  false  Messiah,  who  is
to  arise  among  the  Jews  themselves  in
Jerusalem.  .Almost  universally  (with  the  exceiitions  to  be  after-
wards mentioned)  it  is  predicted  that  he  is  to  c-.t.ililish  himself
in  the  temple  and  lay  claim  to  Messianic  (.md,  so  f;ir.  (li\ine)
honours.  (Sometimes,  as  in  Ascens.Jes.ib,  Vici.  in  A/oc.  13  13,
and  in  the  Ethiopic  Ajjocalypse  of  Peter,  we  read  that  he  will
set  up  his  statue  in  the  temple— doubtless  a  reminiscence  of
the  Caligula  episode.)  After  the  destruction  of  Jerusalem,
accordingly,  the  expectation  that  the  Antichrist  will  rebuild
the  temple  in  Jerusalem  becomes  univers.-il.  He  will  show
special  frivour  to  the  Jews,  will  receive  circumcision  himself,  and
■will  compel  others  to  do  so.  He  will  arise  from  the  tribe  of
Dan  (t/.v.,  g  9  ;  Jewish  ha^gada  is  at  the  root  of  this  [cp  Tcs/atn.
Dan  s/.  :  also  the  omission  of  Dan  in  Rev.  7  5  ^,  as  to  which
see  Iren.  v.  30  2,  perhaps  also  even  i  Ch.(i6i  (46l(see.SV;<)r)69l54]
7  12) ;  see  Schneckenburger-Hiihmer,  412).  If,  bearing  all  this  in
niind,  we  once  more  turn  to  2  Thess. -J  97?:  Jn.543  Rev.  11  3^,  it
jmmetliately  becomes  plain  that  any  '  historical '  or  preterist
interpretation  of  the  .Antichrist  is  out  of  the  question.  On  the
basis  of  a  hagg.-jdic  view  of  Dan.  11  43  78,  there  came  into
the  tradition  this  further  element,  that  the  .Antichrist,  at
his  first  appearing,  is  to  comiuer  the  kings  of  Egypt,  Ethiopia,
and  Libya.  Another  invariable  element  of  the  tradition  under
consideration  is  the  enumeration  of  the  miracles  to  be  wrought
by  the  .Antichrist,  particularly  celestial  signs  (Rev.  13  iiyi),  and
miracles  of  healing  (although  that  of  raising  the  dead  is  Iwyond
his  reach).  Hereupon  the  .Antichrist  will  achieve  the  dominion
of  the  whole  world,  and  gather  round  himself  to  his  capital  all
peoplesand  vast  armies(4  Esd.  13  iJT.  Apoc.  Bar.  40  Rev.  1 1  9^.).
_ Next,  a  great  drought  and  famine  will  come  upon

9.  Conflict,  the  whole  earth  (differently  and  less  clearly  put  in
Rev.  11  6),  and  in  these  straits  the  Antichrist  will
order  his  servants  (spoken  of  also  as  demons)  to  mark  men  with
his  mark  (according  to  the  Latin  Homily  of  the  pseudo-Ephraim,
a  serpent  mark),  so  that  only  those  who  bear  it  shall  be  permitted
to  buy  bread  (Rev.  13  \6/.).  Against  the  .Antichrist  come
forward  the  two  witnesses  (almost  unanimously  taken  to  be
Elijah  and  Enoch),  who  disclose  his  real  character,  .so  that
many  turn  away  from  him  (otherwise,  and  very  obscure,  what
we  read  in  Rev.  11  3^).  It  is  noteworthy  that  in  many  sources
there  is  no  inention  of  the  resurrection  of  the  two  witnesses —
doubtless  an  incident  introduced  for  the  first  time  by  the  author


ANTICHRIST

of  Rev.  n.  At  the  preaching  of  the  witnesse*  a  coniiderabl«
company  of  Israel  are  converted  and  l^c^in  the  opposition  to  the
Antichrist  O^rhaps  Rom.  9  20  is  to  be  interpreted  in  thi.*  con-
nection). The  144,000  who  are  scaled  in  Rev.  1  $  ff.  certainly
have  their  explanation  here.  The  faithful  now  l>ctake  thcm-
.selves  to  the  wilderness  or  to  the  mountains  (.Mt.  24  16^.)  ;  but
the  rlays  of  Antichrist's  reign  of  terror  shall  be  shortened.  The
years  shall  Iwcume  months,  the  months  days,  the  days  hour*
(Mt.  24  22).  Then  the  .Antichrist  will  send  his  armies  in  pursuit
of  the  faithful  who  have  fled  into  the  wilderness  ;  but  there  they
shall  l«;  delivered  by  the  angel.s  of  (lod  or  by  the  Mcvsiah
(Rev.  1213^.),  and  the  army  of^  the  Antichrist  destroyed  (cp  the
mysterious  angelic  battle  outside  the  city,  in  Rev.  14  14^.,  and,
in  connection  with  this,  the  appearance  of  the  lamb  with  the
,« T« X i c  '44.000 in Rev.  16 1  J^.). The  Antichrist is

10.  Defeat  of  finally  slain,  according  to  authorities,  by  the
Antichrist. Messiah,  with  the  breath  of  his  mouth  (Is.  11  4

2  Thevs.  2  B^the  same  statement  is  found  in
late  Jewi.sh  .sources,  such  as  Targ.  Jon.  on  Is.  1 1  4  and  others).
Perhaps  .in  older  tradition  may  be  traced  in  the  view  that
the  archangel  Michael  is  to  be  the  conqueror  of  the  Antichrist
(Dan.  12  I  Rev.  126,  Ass.  Mas.  10).  Now  is  seen  a  mighty
sign  in  hea\x-n  (Mt.  2430)  —  the  sign  of  the  Son  of  Man —
interpreted  _  by_  later  writers  (cp  alreaily  />/>/.  16  6,  inuitlov
iKitfTaroot  iv  ovpavio)  as  referring  to  the  Cross,  but  originally,  we
may  be  sure,  betokening  the  Divine  Judge  of  the  world  (Housset,
154).  Then  follows  the  coming  of  the  Divine  Messiah  to  judg-
ment, amid  mighty  convulsions  of  nature  (Wi.Hii)  /.  Rev.
6i2  7f".).  From  the  four  corners  of  heaven  desolating  storms
burst  upon  earth  ami  cleanse  it  (Rev.  7i  z^^),  and  before  the
divine  advent  descends  a  tempest  of  fire,  whicli  burns  the  earth
down  to  its  depths,  and  dries  up  the  sea  and  the  rivers
(Rev.  21  i).

At  the  very  first  gLince  it  is  plain  that,  in  this  tradition,  we

are  dealing  not  with  an  artificial  exegetical  mosaic  of  the  various

passagesof  the  New  Testament  (and  the  Old)

11.  Coherence  which  here  come  into  account,  but  with  an
of  tradition, original l)ody of  tradition,  organically  and

inherently  consistent  ;  and  that  the  separate
escbatological  fragments  of  this  tradition  in  the  NT  become
intelligible  only  when  they  are  brought  into  their  organic  place
in  the  scheme  of  the  tradition  as  a  whole,  so  that  their  essential
consistency  becomes  m.inifest.

Origin  of  the Tradition. — Naturally  we  turn,  in  the
first instance, to  the  eschatological ideas  of  the  O'l".
Schneckenburger will have it that the


idea  of the Antichrist comes from the
prophecies concerning Gog and Magog


1  For  the  references  in  detail  see  Bousset,  Der  Antichrist,
Gott.  1895.

t8z


12.  OT
eschatology.

in  Kzck.  (38/.).  That  in  every  form  of  the  tradition
the  prophecy  concerning  Gog  and  Magog  occurs  in
close  connection  with  the  story  of  the  Antichrist  is
indeed  true  to  the  extent  that  they  are  made  to  a])iK'ar,
sometimes  after  (Rev.  2O7/. ),  and  sometimes  Ix-fore,
the  time  of  his  rule.  Positive  identification  of  (Jog
with  Antichrist,  however,  does  not  occur  till  the  seventh
century,  and  even  then  only  in  Jewish  sources.  Many  of
the  details  of  the  traditions  can  be  traced,  as  has  tieen
already  said,  to  Jewish  haggada.  In  this  particular
point  Dan.  7 11/  is  approximated  to  most  nearly;  but
even  here  there  is  a  marked  difference,  and  the
originality  of  the  view  outlined  above  is  conspicuous.
In  Daniel  the  disturber  is  a  foreign  power  ;  but  here
the  seducer,  who  personates  God  or  simulates  the
Messiah,  rises  up  from  amid  the  people  of  (jod.
Thus  there  has  lx;en  an  important  development  since
Daniel.  Perhaps,  as  was  suggestt?d  in  conversation  to
the  present  writer  by  Prof.  Smend,  the  historical  occasion
for  this  advance  was  supplied  by  the  experiences  of  Israel
under  the  Maccal>ees  and  the  Herods.  In  any  case,  we
RT  1  tiutst  note  a  parallel  in  Jewish  .Apocalyptic.
■  That  ideas  allied  to  those  in  our  tradition
were  active  among  the  Jews  al>out  the  time  of  Christ  is
shown  by  4  I^sd.  biff.  (56  ;  regnabit  quern  non  sperant),
Apoi.  liar.  36-40,  Sibyll.  ^63  ff.  (2167^),  Test.  Dun  5.
Ass.  Mas.  9,ff.,  and  the  (probably  Jewish)  nucleus  oiAsc.
Jfs.  (323-413).  Now,  in  this  tradition,  the  constantly
recurring  name  of  the  great  enemy  of  the  last  times — a
name  already  known  to  the  apostle  l^ul  (2  Cor.  615) —
is  Belial  (Beliar).  Rut,  according  to  many  passages
of  the  Testaments,  Belial  is  a  spirit  of  the  air,  ruler  of
the  evil  spirits.  According  to  Test.  Dan  ft.  the  Messiah
will  fight  against  him  in  the  last  days.  The  supporters
of  Belial  are  the  children  of  Dan.  In  Sib.  863  ff.
(probably  dating  from  the  time  of  Cleopatra).  Belial  is
already  presented  in  an  aspect  closely  resembling  that
182


ANTICHRIST

of  Antichrist  (still  more  so  in  the  Ascensio,  which,  how-  I
ever,  has  unquestionably  undergone  Christian  revision).  !
In  the  Ascensio  the  angel  Samtnael  interchanges  parts
with  Belial,  and  Sammael  figures  also  in  later  Jewish  j
tradition  as  the  enemy  of  the  last  times'  (on  the  origin  '
of  Belial,  and  on  the  various  developments  of  meaning,  {
see  Bkmal).  Suggestions  of  the  same  idea  occur  in  '
Lk.  IO18  Jn.  1231  (Col.  215).  Here  we  would  seem  to
have  an  aspect  of  the  tradition  that,  in  point  of  time  and
contents,  comes  a  great  deal  nearer  that  of  Antichrist
(2  Cor.  615:  'and  what  concord  hath  Christ  with
lieliar?'),  which  is  not  of  historical  but  of  purely
eschatological  origin  :  the  idea  of  a  rebellion  of  an
angelic  power  against  God  at  the  end  of  time.  Perhaps
it  is  out  of  this  figure — behind  which  in
turn  stands  the  wilder  figure  of  the  dragon
rising  in  relx,'llion  against  (Jod  in  the  last  times,  which
Gunkel  conjectures  to  have  its  origin  in  the  Babylonian
creation-myth  (see  Cke.vtion,  §  2/. ) — that,  under  the  ex-
periences of  the  Maccabean  period,  the  humanised  figure
of  a  pseudo- Messiah  came  into  existence.  In  this  way
we  can  explain  also  the  superhuman  traits  in  the  picture,
such  as  his  declaring  himself  to  be  God  (2rhess.  24),
and  his  sitting  in  the  temple  of  God  (cp  the  myth  of  the
storming  of  heaven  by  the  dragon  in  Rev.  12 1^).
These  conjectures  find  further  confirmation  in  the  fact
that,  in  later  tradition,  the  ghostly-demonic  element  in
the  portrayal  of  Antichrist  comes  again  more  con-
spicuously to  the  front,  and  the  Antichrist  is  even
represented  .as  a  dragon  who  rebels  against  God  (cp
the  writings  of  I*2phraim  Syrus,  and  Apoc.  Zeph. ).

Points of Contact with other Traditions.  — One
legend  that  comes  into  relation  with  that  of  Antichrist


14.  Dragon.


16.  Nero
redivivus.


in  many  ways  is  that  of  Nero  redivivus.
Not  that  the  figure  of  Antichrist  had  its
beginning  in  the  story  of  Nero.  Originally
both  legends  had  currency  side  by  side.  It  was  only
after  Nero's  return  at  the  head  of  the  Parthians  (at  first
conceived  of  in  a  purely  human  way — cj)  the  nucleus  of
Rev.  17)  had  become  indefinitely  delayed,  and  after  men
had  liegun  to  expect  the  returning  Nero  only  as  a  spirit
from  the  under-world,  that  they  gradually  transferred
to  him  some  traits  lielonging  to  the  Antichrist-  (cp
Sib.  ^61  ff. ,  where,  in  like  manner,  Belial  is  interpreted
to  mean  one  of  the  Cnesars  ;  see  Ai'oc  ai.vitic,  §  95).
Such  an  amalgamation  of  the  two  figures  is  already
met  with  in  Rev.  13  and  17  (in  their  present  form).
The  old  form  of  .Antichrist,  however,  retains  such
vitality  that  in  the  end  (Rev.  13 n^^)  it  appears  as  a
second  beast,  servant  of  the  first  and  on  the  same  scene.
A  similar  and  (as  far  as  its  occasion  is  concerned)  still
more  manifest  doubling  of  .•\ntichrist  is  seen  in  Com-
modian's  Carmen  Apoloi^eticiim,  in  Lactantius  (as
above),  in  Martin  (see  Sulpicius  Severus,  Dial.  2n),
and  in  the  ^i^Xiov  K\riiJ.€VTOi  (Lagarde,  Reliq.  juris
eccl.  Zoff.).  There  is  a  complete  fusion  in  the  Ascensio
Jesaiir,  and  in  the  commentary  on  the  Apocalypse
of  Victorinus.  This  complicated  figure  of  Nero  redivivus
took  special  hold  on  the  Sibylline  literature  of  the  second
century,^  and  here  again,  in  the  delineation  of  this,  we
meet  once  more  with  the  old  features  of  the  dragon
myth.  A  fusion  between  the  Antichrist  tradition  and
the  Simon  Magus  legend  has  already  been  observed  by
Schneckenburger,  and  tr.aced  in  a  variety  of  points  by
the  present  writer.  The  same  tradition  comes  into
fusion  w  ith  the  later  .Alexander  legend  and  the  old  German
saga  of  the  end  of  the  world  (Muspilli,  EJda).

On  this  and  other  connected  subjects  see  Houssct, /)fr  .,4«/;-
christ,  in  the  English  translation  of  which  (1896)  special  atten-
tion has  been  bestowed  on  the  index  (see,  e.g.,  'Simon  Magus,'
'Alexander').  See  also  K.  VVadstein,  'i)ie  eschatologische
Ideengruppe;  Antichrist,  Weltsabbath,  Weltende  und  Welt-
eesicht  in  ihrer  christlichmittelalterlichen  Gesammtentwicke-
lung,'  ZiVT,  1895  and  1896. On  the  Armenian  form  of  the

t  V.X^jtnmcn^cr,  Kfttdecktes  /ttdentum  1 70^;  cp  .^sc.  /es.  7  g.

>  This  has  been  already  remarked  by  Schneckenburger.

'  Cp  Zahn,  '  Apocal.  Studien  '  in  Z.y.  kirchl.  Ltben  u.  IVtss.

183


ANTIOCH

Antichrist-Iegena  see  Conybcare,  Acnd.,  26th October 1895 ;
and  on  a  singular  Mohammedan  tradition  see  Lvdda  at  end.

w.  B.

ANTILIBANUS  (antiAiBanoc  [BA],  om.  «).
Judith  1  7. See  Lkh.V.NO.N.

ANTIMONY  (11-1S),  Is.  54..  RV  mg..  F:V  'fair
colours.' See  P.MNT.

ANTIOCH  (ANTioxeiA  [Ti.  WH]).  i.  in  Pisidia ;
more  correctly,  '  .\ntioch  towards  Pisidia'  ('Aj'ri6xeta
T)  irpbi  lliffidiqi),  to  distinguish  it  from  the  Antioch  on
the  Me.ander  (the  form  '  Pisidian  Antioch,'  'AvTioxfia.
7)  WiaiSia  [Ti.  WH],  Actsl3i4,  arose  to  distinguish  it
from  the  more  famous  .Antioch  of  Syria).  It  was
really  a  Phrygian  city  ;  but  in  NT  times  it  was  of  course
included  within  the  Roman  province  Galatia.  Stralx)
(p.  577)  accurately  descrilx;s  it  as  lying  'on  a  hill,'  on
the  south  side  of  the  range  now  called  Sultan  Uagh,  in
Phrygia  Parorea ;  but  it  was  not  until  1833  that
Arundell  found  its  ruins  at  Yalobatch.  The  town  was
founded  about  300  H.C.  by  the  Seleucid  kings,  and  the
transportation  of  2000  Jewish  families  to  the  fortresses
of  Lydia  and  Phrygia,  as  recorded  by  Josephus  {Ant.
xii.  3),  must  in  part  refer  to  Antioch.  By  Augustus  it  was
made  a  Roman  colony  (6  B.C. )  ;  hence  its  coins  Ijear  the
legend  Cajsarea.  Antioch  was  adopted  as  the  centre  of
military  and  civil  administration  in  Southern  Galatia,
and  from  it  rarliated  the  roads  to  the  colonies  designed
to  check  the  unruly  highlanders  of  Pisidia  and  Isauria.
As  an  element  in  the  pacification  of  this  district,  the
privileges  of  the  Jews  were  confirmed  by  the  Emperors,
and  Paul  found  a  large  Jewish  colony  in  the  city.  The
Romanisation  of  this  part  of  Galatia  was  in  especially
active  progress  during  the  reign  of  Claudius,  41-54  .A.  n.
At  the  time  of  Paul's  visit,  therefore,  Antioch  was  at
the  height  of  its  importance.  Besides  its  relations  with
Apamea  (on  the  W. )  and  with  Iconium,  Lystra,  and  east-
ern Asia  Minor,  it  must  have  had  a  commercial  connection
with  the  Pamphylian  seaports,  among  them  Attalia  and
Perga  ;  and  Paul  must  have  reached  Antioch  by  following
this  southern  trade-route,  which  probably  ran  through
Adada  [Kara  Bavlo,  Bavlo  being  the  modern  pro-
nunciation of  the  apostle's  name).  There  was  a  large
body  of  Jewish  proselytes  in  Antioch,  many  of  them
women  of  position  through  whom  the  Jews  were  able  to
influence  the  magistrates  against  the  apostles  (.Acts
13  so).  The  magistrates  had  summary  jurisdiction  over
disturbers  of  the  public  peace,  such  as  the  apostles
were  alleged  to  be  (cp  v.  44,  irao-a  t)  ttoXis  avvrix&V-
and  z'.  45,  Iddvres  tous  6x^ovs)  ;  but  the  'casting  of
them  out  of  the  borders'  of  the  colony  could  not  imply
permanent  banishment — at  any  rate  in  the  case  of  Paul,
who  was  a  Roman  citizen.  Accordingly  we  find  the
latter  returning  to  Antioch  from  Derlx;  (Acts  14  2.)  and
perhaps  revisiting  the  city  at  least  twice  (.Acts  166  18 23,
see  Galati.\  ).  If  the  trade  of  Antioch  was  concentrated
in  the  hands  of  the  Jews,  we  can  the  more  easily  under-
stand Paul's  first  success  here  in  Asia  Minor  :  the  new
teaching  did  not  conflict  with  any  commercial  interests  of
the  gentile  inhabitants,  as  it  did  at  Ephesus  and  Philippi,
while  at  the  same  time  the  Jewish  proselytising  had
prepared  the  people  for  its  reception.  It  is  also  not
without  significance  that  on  the  death  of  king  Amyntas,
some  seventy  years  l)efore  Paul's  visit,  the  ancient
worship  of  '  ^ien '  (MV  'AffKaio^.  'ApKoios  Strabo,
'A<TKrjif6i  coins)  had  been  abolished,  so  that  there  was
probably  no  gentile  hierarchy  in  existence  to  oppose  the
apostles.  Hence  the  effect  of  their  preaching  w.as  more
marked  here  than  in  any  other  case,  except  Corinth
(Acts  134448/).  .All  the  more  strange  is  the  sub-
sequent unimportance  of  the  South  Galatian  churches.

2.  In  Syria  (i  and  2  M.acc.  AV  Antiochia).  This
great  city, the  third metropolis  of  the Roman  world,

1 Citv *^^  Queen  of  the  Ivist  {rj  Ka\^  Athen.  I75  ;

'■ oricntis  apex  pulcher),  and  the  residence  of

the imp«srial legate of  Syria, survives in Antdkleh,

184


ANTIOCH

a  town  of  only  6000  inhabitants.  It  is  situated  at
the  point  of  junction  of  the  ranges  of  Libanus  and
Taurus,  on  a  fine  site  hard  by  the  left  bank  of  the
Orontes,  just  where  the  river  turns  westwards  to  run
lx;tween  Mt.  Pieria  on  the  N.  and  Mt.  Casium  on  the
S. ,  to  the  sea  16  m.  distant.  A  little  higher  up  the
river  .Antigonia  had  Ixx-n  built  in  307  n.c.  by  Antigonus  ;
but  seven  years  later  Scleucus  Nicator  transferred  its
inhabitants  to  his  new  city  of  .Antioch.

.Stralx)'s  meagre  account  (p.  750)  is  the  foundation
of  our  topographical  knowledge  of  the  city.  Like  the
district  in  which  it  lay,  Antioch  was  a  rerpdiroXti,  an
agglomeration  of  four  parts.

The  first  contained  the  population  of  Antigonia  ;  the  second
the  bulk  of  the  citizens.  'Ihe  third  part  was  the  creation  of
SeleucusCallinlcus (246-226  B.C.),  and  the  fourth,  on  Mt.  Silpius,
of  Antiochus  Epiphanes.  Each  part  had  its  own  wall ;  but  in
addition,  the  whole  vast  area,  larger  than  that  of  Rome,  was
surrounded  by  huge  walls  running  over  the  mountains  and
across  the  ravines.  From  Nicator's  time  dates  the  well-known
statue  '  the  Fortune  '  (Twvi;)  of  Antioch,  a  work  of  the  Sicyonian
Eutychides,  a  pupil  of  Lysippus  (Paus.  vi.  2  7).  The  memory
of  it  is  preserved  on  the  coins,  and  in  a  small  marble  statuette
in  the  Vatican.  The  goildess,  a  graceful  gentle  figure,  rests
negligently  on  a  rock  ;  while  the  river,  a  vigorous  youth,  seems
to  swnn  out  from  under  her  feet.

Seleucus  Nicator  also  embellished  Daphnf,  (Aci^i/tj
[V.\]),  5  m.  distant  from  .Antioch,  but  reckoned  a
suburb.  It  was  a  spot  musical  with  fountains ;  its
groves,  crowded  with  temples,  halls,  and  baths,  were
the  seat  of  a  cult  of  Apollo  and  Artemis.

.•\mong  its  artistic  treasures  was  a  statue  of  .Apollo  Musagetes
by  the  .Athenian  Hryaxis.  The  precincts  of  Daphne  were
endowed  with  the  right  of  asylum  and  naturally  became  the
haunt  of  villany — of  runaway  slaves,  debtors,  and  cut-throats
(Tac.  Ann.  36o;  Tiberius  in  22  a.d.  attempted  to  regulate  this
abuse  in  several  cities) :  if  we  may  trust  the  story  of  Onixs  in
2  M.-icc.  4  33,  D.iphne  'flung  awav  the  one  rare  chance  of  shelter-
ing virtue.'  The  site  is  now  called  Bet  el  Ma,  the  '  house  of
Water.' It  retains  no  traces  of  its  former  magnificence.

From  this  suburb,  which  Roman  wealth,  Greek  art,
and  Oriental  licentiousness  conspired  to  make  unique
even  in  the  ICast,  .Antioch  took  its  distinguishing  name
— i]  iirl  Aa<pvri.  In  itself  the  title  bore  no  reference  to
the  pleasure  pursuits  of  the  suburb — as  though  insinu-
ating that  there  the  true  life  of  the  city  was  to  be  found  :
it  was  a  genuine  official  title.

.Accordingly  we  find  it  on  coins  (cp  '.\i'tiox«'<oi'  tSiv  iir\
KoAAipoT) ;  Tiov  iv  tilvy&oviif ;  toic  jrpot  tcS  idpoi).  Hence
I'liny  (//,V,'i  21  [18])  writes  '  Antiochia  Epiclaphnes.'  Tacitus
(Ann.  2  83)  transliterates  the  Greek,  and  calls  the  suburb  itself
'  Epidaphna.'

Holm  has  summed  up  in  a  striking  sentence  the
historical  position  of  .Antioch  under  the  Seleucid  kings.
2.  Character  -■^J*^""^^  ^'°^^  'o  the  sea  (avatrXovi
ai't)r]ij.cp6i>  Strabo,  p.  751),  it  was  yet
no  seaport ;  on  the  borders  of  the  desert,  it  was  yet
something  more  than  a  centre  for  the  caravan  trade
Ixitween  the  East  and  the  Wx-st.  The  city  reflected  the
character  of  the  kingdom  of  which  it  was  the  capital,  a
kingdom  which  itself  also  was  neither  a  genuine  naval
nor  a  genuine  land  power.  Antioch  was  a  Greek  city,
just  as  the  Seleucid  kingdom  was  an  attempt  to  impose
upon  the  Orient  the  political  ideas  and  forms  of  Hellas.
Yet,  in  the  capital  as  in  the  kingdom  at  large,  there  was
no  true  Hellenism  ;  the  commingling  of  Oriental  and
Western  elements  resulted  in  the  jjerpetuation  of  the
worst  features  of  both  races,  and  the  moral  worthlessness
of  the  Syrian  found  in  the  brilliance  and  artistic  tem-
perament of  the  (ircek  merely  the  means  of  concealing
the  crudities  of  his  own  life.  The  characteristic
failing  of  the  Greek  also  was  e.\hibited  on  a  great  scale.
.A  third  element,  and  that  the  one  most  important
for  biblical  history,  was  provided  by  the  Jews.  The
colony  was  in  fact  coeval  with  the  city,  for  it  dated  from
the  time  of  Seleucus  Nicator,  who  gave  the  lews  the  same
privileges  as  he  gave  the  (Greeks  (Jos.  .-///A  .\ii.  3 1).  >  For
this  connection  with  the  Syrian  kings  see  i  Mace.  11  42/
Herod  completed  the  marble-paved  street  which  we  can
1  According  to  2  Mace.  49  (cp  also  v.  19)  Jason  conferred  on
the  people  of  Jerusalem  the  status  of  citizens  of  Antioch
(Antiochians)  on  which  see  T/i.  T  12  544  ('78).

185


ANTIOCHUS

trace  from  the  '  Gate  of  St.  Paul '  to  the  modem  town
(Jos.  An/,  xvi.  53).  Thus  all  the  forms  of  the  civilised
life  of  the  Empire  found  in  Antioch  some  representative.
In  its  agora,  said  Libanius,  the  customs  of  the  world
might  \)K  studied.  In  no  city  was  pleasure  more  earnestly
pursued.  Daphnici  mores  were  proverbial  ;  the  Orontes
was  synonymous  with  suix.Tstition  and  depravity  (Juv.
Sat.  862).  Yet  it  would  ix;  of  value  to  discover  to  what
extent  the  lower  and  middle  orders  of  the  [x)()uIation
were  really  affected  by  the  lu.\ury  and  abandon  of  which
we  hear  so  much  ;  that  is  after  all  but  one  side  of  the
city's  life,  and  there  is  a  temptation  to  exaggerate  it.
There  w;is  little  real  intellectual  life  ;  epigram  and  light
prose  were  the  most  flourishing  forms  of  literature.
Cicero  {Fro  Arch.  3,  §  4)  is  exaggerating  with  his
'  eruditissimis  hominibus  lilx-ralissimiscjue  studiis  ad-
fluenti."  Antioch  is  far  less  celebrated  than  Alexandria
in  the  literature  of  the  first  and  second  centuries  A.  D.
This  intellectual  attitude  is  a  fact  of  some  imjxjrtance,
in  its  relation  to  the  first  Christian  teaching.

The  mixture  of  Roman,  CJreek,  and  Jewish  elements
admirably  adapted  .Antioch  for  the  great  part  she  playrd

S.Christianity,  l'!/^':  '■■'^'''>'  '?'''°''>'  °^  <^hristiamty.
wiiiiBuiaiiiujr. J  j^^  ^ijy  ^^.^^  j^^^  ^^^^^^  ^j.  ^^^  church.

There,  as  elsewhere,  Judaism  prepared  the  ground  for
the  seed  of  the  word  (cp  Chrys.  Horn.  xxv. ).  '  Nicolas,
a  proselyte  of  Antioch,"  one  of  the  first  deacons  (Acts  65),
was  only  one  of  a  '  vast  nmltitude  of  Greeks '  w  ho  in
that  city  were  attracted  to  the  Jewish  doctrine  and
ritual  (Jos.  BJ \'\\.  83  ;  cp  Acts  11 19-21).  The  ancient  and
honourable  status  of  the  Jews  in  Antioch  gave  to  the
infant  church  a  firm  and  confident  organisation.  Very
early  the  city  became  a  centre  on  a  level  with  Jerusalem  in
importance  (Acts  11  22  26-30  13  i).  The  cosmopolitanism
of  its  inhabitants  inevitably  reacted  upon  the  Christians
in  the  way  of  familiarising  them  with  universalist  ideas,
and  Antioch  conseciuently  became  the  centre  of  mis-
sionary labour.  It  was  Paul's  starting-point  on  his
first  journey  with  Barnabas  (Acts  13  1-3),  and  thither  he
always  returned  with  his  report  of  work  done  ( Acts  1 4  26/
1530  I822).  It  was  at  the  instance  of  the  church  at
-Antioch  that  the  council  of  Jerusalem  sent  the  circular
letter  to  the  gentile  Christians  (,Actsl523  Gal.  24-14),
and,  according  to  .Acts  11  26  (on  which  see  Christian,
beginning,  and  §  2  [end]),  it  w.is  in  .Antioch  that  '  the
disciples  were  called  C:hristians  first ' — undoubtedly  as  a
nickname.  W'e  know  that  the  |x;ople  of  Antioch  were
noted  for  their  scurrilous  wit  (Philost.  /'/'/.  3  16  Zos.  3n
441  Procop.  BP'IZ).  w.  J.  \v.

ANTIOCHIA  (ANTiox[e]iA  [ANV]),  i  and  2  Mace.
AV,  RY  .Antioch,  2.

ANTIOCHIANS  (ANTioxeic  [V.A]),  2  Mace.  4.9
("XIAC  L-A]!,  and  in  AV  also  v.  9  (-XON  [V]),  where
RV  has  '  titizcris  of  Antioch.' See  Antioch  2,  §  2  n.

ANTIOCHIS  (ANTiox[e]lC  [V'A]).  concubine  of
Antiochus  1\'.  l'2piphanes  (2  Mace.  430).

ANTIOCHUS  (&NTIOXOC  [ANV] ;  anticoxoc  [N*
once,  \'*  once,  .A  once]),  i.  Antiochus  III.,  surnamed
the  Great,  was  the  son  of  Seleucus  Callinicus,  and
ascended  the  Syrian  throne  at  the  age  of  fifteen,  on  the
death  of  his  brother  Seleucus  Ceraunus.  He  is  the
earliest  of  the  great  Sklkucid.*:  (</.:•.)  mentioned  in
the  .Apocrypha,  but  Antiochus  II.  Theos  and  .Antiochus
I.  Soter  (his  grandfather  and  great-grandfather  re-
spectively) are  alluded  to  in  Dan.  11  (see  Daniel,  §  6).
His  reign  (223-178  B.C.)  embraced  a  series  of  wars
against  revolted  provinces  and  neighbouring  kingdoms,
wars  in  the  prosecution  of  which  his  disasters  and
successes  were  equally  great.  The  events  of  his  life  aiii
briefly  alluded  to  in  Dan.  11 10^ — notably  his  expedition
in  Asia  Minor  in  197  B.C.  (cp  v.  18)  which,  after  varying
fortune,  ended  in  a  crushing  defeat  at  the  hands  of
Scipio  .Africanus  near  Magnesia  in  190  B.C.  (cp  v.  18).
This  was one of  the  exploits  of  the  Romans  which


ANTIOCHUS

Judas  the  Maccabec  is  said  to  liave  heard  of  (i  Mace.

8-8)-  . .  .  ...

The  account  in  its  present  form  is  not  free  from  inaccuracies.
Thus,  the  writer  states  that  Antiochus,  the  'great  king  of  Asia,'
had  with  him  120  elephants  (?'.  6,  incep.  oj'tioi't  («*]);  but  accord-
inz  to  Livy  (37  39)  there  were  only  fifty-four.  '  It  is  not
unlikely  that  in  the  popular  tradition  the  original  number  was
exaggerated'  (Cambr.  liible,  ad  ioc.).  Cp  MAtcAHEt^s,  First,
I  10.

One  of  the  conditions  of  the  humiliating  peace  imposed
in  1 88  B.C.  was  that  twenty  hostages,  incluc'ing  a  son  of
the  king  (cp  i  Mace.  1 10  and  lx;low,  2).  should  be  sent
to  reside  in  Rome.  .Antiochus  the  Great  was  killed  in
an  attempt  to  plunder  the  temple  at  Elymais  (187  n.c. ),
and  was  succeeded  by  his  son  Seleucus  IV.  I'hilopator.
See  SiiLEUCio^:^

2.  Antiochus  IV.  Epiphanes  ('E7ri(/>aj^s  '  the  illus-
trious '  [cp  I  Mace.  1 10  where  A  -eij],  called  in  mockery
'Ewi/itti'ijs  'the  madcap'),  youngest  son  of  no.  i.  On
his  place  as  hostage  (see  above,  i)  being  taken  by  his
nephew  Ukmktkius,  he  returned  to  the  East,  and — his
elder  brother,  Seleucus  IV.,  having  meanwhile  been
murdered — seized  the  Syrian  throne  (175  B.C. ),  and  soon
became  famous  for  his  conquests  in  Coele  -  .Syria,
Palestine,  and  Egypt  (cp  i  Mace.  1  ibff.  2  Mace.  5i  ^,
and  see  Dan.  11 21^).  During  his  Egyptian  campaign
he  twice  took  Jerusalem  ( i  .\Iacc.  1  20^  2  Mace.  buff.).
In  spite  of  the  presence  of  a  strong  favourable  Hellenistic
party  (see  Jason,  Menelaus),  Antiochus  appears  to
have  seen  that  he  could  never  hope  to  subdue  Judita
until  he  had  rooted  out  the  peculiar  Jewish  religion  (see
Israel,  §  69/  ).  He  accordingly  promulgated  a  decree
enjoining  uniformity  of  worship  throughout  his  dominions
(i  .Mace.  141^),  and  even  went  so  far  as  to  endeavour
to  force  upon  the  Jews  the  worship  of  heathen  deities
(see  Abomination,  ii. ).  His  persecuting  policy  w;\s
responsible  for  the  rise  of  the  .-\ssiDEANS,  and  stirred  up
the  successful  resistance  of  the  Maccabees.  His  end
(164  B.C.)  is  variously  described.  According  to  i
Mace.  61-16  he  was  visiting  a  rich  and  celebrated  temple
in  Persia  (see  Ei,ym.\is),  when  tidings  of  the  ill-success
of  his  troops  in  Judaea,  and  remorse  for  his  sacrilege  at
Jerusalem,  caused  his  death — according  to  Polybius
(31 2)  at  Tab.B  in  Persia.^  The  usually  accepted
reference  to  his  end  in  2  Mace.  1 10-17  is  not  very  prob-
able, see  Maccabees,  Second,  §  7.  He  is  doubtless
alluded  to  in  Ps.  75  ^f. ,  and  there  are  numerous  references
tohis  life  and  character  in  Daniel(^.i'.  ,§§i,  6,  8,  10, 18).

The  post-Talmudic  tract  Megillath  Antiochus  is  a  legendary
account,  in  Aramaic,  of  the  persecutions  in  his  reign  ;  cp  Schii.
Cjy\  123  (see  Maccaukks,  Second,  §  11). See  Sei.euciu.«.

3.  Antiochus  V.  Eup.ator  (Ei>7rdTW/3),  the  young  son
of  -Antiochus  IV.  Epiphanes  (see  2,  above),  was  left
under  the  care  of  Lysias,  whilst  the  father  conducted
his  wars  in  Persia  (i  Mace.  832/).  On  the  death  of
Epiphanes  (164  B.C.)  Lysias  obtained  the  regency,
ousting  his  rival  Pun. IP,  5,  and  set  up  Epiphanes'  son  as
king,  giving  him  at  the  same  time  the  surname  Eupator
(i  Mace.  614^) — 'on  account  of  the  virtues  of  his
father'  (Appian).  Together  they  entered  Jud:ea  (see
Israel,  §  75  beg. )  and,  encamping  at  Beth-zacharias,  be-
sieged Bethsura  (see  Beth-ZUr).  The  Maccabreans  were
defeated  and  the  famous  Eleazar  [q.v. ,  7)  was  killed  (i
Mace.  6  28  ff.  ).^  The  war  was  brought  to  an  abrupt  close,
however,  by  the  news  that  Philip  had  occupied  Antioch,
and  a  hasty  peace  was  concluded  restoring  to  the  Jews
the  privileges  they  had  enjoyed  previous  to  the  persecu-
tions of  Antiochus  F^piphanes  (cp  Isr.ael,  /.c.  ).  In  the
following  year  (162  B.C. )  the  king  and  his  guardian  were
put  away  by  Demetrius  [q.v.,  i]  (i  Mace.  7i^  2
Mace.  14i^). See  SeleuciD/E.

4.  Antiochus  VI.,  surnamed  Theos  (Oe6s),  son  of
Alexander  Balas, spent  his  early  youth  as  a  ward  of

1  His  father,  Antiochus  III.  the  Great,  died  whilst  engaged
in  this  same  district  upon  a  similar  errand.  Tradition  may  have
confused  the  son  with  the  father.

*  3  Mace.  13  21  ascribes  their  ill-success  to  treachery  (see
RhodocusX

187


ANTIPATRIS

an  Arabian  (see  Imalcue).  He  was  brought  forward  by
Tryphon,  a  former  follower  of  lialas,  and  set  up  as  king
in  opposition  to  Demetrius  Nicaior  (see  Demetrius,
2)  who  was  rapidly  becoming  unpopular  (i  Mace.
11 39  54  ;  145  B.C.).  On  his  coronation  he  received  the
surnames  '  Ejiiphanes '  and  'Dionysus.'  Henceforth
he  became  a  mere  UkA  in  the  hands  of  Tryphon,  who
ultimately  found  an  opportunity  of  slaying  him  ( i  Mace.
1831). See  further  Tkvi'Hon,  SELEUCiUiK.

5.  Antiochus  VII.  SidCtes(2::i5^7;$), — »".«.,  man  of  Sid6
in  Pamphylia, — called  also  Ei/at^ris  (Jos.  Ani.  xiii.  82),
was  the  son  of  Demetrius  I.  and  younger  brother  of
Demetrius  1 1.  N'icator.  The  capture  of  his  brother  by
the  Parthians  gave  Sidetes  the  opportunity  of  asserting
his  claim  to  the  Syrian  throne  in  opposition  to  the
unpopular  Tryphon.  To  win  over  the  Jews  he  wrote,
from  Rhodes,  to  Simon  '  the  chief  priest  and  governor,'
and  by  advantageous  concessions,  remission  of  royal
debts,  and  the  formal  f)ermission  to  coin  money,  attained
his  end  (1  Mace.  \;)iff.  ;  acrtwxos  [k*  v.  i]).  Tryphon
was  besieged  at  Dor  [v.  25),  and  ultimately  forced  to
flee  to  Orthosia  {v.  37).  'Ihe  situation  immediately
changed.  Antiochus  felt  his  position  secure,  and  sent
Athenobius  to  Simon  demanding  Joppa,  Gazara,  the
citadel  of  Jerusalem,  and  the  arrears  of  tribute  (28 _^).
The  refusal  of  these  demands  brought  about  war,  and
Cendkheus  was  dispatched  against  the  Jews  (ir>38^).
Sidetes  appears  no  more  in  i  Mace. ;  but  in  the  time  of
John  Hyrcanus  (see  Macc.vhi:es,  i.  §  7)  he  came  and
Ixjsieged  Jerusalem  (133  B.C.),  and  five  years  later  met
his  death  whilst  fighting  the  Parthians  under  Phraortes
II.  (.\rsaces  VII.,  128  B.C.). See  Seleucid.e.

6.  Father  of  Numemus  (i  Mace.  12 16  14  22).

ANTIPAS  (&NT[e]inAC  [Ti.  WH],  abbrev.  from
dfTiiraTpos.  see  Jos.  ^«/.  xiv.  I3;  cp  Cleopas  from
KXeoTTarpos). i. See  Herodian  Family,  2.

2.  The  'faithful  witness'  of  Pergamum  named  in  Rev.  213.
According  to  the  ^!c7a  Sancto>-um  (.\pr.  11)  he  was  bishop  of
Pergamum,  and  suffered  death  (by  the  '  brazen  bull ')  under
iJoiiiitian.

ANTIPATER  (^NTinATpoc  [AKV]),  son  of  Jason
[3],  an  ambassador  sent  by  the  Jews  to  the  Lacedae-
monians (i  Mace.  12 16  14  22).  See  Sparta.  For  the
Antipater  from  whom  Antipatris  (see  below)  was  named
see  Hekodian  Family,  i.

ANTIPATRIS  ( ANTinATRlC  [Ti.  WH])  was  founded
by  Herod  the  Great  on  '  the  finest  plain  '  of  his  kingdom
... .  — i.e.,  .Sharon — in  memory  of  his  father

1.  Allusions.  ,i^„jip.^jgr  (Jos.  /?/i.2l9),but  also,  as  the
history  of  the  town  abundantly  proves,  for  strategical
reasons.  The  other  details  given  by  Josephus  are,  that
it  lay  'close  to  the  mountains'  {BJ\.\^)  o\\  the  plain
of  Kaphar  Saba  (Ka</)ap(7a/3a),  fertile  and  well-watered,
that  a  river  encompassed  the  city,  and  a  grove  of  very
fine  trees  (.•f«/'.  xvi. 52).  In  another  passage,  probably
from  a  different  source,  Josephus  identifies  it  with
Kaphar  Saba  (Xa/3apfa;3a  ^  vvv  'AvrnraTpls  KaXeiTat),
and  tells  how,  to  resist  Antiochus  on  his  march  against
the  Arabians  (circa  85  B.C.),  Alexander  Jannaeus  made
a  deep  ditch  and  a  wall,  which  however  Antiochus
destroyed,  extending  thence,  a  distance  of  150  (?)
stadia,  to  the  sea  at  Joppa  {id.  xni.l5i).  During
Roman  times  Antipatris  was  a  station  at  or  near  the
junction  of  the  military  roads  from  Lydda  and  from
Jerusalem  respectively  to  Cresarea,  where  the  latter
road  issued  from  the  hills.  Thus  Paul  was  brought
by  night  from  Jerusalem  to  Antipatris  and  thence,  part
of  his  escort  returning,  to  Cnesarea  (Acts233i).  The
return  of  so  much  of  Paul's  escort  is  explained  by  the
fact  that,  Antipatris  l)eing  according  to  the  Talmud
{Tnlm.  nab.,  Gittin,  j6a)  on  the  limits  of  Jewish  soil,
all  danger  of  an  attack  by  the  threatened  Jewish  ambush
(.Acts  23  16  20  ^ )  was  now  past.  There,  in  66  A.  D. ,
Cestius  Gallus  halted  on  his  way  to  Lydda  {li/'n.  19 1),
and  to  this  point,  on  his  subsequent  retreat  from
Jerusalem,  he  was  pursued  by  the  Jews  (ib.  9). There,


ANTONIA

too,  in  the  same  year,  Vespasian  halted  on  his  march
from  Cx'sarca  to  Lydda  (ib.  iv.  8i).

AiUipatris  is  not  marked  in  the  Tab.  Pent.  The
Bordeaux  I'ilgrinj  (333  A.n. )  j;ivi.s  it  as  10  k.m.  from
_..  Lydda  and  26  from  Ciu-sarea  ;  the  ///'«.  Ant.
'  as  28  from  Ca;sarea  ;  and  Eus.  and  Jer.  in
the  Ofiom.  as  6  S.  from  Galgulis  (in  all  probability  the
present  Jiljuliyeh).  Schiirer  (Hist. Zi-^o)  and  others,
following  Rob.  (i^A'4  139/. ),  identify  it  with  the  present
Kefr  Sfiba,  23  R. m.  (as  the  crow  flies)  from  Cajsarea.
Hut,  as  Kefr  Saba  is  no  less  than  17  R.m.  from  Lydda
and  2  R.m.  N.  from  Jiljuliyeh;  as,  besides,  it  has  no
ancient  remains,  nor  any  such  wealth  of  water  or  en-
compassing river  as  Josephus  descrilxis,  it  is  more
probable  that  Antipatris  lay  farther  S.  on  the  upjx;r
waters  of  the  'Aujch,  which  are  about  29  R.m.  from
Cajsarea,  4  S.  of  Jiljuliyeh,  and  about  11  N.  of  Lydda,
in  a  district  which  better  suits  the  data  of  Josephus.
Here  Dr.  Sandreczky  and  Sir  C.  W.  Wilson  {FEF
Qu.Sf.,  1874,  p.  192/.)  have  suggested  the  site  of
Kal'at  Rds  el-'Ain,  at  the  very  copious  sources  of
the  'Aujeh,  which  they  identify  with  die  crusading
castle  of  Mirabel  (el-Mirr  being  a  neighbouring  place-
name).  They  point  out,  too,  that  the  valley  of  the
'Aujoh  would  Ije  a  more  natural  line  for  the  great  ditch
of  .\le.\ander  Janiuvus  than  a  line  from  Kefr  Saba  to
the  sea.  Although  Neubauer  [G^og.  du  Talin.  80 jf.)
tiiinks  that  tiie  Talmud  distinguishes  between  Kefr  Saba
and  .Antipatris,  this  is  doubtful,  for,  while  their  names
are  given  separately,  both  are  defined  as  border  towns
■ — Ijctween  Samaria,  a  heathen  country,  and  Judaea.
These  are  all  the  data  for  the  question  of  position.
Without  excavation  on  the  sites  named,  and  the  dis-
covery of  the  rest  of  the  Roman  road — probably  the
road  by  which  r\aul  was  brought — traced  by  l':ii  Smith
in  1843  from  Gophna  to  the  plain,  but  lost  at  the  edge
of  the  hills  [Biblioth.  Sac  .\  ^^'&  ff.) ,  it  is  imix^ssible  for  us
to  be  certain  where  exactly  Antipatris  stood.  We  cannot
exjject  to  find  many  ruins  on  the  site.  Unlike  other
Herodian  sites,  it  is  not  stated  to  have  Ix^n  embellished
by  great  buildings  ;  and  the  town  did  not  afterwards
develop. Huhl  (Pal.  199)  f;ivours  Ras  cl-'Ain.

In  333  the  Bordeaux  Pilgrim  calls  it  a  vtutaiio,  or  change-
house,  not  a  chitas  like  Lydda  (the  next  'change'  he  mentions
— Hetthar,  10  R.m.  towards  Ca;sarea  —  is  perhaps  the  present
e{.Tlreh,  PEF  Mem.  2  166).  In  404  the  Peretp:  S.  I'autce  calls
it  'semirutum  oppidulum.'  In  451  it  had  a  bishop  {Acts  0/  the
Coun.  o/Chalceiion  :  cp  Descr.  Parochice  Jerusalem,  circa  460),
and  in  744  it  still  contained  Christians.  With  their  disappear-
ance before  the  .^rabs,  the  Greek  ecclesiastical  name  would
vanish,  and  has  not  been  recovered  (but  see  the  curious  state-
ment of  a  native  in  /'A'/-"  .V^-w/.  2  134,  that  the  name  of  Kefr
S.'iba  is  Aiuifatrus).  The  Crusaders  wrongly  identified  Antipatris
with  ' Arsuf,  tlie  ancient  Apollonia.  c.  A.  S.

ANTONIA,  see  Jkkusalkm.

ANTOTHIJAH,or  rather  RVANTHOTnijAH(n>nh3y,
n^»rinpV  [Oi.],  n^phay  [BS.];  probaWy  a  feminine
adjective  formed  from  .Anatiioth  [^.t'-]),  in  genealogy

of UlNJA.MIN [q.v.. §  9  ii. /3), I Ch.824t (ANOOGAie
[ANABcoeiA. A] KAI A,eeiN  [€5"'^],  ANAea)e(5j.L]).

Al^OTHITE  ('ninpy),  i  Ch.  ll  28  AV.  See
Anatiioi  H,  I.

ANUB(3-i::;;  eNNcoNtCn],  erNcoB[A],  ANcoB[L];
Axoii),  a  Judahite,  descendant  of  Coz  (RV  Hakkoz)
( I  Ch.  48). Probably  to  be  identified  with  Anak  (We. ).

ANUS  (annac  [B]),  I  Esd.  948  AV=Neh.87
Han  AN,  4.

ANVIL  (DyS),  Is.  41 7t. See  Metal  Work.

APAME  (ahamh [BAl,  -hh-  [L]; \-^ <=^<*:  apeme),
daughter  of  Bartacus  and  concubine  of  Darius  (i  Esd.
4291.

APAMEA  (Jer.  Talm.  Kil.  932^  N*DDN.  but  oftener
N^ODDX), mentioned in the Vg. text of  Judith3i4,
apparently as a district ( '  pertransiens . . . omnem
Apameam  ' )  in  the  line  of  march  of  Holofernes.
189


APHARSACHITES

■Airafi>>»ni,oneof  the  ten  districts  of  N.  Syrui  under  Rome(I>tol.
C^tyr.  V.  16  19),  took  its  name  from  'Atroficta,  a  fortified  town
(named  after  Seleucus  Nicator'.s  Persian  wife),  built  on  a  hill
some  six  or  more  miles  east  of  the  Orontes,  half-way  between
Emesa  and  Antioch,  and  now  represented  by  important  ruins
under  the  village  that  occupies  the  site  of  the  old  citadel,  now
calleil  l<al'atelMudllf.  Sec  .Stral>o,  p.  752;  Ritter,  Erdkunde
17,  Abth.  ii.  1075-86  ;  E.  Sachau,  Keise  in  Syrien  u.  Meso^t.
Ti-Zji  (photographs  and  map)  ;  also  reff.  in  Hoettg.  Lex.  Jos.

APE(D*Dp,  D^Sip;  meHKOi  [BAL];  si,ni<r,  1  K.
IO22,  Xiewv  TopfiTuiv  [BL],  cp  7'.  1 1 ;  2  Ch.  021+).  An
animal  mentioned  among  the  rarities  brougiil  from  Opiiir
by  Solomon's  fleet.  The  Heb.  /kH/iA,  'ajx;,'  is  evidently
a  loan-word,'  and  is  usually  connected  with  Jta/>i,^  the
Sanscr.  name  of  the  ape  ;  thus  the  home  of  the  animal,
though  r\ot  necessarily  the  situation  of  Ophir,  will  be
indicated.  It  is  mentioned  in  each  case,  in  MT  (the
phenomena  of  (S  are  here  very  peculiar),  in  connection
with  the  jjeacocks  (if  the  common  theory  is  correct)
imi^orted  by  Solomon  from  Oi'UiK.  Perhaps  '  monkey'
would  Ije  a  more  correct  modern  English  rendering  than
'ape,'  which  suggests  the  tailless  quadrumaiia,  wiiile
the  animals  of  this  order  represented  on  the  Assyrian
and  Egyi^tian  inscriptions  have  tails.  Just  so,  Kr)Aot.
would  have  been  a  lx;tter  Greek  rendering  than  iriOrjKoi
(the  LXX  word),  if  Aristotle  is  correct  in  making  the
iri9riKoi  tailless.  Four  kinds  of  motikeys  are  repre-

sented on  the  Assyrian  monuments.  Those  on  the  black
obelisk  of  Shalmaneser  II.  seem  to  belong  to  an  Indian
sjjecies ;  they  appear  in  company  with  the  Indian
elephant  and  the  Bactrian  camel  (Houghton,  'On  the
Manmialia  of  the  Assyrian  Sculptures,"  TSPA  5319/
Vn^)-  Monkeys  (,^(7^)  and  balloons  were  nmch  in
request  in  Eg>-pt.  Queen  Ha'tsepsut  ('Hatasu,'  i8th
dynasty)  received  them  among  other  rarities  from
the  (African)  land  of  Punt  ;  see  the  picture  of  the
native  ambassadors  leading  specimens  of  the  Cyno-
cepluilus  Hamadrj'as  and  the  Cynocef^halus  Bubuinus.'^
Halevy,  however  [K'EJ'lltif. ),  would  identify  Solomon's
C'Eip  and  c\'3n  (see  Pkacocks)  with  the  tuku  and
kukupi  mentioned  in  the  Amarna  tablets  in  the  requests
of  the  Asiatic  princes — i.e.,  different  sorts  of  vessels  full
of  aromatic  oil,  etc.'*  Plutarch  [de  Is.  et  Osir.  81)  gives
an  account  of  the  sixteen  ingredients  of  the  ICgyjJtian
K\)(pi.^  N.  M. — A.  K.  s.

APELLES  (AneAAHC  [Ti-  WH],  contracted  from
A7ro\\6oa»poj)  is  saluted  in  Rom.  16 10,  where  he  is
called  'the  approved  {Sokl/jlos)  in  Christ,'  an  exjjression
which  seems  to  suggest  that  he  had  shown  constancy
as  a  confessor  in  time  of  trial.  Nolliing  further  is
known  of  him.  Weizsiicker  suggests  that  his  Christian
activity  may  have  been  chiefly  within  the  household  of
Aristobulus  also  mentioned  in  v.  10  (Ajost.  Age  1  399).

In  the  list  of  the  'seventy  apostles'  which  we  owe  to  Pseudo-
Dorotheus,  Apelles  is  represented  as  bishop  of  Heraclea  ;  that
of  Pseudo-Hippolytus  mentions  Smyrna.  According  to  the
viro/uiTj/ua  of  Peter  and  I'aul  by  the  Pseudo-Symeon  Metaphrastes,
he  was  consecrated  bishop  of  .Smyrna  by  Peter.

APHAEREMA (^ctiAipeMA [NV']), i Mace.  11 34

RV, AV  Al'HKKK.MA.

APHARSACHITES  (N'SD'lDX  [Ba.];  '"laX  [Gi.];
Ac})ApcAXAiOi  [B.\],  but  -CAKKAIOI  [B]  in  Ezra56;
-RACBaxaiOI  [L]  ;  see  also  next  article),  a  word  used
(P>.ra56  tJ6t)  apparently  as  the  title  of  certain  ofticers
under  Darius.  Another  form  is  Ahuaksathchitks  ;  see
Ezra  49,  where  the  word  is  misunderstood  (see  Ezra,  ii.

1  If  it  belongs  to  the  original  text  :  see  Edonv,  §  2  A

2  Whence  also  Ki\fio^  or  ttijjro?,  and  Eng.  a^e.

'  Edwards,  Pharaohs,  Petlahs,  ami  KxJ>lorers  292.  See
also  the  apes  and  baboons  on  a  wall-painting  in  a  tomb.  El
Bersheh  (Egypt.  Explor.  Fund),  Pt.  IL,  plate  .vi.  ;  cp  p.  29.

*  See  Am. 'Tab.  B  28  =  Wi.  294,  col.  2,40;  i  kukupu  5a  .  .  .
(ka]-du  naktamiSu,  'a  kukupu  .  .  .  with  its  lid  ' ;  col.  3,  43  .  .  .
kukubu  samni  {abi,  '.  ._ .  a  kukubu  of  gixxl  oil";  B  5,  i,  25
(recto)  samni  .5a  tabu  aljiya  uSiranni  II  duk  kukupu,  'send  me,
my  brother,  good  oil,  two  vessels  kukupu  '  (so  Hal.,  not  in  Wi.).
£>uk  or  tuk  (pi.  tuke)  is  the  ordinary  ideogram  for  '  vessel,
receptacle.'

*  The  Assyriological  notices  are  mostly  due  to  Prof.  Cheync


APHARSATHCHITBS

§  lo)  and  treated  as  the  uanic  of  a  tribe  settled  in
Palestine  by  Asnai'I'KR.  Its  etymology  is  still  very
uncertain.  See  G.  Hoffmann,  Z^  254 /• ;  Marquart,
Fund.  64  ;  and  Andreas  in  Marti,  Bibl.-aram.  Gram.,
Glossary,  p.  53*.

APHARSATHCHITES,  The  (N^^JilpnDN  [Bii.] ;
N-DHDIDX  [Gi.];  4)&pece^x<MOl  L'^].  A(J)ApCAe-
[A]VA<i)ApACT&X-  [L]).  I':z>a49t.  See  Al'HAKSAClI-
ITES.

APHARSITES  (S^DnSN  [Bii.  Gi.];  A(t)p&CMOi  [B].
A(J)APC-  [Al  ;  cJ)ApAceAlOI  [1^1).  mentioned  in  I'>.ra49t
as  a  tribe  settled  in  Palestine  by  AsNAPi'EK.  Various
attempts  al  identification  have  Ijcen  made  {Persians,  by
Kawlinson,  Pulp.  Com.  ad  loc. ,  but  see  A'AT^"^^  376;
Par  sua,  a  Median  tribe,  by  Del.  Par.  327)  ;  but  the
word  is  Ijest  regarded  as  a  scribe's  error,  related  (some
think)  to  N-32-12X  (EV  Apiiaksachites,  Kzraf)6  66),
or,  more  probably,  miswritten  for  Nnea  'scribes.'  The
last  letter  of  n-i-eu  (MT  K-^tn^,  see  -Tarpki.itks)  was
attached  bv  dittography  to  the  ne.\t  word  (Marquart,
Pun  J.  64).'

APHEK(pD.^f  Acj)eK  [BAL]).  It  is  not  easy  to
determine  how  many  i)laces  of  this  name  are  mentioned
in  the  OT.  Only  one  of  them  has  Ix^en  satisfactorily
identified.

1.  In  Josh.  134  (ra0e/c  [B],  a^e/ca  [A],  -kk.  [L])
.\phek  appears  as  the  limit  of  the  Sidonian  country,
apparently  as  its  northern  limit  towards  the  Giblites  or
Byblians.  This  Aphek,  therefore,  is  commonly  identified
with  Aphaca  (now  Afka),  famous  for  its  sanctuary  of
Astarte,  which  lies  at  the  source  of  the  river  of  Byblus,
the  ,\donis  or  (as  it  is  now  called)  Nahr  Ibrahim  ;  cp
Lucian,  Dea  Syria  6-8.

2.  The  Aphek  assigned  in  Josh.  19  30  to  the  tribe  of
.\sher  is  mentioned  in  Judg.  1 31  (where  the  name
is  written  p-EN,  Ai'iiiK,  a^eK  [AL],  vaei  [B])  as  one
of  the  towns  which  the  Canaanites  were  able  to  maintain
against  the  invaders.  Here  also  some  suppose  that
.\phaca  is  meant ;  but  it  is  difticult  to  believe  that  .Asher
ever  attempted  to  extend  so  far  north,  and,  as  it  appears
from  Josh.  17iii  that  .Asher  had  a  theoretical  claim  to
l)art  of  the  plain  of  Sharon  S.  of  Mt.  Carniel  as  far  at
least  as  Dor,  it  is  probable  that  Aphek  in  Sharon  (no.
3)  is  meant.

3.  In  Josh.  12 18  {o<l>iK  [B])  we  read,  in  the  list  of  the
kings  smitten  by  Joshua,  '  the  king  of  Aphek,  one  ;  the
king  of  Lasharon,  one '  ;  but  it  is  better  to  emend  the
verse  with  the  aid  of  ©»  (•0</>^(c  r^s  'ApwK)  and  read  '  the
king  of  Aphek  in  the  (plain  of)  Sharon,  one'  (see  Di.
on  the  passage).  This  Aphek  in  Sharon,  as  W'ellhausen
has  pointed  out,  is  the  city  {a)  from  which  the  Syrians
of  Damascus  made  repeated  attacks  on  Samaria,  i  K.
2O2530  (a</)eKa  [B.\],  -kk.  [L]),  aK.lSi?,^  and  {b
and  c)  from  which  the  Philistines  assembled  their  forces
for  war  with  Israel  before  the  battles  of  Gilboa  ( i  S.
29 1 )  and  of  Eben-ezer  (i  S.  4i  ;  Jos.  a/i^eKa  or  a<p€Ka).

(a)  As  regards  the  Aphek  of  Kings  :  that  it  lay  in  a
lowland  plain  is  clear  from  i  K.  20 23,  and  that  the  plain
is  that  of  Sharon  follows  from  2  K.  1822  (S^,  where  we
find  the  addition  (undoubtedly  genuine)  'and  Hazael
took  the  Philistine  from  his  hand  from  the  Western  sea
to  .\phek.  ■  Aphek  therefore  lay  on  the  verge  of  Philistia
—i.e..  in  Sharon— and  we  must  understand  that,  both
in  Benhadad's  time  and  in  the  time  of  Hazael,  the  Syrians
avoided  the  difficulties  of  a  direct  attack  on  the  central
mountain-land  of  Canaan  by  striking  into  the  maritime
plain  south  of  Carmel  and  so  securing  the  mastery  of
the  fertile  coast-land  without  having  to  besiege  Samaria.
Their  route  would,  in  fact,  be  the  present  great  road  from
Damascus  to Ramleh  through  Megiddo.^ At  Aphek,


APHEK

soinewhcre  in  the  north  of  the  Sharon  Plain,  they  had  a
great  military  post  from  which  they  could  direct  their
armies  either  against  Samaria  or  against  the  Philistines
(2K.  12i7[i8]).

{b)  As  regards  the  Aphek  of  Samuel  :  it  is  clear  that
a  point  in  the  northern  part  of  the  Sharon  Plain,  on
the  road  to  Megiddo  and  the  plain  of  Esdraelon,  is
appropriate  to  i  S.  29 1.  The  mustering-place  of  the
Philistines  cannot  have  teen  in  the  heart  of  the  Hebrew
territory,  least  of  all  at  such  a  place  as  el-Faku'  on  Mt.
Gilboa  (in  the  rear  of  Sauls  army  !)  where  it  is  absurdly
placed  by  Conder  and  Armstrong.  It  is  argued  that
the  Philistines  were  at  Shunem  (iS.  284)  tefore  they
reached  Aphek  ;  but  to  argue  thus  is  to  forget  that  i  S.
283-25,  the  story  of  Saul  and  the  witch  of  Endor,  is
a  distinct  narrative,  by  a  different  hand,  and  that  29 1
originally  followed  directly  on  28  if.

(c)  Finally,  the  attack  on  central  Israel  which  issued
in  the  battle  of  Eten-ezer  and  the  destruction  of  Shiloh
(iS.  4)  would  naturally  te  taken  to  have  teen  made
from  the  same  .Vphek,  were  it  not  that  commentators  have
assumed  that  the  position  of  Eten-ezer,  and  therefore
of  Aphek,  is  fi.xed  somewhere  near  Mizpah  by  i  S.  7 12.
It  is  certainly  safer,  however,  to  distinguish  the  battle-
field of  Eten-ezer  in  i  S.  4 1  from  the  stone  Eten-ezer
set  up  by  Samuel  many  years  later,  than  to  assume  the
existence  of  two  Apheks  fitted  to  te  the  starting-point
of  a  Philistine  campaign  (cp  Eben-ezkk).  And  here
also  it  is  to  te  observed  that  chaps.  4  and  7  are  derived
from  distinct  documents,  and  that  the  historical  value
of  the  second  is  very  insecure.

Eriini  w  hat  has  been  said  it  will  appear  without  further
argument  that  it  is  illegitimate  to  seek  an  Aphek  in  the


region,  between


Mt.  Tabor  and  the  Sea  of  Galilee,  to


1  On  this  passage  see  Asher,  §  3.

- ■-  ■'•/.,  ET,  39  [but  cpGASm. //G

401/].


■-'  .See  We.  C//  254  ;  cp  //ist.,

s'Cp  the  route  of  Al-NabulusI,  ed.  Tuch.


350


which  Eus.  and  Jer.  give  the  name  of  Saron,  or  to  place
the  .\phek  of  Kings  at  the  caravan-station  of  Elk  in  the
mountains  to  the  E.  of  the  Sea  of  Galilee.  This  may
be  the  Apheca  near  Hippus  or  Hippe  of  OS  91  24  and
219  72  ; but  is  not  a  biblical  site.  W.  K.  S.

The  existence  of  an  Aphek  in  Sharon  is  put  te-yond
doubt  by  the  following  additional  evidence.  Firsf,  in
the  lists  of  Thotmes  III.  {c  1600  B.C.)  nos.  60-76
form  a  group  V)y  themselves  ;  62  is  Joppa,  64  Lydda,  65
Ono.  Then  come  66  Apukn,  67  Suka,  68  Yhm.  At
this  last  place,  Thotmes  had  to  decide  which  of  three
roads  he  should  take  over  Carmel.  Yhm  must  therefore
have  lain  near  the  most  southerly  road— that  is,  somewhat
south  of  the  mouth  of  the  Wady  'Abu  Nar— and  may
be  the  present  Yemma  by  the  high  road  along  the  edge
of  the  Samarian  Hills.  Suka  is  doubtless  the  present
Shuweikeh,  2  m.  farther  S.  Apukn  therefore  lay
between  it  and  Ono.  Maspero,  it  is  true,  identified
Suka  and  Apukn  with  the  Judoean  Shocoh  and  Apheka
of  josh.  154853;  butW.  Max  Miiller  {As.  u.  Eur.  161)
has  shown  that  the  list  contains  nothing  S.  of  Ajalon.
The  n  of  Apukn  may  te  the  common  termination  of
place-names  jr.  Max  Mtiller  says  it  may  also  te
read  as  i.  Secondly,  in  the  autumn  of  66  A.  D.  Cestius
Gallus,  advancing  on  Jerusalem  from  Caesarea,  reached
Antipatris,  and  '  sent  before '  a  party  to  drive  the  Jews
out  of  'the  tower  of  Aphek'  (IIi;p70S  'A^ckoO).  After
taking  the  tower  he  marched  on  Lydda  (Jos.  DJ\\.  19  i).
This  agrees  with  the  data  of  Thotmes  III.  and  places
Aphek  te'tween  the  River  "Aujeh  and  Lydda.  Here
there  is  now  no  place-name  which  affords  any  help  in
the  case,  unless  it  te  that  of  the  village  Fejjeh — i.e.,
originally,  Feggeh — about  9  m.  NE.  of  Joppa  (which,
however,  does  not  lie  quite  near  enough  to  the  E.  limit
of  the  plain  to  suit  Lucian's  text  of  2  K.  1822),  and  it
ought  not  to  te  overlooked  that  in  a  list  of  mediaeval
Arab  place-names  quoted  by  Rohricht  {ZDPV,  1896)
there  occur  both  Sair  Fuka  and  Fakin.  A,^ain,  in  a

fragment  of  Esarhaddon  (681-668  B.C.)  a  city  Apku  is
descrited  as  30  '  kasbu-kakkar '  from  Raphia  on  the
Egyptian  frontier.  Schrader(  A'.-/  rC-'  204),  who  translates
kasbu-kakkar  by  *  double  leagues,"  takes  Apku  to  lie  on


APHEKA

the  K.  of  the  lake  of  Ciennesaret  {i.f.,  the  present  Fik)
and  the  Aplick  of  i  K.  2O26,  etc.  This,  however,  seems
less  likely  to  give  the  distance  from  Raphia  of  a  place  so
situated  than  of  an  Aphek  on  the  plain  of  Sharon.  The
'Aujth,  it  may  Ix;  remarked,  is  70  m.  from  Raphia.
It  oufjht  not  to  Ix;  overlooked  that  the  particularis-
ing of  one  Aphek  as  '  in  Sharon '  (Josh.  12 18,  see
above,  3)  implies  the  existence  of  other  Apheks  in  the
land.  f;.  A.  .s.

APHEKA  (Hi^QN,  a^jaka  [AL],  (|>akoya  ['5]).  an
miidctiliticd  citv  in  the  mountain-land  of  fudah (Josh.

ir)5;tl-

APHEREMA,  RV  Ai'I1/Kkkm.\  (AcJjAipeMA  [N],
A4)ep.  \y'-'^]  fUiSii  ).  I  .Mace.  1134,  probably  a
CJnvciscd  form  of  the  city-name  I-".rnK.\iM  (i/.z'.,  ii. ).

APHERRA  (A(i)eppA  [HA]),  a  group  of  children  of
Solomon's  servants  (see  NiCTlllNlM)  in  the  great  post-
exilic  list  (I'>.K.\,  ii.  §  9,  §  8(),  one  of  eight  inserted  in
I  I-".sd.  0^4  (om.  L)  after  I'ochereth-hazzeljaim  of  j  I'.zra
257  =  N'eh.7  59-

APHIAH(n'DX;  A(t)eK[BL],  -(t)AX  [A*].  -(J)ix  [A'']).
iS.  Oif,  according  to  MT,  one  of  Saul's  ancestors;
but  '.son  of  Aphiah,  a  Hcnjamitc,'  should  probably  l)e
'  of  Gilxjah  of  Benjamin  '  (p'  j3  [njvajc).  So  virtually
Wellhau.seii  ;  but  he  did  not  notice  that  Aphiah  (cp  ©
and  note  that  k  =  ];,  e.i;.,  in  Rcba  \u.  :n8)  is  a  corrup-
tion of  (jilx-ah. This  was  reserved  for  Marcjuart  {I'lnul.

15).  T. K.  C.

APHIK  (p*pX),  Judg.  1  3it- Sec  .\i'iiKK,  2.

APHRAH,  HOUSE  OF,  R\'  Eeth-lcs-Aplirah  (n'5
rr\^t>-  OIKOY  KATAreAooTA  [HA(JJ),  Mic.  I10+,  the
name  of  a  town  not  identified  with  any  certainty.  The
determination  of  the  site  of  Beth-le-Aphrah  cannot  be
separated  from  the  larger  question  of  the  text  of  the
whole  passage,  Mic.  1 10-15,  which  cannot  be  discussed
here  (see  Taylor,  MT  of  Mic.  ;  Ryssel,  Untersuch.  on
the  Hook  of  Mic.  26  ff.  ;  We.  Kl.  Pn>ph.  ;  Wi.  A  T
Unters.  185/.,  AOF\io^).  So  much,  however,  is
plain — the  vocalisation  cannot  \vi  trusted,  especially
in  view  of  the  paronomasia  ( '  house  of  dust '  RV  mg. ),
and  even  the  consonants  were  differently  read  by  ©.
The  older  writers  {e.g. ,  Winer,  so  now  also  Xowack)
identified  -Aphrah  with  Ophr.-mi  {q.v.)\  cp  Pesh.  'the
houses  of  Ophrah.'  But  the  context  seems  to  demand
some  place  farther  ^^^  and  S.  Winckler,  w  ith  his  rather
too  ingenious  emendation  '  Bethel '  (reading  iSjr'^N  for
"icy  r\-\-:'^  AOF,  I.e.),  seeks  to  avoid  this  objection  by
reading  '(Jilgal'  for  the  historically  im[)ossible  '(iath,"
and  (with  We.)  '  Bekaim '  (see  BociiiM)  for  the  very
questionable  bdko  (133)  in  1  io«.  Ww/..  [KG  I!,  ad  loc),
followed  by  Miihlau  in  H\VB<-\  suggests  a  ' Afrd  that
Yakut  [Mo  jam  el  bulddii,  sub  voc. )  mentions  as  'a castle
in  Palestine  near  Jerusalem. '  Ges. -Bu.  suggests  doubt-
fully lietogabra  (Kleutheropolis,  Be  it  Jibrln),  which,
however,  represents  an  Aram,  xiaj  n'a(-N'estle  in  '/.DPV
I224/).  Perhaps  the  name  of  the  Wady  el-Ghafr
running  E.  not  far  S.  of  Mirash  may  be  an  echo  of
Micah's  Aphrah.  So  GASm.  [Twelve  Proph.X^Z^),
Che.  (JQR,  July  1898).  The  ■?  in  .iisy'?  seems  to  be  a
scribe's  error  (as  if  '  in  the  dust ').

APHSES  (VVSn).  I  Ch.24i5t  AV,  RV  H.vpi'izzez.

APIS  (^in;  o  &nic  [BXAQ  J.  ott.  [Q*  (superscr.
a  (J'  f<'")] ;  Egyptian  Hapi),  the  bl.ick  bull-god  of  Mem-
phis (sc-e  Egyht,  §  14).  Though  the  name  of  this  famous
deity  does  not  occur  in  EV,  he  is  mentioned  once  in  OT
(Jer.  46  isrz).  ©  alone  has  preserved  the  true  division
of  the  words  :  for  r^nDj,  AV  '  are  swept  away '  (similarly
RV  Pesh.  Vg. ),  we  must  read  rn  D3.  'hath  fled  Apis'
[^(fivyev  6  'Airts).  Cp  Konig,  Syntax  210,  n.  i.
For  an  analogous  correction  see  Giesebrecht  and  Cornill
aJ  loc.  and  cp  C.VLi",  Goi.dk.n,  §  2.
13  193


APOCALYPSE

APOCALYPSE,  THE  (Hook  ok  Revki.ation).
According  to  the  best  authorities  (NC.\  [in  subscription]

1 Name ^^' ^^' ^^' ^^  ' ' '' ^^^^)'  '^*^  *'''*^  ''"'"'

■  ,  ,  '  a7^o^aX^'j'lJ  \(t)a.[v^vo^<.  Later  MSS  add  toi/
ftZlCl  Pid.C6  /I ■,  ^-^  1  • V

in  NT  "^0^070"  (v  '*"^'  many  cursives),  or  tov
aTTOffToXov,  or  tov  air.  Kai  evayYeXiffrov
( P  vg.  cod. ,  Syr. ).

In  almost  all  MSS  the  Apocalypse  now  holds  the
last  place  in  the  NT.  The  stichometry  of  Cod.  Claro-
montanus  (D,  Paul)  arranges  as  follows  :  Evang.  Paul.
Cath.  Apoc.  Act.  (see  (Jreg.  Prol.  '.i  136  ;  cp  also
what  is  said  alxjut  the  Evangeliaria,  175  and  368).  In
the  Syriac  version  of  the  A])ocalypse  which  has  t)een
edited  by  Gwj-nn,  the  book  was  preceded  by  the  Fourth
(jospel.  The  hiatus  in  Cod.  D  was  perhaps  originally
occupied  by  the  Apocalypse  and  Johannine  Epistles
(Bousset,  TI.'A,  1892),  thus  giving  the  order  Evang.,
-Apoc,  Epp.  Joh. ,  Acts.  All  this  jjerh;i|3s  indicates  that
the  Apocalypse  and  the  other  Johannine  writings  were
originally  handed  down  together.  In  point  of  fact,
Tcrtullian  actually  speaks  of  an  '  instrumentum
Johannis,'  which  consisted  of  .Apoc.  and  i  Jn.  [Resiirr.
38,  39  ;  Pud.  19  ;  Pi/ga  9  ;  Pnrscr.  33).  Cp  Ronsch,
Da.<:  neue  Te.st. Tertull.  528.

The  Book  seems  to  be  presupposed  in  two  places  in
the  Ignatian  epistles, [a)  Ad  Eph.  153  :  '"«  tI'M"'  aiToO

2.  External
evidence ;


canonicity.


(NA  read  \aol  in  Rev.  21  3)  k(x.I  avrbi
^  (V  rj/j-iv  Oeos.  [b)  Ad  Pliilad.  6  i  :  oi'rot
€//oi  aTy)\a.i.  elaiv  Kai  rd^oi  vcKpQv  icp'  oh
yeypavTai  fiovov  opofxara  avOplwwv  (cp
Rev.  3  12/. ,  in  the  ej)tstle  to  the  church  of  Philadelphia).
Andrew  of  Ctesarea,  UKjreover,  mentions  Papias,  amongst
others,  as  bearing  witness  to  the  Apocalypse  (raiVr;
TTpojxapTvpovvTwv  t6  OL^LbiTLaTov),  and  on  Rev.  12  7
adduces  (.3240  ^. ,  ed.  Sylb. )  two  observations  taken
verbatim  from  Papias.  That  Eusebius  does  not  mention
the  testimony  of  Papias  is  doubtless  to  be  accounted
for  by  the  historian's  unfriendly  attitude  towards  the  book.
Iren;uus  appeals  in  support  of  the  traditional  number
666  to  'elders'  who  had  actually  seen  John.  (In  all
probability  we  could  reduce  this  testimony  of  the  elders
to  that  of  Papias  alone  :  Harnack,  Chron.  der  alkhristl.
Lit.  1333^.).  We  find  a  writer  so  early  as  Justin
asserting  the  book  to  be  apostolical  [Dial.  81  :  Trap'
ir)iLiv  avrip  ris  v  dvo/xa  'lajdvprji  eh  twv  dTrocrT6\un>
XpLffTod  ev  dwoK. )  and  canonical  [Apol.  1  28  :  (is  fK  rdv
r]fX€T€/>wi'  avyypa/x/jLaTwv  fxaduv  dvvaade).  This  early
recognition  of  the  Apocalypse  as  a  canonical  writing
need  not  surprise  us  :  the  book  itself  puts  forward  a
claim  to  this  character  (1 18/:  22 18).

In  the  second  half  of  the  second  century  we  find  the
Apocalypse  widely  recognised.

It  is  generally  current  (a)  in  Asia  Minor,  alike  among  Mon-
tanists,  anti-Montanists  (Apollonius  ;  Euseb.  //A"  v.  18 14),  and

mediating  writers  (.Melito  of  .Sardis;  I'b.  iv.  2i)  2; ;
3.  2nd  and  (/■)  in  Caul,  both  with  Irenaeus  (,-/,/^'.  Jhr>.
Cent. ■'■  rt  3  ^- iii-  1  I 34 .\i.  I v.  :;0  i  3) and in the

writing;  of  the  church  of  Lugdiinum  and  Vienn.i
(in  Pais,  ///i  v.  1 58).  {c)  In  .Africa,  as  already  mentioned,
Tertulliart  knows  of  an  insiruiiientuiii  Jo/iannii  to  which  bi.tti
the  Apocalypse  and  i  Jn.  belong;  the  Arts  of  J\'rpetua  and
Feliciias  shows  acquaintance  with  it  (cp  cc.  4  and  I'.'),  (if)  In
Egypt  the  /udiciiiin  Petri  seems  to  know  the  book  (Hilgtnf.
Naz'.  Test.'cxtr.  Can.  Reccptuin  loi);  (<•)  for  Antioch,  lii^hop
Theophikis  (Eus.  II Ii  iv.  24  i)  is  our  witness  10  the  same  efTuct  ;
and  (y )  for  Home,  the  Muratorian  Canon,  (g)  Clement  of  .Mex-
andria  cites  the  Apocalypse  (I'ud.  2  108  iig;  Strom.  0  106),
Origen  is  unaware  of  any  reason  for  doubting  its  apostolic  origin
{in  Jos.  J  loin.  6;  cp  Eus.  HE  vi.  209).

The  situation  changes,  however,  in  the  third  century.

As  early  as  in  the  second  century  Marcion  had  refused

, to  recognise  the  book  (Tert.  Adz:  Marc.  45)

4,  oFu ,  ., _  __ii_,i »  _f  .u„ \i — : .^**^;k..*.^.


Cent.


and  the  so-called  sect  of  the  Alogi  attributed


both  the  Apocalypse  and  the  Fourth  Gosjiel
to  Cerinthus  (Epiph.  //«/-.  51,  Philastr.  Hirr.  60 --
Hippolytus  ;  cp  Iren.  iii.  11 9) — probably  on  account  of
their  own  hostility  to  Montanism  (after  Irenxus  ;  Th.
Zahn,  Kaiioin-gesch.  1239^,  Bousset,  Koinm.  16/).

This  opposition  by  the  .Alogi  was  continueil  by  the  Roman
presbyter  Caius,  who,  in  his  dispute  with  the  Montanist  Proclus,

194


APOCALYPSE

also  attributed  the  work  to  Cerinthus  (Eus.  HE  iii.  28a).  From
the  refutation  of  Cains  by  Hippolytiis  ((cn/)aAaia  acaro.  raiov,
As-iem.  Bihl.  Or.  iii.  1  15;  fragments  in  Gwynn,  Hermalh.  6
3)7-418  ;  cp  also  the  writuijj  catalogued  in  the  inscription  on  the
throne —iiirfp  toO  ko-to.  '\\oa.vvi\vtva.-f^tKLovKaL\  airoKaAvi^cuit)  we
learn  that  Caius  directly  took  up  and  continued  the  criticism  of
the  Alogi.

The  criticism  of  Dionysius  of  Alexandria  (Eus.  HE
vii.  25)  was  more  moderate  and  more  effective.  He
does  not  liold  Cerinthus  to  have  l)ecn  the  author  of  the
Apocalypse,  but  conjectures  that  it  must  have  l)ccn  the
work  of  some  other  John  than  the  son  of  Zchedee,
arguing  from  a  comparison  between  the  Apocalypse  on
the  one  hand  and  the  Cjosijel  and  Epistles  on  the  other
as  to  style,  language,  and  contents.  The  criticism  of
Dionysius  was  afterwards  taken  up  by  Eusebius,  who
was  the  first  to  provide  a  firm  basis  for  the  conjecture  of
Dionysius  as  to  a  second  John  by  a  reference  to  what
Papias  says  of  '  both  '  Johns  {HK  iii.  39)  and  inclines  to
class  the  Apocalypse  with  the  spurious  books,  voOoi  \  IIP.
iii.  254).

Henceforward  the  view  of  Dionysius  and  Eusebius
became  the  prevailing  one  in  the  Eastern  Church.

The  book  was  recognised,  indeed,  by  Methodius  of  Tyre
(.?;w/r'j.  I5O5  84^)  and  I'amphilus  (.  )/o/.,  ed.  de  la  Rue,
4  25  3^),  but  on  the  other  hand  unrecognised
0.  Eastern  l,y  Cyril  (fatcch.  4  33-36),  Greg,  of  Naz.  (Carm.
Church.  33)1  the  Synod  of  Laodicea  (Can.  64,  see  Zahn,
iif>.  cit.  2  197  Jf.),  the  Afiostolical  Constitu-
tions (Can.  85  (84];  Zahn,  2  191^^),  the  Janihics  of  .Seleucus
(Zahn,  2  217).  The  Apocalypse  is  not  mentioned  by  Theodore
of  Mopsuestia,  or  by  Chrysostom  (cp  the  wpo6e<opia  of  the
Synopsis  of  Chrysostom,  Zahn,  2  230),  or  by  Theodoret.  In  the
Stichometry  of  Nicephorus  manipulated  in  Jerusalem  (circa
850;  Zahn,  22882967^)  it  figures  among  the  Aniilcgomena ;
in  the  list  of  the  sixty  canonical  books  it  is  not  found,  though  it
is  again  introduced  into  the  Syno/>sis  of  .\thanasius.

The  unf;ivourable  judgment  of  the  Syrian  church  re-
garding it  is  very  noteworthy.

The  Doctrine  0/  Addai  which,  in  the  form  in  which  we  now
have  it,  dates  from  about  400  A.U.,  recognises,  as  authoritative
scripture,  nothing  beyond  the  four  gospels  (Diates-
6.  Syrian  saron),  the  Pauline  Epistles,  and  Acts.  p'rom
Church,  'he  Peshitta  it  is  wholly  absent.  Whether  Ephraim
recognises  the  Apocalypse  as  canonical  is,  to  say
the  least,  doubtful.  The  Greek  works  that  pa-ss  under  his  name,
beingofuncert.ain  authenticity,  cannot  here  betaken  into  account,
and  thus  the  evidence  that  he  did  appears  to  rest  mainly  on  a  single
passage  (Opera,  Assem.  2  232,  cp  Rev.  01-3).!  In  any  case,
the  noteworthy  fact  remains  that  Ephraim  cites  the  Apocalypse
but  little,  and  develops  his  apocalyptical  ideas  on  lines  supplied
by  other  writings.  Besides,  the  Syrian  Church  did  not  look  upon
the  book  with  favour.^  Jacob  of  Edessa  (oh.  708)  cites  it
(Ephraemi  opera,  ed.  Assem.  1  192),  and  ."•  r  Salll)  (oh.  1171),
bishop  of  Mabug  (MabbOgh),  comments  on  it  (Gwynn,  Ixx.xvii
ci);  but  Kar-Hebrsus  (oh.  1286)  holds  it  to  be  the  work  of
Cerinthus  or  of  the  'other'  John  (Assem.  Hihl.  Or.  3  15),  and
'Ebed  Je'Su'  (oh.  1318)  omits  it  from  his  list  of  canonical  scriptures.
In  an  Armenian  Canon  also,  by  Mechitar  of  Aivirank  (1290),
the  .Vpocalypse  is  reckoned  among  the  Aiitilegomena.

Though  the  opposition  to  the  Apocalypse  was  thus
„ . -  persistent  in  the  S3Tian  Church, it  gradu-

■  „  ally  died  away  in  the  other  Eastern  prov-

^° inces.

The  book  is  acknowledged  by  Athanasius,  Didymus,  Cyr.  Alex.,
Nilus,  Isidore  of  Pelusium  (Egypt),^  Gregory  of  Nyssa,
Epiphanius  of  Salamisj  and  Johannes  Damascenus.  Andrew,
archbishop  of  Csesarea  \n  Cappadocia,  wrote  his  commentary  on
it  in  the  first  half  of  the  fifth  century.  He  was  not,  however,
followed  in  this  until  the  ninth  century,  when  Arethas,  his  suc-
cessor in  office,  also  undertook  the  task.

In  the  Western  Church,  on  the  other  hand,  the
Apocalypse  was  accepted  unanimously  from  the  first.
8  West  Hippolytus  (sec  above)  defended  and  com-
■  mented  on  it  in  a  no  longer  e.\tant  work,
and  makes  copious  quotations  from  it  in  his  Com-
mentary on  Daniel  and  in  his  De  Antichristo.

Similarly,  it  is  recognised  by  Lact.antius  (fnstit.  2  2  T 10,
epit. 42; cpTis^X Hilary {De Trin.  (52043), Ambrose

1  Owjnn(7"/j<'  Apocalypse  0/  St.  John  in  a  Syriac  I'ersion,
Dublin-London,  1897,  p.  ciii)  cites  also  De  Lamy,  Hymn.  1  66
— a  pass.ige  which  the  present  writer  finds  himself  unable  to
accept  as  proof.

2  Thomas  of  Harkel,  it  is  true,  included  it  in  his  translation,
as  probably  also  (according  to  the  latest  researches  of  Gwynn)
did  Philoxenus  of  Mabug  (Mabbugh).

3  See  Lflcke,  V^ersuch  einer  vollst&ndigen  Einleitung  in  die
Offenbarung  Johannis  (*),  Bonn,  185a.

195


APOCALYPSE

(De  Virg.  14,  De  Spiritu  3  ao),  Rufinus  {Exp.  in  Symh.  37) ;
on  Novatus,  Commodian,  Arnobius,  and  others  see  Lardner,
Credibility  o/the  Gospel  History.

Augustine  (in  Evang.-Joh.  1836,  Epist.  118,  Civ.
Dei  2ii7)  insists  on  the  identity  of  the  author  of  the
Gospel  with  the  writer  of  the  .^pocalypse.

The  liook  was  acknowledged  at  the  synods  of  Hippo  (39p)and
Carthage  (397).  As  early  as  the  end  of  the  third  century  it  was
commented  on  by  Victorinus,  bishop  of  Pettau  (i;;^.  303  a.d.).
j He  was  followed  by  the  Uonatist  Ticonius  (Ixrfore  380).

An  exceptional  position  was  taken  up  by  Jerome,  who,
under  eastern  influence,  relegated  the  Af>ocalypse  to  the
second  class  of  script urce  ecclesiastiae  {in  Ps.  149),
as  also  afterwards  by  Philastrius,  if  it  be  indeed  the  case
that  the  book  was  not  mentioned  in  the  Canon  of  his
De  hceresibus  87/.

At  a  later  date  the  capitulum  Aquisgranense  {Corp.  Jur.
Germ.,  ed.  Walter,  ii.  l77y;,  cap.  20),  adopting  the  decision  of
the  Synod  of  Laodicea,  removed  it  from  the  Canon.

At  the  Reformation  the  view  of  Jerome  was  revived

by  I'',rasmus  in  his  Annotationes. Luther's  well-known

_. „ adverse judgment, pronounced in his

I  .. '  preface  of  1522,  rests  more  on  a  religious

■ than on a scientific foundation. Sub-

sec|uently  he  gradually  modified  his  view  in  a  sense  more

favourable  to  the  book. In  his  translation,  however,  he

indicated  his  unfavourable  opinion  so  far  at  all  events

that  he  relegated  James,  Jude,  Hebrews,  and  the  Apoca-

lyi)se  to  the  end  of  the  NT  without  pagination. The


last  edition  of  the  NT  in  this  form  appeared  in  1689.
C'arlstadt  {Libellus  de  caiumicis  scriptttris,  1520),
falling  back  on  the  criticism  of  Eusebius,  classed  the
Apocalypse  among  the  seven  Aniilcgomena.  The
opposition  to  its  reception  lasted  down  to  the  following
century,  and  disappeared  only  after  the  introduction  of
John  Gerhard's  cunningly  devised  distinction  between
canonical  and  deutero-canonical  writings  {Loc.  theol.  i.
cap.  9,  §  241).  In  the  reformed  churches  the  opposition
disappeared  much  earlier — from  the  time  of  Calvin,
indeed.

In  the  eighteenth  century  the  question  was  again  revived  by
Abauzit  (Discours  hist,  surtapoc.  (in  (Euz'res diverses,  torn,  i.,
1770);  Hermann  Oeder  {Christlich  freie  Untersuch.  iib.  d.
sogcnanntc  Offenh.  Joh.,  published  by  Sernler,  Halle,  1769),
reverting  to  the  view  of  Caius  of  Rome,  attributed  the  book  to
Cerinthus.  He  was  followed  by  Sernler  (Freie  Untersuch.  des
Canons,  1772,  and  in  many  controversial  writings),  and  byCorrodi
(Gcsch.  des  Chiliasmus,  1781).  The  best  defence  was  that  of
Ha.n\v\g  {Apolo/;ic  der  ApoA.,  1780-83).  Cp  also  the  .successive
editions  of  J.  D.  Michaelis,  Junl.  in  die  gSttliclien  SchHften
from  1750  onwards.

Our  sources  for  the  text  are  the  following  : —

A.  Greek  .1A9.9.— (t)  Uncials.  It  exists  in  KAC  (89-5  14  V  14-17
85-016 IO10-II3 1013-182  19  5-22  21 being  absent),  also  in P

Porfirianus  Chiovensis  s^c.  9  Act.  Cath.  Paul.

10.  Text:' Apoc.  (10  12-17  I  1912-20  2  226-21  being  absent),

the  material.  =i"J Q  ('"  Tischendorf, li), Vaticanus 2066

sa;c.  8  (Apoc.  only).  (2)  Cursives.  Of  these
some  seventy  are  more  or  less  collated.  Their  readings  can  be
learned  from  the  editions  and  collations  of  Mill-Kuster  (1710),
IJengel  (i734#),  Wetstein  (1751-2),  Matthsei  (1782-88,  torn,  x.).
Alter  (1786-87),  Birch  {\'arite  Lectt.  in  Apok.,  1800),  Scholz
('30-36),  Scrivener  {Codex  Augiensis,  1859;  Adversaria
Critica,  '93),  Tregelles  ('57-72),  Ti.schendorf  (ed.  octava  major),
Alford  {.Me^v  Test.  vol.  iv.  ed.  2,  1885),  Simcox  (/.  Phil.  22
28577:).

B.  I'ersions. — (i)  Latin. — .\  good  deal  is  now  known  about
these.  The  oldest  stage  is  represented  by  h  (Floriacensis),  the
Latin  translation  used  by  Primasius  (Haussleiter,  Forschungen
zur  Gesch.  des  Kanons  iv.) ;  the  intermediate,  by  the  Gig.as
Holmensis  (ed.  Belsheim,  '79).  The  best  material  for  the
Vulgate  is  lirought  together  in  Lachmann  (.\o7\  Test.)  and
Tischendorf.  (2)  Syriac— A  valuable  Syriac  rendering
(probablv  the  Philoxeniana)  has  recently  been  edited  by  Gwynn
{op.  cit.y^  The  Syriac  MSS  hitherto  known  (see  Gwynn,  xiv._^.)
represent  the  text  of  Thomas  of  Harkel.  (3)  Importance  also
attaches  to  the  still  comparatively  unexplored  Coptic  (see
Goussen,  Stud.  Theol.  i.)  and  Armeni.-»n  versions.

C.  Church  Fathers. — There  are  copious  citations  in  Origen,
Hippolytus  (especially  in  the  De  Antichristo  and  in  the  com-

'  See  F.  Delitzsch,  Handschriftliche  Funde,  1861  ;  B.  Weiss,
'Die  Joh. -Apok.'  in  Texte  u.  Untersuch.' i  ('91);  W.
Bousset,  '  Text-kritische  Studien  '  in  Texte  u.  L  'ntersuch.  1 1  4
('94);  Gwynn,  The  Apocalypse  in  a  Syriac  version,  1897;  on
which  see  T.  K.  Abbot,  'Syriac  version  of  Apocalypse,'  Htrm-
athena,  1897,  pp.  27-35.

2  See  last  note.

196


APOCALYPSE

nietitarj-  on  Daniel;  »ee  the  new  edition  by  lionwetMih  and
Acheliii),  and  Cyorian.  The  text  used  hy  Andrew  of  Ca:>area
and  Arelha.1  in  tneir  commentaries  han  nut  a-s  yet  t>een  fully
cstalilished.  The  text  of  the  lost  coninicntary  of  Ticonius  can
1m-xi  l>e  made  out  from  the  excerpt  from  the  commentary  on  the
INrudo-Augustinian  Homilies.

In  the  attrnipi  to  classify  this  material,  it  is  l>est  to

Ikj;!!!  witli  ilu-  class  which  shows  the  latest  text— namely,

11 Clasaifica. ^ '  ^  ^^^  Arethas  class,  so  named  because

tion.  '^  "^"^  ^^  *'"''  order  was  used  by  Arethas

for  his  Commentary  (hence  also  many

cursives of this class are, strictly  sijcaking, MSS  of

Arethas-Comnientaries). To  this  class  belong  Q  and

about  forty  of  the  more  or  less  known  cursives. The

material  being  so  defective,  separate  groups  within  the

class  can  hardly  be  distinguished.

Tentatively  and  under  great  reservation  a  few  may  here  be
suggested,  (i.)  9,  13,  27,  93  are  somewhat  closely  connected
(cp  7V,/r,  j8^,  p.  658) ;  {ii.)2,  8,  (14),  140,  151,  29,  50,  97  (the  last
three  very  mtimately  related),  94;  (iii.)  6,  11,  31,  (47);  (iv.)
lastly,  y,  14,  93  show  near  affinities.  The  group  "formed  by  (v.)
7,  16.  39,  45,  69  represents  the  transition-stage  between  this  class
(i)  and  the  next  class  (2).

The  second  class,  which  we  can  detach  from  the  rest
as  having  arisen  out  of  a  Liter  redaction,  is  (2)  the  so-
called  '  .Andrew  '  class — the  cla.ss  to  which  the  text  used
by  Andrew  (see  alxne,  §  10  (')  in  his  conmientary
belonged.  It  falls  into  several  clearly  distinguishable
sulMjrdinate  groups.

(i.)  The  group  consisting  of  35,  68,  87,  121  stands  almost
entirely  apart,  presenting  .is  it  does  many  points  of  contact
with  the  .\reth.as  group,  but  often  showing  a  very  peculiar  text.
The  following  three  groups,  on  the  other  hand,  are  very  closely
akin  :  (ii.)  i,  12,  36,  81,  152 (often  with  a  very  archaic  Latinising
substratum);  (iii.)  28,  73,  79,  80,  09  ;  (iv.)io,  17,  37,  ^9,  (72],  91,
96,  (154],  161.  Cod.  P  admits  of  Ijeing  ranked  with  this  class  as
a  whole,  but  cannot  be  associated  with  any  of  the  subordinate
groups  in  particular.

Of  all  the  known  cursives  there  are  only  (3)  four — [26],
38,  51,  95 — which  it  h.-is  hitherto  been  found  impossible
to  classify  ; they  show  an  ancient  te.xt.

It is as  yet  difficult to  detect the 'Western  text"
12.  'Western Jf":^ '^.':''') '" the Apocalypse ; hut
Text '  ^^' gradually l>ecome practic-

able as  in  recent  years  new  sources
have  lieconie  accessible.

Witnesses  to  it,  though  only  in  part,  are  the  uncial  K  (with  a
very  erratic  and  only  ijarlially  ancient  text),  the  text  of  Priniasius
(identical,  according  to  Haussleiler's  investigations,  with  C'y-
prian's  text,  and  thus  old  African),  the  fragments  of  A,  the  (ligas
Holniensis  g;  Ticonius  (containing  a  later  development  of  the
text),  and  the  Syriac  version  edited  by  Gwynn  and  designated  2
(the  later  version  known  .ys  ,S  shows  a  text  almost  everywhere
corrected  in  accordance  with  the  .Arethas  class,  though  in  many
places  also  it  contains  a  text  older  than  2).  To  the  same  cate-
gory l)elong  also,  in  part,  the  ^roup  i,  12,  36,  81,  152  (cp  (Iwynn,
cxli.)  and,  finally,  the  Armenian  version,  which,  unfortunately,
is  not  yet  sufficiently  known  (note  the  coincidence  of  i,  12,  36,
etc.  with  arm.  ;  cp  Uousset,  Koiiiih.  178).  .A  further  point
worthy  of  notice  is  the  close  affinity  of  K,  2  (S),  and  Origen  ;  one
might  almost  venture  to  constitute  N20r.  a  distinct  group  in  the
Western  Cla.ss  (Housset,  181  ;  Gwynn,  Iv^).

Distinctly  the  best  text  is  that  presented  by  ACVg.
The \'ulgate furnishes us with  good means of  con-

13  Result ^""""'"S  'h^  t^"'  °f  -^^^  especially  where

the  two  differ  or  where  (J  is  wanting.
A\g. ,  therefore,  w  here  C  is  wanting,  often  constitutes  a
stronger  testimony  than  that  of  all  the  other  witnesses
together.

'  I  John  am  he  that  heard  and  saw  these  things '
(228  k\'  ;  cp  1  4  9). Are  we  to  identify  this  John  with  the

14  V^ntaaaaA  '^postle,  the  son  of  Zebedee? Within

author  '^^  ^^"^  ''^'^'^  ^^  '♦  "''S^' f'^''"'>'  ^

urged  against  this  identification.  The
first  to  submit  the  question  to  thorough  discussion  was
Dionysius  of  .Me.xandria  (see  above,  §  4)  ;  in  the  result
he  attributed  the  txjok  to  another  John.  'Ihis  theory
of  a  second  John,  adopted  also  by  Eusebius  (HE
iii.  39  I  ff.),  w.as  revived  in  the  present  century  (Hleek,
Ewald,  de  Weite,  LUcke,  Neander,  Diisterdieck.
etc. ),  the  John  of  the  .Apocalypse  l)eing  usually  in  this
case  identified  with  the  '  IVesbyter '  of  Eus.  HE
iii.  39 1  ff. Criticism advanced  another  step,  however.

«97


APOCALYPSE

I  and  declared  the  whole  tradition  regarding  the  presence
of  John  the  .AiH)stle  (and  Evangelist)  in  .Asia  Minor  to
have  been  due  to  a  confusion  Ijetween  his  name  and  that
of  the  presbyter.

.So  Vogel,  Der  EvaH^tlist  Johannts,  1801-4 ;  LiitzcllieTger,
Die  kinklicht  Trattilton  fiber  den  Aposttt  Joktinn,s,  1840;
Keim,  Cesch.  Jesu  voh  Sazam,  1867,  1  161  /  ;  Scholtcn,  Per
Af>.  Johantus  in  Kleinasien,  187a;  WeiflTenbach,  Dot  t'ufiat-
fragment,  1874  ;  Thoma,  Das  Johannisev.,  1882  ;  and  other*.
.Against  .Scholten  cp  Hilgenfeld,  /UT,  1876  77,  also  Zahn,
St.  A'r.  1866,  p.  649^.  ;  Actajoannis  civ.,  .Steitz,  St.  Kr.,  1868,
p.  509^.,  Herzog,  A' A' 11  78^

The  question  is  difficult.  The  first  remark  to  l)e  made
upon  it  is  that  the  assumption  that  there  were  two  Johns

16  Onlv  '"  '^^''^  Minor— the  ajwstle  and  the  presbyter
one  John *^"''^ ""'X slender supix)rt in ancient

in  Asia "'■^'^''''""- Whatever  the  interpretation  we

Minor  '"'^^  ''"^  ^^  ^^^  important  testimony  of
Fapias  preserved  by  Eu.sebius  {I/Ji  iii.
39 1  ^),  it  is  at  least  certain  that  I^ipias  spe-aks  not  of
two  Johns  in  Asia  Minor — the  ajKjstle  and  the  presbyter
— but  of  one  John,  whom  we  are  to  look  for  as  a  near
neighlxjur  of  Papias  in  space  and  time.  Of  a  second
John  the  second  century  and  the  first  half  of  the  third
know  nothing  ;  he  is  unknown  to  Iren;vus  and  to  those
who  disputed  the  claims  of  the  Fourth  {jos(x;I,  to  the
Alogi  and  to  Caius,  to  Tertullian,  to  Clement,  and  to
Origen.  Not  till  the  time  of  Dionysius  of  .Alexandria  is
reached  do  we  find  any  indication  of  the  sort  (Eus.  I/E
vii.  25i6).  Even  Dionysius  alleges  no  other  evidence
than  that  in  his  day  two  graves  of  '  John  '  were  shown.

The  inference  he  draws  from  this—  that  there  must  have  Ijcen
two  Johns — is  by  no  means  a  stringent  one.  It  would  not  lie  less
reasonable  to  suppose  that  in  his  day  the  precise  burial-place  of
John  was  no  longer  known,  or  that  the  twofxi^/iiaTa  represented
two  distinct  holy  '  places '  of  John  (so  Jer.  <ie  vir.  ill.  9  :  ilu,r
tiientoricf  ;  Zahn,  Acta  Jo.  civ).  For  this  supposition,  Kusebius
h.xs  supplied  a  plausible  basis  by  combining  the  statement  of
Papias  about  two  Johns  with  the  traditions  mentioned  by
Dionysius  about  two  graves  of  John  at  Ephesus.

If  the  assumption  that  there  were  two  Johns  in  Asia
Minor  proves  to  tie  a  baseless  hypothesis — and  its  base-
ifi Vi th lessness  is  shown  bv  the  fact,  among  other

Presbyter  *'^'"S^'  ^'^•''  """  '  J"*^"  '  ^^  ^^^  ^''"o*"  '^
"  ■  so  often  spoken  of  w  ithout  distinguishing
phrase  of  any  kind— the  question  which  next  arises  is  as
to  whether  this  John  was  the  ajnistle  or  the  presbyter.
At  this  point  the  inijxirtant  testimony  of  Fapias  turns  the
scale  in  favour  of  the  presbyter.  For  his  contem]j<3rary
and  the  authority  w  hom  he  cjuotes  is — next  to  Aristion
— the  '  presbyter  '  John  (Eus.  ///•.'  iii.  394)  ;  and  Aristion
and  John  are  doubtless  also  to  Ik-  identified  with  the
Trpfff^vTfpoi  whom,  according  to  Eus.  ///;'  iii.  393,  Fapias
could  still  directly  interrogate.  The  evidence  of  2  Jn.
and  3  Jn. ,  claiming  as  they  do  to  l>e  written  by  the
Tfxa^VTfpos,  points  in  the  same  direction.  Moreover,
as  has  already  lieen  ix)inte(l  out  (^  14),  the  .Apocalypse
I  apparently  does  not  profess  to  have  Ijeen  written  by  the
I  apostle.  On  the  other  sitle,  it  is  true,  we  already  find
Justin  [Dial.  81  ;  see  above,  §  2)  asserting  the  apo.stolic
authorship.  It  is,  however,  noticeable  that  Ircnanis —
for  whom  the  tjospel,  the  Epistles,  and  the  .Ajjocalyjise
are  all  by  one  and  the  same  author — sjwaks  of  John
as  an  apostle  only  in  indefinite  expressions  similar  to
those  in  (ial.  1  19,  but  elsewhere  invariably  designates
I  him  as  'disciple'  (/ia^Tp-i^s)  ;  see  liousset,  op.  cit.  41/
I  Further,  Ircn.tus,  who  calls  Papias  a  disciple  of  John.
i  also  speaks  of  Folycarp  as  his  fellow  disciple  ( Eus.
//^iii.  39i).  If  we  refuse  to  supjxjse  that  Iren;eus
had  already  confounded  the  presbyter  with  the  apostle,
then  the  great  teacher  of  Folycarp  was  also,  according
to  Irenaius,  the  '  presbyter '  John  ;  for  Fapias  was  a
disciple  of  the  presbyter.  In  the  Muratorian  canon,
further,  John  is  called  simply  '  discipulus,'  whereas
Andrew  is  'apostolus.'  The  testimony  also  of  Foly-
crates  in  the  letter  to  Victor  (ap.  Eus.  HE\.  24 a_^)
claims  particular  attention  in  this  connection.  Here,
in  a  passage  where  everything  turns  upon  the  exact
titles of the persons named. Polycrales designates


APOCALYPSE

as  the  <rroix<**  of  Asia  Minor  (i)  the  apostle  Philip
and  his  daughters  ;  (2)  John  who  lay  on  the  bosom
of  the  Lord,  fidprvi  Kal  SiSdffKaXoi,  who  was  buried
in  Kphesus,  6s  (yevrjd-rj  lepei's  t6  iriraKov  ire(f)o-
priKu)i  ;  (3)  the  bishops  Polycarp,  Thrascas,  Sagaris,
F'apirius,  Melito.  Polycrates  thus  designates,  plainly
with  intention,  the  author  of  the  Fourth  Gospel  also
as  teacher  and  witness,  not  as  apostle.  Indeed,  the
traditions  relating  to  the  Fourth  Gospel  Ijeconie  much
more  intelligible  if  we  are  al>le  to  assume  that  the
witness  (Jn.  19 35,  ^Ktivos  olStv)  is  not  the  Galihean
apostle,  the  son  of  Zelx.'(lee,  but  another  John,  a
Jerusalemite  (Fiousset,  h'omin.  43/.).  It  may  also  be
remarked  that  the  statement  of  the  Fourth  Gos[x;l —
that  the  beloved  disciple  was  '  known  unto  the  high
priest'  (18 15) — -harmonises  well  with  the  account  of
Polycrates,  'who  Ix-came  priest'  (5s  ie/iei/y  eyevijdr)  ;
cp  further,  II.  Dclff,  .S7.  A>. ,  1891,  and  Harnack,
Chronol.  I456/. ).

The  inference  from  all  this  would  seem  to  be  that  the
(one)  John  of  Asi.i  Minor,  who  was  the  presbyter,  was
one  who  had  seen  Jesus  indeed,  but  not  one  of  the
numljcr  of  the  apostles.  The  John  of  the  Apocalypse
(cp  the  superscription  of  the  lipistlcs)  is  thus  the
presbyter.

Whether  the  .\pocalypsc  was  really  written  b\'  him  is
another question. In order to understand how  the

17  Rpal  Apocalypse  and  the  Fourth  (iospel  could
authorship  '  ''""^  ''*^  attributed  to  the  same  disciple
^'  of  the  Lord,  it  is  necessary  to  remove
them  both  a  little  distance  away  from  him.  John
is  only  the  eye-witness,  not  the  author  of  the  Fourth
Gospel  ;  .so,  in  like  manner,  in  the  Apocalypse  we
may  have  here  and  there  a  passage  that  can  be  traced
to  him,  but  the  book  as  a  whole  is  not  from  his  pen.
Gospel,  Epistles,  and  Apocalypse  all  come  from  the  same
school.  They  show  also  at  various  points  linguistic
affinities  (Housset,  Komm.  ■202  ff.).  They  had,  moreover,
at  first  the  same  history  :  they  were,  it  would  seem,  the
favourite  writings  of  Montanism,  and  were  all  three
alike  rejected  by  the  opponents  of  Montanism,  the
Alogi.

The  earliest  Cireek  fathers  who  in  any  measure
attempted  to  interpret  the  Apocalypse  were  Iren;BUS,
Hippolytus,  and  .Methodius  :

Iren;»;iis,  in  Adv.  /f,rr.  5; Hippolytus,  in  Comm.  on Daniel,

in  airoSetfis ;repi  toD  acnypio-Tou,  in extant fragments of  the

_  KecJaAaia Kara. Vaiov,  and in a no longer

18.  Interpreta-  extant commentary on the book itself;

tion  :  - Greek -Methodius in Sym/>. 150584^ Of

and  Latin.  continuous  commentaries  originating  in  the
(Ireek  Church  we  possess  only  those  of
.Andrew  (5th  cent.,  ed.  .Sylburg)  and  of  Arethas  (9th  cent.,  ed.
Cramer).

The  oldest  Latin  commentary,  which  contains  much
interesting  and  ancient  material  (for  example,  the
interpretation  of  various  passages  referring  to  Nero),  is
that  of  Victorinus  of  Pettau  (o/'.  303).  We  possess  it
only  in  Jeromes  redaction.  Haussleiter  is  about  to
edit  it  in  its  original  form.  An  e.xceedingly  powerful
influence  was  exercised  also  by  the  commentary  of
Ticonius.

This  work  is,  unfortunately,  no  longer  extant,  and  has  to  be
reconstructed,  as  far  as  the  materials  allow,  from  the  pseudo-
Augustinian  Iloinilite  in  Afioc.  (Migne,  Pat.  Lat.  35),  the
commentary  of  Prim.asius  {oh.  586,  ed.  princ.  Ha.sel,  1544),
and  (mainly)  the  great  compilations  of  Beatus,  written  in  776
(in  .-{/'ocrily/'sim,  ed.  F'lorez,  i77o).''

In  his  commentary,  written  before  380  A.ii. ,  wholly
from  the  Donatistic  point  of  view,  Ticonius  consistently
carries  out  the  spiritualistic  interpretation.  In  his
explanation  of  the  millennium  pas.sage  (20  i^)  he  was
afterwards  followed  by  Augustine  (Mousset,  Komm.  65).
Down  to  the  Middle  .\ges  the  exegesis  of  the  book
continuetl  to  follow  that  of  Ticonius,  if  his  Donatistic
tendency  \vi  left  out  of  account.

1  Cp  also  below,  8S  28  and  34.

2  See  Liicke,  Einl.  in  dit  Offeyibarung  ^'^^  1853;  Holtzmann,
HK \\  Bousset,  Komm.  ^iff.

3  See  Haussleiter,  ZKW'L  7  -iyiff.  \  Bousset,  Komm.  (>off.

I9Q


APOCALYPSE

Apart  from  the  works  already  named,  mention  must  be
made  of  those  of  Cassiodorus  (Comfilexiones  in  apocalyfuin
[ed.  Scipio  Maffey,  Florence,  1721]),  Bcda  (oA.  735;  expianatio
apocalypsis  in  Biblioth.  I'atr.  Cologne,  vol.  v.),  and  Ambrosius
Ansbertus  (c.  770  :  in  Af>ocalyftiim  UM  x.,  Bihl.  Patr.,  Col.,  ".t
2).  Dependent,  in  turn,  on  Ansbertus  are  Alcuin  (Migne,  J'nt.
y.a/.  100)and  Haymo  of  Halberstadt  [84J]  (Migne,  117),  while
Walafried  Strabo  s  Glossa  oniinaria  (Migne,  Pal.  I. at.  114)
depends  on  Haymo.  To  the  same  class  of  interpretations
l)elong  the  ]>erforniances  of  Ansclm  of  Laon  (Migne,  ItVJ),
Bruno  of  .\ste  (.Migne,  Wo),  Rupert  of  Deutz  (Migne,  lOit),
Richard  of  St.  Victor  (Migne,  I'.Ml),  Albertus  M.-ignus  (O^eia,
Lyons,  1651,  tom.  12),  a  commentary,  prokibly  in  reality  of
Waldensian  origin,  which  is  found,  in  two  recensions,  among
the  works  of  Thomas  Aquinas  (Opera,  Parma,  1869;  tom.  T.\
3247^  5."j^-).  Hugh  of  St.  Caro(i263;  J'oslilla),  Dionysius
Carthusius  (14th  cent.).  Thus  the  single  commentary  of
Ticonius  continued  to  dominate  the  whole  interpretation  of  the
Apocalypse  until  far  down  in  the  Middle  Ages.

The  next  interpreter  of  the  Apocalypse  to  attain  wide
influence was Joachim of Floris (soon after 1195;

10 Tnar>>iim Hxpositio  .  .  .  abbatis  Joachim  in  Apoc. ,

i».  joacmm.  Venice,  1527).  With  him  the  fantastic
futurist  (chiliastic)  interpretation  Ijcgan  to  gain  the
upix;r  hand  over  the  formerly  prevalent  spiritualising
view.  He  was  at  the  same  time  the  originator  of  a
'recapitulation  theory,'  which  he  carried  out  into  the
minutest  details.  As  '  the  Age  of  the  Spirit,'  associated
with  a  mendicant  order  that  was  to  ajjpear,  occupied  a
central  place  in  the  prophecies  of  Joachim,  he  naturally
became  the  prophet  of  the  '  opposition '  Franciscans,
and  his  works  were  accepted  by  them  as  sacred.  It
was  in  these  circles  accordingly  that  his  immediate
followers  in  the  interpretation  of  the  Apocalypse  arose
(Peter  Johannes  Olivie,  Ubertino  de  Casale,  Sera-
phinus  de  Fermo,  Annius  Viterbiensis,  Petrus  Galatinus) ;
but  his  influence  spread  very  widely  in  the  course  of
succeeding  centuries,  and  a  continuous  chain  of  many
links  connects  the  name  of  Joachim  with  that  of
Cocceius,  who,  in  virtue  of  his  Coj^ita/iones  de  apoc.  S.
Joannis  (Leyden,  1605),  is  usually  taken  as  the  typical
representative  of  the  modern  '  recapitulation  theory. '

Among  the  precursors  of  the  Reformation  the  anti-
Roman and anti- papal interpretation began to gain


20.  Reforma-
tion.


ground,  although  the  only  methodic:
exposition  of  this  view  that  can  be
named  is  the  commentary  (by  J(jhn
Purvey?),  emanating  (rom  \\'yclifiitei  circles  and
written  in  1390,  which  was  afterwards  published  by
Luther  [Commen/arius  in  Apoc.  ante  centum  annos
editus,  1530).

The  founder  of  a  consistently  elaborated  universal-
historical  interpretation  was  Nicolaus  de  Lyra  (1329,
„, -- .  1 ''^  ^^^  Postils,  which  have  been  often

h-  t^^^  1  "  printed).  He  is  followed  by  certain
nfpthofT  Catholic  interpreters,  and,  in  method
at  least,  by  Luther,  who  in  his  pre-
face of  1534  (Walch. ,  11)  gives,  in  the  sp.ace  of  a
few  pages,  a  clever  but  fantastic  interpretation  of  the
entire  book,  in  which,  as  might  be  expected,  the  anti-
papal  interest  holds  a  central  place.  Luther's  view-
continued  to  dominate  the  interpretation  of  the  Apoca-
lypse within  the  Lutheran  church.

it  prevailed  from  the  time  of  Lucas  Osi.tnder  (BiHiorum
sacrorum,  pars  3)  down  to  that  of  Jo.  Gerhard  (.Xnnot.  in
Apoc.  /oh.,  ]ena.,  1643)  .ind  Abr.  Calovius  (Hi/'lia  K07:  Test.
Illtistr.,  tom.  2  Frankfort,  1672  —  a  learned  work  with  valu-
able introductory  material  and  persistent  polemic  .igainst  Hugo
Grotius ;  for  a  list  of  the  commentaries  dependent  on  Luther
see  Bousset,  Komm.  94).  None  of  the  works  mentioned  was
of  any  value  for  the  real  interpretation  of  the  book  ;  the
.\poc:dvpse  and  its  interpretation,  so  far  as  the  Lutheran  Church
in  Germany  is  concerned,  became  merely  the  arena  for  anti-
(iatholic  polemics.

Within  this  period  the  number  of  works  produced  in
Germany  and  Switzerland  on  this  subject  without
dependence  on  the  dominant  Lutheran  view  was  very
small.

.\mong  them  the  Dilis^ens  atque  eruiiita  enarratio  lihri
Apoc.  Joh.,  1547,  of  Theodor  Bibliander  is  worthy  of  notice;
in  it  we  can  discern  in  the  treatment  of  chaps.  12  and  13  the

1  Cp  Wycliflfe's  own  interpretation  of  Rev.  20  in  the  Dialofcui
in  Neander,  KG  6  228.


22.  Scientific.


APOCALYPSE

beginnings  of  an  interprct.-xtion  looking  to  contemporary  con-
ditions. Kullin^cr  (I'redigUH,  15^7)  and  Junius  (Afioc.  Joli.
lUuitratit,  1591)  have  a  good  deal  vn  common  with  Hil>liander.

Wildest  and  most  fanUistic  of  all  are  the  English
commentaries  of  this  [x^riod.

Among  them  may  \x  named  Napier  of  Merchiston,  the
inventor  of  logarithms  (A  Plain  nisan'try  0/ the  ivhoU  Rtvela-
tion  0/  Saint  fohn,  1593),  Thom.-is  Hrightman  (AfuKalyfisis
A/>oca/y/>sfos,  Frankfort,  1609),  Joseph  Nietle  (Clavii  a/>,na-
lyptica,  1627),  and  .Sir  Is.-iac  Newton  {Cf/iscrrations  u/><in  II: f
I'rophfcies  0/  Daniel  and  the  Apocalypse  0/  St.  John,  1732 —
dcjMindent  upon  Mcde).

'I'hc  history  of  a  strictly  scientific  interpretation  of
the  .\|)()c:ilyijsc,  on  the  other  hand,  must  bo  held  to
Ix'jjin  wit!)  the  learned  commentaries  of
French  and  .Spanish  Catholic  theo-
logians. They  meet  the  Protestant  polemic  with  con-
spicuous and  indeed  often  astounding  erutlition,  and,
going  back  to  tiie  pointof  view  of  the  earlier  (.'hurch
fathers,  lay  the  foundations  of  .n  cautious  and  for  the
most  part  purely  escliatological  interpretation.

In  this  connection  the  works  of  Franciscus  Ribeira  (1578),
Ulasius  Vieg.xs(i6oi  ?  cpalso  Hell.irniinus,  Df  SuiHino  /'onti/ice,
lib.  tert.  De  .^ntichristo),  Hcnedictiis  IVreyra  ( i ^^.06  ?),  and  Cor-
nelius a  I^apide  (1626)  are  well  worthy  of  mention.

Conspicuous  alwve  them  all  is  the  Ve^ligatio  arcani
sensui  in  Afocalypsi  of  Ludovicus  ab  Alca/.ar.  That
writer  was  the  first  to  carry  out  consistently  the  idea  that
the  .\pocalypse  in  its  earlier  part  is  directed  against
Judaism,  and  in  its  second  against  Paganism,  so  that  in
ch.ips.  12  /  we  read  of  the  first  persecution  of  the
Christians  in  the  Roman  Empire,  and  in  ch.  19  of  the
tinid  conversion  of  that  Empire.  He  thus  presents  us
with  tlie  first  serious  attempt  to  arrive  at  a  historical
and  psychological  understanding  of  the  book.

The  ide.-»  worked  out  Ijy  .Mcazar  had  already  been  expressed
by  McMtc-nius  in  the  preface  to  his  edition  of  .Arethas  (("/•;,  uinenii
Coiitiitrntor.,  ed.  .Morelius  et  Hentenius  i),  and  by  .Salmeron
(C^ptra,  12,  Coliv^ne,  1614,  'In  sacram  Jo.  Apoc.  prailudia ').
It  ouRht  to  be  added  here  that  the  explanation  of  the  wounded
head  as  referring  to  Nero  Redivivus  is  found  (for  the  first  time
since  Victorinns)  in  the  commentary  of  the  Jesuit  Juan  Mariana.
It  U.1S  fro'u  the  Jesuits  that  Protestant  science  first  learned  how
to  v.ork  thi,  field.

(irotius  [Aftnot.  ad  XT,  Paris,  1664),  who  is  so  often
spoken  of  as  the  founder  of  scientific  e.\egesis,  is,  in  his
remarks  on  the  .Apocalypse  at  any  rate,  entirely  depend-
ent on  .Mcazar,  whose  interi)retation,  indeed,  he  has  not
improved  by  the  details  assuming  references  to  universal
history  and  contemporary  events  which  he  has  introduced
into  it.

(Irotius  in  turn  was  followed  by  Hammond  (cp  the  Latin
editions  of  Clericus,  torn.  1,  .\msterdam,  1698,  and  Clericus's
notes  to  Hammond),  Bossuet  (i633),  and  Herva;us  (1684).  In
Holland  and  ( lermany  the  fantastic  school  of  interpretation
continued  to  flourish  for  some  time  longer,  prominent  repre-
sentatives Ijeing,  in  Holland,  Vitringa,  with  his  profoundly
learned  acaKpio-tt  ajroKoAui/ifait  (1705;  dependent  on  Mede),
and  his  many  followers,  and  in  tlermany,  Bengel,  with  his
commentary  (1740-46-58)  and  sixty  practical  discourses  on  the
Ap<3calypse.  Much  greater  sobriety  is  shown  by  ^oh.  Marck
in  his  fn  Apoc.  Coinm.  1699,  with  its  copious  exegetical  material
and  valuable  introduction;  also  by  a  group  of  eschatological
interpreters  in  which  .are  included  F^leonora  Peters  (1696),
Antonius  I  Iriessun  (1717),  and  Jo.-ichim  Lange  {.-Ipokalyptisches
Liclit  u.  Kfc/U,  1730).

In  the  eighteenth  century,  although  Aubert  de  Verse
(/.<:  I  If/  lie  I' apocalypse,  1703)  followed  the  lines  laid
23  Since  dow n  by  Grotius,  Hannnond,  and  Hos-
18th"century.  ""T'-  ^''^  "''^rpretation  founded  on
'  allusions  to  contemporary  events  gained
the  ascendency,  and  in  a  very  narrow  form.  At  this
lx;riod  it  took  for  the  most  part  the  very  unfortunate
course  of  endeavouring  to  treat  the  w  hole  of  the  AjxJca-
lypse,  after  the  analogy  of  Mt.  24,  as  a  prophecy  of  the
destruction  of  Jerusalem.

In  this  category  must  be  placed  the  expositions  of  A))auzit
{Kssai  siir  Tapoc.,  1733),  Harduin  (1741).  Wetstein  (A/7'<-//«i  a*/
crisin  atquc  interpretationcm  .^'7'ed.  Semler,  1766),  Harenbcrg
(1759),  Hartwig  (cp  g  9),  and,  finally,  Zidlig  (1834).

On  the  other  hand,  we  find  much  that  is  rightly  said
in  Semler's  noies  to  Wetstein  in  Corrodi's  Gesch.  des
Chiliasmus.  And  a  return  was  made  to  the  sounder
general principles of Alcazar by Herrenschneider


APOCALYPSE

{Inaugural  disi.,  Str.issburg,  1786)  and  by  Kichhorn
(Cummenlarius,  1791).  Even  those  shreds  of  the
interpretation  that  l(xjks  to  universal  history,  which  had
still  jx'rsisted  in  showing  thcm.selves  in  .Alcazar's  work,
were  now  stripped  away,  and  thus  a  provisional  resting-
place  was  reached.

This  stitge  is  seen  in  the  works  of  Bleek  (Theol.  Ztschr.  2,
licrlin,  1820,  I'orlesungen  iiher  d ie  A  Pol; .  publi-hcd  by  Hossb.ich
ill  1862),  Kwald  (Cow///;.  1828,  Die  Johann.  S^hriften,  2,  1862),


De  VVette  (Kurze  Krklitrun^,  1848-54-62),  I.iitke  ( /  enuch  cinet
vollst&ndigen liinleitung  tn die  Offenba

1852),  V  * *

(■59-87)-


ttie  Offent'arung, 1812,  2nd
1852),  Volkmar  ('62),  and  also,  for  the  most  part, iJiisterdicck


In  all  these  works  the  interpretation  from  contem-
porary history  is  consistently  carried  out.  All  set  forth
from  the  decisive  observation  that  in  chap.  11  the  preserva-
tion of  the  temple  is  jiredicted,  and  all,  accordingly,  date
the  book  from  Ijefore  70  A.I).  Further,  they  .-ill  rightly
recognise  that  the  main  drift  of  the  .Xpf/calyiJse  is
directed  against  Rome  ;  all,  too  (e.vcept  Diisterdieck),
recognise  Nero  Redivivus  in  the  woundeti  head.  In
particular,  since  the  discovery,  independently  arrived  at
by  Fritzsche,  lienary,  and  Reuss,  that  the  nunilxT  666
is  intended  for  pij  ^Dp,  the  reference  to  Nero  has  Ijecome
the  rocker  de  bronce  of  all  exegesis  of  the  Apocalypse.

In  passing,  mention  may  be  made  ol  some  works  which,
although  following  obsolete  exegetical  methods,  are  not  without
a  scientific  value:  Hengstenberg  ^'49-'5i-'6i),  Kbrard  ('53),  Kiliot
{Hone  Apocalyptictf,  1851;  univ. -hist.),  .\iiberlen  ('54-'74),
Christian  ('61),  Luthardt  ('61),  Alford  (A'rtf  Testament,  4  2),
Kliefoth  ('74),  P.eck  {Erkl.  von  Offenh.  i.-xii.  ;  eschatol.)  and
Kiibel  (in  .Strack-Zdckler's  IfK,  1888;  this  takes  a  mcdi.-iting
course  between  the  standpoints  of  contemporary  history  and
eschatology).  See  also  Zahn,  'Apokalyptische  Stutlien,"  in
ZKHL,  1885-85.

The  interpretation  of  the  Apocalypse  entered  on  a
new  ph.^se '  as  soon  as  doubts  arose  regarding  the  unity
of  the  work  and  the  method  of  literary


24.  Question
of  unity.


criticism  to  be  applied.  The  conjecture,
which  had  l)een  hazarded  more  than  once,-
that  the  .Apocalypse  was  really  a  com[X)site  work  was
again  taken  up  independently  (i)  by  Daniel  \'blter, at

nr T>«j_  i-  _  the suggestion of  W'eizsacker, whose
26.  Redaction i  u  t-u . i u

hvDothe-is  P"'"'  ^^  ^'■''^- ^^^  particular hypo-

nypoineois.  ^,^^^^^ ^^^^ ^^^^^ ^^,  \o\xqx  »  as  to  the

composition  of  the  .Apocalypse  may  for  convenience
be  called  the  redaction  hyjxithesis  [Ueberarbeitungs-
Hypothcse).

He  .issumed  in  his  first  sketch,  which  he  has  not  substantially
modified,  a  fundamental  text  (Crvndscliri/t)  consisting  (apart
from  .single  verses)  of  1  1-4  4-fi  7  1-8  8/  14  1-7  18  19  1-4  14  14-20
195-10  dating  from  the  sixties,  and  an  appendix  IO1-II13  17,
dating  from  68-70  a.d.  This  underwent  three  (or  rather  four)
redactions,  of  which  the  latest  was  in  140  A.u. — or,  at  all  events,
later  than  130.

The  work  of  Vdlter  is  based  on  a  few  happy  observa-
tions. For  example,  he  saw  that  14  14-20  really  forms  the
close  of  an  apocalypse,  recognised  the  divergence  Ijetween
7 1-8  and  79-17.  the  true  character  of  lOi-ll  13, — and  so
forth.  Nevertheless,  broadly,  \'olter's  performance
gave  the  student  an  impression  of  excessive  arbitrariness,
and  was  rejected  on  almost  every  hand.

Against  the  first  edition  see  Harnatk,  TL/,,  1882,  Dec.  ;
Hilgenfeld,  ^Cll'T,  1882;  Warfield,  /'/w/,  Ke7'.  1884,  p.  228;
against  the  second  edition,  Jiilicher,  G'tP.-i,  1886,  pp.  25-38;  Zahn,
ZKH-L,  1886.

The  question  was  next  taken  up  from  an  entirely
different  side  (2)  by  E.  Vischer  ( '  Die  Offenb.  Joh.  eine
jiidische  Schrift  in  christlicher  fiearbeitung,'  in  l^exle  u.
Unters.,  1886,  2nd  ed.  1895);  the  result  has  been  a
lively  and  fruitful  discussion.  Vischer  lx;lieved  himself
to  have  discovered  that  the  ruling  chapters  (11/.)  of
the Apocalypse can be understood  only  on the as-

1  In  connection  with  what  follows  see  Holt?mann,  JPT,  1891;
Baldensperger,  /../.  7'lieol.  u.  Kircltc,  1894  ;  .A.  Meyer,  Theol.
Rundschau,  1897,  Hefie  2-3.

2  (;rotius,  Hammond,  V'ogel  (Comm.  vii.  De  Apoc.  J  ok.  i8ii-
1816),  Bleek  (lierl.  theol.  /.tschr.  2  24oyC;  he  aljandoned  his
view  in  Beitr.  2.  Evang.-Ktitik,  1846,  p.  81  ;  St.  h'r.  1855,  p.
220^).

3  Die  Entsteh.  der  Apok.,  1882,  and  ed.  1885;  Tk.  T,  i8<}i,
pp.  259i?:  608^;  Prot.  KZ,  1886,  p.  32/ ;  Dot  Problem  der
Apoc.,  1893.


APOCALYPSE

sumption  of  a  Jewish  origin.  As  he  nevertheless  con-
tinued to  Ijc  convinced  of  the  essential  unity  of  the
book,  he  inferred  that  in  the  form  in  which  we  now
have  it  it  is  a  Ckristian  redaction  of  a  Jewish  •writing.
To  the  Christiaiv  redactor,  besides  isolated  expressions,
he  attributed  the  following  passages:  1-3  59-14  79-17  1^  "
139/  14I-S13I3  103  I615  17i4  199-'»i3^2U4-6  2l5*-8
226-21.

Vischer's  able  treatise  found  wide  acceptance.  Among  those
who  signified  their  acceptance  of  his  main  thesis  were  Iselin
(Theol.  /..  aus  iter  Schveitz,  1887  ;  '  Apocalyplische  Studien  ')  ;
an  anonyi  '■ ^ ''  •""■ ""■^ '- ■  '^ i-.,i.  :_


TLZ,


ZATn\  i886,  pp.  167-71  ;  Overbeck


1887,  p.  28  /  ;  Mdn^^oz  in  Re-,:  tie  tlUol.  et  phil.
161  ;  Krriger  in  CGA,  1887,  pp.  26-35;  Simcox  in  Ex-
poiitor,  1887,  p.  425/;  On  the  other  hand,  Viiher  (/J/V  Offenb.
Jolt,  keine  ursfiriint;!.  jud.  Apok.,  1886),  Beyschlag  (St.  Kr.
1888),  and  Hilgenfeld  (ZW'T,  1890)  declared  themselves  against
it.

Athough  it  must  be  cordially  acknowledged  that  to
Vischer  belongs  the  honour  of  having  first  raised  the
question  in  its  entirety,  it  nmst  be  said  that  he  was
not  successful  in  his  attempt  to  solve  it.  He  has
neither  proved  the  Jewish  character  of  chap.  11  /  nor
justified  his  fundamental  thesis  regarding  the  unity  of
the  book.  We  shall  Ix;  doing  him  no  injustice  if  we
classify  him  among  those  who  uphold  the  '  redaction  '
hypothesis.

The  earliest  exponent  of  the  '  sources '  hypothesis
{QueUen-Hypotkese),  which  has  lately  come  into  coiu-
__ _  petition  with  that  of  redaction,  was  VVey-

26.  Sources  , . 1  1  1

.  ., . land,whowrote  almost  contemporaneously

hypothesis. ^^.,^j^  y.^^^^^^  ^.^1^ ^_  jggg pp ^^^.^^^  .

and  Om-verking  en  Compilatiehypothesen  toegepast  op  de
Apocal.  van  /. ,  1888).  Weyland  finds  in  the  Apocalypse
tico  Jewish  sources  (N  and  3)  which  have  been  worked
over  by  a  Christian  redactor.

K  corresponds,  roughly,  to  Viilter's  primary  document ;  3  to
the  first  and  second  of  VOlter's  redactors  (in  Vulter's  Appendix
K  and  3  are  separ.-\ted).  Weyland's  Christian  redactor  corre-
sponds in  a  general  way  with  Vischer's  redactor.  In  1894  Kauch
(Die  Offo.b.  des  J.)  signified  his  adherence  to  Weyland.

Against  both  the  hypotheses  we  have  just  described
serious  and  far-reaching  objections  present  themselves.
_,  . ,.  Against  the  'sources'  hypothesis  must

27.  ODjectlons.  j^  ^^ggj  jj^  substance!  the  linguistic
unity  of  the  Iwok  (see  below,  §  34);  against  the  redaction
theory  it  has  to  be  observed  (</)  that  the  fundamental
document  made  out  by  Volter  and  his  followers  (see
above,  §  25)  has  no  special  character  of  its  own,  inasmuch
as  all  the  really  living  and  concrete  passages  occurring
within  it  are  attributed  to  the  redactor  ;  {h)  that  the
disapp)earance  of  every  trace  of  these  numerous  later
redactions  is  remarkable.

From  such  considerations  the  necessity  for  a  third

way became apparent. This third way was first

„  . pointed  out  by  Weizsiicker  in  his  Apo-

h Jf™. ^tolic  Age. He  rightly  discerned  in  the

fiypo  • Apocalyptist's  thrice  repeated  number

of  seven  the  fi.xed  plan  of  an  author  who  wrote  the
Apocalypse  as  a  whole,  and  gave  to  his  work  the
character  of  a  literary  unity.  Into  this  literary
unity  certain  interpolations  intrude  with  disturbing
effect  (71-89-17  11  1-13  12 i-ii  12-17  13  17).  Thus  Weiz-
siicker arrived  at  his  fragment  hypothesis.  According
to  him  the  Apocalypse  is  a  literary  unity  proceeding
from  a  single  author,  into  which,  however,  apocalyptic
fragments  of  various  date  have  been  introduced  by  the
author  himself.  In  the  opinion  of  the  present  writer
these  are  the  lines  along  which  the  true  solution  of  the
problem  is  to  be  sought.  All  later  investigators  in  this
field  have  followed  one  or  other  of  the  three  hypotheses
just  enumerated.

Oscar  Holtzmann  (CrV  2  658-664)  assumes  a  Jewi.sh  ground-
work into  which  again  a  still  older  source  (13  14 6-13)  has  been
worked  in  a  Christian  revision.  Pfleiderer  (Urchristenthum,
1887,  pp.  318-56)  steers  an  eclectic  course  ;  Sabatier  (Les  i^ri^inei
littcraires  de  Capocalypse,  1887)  and  Schoen  (L'origine  de
fapoc.  1887)  represent  a  combination  of  Weizsacker  and  Vischer
(regarding  the  Apocalypse  as  the  work  of  a  Christian  author  who
has  embodied  Jewish  fragments  in  bis  book).

203


30.  Gunkel.


APOCALYPSE

A  thoroughly  elalxjrated  '  sources '  theory  is  that  of

Spitta  {Offenb.  Joh. ,  1884). In  diametrical  opposition

2fi Snitta. '"  Weizsacker, he  claims  to  see,  in  the

■ P  thrice  repeated series of seven, three

sources.

These  are  (a)  the  seal  source  or  Christian  primitive  Apoca-
lypse U  (U  ■=  Urapokalypse),  written  soon  after  60  A.u.  (practjc-
alfy,  apart  from  the  specifically  Christian  inteqjolations  of  the
redactor,  chaps.  1-tl  and  "9-17  81  19 9  10  228-21);  (h)  the  trumpet
source  J(l),  a  Jewi.sh  writing  (J  =  Judi.sch)of  the  reign  of  Caligula
(7i-a  89  IO1-7  11 15  12  13  14i-ii  I613-20  19ii-2o  liOi-is  21 1-8);
(c)  the  vials  source  Ji2),  from  the  time  of  Pompcy  (containing,
approximately,  the  remainder  of  the  book).

These  three  have  been  worked  together  into  a  collected
whole  by  a  Christian  redactor.  (The  additions  assigned
to  iiim  by  Spitta  are  of  alxjut  the  same  e.xtent  as  those
assigned  to  him  by  Vischer. )

The  sources  theory  was  next  carried  to  the  utmost
by  P.  .Schmidt  {Anmerkungen  iiber  die  Comp.der  Offenb.
Joh.,  1891).

Erl>es(/>/>  Oj^enb.Joh.,  1891)  in  his  separation  of  the  literary
sources  agrees  in  the  main  with  O.  Holtzmann,  but  also  main-
tains with  Volter  (whose  hypothesis  he  simplifies)  the  thoroughly
Christian  character  of  the  whole  book.  Bruston  (Les  origines
de  l^ apocalypse,  1888)  pursues  a  path  of  his  own.  .Mi-ndgoz
(.■Xniiales  de  bihliogr.  tlieot.  1  ('88]  pp.  41-45)  assumed  two
Jewish  apocalypses  and  a  Christian  redactor.

The  unity  of  the  book  is  defended  by  certain  scholars  :

Not  only  by  the  critics  of  Vischer  mentioned  above,  but  also
by  B.  Weiss  (AY«/.,  and  Texte  u.  V ntersuch.  8  1891),  Bovon
(Revue  de  tlu-ol.  et  phil.,  1887,  pp.  329-62),  Hirsclit  (Die  Apoc.
u.  ihre  neueste  Kritik,  1895),  and  Bloin  (  Tit.  T,  1883-84).  .\n  ex-
pectant attitude  is  taken  by  H  Holtzmann  (Junl.,  1892  ;  Hand-
koiiim.,  1893).

Finally,  altogether  new  lines  of  investigation  were
opened  up  by  (Junkel  in  his  Schbpf.  u.  Chaos  ('94).  He
controverted  sharply,  and  sometimes  per-
haps not  altogether  fairly,  both  the  current
me.thods  of  interpreting  the  .\pocalypse  (that  which
looks  to  contemporary  history  for  a  clue,  and  that
which  adheres  to  literary  critical  methods),  and  pro-
posed to  substitute  for  them,  or  at  least  to  co-ordinate  with
them,  a  history  of  apocalyptic  tradition.  He  insisted
with  emphasis  upon  the  thesis  that  the  (one)  Apocalyp-
tist  was  not  himself  the  creator  of  his  own  representa-
tions ;  that  his  prophecies  were  only  links  in  a  long
chain  of  tradition.  In  his  investigation  of  this  apo-
calyptic tradition  he  greatly  enlarged  the  scope  of  the
usual  question  '  Jewish  or  Christian  ? '  by  his  endeav-
ours to  prove  for  chap.  12  a  Babylonian  origin,  and
in  other  places  also  (see  below,  §  40)  to  trace  Baljylonian
influences  in  the  book.  Even  if  we  grant  that  Gunkel
has  often  overshot  the  mark, — as,  for  example,  when
he  refuses  to  recognise  Xero  in  the  beast  and  its  number
— it  is  undeniable  that  his  book  marks  the  beginning
of  a  new  epoch  in  the  interpretation  of  the  Apocalypse.

Stimulated  by  Gunkel,  and  accepting  some  of  his
results,  Bousset  {Der  Antichrist  in  der  Ueberlieferung
_  . des  Judenthians, des neuen Testaments,

31.  iJOUBSet.  ^^^^^  j^^  ^^.^^^  Kirche,  1895)  proceeded
to  illustrate  Gunkel's  method  by  applying  it  to  a  definite
concrete  example,  investigating  the  entire  tradition
regarding  .\ntichrist,  and  endeavouring  to  show  that
in  this  instance  a  stream  of  essentially  uniform  tradition
can  be  traced  from  New  Testament  times  right  through
the  Middle  Ages  and  beyond  them.  In  his  view  the
Apocalypse  can  be  shown  to  be  dependent  in  a  series
of  passages,  particularly  in  chap.  11,  on  this  already
ancient  tradition  regarding  .Antichrist.

This  view  has  been  controverted  by  Erbes  (T/ieologisckt
Arbeiten  aus  detti  r/teinischen  ivissenschaftiichen  Prediger-
verein  geivaudt,  Neue  Folge,  1,  Freiburg,  i.  B.,  1897),  who,  as
against  it,  argues  for  the  contemporary-history  method  in  its
most  perverse  form.

Finally,  in  the  Kritisch-exegetische  Kommentar  ('96),
Bousset  has  sought  to  bring  to  a  focus  the  result  of  the
labours  of  previous  workers.  In  his  method  of  inter-
pretation he  follows  Weizsacker  (fragment  hypothesis),
and  therefore  gives  a  continuous  commentary,  describing
the  character  of  each  particular  fragment  in  its  own
I  place.  In  his  exegesis  he  has  given  special  attention  to
204


APOCALYPSE

the  indications  of  (Junkcl,  and  to  the  result  of  his  own
researclies  on  the  sul)jcct  of  Antichrist.

To  Sinn  up  the  result  of  the  lalxjurs  of  the  last  fifteen

years  upon  the  Apocalypse. It  seems  to  be  settled  that

P It ^^^  Ajx)calypse  can  no  longer  Ik:  rej^arded

32.  Kesuits.  ^  ^  literary  unity. Against  such  a  view

criticism  finds  irresistible  considerations.

.■\mong  these  is  the  intuiigruiiy  between  7  j-8  and  79-17,  as
also  th.-\t  Ijctween  7  i-8  and  0  12^,  the  two  explanations  of  the
144,000  in  7  i_^  and  14  ij/".,  the  interruption  of  the  connection
caused  by  10-U  13,  the  jieculiar  new  becinning  made  in  12  i,  the
sini;ular  character  of  chap.  12,  the  tioublelte  presented  bv  chaps.
13  and  17,  the  fact  tliat  in  14  14-20  a  Last  judBment  is  depicted,
whilst  that  involved  in  13 does  not  arrive  till  I'J  11^;  the  observ.-i-
tion  that  in  chap.  17  two  representations  of  the  beast  and  his
associates  are  given  alongside  each  other  (see  below,  §  45)  ;  and
the  isolated  character  of  chaps.  17  and  18,  21  9-22  5.

Further,  the  chapters  do  not  represent  the  same  religious
level.  Chap.  7  1-8  (cp  20  7-9),  with  Us  particularistic  character,
is  out  of  harmony  IxJth  with  cliaps.  1-3  and  with  "9-17  ;  in  11  \/.
the  preservation  of  the  temple  is  expected,  whilst  in  21  22  the
new  Jerus.nlem  is  to  have  none.

Moreover,  different  parts  of  the  book  require  different  dates  :
chap.  11  1-2  must  h.ive  been  written  Ijefore  70  a. I).,  chap.  17  prob-
ably when  Vesp.-isian  had  alre.idy  been  emperor  for  some  time  ;
whilst  the  svriting,  as  a  whole,  cannot,  at  the  earliest,  have  been
llnislied  before  the  time  of  Do


\


This  result  holds  good  notwithstanding  Gunkd's
warning  against  the  overhasty  efforts  of  criticism.  That
a  variety  of  sources  and  older  traditions  have  been
worked  over  in  the  Apocalypse  will  not  be  denied  even
by  the  student  who  holds  that  it  is  no  longer  possible
to  reconstruct  the  sources.

It may  seem  doubtful  whether  a  general  character,

date, and  aim can be assigned to the Apocalypse  ;

T?  1 f ^°'^'  '^  ^'^^  been  seen,  the  work  is  not  a

33.  Keiative  jij^^^ary unity. Still, if there  be good

f  ^^  J  grountl  for  the  critical  conclusion  indicated

structure.  :_^^^^.^^  that  the  Apocalyptist  is  himself
an  inde|x'ndent  writer  who  has  simply  introduced  various
fragments  into  his  corpus  apocalypticum  (Weizsiicker,
Schon,  Sabatier,  Bousset),  a  relative  unity  has  already
been  proved  for  the  Apocalypse.  This  conclusion  is
contirmed,  step  by  step,  when  the  details  of  the  book
are  examined.

The  relative  unity  is  shown  (i)  in  the  artificial
structure  of  the  whole.

Four  separate  times  do  groups  of  seven  occur  (epistles,  seals,
trumpets,  vials)  ;  within  these  groups  the  prevailing  distribution
is  into  4  +  3.  The  delineations  of  judgment  and  its  horrors  are
reijularly  followed  by  pictures  of  joy  and  heavenly  bliss  ;  cp
7  11  14-19  14 1-5  15 1-4  19i-io.  Everywhere  artificial  con-
nections are  employed  in  order  to  bind  the  separate  parts
together  into  one  whole  :  cp,  for  example,  1  20  and  4  i,  64  and
I4  10  5-7  11  11  13;  also  19  2  14689-11  165-12^;  also  IS  19
7  8  21  2.

(2)  Further,  the  relative  unity  is  shown  clearly  in
the  uniformity  of  the  language  throughout.

The following are the more important

34.  Of  language  facts.» Throughout the entire boi)k are

and  style. found (a) strongly marked gr.ammatical

irregularities  —  anacolutha and impossible

constructions  {f.g.,  1  ^f.  12  7),  and  confusions  of  case,  especially

with  following  participles(l4  io2  18  [see  the  reading  of  X]  20812

5 11/  Oi  7  4  9^;^;  s  9  9 14 10  8 11 1 14  6  12 14 10 12  1748  IS  i2y:

10  6  20  2  21  27  [reading  of  K]).  In  1  13  and  14  14  (to  Like  only  one
instance)  the  reading  ii/itoioi'  vl'ov  avOpiunov  cannot  have  been
due  to  two  separate  persons.

(/')  Hebraisms,  especially  the  repetition  of  the  demonstrative
pronoun  in  the  relative  cl.ause  (38  72  9  138  12  208,  cp  I2014
179,  also  271726  3x2  21  O4  21  6),  and  the  Hebraistic  »cai' (3  20

10  7  149/).

(<)  The  const  rue  tio  ad  sensum  is  specially  frequent  (e.g..
Ait/.  5  6  12/  74  93^.  13  11  4  15  13  14  143  173  II  16  194  14);
sometimes  involving  a  plural  predicate  after  a  neuter  plural
subject  (324  4589  5  14  920  11  2  13  18  1^4  16  14  18  3  23  21  24).
Less  clearly  attested  is  the  simple  ungramm.atical  confusion  of
gender  (9  7  14  19  19  20  21  14  22  2  ;  see  the  MSS.).

((j)  Various  other  systematic  peculiarities  of  idiom.  For
example,  irpoaKvvtiv  governs  the  dative  when  the  object  is
efO«(4  10  7  II  11  16  19  4  229,  cp  14  7)  or  JpaKajr  (13  4),  whilst,  on
the  other  hand,  we  have  wpoo-ic.  to  ^piov,  ttji'  e'tKOva,  13[4l8 13  15
14  9  1 1  [19  20)  20  4  (in  16  2  also  we  should  read  tfji'  t'lKova  accord-

1  A  justification  of  these  results  in  detail  will  be  found  in  the
Author's  Commentary  on  this  l)Ook  (Introd.  pp.  183-208).  In
some  cases,  where  the  reading  adopted  is  less  strongly  attested,
the  citations  are  in  brackets.

205


APOCALYPSE

ing  to  the  readings  of  K,  which  are  wrongly  given  in  the  primed
editions).  The  instrumenlal  dative  is  extremely  rare  in  the
Apocalypse  j  its  place  is  often  taken  by  the  construction  with
Hebraistic  ty,  or  even  (but  rarely)  with  6ia  and  the  accusative
(4  1 1  12  1 1  13  14).  The  vocative  is  rarely  used  (twice  only  :  kv/h*,
11  17;  ovpavi,  IS  20).  After  a  neuter  plur.'il  ihe  predicate  is
usually  also  plural  (1  19  8  11  I64  lti2o[18i4|  20  12  21  4).  The
Apocalvptist,  except  in  a  very  few  cases,  construes  6  KaBrnityot
itrC  with  the  accusative,  tow  KoBi'itLtvov  ini  with  the  accusative,
TOW  Ka0rijxii'ov  ini  with  the  genitive,  T<j»  KoBriiitixf  ini  with  the
dative ;  he  writes  «»rl  to  litriunov,  but  tni  Tiuf  inrutnutv  (ex<  tp-
tion  in  14  9),  and  f'lrl  riji'  Kt<fM\r)v  invariably  (except  in  12  1).
He  construes  either  €7ri  rji  yrj?  or  «it  rijf  yiji'  (14  16,  «<ri  Trif  yiji'),
«»rl  r^  #aAa<r<jTjs  or  «i«  Tijf  da^atraav.  He  invariidjly  construes
ypajftfLv,  ioTofai  ini  with  accusative  (14  i  ytyp.  in\  tuv  fitTunutv
and  10  5  iaTai-ai  «'irt  ttjs  yVjt  are  no  exceptions  but  only  con-
firmations of  other  rules).  Noteworthy,  also,  is  the  coiist.int
vacillation  in  tense  between  present  and  future,  and,  in  descrip-
tions, between  present  and  aorist.  The  Apocalyptist  uses  llie
infinitive  almost  invari.ably  in  the  aorist.  Exceptions  occur  in  ilie
case  of  p Aim IV,  of  which  he  apparently  never  makes  an  aorist  ;
ahio  in  Il6l3i3(?).  On  the  other  han<l,  following  the  rule  that  is
customary  elsewhere,  he  construes  fjw'AAtii' almost  always  with  the
present  infinitive.  The  copula  is  often  wanting,  particularly  in
relative  sentences  (1  4  2  13  5  13  9  1 1  20  ic).  A  clumge  in  the  use
of  subjunctive  and  indicative  is  made  only  after  iVa  (oirut  does
not  occur  at  all),  but  here  also  a  certain  regularity  prevails.  A
quite  extraordinary  use  of  iva  occurs  in  12  14  and  14  13  (cp  Jn.
856  92  11  15).  In  its  use  of  particles  the  book  displays  an
oppressive  monotony  :  Kai  is  predominant  everywhere  ;  only  in
the  epistles  to  the  seven  churches  is  the  style  somewhat
livelier.

The  arrangement  of  the  words  is  markedly  Hebraistic.  In
choice  of  words  it  is  remarkably  so.  'I'he  following  characteristic
phr.ases  and  turns  of  expression  may  be  noted  :— Aoyo?  toO  9<oO
Ka'i  fiap-rvpia  'lijcroi/  ;  o  Kvpio^  6  6(iii  o  navroKpaTuip  ;  oTi'Of  Tou
dvfxoi)  TTj?  opy*)?  »  ^**"'  *i5  TOU9  aiuiua^  tujj'  atwfuji'  ;  Aifjiimj  Tov
TTDpot  <cal  Sfiou  ;  (^uAal  yAJxrcrai  Aaoi  tdti) ;  /Si^Aov  ni?  iVirit  ;
^poi'Tttl  (^Mui/al  aarpaiTai  creicrfios  ;  7rj)-yai_  viaTiup  ;  6  iiv  Kai  o  ^v
Kai  6  fp\6^€i'o^  ;  AoAcii/  and  aKo\ov0(iu  fxtrd',  oi'Ofxa  avru*;
fitTo.  Taiira  ;  aAr)6i»'0«  ;  oouAos  (in  a  pregnant  sense),  iJ.apTvpia,
fi.apTvp(lv  ;  heiKvvtiv  \  ciicdi' ;  cr<f>dTTfiv  ',  <rKr)fovi> ;  njptii/  rat
tiToAav.  Compare,  furllier,  the  eiuimcrations  in  0  15  11  18  l;f  16
19518  20  12  (tlie  formula  fiocpoi  Kai  fieydXoi);  the  beatitudes
(jiaicapios  ;  I3  14  13  10  15  19 9  206  22714):  the  doxologies  (lb
4  II  59  12/  7  12  153  19  I  6);  the  formul.e  introduced  with  ii&t
(\3ioiS  l-i  iil7g);'JiA0€i'rir)p.epa(,ipYi'i,iopa  etc.;  tii7lli8147
15  18  10  197).

The  general  style  of  the  Apocalyjise  is  monotonously
diffuse :  article  and  pre[5osition  are  almost  always
rejjealed  when  there  are  more  substantives  than  one,  as
also  is  the  governing  word  before  the  governed.  Whole
clauses  are  gone  back  upon  and  repealed  in  the
negative  : Hebrew  parallelism  is  not  unconuiion.

We  are now  at  last  able  to  form  a  tolerably  clear

conception of the personality, the time, the  circum-

stances, and the  literary  aims  of  the  apo-

■  calyptist  who  planned  the  .Apocalypse,  as  a

whole,  in  the  form  in  which  we  now  have  it.

(a)  The  Apocalyptist  writes  at  a  time  in  which  violent
persecutions  have  already  broken  out — indeed  they  are
beginning  to  become,  so  to  say,  epidemic.

Of  the  seven  churches,  four— Ephesus,  Pergamum,  Smyrna,
Philadelphia — are  passing  through  such  times  of  trial.  The
martyrs  already  form  a  distinct  class  in  the  general  body  of
believers.  They  are  destined  to  have  part  in  the  first  resur-
rection—before the  thousand  -  years  reign  begins  (204^.  cp
Tgj/'.).  The  seer  beholds  them  under  the  altar  (69^.).  All
through  the  book  this  time  of  struggle  is  kept  in  mind  (13  i
149^.  ISijf  106  17  6  IS  20-24).

{!>)  The  .Apocalyptist  predicts  a  still  mightier  and
more  strenuous  struggle.

In  this  struggle  the  predestinated  number  of  martyrs  is  to  be
fulfilled  (69^:).  Philadelphia  is  to  be  preserved^in  this  Last
great  tribulation  (3  10 ;  cp  the  jxeyoAij  #Ai'i/«t  of  7  14).  This
time  is  not  far  off:  the  martyrs  who  have  already  suffered  arc
bidden  endure  only  a  little  longer  (0  1 1).  Therefore,  '  Blessed
are  they  that  die  in  the  Lord  from  henceforth  '  (oir'  oprt  ;  14  1 3).

(c)  This  Struggle  turns,  and  will  in  the  future  turn,
upon  the  worship  of  the  beast.  That  this  beast  is
in  one  sense  or  another  the  Roman  Empire  or  con-
nected with  it,  is  admitted  on  all  hands.  It  is  important,
however,  to  consider  the  grounds  on  w  hich  the  .Apocalypse
opposes  Rome.  Rome's  horrible  deed  is  not,  as  might
perhaps  be  guessed,  the  destruction  of  Jerusalent,  nor
yet — in  the  first  instance,  at  le;isi — the  Neronian  per-
secution, but  the  worship  of  the  beast — i.e.,  Cwsar
worship  (cp  13  149/".  152/:  ItJs/  »o  17619ji/:  20
4-6;  cp  Mommsen,  J?dm.  Gesch.  Ssaon.). — What  the
306


APOCALYPSE

book  predicts  is  the  great  conflict  about  to  break  out  all
over  the  world  between  Christianity  on  the  one  hand  and
the  Roman  Empire  (with  the  Roman  state  religion,  the
worship  of  the  emperors)  on  the  other  (cp  Antichrist,

§7).

(</)  This  great  battle  will  begin  with  the  return  of
Nero  Rcdivivus.

In  common  with  the  rest  of  the  men  of  his  day,  the
Apocalyptist  shares  the  popular  expt-ctatioii  of  tlie  coming  again
of  that  emperor.  Nero  is(13  3  12  14)  the  head  that  was  wounded
to  death  and  afterwards  healed.  He  is  only  '  .as  it  were '  (u)«)
slain,  like  the  lamb  (.'>  6).  For  as  the  latter  continues  to  live  on
in  heaven,  so  does  Nero  prolong  a  shadowy  existence  in  hell.
Out  of  the  abyss  (17  s)  he  will  again  return,  and  as  Roman
Kmperor  demand  acloration.  Then  will  l>e  the  days  of  the  great
future  struggle. Hence  the name  of the beast is  656  —  i.e.,

nop  nn: (cp  An iichkist,  §  15).

((•)  Thus  the  date  of  the  Ai5ocaly[)se  admits  of  lieiiig
ajjproximately  determined.  The  ciui  of  tlic  first  century
is  already  sufficiently  indicated  by  the  fact  tiiat  the
Apocalyptist  expects  the  return  of  Xero  from  hell  (Th.
Zahn,  'Apocal.  Stud.'  inZA'II'Z.,  1885,  pp.  561-76,
1886,  pp.  337-52  393-405  ;  see  below,  §  45).  The
following  consideration  points  to  the  same  inference,
liehind  the  Apocalyptist  in  point  of  time  there  already
lies  a  great  persecution.  He  himself  is  again  living  in
limes  of  persecution,  and  is  expecting  worse  to  come.
Inasmuch  as  the  former  persecution  must  be  assumed
to  be  the  Xeronian,  we  are  compelled  to  carry  the
Apocalypse  down  to  the  later  period  of  Domilian.
When  we  do  so  the  fact  that  11  i  ff.  points
to  a  time  before  the  destruction  of  Jerusalem  need
not  cause  us  any  luisgiving  :  doubtless  the  passage
comes  from  an  earlier  source.  On  the  other  side  we
sh(juld  be  able  to  fix  an  inferior  limit  for  the  date,
could  it  be  shown  that  the  epistles  were  already  known
to  Ignatius  (see  above,  §  2).  The  date  thus  indicated
— the  close  of  the  first  century — was  in  ]joint  of  fact  the
date  at  which,  it  would  seem,  the  general  persecutions
of  the  Christians,  turning  substantially  on  the  rendering
of  divine  honour  to  the  emperor,  first  broke  out  (see
CiiKisTiAN,  §  6).  Tiie  Apocalypse,  as  we  now  have  it,
presupposes  conditions  very  siinilar  to  those  which  we
meet  in  the  well-known  corresjjondence  between  I 'liny
and  Trajan.  In  this  it  is  not  implied  that  the  Apocalypse
could  not  have  been  written  some  ten  years  or  more  earlier.

In  the  conclusion  just  indicated  we  find  ourselves  in
agreement  with  the  best  attested  tradition  as  to  the  date
of  the  writing  of  the  Apocalypse.

According  to  Irenitus  (v.  30  2  ;  cp  v.  20  7),  the  Apocalypse  was
'seen  '  at  the  close  of  Domilian's  reign  at  Patmos,  and  therefore,
of  course,  to  say  the  least,  not  written  earlier  (cp  Vict.  Pettau.
Comin.  on  Apoc.  10 11  ;  Eus.  HE  iii.  18  1-3  ;  Jer.  Dc  vir.  iltus.
p;  Sulp.  Sev.  Chron.'l-},\).  .A.  different  tradition  is  met  with,  it
IS  true — perhaps  in  Tertullian,  who  (De  pru-scr.  Hit-r.  36)
mentions  the  martyrdom  of  John  (by  boiling  oil — a  death  from
which  he  was  miraculously  delivered),  and  his  subse(|uent  banish-
ment, in  connection  with  the  martyrdoms  of  Peter  and  Paul
(but  see,  on  the  other  hand,  Scot-piace  15).  It  is  certain  that  at
all  events  Jerome  {Adv.Jcmin.  1  26  [2  16])  understood  Tertullian
as  assigning  this  martyrdom  and  banishment  of  John  to  the
reign  of  Nero  (cp  Eus.  Dem.  ETans:.  3  ;  the  superscription  of
the  .Syriac  translation  of  the  Apocalypse  edited  by  Ludovicus
de  Dieu  ;  the  Gnostic  Acts  of  John;  Theophylact  [who  gives
the  date  as  thirty-two  years  after  the  Ascension  ;  cp  the  notes
of  some  of  the  Greek  cursives  of  the  Fourth  Gospel  :  thirty  years
after  the  Ascension,  under  Domitian  (I);  Erbes,  48]).  Finally,
Epiphanius  (Hier,  .51  12  33)  will  have  it  that  the  book  was  written
under  Claudius.  The  same  statement  occurs  in  the  Commentary
of  Apringius  (upon  whom  see  Rousset,  CGN,  1895,  p.  2),  whence
it  found  its  way  into  that  of  Heatus  (ed.  Florez,  33).

The  Apocalj'p-se  is  distinguished  from  the  apocalyptic
literature  of Judaism  from  the time of the book of


37.  Details
of  criticism.


36.  Personality
of  Apocalyptist.


Daniel  onwards  by  the  high  pro-
phetic consciousness  which  it  displays.
The  Apocalyptist  as  he  stands  at
one  of  the  turning-points  of  the  world's  history  looks
with  a  clear  eye  into  the  future  and  feels  himself  to  be  a
prophet.  He  is  a  Christian  of  an  especial  type.  For
the  prophets  are  servants  of  God  in  a  peculiar  sense
( 1 1  I O7  11 18  226  [cp  153])  :  they  are  the  fellow-servants
of  the  angels  (229)  ;  other  Cliristians  are  so  only  in
so  far  as  they  follow  the  revelation  of  the  prophets
207


APOCALYPSE

(229).  God  is  master  of  the  spirits  of  the  prophets
(226  cp  17 17  19 10).  Hence  the  author  directly  claims
for  his  work  the  rank  of  a  sacred  book.  It  is  intended
from  the  first  to  Ije  publicly  read  ( 1 3)  ;  those  who  hear
it  and  obey  what  is  written  therein  are  blessed  ( 1 3
227),  and  whosoever  adds  to  or  takes  away  from  it  falls
under  the  most  grievous  curse  (22 18/).  The  frec|uent
mention  of  tiie  propliets  along  with  the  saints  {i.e..
Christians  in  general)— see  11 18  166  I82024 — is  a  proof,
not,  as  many  critics  have  supposed,  of  the  Jewish,  but  of

j  the  Christian,  origin  of  the  related  passages.  The  .Apoca-
lypse in  this  respect  was  the  forerunner  of  Montanism,
and  it  is  no  matter  for  surprise  that  it  was  specially
valued in Montanistic  circles. It is  also noteworthy

' that  the  Apocalyptist  speaks  to  his  own  age  and  time.

(  Whilst  Daniel  is  represented  as  receiving,  at  the  close  of
his  vision,  the  command  to  seal  the  book  for  long,  here

! in  sharp  contrast  we  read  (22 10)  '  Seal  not  up  the  words

i of  the  pro]5hecy. ' The  Apocalyptist  seems  to  have  been

j a  Jewish Christian  of  universalistic sympathies. For

i  him  the  name  of  Jew  is  a  name  of  honour  (29  89)  ;  he
seems  to  uphold  a  certain  prerogative  for  the  Jewish

I  peo|)le(7  1-8  11 1-132O7/. ).  He  shows  himself  intimately
familiar  with  the  language  of  the  OT.

Into  the  apocalyptic  unity  thus  defined,  isolated  frag-
ments  ha\e  been introduced in a  manner  which can
still be more or less clearly  detected.
Of  these  the  more  imjiortant  at  least  must
now be discussed, and some detailed
account  of  the  more  noteworthy  results  of  criticism  given.
Of recent critics the majority (Vischer, \'61ter,
Weyland, Pfleiderer, O. Holtzmann, Schmidt)  regard

;  _,  ,  p the  epistles  to  the  seven  churches  (chaps.

aps. -  .  ^_g^  ^^  having  been  originally  separate

from  the  rest  of  tlie  book  and  as  having  been  prefixed

j  only  after  the  Apocal3'pse  had  in  other  respects  assumed
its  present  form  ;  but  Spitta  has  shown  good  grounds
for  believing  that  chaps.  1-3  and  4-6  ought  not  to  be
separated,  and  (as  against  Vischer  and  others)  has
established  for  the  whole  of  chaps.  4-6  that  Christian
character  which  unquestionabl)'  belongs  to  ^d  ff.  Thus
Spitta  takes  chaps.  1-6  as  a  single  original  document
((Christian  primitive  apocalypse  =  U).

He  seeks  to  prove  this  by  pointing  out  that  there  is  a  definite
close  at  the  end  of  (>,  and  a  fresh  beginning  of  a  new  apocalypse
in  V  I  (so  also  P.  Schmidt).  But  the  sixth  seal  (Oi2_^.)  does  not
represent  the  final  catastrophe  ;  it  only  pictures  a  great  earth-
quake in  the  typical  apocalyptic  manner.  In  t3i5_^  the  end  is
still  to  come,  and  if,  with  .Spitta,  we  pass  on  to  79-17  immedi-
ately after  617,  any  representation  of  the  end  of  all  things  h.as
completely  disappeared  from  our  reconstructed  Apocalypse.  In
any  case,  it  is  impossible  that  one  should  fail  to  recognise
an  interpolated  fragment  in  the  .short  passage  (C9-11)  relating
to  the  fifth  seal.  We  have  an  exact  parallel  to  it  in  4  E.sd.
435  (cp  also  /Ethiop.  Enoch  47).  And  the  tradition  of  4
Esd.  must  l)e  regarded  as  the  original  one.  It  speaks  quite
generally  of  a  predestined  number  of  the  righteous  which  has
to  be  fulfilled  before  the  coming  of  the  end,  whilst  in  the
Apocalypse  the  conception  is  applied  to  the  predestined  number
of  the  martyrs— a  modification  which  can  be  explained  very
easily  from  his  general  position  (see  above,  §  35).

Spitta's  view  that  7 1-8  constitutes  a  fresh  beginning,
which  has  nothing  to  do  with  the  preceding  chapters,
is  certainly  correct  ;  but  neither  has
the  passage  anything  to  do  with  that
which  follows  it  (79-17)  ;  as  to  this  practically  all  critics
are  agreed.  These  facts,  however,  will  not  justify  us  in
attributing  79-17  to  the  redactor  (as  do  Volter,  Vischer,
Pfleiderer  and  Schmidt),  nor  yet  in  carrying  out  a  system
of  deletions  in  chap.  7  (as  do  Erbes,  Wej-l. ,  Rauch)  until
the  two  disparate  sections  have  been  brought  into
harmony.  Our  proper  course  is  to  recognise  (cp  also
Spitta)-  in  7 1-8  an  interpolated  fragment  —  probably
Jewish.

The  sudden  mention  of  the  four  winds,  which  are  held  by  the
angels  and  are  nowhere  in  the  succeeding  narrative  let  loose,
points  to  this  conclusion,  as  also  does  the  introduction  of  the
144,000  I.sraelites  of  the  twelve  tribes — a  numl^er  which  in  14 1_^
is  interpreted  in  a  sense  inconsistent  with  the  original  ' '

Bousset  has  hazarded the  conjecture  that here
have  a  fragment  of  the  Antichrist  legend.


39.  Chap.


41.  Chap.

12i-io.


APOCALYPSE

The  next  passage  wliicli  presents  sjx;cial  difficulties  is
11 1-13. Here  all  critics  are  agreed in recognising a
_.  fragment interpolated Ixilsveen the  sixth

'.  P'  trumpet  and  the  seventh  (cp  9 11  and
'"'^'  11m).  Further,  almost  all  critics  agree
in  regarding  chap.  10  as  an  introductory  chapter
connected  with  this  fragment.  On  closer  examination
it  is  found,  moreover,  that  11  1-13  really  consists  of  two
smaller  fragments:  (a)  lli  /,  a  prediction  of  the
preservation  of  the  temple,  written  before  the  destruc-
tion of  Jerusalem,  and  presenting  points  of  contact  with
Lk.  2124;  (/'I  the  prophecy  relating  to  the  beast  and
the  two  witnesses  (11 3-13).  This  latter  piece  is  of
an  extremely  fragmentary  and  enigmatical  character.

Certain  matters  are  introduced  without  any  preparation  :
the  two  witnesses,  the  l)cast  from  the  ahyss,  the  war  of  the
beast  with  the  witnesses,  the  jjeoples  and  tribes  rejoicing  over
the  death  of  these  last.  .\li  these  are  disjecta  membra  which
point  to  some  larger  connection.

In  this  passage,  too,  Housset  has  sought  to  show  that
we  have  a  fragment  from  the  Antichrist  legend.

In  accordance  with  Jewish  :ind  primitive  Christian  anticip-ition
tlie  .\ntichrist  is  destined  to  appear  as  a  (jod-defying  ruler  in
Jerusalem,  to  lead  the  people  astray  and  tyrannise  over  them,  and
to  gather  together  a  great  army  from  all  nations.  Against  liim
will  arise  the  two  prophets  Elijah  and  Enoch,  and  Israelites
to  a  definite  number  (7  1-8?)  will  be  converted.  A  great  famine
and  drought  will  come.  Then  .Xntichrist  will  put  to  death  the
two  witnesses,  and  the  end  will  draw  near.  It  is  evident  that
here  we  have  a  coherent  tradition,  of  which  some  fragments  are
preserved  in  ch.ap.  11.

Chap. 12 is the most difficult in the book. It
also  falls  into two  sections, 12 1-12  and I213-17, and
betrays  itself  as  a  foreign  intrusion  both  by
its  unfamiliar  character  and  by  its  strange
and  bizarre  representations.

.\.  Dietrich  (Abraxas)  was  the  first  who  sought  to  trace  in  the
chapter  an  adaptation  of  the  myth  of  the  birth  of  Apollo  :  he
liL-ld  tlie  i^x^iiaiil  tu^jitive  woman  to  be  Leto,  the  dragon  was
tlii;  I'Nihoii,  the  child  (who  in  the  original  legend  himself  slew
llu-  l'\tlii)ii,  Mich.icl  liL-iiig  a  later  introduction)  was  Apollo.
The  water  which  in  the  ("ireek  myth  figured  as  a  protecting
power  h;is  here  become  auxiliary  to  the  dragon.

Recently  Guiikel,  in  his  Schopjiitig  u.  Chaos,  has
directed  special  attention  to  this  chapter,  and  shown
that  an  adequate  understanding  of  it  could  Ix:  arrived
at  neither  on  the  assumption  of  a  Christian  nor  on  that
of  a  Jewish  origiti  (\'ischer,  W'eyland,  Spitta) — that  on
either  hypothesis  there  remains  an  intractable  residuum,
bearing  a  mythological  character.  Here,  accordingly,  as
elsewhere  in  the  Apocalypse  (cp  the  seven  angels,  stars,
candlesticks,  torches  [EV  'lamps'],  e3'es,  pp.  294-302;
the  twenty-four  elders,  302-8  ;  Armageddon,  263-66,
and  p.  325  n.  2;  the  numlx;r  3^,  pp.  266-70;  also
chaps.  13  and  17,  379^),  he  found  elements  taken  from
Babylonian  mythology,  and  in  particular  the  myth  of
the  l)irth  of  the  sun-god  Marduk  and  of  the  persecution
of  Marduk  by  the  dragon  Tiamat.  The  difficulty

in  this  construction  of  Gunkel's  is  that  down  to  the
present  date  it  has  been  impossible  to  find  in  the  liaby-
lonian  mythology  any  trace  of  the  myth  of  the  birth
and  ])ersecution  of  the  youthful  sun-god.  Bousset
(Apok.  410/;),  however,  has  called  attention  to  parallels
with  one  chapter  in  Egyptian  mythology  (the  myth  of
the  birth  of  Horus).

In  the  result,  there  seems  much  probability  in  the
supposition  that  chap.  12  embodies  a  myth  of  the  birth  of
the  sun-god  and  the  persecution  of  the  young  child  by
the  dragon,  the  deity  of  winter  and  of  night.  The  Apoca-
lyptist  has  changed  the  sun-god,  however,  into  the  ttois
'iTjffoOj  Xpiarbs,  the  persecutor  into  the  devil,  and  the
deliverance  of  the  child  into  the  resurrection  (observe
the  inconcinnity  of  this  adaptation).  In  this  treatment
of  the  material  laid  to  his  hand,  he  was  not  able
to  give  full  significance  to  the  flight  of  the  woman,
which  is  so  prominent  a  feature  in  the  original  myth.
This  is  accordingly  only  briefly  touched  on  in  126  ;  but
it  receives  copious  and  special  treatment  in  the  second
half  of  the  chapter  {w.  13-17).  Hence  the  incongruity
between  12 1^  and  12 13/;  which  \\'eizsacker  pointed
out.

14  20Q


APOCALYPSE

What  historical  occurrence  is  intended  by  the  flight
of  the  woman  in  12 13-17  is  not  quite  clear.  Usually  the
42 ChaD *^'^'^'  '**  ^*"'""  '^^  refi-'Ting  to  circumstances

,  A  *^*  connected  with  the  destruction  of  Jerusalem
'^''^"  — either  to  the  destruction  and  (in  a  sense)
the  deliverance  of  Judaism,  or,  better,  to  the  flight  of
the  primitive  Christian  (  hurch.

Erijes,  who  seeks  to  explain  ch.  13  as  referring  to  the  Caligula
period  (see  below),  interprets  the  flight  and  deliverance  of  the
woman  in  connection  wuh  the  first  persecution  of  Christians
at  Jerusalem,  strangely  taking  v.  17,  'the  remnant  of  her  seed
who  hold  the  testimony  of  Je.sus,'  as  pointing  to  the  Jews  (I)  at
the  time  of  the  Caligula  persecution.  Spitta  actually  takes  the
persecution  of  the  woman  as  representing  an  occurrence  in
heaven.  '  The  remnant  of  the  seed  of  the  woman  '  represents,
he  thinks,  the  actual  Israel  as  contrasted  with  the  ideal  pre-
existent  Jerusalem  (Israel?).  Others  (Vischer)  interpret  the
rentnant  as  meaning  believers  as  distinguished  from  tlie  Nlessi.ih.

Chap.  13  also  contains  two  passages  of  a  peculiar
character  —  tho.se describing the first beast and the

.•o /^i. 10 second. O. Holtzmaiui, Spitta, and

43.  Cnap.  13:,.,  ,  .  '.  . ,

i.v  c  i.  I.  J.  I'-rbes  were  agreed  m  recoijinsinij  here
the  first  beast.  ^  j^^^.^,^  (Holtzm..  Sp.)  or  a  Christian
(Erb. )  source  dating  from  the  time  of  Caligula.
Independently  of  each  other,  they  all  (as  had  already
been  done  by  Th.  Zahn)  acceiited  the  numlier  616
which  is  given  in  some  .\I.SS  (C.  11  Ticoiiiiis),
instead  of  666,  and  inter]3ieted  it  as  meaning  Tdibs
Katcrap.  The  beast  demanding  worship,  whose  image
{('iKihv)  is  repeatedly  spoken  of,  is,  on  this  view,
the  half- mad  tyrant  Caius  Caligula,  who  in  39  .\.n.
ordered  his  i)rocurator,  I'etronius,  to  set  uj)  his  statue  in
the  temple  at  Jerusalem.  Parallels  to  this  prop-hecy
belonging  to  the  same  date  were  found  in  Mt.  2-1
( '  abomination  of  desolation  ' )  and  in  2  Thess.  2.  The
'  wound  ■  (irXrjyri)  of  the  beast  was  interjjreted  by  Spitta
as  meaning  the  sickness  which  befel  Caligula  towards
the  beginning  of  his  reign.  These  conjectures  are  by
no  means  impossible  ;  but  if  they  are  acceisted,
certain  important  particulars  in  the  cha[)ter  must  be
deleted — in  particular,  references  to  the  wounded  head
of  the  beast.  This  and  the  number  666  {-op  jnj)  show-
distinctly  that  (in  its  present  form)  the  chapter  was
intended  to  be  understood  of  the  return  of  Xero
Redivivus.  Whether  an  older  source  dating  from  Cali-
gula's time  has  here  been  worked  over  remains  doubtful.

As  compared  with  this  interpretation,  the  view  which  takes
the  wounded  head  to  be  Julius  Ca;sar  (Ciunkel,  P.ruston)  has
little  to  be  said  for  it— since  the  number  666  in  that  case  remains
unexplained  ;  nor  c.in  we  reasonably  interpret  the  deatli-wouiid
to  mean  the  interregnum  of  (ialba-Otho-Vitelliiis,  or  refer  the
number  to  the  Roman  empire  (Aareti'os,  Diisterdieck  ;  C'CII  1ST>
Ewald).  '

Still  greater  has  been  the perplexity  of  interpreters

over  the  second  beast. All  attemjjts  to  make  it  out  to

™^ be some definite personality have hitherto

, been  unsuccessful. Bousset  {Cumm. ad  loc.)

vf  ^'^'t  upholds  the  view  that  it  is  in  reality  a  modifi-
cation of  the  older  conception  of  Antichrist,
who  is  here  represented  as  serving  the  first  l)east,  the
Roman  emperor,  and  perhaps  is  to  be  interpreted  as
signifying  the  Roman  provincial  priesthood,  the  active
agency  in  promoting  the  worship  of  the  emperor.

The  objection  usually  urged  against  referring  the  pass-
age to  Nero  —  that  the  beast  whose  number  is  666
cannot  mean  Nero  the  man  ;  that  it  must  mean  the
Roman  empire — is  not  valid.  To  the  .Xpocalyptist  Xero
Redivivus  is  at  the  same  time  the  incarnation  of  all  that
is  dreadful  in  the  Roman  empire.  The  number  of  the
beast  is  the  number  of  a  man  :  cp  17  "■  '  and  the  lieast
...  is  himself  also  an  eighth  '  {koX  avroi  5y8oos  e<XTiv).
Chap.  17  is  intimately  connected  with  chap.  13,  and  this
duplicate  treatment  of  the  same  subjects  is  in  itself  proof
_,  ..  „  sufficient  that  the  .\pocalyptist  had  l)efore
ap.  /.  him  older  prophecies,  which  he  has  worked
over  more  than  once.  In  this  chapter  also  the  reference
to  the  returning  X'ero  is  clear.  Since  Eichhorn,  h<iw-
ever,  it  has  further  been  recognised  on  all  hands  (cp  Ue
Wette,  Bleek,  Lucke),  and  with  justice,  that  the  kings  with
w  hom  the  beast  returns  for  the  destruction  of  Rome  are


APOCALYPSE

the  Parthians,  whose  satraps  might  already  be  regarded
as  independent  kings  (Momnisen,  Rom.  Kaisergesch.
5521).  Thus  our  present  chapter  also  conies  into  a
larger  historical  connection.  As  early  as  the  year  69
A.I),  a  psoudo-Nero  had  raised  commotions  in  Asia
Minor  and  (Ireece  (Tac.  Hist.  2if.  ;  Dio  C;issius,  649  ;
Zonaras,  11  15) ;  in  the  reign  of  Titus  a  second  pseudo-
Nero  showed  himself  on  the  Euphrates  (Zonaras,  11 18)
and  was  acknowledged  by  the  I'arthian  King  Artabanus
(Momm.sen,  5521).  About  88  A.  u.  a  third  pseudo-Nero
again  made  his  appe;irance,  also  among  the  Parthians,
and  threatened  the  Roman  empire  (Suet.  i\'cro,  50  ;  Tac.
IJis'.  1  2).  In  this  form  we  find  the  same  expectation
also  in  the  fourth  Sibylline  book,  written  shortly  after
79  -X.  D.  {Sil'vll.  4 119^  ^yi  ff-)<  ^"d  '"  'he  oldest  portion
of  the  fifth  book,  written  about  74  A.I).  (5143^  361^)  ;
in  the  last  passage  it  is  associated  with  a  denunciation  of
Babylon  and  a  prophecy  of  the  rebuilding  of  Jerusalem
(Rev.  IS  21)  ;  cp  Zalms  exhaustive  researches  (as  above,
§  35)-  tiy  '*"'l^  iwwv:  and  place  our  chapter  (perhaps
associated  with  the  threatening  utterance  against  Rome
and  the  prophecy  of  a  new  Jerusalem)  belongs  to  the
same  circle  of  expectations  and  predictions.  It  was
doubtless  written  in  Asia  Minor  ;  but  the  e.xact  date  is
disputed.

According  to  17  10  the  Apocalyptist  represents  himself  as
writinj;  under  the  sixth  eniptror,  five  having  died  and  .1  seventh
having  yet  to  cume,  to  be  succeeded  by  the  eiglilh,  who  is  to  be
one  of  the  seven  (Xero).  In  reckoning,  it  is  possible  to  begin
either  with  Juhus  Ocsar  or  with  .\ugustus,  to  count  or  not  to
count  the  interregnum  of  C.alba-Otho-Vitellius,  and  finally  to
ask  whether  the  p.issage  was  really  written  under  the  si.xth
emptror,  and  not,  rather,  as  a  vaticinium  ex  enentu,  under  the
seventh  or  eighth.  Thus  interpreters  have  taken  the  si.xth
emperor  to  be  now  Nero  (so  all  who  hold  the  Apocalypse  to  have
been  written  before  70  a.u.  ;  also  V'Olter),  now  "Vespasian,  and,
conformably,  take  the  chajiter  to  have  been  written  now  under
the  last-named  emperor,  now  under  Titus  (the  .seventh  ;  Wey-
land)  or  Domitian,  who  is  then  taken,  on  rationalising  lines,  as
Nero  Redivivus  (Erbes).

The  parallels  cited  above  appear  to  render  the  reign
of  \'cspasian  the  most  probable  date.  The  writer —
probably  a  Christian — expected  after  Vespasian  a  short
reign  for  his  successor  al.so.  The  tradition  was  that
seven  Roman  emperors  were  destined  to  reign.  There-
after Xero  was  to  come  back  with  the  Parthians,  and,
in  alliance  with  these,  to  take  vengeance  on  Rome,  the
bloody  persecutor  of  the  Christians  (176;  'with  the
blood  of  the  saints '  ;  the  words  '  with  the  blood  of  the
martyrs  of  Jesus  '  appear  to  be  a  gloss).  The  denuncia-
tion of  Rome  (chap.  IS)  connects  itself  very  well  with  this
prophecy  (see  Sibyll.  5).

It  is  further  to  be  noted  that  chap.  17  has  already,  in
the  form  in  which  we  now  have  it,  undergone  redaction.

On  the  nne  hand,  Nero  is  simply  the  eighth  ruler  who  was  one
of  the  seven  ;  on  the  other,  he  is  the  beast  who  comes  up  from
the  abyss.  On  the  one  hand,  he  wages  war  along  with  the
Parthians  against  Rome  ;  on  the  other,  he  wages  war  along  with
the  kings  of  the  earth  against  the  lamb.  In  this  redacted  form
(17812-14  or  15;  cp  also  Volter)  Nero  is  designated  as  the
dread  spectre  of  the  time  of  the  end  who  comes  back  from  hell.
Now,  we  find  the  same  expectation  in  chap.  13,  where  Nero  is
plainly  represented  as  dead  (ws  eiriftaytievev,  'as  though  it  had
been  smitten  unto  death ')  and  as  counterpart  (Wiederspiel)  of
the  lamb  that  had  been  slain  and  is  to  come  again.  This  mode
of  repre.senting  Nero  probably  comes  from  the  latest  redactor.
Parallels  to  it  can  be  found  in  the  later  portions  of  the  fifth  book
of  tlie  Sibyllines  (33/^  215-26),  and  in  the  eighth  book  (1-215).

The  legend  of  Nero  Redivivus  first  arose  towards  the
end  of  the  century,  a  full  generation  after  Nero's  death,
when  he  could  no  longer  well  be  supposed  to  be  still
alive  among  the  Parthians  (cp  Zahn,  as  above).  Its
reception  into  the  Apocalypse  supplies  one  of  the
elements  for  determining  the  date  of  the  book.

Chap.  16 12^  (the  sixth  and  seventh  vials)  also  must

have  originally  belonged  to  chap.  17. In  this  passage  the

46 Various  =^"5'"' Po^''^^"' his  vial  upon  the  Euphrates,

fraBinenta '^^^  ''^^  ^^'^^  '"'^^  ^  made  ready  for  the

^^ ■ kings  from  the  east'  (cp  9i3j^,  with  its

reference to the angels bound and loosed at the

Euphrates ;  on  which,  see  Iselin  in  TAeo/. Z.  aus  der


APOCALYPSE

Schweiz,  1887,  as  above,  §  25).  The  representation  of
the  gathering  of  the  kings  at  Armageddon  (Har-
Magedon)  in  this  passage  is  noteworthy  ;  it  is  not  very
intelligible,  as  we  read  of  no  mountain  of  Megiddo,  but
only  of  a  plain  (but  see  Armageddon).  It  recalls  the
ancient  accounts  of  battles  of  the  gods  upon  the  moun-
tains (Gunkel,  Schopf.  263^  389  n.  2).

Chap.  14 14-20  also  appears  to  be  an  ancient  fragment.
It  thus  early  sets  forth  a  final  judgment  by  the  Son  of
\lan.  The  passage,  however,  is  so  very  fragmentary
that  it  is  hardly  possible  for  us  to  make  out  what  its
original  character  may  have  been  (cp  the  expression
'without  the  city'  in  14 20).  liousset  has  sought  to
explain  it  by  reference  to  the  Antichrist  legend.

Fragments  of  older  date  seem  to  have  been  in-
troduced into  the  account  of  the  chaining  of  the
dragon,  the  millennium,  the  irruption  of  (Jog  and
Magog  (2O1-10;  cp  2O9,  irapffxjioXT}  rCiv  ayiwf,  ttoXij
■qyairy}fj.ivri,  and  .^thiop.  Enoch  56,  Sil'vll.  '6  319-
322).  The  description  of  the  binding  and  loosing  of
Satan  recalls  the  Persian  legend  of  the  chaining  of  the
dragon  Azi  Dahak  on  Mt.  Dcmavend.  Finally,  a
continuous  piece — perhajjs  of  Jewish  origin  (see  21  24  26
222)  —  lies  before  us  in  the  description  of  the  new
Jerusalem,  21  9-225.

We  ought  to  compare  Tob.  13  16^,  Ps.  Salom.  17  23^,  Sil'vll.
6247-85,  414-33,  and  the  Hel)rew  Apocalypse  0/  Elijah,  edited
by  M.  Buttenwieser,  65-67.  In  this  last-named  Jewish  source
also  we  find  the  new  Jerusalem  coming  down  from  heaven.

To  summarise  the  results  of  the  forcs^oing  analysis  :
With  the  conclusion  of  the  epistles  to  the  seven  churches
47  Summarv  (chaps.  1-3)  the  Apocalypse,  properly  so
^'  called,  begins.  Here  the  first  six  seals
succeed  one  another  uninterruptedly,  till  the  interpolated
fragment  in  7 1-8  is  reached.  As  a  pendant  to  this
fragment,  with  its  distinctly  Jewish  character,  the  Apoca-
lyptist proleptically  introduces  in  79-17  a  picture  of  the
blessedness  of  believers  from  every  nation  who  have
come  out  of  the  great  tribulation.  Now  follow  the
seventh  seal  and,  arising  out  of  this,  the  seven  trumpets
(chaps.  8-11).  Between  the  sixth  and  tlie  seventh  trumpet -x
the  passage  10  i-ll  13  has  lx;en  interpolated.  In  chap.  In
the  Apocalyptist  indicates  to  some  extent  what  the  '  dis-
position '  of  the  remainder  of  the  book  is  to  be  (cp  10  n).
It  is  to  be  observed  that  in  chaps.  ^  ff- ,  in  addition  to  the
distribution  under  seven  trumpets,  the  Apocalyptist  has
attempted  a  second  under  three  woes.  The  first  woe
answers  to  the  fifth  trumpet  ;  the  second,  the  mention
of  which  might  have  been  expected  after  the  sixth
trumpet,  does  not  come  up  until  11 14,  after  the  great
interpolation  has  been  reached.  The  third  great  woe
(which  is  not  expressly  named  by  the  Apocalyptist)
is  doubtless  indicated  in  12 12.  It  is  hardly  likely  that
we  have  here  a  redaction  from  an  older  source.
Before,  then,  he  comes  to  the  culmination  of  his
prophecy,  in  chap.  13,  the  Apocalyptist  casts  his  glance
backwards  in  chap.  12.  Borrowing  the  imagery  of  an
ancient  sun-myth,  he  depicts  the  birth,  persecution,  and
rescue  of  the  Saviour,  and  afterwards  the  persecution  of
the  Church.  In  chap.  13  he  goes  on  to  foretell  the  coming
final  struggle,  the  last  great  ,ind  decisive  battle  between
the  faithful  ones  and  the  beast  who  demands  adoration.
For  him  the  supreme  crisis  of  this  struggle  still  lies  in
the  future,  when  Nero  Redivivus  is  to  appear.  In  the
bright  picture  which  he  prophetically  introduces  at  14$
by  way  of  contrast  to  chap.  13,  he  adapts  and  modifies
7  1-8.  146-13  is  intended  to  effect  the  transition  to  what
follows.  1  4 14-20  is  a  smaller  interpolated  fragment.
The  great  finale  remains.  The  Apocalyptist  still  had
to  work  in  the  prophecies  contained  in  chap.  \7 /.  \
by  way  of  introduction  to  these,  chap.  1.')/  are  given.
Then  follows,  after  an  intermediate  passage  (19i-io),
the  picture  of  the  final  judgment  (19ii-2l8);  after
which  we  have  a  new  fragment,  21 9-22 5,  followed  by
the  close.

Literature. — The  literature  of  the  subject  has  been  indicated
in  the  course  of  the  article.  w.  B.


APOCALYPTIC  LITERATURE


APOCALYPTIC LITERATURE


CONTKMS


Introductory  08  i-4)-

Apocalypse  of  Karuch  (§g  5-17).

Enoch  ;  Kthiopic  (fS  18-32),  Slavonic  (88  33-41).


Ascension  of  Isaiah  (88  43-47)-
Jubilees  (88  48-58).
Assumption  of  Alose.s  (88  59-67).
Sec  Ai'OCKVi-HA  for  references  to  the  following  less  important  apocalypses.

Abraham  (Apockyimia,  8  O-  Elias  (Ai-ockvpiia,  8  21,  no.  10).

.\ci.im  (ii>.  8  10).  E»dras  {i7>.  g  22,  no.  13).


Bartholomew  (ib.  g  10  (1)  «).


iMc


i  (//'.  8  10,  nos.  I  [a],  no.  2,  and  g


Testaments  of  xii.  Patriarchs  (f|  68-76).
Psalms  of  .Solomon  (gg  77-85).
Sibylline  Oracles  (gg  16-98).

Paul  (Apocrypha,  g  13).
Zcphaniah  (//'.  g  21,  no.  i).


Introductory  :  The  objects  and  nature  of  apocalyptic
literature  (§g  1-4).

I.  Ai'ocai.yi'sk of Baki'CH  J. — A  composite work derived

'  . from  at  least  five  authors, written  mainly  in

1.  Synopsis Palestine, if  not  in Jeru.salem, by  Pharisees
of  Article. ""• ^.u. 5o-(,o. Preserved only in Syriac
(8§5-i7).

II.  Lthiopic  liooK  OF  Enocm. — Written  originally  in  Hebrew
or  Aramaic  by  at  least  five  Assidcan  authors  (20^.64  D.c.)  in
Palestine.  Part  I.  chaps.  1-3(5  earlier  than  170  n.c.  Part  II.
chaps.  83-!H),  i66-i6i  B.C.  Part  III.  chaps.  »1-104,  134-95  B.C.
Part  IV.  (the  Similitudes)  chaps.  37-70,  Q4-64  '..c.  Part  V.  (the
Bi)ok  of  Celestial  Physics)  chaps.  72-78,  82,  70.  Part  VI.
(Fr.iKments  of  a  lost  Apocalypse  of  Noah)  (8§  i8-32).2

HI.  Slavonic  Hook  ok  E.moch,  or  The  Hook  ok  the  Secrets
OF  Enoch. — Written  by  an  Alexandrian  Jew,  mainly  frnm  pre-
existing materials,  about  a.d.  1-50.  Eclectic  in  character ;
preserved  only  in  Slavonic  (§§  33-41).

IV.  Ascension  ok  Isaiah. —  A  composite  work,  written
originidly  in  Greek,  partly  by  Jewish,  partly  by  Christian
authors,  a.d.  i-ioo.  Preserved  in  Ethiopic  and  partially  in
Latin  (§8  42-47).

V.  H()oK  OF  Ji'BiLEES.— Written  originally  in  Hebrew  by  a
Palestininn  Jew.  a  Pharisee  of  the  Pharisees,  probably  40-10  B.C.
Prt^.  i\.'l  ill  luliinpic  and  partially  in  Hebrew,  Syriac,  Greek,
Lati:.,  .::ia  Sl..^ .  ..ic  (§S  48-5S).

>Ni  OK  MosKs.— Written  in  Palestine,  in  Hebrew,
'harisee. Preserved  only  in  Latin  (§§  59-67).
KNTS  OF  THE  XII.  Patkiarchs. — A  Composite
originally in Hebrew by two Jewish authors


Vl..\sM  MI'l

7-30  A.D.,  by  a

VII.  Testa

work written


representing  respectively  the  legalistic  and  the  apocalyptic  sides
of  Pharisaism,  130  B.c.-io  a.u.,  and  interpolated  by  a  succession
of  Christian  writers  from  the  close  of  the  jst  century  down  to
the  4th  century  a.d.  Preserved  in  Greek,  Armenian,  and
Slavonic  versions  (§§  68-76).

VIII.  Psalms  ok  Solomon. — Written  originally  in  Hebrew,
possiblv  in  Jerusalem,  by  two  or  more  Pharisees,  70-40  u.c.
(88  77-85).

IX.  SiiiVLi.i.NE  Oraci  ES. — Written  in  Greek  hexameters  by
Jewish  and  Christian  authors,  mainly  by  the  latter — the  earliest
portions  belon;;ing  to  the  2nd  century  B.C.,  the  latest  not  earlier
than  the  3rd  century  A.D.  (§§  86-98).

Introductory. — The  object  of  apocalyptic  literature
in  general  was  to  solve  the  difficulties  connected  with
2  Problem  ^  be'ie'^  ^^  God's  righteousness  and  the
suffering  condition  of  his  servants  on
earth.  The  righteousness  of  God  postulated  the
temporal  prosixirity  of  the  righteous,  and  this  postulate
was  accepted  and  enforced  by  the  Law.  But  while  the
continuous  exposition  of  the  Law  in  the  post-e.xilic
period  confirmed  the  people  in  their  monotheistic  faith
and  intensified  their  hostility  to  hcathenisiti,  their
e.xpectations  of  m.aterial  well-being,  which  likewise  the
Law  had  fostered,  were  repeatedly  falsified,  and  a
grave  contradiction  thus  emerged  between  the  old
prophetic  ideals  and  the  actual  e.xperience  of  the  nation,
between  the  promises  of  God  and  the  bondage  and  per-
secution which  the  people  had  daily  to  endure  at  the
hands  of  their  pagan  oppressors.  The  difficulties  arising
from  this  confiict  between  promise  and  experience  might
be  shortly  resolved  into  two,  which  deal  respectively
with  the  position  (i)  of  the  righteous  as  a  community,
and  (2)  of  the  righteous  man  as  an  individual.

The  or  prophets  had  concerned  themselves  chiefly
with  the  former,  and  pointed  in  the  main  to  the  restora-
tion (or  'resurrection')  of  Israel  as  a  nation,  and  to
Israel's  ultimate  possession  of  the  earth  as  a  reward  of
righteousness.  Later,  with  the  growing  claims  of  the
individual, and the  acknowledgment  of  these io the

1  On  other  Apocalypses  of  Baruch.  see  below,  Apocrypha,
8  20.
'.i  On  chaps.  71  80/,  see  g  30/

213


S  I  49).

religious  and  intellectual  life,  the  second  problem  pressed
itself  irresistibly  on  the  notice  of  religious  thinkers,  and
made  it  impossible  for  any  conception  of  the  divine  rule
and  righteousness  which  did  not  render  adecjuale  satis-
faction to  the  claims  of  the  righteous  individual  to  gain
acceptance.  Thus,  in  order  to  justify  the  righteousness
of  God,  there  was  postulated  not  only  the  resurrection
of  the  righteous  nation  but  also  the  resurrection  of  the
righteous  individual.  Apocalyptic  literature,  therefore,
strove  to  show  that,  in  resj^ect  alike  of  the  nation  and
of  the  individual,  the  righteousness  of  (jod  would  be
fully  vindicated  ;  and,  in  order  to  justify  its  contention,
it  sketched  in  outline  the  history  of  the  world  and  of
mankind,  the  origin  of  evil  and  its  course,  and  the
final  consummation  of  all  things  ;  and  thus,  in  fact,
it  presented  a  Semitic  philosophy  of  religion  (cp
Chronology  ok  OT,  §  i).  The  righteous  as  a
nation  should  yet  possess  the  earth  either  in  an  eternal
or  in  a  temporary  Messianic  kingdom,  and  the  destiny
of  the  righteous  individual  should  finally  be  determined
according  to  his  works.  For,  though  lie  might  perish
untimely  amid  the  world's  disorders,  he  would  not  fail
to  attain  through  the  resurrection  the  reconipen.se  that
was  his  due  in  the  Messianic  kingdom,  or  in  heaven
itself.  The  conceptions  as  to  the  duration  and  character
of  the  risen  life  vary  with  each  writer.

The  writings  that  are  treated  of  in  the  rest  of  this  article,
however,  deal  not  only  with  the  Messianic  e.x|)ectations
but  also  with  the  exposition  and  aijjilication  of  the  Law
to  the  numberless  circumstances  of  life.  As  Schiirer
has  rightly  observed,  the  two  subjects  with  which  Jewish
thought  and  enthusiasm  were  concerned  were  the  Law
and  the  Messianic  kingdom.  These  were,  in  fact,  parallel
developments  of  Pharisaism.  As  we  have  the  former —
its  legalistic  side — represented  in  the  Book  of  JubiUcs,
so  we  have  the  latter — its  apocalyptic  and  mystical  side
—  set  forth  in  the  Book  of  Enoch.  The  Tcstannnts  of
the  Twelve  Patriarchs  give  expression  to  lx)th  sides  of
Pharisaism  ;  but  this  book,  as  we  shall  see  in  the
sequel,  is  really  a  composite  work  and  springs  from
authors  of  different  schools.  The  rest  of  the  books  here
discussed  belong  mainly  to  the  apocalyptic  side  of
Pharisaism.

It  is  a  characteristic  of  apocalyptic  as  distinguished
from  prophecy  that  the  former  trusts  to  the  written,  the
3  Method.  ^^^^'^'^  '°  '^^  spoken,  word.  This  is  due
largely  to  the  fact  that  the  prophet
addresses  himself  chiefly  to  the  present  and  its  concerns,
and  that,  when  he  fixes  his  ga/.e  on  the  future,  his
prophecy  springs  naturally  from  the  circumstances  of
the  present.  The  apocalyptic  writer,  on  the  other
hand,  almost  wholly  despairs  of  the  present  ;  his  main
interests  are  supramundane.  He  entertains  no  hope  of
arousing  his  contemporaries  to  faith  and  duty  by  direct
and  jxjrsonal  appeals.  His  pessimism  and  want  of  faith
in  the  present  thus  naturally  lead  him  to  pseudonymous
authorship,  and  so  he  approaches  his  countrymen  \s  ith
a  writing  which  purports  to  be  the  work  of  seme
great  figure  in  their  history,  such  as  Enoch,  Moses,
Daniel,  or  Baruch.  The  standfxjint  thus  assumed  is  as
skilfully  preserved  as  the  historical  knowledge  and
conditions  of  the  pseudonymous  author  admit,  and  the
future  of  Israel  is  '  foretold  '  in  a  form  enigmatical  indeed
214


APOCALYPTIC  LITERATURE


but  generally  intelligible.  All  precision  ceases,  howcvei ,
when  we  come  to  the  real  author's  own  time  :  his
j)redictions,  thenceforward,  are  mere  products  of  the
religious  imagination,  and  vary  with  each  writer.  In
nearly  every  case,  we  should  add,  tliuse  books  claim  to
Ix;  supernatural  revelations  given  to  the  men  by  whose
names  they  are  designated.

It will  not  be  amiss here  to  notice  the  gross  mis-
.i[)prehcnsion under which Jost, Graetz, and other


4.  Historical
value.


Jewish  writers  laboured  when  they  pro-
nounced this  literature  to  be  destitute
of  value  for  the  history  of  Jewish
religion.  To  such  statements  it  is  a  sufficient  answer
that  from  200  n.c.  to  70  A.n.  the  religious  and  political
ideals  that  really  shaped  the  history  of  Judaism  found
their  expression  in  this  literature.  It  is  not  in  the
discussions  and  logomachies  of  tlie  Rabbinical  schools
tliat  we  are  to  look  for  the  intiuences  and  aims  that
called  forth  some  of  the  noblest  patriotism  and  self-
sacrifice  the  world  has  ever  witnessed,  and  educated  the
nation  for  the  destinies  that  waited  it  in  the  first  century
of  our  era,  but  in  the  ajjocalyptic  and  pseudepigraphic
books  which,  beginning  with  Daniel,  had  a  large  share
ill  |)reparing  the  most  religious  and  ardent  minds  of
(Jalilee  and  Judiua  cither  to  i)ass  over  into  Christianity,
or  else  to  hurl  themselves  in  fruitless  efforts  against  the
invincible  might  of  Rome,  and  thereby  all  but  annihilate
their  country  and  name.  Still  it  is  true  that  the  work  of
the  scribes  and  the  exposition  of  the  schools  had  opened
the  way  for  this  new  religious  and  literary  development.
The  eschatological  element,  moreover,  which  later
attained  its  full  growth  in  such  pseudepigraphical
writings  as  Daniel,  Enoch,  Noah,  etc.,  had  already
strongly  asserted  itself  in  later  prophets  such  as  Is.
•24-27,  Joel,  Zech.  12-14.  Not  only  the  beginnings,
therefore,  but  also  a  well-defined  and  developed  ty[)e  of
this  literature  had  already  established  itself  in  the  OT.
Its  further  developments  were  moulded,  as  we  have
pointed  out  above,  by  the  necessities  of  the  thought  and
by  the  historical  exigencies  of  the  time.

Cp  Smend's  introductory  essay  on  Jewish  apocalyptic,  ZA  TIV

5  222-250  ('35)  ; Schiirer, //I'si.  644^; Hilgenfeld, />/«' /«>/.

Apokalyptikin  i/irergeschichtlicken  Ilntivickelung,  1857  (Kin!.).

I. The  Ai'oc.m.vp.sk  ok  Bakuch. — The  Apocalypse

of Baruch was  for  the  first  time  made  known  to  the


5.  The  Syriac


modern  world  through  a  Latin  version


Baruch.


of Ceriani in 1866 {Mon. Sacr. i.

273-98). This  version  was  made  from

a  Syriac  M.S  of  the  sixth  century,  the  text  of  which  was

also  in  due  course  published  by  the  same  scholar, in

ordinary  type in 1871, and in a photo-lithographic

facsimile  in  1883. An  examination  of  the  Syriac  version

_ . ,  , makes it clear that this version is a

6.  A  transla-


tion from


translation  from  the  Greek. It  occasion-

_ .  ally transliterates Greek words, and

the text is at times explicable only

on  the  supposition  that  the  wrong  alternatives  of  two

possible  meanings of  certain Greek words have been

followed by the translator. Even before Ceriani's

publication, however, we  had  some  knowledge  of  the

Apocalypse  of  iiaruch  ; for  chaps.  78-8(),  which  contain

Baruch's  Epistle  to  the  nine  tribes  and  a  half  that  were

in  captivity,  had  already  appeared  in  Syriac  and  Latin,

in  the  London  and  the  Paris  Polyglots,  in  Syriac  alone  in

Lagarde's  Lib. Vet. Test. Apoc. Syr. 1861, in  Latin

alone  in  Fabricius's  Cud. Pseiidep. Vet. Test.,  and  in

I'.nglish  in  Whiston's  Authentic  Records. Ceriani's  Latin

version  was  republished  in F"ritzsche's  Lib. Apoc. Vet.

Test. ('71) in  a slightly  emended form; but, as  the

Syriac  text  was  still  inaccessible,  I'Yitzsche's  emendations

are  only  guesses  more  or  less  fortunate— generally  less.

We  have  just remarked that the  Syriac version is

_,  a  translation  from  the  Greek. We  shall

.' . I now  enumerate  the  reasons from  which

„  Y  it appears  that the  Greek was in turn

translated  from  a  Hebrew  original.

(i.)  The  quotations  from,  or  unconscious  reproductions  of,  the

2  IS


OT  agree  in  all  cases  but  one  with  the  Mas.soretic  text  against
©.  (li.)  Hebrew  idioms  survive  in  the  Syriac  text.  Thus
there  arc  niany  instances  of  the  familiar  Hebrew  idiom  of  the
infinitive  absolute  combined  with  the  finite  verb,  and  many
breaches  of  Syriac  grammar  in  the  Syriac  text  are  probably  to  Ijc
explained  as  survivals  of  Hebrew  order  and  Hebrew  syntiix.
(iii.)  Unintelligible  expressions  in  the  Syriac  can  be  explained
and  the  text  restored  by  retranslation  into  Hebrew.  '1  bus,
among  many  others,  the  pas.sages  'Jl  9,  11,  12,  'J4  2  and
02  7  can  be  restored  by  retranslation  into  Greek  and  thence
into  Hebrew. The  Syriac  in  these  verses  is  the  stock  rendering


of  ftKatoOcrdat,  and  this  in  turn  of


pis ; .


but


•'■"f


also^Sixaiot


eti/ac,  and  this  is  the  meaning  required  in  the'  above  pas.sages,
where  the  Greek  translator  erroneously  adopted  the  commoner
rendering.  (iv.)  .Many  paronomasitr  discover  themselves  on
retranslation  into  Hebrew. See  Charles,  Apoc.  Bar.  44-53.

The  final  editor  of  this  work  assumes  for  literary
purposes  the  person  of  Baruch,  the  son  of  Xeriah.
8  Contents  ^^^  scene  is  laid  in  the  neighbourhood
■  of  Jerusalem  ;  the  supposed  time  is  the
period  immediately  preceding  and  subsequent  to  the
capture  of  the  city  by  the  Chakhuans.  Baruch,  who
begins  by  declaring  that  the  word  of  the  Lord  came
to  him  in  the  twenty-fifth  year  of  Jeconiah,*  speaks
throughout  in  the  first  jxjrson.  If  we  exclude  the  letter
to  the  tribes  in  the  captivity  (chaps.  78-87),  the  work
naturally  divides  itself  into  seven  sections,  separated  from
one  another  in  all  but  one  instance  (i.e.  after  35)  by
fasts  which  are,  save  at  the  end  of  the  first  section,  of
seven  days'  duration.  The  omission  of  a  fast  after  chap.
35  may  have  been  due  either  to  an  original  oversight  of
the  final  editor  or  to  the  carelessness  of  a  copyist.

That  the  text  requires  the  insertion  of  such  a  fast  is  to  be  con-
cluded on  the  following  grounds  : — According  to  the  scheme  of
the  final  editor  events  proceed  in  each  sectinn  in  a  certain
order  (see  Charles,  Apoc.  Hnr.  g,  <6,  61).  Thus  first  we
find  a  fast,  then  generally  a  prayer,  then  a  divine  message  or
disclosure,  and  finally  an  announcement  of  this  to  an  individual
or  to  the  people.  Thus  in  the  tifth  section,  il-34,  we  have  a
seven-days'  fast  (21  1),  a  prayer  (-214-26),  a  revelation  (22-30),
and  an  address  to  the  people  (21  24).  Then  another  seven-days'
fa-t  should  ensue  at  the  beginning  of  the  sixth  section  (30-40).
With  the  exception  of  this  omission  events  follow  in  this  section
as  in  the  others.

These  sections  are  very  uner|ual  in  length — 1-56
57-8  9-124  125-20  21-35  36-46  47-77  — a  fact  that,
though  it  does  not  in  itself  make  against  unity  of
authorship,  confirms  the  grounds  afterwards  to  be
adduced  for  regarding  the  work  as  composite.

1.  The  first  section  (l-'ie)  opens  with  God's  revelation  to
Raruch  regarding  the  coming  destruction  of  Jerusalem.  But  a
time  of  prosperity  .should  return.

2.  According  to  the  next  section  (5  7-9  i),  Baruch  fasts  until
the  evening,  and  the  Chalda;ans  encompa.ss  Jerusalem  next  day.
In  a  vision  Baruch  sees  the  sacred  vessels  removed  from  the
temple  by  angels  and  hidden  in  the  earth  till  the  last  times.
The  angels  next  overthrow  the  walls,  the  enemy  are  admitted
and  the  people  carried  away  captive  to  Babylon.

3.  In  the  third  section  (9  2-12  4),  Baruch  fasts  seven  days,  and
receives  a  divine  command  to  tell  Jeremiah  to  go  to  Babylon  ;
but  Baruch  himself  is  to  remain  at  Jerusalem  to  receive  God's
revelations  regarding  the  future.  I5aruch  bewails  Jerusalem
and  the  lot  of  the  survivors.  '  Would  that  thou  hadst  ears,  O
earth,  and  that  thou  hadst  a  heart,  O  dust,  that  ye  might  go  and
announce  in  Sheol  and  say  to  the  dead  :  "  Blessed  are  ye  more
than  we  who  live."'

4.  In  the  fourth  section  (12  5-20),  Baruch  fasts  for  seven  days,
and  is  told  by  God  that  he  will  be  preserved  till  the  end  of  time
in  order  to  bear  testimony  against  the  nations  that  oppressed
Zion.  When  Baruch  complains  of  the  prosperity  of  the  wicked
and  the  calamities  of  the  righteous,  God  answers  that  the  future
world  is  made  on  account  of  the  righteous — that  the  blessings  of
life  are  to  be  reckoned  not  by  its  length  but  by  its  quality  and
its  end. Baruch  is  bidden  not  to  publish  this  revelation  (20  3).

5.  In  the  fifth  section  (21  i-S.'i),  Baruch  fasts,  as  usual,  seven
days.  He  deplores  the  bitterness  of  life,  and  suppliaites  God  to
bring  about  the  promised  end.  God  reminds  him  of  his  ignor-
ance, and  declares  that  the  end,  though  close  at  hand,  cannot
arrive  till  the  predestined  number  ot  men  be  fulfilled,  and  again,
in  answer  to  Baruch's  question  respecting  the  nature  and  the
duration  of  the  judgment  of  the  ungodly,  descril>es  the  coming
time  of  tribulation,  which  will  be  divided  into  twelve  parts  At
its  close  the  Messiah  will  be  revealed.  Baruch  summons  a
meeting  of  the  elders  in  the  valley  of  Kedron,  and  announces  to
them  the  future  glory  of  Zion.

6.  The  sixth  section  (3rt-40)  should  begin  with  the  mi.ssing  fast
of  seven  days. Shortly  after,  he  has  a  vision  of  a  cedar  and  a  vine

1  We  may  observe  here  that  Jeconiah  reigned  only  three
months,  and  was  carried  captive  to  Babylon  eleven  years  before
the  fall  of  Jerusalem.


APOCALYPTIC  LITERATURE


wiilth  symbolise  the  Roman  power  and  thetriumphofthe  Messiah.
When  liaruch  asks  who  shall  share  ni  the  future  hlessciiness,  God
answers  :  •  To  those  who  have  U-lieved  there  will  be  the  blessed-
ness that  was  spoken  of  aforetime.'  Haruch  then  (4-I-47)  calls
together  his  first-l)<>rn  son  and  seven  of  the  elders,  tells  them  of
his  approaching  end,  and  exhorts  them  to  keep  the  law,  lor  '  a
wise  man  will  not  be  wanting  to  Israel,  nor  a  son  of  the  law  to
the  race  of  Jacob.'

7.  After  a  fast  of  seven  days,  Taruch  in  the  seventh  section
(47-77)  prays  for  Israel.  The  revelations  that  ensue  tell  of  the
coming  tribulation,  liaruch  bow:. Us  the  evil  eflccls  of  Adam's
fall.  In  answer  to  his  request,  he  is  instructed  as  to  the  nature
of  ihe  resurrection  bodies.  Then,  in  a  new  vision  (.■)3-74),  he  sees
a  cloud  a.scending  from  ihe  sea  and  covering  the  whole  earth.
There  was  lightning  about  its  summit,  and  soon  it  began
to  discharge  first  black  waters  and  then  clear,  and  again  black
waters  and  then  clear,  and  so  on  till  there  had  been  six  black
waters  and  six  clear.  At  last  it  rained  black  waters,  darker
than  had  been  all  that  were  before.  Thereupon,  the  lightning
on  the  summit  ot  the  cloud  flashed  forth  and  healed  the  earth
wheie  the  last  waters  had  fallen,  and  twelve  streams  came  up
from  the  sea  and  became  subject  to  that  lightning.  In

the  fillowing  chapters  the  vision  is  interpreted.  The  cloud  is
the  world,  and  the  twelve  successive  discharges  of  black  waters
and  clear  waters  symbolise  six  evil  periods  and  six  good  periods
of  the  world's  history.  The  eleventh  pcriutl,  s\  iiil>(>li-,t(i  by  the
black  waters,  pointed  to  the  supposed  present  trilnilantiii  of  Jeru-
silen?.  The  rest  of  the  interpretation  follows  i  ,  tin  future  tense.
The  twelfth  clear  waters  point  to  the  renewed  prosperity  of  Israel
and  the  rebuilding  of  Jerusalem.  The  last  black  waters  that
were  to  flow  pointed  to  troubles,  earthquakes,  and  wars  over
the  whole  earth.  Such  as  survived  these  were  to  fall  by  the
haiulscf  the  .Messi.ih.  These  bl.ickevt  of  .ill  the  waters  were
to  Ik-  f..ll.)\sca  hy  clear  waters,  which  s\inl>.)Ii/i:(l  tlie  blessedness
of  tin:  Mo-iaiiic  times.  This  Messianic  jirriiHUhould  form  the
l)iiii:iil.iiy  line- lii-tween  corru])tion  ami  iiicurruiiiioii.  'That  time
i>5  til.-  I  .n-iiiiiinati'.n  <if  that  which  is  corruptible,  and  the  begin-
ning ■  .f  i!i. a  wliirli  is  inc.rruiiiible.'  liaruch  thanks  God  for
the  ivAclat  1.111  \iniclisafc(i.  lie  is  then  informed  of  his  coming  de-
partuie  from  the  earth,  but  is  bidden  first  to  g.)  and  instruct  the
people.  He  admonishes  them  to  be  faithful  (chap.  77),  and  at
their  reiiuest  sends  two  epistles,  one  to  their  brethren  in  liabylon
('  the  two  and  a  half  tribes ')  and  the  other  to  the  tribes  ('  nine
and  a  half)  beyond  the  Euphrates.  The  latter  is  given  in
chaps.  7S  87.  It  is  probable  that  the  lost  letter  to  the  two  tribes
and  a  half  is  identical  with,  or  is  the  source  of,  the  Greek  Haruch
39-429. See  Charles,  Apoc.  Bar.  65-57.

From  the  discovery  of  the  Apocalypse  of  Rainich  in

_  .  . ,, 1866  till  1 89 1,  it  was  regarded  by  scholars

9.  Kabiscns  ^^  ^^^  ^^^^^  ^^  ^^^^  author. In  the  latter

tneory  ot ^^^^^ KalMscli,  in  an  article  entitled  '  Die

sources. Qudlen  der  Apocalypse  Baruchs  ' {JPT,

1891, PI). 66-107), showed beyond  the  possibility of

(luestion  tliat  the  work  was  composite  and  derived  from

at  least  three  or  four  authors.

Thus  he  distinguishes  1-24  i,  302-34,  41-52,  and  75-87  as  the
groundwork  written  after  70  A.D.,  since  these  chapteis  imply
the  destruction  of  the  temple.  He  further  observes  that  these
parts  are  marked  by  a  despair  which  no  longer  looked  for  peace
and  happiness  in  this  world,  but  fixed  its  regards  on  the  world
of  incorruption.  In  the  other  jjieces  of  the  book  there  is  a
strong  faith  in  Israels  ultimate  triumph  here,  and  an  optimism
which  looks  f.>r  the  ,ni,>uniiii..ti..i,  of  Messianic  bliss  in  this
life  ;  and.  as  Kabisch  ri-htiv  ..marks,  the  ten. pic  is  still  standing.
These  other  secti'.ns,  l„,wJv,:i-,  are  the  w,.rk  n,,t  of  .,ne  writer
but  of  three,  being  cunstituied  us  follows  :  a  short  Ap..c.  24  3-
2!t,  the  Vine  and  Cedar  Vision  :i(i-40,  and  the  Cloud  Vision
53-74  :  30  I  '•>'!  2-4,  35  are  due  to  the  final  editor.

This  theory  is  certainly  in  the  right  direction. It  is
<)|)LMi. however, to  unanswerable  objections. 'I'here  is
no unity in the so-called groundwork.


10.  Present
writer's
results.


When  submitted  to  a  detailed  criticism,  it
exhibits  a  mass  of  conflicting  conceptions


and  staten)ents.  The  results  of  such  a
criticism  mav  lie  stated  briefly  as  follows  (for  the  details
see  Charles.' .-//<^t:.  liar.  53-67).  1-26  31-35  41-52  75-
87  were  written  after  the  fall  of  Jerusalem,  and  were
derived  from  three  or  possibly  four  authors,  Bj,  Bj,  B3,
and  possibly  S.

Bi  =  l-i>i  43-447  45/77-82  84  8()/,  written  by  a  Pharisee
who  expected  Jerusalem  to  be  rebuilt  and  the  dispersion  to  be
brought  kick  from  exile.

R..,  =  9-12  13-25  302-35  41/  448-15  47-52  75/  83,  also  by
a  Pharisee  who  looked  for  no  national  restoration,  but  only  for
the  recompense  of  the  righteous  in  heaven.

P,3  =  S5,  written  by  a  Jew  in  exile.

S.  =106-124,  possibly  by  a  Sadducee,  but  perhaps  to  be  as-
signed to  H.J.

The  rest  of  the  lx)ok  was  written  before  the  fall  of
Jerusalem.  It  consists  of  an  Apocalypse  27-30 1  (  =  Ai)
217


and  the  two  Visions  36-40  (  =  Aj)  and  53-74  •  (  =  A,
already  mentioned.  All  these  different  elements  were
combined  by  the  final  editor,  to  whom  we  owe  also
42-6  2t5  284/.  322-4  and  possibly  some  other  additions.

Jewish religious thought busied itself, as already

observed,  mainly  with  two  subjects,  the  Messianic  hope

«... . and  the  Law  ;  and in  proportion  as  the

.. . one Ijecame more prominent the  other

criteria. j^^.„ j^^^ ^^^ background. Now, the

chapters  written  Ixifore  70  A.U.  are  mainly  Messianic.

Chaps.  27-30  i  (Ai)  and  30-40  (.V.)  take  account  of  the  I-aw
only  indirectly,  whereas  in  those  written  after  that  date  the  whi  le
thought  and  hopcsof  the  writers  centre  in  the  Law  as  their  presei  t
mainstay  and  their  source  of  future  bliss.  In  chaps.  53-74  (A:/,
again,  the  Messianic  hope  and  the  Law  are  eijually  emphasized.
iTiis  writing  marks  the  fusion  of  early  Kabbinism  and  tie
popular  Messianic  expectation. (See  Charles,  oJ<.  cit.)

In  the  sections  B,  and  B,2,  on  the  other  hand,  written
after  the  fall  of  Jerusalem,  we  have  two  distinct  outlooks
as  to  the  future.  In  B,  the  writer  is  still  hopeful  as  to
the  future  of  Jerusalem.

It  is  delivered  into  the  hands  of  its  enemies  indeed,  but  only
for  a  time  (41O9).  The  consolation  of  Zion  should  yet  be
accomplished  (44  7  hi  i  4),  and  the  ten  tribes  brought  back  from
their  captivity  (7S  7  84  10).  Moreover,  the  retribution  of  the
Gentiles  was  close  at  hand  (82  2-9),  and  in  due  time  would  arrive
the  judgment,  in  which  God's  justice  and  truth  should  exact
their  mighty  due  (809).

In  B.2.  on  the  other  hand  (and  if  possible  still  more  in
B3  =  chai3.  85),  the  writer  is  full  of  irremediable  desjjair
as  to  the  earthly  fortunes  of  Zion  and  its  people  in  this
world  (106-11).

Destruction  awaits  this  world  of  corruption  (21  19  31  5).  The
righteous  have  nought  to  look  for  save  the  new  world  (44  12).  the
world  that  dies  not  (.'d  3),  the  world  of  incorruption  (85  5).  Only
in  the  world  to  cmie  will  every  man  be  recompensed  in  the
resurrection  according  to  his  works  (50/),  when  the  wicked
shall  go  into  torment  and  the  righteous  shall  be  made  like  unto
the  angels.

In  the  sections  written  l)efore  the  fall  of  Jerusalem,
the  Messianic  element,  which  was  wanting  in  B,,  B.^,
and  B.J,  is  predominant.  The  three  Apocalypses  '27-30
(.Aj)  36-40  (Aj)  53-74  (A,)  have  many  features  in
common — such  as  an  optimistic  outlook  as  to  Israel's
earthly  prosperity,  the  earthly  rule  of  the  Messiah  till  the
close  of  this  world,  and  the  material  blessings  of  his
kingdom.  There  are,  however,  good  grounds  for  regard-
ing them  as  of  different  authorship.  The  Messianic  reign
is  to  close  with  the  final  judgment.  On  the  Escha-
tology  of  the  book  see,  further,  IvsciiATOLoGV,  §  78.

All  the  elements  of  this  book  are  distinctly  Jewish.
Its  authors,  as  already  observed,  were  Pharisees,  full  of
confidence  in  the  future  glories  of  their
nation,  either  in  this  world  or  in  the  next,


12.  Author-


ship.


notwithstanding their present hum


tions.  They  entertain  the  most  lofty  coiicejitioiis  as  to
the  divine  election  and  the  absolute  pre-eminence  of
their  race.

It  was  on  Israel's  account  that  not  only  the  present  world
(14  19)  but  also  the  coming  world  (107)  was  created.  Israel  is
God's  chosen  people  whose  like  is  not  on  earth  (is  20);  the
perpetual  felicity  of  Israel  lay  in  the  fact  that  tlty  had  not
mingled  with  the  nations  (-18 23).  The  one  haw  which  they  had
received  from  the  one  God  (4824)  could  help  and  justify  them
(51  3);  for  so  far  as  they  kept  its  ordinances  they  could  not  fall
(4S22):  their  works  would  save  them  (14  12  51  7<>3  3).  In  <!iie
time  also  all  nations  should  serve  Israel ;  but  such  of  them  as  h.-\d
injured  Israel  should  be  given  to  the  swa.rd  (72  6).  The  carnal
.sensious  nature  of  the  Messiah  and  his  kingdom  (20-30  30  ; -40
72-74)  is  essentially  Pharisaic.  There  w.is  to  be  a  general
resurrection  (42  8  12);  but  apparently  only  Israel  .should  l.e
saved  (51  4).

1  It  is  possible  to  determine  approximately  the  earlier  limit
of  the  composition  of  .-\;t  by  means  of  what  we  might  call  the
Enochic  canon.  This  is  :  No  early  Jetvish  book  -u-hich  extols
Enoch  could  have  been  ivrittcn  after  50  a.d.,  ami  tlu  attribu-
tion 0/ Enoch's  words  and  achievements  in  a  Jc.vish  tvotk  10
other  O  T  heroes  is  a  sign  that  it  was  written  after  the  Pauline
preaching  0/  Christianity.  This  hostility  to  I-  noch  from  50
A.U.  onwards  (cp  Knoch)  is  to  be  traced  to  Lnochs  .-icccptance
among  the  Christians  as  a  Messianic  prophet.  Kor  the  grounds
and  illustrations  of  this  canon  see  Charles,  .-iyVv.  Bar.
21-22,  loT.  Now,  in  .50  5-11  of  this  Apocalypse  many  of  1  noch  s
functions  and  revelations  are  assigned  to  Moses.  Hence  Aj
was  written  after  50  A.D.

ai8


APOCALYPTIC  LITERATURE


The  affinities  of  Apoc.  Bar.  with  4  Esdras  are  so  strik-
ing and  so  many  that  Kwald  ascribed  the  two  books  to  the
.  _  Aflinitv  •'''^'"^  author.  Though  this  view  has  not
th  4  F  ri  '**^'''"  ^'^cepted  in  later  criticism,  it  will
not  be  amiss  to  draw  attention  to  these
affinities,  (r)  The  main  features  of  the  two  books  are
similar.  They  have  one  anti  the  same  object — to  de-
plore Israel's  present  calamities  and  awaken  hope  in  the
coming  glories,  temporal  or  spiritual,  of  their  race.

In  both  the  speaker  is  a  notable  figure  of  the  time  of  the
Babylonian  captivity.  In  both  there  is  a  sevenfold  division  of
the  work,  and  an  interval  (as  a  rule,  of  seven  days)  between  each
two  divisions  ;  and,  whereas  in  the  one  Ezra  devotes  forty  days
to  the  restoratiiin  of  the  scriptures,  in  the  other  Haruch  is
bi  Idsn  to  spend  forty  days  in  admonishing  Israel  before  his  de-
parture from  the  earth.

(2)  They  have  many  doctrinal  peculiarities  in  common.

According  to  l)oth,  man  is  saved  by  his  works  (4  Esd.  7  77  8  33
97,  A(>.  Bar.  22l4i2etc.);  the  world  was  created  in  belialfof
Israel  (4  Esd.  6  55  7  1 1  !•  13,  A/>.  Bar.  14  19  l.'>  7  etc.)  ;  man  came
not  into  the  world  of  his  own  will  (4  Esd.  8  5,  Ap.  Bar.  14  11  48
15) ;  a  predetermined  number  of  men  must  be  attained  before
the  end  (4  Esd.  436/,  Ap.  Bar.  2845);  God  will  visit  his
creation  (4  Esd.  5  56  0  18  it  2,  Ap.  Bar.  20  2  24  4) ;  Adam's  sin  was
the  cause  of  physical  death  (4  Esd.  3  7,  Ap.  Bar.  23  4)  ;  the  souls
of  the  good  are  kept  safe  in  treasuries  till  the  resurrection  (4  E.sd.
435-377328095,  Ap.  /)'jr.  3O2).

This  list  might  have  been  indefinitely  added  to.
On  the  other  hand,  there  are  clear  points  of  divergence.
14  Divereence  ^"  ^'-^'^^''^^s  the  Messianic  reign  is  limited

from  4  Esd  *°  "^°°  years  (7  28/  ),  whereas  in  Baruch
this  period  is  quite  indeterminate.
Again,  in  the  former  {729)  the  Messiah  is  to  die,  and
the  Messianic  reign  is  to  close  with  the  death  of  all
living  things ;  whereas  in  the  latter,  according  to  30,  the
Messiah  is  to  return  in  glory  to  heaven  at  the  close  of
his  reign,  and,  according  to  73/,  this  reign  is  to  be
eternal,  though  it  is  to  belong  partly  to  this  world  and
partly  to  the  ne.xt.

Again,  in  Esdras  the  writer  urges  that  God's  people  should  be
punished  by  Gods  own  hands  and  not  by  the  hands  of  their
enemies  {Jji() /.),  for  these  have  overthrown  the  altar  and
destroyed  the  temple,  and  made  the  holy  place  a  desolation  (10
217C).  In  Haruch  it  is  described  at  length  how  the  holy  vessels
were  removed  by  angels  and  the  walls  of  Jerusalem  demolished
by  the  same  agency  before  the  enemy  drew  nigh  (0-8).

On  the  question  of  original  sin  likewise  these  two  books  are
at  variance.  Whilst  in  Esdras  the  entire  stream  of  physical  and
ethical  death  is  traced  to  Adam  (3  7  2iyC  4  307  48),  and  the  guilt
of  his  descendants  minimised  at  the  cost  of  their  first  parent
(yet  see  S  55-61),  Haruch  derives  physical  death  indeed  from
Adam's  transgression  (17  3  23  4  54  15),  but  as  to  ethical  death  de-
clares that  "each  man  is  the  Adam  of  his  own  soul "  (54  19  ;  yet
see  4842).

It  will  be  clear  from  the  facts  set  forth  above  that
the  relations  of  these  two  apocalypses  constitute  a  com-

15  Real  ^'^'^  problem.  If  we  attempt  to  deal  with
,'  ..  this  problem on  the  supposition  that  each

book  is  derived  from  a  single  author,  no
solution  is  possible ;  and  the  barrenness  of  criticism
hitherto  in  this  direction  is  due  to  this  supposition  of  their
unity.  When,  however,  we  come  perforce  to  recognise
their  comjiosite  nature,  we  enter  at  the  same  time  on
the  road  that  leads  to  the  desired  goal.  For  a  pro-
visional study  of  the  relations  lietween  the  various  con-
stituents of  this  apocalypse  and  4  Ksdras,  the  reader
can  consult  Charles,  Apoc.  Bar.  67-76.  The  results  of
this  study  tend  to  show  that,  whilst  some  of  the  con-
stituents of  4  Ksdras  are  older  than  the  latest  of  Baruch,
other  constituents  of  Baruch  are  decidedly  older  than
the  remaining  ones  of  4  Esdras.

The  points  of  contact  between  this  apocalypse  and
the  NT  are  many  ;  but  they  are  for  the  most  part
IR  PI  f  insufficient  to  establish  a  relation  of  de-
to  NT^**"  pendence  on  either  side.  The  thoughts
and  expressions  in  questions  are  explicable
from  pre-e.xisting  literature  or  as  commonplaces  of  the
time.

Such,  among  many  others,  are  Mt.  3  16,  Ap.  Bar.  22  i,  Mt.  26
24,  Ap.  Bar.  106,  Lk.  21  28,  Ap.  Bar.  287,  Rom.  818,  Ap.
Bar.  15  8.

The  following  passages  are  of  a  diflferent  nature
and  postulate  the  dependence  of  our  apocalypse  on  the

219


NT,  or  possibly,  in  one  or  two  of  the  instances,  of  both
on  a  common  source.

With  Mt.  16 26,  'For  what  shall  a  man  be  profited,  if  he
.shall  gain  the  whole  world  and  forfeit  his  soul?  or  what  shall  a
man  give  in  exchange  for  his  soul?'  cp  Ap.  Bar.  61  15,  '  For
what  then  have  men  lost  their  life,  or  for  what  have  those  who
were  on  the  earth  exchanged  their  soul?'  Also  with  i  Cor.  15
19,  '  If  in  this  life  only  we  have  hoped  in  Christ,  we  are  of  all
men  most  miserable,'  cp  Apoc.  Bar.  21  ij,  '  For  if  there  were
this  life  only  .  .  .  nothing  could  be  mure  bitter  than  this.'  Also
with  I  Cor.  15  35,  '  How  are  the  dead  raised  and  with  what
manner  of  body  do  they  come?'  cp  4i>  2,  '  In  what  shape  will
those  live  who  live  in  that  day?'  Cp  also  Lk  1  42  with  Ap.
Bar.  54  10,  Jas.  1  2  with  52  6,  and  Rev.  4  6  with  51  2.

As  the  Apocalypse  of  Baruch  was  written  between
50  and  100  A.D.  it  furnishes  us  with  the  historical  setting
17  'Valufl  ^""^  background  of  many  of  the  NT  prob-
■  lems,  and  thereby  enables  us  to  estimate
the  contributions  made  in  this  respect  by  Christian
thought.  Thus,  whereas,  from  492-51,  we  see  that  the
Pauline  doctrine  of  the  resurrection  in  i  Cor.  15  35-50  was
not  an  innovation  but  a  developed  and  more  spiritual
exposition  of  ideas  already  current  in  Judaism,  it  is  clear,
on  the  other  hand,  from  the  teaching  of  this  book  on
Works  and  Justification,  Forgiveness  and  Original  Sin
and  Freewill  (see  Charles,  op.  cit.  pp.  80-85),  what  a
crying  need  there  was  for  the  Pauline  dialectic,  and
what  an  immense  gulf  lay  herein  between  Christian  and
Rabbinic  teaching.  No  ancient  book  is  so  valuable  in
attesting  the  Jewish  doctrine  of  that  period.

Bihliof^raphy. — In  addition  to  the  works  already  mentioned,
the  reader  may  consult  Langen,  De  Apoc.  Bar.  comtii.  ('67) ;
Ew.  CGA  ('67),  1706-17,  1720;  /fist.  0/  Israel,  857-61;
Drummond,  The  Jeiois/t  Messiah  ('77),  1 17-132;  Kneucker,
Das  Buch  Bar.  ('79),  190-198;  Di.  '  Pseudep."  in  PRE^^,
12356-358  ;  Deane,  I'scudtp.  ('91),  130-162.

II.  The  Book  of  Enoch. — By  the  exegesis  of  later
times,  the  statement  that  ICnoch  walked  with  God  (Gen.
24  ; see Enoch)  was taken to mean


18.  Jewish
view  of
Enoch.


that  he  enjoyed  superhuman  privileges  of
intercourse  with  God,  and  in  this  inter-


course received  revelations  as  to  the  nature
of  the  heavens  and  the  earth,  the  present  lot  and  the
destinies  of  men  and  angels.  It  was  natural,  there-
fore, that  an  apocalyptic  literature  should  seek  the
shelter  and  authority  of  his  name  in  ages  when  such
literature  became  current.  In  the  Book  of  Enoch  pre-
served in  Ethiopic  we  have  large  fragments  of  this
literature  proceeding  from  a  variety  of  Jewish  writers
in  Palestine  ;  and  in  the  Book  of  the  Secrets  of  Enoch
preserved  in  Slavonic  we  have  further  portions  of  it,
written  originally  by  Hellenistic  Jews  in  Eg\-pt.  To
the  latter  book  we  shall  return.

The Book of Enoch as  translated into Ethiopic

belongs  to  the  last  two  centuries  B.C. All  the  writers  of

, ,  the NT  were  fannliar  with it  and  were

_  ■ , . . more  or  less  influenced  by  it  in  thought
Enoch :  its , ,• •  t • » ;  •

,  and  diction. It  is  quoted  as  a  genuine

lorDune  .  production  in  the  Epistle  of  Jude(  14/)  and
as  Scripture  in  that  of  Barnabas  [Ep.  43  It) 5)-  The
wl^ho'cso{^.\^(i  Secretsof  Enoch,  Jubilees,  Test.  xii.  Pair.,
Apoc.  Bar.  and  4  Esd.  laid  it  under  contribution.  With
the  earlier  Fathers  and  Apologists  it  had  all  the  weight  of
a  canonical  book  ;  but  towards  the  close  of  the  third  and
the  beginning  of  the  fourth  centuries  it  began  to  be  dis-
credited, and  finally  it  fell  under  the  ban  of  the  Church.
The  latest  references  to  it  are  to  be  found  in  Synccllus
and  Cedrenus,  who  have  preserved  large  fragments  of
the  Greek  version.  The  book  was  then  lost  sight
of  till  1773,  when  two  MSS  of  the  Ethiopic  version
were  discovered  by  Bruce.  From  one  of  these  M.SS
Lawrence  made  the  first  modern  translation  of  Enoch
in  1821.

Enoch  was  originally  written  in  Heb.  or  Aram.,
T  jre "°'  '"  Greek. On this  question the

i  .  gu  g  .  ^.j^jgf  Apocalyptic  scholars  are  practi-

cally agreed.

In  the  case  of  chaps.  1-32  this  view  is  established  beyond  the
reach  of  controversy ;  for  in  IO9  19  188  27  2  28  i  21)  i  31  i  of  the
Greek  version  we  find  that  the  translator  transliterated  Heb.  or


APOCALYPTIC  LITERATURE


Aram,  words  that  were  unintelliKible  to  him.  The  name  view
as  lo  the  remaining  chapiers  has  been  amply  proved  in  the
Joum.  As.  ('67)  352-395  by  Halivy,  who  regards  the  entire
work  as  derived  from  a  Hebrew  orii-inal.  See  also  Charles,
Book  0/ Enoch,  21-22,  325.  Recently  some  Dutch  and  flerman
scholars  have  argued  for  an  Aram,  original  on  the  ground  that
three  Aram,  forms  have  l»ecn  preserved  in  the  Gi/eh  ( Ireck  frag-
ment— \\t..  ^ov«a  in  18«,  (Lavio^apa.  in  28  i,  and  fia^ijpa.  in  L'l»  i.
The  first  is,  it  is  true,  an  .\ram.  form  of  •^15  and  the  two  latter
onaip.  Thisargumcnt,  however,  is  inconclusive.  Wc  find  oxava
in2  K.  H9/' [U.\*l  asatransliterationof  nin,  and  Xiva  in  Neh.
'J  14  (HKJ  as  a  transliteration  of  ['V;  and  there  are  other  inst.-inces
of  the  siime  pcailiarity  in  €*.  Hence  the  presence  of  such
Arani.ii>nis  in  a  text  is  not  sufficient  in  itself  to  establish  an
Aram,  original.

The  Hel).  original  was  translated  into  Greek,  and
from (ircok into J-2lhiopic and Latin. Of  the  Greek

21  Versions ^■'^'■'*'"" c^^V^- 6-94  84-IO14  158-16i
^Greek '''^^  ^'  come  down  to  us  through  Syncel-

lus((/rf.  800  A. u. ).  and  8942-49  through
a  \':itican  MS.  ;  hut  tlie  most  important  fragment  of
this  version— the  CJi/ch  tJreek  fragment — was  discovered
only  a  few  years  ago  by  the  Mission  Archtologique
I'^ranfaise  at  Cairo,  and  published  in  1892.

.M.  I,od's  critical  edition  of  this  frajjnient,  accompanied  by  a
translation,  appeared  almost  simultaneously,  and  next  year  it  was
edited  by  the  present  writer,  with  an  exhaustive  comparison  of
the  llreek  and  Ethiopic  versions  of  1-32,  as  an  .Appendix  to  his
work  on  Rnoch.  The  other  Greek  fragments  will  be  found  in
the  same  work.  The  Gizeh  fragment  was  edited  also  by  Dill-
mann  (.S7;.-i;r  ['92],  li.-liii.  1039-1034,  1079-1092).  The  frag-
ments of  the  Greek  Knoch  with  a  critical  apparatus  are  to  be
published  in  the  2nd  edition  of  vol.  iii.  of  .Swete's  Cambridge

The  Latin  version  is  wholly  lost — with  the  exception
of  1  9,  which  is  found  in  a  treatise  of  the  Pseudo-Cyi)rian

22  Latin. *^"'''''^*^ -■^"' ^'ovutiatium (see Zahn's

(n-sth.  it  XTliclicn  h'anoris,  2797-801),  and
100 1-18,  which  owes  its  thscovery  to  Mr.  James,  in
an  eighth-century  MS  in  the  Hrit'ish  Museum.  This
fr:iginent  is  critically  edited  in  Charles's  Ihiok  of  Enoch,
372-375'  .I-inies,  Apocrypha  Auecdota,  146-150.

The  Ethiopic  version  alone  preser%es  the  entire  text,
and  that  in  a  more  ancient  and  trustworthy  form  than

23.  Ethiopic. thf otl''-''- versions. It has fewer
'^ additions, fewer  omissions,  and fewer
and  less  serious  corruptions.

_  \.  The  Kth:\>/>ic  .1/.S".S".~Tlie  Ethiopic  MSS  are  comp.-ira-
tively  many.  I  here  are  about  twenty  scattered  throughout  the
libraries  of  Europe  ;  half  of  them  are  found  in  the  liritish
Museum.  The  best  of  all  the  known  MSS  is  undoubtedly  that
design.itcd  Orh-nt.  ./V,-  in  the  Hritish  Museum.

I I.  Fditions  0/  the  I'.tkiopic  Text.~Ox\\y  two  editions  have
api)eared— that  of  Lawrence  in  1S38  from  one  AIS,  and  that  of
iJiUmann  in  1851  from  five  M.SS.  Unhappily,  these  MSS
were  late  and  corrupt.  The  present  writer  hopes  to  issue  a
text  based  on  the  incomparably  better  MSS  now  accessible  to
scholars.  Such  a  text  is  actually  presupposed  in  his  Translation
and  Commentary  of  1893.

III.  Translations  and  Commentaries. — Translations  accom-
panied by  Commentaries  have  been  issued  by  I-awrence  ('21),
Hoffmann  Cas-'^S),  Dillniann  (-53),  Schodde  (52),  and  Charles
^'??,^V  P*"  ^^'"'"•T'n's  and  Schoddes  Translations  the  reader
will  find  a  short  review  in  Charles  (6-9).

_  IV.  Critical  fntjuir.es.  -  Some  account  of  these  will  be  found
in  Schiirer,  Hist.  70-73.  and  in  Charles's  Jiook  pf  Knoch,  9-21
309-31 1.  Of  the  many  works  on  this  book  the  following  deserve
spcial  mention  here.  Lucke,  Kinl.  in  d.  Offenh.  dcs  Joh.^i)
(  >2);  Ew.  Abhandl.  ah.  d.  nth.  Jiuches  Henokh  Entstehunc,
Sinn,  und  Zusammenseizung  {'55);  Kostlin,  '  Ueb.  die
Entsteh.  d.  B.  Henoch'  (T/ieol.  Jahrh.  1856,  pp.  240-279  370-
j86);  Hilgenfeld,  Die  j fid.  A/>okalyfitik  ('57),  91-184  ;  Geb-
hardt,  '  Die  70  Hirtcn  des  Buches  Henoch  und  ihre  Deutungen '
(Merx's  Archiv /.  wissoischafll.  Er/orschung  des  AT,  1872,
vol.  11.  Heft  2  163-246) ;  Dnimmond,  The  Je^vish  .Messiah  (87),
17-73;  Eipsius  in  Smith  and  W^ct:'^  Diet.  o/Chr.  .fi/V- ('80),
2124-128;  Schiirer,  Hist.  0  54-73 ;  Lawlor,  y^Krw.  I'hil.  vol.
xxy.  pp.  164-225  I97].

The  Hook  of  iMioch  is  a  fragmentary  survival  of  an

entire literature  that  once  circulated under  his  name.

24.  Com- '^°  *'''^  ^^'^^  ^^  plurality  of  books  as-

positeness  S'o"ed  to  Enoch  front  the  first  may  in
some  sense  point :  as,  for  instance,  the
exi)rcssion  'books'  in  104  12  ;  Te.tf.  .vii.  Patr.  Jud.  18  ;
Origen,  c.  Cchiiin,  554.  and  elsewhere.  Of  this  literature
five  distinct  fragments  have  been  preserved  in  the  five
books  into  which  the  Book  of  Enoch  is  divided  (1-36


37-71  72-82  83-90  91-108).  These  bookswereoriginally
separate  treatises  ;  in  later  limes  they  were  collected
and  edited,  but  were  much  nmtiiaied  in  the  course  of
retlaction  and  incorporation  into  a  single  work.  In
addition  to  this  Enoch  literature,  the  final  editor  of  the
Ixiok  made  use  of  a  lost  ai)OcaIypsc,  the  Hook  of  Noah
(mentioned  in  Jubilees  10 13  21 10),  from  which  he  drew
C-Il  (?)  17-19  3Di2-/  41 3-8  43/  547  i:>i  59/  G5-
6925  106/  Another  fragment  of  the  Hook  of  .Noah
has  l)een  embodied  in  the  Hook  of  Jubilees  (see  below,
§57).

We  have  already  remarked  that  in  the  five  books  into
which  the  whole  work  is  divided  we  liave  the  writings


25.  Criticism.


of  five different authors. I'cfore we


proceed  to  give  some  of  the  grounds
for  this  statement,  we  shall  give  in  merest  outline  the
different  constituents  found  in  the  work  by  the  chief
scholars  who  have  studied  the  subject.

I.iicke  in  his  Einl.  (see  above,  g  23)  regards  the  book  as  con-
sisting of  two  parts.  'i'he  first  part  embraces  l-3t>  7:;-10.'>,
written  at  the  l)egiiining  of  the  Maccabean  revolt,  or,  accortiing
to  his  later  view,  in  the  reign  of  John  Hyrcanus  ;  the  second
consists  of  the  Similitudes  (3i>-71),  and  was  written  in  the  early
days  of  Herod  the  Great.  In  the  latter,  however,  there  are
some  interpolations.  Hofmann  (J.  Chr.  K.)  ascribes  the  entire
work  to  a  c:hrisiian  author  of  the  second  century.  In  thi-.  view
he  was  followed  later  by  Weisse  and  Philippi.  Hofmann
deserves  mention  in  this  connection  on  the  ground  of  his  having
been  the  first  to  give  the  correct  interpretation  of  the  seventy
shepherds  in  ^'.)/.  Ew.  in  his  Ahhandl.  (see  above,  §  23)  gives
the  following  -cKeme  :— Book  I.  (37-71)  f/Vc(?  144  n.c.  ;  Book  II.
(1-10  SI  1-4  S4  1I1-105)  circa  135  B.C.;  Book  111.  (20-3t;  72-!iO
\^&/.)  circa  128  n.c.  ;  108  later.  Book  IV.,  the  Book  of  No.ih
(li  3-8  8  1-3  97  10  1-3  n  22*  17-19  547-552  (M)i-io24  25  04-ti9  16),
.somewhat  later  than  the  preceding.  Kostlin  in  his  essay  (see
above,  g  2q),  a  coiitrilmtioii  of  great  worth,  arrives  at  the  follow-
ing analysis  :  the  groundwork  (l-lii  21-3«)  72105)  circa  1 10  I'.c.  ;
the  Similitud<>s  (37-71  and  17-1'.»)  before  64  B.C.  ;  Noachic
fragments  (54  -j-bh  2  1)0  ('.5-i;',i  25,  possibly  also  20  829-20  lIMiy:).
108  is  an  Essene  addition.  Hil-cnfeld  (<?/.  cit.)  regards  the
groundwork,  consistinj;  of  1-10  20-30  72-105,  as  written  before
98  11. r.  ;  .-ind  the  remaining  chapters  as  coming  from  the  h.ind
of  A  C  liiisti.in  (Jnostic  after  the  time  of  Satuminus.  The
int.  lestiM-  study  of  Tideman  ('ThI'.  I1875]  261-296),  and  the
work>  of  l.ijisius,  Schiirer,  Drummond,  enumerated  above  (iJ  23),
and  .Schodde  ( /'^^  Book  0/  Enoch.  iE82)can  only  be  nienti  iied
here.  As  Dillmann  changed  his  mind  three  times,  and  in  each
instance  for  the  better,  it  will  be  enough  to  give  his  final
analysis.  The  groundwork  (1-36  72-105),  in  the  time  ol  J,,hn
Hyicaims;  the  Similitudes  and  17-19,  before  64  K.c.  :  the
Noachic  fragments  (li  3-s  81-397  10  i  11  20  39  i  2a  54  7-55  2  00
Oj-f.'.t  25  lOli/.)  ;  108  from  a  Liter  hand.

We shall now proceed to di.scuss this question
26 Results '^'■'^■'-■''y' '^"'l endeavour to carry the
criticism  of the book  one  further  stage
towards  finality.

Disregarding  the  interpolations  from  the  Hook  of  Noah
already  mentioned  as  well  as  the  closing  chapter,  we  find
liiat  all  critics  are  agreed  in  ascribing  the  Similitudes
(•37-70)  to  an  authorship  different  from  the  rest.  The
remaining  chapters  (1-36  72-104)  have  been  regarded  by
all  critics  except  Ewald  and  Lipsius  as  proceeding  from
one  and  the  same  author  ;  but  these  scholars,  while  differ-
ing from  each  other,  have  not  i>ersuaded  any  one  but
themselves  as  to  the  justness  of  their  res{x;ctive  analyses.
In  their  contention,  however,  as  to  the  composileness  of
these  chapters  they  were  undoubtedly  right.  This
question  has  been  gone  into  at  length  in  Charles's  />'<)<'*
of  Enoch,  55  /,  187-189,  220  /,  260-263,  where
grounds  are  given  for  Ix^lieving  that  sections  1-36,  72-82,
83-90,  and  91-104  are  writings  distinct  as  to  author-
sliiji,  system  of  thought,  and  date.  We  must  now
proceed  to  sketch  briefly  the  various  independent  writings
contained  in  the  entire  work,  assigning  to  each  its  most
probable  date.

Part  I.,  consisting  of  chaps.  1-36  (for  the  Noachic
interpolations,  see  §  24),  was  written  at  latCit  before
170  B.C.,  and  mainly  from  the  prophetic
standpoint  of  such  chapters  as  Is.  C;"*.
This  is,  undoubtedly,  the  oldest  part  of
the  book,  being  anterior  to  72-82,  83-90.  91-104,  as  it  is
used  by  the  writers  of  these  sections.

As  83-00  was  written  not  later  than  161  B,c.,  l-3<3  must  be
some  years  earlier,  and,  as  there  is  no  allusion  to  the  1


27.  Chaps.
1-36.


APOCALYPTIC  LITERATURE


of  Antiochus  Eplphanes, the  above  date, 170,  is the latest
reasonable  limit  for  its  composition.

This  book — /'.c. ,  1-36 — is  the  oldest  piece  of  Jewish
literature  that  teaches  the  general  resurrection  of  Israel,
describes  Sheol  according  to  the  conception  that  prevails
in  the  NT  as  opjjosed  to  that  of  tiie  O  T,  or  represents
Gehenna  as  a  final  place  of  punishment  (cp  EscnATO-
i.ocY,  §  63).  The  problem  of  the  author  is  to  justify
the  ways  of  God  to  men.

The  rii;liteous  will  not  suffer  always  (1 1).  Sin  is  the  cause  of
this  sufTering,  and  the  sin  of  man  is  due  to  the  lust  of  the  angels
—  the  Watchers  ('.leg  10  IOk).  Hence  the  Watchers,  their
companions,  and  their  children,  will  be  destroyed  (104-1012).
Their  destruction  will  form  the  prelude  to  the  first  world-judgment,
of  which  the  Deluge  will  form  the  completion  (10  i-^).  Sin  still
prevailed  after  the  l>eluge,  however,  through  the  influence  of  the
evil  spirits  that  went  forth  from  the  slaughtered  children  of  the
Watchers  and  the  daughters  of  men  (10 1).  These  act  with
impunity  till  the  final  judgment.  In  the  meantime  character
finds  its  recompense  in  some  measure  immediately  after  death
(•-'•2).  In  the  last  judt:ment  the  Watchers,  the  demons,  and  all
classes  of  Israelites  with  one  exception,  will  receive  their  final
award  (Iq-li;)).  This  jntlginent  is  preceded  by  a  general
resurr;-ction  of  Israel  ('-'2).  The  wicked  are  cast  into  Ciehenna
(■J72);  the  earth  is  cleansed  from  sin  (IO20-22);  the  Messianic
kingdom  is  established,  with  Jerusalem  as  a  centre  (265)  ;  and
Hod  abides  with  men  (203).  The  (Jentiles  are  converted  (IO21).
The  righteous  eat  of  the  tree  of  life  (264-6)  and  thereby  enjoy
patriarchal  lives  (09).  As  to  what  befalls  the  rmhteous  after  the
second  death  there  is  no  hint  in  this  fragmeiUary  section.

Part II., consisting of  83-90,  was  written between

p,  166  aiul  161  n.c. ,  niaiiilv  from  the  same

83  90^^' ^'■^'"'l'"'"^ =^s Daniel. On  a  variety  of

grouiuls, we  are  obliged  to  discriminate

this  section  from  the  preceding.

It  will  be  enough  to  mention  that,  whereas  in  this  there
is  a  Messiah,  in  the  preceding  there  was  none  ;  in  this  the
life  of  the  righteous  is  apparently  unending,  in  the  other  it
was  finite ;  in  this  the  scene  of  the  kingdom  is  the  New
Jer'is.-ilem  set  up  by  Ciod  himself,  in  the  other  it  was  Jerusalem
and  the  entire  earth  unchanged  though  purified.  Finally,  the
picture  in  83-00  is  developed  and  spiritual,  whilst  that  in  1-SO  was
naive,  primitive,  and  sensuous.

The  date  assigned  above  is  not  difficult  to  fix.

The  Hasidim  (see  AssiDEAN's),  symbolised  by  the  lambs  that
are  born  to  the  white  sheep  (006),  are  already  an  orL;aiiised  party
in  the  -Maccabean  revolt.  The  lambs  that  become  horned  are
the  M;\ccabean  fimily,  and  the  great  horn  who  is  still  warring
while  the  author  of  the  section  is  writing  is  Judas  the  Maccabee
(OO9),  who  died  in  161  ii.c.

Cliapters  S3-90  recount  two  visions  :  83/. ,  dealing  with
the  first  world-judgment  ;  80-90,  dealing  with  the  entire
history  of  the  w-orki  till  the  final  judgment.  In  the
second  vision  the  author  considers  the  question  of  Israel's
unmerited  suffering.

Israel  has  indeed  sinned  ;  but  the  punishment  immeasurably
transcends  its  guilt.  These  undue  severities,  the  author  shows,
have  not  come  from  the  hand  of  (;od  ;  they  are  the  doing  of
the  seventy  shepherds  into  whose  care  Ood  committed  Israel
(SO  59).  These  shepherds  or  angels  have  proved  faithless  to
their  trust  ;  but  not  with  impunity.  An  account  has  been  taken
of  all  their  deeds  (8961-64),  and  for  them  and  for  their  victims
there  is  laid  up  a  due  recompense  (90  33).  Moreover,  when  the
outlook  is  darkest,  a  league  of  the  righteous  is  organised
in  Israel  (OOfi).  In  it  there  will  arise  a  family  from  which
will  come  forth  the  deliverer  of  Israel,  Judas  the  Maccabee
(OO9-16).  Kvery  effort  of  the  Gentiles  to  de>troy  him  will  prove
vain,  and  God's  appearance  in  person  to  judge  will  be  the  signal
for  their  destruction.  The  apostates  will  be  cast  into  Gehenna,
and  the  wicked  angels  into  an  abyss  of  fire  (90 20-25).  ('od
himself  will  set  up  the  New  Jerusalem  (90  28  29)  ;  the  surviving
Gentile-i  will  be  converted  and  serve  Israel  (90 30);  the  righteous
dead  will  be  raised  to  take  part  in  the  kingdom  ;  and  finally
the  Messiah  will  appear  among  them  (90  37).  The  Messianic
kingdom  lasts  on  earth  for  ever,  and  its  members  enjoy  ever-
lasting blessedness.

It  will  be  observed  that  this  is  the  earliest  appearance
of  the  Messiah  in  non-canonical  literature  (see  Mkssi.mi,
§  5  ;  EsciiATOLfXJY,  §  60).  He  has,  however,  no  role
to  play  :  he  has  not  as  yet  vindicated  for  himself  a  place
in  the  apocalyptic  doctrine  of  the  last  things.

Fart  III.,  consisting  of  91-104,  was  written  between

134  and  95  B.C. The  well-defined  opposition of  the

p,  Pharisees  and  the  Sadducees  depicted  in

■ ^  ' this  section  cannot  have  been  earlier  than

the  breach  between  John Hyrcanus  and

the  Pharisees  (see  IsRAKi,,  §  78;  -SCKIBKS,  §  i8|  ; hence

not  earlier  than  134  B.C. On  the  other  hand,  it  cannot

223


have  been  later  than  95  B.C.,  as  the  merely  passing
reference  to  |x.T.secution  in  103  15  could  hardly  be  inter-
jjreted  of  Jann.eus  after  his  .savage  massacres  of  the
Pharisees  in  95  B.C.,  which  won  for  him  the  title,  '  the
slayer  of  the  pious. '

This  section  was  originally,  like  83-90,  an  independent  writing.
In  adapting  it  to  its  present  environment,  the  redactor  of  the
entire  work  broke  up  its  original  arranijement.  In  order  to
recover  this  we  must  read  it  in  the  following  order  :— 92  91  i-io
93i-io  91  12-19  9-4-104.  On  a  variety  of  grounds  (see  Charles,
Hook  0/ I'.noch,  260-263),  we  must  attribute  this  work  to  quite
another  author  than  that  of  either  of  the  preceding  sections.

In  passing  from  83-90  to  91-104  we  enter  on  a  world
of  new  conceptions  (cp  Esch.\toi.()OY,  §  64/.).  In
all  previous  apocalyptic  writings  the  resurrection  and
the  final  judgment  have  been  the  prelude  to  an  ever-
lasting Messianic  kingdom  ;  whereas  in  the  present
writing  the.se  great  events  are  relegated  to  the  close
of  the  Messianic  kingdom,  and  not  till  then  do  the
righteous  enter  on  their  reward.  This  kingdom  is
temporary  (91 12-15)  ;  there  is  no  Messiah  ;  the  right-
eous with  God's  help  vindicate  their  just  cause  and
destroy  their  oppressors.  On  the  close  of  the  kingdom
follow  the  final  judgment  (91 15)  and  the  risen  spiritual
life  of  blessedness  in  a  new  heaven  (91  10  9"23).  In
this  view  of  the  future  the  centre  of  interest  has
obviously  passed  from  the  material  world  to  the
spiritual,  and  the  Messianic  kingdom  is  no  longer
the  goal  of  the  hopes  of  the  righteous.  Their  fiiith  finds
its  satisfaction  only  in  a  blessed  immortality  in  heaven
itself.  This  immortality  is  an  immortality  of  the  soul
only  (103  3-4).  As  for  the  wicked,  they  will  descend
into  the  pain  of  SheOl  and  abide  there  everlastingly
(98310  10478).  Here  (lO;]?)  Sheol  appears  as  Hel'l
for  possibly  the  first  time.
30.  Similitudes :  I'^'iY^' "^'^^  Si"»litudes.  consisting  of

chaps 37-70 3/-/0,  were  written  between  94  and  79
^  '  ■ B.C. ,  or  between  70  and  64  B.C.

'  The  kings  and  the  mighty,'  so  often  denounced,  are  the
later  -Maccabean  princes  and  their  .Sadducean  supporters  :  the
later  Maccabean  princes,  for  the  blood  of  the  righteous  was
not  shed  (as  the  writer  complains,  47124)  before  95  n.c;
not  the  Herods,  for  the  Sadducees  were  not  allies  of  the  Herods,
and  Rome  was  not  as  yet  known  to  the  writer  as  one  of  the
great  world-powens.  This  last  fact  necessitates  an  earlier  dale
than  64  B.C.,  when  Rome  interposed  authoritatively  in  the  affairs
ofJiKla;a.

In  his  attempt  to  solve  the  problem  of  the  suffering  of
the  righteous,  the  author  of  the  .Similitudes  has  no
interest  save  for  the  moral  and  spiritual  world.  I  lis
view,  too,  is  strongly  apocalyptic,  and  follows  closely
in  the  wake  of  Daniel.

The  origin  of  sin  is  traced  one  stage  farther  back  than  in  1-3(5.
The  first  authors  of  sin  were  the  Satans  (407).  The  Watchers
fell  through  becoming  subject  to  these  and  leading  mankind
astray  (546).  Though  the  Watchers  were  forthwith  confined  in
a  deep  abyss,  sin  still  flourishes  in  the  world  and  sinners  deny
the  name  of  the  Lord  of  Spirits  (38  2)  and  of  his  Anointed  (48  lo),
and  the  kings  and  the  mighty  oppress  the  children  of  God  (02  11).
Suddenly  there  will  appear  the  Head  of  Days,  and  with  him
the  Son  of  Man  (40  2  34  482),  to  e.\ecute  judgment  upon  .all  alike.
To  this  end  there  will  be  a  resurrection  of  all  Israel  (51 1
61  5),  and  all  judgment  will  be  committed  to  the  Son  of  Man
(4I9  0027),  who  will  judge  all  according  to  their  deeds  (41 1).
Sin  and  wrong-doing  will  be  banished  from  the  earth  (492),  and
heaven  and  earth  be  transformed  (45  4  5),  and  the  righteous
will  have  their  mansions  in  Paradise  (39  6  41  2).  The  Elect  One
will  dwell  among  them  (45  4);  they  will  be  chad  in  garments  of
life  (()2  15  16),  become  anpels  in  heaven  (51  4),  and  continue  to
grow  in  knowledge  and  rigtiteousness  (585).

It  will  be  observed  that  the  Messianic  doctrine  in  this
section  is  unique,  not  only  as  regards  the  other  sections
of  Enoch  but  also  in  Jewish  literature  as  a  whole  (see,
further,  Eschatology,  §  66).

The"  Me.ssiah  exists  from  the  beginning  (48  2) ;  he  sits  on
the  throne  of  (5od  (463  473),  and  pos.sesses  universal  dominion
(026);  and  all  judgment  is  committed  unto  him  (r)927).  If  we
turn  to  the  other  sections  we  find  that  in  1-30  and  91-104  there  is
no  -Messiah  at  all  ;  whilst  in  83-90  the  Messiah  is  evidently
human,  and  has  no  real  role  to  play  in  the  doctrine  of  the  last
things.

If  the  reader  will  turn  to  the  list  of  Noachic  interpola-
tions (see  above,  §  24)  lie  will  find  that  many  of  them
are  to  be  found  in  this  section.
224


APOCALYPTIC  LITERATURE


They  have  M  a  rule  been  drawn  from  an  already  existing
Apocalypse  of  Noah,  and  adapted  bv  an  editor  to  their  present
contexts  in  Knoch.  This  he  docs  by LorrowinK  from  the  Simili-
tudes characteristic  terms,  such  as  '  Lord  of  Spiriis,'  '  Head  of
Days,"  'Son  of  Man,'  tu  which,  however,  either  through  ignor-
ance or  of  set  intention,  he  generally  gives  a  new  connotation.

Chapter  71  does  not  belong  to  the  Similitudes.  It  shows
the  s.-iine  misuse  of  characteristic  phrases  as  the  interpola-
tions just  referred  to  (see  Charles,  Book  of  Knoch,  183/  ).

I'ait  v.,  the  Hook  of  Celestial  Physics,  consists  of
31.  Celestial ^2-78  82  7!>. This like  the  preceding


Physics  (Chaps,


sections, is a work of independent


to  TQ  00 tci\  '-luthorship. There  are no means  of
li-1^,  \il,  79).  j^.t^.r,„ining  ^s  ^jate.

It  h.is  sufTcrcd  from  both  disarrangements  and  interpolations
at  the  liands  of  the  editor  of  the  wliole  work.  In  the  first  phice,
^9 /•  '■''  •''  'nanifest  intrusion  written  from  a  standpoint  quite
dinerent  from  tliatofthe  rest.  In  the  next  place,  S2  does  not
st.md  in  its  original  position.  The  opening  words  of  7l>  in  fact
prcsupp<jse  82  as  already  read.  We  have  found  a  similar  disloca-
tion of  the  text  in  Part  III.

Part  VI.,  the  Noachian  and  other  interpolations.
These  have  been  enumerated  above  (§  24).

The  influence  of  Enoch  on  Jewish  literature  (to  exclude

32.  Influence  <«■•  the  moment  the  NT)  is  seen in

of  Enoch J'tbiiecs  (written  about  the  begmning  of

the  Christian  era),  in  the  Slavonic  Enoch

(1-50  .\.  I). ),  Test.  xii.  Pair. ,  Apoc.  Bar. ,  and  in  4  Esdras.

In  Jewish  apocalyptic  before  40  A.D.  Enoch  was
the  chief  figure  next  to  Daniel  ;  but  his  acceptance  by
tiie  Christians  as  a  Messianic  prophet  led  to  his  rejec-
tion by  the  Jews. See  note  on  §  10.

In  patristic  literature,  Enoch  is  twice  cited  as  .Scripture
in  I-:p.  Harn.  (43  I65).  It  is  also  quoted  with  approval,
tliough  not  always  by  name,  by  Justin  Martyr,  Iren.  and
Athenag. ,  Tert. ,  Clem.  Alex. ,  Orig. ,  Anatolius.  Thence-
forward it  is  mentioned  with  disapproval  by  Hilary,
Chrys.,  Jer.,  .August.,  and  finally  condemned  in  explicit
terms  in  the  Const.  A  p.  6  16.

Far  more  important  than  its  influence  on  Jewish  litera-
ture, was  its  influence  on  NT  diction  (a)  and  doctrine  [b).

(rt)  We  shall  here  draw  attention  only  to  the  indubitable
instances.  Knoch  is  quoted  directly  in  Jude  n /.  Phrases,
clauses,  or  thouphts  derived  from  it,  or  of  closest  kin  with  it,
are  found  in  Jude  4  n  /  ;  Rev.  2  7  3  10  4  6  li  10  9  i  14  20  20  13  ;
Kom.,S33  95;  Kph.l2i;  Ileb.Us;  Acts3i4;  Jn.62227;
Lk.935  I692335;  Mt.  1928  2541  20  24.

{b)  The  doctrines  in  Enoch  that  had  a  share  in  mould-
ing the  analogous  NT  doctrines,  or  formed  a  neces-
sary link  in  the  development  of  doctrine  from  the  O  T  to
the  NT,  are  those  concerning  the  Messianic  kingdom  and
the  Messiah,  Sheol  and  the  resurrection,  and  demonology,
on  which  reference  must  be  made  to  the  separate  articles
on  these  heads  and  to  E.sch.\TOLOgv.  We  here  content
ourselves  with  remarking,  as  regards  the  doctrine  of  the
Messiah,  that  four  titles,  afterwards  reproduced  in  the
New  Testament,  are  first  ajjplied  to  the  personal  Messiah
in  the  Sintilitudes.  These  titles  are  'Christ'  or  'the
Anointed  One,'  'the  Righteous  One,'  'the  IClect  One,'
and  ■  the  Son  of  Man. '  The  first  title,  found  repeatedly
in  earlier  writings  but  always  in  reference  to  actual  con-
temporary kings  or  priests,  is  now  for  t!v  lirst  time  (48 10
r)24)  applied  to  the  ideal  Messianic  king  that  is  to  come.
It  is  here  associated  with  supernatural  attributes.  The
second  and  the  third  of  these  titles,  found  first  in  Enoch,
have  passed  over  into  the  NT — the  former  occurring  in
.\cts  3 14  75^  2214.  the  latter  in  Lk.  935  2835.  The  last
title,  that  of  '  the  Son  of  Man,'  is  historically  the  source
of  the  New  Testament  designation.  To  the  latter  it
contributes  some  of  its  most  characteristic  contents  (see
Charles,  Book  of  Knoch,  312-317).

III.  TiiK  Book  of  thk  Skckkts  of  Enoch. — This
book  has,  as  far  as  is  yet  known,  been  preserved  only  in

33 Secrets ''^'^^■""'*-- For  the  sake  of  convenience

of  Enoch


we  shall  call  it '  the  .Slavonic  Enoch,


its  fortunes.


in  contradistinction  to  the  older  book.


which for the  same  reason  we shall
designate  '  the  Ethiopic  Enoch. '

15  22e:


This  new  fragment  of  the  Enochic  literature  has  only
recently  come  to  light  through  certain  MSS,  some  of
which  were  found  in  Russia  and  some  in  Servia.
Although  the  very  knowledge  of  such  a  Ixxjk  was  lost  for
probably  twelve  hundred  years,  the  book  was  nmch  used
by  both  Christians  and  heretics  in  the  early  centuries.

Citations  appear  from  it,  though  without  acknowledg-
ment, in  the  Hook  of  Adam  and  Eve,  Apoc.  Moses  and  I'aul
(400-500  A.D.),  Sibylline  OracUs,  Asc.  Isa.  and  /./.  0/  liar.
(70-90  A.O.).  It  is  quoted  by  name  in  the  apocalyptic  portion*
of  the  Test,  o/the  xii.  Patr.  {circa  i  A.U.).  It  was  referred  to
by  Orig.  and  probably  by  Clem.  Alex.,  and  was  used  by  Iren.
Some  piirases  of  the  NT  may  be  derived  from  it.

There  are  five  Slavonic  MS.S  : in  two  of  them  the  complete

text  is  found,  while  the  remaining  three  supply  oniy  a  shortened

„, and  incomplete  rcclaction. Kor  the  edition  uul>-

34. Ine lished  by  the  present  writer  the  two  best  of  the

Slavonic  al>ove  MSS  (A  and  H)  were  translated  and  put  at
MSS.  '''^  service  of  the  editor  by  Mr.  Morfill.  The
editor  had  at  his  disposal  also  .M  r.  .Moi  fill's  transla-
tion of  Prof.  Sokolov's  text,  which  is  founded  on  these  and  other
MSS.  In  i8g6  Prof.  IJonwetsch  published  his  Das  .Slavische
Henochbuclt,  in  which  he  gives  a  German  translation  of  the  MSS
A  and  H  side  by  side,  preceded  by  a  short  introduction.

36.  LanfTuajre.  ..  ^''l T^*"  "'^'"  ^'^'^.  °^  ^^^  '  ^'^vonic
* «* Enoch was  written  m  Greek.

This  is  clear  from  such  statements  as  (i)  30  13,  'And  I  gave
him  a  name  {i.e.,  Adam)  from  the  four  substances  :  the  Kast,  the
West,  the  North,  and  the  South.'  Adam's  name  is  thus  derived
from  the  initial  letters  of  the  Greek  nan.es  of  the  four  quarters—
avaTo\ri,  Jijais,  apxro?,  jiorritiPpia.  This  derivation  was  first
elaborated  in  Greek  :  it  is  impossible  in  the  Semitic  languages.
(2)  The  writer  follows  the  chronology  of  0.  (3)  In  60  4  he
reproduces  the  0  text  of  I)t.  32  35  against  the  Hebrew.  (4)  He
constantly  uses  Ecclesiasticus,  which  was  current  chiefly  in
Egypt.

(6)  Certain  portions  were  based  on  Hebrew  originals.
Such  a  hypothesis  is  necessary  to  account  for  the  cjuota-
tions  from  it  or  references  to  it  which  ajjpear  in  the
Test.  xii.  Fair.  The  fact  that  the  latter  work  was
written  in  Hebrew  obliges  us  to  conclude  that  its  author
drew  upon  Hebrew  originals  in  quotations  and  references.

36.  Place. The  book  was  written  in  Egypt.

This  is  deducible  from  the  following  facts  : — (i)  The  variety  of
speculations  which  i:  holds  in  common  with  Philo  and  other
Hellenistic  writers  :  thus  souls  were  created  before  the  foundation
of  the  world,  23  s  (cp  Philo,  De  Somno,\  22  ;  Wisd.81920).
Again,  man  had  seven  natures,  309(cp  I'hilo,  De  MundiOp.  40).
(2)  The  whole  Messianic  teaching  of  the  OT  does  not  find  a
single  echo  in  the  work  of  this  Helleniscd  Isr.-ielite  of  Kgypt,
although  he  shows  familiarity  with  most  of  its  books.  (3)  .Such
monstrous  creatures  as  appear  in  chap.  12  are  n.ttural  products  of
the  Egyptian  imagination.  (4)  The  syncretistic  character  of
the  creation  narrative  in  25 y?  betrays  Egyptian  elements.

Materials  originally  derived  from  this  book  are  discoverable  in

Joel  and  Cedrenus  (1050-1200  a.u.),  though  in  these  authors  the

_ . ,. materials  are  assigned  to  other  names. Two

37.  lielation  pass.-iges  of  the  Hook  0/  Adam  and  Eve  (see
to  other Apocuvfha, § 10)  in 1 6  and 8 are all but

works.  quotations  from  '294y!  and  31  2  of  our  book.
Again  in  the  Apoc.  Moses,  19  (ed.  Tisch.
1866),  we  have  a  further  development  of  14  2-4  of  our  text,  just
as  in  Apoc.  Paul.  64  ovrot  iiniv  6  jrapaieio-o?,  tvOa.  .  .
SevSpov  .  .  ev  if  (iraverravfTO  to  nvevfi-a  to  ayiov  is  a  Christian
adaptation  of  83,  'And  in  the  midst  (of  Paradise  is)  the  tree  of
life — on  which  (jod  rests  when  he  comes  into  Paradise."  The
section  on  the  derivation  of  Adam's  name  in  the  anonymous  De
Montihus  Sina  et  Sion,  4,  is  to  be  traced  ultimately  to  30  13,  and
Augustine's  speculation,  De  Civ.  xxii.  30  5,  on  the  eighth  eternal
day  to  33  2.

Still  earlier  we  find  almost  a  verbal  reproduction  of  50  5-51  i  in
the  Sibylline  Oracles,  2  75.  In  Irena;us,  Contra  //ter.v.'2S^,
the  Jewish  speculation  of  33iy;  is  reproduced,  and  possibly  in
Origen  (see  Lommatzsch  ed.,  vol.  xxi.  59).  However  this  may
be,  there  is  no  doubt  as  to  the  direct  reference  to  24-30  33  8  in  the
De  Princip.  i.  3  2  :  '  Nam  et  in  eo  libello  .  .  .  quem  Hernias
conscripsit,  ita  refertur  :  Priiiio  omnium  crede,  quia  unus  est
Deus,  qui  esse  fecit  omnia  .  .  .  sed  et  in  Enoch  libro  his  similia
describuntur.'  There  are  good  grounds  for  believing  that  in  a
still  earlier  period  (50-100  A.i>.)  the  writers  of  Asc.  Isa.  816
and  oi  Apoc.  liar.  43  were  acquainted  with  19  i  and  31  2  of  this
book  respectively.  In  Ep.  Ham.  15  5-8  and  probably  in  18  1
the  thought  and  diction  are  dependent  on  32  a-33  and  30  15.

In  the  NT  the  similarity  of  matter  and  language  is
sufliciently  great  to  establish  a  close  connection  if  not  a
literary  dependence.

With  Mt.  69,  '  Blessed  are  the  peacemakers,' cp  52  II,  'Blessed
is  he  who  establishes  peace  ' ;  with  Mt.  634  35  37,  '  Swear  not  at
all,'  etc.,  cp  49  I,  'I  will  not  swear  by  a  single  oath,  neither  by
heaven,  nor  by  earth,  nor  by  any  other  creature  which  God
made.  .  .  .  If  there  is  no  truth  in  men,  let  them  swear  by  a  word,

226


APOCALYPTIC  LITERATURE


38.  Date.


yea,  yea,  or  nay,  nay."  Again,  with  Mt.  7  20  and  25  34,  cp  42  n
and  9  i  ;  with  Jn.  14  2  cp  01  2  ;  with  Eph.  4  25  cp  42  12  ;  with
Rev.  9  I  and  10  5/  cp  42  i  and  667.  Still  earlier  we  find  this
book  not  only  used  but  quoted  by  name  in  the  '/'est.  Van  j,
where  the  statement  riiv  irvtvii.aTiav  n^s  irKavrK  •  avtyvioy  yap  tv
^/SXfp  'Kyti}\  TOu  BiKaCov,  on  o  ap^uiv  vfjuau  tarci'  o  XaTava^  is
drawn  from  18 3,  'These  are  the  iJrigori  (i.e.  ' Eyprfyopoi)  who
with  their  prince  Satanail  rejectel  the  noly  Lord."  l  inally,  the
references  to  Enoch  in  Tes/.  Naph.  4,  Test.  Sim.  5,  Test.  Benj.
9,  are  adaptations  of  34  2-3.

The  question  as  to  the  date  has,  to  a  large  extent,  been
deterniined already. The portions  which
have  a Hebrew  background are  at latest
pre-Christian.

This  follows  from  the  fact  of  their  quotation  in  the  Test.  xii.
Patr.  Turning  to  the  rest  of  the  book,  we  find  that  the  ter-
tninus  a  quo  is  determined  by  the  fact  that  it  frequently  uses
Ecclus.  (cp  43  2/.  47  5  52  8  61  2  4,  etc.  ;  see  the  writer's  edition
of  the  Slavonic  Enoch).  The  Ethiopic  Enoch,  further,  is  con-
tinually presupposed  to  be  in  the  background.  Its  phraseology
and  conceptions  are  reproduced  (7  4/!  3349/!  35  2,  etc.).  At
times  its  views  are  put  forward  in  a  developed  form  (8  i  ^y.  40 1^
64  5),  and  occasionally  divergent  conceptions  are  enunciatea
(16  7  IS  4).  Fmally,  explanations  are  claimed  to  have  been  given
by  this  writer  which,  as  a  matter  of  fact,  are  to  be  found  not  in
his  writings  but  in  the  Kth.  En.  (■;ee  40  5/  8/).  It  is  possible
that  the  Book  of  Wisdom  also  was  used  by  our  author  ;  see  05  4.

Since,  therefore,  Ecclus. ,  the  Efh.  Enoch,  and  Wisdom
(?)  were  used  by  this  author,  his  work  cannot  have  been
earlier  than  30  B.C.

The  terminus  ad  quern  must  be  set  down  as  earlier
than  70  A.D.  For  (i)  the  temple  is  still  standing.  (2)
This  book  was  known  and  used  by  the  writers  of  Ep.
Barn,  and  Asc.  Isa. ,  and  probably  by  some  of  the
writers  of  the  NT.  We  may  with  reasonable  certainty,
therefore,  assign  the  composition  of  the  book  in  Greek  to
the  period  50  A.  D.  The  author  is  thus  a  contemporary
of  Philo,  with  whom,  accordingly,  we  find  that  he  holds
many  speculations  in  common.  Much  of  the  book,  how-
ever, goes  back  to  a  Hebrew  background  of  an  earlier
date.

The  author  was  thus  an  orthodox  Hellenistic  Jew  who
lived  in  I'.gypt.  He  believed  in  the  value  of  sacrifices
(426  59  I  662) — though  he  is  careful
to  enforce  enlightened  views  with
regard  to  them  (-loa/.  61  4/) — in  the  law  (.528/),  and
in  a  blessed  immortality  (5O2  656  8/.),  in  which  the
righteous  will  wear  '  the  raiment  of  God's  glory'  (228).
In  questions  affecting  the  origin  of  the  earth,  of  sin,  and
of  death,  he  allows  himself  the  most  unrestricted  freedom
and  borrows  from  every  quarter.  Thus  Platonic  (30 16),
Egj-ptian  (252),  and  Zend  (584-6)  elements  are  in-
corporated in  his  system.  The  result  is  highly
syncretistic.

The  book  opens  with  a  short  account  of  Enoch  as  '  a  very
wise  man '  whom  '  God  loved  and  received  so  that  he  should  see
the  heavenly  abodes,  the  kingdoms  of  the
40.  Contents,  wise,  great,  and  never-changing  God.'  In
chap.  1  two  angels  appear  to  Enoch  and  bid
him  make  ready  to  ascend  with  them  into  heaven.  In  chap.  2  he
admonishes  his  so  is  and  directs  them  not  to  seek  for  him  till  he
is  brought  back  to  them.  Thereupon  (3-6)  he  is  carried  up
through  the  air  into  the  first  heaven,  where  he  beholds  a  great
sea,  and  the  elders,  the  rulers  of  the  orders  of  the  stars,  and  the
treasuries  of  the  snow  and  ice  and  clouds  and  dew,  and  the
angels  who  guard  them.  Thence  the  angels  bear  him  to  the
second  heaven  (7),  where  he  sees  the  angels  who  had  rebelled
against  God,  imprisoned  and  suffering  torments.  These  angels
ask  Enoch  to  intercede  for  them.  Next,  he  ascends  to  the
third  heaven  (8),  where  is  Paradise,  with  all  manner  of  beautiful
fruits  and  '  the  tree  of  life  on  which  God  rests  when  he  comes
into  the  garden,'  and  the  four  streams  of  honey,  milk,  oil,  and
wine,  that  water  the  garden,  and  go  down  to  the  Paradise  of
Eden,  between  corruptibility  and  incorruptibility.  The  angels
inform  Enoch  that  '  this  place  is  prepared  as  an  eternal  inherit-
ance '  for  those  '  who  turn  their  eyes  from  unrighteousness,  and
ace  )mplish  a  righteous  judgment,  and  give  bread  to  the  huuirry,
and  clothe  the  naked,  and  raise  the  fallen  .  .  .  and  walk  with-
out blame  before  the  face  of  the  Lord.'  Enoch  is  then  t.aken  to
the  northern  region  of  this  heaven  (10),  and  shown  'a  very
terrible  place'  of  'savage  darkness  and  impenetrable  gloom,"
with  'fire  on  all  sides,  cold,  and  ice.'  He  is  told  that  'this
place  is  prepared  as  an  eternal  inheritance '  for  those  '  who
commit  evil  deeds  on  earth,  sodomy,  witchcraft "...  who
oppress  the  poor,  who  are  guilty  of  '  stealing,  lying,  envy,  evil
thoughts,  fornication,  murder,'  who  '  worship  gods  without  life.'

Thence  Enoch  is  conducted  to  the  fourth  heaven,  where  he  is
shown  the  courses  of  the  sun  and  moon  (11),  and  the  phoenixes,


39.  Authorship.


and  the  chalk.-idi  i  ?  (12  ;  cp  Cockatrice),  and  the  eastern  and
western  gates  of  the  sun  (13-10),  and  '  an  armed  host  serving  the
Lord  with  cymbals  and  organs'  (17).

In  18  he  is  taken  up  to  the  fifth  heaven,  where  he  sees  the
Watchers  who  had  rel>elled  ;  their  brethren  were  already
confined  in  torment  in  the  second  heaven.  Then  he  passes  to
the  sixth  heaven  (19),  where  are  the  angels  wh.>  regulate  all  the
powers  of  nature  and  the  courses  of  the  stars,  and  write  down
the  deeds  of  men.  Finally,  he  is  raised  to  the  seventh  heaven
(20  /),  where  he  sees  God  sitting  on  his  throne,  and  the
heavenly  hosts  in  their  ten  orders  on  the  steps  of  the  throne,
and  the  .Seraphim  singing  the  trisagion.  He  falls  down  and
worships  (22).  At  God's  command,  Alichael  takes  from  him  his
earthly  robe,  anoints  him  with  the  holy  oil,  and  clothes  him
with  the  raiment  of  God's  glory.  Thus  Enoch  becomes  like  one
of  the  glorious  ones.  Under  the  instruction  of  Vretil  (chap.  '23),  he
writes  366  books,  in  thirty  days  and  thirty  nights,  about  things
in  heaven  and  earth,  and  about  the  souls  of  men  created  from
eternity,  and  their  future  dwelling-places.

In  24-26  God  makes  known  to  Enoch  how  he  created  the
invisible  out  of  the  visible  ;  how  he  commanded  Adoil  (possibly
a  corruption  of  Uriel,  regarded  as  =  light  of  God),  and  Arkhas
(possibly  from  pj(  or  Aram.  Kpnx  =  earth),  to  come  forth  and
burst  asunder ;  and  so  the  light  on  high  and  the  world  below
were  produced.  And  God  divided  the  light  and  the  darkness
(27),  and  made  the  seven  heavens,  and  caused  the  waters
under  the  heaven  to  be  gathered  into  one  place,  and  made  the
earth  from  the  waters  (-8).  Such  were  the  creations  of  the  first
day.  And  on  the  second  day  God  created  the  heavenly  hosts
(291-3).  And  one  of  the  archangels  (.Satanail)  rebelled,  and
God  cast  him  down  (284/)  from  the  heights.  On  the  third
day  (30  I  2)  God  caused  the  earth  to  produce  trees  and  herbs,
and  planted  Paradise.  On  the  fourth  (30  3-6),  he  ordered  great
lights  to  be  in  the  various  circles  of  the  heavens — Saturn,
Venus,  Mars,  the  Sun,  Jupiter,  Mercury,  the  Moon.  On  the
fifth  (30  7-18),  he  created  the  fish  of  the  sea,  and  the  fowl  of
heaven,  and  every  thing  that  moveth  on  the  earth,  ami  on
the  sixth  he  made  man  from  seven  substances,  and  called  him
Adam,  and  showed  him  the  two  ways.  While  Adam  was  in
Paradise  he  could  see  the  angels  in  heaven  (31) ;  but  Satan
envied  him  and  deceived  Kve.  And  God  established  the
eighth  day  (33  1-2),  at  the  beginning  of  which  time  should  be  no
more.  The  corruption  of  the  earth  and  the  deluge  are  then
foretold,  and  the  preservation  of  Noah  (3.'>).  God  bids  Enoch
return  to  the  earth  for  thirty  days  and  teach  his  sons  during
that  time  (30-38).  Enoch  admonishes  and  instructs  his  sons,
tells  them  what  he  has  seen,  and  gives  utterance  to  nine
beatitudes  (39-42).  He  impresses  on  them  the  incomparable
dignity  of  goodness — 'none  is  greater  than  he  who  fears  God'
(43).  They  are  not  to  revile  the  person  of  man,  but  to  present
their  offerings  ;  yet  they  must  not  value  these  unduly,  but  con-
sider the  heart  from  which  they  spring  (44-40).  Enoch  gives  his
books  to  his  sons  (47)  ;  instructs  them  not  to  swear  (49)  ;  and  bids
them  in  meekness  accomplish  the  number  of  their  days,  and
be  open-handed  to  those  in  need  (.'iO/).  Again  he  enunciates
seven  beatitudes  and  the  woes  with  which  they  are  contrasted
(52).  The  departed  .saints,  he  says,  do  not  intercede  for  the
living  (.■)3).  At  the  close  of  the  appointed  time  (55-59)  Enoch
again  addresses  his  sons.  He  declares  that  no  soul  sh.all
perish  till  the  final  judgment,  and  that  the  souls  of  beasts  will
then  bring  charges  against  the  men  who  ill-treated  them.
Further  instruction  follows,  as  to  sacrifice  and  man's  duty  to
the  needy,  and  warning  against  contempt  and  lying  (00-t)3).
The  people  assemble  in  Achuzan  to  take  leave  of  Enoch,  who
addresses  them  on  various  topics  and  exhorts  them  to  faithful-
ness. He  is  then  carried  up  to  the  highest  heaven.  His  sons
build  an  altar  in  Achuz.in  and  hold  high  festival,  rejoicing  and
praising  God  (04-08).

The  value  of  the  book,  in  elucid.ating  contemporary


41.  Value.


and subsequent  religious thought, may


be  exemplified by  the  fresh  evidence  it
contributes  on  the  following  beliefs  : —

1.  The  inillennium. — This  Jewish  conception  is  first
found  in  322-332.  From  this  its  origin  is  clear.  The
account  in  Genesis  of  the  first  week  of  creation  came  in
pre-Christian  times  to  be  regarded  not  only  as  a  history
of  the  past,  but  also  as  a  sketch  of  the  future  of  the
world.  Thus,  as  the  world  was  created  in  six  days,  its
history  was  to  last  6000  years  ;  for  1000  years  with  God
are  as  one  day(Ps.  9O4;  Jub.  430;  2  Pet.  38);  and  as
God  rested  on  the  seventh  day,  so  at  the  close  of  6000
years  there  should  be  a  rest  of  1000  years — i.e.,  the
millennium.

2.  The  seven  heavens. — The  detailed  account  of  the
seven  heavens  in  this  book  has  served  to  explain
difficulties  in  the  NT  conceptions  of  the  heavens,  and
has  shown  beyond  the  reach  of  controversy  that  the
sevenfold  division  of  the  heavens  was  believed  by  Paul,
by  the  author  of  Hebrews,  and  probably  by  the  author
of Revelation. On the Secrets of Enoch see also

ESCHATOLOGY,  §  75.

228


APOCALYPTIC  LITERATURE


IV.  The  Ascension of Isaiah.— This  apocryph

has  come  down  to  us  in  its  entirely  only  in  the  Kthiopic

.  .  version. It  is  a  composite  work,  as  we

■f f  ^f" ■ '  shall see  ;  and  two.  if  not  three, of

Its  lortunes.  j^^  constituents  existed  independently
U-fore  ilR-ir  incorporation  in  the  present  work.  Of
these  the  oldest  is  undoubtedly  2i3ia  and  Si^-m,
which  contains  an  account  of  the  martyrdom  of  Isaiah
(cp  Isaiah,  i.  §  i.  end).  From  this  section,  which  is  of
Jewish  authorship,  seem  to  have  been  derived  such  state-
ments as  :  ■  they  were  sawn  asunder,  they  were  tempted,
.  .  .  they  went  about  in  sheepskins  .  .  .  being  des-
titute .  .  .  wandering  in  deserts  and  mountains' (Heb.
1137/-;  cp  2io-i2  5i  ^).

The  next  probable  reference  is  in  Justin  Martyr  (c.  Tryph.
120),  where  he  says  :  '  ye  sawed  (Isaiah)  in  twain  with  a  wooden
saw.'  So  we  find  it  in  Tn.  In  Tertul.  (Di:  /•a/ienlia,li)  the
reference  is  unmistakable,  while  in  Orij;en  the  book  or  its
matter  is  discussed  :  it  is  there  called  airoKpxxfiov  Hiraiow,  or
simply  anixcnxttov  (A/,  a^  A/ricanum,9 ;  Ad  Matt.  13  57
23  37  ;  In  Jesaiam  homil.  1  5).  The  first  reference  to  the
!«coii(i  part  (t)-ll)  is  in  Epiph.  (Htur.  40  and  tiV  3),  where  we
are  told  that  certain  heretics  made  use  of  this  work,  which  he
calU  TO  avafiaTiKOV  'Htroiov,  to  support  their  opinions.  Jerome
s|>eaks  of  an  .Isctnsio  Isaur,  and  in  the  list  of  the  Canon
edited  by  Montfaucon  and  others  it  is  called  'llaaiov  opaaif.

The  various  constituents  of  the book  were  written

originally in Greek. Thus, in 4  19  21 6  8 @ is

..  followed where it difl'ers from the

43.  Language,  ^gi^rew.  Of  the  tireek  the  greater
part  has  come  down  to  us  in  a  M.S  found  in  the  National
Library  in  Paris,  and  edited  by  Gebhardt  in  Hilgenfeld's
Zeitschrift  (1878) — though  it  is  not  the  original  work,
but  a  free  recast  and  rearrangement  of  it  (see  below).

Translations  from  the  Greek  were  made  into  Latin,
Ethiopic,  and Slavonic. Of the  Latin version, 6-11

44.  Versions.  "^T *'''''"^ '" ?^ sixteenth century

and  were  prmted  at  \  enice  m  1522,
hut  had  long  been  lost  to  view  when  Gieseler  re-edited
them  in  1832.  Two  other  fragments,  214-813  and
71-19.  were  discovered  and  published  in  1828  by  Mai.
though  that  editor  was  not  aware  that  they  belonged
to  this  apocryph.  Happily,  as  remarked  above,  the
entire  work  has  been  preserved  in  Ethiopic,  and  on  the
whole  faithfully,  as  we  can  infer  from  the  Greek  and
the  Latin  fragments.

The  sources  of  its  corruptions  are  often  immediately  recognis-
able by  retranslation  into  Greek.  Thus  in  U35  the  Ethiopic  =
'qui  se  ad  te  .advertit,'  the  Latin  =' praicipiens.'  The  original
of  both  is  fTriTpfTToji',  as  we  find  in  the  Greek  ;  but  the  Kthiopic
translator  has  followed  an  inappropriate  meaning.  That  followed
by  the  Latin  translator  is  admissible  ;  but  the  context  requires
the  ordinary  sense  of  <irtTpe'n-coi'=  '  permitting.'

The  Kthiopic  version  was  first  edited  by  Laurence  in
1 8 19  from  one  MS,  and  afterwards  in  1877  by  Dillmann
from  three  M.S.S.  To  the  latter  edition  are  appended
the  Latin  fragments.  Next  year,  as  we  have  already
noticed,  Gebhardt  edited  the  Greek  text.  Although
a  free  recast  of  our  apocryph,  it  is  very  valuable  for
critical  purposes,  and  in  many  respects  confirins  the
critical  acumen  of  Dillmann.  Still  there  is  need  of
a  work  which  will  give  a  text  emended  and  corrected
with  the  help  of  this  Greek  MS  as  well  as  of  the
Slavonic  version  and  will  deal  more  exhaustively  with  the
different  elements  from  which  the  apocryph  is  composed.
This  need  Charles  has  tried  to  meet  in  his  forthcoming
work.  The  Ascension  of  Isaiah.

Ewald  was  the  first  to  recognise  the  composite
structure  of  this  book,  finding  in  it  the  works  of  three
distinct  authors.  Subsequent  criticisms,
however,  have  only  in  part  confirmed
his  analysis,  and  the  best  work  as  yet
done  in  this  direction  is  that  of  Dillmann.  Dillmann's
hypothesis  is  as  follows  : — There  were  originally  two
independent  works  :  one,  an  account  of  the  martyrdom
of  Isaiah  (2i-3i2  52-14),  of  Jewish  origin  ;  the  other,
the  vision  of  Isaiah  (6-11 1  23-40),  of  Christian  author-
ship. These  two  works  were  next  combined  into  one
volume  by  a  Christian,  who  supplied  them  with  a
prologue  and  an  epilogue  ( 1 1  /  43-13  11  42/. ). Finally,


45.  Composite-
ness.


when  the  lx)ok  had  assumed  this  shape,  another  editor
inserted  1  34a  3 13-5 1  15/  11  2-22  41.  This  will  do  as  a
provisional  hypothesis,  but  it  is  not  final ;  and  Gebhardt,
Schtirer.  and  Deane  are  wrong  in  saying  that  it  is
borne  out  by  external  testimony,  averring  that  in  the
Greek  work  there  is  no  trace  of  the  sections  3i3-5
11  12-22.  By  a  minute  examination  of  the  (jreek  certain
phrases  which  imply  the  author's  ac(|uaintance  with
81317  4  8  11 19  are  discoverable  (see  Charles,  op.  cit.).
llms  the  final  editing  was  completed  before  the
comjxjsition  of  the  Greek  legend.  Further,  since  813
is  found  in  one  of  the  Latin  fragments  published  by
Mai,  this  section  (i.e.,  3 13-6 1)  was  already  present
before  the  Latin  version  was  made.  Too  much  stress
must  not  l>e  laid  on  the  fact  that  1 1 2-22  is  represented
in  the  Latin  version  by  only  a  few  lines  ;  for  it  is
characteristic  of  this  version  to  abridge  the  text  it  is
rendering.

The  following  is  an  outline  of  the  contents  of  tlic
book.

In  the  twenty-sixth  year  of  his  reign  Hezekiah  summ-ns
Maoassch  in  order  to  entrust  to  him  certain  writings  toiicliing

the  future  (1  1-6). Isaiah  foretells  to  Hezc-
46.  ContOntB. ki.T.h  his  martyrdom  at  the  hands  of  Manasseh

(1  7-13).  On  the  death  of  Hezekiah,  Manasseh
abandons  the  service  of  (iod  for  that  of  Satan  ;  and  thus,  owing
to  the  evils  perpetrated  in  Jerusalem,  Isaiah  and  other  prophets
withdraw  into  the  wilderness  (2).  Thereupon  Halkira,  a
Samaritan,  accuses  Isaiah  and  the  prophets  of  prophesying
evil things  against the  king  and  the  people. .\s Herial h.is

fained  possession  of  the  king's  heart,  the  king  sends  and  sti/cs
saiah  (3  1-12).  There  is  a  sudden  break  in  the  narrative

here  (the  conclusion  of  the  martyrdom  of  Isaiah  follows  in
62-14),  to  explain  the  reason  of  Berial's  anger — viz.,  Isaiah's
vision  and  the  revel.ition  in  which  he  laid  bare  the  future  rule
and  destruction  of  Sammael,  as  w'ell  as  the  cominp  redemption
by  Christ.  In  fact,  we  have  the' history  of  the  Christian  Church
summarised  briefly  from  the  coming  of  Christ  to  the  Neronic
persecution  and  the  last  judgment  (313-61).  In  this  short
apocalypse  we  have  the  account  of  an  eye-witness  of  the  condition
of  the  early  Church,  50-80  a.d.  Church  organisation  is  still
in  its  infancy  ;  the  rulers  are  called  presbyters  and  p.xstors ;
bishops  are  nowhere  mentioned.  There  are  disputes  alicjut  the
second  advent ;  prophecy  has  not  yet  disappeared  ;  the  vice  and
greed  of  the  Christian  teachers  are  unsparingly  dealt  with.
The  writer  feels  that  the  end  is  at  hand.  On  52-14,  see  above.
With  6  begins  the  vision  which  Isaiah  saw  in  the
twentieth  year  of  the  reign  of  Hezekiah  ;  he  discloses  it  to  the
king  and  to  Josab  his  son.  In  this  vision  Isaiah  is  conducted
by  an  angel  through  the  firmament  and  the  six  lower  heavens,
and  is  shown  the  chief  wontlers  in  each  ("_/;).  Next  he  is  raised
to  the  seventh  heaven,  where  he  sees  all  the  righteous  from
Adam  downwards.  He  is  then  told  of  the  coming  advent  of
the  Belovedinto  the  world,  and  of  his  crucifixion  and  resurrection.
Finally,  he  sees  the  Beloved  in  the  form  of  an  angel,  and
likewise  the  Holy  Spirit  in  the  same  form,  and  '  the  Great
Glory  ' — i.e.,  God — worshipped  by  the  Beloved  and  the  Spirit
(9).  In  10,  Isaiah  hears  God  commissioning  his  Son  to  descend
into  the  world,  and  thereupon  follows  an  account  of  this  descent.
In  the  concluding  chapter  are  revealed  the  birth  of  Jesus  and
the  history  of  his  life  on  earth  down  to  his  crucifixion  and
resurrection  and  ascension  through  the  seven  heavens  to  his
seat  at  the  right  hand  of  t'.od.

The  Martyrdom  of  Isaiah  proper  (2 1-3 12  52-14),  which

is  of  Jewish  authorship,  was  written  some  time  in  the

_ . first  century  of  our  era  ;  the  Vision  (6-11)

■ * ■  probably  about  its  close ;  and  the  apocalyptic

section  {3t3-5i)  circa  50-80  A.  D.

For  additional  bibliography  on  this  book,  see  Schurer,  Ilisi.
6  145-146  ;  Charles,  The  Asicnsion  of  Isniah.

V.  The  Book  of  Juhilees.— The  Book  of  Jubilees,

which  is  really  a  haggadic  cotnmentary  on  CJeiicsis,  is

P , ,  miportant  as  being  the  chief  monument

_■,.. _ (practically  the  sole  monument)  of  legal

Ju  1  ees  , j^^j^  Pharisaism  belonging  to  the  century

1  8  va  ue.  ininiediately  preceding  the  Christian  era.
Just  as  we  have  the  other  side  of  Pharisaism,  its
apKjcalyptic  and  mystical  side,  represented  in  the  Book
of  F.noch,  so  here  we  have  its  natural  complement  in
the  hard  and  inexorable  legalism  to  whose  yoke,  accord-
ing to  the  author,  creation  was  subject  from  the  beginning
and  must  be  subject  for  evermore.

Jubilees  is  not  only  indispensable  to  students  of  the
NT  and  of  the  history  of  the  Pharisaic  movement :  it
is  likewise  of  first-class  importance  as  a  witness  to  the
readings of  the Hebrew text of Gepesis about the


APOCALYPTIC  LITERATURE


beginning  of  the  Christian  era.  In  this  resjject  it
comes  next  in  worth  to  (55  and  the  Samaritan  text,  and
presents  us  with  much  earUer  readings  than  are  to  l)e
found  in  the  Syr.  or  Lat.  versions,  or  in  Targ.  Onk.
In  the  matter  of  determining  the  respective  values  of
the  Samaritan,  (P,  and  Massoretic  chronologies  its
evidence  will  be  practically  of  decisive  weight.

This  book has been variously named at different
stages  of  its  career. Its  original  name  seems  to  have
M  ^^'*-'" 'Jubilees,' and not the 'Book of

**•  *'*™®- Jubilees.'  So  we  find  it  in  the  Syriac
fragment,  and  likewise  in  Epiplianius,  where  it  is  desig-
nated rd  'lu)(iri\aia  or  ol  'lulirjXatoi.

It  is  also  called  ^  Aen-Ti)  r<Ve<ris  in  Kpiphanius,  Syncellus,
and  others  -a  title  pointing  back  to  kqii  riTNna-  This  name
was  given  to  it  not  because  of  its  smaller  bulk — for  it  is  greater
than  that  of  thccanonical  (lenesis— but  on  the  ground  of  its  inferior
authority.  Other  variations  of  this  title  are  Miicpo-yeVeo-is  and
TO.  KtiTTo.  Vevfdeuii.  In  the  .Abyssinian  Church  it  is  named

the  '  Hook  of  the  Division,'  from  the  first  words  of  the  in.scription
at  the  beginning  ;  and  we  find  still  other  designations.  "Thus,
in  the  decree  of  Gelasius,  according  to  Ronsch's  emendation,
we  find  '  l.iber  de  filiabus  .Vdae,  hoc  est  Leptogenesis.'  This
name,  as  Ceriani  observed,  was  given  to  the  book  because  it
contains  the  names  of  all  the  Patriarchs'  wives  and  assigns
them  a  prominent  role  in  the  course  of  events— a  view  that  is
confirmed  by  the  Syriac  fragment.  Again,  it  seems  to  be
identified  by  Syncellus  with  '  the  so-called  Life  of  Adam ' —
6  Aeydfiei'os  pioi  '\&dfi. ", — for  he  cites  as  from  that  book  three
pass.iges  that  occur  in  Jubilees.  This  Li/e  of  Adam  may  have
been  identical  with  a  part  of  Jubilees,  or  a  later  enlargement  of
a  portion  of  it.  Jubilees  is  once  described  as  the  'Testament
of  .Moses,"  an4  once  as  the  '  Apocalypse  of  Moses,  but  only  by
very  late  writers.

Such  being  the  origin  of  Jubilees  and  the  conditions
under  which  it  was  produced,  it  was  naturally  written
^  in the  sacred language  of Palestine.

gu  g  .  Qj-  ^j^jg  ^^  have  direct  testimony  in  Jer.
£■/.  78,  ad  FaHolam,  mansioric  i8,  where  he  discusses
a  Hebrew  word  for  which  he  could  cite  no  authority
save  that  of  this  book.  The  entire  cast  and  the  idiom
of  the  book  confirm  the  statement  of  Jerome.

We  have  further  testimony  to  the  .same  effect  in  the  title  of
the  Syriac  fragment,  in  which  the  present  book  is  design.ated
'The  Hebrew  l?ook  called  Jubilee.s.'  It  is,  further,  impossible
to  deal  with  the  textual  corruptions  unle.ss  we  deal  with  them  on
this  presupposition.  In  the  case  of  many  of  these  it  is  only
necessary  to  retranslate  them  into  Hebrew  in  order  to  discover
the  original  misconception  or  misreading  of  the  Greek  translator.
Some  interesting  transliterations  of  Hebrew  words,  moreover,
still  survive  in  the  text.

Finally,  fragments  of  the  Hebrew  original  have  come  down
to  us  embedded  in  the  Midrashim.  In  these  at  times  an  entire
sentence  survives,  preserving  not  only  the  words,  but  even
their  original  order,  as  we  can  infer  from  the  evidence  of  the
versions.

There  were  probably  four  versions  of  Jubilees —
Greek,  .Syriac,  Kthiopic,  and  Latin.  The  first  two  were
made  from  the  original  Hebrew.  Of
the  Greek  only  some  fragments  have
come  down  to  us  in  Ki^iphanius  and  through  such
annalists  as  Syncellus  and  Cedrenus.  Of  the  Syriac
only  a  small  fragment,  containing  the  names  of  the
Patriarchs'  wives  and  a  few  other  facts,  survives.

The  Kthiopic  and  the  Latin  versions  were  made  from
the  Greek  version,  not  from  the  original  text.  The
_..  .  .  former  survives  almost  in  its  entirety,
"  ■  and  from  an  exhaustive  comparison  of
the  Ix-'st  attainable  text  with  all  existing  materials  we
find  that  it  is  most  accurate  and  trustworthy.  It  is,
indeed,  as  a  rule,  servilely  literal.

It  has,  of  course,  suffered  from  the  corruptions  naturally
incidental  to  transmission  through  MSS  ;  but  it  is  singularly  free
from  the  glos.ses  and  corrections  of  unscrupulous  scribes,  though
the  temptation  to  bring  it  into  accord  with  the  Kthiopic  ver-
sion of  Genesis  must  have  been  great.  Only  in  about  a  dozen
instances  did  the  temptation  prove  too  great,  with  the  result
that  changes  were  introduced  into  the  text  in  subservience  to
that  version.

Of  the  Latin  version  (made,  as  we  have  seen,  from

, ^. the  Greek)  more  than  a  fourth  has  been

63.  Latin.  ,  '

preserved.

First  published  in  i86i  by  Ceriani  (,Moh.  sacra  et  prof.
torn.  I,  fasc.  I,  pp.  15-62),  it  was  next  edited  with  great
learning  by  Ronsch  in  \%T\(I)as  Buck  dcr  Juh.  unt.  Beifug.
d. revidirten Testes dcr . . . lat. Fragiiiente). Ronsch

231


61.  Versions.


55.  Date.


emended  the  text  in  many  passages ;  but  as  he  was  not  aware
that  it  had  been  corrected  in  conformity  both  with  ©  and
with  the  Vg.,  and  as^  further,  he  Wad  only  a  late  representative
of  the  ICthiopic  version  before  him,  his  work  is  defective  and
far  from  final.  A  critically  revised  text  of  these  fragments  is
given  in  Charles's  edition  of  the  Kthiopic  text.

The  Kthiopic  MSS,  of  which  there  are  four,  belong  respect-
ively to  the  National  Library  in  l'aris(.\),  the  British  Museum
(H),  the  University  Library  in  Tubingen  (C),

64.  Text  of  and  to  M.  d'Abbadie  (D).  B  is  by  far  the
Jubilees,  most  valuable  ;  next  in  value  comes  A  ;  C  and
D  are  late  and  very  corrupt.  In  addition  to
these  MSS,  however,  there  is  a  vast  wealth  of  materials  for
the  criticism  and  reconstruction  of  the  text  in  the  Mas.  and
Sam.  Texts,  and  in  the  Gr.,  Syr.,  Aram.,  and  Lat.  versions  of
Genesis ;  in  the  fragments  of  the  Greek,  Syriac,  and  Latin
versions  of  Jubilees  mentioned  above  ;  and  in  abundant  other
documents  of  a  less  directly  serviceable  nature.  _  (a)  The
Kthiof>ic  Text  has  been  edited  twice — first  by  Di.  in  1859  from
two  MSS  (C,  D),  and  next,  by  the  present  writer  from  \,  B,  C,
D.l  Though  Di.  made  no  use  of  the  critical  materials  just
enumerated  in  the  formation  of  his  text,  and  it  was,  accord-
ingly, in  no  .sense  a  critical  edition,  it  was  a  great  boon  to
scholars  at the time.  (b)  Three translations  have  ap-

peared :  the  first  by  Di.  in  1850  from  one  MS  (i.e.,  C) ;  the
.second  by  Schodde  {BiH.  Sacra,  1885)  from  Di.'s  edition  of
the  text ;  and  the  third  by  the  present  writer  {JQ/^,  1894,
1895)  from  the  text  published  in  1895  referred  to  above.

Jubilees  cannot  have  been  written  later  than  70  A.D. ;
for  the  temple  is  throughout  supposed  to  be  standing.
As  the  book  repeatedly  uses  Enoch  (1-3G
72-104),  it  cannot  have  lx.-en  written  much
before  60  B.C.  Though  there  is  some  evidence  that
would  place  it  nearer  the  earlier  than  the  later  date,
we  shall  leave  the  date  undefined  for  the  present.

__ . ..  The  author  was  a  Palestinian  Jew  and

66.  Author. T1U

a  Pharisee.

Frankel's  view  {MGli'/,  1856,  pp.  3"-3'6,  38o-40o)that  it  was
written  by  a  Hellenistic  Jew  belonging  to  Kgypt  is  rendered  un-
tenable by  the  fact  that  it  was  written  originally  in  Hebrew.  Nor
can  the  writer  have  been  a  Samaritan,  as  Beer  supposes  {Das  Buck
derjuh.,  1856  ;  Noch  ein  Wort  Hb.  d.  Buck  derjub.,  1857)  ;  for,
whereas  the  text  agrees  in  turn  with  MT,  ©,  Syr.  Vg.,  with
Onkelos,  and  even  with  the  Ar.  against  all  the  rest,  it  never,  strange
to  say,  agrees  thus  with  the  Samaritan.  This  evidence  is  con-
clusive in  itself;  but  we  might  further  observe  that,  in  speaking
of  the  four  places  most  favoured  of  God  in  all  the  earth,  the
author  enumerates  Eden,  Sinai,  Zion,  and  the  mountain  in  the
E.xst,  but  not  Gerizim.  Again,  that  he  is  not  a  Sadducee  is  proved
by  the  fact  th.-it  he  believes  in  angels  and  in  the  immortality
of  the  soul.  Nor,  finally,  was  he  an  Kssene  ;  for,  though  some
characteristics  (a  highly-developed  angelology,  the  doctrine  of
the  immortality  of  the  soul  without  the  resurrection  of  the  body,
the  exaggerated  reverence  for  the  Sabbath  and  the  number
seven)  would  seem  to  argue  an  Kssene  origin,  such  an  origin
is  absolutely  precluded  by  the  enforcement  of  animal  sacrifice
and  the  absolute  silence  as  to  the  washings  and  purifications
that  were  of  such  importance  among  the  Kssenes.  1  hus,  though
in  some  legal  questions  of  less  moment  (Beer,  Das  Bucli  der
Juh.)  the  author's  views  are  at  variance  with  traditional  Pharisa-
ism, in  all  essentials  he  isemphaticallyaPharisceof  the  Pharisees.

That  Palestine  was  the  home  of  the  author  is  deducible
in  the  first  instance  from  the  language  in  which  he
wrote.  A  Hellenistic  Jew  would  not  have  written  in
Hebrew.  Again  (not  to  press  other  details),  the  duty
of  absolute  separation  from  the  heathen,  which  is  re-
peatedly enforced,  would  have  been  impossible  of  fulfil-
ment for  any  Jew  outside  Palestine.

There  are  several  lacunce  in  the  book  ;  but  as  far  as
evidence  is  forthcoming,  these  seem  to

67.  Integrity.  ^  ^.^^^^^  ^  j^ppg^^rs,  on  the  other
hand,  to  be  free  from  interpolations.

.\  curious  phenomenon,  however,  presents  itself  in  chap.  7.
Verses  20-39  '^^^  'o  '^*=  ^"  extract  from  the  Book  or  .\pocalypse  of
Noah,  be^mning  in  an  indirect  form  with  t.  20  and  changing
into  the  direct  with  v.  26,  whence  to  the  end  Noah  admonishes
his  sons  in  the  first  person.  These  verses  are  similar  to  the
Noachic  interpolations  in  the  Book  of  Knoch  (see  above,  §  24).

The  contents  of  Jubilees  may  be  briefly  described  as
a  haggadic  commentary  on  the  biblical  text,  from  the
KB  n  \  ♦  creation  of  the  world  to  the  institution
88.  contents  ^^  ^^^  Pas.sover,  in  the  spirit,  and  from
and  character.  ^^^  ^^^^  ^^  ^.■^^^.  ^^  ,_^^^^  Judaism.  Its
aim  is  to  prove  the  everlasting  validity  of  the  law.  The
work  assumes  the  form  of  a  revelation  to  Moses,  made  on
Mt.  Sinai  by  the  '  angel  of  the  presence '  in  the  first  year

1  The  Eth.  J'ers.  of  the  Heb.  Book  of  Jubilees,  ed.  from  four
MSS. R.  H.  Charles,  M.A.,  1895. Clar.  Press,  Oxford.


APOCALYPTIC  LITERATURE


of  the  Kxodus.  The  author  thereby  seeks  to  secure  a
divine  sanction  for  the  additions  he  makes  to  the  bibhcal
narrative.  Anmng  these  the  most  important  novelty
is  his  chronological  system.

In  this  system  the  basis  of  rcckonine  is  the  jubilee  period  of
forty-nine  yc.-irs.  This  jubilee  period  is  subdivided  into  seven
year-weeks  of  seven  years  each.  Hence,  in  ordtr  to  dale  any
event  exactly,  the  author  determines  it  as  occurring  on  a  certain
day  of  a  certain  month  of  a  certain  year  in  a  certain  year-week
of  a  certain  jubilee  period.  Fifty  of  these  jubilee  periods  are
assumed  as  the  interval  between  the  creation  and  the  entrance
of  the  Israelites  into  Canaan.  His  year  strangely  consists  of
fifty-twowecks(;>.,  364  days),  and,  in  opposition  to  the  Pharisaism
of  his  time,  he  claims  that  the  year  sliould  Iw  regulated  by  the
movements  of  the  sun  without  reference  to  those  of  the  moon.
The  dates  assigned  to  the  various  events,  though  presenting
many  difTiculties,  favour  in  the  main  the  Samaritan  chronology.
Another  object  of  the  author  is  to  carry  the  Jewish
cultus  back  into  the  patriarchal  or  even  pre-Adamite
jK-riod.

Thus  we  are  ^iven  to  understand  that  the  angels  observed  the
rite  of  circumcision  ;  while,  as  regards  the  great  annual  festivals,
the  Feast  of  Weeks  was  observed  by  Noah  and  .\bram,  the  Feast
of  Tabernacles  was  first  celebrated  by  .\bram  about  the  time  of
the  birth  of  Isaac,  and  the  Day  of  Atonement  was  established
by  Jacob  in  memory  of  the  loss  of  Joseph.  .Again,  the  law
regarding  the  purification  of  women  after  childbirth  (I^v.  1'2)  is
traced  to  the  fact  that  Adam  was  created  in  the  first  week  and
Kve  in  the  second  ;  to  this  is  due  the  command  '  Seven  days  for
a  man-child  and  two  weeks  for  a  maid-child.'

Certain  variations  from  the  prescribed  ritual  are  observable  in
relation  to  the  festivals.  Thus,  the  injunction  of  fasting  on  the
Day  of  .\tonement  and  the  exclusion  of  the  uncircumciscd  from
tlic  Passover  .ire  omitted  ;  while  in  the  case  of  the  Fe.ist  of
Tabernacles  there  is  no  reference  to  the  custom  of  drawing  water
from  the  pool  of  Siloam  and  pouring  it  out  upon  the  altar.
Though  in  the  last  instance  the  author  agrees  w^th  the  Sadducees,
it  must  be  admitted  that  the  practice  was  a  Pharisaic  innovation
and  that  the  Sadducees  had  the  law  on  their  side.

.\nolher  notable  characteristic  of  the  work  is  the  in-
creasotl  rigour  of  many  of  the  Levitical  ordinances.

Thus,  the  man  who  eats  blood  is  to  be  utterly  destroyed,  and
the  father  wlio  gives  his  daughter,  or  the  brother  who  gives  his
sister,  in  marri.age  to  a  heathen,  is  to  be  stoned  to  death,  and  the
woman  to  be  burned.  Death  is  to  l>e  the  universal  penalty
for  breaking  the  Sabbath  ;  and  the  Sabbath  is  broken  by  buying
or  selling,  by  lighting  a  fire,  by  drawing  water,  by  talking  of  an
intended  journey,  or  by  lying  with  one's  wife.

Another  no  less  interesting  characteristic  is  the  care
either  to  leave  unrecorded  or  to  palliate  the  faults  of  the
Patriarchs  as  well  as  to  multiply  their  virtues.

Thus,  from  the  first  they  were  scrupulous  observers  of  the  ritual
and  ceremonial  law  before  its  authoritative  promulgation  on
Sinai.  There  is  no  mention  made  of  Abram's  deceit  at  the  court
of  Pharaoh ;  Jacob's  answer  to  Isaac's  question  '  Art  thou  my
very  son  Ksau  ? '  is  cleared  from  verbal  falsehood  by  representing
him  as  answering  '  I  am  thy  son.  This  quibble  is  found  likewise
in  the  Talmud,  and  may  therefore  have  been  a  stock  interpretation
of  Jewish  exegesis.  Again,  whereas  in  Genesis  Levi  is  cursed
for  his  share  in  the  destruction  of  Shechem,  in  Jubilees  he  is
highly  honoured  for  the  same  action  and  his  posterity  elected  to
an  everlasting  priesthood.  We  find  the  same  view  taken  by
Philo  (De  Ebrietate,  23).

Akin  to  the  aim  just  described  is  the  attempt  to
justify  from  the  standpoint  of  a  later  age  the  severities
practised  by  Israel  in  their  conquest  of  C^anaan.

It  is  a  Jewish  prototype  of  Rousseau's  Social  Contract.  .Thus
it  is  represented  that,  in  the  presence  of  an  angel,  Noah  divided
the  earth  by  lot  amongst  his  three  sons,  and  bound  them  and
tlieir  successors  by  the  most  sacred  oaths  to  observe  the  arrange-
ment. Destruction  was  invoked  on  the  head  of  him  who  trans-
pressed  it.  According  to  the  sequel,  Canaan  seized  upon  Shem's
inheritance  ;  and  thus  our  author  justifies  the  extermination  of
his  descendants  by  Israel.

As  has  alreadybeen  pointed  out,  though  the  immortality
of  the  soul  is  taught,  there  is  no  resurrection  of  the  body.
In  the  restored  theocracy  that  is  foreshadowed  there  may
be  a  Messiah. See,  futnher,  Escii.vroi.cxJV,  §  72.

For  the  literature  of  this  book  .see  Ronsch,  Das  liuch  dcr  Jub.
422-439;  Schurer  in  loc.  ;  Charles,  '/'//<■  Hook  of  JuhiUes.

VI.  The  Assumi'tion  of  Mosks.— Of  this  book.

which  from  the  twelfth  century  was  regarded  as  lost,  a

.  large fragment  was rediscovered by

09 Assumpl. <^.eriani  in the  Ambrosian Library  in

raoB.  .  Its j^^ji^j^  ^^j  published  by  him  in 1861

lortunes. ^  ,^^^^  ^^^^^  j  ^^^^  ;  pp  j-.g^). This

fragment  was part of  an old Latin version, and is

written  on  a  palimpsest  of  the  sixth  century — the  same


MS thai contains the Latin version of Jubilees  —
which  originally  Ijehjnged  to  the  monastery  of  llobbio.

Before  this  discovery,  however,  we  were,  from  various
sources,  in  some  degree  acquainted  with  the  contents  of
the  lxx)k.

Thus,  the  account  of  the  strife  l>etween  the  archangel  Michael
and  .Satan  alxiut  the  bodv  of  Moses  was  drawn,  as  we  know
(Origen,  De  Princip.Zix),  from  the  apocryphal  book  entitled
\XiK  Asctmio  Mosis—i.e.,a.viXif^<.'i  Muvtrc'uf.  Many  other  writers
testify  to  the  existence  of  this  apocryph.  Besides  the  reference
already  noticed  in  Origen,  there  are  other  references  or
citations  in  Clem.  Alex.  (.V/rcJW*.  1  23  153  0  15  132);  in  Origen
(In  Josuam  liotnii.'li),  Didymus  Alex.  (/«  ep.  Juti.  inanat.
in  Gallandi,  lUblioth.  J'alr.  t)  307),  in  Kvodius,  Apollinaris,  the
Stichometries,  and  in  the  Acta  Synoiti  Nktrm/-,  'J  18.  This  l.l^t
reference  must  be  given  in  full  as  the  passage  quoted  is  fiiuiKl  in
Ceriani'sfr.igment,— MfAAuifon-pw^jiTT;?  Miuucni^  ifiiyairovPiuv,
(i>(  ytypairrai  iv  ^ip\if  'AvaATJt(itu)^  Muvo'cuif,  irpo<r<taA»(ru/iifi-os
'Irjaouv  vibi'  Nauij  (ca'i  iioAtyo/iecos  irpot  avTOV  «</ii} "  (toi  npotBcd.-
<raTO  ixt  6  fl<bs  jrpo  Kara/SoAi^^  xbir/iov  •Ii'ot  fit  TTJt  ito^jjicij?  ainoii
li.«Tin)v.  The  words  quoted  are  thus  rendered  in  the  l-itin
fragment  (1  14)  :  Itaque  excogitavit  et  invttiit  me,  qui  al>  initio
orbis  terrarum  pra:paratus  sum,  ut  sim  arbiter  testamenti  illiii-..
The  rest  of  the  quotations  are  in  the  main  from  the  part  of  this
book  which  is  lost.

Of  the  derivation  of  our  Latin  text  from  the  Grt<  k

there  can  be  no  question. Thus  Greek  words  are  traiis-

.... literated  ; as  chedrio from K(5p6u 1  17.

*  ■ ,  /tere/// us  {romtpijfjiOiS  11,  c/idsishomOXixfii

p^ ,  87,  and  acroHstia from  aKpo^varia b  ^.

'  Again,  we  are  not  infretjuently  obliged  Ut
adopt  not  the  Latin  text  but  the  Greek  it  presupposes,
which  has  been  misrendered  by  the  translator.  Thus
'  ab  oriente  uscjue  ad  occidentcm,'  which  means  'from
the  east  to  the  west,'  is  derived  from  d(p'  i]\iov  dvartX-
\ovTos  l^ixP'-  dvofx^vov,  which  means  also  '  from  sum  ibc
to  sunset  '^the  meaning  required  by  our  context.  lor
similar  instances  see  11 11  18.  Finally,  retranslalion  into
Greek  makes  it  evident  that  in  the  c;\se  of  some  cor-
ruptions in  the  Latin  the  error  arose  through  the  con-
fusion of  different  though  similar  forms  of  words  ;  cp
27  84  56  11 16.  In  4  I  we  have  the  Greek  article  rendered
by  /lie.

The  derivation  of  our  text  from  a  Semitic  original  was

Stoutly denied by N'olkmar, Hilgenfeld, and others.

This  position,  however,  can  no  longer  \x

61.  Meore'W  pgr^gvered  in. A  Semitic  original  nmst

onginal. ^^^^.  ^  conceded. It  remains  a  matter

of  debate  whether  the  balance  of  evidence  is  in  favour

of  an Aramaic or  of a Hebrew source. Rosenthal

decides for the latter; Schmidt- Merx, Colani, and

Carriere  for  the  former. Notwithstanding  all  that  has

been advanced by these  three  scholars, however, in

support  of  their  contention,  the  evidence  points  decidedly

in  the  direction  of  a  Hebrew  original.

Rosenthal  restores  three  or  four  passages  by  means  of  retrans-
lation  into  Hebrew.  In  Charles's  Assumption  o/Mosts  (1897)
the  necessity  of  such  an  hypothesis  is  shown  alike  in  the  Hebrew
character  of  the  Latin  version  and  in  the  possibility  of  removing
most  of  its  corruptions  by  means  of  retranslation  into  Hebrew.
Thus  in  ((36  we  must  follow  the  Hebrew  presupposed  by  the
Latin  ;  next,  in  l>  4  there  is  a  play  upon  words  po.ssible  only  in  the
Hebrew  ;  .again,  there  are  Hebrew  phrases  and  constructions
reproduced  in  I  18  24  7  83  12  t)  i  102.  Finally,  it  is  only  through
retranslation  into  Hebrew  that  we  can  understand  the  text  ur
get  rid  of  its  corruptions  in  49  5  5  10 9  10  16  12  7.

Schiirer  has  already  jxiinted  out  (///.>/.  882)  that  the
Latin  version  we  pos.sess  is  in  reality  a  '  Testament  of
Moses,'  although  ()UOted  in  the  .Acts  of


62.  Real  name
Test.  Moses.


the  Council  of  Niciea  as  the  AvdXTj^ts
Mti>i'(r^<«)S,  and  has  conjectured  that
'  these  designations  were  the  titles  of  two  separate
divisions  of  one  and  the  same  work,  the  first  of  which
has  been  preserved,  whereas  the  quotations  in  the  Fathers
almost  all  belong  to  the  second.'  The  piesent  writers
studies  tend  in  some  degree  to  support  this  conjecture.

Thus  in  the  Latin  version  (1  15  and  10  14)  Moses  siicaks  of  his
death  as  an  ordinar>- one,  and  the  same  fact  undoubtedly  was
stated  in  10  12  before  it  was  interpol.-ited  by  the  editor  who  joined
the  '  Testament "  and  the  '  .Vs-sumption  of  .Moses  '  into  one  I  00k.
Thus  in  10  12  the  text  is:  'erunt  enim  a  morte— rcceptione  —
m(ea)  usque  ad  adventum  lUius  tempora  CCL.'  Schmidt-NIerx
omit  '  morte,'  and  Hilgenfeld  omits  '  receptione,"  these  critics
failing  to  see that 'rcceptione'  was  introduced  by  the  final

234


APOCALYPTIC  LITERATURE


editor  into  the  text  of  the  'Testament'  which  recounted  nothing
of  Moses'  Assumption,  in  order  to  prepare  the  reader  for
the  main  subject  of  the  added  work,  the  '  Assumption  of
Moses.'

Schurer  apparently  assumes  that  both  the  '  Testament '
and  the  '  Assumption '  were  from  one  and  the  same
autlior  ;  but  the  facts  stated  above  are  against  this  sup-
position. The  Latin  fragment  is  the  AiaO-^Kri  Mwi/a^wj
mentioned  in  the  Stichometry  of  Nicephorus.  It  is
there  said  to  consist  of  iioo  lines.  Of  these  about  half
have  survived.  Some  writers  have  sought  to  identify
this  '  Testament '  with  the  Book  of  Jubilees.  This  is
impossible.  Since  4300  lines  are  assigned  to  Genesis
in  Nicephorus'  Stichometry,  this  '  Testament  of  Moses '
would  have  above  5000  or  6000  if  it  were  the
Book  of  Jubilees,  for  the  latter  is  much  longer  than
Genesis.

About  one-half  of  the  original  Testament  has  been
preserved  by  ourl^atin  N'ersion.^  It  is  possible  that  the
latter  half  dealt  with  certain  revelations  about


63.  Lost
portion.


creation  made  by  Moses,  and  that  it  closed
with  his  disappearance  in  a  cloud,  so  that  his
death  was  hid  from  human  sight.

We  make  this  conjecture  on  the  ground  of  the  following
statement  in  .in  old  Catena  on  the  Pentateuch  (Fabric.  CoiY.
Psc'utf.  l^.T.ii.  121-122).  '  Est  quidem  in  apocrypho  mysticoque
codice  legere,  ubi  t/e  creatis  rebus  subtiiius  agitw,  nuhein
lucidam,  quo  tempore  mortuus  est  Moses,  locum  sepulchri  com-
plexam  oculos  circumstantium  perstrinxis.se  ita,  ut  nullus  neque
morientem  legislatorem  necjue  locum  videre  potuerit,  ubi  cadaver
conderetur.'  On  the  'bright  cloud'  see  also  Jos.  A>U.  iv.
849.

On  the  question  of  the  date  of  the  Assumption  of
Moses the opinions of critics oscillate between the

fi4  n  t  death  of  Herod  the  Great  and  the  death  of
■  *  *■  Bar-Cochba.  The  later  date  is  impossible.
Ewald,  Wieseler,  Drummond,  Dillmann,  and  Schurer
assign  it  to  the  first  decade  after  Herod's  death ;
Hilgenfeld  assigns  it  to  44-45  .\.D.  ;  Mer.K  to  54-64
.\.D. ,  and  so  also  Fritzsche  ;  Baldensperger  to  50-70
A.o.  On  various  grounds  all  these  determinations  are
unsatisfactory.  The  real  date  appears  to  lie  between
4  B.C.  and  30  A.D.  It  cannot  be  later  than  30  A.D.
Towards  the  close  of  chap.  6  it  is  stated  that  the  sons  of
Herod  should  reign  for  a  shorter  period  {breviora  tempera)
than  their  father — -a  statement  that  could  have  been
made  only  while  they  were  still  living,  since  it  is  true  of
Archelaus  alone  ;  for  .Antipas  reigned  forty-three  years,
Philip  thirty-seven,  and  Herod  himself  only  thirty-four.
The  book  must,  therefore,  have  been  written  at  the
latest  less  than  thirty -four  years  after  Herod's  death
(4  B.C.) — i.e.,  earlier,  at  all  events,  than  30  A.D.  The
limits  may,  however,  be  defined  more  closely  ;  for  the  pre-
diction that  Herod's  sons  should  rule  for  shorter  periods
than  their  father,  may  owe  its  origin  to  the  general
expectation  that  the  sons  of  such  a  wicked  king  could
not  long  preserve  their  authority,  but  still  more  to  the
actual  deposition  of  Archelaus  in  6  A.D. — an  event  that
would  naturally  be  construed  by  our  author  in  the
light  of  a  divine  judgment  and  suggest  to  him  the
prediction  that  appears  in  the  text  as  to  the  impending
fate  of  Philip  and  -Vntipas.  Hence  the  earliest  limit  of
comp>osition  is  7  A.n.

As  for  the  author,  he  was  not  a  Sadducee ;  for
according  to  chap.  10  he  looks  forward  to  the  establish-

fifi  Author  "^^"*  °*^  ''^'^  -Messianic  kingdom  by  God  in
■  person.  Nor  is  it  possible,  with  Wieseler
and  Schiirer,  to  regard  him  as  a  Zealot  ;  for  ( i )  there
is  not  a  single  incentive  held  forth  to  encourage  men
to  take  arms  in  behalf  of  the  theocracy;  (2)  the
actual  advent  of  the  kingdom  is  brought  about,
not by any action of the righteous in Israel, but

^  It  is  to  be  remarked  that  we  have  in  this  Latin  Fragment  a
clear  instance  of  dislocation  of  the  text.  The  perception  of  this
fact  removes  some  of  the  main  difficulties  in  the  way  of  inter-
pretation. In  order  to  recover  the  original  order,  we  have
to  restore  8  yC  to  their  original  position,  before  6.  For  the
grounds  of  this  restoration  of  the  text,  see  the  present  writer's
edition  of  the  book.

as.";


by  the  archangel  Michael  (10 1-2)  and  God  himself
(IO3-7)  ;  (3)  the  author's  ideal  of  duty  as  regards  pre-
paration for  the  Messianic  kingdom  is  that  depicted  in
9 — i.e. ,  absolute  obedience  to  the  law  and  non-resistance.
The  faithful  Israelite  was  quietly  to  do  his  duty  and
await  God's  will.  The  writer,  accordingly,  glorifies  the
old  ideals  cherished  and  pursued  by  the  Hasid  and
Early  Pharisaic  party,  which  the  Pharisaism  of  the
first  century  B.C.  had  begun  to  disown  in  favour  of  a
more  active  role  in  the  life  of  the  nation.  See  §  81.
God  would  in  his  own  good  time  interpose  in  person
(10);  at  all  events,  he  would  avenge  the  death  of
his  servants  (9;).  Our  author  pours  the  most  scathing
invective  on  his  religious  and  political  opponents,  the
Sadducees,  whom  in  7  he  describes  in  terms  that
freciuently  recall  the  anti-Sadduccan  Pss.  of  Solomon.
(Through  some  ine.xplicable  misapprehension,  Schiirer
and  others  have  regarded  this  chapter  as  a  description
of  the  Pharisees. )  The  author,  therefore,  was  a
Pharisee,  and  a  Pharisee  who  was  the  antithesis  of  the
Zealot  exactly  in  those  respects  in  which  Pharisaism
differed  from  Zealotism.  His  book  was  designed  as  a
protection  against  the  growing  secularisation  of  the
Pharisaic  party  through  its  adoption  of  political  ideals
and  popular  Messianic  beliefs.  To  guard  against  the
possible  suggestion  of  an  Essene  author,  we  may  remark
that  such  a  derivation  is  absolutely  precluded  by  the
recognition  of  animal  sacrifices,  by  the  declaration  of
the  speedy  coming  of  the  Messianic  or  Theocratic
kingdom,  and  by  the  strong  sense  of  national  life,  unity,
and  triumph.  See  Charles's  T/te  Assumption  of  Moses,
pp.  51-54  ;  and  cp  Eschatology,  §  73.

The  following  is  an  outline  of  the contents  of  Ass. Moses

I1-9: Introduction. 10-17 Moses tells  Joshua that he is

about  to  die,  and  commits  certain  books  of  prophecies  to  his

.safekeeping. In  2y;  the  subsequent  history

66.  Contents,  of  Israel  down  to  the  captivity  is  briefly  but
clearly  outlined.  In  their  captivity  the
tribes  remember  that  all  that  had  befallen  them  had  already  been
foretold  by  Moses.  In  4,  owing  to  the  prayers  of  one  who  is
over  them  (Daniel),  God  will  take  pity  on  them  and  raise  up  a
king  (Cyrus)  who  will  re.store  some  fr.igments  of  their  tribes  to
their  own  land.  These  will  mourn  because  of  their  inability
to  sacrifice  to  the  God  of  their  father.s.  Judgment  (5  i)  will
overtake  their  oppres.sors  (the  .Seleucid  kings).  Yet  they  them-
selves (the  Sadducees  and  the  Hasids)  will  be  divided  as  to
what  is  true,  and  the  altar  and  temple  will  be  defiled  by  men
who  are  not  priests  (as  Menelaus,  who  was  a  Benjamite),  but
slaves  born  of  slaves  (5  2-4)  (the  pagani.sing  high-priests  who
were  nominees  of  the  Seleucidae),  and  many  of  them  (the  Sad-
ducean  priesthood  and  aristocracy),  moreover,  will  be  respecters
of  persons  and  unjust,  and  their  country  will  be  filled  with
unrighteousness  (55-6).  Then  (81-5)  a  fresh  vengeance  will
alight  upon  them,  in  which  the  king  of  kings  (.\ntiochus)  will
crucify  tho.se  who  confess  to  their  circumcision,  and  force  them
to  bear  on  their  .shoulders  impure  idols,  and  to  blaspheme
the  word.  A  man  of  the  tribe  of  Levi  (0  1-7),  whose  name
is  Taxo  {i.e.,  Eleazar  [2  Mac.  0  19]  ;  for,  as  Burkitt  has  dis-
covered,  Taxo  is  a  mistake  for  Taxoc  =  Taf(i)<c  =  pia3n  which  by
gemetria  =  -itl;'?K)>  *>'•  say  to  his  .seven  .sons  :  '  Let  us  fast  three
days,  and  on  the  fourth  let  us  go  into  a  cave  which  is  in  the
field  and  die,  rather  than  transgress  the  commands  of  the  God
of  our  fathers.'  In  G  1-7  we  are  told  of  the  assumption  of  royal
power  by  the  Maccabees,  and  of  Herod  as  their  succes.sor  who
IS  to  reign  for  thirty-four  years.  He  will  beget  sons,  who  will
reign  as  his  succes.sors,  but  for  shorter  periods.  Then  follows
((iSyC)  the  capture  of  Jerusalem  by  a  king  of  the  west  (V.irus).
Soon  after,  Judaea  becomes  a  Roman  province.  The  author
next  launches  out  into  a  scathing  denunciation  of  the  Sadducees,
of  whose  injustice,  greed,  and  gluttony  we  have  an  account  in  7.
Thereupon  (lOi-io)  the  times  are  fulfilled,  and  God  appears  to
judge  the  enemies  of  Israel  (10).  Moses  is  then  represented  as
exhorting  Joshua  to  guard  these  words  and  this  book  (10  11).
When  Joshua  deplores  his  inability  to  lead  Israel  (11),  Mo.ses  bids
him  not  to  depreciate  himself  and  not  to  despair  of  the  future  of
his  people  (12). Here  the  fragment  ends.

Ceriani, Mon. Sacr. vol. i. fasc. i (1861); Hilgenfeld,

Messias Juderorum (1869), 43';-468, cp Prol. 70-76, and

Clem. Rom. Epist.'i'  (1876), io7-it!5; Volkmar,

67.  BibliO-  Mose Prophetieund Himmel/ahrt(x'&bi)\^QVm\6.\.

eranhv and Merx {.A>v/iiv  /. iviss. Er/orsihung dts

*  ^  ^'  ATs,  I.  ii.  111-152,  1868);  Fritzsche,  Libri
Apoc.  VT  (1871),  700-730;  cp  Prol.  32-36;  Drummond,  The
J enuish Messiali(\%Tf),  74-84  ;  Baldensperger,  Das Selbstbevmsst-
sein  JesH  (1888),  23-31,  114-118;  Deane,  Pseudepigr.  (1891),
05-130;  .Schurer,  hiist.  67^-83;  Charles,  The  Ass.  of  Mos.
(iSgy).  For  complete  bibliography,  see  the  two  works  last
mentioned.

836


APOCALYPTIC  LITERATURE


VII.  The  Testaments  OF  THE  XII.  Pairiarchs. —

The earliest reference to this Jxjok by name is in

_  .. Origen  in  his  Horn,  in  Josuam,  156  (Ed.

n  * ■*""  I-oinmatzsch  11  143) : '  in  aliquo  quodam
Jratr. ;  its


fortunes.


lilx;llo  qui  appellatur  testanicntuni  duo-
decini  patriarcharum,  quamvis  non  habca-
tur  in  canone,  talem  tanien  quendani  sensum  inveninms,
quod  per  singulos  jjeccantes  siiiguli  Satana;  intelligi
del)eant'  (cp  Reuljen  3).  It  is  possible,  indeed,  that  in
the  preceding  century  the  ideas  of  Fragment  17  in
Stieren's  edition  of  Iren;i:us  (18,56-837)  are  derived
from  this  took — t'f  ili;'  6  Xpicrris  TrpcxTvtrwdri  Kal
iircyviJoaOri  Kal  iytwrjOr]'  iv  fiiu  yap  t<^  'Iwariif)  irpoerv-
■nuidrf  4k  S^  toO  Aei'i  Kal  toO  'loi''5a  r6  Kara  adpKO.,  ws
§aai\ivs  Kal  lepfvi  iytw^Or) '  5m  5^  tou  i^i/^f tj"  4v  rcjj
vaiii  (TTfyvuxxdr]  .  .  .  5ia  Si  tov  Befiafiiv,  tov  Ilai'Xoi',
fh  irdvTa  rbv  Kbafxov  Krjpvx^fli  iSo^dcOr}.  This  con-
junction of  Simeon  and  Levi  is  found  in  Sim.  7  ;  I-ev.
2  8  ;  Dan  5  ;  Gad  8  ;  Jos.  19  ;  lienj.  11.  Since,  how-
ever, it  is  now  demonstrable  that  the  Christian  elements
in  the  Testaments  are  due  to  interpolation,  it  is  not
possible  at  the  present  stage  of  criticism  to  determine
the  relative  chronology  of  these  elements  and  the
writings  of  Irenitus.

The  passages  in  TertuUian  Adv.  Marc.  5 1,  Scorpiace  13,
wliich  most  critics  from  Clraho  onwards  have  regarded  as  based
on  lienj.  11,  are  due,  as  Schiirer  has  already  recognised,  simply
to  the  patristic  interpretation  of  Gen.  41t  27.  This  eleventh  chap,
of  Benj.,  which  contains  the  striking  account  of  Paul,  is  not
found  in  the  .\rmenian  version,  and  is  for  the  most  part  wanting
in  the  Greek  MS  R.  On  these  and  on  other  grounds  we  may
safely  regard  it  us  one  of  the  latest  of  the  Christian  interpola-
tions.

There  is  possibly  an  allusion  to  this  book  in  the  con-
temptuous words  of  Jerome,  Adv.  Vigilant.  6.  The
Testaments  are  next  mentioned  in  the  Stichometry  of
Nicephorus,  in  the  Synopsis  Athanasii  as  well  as  in  the
anonymous  list  of  books  edited  by  Montfaucon,  Petra,
and  others.  In  these  lists  the  book  is  simply  calletl
ITaTpidpxtt''  After  this  date  the  Testaments  are  lost  to
knowledge  till  their  reappearance  in  the  thirteenth
century,  when  Robert  Grosseteste,  Bishop  of  Lincoln,
translated  them  from  Greek  into  Latin.  The  MS
from  which  the  translation  was  made  is  the  tenth
century  Cambridge  MS  of  this  book  (Sinker).  This
Latin  version  was  the  parent  of  almost  all  the  European
versions.

The  work  consists,  as  its  present  title  indicates,  of
the  dying  commands  of  the  twelve  sons  of  Jacob  to  their
_.. .  children.  I2ach  Testament  deals  with  a  fresh
■  and  special  side  of  the  ethical  life,  with  some
virtue  or  vice  which  finds  apt  illustration  in  the  life  of
the  particular  patriarch.  Thus,  according  to  the  titles
in  .Sinker's  text,  Simeon  deals  with  the  vice  of  envy,
Zebulun  with  compassion  and  mercy,  Dan  with  anger
and  lying.  Gad  with  hatred,  Joseph  with  chastity,  and
Benjamin  with  a  pure  mind.  These  titles  are  appro-
priate ;  but  in  manuscripts  O  and  R  all  mention  of
the  virtues  and  vices  is  omitted  ;  in  P  they  are
generally  wanting,  and  when  they  are  given  they  differ
in  all  but  two  instances  from  Sinker's  text,  while  in  the
Armenian  version  they  are  wanting  in  Simeon,  Issachar,
Zebulun,  and  Benjamin;  for  'concerning  chastity'  in
the  title  of  the  Test.  Joseph  we  have  '  concerning  envy ' ;
they  differ  in  the  case  of  Levi,  (iad,  and  Asher  ;  only
in  the  case  of  Judah  do  they  give  a  divided  support
to  the  Cambridge  MS,  which  Sinker  follows.  We  may,
therefore,  regard  the  title  of  each  Testament  as  origin-
ally consisting  of  the  word  Ata^^KTj,  followed  by  the
name  of  the  patriarch  to  whom  it  was  attributed.
It  is  possible,  moreover,  that  the  title  was  originally  still
shorter—/.^. ,  as  we  find  it  in  the  Oxford  MS,  merely  the
name  of  the  patriarch.  The  fact  that  in  the  Sticho-
metry of  Nicephorus  and  in  the  Synopsis  Athanasii,
as  well  as  in  the  anonymous  list  of  books  edited  by
Montfaucon,  Petra,  and  others,  this  book  as  a  whole
is  designated  simply  IIarpidpx«'  points  in  the  same
direction  ;  and  this  evidence  is  the  more  weighty  since

237


the  adjoining  books  in  these  lists  have  their  full  titles
given.  This  supposition  receives  further  support  from
the  initial  words  of  the  Testaments  themselves.  In  the
case  of  seven  of  the  Testaments  the  contents  are  simply
described  as  the  \l/yoi  of  the  Patriarchs,  which  they
spake  or  ordained  (XaXeti',  dirtlv,  or  SiaridfaOai)  before
they  died.  It  is  only  in  the  ca.se  of  the  remaining  five
that  each  is  descrilx.'d  ;is  a  SiadriKr;  which  the  patriarch
i  spake,  enjoined,  or  ordained  (XoXeTi/,  dirfiv,  ivriWfaOai,
I  SiariOfffdai.).  It  is  probable,  theiefore,  that  the  original
title  of  the  entire  lx)ok  was  '  The  Twelve  Patriarchs."

In  tiie  next  place,  it  is  noteworthy  that  in  each  of  the
Testaments  three  elements  are  distinguishable. ( i )  In


70.  Contents.


each  instance  the  patriarch  gives  a  brief


or  detailed  account  of  his  life,  in  which
his  particular  virtues  or  vices  are  vigorously  empl  asiseil.
The  biblical  notices  of  his  life  are  expanded  and  en-
riched after  the  manner  of  haggadic  Midrash.  In  a
few  instances  their  place  is  taken  by  materials  that
conHict  directly  with  the  biblical  narrative.  (2)  The
patriarch  next  proceeds  to  press  upon  his  children  a
series  of  exhortations  based  upon  and  naturally  sug-
gested by  the  virtues  or  the  vices  conspicuous  in  his
own  career  ;  they  are  to  imitate  the  one  and  to  shun
the  other.  (3)  l-'inally,  the  patriarch  gives  utterance  to
certain  predictions  which  bear  upon  the  future  of  his
descendants,  and  the  evils  of  overthrow  and  captivity
which  they  will  entail  upon  themselves  by  their  sins  and
apostasies,  and  their  broach  with  the  tribes  of  Levi  and
Judah.  These  predictions  are  generally  (a)  of  purely
Jewish  authorship ;  but  many  are  (i)  distinctively
Christian.

To  account  for  the  difficulties  which  confront  us  in
this  work,  Grabe  (Spicileg.  Patrum'^-^  [1714],  1 129-144

71  Com-  335-374)  was  the  first  to  suggest  that  the
■..  "  book  was  written  by  a  Jew  and  subse-
pOBlteness.  ^^^^^^^,  interpolated  by  a  Christian.  This
hypothesis  was  for  the  time  so  successfully  combated
by  Corrodi  (A'r//.  Gcsc.h.  des  Chiliasmus,  2ioi-iio)  that
most  subsequent  writers,  such  as  Nitzsch,  Liicke,  Ritschl,
Vorstman,  Hilgenfeld,  Dillmann,  and  Sinker,  have
practically  ignored  the  question  of  the  integrity  of  the
book  and  confined  themselves  mainly  to  the  discussion
of  the  religious  and  national  affinities  of  the  author.

Nitzsch  (/A-  Ttst.  xii.  Patriarch,  litro  I'T  psnid.,  Witten-
berg, 1810)  describes  the  author  as  a  Jewish  Christian  of  Alex-
andria who  had  imbibed  many  of  the  Essene  doctrines  that  were
then  current.  Ritschl  {Entstch.  der  altkathol.  Kirdte,  1.  Aufl.
322  ^)  assigns  the  book  to  a  Gentile  Christian,  appealing
principally  to  Benj.  11  (a  chapter  really  due  to  Christian  inter-
polation :  see  8  68).  Ritschl's  view  w.-is  vigorously  assailed  by
Kayser  ('  Die  Test.  d.  Zwulf  Patr.'  in  Reuss  and  Cunitz's  Hcitr.
zu  den  theol.  Wisscnscha/tcn  [i?5il,  107-140),  who  on  several
grounds  derives  the  book  from  Ebionitic  circles,  reviving  on  a
large  scale  Grabe 's  theory  of  interpolation  in  order  to  arrive  at
this  result.  Kayser's  treatise  was  in  turn  examined  by  Vorstman
(^De  Test.  xii.  Patriarcharum  origine  et  prctio,  1857),  who,
after  a  det.ailed  criticism  of  Kayser's  arguments,  concluded  that
the  Testaments  present  no  trace  of  Ebionism,  but  were  the  work
of  a  CJentile  Christian.  Hardly  had  Vorstman  thus  vindicated
the  view  of  Ritschl  when  a  second  edition  of  this  schol.y's
work  (see  above)  appeared,  in  which  his  former  contention
(pp.  172-177)  was  abandoned  as  impossible,  and  the  theory  of  a
Nazarene  authorship  was  advocated.  Ritschl's  first  view,  how-
ever, has  received  the  continued  support  of  Hilgenfeld  (Zli'T
[1858],  395^  [1871]  302^),  whilst  I.angen(Z?rtj  JudeiitAum  in
Pal.  zur  /.eit  Christi,  140-157)  and  Sinker  {The  Test.  xii.  Patr.
(1869),  16-34;  art.  'Test.  xii.  Patr.' in  Smith's  Dictionary  of
Christian  iiiofrraf'hy,  4^;65-874)  hold  fast  to  the  theory  of  a
Jewish  Christian  authorship.

If  there  were  no  other  methods  of  determining  the
questions  of  authorship  and  date  than  those  pursued  by
Nitzsch  and  his  successors,  finality  or  even  progress
in  such  matters  would  be  a  sheer  impossibility.  To
Schnapp  (Die  Test,  der  xii.  Patr.  untersurht,  Halle,
1884),  however,  is  due  the  credit  of  lifting  the  criticism
of  this  book  out  of  the  arena  of  fniitlcss  logomachies  by
returning  to  Grabe's  hypothesis  of  Christian  interpolation
of  an  originally  Jewish  work.  Schnapp's  theory  is  that
in  its  original  form  the  book  consisted  of  biographical
details  respecting  each  of  the  patriarchs  and  of  exhorta-
tions suggested  by  these  details.  Thus  the  work  com-
238


APOCALYPTIC  LITERATURE


prised  only  two  of  tlie  three  elements  mentioned  in  the
preceding  section  (§  70).  Subsequently,  however,  tlie
book  was  worked  over  by  a  Jewish  writer,  who  inserted,
generally  towards  the  end  of  each  Testament,  sections
dealing  with  the  future  fortunes  of  the  tribes  and  other
matter  of  an  apocalyptic  nature.  Finally,  at  a  later
period  still,  the  book  thus  enlarged  was  revised  by  a
Christian,  who  in  some  passages  merely  modified  the
text  by  slight  changes,  but  in  others  made  large  inter-
polations. Thus  we  have  three  writers  concerned  in
the  Testaments  :  the  original  Jewish  author,  the  Jewish
interpolator,  and  the  Christian  interpolator.  It  is  not
difficult  to  prove  that  in  the  main  this  theory  is  true.

Thus  in  the  Testament  of  Joseph  we  have  two  partially
conflicting  accounts  derived  from  diflferent  authors — i.e.,  1-lOai,
and  10^-18.  As  early  as  1869,  indeed,  Sinker  suggested  a  com-
posite authorship  as  the  solution  of  certain  difliculties  in  the
narrative  ;  but  he  made  no  attempt  to  verify  this  hypothesi.s,  and
so  it  was  reserved  for  Schnapp  to  establish  beyond  question  the
dual  origin  of  this  Testament  and  the  oiher  Testaments.  The
same  compositeness  is  observable  on  a  smaller  scale  in  Benj.  2,
where  'ib  conflicts  with  %i  and  with  every  other  reference  to
the  same  subject  in  the  rest  of  the  Testaments.  Again,  in
Levi  2  <l>s  hi  eiroi.fj.aCi'Onev  ...  6  cc  17)  KapSC(f  fiov  we  have  a
large  addition  which  conflicts  with  the  words  before  and  after.
Levi  sy.  riKOofxev  eU  BcS^A  is  open  to  the  same  criticism.  Again,
in  Dan  t>,  in  adjoining  sentences,  Levi  is  commended  as  the
guide  and  stay  of  Israel  and  denounced  as  the  leader  in  Israel's
apostasy.  It  is  needless  to  multiply  such  instances  further.
The  presence  of  additions  to  the  list  from  a  Jewish  interpolator
is  unquestionable.!

It  is,  however,  no  less  certain  that  all  the  Christian
passages  have  been  inserted  in  the  text  not,  as  Schnapp
supposed,  by  a  single  Christian  interpolator,  but  by  a
succession  of  such  interpolators.

The  grounds  for  this  conclusion  will  be  found  in  Conybeare's
valuable  article  '  On  the  Jewish  authorship  of  the  Twelve
Patriarchs '  (JQJf  ['93],  375-398).  By  collating  the  Armeni.an
version  with  the  Greek  text  of  Sinker,  this  scholar  has  shown
that  most  of  the  Christian  passages  in  the  latter  are  not  to  be
found  in  the  former.  Thus  when  the  (Ireek  MS  used  in
making  the  Armenian  version  was  written,  the  process  of
Christian  interpolation  had  advanced  only  a  short  way  in  the
direction  in  which  later  it  progressed  so  far.  _  In  the  Armenian
version  we  have  thus  a  striking  confirmation  of  the  critical
sagacity  of  the  scholars  who  saw  in  the  Testaments  a  Jewish
work  interpolated  later  from  Christian  sources.  With  the  fresh
materials  at  our  disposal,  there  is  a  splendid  opportunity  for
a  critical  edition  of  the  text,  and  a  scientific  edition  of  the
work  in  which  the  various  elements  will  be  duly  discriminated,
their  dates  as  far  as  possible  determined,  and  their  bearing  on
history  elucidated.

We  have  now  arrived  at  a  stage  when  we  are  in  a
position  to  consider  the  question  of  the  original  language
.J  of  the  Testaments. Apart  from  Grabe,

.Lianguage.  ^^  notable  critic  has  advocated  a
Hebrew  or  Aramaic  original.  This  is  only  what  might
be  expected,  since  nearly  all  the  students  of  this  book
believed  in  its  integrity  and  Christian  authorship.
However,  now  that  by  means  of  external  and  internal
evidence  we  have  come  to  see  that  the  book  was  origin-
ally Jewish,  the  question  as  to  its  original  language
can  no  longer  be  evaded.  On  two  grounds  the  present
writer  is  inclined  to  advocate  a  Hebrew  original.  Space
does  not  suffice  for  dealing  with  the  first  here.  Let  it
merely  fje  observed  that  fragments  have  been  found  in
the  Testaments  which  are  not  exjjlicable  on  the  assump-
tion of  a  date  later  than  100  B.C.  This  and  other
kindred  questions  will  be  dealt  with  at  length  in  the
present  writer's  forthcoming  edition  of  the  Testaments.
The  second  reason  for  supposing  a  Semitic  origin  is  to
be  found  in  the  language.  Dr.  Caster  ( '  The  Hebrew
text  of  one  of  the  Test.  xii.  Patr. '  PSBA,  Dec.  1893,
Feb.  1894)  gives  some  evidence  which  points  in  this
direction.

In  the  article  just  referred  to,  indeed,  he  publishes  what  he
claims  to  be  the  'actual  Hebrew  text  of  the  Testament  of
Naphtali'  entitled  'l^nSJ  riNTlS-  '  '"  'his  text,'  he  writes,  'we
have  undoubtedly  the  original  version  of  the  Testament,  free
from  any  interpolation.'  He  adds  :  'The  Greek  counterpart  of
the  Hebrew  makes  no  sense  and  has  no  meaning  at  all :  while
the  Hebrew  is  rounded  ofi"  and  complete,  and  perfectly  clear.'
It  is  not  necessary  to  traverse  these  statements  at  any  length.

1  Most  of  Schnapp's  conclusions  have  been  accepted  by
Schiirer  (///*/.  5  114- 124).


First  of  all,  the  style  of  the  Hebrew  is  not  earlier,  as  Dr.
Neubauer  informs  us,  than  the  7th  or  the  8th  century  A.D.  In
the  next  place,  even  if  it  were  early,  it  can  lay  no  claim  to  being
the  original  of  the  Greek  'Testament.'  All  that  could  be  urged
is  that  the  two  texts  possess  some  material  in  common.  Their
aim  and  their  spirit  are  as  antagonistic  as  possible.  This  Hebrew
Naphtali,  in  fact,  is  a  strong  polemic  against  Joseph,  whereas  in
the  Greek  Test.  xii.  Patr.  as  well  as  iti  Jubilees,  Joseph  is
universally  extolled  for  his  goodness  and  virtue,  and  the  various
patriarchs  are  punished  in  proportion  as  they  are  hostile  to
Joseph.  By  the  name  of  Joseph  in  this  polemical  treatise  we
are  probably  to  understand  the  ten  tribes  and  their  successors
the  Samaritans.  Though  this  treatise  was  probably  com-

posed long  after  the  Christian  era,  it  is  based  on  old  materials,
.some  of  which  are  common  to  it  and  the  Greek  Test.  Naph.  ;  and
thus  Gaster  is  probably  right  in  observing  that  in  chap,  fi  the
text  must  be  corrupt  where  the  ship  that  comes  sailing  by  is  said
to  be  fietTTOv  rapixuiv,  ckto^  vavriai'  koX  KvfiepvrjTov.  The  (xeo'Tbi'
rapix'^"—'  full  "f  "^alt  fish  ' — cannot  be  correct.  It  was  probably
due  to  a  corrupt  dittography  of  nVc  N'^a,  as  n'po  N>C,  for  in
the  Hebrew  'Testament'  the  text  runs  □•  3S1  n^Sin  n"3N  njm

Subjoined  are  some  of  the  arguments  for  a  Hebrew
original.

(i)  Hebrew  constructions  and  expressions  are  frequent.  Thus,
(rvviiiv  iv  Tii  to/xu  (Reub.  3)=  n-|in3  ]2  >  '''^^  ■"■(p  tf  f Ae'f aro  (6)  =
'2  nna;  irai'Tas  aiirou?  (Jud.  l)  =  n'?3,  /Sapiis  (/*.)  =  large — i.e.,
123  ;  ^<'*  (!*)  transliteration  of  n3  •  iroielv  y-er  ai/rov  Kpicriv
(Joseph.  12)  =  ny  aac'D  , ■!£'];,  etc.  (2)  Paronomasiae,  which  are
lost  in  the  Greek  but  can  be  restored  by  retranslation  into
Hebrew,  are  frequent.  Thus  in  Sim.  2  17  tJ-r/Trip  ixov  €Ka\e<Te  /if
'Zvp.fi^va.  OTt  riKova-e  icvpioj  ri)?  fieTjcreios  avT>)?=  '.-^f  riN  ',';x  Nipni
rTn':'Sn  hlt^yDC  '2  Pi'Cr-  I"  Levin  Ua\«re  TO  ovop.a.  aiiTOV
l>)pcraju..  OTi  fu  t-  yfj  rjiXMV  napoiKOi  ^nei'  =  ct;nj  "ICr  nX  Nipnl
1iS"lN3  ir\T  Dnj  'D ;  (Kd\ea-(V  avTOV  Mepapl  o  €(7Ti  niKpia
/iOu  =  <-no  t<^n  mo  ice  nx  NnpnV,  'luxa^eS  .  .  .  irfx^ri  iv
AlyvTTTw-  ci/Sofos  yap  Vl''^  "3K  n^DJ  "2  "C2  m'^U  123'  I"  2ab.  1
cyio  (Ifjii  Za^ouAiiji',  «6<rts  aya9r)  rot?  -yoi/eCo-i  |Uiou  =  -|3l  mn  j'^jai
31^.  In  Naph.  1  ei-  navoipyia  eTroirjae  'yaxrjK  .  .  .  Sia  toOto
iK\ri0riv  Ne(/>eaAei>  ^ 'S^gj  'nKipj  pS  •  •  •  "^m  nhnZZ-  I"  'he
closing  words  of  this  same  chapter  we  have  two  paronomasise  on
the  name  Bilhah.  creice  ttji/  BaAAav,  Ae'ywc'  KcuvoarrovSo^  fiou
ij 6vyaTr\p- evOv^  yap  rfx8€i<ra  i<nrev&i  0r]Ka.Cti.v  =  nrh2'nH  1*7'

nvh  n':',i3  ■•■-2  'n'?in3  nSnanaK"?- In  Issach.  i.  &ia  t6c  ilktBov

iKXrier)v  'l(Taxap  =  ^2C't/'  "HNipj  l^m-  The  Hebraisms  given  in
no.  I  might  occur,  it  is  true,  in  an  Hellenistic  Greek  original ;
but  it  is  otherwise  with  regard  to  the  'linguistic'  phenomena
just  dealt  with.  These  undoubtedly  postulate  a  Hebrew
original.  (3)  A  third  and  final  argument  enforces  the  same
postulate.  There  ate  certain  passages,  obscure  or  unintelligible
in  the  Greek,  which  become  clear  on  retranslation  into  Hebrew.
Thus  in  Zab.  4  i^aXov  eaBUiv  is  unintelligible  Greek.  This  is
the  text  of  C  and  O.  R  and  P  correct  the  text,  the  former
giving  iKaOiixav  itrdieiv,  and  the  latter  T^p^avro  ecrOieiv,  both  of
which  yield  an  excellent  sense.  They  are,  however,  merely
late  emendations,  and  we  must  therefore  start  from  the  best
attested  text  t^aAoi-  e<TeUi.v  =  S^xV  ICT"  =  '  they  served  up
food  '  It  is  possible,  indeed,  that  the  idea  of  R  is  right,  and
that  1ST'  i^  corrupt  for  13c"-  Hence  'they  sat  down  to  eat.'
In  Gad  4  it  is  obvious  from  the  contrast  instituted  between
oKiyo\pvx^a-  and  fioKpoOvtiia  that  we  must  take  the  former  not
in  its  natural  meaning  as  '  faintheartedness  '  but  as  '  impatience. '
Hence  we  have  here  a  mistranslation  of  nn  nsp-  Exactly  the
same  contrast  appears  in  Prov.  2a  15,  and  the  sarne  false  render-
ing in  (5.  Again,  in  Gad  7,  atfyaipeZrai  avra  iv  kokoU  must
mean  '  He  taketh  them  {i.e.,  riches)  away  from  the  wicked,'
or  'when  [wc«]  are  wicked."  Thus  iv  KaKoU  seems  due  to
confusing  C"J,'C'"10  and  C'i'n3>  and  should  be  iv  kokoU.

Before  leaving  the  question  of  a  Hebrew  original  it
will  be  well  to  notice  some  of  the  arguments  advanced
by  Mr.  Sinker  in  favour  of  the  original  being  Greek.

(i)  He  urges  that  the  very  title  at  SiaOrJKai  k.t.\.  is  against  the
hypothesis  of  a  Hebrew  original.  But  it  is  probable  that  the  title
was  merely  ot  t^'  jraTpia^x<i'  L  ^^^  ^  ^^'  ^"'^'  ^^^.  ^"^  argues  that
such  paronomasia  as  aOtreiv,  vovOfTelv  (Benj.  4) ;  avaCj>eaii,
a<j>aCpe(TLi  (Judah  23);  ei' Ta|ei,  iraKTOv ;  and  Tofis,  orafia
(Nap.  2  3)  imply  a  Greek  original.  As  regards  the  first  pair,
they  are  late  interpolations,  since  the  passage  in  which  they
occur  is  wanting  in  the  Armenian  version  and  in  O  R.  As
regards  the  second  pair,  P  reads  avaipe<rii  in  both  cases,  R
omits  a^aCp€(ri<:,  and  the  Armenian  version  omits  avaipe<m.  It
is  probable,  therefore,  that  there  was  no  paronomasia  in  the
early  Greek  version.  There  is  no  weight  attaching  to  the  other
paronomasia;  cited.  (3)  Again,  Mr.  Sinker  speaks  of  the  use
of  certain  philosophical  terms  as  favouring  a  Greek  original.
But  these  are  found  also  in  (B.  (4)  -^gain,  the  use  of  0  in
Judah  24,  which  he  presses  in  favour  of  a  Greek  original,  is
no  longer  a  valid  argument,  .since  we  find  from  the  Armenian
version  that  the  passage  in  which  it  occurs  is  a  Christian
interpolation.

We may, therefore, reasonably conclude that the
groundwork  of  the  Testaments  was  originally  written
240


APOCALYPTIC  LITERATURE


in  Hebrew.  The  additions  of  the  Jewish  interpola-
tor were,  as  far  as  I  have  examined  them,  in  the
same  language.  Christian  inter|M)lations  were  intro-
duced at  the  close  of  the  first  century  of  the  Christian
era,  and  some  jjrobably  as  late  as  the  tliird  or  the
fourth.

The  earliest  versions  were  the  Greek,  the  Syriac,  and  the
Armenian. Of  the  Syriac  version  only  a fragment  survives,

73 VflrsionB preserved in  the lirilish Museum (Cat. o/

I i.  V ersions.  ^^^.^^  ,^ ^ ^.  ^.^j  j,,. ,  ^^  Of  the  W r„unian
version  six  M.SS,  varyinR  in  dale  from  1220  to  1656,  are  in
Venice  (in  tlic  Library  of  the  Mcchitarists  of  .San  Lazzaro);
one,  of  1388,  in  Vienna;  another,  of  the  fourteenth  century,
in  the  library  of  Lord  de  la  Zouche  :  and  a  ninth,  in  the  pos-
session of  the  Ikitish  and  Foreign  Hible  Society-.  An  edition
of  the  Armenian  version  by  the  Mechitarist  Fathers  is  soon
to  issue  from  the  press.  No  trace  has  as  yet  been  discovered  of
a  Latin  version  anterior  to  that  of  Grosseteste  in  the  thirteenth
century.  This  version  and  the  later  European  versions  are  of
no  critical  worth.  There  is  also  an  old  SlaTonic  version
published  by  Tichonrawow  in  the  Denktit.  dcr  altfuss.  Aiocri.
Lit.,  St.  Petersburg,  1863.

F'ourl  of  these  MSS  have  already  been  made  known  to  the

public  : the Cambridge MS of  the tenth century, and the

_  . _T.  Oxford  MS  of  the  fourteenth,  through  Sinkers

I*, ine edition  of  the  Greek text; t!ie Vatican MS

Greek  MSS.  of the thirteenth and the I'atmos .MS of

the  sixteenth,  through the  Appendix  he  pid)-

hshed  m  1879. These  four  MSS  are  designated  by  their  editor

respectively  as  CORP,  and  this  notation  has  been  followed

in  the  present  article.

It  has  already  been  observed  that  the  process  of
Christian interpolation probably extended from the

75  Date *''°^'^  °^  ''^^  ^^^^  century  a.d.  to  the  fourth.

As  regards  the  apocalyptic  sections  (see
Ks(  ii,\TOl.OGV,  §  61),  which  are  due  to  a  Jewish  inter-
polator, we  have  no  means  at  present  of  determining
their  date  with  any  exactness.  Some  of  them  are  the
oldest  portions  in  the  book,  and  were  probably  written
in  the  second  century  B.C.  ;  but  some  of  them  are  very
much  later,  since  they  contain  citations  from  the  Kthiopic
.mid  the  .Slavonic  Enoch.  As  far  as  the  present  writer
has  examined  them,  he  is  inclined  to  regard  them  as  all
springing  from  a  Hebrew  original.  The  date,  therefore,
of  these  interpolations  may  possibly  extend  from  the
second  century  n.c:.  to  30  A.n.  It  may  be  added,
partly  on  the  evidence  of  the  Armenian  version  and
partly  from  the  context,  that  it  is  clear  that  in  Levi  15,
Judith  23,  and  Dano,  there  are  no  references  to  the
Roman  destruction  of  the  temple  in  70  A.n.  The
groundwork  may  have  t)een  written  about  the  l)eginning
of  the  Christian  era.  We  can  hardly  suppo.se  it
to  be  based  upon  Jubilees,  for  it  never  mentions
it  ;  yet,  since  it  possesses  in  common  with  it  a  vast
mass  of  biographical  details  as  well  as  the  same  chrono-
logical system,  it  is  natural  to  regard  both  works  as
almost  contemporary  and  as  emanating  from  the  same
school  of  thought.

No  attempt  has  l)een  made  to  give  a  systematic
stateiiKMit  of  the  Christology,  since  the  passages  relating

76  Christ- *°  ^^'^  subject  are  derived  not  from  one
ology " ^^ '"''*-''■  °'' period, but from  a  variety  of

scribes  and  times. The  value,  therefore,
of  the  ( "hristological  portions  in  this  book  is  slight.
\'11I. TiiK Psalms of .Solomon.— Very little is

77  Pss  Sol  •  '^"°^^"  °^  ^^^*^  early  history  of  these
its  fortunes ' P^^''"^- ^"'3'  -"^'■''  direct  and  undoubted

references  to  them  are  found  in  early
literature.

Four  of  these  occur  in  catalogues  of  canonical  and  uncanonical
books — viz.,  in  the  .Synopsis  Athnnasii,  the  Stichometry  of
Nicephonis,  the  '  Sixty  Hooks,'  and  the  table  of  contents  in  the
Alexandrian  MS.  The  fifth  reference  is  found  in  the  fiftv-ninth
canon  of  the  Council  of  Laodicea,  which  ordains  oti'ou  4<i
tJiiurtKOVt  i|/oA(xoi>s  KiyetT0ai  iv  rj)  iKK\r)(Ti(f,  ovSi  aKamvKrra
fiifi\ia,  oAAi  fiofa  to  KavonKo.  TJjt  TroAain?  «tal  (t<ni'V)s  SiaOriKt)^.
The  sixth  belongs  to  the  twelfth  century,  and  consists  merely  of
a  note  on  this  canon. With  doubtful  references  we  have  here


1  Mr.  Sinker  has  .since  discovered  two  other  Greek  MSS ;
and  these  six  MSS,  with  the  other  versions,  he  is  using  as  the
foundation  of  a  new  Greek  Text  which,  we  hope,  will  see  the
light  soon.


It  is  obvious,  therefore,  that  the  book  never  attiincd
a  large  circulation.  On  the  other  hand,  as  Ryle  and
James  point  out,  '  where  it  was  read  '  it  was  '  read  with
res|x'ct '  ;  for  '  it  is  the  solitary  instance  of  an  OT
book  which,  from  being  merely  dvTiXtyofjui'oi' ,  Ijccame
diruKpv<pov.'  As  Ijclonging  to  the  former  it  apjx-ars  in
the  first  two  lists  above  mentioned  ;  as  an  dir6Kpv<t>ov
it  is  enrolled  in  the  '  Sixty  Ikxjks."

It  is  notable  in  the  next  place  that,  whereas  these
psalms  are  designated  in  the  first  two  lists  as  ^aXuoi
78  Extent  ''°'''  '^^^  (I'abricius  (^'3ai)  ZoXonwvroi  and
xf/aXfjiol  (cat  <f55ai  (varia  leclio-T]) '  ^o\o-
nQfToi,  ctIxoi,  ^fip,  in  the  next  two  they  are  descrilx:d
simply  as  \f/a\fxoi  ^oXofiQvTos,  with  the  addition  of  t^  in
the  ca.se  of  A.  The  Ixjok,  therefore,  circulated  as  early
as  the  fifth  century  in  two  forms  :  one  consisting  simply
of  the  eighteen  '  Psalms  of  .Solomon,'  the  otlar  of
these  together  with  certain  Odes.  The  first  form  is  the
older.  The  second  probably  originated  in  an  att(iii|)t
to  supplement  a  defective  edition  of  the  first  by  certain
odes  or  songs,  jiartly  of  Jewish,  partly  of  Christian,
authorship,  that  were  current  under  Solomons  name.
For  if  we  accept  the  numlx-r  of  ffrlxot  assigned  to  tin/
psalms  in  the  MSS  {i.e.,  looo),  we  must  regard  the
present  psalms  as  deficient  to  the  extent  of  300.  On
the  other  hand,  as  the  Stichometry  of  Xicephorus  assigns
2100  arixoL  to  the  psalms  and  the  odes  combined,  the
odes  themselves  must  have  been  about  the  same  length
as  the  psalms.  Of  the  odes  only  five  have  \x-vn
preserved.  These  are  edited  in  an  apijcndix  to  the
edition  of  Ryle  and  James.

Up  to  the  present,  five  MSS  of  this  book  have  been  found  ;
but  of  these  the  Augsburg  MS  has  long  Ijecn  lost,  though  we

poss(-.s  a  rt-cord  of  its  readings  in  de  la  Cerda's
79.  Text, clition, ul,i,l, was based upon it. The second

cod  V  i,  thai  of  Vienna  (=V).  This  MS  w.is
collated  by  Haupt  f.,i  II  il^,  nfuld's  two  editions  {ZHT/t.  (iE68],
133-168,  and  Messias  Juduprutii,  1869,  pp.  xi-xviii  1-33);  but
the  collation  has  been  recently  shown  to  lie  most  inaccurate.  The
next  edition  is  that  of  (leiger,  Der  I'satt.  Salomo's  lurau^g.  u.
erkl.  (1871),  based  on  the  same  critical  materials  as  Hilgcnfeld's.
Though  agreeing  with  Hilgenfeld  .as  to  the  date  and  situation,
Geiger  maintains,  in  opposition  to  him,  the  Hebrew  original.
Fritzsche's  edition  was  published  in  the  s:ime  year  (Liltri  afoc.
VT  grnce,  569-89);  and  that  of  Pick  in  1883  (/'»«/•.  Kn:
775-8i3)-  The  third  codex  is  the  Copenh.agen  one  (=H),  to
which  attention  was  first  called  by  Clraux  in  the  Re-,'.  Ciit.
(1877),  291-293.  The  Moscosv  (  =  M)  ami  Pans  (=P)  MSS
were  discovered  and  collated  by  Gebhardt.  All  these  authorities
have  been  used  in  the  edition  of  Ryle  and  James  (liaA/ioi
2oAo/uaJ>'ros,  T/te  Psa/tiis  0/  the  rharisi-(s,  1891).  In  this
edition,  eminent  alike  for  its  learning  and  for  its  critical  insight,
the  reader  will  find  everything  worth  knowing  on  the  subject. "•^
For  the  remaining  literature  on  these  psalms  we  must  refer  the
student  to  this  work  {Inttoii.  i;i-L'l),  and  to  Schiir.  (in  loc);  1  ut
we  must  not  forget  two  of  the  most  fruitful  studies  that  have  yet
been  made — namely,  an  article  by  Movers  in  Herder's  A'm//c«-
Lt.vicon  (1847),  and  an  Appendix  to  We.'s  Pie  J'har.  u.  Satiti.
(1874),  which  contains  the  tr.-inslation  with  notes.

The  date  must be  determined  by  the  references  to

1  Ryle  and  James  m.ake  it  clear  that  in  both  cases  '  we  should
read  the  plural,  against  the  best  MS.S.'

2  Since  the  above  account  was  written  two  new  editions  of
the  text  have  appeared.  The  first  is  that  of  Swete  ('/'Ae  OT  in
Greek,  3  765-787).  This  editor  h.as  m.ade  a  valuable  contribution
to  the  criticism  of  the  text  by  means  of  a  hitherto  uncollated
MS  (which  Gebhardt  designates  R)  belonging  to  the  Vaticari.
.•\ccording  to  Gebh.ardt,  however,  his  coll.ation  of  this  MS  is
deficient  in  point  of  .accuracy.  The  second  edition  is  that  of
O.  von  Gebhardt  (i/zaA^iol  SoAo/uaifTO^ — Die  I'salmen  .Snlomonis
zu/it  ersten  Male  tnit  lienutzuni::  li.  Athoshaiiiiscliri/ten  und
d.  Cod.  Casanatensis,  Leipzig,  1805).  In  the  formation  of  his
text  Gebhardt  has  used  the  .MSS  C  H  J  I.  R.  Of  these  only
H  (the  Copenhagen  MS)  was  used  by  Ryle  and  J.-imcs,  and
H  R  by  Swete.  Hence  C  J  I-  are  here  used  for  the  first  time.
These  are  respectively  the  Co<ld.  Il>eriticus,  I_nura-Klostu,  and
Casanatensis.  The  remaining  MSS,  M  P  V,  Clebhanlt
regards  as  not  deserving  consideration.  He  gives  the  following
genealogy  of  all  the  MSS. Z  represents  the  archetype : —


IG


2^1


APOCALYPTIC  LITERATURE


contemporary  events ; and, as these are many  and
80 Date ^'"^ried,  there  will  be  little  difficulty  in  assign-
ing a  definite  period  to  the  activities  of  the
authors.

The  book  opens  with  the  alarms  of  war  (1  2,  8  i)  in  the  midst
of  a  period  of  great  material  prosperity  (1  if.  8  7) ;  but  the
prosperity  is  only  seeming:  from  their  ruler  to  the  vilest  of  the
people  they  are  altogether  sinful  (17  21/).  The  king,  too,  be-
longs to  the  family  that  has  usurped  the  throne  of  David  (IT  6-8).
A  righteous  judgment,  however,  speedily  comes  upon  them.
A  hostile  army  advances  against  them,  led  by  a  'mighty  striker,'
who  came  from  the  ends  of  the  earth  (8  16).  The  princes  of  the
land  go  forth  to  meet  him  with  joy,  and  greet  him  with  the
words,  '  Blessed  is  thy  path  :  come  ye,  tnter  in  with  peace  '  (8  18).
When  he  has  established  himself  within  the  city  he  seizes  its
strongholds  (821);  he  casts  down  its  fenced  walls  with  the
battering  ram  (2i).  Then  the  Gentiles  tread  Jerusalem  under
foot  ('J  20)  ;  yea,  they  pollute  even  the  altar  with  their  presence
("i  2).  Its  princes  and  wise  counsellors  are  put  to  the  sword,
and  the  blood  of  its  inhabitants  flows  like  water  (S  23)  ;  its  sons
and  daughters  are  carried  away  captive  to  the  West  (8  24  17  14)
to  serve  in  bondage  ('.'a),  and  its  princes  to  grace  the  triumph  of
their  conqueror  (17  14).  Hut  the  dragon  who  has  conquered
Jerusalem  (2  29),  aimed  at  lordship  of  land  and  sea,  and  thought
himself  to  be  more  than  man,  at  last  meets  with  shameful  death
on  the  shores  of  Kgypt,  and  there  is  none  to  bury  him  (2  aoyC).

There  can  be  little  doubt  now  as  to  the  interpretation
of  these  facts.  The  family  that  had  usurj^ed  the
throne  of  David  are  the  Asmonasans,  who,  since  105
B.C.,  had  assumed  the  regal  name.  The  'mighty
s;triker  '  who  comes  '  from  the  ends  of  the  earth  '  is
Pompey.  The  princes  who  welcomed  his  approach
are  Aristobulus  II.  and  Hyrcanus  II.  When  the
followers  of  the  latter  opened  the  gates  to  Pompey,  the
party  of  Aristobulus  shut  themselves  up  within  the
temple,  where  they  were  besieged  by  Pompey  and  their
defences  battered  down  with  battering-rams.  The
massacre  that  follows,  and  the  carrying  away  captive  to
the  West  of  princes  and  people,  agree  only  with  the
capture  of  Jerusalem  by  Pompey.  Finally,  the  cir-
cumstances attending  the  death  of  the  conqueror  on
the  shores  of  Kgypt  recall  the  death  of  Pompey  in  a
manner  that  cannot  be  misconceived.

We  conclude,  therefore,  that  the  second  psalm  was
written  very  soon  after  the  death  of  Pompey  in  48  B.C.,
and  that  i,  8,  17  were  composed  between  63  and  48,
as  they  presuppose  Pompey's  capture  of  Jerusalem  but
show  no  knowledge  of  his  death.  Psalms  5,  7,  9,  13,
and  15  seem  to  allude  to  the  same  sequence  of  events  as
I,  8,  and  17,  and  therefore  to  belong  to  the  same  period.
In  4  and  12,  on  the  other  hand,  'the  sinners'  are
denounced  ;  but  as  yet  no  visitation  by  the  Gentiles  is
spoken  of,  nor  any  interposition  of  the  Gentiles  in  Jewish
affairs  foretold.  Hence  these  psalms  are  probably
anterior  to  64  B.C.  Psalms  3,  4,  11,  14,  and  16  betray
no  distinctly  historical  colouring  ;  but  there  is  nothing
in  them  which  ref|uires  us  to  assume  different  authorship
and  date  from  those  of  the  other  psalins.  We  may,
therefore,  with  Ryle  and  James,  safely  assign  70-40  B.C.
as  the  limits  within  which  the  psalms  were  written.

It  may  be  added  that  Movers,  Del.  and  Keim  have  identified
the  invader  of  Palestine  with  Herod ;  but  this  is  impossible  on
many  grounds ;  and  just  as  many  difficulties  are  against  Ew.'s
identification  of  this  personage  with  Antiochus  Epiphanes.  In
fact,  all  modern  critics  support  the  view  advocated  above.

The  authors  were  clearly  Pharisees.  Thus  they  divide
their  countrymen  into  'righteous'  [Ukolioi;  238/  83-57/.

81.  Author-  i^  „^f  i  '"if  ;  "'""'^'■^  '  .( W^^ot :
238  di3  49  1.356710),  '  samts  ( Off  lot ;
3  10  47  8  40  etc. )  and  '  transgressors '
{■inxf)6.vo^oi\  4 II  1321  27  12 1-4  17  27),  of  whom  the  former
were  the  Pharisees  and  the  latter  the  Sadducees.  They
assail  the '  sinners'  for  having  usurped  the  throne  of  David
(1758)  and  laid  violent  hands  on  the  high-priesthood
(176).  This  assault  on  the  Asmona;an  house  evidently
emanates  from  a  Pharisee.

The  authors  further  denounce  the  priests  for  polluting  the
holy  things  by  their  uncleanness  and  their  neglect  of  the  true
observances  (2358  13  26),  and  likewise  for  outdoing  the  heathen
in  their  abominations  (1  8  89).  Their  attitude,  moreover,  to  the
law,  theirconception  of  the  theocracy,  their  ideal  of  the  bearing
of  a  righteous  man  in  the  case  of  (^entile  oppression,  all  alike
mark  them  out  as  belonging  to  the  Pharisaic  school. To  the

243


ship.


same  school  appertains  the  doctrine  taught  regarding  future
retribution  and  the  Messiah.  In  regard  to  the  last,  Ryle  and
James  observe  with  justice  that  the  Messianic  conception  in
these  psalms  '  marks  the  revolution  which  had  passed  over
Pharisaic  thought  since  the  time,  not  a  century  before,  when
Israel's  mission  in  the  world  was  identified  only  with  the  fulfil-
ment  and  dis.semination  of  the  law.  .  .  .  The  heroic  deeds  of
Judas  Maccabeus  and  his  brothers  had  rekindled  the  ardour
of  the  people  for  a  Jewish  dynasty  and  a  Jewish  kingdom  ;  and
the  Pharisaic  supporters  of  a  theocracy  were  powerless  so  long
as  their  teaching  showed  no  sympathy  with  this  patriotic
enthu.sia.sm.'  But  as  it  was  hopeless  to  look  for  Israel's  re-
demption to  the  helpless  and  huied  later  Asmonajans,  so  it  is
just  at  this  crisis  that  the  author  of  these  psalms  'comV>ines
the  recognition  of  the  failure  of  the  Asmonsean  house  with  the
popular  enthusiasm  for  a  Jewish  monarchy  '  (p.  57).  Thus  the
Pharisees  '  appealed  to  the  patriotic  feelings  of  those  who  had
no  power  to  appreciate  the  abstract  beauty  of  the  old  legalism.
By  its  hope  for  a  "son  of  David  "  it  proclaimed  the  downfall  of
the  Levitical  Asmonaean  house.  By  its  ideal  reign  of  "wi.sdum
and  righteousness,"  it  asserted  the  fundamental  Pharisaic  position
that  the  law  was  supreme.'  Thus  'the  Messianic  representation
of  our  .seventeenth  psalm  marks  the  stage  at  which  Pharisaic
thought  passed  beyond  the  narrow  limits  of  its  earlier  teaching,
and  availed  itself  of  the  popular  a.spiration  for  an  earthly
kingdom.'  "This  step,  however,  'entailed  upon  the  theocratic
party  no  policy  beyond  the  exercise  of  patience  till  God  should
raise  up  the  king,  and  until  then  the  minute  ob.servance  of  this
law'  (p.  58).  Against  the  attitude  adopted  by  the  writers  of
this  book  the  Assumption  0/ Moses  is  a  protest  from  beginning
to  end  (see  above,  §  65).

We  give  below  (§  85)  some  grounds  for  assuming
that  pss.  1-16  and  17-18  are  due  to  different  writers.

As the main interests of the psalms centre in

00 T>i„««. Jerusalem,  the  writer  probably  lived  in  that

82.  i-iace.  ^j^y

It  is  'the  City  of  the  Sanctuary'  (84);  in  it  shall  the  song
of  triumph  be  sung  when  God  brings  back  its  children  from  the
east  and  from  the  west  (11  1-3).  Though  Jerusalem  has  now
been  trodden  under  foot  by  the  Gentiles  (2  2),  the  Messiah  will
cleanse  it  from  all  .such  pollution  (17  25  33),  and  thither  all  the
nations  of  the  earth  will  go  up  to  .see  the  Messiah's  glory  (17  34).
The  psalmist's  indictment  of  the  Sadducean  members  of  the
Sanhedrim  (4  i),  and  his  account  of  their  vices  and  abomination.s,
are  best  understood  as  coming  from  a  contemporary  inhabitant
of  Jerusalem.  To  the  writer  of  psalms  2,  8,  and  17  that  city
is  the  centre  of  all  the  world,  and  the  history  of  other  nations
or  world-empires  is  of  moment  only  in  as  far  as  it  connects  itself
with  'the  Holy  City.'

The  circumstances  connected  with  these  psalms  point
undoubtedly  to  a  Hebrew  original — i.e.,  their  compos!-

83.  Language.  ^'°";. "''':«  70-40  b.c, by  a  Pharisee

°  °  residmg  m  Jerusalem  ; — and,  notwith-
standing Hilgenfeld's  strong  advocacy  of  a  Greek
original,  all  modern  scholars  admit  that  the  psalms
were  coinposed  in  Hebrew.

This  fact  was  first  established by  Geiger  in  opposition  to

Hilgenfeld's  view. It  has  further  been  substantiated  by  Kyle

and  James  with  a  fulness  and  insight  that  cannot  fail  to  win

conviction  (Inlrod.  pp.  77-87). .\s  for  the  (jreek

84.  G-reek  translation,  we  may  provisionally  accept  the  date
'Version, assigned by  the  editors  just  named,  who,  by  a

hypothetical  train  of  reasoning,  show  that  it  '  is
not  later  than  the  middle  of  the  first  century  a.u.'

We  will  now  sketch  in  a  few  words  some  of  the  teaching
of  these  psalms  regarding  the  Messiah  and  the  resurrec-

88.  Eschatology.  'T'  ^■''''''  f  '"''^f'^  \°- ''''  ^^"''''^•
01.  ijDv,ua,uuiu5j-.  jl^g writer of  p.salm 1/ returns to

the  conception  of  the  prophets  and  describes  him  as
'the  son  of  David'  (I723).  He  calls  him  also  'the
Anointed  One"  (t'.  36,  cp  186  8) — a  title  that  had  been
applied  a  few  years  before  to  the  ideal  Messianic  king
in  association  with  supernatural  attributes  ( Enoch  48  10
524).  Here,  however,  the  Messiah  is  a  man  and  nothing
more.

He  is  to  be  raised  up  by  God  himself  (17  23,  cp  186).  He  is
to  destroy  the  supremacy  of  the  Gentiles  (the  Romans)  and
drive  them  f  jrth  from  the  borders  of  Israel  (17  25  27  31).  The
'  proud  finners '  (the  Sadducees)  will  be  expelled  from  the
heritage  of  God  which  they  had  unlawfully  seized  (t/v.  i()/.  41
51).  The  Messiah  will  purge  Jeru.salem  from  all  impurity  and
make  it  his  capital  {vv.  33-35)  ;  he  will  bring  b.ick  to  Palestine
the  dispersed  tribes  (r-.'.  28  34  50) ;  the  Gentiles  will  become
tributary  and  be  converted  to  the  faith  of  Israel  (^n>.  -^xf.  34).
He  shall  himself  be  free  from  sin  {v.  41),  and  all  his  people  will
be  holy  (?'.  36). Further,  he  will  not  conquer  by  force  of  arms

iv.  yf),  but  will  smite  the  earth  with  the  word  of  his  mouth
f .  39).  Finally,  his  rule  is  temporary  (z*.  42)  :  '  He  shall
not  faint  all  his  d.iys."  Only  the  surviving  righteous  share  in
his  kingdom  (17  50);  the  departed  righteous  are  not  raised  to
participate  in  it.

244


APOCALYPTIC  LITERATURE


As  these  hopes  of  the  Messiah  are  confined  to
pss.  17/,  and  as  not  even  the  remotest  hint  of  such
hopes  can  be  discovered  in  the  preceeding  sixteen
psalms,  it  appears  necessary  to  assunie  for  them  a
difference  of  authorship.

In  these,  we  should  ohserve,  there  is  not  a  hint  that  redress
for  present  evils  is  to  be  looked  for  from  the  Messiah.  In  every
instance  the  Psalmist  expresses  his  faith  that  wrong  will  be  set
right,  either  by  ('lod's  present  judgments,  by  which  his  righteous-
ness is  or  shall  be  justified  (2  36  4  9  87  i>  3),  or  by  his  final
judgment  of  the  world,  when  the  righteous  shall  rise  to  eternal
life  (:{ 16  14  6),  and  hell  and  destruction  and  darkness  shall  be
the  heritage  of  transgressors  (14  6  ITi  14).  This  final  judgment
is  spoken  of  as  a  '  visitation '  of  God  upon  the  righteous  and
the  wicked  (3  14-16  1")  n/.)  \  it  is  likewise  called  in  respect  of
the  righteous  'the  day  of  mercy  for  the  righteous'  (14  6  186),
whereas  in  respect  of  the  wicked  it  is  named  '  the  day  of  the
judgment  of  the  Lord  '  (15  13).

Since  there  is  in  pss.  1-16  only  a  resurrection  of  the
righteous,  Sheol  was  conceived  as  the  perpetual  abode
of  the  wicked,  16  2.  Into  Sheol,  thus  conceived  as  hell,
the  wicked  enter  immediately  on  death  (16  2  coni|)ared
with  14  6  15  11).  The  intermediate  r.bode  c^"  the
righteous  is  probably  to  be  regarded  as  the  '  treasuries '
to  which  we  find  the  first  reference  in  Elh.  En.  100  s.
.See  also  Kscn.ATOLocY,  §  67.

IX.  TiiK  SiHYi.i.iNE  Oracles. — The  Sibylline
literature belongs to a class of productions highly

86 Prona characteristic of Hellenistic Judaism.
■ jjjj  i  " '  These,'  as  Schiirer  a[)tly  remarks,  '  were

Literature J^'^^'^h works under a heathen mask.'

However divergent the outward form

assumetl,  they  all  exhibited  one  characteristic  in  common  :

they  addressed themselves to heathen  readers, under

cloak  of  some  name  that  was  influential  in  the  heathen

w  orld,  and  in  the  form  most  natural  to  their  alleged  origin.

liulireclly  or  directly,  their  aim  was  the  propagation  of

Judaism  among  the  Gentiles. Whilst  the  works  ascrilnid

to  Hecat;rus  and  Aristeas  belong  to  the  former  category

(indirect propaganda), the  Sibyllines  are  distinctly of

the  latter.

The  .Sibyl  was  regarded  in  the  ancient  world  as  an

inspired prophetess. .She Iwlonged to no prophetic

an et.-u  1 order  or  priestly  caste,  but  held  a  ijosition
87.  Sibyls, f  I  . II 1  1  ,

' free  anil  uncontrolled  as  a  superhumanly

gifted  organ  of  the  will  and  counsels  of  the  gods.

The  number  of  such  Sibyls  is  variously  stated  at  different
times.  Heraclitus  in  Plutarch  (/-><•  i'ylhice  orac.  «)),  Aristo-
phanes (Pax,  logs),  and  Plato  {fVuei/r.  2-J),  speak  of  only  one.
Tacitus  {Ann.  ti  la)  is  doubtful  whether  there  were  more  th.an
one.  Pausanias  (Descr.  Cnec.  10  12)  mentions  four,  while  Varro
(in  Lactantius,  X)/7'.  /«j///.  1 6)  specifies  ten.  For  further  in-
formation on  this  subject  the  reader  should  consult  Ale.x.indre,
Orac.  Sibyl,  (ist  ed.),  i8s6,  2  i-ioi  ;  Maa.ss,  de  .Sihyllari,m
In.iicihus  (1879),  and  the  arts,  on  the  subject  in  Smith's  Diet.  0/
Gr.  ami  Rom.  Jiiogr.,  and  the  J<ncy.  Brit.  (9).

Written  accounts  of  the  oracles  delivered  by  the
Sibyls obtained in Greece and Asia Minor only a


88.  Sibylline


private  circulation. Still  though  they


Oracles  were  not  preserved  by  the  State  or
publicly  consulted,  we  must  not  under-
rate their  importance  in  the  life  and  thought  of  the  Kastern
classical  world.  In  Rome,  however,  they  acquired
(|uite  a  unique  position.  It  is  not  necessary  to  treat
here  of  the  very  ancient  collection  of  these  oracles,  said
to  have  been  purchased  by  King  Tarciuin,  or  to  record
the  frequent  occasions  on  which  they  were  consulted  by
the  state  liefore  their  destruction  in  the  fire  that  con-
sumed the  Capitol  in  B.C.  83.  (Alexandre  [2198]  has
traced  sixty  such  occasions. )  Their  place  was  soon
afterwards  taken  (75  B.C.)  by  a  collection,  amounting
in  all  to  about  1009  verses,  made  in  Greece,  Asia
Minor,  Africa,  and  Italy,  by  order  of  the  Senate.
(.After  being  revised  under  Augustus,  it  seems  finally  to
have  been  burnt  by  the  order  of  Stilicho  in  404  A.  D. )

Inasmuch  as  such  oracles  enjoyed  high  authority  and
a  wide  circulation  in  the  East, — inasmuch,  likewise,  as
they  were  anonymous  in  origin,  free  from  authoritative
revision,  and  capable  of  modification  or  enlargement  at
pleasure  by  those  in  whose  hands  they  were for the

24s


time  being, — they  offered  to  the  missionary  spirit  of
Hellenistic  Judaism  a  form  of  literature  which  would
readily  admit  the  disguised  expression  of  its  highest
beliefs,  and  at  the  same  time  procure  for  them  a
hearing  in  Gentile  circles.  It  is  not  unlikely,  too,  that
the  prolongetl  search  of  Roman  officials  for  Sibylline
oracles  in  the  East  may  have  further  stimulated  the
inventive  faculties  of  the  Alexandrian  Jews,  and  led  to
the  composition  of  many  of  the  verses  in  our  present
collection.  In  this  method  of  propaganda  the  Christians
proved  themselves  later  to  Ik:  apt  jnipils  of  the  Jews.
So  common,  indee<l,  had  lx;come  in  early  Christian
times  the  invention  of  such  oracles  that  Celsus
(Orig.  coiitr.  Cels.  5 61)  terms  Christians  1.i^v\\i.aTal,
believers  in  sibyls,  or  sibyl-mongers.

This  charge  of  Celsiis  was  not  unmerited  ;  for  with
the  exception  of  a  citation  alwut  the  tower  of  Haljel
made  by  Alexander  I'olyhistor,  80-40  K.C.  (see  Eus.
Chron.\2^),  and  found  likewise  in  Josephus  {Ant.  I43),
it  is  to  Christian  writers  that  we  are  indebted,  not  only
for  all  other  references,  but  also  for  the  preservation  of
the  entire  collection  that  has  come  down  to  us.

Hcrmas  {Vis.  '1  ^)  mentions  the  Sibyl,  but  not  her  verses  ;  but
quot.-xtions  are  frequent  in  Clement  Alex,  and  Lactantius.  A
collection  of  the  P.atristic  <|uotations  from  the  Sibyllines  will  be
found  in  Struve  {Fragittcnta  ii/<rortint  Sibyllinorunt  quir  apud
Lactantium  refieriuntur:  1817),  in  Vervorst  {De  Cariiiinitus
Sibytlinis  apud  sanctos  Patres  discefitatio,  Paris,  1844),
in  Besangon  {De  Veniploi  que  Us  Pi-res  de  f^^hse  ont /ait  des
oracles  sibyllins:  Montauban,  i8si),  and  in  .Alexandre  (2
254-3' •)•

The  Sibylline  Oracles,  as  we  now  have  them,  are  a
chaotic  medley.  They  consist  of  twelve  books — there
were originally fourteen  —  of various


89.  Stirviving
collection.


authorship,  date,  and  religious  con-
ceiition.*  This  arrangement,  which  is
due  to  an  unknown  editor  of  the  sixth  century
(Alexandre),  does  not  in  itself  determine  identity  of
authorship,  or  of  time, or  of  religious  belief  ;  for  many  of
the  books  are  merely  arbitrary  groupings  of  unrelatetl
fragments.  As  the  editor,  moreover,  was  guided  by
caprice  as  often  as  by  any  discernible  principle  of
editing,  it  is  not  strange  that  the  same  passage  fre-
quently recurs  in  different  contexts.

The  first  printed  edition  of  the.se  Oracles  was  published  at

Ba.stl,  in 1545,  from  an .'\ugsburg  (now  a  Munich)  MS,  and

consisted  of  eight  books. .\  metrical Latin

90.  Editions,  translation  of  these  books  by  Sebastian
Cxstalio  appeared  in  the  following  year,
and  an  emended  Greek  text  from  the  same  scholar  in  1555.
The  most  valuable  of  the  early  editions  is  that  of  Opsopotrus
{i.e.,  Koch),  Paris,  1599,  in  which  fresh  MS  evidence-is  brought
to  bear  upon  the  text.  These  were  followed  by  that  of  (Jal-
laeus,  Amsterdam,  1689  ;  but  his  work  is  of  no  critical  worth.
These  eight  Sibylline  books  were  likewise  reprinted  in  Ciallandi's
Bibliotheca  Vett.  Patr.  (Venice,  1788).  Book  14  was  first
edited  by  Mai  in  1817  from  a  Milan  MS  and  Books  11-14
from  two  Vatican  MSS  in  1828  by  the  same  scholar.  Books  9
and  10  have  not  been  recovered.  .Ml  these  editions  have  been

superseded  by  the  first  edition  of -Alexandre's  Oracuta  Sihyllina
(2  vols.  Pans,  1841-1856),  and  his  second  edition  of  1869,  in
which  the  valuable  excursuses  of  the  first  are  omitted  ;  and  by
the  edition  of  Fricdiieb  (Leipzig,  1852).  The  latter  has  a  useful
introduction,  and  is  accompanied  by  a  translation  into  German
hexameters  ;  hut  the  text  is  untrustworthy.

By  far  the  best  text  that  has  yet  appeared  is  that  of
Rzach,  Oracula  Sihyllina  (Vienna,  1891).  For  the
formation  of  this  text  fourteen  MSS  have  been  used  ;
the  text  has  been  further  emended  by  an  exhaustive
collation  of  quotations  in  the  Fathers.  Our  citations
will  be  made  from  this  text.

F'or  further  literature  on  the  subject,  see  Alexandre's  work
(ist  ed.  271-82;  2nd  ed.  418-419);  Schiirer  {Hist.  6288-292).
English  readers  will  find  the  subject  well  treated  in  the  work
of  Schiirer  just  mentioned  ;  Edinb.  Km.  (July  1877,  pp.  31-67);
and  Deane  {Pseude/igr.  1891,  pp.  276-344).

The  relation  of  the  Jewish  and  the  Christian  Sibyllines

to  the  ancient  heathen  ones  it  is  practically  impossible

_  .  to  determine, i. They  assumetl, of

91.  Kel.  to course,  the  outward  form  of  the  older
heathen  Sibyl. Orades, being written in Homeric
hexameter  verse  ;  but  they  transgress  e\  ery  rule  of  pro-
sody. Short  syllables  are  lengthened  through  the  in-
246


APOCALYPTIC  LITERATURE


fluence  of  the  accent,  or  even  without  it,  owing  to  the
exigencies  of  the  verse  ;  and  long  syllables  are  likewise
sliortened.

For  peculiarities  of  metre  and  syntax,  see  Alexandre,
Excursus,  7.  It  must  be  acknowledged,  however,  that  many
of  these  disappear  in  the  better  text  of  Rzach.  Of  acrostic
verses,  which,  according  to  Dionys.  Hal.  (462)  and  Cicero  {De
Div.  254),  was  the  form  of  the  most  ancient  Sibyllines,  only  one
specimen  is  still  preserved — viz.,  in  8  217-2S0,  the  initials  of  which
are  IHSOY2  XPEI2T02  ©EOY  YI02  2nTHl>  2T.\Yl'02.
It  should  be  observed,  further,  that  without  tht;  last  word  1  the
initialsof  the  title  compose  the  word  IXHY2— 'a  fish  '—a  frequent
symbol  of  the  Christian  faith  on  early  monuments.

2.  As  regards  the  matter,  it  is  more  than  probable
that  the  later  Sibyls  used  much  of  the  older  material
lying  ready  to  hand.

Thus,  in  3  414-413  (the  passage  about  Helen),  'the  Erinnysfrom
Sparta,'  is  from  a  heathen  source  ;  so  likewise  the  punning
couplet  in  4  99-100,  which  frequently  recurs  :

K<C\.  2dnoi'  a/i^o?  an-acj-ac  vir"  i)iofe(7-<ri.  KoXv^eL
A^Aos  6'  ovK  en  StJAos,  a.hr\Ka.  hi  navra  to.  A)]Aov.
Another  notable  instance  is  S  361,  where  a  line  from  an  ancient
Delphic  oracle  is  given  verbatim. See  Herod.  1  47.

We  must  turn  from  such questions  to  discuss  the
various elctuents of which the work is composed.
These,  as we  have  already  observed,


92.  Composite
character.


94.  397-829.


are  both  Jewish  and  Christian,  and  the
latter  largely  preponderate.  Owing,
however,  to  the  character  of  the  work,  it  is  not  always
possible  to  distinguish  between  the  two.  It  is  therefore
only  on  some  of  the  smaller  portions  that  we  can  arrive  at
any  certainty.  Much  is  of  a  neutral  character,  and,  as  far
therefore  as  internal  evidence  goes,  may  equally  well
have  proceeded  from  either  class  of  writers.  There  is  a
great  lack  of  external  evidence.  We  shall  now  deal
with  the  various  elements  of  the  work  in  their  chrono-
logical order  as  far  as  that  is  possible.  Our  space  does
not  admit  of  an  analysis  of  all  the  books  ;  we  shall,
however,  give  a  short  survey  of  the  more  important.

The  first  and  oldest  part  is  397-829-  and  probably  the
Proteniiiun. The  latter  is  not  found  in  our  M.SS  ; it
_  istakenfromthe.-/(//^«/o/)'6V/;«ofTheophilus

■  -  ^^'  (180  A.I).).  It  consists  of  two  fragments,
oemium.  ^^  thirty-five  and  forty-nine  lines  respec-
tively. Rzach  (pp.  232-238)  and  Alexandre  link  them
together  by  another  short  fragment  of  three  lines.  On
very  inadec|uate  grounds  the  latter  editor  assigns  them
to  Christian  authorship  ;  but  they  contain  nothing  of
an  essentially  Christian  cast  (on  their
contents,  see  EscH.VToi.OGY,  §  58).
W'ith  regard  to  897-829  opinions  are  conflicting.
Bleek  regards  verses  97-807 — with  the  exception  of  8350-
380,  a  later  Christian  interpolation — as  the  work  of
an  Alexandrian  Jew,  170-160  B.C.  ;  Hilgenfeld  thinks
that  the  whole  of  97-817  was  written  about  140  )5.  c;.  ;
Ewald  brings  down  the  date  to  124  B.C.  Alexandre
assigns  897-294,  4S9-828,  to  168,  but  295-488  to  the  age
of  the  Antonines.  The  strongest  evidence  in  favour  of
Alexandre's  view  is  to  be  found  in  the  difficulty  of  inter-
preting adequately  such  passages  as  8464-473  as  applying
to  the  civil  war  and  the  dissensions  of  Marius  and  Sulla
(Friedlieb,  p.  33).

397-818  falls  naturally  into  three  groups:  (a)  97-294 ;  (i)
295-488  ;  (c)  489-8i8.''  The  first  (a)  opens  abruptly  with  the
building  and  the  destruction  of  Babel  (97-104).  Then  the  earth
is  peopled  and  its  rule  is  divided  between  Cronos,  Titan,  and
Japetos  (106-110).  In  the  strife  that  subsequently  arose  between
the  Cronides  and  the  Titans  these  races  were  destroyed,  and
tliere  arose  in  succes.sion  the  great  kingdoms  of  the  earth — those
of  Egypt,  Persia,  Media,  ./Etliiopia,  Assj-ria,  Macedonia,  again
of  Egypt,  and  of  Rome  (ii8-i6i).  This  closes  the  retrospect  of
the  Siljyl ;  now  begins  her  prophecy  (162-166).  First,  she
predicts  the  rise  of  the  Jewish  (under  Solomon),  the  Macedonian,
and  the  Roman  kingdoms  ;  during  the  reign  of  the  seventh  king
of  Egypt,  of  Hellenic  race,  the  people  of  God  will  again  become
powerful  (167-195). Then  are  recounted  the  judgments  of  God

1  A  Latin  rendering  with  the  last  seven  verses  omitted  is
given  in  Augustine's  De  Civ.  IS  23.

2  Where  Kriedlieb  and  Alexandre  give  828,  Rzach  gives  829
verses.

3  In  the  detailed  analysis  that  follows,  certain  verses,  un-
important for  the  present  purpose,  are  (for  the  sake  of  brevity)
left  unaccounted  for.

247


on  the  kingdoms  of  the  world  and  on  the  Jews  (196-212).  Next,
the  Sibyl  takes  as  her  theme  the  praise  of  the  Jewish  nation,
their  virtues,  and  the  salient  points  in  their  hi.story  from  their
departure from Egypt down to Cyrus  (218-294).  The

second  group  (ft)  is  mainly  concerned  with  judgments  against
Babylon,  Egypt,  Gog  and  Magog,  Libya  (295-333),  and  likewise
against  individual  cities  (341-366).  Then  follows  the  promise  of
Messianic  prosperity  and  peace  (367-380),  and  this  group  closes
with  oracles  regarding  Antiochus  Epiphanes  and  his  successors,
and  various  countries,  towns,  and  islands  (381-488).  In  419-^32
we  have  the  celebrated  diatribe  against  Homer.  The  third

group  (f )  opens  with  oracles  against  Phcenicia,  Crete,  Thrace,  Gog
and  Magog,  and  the  Hellenes  (489-572).  Then  Israel  is  praised
for  its  worship  of  the  true  God  (573-600).  Thereupon  ensues  a
second  prophecy  of  judgment  and  a  call  to  conversion,  and  an
account  of  the  evils  that  were  to  befall  the  ungodly  (601-651).
Then  the  Sibyl  foretells  the  coming  of  the  Messianic  king,  who
would  take  vengeance  on  his  adversaries  ;  next  comes  a  detailed
.account  of  the  period  of  Me.ssianic  prosperity  (652-731),  and,
finally,  the  signs  that  are  to  herald  the  end  of  all  things  (796-808).
The  Sibyl  declares  that  she  is  neither  the  Erythrsan  Sibyl  nor
yet  the  Cuma;an  (809-818).

3.  Though  it  is  obvious  from  the  above  epitome  that
897-818  is  not  a  single  and  homogeneous  composition  but
rather  an  aggregate  of  separate  oracles,  we  are  safe
(with  SchiJrer)  in  regarding  the  three  groups  as  derived
in  the  main  from  one  author,  and  as  dating  from  the
same  period,  the  reign  of  the  seventh  Ptolemy,  which  is
referred  to  in  all  three  groups  (192-193,  316-318,  608-610).
I  Ptolemy  VII.  Physcon  reigned  first  in  conjunction  with
I  his  brother  Ptolemy  VT.  Philometor  (170-164  B.C.).  He  was
then  banished,  but  recovered  the  throne  in  145  and  reigned  as
sole  king  till  117  B.C.  That  the  composition  dates  from  the
latter  period  is  clear  (520-572)  from  the  prophecy  of  the  com-
plete subjugation  of  all  Hellas.  As  Hilgenfeld,  Schiirer,  and
Drummond  point  out,  this  cannot  have  been  written  before  the
fall  of  Corinth  (146  u.c).  The  doom  of  Corinth  is  actually
referred  to  (487),  and  possibly  that  of  Carthage  (492-503).
Verses  388-400,  which  deal  with  the  Seleucid  kings,  were
written  (according  to  Hilgenfeld's  interpretation)  about  140  B.C.
Therefore,  since  the  author  represents  the  Messianic  kingdom  as
beginning  during  the  reign  of  Ptolemy  Physcon,  we  may  safely
take  97-818  to  have  been  written  in  the  second  half  of  the  second
century  B.C.  The  Procemium,  with  which  we  h.^ve  already
dealt  (see  above  §  93),  most  probably  formed  the  introduction
to  these  verses,  and  Schfirer  adduces  external  evidence  from
Lactantius  (iv.  (i  5)  to  that  effect.

Before  proceeding  to  discuss  3 1-96,  we  should  add  that
Friedlieb  and  others  reject  819-828  as  a  later  addition,  as  these
verses  are  at  variance  with  809-811.

With  regard,  however,  to  81-92  all  previous  critics
seem  to  have  gone  wrong  in  connecting  63-92  with  the
preceding  verses.  In  63-92  the  end  of  all
""■  things  is  to  come  during  the  sway  of  Rome
over  the  world  (75-80).  In  1-62,  on  the  other  hand,
only  the  partial  judgments  that  are  to  take  effect  on
the  coming  of  the  Me.ssianic  king  in  49/  are  re-
counted. The  Sibyl  then  promi.ses  in  61/  to  eimmerate
the  cities  that  are  to  suffer  ;  but  here  the  account  breaks
off,  and  not  a  word  more  is  said  in  63-92  in  fulfilment
of  her  promise.  Hence  these  two  sections  are  of
different  authorship.  63  -  92  is  certainly  late  and
Christian. On  81-62,  see  .also  Esch.\toi.<)GV,  §  68.

In  63-74  we  have  a  rejiroduction  of  the  myth  concerning
Nero,  according  to  wliich  Beliar  was  to  return  in  the  form
of  that  emperor  and  work  many  mighty  signs.  This
idea  recurs  in  2  167-170  (a  distinctly  Christian  product),
and  in  the  Asc.  Isa.  3i3-5i  (cp  Antichrist,  §  15).

As  regards  3  1-62,  it  may  be  derived  from  one  author,
and  V.  52  may  refer  to  the  triumvirate  of  Antony,
Octavius,  and  Lepidus.  In  that  case  this  section  was
written  before  31  B.C.

Book  4  is,  with  Friedlieb,  Ew.ald,  Hilgenfeld,  Alexandre,  and
Schiirer,  to  be  regarded  as  of  Jewish  authorship,  and  was
written  about  80  a.d.  or  somewhat  later.  This
96.  Book  4.  date  is  determined  by  two  allusions  :  the  de-
struction of  Jerusalem  (70  a.d.)  in  115-127,  and
the  eruption  of  Vesuvius  (79  a.i>.)  in  130-136.  The  latter  was
to  be  the  immediate  precursor  of  the  vengeance  that  was  to  be
wreaked  on  Rome  by  Nero,  returning  with  many  m>Tiads  from
the  East  (137-139).  There  are  no  grounds  for  a-ssigning  this
book,  with  Ew.  and  Hilgenfeld,  to  Essene  authorship  ;  for,  with
the  exception  of  the  reference  to  ablutions  in  163-165,  there  is
no  mention  of  anything  characteristic  of  the  E.ssenes,  and  the
words  in  question  are  most  naturally  taken  as  referring  to
proselyte  baptism  (Schurer).  The  teaching  enforced  in  179-192
shows  that  the  author  cannot  have  been  a  Jew  of  Alexandria,
but  probably  belonged  to  Palestine ;  for  the  eschatologj'  is
very  naive. From  the  bones  and  ashes  of  men's  bodies  God

248


APOCALYPTIC  LITERATURE

will  fa-shion  anew  the  bodies  in  which  they  will  rise  to  judgment.
The  judgment  will  then  proceed  according  to  their  deeds.  The
wicked  will  again  die,  but  the  righteous  live  again  on  earth.
This  recalls  Enoch  1-30.

Hook  6  i^rofesses  to  be  the  work  of  an  Eeyptian  Sibyl,  the
sister  of  Isis  (t».  53). It  is  mainly  Jewish  ;  but  there  may  be

Christian  elements, 'J'here  is  a  marked  absence
97.  Book  6. of  ideascharactcristicof  JudaismorChristianity,

and  also  of  internal  connection.  Fricdlicb
iiltriliulcs  the  book  to  an  Egyptian  lew  in  the  time  of  Hadrian  ;
.Mcxiindre  to  .1  Christian  Jew  of  Alexandria  in  the  age  of  the
Antonines.  Tlie  first  fifty-one  lines  are  in  effect  a  chronological
oracle  ending  with  Hadrian.  As  the  rest  of  the  book  deals
with  Egyptian  affairs,  it  is  probably  of  different  authorship  and
date,  and  we  may,  with  Ewald,  Hilgenfcid,  and  Schiirer,  accept
80  A.I),  as  an  .-ipproximate  date  for  52-531.  Some  passages  are
decidedly  Jewish  :  7n>.  260-285  (announcement  of  woes  upon  the
idolatrous  Gentiles  ;  but  of  blessing  on  Israel),  t?:  397-413  (the
destruction  of  the  temple  in  Jerusalem);  tta  414-433,  492-511  (the
building  of  a  new  temple  in  Egypt  which  is  to  take  the  place  of
that  already  destroyed  at  Leontopolis) ;  there  .ire  others  also.
The  one  pass.-ige  that  seems  to  be  certainly  Christian  is  256-259  :


Jesus,  the


APOCRYPHA

«Tt  it  Tit  iferat  auTis  an'  ai0«poc  '(oxot  air^p,

oi  iraJidfiai  jjn^iutrtv  ini  (vAov  ayXaoKapwov

'V'fipaiiuv  ox  api<rTO«,  of  jjiAiov  iroT«  arrtatv

'^vri<Ta<i  p>)(T(i  T<  <caA^  xat  ;(<iA((ni'  aytoif .

Book  6  is  the  work  of  a  Gnostic  (?)  Christian.

natural  son  of  Joseph,  is  united  with  d'hrist  at  bapt'sm. The

OB P 1r A  a ^""'"^^*cril)escertain  incidentsat  the  baptism

»8.  COOKS  6-8 son1ewh.1t  after  the  manner  of  the  apo<:rypb;d

11-14 1/. gospels.  Hook 7  is  of  like  authorship

.ind  is  not  earlier  than  the  third  (see  above,

§  91,  1)  century  a.d.  Hook  8,  in  which  the  famous  acrostic

oixurs,  is  of  Christian  origin  but  of  divided  authorship. 1-429

belongs to the second century; 430-501 to  the  third. A.s  to

Hooks 1  /. and 11-14, there is a great \ariety of  opinion.

.Mexandre  as.signs  the  former  to  a  Christian  author  of  the  third

century, and  the  latter  to  an  Alexandrian lew  of  about the

year  267. Kriedlieb  places  \/.  at  the  close  of  tne  second  century  ;

11-14  he  ascribes  to  Jewish  writers  of  the  second  and  the  third

centuries  A.u. respectively; \'i /. to  Christian  writers  of  the

third  century.

Some  of  these  judgments  are  simply  hypotheses  ;  there  is  still
room  for  indefinite  study  on  these  questions.  K.  11.  C.


APOCRYPHA

CO.N'rK.NIS
I.  THE  APOCRYPHA  PROPER  (§§  3-8).

I.  Narrative  (§  4/).  II.  (a)  Prophetic.il  (8  6).

(rt)  Historical  (§  4).  (//)  Apocalyptic  (§  7).

(/')  Legendary  (S  6).  III. Didactic  (i  8).

II.  OTHER  APOCRYPHAL  UTERATURE  (§§  9-31).

Old  Tkstamknt  (§§  10-25).  I^- New  Testamk.nt  (§§  26-31).


I.  Legendary  (§8  10-18).

11.  Ajxicalvptic  (§§  19-23).

III.  Poetical  (8  24).

IV.  Didactic  (§  25).


It  is  proposed  in  the  present  article  to  gi
first  place,  a  general  survey  of  the  very  miscellaneous
..  -  collection  of  books  known  as  '  the  .Apo-
article  crypha  '  (details  Ix'ing  reserved  for  special
articles),  and  then  to  proceed  to  an
enumeration  and  classification  of  the  larger  literature
which  lies  beyond  the  limits  of  that  collection.  Fuller
treatment  of  the  subdivision  '  .\pocalyptic,'  however,
will  be  reserved  for  a  special  article  ( see  above,  .\poc.\LYP-
■nc).  where  will  be  found  an  account  of  the  following
nine  works: — Apoc.  of  Baruch,  Ethiopic  Hook  of  Enoch,
Slavonic  Book  of  Enoch,  Ascension  of  Isaiah,  Jubilees,
Assumption  of  Moses,  Test.  .\ii.  Patr. ,  Tsalms  of
Solomon,  .Sibylline  Oracles.  The  later  Christian  litera-
ture will  Ix;  excluded,  only  those  writings  being  con-
sidered which  contain  portions  assignable,  at  latest,  to
the  early  years  of  the  second  century.

The  name  .Apocrypha  (nom.  pi.  neut.  of  Gk.  adj.
dir6Kpv(poi,  hidden)  is  used  to  denote  a  large  body  of
2  Name  J^^^'s'^  ^"'^  Christian  literature,  consisting
of  writings  which  either  their  authors  or  their
admirers  have  sought  to  include  among  canonical  scrip-
tures, but  which  have  ultimately  failed  to  secure  such  a
position  in  the  estimation  of  the  Church  at  large.

This  special  usage  of  the  word  is  derived  from  the
practice  common  among  sects,  religious  or  philosophic,
of  embodying  their  special  tenets  or  formulai  in  books
withheld  from  public  use,  and  communicated  to  an  inner
circle  of  believers.  Such  books,  generally  bearing  the
name  of  some  patriarch,  prophet,  or  apostle,  were  called
by  their  possessors  apocryphal,  the  designation  imply-
ing that  they  were  hidden  from  the  outer  world,  and
even  from  the  ordinary  members  of  the  sect  itself ;  in
such  cases  the  epithet  apocryphal  was  used  in  a  laud-
atory sense.  Since,  however,  the  books  were  forgeries,
the  epithet  gradually  came  to  take  colour  from  that  fact,
and  in  process  of  time  it  w.as  employed  to  indicate  other
writings  that  had  been  forged.  In  the  common  parlance
of  to-day,  it  denotes  any  story  or  document  which  is  false
or  spurious.

One  of  the  earliest  instances — and  certainly  a  typical  instance
—of  the  use  of  the  word  apocryphal  m  its  laudatory  sense,  occurs

249


Hibliography  (§  32).
in  the


I. Gospels  (8  26/).
II.  Acts  (8  28).

III.  Epistles  (8  29).

IV.  Apocalypses  (8  30).
V.  Didactic  (§  31).


in  a  magical  book  of  Moses  edited  from  a  Leyden  papyrus  of  the
third  or  fourth  century  by  Leeman  and  by  Dicterich  {A/>ra.tas,
109).  The  book  may  be  as  old  .is  the  first  century  A.u.  Its
title  is  Mujvo'eut  iepa.  |3i/3Ao?  an-OKpvt^ot  «7ri<taAoi'/i«V>)  oy6d>)  ij
oyi'a,  '.\  Holy  and  Secret  Hook  of  Moses,  called  the  Eighth,  or
the  Holy.'  For  the  earliest  use  of  the  word  in  iiia/aiii /■artetii,  on
the  other  hand,  we  have  to  turn  probably  to  Cyril  of  .Mexandria
(348  A.u.)  ;  and  for  a  more  frequent  and  clear  employment  of  the
adjective  in  a  disparaging  sense,  to  Jerome,  whose  constant  u.se  of
it  is  probably  responsible  for  our  employment  of  it  at  the  present
day  as  the  equivalent  of  '  non-canonical.'

Finally  the  name  .Apocrypha  has  come  to  Ije
applied,  and  is  now  applied,  by  the  reformed  com-
munions to  a  particular  collection  of  writings.  While
some  of  these  are  genuine  and  authentic  treatises,
others  legendary  histories,  and  the  rest  apocryphal  in
the  disparaging  sense  of  bearing  names  to  which  they
have  no  right,  all  come  under  the  tlefinition  proposed
above,  for  each  of  them  has  at  one  time  or  another  been
treated  as  canonical.'

I.  The  Apocrypha  Proper.
3.  Apocrypha This collection of books may be
proper : classified  in  several  ways. We  might
classification,  classify  them  critically  thus  : —

1.  Additions  to  canonical  fioohs : —

I  Esdr.is  (interpolated  form  of  Ezra)  :  see  below,  §  4,  ii.
Additions  to  Usther  :  see  below,  8  5.  i-
Additions  to  Daniel :  see  below,  g  5,  2.
Prayer  of  Manasses  :  see  below,  §  6,  3.

2.  Pseudepigraphical  writings : —

4  Esdras  :  see  below,  §  7.

Wisdom  of  Solomon  :  see  below,  §  8,  2.

Baruch  :  see  below,  §  6,  1.

Epistle  of  Jeremy  :  see  below,  8  6,  2.

3.  Legentiary  or  Haggadic  writings  : —

Tobit :  see  below,  g  5,  3.
Judith  :  see  below,  8  5,  4-

4.  Genuine  atul  authentic  treatises : —

Ecclesiasticus  :  see  below,  8  8,  i.
I,  2  Maccabees  :  see  Ijclow,  g  4,  i.

Probably  the  most  natural  and convenient  division

lit  does  not  seem  necess.iry  to  devote  space  here  to  comment-
ing upon  the  u.se  of  the  word  Deutero-canonical,  a.s  applied  to
these  books  by  the  Church  of  Rome;  for  it  is  expressly  said  by
the  authorities  of  that  Church  that  no  distinction  of  authority  is
implied  in  the  term

250


APOCRYPHA

will  be  one  depending  upon  the  kind  of  literature  which
each  book  represents,  as  thus  :^

I. Narrative  :  (a)  Historical  ;  (/')  Legendary  (or  Haggadic).
II.  (a)  Prophetical  ;  or  (/>)  Apocalyptic.
III.  Didactic.

1.  (a)  Historical.  i.  T/ie  Books  of  Maccabees.
I  Maccabees.  — An  important  and  generally  trustworthy

4 Historical ^^'^'^''y' extant in Greek. It was
■ translated from a Hebrew original,
which survived as  late  as  the time  of  Jerome. On
this  and  the  following  see  Maccakeks,  Books  of,

2  Maccabees. — Extant  in  Greek  ;  an  abridgment  of  a
work  in  five  books  by  Jason  of  Cyrene  ( see  2  23 ).  Prefixed
to  it  are  two  letters,  from  the  Jews  of  Jerusalem  to
the  Jews  of  ligypt,  commonly  held  to  be  spurious  (see,
however,  Maccabees,  Second,  §  7).

3  Maccabees. — Greek.  A  fragmentary  history  of  an
attempted  massacre  of  the  Jews  under  Ptolemy  Philo-
pator,  and  of  their  miraculous  deliverance.  This  book
and  the  following  are  not  included  by  the  Roman  Church
in  its  Canon,  and  do  not  appear  in  the  Vg.  though  found
in  ©.

4  Maccabees. — Greek.  A  j^hilosophical  discourse,
illustrating  t!ie  triumph  of  Reason  over  Matter,  by  the
story  of  the  martyrdom  of  Eleazar,  and  of  the  '  Seven
Maccabees  '  and  their  mother.  The  work  was  tradition-
ally attributed  to  Josephus.  An  edition  of  the  Syriac
version  with  kindred  documents,  prepared  by  the  late
Prof.  Bensly,  has  been  printed  under  the  supervision
of  \V.  K.  Barnes.

ii.  I  Esdras.^ — Greek.  A  recasting  of  the  canonical
Ezra,  to  which  is  added  the  legendary  tale  of  the  Dis-
pute of  the  Three  Courtiers  (known  to  Josephus).  This
book  api)ears  in  Vg.  as  an  appendix  to  the  NT  ;  but  no
authority  is  attributed  to  it  by  the  Church  of  Rome.
See  Esuras,  Books  of,  First  and  Second.

(/;) Legendary, i.  Additions to  Esther. — Greek.

They consist of  a  number  of  letters,  prayers,  visions,

-  ,  and the like, which  are  found inter-

°  "■  calated into the canonical book of

Esther  in  (5. See  EsruKK,  §  10.

2.  Additions  to  Daniel. — Greek.  These  are  three  in
number  : —

(i. )  The  Story  of  Susanna,  prefixed  to  the  book,
(ii. )  The  Song  of  the  Three  Children,  inserted  in  ch.  3.

(iii. )  The  Story  of  Bel  and  the  Dragon,  following  ch.  12
and  attributed  to  Habakkuk.

They  are  found  both  in  the  ©  Version  and  in  that
of  Theodotion.  What  is  said  to  be  the  Hebrew  original
of  part  of  the  Song  of  the  Three  Children  has  been
recently  found  by  Dr.  M.  Gaster  in  the  Chronicle  of
Jerahmeel,  and  printed  by  him  in  TSBA ,  1894.  Cp
Daniel,  §  5.

3.  Tobit.  — Greek  and  '  Chaldee. '  A  romantic  narra-
tive of  the  period  of  the  Captivity,  written  not  later  than
the  first  century  a.d.  at  latest,  and  perhaps  in  Egypt.
The  book  has  a  literary  connection  with  the  story  of
Ahikar  (see  Achiacharus).  The  date  cannot  at
present  be  considered  at  all  certain.  The  '  Chaldee '
or  Aramaic  version  (on  the  name  see  Aramaic,  §  4,
end),  published  by  Dr.  Neubauer  in  1878,  is  probably
not  the  earliest  form  of  the  book.  Of  the  Greek  there  are
three  recensions,  and  there  are  three  old  Latin  recen-
sions besides  Jerome's  Vg.  version.  There  are  also
two  Hebrew  texts,  one  derived  from  ©,  and  the
other  from  the  Aramaic.  Dr.  Gaster  has  printed  some
fresh  Hebrew  texts  of  the  story  in  TSBA,  1896.  See
Tobit.

4.  Judith. — Greek.  A  romance  which,  in  its  present
form,  may  date  from  the  first  century  B.C.  It  tells  the
story  of  the  deliverance  of  the  city  Bethulia  from  the
Assyrians  under  Holofernes,  through  the  bravery  of
Judith,  a  Hebrew  widow.  No  miraculous  element
appears  in  the  story. See  Judith.

1  So  called  in  EV  and  (S  (^.^.  Swete  [R]).  In  (S a  (subscr.)
it  is  called  6  tepevs  ;  in  Lag.'s  Luc.  it  is  Effipas  B',  and  in  Vg.  it
is  3  Esdras.

251


6.  Prophetical.


7.  Apocalyptic.


APOCRYPHA

II.  [a]  Prophetical.  i.  Baruch. — Greek.  A
pseudepigraphical  book  {i.e.  one  written  under  a  false

name), ascribed  to  Baruch  son  of  Neiiah,

amanuensis  of  Jeremiah. It  consists  of

two  parts  :  (i)  1-38,  which  may  date  from  the  times  of

the  Persian  supremacy,  possibly  has  a  Hebrew  original,

I and certainly  shows  close  affinities with Dan.  9  ; (2)

i 89-09  (end),  originally  written  in  Greek,  probably  after

I 70  a.d.  ; chap. 5  is  modelled  on  the  nth Psalm  of

Solomon. Edited  most  fully  by  Kneucker. Appended

to  this  book  is —

2. The  Epistle  of  Jeremy  ( Baruch  6  in  our  Apocrypha).

— Greek,  also  pseudepigraphic,  purporting  to  be  a  letter

I of  Jeremiah  addressed  to  the  Jews  at  Babylon,  inveighing

against  the  worship  of  idols.
I 3. The  Prayer  of  Manasses. — Greek. This  is  attri-
I buted  to  Manasseh,  king  of  Judah,  when  in  prison. It
is  very  likely  an extract  from  a  legendary  history  of
Manasseh,  of  which  other  portions  appear  to  be  quoted
(in  connection  with  the  i)rayer)  in  the  Apostolical  Con-
stitutions ['lii.');  or  possibly  it  was  written  with  a  view
to  insertion  into  the  text  of  2  Chron.  3."5. It  is  not  in
the  Roman  canon,  but  is  appended  thereto.
' (/')  Apocalyptic.  —  Of this large and important
class  of  writings  only  one  specimen
is contained in our Apocrypha,
namely  : —

4  Esdras.^ — Latin,  Syriac,  Arabic,  Ethiopia,  and  Ar-
menian. The  original  Greek  is  lost.  Only  chaps.  3-14
appear  in  any  Version  save  the  Latin  ;  chaps.  \f.  If)/",  are
later  accretions,  probably  of  two  different  dates,  \f.  being
perhaps  of  second  century,  and  15/  of  third  century;
3-14  are  a  Jewish  apocalypse,  probably  written  about
97  A.D.  ;  1/.  are  Christian,  15/.  most  likely  Jewish.
Rejected  by  the  Roman  Church,  it  is  printed  as  an
appendix  to  the  Vg.  "See  EsDRAS,  Books  of  and
Apocalyptic  Literature,  §§  13-15.

III.  Didactic,  i.  Wisdom  of  Jesus  the  Son  of
Sirach,  commonly  called  Ecclesiasticus. — Greek,  avowedly

_.. ,  . .  translated  from  the  Hebrew  of  which  a
■  considerable  portion  has  lately  been  re-
covered. A  genuine  authentic  treatise,  in  parts  of
high  literary  e.xcellence.  The  author  was  a  Palestinian
Jew  of  the  second  century  B.C.  See  Ecclesias-
ticus.

2.  Wisdom  of  Solomon. — Greek.  Written  under  the
name  of  Solomon,  perhaps  by  Philo  (according  to  an
early  tradition),  certainly  by  a  Jew  of  Alexandria  in  the
first  century.  It  is  of  great  merit  in  parts  ;  but  the  tone
deteriorates  towards  the  end.  The  book  seems,  more-
over, to  be  incomplete. See  Wisdom,  Book  of.

II.  Other  Apocryphal  Literature.

Our  survej'  of  the  remaining  literature  is  a  much
more  difficult  matter. The  idea  of  classifying  the  books


9.  Other
literature.


upon  chronological  principles  must  be
set  aside  at  once  as  impracticable  ;  the
data  are  in  a  majority  of  cases  far  too
vague.  The  simplest  division  that  can  be  made  is
between  those  books  which  have  to  do  with  the  OT  and
those  which  associate  themselves  with  the  New.  ^^'ithin
those  the  classification  will  be  made,  as  in  the  case  of  the
apocrypha  already  described,  according  to  kinds  of
literature  represented  ;  writings  which  unite  more  than
one  element  will  be  arranged  according  to  their  most
prominent  feature.  In  the  case  of  the  OT  literature,
slightly  modifying  our  previous  classification,  we  can
includs  all  the  documents  we  possess  under  the  following
headings  : — i.  Legendary  or  Haggadic  Narratives,  ii.
Prophetical  and  Apocalyptic  books,  iii.  Poetical,  iv.
Didactic.

1  Called  2  Esdras  in  EV,  but  oftener,  as  here,  4  Esdras — i.e.,
4th  after  ist  Esdras,  the  Heb.  Ezra,  and  Neheniiah.  _  It  is
called  3  Esd.  when  Ezra-Neh.  are  counted  one  book,  as  in  ©.
In  an  Amiens  MS  chaps.  I/.  3-14  \b/.  are  called  3rd,  4th,  and
Sth  Esd.  respectively.

252


APOCRYPHA

A.  Old  Testament  (§§  10-25).

I. Legendary  or  Haggadic  Narratives  (§§  10-

,18). I. Testament  {ox  Apocalypse,  or

10.  Adam  and  i>,nitcnce)of  Adam:  Book  of  the  Conflict

Eve,  etc. ^y  ,^J^„^  a„j  y/^,^  — K.xtaut  partially  in

Greek.  Latin,  Syriac,  Arabic,  Ethiopic  [and  Coptic].

These  versions  represent  variously  developed  forms
or  fragments  of  a  Jewish  romance  dealing  with  the
life  of  Adam  and  Eve  after  the  Fall,  and  with  their
death  and  burial.  We  no  longer  possess  the  romance
in  its  original  form.

The  remains  of  it  must  be  sought  in  the  following  documents  :— ■

(a)  (Ireek  Apocalypse  of  Moses,  more  properly  Aujyijo-i?  n-epl
•Afiiji  Kdl  Euav.  Kdited  by  Tischendorf  (Apocalypses  Apocry-
plue,  1866)  and,  in  a  fragmentary  text,  from  the  best  M.S,  by
Ceriani  (Monumenta  sacra  et  pro/ana,  621).  It  is  principally
concerned  with  the  death  of  Adam  and  Kve,  and  includes  an
important  narrative  of  the  Kail. It  is  essentially  Jewish.

W  Latin  I'ita  Adce  ct  Evte :  extant  in  many  MSS,  printed
by  Wilh.  Meyer  in  Ahh.  il.  Munch.  Akad.,  Phdos-plulol.
Kl.  14,  1878.  It  covers  the  same  ground  as  (a)  and  introduces
elements  which  occur  in  (y)  and  (5).

(y)  Arabic  and  Ethiopic  Book  of  Adam  ami  F.ve  or  Conflict
of  Adam  antl  Eve.  A  long  romance,  Christianized  throughout,
dealing  with  the  sufferings  an.l  t^m,.t,>tums  of "vd.im  and  Eve

after  the  Fall. The  history  i-  1 i-i  i  •  the  birth  of  Christ,

and  has  close  affinities  with  li  ,  <iiKr«  (ed.  Bezold  ;

Schatzlwhle).  It  is  derived  m  .  n.  1  .i  iVum  tlie  lost  Jewish
romance.  First  translated  by  i  )iiini.inn  (/'rt.v  Christl.  Adamhuh
des  Morsenlamies,  1853):  Ethiopic  text  by  Trumpp  in  Abh.  d.
Miinch.  Akail.  15,  1879-81  :  English  Version  by  S.  C.  Malan
{Hook  of  Adam  and  K7'e,  1882).  See  too  the  article  'Adam,
Books  of,'  by  Hort,  in  Diet.  Christ.  Biogr.

(6)  Greek,  Syriac,  and  .\rabic  fragments  of  the  Testament
of  Adam.  Prophetic  and  apocalyptic  in  character;  some  are
extracts  from  the  old  romance  in  its  original  form  ;  others  are
Christianized.  Edited  by  Renan  in  Joum.  As.  (1853,  pp.  427-
471);  the  Greek  by  M.  R.  James  (.^/iJcry/Aa  Anecdota  :  Texts
ami  Studies,  ii.  3  138).

(e)  Coptic.  .\  leaf  from  a  Moses-Adam  apocalypse,  gnosticized.
Edited  by  Schmidt  and  Harnack  in  Sitzungsber.  d.  k.  pr.
Akad.  d.  Il'iss.,  1891,  p.  1045.  It  is  now  recognised  by
Harnack  to  be  part  of  the  late  Coptic  Apocalypse  of  Bartholomew.

2.  Book  of  Jubilees,  Little  Genesis  [Leptogenesis),
Apocalypse  (or  Testament)  of  Moses. — -A  'haggadic
coinmoiitary  upon  Genesis.'  The  book  is  in  the  form
of  a  revelation  made  to  Moses  on  Mount  Sinai  by  the
angel  of  the  Presence.  Hence  it  has  been  called  the
Apocalypse  of  Moses.  The  narrative  communicated  by
the  angel  begins  with  the  Creation,  and  extends  to  the
giving  of  the  law,  and  the  whole  time  is  reckoned  in
periods  of  Jubilees:  hence  the  name  Book  of  Jubilees.
The  events  narrated  in  Genesis  are  for  the  most  part
sketched  slightly  with  the  addition  of  details  of  a  legend-
ary character  :  hence  the  name  I^ploi^enesis,  '  a  detailed
treatment  ofGenesis' (see,  however,  EscHATOLOGY,§49).
These  details  include  the  names  of  the  wives  of  the
patriarchs,  the  wars  of  Jacob  and  P2sau,  the  last  words  of
Abraham  and  Isaac.  Much  of  the  legendary  element
in  Test.  xii.  Fair,  (see  below)  is  derived  from  this  book  :
see  Apocalyptic,  §§  48-58.

3.  Testamentsofthe  Three  Patriarchs  ( Abraham ,  Isaac,

and  Jacob).  —  Referred  to  in the  Apost. Const. (616).

■n  ^  ■ Books  under  these names, combining  the
11.  Jratri'


APOCRYPHA

vision  narrated  in  Gen.  15  :  edited  by  N.  Bonwetsch  in
Studien  zur  Geschichte  d.  Theolugie  u.  h'irche,  1897.

5.  Testaments  of  the  Twelve  Patriarchs. — A  book
combining  the  three  elements  of  legendary,  apocalyptic
and  didactic  matter  in  twelve  sections,  each  of  which
gives  the  last  dying  speech  of  one  of  the  sons  of  Jacob  ;
see  Apocalyptic,  §§  68-76.

6.  Life  (or  Confession)  of  Aseneth. — A  Jewish  legend
of  early  date; Christianized.


axchs.


legendary,  apocalyptic,  and  didactic  ele-
ments Christianized,  are  found  in  Greek,
Slavonic,  and  Roumanian  ( Testament  [or  Apocalypse']
of  Abraham),  and  in  Arabic  and  V.\.\\\o\i\c  [Testaments  of
Abraham,  Isaac,  and  Jacob).  They  narrate  the  circum-
stances attending  the  deaths  of  the  three  patriarchs.
Their  early  date  is  maintained  by  the  present  writer
(one  is  cjuoted  by  Origen),  but  is  not  universally  allowed.
Dr.  Koiiler  [JQR,  1895)  assigns  an  Essene  origin  to  the
Test,  oj'  Abraham.

Edited  by  M.  R.  James  ('  Test,  of  Abraham '  :  Texts  and
Studies,  22)  and  by  Dr.  Caster  ('  Roumanian  version  of  Apoc.
of  Abraham,'  PSB.-\,  1887).  The  Greek  version  is  printed  from
one  MS  by  Vassiliev  (WwtWo^a  Gra-co-Byzantina,  1893).

4.  Apocalypse  of  Abraham.— S\3.\on\c,  from  Greek.
An  interesting  Jewish  book  with  Christian  insertions.
The  first  part  is  haggadic,  and  gives  the  story  of  Abra-
ham's conversion  : the  second  is  an  expansion  of  the

2S3


12.  Aseneth.


Extant  in  (ireek  and
Syriac  (and  Latin).  It  is  connected
with  the  Test.  xii.  Pair. ,  and  narrates
the  circumstances  attending  the  marriage  of  Aseneth
with  Joseph.  There  is  much  beauty  in  the  story.  The
Latin  version  was.  according  to  the  present  writer's
belief,  made  by  or  for  Grosseteste,  at  the  same  time
as  that  of  the  Testa?nents.

The  Greek  and  Latin  are  edited  by  P.  Batiffol,  Studia
Patristica,  1889.  The  Syriac  will  be  found  in  Land,  Anecd.
Syr.,  and  Oppenheim,  Fal-ula  Josephi  et  Asenethu;  i8£6.  See
Hort's  article  in  Vict.  Chr.  Biogr.

7.  Testament  of  Job. — A  Midrash  on  Job,  containing
a mythical story  of his life. Christianized to  a very

^  f  ~  limited  extent.  It  is  ascribed  to  his  brother
13.  Job. j^T^pj^5  (Nahor). Job's  wife  is  called  .Sitis.

Elihu  is  represented  as  inspired  by  Satan. The  story

is  worth  reading.

It  exists  in  Cireek  and  seems  to  be  quoted  in  the  Apoc.  Paul.

Printed  from  a  Vatican  MS by  Mai  (.Script. Cet.  .X.n:  Coll.

7  180)  ;  a  French  translation  in  Mignes  J)ict.  des  Apooyf'lus ;

edited  last  from  two  MSS  by  M.  R.  James,  Apocryplta  A,ux-

dota,  ii.  1897.

8.  Testament  of  Solomon. — Greek.  Practically  a
magical  book,  though  interspersed  with  large  haggadic

sections. It is mainly Jewish, though
14.  Solomon,  (Christian  touches  have  been  introduced.
^  It narrates the circumstances under

which  Solomon  attained  power  over  the  world  of  spirits,
details  his  interviews  with  the  demons,  and  ends  wilh
an  account  of  his  fall  and  loss  of  power.

Ed.  first  by  F.  F.  Fleck  in  W'issenschaftl.  Reise;  reprinted
in  Mignes  Ccdrcnus,  vol.  ii.,  as  an  appendix  to  Psellus's
writings.  A  German  translation  by  Bornemann  in  lllgen's
Z.f.  Kirchcngesck.,  1843.

9.  Contradictio  Salomonis. — A  work  under  this  name
is  condemned  in  the  "  Gelasian  "  Decree  de  recipicndis
et  non  recipiendis  libris.  It  was  in  all  likelihood  an
account  of  Solomon's  contest  in  wisdom  with  Hiram,
and  was  the  groundwork  of  the  romance  still  extant
in  many  forms  and  under  many  names — e.g. ,  Dialogue
of  Solomon  and  Saturn  (Anglo-Saxon),  Solomon  and
Kitovras  (?.<?.  Kentauros,  Slavonic),  Solomon  and  Mar-
colph  ( Latin,  etc. ).  Josephus  mentions  the  Hiram-legcnd.

See  on  all  these  books  J.  M.  Kemble's  Introduction  to  the
Anglo-Saxon  Dialogue  0/ Solomon  ami  Saturn,  ^tlfric  Society,
1843,  and  compare  Achiachakus.

10.  Ascension  of  Isaiah. — Partly  haggadic,  but  chiefly
important  as  an  apocalypse — under  which  heading  it
will  be  treated. See  Apocalyptic,  §§  42-47.

11.  Pseudo-Philo's  Libct  antiquitatum  Biblicarum.
—Latin,  from  Greek,  and  that  from  Hebrew.  Printed
,- Ti A thrice  in  the i6th century  (in 1527, in

Pvf-?  ^55°' ''^"^ '" '599). this book had

practically  escaped  the  knowledge  of  all
modern  scholars  (except  Cardinal  Pilra)  until  Mr.
Leopold  Cohn  reintroduced  it  to  the  world  in  an  article
in  the  Jewish  Quarterly  Pez'ieiv,  1898.  It  is  a  haggadic
summary  of  Bible  history  from  Adam  to  the  death  of
Saul,  full  of  most  interesting  visions,  prophecies,  and
legends.

The  Latin  version,  the  only  form  in  which  the  book  is
known,  very  much  resembles  the  version  of  4  Esd.  hour
fragments  published  by  the  present  writer  (Prayer  of  Moses,
Vision  of  Kenaz,  Lament  of  Sella,  and  Song  of  l)a.\id  =  Apoc.
Anecd.  i.)  turn  out  to  be  extracts  from  this  work  of  I'seudo-
Philo. It  is  apparently  pre-Christian  and  merits  careful  study.

12.  Book  of  Jasher. — \  haggadic  commentary  upon
the  Hexateuch, containing  ancient  elements,  but pre-
served  in  a  mediaeval form. There is

16.  Jaalier. ^  prench  translation  by  Drach  in  Mignes
Did.  des  Apocryphes,  vol.  ii.
254


APOCRYPHA

13. /?,>i>^  of  Xoah. — Haggadic  and  apocalyptic  frag-
ments of  this  work  arc  incorporated  in  the  Hook  of  Knoch ;


17.  Noah.


there  is  also  a  Hebrew  Midrash  under  this


name  printed  by  Jellinek  in  Bet-ha-Mid-
rasc/i,  3  155.  I^artly  based  on  the  Book  of  Jubilees.  See
Ronsch  and  Charles,  and  cp.  .VfocALYiTic,  §§  24,  57.

14.  Book  of  Lamech. — The  title  '  Lamech  '  occurs  in
Greek lists  of  apocryphal Ixjoks. A  story  of  Lamech

18.  Lost  Books.  ''^'''''  '^  '"°""'^  separately  in  Slavonic

may  or  may  not  be  identical  with
this.  There  can  be  little  doubt  that  the  old  book
treated  (as  the  Slavonic  one  does)  of  the  accidental
slaying  of  Cain  by  Lamech.

15.  Book  of  Og. — In  the  Gelasian  Decree  a  book  is
mentioned  as  '  The  Book  of  Og  the  giant,  whom  the
heretics  feign  to  have  fought  with  a  dragon  after  the
Flood.'  It  was,  according  to  the  present  writer's
belief,  identical  with  a  book  Wpar^y^arda.  tCov  Viyo-vruiv
or  Treatise  of  the  Giants,  which  is  mentioned  in  a  list
of  Manicha;an  apocrypha  by  Timotheus  of  Con-
stantinople (Fabricius,  Cod.  apoc.  NT  1  139).  It
was  no  doubt  a  Jewish  haggada,  containing,  to  judge
from  the  title,  some  stirring  incidents.  Possibly
it  may  h.ave  given  a  Jew  ish  form  of  the  ancient  Dragon-
myth  of  Babylonia,  on  which  see  Gunkel  (Sc/iopf  ).

16.  Peiiilettce  of  Janiies  and  Mamhres. — Mentioned
also  in  the  Gelasian  Decree,  and  perhaps,  like  the
Panitentia  Cypriani,  a  confession  of  the  wicked  magical
arts  of  the  two  Fgyptian  wizards.  See  an  article  by
Iselin  in  Hilgenfeld's  ZIVT,  1894.  There  is  a  fragment
(in  Latin  and  Anglo -.Saxon)  apparently  belonging  to
this  book  in  the  Cotton  MS  Tib.  B.V.  ;  but  it  has  not
}'et  been  printed.

17.  Esther. — Origen  on  Romans  (92  :  p.  646)h.asthe
following  passage,  which  clearly  refers  to  a  romance
about  Esther  :  '  We  have  found  it  written  in  a  certain
book  of  an  apocryphal  nature  (secretiore)  that  there  is
an  angel  of  grace  who  takes  his  name  from  grace.  For
he  is  called  Ananehel  (oiAnahel),  which  being  inter-
preted means  the  grace  of  God.  Now  in  this  writing
it  was  said  that  this  angel  was  sent  by  the  Lord  to
Esther  to  give  her  grace  in  the  sight  of  the  king. '

There  are,  besides,  many  haggadic  histories — e.g. ,
of  David,  Jonah,  the  Captivity,  and  (see  J?ez'.  St'm.
1898)  the  Rechabites— in  Syriac,  Carshunic,  Arabic,  and
Ethiopic,  which  are  still  unpublished  ;  they  are  to  be
found  in  MS  at  Paris  and  elsewhere.

See  Zotenberg's  Cat.  des  JIfSS  Syriaqucs  and  Cat.  dcs
MSS  lltkiopiques  itc  la  Bibliotlu-que  Nationale,  and  Wright's
Catalogues  of  Ethiopic  and  of  Syriac  MSS  in  the  British
Museum.  Much  Slavonic  apocryphal  literature  also  rem.ains
unknown  to  critics,  though  most  of  it  has  been  printed.  See
Kozak'slist  of  Slavonic  apocryphal  literature  \n  JPT asvix.,  and
Bonwetsch  in  Harnack's  Altchristl.  Lit.  902-917.

II. Apocalyptic. i. Book of  Enoch; and 2.

19.  Apocalyptic  : ^'"''^'  £  Enoch. -^^^  Awjca-
Enoch,  e?c  ^^7'^'  §§  '^'^^  ^'''^  33-4i  respec-

tively.

3.  Sibylline  Oracles.  —  Greek  hexameter  verse,  in  four-
teen books  of  various  dates. See  -Apckt.xlyptic,  §§  86-98.

4.  Assumption  of  Moses. — (^)uoted  in  the  epistle  of
Jude,  as  well  as  by  later  Christian  writers  ;  extant  in
Latin,  incomplete. See  Apoc.VLYPTIc,  §§  59-67.

5.  Apocalypse  of  Baruch.  — A  long  and  important
apocalypse, closely  resembling  4 Esdras in  style  and

20.  Baruch. '^°"Sht. See  .Apocai  yptic,  §§  5-
Jeremiah.  etc. ]!'  ''"'^  also  below  under  /Mroaster
(§  23,  no.  15).

6.  Other  Apocalypses  of  Baruch  {a),  (b),  (c). — As  far
as  is  known  at  present  (a)  is  contained  in  only  a  single
Greek  MS  (Brit.  Mus.  Add.  10,073):  edited  by  M.  R.
James,  Apocr.  Anecd.  ii. ,  with  a  translation  of  the
Slavonic  version  by  W.  R.  Morfill  :  Ftonwetsch  also
has  published  a  German  translation  of  the  Slavonic.
The  Greek  text  has  two  Christian  passages.  In
the  main  it  may  very  well  be  Jewish  and  of  early  date.
It  contains  revelations  about  the  course  of  the  sun  and

25s


APOCRYPHA

moon,  the  history  of  the  Tower  of  Babel,  the  \'ine
(Christian),  and  the  offering  of  the  prayers  of  men  to
God  by  .Michael,  [c)  An  Ethiopic  Apocalypse  of  Baruch,
preserved  in  a  British  Museum  MS  (118  in  Dill-
mann's  Catalogue)  is  apparently  the  production,  in  jjart
at  least,  of  an  Abyssinian  Christian.  This,  or  another,
is  mentioned  in  Wright's  Catalogue  (.\o.  27,  6,  etc.).
A  cjuotation  from  Baruch  not  found  in  any  existing
book  of  his,  is  in  the  Altercatio  Simonis  et  Theophili
{Text  eu.  Unters.  I3),  and  a  larger  one  in  some  MSS
of  Cypriani's  Testiinonia,'62g.  It  is  noticed  by  Ur.  J.
Rendel  Harris  in  Tlie  Rest  of  the  Words  of  Baruch,  p.  10.

7.  Reliqua  verborum  BarMchi  [The  rest  of  the  words
of  Baruch),  or  Paralipomena  Jeremice.  —  Greek  and
Ethiopic.  There  is  hardly  anything  really  apocalyptic
in  this  book,  which  is  a  Christian  appendix  to  the
Apocalypse  of  Baruch,  haggadic  in  character.  It
narrates  the  destruction  of  Jerusalem  by  Nebuchad-
rezzar, the  miraculous  rescue  of  Ebed-melech,  and  the
martyrdom  of  Jeremiah.

Printed  first  in  Etliiopic  by  Di.  {Chrestotiiathia  Aithiopica),
in  Greek  by  Ceriani  (.Mon.  sacr.  et  pro/.),  and  lastly  in  (ireek
by  Dr.  J.  Rendel  Harris  (/v«/  of  the  IVords  0/  Baruch,  1889).
Harris  regards  it  as  an  eirenicon  addressed  by  the  church  of
Jerusalem  to  the  synagogue  after  the  Bar-Cochba  rebellion.  It
was  often  printed  in  variously  abridged  forms  in  the  Greek  Mctuea.

8.  A  short  Prophecy  of  Jeremiah  is  uniformly  attached
to  the  Epistle  of  Jeremiah  in  Ethiopic  MSS  of  the
Old  Testament.  It  consists  of  only  a  few  lines,  and  is
written  to  justify  the  quotation  from  'Jeremy  the
prophet '  in  Mt.  279.  It  is  addressed  to  Pashur.  Jerome
had  seen  a  Hebrew  volume  in  which  a  similar  passage
occurred.  Dillmann  printed  it  in  his  Chrestomathia
ALthiopica,  1866  (p.  viii  n.  2).

9.  Ascension  of  Isaiah.  — See  APOCALYPTIC,  §§  42-47.

10.  Apocalypse  of  Elias,  and

11.  Apocalypse  of  Zephaniah.

The  first  of  these  was  supposed  to  be  the  source  of

Paul's  quotation  in  i  Cor.  29,  '  Eye  hath  not  seen,'  etc.

91 Plina '^^^  second  is  c|uoted  by  Clement  of

Zephaniaretc. -^'^T^"^- They both survive in

*«7yiiaaxia,ii,  cui-.  ^^^.^  dialects  of  Coptic. fragments  of

10  and  II  were  published  by  Bouriant  in  the  Mi'inoires
de  la  Mission  archc'ologique  au  Caire.  Stern  translated
them  into  German  in  ZA,  1886.  The  whole,  with
additional  fragments,  has  been  edited  by  Steindorff  in
Harnack  and  Gebhardt's  Texte  u.  Untersuch.  The
Apocalypse  of  Elias  is  fairly  complete  :  the  editor  assigns
only  one  leaf  to  the  .Apocalypse  of  Zephaniah  and  a  large
fragment  to  an  unknown  Apocalypse.  It  is  the  present
writer's  belief  that  this  last  is  from  an  Apocalypse
of  Zephaniah.  Both  are  seemingly  Christianized  forms
of  Jewish  books,  containing  sections  descriptive  of
heaven  and  hell,  and  prophecies  of  Antichrist,  and  his
conflict  with  Tabitha  and  the  two  witnesses.  There
is  an  Apocalypse  of  P'.lias  in  Hebrew  and  one  was
printed  in  Jellinek's  Bet-ha-Midrasck  and  edited  in
1897  by  Buttenwieser.  A  passage  from  a  Gnostic
Vision  of  Elias  is  quoted  by  Epiphanius  [Hcer.  2613).

12.  A  Revelation  of  Moses,  containing  a  visit  to  the
unseen  world,  has  been  translated  from  Hebrew  by
Dr.  Gaster  (JRAS,  1893).

13.  An  Apocalypse  of  Esdras,  extant  in  SyTiac,
edited by  Baethgen from a  late MS, and published

with  a  translation  in  ZATll'  {Higg-
210  ['86]),  is  by  some  thought  to  be
an  old  Jewish  apocalypse  which  was  remodelled  in
Mohammedan  times.  There  is  an  Ethiopic  Apoc.  of
Esd.  in  fhe  British  Museum  (see  Wright's  Catalogue).

14.  The  same  remark  applies  to  a  Persian  History  of
Daniel  edited  and  translated  by  Zotenberg  in  Merx's
Archiv  (I386),  which  in  its  present  form  is  certainly
mediaeval.  The  Armenian,  the  Coptic,  and  the  Greek
"Visions  of  Daniel,*  which  are  printed  respectively  by

J  It  may  be  noticed  in  this  connection  that  in  ®a  of
Theodotion's  Daniel  the  whole  book  is  divided  into  twelve
Visions  (opatrcit).


22.  Esdras,  etc.


APOCRYPHA

Kalemkiar,  by  Woide,  by  Klostermann,  and  by  I
V'assiliev  (Anecdota  linrco-Hyzantinii,  1893),  arc  also
very  late,  but  contain  ancient  elements.  See  on  these  \
lKK)ks  W.  Itousset's  recent  work.  D<r  Antichrist,  and
compare  .A.ntk  iikist.  It  is  ihouKiit  by  Zahn  that
Hipixjlytus  commented  upon  the  a{xx,ryphal  .Vpocalypse
of  Daniel  as  well  as  on  the  canonical  Apocalypse  (/-or-
sihiingfn,^>\-2o).

15.  liMks  of  Zoroiister. — Zoroaster,  as  we  learn  from
the  tlementines  ( AVf<);w.  1  29  ;  //om.9i).  was  identified

_ . with  Ham,  son  of  Noah  ;  and  mystical
. ■  prophecies,  most  likely  of  Jewish  origin.

Apocalypses,  ^^re  current  under  both  names.  Clement
of  .Mcx.uuliia  quotes  a  prophecy  of  Ham  (Strom.  G642);
and  there  are  oracles  of  Zoroaster  in  Greek  verse  (with
commentaries  by  Cicmistius  Pletho  and  Michael  I'sellus)
printed,  e.g.,  in  Opso|)a;us's  Sibyllitia,  1607.  Zoroaster
was  also  identified  by  Mastern  scholars  with  Riruch.
.Sok)mon  of  Bassora  in  the  Book  of  the  Bee  cites  a
])rophecy  of  his  concerning  the  .Star  of  the  Hpiphany  (ed.
Builge,  circa  37). The  prophecy  is,  of  course,  Christian.

16.  Hooks  of  Sitfi. — The  .Sethians  poss'ssed  writings
called  Books  of  Seth  and  others  under  the  name  of  the
Allogi-Nfis  {dWoyivth),  a  term  which  meant  the  sons
of  .Seth.  Hippolytus  (A'(/.  ILcr.)  (juotes  much  from  a
Sethian  book.  Pscudepigrapha  of  this  kind,  however,  to
which  might  Ix;  added  the  prophecies  of  I'archor  (Clem.
Alex.  ),  the  (losix,'l  of  I'2ve  (l'",piphaiiius),  and  Justin  the
(Inostic's  Book  of  Baruch  (Hippolytus,  Rif.  //<,r.  5),
are  hartlly  to  be  reckoned  among  apocryphal  literature,
since  there  seems  to  have  been  in  them  little  or  no
attempt  at  verisimilitude  of  attribution.

17.  Prayer  of  Jo.<iepk. — Quoted  by  Origen  and  Pro-
copius  (in  Genesiin).  It  represented  Jacob  as  an  in-
carnation of  a  pre-existent  angel  Israel  ;  in  the  fragments
we  i^ossess,  Jacob  is  the  speaker.  The  lx)ok  extended
to  1 100  (XTixoi,  Ix-ing  of  about  the  same  length  as  the
Wisdom  of  Solomon.

18.  Elddd  and  Medad. — .\  prophecy  attributed  to
these  two  elders  (for  whom  see  Nu.  11)  is  quoted  in  the
Shepherd  of  Hernias  ( /'/.f.  234).  It  consisted  of  400
arix^'-  (atwut  twice  the  length  of  the  Song  of  Sfilomon).

111. I'OKTICAI.. I. Psalms of Solomon. — (ireek,


from Hebrew (lost). A collection  of
See


24.  Poetical, eighteen ^^r nineteen) Psalms.

.■\lf)C.\I,Vl'TK-, §§  77-85.

2.  Additions  to  the  Psalter.— (a)  Vs.  l.'il,  on  David's
victory  over  Cjoliath,  is  appended  to  the  ©  Version
of  the  Psalter.  It  is  a  very  simple  composition,  of
some  merit,  (b)  Three  apocryphal  psalms  in  .Syriac,
edited  by  W.  Wright  (PS/i.-t,  1887,  p.  257),  viz.  a
prayer  of  Hezekiah,  a  psalm  on  the  Return,  and  two
thanksgivings  by  David  on  his  victory  over  the  lion  and
the  'wolf.'  They  are  probably  Jewish,  and  of  con-
siderable anticiuity.

3.  A  Lamentation  of  Job's  Wife,  inserted  in  the
©  text  of  Job  2,  is  closely  connected  with  the
Testament  of  Job.

I\^  DiUACTlc— The  three  main  inemlxTS  of  this
__  j».j  ..  cl.a.ss,  the  Wisdom  of  Solomon,  Baruch,
20.  Uiaacuc.  .^^^^j  ^^^  y,^^,^^\^  of  Jeremy,  have  Ix-en
already  noticed  (§  8,  2  ;  §  6,  1  ;  ami  §  6,  2  resi)ectively).
The  Testaments  of  the  Twelve  Patriarchs  (see  .Apoc.V-
LYi'Tic,  §§  68-76)  have  a  large  didactic  element.  lie-
sides  these  there  is  little  to  note,  save  perhaps  certain

Magical  Hooks  of  u\/oses. — Extant  in  Greek  papyri
found  in  Egypt ;  they  have  been  printed  by  Leemans
and  Dieterich  (in  Abraxa.';).  They  are  not  purely
Jewish  ;  Jewish  names  are  employed,  but  there  is  a
large  Orphic  element.  The  story  of  Achiacharus  (see
.Acm.xc  ii.XKUs)  also  ought  to  Ije  mentioned  in  this  place.

Besides  the  many  extant  books  and  titles,  there
were  j)rol)ably  others  of  which  we  know  nothing ;
yet  it  is  the  Ijelief  of  the  present  writer  that  many
more  apocalypses  at  least  have  been  postulated  by
recent  criticism  (e.g.,  Spitta  on  the  Johannine  .\poca-

17  257


APOCRYPHA

lypse.  and  Kabisch  on  the  apocalypses  of  I-^ras  and  of
Baruch)  than  the  prolxibilities  of  the  case  will  warrant.

B. .\/;ir  T/-sjyi.wj:.vr  (^  26-31).
Under  this  head  only  a  few  of  the  most  prominent
NT apocrypha can be mentioned  ; much of the
literature  is  excludetl  by  its  late  date.

1.  GosPKl-S.*  I.  Gospel  according  to  the  Hebn-ivs. —
The  relation  of  this  txx)k to  the  canonical  CJosi)el  of

28 OoBnela ^'^^tthew  cannot  l>e  discussed  here  (see
- '  t ' Gosi'Ei.s). The facts known alx^ut

ragmen  ary  ^^^  \,odk  are  that  it  was  in  Aramaic,  that
Jerome  translated  it  into  Cjreek  and  into
Latin,  and  that  in  his  time  it  was  in  use  among  the
'  Nazarenes  '  of  .Syria.  Jeromes  versions  have  perished  ;
but  he  rei^eatedly  (|uotes  from  the  Latin  one.  The  frag-
ments preserved  by  him,  by  Origen  and  I-^usebius,  and  by
Codex  Tischendorf  1 1 1.  of  ninth  centur)'  (566  in  Gregorj-)
numl)cr  about  twenty-two.  They  will  be  found  in
Hilgenfeld's  NT  extra  Canonem  receptum,  4,  in  the
monograjihs  of  Nicholson,  and  Handmann  (Texte  u.
( 'nters. ),  in  Westcott's  /ntrod.  to  the  Study  of  the
Crospels,  and  in  Zahii's  Gesch.  des  NTlichen  Kanons,
22,  etc.  The  fragments  <|Uoted  contain  additions  lx)th
to  the  narrative  and  to  the  sayings  of  Jesus.  .Some
of  the  sayings  differ  only  in  form  from  similar  sayings
in  the  canonical  gospels  ;  others  are  independent.  The
account  of  the  ba|)tism  is  distinctly  Ebionitic.  The
longest  continuous  passage  describes  the  ajipc-arance
of  Jesus  to  James  the  Just  after  the  resurrection.

2.  Gospel  of  the  Pb'iunites  or  Gospel  of  the  Twelve.—
I'.piphanius  is  the  only  writer  who  has  preserved  us  any
fragments  of  this  gospel  (adv.  Har.  30),  and  from  these
it  is  plain  that  the  book  was  a  '  tendency-writing '  put
into  the  mouths  of  the  Twelve  Apostles  (who  descrilx;
their  call,  using  the  first  i)erson),  and  related  to  the
Greek  Matthew.  It  was  naturally  strongly  Ebionitic,
and  it  began  with  the  baptism.

3.  Gospel  according  to  the  Egypt iaris. — Probably  the
earliest  (jnostic  gospel.  \  passage  is  quoted  by  Clement
of  .Alexandria,  who  tells  us  that  one  Julius  Cassianus,
a  Docetic  teacher,  used  the  same  words;  they  also
appear  in  the  so-called  second  epistle  of  Clement  (of
Rome). The  passage  Cjuoted  is  Encratite  in  its  Ijearing.

4.  Gospel  according  to  Peter.  —  Of  this  book  we  have
knowledge  from  the  following  sources  : — (i )  A  fragment
of  a  letter  of  Serapion,  Bishop  of  Antioch  (.\.I).  n.o-
203),  addressed  to  the  church  of  Rhossus,  condemning
the  gospel  (after  perusal)  as  Docetic  (l'".us.  //A' 6 12).
(2)  A  statement  by  Origen  (In  Matth.  tom.  17k>)  that
the  book  represented  the  lirethren  of  Jesus  as  sons  of
Joseph  by  a  former  marriage.  (3)  A  long  and  im-
portant fragment,  containing  an  account  of  the  Passion
and  Resurrection,  found  by  the  French  Archa-ological
Mission  in  a  tomb  at  .Akhnihn  in  1885,  published  first
in  their  Me  moires  (1892),  and  repeatedly  since  then.
Among  German  editions  must  lie  mentioned  those  of
Harnack,  of  Schut)ert,  and  of  Zahn  ;  among  English
ones,  those  of  Robinson  and  of  Swete.  The  literature  is
very  considerable.  The  conclusions  uixjn  which  critics
seem  agreed  at  this  moment  are  :  that  the  fragment  is
Docetic  and  anti-Jewish,  though  saturated  with  allusions
to  the  Old  Testament  ;  and  that  it  shows  a  knowlc<lge
of  all  four  canonical  gospels.  Its  use  by  Justin  Martyr  is
held  probable  by  most,  but  denietl  by  Swete  (p.  xxxiv/.  ).

5.  The  Fay  urn  gospelfragment. — Contained  in  a  tiny
fragment  of  [japyrus  among  the  Rainer  papyri  at
Vienna  ;  discovered  by  Bickcll.  It  gives  the  words  of
Christ  to  Peter  at  the  Last  Supper  in  a  form  which
diverges  largely  by  omissions  fronj  any  in  the  canonical
gos|X'ls.  Hort  contended  for  the  view  that  it  was
a  fragment  of  a  patristic  homily  and  merely  a  loose
quotation. Ed.  Harnack, Texte  u.  I' nters.  5 4.  etc.

6.  The  Logia.  — This  is  the  name  given  by  the  first
editors, Grenfell and Hunt, to the contents of a

1  On  these  see  also  Gospels  (index).
2^8


APOCRYPHA

single  leaf  of  a  jjapyrus  book  found  by  them  at  Oxy-
rhynchus.  It  contains  a  small  number  of  sayings  of
Jesus  which  in  part  agree  with  sayings  contained  in  the
canonical  gospels  and  in  part  differ  from  them.  Harnack
believes  them  to  be  extracted  from  the  Gospel  according
to  the  Egyptians  ;  but  it  is  as  yet  not  possible  to  express
a  final  opinion  on  their  character.

7.  Ctospel  of  Matthias.  — Probably  identical  with  the
Traditions  of  Matthias,  from  which  we  have  quota-
tions. It  was  most  likely  a  Basilidian  work,  for  the
Basilidians  professed  to  regard  Matthias  as  their  special
authority  among  the  apostles.  See  Zahn,  Gesch.  d.
NT  Kanons,  ii.  2  751.

8.  Vivva.  Ma/)ias  (the  Descent  of  Mary),  quoted  by
Epiphanius  (//«•/-.  26 12),  was  a  Gnostic  anti-Jewish
romance  repre.senting  Zacharias  as  having  been  killed
by  the  Jews  because  he  had  seen  the  God  of  the  Jews
in  the  temple  in  the  form  of  an  ass.

9.  Zacharias,  the  father  of  John  Baptist. — A.  Berendts
in  Studien  zur  /.acharias-apokryphen  u.  Zach.-legende
gives  a  translation  of  a  Slavonic  legend  of  Zacharias
which  may  be  taken  from  an  early  book,  subsequently
incorporated  into  the  Book  of  James.

Almost  every  one  of  the  apostles  had  a  gospel  fathered
upon  him  by  one  early  sect  or  another,  if  we  may  judge
from  the  list  of  books  condemned  in  the  so-called
Gelasian  Decree,  and  from  other  patristic  allusions.

Of  a  gospel  of  Philip  we  have  fragments,  descriptive
of  the  progress  of  the  soul  through  the  next  world,
showing  it  to  have  been  a  Gnostic  composition  ;  it  was
probably  very  much  like  the  Pistis  Sophia  (a  long
Gnostic  treatise  in  Coptic),  in  which  Philip  pla3's  a
prominent  role.  The  Questions  of  Maty  (Great  and
Little)  was  the  title  of  two  Gnostic  books  of  the  most
revoking  type,  quoted  by  Epiphanius  [HcEr.  268).

A  Coptic  papyrus  volume  recently  acquired  by  Berlin
contains  texts  as  yet  unpublished  of  two  Gnostic  books
connected  with  the  names  of  the  Virgin  and  John,  and
also  a  portion  of  some  early  Acts  of  Peter.

For  the  most  part,  however,  these  heretical  pseudepi-

grapha,  where  we  know  anything  of  their  contents,  must  be

27 Fxtant ''assigned  to  a  period  later  than  that  con-


Gospels.


templated  by  our  present  scope. Of  extant


apocryphal  gospels  two  must  bementioned.

1.  Book  of  James,  commonly  called  Frotevangeli um
(this  name  being  due  to  Guillaume  Postel,  who  first
noticed  the  book,  in  the  sixteenth  century). — Extant  in
Greek,  Syriac,  Coptic,  etc.  A  narrative  extending  from
the  Conception  of  the  Virgin  to  the  death  of  Zacharias.
The  James  meant  is  perhaps  James  the  Just.  In
one  place,  where  Joseph  is  speaking,  the  narrative
suddenly  adopts  the  first  person.  Origen,  and  perhaps
Justin,  knew  the  book.  A  Hebrew  original  has  been
postulated  for  it.  It  is  undoubtedly  very  ancient,  and
may  possibl}'  fall  within  the  first  century.  From  it  we
ultimately  derive  the  traditional  names  of  the  Virgin's
parents,  Joachim  and  Anne.  The  work  has  been  edited
by  Tischendorf  {Evangelia  Apocrypha).

2.  Acts  of  Pilate,  often  called  the  Gospel  of  Nice-
demus. — Greek,  Latin,  Coptic,  etc.  In  two  parts:
(i)  an  account  of  the  Passion  and  Resurrection  ;  (2)  a
narrative  of  the  Descent  into  Hell.  Part  I.  may  be
alluded  to  by  Justin  Martyr,  who  more  than  once
appeals  to  Acts  of  Christ's  Passion.  It  is  possible,
however,  that  he  may  be  referring  to  another  apocryphal
document  which  exists  in  many  forms— the  Anaphora
Pilati  or  official  Report  of  Pilate  to  Tiberius.  In  any
case,  the  Acta  Pilati  ( Part  I. )  in  some  form  probably
date  from  ixirly  in  the  second  century.  Edited  by
Tischendorf  [I.e.)  ;  see  also  Lipsius,  Die  Pilatusakten,
and  Schubert  on  the  Gospel  of  Peter.

II.  Acts.  i.  Ascents  of  James  {'  Ava^dfiol'IaKw^ov),
only  mentioned  by  Epiphanius  [Hcer.  30). — An  Ebionite
and  anti- Pauline  book  of  which  we  most
likely  have  an  abstract  in  the  end  of  the
first  book  of  the  Clementine  Recognitions. It  contained

259


APOCRYPHA

I addresses  delivered  by  James  the  Just  in  the  Temple.
I See  Lightfoot,  Galatians,  330,  367.

2. Acts  of Paul  and Thecla. — Greek, Syriac, etc.
I Tertullian  tells  us  that  this  romance  was  composed  in
j honour  of  Paul  by  a  presbyter  of  Asia,  who  afterwards
j confessed  the  forgery  [De  Baptismo,  17)  ;  and  Jerome,
j quoting  Tertullian  ( probably  from  the  Greek  text  of  the
I same  treatise),  adds  the  detail  that  the  exposure  took
j place  in  the  presence  of  John. In  the  present  writer's
opinion,  this  may  be  a  false  reading  : '  apud  Iconium  '
' may  have  Iieen  corrupted  into  '  apud  Joliannem." Un-
doubtedly the  romance  is  the  earliest  of  the  kind  which
we  possess. It  details  the  adventures  and  trials  of  a
! virgin,  Thecla  of  Iconium,  who  was  converted  by  Paul.
; Ed.  Lipsius  (Acta  Petri  et  Pauli). Professor  Ramsay
I contends  for  the  historical  accuracy  of  much  of  the  local
j detail. It  is  now  clear  that  this  episode  formed  part
of the  Acts  of  Paul  which  has  just been discovered
by  Carl  Schmidt  in  a  fragmentary  form  in  Coptic. Until
I the  text  is  published,  however,  little  can  be  said.

The  Acts  of  Paul,  Peter,  John,  Thomas,  Andrew,  and
Philip  have  all  survived  in  part.  They  may  be  referred
to  .some  time  in  the  second  centurj'.  The  author  of  all
of  them,  save  the  first  and  last,  was  most  likely  one
Leucius.  The  Passions  and  Acts  of  the  remaining
apostles  are  all  later.

III.  Episti>k.s.  I.  The  Abgarus  Letters. — A  letter
from  Abgar Uchama, king  of Edessa, to our Lord,

29.  Epistles. ^?-^r^^  him  to  visit  Edessa  and  take

*^  up his abode there, and an answer

from  our  Lord,  promising  to  send  an  apostle  to  Abgarus.

are  given  by  Eusebius  {HE\\-i),  who  translates  them

from  Syriac, and derives them  from  the,  archives of

I Edessa. They  are  very  early,  and  are  intimately  con-

I nected  with  the  legend  of  the  apostolate  of  Addai  or

Thaddasus  at  Edessa. A  fragment  of  a  fourth-century

papyrus  text  of  the  letters  (which  are  very  short)  is  in

the  Bodleian. They  arc  found  also  in  Syriac.

2.  Epistle  of  Paul  to  the  Laodiceans. ^'Lalin.  It
was  founded  upon  Col.  4 16,  and  is  a  short  cento  of
Pauline  phrases.  An  Epistle  to  the  Laodiceans  is
mentioned  in  the  Muratorian  Canon.  See  Lightfoot's
Colo.ssians,  ZM  ff- <  ^^'^  Zahn,  Gesch.  d.  NT  Kan.  ii.  2
566  ;  also  CoLOssiANs  and  Ephesians,  §  14.

3.  Epistle  of  Paul  to  the  Alexandrines.  — Also
mentioned  in  the  Muratorian  Canon,  and  nowhere  else.
Zahn  (I.e.  58)  has  printed,  from  the  Bobbio  Sacranient-
ary  and  Lectionary,  a  lesson  purporting  to  be  taken
from  the  Epistle  to  the  Colossians,  which  he  assigns  to
the  Epistle  to  the  Alexandrines,  or  to  some  similar
Pauline  apocryph.

4.  'Third  Elpistle  of  Paul  to  the  Corinthians  (and
letter  from  Corinth  to  Paiil). — Armenian  and  Latin
(and  Coptic).  These  are  now  known  to  have  formed
part  of  the  Acta  Pauli.

There  are  but  few  other  spurious  epistles,  and  these
are  all  of  a  distinctly  later  character.

IV.  Apocalypses.  1.  Apocalypse  of  Peter. — Greek.
Quoted  by  Clement  of  Alexandria  and  by  the  heathen

antagonist  of  Macarius  Magnes  (who  is


28.  Acts.


30.  Apoca-


possibly Porphyry), and mentioned


yP  ■  the  Muratorian  Canon.  We  have  now  a
considerable  fragment  of  it,  which  was  discovered  in  the
same  MS  as  was  the  excerjit  from  the  Gospel  of  Peter
(see  §  26  no.  4).  This  contains  the  end  of  a  prophecy  of
Jesus  about  the  last  times,  and  a  vision  of  the  state  of
the  blessed,  followed  by  a  much  longer  description  of
the  torments  of  various  classes  of  sinners.  It  was
probably  written  rather  early  in  the  second  centuiy,
and  has  had  an  enormous  influence  on  later  Christian
visions  of  heaven  and  hell.  Dieterich,  in  his  Nekyia,
has  pointed  out  the  strong  influence  which  the  Orphic
literature  has  had  on  the  writer.  A  trace  of  the  influence
of  this  apocalypse  on  Latin  documents  has  been  recently
pointed  out  by  Harnack  in  the  Pseudo-Cyprianic  tract
De  Laude  .Martyrii,  and  earlier by  Robinson in the

260


APOLLONIA

Fassion  of  St.  Perpftua,  and  there  is  a  possible  trace  in
the  earlier  tract  De  Aleatoribus.  The  Arabic  and  the
Kthiopic  Revelation  of  Peter  <ir  lUhiks  of  Clemenl  (see  an
article  by  Hratke  in  Hilgenfeld's  Zeitschr. ,  1893)  seem  "ot
to  contain  the  old  book  embedded  in  them  ;  but  as  yet
they  are  not  very  well  known.  Ed.  Dieterich,  Harnack,
James.

2.  Prophecy  of  Hystaspes. — Lost.  There  are  quotations
from  it  in  the  Preiuhin^  of  Aj«/  (quoted  by  Clem.  Alex. ),
in  Justin  Martyr  (Apul.  1  20  44),  and  in  Lactantius  (Div.
Just.  7  15  «8).  In  every  c.ise  it  is  coupled  with  the  Sibylline
Oracles,  with  which  it  is  clearly  to  be  associated,  as  a
Christian  forgery  in  pagan  form.  Amniianus  Marcellinus
(236)  calls  Hystaspes  a  '  very  wise  king,  father  of  Darius,'
Lactantius,  '  a  very  ancient  king  of  the  Medes,  who  has
handed  down  to  posterity  a  most  wonderful  dream
as  interpreted  by  a  prophesying  boy  (sub  interpreta-
tione  vaticinantis  pueri).'  The  same  author  represents
Hystaspes  as  s;iying  that  the  Roman  name  was  to  Xx
wiped  out,  and,  further,  that  in  the  last  days  the
righteous  would  cry  to  God  and  God  would  hear  them.
Justin  says  that  he  prophesied  the  destruction  of  all
things  by  fire,  and  the  quotation  in  Clement  makes
him  declare  that  the  kings  of  the  earth  should  hate  and
persecute  the  Son  of  God— the  Christ— and  his  followers.
It  is  this  last  passage  which  fixes  the  book  as  Christian
rather  than  Jewish.

V.  DiD.ACTic.  1.  Teac/irri^^  of  the  Apostles  (mAachb).
— Greek.  The  literature  of  this  manual  of  ethics  and
31  Didactic  '-"'^"'''-"'^  discipline  is  enormous,  and  the
history  of  its  various  forms  cannot  be
attempted  here.  It  was  discovered  by  Philotheos
Brycnnios  in  a  MS  of  1056  at  Constantinople,  and
printed  first  in  the  year  1883.  It  consists  of  two  distinct
parts  ;  the  first  an  ethical  manual  which  may  be  founded
on  a  Jewi.sh  document,  and  reappears  in  the  Epistle  of
Harnabas  ;  the  second  relating  to  church  matters,  con-
taining disciplinary  rules  ami  liturgical /or;«?//rr.  Ojjin-
ions  as  to  its  date  differ  widely.  Harnack  would  assign
it  in  its  present  form  (which  is  probably  not  primitive)  to
130-160.  It  forms  the  groundwork  of  the  7th  Book  of
the  .Apostolic  Constitutions.

2.  Preaching  of  Peter.  —  Apparently  an  orthodox
second-century  book,  of  which  Heracleon  and  Clem.
Alex,  have  preserved  important  fragments  containing
warnings  against  Judaism  and  polytheism,  and  words
of  Jesus  to  the  apostles.  Another  set  of  fragments,
which  there  is  no  sufficient  reason  for  repudiating,
contains  a  lament  of  Peter  for  his  denial,  and  various
ethical  maxims.  There  are  strong  similarities  between
the  first  set  of  fragments  and  the  Apology  of  A ri slides.
Dobschiitz  (in  a  monograph  in  Texte  u.  Unters. )  rejects
the  second  set.  The  relation  of  the  book  {a)  to  a
supposed  Preaching  of  Paul,  the  existence  of  w  hich  is
very  doubtful,  and  (/^)  to  the  l^seudo-Clementine  literature,
is  by  no  means  clear.  A  Syriac  Preaching  of  Simon
Cephas,  published  by  Cureton,  has  none  of  the  matter
appearing  in  the  quotations  from  the  Greek  book.

T»-wi'  1.  '^"'^  '^^  books  noticed  above,  and the

32.  BlDllOgrapny.  later  documents  not  named  (which  are
many),  the  student  must  consult  : —
J.  A.  F"abricius,  Coilc.r  Pseutlepig.  Vet.  Test.  Hamburg,
1713  and  1723;  Cotiejc  Apocryphus  NT,  ih.  1719,  1743  (ed.  2);
O.  \.  Vr\lzsche,  LiM  r.T.  pseudefii^aphi  select! :  A.  Hilgen-
feld.  Messias  Jmiteoruni ;  E.  Schurer,  GJl';  Strack  and
Zflckler,  Apokryphen  d.  AT:  Wace  and  Salmon,  Speakers
Comm.,  Apocryplia;  J.  C.  Thilo,  Codex  Apocryphus  Nm>i
J  est  anient  i :  Ti.schendorf,  Evan^.  Apocr.  (eci.  2,  1876);  Acta
Ap.  Apocr.;  Apoc.  Apocr.;  Lipsius,  Die  Apokr.,  Apostel-
geschichten,  u.Apostellegenden;  Miene,  Diet,  des  Apocr.;  James,
Apocrypha  Anecdota,  i.  ii.;  Vassiliev,  Anecdota  Grieco-Byzan-
tina;  I.ipsius  and  M.  Bonnet,  ^c/a  Apostolorum  Apocr.  i.  ii.

Editions  of  individual  writings  have  been  specified  under  their
proper  headings.  M. K.  J.

APOLLONIA  (attoAAconia  [Ti.  WH]).  A  town
on  the  I.gnatian  Road,  in  that  part  of  Macedonia  which
had  the  name  Mygdonia  and  lay  between  the  rivers
Strymon  and  Axius.  It  was  nearLake  Bolbe  (Betschik
Gdl) ;  but  its  exact  site  is  not  yet  known.  From  the
361


APOLLOS

I /tin.  Ant.  we  learn  that  it  was  30  R.  m.  from  Amphi-

I polis. and  37  from Thessalonica. I^ike  places  it  to

the  S.  of  the  lake,  at  the  modern  village  Polina ;  and

1 this  is  probably  right,  though  others  are  inclined  to  look

I for  it  more  to  the  W. at  the  post -station  of Klisali,

which is seven hours from Thessalonica. Ajx^llonia

was  at  any  rate  on  the  main  road  between  Amphijxjlis

and  Thessalonica  by  the  Aulon,  or  pass  of  Arethusa.

Paul  and  Silas, therefore, '  passed  through '  the  town

on  their  way  to  Thessalonica  (Actsl7i).t w.  j.  vv.

APOLLONIUS (AnoAAcoNioc [VA] ; Ai-oi.-

LONIUS  ; hflaOj^  o!^S/).

I I. (.'-^oii)  of  riiKA.si..\s  [4^.1'.]  ;  the  governor  of  Cocle-
syria  and  Phoenicia  who,  according  to  2  Mace.  (85-44),


induced  Seleucus  1\'.  to  plunder  the  rich  temple  treasury
of  Jerusalem  (see  Hici.ioDOKUS).  He  may  possibly  be
the  same  as —

2.  The  governor  of  CcelesjTia  imder  Alexander
Balas,  who  came  to  the  help  of  Alexander's  rival,
Demetrius  II.  (Nikator),  who  made  him  chief  of  the
army.  This  is  more  explicable  if,  as  in  Polyb.  xxxi.
21  2,  Apollonius  was  the  foster-brother  {(n'ivTpo<f>os)  of
Demetrius  I.  He  was  Ijesieged  at  Joppa,  and  was
entirely  defeated  by  Jonathan  near  Azotus  (Ashdod)  in
147  H.c.  (i  Mace.  1069/:).  Jos.  {.int.  xiii.  43)  calls  him
Aaoj  (or  rather  Tads.  Niese)— /.<'. ,  one  of  the  Dai  (the
classical  Daha;)  on  the  E.  of  the  Caspian  Sea— and
erroneously  represents  him  as  fighting  on  the  side  of
Alexander  Balas.

3.  General  of  Samaria,  one  of  the  officers  of
Antiochus  Epiphanes,  beaten  and  slain  by  Judas
the  Maccabee,  166  B.C.  (1  Mace.  3io_^).  He'is  prob-
ably the  chief  tax-commissioner  {Apxoiv  ipopoXoyiai).
who  previously  (168-167  »-t- )  lif>d  been  .sent  to  hellenise
Jerusalem,  and  by  taking  advantage  of  the  sabbath  had
routed  the  Jews  and  occupied  a  fort  there  ( i  Mace.  1  29^
2  Mace.  524/: ). He  may  perhaps  l)e  identified  with—

4.  The  son  of  Menesthcus  sent  by  Antiochus  Epiphanes  to
congratulate  Ptolemy  VI.  Philometor  on  his  accession  (iii  to.
7rp<iiTOKKr)<j-ia  :  2  Mace.  4  21).

5.  Son  of  Ge.nnkus  (6  tov  Vewatov);  a  Syrian  general  under
Antiochus  V.  Eupator  (2  Mace.  12  2).

APOLLOPHANES  (AnoAAO(t)ANHC  [VA] ;  Syr.  has
♦m^aliya/,  .\polloiiius?),  a  Syrian  .slain  by  the  men
of  Jud^xs  the  Maccabee  (2  Mace.  IO37).

APOLLOS  (attoAAwc'  [Ti.  WH]),  according  to
iCor. , our  most  important source, was  a  missionary

1  In  1  Cor  ^"*^  teacher  who  continued  Paul's  work
in  Corinth  after  the  first  visit  of  the  latter
(36),  and  was  afterwards  his  companion  in  Ephesus,
though  not  p>erhaps  at  the  time  the  Epistle  was  being
written  (see  ^f  in  16  12).  Shortly  before  the  writing  of
the  Eirst  Epistle  four  parties  had  arisen  in  Corinth
(1 10-12),  one  of  which  claimed  to  be  '  of  Paul,'  and
another  '  of  Apollos '  ;  it  argues,  therefore,  delicacy  of
feeling  in  Apollos  that  he  did  not  comply  with  Paul's
invitation  to  revisit  Corinth  again.  The  invitation
itself,  on  the  other  hand,  makes  it  plain  that  there
were  no  verj-  fundamental  differences  between  the  two
men,  least  of  all  as  to  doctrine.  Yet  neither  is  it  con-
ceivable that  the  party -division  turned  upon  nothing
more  than  the  personal  attachment  of  their  individual
converts  to  the  two  men  respectively.  On  that  sup-
position there  would  Ix:  nothing  so  blameworthy  al>out
it  ;  and  it  would  Ix;  impossible  to  explain  the  existence,
alongside  of  them,  of  the  party  of  Christ,  and  still  more
of  that  of  Peter.  Our  earliest  authority  for  Peters  ever
having  been  in  Corinth  at  all  is  Dionysius,  bishop  of
Corinth  about  170  (Eus.  //£  \\.2!>6).  who,  contrary  to
all  the  known  facts  of  history,  will  have  it  that  Peter

'  Hy  contraction,  or  rather  abbreviation,  like  Z-qva^  from
Zijr<i&upot,  Wnvvai  from  Wiivfavipoi,  and  so  on  (cp  Names,
8  86,  end).  The  fuller  form  is  more  probably  'AjroAAwnot  than
'ATToAAoiwpoj,  of  which  the  usual  contractions  were  'AiroAAot,
"ATTfAAat,  or  'An-eAAjj^.  The  reading  '.ViroAAoii'iot  is  actually
given  by  D  in  .Acts  IS  24.  By  analogy  the  accentuation  '.XtroA-
X««  ought  to  be  preferred  to  the  currently  adopted  'AiroAAwt.

262


2.  In  Acts.


APOLLOS

came  both  to  Corinth  and  to  Italy  simultaneously  with
Paul.  Thus  the  formation  of  an  Apollos  party,  as  dis-
tinguished from  the  party  of  Paul,  can  have  been  due
only  to  the  individuality  and  niai.ner  of  teaching  of
Apollos.  Paul  finds  it  necessary  to  defend  himself
against  the  charge  that  '  wisdom '  is  absent  from  his
teaching.  His  answer  (liy-lU)  is  that  in  substance
'  wisdom '  is  really  contained  in  the  simple  preaching  of
the  Cross,  but  that  in  form  he  offers  it  only  to  Christians
of  mature  growth,  and  (this  not  l)eing  the  Corinthians'
case)  that  he  h;is  purposely  kept  it  in  the  background
in  his  dealings  with  them.  'I'he  teachers  who  offered
'  wisdom,"  and  thus  excelled  Paul  in  the  eyes  of  many  of
the  Corinthians,  however,  were  assuredly  not  the  Judai.sers
among  whom  the  parties  of  Christ  and  of  Peter  found
their  supporters.  Apollos,  therefore,  must  be  meant.
Paul  actually  says  that  on  the  foundation  laid  by  him-
self in  Corinth,  liesides  the  gold,  silver,  and  precious
stones,  wood,  hay,  and  stubble  have  been  built  ('512).
But  the  energy  with  which  he  pronounces  his  judgment
in  1 19/  29  25  can  be  explained  only  by  the  fact  that  the
adherents  of  .Apollos  overvalued  their  teacher  and
subordinated  substance  to  form.

With  this  agrees  the  notice  in  Acts  18  24-28  (our
secondary  source;  see  AcT.s),'  that  -Xpollos  was  an
elocjuent  man,  mighty  in  the  Scriptures,
and  an  Alexandrian  Jew.  We  ma)'  ac-
cordingly assume  that  the  distinguishing  quality  in
.Apollos'  teaching  of  '  wisdom '  showed  itself  in  an
allegorising  interpretation  of  the  O'V,  such  as  we  see  in
Philo  or  in  the  Epistle  of  Barnabas.  But  the  fact  that
he  was  a  Christian  and  taught  the  doctrine  of  Jesus
'  exactly'  (d/cpi/3uJs  :  IS^s^/))  contradicts  the  statements
(on  the  one  hand)  that  he  knew  only  the  baptism  of
John  (1825c)  and  (on  the  other)  that  he  had  to  be  in-
structed more  perfectly  in  C^hristianity  by  I'riscilla  and
.\(iuila  (1826;^  <:)■  Whilst,  therefore,  it  is  possible  for  us
to  regard  182425^^05  derived  from  a  written  source
which  the  compiler  had  before  him,  I82SC266C  would
seem  to  be  later  accretions.  The  effect  of  these  last
expressions  (even  if  they  are  traditional)  is  to  represent
Apollos  as  sulxjrdinate  to  Paul  ;  for,  according  to
lit  1-7,  the  rest  of  the  disciples  of  John  must  receive  the
gift  of  the  Holy  Ghost  for  the  first  time  at  the  hands  of
Paul.  As  to  the  rest,  the  fact  that  in  19 1-3  mention  is
made  of  these  as  of  something  new  goes  to  show  that
originally  in  18  25  there  was  no  reference  to  a  disciple
of  John.  Further,  Acts  18  28  is  not  easily  reconcilable
with  what  is  said  in  i  Cor.  36  :  that  the  mission  of
Apollos  was  directed  to  the  same  persons  as  that  of  Paul,
and  that  the  church  of  Corinth  consisted  almost  entirely
of  Gentile  Christians  (i  Cor.  122  compared  with  7  18).
In  that  case  .Acts  1826a  may  be  attributed  to  the  same
author  to  whom  1828  (and  1825c  266  c  7)  nmst  be  ascribed.
Of  the  most  recent  attempts  to  deny  the  existence  of  the  con-
tradictions indicated  above  none  can  be  pronounced  successful.
Blass(^.r/.  I'ivies,  7,  1895-96,  pp.  ■ii,iff.,  564,  and  P hilolo^  of  the
Cos/iels,  1898,  p.  y> /.)  supposes  Apollos  to  have  derived  his
knowledge  of  Christianity  from  a  book  where,  as  in  the  .second
canonical  gospel,  the  baptismal  precept  was  wanting.  _  Arthur
Wright  (/ixp.  Times,  H,  1897-9S,  pp.  8-12,  4377C)  replies,  with
rea.son  (as  it  seems  to  us),  that  such  use  of  a  book  could  not  have
been  intended  by  the  word  Ka.Tr])^el(T9al..  It  is  only  of  aKoveiv
that  HIa.ss  has  been  able  to  show  that  in  some  few  cases  it  is
practically  equivalent  to  '  learning  by  reading  '  (see  the  example.s,
in  Stephanus,  'J'/ics.  I.,  Paris,  1831,  p.  1268  A  and  1!.  They  are
not,  however,  all  of  them  quite  certain.  Nor  is  Jn.  12  34  a  case
in  cKjint  ;  the  meaning  is  '  Our  teachers  have  read  in  the  law,
and  have  told  us  by  word  of  mouth  that  the  Christ  abideth  for
ever  ').  No  single  in.stance  can  be  adduced  in  which  Ka-n]\fl(r-
©at  denotes  acquisition  of  knowledge  without  intervention  of  a
teacher.  In  p.articular,  in  Rom.  2  17,/;  the  meaning  is,  'thou
bearest  the  name  of  a  Jew  and  .  .  .  provest  the  things  that
differ,  being  instructed  out  of  the  law '  [by  frequenting  the
synagogue,  or  the  instruction  of  the  scribes] ;  and  even  in  those
cases  where  cucoveii/  has  practically  the  sense  of  'read,'  the
underlying  idea  is  always  that  the  book  is  read  not  by  the
'hearer'  himself,  but  by  some  other  person,  as,  for  example,  a
slave,  so  that  the  primary  sense  of  the  word  has  never  entirely
disappeared. In  the  case  of  .\pollo.s,  howe/er,  the  idea  that  he

1  The  reference  to  Acts  18  24-38  occurs  in  |  11.
263


APOSTLE

used  a  Christian  book,  not  however  reading  it  himself  but  getting
it  read  to  him  by  some  other  person,  is  too  far-fetched  to  be
brought  into  reciuisition  here.  To  the  suggestion  (referred  to  by
Blass,  Acta  Apostolorum,  ed.  philol.  1895,  <»''  lo<^-)  that
Apollos  may  have  been  orally  instructed  by  a  man  whose  know-
ledge of  Christianity  in  its  turn  was  limited  to  the  contents  of  a
book  from  which  the  baptismal  command  was  absent,  it  has  to
be  replied  that  the  supposition  is  irreconcilable  with  the  aKpifiiot
of  Acts  1725.1  Wright  himself,  however,  contributes  nothing
new  to  the  solution  of  the  question  except  the  emendation  of
iKaXti  into  an-eAaAci  (so  U),  the  verb  being  then  taken  as  mean-
ing '  to  repeat  by  rote  '  or  at  least  '  to  glibly  recite.'  Even  if  such
a  meaning  could  be  established  for  the  word,  it  would  not  nearly
suffice  to  remove  the  difficulties  of  the  passage.  Lastly,  Balden-
sperger  (_Der  I'rotoi;  lies  ^  Jivan,^eiiums,  i86<5,  pp.  93-99)  is  con-
strained to  take  refuge  in  the  view  that  what  Apollos  taught
aKp'^uv;  consisted  only  of  iMessianic  matters  as  enumerated  in
such  passages  as  Heb.  eiyC;  that  the  editor  of  the  source  of
Acts  here  employed  .says  to  7r«pi  tou  'IijaoO  only  from  a  point  of
view  of  his  own,  meaning  all  the  while  not  the  historical  Jesus
but  simply  the  Messiah  in  the  larger  sense,  in  whose  coming  the
disciples  of  John  also  believed.  If  this  be  .so,  he  could  not
possibly  have  expressed  his  meaning  in  a  less  appropriate  and
more  misleading  way.

Tit.  3 13,  the  only  other  XT  passage  in  which  Apollos

is  named,  catuiot  be  used  as  a  historical  source  ;  and

_  , there  is  no  ground  for  the  conjecture  that

. . what constituted the difference between

P  ■ Apollos  and  I'aul  lay  in  the  value  attached

by  the  former  to  the  administration  of  baptism  with  his
own  hands  (i  Cor.  1 13-17),  and  that  thereby  he  gave  an
impulse  to  the  practice  of  baptism  for  the  dead  ( i  Cor.
1.529).  Paul,  indeed,  regards  the  church  of  Corinth,
although  he  has  personally  baptized  hardly  any  of  its
members,  as  wholly  his  own  (i  Cor.  4 15  and  often).
On  the  other  hand,  the  hypothesis  put  forward  by
Luther  (as  having  already  been  suggested  somewhere)
that  Apollos  wrote  the  Epistle  to  the  Hebrews  is,  at  all
events,  preferable  to  any  other  that  ventures  to  con-
descend on  a  name.

In  the  lists  of  '  the  Seventy  '  (Lk.  10  i),  dating  from  the  fifth
and  sixth  centuries,  Apollos  is  enumerated,  and  has  the  diocese
of  Cajsarea  assigned  to  him  {C/i)on.  J'asc.  Bonn  ed.,  i.  442,
ii.  126).  p. VV. S.

APOLLYON  (AnoAAYOON  [Ti.  WH],  Rev.9ii.
See  An.\i)DON.

APOSTLE  (^noCToAoc. '  a  messenger ')  2  was  the

title  conferred  by  Jesus  on  the  twelve  disciples  whom

,  „, he sent forth, on a certain occasion, to

_,■ , , preach  and  heal  the  sick. In  the  earliest

(jospel  tradition  the  disciples  appear  to  be

spoken  of  as  apostles  only  in  reference  to  this  special

mission  (Mk.  814  [NB]=  Lk.  6  13.  cp  Mt.  IO2  ;  and  Mk.

63o  =  Lk.  9 10)  ; but  the  name  soon  Vxicame  a  customary

designation,  and  is  so  employed  in  Lk.  (175  24  10)  and

Acts  (I2, etc.). The  nuinl)er  twelve  was  symlxslical,

corresponding  to  the  twelve  tril)es  of  Israel  ; and  when

Judas  fell  from  his  '  apostolate ' (.Actsl25)  the  number

was  restored  by  the  election  of  Matthias.* It  is  used

in  this  symbolical  and  representative  sense  in  Rev.  21  14.

Lists  o/the  T~,velve.—\n  the  four  lists  (Mt.  IO2  iMk.3  16  Lk.

614  Actsl  13)  the  names  fall  into  three  groups  of  four  names,

the  first  name  in  each  group  being  constant,  while  the  onier  of

the  rest  changes. Thus  : —

I. Mk.  Peter James  John  .Vndrew.

-Ml.  Lk. Peter Andrew  James  John.

.\cts  Peter John  James  Andrew.

II.  Mk.  Lk. Philip Bartholomew Matthew  Thoma.s.

Mt.  Philip Bartholomew Thom.-is  Matthew.

Acts  Philip Thomas  Bartholomew  Matthew.

III.  Mk.  Mt. James Thaddajus Simon  the Jud.is

of  .Alphajus  Cananjean I.scariot.

Lk.  (.\cts)  James .Simon Zelotes Judas  of  Judas

of  .\lpha;us  J.ames  Iscariot.

Mark's  order  of  the  first  group  recurs  in  ftlk.  13  3.  It  puts  first
the  three  who  were  selected  as  witnesses  of  the  raising  of  Jairus's
daughter  (Mk.  637),  of  the  Transfiguration  (82),  and  of  the
Agony  (14  33).  "Their  importance  is  further  marked  by  surnames
given  by  Jesus,  Peter  (  =  Ceph.T.s)  and  Boanerges. Mt.  and  Lk.

1  Plass  now  {Phil.  0/ Gospels')  expressly  rejects  the  idea.

2  ijroo-ToAot,  a  stronger  word  than  dyytAos,  properly  denotes
not  a  mere  messenger,  but  rather  the  delegate  of  the  person  who
sends  him.  It  seems  to  have  been  used  among  the  Jews  of  the
fourth  centurj-  A.D.,  of  persons  sent  on  a  mission  of  responsibility,
especially  for  the  collection  of  moneys  for  religious  purposes.

S  On  this  subject,  see  Matthias,  i.

264


tliu  locality  in  whic
l)y  the  NT  of  the


APOSTLE

drop  the  Aramaic  surname  Boanerges,  and  class  the  brothers  I
together  (' Peter  anil  Andrew  his  brother').  In  Acts  the  order  |
is  accounted  for  by  the  prominence  of  Peter  and  John  in  the

rninj;  chapters. This  seems  to  have  h.id  a  reflex  action  on
writer's  mind,  for  in  l.k.Ssi  O28  we  have  '  Peter  and  John
and  James,'  though  where  Peter  is  not mentioned we  nave .
'  James  and  John,'^9  54.  |

The  original  signification  of  the  t m  (delegate  or
missionary)  is  recalled  by  its  application to  Barnaljas
p . and  Saul  (Actsl44i4),  who  had  been  selected 1
under  the  direct  guidance  of  the  Spirit  from
among the prophets and teachers of the church of !
Antioch and sent forth on a mission . enterprise, j
I'aul  in  his  epistles  defends  his  claim  to  be  an  ap(5stle |
in  the  highest  sense,  as  one  directly  commissioned  by
God  ;  and  in  this  connection  he  empliasises  his  personal
ac(iuaintance  with the  risen  Christ  (Gal.  1 1  2  Cor.  11  5
1  Cor.  9  I  : '  Am  I  not  an  apostle,  have  I  not  seen  Jesus
our Lord?'). As 'apostle of the Gentiles' (Koni.
11 13)  he  received  full  recognition  from  the  chief  apostles
in  Jerusalem  ((Jal.  '2  7-9).

The  stress  laid  by  I'aul  on  his  own  apostolate,  as  '  not
a  w  hit  behind ' that of  the Iwelve, was probably  a
^.,  main  factor  in  the  subset|uent  restriction  of

®"'  the  title  to  the  original  apostles  and  himself.  '
In  the  N'T,  however,  it  is  certainly  applied  to  Barnabas,  j
as  we  have  seen,  and  almost  certainly  to  Silvanus
(i  Thess.  26),  .\ndronicus,  and  Junias  (Rom.  16 7) —
apart  from  its  more  limited  reference  in  the  case  of  the
'apostles  of  the  churches'  (2  Cor.  823)  and  Epaphro-
dilus  (Phil. '225  'your  apostle').  Moreover,  we  see  it
claimed  in  the  church  of  ICphesus  by  certain  persons  to
whont  it  is  denied  only  after  they  have  been  tested  and
'found  false'  (Rev.  22).

Rules  for  deciding  the  v.-ilidity  of  such  claims  are  given  in  the
early  ni.iTiual  called  / /te  Tituhine: o/tlie  Af'OstUs.  This  book,
Lh  shows  us  a  jjriinitive  type  of  Church  life  existing  in
ility  in  which  it  was  written,  confirms  the  view  suggested
extension  of  the  title  of  apostle  beyond  the
\  of  the  Twelve  and  Paul.  Apostles  are  here  spoken  of  as
teachers  essentially  itinerant ;  ranking  above  the  prophets  who
may  or  may  not  ne  settled  in  one  place,  and  in  no  specified
relation  to  the  bishops  and  deacons  who  are  responsible  for  the
ordinary  local  administration  of  the  community.  Even  as  the
first  apostles  were  sent  forth  '  without  purse  or  scrip,'  .so  these,
'according  to  the  ordinance  of  the  gospel,'  move  from  place  to
place,  and  are  not  to  remain  in  a  settled  church  more  than  two
days,  nor  to  receive  money  or  more  than  a  day's  rations.  These
wandering  missionaries  are  referred  to  by  Kusebius  as  '  holding
the  first  rank  of  the  succession  of  the  apostles  '  (//A'3  37  5  10  ;
he  avoids  the  actual  designation  'apostle,'  perhaps  in  deference
to  later  usage)  ;  and  the  strict  regulations  in  the  Teaching  prove
that  there  was  danger  lest  the  frequency  of  their  visits  should
become  burdensome  to  settled  churches.

It  is  interesting  to  observe  that  the  tradition  of  the  application
of  the  title  to  missionaries  survives  at  the  present  day  in  the
Kast.  Among  the  ( Ireeks  the  word  for  a  missionary  is  icpaird-
o-ToAot,  and  the  delegates  of  the  .\rchbishop  of  Canterbury's
mission  to  the  Nestorians  are  regularly  called  apostles  by  the
Syrians  of  Urmi.

Having  thus  clearly  established  the  wider  use  of  the
term  '  apostle,'  we  must  return  and  consider  the  uniciue-

4.  ApoBtolate. ^f'^  °^  ^'^\  ,P"^!"°"  °f^"P'f  ^^  '^^
"  Iwelve  and  I'aul,  to  whom  par  excel-

lence the  title  Iwlongs.  The  distinction  of  their  office
which  first  comes  under  notice  is  that  they  were  witnesses
of  the  Resurrection.  This  is  emphitsised  at  the  election
of  the  new  apostle  in  Acts  lai/  'Of  the  men  which
have  companied  with  us  all  the  time  that  the  Lord  Jesus
went  in  and  out  among  us,  one  of  these  must  with
us  be  a  witness  of  his  resurrection.'  Their  personal
discipleship  to  Jesus,  however,  and  the  special  training
which  he  had  bestowed  upon  them,  had  fitted  them
to  Ix;  not  only  the  preachers  of  faith  and  repentance
to  the  multitudes,  but  also  the  authoritative  instructors
of  the  '  brethren  '  (cp  .Acts  242  '  the  apostles'  doctrine  ').
Their  commission  was  derived  directly  from  Christ,
even  as  his  was  from  the  Father  (Jn.  2O21,  and  cp
I  Clem.  45  :  '  Christ  then  is  from  God,  and  the
apostles  from  Christ').  In  pierforming  cures  they  lay
stress  upon  the  fact  that  they  are  his  representa-
tives ;  their  acts  are  in  fact  his  (cp  especially  Acts
3 16  934).  Certain  functions  are  in  the  first  instance
26s


APPEAL

exercised  exclusively  by  the  a[x>stlcs  :  as  the  laying  on
of  hands,  to  convey  the  Pentecostal  gift  to  the  Iwip-
tized,  and  the  appointntent  of  local  ofticers  in  the
church.  In  the  earliest  stage,  t(x>,  the  contributions  of
wealthy  lx:lievers  are  laid  '  at  the  apostles'  feet ' ;  though
at  a  later  lime  it  is  '  the  presbyters  '  who  receive  the  offer-
ings made  for  'the  brethren  in  JudiL-a'  (Acts4  34/.  1 1  y^).

The  authority  implied  in  their  commission  is  nowhere
formally  defined  ;  but  on  two  important  occasions  we
are  permitted  to  observe  the  method  of  its  exercise.
'Hius,  in  the  appointment  of  the  Seven  the  apostles  call
on  the  whole  Uxly  of  believers  to  elect,  and  thereuiKJii
themselves  apjxjint  the  chosen  persons  to  their  work  by
a  solenm  ordination.  ,\gain,  when  the  c)uestion  of  the
obligation  of  (jentile  Ixjlievers  to  observe  the  Mosaic
ritual  arises  in  .Antioch,  it  is  referred  to  '  the  apostles
and  elders '  in  Jerusalem  (see  Cou.scil,,  ii. ),  and  a  letter
is  written  in  their  joint  names  ( '  the  apostles  and  elder
brethren).  This  letter  is  couched  in  terms  of  authori-
tative advice  rather  than  of  direct  conuiiand  ;  ami  the
authority  which  it  implies,  with  regard  to  the  distant
communities  whose  interests  are  involved,  is  moral
rather  than  formal.

In  the  churches  of  Pauls  foundation  we  find  that
apostle  acting  with  a  consciousness  of  the  fullest
authority,  in  appointing  presbyters,  conveying  the  gift
of  the  Spirit,  and  settling  all  kinds  of  controverted
questions  (.Actsl423  196  i  Cor.  7  17)-  His  relation  to
the  Twelve  is  marked  by  a  firm  sense  of  independence
together  with  an  earnest  desire  for  concerted  action.
In  the  case  of  Timothy  at  Ephesus  and  of  Titus  in
Crete  we  see  him  delegating  for  a  time  during  his  own
absence  his  apostolic  authority.

For  the  relation  of  the  apostolate  to  other  forms  of
the  Christian  ministry,  see  Chukch,  §  12.

Hishop  Lightfoot's  note  '  on  the  name  and  office  of  an  .Apostle  '
(Comm.  on  Gal.  5th  ed.  92-101)  had,  even  Ijefore
Literature,  the  recovery  of  the  Teaching,  destrojed  the
fiction  of  the  limitation  of  the  term  in  the  first
age.  It  needs  now  to  be  supplemented  by  Harnack's  important
discussion,  Lehre  tier  Apostel,  93-118.  The  whole  .subject
ha.s  been  freshly  and  vigorously  treated  by  Hort  in  Ecctesia
{/>assim).  J. A. R.

APOTHECARY  (Hpl  E.x.  3O2535.  Hj^-n  Eccl.  lOi).
The  Hel).  word  means  'perfumer.'  See  CoNKKCiioN.
Pkkfl'.MK.  ©'s  term  is  fxvpfxl/ds,  the  medical  or  magical
aspects  (see  (papnaKia,  -Kfvfiy,  -koi/  in  ©)  of  whose
trade  may  be  seen  in  Ecclus.  388,  where  his  skill  in
compounding  the  medicines  (i-.  4  (papfxaKa,  medidimcnla)
that  the  Lord  created  out  of  the  earth  is  referred  to.
In  Neh.  38  is  mentioned  a  guild  of  perfumers,  one  of
the  'sons'  or  members  of  which  was  Hananiah  (the
idiom  is  effaced  in  R\',  and  misrepresented  in  A\',
which  gives  '  son  of  one  of  the  apothecaries  ').

APPAIM  (D'SX,  e4)p<MM  [B];  ActxJ).  [A];  co4)eiM
[L]),  a  Jerahmeelite  (i  Ch.  230/).

APPARITION  (<})antacma).  Mt.  1426  RV.  See
l)i\  iNAiKiN,  S  3  131,  Soul.

APPEAL.  On  inferior  and  superior  courts,  or  what
might  Ije  called  courts  of  review  or  of  appellate  juris-
diction in  the  Hebrew  commonwealth,  see  Govkkn-
MKNT,  §§  19,  31,  and  L.wv  and  Justick,  §  16.  As
regards  Roman  criminal  procedure, — the  ap(x.-al  of  Paul
to  C;«sar  is  best  understood  from  the  narrative  of
?"estus  to  Agrippa  (Acts  25 14-2')-  Accused  by  his
compatriots  in  '  certain  questions  of  their  own  super-
stition,' and  asked  whether  he  was  willing  to  go  to
Jerusalent  and  there  hv:  judged,  he  had  'appealctl'  («xi-
KoKfaafiivov)  to  be  reserved  for  the  hearing  {Siitvwaiv.
cosrnitionem)  of  C.-Bsar.  The  aix)stle  as  a  Roman
citizen  was  well  w  ithin  his  rights  w  hen  he  invoked  the
authority  of  the  emperor  and  thereby  virtually  declined
the  jurisdiction  alike  of  the  Jewish  courts  and  of  the
Roman  procurator  ;  and  his  reasons  for  choosing  to  do
so  are  not  far  to  seek.— Under  the  republican  pro-
cedure every  Roman  citizen  had  the  right  oi  frroocatio
266


1.  Name.


APPHIA

ad  fopulum.  From  the  time  of  Augustus  the  populus
ceased  to  exercise  sovereign  criminal  jurisdiction  ;  the
emperor  himself  took  cognisance  of  criminal  cases  as  a
court  of  first  instance,  having  co-ordinate  jurisdiction
with  the  senate. — The  quiestio  procedure  continued  as
before  to  be  the  ordinary  mode  of  trial.

APPHIA  (An(t)l<\  [Ti-  WH],  etc.,  appia,  etc.  Cp
especially  Lightf.  Col.  and  Phikm.  ZT^ ff\  probably
the  wife  of  Philemon  (Philem.  2),

APPHUS  (cA(t>ct)OYC  [A];  CAH*-  [NV]),  i  Mace.

25. See  J()N.\TH.\N. 18, MACCABKKS,  §5.

APPII  FORUM,  RV  •  Market  of  Appius"  (ATTnioy
(t)OpoY  [  •  '■  WH]  ;  modern  I-'oro  Appio),  a  well-known
halting-place  on  the  Via  Appia,  where  Paul  was  met
by  brethren  from  Rome  (Acts  28 15)-  The  distance  from
Rome  is  given  in  the  I  tin.  Anton.  (107)  as  43  R.  m.
(and  so  perhaps  //.  Hier. — e.g.,  Migne,  PL.  8794,
but  in  other  edd.  [6ir/]  as  37).

For  inscription  on  XLlil  milestone,  found  near  Foro  Appio,
see  CIL  x.  pt.  i.  686.  The  road  leading  to  Appii  Forum  from
the  .south  through  the  district  of  the  Pontine  M.-irshes  was  often
abandoned  in  favour  of  a  journey  by  boat  (cp  Horace,  Sat.  i.
5  1-26,  where  .\npii  Forum  is  described  (/.  4)  as  being  '  Differtum
nautis,  cauponibus  atque  malignis. See  also  Three  Taverns.

APPLE  (man;  Pr.  25ii  Cant.  235  78[9]  85  Joel
1  i2t,  see  also  Fruit,  §  12),  by  some  understood  as  a
generic  name  including  various  fruits,  and
by  others  supposed  to  mean  not  the  apple
but  the  quince,  citron,  or  apricot.  The  origin  of  the
Hebrew  name  is  not  quite  certain  ;  but  there  seems  no
sulVicient  reason  for  rejecting  the  accepted  derivation
from  n33,  to  breathe  ;  ^  the  name  thus  alludes  to  the
perfume  of  the  fruit.  msn  in  post-biblical  Hebrew,
aiul  the  corresponding  word  iuj/liA  -  in  Arabic,  ordin-
arily denote  the  'apple' ;  and  this  rendering  is,  so  far,
supported  by  the  ancient  versions — Greek,  Syriac,
Arabic,  Latin,  and  the  Targum.  It  must  be  admitted,
however,  that  all  the  words  used — fi7J\ot>,  hazzord,^
nun,  tufdh,  malum  (s.  pomutn) — are  capable,  with  or
without  the  addition  of  an  epithet,  of  being  applied
to  other  fruits  ;  ixffKov,  indeed,  originally  meant  '  large
tree,"  or  fruit  in  general,  and  only  gradually  became
confined  to  the  apple ;  *  cp  the  very  wide  use  of
pomiim,  poma  in  Latin.  Still,  an  examination  of  the
biblical  passages  where  nisn  occurs  seems  to  show
that  soiue  particular  fruit  is  intended  ;  and  the  question
must  1)6  answered  by  considering  ( i )  which  kind  of  fruit
possesses  in  the  highest  degree  the  qualities  of  beauty  of
colour  and  form,  of  fragrance,  and  of  efficacy  in  over-
coming the  feeling  of  sickness  ;  and  (2)  which  fruit-tree
was  most  likely,  under  the  conditions  of  climate  and  of
botanical  history,  to  be  found  abundant  in  Palestine
during  biblical  times.  [Though  all  the  six  occurrences
of  men  are  possibly,  not  to  say  certainly,  post-exilic,
the  antiquity  of  the  cultivation  of  the  tree  (or  class  of
trees?)  in  Palestine  is  proved  by  the  place-names
Tappuah  and  Beth-Tappuah.  ]

The  following  identifications  have  been  proposed  : —
(i)  apricot  (Tristram,  FFP  294)  ; (2)  apple  (especially


2.  Identifi-
cation.


WRS,  /.  Phil.  136s/.);  (3)  citron  or
orange  (  Del.  Comm.  on  Proa<. ) ;  (4)  quince
[Houghton,  PSBA  I242-48  [1889-90]).


1  It  seems  doubtful  whether  there  was,  a.s  postulated  by  L5w
(.Aravt.  Pfliinzennamen,  156)  and  Houghton  (I'SBA  I247
[1889-90]),  any  word  nSD  to  swell,  even  in  Rabbinic  Hebrew.
It  is  at  all  events  unknown  to  biblical  Hebrew,  to  Syruic,  and  to
Arabic.  See,  further.  Lag.  Uehers.  m,  129;  and  F.  Hommel,
A«/sdtze  u.  Ahliauill.  107,  and  in  ZDMG  44546  ('90)-

2  This  must  be  a  loan-word  in  Arabic  (Friinkel,  Aram.
Fremdiv.  140),  probably  from  Aramaic,  though  no  trace  of  it
has  yet  been  found  in  Syriac.

8  Lag.  is  inclined  to  derive  this,  the  Aramaic  equivalent  of
mSB,  from  the  .\rmenian  word  for  apple  (hntsor)  and  thus  prove
that  the  fruit  came  to  Semite  lands  from  \tmf^n\^{Uebers.  II.  cc.) ;
but  Hommel  shows  the  probability  of  the  word  being  genuinely
Semite,  connecting  it  with  an  Arabic  root  /janaza  (Au/sdtze  u.
AM  and/.  107).

*  Hehn  and  Stallybrass,  IVanderings  0/ Plants  and  Animals,
499-

267


APPLE

1.  With  regard  to  the  first  of  these  —  the  apricot
(Prunus  Armeniaca,  L. ) — it  is  to  be  remarked  that  it  is
not  mentioned  by  Theophrastus,  and  does  not  appear  to
have  been  known  to  the  ( ireeks  or  the  Romans  l«fore  the
commencement  of  the  Christian  era  ( De  C.  Ori^.  <"-''  171).

Its  original  home  was  E.  Asia  (probably  China),  whence  it
gradually  spread  westward  to  Armenia  (jjlt)A.ov  WpfxevioKov,
malum  armeniacum) ;  but  Tristram  is  certainly  wrong  in
saying  {^Nat.  Hist.  335)  that  it  is  native  there.

The  present  abundance  of  the  apricot  in  Palestine  is
almost  certainly  post-biblical.

2.  The  apple — Pyrus  Malus,  L. — is  found  without
doubt  in  a  wild  state  in  Northern  Asia  Minor,  especially
about  Trebizond,  and  occasionally  forms  small  woods.

It  extends  eastwards  to  Transcaucasia,  and  apparently  to
Persia  (cp  Boissier,  Fl.  Orient.  2656).  Sir  Joseph  Hooker  says
that  it  is  'apparently  wild'  in  NW.  Himalaya  and  W.  Thilict,
but  that  everywhere  else  in  India  it  is  cultivated  (/■/.  Brit.  Ind.
2375).  De  CandoUe  (0>7>-.  180)  thinks  the  apple  was  indigenous
and  cultivated  in  Europe  in  prehistoric  times;  but  Boi.ssier(/.f.)
restricts  its  natural  occurrence  to  Macedonia  and  Euboea.

In  any  case  the  original  apple  clearly  required  a  cool
climate.  Under  cultivation  there  have  been  obtained
varieties  which  will  tolerate  and  even  require  a  warmer
one  ; '  but  these  are  notoriously  modern  inventions,  and
it  is  absurd  to  take  account  of  them  in  considering  the
ancient  history  of  the  fruit.  In  truth  the  original  apple
. — and  the  apple  of  biblical  times  was  presumably  some-
what similar — cannot  have  Ijeen  very  attractive  :  it  was
in  fact  a  '  crab '  only  about  an  inch  in  diameter.

Sir  Joseph  Hooker  says  (from  his  own  knowledge)
'Palestine  is  too  hot  for  apples."  With  this  agrees
Tristram's  account :

'Though  the  apple  is  cultivated  with  success  in  the  higher
parts  of  Lebanon,  out  of  the  boundaries  of  the  Holy  Land,  yet
It  barely  exists  in  the  country  itself.  There  are,  indeed,  a  few
trees  in  the  gardens  of  Jaffa ;  but  they  do  not  thrive,  and  have
a  wretched,  woody  fruit.  Perhaps  there  may  be  some  at
'AskalSn.  What  F^nglish  and  .American  writers  have  called
the  "apple,"  however,  is  really  the  quince.  The  climate  is  far
too  hot  for  our  apple  tree '  (XffB  334^^).

As  there  is  no  evidence  of  the  apple  ever  having  been
found  native  in  Syria,  those  who  render  tappuah  '  apple '
have  to  show  ( i )  that  it  was  introduced  from  without
(Pontus),  and  (2)  that  it  became  established  when
introduced.  Both  propositions  are  improbable.  What
is  said  above  of  the  introduction  of  a  few  modern  sorts
into  S)Tian  gardens  is  true  ; "''  but  it  is  imjjossible  to  infer
from  this  fact  that  the  biblical  tappfiah  was  the  apple.

The  strongest  argument  for  the  apple  is  that  tuffdh  is
used  in  modern  Arabic  for  this  fruit ;  but,  as  we  have
seen  above,  the  word  may  have  wider  significance,  and
it  is  exceedingly  probable  that  in  such  passages  as
those  quoted  by  Robertson  Smith  in  an  article  (Journ.
Phil.  65/)  which,  though  short,  appeared  to  him
(prematurely?)  to  be  almost  decisive,  it  is  really  the
quince  that  is  meant.  Even  if  '  apple '  be  the  usual
modern  meaning  of  tuffdh,  it  is  far  from  uncommon  in
botanical  history  for  a  name  to  pass  from  one  to  another
of  two  plants  so  nearly  allied  as  the  quince  and  the  apple.

[J.  Neil  {Pal.  E.xplored,  '82,  p.  186)  differs  widely
from  Prof.  G.  Post  of  BejTout  (Hastings,  DB,  '  Apple'),
who  argues  that  the  apple  as  grown  in  Palestine  and
Syria  to-day  alone  fulfils  all  the  conditions  of  the  tappuah.

Post  remarks,  'almost  all  the  apples  of  Syria  and  Palestine
are  sweet  (Cant.  2  3).  To  European  and  .\merican  palates  they
seem  insipid.  But  they  have  the  delicious  aroma  of  the  better
kinds.  .  .  .  Sick  persons  almost  invariably  ask  the  doctor  if
they  may  have  an  apple  ;  and  if  he  objects  they  urs^e  their  case
with  the  plea  that  they  only  want  it  to  smell."  This  being  so,
it  is  needless  to  conjecture  that  'such  an  epicure  as  Solomon
would  have  had  many  of  the  choicest  kinds,'  for,  according  to
Post,  the 'ordinary  and  (to  us)  disappointing  Syrian  apple  can
still,  without  poetic  idealisation,  be  referred  to  in  the  language
of  Canticles. But  was  Canticles  written  for  Syria?]

3.  No  citrus  (orange  or  citron)  will  do.

"The  citron  has  its  home  in  the  sub-Himalayan  tract  of  N.


1  Thus  the  best  American  apples  succeed  in  Great  Britain
only  under  glass.

2  Similarly,  in  the  Deccan  four  sorts  of  apples  are  now  found  ;
but  these  are  all  introduced,  two  from  England  and  two  from
Persia.

268


APRONS

India.  Thence  it  spread  W,  through  Mesopotamia  and  Media;
hence  its  cuirent  botanical  name,  Citrus  tnfdica,  L.'  It  is
first  mentioned  by  Theophrastus  (to  ^^Aoi'  to  (irfiiKov  r\  rh
ittfiViKov;  Hilt.  iv.  42);  but  he  says  that  it  is  not  eaien  (ovk
iaVUrai).  It  was  probably,  therefore,  not  much  developed  by
ciiltivaiiun.

The  koniaiis  did  not  know  the  citron.  Their  citron
wootl  was  the  wood  of  Callitris  quadrivalvis.  Vent. ,
from  N.  Africa.  The  true  citron  was  prolxibly  not
introduced  into  Italy  till  the  third  or  fourth  century  A.D.

[The  claims  of  the  citron-  (to  be  the  tuppuah)  are  so
exceedingly  slight  that  its  introduction  into  I'alobtine
is  chieHy  interesting  in  conneciion  with  the  leist  of
Taljernacles,  at  which,  in  the  time  of  Jos. ,  it  was  carried
by  the  Jews  (a  custom  which  is  continued  to  the  present
day:  see  'The  Citron  of  Commerce,'  Kno  liulUtin,
June  1894).  It  was  introduced  at  any  rate  during  the
peri(xl  of  their  relations  with  Media  and  Persia,  and  we
find  it  depicted  upon  Jewish  coins  (see  Stade,  Gl'I2,
facing  p.  406).

The  statement  of  fos.  {Ant.  xiii.  l.S  5)  i«,  that  according  to  the
law  of  the  Feast  of  T.-ibernacles  blanches  i)f  the  palm  and  citron
tree  (0vpaovv  Tcii'  ^oiviiciov  Kai  Kirpimv)  were  to  be  l)orne  by  every
one:  elsewhere  (/A  iii.  10  4)  he  specifics  the  Myrtle,  the  willow,
and  boughs  of  p;dni-tree  and  of  pome-citron  (>iVjAo«  rijv  ireptrf'as).
The  T.ilmudic  law  particularly  ordained  that  the  fruit  should
be  held  ill  the  left  hand,  and  the  branches  (or  z'?^^)  in  the  right.a
I  he  priestly  l.iw,  on  the  other  hand,  has  not  the  precision  which
the  translators  and  exegetes  of  a  later  age  gave  to  it.  In  Lev.
'-•3  39 /?:  (H),  among  the  requirements  for  the  feast  of  ingathering,
stanifs  the  'fruit  of  goodly  trees,'  or  (better)  'goodly  tree-fruit'
("n.l  I'j;  'is;  cp  ©bal^  xopirbc  (vAou  iipaiov),  which  Targ.,
Pesh.,  and  ancient  Jewish  tradition  identified  with  the  orange
or  citron. ■•  This  identification  is  open  to  question,  and  the
expression  may  In-  coiuicctn!  preferably  svith  the  'fair  boughs'
mentioned  in  the  account  of  the  Feast  of  Tabernacles,  a  .\Iacc.
\Q6(^.  (KAdfovt  uipaiovt ;  ratitos  virides ;  Pesh.  om.).  Nor  is
the  citron  specifically  mentioned  in  the  somewhat  fuller  and  l>-ss
vague  list  in  Neh.  815  (the  Pesh.  apparently  renders  '  jjalmtrees  '
by  'citrons'),  although  commentators  found  an  allusion  to  n  in
the  pc-  i'J,',  the  fat  or  oily  tree  (AV  'pine,'  KV  '  wild-olive  ').]

The  orange  was  unknown  to  the  ( Ireeks  and  Romans.
It  was  introduced  into  Mediterranean  countries  by  the
Arabs  alxjut  the  ninth  century.

4.  Whereas  the  development  of  the  modern  apple  is
most  probably  to  be  attributed  to  the  northern  races,  the
quince  [Pyriis  Cydoiiia,  L.  =  Cydonia  I  u/^uiris,  I'crs. )
is  a  fruit  characteristic  of  the  Slediterranean  basin  and
recjuires  a  warm  temperate  climate.  A  native  of  W.
Asia,  it  extended  to  the  Taurus,  and  thence  spread
through  all  Mediterranean  countries.'  The  best  sort
came  from  Crete  ;  hence  /xfjXov  Ki'Siiviov  and  Malum
coto/ifiim,  and  the  various  European  names  (Codogno,
Ital. ;  Coing,  Fr. ;  and  Quince,  Engl. ).  Hehn  {I.e.  185)
says  :  '  The  golden  apples  of  the  Hesperides  and  of
.\talanta  were  idealised  quinces  ...  Its  colour,  like
that  of  the  pomegranate,  made  a  lively  impression.'
This  would  well  accord  with  the  reference  in  I'rov.  2.')  11  ;
whilst  the  well-known  aroma  of  the  quince  (much  stronger
than  that  of  the  apple)  would  explain  Cant.  2578[9].  It
is  true  that  the  taste  of  the  fruit,  unsweetened,  is  harsh
and  bitter,  and  there  is  hence  some  difficulty  in  re-
conciling our  theory  with  Cant.  23;  but  something
must  Ix;  there  allowed  for  the  idealisation  of  the  picture,
and  undoubtedly  the  fruit  could  be  prepared  in  such  a
way  as  to  have  a  delicious  taste.  Moreover  the  whole
classical  history  of  the  fruit  is  saturated  with  erotic
suggestion,  and  this  falls  in  with  the  repeated  mention  of
it  in  Canticles.  N.  M. — w.  t.t. -d.

1  Sir  Joseph  D.  Hooker  (/"/.  Brit.  Ind.  1 514)  gives  its  range
as  Garwhal  to  Sikkini.

"^  anriK,  from  Pers.  turunj.  For  the  various  traditions  con-
nected with  it  cp  Levy,  s.v. See  I.aw,  46.

*  The  Daphnephoria  as  depicted  by  Leighton  is  a  familiar
and  popular  illustration  of  this  custom.

■•  Rashi  referred  to  the  annual  beauty  of  the  tree,  and  the
Talmud  supplied  that  m,T  =  -n'n— '.<•.,  w3<of>— an  allusion  to  the
fact  that  the  citron  grows  beside  all  waters  (cp  Field,  Hexaf>la,
ad  he).  See  De  Candolle  ((V/;^.(2»  143  /),  who  quotes  Risso
to  show  that  the  citron  was  not  recognised  by  the  translators  of  0.
If  •\■\^n  i"*  really  a  genuine  (and  ancient)  Semitic  word  (cp  above,
f  I,  n 3),  it  is  tempting  to  read  it  here  instead  of  Tin-

»  De  CandoUe,  189,  says:  'Avant  I'ipoque  de  la  guerre  de
Troie.'

269


AR,  AR  OF  MOAB

APRONS.  For  n'nin,  the  ( fig-leaf »  coverings  of
Gen.  37  (AV  '"»•  '  things  to  gird  alx>ut,'  KV  •"«•  •  girdles  *  ;
g^i.Ai.  nepizcoM&TA).  see  GiKiJi.E.  2.  For  nr.9^0
(Ruth3i5  AV  ■"»)  see  M.VNTLE,  §  2.  no.  3.  The
ci/juKivOia  [Ti.  WH]  of  Actsl9i2t  (used  for  healing
purposes)  aie  the  semicinctia  or  aprons  worn  by  servants
and  artisans.

AQUILA  (akyA&C  [Ti.WII])  is  the  I^ttin  name  by
which  alone  we  know  one  of  tite  Jewish  con)p.anions  of
I'aiil.  ,\  Jew,  native  of  Pontus,  he  had  removed  to
Rome  and  there  carried  on  his  calling  as  tent-maker  ;
probably  it  wiis  also  in  Rome  that  he  married  his  wife
Prisca  or  Priscilla,  whose  name  is  alw.ays  .issotiatcd  with
his  — most  connnonly  indeed  placed  Ijefore  it.  'I  he
banishment  of  the  Jews  from  Rome  by  Claudius  (cina
A.D.  49)  led  to  the  settlement  of  Aquila  and  his  wife  in
Corinth  (.Acts  18 2).  Here,  presumably,  their  actiuaint-
ance  with  Paul  l)egan  and  they  were  converted  to
Christianity.  It  was  w ith  them  that  the  ap(-.stle,  also  a
tent-maker,  lodgetl  on  his  first  visit  to  Corinth.  (.\ftcT-
wardss  Ux^king  back  upon  his  relations  with  them  at  this
time  [Rom.  16 3]  he  applies  to  them  the  words  :  '  fellow-
workers  in  ('hrist  Jesus,  who,  for  my  life,  laid  down
their  own  necks  ;  unto  whom  not  only  1  give  thanks,
but  also  all  the  churches  of  the  ( jentiles. '  \  From  Corinth
A(|uila  and  Priscilla  accompanied  Paul  to  l-lpliesus  (.Acts
18  iS),  and  here  they  remained  behind  while  he  went  on
to  Jerusalem.  At  this  time  Apollos  (q.v.)  arrived  in
Ephesus,  and  the  zealous  pair  undertook  to  '  expound
unto  him  the  way  of  God  more  perfectly  '  {^\  26).  Writ-
ing to  the  Corinthian  Church  after  his  return  to  l-"phestis,
Paul  enclo.ses  the  mes.sage  :  '  Atjuila  and  Prisca  salute
you  much  in  the  Lord,  with  the  church  that  is  in  their
house'  (i  (or.  It)  19).  What  is  meant  by  this  church  is
not  <iuite  clear  ;  but  the  expression  shows  that  they  niu.st
have  held  a  somewhat  prominent  and  periiaps  oflicial
position  in  the  I'^phesian  comnmnity.  That  Ejihcsus
contiimed  (or  was  supposed  to  have  contiinied)  to  be
their  home  long  after  Paul  left  it  is  shown  by  the  .saluta-
tion addressed  to  them  in  2  Tim.  4  19.  That  tlu-y  are
saluted  in  Rom.  1 0 .;  siiows  (on  the  assumption  that  Rt  in.
16  3-20  is  an  integral  part  of  the  epistle  in  which  it  now
occurs  ;  see  Ro.m.ans)  that  at  rome  period  they  must
have  returned  to  Rome  for  at  least  a  season  ;  but  the
occurrence  of  their  mimes  here  is  one  of  the  facts  that
are  held  to  make  it  probable  lliat  the  salutations  of  Rom.
16  3-20  really  belong  to  an  I-'phesian  epistle.

F.cclesiastical  tradition  has  little  to  .say  of  either  Aquila  or
Priscilla  ;  in  some  late  forms  of  the  legend  of  Luke,  .Aquila  and
Pri.sc»<j  are  represented  as  having  been  the  discip'es  and  lifelong
companions  of  that  evangelist,  and  as  h.iving  had  his  tlospel
entrusted  to  them  by  him.  They  are  enumerated  in  the  lists  of
the  'Seventy'  (Lk.  10),  dating  from  the  fifth  or  sixth  century,
Priscrtj  being  sometimes  read  for  Prisca.  See  Lipsius,  Afokr.
A/>.-gesch.  i.  203,^  399  ii.  '-'367.

AR,  AR  OF  MOAB,  is  mentioned  in  the  two  ancient
songs  which  celebrate  Israel's  passage  across  Moab  : —
Nu.  21 15,  '  the  slope  of  the  valley  that  stretches  to  the
se;tt '  or  site  '  of  Ar '  (-10,  hr  [BAL])  ;  t.  28,  a  'fire  hath
devoured  Ar  of  Moab  (dk^C  "iJ"  ;  Mwa/i  [L];  ?ws  M.
[BA], —;.(•.,  'o  ny  ;  so  Sam.  and  some  Heb.  MSSl  and
consumed  the  high  places  of  Arnon. '  This  '.Ar  Moab  is
usually  taken  to  Ix;  the  same  as  the  'Ir  Moab,  '  city  of
Moab'  (3N1D  TV  ;  irliXiv  Mwa^  [BAL]).  'which  is  on
the  Ixirder  of  Arnon  at  the  uttnost  part  of  the  border '
(Nu.  2236),  where  Barak  met  Bal.iam  when  became  to
Moab  from  the  Iv  ;  and  indet^d  ny  in  those  ancient  songs
mav  te  the  primitive  spelling  of  tj-.  It  is  also  the '.Ar
Mo'al)  of  Is.  15  I  (ii  yioiaSfiTis  [BNAQP]),  there  parallel
to  Kir  Moab,  another  chief  fortress  of  the  country,  the
present  Kerak.  It  may  also  be  '  the  city  (i-y)  in  the
midst  of  the  valley* — i.e.,  of  Arnon  (Deut.  236  Josh.
189  16  and  2  S.  245).  In  harmony  with  these  passages,
it  is  called  the  'border  of  Moab'  in  Deut.  2i8  (©'^»''■
Apo7;pl  ;  but  in  vr.g  (Aporfp  [A*"'"*"*"  FI.])  and  29
(ApoTip  [BEL]  ;  Apor/X  [A])  of  the  same  chapter  it  seems
270


ARA

to  mean  a  district  rather  than  a  town,  and  in  this  con-
nection it  is  interestiiij;  that  ©"^  renders  '.Ir  A/oab  in
Is.  15  by  Moabitis.  Our  present  knowledge  of  the  tojx)-
graphy  of  Moab  does  not  enable  us  to  identify  the  site  of
'Ar,  the  city.

We  may  be  sure  it  wa.s  not  the  njodern  Rabba  (so  the  PKF
map),  the  Areopolis  which  in  the  fourth  century  of  our  era  was
the  capital  of  ^loab.  Others  have  suggested  the  Mehatet  el-Haj
on  the  left  bank  of  the  Arnon  opposite  Aroer  (see  llurckhardt,
•i>'--  374)-

More  probably  (cp  N'u.  2236)  it  lay  at  the  VI.  end  of
one  or  other  of  the  Arnon  valleys.

There  l.anger  (A'c/.v,-(^<-r;V/»/,  xvi.)  has  proposed  Lejfm  (Legio?)
described  by  Doughty  (./rrt/'.  Jh'strrta,  1  20)  as  a  'four-square,
limestone -built,  walled  town  in  ruins,  the  walls  and  corner
towers  of  dry  block-building,  at  the  midst  of  every  wall  a  gate.'

G. A. S.

ARA  (XnS  ;  &PA  [n.\]  -Ai  [L]),  in  a  genealogy  of
AsiiKK  (-/.-■. ,  i.  §  4),  I  Ch.  7  fSh  Perhaps  N1N  should  lie
pronouiucd  XnX  ( Ura)  for  -Inj-VIN  ( Uriah). See  Ul.i.A.

ARAB  (3"3NI,  AipCM  [H].  epeB  [AI>]),  a  site  in  the
hill-country  of  Judah  (Josh,  ir.32).  If  DUMAII  {q.v. ,  4)
is  ed-l)onieh,  there  ni;iy  possibly  lie  an  echo  of  Arab
in  er-Riibiyi'h,  the  name  of  a  site,  with  ruins,  in  the
mountains  of  Judah,  .S.  of  Hebron  [PliFMcm.ozii
360).

ARABAH  (nnnyn,  h  AP&B&[BAL],  often  translated
by  H  npoc  'eic,  eni,  kata)  Aycaaac,  sometimes  by
KaB'  inpoc)  ecnepAN  115.VLJ),  as  a  common  noun,
from  a  root  probably  meaning  '  dry'  (cp  Arabia,  §  i),
is  used  as  a  parallel  (Is.  35  16,  etc.)  to  "l2"ip,  'desert-
steppe,'  and  to  n^V  )*"IX'  '  parched  ground,'  with  much
the  same  force.  As  a  proper  name,  with  the  article,  it
is  generally  confined  to  the  great  depression  of  the  Dead
Sea  valley,  '  the  'Arabah. '  So  correctly  in  R V  ;  in  AV
it  is  more  usually  translated  '  plain  '  (r/.?'. ,  6)  or  '  wilder-
ness'  (but  in  Josh.  18  18  ''Arabah,'  ©"^'-  liaidapafia,  see
Hi:th-.-\kabah).  Along  with  the  hill-country,  the  slopes,
the  Shephelah,  and  the  Xegeb,  it  is  reckoned  as  one  of
the  great  parallel  divisions  of  the  land  (Dt.  I7  Josh.
]  1  16  128),  and  it  is  clear  that  the  name  was  applied  not  '
only  to  the  depression  from  the  Lake  of  Galilee  (Dt.
:>i7  ;  cp  .\KBATTis)  to  Jericho  (2  K.  2r)4)  and  the  Dead  ,
Sea  (which  was  called  the  Sea  of  the  'Arabah  :  Dt.  449,  I
etc.,  Josh.  3i6,  etc.),  but  also  to  the  rest  of  the  same
great  hollow  as  far  as  the  Gulf  of 'Akabah  (Dt.  1 1).

Different  parts  of  the  Arabah  were  called  'Arboth  [
(construct  plur.  of '.-\rabah)  ;  cp  Josh.  5  10  Jer.  39  5.  etc.,  |
KV  'plains  of  Jericho'  ;  Nu.  22 1  263,  etc.,  'plains  of  '
Moab.' See  too  Akbattis.

To-day  the  name  E/-'A  raha  is  confined  to  the  south  of  the  line
of  cliffs  that  crosses  the  valley  obliquely  a  few  miles  south  of  the
southern  end  of  the  Dead  Sea ;  and  all  N.  of  this  is  known  as
El-Chor,  '  the  depression  '  (Rob.  BA'  2  490).

The  singular  geological  formation  of  the  'Arabah  is
indicated  under  Palkstinf;  (§  3).  Here  it  is  sufticient  to
explain  how  such  a  name  was  applied  to  the  valley  even
X.  of  the  Dead  Sea.  In  spite  of  the  enormous  possible
fertility  of  the  Jordan  valley  under  proper  irrigation,  the
vast  stretches  of  jungle,  marl,  saline  soil,  and  parched
hillsides  out  of  reach  of  the  streams,  along  with  the
sparseness  of  cultivation  in  most  ages  (owing  to  the  great
heat,  unhealthy  climate,  and  wild  beasts),  fully  justify
the  name  'Arabah.  In  the  NT  also  the  valley  is  called
a  wilderness  (ttJ  ip-fifjufi  Mk.  1  4).

For  the  'Arabah  S.  of  the  Dead  Sea,  see  Rob.  BR  i.  and  ii.,
Yi\\\\,PHFMe»t.,  'Geology,' and  for  the  part  N.  of  the  Dead
Sea,  Stanley,  SP  7  ;  Conder,  Tent  IVork  in  Pal.  14  ;  C.ASm.
//(;  •-'•-'/•  G. A. S.

ARABAH,  BROOK  OF  THE,  AV  River  of  the
Wilderness  (n3"TJ?n  7T\)),  is  in  Am.  614  the  southern
limit  of  the  land  of  Israel  in  opposition  to  the  northern
Pass  'of  Hamath.  The  name  occurs  nowhere  else;
but  by  some  has  been  taken  as  another  form  of
Brook  of  the  'Arabim  (d'3-ij;.t  ;  EV  Bkook  of  the
Willows  [AV™?-  Brook  of  the  Arabians] —
rather  of  the  Populus  euphratica :  ZDPl'2  iog).
271


ARABIA

given  in  Is.  15?  as  the  southern  boundary  of  Moab.
This  may  be  the  long  Wady  el-Hasy  (or  Hessi,  PEF
Map)  which  Doughty  (Ar.  Des.  I26)  describes  as  dividing
the  uplands  of  Moab  and  Edom,  and  running  into  the
S.  end  of  the  De;id  Sea  ;  by  some  thought  to  be  also
the  Brook  /.KKKI).  It  is  doubtful,  however,  whether  the
Israelite  kingdom  could  ever  have  Ix^n  described  as
extending  S.  of  the  Arnon.  Hoffmann  ['/.ATW  Z
"5  ['83])  suggests  that  the  Brook  of  the  Arabah
may  have  lain  at  the  N.  end  of  the  Dead  Sea.  ©s
rendering,  tov  xeiMppoi'  tu)v  Svff/J.wi>  [B.\(^],  is  no  help.
It  is  to  be  noted  that  N.  Israel  under  Jeroboain  II.  in
the  time  of  Amos  is  staled  in  2  K.  IIqs  to  have  extended
from  '  the  entering  in  of  Hamath  unto  the  Sea  of  the
Arabah.'  The  diOiculty  is  increa.sed  by  the  uncertainty
as  to  whether  Aitios  means  to  include  Judah. G.  A.  S.

ARABATTINE  (akpaBatthnh  [AN]),  i  Mace.
53t  -W, i<\'  Akkahaitlnk.

ARABIA,  ARABIANS  (3"}^  ;  gentilic  '•inj?  and  in
Xch.  "2-11?,  pi.  D'niy,  also  once  D'X'2"iy,  'and  once
Kt.  □'*2-lV  ;  ApABLeJiA  decl.  and  indecl.  LBSAL,  etc.],
-BICCA  [BXA],  ApAy  (-aBoc)  [BXAL.  etc.],  APAB[eJi
[BN.\]).

'1  he name 'Arab' (any) seems originally to  have

meant  nothing  more  than '  desert '  : hence  '  jjeople  of

_ ,.  the desert.' So  Isaiah'  uses  the  word,

OT  usaire  ^"  ^^^'^  forest  in  the  desert  {'iirab ;  but
usage.  ^  iairipa%)  ye  halt  for  the  night'  (Is.
21  13).  More  usual  in  Hebrew  is  the  fem.  form  'linibah
{f.^if.,  Job24  5  396),  a  word  employed  as  a  proper  name
to  denote  the  desolate  valley,  in  which  the  Dead  Sea  is
situated,  reaching  to  the  north-eastern  extremity  of  the
Red  Sea  (.see  Arab.AH,  i. ).  In  the  OT  the  term  'Arab,
as  the  name  of  a  particular  nation  and  country,  is  confined
to  comparatively  late  writings  ;  it  must  therefore  appear
highly  improbable  that  the  Homeric  'EpefxfioL  ((A/.  484)
are  to  be  identified  with  the  Arabs.  The  lists  in  Genesis,
which  specify  various  Aral>ian  trilies,  do  not  mention
the  name — a  very  significant  indication  of  their  anticjuity.
The  word  being  certainly  an  appellative  ('desert')  in
Is.  21 13  (with  I'lV  cp  Hal).  1  8  ©,  Zeph.  83  ©),  the  heading
a'jpa  Kbc,  '  Oracle  concerning  the  Arabs,'  cannot  be  in
accordance  with  the  author's  real  meaning.  ^  No  certain
instance  of  the  use  of  'Arab  as  a  proper  name  occurs
before  the  time  of  Jeremiah.  He  speaks  of  '  all  the
kings  of  'Arab  '  '•'  ( any  'aSn^'T'O  TNi,  Jtr.  25  24).  The  words
which  follow  in  M'T,  aij-rr  '2*70  ^dtiki.  are  of  course  a
dittography  ;  in  order  to  make  sense  the  scril)es  pro-
nounced 3"iyn  'the  mixed  people,'  a  form  which  really
occurs  in  7'.  20,  as  well  as  in  Ez.  3O5  and  i  K.  IO15
(where  ©  reads  layn  for  aij'^)-  1  he  Greek  text  of  Jer.
2524  {k.  irdvTai  t.  ffVfji/uKTOVi  [BNQ],'*  it  may  l>e  noticed,
does  not  presuppose  a  repetition,  and  moreover  (followed
by  Co.)  omits  the  word  'kings,'  necessary  though  it  is
to  the  sense.  The  phrase,  '  like  a  'Ar.ibf  in  the  desert '
(Jer.  32,  KopiJovTi  [BXA]  ;  Aq.  a/xn/-  [Q  ■"«■]),  m.iy  be
explained  to  mean  either  '  like  an  Arab '  or  '  like  a
Nomad  ' — the  word  has  not  yet  acquired  a  strictly  ethno-
graphical signification.  The  same  thing  applies  to  a
passage  dating  from  the  end  of  the  Babylonian  Exile,
'  No  '.4ra^/ shall  pitch  his  tent  there,  nor  shall  shepherds
cause  their  flocks  to  lie  down  there'  (Is.  132o,  "ApaSfs
[BX.\"'8]).  InEz.  2721,  however,  .^ra<*  (315;;  Apa^[e]ia
[BAQ],  with  the  note  eairepa  [Q'"^]),  appears  as  the
name  of  a  people,  coupled  with  Kedar,  a  desert  tribe  very
frequently^mentionedat  that  period(see  Ishmael,  §  4[2]).

^  Isaiah's  authorship,  it  is  true,  has  been  disputed  (see  IsAtAH,
§<)).

2  (B  omits  it ;  but  Aq.  Symm.  Theod.  all  have  it.

3  f;iesebr.,  however,  while  agreeing  as  to  the  dittography
which  follows,  denies  that  'and  all  the  kings  of '-•? ra^  '  are  the
words  of  Jeremiah  ;  the  closing  words  of  the  yerse  ('  who  dwell
in  the  wilderness ')  alone  are  genuine;  they  give  the  locality  of
those  '  who  have  the  corners  of  their  hair  polled  '  (7'.  23).  Cp.
926  (25I,  'all  that  have,  etc.,  who  dwell  in  the  wilderness."

*  ®  A  has  K.  IT.  T.  <r.  avToi).

272


ARABIA

It  would  seem  that  the  name  of  the  Arabs  came  into
use  among  the  Helirews  at  a  time  when  the  old  names
Ishmael,  Midian,  etc. ,  were  disappearing  from  ordinary
sixxxh.  This  change  may  Ix;  connected  with  the  fact
that  during  tlie  |)ori(xl  in  {|uestion  various  triUs
were  advancing  front  the  S.  into  the  northern  deserts
and  dispossessing  the  former  inhabitants,  who,  in  all
probability,  were  closely  akin  to  the  Hebrews.  Such
shiftings  of  the  population  have  occurred  repeatedly
in  the  course  of  ages.  However  unproductive  the
districts  to  the  K.  and  to  the  S.  of  Palestine  may
apixair  to  us,  they  are  nevertheless,  from  the  point  of
view  of  the  Nomads,  decidedly  preferable  to  many  parts
of  Arabia  projxir.

1  rom  the  ninth  century  H.c.  and  onwards,  the  name
2 Other  ^^  '^'^  Arabs  occurs  in  the  Ass\Tian  inscrip-

.  lions,  where  it  presents  a  variety  of  forms '

{.trudi,  Aruhu. Aribi, etc., the  adjective
being  Arbaya).

The  name  Urbi  {KlilZ^f. ),  however,  can  scarcely  be,
as  I  )elitzsch  (/.(-.)  su[)poscs,  aiKJther  form  of  the  same
word  and  the  eijuivalcnt  of  tlie  .\rab  I'/fi  (.vhich  appears
to  t»e  quite  late)  and  of  the  Hcb.  ziy-  The  Arabs
metitioned  in  the  cuneiform  inscriptions  were  probably
all,  or  for  the  most  part,  natives  of  the  Syrian  desert,
though  we  have  no  reason  to  assume  that  the  name  was
applied  to  them  exclusively  as  distinguished  from  the
inhabitants  of  Arabia proper.

The  inscriptions  of  the  Persian  King  Darius  {c.j^.,
Behistun,  i,  15)  mention  Arabaya  among  the  subject
lands,  always  placing  it  after  Babylonia  and  Athura
(i.t-.,  Assyria,  Mesopotamia  proper,  and  po.ssibly
northern  Syria)  and  before  Kgypt  ;  here  also  the
word  must  refer  to  the  great  deserts  of  Syria — perhaps
also  to  those  of  Mesopotamia  and  the  Sinaitic  penin-
sula. ^Ischylus  (/V;x  316),  the  first  extant  Greek
writer  in  whose  works  the  name  occurs,  speaks  of  a
distinguished  Arab  in  the  army  of  Xer.xes,  and  the
contemporary  authority  whom  Herodotus  follows  in  his
account  of  the  Persian  army  makes  mention  of  Arabs  on
the  same  occasion  (Herod.  769).  While  the  notions
of  .(Eschylus,  however,  about  the  geographical  position  of
the  Arabs,  are  altogether  fantastic—  he  represents  them  as
dwelling  near  the  Caucasus  {Prom.  422) — Herodotus
shows  himself  nmch  lx;tter  informed.  He  applies  the  term
Arabia  to  the  whole  peninsula  (cp  Herod.  2  n  3107-113
439)  ;  but,  as  might  have  been  exix-cted,  he  refers  in
particular  to  tho.se  Arabs  who  inhabited  the  country
between  Syria  and  Egypt  (21230347/:  88091,  etc. ).
It  is  also  to  be  remarked  that,  in  accordance  with  a
peculiar  classification,  he  gives  the  name  of  Arabia  to
that  part  of  Egypt  which  lies  to  the  E.  of  the  Nile  valley
(28,  etc. ).  Xenophon(.4«(z/^.  vii.  8  25)  speaks  of  a  governor
set  by  the  Persian  king  over  '  Phoenicia  and  Arabia,'  by
which  is  meant  the  S.  of  Syria,  including  Palestine  and
the  neighbouring  desert — a  separate  governor  l)eing  set
over  'Syria  and  Assyria."  Similarly  in  the  Cyropudia
he  doubtless  always  means  by  Arabia  the  desert  lands
which  were  to  some  extent  dependencies  of  the  Persian
Empire,  not  the  peninsula  itself;  we  must  remember,
further,  that  Xenophon  had  no  definite  ideas  about
these  countries,  through  which  he  had  not  himself
travelled.  The  nanie  Arabia  is  used,  in  particular,
for  the  desert  of  Mesopotamia  {Ariab.  i.  5i);  it  can
hardly  be  an  accident  that  this  very  district  is  called
'Arab  by  Syriac  writers  from  the  third  century  after  Christ
and  onwards.  Whilst,  however,  the  term  is  regularly
applied  to  that  part  of  the  desert  which  remained!  under
Roman  dominion  till  the  Mohammedan  conciuest,  the
eastern  portion,  which  belonged  to  Persia,  is  more
commonly  known  as  liiih  'Arabdye  (or  Bd  'Arbdyd  in
the  Arabicised  form )  — »'.  e. ,  *  land  of  the  Arabs. '  Traces
of  this  usage  are  found  in  late  Greek  authors  also.
A  strictly  ethnographical  sense  belongs  to  the  word

1  See  Del.  Par.  295  304^  ;  and  cp  Schr.  KGP,  \oaff.
18  273


ARABIA


Arab '  in  the  w  ritings  of  a  contemporary  of  Herodotus,
3  Later  OT  -^'-■'^*^'"'"*''  ^*'>"  suftered  nmch  from  the
writers.


enmity  of  an  Arab  (Neh.  219616)  and
enumerates  '  the  Arabs '  as  such  in  the
list  of  his  opponents  (Neh.  ^^  [i]).  The  Arab  in<|uestion
bears  a  name  which,  according  to  the  Massoretic  vocal-
isation, is  to  l)e  pronounced  Gkshkm  (q.v. )  or  Gashmu,
and  apjx-ars  in  the  Greek  text  as  I'T/ffdM  [BNA],  Waatt.
[L]  ;  the  correct  form  is  probably  Cuihumu.  a  well-
known  Arabic  name.  It  is  very  likely  that  at  that  time
the  great  migration  of  the  Nabata-ans  had  already
happened(see  F.DOM,  §9,  Nabat.i;.\ns).  The  Chronicler
too  refers  to  '  the  Arabians. '  They  brought  tribute,  he
tells  us,  to  thepiousKingJehoshaphat  (2Ch.  17").  He
relates,  also,  how  God  punished  the  wicked  Joram  by
means  of  the  Philistines  and  •  the  Arabians  who  were
beside  the  Ethiopians'  (2  C  h.  21  16,  cp  22 1),  and  how
he  succoured  the  pious  L'zziah  in  the  war  against  '  the
Arabians  that  dwelt  in  Cji;k-h.\ai.  '  ['/.J'.]  and  other
nations  (2Ch.  267) — all  this  is  written  from  the  point
of  view  of  the  author's  own  time  (circa  200  It.c),  and

! has  no  claim  to  Ix;  regarded  as  historical.

\  By  the  Vjcginning  of  the.\Iaccal)ean  period  the  kingdom
of  the  Nahat.i=:ans  [^.f.]  had  long  been  firmly  estab-
lished. At  that  time  various  other  Arabian  trilx.'s  were
also  to  be  found  in  the  great  Syrian  desert,  and  hum.
among  these  certain  families  and  persons  rose  to  great
power  during  the  decline  of  the  Seleucid  Empire.  In
several  Syrian  towns  we  find  Arabian  sovereigns,  and  at
Palmyra,  at  least,  there  was  an  Arabian  aristocracy  ;
elsewhere  also  Arabian  chieftains  occasionally  played
an  important  part  in  the  politics  of  that  period,  i  Mace,
several  times  mentions  Nabat.tans  and  other  Arabs
(525  39  93s  ]1 17  39  I'-is'  ;  cp  2  Mace.  58  12io/.).

The  apostle  Paul,  after  his  conversion,  retired  into
Arabia  (Gal.  1  17) — probably  some  desert  tract  in  the
4  NT  ^'^''•'^''*'^"  kingdom.  When  he  speaks  of
Arabia  he  of  course  includes  the  Sinaitic
peninsula  (Gal.  425).  Similarly,  •  Arabs  "  (Arabian  jews
or  proselytes)  in  Acts2ii  probably  means  natives  of  the
Nabatrean  kingdom  (see  Nai!AT.+:ans)  or  of  the  Roman
provinceof  Arabia  which  covered  almost  the  whole  extent
of  that  kingdom.  The  province  was  constituted  by  .\.
Cornelius  Palma,  governor  of  Syria  [circa  105  A.  P.).

At  what  ix;rio(l  certain  trilxjs  began  to  call  themselves

Arabs,  and  at  w hat  period  the  name  was  adopted  by  the

_ Mi-  whole nation, cannot Ix.- determined.

O.wauve ihcdistinguishedscholar,  D.H.Miiller.i

AraDian  usa^e.  .  . 1 u  . u  % v  ■

^ has  mamtamed  that  the  name  '  Arab

was  unknown  to  the  natives  of  Arabia  till  Mohammed
introduced  it  as  a  national  designation.  This  view ,  how-
ever, is  scarcely  tenable.  The  present  writer  does  not
happen  to  have  made  any  notes  on  the  occurrence  of
the  name  in  the  pre-Islamic  poetry  ; '■*  but  the  verse  in
Tabari,  i.  1036 5,  which  dates  from  the  begiiming  of  the
seventh  century,  is  a  sufficient  proof  of  its  occurrence—
the  poet,  who  can  have  known  nothing  of  Mohanmied,
s|x;aks  of  3000  Arabs  as  opjwsed  to  2000  foreigners.
The  events  there  descrilied  happened  in  the  neighbour-
hood of  the  lower  Euphrates — that  is  to  say,  in  a  district
where  Arabs,  Aramaeans,  and  Persians  frequently  came
into  contact  with  one  another,  and  where,  for  that  very
reason,  a  special  term  to  denote  the  Arabian  nationality
and  language  was  absolutely  required.  When  we  take
into  account  the  frequent  conmiunication  between  the
Arabs  of  this  district  and  those  of  the  distant  W.  and
S. ,  and  the  great  uniformity  of  the  Arabian  nation,  it
must  appear  highly  probable  that  the  name  had  long
been  generally  usetl  in  Arabia  itself.

1  Neue  Freie  Presse,  1894,  20th  .April.

2  He  would  not  lay  great  stress  on  the  words  kurd  'ara-
biyittin,  'villages  of  Arabian  women,'  or  kuran  'arablyatin,
'Arabian  villages,'  in  a  verse  ascribed  to  the  old  poet  Inira°-al-
kais  (about  550  A. D.),  392  (Ahlwardt),  the  fragment  being  veo'
obscure  and  the  text  not  quite  to  be  trusted.  Nor  could  he  affirm
the  genuineness  of  the  verses  ascribed  to  old  poets  in  A^dnt  ix.  10
second  last  line,  x.  1-J9  2  where  the  word  'Arab  occurs.

874


ARAD

Hassan  and  other  poets  contemporary  with  Mohammed  make
use  of  the  word  'Arafi  and  its  uliiral  A'  rat  as  a  term  known  to
every  one  (see  the  Diwan  of  Hassiin,  ed.  Tunis  10  i  17  4  103  13,
Agdnl  xW.  15628).  It  is  also  very  likely  that  in  the  common
phrase,  'no'A'ii  is  to  be  found  there,'  the  word 'v-Jri^  means
simply  '  an  Arab  '  and  hence  'any  human  being.'  Still  more
conclusive  is  the  fact  that  the  verb  ' arrciba  or  draha  which
occurs  in  one  of  the  oldest  wjets  signifies  'to  explain,'  properly
'  to  speak  in  .\rabic  '  {i.e.,  'distinctly  ')  ;  hence  this  name  for  the
language  must  have  l)een  current  long  before  the  Prophet.
That  .-krab  was  already  employed  to  denote  the  country  and  its
inhabitants  is  shown,  further,  by  the  words  ' irdb,  '  horses,  or
camels,  of  pure  native  breed,"  and  mtirih,  'possessor,  or  con-
nois-ieur,  of  such  horses,'  both  of  which  terms  were  commonly
used  in  the  early  days  of  Islam.

The  plural  form  .I'rdb,  '  Rcdouins,'  is  presumably  de-
rived from  the  primitive  sense  'desert.'  In  the  Koran
the  A  'rdb  are  several  times  distinguished  from  the  in-
habitants of  the  towns.  When  we  find  that  a  poem,
composed  shortly  tx;fore  Islam,  mentions  '  the  nomadic
and  the  settled  .\ 'rab, ' '  the  latter  class  must  be  undfirstood
to  consist  of  the  inhabitants  of  small  oases,  who  retained,
on  the  whole,  the  customs  of  the  Bedouins,  and  differed
widely  from  the  people  of  the  towns.  .Since,  however,
the  I5edouins  always  formed  the  great  bulk  of  the  natives
of  Arabia,  it  is  not  strange  that,  from  the  earliest  days
of  Islam,  the  name  Arab  was  frequently  used  specially
of  them.  So  in  the  great  Sab:ijan  inscription  of  Abraha,
the  .Abyssinian  prince  of  Yemen,  in  543  a.d.  ,  the  name
any  (or,  with  the  postpositive  article,  pn;-)  seems  to  signify
the  Nomads.'-  T.  N.

ARAD  (nnj?;  araA  [B.\L]  ;  arad;  for  gentilic
Aradite,  see  telow).  i.  .\.  South  Canaanitish  town,
with  a  king  or  chieftain  of  its  own,  conquered  by  the
Israelites,  Josh.  I2.4  (a[c]pa(9  [B],  aSep  [.\L],  iierad).
The  reference  to  the  'king  of  Ar.ad '  in  Nu. '21i,  and
the  abrupt  notice  in  Nu.  3040,  arc  useless  for  historical
purposes,  the  former  all  but  certainly,  and  the  latter
certainly,  having  been  inserted  by  a  later  editor  (see
.VIoore  on  Judg.  1  17,  Di.  on  Nu.  .')34o).  This  removes
(ine  of  the  chief  difficulties  connected  with  the  notices  of
-Arad  (cp  Houmah,  Zkphath).  Another  difliculty
arises  from  the  reference  in  Judg.  1 16  to  '  the  wilderness
of  Judah  which  is  in  the  Negeb  of  Arad  '  {^i.e.,  in  that
part  of  the  .\egeb  to  which  .Arad  belonged).  The  ex-
pressions appear  to  Prof  Moore  to  be  self-contradictory,
the  Wilderness  of  Judah  and  the  Negeb  being  distinct
regions  (Judges,  32).  He  points  out  as  an  additional
ground  for  scepticism  that  ©ba  differs  from  MT  in
reading  nx-jn  instead  of  3jjn.^  It  would  be  unsafe,
however,  to  assert  that  in  usage  the  term  '  wilderness
of  Judah'  cannot  have  included  the  Negeb  S.  of  .Arad
— *'..,^.  ,the  IVddy  el-.\fi!h  {sceSWJV,  CiTY  OF  ;  Judah)
— and,  as  to  ©'s  reading,  we  may  certainly  disregard
it,  chiefly  on  the  ground  (suggested  by  Prof.  Moore
himself)  that  there  is  no  steep  pass  (niD,  Kardjiaa-is)
in  the  neighbourhood  of  .Arad.

The  site  was  found  by  Robinson  at  7>//  'Arad,  which
is  a  round  isolated  hill  17  m.  SE.  of  Hebron,  and  the
details  given  by  Eus.  and  Jer.  {OS  2I455  8722882)
are  (juite  consistent  with  this  identification.  There  are
indeed  no  relics  here  of  the  ancient  city,  and  only
scanty  remains  of  ancient  bridges  ;  but  this  does  not
prevent  Gu(5rin  from  pronouncing  Robinson's  view  '  ex-
tremely probable,  not  to  say  certain '  (/«,/<fe,  3  185).
The  city  of  Arad,  it  may  lie  noticed  in  conclusion,
existed  long  after  the  'age  of  Joshua,'  for  Shishak  in-
cludes it  in  his  list  of  conquered  cities  in  Palestine
(WMM,  As.  u.  Eur.  168).  'Aradite,'  therefore,  may
well  be  restored  in  28.28253  (see  Harodite). The

J  Dlwiin  0/ Hassan  ihn  Thdhit,  51,  /.  <)  =  Aghdn{,  14  126.

-  .See  Ed.  tllaser,  /^wei  Inschri/ten  tibcr  den  Dammbruck
von  MArih,  33,  etc.

3  tit  Tr\v  iprifiov  ttji'  oi<rav  «V  Tci  rarip  'lovSa,  7/  i<m.v  cVi  icara-
Pa<rtio^  '.KpaS  [B];  e.  t.  J.  'lou^a  t.  o.  iy  tu  I'drio  eirt  Kara-
^acrrwf  'Apoj  [.AL],  if  tw  votu  is  a  duplicate  rende'rins;,  and  to
be  rejected.  So  far,  van  Doorninck,  Bu.,  and  Ki.  (///JM268)
are  right.  It  is  prern.-iture.  however,  to  assume  that  1-1133  is  the
original  reading  ;  it  is  really  a  conjectural  correction  of  a  false
reading  (due  to  repetition)  13103.

275


ARAM

connection  of  David  (q.v.,  §  i,  note  on  'Bethlehem*;
cp  also  Aruath)  with  S.  Judah  throws  a  new  light
on  the  interest  of  narrators  in  the  fortiuies  of  .\rad  and
Zephath.

2.  (lupijp  [B] ;  ofMti  [.A])  in  a  genealogy  of  Bknjamin  {g.v.,  |  9,
iu  P)  I  Ch.  8  IS.  T.  K.  C.

ARADUS  (apaAoc  [AXV]),  iMacc.  ISzaf.  See
Arvad.

ARAH  (rriX  [so  in  pause,  cp  Baer  ud  Ez.  25],  §  70,
'  wayfarer '  ?).

1.  b.  Ulla,  in  genealogy-  of  .Asher  {q.v.,  §  4),  i  Ch.  7  39!  (o/xrx
[B.A]);  ©I.  omits  Ulla  and  Arab,  and  ascribes  the  remaining
names  in  v.  39  to  Ithran  (v.  38).

2.  In  the  great  post-e.\ilic  list  (see  Ezra,  ii.  §  9,  §  8<-);  Ezra
2  5  (r,pa  [B],  opes  [A],  o>p«[Ll)=-  Neh.  7  10  (npa  [BA],  -^  |,y],  rfipa
[I.l)=  I  Esd.  5  10  Akks  (ap««  (l',A|,  Tjtpo  [I,]).  His  son  .Sliechan-
iah  [6J  was  the  father-in-law  of  the  Anunonite  Tobiah,  4  (Neh.
618  Tjpac  [UN.A],  Tjipa  [L])

ARAM  (C"1X;  (5"^'-  araaa.  cypiA,  o  cypoc,  01
CYpoi  ;  on  Aramseans  see  lx;low,  §  7).

The  EV  commonly  translates  '  Syria  '  or  '  Syrians '  (cp  how-
ever Hos.  12  12  KV  '  Aram  '),  but  occasionally  (viz.,  Cen.  10  2j_/:
22-1  Nu.  2:i7  iCh.  I17  2  23  734)  retains  the  Hebrew  form
'Aram'(on  Mt.  1  3/.  AV,  and  Lk.  833  AV  see  Ra.\i,  i,  .Akm).
The gentilic 'B^iN,  on the  other hand, is  always  translated

'  SjTian '  (except  Dt.265,  RVmg.  'Aramean';  .TsnK  iCh.  714

EV  '  Aramltess ').  n'lpn.K  is  rendered  by  '  Syrian  language '  (Is.
36  I  r  2K.  IS  26  EV  Dan.  24  RV),  or  '  Syrian  tongue'  (Ezra  4  7
AV),  '  Svri.ic  '  (Dan.  2  4  .AV),  and  by  '  Aramaic  '  (Dan.  2  4  Ezra
47  both  RVmjj.).

Aram  appears  in  Gen.  10 22  (kpafiuv  [.K"])  as  one  of
the  sons  of  Shem.  This  in  itself  does  not  prove  anything
1  Name  ^  ^°  ^^^^  nationality  and  language  of  the
people  in  question,  for  the  classification
adopted  in  the  chapter  is  based,  to  a  large  extent,  on
geographical  and  political  considerations.  But  there  is
no  reason  to  doubt  that  .Aram  here  stands  for  the  w  hole,
or  at  least  for  a  portion,  of  those  '  .Semitic  '  tribes  whose
language  is  called  '  .Aramaic  '  in  the  OT  (Ezra  4  7  Dan.  24)
and  is  placed  in  the  mouth  of  L.aban  the  .Aramasan.
according  to  the  ancientgloss  inCien.  31 47.  In  later  times
the  name  was  still  known,  though  often  supplanted  by
'  Syrian,'  which  the  Greeks  employed,  from  a  very  early
period,  as  the  ecjuivalent  of  the  native  Aram  and  its
derivatives.  Aram  may  perhaps  be  the  source  of  the
Homeric  'Epe/j.i3ol  (Od.  484).

It  has  long  been  known  that  Aramaic  was  used  as
the  official  language  in  the  western  half  of  the  .Achae-
menian  empire.  From  2  K.  I826  (  =  Is.  36ii)  we  might
have  concluded  that  this  language  occupied  a  similar
position  under  the  Assyrian  rule  ;  moreover,  if  Friedr.
Delitzsch  be  right  [Par.  258),  an  AssjTian  and  an
Aramaic  '  secretary '  are  mentioned  together  in  a  cunei-
form inscription.  The  recent  excavations  at  Zenjirli
have  proved  that  in  that  district,  to  the  extreme  .\.  of
Syria,  .Aramaic  served  as  a  written  language  as  early  as
the  eighth  century  B.C.,  although  the  population  was
not  purely  .Aram.-ean.  On  the  other  hand,  the  .Aramaic
inscriptions  of  Tema,  to  the  N.  of  Medina,  bear  witness
to  the  existence  of  an  Aramasan  colony  in  the  NW.  of
Arabia  about  500  B.C.  That  Mesopotamia  proper  [i.e.,
the  country  bounded  by  the  Euphrates,  the  Tigris,  the
N.  mountain-range,  and  the  desert — hence  exclusive  of
Babylonia)  was  inhabited  by  .Aramxans  appears  from
the  OT.  Moreover,  an  inscription  of  Tiglath-pileser  I.,
who  is  placed  about  1220  B.C.,  mentions  an  Aramasan
trilie  in  this  district,  in  the  neighbourhood  of  Harran
(Schr.  A7i  I33).  .\  similar  statement  is  found  in  an
inscription  three  centuries  later  (ibid.  1 165).  Hence  the
Greeks,  from  the  time  of  .Alexander  onwards,  called
this  country  "^vpia  ij  fuffr)  tQv  ^^0Ta^lu}v,  or,  more  shortly,
V  MecroiroTafiia  (see  .Arrian,  passim).  On  the  lower
Tigris  and  Euphrates,  near  the  confines  of  Susiana.  — that
is  to  say,  in  much  the  same  region  that  was  afterwards
known  as  '  the  land  of  the  .Aramajans"  (Beth  Aramdye,
in  Persian  Suristdn),  and  contained  the  royal  cities, —
there  were  nomadic  (?)  Aramaeans  according  to  an  in-


2.  Language.


ARAM

scription  of  Tiglath-pileser  III.  (745-727  B.C.),  and  an
inscription  of  Sennacherib  (705-681  B.C.).  (See  Del.
I.e.  238,  .Schr.  K.i  /■  1 16,  A'/y  285).  The  name  occurs
also  in  a  few  other  .Assyrian  inscriptions  ;  but,  owing  to
the  imperfection  of  the  writing,  it  may  sometimes  be
doubted  whether  the  word  is  really  mK,  'Aram,'  and
not  some  such  form  as  cnv-  Din,  or  oin-  It  is  remark-
able that  the  cuneiform  inscrijjtions,  at  least  according
to  tho  opinion  of  IX-I.  and  Schr.,  never  give  the
name  of  '  .\ramaeans '  to  the  .Aramaic-speiiking  popu-
lations W.  of  the  Euphrates,  whereas  in  the  O'l'  this
is the .\ramaean country par  excellence  (cp Akam-

NAIl  \R.\IM, .\IkS()I'OT.\.MIA,  § I ).

1  houi;;li  at  several  periods  the  whole,  or  the  greater
p;irt,  of  the  .Ariinuean  nation  has  bc-en  subject  to  a
single  foreign  power,  the  Arama.-ans
have  never  formed  an  independent
political  unity  ;  in  fact,  so  far  as  we  know,  there  h;is
never  existed  a  state  comprehending  the  Aramaans  of
the  main  part  of  Syria  or  of  Mcsoixjtamia  jjroper,  to  the
exclusion  of  other  races.  From  a  very  early  time,  how-
ever, the  population  of  these  couiUries  mast  have  been
pre<l(>minantly  .Vrama'.an,  as  is  shown  by  the  fact  that
all  the  other  nationalities  were  gradually  eliminated,  so
that,  even  Ixjfore  the  Christian  era,  the  various  dialects
of  the  .Aramaic  (or,  as  the  Greeks  say,  Syrian)  language
prevailed  almost  exclusively  in  the  cultivated  lands  which
lie  lietwcen  the  Mediterranean  and  the  Mountains  of
.Armenia  and  Kurdistan.  Aramaic  was  used  by  the
neighbouring  Arabs  iis  the  language  of  writing  ;  it  also
took  possession  of  the  l.md  of  Israel  (see  §  5,  end).  It
is  indeed  very  unlikely  that,  as  early  as  the  time  of
Solomon,  there  w;is  an  important  .Arama.'an  element  in
Palestine,  as  W.  .Max  Miiller  supposes  [As.  u.  Eur.
171 1  ;  the  ending  (/  in  many  names  of  Palestinian  cities
in  the  list  drawn  up  Ijy  the  Egyptian  king  Sosenk  is
probably  nothing  more  than  the  Hebrew  ending  r\-,  ex-
pressing motion  towards — the  so-called  H^  locale.  Even
in  some  books  composed  before  the  Exile,  however,  the
influence  of  the  language  spoken  by  the  neiglibouring
Aramaeans  is  occasionally  perceptible.  Ihis  iniluciice
became  very  much  greater  after  the  Exile  (when  those
Israelites  who  remained,  or  founded  settlements  in
Juda.-a,  Samaria,  and  (ialilee,  were  at  first  feeble  in
numbers)  and  little  by  little  the  .Aramaic  tongue  spread
over  the  whole  country.  Though  the  language  of  such
parts  of  the  O  T  .as  Esther,  Ecclesiastes,  and  several  of
the  Psalms  is  Hebrew  in  form,  its  spirit  is  almost  entirely
Aramaic.  The  compiler  of  Ezra  inserted  into  his  book
an  extract  from  an  Aramaic  work  composed,  it  would
seem,  alxsut  300  H.c;  and  half  of  the  Hook  of  Daniel
(which  was  written  in  167  or  166  R.c. )  is  in  Aramaic.
Moreover,  a  dialect  of  this  language  was  spoken  by
Christ  and  the  apostles,  and  in  it  the  discourses  reported
in  the  Gospels  were  originally  delivered.  Nor  did  the
Latin  language  (under  the  Roman  rule)  ever  threaten
to  supplant  the  prevalent  Aramaic.  Greek,  it  is  true,
gained  some  footing  in  Syria,  and,  since  it  was  the
vehicle  of  intercourse  and  literary  culture,  exercised  a
great  influence  on  the  native  dialects.  It  was  the  con-
quests of  the  Moslems,  however,  that  suddenly  brought
to  an  end  the  ascendency  of  Aramaic  after  it  had  lasted
for  more  than  1000  years.  The  Arabic  language  \\;is
diffused  with  surprising  rapidity,  and  at  the  present
day  there  are  only  a  few  outlying  districts  in  which
Aramaic  dialects  are  spoken.

What  group  of  tribes  the  author  of  Gen.  IO23  includes
under  the  name  of  .Aram,  we  are  unable  to  say  precisely.


3.  In
Pentateuch.


Of  the  '  sons  of  Aram '  enumerated  there  is
unfortunately  none  that  can  be  identified
with  toleral)le  certainty  (see  Gkogr.M'HY,
§  24).  The  position  of  '  Uz.'  although  it  occurs
several  times  in  the  OT,  is  unknown.  It  must,  however,
have  been  situated  not  far  from  Palestine.  '  Mash  "
is  usually  supposed  to  lie  the  country  of  the  Mdcrio;'  5poi
(Strabo,  506,  etc. ),  the  source  of  the  river  Mashe  i^n  har
277


ARAM

Mashl,  in  Arabic  Hirmds),  which  flowed  by  Nisibis
([pseudo-JDionysiusof  Tcl-Mahri?,  ed.  Chalxjt,  718,  and
Thomas  of  Marga,  ed.  Budge,  346 19)  ;  this  is,  however,
by  no  means  certain.  Other  theories  rcsjjecting  the
names  in  Gen.  10  23  might  be  mentioned  ;  but  they  are
all  oj^en  to  tjuestion.

A  second  list,  in  Gen.  22ai,  represents  Aram  as  a  son
of  Kemuel,  son  of  Nahor  and  brother  of  Uz,  Kescd
(EV  Chesed  ;  the  eponym  of  the  Chaldeans),  llethucl,
and  others.  Ik-thuel  is  called  an  '  Aranuean '  in  Gen.
'^620  285,  as  is  also  his  son  Ealian  in  fjen.  tiiJaoSl  2024.
The  passages  in  question  lx;long,  it  is  true,  to  different
sources  ;  but  they  may  have  been  harmonised  by  the
redactor.  All  these  statcnients  seem  to  p<jint  to  the
district  of  Harran  (Hakan.  q.v.),  where,  as  Hebrew
tradition  aflirms  with  remarkable  distinctness,  the  patri-
archs (.Abraham,  Jacob),  and  the  patriarchs'  wives
(Kelxjcca,  Leah,  Rachel),  either  were  Ixjrn  or  sojourned
for  a  long  time.  Here,  in  remote  antit|uity,  Hebrew
trilxis  and  Aramaean  tribes  (represented  by  Nahor)
prolxibly  dwelt  side  by  side. '  Hence  it  is  said  in  iJt.
2t5  5  'a  nomad  Aramitan  w.as  my  father.'  In  one  of
the  sources  of  Genesis  the  country  of  Laban  is  called
'Aram  of  the  two  rivers,"-*  which  seems  to  mean,  as
has  long  been  held,  the  Arania.an  land  between  the
Euphrates  and  the  Tigris,  or  tjetween  the  Euphrates
and  the  ChabOras  (Kiepert,  I.eltrb.  J.  alt.  Geogr.  154).
Wiiat  is  meant  by  Paddan  Aram,  however,  the  name
given  to  the  dwelling-place  of  Laban  and  his  kinsmen
in  the  other  source  (see  Paua.n),  is  not  clear.  In  As-
syrian (?)  and  Aramaic  Paddan  signifies  'yoke,'  and  by
a  change  of  meaning,  found  also  in  other  languages,  it
conies  to  denote  a  certain  area  of  land,  and  finally
'  corn-land,"  but  not  a  '  plain,'  as  is  sometimes  assumed
by  those  who  wrongly  take  the  phru.se  '  field  of  .Aram  '
(Hos.  12i3[i2])  to  be  a  translation  of  '  Paddan  .Aram.'
This  latter  can  scarcely  be  the  name  of  a  country.  It
may  denote  a  locali/y  situated  in  the  land  of  .Aram.  We
might,  therefore,  Ix;  templed  to  identify  Paddan  Aram
with  a  place  near  JJarrdn  called  J'addiind  (see  Wright,
Cat.  Syr.  MSS.  1127a;  Georg  Hoffman,  O/usc.
Acstor.  129,  /.  21),  in  Gr.  <f)a5ava  (Sozom.  633),  and  in
Ar.  Fadddri,  in  the  neighbourhood  of  which  Tell  luiddar.
is  situ.ated  (see  Yakut  s.v.).  It  is,  however,  a  somewhat
suspicious  consideration  that  several  of  the  passages
which  have  been  cited  mention  the  patriarchs  in  con-
nection with  the  place.  I  lence  the  name  m,ay  l:>e  due  to
a  mere  localisation  of  the  biblical  story  on  the  part  of  the
early  Christians.  .According  to  the  luu-rative  of  Balaam,
'  Pethor'  is  in  .Aram  (.\u. '2'2s  23?  ;  see  PethuK).  If
Schr.  (fCAT  155^  A'/>  1  133)  be  right  in  identifying
it  with  the  city  of  Pitru,  mentioned  in  .Assyrian  insciip-
tions,  and  situated  on  the  river  Sagur  (Sajur) — that  is  to
say,  not  far  from  Mambij  (Hierapolis) — the  statement
that  Pethor  is  on  the  Euphrates  itself  cannot  be  quite
correct.  Such  an  inaccuracy,  however,  would  not  be
surprising.

AA'hat  historical  foundation  there  may  be  for  the
accoimt  of  the  subjugation  of  Israel  by  Cushan
Rishathaim  (y.r'. ),  'king  of  .Aram  of  the  Two  Rivers'
(Judg.  38-io),  is  uncertain.

Of  all  the  .Arama;an  states,  by  far  the  most  important
from  the  point  of  view  of  the  Israelites,  during  the
kingly  period,  was  Damascus,  the  in-
■  habitants  of  which,  from  the  time  of
David  {q.v.,  §  &b)  onward,  were  often  at  w;xr  with  their
Israelite  neighbours  ;  but  there  must  also  have  been
much  peaceable  intercourse  between  the  two  nations.
In  most  cases  where  the  OT  speaks  of  .Aram  the
reference  is  to  Damascus  (even  though  the  latter  name
be  not  expressly  mentioned),  the  small  Arama.an  states
of  the  neighbourhood  being  sometimes  included. That

1  On  this  point  see  Israel,  i  i.

2  It  is  not  neces.sary  to  .suppose  with  W.  Max  MQlIer  {I.e.
252,  255)  that  the  Dual  naharaim  is  a  mistake  for  the  plural
nfkArlm.  On  this  subject,  however,  cp  Akam- naharaim,
Mesopotamia,  |  i.

278


4.  D


ARAM

this  mode  of  speaking  was  acmally  current  in  early
times  is  proved  by  such  passages  ;is  Am.  1 59  Is.  7 2  4/  8.
Cp  Dam.\scus.

Not  far  from  Damascus  lay  the  Aramasan  districts  of
Maacah  {(/.v.,  2)  and  Geshur  (q.v.,  i). That  Maacah
__ , was  .\ram:ean  is  not  expressly  stated —
G  ^  except  in  i  Ch.  196.  where  the  text  is  very

P  h  ^  doubtful ;  '  but  it  seems  to  Ije  indicated  by
Gen.  '2i2^,  where  Maacah  is  represented  as
a  .son,  or  daughter,  of  Nahor  by  a  concubine.  Moreover,
in  I  ("h.  7  16  Machir,  the  chief  representative  of  the  trit)e
of  Manasseh  teyond  the  Jordan,  is  the  husband  of
Maacah,  and  in  v.  14  t>f  the  same  chapter  he  is  a  son  of
Man;isseh  by  an  .\ram;ean  concubine  whence  we  may
infer  that  the  Israelite  tribe  which  had  penetrated
farthest  to  the  XH  Ix-came  mingled  with  the
Aramx-ans  of  Maacah.  That  the  Maacathites  were  not
included  in  Israel,  though  they  dwelt  among  the
Israelites,  is  stated  in  Josh.  13 13.  Their  geographical
situation  is  to  some  extent  determined  by  the  fact  that
Alx'l,  though  regarded  as  an  ancient  Israelite  city  (2.S.
2019),  is  sometimes  called  Aljel-bCth-Maacah,  'Abel  in
the  land  of  Maacah  '  (2  S.  2O14,- etc. ),  in  order  to  dis-
tinguish it  from  other  places  bearing  the  name  Abel.
In  accordance  with  the  statements  in  i  K.  1020  2  K.
ir>29  (to  which  must  be  added  2. S.  20 18,  a  passage
preserved  in  <!5  but  mutilated  in  M  T),  this  Abel  is  now
generally  admitted  to  be  identical  with  the  northern
.\bil,  near  Hunin,  on  one  of  the  brooks  which  unite  to
compose  the  Jordan  (see  Abi:i.-Bi:th-M.\AC.\h).  That
this  region,  on  the  sloj^es  of  Hermon,  was  the  home  of
the  Maacathites  appears  from  Dt.  814  Josh.  I25  13ii  13,
where  they  are  mentioned  together  with  the  Geshurites,
another  foreign  people  who  continued  to  dwell  among
the  Israelites  (Josh.  13 13),  and  Ijelonged  to  .Aram  (2  S.
I'jS;  cp  also  i  ("h.  223,  where  the  text,  it  nnist  be
admitted,  is  ol)scure  and  seems  to  be  corrupt).  Not  far
off  was  the  territory  of  Rehob  or  Beth  Rehob,  which
included  the  city  of  Dan  (Judg.  I828),  often  mentioned
as  the  northern  limit  of  Israel,  the  modern  Tell  el-kadi,
a  few  miles  ea^t  of  the  aforesaid  Abil.  In  Josh.  19  28
Rehob,  it  is  true,  is  reckoned  as  belonging  to  the
Israelite  tribe  of  .\sher  ;  but,  according  to  2  S.  106,  its
inhabitants  were  .Aramrtans.  Thus  it  appears  fairly
certain  that  several  Aram;tan  tribes  were  settled  near,
or  within,  the  borders  of  the  northern  tribes  of  Israel
(  Naphtali,  Asher,  and  Eastern  Manasseh).  In  these  parts
the  Aram;^;an  population  seems  to  have  extended,  with
scarcely  any  interruption,  as  far  as  Damascus.  The
.Xramneans  of  Maacah  and  Rehob  fought  on  the  side  of
the  Ammonites  against  David  (2  S.  106=  i  Ch.  1961
David  married  a  daughter  of  the  king  of  the  Geshurites,'
and  she  Ijecame  the  mother  of  Absalom.  It  is  remark-
able that  she  bore  the  name  of  Maacah  (2  S.  83=  i  Ch.
82),  which,  as  we  have  seen,  occurs  often  in  con-
nection with  Geshur  ;  and  the  same  name  was  given  by
Absalom  to  his  daughter,'*  afterwards  the  mother  of  two
kings  of  Judah  ( i  K.  1 5  2 10 13  2  Ch.  1 1  20/: ).  After  he
had  murdered  his  brother  Anmon,  .\bsalom  took  refuge
with  his  grandfather  the  king  of  Geshur,  and  remained
there  for  a  considerable  time  (28.1838  I42332).  The
king  of  (ieshur  must,  therefore,  have  lieen  to  some  extent
indejxindent  of  David.  Of  all  these  Aramtean  tribes
we  he.ir  nothing  more  in  later  times  ;  but  one  of  them
has  left  a  trace  in  'the  Maacathite'  (see  Ma.'VCAH,  i),
an  appellation  borne  by  the  father  of  Jaazaniah,  a  con-
temporary  of  Jeremiah the prophet (2  K.  2523  =  Jer.

1  Instead  of  ,13J,'D  CINi  the  '  .\rama:ans  of  Maacah,'  the
jKirallel  passage  2. S.  106  has  nDJ-D  "]Sc,  'the  king  of  Maaoih,"
for  which  (S"  reads  /Sao-iAf'a  "A^oA^/c.  Here  the  word  '.X/aoA^k
is  certainly  due  to  a  mistake  ((pAl.  have /iiaaxo) ;  but  /SavtAea
[BAL]  supports  the  M.-ussoretic  reading  -^■z-

2  In  this  verse  we  should  no  doubt  read  ,13;©  n'3  n^3K  with
Ew.,  Wellh.,  and  others.

*  See,  however,  Geshi'R,  2,  where  the  view  is  proposed  that
David's  wife  was  from  the  Southern  Geshur.

*  On  this  see,  however,  Maacah,  ii.

279


ARAMAIC  LANGUAGE

408).  These  -Aramseans,  who  were  so  closely  connected
with  the  Israelites,  probably  played  an  important  part
in  the  diffusion  of  the  Aramaic  language  over  Palestine.
Another  state,  also  descriljed  as  Aram;tan,  was  that
of  ZoBAH  (g.v. )  (2  S.  1068  ;  cp  i  Ch.  I!)6  Ps.  60  [title]).

- „  . . which  seems  to  have  lx;en  for  a  while  of

6.  iuODftlL  T .

greater  consec|uence. In  it  was  situated  the

city  of  Bkrotiiai  (2S.  108),  no  doubt  identical  with
Bkkoth.'vh  {(/.v.),  which  in  Ez.  47  16  is  placed  between
Hamath  and  Damascus.  With  this  it  agrees  that,
according  to  the  statements  of  the  historical  books,
Zobah  had  relations  with  Hamath  on  the  one  side,  and
with  Damascus  on  the  other.  Its  site  must,  therefore,
be  approximately  in  the  neighbourhood  of  Emesa  ;  and
we  may  hope  that  arch;e<3logical  researches  will  throw
further  light  upon  the  subject.'

The  statement  about  Sauls  wars  with  '  the  kings  of
Zobah'  (iS.  1447)  is  open  to  grave  suspicion  ;  it  is,  in
fact,  doubtful  whether  the  warlike  operations  of  Saul
ever  extended  so  far  (see  Saul,  §  3).  A  little  later,
however,  we  find  Zobah  and  Damascus  assisting  the
Ammonites  in  their  war  against  David  (see  D.WiD,
§  %b).  Al  length  Hadad'ezer,  king  of  Zobah.  even
brought  to  his  help  Aramieans  from  beyond  the
Euphrates,  but  was  utterly  defeated,  together  with  the
king  of  the  .Ammonites,  and  David  carried  off  a  rich
booty.  Upon  this  the  king  of  Hamath,  who  had  been
at  war  with  the  king  of  Zobah,  sent  an  embassy  to  the
Judasan  king,  expressing  great  satisfaction  (2S.  810).
According  to  2  S.  2836,  one  of  David's  heroes  (among
whom  were  several  non-Israelites)  came  from  Zobah  ;
in  I  Ch.  11  38,  however,  the  reading  is  quite  different  (see
Zoh.Xh).  a  servant  of  the  above-mentioned  Hadad'ezer,
named  Rezon,  fled  from  his  master,  became  the  chief  of
a  band  of  robbers,  and  after  Davids  death  founded  a
kingdom  at  Damascus  (i  K.  11 23  ^  ;  see  Dam.\sci;s,
§  3).  It  is  not  ea.sy  to  extract  a  satisfactory  sense  from
the  passage  which  descril)es  the  capture  of  '  Hamath  of
Zobah'  by  Solomon  (2Ch.83),  and  there  is  reason  to
suspect  the  integrity  of  the  text.  After  the  time  of
Solomon  we  find  no  mention  of  Zobah  in  the  OT  ;  but
-Assyrian  monuments  bear  witness  to  the  existence  of
this  city  in  the  seventh  century  B.C. — if,  as  seems  likely,
the  same  place  be  meant.

In the account of  the  wars  of David  against  the

Ammonites and their allies, these latter  are classed

,.  .together  under  the  name  of 'Aramieans'

7.  Aramaeans.  ^^  g  i^zf.  ,4/:)  ;  but  this  is  perhaps
nothing  more  than  a  classification  a  potiori.  It  is  of
more  importance  to  notice  that  the  army  of  Nebuchad-
rezzar is  called  by  a  contemporary  '  the  army  of  tlie
Chaldeans  and  of  the  Aramaeans  '  (Jer.  80  n).  That  the
great  mass  of  the  Babylonian  army  was  composed  of
Aramasans  might  have  teen  naturally  inferred,  even
if  we  had  not  this  explicit  statement  on  the  subject.

Cp  Noldeke,  'Die  Namen  der  .-Xram.  Nation  u.  Sprache,'  in
y.DMG  '25  113^. ;  Ktrcrupio-i  2vpios  !£vpof  in  Hermes,  h  443^. ;
.nnd  the  section  on  the  Aramaic  dialects  in  .Art.  '  Semitic
Languages,'  /CB(^),  published  separately  in  German,  Die  Sent.
Sprachen,  Leipsic,  18S7,  p.  27^,  2nd  ed.,  1899.

2.  .An  .Asherite  (iCh.  734!;  [ouclopoi'  [B],  o/xifL  [.AL]).  See
also  Ram,  i,  and  .Akni.  t.  N.

ARAMAIC  LANGUAGE.^ Aramaic  is  nearly  re-
lated to Hebrajo- Phoenician  ; there is, nevertheless.
_^  .  . .a  sharp  line  of  demarcation. Of  its

.  ueopr  p  original home nothing certain is

extent.  known. In  the  O  T  '  Aram  '  appears

at  an  early  period  as  a  designation  of  certain  districts  in
Syria  (sea  Ar.\m,  §  i)  and  in  Mesopotamia.  The
language  of  the  Aramnaans  gradually  spread  far  and
wide.  It  occupied  all  Syria — both  those  regions  which
had  been  in  the  possession  of  non-Semitic  peoples,  and

1  It  would  appear  that  the  As.syrian  inscriptions  sometimes
mention  this  place  as  Suhutu  or  Subiti  (sec  I  )el.  Par.  i-jc^Jf.  ;
Schrader,  KG F  122,  h'AT  182^);  but  they  have  not  enabled
us  to  fix  the  site.

•  Revised  and  adapted  bv_  the  author  from  art.  '.Semitic
Languages '  (Aramaic  section)  in  EB{^)  L'l.

280


ARAMAIC  LANGUAGE


those  which  were  most  likely  inhabited  by  Canaanite
tribes.  Last  of  all,  Palestine  Ixjcame  Aramaised  ( il>.  §  2).
Towards  the  E.  this  language  w:is  spoken  on  the
Euphrates,  and  throughout  the  districts  of  the  Tigris
S.  and  W.  of  the  Armenian  and  Kurdish  mountains  ;
the  province  in  which  the  capitals  of  the  Arsacides  and
the  Sasanians  were  situated  was  called  '  the  country  of
the  Aram.-i.-ans.'  In  Babylonia  and  Assyria  a  large,  or
perhapxs  the  larger,  portion  of  the  population  were  most
probably  Aramreans,  even  at  a  very  early  date,  whilst
Assyrian  was  the  language  of  the  government.

Some short Aramaic inscriptions of the Assyrian
period,  principally  on  weights,  have  long  l)cen  known.
To  these  have  rccenlly  lx.en  added  longer


2.  Earlier
history.


ones  from  the  most  northern  part  of  .Syria
(Zenjirli,  alx)ul  37'  N.).  In  these,  as  in  the
weight  inscriptions,  the  language  differs  markedly  from
later  Aramaic,  esiK.'cially  by  its  close  approximation  to
Hebrew -Can.a.anitc  or,  jx^rhaps,  to  Assyrian;  but
Aramaic  it  undoubtedly  is.  It  is  to  Ix;  hoped  that  more
of  these  inscriptions,  important  alike  for  their  language
and  for  their  contents,  m.iy  yet  be  discovered.^

In  the  Persian  period  Aramaic  was  the  oflicial  language
of  the  provinces  W.  of  the  Mujihrates  ;  and  this  explains
the  fact  that  some  inscriptions  of  Cilicia  and  many  coins
which  were  struck  by  gtwernors  and  vassal  princes  in
Asia  Minor  (of  which  the  stamp  was  in  some  cases
the  work  of  skilled  Greek  artists)  lx.'ar  Aramaic  in-
scriptions, whilst  those  of  other  coins  are  Greek.  This,
of  course,  does  not  prove  that  .Aramaic  was  ever  spoken
in  .Asia  Minor,  and  as  far  north  as  .Sinope  and  the
Hellespont.  In  l'"gypt  Aramaic  inscriptions  have

been  found  of  the  Persian  period,  one  lx.'aring  the  date
of  the  fourth  year  of  Xerxes  (482  H.  c. )  ;  -  we  have  also
official  documents  on  papyrus,  unfortunately  in  a  very
tattered  condition  for  the  most  part,  which  prove  that
the  Persians  preferred  using  this  convenient  langu.age  to
mastering  the  difficulties  of  the  Egyptian  systems  <>f
writing.  It  is  further  possible  that  at  that  time  there
were  many  .Aranirt-ans  in  l\gypt,  just  as  there  were  many
Phci-nicians,  Greeks,  and  Jews.

This  preference  for  Aramaic,  iiowtver,  probably
originated  under  the  Assyrian  ICmpire,  in  which  a  very
Large  pro[X)rtion  of  the  population  s])oke  Aramaic  :  in
it  this  language  would  naturally  occupy  a  more  important
position  than  it  did  under  the  I'crsians.  Thus  we  under-
stand why  it  was  taken  for  granted  that  a  great  Assyrian
officer  could  speak  Aramaic  (2  K.  1826  =  Is.  36  11),  and
why  the  dignit.aries  of  Juriah  apjiear  to  have  learned  the
language  (idid.):  namely,  in  order  to  communicate  with
the  Assyrians.  Tlie  short  dominion  of  the  Chalde.ans
prob.ably  strengthened  this  preponderance  of  Aramaic.

A  few  ancient  .Aramaic  inscriptions  have  been  dis-
covered far  within  the  limits  of  .Arabia,  in  tiie  palm
oasis  of  Teima  (in  the  north  of  the  Hijaz)  ;  the  oldest
and  by  far  the  most  important  of  these  was  perhaps
made  somewhat  before  the  Persian  period.  ^  We  may
presume  th.at  .Aramaic  was  introduced  into  the  district
by  a  mercantile  colony,  which  settled  in  the  ancient  seat
of  conmiercc  ;  and,  in  consequence,  Aramaic  may
have  reniainetl  for  some  time  the  liter.ary  language  of
the  neighbouring  .Arabs.  Those  .Aramaic  monuments,
which  we  may  with  more  or  less  certainty  ascribe  to  the
Persian  f)eriod,  exhibit  a  langu.age  which  is  almost
absolutely  uniform.  The  Egypti.an  monuments  bear
marks  of  Hebrew,  or  (better)  Phoenician,  influence.

Intercourse with Aramaeans caused  some  Aramaic

1  Cp  A  ttsgyahingcn  inSendschirli,  S.-ich.iu,  KSnigl.  AT  us.  zu
Berlin,  Mittlieil.  aus  lienor.  Sainml.  1893  ;  also  O.  H.  MuUer,
altseiii.  fnschri/t.  r.  Sentischirli,  Vienna,  1803;  HaUvy,  Rer.
Sent.,  Paris,  1804,  and  on  the  language,  Nsfd.  7.DMG  47  99 ;
D.  H.  Muller,  '  Die  Riuinschrift  des  B.irrekub,'  ZKMW 10  ;  Wi.
in  MIT,,\^:  Halivy,  Rn'.  Sem.  1897;  G.  Hofrm.-inn,  /.A,
1897,  T,\T  ff.  Two  old  Aram,  inscription.s  from  Nerah  (near
Aleppo)  have  since  been  brought  to  light ;  cp  Hoffmann,  il>.  ^ot  ff.

2  See  the  Palfeographical  Society's  Oriental  Series,  plate
Ixiii.,  and  CIS  2,  no.  122.

3  See  CIS  2,  nos.  113-131.

38Z


words  to  be  imported  into  Hebrew  at  a  comparatively

Rihli 1  '^^'"'y  fl^'«^- This  influence  of  Aramaic  on

\  . Hebrew  steadily  grew, and  shows  itself  so

■  strongly  in  the  language  of  I-kclesiastes,  for

example,  as  almost  to  comjx-l  the  inference  that  Aramaic

w.-is  the  writer' s  mother-tongue,  and  Hebrew  one  sulisc-

quently  acc|uirc<i,  without  coniplete  mastery.

Certain  portions  of  the  OT  (I:zra4  8-<;i8  712-26  lian.
24-828  ;  also  the  ancient  gloss  in  Jer.  10  11)  are  written
in  Aramaic.  The  free  and  arbitrary  interchange  lietween
Aramaic  and  Hebrew,  lx!tween  the  current  iK)pular
siK-ech  and  the  old  sacred  and  learned  langu.ige.  is
peculiarly  characteristic  in  Daniel  (167  or  166  H.r.l;
see  Da.\ii:i.,  ii.  §  11/  Isolated  p.ussages  in  I'.zra
perhaps  lx;long  to  the  Persian  pK.'ri«>d,  but  have  certainly
been  remodelled  by  a  later  writer.'  Still  in  Ezra  \vi;
find  a  few  antic|ue  forms  which  do  not  occur  in  Daniel.

The  Aramaic  pieces  contained  in  the  OT  have  the
great  advantage  of  being  furnished  with  vowels  and
other  orthographical  signs.  These  were  rot  inserted
until  long  after  the  composition  of  the  books  (they
are  sometimes  at  variance  with  the  text  itself)  ;  but
Aramaic  was  still  a  living  language  when  the  punctua-
tion came  into  use,  and  the  lapse  of  time  w.as  not
so  very  great.  The  tradition  ran  less  risk  of  corruption,
therefore,  than  in  the  ca.se  of  Hebrew.  Its  general
correctness  is  further  attested  by  the  innumerable
points  of  resemblance  Ijetween  this  language  and
Syriac,  with  which  we  are  accurately  acquainted.  The
Aramaic  of  the  OT  exhibits  various  anticjue  characteristics
which  afterwards  disapjx'ared — for  example,  the  forma-
tion of  the  passive  by  means  of  internal  vowel-change,
and  of  the  causative  with  //a  instead  of  witha—  phenomena
which  have  been  falsely  ex[)lained  as  Hebraisms.

IJiblical  Aramaic  agrees  in  all  essential  respects  with
the  language  tised  in  the  many  inscriptions  of  Palniyra
A  KT  v.  f  + (lieginning  soon  t)efore  the  Christian

4.  Nabatsean,  etc.  ^^^  ^^^  extending  to  about  the  end  of
the  tiiird  century),  and  on  the  Nabata.'an  coins  and
sloiie  inonuinents  (concluding  about  the  year  100  A.I). ).
Aramnic  was  the  language  of  Palmyra,  the  aristocracy
of  which  were  largely  of  Arabian  extraction.  In  the
northern  portion  of  the  Nabata-an  kingdom  (not  far
from  Damascus)  there  w,as  probably  a  large  .Aramaic
population  ;  but  Arabic  was  spoken  farther  south.  .At
that  time,  however,  Aramaic  was  highly  esteemeil  as  a
cultivated  language,  for  which  reason  the  Arabs  in
question  made  use  of  it,  as  their  own  language  was  not
reduced  to  writing,  just  as  in  those  ages  Greek  inscrip-
tions were  set  up  in  many  districts  where  no  one  sjioke
(ireek.  The  great  inscrijjlions  cease  with  the  over-
throw of  the  Nabativan  kingdom  by  Trajan  (105  A.D. )  ;
but,  down  to  a  later  perio<l,  the  .Arabian  nomads  in  those
countries,  especially  in  the  Sinaitic  peninsula,  often
scratched  their  names  on  the  rocks,  adding  some  bene-
dictory formula  in  Aramaic.  These  inscriptions
having  now  l)een  deciphered  with  completeness  and
certainty,  there  is  no  longer  room  for  discussion  of
their  Israelitic  origin,  or  of  any  similar  fantastic  theories
concerning  them.  That  several  centuries  afterwards
the  name  of  '  Nabat«?an  '  was  used  by  the  .Arabs  as
synonymous  with  '  Arama-an '  was  probably  due  to
the  gradual  spread  of  Aramaic  over  a  great  part  of
what  had  once  btxn  the  country  of  the  Nabata-ans.  In
any  case,  Aramaic  then  exercised  an  inmiense  influence.
This  is  proved  by  the  place  which  it  occupies  in  the
strange  Pahlavi  w  riting.  v.arious  branches  of  which  date
from  the  time  of  the  Parthian  empire.  Biblical  .Aramaic,
as  al-so  the  language  of  the  Palmyrene  and  the  NalKita-an
inscriptions,  may  be  descrilxjd  .as  an  older  form  of
Western  Aramaic.  The  opinion  that  the  Palestinian  Jews
brought  their  Aramaic  dialect  directly  from  Babylon —
whence  the  incorrect  name  '  Chaldee  '  — is  untenable.

1  The  decree  which  is  said  to  have  been  sent  by  Artaxerxes
(Ezra  7  1 2-26)  is  in  its  present  form  a  comparatively  late  pro-
duction (cp  Ezra,  ii.  S  lo).

282


ARAMAIC  LANGUAGE


By  the  time  of  Christ  Aramaic  had  long  been  the
current  popular  speech  of  the  Jews  in  Palestine,  and
^_  the  use,  spoken  and  written,  of  Hebrew
(in  a  greatly  modified  form)  was  confined  to
scholars.  Christ  and  the  apostles  spoke  Aramaic,  and
the  original  preaching  of  Christianity,  the  £1)077^X10;',
was  in  the  same  language.  And  tliis,  too,  not  in
the  di.alect  current  in  Jerusalem,  wiiich  roughly  coin-
cided with  the  literary  language  of  the  period,  but  in
that  of  Galilee,  which,  it  would  seem,  had  developed
more  rapidly,  or,  as  is  now  often  but  erroneously  said,
had  Ixicome  corrupted.  Unfortunately,  it  is  impossible
for  us  to  know  the  Galilean  dialect  of  that  period  with
accuracy.  The  attempts  made  in  our  days  to  reduce
the  words  of  Jesus  from  Greek  to  their  original  language
have,  therefore,  failed.

In  general,  few  of  the  sources  from  which  we  derive
our  knowledge  of  the  Palestinian  dialect  of  that  period
_  can he implicitly trusted. In the syn-

gum.  .  ^gogy^s  jt  ^y^s  necessary  that  the  reading
of  the  OT  should  be  followed  by  an  oral  '  targum ' — a
translation,  or  rather  a  paraphrase  into  Aramaic,  the
language  of  tlie  people — which  was  at  a  later  period
fi.xed  in  writing  ;  but  the  officially  sanctioned  form  of
the  Targum  to  the  Pentateuch  (the  so-called  Targum
of  Onkelos)  and  of  that  to  the  prophets  (the  so-called
Jonathan)  was  not  finally  settled  till  the  fourth  or  fifth
century,  and  not  in  Palestine  but  in  Babylonia.  The
redactors  of  the  Targum  preserved,  on  the  whole,  the
older  Palestinian  dialect ;  yet  that  of  Babylon,  which
differed  considerably  from  the  former,  exercised  a
vitiating  influence.  The  punctuation,  which  was  added
later  (first  in  Babylonia)  is  not  so  trustworthy  as  that  of
the  Aramaic  passages  in  the  OT.  The  manuscripts
which  have  the  Babylonian  superlinear  punctuation
may,  nevertheless,  be  relied  upon  to  a  great  extent.
The  language  of  Onkelos  and  Jonathan  differs  but  little
from  biblical  Aramaic.  The  language  spoken  some
time  afterwards  by  the  Palestinian  Jews,  especially  in
Galilee,  is  exhibited  in  a  series  of  rabbinical  works —
the  so-called  Jerusalem  Targums,  a  few  Midrashic  works,
and  the  Jerusalem  Talmud.  Of  the  Jerusalem  Targums,
at  least  that  to  the  Pentateuch  contains  remains  that  go
back  to  a  very  early  date,  and,  to  a  considerable  extent,
presents  a  much  moreancient  aspect  than  that  of  Onkelos,
which  has  t>een  heavily  revised  throughout  ;  ^  but
the  language,  as  we  now  have  it,  belongs  to  the
later  time.  The  Targums  to  the  Hagiographa  are,  in
part,  very  late  indeed.  All  these  books,  of  which  the
Midrashim  and  the  Talmud  contain  much  Hebrew  as
well  as  Aramaic,  have  been  handed  down  without  care,
and  require  to  be  used  with  great  caution  for  linguistic
purposes.  Moreover,  the  influence  of  the  older  language
and  orthography  has,  in  part,  obscured  the  characteristics
of  these  popular  dialects  :  for  example,  various  gutturals
are  still  written,  although  they  are  no  longer  pronounced.
The  adaptation  of  the  spelling  to  the  real  pronunciation
is  carried  furthest  in  the  Jerusalem  Talmud,  but  not  in
a  consistent  manner.  All  these  books  are  without
vowel-points  ;  but  the  frequent  use  of  vowel-letters
in  the  later  Jewish  works  renders  this  defect  less  notice-
able (cp  Tkxt,  §  64).

Not  only  the  Jews  but  also  the  Christians  of  Palestine
retained  their  native  dialect  for  some  time  as  an  ecclesi-
7  Christian  ^^'''^'^'  ^"^  literary  language.  W'e  possess
p  j'  . translations  of  great  portions  of  the  Bible

ratestinian.  (g^pgcially  of  the  Gospels)  and  fragments
of  other  works  in  this  dialect  by  the  Palestinian  Christians
dating  from  about  the  fifth  century,  partly  accompanied
by  a  punctuation  which  was  not  added  till  some  time
later.  This  dialect,  the  native  country  of  which  was
apparently  not  Galilee,  but  Judaea,  closely  resembles
that  of  the  Palestinian Jews, as  was to be  expected

1  This  in  opposition  to  Dalman's  Grannn.  d.  jtid.  pal.  Aram.
(Leipsic,  94)— a  book  highly  to  be  commended  for  the  fulness
and  accuracy  of  its  facts,  but  less  so  for  its  theories.

283


from  the  fact  that  those  who  spoke  it  were  of  Jewish
origin.

Finally, the  Samaritans, among the inhabitants  of

Palestine, translated their sacred book, the Penta-

ft og„--:x-n teuch,  into  their  own  dialect :  see  Tkxt,

Sect §  ^'^- "^^^  '''■"'''''^  ^'"'^>'  °^  ^""'^  ^™"*-
lation  proves  that  the  language  which

lies  at  its  base  was  very  much  the  same  as  that  of  the

neighbouring  Jews. Perhaps, indeed, the  Samaritans

may  have  carried  the  softening  of  the  gutturals  a  little

farther  than  the  Jews  of  Galilee. Their  absurd  attempt

to  embellish  the  language  of  tlie  translation  by  arbitrarily

introducing  forms  borrowed  from  the  Hebrew  original

has  given  ri.se  to  the  false  notion  that  Samaritan  is  a

mixture  of  Hebrew  and  Aramaic. The  introduction  of

Hebrew and even of Arabic words and forms was

practised  in  Samaria  on  a  still  larger  scale  by  copyists

who  lived  after  Aramaic  had  become  extinct. The  later

works  written in the Samaritan dialect are, from a

linguistic  point  of  view,  as  worthless  as  the  compositions

of  Samaritans  in  Hebrew  :  the  writers,  who  spf)ke  .Araljic,

endeavoured  to  write  in  a  language  with  which  they  were

but  half  acquainted.

All  these  Western  Aramaic  dialects,  including  that  of  the

oldest  inscriptions,  have  this  characteristic  among  others


9.  Western
dialects.


in  common,  that  they  form  the  third  fx^r.son
singular  masculine  and  the  third  person
plural  masculine  and  feminine  in  the  im-
perfect by  prefixing^,  as  do  the  other  .Semitic  languages.
And  in  these  dialects  the  termination  d  (the  so-called
status  emphaticus)  still  retained  the  meaning  of  a  definite
article  down  to  a  tolerably  late  period.

As  early  as  the  seventh  century  the  conquests  of  the
Moslems  greatly  circumscribed  the  domain  of  ,'\ramaic,
and  a  few  centuries  later  it  was  almost  completely
supplanted  in  the  W.  by  Arabic.  For  the  Christians  of
those  countries,  who,  like  every  one  else,  spoke  Arabic,
the  Palestinian  dialect  was  no  longer  of  importance.
They  adopted  as  their  ecclesiastical  language  the  dialect
of  the  other  Aramaean  Christians,  the  Syriac  ( Edessan  ;
see  §  1.1  Jf.).  The  only  localities  where  a  \\'.  Aramaic
dialect  still  survives  are  a  few  villages  in  Anti-Libanus.^
The  popular  Aramaic  dialect  of  Babylonia,  from  the
fourth  to  the  sixth  century  of  our  era,  is  exhibited  in  the
■,  ^  T,  \.  t  ■  Babvlonian  Talmud,  in  which,  however,
^^^l^""^*^  as  in  the  Jerusalem  Talmud,  there  is
and  MandsQan.  ■ 1  ■ r \  i

a  constant mmglmg  of  Aramaic and

Hebrew  passages.  To  a  somewhat  later  period,  and
probably  to  a  somewhat  different  district  of  Babylonia,
belong  the  writings  of  the  Mandaeans,  a  strange  sect,
half  Christian  and  half  heathen,  who,  from  a  linguistic
point  of  view,  possess  the  peculiar  advantage  of  having
remained  almost  entirely  free  from  the  influence  of
Hebrew,  which  is  so  perceptible  in  the  Aramaic  writings  of
Jews  as  well  as  in  those  of  Christians.  The  orthography  of
the  Mandaeans  comes  nearer  than  that  of  the  Talmud
to  the  real  pronunciation,  and  in  it  the  softening  of  the
gutturals  is  most  clearly  seen.  In  other  respects  there  is
a  close  resemblance  between  Manda;an  and  the  language
of  the  Babylonian  Talmud.  The  forms  of  the  imperfect
which  we  have  enumerated  above  take  in  these  dialects
n  or  /.  In  Babylonia,  as  in  Syria,  the  language  of  the
Arabic  conquerors  rapidly  drove  out  that  of  the  country.
The  latter  has  long  been  extinct — unless,  which  is  possible,
a  few  surviving  Mandajans  still  speak  among  themselves
a  more  modern  form  of  their  dialect.

At Edessa,  in the  W. of  Mesopotamia, the  native

dialect  had  already  been  used  for  some  time  as  a  literary

_ . language,  and  had  been  reduced  to  rule

■  ^y'^**' through  the  influence  of  the  schools  (as

\ ®^  . is  proved  by  the  fixity  of  the  grammar  and

Aramaic, ^j^^  orthography)  even  before  Christianity

1  On  this  subiect  we  h.-ive  now  very  valuable  information
in  a  series  of  articles  by  M.  P.irisot  (/<M«r«.  As.,  1898);  moie-
o\er  it  is  hoped  that  Professors  Prym  and  Socin  will  soon  be
able  to  furnisn  more  ample  details.

084


ARAMAIC  LANGUAGE

acquired  power  in  the  country,  in  the  second  century.  At
an  early  period  the  Old  and  the  New  Testaments  were  here
translated,  with  the  help  of  Jewish  tradition  (see  Tkxt,
§  59).  This  version  (the  so-called  PesWtta  or  I'eshito)  be-
came the  Bible  of  Aram^an  Christendom,  and  Kdessa
became  its  capital.  Thus  the  Aramx-an  Christians  of  the
neighlxjuring  countries,  even  those  who  were  subjects  of
the  Persian  empire,  adopted  the  Edessan  dialect  as  the
l;\nguai;e  of  the  church,  of  literature,  and  of  cultivated
ituercourse.  Since  the  ancient  name  of  the  inhabitants,
'  .Xramu-ans,'  just  like  that  of  "EXXTji/ej,  had  acc|uired  in
the  niinils  of  Jews  and  t^hristians  the  unpleasant  signifi-
cation of  'heathens,'  it  was  generally  avoided,  and  in
its  place  the  Greek  terms  '  Syrians  '  and  '  .Syriac  '  were
used.  '.Syriac,'  however,  was  also  the  name  given  by
the  Jews  and  the  C  hristians  of  I'alestine  to  their  own
language,  and  '  Syrians '  was  applied  by  both  Greeks
ancl  Persians  to  the  .\rama;ans  of  liabylonia.  It  is,  there-
fore, incorrect  to  employ  the  word  '  Syriac '  as  mean-
ing the  language  of  ICdessa  alone  ;  but,  since  it  was
the  most  important  of  these  dialects,  it  has  the  best
claim  to  this  generally  received  apjiellatioa.  It  has,  as
we  have  said,  a  form  very  definitely  fixed  ;  and  in  it  the
above-mentioned  forms  of  the  imperfect  take  an  n.  As
in  the  Babylonian  dialects,  the  termination  li  has  become
so  completely  a  part  of  the  substantive  to  which  it  is
addetl  that  it  has  wholly  lost  the  meaning  of  the  definite
article  ;  whereby  the  clearness  of  the  language  is  j^er-
ceptibly  impaired.  The  influence  exercised  by  Greek  is
very  apparent  in  Syriac.

From  the  third  to  the  seventh  century  an  extensive
literature  was  produced  in  this  language,  consisting
_. ...  chietlv,  but  not  entire!  v,  of  ecclesiastical

12.  Its  nistory.  ^^.^^j,^  j^^  ^^^  development  of  this
literature  the  Syrians  of  the  Persian  empire  took  an
c.iger  part.  In  the  Kastern  Roman  empire  Syriac  was,
after  (ireek,  by  far  the  most  important  language  ;  and
under  the  Persian  kings  it  virtually  occupied  a  more
prominent  position  as  an  organ  of  culture  than  the
Persian  language  itself.  The  conquests  of  the  Arabs
totally  changed  this  state  of  things.  Meanwhile,  even
in  Edessa,  a  considerable  difference  had  arisen  lx,'tween
the  written  language  and  the  popular  speech,  in
which  the  process  of  modification  was  still  going  on.
About  the  year  700  it  became  a  matter  of  absolute
necessity  to  systematise  the  grammar  of  the  language
and  to  introduce  some  means  of  clearly  expressing
the  vowels.  The  chief  object  aimed  at  was  that  the
text  of  the  Syri.ac  Bible  should  Ix;  recited  in  a  correct
manner.  It  happened,  however,  that  the  eastern  pronun-
ciation differed  in  manyrcspects  from  that  of  the  W.  The
local  dialects  had,  to  some  extent,  exercised  an  influence
over  the  pronunciation  of  the  literary  tongue  ;  and,  on
the  other  hand,  the  political  separation  Ixjtween  Rome
and  Persia,  and  yet  more  the  ecclesiastical  schism — since
the  SjTians  of  the  ?2.  were  mostly  Nestorians,  those  of
the  W.  Monophysites  and  Catholics  —  had  produced
divergences  l)etween  the  traditions  of  the  various  schools.
Starting,  therefore,  from  a  common  source,  two  dis-
tinct systems  of  punctuation  were  formed,  of  which  the
western  is  the  more  convenient,  but  the  eastern  the
more  e.vact,  and  generally  more  in  accordance  with  the
ancient  pronunciation  :  it  has,  for  example,  a  in  place
of  the  western  <>,  and  0  in  many  cases  where  the  western
Syrians  pronounce  u.  In  later  times  the  two  systems
have  been  intermingletl  in  various  w.ays.

Arabic  everywhere  put  a  speedy  end  to  the  pre
dominance  of  Aramaic  —  a  predominance  which  had
lasted  for  more  than  a  thousand  years— and  soon  began
to  drive  Syri.ac  out  of  use.  Nevertheless,  up  to  the
present  day  Syriac  has  remained  in  use  for  literary  and
ecclesiastical  purposes,  and  may  perhaps  be  even  spoken
in  some  monasteries  and  schools  ;  but  it  has  long  Ijeen
a  dead  language.  When  Syriac  became  extinct  in  Edessa
and  its  neighlxjurhood  is  not  known  with  certainty.  It
is  very  desirable  that  theologians  who  interest  them-


ARAM-NAHARAIM

selves  scientifically  in  the  history  of  the  first  centuries  of
Christianity  should  karn  some  Syriac.  1  he  task  is  not
very  difhcult  for  those  who  know  Hebrew.

In  somedistricts  of  northern  Mesopotamia,  of  the  Mosul
territory,  of  Kurdistan,  and  on  Lake  Urmia,  Aramaic
19  w H • dialects  are  spoken  by  Christians  and

13.  Weo  Bynaxs  oc^-^ionaHy  ,,y  j^ws. Among these

la  ec  8.  jj^.^j  ^j.  L,'pp,i^  fj^j  liecome  the  most
important,  since  American  missionaries  have  formed  a
new  literary  language  of  it.  Moreover,  the  Roman
Prop.aganda  has  primed  books  in  two  of  the  Neo-Syriac
dialects.

On  the  Aramaic  dialects  In  general,  see  Nnldeke,  '  Die  X.Tmen

d. Aram. Nation u. Spraclie,' in /.DMC '.'.'>  113  _ff.  ('71);

Wrisht,  Cw«A  Cratiim.  Sctii.  \^Jf.\  K.ui.

14.  Literattire.  Cramtn.  d.  JIM.-Aram.  bff. The 'Aramaic
inscriptions from Assyria, Habylonia,  Asia


Minor,  and  F.>;ypt  are  found  in  the  .second  part  of  the  C7.S'(tlie
Sinaitic  and  I'ahnyrene  inscriptions  have  not  yet  appeared).
For  the  Nabata-an  the  most  im|>ortant  publication  is  Kutin^'s


Nahattiische  /nschri/titi,  lierlin,  1885.  Others  are  to  be  found  in
various  journals.  Of  these  the  most  considerable  is  the  i^reat
inscription  of  Petra,  first  edited  by  l)c  Vo^\\i,  J.As.,  1896,
8304^  Many  Sinaitic  are  contained  in  Kuting's  .V/«a;//V/»<'
Inschr.  ('gt),  and  of  the  Palmyrene  the  (comparatively  small)
collection  in  iJe  Vogiii's  La  Syrie  C'»-«/rrt/f(  1868-77)  is  the  most
convenient  for  use.  Majiy  others  are  to  be  found  scattered
through  journals  devoted  to  Oriental  subjects,  the  most  imp<jrtant
being  the  great  Fiscal  biscription  in  P.ilmjTcne  and  (Ireek:  see
ZDMG  42370^  ('88),  where  the  literature  is  cited.  .\  few
Palmyrene  inscriptions,  annotated,  are  appended  to  Sevan's
Coiinnentary  on  Daniel.

The  most  complete  S>riac  grammar  is  Nf'ildeke's  Syrisclie
C>n>/n/ia(iA:  {Leip^ic,  '80;  2nd  ed.,  'gS).  Duval's  (Paris,  '81)  is
useful  for  comparison  with  the  other  Aramaic  dialects,  and
Neslle's,  in  the  Porta  Lin^tarvm  ( ^rientalium  (2nd  ed. ,  Berlin,
'88),  is  an  introductory  handbook.  To  theologians  wishing  to
learn  Syriac,  Roediger's  Chrcstomathia  .<:yrinca(yrA  ed.,  Halle,
'92)  may  l>e  highly  recommended.  .Articles  on  the  Nabataian,  the
Palmyrene,  and  the  Cbristian-Pnl.-tinian  dialects  by  Noldcke
are  to  be  fecund  in  the  /  '>  1 ',  ■  >  ,  -  ■'  111537/;  'lAa^jf.  ['63,  '65,
'70]. Of  S\ri;i. (iiiii  f  .r  a  long  time  was  the

only  otie of i;. m  r.\l :  three have appeared,

P.iyne  Siiiiih's  Liriat  / //  ;  inately  not  yet  finished),

Brockelmaiin's  and  lirun  s.  Of  j.;|..ssaries  to  the  Aramaic  in-
scriptions, we  must  now  add  to  Ledrain's  J>ict.  ties  noiiis
froprcs  Paltuyreniens  ('87)  the  glossary  of  Stanley  A.  Cook
(Cambridge,  '98)  and  Lidzbarski's  J/anMuch  der  nordsetiii-
tischen  Ef'igraphik  ('98).

For  the  various  dialects  used  in  early  Jewish  literature,  includ-
ing the  Hebrew  parts  of  it,  we  have,  besides  the  old  lUiMorf
(Hasel,  1639),  J.^cob  Levi's  Neuheb.  u.  Chald.  llorU)/'.
(Leipsic,  1876-89),  and  the  shorter  one  of  J.  I>alman  (part  1,
Leipsic,  '07).  Levy  h.ad  previously  edited  a  Chald.  M'ortcrh.
iihcr  die  Tar^nanim  (leipsic,  '67).

On  the  biblical  Aramaic  there  are,  besides  the  grammar  of
Kautzsch  ('84),  the  little  lx>oks  of  .Strack  (2nd  ed.,  Leipsic,  '97)
and  of  Marti  (Leipsic,  '96).  For  the  Targum  dialects  there
is  no  grannnar  that  meets  the  requirements  of  modern  science.
Nor  is  there  yet  an  adequate  grammar  of  the  Aramaic  dialect
of  the  Babylonian  Talmud,  although  the  little  tract  of  S.  1).
l.,uzzatto,  Elevicnti gramtnaticaiidi Caldeo  Inhliio  e  dcldialetto
Taliitudico  Bahilontse  (Padua,  '65),  is  a  verj-  useful  work.  For
the  Palestine  Jewish  dialects  see  iJalman's  Clranmiar  (Leipsic,
'94);  for  the  Samaritan,  the  grammar  of  IJhlemann  (Leipsic,  '37)
and  Petermann  (Berlin,  '73).  Neither  of  these,  naturally,  repre-  ,
sents  the  results  of  modern  scholarship.  For  the  Mandaic,  see
that  of  Niildeke  (Halle,  '75),  for  the  Neo-Syriac  that  of  the  s.-ime
author  (Ijeipsic,  '68),  and  especially  the  most  valuable  grammar
of  A.  T.  Maclean  (Cambridge,  '95).  T.  N.

ARAMAIC  VERSIONS. See  Tkxt,  §§  59/.,  64.

ARAMEAN  C?i)"lX),  Ut.  -265  R\''"--,  and  AramitesB
(n'f3")N),  I  Ch.  7i4  EV. See  Aram  (beginning).

ARAM-MAACAH  (HSyp  DIX),  i  (  h.  196  RV.
Sec  Ma.mah,  I.

aram-nahaeaim  (Dnn?  ons). i:v  pres.-r^es

the  form  Aram-naharaim  only  in  Ps.  60  (title :  fi^iroTroTofttaK
<rvpw  IBKT],  >x.  crvpiai'  [R])  and  in  Dt.  285  [4]  RVme-  ;  else-

where  the  phr.ise  is  invariably  remlered
1.  OT  expression. Mksoi-otamia,  even  in  Jucfg.  Hio  (so

H  (rupiat  iroTafiCii')  where  .MT  has
simply  .\ram  (C1X  ;  <rvpi«  [.\  ;  L  oiri.  altogether]).  The  other  C
forms  are;  Judg.  3h,  TrOTOfiuf  <rvptas  (Bj,  <rvpia^  ixf  trowoTafiCa^
iroTO/iu)!'  [AL] ; 1  Ch.  11*6  avpia<:  fji«roiroTaitiat  [BkALJ.

Apart  from  Judg.  38,  where  its  genuineness  is  more
than doubtful (see Clshan-kish.\thaim), and the
confused  editorial  data  of  i  Ch.  196  and  Ps.GOa  (title  in
s86


ARAM-NAHARAIM

EV),  which  are,  of  course,  too  latt-  to  be  anytliing  but
antiquarian  lore,'  the  phrase  Arani-nahar(a)im  occurs
in  ^^^  only  twice — once  in  J,  defining  the  position  of
the  '  city  of  N'ahor'  (or  perhaps  rather  '  of  Harran' ;  see
Nahok),  (Jen.  24  lo,  and  once  in  I),  defining  the  position
of  Pethor  on  the  west  bank  of  the  Euphrates  (Dt.
23  5  [4]).  Whilst  the  two  towns  in  (|uestion  are  Aramaean
cities  known  in  later  "^  as  well  iis  in  earlier  *  periods  of
history,  the  stories  connected  with  them  in  the  passages
cited  are  legends  of  prehistorical  times,  whose  interpre-
tation is  necessarily  more  or  less  conjectural  (see  Nahok,
FiAl.AAM).  We  have  no  other  evidence  for  the  actual
currency  of  a  compound  geographical  expression  Aram-
nahar(a)ini.  Indeed,  Aram  is  propjerly  a  race-name
rather  than  the  name  of  a  district  :  apart  from  the
passages  cited,  there  does  not  appear  to  be  any  un-
ambiguous case  of  its  use,  whether  alone  or  in  combina-
tion, as  a  geographical  expression.  Xaharim,  or  Naharin
(see  l>elow,  §  2),  on  the  other  hand,  is  well  known  as  an
ancient  name  for  Northern  Syria  and  the  country  stretch-
ing eastwards  from  it.  Aram-Naharaim,  or  (better)
.\rani-Naharim,  might  then  be,  like  Aram-Zobah,  etc.,
properly  the  name  of  a  people  rather  than  of  a  territory
— unless,  indeed,  .\ram  tx;  perhaps  a  simple  gloss  ex-
plaining Nahar(a)im  (cp  the  converse  case  of  Yahwe-
elohim  in  Gen. '2).  That  Nahar(a)ini  is  a  dual  ('the
two  rivers  ')  is  extremely  doubtful  (cp  Moore  on  Judg.  38)
— the  word,  as  already  hinted,  should  probably  be  pro-
nounced Naharim  (see  §  2).

The  term  Mksoi'd  1  ami,\  {q.v.,  §  i)  is  explained  by  the  Greek
geographers  as  me.-iiiing  '  between  the  rivers  ' ;  but  they  need  not
have  been  right  in  assuming  thit  the  rivers  referred  to  were  two.
It  seems  not  improl).ible  that  the  (Ireek  name  is  really  connected
with  the  ancient  name.-*

The  form  Xahariii  (the  spelling  varies  :  on  this  pro-
nunciation see  W.\IM,  As.  u.  Eur.  25  i ,  252  n.  3[-/«  can,

of  course,  also  Ije  read  -en. — WMM])  is |


2.  The  name
Naharin.


3.  Extent.


attested by the Egyptian records  of  the j
New  Empire, when  this name  seems  to
take  the  place  of  the  earlier  phrase  Up])er  Ruterm  [ih.
249). W. M. Miiller regards the form as plural  ^ i
(252)  ;  but  it  may  also  be  a  locative  like  ICphraim,  etc. !
(see  Namf.s,  §  107).  \

In  Assyrian  or  Babylonian  inscriptions  the  natne  has
not  yet  Ijeen  met  with  (see  §  3)  ;  but in the  Amarna .
letters  it  occurs  repeatedly  as  nidtu  Nahrima  or  Narima,
from  which  we  learn  tlie  valuable  fact  that  in  I'hojnicia
(Gebal)  and Palestine  (Jerusalem)  the  form  with  tn  was j
usual.  j

Naharin  (Nahrima)  was,  as  the  meaning  of  the  name
('river-land')  would  suggest,  a  term  of  physical  rather
than  of  political  geography.  It  need  not,
therefore,  have  been  used  with  a  very
great  definiteness  (cp  the  ancient  names  Wapairoraixia.,
Polyb.  V.  69  ;  and  the  mod.  Riviera)  ;  and  the  inscrip-
tions, in  fact,  bear  this  out.  j

It  seenis  to  have  extended  from  the  valley  of  the  '■
Orontes,  across  the  Euphr.ates,  somewhat  indefinitely
eastwards  [As.  u.  Eur.  249).  Explanations,  based  on
the  view  that  aim  is  dual,  like  those  of  Dillmann  (the
territory  between  the  Chaboras  and  the  Euphrates),  of
.Schrader  in  h'A  7''''^'  (between  the  middle  Euphrates  and
the  Halih),  and  of  Hal6vy  in  Rev.  St'm.  July  1894  (the
neighbourhood  of  Damascus,  w.atered  b\-  the  so-called
Abana  and  the  Pharpar)  seem  less  satisfactory.  In
its  widest application, the  whole  water-system drain-

1  The  pa.s.sages  in which  the  phrase  has  been  inserted  are
obviously  borrowed  from  2  .S.

2  Pethor  mentioned  by  .Shalmaneser  II.

3  Pethor  mentioned  by  Thotmes  III.

■*  it  is  at  least  worth  considering  whether  Mesopotamia  may
not  be  a  translation  of  the  Arama;an  expression  ^JOjJ JNaS

'district  of  rivers,'  a  natural  rendering  (cp  the  Syriac  Heth
'.\rbriye  for  Xenophon's  '.Kpafiia)  of  Naharim  ('riverland '),
afterwards — by  an  easy  misunderstanding  (of  which  there  are
examples) — due  to  the  two  like-.sounding  words  l>eth — suppo.sed
to  mean iei^vetn  rivers.'

s  If  the  suggestion  made  in  the  preceding  footnote  be  adopted,
troTO/xui'  implied  in  Mesopotamia  will  be  plural.

287


ARARAT

ing  into  the  Persian  Gulf  could  be  called  '  the  waters '  or
'  the  great  water  system  '  'of  Nah.arin  '  {As.  u.  E.ur.  253-
255).  In  its  stricter  (narrower)  apjilication  it  probably,
at  one  time,  included  or  formed  part  of  H.anig.albat
(Hani-rabbat).  On  the  history  of  this  whole  district
see  Mksopotamia.  h.  w.  h.

ARAM-ZOBAH  (naiV  D1S).  .See  Aka.m,  §  6.
David,  §  9,  and  Zobah.

ARAN  (n^,  perhaps  '  mountain  goat' — cp  Ei'HKR —
but  Nold.  and  Di.  question  this  ;  arRAN  [HAL]),  a
'son'  of  Dishan  the  Horite  ;  Gen.  3t)28  (pK  [Sam.];
ARAM  [AE])=i  Ch.  I42  (&PAN  [E])-  C.  Niebuhr
(influenced  by  the  preceding  name  Uz)  prefers  the
reading  Aram,  which  is  supported  by  some  Heb.  MSS,
Targ.  Jon.,  ©^  Vg.  .and  Onk.  (cp  Cesch.  I29).  The
MT  is,  however,  probably  correct  (cp  Oren,'  i  Ch.  225),
though  if  Oren  is  the  right  pronunciation  of  jik  in  i  Ch.
225,  it  is  probably  correct  .also  in  i  Ch.  I42,  and  vice
versa  (see  We.  De gent.  39).

ARARAT  (0"inX' ;  ararat  [BAL]).  i.  Ararat  is
mentioned  in  the  C)T  .as  a  country  ;  2  K.  I937  (arapa9


1.  Country
biblical


[H].  apaAaA[A])  =  Is.  37  38(ApA\eN[e]iA
[BNAO(^)])  ; cp  Tob.  1  21  [apa.pa.0  [BJ)  AV

aUusions  ■^^^**^'  J"^""-  ^1=7  (apate  har'  eMoy
[BN]  ;  apa.peQ\.\\,  apaper  (l.^).  The  first
two  passages  referred  to  are  parallel  ;  they  relate
that  the  two  sons  of  Sennacherib  (Sin-ahi-irba),  after
having  slain  their  father,  '  escaped  into  the  land  of
Ararat'  (so  RV).  A  collateral  confirmation  of  this
report  is  given  by  an  inscription  of  Esar-haddon"  (.\sur-
ah-iddina)  which  states  that  on  the  news  of  the  murder
of  his  father  he  quickly  collected  the  forces  (with  which
he  was  probably  carrying  on  a  campaign  in  Cappadoci.a
or  Cilicia),  marched  against  Nineveh,  and  defeated  the
army  of  the  murderers  at  Hanirabbat  (Hanigalmit?
Schrader).  This  district  lies  in  the  neighbourhood  of
Melitene,  just  where,  at  a  later  time,  the  Romans
entered  .Armenia  {i.e. ,  .Arar.at).  In  Jer.  /.c.  the  prophetic
writer  summons  the  kingdoms  (or,  as  (S^X,  the  kings)  of
.Ar.arat,  Minni,  .and  Ashkenaz  to  fight  against  Babylon.
This  too  agrees  with  the  representations  of  the  inscrip-
tions, which  constantly  distinguish  between  the  land  of
Mannu  and  Urartu  or  Ararat.  Mannu  (which  lay  to
the  .S.  or  SE.  of  Lake  L'rflmTa)  was  generally  subject
to  the  .Assyrians,  but  at  least  once  was  conquered  from
them  by  .Argistis  son  of  Menua.s  (see  Tiele,  //./(/'  208,
215). See  further  Minni,  Ashkenaz.

The  name  Urarti  appears  in  the  A.ssyrian  texts  from

the ninth century  onwards. It appears to be inter-

.  . changeable  with  N.airi  {i.e.,  the  streams),

■  ■'^^fsy"^^  the  old  Semitic  name  of  the  country,
'  ■  which  it  bore,  for  example,  under  Tiglath-
pileser  I.  {circa  1108  B.C.)  and,  as  appears  from  the
notices  in  the  Egyptian  inscriptions  of  the  eighteenth
dynasty,  at  a  much  earlier  date  {circa  1400  B.C. ).  The
kings,  who  are  called  by  the  Assyrians  Urartians,  never
apply  this  name  to  themselves.  .S.arduris  I. ,  the  first
king  whose  inscriptions,  written  in  As.syrian  {circa  830
B.C.),  have  come  down  to  us,  calls  himself  king  of
Nairi,  a  title  which  the  .Ass\Ti<ans  n.aturally  did  not
grant  him,  Ixjcause  they  themselves  laid  claim  to  his
country.  His  successors,  who  use  their  own  language,
call  their  land  Biaina,  out  of  which  the  later  name  Van
has  arisen,  a  name  which  must  at  that  time  have  been
transferred  from  the  district  where  the  kings  resided  to
the  wholjs  kingdom.

Next,  as  to  the  extent  of  the  kingdom  of  Urartu  or
Nairi.  The  greater  p.art  of  the  later  .Armenia  was,
sometimes  at  any  rate,  included  within  its  limits  ;  for
Vannic  inscriptions  have  teen  found  even  in  Malatlyah,
ne.ar  Palu  on  the  Upper  Euphrates,  and  as  far  away  as
the  Russian  province  Erivan.  It  would  appear  that
originally  Nairi  denoted  a  more  southerly  region,  where
1  On  Oman  see  Araunah.  '-  3  R.  15,  col.  i.17.


ARARAT

the  Tigris  and  the  Muphrales  rise,  wliilst  Ararat  proper
( Urarti  |  lay  to  the  X. ,  in  the  plain  of  the  Araxes  ;  but  that
Ixitween  the  eleventh  century  and  the  ninth,  the  L'rartians
(whom  their  language  shows  to  have  l>een  a  non-Semitic
jx-'oplc)  conciuered  the  more  southerly  region,  and  estab-
hshed  there  the  thief  se^at  of  their  dominion — a  con(|uest
which  they  were  enabled  to  make  by  the  great  decline
of  Assyria  at  that  time.  Afterwards,  both  names,  Nairi
and  Urartu,  were  used  for  the  whole  country.  The
Assyrian  king  S;irgon  broke  the  power  of  Urartu  f<jr  a
long  time  ;  but  his  successors  did  not  succeed  in  their
endeavours  to  destroy  it,  and  so  it  is  not  uimatural  that
Assyriologists  have  sometimes  defended  the  pre-e.\ilic
origin  of  the  long  prophecy  against  Babylon  at  the  end  of
the  liook  of  Jeremiah,  on  this  ground  among  others,  that
the  kingdoms  of  Ararat  and  Minni  are  still  well  known
to  the  Israelites,  and  considered  to  Ix;  formidable
powers.'  Kuenen,  however  {(>//<fJ-'  2  242  = /w«/.  2
232/),  hiis  sufticiently  shown  that  these  arguments  are
not  conclusive.  l'ro]x.'r  names  like  Ararat  and  Minni
simply  prove  the  literary  and  anlicjuarian  research  of  the
author,  and  the  jihenomena  of  the  prophi  cy  as  a  whole
ap|x;ar  to  Ixnh  the  present  writers  to  presuppo.se  a  jxjriod
later  than  that  of  Jeremiah, (.'-^ee  Jkkk.miaii,  ii. ).

2.  Ararat  is  mentioned  also  in  the  post-e.\ilic  version
of  the  Deluge-story.  The  statement  runs  thus:  'And
3 Deluee-  '^*^  ^^^  reste<l  . . . upon  the  mountains  of

■  .  "'Ararat'  ((Jen.  84  RV  ;  Samar.  text  ann.T).
^'  This  is  precisely  parallel  to  the  statement  of
the  cognate  Babylonian  story  (see  l)Ki,UGi:,  §  1)  :  '  The
mountain  of  the  land  of  Ni.sir  stopped  the  ship,'  or,  as  the
following  lines  give  it,  '  The  mountain  Nisir  stopped  the
ship."  That  Nisir  (protection?  deliverance?)  is  proijcrly
the  name  of  a  mountain  or  mountain  range  seems  to  be
clear  from  .Xsur-na.sir-pal's  inscription  (see  A'//  1  77),  and
Ararat  too,  in  the  intention  of  the  Hebrew  writer,  will
l)e  tlie  name  of  a  mountain  or  mountain  range.  The
situation  of  Nisir  is  clear  from  the  inscription  just
referred  to.  It  was  in  Media,  K.  of  the  Lower  Zab,
and  S.  of  the  Caspian  Sea.  There  lies  l-'-Iburz,  the
Hara.  berezaiti,  or  Hara  haraiti  bares,  thus  named  by
the  N.  Iranians  after  their  mythic  sky-mountain.  Now,
it  is  remarkable  that  Nicolaus  Dam.iscenus  (in  Jos.
.////.  i.  36,  cp  also  OS*'-)  209 48)  names  the  mountain  of
the  ark  Iferis,  and  places  it  'above  Minyas' — i.e.,  Minni
(Mannu).  Baris  ( fia res  =  high)  appears  to  Ix;  a  fragment
of  the  Iranian  name  of  Elburz,  which  this  writer  took
for  the  whole  name.'^  It  may  I)e  conjectured  that  this
was  the  mountain  which  the  Hebrew  writer,  in  accord-
ance with  the  Babylonian  tradition,  had  in  view.  If
so,  he  gave  it  the  name  which  it  bore  in  his  own  time,
Hara  haraiti,  shortening  it  into  Ararat,  not  ix'rha[js
without  confusing  it  involuntarily  with  the  land  of
I'rarti,  which  latter  name  may  have  hatl  a  ilifferent
origin.

It  was  natural  enough  that  the  most  widely  sjjread
tradition  accepted  the  identity  of  the  .\rarat  of  the
Hebrew  Deluge-story  with  the  kingdom  of  Ararat  spoken
of  al)ove.  There  {i.e.,  in  the  plain  of  the  Araxes)  a
lofty  mountain  rises,  worthy,  so  it  may  have  appeared,
to  be  the  scene  of  such  a  great  event  as  the  stranding  of

1  Sayce,  Cri/.  ^ron.  485/  Prof.  Sayce  is  uncertain  whether
leremiah  'has  m.-\de  use  of  some  earlier  pronhecy  of  which
Nineveh  was  the  burden,  or  whether  'the  prophecy  belongs  to
a  time  when  Haliylon  had  already  taken  the  place  of  Nineveh,
but  when  in  other  respects  the  political  condition  of  W.  Asia
still  remained  what  it  was  in  the  closing  days  of  the  Assyrian
Kmpire."  '  In  any  case  the  prophecy  must  be  earlier  than  the
age  of  the  .second  Isaiah,  to  which  modern  criticism  has  so
often  referred  it."  This  was  printed  in  1894,  five  years  after  the
appearance  of  vol.  ii.  of  the  most  authoritative  summary  of
'modern  criticism,'  Kuenen 's  OmierzoeM'i),  and  two  years  after
that  of  the  (lerman  translation.  Prof.  Tielcj  who,  in  i886
{liAii  480),  from  an  incomplete  view  of  the  critical  arguments,
maint.-iined  Jer.  ,50/  to  have  been  written  before  Cyrus  among
the  e.xiles  in  Babylon,  now  accepts  Kuenen's  main  conclusions
as  expressed  in  the  work  referred  to.

2  Whether  Lubar,  the  name  of  the  mountain  of  the  ark  in
Juhilees,  chaps.  5  and  10,  has  any  connection  with  liaris,  it  is
unimportant  to  decide.


19


289


ARAUNAH

I the ark. Of  its two  conical peaks,  one is crowned

with  iK-rpetual  snow,  and  rises  17,000  ft.  alxive  the  sea-

: level  ;  the  other  is  4000  ft.  lower. That  the  Hebrew

i writer thought of these mountains is in the highest

degree improbable (.see Di. Ceitesis, 131). Another

tradition  identified  .\rarat  with  the  land  of  Cardu  (so

I'esh. ,  Targ. )  —i.e. ,  the  ancient  Korduene  or  Karduchia

on  the  left  bank  of  the  L'p|x.T Tigris,  and  the  mountain

I of the ark with the Jelx-l Jfidi, SW. of I.akc  \'an,

\ which  has  Ijccome  the  traditional  site  with  the  .Moslems.

In the Table of .Nations (Gen.  10) the name of

Ararat does not occur  ; but Ashkenaz, kiphath (or

Diphath),  and Togarmah  (see  sixjcial  articles)  jjrobably

denote  districts  of  \V.  and  .NW.  .Armenia.

: For the geography  of Urartu cp  esjjccially  Sayce,

j 'Cuneiform Inscr.  of  \'an,'  /A*. /.V  xiv. pt. ii.  388/:,

where,  however,  the  .Armenians,  who  entered  the  country

from  the  W. , and are related to  the .Aryan  races  tjf

Asia Minor, are regarded as Iranians. It  is  against

this  view  that, shortly  after the first mention of the

name Urartu by A.sur-niisir-pal, names  of  an  Aryan

i sound  occur  in  an  inscription  of  his  son  Shalmaneser  II.

I (.Artasari  and  Data).  c.  i-.  r. — w.  ii.  k.

ARARATH,  AV"'*.'-  4  Ksd.  1345; KV  Ak/aki:tii.

ARARITE ('"1>N*I1), 2. S. '2333^  kV  ; .W H.\k.\k-

ITK,  3.

ARATHES  (apaBhc  [VA]).  i  Mace.  ir>2.. kV,  .\V

Aki.\k.\tiiks  (</.:■.  ).

ARAUNAH  (n;)-)N, so Kr.  everywhere  in 2  S.  24,

but  Kt.  nniNn  V.  16,  n':-is  r.  is,  njnx  ^r.  22-

24),  orORN.\N  (|:"1N  in  Ch.),  a  Jebusite.  whose  threshing-
floor,  consecrated  by  the  presence  of  the  angel  of  ^'ahuc,
David  ])urchased  as  a  site  for  an  altar  (cp  MoKl.Ml).
The  story  is  told  in  two  forms,  which  agree  in  es.sentials.
On  I  Ch.  21  20  see  note  to  Kittel's  translation  in  SHOT
(2  .S.  24  16  f.  I  Ch.  21  IS  f.  2  Ch.  3i,  opva  [B.\I.]  ;  cp
opova  Jos.  Atit.  vii.  33,  opovva  ih.  I34I.  'The  real  name,
however,  was  not  .Araunah,  which  is  thoroughly  un-
Hebraic,  and  presumably  un-Canaanitish.  'The  critics
have  in  this  case  not  lx;en  critical  enough.  Even  Budde
{SHOT,  Heb.  ed. ,  note  on  2  S.  24 16)  admits,  rather
doubtfully,  the  form  .Araimah.  Klost.  prefers  ©s
form  Orna,  which,  however,  is  no  better  than  the  Oman
of  the  Chronicler.  One  has  a  right  to  require  a  definitely
Hebrew  name,  and  such  a  name  for  this  Jebusite  MT
actually  gives  us  in  2  S.  24  18— viz. ,  ,TrK=  .T:nN  .Adonijah
(cp  0^«'ia[s]  [.AL]  =  . Adonijah  in  2  S.  84,  and  in  ©'  of
I  Ch.  32,  and  in  1  K.  1/.).  It  is  [jroposed,  therefore,
to  correct  '.Araunah'  into  '.Adonijah'  throughout,  except
in  V.  23  (on  which  s(,'e  lx.'low)  ;  cp  '  .Adonilx?zek,'  mis-
written  in  Judg.  1  for  '  .Ado.n'izedkc  '  {q.v.).

'The  critics  have  Ix-'en  very  near  making  this  correction.
'They  ha,\e  rightly  rejected  the  pretty  romance  based  on
the  phrase  '  .Araunah  the  king'  in  2  S.  2423  (M'T),  from
which  Kwald  (///.f/".  3 163)  inferred  that  .Araunah  w;is
the  old  dethroned  king  of  Jebus.  'They  have  also
rejected  the  makeshift  rendering  of  RV,  '  .AH  this,  O
king,  doth  .\raunah  give  unto  the  king,'  Ijecause  a
subject  sjxiaking  to  his  sovereign  was  bound  to  call
himself  humbly  "the  king's  servant'  (cp  i  S.  2619  i  K.
1  26).  .As  Wellhausen  first  saw ,  the  sense  required  is,  '  .All
this  doth  the  servant  of  my  lord  the  king  give  unto  the
king.'  'This  means  correcting  ,n:i-iN  into  "jnK.  and  pre-
fixing 135,' — a  capital  correction  which  only  needs  to  lie
supplemented  by  the  emendation  of  nriK  elsewhere  into
.Tann  (see  alwve).

An  additional  argument  h;is  thus  Ix-'en  gained  for  the
substitution  of  '  .Adonijah  '  for  '  .Araimah. '  'The  cor-
rection is  certain,  and  it  is  of  the  highest  interest.  The
Israelite  king  and  his  Jebusite  subject  worship  the  same
god — the  go<i  of  the  land  of  Canaan.  Adonijah  too
was  not  an  ex-king,  but  simply  a  member  of  the  J<-busite
comnninity.  which  continued  to  exist  even  after  the
conquest  of  Jerusalem. <S'-  (2  S.  66 'Opi'd.  Heb. |\qj)

290


1.  In  Galilee  ?


AREA

apparently  identified  the  place  witii  the  tlireshing-floor
at  Perez-Uzzah  (see  Nacmun).  t.  k.  c.

AREA  (ya-lX  ;  AppoB  [B],  arBo  [A]  -Be  [10).  '  the
greatest  man  among  the  Anakim '  (Josh.  His).  See
A.NAic,  and  IIkhkon,  i.

ARBAH  (y5")S)  Gen.  ^o^j  AV. See  Hebron,  i.

ARBATHITE  Cn^nyn)— /.«. ,  a  man  of  Beth-arahah
(2  S.  '_'3  3i  I  Ch.  1132)- See  Abi-ALBON.

ARBATTIS  AV,  or  rather  Arbatta  RV  (cn
arBaktoic  [AX'^-^];  -Banoic  [X*],  -Batn.  [V*],
-TAN.  ['^''J  ;  ^  g-  '"  Aibatis ;  the  .Syriac  gives  the
strange  form  .'/n//^rt/,  J^?»/ )•  i  ^^^cc.  fjzs.f  Simon
the  Maccabee,  after  his  successes  in  Galilee  against  the
Gentiles,  brought  Iwck  to  Judaea  '  those  [Jews]  that
were  of  (reading  iK  for  iv)  Galilee  and  in  Arbatta.'
A  district  rather  than  a  town  is  obviously  to  be  under-
stood. Ewald  (Hist.  5314)  thinks  of  the  plain  called
el-Batlha  on  the  NE.  shore  of  the  Sea  of  Galilee  (cp
the  Syriac  form)  ;  more  probably  the  Arabah  or
Arabolh  (nmyi  of  Jordan  is  intended. See  Arabah,  i.

ARBELA  (eN  ArBhAoic  [AXV]),  i  Mace.  9  2.
Bacchides  and  .Alcimus,  in  their  second  expedition  into
Jud;T?a,  '  went  forth  by  the  way  that  leadeth  to  Galgala
(yaXaaS  [codd.  64,  93]),  and  pitched  their  tents  before
Masaloth  (RV  Mesaloth  ;  fxeaaaXoid  [.V],  jxaiaa.  [XV]),
which  is  in  Arljela. '  There  are  four  alternative  e.\-
planations  (but  see  CHisi.oTH-'rABOR).

J'/rsf :  Josephus  (A/i/.  xii.  11 1)  seems  to  have  read
for  'Galgala,'  'Galilee,'  which  Wellhausen  (//C;  (^>  261,
n.  2,  where  he  quotes  the  parallel  case,
Jos.  xii.  23  ©"  Trjs  Va\ei.\aias)  adopts,
and,  without  explaining  Masaloth,  takes  Arbela  to  l)e
the  well-known  spot  at  the  head  of  the  cliffs  overhanging
the  western  border  of  the  plain  of  Hattin,  the  modern
Irbid.  The  interchangeableness  of  the  two  forms
Arlx'd  and  .\rl)el  is  proved  by  the  Arab  geographers.
Nasir-i-Khusrau,  1047  A.  n. ,  calls  it  Irbil  ;  Yakut  in
1235  A.  I).,  and  others,  call  it  Irbid.  The  limestone
caverns  near  Irbid  were  the  haunts  of  bandits,  who
were  only  with  difliculty  dispossessed  by  Herod  the
Great  ;  the  methods  he  employed  are  graphically
descrilied  by  Josephus  (Anf.  xiv.  15  4  ^^/  '•  16  2  jr.).
Robinson,  who,  with  most  moderns,  accepts  this  identi-
fication, conjectures  that  Mesaloth  '  which  is  in  Arbela'
represents  the  Heb.  n^'PDn  in  the  sense  of  s/ej>s,  storeys,
terraces,  and  describes  the  fortress  on  the  face  of  the
almost  perpendicular  cliff  (3  2S9).  \\'ith  more  reason
Tuch  [QiicTst.  de  Flav.  Jos.  Libh.  Hist.),  followed  by
Wellhausen  (I.e.),  proposes  to  read  ;\Iecra5u)^  (cp  HP
93,  MacrtraSw^)  as  if  for  nniiip  'strongholds.'  The
objections  to  this  identification  are  that  Josephus  is  the
onlj'  authority  for  the  reading  raXtXaiac,  and  that,  by
all  we  can  learn  from  him,  the  task  of  reducing  Arlxila
would  have  cost  Bacchides  more  time  than  in  the
circumstances  he  was  likely  to  be  willing  to  spend.
The  direction  through  (ialilee  by  Arbela  would,  how-
ever, be  a  natural  one  for  the  Syrians  to  take.

Second :  As  natural  a  line  of  march  for  the  Syrian  army
lay  along  the  coast  down  to  the  mouth  of  the  valley  of
n xt A" 1 „  Aijalon,  and  up  that  valley  or  one  of  the

2.  By  Aljalon?  p_.^rallel  defiles  farther  S.  On  this  hne
there  was  a  Va\ya.\a.,  the  present  Jiljuliyeh,  a  little  more
than  13  m.  NE.  of  Joppa,  on  a  site  so  important  that
the  main  road  might  well  be  descril)ed  as  bhov  ttjv  els
ra\7aXa.  There  is,  however,  no  trace  along  it  of  a
UaiffaXdid  or  an  'Ap^ijXa.

Third: If  Bacchides  wished  to  avoid  the  road  by

the  coast  and  up  Aijalon,  which  had  proved  so  fatal  to

. Nicanor,  he  may  have  taken  the  road

3.  InSamana?  ^^^^  Esdraelon  S.  through  Samaria,
which  Holofemes  is  represented  in  Judith  as  taking —
the  road  which  this  book (4?) expressly  calls  'The

391


ARCHES

anabaseis  of  the  hill-country, '  '  the  entrance  into  Judaea. '
Upon  it  there  stand  two  Gilgals,  one  near  Shechem,
and  one  5  m.  N.  of  Gophna,  which  Ewald  {Hist.  ling,
ed.  5  323)  takes  to  l:)e  the  Galgala  of  the  narrative  (but
see  Gll.G.M.).  On  this  route  Masaloth  might  be  Meselleh
or  Meithalun,  respectively  5  and  8  m.  S.  of  Jenin,  each
of  them  a  natural  point  at  which  to  resist  an  invader.
A  greater  difficulty  is  presented  by  iv  'Ap^riXoii.  The
plural  form  evidently  signifies  a  considerable  district.
Now,  Eusebius  {OS^'^>  'Ap^r)\d)  notes  the  name  as  extant
in  his  day,  on  ICsdraelon,  9  R.  m.  from  Lejjun,  while
the  entrances  from  Esdraelon  on  Meselleh  and  Meithalun
are  gh  R-  ni.  from  Lejjun.  It  is  therefore  possible  that
the  name  'ApjirjXd  co\cred  in  earlier  days  the  whole  of
this  district.  The  suggestion  is,  however,  far  from  Ixiing
capable  of  proof.  The  chief  points  in  its  favour  are
the  straight  road  from  the  N. ,  which  was  regarded  as
a  natural  line  of  invasion,  and  the  existence  along  the
road  of  a  Jiljuliyeh,  a  Meselleh,  and  a  Meithalun.

Fourth  :  There  is  some  MS  authority '  for  reading
7aXaa5  instead  of  70X70X0 ;  and  if  the  march  of
J  p-i  An  Bacchides  be  conceived  as  having  been
4.  in  Uileaa  ?  tj^^ough  Gilead,  the  Arl^ela  of  i  Mace.
92  may  tx;  the  'AplirjXd  (mod.  Irbid)  which  Eusebius
(O.S'  21473)  vaguely  defines  as  a  certain  village  Ix-'vond
Jordan  on  the  confines  of  Pella.  This  Irbid,  however,
lies  very  far  E.  and  not  in  a  direct  line  from  the  N.
I-A-en  from  Damascus,  it  would  be  a  roundabout  way
for  the  Syrian  troops  marching  with  speed  on  Jerusalem.
(We  can  hardly  compare  the  advance  of  Antiochus  III.
upon Ptolemy  IV.  [Polyb.  5  6],  in  the  course  of  which

] Antiochus,  after  taking  Tabor  and  Bethshean,  crossed

I Jordan and  overran  Gilead  from  Arbela  to  Rabbath-

j anunon).

Of  these  four  alternatives  the  first  and  third  seem  the
most  probable.  The  difficulties  of  all,  however,  are  so
great  that  most  historians  {e.if.  Schiirer  and  Stade)  shirk
discussion  of  the  line  of  march,  and  bring  Bacchides
without  delay  to  the  walls  of  Jerusalem.  G.  A.  s.

ARBITE,  THE  ("anxn),  2  S. -2335.  probably  an
error  for  Archite. See  Paarai.

i  ARBONAI  (aBrcona  [BA],  xeBRcoN  [X]  ;  ji^:^
'Jabbok' [Syr.]; ma?ntrc). In  Juilith  224  it  is  stated

i  that  Nebuchadrezzar  '  went  through  Mesopotamia,  and
destroyed  all  the  high  cities  that  were  upon  the  river
(xetM"P/'os)  Arbonai  till  ye  come  to  the  sea. '  X'arious
commentators,  following  Grotius,  have  taken  the  Cha-
boras  to  be  meant.  There  is  much  plausibility,  however,
in  the  suggestion  of  Movers  that  the  proper  name  may
have  arisen  out  of  a  failure  to  understand  the  original,
which  he  conjectures  to  have  been  •^,^:^  irv^  '  (the  cities
which  were)  beyond  the  river,' i^y  having  Ijeen  taken
for  a  proper  name  and  supplied  with  a  CJreek  ending.

ARCHANGEL (APX<\rreAoc[Ti.WII]),  Judeg.  See
Angel,  §  4.

ARCHELAUS  (ARxeXAOC  [Ti.WH],  Mt.222t).  son
of  Herod  the  (Jreat  by  Malthake,  and  elder  brother  of
Herod  Antipas.  By  his  father's  will  he  was  made  ruler
over  Jnd;ea  and  Samaria,  and  his  visit  to  Augustus  for
the  confirmation  of  this  inheritance  doubtless  suggested
a  point  in  the  parable  Lk.  19 12/:  Upon  his  coins  he
bears  the  family  name  of  Herod  and  is  called  '  Eth-
narch,'  for  '  king '  he  never  v.iis,  in  spite  of  his  assump-
tions (cp  Jos.  ,/;//.  xvii.  45)-  He  may,  however,  have
l>een  popularly  called  'king.'  (Cp  Jos.  ,-i///.  .xviii.  43,
and  the  use  of  ^affiXevei  in  Mt.  222.  See  further
Herodian  Family,  3. )
ARCHER.  See  War,  Weapons.
ARCHES  is  the  rendering  in  the  EV  of  n'"lS7^N,  etc. ,
in  Ez.  4O16/:  The  word  cS'N  or  cSn  occurs  in  MT
only  in  this  chapter  ;  but  (S"'^'-  transliterates  ai\a/i
also  where  MT  has  cSiK.  cSn.  Whatever  explanation
be  adopted  of  the  variation  of  form,  the  meaning  is
1  HP  oSov  «n  Y^v  yaXaaS  [cod.  64],  o.  nji'  tit  yoAooi  [cod.  93].


ARCHBVITES

doubtless  the  same  throughout  —  viz. ,  '  porch. '  ?iee
Porch,  P.m-ack.  Tkmpi.k.

That  the  priticiple  of  the  arch  early  became  known
to  Israel  is  a  probable  inference  from  the  shape  of  their
To  .M  lis.

ARCHEVITES  (Kt.  "lanN.  cp  Kau.  Gram.  d.  bihl.
Aram.  §(il6;  Kr.  NM3->N  ;  6  Swetc,  ApxHyoi  ;
ApxoYCl  [IVl  ;  AXYAioi  [AJ  ;  Apx-  [LJ),  mentioned  in
Kzra49tasatril)esettle<lin  Palestine  by  AsN.\l'l'KK(^.r'. ).
The  word  is  not  to  lie  regarded  as  meaning  inhabitants  of
Krech  (kyssel,  Kyle),  or  as  etjuivalent  to  d/)xocTes  (Jen-
sen, TLZ,  1895,  n.  20),  but  rather  as  miswritteii  for  (>)i,
K;(n)53.  'who  are  Cuthieans '  (see  2  K.  17  24  'from
Babylon  and  from  C'uthah,'  etc.  K  So  Marc).  Fun  J.
64/

ARCHI  ('3"!N*n),  Josh.  I62  AV,  RV  ARCiiiTiiS.

ARCHIPPUS  (APXinnoc  [Ti.  WH])  is  included  as
a  '  ffUow-soldier  '  of  Paul  and  Timothy  iti  the  address
of  the  epistle  to  Philemon  (Philem.  2),  and  in  that  to  the
C'olossians  (417)  he  received  this  message  :  Take  heed
to  the  ministry  {6iaKoviav)  which  thou  hast  received  in
the  Lord,  that  thou  fulfil  it.'  Most  probably  he  had
recently  become  the  minister  (more  than  'deacon'  in
the  narrower  sense)  of  the  church  at  Colossa,-,  perhaps
in  succession  to  Epaphras,  who  was  now  with  the
apostle.  In  .7/.  Const.  (746)  he  is  said  to  have  teen
apostolically  ordained  bishop  of  I.aodicea  in  Phrygia.

ARCHITES.  A\-  Akchi  (-3>Sn  ;  toy  APXI  \^'^  •
©"'^  combine  the  word  with  the  following  Ataroth,
XarapwOei  [B],  ApxiATdvpooG  [AJ),  a  clan  mentioned  in
the  difficult  phnise  niTjy  ^SIXH  ^-133  (Josh.  162)  in
the  delimitation  of  the  southern  frontier  of  Joseph.
Probably  we  should  reverse  the  order  of  the  last  two
words  and  read  '  the  border  of  ,\taroth-of-the-Archites. '
Indeed,  we  might  plausibly  go  a  step  further  and  change
•3iKn  to  mun  (or  "n-iNn),  '  Addarites '  (or  'Arditcs').
See  Ataroth,  2.  That  the  name  Archi  lingers  in  that
of  the  village  'Atn  'Arik,  5  m.  WSW.  of  Beitln
iPEFA/em.  87),  is  at  best  a  hazardous  hypothesis  (cp
Ottli,  and  Buhl  Pal.  170/.).  The  home  of  the  clan
of  Archites  to  which  Hushai  and,  according  to  ©  (2  S.
23  n  nai,  6  'Apovxatos  [BA],  6  Apax<-  [L];  and  f.  35
*3"'Kn,  [tov  Ovpai]  oepxfc  [B],  6  Apaxfim  [A],  6  Acpapei
[1.]),  Shammah  ['/.v.,  3  and  4]  and  Paarai,  two  of
David's  heroes,  belonged,  may  have  been  farther  S.

ARCHITECTURE.  See  Conduits  anu  Reser-
voirs, FoKTKi.ss,  House,  Palace,  Temi'le,  Tomb.

ARCHIVES. See  Historical  Literature.  §  5.

ARCTURUS,  AVs  rendering  of  liy  (Job  99)  and
C"l?  (JobaSi-'i  ;  K\'  Bear.  Most  probably,  however,
try  in  JobQg  has  arisen  from  dittography  of  ncy  which
precedes,  for  V'03  follows  without  1.  The  whole  verse
seems  to  lie  an  unmetrical  interpolation  (see  Bickell)  ;
Duhm.  agrees  as  to  e-j,-,  and  gfx,'s  so  far  as  to  excise  ?'<■.
8-10  (so  also  Beer).  Observe  that  Am.  58,  which  is
certainly  (see  Amos,  §  12)  an  interpolation,  and  very
possibly  alludes  to  JobQg  (as  Am.  4  13,  also  interpolated,
may  allude  to  Job98),  does  not  include  ry  among  the
constellations.  We  have,  therefore,  only  to  explain  the
r-y  (c^'V?)  of  Job3832.  That  the  Pleiades  are  meant  is
not  unlikely  (see  Stars,  §  3  (a);  cp  Tg.  (8832)  Sy  Knjt
NrtmsK,  '  the  hen  with  her  chickens ' ).  Cheyne,  however,
prefers  '  the  Lion  with  his  sons  '  (on  Job 38 31,  etc.'  //?/.,
1898,  103/:).  Epping's  list  of  'stations'  for  Venus
ami  Mars,  obtained  from  Seleucidean  tablets,  gives  as
the  tenth  '  the  fourth  son  behind  the  king '  (p  Leonis).
The  '  king'  is  Regulus  (o  Leonis)  ;  he  is  preceded  by
ris  an  '  Lion's  head'  (t  Leonis).

(«<nr«poi'  [BKAl;  klynthd  [Pesh.];  nrcturum  \W%.  Op],  vts-
perum  \ib.  38  32).  In  5»9  ©,  Pesh.,  presuppose  the  order  yo3>
rV'  nO'>) t:p  Mazzaroth,  Orion,  Pleiades.

C.  F.  B. — T.  K.  C.

993


AREOPAGUS,  AREOPAQITB

ARD  ('^'^N,  Gen.  4621  Nu.  2640!  cp  Arik)N.  Akod),
perhaps  a  lx;tter  form  than  Addar  (tik)  of  ||  i  Ch.  Sjt
(Oen. apaA [ADL; B lacking; Jos. c&poAoc]  :

Nu.  aAap  IBJ,  AAep  [AKL]  :  i  Ch.  aAci  [B],  ApeA  [A],
aAap  [LJ)  in  genealogy  of  Benjamin  (q.v.,  §9;  ii.  /j)  ;
variously  designated  son  of  Benjamin  ((ien.  .MT),  son  of
Bela  ( \u.  and  i  Ch. ),  son  of  (Jera  b.  Bela  (Gen.  [ADL  ;
B  lacking]).  Gentilic  Aruite  (-t-k  ;  ©"'*  om.,  0  AJtpt
[L,/.r],.

ARDATH,  R\'  Ardat,  the  name  of  a  field  mentioned
only  in  4  Esd.  926  as  the  scene  of  a  vision  of  Esdras.

The  Kth.  and  Syr.  read  Arf-had,  which  Fritzsche  and  HilKf.
follow.  1  he  Lat.  Vss.  var>-  -.—ardath  (Vg.j,  adar  (.S*l,  ardati
\.\\,  etc.  ;  cp  Bensly  ad  loc.  .Supported  by  the  description  in
T.  i4  ('a  field  .  .  .  where  no  house  is  Imilded  '),  Volkmar  would
emend  to  Arha,  'desert'  (more  correctly  Araha).  .Similarly
Kendel  Harris,  who,  however,  connects  Arba  with  Kirjalh-arba


{Kest  0/  H'oriisof  liaruch,  Camb.  1889),  in  which  ca.se  the  'oak  '
in  14  I  will  be  Aljraham's  oak  of  Hebron.  On  the  other  hand,
we  should  then  expect  rather  the  usual  name  Hebron,  or,  at
least,  the  fuller  form,  Kirjath-.\rba.  If  .Ardat  is  indeed  lo  be
sought  for  in  this  district  (in  3  i  Ksdras  is  in  H.ibylon)  we  minht
follow  T.  Kec.  more  closely  and  identify  it  with  the  well-known
Arad,  which  also  was  situated  in  a  de.sert. See  Akad,  i.

ARDITES  C'nnKn).  Nu.  2640. See  Ard.

ARDON  (i'n>S;  opNA  [BA],  aBAcom  [L]).  b.
Azubah,  a  Calebite  (i  Ch.  2i8t). See  Azubah,  i.

ARELI  (^"pN-IN;  Gen.  46.6;  apihAic  [^].  &pOH-
Aeic  [A],  AnHAeic  [L] ;  Gen.  i.e.,  also  TCO  apihA
[BFL],  om.  A;  see  .Ariel),  b.  Gad.  In  Nu.  2(ji7i*
the  name  is  u.sed  also  collectively  with  the  art.
(EV  'the  Arelitea';  o  ApiHA[e]l  [BFL]),  with  con-
sciousness that  'son  of  Gad'.— Gadite  clan.  I)(jubt-
less  V.  iji,  should  t)e  corrected  to  '  Of  .-\riel  ('^KnN';:),  the
family  of  the  Arielites  ('S^t^^t,^),'  and  it  is  possible  th;it
the  names  should  rather  be  Uriel,  L'rielites  (see  N'amks,
§  35).  T.  K.  c.

AREOPAGUS,  AREOPAGITE  (Acts  17. 9  eni  ton
&p[e]lON  nAfON  [Ii-  WHJ  i:V'  'unto  [the]  .Areopagus'  ;

1  The  hill '^' '"'  '^"^  '  ^^^^^  "'"' ^^'  '  ^^'"«-'opaR"s '  ;

hence  the  title  .Areopagite,  .Actsl7  34t,
ApeonAreiTHC  [lij.  ti-  [^^'H])-  Dirticulty  is
caused  by  the  fact  that  the  name  signifies  Ijolh  a
hill  and  a  court.  The  hill  is  that  formless  mass
of  rock  which  lies  towards  the  NW.  below  the  .Acro-
polis, separated  from  it  by  a  depression  now  largely
filled  with  earth  (Herod.  852;  Luc.  Pise.  42).  'I'he
NE.  corner  of  the  hill  is  a  precipice,  to  the  top  of
which  we  ascend  by  means  of  sixteen  ruined  steps,  cut
in  the  rock  at  the  SF",.  angle.  At  the  head  of  the  stair
are  the  remains  of  an  altar.  The  deep  chasm  at  the
foot  of  the  precipice  was  connected  with  the  worship
of  the  Semnai  (Eumenides  or  Furies).  'The  whole
place  was  sacred  to  the  most  awful  associations.
Mythology  had  here  lent  to  the  majesty  of  the  law  a

2  The  Court "^'^^^  solemn  background. ' As  a  Court,

the  .Areopagus  was,  before  the  develop-
ment of  the  democratic  spirit,  the  supreme  authority  in
Athens.  Its  powers  were  of  two  kinds,  definite  and
indefinite.  '  The  definite  powers  were  : — ( 1 )  a  limited
criminal  jurisdiction  ;  (2)  the  supreme  direction  of
religious  worship  especially  of  the  cultus  of  the  F^umen-
ides.  The  indefinite  powers  were  : — a  general  sup)er-
vision  or  guardianship  (i)  of  all  magistrates  and  law
courts  ;  (2)  of  the  laws  ;  (3)  of  the  education  of  the
young  ;  and  (4)  of  public  morals — in  addition  to  which
there  was  (5)  the  competence  to  assume  in  political  and
national  emergencies  a  dictatorial  authority."

Diu-ing  the  earlier  history  of  the  city  the  court  held  its
sittings,  for  the  trial  of  blood-guiltiness,  upon  the  hill
itself.  For  the  hill  was  the  Hill  of  the  Arae,  the  Curses
or  Imprecations — '  the  place  for  the  solenm  irrevocable
oath,  the  natural  court  for  the  trial  of  terrible  offences
of  blood-shedding  that  might  not  be  tried  under  a  roof."
Moreover, to the  avly  city, the  Areopagus  was  the

294


AREOPAGUS,  AREOPAGITB

place  without  the  RaU-s,  a  place  Id  eoiulciim  the  rriminal,
to  erect  a  inoimineiit  for  the  outcast  tyrant,  to  bury  the
stranger  (Roliert,  Aus  Kydathen,  loi).  It  was  during
the  earlier  and  the  later  periods  of  Athenian  history  that
the  Court  of  the  Areopagus  (17  ex  tov  'kptlov  wdyov
(ioi'Xri)  enjoyed  its  powers  to  the  full.  In  the  interval
Ephialtes,  aided  perhaps  by  Theniistocles  (Arist.  Const.
Ath.  25;  462  H.c. ),  abolished  most  of  its  indefinite
functions,  and  thus  deprived  it  of  its  strongest  influence  ;
it  lx;canie  merely  a  '  crinjinal  court  of  narrow  competence. '
Thenceforth,  as  in  Aristotle's  time,  it  dealt  only  with
cases  of  wilful  homicide,  of  poisoning,  and  of  arson
{Const.  .If/i.  57),  while  the  suiJerintendence  of  religion
was  in  the  hands  of  the  King  Archon.  As  indictments
for  impiety  ( ivdei^ei^  dcrfjSfias)  came,  in  their  preliminary
stages,  before  the  latter,  cases  which  once  would  have
gone  before  the  Areopagus  were  now  tried  before  the
popular  jury-courts.  It  was  in  this  way,  therefore,  that
Socrates,  accused  like  Paul  of  not  worshipping  the  gods
of  the  city  and  of  introducing  new  divinities,'  was  tried.
As  the  regular  place  of  business  of  the  King  Archon
was  the  Stoa  Hasileios — the  associations  of  which  were,
in  later  days,  exclusively  religious — it  was  within  that
portico  that  the  charge  of  impiety  was  brought  against
the  philosopher.  It  is  probable,  h(5wever,  that  the
.Areopagus  also  alwa3'S  met  within  the  Stoa  (Dem.  ?'//
_  Iristog.  776)  when  ritual  did  not  demand  a  midnight-
sitting  on  the  o]jen  rock — in  other  words,  in  all  cases
other  than  those  of  murder.  When,  with  the  advent  of
the  Romans,  the  Areopagus  reappeared,  after  its  long
eclipse,  as  once  more  the  supreme  authority  of  the  city
(cp  Cic.  /■:/>.  nd  Fam.  xiii.  1 5  ;  Nat.  Dear.  274),
and  the  specific  control  of  religion  fell  again  within  its
competence,  it  would  naturally  continue  to  meet  there.

There  it  was,  therefore,  and  liefore  that  body,  that
P.aul  was  summoned.  To  speak  of  him  as  '  perhaps
3  Paul  •'^''^"'''"»  °"  ^^^  ^■'^■"y  stone  where  had  once
stood  the  ugly  Greek  who  was  answering  the
very  same  charge  '  (Farrar,  St.  Paul.  3qo)  is  to  sacrifice
historical  truth  to  sentiment.  We  must  relinquish  the
fond  idea  that  Athens  has  the  interesting  distinction  of
being  the  one  city  of  the  world  where  we  can  tread  in
the  very  footsteps  of  the  apostle.  The  view  now
generally  taken  errs  in  a  double  manner.  It  maintains,
first,  that  the  proceedings  were  in  no  sense  legal  or
magisterial  ;  and  secondly,  that  they  were  upon  the  hill.
The  marginal  rendering  (AV  v.  22)  is  no  doubt  right  in
representing  that  it  was  before  the  court  that  Paul  was
brought.  Can  we  believe  that  a  crowd  of  idlers,
parodying  the  judicial  procedure  of  the  court,  could
have  lx?en  allowed  to  defile  the  neighbourhood  of  '  that
temple  of  the  awful  goddes.ses  whose  presence  was
specially  supposed  to  overshadow  this  solemn  spot,  and
the  dread  of  whose  name  was  sufficient  to  prevent  Nero,
stained  as  he  was  with  the  guilt  of  matricide,  from
setting  foot  within  the  famous  city'  (Suet.  \er.  34;  Dio
Cas.  4314)?  Such  a  view  requires  better  support
than  is  given  by  the  bare  assertion  that  '  the  Athenians
were  far  less  in  earnest  about  their  religion  than  in
the  days  of  Socrates,  and  if  this  was  meant  for  a  trial
it  could  only  have  Ijeen  by  way  of  conscious  parody'
(Farrar,  op.  cit.  390,  n.  3).  Xor  can  an  appeal  to
Acts  9  27  prove  that  firiXa^d/ievoi  (Acts  17  19,  A\'  'took')
is  here  not  used  in  the  sense  of  '  arrest. '

The  view  advocated  by  Curtius  {Stadts^rrsch.  von  Athen,
262/  )  is  correct.  Paul  wa,s  taken  not  to  the  Areopagus
hill, — a  place  not  adapted  either  for  hearing  or  for
speaking,  upon  an  occasion  such  as  this, — but  to  the
Stoa  Rasileios  (iirl  tov  'Apeiov  iriyov  ;  cp  Acts  9 21
16 19,  etc.)  for  a  preliminary  examination  {a.v6,Kpi<m).
There  it  was  to  be  decided  whether  the  new  teaching
would  justify  a  prosecution  for  the  introduction  of  a
new  religion. Standing  in  the  midst  of  the  assembled

1  Cp  Xen.  .'item.  1  i  with  Act.s  17  18.  Yet  there  is  probably
no  consciou.s  reference  on  the  part  of  the  Christian  writer  to  the
trial  of  Socrates,  though  the  contrary  has  been  asserted.

295


ARBTAS

Areopagites  [ev  /u^cri^  tov  Wpeiov  jrayov,  cp  Cic.  ad
.///.  i.  145;  Foiiillcs  d'  l-.pidaurL',\t'&,  'Apftos  7r(i7oj
Xj70I's  iwoi-^aaTo),  he  made  his  defence.  Much  of  what
fell  from  his  lips  may  be  presumed  to  have  awakened
an  echo  in  the  breasts  of  his  audience  (on  the  speech  see
Hi:i,l.KNiSM,  g  9)  ;  but  the  mention  of  the  resurrection
of  the  body  seemed  to  remove  the  case  altogether  out  of
the  domain  of  the  serious  and  practical.  The  court
refused  to  continue  the  examination,  and  Paul  was
contemptuously  dismissed  (^x^f^'afoj'  i'.  32/  ).  Curtius,
Pnulus  in  Athen,  modifies  his  view.  For  another  view,
see  Rams.  Paul.  243/  See  al.so  Findlay,  Ann.  Brit.
Srh.  1  78/  w.  J.  W.

ARES  (Apec  [HA]), I  F.sd.  ■iio=E/ra25,  Ar.\h,  2.

ARETAS  (ApeTJkC  [Ti-  WH]),  an  ancient  name
(strictly  Harlth.1  ;  nn'^^  in  inscriptions:  i\<f.,  Euting
A'afi.  hischr.  N'o.  16)  of  Nabat.tan  princes,  mentioned
in  the  story  of  Jason  the  high  priest  (in  the  time  of
Antiochus  Epiphanes),  2  Mace.  08  (A/jfraj  [V'A]).
The  Arfitas  of  this  passage  is  called  '  king  of  the
Arabians';  he  was  hostile  to  Jason  (^.7-.).  Another
Aretas  was  master  of  Damascus  in  the  time  of  Paul —
three  years  after  the  apostle's  conversion.  His  '  ethnarch '
sought  (see  Ijelow)  to  apprehend  Paul,  who,  however,
made  good  his  escape  (2  Cor.  11  32/).  The  story  of
the  Nabataians  has  lx!en  told  elsewhere  (see  D.\MASCU.S,
§  12,  Nabat/KANs).  It  is  certain  that  about  85  B.C.
they  had  possession  of  Damascus  ;  but  it  should  he
added  that  the  autonomy  of  Damascus  in  70-69  b.  r.  is
established  by  numismatic  evidence.  The  first  collision
\\  ith  the  Romans  was  in  64-62  B.  c. ,  when  the
Xabataian  king,  Aretas  III.,  intervened  in  the  struggles
between  Hyrcanus  and  Aristobulus.  Damascus  now
came  under  Roman  sovereignty.  During  the  following
decennia  the  Xabattean  kingdom  became  involved  in
the  wars  occasioned  by  the  Parthians — with  varying  but
for  the  most  part  ill  success.  The  king  also  had  various
disputes  with  his  neighbour  Herod  the  Great.  Aretas
IV.  (9  B.C.--40  A.ix)  had  tact  and  skill  enough  to
keep  terms  with  Augustus  ;  his  daughter  Ix-came  wife
of  Herod  Antipas  (Jos.  Ant.  xviii.  oi),  but  was  set
aside  in  favour  of  Herodias.  Disputes  on  frontier
questions  furnished  the  aggrieved  father  with  pretexts
for  war.  Vitellius  was  ordered  by  Tiberius  to
avenge  the  defeat  inflicted  by  Aretas  upon  Herod  ;
but  the  death  of  the  P2mperor  put  an  end  to  the  scheme
(cp  Chronology,  §  78).  At  this  time,  according  to
2  Cor.  11 32,  Damascus  must  again  have  fallen  into
the  hands  of  Aretas  ;  Damascene  coins  of  Tiberius  do
not  occur  later  than  33-34  A.n.  A  tempting  con-
jecture is  that  it  was  Caligula  that  sought  at  this  price,
after  his  accession,'  to  buy  over  Aretas,  against  whom
Tiberius  had  so  recently  ordered  war ;  yet,  in  our
complete  ignorance  of  this  chapter  of  history,  we  are  not
precluded  from  supposing  that  Tiberius  himself  in  34
A.n.  had  already  taken  occasion  to  present  Aretas  with
the  city  as  a  peace-offering  (cp  Chronology,  §  78).
A  violent  capture  of  the  city  by  Aretas  is  not  to  be
thought  of :  such  a  deed  w  ould  have  called  for  exem-
plary punishment  at  the  hands  of  the  Romans.  Equally
improbable  is  the  view  of  Marquardt  (Rom.  Staatsz'er-
7ualtung,  1  405)  and  Monuusen  {Rom.  Gesch.  ln,^t)
that  Damascus  had  remained  subject  to  the  king  of
Arabia  continuously  from  the  beginning  of  the  Roman
period  till  106  .\.  o.  For  ( i )  in  Pomjx'v's  time  Damascus
belonged  to  the  Decapolis  (Plin.  HM  v.  18  74;  Ptol.
V.  1522;  cp  Dh:c:abolis,  §  2);  (2)  in  the  reign  of
Tilwrius  it  was  the  Roman  governor  that  gave  the
authoritative  decision  on  a  cjuestion  of  frontier  between
Damascus  and  Sidon  (Tac.  Ann.  xvii.  63)  ;  (3)  we  have
im])erial  coins  of  Damascus  with  figures  of  Augustus,
Tiberius,  and  Nero  ;  (4)  in  Domitian's  time  there  was
a  cohort  raised  in  Damascus,  the  Cohors  Flavia  {CIL

1  So  also  Gutschmid  (Excursus  in  Euttng's  Nab.  Inschr.  85)
and  Schurer  (GJ  V  \  618,  ET2  357/).

296


AREUS

2870  ;  5  194,  652^. ) ;  (5)  Damascus  was  not  included  in
the  Roman  province  formed  out  of  the  N'abatiean
kingdom  in  106  A.  I).

What  it  was  that  induced  Aretas's  '  ethnarch '  in
Damastus  to  [jersecute  i'aul,  it  is  impossible  to  say.
r'erha])s  he  regarded  Faul  as  a  turbulent  and  dangerous
Jew  ;  |)erhaps  he  wished  to  propitiate  the  other  Jews  in
Danuiscus,  who  were  many  and  powerful  (Jos.  lij
ii.  2O2;  vii.  87) — so  powerful  that  the  synagogues  had
been  able  to  hand  over  to  the  '  young  man  '  Saul  and
his  helpers  such  Jews  as  acce|)ted  the  (iosjx;l.  The
subseciuent  years,  down  to  the  ab.sorplion  of  the
kingdom  by  the  Romans,  offer  no  incident  of  s]x;cial
interest.  It  is,  however,  significant  that  in  67  A. D. ,  in
the  Jewish  war,  Malchus  II.  (Malku)  contributed
auxiliary  troops  to  the  army  of  Vespasian  (Jos.  ///  vii.
42).  Shortly  lx;fore  this,  Damascus  nmst  have  been
retaken  from  the  Nabatwans  by  Nero,  for  imperial  coins
of  Damascus  are  again  met  with  from  62-63  onwards.

Consult  Schiirer,  C,JV\  bio/.,  where  further  litera-
ture is  referred  to  ;  and  cp Dama.scl's,  §  12  ; Naba-

T/^:AN.S.  H.  V.  .s.

ABEUS  (&PHC  [ANV,  but  cp  Swete  ;  Jos.  apeioc])
I  Ma.r.  VI 20  AV. See  Si'ARTA.

ABOOB.  I.,  a  territory  in  Rashan,  alwavs  in  the
phrase  ahN  b2n  (Dt.34.3/.  aJ-1iS.-|),  'district'  or
•circuit'  of  Argob  (nepiXOjpON  ApfOB'  [BAL]  ;
once  (\pBOK  [B*]).  It  was  taken  by  Israel  in  the  war
with  Og,  and  coiUained  sixty  cities  with  walls  and  gates
(1)1.84/.).  ^\  e  are  ignorant  of  its  precise  situation.
In  Dt.  84  it  seems  equivalent  to  '  the  kingdom  of  Og
in  Hashan'  (cp  1K.413  where  0  is  corrupt);  but
in  V.  13  it  stands  in  apposition  to  'all  Bashan. '  The
term  'district,'  literally  meaning  'line'  of  Argob,
which  seems  to  imply  very  definite  limits,  has  led
many  (Targums,  Porter,  Henderson,  and  the  Pal.  Surv.
Maps)  to  identify  it  with  the  present  Lcja,  the  low,
rough  plateau  of  congealed  lava,  whose  sharp  edge  dis-
tinctly marks  it  off  from  the  surrounding  plain.  For
this,  however,  there  is  no  other  evidence  ;  nor  does  the  C)  T
narrative  carry  the  con(|uest  of  Israel  so  far  to  the  N'lC.
The  one  certainty  is  that  Argob  lay  in  Hashan.  The
addition  in  Dt.  814  that  it  ran  up  to  the  lx)r<ler  of  (ieshur
and  Maachah  is  indefinite,  and  the  te.xt  of  the  rest  of
this  verse,  which  identifies  Argob  with  the  conc|uest  of
Jair,  is  corrupt.  The  Havvoth-Jair  were  tent  villages
and  lay  in  (Jiilead  ;  the  cities  of  .\rgob  were  fortified  and
lay  in  Bashan.  The  only  places  with  names  (whether
in  (Jreek  or  in  modern  times)  of  any  similarity  are  the
'Vayafia  (so  Pa7a/3ai'  i  K.  4  13  [L])  of  Jos.  A^it.  \m.  If)  5,
a  fortress  E.  of  Jordan,  whose  site  is  unknown  (cp
Reland,  Pa/.  201),  and  the  modern  Rajib  (Rujcb)  and
W'ady  Rajib  (Rujeb),  which,  however,  lie  in  (Jilead.  The
name  Argob  may  be  derived  from  Heb.  regeb,  a.c/01/  {see
K/.i-A.).  Besides  authorities  named,  see  Eus.  OS  ;  Wetz.
A'fi.sfhfr.  iiher  Ha u ran,  etc.  83;  G.\Sm.  HG  551  ^. ;
Dr.  (/(/  Deut.  84-5.  On  archieological  remains,  see
Bashan,  §  3.  g.  a.  s.

2.  Argob  and  Arieh  (nnKrrnKi  aj-iK-riK),  two  names
mentioned  in  connection  with  Pekah's  conspiracy  against
Pekahiah  (2  K.  ir)25),  but  whether  of  officers  on  the  side
of  the  king,  who  shared  his  fate  {his gififion'm ,  according
to  Targ.  Jon.),  or  of  conspirators  along  with  Pekah.  it
is  difficult  to  say,  owing  to  the  corrupt  slate  of  the  text.
Argob  (opyo^  lli.M,]  oo)k^i)  is  not  suitable  for  a  personal
name.  It  is  a  well-known  place-name  (see  above,  i),  and  Arieh
(op[«]to  I  HI,],  apt*  [A],  wh*^  )  has  the  article  prefi,\ed  (as  if  '  the
lion').  The  Vjj.  (' percussit  eum  .  .  .  juxta  Argob  etjuxta  Arie ')
accordingly  treats  the  names— we  think  correctly— as  names  of
places  2  (cp  Tisch.),  in  which  ca.se  they  are  doubtle.ss  glosses.
Argob  may  have  easily  arisen  from  the  preceding  J10'1»»(BAL  cm.)

'  In  Jos.  14  15  ®n  gives  Apyo^  for  t;3^K  ;  see  Kirjath-arba.
■•J  Not  to  be  connected  with  apta  (Kus.  OSt^l  '2S8  10),  or  rather
an'tiia  (Jer.  t/:  14<'>26);  see  Arlm.\h.

297


ARIEL

or  may  be  a  gloss  upon  the  '  Gileadites''  (see  below).  St.
(ZA'/'H't)  160)  for  'Arieh'  would  read  TK^  riin^  and  !iugge»U
that  '  Argob  and  Havvoth  Jair  '  were  originally  glosses  belonging
to  r.  29.  On  that  theory',  the  origin  of  the  difficult  DK  (prefixed
to  both  names)  becomes  clear.

The  MT  leaves  it  obscure  whether  the  '  fifty  men  of
the  sons  of  (Jileadites '  '  were  fellow -conspirators  with
Pekah  (so  <S"'-,  which  reads  AvSpts)  or  whether  they
were  slain  along  with  the  king  (so  (5'*  AvSpas,  V'g.  viros).
<E5"*  (not  E)  presents  a  different  reading,  '  fifty  of  the
four  hundred,'  which,  if  correct,  must  refer  to  .some
IxKly-guard.  This  may  Ix;  a  trace  of  the  true  text,  and
Klostermann  accordingly  restores  'he  (Pekah)  smote
him  .  .  .  with  his  (Pekahiah's)  400  warriors,  and  with
him  (  Pekah)  were  fifty  men  of  the  Gileadites.'  Pkkah
[</.''■]  w;is  possibly  a  Gileadite.

ARIARATHES.RVAKATll^;s(Ap^eHc[^■A].Apl<^p•

[N|l.  Kiic  of  the  so\er(Mgns  enimicrated  in  i  Mace,  iri22.
Ariarallii's  \'l.,  Pliilopator,  king  of  Cappadocia  (163-
130  H.c. ),  is  obviously  intended. See  C.vhpauocia.

ARIDAI  (nnX;  ApcAloc  [BAE]  ARCeoc  [N]  ;
but  cp  .-\KiSAi),  son  of  Haman  (Eslh.  99).  See  Esthkk,
§  3  (end).

ARIDATHA  (XnnnX  ;  c&rBaxa  [BNAE],  but  cp
Gr.  readings  of  Pokatha),  son  of  Haman  {g.v.),  Esth.
98. See  i;.STiiKK,  §  3  (end).

ARIEH  (nnsn),  2  K.]:.25  ;  see  Argob.  2.

ARIEL  ("PNns*,  but  '?N>N:  in  .S. ;  ^PIhA  [BAE]I.
I.  A  personal  name.  So(i.  j  Gen. 46  16  Nu.2617,  ©  ;
MT  ■''?N"1N  (see  Akei.i  [EV],  where  ©'s  readings  are
given),  the  eponym  of  a  family  of  (j.\u  {(/.i'.)  in  P;
(ii.  I  ICzra  816  (  =  iEsd.843,  EV  Iduki..  mg.  Akiki,  ;
i5oi'7;Xos  [BA]),  head  of  family,  temp.  Ezra  (see  EZRA,  i.
{5  2,  ii.  §  15  (i)d);  and  (iii. )  2S.-2320  [BE;  A  omits]
=  I  Ch.  11  22  [BXAE],  a  Moabite  whose  two  sons-'  were
slain  by  David's  warrior,  Benaiah.  So  RX','*  Kau.  //S,
l'".w.  We.  Dr.  Some  more  striking  action,  however,  ia
re<|uired  in  such  a  context,  and  it  is  Ijest  to  adopt  some
form  of  Klostermann's  emended  reading,  which  makes
Benaiah  the  slayer  of  two  young  lions  (so  Bu.  in  S/i( >'/').
Marcjuart,  however,  suggests  that  for  Ariel  in  2  S.  we
should  read  Uriel  (cp  L'RIAII,  i  [2S.  L'825]),  and  the
author  of  X.AMES  (§  35)  makes  a  similar  suggestion  for
Ariel,  2,  and  for  Arei.I  {</.■::).

2.  .\  prophetic  name  for  Jerusalem,  Is.  29 1/.  7  (6),*
probably  to  be  read  Uriel  (Sn'In)  in  vz:  i,  2a,  7,  and
Arial  ( "'nhn  =  S'In )  in  v.  zb.  Uriel  (or  Uruel?)  would
be  a  modification  of  Urusalem  (c'?ri"iN  ;  Am.  Tab.
Urusalim  ;  see  Jkrusai.em),  and  mean  originally,
God's  enclosure  or  settlement  (cp  Jkklei.).  Arial
(cp  Ar.  irat"",  hearth)  means  altar-hearth,"  as  it  prob-
ably does  in  Mesha's  inscription  Cskix //.  12,  17/.).  The
prophecy  containing  it  was  written  during  Sennacherib's
invasion  (see  IsAlAH,  ii.  §  20)  ;  it  aimed  at  dissipating
the  false  confidence  of  the  people  in  the  security  of
Jerusalem.  The  pro{)er  name  of  the  city  was  Urusalem
(which  afterwards  became  Jerusalem).  Isaiah  alters
this  into  Uriel  (Uruel  ?)  in  order  to  make  a  paronomasia.
In  a  year  or  two  the  city  against  which  David  had
encamjied  svill  be  l)esieged  by  a  greater  than  Da\id,
and  so  great  will  Iw  the  slaughter  in  its  streets  that  its

1  Argob  and  Gilead  lie  close  together.

^  D'lySj  ":ZC..  a  fusion  of  lySj  '320  and  C"iy^jn"|2(s')  "P'  );
cp  Kau.  lis,  crit.  note.

»  MT  omits  '  sons  '  in  both  places,  and  ®Raj<  in  Ch.

*  RV  '  the  two  (sons  of)  .Ariel ' :  AV  '  two  lion-like  men.

*  In  V.  7  ©  has  a  doublet  ;  itpouaakrfu  (BZP  both  times,  and
AQ  second  time],  i^A  [KAQ'*  first  time],  tA^Ji  ot  y' af>i>|A  [Q  mg.
first  time),  iiAji  (K  second  time).

6  The  same  word  prok-xbly  occurs  with  thus  meaning  in  Kzekiel's
planofthetemple;Kz.43i5/(7'.  isa'^K'^H;  15^  AV.  i6«  AV.  VkTj
V.  1  -a  0a>?  fiov  e?  ■  T|TOt  opo«  Ov  iis  TO  Ov<n.a.<rn\piov  ovruf
(KoAeire  [adnot  in  Q"'S]).

2q8


ARIMATHJEA

name  will  Ixjcome  no  longer  Uriel,  hut  (by  a  slight
modification)  Arial — i.e.,  altar-licartli.  The  reading
Uriel  seems  to  have  been  known  to  the  author  of
3I9:  '  'says  Yahwe,  who  has  a  fire  (tk)  in  Zion  and
a  furnace  in  Jerusalem.'  The  other  explanations  of
this  prophetic  name  are  (i)  lion,  or  lioness,  of  God
(ICw.,  Di.,Che.,/ja. ''»)  ;  (2)hearth  of  God(Del.,  Konig,
Kittcl);  (3)  altar-hearth  (Stade,  Duhm,  Che.,  SHOT).
Of  these,  the  third  is  probably  the  easiest  ;  but  none  of
theni  ([uite  accounts  for  the  selection  of  the  new  name
for  David's  city,  nor  for  the  expression  'and  will
iK'come  to  me  like  (an)  Ariel  {v.  2b).  T.  K.  C.

ARIMATHiEA  (Api/v\<\eAiA  [Ti-  WH]),  Mt.'2757.
etc. Sec  R.\M.\TI1.\1.\I-Z(J1'111.\I.

ARIOCH  (^r-lS  ;  aricox  [BADKL  87,  X-^"].  -XHC
[87  in  Dan.  2  i4/.]).  Probably  a  Hebraised  form  of  an
old  Babylonian  name  (see  Chkuoklaomer,  §  3)  u.sed,
(i)  possibly  with  arcli:vological  accuracy,  in  Gen.  14  19
of  an  ally  of  an  ancient  king  of  Elam  ;  (2)  by  a  literary
fiction,  of  Nebuchadrezzar's  captain  of  the  guard  (Dan.
'214/  24/  )  ;  and  (3)  of  a  king  of  Hlam  (so  the  Syriac)
in  alliance  with  Nebuchadrezzar  (Judith  1  6,  a/Jtacre  [N*].
Cp  Bezold,  Babyl.  Assyr.  Lit.  53.

ARISAI  Cpnii! ;  Poi'^aiov  [RSL],  -^avov  [A],
milcss  we  regard  this  as  an  intruder  and  identify  Arisai
with  the  succeeding  name  Ap^atos  ;  see  Arii).\i),  son  of
Hainan  (I':s.  Og). See  EsTiiEK,  §  3  (end).

ARISTARCHUS  (arictapxoc  [Ti-  WH]),  a  Thes-
salonian  (.\cts204.27  2),  one  of  Pauls  comi^anions  in
travel  (.Actsl929),  was  among  those  who  accompanied  him
from  Europe  on  his  last  recorded  visit  to  Jerusalem  (Acts
2O4),  and  also  on  his  voyage  to  Rome,  having  joined  him
at  Cresarea  (.•\cts27  2).  As  the  apostle's  '  fellow-prisoner'
((nij'atxMa^<»"'05)  he  unites  with  him  in  saluting  the
(Jolossians  (Col.  4  10).  Cp  Colossians,  §  \o f.  He
joins  in  the  salutation  to  Philemon  (Philcm.  24),  but  in
this  passage  is  designated  simply  as  '  fellow -worker,'
Epaphras  alone  being  called  '  fellow-prisoner. '  Erom
this  it  has  been  inferred,  with  mucli  probability,  that  the
companions  of  Paul  relieved  one  another  in  voluntarily
sharing  his  captivity.

In  the  lists  of  the  'seventy  disciples'  given  by  the  Pseudo-
Dorotheus  and  Pseudo-Hippolytus  (not  earlier  than  the  fifth
cent.),  Aristarchus  is  bishop  of  .\pamea  in  Syria.  Psendo-
1  )orotheus  also  has  it  that  along  with  Pudetis  and  Trophimus
he  was  beheaded  in  Rome  at  the  same  time  as  Paul.

ARISTOBULUS  (apictoBoy\oc  [VA  ;  Ti.  WH],  a
Greek  name  adopted  by  Romans  and  Jews,  and  borne
by  several  memlx,TS  of  the  Maccabean  and  Herodian
families).

1.  The  teacher  (5i5c{(r(caXoj)  of  Ptolemy  (no.  i),  towhom
Judas  (the  Maccabee)  sent  letters  (2  Mace.  1  io|.  He  is
the  well-known  Jewish- Hellenistic  philosopher  of  that
name,  who  resided  at  the  court  of  Ptolemy  VI.  Philo-
metor  (180-145  n.  c. ).  He  was  of  priestly  descent  (dir6
ToO  tO}v  xP"''^**"'  'fp^wv  -yivov^,  J'.  10 ;  cp  Lev.  43  |nr,T
n'r^n),  and  was  the  author  of  (among  other  writings)
certain  works  on  the  Pentateuch,  fragments  of  which  are
preserved  in  ("lenient  of  .Alexandria  and  in  l-Aisebius.
See  Schiir.  6'//' 2  760^,  Ew.  (7  TV  4  355,  and  Kue.
Godid.  1  433./

2.  '  They  of  the  household  of  Aristobulus  '  are  saluted
in  Rom.  16 10.  It  is  not  implied  that  Aristobulus  him-
self was  a  Christian.  The  name  was  a  common  one
in  the  dynasty  of  Herod.  The  list  of  the  '  seventy
disciples '  given  by  the  Pseudo-Dorotheus  names  Aris-
tobulus as  bishop  of  Britain.

ARITJS  f<\pHC  [ANN' ; 0  is  not  certain,  see  Swete],
ARirs),  I  Mace.  ]22o  RV;  see  Si-akta.
AEK. See  Deluge,  §  10.

1  Isal.ih's  aiithnrship  is  doubted  (Che.  Intr.  Isa.  204)  It  is
iinlikely  that  I.saiah  e.vilained  Uriel  'Cod's  fire";  the  parono-
masia in  7'.  ih  would  then  disappear  Moreover  TN  in  the
sense  of  fire  seems  to  be  late. Cp  30  32/: ;  33 17  (late).

209


ARK  OF  THE  COVENANT

ARK  OF  THE  COVENANT  or  Sacred  Ark  (|nN  ;  1
KiBcoToc  L15ALJ ;  .ikc.i).

There  is  nothing  more  significant  than  the  changes  in
the  titles  of  sacred  objects. We  must, therefore, be
-J  careful  to  place  these  titles  in  their  chrono-

A  k^^f  "  l<'g't"=^l  "rder.  According  to Seyritig(/./ '/'IF
ArK  o  1^  ,,6  ['91])  the  oldest  name  of  the  ark  (or
ixOO,  CuC.  g.j^.rgj  chest)  is  '  the  ark  of  Yahwe  the  (Jod
of  Hosts  (SCte'oth)  w  ho  is  enthroned  upon  the  cherubim. '
This  title  is  reached  by  an  analysis  of  the  designations  of
the  ark  in  [a]  28.62  and  (b)  iS.  44  (both  passages
belong  to  early  documents).  The  titles  given  in  {a)  are
'ark  of  G(xl '  (hd-elOhiin),  and  'called  by  the  name  of
Yahwe  Seba'oth  that  is  enthroned  upon  the  cherubim.' '■^
In  {b)  the  title  is  '  ark  of  the  b'rilh  of  Yahwe  Seba'oth  who
is  enthroned  upon  the  cherubim.'  Recombining  the
supposed  oldest  elements  in  these  titles,  .Seyring  obtains
the  title  mentioned  above.  This  usually  careful  scholar,
however,  has  overlooked,  in  dealing  with  {b),  (5's  reading
in  the  preceding  verse — viz.,  '  the  ark  of  our  God"  (tt]v
Ki^ccrbv  ToO  dfov  rj/jLwv  [B],  r.  k.  rris  SiaOi^K-ijs  tov  6.  i].
[A],  T.  K.  T.  S.  Kvpiov  T.  0.  i].  [L]),  which  is  self-evidently
more  correct  than  the  Deuteronomic  formula*  of  MT,
and,  taken  together  with  i;.  6  ('  ark  of  Yahwe  '),  justifies
us  in  assuming  that  the  equally  simple  title  '  ark  of
Yahw6 '  stood  originally  in  v.  ^a  and  v.  5,  and  '  ark  of
God'  (cp  ZT'.  II  17  19-22)  in  v.  ^b.  Nor  has  Seyring
noticed  that  after  '  ark  of  God  '  in  {a)  the  relative  clause
which  follows  is  superfluous,  and  presumably  a  later
insertion.  It  must  Ije  added  that  it  remains  most
improbable  that  the  divine  name  Yahwe  Sgba'oth  is
older  than  the  .Assyrian  period,  to  which  indeed  Amos
who  undoubtedly  uses  it  belongs  ;  at  any  rate  the  theory
that  this  name  represents  Yahwe  as  the  God  of  Israel's
hosts,  and  has  any  special  connection  with  the  ark,  has
insuperable  difficulties.*  Thus,  so  far  as  (a)  and  (/')  are
concerned,  the  popular  names  for  the  ark  were  very
short— viz. ,  'ark  of  Yahwe,'  'ark  of  God,'  and  'ark  of
our  God,' — and  from  the  context  of  the  former  passage
we  find  that  there  was  a  still  shorter  name,  '  the  ark '
(2S.  64),  which  occurs  thrice  in  old  parts  of  Samuel,
and  five  times  (or  seven,  including  Josh.  81417;  sec
Kau.  i/S)  in  the  He.xateuch.  The  title  'ark  of  God'
(ctiSn.t  piK.  or  twice  d'hSk  ]Sik)  occurs  often  in  old
parts  of  Samuel,  and  also  in  Chronicles.  In  a  solemn
speech  of  David  in  i  Ch.  If)  12  14  we  find  the  sonorous
phrase  '  the  ark  of  Yahwe  the  (iod  of  Israel,'  which  re-
minds us  of  the  phrase  used  by  the  Philistines  in  i  S.  5
7/.  II.'  Side  by  side  with  'the  ark  of  Elohim'  we
naturally  find  the  phrase  'the  ark  of  Yahwe.'  It
occurs  first  in  the  composite  work  JE,  and  may  rea.son-
ably  tx;  ascribed  in  the  first  instance  to  J,  though  in  some
passages  it  may  have  been  inserted  by  the  editor,  either
as  an  altogether  new  addition,  or  in  lieu  of  the  phrase
'  the  ark  of  God,'  which  was  probably  used  in  E.  Once
(Josh.  813)  we  find  this  remarkable  addition  'the  Lord
of  the  whole  earth,'  which,  apart  from  jj'.  h  13,  occurs
only in late  writings, and, as  Seyring points  out, is

1  Cp  Ass.  eru,  erfnu{erintiu),  'box,'  'receptacle'  (Deluge,
§10).

2  The  same  renderings  are  given  for  n3n,  Noah's  ark,  but
not  for  nrB,  the  '  ark '  in  the  bulrushes.

3  This  rendering  implies  that  CC',  '  name,'  occurs  twice  in  MT
by  pure  accident.  Otherwise  we  should  have  to  suppose  that
the  name  by  which  the  ark  was  called  was  '  the  name  of  Vahwi
Seba'oth,"  etc.

*  Smenc}'s  arguments  {Kel.-gesch.  185  ^),  weakly  met  by
Marti  (Cesch.  dcr  Isr.  Rel.  140),  appear  conclusive,  only  he
should  have  fortified  himself  by  .Assyrian  parallels.  Thus,  Asur
is  said  to  rule  kis.sat  ilani  '  the  mass,  or  entire  multitude,  of  the
Ciods,'  Nebo  to  be  the  overseer  kiSsat  Same  u  irsitim  'of  the
m.-uss  (multitude)  of  heaven  and  earth.'  .Amos  and  his  school
represent  Yahwe  as  the  lord  of  all  supernatural  beings  in  the
universe,  in  opposition  to  all  rival  deities.  See,  however,  Names,
8  123.

*  On  these  points  see  further,  Rudde's  crit.  note  in  SBOT;
Conard,  X.-iTlf  12  71  ['92],  n.  i  ;  We.  TBS  167  (especially  as
to  the  right  rendering  of  i  Ch.  136).


ARK  OF  THE  COVENANT


presumalily  due  to  a  post-exilic  writer  whose  idea  of
Yahwi:  differetl  from  that  of  JM  The  phrase  '  the  ark
of  Yahw^'  passed  from  JIC  into  the  terminology  of  the
historical  lxx)ks  in  general  (including  Chronicles).

A  new  title  for  the  ark  si-ems  to  have  been  coined  by
the  auiiior  of  the  original  Deuteronomy  (I)eut.  108),  and
adaiJted from him by  writers  and editors


2.  Ark  of
b'rith.


who  shared  his  religious  point  of  view,  and
even  (strange  to  say)  by  the  Chronicler,  who,
in  general,  stands  so  completely  under  the  influence  of
the  I'riestly  Code.  This  phrase  is  '  the  ark  of  the  b'rith  '
(usually  rendered  'covenant"  ;  see  below),  either  simply
(Josh.  3-())  or  in  various  combinations,  such  as  'ark  of
the  d'riiA  of  Yahwe,"  'ark  of  the  />'rif/i  of  IClohim,'  and
'  ark  of  the  d'ri/k  of  Adonai. '  The  Deuteronomislic  editors
have  freely  introduced  the  term  b'rith  into  the  titles
of  the  ark  in  the  older  sources  which  they  edited.  The
work  of  the  editor  clearly  betrays  itself  in  such  phrases
as  n'lan  |hKn  (Josh.  314),  .li.n'-nna  jmn  (Josh.  817),
where  the  editor  has  forgotten  to  make  the  omission  of
the  article,  necessitated  by  the  introduction  of  a  de-
p)en(lcnt  genitive.

And  now  as  to  the  correct  meaning  of  the  phrase
nna.T  jinx-  It  is  rendered  by  ©"-^l  ir\  Kifiiorbi  rrjs  dia-
OrjuTji,  by  Vg.  (irta  fadtris  and  area  testaiiifnli  (Nu.
14  44*.  and  by  EV  'ark  of  the  covenant.'  That  b'rith
cannot,  however,  in  this  phrase  mean  '  covenant '  in  our
sense  of  the  word  is  clear  from  i  K.  821  (  =2  Ch.6ii),
where  we  are  told  that  'the  b'rith  of  Yahwe'  was  'in
the  ark.'  The  phrase  is  parallel  to  that  in  E.\.  '25  16  21,
'  intothearkthoushalt  putthetestimony'(rny."i  nx).  which
(see  below )  is  a  technical  term  for  the  'two  tables'  of
the  Decalogue.  Hence  Kau.  US  rightly  rejects  the
obscure  if  not  misleading  phra.se  '  ark  of  the  covenant,'
and  substitutes  'ark  with  the  law  (of  Yahwe),'  which  is
at  any  rate,  by  common  admission,  the  best  appro.xi-
mate  rendering  (cp  CovKN.ANT,  §  i ).

The  latest  phase  in  the  historical  development  of  the
names  of  the  ark  is  marked  by  the  title  which  occurs
eleven  tin\es  in  the  I'riestly  Code  and  also


3.  Ark  of
'gdflth.


in  Josh.  4 16  (introduced  into  JE  by  the
editor  ?),  meaning  '  ark  of  the  publicly
delivered  ordinance'  (©"'^'-  tj  Kifiuirbs  t^s  diaOrjhij^  rod
fxaprvpiov,  \'g.  una  testimunii,  EV,  ark  of  the  testimony).
The  meaning  given  above  is  confirmed  l)y  \\\.  31 18  (1^  ?)
32 1 5  (H)  3429  (P),  where  we  hear  of  '  the  two  tables  of
the  rni;-'  Probably  this  new  title  appeared  to  the
priestly  writer  clearer  and  more  definite  than  that
introduced  by  Deuteronomy.  It  did  not,  however,
displace  the  older  phrases,  which  reapjiear  not  only  in
Chronicles  but  also  in  the  Greek  Apocrypha,  and  {k.
T%  Sta07jKr]i)  in  the  NT  (see  Ixjlow,  §  15).

On  looking  back,  we  see  that  the  names  and  titles  of
the  ark  fall  into  three  classes.  We  have,  first,  the  names
'  ark  of  Yahwe,'  '  ark  of  God,'  '  ark  of  our  (iod,'  which
indicate  that  the  ark  contained  an  object  which  in  some
way  symlxilised  and  represented  Israel's  (Jod  ;  and  next,
the  names,  'ark  of  the  law,'  'ark  of  the  ordinance,'
which  suggest  that  the  object  contained  in  the  ark  was
inscribed  with  laws;  and  lastly,  attached  to  the  older
names,  titles  such  as  those  in  Josh.  8(11)13  2  S.  62,  which
indicate  a  desire  to  correct  the  materialistic  interpreta-
tion which  might  seem  to  convert  the  ark  into  an  idol.
A  critical  study  of  the  texts  is  the  necessary  commentary
on  these  deductions  from  names.  The  following
sections  aim  at  bringing  together  the  chief  notices  of
the  ark,  indicating  the  sources  from  which  they  are
derived,  and  then,  at  fitting  points,  giving  the  reader
some  idea  of  the  results  which  follow  from  a  critical
treatment  of  these  notices.

We  t\im  first  of  all  to  the  documents  called  J  and  E
(as  far  as  we  can  separate  the  one  from  the  other)  in  the
Hexateuch. It  is  more  than  probable '  that  both  J  and

J  See  the  analysis  of  Ex.  82  /  in  Exouus,  ii.  |  3,  and  cp
Bacon,  Exodus,  143,  146 ;  We.  CH  95  ;  Di.  Kx.  u.  Lev.  345.


E.  in  their  original  form,  relatetl  how  Yahw6  or  E16hini,
at  Sinai  or  at  Horeb,  directed  an  ark  to  Ijc  made  as  a
4.  Traditional  ff'^'^}^'  ^is  personal  presence  as
oricin  of  '*'"'^'*'-"''  '^^  ^"^  I^*"P'*-"-  ^  ^"=**^  passages
*■_  ..p  were  omitted  by  the  editor,  who  pre-
■  ■  ferred  the  much  more  suitable  account
(so  he  must  have  deenied  it)  given  in  P  (see  Ix-low,  §  13),
but  has  preserved  the  tradition  of  J  and  E  that,  lioth
in  the  wilderness  and  on  the  entrance  into  Canaan,
the  ark  led  the  van  of  the  host.  In  referring  to  this  J
([uotes  two  poetic  fornmhe  (Nu.  IO3536),  which  he  says
were  sjjoken  by  Mo.ses  at  the  lK.ginning  and  the  end  of
a  day's  march,  but  which  more  probably  arose  at  a  later
time.'  Whether  J  and  V,  agreed  with  Deuteronomy  in
stating  that  the  '  two  tables  of  stone  '  were  placed  in  the
ark  is  a  matter  which  can  Ix;  only  conjecturally  decided.
There  is,  however,  a  very  strong  probability  that  they  did
not.  E's  story,  at  any  rate,  is  much  more  forcible  if
we  sup(K).se  no  renew  al  of  the  shattered  tables  ( V.\.  32  19),
and  we  cannot  believe  J  to  have  differed  on  this  im-
portant point  from  V..  Historical  considerations  (.see
below,  §  10)  confirm  this  conclusion.  In  particular,  the
ark  was  not,  in  the  succeeding  narratives  of  J  and  \\.  a
symbol  of  the  revealed  law,  but  the  focus  of  divine
powers.  Twice,  we  are  told,  the  Israelites  omitted  to
take  the  ark  with  them  and  were  defeated  (Nu.  I444
Josh.  74),  and  on  the  latter  occasion  Joshua  prostrated
himself  Ixifore  the  ark,'-^  and  remonstrated  with  Yahwe,
the  God  of  Israel.  The  crowning  proof  of  the  potency
of  the  ark  was  given  when  the  Israelites  cros.sed  the
Jordan  (according  to  one  of  the  traditions,  at  harvest
time),  and  captured  Jericho  (Josh.  3/".  6).  The  Deuter-
onomic  editor  has  made  the  former  part  of  the  narrative
dirticult  to  restore  to  its  original  form  (which  was  a  com-
bination of  J  and  E);  but  it  is  probable  that  J  and  V.
already  described  the  priests  (not,  '  the  priests,  ti.e
Levites  ')  as  bearers  of  the  ark.  In  the  latter  part  it  is
not  very  difticult  to  recover  a  simpler,  more  natural,
and  presumably  earlier  account,  in  which  no  e.vprtss
mention  is  made  of  the  ark,  and  nothing  is  said  of  tl.e
falling  down  of  the  walls  of  Jericho  (on  the  narrative
see  JosiHA,  ii.  §  7).^  Thus  far,  then,  the  most  genuine
tradition  is  clear  and  intelligible.

['  The  invention  of  portable  sanctuaries,  and  esp>ecially
of  portable  idols,  may  possibly  go  back  to  the  nomatlic
Semites  and  to  a  time  when  the  gods  were  still  tribal
rather  than  local  ;  but  the  probabilities  are  all  against
such  a  view.  There  is  less  trace  of  such  an  institution
in  Arabia  than  in  any  other  part  of  the  Semitic  world,
and  nowhere  else  is  the  principle  so  strongly  marked
that  a  trilx;  that  changes  its  seats  changes  its  gods.
Even  the  ark  of  Yahwe  is  not  carried  back  by  Heljrew
tradition  to  patriarchal  times  ;  the  patriarchs  do  worship
only  where  they  have  a  fi.xed  altar.  It  is,  therefore,  more
likely  that  portable  symbols  of  the  godhead  first  arose
among  the  settled  Semites  and  in  connection  with  the
religion  of  the  army  in  war.  In  this  connection  the  idea
of  a  portable  god  involves  no  great  breach  w  ith  the  con-
ception that  each  deity  has  a  local  home,  for  w  hen  the
campaign  is  over  the  god  returns  to  his  temple.  When
the  notion  of  portable  gods  was  once  established,  however,
its  application  could  easily  \xi  extendetl  and  would  serve
to  smooth  away  the  difficulty  of  establishing  new  jierma-
nent  sanctuaries  in  conquered  regions  or  colonies  over
the  sea.  A  Greek  colony  always  carried  its  gods  with
it,  and  it  is  probable  that  this  w:is  often  done  by  the
Phoenician  colonists  also.  Even  in  Israel  we  find  that
the  sanctuary  of  Yahw^  at  Dan  was  constituted  by
setting  up  the  image  from  Micah's  .sanctuary  (Judg.  18
30),  just  as  David  gave  a  religious  character  to  his  new
capital  by  transferring  the  ark  to  it. ']■•

But  by  what  critical  process  can  we  bring  simplicity

I  Delitzsch,  however,  defends  the  Mosaic  authorship,  ZKW
3  22S-215  ['82].

•■i  So  MT  and  C- ;  ©baf  omit  'the  ark  (oQ."

3  We.  CH  i2r.  Ki.  lint.  1  282/

<  From  WRS,  Burnett  Lectures,  and  series.  Lect.  I.  (MS>.


ARK  OF  THE  COVENANT


into  the  episode  of  the  capture  and  restoration  of  the
_ ,  sacred  ark  by  the  Philistines  ( i  S.  4  i-7  i )  ?

5.  (capture g^^^^  ^^^^^  ^^^  a.hnitted. That  at  the
^^  end  of  the  period  of  the  Judges  the  ark

^^  °  ^'  rested  at  the  Kphrainiitish  sanctuary  of
Shiloli  is  a  trustworthy  statement,  guaranteed  by  i  S.
43/.  (cha|).  .3  we  must  regretfully  pass  over,  as  coming
from  a  different  hand  and  later  writer  ;  sec  Samuki,,
ii. ).  It  must,  also,  Ije  a  fact  that  the  Philistines
had  defeated  the  Israelites  near  I'Iben-ezer  (IsK.\i:i.,
};  1 1 ).  Tradition  doubtless  added  that  the  leaders  of
Israel  attributed  their  misfortune  to  the  absence  of  the
ark  from  the  host,  and  that  they  therefore  fetched  the
sacred  chest  from  Shiloh.  The  immediate  conseciuences
are  graphically  described.  On  the  arrival  of  the  ark
the  Israelites  were  in  a  state  of  wild  delight  ;  and  the
Philistines  who  heard  the  shoutings  were  proportionately
alarmed,  for  '  who  (said  they)  can  deliver  us  from  these
great  gods?'  {(f/Mim).  Nevertheless,  with  the  courage
of  despair,  the  Philistines  renewed  the  fight  with  complete
success,  and  were  even  able  to  carry  off  the  ark  in
triumph.  Then  begins  a  series  of  wonderful  incidents
from  which  it  is  difficult  to  e.xtract  a  kernel  of  early
tradition.  Stade  thinks  (Gl'I  1  202/ )  that  in  chaps,
f)  and  6  he  can  find  the  remnants  of  two  distinct  accounts  ;
but  the  recognition  of  this  would  only  diminish  the
number  of  difficult  features  in  the  narrative.  It  would
obviously  not  provide  an  intelligible  statement  of  facts.
Of  the  difficult  details  referred  to  there  is  only  one  which
it  is  necessary  to  criticise  here.  It  is  a  statement  which
the  study  of  the  Assyrian  monuments  seems  to  make
historically  impossible.  The  Philistines,  we  are  told,
under  the  pressure  of  pestilence,  returned  the  '  gods  '
which  they  had  captured  from  Israel.  Ancient  nations
did  not  act  thus  in  such  circumstances.  For  example,
we  know  that  the  image  of  the  goddess  Xana  (see
Xan.i:.\)  was  taken  from  Erech  by  an  Elamite  king,
and  detained  in  Elani  for  1635  years.  Did  an}'  calamity
ever  suggest  to  the  Elamites  the  idea  that  Nana  was
chastising  them  for  the  insult  to  her  image?  No.
Asurbanipal,  king  of  Assyria,  had  to  devote  all  his
energies  to  the  task  of  crushing  the  Islamites  before  he
could  restore  the  image  to  its  ancient  home  (cp  .A^IR-
RANl-PAL,  §  8).  Similar  stories  of  reconciuered  idols
are  told  in  connection  with  the  names  of  Asurbanipals
grandfather  Sennacherib  (cp  AssvKi.v,  §  20)  and  the  old
Babylonian  king  Agu-kak-rime. '

The  fragmentary  document  which  we  have  thus  far
studied  closes  with  the  statement  that  the  ark  was  placed
in  the  house  of  Abinadab  at  Kirjath-jearim,  and  that
Abinadab's  son  was  consecrated  to  keep  it.  It  is  to  an
entirely  different  (and  probably  earlier)  source'-^  that
we  owe  the  narrative  of  the  bringing  of  the  ark  to  Zion.
We  learn  here  that  at  the  time  when  David  bethought
himself  of  the  ark,  it  rested  at  a  place  called  Baal  in
Judah  (2  S.  62  ;  see  Driver  ad  loc. ).  During  the  whole
of  Saul's  reign  and  during  David's  seven-years'  reign  in
Hebron,  it  had  lain  forgotten  in  a  provincial  town.
Neither  Saul  nor  David  had  thought  of  taking  it  into
battle  ;  nor,  so  far  as  our  evidence  goes,  had  it  been
visited  by  the  people.  What,  then,  had  been  the  effect
of  the  repeated  attestations  which  the  divine  judgments
had  given  to  its  supernatural  power  ?  Let  us  see  whether
the  narrative  in  2  S.  6  (which  appears  to  be  older  than
that  in  i  S.  4i-7i),  when  critically  treated,  suggests  any
way  out  of  our  manifold  difficulties.  It  is  permissible,
and  indeed  necessary,  to  disregard  so  much  of  chap.  6
as  relates  to  the  death  of  Uzzah  (a  passage  which  in  its
difficulty  resemt)les  parts  of  the  story  in  i  S.  5  / ,  and
the  growth  of  which  can  be  accounted  for),  and  to  fix
our  attention  on  the  simpler  narrative  in  vv.  10-15,  the
kernel  of  which  is  that,  early  in  David's  reign,  the  ark

1  Tide,  BAG  128/  305/  392 if: ,  referred  to  by  Kostcrs,  TliT
27  364  ['93].

2  The  reference  in  2  S.  6  3  to  the  house  of  Abinadab  seems  to
be  an  editorial  insertion  (see  Kosters,  op.  cit.  368).


was  in  the  house  of  one  Obed-edom  of  Gath,  and  that
David  fetched  it  thence  with  much  jubilation  to  Zion.
How  came  the  ark  to  be  there  ?  That  David  of  his  own
accord  entrusted  such  a  sacred  object  to  a  Philistine  is
highly  improbable  ;  but  how  if  Obed-edom  was  not  a
Philistine  sojourning  in  Judah.,  but  a  foe  residing  in  his
native  town  of  Gath  ?  How  if  the  ark  had  never  left
Philistine  territory,  though  it  had  been  shifted  from
Dagon's  temple  to  a  private  house?  How  if  David
acted  as  Assyrian  kings  acted  in  similar  circumstances,
and  reconcjuered  the  precious  object  which  was  to  him
in  some  sense  the  dwelling  of  his  God?  This  is
the  hypothesis  of  Kosters,  who  held  not  only,  with
Kittel  and  Budde,  that  2  S.  21 15-22  is  properly  the  con-
tinuation of  the  narrative  in  2  S..')  17-25,  but  also  that
the  secjuel  of  the  story  of  the  battle  in  Gath  (2  S.  21 20)
was  once  the  notice  that  David  fetched  the  ark  from
the  house  of  Obed-edom  in  Gath  and  deposited  it  for  a
time  at  Baal.^  After  this,  according  to  Kosters,  came
originally  the  story  of  the  capture  of  Jerusalem  (an  event
which  this  critic  places  after  the  hostilities  referred  to  in
2  S.  i)\T  ff.),  and  of  the  bringing  up  of  the  ark  to  Zion.
The  editor  to  whom  the  present  form  of  2  S.  61-12  is
due  apjiears  to  have  had  a  religious  rather  than  a  his-
torical motive.  The  facts  as  stated  in  the  original
narrative  might  suggest  to  some  readers  that  Yahwe
needed  the  interference  of  David  to  deliver  him  from
captivity  :  in  other  words,  that  David  was  stronger  than
his  God.  The  editor  shrank  from  inventing  an  entirely
new  narrative,  but,  to  counteract  that  idea,  put  the
central  facts  in  the  traditional  story  in  an  entirely  new
setting.

This  hypothesis,  the  present  writer  has  long  felt,
is  absolutely  required  to  clear  up  an  important  historical
episode.'^  Without  it  the  central  facts  of  tradition,  in-
cluding David's  almost  ecstatic  joy  (2  S.  614),  are  hope-
lessly obscure.  A  glance  at  2  S.  6 1  /  will  convince  the
reader  that  there  is  nothing  arbitrary  in  the  view  pro-
posed. That  vv.  2-i2«  caimot  have  been  the  original
sequel  of  v.  i  must  be  clear.  Unless  v.  i  is  simply  mis-
placed, it  must  have  been  followed  by  a  record  of  some
martial  exploit  of  David.  To  the  present  writer  it  seems
])robable  (see  David,  §  7)  that  the  exploit  consisted  in
a  great  victory  near  Gath  (cp  2.S.  2I20/. ),  which  so
weakened  the  Philistines  that  they  offered  to  restore  the
ark  on  condition  of  David's  making  with  them  a  treaty
of  peace,  and  that  David  him.self  fetched  the  ark  from
Obed-edom's  house.  It  will  te  remembered  that  when
David  defeated  the  Philistines  at  Baal-perazim  he  had
'taken  away  the  images'  (2S.  .521)  which,  by  their
presence,  should  have  ensured  a  Philistine  victory.  It
seems  probable  that  when  the  Philistines  restored  the
ark  David  gave  back  the  captured  '  iniages. '  Clever-
ness was  a  characteristic  of  this  king.  It  was  all-im-
portant to  him  not  to  wage  an  internecine  warfare  with
the  Philistines,  and  he  therefore  '  contented  himself  with
a  peace  honourable  for  both  parties'  (Kamphausen).
The  original  story  may  have  referred  to  this  restoration
of  the  images  captured  at  Baal-perazim,  and  this  com-
jKJund  name  may  have  suggested  the  mention  of  '  Baal '
and  '  Perez-uzzah  '  in  2  S.  6  as  it  now  stands.  In  a
certain  sense,  indeed,  the  ark  uuis  recovered  from  Baal-
perazim.

Our  next  notice  of  the  ark  is  in  2  S.  7,  a  passage  full
of  varied  interest,  though  in  its  present  form  not  older
than  the  sixth  century. It  tells  us  (and  no  doubt the

1  The  rea.*5n  why  David  deposited  the  ark  at  Baal  was,  accord-
ing to  Kosters,  that  he  had  not  yet  conquered  Jehus  or  Jeru.salem.
Those  who  hold  another  view  as  to  the  time  of  the  conquest  of

Jebus  will  give  a  different  reason.  David  had  indeed  conquered
ebus,  but  had  not  yet  adapted  it  by  fresh  buildings  to  ser\e  the
purpose  of  a  capital. See  Daviu,  §  10.

2  Since  the  above  was  written,  Winckler  has  made  another
attempt  to  produce  an  intelligible  view  of  the  hi.stor>'  of  the  ark
(Gl  T^ff.).  It  is  difficult  to  see  that  there  is  any  .solid  ground
for  his  very  revolutionary  hypothesis ;  but,  at  any  rate,  he
perceives  a  problem  which  escaped  the  earlier  writers  before
Kosters.

304


ARK  OF  THE  COVENANT


statement  is  historical)  that  David  wished  to  huikl  a
cedar-house  for  the  ark,  but  was  forliiddcn  l)y  an  oracle.
We  can  understand,  therefore,  that  for


6.  Fernianent
abode.


a  time  (as  2S.  lln  suggests)  the  ark
was  still  carried  with  the  army  as  an
insurance  against  defeat.*  The  capture  of  it  by  the
Philistines,  however,  had  already  given  a  blow  to  the
primitive,  fetishistic  conception  of  the  ark,  and  an
occasion  arose  when  David,  it  would  seem,  was  inwardly  ^
moved  to  express  a  far  higher  view.  It  was  probably  a  !
turning-point  in  Israel's,  as  well  as  in  David's,  religious
development.  The  circumstances  were  these.  David  was
fleeing  froni  Jerusalem  before  Absalom.  Zadok  wished  j
to  carry  the  'ark  of  God'  with  David  and  his  body-  j
guard.  The  king,  however,  protested,  and  commanded  1
Zadok  to  carry  it  back,  '  that  it  may  Ixj  seated  in  its
place'  (2S.  ]o25,  ©'-).  He  was  conscious  (if  t'.  26
may  be  followed)  that  Yahwe  might  have  cause  to  be
displea.sed  with  him,  and  would  rather  suffer  his  punish-
ment meekly  than  seem,  by  having  the  ark  with  him,  to
demand  the  interposition  of  Yahwe  as  a  natural  right.
Henceforth,  therefore,  the  symbol  of  Yahwe's  presence
should  no  more  '  leave  its  place '  :  Yahwe  would  direct
Israel's  aflairs,  both  in  p)eace  and  in  war,  from  Zion.
ICarly  in  Solomon's  reign  the  greatest  of  all  Israel's
sanctuaries  was  erected.  Much  as  the  original  passage
of  .Solomon's  biography  has  been  edited  (see  Kau.  //i'
and  cp  (5),  it  is  beyond  ciuestion  that  this  king  trans-
ported the  ark  from  its  temporary  abode  to  the  sanctuary  j
of  his  temple.  There — so  both  he  and  David  hoped —
it  was  to  serve  as  a  national  centre,  and  complete  the
unification  of  Israel.  The  hope  was,  however,  dis-
appointed ;  nor  do  even  the  writers  of  Judah  spend  a
word  on  the  ark,  or  give  a  hint  as  to  the  feelings  of  the
people  towards  it.

Our  ne.xt  news  of  the  ark  is  indirect,  and  conies  from
an  exilic  or  post-exilic  passage  of  the  I^ook  of  Jcrcniiaii
(3i6). The passage runs thus: 'In


7.  Disappear-


those  days  no  more  shall  one  say,  ' '  The


"•"'"'•  ark of  the h' nth  of  Yahwe,"  neither

shall  it  come  into  one's  mind,  neither  shall  one  think
upon  it,  nor  miss  it.  neither  shall  it  he  made  again.'
The  full  inqjort  of  the  words  may  be  doubtful  ;  but  at
least  one  thing  is  clear — the  ark,  on  the  possession  of
which  the  weal  or  woe  of  Israel  had  once  seemed  to
depend,  had  passed  away.  This  is  too  patent  from
later  writings  to  be  denied.  I'",zra  1  and  i  Mace.  4  do
not  mention  the  ark  among  the  sacred  vessels.  Josephus
(/^v.  05)  declares  that  the  Holy  of  Holies  contained
nothing  at  all.  Lastly,  Tacitus,  relating  the  entrance  |
of  Pompey  into  the  temple,  uses  the  emphatic  words,
'  Inde  vulgatum  nuUas  inlus  deum  effigies  ;  vacuam  '
sedem  et  inania  arcana'  [Hist.  69).  How  the  ark
disappeared  will  Ije  considered  presently  (see  next  §).
Sufiice  it  to  add  here  that  the  sepher  tofdh  or  '  Book  of
the  Law '  succeeded  to  the  undivided  reverence  of  true
Israelites,  and  is  still,  with  its  embroidered  mantle  and
ornaments,  the  most  sacred  object  in  every  synagogue.

When,  then,  and  how  did  this  holy  thing,  which,  ac-
Cf)rding  to  Jer.  3 16,  was  by  many  so  painfully  missed,  pass

o T4. r_4. out  of  sight? We  have  accounted  for  one
8.  Its  ia.te.  ■  ,  . . ,

strange  gap  in  our  historical  notices  respect-
ing the  ark  :  how  shall  we  explain  the  still  longer  and
stranger  lacuna  which  extends  from  (say)  960  to  586
H.  < :.  ?  Why  is  it  that  neither  the  historians  nor  the
prophets  of  this  period  (so  far  as  we  possess  their  works)
refer  to  the  fortunes  of  the  ark  or  to  the  popular  rever-
ence for  it  in  their  own  time?  Three  answers  seem
possible.  ( t )  Soon  after  960  the  ark  may  have  l)een
captured  by  an  enemy — a  calamity  which  was  deliterately
suppressed  by  the  historians,  just  as  they  suppressed  the

1  We  must  not  refer  here  to  i  K.  "2  26,  which  .states,  according
to  MT,  that  .-Miiathar  used  to  '  bear  the  ark  before  David ' —
i.e.,  in  his  campaigns.  The  right  reading  is,  not  jiix.  'ark,'  but
n^DK.  '  ephod ' ;  cp  i  S.  23  6  9.  Cp  the  s.-ime  mistake  in  i  S.  14  18,
MT. (So  first  Thenius.)

20  303


destruction  of  the  temple  of  Shiloh.  Cliesebrecht  and
( 'ouard  have  j)ointed  to  the  invasion  of  Judah  by  Shishak
(Se.sonk  I.),  king  of  Kgypt,  alxiut  928,  as  the  occasion
of  this  (see  i  K.  14  26).  Ihe  objection  is  that  Shishak's
campaign,  as  the  bas-reliefs  at  Karnak  apjK;ar  to  pr<ne.'
was  against  Israel  as  well  as  Judah,  and  that,  Egypt
being  too  weak  at  that  time  to  think  of  jjermanent  con-
quests, the  expedition  must  have  been  simply  due  to
vainglory  and  to  greed.  If  Shishak  took  away  from
Palestine  anything  in  the  nature  of  an  idol,  it  must  have
been  the  '  golden  calves'  of  Jerolxjam,  and  not  the  out-
wardly unattractive  wooden  chest  in  the  sanctuary  of  the
temple  of  Rehoboam.  I^>sides,  Reholxjam  and  his  priests
would  never  have  allowed  the  cajjture  of  the  ark  to
become  known  :  they  would  ci-rtainly,  in  the  interests  of
the  temple,  have  substituted  a  new  chest,  for  which
pious  fiction  the  supposed  discoveries  of  Babylonian  kings
mentioned  by  Tiele  [liAC,  461)  may  perhaps  furnish  a
parallel.  (2)  The  ark  may  have  been  carried  away  with
the  temple  treasures  in  785.  by  Joash,  king  of  Israel
(2  K.  1414),  who  would  hardly  have  omitted  to  reclaim
the  long-lost  treasure  of  the  I-:phraimitish  sanctuary  at
Shiloh.  The  objection  to  this  is  that  the  ark  had  Ion;;
ceased  to  be  the  special  possession  of  a  trilie,  and  that
events  had  proved  that  Joash  could  well  dis|jen.se  with
the  ark,  while  to  have  carried  it  away  would  have  been
an  offence  against  the  great  hero  of  united  Israel — David.
(3)  The  ark  (which  was  probably  renewed  by  the  priests,
when  decayed  from  age)  may  have  retained  its  place  till
the  great  catastrophe  in  586,  and  previously  to  this  may
have  lost  much  of  its  ancient  prestige  owing  to  the
growing  sense  of  the  inconsistency  of  identifying  such  an
object  as  the  ark  with  the  great  God  Yahwe,  and
perhaps  also  to  discourses  of  the  prophets  against  a
superstitious  reverence  for  the  ark  which  have  been  lost,
or  even  su[)prcssed  by  editors.  This  view — which  is  in
the  main  that  adopted  in  4  Ksd.  IO22,  and  implied  by
the  legend  in  2  Mace.  25  (cp  below,  §  15),  that  Jeremiah  '-
hid  the  tabernacle  and  the  ark  and  the  altar  of  incense
in  a  cave — is  by  no  means  an  improbable  one.  The
only  obvious  objection  to  it  can  easily  be  met.  The
assertion  in  Dent.  10 4/  that  the  ark  was  simply  the
repository  of  two  inscribed  tables  of  stone  need  not
imply  that  D,  like  P,  is  an  arch:tologist,  and  that  the
object  which  is  thus  wrongly  descritx^d  no  longer  existed.
It  is  more  natural  to  suppose  that,  like  the  other  fetishes
to  which  this  writer  is  so  vehemently  ojjposed,  the  sacred
stones  which  (as  we  shall  see)  were  the  objects  venerated
of  old  in  the  ark  still  held  their  place,  concealed  from
view  but  secure.  The  Deuteronomist,  speaking  in  the
name  of  Moses,  could  not  help  assuming  the  sanctity  of
the  ark  and  its  contents.  In  the  interests  of  piety,
however,  he  transformed  (as  far  as  words  could  do  it)  the
nature  of  the  objects  in  the  ark.  That  venerable  coffer
was  not,  he  meant  to  say,  in  any  sense  the  dwelling  of  the
deity,  whom  no  temple  could  hold  (i  K.  827)  :  it  siinjily
contained  a  perfect  written  embodiment  of  the  funda-
mental demands  of  Israel's  righteous  tiod.

This  leads  us  to  consider  the  origin  and  affinities  of
the  ark. Yor  the  ark  of  the  Deuteronomist  (and  of  I'l.
with  its  two  inscril)ed  tables,  no  parallel  has


9.  Real
nature.


Ixien found. Prof. Savce indeed refers


Mr.  Rassam's  discovery  of  a  coffer  with  two
inscribed  alabaster  tablets  in  a  little  temple  at  Balawat.
near  Mosul  ;  •'  but  the  coffer  (which  was  not  placed  in
the  sanctuary)  also  was  of  alabaster,  and  with  its  con-
tents corresponds  to  the  chests  containing  sacred  Ixjoks
which  were  among  the  regular  appurtenances  of  Egj'ptian
(anil  probably  of  Syrian )  lemiiles,  but  were  not  meant  to
be  carried.  For  the  ark  known  to  the  earliest  Hel  rew
traditions, however, there are many monumental

1  .St.  GVI 1  -,53/  ;  WMM,  As.  u.  Eur.  166-169.

2  In  the  Ta\m\xd  (Hitrajoth,  I2(i)it  is  Fosiah  who  hides  the
ark  and  other  sacred  objects,  including  the  pot  of  manna  (see
below,  §  15).

»  Sayce,  Hihbert  Lectures,  65  ;  cp  Pinches,  TSBA  7  83.

306


ARK  OF  THE  COVENANT


parallels.  In  Egypt,  for  instance  (from  which  Reran
too  hastily  derives  the  Israelite  ark),  no  festal  pro-
cession could  be  sculptured  or  painted  without  them.^
The  arks,  with  their  images,  were  placed  on  boats,
which  were  ornamented  at  the  ends  with  heads  of
the  divinities  within  ;  the  king  himself,  being  divine,
also  had  his  ark-boat.  Such  an  ark-boat,  too,  is
referred  to  in  the  strange  story  of  the  daughter  of  the
king  of  Bahtaii,"  where  an  image  of  the  god  Honsu  is
said  to  have  txjen  transported  to  .Syria,  to  deliver  a
princess  from  tlie  spirit  that  oppressed  her.  These
shrine-boats  must  originally  have  had  their  parallels  in
Babylonia  :  the  constant  expression  for  the  sacred  arks
in  the  cuneiform  texts  is  <■///'/'/  ■' — •/.  e. ,  '  ships. '  Within  the
best-known  historical  periods,  however,  it  was  in  simple
arks  or  coffers  that  the  images  of  the  gods  were  borne
m  procession  at  the  Babylonian  (and  Assyrian)  festivals.

Thus  it  appears  that  two  things  were  essential  in  a
sacred  ark— that  it  shouUl  ixj  of  a  size  and  a  material
which  would  permit  it  to  be  carried,  and  that  it  should
contain  a  representation  or  mystic  symbol  of  a  deity.
The  ark  known  to  David  and  Solomon  doubtless  com-
plied with  these  conditions.  It  was  a  simple  wooden
box,  such  as  the  ancestors  of  the  Israelites  had  used  in
their  nomadic  slate  for  their  few  valuables,'*  without  either
the  coating  of  gold  or  the  cherubim  with  which  the
reverence  of  a  later  writer  provided  it.  As  to  its
p  .  .  contents,  the  inscribed  '  tables  of  stone,'
■  "^  ®^  ^'  which  we  should  never  have  expected
to  find  in  the  Holy  of  Holies,  were  but  a  substitute  of
the  imagination  for  some  mystic  symbol  or  representation
of  Yahwe.  Of  what  did  that  symbol  consist  ?  We  are,
of  course,  bound  to  do  what  we  can  to  minimise  the
fiction  or  error  of  the  Deuteronomist  ;  but  we  must  not
deviate  from  the  paths  of  historical  analogy.  These
duties  are  reconciled  by  the  supposition  that  the  ark
contained  two  sacred  stones  (or  one).°  This  view,  no
doubt,  imjilics  a  survival  of  fetishism  ;  but  there  are
traces  enough  of  fetishism  (on  which  see  Idolatuy,  g  4)
elsewhere  in  Hebrew  anticiuity  to  justify  it.  The  stones
(or  stone)  miist  have  been  ancient  in  the  extreme.  They
(or  it)  originally  had  no  association  with  Yahw^  ;  they
represented  the  stage  when  mysterious  personality  and
power  were  attached  to  lifeless  matter.  Being  portable,
however,  they  were  different  from  the  sacred  stones
of  Bethel,  Bcth-shemesh,  .Shechem,  and  En-rogel,
and  are  most  naturally  viewed  as  specimens  of  those
b.netyls,  anim.ated  stones,  which,  according  to  Sancho-
niathon,  were  formed  by  the  heaven-god,  and  were
presumably  meteorites.  They  may  have  belonged
originally  to  the  tribe  afterwards  called  Ephraim;  and
when  the  several  tribes  united  in  worshipping  Yahwe,
the  Gorl  of  Moses,  the  l-^phraimitish  ark  with  its  contents
may  have  Ijeen  adopted  as  the  chief  sacred  symbol  of
Yahwe.  Theearliest  narrators  (see  above,  §  3,  end)  viewed
the  ark  (which  was  virtually  one  with  what  it  contained)
as  a  substitute  for  the  immediate  presence  of  Yahwe,  the
sin  of  the  'Golden  Calf  at  Sinai  having  proved  the
Israelites  to  be  unripe  for  such  an  immense  privilege.
The  primitive  Israelites,  however,  who  knew  nothing  of
the  story  referred  to,  nuist  have  regarded  it,  not  as  a
substitute,  but  as  the  reality  itself

The  portableness  of  the  Israelitish  ark  did  not,  it  is
true,  lead  to  its  being  carried  about  in  processions. The


11.  Treatment.


reason  is  that,  to  the  Israelite,  the  object
within  the  ark  was  much  more  than  an

1  .See  the  procession  of  the  arks  of  Amen  Re",  Mut,  and  Honsu
(the  Theban  triad)  in  the  second  court  of  the  temple  of  Ram[e)ses
III.  at  Medlnet  Hfibfi  (Wilkinson,  Anc.  Egyf>tians,  8289),
and  Plate  V.  in  Naville's  Festival  Hall  ofOsorkon,  i  (cp  p.  18).

2  Maspero,  i?/'(2)  840-45.

3  Del.  Ass.  HWB  s.v.  elififnt.  On  the  processional  arks  in
Babylonia,  see  Tiele,  ZA  2  179^;  C.  J.  Ball,  PSBA  14  4.

■•  Cp  Doughty,  Ar.  Des.  1  227.

»  Cp  Vatke,  Die  Rel.  des  AT  321;  St.  GVl  ^sif-  \  Benzinger,
Hehr.  Arch.  370.  There  were  and  still  are  two  sacred  stones,
a  black  and  a  white,  built  into  the  wall  of  the  Ka'ba  at  Mecca
(WRS,  KiH.  297/.).

307


I  idol.  It  was  not  merely  one  of  a  class  of  objects,  each
of  which  contained  a  portion  of  the  magical  virtue  of
the  deity  whom  it  represented  :  ^  it  was  the  only  object
with  which  Yahw^  w;is  so  closely  connected  that  the  ark
(for  reverence  forbade  mention  of  the  stones)  and  Yahwe
were  practically  synonymous  terms.  It  was,  therefore,  too
sacred  to  be  moved  for  a  slight  reason.  Worshippers
would  rather  make  a  procession  round  or  before  the  ark
(cp  2  S.  6 14)  than  bear  it  in  procession  themselves.  The
reverence  implied  in  the  story  in  2  S.  66/  may  represent
the  feeling  of  an  age  later  than  David's  ;  but  circumstances
had  long  been  leading  up  to  that  extreme  exaggeration.
The  higher  the  conception  of  Yahwe  became,  the  greater
was  the  awfulness  which  encompassed  the  ark,-^  until  (it
appears  probable)  by  a  natural  reaction  the  nobler
Israelites  rejected  the  fetishistic  conception  of  the  ark
and  its  contents  altogether.  Thus  we  get  one  great
distinction  between  the  ark  of  the  Israelites  and  other
sacred  arks  :  it  was  not  subservient  to  idolatry.  The
only  occasions  on  which  it  left  its  resting-place  were
times  of  war.  Then,  indeed,  it  was  carried  with  the  host
into  the  fray,  just  as  the  Philistine  images  were  carried
into  battle  by  the  Philistines  (2  S.  52i) — not  to  speak  of
Arabian  and  Carthaginian  parallels.  •*  It  was  not  specially
a  'warlike  palladium,'  however,  except  for  the  jjeriods
when  war  rather  than  peace  was  the  normal  state
of  the  people  ;  ■*  and  we  have  found  even  David,  at  a
great  crisis  in  his  life,  deciding  to  put  his  trust  in  his
God  without  the  presence  of  the  ark.

The  notices  of  later  writers  are  valuable  mainly  for
the  religious  history  of  the  period  of  their  authors. They
,n T i show  us  how,  near  the  close  of  the  pre-exilic
■ .  (and  afterwards  in  the  post-exilic)  age,  pious

men  imagined  to  themselves  the  nature  and
circumstances  of  the  ark.  It  is,  therefore,  unsafe  to
infer  with  Bertheau,  from  2  Ch.  803,  that  the  ark  was  re-
moved from  the  sanctuary  by  Manasseh  ;  unsafe,  also,
to  infer,  with  the  old  C^ambridge  scholar  Spencer,  from
P's  description  of  the  ark,  that  it  was  designedly  made
like  the  arks  of  Egypt,  in  order  that  the  Israelites
might  miss  no  splendour  or  elegance  which  had  charmed
their  eyes  at  Zoan.  That  Manasseh,  with  his  S3'ncret-
istic  liberality,  would  have  removed  the  ark  is  altogether
improbable.  Spencer's  theory,  on  the  other  hand,
may  contain  an  element  of  truth,  and  is,  at  any  rate,
more  plausible  than  the  view  developed  out  of  P's  account
by  Riehm.®  It  is  probable  that  the  priestly  legislator
(P.i),  in  his  description  of  the  ark,  did,  unconsciously
and  in  no  servile  manner,  take  suggestions  from  the
sacred  chests  of  Babylonia  and  Egypt,  which  he  had
seen  or  heard  of.  The  simple  chest  of  which  J  and  E
had  doubtless  spoken  was  unworthy  (he  thought)  to
be  in  any  sense  the  symbol  of  the  '  Lord  of  the  whole
earth.'  Not  such  an  ark  could  Moses  have  ordered
to  be  made,  for  Yahwe  was  all -wise  and  must  have
'  filled  '  the  artificers  of  the  ark  and  the  talx^rnacle  '  with
a  divine  spirit  in  wisdom  and  understanding '  ( Ex.
8031).  We must not, however, overlook the

references  to  the  ark  in  writings  of  the  Deuteronomic
school.  We  are  told  (Dt.  108)  that  Yahw6  'separated
the  tribe  of  Levi  to  bear  the  ark  of  the  b'rith  of  Yahwe,'
and  in  Dt.  3I9  (cp  25/!)  we  find  a  special  title  given  to
'  the  priests  the  sons  of  I^vi,'  which  is  derived  from  this
function  (cp  Josh.  83).  For  other  Deuteronomic  references
to  the  ark,  see  Dt.  8X25/  Josh.  833  i  K.  815  619  8921.

1  Cp  Maspero,  /v/'(2>  843,  n.  2.

2  Cp  1  S.  0  20,  '  And  the  men  of  Beth-shemesh  said.  Who  is
able  to  stand  before  Yahwe,  this  holy  God?'

3  .See  WRS,  Rel.  Sem.i^)  37.

*  Kautzfch  and  Kraetzschmar  (see  '  Literature  ')  hardly  seem
to  hit  the  mark.  We  cannot  lay  any  stress  on  the  titles  in  i  S.
4  4  2  S.  <■>  2,  on  grounds  stated  .ilready  (above,  S  ')•

B  Riehm  thinks  (//;F/f(2|,  art.  '  Biindeslade  ')  that  the  ark  was
constructed  in  such  a  way  as  to  show  the  diametrical  opposition
between  the  religion  of  revelation  and  the  religion  of  nature
worship,  the  presence  of  Y.ahwe  (symbolised  by  the  cherubim  on
the  .irk)  being  conditional  on  Israel's  performance  of  its  covenant-
duties.


ARK  OF  THE  COVENANT

W'c  now  reliirn  to  the  much  more  important  notices ]
in  the  I'riestiy  Code  and  in  Chronicles. A  full  descrip-
p, tion  of  the  ark  is  given  in lix.  '25 10-22

, ■. . 37 1-9- It was made of acacia wood.

aescnption.  .,.,jj^  statement  is  jwssibly  based  on  tradi-
tion which  is  particular  as  to  the  materials  of  sacred
objects.  The  shittah-tree  grows  not  only  in  Arabia,
but  also  in  parts  of  Palestine  :  the  ark,  therefore,  could
be  renewed  if  necessary.  It  was  oblong — two  cubits
and  a  half  in  length,  one  and  a  half  in  breadth  and  u\
height.  Ciold  was  overlaid  on  it  within  and  without,
and  on  the  lid,  which  had  a  projecting  golden  rim  (it),
was  a  plate  of  pure  gold  (nii;3  ;  see  Mickcy-.skat),
sustaining  two  golden  cherubim  (see  CHiiKUH,  i. ),  or
winged  figures,  whose  wings  extended  over  the  ark.
From  these  cherubim  Yahwe  promised  to  comnuniicate
w  ith  Moses,  and  reveal  his  will  for  Israel.  According
to  \i\.  30  26,  the  ark  was  to  Ije  anointed  along  with  the
tal)ernacle  and  the  rest  of  its  furniture.  When  made,
it  was  broiight,  we  are  told,  to  Moses  (3935),  and
placed  by  him  in  the  tal)ernacle,  screened  by  the  veil  ^
(/.£'.,  in  the  Holy  of  Holies  ;  see  2633/).  In  Lev.  Itiz
the  sanctity  of  the  ark  is  emphasised  by  the  command
that  .\aron  (/.<•.,  the  High  Priest)  shall  enter  the  Holy
of  Holies  only  once  a  year.  In  Nu.  831  the  charge  of
the  ark  is  committed  to  the  Kohathites,  and  in  4  5  it  is
commantled  that  when  the  talK,Tnacle  is  moved  Aaron
and  his  sons  (i.e. ,  the  priests)  shall  carefully  cover  up  the
ark  with  the  veil,  Ixifore  the  Kohathites  take  it  up,  in
order  that  the  latter  may  neither  see  (v.  20)  nor  touch
{t.  15)  the  holy  things.  In  789  (RV)  the  Voice  {i.e.,  of
Yahwe)  speaks  to  Moses  from  the  'Mercy-Seat.'  The
gloss  in  Judg.  '2O27/ — a  gloss  added  luider  the  influence
of  I'.,  -states  that  the  ark  was  at  Bethel  in  the  days  of
Phinehas,  and  the  editors,  who  follow  1\,  doubtless
understood  that  the  ark  was  always  in  the  tabernacle
till  the  battle  of  Aphek  (cp  T.\hkrn.\ci.k).

The  Chronicler  adds  scarcely  any  fresh  incidents  to  the
accountoftheark,  and  edits  the  earlier  narratives  in  SanuK'l

,- r>v, ;„!»_ =!»'•  Kings  on  the  assumption  that  the

14.  Cnronicler, , •  ^ r.i n .1 !• 1  1

.  regulations  of  the  Pncstly  Code  were  ob-

served throughout  the  history.  In  I  Ch.
\r>  \f.  he  makes  David  say,  '  None  ought  to  carry  the  ark
of  (jod  but  the  Levites,'  and  they  carry  it  according!}'  ;
and  at  first  sight  it  apix;ars  as  if  the  Philistine  Obed-
edom  liecame  a  Levite  (i-<\  1821  24)  ;  see  however  Obkij-
E1K)M,  2.  A  profound  sense  of  the  sanctity  of  the  ark
is  shown  in  iCh.  282,  where  the  ark  or  the  'Mercy-
seat'  is  called  '  the  footstool  of  Cod,'  and  in  2  Ch.  811,
where  Solomon  refuses  to  let  Pharaoh's  daughter  dwell
in  the  palace  of  David,  '  because  the  places  (?)  are  holy,
whereunto  the  ark  of  Yahwe  hath  come.'  In  353,
Josiah  commands  the  Levites  to  '  put  the  holy  ark  in
the  Temple '  :  'it  shall  not  t)e  a  burden  on  your
shoulders. '

The  only  direct  references  to  the  ark  in  the  Psalms
are  in  Ps.  1328  (cp  2Ch.  ()4i),  where  it  is  styled
tlV  I"?*'  '^^  °f  ^^y  strength';  and  in  Ps.  786i,
where  God  is  said  to  have  delivered  his  '  strength  *
{i.e.,  the  ark)  into  captivity.  An  indirect  reference  has
often  been  supposed  in  Pss.  24  47  and  68  ;  but  this  in-
volves the  untenable  assumption  of  their  pre-e.\ilic  origin.

The  ark  is  only  twice  mentioned  in  the  NT.  It  and
its  contents  are  described  in  Heb.  94  as  in  P2,  e.xcept
IB  WT  ^^^  ^^^  P°'  ^^  manna  (see  above,  §  8,  note)
■  is  said  to  have  been  in  (instead  of  beside)  the
ark.  In  Rev.  11 19,  after  the  seventh  angel  has  sounded,
'  the  temple  of  God  in  heaven  '  is  opened,  and  the  '  ark
of  God's  covenant '  is  seen  within.  The  words  '  in
heaven'  (6  iv  t(|5  ovftdvi^)  are  however  probably  an
editorial  insertion  (Spitta).  It  is  the  earthly  (not  the
heavenly)  temple  that  is  referred  to,  and  the  meaning
of  the  statement  is  that  the  ark  which  was  hidden  (so

1  This  seclu.sion  i.s  in  harmony  with  the  tran.scentlentalism  of
the  later  conception  of  the  divine  nature.  I

309


ARMAGEDDON

tradition variously  said) by  Jerenuah or  Josiah, shall
suddenly  reapjjear  in  the  sanctuiiry  in  the  latter  days.

Sec,  Iwsidc.s  Spencer,  De  Ugihus  Jielirtforum  (it&<),  .Sc)iing

(on  the  ii.-inies  of  the  ark),  /iA  //K  11  1 14-124  r9i  ] ;  Coiiard  (011

the  religious  and  national  import  of  the  ark),

16.  Literature. -^.-/ 7 /r  12  ('92); Kaui/wh  (on  ihc  tide

Yahwfc  .Seba'oth),  /'■.  <M'861,  17-22;  Kostcrs,
TA  7",  27  361-378  ['93] ;  iJi.  on  Kx.  2!) ;  Nowack's  and  UenzinKcr*
//rfi.  An/i.\  VVinclcler,  C/  1  I'gjl,  70-77;  Kraetzsthmar, />/>
liuniifS7'orstelluMg,  1896,  pp.  2o£-22o;  Hiihr,  SymMik,  1  482,  etc.
(on  other  sacred  arks)  ;  .Simpson,  '  Ark -shrines  of  Japan,'  TUBA
'•i  550-554-  T. K. C.

ARKITE  ('piyn— ».r.,  the  "Arkite.  man  of  'Arka  ;
ApoyKAiOC  [ADICL,  Jos.  Ant.  i.  62  ;  cp  .'-'am.  'pHJ?]*,  a
(  .inaanite  ( Pha-nician )  tribe,  (Jen.  10i7=  i  (  h.  1  15  (om.
H.  AP&K€I  [I-])  ;  sec-  Gi.ocKAl'i.V,  §  16,  1.  Arka  (cp
apKT\,  Jos.  I.e.)  is  mentioned  among  the  cities  taken
by  Tiglath-pileser  III.  (cp  KAT<-'>  104,  254/.),  and.
at  a  much  earlier  period,  in  the  Aniarna  tablets  (<..;'..
78,  12,  Irkata ;  once  [126,  22]  Irkat;  the  Arkmilii
of  Thotmes  HI.  seems  to  Ik;  a  collateral  form).'  The
lofty  tell  commanding  the  remains  of  the  ancient  city
was  discovered  by  .Shaw  in  1722.  At  its  S.  foot  flows
the  Nahr  '.\rka  in  a  deep  rocky  Ijetl,  towards  the  sea,
two  hours  distant.  To  the  11  of  the  tell  is  the  villaf,'i;
of  'Arka,  about  12  m.  N.  of  Tri]X)li.s.  It  was  an
important  place  in  the  Roman  jjeriod,  when,  throii^ii
being  the  birthplace  of  Ale.xander  .Severus,  it  was  called
C;esarea  Libani.  It  was  famous  for  the  worship  of
.Astarte.  See  Smiths  Did.  Class.  Ceoi;.  s.r.  .Ina;
Schii.  (;/r  I498  n.

ARMAGEDDON, RV Hak-M.\(;i;i.()N (APMApeA-

^UJN  [1  R]. AP MAreAcoN L^'^  lij' ARMAreAcON I  1 '■

1 Howunder-  ''''■'^'•^' ''"''• ■^"'- ^^'■'■"'".^''•'^^"' ' ^P

RtnoH  hv epMAKCAcoN.vers.  Memph.  ),  theiKune

th  "*"  ^^^"^  ^^^'  ^^'^^^  battlefield  (  Rev.  IC.  I'Sl.

^^ °^"  lietween  the  sixth  vial  and  the  seventh  is

inserted  a  vision  ( Rev.  16  13/.  16)  which  has  no comiection

with  the  context,  Ijeing  apparently  the  setjuel  of  the  vision

of  the  three  angels  in Rev.  146-ii. The  three  angels

proclaim the  coming  judgment  ujion  the  world-power

and  the  way  to  escajxi  it  ; the  three  demoniacal  s|)irits

(from the dragon, the beast, and the false proplKt)

seek  to  counteract  this  by  '  gathering  the  kings  of  ihe

whole  world for  the  war  of  the  great  day  of  (Jod  the

Almighty.' The  junction  of forces is made at 'the

place  which  is  called  in  Hebrew  Har-Magedon. '

Two  c|uestions  have  to  be  asked  :  (i)  What  did  the
writer  understand  by  Har-Magedon  (if  this  is  the  correct
reading)?  and  (2)  What  was  the  meaning  of  the  term
in  the  source,  whether  written  or  oral,  from  which  he
drew?  It  is  in  the  highest  degree  probable  that  the
writer  himself  interpreted  the  phrase,  '  the  mountains  of
Megiddo'  (cp  Apyapi^iv=  Mount  Gerizim,  Eupolemus
ap.  Eus.  /-"/;' 9  17).  Itoth  from  its  natural  advantages
and  from  its  history  the  Plain  of  Megiddo  (Zech.  I'Jii)
would  have  been  the  more  obvious  scene  of  such  a  great
gathering  ;  but  the  writer  could  plausibly  justify  the
substitution  of  '  mountains  '  for  '  plain  '  by  the  much-
studied  apocalyptic  descriptions  of  Ez.  88821  392417,
where  the  hordes  of  Gog  are  said  to  meet  their  end
'upon  the  mountains  of  Israel.'  Megiddo  itself  is,  of
course,  a  hill-town,  though  close  to  the  great  Plain  of
which  it  commands  the  southern  entrance  :  there  is
nothing  incorrect,  therefore,  in  the  phrase  '  the
mountain-district  of  Megiddo.'  Har-Magedon  is  no
doubt  half-Hebrew  ;  but  it  would  Ix;  strange  if  readers
of  Jewish  (Jreek  could  not  interpret  it  (cp  terms  like
Na7e(3  in  0 1. See  Apoc.M-VI'se,  §  46.

If,  however,  we  hold  it  to  be  probable  that  the  small

apocalypse  (.see  Spitta,  Offetib.  568)  to  which  16  16  Ix-longs

j». . . is  a  translation  of  a  Hebrew  original,  and

?"^ certain,  at  any  rate,  that  the  writer  built

meaning. ^^  ^ considerable extent on traditional

1  Cp  the  ethnic  Irkanatai  on  the  monolith  of  Shalmaneser
II.  (292;  KliXiy^t).  So  Honiniel,  Cesc h.  6o<),  Ed.  Meyer
'Glos.sen  z.  d.  Thontaf.  von  el -Am.,'  jKgyptiaca  ("97),  p.  69;
cp  WMM,  As.  u.  Eur.  247.

310


ARMENIA

semi -mythic  stories  eschatologically  interpreted,  it
lx;c()ines  a  question  whether  his  interpretation  of  the
name  of  the  great  battletield  as  meaning  '  mountains  of
Megiddo'  is  correct.  The  restoration  of  the  original
text  offered  by  a  writer  in  Z.l'J'U'  7  170  ['87],
nao  •\n  ("will  gather  them  unto  his  fruitful  mountain  '  —
/.(•.,  the  mountain-land  of  Israel),  does  not  give  a
delinite  locality,  which  seems  to  lie  required  in  this
context.  Nor  are  the  attempted  numerical  explana-
tions cjuoted  by  Spitta  {Offciib.  402)  more  prol),ible.
Ciunkel,  therefore,  thinks  (Scho/>/.  266)  that  '  Harma-
gedon '  mast  tx:  a  name  of  mythic  origin,  connected
in  some  way  with  the  fortimes  of  the  dragon  who  is
the  lineal  heir  of  the  Rabylonian  dragon  Tiamat,  the
personification  of  chaos  and  all  evil  (cp  Crk.\tion,
§1).  On  p.  389  of  the  same  work  Zimmern  com-
nunucates  a  conjecture  of  Jensen  that  fj.ayeduji'  is
identical  with  /xiyadojv  in  the  divine  name  'TecrefiiyaSwv ,
the  husband  of  'Epecrx^y"-^  ( =  Bab.  Ereskigal),  the
Babylonian  goddess  of  the  underworld.  Sec  Khchi.
Mils.  4949,  where  in  a  magic  formula  given  by  Kuhiiort
from  Greek  papyri  we  read,  ^fois  xdov'101%  'Tfce/jnyaSuv
Kal  Kovprj  lie  per  e(f>6vrj  'Hpfcrx'7a\  k.t.X.  (see  also
HAi>.\n-RiMMON).  The  same  two  (doubtless  Baby-
lonian) names  occur  on  a  lead  tablet  from  .Alexandria,
Rhein.  Miis.  18  563,  where  the  former  is  given  as
'Te(rf/i/xt7a5w»'.  It  would  be  natural  that  the  spot  where
Tiamat  was  defeated  (and  was  again  to  be  defeated)  by
Marduk  siiould  Ix;  called  by  a  name  which  included  that
of  a  god  of  the  underworld.  T.  K.  ('.

ARMENIA  Cl^I^^vI,  2  K.  U»37  Is,  3738t  AV,  RV
Ar.vkat.

ARMLET  (Tp-13,  e.wnAoKiON  [H.\FL]),  so  RV  for
.WT.MU.i.r  in  i:x.  3;') 22  InepiAeJiON  ?  [1UFL]K  Xu.
31  50.  It  may  be  doubted,  however,  whether  the  word
does  not  mean  an  ornament  for  the  neck  (so  R\'mg.
N'eckl.ACK) — perhapsa  necklace  consisting  of  a  number
of  little  spheres,  cp  Ar.  kumzal"" ,  a  little  ball.  See
Okn.vmknts.

ARMONI  ("Jb-jN,  •  Talatinus'?;  epMWNOCi  [H].
"Niei  [A],  A)(|  [I.])'  ^  -''"n  of  Saul  sacrificed  by  David
to  the  vengeance  of  the  Gibeonites  (2S.  2l8t).  .See
Rizi'.\n.  Neither  he  nor  Mephibosheth  [i],  the  two
sons  of  Rizpah,  is  mentioned  elsewhere.

ARMOUR,  ARMS  (D*'?3),  i  S.  17 54.  See  Bkea.st-
I'l.Aii:,  I,  1Ii:lmi:t,  (Jki;avks,  Shiki.i)  ;  and  cp  War,
and  Wkai'ons.

ARMOUR-BEARER  (c'??  Nb'J,  which  happens  to
occur  only  with  a  suffix,  VP^  'J,  Judg.  954,  etc. ,  or  in  the
consir.  St.,  nXV  ^^3  N^'X  2  S.  2337  iCh.  II39).
Abimelech,  Saul,Joab,  all  had  armour-bearers  ;  Goliath's
S(|uire  is  called  a  shield-lx;arer  (i  S.  177).  On  the  age
of  armour-bearers,  cp  WRS,  OTJO'i  431  ;  Che.  Aids
to  Crit.  77  n.  Is.  52 11,  .nin'  -hz  "N'r:  (KV  '  Ve  that
bear  the  ves.sels  of  the  Lord')  is  taken  by  most  com-
mentators (.\ben  Ezra,  Kimchi,  Cheyne  formerly)  to
mean  '  armour-tearers  of  N'ahwe '  ;  but  this  is  im-
probable (see  Di.  ad  loc. ).

ARMOURY.  In  Neh.  3 19  PC'SH,  '  weapons,  arming,'
1(5,  T)  (TwaiTTOvaa),  and  in  Jer. ,'(025  "I^IX,  'treasure,
store,'  are  probably  contractions  for  pw'JH  IT'S,  '  house
of  weapons,'  and  "IVINH  D"'?,  'house  of  treasure'
respectively.  In  Cant.  44  '  thy  neck  is  like  the  tower
ot  David  builded  for  an  armoury '  m'SPH"?  is  difficult.
Vg.  renders  it  cum  propugnaciilis.  while  ©  merely
transliterates  {daXiriwe  [BS],  -X0i.  [.\]),  and  O.S'^'  202,
84  has  daXwiioO — iwdX^t)  ^  v\pr)\d.  The  meaning
'armoury'  has  no  philological  basis  (see  Del.  ad  loc),
and  yet  it  is  the  only  meaning  which  suits  the  context.
Cheyne  {Exp. Times,  June  '98)  supposes  corruption  of


ARMY

the  text  and  reads  d'bW^  '  for  the  shields. '  The  neck
of  the  Shulamite  is  compared  to  the  tower  of  David
adorned  with  small  metal  plates — i.e.,  perhaps  to  the
'house  of  the  forest  of  Lebanon'  in  which  were  sus-
pended the  shields  and  targets  of  gold.  Fancifully  the
j)oet  represents  these  shields  as  suspended  on  the  outside
(cp  Kzek.  27").  Budde  and  Siegfried  agree  in  placing
the  'tower'  at  Jerusalem.

ARMY  (Nny.  '?'n, nsnyp). The main  army  of
Israel,  like  that  of  all  primitive  nations,  and,  in  the  last


1.  General


resort, of all nations, consisted of the


levy.


whole  able-bodied  adult  male  population.
In  Nu.  li-3(P),  twenty  is  fi.xed  as  the
age  at  which  a  man  became  a  soldier  ;  but  it  is  not
probable  that  any  such  regulation  was  rigidly  observed
in  practice.  This  general  levy  constituted  the  fighting
force  of  Israel  in  the  wilderness,  at  the  time  of  the
settlement  and  under  the  'Judges,'  and  remained  its  chief
military  resource  throughout  its  national  history.  Under
the  'Judges,'  the  armies  mentioned  are,  for  the  most
part,  the  levy  of  the  tril)es  or  clans  immediately  con-
cerned. On  sjxjcial  occasions,  however,  such  as  the  war
against  Sisera,  and  Saul's  relief  of  Jaljesh-gilead,  all  the
fighting  men  of  Israel  were  summoned,  and  their
olx;dience  to  the  sunmions  was  represented  as  a  para-
mount religious  duty.

The  armies  obtained  from  such  levies  varied  greatly
in  number  and  efficiency  ;  a  clan,  or  even  a  trilx;,
whose  immediate  interests  were  threatened,  would
readily  take  the  field  in  its  full  strength.  An  appeal
for  a  general  levy  of  Israel  would  scarcely  ever  be  more
than  partially  responded  to;  Deborah  (Judg.  5)  com-
plains of  the  absence  of  Reuben,  Gilead,  Dan,  and
Asher  ;  the  national  leaders  sought  to  prevent  such  dere-
lictions from  duty  by  the  most  solemn  appeals  to
religious  sanctions — Deborah  curses  Meroz  (Judg.  r)23),
and  Saul,  when  a  spirit  (or  impulse)  from  (iod  came
upon  him,  threatened  to  cut  in  pieces  the  o.xen  of  all
recreants  (i  S.  116).

When  armies  were  required  these  national  or  tribal
levies  were  called  together  by  messenger  (c"DN''?n  T2
I  S.  11  7),  sound  of  trumpet  (ntjic*  Judg.  634),  or  erection  of
standard,  or  other  signal  (d:  Jer.  46,  see  Ensig.n')  ;
when  the  emergency  was  over  they  dispersed  to  their
homes.  They  were  well  suited  to  carry  on  or  repel
border  forays,  but  could  not  maintain  prolonged  \Nar-
fare,  esp)ecially  at  any  distance  from  their  own  territory,
or  even  oppose  adecjuate  resistance  to  any  formidable
invasion.  These  levies  were  composed  entirely  of
infantry  ("Sn  iS.  4iol54);  the  Israelite  territory,  in
early  times,  was  chiefly  hill -country,  where  cavalry
force  could  neither  Ije  formed  nor  used.  The  first
Israelite  who  is  mentioned  as  possessing  horses  is
Absalom,  2S.  15i  (cp  Horse,  §  3).

Such  armies  were  very  loosely  organised. As  Well-

hausen (HI  436  ['8:5])  points  out,  'what  there  was  of

p  , permanent official authority  lav  in the

i.  uommana.  j^^^^^j^  ^^  j,^^  ^^^^^^^  ^^^j  ^^^^^  of' houses  ;

in  time  of  war  they  commanded  each  his  own  household
force.'  So  .Abraham  leads  the  expedition  to  rescue  Lot
(Gen.  14),  and  Jair  conquers  the  '  tent  villages  of  Jair '
(Nu.  3241).  Similarly,  P  descril>es  the  '  princes  '  of  the
tribes  as  also  their  captains  in  war  (Nu.  1/  ).  Deborah
(Judg.  514/)  speaks  of  the  princes  and  leaders  of  Is-
sachar  and  other  trilies  (see  Government,  §  21).  In
practice,  howt;ver,  the  hereditary  heads  of  tribes  and
clans  were  often  set  aside  on  account  of  the  ability  and
self-assertion  of  other  leaders.  Indeed,  these  hereditary
heads  of  houses  play  a  very  small  part  in  the  actual
history,  possibly  because  history  emphasises  what  is
exceptional.  The  'judges,'  whose  main  function  was
to  head  the  Israelite  armies  in  special  emergencies,  were
men  called  by  a  kind  of  divine  inspiration.  Gideon
and  Saul  are  not  the  heads  of  their  trilies  or  even  clans  :
312


ARMY

Gideon's  family  was •  p<ior in Man:isseh  and he  was
the  least  in  his  fathers  house'  (Judg.  (Jis).  and  Sauls
family is descriljed in almost identical terms ( i  S.
9ji). In  the  absence  of  any  other  widely  recognised
authority, the priests of the great sanctuaries, and
especially  of  the  ark.  sometimes  assumed  the  conmiand
of  armies, when called by  anibition or the sense of
duty  (l)KBOKAH  ['/.J'.],  the  house  of  KlA  [i/.r.].  Samukl
[</.i:]). When  the  trilxis  were partly  merged in the
kingdoms,  and  the  clans  and  families  were  in  a  measure
superseded  by  the  t<iwiis  and  village  conmmnities,  the
levy  would  naturally  follow  the  new  order  (Amos  63).
Probably under the  kings the levies did not always '
assemble  by  clans,  but  men  were  collected  by  the  royal
officials from the  various  districts (cp  CJovkknmknt.
§  20). In  any  case,  the  organisation  of  the  levies  was ;
subordinated to  that  of  the  standing  army, and they
were  divided  into  'thousands.'  'hundreds,'  'fifties.'  and 1
'lens,'  institutions  which  are  said  by  an  ancient  iradi- |
tion,  I'.x.  18 25  (JK),  to  have  originated  with  Moses.  ■

A  second  important  element  of  the  military  strength .
of  Israel,  as  of  all  nations  at  a  simil.ar  st;.ge  of  develop)-
P , ment, lay in the jjcrsonal following of
3.  Bands,  i^j^.jj ^1^^ mndc war their occupation. I
These  '  bands  '  (inj,  also  used  of  a  division  of  an  army) '<
may be roughly likened to the vassals of feudal \
chiefs, the '  free  companies '  of  the middle ages, and j
even  to  the banditti in unsettled  districts. As  in  the
case  of  England  and  Scotland,  the '  bands  '  flourished
sjiecially  on  the  frontiers  ; the  territory  of  Israel had |
a  frontier  very  long  in proportion to its  area. Such ,
'  bands '  could  take  the  field  much  sooner  than  a  clan-
levy,  and  would  be  better  disciplined  and  nmch more
oxix,Tt in warfare. More than once they rendered |
signal  .service  to  the  nation. The  '  vain  fellows  '  whom !
that  captain  of  banditti,  Jephthah,  gathered  round  him
(□'P'"!  C'C'JN. Judg.  II3) were the  kernel of the  army |
which  defeated  Amnion,  and  David's  following  was  one 1
chief  instrument  in  the  restoration  of  Israel  after  (lilboa. '
I  S.  '2'2-30  gives  us  a  detailed  account  of  the  formation,
character,  and  career  of  such  a  IkkIv  (see  U.wii),  t;  4).
It was a self-constituted  frontier-guard,  living  on  the
plunder of the neighbouring trilxis and by levying
blackmail on their fellow-countrymen, whom they
claimed  to  protect. The  warlike  services  rendered  by
the  'bands'  were  accompanied  by  serious  drawbacks.
They  added  to  the  danger  of  civil  war  ; they  embittered
the  relations  with  neighbouring  trilxis  ;  and  they  were
capable, like David, of  taking service  with  foreigners
even  against  their  own  countrymen. We  do  not  hear
of  them after David's time  ; they  would scarcely be
tolerated  by  powerful  kings,  but  were  sure  to  reappear
in  unseltletl  times.

As  the  main  function  of  a  king  was  that  of  permanent
commander-in-chief,  a  monarchy  implied  some  sort  of
.  standing army and permanent military

organisation.  In  time  of  peace  the  king
kept  a  l)odyguard  as  the  main  support  of  his  authority,
and  this  bodyguard  formed  the  nucleus  of  the  army  in
war  (cp  GOVKRNMK.VT,  §  18).  We  find  Saul  '  choosing  '
3000  men  (i  S.  ISa)  and  sending  the  rest  of  the  people
to  their  tents.  He  did  not  keep  these  chosen  men  as
a  i>ermanent  army,  for  in  1  S.  24  2  he  chooses  another
3000  when  he  wishes  to  pursue  David.  Probably  he
did  his  l)est  throughout  his  reign  to  keep  by  him  a
l)icked  force,  which  was  virtually  a  standing  army.  He
had  a  permanent  commander-in-chief,  Abner  (iK3S"Tb
I  S.  1450),  and  his  personal  following  must  have  in-
cluded other  permanent  military  oflicers  (cp  Govf.RN-
MKNT,  §  21).  David's  band  of  followers  during  his
exile  served  as  the  kernel  of  a  much  more  complete  and
extensive  military  organisation.  The  office  of  com-
mander-in-chief remained  a  permanent  institution,  and
the  captains  of  the  host  (h'm  nir  2S. '244)  also  appear
as  permanent  officers.  A  bodygnard,  practically  a
313


ARMY

continu.alion  of  David's  companions  in  exile,  was  forme<I,
and  its  captain  is  mentionetl  as  one  of  the  great  officers
of  state  (2.S.  818  •2'J23  2^23.  ,ip''irn-'^Ki  nap:  C'5r''f,7lo
K3->lV).  Now,  however,  the  Ixxlyguard  had  come  to
consist  of  foreign  mercenaries,  '  C'hereihites  and  Pele-
thiles,'  probably  Philistines  (see  CllKKKriiiTKS,  C.\IMI-
TUK).  In  2.S.  15  18  we  find  600  Philistines  from  (iath
in  Davids  army  ;  (P's  fjaxvro-^-  however  (in  a
doublet),  suggests  a  reading  gihbdrhn,  or  'mighty
men.'  for  gittim,  or  '(iittites.'  If  the  latter  :s  the
correct  reading,  the  (iittites  njay  have  l)een  either
part  of  the  Vxjdyguard,  or  else  an  indeixindent  band  of
mercenaries  (see  David,  S  i  i(<i)).  I'he  Cherethites  and
Pelethites  are  not  mentioned  after  the  death  of  David  ;
but  the  iKxlyguard  of  foreign  mercenaries  nmst  have
remained  a  pernwnent  institution.  1K.I427  s|X'aks
of  the  captains  of  the  guard,  literally  'runners'  ('njr
C>~in),  that  kept  the  pal.ace  gates  (cp  2  K.  10 25).
2  K.'l  1  4  sjx;aks  of  '  the  centuri'Mis  of  the  Carites  and  of
the  guards'  (c's-;'''!  ns^  niKSn  "li;-),  where  the  Carites
are  possibly  identical  with  the  Cherethite.s.  If  the
reading  in  2S.  238  is  correct,  and  if  -r^B*  in  •c";'C'n  cki
(AV  '  chief  among  the  captains '  ;  RV  '  chief  of  the
■•aptains ' )  is  rightly  explained  as  referring  to  the  third
occupant  of  a  chariot  (Tpio-rdrTjj  [HAL],  ICx.  14?  I.'m.
etc.),  it  may  indicate  the  use  of  chariots  by  David,
though  it  is  probably  u.sed  in  its  later  sense  of  '  captain  '
(see  Chariot,  §  10).

With  the  very  doubtful  exception  of  these  '  shalishim,'
we  have  no  reference  to  Israelite  chariots  and  cavalry
before  the  end  of  Da\id's  reign.

According  to  FA'  of  2S.S4,  he  reserved  horses  for  a  hundred
chariots  out  of  the  spoil  taken  from  H.-id.id'ezer  lien  Rehol),  kin>;
of  Zol)ah;  (pliAl.  translates  'reserved  for  himself  a  hundred
chariots.'  Reuss  and  Kantzsch  translate  'a  hundred  cli.iriot
horses.'  No  reference  is  m.-ide  to  the  use  of  these  ch;iri..ts  or
horses  in  war  ;  moreover,  the  passage  prob.-\bly  belongs  to  the
last  editor  of  Samuel.

Solomon,  however,  established  a  force  of  1400
chariots  and  12,000  hor.semen  (i  K.  IO26I,  and  accord-
inglv  we  find  mentioned  among  his  oflicers  ■  captains
of  his  chariots  and  of  his  horsemen  '  (vc^gEi  12:-;  -c\  i  K..
922).  Occasional  references  occur  in  the  later  history
to  Israelite  chariots  and  horsemen  (2  K.  S21  \'-\i)-  Prob-
ably the  armies  of  Israel  and  Judah  were  modelled  on
the' army  of  Solomon  till  the  end  of  these  monarchies  ;
but  their  main  reliance  would  be  on  the  infantry.  To-
wards the  close  of  the  Jewish  monarchy  a  quasi-religious
feeling  against  the  use  of  chariots  and  cavalry  seems  to
have  arisen,  and  Dt.  17  16  forbids  the  king  to  nniltiply
horses  (cp.  Dt.  20i  I.s.  31i).  The  references  to  the
houghing  of  horses  by  Joshua  (Josh.  1 1  69)  and  David
(2  S.  84)  are  probably  due  to  a  Deuteronomic  redactor.

Nothing is said alxnit  paying soldiers. In  earlier
times  the  Israelites  w ho  formed  the  national  levy  would
„ . .  find their own weapons and pro-

6.  Maintenance.  ^^^^^  ^he  latter  l>eing  often  obtained
from  the  enemy  by  jjlunder  or  from  friencls  by  gift
or  exaction.  Probably  throughout  the  history  the
general  levy  was  mostly  provided  for  in  this  way  ;
though,  as  the  royal  government  became  more  jKiwerful
and  more  completely  organised,  it  may  have  done
something towards feeding and arming these levies

(see  (iOVERNMK.NT, §  20).

The  bodyguard  and  the  rest  of  the  standing  army,
including  the  charioteers  and  cavalry,  stood  on  a
different  footing.  They  were  maintained  by  the  govern-
ment (i  K.  427),  chariot  cities  being  assigned  as  a  pro-
vision for  the  chariots  and  cavalry.  They  w  ere  probably
paid  ;  certainly  the  foreigners  in  the  Ixxlygu.ard  did  not
serve  for  nothing.  The  plunder  taken  from  enemies
would  be  an  important  part  of  the  renmneration  of  the
soldiers,  and  a  principle  of  division  Rnween  the  actual
combatants  and  the  reserve  is  laid  down  in  i  S.  3024-
The rules  as to exemption from military service in

314


ARMY

Dt.  20  are  probably  an  ideal  based  on  traditional  public
opinion.

No  reliance  can  be  placed  on  the  numbers  which  are
given  for  Israelite  armies.  At  the  same  time,  the  two
kingdoms  seem  to  have  been  populous  in  prosperous
times,  and  a  general  levy  of  able-bodied  adults  may
sometimes  have  attained  very  large  dimensions.

Under  powerful  kings  the  Israelite  armies  were
strengthened  by  the  au.\iliary  forces  of  subject  allies
— e.i^.,  Edoni  (2  K.  3).  Doubtless  such  assistance  was
sometimes  purchased,  after  the  manner  of  the  narrative
in  2  Ch.  25.

The  details  as  to  the  Levites  in  the  account  of  the
deposition of  Athaliah in 2  Ch.  23 |cp 2K.  11) were

6.  Levitical  ^'J'^t'^^'  «"gg,'^^»^^  »^>-  ^^^^  institutions  of

* the  Chronicler  sown  tune  (6/r(.(j  300  h.c).

guar  .  'ph^se  details  seem  to  show  that  the
Levitical  guard  of  the  Temple  was  then  in  e.xistence.
As  this  guard  is  not  provided  for  in  the  Priestly  Code,  j
it  was  probably  formed  after  the  time  of  Ezra.  Possibly
the  Trpo(XTdTr]s  rov  iepov  [VA]  in  2  Mace.  3  4  may  have
been  the  captain  of  this  guard.  If  so,  however,  it  is  ]
difficult  to  suppose  that  the  present  text  is  correct  in
ascribing  him  to  the  tribe  of  Benjamin  (see,  however,
Bknja.min,  §  7  end).  The  capt^n  of  this  guard,  under
the  title  of  arpaTriyJs,  is  mentioned  by  Josephus  in  his
account  of  the  time  of  Claudius  Cajsar  (y4«A  x.\.  62),
and  of  the  destruction  of  the  Temple  (BJ  vi.  03),  and
in  Lk.  22452  and  Acts  4  i  .'12426.  Probably  the  officers,
VTT-qpiTai,  who  assisted  in  the  arrest  of  Jesus  (Jn.  I83,  cp
73245)  l)elonged  to  this  body.

In  the  post-exilic  period,  under  the  suzerainty  of  the
Persians,  and  of  the  Greek  kings  of  l"'gypt  and  Syria,

p . ... the  Jews  could  scarcely  be  said  to  have

7.  l-OSt-exiUC. ^^ ,^j.|^^y .pj^g ^^^^^ Qf. >,rehemiah ,

clearly  shows  that  they  had  to  trust  to  their  own  energy |
and  courage  for  protection  against  hostile  neighbours  ; j
but  they  fought  as  a  city  militia  rather  than  as  a  peasant
levy.

The  revolt  of  the  Maccabees  made  Judrea  a  military
power.  The  long  wars  not  only  habituated  the  bulk  of
the  people  to  arms,  but  also  produced  a  standing
army,  which  soon  included  many  foreign  mercen-
aries. Jewish  soldiers  also  received  pay  ( i  Mace.  1  4-32),
probably,  however,  only  picked  bands  that  formed  the
standing  army  and  ranked  with  the  other  mercenaries.
Josephus  (/?/i.  25)  tells  us  that  Hyrcanus  I.  (135-107
B.C. )  was  the  first  Jew  who  maintained  foreign  mercen-
aries {^evorporpeif).  .Alexander  Jannasus  (106-79  B-C. )
employed  Pisidian  and  Cilician  mercenaries,  and  at  one
time  was  at  the  head  of  a  mercenary  army  of  1000  horse
and  8000  foot,  in  addition  to  10,000  Jews.  These
mercenaries  are  styled  'Greeks'  (i?/i.  435,  cp  04).
As  the  Jews  had  long  been  suVjjects  of  the  (jreek  kings
of  Egypt  and  .Syria,  their  armies  would  be  equipped  and
disciplined  after  the  Greek  fashion.

When  the  l-^ast  fell  under  the  supremacy  of  Rome,

the  Herods,  as  clients  of  Rome,  formed  their  armies  on

P  the Roman model. Indeed, Herod the

■p . J Great  was  at  times  in  command  of  Roman

forces,  and  Jewish  and  mercenary  '  cohorts  '

(aireipai)  are  spoken  of  as  fighting  side  by  side  with

the  Romans  (/:?/i.  156  IO2). Herod's  army  consisted

largely  of  mercenaries  drawn  chiefly  from  the  Teutonic

subjects and neighbours of the empire — Thracians,

Germans,  and  Ciauls  i/J/  i.  389).

The  insurgent  armies  in  the  Jewish  war  were  very
heterogeneous.  The  national  government  appointed
militiiry  commanders  for  the  various  districts,  among
whom  was  Josephus.  He  tells  us  that  he  organised  an
army  of  100,000  on  the  Roman  model,  including  4500
mercenaries,  a  bodyguard  of  600,  but  only  250  horse-
men :  a  typical  Hebrew  army  in  its  constitution.  The
garrison  of  Jerusalem  is  said  to  have  consisted  of  23,400
men,  including  Idumrt-ans  and  bands  of  Zealots.  They
seem  to  have  possessed some organisation and dis-

315


ARNAN

cipline, but were divided into adverse factions (11/
V.61).

The  armies  of  the  other  states  of  Syria  did  not  differ
essentially  from  those  of  Israel. From  the  first,  however,


9.  Foreign


they  made  use  of  chariots  and  cavalry,
and  throughout  the  history,  e.xcept
during  the  reign  of  Solomon,  the  Syrians
were  superior  to  the  Israelites  in  these  arms  (Josh.  11 4
17i6  Judg.  I1947  iS.  l;J5  2S.  84  iK.  2O125  2231.
etc.).  On  the  other  h.ind,  the  great  military  empires
of  Egypt,  Assyria,  and  Babylon  possessed  a  much  more
extensive  and  effective  military  organisation.  They
had  corps  of  chariots,  light-armed  and  heavy-armed
cavalry  and  infantry,  together  with  archers  and  slingers
and  engineers.  Their  armies  included  large  forces  of
mercenaries  and  tributaries.  P'or  military  purposes
these  great  empires  stood  to  the  Syrian  kingdoms  in
about  the  same  relation  as  that  of  a  first-class  European
power  to  the  smaller  Asiatic  states.

It  is  not  necessary  to  notice  the  Persian  army,  and
of  tiie  armies  of  the  Ptolemies  and  Seleucides  we  need
say  only  that  they  were  modelled  on  the  Macedonian
armies  of  Philip  and  Alexander,  with  some  modifica-
tions due  to  Oriental  influences.  For  example,  they
employed  elephants  (i  Mace.  I17,  etc.).

Ihe Roman army is incidentally  alluded  to  in  the
NT. The legion (Mt.  2653  Mk.  5915  Lu.  830) varied
P  considerably  at  different  times  in  numbers

and  in  constitution  ;  during  the  early
^'  empire  it  was  a  composite  force,  consisting
of  about  6000  legionary  infantry,  together  with  cavalry,
light-armed  auxiliaries,  and  military  engines.  The
legionary  infantry,  or  legion  proper,  were  divided  into
ten  cohorts.  The  '  band  '  (crTret/ja)  which  took  Jesus
(Mt.2727  Mk.  15i6  Jn.  I8312)  was  probably  a  cohort
(so  RV'"S)  forming  the  Roman  garrison  in  Jerusalem.
The  same  cohort  is  mentioned  in  Acts  21 31.  In  Acts
10 1  we  read  of  the  Italian  band,  and  in  27 1  of  the
Augustan  '  band.'  The  It.ilian  '  band  '  may  have  been
an  independent  cohort  of  Italian  volunteers  (.Schiir.  (/"//'
1  386).  The  '  Augustan  band  '  (airdp-qs  "^e^aarris)  may
have  been  part  of  the  Sebastene  —  i.e.,  .Samaritan  —
auxiliaries,  who,  according  to  Jo.sephus  [A>if.  xx.  87),
formed  a  large  part  of  the  Roman  garrison  of  Palestine.
The  name  might  be,  and  doubtless  was,  understood  as
'  Augustan  '  as  well  as  '  .SeVmstene  '  (the  title  '  Augustan  '
was  borne  by  some  of  the  Roman  legions).  See  further,
Cornelius,  §  i.  The  officers  of  the  legion  were  the
tribunes  and  centurions.  Six  tribunes  were  attached  to
a  legion  and  were  associated  in  command.  We  fre-
quently find  a  tribune  holding  independent  command  of
a  cohort  or  larger  force  :  the  '  chief  captain  '  (Jn.  I812
Acts  21-25),  x''^'apX05'  commanding  the  cohort  at  Jeru-
salem was  a  tribune.  Each  cohort  contained  ten  centuries
or  bodies  nominally  consisting  of  a  hundred  men  ;  these
were  commanded  by  centurions.  As  the  independent
cohorts  were  organised  on  the  model  of  the  legions,  it  is
probable  that  the  cohorts,  tribunes,  and  centurions  of  the
NT  belonged  to  the  auxiliary  forces.  Mommsen  says  of
the  Roman  garrison  in  Palestine  that  it  consisted,  as
elsewhere  in  provinces  of  the  second  rank,  of  a
moderate  number  of  cavalry  and  infantry  divisions,
in  this  case  of  Samaritans  and  Syrian  Greeks —
subsequently  one  ala  and  five  cohorts  or  about  3000
men.  The  province,  therefore,  did  not  receive  a
legionary  garrison.  A  small  force  under  a  Roman
commandant  occupied  the  citadel  at  Jerusalem.  During
the  time  of  "the  Passover  this  was  reinforced  by  stationing
a  stronger  division  of  Roman  soldiers  in  one  of  the
temple  buildings  (Prov.  Rom.  Emp.,  ET,  2  186).

W.  H.  B.

ARNA  [arxa)  b.  Ozias,  in  the  genealogy  of  Ezra
(4  V.I.A.  I2),  apparently  =  Zerahiah  in  ;i  Ezra  74-

ARNAN  (|:iN  ;  orna  [BA],  apncon  [L]). Accord-
ing to  MT  of  I  Ch.  321,  the  '  sons  of  Arnan '  occur  in  the
316


ARNI

genealogy  of  Zerubbabcl.  <P.  V'g.  and  Syr.,  however,
make  Arnaii  the  son  of  Kephaiah.  The  name  might
nieaM  '  noisy '  ;  but  ptx  elsewliere,  as  a  jiersonal
name,  tx:ing  corrupt  |see  Akalnah),  and  the  names  of
the  other  descendants  of  Han.aniah  (see  K\)  lx;ing  com-
pounded with  -iah,  it  seems  plausible  to  correct  to  .Tnx
(Adonijah),  which  m.ay  have  been  abbreviated  '"nK
(whence,  by  corruption,  uttt  or  pnK)-  T.  K.  C.

ARNI  (&pNei  [Ti.WH  after  NBLXF]).  Lk.333  RV.
is  the  reading  to  be  pr<;fcrred  to  A\'  ARAM.  See
Ram,  !.

ARNON  (panS).  Nu.  21  u  ;  see  Moab.

AROD  (nnx,  ApoAei  [B*],  &poAA[e]i  [B'bAF],
AopAA  [i-J(.  Nu. -JGiz^tien.  46i6,  Arodi  (""mt*.
APOH^IC  [A],  &YAPIC  [^l  OppoAeiC  |l'|i.  for  which
gentilic  form  1-V  in  Nui  /.c.  has  Arodite.  A  name  in
genealogy  of  Gad  {t/.v. ), Cp  Akkli.

AROER  ("lynu.  nyij^;  in  judg.  11=6  niinr ;  ;.<•.,

'  bushes  of  dwarf  juniper  " '  [I>aj^.  Semi/.  1  30]  ;  ApoHp
[BAL] ;  gentilic Aroerite, ^"lyiy.  see  Hotiiam,  2).

1.  A  city  '  on  the  edge  of  the  torreiit-valiey  of
Arnon,'  see  Moab.  (Dt.  236  etc.;  cp  rW-'>  21231
8G?S,  iv'  6<ppvo%  rod  6povs,  in  vcrticf  moiitis)  ;  the
descriptions  agree  with  the  position  of  the  ruins  of
'Ard'ir,  on  the  edge  of  the  precipitous  N.  bank  of  the
ravine  of  the  .Arnon  (Burckhardt,  Syria,  372  ;  Tristram,
iMoab,  129-131).  The  spot  is  about  11  m.  from  the
mouth  of  that  river,  .\roer  marked  the  S.  limit  of  the
Reuljenite  territory  and  of  the  Israelitish  possessions
eastward  of  the  Jordan,  Nu.  3234  t)t-  -36  812  448  Josh.
122  {apvijjv  [B])  13916  2  S.  245  {ap07)\  [B])  2  K.
IO33;  cp  Judg.  11 26  iM-np  [A],  om.  L);  i  Ch.  58.
In  Jer.  48  19  (post-exilic)  and  in  the  inscription  of  Mcsha
(1.  26,  ijnj')  it  appears  as  Moabitish.  The  Moabites  had
in  fact  pos.sessed  it  before  the  Israelites,  in  successicjii  to
the  .\morites  (cp  Nu.  21  26).  That  Aroer  on  the  Arnon
is  meant  in  2  S.  24  5  is  now  generally  admitted  (see  Ur.
TBS  285  f. ).  The  expression  '  the  cities  of  Arocr  '  in
Is.  172  is  geographically  difficult  ;  there  is  no  doubt  a
corruption  of  the  text  (see  (5  and  cp  SBOT).

2.  A  place  K.  of  Kabbath-Ammon,  Josh.  1825  [apajia
[B], -/jwTj/)  [.-\])  Jud.  ll.ist;  not  idenlitied.  Jer.  (rW'i
965)  says  it  was  on  a  mountain  20  R.  m.  N.  from
Jerusalem.

3.  A  place  in  the  far  south  of  Judah,  i  S.  30  28
(mentioned  after  Jattir),  and  probably  Josh.  15  22
(mentioned  after  Dimonah).  Identified  by  Rob.  with
the  ruins  of  '.Ir'ara,  3  hrs.  I'^SK.  from  Beersheba.
(The  payovr]\  of  ©'-in  i  S.  is  perhaps  from  apovrjX  :
see  AoADAil. )  T.  K.  c.

AROM  (ApoM  [BA]),  I  Esd.  5 16. See  Hashum.

ARPACHSHAD  (TJ'^SIX),  Gen.  10 22  RV  ;  see
below,  .Arphaxad,  i.

ARPAD,  AV  twice  (in  Is.)  Arphad  (nSIN,  d.p<t>d.\
[B.\L].  ARPiiAD,  .\ss.  Arpaddu).  2  K.  1 S 3V( a/)<?ia\  [li],
-<^r  [.\],  19.3  {-<^a.d  [B]),  Is.  IO9  (not  in  6),  StJig  and
;!7  13  {-^aB  [BSAD  (Q)]),  jer.  4923  (-<^afl[A],  o^iaS  [«*]).
Of  these  pas.s.ages  Is.  IO9  is  the  most  important,  because
we  can  unhesitatingly  fix  its  date  and  authorship.  Isaiah,
writing  in  711  B.C.,  makes  the  Assyrian  king  refer  to
the  recent  capture  of  Hamath  and  Arpad  (reckoned  by
the  -Assyrians  to  Hatti-land)  as  a  warning  to  Jerusalem.
Arpad  had  been  frequently  captured  by  the  early  .\ssyrian
kings,  but  was  finally  subjugated  and  .Assyrianised  by
Tiglath-pileser  III.  in  740.  From  this  time  it  takes  its
place  among  the  Eponym  cities.  Its  importance  prob-
ably lay  in  its  command  of  a  Euphrates  ford,  though  it
was  not  on  that  river.  We  find  that  a  city  Xibiru  ( •  the
ford  ' )  was  reckoned  to  belong  to  the  governor  of  Arpad.
Arpad  is  now  Tell-Erfad,  13  m.  from  Aleppo  to  NW.

C.  H.  W.  J.

1  'Aroer'  Ls  an  Arabising  'broken  plural'  oK'ar'Hr,  'dwarf
juniper,"  a  plant  which  abounds  in  rocky  localities  (see  Heath).


ARPHAXAD

ARPHAXAD,  RV  better  Arpachahad  (IBbSTK ;
Ap(t)A5AA  (I'.ALJ;  -Ahc  U"^J).  'Ill--  third  '.son-  of
Shem.Gen.  102224;  cpGen.  11 10-13  (all  1'),  i  Ch.  1  17/.
(©»  omits  these  two)  24.  The  name  has  Ijecn  much
discussed.

Bochart  and  many  after  him  (e.g.  Franz  Del.,  Kautzsch  in
HWli,  and  N.lld.  ZDMC,  36,  1S2  I'82),  ^eutyr.  Cr.  20)
identify  it  with  the  Arrapachitis  of  Ptol.  (vi.  1  2),  a  region  on  the
Upper  Zab,  NK.  from  Nineveh.  On  this  iheoiy,  however,  -s/mii
(iC'Vemains  un.iccounted  for,  as  we  can  hardly,  with  1  .ag.  (Symm.
1  54),  have  recourse  to  the  Armenian  f<i/.  Jos.,  on  the  other
hand,  long  ajjo  identified  Arph.Tx.id  with  the  Chaldxans  {.■Inf.
i.  *54),  and  (los.,  l-,w.,  Schr.  ((V'/loy),  Sayce  (Crir.  Mnn.
147),  adopting  tliis  view,  reg.ird  the  ICOSTK  as  compounded  of
an  assumed  noun  r-ijj,  ' boundary '  (Ar.  'ur/at),  and  1^3  =
C"lL"2,  'Chalda;a.'

Two  things  at  least  are  certain  ;  we  cannot  dispense
with  Babylonia  in  this  context,  and  in  (jen.  llio^
.Arpachshad  is  represented  as  the  source  of  the  Terahite
family  to  which  .Abraham  lx.-longed.  The  latter  part  of
the  name  nr22-K  must,  therefore,  Ix;  ~fz—ie. ,  Chalda,-a.
It  is  eciually  clear,  however,  that  the  .Assyrian  province  of
Arbaha  (which  may,  or  may  not,  lie  the  Arrapachitis  of
Ptol. )  would  tx;  very  appropriately  introduced  after
Asshur,  and  that,  apart  from  the  last  syllable  (-shad),
.Arpachshad  has  received  from  the  earlier  critics  no  ex-
planation that  is  even  plausible,  except  that  of  Bochart
and  Noldeke.

Butting  these  facts  together,  the  present  writer
suggested  [Expos.  Feb.  1897,  pp.  145^)  the  following
theory.  .Arp.ichshad,  or  at  least  •\czz~k,  is  really  not
one  word  but  two  words — .Arpach  ("riN)  and  Chesed
(ibr).  The  former  is  the  Heb.  name  of  the  Assyrian
province  of  .Arbaha  or  [KB  2  88/.)  .Arabha,  which,
according  toWinckler,  isnot.\rrapachitis,  butadistrict  N.
of  the  Tigris,  S.  of  the  Median  Mountains,  and  W.  of
Elam.'  The  latter  is  Chaldaja  (see  Cuksko).  (Jen.
IO22,  therefore,  upon  this  theory,  originally  ran,  ' 'I'he
sons  of  Shem  ;  Elam  and  Asshur  and  Arpach— (.'hesed
and  Lud  and  Aram. '  \'erse  24,  as  E.  Meyer  and  Dillmann
agree,  is  an  eilitorial  interpolation  (cp  11 10^).  'l"he
form  Arpachshad  in  11  \off.  will  be  due  to  the  editor,
who  misunderstood  ir233iNi  in  10  22,  and  it  will  not  Ije
too  bold  to  restore  ira — if-,  Chesed.  The  alternative*
is  to  suppose  the  original  reading  to  have  lx.-en  riEiK
1^3 — ■«■<'■.  .Arp;ih  Chesfxl,  which  the  scril^e,  through  an
error of  the ear, changed into .Arpach Chesed {ztr\V.

Hommel,  however  [Acad.  17th  Oct.  1896;  .AHT
212,  294-298),  prefers  to  ex])lain  the  word  as  I'r-pa-
keshad,  an  '  Egyptian  v;xriant '  for  the  Heb.  Ur-kasilim,
pa  being  taken  as  the  F!gyptian  article  ;  he  compares
the  old  (?)  Egyptian-Hebrew  name  Putiel,  and  the
Semitic-Egyptian  pa-bd-ra  —  ha-haal  (W.MM,  As.  n.
Eur.  309).  If  only  we  had  sure  evidence  that  there  was
an  Egyptian  mania  in  early  Palestine  similar  to  the
Semitic  mania  of  the  I'gyptians  of  the  Middle  Ijnpire,
and  could  also  think  that  P  had  access  to  records  of  ex-
treme antiquity,  fairly  accurately  preserved,  this  e.xplana-
tion  would  at  once  liecome  plausible.  A  comprehensive
study  of  the  names  in  P,  however,  does  not  compel  us.
indeed  it  scarcely  permits  us,  to  make  the  second  of
these  assumptions.  Putiel  (</•"'•)  is  distinctly  an
artificial  name,  and  if  Arpachshad  should  really  l>e  read
Ur-pa-keshad  we  should  on  this  analogy  be  inclined  to
regard  it  as  artificial  too.  In  it.self  a  reference  to
Ur-kasdim  would  no  doubt  be  admissible,  since  this
place  or  district  is  referred  to  by  P  (11  31)  as  well  as  by
Jj. It  is  chiefly  the  presence  of  3  (p)  in  il"3£:-;n  th.at

•  Prof  Jensen  informs  the  writer  that  he  ha*  independently
formed  the  same  opinion  as  to  the  orijjin  of  Arpiich'^had,  but
that  he  prefers  to  identify  Arpach  with  Arrapachitis  =  mod.
AlbaU. This  view  has  occurred  to  the  writer  also.

2  The  transition  from  h  (in  Arlxiha)  to  3  in  -p-K  has  not  then
to  be  accounted  for.  On  the  former  theory,  the  Priestly  Writer,
who  was  not  indebted  either  to  a  cuneiform  record  or  to  a
Babylonian  informant,  received  the  name  in  a  slightly  incorrect
form,  the  final  h  having  been  softened  in  pronunciation  to  ch.


ARROW

prevents  us  from  reading  Ur-Casdim  (written  'irz  ix)  in
(ien.  10  22  between  Asshur  and  Lud.

2.  The  name  given  in  Judith  i.  to  the  king  of  Media  who  \vas
formerly  identified  with  Deioces  the  founder  of  Kcbatana,  or  with
Phraortes  his  son.  The  name,  however,  has  been  borrowed  to
};ive  an  air  of  antiquity  to  the  narrative,  and,  as  in  the  cases  of
Hoi.oKKKNKS,  and  others  in  this  book,  stands  for  some  more
modern  personage,  probably  Mithridates. See  Judith,  ii.

T. K.  C.

ARROW,  see  Wkai'ons,  Divination,  §  2  (i).

ARROWSNAKE  in  (Jen.  49.7  .\V"«=;b*DC^.
•  cerastes,'  erKAGHMeNOC  [6»'^"'-''-]  (see  Skri'ENT,  §  i.
no.  10),  and  in  Is.  34  15  RV  =  nS-l  (exiNOC  [©"w*^""]).
AV  Gkkat  Owl  ((/.v.,  2) ;  see  Serpent,  §  i,  no.  8.

ARSACES  (APCAKHC[AX,  -(tik.  (Xonce)  V]).  'king
of  Persia  and  Media,'  by  whom  Demetrius  Nieator
(Di.Mi.rKius  [2])  was  defeated  and  made  a  prisoner
(I  .Mace.  14-'/".  1522). See  Persia.

ARSARETH,  RV  Arzareth  (so  Lat.  arzareth,  also
iu-zaren,arzar;  AV'^e-  Ararath) — i.e.  JTinX  "^X  (cp
Dt.2927  [28]  Jer.  2226) — '  the  other  land,'  1  the  region,  a
journey  of  one  year  and  a  half  lieyond  the  Euphrates,
where  the  exiled  tribes  were  supposed  to  be  settled
(4  l".sd.  1345  ;  cp  7'.  40).  This  belief  in  the  'Lost
rril)es  '  is  found  already  in  Jos.  {Ant.  .\i.  i^-z).

ARSIPHURITH(Apc[e]i<t)OYpeie[H-\]),iEsd.r.i6.

RV  ; see  joKAH.

ARTAXERXES  (Xn*^'L*'nJi)-!X,  Ezra47«,  or  Xri*;;*C'",
Ezra 4 7-^,  or  wXnL*';;-,  Ezra4S  7  17"  81  Neh.  2i  5 14  136,
Baer's  text  ;  Ac^peABA  [15]  ;  ApeACACGA  [A]  ;  Ap-
CApCAeA[wS*'--''(«/^/-///.')];  ApxASep^HcLX'-"];  Arta.v-
erxes). The  following  variants  occur  :  —

Kzra47(r/'8  {aaacpQa.  [B],  apTOLtTatrQa  |.\]),  k  {apcrapOa  [I!],
a.p  I  9a  \\\),  t>  14  (aa-Tap9a  [H]),  7  i  {a.p9acre(rea  |  F.l),  7  t  i  (atro-ap-
ea9a  [I!]),  12  {a(rapea$a  [B\]),  21  (ap(rap9a9a  [I!]),  Si  (ap9acT9a.
[H]),  Xeli.  2 1  {ap(Ta9ep9a  [B|,  ap(Tapa-a9a  [N'cl)]^  aprafepfr)?
[Nc.a]),  5  14  {apa-evaOa  [HJ,  aapiraSa  [Xj,  ap9aaacr9aL  [A]),  136
(ap<Toa-a9a  [BN]).

Artaxerxes  is  the  name  given  to  the  king  of  Persia,
who,  we  are  told  (Neh.  2i  014  1.J6),  gave  per-
mission to  Nehemiah  his  cuptearer  to  rebuild  the
walls  of  Jerusalem,  and  to  this  end  made  him  governor
{peha  ;  cp  Assyr.  bel-pahati,  town  governor,  and  pihatu,
province,  satrapy).  The  same  name  is  borne  by  the
king  who  permitted  Ezra  and  his  band  to  return  to
Palestine,  and,  along  with  his  ministers  and  princes,
lavished  tokens  of  favour  on  the  returning  exiles  (Ezra  7/1 ).
The  statement  in  Ezra  47-23  that  earlier  efforts  of  the
Jews  to  rebuild  the  walls  of  Jerusalem  ceased  at  this
king's  conmiand  is  unhistorical  (see  Ezra,  ii.  §  lo),
and  the  account  in  Ezra  7 11-26  of  the  favour  shown
by  him  to  the  temple  and  its  ministers  is  probably
e.xaggerated  (see  Ezra,  i.  §  2).  It  is  certainly  in-
correct to  name  him  along  with  Cyrus  and  Darius
as  having  promoted  the  building  of  the  temple  (Ezra6 14),
for  this  had  already  been  completed  in  the  reign  of
Darius.

The  name,  which  is  certainly  identical  with  the
Persian  Artakhshatra  ( '  the  true,  or  legitimate,  kingdom,'
an  expression  taken  from  the  teaching  of  the  Avesta  ;
Assyr.  Artaksatsu,  Susian  Irtakshazsa,  —  forms  more
closely  approximating  the  Hebrew),  was  pronounced  by
the  (Jreeks  .\rta.verxes  (so  in  i  Esd.  B  ;  but  Aprap^ep^-qs
A*B^"  sometimes).  The  king  intended  is  beyond
doubt  one  or  another  of  the  three  Persian  rulers  who
bore  that  name.  The  attempts  to  identify  him  with
Cambyscs,  or  with  Pseudo-Smerdis,  or  with  Xer.xes,
on  the  false  assumption  that  .\rtakhshatra  was  not  a
name  but  a  title,  were  abandoned  long  ago.  The  only
question  is,  Which  of  the  three?

The  third  in  the  list,  Artaxerxes  Ochus,  is  excluded,
both  by  chronology  and  by  the  known  character  of
that energetic despot and zealot for the Mazdean

1  Less  probably  niN  ['"IK.  land  of  Arat — i.e.,  Ararat  (Volkmar).


ARVAD

creed,  which  alike  prohibit  the  supposition  that  he  can
have  been  the  lx;nevolent  patron  of  Nehemiah  and  Ezra,
Which  of  the  remaining  two  is  meant  is  still  disputed
among  scholars.

As  in  Kzra  4  6_/C  the  name  follows  immediately  on  that  of
Ahasuerus,  and  no  more  precise  designation  is  added,  it  is
natural  enough  to  think  of  Artaxerxes  I.  If,  however,  as  seems
proljable  (see  Ezra,  ii.  §  10),  Kzra  did  not  come  to  Palestine
till  after  Nehemiah,  and  if  it  be  true,  as  we  read  in  Ezra"?,
that  the  date  of  Ezra's  arrival  was  in  the  seventh  year  of
Artaxerxes,  while  the  established  date  of  Nehemiah's  arrival
is  the  twentieth  year  of  Artaxerxes,  then  Ezra's  expedition
must  have  been  under  Artaxerxes  Mnemon,  and  so  more
than  half  a  century  after  Nehemiah's  mission.  This,  however,
is  not  at  all  probable,  and  it  seems  preferable  to  assume  that
the  date  assigned  to  Ezra's  arrival  (in  the  seventh  year  of
Artaxerxes)  is  an  invention  that  had  been  suggested  by  the
transposition  of  the  two  expeditions.

We  have  thus  good  reason  for  assuming,  with  Kuenen,
Ryssel,  Ryle,  and  others,  that  by  Arta.xer.xes  we  ought
throughout  to  understand  Artaxerxes  I.,  Longimanus,
a  surname  which  is  doubtless  to  be  taken  in  the  same
sense  as  the  expression  in  the  inscription  of  Darius
(Naks  i  Rustem,  inscr.  a,  §  4,  /.  43/.)  to  the  effect  that
the  spear  of  the  Persian  reaches  far.  He  is  descrited
as  having  been  a  good -hearted  but  weak  sovereign,
ruled  by  his  wives  and  favourites,— an  account  which
harmonises  with  what  we  learn  from  Nehemiah.

c.  P.  T.— w.  H.  K.

ARTEMAS  (ApreMAC  [Ti.  WH],  most  probably  a
coiUraction  from  ApreMlAcopOC  '•  see  Varro,  De  Ling.
Lat.  89  (§  21),  and  cp  .ApoLLo.s,  §  i  n. ),  a  com-
panion or  messenger  of  Paul,  mentioned  once  in  the
Pastoral  Epistles  (Tit.  3  12  :  '  When  I  shall  send  Artemas
unto  thee  . . . give  diligence  to  come  unto  me  ').

In  the  lists  of  the  '.seventy  disciples'  which  we  owe  to  Pseudo-
Dorotheus  and  Pseudo- Hippolytus  he  appears  as  bi.shop  of
Lystra.

ARTEMIS  (ApreMic  [Ti.  WH]),  .VctslQz+z?/ 34/
RV'";.'-; EV  Diana.

ARTILLERY  (^^?),  1S.2O40AV;  AV'e-  'instru-
ments,' R\'  We.\pons  (q.V.).

ARTS  and  MANUFACTURES.  See  Trade  and
Commekck,  and  Handicrai- TS.

ARUBOTH  (m2-|N'— /.f.  as  in  RV  Arubboth  ;  €n
ApABcoe  [A],  .  .  .'  Bhp  BhO  •  •  •  [L] ;  •  •  .  6.
Bhp  .  .  •  [B]),  I  K.  4  lot,  the  seat  of  the  third  of
Solomon's  twelve  prefects  (see  Bi;n-I  Ii'.-Sed).  The  third
is  one  of  the  districts  omitted  by  Jos.  {.{iit.  viii.  23,
ed  Niese).  See  Ben-Hesed.  Cp  Schick,  '  Wady
"Arrub,  the  Aruboth  of  Scripture,'  FRF  Qii.  St.  Oct.
1898,  pp.  238/:

ARUMAH  (np-1-|X3,  Kr.  HD-m,  with  prep.  3;
&PH/V\a[B],  ApiAi\A[ALand  as't-i  225,  2],  kum.i  [Vg.]),
the  place  where  Abimelech  dwelt  before  his  capture  of
Shechem — obviously  not  very  far  from  that  town  (Judg.
941).  Perhaps  it  is  represented  by  the  modern  el-
'Ormah,  6  m.  SSE.  from  Shechem,  where  there  are  ruins
still  (Van  de  Velde,  Rcisen,  2  268).  Otherwise  the
place  is  quite  unknown.

For  ,ia7r.a  (f.  31  ;  eJ'/i/)i'</)3[B];ierd  5a>pwj'[AL]),  .W
'privily,'  RV  'craftily,'^  RV'"i.'-  -in  Tormah '  (so  Jos.
Kimhi,  who  took  it  to  be  the  name  of  a  town),  it  is
best  to  read  ,iD"iN3,  '  in  -A.rumah. '  Eus.  WTongly  identifies
it  with  pov/xd.  near  Diospolis  =  Lydda  (cp  Rumah).

ARVAD  ("I1")X[Ba.],Tl"IN*  [Gi.]),  whence  the  gentilic
Arvadite  (HnX),  CJen.  10i8=  i  Ch.  1  i6t  (so  (Sbaql
everywhere  Ap&AlOC  but  Apovadei  i  Ch.  I16  [L];
Egypt.  'Araiut[u],  etc.;  Assyr.  usually  ArM[u]at/a;
APAAoc.'for  ApfAAoC.  I  Mace.  I.'j23;  Targ.  Jer.
^N3"jnp3N— ?.^. ,  of  Antaradus  ;— Jos.  Ant.  i.  62  Apoy
Amoc.  etc.;  mod.  Ruwdd,  etc.),  a  town  referred  to  by
Ezekiel  (27  8 11)  in  his  elegy  on  Tyre  as  one  of  some
thirty  cities  and  countries  that  had  contributed to  its

'  ncina  would  mean  rather  '  deceitfully ' ;  but  the  form  is
anomalous— it  would  be  easier  to  read  nC'1^'3.

320


ARZA

splendour  and  diRiuty — men  of  Arvad,  he  says,  rowid
its  ships  (?•.  8)  and  manned  its  walls  {v.  1 1 ) — and  likcwi:,*.-
mentioned  ('Apados,  the  only  Syrian  place  named)  in  the
list  of  nineteen  places  in  i  Mace.  ISaj  (see  Maccabkks,
KiKs  T.  §  9|.  Arvad  was  the  most  northerly  of  the  great
Phoenician  cities,  ancestress,  with  Sidon  and  Tyre,  of
Tripoli,  which  lies  some  thirty  miles  farther  south.

HuilC  on  an  islam!  (la  kahal  titlmli,  Kli  1  io8,  /.  86/),  about
half  a  mile  ionn  from  N.  to  S.,  and  a  liltic  over  a  quarter  of  a
mile  hroail,  lyinj;  slinlitly  less  than  two  miles  from  the  mainland,
it  dared  to  resist  Thotmes  III.  when  ap|>areiitly  most  of  the
other  Phoenician  cities  yielded  without  force  (see  his  .\nnals  in
UniKsch,  Hist,  o/ Kgy/>t  ^-^VVV  1  376/.);  and  Tislath-pileser  I.
tells  how  he  embarked  in  ships  of  Arvad  and  sailed  on  tne  Cireat
Sea.  It  was  still  inde|x:iident  in  the  ninth  century  k.c,  :iiid
in  the  time  of  Sarijon  it  and  Tyre  and  (lebal  were  the  really
im|)<>rtant  Phivnician  centres.  Cp  also  A^L'K-ua.m-i'AI.,  f  4,
end.

In  the  days  of  Kzekicl  it  was  sulxDrdinate  to  TyTe  ;
but  in  the  Persian  age  it  regained  its  ancient  iniixjrtance,
and  in  the  time  of  .Mexaiuler  exercised  control  ovor
quite  an  extensive  tlistrict  on  the  mainland.

In  the  first  half  of  the  second  millennium  ii.c.  there  must  have
l)cen  more  equality  l>etween  the  Arvadites  of  the  mainland  and
those  on  the  island,  if  W.  Max  Miillcr  is  ri).;ht  in  lielieving  that
the  Kgyptiaii  name  corresponds  to  a  plural  form  fl'ni'lK.  'J"he
ruins  of  the  gigantic  wall  that  once  surrounded  the  island  on
three  sides  (see  Pietschin.,  as  below,  and  esp.  Kenan,  I'l.  ii.y.)
prove  that  the  Arvadites  knew  other  things  besides  rowing.
Kus.  (Chron.  Armen.  ed.  Aucher,  1!  172/;)  records  that  AKa)<liis
was  rounded  in  761  11. c,  and  Strabo(xvi.  2  13/)  states,  althininh
only  with  a  ois  <^a<rii',l  that  it  was  founded  by  fugitives  (inni
Sidon.  We  cannot,  of  course,  assign  to  the  eighth  century  the
real  founding  ofAradus  or  even— what  1  lillinann  (on  (ien.  10  18)
seems  to  suggest —the  founding  of  the  insular  town  asdistinguislied
from  a  settlement  on  the  mainland  (cp  the  later  Antaradus,  mod.
TarjOs  [see  Targ.  above)).  The  words  of  .\5ur-nasir-pal  quoted
above  (cp  A'/'(-t  2172)  preclude  this.  The  Kgyptian  inscrip-
tions show  that  in  the  second  millennium  it.c.  Aradus  was  one
of  the  most  important  PhuL-nician  cities  (see  Pikhnicia).

/.//(•;vi/»/r<-;—Strabo  (/.(■.);  Pietschmann,  OVjf  A.  li.  PhBn.  36-
40;  W.M.M,  As.  u.  Eur.  iZ6 /.,  COT  1  87^;  Renan,  Miss,
lit-  riu'n.  19-42;  i;.  J.  Chester,  Suti'.  West.  Pal.,  .Sftrial
I',ipi-rs,  ■j'^--j'i  ;  see  further  relT.  in  Vigouroux  :  a  map  of  island
in  .\dmiralty  Charts  No.  2765,  or  \V.  Allen,  The  Dead  Sea,
'•.  t^'id.  ]1.  VV.  H.

ARZA  (Xy-lX  ;  coca  [B].  arca  [A],  aca  [K]).  King
Haa.sha's  prefect  of  the  palace  at  'i'irzah,  and  doubtless
Ziniri's  accomplice  in  the  assassination  of  the  king  ( i  K.
High,  see  /iMKi.  The  form  of  llie  name  appears  to  Ixj
somewhat  uncertain

ARZARETH  (./A'z.-//jy;r//), 4]:.sd.  1845. RV  ; AV

.\k-.  \i;i.i  11.

ASA  (SDN.  §  51  ACA  [  I5.\L].2  perhaps  short  for  n;pN
i.e.,  'Yahw6  healeth';— cp  .Aram,  aiul  .\r.  ',i.ui.  'to
heal,'  .\ss.  ,iju,  'a  physician,'  a  title  applied  to  the  god
ICa  f  Del.  .Iss.  H  WH\  ;  the  name  may  express  a  pious  wish
tiiat  Vahwe  would  heal — i.e.,  restore  prosjxjrily  to— his
pfo|)le  ;  cp  Hos.  7i  113)-

I.  Son  of  Abijah  and  third  king  of  Judah  (first  half
of  9th  cent.  n.c:. ;  see  CHKOSOi.txjY,  §  32).  Of  .\sas
long  reign  but  one  event  is  handed  down  to  us  on  the
l)est  authority  (i  K.  ].'>  16-22),  and  it  si)e.aks  in  favour  of
the  royal  annals  that  they  have  not  buried  such  an  action
of  the  reigning  king  in  oblivion.  T'he  subject  of  the
narrative  is  nothing  less  than  the  purchase  by  Asa  of  help
from  the  king  of  Damascus  against  Judah's  northern
brethren.  All  the  silver  and  gold  that  was  still  to  l)e
found  in  the  royal  treasury,  Asa,  we  are  told,  sent  to
Ik-nhiidad,  king  of  .Aram,  to  brilje  him  to  transfer  his
covenant  of  friendship  from  Israel  to  Judah.  Thus  it  was
to  Jiuiah  that  the  first  Aramnean  invasion  of  Israel  was
due,  and  we  can  believe  the  statement  of  the  Chronicler
that  .Asa  s  conduct  did  not  pass  without  prophetic  rebuke
(2  Ch.  l()7-io;  on  the  details  no  stress  can  be  laid).
The  situation  of  Asa  was,  it  is  true,  difficult.  \\y
pushing  his  frontier  to  Ramah, Baasha  threatened  to

1  It  has  been  .supposed  (e.g.  Ges.  Thes.)  that  the  name  Ar%'ad
means  '  Kefujje.'

■-  Mr.  Hurkttt  argues  that  \.<rw^.  .Asaph,  '  was  once  the  render-
Wg  of  the  I. XX  '  for  Asa,  as  <rip"x  '"  for  kto  S'ra  (Camhritt^e
Unri'ersity  i.e^rter,  March  1897,  p.  699/). Cp.  Asahh,  .,.

21  321


ASAHEL

reduce  the  kingdom  of  Judah  to  vassalage,  for  Ramah
was  only  4  m.  from  Jerusalem. The  diversion  caiLsed
by  the  Arama-an  inviusion  removed  this  danger. Asa
I summoned '  all  Judah ' to  the ta.sk  of pulling  down
the fortifications  executed by Baasha  at Ramah,  and
I with  the  material  fortified  (Jeba  and  Mizpah,  the  one  a
i little  to  the  NK. ,  the  other  to  the  S\V. .  of  Ramah. It
j is  t|uite  another  writer  who  tells  us  that  Asa  'did  that
I which was  right  in  the  eyes  of  Vahwe,  like  David  his
I father'  (i  K.  l.'»ii|. To  the  Deuteronomistic  compiler
matters  affecting  the  ciiltus  were  more  imjiortant  than
was  [Kjlitical  morality  ;  a  later  writer,  the  Chronicler,  has
a  much  more  complete  justification  (if  it  were  but  trust-
worthy) for  his  religious  eulogy  of  .Asa. The  details  of
I K.  ir>  12-24 are  dealt with elsewhere  (see Baasha,
j Bi;nhadai),  §2(1),  etc.).

(  Three  other  points  alone,  in  the  compiler's  own  state-
ments, need  to  Ix;  referred  to.  The  name  of  Asa's
mother  is  given  {v.  10)  as  '  Maai-Rh  (©'"-  ava),  and  she
is  called  the  daughter  of  Abishalom,'  whilst  in  i'.  a
Maacah  is  l)ie  name  of  the  mother  of  Abijah.  Most
probably  •  .\bishaloni '  in  -■.  10  is  a  mistake  for  '  Uriel '
,  (see  2  Ch.  132)  ;  but  it  is  not  altogether  impossible  to
I  hold  with  \\'ellhau.sen  that  .Abijah  and  Asa  were  brothers
(cp  Maa<aii,  ii.  4I.

The  second  ijoint  is  that  in  his  old  age,  according  to
the  compiler,  Asa  had  a  disease  in  his  feel  (i  K.  I523).
The  (  hronicler  accepts  this  (doubtless  traditional)  state-
ment, but  gives  it  a  new  colour,  partly  by  changing  the
date  of  the  war  lietween  .A.sa  and  Baasha  (on  which  see
'  CllKOMCl.KS,  §  8.  and  WRS,  OZ'/CW  197),  partly  by
the  remark  (cp  Mkdic.i.nk)  that  'he  sought  not  to
Yahwe,  but  to  the  phy.sicians  '  (2  Ch.  16  12).  Whether
the  assumption  that  there  was  a  class  of  ])hysicians  who
treated  disca.ses  from  a  non-religious  ixjint  of  view  is
justifiable  may  Ix:  c|uestioned.

The  third  point  is  a  tantalising  mention  (i  K.  ir>23)
of  'all  Asa's  warlike  deeds  CinT^r^r)-'  Is  this,  as
Klosterniann  supix).ses,  an  allusion  to  the  victory  over
that  (.'tishile  king,  who,  according  to  2  Ch.  14 9- 15,
invaded  Judah  with  a  huge  force,  and  came  as  far  as
Marcshah  (see  Zkkaii,  5)?  Or  does  not  the  compiler
make  the  most  of  the  achievements  to  which  .Asa,  it  is
jjrobable,  could  legitimately  lay  claim  (cp  i  K.  15231,
not  always  w  ith  much  Ix^nefit  to  his  reputation  ?

2.  I'ather  of  Hkkkcuiaii,  2  ;  i  Ch.  9 16  (()cr(ra[B])  ;
omitted  in  '}  Xeh.  11  17.  T.  K.  C.

ASADIAS  (acaAioy  fB]  caAaioy  \-^l  ■''^dei),  an
ancestor  of  Baruch  (Bar.  1  1)  ;  cp.  Hasadiaii.

ASAEL  (Tob.  li,  acihA  [BN.A]  ;  Itala,  Asihel .■
Eth.  Wzhil ;  Heb.  versions  7Nb'y,  7'L*'{<),  a  name
occurring  in  the  genealogy  in  Tob.  ]  i.  The  genealogy
is  omitted  by  the  .Aram,  version,  but  given  in  a  very
regular  form  in  the  Heb.  (ed.  Xeubauer),  Itala,  and  N.
The  (ireek  texts,  however,  mark  oft"  Asiel  {sic)  from  the
other  names  by  saying  Ik  toO  awipnaroi ' .\ffir]\,  a  dis-
tinction preserved  in  \'g.  '  ex  tribu  et  ci\  itate  Ne|)hthali,"
though  tlie  word  'AffujX  is  omitted.  They  are,  therelore,
probably  right  also  in  their  orthography,  since,  according
to  (Jen.  ■1(524  Nu.  •_'<;4S  (  \1-  ],  etc..  Aair]\  is  a  .\aphtalite
clan  (see  Jahzki.i,). If  this  is  so  the  name  is  '"Ksn".

ASAHEL  {biir^b'y.  §  3.  ;  acahA[HNA]:  acc  [I^.
but  I  Ch.  1 1  26  as  in  B]  ;  atraT/Xoy  Jos. ),  youngest  (?  2  .S.
2 18)  son  of  Zeruiah  David's  sister,  and  brother  of  Joab
and  .Abishai.  He  was  renow  iie<l  for  his  lightness  of  foot
{ifi. ).  .As  in  the  case  of  his  unfortunate  cousin,  almost  all
we  know  of  him  is  the  story  (2  S.  219-25)  of  his  death
at  the  reluctant  hands  of  Abnkr  (t/.v. ).  '  There  lacked
of  David's  servants  but  nineteen  men  and  Asahel '  (t.  30):
such  is  the  statement  of  David's  loss  in  the  l«ttle  of
Gibeon.  With  this  special  mention  agrees  the  fact  that
his  name  stands  first  in  the  list  of  the  '  thirty '  henxs
in  2  S.  '2S  and  i  Ch.  11  (but  cp  Amasai).  It  is  true,
another  account  is  given  in  the  new  version  of  the  list  of

333


ASAHIAH

heroes  in  i  Ch.  27  {v.  7),  where  we  find  Asahel  com-
mander of  a  division  of  David's  army.  The  incom-
patibility of  this  statement  with  his  death  before  David
became  king  of  Israel  was  obvious.  The  present  te.xt,
accordingly,  adds  '  and  Zebadiah  his  son  after  him,'  for
which  ©"^  has  '  .son  Kal  oi  d5e\<l>oL,'  to  which  (S"-  adds
diriffw  avTOV.

2.  An  itineratiiiK  Levitical  teacher  temp.  Jehoshaphat,  2  Ch.
178  (la,r[(]ir,\  [H.V],  Ao-t.jA  [L]).

3.  An  overseer  of  chambers  in  the  temple  temp.  Hezekiah
(2  Ch.  ;n  i3t).

4.  'l-'atlier'  or  ancestor  of  Jonathan  [13],  temp.  Ezra;
EzralOi5(acn)A.[l!],  <rar,.  [N*],  N'Aasini)=i  Esd.  <.i  14+,  AzAEL
(aiarjAof).

ASAHIAH  (r^lC'V.).  2  K.  22.2  14,  RV  A.saiah,  2.
ASAIAH  (IT'b'y,  §  31,  '  Yahwe  hath  made'  ; ac<MA
[BAI,]).

1.  One  of  the  Simeonite  chieftains  who  dispossessed  tlie
Meunim  [see  RV],  i  Ch.  434-41  (.\cria  [1!]).

2.  '  K.in;i's  servant '  to  'osiah,  2  K.  '22  12,  AV  Asahiah  (lacrai
[A],  A^apias  [L]),  14  (ao-aias  [BA]  a^apia?  [LJ)  =  2  Ch.  34  20
(Icraia  [I')],  IcDtrias  [1>]).

3.  A  .Merarile  family,  i  Ch.  630  [15]  (.\<j-a^a  [h]),  156  (.Vaai
[B],  a<ra,a^  [A^)),  .1  (atrata?  [A]).

4.  A  Shilonite  fimily,  i  Ch.9s  (A^<ra  [B]),  probably  same  as
(3),  but  cp  Maaskiah,  ii.  i8(Neh.  II5).

ASANA  (<\cc<\NA  [B]),  I  l':sd.  .'131  =  Ezra  250,  Asnah.

ASAPH (^DX an abbreviated name, § 50, ACAct)

[BALJ).

1.  The  father  of  Joali,  the  recorder,  2  K.  18 18
(liiiaacpar  [BA],  Lwax  vlos  aa<pav  [L]),  37  ((ra<pav  [B])  =
Is.  :3()3  22;  but  (3  suggests  the  reading  '  Shaphan  '  or
■  .Shaphat. '  1

2.  The  keeper  of  th(;  royal  '  paradise '  or  forest
(probably  in  Palestme),  Xeh.  28  (affacpaT  [L],  aSoatos
[Jos.]).

3.  The  eponym  of  the  Asaphite  guild  of  singers,
E/.ra24i  3  10  Xeh.  744  Hi?  (only  N^^-'' L  in  0)  22  [aaa^
[BX])  I  Ch.  2i>i/.,  and  elsewhere,  who  is  represented  by
the  (.Chronicler  as  a  seer  (2  Ch.  2930)  and  as  a  contem-
porary of  David  and  Solomon,  and  chief  of  the  singers
of  his  time,  Xeh.  I246  i  Ch.  I51719  (Aa-a/3  [N])  ItJs
(A(ro-a(^[N])  2Ch.  0  12,  etc.-  On  the  later  equation  of
.A.saph  with  the  .\r.  Lokmiln  and  Gk.  /Esop,  cp  S^orjr
of  A/tikar,  Ix.wii.  /.  Complicated  as  the  history  of
these  guilds  is,  we  are  able  to  see  from  Ezra  241  that
at  one  time  the  terms  '  b'ne  Asaph '  and  '  singers '
were  identical,  and  that  the  singers  were  kept  distinct
from  the  Levites.  The  guilds  of  the  b'ne  Asaph  and
b'ne  Korah  were  the  two  hereditary  choirs  that
superintended  the  musical  services  of  the  temple.  They
do  not  seem  to  have  been  very  prominent  before  the
Exile.  More  important,  however,  was  the  triple  division.
This  comprised  the  three  great  names  of  Asaph,  Heman,
and  Ethan  (or  Jeduthun),  which  were  reckoned  to  the
three  Levitical  houses  of  Cjershom,  Kohath,  and  Merari
(i  Ch.  6  ;  see  P.s.\lm.s).  A  still  older  attempt  to  incor-
porate the  name  among  the  Levites  may,  according
to  WRS,  O/yC'-'  204,  n.  I,  be  seen  perhaps  in  the
occurrence  of  the  name  Abi ASAPH  {q.v.),  the  eponym
of  the  Asaphite  guild,  as  a  Korahite.  Of  the  threefold
division  of  singers  a  clear  example  may  be  seen  in  Xeh.
1224  where  Hashabiah,  Sherebiah,  and  Jeshua,  the  chiefs
of  the  Levites,  are  appointed  to  praise.  Similarly,  in
Neh.  11 17  three  singers  are  mentioned  —  Mattiiniah,
Abda,  and  Bakbukiah.  Mattaniah  and  Abda  are
descendants  of  Asaph  and  Jeduthun.  '  Bakbukiah '
we  should  correct  to  '  Bukkiah,'  a  son  of  Heman.
Thus,  e.ach  of  the  three  great  guilds  finds  its  repre-
sentative. See  Ethan,  2,  Hkman,  Jp:duthun.

The  name  Asaph  occurs  in  the  titles  of  certain  Psalms
(see  Psai.ms).

4.  The  best  supported  reading  in  Mt.  I7  {aaatj}
[Ti.  WH],  cpRV"'*-'-;  on  this  reading  see  Asa,  footnote)

1  In  2  Ch.  34  15  ©A  ),3s  a<Taj>  for sc*.

2  In  1  Ch.  '-'lii  (P'i  reads  .\j3iafa</)ap,  which  corresponds  very
nearly  to  i  Ch.  9  19  (0  Xfiia<ra4). In  2  Ch.  2i>  13  ©H  reads  Ao-a.


ASCENT  OF  THE  CORNER

where  TR  and  EV  have  Asa. See  (jEnkai.ogies  of

Jksus,  J?  2  (^.

ASARA  (ac&p&[BA]),  I  Esd.  531  RV  ;  AV  Azara.

ASABAMEL,  a  name  occurring  in  the  inscription  set
up  in  honour  of  Simon  the  Maccabee  (i  Mace.  14  28).
The  writing  begins  as  follows  : — '  On  the  i8th  day  of  Elul
in  the  172nd  year,  this  is  the  third  year  of  Simon,  the
high  priest  ev  aapafxeX  (so  (5^.  whence  AV  SARAMKt.,
€v  aa-apaiJ-eX  [NV],  asaramel  [Vg.])  in  a  great  congrega-
tion ' — etc.  It  has  long  been  recognised  that  this  ex-
pression is  a  transliteration  of  some  Hebrew  word  which
stood  in  the  original,  as  is  the  case  with  the  difficult
sarbeth  sabanai  el  in  the  title  of  this  book  (see  MACCA-
BEES, EiKST,  §1).  By  some  it  is  taken  to  represent
a  place— ^.^.^.,  it  might  be  a  corruption  of  Jerusalem
(Castellio) — or  to  represent  the  Heb.  hv;  Dj;  "isn,  '  the
court  of  the  people  of  (lOd  ' — i.e. ,  the  great  court  of  the
temple  (Keil  ;  cp  Ew.  GeschS"^^  4438) — or  n>d  liin,  the
court  of  Millo  (Grotius),  or  "jn  dj?  nyc*.  '  the  gate  of  the
people  of  God.'  It  is  better,  however,  to  see  in  this
expression  an  honorific  title.  From  1  Mace.  1842
we  see  that  contracts  were  dated  from  the  first  year  of
Simon  '  the  great  high  priest,  and  captain  and  leader
of  the  Jews'  (cp  the  titles  given  him  in  I447  and  15i),
and  it  seems  natural  that  in  an  inscription  written  in
honour  of  Simon  we  should  find  more  than  the  simple

title  'high  priest.'  (Cp  the  Pesh.  ^^ira,..).^  )s9.
'  leader  [or  "  great  one  "]  in  Israel ').  Hence  Asaramel
is  taken  by  many  (Wernsdorf,  Scholz,  Grinnn,  Ztickler,
etc. )  to  represent  Sv  cy  "ib,  '  prince  of  the  people  of
God.'  The  great  difficulty  would  then  lie  in  the
presence  of  the  preposition  kv.  This,  however,  may
have  been  inserted  by  a  copyist  who  supposed  that  the
word  was  the  name  of  a  place  not  of  a  person.  1
Possibly  iv  is  an  integral  part  of  the  word,  and  we
should  read  Sn-cj,'  ■!>■.:.  'the  sprout  (cp  Is.  lli)  of  the
people  of  God,'  or,  better,  'r.s-cj;  i^j,  '  protector  of  the
people  of  God  '  (cp  v.  47/,).

ASAREEL,  or,  better,  RV  Asarel  ("^Nlb'X,  §  67  ;  cp
P^nt^'N,  and  sec  Ahab,  §  4,  n.  5  ;  iccrahA  [B],
ec.  [A]  (\cepH.  [E  which  adds  koi  iwa.Xi'-P-\)<  '  son  '  of
(the  unknown)  Jehaleleel  (i  Ch.  4 16)  and  'brother'  of
ZiPH  ('/.i'.,  2),  Ziphah  and  Tiria.

ASARELAH (n^XIV'i^ [Ba. Ginsb.]. ^73; cp

'PNTJ'N;  epAH\  [B],  lecmA  [A],  AcelpH^<^  [L]),  a
'son  of  Asaph'  i  Ch.  252;  called  Jesarclah,  I-^V
Jesh.\relah  (nSjsnt;'; ;  ia-epL7)\  [B],  i<Tpe-r]\a[A])  in  v.  14.

ASBACAPHATH  (<\cBAKA(l)<\e  [B] ;  in  Pesh.  the
name  is  KSjs)^*./),  i  Esd.  569  RV"e-,  AV  (1611)
Asbazareth,  RV  Asbasareth  (AcBACApee  [A]),  the
name  answering  in  i  l'>sd.  069  ©"-^  to  the  lisarhaddon
of  ]|  Ezra  4  2  (which  is  reproduced  by  ©'•,  axopBav).
The  right  reading  is  aa^a<pad,  which  represents  ns2DX-
This  is  evidently  an  alternative  to  the  reading  isjdn  of
Ezra  4 10,  and  it  suggests  that  the  writer  of  the  gloss  in
Ezra49/  (see  '  Ezra'  in  SHOT)  found,  not  [nmox,  but
ns:D.x,  in  his  text  of  Ezra  4  2.  So  Marq.  [Fund.  59);
but,  in  connection  with  the  difficult  theory  that  the  name
originally  given  in  Ezra  4  2  was  pnaN  =  |ijnD.  Sargon  ;
see  A.SNAPPER.

ASCALON (^^ckaAcon). i  Mace.  1086, etc., RV

A.SHKKI,ON  [q.v.).

ASCENT  OF  THE  CORNER  (HSBn  n!>y  ;  ana

1  The  prefixed  iv  is  explained  by  Schiirer  {Gl'l  1  197,  n.  17)
as  a  corruption  of  o-eyer  ([JD),  which  corresponds  to  the  Gr.
(TTpoTTjyos.  Renan's  suggestion  {Iftst.  <t  Isr.  ix.  cap.  1  ad  Jin.)
that  ev  acrapa^ieA  is  a  corruption  of  some  it'isli,  may  be  mentioned  :
in  his  view  the  expression  is  similar  to  those  which  Arabian
authors  often  add  to  the  names  of  persons.

324


ASEAS

M6CON  THC  KAMnHC  [B]  I  AN&B&CeaiC  THC  K.
[NA]:  THC  A.  T.  rwNiAC  [L])  Neh.  831  RV.  See
Jekusai.im.


[BA]),


Ksd.  932  =  Ezra  IO31,


ASEAS (ac&iac

ISSIllAII, 5.

ASEBEBIA,  RV  Asebebias  (AceBHBiAC  [BA]).
I  l.sd.  847- I>.ra8i8,  SUKKKUIAH,  q.v.

ASEBIA  (AceBiAN  [A]),  i  Esd.  847  AV,  RV
Asebiaa i:zra  8 19.  Hashabiah,  7.

ASENATH  (n:pN;  AceNNcG  [ADE],  -cnc.  [K]).
ACCeNeO  [I-l.  daughter  of  Potiphcrah,  priest  of  On  ;
wife  of  Joseph  (lien.  41  4550  4(i  iuf).  A  genuine
Egyptian  name.  See  JoSKPii  1,  §  4  I  a""^  «"  the  apo-
cryplial  '  Life  of  Aseneth,'  Ai'ocryi-ha,  §  12.

ASER,  RV  AsHEK  (achp  [BA]),  Tob.  1 2.  See
Hazok,  I.

ASERER. RV  Skkau (cepAp [BA]), i  Esd.  5  32= '
Ezra  253,  SisKRA,  2.  \

ASH  (pX, niTYc).  fjetter  RV  Fir-Tree,  seems  to  I

tx-  naini'd  (Is.  44  14)  as  a  tree  used  by  makers  of  idols.  I

If  Oirn is  genuine  (see  below)  we  may  reasonably  hold  I

it  to  l)e  the  .Assyrian  irin — cedar  or  fir.  I

'  Fir '  is  supported  by  the  versions  (tti'tv?,  pinus)  and  by  the  j

Rabbis  (retT.  in  ties.  Tlies.);  Tristram's  suggestion,  J'inns  \
hal,f>ens:s. Mill, the  Aleppo Pine  {NHB, 33s), is  attractive.


That Hcb. Orel


improbable  ; px


cannot be


Fraxinus  ortiiis,  L.,  the  Manna  Ash,  a  native  of  -S.  Kurope,
not  found  farther  E.  than  W.  .\sia  iMiuor.  Celsius  (11  ierobot.
1  i%^ff.)  held  jix  to  be  the  ardii  of  AbulfadI,  and  the  'thorny
tree"  th.nt  he  meant  it  is  not  difficult to  make  out. Rhus  pxy-

cai:''  r  ''  ' ' b:it like  Sorjtus  A-uciiparid)

is  I  .  '<>re  (1e  [ Egypie,  205),  and

that  ■  ;liough  not  yet  proved,  is  by

no p  uiria,  which  also  might  be

thou.L;lit  i)f,  r.xiuliK-.  .Siv/v^.v  .[u^  :<piiria  more  closely.

The  reading,  however,  is  uncertain,  px  occurs  only
in  this  passage,  and  a  Mass.  note  calls  attention  to  the
'  small  r,'  which  seems  to  point  to  a  reading  nx  '  cedar.'
Perhaps  a  better  emendation  would  be  Sk  ('  God  ').

So  Rio.  and  Che.  (SHOT,  Heb.  138),  following  ©.  The
«  ord  TTiTu?  is  wanting  in  nearly  all  the  best  ISISS  (RNAQP)  of
(?,  and  in  others  appears  as  a  Hcxaplaric  addition  with  an
asterisk.  The  text  of  the  whole  verse  as  it  appe.ars  in  (P"  and
other  M.S.S  is  simply — Ikoi^ci/  ^v\ov  eK  tov  Spviiov  6  iil>vTev<reii  o
Kvpio<;  Kal  iierb?  ifiriKvvei'  (the  Peshitta  is  even  shorter,  '  the  wood
that  w.xs  cut  down  from  the  thicket,  that  by  rain  was  nurtured  ').
I'ctween  eKO^ev  and  ^v\ov  Origen  inserted  in  the  Ifexaplaric
te.\t  this  addition,  from  .Aq.  and  Theod.,  eauTcp  kc'6/jovs,  koX
eAajSt't/  aypiofiaXa.vov  Kai  Spvi^  Koi  iKaprepuitTev  avT(^  aiKl  similarly
added  niTW  after  6  (cv'pios ;  see  Field's  llexnpla  in  loc).

N.  M. — \V.  T.  T.-U.

ASHAN  (;^y;  acan  [BAE],  AceNNA[A].  acanna
[I/),  an  unidentified  site  in  the  lowland  of  Judah,
apparently  in  its  most  .southern  part  (Josh.  I542,  ancox
[B],  AceNNA  [A],  -CANN.  [E]),  assigned  in  Josh.  ] 9?
(AC^^^  [-^1)  to  Simeon,  and  named  among  the  priests'
cities  in  i  Ch.  659  [44]  =  Josh.  21 16  (where  for  MT  ry,  EV
A  I.N,  AIN  [A],  NAeiN  [L],  we  should  probably  read
jr;*. -\shan  ;  cp0"  aca  ;  so  Bennett  in  .S/jO 7').  A.shan
m;iy  perhaps  I)e  the  same  as  the  Bok-A.sh.^n  \(J.v.\  or
CuoH-.\snAN  (RV  C'OK-ASHAN)  of  I  S.  3O30,  the  site  of
some  well  or  reservoir.

ASHARELAH (n'rNlbVX, Rii. Ginsb.), r  Ch.  252

kV, A\-  .\S.\KKI.AH.

ASHBEA  (yi'J'N,  §  42.  for  Sy3L"N?  ;  ecoBA  [BA],
AceBA  [E]).  The  'house  of  Ashliea '  included  'the
(Judahile)  families  of  the  house  of  those  that  wrought
fine  linen  '  ( i  Ch.  42i)  ;  or  Beth  Ashljea  may  be  the  name
of  their  dwelling-place.  Nothing  further  is  known  of
this  weaving  guild.

ASHBEL  h%^%  §  43  :  ACBhA  [ADL] ;  acaBhAoc

[Jos.]; Sam. ^X3B>N),  gentilic  Ashbelite, Nu. 2638

325


ASHDOD,  AZOTUS

(^Sa^N,  ACYBHp[e]i  [BAF],  -coyBhpi  [E]).  in  a  gene-
alogy of  Benjamin  (4'.t/.,§9ii.[y3J),  Gen.  4621  =  Nu.  2»538
(acyBhp  [BAF],  -coyB  [E])=iCh.  81  (caBa  [B])  ;
ap|)arently  represented  by  Jkdiakl  in  1  Ch.  76-ii  (v.  6).
Probably  the  name  is  a  corruption  of  Isiikaai.  (ii.v.).
ASHCHENAZ (TJS'^'K),  Jer.  51 27 AV  ; RV  Asii-

KE.NAZ, q.v.

ASHDOD,  AZOTUS  (nni^N,  'strength,  strongly-
founded'  or  iHjrhaps  'man  |inen]of  I)<xl,  Uudu '  ;  cp
AbiuiLK.  Bi.Ni;-HEK.\K  ?  ;  AZa)TOC  [B.XNQI'EI,  hence
its  name  in  .\pocr. ,  NT,  etc.),  gentilic  Asbdodite,  .\N'
Ashdotbite  nntri*.  Josh.  133  (AZCoT(e)ioc  [B\E|  ;
pi.  fem.  ni-inc'N;  Neh.  1823  in  Kr.  ni'T^e'K  ;  azcotiac
[B.\E],  -|AaC  [N]).  ^  famous  Philistine  city  .some  2-3
m.  from  the  Mediterranean  coast,  about  half-way
Ixitween  Gaza  and  Joppa.  It  was  one  of  the  five
confederated  towns  of  the  Philistines,  and  stood  far
above  the  others  in  importance  —  a  pre-eminence  due
doulitless  to  its  commanding  position  on  the  great
military  road  Itetween  .Syria  and  Egypt,  at  the  spot
where  a  branch  of  it  leads  off  to  Ekron  and  Ramleh.
It  survives  in  the  modern  Esdud,  a  miserable  little
village  on  a  woody  and  beautiful  height,  to  the  W.  of
which,  at  an  hour's  distance,  are  still  found  the
traces  of  a  harbour  now  called  Minet  el-Kal'a. •
JE  assigns  .\shdod  to  Judah  (Josh.  I546/. ,  affr)5u0,
affeiedwff  [B],  acrSuj/x  [A,  in  v.  47  om.],  eadujS  [E])  ;  but
this  statement  clearly  needs  modification  in  view  of
Josh.  133  (1)..  ;  cp  11  22.  afffXSo}  [BJ,  aduB  [.\],  aarjSoid
[F],  acy(55ix>d  [E]),  which  is  supported  by  the  fact  that
Israel  seems  never  to  have  sulxlued  the  Philistine  strong-
hold (2  Ch.  2()6  is  doubtful).  In  Samuel's  time  the  ark
was  removeil  thither  from  Eben-ezer,  and  placed  in  the
tem])le  of  Dagon  ( i  S.  5/. ),  whose  cult  was  more  particu-
Inrly  associated  with  .\shdod  (cp  i  Mace.  IO83  1 1  4).-
Aslulod  is  denounced  by  Amos  with  other  Philistine
towns  for  the  infamous  slave-raids  upon  Judah,  and  the
same  prophet  alludes  to  it  again  in  terms  which  show
that  in  the  middle  of  the  eighth  century  it  was  a  place
of  no  little  repute  (39  [|i  Egypt],  ©"^  ^eads  '.Assyria,'
against  which  cp  We.,  Now.  ;  Aq.,  Sym. ,  Theod.  read
-Ashdod).  Although  unmentioned  in  the  annals  of
Tiglath-pileser'scampaign  against  Philistia  and  Pha-nicia
(cp  Wi.  Gl'I  1223)  it  probably  suffered  at  his  hands.
On  the  other  hand,  we  are  fortunately  well-informed
of  its  fate  some  years  later  in  the  siege  alluded  to
in  Is.  2O1  (711  H.c.).^  As  a  commemorative  record
relates  (cp  A'./r<->  398/,  KB  265/.),  Azuri  |cp  Heb.
T,^y,  Azzur),  king  of  Asdudu,  had  been  sujierseded  ■*
by  his  brother  Ahi-miti  (cp  Ahimoth,  Mahath),  who
in  turn  was  overthrown  by  the  anti- Assyrian  party  (the
Ha-at-ti)  ^  in  favour  of  Yaniani  (or  Vavani  =  the
Ionian?).  Ashdod  was  besieged,  not  by  Sargon,  but,
as  the  MT  more  correctly  states,  by  his  general
or  Tartan  [q.v.].  This  siege,  as  Is.  206  suggests,
involved  the  surrounding  peoples,  and  ultimately
resulted  in  the  flight  of  Yavani  to  the  land  of  Musri.
which  belongs  to  Miluhha,  the  district  lying  in  N.
Arabia,  bordering  on  Edom  (see  Mizraim,  §  ^b).
The  same  tablet  records  the  destruction  of  (/;■)  liimtu
Asdudiinmu,  which,  according  tt)  Schrader,  is  '  Gath  of

1  In  early  Christian  times  'A^coto?  irapoAtot  and  '.Xftoxot
(xecrd-yeios  are  keut  distinct.  Josephus  sometimes  .speaks  of  .Ash-
dod (and  similarly  of  Jabneh,  Jamnia)  as  an  inland  town  (./«/.
xiv.  4  4,  lij  i.  7  7),  at  other  times  as  a  coast  town  (Attt.  xiii.  l."!  4).
There  may  have  been  a  harbour  here  in  the  time  of  Sargon  ;  cp
above.

■■2  Hence  it  has  been  conjectured  that  Dagan-takala  in  the
Amarna  tablets  (A"Z>  .")2i5  /.)  belonged  to  Ashdod.

3  For  the  date,  etc.,  cp  Ch.  I»tr.  \io/.  ;  Wi.  Alt.  I'nt.
'42-^

••  He  had  sought  to  ally  himself  with  the  surrounding  kings
against  As.syria.  Another  inscription  relates  that  the  men  of
Philistia,  Judah,  Edom,  and  Moab  had  sent  presents  to  Pir'il,
king  of  Musri,  for  a  like  purpose  (cp  A' A'  -^n/.  and  note).

'  These  Ha-at-ti  of  Ashdoil  seem  to  have  been  closelv  related
to  Musri  (cp  also  Wi.,  "  Musri,  etc."  in  Ml'G,  1898,  1  26/.).

3=6


ASHDOTH-PISGAH

the  Ashdodites'  (cp  '  Gath  of  the  Philistines,'  Am.  62,
and  for  a  wider  use  of  Ashdod  see  below).  Others
(Del.  Par.  '2i<)/.,  \Vi.  Che.)  read  as  two  names,  and
explain  the  latter  as  c'n  inc-N — i.e.,  the  port  of  Ashdod
(cp  note  I,  below).

Ashdod  soon  regained  its  power,  and  in  the  following
century  the  'great  city  of  Syria'  (Herod2i57)  was  be-
sieged by  Psammetichus  for  twenty -nine  years,  an
allusion  to  which  is  seen  in  Jer.  252o  (less  probably  also
Zeph.  24:  seeZKi'H.\Ni.\ii,  ii. ).  further  evidence  of  its
independence  may  l)e  seen  in  the  mention  of  Ahi-milki,
king  of  Ashdod,  temp.  Esarhaddon  {A'AT^'^  355 12).

The  Ashdodites  were  allied  with  the  Arabians  and  the
.\mmonites  against  the  Jews  of  Jerusalem  (Xeh.  4?  [i]),
and  Xehemiah,  denouncing  the  foreign  marriages,
mentions  the  women  of  Ashdod  (also  of  Ammon  and
Moab),  whose  offspring  speak  a  degraded  dialect  called
rnnc'K  (Xeh.  1823/  ,  afwri(rr[e]i  [BNAL]) :  cp  the  allu-
sion in  Zech.  96.  The  use  of  Ashdod  in  these  passages
is  peculiar,  and,  if  genuine,  suggests  that  the  name
Ashdod  comprised  also  the  surrounding  district  (cp
Schrader's  explanation  oi  asdudimtnu  above).  ^

Ashdod  and  its  neighbourhood  was  ravaged  by  Judas
(i  Mace.  068,  cp  415),  and  in  147  li.c.  his  brother
Jonathan  defeated  Apollonius  there  and  burnt  the  temple
of  Dagon  (i  .Mace.  IO77  ^,  cp  11  4).  John  Hyrcanus
burnt  the  towers  in  the  surrounding  fields  after  defeating
Cendelxtus  (i  Mace.  16  10).  In  the  time  of  Alexander
Jannreus  it  Ixilonged  to  Juda;a  (Jos.  Ant.  xiii.  I54)  ;  but
it  was  separated  from  it  under  Ptolemy  (Jos.  BJ  i.l ^].
In  the  XT  it  is  mentioned  only  once,  in  connection  with
Philip's  return  from  (Jaza  to  C;fsarea  (Acts 8  40).  See
Schiir.  Gil  267/,  \\i.  (;/7  I223/.  ;  and  cp  Pun.is-
TINKS.  ,s.  A.  c.

ASHDOTH-PISGAH  (HipSSn  nhC'N)  is  uniformly
traiislatfil,  in  RV,  'the  slopes  (manf.  or  springs)  of
Pisgah'  [\n.  817  449  [liL-re  also  AV]  Josh.  I23  [no
marg.  note]  I820;  for  <2>'s  readings  see  Pisgah).  In
like  maimer,  the  Heb.  nh^^x,  rendered  '  springs  '  in  Josh.
10 40  128,  is  in  RV  '  slopes.'  The  declivities  or  shoulders
of  a  mountain  plateau,  where  it  sinks  sharply  into  the
plain,  are  meant.  The  word  is  perhaps  derived  from
na-N,  in  the  sense  of  'pouring  out';-  the  explanation
usually  given  is  that  the  Ashedoth  are  the  line  on  the
mountain-side  where  springs  break  forth. See  PiSG.\H.

ASHER  {-V^-  ACHp  [BAL],  ^CH  [A*Xu.772],
iachB  [B,  Josh.  17  10];  Jos.  ACHpoc  ;  gentilic  ^"!"'N
1 Name  and -^-slierite),  the  eponymous  head  of  the


origin.


tnl)c  of  the  same  name. Unimportant


for  the  history  of  Israel — it  is  traced
by  the  Yahwist  to  Zilpah,  Leah's  maid  (Gen.  3O12/. ),
— this  tribe,  perhaps  more  than  the  other  Zilpah  and
Bilhah  tribes  (see  Israki,,  §  5),  raises  questions  diffi-
cult to  answer.  Is  the  popular  etymology  (Gen.  30 13,
probably  also  alluded  to  in  the  'Blessings')  correct,
or  does  the  name  not  rather  point  to  some  deitv^
in  which  case  it  is  natural  to  connect  it  with  the  root
■irN  (•\V-),  'to  be  propitious,'  whence  the  name  of  the
Assyrian  God  Asur?*  In  what  relation  does  Asher
stand  to  a  once  somewhat  important  state  called  Aseru,

'  So  in  I  Mace.  14  34  Gazara  (in  reality  17  m.  to  NE.)  is
'  upon  the  borders  of  Azotiis  ' ;  cp  also  (doubtfully)  2  Ch.  'lu  (,.

■-'  Delitzsch  compares  the  Ass.  iit/u,  pi.  iSdati,  the  'base'  of
anvthing  (Prol.  46  ;  cp  Dr.  on  Dfut.  3  17).

='  Tiele  long  ago  wrote,  '  Asher,  like  Gad,  is  a  god  of  good
fortinie,  the  consort  of  Asherah '  iVergelijIc.  Gescli.  Tan  de
^'■Sy/'t.  en  Xtesofiotain.  Godsdiensien,  1872,  p.  542),  and  both
parts  of  this  statement  may  still  be  defended.  So  Che.  Proph.
/s.O)  1  ,03  (on  Is.  178).  Cp  Del.  .^.m.  //Jl^B  148.  G.  A.
Barton  (//>/,  15  174  ['96])  suggests  a  connection  with  the  divine
name  implied  in  the  name  Abd-a.sirta  referred  to  towards  the
end  of  g  I  (see  Ashkrah,  §  3).  Jensen  (Hittiter  u.  Armenier)
offers  proof  that  the  name  of  the  consort  o*"  the  goddess  Asratii
was  Hadad  or  Rammun  the  storm-god.  Had  he  also  the  title
A.sir? Lastlv  (;.  H.  Skipwith  UQK  H  241  ['99])  even  sug-ests


ASHER

As[s)nru,  which  occupieil  W.  Galilee  in  the  time  of  Seti
I.  and  Ram.ses  II.  (W.\IM,  ^/j.  u.  Eur.  236-9)?  Did  that
ancient  people  to  some  extent  throw  in  their  lot  with
the  invaders  from  the  wilderness  (cp  Hakm£I>her),  or  is
Asher  in  the  O  T  simply  a  geographical  name  for  some
Israelites  who  settled  in  a  district  already  long  known
as  Asher?  Honmiel  {A HI'  228,  237)  thinks  that
the  Asherites  were  one  of  several  Israelitish  trilx;s
which,  l^efore  the  time  of  Moses,  had  encami^ed  in
the  district  between  Egypt  and  Judah  (cp  Shihok-
LIB.NATH)  and  that  they  are  the  Habiri  referred  to  in
the  Amarna  letters  as  having  burst  into  Palestine  from
the  south.  Jastrow,  on  the  other  hand,  inclines  to
identify  the  Habiri  with  the  Asherite  clan  Heber  (see
below,  §  4)  and  to  connect  the  Asherite  clan  Malchiel
with  the  followers  of  Milkili,  the  writer  of  several  of  the
Amarna  letters,  while  G.  A.  Barton  suggests  that  the
sons  of  Abd-asirta  (b'lie  l-",bed  Asera),  of  whom  we  hear
so  much  in  the  letters  of  Rib-Addi  of  Gebal,  may  have
become  an  important  constituent  part  of  the  O  T  tribe
of  Asher,  so  that  it  inherited  their  name  in  abbreviated
form.  That  the  OT  Asherites  were  at  all  events  not
2  Earlier  ^^^^  closely  bound  to  Israel  is  proved  by
references  """^  earliest  historical  notice  of  the  tril)e,
■  according  to  which  it  took  no  interest  in
the  rising  against  Sisera  :  '  Asher  sat  still  at  the  shore
of  the  sea,  and  abode  by  his  creeks'  (Judg.  517).'
Moreover,  that  they  were  somewhat  mixed  up  with  older
inhabitants  appears  clearly  enough  in  Judg.  1 32.  'Whilst,
therefore,  the  fertility  ascribed  in  the  '  Blessings  of
Jacob  and  Moses '  to  the  district  where  Asher  dwelt,
although  it  at  once  suggests  the  popular  etymology  (see
above),  is  known  to  have  been  really  characteristic
of  the  part  of  (jalilee  in  cjuestion  (see  reff.  in  Dr.  on
Dt.  8824,  and  cp  BiuzAii  h),  we  can  hardly  say  how  far
the  distinctness  from  the  Phoenicians  of  the  coast,
apparently  implied  in  7'.  25  of  the  later  Blessing,  was  an
actual  fact.  On  the  other  hand,  the  writer  of  the
account  of  Ishhaal  {q.v.,  1)  seems  to  have  thought
Asher  worth  mentioning  as  included  in  the  I5enjamite
claim  (see  AsHiKiTKS,  Geshur,  i).  It  is  not  surpris-
ing in  view  of  the  prevailing  vagueness,  that  the  '  Bless-
ing of  Jacob '  speaks  of  Zebllu.n  in  almost  the  same
words  that  the  Song  of  Deborah  had  applied  to  Asher,
and  that  the  '  Blessing  of  Moses '  then  associates  I.s-
SAc:nAR  with  Zebulun.  Definite  boundary  there  can
hardly  have  been,  whilst  the  distribution  of  the  popula-
tion must  have  changed  somewhat  from  age  to  age.  We
need  not  wonder  that  the  account  of  Ashcr's  territory
3.  Boundaries.  "^'^'"^  the  priestly  compiler  has  given
us  in  Josh.  1924-31  (in  which  some
scholars  have  found  traces  of  JE)  is  unusually  vague.
Not  many  of  the  places  can  be  identified  with  certainty.

Ai.AMMKLKCH  (Wady  el  -  Melek),  Jifhthah-ei.  (Jefat),
Cabui,  (Kabul),  Kanah  (JjLana)  have  probably  been  identified,
and  possibly  also  P^bron  (i.e.,  AiiOON,  i.)  and  Ham.mon,  i
(Umm  el  'Amfld).  Ummah  should  probably  be  read  Accho.
Shihor-Limsath  {(/.7>.)  may  perhaps  be  the  Nahr  ez-Zarka.
MisHAi,  and  Hosah  {qq.i'.)  are  probably  to  be  recognised  in
Egyptian  and  Assyrian  inscriptions.

That  Accho  or  .\chzib  or  Sidon  was  ever  included  in
an  Israelitish  tribe  Asher,  is  a  purely  ideal  conception,
and  the  same  is  clearly  true  (Judg.  I31/. )  of  other  cities
in  the  list.  For  indications  of  an  Aramaean  element  in
the  population  (2  S.  106)  see  Ar.-KM,  §  5.

The  tribe  to  the  S.  of  Asher  was  Manasseh.  In
Josh.  1 7 1 1  we  have  a  Yahwistic  passage  which  is
commonly  interpreted  as  declaring  that  Dor  lay  within
the  limits  of  territory  ideally  assigned  to  Asher,  although
it  really  belonged  to  Manasseh.  This  interpretation
gives  support  to  the  hypothesis  that  Shihor- Libnath
(Josh.  1926)  is  to  be  taken  as  the  southern  boundary  of
Asher,  and  to  be  identified  with  the  river  Zarka,  which
enters  the  sea  almost  midway  between  Dor  and  CiKsarea.
If  Asher  really  moved  northwards  from  an  earlier  home

1  On  the  statement  in  Judg.  6  35  723,  that  Asher  took  part  in
the  conflict  with  Midian,  see  .Moore,  ad  loc.


Dor  is  represented  as  belonging  to  Asher,  since,  as  a  matter  of
fact,  it  and  the  cities  mentioned  with  it


ASHER

in  S.  Palestine  (see  above,  §  i).  traces  or  at  least
memorials  of  it  may  have  long  survived  (see  Siiihok-
LlHNA  Til).  This  would  make  it  not  quite  so  difficult  to
understand  the  account  of  P,  even  if  it  is  a  fact  that  he
really  brings  Asher  farther  S.  than  Carmel  (Josh.  1926).

The  linguistic  peculiarities  of  the  verse  Josh.  17  ii  support  the
sugcestion  of  Dillmann  (ad  loc.)  that  all  that  follows  the  word
'  .\shcr  '  except  '  the  three  heights '  belongs  really  to  r.  12,  taking
the  pl.ice  there  of  the  words  '  those  cities  "(cp  Judg.  1 27) ; '  but  we
do  not  know  what  '  the  three  heights  '  are  (though  they  certainly
might  include  '  the  heights  of  Uor  ' ;  cp  Josh.  11  2  l'.'2j).  Ihere
Is,  however,  little  historical  importance  in  the  question  whether
- •  ■ • • ■  .  Ash. .

remained  in  the  posses-
sion of  the  Canaanites  or  Phoenicians.

On  the  other  three  sides  the  territory  of  Asher  is  even
less  defined.  According  to  Josh.  19 27,  it  was  conter-
minous with  Zebulun  on  the  M,  while  according  to
V.  34  it  stood  in  the  same  relation  to  Naphtali.  It  is
diflicult  to  bring  it  into  relation  with  Issachar.  In
general,  Asher  nmst  l)e  regarded  as  the  norlh-western-
most  district  connected  with  Israel,  and  as  stretching
indefinitely  W.  and  N.  and  losing  itself  gradually
amongst  the  Phoenicians  of  the  coast.

(i. )  P's  genealogy  of  .Asher  (given  twice  :  Nu.  2644,
probably  the  more  original,  =(jen.  4617),  which  is  re-
, _  , . produced  in almost  identical  form  by

4.  Genealogies,  ^j^^  Chronicler  (iCh.730/.).  is  very
simple,  consisting  probably  of  (primarily)  the  three
clans,  the  Imiiites  (perhaps  really  Jamin  ;  so  (P^^l  j^
Nu.  and  perhaps  ©"  in  i  Ch. ),  Ishvites  (doubtful),  and
IJeri'ites.

With  the  last  mentioned  are  associated  as  secondary  clans  the
Hel>erites  (known  as  a  Kenite  name)2  and  the  Malchielites
(known  as  a  personal  name  in  the  Amarna  letters  from  S.
Palestine)  as  '  sons,'  and  Serah  (perhaps  an  Aram,  name  ;  root
not  found  in  Hebrew)  as  sister.  There  is  no  earlier  mention,
however,  of  any  of  these  names  in  connection  wiili  .Asher,
though  the  first  and  third  are  well  known  in  the  central  high-
lands of  Palestine.

(ii.)  To  this  simple  genealogy  the  Chronicler  appends  (i  Ch.
731  i-^9)  a  remarkable  list  of  one  Malchielite  and  over  thirty
Heberites — remarkable  because  the  names  are  not  of  the  dis-
tinctive type  that  abounds  in  the  Chronicler.  The  list,  if  we
remove  certain  textual  corruptions,''  looks  as  if  it  were  meant
to  be  schematic  (t'.t'.,  3  sons  and  3  x  3  j^randsons,  followed  by
.some  seventeen  in  the  fourth,  fifth,  and  sixth  generations);  but
we  cannot  reach  a  text  that  inspires  confidence.  It  nuist  be
remembered,  however,  that  many  of  the  names  may  well  be
foreign.  Harnepher  has  been  referred  to  above.  The  alTinities
of  some  of  the  names  are  worthy  of  note  ;  note,  <r.J^^,  the  rem.irk-
able  groups  Heber,  Ithran,  Jether  ;  so  also  Beria,  Shelesh  =
Shilsha  »iv.  37  (Shalisha?  cp  ®B),  Shual.

Lk.  236  speaks  of  a  certain Anna  as being  of the
trilKj  of  Asher  (but  see  Gkneakogiks,  i.  §  8).
2. Tob.  I2  RV,  AV  AsKK. See  Hazor,  i.

II.  w.  11.

ASHER  ("I'J'X ;  achr  [RAL]),  a  town  on  the
southern  border  of  Manasseh,  mentioned  in  Josh.
17?  (RV')  in  the  following  terms  : — '  And  the  border  of
Manasseh  was  from  Asher  to  Michmethath  which  is
before  ['•''•.  I--  of]  Shecliem.'  After  this  we  are  told
that  '  the  border  went  along  to  the  right  hand  {i.e.,  to
the  .S.J,  unto  the  inhabitants  [/.<•.,  the  district]  of  En-
tappuah. '  These  statements  nuist  Ix;  taken  in  connec-
tion with  the  description  of  the  N.  bortler  of  Ephraim
in  166,  where  the  names  which  corresiK>nd  to  Asher
and  Michmethath  are  Michmethath  and  Taannth-
Shiloh,  and  Taanath-Shiloh  is  stated  to  lie  E.  of  Mich-
methath. On  the  assumption  that  En-tappuah  is  .SW.
of  .Shechem  (see  T.\PPUAH,  2),  .\sher  nmst  lie  some-
where to  the  E.  of  Shechem,  between  Michmethath  and
Taanath-shiloh. Thus  far  we  have  proceeded  on  the

1  'Dor'  in  Judg. I31  ®B*i-  is  no  objection,  for  it  does  not  fit
the  context,  and  is  probably  simply  an  insertion  bused  on  the
passage  in  Joshua.

2  Note  that  for  Jehubbah  (i  Ch.  734)  ®b  reads  ic.  utpafi—r'.e.,
Hobab?

8  Ahi  in  71.  34  should  certainly  be  'his  brother.'  Probably
Hotham  (r'.  37)  is  a  miswritten  Helem(cp7'.  35),  in  which  c.ise
'  sister '  (I'l/tOtftttm)  in  t.  32  may  be  a  duplicate  of  Hotham.
Ulla  (v.  39),  as  it  ought  to  resume  some  name  already  mentioned,
may  be  a  corruption  of  Shual,  which  we  should  perhaps  restore
for  Shua  in  v.  32.

329


ASHERAH

theory  that  RVs  reading  is  correct ;  it  is  in  fact  that  of
most  scholars,  including  Dillmann  and  Kautzsch.  The
rendering  seems,  however,  to  need  revision.  Consider-
ing that  MlcuMKTHATii  [q.v.)  stands  in  17  7  hi  close
proximity  to  Asher  (without  any  connecting  anJ),  and
that  it  would  be  natural  to  distinguish  this  .\sher  from
the  better  known  one  (with  which  indc-ed  Kerr  in
PEFQu  Si.,  1877,  p.  45,  actually  confounds  it)  by  add-
ing the  name  of  the  district  in  which  it  w;is  (cp  '  Kedesh-
Naphtali'),  it  seems  probable  that  Michmethath  is  the
name  of  a  district,  and  that  we  should  render  (against
the  accents  and  Targ. ,  but  in  accordance  with  ©*'•),
'And  the  Ixsrder  of  Manasseh  was  from  Asher  of  (thei
Michmethath,'  the  starting-point  alone  lx;ing  mentioned
in  the  opening  clause,  as  in  152  (so  Reland,  J.  Schwarz,
Conder).  The  description  in  17?  will  then  exactly
correspond  to  that  in  106  in  so  far  as  Michmethath  is
the  first  point  mentioned  on  the  border  between
Ephraim  and  Manasseh.  '  .Asher  of  the  Michmethath  '
might  l)e  .some  place  in  the  N.  of  the  district  called  '  the
Michmethath. '  If  this  district  is  the  plain  of  el-Makhna,
two  ruined  places  at  once  suggest  themselves,  now  called
the  upjjer  and  the  lower  Makhna  respectively  ((ju<;rin,
Sam.  1  459/1 ).  Mere,  however,  no  villages  preserve
any  traces  of  the  ancient  name.  Eus.  and  Jer.  \OS
2"2li29  9828)  suggest  another  identification.  They  refer
to  a  village  called  Asher,  15  R.  m.  from  Neaiwlis  on
the  road  to  Scylhopolis,  a  description  which  points  to
J't-vasir,  I  R.  m.  N'l''.  of  Thelx;z,  where  the  15th  R.
milestone  has  actually  lieen  discovered  (S^journi?,  K'ci'.
liibl.,  1895,  p.  biy /.).  Tiyasir  is  now  a  mud  hamlet  ;
but  it  succeeds  a  place  of  some  importance.  Rock-cut
sepulchres  abound  ((jucrin,  Sam.  1  108).  It  is  not
probable,  however,  that  Eus.  and  Jer.  had  a  clear  or
cor?ect  view  of  the  Ixjundary  line,  and  the  transition
fr'ini  Asher  to  Teva.^ir\s  not  an  easy  one.  (The  latter
name  seems  to  be  the  i)lur.  of  taisir,  inf.  2  coiij.  of
yasara. So  Kampffmeyer,  /.DP] \^-z.) T.  K.  c.

ASHERAH,  plur.  Asherim,  the  RV  transliteration  of
the  Heb.  nTJ'X  (pi.  D*"^L*'N  ;  in  three  late  passages
rilX'S),  a  word  which  AV,  following  6
(aAcoc  [B.AFL])  and  Vg.  [lucus),  renders
grove,  groves.  That  this  translation  is  mistaken
has  long  l>een  universally  recognised.  R\'
avoids  the  error  by  not  translating  the  word  at  all  ;  but,
by  consistently  treating  the  word  as  a  proper  noun,  it
gives  occasion  to  more  serious  misunderstanding.

The  lisherd  was  a  wooden  post  or  mast,  which  stood
at  Canaanite  places  of  worship  (Ex.  34  13  Judg.  «25  and
frequently),  and,  down  to  the  seventh  century,  also,  by
the  altars  of  Yahwe,  not  only  on  the  high  places,  or  at
Samaria  (2  K.  136)  and  Bethel  (2  K.  2315).  but  also  in  the
temple  in  Jerusalem  (2  K.  236).  The  ashera  is  frequently
named  in  conjunction  with  the  upright  stone  or  stele
{ma.^seM,  hammdn  ;  see  Massebah  and  IliOl.ATKV,  §  4).
The  pole  or  post  might  Ix;  of  considerable  size  (cp  Judg.
625/)  ;  it  was  perhaps  sometimes  carved  (i  K.  15  13),*
or  draped  (2  K.  287),  but  the  draping  especially  is
doubtful.  The  shape  of  an  ashera  is  unknown.  Many
Cypriote  and  Phamician  gems  and  seals  representing  an
act  of  adoration  show  two  (more  rarely  three)  posts,
generally  of  alwut  the  height  of  a  man,  of  extreniely
variable  forms,'-  which  are  supposed  by  many  archreo-
logists  to  be  the  asheras  (and  masse/'as)  of  the  OT
(see  Phoenicia).  This  is  not  improbable,  though
direct  evidence  is  thus  far  lacking  ;  but  in  view  of  the

1  '  A  shocking  thing  (Jewish  tr.adition,  phalhis)  as  an  ashera ' ;
on  2  K.  L'l  7  see  below.

■-  .See  Lajard,  Culte  ife  Mithra,  18477:;  Ohnefalsch-Richter,
Ky/>ros,  1893,  where  a  great  many  of  these  pieces  are  collected.
Similar  figures  are  found  on  Assyrian  reliefs,  and  on  Carthaginian
ci/>/<i.  We  may  compare  the  Kcyptian  tifJu  column  (at  Busiris),
the  Indian  sacrifici.il  post  (Oldenberg,  Ktligion  dei  Veda,  91),
the  so-called  'totem-posts'  of  the  N.  American  Indians,  etc
See  in  general  Lippert,  Kulturgcschichte,  2  iltff.,  and  Jevons,
Inir.  Hist.  Rel.  134/

330


post.


ASHERAH

great  variety  of  types,  and  the  age  and  origin  of  the
figures  in  question,  it  can  hardly  be  confidently  inferred
that  the  asheras  of  the  Old  Canaanites  and  Israelites
were  of  similar  forms.  The  representations  do  not  give
any  support  to  the  theory  that  the  ashera  was  a  phallic
emblem.

It  is  the  common  opinion  that  the  ashera  was  origin-
ally a  living  tree  (Si/ri  on  Dt.  12 3,  Aboda  zara,  fol.  45

2.  Not  a  tree.  ";!'■•  ? ^'-  °"  ^^-  ^^">'  ^°'"  "^^'"^
the  pole  or  mast  was a  conventional

substitute.  1  This  is  antecedently  not  very  probable.
■]"he  sacred  tree  had  in  Hebrew  a  specific  name  of  its
own  (el,  eld,  elon,  or,  with  a  different  and  perhaps
artificial  pronunciation,  alia,  allon),  which  would  natur-
ally have  attached  to  the  artificial  representative  also  ;
nor  is  it  easy  to  explain,  upon  this  hypothesis,  how  the
ashera  came  to  be  set  up  Ijeneath  the  living  tree  (2  K.
17 10).  The  only  passage  in  the  OT  which  can  be  cited
in  support  of  the  theory  is  Dt.  I621  :  '  Thou  shalt  not
plant  thee  an  asherah  of  any  kind  of  tree  (RV)  beside
the  altar  of  Yahwe  thy  God,'  or,  more  grammatically,
'an  ashera — any  kind  of  tree  '  (ry  Sa  mrx).  As,  how-
ever, in  the  seventh  century  the  ashera  was  certainly  not
ordinarily  a  tree,  this  epe.vegesis  would  be  very  strange.
In  the  context,  whether  the  words  in  question  be
original  or  a  gloss,  we  expect,  not  a  restriction  of  the
prohibition  such  as  this  rendering  in  effect  gives  us,  but
a  sweeping  extension  of  it.  We  must,  therefore,  trans-
late,  '  an  ashera — any  wooden  object. '  '-'

It  does  not  appear  from  the  OT  that  the  asheras
belonged  exclusively  to  the  worship  of  any  one  deity.
The  ashera  at  Ophrah  (Judg.  625)  was  sacred  to  Baal ;  the
prohibitions  of  the  law  (Dt.  l(52i/)  are  sufficient  proof
that  they  were  erected  to  Yahwe  ;  ^  nor  is  there  any
reason  to  think  that  those  at  Bethel,  Samaria,  and  Jeru-
salem were  dedicated  to  any  other  god.  The  assertion,
still  often  made,  that  in  the  religion  of  Canaan  the
massefias  were  sacred  to  male,  the  asheras  to  female
deities,  is  supported  by  no  proof  whatever.

From  certain  passages  in  the  OT  (especially  Judg.  87
I  K.  18  19  2  K.  234),'*  it  has  been  thought  that  there  was
3  A  eoddess  '  ^'"^°  ^  Canaanite  goddess  Ashera,  whose
^  • s}-mbol or  idol was the  ashera post.

.Since  in  the  places  cited  the  names  of  Baal  and  Ashera
are  couijlcd  precisely  as  those  of  Baal  and  Astarte  are
elsewhere  (Judg.  2 13  106  i  S.  74  [&"''-  ra  dXcnj
A(Trapu6]  12 10  [©"al  ^^^^s  &\cT€<nv]),  many  scholars
have  inferred,  further,  that  Ashera  was  only  another
name  or  form  of  the  great  Semitic  goddess,  Astarte
(Tiieodoret,  Qiiwst.  jj  in  iv.  Reg.,  Selden,  Spencer,
etc. ) ;  whilst  others  attempt  in  various  ways  to  distinguish
them — e.g.,  Astarte,  a  pure  celestial  deity,  Ashera,  an
impure  'telluric'  divinity  (Movers);  or  the  former  a
goddess  of  the  Northern  Canaanites,  the  latter  of  the
Southern  (Tiele,  Sayce).  Conservative  scholars  such  as
Hengstenl)erg,  Bachmann,  and  Baethgen,  however,  have
contended  that  in  the  passages  in  question  the  symbol
of  Astarte  is  merely  put  by  metonymy  for  the  name  of
the  goddess  ;  and  many  recent  critics  ^  see  in  these
places  only  a  confusion  (on  the  part  of  late  writers)  of  the
sacred  post  with  the  goddess  Astarte.  ^  A  critical
examination  of  the  passages  makes  it  highly  probable

1  See  Ohnefalsch-Richter,  Kyfiros,  etc.,  PI.  Ixxxiv.  3  and  7,
where  in  precisely  similar  relations  to  the  scene  a  carved  post
(supposed  ashera)  takes  the  place  of  a  cypress  tree.

-  j'j;  is  not  only  a  tree,  but  also  a  stake  (Dt.  21 22  and  often).
That  the  trees  depicted  on  Phoen.  coins,  etc.,  were  called  asheras
(Pietschmann,  Phonizier,  213)  is  merely  inferred  from  the  OT.

^  The  condemnation  is  based,  not  on  the  fact  that  the  presence
of  these  symbols  presumes  the  worship  of  other  gods,  but  on  the
principle  that  Israel  shall  not  worship  Yahwe  as  the  Canaanites
worship  their  gods  (Dt.  122^).

■*  In  2  K.  21  7,  '  the  image  of  the  ashera,'  the  word  image  is  a
gloss;  cp  V.  3  and  2  Ch.337.  On  i  K.  15  13  and  2  K.  287,  see
above.  In  i  K.  18  19  the  400  prophets  of  Ashera  are  interpo-
lated (We.,  Klo.,  Dr.).

5  We.,  G.  Hoffmann,  E.  Mey.,  St..  WRS,  and  others.

8  This  confusion  is  found  in  a  still  greater  measure  in  the
versions.

331


ASHES

that  in  the  OT  the  supposed  goddess  Ashera  owes  her
existence  only  to  this  confusion.  In  the  Amarna  corre-
spondence, however,  there  is  frequent  mention  of  a
Canaanite  who  bears  the  name  Abd-asratum,  equivalent
to  Heb.  ' Ebed-asherd,  sometimes  with  the  divine  deter-
minative,^z.*. ,  Servant  of  (the  divine)  Ashera.  This
has  not  unnaturally  been  regarded  as  conclusive  evidence
that  a  goddess  Ashera  was  worshipped  in  Palestine  in
the  fifteenth  century  b.c.^  The  determinative  might
here  signify  no  more  than  that  the  ashera  post  was
esteemed  divine — a  fetish,  or  a  cultus-god — as  no  one
doubts  that  it  was  in  OT  times  ;  cp  Phoenician  names
such  as  'Ebed-susim,  Servant  of  (the  sacred)  horses
[CIS  i.  46,  49,  53,  933,  etc.);  or  'Ebed-hckal,  Ger-
hckal  (G.  Hoffmann),  which  might  in  Assyrian  writing
have  the  same  determinative  ;  further,  Assyr.  ekurru,
'temple,  sanctuary,'  in  pi.  sometimes  'deities'  (Del.
HWB  718).  The  name  of  the  'goddess  Asratum,"
however,  occurs  in  other  cuneiform  texts,  where  this
explanation  seems  not  to  be  admissible :  viz. ,  on  a
haematite  cylinder  published  by  Sayce  (7. A  6  161);  in
an  astronomical  work  copied  in  the  year  138  B.C.,
published  by  Strassmaier  [7.A  6241,  /.  <^  ff.)  ;  and  in  a
hymn  published  by  Reisner  [Sumer.-babylon.  Hyninen,
92) — in  the  last  in  connection  with  a  god  Amurrii,
which  suggests  that  the  worship  may  have  been  intro-
duced from  the  West.  See  Jensen,  '  Die  Gotter  Ainur-
ru(i',)  und  Asratu,'  ZA  11  302-305.

The  word  ashera  occurs  also  in  an  enigmatical
Phfijnician  inscription  from  Ma'sfib,  which  records  a
dedication  '  to  the  Astarte  in  the  ashera  of  El-hammon  '
(G.  Hoffmann)  ;  where  it  is  at  least  clear  that  ashera
cannot  be  the  name  of  a  deity.  The  most  natural
interpretation  in  the  context  would  be  '  in  the  sacred
precincts.'  In  an  inscription  from  Citium  in  which  the
word  was  formerly  read  (Schroeder,  ZD.MG  35  424,
'mother  Ashera';  contra,  St.  ZATW  l^^^f.  ;  cp
v..  Mcy.  in  Roscher,  2870),  the  reading  and  interpreta-
tion are  insecure  (see  CIS  i.  no.  13). Cp  PncK.\ici.\.

The  etymology  and  the  meaning  of  the  word  are
obscure. The  most  plausible  hypothesis  perhaps  is  that


4.  Etymology.


usher tm  ongmally  denoted  onXyihn sign-


posts set  up  to  mark  the  site  or  the
boundaries  of  the  holy  place  (G.  Hoffmann,  I.e.  26).
The  use  of  the  word  in  the  Ma'sub  inscription  for  the
sacred  precincts  would  then  be  readily  explained,  and
also  the  Assyrian  asirtu  plur.  asrati  [esreti),  defined
in  the  syllabaries  as  meaning  '  high  place,  oracle,  sanc-
tuary.'  In  any  case,  ashera  is  a  nonien  ufiitatis,  and  its
gender  has  no  other  than  a  grammatical  significance.

Forsome  further  questions  connected  with  the  prophetic
opposition  to  the  use  of  asheras  in  the  worship  of  Yahwe
and  the  prohibition  in  the  laws,  see  Idol.'vtky,  §8.

The  older  literature  is  cited  under  Ashtoreth  \q.v.].  For
recent  discussion  see  We.  CM  28iyC  note  ;  St.  Cl'f  1  458^,  cp
^,-17'/Fl345,  4  293^  t)3i8y:;  G.  HotTmann,  Lfher  einige
plum.  Inschriftcn,  id  ff.  ;  WRS,  Rel.  Sc,„.<^)  187^  On  the
other  side,  Schr.  ZA  3  364.  Reference  may  be  made  also  to
Baethgen,  Beitr.  ziZJT.  ;  and  to  Collins,  P.^BA  11  ■2^1  _^.,  who
endeavours  to  show  that  the  ashera  was  a  phallic  emblem  sacred
to  Baal.  G.  V.  M.

ASHES  (1SX,  of  uncertain  derivation)  is  used  in
various  figures  of  speech  typifying  humiliation,  frailty,
nothingness,  etc. :  e.g. ,  to  sit  in,  or  be  covered  with,
ashes  (Job28,  cp  Ez.  273°  Lam.  3i6),  to  eat  ashes  (Ps.
1029),  to  follow  after  ashes  (Is.  44 20,  Che.  ad  loc,  cp
Hos.  12 1).  To  throw  ashes  on  the  head  (2S.  13x9  Is.
61 3),  or  to  wear  ashes  and  sackcloth  (Dan.  93  Esth.
4i  Jonah36,  cp  Mt.  II21  Lk.  IO13),  was  a  common  way
of  showing  one's  grief;  see  Mourning  Customs,  §  i.
The  combination  '  dust  and  ashes  '  (ieni  isy  ;  cp  also
Dust)  is  found  in  Gen.  1827  Job  42  6  (cp  Ecclus.  IO9) —
note  the  striking  assonance  isn  nnn  iNB  Is.  61 3,  'in-
stead of  ashes  a  coronal '  ;  cp  Ewald's  '  Schmuck  statt

1  Schr.  ZA  3  364,  and  many.  The  name  is  once  written
with  the  common  ideogram  for  the  goddess  Iltar  (Br.  Mils.  33
obv.  1.3).

332


ASHHUR

Schmutz."  'Proverbs  of  ashes'  (Job  13 12)  is  a  sym-
bolism of  empty  triHiiig  sayings. '

To  denote  the  '  ashes '  of  sacrificial  victims  the  alx)ve
word  is  found  only  in  Nu.  I99/ ,  where  the  ashes  of  the
burnt  heifer  are  represented  as  endowed  with  the  power
of  rendering  clean  or  unclean  the  person  who  came  into
contact  with  them  (cp  Hel).  913).  The  usual  term  is
jC'T  iiekn,  prop.  '  fatness,'  which  comes  to  be  used  of  the
ashes  of  the  victims  nnxed  with  fat.  From  l.ev.  1 16
(P)  it  would  seem  that  these  were  placed  on  the  ea.st
side  of  the  altiu-,  and  afterwards  removed  to  a  place
'  outside  the  camp'  [ib.  4  12,  cp  610/  [j/.J  P).''^

It  is  noteworthy  tliat  |C''n  occurs  only  twice  outside  P:  viz.,
Jcr.  31  40  and  i  K.  13  3  5  (the  latter  in  a  passage  which  is  a  late
atUlition  to  the  book  ;  see  Kings,  §  5,  n.  1).  JB'^3  n'S  'ashes
(RV  mg.  'soot';  cp  Ges.-bu.)  of  the  furnace,'  Ex. '.is  10  ((P
aiOiiAi))  is  quite  obscure  ;  see  Furnace,  ^jrofio?,  (D's  usual
rendering  of  "lEK  (cp  also  in  NT  I.e.  above),  is  found  aj;ain  in  2
M.UX-.  13  5,  in  connection  with  the  tower  full  of  ashes  at  llerea  (2)
wherein  Menelaus  met  his  death.  'Vi<t>pa  (of  which  the  verb
re^pou),  'to  turn  to  ashes,'  is  used  in  2  I'et.  2  6  of  Sodom  and
(Joniorrah)  is  found  only  in  Tob.  (i  16  8  2,  '  ashes  of  perfume  '  (or
'  incense,' RV)and  Wisd. 'J3,  '  our  body  shall  be  turned  toashes.'

ASHHUR  (so  RV)  ;  AV  AsiiuR  CVjntf'X,  §  81,  origin-
ally '  man  of  Morus '  [on  this  class  of  names  see
also  Ei.in.M)];  in  iCh.  li24.  acxco  [15],  acAooA  [A],
ACCcap  [I-];  in  4,  CARA  [1^].  Acxoyp  [^J.  Acocop
[L],  .isi/HK,  .-issik),  mentioned  apart  from  tlic  more
important  branches  of  Hezron — Jerahmeel,  Ram,  and
(  hclubai  (Caleb) — as  a  posthumous  child  (i  Ch.  224  45),
father  of  Tekoa  (see  Juuah).

ASHIMA  {^lp'\^^  :  Ac[e]iMAe  [BA],  accnaG  [L]).

a  Ilamathite  deity  (2K.  ITjof).  On  the  true  form  of
the  name  (cp  (P)  and  its  moaning,  see  Ham.\TH.

ASHKELON  (fl'Ppy'N,  deriv.  unknown,  ack&AcoN
l]iSAL]:3  ethnic  ^Ji^ptJ'is*,  -[e]iTHC.  Ashkelonite,
josh.  133  RV,  AV  EshkAI.omtk)  ;  mod.  '.Askaldn
[with  initial  V]),  one  of  the  five  cities  of  the  Philistines,
the  only  one  (it  is  generally  held)  •*  just  on  the  sea  coast
(cp  Jer.  477),  lies  12  m.  N.  from  Gaza.  The  site  is  a
rocky  amphithentre,  with  traces  of  an  old  dock,  filled
with  Herodian  and  Crusading  ruins.  It  has  no  natural
strength  ;  its  military  value  seems  to  be  due  to  its  com-
mand of  the  sea,  though  the  harbour  w;is  small  and
difficult  of  access.

Under  the  Kgyi)tian  rule  Ashkolon  was  a  fortress  ;
letters  from  its  governor  Jitia  appear  in  the  Amarna
correspondence  (Am.  Tab.  211/),  and  Alxl-hiba  of
Jerusalem  complains  that  the  territories  of  Askaluna
and  Gazri  have  joined  in  the  alliance  against  him  {ib.
180,  14).  Ashkelon  seems  to  have  revolted  from
Rameses  II.  (WMM,  As.  u.  Eur.  222  ;  cp  Egvi'T,  §
58),  and  from  Meneptah  (see  Egyi'T,  §  60,  n. )  ;  but  it
was  reconciuered  by  them.' The  storming  of  the  city

t  In  I  K. '20  38  41  it  is  almost  certain  that  with  RV  we  should
point  "12X  instead  of  ^E^<  (AV  a.shcs)and  render  '  head-land ' ;  see

TUKISAN.'

2  Hence  the  denominative  [ii"^,  '  to  clear  away  the  fat-ashes '
Nu.4i3  Ex.273  ;  see  Altak,  §  13.

3  Asiialonand  Ekron  are  confused  in  ffS  more  than  once  ;  a:.,

■♦  [With  regard  to  the  site  of  Ashkelon  proper,  it  is  possible  to
hold  that,  like  other  Philistine  cities,  it  lay  a  little  inland  ;
Antoninus  Martyr  (ch.  33,  ed.  Gildemeister,  23),  indeed,  in  the
sixth  century  a.d.,  expressly  distinguishes  it  from  the  sea-side
town,  and  in  536  a.d.  a  .synodical  letter  was  signed,  both  by  the
Bishop  of  Ascalon  and  by  the  Bishop  of  Maiumas  Ascalon.  Ac-
cording to  Clermont  Ganneau  (see  A'<t'.  archiol.  27  368),  the
inland  town  was  on  the  site  rej^resented  by  the  modem  villages,
Hamameha.nA  el-Mejdel  (^xx:  Guirin./W.  '2129;  CI.  Ganneau,
^rc/i.  Res.  in  Pal.  2190).  In  a  (ireek  transl.ntion  of  a  lost
Syriac  text  (published  by  Raabe)  Ascalon  appears  to  be  described
as  bearing  the  name  of  n-oAaia — i.e.,  ireKtiO.  (dove) — in  allusion
to  the  sacred  doves  of  Astarte,  and  as  l)eing  about  2  m.  from  the
sea.  The  .\r.  name  Ilaindmeh  means  dove.  There  are,  how-
ever, two  other  theories  respecting  el-Mejiitl,  one  of  which  pos-
sesses much  plausibility  (see  Migdal-Gad).]

*  Ascalon  (Askaini)  is  one  of  the  places  in  Palestine  which
Meneptah,  on  the  Israel-steli,  claims  to  have  captured.

333


ASHPENAZ

I is  represented  on  a  wall  of  the  Ramesseum  at  Thelses  ;
' the  inhabitants  are  depicted  in  the  sculptures  w  iih  Hiltiie
features.

Ashkelon is not  enumerated among the towns of

; Judah  in  Josh.  15,  and  apparently  in  Judg.  1 18  also  we

'' ought,  with  0,  to  read  a  negative  ;  cpjosh.  I33. It  was

Philistine  in  the  days  of  Samson  (Judg.  14  19),  Samuel

(iS.(5i7),  David  (2.S.  l2o),  Amos  (.\m.  1  8),  Zephaniah

\ ('247),  and  Jeremiah  (Jer.  252o  47s  7),  iii"l  i'l  the  tjreek

age  (Zech.  95). It  was  taken  by  Sennacherib  (Schrader,

A'AJ'<->  165/,  hkalitita),  who  deposed  its  king  .';^idka

in  favour  of  Sarluddri, son  of  Rukibti, 701 B.C. In

I the  time  of  Asurbanipal  it  had  a  king  Mitinti.

i The  fish-goddess, Derketo  (see  Atakcjatis),  had  a

temple to the  east  of the  city  on a  tank, of  which,

Ixitwcen  t7-.l/(y</t'/and  ' AskaLin,  some  traces  still  remain.

I After the  concjuest  of  Ale.xander  the  Great, Ashkelon

I became, like the other Philistine cities, thoroughly

[ Hellenic  ; but,  more  prudent  than  they,  it  twice  ojx.-Med

I its  gates  to  Jonathan  the  Maccabee  (i  .\lacc.  1086  II60),


and  again  to  .\le.\ander  Jann.eus.  It  was  the  birth-
place of  Herod  the  Great,  who  gave  it  various  buildings
(Jos.  /y/i.  2I11);  and  was  afterwards  the  residence  of
his  sister  Salome  (Jos.  /V/ii.  t).!).  It  is  said  to  base
Ijeen  '  burnt  to  the  ground '  by  the  Jews  in  their  revolt
against  Rome  (Jos.  yy/ii.  I81),  but  then  to  have
repulsed  the  enemy  twice  {ib.  iii.  '212).  In  Roman  times
it  was  a  centre  of  Hellenic  scholarship  ;  antl  under  the
Arabs,  who  called  it  the  '  Bride '  and  the  '  .Summit  of
Syria,'  was  a  frequent  object  of  struggle.  It  was  taken
by  the  Christians  in  1154  ;  retaken  by  ."^aladin  in  1187  ;
dismantled  and  then  rebuilt  by  Richard  in  1192  (cp
Vinsauf,  Itin.  Ricard.  {)\ff.)\  and  finally  demolished
in  1270.  There  are  considerable  ruins,  which  have
been  described  by  Gu^riu  {Jiui.  2153-171},  and,  best
and  most  recently,  by  Gulhe  {ZDJT  'lii^  ff. ,  with
plan;  cp /"/iV-' J/*"///.  3  237-247).  The  neighbourhood
is  well  w.atered  and  exceedinglj'  fertile,  the  Ascaloma
cicpa,  scallion  (shallot)  or  onion  of  Ascalon,  being  among
its  characteristic  products.  See,  further,  PuiLlsTiNKS,
and,  for  Rabbinical  references,  Hildesheimer,  Jieilr.
zur  Ceoiir.  FaUistinas,  \  ff.  G.  A.  s.

ASHKENAZ  (n^C'wN' ;  acxanaz  [BADEL] ;  .is-
CK.Mi/.).  The  people  of  Ashkenaz  are  mentioned  in
Gen.  IO3  and  ((\cxeNez  [A])  i'l  ;i  1  Ch.  1  6  in  connection
with  Gomer  ;  in  Jer.  51 271  (acxanazcOC  or  -aiOC
[Bis-\],  acka.  [Q])  after  Minni.  There  is  no  occasion
to  connect  their  name  with  the  propier  name  Askanios  in
Hom.  //.  2862  18793,  nor  with  the  Ascanian  triljes  in
Phrygia  and  Bithynia,  and  infer  that  the  original  home  of
Ashkenaz  was  in  Phrygia  (Lenormant,  E.  Meyer,  Di. ).
Rather  Ashkenaz  must  have  been  one  of  the  migratory
peoples  which  in  the  time  of  Esar-haddon  burst  upon
the  northern  provinces  of  .Asia  Minor,  and  upon  .Armenia.
One  branch  of  this  great  migration  appears  to  have
reached  Lake  Urumiyeh  ;  for  in  the  revolt  which  Esar-
haddon  chastised  (i  R  45,  col.  2,  27 jf.),  the  Mannai,
who  lived  to  the  SW.  of  that  lake,  sought  the  help
of  Ispakai  'of  the  land  of  Asguza,'  a  name  (originally
perhaps  Asgunza)  which  the  scepticism  of  Dillmann
need  not  hinder  us  from  identifying  with  Ashkenaz,  and
from  considering  as  that  of  a  horde  from  the  north,  of
I ndo- Germanic  origin,  which  settled  on  the  south  of
Lake  Urumiyeh.  (See  Schr.  COT'I^gs;  \Vi.  GBA
269;  ^7^6488491;  similarly  Friedr.  Del.,  Sayce,
Knudlzon. )  T.  K.  C.

ASHNAH  (^3E^'^^^  acna  [AL]).  the  name  of  two
unidentified  sites  in  the  lowland  of  Judah  ;  one  apparently
in  the  more  north-easterly  portion  (Josh.  1633  accA
[B]),  the  other  nuich  farther  south  (I543,  iana  [BJ,
ACeNNA[A], -CANN. [I-]t).

ASH-PAN  (nnnO),  i  K.  75o.Wn>ir.;  see  Censer,  2.

ASHPENAZ  (T^Bt^N,  ABiecApi  [©«'],  [rcol  ac<J)A-
Nez  [  Theod.  B.\]),  chief  of  the  eunuchs  under  Nebuchad-

334


ASHRIEL

rezzar  (Dan.  I3).  The  current  explanations  are  un-
tenable,^ and  the  cause  is  obvious.  The  name  is
corrupt,  and  has  been  brought  into  a  delusive  resem-
blance to  Ashkenaz.  An  earlier  form  of  the  name,
equally  corrupt,  and  brought  into  an  eciually  delusive
resemblance  to  an  ancient  Hebrew  name,  is  Abiezri
(niyax  ;  see  Ahiezer,  i)  ;  this  is  the  form  adopted  by  @.
What  is  the  original  name  concealed  in  these  two
api)arently  dissimilar  forms  ?  ©  enables  us  to  discover
it  by  its  reading,  evidently  more  nearly  accurate  than
that  of  MT  in  Dan.  1 11 — /cai  direv  ^avtrjX  'A^Le<rdpi  rip
di'ttSetx^^"''''  apxtevMovxij)  eTri  rbv  AavirjX.  .  .  .  The
MT  indeed,  in  tv.  ii  16,  represents  Daniel  as  com-
numicating  with  a  third  person  called  Melzar,  or  '  the
Melzar'  ;  but  a  comparison  of  i/z'.  37-1018  shows  that
this  representation  must  be  incorrect.  It  was  the  '  prince
of  the  eunuchs '  that  Daniel  must  have  addressed  in
t'.  II  ;  a  slight  transposition  and  a  change  of  one  point
are  indispensable  (see  Mici.ZAU).  We  have  now,  there-
fore, four  forms  to  compare ;  (a)  nrj'zx,  (''')  usui<,
{c)  i^hcn,  and  (rf)  n^'ca^  (Fesh.  in  v.  n).  Of  these,
(a),  (c),  and  (d),  virtually  agree  as  to  the  last  two  letters
(if  in  a  we  neglect  the  final  ',  which  is  not  recognised  in
Syro-Hex.  or  by  l""phrem).  These  letters  are  n^-.  Next,
{a),  {d),  (t),  and((/)agree  as  to  the  presence  of  a  labial ;  the
first  two  arefor  a  mute,  the  others  for  a  liquid.  Also(i^)and
{c)  attest  a  S  ora  3,  and  (a)  and  (</)  a  ',  which  might  be  a
fragment  of  a  *?,  while  (/;)  and  (d)  present  us  with  a  a,  of
which  they  in  (a)  looks  like  a  fragment.  Next,  (a),{i),and
(r)  attestan  n  or  a  n,  and  lastly,  (a),  (c),  and  {d)  agree  as  to
1.  The  almost  inevitable  conclusion  is  that  the  name
of  the  chief  eunuch  was  -li-Nti''?^,  commonly  pronounced
Belshazzar.  Tliis  is  not  the  only  occasion  on  which  the
name  Balsarezer  ( =  Belshazzar)  has  suffered  in  trans-
mission (see  BiLSHAN,  Sakkzkk).  t.  k.  c.


ASHRIEL


("pNnb'N),  iCh.  714AV,  RVAsrihl.


ASHTAROTH  {n)-\n^'V—i.e.,  Ashtoreth  in  her
different  representations  ; — ACTApooe  [BAL],  -T&fOO.
[n'' Josh.  9  10],  AcGakpoOM  [A  Josh.  1831]  ;  the  adjective
is  Ashterathite,  '•ri^Flt^'y,  o  (\CTAptoe[e]i  [BA],  eecT.
[.i].  ec0Ap6oei  [L],  I  Ch.  1144).  Ashteroth-Karnaim

(□*3"li? niri'J'J?  ; ACT<Npa)e  Kd,pN<MN  [A],  -Tep- KA.IN.

[!■:]) — i.e. ,  '  Ashtaroth  of  the  two  horns  '  ? — '  Ashtaroth
of  (=near) Karnaini '  ?) in Uen.  145,^ and Be-esh-
terah (n-irT_;'J?3, i.e., ny}:;^^,  D'Z, or 'house of
Pf  Astarte';  Bocopan[B], -ppA[L],  Bee-

1.  Keierences.  ^^^^  ^^^^^  j^  ^^^^  2i  27,  but  nnnE^y

simply  in  Dt.  I4  Josh.  9iol24  I31231,  where  it  appears,
along  with  Edrei,  as  a  chief  city  of  Og,  king  of  Bashan  ;
and  in  i  Ch.  656  [71]  (ACHpooB  [B]  pAMa)e  [A^'])  as  a
Levitical  city.  Then,  in  Am.  613  (Griitz's  restored
reading)  we  have  Karnaim  as  the  name  of  a  city  E.
of  the  Jordan  taken  by  Israel,  and  in  i  and  2  Mace.
Karnaim  or  Karnion  as  a  city  in  Gilead  with  a  temple
of  Atargatis  [t/.i'.]  attached  to  it.  The  lists  of
Thotmes  III.  {circa  1650  B.C.)  contain  an  'A-s-ti-ra-tu
(AV-'(-')545  ;  WMM,  As.  u.  Eur.  162,  313  ;  cp  Ashtarti"
Bezold  and  Budge,  Tell  el-Amarna  Tabl.  in  B}-it.  Mii.
43,  64).  Whether  these  names  represent  one  place  or
two  places  is,  on  the  biblical  data,  uncertain.

It  is  significant,  however,  that  Eusebius  and  Jerome

1  For  example,  Halivy  compares  Pers.  aspanj,  'hospitium'
{/As.,  188 !,  228jy;) ;  Nestle  too  explains  '  hospes '  from  the
Armenian  0fari^.  38). Frd.  Del.  and  .Schr.  offer  no  explanation.

2  If  sve  adopt  the  form  Ti'JO.  ^  slight  difference  in  the  summa-
tion will  be  the  result.

•*  Here  it  is  described  as  the  abode  of  the  Rephaim  at  the  time
of  the  invasion  of  Chedorlaomer.  Or  were  there  two  neighbour-
ing cities?  Kuenen,  Buhl,  and  Siegfr.-St.  read  '  A.shtaroth  <ind
Karnaim,'  claiming  ©l  as  on  their  side.  Probably,  however,  the
ri^^ht  ©  reading  is  Atrraptofl  Kapi/aic  [AL]  (see  Nestle,  Marg.).
Moore  explains  '  the  Astarte  of  the  two-peaked  mountain  ' ;  see
especially  G.  F,  Moore,  JBL  156^.  [97]),  and  cp  col.  336,  n.  3.

335


ASHTORETH

(05(2)  20961 1  84  s  26898=  108 17)  record  the  existence  in

2  The  OS '^''"''^  ^^^  '"  Batanea  of  two  places  called
■  gi+ga  Astaroth-Karnaim, '  which  lay  9 R. m.

apart,  between  Adara  (Edrei)  and  Abila'
of  the  Decapolis  ;  one  of  them,  'the  city  of  Og,'
(say)  6  R.  m.  from  Edrei,  the  other  '  a  very  large  town
of  Arabia  [in  which]  they  show  the  house  of  Job  ' ;  and
in  the  Peregrinatio  of  S.  Silva  of  Aquitaine  (4th  cent.)
Carneas  is  mentioned  as  the  place  where  she  saw  Job's
house.  Now,  at  the  present  day  there  is  a  Tell  'Ashtarah
on  the  Bashan  plateau,  on  the  W.  of  Hauran,  21  m.  E.
of  the  Lake  of  Gahlee  (long.  36°  E. ,  lat.  32'  50'  N. ),
1900  ft.  above  the  sea  ;  and  2  m.  N.  lies  El-Merkez,
where  the  tombs  of  Job  and  his  wife  are  shown,  and
there  was  the  ancient  Christian  monastery  of  Job,  while
1  m.  farther  N. ,  at  Sheikh  Sa'd,  is  a  basalt  monolith,
with  Egyptian  figiu-es,  known  as  Job's  stone  (see  Erman,
ZZ)/^/ '15  205-211).  In  this  neighbourhood,  then,  must
have  lain  one  of  the  Ashtaroths  of  the  OS.  It  does
not  suit  the  datum  of  the  latter — '  between  Adara
and  Abila ' ;  but  this  ma}'  be  one  of  the  not  infrequent
inaccuracies  of  the  OS.  From  this  Ashtaroth  Eusebius
l^laces  the  other  9  R.  m.  distant.  Now,  6  R.  m.  S. ,
near  the  W.  el-Ehrer  (the  upper  Yarmuk),  lies  Tell  el-
Ash' ari,  which  some  (like  van  Kasteren)  take  as  the
second  Ashtaroth.^  This,  Buhl  [Cicog.  249)  prefers  to
find  8  R.  m.  S.  of  Tell  'Ashtarah  in  Muzeirlb,  the  great
station  on  the  //(//road,  with  a  lake  and  an  island  with
ruins  of  pre-Mohammedan  fortifications.  A  market  has
been  here  since  the  Middle  Ages,  and  the  place  must
have  been  important  in  ancient  times.  Moreover,  it
suits  another  datum  of  the  OS.  in  lying  about  6  R.  m.
from  Edrei.

Much  more  difficult  is  the  question  of  identifying
any  of  these  sites,  or  the  two  Ashtaroths  of  the  OS. ,
OT  "t  ^^''^  *^^  corresponding  names  of  OT.
SI  es.  yj^^^gg  jjj  jj^jg  p^^f  Qf  Palestine  have
always  been  in  a  state  of  drift.  That  Tell  'Ashtarah
is  the  'Ashteroth  Karnaim  of  Gen.  14  5  or  the  'Ashtaroth
of  other  texts  has  in  its  favour,  besides  its  name,  the
existence  of  a  sanctuary,  even  though  this  has  been
transferred  in  Christian  times  to  Job.  On  the  other
hand,  Muzeirib  must  have  been  of  too  great  import-
ance not  to  be  set  down  to  some  great  place-name
of  the  OT  ;  and  its  accessibi.ity  from  Edrei  suits  the
association,  frequent  in  the  OT,  of  the  latter  with  Ash-
toreth. As  to  the  Karnaim  of  i  Mace.  026  (which,  of
course,  is  the  same  as  the  Karnaim  of  Am.  613),  it  cannot
have  been  Muzeirib,  as  Buhl  contends,  for  in  such  a  case
the  lake  would  certainly  have  been  mentioned  in  con-
nection with  the  assault  of  Judas  upon  it  (a  lake  is
mentioned  near  Caspis  or  Casphon  \_q.v.'\  which  Judas
took  previously)  ;  and  in  2  Mace.  12  21  Karnion  is  said
to  be  difficult  to  get  at  bia.  ttjv  iravTuiv  tQv  tottcji'
(TTevoTTjTa.  This  does  not  suit  Muzeirib,  or  Tell
'Ashtarah,  or  Sheikh  Sa'd.  Furrer,  therefore,  has  sug-
gested for  Karnion  A'rcn  or  "Grcn,  the  .Agraina  of  the
Romans,  in  the  inaccessible  Lejd.  Till  the  various
sites  have  been  dug  into  and  the  ancient  name  of
Muzeirib  is  recovered,  however,  we  must  be  content  to
know  that  there  was  an  'Ashteroth  Karnaim  near  Tell
'Ashta7-ah,  and  that  possibly  there  was  a  second  site
of  the  same  name  in  the  same  region  in  OT  times.

On  the  whole  subject  see  especially  /CDPf  xm.  xiv.  and  xv.,
Schumacher,  Across  the  Jordan  (203-210),  and  Buhl,  Stud,  zur
Topos^r.  dcs  y.Ostjordanlandcs,  12  JT-t  •/'«'•  248-250;  also
Moore,  JBL  It)  iS5.ff^-'  'i''"^l>  f'^"'  •">"  Kgyptological  explanation  of
the  name  '  Ashtoreth  of  the  two  horns,'  WMM,  As.  u.  Kur.  313.

G.  A.  S.

ASHTORETH  (JTIPIB'J?),  a  goddess  of  the  Canaanites

1  Sub  A<rr.  Kapvaeiv.  ~  Sub  Kapvaetfi.

3  So  Schumacher.  '  The  double  peak  of  the  southern  summit
oi  Tell  el-  Ash'ari,  formed  by  the  depression  running  from  N.
to  S.,  would  make  the  appellation  of  K.arnaim,  or  "double-
horned,"  extremely  appropriate '  {.Across  Jordan,  208).  In  a
Talmudic  discussion  as  to  the  constructions  for  the  Feast  of
Booths  it  is  said  that  Ashteroth  Karnaim  was  situated  between
two  mountains  which  gave  much  shade  {Succa,  ■za;  cp  Neub.
Ge'o^-.  246). Many  regard  this  statement  as  purely  imaginative.

336


2.  Chaxacter.


ASHTORETH

and  PhoL'nicians.  The  Massoretic  vowel-pointing,  which
^  is  followed  by  ICV,  gives  the  word  the  vowels

■  of  bi'isheth,  '  scandalous  thing '  (cp  Molech
for  Melik)  ;  the  true  pronunciation,  as  we  know  from
tlic  dr.  'AffTdprrj  (so  even  ©"al  ;  alongside  of  aarapujO
[HAL])  and  from  Augustine,*  was  ''Ashtart.'  In  the
or  the  name  in  the  plural  (the  'AshUiroth)  is  coupled
witii  the  JJaals,  in  the  general  sense,  '  the  heathen
gods  anil  godilesses,'  "^  a  usage  with  which  the  Assyrian
i/tini  u-istardti  is  compared.  Solomon  is  said  to  have
built  on  the  Mt.  of  Olives  (i  K.  II5,  cp  33)  for  the
rhiLnician  'Ashtart  a  high  place,  which  was  destroyed
more  tlian  three  centuries  later  by  Josiah  (2  K.  23 13).

( )f  the  character  of  this  goddess  and  her  religion  we
k-aru  nothing  directly  from  the  O  T.  Her  name  docs
not  occur  either  in  the  prophets  or  in
historical  texts  in  any  other  connections
than  those  cited  above  ;  it  is  nowhere  intimated  that  the
licentious  characteristics  of  the  worship  at  the  high  places
were  derived  from  the  cultus  of  Astarte.  The  weeping
for  Tanunuz  (I'>..  814),  which  Clyril  of  Alexandria  and
Jerome  identify  with  the  Phu'iiician  mourning  for  Adonis
(so  (?'-'•'"*.'•),  was  more  probably  a  direct  importation  of
the  Babylonian  cult.-*  This  is  doubtless  true  also  of  the
worship  of  the  '  Queen  of  Heaven  '  (Jer.  7  18  [©bkaq
tt;  (jTparigL  toj  ovpavov],  44  17  _f.),  whatever  the  name
may  mean  (see  Qikkn  OK  Hkavkn).  The  law  which
forbids  women  to  wear  men's  garments,  or  men  women's
(Ht.  225),  may  Ix;  aimed  at  obscene  rites  such  as  obtained
in  the  worship  of  many  deities  in  Syria  and  Asia  Minor,
but  need  not  refer  specifically  to  the  cult  of  Astarte.

Many inscriptions from the mother -country and

its  colonics,  as  well  as  the  testimony  of  Greek  and  Latin

^ . writers,  prove  the  prominent  place  which

■  ,  ^^y"^  the  worship  of  .\starte  had  among  the
Phuenicians  ;  Egyptian  documents  place
the  ''Ashtart  of  the  Hittite  country'  by  the  side  of  the
'  .Sutech  of  Heta,'  the  principal  male  divinity;  the
Philistines  deposited  Sauls  armour  as  a  trophy  in  the
temple  of 'Ashtart  (i  S.  31 10  ©"al  ^^  a(rTapT[€]i.ov } ,
jjcrhaps  the  famous  temple  at  Ashkelon  of  which
Herodotus  writes  (lios);'*  the  stele  of  Mesha,  king  of
Moab  (9th  cent.  B.C.),  tells  how  he  devoted  his  prisoners
to  .Vshtar-Chemosh  ;  a  city  in  Bashan  often  mentioned
in  the  OT  lx;ars  the  name  Ashtaroth  (cp  also  Ashteroth
Karnaim,  Gen.  14  5,  and  Bceshterah,  Josh.  21 27;  see
Asiitakoth).  '.Ashtart  w.as  worshipped  in  Babylonia
and  .\ssyria  under  the  name  I  star  (considerable  frag-
ments of  her  myth  have  been  preserved)  ;  in  Southern
Arabia  as  '.\thtar  (masc. );  in  Abyssinia  as  'Astar  ;  ^
in  Syria  as  '.\tar  or  '.Athar  (in  proper  names  :  cp  Atak-
<;.\ris  [(/.  V.  ]  —  Dercdto).  The  .\rabs  are  the  only  Semitic
people  among  whom  we  do  not  find  this  deity  ;  and
even  here  it  is  possible  that  al-Lat  and  al-'L'zza  were
originally  only  titles  of  Astarte.  The  normal  phonetic
changes  in  the  word  show  that  the  worship  of  Astarte
did  not  spread  from  one  of  these  peoples  to  the  others,
but  was  common  to  them  Ixjfore  their  separation.
The  fem.  ending  is  peculiar  to  the  Palestinian  branch
of  the  race,  and,  as  has  Ix.-en  observed,  in  Southern
.\rabia  '.\thtar  was  a  god,  not  a  goddess.

Unlike  Baal,  Astarte  is  a  proper  name  ;  but  under
this  name  many  diverse  divinities  were  worshipjjed.
The  I  star  of  Arbela  was  recognised  by  the  Assyrians
themselves  ;is  a  goddess different from the Istar of

1  Qua-s/.  16  in  Jnd.,  Estart,  Astart.  Confirmatory  evidence
is  Kiven  by  the  Kgyptian  transcription.

_  -  judj;.  2  13  106  I  S.  7  3  (^hal  Ta  ak^^  4  12  10  ((Sbai.  rots
oA(re<Ti»');  all  belonging  to  the  later  elohistic(K-j)  or  deiiteronomic
school.

^  The  identification  of  Tanimuz  with  Adonis  is  found  also  in
Melito  (Cureton,  Spicil.  25).  The  connection  of  the  myths  is
unquestioned. See  Tammuz.

<  It  is,  of  course,  not  to  lie  inferred  that  the  Philistines  wor-
.shipped  Astarte  before  they  invaded  Palestine.  The  temple  was
an  old  Canaanite  sanctuary.

5  HaMvy's  discovery-  is  confirmed  by  the  recent  publication  of
the  .\xum  inscriptions.


4.  Character.


22


337


ASHTORETH

Nineveh  ;  the  Istar  of  Agade  from  the  Istar  of  Urku
(see  Assyria,  §  9.  Babvi.onia,  §  26).  The  inscription
of  I'lshmunazar  shows  that  more  than  one  'Ashtart  had
a  temple  in  Sidon  ;  and  we  know  many  others.  Whether
those  differences  are  only  the  conse(|uence  of  natural
divergence  in  the  worship  of  the  priniitive  .Semitic  deity,
in  the  immense  tract  of  time  and  space,  or,  as  is  alto-
gether ntore  jjrobable,  in  great  part  due  to  the  identifi-
cation of  originally  unconnected  local  nutnina  with
Astarte,  the  result  is  the  same : '  there  were  many
Astartes  who  were  distinguished  from  one  another  by
character,  attributes,  and  cultus — a  class  of  goddesses
rather  than  a  single  goddess  of  the  name.'-'

Astarte  was  often  the  tutelary  divinity  of  a  city,  its
'proprietress'  [ba'alat);  and  then,  of  course,  its  pro-
tectress and  champion,  a  warlike  god-
dess. On  the  other  hand,  she  was  a
goddess  of  fertility  and  reproduction,  as  apjx;ars  strik-
ingly in  the  myth  of  the  descent  of  Istar.  These  two
characters  might  l)e  attributed  to  different  .AsUirtes,
as  among  the  .Assyrians  (cp  the  Aphrodites)  ;  but
they  might  also  coexist  in  one  and  the  same  goddess,
and  this  is  doubtless  the  older  conception.

The  figures  from  Babylonia  and  Susiana,  as  well  as
from  Phoenicia  and  Cyprus,  which  are  believed  to  rc|)re-
sent  Astartes,  express  by  rude  exaggeration  of  sexuality
the  attributes  of  the  godiless  of  generation.*  That
the  cultus-images  of  .\starte  were  of  similar  tyjies  is  not
probable.  At  Paphos  she  was  worshipped  in  a  conical
stone,  and  many  representations  show  the  evolution
from  this  of  a  partially  iconic  idol.

In  the  astro-theology  of  the  Babylonians  the  planet
Venus  was  the  star  of  Istar.  It  is  a  common  but  ill-
founded  opinion  that  in  Palestine  Astarte  was  a  moon
goddess.  The  name  of  the  city,  Ashteroth  Karnaim,  is
often  alleged  in  support  of  this  theory.  Kven  if  the
translation,  '  the  horned  .\starte,'  Ix;  right,  however,  it  is
a  very  doubtful  assumption  that  the  horns  represented
the  crescent  moon — it  is  cjuite  as  natural  to  think  of  the
h(jrns  of  a  cow  or  a  sheep,  or  of  an  image  of  the  goddess
made  after  an  I-'gyplian  type  (see  Ecivi'T,  §  13)  ;  "• — and
it  is  a  still  more  unwarranted  assumption  that  Astarte
was  elsewhere  in  Palestine  represented  in  the  same  \\ay.
It  would  be  a  nuich  more  logical  inference  that  the  horns
were  the  distinctive  attribute  of  this  particular  .Astarte.*
The  other  testimony  to  the  lunar  character  of  Astarte  is
neither  of  an  age  nor  of  a  nature  to  justify  much  confidence
[De  dea  Syr.  4  ;  Herodian,  v.  G4).  The  point  to  be  in-
sisted on  is  that  the  widely  accepted  theory  that  Astarte
was  primarily  a  moon  goddess,  by  the  side  of  the  sun
god,  Baal,  has  as  little  foundation  in  the  one  case  as  in
the  other.

In  Dt.  7  13  '  the  'iishtdroth  of  the  flocks  '  are  parallel
to  the  'offspring  of  the  herds,'  from  which  it  has  l)eeii
ingeniously  argued  that  among  the  nomadic  Semites
Astarte  was  a  sheep-goddess  (W'RS,  Rel.  Sent.  <"-'  3 1  o,  and
469^)  ;  but  this  also  seems  hazardous.

Of  the  cultus  of  -Astarte  we  know  comparatively  little.
Religious prostitution ( I  kit. 1  199  ; Stralxj  xvi.  1  20 ;

6 Cultus ^P-  J'"'^"'-  ^^-f'-  f"-""-  ^''^-'^^ ''  ^'  '''■"  '*'-''''•
* 6, etc. ) was not  confined to the temples

of  Astarte,  nor  to  the  worship  of  female  divinities.
Nu.  25  1-5  connects  it  with  Baal-peor  ;  Am.  2?  Dt.  2.'Ji8
(17),  etc.,  show  that  in  Israel  similar  practices  infected
even  the  worship  of  A'ahwe.  There  is  no  doubt,  how-
ever, that  the  cultus  of  Astarte  was  saturated  with  these
abominations.

'  In  the  period  from  which  most  of  our  monumental  evidence
comes,  still  another  cause  must  l>e  recognised  :  syncretism  with
the  Egyptian  religions  (see  E;(;ypt,  |  16).

2  This  use  predominates  in  Hebrew,  which  has,  indeed,  no
other  word  for  '  goddess ' ;  but,  as  has  been  remarked  above,  it
is  found  in  Assyrian  also.

3  Heuzey,  Rn>.  Arcli/ol.  xx.vi.v.,  1880,  p.  \  ff.\  Ohnefalsch-
Richter,  Ky/>ros,  etc.  On  the  origin  of  this  type  sec,  however,
S.  Rein.-ich,  R,-!>.  ArclUot.  3  se'r.  2ii,  1895,  p.  3b'  ff.

■«  Cp  the  representation  of  Haalat  of  Byblos,  tV.V  1  i,  PI.  I.
8  On  Ashteroth  Karnaim  see //>*/,  It)  155^.

338


ASHUR

The  origin  and  the  meaning  of  the  name  are  obscure  ;
but  tliis  is  liardly  a  sufficient  reason  for  supposing  that
the  nicjst  universally  worshipped  of  Semitic  divinities  was
of  non- Semitic  extraction  (see  Haupt,  /.DMG  34
758).  The  relation  between  Astarte  anil  Aphrodite  is
an  interesting  and  important  question,  upon  which  we
cannot  touch  here.

Literature.— f^tXAcn,  De  Dis  Syris,  syn.  ii.  ch.  2  ;  Movers,
Phonizier,  1  55<)-65o ;  Scholz,  Giitzendienst  nnd  ZaubcKwesen
bei  den  alten  //ebniern,  259-301  ;  Baudissin,  art.  'Astarte  und
Aschera'in/'^AX'*)  "2147-161  (where  the  lit.  in  full  may  be  found);
Raethgen,  Beitr.  zur  seinit.  RcL-gesch.,  1888  ;  E.  Meyer,  art.
'Astarte'  in  Roscher's  L,.v.  dcr grivch.  it.  Rom.  Myth.  645-655,
in  part  corrected  by  his  art.  '  H.ial,'  //'.  28677?! ;  Harton,  '  Ash-
torethandher  liilluence  in  the  OT,'//'^-  '^^17,ff-\  '  The  Semitic
Isblar-cult,'  //<\''raita,  9  133-165  10  1-74.  See  also  Driver's  very
COJnprolicnsive  article  ia  Hastings,  DB.  g.  F.  M.

ASHUR  (>in'^\S),  I  Ch.  224  AV,  RV  Ashhuk.

ASHURITES,  THE  (n-l^'.^H,  ton  GAceipei  [B],
GacoyP  ['^^'  ezpi  I  f- ;  '  Jezreel '  follows]),  are  mentioned
in 2  Sam.  "Jgy among various clans subject to the i
authority of Ishbaal. Posh. Vg. read n^c'jri, the j
Gcshurites,  which  is  accepted  by  some  (see  Gksuur), j
while  others  (Kamph.  Ki.  Klo.  Gr. )  folh^w  the  Targ. {
(iCK  n'aT  '?;•. cp  ©") and  read  nt^xri (cp Judg.  1 32)
— i.  e. ,  '  the  Asherites, '  whose  land  lay  to  the  W.  of  Jordan !
above  Jczrcel,  which  is  mentioncu  ne.\t,  the  enumeration
proceeding  from  N.  to  S.

ASHVATH  (nV^'i;;  AceiG  [BA],  -coyaG  [L]),  iu  a '
genealogy  of  AsHiiR  (y.T'. ,  §  4  ii. ),  i  Ch.  Jssf.

ASIA(h  <\ClA[Ti.\\'H]). Great  uncertainty  prevailed
during  the  apostolic  period  as  to  the  usage  of  the  names 1
of  the  districts  of  Asia  Minor. The  boundaries  of  several !
of  the  districts  had  long  been  uncertain  ^those  between j
Mysia  and Phrygia  were  proverbially  so  (Strabo,  564). |
This confusion arose from the fact that the names i
denoted  ethnological  rather  than  political  divisions,  and
belonged  to  diverse  epochs. They  are  like  geological
strata,  which  are  clear  enough  when  seen  in  section  but
impossible  to  disentangle  when  represented  on  a  single
plane. A  further  complication  arose  when  the  Romans
imposed  upon  the  country  the  provincial  system. Tiie
official  nomenclature  was  applied  without  any  account
being  taken  of  the  older  history  or  of  ethnical  facts  or ;
popular usage. In the case of Lycia, Bithynia, or j
Pamphylia there was no distinction of any moment I
between  the  old  and  the  new  usage  ; but  in  the  case  of
Galatia  and .Asia the difficulty  of distinguishing the j
precise  sense  of  the  names  is  very  great.  !

The  province  of  Asia  was  formed  in  133-130  B.  C.  when i
Attains  III. of  F^ergamus  left  his  kingdom  by  will  to ;
Rome  ; the  name  Asia  had  early  come  into  use  because i
there  was no  other  single  term  to  denote  the  ^gean j
coast  lands. The  area  of  the  province  was  subsequently |
increased,  first  by  the  addition  of  Phrygia  (116  B.c;. )  ;
we are, therefore, confronted by the difficulty of j
distinguishing  whether,  in  any  given  case,  the  word  Asia
is restricted to the coast or  extended to the entire j
province — in other  words,  whether  it  includes  Phrygia
or  not.

In  Acts  2(5,  Asia  indicates  the  towns  of  the  highly  civilised
coast  land,  for  the  enumeration  is  popular  and  Greek  in  style,
as  is  proved  by  the  mention  of  Phrygia  alongside  Asia  :  accord-
ing to  the  Roman  mode  of  speaking,  Phrygia  was  included  in
Asia,  with  the  exception  of  that  small  part  round  Antioch
(Phrygia  Galatica)  which  fell  to  the  province  Galatia.  Such
names  as  Phrygia,Mysia,  or  Lydia  were  to  a  Roman  without
any  political  significance,  being  merely  geographical  terms
denoting  parts  of  the  province  of  Asia,  used  on  occasion  to
specify  exactly  the  region  referred  to  by  the  speaker  (Cic.
pro  Flac.  xxvii.  §  65;  Asia  vesira  constat  ex  Phrygia,  Mysia,
Caria,  Lydia).  Such  use  can  be  paralleled  from  the  NT.  In
Actsl67  Kara  ■ri\v  'iUvtjiav  (Ti.  WH]  is  used  to  define  rigidly
the  point  reached  by  the  apostles  when  warned  from  Bithynia.
In  Actsfig,  a  decision  is  more  difficult.  The  Jews  who  'dis-
puted 'with  Stephen  were  probably  those  educated  in  the  schools
of  .Smyrna  or  Pergamus ;  but  we  cannot  on  a  priori  grounds
decide  that  some  of  them  did  not  belong  to  Phrygia.  Here,
therefore,  .-Xsia  may  or  may  not  be  used  in  its  Roman  sense.
So  also  in  Acts  21  27  =  24  18.

339


ASIARCH

The  whole  question  of  the  sense  in  which  geographical
terms  are  used  by  the  writer  of  Acts  centres  round  Acts
166,  where  the  apostles  are  forbidden  to  preach  in  .Asia
{Kuikvdivrt^  .  .  .  XaX^crai  t6v  \6yov  iv  -rg  'Affiq,
[Ti.  WH]).  Those  interpreters  {e.^i;^.,  Con.  and  Hows.
I324)  who  take  the  preceding  words  (oi9)\dov  Se  tt)v
^pvylav  Kal  raXarur/c  x^po-"  [I '•  WH])  to  express  the
opening  up  of  new  ground  by  missionary  enterprise
N.  of  Antioch  in  Pisidia  are  compelled  to  restrict
the  prohibition  of  preaching  in  Asia  to  the  coast  land —
in  other  words,  to  take  I'hrygia,  Galatia,  and  Asia  in
their  popular  non-Roman  sense— for  all  Phrygia  N.  of
Antioch  belonged  to  .Asia  in  its  Roman  or  administrative
sense.  Yet  we  must  ask  if  the  simple  Si7J\doi>  (AV
'gone  throughout')  can  be  taken  to  imply  preaching.^
If,  however,  the  apostles  did  not  jireach  in  their  pa,ssage
through  the  district  called  here  ij  'I'puyla  Kal  VaXariKr}
Xwpa,  there  appears  to  be  no  necessity  for  giving  a
popular  meaning  to  the  geographical  terms  here  used,
unless  in  the  interests  of  what  Ramsay  calls  the  N.
Galatian  theory  (see  Gal.vtia,  §§  7-30,  especially
§§  9-16).  On  this  view,  then,  the  words  indicate  such
parts  of  Galatic  Phrygia  as  had  not  been  traversed  at
the  time  of  receiving  the  prohibition  (or,  more  probably,
that  part  of  Phrygia  which  belonged  to  the  province
Asia),  together  with  Old  or  North  Galatia.  In  favour
of  this  is  the  fact  that  the  part.  KuXvO^fres  must  be
prior  in  time  to,  i.e.  contain  the  ground  of,  the  action
denoted  by  Sif/X^o;', — '  they  traversed  .  .  .  because  they
had  been  forbidden.'  If,  in  face  of  the  difficulties  of
the  N.  Galatian  view,  we  fall  back  upon  the  S.  Galatian
theory,  the  district  ij  <bpvyia  Kal  VaXariKT]  x^P"-  i""St
be  regarded  as  partly  identical  with  that  called  Tr]v
YaXariKTjv  x^po^"  ko.1  'i>pvyLav  in  Acts  18 23  (which  can
hardly  be  other  than  that  of  the  S.  Galatian  churches)  ;
and  also  it  must  already  have  been  traversed  wholly  or
in  part  be/ore  the  prohibition  to  preach  in  Asia  (Rams.
Expos.  May  1895,  P-  39^  ;  Church,  5  ed.  p.  75).
Ramsay  consequently  attempts  to  interpret  the  words
SiTJXOov  KuiXvO^vrei  ns  =  8l7JX0ov  Kal  iKuiXvOr^aav
{duXdofTes  eKboXvOj^aav),  or  on  purely  subjective  grounds
adopts,  with  Lightfoot,  the  reading  BieXOouTes  5^  from
inferior  MSS  {Si.  PauK^K  p.  195).  It  seems  better  to
take  SiTJXOoi'  Of  as  resumptive  and  as  summing  u]5  the
previous  verses,  with  an  ellipse — '  so  then  they  traversed
.  .  .  (neglecting  Asia)  having  been  forbidden '  :  in
which  case,  here,  as  elsewhere  throughout  the  narrative
of  Paul's  journeyings,  the  word  Asia  is  used  in  its
technical,  Roman,  sense.

This  sense  is  clearly  the  best  in  the  following  passages  : —
during  Paul's  residence  in  Ephesus,  'all  they  wliich  dwelt  in
Asia  heard  the_  word  of  the  Lord  Jesus'  (Acts  19 10;  see  also
7m.  22,  26  /!).  The  deputies  escort  the  apostle  from  Corinth  as
far  as  Asia  (.\cts2O4);  other  instances  in  the  same  chap,  are
7'7'.  16  (Ephesus  was  virtually  capital  of  the  province)  .ind  18.
In  272,  Kara  •rijii'  '.^crt'ac  ron-ous  [Ti.  WH],  there  is  nothing
to  forbid  our  taking  the  word  in  its  Roman  sense.  Similarly,
in  tlie  Epistles,  the  technical  sense  is  required —f.c.,  Rom.
16 5,  Epasnetus  the  first-fruits  of  Asia  (RV);  i  Cor.  10  19,  the
churches  of  Asia;  2  Cor.  18,  (probably)  alluding  to  the  riot
at  Ephesus,  or  to  dangerous  illness  there  ;  2  Tim.  1 15.  The
Roman  province  is  meant  also  in  i  Pet.  li,  where  the  enumera-
tion Pontus,  Galatia,  Cappadocia,  Asia,  Bithynia  (=  Bithynia-
Pontus)  sums  up  all  Asia  Minor  within  the  Taurus,  p'inally,
in  Rev.  1  4,  the  seven  churches  of  Asia  are  those  established  in
the  chief  towns  of  the  Roman  province.  In  i  Mace.  86,
'  Antiochus,  the  great  king  of  Asia,'  the  word  is  used  in  a  wider
sense  =  .Asia  Minor,  with  Syria  (so  also  11 13,  '  the  diadem  of
Asia';  1239  18  32  2  Mace.  83  :  cp  Jos.  ^nt.  xii.  3  3  1847).  In
2  Esd.  1546,  '  A.sia,  that  art  partaker  in  the  beauty  of  Babylon,'
the  sense  is  still  wider=  Persian  empire  (10  i  ;  cp  Herod,  i.96
177  :  Jos.  Ant.  xi.  8  3).  vv.  J.  W.

ASIARCH  (01  ACIAPXAI  [Ti.  WH],  AV  ■  the  chief
of  Asia'  ; RV 'chief  officers  of  Asia'). An officer

1  See  Acts  1541,  5t^pX«ro,  but  with  fnia-rripii^tav  ad<'ed  ;  I64,
6t«iropeuo«'TO,  but  with  wapeSiSoa-av  added.  On  the  other  hand
we  have  13  14,  iteAdovTes  anb  Trjs  Ilepyi/s — no  preaching  on  the
ro.-id  :  and  17  i,  SioSevVavres  ttji'  '.\ij.<fiiTTo\iv  koX  ttiv  'AiroKkioviav
[Ti.  WH),  where  also  there  was  no  attempt  at  evangelisation,  so
far  as  we  can  tell. (But  see  Rams.  Expos.  May  1895,  p.  385/:)

340


ASIBIAS

heard  oi  only  once  in  the  NT — viz. ,  in  the  account  of
the  riot  made  by  "  Demetrius  and  the  craftsmen '  at
Ephesus  (Acts  1931).  The  annual  assembly  of  civic
deputies  (koivov  'Affias),  over  which  he  presided,  was
combined,  in  Asia,  as  in  other  provinces,  with  an
annual  festival  in  honour  of  the  reigning  emperor  and
the  imperial  system.

Soon  after  the  victory  of  Actium,  in  fact  as  early  as  29  B.C.,
Augustus  had  allowcti  temples  to  himstlf  and  Konia  to  be
dedicated  in  I'erganius,  the  tie  jure  capital  of  Asia,  as  well  as  in
Nicomcdcia  and  Ancyra,  the  capitals  respectively  of  Hiihynia
and  Galatia(Tac.  Ann.  iv.  374).  This  blending  of  a  religious
with  an  administrative  institution  became  a  leading  idea  of  the
imperial  policy  ;  but,  as  rcKards  the  pomp  of  the  festivals  and
the  civic  rivalries  excited,  the  institution  nowhere  developed  as
it  did  in  Asia.  Naturally,  the  conduct  of  the  games  and  festival
in  honour  of  the  emperor  fell  to  the  president  of  the  provincial
Diet.

As  the  Asiarch  bore  most  of  the  expense,  though
some  was  borne  Ijy  voluntary  subscription  or  appoi  tioiicd
to  the  several  towns,  this  jjoiitico-religious  oflice  was
open  only  to  the  wealthy— the  prosperity  of  Tralles,
for  example,  was  shown  by  its  continuous  series  of
Asiarchs  ' — and  the  title  was  retained  after  the  expiration
of  the  year  of  office.  To  find  Paul  counting  friends
among  the  Asiarchs — i.e.,  among  those  who  then  held
or  who  previously  had  held  the  office — throws,  therefore,
a  valuable  side-light  ujion  the  attitude  adopted  towards
Christianity  by  the  upper  classes  of  the  provincials  :  it
was  an  .Asiarch,  Philip,  who  at  Sniyrna  resisted  the  cry
of the  mob to '  let loose  a lion on Polycarp '  ( Eus.

///^4.5.  §27)-

It  would  be  a  mistake,  then,  to  imagine  that  the
Asiarch,  as  such,  had  any  connection  with  the  Ephesian
worship  of  ArUmis.

In  fact  Ephesus,  like  Miletus,  was  expressly  rejected  by
Tilicrius  as  a  claimant  for  the  honour  of  an  imperi.-il  temple,
proliably  beciuse  of  the  risk  of  Ciesar's  worship  being  over-
shadowed by  the  local  cult  (Tac.  Ann.  iv.  oo  6).  It  would
naturally,  however,  have  the  rii;lit  to  put  f  >rs\ard  a  candidate
for  the  Asiarchate.  We  lie.<r  of  similar  officrs  in  other  pro-
vinces— e.g^.,  a  tialatarch,  a  I'.itli\ 'lianh,  a  Syriarch,  and  a
Lyciarch."  The  Last  at  any  laic  i>  clearly  urigiually  a  political
officer— the  head  of  the  League  (Strabo,  665).

There  was  thus,  at  first,  but  one  Asiarch  in  office  at
a  time  in  all  Asia — the  president  of  the  Diet  at  Ephesus  ;
but  as  temples  dedicated  to  Cnesar  multiplied  in  the
province,-  and  each  of  them  became  the  centre  of  an
annual  festival,  the  chief  priests  at  such  temples  per-
formed the  functions  discharged  at  the  festival  at
Ephesus  by  the  .Asiarch,  and  finally  the  presidency  of
the  festival  even  at  Ephesus  was  taken  from  the  chair-
man of  the  Diet  and  given  to  the  chief  priest.  The
Diet  and  its  civil  functions  thus  fell  into  the  background,
and  the  name  .Asiarch  came  to  mean  the  priestly
provider  of  a  popular  festival  in  coimection  with  the
worshi])  of  a  dead  or  reigning  emperor.  With  the
growing  importance  of  this  worship  the  religious  influence
of  the  priestly  Asiarchs  extended  ;  and  as  the  worship  of
the  emperor  became  the  outward  sign  of  loyalty  to  the
empire,  it  was  through  the  provincial  chief-priesthoods
that  the  old  and  the  new  faith  came  into  contact.
Hence  Julian  writes  to  the  Galatarch  as  the  proper
medium  for  his  anti-Christian  propaganda.  (See
Momms.  Provinces,  1  344  fol.  ET,  Rams.  Class.  Nev.
8174.  A  different  view  in  a  long  article  by  Brandis
in  Pauly's  /?.  /inc.  new  ed.  s.v.).  W.  J.  vv.

ASIBIAS  (AceBei&c  [B],  aciBi&c  [A],  /weAxiAC
[E]),  in  the  list  of  those  with  foreign  wives  (see  Ezra,
i.  §  5,  end),  I  Esd.  926=  Ezra  10 25  (caBia  [N].  a.  [A.],
Bom.).  See  Mai.chij.mi,  5.  Asibias  is  probably  a
Graicised  form  of  Hashabiah.

ASIEL  (hii'bV.  §  31  ;  ACIh\  [B.AL]).  i.  a  name
in  the  genealogy  of  Simeon  (i  Ch.  435).

1  (tal  aeC  Tivet  ef  avrfii  eliriv  01  <rpo>TevoiTes  Kara.  t»|I'  inaL(>xCa.v,
otit  'A(ridpx»f  KoXova-iv  (Strabo,  64Q).

2  .Already  in  26  a.d.,  for  example,  a  temple  was  erected  in
Smyrna  to  Tilierius,  jointly  with  his  mother  Livia,  and  the
Senate  (Tac.  .-1«».  iv.  154563).


ASNAPPER

2.  A  scribe,  4  E^sd.  14  24  (as/hhl).

3.  Tob.  1 1  RV,  AV  AsAKL  (q.v.).

ASIPHA (ACei<t)<\ [A]), I  Esd.  5  29=  Ezra  2  43-

HA.SUPHA.

ASKELON  (ihp^^'it.),  Judg.liS  AV,  RV  Ashkelon.

ASMODEUS,  kV  AsmodaeuB  (acmoAaycI'M.  -Aai-
OC  L^AJ,  -Aeoc  [N]),  called  '  the  evil  demon  '  (Tob.  i<8,
17).  Considering  ( i )  the  close  connection  of  the  story  of
Tobit  with  Media,  (2)  the  affinity  of  the  seven  archangels
in  Tob.  12 15  to  the  seven  Mazdean  Amesha9[x;ntas,  and
(3)  the  impossibility  of  deriving  Asmodeus  or  .Asmodai
(or  the  later  Hebrew  forms,  on  which  see  below)  from
ncrK.  '  to  destroy, '  we  are  obliged  to  look  for  an  arch-
demon  of  similar  name  and  attributes  in  Mazdean
demonology.  The  Asmodeus  of  Tobit  has  two  attri-
butes :  he  is  lustful  (like  a  satyr),  and  has  the  power
to  slay  those  who  oppose  his  will  (Tob.  38  G15  ©"'^).
Now,  it  is  true  that  there  is  no  demon  in  Mazdeism  of
similar  name  who  has  exactly  those  characteristics  ;  but
one  of  the  seven  arch-demons  who  are  oijposed  to  the
seven  Mazdean  archangels  is  called  .\cshma,  and  is
the  impersonation  of  anger  (the  primary  meaning)  and
rapine.  So  constaiuly  is  he  mentioned  in  the  .Avesta
beside  .Angra  Mainyu  or  Ahriman  (with  his  weiipon  '  the
wounding  spear')  that  we  could  not  wonder  if  he  l)e-
came  naturalised  in  the  spirit-world  of  the  Jews  in  the
Persian  period.  Once  adopted,  he  would  naturally
assume  a  somewhat  difl'erent  form  ;  his  attributes  would
be  modified  by  the  sovereign  will  of  the  popular  imagina-
tion. This  was  actually  the  course  of  history,  as
modern  critics  hold.  By  the  time  the  Book  of  Tobit
was  written  Adshma  had  already  a  well-tlefined  ro/f,
and,  though  vindictive  ;is  ever,  had  exchanged  the
field  of  battle  for  less  noble  haunts.  The  Asmodai  <>f
Tobit  is,  in  fact,  the  counterpart  of  Limth  {t/.v.),  and
in  still  later  times  divided  with  her  the  dominion  of
the  shedim  or  demons.  Asmodai,  or,  as  his  name  is
written  in  Targ.  and  Talmud,  'Ki:;rN  or  "icc'K.  ";'s  as
dangerous  to  women  as  Lilith  was  to  men,  thougli  we
also  find  him  represented  in  a  less  otlious  character
as  a  potent,  wise,  and  sometimes  even  jocular  elf  (sec
Gittim,  68(7,  in  Wiinsche's  1  er  bab.  Tnlm.  2180-183).
The  second  part  of  the  name  .Ashmodai  is  of  uncertain
origin.  Most  connect  it  with  the  Zend  dunut.  '  demon  '  ;
but,  though  the  combination  Aeshmo  dacvo  is  not  im-
possible, it  is  nowliere  found  in  the  texts.  Kohut's
explanations  [Jiid.  Angelologie  and  Aruc/i,  s.v.)  are  pre-
carious.

Cp  Zemiavesta  and  Pahlavi  Texts  in  SBE;  Spiegel,  ErAn.
Atter:humskunde,'i.-L-ii  /.\  Grunhaum,  Z/X1/0  31  204,  etc.;
Kohut's /«</.  Ant;eioiogie,  72,  etc.  T.  K.  C.

ASNAH  {TMj:?\<,  -thornbush'  ;  acena  [BA]  ;  -nna
[E]  ;  asena).  The  B'ne  .Asnah,  a  family  of  Nethinim
in  the  great  post-exilic  list  (see  EzKA,  ii.  §  9),  Ezra25o
=  1  Esd.  531,  -As.XNA  {aaaava  [B],  acra.  [.A])  — Neh.Tsa
6'-  (EV,  following  BNA,  om. ).

ASNAPPER,  RV  Osnaim'AK,  better  Asfinappar
("iS:DN  ;  NA(t)Ap  [A],  AceNN.  [l''l.  caAmanac-
CApHC  [L],  .is!iX.iPii.4R),  Ezra49/  To  '  the  great  and
noble  .Asfinappar'  is  ascriljed  the  transplanting  of
several  nations  into  Samaria  from  Ixiyond  the  Euphrates.
The  two  epithets  naturally  suggest  that  an  .Assyrian  king
is  referred  to,  and,  as  Bosanquet  in  G.  Smith's  Hist,
of  Assurbariipal.  364  ['71],  suggested,  the  king  can  only
tie  the  conqueror  of  Susa— Asur-bani-pal  (^sjrK  from
SB](2n)DN  =  S£3-:3"iDN)-^  This  view  is  confirmed  by  the
discovery  (due  to  Marq.  Fund.  59)  of  a  various  reading
for  1BJDK  which  underlies  the  impossible  .Asbacaphath
{q.v.)  of  I  Esd.  .'■j 69,  viz.  1E1CN.  The  two  readings
supplement  each  other,  and  are  e.xplained  by  a  common
original  nsjaDX,  which  is  clearly  .Asur-bani-pal.  This
great king's name  must have stood  both  in Ezra  4  2

1  An  explanation,  in  the  form  which  Gel/er  gave  to  it  (.4^^75^
['75D,  now  widely  accepted. Cp,  however,  HalAvy,  REJ  ix.  la.

342


ASOM

( '  Esarhaddon '  being  an  ignorant  scribe's  alteration)
and  in  the  source  from  which  the  statement  in  Ezra  4  2
is  derived  (perhaps  2  K.  17  24,  which  at  present  merely
refers  to 'the  king  of  Assyria'). See  further,  AsuR-

HAM-I'AL.

ASOM  (acom  [HA]),  I  Esd.  9  33  =  Ezra  10  33.
IlAsniM.

ASP  (IDS,  p^'then:  AcniC  [HAL])  in  Dt.  3233  Job
20.4-6  (ApAKCON  LJ''^5AC])  Is.  118  AV,  in  I's.f,84  91 13
■VV"'>-'-  (BaciAickoc  [HSARTJ),  and  in  Rom.  Sist;
probably  sonic  species  of  viper  (cp  AUDER,  2),  see  iJER-
I'KNT,  J;  I,  n.  5.

ASPALATHUS  (ACTTAAAeoc  [BSA] ;  balsamum)  is
associated  with  cinnamon  and  other  perfumes  in  the
Praiseof  Wisdom  ( licclus. 24 15).  Theophrastus  [Hist.^j)
mentions  it  along  with  various  spices,  etc. ,  used  in  making
unguents,  and  in  Pliny  (//.V2224)  it  is  'radix  unguentis
expetiht-.'  Fra;is,  the  most  recent  writer  on  classical
botany  (Synopsis  Plantarum  Florce  Classics,  49),  refers  it
conjecturally  to  Genista  acanthoclada,  D.C. ,  a  native  of
Greece  and  the  Grecian  archipelago  ;  but  the  most  that
can  safely  be  said  is  that  it  seems  to  have  teen  a  prickly
shrub,  probably  leguminous,  with  a  scented  wood  or
root.  The  ante-Linnoean  commentaries  devoted  much
attention  to  it,  but  with  no  more  definite  result.  It
has  evidently  been  lost  sight  of  since  classical  times,
and  supplanted  by  other  perfumes.  w.  T.  t.-d.

ASPATHA  (XnSDX,  (t)AC^<^[I!^*'■"].  ^lAfA  [N*"''],
(})A.  [A],  cJ)ACA  [!>].  one  of  the  ten  sons  of  Ham.\N
((/.  7'. )  E.St.  97.  I'ott  and  Hcnfey  ex])lain  the  name  as
the  Pers.  aspadata,  '  ab  ecjiio  sacro  datus  '  (cp  Be.-Rys. ) ;
but  the  MT  reading  is  too  insufficiently  supported.

ASPHAR,  THE  POOL  (Aakkoc^  accJjapLwXV;  Jos.],
A-  &c4)AA  [A]  ;  /ari/s  Asphar  [Vg.]),  in  the  wilderness
of  Tekoa,  is  mentioned  in  coimection  with  the  struggle
of  Jonathan  and  Simon  the  Maccabees  with  Bacchides
( I  Mace.  933 ;  cp  Jos.  Ant.  xiii.  1  2).  The  Be'cr  Asphar
is  probably  the  modern  Bir-Selhiih,  a  considerable
reservoir  in  the  wilderness,  6  m.  WSW.  of  Engedi,
and  near  the  junction  of  several  ancient  roads  (described
by  Rob.  BR  2  202)  ;  the  hills  around  still  bear  the  name
Safrd,  an  equivalent  of  .Vsphar.  A  less  probable  identifi-
cation is  that  with  the  ruins  and  cistern,  es-Za'fcrdneh
to  the  S.  of  Tekoa  (Buhl,  Pal. 158).  G.  A.  S.

ASPHARASUS  (accIjapACOC  [BA]),  i  Esd.  53  =
Ezra22,  .Mizi>ar.

ASRIEL  ('?X"'-l':;*X,  §  67,  ecpiHA  [BAL]  ;  the  patro-
nymic is  Asrielite,  *V5<;?"P''^n.  -A[e]i  [BAF],  cep.  [L]).
a  Gileadite  family,  descended  from  Manasseh  through
Machir,  losh.  1/2  (lezemA  [B],  epi.  [A]),  Nu.  2631
(cepi.  [I'll-  In  I  Ch.  7 14-19  (AcepeiHA  [B],  AV  Ash-
rikl;  see  Manasseh),  a  very  different  Manassite  gene-
alogy, the  name  is  probably  dittography  of  the  syllables
immediately  following  (ync'N  ;  cp  also  text  of  ©");  read,
'  The  sons  of  Manasseh  whom  his  concubine  the  Ara-
niitess  bare '  (cp  (jen.  4620  (S).  The  name  may  be  old,
though  it  comes  to  us  from  late  writers.

ASS  ("llt^n;-  fem.  pnX;'  ONOC  [BAL];  asinus,
asina].  Wild  Ass  (NIS  or"  -ihr  =  Chald.  Tli;  ;  ^  ovos
aypios  ;  onager),  and  Young  Ass  (IT,  wu\os  [B.\L]).

The  followi.^g  are  the  passages  :  (a)  for  'ass'  Gen.  12  16  223
40  1 1  14  ((0  TOKaAd^),  K.x.  13i3  Nu  22  28  Dt.  22  10  Judg.  5  10
(viTo^vyiov  [Ah])  15  15  2  K.  62s  Is.  21  7  Zech.  99  ((P  ujrofwyioi')
Mt.  2I2  I.k.  13i5  etc.;  (/•)  for 'wild  ass'  Job6  5  11  12  (©  ofo?
ep7)f<.iTT)s)  24  5  (©  ovoi)  3;t  5  Ps.  104  11  (O  ovaypot.)  Is.  32  14  Jer.

1  The  usual  rendering  of  "IN3  or  li3  in  (B.

2  Root  npn,  'to  be  red.'  On  the  form  cp  Lag.  Uebers.  ii,
Barth,  iVB'ig^.

*  The  Ar.  verb  '<!/«««  = 'contracto  brevique  gressu  incessit ' ;
but  this  may  be  denominative.  priN  has  of  course  no  connection
wilh  asintis :  see  Lag.  Ann.  St.  817.

■•  Lag.  derives  -iny  from' arada,  'he  threw  a  stone  far,'  re-
ferring to  the  effect  of  the  animal's  trampling  hoofs  {Uebers.
sSyi). KTB  seems  to  be  connected  with  the  notion  of  swift  flight.

343


ASSAPHIOTH

2  ^4  (®  tiT\arvvtv)  \i  f>  Dan.  .5  21  ({p  ovaypwv)  Hos.  8  <>  (©  om.)

(Jen.  16i2t KV  ((S  oypoiico?)  ; there  w;is  pc-rhaps  originally  a

reference  to  the  wild  ass  ;.lso  in  i  S.  24  14  [15J  2020,  where  MT

now  reads fyT3=FLEA  [g.v.]. (t) For  'young  ass'  Is. 306

(®  ovcx;),  24  (<S  /3oe?),  KV 'foal'  Gen.  49  11 32  16,  EV 'colt'

Zech.  it  9  and  (»£>  oi-o?)  Job  11  12,  EV  'ass  colt '  Judg.  IO4  12  14.

A  comparison  of  the  passages  in  which  licn  and  jinx

respectively occur shows that the former was more

used for carrying burdens and for agriculture, the

latter  for  riding. Hence  some  have  thought  that  [mn

denotes  a  superior  breed  and  not  simply  '  she-ass '  ;  but

this  opinion  is  now  given  up. We  must  conclude  that

she-asses  were  preferretl  for  riding. As  the  name  licn

shows,  the  Eastern  ass  is  generally  reddish  in  colour  ;  ^

white  asses  are  rarer,  and,  therefore,  used  by  the  rich  and

distinguished. This  explains  the  reference  in  Judg.  5 10. '^

The  -i'li  (young  ass,  colt,  foal ;  in  Ar.  specifically  wild

ass;  see  Hommel,  Sdugetliiere,  127^  )  was  used  variously

for  carrying burdens (Is.  306), for  agriculture (t-.  24),

and  for  riding  on  (Zech.  99). On  Judg.  IO4  12:4,  see

J  AIR. On  the  place  of  the  ass  and  on  its  employment

among  the  Jews  see  generally  Jos.  c.Ap.  2-j.

I The ass  has been from the most  ancient times  a

domesticated  animal, and  probably, in Egypt at any

rate,  preceded the  horse  as a  servant  of  man. It  is

1 even  questioned  whether  the  wild  stock  from  which  it

i was  derived  survives  at  the  present  day,  some  authorities

'. holding  that  the  Hocks  of  wild  asses  met  with  in  various

■ parts of  Asia  and Africa  are  but  the  descendants  of

those  ^^hich  have  escaped  from  the  domesticated  state.

The  domestic  ass,  Etjuus  asinus,  is  believed  to  be
descended  from  the  wild  ass  of  Africa,  E.  asinus,  of
which  there  are  two  varieties,  Africanus  and  Somalicus  ;
and  the  strong  disinclination  to  ford  even  narrow  streams
which  these  animals  show,  and  their  delight  in  rolling
in  the  dust,  are  regarded  as  indications  that  their  origin
is  from  some  desert-dwelling  animal.  In  former  times
this  species  seems  to  have  extended  into  Arabia.

In  the  East  the  ass  plays  a  large  part  in  the  life  of
the  people,  and  has  received  a  corresponding  amount
of  care  at  their  hands.  Much  trouble  is  taken  in  breed-
ing and  rearing  the  young.  Darwin  distinguishes  four
different  breeds  in  Syria  :  '  first,  a  light  and  graceful
animal  (with  an  agreeable  gait),  used  by  ladies  ;  secondly,
an  Arab  breed  reserved  exclusively  for  the  saddle  ;
thirdly,  a  stouter  animal  used  for  ploughing  and  various
purposes  ;  and  lastly,  the  large  Damascus  breed,  w  ith
.  .  .  peculiarly  long  body  and  ears. '

The  wild  asses  which  roam  in  small  herds  over  a  considerable
part  of  Asia  are  sometimes  regarded  as  belonging  to  one  species,
the  Equus  hetnionus ;  sometimes  to  three,  the  E.  hemip/<us
found  m  Syria,  the  E.  onager,  the  Onager  of  Persia,  Heluchistan,
and  parts  of  Northern  India,  and  the  E.  hentionus  of  the  high
table-lands  of  Tibet.  Sven  Hedin  describes  the  last-named  as
resembling  a  mule.  Living  at  such  high  altitudes  it  has  un-
usually large  nostrils.  These  are  artificially  produced  by  the
Persians,  who  slit  the  nostrils  of  their  tame  asses  when  about  to
use  them  for  transport  purposes  in  mountainous  districts.  The
Syrian  species  or  sub-species  rarely  enters  the  N.  of  Palestine
at  the  present  time.  Wild  asses  congregate  in  herds,  each  with
a  leader,  and  are  said  to  migrate  towards  the  south  at  the  ap-
proach of  winter.  They  are  so  fleet  that  only  the  swiftest  horses
can  keep  pace  with  them,  a  fact  recorded  both  by  Xenophon
and  by  Layard  ;  and  they  are  so  suspicious  that  it  is  difficult
to  approach  within  rifle-shot  of  them.  They  are  eaten  by  the
Arabs  and  the  Persians.  N.  M. — A.  E.  S.

ASSABIAS  (acaBi&c  [10).  RV  Sabias,  iEsd.19
=:2Ch.  359,  Hashabiah,  6.

ASSALIMOTH  (ACCAAiMcaG  [really  -^c  caA.  A]),
I  Esd.  836  AV=  Ezras  10,  Shei.omith,  4.

ASSANIAS,  RV  Assamias  (accamiac  [B]),  i  Esd.
8 54=: Ezra 8 24,  Hashabiah,  7.


ASSAPHIOTH  (AccAcJjeicoe  [B]),
:Ezra255,  Hassophereth.


Esd.  533 RV


t  the  ?".gyptians  execrate  the
Tuf^ttifa,  Kixi  bvuiSri  t»|»'  ;(/)odi/


1  Cp  Plutarch  s  statement  tl
ass  Sia.  TO  TTvppou  yeyoi/eVai  to
(quoted  by  Bochart).

2  niins  nijilN,  not  strictly  7vhite,  but  white  spotted  with  red,
as  the  .>ame  word  means  in  Arabic,  where  it  is  specially  applied
to  the  she-a.ss.

344


ASSASSINS

ASSASSINS,  the  RV  rendering  of  ciK&pioi  [Ti.
Wll],  M..in!  -i.e.,  '  dagKwmon  ■  :  Acts 21 38  (AV
niurdurers.).  They  are  so  called  from  the  sica  or  small
curve<l  sword,  resembling  the  Persian  acinaces  (Jos.
Ant.  xx.  8  to),  which  they  carried  under  their  cloaks.
'rhou<;h  used  generally  without  any  political  meaning
(cp  Schiir.  (/'/7I480,  note),  the  term  sicarii  came  to
be  employed  to  denote  the  biiser  and  niore  fanatical
associates  of  the  zealots,  who.se  jwlicy  it  was  to  eliminate
their  antagonists  by  assassination. See  ZEALOT.

ASSEMBLY  0'}P^ '  's  frequently  used,  especially  in
post-exilic  literature,  to  denote  the  theocratic  convocation
of  Israel,  the  gathering  of  the  ixjojjle  in  their  religious
capacity.  It  thus  Ix-conies  synonymous  with  iKK\y)ffla
(so  generally  (p  ;  in  Nu.  2(146  10  12  owafwyi),  so  Lk.  4
13  14),  which  in  the  N'l"  is  used  of  the  Christian  church,
in  contrast  to  the  Jewish  kdhdl  of  the  Mosaic  dispensa-
tion. See  CjlfKCH,  §  I.  Closely  allied  in  meaning
and  usage  is  niy  (from  i;",  'to  appoint':  a  company
assembled  together  by  appointment),  employed  to  de-
note the  national  body  politic.  Mosaic  Israel  encamped
in  the  desert  (cp  Kue.  Einl.  §  15,  n.  12).  Both,  e.g.,
include  the  .i,^r  (cp  for  'y  I'",x.  I'iig,  for  'p  Nu.  Ifus  ;
see  .SrR.\N(iKR  AND  SojouKNKK ),  but  are  sometimes
interchanged  (cp  Nu.  I646/.  [17 10/.]  20).  The  dis-
tinction between  the  two,  which  was  doubtless  always
observetl,  is  clearly  seen,  e.g.,  in  Lev. -i  ij /.  ('if  the
whole  congregation  of  Israel  shall  sin,  and  the  thing  be
hid  fronj  the  eyes  of  the  assembly  .  .  .  when  the  sin
therein  is  known  then  the  aw^'w^// shall  offer'  .  .  .  ),
where  the  kCihiil  is  composed  of  the  judicial  representa-
tives, the  picked  members  of  the  ,-;ny  (cp  also  Ut.  '2.'.\\f.
where  certain  classes  of  the  people  — i.e.,  Ihe'edd/i —
may  not  enter  into  the  kahal). See  Sy.nedkiu.M.

Apart  from  their  occurrence  in  the  more  secular
meaning  of  '  nnillitude,  lunnlxir,  swarm,"  both  Sip  and
r\-\]!  occur  but  rarely  in  pre-Deuteronomic  literature.

Snp(>)KV  'assembly":  cp  Kx.  IO3  Lev.  4  13^  and  Jer.  Si'.ij
(crvcaywyj))  .')0g  (ycuyai)  K/.  'Ji'.j.i  (d\Aos),  etc.  (2)  KV  'congre-
gation':  i  K.  I  ra  108(of  the^v'A?/;)
Pr.  5i4Mi.  \  'assembly':  Nu.
1515'-  lt)47 . .^35  1  Judg. '2I5  (see

Jrix,i:s,  §  I  ,)  ,. ;-„;..,.',, , .....  The  coUocatiun

'day  of  assembly'  Di.  'J  10  IU4  (&  um.)  ISiO,  refers  to  tbe  d.iy
on  which  the  Law  was  given  upon  Sinai.  For  its  more  secular
meaning  cp  Clen.  35  1 1  (P)'-  Ez.  17  17  (©  oxAo?  KV  '  company  ')  ;
(;en.  •283'-i  -184  (P)'-!  Nu.  2'24  (K),'-'  .VV  'multitude,'  RV  'com-
pany' (ui  Kz.  li)4o  "2346,  (B  6xAo9,  RV  '  assembly ').  Cp  also
I  S.  1747  '•  the  assembly  of  Israel  present  at  the  fight  between
D.-ivid  and  (loliath  (E?  see  .Samukl,  g  4).  The  earliest  occur-
rence is  probably  tien.  ii'.l6  (tP  crucrTatrij)  the  kiihdl  of  Simeon
and  Levi  (parallel  to  -|ia).  Closely  related  is  TyT'T\'p  '  assembly,'
Neh..')7:  cp  Dt.3342(AV  'congregation'),  and  i  S.  19  20  (after
(P  ;  cp.S /><'/'«</ /,)<■.  The  passage  is  Midrashic).  The  verb  (*P
«ft(c)cAT)(7ia^ni',  fKK\.)  is  equally  rare  in  pre-exilic  literature;  cp
Jer.  •2<>q  l)t.4io  31  1228  also  i  K.  8iy.  l'22i  (see  Ki.st;s,  g  5)
Judg.  201  (see  Jtl)ca;s,  §  13)  Kx.  32 1  (E)  ((rvncrrai'ai)  1''46
(Trapc^ijSoATJ)  and  2  S.  '20 14  (E?  cp  under  Sheba).

niy,  '  congregation  '  (<B  usually  avfaytoyri)  EV  Ex.  16 1 7?;  Xu.
2O11,  etc.  EV  'a.s.sembly,'  Ps.  22i6  [17]  Pr.  614;  but  RV
'congregation,'  Lev.  84  Ku.  89  lOz/.  Iti2  '208  Ps.  S(m4. In

? re-exilic  literature  cp  Nu.  "2011  (R?);  Jer.  ('118  (<P  noiixvia)  and
los.  7i2  ((B  eAi.//«iu«) (in  both  corrupt?)  1  K.85  12  2o(cp  above)
Judg.  20  I  21  10  13  16  (cp  above). In  a  wholly  secular  sense,  cp
Judg.  148  swarm  (of  bees),  Ps.  6830  [31]  multitude  (of  bulls).
'  Assembly '  also  re[)resents  the  following  : —
I. .T^j;,  nnsj?  *  asdrdh,  dsereth,  apart  from  Jer.  92  [i]

*  Srtp  (to  caIl)  =  Ar.  kala  (to  speak);  cp  Syr.  ff'hal  to  call,
collect ;  kahliina  brawler.  The  change  from  '  calling '  to
'  assembling  is  easy ;  cp  use  of  Heh.  pj-rjj.  The  relation  between
S'n'p  (assembly)  and  \x.  kala  is  analogous  to  that  between  nio,
council,  etc.,  and  Syr.  s'wiidha,  talk,  conversation  (in  C.en.  496
they  are  parallel),  'p  finds  an  interesting  parallel  in  Sab.  nVnp
irinv.  t'l^  assembly  of  'Athtar  (.\shtoreth).  On  the  usage  of
kd/tiiUcc  Holzinger,  ZA  77C9  105/  ['89].

2  In  these  f)as-ages  ®  has  crvfayuyi).

3  From  ixy,  to  press,  restrain  ;  cp  •n];':  '  detained  '(1  .S.  21  7  Jer.
86  5) ;  perh.  'y  a  taboo,  tem/>us  clausum  ;  cp  WRS,  Sent.  456,  who
notes  the  proverbial  3'iyi  '\>-i'^  'one  under  a  taboo  and  one  free.'
Cp  .Ass.  eseru,  to  bind,  enclose  ;  uftirtu,  magical  spell,  constella-
tion (Muss-.\rnolt).

345


ASSHURIM

where  it  is  used  of  a  '  band  '  of  evil  doers  (avvoioi,  KV
'assembly';  Che.  emends  to  n"i:n.  JQJi,  July  i8y8),  is  a
technical  term  for  some  public  religious  convocation  im-
pcjsing  restraints  on  the  individual  (EV,  SoLKMN  ,-\s-
siMHi.V)  ;  cp  2  K.  IO20  (in  honour  of  Baal,  i(p[<Ja
[M.\],  0(paw(ia  [L]),  Joelli4  2i5  ('y  ^tnp  parallel  to
Cii  inp,  tfe/)oir[e]ia  =  .Ti;y),  Am.  621  (parallel  to  ;::.
iravriyvpii),  and  Is.  1  13  ('ji  jik,  read  'p  c^i'.  and  .--i-e
Jastrow,  Amer.  J.  J'lieol.  '98,  p.  336  ;  vrjcrfia  k.  dyp.a't).
Technically,  'd.uirdh  is  used  almost  wholly  in  post-
exilic  writings  (©  invariably  i^ubiov,  finale,  close  ;  cp  C>  s
title  Ps.  28  [29]),  of  (a)  the  assembling  upon  the  sevemh
day  of  unleavened  cakes,  Dt.  168'  (kV'"'i.'-  Cujsi.ng
Fkstivai,)  ;  (b)  the  eighth  or  sujx'rnumerary  day — in
ecclesiastical  language  the  octave — of  the  Feast  of
Booths,  Lev.  2^36  Nu.  2935  (KV"'K-  as  al)ove)  Neh.
818  ;  similarly  the  eighth  day  at  the  close  of  .Solomon's
dedicatory  festival  (2  Ch.  79),  and  [c)  the  I-'east  of
Weeks,  Jos.  Ant.  iii.  106  (acapda)  and  in  the  Mishna.

2.  lyii's,  mo  ed  (Nu.  162);'c'K"ip,  famous  in  the  congre-
gation, RV,  preferably  'called  to  the  assembly";  0
fiov\-r\\  cp  also  P.s.  74  8  RV'tf-  ( EV  synagogues.  ©
eopTT]).  'Fhe  locution  lyio  S.nk,  '  tent  of  congregation
(RV  meeting) '  (G  aK-qvT)  /xapTvpLov),  occurs  frec|uently  in
P.also  Kx.  337  Nu.  124  Ut.  31 14  (H).  Nu.  11  16  (J)  ;  and
outside  Hex.  in  i  S.  222  ^  ;  but  (P"  om. )  i  K.  84  (©  t6
ffKTivwfjia  Tov  /jLapTvpiov)  (see  KiSGs,  §  5).  Cp  also
CuNGKKG.\TioN,  MoUNT  OK  ;  Sv.NAGOGLE  ;  and  see
Tahkknacle.

lyiO  is  properly  an  appointed  time  or  place  (like  my  from
ly)  ;  cp  Gen.  IS  14  (0  icatpds),  etc.,  I„im.  26  ((P  eopr^),  etc. ;  hence
used  of  a  .sacred  season  or  set  feast  (Hos.  9  5,  (P  iravTJyupn,  etc.),
probably  also  one  set  by  the  moon's  appearance  (cp  (len.  1  14
©  icaipos).  In  designating  feasts  it  is  employed  in  a  mucli  wider
sense  than  in  (see  Feasts,  g  6,  Dance,  §  3).  It  is  Used  not
only  of  the  year  of  Release  (Dt.  31  10  iD  icaipo?),  and  of  the
Passover  (Hos.  129(10]  ©  kop-n\),'^  but  also  of  the  Sabbath,  New-
Year,  and  Day  of  Atonement  (cp  Lev.  23  ©  iop-ri]).

3.  Kipc,  mikrd';  Is.  1 13 'd  K-.p,  the  calling  of  assemblies
(<5  r]fi4pa  fieydXrj)  ;  cp  Is.  4 15  (©  ra  Trfpii;vi;\cfi).  The
locution  cn'p  K-:po>  '  '^o'y  convocation "  (6  kXtjtij,  or
^iriK\-r]Tos  ayLa\  only  in  P  (Ex.  12 16  Lev.  23  2  J".  Nu.  28

1825/ 29  I  7  I.:i  I.

4.  niD.  sud,  Jer.  6  II  (©  avvayuryrj)  l.'i  17  (©  aivtSpiov]  ;
Ps.  897  [8]  111  I,  kV  'council,'  G  jiovXri  ;  also  in  Lz.
139,  AV"'e-  RV  'council,'  RV'"*.'-  'secret,'  <S  iraiSda.
See  Council,  3.

5.  n'lSDN  'S^|3,  badledsuppoth,  Eccl.  12  n  ((5  irapa  jQiv
avvOffidTuv),  masters  of  assemblies,  a  reference  to  the
convocations  of  the  wise  men  (cp  Ph.  nscN  ]2,  '  memlwr
of  an  assembly  ' )  ;  RV""*.'-  '  collectors  of  sentences  ' ;
Tyler,  '  editors  of  collections' ;  Haupt,  '  \  crses  of  a  cob
lection';  Che.  'framers  of  collections' — /.f.  ,'k  'V>S  (A^''-
AV/.  Li/r,  182).  ""='

6.  <*.-K\T7(ria  (cp  above)  Mt.  lGi3  IS17  Acts  1932  394'
Heb.  1223  ; see  C'Ht.Kt  ii.

7.  ffifaywyrj  (cp  above)  Ja.  22  AV,  RV""*-'-;  R\'
Synag()(;uk  ((/.!'.).

ASSHUR. See  A.'^svkia.

ASSHUR,  CITY  OF. See  Telassar.

ASSHURIM  (Dn-I^'N,  AcoypiM  [A];  AccoypieiM
[D  L]  ;  AccoypiHA  [I"-]),  ''i^  *""'st  born  of  Ui-.dan  (Cen.
'2'>3).  The  name  is  enigmatical.  Hommel(,-///7'239/')
thinks  that  we  should  read  Ashurim,  not  Asslfurim,
and  that  .-\shur  is  the  fuller  and  older  form  of  Sulij.
InaMinnean  inscription  ((ilaser,  1 155  ;  cpWi.  .lO/'zS/.
and  see  /.DMCt,  1895,  p.  527)  l"-gypt,  Ashur  and  'Ibr
Naharan  are  grouped  together  (see  Kbkr).  The  same
territory,  extending  from  the  '  River  of  h-gypt '  (?)  to  the
country  between  lieersheba  and  Hebron,  may  perhaps
be  meant  in  Gen.  25 18,  where  the  gloss  '  in  the  direction

t  The  only  pre-exilic  occurrence  of  'y  in  a  technical  sense  ;  but
note  that  according  to  .St.  (7/'/1658,  tn\  1-4  5-8  are  doublets;
cp  Nowack,  A  n'l.  2  154  note.

2  We.,  however  (AV.  /V<»/A.('')>  reads  "jmyj,  and  Now.  cViy

346


ASSIDBANS

of  nitj-K  ( ' '  Ashur  ") '  was  misunderstood  by  the  authors  of
the  vowel-points.  The  reference  intended  was,  according
to  Hominel,  to  Ashur  in  S.  Palestine  ;  he  proposes  to
read  Ashur,  not  Asshur,  also  in  Nu.  2422  24.  The  latter
view,  at  any  rate,  is  very  improbable  (see  Balaam,  §  6).
Cp  also  Gksiiuk,  2.

ASSIDEANS,  RV  '  Hasidaeans,"  RV™2;  'that  is
Chasidim'  (d^CiAAlOl  [ANVJ),  is  a  transcription  of  the
Hebrew  hasidim,  pious  ones  (AV,  generally,  saints).
It  is  often  used  of  faithful  Israelites  in  the  Psalms
(17  times  in  plur. ,  5  times  in  sing.),  and  sometimes  un-
questionably of  the  so-called  Assideans  [e.g.,  IIG15
149 1  5  9).  In  I  Mace,  the  name  appears  as  the  designa-
tion of  a  society  of  men  zealous  for  the  law  ( i  Mace.
242 — according  to  the  correct  text  as  given  by  Fritzsche),
and  closely  connected  with  the  scribes  (i  Mace.  7  12/).
It  is  plain  from  these  passages  that  this  society
of  'pious  ones,'  who  held  fast  to  the  law  under  the
guidance  of  the  scribes  in  opposition  to  the  'godless'
Hellenising  party,  was  properly  a  religious,  not  a
political,  organisation.  For  a  time  they  joined  the
revolt  against  the  .Seleucids.  The  direct  identification  of
the  Assideans  with  the  Maccabee  party  in  2  Mace.  146,
however,  is  one  of  the  many  false  statements  of  that
book,  and  directly  contradictory  to  the  trustworthy
narrative  of  i  Mace.  7,  which  shows  that  they  were
strictly  a  religious  party,  who  scrupled  to  oppose  the
legitimate  high  priest,  even  when  he  was  on  the  Greek
side,  and  withdrew  from  the  war  of  freedom  as  soon
as  the  attempt  to  interfere  with  the  exercise  of  the
Jewish  religion  was  given  up.  We  are  not  to  suppose
that  the  Assidcan  society  first  arose  in  the  time  of  the
Maccabees.  The  need  of  protesting  against  heathen
culture  was  doubtless  felt  earlier  in  the  Greek  period.
The  'former  hasJdim,'  as  a  Jewish  tradition  [Nedarim,
10  a)  assures  us,  were  ascetic  legalists.  Under  the
Asmonean  rule  the  Assideans  developed  into  the  better
known  party  of  the  Pharisees,  and  assumed  new  relations
to  the  ruling  dynasty.  It  appears,  from  the  Psalter  of
Solomon,  which  represents  the  views  of  the  Pharisees,
that  the  party  continued  to  affect  the  title  of  '  pious
ones'  [Hxnot),  but  less  frequently  than  that  of  'righteous
ones'  (Skatot).  Indeed,  the  third  Jewish  party  of  the
.■\smonean  period  had  already  appropriated  the  former
name,  if  we  may  adopt  Schlirer's  derivation  of  Esskne
{q.v.).  See  We.  Pk.  u.  Sadd.  ('74),  p.  76/:,  whose
results  WRS  adopted,  and  cp  Schiir.  Hist,  /i  7^1 212;
Che.  OPs,  56  (on  the  u.se  of  'Assideans'),  and  other
passages  (index  under  khasuiim). W.  K.  S. — T.  K.  C.

ASSIR  (T'DX.  '  prisoner  ;  but  perhaps  rather  TDX
=  Osiris  ;^  cp  HuR).


ASSYRIA

1.  (In  Ex.  ao-eip  [BF],  ojtn\p  [AL] ;  in  i  Ch.  apfo-ci,  acrepei,
acretp  [I?],  acreip  [.\],  aTijp  acrep  \\.\  ;  Asir).  The  enoiiym  of  one
of  the  families  or  divisions  of  the  Korahiie  guild  of  Levites ;
Ex.  024[P].  Cp  I  Ch.  622/:  37  [7/  20],  and  for  the  inter-
pretation ofthe.se  discrepant  genealogies  see  Kokah.

2.  Sonof  Jeconiah(i  Ch.3i7  ;  a<7-€ip(HAL]).  .So AV,  following
a  Juwi.sh  view  that  Assir  and  Sliealtiel  are  the  names  of  two
different  sons  of  Jehoiachin(.S"a«Atvr'/-/M,  37  a;  Midrash  Vayikra,
par.  X.;  Midr.  Shir  /la-Shiriin,  on  86;  so  Kinichi);  but  the
best  texts  (Ha.,  Ginsh.)  make  '  Jeconiah-.'Vssir '  the  name  of
one  man.  Kau.  /AV  and  SBOT  rightly  restore  the  article
before  Assir  (the  preceding  word  ends  in  ,n).  Render,  therefore,
'  Jeconiah  the  captive '  (so  RV). Cp  Shealtiel.

ASSOS.  or  ASSUS  (accoc  [Ti.  WII]),  Acts
20 13,^  a  town  and  seaport  in  the  Roman  province  of
Asia  ;  now  liehram  Kalessi.  Strabo,  who  ranks  Assus
and  Adramyteum  together  as  'cities  of  note,'  pithily
describes  the  former  as  lying  in  a  lofty  situation,  with
splendid  fortifications,  and  communicating  with  its
harbours  by  means  of  a  long  flight  of  steps  (610,  614).
So  strong  was  the  position  that  it  gave,  rise  to  a  pun  by
the  musician  Stratonicus,  who  applied  to  it  the  line
haaov  W\  (Ss  Kiv  da^aaov  6\iOpov  irelpad'  iKr/ai.
'  Come  anigh,  that  anon  thou  mayest  enter  the  toils  of
death'  (Hom.  //.  vi.  143).  The  joke  lay  in  reading
'Aaaov  id' =' Come  to  Assus.'  The  town  was  always
singularly  Greek  in  character.  Leake  observes  that  its
ruins  give  '  perhaps  the  most  perfect  idea  of  a  Greek  city
that  anywhere  exists.'  The  material  is  granite,  which
partly  accounts  for  their  immunity  from  spoliation.  One
of  the  most  interesting  parts  is  the  Via  Sacra,  or  Street
of  Tombs,  extending  to  a  great  distance  to  the  NW.
from  the  gate  of  the  city.  It  is  bordered  by  granite
colfins,  some  of  them  of  great  size.  In  Roman  times,
owing  to  its  supposed  power  of  accelerating  the  decay
of  corpses  (PI.  //N  '2g8  8627),  the  stone  of  Assus
received  the  name  sarcophagus.  Paul  must  have  entered
the  city  by  the  Street  of  Tombs  on  his  last  journey  to
Jerusalem  (Acts  20 13  14).  The  apostle  had  landed  at
Troas  and  walked  or  rode  the  20  m.  thence  to  Assus  in
time  to  join  his  companions,  who  had  meanwhile  sailed
round  Cape  Lectum.

A  good  account  of  Assos  is  given  in  Fellows,  Asia  Minor,
52;  Murray's  Handbook  0/  .A.  .It.  64:  for  its  inscriptions  see
Report  o(  the:  American  K.vpedition,  1882.  w.  J.  W.

ASSUERUS  (acyhroc  [B]  etc.)  Tob.  14i5t  AV,
RV  Ahasuekus  [q.v.,  no.  3).

ASSUR  (i)  (-|1K>N)  Ezra42  Ps.  838  AV,  4  Esd.
2  8  EV  (As.'!ur  [ed.  Bensly])  Judith  2 14  etc.  AV,  RV
As-SHUR  ;  elsewhere  RV  Assyria  {(/.v.).

2. (acoyP  [BA]),  I  Esd.  53i  =  Ezra25i>  Harhuk.


A


ASSYRIA


Names  and  References  (§  \/.).
Country,  etc.  (§§  3-6).
People,  Language,'-  Religion  (§
Civilization  (8i  10-17).
Excavations  (§  18).


'  7-9)-


CONTENTS

Chronology  (§§  19-21).
Personal  Names  (§  22).
Early  History  (§§  23-25).
First  Kings  (§  26).
Shalniane.ser  I.  (§  27).


Tiglath-pileser  I.,  etc.  (§§  28-30).
A.sur-nasir-pal  (§  31).
Shalmane>,er  II.,  etc.  (8  32).
Tiglath-pileser  III.,  etc.  (§  33/).
Bibli..graphy  (§  35).


Assur, the name of the country  _known to  us as
Assyria, was  written  in Hebrew  ~I-1B^X, EV  AssiiuK,

„  or  more  fully  -VjCTK pN, in the LXX

I.  Names.  ;  - ' '  ,_.,

ACCOYP  ^nd  ACCYPIOC  (©'-  sometnnes
ACOYP)  ^y  Josephus  and  the  (Jreek  historians  ' Xaavpia,
in  the  CJreek  of  the  Alexandrian  epoch  '.Aroi'pi'a,  and
in  Aramaic  Athiir,  Athiiriyd,  in  which  form  the  name
survived  as  that  of  a  diocese  of  the  Nestorian  Church.

Other  forms  occurring  once  in  ®  are  : — ao-ovp  in  E  and  in  A  ;
otro-ouptct/Lt  in  D,  in  A,  and  in  L  respectively  ;  -piTjA  in  E  ;  ao-crupos


1  Nestle,  Eisrennamen,  11 1  :  Che.  Prof>h.  Is.
on  Is.  10 1  in  SBOT;  see  also  Names,  f  82.

2  For  literature  see  Babylonia,  §  \^ff.


2  144  300,  and


in  Al ; a<roupi/i  in  A; crvpioi  in B*  ; aovp in B-ib  jja'a-bca
(and  twice  in  A)  ;  To«p  in  N*.

By  the  Assyrians  themselves  the  name  of  their  country
waswritten  phonetically 'i^  *— >-^  or  »^  >-^  KI^I'
or  (combining  the  two)  V"  ^—  *^  KI^I'  ^'^'^  ^'^"^
■^  and  /T£T  being  determinatives  respectively  for
'land'  and  'place.'  .Subscquentl\-,  the  two  signs  that
formed  the  word,  >—  (  -as)  and  >-^  ( =  J«r),  were  run
together  and  the  name  was  written  ■';;;^ -^i^ KIeI»

1  In  2O13  Vg.  translates  apoKre?  atrirov  (Ti.  WH)  by  cum
sustulissent  de  Asson,  taking  the  word  (incorrectly)  as  the  name
of  the  city.

348


ASSYRIA

V"  *-*-V»  ^"<^  finally  the  writing  of  the  name  was
abbreviated  to  the  single  horizontal  stroke  that  forms  its
first syllable. \^ .^^ -^  ^Jg. The name

v.as  also  written  V  ^Hf- JJ  Ip  E-^H'  "^^  ^"f
Vr  -V  or  V  ->f  --V  <^-i-'->  'land  of
tlu!  goii  Asur."'  In  fact,  it  is  prob.ible  that  the  city
of  Asur,  from  which  the  land  of  Assur  was  named,
received  its  title  from  the  national  god.  Other  in-
stances are  known  in  which  a  god  has  given  his  name
to  the  country  or  city  that  worshipped  him.  The
land  of  Ciuti  that  lay  to  the  K.  of  Assyria  beyond
the  Lower  Zab  appears  to  have  taken  its  name  from
(juti  its  national  god,  whilst  the  god  Susinak  gave  his
name  to  the  city  of  Susinak  or  Susa,  the  principal
tow  II  on  the  banks  of  the  Eula.'us.  The  general  term
among  the  (jreeks  for  all  subjects  of  the  Assyrian
empire  was  'Affavpioi,  which  was  more  usually  short-
ened into  ^vpioi  or  i:,vpoi.'^  The  abbreviated  form
a(  the  word  was,  however,  gradually  confined  to  the
western  Aramaic  nations,  being  at  last  adopted  by  the
Aram:t!ans  tlicmselves.  These  peoi)le.  on  Ijecoming
Christians,  drojjped  their  old  name  in  consequence  of
the  heathen  associations  it  had  accjuired  in  their  transla-
tion of  the  XT,  and  styled  themselves  Siir'ydye,
whence  the  modern  term  '  Syriac. '  The  unabbreviated
name  was  used  to  designate  the  district  on  the  banks  of
the  Tigris,  and  this  form  of  the  word,  passing  from  the
Greeks  to  the  Romans,  finally  reached  the  nations  of
northern  Kuroiie.

References  to  Assyria  or the  Assyrians in the  OT

are  very  numerous,  though  they  are  in  the  main  con-

_.. .. . fined  to  tlie  historical  and  the  prophetic


references.


books  ;  the  former  describing  the  rela-
tions of  Assyria  with  the  later  kings  of
Israel  and  Judah,  the  latter  commenting  on  these
relations  and  ottering  advice.  The  prophets,  in  their
denunciations  and  predictions,  sometimes  refer  to  the
Assyrians  by  name  ;  at  other  times,  though  not  actually
naming  them,  they  dcscrilie  them  in  terms  which  their
hearers  could  not  possibly  mistake.

The  principal  references  may  l)e  classified  under  the  following
three  headings  :  (<i)  Geographical  use  of  the  name  As.syria  :  to
describe  the  course  of  the  Tigris  in  the  account  of  the  garden  of
Eden  (den.  'J  14),  and  to  indicate  the  region  inhabited  by  the
sons  of  Islimael  ('Jo  18).  (/•)  Rcfeniic  f  -,  \.,  in.if  is  of  history:
the  f>undation  of  tlie  .Assyrian  cmiii:.'  (Imh.  luu),  and  its
classification  among  the  naliuiis  f  10  .■  ■)  ;  Mr  ii.ili  .in's  tribute  (2  K.
\'i  \()/.)  \  the  captivity  ofiiorilvrn  Im:i'  1(1s.  '.i  1  ;s  23);  2K.  1.')  29  ;

I  Ch.  526);  the  assis'tan..-  ,  ,f  Ah,/  l,y  Tighuh-i.il._sor,  followed
by  the  capture  and  u.r.i  iviis-  nl  I  i.uiiascus  (2  K.  Hi  5-1S  ;  2  Ch.
2820/);  Hosheas  suj.jc.  Hull  h,  Shalmaneser  (2K.  173);  his
treachery  and  pnnishmtnt  (17  4);  the  siege  and  capture  of
Samaria  (17  57C  18  0-12),  and  the  colonisation  of  the  countrj-  by
foreigners  (17  24  ff'.) ;  Sennacherib's  invasion  of  Palestine  and
Hezekiah's  payment  of  tribute,  his  refusal  to  submit  to  further
demands,  the  escape  of  Jerusalem  from  the  Assyrian  vengeance,
and  Sennacherib's  death  (2  K.  IS  i3-l'.'37  ;  Is.  3C.  and  37  ;  2  Ch.
S"2i-23);  the  trade  of  .Assyria  with  Tyre  (Ezek.  "27  23)  ;  gcieral
references  to  past  captivity  or  oppression  by  Assyria  (Is.  524;
Jer.  .^>0i7;  Lam.  5  6;  Ezek.  289^?;  23);  reference  to  the  punish-
ment that  overtook  -XssjTia  (Je: .  '>0  18) ;  reference  to  the  coloniza-
tion of  Palestine  by  Esarhaddon  (Ezra  4  2).  (t)  Pmphetic
criticism  and  forecasts :  evil  or  captivity  threatened  or  foretold
as  coming  from  Assyria  (Nu.  24  32  ;  Hos.  9  3  11';;  Is.  7  17^
10  5  23  13;  Ezek.  23233222;  Ps.S3  8):  the  futility  of  depending
on  Assyrian  he!p(Hos.  .5  137117:  8  ^/.  IO4-6  12  i  :  Jer.  2  18  -6);
the  participation  of  Israel  in  Assyrian  idolatry  (Ezek.  1<>28  23
5^);  prophecies  of  the  return  from  rr.piivity  in  Assyria  (Hos.

II  II  ;  Mic.7  12  ;  Is.  11  11  16;  Zech.  lOio);  predictions  of  over-
throw or  misfortune  for  Assyria  (Nu.  2424;  Mic.  65/;  Is.  10
■Hj^.  1425  3O31  318;  Ezek.'3l3^  ;  the  prophecy  of  Nahum  ;

1  Throughout  the  present  article  the  form  fi$.\\r  is  employed
for  the  name  of  the  god  and  city,  AS-Snr  for  that  of  the  land.  In
the  inscriptions  the  name  of  the  land  is  written  with  the  doubled
sibilant,  an  original  Assyrian  form  that  is  not  inconsistent  with
the  later  Greek  and  Aramaic  renderings  of  the  name  (see  N6l-
deke,  /^A  1  268^).  The  name  of  the  god,  however,  is  written
in  the  inscriptions  both  with  the  single  and  doubled  sibilant,  of
which  the  former  may  be  regarded  as  the  more  correct  on  the
basis  of  the  Greek  and  Hebrew  transliteration  of  certain  proper
names,  in  which  the  name  A5ur  occurs  (see  Jensen,  iCA  1  i^.
and  Schrader,  ib.  209 _^).

2  On  this  see  Svria.

349


ASSYRIA

Zeph.  213;  Zech.  lOii);  references  to  Assyria  as  taking  part
in  the  final  cuiiveisii^ii  and  reconciliation  of  mankind  (I-.  ID
23^.  27  13).  In  some  of  these  pa.%sages,  however,  Assyria  may
=  Syria  {g.v.).

It  is difficult  to define  exactly the Iwundaries  of

Assyria. The  extent  of  the  country  varied from  time

p ... to time according to the adtiitional

J*' f  ^''^ territory actiuired in con<|uest by its

and  extent.  j„onjirchs,  and  the  name  itself  has  at
times  suffered  from  a  somewhat  vague  and  general
application.  The  classical  writers  employed  it  in  a
conventional  sense  for  the  whole  area  watered  by  the
Tigris  and  the  luiphrates,  including  northern  Baby-
lonia, whilst  its  use  has  even  been  e.xtended  so  as  to
cover  the  entire  tract  of  country  from  the  coast  of  the
Mediterranean  to  the  mountains  of  Kurdi.stan.  In  a
definition  of  the  extent  of  Assyria  projier,  however,  any
vague  use  of  the  name  may  be  ignored,  for,  although
at  one  time  the  Assyrian  empire  embraced  the  greater
part  of  western  Asia,  the  provinces  she  included  in  her
rule  were  merely  foreign  states  not  attached  to  herself
by  any  organic  connection,  but  retained  by  force  of
arms.  In  general  terms, therefore, the  land  of

Assyria  may  be  said  to  have  been  situated  in  the  upper
portion  of  the  Mesopotamian  valley  about  the  middle
course  of  the  river  Tigris,  and  here  we  may  trace
certain  natural  limits  which  may  be  regarded  as  the
proper  boundaries  of  the  country.  The  mountain
chains  of  Armenia  and  Kurdistan  form  natural  barriers
on  the  N.  and  K.  On  the  S.  the  boundary  that
divided  Assyria  from  Babylonia  was  in  a  constant
state  of  fluctuation  ;  but  the  point  at  w hich  the  chaiacter
of  the  country  changes  from  the  flat  alluvial  soil  of  the
Habylonian  plain  into  the  slightly  higher  and  more
undulating  tracts  to  the  X.  gives  a  suflicienlly  well-
defined  line  of  demarcation.  On  the  W. ,  Assyria  in
its  earliest  period  did  not  e.\tend  Ix;yond  the  territory
watered  by  the  Tigris;  but,  finding  no  check  to  its  advance
in  that  direction,  it  gradually  absorbed  the  whole  of
Mesopotamia  as  far  S.  as  Babylon,  until  it  found  a
frontier  in  the  waters  of  the  Euphrates.

The  chief  feature  of  the  country  is  the  river  TiGlUS

(^.7'.),  which,  rising  in  the  mountains  of  Armenia,  runs

_ . . . southward  and  divides  Assvria  into  an

4.  Description,  j, ^^^  ^  ^y ^-^^^-^^^ .^^^^  jj,„.j  „f

Assyria  which  is  situated  on  the  I-:,  or  left  bank  of  the
Tigris,  though  the  smaller,  has  always  been  nnich  the
more  important.  The  country  on  that  side  of  the  liver
consists  of  a  continuous  plain  broken  uj)  by  low  detaclicd
ranges  of  limestone  hills  into  a  series  of  shallow  valleys
through  which  small  streams  run.  All  the  main  tribu-
taries, too,  that  feed  the  Tigris  rise  in  the  Kurdish  moun-
tains, and  flow  through  this  K.  division  of  the  countiy.
The  E.  Khabur,  the  Oreat  or  Upper  Zab,  the  Little  or
Lower  Zab,  the.Adhem,  and  the  Diyala  join  the  Tigris  on
its  left  or  E.  bank.  Being  therefore  so  amply  sujiplied
with  water,  this  portion  of  the  country  is  very  fertile,
and  well  suited  by  nature  for  the  rise  of  imiwrtant
cities.  On  the  other  hand,  W.  Assyria,  which  lies
between  the  Tigris  and  the  Euphrates,  is  a  much  drier
and  ir.ore  barren  region.  The  fall  of  the  two  rivers
between  the  point  where  they  issue  from  the  .'^purs  of  the
Taurus  and  the  point  where  they  enter  the  Babylonian
alluvium — a  distance  of  si.\  hundred  or  seven  hundred
miles — amounts  to  about  one  thousand  feet,  the  Tigris
having  the  shorter  course,  and  lieing,  therefore,  more
rapid.  The  country  l«-lween  the  rivers  consists  of  a
plain,  sloping  gently  from  the  NW.  to  the  SIO.  In
its  upper  part  this  region  is  somewhat  rugged  ;  it  is  in-,
tersected  by  manv  streams,  which  unite  to  form  the
Belikh  and  W.  Khabur.  The  rivers  flowing  S.  join  the
Euphrates,  and  the  district  through  which  they  pass
is  watered  sufficiently  for  purposes  of  cultivation.  In
the  SW. ,  however,  the  supply  of  water  is  scanty,  and
the  country  tends  to  become  a  desert,  its  slightly
undulating  surface  being  broken  only  by  the  Sinjar
range, a  single  row  of  limestone  hills. The  disUict

350*


6.  Cities.


ASSYRIA

S.  of  these  hills  is  waterless  for  the  greater  part
of  the  year  ;  the  few  streams  and  springs  are  for  the
most  part  brackish,  while  in  some  places  the  country
consists  of  salt  deserts,  and  in  others  vegetation  is
rendered  imposible  by  the  nitrous  character  of  tiio
soil.  It  is  true  that  on  the  edges  of  this  watorkss
region  there  are  gullies  (from  one  to  two  miles  wide)
which  present  a  more  fertile  appearance.  These  have
been  hollowed  out  by  the  streams  in  the  rainy  season,
and,  being  submerged  when  the  river  rises,  have  in  the
course  of  time  been  filled  with  alluvial  soil.  At  the
present  day  they  are  the  only  spots  between  the  hill-
country  in  the  north  and  the  Babylonian  plain  in  the
south  where  {permanent  cultivation  is  possible.  It  has
been  urged  that  this  portion  of  the  country  may  have
changed  its  character  since  the  time  of  the  Assyrian
empire,  and  it  is  possible  that  in  certain  districts
extensive  irrigation  may  have  considerably  increased  its
productiveness  ;  but  at  best  this  portion  of  Assyria  is
fitted  rather  for  the  hunter  than  for  the  tiller  of  the  soil.
The  land  to  the  left  of  the  Tigris  is,  therefore,  much  better
suited  for  sustaining  a  large  population,  and  it  is  in
this  district  that  the  mounds  marking  the
sites  of  the  ancient  cities  are  to  be
found.  Asur, the earliest city of  -Vssyria, is

indeed  situated  to  the  west  of  the  Tigris,  near  the  spot
where  Kal'at  .Shcrk.it  now  stands  ;  but  its  site  is  witliin
a  short  distance  of  the  river,  and  it  was  the  only  city  of
importance  on  that  side  of  the  stream.  .\part  from
its  earliest  caisital,  the  chief  cities  of  Assyria  were
Nineveh,  Calah,  and  Dur-.Sargina.  Nineveh,  whose
foundation  must  date  from  a  period  not  much  more
recent  than  that  of  .\sur,  was  considerably  to  the  N.
of  that  city,  ojiposite  the  modern  town  of  Mosul
( Mtnv.u'I),  on  the  I'",,  bank  of  the  Tigris,  at  the  point  where
the  small  stream  of  the  Khosr  empties  its  waters  ;  its
site  is  marked  by  the  mounds  of  Kuyunjik  .and  Nebi
Yunus(cp  Nl.N'KVEii).  Calah,  founded  by  Shalmaneser
I.,  corresponds  to  the  modern  Ninirud,  occupying  a
position  to  the  S.  of  Nineveh  on  the  tongue  of  land
fonned  by  the  junction  of  the  Upper  Zab  with  the
Tigris  (cp  Cai.aii).  Dfir-.S.argina,  'the  wall  of
Sargon,'  was  founded  by  that  monarch,  who  removed
his  court  thither  ;  the  site  of  the  city  is  marked  by  the
modern  village  of  Khorsabad,  to  the  NE.  of  Nineveh
(cp  S.\kc;on).  It  will  be  seen  that  there  was  a  tendency
throughout  .Assyrian  history  to  move  the  centre  of  the
kingdom  northwards,  following  the  course  of  the  Tigris.
Other  cities  of  importance  were  Arba'il  or  Irba'il
(Arbela)  on  the  K.  of  the  Upper  Zab;  Ingur-Bel  (cor-
responding to  the  modern  Tell  -  Balawat),  situated
to  the  .SE.  of  Nineveh  ;  and  Tarbis,  its  site  now
marked  bv  the  village  of  Sherif-Khan,  lying  to  the
NW.  of  Nineveh.

From  the  abo\e  V)rief  description of  the  country,  it
may be inferred that .Assyria [jresents considerable

- -KT^f.. 1 differences of climate. !•".. Assyria  was

6.  Natural .,  .  ,  , .  •' .

resources  ^  favoured region, possessmg  a

good  rainfall  during  winter  and  even  in
the  spring,  and  having,  in  virtue  of  its  proximity  to  the
Kurdish  mountains  and  its  abundant  sujjply  of  water,  a
climate  cooler  and  moister  than  was  generally  enjoyed
to  the  W.  of  the  Tigris.  In  this  latter  region  the  some-
what rigorous  climate  of  the  mountainous  district  in  the
N.  presents  a  strong  contrast  to  the  arid  character  of
the  waterless  steppes  in  the  centre  and  the  S.  The
frequent  descriptions  of  the  extreme  fertility  of  Assyria
in  the  classical  writers  may,  therefore,  be  regarded  as  in
part  referring  to  the  rich  alluvial  plains  of  Babylonia.
Not  that  .Assyria  was  by  any  means  a  barren  land.  She
supplementetl  her  rainfall  by  extensive  artificial  irrigation,
and  thus  secured  for  her  fields  in  the  hot  season  a
continual  supply  of  water.  Her  cereal  crops  were
good.  Olives  were  not  uncommon,  and  the  citrons  of
Assyria  were  famous  in  antiquity.  Fruit  trees  were
extensively  cultivated,  and,  although  the  dates  of  Assyria

351


ASSYRIA

were  much  inferior  to  those  of  Babylonia,  orange,
lemon,  pomegranate,  apricot,  mulberry,  vine,  and  fig
were  grown  successfully.  The  tamarisk  was  an  ex-
ceedingly common  shrub  ;  oleanders  and  myrtles  grew
in  the  eastern  district ;  but,  except  along  the  rivers  and
on  the  mountain  slopes,  trees  were  scanty.  The  trees,
however,  included  the  silver  poplar,  the  dwarf  oak,  the
plane,  the  sycamore,  and  the  walnut.  Vegetables  such
as  beans,  peas,  cucumbers,  onions,  and  lentils  were
grown  throughout  the  country.  Though  Assyria  could
not  compete  with  Babylonia  in  fertility,  her  supply  of
stone  and  minerals  far  exceeded  that  of  the  southern
country.  Dig  where  you  will  in  the  alluvial  soil  of  the
south,  you  come  upon  no  strata  of  rock  or  stone  to
reward  your  efforts.  In  Assyria  limestone,  sand-
stone, and  conglomerate  rock  were  common,  whilst
gray  alabaster  of  a  soft  kind,  an  excellent  material  for
sculpture  in  relief,  abounds  on  the  left  bank  of  the
Tigris  ;  hard  basaltic  rock  and  various  marbles  w  ere
also  accessible  in  the  mountains  of  Kurdistan.  Iron,
copper,  and  lead  were  to  be  found  in  the  hill  counti^'
not  far  from  Nineveh,  while  lead  and  copper  were
obtained  from  the  region  of  the  upper  Tigris  in  the  neigh-
bourhood of  the  modern  town  of  Diarbekr.  Sulphur,
alum,  salt,  naphtha,  and  bitumen  were  also  common  ;
bitumen  was  extensively  employed,  in  place  of  mortar
or  cement,  in  building  (cp  Bitumkn).  Of  the

wild  animals  of  Assyria  the  lion  and  the  wild  bull
are  those  most  often  mentioned  in  the  historical  in-
scriptions as  affording  big  game  for  the  Assyrian
kings.  Less  ambitious  sportsmen  might  content  them-
selves with  the  wild  boar  and  the  deer,  the  gazelle,  the
ibex,  and  the  hare  ;  while  the  wild  ass,  the  bear,  the  fox,
the  jackal,  the  wild  cat,  and  wild  sheep  were  to  be
found.  The  most  common  of  the  birds  were  the  kite
or  eagle,  the  vulture,  the  bustard,  the  crane,  the  stork,
the  wild  goose,  wild  duck,  teal,  tern,  partridge  (red  and
black),  the  sand  grouse,  and  the  plover.  We  know
from  the  monuments  that  fish  were  common.  Of  the
donu^stic  animals  of  the  Assyrians  the  principal  were
camels,  ho^ses,  mules,  asses,  oxen,  sheep,  and  goats.
Dogs,  resembling  the  mastiff  in  appearance,  were
employed  for  hunting.  From  the  fact  that  heavy  stone
weights  carved  in  the  form  of  ducks  have  been  found,
it  may  be  assumed  that  the  duck  was  domesticated.

The  -Assyrians  belonged to  the  northern family  of
Semites,  and  were  closely  akin  to  the  Phoenicians,  the


7.  National


Aramaeans, and the Hebrews. Their


character.


robust  physical  proportions  and  facial
characteristics  are  well  known  from  the
monuments,  and  tally  with  what  we  know  of  their  char-
acter from  their  own  inscriptions  and  the  writings  of  the
Hebrew  prophets.  Is.  33  19  describes  the  Assyrians  as
'  a  fierce  people ' — an  ei)ithet  that  fits  a  nation  whose
history  is  one  perpetual  warfare.  The  dividing  line  be-
tween courage  and  ferocity  is  easily  overpassed,  and  in  a
military  nation,  such  as  the  Assyrians  were,  it  was  but
natural  that  there  should  be  customs  which  to  a  later
age  seem  b.arbarous.  The  practice  of  impaling  the
defenders  of  a  captured  city  was  almost  universal  with
the  -Assyrians  ;  the  torturing  of  prisoners  was  common  ;
and  the  practice  of  beheading  the  slain,  whilst  adding  insult
to  the  vanquished,  was  adopted  as  a  convenient  method
of  computing  the  enemy's  loss,  for  it  was  easier  to  count
heads  than  to  count  todies.  The  difference  in  character
between  the  -Assyrians  and  the  milder  Babylonians  was
due  partly  to  the  absence  of  that  non-.Semitic  element
which  gave  rise  to  and  continued  to  influence  the  more
ancient  civilisation  of  the  latter  (see  B.\byloni.\,  §  5) ;
partly,  also,  to  differences  of  climate  and  geographical
position.  The  ferocity  and  the  courage  of  the
Assyrians  are  to  a  great  extent  absent  from  the
Babylonian  character.  It  has  been  asserted  that  the
Semites  never  make  great  soldiers,  yet  there  have  been
two  prominent  exceptions  to  this  generalisation — the  As-
syrians and  the  Carthaginians. The  former  indeed  not

352


MAP  OF  SYRIA,  ASSYRIA,  AND  BABYLONIA


INDEX  TO  NAMES  (A-J)

Piirfn/fifsfs  indicating  articles  that  refer  to  the  place-names  are  in  certain  cases  added  to  non-biHical  names  having
tio  biblical  equivalent.  The  alphttbettcal  arrangement  ignores  prefixes  :  el  (the),  J.  (/ebel,  mt.),  Kh.  (h'hirbat,
■ruin'),  L.  [lake).  Mt.,  N.  {.Xahr,  'river'),  R.  [river).


J.  'Abdul  "Am,  Ea

Abu  Habtah,  F4  (Babylonia,  ||  3  14)

Abu-Shahrein,  H5  (Babylonia,  |  3)

Accho,  B4

Achmetha,  1 3

Achzib,  H4

Acre,  B4  (Damascus,  f  4)

Aderbai^an,  (i2,  Ha

R.  Adheni  (A'zam  ?),  G3  (Assyria,  i  4)

Adiabfnc,  Fa  (Disi-ersion,  |  6)

'Adlan,  B4

R.  Adonis,  B3  (Aphrk,  1)

'Afrin,  Ca

Agadi,  F"4  (Babylonia,  i  3)

Agamatanu,  1 3

'Ain  Kadis,  B5

'Ain  Tab,  Ca

'Akarkuf,  G4  (Babel,  Tower  of,  |  7)

'Akka,  B4  (Beth-emek)

Akkad,  G4  (Babylonia,  |  i)

Akku,  B4

Akzibi,  B4

Alalia  [Eg.  "Asi],  A3  (Cvprus,  i  j)

Albak,  Vji

Aleppo,  Ca

Alexandretta,  Ca

Aniatu,  C3

Amedi,  Ea

Amid,  Ea

Amida,  Ea

N.  Amrit,  B3

J.  el-Ansariya,  C3

Antakieh,  Ca

Anlarados,  B3  (Akvad)

Antioch,  Ca

Apaniea,  C3  (mod.  Rum  K'ala)

Apamea,  Da  (mod.  Kal'at  el-Mudik)

Aradus,  B3

Ararat,  Ei

Arba'ilu,  Fa  (Assyria,  f  5)

Arbela,  Fa  (Assyria,  |  5)

Mt.  Argaeus,  Bi  (Cafpadocia)

W.  el-'Arish,  As

Arka,  C3

Arliite,  C3

Armenia,  Ei  (Ararat,  f  a)

Ar  Moab.  B5

Arpad,  Ca  (Assyria,  i  32)

Arpadda,  Ca

Arrapachitis,  Fa  (Arphaxad)

Arvad,  B3  (Assyria,  jf  31)

Asdudu,  B5

Asguza  ?  Ga  (Ashkenaz)

Ashdod.  Bs

Ashkelon,  B5

N.  el-".A.si,  C3

'Askalan,  Bs

Askaluna,  Bs

Asshur,  Fa

Assur.  Fa  (Assyria,  |  i)

Assyria.  (13

Asur,  F3  (Assyria,  |  i)

AtropatC'iie,  Ga

R.  A'zam?  G3

Azotus,  B5

Babylon,  G4

Babylonia,  Gs

Bagdad,  G4  (Babel,  Tower  of,  |  7)

Bagdadu,  G4

Bagistana,  H3

Balawat,  Fa  (Assyria,  i  5)


Baldeh,  B3

R.  Balicha.  Da

R.  Balihi.  Da

Barzipa,  G4

Basra,  Hs  (Babylonia,  f  14)

Batrun,  B3

Bavian,  Fa  (Babylonia,  |  58)

Beersheba,  Bs

Behistun,  H3  (Babylonia,  %\  u  13)

Beirut,  B4  (Berothah)

R.  lielikh.  Da  (Assyria,  |  4)

lieroea,  Ca

Berytus,  B4

Biaina,  Fi  (Ararat,  |  2)

Bir  es-Seba',  Bs

Birejik,  Ca  (Carchemish,  |  3)

Birs-Nimrud,  G4  (Babylonia,  f  3)

Biruti,  B4

Bit  Yakin,  H5  and  1 5  (Chaldea)

Borsippa,  G4  (Babylonia,  |  3)

Botrys,  B3

'  Brook  of  Eg)'pt,'  A5

Byblos,  B3  (As-SYRiA,  I  31)

Caesarea,  B4

Calah,  Fa  (Assyria,  |  5)

R.  Calycadnus,  Aa  (Cii.icia,  |  i)

Caphtor,  Ba

Cappadocia,  Bi

Carchemish,  Da

Carmania,  inset  map  (Carmanians)

Mt.  Carmel,  B4

Carpasia,  B3

Carrhae,  Da

Caspian  Sea,  Ii  (.\RAkAT,  |  3)

R.  Chaboras,  E3

Chalcis,  C3

Chalybon,  Ca

Chittim  (see  Kittim)

Choaspes,  1 4

Cilicia,  Ba

Circesium,  E3

Citium,  A3  (Cyprus,  g  i)

Commagene,  Ca

Ctesiphon,  G4

Cuth,  Cuthah,  G4  (Babylonia,  i  3)

R.  Cydnus,  Ba  (Cilicia,  f  1)

Cyprus,  A3

Damascus,  C4

Daphne,  Ca

Diarbekr,  Ea  (Assyria,  i  6)

R.  Dijla,  Fa

R.  Diklat,  Ea

Dilmun?  16

Dimashk,  C4

Dimaski,  C4

Dinaretum  Pr. ,  B3

R.  Diyala.  G3  (Assyria,  i  4)

Dor,  B4

IXir  Kurigalzu,  G4  (Assyria,  |  28)

Dur  Sargina,  Fa  (Assyria,  |  5)

Du'ru,  B4

Ecbatana,  I3

Edessa,  Da  (Aramaic,  f  11)

Edi'al,  A3

Edom,  Bs

Elam,  H4  (Babylonia,  i  22)

Elamtu,  H4

Mts.  of  Elburz,  la  (Ararat,  |  3)

Ellasar,  Gs


Ellip,  H4

Mt.  El  vend,  I3

Emessa,  C3  (see  Hemessa)

Epiphania,  C3

Erdjish  Dagh,  Bi

Erech,  G5  (Babylonia,  i  3)

Eridu,  Hs  (Babylonia,  |  3)

Esdud,  Bs

R.  Eulaeus.  I5,  H4(ASlrbani-pal,  |  6)

R.  Euphrates,  Da,  F4(Babyu>nia,  I14)

R.  Furat,  Da,  F4

Gambulu?  Hs  (j^ur-bani-pal,  |6)

Gargamil,  Da

Gauzanitis,  Ea

Gaza,  Bs

Gebal,  B3

(jedrosia,  inset  map  (Carmanians)

Ghazza,  Bs

Ghiuk  Su,  Aa

Gimir,  Bi

Cidk  Su,  Ca

Gordaean  Mts. ,  Ga

Gozan,  Ea  (Assyria,  |  32)

Great  Sea,  B3,  B4

Great  Zab,  Fa

Gubli,  B3

Guzana,  Ea

Habur,  E3

Hadrach,  C3  (Assyria,  f  32)

Halab.  Ca

Halwan,  Ca

R.  Halys,  Bi  (Cappadocia)

Hamadan,  1 3

Hamat,  C3

Hamath,  C3

Haran,  Da

Harran,  Da

yarran(u).  Da

J.  el-Hass,  C3

yatarikka,  C3

Hatte,  Ca  (Canaan,  |  10)

Hauran,  C4

Hauran,  C4

Hawranu,  C4

Hazzatu,  Bs

Hebron,  Bs

(H)emes(s)a,  C3

Hesban.  Bs

Heshbon,  B5

yilakku,  Ba  (Cilicia,  g  2)

Hillah,  G4  (Babylonia,  i  3)

Hit.  F4

Homs,  C3

Hulwan,  G3

R.  yusur.  Fa  (see  Khawsar)

Nahr  Ibrahim,  B3

Ichnae,  Da

Idalium,  A3

Imgur-Bel,  Fa  (Assyria,  |  5)

Irbil,  Fa  (.\ssyria,  f  5)

Isin,  Gs  (Babylonia,  t  49)

Issus,  Ca  (Cilicia,  |  i)

Jebeil,  B3

Jebel  Judi,  Fa  (Ararat,  |  3)

Jerabis,  Da

R.  Jihun,  Ca

Joppa,  B4


SYRIA,  ASSYRIA


ENCYCLOP/<


AM) HAinLOXTA


1^.  Siuit  42  of  Uremw. F


INDEX  TO  NAMES  IN  M.\P-Confinued  (K-Z)


N.  cl-Kablr,  B3

N.  el-Kabir.  B3

Kadesh-bariiea,  Bs

Kaisariyeh  (Mazaca),  Bi

Kaisariyeh,  B4

kalah,  F2

Kal'at  Dibsa,  D3

Kal'at  el-Mudik,  C3

kal'at  Sherkat,  F3  (Assyria,  i  5)

kaldu,  Hs.  H6

Kalhu.  Kalah.  F2

Kana,  B4

Karaja  Dagh,  Da

kardunias G4,  H5

Karkisiya,  E3

R.  karun,  I5

Kassi,  1 3  (Babylonia,  §  56)

Kebben  Maden,  Di

Kefto,  B2  (Caihtur,  §  4)

Keniiisrin,  C3

R.  Kerkhah,  15,  I4

R.  Khabur,  F2  (Assyria,  §  4)

R.  KhabQr,  E3  (Assyria,  §  4)

el-Khalil,  B5

R.  Khawsar,  '  Khosr,'  F2  (Assyria,  §  5)

Khorsabad,  F2  (Assyria,  §  5)

Kirruri,  G2  (Assyria,  §  31)

Kis,  G4  (Babylonia,  S§  3  47)

Kittim,  A3

Kizil  Irniak,  Bi,  Ci

koa,  G3

Korduene,  G2  (Ararat,  §  3)

Kue,  B2  (Cilicia,  $  2)

kummuh,  Di  (Assyria,  §  28)

kurdistan,  G2  (Assyria,  §  3)

Kuma,  H5

N.  Kutha,  G4

KutQ,  G3  (Babylonia,  |  69)

kutu.  G4

Kuyunjik,  F2  (Assyria,  |  5)

el-Ladikiyeh,  B3

Lagas,  H5  (Babylonia,  §  3)

Laodicea,  B3

Larnaca,  A3

Larsa,  G5  (Babylonia,  i  3)

R.  Leontes,  B4

N.  Litani,  B4

Lower  Zab,  G3  (Assyria,  §  4)

Lycaonia,  A2  (Cappadocia)

Malatya,  Di

Nahr  Malik.  G4

Ma'lula.  C4  (Aramaic,  S  9)

Man.  Fi

Manda.  H2  (Cyrus,  §  2)

Mar 'ash.  C2

Marathus,  B3

Maridin.  E2

Mt.  Masius,  D2

Kh.  Ma'sub.  B4

Mazaca.  Bi  (Cappadocia)

Media.  I3  (Babylonia,  S  56)

Mediterranean,  B3.  B4

Melitene.  Di  (Ararat,  $  i)

Memphis, inset map  (Asur-bani-pal,

f  i)
Meshech.  Ci
Mesopotamia,  E2
Mie-Turnat.  G4
Mitani,  1)2  (Assyria,  i  28)
Mosul.  F2  (Assyria,  jl  5)
Mukayyar.  G5  (Babylonia,  §  14)
Muiku,  Ci  (Assyria,  i  28)
Musri,  C2  (Assyria,  §  28)
Musri,  b5(AsHuoD)

Nabataea,  C"5  (Asur-bani-pal,  |  9)
Kaharina,  D2  (Aram-naharaim,  |  2/.)


Na'iri.  Ei.  Fi,  Ga  (Ararat,  f  2)

Namri.  H3

Nasibin.  E2

Nebi  Yunus.  Fa  (Assyria,  |  5)

Nicephoriuni.  U3

Niffer,  G4  (Babylonia,  f  3)

Nimrud.  F"2  (Assyria,  |  5)

Nineveh.  F2  (Asur-bani-pal,  |  2)

Mt.  Niphates,  Ei

Nippur,  G4  (Babylonia,  f  3)

Nisibis,  Ea  (Dispersion,  |  6)

Nisin  or  Isin,  G5  (Babylonia,  §  49)

Mts.  of  Nisir,  Ga  (Deluge,  §  2)

Opis.  G3  (Cyrus,  f  2)
Ornithonpolis.  B4
R.  Orontes,  C3  (Assyria,  S  31)
Osrhoene,  Da

Palastu.  B5  (Canaan,  §  17)

Palmyra,  D3  (Aramaic  Language,  $  2)

Paltos,  B3

Parthia.  inset  map

Pedias.  Ba  (Cilicia,  f  t)

Pekod.  H4

Philistia.  B5  (Canaan,  |  17)

R.  Physcus,  G3

Pitru.  Da

Pukudu?  Hs

R.  Purattu.  D2,  F4

R.  Pyramus,  C2  (Cilicia,  §  i)

R.  Radanu,  G3
Rakka.  D3
Ras  el-'Ain,  E2
Rasappa,  D3
Reieni,  E2
Rezeph.  D3
Rhesaina.  Ea
Ribla,  C3
Riblah.  C3
Ruha,  D2
Rusafa,  D3
Ruwad,  B3

es-Sabaha.  C3

R.  Sagurri,  C2

Saida,  B4

R.  Sajur.  Ca  (Carchemish,  §  2)

Salamis,  A3  (Cyprus,  §  2)

Salchad.  C4

Salchah.  C4

Samaria,  B4

Samairah.  F3

Samerina.  B4

SamOsita,  Da  (Cappadocia)

Sarafand.  B4

Sarepta,  B4

Saruj,  Da

R.  Sarus.  Ba  (Cilicia,  §  i)

Sebastiya,  B4

Seleucia.  G4

Senkereh.  Gs  (Babylonia,  §  3)

Serug.  Da

Shatt  el-' Arab.  H5

Shan  el-Hai,  H4,  Hs  (Babylonia,  §  3)

Shatt  en-Nil.  G5  (Babylonia,  g  3)

Sherif  Khan.  Fa  (Assyria,  g  5)

Shinar.  G4

Shirwan.  H3

Shoa?  G4

Shushan,  I 4

Sidon,  B4  (Assyria,  |  31)

Sidunu.  B4

R.  Sihun,  Ba

Simirra,  B3

Si- vB3

Singf- .^  Ea

Sinjar  Range,  Ea  (Assyria,  g|  4  16)

Sinzar,  C3


Sippar,  F4  (Babylonia,  ||  3  54)

Sirpurla,  Hs  (Babylonia,  gg  3  48)

Soli.  Ba  (Cilicia,  g  i)

Sophene,  Di

R.  Subnat.  Ei  (Assyria,  g  27)

Sumeisat,  Da

Sumer, H5  (Babylonia,  g  1)

Sumra.  B3

Sur,  B4

Surru,  B4

Susa.  I4  (Cyrus,  g  i)

^>usan,  I4  (Cyrus,  g  6)

Susiana  (Aram,  g  1)

Susiana.  Is  (Babylonia,  g  10)

Sutu.  G4

Syrian  Desert,  D4

Tabal,  Ci  (Asur-bani-pal,  g  4)

Tadmur.  D3

Tantura.  B4

Tarabulus.  B3

Tarbis,  Fa  (Assyria,  g  5)

Tarsus,  Ba  (Cilicia,  g  1)

Tartus,  B3

L.  Tatta,  Ai  (Cappadocia)

Taurus,  Fi.  Ba  (Cappadocia)

Tell  'Arka,  C3

Tell  Aswad.  G4

Tell-Erfad.  Ca

Tell  Ibrahim,  G4  (Babylonia,  g  3)

Telloh.  Hs  (Babylonia,  g  3)

Teredon.  Hs

Thapsacus,  D3  (Assyria,  g  16)

Thebae.  inset  map  (A5ur-bani-pal,  g  1)

R.  Tigris.  Fa,  H4  (Assyria,  g  4)

Tiphsah,  D3

R.  Tornadotos,  G3

Tracheia,  Aa  (Cilicia,  g  1)

Tripolis.  B3  (Damascus,  g  4)

Tubal.  Ci

R.  Turnat.  G3

L.  Tuzla.  A I

Tyre,  B4  (Assyria,  g  31)

Tyros,  B4

Udumu,  Bs

R.  Ulaa.  I5

R.  Ulai,  Is

Upe.  G3

Upper  Zab,  Ga  (Assyrta,  g  4)

Ur,  G5  (Babylonia,  g  3)

Urartu,  E;i  (Ararat,  g  i)

Urfa.  Ruha,  Da

Uruk,  Gs

L. Urumiyah,  Urmia.  G2  (Aramatc.

g.3)
Ur(u)salim,  Bs

L.  Van,  Fi  (Assyria,  g  11)

W.  el-'Arlsh,  A5

Warka,  Gs  (Babylonia,  g  3)

Yarn.  B4
Yamutbal,  H4
Yapu,  B4

Zab  (Upper  or  Greater),  F2  (Assyria,

Zab'(  Lower),  F3  (Assyria,  g  4)

Zabatus,  Major.  F2

Zabatus,  Minor,  F3

Zabu,  Eln,  F2

Zabu  Supalu,  F3

Mt.  Zagros,  G3

Zenjirli,  C2  (Aramaic  Language,  g  2)

Zerghul.  Hs

Zeugma,  C2

Ziniri,  G3  (Assyria,  g  32)

ez-Zib,  B4


ASSYRIA

only  (lis[)layed  the  energy  of  conquest,  but  also  combined
with  it  a  gresit  |X)wer  of  administration  by  which  they  or-
gaiiisc<l  the  empire  they  had  acciuired.  It  was,  however,
the  custom  of  the  ( ireek  historians,  and  aflerwanls  of  the
Romans,  to  paint  the  Assyrians  as  a  singularly  luxurious
and  sensual  nation.  Their  monarchs,  from  the  founder
of  the  empire  down  to  the  last  king  who  held  the  throne,
were  doscrilx.>d  as  given  up  to  pleasure.  It  is  po.ssible
that  as  regards  the  later  empire  this  tradition  contains
a  substratum  of  truth,  for  the  growing  luxury  of  Assyria
may  well  have  l)een  one  of  the  causes  that  brought
alK)ut  her  fall.  For  the  earlier  and  the  middle  [Xiriotl  of
Assyrian  history,  however,  the  statement  is  proved  to  l>e
untrue,  lx)th  by  the  records  of  Assyria  herself  and  by  the
negative  evidence  of  the  Hebrew  jjrophels.  [liese  con-
temiK)rarics  of  Assyria,  who  hated  her  with  the  bitter
hatred  which  the  o|)pressed  must  always  feel  for  their
o|)pressors,  rarely,  if  ever,  denounce  her  lu.xury  ;  it  was
her  violence  and  robbery  that  impressed  her  victims.  In
the  language  of  prophecy  the  nation  is  pictured  as  a  lion
(Nah.  2 12),  and  it  is  not  as  a  centre  of  vice  but  as  '  the
bloody  city '  that  Nixlium  foretells  the  destruction  of  her
capital  (3i).

The  Assyrians  s|x)ke  a  .Snnitic  language,  which  they
inherited  from  the Habylonians — a language  that  was

8  Laneuaee  '"°''*-'  closely  allied  to  Hebrew  and
.°  °  '  .\ramaic  than  to  Arabic  and  the  other
dialects  of  the  S.  .Semitic  group.  They
wrote  a  non-.Semitic  character,  one  of  the  varieties  of
the  cuneiform  writing  (see  B.\HVH)NI.\,  §  5^).  Like
their  language,  this  system  of  writing  came  to  them
from  the  Habylonians,  who  had  themselves  inherited  it
from  the  previous  non-Semitic  inhabitants  of  Babylonia.
The  Assyrians,  although  retaining  the  Babylonian  signs,
made  sundry  changes  in  the  formation  of  them,  and  in
some  it  is  possible  to  trace  a  steady  develojiment  through-
out the  whole  period  covered  by  the  Assyrian  inscri[)tions.

The  forms  of  some  of  the  characters  in  the  inscriptions
of  ahnost  every  .\s.syrian  king  display  slight  variations
from  those  emiiloyed  by  his  predecessors.  Indeed,  in
some  few  cases,  the  forms  used  at  different  [)eri()(ls
differ  more  widely  from  one  another  than  they  do  from
their  Babylonian  original.  The literature of  the

Assyrians  was  borrowed.  In  a  .sense  tin y  were  with-
out a  literature, for  they  were not a literary  [)eople.

They  were  a  nation  of  warriors,  not  of  scholars.
In  this  they  present  the  greatest  contrast  to  tluir
kindred  in  the  S.  Possessed  of  abundant  practical
energy,  they  were  without  the  meditative  temperament
which  fosteretl  the  growth  of  Baliy Ionian  literature  ;
and,  although  displaying  courage  in  battle  and  devotion
to  the  chase,  they  lacked  the  epic  spirit  in  which  to  tell
the  tales  of  their  enterprise.  The  majority  of  the  his-
torical inscriptions  which  they  have  left  behind  them  are
not  literature  :  they  are  merely  lists  of  con(|uered  cities,
catalogues  of  ca|)tured  spoil,  and  statistics  of  the  slain.
Though  not  original,  however,  the  As.syrians  were  far
from  Ixiing  illiterate.  They  took  over,  root  and  branch,
the  whole  literature  of  Babylonia,  in  the  copying,  the
collection,  and  the  arrangement  of  which  they  {lisplayed
the  .same  energy  and  vigour  with  which  they  prosecuted
a  campaign.  It  was  natural  that  the  jiriests  and  scril>es,
whose  duty  it  was  to  copy  anil  collate,  should  attempt
compositions  of  their  own  ;  but  they  merely  reproduced
the  matter  and  the  methods  of  their  predecessors.  In  a
word,  the  Assyrians  nuide  excellent  librarians,  and  it  is
to  their  powers  of  organisation  that  we  owe  the  greater
part  of  our  knowledge  of  Babylonian  literature.  Since,
therefore,  the  language,  the  system  of  writing,  and  the
literature  of  the  Assyrians  were  not  of  their  own  making,
but  merely  an  inheritance  into  which  they  eiUered,  the
description  of  them  in  greater  tletail  fiiUs  more  naturally
under  the  article  Babvi.oni.x  (see  §  19 J^.).

The  religion  of  the  Assyrians  resenibles  in  the  main
that  of  the  Babylonians,  from  which  it  was  derivetl.
The  early  colonists  from  the  south  carried  with  them  the

'^^  353


ASSYRIA

gods  of  the  country  which  they  were  leaving  ;  but  from
the  very  first  they  apjxiu  to  have  sonjewhat  mixlified
9  Religion  '^*^  system  and  to  have  given  a  dis-
°^  ■  tinctly  national  character  to  the  pantheon
tiny  tiorrowed.  This  end  they  achievetl  by  the  intro-
duction of  the  worship  of  Asur,  their  |>ctuliarly  national
god,  who  was  for  them  the  symljol  of  their  sejiarate
existence.  A.sur  they  stn  alK)ve  all  the  Ribylonian
deities,  even  Anu,  Bel,  and  11a  taking  a  sulK)r«linate
position  in  the  hierarchy.  It  is  true  that  we  hnd  Bcl
mentioned  at  times  as  though  he  were  on  an  ((jual
footing  with  A.sur,  esjiecially  in  the  d(iuble  royal  title
"(jovernor  of  Bel,  Representative  of  .\siir,'  while
Assyria  is  sometimes  termed  •  the  land  of  Bel '  and
Nineveh  '  the  city  of  Bel."  These  titles,  however,  were
not  inconsistent  with  Asur's  sui)remacy.  He  was  •  the
king  of  all  the  gods,'  and  any  national  success  w.as
regarded  as  the  result  of  his  initiative.  It  was  Asur
who  marked  out  the  kings  of  As.syria  fKoni  their  birth,
and  in  due  time  called  them  to  the  throne.  It  was  he
who  invested  them  with  [jower  and  gave  them  victory
over  their  enemies,  listened  to  their  prayers,  and  dii  tated
the  policy  they  .shoultl  pursue.  The  .Assyriati  army  w<Te
'the  troops  of  .\sur '  ;  the  national  foe  was  '  .\'i:r's
enemy";  and  every  ex[)edition  is  stated  to  have  Ix-en
undertaken  only  at  his  direct  conimand.  In  fact,  the
life  of  the  nation  was  con.secrated  to  his  service,  and  its
energies  were  speiu  in  the  attempt  to  vindicate  his
majesty  among  the  nations  that  surrounded  them.  His
symlx>l  was  the  w  inged  circle  in  which  was  fri-(|uently
enclosed  a  draix.-d  male  figure  wearing  a  head-dress  w  ith
three  horns  and  with  his  hand  extendetl  ;  at  other  times
he  is  representeil  as  holding  a  lx)w  or  drawing  it  to  its
full  extent.  The  synilx)l  may,  jx'rhajjs,  Ix,-  explained
as  a  visible  re[)resentalion  that  Asur's  might  had  no
etjual,  his  influence  no  limit,  and  his  existence  no  end.
This  synibol  is  often  to  Ix;  found  on  the  momnnents  as
the  accompaniment  of  royalty,  signifying  that  the
Assyrian  king,  as  Asur's  re|)resenlati\e,  was  under  his
es[K'cial  protection  ;  and  we  find  it  not  only  sculptured
above  the  king's  image  but  also  graven  on  his  .seal  and
even  endjroidered  on  his  garment.  It  is  possible  that
we  may  trace  in  this  exaltation  of  the  god  Asur  the
Semitic  tendency  to  monotheism,  the  complete  vindica-
tion of  which  first  fomul  ex[)ression  in  the  Hebrew
prophets.  It  must  not  Ix-  supposed,  however,  that  the
new  deity  stood  in  any  op|)osition  to  the  older  gods.
These  retained  the  resjx'ct  and  worship  of  the  Assyrians,
and  stood  by  Asur's  side — not  so  powerful,  it  is  true,
but  retaining  considerable  influence  and  lending  their
aid  without  prejudice  to  the  advancement  of  the  nation  s
interests.

The  spouse  of  A.sur  was  Belit--  that  is,  'the  Lady"
pnr  excellence — and  she  was  identified  with  the  goddess
Istar  (see  especially  3  R.  24,  80  ;  53,  n.  2,  367! ).  and
in  particular  with  Istar  of  Nineveh.  Another  goddess
who  enjoyed  es[xxial  veneration  in  Assyria  w.as  Istar  of
.Arlxila,  who  became  particularly  prominent  under  Sen-
n.icherib  and  his  succes.sors,  and  was  generally  men-
tioned by  the  side  of  her  naniesake  of  Nineveh.  She
was  especially  the  goddess  of  battle,  and  from  Asur-
bani-p;\l  we  know  the  conventional  form  in  which  she
was  presented.  This  monarch,  on  the  eve  of  an  engage-
ment w  ith  the  Klamites,  feeling  far  from  confident  of  his
own  success,  api^ealed  for  encouragement  antl  guidaniv
to  Istar  of  Arljela.  The  gotldess  answeretl  the  kings
prayer  by  apjxjaring  that  night  in  a  vision  to  a  certain
seiT  while  he  slept.  On  recounting  his  dreani  to  the
king,  the  seer  descrilxxl  the  appearance  of  the  goddess
in  these  words  :  '  Istar,  who  dwells  in  Arlx'la,  enteretl.
On  the  left  and  the  right  of  her  hung  Cjuivers  ;  in  her
hand  she  held  a  bow  ;  and  a  sharp  sword  diil  she  draw
for  the  w  aging  of  battle. '

Besides  Asur  and  Istar.  two  other  gods  were  held  in
particular  respect  by  the  Assyrians — Ninib,  the  gotl  of
battle,  and  Nergal,  the  god  of  the  chase. Almost  all

354


ASSYRIA

the  Assyrian  kings,  however,  had  their  own  pantheons, I
to  whom  they  owed  especial  alle;:;iance. In  many  cases
the  names  constituting  the  pantheon  occur  in  the  king's, i
inscriptions  in  a  set  order  that  does  not  often  vary.  !

Such  were  the  principal  changes  which  the  Assyrians  ,
made  in  the  pantheon  of  Babylonia,  the  majority  of
whose  gods  they  inherited,  with  their  functions  and
attributes  to  a  great  extent  unchanged.  It  is  true  that
our  knowledge  of  Ikibylonian  religion,  like  that  of
Babylonian  literature,  comes  to  us  mainly  through
Assyrian  sources  ;  but  though  it  passed  to  them,  its  origin
and  development  are  closely  interwoven  with  the  history
of  the  okler  country.  The  cosmology  of  the  Assyrians
and  their  conception  of  the  universe  were  entirely  Baby-
lonian (see  B.VHYLONi.v,  §  25)  ;  their  astrology  [ib.  ^  34),
their  science  of  omens  {§  32),  their  system  of  ritual  and
their  ceremonial  observances  ( §  29/  )  were  an  inheritance
from  the  temples  and  worships  of  the  south.

Though  in  language,  writing,  and  literature  Assyria  so

closely resembles Babylonia, in her  architecture she

... presents  a  striking contrast. The  alluvial

,'■  "  plains  of  the  southern  country  contained  no

stone,  and  the  Babylonian  buildings  were,

therefore,  mainly  composed  of  brick. The  resources  of

As.syria  were  not  so  poor  ;  the  limestone  and  the  alabaster

with  which  her  land  abounded  stood  her  in  good  stead.

The  palace  was  the  most  important  building  among
the  Assyrians,  for  the  principal  builders  were  the  kings.
It  was  erected,  usually,  on  an  artificial  platform  of  bricks
or  earth  ;  in  which  fact  we  may  possibly  see  a  survival  of
a  custom  of  Babylonia,  where  such  precautions  against
inundation  were  necessary.  The  platform  was  generally
faced  with  stone,  and  was  at  times  built  in  terraces  which
were  connected  by  steps.  The  palace  itself  was  com-
posed of  halls,  galleries,  and  smaller  chambers  built
round  open  courts,  the  walls  of  the  former  being  orna-
mented with  elaborate  sculptures  in  relief.  It  is  only
from  their  foundations  that  our  knowledge  of  the  Assyrian
palaces  has  been  obtained.  From  these  remains  a  good
idea  of  their  e.xtent  can  be  gathered  ;  but  there  is  no
means  of  telling  the  appearance  they  presented  when
complete.  Their  upper  portion  has  been  totally  de-
stroyed :  it  is  a  matter  of  conjecture  whether  they  con-
sisted of  more  than  one  story.  The  paving  of  the  open
courts  was  as  a  rule  comjiosed  of  brick  ;  but  sometimes
stone  slabs,  covered  with  shallow  carving  in  conventional
patterns,  were  employed.

The  temple  was  subordinate  to  the  palace.  Our
knowledge  of  its  appearance  is  based  mainly  on  its
representation  on  the  monuments,  from  which  it  would
appear  that  the  .\ssyrians  inherited  the  Babylonian
zikkurratu  (temple-tower),  a  building  in  stages  which
diminish  as  they  ascend  (see  B.\bvu)NI.^,  §  16,  beg.).
Unmistakable  remains  of  a  building  of  this  description
were  uncovered  on  the  N.  side  of  the  mound  at  Nimrud.
Another  type  of  building  depicted  on  the  monuments
has  been  identified  as  a  shrine  or  a  temple  ;  it  was  a
single-storied  structure,  with  a  broad  entablature  sup-
ported by  columns  or  pilasters.

The  domestic  architecture  of  the  Assyrians  has
perished.  The  dwellings  of  the  more  wealthy  must  have
resembled  the  royal  residence.  On  the  bas-reliefs  are
to  be  found  villages  which  bear  a  striking  resemblance  to
those  of  modern  Mesopotamia ;  and,  having  regard  to  the
eternal  nature  of  things  eastern,  we  may  regard  it  as  not
unlikely  that  the  humbler  subjects  of  Assyria  were  housed
neither  better  nor  worse  than  the  villagers  of  to-day.

It  was  to  adorn  their  palaces  and  temples  that  the
As.syrians  employed  the  sculptured  slabs  and  bas-reliefs
■iA.ii a 1 +  ^^''^ which their name is peculiarly

10/^.  sculpture.  ..associated.  The  majority  of  these  have
come  from  the  palaces  of  .\sur-nasir-pal,  Sargon,  Sen-
nacherib, and  Asur-bani-pal.  The  work  of  the  earliest
of  these  kings  is  distinguished  from  that  of  his  successors
by  a  certain  breadth  and  grandeur  of  treatment ;  but
the  constant  repetition  of  his  own  figure,  accompanied

355


ASSYRIA

by  attendants,  human  or  divine,  becomes  monotonous.
The  woik  of  Sargon  presents  a  greater  variety  of  subject
and  treatment  ;  but  it  is  in  the  sculptures  of  Sennacherib
and  .\iur-bani-pal  that  the  most  varied  episodes  of
Assyrian  life  and  history  are  portrayed.  It  was  natural
that  battle-scenes  should  chiefly  occupy  the  sculptor  ;
yet  even  here  the  artist  could  give  his  fancy  play.
Whilst  he  was  bound  by  convention  to  dejiict  the  vulture
devouring  the  slain,  he  could  carve  at  the  top  of  his
slab  a  sow  with  her  litter  trampling  through  a  reed-
bed.  Armies  in  camp  or  on  the  march,  the  siege  of
cities  or  battles  in  the  open,  the  counting  of  the  slain
and  the  treatment  of  prisoners — all  are  rendered  with
absolute  fidelity.  When  an  army  crosses  a  river  and
boats  for  transport  are  not  to  Ix;  had,  the  troops  are
represented  as  swimming  over  with  the  help  of  inflated
skins' — a  custom  that  survives  on  the  banks  of  the
Tigris  to  the  present  day.

Though  the  sculptures  of  Sennacherib  and  Asur-b.ini-
pal  have  much  in  common,  as  regards  both  their  matter
and  the  method  of  their  treatment,  each  king  had  his
own  favourite  subject  for  portrayal  on  his  monuments.
Sennacherib  liked  most  to  perp)etuate  his  building
operations  ;  Asur-bani-pal,  his  own  deeds  of  valour  in
the  chase.  Sennacherib  erected  two  palaces  at  Nineveh
— the  one  at  Nebi  Yunus,  the  other  at  Kuyunjik — but
it  is  only  at  Kuyunjik  that  the  palace  has  been  thoroughly
explored.  On  the  walls  of  this  latter  edifice  he  caused
to  be  carved  a  series  of  scenes  in  which  his  builders  are
represented  at  their  work.  Stone  and  timber  are  being
carried  down  the  Tigris  upon  rafts  ;  gangs  of  slaves  are
collecting  smaller  stones  in  baskets,  and  piling  them  up
to  form  the  terrace  on  which  the  palace  is  to  stand  ;
others  are  wheeling  hand-carts  full  of  tools  and  rojjes  for
scaffolding,  or  transporting  on  sledges  huge  blocks  of
stone  for  the  colossal  statues.  The  hunting-scenes  of
Asur-bani-pal  may  be  regarded  as  marking  the  acme
of  Assyrian  art.  Background  and  accessories  are  for
the  most  part  absent.  Thus,  grotesque  efforts  at  per-
spective, common  to  the  most  of  early  art,  are  avoided,
with  the  result  that  the  limitations  in  the  methods  of
the  early  artist  are  not  so  apparent.  The  scenes
portrayed  are  always  spirited.  The  figures  are  all
in  motion.  Whilst  the  elaboration  of  detail  is  not
carried  to  an  extreme,  action  is  represented  with  com-
plete success.  This  series  of  hunting-scenes  contains
pieces  of  great  beauty.  It  is  in  striking  contrast  to  the
large  majority  of  Assyrian  sculptures,  which  tend  to
excite  interest  rather  than  admiration.  Still,  even  the
earlier  work  has  not  entirely  failed  in  its  purpose —
ornamentation.  The  stiff  arrangement  of  a  battlefield
has  often  a  decorative  effect ;  and  the  representation  of
a  river  with  the  curves  and  scrolls  of  its  water  contrast-
ing with  the  stiff  symmetrical  line  of  reeds  upon  its  bank,
is  always  pleasing.  Indeed,  from  a  decorative  point  of
view,  Assyrian  art  attained  no  small  success.  Traces
of  colour  are  still  to  be  found  on  some  of  the  bas-reliefs,
on  the  hair  and  beards  of  ligures,  on  parts  of  the  cloth-
ing, on  the  belts,  the  sandals,  etc.  ;  but  the  question
whether  the  whole  stone-work  was  originally  covered

1  A  singular  detail  may  be  noticed  with  refer<;nce  to  the
representation  of  the.se  skins.  The  soldier  places  the  skin
beneath  his  belly,  and  by  means  of  his  arms  and  legs  paddles
himself  across  the  water.  Even  with  this  assistance  he  would
need  all  his  breath  before  his  efforts  landed  him  on  the  opposite
bank ;  but  in  the  sculptures  each  soldier  is  repre.sented  as
retaining  in  his  mouth  one  of  the  legs  of  the  inflated  skin,  into
which  he  continues  to  blow  as  into  a  bagpipe.  The  inflation
of  the  skhi  could  be  accomplished  far  more  eflfectually  on  land
before  he  started,  and  the  last  leg  of  the  beast  could  then  be
tied  up  so  that  the  swimmer  need  not  trouble  himself  further
about  his  apparatus,  but  devote  his  entire  attention  to  his
stroke.  This,  no  doubt,  was  what  actually  happened  ;  but  the
sculptor  wishes  to  indicate  that  his  skins  are  not  .solid  bodies
but  full  of  air,  and  he  can  find  no  better  way  of  .showing  it  than
by  making  his  swimmers  continue  blowing  out  the  .skins,  though
in  the  act  of  crossing.  This  instance  may  be  taken  as  typical
of  the  spirit  of  primitive  art,  which,  diflident  of  its  own  powers
of  portrayal,  or  distrusting  the  imagmation  of  the  beholder,  seeks
to  make  Us  meaning  clear  by  means  of  conventional  devices.

356


ASSYRIA

with  paint,  or  only  parts  of  it  picked  out  in  colour,  can-
not be  dLcided.

I".ven  more  famous  than  their  sculptured  slabs  are  the
colossal  winged  lions  and  hunian-heatled  bulls  of  the
Assyrians.  They  fired  the  imagination  of  the  Hebrew
prophet  Kzekiel,  and  they  impress  the  beholder  of
to-(lay.  These  creatures  were  set  on  either  side  of  a
doorway  or  entrance,  and  were  intended  to  be  viewed
both  from  the  front  and  from  the  side — a  fact  that
explains  why  they  are  invariably  represented  with  five
legs.  A  very  curious  effect  was  often  produced  by
running  inscriptions  across  the  bodies  of  these  bea.sts
without  regard  to  any  detail  of  carving  or  design.  Asiu-
nasir-pal  was  a  great  offender  in  this  respect.  Not  con-
tent will)  scarring  his  colossi  in  this  manner,  he  ran
inscriptions  over  his  bas-reliefs  as  well,  and  displayed  a
lack  of  imagination  by  reiseating  the  same  short  inscrip-
tion again  and  again  with  but  few  variations.

Carving  in  the  round  was  rarely  practised.  A  stone
statuette  of  A.sur-nasir-pal,  a  seated  stone  figure  of
Shalmaneser  II.,  and  some  colossal  statiii.s  of  the  god
Nebo  have  teen  found  ;  but,  though  the  proportions  of
the  figure  are  more  or  less  correct,  their  treatment  is
exceedingly  stiff  and  formal.  Modelling  in  clay,  how-
ever, was  common.  A  few  small  clay  figures  of  gods
have  been  discovered,  and  we  possess  clay  models  of
the  favourite  hounds  of  Asur-bani-pal.  We  know,  too,
that  the  stone  bas-reliefs  wore  first  of  all  designed  and
niotlelled  on  a  smaller  scale  in  clay  :  the  British  Museum
possesses  fragments  of  the.se  clay  designs,  as  well  as  the
rough  drafts  on  clay  tablets  which  the  Assyrian  masons
copied  when  they  chiselled  the  inscriptions.

In  their  metal  work  the  Assyrians  were  very  skilful.
This we may  gather  both from the monuments and


11.  Metal
work.


from  the  actual  exam|jles  of  the  art  that


have  come  down  to


A  good  majority


of  the  originals  of  the  metal  trappings,
ornanuMits,  etc.,  that  are  represented  on  the  monuments
nmst  have  been  cast.  The  metal  weights  in  the  form  of
lions  are  among  the  best  actual  examples  of  casting
that  we  possess.  In  the  British  Mu.seum,  moreover,
there  is  to  be  seen  an  ancient  mould  that  was  emjiloycd
for  casting.  It  was  found  near  Mosul,  and,  although
it  must  lie  assigned  to  a  period  about  two  centuries
subsot|uont  to  the  fall  of  Xineveh,  it  probably  represents
the  traditional  form  of  that  class  of  matrix,  and  we
shall  not  be  far  wrong  in  supposing  that  such  moulds
were  extensively  employed  in  the  Assyriati  foundries  of
at  least  the  later  empire.  The  mould  in  question  is
made  of  bronze,  and  is  formed  in  four  pieces  which  fit
together  accurately.  Three  holes  may  be  observed  on
the  Hat  upjjer  surface.  Into  these  holes  the  molten
metal  was  poured.  When  the  mould  was  opened  after
its  contents  h.ad  Ijeen  given  time  to  cool,  there  would
be  seen  lying  within  it  three  barl)cd  arrow-heads.

It  was,  however,  in  the  more  legitimate  art  of  metal-
beating  that  the  .Assyrians  excelled.  Much  of  the  em-
bossed work  that  adorned  their  thrones,  their  weapons,
and  their  armour  was  wrought  with  the  hammer,  while
the  dishes  and  bowls  from  Nimrfid  and  the  shields  from
the  neighIx)urhood  of  Lake  \'an  are  covered  with
delicate  rcfoiiss^  work,  the  design  on  the  upper  side
lx;ing  finished  and  defined  by  means  of  a  graving  tool.
The  largest  and  finest  examples  of  this  class  of  work
that  have  been  preserved  are  the  bronze  sheathings  of
the  gates  of  Shalmaneser  II.,  which  were  excavated  at
Tell-Balawat  in  1879  and  are  now  to  be  seen  in  the
British  Museum.  The  bronze  gates  of  nations  in
antiquity  were  not  cast  in  solid  metal.  They  would
have  been  too  heavy  to  move,  and  metal  was  not  ob-
tained in  suflScient  quantities  to  warrant  such  an  ex-
travagance. The  gate  was  built  principally  of  wood,
on  which  plates  of  metal  were  fastened  ;  the  object
being  to  strengthen  the  gate  against  an  enemy's  assault,
and  especially  to  protect  its  wooden  interior  from  de-
struction by  fire. The  metal  coverings  of  Shalmaneser's

3S7


ASSYRIA

gate  consist  of  bronze  bands  which  at  one  time
strengthened  and  adorned  it.  .\  brief  inscription  runs
round  them,  while  the  space  is  filled  with  designs  in
delicate  relief  illustrating  the  battles  and  conquests  of
the  king  and  in  general  treatment  resembling  the  bas-
reliefs  of  stone  to  which  reference  has  been  made.

Iron  was  used  by  the  Assyrians  ;  but  bronze  was  the
favourite  substance  of  the  metal-worker.  Specimens  of
the  bronze  employed  have  been  analysed,  and  it  has  Ix-en
ascertained  that  it  consists  roughly  of  one  part  of  tin  to  ten
parts  of  copper.  We  know  from  the  jewels  represented
on  the  monuments  that  ornamental  work  in  silver  and  in
gold  was  not  uncommon,  and  specimens  of  inlaid  work
and  of  work  in  ivory  have  been  found  at  Nimrud.  Many
of  the  examples  we  possess,  however,  betray  a  strong
Egyptian  influence,  apparent  in  the  general  method  of
treatment  and  in  the  occurrence  of  the  scarabieus,  the
cartouche,  and  a  few  hieroglyphs.  Thus  they  must  be
regarded  not  as  genuine  Assyrian  productions,  but  rather
as  the  work  of  I'hucnician  artists  copying  Egyptian
designs.  Enamelling  of  bricks  w  as  extensively  employed
as  a  means  of  decoration.  The  designs  consist  some-
times of  patterns,  and  sometimes  of  scenes  in  which
men  and  animals  take  part.  The  colouring  is  subdued,
and  the  general  effect  is  harmonious.  The  fact  that
the  tones  of  the  colouring  are  so  subdued  is  regarded
by  some  as  a  proof  that  they  have  faded.  Some
excellent  examples  of  enamelled  architectural  orna-
mentation in  terra-cotta  have  been  found  at  Nimriid.
They  bear  the  name  of  Asur-nasir-pal.

Engraving  on  gems  and  the  rarer  stones  and  marbles

was  an  art  to  which the  Assyrians  especially  devoted

_ . . themselves. There  have  been  found  a

.  oea  s,  e  c.  ^^^.  g,.j^,g  ^^^^  g^^j^  ^■^^^^  ^^^  ^^.j^j  j„
shape  ;  but  the  general  form  adopted  was  that  of  a
cylinder.  Those  of  cylindrical  form  vary  from  about
an  inch  and  a  half  to  two  inches  in  length  and  from
about  half  an  inch  to  an  inch  in  diameter.  They  were
pierced  along  the  centre  so  that  the  wearer  could
suspend  them  from  his  [person  by  a  cord.  The  use  to
which  they  were  put  was  precisely  similar  to  that  of  the
signet  ring.  A  Babylonian  or  an  Assyrian,  instead  of
signing  a  document,  ran  his  cylinder  over  the  damp
clay  tablet  on  which  the  deed  he  was  attesting  had
been  inscribed.  No  two  cylinder  seals  were  precisely
alike,  and  thus  this  method  of  signature  worked  very
well.  As  every  wealthy  Assyrian  carried  his  own  seal-
cylinder,  it  is  not  surprising  that  time  has  spared  a  good
many  of  them.  (It  may  be  noticed  in  passing  that  the
class  of  poorer  merchants  and  artis;ins  did  not  carry
cylinders.  When  they  attested  a  document  they  did  so
by  impressing  their  thumb-nail  on  the  clay  of  the  tablet.
\Vhether  a  certain  social  status  brought  w  ith  it  the  privi-
lege of  carrying  a  cylinder,  or  whether  the  possession
of  one  depended  solely  on  the  choice  or  rather  on  the
wealth  of  its  possessor,  is  a  question  that  has  never  been
solved. )

The  work  on  the  cylinders  is  always  intaglio,  the
engraver  aiming  at  rendering  beautiful  the  seal  im-
pression rather  than  the  seal  itself.  The  subjects  repre-
sented, which  are  various,  include  acts  of  worship,  such
as  the  introduction  by  a  priest  of  a  worshipper  to  his
god,  mythological  episodes,  emblems  of  gods,  animals,
trees,  etc.  :  the  engravings  are  generally  religious  or
symbolical.  The  official  seal  of  the  Assyrian  kings
forms  the  principal  exception  to  this  general  rule  ;  it  is
circular  and  represents  a  royal  jjcrsonage  slaying  a  lion
with  his  hands.  The  character  of  the  work  itself  varies
from  the  rudest  scratches  to  the  most  polished  w  orkman-
ship,  and  it  may  be  regarded  as  a  general  rule  that  the
more  excellent  the  workmanship  the  later  the  date.  The
earlier  seals  are  inscriljed  by  means  of  the  simplest  form
of  drill  and  graver,  and  the  marks  of  the  tools  employed
for  hollow  ing  are  not  obliterated,  the  heads  of  the  figures
being  represented  by  mere  holes,  while  the  bodies  re-
semble fish-tiones  ;  it  should  be  noted,  however, that

358


13.  Pottery.


ASSYRIA

early  Babylonian  seals  of  great  beauty  have  been  found
at  Telloh.

It  is  strange  that  the  Babylonian  and  the  Assyrian,
living  in  a  land  of  clay,  building  their  houses  of  brick
and  writing  on  clay  tablets — -in  fact,  with
jjlastic  clay  constantly  passing  through
their  hands — produced  no  striking  s|)ecimens  of  pottery.
'They  employed  clay  for  all  their  vessels  ;  but  the  forms
these  assumed  do  not  show  great  originality,  and  or-
namentation was  but  niggardly  applied.  That  the
Assyrians  were  glass-blowers  is  shown  by  the  discovery
of  small  glass  bottles  and  bowls.  ^

The  domestic  furniture  of  the  Assyrians  does  not
demand  a  detailed  description. .\11  that  was  made  of


14.  Furniture
and  em-
broidery.


wood  has  perished.  Only  the  metal
fittings  survive  ;  but  these,  with  the
evidence  of  the  bas-reliefs,  point  to  a
high  development  of  art  in  this  direc-
tion. Perhaps  the  most  sumptuous  specimens  of  As-
syrian furniture  that  the  monuments  jwrtray  are  the
throne  in  which  Sennacherib  is  seated  before  Lachish,
the  furniture  in  the  '  garden-scene'  of  Asur-bani-pal  (both
in  th-j  British  Museum),  and  the  chair  of  state  or  throne
of  Sargon  on  a  slab  from  Khorsabad  in  the  Louvre.

Of  the  art  of  embroidery,  also,  as  practised  by  the
Assvrian  ladies,  the  invaluable  evidence  of  the  monu-
ments gives  us  an  idea.  The  clothes  of  the  sculptured
figures  are  richly  covered  with  needle-work,  especially
on  the  sleeves  and  along  the  bottom  of  robes  and  tunics,
while  the  royal  robes  of  Asur-nasir-pal  are  embroidered
from  edge  to  edge.  The  general  character  of  the
designs,  whether  consisting  of  patterns  or  of  figures,
resembles  that  of  the  monuments  themselves.

One  other  subject  must  be  noted  in  this  connection, — •

it  does  not  strictly  fall  under  the  heading  either  of  art  or

__ , . of  architecture,  though  it  is  closelv  con-

15.  Mecnamcs.  ^^^,4^.^  ^.■^^Y^  branches  of  both'!— the
knowledge  of  mechanics  that  the  Assyrians  display.
To  those  who  have  had  any  experience  in  the  remo\al
or  fixing  of  Assyrian  sculpture,  and  know  the  thickness
of  the  bas-reliefs  and  the  weight  of  even  the  smallest
slab,  the  energy  and  skill  recjuired  by  the  Assyrians  to
quarry,  transport,  and  fix  them  in  position  is  little  short
of  marvellous.  Yet  all  this  was  accomplished  with  the
aid  of  only  a  wedge,  a  lever,  a  roller,  and  a  roj^e.
Representations  of  three  of  these  implements  in  use  are
to  be  seen  in  the  building-slabs  of  Sennacherib.

Among  mechanical  contrivances  may  be  mentioned  the
crane  for  raising  water  from  the  rivers  to  irrigate  the
fields,  and  the  pulley  employed  for  lowering  or  raising
a  bucket  in  a  well.  The  ingenuity  of  the  Assyrians
is  apparent  also  in  their  various  engines  of  war  and  the
elaborate  siege-train  that  accompanied  their  armies.  The
battering-rams,  the  scaling-ladders,  the  shields  and
pent-houses  to  protect  sappers  while  undermining  a
wall — not  to  mention  their  chariots,  weapons,  and
defensive  armour — all  testify  to  their  mechanical  skill.

The  position  of  Assyria  was  favourable  for  commerce.
Occupying  part  of  the  most  fertile  valley  of  W.  Asia,

.  ^ _  she  formed the  highway  between E.

16.  Commerce. ,  ,,, ^r  ,

and  W. Of  her  two  great  rivers,  the

Euphrates  approaches  within  one  hundred  miles  of  the
Mediterranean  coast,  yet  empties  its  waters  into  the
Persian  Gulf.  At  the  time  of  the  .\ssyrian  empire  a
highway  of  commerce  must  have  lain  from  the  Phoenician
coast  to  Damascus  and  thence  along  the  Euphrates  to
the Indian Ocean. Many important caravan routes

'  They  shine  with  beautiful  prismatic  tints.  Most  glass  that
has  been  buried  for  a  considerable  period,  indeed,  whether  of
Assyrian,  Egyptian,  Greek,  or  Roman  manufacture,  presents
this  iridescent  appearance.  It  is  a  popular  error  to  .suppose
that  it  possessed  these  tints  from  the  beginning  and  that  the
art  by  which  the  colouring  was  attained  ha.s  perished  with
those  who  practised  it.  The  ancients  must  not  be  allowed  to
take  the  credit  due  to  nature.  The  earth  and  the  atmosphere
acting  on  the  surface  of  the  glass  have  liberated  the  silex,
and  the  process  of  decomposition  is  attended  with  the  iridescent
appearance.

359


ASSYRIA

also  lay  through  Assyria.  Nineveh  maimained  com-
mercial relations  with  the  districts  around  Lake  UrQ-
miyah,  and  with  Ecbatina,  while  to  the  west  he
PhcEnician  traders  journeyed  by  the  Sinjar  range  to
Thapsftcus  on  the  Euphrates,  thence  south  to  Tadnior
and  through  Damascus  into  Phoenicia  :  a  second  western
caravan  route  lay  thr<jugh  Harran  into  upjx.-r  Syria  and
Asia  Minor,  while  Egypt's  trade  with  Assyria  as  early  as
the  fifteenth  century  is  attested  by  the  Amarna  tablets.
The  prophet  Ezekiel  has  borne  witness  to  the  presence  of
Assyrian  merchants  at  Tyre  in  his  time  ;  j'et  it  was  the
nations  that  traded  with  Assyria  rather  than  Assyria
with  the  nations,  for  the  Assyrians  were  es.sentially  a
jx'ople  who  preferred  to  acquire  their  wealth  by  con-
(|uest  rather  than  in  the  market-jjlace.  The  internal
trade  of  .Assxria  is  represented  by  the  contr.act  tablets
dating  from  the  ninth  century  to  the  end  of  the  empire,
that  have  Ijeen  found  at  Kuyunjik.  These  tablets —
not  nearly  so  many  as  those  discovered  throughout  Baby-
lonia {i/.v.,  §  19,  beg. )— deal  with  the  sale  of  slaves,
cattle,  and  produce,  the  purchase  of  land,  etc.,  and  tear
witness  to  the  internal  prosperity  of  Assyria.  They  are
written  more  carefully  than  the  majority  of  those  of
Babylonia  ;  and  the  Babylonian  device  of  wrapping  the
tablet  in  an  envelope  of  clay  on  which  the  contract  was
inscribed  in  duplicate,  with  a  view  to  its  safer  preserva-
tion, was  not  often  adopted.

The  form  of  government  in  Assyria  throughout  the
whole course of  her  history  was that of  a military
p  despotism. The  king  was  supreme. He

.  '  was  Asur's  representative  on  earth  and
under  the  special  protection  of  the  gods.
Whatever  policy  he  might  aaopt  was  Asur's  policy,
and  it  was  the  duty  of  every  subject  of  Assyria  to  carry
out  his  will.  The  nation  therefore  existed  for  the  mon-
archy, not  the  monarchy  for  the  nation.  The  kingship
rested  on  the  army,  on  which  it  relied  to  quell  rebellion
and  maintain  authority  as  well  as  to  conquer  foreign
lands.  The  army  was  in  consequence  the  greatest
power  in  the  state.  Its  commander-in-chief,  the  ttirtan
or  tartan,  held  a  position  next  to  that  of  the  king  him-
self, in  whose  absence  he  led  the  troops  and  directed
operations  (cp  T.\Kr.\N).  The  saku  was  an  impt)rtant
lower  oflScer  ;  the  rab-kisir  was  his  superior  ;  and  the
iud-sake  and  rah-sake  were  only  second  to  the  tai  tan
(cp  R.\BSH.\KKH).  The  tides  of  many  court  officers  are
known  ;  but  it  is  difficult  to  ascertain  their  functions.
The  more  important  were  eligible  for  the  office  of  the
limmu,  to  which  they  succeeded  in  order,  each  giving  his
name  to  the  year  during  which  he  held  office  (.see  §  19
and  Chronology,  §  23).  In  a  military  state  such  as
Assyria  a  system  of  civil  administration,  it  may  be  said,
had  almost  disappeared.  The  governors  of  the  various
cities  in  the  realm,  whose  duty  it  was  to  maintain  order
and  send  periodical  accounts  to  the  king,  were  not
civilians.  In  fact,  every  position  of  importance  in  the
empire  was  filled  from  the  army.  Priests  and  judges
exercised  a  certain  authority  ;  but  it  was  small  in  com-
parison with  that  of  similar  classes  in  Babylonia.


18.  Excava-
tions.


It  was  Assyria  that  at  first  attracted
the  attention  of  explorers,  though  within
recent years Babylonia has enjoyed a


monopoly  of  excavation  and  discovery

In  the  year  1820  Rich,  the  resident  of  the  East  India  Com-

I  p.any  at  Bagdad,  visited  Mosul  and  m.ide  a  superficial  examina-
tion of  the  mounds  of  Kuyunjik  and  Nebi  Yfinus. He  obtained

1  some  fragments  of  pottery  and  a  few  bricks  inscribed  in  cunei-
form characters,  and  he  published  an  account  of  what  he  had
seen.  It  w.-is  not  until  1842  that  attention  was  again  attracted
to  these  mounds.  Botta,  the  French  Consul  at  Mosul,  then
began  to  explore  Kuyuniik.  His  efforts,  however,  did  not  meet
with  much  success,  and  next  year  he  transferred  his  attention  to
Khorsabad,  15  m.  to  the  N.  of  Mosul.  There  he  came  across
the  remains  of  a  large  building  that  subsequently  proved  to  be
the  palace  of  Sargon,  king  of  As.syria  (722-705  B.C.).  The
majority  of  the  sculptures  that  he  and  Victor  Place  excavated

I  on  this  site  are  to  be  found  in  the  Louvre  ;  some,  however,  were
obtained  for  the  British  Museum  by  Sir  Henry  Rawlinson.

1 In  1845  Sir  Henry  Layard  explored  the  mounds  at  Nimrfid

360


ASSYRIA

ami  Kuvunjik.  undertaking  excavations  at  these  places  for  the
trustees  of  llic  Hritish  Museum;  these  diggings  were  continued
by  Loftus,  Kassani,  and  others,  under  the  direction  of  Sir
Henry  Rawlinson,  who  was  then  serving  as  Consul-General  and
political  agent  at  Bagdad,  and  they  resulted  in  the  discovery  of
the  principal  remains  of  Assyrian  art  that  have  hcen  recovered.
At  NimrOd  the  palaces  of  A5ur-na>ir-pal  (884-860  B.C.),  Shal-
maneser  II.  (860-824  "-C-).  !"1<1  Ksarhaddon  (681-669  B.C.)  have
been  unearthed  (cp  Cai.ah),  and  at  Kuyuniik  (cp  Nineveh)
the  palace  of  Sennacherib  (705-681),  and  that  of  ."VSur-bani-
pal  (669-625).  The  bas-reliefs,  inscriptions,  etc.,  from  that  palace
are  preserved  in  the  Hritish  Museum.  At  Kuyunjik  (1852-54)
the  famous  library  of  .A5ur-bani-pal,  from  which  the  greater
part  of  our  knowledge  of  Babylonian  and  Assyrian  literature  is
derived,  was  discovered.  At  Kal'at  Sherkfitand  at  Sherlf  Khan
excavations  were  successful ;  important  stone  inscriptions  and
clay  cylinders  of  the  early  kings  were  found  at  Kal'at  Sherkat.

The  ye.ars  1878-79  were  times  of  remarkable  discoveries.  Dur-
ing this  peri(xl  the  'finds 'at  Kuyimjik  included  the  great  cylinder
of  .\Sur-bani-pal  {(^.v.),  the  most  perfect  specimen  of  its  kind
extant  ;  at  Niniriul  a  large  temple  dating  from  the  time  of
ASur-nfisir-pal  w.is  unearthed,  while  excavation  at  Tell-Halawat
resulted  in  the  recovery  of  a  second  temple  of  A5ur-nasir-pal
and  the  bronze  coverings  of  the  gate  of  Shalmaneser  II.  (cp
supra).  Besides  the  excavators  and  explorers  of  Assyria  to
whom  reference  has  been  made,  two  others  should  be  mentioned
— George  Smith  and  K.  A.  Wallis  Budge.  George  Smith,  in
the  years  1873,  1874,  and  1875-76,  undertook  three  expeditions
to  that  country,  on  the  last  of  which  he  lost  his  life.  The  most
recent  additions  to  the  collection  of  cuneiform  tablets  from
Kuyunjik  were  made  by  Budge  in  the  years  1888  and  1891.

Of  the  Assyrian  antiquities  which  have  been  recovered,  most
of  the  sculptures  of  Sargon  from  Khorsabad  are  in  the  Ix)uvre  ;
Berlin  possesses  a  stele  of  Sargon  found  at  Cyprus  (cp  Sargon)
and  a  stele  of  Ksarhaddon  ;  a  few  slabs  from  the  palace  of  A<5ur-
nasir-pal  have  found  their  w.iy  into  the  museums  at  Edinburgh,
the  Hague,  Munich,  Ziirich,  and  Constantinople,  and  others
from  Kuyunjik  int.)  priv.ue  galleries;  almost  all  else  is  to  be
found  within  tlic  ualU  .if  the  I'.ritish  Museum.

Tlierc  are  Rjur  main  sources  of  information  for  the
settlement  of  Assyrian  chronology  —  the  so-called
19.  Chronology.  ' '"fonym  lists  "(see  l)elow),  the  chrono-
°-'  logical  notices  scattered  throughout
the  historical  inscriptions  (see  §  20,  beg.),  the  genea-
logies some  of  the  kings  give  of  themselves  (see  §  20,
end),  and  lastly  those  two  most  important  documents
which  have  been  styled  the  '  .Synchronous  History '
(§  21,  beg.)  and  the  'Babylonian  Chronicle'  (§  21,
end).

The  early  Babylonians  had  counted  time  by  great
events,  such  as  the  taking  of  a  city,  or  the  construction  of
a  canal  (cp  CiiKONoi.or.Y,  §  2,  teg. ).  This  primitive
system  of  reckoning,  by  which  a  period  or  date  could
be  but  roughly  estimated,  gave  place  among  the  later
Babylonians  to  the  fashion  of  counting  time  according
to  the  years  of  the  reigning  king.

The  Assyrians  adopted  neither  of  these  methods.
They  invented  a  system  of  their  own.  They  named
the  years  after  certain  officers,  each  of  whom  may  pos-
sibly have  been  termed  a  limn  or  limmu,  though  the
majotnty  of  scholars  agree  in  regarding  this  term  as
referring  not  to  the  officer  himself,  but  to  his  period
of  office.  These  officers  or  eponyms  were  appointed
in  a  general  rotation  ;  each  in  succession  held  office  for
a  year  and  gave  his  name  to  that  year  ;  the  office  was
similar  to  that  of  the  archonate  at  Athens  or  the  con-
sulate at  Rome.  Lists  of  the  linimus  have  teen  pre-
served from  the  reign  of  Ramman-nirari  II.  (911-890
B.C. )  down  to  that  of  .Asur-bfini-pal  (669-625  H.c. ).
Some  of  them  merely  state  the  name  of  the  e[X)nym  ;
others  add  short  accounts  of  the  principal  events
tiuring  his  term  of  office.  Now,  it  is  obvious  that  the
dates  of  all  the  years  in  this  known  succession  will  te>
known  if  there  te  any  of  them  that  can  te  determined
independently.  It  fortunately  happens  that  there  is  such
a  year.  From  the  list  we  know  that  in  the  eponymy  of
Pur-Sagali  in  the  month  of  Sivan  (May-June)  the  sun
was  eclipsed,  and  astronomers  have  calculated  that  there
was  a  total  eclipse  at  Nineveh  on  the  15th  of  June  763
B.C.  Hence  the  year  of  Pur-Sagali  is  fixed  as  763,  and
the  dates  of  the  eponyms  for  the  whole  period  covered
by  the  lists  are  determined  (see  further  Chronology,
S  24,  and  cp  telow,  §  32).

For  the  chronology  tefore  this  period  other  sources
must  be  sought. Approximately  it  can  sometimes  be

361


ASSYRIA

determined  by  means  of  data  supplied  by  the  inscriptions
20 Earlier  '^^  '^^  kings  in  the  form  of  chronological

neriod. "o*'^^'^^  o*"  remarks. For  example.  Sen-

^  nacherib  in  his  inscription engraved on

the  rock  at  Bavian  (see  Kli1\x(>  ff.),  in  recounting
his  conquest  of  Babylon  (689  u.c. ),  adds  that  Kamman
and  Sala,  the  gcxls  of  the  city  of  Kkallati  wl)ich
Marduk-nadin-ahO,  king  of  Akkad,  in  the  time  of
Tiglath-pilcser,  king  of  Assyria,  had  carried  away
to  Babylon,  he  now  recovered  and  restored  to  their
place  after  a  lapse  of  418  years  (cp  telow,  §  28).
According  to  .Sennacherib's  computation,  therefore,
Tiglath-pileser  I.  must  have  te-en  reigning  in  the
year  1107  B.C.,  and  from  the  inscription  of  Tigl.ath-
pile.ser  himself  on  his  cylinders  (cp  below,  §  28,  lx.'g.  )
we  know  that  this  year  is  probably  not  among  the  first
five  of  his  reign  (cp  te-low,  §  28).  Moreover,  Tiglath-
pileser  himself  tells  us  that  he  rebuilt  the  temple  of  .Anu
and  Ramman,  which  si.xty  years  previously  had  teen
pulled  down  by  A.sur-dan  because  it  had  fallen  into
decay  in  the  course  of  641  years  since  its  foundation  by
.Samsi- Ramman  (cp  below,  §  25).  This  notice,  there-
fore, proves  that  Asur-dan  must  have  teen  on  the  throne
about  the  years  1170  or  1180  B.C.,  and  further  approxi-
mately fixes  the  date  of  Samsi-Ramm.an  as  about  the  year
1820.  The  date  of  one  other  Assyrian  king  can

be  fixed  by  means  of  a  reference  made  to  him  by  one  of
his  successors.  Sennacherib  narrates  (cp  below,  {5  27)
that  a  seal  of  Tukulti-Ninib  I.  had  teen  brought  from
Assyria  to  Babylon,  where  after  600  years  he  found  it
on  his  conquest  of  that  city.  Sennacherib  conquered
Babylon  twice,  once  in  702  and  again  in  689  ;  it  may
te'  concluded,  therefore,  that  Tukulti-Ninib  reigned  in
any  case  before  1289  B.C.,  and  possibly  tefore  1302
B.C.  We  thus  have  four  settled  points  or  pegs  on
which  to  hang  the  early  history  of  Assyria.

Further  assistance  in  the  arrangement  of  the  earlier
kings  is  obtained  from  genealogies.  Ramman-nirari
I. ,  for  example,  styles  himself  the  son  of  Fudil
(  =  Pudi-ilu),  grandson  of  Bel-nirari,  great  grandson  of
Asur-uballit,  all  of  whom,  he  states,  preceded  him  on
the  throne  of  Assyria.  Most  of  the  Assyrian  kings  of
whom  we  possess  inscriptions  at  least  state  the  nante
of  their  father,  while  in  one  instance  we  know  the
relationship  between  two  early  kings  from  a  consider-
ably later  occupant  of  the  throne,  Tiglath-pileser  I.,
informing  us  that  Samsi  Ramman  was  the  son  of  Ismi-
Dagan  and  that  each  was  an  early  patesi  of  Assyria.
We  thus  know  to  a  great  extent  the  order  in  which
the  kings  must  te  arranged,  and  in  cases  where  a  son
succeeds  his  father  we  can  assign  approximately  the
possible  limits  of  their  respective  rules.

A  further  aid  is  found  in  the  '  Synchronous  H  istory  '
of  Assyria  and  Babylonia.  This  inscription  was  an
„ .  oflicial document drawn up  with the

■ ^  " aim  of  giving  a  brief  sunmiary  of  the

nous  nistory,  relations  tetween  Babylonia  and  As-
syria from  the  earliest  times  in  regard
to  the  boundary  line  dividing  the  two  countries.  The
chief  tablet  on  which  this  record  is  inscriljetl  is.  un-
fortunately, broken  ;  but  much  still  remains  which  renders
the  document  one  of  the  most  important  sources  for
Babylonian  and  Assyrian  history.  From  it  we  ascer-
tain for  considerable  periods  which  kings  of  Babylonia
jind  Assyria  were  contemporaries.

Simil.ar  information  for  the  jx^riod  from  alx>ut  775  to
669  B.  c.  is  obtained  from  the  Babylonian  Chronicle.

Now,  we  know  the  order  and  the  length  of  the  reigns
of  a  great  majority  of  the  Babylonian  kings  from  the
Babylonian  lists  of  kings  that  have  been  discdvered,  and
the  dates  of  some  can  te  fixed,  like  those  of  the  earlier
Assyrian  kings,  from  subsec|uent  chronological  notices
(cp  Babylonia,  §38).  The  dates  and  order,  there-
fore, of  the  kings  of  both  Babylonia  and  Assyria  can
to  sonje  extent  te  approximately  settled  inde|x^ndently
of  one  another,  and  each  line  of  kings  can  te  controlled

362


ASSYRIA

from  the  other  by  means  of  the  bridges  thrown  across
between  the  two  by  the  '  Synchronous  History '  and  the
'  Haljyioniau  Chronicle.'

A  further  means  of  control  is  supplied  by  the  points
of  contact  that  we  can  trace  between  Assyria  and  Egypt.
Such  are  the  P2gyptian  campaigns  of  Asur-bani-pal  re-
counted on  his  cylinder  inscription  and  the  letter  from
Asur-uballit  to  Amenophis  IV.,  recently  found  at  Tell
el-'Amarna,  and  now  preserved  in  the  GTzeh  Museum.
These  points  of  contact  are  not,  however,  sufficient
to  warrant  a  separate  classification  ;  and  to  go  to
Egyptian  chronology  to  fetch  help  for  that  of  Assyria
would  be  to  embark  on  an  explanation  igfwii  per
Ignatius  (cp  Egypt,  §  55/.,  and  c;hronology,  §  19).

Assyrian  chronology,  therefore,  unlike  that  of  early
Babylonia,  may  be  regarded  as  tolerably  fi.xed.  The
dates  of  the  later  Assyrian  kings,  with  the  exception
of  the  successors  of  Asur-bani-pal,  can  be  settled  almost
to  a  j'ear,  while  the  dates  assigned  by  various  scholars
to  the  earlier  Assyrian  kings,  though  differing,  do  not
differ  very  widely.  The  data  summarised  above,
which  must  form  the  basis  of  ever}'  system  of  Assyrian
chronology,  are  not  elastic  beyond  a  certain  point.
Thus,  whilst  no  two  historians  agree  precisely  as  to  the
dates  to  be  assigned  to  many  of  these  earlier  kings,  the
maximum  of  their  disagreement  is  inconsiderable,  and
the  results  arrived  at  by  almost  any  one  of  them  may
be  considered  approximately  correct.

With  the  Semitic  races  in  general  and  the  Baby-
lonians and  Assyrians  in  particular  pro[)er  names  re-
„  tained their original forms with great

persistency.  Among  these  two  nations,
in  fact,  many  names  consist  of  short  sentences,  complete
and  perfectly  grammatical  ;  indeed,  were  it  not  for  the
determinatives  placed  before  them  to  show  that  they  are

names  (  T  for  males,  ^^  for  females)  the  difficulty
of  reading  Assyrian  texts  would  be  considerably  in-
creased.

The  following  are  translations  of  some  of  the  names
of  Assyrian  kings  the  interpretation  of  which  may  be
regarded  as  certain.  Where  the  real  Assyrian  form
of  the  name  differs  from  the  form  now  in  common  use
it  is  added  in  brackets  :  —


Ismi-Dag.an . .

. . '  Dagon  hath  heard.'

Samsi-Ramnifin  .

. . '  Mv  sun  is  Rimmon.'

Asur-I,Cl.iii;i;u .

. . 'Asur  is  lord  of  hi.s  people.

Puzur-.V;iir . .

. . '  Hidden  in  A.sur.

Asur-nrKlin-alic .

. . 'Asur  giveth  brethren.'

Asiir-uhallit ■. .

. . '  A.sur  hath  quickened  to  life.

Hel-nirari . . .

. . '  I5el  is  my  helper.'

Kammfm-nirari .

. . '  Rimmon  is  my  helper.

Shalmaneser  (Suln

.anu-asaridu) '  Sulman  is  chief.

Tukulti-Xinib .

. . 'My  helpis  Ninib."

BC-1-ktui.ir-u.ur .

. . '  Bel,  protect  the  boundary  !

Ninib-pal-Ksara.

. . 'Ninib  is  the  .son  of  ESara.'

Asur-dan . . .

. . 'Asur  is  judge.'

A.?ur-res-isi . .

. . 'Asur,  raise  the  head!'

Tiglath-pileser  (T

ukulti-pal-Esara) 'My help  is  the  son  of

E.sara.'

A^ur-bCl-kala . .

. . 'Asur  is  lord  of  all.'

A.sur-nasir-pal .

. . '.\sur  protecteth  theson.'

Asur-nirari . .

. . '  .\sur  is  my  helper.'

Sargon  (.Sarru-kinu) . '  I'he  legitimate  king.'

Sennacherib  (Sin-ahe-erba) 'Sin (i.e., the Moon -god)  hath

increased  "brethren."'
Esarhaddon  (.\Sur-ah-iddina) '  A.sur  hath  given  a  brother.'
A.5ur-bani-pal . . . '  Asur  is  the  creator  of  a  .son.'
A<5ur-etil-ilani . . . '  Asur  is  prince  of  the  gods.'
Sin-.sar-i.5kun  . . . . '  Sin  hath  established  the  king.'

The  beginnings  of  the  Assyrian  empire  are  not,  like
those  of  Babylonia,  lost  in  remote  antiquity. It  is  far
_. .  more  recent  in  its  origin. The  account

23.  History,  contained  in  Gen.  lOn  to  the  effect  that
the  .Assyrians  went  forth  from  the  Babylonians  and
founded  their  own  cities  is  supported  by  all  the  evidence
-we  can  gather  from  the  inscriptions.  It  is  true  that  no
actual  account  of  this  emigration  has  yet  been  found
lamong  the  archives  of  either  nation  ;  but  every  indication
of  their  origin  tends  to  support  the  biblical  account,
for  the  .\ssyrians  in  all  that  they  have  left  behind  them

363


ASSYRIA

betray  their  Babylonian  origin.  Their  language  and
method  of  writing,  their  literature,  their  religion,  and
their  science  were  taken  o\'er  from  their  southern  neigh-
bours with  but  little  modification,  and  their  very  history
is  so  interwoven  with  that  of  Babylonia  that  it  is  often
difficult  to  treat  the  two  countries  separately.

The period at  which the  Assyrian offshoot left its
parent  stem,  though not  accurately  known,  can  be  set


24.  Settlement.


within  certain  limits. It  must  have


lx?en  at  least  before  2300  ».c.  'I'he
Babylonian  emigrants,  pushing  northwartls  along  the
course  of  the  Tigris,  formed  their  first  imjjortant  settle-
ment on  its  W.  bank  sotne  distance  to  the  X.  of  its
point  of  junction  with  the  Lower  Zab.  Here  they
founded  a  city,  and  called  it  Asur  after  the  name  of
their  national  god, — a  city  that  long  continued  to  be
the  royal  capital  of  the  kingdom.

The  oldest  Assyrian  rulers  did  not  bear  the  title  of
king. They  bore  that  of  issakku,  a  term  ecjuivalent  to

25.  Earliest  "-"f  ti^l" /f «'•  ^fumed  by  many  rulers

.  of the  old Babylonian cities m the S.

ru  ers.  .j,j^^  jjhrase  '  issakku  of  the  god  .Asur '  is
not  to  be  taken  in  the  sense  of  '  priest. '  In  all  probability
it  implies  that  the  ruler  was  the  representative  of  his
god — an  explanation  that  is  quite  in  accordance  with  the
theocr.atic  feeling  of  the  period.

The  earliest  issakkus  at  joresent  known  to  us  are
Lsmi-Dagan  and  his  son  Samsi-Ratnman.  The  latter
built  a  temple  to  the  gods  Anu  and  Ramman,  which,
Tiglath-pileser  I.  tells  us,  fell  into  decay;  641  years
afterwards  Asur-dan  pulled  it  down,  and  60  years  later
it  was  rebuilt  by  Tiglath-pileser  hirnself  This  refer-
ence enables  us  to  fi.\  the  date  of  Samsi-Ramman  at
about  1820,  and  it  is  usual  to  assign  to  Ismi-Dagan,
his  father,  a  date  some  twenty  years  earlier,  circa  1840
B.  c:.  In  addition  to  his  buildings  at  A.sur,  Samsi-
Ramman  restored  a  temijle  of  Istar  at  Xineveh.  The
names  of  other  issakkus  are  known,  although  their  dates
cannot  be  determined.

Bricks,  for  example,  have  been  found  at  Kal'at-Sherkat,  the
site  of  the  ancient  city  of  Asur,  which  bear  the  name  of  a
second  Sam.si- Ramman,  the  son  of  Igur-kapkapu,  and  record
that  he  erected  a  temple  to  the  national  god  in  that  city.  .An-
other brick  from  the  .same  place  is  inscribed  with  the  name  of
Iri.sum,  the  son  of  Hallu,  commemorating  his  dedication  of  a
building  to  the  god  Asur  for  the  preservation  of  his  own  life
and  that  of  his  son.

There  are  no  data  for  determining  the  relation  of
Assyria  to  Babylonia  at  this  period.  Whether  the  early
issakkus  still  owed  allegiance  to  their  mother  country
or  had  already  repudiated  her  claims  of  control  is  a
question  that  cannot  be  decided  with  certainty.  It  is
generally  supposed,  however,  that  at  some  period  be-
tween 1700  and  1600  B.C.  .Assyria  finally  attained  her
independence.

The  oldest  Assyrian  king  whose  name  is  known  to

us  is  Bel-kapkapu. Ramman-nirari  III.,  in  an  obscure

i»c T- +  V4  passage  in one  of his inscriptions,

26.  Jrirst  Jnngs.  ^ig^tj^^s  Bel-kapkapu  as  one  of  his
earliest  predecessors  on  the  throne  of  Assyria.  This
passage  is,  however,  the  only  indication  we  possess  of
the  time  at  which  he  ruled.  The  first  Assyrian  king  of
whom  we  have  more  certain  information  is  Asur-bel-
ni.sisu. With this king our knowledge of  Assyrian

history  becomes  more  connected,  and  we  can
C!>ca  14  o.  jrj^(,gip  greater  detail  the  doings  of  the  various
kings  and  the  relations  they  maintained  with  Babylonia.
The  soarce  of  information  that  now  becomes  available
is  the  'Synchronous  History'  (see  above,  §  21).

From  this  document  we  learn  that  A.sur-l)el-ni,sisu  w.as  on
friendly  terms  with  Kara-indas,  a  king  of  the  third  Babylonian
dyn.-isty,  with  whom  he  formed  a  compact  and  determined  the
boundary  that  should  divide  their  respective  kingdoms.  These
friendly  relations  were  maintained  by  Puzur-Asur,
ctrca  1440.  l^jngofAssyria,  who  concluded  similar  treaties  with
Burna-BuriaS,  king  of  Babylonia.  Puzur-A5ur  was  probably
succeeded  by  A5ur-nadin-ahe  (.circa  1470).  This  king  is  mentioned
in  a  letter  of  A.sur-uballit  to  Amenophis  IV.,  king  of  Egypt,  in
which  he  refers  to  A.5ur-nadin-ahe  as  his  father.  How  long  the
friendly  relations  between  Assyria  and  Babylonia  continued  we

364


ASSYRIA

cannot  say;  but  it  was  impossilile  that  friction  should  always  be
avoided.  Assyria  was  proud  of  her  indei)eiideiice,  while  Haby-
lonia  could  nut  but  be  jealous  of  her  growing  strength.  _  Thus  it
was  not  long  before  their  relations  licLaiue  hostile.  It  i.s  under
Asur-uballi(  that  we  first  find  the  two  nations  in
circa  1410.  ^  conflict.  Asnr-uballij,  to  cement  his  friend-
ship with  Babylonia,  had  given  his  daughter  Muballifat-Seru.-i  in
marriage  to  a  Babylonian  king,  and  K.ara-harda<S,  the  ofTspring
of  this  union,  in  time  succeed<.-d  his  father  on  the  throne.  He  was
slain,  however,  in  a  revolt,  and  Nazi-bugaS,  a  man  of  unknown
origin,  was  srt  up  in  his  stead.  To  avenge  the  death  of  his
grandson,  ASiir-uballi;  invaded  Babylonia,  slew  Nazi-l)uga5,  and
set  the  youn;4cst  son  of  Burna-I'urias,  Kurigalzu  II.,  on  the
throne.  (Such  is  the  account  given  in  the  'Synchronous  His-
tory' of  A.^ur-uballij's  intervention  in  Babylonian  affairs.  It
may  be  mentioned,  however,  th.it  a  parallel  text  contains  a
somewhat  different  version  of  the  afT.iir,  with  which  the  account
in  the  'Synchronous  History'  has  not  yet  lieen  satisfactorily
reconcilei.!.)  Kurigalzu  did  not  long  maintain  friendship  with
Assyria.  .Soon  we  find  him  at  war  with  A5ur-ubrilli}'s  soni
Q  an;l  successor,  Bel-nirari.  Bel-nirari,  he  wever,  de-
circa  I3«0.  f^.^^^.;!  i,;,,,  ^^  ti,e  ^.jiy  of  Sugagu,  and  .-ifter  plunder-
ing his  camp  added  to  the  Assyrian  territory  half  of  the
country  from  the  land  of  Sub.iru  to  Babylonia.  liel-nirari's
son  I'udi-ilu  {circa  ijoo)  retained  the  territory  his  father  had
acquired,  but  did  not  attempt  to  make  further  encro.achments
on  the  S.  He  undertook  successfid  expeditions,  however,
.against  the  tribes  on  the  E.  and  SK.  of  Assyria.  We  possess
an  inscription  on  a  brick  from  liis  i)alace  at  Asur,  and  another
inscription  of  his  on  a  six-sided  si  in.- (in  I'r  British  Museum)
records  that  he  erected  a  temple  to  S:ui:.is  ilio  Sun-god.  His  son
■  T~  .  .  Kamman-niran  I.,  after  sircn-tlieiiing  the .\ssyrian
Lina  1345.  rule  in  the  territory  recently  acquired  by  his  fattier,
turned  his  attention  to  his  S.  boundary.  He  conquered  the
Babylonian  king  Nazi-maruttas  in  Kar-I§tar-Akarsallu,  and
added  considerably  to  his  empire.

R;iiniiiaii-nir;iri  was  succeeded  by  his  son  .Slialmanesor
I. lie  has  lelt us  no  account of the cxpedilions he
circa  i  x-xo. undertook  ; but  that  he  was  a  great  con-


27.  Shal-


L


cjueror  we  gather  from  a  reference  in  the

aiuials  of  Asur-nasir-iial. This  king  fe-

maneser  I., i^^j^-s  that  in  his  reign  the  Assyrians  whom

®"°'  Shalnianeser, king  of  Assyria, a prince

who  preceded  him,  had  settled  in  the  city  of  Halzidipha

revolted  under  Hulai,  their  governor,  and  took  the  royal

Assyrian  city  of  Daindamusa. 'J'hese  places  lay  on  the

upper course of the Tigris ; and it is  evident  from

Asur-nasir-iJal's  account  that  .Shalnianeser  had  formed  a

sort  of  military  outpost  at  this  spot  which  shows  that  he

must  have  undertaken  successful  expeditions  against  the

countries  to  the  XW.  of  Assyria. We  may  conclude

that  it  was  in  consecjuence  of  this  extension  of  his  territory

along the Tigris that .Shalmaneser transferred his

capital  from  Asur  in  the  south,  which  had  formed  the

royal  residence  of  Assyria,  to  Calah,  a  city  of  which  he

was  the  founder,  as  we  learn  from  Asur-n.asir-pal. This

new  capital was situated about eighteen miles S. of

Nineveh  (cp  Calah). Shalmaneser,  however,  did  not

neglect  the  older  capital. He  enlarged  its  royal  palace

and  restored  the  great  temples. We  know  also  that  he

restored  the  great  temple  of  Istar  at  Nineveh.

On  his  tleath  he  was  succeeded  by  his  son  Tukulti-

Ninib,  who,  like  his  father,  busied  himself  in  extending

the  NW. limits  of  his  kingdom. At  the
circa  I2QO.  r 1 .. ,  ■  .

sources  of  the  Subnat,  a  river  that  joins  the

Tigris  some  distance  above  the  modern  Diar-bekr,  he
caused  an  image  of  himself  to  be  hewn  in  the  rock.
He  con(iuered  Babylonia,  and  for  seven  years  governed
the  country  by  means  of  tributary  princes.  Though
we  have  not  recovered  any  actual  inscription  of  this
king,  we  possess  a  copy  of  one  made  by  the  orders  of
Sennacherib,  on  a  clay  tablet  in  the  British  Museum.
The  original  was  inscribed  on  a  seal  of  lapis-lazuli,  and
Sennacherib  tells  us  it  had  been  carried  from  Assyria  to
Babylon.  Six  hundred  years  later,  says  Sennacherib,
on  his  conquest  of  that  city,  he  found  the  seal  among
the  treasures  of  Babylon  and  brought  it  back  (cp  above.
§  20).  The  inscription  itself  is  short,  merely  contain-
ing the  name  and  titles  of  Tukulti-Ninib,  and  calling
down  the  vengeance  of  Asur  and  Ramman  on  any  one
who  should  destroy  the  record.  How  or  at  what  period
the  seal  was  brought  to  Babylon  cannot  be  said  with
certainty  ;  but  it  is  not  improbable  that  it  found  its  way

36s


ASSYRIA

there  during  Tukuhi-Xinib's  occujiation  of  the  country.
This  occupation  was  not  permanent.  At  the  i-\\tl  of
seven  years  the  nobl<-s  of  Babylon  revolted,  and  set
Ramman-sum-usur,  or  Ramnian-sum-na.sir  (the  name
may  Ix;  read  in  either  way),  on  the  throne  there  as  an
inilepondenl  king.  Tukulti-Ninib  was  not  a  popular
ruler,  for  he  was  slain  in  a  revolt  by  his  own  ncjbles,
who  set  his  son,  A-sur-nasir-pal,  upon  the  throne.  We
possess  an  Assyrian  copy  of  a  letter  written  by  a  Baby-
lonian king  named  Kanimiln-sum-nasir  to  Asur-narara
and  Nabfi-daian,  kings  of  Assyria.  If,  as  has  been
suggested,  the  writer  of  this  letter  and  th<!  king  who
succeeded  Tukulti-Ninib  on  the  throne  of  Babylon  are
identical,  we  obtain  the  names  of  two  other  Assyrian
kings  of  this  period.

A  few  years  later,  under  Bel-kudur-usur  {circa  1210),  we  find
the -Assyrians  and  Babyh^nians  again  in  conflict.  Bel-kudur-usur,
tlieAssyrianking,  wasslaininthebattle ;  butNinili-
Circa  1205.  pal-ESara  retreated  with  the  Assyrian  armv,  and
when  the  Babylonians  followed  up  their  advantage  by  an
invasion  of  Assyria  he  defeated  them  and  drove  them  from  the
country.  The  Babylonians,  however,  tboujjh  repulsed,  appear
to  have  regained  a  considerable  part  of  their  former  territory
from  the  Assyrians.  The  next  occupant  of  ti


The  1
,  the  son  of  Ni


pal-K


throne
He  retrieved
tained  at  the


iina  1^00.  jjij.  disasters  which  his  father  had  sus
hands  of  the  Babylonians.  He  invaded  Kabyl
Zainama-suni-iddin,  captured  the  cities  of  Zaban,  Irria,  and
Akarsallu,  .-ind  returned  with  rich  booty  to  Assyria.  The  only
other  fact  that  we  know  of  this  king  was  that  he  pulled  dov.  n
the  temple  of  Kamm.'m  and  Asur  which  had  been  erected  by
S.imsi-Ramman,  but  had  since  fallen  into  decay.  His  must
have  been  an  energetic  reign,  to  justify  the  eulogy  pronounced
on  him  by  his  great-grandson  'I'iglath-pileser  I.  This  monarch
describes  him  as  one  '  who  wielded  a  shining  sceptre,  who  ruled
the  men  of  Bel.  u  hose  dnds  .111(1  offerings  pleased  the  great  gods,
and  who  live.  ■.•.■  Asluir  dfm  u.-is  Muceeded

by  his  son  Mir  i\  a  1150),  of  ^vl}(J^e  rri.;n  ue  know


[40.


■a  l,y  lii


Ami


Circa  1 120.


28.  Tiglath-
pileser  I.


.  ^^  iiMiii  J  i,i;:atn-;)ile>er  c.iMs  '  tlienii^^lity
king  who  conquered  the  hums  uf  tiie  fue  ;uid  (-sertlirew  all  the
exalted'  ;  and  from  a  clay  IhavI  of  liis.  iKaiiny  r.n  inscription,
we  learn  that  the  propl, -,  of  Lnllumi  and  KutT  were  among
those  he  overthrew.  lie  u  as  victorious  against  the  Baljylonians.
The  Baliylonian  kint;,  Nrhialiad.nv/ar  I.,  desiring  to  extend
the  northern  limits  of  liis  coantiv  invaded  Assyria  and  besieged
a  border  fortress.  _  Asur-rc.;-iM,  however,  summonrd  his  ,  hariots
of  war,  and  on  his  advance  llie  r)al)ylonian-.  r  ing

their siege-train. Nebuch.idrez/ar, witli 1  .od

troops,  soon  returned  ;  but  .\sur-res-isi,  alter  i  ua

army,  gave  him  battle  and  inflicted  on  liim  aiiusnin-  ueieat.
The  Babylonian  camp  was  plundered,  and  forty  chariots  fell  into
the  hands  of  the  Assyrians.

On  the  death  of  Asur-res-isi  the  throne  passed  to  his
son  Tiglath-pileser  I.,  whose  reign  marks  an
epoch  in  Assyrian  history.  He  is,  moreover,
the  first  Assyrian  monarch  who  has  left  us  a  detailed
record  of  his  achievements.  The  great
inscrii)tion  of  this  king  is  contained
on  four  octagonal  cylinders  of  clay  which
he  buried  at  the  four  corners  of  the  temple  of  Ramman
at  Asur  to  serve  as  a  jjermanent  record  of  his  greatness
and  of  the  extent  of  the  ,\ssyrian  empire  during  his  reign.
I'",ach  of  the  four  cylinders  contains  the  same  inscription.
Where  one  is  broken  or  obscure  the  text  can  be  made
out  from  the  others. '

In  the  course  of  the  introduction  with  which  he  prefaces  the
account  of  his  expeditions  he  gives  the  following  description  of
himself:  'Tiglath-pileser,  the  mighty  king,  the  king  of  hosts
who  has  no  rival,  the  king  of  the  four  quarters,  the  king  of  all
rulers,  the  lord  of  lords,  .  .  .  the  king  of  kings,  the  excellent
priest  who,  at  the  command  of  the  Sun-god,  was  entrusted  with
the  shining  sceptre  and  has  ruled  all  men  who  are  subject  to
Bel,  the  true  shepherd  whose  name  has  been  proclaimed  unto
the  rulers,  the  exalted  governor  whose  weapons  Asur  has
commanded  and  whose  name  for  the  rule  of  the  four  quarters  he
has  proclaimed  for  ever,  .  .  .  the  mighty  one,  the  destroyer  who
like  the  blast  of  a  hurricane  over  the  hostile  land  has  proved  his
power,  who  by  the  will  of  Bel  has  no  rival  and  has  destroyed
the  foes  of  Asur.'  On  the  conclusion  of  this  preface  the

inscription  goes  on  to  recount  the  various  campaigns  in  which
Tiglath-pileser  was  engaged  during  the  first  hve  years  of  his
reign.  He  first  advanced  against  the  inhabitants  of  .MuSku
(the  Meshech  of  the  OT  ;  see  Tubal),  who  had  overrun  and
conquered  the  land  of  l^ummuh,  which  lay  on  both  sides  of  the
Euphrates  to  the  NW.  of  Assyria.  Tiglath-pileser,  therefore,
crossed  the  intervening  mountainous  region  and  defeated  their


I  Translation  in  KB  \
366


I4-47-


ASSYRIA

five  kings  wiih  great  slaughter.  '  The  bodies  of  their  warriors,"
he  says,  'in  the  destructive  )>attle  did  I  cast  down  like  a
tempest.  Their  blood  I  caused  to  flow  over  the  valleys  and
heights  of  the  mountains.  Their  heads  I  cut  off,  and  around
their  cities  I  heaped  them  like  .  .  .  Their  spoil,  their  posses-
sions, their  property  without  limit,  I  brought  out.  Six  thousand
ni-Mi,  the  remainder  of  their  armies,  who  before  my  weapons  h.td
fled,  clasped  my  feet  (/.»•.,  tendereil  their  submission).  I  carried
them  awav  and  reckoned  them  as  the  inhabitants  of  my  land.'
Tiglath-pileser  then  attacked  the  land  of  tCummuh,  burnt  the
cities,  besieged  and  destroyed  the  fortress  of  .ScriSe  on  the
'Pilaris,  and  captured  the  king.  He  defeated  the  tribes  that  came
to  the  assistance  of  Kummuh,  and  after  receiving  the  submission
of  the  neighbouring  city  of  Urartinas  returned  to  Assyria  with
great  booty,  part  of  which  he  dedicated  to  the  gods  Asur  and
Ramm.'in.  This expedition was  followed  by  one  agamst

the  land  of  Subari  (or  Subarti),  in  the  course  of  which  he
defeated  (our  tliousand  warriors  of  the  Hatti  (see  Hit  riTK.s)aiHl
captured  one  hundred  and  twenty  chariots,  .\nother  campaign
in  the  mountainous  regions  of  the  NW.  met  with  similar
success,  and  resulted  in  the  submission  of  many  small  states  and
cities.  Tiglath-pileser  now  devoted  his  energies  to  extending
his  border  in  another  direction.  He  crossed  the  Lower  Zub  and
overran  the  districts  of  Murattas  .antl  Sarada'us  to  the  S.  of
Assyria.  Shortly  afterwards,  however,  he  returned  to  the  N.,
whence  he  brought  back  with  him  the  captured  images  of
twenty-five  gods,  which  he  set  up  as  trophies  in  the  temples  of
his  own  land.  Tiglath-pileser  next  extended  his  conquests  still
farther  north  into  the  district  around  tlie  upper  course  of  the
Euphrates.  The  mountains  he  passed  with  great  difficulty,  and
crossed  the  Euphrates  itself  on  rafts  which  his  troops  constructed
out  of  the  trees  that  clothed  the  hill-sides.  Here  twenty-three
kings  of  the  land  of  Na'iri,  alarmed  at  his  approach,  assembled
their  combined  forces  to  give  him  liattle.  '  Hut,'  writes  Tiglath-
pileser,  'with  the  violence  of  my  mighty  weapons  I  oppressed
them,  and  the  destruction  of  their  numerous  host  I  accomplished
like  the  onslaught  of  the  Storm-god.  The  corpses  of  their
warriors  I  scattered  in  the  plains  and  on  the  mountain-heights.'
After  completing  the  sulijugation  of  the  district  he  restored  the
kings  he  had  captured,  and  in  adilition  to  the  spoil  he  had  taken
he  received  from  them  as  tribute  twelve  thousand  horses  and  two
tho'.isaTid  oxen.  The  .Vssyrian  king  now  turned  his  troops

against  the  region  of  the  VV.  Euphrates.  He  subdued  the
district  around  the  city  of  Carchemish,  and  even  extended  his
conquests  beyond  the  river,  which  his  army  crossed  on  rafts
buoyed  up  by  inflated  skins.  The  last  campaign  of  which  we
have  a  detailed  accoiuit  is  th.at  against  the  land  of  Musri  to  the
X.  of  A.^vi-ia.  the  inlia'.itants  of  which,  when  at  length  driven
int.,  Ih-lr  ,':l,ief  city  of  Arini,  Icn.leied  their  submission.  Tiglath-
pil -^ir  thin  mar.luMl  thrciui;li  the  ?ieii,'hb(>iirini;  cnuntrv  carrying
with  him  hie  and  sword,  burning  the  cities  he  look  and  digging
up  their  foundations.  The  royal  scribe,  speaking  in  his  master's
name,  concludes  his  record  of  these  early  conquests  of  Tiglath-
pileser  with  the  following  summary  :  '  In  all  forty-two  Lands  and
their  kings  from  beyond  the  Lower  Zfib,  from  the  border  of  the
distant  mountains  .as  far  as  the  farther  side  of  the  E)uphrates  up
to  the  land  of  Hatti  and  as  far  as  the  upper  sea  of  the  .setting
sun  (i.e.,  Lake  Van),  from  the  beginning  of  my  sovereignty  until
my  fifth  year,  has  my  hand  con(|uered.  One  command  have  I
caused  them  to  bear;  their  h<)-.[ages  have  1  taken;  tribute  and
tax  have  I  imp  jsed  upiu  thcni.'

The  cylinder-in>  aiption  of  Tiglath-pileser  does  not  recount
the  later  expeditions  of  his  reign.  From  the  'Synchronous
History,"  however,  which  deals  with  his  relations  with  Baby-
lonia, we  learn  that  Tiglath-pileser,  king  of  .Assyria,  and  Marduk-
nadin  ahe,  king  of  Babylonia,  had  'a  second  time'  set  in  battle
array  their  chariots  of  war  that  were  assembled  above  the  Lower
Zab  in  .Vrzuhina.  '  In  the  .second  year "  they  fought  in  Akkad,
where  Tiglath-pileser  '  captured  the  cities  of  L)rir-Kurigalzu,
Sippar  of  the  Sun-god,  Sippar  of  .Anunitu,  Babylon,  Opis,  the
great  cities  together  with  their  f  irtifications ;  at  the  same  time
h;  plundered  .\karsallu  .as  far  as  the  city  of  Lubdi,  and  the  land
of  Su'ii  (on  the  Euphrates  to  the  NW.  of  15.al)ylon)  in  its  entirety
up  to  the  city  of  Rapiku  he  subdued.' 1  The  phrase  'a  second
time'  i-^  puzzling,  for  the  'Synchronous  History'  does  not  relate
a  previous  campaign  of  Tiglath-pileser  against  Babylon.  Some
scholars  therefore  suggest  that  it  refers  merely  to  the  former
struggle  of  Asur-res-isi,  Tiglath -pileser's  father,  with  the  Baby-
lonian king  Nebuchadrezzar  I.;  but  it  must  be  remembered  that
Tiglath-pileser  did  not  meet  with  unvarying  success  in  his  re-
lations with  Babyloni.a,  for  Sennacherib  mentions  that  during
his  reign  Rammfin  and  Sala,  the  gods  of  the  city  of  Ekallati,
had  been  carried  off  by  Marduk-nadin-ahe,  king  of  Akkad  (cp
above,  8  20).  The  question  whether  this  conquest  of  Ekallati
was  before  or  after  Tiglath -pileser's  successful  Babylonian
campaign  is  still  indeed  an  open  one  ;  but  the  supposition  is
plausible  that  Marduk-nadin-ahe's  advance  against  Assyria  was
;n  the  first  year  of  hostilities  between  the  two  countries,  and
that  his  success  was  merely  temporary,  being  followed  'in  the
second  year '  by  Tiglath-pileser's  extensive  conquests  in  Baby-
lonia as  related  in  the  '  Synchronous  Hi.story.'

Tiglath-pileser  was  a  great  hunter.  He  kept  a  record  of
the  beasts  he  slew  in  the  desert.  This  was  inserted  in  the
cylinder-inscription  after  the  account  of  his  campaigns.  PVom
it  we  learn  that  with  the  help  of  the  gods  Ninib  and  Nergal


ASSYRIA

he  .slew  'four  wild  oxen,  mighty  and  terrible  in  the  desert
of  the  land  of  Mitiini  and  in  Araziki,  which  is  in  front  of  the
land  of  Hatti,"  ten  elephants  in  the  district  of  Harran  and  on
the  banks  of  the  Khabur,  one  hundred  and  twenty  lions  on
foot,  and  eight  hundred  with  spears  while  in  his  chariot.  He
caught  four  elephants  alive,  and  brought  them  back,  together
with  the  hides  and  tusks  of  those  he  had  slaiuj  to  the  city  of
A5ur.  No less  energetic was the king in  his  building

operations.  The  temples  of  the  gods  in  .Asur  that  were  in  ruins
he  restored  ;  he  repaired  the  palaces  throughout  the  countrj-
that  his  predecessors  had  allowed  to  fall  into  decay  ;  he  extended
his  water-supply  bjr  the  construction  of  canals;  he  accumulated
considerable  quantities  of  grain.  As  a  result  of  his  conquests,
he  kept  As.syria  supplied  with  horses,  cattle,  and  sheep,  and
brought  back  from  his  campaigns  foreign  trees  and  plants,  which
became  acclimatised.

The  reign  of  Tiglath-pileser  was  a  period  of
great  prosperity  for  Assyria.  He  pushed  his  conquests
until  the  bounds  of  his  empire  extended  from  below
the  Lower  Zab  to  Lake  Van  and  the  district  of  the
Upper  P-uphrates,  and  from  the  mountains  to  the  K.  of
Assyria  to  Syria  on  the  W. ,  including  the  region  wateretl
by  the  Khabur.  He  was  a  good  warrior  ;  yet  he  did
not  neglect  the  internal  administration  of  his  realm,
devoting  the  spoil  of  his  campaigns  to  the  general
improvement  of  the  country.  In  fact,  the  summary  lie
gives  of  his  own  reign  is  a  just  one  :  '  To  the  land  of
A.sur  I  added  land;  to  its  people  I  added  people.  The
condition  of  my  people  I  improved  :  I  caused  them  to
dwell  in  a  jseaceful  habitation.'

The  prosperity  which  .\ssyria  had  enjoyed  under
Tiglath-pileser  does  not  appear  to  have  long  survived
his  death.

-At  the  time  of  Asur-bel-k.ala,  Tiglath-pileser's  son,  relations
between  Assyria  and  Babylonia  were  of  a  friendly  nature.
Asur-bel-kala  .at  first  made  treaties  with  Marduk-sapik-zer-mali,
king  of  Babylon  ;  and  later,  when  Ramman-aplu-iddina,  a  man
of  obscure  extraction,  ascended  the  throne  of  Babylonia,  he
further  strengthened  the  connection  between  the  two  countries
by  contracting  an  alliance  with  the  daughter  of  the  Babylonian
king.  Samsi-Ramman,  another  son  of  Tiglath-pileser  I.,  also
succeeded  to  the  throne,  but  whether  before  or  after  his  brother
Asur-bel-kala  cannot  be  determined.  The  only  inscription  of
this  king  that  we  possess  records  that  he  restored  the  temple  of
the  goddess  Istar  m  Nineveh.

Such are the only facts we know concerning the
immediate  successors  of  Tiglath-pileser I.,  and  at  this
29 (raT)  poi'it  a  gap  of  more  than  one  hundred

years  occurs  in  our  knowledge  of  the
ciira  1070-950.  history  of  Assyria.  We  may  surmise
that  the  period  was  one  of  misfortune  for  the  empire.
What  little  can  be  gathered  from  the  inscriptions  con-
cerning these  years  speaks  of  disaster.

Shalmaneser  11.,  in  his  monolith-inscription,!  states  that  he
recaptured  the  cities  of  Pethor  and  .Mutkinu  (beyond  the
Euphrates),  which  had  been  originally  taken  by  Tiglath-pileser
I.,  but  had  meanwhile  been  lost  by  .\ssyria  in  the  time  of  a  king
named  .Asur-  .  .  .  (the  latter  half  of  the  name  being  broken).
"This  king  may  be  identified  with  A.sur-erbi,  and  in  that  case  he
must  have  met  with  at  least  some  .success  in  the  W.,  for  we
know  that  at  a  place  on  the  coast  of  Phoctiicia  Asur-erbi  cut  an
image  of  himself  in  the  rock,  near  which  at  a  later  time
Shalmane.ser  II.  caused  his  own  to  be  set.  The  names  of  two
other  kings  are  known:  Erba-Ramman  and  ASur-nadin-ahe,
whose  reigns  must  have  fallen  during  this  period.  They
are  mentioned  in  the  so-called  'hunting  inscription'  of  A5ur-
nusir-pal  as  having  erected  buildings  in  the  city  of  A.sur,  which
were  restored  by  Aliur-nasir-pal.

No  direct  light  is  thrown  on  this  dark  period  by  the
'  Synchronous  History.'  As,  however,  it  is  written  with
a  strong  Assyrian  bias,  its  silence  is  an  additional  tes-
timony that  during  this  period  Assyria  must  have  suffered
misfortunes.

When  we  once  more  take  up  the  thread  of  Assyria's

_- .  history, our  knowledge  of  the  succes-

30.  Predeces- •„., '. .  „,  ,.•  „^  • .,1,k.„i.„„  ,i„,..„  .^


sors  of  A.


sion  of  her  kings  is  unbroken  down  to


the  time  of  Asurbanipal.
Tiglath-pile.ser  II.  heads  this  succession  of  rulers  ;  but  of  him
we  know  nothing  beyond  his  name,  which  occurs  in  an  inscrip-
tion of  his  grandson  Ramman-nirari  II.,2  whostyles
Ctrca  930. him 'kiuiiofhosts,  king  of  Assyria." Tigl.alh-pileser
1 1,  was  succeeded  by  his  son  Asur-dan  II. Of  this  king  we  know
that  he  constructed  a  canal,  which,  however,  in  the  course  of  thirty
years  fell  into  disrepair,  and  was  therefore  made  gootl
9"' by  ASur-na.sir-pal. Ramman-nirari  II.,  who  succeeded
his  father,  has  left  iehind  him  only  the  short  inscription  (just


KB  I  igS.
367


1  KBXxioff.


2  A"51,


368


ASSYRIA

mentioned)  recording  his  own  name  and  those  of  his  father  and

grandfathtT. He  was  an  energetic  ruler,  as  Is  evinced  by  the

.Synchronous  History,"  which  records  various  successes  of  his

against the Habylonians— first against the Babylonian king,

SamaS-mudammik,  and  later  against  his  successor,  Nabu-iSum-

iikun,  who  had  set  himself  by  force  upon  the  throne. From  this

latter  monarch  he  captured  many  cities  and  much  spoil. He  did

not,  however,  press  his  victor>'. He  concluded  a  truce  with

the  Babylonian  kine,  either  Nabn-5um-i5kun  or  his  successor,

and each added the other's daughter to his harem. His

„  son,  Tukulti-Ninib,  succeeded  him,  and  from  an  inscrip-

°9°- tion  of  this  mon.irch  at  .Sebeneh-Su  we  m.-i>r  infer  that

he  undertook  successful  expeditions  to  the  N.  of  Assyria,  at  least.

Tukulti-Ninib  was  succeeded  by  hisson  Asur-nasir-pal,

one  of  the  greatest  monarchs  Assyria  ever  pro-

■*■ duced. The  ann.als  of  his  reign  he  inscril)ed  on

a  slab of  stone, which he set up in the temple  of

.  r  the  god  N'inib  at  Calah. In  this  inscrip-

31.  Asur- jjy„  1  Qpj.  of  the  longest  historical  inscrip-

nasir-pal. ^j^^^  ^j-  ^ggyrj^ he  gives  an  account  of

the  various  campaigns  he  undertook.

In  the  first  years  of  his  reign,  he  tells  us,  he  went  .-\g.-iinst  the
land  of  Numme,  a  mount.iinous  tract  of  country  to  the  N.  of
Assyria,  and  subdued  the  l.-inds  and  cities  in  its  neighbourhood.
'I'he  king  then  proceeded  against  the  district  of  Kirruri  that  lay
along  the  W.  shores  of  L.-ike  Uriimiy.-ih.  Turning  W.  from
Kirruri,  he  p.tssed  through  the  land  of  Kirtii  on  the  Upper
Tii^ris,  .ind  city  after  city  fell  into  his  hands.  He  returned  to
Assyria  with  the  booty  he  had  collected,  .and  brought  with  him
Bubu,  the  son  of  Hubfi,  the  governor  of  Nistun,  a  city  where  he
had  met  with  an  obstinate  resistance.  This  wretch  he  flayed
alive  in  .\rl>cla,  nailing  his  skin  to  the  city  wall.  In  the  s.-ime
year  he  again  repaired  to  the  region  of  the  Upper  Tigris,  against
the  cities  at  the  foot  of  the  mountains  of  Nipur  and  Pasatu.
He  then  passed  westward  to  the  land  of  Kummuh,  quelling  a
revolt  in  the  city  of  Sfiru  on  the  Khfibur,  and  seizing  the'  rebel
le.-uler  Ahi.ibaba  who  was  brought  back  to  Nineveh,  where  be
W.XS  flayed.  The  tribes  siirn.unilini;  the  disatTeited  region
tendered  their  submission.  In  the  next  )e.ir  the  tirst  act  of  the
king  was  to  stamp  out  anotlier  rebellion.  Neu  ^  was  l)rought  to
him  that  the  city  of  Halzidipha,  wliieli  .SluUiuaneser  II.  had
colonised  (see  above,  §  27,  beg.),  was  in  a  state  of  revolution,  and
had  att.icked  the  Assyrian  city  of  Damd.-imusa.  While  on  his
way  against  the  rebels  be  set  up  .an  im.age  of  himself,  at  the  source
of  the  river  .Subnat,  beside  images  of  two  of  his  predecessors,
Tiglath-pileser  I.  and  Tukulti-Ninib.  He  then  defeated  the
rebels  at  the  city  of  Kin.abu,  which  he  captured,  and  pro-
ceeded to  punish  the  revolt  with  severity,  fl.aying  the  rebel
leader  Hulai.  Next  he  attacked  the  city  of  Tela  and  burnt  it,
mutilating  the  prisoners  by  cutting  off  their  ears  and  h.ands  and
putting  out  their  eyes.  These  wretches,  while  still  alive,  he
piled  up  in  a  great  heap  ;  he  made  another  heap  out  of  the
heads  of  the  slain,  while  other  he.ads  he  fastened  to  trees  round
the  city  ;  the  youths  and  maidens  he  burnt  alive.  These  details
may  suffice  to  show  the  brutal  practices  of  this  great  conqueror.
ASur-nfisir-pal  next  proceeded  to  the  city  of  Tu.sh.a,  which  had
been  deserted  by  the  Assyrians  in  consequence  of  a  famine.
After  restoring  and  strengthening  its  w.alls,  he  built  a  palace  for
himself  and  brought  back  the  former  inhabitants  of  the  city.
After  his  return  he  again  undertook  a  pillaging  expedition
in  the  mountainous  regions  of  the  north.  The  next  two
years  were  mainly  t.aken  up  with  campaigns  in  Dag.ara  and
Zamu.a,  which  were  in  a  state  of  insurrection,  Nur-R.ammrin,
the  chief  of  Dagara,  leading  the  revolt.  The  war  w.as  a  pro-
tracted one,  and  three  expeditions  were  required  before  order
was  completely  restored.  These  expeditions  were  followed  by
others  in  the  region  of  Kummuh,  and  in  the  land  of  Na'iri.
From  his  residence  at  Tusha,  the"  king  then  crossed  the  Tigris
and  captured  Pitura  .and  certain  towns  round  the  city  of
Arbaki.  Asur-n."isir-pal  records  at  this  point  the  death  of
Ammeba'la,  one  of  his  nobles,  who  was  murdered  by  his
subordinates.  The  king's  anger,  however,  w.as  appeased  by  a
large  tribute,  although,  according  to  one  .iccount,  he  flayed  Hur-
Ramman,  the  chief  rebel,  and  nailed  his  skin  to  the  w.-ill  of  Sin.abu.
One  of  the  most  important  campaigns  in  the  reign  of  .\sur-
nasir-pal  was  that  against  the  land  of  Suhi.  Although  S.adudu,
the  ruler  of  th.at  land,  obt.ained  help  from  N.abu-aplu-iddina,
king  of  Babylonia,  his  capital  Suru  was  taken  and  he
himself  escaped  only  by  flight.  A  second  campaign  led  to  the
subjugation  of  the  whole  district  and  a  considerable  extension
of  the  Assyrian  sphere  of  influence  along  the  Euphrates.
ASur-nSsir-pal  next  crossed  the  river  and  c-irried  his  arms  into
N.  Syria.  He  first  made  his  w.iy  to  C.archemish  and  received
the  submission  of  Sangara,  king  of  the  land  of  Hatti.  Pro-
ceeding SW.  and  exacting  tribute  from  the  districts  through
which  he  pa.ssed,  he  crossed  the  Orontes  and  marched  .S.  into
the  district  of  Lebanon.  The  cities  on  the  coast  of  the
Mediterranean,  including  Tyre,  Sidon,  Byblos,  and  Armad
(.\rvad),  sent  presents.  In  the  N.  districts  he  cut  down  cedars,
which  he  used  on  his  retunj  in  building  temples  to  the  g<>d>.
One  more  expedition  .ASur-nasir-p-al  undertook  on  the  N.  of
Assyria,  traversing  the  land  of  |yummuh  and  again  penetrating
to  the  upper  reaches  of  the  Tigri.s.


24


KB  \  soj:,  K PCI)  2 134^.
3^9


ASSYRIA

Asur-na.sir-pal  firmly  established  the  rule  of  .\.ssyria  in
the  NW.  and  the  .\. ,  while  he  extended  his  empire
eastwards  and  laid  the  foundations  of  Assyria's  later
supremacy  in  the  W.  on  the  coast  of  the  Meditenanean.
He  w.as  one  of  Assyria's  greatest  contjucrors  ;  but  his
rule  was  one  of  iron,  and  his  barbarity  was  exceptional
even  for  his  time.  He  was  a  great  builder.  .\t
Nineveh  he  restored  the  royal  palace  and  rebuilt  the
temple  of  Lstar. The  city  of  Calali,  which  Shalmaneser

I.  had  founded,  he  rebuilt,  [leopling  it  with  captives
taken  on  his  e.\[)editions.  He  connected  it  with  the
Upf)er  Zal)  by  means  of  a  canal,  and  erected  two  temples
and  a  huge  palace,  from  which  his  bas-reliefs,  now  in
the  British  Museum,  were  obtained  (cp  alx)ve.  §  18).

Asur-niisir-pal  w.as  succeeded  by  his  son  .'^lialnianeser

I I,  who  extended  the  kingdom  of  his  father  beyond  L.ake

ggQ  Van  and  Lake  l'ri"in)iyah. He  exer-

cised a  protectorate  over  Babylonia  in
32.  Shalmane-  t^e .s. , and his kingdom  'included

Ber  II.  and Damascus, which he  had  concjuered.

successors.  During  his  reign,  for  the  first  time  in
history,  .Assyria  came  into  direct  contact  with  Israel  :
he  mentions  .\hab  of  Israel  as  one  of  the  allies  of
Benhadad  of  Damascus  (cp  Sh.m.m.ankskr  II. ).  His
later  ye.ars  were  troubled  by  the  revolt  of  his  son  Asur-
danin-pal  ;  but  his  younger  son.  .Sam.si-Ramnian,  put
down  the  rebellion,  and  on  his  father's  death  succeeded
to  the  throne.

On  a  monolith  of  .Sam.si-R.amm.nn  II.,  now  in  the  British
Museum, is  :ui  inscription in arcliaistic characters narrating

_  four  campaigns  of  this  mon.arch. He  restored  order  to

°^4-  the  kingdom,  which  had  been  thrown  into  confusion  by
the  rebellion  of  his  brother,  and,  having  established  his  own
authority  over  the  territory  subjugated  by  his  father,  ex-
tended it  on  the  E.  He  routed  the  Habyloni.an  king,  Marduk-
balatsii-ikbi,  in  spite  of  the  large  army  the  latter  had  collected,
comprising  drafts  from  Elam  and  Chaldea  in  addition  to  bis
regular  troops.

Sanisi-Rammfin II. was succeeded by liis son.

Raminan-nirari  III.

Two  inscriptions  on  stone  slabs  from  Cal.ah,  an inscription

on  some  statues  of  tlie  gixl  Nebo,  and  an  inscription  on  a  brick
P  from  the  mound  of  Nebi-Viim"is,  are  the  records  actually

°'^' d;aini;  from his  reign;  but these  are  supplemented  by

a  sliort  noti,  e  in  the  '  .Synchronous  Histor>-,'  and  by  the  Eponym

Canon,  wliicli  adds  short  notices  of  the  principal  events  during

each  year  of  his  reign.

Ramman-nirari  III.  undertook  expeditions  in  Media.
Parsua.  and  the  region  of  Lake  Urumiyah  on  the  K. ;
concjuered  the  land  of  Nairi  on  the  N. ;  and  subjugated
all  the  coastlands  on  the  W. .  including  Tyre,  Sidon.
Israel.  ?",dom,  and  I'hilistia.  Mari',  king  of  Damascus
(see  Bknh.VDAD,  §  3),  attempted  no  defence  of  his  capital.
He  sent  to  Ramman-nirari  his  submission,  paying  a
heavy  tribute  in  silver,  gold,  copper,  and  iron,  besides
quantities  of  cloth  an<i  furniture.  A  considerable
portion  of  Babylonia  also  owned  the  supremacy  of
Ramman-nirari.  In  his  inscription  on  the  statues  of
Nebo,  he  mentions  the  name  of  his  wife  Samnmramat
(the  Assyrian  form  of  the  Greek  Semiramis).  He  was
a  great  monarch.  His  energetic  rule  and  extensive
co!K|uests  recall  those  of  .Shalmaneser  II.  his  grand-
father.

Of  the  three  kings  that  follow  not  much  is  known.

„ Shalmaneser  HI.  succeedetl  Ranmian-nirari,  and

^  ^' froni the I'.jwnynj t.anon we gather  that he

undertook  campaigns  against I'rartu  (.Armenia), Itu",

Damascus,  and  Hatarika  ( Hadrach). He  was  succeedetl

by  .\.sur-dan HI. This  king  made  foreign  ex-

^^  ■ petlitions. His was a troubled reign. The

most  important event  recorded in his time was the

eclipse  of  the  sun  in  763  (cp  above,  §  19,  end  ;  Amos.  §  4  ;

EcMi'SK,  §1). The  same  year saw  the  outbreak  of

civil  war  :  the  ancient  city  of  .\sur  had  revolted. In

761  the  rebellion  was  joined  by  the  city  of  Arapha.  and

in  759  by  the  city  of  (jozan. In  758,  however,  after  it

had  lasted  six  years,  the  revolt  was  brought  to  an  end  ;

Gozan  was  captured,  and  order  once  more  restored.

The  troubles  of  Assyria  during  the  reign  of  Asur-dan

370


ASSYRIA

were  aggravated  in  the  years  765  and  759  by  visitations
of  the  plague.  On  liis  death  he  was  succeeded  by  Asur-
nirari.  Although  at  the  beginning  of  his  reign
'^^^'  this  king  undertook  expeditions  against  Hadrach
and  Arpad,  and  later  two  campaigns  against  the  Ziniri,
for  the  greater  part  of  his  reign  he  was  inactive.  In
746  the  city  of  (,'alah  revolted,  and  next  year  a  man  of
unusual  energy  usurped  the  throne,  and,


ASUR-BANI-PAL


33.  Tiglath-


assuniing the name of Tiglath-pileser,


^ ,  ■ extended  Assyrian  supremacy  farther  than

it  had ever reached. In the  reign of
'riglath-j)ileser III. Assyria came into
'"'-'■  close  contact  with  the  Hebrews, a  con-

tact that  continued  under  each  of  his  successors  until
the  reign  of  Ivsarhaddon.  The  events  of  their  reigns
and  the  influence  they  exerted  on  the  history  of  Israel
and  Judah  are  described  in  the  separate  articles  on  these
successive  kings.

Tiglath-pileser  III.  was  succeeded  in  727  by  Sii.\L-


727-669.


m.\ni-.si:k  IV.  (t/.v.),  and  he  in  722  by  the


usurper  S.\kgon  {'/.z'.),  to  whom  succeeded
in  705  his  son  .Sknn.vchkkih  {</.i: ),  in  680  his  grandson
lOsAkiiAUDON  ('/.<'.),  and  in  669  his  great-grandson
Asur-bani-pal.  For  the  expeditions  of  the  last-
named  monarch  in  Egypt,  IClam,  Arabia,  etc.  see
A5uk-hani-I'.\L.  His  literary  tastes  found  expression  in
the  collecting  of  a  great  library  at  Nineveh.  The  Eponym
list  and  his  own  iiiscrii)tions  cover  only  the  fast
part  of  his  reign  ;  his  later  years  are  clouded  in
uncertainty,  and  the  date  of  his  death  is  a  matter  of
conjecture. The period  from  his  death


34.  Decline


until  the  fall of  Nineveh  is  equallv  ob-


and  fall "'""  ""'  '""  ^' •"'""-'"'"  '^  '^T

scare.  We  know  the  names  of  two  of
his  sons,  .\sur-etil-ilani  and  .Sin-sar-iikun,  who  both
occupied  the  throne  ;  but  the  length  of  their  respective
reigns  and  even  the  order  of  their  succession  are  matters
of  dispute.  It  used  to  be  assumed  that  during  this
period  Assyria  was  entirely  stripped  of  her  power  and
foreign  possessions  ;  but  this  view  has  now  been  modified
in  consequence  of  recently  discovered  contract -tablets
dated  from  both  northern  and  southern  Babylonian  cities
according  to  the  regnal  j-ears  of  the  last  two  Assyrian
kings.  These  prove  that  the  Assyrian  supremacy  in
Babylonia  continued  for  some  little  time  at  least.  As-
syria's power,  however,  was  waning.  A  long  career  of
concjuest  had  been  followed  by  an  age  of  luxury,  and  her
strength  was  sapped.  The  Scythian  hordes  that  had  swept
across  W.  Asia  had  further  weakened  her.  Thus,  when
Nabopolassar,  repudiating.Assyrian  control,  allied  himself
with  Cyaxares.  king  of  Media,  and  their  combined  forces
invaded  the  country,  her  resistance  met  with  no  success.

, , Though  Xineveh  held  out  for  two  years,  the

circa  606. . "^  ,  , , 1  , ,

city  was  at  last  captured  and  destroyed,  and

Assyria  was  annexed  to  the  empire  of  the  Medes.

The  most  recent,  and  at  the  .same  time  most  scientific,  work  on
Assyrian  art  and  architecture  is  Perrot  and  Chipiez's  //isL  de
fart  dans  rantiquite,  vol.  ii.,  Chahiec  ft
38.  Bibliography.  Assyrie,  Paris,  1884.  Of  works  which  ap-
peared soon  after  the  discovery  of  the  re-
mains of  .Assyrian  art,  and  do  not  attempt  a  scientific  treatment,
one  of  the  earliest  was  liotta  and  Flandin's  Monuments  de
Ninive,  5  vols.,  Paris,  1849-50.  The  two  works  of  Sir  Henry
Layard,  Nineiieh  and  its  Remains  and  Monuments  of
Nineveh,  contain  a  good  account  of  his  discoveries.  In  Assyrian
Discoveries,  Lond.  1875,  George  Smith  has  described  the  results
of  his  own  explorations.

For  the  history  of  Assyria  the  principal  work  is  Tide's  Bab.-
Ass.  Gesch.  Gotha,  i886-83.  Reference  may  also  be  made  to
Hommel's  Gesch.  Bab.  u.  Ass.  Berlin,  1885-88,  the  Gesch.  Bah.
u.  Ass.  by  Miirdter  and  Delitzsch,  Calw  and  Stuttgart,  1S91,
and  Winckler's  Gesch.  Bab.  u.  Ass.  Leipz.  1892.  Among
Knglish  works  dealing  with  the  history  of  Assyria,  see  George
Smith's  Assyria  (SPCK,  Oxf.  1875),  and  Prof.  G.  Rawlinson's
Five  Great  .M anarchies  0/  the  Eastern  World,  vols.  i.  and  ii.
Lond.  1871.  Both  these  works  have  been  superseded  on  several
points  in  consequence  of  later  discoveries.

Assyrian  history  can  be  rightly  understood  only  if  followed  in
the  inscriptions  themselves.  Translations  of  most  of  the  his-
torical inscriptions  of  Assyria  are  given  in  Sclirader's  KB  i.  and
ii.  Berlin,  1889-90,  each  of  which  contains  an  explanatory  map.
A  series  of  popular  English  translations  of  Egyptian  and  As.syrian
monuments  was  foiiiidoj  and  edited  by  Dr.  S.  Birch  of  the  British

371


Museum  and  entitled  RP  (12  vols.  Lond.  1S73-81),  of  which  vols,
i.  iii.  V.  vii.  ix.  and  xi.  deal  with  Assyrian  and  Babylonian
inscriptions.  These  translations  have  now,  of  course,  been
super-seded.  In  a  new  series  edited  by  A.  H.  Sayce  (6  vols,
Lund.  1888-92)  the  old  methods  and  plan  were  not  modiiied.
As  a  collection  of  all  the  points  in  the  OT  illustrated  or  explained
by  the  monuments,  Schrader's  COT'\%  still  unrivalled.

For  works  treating  of  the  religion  of  the  Assyrians  see  Baby-
lonia, S  71.

For  the  student  who  would  gain  a  more  than  superficial  know-
ledge of  Assyriology  it  is  needless  to  give  a  list  of  works,  as  this
has  already  been  done  in  Bezold's  Bab.  Ass.  lit.  Leipz.  1886;
the  literature  since  18S6  can  be  ascertained  from  the  bibliographies
appended  to  the  ZA  and  to  the  American  Journal  0/ Semitic
Languages  and  Literatures,  and  from  the  Or.  Bibliographie.

L.  W.  K.

ASTAD (actaa  [A]), I Esd.  5i3 RV=Ezra2i2.

AZGAD.

ASTAEOTH  (mntrr),  Dt.  l  4  ; RV  Ashtaroth.
ASTARTE. See  AsaroKETH.
ASTATH  (ACT&e  [BA]  ^zfAA [E]). i  Esd.  838  =
Ezra  8 12,  .\zc;ad.

ASTROLOGER  (Dan.  l2oetc.,  ^if^).  RV  En-
chanter; and  Is.  47i3t  (u^P'J' ""l^'n),  RV"'*f-
'divider  of  the  heavens.'  See  Stars,  §  5;  also
Divi.NATiON,  §  2  (5)  and  M.\Gic,  g  3  (4).

ASTYAGES  (actyafhc  [BAQ]),  according  to
Theodotion's  text  of  Bel  and  the  Dragon  {v.  1),  was  the
predecessor  of  Cyrus  in  the  kingdom  of  Persia.  See
CviiLS.

ASUPPIM  and  HOUSE  OF  ASUPPIM  (i  Ch.  20 17.
n*S3.^^;  eic  TO  <\CA<l)eiN  [A],  e.r.  ececj).  [B] ;
Toic  AC&cJjeiAA  [E];  r.  15  'NH  n^3,  oiKoy  &cA(t)eiN
[A],  O.  ece(JjGiN[B],  o.  &C<\ct)[L];  1^  ^  .^fPesh.l;
RV  in  each  case  '  the  storehouse.'  In  Neh.  1225t  AV
renders  thesameword  '  the  thresholds '[marg.  'treasuries,*
'  assemblies  ']  ;  ©bnal,  fV  jQ  (Twayayeiv  fie  [different
vocalisation];  RV  'the  storehouses'),  a  word  used  by
the  Chronicler  to  describe  certain  storehouses  situated
at  the  temple  gates  {.\eh.  I225),  perhaps  specially  the
soutiiern  gate  (i  Ch.  2615). See  Temple.

ASUR(AC0YP[B-^]),  I  Esd.  531  RV  =  Ezra25i.HAR-

HUR.

ASUR-BANI-PAL.  Though  mentioned  by  name
only  once  or  twice  in  OT  (see  .\snapi'KK),  Asur-bani-pal
is  important  to  OT  literature  from  his  deportation  of
troublesome  populations  to  the  region  of  Samaria  (see
Samaria,  Samaritans,  and  cp  below,  §  12) ;  also
from  references  to  his  camp.aigns  in  Egypt  and  Arabia  in
the  prophecies  (see  Is.MAH,  ii.  §9,  and  Xaiilm,  §2).  He
was  one  of  Assyria's  greatest  kings,  and  famous  not  less
for  his  devotion  to  art  and  literature  than  for  his  extensive
concjuests.  His  name,  which  is  best  read  .Asur-bani  (or
bani)-apli,  means  '  A.sur  is  the  creator  of  a  son.'  He  was
the  eldest  son  of  Esarhaddon,  and  ascended  the  throne
in  668  B.C.  His  succession  had  teen  secured  by  his
having  been  publicly  proclaimed  king  before  his  father's
death,  while  his  brother,  Samas-sum-ukin,  was  installed
in  Babylon  as  viceroy  or  tributary  prince.

From  the  moment  of  his  accession  he  was  plunged
into  a  prolonged  war  in  Egypt,  for  Tarku  (Tirhakaii),
king  of  Ethiopia,  in  the  words  of
A.sur-kani-pal,  '  forgot  the  might  of
Asur,  Istar,  and  the  great  gods  my
lords,  and  trusted  in  his  own  strength '  :  that  is,  he
raised  a  large  army  and  descended  upon  Egj'pt.  The
prefects  and  governors  appointed  by  Esarhaddon  fled  at
Tarka's  approach.  He  captured  Theljes,  descended  the
Nile  to  Memphis  where  he  lixed  his  capital,  and  pro-
claimed himself  king  of  Egypt.  On  receiving  the  news
of  this  disaster,  .^sur-b.ani-pal  determined  to  recover
Egypt.  During  the  p.assage  of  his  army  through  Syria
and  along  the  coast  of  the  Mediterranean,  reinforce-
ments in  men  and  ships,  in  addition  to  the  customary
tribute,  were  received  from  twenty-two  subject  kings  of

372


1.  Ist  Egyptian
campaign.


3.  2nd  Egyptian
expedition.


4 Sietre '^^^^'^ '" ^^^ midst of  the sea'
Of  Tyre *^!=scription  of  the
^ ' his predecessors,


ASUR-BANI-PAL

Palestine  and  Cyprus,  among  whom  Manasseh,  king  of
Judah,  is  mentioned  (cp  EsakhaudoN).  Tarku,
hearing  of  the  advance  of  the  Assyrians,  sent  out  his
own  forces  from  Mcmijhis.  At  Karbaniti,  within  the
Egyptian  lx)rder,  the  forces  of  TarijU  were  utterly
routed,  while  the  king  himself  abandoned  Memphis
and  escaped  by  Iwat  to  Thelxis,  leaving  his  capital  and
the  whole  of  Lower  I'^gypt  in  the  hands  of  the  Assyrians.
The  various  governors  and  petty  kings,  who  had
formerly  been  tributary  to  Esarhaddon  and  had  been
expelled  by  'larkfi,  now  returned,  and  joined  their
own  forces  to  those  of  the  Assyrians,  upon  which  the
combined  armies  ascended  the  Nile  in  a  fleet  of  boats
to  dislodge  Tarku  from  Thelies.  In  forty  days  the
journey  was  accomplished.  Tarku  abandoned  the  city
without  striking  a  blow,  and  retreated  into  Ethiopia,
leaving  the  whole  of  I'.gypt  in  the  hands  of  the  Assyrians,  j
He  did  not,  however,  abandon  his  designs  upon  |
Egypt,  and,  as  his  former  attempt  at  open  opposition '

n T) li. li'i<J  proved  unsuccessful,  hij  now  resorted I
supprelsed.  '°  '"^^'^i^^''': I'^^rceiving  th.t  the  native |

^'^  Egj'ptian  prmccs  were  far  from  contented

under  the  military  sway  of  the  Assyrians,  he  ojiened  secret I
negotiations  with  them,  Nikfi  (Niccno),  Sarruludari,  and
I'akruru  leading  the  conspiracy  on  the  Ej;yplian  side.
It  was  agreed  that  they  should  transfer  their  allegiance I
to  Tarku,  who  in  return  would  leave  them  in  undisturbed
possession of their principalities, and that, while  he
attacked  Egypt  from  the  south,  they  would  raise  a  revolt
in  the  interior. The  Assyrian  generals, however, sus-
pecting that  some  treachery  was  afoot,  intercepted  their
messengers,  and  learnt  the  full  e.xtent  of  the  plot. Niku
and  Sarruludari  were  bound  hand  and  foot  and  sent  to
Nineveh,  while  their  fellow-conspirators  were  slain. Tl,o ;
revolt,  thus  prematurely  hastened,  was  ciuelled  without !
difficulty. Tarku  was  once  more  driven  from Upper j
Egypt,  and  soon  afterwards  died.  j

A5iir-k"ini-pal,  in  restorin};  the  country  again  to  order,  appears  [
to  have  mitigated  liis  former  rigour,  seeking  to  conciliate  rather
than  to  suppress  the  native  rulers.  Niku  was  ikikIijiumI.  He  u.is  j
clothed  in  costly  raiment  ;  a  ring  was  set  upon  lii>  (i!i',-tr,  and  .a  |
fillet  of  gold  about  his  head  (as  an  emblem  of  his  rc-.un.iti.jii) ;  and  ;
with  presents  of  chariots,  horses,  .and  mules,  lie  returned  to  j
Kijypt,  where  he  was  once  more  installed  as  governor  in  Sais,
wiule  his  son  Nabu-sezibanni  was  appointed  governor  of  Athribis.

Ethiopia,  however,  could  not  long  keep  her  eyes  from I
Egypt  ; and, although  Tarku  was  dead,  the  ambitions

of  his  country  did  not  die  with  him. |
was  not  long  tefore  Urdamane,  his

successor,  marched  northwards  and
took  I'jiper  Egypt  (cp  Egypt,  §  66).  He  advanced
from  Thelx;s  to  meet  the  Assyrian  expedition  sent
against  him,  but  was  worsted  in  the  battle,  returned
to  the  city,  and  thence  fled  farther  south  to  Kipkip.
The  Assyrians  marched  on  Thelies,  and  the  city
itself,  together  with  immense  booty,  fell  into  their
hands,  'fhey  carried  back  with  them  to  Assyria  two
huge  obelisks,  and  thus  set  the  fashion,  adopted  by
all  the  later  conc|uerors  of  Egypt,  of  perpetuating  their
victory  by  means  of  the  monuments  of  the  conquered
country  itself.  'With  full  hands,'  writes  .^sur-bani-pal,  '  I
safely  returned  to  Nineveh,  the  city  of  my  rule. '  This

successful  exjxjdition,  however,  had  no  lasting  effect.
Egypt  was  too  far  off  to  remain  for  any  length  of  time
the  vassal  of  .Assyria.  Psammetichus,  the  son  of  Nikfi,
obtained  the  supremacy  over  the  whole  country,  and
permanently  shook  off  the  .Assyrian  yoke.

After his  second Egyptian  campaign  Asur-bani-pal
directeti his  forces  against Ba'al, king  of  Tyre, '  who

good
city  (see  Tyre).  Like
Asur-bani-pal  failed  to
capture  a  stronghold  so  favoured  by  nature.  He
erected  towers  and  earthworks,  however,  and  attempted
to  cut  off  communication  from  the  sea  as  well  as  from
the  land,  and  ntaintained  so  effectual  a  blockade  that
Ba'al,  at  Last  reduced  to  extremities,  sent  Yahi-milki  to

373


6.  Elam.


ASUR-BANI-PAL

ask  for  terms.  A5ur-bani-pal  contented  himself  with
levying  tribute  on  the  city,  and  with  demanding  the
kings  daughter  and  niec-es  for  his  harem,  together
with  their  dowries.  After  humbling  Tyre,  it  was

no  hard  matter  to  obtain  the  submission  of  the  less
imjxjrtant  princes  of  the  Mediterranean  coast.  .\mf)ng
these  were  Vakinlfi,  king  of  the  island-city  of  Akvad,
Mugallu,  king  of  Tabal,  and  Sandasarmu,  king  of
Cilicia  (Cil.lciA,  §  2).

Gyges  ((jugu),  king  of  Lydia,  also  apjx^rs  to  have
heard  of  the  success  of  the  Assyrians,  and  to  have  .sent
p  -in his  submission. Eor  some  years he

. ,r°  maintained these  friendly  relations, and

uy  la,  etc.  ^^  ^j^j^  j^,^^.^  attributed  his  success  over  the
Cinmierians,  in  proof  of  which  he  sent  to  Nineveh  two
captive  Cimmerian  chiefs  bound  hand  and  foot  with
fetters  of  iron.  Towards  the  end  of  the  reign  of  Asur-
bani-pal,  however,  Gyges  severed  his  connection  with
Assyria,  and  aided  Psammetichus  (Psametik)  in  his
struggle  for  I",gyptian  indei>endence  (cp  Egvi-t,  g  67).

Asur-bani-pal  was  now  free  to  turn  his  attention  to  the
eastern  borders  of  his  kingdom.

During  the  absence  of  the  Assyrian  army  in  its  distant
camp:ii.;ns,  the  E.  frontier  of  Assyria  had  been  coiistanlly
vi.>l:ited  by  the  king  of  Mannai  (see  Mi.nm).  Asur-bani-pal
determined  to  chastise  Al)5eri.  He  marched  northwards,  and
foiled  an  attempt  of  his  opponent  to  surprise  the  Assyrians  by  a
niL;ht  attack.  A|)scri  fled  to  his  capital  Izirtu,  while  .A.s'ur-
bruii-pal  laid  waste  the  country.  On  his  death  in  a  revolt  he
was  succeeiled  by  his  son  Ualli,  who  bought  terms  of  peace
from  A5ur-bani-pal.

The  most  warlike  nation  on  the  E.  of  Assyria,  how-
ever, and  indeed  her  most  powerful  enemy,  was  Ei..\M
((/.  '■. ).  Urtaku  its  king  had  shown  his  hostility
to  Assyria  already  in  the  reign  of  Esarhaddon,
by  attempting  to  stir  up  a  rebellion  in  Chaldea  ;  and
although,  when  his  people  were  suffering  from  famine,
he  had  received  assistance  from  .\sur-bani-pal  himself,  he
now  proposed  an  invasion  of  Babylonia,  hoping  thereby
to  cripple  the  .Assyrian  power.

Acting  on  the  advice  of  his  general,  M.arduk-?Suin-ibni,  he
formed  an  alli.uicc  with  P.cl-iklsa,  king  of  Gambulu — a  coiuiir>
situated  in  the  lower  b.asin  of  the  Tigris,  on  the  shores  of  the
Persian  tnilf— and  having  won  over  to  his  side  Nabfi-5um-Iris,  a
governor  in  Chaldea,  he  crossed  the  Babylonian  border.  On
news  being  brought  to  Asur-bani-pal  that  the  Elamites  h.id
advanced  like  a  flight  of  locusts'  and  were  encamped  against
Babylon,  he  set  on  foot  an  expedition,  and,  marching  southwards,
drove  Urtaku  beyond  the  frontier.

On  the  death  of  Urtaku,  shortly  afterwards,  the  throne
was  seized  by  Teumman,  who  immediately  sought  to  rid
himself  of  the  sons  of  the  former  kings,  Urtaku  and
Ummanald.as  I.  His  intended  victims,  however,  escajjed
with  their  friends  to  the  court  of  Asur-bani-pal,  where
they  were  in  kindliness  received,  and  protected.  This
incident  caused  a  renewal  of  the  war  between  Elam  and
Ass}Tia.  An  interesting  fact,  which  throws  light  on
Assyrian  prophecy,  is  related.  On  theeve  of  the  campaign
Asur-bani-pal  prayed  solemnly  to  the  gotidess  Istar,  who
to  encourage  him  appeared  in  a  vision  to  a  seer,  and
promised  victory  to  the  Assyrian  arms.  ^  Confident  of
success,  Asur-bani-pal  set  out  for  Elam,  and  pressed  on
up  to  the  walls  of  Susa.  Here,  on  the  banks  of
the  Eula;us,  there  was  a  decisive  battle,  in  which  the
Elamites  were  utterly  routed.

'The  land  of  Klam,"  writes  .Asur-bani-pal,  'through  its  extent
1  covered,  as  when  a  mighty  storm  approaches  ;  I  cut  off  the
head  of  'I'eumman,  their  king,  the  rebel  who  had  plotted  evil.
Beyond  number  1  slew  his  warriors ;  alive  in  my  hands  I  took
his  fighting  men  ;  with  their  corpses  as  with  thorns  and  thistles
I  filled  the  vicinity  of  Susa  ;  their  blood  I  caused  to  flow  in  the
Eulseus,  and  I  stained  its  waters  like  wool.'-

.Asur-bani-pal  divided  the  land,  proclaimed  as  vassal
kings  Ummaniga.s  and  Tammaritu,  the  two  sons  of
Urtaku  who  had  cast  themselves  on  his  protection,  and,

1  See  the  striking  p.-iss.-ige  in  the  annals  (Smith,  J/ist.  0/
Assurb.  123-126).

*  (5  K  5,  43,  a^rvp  klnta  nahdsi.  A'a^rjjw  =' red  -  coloured
woo!.'  The  adverb,  nabdsfi,  'like  red  wool,"  ace.  to  Ruben,
JQR  10  SSI,  is  an  Ass.  loan-word  in  the  Song  of  Deborah,
corrupted  in  our  text.]

374


ASUR-BANI-PAL

returning  by  way  of  Ganibulu,  exacted  a  terrible  venge-
ance from  that  land.

We  now  approach  the  greatest  crisis  in  the  history  of

Asur-bani-pal. On  ascending  the  throne  of  Assyria  he

7 Revolt  of  ^'^'^  appointed  his  younger  brother  Samas-


BabyloE


sum-ukin king  of Babylon, without  re-


suppressed. V


nouncing  his  own  suzerainty.  Samas-
sum-ukin,  however,  was  dissatisfied  with
his  dependent  position,  and  resolved  to  revive,  if
possible,  the  relations  between  .Assyria  and  Babylon.
His  own  resources  being  insufficient  for  subjugating
Assyria,  he  began  to  form  a  coalition  of  the  neighbouring
nations,  all  glad  of  an  opportunity  to  strike  a  blow  at
their  powerful  neighbour.  The  Chaldeans  and  the
Aranirean  tribes  of  the  coast  gave  assistance  ;  Um-
manigas,  king  of  IClam,  threw  over  his  patron  Asur-
bani-pal,  and  joined  the  revolt  ;  Arabia,  Ethiopia,
and  possibly  Egypt,  sent  help.  Asur-bani-pal  did  not
lose  an  instant,  but  set  out  with  the  whole  of  his  force
to  the  SE. ,  where  he  successfully  kept  his  enemies  in
check.

Fortune  favoured  him  by  neutralising  to  some  extent  the
assistance  which  Samas-sum-ukln  expected  to  receive  from  Elam,
his  most  powerful  ally.  That  country  was  thrown  by  internal
revolution  into  a  state  bordering  on  anarchy,  Ummanigas  and
the  whole  of  his  family  having  been  slain  by  Tammaritu,  who
in  turn  was  dethroned  by  Indabiga.5,  and  only  saved  his  life  by
flight  to  Assyria.

Asur-baui-pal  hastened  to  attack  the  allied  forces,  easily
defeated  them,  and  proceeded  to  besiege  the  four  cities
—Babylon,  Borsippa,  Sippara,  and  Cutha — in  which
they  had  sought  shelter  after  their  defeat.  The
defenders  held  out  stubbornly  for  some  time.  When
all  was  over,  Sama5-sum-iikin,  to  avoid  his  brother's
vengeance,  set  fire  to  his  palace  and  perished  in  the
flames.

After stamping out the rest of the rebellion and

restoring order throughout Babylonia and Chaldea,

8 Subiueation  ^^^""""bani-pal  directed  his  forces  against

^f  r-if™ Elam,  where  for  the  next  two  or  three

of  Elam.  ,  ■ ,  , T  T

years  he  carried on a  war  with  Um-

manaldas  II.,  who  had  ascended  the  throne  of  Elam
after  slaying  Indabigas,  his  predecessor.  It  is  true  that
for  a  short  time  during  this  period  Ummanaldas  was
driven  into  the  mountains  by  Asur-bani-pal,  who  set
Tammaritu  on  the  throne  of  Elam  in  his  stead  ;  but,
as  soon  as  the  Assyrian  army  had  withdrawn,  Um-
manaldas came  out  from  his  retirement,  gathered  his
forces,  and  compelled  Asur-bani-pal  again  to  take  the
field  against  him.  On  the  appearance  of  the  Assyrian
army  Ummanaldas  retired,  allowing  Asur-bani-pal  to
capture  the  cities  and  lay  waste  the  country  on  his
march.  At  length,  however,  he  hazarded  a  battle.
He  met  with  a  signal  defeat  and  was  again  driven  to
take  refuge  in  the  mountains,  while  Susa  and  its  ac-
cumulated riches  fell  into  the  hands  of  the  conquerors.
'  Uy  the  will  of  Asur  and  Istar,'  boasts  Asur-bani-pal,  'into  its

r daces  I  entered  and  sat  myself  down  rejoicing.  Then  opened
their  treasure-houses,  within  which  silver  and  gold,  furniture
and  goods,  were  stored,  which  the  former  kings  of  E:iam  and  the
kings  who  had  ruled  even  to  these  days  had  collected  and  placed
therein,  whereon  no  other  foe  besides  myself  had  set  his  hands  :
1  brought  it  forth  and  as  spoil  I  counted  it.'  He  recovered  also
all  the  treasures  with  which  §amas-sum-ukTn  and  his  predecessors
had  purchased  Klamite  support.  Susa  itself  was  rased  to  the
ground  ;  the  royal  statues  were  carried  to  Assyria  ;  the  groves
were  cut  down  and  burnt,  and  the  temples  violated.

After  the  subjugation  of  Elam  the  annals  of  Asur-
bani-pal  relate  a  series  of  conflicts  with  Arabia  (.Smith,

9  Arabia  ^^"^-  °f  ^^^^'^^-  256 #)•  This  was  the
last  great  war  in  which  this  monarch
is  known  to  have  engaged.  At  the  beginning  of  his
reign  he  apjxiars  to  have  had  friendly  relations  with  the
Arabian  king  Uaite'  ;  but  on  the  revolt  of  .Samns-sum-
ukin  the  latter  joined  the  coalition  against  Assyria.
Uaite'  himself  attacked  Palestine,  overrunning  Edom  and
Moab,  and  penetrating  almost  as  far  N.  as  Damascus.
Here,  however,  he  was  defeated  by  the  Assyrians.

Leaving  his  camp  standing,  Uaite'  fled  alone  to  Nabataea. He

375


ASUR-BANI-PAL

appears,  however,  to  have  surrendered  to  ASur-bani-pal,  who
threw  him  into  chains,  and  kept  him  a  prisoner  in  a  kennel
with  his  hounds— .'\diya  his  wife,  and  the  king  of  Jsedar,  his  ally,
sharing  the  same  fate.  The  other  division  of  the  Arabian  army,
which  had  joined  the  forces  of  .Samai>-sum-ukin,  shared  his  defeat
and  perished  in  Habylonia.  Abiyate",  their  leader,  surrendered
to  Asur-bani-pal,  kissed  his  foot  in  token  of  submission,  and  was
appointed  king  of  Arabia  in  the  place  of  Uaite'.  No  sooner,
however,  had  he  returned  to  his  country,  than  he  associated  him-
self with  the  Nabataeans  in  a  series  of  joint  attacks  on  the  frontier
of  Assyria.  Asur-bani-pal,  therefore,  crossed  the  Tigris  with  his
army,  and  embarked  on  a  difficult  march  through  the  -Syrian
desert.  The  Assyrians,  after  some  minor  conflicts  in  which  they
were  successful,  eventually  engaged  the  main  body  of  the
Arabian  army  in  the  mountains  of  Hukkuruna,  to  the  SK.  of
Damascus.  The  Arabians  were  defeated,  Abiyate"  and  Ayamu
were  taken,  and  A5ur-bani-pal  set  out  for  Assyria  with  immense
numbers  of  captives  and  herds  of  cattle ;  on  his  return  camels
were  distributed  throughout  Assyria  '  like  sheep."

The annals conclude their record of the wars of
Asur-bani-pal with an account of his


10.  Closing
years.


triumphal  procession through  Nineveh  in

celebration  of  his  victories.
Ummanalda.?,  the  Elamite,  who  had  shortly  before  been
captured,  Tammaritu  and  Pa'e,  two  other  captive  Elamite
kings,  with  Uaite',  the  king  of  Arabia,  were  fastened  to  tlie
yoke  of  the  chariot  in  which  he  rode.  He  then  entered  the
temple  of  his  gods,  offering  sacrifices  and  praising  them  for  the
triumphs  they  had  vouchsafed  him  over  his  enemies.

Asur-bani-pal  probably  reigned  till  625  B.  c. ;  but  of  his
later  years  the  royal  records  do  not  speak.  It  is  im-
possible to  assign  with  certainty  a  reason  for  this
silence.  Possibly  the  kingdom,  which  had  been  shaken
to  its  foundations  by  the  revolt  of  Samas-sum-ukin
during  these  years,  showed  signs  of  its  approaching  end.
It  is  certain,  at  any  rate,  that  the  Medes,  whom  Asur-
bani-pal  had  earlier  in  his  reign  defeated,  again  showed
signs  of  activity  (see  Per.sia)  ;  and  it  is  probable  that
during  his  reign  the  wild  hordes  of  the  Scythians
descended  from  the  N.  and  the  NE. ,  slaying  and
plundering  and  carrying  all  before  them.  The  question
whether  the  empire  of  Assyria  declined  only  under  Asur-
bilni-pal's  successors,  or  had  already  become  disintegrated
before  his  death,  is  one  that  cannot  be  answered  with
certainty.

Turning  from  foreign  politics  to  the  internal  condition
of  Assyria  during  the  reign  of  Asur-bani-pal,  we  find  tl


11.  Policy  and


country  superficially,  at  least,  prosper-


buildings,  etc.  °^,'- ^Though the constant wars of
°  Asur-bani-pal  must  have  been  a  great

drain  on  the  manhood  of  the  nation,  his  almost  un-
varying success  resulted  in  a  great  accumulation  of
wealth — ^the  spoil  of  the  conquered  cities.  Not  only
did  his  generals  carry  off"  the  gold  and  silver,  and
anything  else  of  value  that  was  portable  ;  not  only
did  they  drive  to  Assyria  the  flocks  and  herds  of  the
whole  country :  the  population  itself  they  deported.
It  was  the  Assyrian  policy  (see  above,  §  i)  to  weaken
the  patriotic  feeling  of  the  conquered  races  in  this  way,
and  so  to  lessen  the  chances  of  revolt.  A  secondary
object  of  the  conquerors,  however,  had  reference  to
Assyria  herself,  for  huge  bands  of  captives  were  brought
back  in  chains  to  replenish  the  labouring  populace  at
home.  Many  of  these  wretches  found  their  way  into  the
possession  of  private  owners  ;  but  the  majority  of  them
were  retained  as  slaves  by  the  king  himself,  who,  like
his  predecessors,  sought  to  gratify  his  desire  for  splendour
and  to  perpetuate  his  name  by  the  erection  of  huge
buildings  in  the  capital.  The  most  important  of  these
buildings  of  Asur-bani-pal  was  his  own  palace,  which  he
built  to  the  north  of  that  of  his  grandfather  Sennacherib
—  the  remains  exist  at  the  present  day  in  the
mound  of  Kuyunjik  opposite  the  modern  town  of
Mosul.  The  walls  of  its  chambers  he  lined  with
sculptures  in  relief,  representing  his  own  exploits  on
the  field  of  battle  and  in  the  chase,  in  which  the  details
are  most  carefully  and  elaborately  carved,  while  the
designs  themselves  mark  the  acme  of  Assyrian
art.  Asur-bani-pal  restored  the  palace  of  Sennacherib,
strengthened the  fortifications  of  Nineveh, and built

376


ASYLUM

or  restored  various  temples  throughout  Assyria  and
Babylonia.

It  was  the  custom  of  the  classical  historians  to
represent  Asur-bani-pal  as  of  an  effeminate  and  luxurious
disposition,  spending  his  life  at  Nineveh  in  idleness  and
dissipation.  The  Assyrian  records  have  dissipated  this
illusion.  Though  it  is  probable  that  many  of  his
campaigns  wore  conducted  by  his  generals,  the  king's
personal  valour  in  the  field  and  in  the  hunt  is  undoubted.
His  skill  as  an  administrator  is  testified  by  his  organisa-
tion of  the  inuiiense  territory  actjuired  in  his  victorious
campaigns.  His  palaces  and  buildings,  even  to  this
day,  boar  witness  to  his  love  for  art  and  architecture.
It  is  for  none  of  those  things,  however,  that  his  memory
is  honoured  alxne  that  of  other  kings  of  Assyria.  He
was  the  first  of  his  nation  to  make  a  systematic  and
universal  study  and  collection  of  his  country's  literature,
and  it  is  to  the  lii^rary  he  collected  in  his  palace  that  we
owe  the  greater  part  of  our  knowledge  of  Babylonian
and  Assyrian  literature  and  language.  L.  w.  K.

ASYLUM,  a  sanctuary,  within  whose  precincts  those
who  take  refuge  may  not  be  harmed  without  sacrilege.

1.  General


principle.


In  early  times,  holy  places,  as  the  homos  or
haunts  of  the  gods,  extended  over  every-
thing in  thorn  the  protection  of  their  own
inviolability.  Wild  animals,  and  sometimes  even
domestic  animals  which  strayed  into  them,  shared  this
protection  with  debtors,  fugitive  slaves,  and  criminals,
as  well  as  the  victims  of  unjust  pursuit  or  violence.
Manslayors  sought  refuge  in  them  from  the  sword  of
the  avenging  kinsmen,  and  the  right  of  asylum  had  an
especial  importance  among  those  peoples  in  which  the
primitive  law  of  blood  vengeance  was  most  persistently
maintained.^  The  right  of  asylum  was  possessed  by
different  sanctuaries  in  various  degrees,  depending  on
proscription,  the  holiness  of  the  place,  and  other  circum-
stances ;  it  sometimes  extended  to  an  entire  city,  or  even
to  a  mark  beyond  its  walls.  Even  within  the  same
sanctuary  it  was,  of  course,  a  greater  sacrilege  to  drag
the  suppliant  away  from  the  altar  or  from  the  image  of
the  god,  or  to  slay  him  there,  than  merely  to  violate  the
sacred  precincts.  In  later  times  the  abuse  of  those
privileges  led  to  legal  regulation  and  restriction  (cp,
c.j(.,  Tac.  Ann.  860-64  414).

In  Israel  the  oldest  law  (Ex.  21 12-14)  recognises  the
riglu of asylum, but denies its protection to the


2.  Early


murderer  wUh  malice  aforethought  : '  from


practice.


lx.'side  my  altar  thou  shall  take  him  to  die. '
Doubtless  every  altar  of  Yahwe  (Ex.  20 24/. )
was  an  a.sylum  ;  but  not  all  wore  equally  venerated,  nor
would  the  village  high-place  protect  the  suppliant  as
securely  as  the  more  famous  sanctuaries.  The  only
historical  instances  in  the  OT  in  which  men  who  fear
for  their  lives  take  refuge  at  God's  altar  are  those  of
Adonijah  (iK.l  50-53)  and  Joab  (iK.  228-34;  on  the
text  cp  ©  and  Klo. ).  Adonijah  was  i^orsuaded  to  leave
the  asylum  ;  Joab,  by  Solomon's  orders,  was  slain  at
the  very  altar.

When  the  drastic  reforms  of  Josiah  (621  B.C.)
destroyed  and  desecrated  all  the  old  holy  places  of
3  In  Dt  ^^'^^^^  '"  ^'^  kingdom  except  the  temple  in
Jerusalem,  one  of  the  necessary  measures  of
the  reform  laws  was  to  provide  a  substitute  for  the  asyla
thus  abolished  ;  since  it  was  obviously  impossible  that
manslayors  from  the  remote  parts  of  the  land  should
escape  to  Jerusalem.  Accordingly,  six  cities  of  refuge
are  appointed — three  E.  of  the  Jordan  (Ut.  441-43),'^  three
W.  of  it  (Dt.  192/) — with  eventual  provision  for  three
more,  in  Philistia,  Phoenicia,  and  Coi'le-Syria  (Dt.  19
8-10).  The  distinction  between  manslaughter  and
murder  is  clearly  defined  and illustrated  , the  case  is

1  So,  e.g.,  in  Greece  ;  whilst  in  Rome,  where  blood  vengeance
was  early  abolished  by  law,  the  right  of  asylum  was  almost
exclusively  reserved  for  slaves.

2  These  verses  are  out  of  place,  and  probably  secondary  ;  sec
Dec  riiKONo.MV,  f  20.

377


ASYNCRITUS

tried  at  the  place  whore  the  offence  was  committed,  and
if  the  verdict  Ix;  nmrdor  the  elders  of  the  city  in  whose
territory  the  defendant  resides  arc  emjxjwered  to  take
him  from  the  asylum  and  deliver  him  to  the  next
kinsman  of  the  murdered  man,  as  the  natural  executor
of  the  sentence. '

The  post-exilic  law  also  (Nu.  359^,  cp  Josh.  2O-2-6)
appoints  six  cities  of  refuge  (c''i:t:.i  "^y),  and  defines  the
y  _  crimes  in  substantially  the  same  way  ;  but  it
differs  radically  from  the  Deutoronomic  legisla-
tion in  providing  (i)  that  the  manslayer  shall  bo  brought
from  his  asylum  to  be  tried  l)ofore  tlio  '  congregation  '
('eddh) — i.e.,  the  religious  conmiunity  of  the  post-oxilic
Jerusalem  (Nu.  351224/ )— and  (2)  that  at  the  deatli  of
the  high  priest  the  manslayer  may  without  peril  return
to  his  home  and  estates  (z'z/.  25  28).^*  Further,  it  is  ex-
plicitly forbidden  to  compound  the  crime  by  taking  a
bloodwite,  or  to  allow  the  homicide  upon  payment  of  a
fine  to  leave  the  city  of  refuge  before  the  death  of  the
high  priest.

The  cities  designated  are,  E.  of  the  Jordan,  Bezer,
Ramoth  in  Gilead,  and  Golan  in  Bashan  (Dt.  441-43
5 C"f f  Josh.  208); W. of  the  Jordan, Kodesh  in


refuge.


Galilee,  Shechem,  and  Hebron  (Josh.  2O7).

The  last  three  wore  all  venerable  sanctuaries,
older,  indeed,  than  the  Israelite  invasion,  and  wore
probably  chosen  not  only  on  account  of  their  location,
but  also  because  they  wore  already  asyla  of  established
sanctity.  It  may  bo  assumed  that  this  was  the  case
also  with  the  cities  of  refuge  E.  of  the  Jordan,  of  which,
with  the  exception  of  Kamoth,  we  know  little.  Jewish
scholars,  with  some  plausibility,  maintain  that,  besides
those,  all  the  other  Levitical  cities,  of  which  there
wore  forty-four,  many  of  them  .seats  of  ancient  sanctu-
aries, possessed  the  right  of  asylum  in  a  lower  degree. ■*
Whether  this  system  was  ever  actually  introduced  in  its
whole  extent  is  doubtful.  Neither  in  the  brief  years
between  Josiah's  reform  and  the  fall  of  the  Jmhvan
kingdom  nor  after  the  restoration  did  Judah  pos.soss
more  than  a  small  jjart  of  the  territory  contemplated  by
these  laws.

In  the  (jrook  poriiKJ,  and  later  (under  Roman  rule)
many  Hellenistic  cities  in  Syria  enjoyed  the  privileges  of
p  ,,  .  asvlums.  Not  to  speak  of  the  famous
b.  raxaiieis.  sa-„^;ju_.^ry  of  Apollo  and  Artemis  at
Daphne,  near  Antioch,  where  the  Jewish  high  priest,
Onias,  is  said  to  have  taken  refuge  (2  Mace.  433^,
cp  Strabo,  .xvi.  26),  the  title  dcn'Xos  appears  on  coins  (jf
Ctv'sarea,  Panias,  Dioca;sarea  (Sepphoris)  in  (ialileo,
Ptolomais(.\cco),  Dora  (Dor),  .Scythopolis  (Beth-sheanI,
Gadara  and  Abila  in  the  Decapolis,  and  others.  .\c-
cording  to  Josephus  [Ant.  xm.'l^),  this  character  was
conferred  on  Jerusalem  by  Demetrius  I. ;  but  i  Mace.
IO31  knows  nothing  of  it.  C'p.  Ashtokkth,  ^\siii;k.\ii.
There  is  no  recent  and  adequate  work  on  this  subject.  / I'lc
Law  0/ Asylum  in  Israel,  by  A.  P.  Rissell  (I.eipsic,  1882)  is  a
lalioured  attempt  to  prove  that  the  laws  must  all  have  originated
in  the  age  of  Moses.  See  also  S.  Ohlenburg,  DU  Inl'lischcn
Asylc  in  talmudischem  Gnvande,  1895  ;  and  compare  .Stengel,
art.  'Asylon'  in  Pauly-Wissmva,  Keal-encycl.  der  class.
AllertuiHswiss.  On  the  wide  diffusion  of  the  fundamental  con-
ception of  asylums,  and  on  its  possible  origin,  see  J.  ( :.  Frazer's
article  on  '  i'he  Origin  of  Totemism  and  Exogamy '  in  J-'ort.
Ret'.,  April  1899.  G.  V.  .M.

ASYNCRITUS  (AcyrKPlTOC  [Ti.J,  -yNK.  [WH])
is  one  of  live  who.  with  •  the  brethren  that  are
with  them,'  are  saluted  in  Rom.  16 14.  They  seem  to
have  been  Christian  heads  of  households,  or  perhaps
class  leaders  of  some  sort.

.\syncritus  figures  in  the  list  of  the  '  seventy  disciples '  by  the


1  In  all  these  particulars  there  is  a  striking  and  instructive
resemblance  to  the  Athenian  code  of  Draco  (624  B.C.).

■-In  this  provision  it  is  evident  that  the  sojourn  in  the  city
of  refuge  is  regarded  as  a  species  of  exile,  a  punishment  which
was  removed  by  a  general  amnesty  at  the  ascension  of  the  new
high  priest,  the  real  sovereign.  Accordingly,  in  the  Mishna,
and  in  Jewish  jurisprudence  generally,  residence  in  the  city  of
refuge  is  railed .iWr?,  'exile,'  cp  e.g.  Makkoth,^\.

3  See  Mainionides,  Yad  IJazaka,  Hilkoth  Roseah,  ch.  8.

378


ATAD

Pseudo-Dorotheus  as  bishop  of  '  Urbania,"  and  in  that  of  the
Pseudo- Hippolytus  as  bisnop  of  '  Hyrcania '  ^doubtless  the
preferable  reading).  In  the  great  Greek  Merura  he  is  com-
nicinorated  aloiit;  with  Herodion  and  Agabus  on  8th  April.

ATAD  (TJXn),  Gen.  50  lo. See  Abel-Mizkaim.

ATAR  (atap  [A]),  I  Esd.  528  RV  =  Ezra  242.  Ater.  2.

ATARAH  (HTJi;,  'crown';  atara  [BL],  erepA
[A]),  seioiui  wife  of  Jerahmeel  (iCh.  226).  In
genealogical  phraseology  this  signifies  that  the  clan
occupied  a  new  region  (cp  Caleb's  wife  Ephrath  ;  and
see  .\zrBAii,  Calkh),  and  presumably,  like  Caleb,  it
moved  farther  N. ,  in  which  case  we  may  compare
Atarah  with  .\  rkOTH-BicTH-JoAB,  mentioned  along  with
Bethlehem,  etc.,  in  iCh.  254-

ATARGATIS,  TEMPLE  OF  (to  ATeprATiON  [AV]).
2  Mace,  rjjo;  cp  i  Mace.  543  A  In  the  walled  enclosure
of  this  trans- Jordanic  temple  the  Ammonites  and
Arabians  defeated  by  Judas  the  Maccabee,  after  throw-
ing away  their  arms,  took  refuge  (see  Ashtakoth,  §  i).
It  was  in  164  B.  c. ,  the  year  after  the  re-dedication  of  the
temple  at  Jerusalem,  which  had  animated  the  foes  of  the
church-nation  to  a  deadly  {persecution  (i  Mace.  52).
Judas  had  already  acted  with  the  severity  of  the  old
Israelitish  law  of  war,  dealing  with  the  trans-Jordanic
towns  and  the  heathen  part  of  their  peoples  as  Joshua
had  dealt  with  Jericho  (i  Mace.  5s  28  ;  cp  Josh.  624,  JE),
but  with  the  added  zeal  against  idolatry  justified  by
Dt.  75  123.  Naturally,  this  champion  of  monotheism,
like  his  successor  Jonathan  at  Ashdod  (x  Mace.  10  83),
had  no  scruple  in  violating  the  temple  precincts.  The
unarmed  multitude  he  slew  (2  Mace),  and  the  temple-
buildings,  with  all  the  objects  polluted  by  idolatry,  he
burned  ( i  Mace. ).

Atargatis  (nnjnny;  cp  Vogii^,  Syr.  Cent.  n.  3;  also
injnny  ;  cp  ZD.\IG  ['52J  6  473  /  ),  to  whom  the  temple
l)clonged,  is  in  The  Spfaker's  Commentary  (n.  on
I  Mace.  526)  identified  with  Astarte.  This  is  a  natural
error,  for  Carnaim  is  no  doubt  Ashteroth-Karnaim — so
called  from  the  addiction  of  the  town  to  the  worship  of
various  forms  of  Ashtoreth  or  Astarte.  We  know,  how-
ever, that  these  deities  were  different  ;  for  at  Ascalon
there  were  temples  of  Astarte  and  of  AtargAtis  (DerkCto)
side  by  side.  All  that  is  true  is  that  the  first  part  of  the
name  .Vtargfttis  {i.e.,  ^rlv)  is  the  Aramaic  equivalent  of
the  Phoenician  and  Heb.  [n]inr;'  without  the  fem.  end-
ing (see  PiiffiNici.A)  ;  but  the  religious  significance
of  this  Atnr  ('.Vttar  for  'Athtar)  is  profoundly  modified
by  its  union  with  'Athe  (usually  written  ,iny  or  tiv)'  a
Palmyrene  divinity  whose  name  is  well  attested,  and
occurs  in  many  proper  names.  ^  AtargStis  is,  in  fact,
that  form  of  Astar[te]  which  has  absorbed  into  itself  the
characteristics  of  another  deity  called  'Athe  (cp  Ashtar-
Kamosh  in  the  inscription  of  Mesha).  Lucian,  in  his
De  Dea  Syra,  has  left  us  a  minute  account  of  the  temple
and  worship  of  the  Syrian  goddess  (who  was  no  doubt
Atargatis)  at  Hierapolis  (Mabug),  which  illustrates  the
Jewish  hatred  of  it.

The  connection  of  this  'omnipotent  and  all-producing  goddess'
(Apiileiu.s)  with  sacred  life-giving  waters  has  been  studied  by
Prof.  W.  R.  Smith  (^RS(^)  172-175).  See  also  Prof.  W.  Wright,
TSBA  6438/.;  Haethgen,  Beitr.  68^.  256/;  Baudissin,  art.
'  Atargatis,'  in  Herzog-Plitt,  PRE  vol.  i.  (who  notices  the  differ-
ent forms  under  which  the  goddess  was  represented)  ;  Puchstein,
ZA  !)  420  ;  Roscher,  Lex.  s.v.  'Astarte,'  4  (a).  t.  K.  C.

ATAROTH  (niTOi;,  'crowns'  or  'wreaths,'  cp  Is.  28 1
Zech.  611  14,  etc.  ;  aVapcoO  [BAL]).

1.  iCh.  254. See  Atkotii-Beth-Jo.\b.

2.  Ataroth-Addar  (tin  ni-ipy.  Jo.sh.  16s,  aa-rapoiO
Kai  tpoK  [R],  ar.  k.  aSap  [A],  ar.  a8ap  [L]  ;  18 13,  AV
Ataroth-Adar,  fiaarapioOopfX  [B].  ar.  aSdap  [A],  ar.
(Soap  [L],  called  also  simply  Atakotii,  Jo.sh.  16 2,
Xarapwdei  [B,  where  x  's  all  that  is  left  of  'Dnw]),
perhaps the present 'A/drd on the high road from

1  The  oldest  centre  of  the  wonship  of  'Athe  is  thought  by
Hommel  {PSBA,  1897,  p.  8 1 )  to  have  oeen  the  E.  of  Asia  Minor,
whence  the  cult  spread  to  W.  Asia  Minor  and  N.  Syria.

379


ATHALIAH

Jerusalem  to  Bethel,  3^  m.  S.  of  Bethel,  and  6  E.  of
the  upper  Beth-horon  (see  Gu6rin,  Judie,  Ztf.  ;  but
on  the  other  side  Robinson,  2  314).  As  it  is  a  lien-
jamite  locality,  we  might  plausibly  identify  Aduar  with
the  Benjamite  clan-name  Aduar,  Aku  [y.f.].

3.  An  unknown  site  (ni-c;;.  Josh.  I67,  affrapwd  [B])
between  Janoah  and  Naarah,  on  the  north-eastern  frontier
of  the  territory  of  Ephraim.

4.  A  city  of  Gad  (ni-.oy,  Nu.  32334,  arapuv  [A]  34,
aarapwO  [F'»'<1]),  mentioned  in  the  inscription  of  Mesha
(/.  II,  TOO]})  as  recontjuered  by  him,  along  with  a  '  land
of 'Ataroth  (/.  10)  dwelt  in  from  of  old  by  the  men  of
Gad.'  The  name  survives  as  that  of  a  mountain,  and
a  ruined  site  'Attdrus,  at  the  top  of  the  Wady  Zerka
Main,  10  m.  E.  of  the  Dead  Sea.  (Tristram,  .\/oiib,
272-276.)  The  US  (Eus.  21451,  acrrapwO  :  Jer.  87  17)
wrongly  identify  with  no.  i,  presumably  confusing  Joab
with  Job,  whom  tradition  associates  with  Ashtaroth-
Karnaim. See  Atroth-Shophan.  g.  a.  s.

ATER  ("IPK,  §  66  ;  athp  [BA]  ;  '  left-handed  '  ?  cp
Judg.  :ji5  Heb.,  and  the  Lat.  name  Sca;vola).

1.  The  B'ne  Ater  of  Hezekiah  (•l^'pin"'?  "ICK'':2  ;  arrjp  tu  e^«ia

[RKA]),  a  family  in  the  great  post-exilic  list  (see  Ezka,  ii.  8  9,
§81:),  Ezra 'J  16  (a^fp  tw  e^eict  |L])=Neh.  "21  (a^rjp  tu  t^exia
[L]=i  Esd.  615 (oT7;f> ef«tov [A], a^-qp  t.  [B],  a^rjp  t<j)  t^cKia

(L),  Aterezias,  RV  .'^tek  of  Ezekias.  Atkr  Hkzkkiah,
AV  Atbk  Hizkijah  ('Tptn  IBK),  appears  also  among  the  signa-
tories to  the  covenant  (see  Ezra,  i.  §  7),  Neh.  10  17  [18]  (airip
t.  [BN],  arrip  e.  [A],  a^rip  efexias  [L]).

2.  The  B'ne  Ater  (viol  arrip  (BKA],  vioi  of.jp  [E]),  a  family  of
doorkeepers  in  the  great  post-exilic  list  (see  Ezra,  ii.  §  9)
(C"l>.'L"'rt  '32),  Ezra  2  42  (iiiot  arr.  [A])  =  Neh.  745  (viol  arTjp  viov
arrjp '[B])=iEsd.5  28, Jatal, RV Atar (om. B, arap [A]

ATERGATIS  (to  AreprAXiON  [V.\]),  2  Mace.  I226
RV,  A\'  Ataugatis.

ATETA  (^THTA  [A]),  i  Esd.  528  RV  =  Ezra242,
Hatita.

ATHACH  ("^jnr,  'inn'?[Ges.];  noo  [B],  nomBc
[TR],  Ae^r  t'^]'  NAreB  [L]),  one  of  the  towns  of  Judah
to  which  David  sent  a  part  of  the  Amalekite  spoil
(iS.  3U3ot).  According  to  Wellhausen,  Driver,  and
Budde,  it  is  the  Ethek  {i/.i:)  of  Josh.  1042  {lOaK  [B],
adtp  [AL]),  197  (tfOfp  [BJ.  (ifO.  [A],  ecrep  [L])  ;  these
scholars  decline  to  decide  which  of  the  variants  is  correct,
though  Budde  retains  -;n>'  in  the  text  of  i  S.  The  voo,
voixfie,  and  vaytfi  of  certain  MSS  may,  however,  point
to  a  various  reading  Nob.  Gu(5rin  visited  a  place  called
Nulhi,  near  Khai-ds,  and  \\'.  of  the  Kh.  K'lld  (Keilah),
which,  he  thinks,  may  be  meant  by  vofi^e  {/udi'e,  8349).
That  there  must  have  been  several  places  called  Nob
is  generally  admitted.  Klostermann  suggests  2:y,  yi.v.iB
(Josh.  11 21),  a  place  near  Hebron  (Hebron  follows),
and  the  question  arises  whether  Nob  itself  may  not  Ix;
a  shortened  form  of  Anab  (see  Nob).  In  Josh.  11  21
(5"  gives  ava^o}0  =  r\2:i!.  out  of  which  both  pn  Tociien
[17.  T'.]  and  -^nv  Athach  may  perhaps  have  arisen  by  the
loss  of  one  letter  and  the  transposition  and  slight
corruption  of  other  letters.  It  so  happens  that  there
are  to-day  two  'Anabs  S.  of  Hebron  called  the  great  and
little.  These  may  represent  the  Anaboth  or  Grape-
towns.  T.  K.  c.

ATHAIAH  ( n^nr,  §  39,  meaning  obscure  ;  cp  Gray,
//PN297:  A0eA[B].  -€Ai  [A],  -ee[N].  AGAPAceAcCL];
y4Ti/^JA.'i),  in  list  of  Judahite  inhabitants  of  Jerusalem
(see  Ezra,  ii.  §5  [b],  §  i5[i]«),  Neh.  11  4=  iCh.  94t.
Uthai  Cn-li; ;  rooe[e]i  [BA],  oyei  [E]).  where  differ-
ent links  are  given  Ijctwecn  him  and  Perez.

ATHALIAH  (in^^nr,  nhrsa,  §§  39.  5=:  -vahw^

is  great'  ;  cp  with  Che.,  Ass.  etellu,  'great,  high,'  also
'  lord,'  used  of  gods  and  kings  [Del.  Ass.  HWli,  J.t'.]).
I.  {yodoKia.  [BAL],  but  -BOX.  [A  vid.  in  2  K.lli3]).
Daughter  of  .Ahab  and  Jezebel,  and  wife  of  Jehoram,


A  TH  ART  A3

king  of  Judah  (2  K.  81826  11 1^13*0).  The  death
of  AilA/.iAii  (</.?.,  1)  (lc[)nvf<l  Athaliah  of  her  proud
position  as  qiit-en- mother  (nya;).  Having  apparently
no  other  son  whom  she  could  place  on  the  throne,  she
dottrnnni'd  to  put  to  death  all  the  surviving  nuile
nicnilxrrs  of  the  royal  family,  and  to  govern  in  her  own
name.  For  six  years  (841-836  B.C.)  she  maintained
herself  on  the  throne  —  a  singular  fact  which  raises
cjuestions  more  easily  asked  than  answered.  We  hear
of  nothing  done  by  her  for  her  adopted  country  ;  but
whose  interest  was  it  to  preserve  the  memory  of  this  ?
On  the  story  of  her  deposition  and  violent  death,  see
JoASM  (i).  Observe  that  the  massacre  of  the  royal
princes  by  Athaliah,  adopted  by  the  Chronicler  in  2  i  li.
'22 10.  is  inconsistent  with  the  massacre  attributed  to
Jehoram  in  2  Ch.  21 4  and  the  captivity  of  all  Jehoram  s
sons  but  Ahaziah,  imagined  in  2  Ch.  21 17.

2.  In  a  geiiealocy  of  Uk.sjami.n  [§  9  ii.  ft],  i  Ch.836  (oyoSoAia
[Bl,  yo9oA.a|Al.  o«wa[l.l).

3.  .-V  family  in  Kzra's  caravan  (see  Kzka,  i.  §  2,  ii.  J  15  [i]
if),  K/r.iK;  (afl.Att  ll!|,  a0\ia  [A],  yotfoKiou  [L])=I  Ksd.833
JuTimilAs  lA'  (yoeoAiou  [UA],  -liov.  [L]).

ATHARIAS,  KV  Attiiakias  (&TeApiAC  [HM)-  ^
Ksd.  ;".4.j- ]:zia26!,  Tikshatha  {(/.v.).

ATHARIM  (anriN),  in  the  expression  'NH  TQl  (Nu.
21  it  I  is  t.iktn  by  R\'  for  a  place-name  ('  by  the  way  of
Atharim  '  ;  so  qAon  AOApeiN  [  HJ.  O.  -el^^  [AFL])  ;  by
AV  and  R\'"«-  (following  'I'arg.  and  Syr.)  as  equivalent
to  C'fn  { '  [the  way  of  J  the  spies  ').  That  onnun  should
have  been  substituted  for  nnnn  is.  however,  highly  im-
probable. Dillmann  has  suggested  that  the  word  may  be
connected  with  the  .\rab.  athnr,  '  vestige'  or  '  footprint,'
and  proposes  to  translate  '  the  caravan  path. '  Tlie
expression  may  Ije  corrupt  (see  Kadic.sh,  §  3  i. ).

ATHENOBIUS  (aGhnoBioc  [AN\];,  friend  of  An-
tioclms  \'1I.  SidCtes,  and  his  envoy  to  Simon  tlic  liigh
I'ricst  I  I  Mace.  15 28-36).

ATHENS  (a0hnai). \\'e  nmst  repeat  the  words  of

Sir.il«)  — d\\d  7ap  «t's  ir\i]Oo%  eiJ.wiirTii}v  tGjv irfpl  rrjs

1 Its  art '"'•^■^f'^^  Tai'Trjs  vpLvoi'/ji.^vuvTeKaldiafioo)-

unappreciated.  ^''"•"'  T*"?  '^^^'""if"''  (P-  3?6).  There
IS,  mtieed,  an  essential  unpropricty
involved  in  making  Paul's  visit  to  Athens  the  occasion
for  a  ri'sumif  of  the  architectural  and  artistic  treasures  of
the  city.i  'V\hat  the  apostle  might  have  seen  we  can
learn  from  I'ausanias  ;  what  he  did  see  may  safely  be
reduced  to  a  minimum.  '  .\  Hebrew  of  the  Hebrews,'
who,  'after  the  most  exact  sect,'  'lived  a  Pharisee,"
could  at  txjst  feel  only  indifference  to  the  history  of  the
heathen,  and  his  spirit  could  not  fail  to  l>e  '  stirred '
at  the  fre<juent  signs  of  ignorance  of  (jod  visible  on
every  hand  in  their  cities,  even  though  he  had  been
brought  up  'at  the  feet  of  a  Kabban  Gamaliel,  whose
liberality  of  sentiment  is,  after  all,  largely  problema-
tical. Not  one  of  the  associations  which  are  valuable
to  us  crowded  into  the  apostle's  mind  as  he  landed
at  PhalOrum  or  Pira:us.  And  the  many-sided  art  of
Athens  had  no  message  for  a  man  of  his  intensity  and
whole-hearted  devotion  to  the  task  of  destroying  the
paganism  in  which  that  art  was  rootetl.

Much  more  valuable,  and  more  difficult  also,  is  it  to
realise  the  spiritual  atmosphere  in  which  Paul  found
2  Intellectual '^'"^'^"'^-  The  ixjriod  of  Athenian  great-
atmosphere.  IT  '"  P°''''"  ^'''^  '""S  ^^"  P""^'-
.Athens  now  only  a  free  city  of  the
Iirovince  of  Achaia  was  not  even  the  seat  of  the  governor
(Str.  398).  In  art  and  in  literature  also  she  was  no
longer  the  schoolmistress  of  nations  ;  in  every  depart-
ment of  mental  activity  the  creative  faculty  was  dead.
In  the  domain  of  philosophy  alone  the  manipulation  of
the  dry  Iwnes  of  logical  science  continued  to  give  the
semblance  of  life.  Here  also  the  spring  of  Athenian
wisdom  had  run  dry.  The  masters  of  the  schools
•  Still  more  would  this  remark  apply  to  the  only  places  in  the
or  where  Athenians  are  referrcU  to  (2  .Macc.O  i  9  15) :  on  the
reading  (Vg.  has  Aniiockenum  in  61)  see  Grimm,  ad  locc.

381


ATHENS

sprang  from  Asia,  Syria,  or  the  Eastern  Archipelago  ;
(jrc-ec-e  proper  was  representetl  exclusively  by  third-  or
fourth-rate  nien.  Nevertheless,  for  centuries  Athens
continued  to  be  regarded  as  the  chief  seat  of  Greek
philosophy  ;  nor  did  she  renounce  her  claim  as  a  semin-
ary of  philosophy  to  the  most  imjwrtant  place,  even
when  she  had  to  share  that  honour  with  other  cities,  such
as  .\lexandria.  Koine,  Rhodes,  and  Pauls  own  1  arsus.
The  whole  city,  indeed,  resembled  one  of  our  University
towns  at  an  epoch  of  intellectual  stagnation.  The  so-
called  education  of  a  Roman  was  incomplete  unless
some  time  had  been  spent  in  loitering  through  the  groves
and  porticoes  of  Athens.  '  Two  schools  in  particular,
markedly  different  and  decided  in  their  peculiarities,
stood  opiK)sed  to  each  other— the  school  of  the  Stoics
\\\  ho  insisted  almost  exclusivelyon  the  universal  clement),
and  that  of  the  Epicureans,  who  gave  prominence  to  the
individual  element  in  man,  pursuing  happiness  by  looking
w  ithin.  The  Stoics  regarded  man  exclusively  as  a  think-
ing being  ;  the  Epicureans,  as  a  creature  of  fc-eling '
(Zeller,  The  Stoics,  Epicureans,  and  Sceptics,  27).
Probably  in  no  other  city  of  the  world  at  that  time  was
it  easier  to  meet  '  certain  philosophers  of  the  Epicureans
and  of  the  Stoics'  (Acts  17 18).  A  well-known  and
curious  parallel  to  the  ajxjstle's  visit  is  afforded  by  the
Life  of  .Apollonius  of  Tjana.  On  his  way  up  from  his
ship  to  the  city  Apollonius  met  many  pliilo-soijliers.
some  reading,  some  perorating,  some  arguing,  all  of
whom  greeted  him  {Phdoi.  lit.  4  17).  In  a  word,
Athens  at  the  time  of  Paul's  stay,  and  more  notably
afterwards,  was  a  city  of  pedagogues  ;  and  'le  pedagogue
est  le  moins  convertissable  des  hommcs '  (Kenan,  .S7.
I'aul,  199).  In  the  midst  of  this  academic  element  Paul
found  himself  alone  (i  Thess.  3i).  For  his  inner  life  at
this  time  we  must  look  to  the  Epistles,  not  to  Acts.  He
was  more  attracted  by  the  eager  artisans  of  Thcssalonica
and  the  earnest  men  of  business  in  Coriiuh  than  by  the
versatile  anti  superlicial  schoolmen  of  .\theiis  (cp  1  I  liess.
I9).  Still,  it  would  be  unfair  to  attribute  his  fa. lure
entirely  to  the  Athenian  character'  (Dcmades  said  that
the  crest  of  Athens  should  have  Ix-en  a  great  tongue)  :
allowance  must  l)e  made  for  the  inevitable  exaggeration
of  the  reformer,  whether  in  morals  or  in  politics  :  his
perspective  is  distorted.  Nor  is  it  fair  to  count  it
blame  lo  .\thens  that  she  was  regariled  as  ultra-religious,
bn.iJiha.i)xoviaripo\<%,  Acts  1 7  22  (this  opening  compli-
ment of  the  apostle's  speech  admits  of  rich  illustration;. -'
It  would  be  a  mistake  to  see  in  the  altar  dedicated  to
the  unknown  god  (.Acts  17 23)  a  desire  to  include  in  their
Pantheon  any  and  every  deity  that  might  possibly  be
worthy  of  honour  (see  Unknown  (iou).  Worship
found  expression  in  art,  not  in  the  minutiiv  of  formalism.
Athens  was,  therefore,  pre-eminently  a  city  of  statues,
and  Renan  is  right  in  remarking  that  the  prejudices  of
Paul  as  a  Jew  blinded  him  :  he  took  all  the  statues  he
saw  for  'objects  of  worship'  [aefiacr/xaTa,  Acts  17  23  )•
We  are  not  guilty  of  '  corrupt  Hellenism  '  in  attempting
a  true  estimate  of  the  a]X)stles  altitude.

.\n  explanation  of  the  disap[)ointing  effect  of  Paul's
teaching  nmst  be  sought  in  the  position  of  the  Jew  ish

3.  Paul's


colony  in  Athens,  and  not  solelv  in


failure  B^-ratetl  commonplaces  on  .\thenian  character
and  philosophy.  The  colony  was  evidently
not  a  large  one  ;  there  would  Ik;  little  to  attract  Jews
thither  in  preference  to  Corinth.  Paul  s  work  among  his
countrymen  in  Athens  was  slight  :  he  '  conversed  '  w  ith
them  {5t(\^yfro,  .\ctsl7i7).  No  trace  of  any  building
which  could  have  lxH;n  a  synagogue  has  been  found,  w  ith
the  exception  of  the  nuuble  {/nscr.y£t.  A'om.  A  tit.  404)

1  Qtiotations  might  be  multiplied  to  illustrate  Athenian
loquacity  (Acts  17  21;  cp  Thuc.  i.  70,  i^wT(poiro<ot ;  Ar.  t.q.
1263,  Tjj  K<x>}i'atwi'  iroAei  = '  Gapcnians '  ;  Dciiiosth.  t'kil.  \.
10,  43  ;  Mcnand.  /•>.  Geoix-  9  ;  Plutarch  fiaaim).

*  I'aus.  i.  17 1,  0to\)%  iv<Tt^ov<Tiv  aAAwy  trAror :  f.^.,  they
erected  an  altar  lo  .Mercy  ;  i.l.'4  3  ' KOrfvuioi^  trtpKrvoTtpov  ti  ij
Toiv  oAAotf  ii  Ta  Otia  i<TTi  (7irov£>)(  :  I'hilos.  /  it.  vi.  2,  i^tAo<h>Ta(  :
^ul.  A/isa/>.  ^iA6»«ot  ;  ytl.  f^  ar.  Hist.  v.  17,  Toaovror  V
AOiifatoit  Jcio-ifatfiofias.

382


ATHLAI

containing  the  words  avrr)  ij  wvXr]  rov  Kvplov  (Ps.  II820);
this  might  have  iMjlongcd  to  the  entrance  of  a  synagogue.
The  Hellenic  belief  &ira^  davJvTOi  ovth  (crr  dvaffracris
was  not,  in  Athens,  reduced  by  the  powerful  solvent  of
Judaism.  Hence,  the  moment  the  apostle  uttered  the
words  '  raised  from  the  dead '  his  audience  revolted.
Elsewhere  his  difficulties  centred  round  another  point —
whether  Jesus  was  the  Messiah  or  not.  In  Athens,
where  Jewish  thought  had  no  hold,  the  idea  of  the  resur-
rection of  the  body  was  unfamiliar — least  so  to  the
Stoics,  although  it  would  !«  an  anachronism  to  quote
here  the  remarkable  approach  made  by  such  Stoics  as
Seneca  to  Christian  modes  of  thought.  Little  wonder,
then,  that  Paul's  work  at  .Vlhens  was  a  comparative
failure,  and  that  he  felt  it  to  be  so  (Acts  17  34  i  Cor.
23).  His  visit  to  the  city  was  a  mistake  ;  and  perhaps
it  was  from  the  first  due  to  accident.  In  the  hurried
departure  from  Heroea  (.Acts  17 10^),  there  would  be
little  time  for  making  plans  or  for  choosing  modes  of
transport,  and  the  apostle's  abode  in  Athens  seems  to
have  Ijeen  largely,  if  not  entirely,  due  to  the  necessity
he  was  under  of  waiting  for  his  companions  (Acts
17.5/.).  W.  J.  w.

ATHLAI  c^r^v = n;7nr,  §§  39, 52,  athah.vh,  ,/.  v. ),

in  list  of  those  with  foreign  wives  (see  Ezra,  i.  §  5,  end),
Ezral028  {da\€L |  H], -/x [X],  o(^a\t [A], 0eXea [L];

ATIf.lLAl)=l I-:sd.  9  29 .\MATIIKIS, RV E.MATHKIS

(efxaeOis  [H],  -aOeis  [A],  OeXeei  [L]).

ATIPHA  (ATect^A  [BA]).  I  Esd.532  =  Ezra254.  Ha-

TIIMI  A.

ATONE,  ATONEMENT  (^33,  ©  e5iAACKeiN  ;
□•"123,  (5  e5iA(\CM(\;  NT  kataAAaph)-  The  e.x-
[)ression  '  to  atone  '  (nBs)  generally  describes  the  effect
of  the  sacrifices  in  removing  guilt.  The  pure  religious
idea  of  atonement,  however,  as  \V.  R.  Smith  remarks
(OTVCCi  439)  is  to  be  found  in  the  Prophets  (and,
surely,  in  Ps.  51  ;  see  in:  i  [2]  2  [3]  7  [8]  9  [10]  ;  also,
with  nsD  in  603  7838  799).  There  it  has  no  relation  to
.sacrificing,  and  we  cannot  fail  to  see  the  appro]jriate-
ness  of  this  scholar's  explanation  of  ^^^  kippei-  as  mean-
ing primarily  '  to  wipe  out."  This  is  in  accordance  with
Syriac  usage  ;  but  the  only  OT  passage  in  which  the
sense  of  'wipe  out'  is  possible  is  in  Is.  28 18,  where  the
reading  is  much  disputed  (Houbigant,  Lowth,  Du.  [but
not  Di.,  Che.]  read  nrni  instead  of  isdi),  and  where  it  is
at  any  rate  open  to  us  to  obtain  the  sense  '  wiped  out '
indirectly  from  the  common  reading  ( '  covered  over'  ;  cp
Gen.  614).  The  usual  view  is  that  a  propitiation  is  ex-
pressed by  kipper  metaphorically,  as  a  '  covering  '  (cp  Ar.
kafiira  :  in  i.  stem  tt'xU,  in  ii.  expiavit),  as  when  Jacob,
fearing  Esau's  anger,  says,  '  I  will  cover  his  face  with  a
present'  (cp  Gen.  20  16  Job924).  The  Hebraistic  usage
of  the  word  is  well  set  forth  by  Driver,  Dent.  425,  439.
W.  R.  Smith's  note  in  O  776' (^' 438-440  also  deserves
attention  ;  but  OTJC^^  381,  etc.,  should  here  be  com-
])ared.

In  the  NT  '  atonement '  is  given  by  .W  for  KaraWayr],
Rom.  5 11;  but  RV,  with  a  proper  regard  to  consist-
ency, substitutes  'reconciliation';  cp  2  Cor.  5 18/^,
'the  ministry,  the  word,  of  reconciliation.'  Elsewhere
KaroXXayij  occurs  in  Rom.  5  10/.  11 15  ;  cp  Col.  1  21  ;  it
is  hardly  one  of  (5's  words,  being  found  only  in  2  Mace.
020.  See  further,  Atonemk.nt,  Day  of,  Mkkcy-
sic.vr,  Ransom,  Sacrifice  ;  and  cp  WRS,  /^e/.  SemJ"^'
237,  320,  437,  etc.  ;  also  We.  CH  335/

See  also  Ritschl,  Die  christl.  Lehre  von  d.  Recktfcrtigting
u.  d.  Vcrsfihnung,\\.;  Weiss,  Bihl.  Theol.  0/  NT  1 4x9-452
■J 202-216;  D.-ile,  flu  Doctrine  0/  the  Atonement;  Wilson,
Ilulscan  Lectures  on  the  Atonement  (1899).  The  semi-popuKir
literature  is  extensive.

ATONEMENT,  DAY  OF  (DnSSH  DV ;  later,
■l33ri  DV  ;  in  Talmud  N2"}  NO'r,  'the  great  day,'
NOV,  '  the  day,'  and  N3T  X01V,  '  the  great  fast '  ;  cp
Acts279,  H  NHCTeiA — ;^s  the  only  fast  enjoined  by  the
law).

383


ATONEMENT, DAY  OF

The  law  relating  to  this  day  (Lev.  1(!),  which  as  it

now stands connects with the story of .Nadab  and

1 Ana.lvBiB  '^'^'^"  '"  Lev.  10 1-7,  is  not  in  its  present

' fi ^ form a homogeneous unity.' This is
evident, not only from the duplicate
verses  6  and  1 1 ,  and  from  peculiarities  of  the  arrange-
ment, but  also  from  the  contents  of  the  law.

The  chapter  as  a  whole  treats  of  two  quite  distinct  subjects  :
viz.,  (i)  the  warning  of  the  high  priest  that  he  is  to  enter  the
Holy  of  Holies  not  at  pleasure,  but  only  under  certain  specified
precautions  ;  (2)  the  ordering  of  a  yearly  Day  of  Atonement,  for
which  an  exact  ritual  is  prescribed,  i.  is  contained  in  71V.  1-4
6  12  13  34  <5,  and  belongs  to  Po  ;  2.  is  itself  composite,  (a)  ft'.
29-34  a  give  complete  directions  for  the  annual  observance  of  a
day  of  fasting  and  humiliation,  on  which  the  sanctuary  and
people  are  to  be  cleansed  by  '  the  priest  who  shall  be  anointed  '
(cp8i2) — i.e.,  the  high  priest  of  the  time;  the  atonement  is
supposed  by  the  lawgiver  to  Ix:  carried  out  in  accordance  with
the  ritual  (which,  originally,  immediately  preceded  it)  of  Lev.  9,
an.',  with  the  law  of  the  sin-offering  laid  down  in  Nu.  1624.  On
critical  grounds  this  law  also  must  be  held  to  belong  to  Pj.  {b)
v~j.  5  7-10,  14-28,  on  the  other  hand,  by  which  the  quite  peculiar
ritual  of  the  Day  of  Atonement  is  prescribed,  are  the  work  of  a
much  later  hand.

Why  and  when  these  various  portions  of  the  present
law  were  combined  into  one  are  questions  that  will  be
discussed  elsewhere  (see  Leviticus,  {5  6/.,  and  Hexa-
teuch)  ;  the  important  fact,  gained  from  critical
analysis,  is  that  the  Day  of  Atonement,  as  far  as  its
ceremonies  are  described  in  Lev.  16,  is  of  comparatively
recent  origin,  and  the  result  of  a  very  interesting
development.

This  conclusion is  supported  by  a  variety  of  con-
siderations, [a)  That  the  pre-exilic  worship knew  of
„.  -  no  such  day  as  is  descrilxid  in Lev.  16  is

■j ° evident,  not  only  from  the  alisence  of  all


develop-
ment.


mention  of  it  (an  omission  which  cannot
be  accidental,  the  other  high  days  being
referred  to),  but  also  from  the  fact  that  consciousness  of
sin  and  sense  of  need  of  a  propitiation,  which  are  the
necessary  conditions  of  such  an  institution,  first  became
prominent  in  the  time  of  Ezekiel  (see  Fea.st.s,  §  11).
{b)  The  earliest  trace  of  public  days  of  fasting  and
humiliation  in  the  exilic  period  ajjpears  in  Zech.  735819;
the  four  yearly  fasts  there  mentioned  were  com-
memorative of  the  national  calamities  at  the  fall  of
Jerusalem,  and  appear  to  have  been  still  observed  in
post-exilic  times.

ICzekiel,  in  this  as  in  other  respects  the  forerunner  of  the
priestly  law,  had  enjoined  two  atonement-days  (the  first  day  of
the  first  month  and  the  first  of  the  seventh,  4u  i8-2o).2  A
young  bullock  as  a  sin-offering  was  to  be  brought,  and  with  its
blood  were  to  be  smeared  the  posts  of  the  house,  the  four
corners  of  the  altar,  and  the  posts  of  the  gate  of  the  inner  court
—  'so  shall  ye  make  atonement  for  the  house';  together  with
this,  certain  sin-offerings  for  prie.st  and  people  are  enjoined  for
the  passover-day  (Ezek.  45  22).

(<r)  When  we  turn  to  the  detailed  account  of  the
reading  of  the  law  in  Neh.8/,  we  find  mentioned  a
joyous  celebration  on  the  first  day  of  the  seventh  month,
and  a  celebration  of  the  Feast  of  Taljernacles  on
the  fifteenth,  without  any  reference  to  a  Day  of  Atone-
ment on  the  tenth.*  On  the  twenty-fourth  day,  on  the
other  hand,  a  general  fast  with  confession  of  sin  was
held,  by  no  means  in  accordance  with  the  ritual  of
Lev.  16 14-28.  This  makes  it  clear  that  what  stood  in
the  Law-book  used  by  Ezra  (P„)  was  not  the  Levitical
ritual  (Lev.  16 14-28),  but  only  a  precept  of  a  yearly  fast-
day  with  sabbatic  rest — in  other  words,  the  precept  laid
down  in  Lev.  16  29-34.

The  change  from  the  tenth  to  the  twenty-fourth  at  the  first
celebration  is  intelligible  enough  on  the  a.ssumption  that  the
fast-day  was  not  at  first  so  prominent  in  the  law-book  as  it
afterwards  became  in  Lev.  1(>  14-28.

Even  in  the  still  later  list  of  high  days  in  Lev.  2827
and  Nu.  297  we  do  not  find  any  reference  to  the
specific ritual of Lev.  16 14-28; the  tenth day  of  the

1  .See  Benzinger's  .study,  ZATW  ^ts/.  ['89),  and  cp  Stade,
Gl'l  •!  258,  and  Lkviticis,  g  2.

2  The  text  of  Kzek.  Vi  20  should  lie  emended  in  accordance
with  (SBAO,  gr,n3  <y«3tr3-

3  Cp  Keuss,  Gesch.  dcr  heil.  .?tAr.(2)  v^oof.  (Holzinger,  Hex.
750,  note,  differs).

384


ATONEMENT,  DAY  OF


seventh  month  is  simply  marked  by  fasting,  sabbath
ri'st.  and  the  usual  sin-offerings.  I'he  Day  of  Atone-
m<'nt  fioscribed  in  Lev.  16  must  have  lx?en  the  result  of
a  long  [iroccss  of  development,  and  the  ])ericope  formed
by  Lev.  1(55  7-'o  «4-28  niust  l»elong  to  the  very  latest
portions  of  1'.  The  precept  in  Kx.  30  lo  is,  of  course,  a
still  later  adtlition  to  the  ritual,  enjoining  that  the  blood
of  the  sin-offering  should  also  be  applied  to  the  altar  of
incense.

It  is  a  significant  fact  that,  as  the  later  title  proves
(see  aljove,  §  i),  the  Day  of  Atonement  became  the
3.  Fundamental  '""''  in^'ortant  in  the  ecclesiastical


principle,  etc.


year  ;  Jewish  feeling  in  the  later  age


inevitably  led  to  tliis.  Now  :is  to
the  meaning  of  the  law.  The  terms  of  Lev.  16  permit
no  uncertainty.  The  law  has  reference  to  the  thorough
purilication  of  the  jxiople  and  sanctuary.  The  sin-
offerings  throughout  the  year  have  left  many  unknown
or  'secret'  sins;  and  since  the  people,  the  land,  and,
above  all,  the  sanctuary  are  rendered  impure  by  sin
(Lev.  l.'isi  Nu.  19i3-2o  Kz.  45 18  Lev.  16io),  there  was  a
danger  tliat  the  sacrificial  services  might  lose  their
eflic.acy  and  e\en  that  Yahwe  might  desert  his  defiled
sanctuary.  This  was  the  re.ason  for  the  institution  of
the  Day  of  Atonement  —  that  the  Israelites  might
annually  make  a  complete  atonement  for  all  sin,  and
that  the  sanctuary  might  Ije  cleansed  (Lev.  I633).  The
leading  idea  of  the  entire  Priestly  Law  found  here  its
best  expression.  The  Day  of  Atonement  cjuickened,
on  the  one  hand,  the  {xjoi^le's  sense  of  sin  and  dread  of
Vahwe's  avenging  holiness,  and,  on  the  other  hand,
their  assurance  of  reconciliation  and  of  their  renewed
holiness.  This  holiness  was  guaranteed  by  their  re-
ligious system,  the  etTicacy  of  which,  marred  by  sin,
was  again  restored  by  this  solenmity  of  expiation.  It  is
the  key-stone  of  the  whole  system,  the  last  consequence
of  the  |)rinciple,  '  Ye  shall  be  [ceremonially]  holy,  for  I
am  holy. '

If  we  turn  to  the  ritual,  we  can  without  difTiculty
discover  its  fundamental  ideas.  The  liigh  priest,  after
bathing,  puts  on  i)lain  white  linen  garments  instead  of
his  elaborate  vestments,  for  he  is  to  appear  as  a  humble
suppliant  before  the  Holy  One  whom  only  the  pure  may
ajiproach.  Of  course,  before  lie  can  make  atonement
for  the  people  he  must  first  do  so  for  himself  and  for  his
'house' — i.e..  for  the  entire  priesthood.  On  entering
the  Holy  of  Holies  he  is  to  envelop  in  a  cloud  of  holy
incense-smoke  the  place  of  God's  personal  presence,
lest  he  die.  The  ritual  of  blood-sprinkling,  as  far  as  it
is  peculiar  to  this  day,  is  only  an  elaboration,  recjuired
by  the  extreme  closeness  of  the  approach  to  (Jod,  of  the
usual  procedure  in  sacrificial  offerings.  The  conception
has  been  explained  by  Roljcrtson  .Smith  *  as  an  inherit-
ance from  primitive  ideas  about  sacrifice.  See  Sacki-
FlCK,  §  22.  I.  B.

The  Day  of  Atonement  has  been  called  by  Delitzsch
the  (;«><)(1  lYiday  of  the  Law.  This  can  hardly  be
4.  Propitiatory '»=^'."'f'"e'l  ^^ith  regard  to  its  earlier

Character.  P*-;"°a-  ^^^ocxX  Friday  was  not  in-
stituted to  restore  the  impaired  cere-
monial holiness  of  the  community  ;  it  had  from  the  first
a  reference  to  the  individual  and  to  spiritual  religion.
It  w.as  otherwise  with  the  Yom  Kij^piirim,  even  if  its
institutors  were  not  personally  opjxjsed  to  the  supple-
menting and  counteracting  agency  of  teachers  of  a
nobler  religion.  We  will  not  deny  that  the  poetic
prayers  composed  for  the  '  great '  day '  during  the
Dispersion  touch  the  Christian  deeply  from  their  extra-
ordinary spiritual  dejith  and  their  sense  of  individual
religion.  These  prayers,  however,  are  no  evidence
of  the  spirit  of  the  original  institution.  It  is  not
necessary  to  dwell  on  the  A/azel-ritual.  The  ritual
of  the  Day  of  Atonement  has  grown  (this  can  Ix:  shown
by  literary  analysis  as  well as  by  archaeological  con-

1  Rtl.  St->,t.{-2)  40/:
25  38s


siderations),^  and  the  Azazel-ritual  is  the  latest  portion
of  it.  'We  might  perhaps  supixise  tli.it  those  who  con-
tinuc-d  Lzra's  work  were  not  up  to  his  level  ;  but  when
we  look  at  Lev.  1629-34rt,  which  is  the  earliest  part  of
the  law  (cp  9y_^.),  we  still  hnd  in  it  provisions  op|x>sed
in  tendency  to  the  pure  religi<jn  of  the  greatest  prophets
and  psalmists.  I'he  procedure  with  the  blood  may  Ije
arch.i'ologically  explained  so  as  to  minimise  the  shock
which  it  causes  us ;  it  may  also  \xi  spiritualised,  so  as
to  assume  a  totally  new  appearance  ;  but  it  is,  as
has  been  stated,  out  of  harmony  with  that  prophetic
religion  which  is  restated  in  I'ss.  40  50  51.  It  is  also
in  this  part  of  the  law  that  we  find  an  expression  which,
when  correctly  explained,  condenses  the  uns|jiritual
elements  of  the  law  into  a  nutshell.  It  is  the  expressirm
sabbath  iabbdthon,  which  may  well  Ix;  more  ancient  than
the  day  to  which  it  is  api)lied.  k\'  renders  I-ev.  l(J3i
thus  :  '  It  is  a  sabbath  of  solemn  rest  unto  you,  and
ye  shall  afflict  your  souls;  it  is  a  statute  for  ever.'
Jastrow  {Amer.  Joiirn.  Theol.  \^\i  ff.  ['98])  has  made
it  probable  that  Sabbaik  and  sabba/Jion  answer — the
latter  more  exactly'-  than  the  former  —  to  the  Haby-
lonian  ceremonial  term  hibatlum,  which  means  a  day
of  propitiation  with  reference  to  the  dies  itefasti  of
the  kings.  If  so,  the  terms  iabbath  and  lablathCm,
which  are  derived  from  nar,  to  rest,  imply  that  by  the
usages  on  the  day  to  which  these  terms  are  applied,
rest  is  given  to  an  angry  (jod.^  The  expression  'to
afHict  the  soul'  {'inrid  nfphesh),  used  in  the  same  verse,
is  not  less  archaic  in  spirit,  even  if  much  later  in  use  ;  *
it  was  adopted  by  late  theologians  as  a  synonym  of  the
old  word  D1S.  'to  fast.'  This,  too,  implies  an  un-
spiritual  doctrine — viz.,  that  by  denying  the  body
certain  generally  desired  goods  the  mind  of  a  deity
can  be  inlluenced  by  his  worshipper.

To  examine  the  full  force  of  the  ceremonies  of  the
Day  of  Atonement,  archa'ologically  viewed,  is  not  our
purpose.  Our  purpose  is  to  emphasise  their  strictly
propitiatory  character.  That  same  character  liclonged,
according  to  the  Jewish  liturgy,  to  the  ritual  of  New
Year's  Day  (AW  has-Sauah).  It  was  belie\ed,*  through
the  influence  of  Babylonian  mythology,  that  the  fate  of
man  was  decreed  on  Ntnv  Year's  Day  (the  festival  of
Creation),  and  that  on  the  Day  of  .Atonement  the
decree  was  'scaled.'  No  wonder  that  the  nine  ilays
which  intervened  Ixjtween  the  first  day  of  the  seventh
month  (New  Year's  Day)  and  the  tenth  (the  Day  of
Atonement)  were  regarded  by  the  Jews  as  penitential
days.  Precisely  when  this  view  of  New  Year's  Day  as
the  Day  of  Destiny  began  to  l)e  taken,  we  know  not.
Probably  it  began  among  the  Jews  of  the  Eastern
Dispersion.  It  gives  a  new  force,  however,  (i)  to  the
collocation  of  Yom  K'ippiirhn  and  RoS  /Ms-Sdndh  in  the
same  month,  and  (2)  to  the  designation  of  both  days
(see  Lev.  2^24)  as  iabbdthon.  To  what  extent,  if  at  all,
the  ritual  of  these  days  is  a  revival  of  primitive  custom,
is  obscure.  It  is  quite  possible  that  in  primitive  times
Israelitish  ritual,  at  any  rate  in  certain  places,  approxi-

1  The  literary  .analysis  of  Lev.  l(i  is  passed  over  in  SBOT
(Heb.  ;  1894);  m  the  article  '  D.iy  of  Atonement  '  in  Hastin^is,
Dli\-2ooh  \'ofi\,  the  omission  has  l>een  supplied  from  Ben-
zinger.  Driver's  moderating  remarks,  however,  do  not  affect
the  position  taken  up  by  Stade  and  i'.enzinger,  who  are  both
fully  awake  to  the  incompleteness  of  merely  literary  analysis
of  ancient  laws.  The  deficiency  noted  in  SIH '  /'  is  also  to  be
observed  in  the  Leviticus  in  Kautzsch's  new  translation  (NS).
Cp  Lkviticcs.

■•2  Sabbath,  acc.  to  Jastrow,  '  is  the  distinctively  Hebrew  name
given  to  a  particular  Sabhdthfn  '  (c/*.  cif.  34^/.).  .4abbathon  =
liab.  iahalium;  the  terminations  corresjwnd  (Jastrow,  332X

3  The  most  common  term  for  '  propitiation  '  was  »«*  //M/' (lit.
'  rest  of  the  heart ')  ;  iliii  (  =  CV>  '  day  ")  niih  libhi  has  the  sense  of
'  day  of  propitiation '  (  lastrow,  330).

••  It  occurs  in  Is.  68^510  Ps.  3513;  also  in  Ix;v.  I631  282732
Nu.  297.  That  the  historical  Isaiah,  in  disparaging  fasts,  does
not  use  the  phrase  (Is.  1  13,  but  cp  ©)  is  significant.

5  See  KBZn/.  (Marduk  comes  at  Z.-igmuk,  the  beginning
of  the  year,  'to  destine  the  fate  of  my  life');  cp  Karppc
on  'Jewish  New  Year'  in  Rev.  S/tn.,  and  Jensen,  KosmoL  84-
86,  238.

386


ATONEMENT,  DAY  OP


mated  rather  more  to  Babylonian  than  was  afterwards
the  case.  One  could  wish  this  to  be  true,  for  it  would
then  be  easier  to  account  for  the  ceremonies  of  the
Vom  Kippiirim,  so  archaic  in  spirit,  and  so  contrary  to
the  tendency  of  I er.  31  31-34  Kzek.  8625-27  Mic.  719.

At  any rate, the  propitiation-days  of  the  post-exilic
Israelites  were  nobler  than  those  of  the  Babylonians,  in
_  , . as  far  as  they  were  for  the  benefit  of

6. comparative  ^j^^  ^^^^-^^  people,  and  not  merely  for
nobiUty.  jj^^j  ^f  j,^^ xxAcxs. The Babylonian

regulations  of  the  'days  of  appeasement'  {mbattum  =
}in32')  bear  upon  the  conduct  of  the  king  ;  but,  since  '  the
whole  congregation  is  holy,"  those  of  the  Yom  Kippiirim
necessarily  touch  the  conduct  of  all  faithful  Jews  and
even  of  'sojourners  (Lev.  I629).  In  this  respect  the
Jewish  religion  has  a  much  closer  affmity  with  the
Zoroastrian  than  with  the  Babylonian  or  the  Assyrian.
If  the  provision  for  giving  the  uneducated  populace
a  visible  sign  of  the  forgiveness  of  all  its  sins  and  the
removal  of  their  punishment  appears  to  us  barbaric  and
unspiritual  (see  .Vzazki.,  §  i) — if,  too,  the  populace  was
only  too  likely  to  misinterpret  the  comprehensive  ex-
pressions of  Lev.  16 162130,  and  to  think  that  all  sins
whatever  were  cancelled  by  the  ritual — we  must  remember
(as  regards  Azazel)  the  compromising  spirit  natural  to
large  educational  churches,  and  (as  regards  the  other
point)  the  difficulty  in  an  l-Lastern  language  of  guarding
against  all  possible  misinterpretations  of  phrases.  A
misinterpretation  it  certainly  is  when  a  Mishna  treatise
declares  that — •

'  The  goat  which  is  di.smi.ssed  atones  for  all  (other)  trans-
gressions, as  well  the  light  as  the  grave,  the  intentional  and  the
unintentional,  those  foreknown  and  tho.se  not  foreknown '
{Shebiioth  1  6).

The  analogy  of  Lev.  4213  etc.  Nu.  I524  distinctly
shows  that  in  such  propitiatory  ordinances  it  is  accidental
transgressions  (,ij;e'3),  not  deliberate  transgressions
(ncn  "vy),  that  are  referred  to  ;  and  in  Yomd%()  we  read,
'  He  who  says,  I  will  sin,  the  Day  atones  ;  to  him  tlie
Day  will  bring  no  atonement. '  ^

In  NT  times  the  Jews  had  advanced  religiously
beyond  the  contemporaries  of  Ezra.  In  the  Epistle  to
the  Hebrews  and  in  that  of  Barnabas
we  meet  with  a  Christian  gnosis  ;  but
there  was,  no  doubt,  also  an  allegorising  gnosis  that  was
Jewish.  There  must  have  been  both  poetic  symbolisers
(cp  Ps.  5l7[9])  and  typologists.  What  Barnabas  says
(78)  about  the  scarlet  cloth  tied  on  the  neck  of  the
•  scapegoat '  is  absurd  ;  but  it  is  an  exquisite  allcgor}'
that  the  I'^pistle  to  the  Hebrews  suggests  in  the  words
(Heb.  10 19-22)—

'  Having  therefore  holdness  to  use  the  entrance  into  the  holy
place  with  the  blood  of  Jesus— the  entrance  which  he  dedicated
for  us — a  fresh  and  living  way — through  the  vail,  that  is  to  say,
his  flesh,  and  having  a  great  priest  over  the  house  of  God,  let
us  approach,'  etc.

Christians  are,  strictly,  no  priests  (Christ  is  the
'great  priest');  but  the  rending  of  the  flesh  of
Christ,  which  brought  him,  the  perfect  one,  near  to
God,  enables  his  followers  to  make  a  nearer  approach
to  the  divine  presence  than  the  greatest  priests  and
prophets  of  the  age  before  him  could  make.  The
entrance  of  Christ  into  the  heavenly  regions  through
death  is  likened  to  the  entrance  of  the  high  priest
once  in  the  year  into  the  Holy  of  Holies.  Of  these
two  entrances  the  same  epistle  speaks  thus  (Heb.
9i2):

'  Nor  yet  through  blood  of  goats  and  bulls, 2  but  through  his
own  blood,  he  entered  once  for  all  into  the  holy  place.'

The  Jewish  high  priest  entered  the  holiest  through
the  blood  of  goats  and  bulls.  The  goat  was  the
offering  for  ■  the  people ;  the  bullock  for  the  high
priest  himself  (Lev.  16 11 15).  Christ  entered  through
his  own  blood. The  high  priest  went  in  once  in  the

J  So  Heb.  9  7,  '  not  without  blood  which  he  offers  for  himself
and  for  the  errors  (iyi'orjuaTui')  of  the  people.'
2  So  the  best  MSS  (ABKD).

387


6.  NT  references.


year  ;  Christ  once  for  all,  as  the  representative  of  his
people,  that  they  might  ever  after  have  free  access  to
God.  '  Once  for  all '  (^^Ciirat)  is  to  be  e.xplained  by
925,  'the  high  priest  enters  the  holy  place  every  year
with  blood  not  his  own '  [iv  aifxari.  aXKorpiif)).

The  point  is  not  how  many  times  in  the  day  the  high  priest
entered  the  holiest,  but  that  he  entered  on  one  day  in  the  year.
Of  course,  he  went  in  more  than  once  on  the  'great  day';  the
Mishna  says  four  times — (1)  with  the  incense  ;  (2)  with  the
blood  of  the  bullock ;  (3)  with  that  of  the  goat  ;  (4)  after  the
evening  burnt -offering,  to  bring  away  the  censer  and  the
-plate. Lev.  1613-15  also implies more than one en-


There  is  a  reference  to  the  ritual  in  Heb.  13  n,  where
the  death  of  Jesus  outside  the  gate  is  compared  with
the  burning  of  the  remnants  of  the  sin-offering  without
the  camp.  This,  however,  as  Davidson  has  shown, ^  dis-
joints the  ritual,  and  is  really  a  mere  isolated  analogy.

The  treatise  y'(>?nd  (cp  also  Jos.  Ant  iii.  10  3  and  l-",p.
Barn.  ch.  7)  throws  much  fresh  light  on  the  details  of  the

.. -n  X -1 • ritual ; we  must not, however, suppose

7.  Details  in  , ... ,,  ,. ,,

„.  ,  that  It  IS  \n  all  respects  literall}'  accurate.

^^  ■  In  the  Cambridge  MS  (Palestinian  re-
cension) it  is  called  Massekeih  A'ippnrim,  wliich  is  its
true  title,  as  the  commentarj^  of  Maimonides  on  the
Mishna  also  proves.  J.  Derenbourg  has  attempted  a
restoration  of  the  oldest  recension  (see  below,  §  8).

The  minute  directions  for  the  purification  of  the  high  priest
need  not  detain  us.  Three  confessions  of  sin  {umidfiy)  form  the
most  beautiful  part  of  the  ritual  ;  they  are  preserved  in  Yomd
3842  and  O2,  and  have  passed  with  slight  changes  into  the
Jewish  liturgy.  In  each  of  the.se  confessions  the  sacred
Tetrngrammaton  (,^^n•)  occurs ;  altogether  it  was  pronounced
ten  times,  and  as  often  as  the  high  priest  came  to  the  name
those  who  stood  near  fell  on  their  faces,  while  the  multitude
responded  :  '  lilessed  be  the  Name,  the  Name  of  tlie  glory  of
his  kingdom,  for  ever  and  ever.'  The  first  part  of  the  service
(including  the  blood-sprinkling)  was  gone  through  close  to  the
Most  Holy  J'lace.  the  rest  was  performed  close  to  the
worshippers,  in  the  eastern  part  of  the  court  of  the  priests,  north
of  the  altar,  where  stood  two  goats  and  an  urn  with  two  lots.
The  high  priest  drew  the  lots,  and  it  was  held  to  be  a  good
oinen  if  his  right  hand  drew  forth  the  lot  'for  Yahwe.'  To  the
horn  of  the  '  goat  for  Azazel '  a  '  tongue  '  of  scarlet  cloth  was  tied.

The  high  priest  then  went  to  the  bullock,  over  which  he  had
already  confessed  the  sins  of  hini.self  and  his  hou.se,  and  now
confessed  tho.se  also  of  'the  .seed  of  Aaron,  thy  holv  tribe.'
Hearing  the  censer  and  the  incense,  he  was  seen  to  disappear
within  the  sanctuary.  There  he  stood  alone ;  he  rested  his
censer  on  a  stone  called  pTflt"  ^  which  stood  in  the  place  of  the
ark.  Outside  the  Holy  of  Holies  he  uttered  a  prayer  ;  it  had
to  be  a  short  one,  lest  the  people  should  become  anxious.*
Again  the  rite  of  blood-sprinklii  g  is  performed  in  the  Holiest,
and  then  the  'goat  for  Yahwe'  is  sacrificed.  A  third  time  the
high  priest  enters  the  Holiest,  and  again  there  is  blood-
.sprinkling  in  all  parts  of  the  sanctuarj-.  Forty -three  such
sprinklings  have  purified  the  sanctuary.  But  the  people  at
large  have  to  receive  the  visible  sign  of  forgiveness.  The  '  goat
for  Azazel '  now  becomes  prominent.  A  widduy  or  ci>nfe.ssion
is  uttered  over  the  animal's  head,  which  is  now  to  be  led  to  the
precipice  marked  out  for  the  destruction  of  the  goat.  Men  of
rank  from  Jerusalem  accompany  it  ;  cries  and  curses  hasten  its
progress  (see  Azazki.,  §  4).  Meantime  the  high  priest  puts  on
his  'golden  vestments'  ;■*  then  he  puts  them  oflf  again,  and  a
fourth  time  (see  above)  enters  the  Holiest.

The  evening  of  the  '  great  day '  closed  with  a  banquet
for  the  high  priest  and  his  friends,  and  with  dancing
in  the  vineyards  for  the  maidens  of  Jerusalem.  Prob-
ably this  dance  was  primitive  ;  it  attached  itself  to  the
Day  of  Atonement,  as  a  natural  mode  of  relief  to  tired
human  nature  (  Taanith  4  8).  See,  further,  Dancing,
§  8  ;  Canticles,  §  8.

The  treatise Vptitd  i^Mishna  by  Surenhusius ; Yomn  alone
ed.  Strack  ;  cp  Wiinsche,  Der  hab.  Tabu.  1  340  J?;)  :  J.  Deren-
bourg,  '  Essai  de  restitution  de  I'anc.  r^dac-

8.  Literature,  tion  de  M.ass(;chet  Kippourim,"  R FJ  no. U

^1-80  ('83);  Maimonides,  Hihhnth  yom  hak-
kippuriiti,  in  Dehtzsch,  Hebrcivs  2  464 _^  ;  Kuenen,  Hex.  86,
312;  Oort,  r/i/"  10  142-165  ('76):  Benzinger,  Z.r/'/KO  65-88
('8g);  articles  by  Delitzsch  in  HU'BC^),  and  mZKlVl  173-183
('80),  reviewed  by  Kuenen,  ThT  17  207-212  ('83);  Spencer,  De


1  See  his  instructive  essay,  Hebrews  ('82),  196-202.

2  Commonly  explained  '  foundation,'  and  illustrated  by  Job
386.  *

S  Such  a  'short  prayer'  is  given  in  Jer.  Yomd,  gb  (Del.
Gesch.  (ierjud.  Ppesie,  iZj/.).

*  Cp  Ecclus.  50  9 II,  and  the  verses  from  the  Abodah  in
Del.  Jiid.  Poesie,  21/.

388


ATROTH

Up.  rit.  iii.  Diss.  viii.  ;  D.  HoflTmann  in  Berliner's  Magasin  f  76),
\ff.  ;  Adler,  ZATW Z  xi^-iij,  ('83) ;  Stade,  CVI  2  182,  258^?:;
Schultz,  or  Theol.  1  367/,  2402^  ;  KUershcim,  The  '1  empU
('74),  563-288;  Driver,  'Atonement,  Day  of,'  in  HaNtings,  DB
1199-201,  and  'Leviticus'  in  SliO T  (V.n^.');  Di.  on  Lev.,  and
Nowack's  and  lienzinger's  Arch;cologies.

§§  1-3  1-  »■: §§4-8  T.  K.  C.

ATROTH  (  Nu.  3235  AV). See  ArKOTJi-SHornAN.

ATROTH  BETH -JO  AB  (nSV  H'?  Tiysq)i—i.e.,
'  crowns  of  the  house  of  Joab  '  ;  ATApcoG  OlKOy  ICOAB
[B],  A-  o-  icoBaB  [A],  ATAPCO  K.  BHeiOJAB  [!']')•  '1"
unknown  locality,  mentioned  in  i  Ch.  "254  along  with
Bethlehem  and  Netophah,  in  a  Calebite  connection  ;
its  people  were  sons  of  Salma  b.  Hur  b.  Caleb  (see
jABli/).  Salma  was  the  'father'  of  Beth-lehem,  the
burial-place  of  Joab's  father  Zkruiah  [g.v-].  Meyer
(/i«/.  147)  suggests  a  connection  with  the  valley  of
Charasiiim.

ATROTH  -  SHOPHAN, AV Atroth, Shopman

(\z:vc'  n'nqr ;  cco(t)Ap  Lu.vj,  -an  LK],  co(t)AP  [l],

Eus.  21454).  a  town  of  Gad  (Nu.  8235) ;  perhaps  one  of
the  two  localities  in  Moab  still  called  'Attarus.  See
Atakoth,  4.

ATTAI  ('rir,  perhaps  abbrev.  of  Atiiaiah).

1.  Son  of  the  Kgyptian  Jarha  by  the  daughter  of  Sheshan  the
Jerrihintelite :  his  son  was  Nathan;  iCh.  235/;  (eeOei  [I!J,
i.eec  (LI,  u9e[e]i  [A]). See  Jarha,  Jkrah.mkkl.

2.  One  of  David's  warriors;  i  Ch.  12ii  (eeoi  [BN],  f06[f]t
[AL]). See  David,  §..,«,  iii.

3.  Son  of  Kehoboam  ;  2  Ch.  11  20  (ie9e[e]t  [BAL]).
ATTALIA  (ATTAAeiA  [-ia  Ti.  \VH]). A  town  on

the  coast  of  Paniphylia,  fouiulcci  by  .\ttalus  Philadelphus,
king  of  Purgamus,  for  the  Syrian  and  Egyptian  trade,
which  it  shared  with  Perga.  There  has  been  some
discussion  about  the  site,  as  Strabo  (p.  667),  enumerat-
ing from  west  to  east,  mentions  Olbia,  the  river  Catar-
rhactes,  and  then  Attalia  ;  from  which  it  would  seem
tliat  Attalia  must  be  the  modern  Laara.  Ptolemy,
however,  is  more  e.xact  :  he  puts  it  west  of  the  Catar-
rhactes.  Thus,  it  is  equivalent  to  the  modern  Adalia,
which  is  still  a  port  with  considerable  trade.  The  town
has  a  picturesque  appearance,  being  perched  on  the
long  line  of  cliffs  created  by  the  calcareous  deposits  of
the  Catarrhactes,  which  pours  over  them  in  torrents  to
the  sea.  The  remains  are  almost  entirely  Roman.
The  apostle  Paul  passed  through  the  town  on  his  return
from  his  '  first  missionary  tour '  in  the  interior  (Acts
1425).  It  is  still  a  bishopric.  [See  Pkkga,  and
Ramsay,  Hist.  Geogr.  of  Asia  Minor,  420.] w.  j.  w.

ATTALUS  (attaAoc  [ANV]).  Three  kings  of
PerganuLs  bore  this  name  ;  but  we  are  here  concerned
with  the  last  two— .\ttalus  IL ,  Philadelphus,  159-138
B.C.,  and  his  nephew  Attalus  IlL,  Philomctor,  138-133
B.C.  The  Pcrgamene  kings  were  all  allies  of  Rome,
and  the  last  made  the  Roman  people  his  heir  (see  Asia).
In  I  Mace.  1.5  22  we  read  that  'Lucius,  consul  of  the
Romans,'  wrote  letters  in  favour  of  the  Jews  to  Ptolemy,
Attalus,  Ariarathes,  and  others.  Attalus  II.  is  probably
meant;  but,  as  the  date  of  the  letters  falls  in  139-138
B.C.,  it  is  possible  that  they  were  sent  to  his  successor.
Attalus  III.  was  the  son  of  Eumenes  by  Stratonice,  the
daughter  of  Ariarathes,  king  of  Cappadocia,  who  was
a  close  ally  of  the  Romans,  sharing  the  fate  of  Publius
Licinius  Crassus  in  the  war  with  the  Pergamene  pre-
tender Aristonicus,  130  B.C.  Josephus  {Ant.  xiv.  10  22)
c|uotes  a  Pergamene  decree  in  favour  of  the  Jews  about
the  time  of  Hyrcanus.  W.  j.  w.

ATTHARATES  (attapath  {V>\  atGapathc  [A],
AeApACBAC  [!>]),  I  E.sd.  y49::=Neh.  89,  Tirshatha.

ATTHARIAS  (atGapiac  [B.\]).  iEsd.540,  RV  =
Ezra  L'bi, Tikshatha.

ATTIRE.  For  Ezek.23.5  (c'Sno.  fhfillm)  see
Turban;  for  Jer.  232  (nnrp.  kiHurim)  see  Girdle;
for  Prov.  7io  (ny,  nth)  scc'dres-S,  §  i  (4).

1  After  ©L  we  may  assume  a  separate  place-name  Ataroth  ;
see  Atarah.


AVIM,  AVIMS,  AVITES

ATTUS  (attoyc  [AL]).  i  Esd.  829,  RV=Ezra82.
Hattush,  I.

AUGIA  (ayKeIia  [BAL]).  i  Esd.  538.  Not  in  |1  Ezra
26i  =  Neh.  763. .See  Barzillai,  3.

AUGURY  ('one  who  practises  augury,"  R\'  Lev.
19-'6  IH.IS1014  2K.2I6;  AV  'observer  of  limes,'
pir^). See  Divination,  §  2  (2).

AUGUSTUS  (AYroyCTOC  [Ti.  ^^T^]),  an  honorific
title  lx.'sto\ved  upon  Octavi.in  (27  B.C.),  and  from  him
handed  on  to  his  successors.  It  is  applied  to  him.
along  with  the  title  of  Ci4-:.SAR  {q.v.),  in  Lk.  2i  EV.
For  his  reign,  in  as  far  as  it  concerns  Jewish  history,
see  Hkrodian  Fa.mii.v,  i,  and  Israp:i,  ;  and  for  the
dilTiculties  rai.sed  by  Lk.  2i  w  ith  regard  to  the  census,  see
j Chronology,  §  59/

In Acts  262125 the AV 'Augustus' for  aefiaaroi

should  rather  be,  as  in RV,  simply  'the  emperor,'  or,

j as in RV"'a-, 'the Augustus.' The reference is to

I Nero  (see  C^K.SAR). For  'Augustus's  band,'  or  rather

j (as  in RV) 'the Augustan band' (.\cts  27 1 aireipyji

TlejiaaTTJ^),  see  Army,  §  10.

AURANUS  (AYPdNOY  [^"-^l :  cp  Avaran),  leader
of  the  Assassins  in  Jerusalem  in  the  time  of  Lysimachus
! (2  Mace.  440).
; AUTEAS (aytaiac [BA]), i  Esd.  948  =  Neh.  8  7,

j IIOI;l.\H,  2.

AUTHORITIES (e^OYCiAi. iPeL322). Sc-e

Angels,  §§1,9.

AVA  (j;-U'),  2  K.  1724  AV  ; RV  AvvA.

AVARAN  (ayapan  [AXV]),  i  Mace.  25.  See
Eleazak,  7  ;  NLvccAHKKs,  i.  §  3  ;  cp  Auranls.

AVEN  (JIN;  CON  [B.VQP]  in  Hos.  108  Am.  1 5,  but
hAioy  TJoKeCxiC  [B.VQ]  in  Ezek.  30i7t).  i.  In
Ezek.  3O17  the  reference  is  doubtless  to  the  I'^gyjitian
Heliopolis  (see  O.n).

2.  In  Hos.  108  (EV  '  the  high  places  of  Aven  ')  Targ.
Jon.  has  '?Nn'2,  Bethel,  which  explanation  is  given  by
all  .ancient  and  most  modern  interpreters  ;  but,  in  con-
sideration of  the  well-attested  use  of  pn  (aven)  in  the
sense  of  '  false  worship,'  '  idolatry'  (see,  e.g.,  Hos.  12 12
[11]),  it  is  a  question  ( i )  whether  we  should  not  render  with
G.  A.  Smith,  '  Destroyed  are  the  high  places  of  idolatry,
the  sin  of  Israel,'  and  (2)  whether,  when  we  have  regard
to  the  parallel  passage  Am.  79,  and  to  the  probably  not
infrequent  occurrence  of  glosses  in  the  MT  of  the  pro-
phetic writings  (see,  e.g.,  Mic.  I5/.),  the  words  riNcn  |U<
should  not  lie  either  omitted  or  printed  in  a  diflerent
type  as  an  editorial  insertion.  The  passage,  as  Well-
hausen  remarks,  gains  greatly  by  this  omission.  Vg. 's
reading,  e.xre/sn  idoli,  favours  the  view  here  taken  of
j\y.  Ibn  Ezra  paraphrases  c'Sya  niC3  '  the  high  places
of  the  Baals. '

3.  In  Am.  1  5  M.aundrell  (1697),  Grove,  W.  A.  Wright,
and  G.  A.  Smith  (with  Hitzig)  are  inclined,  in  com-
pany with  (S,  to  identify  the  '  plain  (or  broad  valley)
of  Aven'  (Bikath-Avkn  ;  so  AV"'S)  with  the  great
plain  between  Lebanon  and  Antilibanus  (the  so-called
Bcka),  in  which  the  famous  temple  of  the  Syrian  Helio-
polis (Baalbec)  was  situated.  The  vocalisation  jijj  will
then  imply  a  play  on  the  name — not  On,  but  Aven.
This,  however,  is  a  far-fetched  supposition.  On
( =  Egyptian  Ann)  represents  ;he  secular,  not  the  re-
ligious, name  of  the  Egyptian  Heliopolis  (see  Bkth-
Shemesh.  4).  It  is  very  doubtful,  moreover,  whether
the  second  Heliopolis  (Baalbec)  was  an  Aramtean  city
in  the  time  of  Amos,  and  it  is  a  plausible  view  of  W'ell-
hausen  that  [ik,  '  false  worship,'  has  been  substituted
for  the  name  of  some  god.  Cp  Winckler,  A  T  Unter-
such.  183,  n.

AVENGER  (^SiK  Nu.  35 12. See  Goel.
AVIM,  AVIMS,  AVITES. See  AvviM.
390


AVITH
AViTH  (n')v,  in  i  ch.  Kt.  nvv  \  reeeA[i]M

[R.\1)I::L]),  the  city  of  Hadad  I.,  king  of  Edoni,  Gen.
3635  I  Ch.  I46  (reee<\M  [A],  eyie  [L])-  €5's  reading
of  the  Hebrew  must  have  Ijeen  c'nj.  Cjittaim,  which  is
clearly  correct.  'Ihc  city  of  the  next  king  had  a  name  of
similar  meaning  (Masrekah). See  GiTTAiM. T.  K.  C.

AWA,  AV  AVA  (Xiy  or  H-ir  ;  Vg.  AvaA)  ;  2  K.  1724
(&IA  [HA],  AIAN  [Lf).  RV  ;'  also  Iwah,  AV  IvAH,
7\W  (omitted  or  only  represented  in  corrupt  form  in  &  ;
Vg.  jr.i).  2K.  1834(<\YA  [A];  not  in  ©'"-),  19i3
(oyAoY  W'  AYTA  [A],  om.  L)  =  Is.  37i3  (oyrAYA
[BXOg"'*.'j.  erroyr^YA  f^]-  oyre  or  oyxA  [Q*]).

In  the  latter  group  of  passages  the  punctuation  implies
an  exegetical  mistake  (see  commentators  on  Is. )  :  the
name  throughout  should  Ix;  Avva  or  Avvah,  and  it
used  to  be  thought  that  the  city  referred  to  the  same
as  that  from  which  the  king  of  Assyria  brought  colonists
to  the  'cities  of  Samaria'  (2  K.  1724)-  It  is  clear,
however  (Wi.  .IT  rntcrsuch.  101/ ),  that  2  K.  17  24  31
have  been  interjjolated  by  some  one  who  supposed
Sei'HAKVAI.m  [y.i'.]  in  2K.  I834I913  to  be  the  Baby-
lonian city  of  that  name.  It  is  only  in  the  speeches  of
Sennacherib's  envoys  that  .\vva  has  a  right  of  existence  ;
'Avva  or  'Avvah,  however,  is  surely  a  corruption  of
'Azzah  (,ny),  'Gaza.'  Tiglath-pileser,  when  he  con-
quered Gaza  in  734  B.C.,  appears  to  have  introduced
the  cultus  of  Asur  (Wi.  GBA  228,  333).  'Where,'
then,  '  are  the  gods  of  Sepharvaim  and  of  Gaza?  '  (So
Che.  Exp.  Times,  June  1899.)  T.  K.  C.

AWIM  (D''-'!y,  so  RV ;  AV  AviM,  AviMS,  Avites
[Avvites,  K\']).  i-  According  to  Dt.  223,  the  Avvim
inhabited  the  Philistine  coast  'as  far  as  Gaza'  before
they  were  '  destroyed '  by  the  Caphtorim — i.  e. ,  the
Philistines.  The  same  late  writer,  in  whom  the  anti-
quarv's  interest  is  prominent,^  states  that  the  Avvim
dwelt  in  villages  or  settlements  {xS'-yin  ;  see  Hazok)  ;
(S  and  Vg. ,  however,  read  o'lnn.  '  the  Hivites  '  {01  evaioi
[BAKL]  ;  //«■«-/).  In  Josh.  132-6  (an  editorial  insertion
which  expands  the  simple  statement  of  J E  in  z'.  i)  we
find  the  Avvim  again  introduced,  and  described  (if
RV  is  right)  as  belonging  to  the  S.  of  Philistia  ;  prob-
ably, however,  '  on  the  south '  belongs  to  the  whole
region  defined  in  vt'.  ib  3.  Here  ©  and  \'g.  once  more
read  'the  Hivites.'  Sir  G.  Grove  (in  Smith's  DB)
suggests  that  the  Avvim  may  be  identical  with  the
Hivites  (cp  ©  Vg.  above)  ;  but  the  latter  name  is
imifornily  found  in  the  singular  ('in.T)-  The  word
might,  to  a  Hebrew  ear,  mean,  yet  probably  does  not
mean,  'ruins'  (cp  Iim).  Not  improbably  it  is  a
mutilated  form  of  ca-iy,  '  Arabians  '  (Che.  Exp.  Times,
June  1899).  The  Avvim  (so-called)  were  Bedawin
who  had  begun  to  adopt  a  settled  life.

2.  E"!'^'  ^'i'^  def.  art.,  'the  ruins'  (aniv  [B],  aueifi  [AL],
Vg.  Aviin),  an  unidentified  place  in  Benjamin  (Josh.  18  23).  It
is  mentioned  in  immediate  connection  with  Bethel  and  Parah,
and  on  this  account  has  been  conjectured  by  Knobel  to  be  the
same  as  Ai.

3.  In  Josh.  15  29  (Sal  reads  '  Avvim  '  for  '  Iim." See  IlM  (i).

4.  The  people  of  Avva  (^.7'.),  2  K.  17  31.  ®  again  oi  fvaioi
IBAL  (there  is  a  second  rendering,  aiioi/et^  in  L)] ;  Vg.  Hevtei.

T. K. C.

AWL  (rV^P,  lit.  -borer';  'onHTlON  [BAFL]).
An  instrument  for  boring,  mentioned  in  the  description
of  the  'law  of  slavery'  (l':x.  216  Dt.  15 17)-  It  prob-
ably resembled  the  Egyptian  boring  instruments  de-
picted in  Kitto  (s.v.),  or  those  more  recently  discovered
by  Bliss  at  Tell  el  Hesy  (see  A  Mound  of  Many  Cities,
81).  Such  instruments  were  used  by  workers  in  leather
(see l-:rman. Life in Ancient Egypt, 450/.). Cp

Sl.AVKRY.

AWNING  (HDSp.  cp  Gen.  813).  Ezek.  27;  RV,  cor-
recting the  punctuation  C^IDDD,  AV  '  that  which  covered
thee'). Cp  Dress,  §  i  (4).

1  Cp  Kue.  Hex.  117-119  ;  Mey.  GA  1  217  (8  179)-
391


AYEPHIM

AXE.  I'Vom  the  rude  stone  chisels  and  hatchets
('celts')  of  palaeolithic  man,  bronze  and  iron  axe,
hatchet,  tomahawk,  and  adze  were  gradually  developed.
Various  early  forms  of  these  implements  (needed  alike
in  war  and  in  peace)  are  found  in  our  museums  of
Egyptian  and  Babylonian  antiquities  ;  the  monuments
also  give  ample  evidence  of  their  existence.  See  Handi-
crafts and  Weai'ONS.

Of  the  or  words  for  '  axe, '  three  at  least  may  be
nearly  synonymous  :

I-  \^^h  gat-zen  (securis);  Dt.lSs  (iftVr));  20 19  (ixiSripoi) ;
I  K.67  (jr«'Aeicus) ;  Is.  10  15  ('a^iinj),  everywhere  an  implement
for  felling  trees  or  hewing  large  timber  for  building.  The  word
is  used  thrice  in  the  Siloam  inscription  (//.  2  4),  in  the  .sense  of  a
quarryman's  or  miner's  pick. On2S.  I231  2  K.65,  cp  Iron,  §  2.

2.  DT\p,^ar</d„i,'ai^iyr,,seairis(]udg.948Ps.'Hs  iS.132oy:
Jer.  4622!),  perhaps  specially  used  for  felling  trees;  if  so,  it
would  have  a  heavier  head  than  the  garzen.

3.  '?'B'3,  kaihi,  ire\€KVi,  securis,  P.s.  7461;  in  Tg.  Jer.4622
for  Heb.  DTIj7.  RV  gives  'hatchet,'  apparently  to  suggest  a
diminutive  axe.  (D,  Sym.,  Pesh.,  however,  read,  not  lI'n^BB
'  its  carved  work,"  but  ?''J'5?  'its  gates.'  The  rather  improbable
word  '  iJ'3  should  perhaps  be  ('3ij*  'knife'  (Che.  Ps.i"^),  and
in  the  light  of  the  Tg.  we  should  emend  msVo  to  nVB'?!^
'  two-edged  '  (Herz,  Che.P),  '  with  two-edged  axe  ').

Somewhat  different  from  these,  and  probably  adze-
shaped,  is  :

4.  l:iyO>  vta'sAd,  xuivfv\La.  [B'^AQ,  reading  npS1D?l,  ascia  in
Jer.  IO3  Is.  44i2l(<ric€Trap»'u),  //wrt,  AV  '  tongs '),  and  by  emenda-
tion of  the  text  in  Is.  10"35-'  (Duhm)  and  Zech.  11  3  [2])  (see
FoKEsr).  Kimhi  understands  something  lighter  than  the
kardom,  or  'axe.'  In  Jer.  IO3  maasad  is  a  tool  suitable  for
fashioning  or  carving  wood.

Two  Other  words  are  doubtful.

5.  ain  In  Ezek. 269,  EV  'axe,'  an  insecure  rendering.  The
text  is  possibly  corrupt  (see  Co.;  rais  naxaipan  [BAQ],  tois
ojrAois  [Qn'U]).

6.  •■!;.'.;!?,  2  S.I231  (vnoTOiievi  [A])=i  Ch.203,  TtliO,  which
Berth,  and  Kittel  conform  to  Sam.  The  text,  however,  perhaps
needs  more  extensive  emendation.  Che.  reads  'jnan  nilJCS
a  marginal  correction  of  the  mjD3  (after  cc'l)  which  found  its
way  into  the  text  (ICxp.  Times,  x.  1899,  p.  285). See  Saw.

Of  the  NT  names  the  afiVij  of  Mt.Sio  Lk.39  is  the  wood-
man's axe  ;  but  Rev.  2O4  (ireAeicifecreai  ;  cp  ©  1  K.  5  18)  refers
to  the  axe  of  the  headman  (Trt'Aeicus).

Axes  were  among  the  emblems  of  high  rank  in  Egypt
and  at  Mycenas  (see  the  axe  figured  in  Erman,  Egypt,
73  ;  Schliemann,  Mycena,  252).  In  the  O T  it  is  rather
the  mace  that  is  the  favourite  emblem  of  sovereign
power  (see  Rod).  There  is,  however,  a  sarcastic  passage
in  Bar.  615  which  suggests  that  the  axe  could  be  an
emblem  of  divinity  ;  and  we  may  perhaps  illustrate  it  by
Frazer's  learned  note  on  Paus.  x.  14i.  The  double-
I  headed  axe  is  characteristic  of  so-called  Hittite  sculptures.
j  The  Labrandean  Zeus  of  Caria  also  is  represented  on
!  coins  as  carrying  a  double-headed  axe  {labriis  =  a.\e  in
Lydian  ;  Plut.  Quccst.  Grcrc.  45).  There  appears  on  the
coins  of  Tenedos  a  similar  axe,  which,  being  generally
accompanied  by  a  cluster  of  grapes,  may  be  a  symbol
of  the  worship  of  Dionysus.  Cp  also  Ohnefalsch-
Richter,  Aypros,  1 257.'^  Of  course,  the  bow  and  the
sword,  not  the  axe,  are  the  emblems  of  Yahwe,  though
in  Ezek.  92  the  supernatural  agents  of  Yahwe  carry
mauls  (or  like  weapons). See  Ba Tri,i;-.\XE.

AYEPHIM  (D''2T),  the  rendering  of  R\''"^'-  in  2  S.
16 14,  where  the  text  has,  'and  the  king  and  all  the
people  that  were  with  him  came  weary."  So  C
4K\e\vfji^i>oi  [BL], 6  iKXeXvfidvos  [A]. The  name  of

1  nsJ^D  as  it  stands  does  not  make  sense.  For  proposed  emen-
dations see  Che.  {.'iSOr.  Isaiah,  Heb.),  Duhm,  Di.-Ki.

2  'With  a  terrible  crash'  (ninyjis)  «  only  a  conjectural
rendering  of  MT.

3  Perhaps,  however,  the  axe  was  depicted  as  a  survival  of  the
time,  before  the  introduction  of  coined  money,  when  it  may
have  been  the  unit  of  barter  (Ridgeway,  OH^-in  0/  Metallic
Currency,  etc.,  317/)-  Perhaps  too  the  'tongue'  (jirS)  °^
gold  in  Josh.  7  21  was  in  the  shape  of  an  axe  ;  see  Exp.  Ti


1897,  p.  61.


392


AYYAH

some  place  seems  to  Ix?  rfquired  by  the  context.  If
Aycphini  l)e  indeed  a  placo-nanR-,  the  locality  it  indi-
cates remains  unidentifie<i.  On  the  other  hand,  it  may
Ik;  a  corruption,  or  the  place-name  may  have  dropjx-d
out. Cp  \Vc.  in  liK. ;  ©'  adds  irapd  rbv  'lopddfT/c.

G.  A.  s.

AYYAH  (n;y  [liii.  (Ji.]),  1  Ch.  r^St  RV"'K=AV
G.\z.\  [./.7.  ,  2 J. Sec  .\l, I.

AZAEL (azahAoy I'^AJi, i  Ksd.  9i4  =  I>-ral0is.

AS.MII.I.,  4.

AZAELUS  (azahAoc Ll^J). i  Ksd.  9  34=Hzral04.,

RV  .\Z.\KKKI., 5.

AZAL,  or  rather  RV  AzKi,  (*?>*>? :  l&COA  [BNr].
ACAhA  I-\Q]*.  ihti  point  to  which  the  cleft  of  the  moun-
tain is  to  rc.ich  when  Yah\v6  descends  ujxjn  the  Mt.
of  Olives  in  battle  (Zech.  14  5)-  This  place,  presumably
situ:ited  near  Jerusalem,  is  often  identified  with  the
eciually  obscure  Hkthkzkl.  Kohler,  Wright,  and
others  (after  Vg.  Symm. ),  with  less  probability,  take
':•!»«"'?«  to  Ix:  an  adverbial  expression,  '  very  near,  hard
by"  (cpOlsh.  §  167^;  but  sec  also  Konig,  §  330  /  [7]).
Clermont  (ianneau  thinks  of  the  Wady  Yasul,  a  little
valley  on  the  right  of  Uie  '.\in  el-Loz,  in  the  Wady
en- Nar  (/'/■. V-V"-. iSyi.p. loi).

AZAUAH  (■"in^S'N*.  ecceAiOY  [-^L]),  father  of
Shaphan  the  .secretary,  2K.  223  (eAloy  [H]l  =  2Ch.
318(ceAi&(HAl).

AZANIAH  (n;3TN,  §  32,  •  Yahui'  weighs,'  cp  Jaazan-
iah ;  AZ&N[eli&  [BA],  -nihA  [N],  azaioy  ni).  a
Levite  si'^natory  to  the  covenant  (see  I'.ZK.V,  i.  §  7),
Neh.lOQl...).

AZAPIIION  (ACC&<t)eicoe  [B]).  lEsd.Sjj  AV  =
Ezraiiss  RV,  Has.soI'HKKKTII  [(/.;'. J.

AZARA,  RV  AsAKA  (ac&RA  [BA]),  a  family  of
Netiiimm  mentioned  after  Phinees  (  =  P[h]aseah)  in
the  great  post-exilic  ILst  (.see  KzKA,  ii.  §  9),  i  Esd.  Ssif.
Unmcntioned  in  ||  ICzra249  Neh.  7  51.

AZARAEL  (ozeiHA  [BA]),  Neh.  I236  AV,  RV  Aza-

RKF.I., 4.

AZARAIAS.  I.  AVSakaias,  i  Esd.  81  (azaraioy
[B],  CAPAIOY  |AL])  =  Kzra7i,  Skkaiaii,  7.

2. .\\"  .AzAKiAS  (2  Esd.  1 1)  ;  see  Azakiah,  3.

AZAREEL,  or  rather,  as  in  RV,  Azarel  ('PNITIJ.  §
28  ; '  (iod  helps  '  ;  ezpiHA  [AL],  cp  Azkikl).

1.  One  of  David's  warriors  (iCh.  126;  o^/)«u|A.  [BK],  «At>jA
[A];  fi^A(Ll). .See  David,  $  11,  a.  iii.

2.  One  of  the  sons  of  Heman  (see  Lkvi),  i  Ch.  25  18  (a^apta
IB);  o^c>)AlI,];  cp  Uzziel).

3.  .V  D;uiite  'prince'  under  David  (i  Ch.27  22  ;  a.^a.(>a.T\\  [B],
afp.,A|l,l). .See  David,  8  M,  <-.  i.

4.  A  priest  in  list  of  inhabitants  of  Jerusalem  (see  Ezra,  ii.
I  5  [*1.  %  '5  fO  a),  Neh.  11  13  (»<j-5pi7|A  [BK]);  in  the  procession
at  the  dedication  of  the  wall  (see  Exka,  ii.  §  13  i'),  Neh.  12  36,
AV  Azakaei.  (oi'et.jA  [HK*A],  o^pecTjA  [N'^'^p  superscr.]).

5.  In  list  of  those  with  foreign  wives  (see  Kzka,  i.  §  5,  end),
Ezra  10 4 1  (»^€pr,A  [P.],  e<rpi7,A  [«])=  i  Esd.  934  (Esril,  RV
EzKil.,  «fp(e|iA  |H.\1,  e<7-piT)A  [L]),  apparently  repeated  as
Azaki..  s  (//..  o.C,a.r^K  [A],  -o«  [I'.l,  oni.  L).

AZARIAH  (nnrr,  §§  28  84  [or  •innri?;  in  nos.  I,
2,  6,  7,  8,  13,  15,  19,  20  ;  cp  Baeron  i  Ch.  238],  '  Yahw6
helps'  ;  cp  Elkazar,  Azkikl  ;  azariac  [B.\L]).

1.  b.  Zadok  ;  priest,  temp.  Solomon,  i  K.  42  (afap«i
[B]). See  Bkn-hur.

2.  Chief  priest,  temp.  Uzziah  (2  Ch.  2617-ao).

3.  Chief  priest,  temp.  Hezekiah  (2  Ch.  31 10-13).

In  I  Ch.  69-14  (535-39)  the  name  of  Azariah  is  borne  by
the  twelfth,  the  fourteenth,  and  the  twentieth  in  descent
from  .Aaron  in  the  line  of  Eleazar  (it.  9  n  i3ofapta[B]) ;
of  the  fourtc-enth  it  is  said  that  he  '  executed  the  priest's
office  in  the  house  that  Solomon  built  in  Jerusalem '
(iCh.  610/  [.I36/.  ]).  Omissions  and  transpositions
allowed  for,  the  three  Azariahs  in  this  series  may  be
held  to  lie  identical  with  nos. i.  2, and  3  above; at


AZAZEL

the  same  time,  it  is  difficult  to  su|)ix>se  that  the  Hilkiah
of  iCh.  t5i3/.  (539/)  should  Ije  distinguishe<l  from
the  Hilkiah  of  i  Ch.  9ii  and  EzraTi  (fa/)«toi^  [BJ;  ;  if
we  identify  these,  .\zariah  (3)  was  a  contemporary  of
Josiah,  not  of  Hezekiah.  This  name  ap|x;ars  also  as
Azarias,  .\zaraias,  Aziei,  Ezerias,  and  ICzias.

4.  Expounder  of  taw  (see  EzKA,  ii.  f  i-^/.  ;  cp  i.  |  8;  ii.  |  16
[5I,  «  iShb).  Neh.87(om.  BKA)=  i  Esd.  fl  48  (Azarias),  and
signatory  to  the  covenant  (see  Ezka,  i.  $  7),  Neh.  10  2  I3I  (ai^a.ju.a.
[BK<:-3AJ,  l;a.xo^'.<y.^  [«*]).  See  also  Neh.  3  23  (a^ap.a  [BKA]),
24  (^T)fla^ap(t]ia  (liKA],  oikov  of.  [L]).  He  is  apparently  the
Ezka  of  Neh.  12  i  13.

5.  A  Kohathite  Levite  (i  Ch.  6  36  [21],  o^op»a  [BL],  cp  2  Ch.
2S>  12,  l.Tiiy). In  I  Ch.  (i  24  [9I  his  pl.ice  is  taken  by  U/ZIAH,  2.

6.  1).  Nathan,  su|)ervisor  of  .Solomon's  twelve  prefects  (i  K.4
5).  Probably  he  had  to  see  that  the  contributions  of  the  diflTtr-
ent  departments  were  punctually  furnished.  His  father  was
most  likely  the  well-known  prophet  who  in  2  S.  12  1  is  called
simply  Nathan  (so  Ew.,  We.,  Klo.).  Others  (e.g.,  Biihr)  make
Azariah  Solomon's  nephew  ;  cp  2  S.  6  I4(©  opclejia  [B*L1).  See,
however,  ZAnUD.

7.  \  son  of  King  Jehoshaphat,  twice  enumerated  (as  Azariah
and  .Azariahu)  in  2  Ch.  21  2,  out  omitted  in  (B  jl'l.

8.  A  son  of  Jchorani,  king  of  Jud.ih  in  2  Ch.  226  (oxo^cliat
I  [BAL])  ;  but  it  is  clear  from  2  K.  8  29,  as  well  as  from  2  Ch.  22  i,
[ that  Ahaziah  [2)  is  meant. In  2  Ch.  21  17  he  is  called  Jkjio-

AHAZ(^.7'.,  3).

9.  King  of  Judah  ;  otherwise  known  as  Uzziah  (f.v.,  i).

'  10.  One  of  the  '  three  children,'  companions  of  Daniel  ;  othcr-
'  wise  called  Abkdnego  [f.7>.]  (Dan.  I671119  Song  of  Three
I Children,  v.  66  [®,  Theod.  Dan.  3  88],  Azaki  as,  7).


[A]).


I.  A  Judahii


of  Ethan,  iCh.  28  (^apeia  [B]; a^apia


12.  A  Jerahmeelite,  i  Ch.  2  38_/C  (a^apia  [B]).

13.  b.  Odkd,  a  prophet  of  Judah,  whose  prophecy  to  King  .A.sa
is  recorded  in  2  Cn.  15  1-8.  The  prophecy  is  attributed  to  Oded
in  f .  8.

14.  Son  of  Jeroham  ;  one  of  the  captains  who  were  associated
with  Jehoiada  in  deposing  .\thaliah  (2  Ch.  23  i).

15.  Son  of  Obed  ;  another  of  the  captains  associated  with
Jehoiada  (2  Ch.  23  i  ;  cp  i  Ch.  2  38/.).

16.  Son  of  Hoshaian  ;  an  opponent  of  Jeremiah,  Jer.  43  2
(a^axou>ias  [«*]). Cp  Jaazaniah,  i.

17.  Le.ider  (see  Ezka,  ii.  §  82)  in  the  great  post-exilic  list  (//.
ii.9),  Neh.  V  7  (a^apia  [BN],  -pea  [A])=Ezr322,  Sekaiah  ;  see
Ezka  {apaia<:  [B.\*J,  crapaiai  [.\a!L]).

18.  In  procession  at  dedication  of  wall  (see  Ezka,  i.  §  i^g),
Neh.  12  33,  faxapiat  [BN]  (see  B.-ier),  cp  (4).

19.  An  Ephraimite,  temp.  Ahaz,  who  took  part  in  restoring
the  captives  of  Judah,  2  Ch.  28  12  (ovSeia  [Ii]).

20.  b.  Jehallelel,  a  Merarite  Levite,  2  Ch.  29  12  (fovopiat
IBA]).

AZARIAS  (azarIAC  [BAL]),  the  Greek  form  of
Azariah.

1.  I  Esd.  9  21  =  Ezra  10  21,  Uzziah,  3.

2.  In  list  of  Ezra's  supporters  (i  Esd.  943),  wanting  in  ||  Neh.
8  4  ;  see  Be.  ai^  loc.

3.  I  Esd.  9  48  =  Neh.  8  7,  Azariah  (A

4.  RV  AzAKAiAs  (2  Esd.  1  i),  b.  Helkias  ;  see  Azariah  (3).

5.  The  name  assumed  by  the  angel  Rafhaei.  \q.T.\  when
accompanying  Tobit  (Tob.  5  12  O613  78  9  2).

6.  A  captain  in  the  army  of  Judas  the  Maccabee,  i  Mace.  5  18
5660  (in  7'.  56  ^axopiat  [.\K]).

7.  .Song  of  I'hree  Children,  66  (©  Theod.  Dan.  3  88);  see  Aza-
kiah (10).

AZARU  (azaroy  [B]).  i  Esd.  5 15  RV;  AV  Azlra.s.

AZAZ  (TTr,  ozOYZ  [BA] ;  but  L  gives  lojAZAZ— '•«'•.
Joazaz)  : cp  .\zaziah,  a  Reulienite  name  (i  Ch.  5  Sf).

AZAZEL  (^TNTI?).'  Of  the  two  goats  set  apart  for
the  great  Day  of  Atonement  (see  Atonement,  Day
,  y  ...  ,  ok),  one  was  chosen  by  lot  for  a  sin-
1.  lieviwcai offering  for  Yahwe,  the  other  for  '.Aza'zel

practice.  ^^^.  jgg.,^)  i^^^^^  j^e  sin-offering  had
been  made  in  behalf  of  the  people,  the  high  priest  was
to  lay  both  hands  upon  the  head  of  the  goat  for  '.\zazel,
and  confess  over  it  all  the  sins  of  the  Israelites  (cp  the
confession  of  sin  in  Mishna,  Vdrnd  62),  laying  them  on
its  head  and  sending  it  out  into  the  wilderness  to  Azazel
(y.  21/.).  The  meaning  of  this  act,  which  is  further
described  in  the  Targum  of  pseudo-Jonathan,  is  clear.
The  goat  symbolically  bears  away  the  sins  of  the  people.
Something  analogous  is  found  in  I^v.  14  4^,  where,  for
the  purification  of  the  leper,  one  bird  is  to  be  killed,  and
the  other,  charged  with  the  disease,  is  to  be  let  loose
1  AV  renders  'scapegoat.'  For  the  renderings  in  ©,  see  col.
395,  note  7.

394


AZAZEL

into  the  open  field.  Cp  also  Zech.  f>%ff.,  where  sin  is
carried  away  bodily  into  the  land  of  Shinar.^

The  meaning  of  Azazel  is  much  disputed  ;  it  is,  of
course,  a  subject  closely  connected  with  the  incjuiry  into

.^  the  origin  of  the  custom.  It  is  at  least
2.  wno  was .„• ,, — ,  „„  \^r^^^\  ,^


Az&zel  ?


certain  that,  as  Azazel  receives  one  goat
while  Yahw6  receives  the  other,  both  must
be  personal  beings.

The  theory  of  the  Jewish  interpreters  (Tg.  ps.-Jon.,  Rashi,
Kimhi  ;  cp  Ibn  Ezra's  references  to  current  views),  that  Azazel
is  a  place  in  the  wilderness,  is  inadmissible  ;  and  equally  so  are
the  views  of  Aq.,  Syinm.,  Jer.,  AV,  that  it  means  the  goat
itself  (rpo-yov  !ntep\cni.tvo<i  and  oAitfi'co?,  capfr  emissarius,  '  the
scape-goat'),  and  of  Mer.x  in  Schenkel's  Bib.  Lex.  1  256,  and
others,  that  it  is  an  abstract  term  =  '  complete  removal  or
dismissal '  (from  \'''?ij;),  a  view  probably  taken  by  ©.2

It  seems  most  natural  to  connect  the  belief  in  question
with  the  demonology  and  angelology  which  developed
so  largely  in  the  post-e.\ilic  age  (^wocA  678 196IO4).
One  group  of  interpreters,  on  this  view,  take  Azazel  as
a  prominent  memlier  of  the  class  of  se'irim,  or  demons
of  the  field  and  the  desert,  to  whom  sacrifices  were
offered  in  post-e.\ilic  times  (Lev.  17?  ;  see  Satvr,  §  2),
— to  whom  possibly  all  the  sins  of  the  people  with
their  evil  effects  were  symbolically  sent  every  year  (so,
with  various  modifications,  Ew. ,  Di. ,  Dr.  \_Iixpos.\  Now. ,
Benz. ).  We  need  not,  however  (with  the  first  three
scholars),  regard  the  conception  as  a  primitive  one,  or
as  having  been  taken  over  by  the  religion  of  Yahw6  from
an  earlier  stage  ;  and  least  of  all  is  there  any  imitation
of  the  symbolic  vengeance  taken  by  the  Egyptians  on
Set-Typhon^  (see  Brugsch,  Rclig.  u.  My f hoi.  d.  alt.
Aeg.  710).  On  the  other  hand,  Cheyne  ( '  The  Date  and
Origin  of  the  Ritual  of  'Aza'zel '  in  ZATIV  15  i53-'S6
['95])  considers  it  to  have  been  one  of  the  objects  of  the
ritual  '  to  do  away  with  the  cultus  of  se'irim  by  sub-
stituting a  personal  angel  for  the  crowd  of  impersonal
and  dangerous  se'irim.''*  His  arguments  for  this  very
attractive  view  are  (a)  the  form  of  the  name  (deliberately
altered  from '^Niiy,  '  God  strengthens' ;  cp  ^n'lij;,  i  Ch.
15  21),  which  seems  to  be  akin  to  that  of  the  other  names
of  angels;  and  (/)  more  especially  the  passages  of  the
Book  of  Enoch  referring  to  Azazel  as  a  leader  of  the
evil  angels  (Gen.  6124).  '  Azazel  is  therefore  of  literary
not  of  popular  origin  ;  he  is  due  to  the  same  school  of
speculative  students  of  Scripture  to  which  we  owe  the
other  names  of  angels,  good  and  evil,  in  the  later
literature.'  In  any  case,  we  nmst  admit  that  the  old
interpreters  w'ho  identified  Azazel  with  Satan  *  had
some  plausibility  on  their  side  (Orig.  c.  Ceh.  6305;
Iren.  H<vr.  1  12,  followed  by  Spencer,  Hengstenberg,
Kalisch,  and  Volck).  We  may  at  least  venture  to  say
with  Reuss  ®  that  '  the  conception  of  Azazel  lies  on  the
way  which  led  later  to  that  of  the  devil. '  For  Azazel
is  certainly  described  as  in  some  sense  a  being  hostile
to  God.  1.  B.

It  is  strange  that  so  many  modern  critics  should  have
failed  to  comprehend the  ritual  of  the  scapegoat,  and
"R  cfint ^^^^  rejected  with  much  positiveness  the
'... .  only natural explanation of the name

cn  icism.  ^^aj,cl,  so  that  it  has  become  a  kind  of
dogma  that  "^mtj;  is  not  from  "^j*  jiy,  but  either  a  weak-
ened form  of  SiViK,  meaning  '  averruncus,"  or  '  porro
abiens,'  or  '  amolio  '  (Ol. ,  Merx,  Stade,  Kautzsch-Ges. ,
Volck), ^  or  else  a  broken  plural  of  difficult  interpretation

1  P'or  extra-biblical  parallels,  see  below,  g  3;  also  Ew.  Ant.
158  ;  WRS,  Ret.  Se»t.w  422  [and  for  an  Assyriological  explana-
tion of  the  reference  to  the  wilderness,  see  Ritual,  §  10].

2  Cp,  however,  below,  note  7.

3  This  view  has  left  a  trace  in  Smith,  JJB(^)  1  297,  but  has
received  no  sanction  from  Di.  or  Dr.,  whose  names  are  mentioned.
Against  it  see  Diestel,  jZt./.  hist.  '1  lieol.  ('60),  pp.  159^

<  I'rof.  G.  F.  Moore  suggests  a  reference  to  Nachmanides  on
Lev.  168.

*  The  Rabbinic  identification  of  .Satan  with  Sammael  as '  chief
of  the  Satans'  (Midr.  R.  on  Dt.  11  3)  may  here  be  chronicled.

8  Gesch.  (ier  Schri/ten  des  A  'H^l,  501.

7  Some  critics  refer  to  ®  a.s  having  initiated  the  theory  of  an
abstract  formation.  Certainly  in  Lev.  10  10  <5,  ©bafi.  renders
VtKiyS  »i«  '"I"  oiroirojijnji' ;  and  in  v.  26,  ets  at/wo-ic. What  the

395


AZAZEL

(perhaps  some  particular  class  of  unfriendly  demons  ;
see  Steiner  in  Schenkel,  Bid.  Lex.  5599,  and  Bochart). '
The  truth  is  that  the  old  derivation  of  Azazel
from  <^/iij;,  'to  Ix;  strong' (see  Tg.  ps.-Jon.,  Saadia),
needed  to  assume  a  new  form  in  order  to  commend  itself.
The  explanation  of  the  name  as  7K  TKjy  (which  was  retracted
by  Diestel  its  author)  implies  an  un-Hebraic  mode  of  formation,
says  Di.,  and  the  names  of  angels  compounded  with  7K
belong  to  the  later  Jewi.sh  theology.  The  former  objection  is
not  absolutely  decisive  ;  the  name  .\birel  \n  Jubilees  seems  to  be
h«  T3K  (see  Abrech).  Still,  there  is  no  neces.sity  to  follow
Diestel  ;  the  later  Jews  could  form  names  correctly,  and  the  ex-
planation offered  above,  which,  with  the  connected  theory,  may
claim  to  be  virtually  a  nevv  one,  is  not  open  to  iji.'s  objection.
Di.'s  second  objection  points  the  way  to  the  true  reason  why
modern  scholars  have  often  given  such  far-fetched  and  improbable
(however  learnedly  justified)  etymologies.  They  felt  that  a  name
formed  on  the  analogy  of  Michael  and  Gabriel  must  be  late ;  but
their  theory  compelled  them  to  suppose  that  Azazel  was  early,
and  that  the  name  Azazel  in  Enoch  (like  Belial  and  Heelzebub,
Delitzsch  ventures  to  add)  was  simply  borrowed  from  the  OT.*
Thus  the  light  thrown  on  the  name  by  the  15ook  of  Enoch  was
missed.  Nor  was  sufficient  u.se  made  of  the  Mishna  treatise
called  i'dmd,  with  its  strange  but  not  imaginary  details,  although
the  description  comes  from  a  time  not  very  far  removed  from  that
of  the  later  portions  of  the  priestly  code.  Nor  did  critics  give
heed  enough  to  the  facts  of  comparative  folklore,  which  illustrate
certain  details  in  the  1  'Oiiui.

The  more  we  study  the  Priestly  Code,  the  more  we
are  struck  by  the  combination  of  firmness  and  laxity
which  its  compilers  display.  They  are  firmness  itself  as
regards  the  essential  principles  of  the  law,'*  but  very
com]5liant  to  minor  popular  superstitions.  Nothing,
therefore,  can  be  more  probable  than  that  the  legal
authorities  to  whom  the  later  portions  of  Lev.  16  are  due
gave  their  sanction  to  a  custom  which  it  had  perhaps
been  found  im|)ossible  to  root  out,  on  condition  of  its
being  regulated  and  modified  by  themselves.  Assum-
ing this  to  have  been  the  case,  we  can  explain  the
name  Azazel,  and  even  account  for  the  spelling,  which
has  struck  many  scholars  as  inconsistent  with  the  ety-
mology h«  ny.  From  the  point  of  view  here  adopted —
viz. ,  that  the  priestly  code  is  not  Mosaic,  but  a  com-
bination of  diverse  elements  due  to  many  different  persons
in  the  exilic  and  the  post-exilic  periods,  and  framed  in  a
statesmanlike,  compromising  spirit — there  can  he  no
doubt  that  the  view  here  mentioned  is  correct.  There
is  no  uncertainty  as  to  the  meaning  of  the  name  Azazel,
and  very  little  as  to  the  origin  and  significance  of  the
rite.

To  supplement  the  account of  the  present  writer's

theory  given  above,  it may be  said that,  like Diestel

, - .  ,  formerly, he opposes the widely

4.Jewishsuper-  ^^^^^^J ^.^^. ^^^^ ^^-^^j ^^.^^ ^

KaKodai/JLUV  to  whom  the  sin  of  the
jjeople  and  the  resulting  calamities  were  sent,  and  that
the  belief  goes  back  to  pre-exilic  times.

The  first  part  of  this  view  was  that  of  Benzinger  (Arch.  478)
in  1894  ;  it  is,  however,  scarcely  tenable.  The  sultan  of  they/««,
to  whom  the  se'irim  propitiated  by  the  Jews  in  post-exilic  times
correspond  (see  Satvk,  §  2),  has  no  personal  name ;  he  and  his
subjects  are  impersonal.  If  Azazel  were  a  demon  we  should
hear  of  him  in  other  parts  of  Leviticus.  Nor  is  it  likely  that
even  a  later  legislator  would  have  adopted  Azazel  as  an  evil
demon.

translator  meansbythi.s,however,isa7roir«/x7ro/iiei'os(soTheodoret,
Qutest.  22  in  Lev.),  in  short,  he  agrees  with  Aq.,  Symm.,  Jer.
in  deriving  the  name  from  Ij;  and  7jJ?.  This  gives  the  right  in-
terpretation of  airoTroMn-oios  [R.^FL],  which  answers  to  Azazel  in
V.  loa.  Aj/erruncus,  in  this  view  of  the  facts,  is  not  the
equivalent  of  ®'s  term,  as  Ew.  (Anf.  ^63)  supposes.

1  Del.  is  ^ot  happy  in  his  explanation,  '  Defier  of  God."  He
traces  the  name  to  Arabic  mytnology:  'azz  is  used  of  a  horse
which  successfully  resists  its  rider  (ZA'/K  1  182  ('80])  ;  but
Konig  is  no  more  successful— '  fortis  decedens'  is  his  rendering
{Lehr^eb.  2  a,  417).

2  So  Driver  (Expositor,  1885,  b.  p.  215).  In  Hastings'  DB
(art.  '  Azazel ')  no  very  definite  conclusion  is  reached  ;  but
reference  is  duly  made  to  the  too  generally  neglected  analogies
of  other  popular  religions.

I»  Kalisch  rightly  says  that,  'although  Azazel  and  his  goat  are
a  stain  on  the  Levitical  legislation,  they  do  not  taint  the_  main
principle  of  Judaism — Ckxl's  absolute  sovereignty'  {Leviticus,
2  804).

396


AZAZEL

Az&zcl'  to  the  Jewish  theulugiaiis  (including  the  authors
of  the  scajx'Koat-ritual)  was  a  fallen  angel ,  evil  no  doubt,
yet  not  altogether  unfriendly  to  man,  for  he  was  the
true  TulKiI-cain,  one  of  the  '  sons  of  KlOhim  '  mentioned
in  (icn.61/.  4^  (sf'e  Enoch  6  6/!  81  and  es|>ecially
10  4-8  l:}i).  lie  was  said  to  have  been  Ixjund  hand
and  foot,  and  placetl  in  '  an  opening  in  the  desert  which
is  in  Dudael '  ;  rough  and  jagged  rocks  have  Ix^n  laid
up)n  him.  Now,  DudaCl  is  not  '  God's  caldron  '  (Di. ),
but  (Cjeiger,  Charles)  a  fant.istic  modification  of  Hadudo
in  llcth  H.adudo,  where  w;is  the  crag  (p'^j)  down  which,
according  to  Yoma  (0  4  ;  cp  Tg.  ps.-Jon.  Lev.  IG22),
the  •  goat  for  Azazel '  was  pushed,  which  crag  Schick  ■*
identifies  with  nuxl.  Bet-hudidun,  on  the  edge  of  a  chalk
cliff,  overhanging  a  rocky  chasm,  at  the  right  distance
from  lerusalein.  The  coincidence  seems  too  striking  to
permit  a  doubt  as  to  the  true  character  of  Azazel.

It  w.as  this  personal  angel  (the  later  Jews  gave  a
quasi-pcrsonality  to  the  angels)  that  the  author  of  the
sea  I  )egoat- ritual  substituted  for  the  crowd  of  se'irim  (or
earth-denjons)  to  whom  the  people  sacrificed  ;  just  as
the  scafjegoat  was  the  substitute  for  the  sacrificial
victims.^  The  need  must  have  been  great  indeed.  In
the  marriage  songs  of  the  Canticles  we  twice  find  (it  is
probable)  the  strange  apjx.'ai,  '  I  charge  you,  O  ye
(iauijiUers  of  Jerusalem,  by  the  fairy-hosts  and  by  the
tree-spirits. '  *  In  such  a  poem  the  name  of  Yahwe  could
not  be  lightly  used  :  all  the  world,  however,  knew  of  the
su(jernatural  beings  who  haunted  thickets  and  some-
times inhabited  trees,  and  like  the  Jinn  to-day,  were
sometimes  friendly  to  man,  sometimes  unfriendly."
The  substitution  apjxiars  to  have  produced  an  effect  :
at  least,  the  Chronicler,  in  the  third  century,  represents
the  custom  of  sacrificing  to  the  scirhn  as  pre-exilic
(2  Ch.  11  15).  Certainly,  too,  we  may  infer  from  the
details  resi)ecting  the  n'7rcon  TVS'  ( '  the  dismissed  goat ')
in  Yomd  that  the  popularity  of  the  institution  was  great.
The  cries,  'Take  (tlioin)  away  and  get  out,' ^  reported
by  the  Gemara  on  Yomd  6  4,  show  how  intensely  the
lower  classes  (Rabylonians  thoy  are  disparagingly
called)  believed  in  the  removal  of  their  sins  by  the  goat.
Sec  also  lip.  Barn.  7  ;  Tertull.  adv.  Marc.  87  ;  adv.
J  lid.  14;  Just.  c.  Ttyph.  40.  That  the  'goat  for
Azazel '  was  really  pushed  over  the  precipice  (  Yomd,
G),  we  have  no  reason  to  doubt.  It  is  instructive
to  notice,  however,  that  the  scrilje  who  inserted  the
directions  in  Lev.  16  could  not  bring  himself  to  put
down  all  that  actually  happened.  WTiat  we  re;id  is
that  Aaron  was  to  confess  all  the  sins  of  the  Israelites
(there  is  great  emphasis  on  '  all ')  over  the  goat,  and  to
send  him  away  in  the  charge  of  a  certain  man  into  a
solitary  land  (pr^\  fnx  v.  21/.).  This  is  explaineti  in
Tg.  ps.-Jon.,  "and  shall  send  him  away  by  a  man
prepared  from  tlie  preceding  year,  to  take  him  into  a
rocky  desert  which  is  Beth-hadure '  (see  above).  In
compensation  for  this,  it  is  Leviticus  that  gives  us  one
detail  not  preserved  in  Yomd.  In  v.  10  it  is  said  that
the  goat  for  Azazel  is  to  be  presented  alive  before  Yahw6,
that  atoning  rites  may  be  performed  over  him  ("133^
vSy)  ;  which  recalls  the  direction  about  the  '  living
bird'  (see  §  i)  that  forms  a  parallel  to  the  scapegoat  in
the  law  of  cleansing  the  leper  (Lev.  14  6/  ).

*  Another  form  of  the  name  may  have  been  Uzziel  (cp  Tg.  ps.-
Jon.  on  (len.  64  with  Enoch  0). The  form  Azael  also  is  found.

*  It  is  not  worth  while  to  e.\amine  tlie  Jewish  interpretations
of  this  strange  pcussaRe  (see  Enoch,  Tg.  ps.-Jon.,  Jude).

3^r/)/T3i,4^.  CSo].

<  Sec  WRS,  Rel.  5««  (2)  418,  422,  468.

B  Cant.  2  73  5,  ni'j'K^^  ni>«3i:3.  The  change  in  the  pointing
is  very  slight  :  Sk  should  be  \.  The  usual  explanation  is  very
fanciful  (see  Budde).  The  sacred  trees  (especially  the  locust-
or  .■.-irob-trees)are  still  reverenced  in  Palestine  as  being  possessed.

8. See  WRS,  Rtl.  Sfm.fll  i3'-i33;  Haldensperger,  PEFQu.
St.,  July  93,  p.  204^  Some  of  the  jinn  are  believed  to  be
dangerous  to  newly  married  people.  Don't  play  with  love,  says
the  passage  (Cant.  2  7),— for  fear  of  the //«>..

^  KS1  '?'IB  KS1  ViD-

397


AZGAD

To  resume  and  to  supplement :  the  usages  described
in  YOmd  are  a  combination  of  a  primitive  s-icrifice  to  the
demons  of  untilltxl  or  (especially)  mountainous  country
with  a  superstitious  custom  still  widely  prevalent,  accord-
ing to  which  evils  of  all  kinds  were  sought  to  Ix-  got
rid  of  by  the  device  of  lading  them  on  some  .inimal,
which  was  thereupfjn  driven  away  from  the  community
like  the  scajiegoat  (see  Lyall,  Fortnif^htly  Jinirw,  1872.
p.  131  ;  IVazer,  Golden  Hough,  2189-193;  K.  F.  Knight,
Wlure  Two  l-.mpires  .Meet,  221/).  Such  customs,
as  Frazer  points  out,  tend  to  become  periodic,  like  the
rite  of  the  sca|x.'goat.  See,  further,  Atunemknt,
Day  ok.

Diestel,'  Sct-Typhon,  Asasel,  und  Satan  '  in  7.t./.  hist.  Theol.

i860, p. 159^.; Oort, Th. T  10 150-155 |'76); Haiidissin,

.Studd.  zur  setn.  Kfl.-gesch. 1 iSoyC  ;  Drlvir,

Literattire.  K-tpos.  1885/-.  pp.  214-217;  chevne,  /..-nn-

'•^ '5.1 ff- I'QSI'. and articles by Driver in
Hastings  Dli,  and  by  Voick  in  Herzog,  PRE^'^), Cp  also  DL
and  Kalisch  on  Leviticus,  and  Nowack,  Hebr.  Arch.  2 166.
§  1/ L B.; §3/. T. K. C.

AZAZIAH (-in^TTl?, § 29, '  Yahwfe is strong,' or

'  strcigtlK-ns  •  ; pzleJl&C  [HKAL]).

1.  A  l.cvite  inusici.nn,  temp.  David  (see  Lkvi),  i  Ch.  l!>2i.

2.  An  Kphrainiitc,  leinp.  Davi.l  (i  (  h.  27  20).

3.  A  Lcvitc,  temp.  Hezckiah  (2  Ch.  :il  13  ;  OX««  [A]).

AZBAZARETH  (AcBACApeG  [A]),  i Ksd.569  AV.

R\"'t.' .-\SHA(  APHATll.

AZBUK  (,>13rr  ;  azaBoy  \>^\  X  ['*]■  AzBoyx  [A].
ezAoYK  [L]  .i/.noc],  father  of  .\f,iii;miah  [2]  (Neh.  3
16 i).  Possibly  of  non-Jud;ean  origin  ;  cp  Mcy.  Ent.
147  167.

AZEKAH  (HipTr,  azhka  [BNAQL]),  a  town  in  the
lowland  of  Judah  (Josh.  Ij  ;5,  'laj'TjKO  [H]),  not  far  from
the  supposed  scene  of  Davids  combat  with  (ioliath  (i
S.  17  i).  This  was  in  the  Valk  hk  Ei.ah  (  II '.  es-Snnt,
on  the  upper  course  of  the  Sukcieir)  near  Socoh  (Shu-
weikeh),  which  is  about  12  m.  S.  from  Aijalon  and  2  m.
S.  from  Jarniulh.  .\zekah  is  mentioned  as  one  of  the
points  to  which  the  pursuit  of  the  five  kings  by  the
Israelites  e.Mended  after  the  battle  of  Beth-horon  (Josh.
10  10).  Ii  was  fortified  by  Rehol>oam  (2  Ch.  11  9,  ' k^iKO.
[L]),  besieged  by  Nebuchadrezzar  (Jer.  847),  and  re-
inhabited  by  Jews  in  post-e.\ilic  times  (Neh.  11 30).
Perhaps  an  echo  of  the  name  survives  in  lUr  ez-Zdg,  N.
of  Socoh  (cp  Buhl,  Pal.  90,  n.  92  ;  and  see,  on  the
other  hand,  Seylxild,  MDPV,  1896,  p.  26).

AZEL  (H'N).  2ech.  Hs  RV  =  AV  Azai,,  q.v.

AZEL  (?V^it.  §  50;  abbrev.  from  Azaliah.  q.v.\
eCHA  [RA],  acahA  [I-]),  a  descendant  of  Saul,  in  a
genealogy  of  Bknjamin  [q.v.,  §  9,  ii.  [/i]),  i  Ch.  8-57/
(aCCAHA  [L])  =  943  (eCAHA  [HS]).  944  (ecAHA  [N]).

AZEM  (D>*r),  Josh.  1529  AV.  RV  Kzem.

AZEPHURITH,  RV  Aksii'hlkitii  (Apcei(})OYpeie

[BJl.  I  Esd.  r)i6=l':zra2i8,  JOKAll.

AZETAS  (azhtac  [B.\J,  om.  L),  a  family  in  the  great
post-e.\ilic  list  (see  Ezra,  ii.  §  9,  §  8  c)  in  i  Esd.  615,
but  not  in  ||  l"zra'2  16=  Neh.  7  21  ;  perhaps  the  name  owes
its  presence  to  some  mistake  (Mey.  E.nt.  155  n. ).

AZGAD  (natr,  §  43—/.  e. ,  •  strong  is  CJad '  [cp  Azbaal.
67.S'  1  118,  and  see  Gad],  or,  'fate  is  hard'  (?)  ;
AZTaA  [AL]).  The  B'ne  Azgad,  in  the  great  post-
e.xilic  list  (see  Ezra,  ii.  §  9I,  Ezra2i2  (reckoned  at
1222:  affyad  [B],  a/37.  [A],  aataS  [L])  =  Neh.  7i7
(reckoned  at  2322  ;  affyad  [B],  ayerad  [A],  a<rTo5  [N])
-  I  Esd.  5 13.  AV  Sadas,  RV  Astad  {afr/ai  [H,  where
the  numlier  of  the  family  is  given  as  1322 J.  affxaa  [-\]).
A  band  of  no  males  of  them  came  up  with  Ezra,
Ezras  12  (see  Ezra,  ii.  §  5  «  ;  §  3)  {aaraS  [B])  =  i  Ksd.
838,  EV  A.STATH,  RV'i.'-  Azgad  (aaraO  [BA]),  and
they  were  represented  among  the  signatories  to  the
covenant  (see  EzKA,  i.  §  7),  Neh.  10 15  [>6]  {aayaS  [B],
affrad  [K]).

398


AZIA


AZIA (ozeiOY [»])•

UZZA, 2.


i<::sd.


AV Ezra  2  49,


AZIEI (4  F,s(l.  1 2) in the genealogy of Ezra, see

AZARIAH, 3.

AZIEL  (^ii'tV.  I  Ch.  1520). See  Jaaziei,.

AZIZA  {HyW.  §  83  :  -strong'  ;  ozei  [L],  -a  [BK],
oft^o  [A],  in  list  of  those  with  foreign  wives  (KzuA,  i.  §  5,  end),
Kzra  10  27=t  Ksd.H28,  Sakdel'S,  RV  Zakueus  {itpaXia,  (I?),
fapfiaiat  [A],  os'tt  [L]).

AZMAVETH  (niDTy,  perhaps  '  Death  is  strong'  [cp
Cant.  86j,  a  possible  name  for  a  hero  [sec  AniMOTH,
and  cp  Gray,  HFN  231];  ace.  to  Kittcl  the  ending
should  Ix;  -moth  or  -muth  {SHOT  i  Ch.  1  20]  ;  oni.  BA,
AZMCoe  V^"'-  "'*^-].  ACM-  [I-])-  A  lienjaniite  place  near
Geba  (Neh.  1229),  usually  identified  with  el-ljizmch,  a
village  4  m.  XH.  of  Jerusalem,  between  Jeba'  and
"Anata  ( ZDP  / '  2 155  ;  PEF  Mem.  89).

The  b'ne  Azmaveth  occur  in  the  great  post-e.xilic  list  (see
EzKA,  ii.  §  9),  Ezra 'J  24  (uioi  aa/itufl  [  lij  .  .  .  af.  [A]  .  .  .  a^ud
[L])=Neh.  728  (iffipc? |3r;Co(r/iia>9  [RN],  a.  ^tfi' .  [.\],  uioi  OL<T6)i.mB
[L]),  Bethaz.mavi;th  (moiy  n'2)=  i  Ksd.5i8,  RV  1!iimas-
MOTH,  which  is  preferable  to  AV  Bethsamos  (jSaiTao-^ui'  [B],
Bai#a(T/aiu0  ^a^;uaj6  |.\1).

AZMAVETH  (nipm,!  see  above;  acmooG  [BL],
AZ^^•  [A]).

1.  One  of  David's  thirty  mighty  men,  2S.2331  (acr^ud  [B*],
O-HU).  [Bb],  -as  /nue  [A],  afeA,ui<oi'[L])=i  Ch.  11  33  (a^^a>r  [BN]),
anativeof  lUiiUKi.Mlv'.i'.lC.pnna  [iCh.]and  -Sri-ia  [2S.]  being
both  miswritten  for  'P"in3  [We.  Dr.]). Azmaveth,  the  '  father '  of

Jeziel  and  Pei.et,  2  (i  Ch.  I23;  a<r/tx(o0  [N]),  two  of  David's
warriors,  may,  however,  be  the  place-name;  cp  above.  .See
David,  §  II  (a)ii.

2.  b.  Jchoadah  or  Jar.ah  ;  a  descendant  of  Sanl  in  a  genealogy
of  Benjamin  (§  9,  ii.  [^]),  iCh.  S36  (craA/Aui  [B])=:942  (ya^aiuS
[BN]).

3  b.  Adiel,  one  of  Davids  ovevseeis  (i  Ch.  2725).  See
David,  §  11  (r)  i.

AZMON  (I'lD^T),  an  unidentified  site,  marking  the
western  ])ortion  of  the  southern  frontier  of  Judah  liefore
the  point  where  '  it  went  out  at  the  brook  of  I'^gypt '
(Josh.  ir)4  Xu.  344  5t).  <5  has  Atre/uwfa  [iUl],
iieX/xojj'a  [B-V],  kc^Kp-uiva,  [AFL]  ;  Targ.  has  cDp.  on
which  last  precarious  reading  Trumbull  bases  his
identification  of  Azmon  with  'Ain  el-Kaseme  in  the
W.  Kaseme. With  .\zmon  cp  Ezem  (dsj;).

AZNOTH-TABOR  (inPI  niJ^X— /.k,  'ears,  or
outliers,  of  Tabor' — §  99  ;  cp  Uz/.i:n-Sheek.\h),  a  land-
mark of  Xaphtali,  doubtless  near  Mt.  Tabor,  Josh.
1934  (eNAG  e^Boop  [B],  AZANOOe  0.  [A],  AZCoG  e.  [!>])•
According  to  Onom.,  a^avojff  (O.S"''->  224,  88)  lay  near
Diocnesarea  or  Sepphoris  ;  cp  Chisloth-Takor,  and
see  Taiujk.

AZOR  ( Aztop  [Ti.  WH]),  Mt.  1 13 ;  see  Genkalogies,
ii.  §  2.

AZOTUS  (azcotoc  [AXV],  Jos.  .f ;//.  xii.  11  2,  ezAC
[ed.  Xiese],  azAC  AZARa).  the  'mount'  to  which
Macchides  pursued  the  Jews  in  the  battle  (Apr.  161  B.C. )
in  which  Judas  the  Maccabee  lost  his  life  (i  Mace.  915),
is  unknown.  Michaelis  has  very  plausibly  conjectured
that  the  expression  may  be  due  to  a  mistranslation  of
the  Heb.  inn  nncx  (cp  Ashdoth-Pisgah),  meaning
the  slopes  where  the  hill  country  of  Judah  descends  into
the  Shephelah.  Ewald  (GwcA.  (•'' 4  422,  n.  2)  compares
Atara  W.  of  Bir  ez-Zet,  a  small  hill.

2.  The  Azotus  (a^wros  [Ti.  'WH])of  Acts84o  i  Mace.
4  15  568  1077  f-  84  11  4  1434  16 10  Judith  2  28  is  Ashuod
[i/.v.].  Some  (including  Buhl,  p.  188)  also  identify  with
Ashdod  the  Azotus  of  i  Mace.  915.

AZRIEL  ("PXnrr.^  perhaps  '  help  of  God,'  §  29).

'  On  the  vocalisation  and  (S's  readings  cp  Hazarmaveth.

2  "^tj;  is  an  Aram,  pronunciation  (cp  '?N'^7^'),  and  it  is  note-
worthy that  here,  contrarily  to  its  usual  practice,  ®  prefers  the
Hebrew  vocalisation  (cp  Kittel,  SBOT  ad  loc).

399


AZZUR

1.  One  of  the  chiefs  of  Manas.seh-beyond-Jordan,  iCb.  5  24t
(.a«p.,A[Bl,  «^p.  IA],  *fp.  [I.]).

2.  \  Xaphtalitc,  i  Ch.  27  igt  {t<rpn.r\K  [B] ;  but  some  Hebrew
MSS  have  UzziEl.,  a  reading  supported  by  ©al  o^itjA).

3.  Father  of  Seraiah  [2),  Jer.3026t  (e<rpi>)A  [BN],  ecrf.  [A),
«<rfip.  [Q]).

AZRIKAM  (Di^nm,  €zpiK*M  [AL]).

1.  Levite,  in  list  of  Judahite  inhabitants  of  Jerusalem
(KzKA,ii.  8  5  W,  8  15  [']«),  Nch.ll  i5(e^p(i[B],  «XP"  Ik*  "JJ.
e^piKav  [nc.aj,  ecr^pt  [A])=  i  Ch.i>r4  (ea-ptiKav  [B],  a^iKo^  [L]).

2.  A  descendant  of  Zerubbatiel,  iCh.  823  (egptiKav  [B],
fo-piKoii  [A],  a<Tp.  1 1-1).

3.  Descendant  of  .Saul  in  a  genealogy  of  Benjamin  (§  9,  ii.  [p]),
iCh.S38 (efp««at [B"], efp«« [BabJ)=  i  Ch.944 (^fvSpeiKav

4.  'Ruler  of  the  house'  under  Ahaz,  2Ch.2S7  (eySpeixav
m,,ip,Kay[A]).

AZUBAH  (na-ITi;,  'forsaken-;  AZOyBA  [BAL]).
I.  Wife  of  Cm.ku  [f.v.]  in  iCh.  2i8/.  {ya(;ov^a
(  B,  .\  in  T.  19],  a/Soi/fa  [L]).  The  names  in  this  passage
are  as  j)eculiar  as  the  constructions.  Kittel  {SHOT)
renders  an  emended  text  thus  :  '  And  Caleb  b.  Hezron
took  Azubah  (deserted  one)  to  wife,  and  begat  Jerioth
(tent-curtains)  ;  and  these  are  her  sons,  Jesher  (up-
rightness), Shobab  (backsliding),  and  Ardon. '  As  to
the  names  of  tliese  sons,  Jesher  may  be  read  Jojashar
(Vahwe  is  right),  and  Shobab  Jashub  (one  who  turns
to  (jod),  and  Ardon  Oman  (©  opva).  But  -,b"  can
hardly  be  thus  used  of  God  (in  spite  of  Dt.  324  Ps.
119137),  and  Oman,  or  (iCh.  821  MT)  Arnan,  has
a  suspicious  aspect.  Hence  Klostermann  [Gesch.
115)  takes  V.  18  to  be  a  record  of  a  shortlived  colony
of  Calebites,  founded  on  the  spot  where  there  had
been  a  pastoral  settlement.  He  renders  '  Caleb  b.
Hezron  made  the  deserted  one — the  woman  of  tent-
curtains — to  bear  children,  namely.  Upright,  and  Back-
slider, and  Destruction  '  (reading  riiy'T  nc'N,  Tk?*,  and
p3x).  The  colonists  began  well,  but  '  left  the  paths
of  uprightness '  (Pr.  2 13),  and  were  given  up  to  '  destruc-
tion '  (=She5l,  Pr.  15ii).  Wellhausen  also  (Z)?  Gent.
33/)  notices  the  symbolic  character  of  the  names;
nr\  according  to  him,  =|nc'',  Jeshurun  ;  rni••^"n3  (so
he  reads)  is  a  tent-dwelling  woman  ;  n3Mj?.  the  desert
region  inhabited  at  first  by  the  Calihibites.

2.  Mother  of  Jehoshaphat,  i  K.  2242  (dfae^a  [B])
=  2Ch.  2031.  T.  K.  c.


AZUR  (>VTy),  J(

AzZLK[^.t.., I/].


Ezek.  Ill AV; RV  Ijetter


AZURAN,  RV  AzARU,  RV"?-  Aztira  (azaroy  [B].

-^oup.  [A],  om.  L),  family  in  the  great  post-e.\ilic  list  (see  Ezra,
ii.  §  9,  §  8  c),  in  I  Esd.  5  15,  but  not  in  ||  Ezra  2  16  =  Neh.  7  21  ;
probably  identical  with  Azzuk,  2(Xeh.  10  17  [iS]).  Note  in  each
case  the  occurrence  of  the  preceding  names,  Adin,  Ater,  and
Hezekiah.

AZZAH.  AV  Gaza  (H-Tr,  pAiAN  [B],  pAZHC  [A],
aAia  [L]),  iCh.  728RV.  Many  Hebrew  MSS  here
read  .tj?  (Ayyah  ;  cp  (P"),  a  reading  recommended
by  the  context.  The  place  was  apparently  N.  of
Shechem. See  Gaza.

AZZAN  (I^y,  '  gifted  with  strength '  ;  oz<J  [BAFL]).
father  of  Paltiel,  2  (Nu.  3426t).

AZZUR  4"V1W  [1-ri;  in  2],  •  helped  [by  God] ' ) ;  see
Names.  §  56,  and  cp  Azuri  of  Ashdod.

1.  Father  of  Hananiah,  the  prophet,  of  Gibeon,  Jer.28  [(B  ch.
35]  I  (a^(op  [BNAQD;  AV  Azur.

2.  Father  of  Jaazaniah  [4I,  Ezek. Ill  (.^p  [B],  lo^ep  [A],
aiovp  [Q],  a^«  [Q'nff],  iffep  [I'Ll)  ;  AV  AzuR.

3.  One  of  the  signatories  to  the  covenant  (see  Ezra,  j.  87);
Neh.  10 17  (aSovp  [B],  of.  [NAL]) ;  AV  Azuran  ;  perhaps  also  a
Gibeonite?


BAAL


BAAL


B


(7i«'3  ;  ®  often  h  BaaA.  indicating  that  the
reader  is to  substitute aicxynh  ; ihe substitute has

1.  Meaning ''"'""' '^^ ''''>'  '"'"  ""-" '^•^^  '"  ^  ^■
of  name: ^*"9  25. as the corresponding flt^'S

local  numiiia.  ^•'^  '"  "**-'  '^'^^-  '*^-'''  ^'f  Jer.  324  and
elsewhere;  see  Di.  A/B/i.l  Phil. -hist.
Kl.  188 1 )  is  a  word  common  to  all  the  Semitic  languages,
which  iJriniarily  signifies  owner,  proprietor,  possessor.  It
is  used,  for  example,  of  the  owner  of  a  house,  a  field,
cattle,  and  the  like  ;  the  freeholders  of  a  city  are  its
l>t'\i.'im.  In  a  secondary  sense  ba'al  means  husband ;
but  it  is  not  used  of  the  relation  of  a  master  to  his
slave  or  of  a  superior  to  his  inferior  ;  nor  is  it  synony-
mous with  the  Hcb.  and  Pha.n.  ddon,  Syr.  mar,  .-\rab.
rabb,  in  the  general  sense  of  lord,  master.  When  a
divine  being  (<V)  is  called  baal  it  is  not  as  the  lord  of
the  worshi[)per,  but  as  the  proprietor  and  inhabitant
of  some  place  or  district,  or  the  possessor  of  some
distinctive  character  or  attribute,  and  therefore  a  comple-
ment is  always  required.  Each  of  the  multitude  of  local
B.i.ils  is  distinguished  by  the  name  of  his  own  place.
There  was  a  Baal  of  Tyre,  a  Haal  of  Sidon,  a  Baal  of
Harran,  a  Baal  of  Tarsus  ;  a  Baal  of  the  Lebanon,  and
a  Baal  of  Mt.  Mcrnion  ;  a  Baalat  of  Byblos,— and  so
on.-  We  know  that  in  some  cases  the  Baal  of  a
place  had  a  proper  name :  the  Baal  of  Tyre  w  as
-Melkart  ;  in  Southern  Arabia  Dhu  Samawi  was  the
Baal  of  Bakir,  '.\thtar  of  Gumdan,  and  so  on.  In
other  cases  the  local  Baal  was  distinguished  in  some
other  way.  The  god  of  Shechem  was  Baal-berith
(ix.-rhaps  as  presiding  over  an  alliance;  but  see  B.\.\i.-
hickiph)  ;  Baalzebub  (to  whom  was  ascribed  control
of  Hies  ;  cp  B.V.m./.khuh)  had  a  celebrated  oracle  at
Kkron  ;  a /3a Vapvws,  Koipavos  kui/jluv  (Baal-markod),  is
known  from  inscriptions  found  near  Beirut  ;  a  kjjto  ^]}2
{sanatorf)  in  Cyprus,  and  so  on.  In  Baal-gad  and
Baal-zephon  the  second  element  seems  to  be  the  name
of  a  god  (see  F(jktunk.  B.\al-Zi;i'hon).  On  Baal-
hanunon  and  Baal-shamem  see  below,  §  3/  There  is
nothing  in  these  jjeculiar  forms  to  shake  the  general
conclusion  that  Baal  is  primarily  the  title  of  a  god  as
inhabitant  or  as  owner  of  a  place.

There  were  thus  innumerable  Baals — as  many  as
there  were  towns  (Jer.  228  11 13),  .sanctuaries,  natural
objects,  or  qualities  which  had  a  religious  significance
for  the  worshippers.  Accordingly,  we  frequently  find
in  the  OT  the  plural,  Baalim,  the  Baals,  which  we
must  interpret  not,  as  many  still  do,='  of  the  multitude
of  idols,  or  of  local  differentiations  of  one  god,  but  of
originally  distinct  local  numina.  The  Baals  of  different
places  were  doubtless  of  diverse  character  ;  but  in
general  they  were  regarded  as  the  authors  of  the
fertility  of  the  soil  and  the  increase  of  the  flocks  (Hos.
25  12),  and  were  worshipped  by  agricultural  festivals
and  offerings  of  the  Ixiunty  of  nature  (IIos.  2  8  13).  An
interesting  survival  of  this  conception  is  the  Talmudic
phrase,  field  of  the  baal,  place  of  the  baal,  and  the
Arab  ba'l,  for  land  fertilised,  not  by  rain,  but  by
subterraneous  waters  (cp  A'el.  .Sew.*-)  ^7 Jf.).  Proper
names  of  persons  such  as  Hannibal  (Favour  of  B.aal),
Hasdnibal  (Help  of  Baal),  Baal-yatan  (Baal  has  given),
Shama'-ba'al  (Baal  hears),  compared  with  similar  Yahwfe
names,  Hananiah.  Azariah.  Jonathan,  Shemaiah,  show
that Phoenician parents acknowledged in the gift

J  See  WRS,  Rel.  Sem.f^  a^ff.
2  Cp  ill  the  OT  Haal-hazor,  B.aal-i
and  the  like.
'  For  e.xample,  Baethgen.

26  401


meon,  Baal-peor,  Baal-tamar,


of  children  the  goodness  of  Baal,  as  Israelite  parents
that  of  Yahwe.

That  B.aal  was  primarily  a  sun-god  was  for  a  long
time  almost  a  dogma  among  scholars,'  and  is  still  often

2  Not  sun-  ''*^I'*-'''^''^^- ""s  doctrine  is  connected  with

,  theories  of  the  origin  of  religion which

*  are now  almost universally  akindoned.

The  worship  of  the  heavenly  bodies  is  not  the  Ijeginning
of  religion.  Moreover,  there  was  not,  as  this  theory
assumes,  one  god  Biuil,  worshipped  under  difllerent
forms  and  names  by  the  Semitic  peoples,  but  a  multi-
tude of  local  Baals,  each  the  inhabitant  of  his  own
place,  the  protector  and  benefactor  of  those  who
worshipfx;d  him  there.  Even  in  the  astro-theology  of
the  Babylonians  the  star  of  BCl  was  not  the  sun  :  it  was  the
planet  Jupiter.  There  is  no  intimation  in  the  OT  that
any  of  the  Canaanite  Baals  were  sun-gods,  or  that  the
worship  of  the  sun  (.Shemesh),  of  which  we  have  ample
evidence,  both  early  and  late,  was  connected  with  that
of  the  Baals  ;  in  2  K.  "23  5  cp  11  the  cults  are  treated  as
distinct.

The  hammdiuvi  (c'wn).  included  in  the  inventory  of
places  of  idolatrous  worship  with  massibas  and  asluras

3  Baal-  ^''^'  '^^^  '^"'^  elsewhere),  have  indeed,  since
v.ow,^^J  Rashi,  Ijeen  connected  with  the  late  biblical
nammon. ■  .,•  . ■ . -  , ^ .

and  Mishnic  hamma  (.i^n).  sun,  and  ex-
plained as  sun  images  (RV),  sun  pillars;-  and  it  has
further  l)een  conjectured  that  the  hammdnim  belonged
specifically  to  the  cultus  of  Baal-hammon,  whose  name
occurs  innumerable  times  in  Punic  inscriptions. ^  and  is
commonly  explained  '  the  glowing  Baal ' — i.e. ,  the  Sun.*
This  translation,  however,  can  hardly  be  right  :  the
article  would  be  expected  :  according  to  all  analogy,
liammon  should  be  a  genitive.  '  The  deity  which  dwells
in  the  sun-pillars '  would  be  formally  possible  ;  but  w  ith
the  direct  connection  of  Baal-hammon  with  the  sun,  one
of  the  chief  arguments  for  interpreting  hammdnim  to
mean  '  sun-pillars '  falls  to  the  ground.  In  this  state  of
the  case  we  cannot  be  sure  that  Baal-hammon  was  a
solar  deity  ;  and  if  fresh  evidence  should  prove  that
he  was,  it  would  Ije  unwarrantable  to  infer  that  the  Baals
universally  bore  the  same  character.

Another  Baal,  whose  cultus  was  more  widely  diffused
than that of Baal-hammon  —  in later times  he rose

4  Baal  '^'^^''^  ^1'  ^'^c  local  Baals,  and  perhaps  in
shamem.  "^'^"y  places  supplanted  them — was  I5aal-
shamem,  whose  name  we  must  interpret,
not  '  Lord  of  Heaven,'  but  '  The  gotl  who  dwells  in  the
heaven,'  to  whom  the  heavens  Ijelong.'  Philo  of  Byblos
identifies  B.aal-shamem  (»ci'ytos  ovpavov)  with  the  Sun
("HXtoj  ;  see  I'ragm.  Hist.  Gr.  3  565/  )  ;  Macrobius  says
that  the  god  of  Heliopolis  was  at  once  Jupiter  and  Sol
(Sal.  1  23)  ;  a  PalmjTene  bilingual  (Vog. ,  no.  16)  seems
to  give  "HXtos  for  prH'^.  hi"  the  reading  is  not  quite
certain.  The  Greeks  and  the  Hellenised  Syrians  identify
Baal-shamem  with  Zeus  \e.g.,  Z.  fi^yiffros  Kepai'fios),
which  is  better  in  accord  with  the  obvious  significance
of  the  name.  *

When  the  Israelites  invaded  Western  Palestine  and

1  See,  for  example,  Creuzer,  Symb.  u.  Afytk.i^)  2413;  Movers,
Phdrt.  1  169^

'^  It  is  singular  that  this  interpretation  did  not  suggest  it.self
to  any  of  the  ancient  translators. See  further,  Ma^^eba,  |  6.

•*  In  Phoenician  also  E!-hammon.

■•  In  a  Palmyrene  inscription  a  /lammdnd  is  dedicated  to  the
sun  ;  De  Vogui,  no.  123  a.

*  The  name  is  equivalent  to  Dhfi  .Samawi  in  Southern  Arabia.

8  liaal-shamem  in  Dan.  12 11  (perverted  by  Jewish  wit  to
Sikkils  Somem,  '  the  appalling  abomination ')  was  probably  a
Roman  Jupiter  (see  Abomination,  ii.).

402


BAAL

passed  over  from  a  nomadic  to  an  agricultural  life,  they

J ., learned  from  the  older  inhabitants  not  only

R  *1  ^  ^°'^  *°  plough  and  sow  and  reap,  but  also
*  ■  the  religious  rites  which  were  a  part  of
Canaanite  agriculture— the  worship  of  the  Baals  who
gave  the  incre;\se  of  the  land,  the  festivals  of  the
husbandman's  year.  At  first,  probably,  this  worship
of  the  Baals  of  the  land  went  side  by  side  with  that  of
Yahw6,  the  God  of  their  nomadic  fathers.  When
Israel  came  into  full  possession  of  Canaan,  however,
Yahwe  himself  tx^came  the  Baal  of  the  land.  Names
like  Jerubaal  (Gideon),  Eshbaal  (son  of  Saul),  Baal-
jada  (son  of  David),  prove  that  Israelites  in  whom
the  national  spirit  was  strongest  had  no  scruple  in
calling  Yahwe  their  Baal.  The  worship  on  the  high
places  was  worship  of  Yahwe  in  name  ;  its  rites  were
those  of  the  old  Baal  cult.  The  prophets  of  the  eighth
century,  especially  Hosea,  denounced  this  religion  as  pure
heathenism.  In  whose  name  it  is  practised  is  to  them
immaterial  :  it  is  not  the  name  but  the  character  of
God  that  makes  the  difference  between  the  religion  of
Israel  and  that  of  the  heathen.

In  the  preceding  century  Elijah  had  roused  the  spirit
of  national  Yahwism  in  revolt  against  the  introduction
of  the  worship  of  the  Tyrian  Baal  (Melkart)  by  Ahab,
and  Jehu  had  stamped  out  with  sanguinary  thoroughness
the  foreign  religion  ;  but  this  conflict  was  of  a  char-
acter wholly  different  from  that  in  which  the  prophets  of
the  eighth  century  engaged  with  the  Canaanite  Baal-
religion  practised  in  Yahwe's  name.  In  the  seventh
century,  with  the  introduction  of  Assyrian  cults,  there  was
a  marked  recrudescence  of  the  kindred  Old  Israelite  and
Canaanite  religions,  which  provoked  the  violent  measures
of  Josiah,  but  was  only  temporarily  checked  by  them,  as
we  see  from  Jeremiah  and  Ezekiel.

With  the  cultus  of  the  Baals  in  Canaan  we  are
acquainted  chiefly  through the descriptions  which  the

_  ,  prophets  give  of  the  Baalised — sif  venia

6.  Uaal  cultus.  -,^,.^^_worship  of  Yahwe.  The  places
of  worship  were  on  the  hill-tops,  under  the  evergreen
trees  ;  they  were  marked  by  asheras,  masscbas,  ham-
mdnim.  Images  were  not  always,  perhaps  seldom,
present :  an  image  required  a  shrine  or  temple.  At  the
altars  on  the  high  places,  offerings  of  the  fruits  of  the
land  and  the  increase  of  the  flocks  were  made  ;  ^  beside
them  fornication  was  licensed — nay,  consecrated.  The
Baals  had  their  priests  (Chem.^rim,  q.v.)  and  prophets.
At  the  great  contest  on  Carmel  they  leap  upon  the  altar,
and  cry,  and  gash  themselves  with  knives  '  after  their
manner. '  We  may  supplement  these  scanty  notices  by
descriptions  of  Phojnician  worship,  especially  of  the
Tyrian  Baal,  Melkart,  and  of  the  Punic  '  Kronos,'  in
Greek  authors.  See,  further,  High  Places,  Idolatry,
and,  with  reference  to  human  sacrifices,  Molecil

.Selden, De Dis Syris, 1617 ; Movers, Die  Phdnizicr, i.  ;

M  (inter,  Religion  iter  Kart/niger ;  Oort,  Worship  of  Baalim

in Israel, translated by Colenso, 1865;

Literature.  l^audissin,  art. '  \\z.:x\; PR £(?■);  Pietschmann,
IVidnizier,  1889,  I'ii  ff.  \  Baethgen,  Beiir.z.
seinit.  Rel.-gesch.  ;  K.  Meyer,  art.  '  Baal '  in  Roscher,  Lexikon
derGriech.  u.  RSm.  Myth.  2867^  w.  R.  S. — G.  F.  M.

BAAL  (Sl?3.  '  Lord  '  ;  cp  "rjSo,  i  Ch.  835).

1.  In  a  genealogy  of  Rkuisen  ;  i  Ch.  55  {iwrjk  [B],
/SaaX  [.\],  /9aXa  [L]).

2.  In  a  genealogy  of  Benjamin  {q.v. ,  §  9,  ii.  ^) ;  i  Ch.
830  (/3oaXa/fat/tt,  i.e.  ^aa\a  /cat?  [B],  /3aaX  [/cat  vrjp]
[A],  /iaeX[/cai  .-aSa/S  /cat  vrjp]  [L])  =  936  (/3aaX  [BA],
/3aeX  [L]).  It  is  more  probable  that  MT,  followed  by
some  ancestor  of  ©'',  dropped  Ner  (31:1  [131])  in  i  Ch.  8
than  that  it  has  been  added  elsewhere  (so  SBOT).
The  conjecture  (We.  TBS  31  n. )  that  Baal  and  Nadab
are  to  be  read  together  as  a  compound  name  is  thus
unsupported ; it is also unnecessary, since Melech

1  Punic  temple  inscriptions  defining  the  dues  of  the  priests
for  v.irious  kinds  of  sacrifice  (so-called  Tariffs  of  Marseilles  and
Cartha!,'e)  show  that  both  the  animals  offered  and  the  classes  of
sacrifice  were  closely  similar  to  those  of  the  Hebrew  laws.

403


BAALE  JUDAH

(tI^o)  likewise  occurs  (i  Ch.  835  etc.)  alone  as  a  proper
name. See  Names,  §  42.

BAAL  (/I'll),  I  Ch.  4  33t. See  Baalath-beer.

BAALAH  (n7j?3,  §  96). i.  See  Kirjath-Jearim.

2.  A  city  in  the  Negeb  of  Judah,  Josh.  I529  (/3aXa
[B],  paaXa  [AL]).  In  Josh.  19 3  the  name  is  written
Balah  (n^a;  (iuXa  [B],  /3eX/3wXa  [A],  jioXa  [L]),  and
the  place  is  assigned  to  Simeon.  In  i  Ch.  4  29  it  appears
as  BiLHAH  (nri^£;  a/SeXXa  [B],  jSaXaa  [A],  (iaXaaS
[L]). The  reading  is  uncertain  and  the  site  unknown.

3.  Mt.  Baalah,  a  landmark  on  the  bound.ary  of
Judah  between  Shikkeron  and  Jabneel,  Josh.  15  n  (8pia
iirl  Xi^a  [B],  fipoj  yrjs  /3aXa  [A*],  o.  y.  ya^aXa  [.A"  *'],
o.  T?js  fiaaXujv  [L]).  The  site  is  unknown,  unless  with
Clermont-Ganneau  (J?ev.  Crit.  '97,  p.  902)  we  should
read  n,-i:  for  n,n,  and  identify  the  '  river  of  the  Baal '
with  the  Nahr  Rubin  (see  Jabneel,  i).  More  than
one  river  in  Palestine,  doubtless,  was  dedicated  to  Baal.

BAALATH. See  Kirjath-Jearim.

BAALATH-BEER  ("IX?  nSl'3,  Josh.  198  B&p€K
[B*],  BAXeK  [B^''].  BAAXeepHppAMtoG  [A],  B<Jk<\Xe0
BHppAGMcoe  [L])  or  Baal  (i  Ch.  433).  also  called
Ramah  of  the  South  (333  DOT,  Josh.  198)  or  Ramoth
of  the  South  (i  S.  30 27  pafxa.  [BL], , -^  [A]  vbTov)  ;
perhaps  the  same  as  the  Bealoth  (nvr3,  fiaX/jLaivav
[B],  ^aXwd  [AL])  of  Josh.  1.^24  (and  V  K.  4  16  ;  see
Aloth),  an  unidentified  site  in  the  Negeb — probably
its  most  southern  part — of  Judah.  The  name  implies
that  it  had  a  well  and  was  a  scat  of  Baal-worship.

BAAL-BERITH  (fin?  hv2-Le.,  ■  the  [protecting]
Baal  of  the  covenant '),i  a  form  of  the  Canaanitish
Baal  worshipped  at  Shechem  (Judg.  94).  called  El-
berith  (n''"l!l  ^N,  'God  of  the  covenant")  in  Judg.  946
RV.

©  has  in  Judg.  94  BooA^epie  [B],  paaX  Sioe^foj?  [A],  /3aaA-
/3«p[ei9]  «io0>)/CT)s  [L];  in  v.  46  /Sai^p  PepcO  [B],  /SooA  fiiaerjicris
[A],  r,\  Sia0.  [L];  in  833  /3aaA  /Setp  [A],  ^ooA/Sepete  [L],  ^aoA
Sia0riKr}v  [BJ.

The  covenant  intended  was  probably  that  between
Shechem  and  some  neighbouring  Canaanitish  towns,
which  were  originally  independent,  but  were  at  length
brought  under  Israeliti.sh  supremacy  (Ew. ,  Rue. ,  We. ).
Of  the  rival  views — viz.,  {a)  that  the  covenant  was
between  Baal  and  his  worshippers  (Baethgen,  Sayce
in  Smith's  DBi'^^),  and  {6)  that  it  was  between  the
Canaanitish  and  the  Israelitish  inhabitants  of  Shechem
(Be. ,  Ki. ) — the  former  gives  an  undue  extension  to
a  specially  Israelitish  idea,  and  the  latter  misconceives
the  relation  of  the  Israelites  within  Shechem  to  the
Canaanites.  Gen.  14 13  cannot  possibly  establish  the
former  (Baethgen),  nor  can  the  name  of  Gaal's
father,  or  the  speech  of  Gaal  (q.v.)  in  Judg.  928,  be
used  to  support  the  theory  of  an  influential  Israelitish
element  in  the  population  of  Shechem.  Any  Israelites
who  might  be  dwelling  in  Shechem  would  be  simply
Dnj  or  protected  strangers,  and  not  parties  to  a  covenant.
The  temple  of  Baal-bcrlth  had  a  treasury  from  which
the  citizens  made  a  contribution  to  Abimelech  (Judg.
94).  It  was  there  that  Gaal  first  came  forward  .as  a
leader  of  the  rebellion  (927),  and  within  its  precinct  the
inhabitants  of  the  tower  of  Shechem  (the  'acropolis,'
We. )  fipund  a  temporary  refuge  from  Abimelech  at  the
close  of  the  revolt  (946).  The  deuteronomic  editor
mistakenly  accuses  the  Israelites  of  apostatising  to  Baal-
berith  after  Gideon's  death  (Judg.  833;  see  Moore's
note).  T.  K.  C.

BAALE  JTJDAH. See  Kirjath-jearim.

1  '  Or  may  not  B.-uil-berith,  El-berith,  simply  mean  "  God  of
the  community"  (cp  Cuvknant,  §  5)?  The  origin.-il  story
probably  gave  the  name  of  the  god  of  Shechem'  (Prof.  N.
Schmidt).

404


BAAL-GAD

BAAL-GAD  (13  bv2.  '  Lord  of  Good  Fortune'  ;  cp
Guduh;il--(;u<l  H;iiil  [  Hoffnjann.  Ueifr  eiHij^v  ph6n.
Inschrr.  27J  ;  BaaAfaA  L''"LJ,  and  through  corruption
BAA(&)rAA(&)  IMAJI.i  'in  the  valley  of  I^ebanon,
under  Mt.  Hc-rnion,'  is  thrice  mentioned  in  Joshua  (11 17
127;  135  ToXvaa  [H],  7a\7a\  [A],  fiaeXyao  [L])  as
marking  the  northern  limit  of  Joshua's  contjuests.
'though  Sayce  and  others  identify  it  with  Ba'albck
iK'cause  it  is  descril)ed  as  in  the  nypa  of  Lebanon,  it  is
much  more  probably  the  Baai.-hekmon  of  1  Ch.  ;'<23
(cp  also  the  'mount  Rial-hermon '  of  Judg.  83),  now
known  as  nrinids  ;  sec  C>i:SAKliA,  §  7 /. ,  and  Uan,  ii.

BAAL-HAMON  {'i'\^r\  'pya  ;  BeeGAAMtoN  [B],
BeeAA-  [N].  BeeA.  [AJ).  a  place  where,  according  to
a  marriage  song  of  no  historical  authority  (Cant.  811),
Solomon  had  a  vmey;ird  which  he  entrusted  to  keepers.
Some  (f..^"-. ,  Del.,  Oettli)  have  identified  it  with  the
Balamo(n)  of  Judith  83,  which  seems  to  have  been
not  far  from  Dothan.  It  is  obvious,  however,  that
some  well-known  place  is  meant,  and  the  ieferences  to
N.  Israelitish  scenery  elsewhere  in  the  Song  of  Songs
give  some  weight  to  Griitz's  conjecture  that  for  '  Baal-
hamon  '  we  should  read  '  Baal-hermon  '  (Judg.  83  i  Ch.
523).  If  Socin  (BciedJ^^  331)  is  right,  Baal-hermon
and  Baal-gad  are  the  same,  and  are  to  be  sought  at
the  mod.  Ila.sbeiya  (see,  however,  C^k.sarea  Piiii.ipi'i)  :
on  the  luxuriant  terraces  on  both  sides  of  the  valley
vinos  and  other  fruit-trees  are  still  cultivated.  Most
probably,  however,  '  in  Baal-hanion  '  is  due  to  a  corrupt
repetition  of  '  to  Solomon. '  Bickell  is  right  in  omit-
ting it.  T.  K.  c.

BAAL-HANAN (p^n-'pr?. § 42. 'Baal has been

gracious'  ;  tpjohanan,  Ph.  7r23n,  and  the  well-known
'Hannibal,'  also  Ass.  Baalhanunu,  COT,  I89).

1.  Ben  Achbor;  one  of  the  kings  of  Edom,  according  to
Gen.  8638/.  (^aXaevvuv  [A],  /3a\ae«'a«'  [D],  ^aXaefvwp
[E],  fiaaXevuv  [L])  =  i  Ch.  1 49/  {(iaXaeuvuip  [B],  (3a-
XaevvCJ  [.\],  fiaWevuv  [L]).  Strangely  enough,  the
name  of  his  city  or  district  is  not  given.  Moreover,
the  scrite's  error  c'nay  ( '  Hebrews  ' )  for  c'"i3Dy  ( '  mice  ' )
in  I  S.  14 II  (see  Bu.  SHOT)  suggests  that  ma:;'  p  (ben
Achlwr)  in  v.  38/^  may  be  a  variant  to  niyn  p  in  v,  32.
Now,  as  Hadad  II.,  an  important  king,  (probably)  tlie  j
founder  of  a  dynasty,  has  no  father's  name  given,  it  |
seems  likely  that  Baal-hanan  is  the  lost  father's  name  ;
and  thus  the  tc.vt  should  run,  '  .\nd  Saul  died,  and
Hadad,  ben  Baal-hanan,  reigned  in  his  stead '  (so
Marq.  Fund.  10/.;  see,  however,  Bela  [ii.]).  See
Edom.  §  4,  Hadad.

2.  A  Gederite  ;  according  to  the  Chronicler,  super-
intendent of  olives  and  sycamores  in  the  Shephelah  of
Judah  in  the  time  of  David  ;  i  Ch.  2728  {jiaXavas  [B],
/SaXXam  [A],  ^aXaavav  [L]). See  David,  §  iic.

BAAL-HAZOR  (l^'n  Sv?,  §§  93.  96).  2  S.  1823.
See  H.\/,OR,  2.

BAAL-HERMON  (pDin  "pyS;  §93,  B&lAeiM  [B*],
BaaAcim  [B''],  BaaA  epMtoN  [AL]).  1  Ch.  523  ;  see
Baai.-(;ad. Baal-uamon.  and.  especially,  C.ksarea

PHII.II'PI.

BAALI  ("hp:!).  Hos.  2i6  EV ;  mg.  rightly  'my
lord  '  AV,  RV  '  my  master.' See  Hosea.  §  6.

BAALIM  (D^'pran).  Judg.  2 II. See  Baal,  §  i.

BAALIS  (D'hvi ;  B6A[e]iCA  [BXc.aAQ],  BeNeCA
[X*]  BaaAiC  [Q'"^].  cp  Sw.  ad  loc.  ;  Jos.  Ant.  x.  93.
§  164.  Ba&Aimoc — ie-.  Dvl'2  as  some  Heb.  MSS
read),  king  of  the  Ammonites,  the  prime  mover  in  the
murder  of  Gedaliah  (Jer.  40  [47]i4  ;  cp  41 10).  The
name  is  interesting  as  an  etymological  problem.  Some
render  '  .Son  of  exultation,'  on  the  precarious  supposition
that  in  this  name  and  a  few  others  3  stands  for  ja  (see

1  Through  confusion  of  X,  a,  and  8  in  the  uncial
405


BAAL-PERAZIM

Bidkar)  ;  while  Baethgen  {Lkitr.  tur  Sem.  Rel.-gesch.
16)  compares  the  Phoenician  cni'^i^Cl^  1,  no.  308  ;  CKi3V.
ib.  no.  50)  and  renders  '  husband  of  Isis ' — a  still  more
precarious  derivation. See  Ammo.N,  §  8.  W.  R.  S.

BAAL-MEON  (jirn  "Pra  ;  §§  93  96  ;  Nu.  3238  Ezelc
2.')9  I  Ch.  .")8),  otherwise  Betb-baal-meon  (Josh.  13 17),
Beth-meon  (Jer.  4S23).  or  Beon  (i>2  ;  .Nu.  ■^'l^).

(S's  rc.idinRS  are:  in  .\u.3-Ji8,  ^tcA^tu)!-  (HAL);  in  Ezek.
•J.'ig,  .n-ai'ay.uyTjt  [1!*],  «.ra^oj  -nr^-i  [Hat^AQ)  ;  1  Ch.  5  R,  ^«A-
p.a.(ra<i>v  \\\\,  -^auj)'[.\l,  ■fxtoji-II-];  in  Josh.  13  17,  oikou  fi«A0<ofl
11!],  01.  ^tKa.y.uiv\\\,  oiKou?  ^ttA/iu>e[L]  ;  in  Jer.  4b  23,  01x01/ /xauc
[P.AQl,  0.  y.auS  [K*],  o.  7a^u)^  [K^a);  {„  Nu.  323^aiof  IBFviJ.L],
^o/aa  lAJ).

The  place  is  assigned  in  Numbers,  Joshua,  and
Chronicles  to  the  Reutenites.  It  is  twice  mentioned,
once  as  lieth-baiil-meon  and  once  as  Baal-nieon,  in  the
inscription  of  Mesha  (//.  9  30),  from  which  we  learn
that  it  was  Moabite  before  the  time  of  Omri  and  became
so  again  under  Mesha.  It  was  Moabite  also  in  the
time  of  Jeremiah  (Jer.  4823),  and  in  that  of  Ezekicl,
who  names  it  with  Beth-jeshimoth  and  Kiriathaim  as
'  the  glory  of  the  country '  (Ezek.  259).  It  is  represented
by  the  modern  Ma'in,  in  the  W.  Zerka  Ma'in  on  the
Moabite  plateau,  2861  ft.  alxjve  sea-level,  5  m.  SW.
from  Madaba. There  are  extensive  ruins  [BaedJ'^^  177)-

It  may  probably  be  identified  with  the  Maccab:ean
Bea n-  [q.  V.  ].  The  Onomastica  ( (95<-'  32  40  101  32)  quote
the  Reubenite  city  under  the  forms  (iatav,  Basan,  iroXis
ToO  'Afioppaiov.

BAAL-PEOR  (nir?  hl%  BeeA(|)ertop  ©BKAFRrL),
or,  rather,  the  Baal  of  Poor  (so  RV"'K-  Nu.  f:53  ;  see
Baal,  §1),  the  Moabite  god  to  v.  hose  cult  Israel  yoL-ed
itself  while  in  Shittim  (Nu.  I.e.  JE,  Dt.  43  Ps.  10(•)29■
thrice  in  later  writings  abbreviated  to  PiiOR  ['/.v.,  2jl.
The  name  occurs  in  Hos.  9 10  as  a  pUnf-itaiiw—^'n.
abbreviation,  it  would  seem,  for  Beth-Baal-Ptor  (see
Beth-Peor).  The  nature  of  the  worship  of  this  god
is  unknown,  although  it  is  not  improbable  that  it  was
a  local  cult  of  Chemosh  (Gray,  Hi'N  131).  lor  the
old  speculations,  based  mostly  upon  precarious  et)-
mologies,  see  Selden,  De  Dis  Syris.  See,  furilicr,
Pedr,  and  cp  Baudissin,  Sfudien,  22,2,  Bacthg.  Beili:
14/.  261,  and  Di.  Num.  ad  loc. ,  Dr.  Icut.  mi  loc.

BAAL-PERAZIM  (D'>"J?-^r3,  §  89),  a  place  men-
tioned in  connection  with  a  battle  between  David  and
the  Philistines  in  the  valley  of  Rei'HAIM  [q.v.),  hard
by  Jerusalem,  2S.  020  (eTrdfw  [or,  tTr'dvw]  SiOAOirilj'
[B.\L]);i  I  Ch.  14ii  ^/.f  (<^aX(/)a^icrfiM  •  .  .  SiaAOTTTj
(papiffiv  [B],  <f>a\aaS'  tpadeiaei  .  .  .  SiaKoirriP  (papKiv
[{<],  ^aaXcpapafffLV  .  .  .  SiaKOTri]  (fjapaafif  [.\],  fia(\-
(papaaiv  bis  [L]).  According  to  the  mrrator,  the
name  was  so  called  because  David  had  said.  '  Yahwe
has  broken  through  my  foes  before  me  as  at  a  breaking
through  of  water,"  Baal-perazim  (i.e.,  '  Lord  of  acts  of
breaking  through ')  being  regarded  as  a  title  of  the  God
of  Israel.  The  same  event  seems  to  be  referred  to  in
Is.  2821,  where  tlie  place  is  called  Mt.  Perazim  {6poi
dcreiiQv  [BXAQ],  tbj  6p(i  diaKoirruv  [Aq.  in  Q™«  J.  if  ri^
6p(i  Tu)v  diaKOTTuif  [Sym.  Theod.  in  Q'"2]).  This  form
of  the  name  suggests  the  most  complete  explana-
tion of  David's  question,  '  Shall  I  i;o  vp  against  ihe
Philistines?"  (I'.ig).  He  asks  whether  he  shall  come
upon  the  Philistines  from  the  chain  of  hills  which  bounds
the  valley  of  Rephaim  on  the  east  (in  v.  20  read,  '  And
David  came /n>»»  B;ial -  perazmi , '  with  ©  and  Klo. )  ;
he  starts,  be  it  remembered,  from  Jerusalem  (see  David,
§  7).  On  the  next  occasion  he  did  not  '  go  up'  (on  the
hills),  but  came  upon  his  foes  from  the  rear  (r.  19).
In  spite  of  this  narrative,  which  is  written  from  the  later
Israelitish  point  of  view,  the  name  Baal-perazim  must
have  existed  long  before  David.  It  is  analogous  to
RiMMON-PKRKZ,  which  means  '  Rimmon  (RammSn)  of
Perez.'  and  belonged  properly  to  some  point  in  the
chain  of  hills  referred  to,  which  was  specially  honoured
ss^VD,  being  preceded  in  v.  20a  by  ««  tmv.

406


BAALSAMUS

by  Canaanitish  Baal  -  worshippers.  David,  however,
beyond  doubt  took  Haal  as  synonymous  with  Yahw  e  ;
the  name  gave  him  a  happy  omen,  and  received  a  fresh
significance  from  his  victory.  Whether  '  Perazim  '  was
originally  a  name  descriptive  of  the  physical  appear-
ance of  the  hills  E.  of  the  valley  of  Rephaim,  or  whether
it  had  some  accidental  origin,  cannot  be  determined.

BAALSAMUS  (BaaAc*.moc  [BA]),  i  Es(1.'943  RV

=  Nfh.  84, .\iAASKI.\H, 15.

BAAL-SHALISHA,  RV  Baal-Shalishah,  {hv2.
n^'^^,  BAiecAp[e]lC&[B*A™l(ras(ra  A?)],  Bh0C&A|-
c&  U-]),  in  Ephraim,  evidently  near  Gii.GAL  (2  K.  442),
doubtless  identical  with  the  Bethsalisa  and  B<m9-
CApiCAG  of  Jer.  and  Eus.  (O5107ii  23992),  15  R.  m.
N.  of  Diospolis  (Lydda).  These  conditions  seem  to  be
met  by  Kh.  Sirisid,  which  is  exactly  13  Eng.  m. ,  or
about  14J  R.  m.  from  Lydda  (PEFQ,  '76,  p.  68).
Four  miles  farther  on  is  the  village  Kh.  Kefr.  Thilth,
with  which  Baal-shalisha  is  now  identified  by  Conder
{FEFM-2'2'&s).  In  illustration  of  2  K.  i.e.  the  Talmud
{San/i.  12  a)  states  that  nowhere  did  the  fruits  of  the
earth  ripen  so  quickly  as  at  Baal-shalisha.  See  Sha-
i.isii.\,  L.\ND  OK,  and  cp  Zi;i.zah.

BAAL-TAMAR  ("iDn  hv'^—i.e. ,  '  Baal  of  the  Palm,'
§§  96  103,  Ba&A  GAAAdikP  [BAL]),  an  unidentified  locality
in  the  neighbourhood  of  Gibeah,  where  the  Isr.aelites  put
themselves  in  array  against  the  Benjamites  (Judg.  20 33).
Some  think  of  '  the  Palm  of  Deborah  '  (Judg.  45),  which,
however,  was  too  remote  (Moore).  Eus.  (05  238  75)
speaks  of  a  Beth-thamar  near  Gibeah.

BAALZEBUB {1^1]  ^^3 ; eN To^ [eN th A

V.  2,  B.\  77'.  6i6; ^id,  Toy. T.  ?■.  i/.] B(\<!kA  MyiAN
[B.\],  taking  Zcbub  or MyiA  =^s  the  name


1.  Not
Fly-god.


of  the  god


Jos.  Ant.  ix.  2i), a god


of  I'^kron,  whose  oracle  was  consulted  by
Ahaziah  king  of  Israel  in  his  last  illness  (2  K.
\2f.6i6-\).  The  name  is  commonly  explained  'lord
of  flies.'  True,  there  is  no  Semitic  analogy  for  this  ;
but  Pausanias  (viii.  267;  cp  J.  G.  Frazer's  note  on  v.
14  I )  tells  us  of  a  Ze(>s  dirbfj.vio'i  who  drove  away  danger-
ous swarms  of  flies  from  Olympia,  and  Clement  of
Alexandria  attests  the  cultus  of  the  same  god  in  Elis
{Protrept.  238)  ;  and  we  may,  if  we  will,  interpret  the
title  '  a  god  who  sends  as  well  as  removes  a  plague  of
flies '  (so  Baudissin),  which  lifts  the  god  up  a  little.  Let
us,  however,  look  farther.

Bezold  [Catalogue,  K.  3500)  thought  that  in  an
Assyrian  inscription  of  the  12th  cent.  B.C.  he  had  met
9 M  t  jtaH  with  Baal-zabubi  as  the  name  of  one  of  the

f  7phuh  sods  of  the  Ebir  nari  (on  which  see  Ebkr,
§  i),  in  which  case  Baal-zebub  was  a  widely
known  divine  name,  adopted  for  the  god  of  Ekron.
The  restoration  of  the  final  .syllable  -bi,  however,  is  ad-
mittedly quite  uncertain,  and  the  reading  Baal-sapuna
(see  Baal-Zephon,  i)  seems  much  more  probable.^
Winckler,  therefore,  suggests  that  Zebub  might  be
some  very  ancient  name  of  a  locality  in  Ekron ^  (no
longer  to  be  explained  etymologically),  on  the  analogy
of  Baal-Sidon,  Baal-Hermon,  Baal  -  Lebanon.  No
such  locality,  however,  is  known,  and  Ekron,  not  any
locaUty  in  Ekron, was the  territory  of the Baal. It

o ■n«_i — 's,  therefore,  more  probable  that  Baal-

3.  Real  name , , . , , r  «• .  ; u-  u

Baal  zfibfll ^s"^^", '  lord of  flies (which occurs

only in a '  very  late ' narrative, one

which has a pronounced didactic tendency),'' is a

contemptuous uneuphonic  Jewish modification  of  the

true  name,  which  was  probably  Baal-zebul,  '  lord  of  the

1  \Vi.  GI  1  223,  225  ;  Hommel,  AHT  196,  255.  Halivy  has
made  a  similar  mistake  (see  next  note).

2  \\A\ii\y  (R,-,i.  shn.  1  23)  thought  that  he  had  proved  this;
but  in  Am.  Tab.  174,  16,  to  which  he  refers  for  an  Ekronite
Zabubu,  the  right  reading  is  .Sapuna.

3  Kuenen,  Ond.  1  409  (§  25',  n.  8).

407


BAAL-ZEPHON

high  house'  (cp  i  K.  813,  and  Schrader's  note  in  COT).
This  is  a  title  such  as  any  god  with  a  fine  temple
might  bear,  and  was  probably  not  confined  to  the  god
of  Ekron  (in  the  Panammu  inscription  of  Zeiijlrli,  /.  22,
the  god  Rakubel  bears  the  title  n'a  h]!^,  '  lord  of  the
house').  The  second  part  of  it  strongly  reminds
us  of  E-sagila,  the  'high  house'  of  the  god  Marduk
(see  Babylon,  §  5).  '  High  house '  (zebul)  would  at  the
same  time  refer  to  the  dwelling-place  of  the  gods
on  the  -\ii)0  "(.t  or  '  mountain  of  assembly '  in  the  far
north  1  (see  Congregation,  Mount  ok).  There  is
some  reason  to  think  that  the  Phoenicians  knew  of  such
a  dwelling-place.  The  conception  is  implied  in  the
divine  name  Baal-Saphon,  'Lord  of  the  north'  (see
Baal-Zephon),  and  in  the  Elegy  on  the  king  of  Tyre
(Ez.  28 12^) ;  and  theSemitised  Philistines  also  probably
knew  of  it.  At  any  rate,  the  late  Hebrew  narrator —
or,  if  we  will,  an  early  scribe — may  have  resented  the
application  of  such  a  title  as  '  Lord  of  the  high  house '
(which  suggested  to  him  either  Solomon's  temple  [n'3
"^^T  I  K.  8 13]  or  the  heavenly  dwelling  of  Yahwe  [}ij;c,
lit.  26  IS  Ps.  686])  to  the  Ekronite  god,  and  changed
it  to  '  Lord  of  flies,'  Baal-zebub.  See  Bkki.zebub.
This  explanation  throws  light  on  three  proper  names, —
Jezebel,  Zehul,  and  Zebulon  —  also  on  Is.  6815,
'  from  thy  zi'/'ul  (high  house)  of  holiness  and  glory.'
The  same  term  s3ii/  could  be  applied  to  the  mansion
of  the  moon  in  the  sky  (Hab.  3  11,  We. ). T.  K.  C.

BAAL-ZEPHON  (pS>*  hv^),  or,  no  doubt  more
accurately,  Baal-Zaphon  (pS^'  '3).

1.  The  name  of  a  Phoenician  god,  formed  like  Baal-
Gad,  liaal-Hermon,  and  meaning  '  Baal  of  the  north.'
Though  not  mentioned  in  OT,  it  is  important  as  enabliiig
us  to  account  for  certain  ancient  Israelitish  proper  names
(Zapiion,  Zephon,  Zephonites,  Ziphion),  and  also
for  the  enigmatical  reference  to  a  mountain  abode  of
the  Elohim,  situated  '  in  the  recesses  of  the  north'  (Is.
1413;  see  Congregation,  Mount  of).  The  latter
conception  was  evidently  believed  by  Ezekiel  (2813/)
to  be  familiar  to  the  Phoenicians,  and  is  clearly  con-
nected with  the  divine  name  in  question,  which  describes
and  designates  '  the  Baal  whose  throne  is  on  the  sacred
mountain  of  the  gods  in  the  north'  (Baethg.  Beitr.  23,
261).  The  Assyrian  inscriptions  contain  several  refer-
ences to  this  god.  A  text  of  Esar-haddon  speaks  of  Ba.il-
sapunu  as  one  of  the  'gods  of  Ebir-nari '  (see  Ei'.er,  i),
and  more  than  one  mountain-district  nwy  have  bone
the  name  of  Baal-Zaphon.'^  The  chief  seat  of  the  god,
however,  must  have  been  in  the  centre  of  Mount
Lebanon.  Elsewhere  (Copper,  §  3)  other  texts  are
referred  to  in  which  Ba'ali-sapuna  is  described  as  rich
in  copper,  which  appears  to  have  been  the  case  with
Lebanon.  Altogether  we  cannot  be  wrong  in  identify-
ing Baal-Zaphon  with  Baal-Lebanon,  '  the  Baal  of
Lebanon."  The  relation  of  this  national  deity  of  the
Phoenicians  to  the  Baal-Zaphon  of  Goshen  requires
separate  consideration  (see  2).  On  the  question  whether
Baal-Zaphon  was  known  under  another  of  his  names  in
Philistia,  and  even  perhaps  among  the  Israelites,  see
Beel-Zebul,  §  2.  T.  K.  C.

2.  ^eeXffeircpbjv  :  so  most  MSS,  but  many  MSS  ^
P£€\ff€<f>i>)v  ;  Vg.  Beelsephon  (sejon  in  Jer.  OS;  Targ.
pss-'j^ya,  cp  Syr.  Bg'el-SCphftn  ;  Arab.  Walton,  '  Safun,
the  idol,'  safun  at-fdgiith),  a  place  near  the  point  where
the  Isrjjelites  crossed  the  Red  Sea,  and  opposite  their
encampment  (Ex.  14 2 9  Nu.  33?).  The  name  is  usually
understood  to  point  to  a  national  Phoenician  god  of  the

1  This  is  .ikin  to  the  theory  of  Movers,  who  makes  Baal-zebul
('  Lord  of  the  he.avenly  dwelling ')  originally  a  name  of  Saturn,
a  theory  which  lacks  evidence.

2  TigIath-pileserIII.(A'A'ii.  26/)  speaks  first  of  the  mountains
of  Lebanon  and  then  of  the  land  of  Ba'ali-.sapuna  as  far  as  the
mountains  of  Ammana.

3  E.^.,  AF  7  10,  perhaps  L.  This  form  also  seems  to  be
Hexaplaric  (see  the  Boheiric  version  ;  the  older  Sahidic  text
has  ir0  for  <^).


BAANA

same  name  ;  but  the  Egyptians  who  mention  a  goddess
Ha'alt(i)-sapuna  as  worshipjK-d  at  Memphis  ^  connect
this  cultus,  very  significantly,  with  that  of  Sa/>ii\u),  a
local  god  of  Western  Goshen  (see  GosJiKN,  §  2).  This
divinity  was,  therefore,  evidently  not  a  I'hoinician  deity  ;
her  domain,  at  any  rale,  was  either  in  or  near  the
region  of  (joshen.  Conse(|uently,  the  Haal  whom  this
local  Ha'alt  or  Hettis  implies  was  not  also  the  Phoenician
Haal-Zephon,  though  whether  he  had  an  independent
origin  or  not,  cannot  as  yet  be  determined.  Like  most
of  the  local  names  of  Goshen,  Haal-Zephon  (or  rather —
see  (1) — -Haal-Zaphon)  is  clearly  Semitic-

The  honour  accorded  by  the  l-".gyptians  to  the  consort
of  '  Haal-Zephon  '  no  doubt  proves  the  importance  of  that
town  of  Goshen.  It  is  difiicult,  however,  at  present,  to
determine  the  situation  of  the  place  (see  Kxouus,  i.  §  6).
The  expression  'be/ore  Haal-Zephon,  over  against  it"
(obscured  in  Nu.  33?/. )  need  not  signify  '  eastward  of,"
which  in  ordinary  Hebrew  would  be  the  most  natural
meaning  ;  it  seems  rather  to  indicate  here  some  point
not  yet  touched  on  the  NIL.  (or  S.  ?).

Such  iiltiitifications  as  that  with  Heroopolis  (Forster),  'Ajrud
(Niebuhr),  etc.  had  to  be  given  up  even  before  tlie


Goshen  and  Heroopolis  was  determined  by  Naville's
tions.  For  the  value  of  more  modern  theories  (Hrugsch,  =  Mount
Casius ;  Kbers,  on  the  'Atuk.-i  mountain,  SW.  of  Suez;  Naville,
on  Lake  Tinisah,  near  Sheikh  en-Nedek),  see  Exodus,  i.  §  t  J/'.
I,  T.  K.  C. — 2,  \V.  M.  M.

BAANA  (N3r3,  probably  =  Baanah  [lx.-low] ;  Baana,
[BXA]).

1.  b.  Ahilud  (or  perhaps  better  Ahimelech  ;  see  Ani.tn,  2  ;
Ahimki.hch,  i),  .Solomon's  prefect  in  the  \alley  of  Jezreel  ;
lK.4.2(/3aKX<'[Hl,  "o-^a;^<i[L]).

2.  b.  Hushai,  prefect  in  Asher ;  i  K.  4  16  (/Saai^as  [A],
^ai'aia?  [I,]).  His  father,  Hushai,  is  no  doubt  the  well-known
courtier  of  David  (2.S.  1')  52). Cp  Ailii.uu,  2.

,. I.uher  of  Zawik  |r/.7'.,  3] ;  Neh.  84  (om.  A  ;  /Sa^oa  [L]).
4. 1  i:v,1.58  =  Xeh.77,  Haanah,  3.

BAANAH  (n;r3; cp  Nabataean  "|Ji;3  [  CAS' 2  220];

B&AN&  [RSAL])!

1.  b.  Kimmon,  a  P>eerothite,  one  of  the  murderers  of  Ishbaal,
2S.  4  2^  Oai/aia  [L],  and  in  H  ^aajti  [fT'.  59],  /3a/oi/Lia  l?'.  6|;
Jos.  ^aii'n.%,  Pavao9a). See  Rechab,  i,  Ishhaal,  i.

2.  1'  ather  of  one  of  David's  heroes,  2  S.  2^  29  (j3e>/ta/u.eti/?  [15],
^aavaai  [A])=  i  Ch.  11  30  (coofa  [BN]  j3ai/a  [L]).

3.  A  leader  (see  KzHA,  ii.  §  8  <•)  in  the  great  post-exilic  list
(/■/i.  ii.  §  9),  Kzra22  (/3aAAeia  [B],  /3ai/aa  [L])=Neh.  7  7=  i  Esd.
5  8,  1!aana  [4]. Possibly  the  same  as  Baana,  3  (above).

4.  Signatory  to  the  covenant  (see  EzKA,  i.  §  7) ;  Neh.
10  27  [28]  (om.  L).

BAANI  (BAAN[e]l  [BA]),  i  Esd.  9 34  =  Ezra  10 34,
Bani,  2.

BAANIAS  (Bannaiac  [BA]).  i  Esd.  926,  AV  =
EzralO-'s,  Hknai.mi,  7.

BAARA  (X'ni?3),  a  'wife'  of  Siiaiiaraim  {^.z'.),  in
genealogy  of  Hk.nj.vmin  (§  9  ii.  ji),  1  Ch.  88  (iBaaAa
[B],  BAAP&  [A],  BaAaa  [L]).

BAASEIAH  (nyL*'i;!3,  no  doubt  a  textual  error  for
n^wT'3,  see  Maasi.ia'h),  a  Gershonite  Levite  ;  i  Ch.
640  [25J  (maacai  [HJ.  Baacia  [A],  Bacia  [LJ).

BAASHA  (NL"r3  or  wSb'^a,  §  51  [cp  Ba.  on  2  Ch.
I61],  BaACA  [H.\L]  ;  Jos.  .Inf.  viii.  I23,  BACANHC  ;
BA.is.i. Ba'sa  occurs  on  the  monolith inscription of

J  .Sail.  4  I,  rev.  ;  cp  \V^I^L  As.  u.  Eur.  315.  The  reading
Ba'a/y  (so  Goodwin,  Brugsch,  etc.)  is  incorrect.

2  What  Baal-Zaphon  (at  any  rate  the  Baal-Zaphon  of  Goshen)
signifies,  is  disputed.  '  Watch-tower '  (■v/nss)  ''  certainly  does
not  mean.  Gesenius  (after  Forster)  compared  the  Gk.  Tv^wi/
(originally  a  wind  god),  who  was  identified  by  the  Greeks  with
the  Egyptian  .SV/,  Sijfl  (EcvfT,  g  14),  on  the  basis  of  the  later
confusion  with  the  giant  Tuc^ufevs.  Quite  inadmissibly.  Nor
can  the  equation  be  supported  by  the  unfortunate  assertion  that
'Tep'  was  a  name  of 'Set'  (cp  Renouf,  ///M.  Lects.  for  1879,
p.  114).  A  much  more  reasonable  explanation  is  '  master  of  the
north,'  i.e.,  'north  point';  Baal-Zephon  was  indeed  near  the
north  end  of  the  Gulf.  Others  {e.g.,  Kber.s)  explain  Zaphon  as
'  the  north  wind,'  this  wind  being  important  for  the  sailors  on  the
Red  Sea,  who  would  make  their  orisons  at  the  sanctuary  of  Baal-
Zafhon.  Cp  the  name  Baal-sapuna  on  Hamathite  territory
(Tig.-pil.  111.),  Hommel,  AllT,  255,  WMM,  As.  u.  Eur.
315. See  also  Zaphon.

409


BABEL,  TOWER  OF

Shalmaneser  II.  as  the  name  of  an  Ammonite  king
[Lei.  Par.  294,  Schr.  K'.IT-^  196,  .Mt.urdy,  Jlist.
I'ruph.  .Man.  I273]),'  b.  Ahijah,  an  Issacharite,  lx;camc
king  of  Israel  in  succession  to  Nadab,  whom  he
conspired  against  and  slew  at  the  I'hilistme  town  of
Giblxithon,  afterwards  killing  all  the  rest  of  Jerolwam's
family  ( I  K.  1527 /).  The  fact  that  the  Philistines
were  able  to  resume  war  against  Israel  leads  to  the
supposition  that  there  had  Ix-en  a  military  revolution
in  which  Baasha,  one  of  Nadabs  generals,  was  the
leader  (cp  Ki.  Hist.  2254).  His  reign  was  marked  by
his  energetic  ojx;rations  against  Asa  "■'  {q.v. ).  By  build-
ing Ramah  (iK.  I517)  Baasha  had  endeavoured  to
shut  off  Jerusalem  from  intercourse  with  the  outer
world,  and  Asa  was  saved  only  by  the  purchased  aid  of
Benhadad  (q.v. ,  §  2),  who  invaded  Israel  '  unto  Na])luali '
(v.  20,  c|>  ©).  We  know  but  little  of  his  '  acts  '  or  of  his
'might'  (iriTaJ,  i  K.  165)-  He  was  one  of  the  few
kings  who  died  a  natural  death.  He  was  buried  at
Tirzah,  which  was  still  the  royal  residence  (i  K.  15  21 33),
having  lx;en  made  such  by  Jeroboam  (see  Tirzah).
Baasha  was  the  head  of  the  second  dynasty,  which
was  e.xtirpated  at  a  later  time  by  Zimri,  '  in  accordance
with  the  word  of  Yahwe  which  he  spake  against  Baasha
by  Jehu  the  prophet'  (see  Jkhu,  2,  b.  Hanani).  The
fate  of  the  house  of  Baasha  b.  Ahijah,  as  also  that  of
Jerolxjam  b.  Nebat,  is  referred  to  by  later  writers  ;  cp
I  K.  21  22  2  K.  99.  See  Iskaki,,  §  29,  Ciiko.nk  i.ks,
§  8,  and,  for  his  date  (about  900  B.C.),  Ciiko.\i)1.(j,-;v,
§32-

BABEL,-'  TOWER  OF  (Cien.  11 1-9). The  story  of
the  lower  \?^j'P),  when  its  lacunar  have  been  tilled  up,
is  to  this  effect. All  mankind  had  still


1.  OT  story.


one  language,  and  kept  together. On


one  of  their  nomadic  journej-s  they  found  a  spot  which
.suggested  the  adoption  of  a  settled  life  ;  it  was  the  plain
of  Shinar.  Having  no  building  material,  they  de\  ised
the  plan  of  baking  clay  into  bricks,  and  using  bitumen
for  cement.  They  were  the  first  city-btiilders.  Their
design,  however,  \\as  to  build,  not  only  a  city,  but
also  a  stupendously  high  tower  which  should  Ix;  at  once
a  monument  of  their  strength  and  a  centre  or  rallying-
point  that  would  prevent  their  ever  being  disper.sed.
Uneasy  at  their  newly  awakened  activity,  Yahwe  '  came
down  '  to  take  a  nearer  view  of  the  buildings,  and  then
returned  (to  his  lofty  mountain  abode,  Ezek.  2814)  to
take  counsel  with  the  sons  of  ElOhim.  This,  he  said,  is
but  the  beginning  of  human  ambition  ;  nothing  will
soon  lie  too  hard  for  man  to  do.  Come,  let  us  go
down  (together),  and  bring  their  speech  into  confusion.
Hence  arose  the  present  variety  of  languages  and  the
dispersion  of  mankind,  and  hence  the  name  of  the  well-
known  city  called  Babylon.

This naive narrative, which is  Yahwistic, probably
comes  from  the  same  writer  as  the  story  of  Paradise.  ■•

Both narratives present the  same  childlike

2. Genera,! curiosity  .about  causes,  the  .same  strongly  an-

Character. thropomorphic  and  in  some  sense  polytheistic

conception  of  the  divine  nature  (cp  z<.  h/.  with


1  We.  {Heid.i^)  62)  suggests  that  KC'i'a  may  l^e  a  contraction
for  KC'"'?J?3'  .Similar  contractions  are  seen  in  the  Phoen.  CCCJ'3
and  Aram,  (from  the  Hauran)  |cri*3-  Sa  ispossibly  a  divine
name  and  seems  to  recur  in  the  names  Abishai,  Ammi-sha  (f  t
Amasa),  etc.;  see  Jerusha.  It  may  also  be  the  same  as  the
god  Ii-  mentioned  in  a  S.  Arab,  inscription  (Exp.  T.  10329).
Its  identification  with  a  Palm,  deity  nc  is  open  to  question.

2  Cp  the  tradition  referred  to  in  Jer.  41  9  (©N  omits  the  name).

3  On  the  name  (^'^^),  see  Bauvlon,  §  i,  and  below,  col.
411,  n.  4,  and  8  6.

4  According  to  the  non-critical  view,  the  sur\'ivors  of  the
Deluge  made  their  way  from  the  mountain  on  which  the  ark  had
rested  to  the  land  of  Shinar  (so  Sayce,  Crit.  Man.  155).  The
Deluge-story,  however,  makes  Shem,  Ham,  and  lapheth  them-
-selves  the  progenitors  of  the  different  sections  of  mankind,  and
has  thus  no  need  of  the  Tower-storj .  Even  if  such  a  narrative
had  been  intioduced  into  the  Deluge-story,  how  could  'Shem,
Ham,  and  lapheth  '  be  called  'all  the  earth  '  (11 1)?  See  We.
CU  13  ;  but  cp  Stade,  ZA  T\V  14  276^.  ['94I.

410


BABEL,  TOWEB  OP


8  22) ;  both,  therefore,  have  in  all  ages  given  occasion  to  the
enemy  to  blaspheme.  Philo  {Di  Cot^usione  l.iiisnarum)
thought  that,  to  avoid  '  the  most  surpassing  impiety,"  the
anthio|X)niorphisms  must  be  interpreted  allegorically.  If  we
are  not  prepared  to  follow  him  in  this,  we  must  once  more  apply
the  mythological  key  (see  Adam  and  Eve,  jt  4).

It  is  perhaps  the  second  extant  chapter  in  the  mythic
chronicle  of  the  first  family  that  we  have  l)efore  us  :  the
passage  which  originally  linked  the  story  of  the  Tower
to  that  of  Paradise  has  been  lost  (see  Nki'HII.IM).  It  is
clear,  however,  that  the  first  men  had  not  gone  far  from
Paradise  :  they  are  still  on  their  journeys  '  in  the  east '
when  this  ambitious  project  occurs  to  them  (see  Gi:o-
GRAPHY,  §  13).

Tlie narrative may be regarded in two aspects.

While explaining how the city of Babylon,  wiih its

_  . . gigantic  terrace- tern  pies,  came  to  be  built

■ . °^ (see  §  4),  it  accoimls  for  the  division  of


of  diverse
tongues.


men  into  different  nations,  separated  in
abode  and  speech. Not  to lie able to


imderstand  one's  neighbour  seemed  to  the  primitive  men
a  curse  (cp  Dt.  2849  Jer.  5 15)-  It  is  not  improbable
that  there  was  an  ancient  N.  Semitic  myth  which  ex-
plained how  this  curse  arose.  It  is  said  that  there
are  many  such  myths  elsewhere,^  and  some  of  them
(e.g.,  that  reported  by  Livingstone  from  Lake  Ngami,
and  that  mentioned  in  the  Bengal  Census  Report  for
1872 — to  mention  only  two  of  the  best  attested)  have
a  certain  similarity  to  the  Hebrew  story.  It  is  credible,
therefore,  that  the  X.  Semites  ascribed  the  curse  of  many
languages  to  the  attempt  to  erect  a  tower  by  which  men
might  climb  up  '  above  the  stars  of  Cjod '  and  '  sit  on
the  mountain  of  assembly '  and  '  make  themselves  like
the  Most  High'2(Is.  H13/.).

The  old  myth,  like  that  which  seems  to  underlie  the

story  of  Sodom  {}.v.), said nothing  as  to  where  the

_.  . . , town  to  which  the tower  belonged  lay.

-^  ,  °:  When,  however,  through  some  devastat-

■^  '  ing  storm,  one  of  the  chief  temple-towers
of  Babylon  (see  B.\BVLONi.\,  §  27)  fell  in  remote  days
into  disrepair,  wandering  Aramaaan  trilxis  may  have
marked  it,  and,  connecting  it  with  the  '  balx;! '  of
foreign  tongues  in  Babylon,  may  have  localised  the
myth  at  the  ruined  temple-tower.^  ftalbel,  they  would
have  exclaimed  :  ■*  it  was  here  that  (iod  confounded
men's  sjx;ech,  and  the  proofs  of  it  are  the  ruined  tower
and  the  name  of  Batel.

It  is  remarkable  that  the  polytheistic  element  in  the
old myth should have been so imperfectly  removed.


6.  Character
of  myth.


Even  the  writer  who  adopted  and  retold
the  story  was  still  far  off  from  the  later
transcendental  monotheism.  The  changes
which  he  introduced  consisted  in  omissions  rather  than
in  insertions.  Yahwe  still  has  to  come  down  to  inquire  ;
he  still  has  to  communicate  the  result  to  the  inferior
divine  beings,  and  bring  them  with  him  to  execute  judg-
ment ;  but,  though  he  needs  society,  as  ruler  Yahw6
stands  alone  :  there  is  no  triad  of  great  gods,  as  in
Babylon.  It  is  also  worth  mentioning  that  the  narrator's
idea  of  civilisation  is  essentially  a  worthy  one.  No  city
can  be  built,  according  to  these  early  men,  without  a
religious  sanction.  Enos,  as  another  myth  appears  to
have  said,  is  at  once  the  beginner  of  forms  of  worship

1  .See  F.BIS>),  art.  Babkt.,  Tower  <of  (Sayce),  and  cp  Luken,
Die  Traditionen,  318-322.

2  In  a  Babylonian  hymn  we  find  the  god  Bel  identified  with
'the  great  mountain  whose  top  reaches  to  heaven'  (Jensen,
Kosinol.  21).

3  In  the  original  myth  there  was  no  hyperbole.  In  the
localised  myth,  however,  the  de.scription  '  whose  top  reacheth
unto  heaven'  seems  parallel  to  a  phrase  in  Dt.  I28,  and  to
similar  descriptions  of  Egyptian  obelisks  (see  lirugsch,  Egypt
under  the  Pharaohs,  310)  and  Assyrian  and  Babylonian  temple-
towers  (so  Tiglath-pilcser ;  'its  temple  -  towers  I  raised  to
heaven,'  Del.  Ass.  UWB  162;  and  Hammu-rabi,  '(the  temple)
whose  top  Is  high  as  heaven  he  built, KB  iii.  <?,  129.

<  A popular  etymology would connect Bdbel  with Aram.
ba/hel  much  more  easily  than  with  Heb.  bd/at  (ficK  Olshausen,
Lehrh.  |  189a),  as  Bu.  supposed  in  1883  {I'rgesck.  3S7). On-
kelos  on  Gen.  11 9  gives  ^373  for  '^e  ^"^^  of  M"!.
411


and  the  father  of  Cain  the  city-builder  (see  Cain,  §  i).
On  the  other  hand,  the  idea  that  God  grudges  man  the
strength  which  comes  from  union,  and  fears  human
ambition,  is  obviously  one  of  the  'beggarly  elements'
of  ethnic  religion  from  which  Jewish  religion  had  yet  to
disengage  itself.

We  have  seen  that  there  was  not  improbably  an  old
N.  Semitic  myth  of  the  interrupted  building  of  a  tower
fi  OT  form  not  *°  account  for  the  dispersion  of  the
■RQ>^17lnT,i'lT,  nations.  Should  such  a  myth  one  day
uaoyioman.  ^^  discovered  in  Babylonia,  1  it  will
certainly  disappoint  many  p)ersons  by  not  mentioning
the  '  confusion  of  languages,'  nor  giving  Babylon  as  the
scene  of  the  events,  { 1 )  because  the  Ass.  bullulu  means
'fundere,'  not  '  confundere, '  and  (2)  because  the  city  of
Babylon  was  regarded  as  of  divine  origin,  and  its  name
Bdbilw-AS,  explained  as  Bdb-ili,  'the  gate  of  God,'  or
'  of  the  gods '  (cp  Bahylon,  §  i).  The  latter  reason  is
decisive  also  against  the  theory  '■^  that  the  Sibylline  story
of  the  Tower  of  Babel  and  the  cognate  one  of  .AbydCnus  ^
rest  on  Babylonian  authority.  That  two  of  the  reporters
of  the  story  give  the  polytheistic  ot  Ceot  proves  nothing,
for  the  plural  was  sufficiently  suggested  by  the  Hebrew
narrative  {y.  7).  The  non- biblical  features  of  their
version,  though  in  one  point  (the  object  ascribed  to  the
builders)  probably  an  accurate  reconstruction  of  the
earliest  myth,  are  of  no  authority,  being  clearly  derived
from  the  imaginative  Jewish  Haggada,"*  which  is  re-
sponsible also  for  the  part  assigned  by  later  writers
to  Nimrod  (Jos.  Ant.  i.  42  ;  cp  Dante,  Inf.  31  76-81).
Where  was the tower referred to in the Hebrew

r. o-i. .narrative? Few  scholars  have  declared  this
7.  Site  of


tower.


problem insoluble  ; but almost all have


missed  what  seems  the  most  natural  answer.
Benjamin  of  Tudela,  who  travelled  about  a.d.  1160,  sup


it  to  be  the  mound  called  by  the  Arabs  Birs  Nimrud,  which,  he
says,  is  made  of  bricks  called  al-ajur.^  This  agrees  with  the
Midrash  (AVr.  rabha,  par.  .x.xxviii),  and  is  probably  implied  in  the
strange  gloss  of  ©  in  Is.  10  9.  In  the  sixteenth  century  Balbi
and  Ralph  Fitch,  and  in  the  seventeenth  John  Cartwright,  give
descriptions  of  the  '  Tower  of  Balx:l  '  which  are  plainly  suggested
by  the  huge  mass  of  brickwork,  6  or  7  m.  W.  of  Bagdad,  known
as  Tell  Nimrud  or'Akarkuf  (see  Del.  Par.  208  ;  Peters,  Nippur,
i.  i88_/C).  Pietro  delia  Valle  in  the  eighteenth  century  preferred
the  great  mound  near  Hillah  called  Bdbil,  which,  however,  as
Rassam  has  shown,  represents  the  famous  hanging  gardens  (see
Baiiylon,  §§4  8).  In  the  nineteenth,  C.  J.  Rich  and  Ker  Porter
revived  the  Birs  Nimrud  theory,  and  most  scholars  have  followed
them,**  largely  influenced  by  Nebuchadrezzar's  Borsippa  inscrip-
tion. No  one  has  put  this  view  so  plausibly  as  J.  P.  Peters,  in
an  article  which  appeared  since  this  article  was  written  (JBL,
1896,  p.  loC^).  The  statements  of  the  king  are  no  doubt  well
adapted  to  illustrate  the  disrepair  into  which  (see  $  4)  the  tower
originally  intended  must  have  fallen,  even  though  they  do  not,
as  Oppert  once  thought,  descrilje  the  'confusion  of  tongues.'
Let  us  pause  upon  them  for  a  moment.  They  tell  us  that  the
temple-tower  {zikkurrat)  of  Borsippa  had  '  fallen  into  decay
since  remote  days,'  and  indeed  that  it  had  never  been  quite
completed  by  its  original  builder.  '  Rain  and  storm  had  thrown
down  its  wall ;  the  kiln-bricks  of  its  covering  had  split ;  the
bricks  of  its  chamber  were  in  heaps  of  rubbish.  '  To  restore  it,'
says  Nebuchadrezzar,  'the  great  Lord  Marduk  impelled  my
mind.'  t

Borsippa,  however,  is  not  the  place  we  should  natur-
ally go  to  for  the  tower.  Babylon,  and  Babylon  alotie
(which  was  always  distinguished  from  Borsippa)  must
cover  the  site.  The  late  Jewish  tradition  is  of  no  value
whatever :  it  grew  up,  probably,  during  the  Exile,
when  Nebuchadrezz;u-'s  restoration  of  the  '  temple  of  the

1  The  story  as  it  stands  is  not,  as  Stade  (ZA  TIV,  1895,  p.  157)
and  Gunkel  (Sclidpf.  149)  (not,  of  course,  on  the  ground  of  the
supposed  di.scovery  in  TSBA  5303,^,  RP't  \i<)_ff.  \  cp  Sayce,
Hibb.  Lect.  406)  have  held,  Babylonian.

2  Gnippe,  Die  gHech.  Culte  u.  Mytlun,  683  ;  ZA  TW  9  154


['89];  Sta.  ZAriV\b-i.^i  161  ['95].


t.  Sibyll.Z<)T  ff.;  Jos.  Ant.\.\-i\  Syncellus,  Chron.
ed.  Dindorf,  81  ;  Eus.  Chron.  ed.  Schoene,  1  33.  Cp  Bloch,  Die
Quet/en  des  Ft.  Josephus,  $^ /.  ['79];  Freudenthal, //*//<:««/.
Studien  1  25.

«  See  Jubilees\0  19-26  (Charles,  /QR  6 208/).

5  The Arabic 'rt;«rr'<" comes through .Aram, from As.s.
agvrru,  '  kiln-bricks  '  (often)  ;  both  words  are  used  collectively.

6  For  Sir  H.  Rawlinson's  view,  which  differs  from  the  views
mentioned  above,  see  G.  Smith's  Chaldaan  Genesis,  edited  by


layce,  171.

r  KB3b  52-55;  cp  cor


1.09/


1.  Name,  etc.


BA6I

seven  lights  of  heaven  and  earth '  was  recent.  In  the
tikkurrat  of  the  great  temple  Ivsagila  (see  Babyi.on,
§§  4,  5),  represented,  according  to  Honiniel,  by  Tell
'Amran,  we  have  the  true  tower  of  HalK.-!.  Nebu-
chadrezzar himself  speaks  of  this  tower  in  the  Borsippa
inscription.  '  K-temcn-an-ki,'  he  says,  'the  tikkurrat
of  Babylon.  I  restored  and  finished."  An  account  of
this  building  has  been  given  from  a  Babylonian  tablet
by  the  late  George  Smith.  He  tells  us  that  '  the  whole
height  of  this  tower  alxjve  its  foundation  was  15  gar,  or
300  feet,  exactly  eciual  to  the  breadth  of  the  base  ;  and,
as  the  foundation  was  most  probably  raised  above  the
level  of  the  ground,  it  would  give  a  height  of  over  300
feet  at)ove  the  plain  for  this  grandest  of  Babylonian
temples. '  >  What  vicissitudes  this  zikkurrat,  or  its  pre-
decessor, passed  through  in  early  times,  who  shall  say  ?

T.  K.  C.
BABI  (BaBi  [A]),  I  Esd.  837  =  Kzra8ii,  Bebai,  i.
BABYLON.  The  word  "paa  (©"■^'-  BaByAoon).
B.'UmjI,  designating  the  city  which,  in  course  of  time,
liecame  the  capital  of  the  country  known
as  Babylonia,  is  the  Hebrew  form  of
the  native  B;lb-ili  ( '  gate  of  God,"  or  '  Gate  of  the  gods  ').
The  Accadian  or  Sumerian  name,  Ka-dingira,  is  a
translation  of  the  Semitic  Babylonian.  Of  the  other
names  of  the  city,  Tin-tir,  '  Seat  of  life,'  and  \\  or  E-ki
(translated  '  hcjuse '  or  'hollow')  are  among  the  best
known.  The  existence  of  these  various  names  is  prob-
ably due  to  the  incorporation,  as  the  city  grew,  of  out-
lying villages  and  districts.  .Among  the  places  which
seem  to  have  been  regarded,  in  later  times,  as  a  part  of
the  city,  may  be  mentioned  Su-anna  (a  name  sometimes
apparently  interchanged  with  that  of  Babylon  itself)  ;
To,  which,  though  it  had,  like  Babylon,  a  pihatti,  or
district  of  its  own,  is  nevertheless  described  as  being
'within  Babylon';  and  Suppatum  and  Litamu,  ap-
parently names  of  plantations  ultimately  included  in  the
city.

The  date  of  the  foundation  of  Babylon  is  still  un-
certain. Its  association  in  Gen.  10 10  with  Erech,
Akkad,  and  Calneh  implies  that  according  to  Hebrew-
tradition  it  was  at  least  as  old  as  tho.se  cities,  and  con-
firmation of  this  is  to  lie  found  in  the  bilingual  Creation-
story  (see  Ckkation,  §  16  d\,  where  it  is  mentioned  as
coeval  with  l->ech  and  Nippuru,  two  primeval  cities,  the
latter  of  which  has  l)een  proved  by  the  excavations  to
dale  back  to  prehistoric  times.

No  detailed  history  of  the  rise  of  the  city  has  yet
come  to  light.  Agum  or  Agu-kak-rime  (about  1550  I!.  C.)
spx.-aks  of  the  glorious  shrines  of_Marduk
and  Zirpanitum,  in  the  temple  l"-sagila,
which  he  restored  with  great  splendour.  About  892  H.  c. ,
Tukulii-Ninip,  king  of  Assyria,  took  the  city,  slaying
the  inhabitants,  and  carrying  a  vast  .amount  of  spoil  (in-
cluding the  property  and  dues  of  the  great  temple
IC-sagila)  back  with  him  to  .Assyria.  Sennacherib,  how-
ever, went  farther  than  his  predecessor.  He  says  that,
after  having  spoiled  the  city  at  least  once,  he  devoted
it  to  utter  destruction.  The  temples,  palaces,  and  city-
walls  were  overthrown.  The  debris  having  been  cast
into  the  canal  Arahtu,  that  waterway  was  still  further
dammed  up,  and  a  flood  in  con-secjuence  ravaged  the
country.  ICsarhaddon,  when  he  came  to  the  throne,
began  the  rebuilding  of  the  city,  restoring  the  temples
w  ith  much  sjilendour  ;  and  the  work  of  beautifying  them
was  continued  by  Samas-sum-ukin  and  .Asur-bani-pal,
his  sons,  the  former  as  king  of  Babylon,  and  the  latter
as  his  suzerain.  Later,  Nabopolassar  continued  the
work  ;  but  it  was  left  for  his  son  Nebuchadrezzar  to
bring  the  city  to  the  very  height  of  its  glory.  Later
still,  Cyrus  held  his  court  at  Babylon  (.Su-anna),  where
vassal  kings  brought  him  tribute  and  paid  him  homage.
The  siege  of  the  place  and  the  destruction  of  its  walls  by

t  See  Sayce,  Hibb.  Led.,  App.  ii.;  but  cp  Jensen,  Kosmol.


2.  History.


BABYLON

Darius  Hystaspis  were  the  beginning  of  its  decay.
Xerxes  is  said  (Herod.  1  183)  to  have  plundered  the
tenjple  of  BClus  of  the  golden  statue  that  Darius  had
not  dared  to  remove,  and  Arrian  (836)  states  that  he
destroyed  the  temple  itself  on  his  return  from  Greece.
He  relates  also  that  Alexander  wished  to  restore  this
celebrated  fane,'  but  renounced  the  itlea,  as  it  would
have  taken  ten  thousand  men  more  than  two  months
to  remove  the  rubbish  alone.  Be  this  as  it  may,
Antiochus  Soter,  in  an  inscription  found  aj  Birs-
Nimrud,  mentions  having  restored  the  temple  lO-sagila
(the  temple  of  BClus),  showing  that  some  attempt  was
made,  notwithstanding  Alexander's  abandonment  of  the
task  in  despair,  to  bring  order  into  the  ch.aotic  mass  of
ruin  to  which  it  had  apparently  been  rc<luced.  The
people  of  the  great  city  had,  in  all  probability,  by
this  time  almost  entirely  migrated  to  Seleucia,  on  the
Tigris  ;  but  the  temple  services  were  continued  as  late  as
the  third  decade  B.C.,  and  probably  even  into  the
Christian  era.  The  temple  was  still  standing  in  127
B.C.  (reign  of  the  Kharacenian  king  Hysp;isines),  and
had  a  congregation,  who  worshipped  the  god  Marduk
in  combination  with  Anu,  this  twofold  godhead  lx;ing,
apparently,  called  Anna-Bel.  .\  small  tablet,  dated
'  2i9lh  year,  Arsaces,  king  of  kings,'  records  the  lj<jr-
rowing  by  two  priests  of  E-sa-bad  (the  temple  of  the
goddess  Gula  at  Babylon)  of  a  certain  sum  of  silver
from  the  treasury  of  the  temple  of  Bel.  This  date,
which  is  regarded  as  .Arsacidean,  shows  that  certain
temples,  including  the  tower  of  BClus,  remained,  with
their  priesthood  and  services,  as  late  as  the  year  29  B.C.
{Bab.  Or.  Record,  4  133).

Rather  more  than  50  miles  .south  of  Bagdad,  on  the
east  bank  of  the  Euphrates,  lie  the  ruins  siill  identified
by  tradition  as  those  of  Baliylon.  These
remains  consist  of  a  series  of  extensive,
irregularly-shaped  mounds  covering,  from  north  to  south,
a  distance  of  about  5  miles.  Bfdjil,  the  northmost  ruin,
has,  according  to  .Ainsworth,  a  square  superficies  of
120,000  ft.,  and  a  height  of  64  ft.  The  next  in  order
is  the  Mujellibch,  of  about  the  same  superficies  and  a
height  of  28  ft.  After  this  come  two  mounds  close
together,  the  Kasr  or  '  j^alace,'  and  that  called  '.Amran-
ibn-'.\li  to  the  south  of  it.  These  two  together  have  a
suiierlicies  of  104,000  ft. ,  and  a  height  of  67  ft. ,  or  w  ith
the  bens,  or  stone  monument,  115  ft.  Most  of  these
two  mounds  is  '  enclosed  w  ithin  an  irregular  triangle
formed  by  two  lines  of  ramparts  and  the  river,  the  area
being  alxuit  8  miles'  (Loflus).  Other  remains,  includ-
ing two  parallel  lines  of  rampart,  are  scattered  alwut,
and  there  are  the  remains  of  an  embankment  on  the
river  side.  On  the  W.  bank  are  the  ruins  of  a  palace
said  to  be  that  of  Neriglissar.

According  to  Herodotus  (1 178-187),  the  city  ff)rmed  a
vast  square, 480  stades (55J  miles)  in  circumference.


3.  Buins.


4.  Greek
descriptions.


Around  the  city  w.as  a  large  ditch  of
nmning  water,  and  beyond  that  a  great
rampart  200  cubits  high  and  50  bro.ad,
there  lx.>ing  on  it  room  enough  for  a  four-horse  chariot
to  pass,  and  even  to  turn,  in  addition  to  space  sufficient
for  '  chambers  facing  each  other. '  The  top,  therefore,
would  seem  to  have  resembled  a  kind  of  street.  The
wall  was  pierced  by  a  himdred  gateways  closed  with
brazen  gates.  On  reaching  the  Ivuphrates,  which  ( Hero-
dotus says)  divided  the  city,  it  was  met  by  walls  which
lined  the  banks  of  the  stream.  The  streets  were  arranged
at  right  angles.  Where  those  which  ran  down  to  the
Euphrates  met  the  river-wall,  there  were  gateways  allow-
ing access  to  the  river. On  each  bank  of  the  Euphrates

1  A  confirmation  of  this  occurs  in  the  tablet  Hu.  88-5-12,  619,
which  is  dated  in  6th  ye.-ir  cf  Aliks.-ind.nrrls  (Alex.nndi-r),  and
refers  to  lo  mana  of  silver  .-us  tithe  paid  ana  aakii  la  f(>iri  sa
E-sangiUso  to  be  read,  according  to  the  Aramaic  docket),  'for
the  clearing  away  of  the  dust  (rubbish)  of  E-sangil  (E-sagila)'
(Oppert  in  the  Comptes  Kemius  de  tAcad.  des  Inscr.  et  Be/Its
Lettres,  1898,  pp.  4i4^.).

414


Scale:  i  inch  =  4000  yards.

Scale of  Miles
234


4000  \'ai-(Js


Present  River  Beds

Dry  Beds

Ancient  Lateral  Irrigants,  now  dry..


Date  Palms _

UnciHtiuated  and  Desert.
Cultivated,  Gardens  etc


Itlt


Prominent  Mounds  and  Ruins i^'^M'' Swamps,  Marshes,  and  Rice  Grounds...  ■-^-  ^


//  aitirO-Jloti.'aU  tc.


THE SITE OF BABYLON


rompiled  mainly  from  surveys  by  Jones,  Selby,  Bewsher,  and  CoHing^^'Ood,  1845-65,  with  corrections  to  1885
(published  by  the  India  Office).  Small  additions,  etc.,  from  Ki(:jx;rt's  '  Kuiiicnfckior  der  Umgegciid  von  Babylon  '
in  Ztschr.  d.  Gesellsch.  J.  Erdkundc  su  Berlin.


BABYLON

were  certain  forlifk-d  buildings,  the  royal  palace  lx;ing
on  one  side,  anil  the  temple  of  Helus  on  the  other.  The
latter  was  a  tower  in  stages,  with  an  exterior  winding
ascent  leading  froni  stage  to  stage,  and  alxjut  half-way
up  a  resting-place  for  the  visitor.  The  top  was  sur-
mounted by  a  sjKicious  chaix,'l,  containing  a  richly
covered  bed  and  a  golden  table.  iN'one  passed  the
night  there,  according  to  the  priests,  except  a  woman  of
the  country  whom  the  god  had  six.'cially  chosen.  Lower
down  was  another  chapel  containing  a  seated  statue  of
/cus  (llel-Marduk)  and  a  large  table,  Ixjth  of  solid  gold.
Outside  were  two  altars,  one  of  them  of  gold  ;  and  it
was  here  that  the  golden  statue  that  was  carried  away
by  Xer.xes  formerly  stood.  Herodotus  sjjeaks  also  of  the
large  reservoir,  constructed,  he  says,  by  <.)ueen  Nitocris,
and  of  the  embankments  and  the  bridge  that  she  made,
the  hist  lx.-ing  a  series  of  piers  of  stone  built  in  the  river,
connected  l)y  wooden  drawbridges  which  w  ere  w  ithdrawn
at  night.  Nitocris  caused  to  l)e  erected  over  the  most
frecjucnted  gale  of  the  city,  the  tomb  which  she  after-
wards occupied  :  but  this,  he  says,  was  removed  by
Darius,  who  thought  that  it  was  a  pity  that  the  gate
should  remain  unused,  and  coveted  the  treasure  that  she
was  supposed  to  have  placed  there,  which  he  failed  to
find.  The  houses  of  the  city,  according  to  Herodotus,
were  three  and  four  stories  high.  He  does  not  mention
the  hanging  gardens.

Ctesias  (ap.  Diod.  Siculus,  27,'.)  makes  the  circuit
of  the  city  only  360  stades  (41  m.  600  yds. ).  It  lay  on
l)oth  sides  of  the  Euphrates,  which  was  crossed  by  a
bridge  at  its  narrowest  point.  The  bridge  was  similar
to  that  descrilxid  by  Herodotus,  and  measured  5  stades
(3032  ft. )  in  length  and  30  ft.  in  breadth.  At  each  end  was
a  royal  palace,  that  on  the  E.  being  the  more  splendid.
There  was  a  part  called  the  twofold  royal  city,  which
was  surrounded  by  three  walls,  the  outmost  having  a
circuit  of  7  m.  'Fhe  height  of  the  middle  wall,  which
was  circular,  was  300  ft. ;  that  of  its  towers,  420  ft.
The  inmost  wall,  however,  was  even  higher.  The
walls  of  the  second  enclosure  and  those  of  the  third
were  faced  with  coloured  bricks,  enamelled  with  various
designs.  Among  them  were  representations  of  Semi-
ramis  and  .Ninus  slaying  the  leopard  and  the  lion.
The  two  palaces  were  joined  by  a  tunnel  under  the
river  as  well  as  by  a  bridge.  DiodOms  mentions  the
square  lake,  and  describes  the  temple  of  Belus,  which,
he  says,  had  a  statue  of  Zeus  (Hel-Marduk)  40  ft.
high,  and  statues  of  Hera  and  Rhea  (probably  Zir-
panitum  [see  Succotii-Bk.voth]  and  the  goddess
Damkina).  He  describes  the  famous  hanging  gardens,
which  were  scjuare,  and  measured  400  ft.  each  way,
rising  in  terraces,  and  provided  with  earth  enough  to
accommodate  trees  of  great  size.  (Eor  other  Oeek
accounts,  see  (i)  Arrian,  Anab.  7251,  and  Plut.  Alex.
74  ;  (2)  Diod.  Sic.  27-10,  Curt.  Ruf.  5i  24-35  ;  (3)  Strab.
I615;  (4)  Diod.  19ioo,  7  and  IMut.  Demetr.  7;  (5)
Philistr.  V'it.  Apoll.  I25;  to  which  may  be  added  (6)
Berossus  in  Jos.  Ant.  .\.  11 1,  C.  Ap.  \\<)f.,  and  Eus.
Frap.  Ev.  ^^t^  c  d).

The  best  native  account  of  the  glories  of  Babylon  is
probably  that  of  the  well-known  king  Nebuchadrezzar

6.  Nebuchad-  ^'^'^  '^^  ^°^  *~"'^  '""''-'''  ^"  ^'^°'"  ^'^*^  '^''^

^„ ,_ owed  much — who,  inileed,  may  Ix;  said  to

rezzar  a ,  .• n I 1 . 'nu


account.


have  practically  rebuilt  it. The  most


ptjrtant  edifice  to  him  was  the  temple
of  Bclus  (i'L-sagila,  later  called  IC-saggil  or  E-sangil),
and  with  this  he  lx.'gins,  speaking  first  of  the  shrine  of
Marduk,  the  wall  of  which  he  covered  with  massive  gold,
lapis-lazuli,  and  white  limestone.  He  refers  to  the
two  gates  of  the  temple,  and  the  place  of  the  assembly,
where  the  oracles  were  declared,  and  gives  details  of  the
work  done  upon  them.  It  was  apparently  a  part  of
this  temple  that  he  calls  E-temen-ana-ki,  '  the  temple
of  the  foundation  of  heaven  and  earth,"  and  descrilx;s
as  the  '  tower  of  Babylon '  (sikkiirat  Babili),  stating
that  he  '  raised  its  head '  in  burnt  brick  and  lapis-lazuli
27  417


BABYLON

(cp  BABt:i,.  Tower  ok.  §  7).  .\fter  referring  to
various  other  shrines  and  temples,  he  speaks  of  Inigur-
Bel  and  Nimitti-Bel,  the  two  great  ramparts  of  the
city,  built,  or  rather,  rebuilt,  by  his  father  Nal)o-
polassar,  who,  however,  had  not  Ijeen  able  to  finish
them.  Nebuchadrezziir  goes  on  to  descrilje  what
he  and  his  father  had  done  on  these  defences — the
digging  and  bricking  of  the  moat,  the  bricking  of  the
banks  of  the  Euphrates,  the  inijjrovement  of  the  road-
way called  Aa-ibur-.s;ibu,  the  elevation  of  which  Nebu-
chadrezzar raised  '  from  the  shining  gate  to  (the  ro.idway
called)  I.star-sakipat-tebi-sa,'  and  so  on.  In  conse(|uence
of  the  raising  of  this  stret;t,  the  great  city  gates  of  the
walls  Imgur-Bcl  and  Nimitti-Bel  had  to  be  made  higher.
They  were  at  the  same  time  decorated  with  lapis-lazuli
and  figures  of  bulls  and  ser|)ents,  provided  with  doors
of  cedar  covered  with  bronze.  Then,  to  strengthen  the
city  still  further,  Nebuchadrezzar  built,  4000  cubits  Ix.--
yond  Imgur-Bel,  another  wall  (with  doors  of  cedar
covered  with  bronze),  surrounded  with  a  ditch.  To
make  the  approach  of  an  enemy  to  xhc.  city  still  more
difficult,  he  surrounded  the  tlistrict  with  'great  waters'
like  unto  the  sea.  .After  this  he  turned  his  attention
to  the  royal  palace,  a  structure  which  reache<l  from  the
great  wall  Imgur-Bel  to  the  canal  of  the  rising  sun,
called  Libilhegalla,  and  from  the  bank  of  the  Euphrates
to  the  street  .Aa-ibur-sabu.  It  had  been  constructed,
he  says,  by  his  father  Naboj)olassar  ;  but  its  foundations
had  been  weakened  by  a  flood  and  t)y  the  raising  of  the
street.  This  edifice  Nebuchadrezzar  placed  in  good
repair,  and  adorned  with  gold,  silver,  precious  stones,
and  every  token  of  magnificence,  after  rearing  it  high  '  as
the  wooded  hills. '  Other  constructions  that  he  made
were  a  wall  490  cubits  long  (apparently  intended  to  serve
as  an  additional  tiefence  to  a  part  of  the  outer  wall)
called  Nimitti-Bel,  .tikI,  Ixitween  the  two  walls,  a  struc-
ture of  brick,  surmounted  with  a  great  edifice,  destined
for  his  roj-al  seat.  This  pal.ace,  which  joined  that  of
his  father,  w;rs  erected  in  fifteen  days.  After  adorning  it
with  gold,  silver,  costly  woods,  and  lapis  lazuli,  he  built
two  great  walls  around  it,  one  of  them  being  constructed
of  stone.

There  is  a  substantial  agreement  between  thisdescrijj-
tion  and  the  description  of  the  Greek  writers. E-sagila,


6.  Native
and  Greek


accounts.


'the  high-headed  temple,'  is  the  temple  of
Belus  ;  the  palace  constructed  in  fifteen
days  is  that  referred  to  by  Josephus  as
having  lx,'en  built  in  the  same  short  period
{A fit.  .\.  11  1).  Nebuchadrezzar  does  not  refer  to  the
reservoir  mentioned  by  the  Greeks ;  but  we  may  recog-
nise it  in  the  'great  waters,  like  the  mass  of  the  seas,'
which  he  carried  round  the  district,  and  designed  for  the
same  purpose — namely,  defence  against  hostile  attack.
The  walls,  Nimitti-Bel  and  Imgur-Bel,  are  the  outer
and  inner  walls  resjx.'ctively,  and  the  latter  may  lie  that
which,  according  to  Herodotus  (above,  §  4),  ran  along
the  banks  of  the  river.  The  hanging  gardens  are  not
referred  to  by  Nebuchadrezzar,  and  it  is  therefore  very
doubtful,  notwithstanding  the  statement  of  Ctesias,
whether  this  king  built  them.  Such  erections  were  not
uncommon  in  Assyria,  and  it  is  even  possible  that  they
were  due  to  the  initiative  of  a  king  of  that  country.
In  the  palace  of  .Asur-b.ani-pal  at  Kuyunjik,  which  was
discovered  and  excavated  by  R;\ssam,  was  a  room  the
bas-reliefs  of  which  were  devoted  to  scenes  illustrating
that  king's  Babylonian  war,  one  of  which  shows  a  garden
laid  out  on  a  slope,  and  continued  alx)ve  on  a  structure
of  vaulted  brickwork,  an  arrangement  fairly  in  accord
with  the  description  of  the  Babylonian  hanging  gardens
given  by  Diodorus  and  Pliny  ;  and  it  is  noteworthy  that
the  latter  attributes  them  to  a  Syrian  (.Assyrian)  king
who  reigned  at  Babylon,  and  built  them  to  gratify  a  wife
whom  he  loved  greatly.  This  bas-relief  was  regarded
by  Sir  Henry  Rawlinson  and  George  Smith  as  repre-
senting the  hanging  gardens  at  Babylon,  and  a  neigh-
bouring sculpture,  which  shows  a  series  of  fortified  walls,
418


BABYLON

three  or  more,  as  well  as  a  palace,  prolxibly  reiiresents
the  walls  of  the  city  as  they  wore  in  the  time  of  Asur-
bani-pal  and  his  brother  Samas-sum-ukin,  with  whom  he
waged  war.  The  palace  has  columns  supported  on  the
backs  of  lions.

A few additional details concerning the city are
given  by  some  of  the  many  contract-tablets  found  on

7  Details  from  ^'"^  ^^^- ^''*-*  ''''^  ^^*^^'  ^°"'*^  °^  ^'^®
'.,  . . canals,  and  the  streets  and roadways

the  contract-  ' , ,  ^ c. .i.

tahl  t  seem to have been named after the

gods.  We  read  of  the  gates  of  Zagaga,
Ninip,  and  Sama.s,  and  of  the  canal  Nar  Hanitum.
Others  of  the  canals  received  the  names  of  the  cities  to
which  they  tlowed  {<:,i,'. ,  the  liorsijipa  canal,  and  the  old
Culhah  canal).  Tlie  tablets  confirm  the  statement  of
Q.  Curtius  that  the  houses  of  the  city  did  not  till  all
the  space  enclosed  by  the  walls,  the  greater  part  of  the
ground  lx?ing  apparently  fields,  gardens,  and  plantations
of  tiate-palnis  and  other  trees,  sufficient  to  furnish  all
the  provisions  that  the  city  needed  in  event  of  siege.
There  is  no  mention,  in  the  native  records,  of  a  bridge
across  the  I'.uphrates,  such  as  is  described  by  the
Greeks;  but  a  contract -tablet  of  the  time  of  Darius
seems  to  refer  to  a  bridge  of  boats.  There  is  no  con-
firmation of  the  statement  that  there  was  a  tunnel  under
the  river.

There  have  been  various  conjectures  as  to  the
identification  of  the  different  ruins  on  the  site  of
Babylon.  Rich  thought  that  the  hang-
ing gardens  were  represented  by  the
mound  known  as  Babil,  and  this  is
the  opinion  of  Rassam,  who  found  there  '  four  ex-
quisitely-built wells  of  red  granite  in  the  S.  portion  of
the  mound.'  They  are  supplied  with  water  from  the
Euphrates,  which  Hows  alxjut  a  mile  away,  and  their
depth  is  about  140  ft. Originally,  he  thinks,  they  were


8.  Identifica-
tions of  ruins.


BABYLONIA

about  50  or  60  ft.  higher.  Rassam  regards  Mujellibeh
as  representing  the  palace  begun  by  Naboix)l:issar  and
finished  by  Nebuchadrezzar  in  fifteen  days.  Remains
of  enamelled  tiles  of  various  colours  and  designs  are
found,  he  says,  only  on  that  spot.  The  Kasr  he  takes
to  l)c  the  remains  of  the  Temple  of  Helus,  though  he
frankly  admits  that  there  are  many  difiiculties  in  the
way  of  this  identification.  As  the  latest  opinions,
carefully  formed  by  one  who  has  frequently  been  on
the  sjx)t,  they  will  probably  be  considered  to  possess
a  special  value.

ihe  two  queens,  Scmiramis  and  Nitocris,  to  whom
so  many  of  the  wonders  of  ancient  Babylon  are  attributed,
are  not  mentioned  on  the  native  monuments  of  the
Babylonians,  as  far  as  we  are  at  present  acquainted
with  them.i  In  all  probability,  the  explanation  of  this
difficulty  is  that  they  suggested  the  erection  of  the
works  in  question,  and  the  reigning  ruler  (probably  their
husbands)  carried  them  out.  Only  careful  exploration
of  the  sites  can  decide  satisfactorily  the  real  nature  of
each  ruin — by  whom  it  was  built,  or  rebuilt,  or  restored
— and  the  changes  that  it  underwent  in  the  course  of
ages.  The  discovery  of  the  wells  at  Babil  seems  to
place  the  nature  of  that  ruin  beyond  doubt,  though
Oppert  [Comptes  Rendus,  1898,  p.  420)  thinks  that  its
distance  from  the  other  remains  is  too  great,  in  view  of
the  fact  that  Alexander,  when  suffering  from  a  mortal
illness,  was  carried  from  the  castle  to  the  baths  and  the
hanging  gardens  (Plut.  Alex.  ch.  76  ;  Arrian,  Exp.  Al.
725).  Much  more  may  be  expected  from  the  German
exj)lorations.

There  is  a  thorough  article  on  the  history  and  the
topography  of  the  city  of  Babylon  in  Pauly-\\'issowa's
Realenc.  der  class.  Alterthumswiss.  ii.  ('96).  On  the
Babylon  of  the  NT  see  Petek,  Epistles  ok,  §  7,  and
cp  Rome.  t.  g.  i*.


Names  and  Description  (§§  1-4).
Language  and  Script  (§§  5-9).
Decipherment  and  Excavation  (§§  10-14).
Architecture  and  Art  (g§  15-18).
Literature  and  Science  (§§  19-24).
Religion,  augury,  etc.  (§§  25-34).


BABYLONIA

CONTENTS

Mythology  and  Legend  (§  35/!).
Chronology  (§§  37-3^).
Historical  Periods  (§  40).
Early  Semitic  Kingdoms  (§  41^).
Sumerlan  Kingdoms  (§§  43-47).
Ur,  etc.  (§§  48-52).


Babylon  (§§  53-70).
Dynasties  a-8  (§8  56-62).
Nabonassar  (S  63).
Assyrian  suzerainty  (§  64).
Neo-Babylonian  Empire  (§§  65-70).
Bibliography  (§  71).


The  country  of  Babylonia,  called  by  classical  writers
BaBy^'^JN''^)  t^kes  its  name  from  that  of  its  principal

1 Names *-"'^-'  "•'^"^■'-"^'  (^•''•'  §  ')• ^"  ^"^^  C»'^
the  city  and  the  country  are  not  sharply

distinguished  ;  both  are  frequently  included  under  the
Hebrew  /33.  In  other  passages  the  country  is  termed
"ITJl/',  Shinar  (see  Shi.nak),  while  in  post-exilic  times
the  whole  nation  are  referred  to  as  D^'^LJ'3,  '  Chal-
daeans,'  and  the  country  as  D'^^'B  ]'1X.  '  the  land
of  the  Chald.vans  ■  (see  Chaluka).  Among  the
Babylonians  themselves  there  was  no  single  name  for
the  whole  country  until  the  third  Babylonian  dynasty
(eighteenth  to  twelfth  century  B.C.),  when  the  Kassite
designation  of  a  portion  of  the  country  as  Karduniash
was  extended  and  adopted  in  the  royal  inscriptions  as  a
general  name  for  the  country, — a  use  of  the  term  that
was  retained  throughout  the  whole  pericxl  of  the  nation's
history.  The  whole  of  Babylonia  could  also  be  expressed
by  the  double  title  Sumer  and  Akkad,  which  the  Baby-
lonians adopted  from  the  previous  non- Semitic  in-
habitants of  the  land,  Akkad  designating  the  northern
half  of  the  country  and  Sumtr  the  southern  half.  The
use  of  the  former  name  was  extended  in  the  Neo-Baby-
lonian i^eriod,  and  the  word  in  such  phrases  as  '  the
king  of  Akkad  '  and  '  the  army  of  Akkad  '  was  emplo)ed
to  designate  the  whole  country.  The  terms  til  rat
arba'im,  'the  four  quarters,'  and  kiHatu,  'the  v.'orld,"
which  occur  in  the  royal  titles  iar  kibrat  arba'im,  '  king


of  the  four  quarters,'  and  lar  kiHafi,  'king  of  the
world,'  were  employed  to  express  extensions  of  the
Babylonian  empire  beyond  the  natural  limits  of  the
country  (cp  Mesopotamia).

The  natural  features  that  bound  the  countr}-  of  Baby-
lonia are  the  Persian  Gulf  on  the  S. ,  the  Arabian  desert

„  _  ...  on  the  W. ,  and  the  Tigris  on  the  E. ,
2.  Description.  ^^.^^^  ^^^  y^^^-^  ^^^^,  ^^^^^-^  ^^  ^^^  ^_

may  be  placed  roughly  at  the  line  where  the  slightly
elevated  plain  to  the  N.  changes  to  the  alluvial  level.
At  the  present  day  Babylonia  in  the  S.  differs  con-
siderably in  size  and  conformation  from  the  ancient
asi)ect  of  the  country.  The  soil  carried  down  by  the
Tigris  and  the  l-.uphrates  is  considerable,  and  the
alluvium  so  formed  at  the  head  of  the  Persian  Gulf
increases  to-day  at  the  rate  of  about  a  mile  in  seventy
years  ;  moreover,  it  is  thought  by  some  that  the  rate
of  formation  was  considerably  more  rapid  in  ancient
times.  Thus  in  the  early  period  of  Babylonian  his-
tory the  Persian  Gulf  extended  some  120  to  130  miles
farther  north  than  it  extends  at  present,  the  Tigris  and
the  Euphrates  each  entering  the  sea  at  a  separate  mouth.
The  country  was  thus  protected  on  the  S.  by  the  sea,
and  on  the  W.  by  the  desert  which,  lising  a  few  feet
above  the  plain  of  Babylonia,  approached  within  thirty
1  On  S.nmnuiramat  tlie  wife  of  Ramman-nirari  (or  Addu-nirari)
III.,  see  AssvRiA,  832.  Apparently  the onl^  queen  who  reigned
in  her  own  right  w.is  Azaga-l!au  or  Hau-cllit,  in  whose  reign  on  ens
similar  to  those  belonging  to  the  time  of  Sargon  of  Agacfc  and
his  son  were  composed. She  belongs  to  a  very  early  period.


I


3.  Cities.


BABYLONIA

miles  of  the  Euphrates  ;  and  il  was  only  from  the  N.
and  E.  sides  that  it  was  ojxin  to  invasion.  From  the
nujuiitainous  country  to  the  K. ,  across  the  Tigris,  the
Kassite  and  Klaniite  tribes  found  it  easy  to  descend
upon  the  fertile  Babylonian  plain,  while  after  the  rise
of  the  Assyrian  empire  the  boundary  between  Assyria
and  Babylonia  was  constantly  in  dispute.

The  principal  cities  of  the  country  were  situated  in
two  jjrouijs  :  one  in  the  north  ;  the  other  in  the  south,
nearer  the  se;i.  The  southernmost  city  was
Eridu,  tlie  modern  Abu-.Shahrein,  situated
on  the  Euphrates  not  far  from  the  ancient  coast-line  of
the  Persian  (iulf.  To  the  W.  of  Abu-Shahrein  the
mound  of  Mukayyar  marks  the  site  of  the  ancient  city
of  Ur  (see  Ur).  Between  the  Tigris  and  the  Euphrates
to  the  NW.  of  Ur  st(wd  Larsam  or  Larsa,  the  modern
Senkereh,  and  to  the  \V.  of  Larsam  the  city  of  Erech,
the  remains  of  which  are  buried  under  the  mounds  of
Warka.  To  the  1',.  of  Warka,  on  the  1 ,.  bank  of  the
Shatt-el-I.Iai,  the  mounds  of  Telloh  ^  represent  the  city
of  Sirpurla,  or  Lagas  (as  it  was  knovsTi  in  the  later
period  of  its  history) ;  the  two  cities,  Isin  and  Maru,
the  Sites  of  which  have  not  yet  been  identified  with
certainty,  complete  the  list  of  the  principal  cities  in
the  S.  The  N.  group  of  cities  consists  of  Babylon,

situated  on  the  Euphrates,  near  the  modern  town  of
Hillah  (see  Babylon)  ;  Borsippa,  marked  by  the  mound
of  Birs-Ximrfid,  not  far  from  Babylon,  on  the  SW.  ;
Cuthah,  the  modern  Tell-Ibrahim  (see  C^uth.xh),  to
the  N.  of  Babylon  ;  Sippar,  the  modern  Abu-Habbah  ;
the  city  of  Kis,  still  nearer  the  metropolis  ;  and  Nippur,
the  modern  NitTer  (the  southernmost  city  of  the  group),
to  the  N.  of  the  Shatt-en-Xil.  The  site  of  the  city  of
Agade,  which  was  in  the  northern  half  of  the  country,
probably  not  far  from  Babylon,  has  not  been  satis-
factorily identified.

The present state of the country differs  consider-
ably from  that  presented  by  it in  ancient  times. All
4  Na.tiira.1 ^"'^'^"'  writers  describe  Babylonia  as  ex-
'  ceedingly  fertile  and  producing  enormous

quantities  of  grain  ;  but  at  the  present  day
long  neglect  of  cultivation  has  rendered  the  greater  part
of  it  an  arid  waste,  varied  in  the  neighbourhood  of  the
rivers  by  large  tracts  of  marsh  land.  There  are  still
visible  throughout  the  country  embankments  and
trenches  which  mark  the  courses  of  ancient  canals,  by
which  the  former  dwellers  in  the  land  regulated  their
abundant  water-supply,  which  w;is  not  allowed  to  swell
the  areas  covered  by  the  swamps,  but  was  utilised  for
the  systematic  irrigation  of  the  country.  The  whole
land,  in  fact,  was  formerly  intersected  by  a  network  of
canals,  and  to  the  systematic  irrigation  of  its  alluvial
soil  may  be  traced  the  secret  of  Babylonia's  former
fertility.

The  principal  products  of  the  country  were  wheat
and  dates.  The  former  gave  an  enormous  return.
The  latter  supplied  the  Babylonians  with  wine,  vinegar,
and  a  species  of  tlour  for  baking  ;  from  the  sap  of  the
date  tree  was  obtainetl  palm-sugar  ;  ropes  were  made
from  its  fibrous  bark,  and  its  wood  furnished  a  light
but  tough  building  material.  Wine  was  also  obtained
from  the  seed  of  the  sesame  plant  :  and  barley,  millet,
and  vetches  were  grown  in  large  quantities.  In  addition
to  the  palm,  the  cypress  was  common  ;  poplars,  acacias,
and  pomegranates  grew  in  the  neighlK)urhoo<l  of  the
streams  ;  but  the  cultivation  of  the  vine,  and  of  oranges,
apples,  and  pears,  was  artificial.  The  enormous  reeds
which  abound  in  the  swamps  were  used  by  the  Baby-
lonians for  the  construction  of  huts  and  light  boats,  and
for  fencing  round  the  fields.

The  domestic  animals  of  the  Babylonians  w^.e  camels,
horses,  oxen,  sheep,  goats,  and  clogs  ;  while  the  lion,
the  wild  ox,  the  wild  boar,  and  the  jackal  were  the
principal  wild  animals  found  in  the  country  ;  gazelles
and  hares  were  not  uncommon  ;  a  great  variety  of  birds
1  Perhaps  =  Tell  L8^.
421


BABYLONIA

haunted  the  marshes  and  the  plains  ;  and  fish,  princi-
pally Ixirbel  and  carp,  were  abundant  in  the  rivers.

The  language  sjKjken  by  both  the  Babylonians  and
the  A.ssyri.uis  is  usually  referred  to  as  'Assyrian.' It

B  Laneuaee  ^'''^"8^  '"  ^^"^  northern  group  of  the
«^^^  *  ^'"'''•'^  languages,  claiming  a  closer
relationship  to  Bhcenician,  Hebrew
(see  Hkbrew  La.sgi;A(;k),  Syriac,  and  the  other  Ara-
maic dialects  (see  Aramaic  LAN<;f.\GK),  than  to  the
niore  southern  group,  which  comprises  the  Sabwan  or
Himyaritic,  the  Arabic,  and  the  Ethiopic  tongues.  But
while  in  its  non\inal  and  verbal  formations  it  exhibits
the  Semitic  idea  of  inflection  from  roots,  and  while
those  roots  themselves  are  found  in  the  other  Semitic
languages,  it  has  Ix;en  subjected  to  a  stronger  foreign
infiuence  and  has  assimilated,  to  an  extent  that  is  not
met  with  in  any  other  of  the  Semitic  languages,  a
considerable  body  of  non-.Semitic  words  and  expres-
sions. The  influence  exerted  by  the  previous  inhabit-
ants of  Babylonia  upon  their  Semitic  conquerors  was
indelible,  and  throughout  their  whole  literature,  especi-
ally in  their  mythological  and  religious  compositions,
words  of  non-Semitic  origin  are  constantly  met  with.

The  language  possessed  the  vowel  sounds,  a,a,  e,  e,  i,  I,  u,  u,

and  the  consonantal  sounds  b,  g,  d,  z,  h,  (,  k,  I,  ni,  n,  s,  p,  s,  k,

r,  .?,  and  t,  representing  the  Hebrew  2,  J,  1,  I,  n

6.  Sounds,  (u.,  c),  £3,  3,  L,,  a,  j,  o,  b,  s,  p,  n,  p,  and  n-

The  existence  of  the  e  sound  in  Assyrian  has
been  questioned,  and  it  is  true  that  the  signs  containing  e
and  /  are  constantly  interchanged ;  but  tliat  the  e  sound
was  used,  at  least  for  a  certain  period,  may  be  regarded  as
practically  certain,  for  not  only  is  it  required  to  explain  cer-
tain vowel-changes  which  occur,  but  it  is  also  vouched  for  by
the  Greek  and  Hebrew  forms  of  certain  Babylonian  words,  and
by  the  occurrence  of  some  twelve  signs  in  the  syllabary,  the
existence  of  which  is  more  naturally  explained  by  the  supposi-
tion that  they  contain  the  vowel  e,  than  by  the  assumption  that
they  are  merely  duplicates  for  certain  other  signs  which  un-
doubtedly contain  the  vowel  /.  The  pronunciation  of  the
consonants  is  in  the  main  the  same  as  that  of  the  equi\alent
consonants  in  Hebrew.  With  regard  to  the  pronunciation  of
the  consonants  i^,  p-,  d,  i,/,  and  /,  it  is  possible  that  in  Assyrian,
as  in  Hebrew  and  Aramaic,  they  were  pronounced  as  spirants
when  coming  between  two  vowel  sounds  ;  in  writing,  however,
no  distinction  is  indicated.  It  may  be  noted,  that,  while  the
Assyrians  made  no  distinction  in  their  pronunciation  of  Jt  and
^,  the  Babylonians  pronounced  the  latter  as  ^;  that  among
the  later  Babylonians,  at  least,  m  appears  to  have  been  pro-
nounced as  71 ;  and  that  the  pronunciation  of  jby  the  .Assyrians
gradually  approximated  to  s.  The  Semitic  sounds  represented
by  the  Hebrew  consonants  jj,  ri,  !>  n{'-^-,  C)i  '  ^"d  y  (/.(•.,  ^
and  ^),  are  not  distinguished  in  the  A.ssyrian  syllabary,  as  will
be  apparent  from  the  following  examples  given  in  transliteration,
the  equivalent  roots  in  Hebrew  or  .\rabic  being  added  in  paren-
theses :  akdlu,  '  to  eat '  (Sdn)  ;  aldku,  'to  go '  (-jSi)  :  cdeshu,
'  to  be  new '  (cinn)  :  eberu,  '  to  cross '  {y^) ;  erebu,  '  to  enter '
(s^y^) ;  alddu,  '  to  bear '  (i"?!) ;  and  eniku,  '  to  suck '  (py).  That
these  sounds  were  not  distinguished  is  due  to  the  fact  that  the
Babylonians  did  not  originate  their  own  system  of  writing,  but
borrowed  the  system  they  found  in  use  among  the  eanier  in-
habitants of  the  country.

This  method  of  writing  has  been  termed  '  cuneiform,'
since  the  wedge  ( Latin  cuneus)  forms  the  biisis  of  the
_  -m-iiin-  written  character  in  the  later  periods
*■  of  its  development.  Each  character
or  sign,  in  faci,  consists  of  a  single  wedge,  or  is
made  up  of  different  kinds  of  wedges  in  various
combinations,  the  wedges  of  most  common  occurrence
being  the  upright  wedge  ]f,  the  horizontal  wedge  »— ,  and
the  arrow  head  \,  while  the  sloping  wedges  \»  ^,  and
y  Occur  in  several  characters.  The  characters  are
written  from  left  to  right,  and,  except  in  some  poetical  com-
positions, no  space  is  necessarily  left  between  the  words  ;
every  line,  however,  with  one  or  two  isolated  exceptions,
ends  with  a  complete  word.  The  following  Assyrian
signs  will  serve  to  illustrate  some  of  the  methods  of  com-
biijation  adopted  in  the  formation  of  the  later  char-
acters:  >f ,  >^,  ^-VT,  ._£Yy,  ^T,  ^^ffl  ^T.
tz]^^,  <]^,  ■:J«^y,  ^^^  Jgy^. In  the  earliest  forms


BABYLONIA

of  the  writing,  however,  there  is  no  trace  of  the  wedge  :

_  . . the characters consist of straight lines.

8.  Ungin. ,j.j^jg  jg  j^jg  ^^  jj^^.  f^^^  ^Yiai  cuneiform  was

merely  a  descendant  of  a  system  of  picture-writing.

In  the  case  of  many  of  the  ch.nracters  which  occur  in  the  mcst
ancient  inscriptions  it  is  still  nossihle  to  recognise  the  original
i  which  underlie  ihem. For  example  the  sign  for 'heaven,'


'god.'  'high,'  is  a  st.ir  with  eight  points,  or  possibly  a  circle
intersected  by  four  diameters;  the  sign  for  'sun 'is  a  rough
circle  representing  the  sun's  disk  ;  the  sign  for  'ox  '  is  the  head
of  an  ox  with  horns  ;  the  sign  for  '  grain  '  is  an  ear  of  corn.

All  the  characters,  however,  did  not  descend  from  pictures.
Some  were  formed  artificially  by  combination.  Thus  the  sign
for  '  water '  when  pl.iced  within  that  for  '  mouth '  gave  a  now
sign  with  the  meaning  '  to  drink '  ;  the  sign  for  food  placed
within  the  sign  for  '  mouth '  gave  a  sign  with  the  meaning  '  to
eat '  ;  the  sign  for  '  wild-ox '  was  formed  by  placing  the  sign  for
'  mountain  '  within  that  for  '  ox  ' ;  while  other  signs  were  formed
by  writing  a  char.icter  twice  or  three  times.  Moreover,  it  is  pos-
sible thai  the  artificial  formation  of  characters  was  customary  to
a  con^i<lL•r.^ble  extent.  According  to  a  theory  recently  put
forward  by  I  )elilzsch,l  certain  strokes  and  combinations  of  strokes
to  be  traced  in  the  oldest  forms  of  many  of  the  characters  had  a
meaning  inherent  in  themselves^  and  formed  the  motive  on  the
basis  of  which  the  signs  containing  them  were  developed.  This
question,  however,  is  one  on  which  it  is  impossible  to  form  a
conclusion  until  more  of  the  inscriptions  of  the  earliest  period,
recently  discovered,  have  been  published.

In  the  later  forms  which  the  characters  assumed  the  original
lines  g.-ive  way  to  wedges  from  the  fact  that  the  scribes  employed
extensively  soft  cl.ny  instead  of  stone  as  a  material  on  which  to
write.  .V  line  formed  by  a  single  pressure  of  the  style  naturally
assumed  the  form  of  a  wedge,  while  the  increased  clearness
and  uniformity  which  resulted  secured  for  the  wedge  its  final
.-idoption.  In  addition  to  the  changes  which  occurred  in  the
forms  of  the  characters,  there  was  a  development  in  their  signifi-
cation. Originally  representing  complete  words  or  ideas,  they
were  gradually  employed  to  express  the  sounds  of  the  words
tb'.>y  represented  .-ipart  from  their  meaning ;  and  thus  were
developed  their  syllabic  values.

The  Babylonians  adopted  this  method  of  writing  from

_. . . the  non-Semitic  race  (see  below,  g§  43,

9.  rrmciples. ^^  ^^^  ^^.,^^__^^  ^j^^.^.  ^^^^^^^j  -^^  possession  of

the  country,  and  they  adapted  the  system  to  their  own
idiom.

To  characters  or  groups  of  characters  representing  Sumerian
words  they  assigned  the  Semitic  words  which  were  equivalent
to  them  in  meaning  ;  they  also  employed  the  signs  phonetically,
the  sylLibles  they  represented  consisting  either  of  a  vowel  and
a  consonant  (simple  syllables) — e.g:,  ha,  id,  su  —  or  of  a  vowel
between  two  consonants  (compound  syllables)— (r.^.,w/rt!/,^vV,  /«/.
The  system  w.os  further  complicated  by  the  fact  that  the  majority
of  signs  were  polyphonous — that  is  to  say,  they  had  more  than
one  syllabic  value  and  could  be  used  as  ideograms  for  more  than
one  word.  A  sign,  therefore,  might  be  used  in  one  of  three  ways  :
as  a  syllable  in  a  word  written  phonetically,  or  as  an  ideogram
for  a  complete  word,  or  as  one  sign  in  a  group  of  two  or  more
signs  which  together  formed  an  ideogram  fur  a  complete  word.

That  this  mixed  method  of  ideographic  and  phonetic  writing
was  often  found  ambiguous  is  attested  by  the  methods  which  the
Babylonians  took  to  simplify  it.  (i)  One  of  these  methods  con-
sisted in  adding  to  a  word  what  has  been  termed  its  determina-
tive, a  sign  attached  to  a  word  to  indicate  the  class  of  thing  to
which  it  refers.  Thus  a  special  sign  was  placed  before  male  proper
names,  another  before  female  proper  names ;  the  sign  for  '  god '
was  placed  before  the  names  of  deities;  the  sign  for  'country'
regularly  preceded  the  names  of  countries  ;  similar  determinatives
were  used  before  the  names  of  cities,  mountains,  rivers,  tribes,
professions,  woods,  plants,  stones,  garments,  vessels^  certain
animals,  the  names  of  the  months,  stars,  etc.,  while  in  a  few
classes  the  determinative  is  placed  after  the  word,  as  in  the  case
of  places,  birds,  fish,  etc.  A  determinative  was  never  pro-
nounced :  it  was  designed  only  as  a  guide  to  the  reader,  indicating
the  character  of  the  word  it  accompanied.  (2)  Another  aid  to
the  reader  consisted  in  adding  to  an  ideogram  what  has  been
termed  \\^  phonetic  complement — that  is  to  say,  the  final  syllable
of  the  word  for  which  it  is  intended.  By  this  means  the  reader
is  not  only  assisted  in  assigning  the  correct  word  to  the  ideogram,
but  also,  in  the  case  of  verbs,  is  enabled  to  detect  with  greater
ease  the  stem  and  tense  intended  by  the  writer.  Even  with  this
assistance,  the  writing,  with  its  list  of  more  than  five  hundred
characters,  was  necessarily  complicated.  The  use  of  ideograms
was  never  entirely  given  up,  and,  although  in  the  Neo-H.-iby-
lonian  period  simple  syllables  were  employed  in  preference  to
compound  syllables,  the  Assyrians  and  Babylonians  never
attained  the  further  development  of  an  alphabet.

The  dccii)herment of  the  Assyrian  and  Babylonian
.  inscriptions  resulted  from the labours

10.  Decipher- ^^  scholars  who  had  previously  devoted
ment.  themselves  to  the  interpretation  of  the

cuneiform  inscriptions  in  old  Persian.

From  the  sixth  to  the  fourth  century  B.C.  the  Persians  made

1  Die  Entstekuf^  des  iltesten  Schri/lsystems  (Leipsic,  1897).

423


BABYLONIA

use  for  their  inscriptions  of  a  character  which  they  had  borrowed
originally  from  the  Babylonians.  Other  nations  of  W.  Asia  al.so,
such  as  the  Su.sians  and  the  people  dwelling  around  Lake  Van,
borrowed  from  Babylon  the  idea  of  cuneiform  writing,  in  some
cases  making  use  of  the  Babylonian  characters,  in  others  modif>--
ing  them  to  a  greater  or  less  extent.  'Ihe  changes  introduced
by  the  Persians  when  they  borrowed  the  idea  of  writing  by  means
of  wedges  were  considerable,  for,  instead  of  employing  a  sign-list
of  several  hundred  characters  representing  syllables  and  complete
words,  they  confined  themselves  to  thirty -nine,  each  of  which
represented  a  single  alphabetic  value.  Of  the  various  systems
of^  cuneiform  writing,  therefore,  the  Persian  was  by  far  the
simplest.  The  Achaemenian  kings  who  ruled  in  Persia  at  this
period  numbered  among  their  siibjects  the  peoples  of  Susia  and
Babylonia,  these  countries  having  by  conquest  been  added  to
their  empire.  When,  therefore,  they  set  up  an  inscription
recording  their  campaigns  or  building  operations,  they  aaded,
by  the  side  of  the  Persian  text,  Susian  and  Babylonian  transla-
tions inscribed  in  the  cuneiform  characters  employed  by  these
two  nations.  There  are  thus  engraved  on  the  palaces  and  rocks
of  Persia  trilingual  inscriptions  in  the  old  Persian,  Susian,  and
Babylonian  characters,  and  it  will  be  obvious  that  as  soon  as
one  of  these  three  characters  could  be  read  the  way  would  be
opened  for  the  decipherment  of  the  other  two.  Of  the  three
the  Persian,  with  its  comparatively  small  number  of  signs,  is
(as  we  have  said)  the  simplest,  and  it  was  therefore  natural  that
it  was  the  first  to  attract  the  serious  attention  of  scholars.

C.rotefend,  in  a  paper  published  in  1802,  supplied  the  key  to  a

correct  method  of  decipherment. Taking  two  short  inscriptions

in  the  old  Persi.-in  character  which  Niebuhr

11.  Grotefend.  had  copied  at  Persepolis,  he  submitted  them

to  an  analysis.  The  inscriptions,  he  found,
coincided  throughout,  with  the  exception  of  certain  groups  of
characters,  which,  he  conjectured,  might  represent  proper  names.
On  this  assumption  each  inscription  contained  two  proper  names,
the  name  of  the  king  who  set  it  up,  and,  it  might  be  supposed,
that  of  his  father.  IJut  the  name  which  occurred  first  in  one
inscription  was  the  name  which  stood  second  in  the  other— that
is  to  say,  the  three  different  groups  of  characters  must  represent
the  names  of  three  monarchs  following  one  another  in  direct
succession.  From  the  fact  that  the  inscriptions  were  found  in
the  ruins  of  Persepolis  it  might  be  concluded  th.it  their  writers
were  Persi.in  kings;  and  when  he  applied,  by  way  of  experi-
ment, the  three  names  Hystaspes,  Darius,  and  Xerxes,  he  found
that  they  fitted  the  characters  admirably.  On  his  further  de-
ciphering the  name  of  Cyrus  he  obtained  correct  values  for  more
than  a  quarter  of  the  alphabet.

Of  the  forty  Persian  signs,  of  which  one  is  merely  a  diagonal
stroke  employed  for  dividing  the  words  from  one  another,  Grote-
fend's  first  alphabet  included  thirty.  He  subsequently  sug-
gested values  for  thirty-five  characters ;  but  he  did  not  improve
upon  his  original  alphabet.  He  correctly  identified  a,  u,  d,  p,
/,  r,  s,  and  / ;  his  values  kh,  dj,  and  tli  were  practically  correct ;
and  his  v  was  not  far  off  the  correct  value  h.  About  1822  St.
Martin  took  up  the  investigation,  working  at  the  decipherment
for  the  next  ten  years,  but  without  much  result ;  he  identified  /  and
V,  however,  and  for  the  \oweI  /,  which  had  been  read  as  o  by
Grotefend,  he  gave  the  improved  reading^'.  The  characters  for  /«
and  «  were  identified  by  Kask  in  1826,  and  Burnouf  in  his  memoir,
published  ten  years  later,  identified  k,  b,  and  s,  while  his  readings
q  andjf  A  for  two  other  characters  were  great  improvements  on  the
suggestions  of  Grotefend  and  Sl  ftlartin.  In  the  same  year
Lassen  produced  his  first  alphaliet,  improvements  on  which  he
published  in  1839  and  1844,  in  a  few  cases  m.iking  use  of  the  sug-
gestions of  Jacquet  and  Beer  which  had  been  published  soon
after  the  jippearance  of  his  first  alphabet.  He  suggested  correct
readings  for  at  least  ten  characters,  and  improved  readings  of
some  others.  This  final  alphabet  did  not  contain  many  incorrect
identifications.  The  scholar  who  did  most,  however,  for

the  decipherment  of  the  cuneiform  inscriptions  was  the  late  Sir
Henry  Rawlinson. He  first  turned  his  attention  to  the  subject
in  1835,  when  stationed  at  Kirmanshah,_  on

12.  Rawlinson. the  western  frontier  of  Persia. At  that  time

he  had  only  heard  of  Grotefend's  discover^- ;
he  had  not  seen  a  copy  of  his  alphabet,  and  did  not  even  know
on  what  inscriptions  it  had  been  based.  Thus  he  began  the
work  of  decipherment  from  the  beginning.  For  his  first  analysis
he  took  two  short  inscriptions  similar  to  those  u.sed  for  the
purpose  by  Grotefend,  which  yielded  him  the  names  of  Hys-
taspes, Darius,  and  Xerxes.  During  the  next  year  he  had
increased  his  list  of  names  by  the  correct  identification  of
Arsames,  Ariamnes,  Teispes,  Acha:menes,  and  Persia.  It  was
not  until  the  autumn  of  1836  that  he  first  had  an  opportunity  of
seeing  the  works  of  Grotefend  and  St.  Martin.  Then  he  pcr-
ceivea  that  his  own  alphabet,  based  as  it  was  on  longer  in-
scriptions, was  far  in  advance  of  the  results  obtained  by  them.
In  1837  he  copied  the  greater  part  of  the  long  inscription  at
Behistun,  containing  the  annals  of  D.irius,  and  forwarded  a
translation  of  the  first  two  paragraphs  to  the  Royal  .\siatic
Society ;  but  next  summer,  while  at  Teheran,  he  heard  that
Burnouf's  publication  had  meanwhile  anticipated  many  of
his  improvements.  In  the  autumn  of  1838  he  obtained  the
published  copies  of  the  Persepolitan  inscriptions,  and  with  the
help  of  the  allied  languages  of  Sanscrit  and  Zend,  analysed
every  word  in  the  inscriptions  that  had  up  to  that  time  been
copied.  He  then  found  that  Lassen's  alphabet  confirmed  many
of  nis  own  conclusions ;  but  he  obtained  assistance  from  it  in  the
case  of  only  one  character.

4=4


BABYLONIA

It  will  ihus  be  seen  that  Rawlinson  worked  out  the  characters
of  the  Persian  alphal>et  for  hiiiiNcIf  independently  of  his  prede-
cessors and  c<mlenii).>raries ;  but  it  was  not  on  this  achievement
that  he  himself  based  his  title  to  originality.  He  justly  claimji
that,  whereas  his  predecessors  had  succeeded  only  in  reading  a
few  proper  names  and  royal  titles,  he  had  l>ecn  the  first  to  present
to  tne  world  a  correct  grammatical  translation  of  over  two
hundred  lines  of  cuneiform  writing.  This  translation  was  in  the
hands  of  the  Royal  Asiatic  Soi.iety,  and  was  being  prepared  for
publication  in  1839,  when  his  duties  in  Afghanistan  put  an  end
to  his  studies  for  some  years.  It  was  not  until  1845  that  he
found  leisure  to  complete  the  work,  in  which  year  he  published
his  memoir  containing  a  complete  translation  of'^the  whole  Persian
text  of  the  Behistun  inscription.'

Now  that  he  had  completed  the  decipherment  of  the
old  Persian  cuneiform  inscriptions,  Rawlinson  turned
_  .  his  attention  to  the  Mahylonian  cuneiform.
■  .  ^  .\  comparison  of  the  third  column  of  the
Hehi.->tun  inscription  with  the  now  known
Persian  text  occurring  in  the  first  column  w;is  the
starting-point  of  his  studies,  and  in  1851  he  published
the  text  and  translation  of  the  liahylonian  part  of  this
inscription,  at  the  same  time  demonstrating  the  fact  that
the  Babylonian  characters  were  polyphonous.  The  his-
torical inscriptions  on  cylinders,  slabs,  and  stelai  that
had  l)een  found  in  Assyria  and  Babylonia  meanwhile
atTorded  ample  material  for  study,  and  other  workers
lent  their  aid  in  the  decipherment.  In  the  years  1849-
1852  Hincks  contributed  papers  to  the  Royal  Irish
Academy.  His  most  important  discovery  was  the
tietermination  of  the  syllabic  nature  of  Babylonian  writ-
ing. Subse<iuently  Rawlinson,  Hincks,  Xorris,  and
OpiJert,  while  devoting  themselves  to  the  further  interpre-
tation of  the  historical  inscriptions,  classified  the  principal
grammatical  rules  of  the  language,  and  so  brought  the
work  of  decipherment  to  an  end.

The  earliest  explorers  of  Babylonia  did  not  undertake
systematic  excavation.  They  devoted  themselves  to
14  Exeava  surveying  and  describing  the  ruins  that
tiona  were  still  visible  upon  the  surface. Tiie

most  valuable  memoirs  on  the  subject
are  those  on  the  site  of  Babylon  compiled  by  Rich,  who
from  1808  till  1821  was  the  H(mi.  IC;ist  India  Company's
resident  at  B.agdad.  Systematic  excavations  were

first  undertaken  in  Babylonia  during  the  years  1849-55,
under  the  direction  of  Sir  Henry  Rawlinson  assisted  by
Loftus  and  Taylor.

In  1854  Rawlinson  excavated  at  Hits  Nimrfid  near  the
Euphrates  a  few  miles  SW.  of  Hillah,  a  mound  that  marks  the  site
of  a  great  zikkurrat  erected  by  Nebuchadrezzar  II.  within  the
Ixiundaries  of  the  .ancient  city  of  Borsippa.  Here,  in  addition
to  tracing  the  plan  of  the  building,  he  found  fine  cylinders
recording  Nebuchadrezzar's  building  operations.  He  also  suc-
cessfully excavated  the  mounds  I<:asr  and  Biibil,  to  the  N.  of
Hillah,  within  the  site  of  ancient  Babylon  ;  and  during  the  same
period  excavations  were  conducted  at  the  mound  of  NiflTc-r
to  the  SE.  of  Hillah,  marking  the  site  of  the  ancient  city  of
Nippur,  and  in  H.  Babylonia  at  the  mounds  of  Warka,  the  site
of  Erech,  Senkereh  the  site  of  Larsa,  and  Mukayyar  the
site  of  Ur.  While  Rawlinson  was  carrying  on  these  extensive
excavations,  the  French  furnished  an  expedition  which  was
placed  under  the  direction  of  Kresnel  and  Oppert,  and  during
the  years  1851-54  did  valuable  .service,  especially  in  surveying
and  describing  the  site  of  the  ancient  city  of  Babylon.  In  1878
the  Trustees  of  the  British  Mu.seum  again  undertook  systematic
excavations,  which  were  continued  down  to  the  year  1883  under
the  direction  of  their  agent  H.  Rassam.  Excavations  were
undertaken  in  the  neighbourhood  of  Hillah,  at  Tell-Ibrahim,  the
site  of  the  ancient  city  of  Cuthah,  and  at  Abu-Habbah,  the  site
of  Sippar,  where  exceedingly  rich  finds  of  tablets  and  cylin<lers
^'•^'■c  "jaJe.  The  various  expeditions  of  George  Smith  and  E.
A.  Wallis  Budge  resulted  in  the  recovery  of  many  Babylonian
inscriptions.  The  French  have  obtained  rich  finds  of  sculptures
arid  inscriptions  of  the  early  period  at  Telloh,  in  consequence  of
the  exertions  of  de  .S.-\rzec,  who,  since  his  appointment  as  French
\'c<=-consul  at  Ba.s.sorah  (Basra)  in  1877,  has  devoted  himself  to
the  thorough  excavation  of  tlie  mounds  that  mark  the  site  of  the
ancient  city  of  Sirpurla.  The  most  recent  excavations  are  those
of  the  .Americans  at  NifTer,  which  were  begun  in  1888;  they
were  atily  conducted  by  Haynes,  and  have  only  recently  lieen
di.scontmued.

With  the  exception  of  those  at  Telloh,  the  mounds

of  B.abylonia,  unlike  those  of  A.s.SYKi.A  (</.j'.,  §  10),  do

not  j-ield  many  sculptures  or  reliefs  ;  but  the  excavations

have  enabled  us  to  trace  the  history  of  the  brick-built

1  SctJRASXQ.


BABYLONIA

palaces  and  temples,  whihr  the  '  fmds '  comprise  votive
tablets  of  stone  and  inscrilx.-d  alabaster  vases,  buildiitg-
inscriptions  u|x>n  cylinders,  and  thousands  of  inscrilied
clay  tablets,  many  of  which  are  of  grc-at  literar)-,  his-
torical, and  scientific  interest.

As  the  soil  of Babylonia is alluvial, it is entirely
without  metals,  and  even  without  stone,  lx>th  of  which

IB  Buildinir  had  to  l^e  imported  from  other  countries.
*••  This  scarcity  of  stone  had  a  consider-
able intiueiice  on  the  character  of  Babylonian  architecture.
The  difficulties  of  trans|x>rt  prohibited  its  adoption  as
a  building  material  except  to  a  very  small  extent,  and
as  excellent  clay  was  obtainable  throughout  the  whole
of  Babylonia,  all  the  temples  and  jxilaces  as  well  as
private  dwellings  were  com[X3sed  throughout  of  brick.
The  bricks  were  of  two  kinds,  baked  and  unbaketl.
The  former,  though  merely  dried  in  the  sun,  formed  a
serviceable  building-material,  and  in  some  cases  entire
buildings  are  com|)ose<l  of  them.  The  usual  practice,
however,  was  to  build  the  greater  part  of  the  structure
of  sun-dried  bricks  and  then  to  face  it  with  bricks
dried  in  the  kiln,  the  thin  layer  of  harder  material
on  the  surface  protecting  the  whole  structure  from
rain  and  flood  and  change  of  temjjerature.  Buildings
of  unburnt  brick  were  often  strengthened  by  thick  layers
of  matting  composed  of  reeds,  while  the  interior  struc-
ture of  faced  walls  was  in  some  cases  strengthened  at
intervals  by  courses  of  baked  brick.  The  bricks  them-
selves vary  considerably  in  size.  Many  of  them  were
stamped  with  the  name  of  the  king  for  who.se  use  they
were  made,  which  lends  considerable  aid  in  settling  the
date  and  history  of  many  structures.  For  binding  llu-
bricks  together  two  kinds  of  cement  were  emplovi.-d,  tlx-
one  consisting  of  bitumen,  the  other  of  [jlain  clay  or
miul,  in  some  cases  intermixed  with  chopjx'd  straw.
The  latter  was  used  the  more  extensively,  bitumen  lx.'ing
employed  only  where  there  was  sjx-cial  need  of  strength,
as  at  the  base  of  a  building  where  injury  from  rain  was
to  l)e  feared  (see  Bitumkn).  Conduits  of  baked  bricks
were  employed  for  carrying  off  the  water  from  the
larger  buildings  (see  also  Brick,  §  4).

The  [)rincipal  building  with  the  B.ibylonians  was  the
zikkurralu or temple, consisting  of a lofty structure

16.  Temples. "''"S '" huge stages one' al>ove the
*^  other,  composed  for  the  most  part  of

solid  brick  and  ascended  by  a  slairca.se  on  the  outside  ;
the  image  of  the  god  to  whom  it  w;is  dedicated  was
placed  in  the  shrine  at  the  top.  The  remains  of  these
tem[)Ie-towers  at  the  present  day  are  co\ered  by  huge
mounds  of  earth  and  debris,  and  thus  it  is  difficult  to
trace  their  plan  and  estimate  their  original  dimensions.
The  larger  ones,  however,  have  Ixvn examined  at  different
times.  That  at  Warka,  which  at  the  present  day  rises
more  than  a  hundred  feet  above  the  plain,  measures
some  two  hundred  feet  scjuare  at  its  base,  and  consisted
of  at  least  two  stories.  The  temple  at  Mukayyar  is
built  on  a  platform  raised  alwut  twenty  feet  al)ove  the
plain  ;  it  is  in  the  form  of  a  parallelogram,  the  sides
measuring  198  ft.  and  133  ft.,  and  the  angles  pointing
to  the  cardinal  points.  Only  two  stories  are  at  present
traceable,  of  which  the  lower  one  is  strengthenetl  by
buttresses.  The  upjjer  story  does  not  rise  from  the
centre  of  the  lower,  but  is  built  rather  at  one  end.
There  are  s;\id  to  have  lieen  traces  on  it,  at  the  Ix^u'inning
of  the  century,  of  the  chanil)er  or  shrine  which  may
have  originally  contained  the  image  of  the  god.  The
zikkurrat  at  Nippur  is  of  a  somewhat  simil.ar  construc-
tion. It  is  built  in  the  form  of  a  parallelogram,  on
the  NW.  edge  of  a  large  platform,  the  four  corners
also  pointing  to  the  four  cartlinal  points.  In  this  temple
three  stages  have  l)cen  traced,  and  it  is  not  probable
that  there  were  more.  In  the  later  Babylonian  period  the
number  of  stages  was  increased,  .as  in  the  temple  of  Bel
or  Marduk  at  Babylonia,  and  that  of  Nabu  at  Borsippa.
both  of  which  were  finally  rebuilt  with  great  magnificence
by  Nebuchadrezzar  H.  (see  B.abyi.on,  Nkblxhad-
426


BABYLONIA

RKZ/.ak).  Rising  on  their  platforms  high  alx)ve  the
houses  of  the  city  and  the  surrounding  plain,  these
ancient  temples  must  have  been  impressive,  though  in  the
early  period  they  were  entirely  without  ornament  or  colour.

The  remains  of  but  few  Babylonian  palaces  have
been  unearthed,  that  at  Telloh  being  the  one  liolonging
Oth  ^'^  ^^^  early  jjeriod  that  has  been  most
h  id'  ^a  •''ystematically  excavated,  while  the  finest
°  '  example  of  the  later  period  is  the  palace  of
Nebucliadrezzar  at  liabylon  with  its  hanging  gardens
(see  Habvi.un,  §  5/  ).  Of  the  domestic  architecture  of
the  Babylonians  not  many  remains  have  been  recovered.

The  site  from  which  the  finest  examples  of  early
Babylonian art have  liecn obtained is  Telloh, where

m  Ar+  excavations  have  afTorded  evidence  of  an
art  so  highly  developed  that  its  origin
must  be  set  back  at  least  2000  years  lx;fore  the  con-
solidation of  the  Semitic  kingdom  of  Babylonia  (see
Iwlow,  §  54).  Large  seated  statues,  in  diorite,  of  Ur-
Bau  and  (iudea,  carved  in  the  round,  stone  slabs  and
plates  sculptured  in  relief,  small  figures  and  carvings
in  marble,  stone,  ivory,  and  bronze,  bronze  and  silver
vessels,  cylinder-seals,  and  ornaments  of  various  kinds
attest  the  skill  of  these  early  Sumerian  artists,  who  were
the  teachers  of  the  Semites  by  whom  they  were  eventu-
ally displaced.

.'\t  a  later  period  the  Babylonians  ornamented  the
interior  of  their  jmlaces  and  houses  by  covering  the
brickwork  with  plaster,  on  which  they  painted  ;  or  they
coated  the  walls  with  enamelled  bricks.  The  develop-
ment of  sculpture,  however,  unlike  that  of  Assyria,  was
hampered  by  the  lack  of  material  in  which  to  work,  and
it  is  not  surprising  that  the  carvings  that  have  come
down  to  us  never  approach  the  level  attained  by  the
reliefs  of  the  later  Assyrian  kings.

Of  the  many  thousands  of  Babylonian  and  Assyrian
inscriptions  that  have  l)een  recovered  only  a  small
,- ,.. .  i)roportion  can  be  classified  as  literature

19.  Literattire.  • ., . .  r.u .  t^ u

in  the  strict  sense  of  the  term. Perhaps

the  largest  section  of  the  inscriptions  consists  of  the
contract  tablets,  which  throw  an  interesting  light  on  the
social  and  commercial  life  of  the  people,  but  in  no
single  instance  can  be  regarded  as  of  literary  value.  ^
Similarly  the  many  texts  of  a  magical  and  astrological
nature  (see  below,  §  33/.),  tablets  containing  forecasts
and  omens,  tablets  prescribing  offerings  and  ceremonies
to  be  performed  before  the  gods  (§  30),  can  hardly  take
rank  as  literature,  though  their  classification  and  study
is  leading  to  a  more  accurate  knowledge  of  Babylonian
religion  and  belief;  while  the  great  body  of  letters  and
despatches  dealing  with  both  public  and  private  affairs,
written  as  most  of  them  are  in  a  terse,  abbreviated
style,  are  worthy  of  study  from  a  philological  rather
than  a  literary  standpoint.'*

When  all  these  deductions  have  been  made,  however,
there  remains  a  considerable  number  of  texts  on  the  basis
of  which  the  liabylonians  and  Assyrians  may  justly  lay
claim  to  the  possession  of  a  literature  consisting  of  both


20.  Poetry.


poetry  and  prose. The  [principal  examples


of  Babylonian  poetry  are  presented  by  the
legends, 3  the  m.ajority  of  which  are  written  throughout  in
metre,  by  mythological  and  religious  compositions  and
penitential  psalms,  many  of  which  are  composed  in
Sumerian  with  interlinear  Assyrian  translations,  and  by
the many prayers, hymns, incantations, and litanies

1  See  Oppert  and  Menant,  Documents  juridiquts  (Paris,
1877);  Strassmaier,  Bah.  '/V.r/?  (Leipsic,  1899,  etc.);  Melssner,
Beitr.  sum  althah.  Privatrtcht  (I^eipsic,  1893)  ;  and  A7)  4.

2  See  BucIkc  and  Hezold,  I'cll  ct-Aniarnn  7ViM'/j  (London,
T892);  Hezold,  Oriental  Diplomacy  (London,  1893);  KBh\
Del.  Beitr.  z.  Assyr.  1  ;  and  R.  F.  Harper,  Assyrian  and  Baby-
lonian Letters  (IjCtniXon,  1892,  etc.).

'  See  George  Smith,  Chaldean  Genesis  (London,  1B80):
IV.  R;  Haupt,  Ba6.  Nimrodepcs  (Leipsic,  1884);  E.  T.
Harper,  Beitr.  z.  Assyr.  2  ;  Jeremias,  Izdubar  Nimrod  (Leip-
sic, 1891);  Jensen,  Kostnologie  (StrassburR,  189-1);  Zimniern  in
Gunkel's  .Schspf.  (Oott.,  1895);  and  I>el.  Abh.  d.  KSnigl.
sacks.  Gesells.  d.  Hiss.,  Bd.  17,  n.  a  ('96).

427


BABYLONIA

which  occur  on  tablets  by  themselves,  or  are  preserved
in  the  ritual  texts  intersjjerscd  with  directions  for  the
performance  of  ceremonies. '  1 1  has  long  been  recognised
that  Babylonian  ixjctical  compositions,  like  those  of  the
Hebrews,  are  written  in  a  rough  metre  consisting  of
verse  and  half-verse,  the  Babylonian  scriljes  frequently
emphasising  the  central  division  of  the  verse  in  the  com-
positions they  copied  by  writing  its  two  halves  in  separate
columns.  More  recently  it  has  Ixjen  pointed  out"'*  that
in  many  compositions,  in  addition  to  this  central  division,
each  verse  is  divided  by  a  definite  number  of  accented
syllables  or  rhythmical  Ijeats.

The  feet  or  divisions  so  formed  do  not  contain  a  fixed  number
of  syllables,  but  consi.st  of  a  single  word  tr  of  not  more  than  two
or  three  short  words  closely  connected  with  each  other,  such  as
prepositions  and  the  substantives  to  which  they  are  attached,
words  joined  by  the  construct  state,  etc.,  the  metre  in  some
tablets  being  indicated  by  blank  spaces  left  by  the  scribe.  The
commonest  metre  is  that  consisting  of  four  divisions,  in  which
the  two  halves  of  the  verse  are  each  subdivided  ;  but  this,  in
many  texts,  especially  in  some  of  the  pravcrs,  is  interrupted  at
irregular  intervals  by  a  bne  of  only  three  feet.

In  many  of  the  legends,  moreover,  the  single  verses
are  combined  Ixith  by  sense  and  by  rhythm  into  strophes
consisting  of  four  or  two  lines  each.

The  b<.'st  examples  of  Assyrian  and  Babylonian  prose
are  the  longer  historical  inscriptions  Iselonging  to  the
21.  Historical  ^^^"^  ^r^"^^'  This  class  of  inscription
inscriDtiona  "'-■'"=^"'^s  a  more  detailed  treatment.
^  ■ Ap;irt  from  its  literary  value,  it  is  the

principal  source  of  our  knowledge  of  the  history  of  the
Babylonians  and  Assyrians  themselves,  and  supple-
ments and  supports  in  many  particulars  the  biblical
narrative  of  the  relations  of  Israel  and  Judah  to  their
more  powerful  neighbours.

Unlike  all  other  classes  of  inscriptions,  which  were
written  with  a  style  on  tablets  made  of  clay,  the
historical  inscriptions  assume  a  variety  of  forms.  The
shortest  form  consists  merely  of  a  king's  name  and
titles,  which  are  stamped  or  inscril)ed  on  bricks  built
into  the  structure  of  a  temple  or  palace  which  he  had
erected  or  restored.  In  some  cases  the  actual  stamps
that  were  used  for  this  purpose  have  been  recovered.
Similar  .short  inscriptions  were  engraved  during  the  old
Babylonian  period  on  door-sockets  of  stone.  Another
class  of  short  inscription  records  the  dedication  of
temples  on  their  erection  or  when  they  have  been  re-
built ;  these  are  frequently  written  on  clay  cones
fashioned  in  the  form  of  pegs  or  nails,  which  may  very
possibly  have  had  a  phallic  significance.  The  cones
of  Guclea  and  Ur-Bau  are  those  most  frequently  met
with,  while  clay  cones  of  different  sha[x;s  were  engraved
by  Mul-Babbar,  patesi  of  Isban,  Sin-giisid,  Kudur-
Mabug  and  other  early  Babylonian  kings ;  cones  of
bronze,  ornamented  with  the  figure  of  a  god  clasping  the
thicker  end,  have  also  been  found  at  Telloh.  Dethca-
tory  inscriptions  were  also  written  on  circular  stones,
{perforated  through  the  centre  ;  when  these  are  small
they  are  usually  descrilxjd  as  '  mace-heads '  ;  but  the
use  to  which  the  larger  ones  were  put  has  not  been
ascertained.  The  '  mace-heads  '  of  S.argon  I. ,  ManiS-
tusu,  and  Nammaghani  are  good  examples  of  the
former  class.  Small  scjuare  tablets  of  diorite,  but
more  commonly  larger  oblong  tablets  of  limestone
inscribed  on  lx)th  sides,  were  employed  for  votive  in-
scriptions ;  those  of  Rim-Aku  and  of  liis  wife,  of
yammu-rabi  and  of  Samsu-iluna,  are  particularly  fine
examples  of  this  class  of  inscription.  In  the  later
Babylonian  period,  when  such  a  votive  inscription  of
an  early  Babylonian  king  was  found  in  the  ruins  or
ancient  archives  of  a  temple,  a  pious  liabylonian  would
frequently  have  an  accurate  copy  of  it  made  in  clay,

1  See  IV.  R  ;  Haupt,  Aik.  und sum.  Keilschri/ltexte  {\jt\^
sic,  1881-2):  Zimmern,  Bab.  Bussps.  (I^ipsic,  18S5)  and  Surpu
(Leipsic,  1896);  Urunnow,  ZAi/.  ;  Kniidtzon,  Assyr.  Ceb.  an
den  Sonnengott  (Leipsic,  1803);  Tallqvist,  Mat/lU  (I.eipsic,
1895) :  King,  Bab.  Magic  and  Sorcery  (London,  1896) ;  and
Craig,  Rel.  Texts  (Leipsic,  1895-7).

a  Zimmern,  ZA  8  and  10.

438


BABYLONIA

which  he  placed  as  an  offering  in  one  of  the  temples  in
Babylon.  Several  archaic  inscriptions  have  tlms  boon
preserved  in  Neo-Hahylonian  copies.  The  famous  stone-
tablet  recording  the  endowrncnt  of  the  temple  of  the  .Sun-
god  at  Sippar  by  Xabu-pal-idilina,  which  was  found  in
a  clay  cotTer  with  the  sculptured  portion  protected  by
clay  shields  provided  for  it  by  Nalx)polassar  nearly  three
hundred  years  after  it  was  engravetl,  is  uiii(|ue.

Clay  viises  and  bowls  were  em[)loyed  by  some  of
the  Assyrian  kings  for  recording  thfir  building  <)|K'ra-
tions,  the  inscriptions  running  in  parallel  linos  round
the  outside,  while  v;ises  of  alabaster  which  were  pre-
sented to  the  temples  fre<|uenlly  bore  the  name  and
titles  of  the  king  who  dedicated  them.  Inscriptions  on
statues  are  not  frcciuently  met  with  in  the  later  jx^riods
of  Babylonian  and  Assyrian  history,  the  short  inscrip-
tions on  the  statues  of  .A.sur-iiasir-pal,  the  longer
inscription  on  the  seated  figure  of  Shalnianeser  II.,  and
those  on  the  two  large  figures  of  the  god  Nebo,  being
the  principal  examples  ;  at  Telloh,  however,  long  in-
scriptions of  the  non-Semitic  kings  Gudea  and  Ur-Bau
are  found  engraved  on  their  statues  of  diorite.  Slabs
of  stone,  marble,  and  alabaster  were  employed  for
longer  historical  inscriptions.  These  were  sometimes
treated  as  tablets  and  engraved  on  both  sides,  as  in  the
memorial  tablets  of  Ramman-niniri  I.  ;  but  more
frequently  they  were  intended  as  monuments,  and  set
up  in  the  palaces  of  the  kings  who  made  them  ;  parts
of  many  are  decorated  with  sculpture,  and  in  some  in-
stances with  portraits  in  relief  of  the  king  whose  deeds
they  record.  The  later  Assyrian  kings  also  engraved
their  records  on  the  colossal  wingeil  bulls  and  lions
that  flanked  the  entrances  to  their  palaces,  and  by  the
side  of,  and  even  ujwn,  the  bas-reliefs  which  lined  their
walls.  In  some  places  on  the  borders  of  Assyria,  as  in
the  district  of  Lebanon  and  at  the  source  of  the  Tigris,
inscriptions  to  record  the  farthest  point  reached  by  some
military  expedition  were  engraved  in  the  living  rock.

Clay,  however,  was  the  material  most  extensively
employed, and for the longer historical inscriptions

22.  Clay  prisms,  f  "^  ^°'"'"  "^  P.7'"  ""^  f  ""^'^•'  ^^'^^
^.^  found  to  offer the  greatest  amount

of  surface  in  the  most  compact  form  ;

the  two  earliest  prisms  that  have  been  discovered  are

those  of  Gudea, each of  which contains about two

thousand  lines  of  writing.

The  annals  of  several  of  the  Assyrian  kings  also  were  inscribed
on  clay  prisms,  goixi  examples  of  which  are  the  four  eight-sided
prisms'  of  Tiglath-pileser  I.  (see  Assyria,  §  28),  the  famous
six-sided  'I'aylor'  prism  2  of  Sennacherib,  which  contains  an
account  of  his  siege  of  Jerusalem  (see  Sennachkkib),  the  six-
sided  prisms^*  of  Ksakiiaudon  (g.v),  and  the  fine  ten-sided
prLsms-*  of  A.'Sur-b.'ini-pal.

Small  barrel-cylinders  were  employed  by  some  of  the  Assyrian
kings,  including  Sargon,  Ksarhaddon,  .\sur-bani-pal,  and  Sin-
Sar-iikun,  and  larger  ones,  containing  accounts  of  his  first  three
campaigns,  by  Sennacherib.  Barrel  -  cylinders,  however,  are
principally  associated  with  the  later  Babylonian  kings.  Most
of  them  contain  accounts  of  the  building  operations  of  Nkbu-
CHADKKZZAK  II.  (t/.v.)  and  Nabonidus.  The  two  latest  barrel-
cylinders  that  have  been  recovered  are  those  of  Cvrus  (.see
below,  §  69),  describing  his  taking  of  Babylon  (s^S  n.c'.),  and  of
Antiochus-Soter  (280-260  B.C.),  recording  his  rebuilding  of  the
temple  of  K-zida  m  Borsippa.

Large  clay  tablets  with  one,  two,  or  three  columns  of  writing
on  each  side  were  employed  for  long  historical  inscriptions.
Among  the  best  examples  are  the  t-Tblets  of  Tiglath-pileser
III.,  which  were  found  in  the  SE.  palace  at  NimrQd,  the  tablet
of  tNarh:iddon  inscribed  with  his  genealogy  and  an  account  of
his  building  operations,  the  tablet  giving  an  .iccount  of  A5ur-
bani-pal's  accession  to  the  throne  of  .Assyria,  and  of  the  installa-
tion "f  his  brother  as  viceroy  of  Babylon,  and  those  recording
A-Sur-bani-pal's  conquests  in  Arabia  and  Klam,  his  campaigns
in  Egypt,  and  the  embassy  of  (iyges,  king  of  Lydia.

The  .Assyrians  and  Babylonians  themselves  were
ardent  students  of  their  own  literature,  compiling  cata-

23.  Eesearch.  ^°^^^  °^  ^^^^^  principal  literary  com-
positions, and writing explanatory
Ubiets  and  commentaries  on  many  of  the  more  difficult
texts. Their  language  itself  and  their  method  of  writing
i  Translation  in  /CBl  14-48.  a  Translation  in  A'i52  8o-ii3.

•  1  ranslation  in  KB  2  124-140. *  Translation  in  A'B  2  152-236.


BABYLONIA

were  studietl  in  detail,  archaic  forms  of  characters  being

collectetl  into  lists  and  traced  back  to  the  pictures  Iroin

which  they  originally  sprang. Syllalxiries giving  the

values  of  the  ch;u-acters  in  Sumerian,  and  their  .Assyrian

names and meimings,  were  compiled. (Jollections  of

grammatical  paradigms  for  every  class  of  tablet  were

made  for the use  of lieginners  ; examples of verlxil

formations  were  collected  and  classified  ;  and  exjjlana-

lory  lists  of  ideographs  were  made,  arrangetl  in  some

inst.ances  accoriling  to  the  forms  of  the  characters  with

which they l)egan or ended, in others according to

the  meanings  or roots of their  Assyrian  e(|uivalciits.

Perhaps  the  most  interesting  of  the  granmiatical  tablets

are  the  lists  of  synonymous  words, which  served  the

purjjose  of  a  mo<lern  dictionary.

The most notable scientific achievements of the

Babylonians  were their knowledge  of  astronomy  and

-. , .  their method of reckoning time.

24.  Astronomy.  .,.,_ .  ■  ■  **

•' 1  hese two achievements are to  a

great  extent  connected  with  each  other,  for  it  w;\s  owing
to  their  astronomical  knowledge  that  the  Babylonians
were  enabled  to  form  a  calendar.  lYom  the  earliest
times,  in  fact,  the  Babylonians  divided  the  year  into
months,  partly  of  thirty  and  partly  of  twenty-nine  days,
and  by  means  of  intercalary  months  they  brought  their
lunar  and  their  solar  year  into  harmony  with  each  other.
Their  achievements  in  astronomy  are  the  more  remark-
able as  their  knowledge  of  mathematics  was  not  extra-
ordinary :  though  we  pos.sess  tablets  containing  correct
calculations  of  sijuare  and  cufx;  roots,  most  of  their
calculations,  even  in  the  later  astronomical  tablets,
are  based  principally  on  addition  and  subtraction.

Herodotus  and  other  ancient  writers  concur  in  tracing
to  Babylonia  the  origin  of  the  science  of  a.stronomy,  as
known  to  the  ancient  nations  of  Europe  and  W.  Asia.
In  more  recent  times  some  scholars  have  asserted,  with
less  probability,  that  Indian  and  Chinese  astronomers
also  obtained  their  knowledge,  in  the  first  instance,  from
Babylon.  That  the  Babylonians  themselves  took  astro-
nomical observations  from  the  earliest  periods  of  their
history  is  attested  by  general  tradition  ;  and,  though  the
forms  this  tradition  assumed  sometimes  exhibit  extra-
ordinary exaggeration, — as  in  the  calculations  referred
to  by  Bliny,  according  to  one  of  which  the  Babylonians
possessed  records  of  astronomical  calculations  for
490,000  years,  and  according  to  another  for  720,000
years, — there  is  not  sufficient  reason  for  rejecting  the
tradition  as  having  no  substratum  of  truth,  and  it  is  not
improbable  that  the  Babylonians,  even  Ijefore  the  era
of  Sargon  I.,  were  watching  the  stars  and  laying  the
foundations  of  the  science.  The  first  observations
naturally  belonged  rather  to  the  practice  of  astrology
and  can  hardly  be  reckoned  as  scientific,  and  it  is  not
until  the  later  periods  of  Assyrian  and  Babylonian
history  that  we  meet  with  tablets  containing  astronomical
as  opposed  to  astrological  observations.

The  Assyrians  made  their  observations  from  specially
constructed  observatories,  which  were  not  improbably
connected  with  the  temples ;  the  observator)'  was
termed  a  i//  tamarti ,  or  '  house  of  obser\ation  '  ;  and
we  possess  the  reports  of  the  astronomers  sent  from
these  observatories  to  the  king  recording  successful
and  unsuccessful  observations  of  the  moon,  the  un-
successful ob.servation  of  an  exi^ecttxl  eclipse,  the  date
of  the  vernal  equinox,  etc.  The  astronomers,  as  a
rule,  sign  their  names  in  the  reports,  and  from  this
source  we  know  that  there  were  important  astronomical
•schools  at  Asur,  Nineveh,  and  .Arbtla  in  the  seventh
and  eighth  centuries  R.c.  ;  the  many  fragments  of
tablets  containing  lists  of  stars,  obser\'ations,  and
calendars,  which  date  from  the  same  periotl,  are,  how-
ever, of  an  astrological  rather  than  a  scientific  character.

-Although  we  first  meet  with  astronomical  inscriptions
on  Assyrian  tablets,  it  is  probable  that  the  Assyrians
derived  their  knowledge  originally  from  Babylonia,  and
we  may  see  an  indication  of  this  origin  in  a  fragment  of

430


BABYLONIA

an  Assyrian  conimentar)-  ruffiriiig  to  an  astronomical
inscription  which  had  lieen  brought  to  Assyria  from  the
ancient  city  of  Agade.  At  a  later  perioti  there  were
imimrtant  schools  of  astronomy  in  Habylonia,  at  Sippar,
Horsippa,  and  Orchoe ;  but  it  is  from  inscriptions
obtained  from  the  site  of  the  first  of  these  three  cities
alone  that  our  knowledge  of  Babylonian  astronomy  is
principally  derived.  Excavations  undertaken  at  Abu-
Habbah,  the  site  of  Sippar,  resulted  in  the  discovery
of  many  fragments  of  astronomical  tablets  (Ixilonging
principally  to  the  Seleucid  and  Arsftcid  eras)  written
in  the  later  cursive  Babylonian ;  and  these,  though
in  but  few  instances  unbroken,  have  sufliced  to  vindi-
cate the  scientific  character  of  Babylonian  astronomy.
Though  the  Babylonians  may  have  liad  no  correct
conception  of  the  solar  sj-stem,  they  had,  at  least  in
the  later  period  of  their  history,  arrived  at  the  con-
clusion that  the  movements  of  the  heavenly  bodies
were  governed  by  laws  and  were  amenable  to  calcula-
tion ;  and  from  the  tablets  we  gather  that  they  both
observed  and  calculated  the  time  of  the  appearance
of  the  new  moon,  and  the  periodical  occurrence  of
lunar  and  solar  eclipses,  that  they  noted  the  courses  of
the  ]5lnnets,  and  that  they  included  in  their  observations
cort.iin  of  the  principal  constellations  and  fixed  stars.

As in  all  primitive  religions,  the  gods  of  Babylonia
were in their  origin personifications of the forces  of
nature. The various phenomena of


26.  The  gods.


25.  Religion;


the world were not regarded as  the


, ^ ,  result  of  natural  laws. They  were  ex-

cnaracter. i . ■ . .1 ,  •.

plamed  as  due  to  the  arbitrary  action

of  mysterious  beings  of  more  than  human  power.  The
tempest  with  its  thunder  and  lightning  was  mysterious
—  it  must  therefore  be  the  work  of  a  god  ;  the  light  of
the  sun  is  the  gift  of  the  god,  to  whose  unwearying  exer-
tion its  movements  in  heaven  are  due  ;  heaven  itself  is
a  realm  as  solid  as  the  earth  on  which  men  walk  ;  and
each  must  be  controlled  by  its  own  peculiar  deity.  In
fact,  Babylonian  religion  was  a  worship  of  nature  in  all
its  i^arts,  each  part  the  province  of  a  deity,  friendly  or
hostile  to  man,  subject  to  human  passions,  and,  like
man,  endowed  with  the  powers  of  thought  and  speech.
Many  of  the  gods  resembled  mankind  in  having  human
bodies  ;  some  resembled  animals  ;  and  others  were
monsters,  partly  man  and  partly  beast.  They  differed
from  man  in  the  possession  of  superhuman  powers ;
but  no  one  deity  was  all-powerful.  The  authority,
even  of  the  greater  gods,  was  specialised,  and  beneath
them  were  a  host  of  demons  endowed  with  various
qualities,  but  of  more  narrowly  limited  influence.

Such  is  the  general  character  of  the  Babylonian
pantheon  regarded  as  a  whole  ;  but  it  was  not  in  the
mass  that  the  Babylonians  themselves  worshipped  their
gods,  and  this  fact  serves  to  explain  the  varying
theology  presented  by  the  Babylonian  religious  texts.
Every  city,  for  examjjle,  had  its  own  special  god  (cp
§  68),  who  was  not  only  the  god  of  that  city  but  also,
for  its  inhabitants,  the  greatest  of  the  gods  ;  so  too  in
the  temple  of  any  god  a  worship|x;r  could  address  him
in  terms  of  the  highest  praise,  and  ascrilx;  to  him  the
loftiest  attributes,  without  in  any  way  violating  the
canons  of  his  creed,  and  with  no  danger  of  raising  the
jealousy  or  wrath  of  other  deities.  In  fact,  in  the
rial)\lonian  system,  there  w.as  no  accurately  determined
hierarchy,  and  the  rank  and  order  of  the  various
deities  was  not  strictly  defined,  but  varied  at  different
periods  and  in  the  different  cities  throughout  the  land.
The  tolerant  nature  of  the  Babylonian  deities  and  the
elasticity  of  their  character  explain  the  ease  with  which
foreign  deities  were  adopted  and  assimilated  by  the
pantheon,  while  the  origin  of  this  elasticity  may  lie
traced  back  to  the  mixture  of  races  from  which  the
Babylonian  nation  sprang.

In  spite  of  the  varying  nature  of  the  Babylonian
pantheon,  it  is  still  possible  to  sketch  the  general
character and attributes  of  the principal Babylonian

431


BABYLONIA

deities. At  the  head  of  the  jiantheon,  from  the  earliest

{x;riod,  stood  a  powerful  triad  consisting  of  Anu,  the  god

of  heaven,  Bel, the  god  of  the  earth,

and  Ea,  the  god  of  the  abyss  and  of

hidden knowledge. Xext in order comes  a  second

I triad,  comprising  the  two  chief  light-gods  and  the  god

I of  the  atmosphere:  i.e..  Sin,  the  Moon-god,  Sama.s,  the

i Sun-god,  and  Ramman,  the  god  of  storm,  thunder  and

j lightning,  clouds  and  rain. All  of  these  gods  had  their

own cities, which were especially devoted to their

j worship. Thus the  worship  of  Anu was  centred at

Erech,  that  of  Bel  at  Nippur,  and  that  of  Ea  at  Eridu ;

j the  oldest  seat  of  the  worship  of  Sin  was  Ur,  though  in

j Harran also there was an important temple of the

1 Moon-god  ; and  the  cities  of  Earsa  and  Sippar  were

the  principal  centres  of  the  Sun-god's  worship. The

city-god  of  Babylon  was  Marduk,  whose  importance  in

the  pantheon  increased  as  that  city  became  the  capital

of  the  country,  until  in  process  of  time  he  came  to  be

identified with Bel, '  the lord  ' par e.xcelliiue. The

nearness  of  Borsippa  to  the  capital  explains  the  close

connection  of  Kabu,  its  city-god,  with  Marduk,  whose

attendant  and  minister  he  is  represented  to  have  lieen.

The  god  Xinib,  whose  name  is  read  by  some  as  Adar,

was of solar origin  ; the fire -god, who plays an

important part  in the  magical  beliefs  and  ceremonies

of  the  Babylonians,  was  Xusku  ;  and  the  god  of  battle

was  Xcrgal,  the  centre  of  whose  worship  was  at  Cuthah.

The Babylonian goddesses  were  in most cases of

minor importance  ; they were overshadowed by the

male  deities  with  whom  they  were  connected,  and  the

principal  function  of  each  was  to  Ijecome  the  mother  of

other gods. In some  cases their  very  names  betray

their secondary  importance, as in  that  of  Anatu, the

spouse  of  Anu, and  that  of  Belit, the  spouse  of  Bel.

The  spouse  of  F3a  was  Damkina  ; Xingal  was  the  lady

of  the  Moon-god,  .Ai  of  Samas,  Sala  of  Ramman.  Tai-

metu  of  Xabu,  Gula  of  Ninib,  and  Laz  of  Xergal.

The  relationships  of  the  gods  to  one  another  are  not  accurately
determined,  in  .some  cases  contradictory  traditions  liaving  been
handed  down  ;  Sin,  Samas,  and  Ninib,  however,  were  regarded
a.s  the  children  of  Bel,  though  .Sama.s  also  passed  as  the  .son  of
Sin  and  Ningal,  Marduk  was  the  son  of  Ea,  and  Nabu  the  son
of  Marduk.

On  a  different  plane  from  the  other  goddesses  stands
Istar,  one  of  the  most  p)owerfuI  deities  in  the  p.antheon.
She  appears  in  two  distinct  characters,  under  which  she
assumes  different  titles,  and  is  credited  with  different
genealogies.  As  the  goddess  of  battle  she  was  hailed
as  Anunitu,  the  daughter  of  Sin  and  Xingal,  and  was
worshipped  at  Agade  and  at  Sippar  of  Anunitu  ;  as  the
goddess  of  love  she  was  termed  Belit-ilani,  the  daughter
of  Anu  and  Anatu,  and  the  chief  seat  of  her  worship
was  the  temple  of  E-ana  at  ?".rech  ;  it  was  here  that  the
unchaste  rites,  referred  to  by  Herodotus  as  having  been
paid  to  the  goddess  Mylitta,  with  whom  Istar  is  to  be
identified,  were  performed.  Her  name  was  connected
in  legend  with  Dumuzi  or  Tammuz,  her  youthful  lover,
on  whose  death,  it  is  related,  she  descended  to  the
lower  world  to  recover  him.

The  conception  of  the  Babylonian  deities  as  actual
personalities  endowed  with  the  bodies  and  swayed  by
the  passions  of  mankind,  and  related  to  one  another  by
human  bonds  of  kindred,  was  not  inconsistent  with  the
other  and  more  abstract  side  of  their  character  which
underlay  and  was  to  a  great  extent  the  origin  of  the
human  attributes  w  ith  w hich  they  were  credited.  Thus,
the  return  of  Tammuz  and  Istar  to  earth  was  the
mythological  conception  of  the  yearly  return  of  spring.
Moreover,  as  each  force  in  nature  varies  in  its  action  at
different  seasons,  so  each  of  its  manifestations  may  be
connected  with  a  separate  deity.  The  attributes  of
several  gods  can  thus  Ijc  traced  to  a  solar  origin.
Whilst  SamaS  represented  the  sun  in  general,  special
manifestations  of  his  power  were  connected  with  other
deities  ; Nergal,  the  god  of  war,  for  example,  represents

433


BABYLONIA

tli<;  sun's  destructive  heat  in  summer  and  at  noon-day,
Ninib  the  sun  on  the  horizon  at  sunrise  and  sunset,  and
Marduk,  the  sixx-ial  friend  of  man,  its  temperate  heat
in  the  morning  and  in  s[jring.  The  iisjx.*ct  of  the
heavens  at  night  also  plays  a  considerable  part  in  the
origin  of  the  gods  of  Habylonia.  Thus  each  of  the
planets  was  connected  with  one  of  the  greater  gods  :  the
fixed  stars  represented  lesser  deities,  and  HOl  and  Ka,
though  ruling  the  earth  and  the  abyss,  also  had  astro-
logical characters,  in  virtue  of  which  they  divided  with
Anu  the  control  of  the  sky.

The  worship  of  their  deities  by  the  Rabylonians  was
attended  by  a  complicated  system  of  ritual  and  ceremony.

27  TemnlsB  ''  formed  one  of  the  most  important
^  '  asix-'cts  of  the  national  life,  and,  as
tlu-ir  temijles  were  the  largest  of  their  buildings,  so  the
priests  were  the  most  powerful  class  in  the  conmiunity.
In  each  city  the  largest  and  njost  im[x)rtatu  temple  was
that  devotetl  to  the  city-god.  Thus  the  chief  temple  at
Babylon  w;xs  E-sagila,  the  centre  of  the  worship  of
Marduk  ;  the  great  temple  at  Horsippa  was  E-zida,  the
temple  of  Nabu  ;  the  principal  temple  at  Nijjpur  was
E-kur,  the  centre  of  Bel's  worship  ;  and  ]£-hul-hul  the
temple  of  the  Moon  god  at  Harran,  E-barra  the  temple
of  Samas  both  at  Si[)par  and  at  Larsa,  and  l-'.-ana  the
temple  of  Istar  at  Erech,  were  the  principal  temples  in
each  of  these  cities.  Situated  on  a  lofty  platform  and
rising  stage  upon  stage,  these  ziggurats  or  temple-
towers  dominated  the  surrounding  houses,  and  were
more  imposing  than  the  royal  palaces  themselves.  At
the  summit  of  each  the  image  of  the  god  reposed  in  his
shrine,  and  around  its  base  clustered  the  temple  offices
and  the  dwellings  of  the  priests.  To  each  temple  was
attached  a  trained  and  organised  priesthood,  devoted
exclusively  to  the  worship  of  its  god,  and  preserving  its
own  ritual  and  body  of  tradition.  The  temples  were
under  the  direct  patronage  of  the  kings,  who  prided
themselves  on  the  rebuilding  and  restoration  of  their
fabrics  as  much  as  on  the  successful  issue  of  their
campaigns,  while  the  priesthoods  were  su[)ix)rted  by
regular  and  ai)pointed  offerings  in  addition  to  the
revenues  they  drew  frcmi  the  lands  and  property  with

28  Priests  ^^''''-"'^  ^'^*^  temples  were  endowed.  The
influence  of  the  jjriests  upon  the  people
was  exerted  from  many  sides,  for  not  only  were  they
the  gods  re[)resentatives,  whose  services  were  reciuired
for  any  act  of  worship  or  intercession,  but  they  also
regulated  and  controlled  all  departments  of  civil  life.
They  represented  the  learned  section  of  the  nation,  and
in  all  probability  the  .scrilnjs  belonged  entirely  to  the
priestly  class.  They  coin|x).sed  and  preserved  the  national
records,  and  although  some  of  the  later  As.syrian  kings
collected  libraries  in  their  palaces,  this  was  probably
accomplished  only  with  the  co-operation  of  the  priest-
hood and  by  drawing  on  the  collections  of  tablets
preserved  in  the  great  temples  throughout  the  country.

A  still  more  powerful  influence  was  exerted  by f


the  priests  on  the  common  people  in  connection  with
their  social  life  and  conmiercial  transactions,  inasmuch
as  the  administration  of  the  law  was  in  their  hands.

The  religious  functions  discharged  by  the  priesthood
were twofold. On the  one hand, they  carried out
the regular sacrifices  and services  of the temple to
which they  were  attached ; on thi-  other, they  were
always  at  the  service  of  any  one  who  w  ished  to  present
an  offering  or make intercession in his  own behalf.
In  their  former  capacity  they  celebrated  regular  feast-
days  in  every  month  as  well  as  the  great  festivals  of
the  year, such  as  the  New  Year  ; in the  latter  their
ministrations were niore personal, and consisted in
introducing  the  individual  suppliant  into  the  presence
of  the  deity  and  performing  for  him  the  necessary  rites.
29.  Claims ^''^'^''^y  Babylonian  had  his  own  god  and
of  religion.  S^'t'ess,  to  w  hose  worship  he  dedicated
himself. They,  in  return,  were  his  patrons
and protectors. When  any  misfortune  happened to
28  433


BABYLONIA

him  it  was  a  sure  sign  that  his  go<l  and  goddess  were
angry  and  had  removed  from  him  their  countenance
and  protection,  an<l  in  such  a  predicament  he  would
have  recourse  to  the  t<;mple  of  one  of  the  greater  go<ls,
whose  influence  he  would  invoke  for  his  restoration  to
the  favour  of  his  patron  deities.  The  protection  of  his
go<l  and  g(Mldtss  were  neces.sary  to  preserve  a  man
from  the  spiritual  dangers  that  surrounded  him,  for
he  Ix-lieved  that  on  every  side  were  evil  go<ls,  spirits,
demons,  and  sjxjctres,  who  were  waiting  for  any  oppor-
tunity he  might  give  them  to  injure  him.  Any  sickness
or  misfortune,  in  fact,  he  regarded  as  due  to  a  spell
cast  upon  him  which  had  its  origin  in  one  of  several
causes.  It  might  be  the  result  of  an  act  of  sin  or
imjjurity  committed  by  him  with  or  without  his  own
knowledge  ;  or  it  was  the  work  of  an  evil  spirit  or
demon  ;  or,  finally,  it  was  due  to  the  machinations  of  a
sorcerer  or  sorceress.  Whatever  its  cause,  his  only
hope  of  recovery  lay  in  recourse  to  the  priests,  through
whom  he  could  approach  one  of  the  gods.

P>om  the  carvings  on  Hal)yIonian  cylinder-seals  we
know  the  attitude  that  the  suppliant  must  assume  when
30  Relijrious  ''"''^  "^^°  '''"  presence  of  the  god.  He
Observances.  '^  '^P'^^^^^^'f  ^  ^'•'"^'ing  with  both
hands  raised  before  hnn,  or,  with  one
hand  raised,  he  is  Ijeing  led  forward  by  the  priest,
who  grasps  the  other.  The  penitential  psalms  and
incantations  preserved  on  tablets  from  the  library  of
Asur-bani-pal  indicate  the  general  character  of  the  jxiti-
tions  he  must  make,  consisting  of  invocations  of  the  deity
aildressed,  confessions  of  sin,  and  prayers  for  assistance,
recited  partly  by  the  priest  and  partly  by  the  suppliant
himself.  Many  tablets  record  the  offerings  that  nmst
l)e  made  liefore  the  gods,  comprising  oxen,  sheep,
lambs,  birds,  fish,  bread,  dates,  butter,  honey,  oil.  date-
wine,  sesame  w;ine,  pieces  of  precious  woods,  gold,
jewels,  and  precious  stones,  plants,  herbs,  and  flowers.
Many'  magical  rites  and  ceremonies  were  performed  by
the  priests,  such  as  the  knotting  and  unknotting  of
coloured  threads,  the  burning  of  small  images  made
of  a  variety  of  substances,  including  bronze,  clav,
bitumen,  plaster,  wood,  and  honey,  to  the  accompani-
ment of  incantations  ;  the  throwing  into  a  bright  fire
of  certain  substances,  such  as  a  fleece,  a  goat -skin,  a
piece  of  wool,  certain  seeds  or  a  [xjd  of  garlic,  a  special
form  of  words  Ijeing  recited  by  the  priest  as  he  per-
formed the  rite  ;  the  dropping  of  certain  substances
into  oil  and  the  pouring  out  of  libations.  Such  cere-
monies and  rites  were  not  regarded  as  symbolical,
but  were  supposed  to  be  sufficient  in  themselves  to
secure  the  suppliant's  release  from  the  sfxill  or  ban  to
which  his  sufferings  or  misfortunes  were  due.

The  prediction  of  future  events  also  plays  an  important
part  in  the  religion  of  the  Babylonians  and  Assyrians.
31  AuBTirv  ^'^  ^^"^  '^^°'"  Ix-'ing  carried  on  in  secret
gury.  ^j^j  ^^^  ^  j^^^  isolated  soothsayers,  augury
was  practised  as  a  science  by  a  large  and  organised  body
of  the  priesthood  under  the  direct  control  and  patronage
of  the  king.  This  Ixjing  the  case,  it  is  not  surprising
that  a  considerable  jx)rtion  of  the  native  literature  deals
with  the  subject  of  omens  and  forecasts.  Almost  every
event  of  common  life  was  regarded  by  the  jjious
Babylonian  as  perhaps  a  favourable  or  unfavourable  sign
re<|uiring  the  interpretation  of  an  ex[)crt,  and  necessitating
a  journey  to  the  temple.  Those  whose  duty  it  w:is  to
furnish  the  interpretation  of  such  an  event  did  not
necessarily  pretend  to  second  sight  or  rely  on  a  vision
or  any  divine  communication  ;  their  answer  was  based
on  their  own  knowledge,  actjuired  by  sjjecial  training
and  study.  In  the  course  of  time  all  events  and  the
consequences  said  to  result  from  them  had  been  written
down  ;  the  tablets  on  which  they  were  inscribed  had
been  divided  into  clas.ses  according  to  the  subjects  of
their  contents  ;  and  many  were  collectetl  into  series.
Thus  an  important  temple  would  contain  a  small  library
dealing  with  the  subject,  retjuiring  to  be  mastered  by

434


BABYLONIA

the  novice  and  always  at  hand  for  the  consultation  of
the  augurs  themseh  es.  Many  of  tliese  tablets  have  been
preserved,  and  it  is  to  them  that  we  owe  our  knowledge
of  tlus  important  department  of  Babylonian  religion.

The  text  of  an  omen-tablet  consists  of  short  sentences,
each  of  which  generally  occupies  one  line  of  the  tablet.
„ ^  The  construction  of the  sentence  is  in-

.  ■ ,  . .  variably  the  same,  and  may  be  rendered

by  the  following  formula  :  '  when  (or  if)
so  and  so  is  the  case,  such  and  such  an  event  will
happen.'  There  arc,  therefore,  two  ways  in  which  we
may  classify  an  omen — cither  by  its  protasis  or  its
apodosis.  Regarded  from  the  latter  point  of  view,

all  omens  may  be  roughly  divided  into  those  that  relate
to  public  affairs  and  those  that  relate  to  the  fortunes  of
an  individual.  Thus  certain  occurrences  may  be  looked
upon  as  foretelling  the  death  of  the  king  or  the  future
condition  of  the  country,  whether  there  will  be  a  plentiful
harvest  or  a  famine,  whether  there  will  be  war  or  peace,
and,  if  war,  in  what  cjuarter  it  may  be  exixicted.  Those
which  relate  to  private  affairs,  on  the  other  hand,
concern  themselves  with  the  health,  sickness,  or  death
of  a  man  or  of  his  wife  or  child,  or  foretell  the  stability
or  destruction  of  his  house.  Some  few  tablets  indeed
relate  to  special  classes,  such  as  those  which  foretell
accidents  that  may  happen  to  women  during  pregnancy ;
but  in  the  majority  of  omen-texts  the  apodosis  is  couched
in  general  terms  and  the  same  phrases  regularly  recur.
In  fact,  the  events  foretold  are  not  very  many,  and  may
generally  be  classed  under  the  headings  of  death  and
life,  sickness  and  health,  famine  and  plenty,  war  and
peace  ;  the  predictions  are  cast  in  a  vague  form,  and
details,  such  as  the  place  or  manner  of  a  man's  death,
arc  but  rarely  specilicd.  In  the  protasis, on  the

other  hand,  we  find  an  almost  Ijewildcring  variety  of
subjects,  which  admit,  however,  of  a  rough  classification.
What  is  perhajas  the  largest  section  centres  round  the
phenomena  of  human  birth,  the  predictions  being  based
on  the  manner  of  delivery  and  on  the  appearance  of  the
child  ;  and  not  only  were  miscarriages  and  the  births
of  monstrosities  regarded  as  of  peculiar  import,  but
variations  in  the  a[)pearance  of  normal  offspring  also
formed  the  basis  of  prediction.

Different  parts  of  the  body  of  a  newly-born  child  are  dealt
with  independently,  and  to  have  grasped  correctly  the  significance
of  every  part  must  have  required  a  long  course  of  training  and
study  of  the  tablets.  The  state  of  the  eyes  or  the  liair,  the
position  and  size  of  the  ears,  mouth,  hands  and  feet,  the  re-
seml)lance  of  the  face  to  that  of  certain  animals,  were  all  carefully
considered.  The  parturition  of  animals  also  was  made  a  special
.study,  the  appearance  of  the  offspring  of  lions,  oxen,  horses,
and  other  animals,  the  colour  of  their  hair  and  the  number  and
position  of  tlieir  limbs,  being  regarded  as  significant.  Omens
were  drawn  from  the  appearance  of  the  various  parts  of  the  body
of  an  adult,  male  or  female,  especially  in  sickness,  such  as  the
state  and  colour  of  the  eyes,  the  ears,  and  the  hair,  the  state  of
the  heart,  the  lungs,  the  buttocks,  and  other  members  of  the
body,  the  resemblance  of  the  head  to  that  of  a  bird  or  beast,  the
condition  of  the  urine,  etc.  ;  with  a  view  to  predictions,  studies
were  also  made  of  the  actions  of  a  man,  such  as  that  of  eating,
and  certain  other  of  his  natural  functions.  Another  large  cla.ss
of  omens  were  drawn  from  the  appearance  of  animals,  such  as
the  colour  of  the  horns  of  oxen  and  the  direction  in  which  they
curve,  while  the  actions  of  certain  animals  (pigs,  horses,  etc.)
were  likewise  studied.  If  a  man  is  walking  and  wishes  to  know
the  future  he  must  notice  the  direction  in  which  an  animal  moves
round  him,  and  he  must  note  if  a  lion,  or  a  hvena,  or  a  bird
crosses  his  path.  If  he  sees  a  snake  at  ihc  entrance  of  a  gate  or
at  the  doors  of  a  temple,  or  dogs  and  calves  as  he  is  going  out
of  a  door,  he  must  visit  the  augur  for  an  interpretation.  The
appearance  of  animals,  snakes,  or  scorpions  in  a  man's  house,
or  in  a  pakice  or  a  temple,  w.as  of  .significance,  while  the  sling
of  a  scorpion  was  a  warning  of  various  events,  different  results
following  from  stings  on  different  toes.  The  appear,ince  and
flight  of  birds  were  exhaustively  treated,  and  a  man  was  wise  if
he  did  not  disregard  the  flappings  of  a  bird's  wing  and  did  not
fail  to  observe  the  direction  in  which  it  flew  should  it  flutter
round  his  head.  Another  cla.ss  of  omens _  laid  stress  on  the
locality  of  certain  events  :  those  occurring  in  cities  and  streets
received  a  treatment  different  from  that  of  occurrences  in  the
fields  and  open  country.  Predictions  were  made  from  the  slate
of  a  house,  its  walls,  etc.,  and  even  from  the  state  of  the  furniture
which  it  contained.  The  lime  of  the  events  or  observations  was
in  some  instances  considered  imponant,  and  in  these  cases  the
month  and  day  were  specially  noted.

435


BABYLONIA

As  omens  were  taken  from  so  many  common  objects

and  occurrences,  it  was  natural  that  dreams  and  visions

„„ _.  should be regarded as indications of

33.  Dreams.  ^  •

future  prosperity  or  misfortune,  and  that

the  objects  or  animals  a  man  might  behold  in  a  dream
had  each  a  different  signification.  Thus,  if  he  beheld
in  his  dream  certain  people,  or  seemed  to  be  fighting
with  a  relation,  such  as  his  father  or  grandfather,  the
visions  had  a  special  meaning,  while  the  fact  that  the
[jerson  he  fought  with  was  alive  or  dead  at  the  time  was
also  of  importance  ;  a[)i)aritions  of  spectres  and  demons
in  a  house  were  indicative  of  the  future.  In  the  majority
of  omens  the  conditions  on  which  they  were  based  were
chance  occurrences  and  events  ;  it  was,  however,  possible
to  obtain  information  as  to  the  future  by  artificial
means,  such  as  by  okserving  the  entrails  of  viitims,  by
kindling  fire  on  an  altar  and  noting  the  direction  in
which  the  smoke  rose,  or  by  observing  the  flickering  of
the  flame  of  a  lamp.

^\'ilh  omens  it  is  difficult  to  say  how  far  the  facts  on

which  the  predictions  were  based  were  merely  signs  of

. . .  prosperity  or  misfortune  which  would

. s  ro  ogy.  pQj^g  jj^  j^j^y  ^j^gg j^j^jj  j,,,^  f^j.  fj^gy

were  regarded  as  in  themselves  the  actual  cause  of  such
prosperity  or  misfortune.  In  the  case  of  astrological
forecasts,  however,  which  are  closely  connected  with
the  omens,  it  seems  probable  that  the  latter  concejition
preponderated.  The  astrological  phenomena  that  are
mentioned  were  not  merely  passive  indications  of  the
future,  but  active  forces  influencing  the  lives  and  fortunes
of  the  individual  and  the  state.  The  practice  of  astrology
■was  based  principally  on  observations  of  the  sun  and
moon  and  stars,  their  relative  positions  at  different
times,  and  the  various  combinations  presented  by  them.
Another  large  body  of  forecasts  was  based  on  eclipses
of  the  sun  and  moon,  the  results  varying  with  the  time
of  the  eclipse,  the  appearance  of  the  sun  and  moon
during  the  eclipse,  and  the  direction  in  which  the  shadow
travels.  Forecasts  were  based  also  on  the  appearance
of  meteors  and  shooting  stars,  on  observations  of  light-
ning, clouds,  and  rain,  on  the  direction  of  the  wind,  on
the  various  directions  in  which  a  cloud  may  travel,  and
on  the  colour  and  shape  of  clouds  and  their  resemblance
to  animals,  fishes,  ships,  etc.  As  in  the  case  of  the  omen
talilets,  the  Babylonians  possessed  a  grc-at  body  of  astro-
logical literature  ;  observations  and  forecasts  in  course
of  time  were  collected,  grouped,  and  classified  ;  and
large  works  upon  the  subject  were  copied  out  on  con-
secutive tablets  for  the  training  and  u.se  of  the  astrologers.
Many  tablets  belonging  to  these  larger  works  have  come
down  to  us  ;  there  are  also  preserved  in  the  British
Museum  small  oblong  tablets  containing  the  answers
of  astrologers  who  had  been  consulted  as  to  the  future,
as  well  as  their  reports  on  recent  astrological  observa-
tions and  the  interpretation  to  be  set  on  them.

Around  the  figures  of  their  gods  the  Babylonians  wove
talcs  and  legends,  which,  originating  in  remote  antiquity,
„ , 1  ^^cre  handed  down through countless

30.  Jaytnoiogy.  generations,  being  added  to  and  modi-
fied by  the  hands  through  which  they  passed.  They
were  collected  and  arranged  during  the  later  periods
of  Ass}Tian  and  Babylonian  history,  and  it  is  in  these
comparatively  recent  forms  that  they  are  preserved
in  the  literature  that  h.as  come  down  to  us.  It  is  true
that  the  tablets  containing  the  legends  of  Adapa  and  of
the  goddess  Eriskigal  were  found  at  Tell  el-Amarna
and  date  from  the  fifteenth  century  B.C.  ;  but  not  one  of
the  tablets  containing  the  other  legends  is  earlier  tiian
the  seventh  century  B.C.  The  antitjuity  of  the  legends
themselves,  however,  is  amply  attested  by  the  divergent
forms  which  in  some  cases  the  same  legend  assumes,  as
related  on  different  tablets  lx;longing  to  the  later  Assyrian
and  Babylonian  periods,  or  referred  to  in  the  works  of
classical  writers.  An  additional  interest  attaches  to  two
sections  of  the  legendary  literature  of  Babylon  from  their
close  resemblance  to  the  narrative  of  the  early  part  of

436


BABYLONIA

Genesis,  relating  to  the  creation  and  the  deluge.
Whether  we  are  to  trace  the  ultimate  origin  of  both  the
Babylonian  and  the  Hebrew  versions  of  these  legends
to  the  previous  non-Semitic  inhabitants  of  Babylonia
need  not  concern  us  here.  The  contents  of  these
legends  and  their  relation  to  the  Hebrew  narratives  will
also  Ixj  more  conveniently  treated  elsewhere  (see  Crka-
TioN,  Dki.ugk,  Caimiks,  Enoch,  Noah).  The
legends  of  the  creation  and  the  epic  of  Gilgames  are
certainly  the  most  famous  portions  of  Babylonian  myth-
ology ;  but  they  form  only  a  part  of  the  legends  and
beliefs  thai  were  current  in  the  various  cities  of  Baby-
lonia. Kven  those  which  have  come  down  to  us  on  the
tablets  present  a  great  variety  of  subject  and  treatment.

Istar's  descent  into  Hades  is  one  of  the  best  preserved
of  these  legends.  It  contams  a  description  of  the  lower
world,  and  records  how  at  each  of  the  gates  that  lead
thereto  the  goddess  is  stripped  of  a  portion  of  her
a|)parel  until  she  enters  naked  into  the  realm  of  Allatu,
and  how  she  is  detained  there  but  is  eventually  brought
back  to  earth  to  put  an  end  to  the  troubles  of  men  and
animals  that  had  followed  the  departure  of  the  goddess
of  love.  The  Plague-god  was  a  prominent  figure  in
Babylonian  mythology,  the  legends  describing  in  detail
the  ravages  he  caused  among  the  cities  of  the  land.
Two  oilier  legends  may  be  mentioned  brietly  :  that  of
the  Zu's  theft  of  the  destiny-tablets,  and  tlie  legend  of
Adapa  and  the  South-wind.  In  the  former,  Zu  is
recoriled  to  have  (led  with  the  tablets  to  his  mountain,
and,  although  the  other  gods  would  not  venture  against
him,  he  was  eventually  captured  by  Samas  the  Sun-god
in  his  net.  The  legend  of  Adapa  relates  how  Adapa,
the  son  of  Ea,  was  fishing  one  day  in  the  sea  for  his
father's  household  when  the  South-wind  blew  and  ducked
him  under  ;  how  in  anger  he  caught  the  South-wind,
and  broke  her  wings  ;  and  how  he  came  to  heaven  into
the  presence  of  .\nu,  who  summoned  him  thither  on
noticing  that  the  South-wind  had  ceased  to  blow.  In
many  of  the  legends  animals  and  birds
endowed  with  thought  and  speech  are
introduced  :  as  in  the  legend  of  Etana's  flight  to  heaven
with  the  eagle,  the  legend  of  the  Eagle,  the  Serpent  and
the  Sun-god,  the  legend  of  the  Fox,  the  legend  of  the
Horse  and  the  Ox,  and  the  legend  of  the  Calf.  Not
only  do  gods,  heroes,  and  animals  figure  in  the  mythology
of  Babylonia,  but  also  ancient  kings,  whose  actual
existence  is  attested  by  the  remains  of  their  buildings
and  inscriptions,  were  raised  to  the  level  of  heroes  or
demi-gods  in  the  popular  imagination,  and  their  names
•became  centres  round  which  in  the  course  of  ages  legends
have  clustered.  The  most  famous  of  these  is  the  legend  ^
of  the  birth  of  Sargon  of  Agad^,  who  is  said  to  have
been  of  lowly  origin  ;  his  father  he  knew  not,  and  his
mother  set  him  floating  on  the  Euphrates  in  a  chest  of
reeds  smeared  with  bitumen  ;  but  Akki  the  irrigator
rescued  him,  and  while  he  was  serving  as  gardener  to
his  benefactor,  the  goddess  Istar  loved  him.  Eventu-
ally she  invested  him  with  the  rule  of  the  kingdom.
Naram-Sin  the  son  of  .Sargon,  Dungi  king  of  Ur,
Nebuchadrezzar  I.,  and  other  ancient  kings,  figure
in  the  legendary  literature.

The  data  available  for  the  settlement  of  Babylonian
chnjuology  vary  for  each  of  the  three  periods  (see  lielow,
37.  Chronology:  §  '^°>  '"'°  ^'^j?  \he  history  of  the

First  nerit^ country may be divuled. In the

^  first period a single date has been

fixed  for  us  by  a  reference  in  one  of  the  cylinders  of

Nabonidus,  from  which  we  infer  that  Sargon I. lived

about  3750  B.C. When  Nabonidus  states*  that  3200

years  have  elapsed  since  .Sargon  laid  down  an  inscription

which  he  himself  found,  he  is  naturally  giving  only  an

approximate  estimate  of  the  period  during  which  it  had

lain  buried. There  is  no  reason,  however,  for  doubting

the  general  accuracy  of  the  statement ;  for  the  Babylonians

were  careful  compilers  of  their  records,  and  Nabonidus

1  See  A'S  Sa  100  j^.  "i  KBU  104.

437


36.  Legends.


BABYLONIA

had  access  to  sources  of  information  which  have  not
come  down  to  us.  This  one  date,  therefore,  gives  us  a
fixed  pxjint  in  the  early  history  of  the  country.  In

settling  the  chronology  before  and  after  this  point  we
do  not  gain  much  assistance  from  the  list  of  dynasties
preserved  from  the  history  of  HCrossus,  who  places  in
the  earliest  period  ten  kings  who  ruled  Ix.-fore  the  flood.
Similarly  a  tablet  from  Kuyunjik  containing  the  names
of  certain  kings,  who,  it  states,  ruled  after  the  deluge,
is  not  of  assistance,  esf>ecially  as  the  names  it  docs  con-
tain are  arranged  not  chronologically  but  on  a  linguistic
basis.  In  settling  the  chronology  of  this  period,

we  have,  in  fact,  to  fall  back  ujxjn  the  internal  and
external  evidence  of  date  afforded  by  the  archaic  inscrip-
tions themselves,  (i)  The  internal  evidence  consists
principally  of  the  royal  genealogies  contained  by  the
inscriptions,  from  which  the  relative  dates  of  the  kings
so  mentioned  can  be  a.scertained.  Good  examples  of
the  use  of  such  evidence  are  afforded  by  some  of  the
inscriptions  of  the  kings  and  patesis  of  .Sirjjurla  :  as,
for  example,  t>y  the  inscriptions  of  Ivdin-gir.i-nagin,  in
which  he  calls  himself  the  son  of  Akurgal,  and  of
Akurgal,  who  styles  himself  the  son  of  L'r-.\in.a  ;  or
that  of  P',ntena,  in  which  he  is  called  the  son  of  En-
anna-tunia  and  the  descendant  of  Ur-Xina,  or  the  gate-
socket  of  En-anna-tuma  II.  from  which  we  learn  that
Eiitena  was  his  father  ;  or  the  circular  stone  plate  con-
taining an  inscription  of  the  wife  of  Nammaghani,  in
which  she  is  referred  to  as  the  daughter  of  Ur-Bau,
proving  that  Nammaghani  succeeded  Ur-Bau  through
his  wife's  title  to  the  throne.  (2)  The  external  evidence
afforded  by  an  inscription  is  obtained  partly  by  a  study
of  the  general  style  of  the  writing,  the  forms  of  the
characters,  etc.  ;  partly  by  accurately  noting  its  relative
position  with  regard  to  other  inscriptions  near  which  it
may  happen  to  be  found,  the  different  depths  at  which
inscriptions  are  unearthed  in  some  cases  giving  a  rough
idea  of  their  comparative  ages.  It  must  be  admitted,
however,  that  the  e\idence  to  be  obtained  both  from
paUeography  and  from  systematic  excavation  is  in  its
nature  extremely  uncertain  and  liable  to  various  inter-
pretations. Such  evidence  is  of  service  when  lending
its  weight  to  that  obtained  from  other  and  independent
sources  ;  but  when  it  is  without  such  sup[)ort  it  cannot  l)e
regarded  as  indicating  more  than  a  general  probability.
For  the  chronology  of  the  second  jx-riod  we  have  the
genealogies  to  Ix;  obtained  from  the  historical  inscriptions,

38.  Second


as  well  as  the  chronological  notices  which
occur  in  some  of  them. From  the  latter


"  ■ source,  for  example,  we  gather  that  Burna-

Burias  lived  some  700  years  after  Hammu-rabi,^  that
Sagasalti-Buriaslived  about  800  years  before  Nabonidus, '■*
and  that  Marduk-nadin-ahe  defeated  Tiglath-pileser  1.
418  years  before  Sennacherib  conquered  Babylon"  (cp
AssvKi.\,  §  20).  Our  principal  source  of  inforniatiuii,
however,  lies  in  the  chronological  documents  of
the  Babylonians  themselves.  ( i )  One  of  the  most
important  of  these  is  the  '  List  of  Kings,'  a  list  of  the
names  of  the  kings  of  Babylon  from  about  2400  to
625  B.C.,  in  which  the  kings  are  divided  into  dynasties,
the  length  of  each  reign  and  the  total  length  of  each
dynasty  being  added  ;  ■*  a  smaller  list  of  kings  contains
the  names  of  the  kings  of  the  first  two  dynasties.'  (2)
Prom  the  document  known  as  the  '  Babylonian  Chron-
icle '  ^  we  obtain  a  record  of  events  in  Babylonia  and
Assyria  from  the  early  part  of  Nabonassar's  reign
(about  745  H.  c. )  to  6^9  R.  c. ,  the  first  year  of  the  reign
of  Samas-sum-ukin,  and  this  information  is  supplemented
by  (3)  the  '  Ptolemaic  Canon '  (see  Chro.noixxiy,  §  24^  ).
which  also  begins  with  the  reign  of  Nabonassar.  The
fragment  of  a  second  Babylonian  chronicle  refers  to
kings  of  the  first,  fifth,  sixth,  and  seventh  dynasties,
while  part  of  a  third  chronicle  supplements  the  narrative

1  KB  %b  90/  2  KB  ih  106/

»  Bavian  inscription.  *  KB  2  286/,  or  R P^)  1  \f,ff.

«  KB  2  288y:,  or  RP^)  1 13/  ^  KBi  274^,  or  RPf?)  1  nff.

438


BABYLONIA

of  the  '  Synchronous  History  '  for  certain  portions  of  the
third  dynasty.  Finally,  (4)  the  '  Synchronous  History  '  ^
(see  Assyria,  §  21,  beg. )  itself  connects  the  history  of
Babylonia  with  that  of  Assyria,  with  certain  breaks,
from  about  1480  to  810  B.  c:.

For  the  third  period  of  the  history  the  succession  of

the  kings  is  known  from  the  Ptolemaic  Canon,  which,

_,  . , ill  addition  to  the  names  of  the  kings,  gives

■ . ^ the  lengths  of  their  respective  reigns  ; and

perio  .  jj^^_  information  so  obtained  is  controlled  by
the  many  Babylonian  contract  tablets  which  have  lx;en
found  dated  according  to  their  regnal  years.

The  history  of  Babylonia  falls  naturally  into  three
main  periods.  The  first  period  comprises  the  history
of  the  country  from  the  earliest  times


lown  to  the  consolidation  of  its  various
elements  into  a  single  empire  ruled  by


40.  Historical
periods.

Semitic  kings  with  their  capital  at  Babylon.  The
second  period  begins  with  the  first  dynasty  of  Babylon,
to  whose  greatest  king,  Hammurabi,  was  principally
due  the  consolidation  of  the  Babylonian  empire,  and
extends  to  the  fall  of  the  power  of  Assyria,  whose  later
kings  included  Babylonia  in  their  dominions.  The
third  period  comprises  the  history  of  the  Neo-Babylonian  j
empire.

The  length  of  the  first  period  can  only  be  appro.\i-  I
mately  determined,  for  it  reaches  back  into  remote  |
antiquity  ;  the  second  period  deals  with  the  history  of
some  sevcMiteen  hundred  years,  extending  from  about
2300  to  625  n.  c;.  ;  the  third  period  is  by  far  the  shortest
of  the  three,  for  it  contains  the  history  of  an  empire
which  lasted  for  less  than  a  hundred  years,  from  Nabo-
polassar's  accession  to  the  throne  of  Babylon  in  625  B.C.
to  the  capture  of  the  city  by  Cyrus,  king  of  Persia,  in

538 B.C.

During  the  first  period  the  name  of  Babylon  is  not
known.  The  country  is  under  the  successive  domination
of  the  more  ancient  cities  of  the  land  until  the  Semitic
element  eventually  predominates.  During  the  second
period  Babylon  holds  her  place  as  the  centre  of  the
country  in  spite  of  the  influx  of  Kassite  and  Chaldean
tribes  and  the  opposition  of  Assyria.  In  the  third  period
the  magnificence  of  Babylon  became  one  of  the  wonders
of  the  ancient  world.

In  treating  the  earliest  period  of  the  history  of  the
country  we  are,  to  a  great  extent,  groping  in  the  dark.
p .. . Our  [principal  sources  of  information  are
. , the archaic inscriptions found  on  many
perioa. ^^  ^j^^  ^^^^^  ^^  ^^^  ^j^  Babylonian  cities,
and  these  have  been  considerably  increased  by  recent
excavations. In  order,  then,  to  understand  clearly  the
problems  they  present,  it  will  be  necessary  to  proceed
gradually  from the points that  may  be regarded as
definitely  fixed  into the regions  where  conjecture  still
holds her own. As the earliest date that can be
regarded  as  settled  is  that  of  Sargon I. ,  it  necessarily
forms  the  basis or  starting-point from which to  re-
construct the  history  of  the  period.

Nabonidus,  the  last  king  of  Babylon,  on  a  clay
cylinder  found  at  Abu-Habbah  records  the  fact  that
while  restoring  the  temple  of  the  Sun-god  in  that  city
he  came  upon  the  foundation-stone  of  Naram-Sin,  the
son  of  Sargon,  which  for  3200  years  no  king  that  went
before  him  had  seen.  As  the  cylinder  of  Nabonidus
was  inscribed  alx)ut  the  year  550  B.C.,  we  conclude
that  Naram-Sin  lived  about  3750  B.C.,  and  Sargon  his
father  about  3800  B.  c.

During  the  French  expedition  to  Mesopotamia  (185 1-
1854)  Oppert  found  in  Babylon  an  alabaster  vase  in-
scribed in  archaic  characters  with  the  name  of  Naram-Sin,
to  which  was  added  the  title  '  king  of  the  four  quarters. '
The  vase,  which  was  lost  in  the  waters  of  the  Tigris  on
23rd  May  1855,  formed  the  only  remains  of  this  king
that  were  recovered  until  the  American  expedition  in
1888.

J  A'£  1  i94if.
439


BABYLONIA

Of  Sargon,  however,  two  inscriptions  were  known  ;
the  one  on  the  cylinder  in  the  possession  of  M.  de
Clerq,  the  other  on  a  mace-head  in  the  British  Museum.
Some  doubt  was  thrown  on  the  identification  of  this
king  with  the  Sargon  of  Nabonidus  ;  for,  whilst  the
name  of  the  latter  was  written  hargina,  that  of  the
former  was  Sargani-.sar-ali.  Such  an  abbreviation,
however,  was  not  unu.sual  in  the  n.ames  of  many  of  the
early  kings,  and  the  identity  of  the  two  names  is  now
put  beyond  a  doubt  by  the  discovery  at  Nippur  of
inscriptions  of  Sargani-sar-ali  in  the  same  stratum
which  held  bricks  stamped  with  the  name  of  Naram-Sin.

That  the  empire  over  which  Sargon  ruled  was  exten-
sive is  attested  by  the  legends  that  at  a  later  period
gathered  round  his  name  (see  above,  §  36).  His  name
and  that  of  Naram-Sin  occur  in  an  astrological  tablet,'
in  which  expeditions  against  I'ha-nicia,  Elam,  etc.,  made
by  these  two  kings  during  certain  lunar  phases  and
astrological  conditions,  are  recounted  ;  and,  although  it
would  Ix;  rash  to  regard  such  statements  as  historical
on  the  authority  of  this  tablet  alone,  they  at  least  bear
witness  to  the  permanent  hold  which  the  name  of  Sargon
had  attained  in  the  popular  imagination.  In  a  cylinder '■*
of  Nabonidus  found  at  Mukayyar  (Ur)  the  title  '  king  of
Babylon  '  is  ascribed  to  both  Sargon  and  Naram-Sin  ;
but  it  is  probable  that  the  city  of  Agade,  not  Babylon,
formed  the  centre  of  their  empire,  as  '  king  of  Agade  '
is  the  title  by  which  Sargon  invariably  describes  himself
The  site  of  this  city  has  not  been  identified  ;  but  it  is
probably  to  be  sought  in  Northern  Babylonia.

Both  Sargon  and  Naram-.Sin  were  Semites,  and  the

_ ... extent  of  their  empire  shows  the  progress

,  .■ ,  which  the  Semitic  invaders  were  making

°  ' towardsthefinalsubjugationofthecountry.

The  name  of  another  king  who  was  probably  of  Semitic  origin
is  Uru-mu-u5,  possiljly  to  be  read  as  .Vlu^arsid,  and  from  the
fact  that  his  inscriptions  were  found  at  Nippur  near  those  of
Sargon,  which  they  closely  resemble  in  character,  it  may  be
assumed  that  he  belonged  to  about  the  same  period.  His
name  has  been  found  on  alabaster  vases  which  he  dedi-
cated and  placed  in  the  great  temple  of  Bel  at  Nippur;  the
vases,  he  states,  formed  part  of  the  spoil  captured  on  a  successful
expedition  against  Elam  and  Hara'se  to  the  K.  of  Babylonia.
Moreover,  ManiStusu,  whose  name  occurs  on  a  mace -head
preserved  in  the  British  Museum,  must  also  be  assigned  to
about  the  same  period.

In  addition  to  the  empire  established  by  Sargon,
there  is  not  lacking  evidence  of  the  existence  at  this
time  of  other  Semitic  kings  and  principalities.  The
inhabitants  of  Lulubi  spoke  a  Semitic  dialect,  as  is
evinced  by  the  inscription  engraved  on  the  face  of  the
rock  at  Ser-i-pul,  a  place  on  the  frontier  between
Kurdistan  and  Turkey.  The  inscription  accompanies
and  explains  a  relief  representing  the  goddess  Nini
granting  victory  over  his  foes  to  Anu-biinini,  king  of
Lulubi,  and  from  the  archaic  forms  of  the  characters
the  work  must  be  assigned  to  a  period  not  later  than
that  of  Sargon.  It  is  also  probable  that  the  inhabitants
of  Guti,  a  district  to  the  NE.  of  Babylonia,  were
Semites  ;  for  an  archaic  inscription  of  a  king  of  Guti,
which  was  found  at  Sippar,  is  written  in  Semitic
Babylonian.  This,  we  may  assume,  was  carried  to
Sippar  as  spoil  from  the  land  of  Guti,  though  it  is  also
possible  that  the  stone  containing  the  inscription  was
a  gift  of  the  king  of  Guti  to  the  temple  at  Sippar,  the
inscription  being  composed,  not  in  the  king's  own
language,  but  in  the  Semitic  dialect  of  Sippar.

Still, whilst  a  few  of  the in.scriptions  of  this  early

period  are  undoubtedly  Semitic  and  may  be  adduced  as

. evidence  of  the  first  settlements  of  the

43.  btunenan  g,.,„ites  in  Babylonia, the  majority  of

the  inscriptions  that  have  come  down

to  us  are  written  in  a  non-Semitic  tongue  (to  which  the

late  Sir  H.  Rawlinson  gave  the  name  Accadian), now

generally known as Sumerian.* These inscriptions

3  For  many  years  a  controversy  has  raged  around  the
character,  and  even  the  existence,  of  this  language.  The
theory put forward by Halivy that Sumcrian  was not a

440


BABYLONIA

have  been  found  in  the  moiimis  which  mark  the  sites
of  the  ancient  cities  of  the  land,  and  were  the  work  of
the  previous  inhabitants  of  the  country  whom  the
invading  Semites  eventually  displaced.  One  of  the
most  important  of  their  ancient  cities  is  to-day  repre-
sented by  the  mounds  known  as  Telloh,  situated  to
the  N.  of  Mukayyar  and  K.  of  W'arka,  on  the  E.
b;\nk  of  the  Salt-el- 1 1.ii.  These  mounds  mark  the  site
of  a  city  called  by  the  kings  and  governors  who  ruled
there  Isirpurla.  but  known  at  a  later  time  as  Lagas.
The  excavations  that  wire  l)egun  on  this  site  by  Ue
Sarzec  in  1877  have  resulted  in  a  rich  harvest  of  in-
scriptions on  statues,  cylinders,  cones,  tablets,  bricks,
etc..  from  which  it  is  possible  to  trace  the  history  of
the  city  throughout  a  long  [x;riod.  Its  earlier  rulers
called  themselves  'kings,"  the  later  ones  lx.'aring  the
title  of  patesi,  which  is  eciuivalent  to  the  .Assyrian
issakku.  The  word  patesi,  whilst  implying  that  the
ruler  is  the  representative  of  the  national  god,  indicates
the  possession  of  a  power  less  su])reme  than  that
attaching  to  the  word  lugal  (.Sem.  sarru),  'king,'  and
it  has  Ijeen  ingeniously  suggested  that  the  change  in
title  was  in  consequence  of  an  actual  change  in  the
fortunes  of  the  city,  the  rule  of  the  patesis  being  held
to  mark  the  subjection  of  their  city  to  another  jxnver.
The  manner  in  which  the  succession  of  the  various
kings  and  patesis  was  determined  has  been  already
referred  to  (see  above,  §  37)  ;  the  following  is  a  brief
description  of  their  history  based  on  those  results.

The  oldest  king  of  Sirpurla  known  to  us  is  in  all  proUability

Uriikafiina. .\fler  an  interval,  tlic  length  of  which  is  unknown,

we  fuid  Ur-Nina  on  the  throne;  and,  as  he

44.  Rulers  of  gives  to  neither  his  father  nor  grandfather
Sirpurla  the  title  of  king,  it  is  not  unreasonable  to
or  Laeash  conclude  that  he  was  the  originator  of  a  new
°  ■  dynasty,  a  dynasty  that  we  can  trace  tlirough
several  generations.  Ur-N ina  was  succeeded  by  his  son  -Vkurgal,
who  bore  both  the  titles,  king  and  patesi,  and  it  was  not  untd
the  reign  of  K-dingira-nagin,  .Vkurgal's  son  and  successor,  that
the  title  patesi  appears  to  have  ousted  that  of  king  permanently.
It  is  during  the  reign  of  E-dingira-nagin,  however,  that  we
find  the  first  record  of  any  extensive  military  operations  under-
taken by  the  inhabitants  of  .Sirpurla.  To  his  reign  belongs  the
famous  stele  of  vultures,  carved  to  commemorate  his  victory
over  the  city  the  name  of  which  is  provisionally  read  as  Isban.
E-dingira-nagin  was  succeeded  by  Ins  brother  En-annatuma  1.,
whose  son  Entena  and  grandson  En-anna-tuma  II.  con-
tinued the  succession.  After  a  second  interval  comes  Ur-Hau,
from  whom  the  throne  passes  through  his  daughter  to  his
son-in-law  Nanimaghani.  -Vfter  a  third  but  shorter  interval
there  followed  (judea,  who  conducted  a  successful  campaign
against  Elam,  but,  like  his  predecessors,  devoted  most  of  his
energies  to  building  operations. He  was  succeeded  by  his  son


Ur-Ningirsu  ;  and  hnally  there  must  be  placed  a  second  Akur^al
and  either  before  or  after  him  Lukani,  whose  son  Ghalalama
may  possibly  have  succeeded  him  on  the  throne.

The  monumental  inscriptions  of  these  old  kings  and .
patesis  of  Sirpurla  are,  with the  e.\ception of  one  of

.•. mi. • Ur-Bau  and  several  of  Gudea,  com-
45.  Their  ,1  j  ,,

. _i i-  paratively short, and are generally

Cnptions.  concerned  with  the  erection  of  build-
ings and  temples  in  the  city,  an  object  to  which  lx)th
kings  and  patesis  without  exception  devoted  themselves.
The  thou.sands  of  clay  tablets,  howe\er,  which  have
been  discovered  dating  from  this  period,  the  high  point
of  development  attained  in  their  sculpture  and  carving
in  relief,  the  elalx)rate  but  solid  construction  of  their
temples  and  palaces,  are  all  evidence  of  a  highly  !
develojK'd  civilisation  ;  and  the  c|uestion  at  once  arises  I
as  to  what  date  must  l)e  assigned
for  the  rise  of  the  kingdom  of
Sirpurla.  Additional  interest  is  lent  to  the  way  in
which  this  question  may  lie  answered  by  the  fact
that even the  earliest inscriptions  and  carvings that

language  but  merely  a  cabalistic  method  of  writing  invented
by  the  Semitic  Babylonians  themselves  w.-us  for  years  stoutly
defended  by  its  adherents  ;  it  has  now,  however,  given  way
before  the  results  of  recent  excavations.  The  thousands  of
archaic  tablets  found  at  Telloh  and  elsewhere  are  written
entirely  in  Sumerian  by  a  people  who  both  in  their  inscriptions
and  in  their  art  exhibit  no  traces  of  Semitic  origin.  The  exist-
ence of  .Sumerian  as  the  language  of  these  early  inhabitants  of
Babylonia  is  now  generally  admitted. See  also  below,  g  71  (end).


^16.  Their  date.


BABYLONIA

have  Ix?en  disccjvered  cannot  have  l>eeM  the  work  of  a
barbarous  race,  but  demand  the  assumption  that  at
least  one  thou.s;ind  years,  during  which  they  gradually
attained  their  high  level  of  civilisation  and  culture,  h.ad
])assed.

It  will  be  obvious  that,  as  the  date  of  Sargon  I.  is
already  fixed,  the  simplest  way  of  answering  the  question
and  of  assigning  a  date  to  the  earlier  kings  of  Sirpurla
is  to  {ietermine  the  relation  in  which  they  st<j<)d  to
Sarg<jn  I.  Until  recently  it  was  imi>.)ssible  to  come  to
any  definite  conclusion,  though  it  was  generally  hekl
that  the  archaic  forms  of  characters  on  the  inscriptions
of  the  kings  of  Sirpurla  favoured  the  theory  which
assigned  to  them  an  early  date.  The  excavations  at
Xipijur,  however,  have  now  yielded  sufficient  data  to
justify  a  more  conclusive  answer.

In  the  sanie  stratum  as  the  inscriptions  of  .Sargon
and  Alusarsid,  and  not  far  from  them,  was  found  a
fragment  of  a  vase  inscrilied  with  the  name  of  Kntena,
patesi  of  Sirpurla,  who  is  said  to  have  i)resented  the  vase
to  En-lilla  or  Hcl,  the  god  of  Nipinir.  It  w<juld  Ix--  rash
to  conclude  from  this  f;\ct  alone  that  Knten.a  was  the
contein[X)rary  of  .Sargon  I. ,  though  it  may  Ije  held  to
indicate  that  approximately  the  same  date  may  lie
assigned  to  Sargon  and  the  earlier  patesis  of  ."^irijurla.
I';xcavations,  however,  were  subse(|uenlly  extended  Ix-low
the  level  at  which  the  records  of  .Sargon  had  been  found,
and  traces  of  a  still  more  ancit-nt  civilisation  were
disclosed.  An  altar  with  a  small  enclosure  or  curb
around  it,  two  immense  vases  of  clay  standing  at  short
intervals  fronj  e;ich  other,  probably  on  an  inclined
plane  leading  up  to  the  altar,  and  a  massive  builtling
with  an  ancient  arch,  were  the  principal  architectural
remains  discovered.  However,  there  were  also  found
inscriptions  which,  though  occurring  at  a  hifjlier
level  and  mixed  with  the  inscriptions  of  Sargon,  are
probably  to  be  assigned  to  a  pre-.Sargonic  period.  As
the  majority  of  these  are  broken  into  small  fragm<;nts,
it  is  not  unlikely  that  they  were  intentionally  broken
and  scattered  by  some  subsetjuent  invader  of  the  country.
Gate-sockets  and  blocks  of  diorite,  however,  were  not
broken,  and  so  were  ni;ule  use  of  by  subsetjuent  kings.
Thus  both  .Sargon  I.  and  Bur-Sin  II.  used  for  their
own  inscriptions  the  blocks  which  already  bore  the
rough  inscription  of  Lugal-kigub-nidudu,  one  of  the
kings  of  this  early  period.  The  characters  in  these
early  inscriptions,  esi>ecially  on  the  vases  of  Lugal-
zaggisi,  the  most  powerful  of  these  early  kings,  bear  a
striking  resemblance  to  tho.se  employed  in  the  inscriptions
of  the  earliest  kings  of  Sirpurla  ( L'rukagina,  Ur-Xina,
and  K-dingira-nagin),  sharing  with  them  certain
peculiarities  of  form  which  are  not  met  with  elsewhere.
The  conclusion  that  they  date  from  al)out  the  siiine
period  is,  therefore,  not  unwarranted  ;  and.  as  this  period
nuist  Ix;  placed  Ix-fore  Sargon  I.,  we  are  justified  in
assigning  to  L'rukagina  a  date  not  later  than  4000  B.C.

To  trace  in  detail  the  history  of  the  predecessors  of

.Sargon  I.,  whose  existence  w.as  not  susjx?cted  until  the

_ .  lowest  strata  beneath  the  temple  of  F.ktir

47.  e  ore  ^^  Xippur  had  been  sifted,  is  a  task  that
°  '  requires  some  ingenuity.  Our  only  source
of  information  is  afforded  by  the  fragmentary  in.scrip-
tions  themselves ;  but,  as  many  of  these  tire  dupli-
cates, it  is  possible  to  reconstruct  their  original
text.  The  earliest  rulers  of  Babylonia,  such  as  Kn-
sag-sagana,  are  found  in  conflict  with  the  city  of  Kis,
and  spoil  from  Kis  was  from  time  to  time  placed  as  an
offering  in  the  temple  at  Nippur.  Sometimes  Kis  w.is
victorious,  and  then  the  king  of  Ki.s,  as  in  the  case  of
Ur-.Sulp.iuddu,  made  a  presentation  to  the  temple  at
Nippur  in  his  own  behalf  The  ultimate  superiority  of
Kis,  however,  w.as  assured  by  its  alliance  with  the
fxjwerful  city  of  Isban  ;  for  Lugal-zaggisi,  son  of  Ukus,
patesi  of  Isban,  on  coming  to  the  throne,  extended  his
sway  over  the  whole  of  Babylonia.  He  has  left  us  a
record  of  his  achievements  in  a  long  inscription  carved
443


48.  Ur.


circa  2800.


BABYLONIA

on  more  than  a  hundred  vases,  which  he  deposited  in
Nippur.  Though  he  especially  favoured  his  own  city
of  Isban,  l>och  was  probably  his  capital,  while  Ur,
Larsa,  and  Nippur  were  important  centres.  Lugal-
zaggisi's  empire  did  not  long  survive  him,  and  the  lead
in  Babylonian  politics  passed  to  the  city  of  Sirpurla.
K-dingira-nagin's  conquest  of  Isban,  however,  was  not
followed  up  by  his  successors  on  the  throne  ;  and  the
hegemony  passed  once  more  to  the  north,  this  time  to
Sargon  of  Agad^,  who  laid  all  Babylonia  under  his
sway,  the  rulers  of  Sirpurla  exchanging  the  title  of
king  for  that  of  patesi  in  consequence  of  their  subjection
to  him.  Such  may  be  taken  as  a  general  sketch  of  the
course  of  Babylonian  history  up  to  the  time  of  Sargon  I.
It  is  impossible  to  say  to  what  race  or  nationality
Lugal-zaggisi  and  the  earlier  kings  belonged,  though
we  may  mention  the  theory  of  Ililprecht,  who  sees  in
their  successes  against  the  cities  of  Babylonia  the  earliest
Semitic  invasions  of  the  country  ;  regarding  Kis  as
their  first  military  outpost,  and  Isban,  which  he  is
probably  wrong  in  identifying  with  Harran,  as  their
military  base.  Another  patesi  of  Isban  who  may  be
placed  in  this  early  period  is  Mul-Babbar  (in  Semitic,
Amcl-Samas),  whose  inscription  on  three  clay  cones  is
preserved  in  the  British  Museum.

After  the  fall  of  Sargon's  empire,  the  first  city  that
appears  to  have  gained  a  considerable  supremacy
throughout  Babylonia  is  Ur.  Under  Lugal-
kigub-nidudu  Ur  had  already  risen  to  some
importance  ;  but  the  city  had  been  incluiled  in  Sargon's
kingdom,  and  it  was  not  until  nearly  a  thousand
years  after  his  death  that  it  again  recovered
its  position.  Only  two  of  her  kings  at  this
later  period  are  known  to  us,  Ur-gur  and  Dungi.  In
addition  to  their  title  '  king  of  Ur,'  both  style  themselves
kings  of  Sumer  and  Akkad,  a  title  implying  that  many
cities  throughout  both  southern  and  northern  Babylonia
had  tendered  their  submission  and  acknowledged  allegi-
ance to  them.  The  monuments  themselves  bear  witness
that  this  title  was  no  empty  boast,  but  had  its  founda-
tion in  a  real  supremacy.

A  seal  cylinder  in  the  British  Museum  bears  a  dedication  to
Ur-(  lur,  '  the  mighty  hero,  king  of  Ur,'  by  a  '  patesi  of  the  city  of
15kun-Sin,  his  servant,' while  there  is  evidence  that  the  later
patesis  of  Sirpurla  were  subject  to  Ur,  the  Louvre  possessing  a
fragment  of  a  statue  dedicated  to  the  goddess  Bau  by  Ghala-
lama,  'son  of  Lukani,  patesi  of  .Sirpurla,  for  the  life  of  Dungi,
'the  mighty  king,  king  of  Ur,  king  of  Sumer  and  Akkad';  an
inscription  with  a  similar  purpose  of  the  time  of  Ur-Ningirsu,
Gudea's  son  and  successor,  is  preserved  in  the  British  Museum.
That  Ur-gur  was  a  great  builder  is  attested  by  the  many
short  inscriptions  on  bricks  recovered  from  the  ruins  of  the
buildings  which  he  either  founded  or  restored.  P'rom  these  we
gather  that  he  built  the  great  temple  of  the  Moon-god  in  Ur,
while  in  Erech  he  erected  a  temple  to  Nina,  the  goddess  Istar.
On  a  brick  from  a  tomb  discovered  by  Loftus  at  Senkereh,
the  ancient  Larsa,  is  recorded  the  fact  that  Ur-gur  built  a  temple
to  the  Sun-god  there,  and  bricks  found  at  Nippur  record  his
rebuilding  of  the  great  temple  of  E-kur  in  that  city.  Excava-
tions at  the  latter  place  show  that  this  temple  was_  larger  than
any  of  its  predecessors;  buildings  that  had  been  standing  since  the
time  of  Naram-Sin  he  razed  to  the  ground  in  order  to  erect  his
huge  platform  of  sun-dried  bricks,  m  the  NW.  corner  of  which
he  built  a  huge  zikkurratu  (temple  tower)  of  at  least  three  stories.
Ur-gur  thus  appears  to  have  erected  or  rebuilt  temples  in  most
of  the  principal  cities  of  Babylonia ;  in  his  zeal  lor  religion,
however,  he  did  not  neglect  to  strengthen  his  own  capital,  for
we  have  evidence  that  he  erected,  or  at  any  rate  rebuilt,  the
city-wall  of  Ur.  His  son  and  successor  Dungi,  'king  of  Ur,
king  of  Sumer  and  Akkad,  king  of  the  four  quarters,'  carried  on
the  work  of  temple-building  to  which  his  father  had  devoted
himself,  and  restored  the  temple  of  I.^Star  in  Erech.  An  in-
teresting clay  tablet  in  the  British  Museum  contains  a  copy  of
an  old  inscription  that  once  stood  in  a  temple  at  Cuthah.  The
copy  was  made  in  the  later  Babylonian  period  by  a  scribe  named
Bcl-uballit,  and  the  archaic  inscription,  which  his  care  has
rescued  from  oblivion,  records  the  erection  by  Dungi  of  a
temple  to  the  god  Nergal  in  the  city  of  Cuthah.

With  Dungi  our  knowledge  of  the  city  of  Ur  and  its
supremacy  comes  to  an  end  for  a  time.  Whether
|.  .  Dungis  succes.sors  retained  for  long  their
49.  lain,  j^^^ij  ^ygj.  jj^g  |.j.gj  pj-  liabylonia,  or  sjieedily
sank  into  a  position  of  dependence  to  some  other  city,
we  have  no  means  of  telling. When  we  once  more

443


BABYLONIA

come  across  inscriptions  we  see  that  the  lead  in  .'■  umer
and  Akkad  has  passed  into  the  hands  of  the  kings  of  Isin.
At  present  we  possess  inscriptions  of  four  kings  of  Isin  ;  Ur-
Ninib,  Libit-I.5tar,  Bur-Sin  I.,  and  I5me-Dag.-\n.  In  the  case
of  each  of  (hem,  before  their  chief  title  'king  of
Ctrca  2500.  i^i,,'  J5  given  special  mention  is  made  of  Nippur,
Ur,  Eridu,  and  Erech  as  be^ng  under  their  sway.  The  order  in
which  these  cities  are  mentioned  is  significant.  The  fact  that
Nipinir  heads  the  list  proves  that  Ur  sank  greatly  in  importance
after  the  days  when  she  held  the  lead  in  Sumer  and  Akkad.
A  fifth  king  of  Isin,  named  ISbigirra,  is  known  to  us  ;  the  only
evidence  of  his  e.\istence,  however,  is  the  occurrence  of  his  name
and  title  on  a  fragment  of  a  clay  tablet  in  the  British  Museum.
The  rule  in  Babylonia  now  passes  once  more  to  the  city  of  Ur,
which  regains  its  old  supremacy.  ISme-Dagan  was  the  last
king  of  Isin  who  retained  the  title  of  '  king  of  Sumer  and
Akkad,'  and  held  together  the  confederation  of  Babylonian
cities  which  that  name  implies  ;  we  (ind  his  son

50.  2na  Dyn. erecting  a  temple  for  the  life  of  Gungunu,  king
of  Ur.  of  Ur,  as  a  token  of  homaKe. Under  Gungunu

began  the  second  dynasty  of  Ur,  to  which  the
circa  2400. kings  Bur-Sin  II.,  Ine-Sin,  and  Gamil-Sin  be-
long. The  many  inscriptions  on  clay  tablets
that have been  recovered, dated in the  reigns  of  these  three
kings,  testify  to  the  great  commercial  prosperity  of  Babylonia
at  this  time. The  rise  of  the  city  ol  Larsa  followed

51.  Larsa. the second dyn.-isty  of  Ur. The  kings of  the

former  city  held  Ur  as  a  dependency,  and  appear
to  have  extended  their  rule  still  farther  afield,  for  they  assume
also  the  title  'king  of  Sumer  and  Akkad."  The  two  principal
kings  of  Larsa  were  Nur-Kamman  and  his  son  Sin-iddina.
Both  erected  temples  in  Ur,  and  the  latter  founded
Ctrca  2300.  a  temple  to  the  Sun-god  in  his  capital.  Sin-iddina
also,  after  meeting  with  success  in  the  field,  turned  his  attention
to  the  internal  improvement  of  his  territory.  He  rebuilt  on  a
larger  scale  the  wall  of  Larsa,  and  by  cutting  a  canal  obtained
for  that  city  a  constant  supply  of  water.

Sin-iddina  does  not  mention  the  name  of  the  enemy
his  victory  over  whom  he  records. It  has  been  sug-
pi  gested, however, with great  probability,

■  that  it  was  F.lani  whom  he  repulsed.  This
must  have  been  the  period  of  the  Elamite  invasion
to  which  Asur-bani-pal  refers.  On  taking  the  city  of
Susa,  about  650  B.C.,  Asur-bani-pal  relates  that  he
recovered  the  image  of  the  goddess  Nana,  which  the
I-.lamite  Kudur-Nanhundj  had  carried  off  from  Krech
1635  years  before — i.e.,  about  2285  B.C.  Though  Sin-
iddina  repulsed  the  Elamites,  he  did  not  check  them
for  long.  A  few  years  later  we  find  them  under  the
leadership  of  Kudur-Mabug,  son  of  Simti-silhak,
again  invading  Babylonia.  This  time  they  met  with
more  success  and  obtained  a  jjermanent  footing  in
the  south.  Kudur-Mabug  was  not  king  of  Elam.  He
styles  himself  '  prince  of  the  Western  land ' :  that  is  to
say,  he  was  ruler  of  the  tract  of  land  lying  on  the
W.  frontier  of  Elam.  Erom  this  position  he  invaded
the  country,  and,  having  established  himself  as  king  of
S.  Babylonia,  he  erected  a  temple  in  Ur  to  the  Moon-
god  in  gratitude  for  his  success.  His  son,  Rim-aku,
succeeded  him  and  attempted  to  consohdate  his
kingdom,  restoring  and  rebuilding  Ur  and  extending
his  influence  over  Erech,  Larsa,  and  other  cities  ;  his
usual  titles  were  '  exalter  of  Ur,  king  of  Larsa,  king  of
Sumer  and  Akkad.'  It  is  a  period  of  much  interest  for
the  biblical  student  (see  Cukuoki.aomer).

During  the  second  dynasty  of  Ur  the  city  of  Babylon
had  enjoyed  a  position  of  independence,  with  her  own
_  .  ^  kings  and  system  of  government ;  but  her
03.  caoyion.  j^fiuence  does  not  appear  to  have  extended
beyond  the  limits  of  the  city.  It  was  not  until  the
reign  of  Hammu-rabi,  the  contemporary  of  Sin-iddina
and  Rim-Aku,  that  she  attained  the  position  of  im-
portance in  Babylonia  which  she  held  without  inter-
rujition  for  nearly  two  thousand  years.  The  dynasty  to
which  Hammu-rabi  belongs  was  called  by  the  native
historians  the  '  Dynasty  of  Babylon,'  and,  as  far  as  we
at  present  know,  forms  the  limit  to  which
Ctrca  2400.  jj^^.y  traced  back  the  existence,  or  at  any
rate  the  indejjendence,  of  their  city.

The  dyn.isty  was  founded  about  2400  B.C.  by  Sumu-abi,  who
was  succeeded  by  Sumula-iluand  Zahum  his  son.  It  is  possible
that  on  Z.-ibum's  death  a  usurper,  Immeru,  attempted  to  ascend
the  throne  ;  but  his  rule  cannot  have  been  for  long,  as  scribes  of
contract  tablets  do  not  give  him  the  title  of  king,  and  his
name  is  omitted  from  the  list  of  kings  of  Dynasty  I.,  Zabum's


BABYLONIA

koii,  Apil-Sin,  being  stated  to  h»ve  directly  succeeded  his  father.
Of  the  reign  of  Apil-Sin's  son,  Sin-nuil>.illi(,  we  know  nothing,
his  only  claim  to  remembrance  being  tliai  lie  was  the  father  of
^aminu-ralii.

It is  difficult to  determine accurately the position
otcupietl  by  Habylon  when  yammu-rabi  ascended the
84 Hamrau-  '^''""*-'- '^^ni  she  was  already  beginning
rabi  ^'^  extend  her  sway  over  the  districts  in

her  iniincdiato  neighbourhood  we  may
conclude  from  a  reference  on  a  cylinder  of  Natxjnidus,
who  states  that  the  temples  of  the  Sun-god  and  of  the
goddess  Anunitu  at  Sippar  had  been  falling  into  decay
'since  the  time  of  Zabum  '  ;  the  phrase  implies  th.-tt
Zabum  had  at  any  rate  rebuilt  these  temples,  and  nmst,
therefore,  have  includetl  Sippar  within  his  sphere  of
influence.  We  may  regard  it  as  certain,  however,  that
the  authority  of  the  city  had  not  penetrated  into  southern
IJabylonia.  On Hammu-rabi's accession  he  first

devoted himself to the internal improvement of  his

circa  saSe,  ^^''''''^''''y-  J"  th<^  P^^^  L)o'h  Babylon  and
^'  Sijjpar  had  suffered  from  floods,  and  the
recurrence  of  these  he  sought  to  diminish  by  erecting
dams  and  cutting  canals.  One  inscription  of  his,
written  both  in  Sumerian  and  in  Semitic  Babylonian
on  clay  cylinders  in  the  British  Museum,  reads  as
follows : —

yan\mu-rabi,  the  mighty  king,  king  of  Babylon,  king  of  the
four  quarters,  the  founder  of  tlie  land,  the  king  whose  deeds
unto  the  heart  of  §ama5  and  Marduk  are  well-pleasing,  am  I.
The  summit  of  the  wall  of  Sippar  like  a  great  mountain  with
earth  I  raised.  Witli  a  swamp  I  surrounded  it.  The  canal  of
Sippar  to  Sippar  I  dug  out  and  a  wall  of  safety  I  erected  for  it.
^anunu-rabi,  the  founder  of  the  land,  the  king  whose  deeds  unto
the  heart  of  SamaS  and  Marduk  are  well -pleasing,  am  I.
Sippar  and  Babylon  in  a  peaceful  habitation  ,1  caused  to  dwell
continuously.  Hammu-ralii,  the  darling  of  Sama^,  the  beloved
of  Marduk,  am  1.  That  which  from  days  of  old  no  king  for
his  king  had  built,  for  SamaS  my  lord  gloriously  have  I  accom-
plished.

In  addition  to  his  works  at  Sippar  we  learn  from
another  inscription  that  he  cut  the  '  Hammu-rabi  canal,"
on  both  sitles  of  which  he  sowed  corn-fields.  He
erected  a  granary  in  Babylon,  in  which  he  stored  grain
for  use  in  years  of  famine  or  scarcity.  The  inscription
recording  the  erection  of  the  granary  has  perished  ;  but
we  possess  a  copy  of  it  in  clay,  made  in  the  N'eo-Baby-
lonian  period  by  Rimut-Gula,  and  deposited  in  Babylon
in  the  temple  E-zida.  Hammu-rabi's  works  of  imjirove-
ment,  however,  were  not  confined  to  Sippar  and  Babylon.
As  he  extended  his  authority  throughout  the  country,
he  introduced  the  same  enlightened  methods,  rebuilding
the  temples  of  the  gods  in  the  various  cities,  conciliating
the  inhabitants,  and  out  of  scattered  principalities  form-
ing a  single  and  organic  kingdom,  with  its  metropolis
at  Babylon.  The  principal  enemy  to  Babylonian

independence  at  this  period  was  P31am  ;  but  after  a  series
of  campaigns  Hammu-rabi  signally  defeated  her,  and
effectually  hindercnl  her  advances  to  the  S.  and  W. ,
after  which  he  was  again  at  liberty  to  devote  himself  to
the  material  improvement  of  his  people.  Hammu-rabi
was  not  the  first  king  of  Babylonia  to  form  a  great
empire  out  of  scattered  elements.  Lugal-zaggisi  and
Sargon  I.  had  already  made  this  achievement,  and  it
is  not  unlikely  that  their  empires  considerably  exceeded
that  of  Hammu-rabi  in  extent.  Hammu-rabi's  work,
however,  is  distinguished  from  theirs  by  «s  permanence.
Whilst  Isban  and  Agad^  soon  sank  back  into  compara-
tive obscurity,  Babylon  remained  the  chief  town  of  the
kingdom  throughout  the  whole  course  of  its  history.
Hamnui-rabi  was  succeeded  by  his  son  Samsu-iluna,  the  other
65  His  '''Pl??  of  the  first  dynasty  being  KbiSum,  Am-
nii-ditana, Ammi-zaduga, and Samsu-ditana,

successors, who follow  one  another  in  direct  succession.

circa  2230.  Samsu-iluna  continued  his  father's  work  of  ir-
rigation, and  we  know  from  two  inscriptions
that  he  budt  many  temples  to  the  gods.  Of  his  successors,
however,  we  possess  few  inscriptions,  though  manv  contracts,
dated  m  the  reign  of  each  of  the  kings  of  this  dynasty,  have
been  found  which  throw  an  interesting  light  on  the  private  and
social  sides  of  Babylonian  life  at  this  period.

The second dynasty consists of eleven kings —
445


BABYLONIA

Iluma-ilu,  Itti-ilu-nibi,  Damki-ilisu,  Is-ki-bal,  and  his
66.  2nd  Dyn.  ^^'''''her  Su-us-si,  (Jul-ki-iar  and  his  son

Uru-Azag.  l^irgal-dara-mas,  and  his  grandson  A-
dara-kalama, A-kur-ul-ana, Melam-

arca  2090.  miiiiai.  and  Ivn-gamil.  Of  this  dynjisty
we  know  nothing,  though  it  has  U-en  conjectured  with
some  probability  that  it  was  during  this  |jcriod  that
the  Kassites  first  invaded  liabylonia.  IX-scending  frcjm
the  mountainous  territoi^y  on  the  lx>rders  of  Media
and  Elam,  they  overran  the  country  and  took  ]X)sses-
sion  of  the  cities  ;  and  at  the  beginning  of  tlie  third
dynasty  we  find  them  firmly  seated  on  the  throne.
So  far  as  we  know,  they  were  never  ejected  by  force,
but  were  absorbed  in  protcss  of  time  by  the  Semitic
element  of  the  nation,  which  gradually  recovered  its
predominance.

There  were  thirty-six  kings  of  the  third  dynasty  ;  but
only  the  names  of  the  kings  at  the  begiiming  and  of  those

B7  3rd  Dvn.  ^^  ''^*''  ^'"'^  "^  *'^*^  dynasty  have  lx.-en  pre-
^^  served  in  the  Babylonian  list  of  kings.
Other  sources  of  information,  however,  now  become
available  ;  the  '  .Synchronous  History  '  gives  a  rdsumd  of
the  relations  between  Babylonia  and  Assyria,  which
during  the  early  part  of  the  third  Babylonian  dynasty
attained  its  independence  (cp  Assvki.\,  §  25);  the
account  furnished  by  the  '.Synchronous  Hi.story"  is
supplemented  by  the  mutilated  text  of  a  somewhat
similar  Babylonian  chronicle  ;  the  official  corresjxjnd-
ence  between  I^bylonia  and  Egypt  during  a  small  part
of  this  jieriod  is  preserved  on  some  of  the  tablets
found  at  Tell  el-Amarna  ;  and,  finally,  inscrijnions  of
several  of  the  kings  themsehes  have  been  recovered,  as
well  as  contract-tablets  dated  in  their  reigns.

The  first  king  of  the  dynasty  was  Gandis,  who  w,xs  succeeded
/-/.vvj  TTotr  ^y  Aguni-.si,  (ju-ia-.si,  Ui-si,  .'Vdu-me-ur,  and  Uz-
cnca  1725.  iji.u.n.ai.  Here  the  gap  occurs  in  the  list  of
kings  ;  and  it  is  probably  at  some  point  in  this  gap  that  we
must  pLice  .\gum,  who  is  known  to  us  from  a  long  inscrijjtion,
a  copy  of  which  in  Neo-Assyrian  characters  was  preserved  in
the  library  of  .\5ur-brini-pal  ;  from  it  we  learn  that  he  recovered
.•  J  coo  ^"'^  restored  to  the  temple  of  E-sagila  in  Babylon
6  ca  1500.  (-(.ftain  iin.iges  of  Marduk  and  of  the  goddess
Zarpanitu,  which  had  been  carried  otf  to  the  land  of  Hani.

A  later  place  in  the  same  gap  must  be  assigned  to
Kallimma-Sin  (or  Kadashman-Bel  ?  cp  Knudtzon,  ZA
15  269/),  four  of  whose  letters  are  in  the  Amarna  series;
this  correspondence  ser\es  to  indicate  the  intimate  re-
lations between  Egyjn  and  Babylonia  at  this  period,
both  the  sister  and  daughter  of  Kallimma-Sin  being
among  the  princesses  of  western  Asia  whom  the  king  of
I'.gypt  married.  The  order  of  the  other  kings,  whose
names  have  been  recovered  and  must  be  placed  within
the  same  gap  in  the  list  of  kings,  has  not  yet  been
ascertained.

It  has  recently  been  suggested,  for  example,  that  Sag.iSalti-
BurLx?,  the  son  of  Kudur-Hcl,  should  be  placed  before  Kar.i-
inda.5,  though  a  later  date  is  possible ;  moreover,  Kurigalzu
I.,  the  son  of  Kadasman-Harbe,  is  usually  placed  after  and  not
before  Kara-indas,  though  a  suggestion  has  latelv  been  made  to
the  contrary.  According  to  the  'Synchronous  History'  Kara-
indaS  was  a  contemporary  of  the  Assyrian  king,  .-VSur-liel-niSisu,
between  whom  and  A5ur-uballit  at  least  two  kings,  Pu7ur-A5ur
and  A5ur-nadin-ahe,  occupied  the  throne  of  Assyria ;  from  the
same  document  we  know  that  between  Kara-inda5  and  Kara-
harda.5,  the  contemporarj'  of  Aiur-uballit,  at  least  one  king,
Burna-Buri.-vS,  occupied  the  throne  of  B.-ibylon  ;  yet  on  the
similar  Babylonian  chronicle  Kara-inda^  is  mentioned  as  the
son-in-law  of  A5ur-uballit,  and  the  father  of  Kara-hardaS.  It  is
p<.)ssible  to  reconcile  these  two  accounts  only  on  the  sup|>osition
that  the  Kara-inda5  of  the  '  Synchronous  History'  is  not  to  be
identified  with  the  son-in-law  of  A.^ur-uballit.  On  this  assump-
tion, and  at  the  same  time  admitting  that  certain  pl.-ices  in  the
order  of  succession  are  not  definitely  ascertained,  we  are  still
able  to  summarise  the  chief  events  of  the  period.  Kara-
ind-oS  is  the  first  I'abylonian  king  mentioned  in  the  'Synchronous
History,"  where  he  is  said  to  have  formed  a  treaty  with  ASur-
jj  bCl-niSiSu,  king  of  Assyria ;  simiUir  friendly  re-
Circa  I4»0.  l^iions  with  the  northern  kingdom  were  probably
maintained  by  Kurigalzu  I.  ami  his  father  Kadaiman-Harbe.
•  ,  ,  ,_  Burna-Buria.5,  the  son  of  KungaUu  I.,  formed  a
circa  1440.  fresh  treaty  with  Assyria  concerning  the  frontier
between  the  two  kingdoms,  and  built  a  temple  to  the  Sungodat
Larsa,  as  we  learn  from  a  brick  that  has  been  recovered  from  its
ruin.s.  A.^ur-uballi(,  who  succeeded  A$ur-nadin-al}£  on  the  throne
of  Assyria, strengthened the  ties  between  his  kingdom  and

446


BABYLONIA

Baliyloiiia  by  marrying  his  daughter  Muballijat-SerQa  to  a
king  of  Babylonia,  who  bore  the  name  of  Kara-inda.^  ;  and  when
his  grandson,  Kara-hardas,  the  son  of  Kara-indaJ,  succeeded
to  the  throne  of  Babylon,  the  relations  between  the  two  coun-
tries were  still  more  cordial.  The  Kassite  troops,  however,
possibly  jealous  of  Assyrian  influence,  slew  Kara-hardas  and  set
the  usurper  Nazi-bug:uS  on  the  throne.  The  death
Circa  1400.  ^,f  Kara-hardai  led  to  the  invasion  of  Babylonia  by
.\sur-uballit,  who  avenged  his  grandson  by  slaying  Nazi-bugaS,
and  putting  Kurigalzu  II.,  a  son  of  Burna-Buria-JS,  the  former
king  of  Babylon,  in  his  place.  Kurigalzu  II.  was  ambitious  to
extend  the  boundary  of  his  kingdom  ;  and  with  this  end  in  view
he  undertook  a  campaign  against  Klam,  the  capital  of  wliicli  he
coii'iuercd  and  sacked,  as  we  learn  from  an  inscription  on  an
agate  tablet  which  was  found  at  Nippur.  On  undertaking
hostilities  against  Assyria,  however,  he  was  defeated  by  Bel-
o  nirari,  and  was  forced  to  accept  the  terms  offered
Circa  1380.  jjy  ,i,g  i,,,n.r  with  regard  to  the  boundary  between
the  two  kingdoms.  The  ne.xt  defeat  by  the  Assyrians  which  the
Babylonians  sustained  was  in  the  reign  of  Nazi-maruttas,  the  son
of  Kurigalzu  II.,  when  Kamman-nirari  inflicted  a
circa  1340.  gig,,^!  Jefeat  on  the  Bal)ylonian  forces  and  extended
the  Assyrian  boundary  still  farther  southward.  Kadasman-
Turgu,  whose  name  was  also  written  Kadasman-Bcl,  the  son
of  Nazi-maruttas,  succeeded  his  father  on  the  throne,  and
was  in  turn  succeeded  by  his  son,  whose  name,  occurring  in
a  broken  inscription  from  Nippur,  may  probalily  be  restored
[KadasmanJ-Burias.  The  Babylonian  List  of  Kings  furnishes
the  names  of  the  last  kings  of  the  dynasty.  Of  Is-am-me-  .  .  .
-ti  we  know  nothing,  and  of  Sagasalti-Surias  only  the  fact  that
he  dedicated  an  object  to  Bel  and  placed  it  in  the  temple  at
Nippur.  .Sagasalti-Surias  was  succeeded  by  his  son  Bibe,  and
the  names  of  the  next  three  occupants  of  the  throne  are  Bel-
Sum-iddina,  KadaSman-Harbe,  and  Kamman-Sum-iddina.  We
do  not  know  the  relations  between  Babylonia  and  .Vssyria  dur-
ing the  early  part  of  this  period  ;  but  it  is  probable  that  the  last
three  kings  acknowledged  the  .supremacy  of  .Xssyria.  Tukulti-
Ninib,  king  of  -Assyria,  to  whom  Rammfm-nirari  III.  ascribed
the  title  '  king  of  Sumer  and  Akkad,'  invaded  Babylonia,  cap-
tured Babylon,  and  for  seven  years  maintained  his  hold  upon
the  country.  On  the  death  of  Rammrin-i5um-iddina,  however,
the  Babylonian  nobles  placed  his  son  Ramman-.'Sum-usur  on
the  throne,  and,  proclaiming  him  king,  threw  off  the  As-
syrian yoke.  Subsequently,  during  the  reign  of  Ramman-5um-
....  usur,  the Assyrians  suffered a  crushing  defeat ;

cina  1210.  their  king,  Bel-kudur-usur,  was  slain  in  the  battle  ;
and  although  Ramman-sum-usur,  on  following  up  his  victory  by
an  invasion  of  Assyria,  was  repulsed  by  Ninib-pal-Ksara,  he
recovered  a  considerable  portion  of  Babylonian  territory.  Dur-
ing the  reigns  of  Meli-sihu,  and  of  his  .son,  Marduk-pal-iddina,
the  Assyrians  made  no  attempt  to  wipe  out  the  reverse  they  had
sustained.  On  the  accession  of  Zamama-sum-iddina,  however,
A.sur  -  dan  crossed  the  frontier  and  recaptured
Circti  1155.  several  Babylonian  cities.  Zamama-.sum-iddina
reigned  only  one  year,  and  was  succeeded  by  Bcl-sum-iddina  II.,
the  last  king  of  the  Kas.site  dynasty.  Under  this  king  the
country  suflcred  attacks  from  Elam,  and  the  discontent  and
misery  which  followed  the  defeats  sustained  by  the  Babylonians
brought  alK)Ut  the  fall  of  the  dynasty.

The  fourth  dynnsty  is  called the  dynasty  of  Pas^  ;

who  its  founder  was  we  do  not  know,  though  an  early

, , ^ place  in  it  must  be  assigned  to  Nebuchad-

■p y.  ,^'  rezzar  I. In  one  of  the  two  monuments

(Fase). jj^^j ^^.^ possess of this king he styles

himself  '  the .Sun  of  his land, who  makes  his  people

prosperous,  the  protector  of  boundaries';  and  it  is  certain

that  to  a  great  extent  he  restored  the  fallen  fortunes  of

the kingciom. He successfully  prosecuted campaigns

against  Elam  on  the  east,  he  conquered  the  Lulubi  on

the  north, and even marched victoriously

3  •  jpHQ  Syria, .\gainst  Assyria, however,  he

did  not  meet  with  similar  success.

On  Nebuchadrezzar's  crossing  the  frontier,  ASur-reJ-iSi,
king  of  .Assyria,  marched  against  him,  and  Nebuchadrezzar,
who  was  not  then  prepared  to  meet  an  army  of  the  A.s-
syrians,  burnt  what  engines  of  war  he  had  with  him,  in  order
to  facilitate  his  retreat.  He  soon  returned  with  reinforce-
ments ;  but  A.5ur-re5-i5i,  who  had  also  strengthened  his  army,
defeated  him,  plundered  his  camp,  and  carried  off  forty  of  his
chariots.  A  king  who  reigned  early  in  the  dynasty  and  may
possibly  have  .succeeded  Nebuchadrezzar  is  Bel-nadin-aplu,
whose  name  is  known  from  a  'boundary  stone'  dated  in  the
fourth  year  of  his  reign.  Under  Mardnk-nSdin-ahc  Assyria
and  Babylonia  were  again  in  conflict.  It  is  probable  that  this
king  enjoyed  a  temporary  success  again.st  Tiglath-pileser  I.,
during  which  he  carried  off  from  the  city  of
Circa  mo.  K^allati  the  images  of  the  gods  Ramman  and
Sala  which  are  mentioned  by  Sennacherib  in  his  inscription  on
the  rock  at  Bavian.  This  campaign  is  not  mentioned  in  the
'Synchronous  History,"  though  in  the  beginning  of  the  account
of  the  campaign  there  mentioned,  which  ended  di.sastrously  for
Babylonia,  the  two  kings,  it  is  said,  set  their  chariots  in  battle
array  'a second  time"  (see  Assyria,  S  28). This  second  cam-

447


BABYLONIA

paign  consisted  of  a  series  of  successes  for  Tiglath-pileser,  who,
after  defeating  Marduk-nadin-ahe  in  Akkad,  captured  Babylon
itself  and  other  important  cities  in  the  northern  half  of  the
kingdom.  .\siir-bel-kala,  Tiglath-pileser's  .successor  on  the
throne  of  Assyria,  changed  his  father  s  policy  and  formed  treaties
with  the  Babylonian  king  Marduk-Sapik-z£r-mati.l  On  this
king's  death  Kamman-aplu-iddina,  a  man  of  ob-
Circa  1 100.  scure  origin,  was  raised  to  the  throne  of  Babylon,
and  A.?ur-bel-kala,  in  pursuance  of  his  policy,  allied  himself  to
the  new  king  by  a  marriage  with  his  daughter.  Only  the
beginnings  of  the  names  borne  by  the  last  three  kings  of  the
dynasty  are  preserved  in  the  List  of  Kings.

The  fifth  dynasty  was  called  the  dynasty  of  the  '  Sea-
land,'  and  was  a  short  one,  consisting  of  only  three
Kth  T»  '^•"gs,  Simmas-sihu,  Ea-mukin-zer,  and
■  ,„ , '^  Ka.s.su-nadin-ahi. It is not  improbable

..^  '■  that  the  Chaldean  tribes,  who  are  not
-'  '  actually  mentioned  in  the  inscriptions  be-
fore the  time  of  Asur-na.sir-pal  and  .Shalmaneser  II.,
were  even  at  this  early  period  making  their  inlluence
felt,  overrunning  southern  Babylonia  and  spreading
themselves  throughout  the  country  ;  and  the  fact  that
at  a  later  time  we  find  them  especially  connected  with
the  district  termed  the  '  Sea-land '  in  S.  Babylonia  lends
colour  to  the  suggestion  that  the  dynasty  of  the  Sea-
land  was  of  Chaldean  origin.

Of  the  three  kings  of  the  dynasty  f^a-mukln-zer  reigned  but  a
few  months  ;  the  other  two  kings,  who  occupied  the  throne  for
longer  periods,  are  mentioned  by  Nabu-aplu-iddina  in  connection
with  the  fortunes  of  the  temple  of  the  Sun-god  at  Sippar.  At  the
time  of  Simma.s-.sihu  this  temple  was  in  ruins  in  consequence
of  the  troubles  and  disturbances  in  Akkad,  the  powerful  tribes
of  the  Sutu  having  previou.sly  invaded  the  country,  laying  the
temple  in  ruins  and  breaking  up  the  sculptures.  .Simmas-sihu
partially  restored  the  structure  of  the  temple,  and  placed  it  in
charge  of  a  priest  for  whose  maintenance  he  appointed  regular
offerings.  In  the  violent  death  of  SimmaJ-Sihu,  of  which  we  learn
from  the  fragment  of  a  Babylonian  Chronicle,  and  in  the  short-
ne.ssof  the  reign  of  Ea-mukln-zer,  we  may  probably  see  additional
indications  of  the  disturbed  state  of  the  country  at  this  time.
Under  Ka.ssu-nadin-ahi  the  general  distress  was  increa.sed  by  a
famine,  in  consequence  of  which  the  regular  offerings  for  the
temple  of  Samas  at  Sippar  ceased.

The  first  king  of  the  sixth  dynasty  was  E-ulbar-sakin-5iim,
and  on  his  accession  to  the  throne  K-kur-.'Num-uSabii,  the  priest
cft  ctVi  'nim  whom  Simmas-§iliu  had  placed  in  charge  of
60.  bin  liyn. t^e  temple  at  Sippar,  complained  to  the  king

(of  Bazi). that  the  offerings  had  ceased. On  hearing  the

circa  1021;  ^'^'^  °f  'he  temple's  resources  E-ulbar-Sikin-
•-'■  JSum  increased  the  regular  offerings  and  endowed
the  temple  with  certain  property  situated  in  Babylon.  The
sixth  dynasty  con.sisted  of  only  three  kings,  E-ulbar-5akin-5um
being  succeeded  by  Ninib-kudurri-usur  and  .Silanim-Sukamuna  ;
it  was  termed  the  dynasty  of  the  House  of  Bazi,  and  each  of  the
three  kings  on  a  fragment  of  a  chronicle  is  termed  a  'son  ofBazi.'

From  this  point  onwards  for  nearly  a  hundred  years

there  is  a  gap  in  our  knowledge  of  Babylonian  history.

After  the  dynasty  of  the  House  of  Bazi  an

61.  Gap. lllamite  occupied  the  throne  for  si.\  years  ;

but  his  name  is not known, nor are  the

circumstances  that attended  his  accession.

He  did not perpetuate his hold upon the country  ;

for  on his death the  rule  again  passed

/R  h  1 ■  '  *° "■^'''''  Babylonians,  the  kings  of  the

(Babylon), ^jgj^jj^ dynasty, which was the second

to  bear  the  title  '  the  dynasty  of  Babylon.'

The  names  of  the  early  kings  of  the  dynasty  are  not  preser\-ed,
though  Sibir,  a  Babylonian  king  whom  A!5ur-nasir-pal  mentions
as  having  destroyed  a  city  which  he  himself  rebuilt,  is  probably  to
be  placed  in  this  period. The  first  king  of  this  dynasty  of  whose
•  '■*'§"  details  are  known  is  SamaS-mudammik,  who

circa  910.  jy^grgj  ^  serious  defeat  at  the  hands  of  Kamman-
nirari  II.,  king  of  Assyria.  Against  Nabu-5um-i5kun,  his  suc-
cessor on  the  throne,  Kamman-nirari  scored
Circa  900.  another  victory,  .several  B.ibylonian  cities  falling
into  his* hands,  though  we  subsequently  find  him  on  good  terms
with  Assyria  and  allying  himself  to  Nabu-sum-i5kun,  or  possibly
his  successor,  each  monarch  marrying  the  other's  daughter.
00  Nabi'i-aplu-iddina  is  the  next  king  who  is  known
Circa  880.  ,„  have  ruled  in  Babylon,  and,  though  he  aided
the  people  of  Suhi  against  A.sur-nasir-pal,  his  relations  with
Shalmaneser  II.  were  of  a  friendly  nature.  He  is  the  king  who
restored  and  endowed  so  richly  the  temple  of  .SamaS  at  Sippar,
digging  in  the  ruins  of  former  structures  till  he  found  the  ancient
image  of  the  god.  He  restored  and  redecorated  the  shrine,  and
with  much  ceremony  established  the  ritual  and  offerings  for  the
god,  placing  them  under  the  direction  of  Nabu-nadin-Sum,  the


area  1005.


i


1  The  name  has  also  been  read  Marduk-Sapik-kuIlat.
448


BABYLONIA

son  of  the former priest E-kur-sum-uSab-Si. Marduk-Sum- i
kldina  Miccccilcd his  father  on the throne ; but his  tirother '
Q  Mardiik-lxil-usati  headed  a  revolt  against  him,  and

Circa  B50.  ,.^,„,^.|i^.j  him  to  tall  in  the  aid  of  Shalnianeser
of  Assyria,  who  defeated  the  rebels  and  restored  the  land  to
order.  Shalmaneser's  son  and  successor,  SamSi-Kamman  II.,
was  not  on  the  same  terms  of  friendship  with  Babylonia.  He
directed  an  expedition  against  that  country  and  plundered  many  ]
cities  before  meeting  with  serious  opposition.  Marduk-balatsu-  j
Q  ikbi, the Kabylonian  kinK, had meanwhile  col-

Ctrca  a 1 2.  |^.,^j  ^is  forces,  which  included  bands  from  i:iam,
Chaldea,  and  other  districts ;  and  the  two  armies  met  near  the
city  of  Dur-I'apsukal.  Marduk-balatsu-ikbi  was  totally  de-
feated :  50(X)  of  his  troops  were  slain  ;  zcxx)  more  were  captured  ;
and  rich  booty,  including  100  chariots  of  war,  fell  into  the  hands
of  the  .Assyrians.  Ramman-nirari  III.,  the  successor  of  Sanisi-
Rammfm,  also  subjugated  a  considerable  portion  of  Babylonia,
carrying  away  to  Assyria  Bau-ah-iddina,  the  Babylonian  king,
together  with  the  treasures  of  hispalace.

Here  the  record  of  the  '  Synchrotious  History  '  ceases,
and  there  fcjliows  another  gap,  of  alxjut  fifty  years,  in
our  knowledge  of  the  history  of  the  country.

The  next  king  of  Babylon  \vho.se  name  is  known
is N'abu-suin-iskun — the  first  name  which  occurs  after

63  Nabo ^^^  hreak  in  the  List  of  Kings. His  suc-
■  cessor was  Xabfi-nasir, the  Nabonassar

of  the  Ptolemaic  Canon  ;  and  with  this
'■^''  king our  knowledge of the Babylonian

succession  becomes  fuller,  as,  in  addition  to  the  evi-
dence afforded  by  the  List  of  Kings,  the  information
contained  in  the  Babylonian  Chronicle  and  the  Ptolemaic
Canon  liecomes  available.  In  the  third  year  of  Nabo-
nassar's  reign,  Tiglath-pileser  III.  ascended  the  throne
of  .Assyria  ;  and  one  of  his  first  acts  was  an  invasion
of  Babylonia,  during  which  he  overran  the  northern  dis-
tricts and  cajjtured  several  cities,  carrying  away  many
of  their  inhabitants.  The  distress  in  the  country  due  to
the  inroads  of  the  Assyrians  was  aggravated  during
this  reign  by  internal  dissension  :  .Sippar  repudiated
Nabonassar's  authority,  and  the  revolt  was  subdued  only  |
after  a  siege  of  the  city.

The  Babylonian  Chronicle  tells  us  that  .after  a  reign  of ;
fourteen  years  Nabonassar  died  in  his  palace  at  Babylon,

and was succeeded by his son Nadinu, the |
'•*■'■ Nadios  of  the  Ptolemaic  Canon,  who  is  to  l)e  iden- I
tified  with Nabu-nadin-zer  of  the  list  of  kings. The 1
eighth dynasty ended  with  the  country  in  confusion.
Nabu-nadin-zer,  after  a  reign  of  only  two  years,  was  slain i
in  a  revolt  by  his  son  Nabfi-.sum-ukin  or  .Sum-ukin,
who  had  hitherto  held  the  position  of  governor  of
a  province. After  his  accession  the  dynasty  soon  came
to  an  end. He  had  not  enjoyed  his  position  for  more
th.in  a  month  when  the  kingdom  again  changed  hands
and  Ukin-zer  ascended  the  throne.

I'Vom  the  fall  of  the  eighth  dynasty  until  the  rise  of
the  Xeo-Babylonian  empire  Babylonia  was  overshadowed

64  Assyrian  ^^  ^^"^  '^°^^'^''  "'^  --Assyria,  the  kings  of
sii^prnintv  '^*^  '''^"*'"'"  country  frecjuently  ruling  Ijoth
BuzerainLy. ^^  xingveh  and  at  Babylon. UkTn-zer

had  reigned  only  three  years  when  Tiglath-pileser  again
invaded  Babylonia,  took  him  captive,  and  ascended  the
throne  of  Babylon,  where  he  ruled  under  the  name  of
Pulu  (see  TiGLATH-i'ii.KSKK).  On  his  death,
which  occurred  two  years  later,  he  was  succeedetl
in  Assyria  by  .Shalnianeser  I\'. ,  who,  according  to  the
iiabylonian  Chronicle,  also  succeeded  him  on  the  throne
of  Babylon,  though  in  the  List  of  Kings  Pulu  is  succet-ded
by  Ululai.  The  two  accounts  can  be  reconciled
by  the  supposition  that  Ululai  was  the  name
assumed  by  Shahnaneser  as  king  of  Babylon  (see
Shalmaneskk).  .Shalnianeser  died  after  a  reign  of
five  years,  and,  while  .Sargon  held  the  throne,  .\1ero-
dach-baladan,  a  Chaldean  from  southern  Babylonia,
freed  Babylonia  for  a  time  from  -Assyrian  control.  He
sided  with  Ummanig.as,  king  of  Klam,  in  his
struggle  with  .Assyria  ;  but  ten  years  later  was
himself  captured  by  .Sargon  after  being  besieged  in
the  city  of  Ikbi-Bel  (see  MkR(JI)ACII-»ai,AI)AN,


729.


727.


721


703-


709.


Sar<;on). Sargon  then  ascended  the  throne  of


lijibylon,  which  he  held  until  his  death


m  705.


BABYLONIA

According  to  the  Ptolemaic  Canon,  the  next  two  years
were  a  period  of  interregnum,  tliough  the  List  of  Kin^s
a.ssigns  the  thnjne  to  Senn.acherib.  However  this  may
Ix.',  we  know  that  in  703  Marduk-zakir-sum  prtKlaimed
himself  king  ;  but  he  had  reigned  for  only  one  month
then  he  was  murdered  by  Merodach-baladan,
iho  had  escap-d  from  .Assyria.  Merodach-
baladan  thus  once  more  found  himself  king  in  Babylon  ;
but  Senn.-icherib  marched  against  him.  defeated  him,
and  caused  him  to  seek  safety  by  hiding  himself  in
the  Babylonian  swamps.  After  plundt-ring  Babylon
and  the  neighlx)uring  cities,  Sennacherib  returned  to
.Assyria. leaving  the  kingdom in the  charge  of

'  ■  Bcl-ibni,  a  young  native  Babylonian  who  had
l)een  brought  up  at  the  .Assyrian  court.  On  the  death
of  Merodach-baladan,  .shortly  afterwards,  a  rising
headed  by  Suzub,  another  Chaldean,  brought  .Sen-
nacherib again  into  the  country.  Bel-ibni  also  must
have  displeased  the  king  ;  for,  after  defeating  Suzub,
.V-nnacherib  carried  BCl-ibni  and  his  nobles  to  .Assyria,
leaving  his own  son  .Asur-nadin-sum  upon  the

'  ■  throne.  .Sennacherib  next  plamied  an  ex|jedilion
against  the  Chaldeans  whom  Merodach-baladan  had
M'ttlcd  at  Nagitu,  on  the  Llamite  shore  of  the  Persian
( iulf,  whence  they  were  able  in  safety  to  foment  insur-
rections and  plan  revolt.  Sennacherib,  determined  to
^^tamp  out  this  disaffection,  transported  his  troops  in
;  hips  across  the  Persian  (julf.  Disembarking  at  the
mouth  of  the  Euheus,  they  routed  the  Chaldeans
and  their  allies,  and  returned  with  much  l)o<jty  and
many  capti\es  to  the  Babylonian  coast.  .Meanwhile
.Suzub,  who  had  previously  esca[)ed  .Sennacherib's  pur-
.suit,  collected  his  forces  and  with  the  help  of  Llam
captured  Babylon  and  placed  him.self  upon  the  throne.
He  is  to  Ix;  identified  with  the  Nergal-usCzib
"■^'  of  the  Babylonian  Chronicle  and  the  List  of
Kings.  He,  however,  ruled  for  only  one  ye.ar.  Sen-
nacherib, on  his  return  from  the  Persian  CJulf,  defeated
his  army  and  sent  him  in  chains  to  Nineveh.  Turning
his  forces  against  Klam,  he  plundered  a  considerable
portion  of  the  c<juntry,  and  was  Mopix-d  in  his
advance  into  the  interior  only  by  the  .setting  in  of
winter. In his absence  a relx;! bearing the name

,  of  Suzub — the  .Musezib-Marduk  of  the  Chronicle

^  ■  and  the  List  of  Kings — seized  the  throne  of
Babylon.  Allying  his  forces  with  those  of  Elam,  he
atlemiJted  to  oppose  .Sennacherib  in  the  field  ;  but  the
combined  armies  were  defeated  at  Hahile.  Next  year
.Sennacherib  returned  to  Babylonia,  captiiretl  the  cit\
of Babylon, and deported Musezib-Marduk and his

,„ family  to  Assyria. According  to  the  Babylonian

"■ Chronicle  and  the  Ptolemaic  Canon,  there  now

occurred a second interregnum, though the List of

Kings  credits  .Sennacherib  with  the  control  of  Babylonia.

On  Sennacherib's  murder  in  681  his  son  Esarhaddon

,  o  was  proclaimed  king  of  Assyria.  He  succeeded
to  the  rule  of  Babylonia  also,  though  a  son  of
Merodach-baladan  made  an  attempt  to  gain  the  throne.
He  came  to  Babylon  and  ]x;rsonally  sujjerintended  the
restoration  of  the  city,  rebuilding  the  temples  and  thtr
walls,  and  placing  new  images  in  the  shrines  of  the
gods.  During  his  reign  Babylon  enjoyed  a  sea.soii
of  unusual  prosjierity,  and  was  free  from  the  internal
feuds  and  dissensions  from  which  she  had  been  suf-
fering.

On  Esarhadd(»n's  death  the  throne  of  Babylon  pa.sse<I

,  ,  to  his  son  .Samas-suni-ukin,  his  elder  son,  Asur-
^'  banipal,  having  already  been  installetl  on  the
A.ssyrian  throne  during  his  father's  lifetime.  For  some
years  the  two  brothers  were  on  friendly  terms,  and  when
I'rtaku  and  the  ICUimites,  with  the  aid  of  some  discon-
tented Babylonian  chiefs,  invaded  the  country,  Asur-
blni-pal  assisted  his  brother  in  repelling  their  attack.
I  )uring  all  this  time  Sam.is-suni-ukin  acknow  letlged  the
supremacy  of  Assyria  and  acquiesced  in  his  brother's
active  control  of  the  internal  aflfairs  of  botli  kingdoms.

•150


BABYLONIA

At  length,  however,  he  wearied  of  this  state  of  depend-
ence, and  seizing  an  opportunity,  organised  a  general
rising  against  Assyria  among  the  neighbouring  tribes
and  nations  who  had  hitherto  owned  her  supremacy.
He  bought  the  supp>ort  of  Ummanigas,  king  of  Klam,
contracted  an  alhance  with  Arabia,  and  at  the  same
time  enlisted  the  services  of  smaller  chiefs.  'I'hough
one  lialf  of  the  Arabian  army  was  defeated  by  the
Assyrians,  the  other  half  effected  a  junction  with  the
Elamites.  This  powerful  combination,  however,  was
neutralised  by  the  revolt  of  Tammaritu,  the  son  of
Ummanigas,  the  king  of  I'^lam.  In  fact,  the  dissensions
in  the  ?',lamite  camp  proved  of  great  service  to  Asur-
bani-pal,  who  completely  crushed  the  confederation  that
Samas-bum-ukin  had  brought  against  him  (see  AsUK-
BANI-PAL,  §7).  Samas-sum-ukm  himself  was  besieged
in  Babylon,  and,  on  the  capture  of  the  city,  he  set  fire  to
his  palace  and  perished  in  the  fiames.  According  to  the
List  of  Kings,  he  was  succeeded  by  Kandalanu,  the
,  Kineladanos  of  the  I'tolemaic  Canon  ; but  this

'^'' king  is  probably  to  be  identified  with  Asur-bani-

pal  himself,  who,  on  this  supposition,  like  Tiglath-pileser

III.  and  Shalmaneser  I\^ ,  ruled  Assyria  and  Babylonia

under  different  names. The  last  years  of  his  reign  are

wrapped  in  obscurity  ; but  on  his  death  the  throne  was

secured  b)'  Nabopolassar,  who  was  destined

66.  Nabo-  to  raise  the  fortunes  of  his  country  and  to

polassax.  found  an  empire,  which,  though  it  lasted  for

625. If'ss  than  one  hundred  years,  eclipsed  by  its

magnificence any previous period in the

varied  history  of  the nation. Nabopolassar, ih fact,

was  the  founder  of  the  Neo-Babylonian  empire.

During  the  early  part  of  Nabopolassar's  reign  Asur-
bani-jjal's  successors  on  the  throne  of  Assyria  did  not
relinquish  their  hold  upon  the  southern  kingdom.  They
retained  their  authority  for  some  time  over  a  great  part
of  the  country  (see  Assyrl^,  §  33/.).  Though  we  do
not  possess  historical  documents  relating  to  this  period,
%\e  may  conclude  that  Nabopolassar  during  all  these
years  was  strengthening  his  kingdom  and  seeking  any
opportunity  of  freeing  at  least  a  part  of  it  from  the
Assyrian  yoke,  and  it  is  not  improbable  that  conflicts
between  the  Assyrian  and  Babylonian  forces  were
constantly  occurring.  Towards  the  end  of  his  reign  he
found  the  opportunity  for  which  he  was  waiting  in  the
invasion  of  Assyria  by  the  Medes.  He  allied  himself
with  the  invaders  by  marrj'ing  Nebuchadrezzar,  his
,  ,  eldest  son,  to  the  daughter  of  Cyaxares,  and  on
the  fall  of  Nineveh  had  a  share  in  the  par-
tition of  the  kingdom.  While  N.  Assyria  and  her
subject  provinces  on  the  N.  and  NW.  fell  to  the  Medes,
S.  Assyria  and  the  remaining  provinces  of  the  empire
were  added  to  the  territory  of  Babylon.

Before  Natojxslassar  could  regard  these  acquisitions
of  territory  as  secure?,  he  had  first  to  reckon  with  the
power  of  ligypt.  Necho  H.,  the  son  and  successor  of
Psammetichus  I. ,  soon  after  his  accession  to  the  throne
had  set  himself  to  accomplish  the  conquest  of  Syria.  In
608,  therefore,  le  had  crossed  the  frontier  of  Egypt  and
begun  his  march  northwards  along  the  Mediterranean
coast.  Vainly  opposed  by  JosiAH  (q.v.),  he  pressed
forward  and  subdued  the  whole  tract  of  country  between
the  Mediterranean  and  the  Euphrates.  For  three  years
he  retained  his  hold  on  Syria,  and  it  was  only  after  the
fall  of  Nineveh  that  Nabopolassar  successfully  disputed
Ills  possession  of  the  country.  Nabopolassar  did  not
himself  head  the  expedition  against  the  Egyptians,  for
he  was  now  old  ;  but  he  placed  the  tro<}ps  under  the
command  of  Nebuchadrezzar  his  son.  The  two  armies
, met  at  Carchemish,  where  a  decisive  battle  took

°^'  place.  Necho  was  utterly  defeated  ;  thousands
of  his  troops  were  slain  ;  and  Nebuchadrezzar  pressed
after  his  flying  army  up  to  the  very  borders  of  Egypt.

While  Nebuchadrezzar  was  still  absent  on  this  ex-
pedition Nabopolassar  died.  His  son,  therefore,  returned
to Babylon and was duly installed as king in his

451


BABYLONIA

st2ad.  It  is  probable  that  during  the  early  part  of
his  reign  Nebuchadrezzar  consolidated  his  rule  in  Syria

and  on the Mediterranean coast by

66.  Nebuchad- yearly exjx?ditions in those regions.

rezzar.  After  a  few  )ears,  however,  the  country

604.  showed  signs  of  repudiating  Babylonian

control.  Nebuchadrezzar  returned  to
the  coast  to  suppress  the  rising.  For  some  years  things
remained  quiet  ;  but  soon  after  the  accession  of  Apries
(see  Egypt,  §  69)  to  the  throne  of  Egypt  the  ferment
revived.  After  a  siege  of  a  year  and  a  half  Jerusalem
fell  (see  Jeru.salem).

Tyre,  the  siege  of  which  also  Nebuchadrezzar  under-
took, held  out  for  thirteen  years,  585-572  (see  I'liCE-
NICIa).  Built  on  an  island,  it  was  practically  im-
pregnable from  the  land,  while  the  blockade  instituted
by  the  Babylonians  did  not  prevent  the  entry  of  supplies
by  water.  More  successful  were  Nebuchadrezzar's
campaigns  against  Egypt.  We  do  not  possess  his
own  account  of  them  ;  but  an  ?2gyptian  inscription
records  that  on  one  of  them  (undertaken  against  Apries)
he  forced  his  way  through  the  country  as  far  as  SyCne,
the  modern  Aswan,  on  the  borders  of  luhiopia  ;  and
it  is  not  improljable  that  the  country  was  subject  to
Babylonia  during  the  first  few  years  of  the  reign  of
Amasis  II.,  who  succeeded  Apries  on  the  Egyptian
throne  (see  Egypt,  §  69).  Nebuchadrezzar's  hold
upon  Egypt  cannot,  however,  ha\e  been  permanent  :
a  fragment  of  one  of  his  own  inscriptions  mentions
his  sending  an  expedition  to  Egjpt  in  his  thirty-seventh
year.  During his reign the relations between

Babylonia  and  Media  were  of  a  friendly  nature,  as  was
not  unnatural  from  the  close  alliance  that  had  been
established  between  the  two  kingdoms  before  the  fall
of  Nineveh.  In  a  war  between  Media  and  Lydia,  some
twenty  years  later,  the  Babylonians  did  not  take  part  ;
but,  when  an  eclipse  of  the  sun  on  the  25th  of  May  in
the  year  585  put  an  end  to  a  battle  between  the  Lydians
and  Medes,  Nebuchadrezzar,  in  conjunction  with  the
king  of  Cilicia,  used  his  influence  to  reconcile  the  com-
batants and  bring  the  war  to  a  close.

While  constantly  engaged  in extending  and solidi-
fying his empire, Nebuchadrezzar did not neglect
the internal  improvement of his kingdom. He re-
built  the cities and temples throughout the  country,
and in  particular  devoted  himself  to  the  enlargement
of Babylon, completing its walls and rebuilding its
temples  with such magnificence that the  city  tiecame
famous  throughout  the  world  (see  Nkkuchadkezzar,
Babylon). Nebuchadrezzar  died  after  reigning  forty-
three  years,  and  was  succeeded  by  his  son  Amel-Marduk,
^ mentioned  as  Evii.-MliKODAC  H  (ij.v.)  in  2  K.
^ ' 11>-2T  ff. Of  this  king  we  possess  no  inscription,
though  contracts  dated  in  his  reign  have  been  found.
He  was  assassinated  after  a  reign  of  two
67.  His years  in  a  revolt  led  by  Neriglis.sar,  his
successors,  brother-in-law,  who  succeeded  him  upon
ceo.  the throne (see Nergal  -  SHAKKZiiK).

His  inscriptions  that  have  been  recovered
are  concerned  merely  with  his  building  operations. He
was  succeeded  by  his  son  Labasi-Marduk,  who,
^^  ■ after  reigning nine months,  was  murdered  by
his  nobles. Nabu-na'id  or  Nabonidus,  the  son  of  Nabu-
balatsu-ikbi,  was  placed  upon  the  throne.

Nahonidus  was  a  ruler  more  energetic  than  his  im-
mediate predecessors  on  the  throne. He  devoted  himself

to  rebuilding  the  ancient  temples
68.  Nabonidus.  throughout  the  kingdom, and dug  in

their foundations  until he found the

ancient  inscriptions  of  the  kings  who  had
first  founded  or  subsequently  restored  them.  In  his  own
inscriptions  recording  his  building  opfirations  he  re-
counts his  finding  of  several  such  inscriptions,  and,  as  he
mentions  the  number  of  years  that  had  passed  since  they
had  been  buried  by  their  writers,  his  evidence  with  regard
to  the  settlement  of  Babylonian  chronology  is  invaluable.

452


555-


i


BABYLONIA

Nabonidus.  however,  in  spite  of  his  zeal  for  rebuilding
the  temples  of  the  gods,  incurred  the  hatred  of  the
priesthotxl  by  his  altcnjpt  to  centralise  Uabyloiiian
religion.  Althou;.ih  the  rise  of  Babylon  to  the  position
of  the  priticipiil  city  of  the  land  had  been  reflected  in
the  importance  of  Marduk  in  the  Babylonian  pantheon,
the  religion  of  the  country  had  never  radically  changed
its  character.  It  had  always  remained  a  bcjdy  of  local
worshijjs,  each  deity  retaining  his  own  separate  centre
of  ritual.  Nabonidus  set  himself  to  centralise  all
these  worships  in  Babylon.  He  removed  the  images  of
the  gods  from  their  shrines  in  the  various  cities  through-
out the  country  and  transported  them  to  the  capital.
By  this  act  he  brought  down  upon  himself  the  resent-
ment of  the  priests,  who  formed  the  most  powerful
section  of  the  community,  and  they,  by  the  support
they  gave  to  Cyrus  on  his  capture  of  Babylon,  con-
siderably aiili'd  the  Persian  conquest  of  the  country.

Cyrus,  who  hail  previously  conquered  the  Medes,  im-
prisoning Astyages  and  .sacking  Ecbatana,  next  turned
his  attention  to  the  conquest  of  Babylonia.

69.  Cyrus. The Babylonian army  was commanded
549.  ^y  BC-1  - -sar-usur  (Belshazzar),  the  son  of

Nabonidus  ; but it did not offer an

effective opposition to the Persian forces. .Xfter

g suffering  a  defeat  at  Opis  on  the  Tigris, it  was

"  '  broken.  Cyrus  marched  on  and  entered  Sippar
without  further  fighting,  and  Natx^nidus  tied.  Babylon
itself  was  taken  two  days  later,  and  Nabonidus  fell  into
the  hands  of  the  concjueror  (cp  CvKUs,  §  2).  In  restor-
ing order  to  the  country,  Cyrus  adopted  the  wise  policy  of
conciliating  the  conquered.  He  restored  to  their  shrines
the  images  of  the  gods  which  Nabonidus  had  removed.
The  popul.arity  he  acquired  by  this  act  is  reflected  in
the  inscription  on  his  cylinder  recording  his  taking  of
the  city,  which  was  probably  composed  at  his  orders  by
the  official  scribes  of  Babylon.  Although  naturally
couched  in  flattering  terms,  it  bears  ample  witness  to
the  pacific  policy  of  Cyrus,  who  therein  allows  himself
to  be  re[3rcsented  as  the  vindicator  and  champion  of
Marduk,  the  principal  deity  of  his  conquered  foe  :

'  He  (;'.c.  .Marduk)  soui;ht  out  a  righteous  prince  after  his
own  heart,  whom  he  might  take  by  the  hand  ;  Cyrus,  king  of
An.^-jn,  he  called  by  tiis  name,  for  empire  over  the  whole  world
he  proclaimed  his  title.  The  land  of  Kutfi,  the  whole  of  the
tribal  hordes,  he  forced  into  submission  at  his  feet ;  as  for  the
men  wham  he  had  delivered  into  his  hands,  with  justice  and
righteousness  did  he  care  for  them.  Marduk  the  great  lord,
the  protector  of  his  people,  beheld  his  upright  deeds  and  his
righteous  heart  with  joy.  To  his  city  of  Babylon  he  commanded
him  to  gi>,  he  made  him  take  the  ro.id  to  P.abylon  ;  like  a  friend
and  helpor  he  went  by  his  side.  His  wide-spreading  host,  the
number  of  which,  like  the  waters  of  a  river,  cannot  be  numbered,
girt  with  their  weapons  advance  at  his  side.  W  ithout  contest
and  battle  he  made  him  enter  into  Habyl  m  his  city;  Babylon
ii:  spared  from  trioulation.  Nabonidus,  the  kin'.;  that  did  not
fear  him,  he  delivered  into  his  hand.  All  the  people  of  Babylon,
the  whole  of  Sumer  and  Akkad,  princes  and  governors  beneath
him  b  iwed  dokvn,  they  kissed  his  feet,  they  rejoiced  in  his
kingdom,  bright  was  their  countenance,  'lb  the  lord,  who
through  his  strength  raises  the  dead  to  life  and  from  destruction
and  misery  h.id  spared  all,  joyfully  they  paid  homage,  they
reverenced  his  name."  Other  pa.s.sages  in  the  cylinder  refer

to  the  zeal  displayed  by  Cyrus  for  Marduk  and  the  other
Babylonian  gods.—'  When  into  IJabylon  I  entered  favourably,
with  ex-'ltation  and  shouts  of  joy  in  the  palace  of  the  princes
1  took  up  a  lordly  dwelling,  Martluk  the  great  lord  [inclined)
the  great  heart  of  the  sons  of  Babylon  to  me  and  daily  do  I
care  for  his  wor-hip.  .  .  .  And  the  gods  of  Sumer  and  .\kkad,
which  Nabonidus  to  the  anger  of  the  gods  had  brought  into
Babylon,  at  the  word  of  Marduk  the  great  lord  one  and  all  in
their  owi  shrines  did  I  causi  to  take  up  the  habitation  of  their
heart's  delight.  .May  all  the  gods  whom  1  have  brought  into
their  own  cities  pray  daily  before  Bel  and  N.-ihu  for  the  lengthen-
mg  of  my  days,  let  them  speak  the  word  for  my  good  fortune,
and  unto  .Marduk  my  lord  let  them  say  :  "  May  Cyrus  the
king  that  feareth  thee  and  Cambyses  his  s  m  [have  prosperity)." '
With  the  capture  of  Babylon  by  Cyrus  the  history
of  the  Babylonians  as  an  independent  nation  comes  to

70.  End ^"  ^"^' '  *^^  country  never  regained  her

independence,  but  remained  a  province
subject  to  the  powers  which  succeeded  one  another
in  the  rule  of  W.  Asia.  Under  Cambyses.  indeed,
and  still  more  under  Darius  Hystaspis,  discontent  be-

453


BACA

came  very  prevalent  in  Babylonia.  Soon  after  the
accession  of  Darius  a  certain  Nadintu-BCl  put  himself
at  the  head  of  a  revolt,  declaring  himself  to  be  Nebu-
chadrezzar, the  son  of  Nabonidus,  the  last  king  of
Babylon.  Darius  stamped  out  the  relx.llion  and  exe-
cuted Nadintu-BCl.  A  few  years  later  he  {juelled  a
second  relx;!lion  headed  by  Arahu,  who  was  cajitured
and  crucilied,  and  during  the  reign  of  Xer.\es  a  similar
rising  proved  equally  unsuccessful.  These  relxillions
were  the  last  struggles  of  the  national  spirit  to  reassert
itself.  They  met  with  no  response  among  the  general
body  of  the  p>eopIe,  who  were  content  to  serve  their
foreign  masters.  Babylonia,  in  fact,  remained  subject
to  the  Persians  until  the  conc|uests  of  Alexander  brought
her  under  Greek  control,  which  she  exchanged  only  for
the  Parthian  supremacy.

(a)  For  the  history  of  Babylonia,  see  the  works  by  Tiele,  Hom-

niel,  Deiitzscb,  and  Wincklercited  under  AssvKiA. Kortheearly

Ix;riod  these  lii-.tories  may  be  supplemented

71.  Bibliography,  bv  reference  to  the  insciiptions  which  are

bein,; published in K. de Sarzec  s Vif-

couveries  en  ChaUfe  {iti^,  etc.),  I  he  Hah.  Exf>ed.  0/ the  Utih'.

0/ Pennsylvania  {\i.^->„  eic),  c.liied  l.y  Hilprccht,  and  Cunei/onn

Texts  from  Babylonian  tablets,  etc.  in  the British  Museum

(i8y6,  etc.). Among  English  histories  refeience  maybe  made

to  George  Smith's  Aa/y-^/z/Vi  (Sl'CK,  1877)  and  G.  Kawlinsoii's

Fcz>e  Great  Monarchies  0/  the  Eastern lyorU,  vols.  i.  and  ii.

(1871). In Schr.'s  KB,  vol.  iii.,  translations  of  many  of  the

historical  inscriptions  of  Babylonia  are  given,  while  the  same

author's  COT  describes  the  principal  points  in  the  O  I' which

are  illustrated by  the  monuments. For  other  works  dealing

with  the  inscriptions  of  Babylonia,  the  bibliographies  mentioned

I in  the  article  .VssvKlA  (§  34)  may  be  consulted.

I (/')  [Oil  the  religion  of  the  Babylonians  we  have  as  yet  only

one  studeiHs'  handbook,  Jastrow's  Keli^on  o/.lssyria  and  Baby-

\ Ionia  (reNicwed by i). G. l-yon, i\ew  World, March, 1899).

Sayce's  Uibhert  Lectures  (for  \'^%^)  on  the  same  subject  are

I less systematic. On the cosmology of Babylonia, Jensen's

Kosmologie  der  Bahylonier  is  still  the  most  complete  authority  ;

but  editions  of  religious  texts  must  be  consulted  by  the  advanced

. student.]

[ (( )  With  regard  to  books  for  the  study  of  the  language,  the  first

dictionary  to  appe.-ir  was  N.irris's  Assyrian  Dictionary  (181)8-72),

I which he  did not live to  complete. In  his  Al/>tiabetisches

I Verzeichniss  der  Assyrixchen  und  Akkad isc hen  if-'or-ter  (1SS6),

I .Str.ussmaier  published  an  immense  collection  of  matcri.d,  which

I has been used in subsequent dictionaries; among  these  may

I be  mentioned  Delitzsch's  Assyrischis  U'orterbuch  (1887,  etc.  ;

unfinished), the  same author's Assyrisehes  H amiivdrterbuch

j ('96),  Muss  Arnolt's  Concise  Dictionary  of  the  Assyrian  Tan-

I g^a^e  (iSg4,  etc.,  in  progress),  ancl  .'Vlcissner's  Suf>f>Umente  zunt

j Assyrisch-'n  U'orterbuch  (i%qZ); Bri'innow's  Classijied  List  0/

Cun  iform  Ideographs,  i88<)  {Indices,  1897),  contains  a  full  list

of  ideographs  with  their  values. The  best  Assyrian  grammar

is  Delilzsch's  Assy.  Granttii.  (1889  ;  transl.  by  Kennedy).

(d)  The  exi.stence  of  the  Sumenan  language,  which  ior  long
was  disputed,  is  now  generally  acknowledged  ;  but  a  grammar
of  the  langu.-ige  has  yet  to  be  written  ;  it  should  Ix:  noted  that
the  views  on  Sumerian  which  Delitzsch  expressed  in  his  Assyr.
Gram,  he  has  since  completely  changeti.  A  list  of  the  Sumerian
values  of  the  cuneiform  signs  is  given  by  Briinnow  in  his
Classified  List,  while  Weissbach's  Die  sumersiche  Frage  ('98)
may  be  consulted  for  the  history  of  the  controversy.

I,.  W.  K.

BABYLONIANS  (^33  'J3 :  yioi  BAByAtoNOC
[B.VJl,  F.z. '2.3,5  [BA  om.  BaB.].  '7  [-ONOC.  B],  23;  in
Aram.  N'^^Il,  BAByAcONiOi  [B.\L],  i:zra49).  in  every
case  the  land,  not  the  city,  is  referred  to  :  cp  especially
Kz.  •2.'^i5,  'the  Ikibylonians.  the  land  of  who.se  nativity
is  Chaldea.'

BABYLONISH  GARMENT.  R\'  Babylonish  Mantle

("U'^w'  ri"l"lX,  lit.  'mantle  of  Shinar,'  so  RV'"*-').
Josh.  721. .See  M.WTI.K.

BACA  VALLEY  OF  (S32il  p'pr,  §  103V  or  Valley
of  Weeping  (RV,  (3  eN  TH  KOiAaAi  Toy  kAayO"
MCONOC  [B'^^'R].  eic  THN  koiAaAa  t.  k.  [N'=^-\T1;
cp  Aq.  Vg.  Pesh. ),  mentioned  only  in  Ps.  846  [7].  For
the  meaning  given  al)ove  cp  the  W'ady  of  Weeping
V^J*  <^J')  found  by  Burckhardt  near  Sinai.  The  name
is  frequently  explained  '  Ixilsam  vale '  (so  RV'"^)  ;  but
cpChej-ne,  who  reads  o'3S  (tp  (5  here  and  at  Judg.  25),
and  supposes  a  play  on  the  name  Bfikaim.  The  pi.  o'Kaa
occurs  in  a  Sam.  h-i^  ff.  (=  i  Ch.  14  14/!),  apparently
454


BACCHIDES

as  the  name  of  a  spot  (see  Rephaim,  Vau.ey  of)
where  there  were  Haca-trees.  David  took  his  stand
there  to  wait  for  Yahwc's  signal  to  attack  the  Philis-
tine's.^ ©  (2S.  524)  speaks  of  it  as  a  'grove,'  mean-
ing an  Asherah  ;  there  is  no  mention  of  trees  in  ©.
On  the  meaning  of  Haca  trees  see  Mui.bkkry.

BACCHIDES(BakxiAhc.  also  B&[x1xi^hc  ;  Barakx-
[i  Mace.  78.  A],  KAKX.  l'^-  ■■■  12,  A),  BakxX-  ['^-  9''
N*.\]),  the  chief  general  of  Dkmktkius  I.  [</.v.,  i],  who
was  sent  to  Judasa  to  enforce  the  claims  of  Alcimus  to
the  priesthood  ( i  Mace.  1&  ff.).  Almost  immediately
after  the  death  of  NiCANOK,  he  was  sent  again  with
Alcimus,  and  inflicted  a  severe  defeat  on  the  Maccabanxn
party  at  Elasa,^  who  lost  their  leader  Judas  (chap.  9,
i6i  B.C.).  Judiea  suffered  heavily  at  the  hands  of
Bacchides  ;  nor  did  any  real  advantage  accrue  when
Jonathan  took  up  the  leadership  {^32 ff.).  The  capital
and  other  important  strongholds  remained  in  the  hands
of  Bacchides,  who  was  engaged  in  fortifying  them  until
the  death  of  Alcimus  (159  B.C.),  when  he  returned  to
Demetrius  (9 57).  At  the  end  of  two  years  the  opponents
of  the  Maccabcean  party  (whose  hands  had  become
strengthened)  agreed  to  betray  Jonathan  and  his  fol-
lowers to  Bacchides.  This  piece  of  treachery  was
discovered  and  avenged  ['ds'^_f-).  Bacchides  set  out
against  Jud;t;a  (158  B.C.)  and  besieged  Beth-basi,  but
met  with  ill  success  everywhere,  until  at  last  he  was
only  too  glad  to  accept  Jonathan's  overtures  of  peace
(968).  The  Jewish  captives  of  the  former  wars  were
restored,  and  the  Maccabees  had  rest  for  four  or  five
years.

BACCHURUS  (BAKXOYPOC  [BA],  cAKXoyp  [I>].
^./(  ( ./ATM,  singer  in  list  of  those  with  foreign  wives
(see  I'l/.KA,  i.  §  5,  end),  i  Esd.  924 ;  but  not  in  ;i  I-".zral024
[MT  EV  ©BKA],  though  ^^  adds  zAKXOyp-

BACCHUS  [Liber],  the  equivalent  of  the  Greek
Dionysus  (so  RV'i.'-  AlONycOC  [AV]),  is  mentioned
in  2  Mace.  67,  where  it  is  said  that  on  the  occasion
of  the  birthday  of  Antiochus  Epiphanes  (175-164)
the  unhappy  Jews  were  compelled  to  attend  the  feast
of  Bacchus  (Aionycia;  R\'"'^-  'feast  of  Dionysia')
wearing  the  ivy -wreath  (ki(J(x6s),  the  peculiar  emblem
of  the  god.  A  few  years  later  Nicanor  (the  general  of
Demetrius)  threatened  to  pull  down  the  temple  and
supplant  it  by  one  dedicated  to  Bacchus  unless  Judas
was  handed  over  to  him  (ib.  I433,  AiavDo-os  [A]).  The
worship  of  Bacchus  seems  to  have  been  introduced
first  by  the  Ptolemies,  of  which  family  he  was  the
patron-god,  and  according  to  3  Mace.  229  several  years
previously  the  Jews  in  Alexandria  had  teen  branded
by  Ptolemy  Philopator  (222-204)  with  the  sign  of  the
ivy  ;  the  object  of  this  obviously  being  forcibly  to
identify  the  unwilling  Jews  with  the  detested  worship  of
Bacchus.  See  Cuttings  of  the  Flesh,  §  6.  His
worship  would  be  specially  abhorrent  to  pious  Jews,
since  one  of  the  greatest  of  the  Dionysian  festivals  fell  in
the  month  Elapheliolion  (March-April),  thus  synchronis-
ing closely  with  the  passover.  In  course  of  time  the
Hellenising  Jews  and  Greek  residents  were  more  attracted
by  the  cult,  and  when  Jerusalem  became  a  Roman
colony  (.i^^lia  Capitolina)  we  find  Dionysus  with  his
thyrsus  and  panther  figuring  upon  the  coins  as  one  of
the  patron  gods.^

The  worship  of  Dionysus  flourished  at  Cassarea,
at  Damascus,  and  in  the  Hauran.  He  was  the  special
patron  of  Scythopolis,  and  from  him  the  town  Dionysia
fSoada)  received  its  name.  Dionysus,  however,  soon
became  identified  with  the  Xabataean  deity  Dusares
(the Baal,  the god of  heaven,  and of  wine). The

1  In  V.  24  emend  fn^X  to  nnyp  (<7-v<ro-ei<7-/io?  [L]  for  irvv.
xXfiiT/xo?  [BAD,  'when  thou  hearest  the  sound  of  a  stormy  wind
in  the  tops  of  the  Baca  trees."  It  is  in  the  tempest  that  Yah  we
'goes  out  against  the  Philistines."

'^  Doubtless  an  error  for  Adasa.

8  See  Madden,  Coins  0/ the  Jews,  1881,  p.  252/

455


BADGERS'  SKINS

Dionysiac  character  which  the  latter  presents  is  not
native:  it  is  directly  due  to  the  northern  influence.^
The  priest  of  Dionysia  (see  above)  calls  himself  the  priest
of  Dusares,  and  on  the  coins  of  Bostra  the  latter  appears
with  the  Dionysian  emblem  of  the  wine-press.  Figures
of  the  vine  and  wine-cup  are  still  found  upon  the  lintels
in  many  of  the  villages  in  the  Hauran.  Although  the
worship  of  Yahw6  had  little  in  conmion  with  that  of
Bacchus  [ncquaquatn  congruentibus  iuslitutis.  Tacit.
Hist.bh),  classical  writers,  observing  the  musical  and
joyful  nature  of  their  ceremonial  rites,  now  and  then
fell  into  the  error  of  making  Bacchus  a  Jewish  god
that  had  been  worshipped  by  the  earliest  patriarchs  (cp
e.g.  Plut.  Sympo.s.l\(>).

For  the  various  mythological  forms  of  Bacchus,  see
Ency.  Brif.^'-'^  s.v. 'Dionysus'; and  Roscher,  s.v.

BAGENOR  occurs  in  an  uncertain  passage,  2  Mace.
1235,  Awcndeo's  bi  ris  tCv  tov  ^aK-qvopo^  ["^'A].  It  is
doubtful  whether  it  is  the  name  of  a  captain  or  the
cognomen  of  a  company  or  division  in  the  army  of
Judas. See  DosiTiiEUS.

BACHRITES,  THE  (n33n  ;  Nu.  2635.  6*'^'  [''•  39]
om. ). See  Becher.

BADGER, ROCK {'{^S'), Lev.  11 5 RV"^- ; lA"

CONEY.

BADGERS'  SKINS,  RV  Sealskins  (D^*L:*nPl  my.

C'nrn'ii;,  ^'nn,  acrmata  Y«»KiNeiN&[iANeiN&.  Aq.,

Sym.,  Ezek.  I610]  [BAL]  ;  Ex. -2.5  5  26 14  357=3  8619
[BAL  om.  ]  3934  Nu.  468  [5ep,uartvy  iiaKivdivi^l  10-12
1425  Ez.  IGiof),  are  mentioned  as  the  fourth  or  outer-
most covering  of  the  tabernacle  (next  above  the  '  rams'
skins  dyed  red'),  and  as  outer  wrappings  for  the  ark
and  different  vessels  of  the  taternacle  during  journeys.
In  Ezekiel's  figurative  description  of  Yahwe's  adorning
of  Israel  as  a  beautiful  maiden,  shoes  of  this  material
are  included.  As  to  the  meaning  of  ia/ias  there  have
been  many  opinions  : five  chief  views  may  be  indicated.

( 1 )  The  ancient  versions  with  one  consent  understood
a  colour  :  ©  Syr.  Chald.  Vg.  render  '  blue  '  or  '  violet,'
Ar.  Samar.  '  black  '  or  'dark.'  This  view,  which  has
been  strongly  maintained  by  Bochart,  rests,  however,
on  no  philological  ground,  and  is  refuted  by  the  syntax
of  the  Hebrew  words. '■^  Apart  from  the  versions,  all
Hebrew  tradition  is  in  favour  of  the  view  that  tahas
is  an  animal.

(2)  In  the  discussion  on  this  animal  in  the  Talnmd
(Shabb.  c.  2,  fol.  28)  the  opinion  prevails  that  it  is  a
species  of  i'^'n  ^t\  (prob.  =  '  ferret '),  a  description  which
would  roughly  suit  the  badger;  and  the  claim  of  this
animal  has  been  supported  (by  Ges.  and  others)  by
comparison  with  late  Lat.  Taxus  or  taxo  (Ital.  tasso,
Fr.  taisson)  and  Cierm.  Dachs.^  The  common  badger,
Meles  taxus,  found  throughout  Europe  and  Northern
Asia,  reaches  its  southernmost  limits  in  Palestine,  where
it  is  common  in  the  hilly  and  woody  parts  of  the
country.  It  is,  however,  improbable  that  the  reference
is  to  the  skins  of  these  animals.  They  would  be  diffi-
cult to  procure  either  in  Egypt  or  in  the  desert,  and
there  is  no  evidence  of  their  being  used  in  those  regions
for  such  a  purpose.''

1  For  the  god  Dusares  (Ao«(7-ap7js,  on  Nab.  inscr.  N-iCIl);  see
ZDMG\^^ez,i\^ll,  Baethg.  Beitr.<)iff.,  WkS,  Kins.V)iff.,
and  We.  He  id.  (2)  48^?:  The  name  means '  possessor  (du)  of  j<-\p. '
The  latter  is  often  taken  to  be  equivalent  to  'Sarah,'  in  which
case  Dusares  is  equivalent  to  Abraham—  a  hazardous  theory.

2  D'C'nri  is  obviously  gen.  after  nhj'^/.*".,  equivalent  to  CVN'
not  to  C'CHNp,  in  the  phrase  for  'rams'  skins  dyed  red.'

3  Philological  explanations  involving  roots  common  to  the
Aryan  and  Semitic  languages  are,  however,  notoriously  pre-
carious.

*  How  little  value  attaches  to  the  opinion  of  the  Rabbis  may
be  gathered  from  another  view,  strongly  supported  in  the
Talmud,  that  the  ;^nB  was  a  kind  of  unicorn  which  specially
appeared  to  Moses  for  this  purpose,  and  immediately  afterwards
disappeared  (Bochart,  i.  830).

4.';6


BABAN

(3)  A  more  scientific  etymology  is  that  which  com-
pares the  Ar.  tiifias  or  duhas,  '  a  dolphin. '  This  would
indicate  a  marine  animal, — probably  (a)  the  sea  J  (RV
text),  or  (i)  the  />or/>t>isf  (KV"'»>').  or  (c)  the  du^^jvir  or
sea-cow.  («)  has  in  its  favour  the  adaptability
of  sealskins  to  the  purposes  referred  to,  the  statement
of  .Artemiilorus  (in  Strab.  It) 776)  that  seals  alwundcd
in  the  Red  .Sea,  one  island  there  Ijeing  called  vriaos
t}>(j3K^v,  and  the  actual  use  of  a  sealskin  covering  in
antiquity  to  protect  buildings,  Ixicause  it  w;is  supposed
that  lightning  never  struck  this  material  (e.jj. ,  I'liny,
HN'lsS'  Suet.  Oct.  90).  One  species  of  seal,  Moiia-
chus  albiventer,  undoubteiily  occurs  in  the  Mediter-
ranean, and  some  authorities  are  of  opinion  that  the
same  is  true  of  the  common  seal,  Fhoca  vitulina.

(b)  The  porpoise,  like  the  seal,  is  as  a  rule  a  denizen  of
the  colder  waters  of  the  glote  ;  but  Phoaetia  commimis,
the  common  porpoise  of  the  Hritish  coasts,  occasionally
enters  the  Mediterranean,  whilst  the  Indian  porpoise,
Ph.  phoacnoides,  inhabits  the  shores  of  the  Indian
t)cean  from  the  Cape  of  Good  Hope  to  Japan,  and  may
have  Ix-'cn  captured in  the  Red  Sea.  [c]  The

Dugong,  lieing  more  like  the  dolphin,  has  the  etymology
in  its  favour.  According  to  Knobel  (Comm.  on  E-\.  205)
this  animal  [Halicore  fabernaculi)  '  is  found  in  the
Red  Sea,  attaining  a  length  of  8  to  10  or  more  feet,  is
hunted  like  the  whale,  and  has  a  skin  well  adapted  for
sandals  or  coverings. '  Friedr.  Del.  sought  to  strengthen
the  case  for  this  identification  (Prol.  to  Baer's  lizek.  p.
xviy!)  by  comparison  with  Ass.  talihi,  an  animal  whose
skin,  according  to  various  Ass.  inscriptions,  was  used
to  cover  the  Ixjams  of  ships  in  the  manner  described  by
Herodotus  (1  194).  He  has  since  (Prol.  77-79  [86]),
however,  abandoned  the  view  that  fah.hi  wis  the
dugong,  and  supposes  it  to  mean  ivether.^  The  tlugong
of  the  Indian  Ocean,  with  the  Manatee  of  the  Atlantic,
composes  the  class  Sirenia.  They  are  usually  found
in  the  estuaries  of  large  rivers  browsing  on  sea- weed,
and  they  are  still  actively  sought  off  the  coast  of
(^)ueensland  for  the  sake  of  their  blubl)er  and  hide.

(4)  Much  less  probable  is  the  opinion  of  Bottchcr
{Neue  Aehrenl.  32^)  that  vnr\  is  a  form  of  v^t\  (he-
goat)  with  the  middle  radical  hardened  ;  he  supposes
that  goat-skin  was  manufactured  into  a  kind  of  morocco
leather.  It  is  natural  that  'rams'  and  'he -goats'
should  come  together  as  in  Gen.  32i5  [14]  aCh.  17ii  ;
but  apart  from  this  the  explanation  has  little  to  recom-
mend it.

(5)  The  latest  and  perhaps  most  probable  view  is
that  put  forward  by  Bondi  {.-Egyptiaca,  iff.),  who
makes  c'nn  a  loan-word  from  Egyptian  ths,  '  Egyptian
leather,'  and  gives  a  thorough  discussion  of  views.
This  meaning  is  especially  suitable  to  Ez.  16io,  but
is  also  appropriate  in  the  other  passages.

Of  all  the  e.xplanations  those  by  Ar.  duhas  or  tuhas,
by  Ass.  tahsu,  and  by  Eg.  ths,  most  deserve  attention.

N.  M.  —A.  K.  S.

BAEAN  (B&l&N  [AXV]),  i  Mace.  54/  RV  ;  AV
Rk.w.

BAO.  .Several  of  the  Hebrew  words  are  much  more
general  in  signification  than  the  English  '  bag.' — (i)  d"3
kTs{Yi\.  25 13  Pr.  I611  Mi.  611  Is.  466)  for  holding  money,
or  the  weights  employed  by  merchants.  In  Pr.  1  14
(/3a\\di'Tio«'),  l':V  renders  Puk.sk.  (2)  ann  hdrit  (cp
.\r.  haritat"",  bag  of  skin,  etc.,  and  see  Frank.  296)
in  2  K.  523  {dv\a.KO%)  of  Naaman's  bag  which  con-
tained a  talent  of  silver.  In  Is.  822  it  is  mentioned
in  the  list  of  women's  adornments,  and  signifies
probably  a  satchel  (so  RV  ;  AV  'crisping  pin').  (3)
'';>3  kili,  a  word  of  very  general  meaning  (see  \'ksski.),
used  of  a  sack  for  containing  corn  (Gen.  4225  477101')  or

1  Cp  Shalmaneser,  Monolith  inscr.  ii.  i6,  ina  elif'f'e  ia
maiak  ta/iii,  '  on  boats  of  skins  of  wethers ' ;  so  Wi.  for  good
reasons;  but  see  references  in  Muss-Arnolt,  Ass.  Did.  s.v.
'!',ab.5,i-M.'

4S7


BAHURIM

of  the  instruments  carried  by  a  shepherd  (Zech.  II15).
It  is  rendered  'bag'  only  in  i  S.  I74049  (.\V"'K-
'vessel')  :  see  Sling. (4)  Tna  -ji'rOr  (  ^'bind,  cp  verb  in

2  K.  12io[ii],  ry,y\  'and  they  put  in  bags'),  JobHi;
(^aWavTiov),  Pr.  720,  aipj  's.  'a  bag  with  holes'  (Hag.
16).  It  is  rendered  'bundle'  in  i  S.  2.'»29  (ien  4235  (of
money)  and  Cant,  li;  (of  myrrh,  RV"'k-  'bag').  (5)
fiaWdPTiov,  Lk.  123J.  RV  'purse';  and  (6)  yXuffiTo-
KOfj.ov  (Jn.  126  1329.  RV"'e-  '  box  ). See  Bo.x,  3.

BAGO  IBAfO  [A]),  1  Esd.  84o=Ezra8i4,  Bkjv.m,  3.

BAGOAS  (from  Pers.  baga,  'God'  ;  see  Ed.  .Meyer,
Ent.  157  ;  cp  Bigvai,  Bigtl)a,  .\bagtha),  a  eunuch  in
the  household  of  Holoferncs  ;  Judithl2ii_^  ( BAfooAC
[BAi] ;  in  v.  13  BAfcoc [A*J).

BAGOI  (BAfOi  [A]).  I  Esd.  5 14=  Ezra 2 2,  Bigv.m,  2.

BAGPIPE  (RV"«-  of  n^yi3!p-1D  Dan.35IOI5Li"''•
Io  K'jD'p,  Kr.  'sidI.  Gr.  CYM4>caNlA.,  KV  'dulcimer').
The  Aramaic  word  is  from  avfx(j>wvia,  a  late  (ir.  word,
used,  curiously  enough,  by  Polybius  in  his  account  of
the  festivities  in  which  .Antiochus  Epiphanes  (who  is  so
frequenth' alluded  to  in  Daniel)  indulged  (xxvi.lOs  xxxi.
48;  see  D.WIKI,,  §7).  For  the /(;r;«  of  the  .\rani.  (p
pSD,  <rv/Ji(poiii'oi,  'agreed,'  in  the  Fiscal  Inscription  from
Palmyra,  137  .\.u.  (col.  8, //.  1445). See  Music,  §4(1  1.

BAHARUMITE,  THE  (*P-1in3,  iCh.  II33;  o
BeepMeiN  [B,  X'-'],  o  -pBeiN  [5'^*1.  o  Barcami  [A],
O  B&pAMAI  [J-J).  e\i(knily  a  scribe's  error  for  'the
Bahurimite' — i.e.,  '  the  man  of  B.MliKlM'  ('DT-'I'^^n).
The  same  reading  should  be  restored  in  2  S.  2831.  See
Bakhumite.

BAHURIM  (Dn-ina  and  Dnn3  ;  /3aovp6i/ii  [A]; 2S.

3  16  PapaK,,  IH],  -^i  [L];  l(i5  jSovpe./l  [R],  xopp<i>x  [1^1:  l"iS
^aopct/u.  |H|,  Pai.6xoppu)v  [LI;  1!»  16  /Saoupei^t  [H],  XOPP"^''  i'li
iK..:;8 Paa0ovpfl^^. (HI, jSaSoupetfA [AL], /SoKXoPI? ij"'^- ■'"'■

vii.  97]),  a  place  in  Benjamin  (2  S.  19 16  [17]),  not  included
in  the  list  of  Benjamite  towns,  which  appears  prominentl\
in  two  very  interesting  narratives — that  of  the  return  of
Micn.VL  to  David,  and  that  of  the  flight  of  David  from
Absalom.  Michal  had  Ixien  given  by  Davids  angry
father-in-law  to  P.M/n  (t/.j.  )or  Paltiel  of  Gallim,  and
David  in  his  returning  prospx,-rity  demanded  her  back.
Followed  by  her  weeping  husband,  Michal  went  from
Gallim  ^  to  Bahurim.  There  Abner  conmianded  Paltiel
to  return.  It  may  naturally  be  asked.  Why  was  Bahurim
selected  as  the  scene  of  this  leave-taking  ?  The  answer
is  furnished  by  the  story  of  David's  flight.  It  is  clear
from  2  S.  16 1  5  (cp  17  24)  that  Bahurim  lay  near  the  ro.ad
from  Jerusalem  to  the  Jordan  valley.  Abner  would  have
to  lake  this  road  on  his  return  to  Mahanaim,  and  would
naturally  wait  at  Bahurim  until  he  knew  for  certain  that  a
visit  to  Hebron  would  Ix;  acceptable  to  the  king.  Mean-
time the  envoys  of  David  conducted  Michal  to  Hebron.
Later  it  was  David's  turn  to  pass  by  Bahurim,  when
he  sought  the  Jordan  valley  as  a  fugitive  (2  S.  If) 28).
At  Bahurim  he  would  apparently  have  made  his  first
halt  had  not  the  insults  of  Shimki  compelled  him  to  go
farther'-  (2  S.  I65-14).  It  was  at  Bahurim  also  that
Jonathan  and  Ahimaaz  lay  hid  in  a  well,  when  pursued
by  the  servants  of  Absalom  (2  .S.  17 18).  The  spot
which  best  answers  the  topographical  conditions  is  (as
Barclay  was  the  first  to  see)  SI-",,  of  the  village  of  <•/-
'/sd7v/vi'A  (see  Laisham).  Here,  to  the  S.  of  the  old
Roman  road,  van  Kasteren  found  in  the  upper  ll'd  {v
er-Rawdby  a  ruin  without  a  name,  which  he  believes  to
be  on  the  site  of  Bahurim  {7.DP]'\Ziax  ff.).  For
a  less  probable  view,  fully  discussed  by  van  Kasteren,
see  Marti,  ZDPVZZff.  T.  K.  C.

1  Sir  G.  Grove  (.Smith's  />/>')  thinks  this  may  be  doubtful.
The  rendering  of  (S '-,  however,  in  2  S.  3  1 5  (wIoC  wfAAetfi)  suggests
that  the  verse  originally  closed  with  C'?3!D,  'from  Gallim.'  That
Palti  was  with  Ishbosheth  at  Mahanaim  seems  very  improbable.

-  The  name  of  the  village  where  he  '  refreshed  himself  (2  S.
If.  14)  seems  to  have  dropped  out. See  Avephim.

458


BAITERUS

BAITERUS  (BAiTHpoc  [BA]).  i  Esd.  5 17  RV.  AV

Mf.tkki;s  ; S,CO  GlBBAK.

BAJITH,  RV  Bayith  (H^an,  'the  temple";  text  of
©  differs),  is  l:\ken  in  EV  of  Is.  15 2  as  the  name  of  a
place,  the  article  fx;ing  neglected  (cp  AiN.  2).  It  is
perhiips  more  defensilile  to  render  the  stichus  containing
the  word  thus  :  '  They  go  up  to  the  temple,  Dibon  (goes
up)  to  the  high  places  to  weep'  (so  Ges.  and  formerly
Che.).  The  temple  referred  to  might  be  the  Reth-
bamoth  of  the  inscription  of  Mesha  (/.  26  ;  cp  Bamcjth-
HA.^I.).  n"a  and  na.  however,  are  so  easily  confounded
(see,  e.g..  Is.  IU32  Kt. )  that  it  is  still  better  to  read  nn'ry
j-3-n  rn.  '  the  daughter  (  =  people)  of  Dibon  is  gone  up,'
with  Huhm  and  Cheyne  {SBO'J).

BAKBAKKAR  C.i^a^il,  form  strange,  probably
corrupt  ;  Bakar  [B],  BakB-  [AL]  ;  I'esh.  has  D-inT,
which  in  fz'.  8  12,  etc.  -  Heb.  DPHV  Jeroham),  a  Levite
in  list  of  inhabitants  of  Jerusalem  (see  EzR.\,  ii.  §  5  [/'],
§  15  [i]  a),  I  Ch.  9i5  ;  not  in  ||  Neh.  1 1 16,  but  perhaps
transposed  to  v.  17  (where  MT  and  (!f>**<^-a  "«•  read
Bakhukiaii  [</.f.],  though  <B^^  omits,  <3^  ^OKxeias).

BAKBUK  (PW2,  §§  38,  71,  'pitcher';  but  see
lx!low  ;  BakBoyk  [AL]).  The  b'ne  Bakbuk,  a  family
of  Nethinim  in  the  great  post-exilic  list  (see  Ezra,  ii.
§  9),  Ezra  251  i^aKovK  [L],  ^aKK.  [B])  =  Jseh.  7  53  (/3aK-/3ou
[B],  veKov^  [N])  =  i  Ksd.  5 31!  (aKov(p  [B],  aKOV/j.^  [A]  ;
EV,  Acub).  The  name  can  hardly  be  Hebrew.  It
may  te  corrupted  from  Assyr.  Habbakuka,  a  plant  name
(see  Hab.vkklk).  t.  k.  c.

BAKBUKIAH  (n;ip3p2,  §  38,  ■  pitcher  of  Yahwe'?
[or  else  =  Bakbuk,  ,-i»  being  probably  a  simple  afforma-
tive  (Jastrow;  /BL  1:S  127)],  cp  Bakbuk  ;  BakB&kiac
j^j^c.a  ■!«.  iup.  L],  BX"A  om. ),  one  of  the  Nethinim;
a  singer  in  list  of  Levite  inhabitants  of  Jerusalem  (see
Ezra.  ii.  §  5  [/'],  §  15  [ij  «,  and  cp  Hcrstel,  105),
Neh.  111?  (BOKXeiAC  [L] ;  omitted  in  ||  i  Ch.  9 16  before
Obadiah  =  Abda  of  Neh. ) ;  and  porter  in  Zerubbabel's
band  (see  Ezra,  ii.  §  6  ^,  §  11,  and  Herstel,  no),
Neh.  1225.  In  Neh.  11 17,  of  the  three  persons  named,
Mattaniah  is  a  '  son '  of  Asaph,  and  Abda  is  a  '  son  '
of  Jeduthun.  It  is  plausible,  therefore,  to  take  Bak-
buliiah  to  be  the  same  name  as  ir|73  (cp  ©J-)  and  identify
with  BuKKiAH  \^q.v.\  one  of  the  sons  of  Heman.  The
three  great  guilds  of  temple-singers  will  then  be  repre-
sented.

BAKEMEATS.  In  his  dream  Pharaoh's  chief  baker
carried  on  his  head  '  three  baskets  of  white  bread '
(••"ih  ''^p.  Gen.  40 16— so  RV  and  most
1.  ua  ing.  joQ^gj-n  scholars ;  AV  'three  white  baskets'),
in  the  uppermost  of  which  were  '  all  manner  of  bakemeats
for  Pharaoh,'  literally,  as  we  read  in  the  margin  of  AV,
'  meat  [food]  of  Pharaoh,  the  work  of  a  baker'  (40 17).
The  best  commentary  on  these  verses  is  the  representa-
tion of  the  royal  bakery  on  the  tomb  of  Ramses  III.  at
Theljes,  which  has  been  reproduced  by  Wilkinson  [Anc.
Eg.,  1878,  1  176),  and  more  recently  by  Erman  [Atic.
Eg.  191).  The  process  of  making  the  ordinary  house-
hold supply  is  described  under  Brkad  ;  here  it  is  pro-
posed to  bring  together  the  scattered  notices  in  Scripture
regarding  other  products  of  the  baker's  skill.  In  this
connection,  it  is  interesting  to  note  the  remarkable  variety
of  shapes  assumed  by  the  bread  and  pastry  in  the  repre-
sentation referred  to.  Additional  varieties  are  collected
by  I->man  from  other  sources  and  represented  on  the
same  page.  Hiw  far  the  Hebrew  court  bakers  (i  S.  8
13)  were  able  to  imitate  those  of  Egypt  we  do  not  know.

There  is  certainly  no  lack  of  names  for  different  species

of  bakemeats  in  the  OT  ;  but  it  is  now  impossible  to

p  . identify  them  (cp  Brkad). Thus  we  can

2.  OaKes.  ^^]y  conjecture,  although  with  a  fair  amount

of  certainty, that the cake named kikkar (133, AV

1  Cp  Akkub,  2.  It  is  pos.sible,  however,  that  BA  omit  the
name  (L  has  Bojc^vk),  since  ojcov^,  etc  may  be  a  duplicate
of  Hakupha  Cf.v.y.

4S9


BAKEMEATS

'morsel,'  RV  'loaf'),  i  S.  236,  must  have  been  round,
like  a  Scottish  '  bannock '  ;  which,  from  the  context,
must  hold  good  also  of  the  barley-cake  (Si'ys)  of  Gideon's
dream  (Judg.  7i3t)-  The  nikki4dim  (d'T|5;,  possibly
from  npj,  to  prick)  may  have  been  thin  cakes  pricked
over  like  a  modern  biscuit,  or  dotted  over  with  the  seeds
of  some  condiment  (sec  below).  They  were  part  of  the
present  which  the  wife  of  Jeroboam  I.  took  to  the
prophet  Ahijah  (i  K.  14  3),  and  are  rendered  by  EV
cracknels,  for  which  the  American  revisers  prefer  to
read  '  cakes.'  ^  Still,  judging  from  etymology,  we  may
consider  the  halld  (n'^n),  the  cake  which  so  frequently
occurs  in  the  sacrificial  ritual,  as  having  been  jjerforated
(':>'-n,  to  pierce)  like  a  modern  Passover  cake.  It  was
made  of  the  finest  flour  (^^b)■  Mention  is  made  of
another  kind  of  sacrificial  cakes,  apparently  of  foreign
origin,  which  the  women  of  Jerusalem  kneaded  and
baked  in  connection  with  the  idolatrous  worship  of  the
'  QUKKN  OF  HiCAVKN  '  {q.v. ),  Jer.  7  18  44  19.  ©  merely  •
transliterates  the  Heb.  word  (crs,  x"-^'^^"-'^  [BNAQ]  ;
X'3.v^G)vo.%  [X*],  x«''«"'«s  [Q*]  in  Jer.  44 19),  and  the
exegetical  tradition  varies.  That  these  kawudiilm  were
some  kind  of  bakemeats  is  clear  from  the  kneading  of
the  dough  in  their  preparation  (7 18).  It  is  generally
thought  that  they  may  have  resembled  the  selinai
(aeXqvai),  cakes  shaped  like  the  full  moon,  which  were
offered  in  Athens  to  Artemis,  the  moon-goddess,  at  the
time  of  full  moon  (see  especially  Kue. 's  essay  '  De
melecheth  des  hemels,'  translated  in  Bu. 's  edition  of  his
Gesammelte  Abh.  208,  and  the  comm.  of  Graf  and  of
Giesebrecht  in  loc. ).  A  similar  custom  is  said  to  have
prevailed  in  the  worship  of  the  Arabic  goddess  Al-'Uzza
(We.  Ar.  HeiJ.(^)  38/.,  2nd  ed.  41/).

With  regard  to  what  may  be  called  the  pastry  of  the
Hebrews,  all  that  can  be  said  with  any  degree  of  certainty
p .  is  that  a  more  delicate  relish  was  imparted  to

■  *  ^'  the  preparation  of  certain  kinds  of  bakemeats
in  three  ways,  (i)  The  dough  was  baked  in  olive  oil.
Thus  the  taste  of  the  manna  is  said  in  one  passage  (Nu.
118  JE)  to  l)e  like  the  taste  of  'cakes  baked  with  oil"
(RV'"*>'-,  jcrn  nc''?),  generally  understood  of  some  dainty
cooked  in  oil  (but  F.V^  '  like  the  taste  of  fresh  oil ').  (2)
The  dough  was  prepared  by  being  mi.xed  with  oil  and
then  fired.  This  mode  of  preparation  was  extensively
used  in  the  ritual  of  P:  see,  for  example.  Lev.  24^,
where  a  distinction  is  made  between  cakes  '  mingled
{rht'2 — see  'j'ja  in  BDB  Lex. )  with  oil '  and  cakes  merely
'  anointed  (n'TOc)  with  oil.'  (3)  In  the  passage  parallel
to  that  quoted  above  (i),  viz.,  E.x.  16 31  [P],  the  taste  of
the  manna  is  likened  to  'wafers  (p'p-t,  for  which  see
Bre.\d)  made  with  honey.'  From  this  passage,  from
the  prohibition  of  honey  in  the  ritual  (Lev.  2ii),  and
from  the  post-biblical  use  of  the  verbal  stem  ^31  (dbS),
we  learn  that  honey  [d'bal) — no  doubt  both  the  product
of  the  bee  and  the  artificial  grape- syrup  (the  modern
dihs:  see  Hdnky) — was  used  in  the  preparation  of  certain
kinds  of  bakemeats.  ©bal  j^  both  the  passages  dis-
cussed (N'u.  118  Ex.1631)  renders  by  iyKpLi,  which,
according  to  Athena'us  (in  Di.  on  Ex.  1631)  denoted  'a
bakemeat  made  with  oil  and  honey.'  Saadia's  word
here  is  katd'if"  [pastilli  dulciarii),  a  species  of  confec-
tion still  made  in  Syria.  Landberg  {Proverbes  ct  Dictons,
125)  defines  it  as  'a  flaky  paste  {patisserie feuilletie')
made  with  walnut  and  sugar  and,  in  spring,  with  cream. '"
Some  sort  of  dainty  confection  is  evidently  intended  by
the  obscure /(W/*o/A  (ni3?'? ;  2S.  136  8iot;  EV  'cakes')
which  Tamar  baked for  Amnon.^ If  the etymology

1  For  Josh.  9  5,  the  only  other  passage  where  D*^5pp  occurs
(EV  '  mouldy "),  see  Di.  in  loc.

-  The  curious  in  these  matters  are  referred  to  I^ndberg's  book
for  a  detailed  list  of  modern  Arab  confections,  123-128  ;  cp  Wetr.
ZDMG  11  517/

•*  On  the  reading  in  v.  9  see  Cooking  Utensils,  8  5  (i.l

460


BAKING

from  33(?  (heart)  were  more  secure,  we  might  conclude
that  the  til-bit  in  question  was  heart-shaped.

In  Kz.  27 17  we  fmd  anicmg  the  trade-products  of
Tyre  a  substance  called  p'lnnag  {21^)  which,  according
to  the  Targuin,  was  a  '  kind  of  confection  '  ;  so  RV'^ti
The  meaning  is  quite  uncertain,  and  probably  the  text
is  (.orrupt  (Co.  would  rtad  j:n,  wax  ;  see  I'a.n.nag).
I'or  the  frequently  mentioned  nv^'VH  or  grape-cake,  see
I'RUIT,  §  5  ;  and  for  the  use  of  condiments  in  baking,
see  Food  and  Spicks.  a.  k.  s.  k.

BAKING. See  Hrkad,  §  2  ;  Oven.

BAKING  PAN  (n?TO),  Lev.  2s  7 9- See  Cooking

Utknsii.s,  §  7.

BALAAM  (DI^p3  ;  etymology  uncertain  ;  Winckler's
Bel-'ain  [G/  1  120)  seems  improbable  ;  cp  perhaps  Ba-Ium-


1.  Two


mc-e  (Am.  Tab.)  and  see  Ihkea.M,  Bki.a,
accounts. -^'■^^•-AIT.ans  ; BaAaam  [B.\L]  ; Joseph.

BaAamoc  ).  b.  Beor  ;  a  soothsayer  or  prophet
whom  Bai.ak,  king  of  Moab,  made  an.xious  by  Israel's
victory  over  the  Amorites,  summoned  to  curse  his
enemies.  Instead  of  doing  so,  Balaam  bore  himself  as
the  prophetic  mouthpiece  of  Yahwe,  whom  he  acknow-
ledged as  his  God  (Mu.  22i8),  and  by  the  spirit  of
Elohim  (24  2)  foretold  the  future  glory  of  Israel.  No
wonder  that  a  prophet  of  Judah,  writing  probably  in
the  dark  and  idolatrous  days  of  Manasseh,  recalled  the
history  of  Balaam,  when  he  would  remind  his  ungrateful
countrymen  of  Yahwe's  '  l>eneficent  deeds'  (Mic.  65).
Balaam's  character  has  long  been  regarded  as  an  enigma,
and  from  Bishop  Butler's  time  onwards  many  subtle
solutions  have  been  offered.  The  enigma,  however,  is
mainly  produced  by  the  combination  of  two  traditions
belonging  to  different  periods,  and  it  is  the  duty  of  the
critic  to  distinguish,  as  far  as  possible,  the  two  traditions
which,  though  one  in  spirit,  present  a  palpable  difference
in  details.

According  to  J,  Balak,  king  of  Moab,  dismayed  by
the  number  of  his  new  and  unwelcome  neighbours,
called  Balaam  from  the  land  of  the  b'ne  Ammon^  to
curse  Israel.  Balaam  protested  that  he  could  not,  for
all  the  royal  treasure,  go  beyond  Yahwe's  word  ;  but  he
saddled  his  ass  and  set  out.^  On  the  road,  the  angel
of  Yahwe,  invisible  to  Balaam,  but  visible  to  the  beast
he  rode,  stopped  his  way  with  a  drawn  sword.  Yahwe
endowed  the  ass  with  speech,  and  at  last  opened  the
prophet's  eyes  to  the  apparition,  and,  had  it  not  been
for  the  fear  which  held  the  animal  back,  Balaam  would
have  paid  for  his  rashness  with  his  life.  Still,  he  re-
ceived permission  to  go,  and  was  only  warned  to  refx)rt
Yahwe's  oracle faithfully.  The  Elohist  has  no

occasion  for  these  marvels.  In  his  account,  Balaam,
who  is  an  .-VramtKan  of  Pethor  {q.v. )  on  the  Euphrates
(or  perhaps  rather  a  N.  Arabian  of  Rehoboth  by  the
river  of  Musri),  did  not  yield  to  Balak's  repeated  solici-
tations till  God  (ElOhim)  appeared  in  a  dream  and  told
him^  to  go  with  the  Moabite  ambassadors.
^  From  this  point  it  is  not  possible  to  separate  the
E  and  J  documents  with  full  confidence.  In  what
follows  we  have  four  great  prophecies  concerning  Israel's
future,  besides  three  short  oracles  on  the  destruction  of
the  .Amalekites,  the  Kenites,  and  the  Assyrians.  Prob-
ably the  first  two  of  the  four  great  prophecies  come  to
us  in  their  present  form  from  the  hand  of  the  Elohist, ■•

'  The  word  'confection'  here  used  in  the  RVms-.  refers  every-
where else  in  EV  to  perfumes  or  spices  (Ex.  30  35,  RV  '  perfume  '  ;
I  L-h.  9  ;o,  AV omtment,'  RV  '  confection ' ;  Ecclus.  388) ;  cp  the
confectionaries  '  or  perfume-compounders  of  i  .S.  8  13.
2  225/,; read  psy  for  iSJ?  with  Di.  after Sam. Pesh. Vg.,
*"il  x?'"^  ^^^-  '^^'^^- For  a  third  view,  however,  see  Pftiioi;
Nu.22  19.2K1  belongs  to  E. The  rea.son  why  Balaam  went
r°iK° '"  -^  extant  portions  of  J.

1  he  Elohistic  account  of  the  prophecies  must,  however,  have
m.i<1e  some  reference  to  Moab,  and  must,  therefore,  have  con-
tained more  thaii  is  now  given  in  chap.  23.

461


BALAAM

while  the  hist  two  are  derived  from  the  narrative  of  the
Vahwist.

Balaam  prepares  for  his  work  rather  after  the  fashion
of  a  sorcerer  than  in  accordance  w  ith  the  spiritual  ideas

2  Oracles  o*"  'J*-' ""ew  prophecy.  In  order  to  inllu-
1  and  2  FEl  ^"'^'^  Elohim,  he  directs  Balak  to  offer
*-  ■'■  sacrifices  of  special  solemnity'  (seven
altars,  seven  oxen,  seven  rams;  cp  Beer-siii.h.v).
Bamoth-baal,  the  scene  of  the  sacrifices,  was  no  ordinary
'high  place,"  but  (probably)  one  of  those  high  hills
where  huge  dolmens  still  suggest  primajval  communing
with  God,  and,  as  we  learn,  it  commanded  a  view  of  at
least  '  the  utmost  part '  of  the  Israelitish  encampment.
This  was  important,  for  a  curse  must  be  uttered  in  sight
of  those  upon  whom  it  is  to  fall  (cp  23  13  a).  When
Balaam  returns  to  Balak  and  his  princes  after  meeting
God,  he  can  but  break  forth  into  jubilant  praise  of
Israel.  Curse  it  he  cannot.  The  people  has  a  destiny
of  its  own  which  parts  it  from  the  surrounding  nations.
The  Israelite  hosts  N.  of  Arnon  are  the  token  of  a
mightier  multitude  unborn.  All  individual  desire  loses
itself  in  the  sense  of  Israel's  greatness.  Happy  is
he  who  dies  in  Jeshurun,  and,  dying,  knows  that  his
people  is  immortal  !  In  vain  Balak  changes  the  seer's
place  of  outlook.  As  Balaam  beholds  all  Israel  from
the  top  of  PiSGAH,2  he  receives  a  divine  oracle  which
confirms  and  transcends  the  former  blessing.  God,
says  Balaam,  is  not  a  man  :  he  does  not  change  his
mind.  Nor  can  trouble  touch  Israel,  for  Yahwfe  himself
reigns  in  their  midst ;  and  the  people  (if  we  may  trust
the  reading^)  greet  this  divine  king  with  exultant  shout.
With  the  strength  of  a  wild-ox,  they  fling  their  foes  to
the  ground.  No  magical  arts  avail  in  Israel's  case  :  even
now  all  has  been  decided,  and  one  can  but  cry  '  W  hat
has  God  done  ! '  Like  a  lion,  Israel  rises  up  to  devour
the  prey.

Again  sacrificial  rites  are  perfopmed,  and  again  Balaam

has to disappoint the king (.see PeoiO. The third

3.  Oracles P'^Ph^^T  (J'-  together  with  some  striking

3  and  4  fJl P''^''^"*^'''  ^°  ^^^  second,-*  has  characteristic

L  -•■  features  of  its  own.  The  poet  still  dwells
on  tlie  numbers  and  prowess  of  Israel,  but  adds  a
panegyric  of  its  well-watered  and  fruuful  land,  and
surprises  us  by  a  definite  mention  of  the  kingly  power
as  distinct  from  the  reign  of  Yalu\e.  The  king  of  Israel
is  described  as  raised  even  above  A(;.\G  (q.v.).  Still
more  definite  is  the  fourth  prophecy.  The  seer  beholds
in  spirit  the  ri.se  of  David,  and  chaunls  the  victories
which  are  to  crush  .Moab  and  subdue  Edom.

The  basis  of  the  story  of  Balaam  is  evidently  a  patri-
otic legend,  which, as  we  now  have  it, presupposes  a

4  Origin <^°'"P''^'''''"vely achanced historical period.

of  story  ^'  '^  '""'''  ^^^  ^'""^^  °^  ^^^  ''^■'^^'  ^^■'^''-"'^  ^•-'<^s
•'■  the  angel  invisible  to  man,  and  speaks
(Nu.  2222-34;  cp  2  Pe.  2 16),  has  a  highly  primitive
flavour.*  Still,  this  story,  though  welded  with  some
psychological  skill  into  the  surrounding  narrative,  is  a
decoration  derived  from  folklore,  and  the  narrative  as
a  whole  is  designed  to  accentuate  the  uselessncss  of
jealous  and  relx^llious  feelings  in  the  .-Xmnionitish  and
Edomitish  neighboiu-s  of Israel. Amnion and  Edom

1  It  is  Balak,  not  Balaam,  who  s.icrifices  ;  '  Balak  and  Balaam  '
in  Nu.232  should  evidently  be  omitted  (as  in  tSSiAL).

-  This  is  certainly  E's  meaning  in  Nu.23i3rt.  The  second
part  of  V.  13,  which  limits  Balaam's  range  of  vision  to  'the
utmost  part  of  the  people,'  must  be  due  to  a  redactor.  Its
object  is  to  harmonise  7'.  13(1  [E]  with  24 2  (J),  which  tells  us
that  Balaam  is  ntnv  taking  his  first  complete  view  of  the  people
of  Israel.  In  reality,  however,  zi.  13  3  destroys  the  progress
which  E  intended  frorn  2241  102813.  .Since  a  limited  view  of
Israel  h.id  not  resulted  in  the  utterance  of  a  curse,  Bal.ik  deemed
it  necessary  to  try  the  effect  of  the  wider  outlook  from  Pisgah.

3  Cheyne,  however,  reads  nnNEni.  '  and  the  glory  of  the  king
IS  among  them.'

•*  It  is  doubtful,  however,  whether  Nu.2322  23  is  not  a  Yah-
wistic  fragment  (see  Bacon,  Triple  Tradition,  228,  and  cp  Di.'s
note). According  to  Cheyne,  niXEH  occurs  both  in  v.  21  </and

^  Cp  the  Babylonian  beast-stories,  the  speaking  horse  in
Horn.  //.  19  404,  and  the  speaking  serpent  in  (jenesis.

463


BALAAM

were  older  as  nations  ;  but  Israel  alone  had  secured
penuanent  foothold  W.  of  Jordan,  and  for  a  time  reduced
the  oldest  nationalities  to  vassalage.  The  story  of
Balaam  points  out  that  Yahwe  had  ordained  these
privileges  of  Israel  long  before.  The  Moabitish  king
and  the  Amnionitish,  Arabian, ^  or  Aramcean  sooth-
sayer had  striven  to  turn  aside  the  irreversible  decree,
and  Yahwe  had  turned  the  very  means  they  took  into  the
instrument  by  which  he  announced  the  triumphs  and
the  unique  destiny  of  his  people.

It  is  much  harder  to  fix  the  date  and  origin  of  the
poems. We  can  scarcely  attribute  them  w  ithout  reserve
to  J and K, for the points  of  contact


6.  Origin  of


between  the  prophecies  (cp  especially  2322


P  ■ and  248)  suggest  that  an  ancient  poem

has  lx*en  exijanded  and  changed  in  diverse  ways.  The
keinel  of  the  poem  may  go  back  to  the  early  days  of
the  kingdom, — even,  it  may  be,  to  those  of  Solomon.
The  national  fortune  is  painted  in  glowing  colours,  and
the  historical  references  stop  short  at  David,  who  was
the  only  king  to  conciuer  both  Moab  and  Edom.  On
the  other  hand,  the  clear  sense  of  Israel's  separateness
from  the  nations  (239)  had  not  arisen,  so  far  as  is
known,  before  the  time  of  the  literary  prophets,  and
the  phraseology  does  not  permit  us  to  place  the  poems,
as  we  now  have  them,  earlier.

The appendix (2420-24), at any rate, is generally

admitted  to  be  comparatively  modern (note  the  exag-

_,  geration  respecting  the  Anialekites). The

,. " structure  .shows  that  the  oracles  are  from

pendix.  ^1^^  j^.^j^j  ^^,^,  24 20,  end,  with  ?-.  24,  end).
The  writer  was  quite  familiar  with  the  .\ss\Tian  power,
and  speaks  of  the  deportation  of  the  Kenites  by  the
.\ssyrians.  He  speaks  of  the  Kenites,  rather  than  more
famous  peoples,  because  he  considers  them  to  be  (like
the  Amalekites  ;  cp  i  S.  ISa)  within  Balaam's  horizon.
He  also  (if  the  text  of  2424  be  correct)  predicts  that
AssvTia  in  its  turn  will  be  destroyed  by  ships  from
Curni.M  ((/.J'.).  Was  he  thinking  of  the  Persian
empire  (Assyria  =  Persia,  Ezra622),  and  its  overthrow
by  Alexander  the  Great  (cp  i  Mace,  li)?  The  theory
has  been  widely  accepted,  and  nuich  controversy  as  to
the  limits  of  prophecy  has  grown  out  of  it.  It  .seems
bolder  than  the  evidence  as  a  whole  warrants  (see  Ui. ),
and  it  has  lately  been  pointed  out  that  '  they  shall
afilict '  (?3;;,  V.  24)  is  a  misreading  which  has  arisen  out
of  the  loss  of  an  ethnic  name  in  v.  23.  Analogy  requires
that  the  last  of  the  three  little  oracles  in  t'?'.  22-24  should
begin  thus  :

And  he  s.-iw  .  .  .  and  began  hi.s  oracle,  and  said,
Alas  who  will  live  (survive)  of  . . .

And  the  discoveries  of  the  Tell  of  Zenjirli  enable  us  to
restore  the  missing  name,  which  was,  not  '  Samuel '
('I'Nicr.  as  many  MSS  and  some  editions),  but
'  .Sham'al.' Then  in  v.  24  we  may  continue  :

And  there  shall  be  .ships  from  the  direction  of  Cj"prus,
And  .Vssyria  .shall  afflict  him  (l-)^'),  and  F;ber  shall  afflict  him,
.\iid  he  too  (.shall  come)  to  destruction.-
The  kingdom  of  Sham'al  in  NW.  Syria  was  not  so  very
far  from  Balaam's  native  place  Pethor.  (The  poet,
at  any  rate,  placed  Pethor  in  Aram.)  That  it  was
di-stroyed  by  Assyrians  and  peoples  from  the  other  side
of  the  Euphrates  (  =  ICber),  and  plundered  by  shipmen
from  Cyprus,  was  probably  within  the  recollection  of  the
author,  who  is,  therefore,  not  to  Ix;  regarded  as  post-

1  See  above,  §  i,  second  paragraph. Cp  Gen.  8632,  and  see

BeLA(2),  MiZKAIM.

'■i  The  importance  of  this  correction  will  appear  if  we  compare
the  alternative  explanation  of  Hommel  (AHT  24$/.), which
produces  the  following  most  unnatural  and  unworthy  distich  :
'  Jackals  (C';n)  shall  come  from  the  north
And  wild  cats  (D';s)  from  the  coast  of  Kittim,'
where  'jackals'  and  'wild  cats'  are  figurative  expressions  for


wild  invaders,  and  Kittim  is,  Hommel  says,  '  the  familiar
for  the  Hittites  (var.  chittim).' .See  Asshukim,  Eber.

463


BALANCE

exilic. Assyria  may  have  been  no  longer  at  the  height
of  its  prosperity,  but  was  still  a  conquering  power.'

We  have  passing  notices  of  Balaam  in  Josh.  249  (E.^)
and  in  Dt.  284/. ,  cp  Neh.  13 1/.  (see  Ammonites,  §  3).

_ Aii„„,-^ „ In  Dt. I.e.,  as  in  E,  he  is  an  Aramaean

7.  Allusions  , ,,  .  u 1  •  T 1
to  Balaam "  Mesopotamia,  hired  to  curse  Israel ;

■  but  Yahwe  turned  his  curse  into  a  blessing.

The  Priestly  Writer  represents  Balaam  in  a  much  more

unfavourable light, Nu.  3l8i6 Josh.  1322 (cp Xu.

25 6-18). He is a  sorcerer, at whose instigation the

Midianite  women seduced the Israelites into  sensual

idolatry  ;  and  he  died  in  the  battle  between  the  Israelites

j and  the  Midianites. Jos.  (Ant.  iv.  66)  dwells  at  great

I length  on  the  corrupting  advice  of  Balaam,  given  in  the

i first  instance  (cp  Rev.  214)  to  Balak,  and  in  Rabbinical

literature  Balaam  is  the  type  of  false  teachers  [Abolh,

519; cp Rev. /.f. ) and .sorcerers. Cp also 2  Pet.  2 15

j Judell. For Arabic parallels to the efficacy of

! Balaam's oracles, see Goldziher, Abhandl. zur  arab.

\ Philologie,  2b  ff.

See Di.'s Count, and cp Tholuck, 'Die  Gesch. Bileams,"

]'eimischte  Scliriften,  1  406-432  ;  Oort,  Disput.  de  Nu.xxii.-

.XX iv., i860; Kalisch, Bible  Studies,  pt. i,

8.  Literature.  1877; Kue. Jheot. njd.  is  497-540  r84];

van  Hoonacker,  '  Observations  critiques  con-
cernant  Bileam,'  Le  Museon,  1888  ;  Halivy,  Re^i.  sent.  1894,
pp.  201-209;  Scbr.  CO r  1  143-145  ;  We.  CH  -i^tff.;  Kit.  Hist.
1  202,  214,  229  ;  Kautzsch,  Abriss  (sketch  of  literature  appended
to  //.V),  143;  Hommel,  GBA  9;  Che.  Exp.  limes,  June  1899,
PP-  399-40-'-  \V.  E.  A.

BALAC  (B&Aak  [Ti.  WH]),  Rev.  214. See  Balak.
BALADAN  (H^'^?),  2  K.  20 12  Is.  ;59i. See  Meko-

DAril-li.VLADA.N.

BALAH  (n^3).  Josh.  I93. See  Baal.mi,  2.

BALAK  (p'73,  BaAak  [BAL]  ;  bai.ac),  b.  Zippor.
an  early  king  of  Moab  (Xu.  22-24  Judg.  11 25,  and  else-
where ;  cp  Rev.  2  14,  Balac),  inseparably  connected  with
Balaam.  For  the  alliteration  cp  JaVial  and  Jubal,  Beta
and  Birsha,  l-:idad  and  Medad,  etc. See  Bai,.\.\m.

BALAMO,  RVBalamon  (B^Aes^MCON  [BNA]),  Judith
83. See  Bi.i.MEN.

BALANCE.  (i)  Mozlndim  (D^3m'D,— the  dual
refers  to  the  two  ear-like  pendants  2)  are  scales  for
weighing  money  (Jer.  32io),  hair  (Ez.  5i,  SjX^  ^iTNOi,
etc.  ;  cp  the  metaphor  of  weighing  calamity  (Jobt52),
men  (Ps.  629  [10],  cp  Dan.  627), ^  and  hills  (Is.  4O17).
The  dust  of  the  balance  is  a  simile  for  an  insignificant
or  negligible  quantity  (Is.  40 15).  The  frequent  metaphor
of  a  just  or  even  balance  (pis  'c.  Lev.  I936,  cp  Job3l6
Ez.  4.')  10 ;  a2tt*,r2  'c,  Prov.  16  n,  RV  '  scales  ' ),  as  opposed
to  one  that  is  false  (nOT?  'd,  Prov.  11  n,  cp  2O23  Am.  85
Hos.  127  [8]  ;  y^T  's,  Mic.  6ii),  is  analogous  to  the  well-
known  Heb.  and  Aram,  idiom  which  expresses  honour
and  integrity  by  the  simile  of  '  heaviness '  (cp  nia  and

(2)  Vox  kan^,  nji  (Is.  466:  only  here  in  this  sense),
see  Reeu,  i,  n.  Other  words  wee.  {■>,) p^les,  oTs,  Prov.
16  II  RV,  AV  'weight,'  Is.  40 12  [aTaOtibi  LBN.AQ]),  EV
'  scales  '  ;  cp  the  verb  in  Ps.  58  2  [3]  ;  but  hardly  >f'?EO  in
Job37i6,  'the  balancings  (t^ssz)  of  the  clouds?'  (see
Budde).  (4)  ^vy()v,  Rev.  65,  frequent  in  @  for  the
above.

The  balances  used  in  Palestine  were  probably  similar
to  those  found  on  Egyptian  monuments.  One  type
consists  of  an  upright  pole  rising  from  a  broad  Ixise  w  ith

1  Che.  Expositor,  1896,  pp.  77-80  (following  D.  H.  Miiller,
Die  Propheten,  1  215/).

2  In  Ar.  m'tzdn  with  z,  whereas  tidii  (=|IN)  has  d\  see
Frankel,  198.

3  Cp  Phoen.  oSsVya.  '  B.  hath  weighed  out.'

*  Cp  the  deprecation  of  unfair  weights  (D'JaK,  lit.  '  stones  ')  in
Lev.  19  35  Prov.  11 1  Mic.  0  11.

464


BALASAMUS

cross  l)cams  turning  upon  a  pin.  An  arm  on  either  side
fueled  in  a  hook  to  which  the  article  to  be  weighed  was
attached  in  Iwgs  (cp  Wilk.  Arte.  Eg.  2246,  fig.  415,
5  (/,  see  Bao,  i  ).  Small  ones  of  a  particularly  ingenious
nature,  as  well  as  hand-stales,  are  found  (Wilk.  1  285
fig.  95).  .-Xbovc  the  pole  is  sometimes  placed  the
figure  of  a  bal)oon  representing  'I'hoth  the  regulator  of
measures.  The  steelyard  (in  Kgy|jt)  does  not  seem  to
have  Ikjcu  known  until  the  Roman  period.

BALASAMUS  (BaaAcamoc  |liA)).  1  Ksd.  94.*  =
Neh.  84. M.\.\sKi.\ii, 15.

BALD  LOCUST  (Dr^D  ;  attakhc  [HAFL]).  The
.wl'dm  is  apparently  a  species  of  edible  locust,  or  a
locust  in  a  particular  stage  of  growth.  .See  further
Locust,  2.

BALDNESS. See  Clttincs,  §  i  ; Haik.

BALM  OIV  or  nV  ;  phtinh  [rit-  AKF]  pithnh
[I", once]: cp Ezek.  27i7 .\V"'K- 'rosin'; \"g. resiiia

1.  OT  S6rl.


(ien.  ;}725  43 II,  Jer.  822  46 11  T.lS,  ICzek.


27 17),  a  valuable  product  of  Palestine,
the  identification  of  which  has  given  much  trouble.
I'.V's  rendering,  'balm,'  is  an  imfortunate  inheritance
'from  Coverdale's  Bible  (see  New  ling.  Diet.  s.v. ).  Let
us  look  fiist  at  the  Hebrew  name  ns  {sdri).  The  .\rabic
danu  or  <///"»' '  is  identical  with  it,  and  since  the  root
means  to  '  drip'  or  '  bleed,'  the  product  referred  to  nmst
l)e  resiiioiis,  but  it  need  not  be  aromatic.  From  the
or  notices  we  learn  that  sdrl  (EV  'balm')  was  found
abundantly  in  Gilead,  that  it  was  in  early  times  e.\[)orted
thence  to  I'-gypt  ((Jen.  .'5725),  was  sufficiently  prized  to
form  an  appropriate  gift  to  a  lord  of  that  country  (Gen.
4'5ii),  was  applied  as  a  remedy  for  violent  pain
(jer.  //.  cc. ),  and  was  among  the  chief  products  of  Pales-
tine that  were  brought  into  the  Tyrian  market  (Ez.  27  17 )•
Next,  we  must  point  out  that  the  modern  commercial
name  '  balm  of  Gilead '  has,  like  the  botanical  specific
name  Gileadensc,  no  foundation  but  the  hypothesis  that
the  substance  so  designated  is  the  OT  '  .fiVv  of  Gilead ' ;
and  that  from  the  earliest  times  resins  and  turpentines
have  been  used  in  medicine,  as  stimulants  and  as  anti-
septics for  wounds,  and  as  counter-irritants  for  pain.
The  ^dri  [VN  '  balm')  of  Jer.  822  46 11  is  clearly  a  local
product  in  Gilead  ;  its  association  with  mJr  (EV
'  myrrh  ')  in  Gen.  3725  43  n  proves  that  it  was  a  valuable
article  of  commerce.

It  has  lx;en  shown  elsewhere  (B.\i.s.\m)  that  the  so-
called  'balsam  of  Mecca,'  produced  by  the  Balsamo-
„  p^  ,  ,  .  demiron  Opobalsamum,  is  most  probably
Z.J^ODaDiy  ^^^  jj^g  .  ^^j^.  Q^  (,  ji^^.^j .  ^^^  j^^  Hebrew

■  mor,  which  EV  mistakenly  renders  '  myrrh '
(see  Bai.sa.m,  .\Iykkh).  SSri  (EV  balm),  then,  must
l)e  something  else.

( I )  Arabic  usage  is  in  favour  of  the  rendering  of  R  V"'n-
Cjen.  3725  etc.,  Mastic — i.e.,  the  resin  yielded  by  the
mastic  tree,  Pistacia  Lentiscus.

This  tree  '  is  a  native  of  the  Mediterranean  shores,  and  is
found  in  Portugal,  Morocco,  and  the  Canaries '  (Fliickiger  an<l
Hanbury's  Pharmacogr.,  161).  According  to  Tristram  (NHH
362),  it  is  extremely  common  in  all  the  Mediterranean  countries,
especially  on  the  African  coasts  and  in  the  Greek  islands,  where
it  overruns  whole  districts  for  many  miles.  Tristram  states,  also,
that  it  is  indigenous  in  all  parts  of  Palestine,  though,  according  '
to  Post  (Hastings,  BD  236  a),  it  is  not  now  to  be  found  E.  of  the
Jordan.  The  mastic  of  commerce  is  mainly  derived  from  the
Isle  of  Scio.  Down  to  the  seventeenth  century  mastic  was  an
ingredient  of  many  medicines.  Unlike  most  resins,  it  readily
softens  with  motlerate  heat,  even  that  of  the  mouth.

As  the  Arabic  word  danv  (or  dirw)  is  used  mainly  of
this  tree  and  its  products,  we  are  not  rash  in  concluding
that  a  substance  of  this  kind  is  intended  in  the  biblical
passages,  though  it  seems  unnecessary  to  limit  ns  sSrl
to  the  resin  of  P.  Lentiscus:  it  may  include  the  resins  j
of  the  terebinth  {P.  Terebinthus)  and  Aleppo  piff
(Pinus  halepensis ;  see  Ash). The  former  yields  '  Chiaii

1  The  Syriac  sar^vS,  must  be  a  loan-word  from  Arabic  (Lag.
Milth.  1  234).


BALSAM

turpentine,'  which  has  recently  been  brought  into  notice
as  an  alleged  remedy  for  cancer.  According  to  I'ris-
tram  {op.  cit.  400),  the  terebinth  is  not  now  tapped  for
turpentine  in  Palestme,  '  where  the  inhabitants  seem  to
be  ignorant  of  its  commercial  value. '  There  is  abundant
evidence  of  the  medicinal  use  of  these  resins  in  antiijuity
(see  Movers,  Plion.  Alt.  iii.  1  223).

(2.)  balanites  tegyptiaca,  called  zakkiim  by  the  Arabs  (Tris-
tram, <»/.  cit.  336),  yields  an  oil  'prepared  by  the  Arabs  of
Jericho  and  sold  in  large  quantities  to  the  pilgrims  as  b.alm  of
(Jilead.'  This,  however,  was  the  irep<Tta  of  (Ireek  writers,  and
clearly,  therefore,  distinguished  by  them  from  /SoAao/xoi'  or
pijTiVrj. It  is  merely  a  modern  substitute.

(3.)  Lastly  must  be  mentioned  Lagarde's  view  that  (Ir.
CTTiipof  =  '"IS  (fjr/).  There  is  great  probability  in  this
identification  of  the  words,  for  (tt-  is  employed  in  .several
instances  to  transliterate  <;  (j) ;  but  evidence  is  wanting  to  con-
nect •");>  with  the  substance  crrvpa^,  which  seems  to  have  been
called  ill  Hebrew  n:3^  (liblineli). See  further  SroR ax.

W.  T.  T.-D. — N.  M.

BALNUUS  (BaAnyoc  [H],  BaAnoyoc  [A]),  i  Esd.
93i  =  Ezral03o. Bi.nnui,  4.

BALSAM  appears  in  RV"'k-,  once  for  Dl^'3  bdsdm
(Cant.  5  if, apcom&TA). and twice in rendering the

i.Heb.basam.P^--^^^'^  °^-^  n?.m  •,.-...//.  i,ab.

bc'sci/t.  'bed  of  bal.sam  '  ((ant.  51362,
(t>lAA<M  TOY  APCOM&TOC)-  KV  text  and  AV  have
'sjiict','  ■  Ixjd  of  spices."  The  verb  (in  .Xram.  bi^st'w)
signifies  to  'have  pleasure.'  'be  attracted  by  desire,"  '
and  in  Heb.  the  nominal  forms  ^  denote  enjoyment  con-
nected with  one  particular  sense — that  of  smell.  From
one  or  othcT  of  the  .Semitic  forms  comes  Gr.  fidXaa/xov.
.Although  hasdvi  and  bosem  in  the  above  passages  may
have  the  general  sense  of  spice  or  perfume,^  it  is  more
probable  that,  like  basdm  and  ^dXiTa/uLov ,  they  denote  the
balsam  tree  or  plant  par  excellence.  We  now  know
that  the  proper  source  of  Mecca  balsam  is  Balsamoden-
dron  Opobalsamum  (see  §  4)  ;  and  a  tree  of  this  kind
.seems  to  be  intended  in  the  passages  from  ancient
writers  which  are  here  summarised.

(rt)  Theophrastus  {Hist.  Plant.  96)  has  a  long  passage  about

the  production  of  lialsani. It  is  produced, he says, 'in the

.  hollow  about  .Syria  '  {iv  tw  auAwi/t  tui  Trcpi

2.  Ancient v,,^,-^^). xhis  phrase Stackhouse  explains

References. from Strabo  as  meaning KotAe-Svpia ;  but

circa  •522  H  C  ''^  ''^'^  present  day  Balsainodetuiron  Opa-
'  "  balsatniivi  does  not  grow  farther  N.  than
Siiakim  ;  it  is  essentially  a  tropical  plant.  Theophrastus,  who
is  so  minutely  accurate  in  all  his  other  details  (note  his  happy
expression  <^vAAoi'  he  .  .  .  o/uoiof  iriryofcu,  '  with  leaves  like
rue '),  cannot  have  meant  what  Stackhouse  supposes.  It  is  cer-
tain, however,  that  the  term  CtEi.E-SvRlA  \q.v.\  in  the  Greek
period  hail  a  wider  application,  and  Veslingiiis  (Opobalsaiiii
I'iiuiiciie,  243)  rightly  remarks,  '  Vallem  hie  intelligendam  esse
Hierichuntis  .  .  .  persuademur.'  The  fruit,  Theophrastus
continues,  resembles  the  terminth  (turpentine)  in  size,  shai)e,  and
colour.  The  'tear'  is  gathered  from  an  excision  ni.n<lL-  witU
iron  at  the  season  when  the  stems  and  the  upper  pans  are
tensest  (jn-i-yr)).  The  odour  is  very  strong  ;  the  twigs  also  art-
very  sweet-smelling.  No  wild  bal.sam  is  met  with  an \  where.
The  unmixed  juice  is  sold  for  twice  its  weight  in  silver ;  even
the  mixed,  which  is  often  met  with  in  Greece,  is  singularly
fragrant.

(/')  Strabo  (763)  is  somewhat  less  full ;  but  there  can  be  no

doubt  that  it  is  the  Mecca  balsam  plant  which  he  descril)es  as

_ grown  in  a  irapaSftcros  at  Jericho. He  says  that  it  is

■t  shrub-like (fla/otMcoSes), resembling cytisus and ter-

minth,  and  sweet-smelling.  The  juice  is  obtained  by  means  of
incisions  in  the  bark ;  it  is  very  much  like  a_  viscous  milk
(■yAio-;^pu)  -yaAojCTt)  and  solidifies  when  stored  in  little  shells
()toyx<»pi<»)-  He  pr.nises  its  medicinal  use,  and  says  that  it  is
protluced  nowhere  else.

piodorus  Siculus  (248)  mentions  'a  certain  hollow"  in  the

neighbourhood  of  the  Dead  Sea  as  the  habitat  of  the  balsam,

o  and  adds  that  great  revenue  is  derived  from  this  plant,

becau.se  it  is  met  with  nowhere  else  in  the  world,  and  is

of  great  value  to  physicians.

Pliny  too  (//.\  l'i25)  affirms  that  the  balsam  plant  is  coiUined


1  Curiously  enough,  Ar.  basinia  h.ts  the  contrary  sense  of
loathing  (sKK  Lag.  Uel'crs.  143)  ;  but  bal.lm  denotes  the  balsam
tree.

2  Heb.  does  not  possess  the  verb.

S  See  SiMCE.  Bcsem  is  the  word  used  in  i  K.  1021025
(Queen  of  Sheba's  visit  to  Solomon).

466


BALSAM

to Juda;a. '  In  former  times it was  cultivated only  in  two
A g  irclens,  Iwthof  them  royal  ;  one  of  them  was  no  more
>  than  twenty  jugcra  in  extent,  and  the  other  less. Ihe

emperors  Vespasian  and  Titus  had  this  shrub  exhibited  at
Rome;  ...  it  liears  a  much  Mroiij;er  resemblance  to  the  vine
\i e.,  ill  the  steins;  here  Phny  scenic  to  borrow  from  Irogus
Pompeius)  than  to  the  myrtle.  The  leaf  bears  a  very  close
resemblance  to  that  of  [rue]  1  and  it  is  an  evergreen.  ...  At
the  present  day  it  is  cultivated  by  the  fiscal  authorities,  and  the
plants  were  never  known  to  be  mure  numerous.  They  never
exceed  a  couple  of  cubits  in  height.'

Josephus  makes  several  references  to  the  balsam.  He  says
{A/it.  viii.  Ob)  that  the  first  roots  of  balsam  (on-ojSaAo-OfiOi/)  were
A  n  '"■""R^'  ''*  Palestine  by  the  queen  of  Sheba.  To
90  A.  L>.  gjyg  _^|j  jjg^  ^p  ^Yie  site  of  Poinpey's  camp  (at  Jericho),
he  says  it  is  where  that  balsam  (b7^o^aAa•a;ao^■)  which  is  of  all
unguents  (fiOpa)  the  chief  grows,  and  describes  how  the  juice
(oiros)  is  obtained  {Ant.  xiv.  4  i).  Again,  when  speaking  of  the
districts  around  Jericho  assigned  to  Cleopatra,  he  speaks  of  the

Cciousness  of  this  pi  int,  which  grows  there  alone  (.;«/.  xv.  42).
itlv,  in  a  second  reference  to  Pompey,  he  says  that  the  region
of  Jericho  bears  the  balsam  tree  (^oAira/iOi'),  wh^se  stems
(n-pfju.i'a)  were  cut  with  >^harp  stones,  upon  which  the  juice  '  drops
down  like  tears '  {B/  i.  0  6).

I'rogus,  an  author  of  the  time  of  Augustus,  is  reproduced  by
Justin  (363). He  describes  the  closely  shut-in  valley  in  which

/  /  >  r-v  alone  the  opobalsamum  grows  ;  the  na'iie  of  the
ISt  cent.  A.n.  ^^^^^  j^  Jericho  (Hienchus).  _  'In  that  valley
is  a  wood,  notable  alike  for  its  fertility  and  its  pleasantness,
being  adorned  w.th  a  palm  grove  and  opobalsamum.  The  opo-
balsamum trees  h  ive  a  form  like  pine  trees  {piceis),  except  that
they  are  less  tall  {iiuigis  huiiiUes),  and  are  cultivated  after  the
manner  of  vineyards.  Ihese  at  a  certain  time  of  the  year  sweat
balsam.'

It  is  remarkable  that  the  Greek  and  the  Roman  writers
dwell  so  constantly  on  the  uniqueness  of  the  balsam-tree


3.  Balsam  in
Arabia.


of  Jericho.  Some  of  them,  at  any  rate
{e.g.,  Strabo,  Pausanias,  Diodorus),  were
not  unaware  that  the  plant  grew  on  the
coasts  of  Arabia  ;  and  Josephus,  in  his  legendary  style,
actually  attributes  to  iiuportation  from  Arabia  its
presence  in  Palestine  (.•:/«/.  viii. 66).  No  doubt  this  is
substantially  correct.  Prosper  Alpinus  {De  BaLsamo,
1592)  and  Veslingius  [Opobahami  I'indicicB,  1643)  long
ago  investigated  the  subject.  In  the  time  of  the  former,
balsam  plants  were  brought  to  Cairo  from  Arabia ;
Alpinus  himself  [op.  cit.  64)  apparently  possessed  a
living  specimen.  The  Arabic  writer  'Abdallatif  [d.  1231)
also  speaks  of  the  balsam  tree  as  in  I'>gypt  at  'Ain
Shems  ('  Fountain  of  the  .Sun')  — z'.^. ,  in  the  gardens  of
Matariya,  close  to  Heliopolis.  It  was  about  a  cubit
high,  and  had  two  barks  ;  the  outer  red  and  fine,  the
inner  green  and  thick.  When  the  latter  was  macerated
in  the  mouth,  it  left  an  oily  taste,  and  an  aromatic
odour.  Incisions  were  made  in  the  barks,  and  the
amount  of  balsam  oil  obtained  formed  a  tenth  part  of
all  the  liquid  collected.^  The  last  balsam  tree  cultivated
in  Kgypt  died  in  1615  ;  but  two  were  alive  in  1612.
This  was  the  only  place  in  Egypt  where  the  balsam
tree  would  grow.  We  can  well  understand,  therefore,
that  the  neighbourhood  of  Jericho  was  the  only  habitat
of  the  tree  in  Palestine.

It  would,  however,  be  unreasonable  to  suppose  that
the needs  of  the luxurious  class  in Palestine in  pre-


4.  Probably


_ Ronirm  times  were  altogether  supplied


OT  mor  EV


from Jericho. The  precious  unguent


,  derived  from  the  balsam  tree,  not  less

•^ '  than  the  costly  frankincense,  was  doubt-

less always  one  of  the  chief  articles  brought  by  Arabian
caravans.  The  tree  that  produces  the  so-called  '  balsam
of  Mecca '  is  the  Balsamodeiidron  Opobalsamum.  This
tree,  as  Schweinfurth  reports,*  '  averages  above  15  ft.  in
height,  possesses  a  yellow  papery  exfoliating  bark,  and
produces  thin,  grayish  black  twigs,  from  the  ends  of
which  a  small  quantity  of  balsam  exudes.'  '  It  is  widely
distributed  over  the  coast  territory  of  Arabia,  the  adjacent
islands,  and  S.  Nubia'  ;  but  'the  balsam  is  collected
only  in  the  valleys  near  Mecca.'  It  is  thus  described  by'
Dymock  (Phnrmaco^r.  Ind.  1  317)  :  '  Balsam  of  Mecca,
when  freshly  imported  into  Bombay,  is  a  greenish  turbid

1 Rutie  in  old  editions  :  but  Mavhoff  prefers  tuhuri  (tuheri).
•J  See  'Abdallatif,  ed.  De  Sacy,  88  (Budge,  The  Mie,  181).
:t  We quote from a rdsumi  of  his researches  in  Pharm.
Journ.  April  1894,  p.  897.

467


BAN

fluid  of  syrupy  consistence,  having  a  very  grateful
odour,  something  like  oil  of  rosemary. '  Jewish  tradition
seems  to  have  held  that  Mecca  balsam  is  what  the  OT
writers  call  sdri — whence  the  rendering  '  balm  '  of  AV
and  RV  (text)  ;  but  the  tradition  was  impugned  long
ago  by  Bochart  {/licroz.  i.  251),  and  docs  not  agree
with  the  use  of  the  .Arabic  cognate  word  danv  (mastic;
see  Balm,  i  ).  Schweinfurth  holds  that  the  OT  name
for  .Mecca  balsam  \»as  not  .u)r/  (EV  balm,  perhaps
really  mastic  ;  see  B.\LM,  i),  nor  bosetn  (see  above,
§  I ),  but  mor  (see  Mykrh).  Certainly  tnor  was  (like
Mecca  balsam)  strongly  aromatic  and  also  a  liquid
substance  (Ex.  3O23  Cant.  5513).  whilst  the  OT  refer-
ences do  not  necessarily  imply  that  sdrl  was  aromatic.
It  is  not  unlikely  that  both  bdsem  (§  i)  and  mor  mean
Mecca  balsam. (Cp  Kew  Ilulletin  for  Mar. -Apr.  1896,

p. 89. ) .See  MVKKIl.  N.  M. — VV.  T.  T.-I). — T.  K.C.

BALSAM  TREES  (D\S03  ;  RV"'k'.  2  S.  023  i  Ch.
14  14  Ps.  S46). See  Mli.ukkky.

BALTHASAR,  RV  Baltasar  (BaAtacar  [B.\Qr]).
Bar.  Ill/ See  Bki.shazz.vr.

BAMAH  (nm,  Ez.  20 29). See  Hich  Pi.ace.s,  §  5.

BAMOTH  (ni02;  BAAAOoe  [BAFL]),  a  station  of.
the  Israelites  Ixjtween  Nauai.ikl  [q.''.)  and  'the  glen
((P'^  vcLTtT))  which  is  in  the  field  [plateau]  of  Moab,
[by]  the  summit  of  [the]  Pisgah,  etc'  (.\u.  21 19).  Eus.
{OS  101  22)  descril)es  it  as  'on  the  Arnon'  (like  Nahaliel),
which  must  be  wrong. See  Bamoth-BAAL.

BAMOTH-BAAL  (^r?  n'lOB— z.^.,  '  the  high  places
of  Baal  "1  lav  in  the  ^Toabite  territory  (see  Nu.  2241,
RV;  cthAh  TOY  Baa\  [BAFLJ),  to  the  north  of  the
Arnon,  and  was  assigned  to  Reulien  (losh.  13  17  :
Bmmoon  B&aA  [B].  BamooG  B-  [AL]).  The  order  of
enumeration  in  Nu.  21 19/ ,  where  it  is  called  simply
Bamoth,  leads  to  the  supposition  (so  Di. )  that  it  must
have  Iain  somewhere  on  or  near  the  Jeliel  'Attarus,  on
the  south  side  of  the  Wady  Zerka  Main  (cp  Is.  152 :
•the  high  places').  Conder  {Heth  and  Moab,  144)
and  G.  A.  Smith  {HG  562),  however,  find  the  Bamoth
in  the  dolmens  immediately  north  of  el-Maslubiyeh,
near  the  Wady  Jideid.  The  Beth  Bamoth  of  the
Moabite  stone  is  perhaps  the  same  place  (cp  Bajith)  ;
but  this  whole  region  is  thickly  strewn  with  the  remains
of  ancient  altars  and  other  religious  monuments  (Conder,
cp  cit.  ijfOff.).  The  name  Banioth-baal  is  suggested
also  by  Nu.  2I28,  where  the  pnN-  nis|  *|?i;2  (EV  'lords
of  the  high  places  of  Arnon' — but  see  ©)  are  mentioned
in  parallelism  with  Ar  of  Moab.  G.  A.  S

BAN,  RV'HK-  Baenan  (Ban  [A].  Bacn&n  [B]),  i
Esd.  037=  Ezra 2 60,  Tobijah,  2

BAN  (Dnn),  to  Ban  (Dnnn).

©  renders  by  avaSeiia.,  ai'dOqiia,  a.v(neBey.a.Ti<TtJ.fvov,  and
in  a  few  in.stances  aTrai^ei'a  and  other  words  denoting  destruc-
tion ;  6.va.0(iJ.aTiifiv  and  more  rarely  avarLOtvai
1.  Terms,  once,  i  Ksd.!t4,  oi'iepoOi',  efoAoflpevfii'j  and  in  a
few  instances  other  verbs  denoting  '  kill '  or  '  de-
stroy.' Vg.  has  anathema,  consecratio,  etc.  ;  occido,  consume,
consecro,  etc.  AV  translates  curse,  utterly  destroy,  accursed
thine,  etc.  ;  RV,  de-Jote,  utterly  destroy,  demoted  thing:

The  root  HR.M  in  Hebrew  denotes  devoting  any-
thing to  Vahwe  by  destroying  it  :  hirem  is  any  person
or  thiiig  thus  devoted.  The  root  is  found  in  a  similar
sense  in  all  the  Semitic  languages,  of  sacred  things
which  men  are  partly  or  wholly  forbidden  to  use.  It  is
esjMJcially  common  in  Arabic  :  e.g. ,  the  sacred  territory
of  Mecca  and  Medina  is  haram,  and  the  harim  (harem)
is  ground  forbidden  to  all  men  other  than  the  master
and  his  eimuchs.  It  may  be  noted  that  the  exclusive
use  of  the  root  in  the  strong  sense  of  devoting  by
destroying  is  characteristic  of  Hebrew  (and  of  the  dialect
spoken  by  the  Moabites  ;  see  §§  3/.),  and  that  in  other
languages  hrm  bears  a  meaning  more  nearly  approaching
NDD  (unclean),  E'lij  (consecrated).

468


BAN

(a)  Idols  are  herem  in  themselves. In  Dt.  7=5  the

Israelites  are  ordered  to  burn  all  heathen  idols  and  not

,  to  bring  them  into  their  houses. The  idols

2.  Law  of  *'


HGrem.


are  hCrem,  and  make  those  who  keep  them


hC-rem.  (d)  Public  herem.  The  Israelites
or  their  rulers  are  ordered  to  treat  as  herem  in  certain
circumstances,  guilty  citizens  or  obno.xious  enemies.  In
I'.x.  22 19 [20]  (liook  of  the  Covenant,  K)  any  one  sacri-
ficing to  any  deity  other  tlian  Yahwe  is  to  Ix:  made
herem.  So  in  substance  Dt.  1.36-ii,  though  the  term
herein  does  not  cKCur  till  t'.  16.  In  Dt.  13  i3-:9  [12-18]
any  idolatrous  Israelite  city  is  to  be  made  herein  :  all
living  things  are  to  lie  killed  and  '  all  its  siwil '  is  to  be
burnt.  .So  far,  in  (a)  as  in  (7'),  the  herem  is  something
abominable  in  itself  and  distasteful  to  God.  Its  de-
struction is  a  religious  duty,  and  an  acceptable  service
to  Yahwe.  Similarly,  in  Dt.  20 16-18  all  Canaiinite  cities
are  to  be  made  herein,  that  they  may  not  seduce  Israel
to  idolatry.  In  Dt.  20 10-14,  if  any  distant  city  refuses
to  surrender  when  summoned,  all  the  males  are  to  be
slain,  ami  all  other  ix;rsons  and  things  may  be  taken  as
spoil.  The  term  'herein'  is  not  used  in  that  paragraph,
anil  is  perhaps  not  applicable  to  it.  (c)  We  gather
from  certain  passages  that  individuals  might  devote
some  possession  to  destruction  as  a  kind  of  service  to
Yahwe,  and  that  also  is  called  herem  (see  Vow).  In  a
section  of  1'  concerning  vows,  Lev.  27,  two  verses  (28/ )
deal  with  this  individual  herem.  Other  vows  may  be
redeemed  ;  but  individual  (like  public)  herem  must  be
destroyed — it  may  not  be  sold  or  redeemed  :  it  is  most
holy  (i'Ji/i-s/t  kihfdshim)  unto  Yahwe.  Among  the  objects
which  an  individual  may  make  herem,  men  are  specially
mentioned  :  they  must  be  put  to  death.  It  is  startling
to  find  such  a  provision  in  one  of  the  latest  strata  of  the
Pentateuch.  Possibly  only  criminals  could  be  made
herem  ;  or  the  text  may  be  fragmentary.  Cp  Dillmann
and  Kalisch  on  Lev.  272829.

In  Josh.  624  we  have  a  provision  that  metal  herem
(obviously  because  indestructible)  is  to  lie  put  into  the
treasury  of  the  sanctuary.  By  an  extension  of  this
principle,  Nu.  18 14  (P)  and  V.z.  4429  ordain  that  herein
shall  lie  the  pro[)crty  of  the  priests.

Herem  is  met  with  in  Hebrew  literature  in  all  periods.
The  sweeping  statements  that  all Canaanite  cities E.


3.  Practice.


and  \\'.  of  the  Jordan  were  made  herem


are  late  generalisations  ;  but  Nu.  21
(JE)  and  Judg.  1 17  (J),  though  otherwise  discrepant,
agree  that  the  city  on  whose  site  Hormah  was  built
was  made  herein.  Other  instances  of  herem  are  Jabesh-
gilead  (Judg.  21  10 /. ),  Jericho  (rebuilding  forbidden
under  supernatural  penalty.  Josh.  626/. ),  the  Amale-
kites  (iS.  15),  and  the  children  of  Ham  at  Gedor
( I  Ch.44i).  Similar  cases— in  regard  to  which,  however,
the  term  herem  is  not  used — are  Giheah  and  Benjamin
(Judg.  20)  and  Sauls  attempt  to  e.xecute  Jonathan  (i  S.
1424-46).  On  the  Moabite  stone  (/.  16/)  Mesha'  says
that  he  made  the  whole  Israelite  populace  of  Nebo
herem  to  Ashtarchemosh.  The  prophets  speak  of
Israel  or  Yahwe  making  herem  of  enemies  (Is.  34  2
etc.)  or  of  enemies'  property  (Mic.  413),  or,  conversely,
of  the  heathen  (Jer.  269),  or  Yahwe  (Is.  4828),  making
herem  of  Israel.  In  the  later  literature  the  root  hnn
often  only  means  exterminate  (2  Ch.  2O23).  The  old
meaning,  however,  was  not  quite  forgotten,  and  in
Ezra  108,  if  any  Jew  failed  to  obey  Ezra's  summons
to  Jerusalem,  his  property  was  to  be  made  herem  and
he  himself  excomnumicated.  In  post-biblical  Hebrew
herem  came  to  mean  excomnmnication  as  well  as  pro-
|)erty  set  apart  for  the  priests  and  the  temple  (Levy  and
Jastrow's  Dictionaries,  s.v.  ;  S.  Mandl,  Der  Dann,
'98,  pp.  24-51) .See,  further,  Excommunic.\tion.

The  character  of  herein,  the  diffusion  of  the  root  in  a
similar  sense  throughout  .Semitic  languages,  and  its  use
in  the  Hebrew  sense  by  the  Moabites,  show  that  it  was
an  ancient  Semitic  institution  belon<;ing  to  Israel  in
common  with  its  kinsmen. Stade  ((/Wi/i.  1  490)  holds

469


BANI

that  a  .Semitic  people  besieging  a  city  vowed  to  make  it
-.  . .  J herem  to  their  god  in  order  to  secure  his

4.  Ungin  ana  ^^^  Moreover,  the  idea  of  herem —
paralieiB.  ^^  ^j^^  ^^  ^^  ^^^  ^.^^^  j^^  allied
languages  shows — was  kindred  to  that  of  sanctity  and
uncleaimess.  Like  these,  it  was  contagious  (cp  Ci.kas,
§§  2.  14)  :  the  possessor  of  herem  lx;came  herem  ( Dt.  7  26
Josh.  618;  .\chan).  OP  legislation,  as  we  have  seen,
converts  the  brilje  to  a  venal  deity  into  a  legitimate
I  penalty.  The  various  degrees  of  severity  are  not  im-
portant in  relation  to  the  principle.

Herem  has  something  in  common  with  taboos,
especially  in  its  fatal  effect  on  its  possessor  —  e.g.,  in
New  Zealand  tabooed  food  is  fatal  to  any  one  who  eats
it  (Frazer,  Golden  Bough,  vol.  ii.  '  Taboos  ')  ; — but  it  is
not  so  closely  allied  to  tatoos  as  the  idea  of  uncleanness
(xca;  WKS,  Rel.  iVw.C-)  450/:).  The  Arab  harim
often  assimilates  to  herem  :  e.g. ,  clothes  used  at  the
circuit  of  the  Ka'aba  are  harim,  and  may  not  be  worn
or  sold.  Cp  also  the  Roman  ceremony  of  dez'olio,  by
which  an  enemy  was  devoted  to  destruction  as  an
offering  to  the  infernal  gods  (Preller,  Kom.  Myth.  124,
466).  The  instance  of  Kirrha  and  the  .Amphictyoiiic
council,  in  which  the  cultivation  of  land  laid  under  a
curse  was  made  the  pretext  for  a  holy  war,  may  also  be
compared  with  the  case  of  Jericho.  w.  11.  H.

BANAIAS  (Banaiac  [B.-V]).  i  Esd.  93S  =  K^ral043.
Bknaiah,  10.

BAND.  I.  In  the  sense  of  a  troop  or  company  of
men,  soldiers,  etc.  (see  .\k.my,  §  3).

The  rendering  of  'agapf>lm,  C'SJX  (prop,  wings,  cp  Piab.
agappu),  'E.z.\in,^\.z.;  gedad,  ^^J,  1K.U24  AV  2  K.  1321,
etc.  ;  hayil,  S-n  (prop,  force),  1  S.IO26  AV  Ezra.S22  ;  iiiahaneh,
n;n9,  Gen.  3-27[8]  W  (prop,  camp),  see  Mah.asai.m  ;  and  rdi,
E?xn,  I  Ch.1223  AV  Job  1 17;  'by  kinds,'  Pr.  3U27,  represents
a  participle  i";;''n,  /wsPs,  'dividing  (it-^clf).'  In  this  sense  the
common  Gr.  word  is  (nrelpa  (cp  Mt.  27  27  Mk.  15 16,  etc.),
'  cohort '  (so  RV"i=;-,  Acts  10 1).

2.  In  the  sense  of  a  ribbon.

So/iefc-M,  2Z;q,  Ex.  288,  RV  'cunningly  woven  band';  -W
'curious  girdle.

3.  Finally,  to  denote  anything  that  connects  or
encloses,  the  following  words  (also  rendered  'bonds,'
etc. )  are  employed.

'Esttr,  •VOH,  Judg.  15i4,  cp  Aram.  "I^DN,  Dan.  4  15  23  [12  zo] ;
/u-fi/te/,  San,  Ps.ll06i  (RV  CoKDS,  ?.7'.),  and  esp.  Zech.  II7  14,
where  '  Bands  '  (mg.  '  binders '  or  '  union ')  is  the  name  of  one  of
the  prophets  staves;  harsubbdth,  ni2i"in,  Is.  uS6  and  Ps. T34
(RVnig.  'pangs,'  doubtful);  mot&h,  H^iS,  Lev. 20 13  Ez.3427,
RV  'bars'  (.Xgkiculture,  §  4);  iiioscr,  -,Dic,  Job395  Ps.23,
■nioiekhbth,  niDCiS,  Job 3831!,  of  the  'bands'  of  Orion;  see
Stars,  §  3(5;  'dbhoth,  T\Z^,  Job  39 10,  elsewhere  (in  plur.)
rendered  '  cords, '  ropes,  etc.

BANI  C^a.  §§5,  52  ;  cp  Palm,  and  Nab.  ':2  ;
probably  shortened  from  Bknaiah,  '  Yah  hath  built
up';  cp  Gen.  3O3  Dt. '209  Kuth4ii,  and  see  Haupt,
Froc.  Am.  Or.  Soc.  Ap.  22  [92]  ;  BAN[e]i  fBN.\L],
-Al  [L],  -AiA  [BL],  -AIAC  [NAL],  BAAN[e]i  [BX.\])
is  a  frequently  occurring  name  (chiefly  post-exilic),  and
in  some  cases  it  is  difficult  to  separate  the  persons
bearing  it  ;  there  is  often  confusion  between  it,  the
parallel  names  BuNNi  and  BiNNUi  [^j/.?.].  and  the  noun
B'ne  (':2). See  Mey.  Entsteh.  142.

1.  A  Gadite,  one  of  David's 'thirty';  2  S.  23  36  (uibs -yoAoaiiet
IB],  vi.  yaSSi  [A],  vu  ayrjpei  [I.])-i  Ch.1138,  on  which  see
Hagri. Cp  Davii.,  S  II  (11.).  .  . ,.

2.  A  family  of  B'ne  Hani  occurs  in  the  great  post-cxiIic  list
(see  Ezra,  ii.  §§98  f),  Ezra  2  10  (/Sai^u  [B],  -vi  [A])  =  Neh.  7  15
Oavovi  [BKA],  -aiov  [L])  .\V  BiNNUi  (.;.r'.)=  i  p:.sd.  5  12  ;  and
various  members  of  it  are  enumerated  in  Ezra  10  J90a>'0u»i  [BK])
=  1  Esd.9  3o(/iai*i  fH.A])  EV  Mam  and  among  those  who  had

j married  foreign  wives  (see  Ezra,  i.  §  5)  in  Ezra  10 34-42:  viz.,

j in  V.  34  (Awi  [BK],  ^aiaifi  ILl)=i  Esd.  9  34  AV  Maani,  RV

I Baani,  and in  v.  38  (ol  viol ^o^'ou"l [BNAJ.  0ayv«t,  cat vioi

470


BANID

Povvei  [I.1=MT  '"31  '32^  EV  Bani  and  Binnli)=  i  Esd. O34
(EV  Bannls,  E1.IAI.1;  fiavvovi,  ESiaAei?  [l!],  /3.,  EAtoAci  [A],
Pevvei.  icai  vtoi  /Soiree  [L]).  It  is  plausible,  however,  to  correct
Bani  into  Binnui  or  perhaps  Bigvai  in  7'.  34  (cp  214).  The
family  is  also  referred  to  on  important  occasions  in  Neh.  817
and  10  13  (fiavovia  [I.]?)  and  as  n>  Ezra's  caravan  (see  Ezra,  i.
i  2,  ii.  §  15  {i)iO,  I  i:sd.S36,  AV  Banid,  RV  Hanias  OSaw.a?
|B],  -raiat  [L],  -vi  air-  [Al)  =  Ezra8io  (vlo>v  [SoAeifiouS,  B],  ui.
iSaAifiioe,  L],  ^aavLi  [eAei^/aoufl'.,  A'"'-])  where  Bani  should  be
restored  in  MT(see  Be.  tu/  ioc).

3.  One  of  the  expounders  of  the  Law  (Neh.  8  7  ;  see  Ezra,  ii.
S  13/  ;  cp  i.  8  8,  ii.  g  16  [5I  15  [t]  f)  who  officiated  at  the  con-
stitution of  the  'congregation'  {^^y.\  see  Ezka,  ii.  S  12,  §
13  [/]).  In  O4  (R.-ini  Kadmiel  ;  (ESBnai.  yjoi  <caS/iiT|,\)  the  name
is  repeated,  probably  by  an  error  (cp  Ryssel) ;  (.Iriitz,  after
Pesh.,  reads  Binnui  for  the  second  Bani.  In  O5  (pHXA  has
simply  KafijunrjA.  Cp  also  Ezra 'J  40  ('  and  Kadmiel  of  the  children
of  Hodaviah  ')=  Neh.  743  with  i  Esd.  ■'Jso  (Ka5/xi7)Aoi;  icai  fiavrov
[\]).  In  Neh.  II22,  Uzzi  (5)  b.  Bani  (/So^t  [K^-a],  ^ovvci  [I-l)  is
called  overseer  of  the  Levites  at  Jerusalem.

4.  Signatory  to  the  covenant  (see  Ezra,  i.  S  7).  Neh.  10  14  [15]
(Pavvi  [LI :  viol  Pavi  [BXA] ;  cp  Bunni,  i).

5.  A  Merarite;  1  Ch.  G31  [46].

6.  A  Judahite  ;  i  Ch.  04  Kr.  (©hai,  omit).

BANID,  RV  Banias  (BANeiAC  [H]),  /.^.,  Bani  {,/.v.
2[emll).

BANISHMENT.  On  various  forms  of  temporary  or
permanent  exclusion  from  the  community  as  a  con-
sefjuence of  crime or ceremonial distjualification, see

IlVN,  §  3;  ClKAN  AND  UNCI.KAN,  §  I  $  /■  )  SV'.NA-
(iOGLTK  ; EXCOMMUNIC.VnON.

In  2  S.  14 14  allusion  is  made  to  Absalom  in  the  word  irnj
(F,V  'banished'),  elsewhere  usually  rendered  'outcast'  (' out-
casts' or  'dispersed  of  Israel');  see  Disi'ERsion,  §  i.  'Ilie
nature  of  the  punishment  threatened  in  Ezra  7  26t  (it:"!!;')  RV"'};-
'rooting  out'  (naiSda  [li.V],  naiSeUiv  [L])  was  alreaijy  ob-
scure to  the  editor  of  i  E.sd.  (S  24  :  ri/aaipta  [BA],  ari^ia  [L]).
E/ra  108  ('  separated  [Si2-]  from  the  congregation  of  the  captiv-
ity ')  may  give  an  explanation  of  the  phrase.

BANK.  For  so/m/i,  nh':>D,  in  2  S.  20  15  2  K.  19  32
Is.  3733  AV  (elsewhere  EV  always  Mount)  and  x°-P°-^
in  I,k.  194!  (AV  Trench,  RV't.'-  Palisaue)  see  Fok-

TIFIC.VTION.

BANK  (Tp^nezA.  Lk.  1923  EV),  BANKER  (tra-
neziTHC Mt. '2527 RV). See Tkauk and C'om-

MEKt  K.

BANNAIA  (Bannmoyc  [A]),  i  Esd.  933  AV  =
Ezral033.  Z-VBAD,  5.

BANNAS  (Bannoy  [I^A]),  iEsd..T26  RV=Ezra
240,  Bani,  3.

BANNEAS  (Bannaiac  [B.\]),  i  Esd.  926  RV  =  Ezra
IO25,  Bknaiah,  7.

BANNER  (D3,  hil,  HN). See  Ensigns.  §  i,  a.  b,  c.

BANNUS  (Bannoyc  [B.\]),  i  Esd.  9 34  =  Ezra  10 38.
Bani,  2.

BANQUET,  Banqueting  House. See  Meai.s.

BANUAS  IBannoy  ['^A]),  i  Esd.  026,  apparently  a
misijrint  for  Bamias  (so  RV). See  Bani  (3).

BAPTISM  (Batttic/wa,  BATTTizem)-  Among
the  permanent  witnesses  to  the  V)irth  of  Christianity
_  .  .  out  of  Judaism  is  the  primary  institu-
gl"-  fJQj^  of  {he  Christian  Church,  the  rite  of
baptism.  W'ith  the  Jews  the  bathing  of  the  whole  tody
in  pure  cold  water — if  possible,  in  a  running  stream —
was  a  recognised  means  of  restoration  from  a  state  of
ceremonial  uncleanness.  Passages  like  Num.  19iiy!,
31 19,  also  Is.  1 16  Zech.  13i,  and  especially  Ezek.
36  24^ ,  may  be  compared.  The  pouring  of  water  on  the
hands — a  symbolic  representation,  perhaps,  of  baptism
in  a  running  stream — was  a  Pharisaic  precaution  in-
sisted on  before  every  meal  (cp  .Mk.  73  Lk.  11 38).  The
Gentile,  whose  whole  life  had  been  ceremonially  un-
clean, was  required  to  submit  to  baptism  among  other
conditions  of  his  reception  as  a  Jewish  proselyte  (Schiirer,
r,V.f(77.*  2569^.; 3rd  ed.  3129). See  Prosei.ytk,  §  5.

The  connection  between  Jewish  and  Christian  baptism


BAPTISM

\  is  strikingly  illustrated  by  the  regulations  prescril)ed  for
I  the  latter  in  the  Didacki,  to  be  noticed  presently  ;  but,
I  the  ceremonial  baptistns  of  Judaism,  though  they  lie
behind  Christian  baptism  and  exert  an  iiitluence  on  its
history,  are  not  its  immediate  antecedent.  The  Jewish
baptisms  were  the  outcome  of  the  Jewish  di.siinction
between  clean  and  unclean — a  distinction  which  was
done  away  by  Christianity  (cp  W.vshings).  Christian
baptism  is  a  purification,  not  from  ceremonial,  but
from  moral  impurity.  The  historical  link  is  found
in  the  baptism  of  John  in  the  river  Jordan.  John
adapted  the  familiar  ceremony  of  baptism  to  a
moral  purpose  :  his  was  '  a  baptism  of  repentance  for
the  remission  of  sins,'  a  purification  of  the  nation
from  that  moral  uncleanness  of  which  ceremonial  un-
cleanness was  properly  typical.  It  was  by  means  of
this  development  of  its  true  significance  that  baptism
was  rescued  from  mere  formalism,  and  prepared  to
become  the  initiatory  rite  of  the  new  Christian  society.

As  Jesus'  work  took  up  John's,  and  as  he  him-
self had  chosen  to  be  baptized  by  John,  it  was  natural
that  his  first  preaching  of  rep)entance  should  be  coupled,
like  John's,  with  a  baptism.  It  is  significant,  how-
ever, that  he  did  not  perform  the  rite  himself:  only
his  disciples  did  so  (Jn.  4 1  / ).  Christian  baptism
was  not  yet  instituted  ;  and  when  it  came  it  was  to
add  a  spiritual  element  which  Joim's  baptism  lacked.
Meanwhile  Jesus  was  indicating  by  his  own  action,  and
by  his  defence  of  the  action  of  his  disciples,  that  the
frequent  i'harisaic  baptisms  —  the  ceremonial  washi.ig
of  the  hands,  arwl  the  '  baptisms '  of  vessels  and  dishes
(.\Ik.  74) — had  no  permanent  claim  on  the  conscience;
and  certain  of  his  words  are  directly  explained  by  one
of  the  Evangelists  as  repealing  altogether  the  ceremonial
distinction  of  clean  and  unclean,  and  as  '  cleansing  all
meats'  (Mk.  719).  Only  when  the  whole  purport  of
Jewish  b.iptisms  was  annulled  was  the  way  clear  for  the
institution  of  the  Christian  rite,  one  of  the  essential
principles  of  which  was  that  it  should  be  performed  once
for  all,  with  no  possibility  of  repetition.

On  the  day  of  Pentecost  Peter  answers  the  inc|uiries
j  of  the  multitude  in  words  which,  whilst  they  recall  the
baptism  of  John,  indicate  the  fuller  significance  of
Christian  baptism  :  '  Repxjnt  ye,  and  be  baptized,  each
one  of  you,  in  the  name  of  Jesus  Christ  for  the  remission
of  your  sins,  and  ye  shall  receive  the  gift  of  the  Holy
Spirit'  (.Acts 2 38).  .\bout  three  thousand  were  there-
upon added  by  baptism  to  the  original  band  of  Iwlievers.
It  is  expressly  stated  that  at  .Sam.aria,  as  the  result
of  Philip's  preaching,  both  men  and  women  were
baptized  '  in  the  name  of  the  Lord  Jesus  '  ;  but  the  gift
of  the  Holy  Spirit  did  not  follow  until  the  arrival  of  Peter
and  John  from  Jerusalem  (S  12-17 1.  I 'i*-'  eunuch  after
Philip's  instructions  asks  for  baptism  ;  and  '  they  go
down  both  together  into  the  water'  (83638).  Saul  is
baptized  by  .Ananias  at  Damascus  (9 18).  When  Peter
preached  to  Cornelius  and  his  friends  '  the  Holy  Spirit
fell  on  all  that  heard  the  word '  ;  whereupon  the  apostle
•  commanded  them  to  be  baptized  in  the  name  of  Jesus
Christ '  (1044.^. ).  Special  stress  is  laid  on  this  incident
as  the  first  occasion  of  the  baptism  of  Gentiles  as  such
(IO45  11  1 18).  It  was  justified  by  the  ajx)stle  on  the
ground  of  the  previous  gift  of  the  Holy  Spirit,  which
was  the  baptism  promised  by  Christ  in  contradistinction
to  John's  baptism  (1116^).

Baptism  was  thus  recognised  as  the  door  of  admission

into  the  Christian  Chrrch  for  Jews  and  (Jentiles  alike  ;

and  certain  disciples  of  the  Baptist  whom  Paul  found  at

j Ephesus  were  baptized  afresh  '  in  the  name  of  the  Lt>rd

j Jesus'  (195). Of  Eydia,  the  purple  seller  of  Thyatira,

found  by  Paul  at  Philippi,  we  read  that  she  'was  bap-

! tized,  and  her  household  '  (1615)  ;  and  of  the  Philippian

gaoler,  that  he  was  Iwptized,  '  he  and  all  his  straight-

, way,' — i.e., in the middle of  the night (I633). .At

I Corinth  a  few  of  the  earliest  converts  were  baptized  by

I Paul himself — Crispus, Gains, and the  household of

47a


I


»


BAPTISM

Stephanas  ; — but  the  apostle's  languaRc  shows  that  this
was  ciuite  exceptional  (iCor.  1  14-17).  In  i  (or.  1629
Paul  nictuions  a  custom,  apparently  prevailing  in
Corinth,  of  vicarious  baptism  in  behalf  of  the  dead.
He  neither  commends  nor  rebukes  it,  and  it  would
seem  to  have  soon  died  out.^

The earliest notice of the method of  baptism is
perhaps  that  which  is  found  in  the  DiJachd,  and,  as  we


2.  Method.


have  already  said,  it  illustrates  the  recog-


nition of  a  connection  l)et\veen  the  Jewish
and  the  Christian  baptisms.  The  Didachi',  here  as
elsewhere,  is  strongly  anti-Judaic  in  its  lone,  and  at  the
same  time  shows  the  inHuence  of  Jewish  practices  upon
the  conmiunity  which  it  represents.  The  Mishna  draws
six  distinctions  in  the  kinds  of  water  available  for
various  piirific.itory  purposes  [.\/ik~wad/k  1  1-8,  qtioted
by  Schiirer,  'J4<>jj^. ),  and  in  certain  cases  it  insists
upon  the  full  stream  of  running  water,  in  which  the
whole  body  can  Ix;  inniiersed.  The  Diduchi  (cliajj.  7)
recognises  'living  water'  —  i.e.,  the  running  stream  —
■other  water,'  'cold,'  and  'warnC  ;  and  finally  allows
a  triple  pouring,  where  a  sufiiciency  of  any  water  for
immersion  cannot  be  had  ;  but,  though  it  indicates  a
preference  in  the  order  here  given,  it  admits  the  validity
of  baptism  under  any  of  these  conditions.

It  is  sometimes  urged  that,  because  ^awTiii'fiv  means
'to  dip,'  Christian  bajjlism  must  originally  have  been
by  immersion.  Tn  the  N'T,  however,  as  in  classical
writers,  the  usual  word  for  '  to  dip  '  is  §a.wTuv  (I-k.  1(124
Jn.  1326).  ^aiTTl^eLv  had  a  wider  usage,  and  could
be  used  even  of  a  mere  cerenionial  handwashing,
as  we  see  from  Lk.  11  38,  '  he  marvelled  that  he  had  not
first  washed  (efiaTTTia-drj)  before  dinner.'  Already  the
partial  ablution  would  seem  to  have  been  regarded  as
symbolical  of  the  whole.  It  is  difficult  to  suppose  that
the  3000  converts  on  the  day  of  Pentecost  could  all  have
been  baptized  by  immersion.  Such  a  method  is  indeed
presupposed  as  the  ideal,  at  any  rate,  in  Paul's  words
about  death,  burial,  and  resurrection  in  baptism  (Rom.
63  /;)  ;  but  pouring  water  on  the  head  was  in  any  case
symbolical  of  inuuersion,  and  tantamount  to  it  for  ritual
puriK)ses.

(ii)  In  the  Xamc,  not  '  into  the  name.'  Although  eh
is  the  ])reposili()n  most  frecjuently  used,  we  find  iv  in
p  . Acts'JjS  IO48  ;  and  the  interchangeability

rmu  a.  ^^  ^j^^  ^^^.^  prepositions  in  late  Greek
may  be  plentifully  illustrated  from  the  NT.  Moreover,
the  expression  is  a  Hebraisni  ;  cp  iv  dvo/j-ari  Kvplov
Mt.  2I9  (  —  Ps.  II826  cr2)  ;  so  in  the  baptismal  fornmla
of  Mt.  2819  the  Syr.  version  has  <QAd  (Lat.  in  nomine).

{/<)  In  the  name  of  Jesus  Christ,  or  of  the  Lord  Jesus.
The  former  exjiression  is  used  in  Acts  238  10  48  ;  the
latter  in  Acts  816  1 95;  cp  also  Acts  22 16,  '  Ari.se  and
be  baptized  and  wash  away  thy  sins,  calling  on  his
name.'  From  these  passages,  and  from  Paul's  words
in  I  C>)r.  1 13  ('  Was  Paul  crucified  for  you,  or  were  ye
Ixtptized  in  the  name  of  Paul  ?  '),  it  is  natural  to  conclude
that  baptism  was  administered  in  the  earliest  times  '  in
the  name  of  Jesus  Christ,'  or  in  that  '  of  the  Lord  Jesus.'
This  view  is  confirmed  by  the  fact  that  the  earliest  forms
of  the  baptismal  confession  appear  to  have  Ijeen  single
— not  triple,  as  was  the  later  creed.  Wlien  Philip's
baptism  of  the  eunuch  appeared  to  have  been  abruptly
narrated,  the  confession  was  inserted  in  the  simple  form,
'  I  believe  that  Jesus  Christ  is  the  Son  of  God  '  (Acts

'  Tertullian  {Res.  48  c.  Marc.  5  10)  assumes  that  the  custom
was  current  in  Paul's  time,  but  is  wrongly  cited  as  attesting  it  for
his  own  day.  Chrysostoin  (ad  loc.)  says  that  Marcionites  prac-
tised it  :  and  Kpiphiiiiius  (/A/'r.  2S6)  had  heard  of  a  tradition
that  the  Corinthians  had  done  the  same.  This  is  very  weak
evidence  for  a  second-century  custom,  and  it  is  most  probable
that  if  the  practice  was  found  it  was  due  to  the  pas.saKe  m  Paul's
Epistle,  and  cannot  be  regarded  as  independent  testimony  to
the  existence  of  the  custom  among  primitive  Christians.

The  difficulties  in  which  Commentators  who  reject  the  obvious
meaning  of  the  words  find  themselves  involved  may  be  seen  at
length  m  Stanley's  Corinthians  {ad  ioc).

473


BAPTISM

837)  ;  and  the  fornmla  'Jesus  is  Lord'  appears  soon  to
have  l)ec(>me  a  stereolyix.'d  confession  of  C  hristian  faith
(cp  ko.  IO9  I  Cor.  123  Phil.  2ii)  ;  moreover  the  'ques-
tion and  answer '  {fir(pwn}/xa)  connecte<l  with  Ixiptism
in  I  Pet.  821  would  appear  to  represent  only  the  central
section  of  the  later  creed.

On  the  other  hand,  we  have  in  Mt.  28 19  the  full
fornmla,  '  in  the  name  of  the  Father  and  of  the  Son  ami
of  the  Holy(jhost. '  We  have  no  .synoptic  parallel  at
this  point  ;  and  thus,  from  a  documentary  point  of  view,
we  must  regard  this  evidence  ;is  posterior  to  that  of
Paul's  Epistles  and  of  .Acts.

The  apparent  contradiction  was  felt  by  Cyprian,  who
suggested  (/•:/>.  7^1?  /.)  that  in  baptizing  Jews  the
apostles  may  have  been  contented  with  the  one  name
of  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  as  they  already  lielieved  in  the
Father  ;  whilst  in  baptizing  (ientiles  they  used  the  full
fornmla,  which  was  given  (as  he  points  out)  with  the
connnand  to  '  make  disciples  of  all  the  nations '  or
'Cientiles.'  This  explanation,  however,  breaks  down
in  face  of  Acts  10  45-48,  the  opening  of  the  door  to  the
Gentiles.

Three  explanations  deserve  consideration  :  (1 ;  that
in  .Acts  we  have  merely  a  compendious  statement — i.e.,
that  as  a  matter  of  fact  all  the  persons  there  spoken  of
were  baptized  in  the  threefold  name,  though  for  brevity's
sake  they  are  simply  .said  to  have  been  baptized  in  the
single  name;  (2)  that  Matthew  does  indeed  report
exactly  the  words  uttered  by  Jesus,  but  that  those
words  were  not  regarded  as  prescribing  an  actual  fornmla
to  Ix;  used  on  every  occasion,  and  that  the  spirit  of  them
was  fulfilled  by  bajnism  in  the  name  of  the  Lord  Jesus  ;
(3)  that  Matthew  does  not  here  report  the  i/>sissima
verba  of  Jesus,  but  transfers  to  him  the  familiar  language
of  the  Church  of  the  evangelist's  own  time  and  locality.

The  first  of  these  explanations  cannot  be  regartled  as
satisfactory  in  the  alxsence  of  any  historical  evidence  of
the  emploj'ment  of  the  threefold  formula  in  the  earliest
times.  A  decision  Ixjlween  the  second  and  the  third
would  involve  an  ineiuiry  into  the  usage  of  the  evangelist
in  other  parts  of  his  Gosp)el,  and  belongs  to  the  dis-
cussion of  the  .synoptic  problem  ;  but  in  favour  of  the
third  it  may  lie  stated  that  the  language  of  the  First
Gospel,  where  it  does  not  exactly  reproduce  an  earlier
document,  shows  traces  of  modifications  of  a  later  kind.

It  has  been  argued  that  when  Paul  (.Acts  nt2y;  |,  in
answer  to  the  statement  of  the  Ephesian  disciples  of  the
Haptist,  '  W'e  have  not  so  much  as  heard  if  there  Ix?  a
Holy  Spirit'  (et  irvevtia.  &.yi6v  taTiv),  said,  '  L'lUo  what,
then,  were  ye  baptized  ?  '  he  presupposed  the  use  of  the
longer  formula  which  expressly  named  the  Holy  Spirit.
The  statement  can  hardly  mean,  however,  that  they  had
never  even  heard  of  a  Holy  .Spirit,  for  disciples  of  the
Haptist  could  scarcely  so  speak  (Mk.  18):  it  must  refer  to
the  special  gift  of  the  Holy  Spirit  which  Christians  were
to  receive.  .Accordingly,  Paul's  question  simply  implies
that  Christian  baptism  could  scarcely  have  been  given
without  some  instruction  as  to  this  gift  which  was  to
follow  it.  In  any  case,  it  would  be  exceedingly  strange
that  at  this  point  Lk.  should  not  have  referred  to  the
threefold  formula,  had  it  been  in  use,  instead  of  simply
saying,  '  When  they  heard  it,  they  were  baptized  in
the  name  of  the  Lord  Jesus  '  (.Acts  19  5).

The threefold formula  is attested by the Didachi

\ (chap.  7),  both  in  express  words  and  by  the  mention  of

the  alternative  practice  of  triple  effusion  ; but,  as  the

Didachi  shows  elsew  here  its  dependence  on  Matthew,

this  is  not  independent  evidence.

Justin  Mart3T  (chap.  V.tZ),  in  describing  baptism  to
heathen  readers,  gives  the  full  fornmla  in  a  paraphrastic
form  {Apol.Xtx),  'in  the  name  of  God,  Father  of  the
I  L'niverse  and  Ruler,  and  of  our  Saviour  Jesus  Christ,
and  of  the  Holy  Spirit.'  .Such  a  paraphrase  was  neces-
sary to  make  the  meaning  clear  to  those  for  whom  he
wrote.

We find the full formula  again  in  Tertullian  some

474


BAPTISM

forty  years  later  (De  Bapt.  13,  Adv.  Prax.  26) ;  and
when  the  First  Gospel  was  widely  known  it  was  certain
to  prevail.  Exceptions  are  found  which  perhaps  point
to  an  old  practice  dying  out.  Cyprian  [Up.  73)  and  the
Apostolic  Canons  (n.  50)  combat  the  shorter  formula,
thereby  attesting  its  use  in  certain  quarters.  The  ordin-
ance of  Can.  A  post.  50  runs — •'  If  any  bishop  or  pres-
byter fulfil  not  three  baptisms  of  one  initiation  [rpia
liairTi(Tfw.Ta  /utaj  fivri<Ttu)s),  but  one  baptism  which  is
given  (as)  into  the  death  of  the  Lord,  let  him  be
deposed.'  This  was  the  formula  of  the  followers  of
Kunomius  (Socr.  524),  'for  they  baptize  not  into  the
Trinity,  but  into  the  death  of  Christ '  (for  other  refer-
ences see  Usencr,  J^elij:,':  Untersiich.,  1889,  I184);  they,
accordingly,  used  single  immersion  only.

No  statement  is  found  in  the  NT  as  to  the  age  at
which  baptism  might  l)e  administered.  CJircumcision,
wliich  Paul  regards  as  fulfilled  in  Christian
baptism  (see  below,  §  5),  enrolled  the  Jewish
boy  in  the  covenant  of  his  fathers  on  the  eighth  day
after  birth,  so  that  there  could  lie  no  doubt  that  young
chihlrcn  were  truly  members  of  the  holy  people.  Thus,
if  children  had  been  excluded  from  baptism  when
whole  families  were  won  to  Christianity,  we  should
almost  certainly  have  had  some  record  of  the  protest
which  would  have  teen  raised  against  what  must  have
seemed  so  inconsistent  a  limitation  to  the  membership
of  the  new  '  I.srael  of  God. '  It  seems  reasonable  to  sup-
pose, therefore,  that  where  '  households  '  are  spoken  of
as  I)eing  baptized  (.Acts  16 15  31-33  i  Cor.  1 16),  there  must
have  been,  at  least  in  some  cases,  instances  of  the
ba]itism  of  infants.  That  Paul  could  speak  of  the
children  of  a  believing  husband,  or  of  a  believing  wife,
as  '  holy '  is  an  indication  in  the  same  direction.

Paul,  as  we  might  expect,  sees  in  baptism  the  means
by  which  the  individual  is  admitted  to  his  place  in  the
one  body,  of  which  he  thus becomes a


4.  Age.


5.  Inter-
pretation.


member  ; '  For  as  the  body  is  one  am


hath  many  members,  but  all  the  memlx.'rs,
many  though  tlicy  \yn,  are  one  body,  so  also  is  the
Christ  ;  for  indeed  by  one  .Spirit  [iv  evi  wvevixaTi)  we
all  were  baptized  into  one  body — whether  Jews  or  Gen-
tiles, whether  bondmen  or  free'  (i  Cor.  12 12/).  Bap-
tism was  thus  the  fundamental  witness  of  Christian
unity  (Eph.  45,  'one  baptism');  and  in  both  the
passages  here  referred  to  it  is  emphasised  as  such  in
view  of  the  variety  of  spiritual  gifts.  A  parable  of
Cliristian  baptism  might  be  found  in  the  cloud  and  the
sea  through  which  all  the  Israelites  had  alike  passed  ;
'  they  were  all  baptized  into  Moses  in  the  cloud  and  in
the  sea'  (i  Cor.  10 2).

In  Rom.  61  J/".  Paul  regards  baptism  as  effecting  a
union  with  the  death  of  Christ  :  '  we  were  baptized  into
his  death. '  It  was  a  kind  of  burial  of  the  former  self,
with  a  view  to  a  resurrection  and  a  new  life.  The  same
conception  recurs  in  Col.  2 11/!,  where  it  is  immediately
preceded  by  the  thought  that  it  corresponds  in  a  certain
way  to  the  circumcision  of  the  old  covenant.  It  is  '  the
putting  off ' — totally,  not  merely  partially  and  symbolic-
ally— of  the  whole  '  Ixxly  of  the  flesh  '  ;  and  so  it  is  the
fulfilment  of  the  old  rite  :  it  is  '  the  circumcision  of  the
Christ.

In  Gal.  826/!  Paul  further  sp>eaks  of  baptism  as  involv-
ing a  kind  of  identification  with  the  person  of  Christ,  so
that  the  divine  sonship  lx;comes  ours  in  him  ;  '  For  ye
are  all  sons  of  God,  through  faith  (or  'the  faith')  in
Christ  Jesus  ;  for  as  many  of  you  as  were  baptized  into
Christ  put  on  (or  '  clothed  yourselves  with  ' )  ("hrist. '  The
old  distinctions,  he  again  reminds  us,  thus  disappeared
— lew  and  Greek,  tx>nd-man  and  free,  male  and  female
— '  for  ye  all  are  one  [man]  in  Christ  Jesus  '  {eU  iark  ip
Xp.  ■I.).

Eph.  .'j26  speaks  of  Christ  as  cleansing  the  Church
by  the  'washing  {\ovTp6v  =  'washing,'  probably
not  'laver.'  [In  ©  -wz  is  always  XoiTvp:  \ovTpji>  is
nsmCant.  42  6s  Ecclus.  342$  ;  so  Aquila  renders  |»m  in

475


BARABBAS

Ps.  60 10  108 10])  of  water  with  the  word'  (eV  ^iJ/Mtn).
This  last  expression  finds  its  interpretation  in  the  pi^fia,
or  formula  of  faith,  to  which  we  have  already  referred —
which,  whether  as  the  confession  in  the  mouth  of  the
baptized  or  as  the  baptismal  formula  on  the  lips  of  the
baptizer,  transformed  the  process  of  ablution  into  the
rile  of  Christian  baptism. With  this  passage  we  may

i compare  Tit.  3s,  '  He  saved  us  through  the  washing  of

I regeneration  and  renewal  of  the  Holy  Spirit '  (5ta  Xovrpou

! iraXivyei'faia^  Kaldi'aKati'ibcTeojs  irv.  ay.).

^ This  last  passage  reminds  us  of  the  teaching  of  Jn.  3.

i  The  relation  of  that  chapter  to  the  sacrament  of  baptism
is  exactly  parallel  to  that  of  chap  6  to  the  sacrament  of
the  eucharist  (see  Eucharist).  W'e  are  secure  in
saying  that  the  evangelist's  interpretation  of  the  signifi-
cance of  baptism  must  have  followed  the  line  of  Jesus'
conversation  with  Nicodemus  as  there  related.  That
a  Gentile,  or  even  a  Jew  who  had  been  neglectful  of
the  Rabbinical  discipline  of  ablutions,  should  need  to
begin  entirely  anew  in  the  religious  life,  to  be  '  born
again  of  water  and  the  Spirit,'  as  a  condition  of  entry
into  '  the  kingdom  of  God,'  would  seem  natural.  The
marvel  and  the  stumbling-block  was  that  this  should  Ik;
required  of  those  who,  like  this  '  teacher  of  I.srael,'  had
been  strictest  in  their  ceremonial  purity  ;  '  M.'u'vel  not
that  I  said  unto  i/tee  .•  ye  must  Ije  born  again. '

Jn. ,  then,  recognises,  with  Paul,  the  universal  character
of  the  initial  rite  ;  whilst  at  the  same  time  the  narrative
teaches  the  radical  nature  of  the  change  in  the  individual
soul.  J.  A.  R.

BAPTISMS (Bahticwoi). Mk.  74, etc., RV"*,

EV  W.ASHINGS  [q.v.].

BARABBAS  (Bap&BBac  [Ti.  WH],  §  48),  the  name
of  the  prisoner  whom,  in  accordance  with  a  Passover
custom,  Pilate  released  at  the  demand  of  the  Jews  while
condemning  Jesus  to  death  (so  Mt.  27  is-20  Mk.  156-i5
Lk.23i7-2sJn.l839/.).

More  precisely  than  Mt. ,  who  simply  calls  him  a
'notable'  (tT iffrjfiof)  prisoner,  and  Jn.,  who  calls  him
„.  a robber, Mk. descrilies him as lying

^'  '  bound  with  them  that  had  made  insurrec-
tion (fitTo,  tQv  <TTa<7ia(TTU)i'  5e5f/i^i'oj),  men  who  in  the
insurrection  had  committed  murder.'  As  Mk.  has  not
previously  referred  to  these  insurgents,  it  seems  all  the
more  probable  that  he  is  borrowing  verbatim  from
another  source,  although  about  this  particular  insurrec-
tion we  are  in  as  complete  ignorance  as  alx)ut  the
Galileans  mentioned  in  Lk.  13 1.  Lk.  (2319),  whofoUows
Mk. ,  adds  that  the  insurrection  had  occurred  in  Jeru-
salem, but  says  nothing  about  any  fellow-prisoners  with
Barabbas,  and  thus  leaves  the  impression  that  Barabbas
personally  had  connnitted  murder.  Mk.  is  entitled  to
the  preference,  not  only  on  this  point  but  also  when  he
represents  the  Jews  as  having  demanded  the  release  of
a  prisoner  on  their  own  initiative,  as  against  the  less
probable  view  that  Pilate  offered  them  this  of  his  own
accord.

Reference  is  sometimes  made  to  the  analogy  of  the  Roman
Lectisternia ;  but  of  these  all  that  Livj- (v.  138)  sa>'s— and  that
only  with  reference  to  their  first  celebration — is  th.-it  during  tho.se
days  such  also  as  were  bound  (Tinif/s)  were  relieved  of  their
chains  (7'mc»/(i),  and  such  was  the  religious  awe  inspired  by  the
proceedings  that  no  one  dared  afterwards  to  rebind  (vituriri)  the
recipients  of  this  divine  favour.  Thus  he  says  nothing  about
release  from  pri.son  ;  and  his  contemporary  Dion.  Halicar.  (I'ig
[  =  10]),  .on  the  authority  of  the  Annals  of  a  certain  Piso,  who
himself  had  been  censor,  while  he  does  indeed  speak  of  such
rele.-ise,  limits  it  to  the  case  of  sl.ives  who_  had  been  laid  under
arrest  by  their  masters  {htS-vfiivrnv  fiiv  rCiv  Otpa-aoirruiv,  oirovf
irpoTfpoi'  iv  TOis  i«7/iiois  tlxov  oi  Sfo-iroroi).

Those  who  find  some  difficulty  in  accepting  the
narrative  as  it  st.ands  may  perhaps  find  themselves
better  able  to  explain  its  origin  on  the  lines  indicated
by  W.  Brandt,  by  whom  every  detail  h.as  been  discussed
with  great  care  (Evangelische  Ceschicht:-,  1893,  pp.
94-105).  Brandt  takes  the  kernel  of  the  story  to  be
that  a  certain  prisoner  who  had  been  arrested  in  con-
nection with  some  insurrection,  but  against  whom  no
476


I


BARACHEL

crime  or  at  least  no  prave  crime  could  be  proved,  was
released  on  the  application  of  the  jx-ople,  who  intervened
in  his  l)chalf  because  he  was  the  son  of  a  Rabbin  (see
below,  §  2).  The  incident,  even  although  it  was  not
simultaneous  with  the  condemnation  of  Jesus,  gave
occasion  in  Christian  circles  for  the  drawing  of  this
contrast  :  the  son  of  the  rabbin  Wiis  interceded  for  and
releasctl,  Jesus  was  condemned.  In  the  course  of
transmission  by  oral  tradition  the  statement  of  this  con-
trast might  gradually,  without  any  conscious  departure
from  historical  truth,  have  led  to  the  assumption  that
the  two  things  occurreil  at  the  same  time  and  on  the
same  occasion.  Finally,  the  liljeralion  of  a  seditious
prisoner — in  any  case  a  somewhat  surprising  occurrence
— seemed  explicable  only  on  the  assumption  of  some
standing  custom  to  account  for  it  ;  this  assumption
must  presumably  have  arisen  elsewhere  than  in  Palestine.
The  above  theory  presupposes  that  ^apa/i/3aj  stands
for K3K  -13, 'son of the father' — i.e., l.cre, of the

2  rabbinical  'master.' (It  was  not  till  after-

*  wards  that  AM'a  began  to  come  into  use
as  a  propc-r  name  [of  rabbins],  explained  by  Dalman
[Gratn.  142]  as  an  abbreviation,  like  '3N,  of  .t3N  :  in
the  time  of  Jesus  it  was  a  title  of  honour  [.\It.  289]. )

Jerome,  imlecd,  in  his  commentary  on  Mt.  J"  16-18  says  that
ill  the  Gospel  of  the  Hebrews  (quod  scril>itiir  jiixta  Hehrtros)
Barabbas  is  explained  as  '  son  of  their  teacher  '  (Jilius  mapstri
fiiriiiii),  where  i-o>~uiii  apparently  implies  an  etymology  similar
to  tliat  found  in  a  scholion  of  a  Venice  MS  in  WH  App.  19;^ —
viz.,  that  /3opa/x^ai'(only  another  form  for  /3apa8j3af  ;  see  Winer,
Grain. W  g  5,  n.  70)  means  'son  of  our  teai:her.'  In  that  case
we  must  (with  ."^yr.  hr.)  write  PappapPav,  taking  the  second
element  as  being  '  teacher, 'and  assume  that  paPfiiiv  was  explained
as  =  K33'1,  'our  teacher,'  or  [1^31,  'their  teacher.'  The  mean-
ing, however,  is  not  essentially  changed  by  this,  as  |3']  (as  also
pSl)  is,  like  K3K,  a  title  of  honour  for  a  great  teacher.

The  most  remarkable  fact  in  connection  with  the
name  of  IJarabbas  is  that  Origen  knew  MSS,  and  did
not  absolutely  reject  them,  in  which  Mt.  27 16/  read
'Jesus'  {'Irjaovv)  Ix^-fore  'Barabbas' — a  reading  still
extant  in  s<jme  cursives,  as  well  as  in  the  Armen.  vers.,
in  Syr.  sin.,  and  partly  also  in  Syr.  hr.  Whether  the
Gospel  of  the  Hebrews,  referred  to  by  Jerome,  also  had
this  reading  is  uncertain  (see  WH).  In  this  reading
'  Barabbas '  would  be  only  an  addition  made  for  the
sake  of  distinction,  as  in  Simon  Bar-jona,  but  not  yet
with  the  full  force  of  a  proper  name.

Some  support  for  it  might  perhaps  he  found  in  the  fact  that
the  first  mention  of  the  name  in  Mk.  is  preceded  by  6  Xeyofievo^.
The  meaning  would then  be  'He  who,  for  distinction's  sake

g hough  it  was  not  his  proper  name),  was  called  Barabbas.'
nly,  in  that  case,  in  Mt.  the  \ty6fi.fvoi>  (here  \vithout  the
article),  since  it  is  followed,  on  the  reading  at  present  in  question,
by  'ItjiTovv  VapaffPav,  would  simply  mean  '  whose  name  was
Jesus  Barabba.s' ;  and  it  may  be  so_  in  Mk.  also.  In  any  case
It  is  remarkable  that  in  all  the  MSS  in  (juestion  Barabbas  should
have  the  name  'Irja-ovs  exclusively  in  ^It.  and  there  only  in  two
verses,  while  7T'.  20  and  26  simply  give  toi/  Rapaj3/3at',  TOf  &i
'Iijo-oGi'  as  an  antithesis.  Thus  we  may  be  tolerably  certain  that
the  name  Jesus  as  given  to  Barabbas  has  arisen  merely  from
mistake.

A  fairly  obvious  explanation  would  be  the  conjecture
of  Tregelles,  that  a  very  early  transcriber  had  '  jjer
incuriam '  repeated  the  last  two  letters  of  vfiiv  and  that
these  were  at  a  later  date  taken  for  the  familiar  abbrevia-
tion of  the  name  of  Jesus.  If  this  theory  be  adopted  we
must  assume  further  that  a  later  copyist  inserted  also  in
V.  16  the  name  'IriffoOv,  which  he  had  found  in  v.  17  ;
but  it  is  specially  interesting  to  observe  that  in  the
Latin  translation  of  Origen  the  word  Jesus  stands  in
V.  17  but  not  in  v.  16  also.  Cp  Zahn,  GescA.  des  NT
A'anons,  2697-700.  P.  w.  s.

BARACHEL  ("PNDia.  '(Jod  blesses,"  §  28;  Bar&xihA
[BXA]),  the  father  of  Job's  friend  Elihu  (Job3226).

BARACHIAH  (H^Dia,  -IH^Dnil),  Zech.  1 1 7,  the
reading  of  .\V  ed.  161 1,  and  some  other  old  editions.
See  Bekkciiiaii  (4).

BARACmAS,  RV  Barachiah  (B&pAXiAC  fTi.
WH]),  Mt.  2335- See  Zaciiaria.s.

477


BARJBSUS

BARAK  ipy^.  'lightning,'  §  66,  cp  Sab.  Cpn3
Palm.  pl3,  Pun.  JUtrais  [the  surname  of  Ilamilcar],
and  the  .\ss.  divine  names  A'amman-birktt  and  Gthil-
hirku  [Del.  Ass.  H \\  li  187]),  b.  Abinoam  (Judg.  46-
5 '2;  Barak  [HI.],  Barax  l-^J)- See  Deborah.

BARBARIAN  (BarBaroc).  primarily,  one  who
sp)eaks  in  an  unintelligible  manner  :  '  hence  a  foreigner
(cp  //. '2  667],  in  which  sense  it  is  employed  by  Paul  in

1  Cor.  14  II  Acts  28  2.  This  usage  was  not  restricted  to
the  Greeks  alone  :  it  is  met  with  among  the  Romans
(cp  Ovid,  FHit.  V.  10 37), and (.according to Herod.

2  158)  among  the  Egyptians.  In  agreement  with  this,  the
people  of  Melita,  who  perhaps  spoke  .some  Phtjunician
dialect,  are  called  'barbarians'  (Acts '28  2  4),  and  &
uses  pdpliapoi  to  render  the  tyi'?  of  Ps.  114  i — a  people
'of  strange  tongue'  (Targ.  'K-i3"i3  Ncv)*  '^ '^^  ""*
uncommon  "E\\77»'es /cai  jSap^apot,  accordingly,  includes
the  whole  world:  cp  Rom.  1 14  (also  Jos.  Anf.  xi.  7  i)
and  the  similar  'Barbarian,  Scythian,'  Col.  3 11;  see
Hkm.knis.m,  §  2.

The  use  of  /3ap/3apos  became  so  customarj-  that  the  term  was
used  actually  in  referring  to  the  speaker's  or  writer's  own
people  ;  cp  Philo,  l^'i'i.  Mos.  §  5,  and  Jos.  (/>/,  pref.,  $  i),  who
applies  the  designation  'upper  barbarians '  to  his  countrymen
beyond  the  Euphrates.3  At  a  later  date  the  word  gets  the
meaning  'cruel,'  'savage,'  etc.  (cp  Cic.  I-'ontei.  IO21,  '  immanis
ac  barbara  consuetudo '),  in  which  sense  it  recurs  in  2  Macc.*.i2i
425lii2and  in  the©  of  Ez.  21  36  [31]  (for  MT  D-lJ/i, 'brutish').

BARBER  (n'?5,  Ph.  a'?X  Ass.  ga/lahu).  Ez.5i.t
See  Bkari).

BARCHUS  (BARXOye  [A],  iEsd.532  RV=l./.ra
253,  Bakko.s.

BARHUMITE,  THE  ('pni^n,  2S. '2^3.  ;  o  Bar-
AlAMeiTHC  [H],  o  Baraiam.  [Mai],  o  Barcom.  |A].
O  aBenni  [!>])• See  Bahakimitk.

BARIAH  (nn2,  MARei  [H],  BeRiA  [AL]),  a  de-
scendant of  Zerubbabel  (i  Ch.  822).

BARJESUS,  the  Jewish  sorcerer  and  false  prophet
in  the  train  of  the  proconsul  Sergius  Paulus  at  Paphos,
in  Cyprus,  who  (.Acts  186-12)  withstood  the  preaching  of
Paul,  and  was  punished  with  temporary  blindness.

At  the  outset, the names present  great  difficulties.
In  136  his  name  (fivo/xa)  is  expressly  said  to  have  been
-_  Barjesus  (BapiT/croOj),  and  such  a  compound

1.  Names.  ^^^^^^  ^^  ^  father  named  Jesus)  can  quite
easily  have  lieen  a  proper  name  (cp  Barabbas,  Barnab;  s,
Rirtholomew).  In  v.  8,  however,  he  is  abruptly  called
'  Elynias  the  sorcerer,  for  so  is  his  name  by  interpreta-
tion '  (E\i'/ixaj  6  ixa-yo^,  oiJrws  yap  fieOfp/xtjiKveTai  rb
tvopLO.  airoL').  A  translation  has  relevance  only  when
it  is  a  translation  into  the  language  of  the  readers  :  in
any  other  case  it  would  be  incumbent  on  the  author  to
state  what  foreign  language  he  is  translating  into.

(a)  This  Ixiing  assumed,  we  must  take  it  that  '  the
sorcerer  '  (6  /uAyo^)  is  the  translation.  Elymas  (EXf/ios),
in  that  case,  would  be  the  word  translated.  Accord-
ingly, the  name  has  been  identified  with  the  Arabic
'a/im,  which  occurs  in  the  Koran  (7io6  [109]  2633  and
36  [34  and  37])  as  an  adjective  following  the  noun  .uihir
which  denotes  a  sorcerer,  and  has  thus  been  taken  to
mean  '  wise,'  '  able.'  I^ss  appropriate  is  the  derivation
from  Aram.  d'Sk  or  d'^n.  meaning  'strong.'  Equate
Hdyos, however, etymologically, with EXi'/taj as we

1  Del.  (Ass.  //;r^  explains  Ass.  barharu  'jackal.'

a  Akin  to  this  are  the  expressions  oi  €fai(i  Cor.  5  i2/)and  rd
iivn  (like  the  Heb.  opj,  see  Gentiles,  §  i)  to  denote  those-
outside  the  Christian  world. Cp  the  Talm.  use  of  n'isnK.

3  Similarly,  the  Jews  frequently  employed  '[wJCIW,  Syr.
arinnyd—i.e.,  '  Aramjean,"  in  the  sense  if  '  barbarian,'— and  so
the  Syr.  translations  of  the  NT,  under  their  influence,  ret.iin  the
term  to  translate  'EAAjji-tT,  ^fli-titoi,— etc.  In  process  of  time  it
was  felt  that  a  word  which  was  used  in  the  NT  to  designate
'  heathen '  could  hardh  be  borne  by  a  Christian  people,  and
the  old  name  was  modified  into  aramdyd ;  cp.  N6.  ZDMG
25  113,  Wright,  Com/>.  Gram.  15.
478


BARJESUS

may,  it  still  has  to  be  explained  how  Rarjesus  came
suddenly  lo  be  called  by  the  other  name,  Elymas.
riie  only  way  in  which  a  plausible  explanation  could  be
reached  would  be  if  Elymas  (in  the  sense  indicated)
could  be  taken  as  a  title  or  cognomen  assumed  by  Bar-
jesus — a  foreign  tongue  being  used  to  heighten  still
further  the  jirestige  which  he  sought  to  accjuire  by  it.
It  is  not  as  a  titli;,  however,  that  the  author  employs  it.
On  the  contrary,  he  gives  the  word  witliout  the  definite
article,  and  expressly  adds  that  the  word  which  he  is
translating  was  the  actual  name  (dvofxa)  of  the  bearer.

{/>)  It  was  quite  sound  method,  therefore,  to  take
Harjesus  for  the  name  translated,  and  Elymas  for  the
translation.

Kven  Pesh.,  in  t:  8,  for  EAv/u,as  6  /layos  arl/urarily  has  'this
sorcerer  Harshuma  (so  Pesh.  reads  for  Bapujirous  in  7'.  6  ;  see
l>;low,  (t)],  whose  name,  being  interpreted,  means  Klynias."
Klosterm.inn  (/VoM'wt'  ?'/«  A/>o.<tc-iti:iic,  1883,  pp.  21-33),  how-
ever, is  al)le  to  sujjport  this  view  only  on  three  assumptions,
each  one  of  which  is  bolder  than  the  otlier.  We  must  read,  he
liolds,  not  EAu^a?,  bnt  'Erot/oios  ;  secondly,  we  must  read,  not
Ila^oiTjo-oOs,  but  '&apir)iTovav,  or,  to  be  ex.^ct,  the  Latin  Bar-
/t'sii/uin ;  and,  in  the  third  place,  the  '\'}p\  13  so  transcribed
(whether  we  derive  it  etymologically  from  the  root  ,^^t■•,  or,  with
more  proliability,  from  the  root  ic"  which  underlies  V^,  prersto
i-st)  means  'son  of  preparedness'  or  'son  of  fitness,' and  thus,
by  the  same  Hel)raism  as  we  find  in  the  name  Barnabas  (<j.v.),
f-aratus,  eroifios.

a.  As  to  t'le  first  of  these  assumptions,  it  has  to  be  noted
that  the  re.iding  'Erot/xos  is  met  with  only  in  Lucifer  of  Calaris
(oh.  371),  and  even  there  not  as  Hetcemus  but  as  Ktoemus ;  D
has  Eroi/uia?,  which,  indeed,  we  cannot  explain,  but  which,
from  its  endinj;,  is  clearly  intended  to  be  taken  as  a  proper
name  ;  parntus  is  found  only  in  Lucifer,  one  Vg.  MS,  and  two
Latin  ^ISS,  in  which  in  many  places  is  found  the  markedly
divergent  text  of  Acts  which  Hlass  takes  to  be  Luke's  earliest
draft  (see  Acts,  g  17)

^.  Next,  as  regards  the  second  assumption.  BopiTjo-ovac  is
found  only  in  I)  ;  Barjesuaiii,  only  in  the  Latin  translation  of
D  ;  Barjesuhaii  or  rather,  according  to  the  one  M.S  known  to
us,  Bxricsitlniin,  only  in  Lucifer,  '["he  corrector  of  1)  has  re-
stored IJapiJja-om-,  which,  as  accusative,  fits  his  reading  oro^ari
icaAoiififi'oi'  for  (L  oio/tia,  hut,  in  spite  of  to  oi'O/na,  is  found  also
in  .\HLP  and  the  Creek  margin  of  the  Philoxenian  ;  N,  Vg.,
Copt.,  Armen.,  and  the  Philoxenian  version  as  well  as  '  noniiulh'
known  to  Jerome,  read  Bapii)<rou — that  is  to  say,  the  simple
Hebrew  form  without  a  Greek  termination.  On  this  Jerome
(on  the  Hebrew  names  in  Acts;  Opera,  ed.  Vallarsi,  899)
remarks,  '  nonmdli  Barjesu  corrupte  legunt,'  himself  declaring
the  right  reading  to  be  Harieu  or  F>eiieu,  for  which,  by  very
daring  etymologising  from  the  Hebrew,  he  obtains  the  meanings
malcjiciuiu,  or ytalrficus,  or  in  iiialo.  Perhaps,  however,  even
Jerome's  aversion  to  Bapirjcrou  rests  upon  the  very  obvious
dogmatic  consideration  put  forward  by  Peda  in  the  eighth
century,  '  non  convenit  hominem  Hagitiosum  et  magum  filium
Jcsu,  id  est,  salvatoris,  appellari  quem  e  contrario  Paulus  (7'.
10)  filium  diaboli  nur.cupat.'  'I  he  form  Barjeu  in  Jerome  can
readily  be  accounted  for  as  merely  a  clerical  error  for  Barjesu,
or  as  arising  out  of  the  Greek  abbreviation  IHY  which  is  met
with  in  the  oldest  -MSS  along  with  the  more  frequently  occurring
lY  for  'Irjo-oC.  The  explanation  in  the  case  of  the  readings
preferred  by  Klostermann  is  much  less  easy.  On  this  .account,
in  spite  of  their  weak  attestation,  one  might  be  inclined  to
regard  them  as  the  true  ones  ;  but  all  the  authorities  for  the  read-
ing f>aratus  have  the  word,  not  in  v.  8  instead  of  EAu^as,  but  as
an  interpolation  after  Bapujo-ous  in  7'.  6,  'quod  interpretatnr
paratus.'  This  addition  is  met  with  elsewhere  only  in  E,  in
the  form  o  fieOepfirfveveTai  EAujxas — rendered  in  the  Latin  of  this
MS  :  ^iii7(/  interpretatnr  Elymas.  It  is  evident  that  in  neither
case  have  we  more  than  a  late  attempt  to  obviate  the  impression
that  Elymas,  first  introduced  in  v.  8,  was  the  name  of  another
person.  Bl.ass,  on  the  other  hand,  regards  the  added  words  as
part  of  Luke's  e.arliest  draft.  He  sees,  however,  that  Luke
could  not  have  written  at  the  same  time  in  v.  8  '  for  thus  is  his
name  interpretetl '  (oiiTcu?  -^ap  nfOfpixrivevtraL  to  ofo/Ma  avrov) ;
and,  accordingly,  he  rejects  these  words  from  Luke's  earliest
draft.  For  this  he  has  not  a  single  authority  ;  and  how  can  he
expl.ain  Luke's  having,  after  all,  iiurodnced  the  words  into  his
second  transcript,  leaving  out  those  in  7:  6  instead '!  Are  we
really  to  believe  that  with  his  own  hamis  Luke  changed  his  good
aid  thoroughly  intelligible  first  text  into  a  positively  misleading
after-text?  Cp  Acts,  §  17  (/).  If,  however,  the  acldition 'ywr/
interpretatur  paratus'  at  the  end  of  7'.  6  is  to  !«  regarded  as  a
late  interpolation,  Lucifer  also,  who  has  it,  lies  open  to  suspicion  :
his  form  Etccmus  in  v.  8  may  be  not  taken  from  an  authoritative
source,  but  a  mere  conjectural  adaptation  to  allow  of  the  word's
l)eing  rendered  paratus  and  itself  regarded  as  a  rendering  of  Bop-
iijiTous.  What  etymology  he  was  following  when  he  preferred
(or  perhaps  conjecturally  introduced)  the  form  Barjesuban  is
a  matter  of  indifference.  In  ancient  times,  as  the  Onomastica
Sacra  abundantly  show,  people  made  out  Hebrew  etymologies
in  a  most  reckless  way.


BARJESUS

y.  Klostermann's  proposed  etymology, /ar<r/«j,  rests  upon  a
very  weak  foundation,  as  no  such  word  as  pc"  (ViJSwan)  can  be
shown  to  exist  (the  proper  name  ,nic'',  IsH  vah,  in  I  .en.  4ti  1 7  has  no
importance  in  this  connection),  and  the  root  nir  or  kic  which  is
used  in  .Syriac  frequently  for  aftov,  icro?,  ofioAo?,  as  also  for
<n;i'-,  Ofio-,  afio-,  in  compounds,  is  never  used  for  eroi^o?.!
Besides,  as  we  have  said,  the  co<lex  has  not  Barjesuban  but
Baiyesubam.  Above  all,  however,  Klostermann's  hypothesis
remains  untenable  as  long  as  one  is  unprepared  to  accept  the
further  assumption  that  o  /uayot  after  EAv/iiav  (or  'Eroifios)  in
7'.  8  is  a  mere  gloss  to  be  deleted  ;  for  6  juayo?  nece.ssarily  leads
to  the  assumption  dealt  with  under  (a).  This  had  no  doubt
already  been  perceived  by  the  scribe  of  H,  who  wrote  o  y-tya^
(the  great)  for  6  fidyo?,  and  so  also  by  Lucifer,  if  the  aittio
■princeps  (of  Tilius)  is  right  in  attributing  the  reading  i>tagnu.i
to  him  (the  only  MS  of  Lucifer  at  present  known  has  tiia^s).
If  Lucifer  really  wrote  tn^ignus,  this  increases  the  suspicion
that  the  other  variants  in  Lucifer  are  in  like  manner  arbitrary
and  unauthorised  alterations  of  the  text.

(r)  In  order  to  make  out  Elymas  to  be  a  translation
of  the  name  of  the  sorcerer,  stress  has  been  laid  on  the
remarkable  Peshitta  rendering  Barshuma  for  Ba/){r?(roi»s.

.Mready,  in  the  seventeenth  century,  we  find  Castell  (Le.r.
lleptagl.  s.v.  c?C')  and  Lightfoot  (Hor.  Ilehr.  ad  loc.)  inter-
preting Bapiijo-ouv  as  Jiliiis  7'tilneris,  and  deriving  Elymas
from  the  .\rabic  'ativta  =  doluit  (□*?«)•  Over  and  above  the
reasons  to  the  contrary  that  have  alre.idy  been  urged  under
(1^),  however,  it  has  to  be  observed  (see  above)  that  a  trans-
lation into  Arabic  would  exjilain  nothing  to  the  readers  :  it
would itself  require to be expl.-iined.  A somewhat

different  turn  is  given  to  the  matter  by  Payne  Smilh  (J'lus.
.Syr.  598).  Barshuma  was  in  the  first  in-tance  given  in  v.  8
as  a  rendering  of  Elymas,  and  only  later  introtluced  by  copyists
also  into  7'.  6  in  substitution  for  Barjesus  in  the  erroneous
belief  that  it  was  the  man's  proper  name.  But  the  Peshitta  in
its  arbitrary  change  of  text  in  7'.  8  (see  abo\e  (h\  ad  mit.)  says
precisely  the  opposite, — that  Barshuma  was  the  proper  name,
and  Elymas  the  translation.  It  must,  therefore,  from  theoutsft
have  held  Barshuma  to  be  a  reproduction  of  the  proper  name
Barjesus.  Thus  P.arshnnia  probably  means  merely  '.son  of  the
name '  ;  and  '  the  name '  is  most  easily  to  be  accounted  for  as  a
substitute  for  'Jesus'  from  the  feeling  of  reverence  which  we
have  already  heard  expressing  itself  in  Beda  [see  aVxive  (/')  /3],  a
reverence  similar  to  that  shown  by  the  Jews  when  they  said
'  the  name  '  instead  of  '  Yahwe.'

((/)  Van  Manen,  contrariwise  (Paulus  1,  Lcyden,
1890,  pp.  98  /.  147),  holds  E.lymas  to  be  the  jjroper
name,  and  interprets  Barjesus  in  the  Hebrew  sense  as
meaning  '  son  of  Jesus  ' — i.e. ,  '  follower  of  Jesus. '

In  this  he  assumes  that  the  primary  document  here  made
use  of  by  the  author  of  Acts  did  not  refer  to  the  man  as  a
Jew,  or  as  a  sorcerer,  or  as  a  false  prophet ;  that  it  simply
contained  the  information  that  at  Paphos  Paul  came  into
opjiosition  with  one  of  the  older  and  very  conservative  disciples
(if  Jesus,  and  got  the  better  of  him  with  Sergius  Paulus.  This
hypothesis  admittedly  departs  so  widely  from  the  text  of  Acts
that  it  is  impossible  to  control  it  thereby.

(e)  Dalman  {Gram.  129,  n.  i  ['94])  propo.ses  a
purely  Greek  explanation.

'EAu/iiis  (so  accented)  he  regards  as  contracted  from  'EAu/natos
(on  these  contractions  see  Nami:s,  S  86  aiijiit.).  In  ©  (except
the  Apocrypha]  and  NT,  indeed,  the  Elamitcs  are  always
'EAa/ii,  'EAa^irat  ;  but  with  the  Greeks  the  forms  are  as  in-
variably 'V-kvixdU,  'EAu/iaioi ;  so  in  Tobit '2  10  Judith  1  6;
I  Mace.  (5 1  has  'EAu/mat.

Philologically  this  derivation  is  the  simplest  of  all  ;
but  it  contributes  nothing  towards  the  solution  of  the
riddle.

The failure  of  all the  attempts  enumerated  above

renders  inevitable  the  suggestion  that  here  the  author  of

_.._ . Acts  has  amalgamated  two  sources,  one

2.  l^merent  ^^  ^^^^.^  ^^„^,^  ^^^  ^^^^  Barjesus  while

the  other  called  him  Elymas.  Even
Klostermann,  in  order  to  explain  the  peculi.ir  distribu-
tion of  the  names  in  ',1:  6  8,  seeks  the  aid  of  this
hypothesis  in  addition  to  the  hypotheses  already  referred
to  [.above  {b),  beg.].  The  addition,  oi'irtijj  ■yap  fitOfp-
fjiT]V€VfTai  rb  tvofia  aiWov  (for  so  is  his  name  translatt;d),
however,  would  in  any  case  be  a  very  unskilful  way  of
amalgamating  the  two  sources  unless  6  fJ.dyoi  (sorcerer),
as  suggested  above,  Ix;  deleted  as  a  gloss.  .'^lill,  it

once  it  is  agreed  to  assume  two  sources,  a  further  and
larger  question  arises  :  the  question,  namely,  whether  the
addition  itself  be  substantially  right — that  is  to  say,
whether  the  one  name  Ije  really  a  translation  of  the  other.
Nay,  more  :  it  is  even  conceivable  that  the  two  names  do
not  denote  the  same  person  ;  that  accounts  relating  to
1  So  Nestle,  in  private  letter  to  the  present  writer.


sources  ?


BARJBSUS

two  different  persons  have  been  transferred  to  a  single
|xrson.  This  inference  is  suggested  also  by  the  epithets
iipplii-d  ;  for,  thougli  it  is  not  altogether  inconceivable
that  a  'sorcerer'  {ij.dyoi)  should  be  a  'false  prophet'
(\l/(t'5oirpo<priTr}s),  the  two  ideas  are  widely  different.

Of  the  critics  mentioned  in  Actr,  |  ii,  who  discuss  our
present  passage  with  reference  to  the  distniction  of  sources,
only  Spitta  aiid  H.  Weiss  regard  136-12  as  all  of  one  piece;
Clemen  and  Hilgenfeld  are  convinccti  of  the  opposite,  but  make
no  definite  suggestions  as  to  separation  of  the  portions  ;  Sorof
and  Jfingst  derive?'.  6/1  from  a  written  source,  77'.  8-12  from
the  j)en  (if  the  redactor  or  from  oral  tradition.  J.,nj;st  further
attributes  to  the  redactor  the  word  /xayov  in  ?•.  6.  Vet  not  even
so  are  all  the  difliculties  cleared  up.

How  far  the  narrative  as  a  whole  is  to  be  accepted  as

historical  hocomes  a  serious  (juestion  as  soon  as  it  has

3 Credibilitv '^^^'^  traced  to  more  than  one  source  ;

Of  Narrative  ^"'  f  crcdihility  has  been  doubte.l
even  by  .Si)itta,  h.  Weiss,  and  others,
who  defend  its  unity.  As  regards  the  miracle  in
particular,  one  is  not  only  surprised  by  its  suddenness,
but  is  also  at  a  loss  to  see  its  moral  justitication.  ( )n
the  other  hand,  a  misunderstanding  would  account  for
it  readily  enough.  A  sorcerer,  a  false  prophet — nay,
any  Jew  ( Acts'28  27)— is,  in  the  judgment  of  the  Christian,
spiritually  blind,  and  this  is  what  l^aul  and  liarnabas
proved  of  Barjesus  in  their  disputation  with  him.  In
being  handed  down  by  tratlition  this  thought  could
easily  undergo  such  a  change  as  would  lead  to  the
repre.sentation  that  physical  blindness  had  t)een  brought
on  as  a  punishment  by  the  words  of  Paul.  On  the
other  hand,  one  would  e.xpect  the  blindness,  if  it  is  to
be  regarded  as  merited,  to  be  permanent,  or,  at  least,
would  expect  to  be  told  of  some  reason  for  its  subse-
<iuent  removal,  as,  for  example,  that  the  sorcerer  had
ceased  to  withstand  Paul  and  Barnabas,  or  even  had
become  a  convert  to  Christianity.  It  is  very  noticeable
that  the  narrator  shows  but  little  interest  in  the  subse-
quent history  of  the  man.  The  conversion  of  the  pro-
consul (not  his  existence  ;  see  Acts,  §  13  ad  fin.)  also
is  doubtful  to  many.

-Ml the more does it now become incumbent to
4.  Tendency '^""^l"'''^  whether the narrative  reveals
in any measure the tendencies dis-
cerned elsewhere  in  .\cts.

[a)  In  the  first  i)lace,  and  generally,  it  is  clear  that
it  has  a  place  in  the  p.arallelism  between  Peter  and  Paul
(.Acts,  §  4),  in  respect  alike  of  the  miracle  of  chastise-
ment, the  confutation  of  a  sorcerer,  and  the  conversion
of  a  high  Roman  officer  (cp  .Acts5i-io  818-24  10 1-48).
It  is  also  in  harmony  with  that  other  tendency  of  .Acts,
to  represent  the  Roman  authority  as  fricndlv,  and  the
Jews  as  hostile  to  Christianity  (.'\f;Ts,  §  5(1);  §  4  ad
iiiif.  ;  compare  very  specially  the  Jewish  e.\orcists  in
close  relation  to  sorcery.  Acts  19  13-16).

{(>)  A  conjecture  of  wider  scope  1  connects  itself  with
what  is  .said  of  .Simon  Magus  (see  Simon  Macus).
If  Paul  was  the  person  originally  intended  in  the  story
of  Simon,  then  in  Acts  89-24  we  find  attributed  to
him  the  one  deed  which  used  to  be  flung  in  his  teeth
by  his  Judaistic  adversaries— that,  by  his  great  col-
lections made  in  Macedonia  and  Achaia,  he  had  sought
to  purchase  at  the  hands  of  the  original  apostles  that
recognition  of  his  ecjuality  with  them  which  they  had  so
persistently  withheld.  The  roniance  of  Simon  Magus,
however,  of  which  we  still  possess  large  portions  (see
Simon  M.\gus).  had  for  its  main  contents  something
different,  viz.,  that  the  sorcerer  had  spread  his  false
doctrines  everywhere  and  supported  them  by  miracles,
but  in  one  city  after  another  was  vanquished  in  dis[nite
and  excelled  in  miracle  by  Peter.  Thus,  apart  from
the  repetition  of  the  occurrence  in  many  cities,  we  are

"  .See  for  example,  Hilgenfeld,  ZIVT,  1868,  pp.  36S-67  ;  De
Wette-Overbeck  on  Acts  136-12;  Lipsius,  Quellen  tier  rami-
sclttn  l\trussage,  1872,  pp.  28,  32,  a\x,/P/\  1876.  p.  s73  :  Holtz-
mann,  /.ll^T,  1885.  p.  431  ;  and  very  specially  Krci\k'e\,Josefihus
u.  Lukas  180-190  ['94I.  Lipsius  afterwards  withdrew  his
earlier  view  ;  .see  Apokryph.  Ap.  -gesch.  ii.  1 ('87),  p.  52  ;  cp.

31  j8i


BARJESUS

told  of  Harjesus  in  Acts  136-i2  exactly  what  is  told  in
the  romance  alxnit  Simon  (that  is,  Paul),  and  of  Paul
exactly  what  is  told  in  the  romance  about  Peti-r.  Hence
the  belief  that  in  I. '16-12  we  can  discover  the  same  pur-
pose on  the  part  of  the  author  as  we  discover  in  818-24.
He  was  accjuainted  with  the  unfriendly  allegation  alxjut
I  Paul,  did  not  lielieve  it,  and  wished  to  set  forth  another
I  view.  In  the  two  passages,  however,  the  method  is
I  not  the  same.  In  8 18-24  it  is  shown  that  Paul  could
!  not  possibly  have  been  the  infamous  sorcerer,  inasmuch
as  Simon  the  sorcerer  w.is  a  Sam.aritan  and  was  quelled
by  Peter  indeed,  but  fjefore  the  conversion  of  Paul.  In
136-12,  on  the  other  hand,  it  is  shown  that  it  was  Paul
hini-self  who  victoriously  met  a  sorc<.-rer  of  this  kind.
One  of  the  reasons  for  this  divergence  is  seen  in  the
desire,  already  noted,  to  establish  a  close  parallelism
between  Paul  and  Peter.  It  is  l)elieved  possible  also  to
explain  on  the  same  lines  why  in  Acts  136-i2  the  scone
is  laid  in  Cyprus,  with  a  Jew  in  the  entourage  of  a  high
Roman  officer  as  one  of  the  dramatis  persona.  To
Cyprus,  according  to  J  osephus  [Aut.  xx.  Tz,  §§  141-143),
belonged  the  Jewish  sorcerer  Simon,  who,  at  the  instance
of  Felix  of  Judita,  procurator  (i.e.,  highest  Roman
officer),  had  induced  Drusilla  to  quit  her  husband.  King
.\zizus  of  PZmesa,  and  marry  Felix.  The  purpose  of  the
narrator  would  have  been  sufficiently  served  had  he
been  able  to  say  that  the  sorcerer  in  question— Simon,
to  wit — under  whose  name  the  Judaisers  imputed  to
Paul  so  much  that  was  shameful,  had  been  met  and
vanquished  by  Paul  himself.  That,  however,  was  im-
possible ;  the  tale  had  already  been  related  of  Peter.
Accordingly  (so  it  is  supposed)  the  narrator  found  it
necessary  to  give  another  name  to  the  sorcerer  worsted
by  Paul.

{c)  His  choice  of  the  names  Barjesus  and  F.lymas  is
still  unaccounted  for.  There  is,  therefore,  a  motive  for
our  attributing  a  historical  character  to  a  certain  other
sorcerer,  Barjesus  (or  Elymas),  as  well  as  to  a  Samaritan
sorcerer  named  Simon.  .Although  it  is  not  easy  to
believe  that  Peter  met  the  Samaritan  Simon,  there  is  no
reason  for  assuming  that  Paul  did  not  meet  Harjesus.
Indeed,  it  can  easily  be  conceded  that  in  Acts  136-i2,
just  as  in  Acts  89-24,  the  author  was  not  consciously
giving  a  false  complexion  to  what  he  had  heard.  He
believed  himself  able  to  offer  a  material  correction.  He
assumed,  that  is  to  say,  that  what  the  Judaisers  were  in
the  habit  of  relating  of  Simon  the  sorcerer,  while  really
intending  Paul  and  his  opposition  to  the  '  true '  Gospel,
rested  in  actual  fact  upon  a  mistaken  identification  with
this  Barjesus  (or  F.lymas),  and  that  the  latter  was  van-
ciuished  not  by  Peter  but  by  Paul.  It  is  less  easy  to

suppose  that  Cyprus  was  given  by  tradition  as  the  scene
of  the  occurrence.  Even  without  any  tradition,  the
name  could  l)e  suggested  by  Joseplms's  mention  of  the
native  place  of  the  Jewish  sorcerer,  and  the  name  of
Paphos  would  naturally  present  itself  from  the  fact  that
the  Roman  i)roconsul  had  his  residence  there.

((/)  The  hypothesis  has  received  developments  to  a
point  where  we  have  to  depend  on  less  clear  indications.
If  the  accusations  in  Acts  against  Simon  and  liarjesus
had  originally  been  brought  against  Paul,  what  is  said
of  the  intimate  relations  of  Barjesus  with  Sergius  Paulus
would  belong  to  the  same  class.  Now.  in  Acts  2426,  it
is  said  that  Felix  often  sent  for  Paul  and  communed
with  him.  It  is  assumed  that  the  Judaisers  had  gone
so  far  as  to  allege  that  Paul  had  purchased  the  friendli-
ness of  Felix  with  money,  or  even,  perhaps,  to  insinuate
that  he  had  been  negotiator  lx;tween  Drusilla  and  Felix.
It  is  to  meet  those  accusations  (so  it  is  assumed)  that
the  writer  of  .Acts  alludes  to  briliery  by  Paul  as  merely
a  hoiMj  on  the  part  of  Felix,  and  informs  us  that  Paul
had  stirred  Felix's  conscience  by  a  solemn  '  rea.soning '
with  him  about  his  sinful  marriage  (24  2$/  ).

(<•)  There  are  two  more  explicit  indications  that  what
we  now  read  alxjut  Barjesus  was  originally  told  of  Paul.
Kx^piis. 'enemy,'  the  epithet  applied  by  Paul  to  Bar-


BAR-JONA

jesus  ( 13  lo),  is,  with  or  without  the  substantive  iLvdpuiros,
.the  standing  designation  for  Simon  (that  is,  Paul)  in
the  pseudo- Clementine  Homilies  and  Recognitions.
The  name,  '  enemy  of  righteousness,'  fits  Paul  and  his
doctrine  of  the  abrogation  of  the  Mosaic  law  through
Christ  (Rom.  IO4)  all  the  more  because  his  Judaistic
opponents  in  Corinth  came  forward  as  '  servants  of
righteousness,'  that  is,  men  of  strict  observance  of  the
law  (2  Cor.  11 15).  In  that  case,  the  temporary  blind-
ing of  Barjesus  will  represent  what  befel  Paul  at  his
conversion  ;  even  the  expressions  /xi]  ^Xiirwv  (without
sight)  and  x"/"^7'^''^'"'*^  (leading  by  the  hand)  in
98/.  have  their  parallels  in  1-3  n.  Here,  then,  unless
the  whole  hypothesis  under  consideration  be  rejected,
we  may  say,  with  reasonable  probability,  that  the
blindness  of  Paul  at  his  conversion  (whether  historical
or  not  is  immaterial)  was  originally  represented  by  the
Judaisers  as  a  divine  visitation  for  his  hostility  to  the
'  true'  (that  is,  the  legal)  gospel,  and  that  it  was  simply
passed  on  by  the  author  of  Acts  to  Barjesus  the  Jew.

Whatever  else  be  the  result  of  what  has  been  said  in
the  present  section,  one  thing  at  least  is  clear  :  it  is
impossible  to  reach  a  definite  conclusion  unless  the
tendency  of  the  author  is  taken  into  account.

According  to  the  trepiodoi  Bapfdjia — a  legendary  work

composed  by  a  Cyprian  about  488 — Barjesus  opposed  the

.J .  work  of  Barnabas  when,  along  with  Mark

5.  Later (^^ctslSsg),  Barnabas  visited  Cyprus  for

legenas.  ^  second  time.  He  withstood  him  in
various  ways  at  his  entrance  into  the  cities  where  he
desired  to  preach,  and  at  last  stirred  up  the  Jews  to
burn  him  at  the  stake  at  Salamis.  (Cp  Lipsius,  Apokr.
Ap.-gesch.  ii.  2,  pp.  283-286  278  297.)  p.  w.  s.

BAR-JONA.  RV  Bar -Jonah,  the  patronymic  of
Simon  Peter  l-Mt.  16  i7t  B<\p  ICa)NA  [Ti.  WH]).  See
Peii.k.

Icui'tt  is  a  Gr.  contr.iction  of  tuai'i'rjs  (cp  Jn.  1  42  2i/k.">'  '"  vib<;
'Iwai'i'ou  [Ti.].  1.  6  vi.  'Iiudi'ou  [WH] ;  21 16  ^.  'Xiaavvov  [Ti.],  2.
"lujacou  [WH]  ;  ]:izev.  etc.  present  tcira ;  see  Var.  Bib.),  which
corresponds  to  an  Aram.  Njnv  nn  \  cp  B.  Talm.  Hull.  133  a,
Dahn.  Jiid.-ral.  Aram.  142  n.  9,  ancl  see  Joanna.

BARKOS  (Dlp-13,  §  82,  BepKOOC  [L]).  The  B'ne
Barkos,  a  family  of  Nethinim  in  the  great  post-e.xilic
list  (see  K/.u.\,  ii.  §  9),  Ezra'iss  (BARKOyc  [B],  -koc
[A])  =  Neh.  755  (B^PKOye  [BSA],  L  om.)  =  i  Esd.  532,
Charcus,  RV  B.ARCHUs  (B^xoyc  [B],  BARXOye  [A]).
The  Nethi.s'im  [q-v.")  were  mainly  of  foreign  origin,
and  the  name  Barkos  seems  to  be  Aramaic  and  to
signify  'son  of  the  God  Kos  or  Kaus. '  The  name  of
this  god  occurs  in  many  theophorous  proper  names
among  the  Northern  Semites  ;  we  have  Kaus-malak
as  king  of  Edom  on  an  Assyrian  inscription  (Schr.
KAT'^'f  150),  Kosnathan  ('n^Dip)  in  Euting's  Nabat.
Inscr.  n.  12  1.  i,  and  a  variety  of  Semitic  names  on
Greek  inscriptions  from  Egypt  containing  the  same
element  [Kev.-ArchioL,  Feb.  1870,  p.  109  ff.).  Cp
also  the  Edomite  Kostobaros^  (Jos.  Ant.  xv.  79).
Names  designating  the  worshipper  as  son  of  his  god  are
common  in  Aramaic — e.g.,  the  biblical  Benhad.M)
[probably],  the  Palmyrene  una.  'son  of  Nebo'  (cp
Barnabas,  §1),  rncna  ':a,  'sons  of  the  son  of  the
Sun-god,'  the  Syrian  Bar-ba'smin,  'son  of  the  lord
of  heaven,"  Barlaha,  'son  of  God,'  etc.  W.  R.  s.

BARLEY  (n-iylf',  DnVV'.''  Kpi0H.  kriBai  [BAL],
Ex.931 Lev.  27 16 Dt.  88 Judg.  7i3, etc.) was in
p  biblical  times  one  of  the  most  character-

1.  common  j^^j^  products  of  Palestine  (Dt.  88),  re-
garded as  one  of  the  neces.saries  of  life
(Joellii).  It  comes  second  in  the  series  of  grains
1  [(coerTO^apo?  m.iy  perhaps  be  a  scribal  error  for  KoayoPapoi —
i.e.,  ^\2iD^p — which  finds  a  striking  parallel  in  the  name  Kau5-
gabri,  an  Edomite  king  mentioned  on  an  inscription  of  Esar-
haddon  (cp  Schr.  /.c.).]

The  less  common  singul.ir  form  is  used  for  the  growing
crop.  The  name,  which  Hebrew  has  in  common  with  Aramaic,
but  not  with  Arabic,  is  derived  from  a  root  meaning  '  to  be
rough '  or  '  bristling.'

483


BARNABAS

mentioned  in  Ez.  (49)  as  ingredients  to  be  used  in
bread-making — wheat,  barley,  Ijeans,  lentils,  millet,  and
Sfjelt  (cp  Bread).  It  may  be  inferred  from  a  variety  of
passages,  such  as  Ru.  217  Jn.  6913,  that  barley  was,  even
during  the  times  when  it  was  cultivated  along  with  whe.at,
the  staple  food  of  the  poorer  class  (cp  Foou).  Suuh  a
reference  as  that  in  i  K.  428  (.08)  shows  us  how  largely  it
was  used  to  feed  horses  and  cattle.^  It  may  also  be
gathered  from  the  part  played  by  the  barley-cake  in  the
dream  of  the  Midianite,  overheard  by  (Jideon  (Judg.
7  13),  where  it  stands  as  a  type  of  the  Israelite  peasant
army,  that  as  in  other  countries,  so  in  Palestine,  the
cultivation  of  barley  preceded  that  of  wheat,  and  w.as  the
earliest  stage  in  the  transition  from  a  nomadic  to  an  agri-
cultural life.'-^  (Cp  PI.  //A'xviii.  72,  '  antiquissimum  in
cibis  hordeum.  ■)  This  is,  on  the  whole,  more  probable
than  the  view  of  Jos.  (.////.  v.  64),  which  has  been  very
generally  accepted,  that  barley- cake  represented  the
feebleness  of  Gideon's  three  hundred,  and  we  are  entitled
to  conclude  that  there  was  a  time  when  barley  was  the
staple  food  of  all  classes  among  the  Israelites.  The
fact  referred  to  in  Ex.931/,  that  in  Egypt  barley
ripens  some  time  earlier  than  wheat,  is  supported  by
the  testimony  of  Pliny  (//A'' xviii.  106)  as  well  as  of
modern  writers  (see  references  in  Di.  ad  loc. ).

In  the  single  case  in  which  the  use  of  barley  is  pre-
scribed in  an  offering  under  the  ritual  law  (see  Jealousy,
2  R'tual  O'^"''"^''  "*"'  §  2).  it  is  somewhat  difficult  to
determine  the  reason.  Some  (e.g. ,  Bahr,
Synibolik,  2  445)  have  regarded  it  as  expressive  of  the
sordid  nature  of  the  alleged  offence  and  the  humilia-
tion of  the  accused  •■'  (a  wife  suspected  of  adultery).
A  reason  which  has  recently  found  more  acceptance
is  that  in  the  case  of  a  simple  appeal  to  God  for
a  judicial  decision  a  less  valuable  offering  was  sufficient
than  was  requisite  when  a  suppliant  besought  God  for
the  bestowal  or  continuance  of  his  divine  grace*  (Di.
on  Nu.  5ii,  etc.).  The  prohibition  to  mingle  oil  or
frankincense  with  the  offering  will,  of  course,  receive  a
similar  explanation.

Two-rowed  barley  {Hordeum  distichon),  \\hich  may
be  presumed  to  be  the  feral  form,  is  a  native  of  W.
.^  .  .  Asia.  It  may  have  been  cultivated  by
■''  Semitic  races  ;  but  it  is  not  represented
on  Egyptian  monuments.  The  kind  most  frequently
cultivated  in  antiquity  was  six-rowed  barley  [Hordeum
hexastichon).  This  occurs  on  the  most  ancient  Egyptian
monuments  and  on  the  coins  of  Metapontum  six  cen-
turies B.  c.  It  was  no  doubt  derived  by  cultivation  from
the  two-rowed  kind  (cp  De  Candolle,  Orig.^^>  294-297,
and  authorities  quoted  there).

The  word  'gerah'  (Ex.3013)  'is  defined  by  Rabbinical
writers  as  equal  to  sixteen  barley-corns ' ;  but  see  Weights  and
Measures.  n.  M. — W.  T.  T.-D.

BARN  (n'l'ljp).  Hag.  29;  see  Agriculture,  §  10.
Also  for  Job  39 12  (p-)  and  (AV  Barnfloor)  2  K.  6  27,
RV  correctly  '  threshing  floor. '

BARNABAS  (B&RNaBac  [Ti.  WH] ;  §48),  otherwise
Joseph  (or  Josks).

According  to  the  author  of  Acts  (4  36),  the  name  Barnabas
(=vib?  irapoucX^creco?)  is  derived  from  the  Aram.  13  (son)  and
the  same  root  as  the  Heb. N'3], jrpo(^^Tr)s  —  the
1.  Name, duty  of  n-apaKAijo-is  ('address,  exhortation'), ac-
cording.; to  I  Cor.  14  3,  and  also  according  to  .\cts
\b^i/.,  being  one  of  the  duties  of  the  irpo(^iiTT)s. When  more

1  So  in  the  Physiologvs  (Land,  Anecd.  Syr.  4  ii^f.,  cited  by
Low,  277)  barley  is  called  the  food  of  cattle  as  opposed  to  wheat
the  food  of  man.

2  Cp,  especially,  the  parallel  cited  by  Budde  {ZDPVYi^i)
from  Radloff's  Aus  Sibirien,  \  329.  <Jp  also  Moore  on  the
passage.

S  It  is  noteworthy  that  barley  formed  part  of  the  price  paid  by
Rosea  to  redeem  his  adulterous  wife  (Hos.  82)  ;  but  this  may  be
a  mere  coincidence.

4  See,  especially,  the  full  discussion  by  Nowack  (^Arch.  2
249^),  who  agrees  with  L)illmann's  view,  and  points  out  th.-it  the
ortering  in  question  is  neither  a  sin-offering  nor  a  guilt-offering
in  the  ritualistic  sense.

484


i


BARNABAS

closely  examined,  however,  this  etymology  is  not  without  its I
dilficullics. It  combines  wonls  from  two  different  languages,
and  moreover  fails  to  account  for  the  form  -ya/Ja. Klostcrmann
(PrM.  ill!  A/xisUllf.tt,  i88j,  pp.  8-14)  seeks  to  derive  the  mean-
ing 7rapai(A>)<7-i«  from  the  Aram, nmj  13,  filius  quieiis,  but  finds
in  it  no  further  reference  than  to  the  satisfaction  which  Harnab.ns I
caused  to  the  apostles  by  becoming  a  convert  to  Christianity, j
I )alman's  etymology  (pram.  li.  jiui.-pal&st.  Arani&Uch, 1894, \
p.  143),  which  makes  iro/xucAijo'tt  a  rendering  of  KCnp,  this  last |
lieing  an  abbreviation  (not  elsewhere  met  with)  of  a  proper  name
.TDfU  or  JCn?  ('3Cn:),  takes  us  very  far from the  form  to  be I
explained. Deissm.inn  comes nearer  the  sound  when  (BiM-
stuilieH, 175-178 I'osj; Xeue BibeUtudien, 15-17 |'97]) he
compares  the  H.irncbo  (133-13)  of  a  Palmyrene  inscription  of  the
year  114  a.d.  (see I)c  Vogiii,  La  Syrie  Centm/e  no.  73),  and
the  Semitic  Bapw/Sout  (son  of  Nebo)  on  a  North  Syrian  inscrip-
tion of  the  third  or  fourth  century  A.u.l In  Is.  4<5i, as  also ^
in Na^ouyoSoi'oorop, tiafioviao&av, Nelxj  is  transliterated  into
Greek  with  a  instead  of  e,  and  the  termination  -a?  may  possibly
have  been  substituted  for  -oi/t  with  the  view  of  disguising  the
name  of  the  heathen  divinity. (For  examples  of  ■^uch  a  custom,
see  Winer,  Grain,  d.  NTIichen  S/>rachiaii<»is,i'')  §  f)  27a.) On
this  theory,  the  rendering  n-apaxATjcrit  is  merely  a  piece  of  popular
etymology. Nestle  (/'.*//<'/.  sa.  r.,  1896,  p.  igy!)  is  inclined  to
take  the  .S>t. KI12,  which  signifies  wapaKa\eli>,  .is  the  starting-
point  of  the  etymological  interpretation  ;  but  he  refrains  from
explaining  more  minutely  the  structure  of  the  form.

If  Joseph  really  did  first  receive  the  surname  of
Barnabas  from  the  apostles,  this  seems  to  have  been  on
account  of  his  distinction  as  a  sjx-aker.  In  tliis  re-
six-'ct,  however,  the  author  of  Acts  (13 15  16  14  12)  invari-
ably subordinates  him  at  least  to  Paul.  Many  Jews,
with  a  view  to  their  dealings  with  Greeks  and  Romans,
assumed  in  addition  to  their  Jewish  name  a  Greek  (or
Latin)  or  at  least  Greek-sounding  surname  (e.^. ,  Acts
I23  1225  ]:Ji9  Col.  4  II,  and  'Ia»'i'aros= '|')  ;  and  it  may
at  least  be  asked  whether  this  cannot  perhaps  have
been  the  case  with  Harnabas  also  (see  N.VMKS,  §§  48,  84).

According  to  the  l^'-pistle  to  the  Galatians  (our
primary  source), Barnabas  was  a  companion  of  Paul  in

2  References  •  ^'^  '"i-ssionary  journeys  for  at  least
some  time  before  the  council  of
Jerusalem. In  the  council  he  joined

Paul  in  supporting  the  immunity  of  Gentile  Christians
from  the  Mosaic  Law  (Gal.  219),  which  makes  it  all
the  more  surprising  that  he  afterwards  retreated  from
the  position  he  had  taken  long  liefore,  that  a  Jewish
Christian  was  at  lil)erty  to  cat  at  the  same  table
with  a  brother  Gentile  freed  from  the  law  ((]al.  2  13).
As  in  the  case  of  Peter,  so  also  in  that  of  Barnabas,
the  rejiroach  of  hypocrisy  hurled  at  both  by  Paul
on  this  account  may  safely  be  toned  down  into
one  of  inconsistency  (see  Council  of  Jerusalem,
§  3).  In  point  of  fact,  Barnabas  Aad  shaken  off  the
Mosaic  law  ;  but  he  had  never  thought  out  all  the
bearings  of  the  step  so  fully  as  to  l>e  able  to  vindicate
it  when  the  venerable  and  sacred  duty  of  observing  the
whole  law  was  so  authoiilatively  pressed  upon  him.
From  this  date  it  was,  of  course,  no  longer  possible  for
him  to  work  along  with  Paul  on  the  same  lines  ;  and
thus  the  dispute  at  Antioch  more  than  sufficiently  ex-
plains why  the  two  separated.  The  mention  of  Bar-
nabas in  I  Cor.  9  6  only  proves  that  at  that  time  also
he  was  a  prominent  missionary,  and  that  he  held
to  the  Pauline  principle  of  supporting  himself  by  his
own  labour  ;  it  is  no  evidence  that  he  was  personally
known  to  the  Corinthians,  or  that  he  had  again  become
one  of  the  companions  of  Paul.

In  the  .\cts  of  the  Apostles  the  separation  of  Barnabas
from  Paul  is  e.\plained  as  due  not  to  a  difference  on  a

3  In  Acta '"''^^^'^'' °^  principle, but to  a personal

question  ;  Ikirnabas  wished  to  take  John
Mark — a  near  relation  of  his,  according  to  Col.  4  10 — as
companion  on  a  second  journey  planned  by  Paul  and
himself ;  but  Paul  objected,  lx;cause  on  a  previous
occasion  (.\ctsi313)  Mark  had  left  them  in  the  lurch

>  In  Die  IVorte  /.,  ja  CoS),  Dalman  comes  over  to  Deiss-
mann's  view,  which  is  also  ably  defended  by  C;.  B.  Gray,  Exp.
Times,  Feb.  1899,  p.  Q%i /.  Cp  also  Arnold  Meyer,  Jesu
Mutterspracfte,^T/.Cg6).


ia  Galatians.


BARNABAS

*

(Acts  1636-39).  Even  if  this  be  accepted  as  a  historical
explanation  (and  we  have  no  means  of  controlling  it),  it
cannot  be  said  to  have  Ijecn  the  chief  one  (see  above,
§  2) ;  as  to  which  Acts  (see  Acis,  §§  4,  6)  is  scrupulously
silent.  In  virtiieof  the  intermediate  position, — as  between
Pauline  and  Jewish  Christianity, — which  was  held,  as
we  have  seen,  by  Barnabas,  he  is  atlmirably  fitted  for  a
mediating  role  in  Acts.  Although  a  native  of  Cyprus,
he  is  regarded  as  a  member  of  the  church  of  Jerusalent
(136/  ;  on  the  sale  of  his  estate,  see  CoMMU.MTY  OK
Got^iJS,  §§  I,  5)  ;  it  is  he  who  negotiates  Paul's  admis-
sion to  that  church  (^27)  ;  it  is  on  that  church's  conmiis-
sion  that  he  ins[x.'cts  the  church  which  had  been  founded
by  dispersed  Christians  at  Antioch  in  Syria  (11 22-24)  ;
it  is  he  who  fetches  Paul  to  Antioch  from  Tarsus  and
introduces  him  to  his  field  of  work  (II25/. ),  and  he
also  is  the  apostle's  travelling  companion  when  the
collection  for  the  poor  Christians  there  is  beitig  brought
to  Jerusalem  (II30  I225);  as  in  this  case,  .so  also  in
the  so-called  first  missionary  journey,  undertaken  along
with  Paul  through  Cyprus  and  the  south  of  Asia
Minor,  his  name  is  placed  first,  at  least  till  187,  and
then  again  in  14 14  and  even  101225.  All  this  is
not  easy  to  reconcile  with  Paul's  well-known  inde-
pendence as  shown  in  his  letters  ;  but  the  journey  in
Acts  11 30  1225  must  also  on  other  grounds  Ik;  pro-
nounceil  unhistorical  (see  Council  ok  Ji:kis.\lem,
§1),  and  the  rest  of  what  is  related  in  Acts  11  is  in-
consistent with  the  order  t^s  "Zvpia.^  Koi  ttjs  KiXtxtas
in  Gal.  I21,  as  is  the  rest  of  what  we  read  in  .\cts  9
with  Gal.  1 15-20  (cp  Acts,  §  4,  and,  for  the  doubt-
fulness of  the  contents  of  Acts  13/,  and  the  probability
of  a  Barnabas  source  there,  §§  13  and  10).  But,
although  the  object  of  the  narrative  in  .Acts  is  incon-
sistent with  history  in  as  far  as  it  seeks  to  suggest
that  the  missionary  activity  of  Paul  among  the  Gentiles
was  no  departure  from  the  views  of  the  primitive
church, — that  on  the  contrary  it  was  authorised  and
even  set  on  foot  by  it, — we  may  without  hesitation  accept
as  historical  (see  Acts,  §  4)  not  only  the  co-operation
of  Barnabas  with  Paul  shortly  before  and  at  the  Council
at  Jerusalem,  which  is  vouched  for  by  the  Lpistle  to
the  Galatians,  but  also  the  part  which  he  took  in  the
first  missionary  journey  (.\cis  13/),  and  even  perhaps
in  Paul's  introduction  to  Jerusalem  (of  course  accord-
ing to  Gal.  1 18/)  at  his  first  visit  to  that  city  three
years  after  his  conversion.  We  may  also  accept  in  all
probability  the  second  journey  of  Barnabas  to  Cyprus
in  company  with  Mark  (.\ctsi539).  From  this  jx)int
his  name  disappears  from  the  NT.

Our  later  notices  of  him  are  of  little  value.  Accord-
ing to  Clem.  Al.  {S/rom.  ii.  20,  §116;  cp  Kus.  //£
.J  .  ii.  1  4),  he  was  one  of  the  Seventy  of  Lk.  10 1 ;
_ . ?■  in  the  frankly  anti- Pauline Clem. Homilies

'  (i.9-16),  which  date  from  the  end  of  the  second
or  the  beginning  of  the  third  century — or  rather,  in  the
sources  from  which  these  Homilies  were  drawn — he  was
a  personal  disciple  of  Jesus,  Palestinian  by  origin,  but
Alexandrian  by  residence,  a  strict  adherent  of  the  law  ;
according  to  Hom.  i.  8,  ii.  4,  Clement  meets  him  in
Alexandria,  but  in  Clem.  Recog.  (1  7)  the  meeting  was
in  Rome.  According  to  this  presumably  earlier  (but
none  the  less  unhistorical)  representation,  he  pro-
claimed the  gospel  in  Rome  even  during  the  lifetime  of
Jesus,  and  therefore  before  Peter.  In  Hom.  1 7  this
statement  is  made  only  of  some  person  who  is  left
unnamed,  and  later  means  were  found  for  the  com-
plete suppression  01  any  such  tradition,  so  full  of
danger  to  the  authority  of  Peter  and  his  alleged
successors.  From  the  fifth  century  onwards  its  place
w.as  taken  by  the  statement  tha^  Barnabas  was  founder
and  bishop  of  the  Church  of  Milan — a  statement,  how-
ever, accompanied  by  the  clause,  '  after  he  had  lieen  the
first  to  preach  the  gospel  in  Rome."  It  was  upon  this
allegation  that  the  archbishops  of  Milan  afterwards
based  their  claims  to  metropolitan  authority  over  the
486


BARODIS

whole  of  Northern  and  part  of  Central  Italy.  In  the
interests  of  Roman  supremacy  (which  had  originally
been  helped  by  it),  the  allegation  was  violently  disputed
by  Roman  theologians  of  the  eighteenth  century.

In  complete  independence  of  the  Roman  and
Milanese  tradition,  there  arose,  after  431  A.  D. ,  the
legend  that  Barnabas  had  Ijeen  the  missionary  to  his
native  island  of  Cyprus,  and  had  suffered  martyrdom  at
Salamis.  where  he  was  buried.  On  this  plea  the
Cyprian  church,  between  485  and  488  A.r). ,  obtained
from  the  I-lmperor  Zeno  its  independence  of  the  Patri-
archate of  Antioch.  The  implied  assumption  is  that
Barnabas  was  an  apostle  in  the  full  sense  of  the  word.

Ecclesiastical  writers  often  substitute  him  for  Barsabbas
(.\ctsl23;  cp  B.\K.SAR.\s,  §  2),  perhaps  on  account  of
the  name  Joseph,  common  to  both  (the  Sahidic  and
I'hiloxenian  versions  have,  on  the  other  hand,  Joses  in
both  cases,  and  there  are  isolated  authorities  for
Barnabas  alone),  but  perhaps  in  order  to  bring  him
nearer  the  apostolic  circle.  This  object  is  effected  in
a  more  pronounced  way  by  Clem.  Recog.  (l6o),  which
identify  him  with  Matthias  (Acts  1  26).  There  is  an
isolated  notice  in  the  ((inostic)  Actus  Petri  V'ercel lenses
to  the  effect  that  Kirnabas  was  sent  along  with  Timothy
to  Macedonia  before  Paul's  journey  to  Spain.  Cp.
Lipsius,  Apokr.  Ap.-gcsch.  ii.  2,  pp.  270-320  (especially
310),  260,  373.

Tertullian's  claim  of  the  authorship  of  the  lOpistle  to
the  Hebrews  for  Barnabas  is  quite  inadmissible.  It  is
...  ,  difficult  to  attribute  to  a  born  Levite
„;■  rfif^^„  (.\cts436)  such  grave  errors  about  the
autnorsmp.  ^^..^^^j^  ^^^  tabernacle)  as  occur  in  Heb.
1)3/  "27  ;  or  to  any  member  of  the  primitive  church  of
Jerusalem  any  such  declaration  as  that  in  Heb.  23,  tliat
he  had  first  received  the  gospel  at  second  hand  through
hearers  of  Jesus.  Nor  is  such  an  origin  consistent  with
the  thoroughly  Ale.\andrian  character  of  the  Epistle.
I'.ven,  however,  if  we  must  refrain  from  basing  any
argument  on  the  statements  about  Barnabas  in  Acts
436,  we  are  still  confronted  by  a  decisive  fact  :  the  man
who  <at  a  critical  moment  was  so  much  subject  to  the
Mosaic  law  ((ial.  213),  could  not  have  spoken  of  its
abolition  and  even  of  its  carnal  character,  as  the  writer
of  the  I'".pistle  to  the  Hebrews  speaks  in  7 12  18  16.
Doubtless  the  ILijistle  to  the  Hebrews  was  attributed
to  Barnabas  because  it  was  supposed  that  the  X6-yos
T/)s  TrapaKXTjfffws  of  Heb.  1822  could  only  have  come
from  the  eios  TrapaKXrjcrews  of  Acts  4  36.

That  Barnabas  should  have  written  the  anonymous
epistle  which  since  the  time  of  Clement  of  Alexandria
has  borne  his  name,  and  on  that  account  has  been
included  among  the  writings  of  the  '  apostolic  fathers,'
is  still  more  inconceivable  than  his  authorship  of  the
Epistle  to  the  Hebrews.  It  goes  far  beyond  Paul  in
its  assertion  of  freedom  from  the  law.  As  to  its  date,
see  under  Acts  (§  16).  p.  vv.  s.

BARODIS  (B<\pcoAeic  [BA]),  a  group  of  children  of
Solomons  servants  (see  Nicthinim)  in  the  great  post-
exilic  list  (Ezra,  ii.  §§  9  8  r ,  151  <;),  one  of  the  eight
inserted  in  i  Esd.  534(om.  ®'-)  after  Pochereth-hazzebaim
of  II  Ezra257  =  Neh.  7  59-

BARREL  {13  y^piA  [BAL]  ;  1  K.  17 12  14 16  1833)-
See  CooKi.vG  Utk.vsils,  §  2  ;  Pottery.

BARRICADE  (biVD).  1  S.  17 20  RV"?-  See  Camp,
§1-

BARSABAS or BARSABBAS (§§  48, 72)- The

etymology  is doubtful. Ba/wa/Sas has been derived

1 Name ^^°"^  "'^  ('son')  and  k2V  or  Kap  ("Sheba,"

— which, however, as  far  as we  know, is

always  the  name  of  a  country,  never  of  a  personl,  from

13  and kis  (  =  ' warrior '  ; cp Nu.  3I53), or from 13

and  K3D  ('  old  man's  son  '). Baptra^^as  ([Ti.  WH]  the

better  attested  form  of  the  name)  suggests  '  child  of  the

487


BARSABAS

Sabbath.'  Dalman  {Gram.  d.  jiid.-paliist.  Aramiiisch,
1894,  J).  143)  instances  analogies  to  show  that  'rat?  or
'n3B*  could  by  contraction  become  nap.  though  Knar  "Q
is  what  we  should  more  naturally  expect  in  such  a  case.

1.  Joseph  Barsabbas,  surnamed  Justus  ('IoCo-tos  [Ti.
WH]),  was  nominated,  though  not  chosen,  for  the
2  Josenh  ^'^'^^"^T  '"  ^^^  apostolate  caused  by  the
"  ■  death  of  Judas.  The  account  of  the  election
in  Acts  1 15-26  could  not  l)e  held  to  Ix;  historical  if  we
regarded  the  number  twelve  for  the  original  apostolate
as  having  lx;en  fixed,  and  invested  with  special  dignity,
only  after  the  controvcr.sy  as  to  Paul's  equality  in  privi-
lege with  the  apostles  of  Jerusalem.  But  even  were  we
to  set  aside  the  reference  to  the  dwdfKa  in  i  Cor.  15  s,  as
being  unparalleled  elsewhere  in  the  Pauline  writings,  we
should  still  be  at  a  loss  to  explain  why  Paul  never
vigorously  protested  against  an  innovation — if  inno-
\ation  it  was — so  arbitrary  and  so  derogatory  to  his
own  position.  Occasion  enough  for  doing  so  presented
itself  in  Gal.  2  and  2  Cor.  10-13.  We  nmst,  accordingly,
ascrilje  to  Jesus  himself  the  choice  of  twelve  of  his
disciples  who  stood  in  peculiarly  close  relations  to  their
Master.  But  in  that  case  it  was  very  natural  that  these
should  seek  to  keep  up  their  number — that  of  the  twelve
tribes  of  Israel.

Whether  the  election  was  in  Jerusalem  is  more  open
to  question.  On  the  arrest  of  Jesus  all  the  disciples,
according  to  Mk.  I450  Mt.  2656,  had  taken  to  flight,
and  that  they  should  have  returned  to  Jerusalem  so  soon
is  not  likely.  The  view  of  Lk.  and  Jn. ,  according  to
w  hich  they  are  present  in  Jerusalem  on  the  day  of  the
resurrection  of  Jesus  (and  remain  there),  cannot  lie
reconciled  with  what  we  are  told  by  Mk.  and  Mt.  ;  the
explanation  is  that  the  third  and  fourth  evangelists
found  the  statement  of  the  first  and  second  incredible.
According  to  this  last,  Jesus,  in  Jerusalem,  through  the
women,  sends  the  disciples,  who  are  also  in  Jerusalem,
to  Galilee,  in  order  that  he  may  there  show  himself  to
them.  The  kernel  of  historical  fact,  however,  is  not  as
I,k.  and  Jn.  have  it,  but  the  reverse:  namely,  that  the
apostles  were  not  in  Jerusalem  at  all,  but  in  Galilee,  and
thus  in  (ialilee  received  the  manifestations  of  their  risen
Lord.  It  may  even  be  questioned  whether  they  were
again  in  Jerusalem  and  able  to  come  forward  publicly
and  unopposed  so  early  as  at  the  following  Pentecost
(see  Gifts,  Spiritu.m.).

In  a  still  higher  degree  must  the  discourse  of  Peter
in  .\ctsl  16-22  be  regarded  as  entirely  the  work  of  the
author  (see  Acts,  §  14).

Instead  of  Tw<r^<^  in  Actsl23,  there  is  some  (though
inferior)  authority  for  'Iwcr^s,  a  reading  due  perhaps  to
a  conjecture  that  the  '  brethren  of  Jesus  '  named  in  Mk.
6 3  were  of  the  numter  of  the  Tw ehe  ;  the  same  con-
jecture, if  in  Acts  1 23  the  reading  Toxr?)^  be  retained,
appears  to  find  support  in  the  fact  that  in  Mt.  1855  the
brother  of  Jesus  in  question  is  called,  not  as  in  Mk.  63
'luffrjs,  but  according  to  the  best  MSS  'liO(7ri(p.  The
assumption,  however,  is  quite  inadmissible  (see  Clopas,

§§  4.  5)-

According  to  Papias  (Eus.  HE  iii.  SOg),  Justus
Barsabas  drank  deadly  poison  with  impunity.  From
the  fifth  century  onwards  he  is  named  as  one  of  the
seventy  of  Lk.  lOi  ;  in  the  list  of  these  preserved  in
Chron.  Pasch.  (Bonn  ed.  i.  400)  he  is  identified  with
Thaddaius  =  Lebb:i.'us  ;  in  that  of  Pseudo-Dorotheus
{ih.  ii.  128),  with  Jesus  Justus  (Col.  4  11),  to  whom  the
.see  of  I'^leutheropolis  is  assigned.  In  the  Passio  Patili
(attributed  to  Linus,  but  really  dating  from  the  5th  or
6th  cent.)  '  Bar;/abas  et  Justus,'  in  another  redaction
'  Barnabas  Justus,'  and  in  a  third  6  '&a.p<ra^a.%  'loiVros,
are  enumerated  among  servants  of  Nero  w  ho,  converted
by  Paul,  are  cast  into  prison  and  condemned  to  death
by  the  emperor,  but  afterwards  released  after  an  appear-
ance of  the  risen  Paul  to  the  latter.  The  identification
of  this  Justus  with  the  biblical  Barsabas  seems  to  have


BARTACUS


irativcly  late  date. See  Lipsius,
01-3,  24  ;  ii. 1  94-96,  150,  161,


3.  Judas.


1.  In  NT.


Ixjon  made  at a c
Apokr. .[p.-i;esth.

281/

2.  Another  Rirs;il)l)as  called  Judas  appears  in  Acts
15 1'.-  (4.  along  with  Silas,  as  a  pronnnent  memlier  of  the
early  church  in  Jerusalem,  and  as  a  irpo-
07)ti7I— th.1t  is  to  say,  as  a  man  endowed
with  the  gift  of  ira/)d»,\i?(Tis  (see  Baknah.vs,  «}  i).  The
mission  asirilxxl  to  him — that  of  conveying  the  decree
of  thecouiuil  of  Jerusalem — caiuiot,  of  course,  Ix:  more
historical  than  the  decree  itself  (see  Coi.NCiL  OK  Jkku-
SAI.KM,  «i  lol.  1'.  W.  s.

BARTACUS  (Baptakoy  [r^A],  Bazakoy  TL],
BH/^.n  IS  (\\'.  I),  father  of  Apame.  a  concubine  of  Darius
(i  llsd.  129).  His  title  or  e|)itliet  rov  OavfxaaTOU  is
obscure.  Jos.  {.hif.  \i.  85)  gives  it  as  rov  dfixaaiov,
which  may  j)ossibly  Ik;  for  fjudecrrov  =  old  Pers.  iiiathista
(simply  'colonel'),  and,  at  any  rate,  is  hardly  a  mis-
understanding of  the  rav  dav/jiaffro?  in  i  Esd.  (RV  '  the
illustrious  M. '),  which  is  not  a  very  natural  epithet.
The  form  given  by  Josephus,  Pa^efaKOf  (cp  Syr.
tdaJf)  jusi).  seems  nearest  to  the  original  name,
whicli  was  probably  Artabazak.  Out  of  this  'Bartacus'
may  ha\e  arisen  in  this  way  :  the  MS  had  ^a^aKov,
and  over  the  first  four  letters  w.is  written  apra  a
correction  which  the  scribe  misunderstood  (so  Marc|.
/■■u.J.  65).

BARTHOLOMEW  (BarBoAomaioc  [Ti.  WH])  is
enumerated  in  Ml.  IO3  .\Ik.  3i8  l,k.  G14  Actsli3  (see
Aposti.k,  §  i)  as  one  of  the  twelve  apostles
of  Jesus.  The  second  portion  of  the  n.ime
represents  the  OT  proper  name  vocalised  by  MT  as
•p?n  {doXfJLfi  ;  for  the  variants  see  Tai.mai).  In
Josephus  {Anf.  x.x.  1  i  §  5)  the  name  Tholomaios  idoXo-
/wijos)  occurs  as  Ixjrne  by  a  roblx-r-chief  It  is  not
necessary  to  derive  from  Ptolemy  ( TrroXe /ua(os ) ;  the  tl
insteail  of  r  is  against  this,  though  the  second  0  for  e
presents  no  difficulty  (Winer,**'  §  5  20  a').  Bartholo-
mew may  have  teen  either  a  genuine  pro|)er  name  like
Barnabas,  Barjesus,  etc. ,  or  a  mere  addition  to  the  real
proper  name  of  the  Ix-arer,  given  for  the  sake  of  dis-
tinction, like  Simon  B.ar-jona  (cp  Barabbas,  §  2)  ;  on
the  latter  supposition  we  do  not  know  the  true  name  of
Bartholomew.  It  is  the  merest  conjecture  that  identifies
him  with  Nathanael  (see  Nathanaki.).  If  we  neglect
this  conjecture  the  NT  has  nothing  further  to  tell  us
about  Bartholomew.

Kcclesiastical  tradition  makes  him  a  missioii.-iry  to  the  most
widely  separated  countries,  and  attributes  to  him  a  variety  of
martyrdoms.  The  oldest  writer  from  whom  we  have
2.  Post-  an  account  of  him  is  Eusebius  (///•:  v.  10 3),  who
biblica,!.  represents  him  as  having  preached  in  India  (in  those
d.^ys  a  very  wide  geograpnical  expression,  including,
for  example,  Arabia  Felix),  and  as  having  left  behind  him  there
the  Gospel  according  to  Matthew  in  Hebrew  ;  but  Lipsius  (.-J/oX-r.
Afi.-gtsch.  ii.  2  54-108  ;  cp  Krgiinz.-heft.  130/!,  189-191),  from  the
closely  related  character  of  the  tr.^dition  regarding  him  and
Matthew,  assigns  an  earlier  date  to  a  tmdition  that  the  shores  of
the  iilack  Sea  were  the  scene  of  the  labours  of  both,  although
this  tradition  is  found  only  in  authors  later  than  Kusebius.
•  According  to  other  accounts,  he  preached  the  Gospel  among
the  Copts,  or  (with  Thomas)  in  Armenia,  or  (with  Philip)  in
Phrj'gia,  and,  after  the  death  of  Philip,  in  Lycaonia.  In  the
lists  of  the  apostles  his  name  is  always  coupled  with  that  of
Philip, — a  fact  which  makes  it  all  the  more  remarkable  that  in
this  group  of  legends  he  is  expressly  designated  as  one  of  the
'  seventy  '  disciples  of  Lk.  10 1.  On  the  other  hand,  the  Parthian
legend  which  gives  Mesopotamia  and  Persia  as  the  field  of
his  labours,  identifies  him  with  Nathanael.  A  heretical  Gospel
of  liartholomciv  is  mentioned  by  Jerome  in  his  preface  to  Mt.

P.  W.  S.

BARTIM^US  (B&RTIMAIOC  [Ti.  WH] ;  on  the
accent  see  IhIow,  §  2,  end),  the  name  of  the  blind
iK'ggar  whom  (according  to  Mk.  IO46-5  )
Jesus  healed  as  he  was  leaving  Jericho
for  Joru.salem.  The  parallel  narratives  of  Mt.  and  I  .k.
show  various  discrepancies  in  points  of  detail.  According
to  I,k.  1 8 35-43  the  healing  happened  as  Jesus  was  enter-
ing, not  when  he  was  leaving,  Jericho,  and  according

489


1.  Story.


BARTIM^US

to  Mt.  2O29-34  two  blind  men  were  heale<l.  It  might
perhaps  Ix;  suggested  that  each  of  the  two  evangelists,
or  at  least  Ml.,  was  thinking  of  some  occurrence  other
than  that  recorded  by  .Mk.  ;  but,  as  against  this,  the  very
close  coincidence  with  the  text  of  Mk.  shows  clearly  that
both  are  dealing  with  the  story  which  is  associated  in
Mk.  with  the  name  of  Bartinueus.

As  regards  this  pjirticular  class  of  miracle,  our  judgment  on
which  must  depend  on  our  doctrine  of  miracles  in  general,  so
much  at  least  may  Ije  remarked,  that  in  speaking  to  the  disciples
of  John  (Mt.  11  5-Lk.722)  of  his  giving  sight  to  the  blind,  and
other  similar  wonders,  Jesus  meant  to  be  understood  in  a
spiritual,  not  in  a  physical,  sense.  Otherwise  the  closing  words,
'and  to  the  ix>or  the  gospel  is  preached,'  would  have  no  force  ;
for  no  proof  of  supernatural  physical  power  is  involved  in  this
crowning  inst.ince.  It  is  plain,  however,  that  the  evangelists
understood  his  words  in  a  physical  sense.  For  in  Mt.  there  is
recorded,  Ijefore  the  account  of  the  message  to  John,  not  only
the  healing  of  a  leper  (81-4)  and  of  a  lame  man  (!*  i-8),  as  in  Lk.,
but  also  the  bringmg  to  life  of  Jairus's  daughter  (t»  18-76),  which
Lk.  records  after  that  message  (Lk. 840-56),  the  healing  of  a
KuK^dt  (t»32y.),  which  Mk.  does  not  record  at  all  and  which  Lk.
relates,  like  the  raising  of  Jairus'  daughter,  after  the  message  to
John  (11  14),  and,  alx)veall,  the  healing  of  two  blind  inen(927-3i),
which  does  not  apjiear  in  the  parallel  narratives.  It  thus  appears
that,  in  the  first  gospel,  instances  of  all  five  classes  of  miracle
are  recorded  as  liaving  occurred  before  Jesus  appeals  to  them  (if
we  may  disregard  the  consideration  that  in  Mt.932/;  icw^dt  is
used  in  the  sense  of  dumb  ;  while  Jesus  in  the  iness;ige  to  John
uses  it  in  the  sense  of  deaO-  Lk.,  on  the  other  hand,  in  whose
narrative  the  message  to  John  is  preceded  only  by  the  raising  of
the  widow's  son  at  Nain  (7  11-17),  in  addition  to  the  healing  of  a
leper  and  a  lame  man  (612-26)  relates  in  7 21  that  Jesus  wiought
upon  many  persons  in  the  presence  of  the  disciples  of  John  the
miracles  to  which  he  was  immediately  afterwards  to  api>eal.
Of  these  miracles  we  have  no  indication  in  the  other  evangelists.
The  conclusion  is  that  the  words  '  to  the  poor  the  gospel  is
(  preached  '  cannot  have  Iwen  the  addition  of  the  evangelists  or  of
I  any  of  their  predecessors.  The  words  destroy  the  uliysical-
supernatural  interpretation  which  the  evangelists  seek  to  put
1  upon  tlic  preceding  clauses.  They  are  the  authentic  words  of
I  lesus  himself,  and  they  prove  that  he  did  not  claim  to  be  a
healer  of  the  physically  blind.

Some  of  the  critics  who  argue  that  the  evangelists
have  misapprehended  Jesus's  words  do  not  deny  the
historicity  of  the  story  of  Bartima-us.  They  point
out  that,  in  .Mk.'s  narrative  at  least,  Bartinufus,
'  casting  away  his  garment,  sprang  up  and  came  to
Jesus'  (and  thus  cannot  have  been  completely  blind)  ;
also  that  the  event  helps  to  render  intelligible  the
popular  enthusiasm  at  the  entry  of  Jesus  into  Jerusalem
immediately  afterwards.  They  account  for  the  divergence
of  Lk.  by  pointing  out  that  for  the  story  of  Zacchieus
a  great  concoiir.se  of  [people  before  the  entry  of  Jesus  into
Jericho  is  reciuired,  and  that  the  evangelist  (erroneously)
iMilieved  this  to  have  been  due  to  the  healing  of  the
blind  man;  Mt.'s  divergence  they  account  for  by
supposing  that  he  had  fused  together  the  story  of
Bartim:tus  and  that  of  the  blind  man,  recorded  in  .Mk.
822-26,  which  he  had  previously  passed  over.  Finally,
they  apix-'al  to  the  express  mention  of  the  name  of  the
|)erson  healed — a  rare  thing  in  the  gospels — as  guaran-
teeing a  genuine  reminiscence.

This  last  argument  would,  of  course,  lose  its  validity

^  should  the  name  prove  to  be  no  real  name

■ but  merely  a  description.

.\ccording to Payne Smith's Thts. Syr. 588, 1461-2, the

Syrian  lexicographers  Bar  '.Mi  («>f/i  885  A.D.)and  F^lias  of  .Anbar

(circa  922)  interpret  Tinucus  as  meaning  blind  (sainya)  ;  similarly

Ownti. Sacr., ed. I.ag.<'' 17t>35; BaprifiotcK, vibt tvi^Aov  ;

and  Jerome  (A  6610)  even  gives  the  corrected  form  '  Harsemia

filius  c.x-cus ' and adds: 'quod et ipsurti conrupte  quidam

Hartima;um  legunt.' The  reading Barscmia,  however,  has  no

support  except  in  Barhebrxus  (0/1.  1286  A.i>.),  who  found  in  two

Greek MSS '  Samya  bar .Samya';! and the interpretation

1  The  reading  is  suspicious  for  the  very  reason  that  it  depends
on  that  of  the  Syriac  translation,  which  could  not  render  o  yib*
Ttfioi'ou  liapTiiiaioi  otherwise  than  by  the  awkward  and  meaning-
less repetition  of  13.  It  accordingly  left  o  «i<K  untranslated,  thus
making  Timaius  the  blind  man's  own  name,  and  designating
him  'D-p  13  'D't3  (so  in  Syr.  sin.  and  nearly  so  in  S>t.  hr.  ;  cp
Land,  Anec.  4  141  :  'JtOTJ  13  'KS't:)-  This  might  be  held  to
indicate  that  the  combination  o  uib?  Tt^iou'ov  BopTijiaiot  cannot
be  due  to  the  evangelist,  who  habitually  introduces  the  Greek
translation  of  an  Aramaic  expression  by  o  «<7t<i'  (8:7  7  11  34)  or
o  «<rTii'  ixe0cl>^irii'*v6iiLeyov  (641  15i2  34).  Thus  o  vw  Ti(ia»ou  is
the  m.irginal  note  of  some  very  ancient  reader.

400


BARUCH


'blind'  cannot  be  establi>licd.  Hilzig,  who  upholds  it,  has
only  inferred  an  Aramaic  <De,  '  to  be  blind,"  as  lieing  the  inter-
mediate step  between  the  Syr.  sfiiil  and  the  Arabic  '  amiya
of  tliis  meaning  (in  Merx's  Arvhiv,  1  \oj/.,  and  Kritik  fauli-
nischer  Brie/e,  1870,  p.  q/.);  but  the  inference  is  not  sound.
It  would  appear,  then,  that  the  .incient  interpretation  'blind'
was  hit  upon  simply  because  Tut/)A6s  stootl  near.  Neubauer
{Stud.  Bib.  1  57;,  without  expressing  any  view  as  to  the
etymology,  gives  KD"n  13  as  the  origfnal  forjn.  This  rests,
however,  only  on  the  writing  of  the  name  in  some  MSS  of  the
Vet.  Lat.  with  th  inste.-id  of  t,  and  the  termination  -cas  instead  of
•{Fus, — to  which,  however,  the  unaniinous  testimony  of  the  Greek
MSS  is  surely  to  be  preferred  (only  D  has  Bopirei/iiai).  Thus  the
most  likely  rendering  of  the  name  would  be  'KSa  "a,  '  son  of
the  unclean.'

.\:ccptinx  this  interpret.-ition,  Volkmar  still  regarded  the  name
ns  only  a  description  of  the  actor  in  the  story.  Uncleaniie^s,
he  argued,  is  the  characteristic  of  the  Gentile  world  ;  wh.-it
Mk.  means  to  say  is,  not  that  an  individual  man,  but  that  the
whole  Gentile  world,  is  freed  from  spiritual  blindness  by  Jesus —
that  is,  by  the  preaching  of  his  gospel  {Marcus  u.  d.  Syni>/>se,
422,  502-6,  675,  TiiJ.  \  Jesus  A'azarrniis,  266 yC).  But  in  the
sight  of  Christianity,  Judaism,  as  well  as  heathenism,  is  blind,
and  Volkmar  linds  Judaism,  too,  represented,  in  the  blind  man
whose  healing  is  described  in  an  e.irlier  chapter  (.Vlk.  822-26  ;
see  Marcus,  338  yC,  403-11;  Jesus  i\azarcnus,  243-5).  The
text,  however,  supplies  not  the  slightest  indication  or  hint  that
in  the  one  place  the  Jews,  in  the  other  the  Gentiles,  are  intended  ;
in  fact,  as  H.artim.-cus  uses  the  words  'son  of  David'  and
'  Rabbuni,'  Volkmar  finds  himself  constrained  to  pronounce  him
not  a  Gentile  in  the  full  sense  of  the  word,  but  a  proselyte —
thereby,  however,  destroying  his  own  position,  which  is  that
the  two  healings  t.aken  tojjether  express  the  deliverance  by  the
gospel  of  the  whole  of  humanity  from  spiritual  blindness.

We  nre  shut  up,  then,  to  the  conclusion  that  Bartimaaus
is  a  proper  name  like  Barnabas,  Barjesus,  and  the  like,
and  it  is  a  nii^ltrr  of  indifference  whether  the  second
element  be  tlic  appellative  "Npa,  '  unclean,'  or  the
personal  name  'q-j  (I^evy,  Neiihcbr.  Woricrh.  2  154).^
or  the  place  natne  n':d'j  {ih.  166),  or  the  second  part  of
the  Syriac  place-name  -^-j  rra  {Thes.  Syr.  486,  1462),
and  whether  any  or  all  of  the  last  three  forms  admit
of  being  traced  to  a  Jew  isIi-Arnmaic  root  n"t:.  '  to  close
up'  (Syr.  CO::)-

Uarlimffius  remains  a  proper  name,  also,  if  the  second  part  of
it  be  supposed  to  be  the  Greek  name  Ti/tatos  (found,  e.g.,  in
Plato).  Orijen  seems  to  have  had  this  derivation  in  his  mind
when  he  called  Bartimjeus  6t)(9  ti^tjj  €7raii'ii/xo«.  Such  a  blending,
however,  of  Aramaic  and  Greek  is  imlikely.  On  the  other
hand,  it  is  not  impossili'.e  that  the  Greek  word  rn.ay  have  had
influence  on  the  accent.  With  a  Semitic  derivation  this  would
naturally  be  Bapri/iaio?,  as  in  MarSatos,  Zaxx^'O?,  and  so  forth.
But  just  as,  on  the  analogy  of  the  very  common  Greek  termina-
tion -ai/o?,  the  accepted  pronunciation  of  Urbanus  and  Silvanus
was  OupiSavos  and  liAouapos  (Koin.  169  2  Cor.  1 19),  although  in
Latin  the  accent  lay  on  the  penultimate,  so  conceivably  the
name  tmder  consideration  may  have  been  accented  Bapri'/oiaios,
even  witliout  supposing  it  to  be  etymologically  derived  from  the
Greek.

For  the  philology  see,  especially.  Nestle,  Afarg.  u.  Mat.,  1893,
pp.  83-92,  and  for  the  subject  in  general,  Keim,  Cesch.  Jcs.  z<oii
Naz.  3  51-54  (Er«  61-64).  P.  W.  S.

BARUCH  (^•n.J,  'blessed  [of  God]';  BaroyX
[BXAQ]  ;  BApOYX'^C  [Jos.]),  son  of  Xeriah  and  brotlicr
of  Sek.MAH  (y.f. ,  4),  one  of  Jeremiah's  most  faitJiful
friends  in  the  upper  class  of  the  citizens  of  Jerusalem
(cp  Jos.  Ant.  X.  9i,  ii^  iina-riuov  ctjiodpa  oiKiai).
We  he.ar  of  Baruch  first  in  604  n.c.  as  the  scribe  who
committed  to  writing  the  prophecies  delivered  by  his
master  up  to  that  date,  and  then  in  603  B.  C.  (?)  as
the  fearless  reader  of  those  prophecies  before  the
people,  the  princes,  and  the  king  (Jer.  36).  After  the
roll  from  which  he  read  had  been  burned,  Baruch
wrote  down  the  substance  of  the  former  roll  afresh
—a  fact  not  without  significance  for  .  the  criticism
of  the  Book  of  Jkkkmiah  il-v-)-  In  587  B.C.,  it  was
to  Baruch  that  Jeremiah  when  in  prison  committed
the  deeds  of  the  land  which  he  purchased  from  his
cousin  Hanamel  at  Anathoth  (32 12),  and  after  the  fall
of  Jerusalem  it  was  this  faithful  scribe  who  was  charged

1  Thi.s  personal  name  r^TSt  however,  is  not  certainly  made
out,  for,  according  to  I)alman(7Vj.(?/.  Lil.-Blatf,  1893,  p.  in/.,
and  Aram.  u.  neuheir.  U'orter/iuc/i,  1898,  p.  162),  in  the  sole
proof-text  cited,  the  reading  in  the  first  edition  is  "DT.  which  he
explains  from  jiyae''

491


BARUCH,  BOOK  OF

with  having  induced  Jeremiah  to  dissuade  his  country-
men from  seeking  a  refuge  in  Egypt  (43 3).  The
disciple  ap[x;ars  to  have  been  similar  in  character  to  his
master.  In  the  language  of  strong  emotion  he  com-
plained of  the  troubles  which  had  come  upon  him,  and
of  the  wandering  life  which  he  was  forced  to  lc:id.
'  Seekest  thou  great  things  for  thyself  [i.e.,  the  leader-
ship of  a  new  and  better  Israel)  ?  :  '  Seek  them  not '  was
the  answer  ;  for  still  worse  troubles  are  in  prospect ;
but  Baruch's  own  life  will  be  spared  (45 1-5  ;  cp  12 1-5).
We  may  be  thankful  for  this  brief  record  of  Baruch's
inner  life.  Its  genuineness  has  l>ecn  too  hastily  doubted :'
the  date  given  in  45 1  is,  of  course,  too  early  to  suit  the
contents,  and  must  be  interpolated  ;  but  the  prophecy
itself  is  altogether  in  character  with  Jeremiah.

No  other  trustworthy  facts  respecting  Harucli  have  reached  us
In  the  Midrash  .S/tir  /:a-S/iiri/ii  {on  Cant.  6  5)  and  in  Migilla
1 6;^,  he  is  said  to  have  been  the  teacher  of  Kzr.a  ;  and  the  Midrash
adds  that  Kzra  did  not  go  up  to  Jerusalem  directly  after  the
edict  of  Cyrus,  because  he  did  not  like  to  miss  the  instructions  of
his  teacher.  This  is  obviously  an  attempt  to  prove  the  unbroken
transmission  of  the  oral  tradition.  An  equally  great  and
equally  groundless  honour  was  conferred  on  IJ.aruch  when
liunsen  represented  him  as  the  'great  unnamed '  prophet  who
composed  Is.  40-1  f).  That  various  apocryphal  writmgs  claimed
Baruch  as  their  author  is  not  surprising  :  Ezra  and  Baruch,  the
two  great  scribes,  were  marked  out  for  such  distinctions. .See

Al'OCKVl'HA, § 20; Al'OCALVl'TIC LITERATURE, § i>  ff-, and

Baruch,  Book  of.

2.  In  list  of  Jud.ahite  inhabitants  of  Jerusalem  (see  Ezra,  ii.
§5^§i5[i]«);  Neb.  11  5. Not  mentioned  in  II  iCh.92^

3.  b.  /Cabbai  (or  Zaccai),  in  list  of  wall-builders  (see  Nehe.miah,
i/,  Ezra,  ii.  §§  16  [i],  15  d) ;  Neh.32o.

4.  Priestly  signatory  to  the  covenant  (see  Ezra,  i.  §  7) ;  Neh.
106  [7].  T.  K.  C.

BARUCH,  Book  of,  a  short  book  which  in  the  LXX  is

placed  immediately  after  Jeremiah,  and  is  reckoned  by

the  Roman  Catholic  Church  as one  of  the so-called

dcutero-canonical  writings.

Its  contents  may  be  summarised  as  follows  : —

(Chap.  1 1-2. )  The  book  is  said  to  ha\ e  been  written

.  P  i.  i  by  Baruch  the  son  of  Neriah  at  Babylon
1.  contents,  j^^  ^j^^  ^^^^^  y^^^.  ^^  ^j^^  ^^^^  ^^^^  j^^_

salem  was  burned  by  the  Chaldeans.

(Chap.  I3-14. )  Baruch  reads  his  book  in  the  presence
of  Jeconiah  [i.e. ,  Jehoiachin),  the  son  of  Jchoiakim,  king
of  Judah,  and  in  the  presence  of  the  other  Jewish  e.xiles
who  dwell  at  Babylon  by  the  river  Sud  ( lovh  [?]).  After
mourning  and  fasting,  they  send  money  to  Jerusalem  to
the  priest  Jehoiakim  ('Itoa/cet/i),  the  son  of  Hilkiah,  com-
manding him  to  offer  sacrifices  in  lx"half  of  Nubuchodo-
nosor  (Nebuchadrezzar)  king  of  Babylon  and  his  son
Belshazzar,  in  order  that  Israel  may  find  ntercy.  .\t
the  same  time,  the  Jewish  e.xiles  send  the  following  book,
which  is  to  be  read  publicly  on  feast  days  in  the  Temple.

(Chaps.  1 15-38. )  This  section  is  a  confession  of  sin,
put  into  the  mouth  of  Israel  and  accompanied  by  prayers
that  God  will  at  length  pardon  his  people  whom  he
has  so  justly  punished.  Special  stress  is  laid  upon  the
sin  which  the  people  committed  in  refusing  to  serve  the
king  of  Babylon,  notwithstanding  the  solemn  injunctions
of  the  prophets.

(Chaps.  39-59. )  Now  follows  a  discourse  addres.setl
to  the  Israelites  dispersed  among  the  Clentiles.  It  begins
by  showing  that  the  calamities  of  the  people  are  due
to  their  having  forsaken  God,  the  only  source  of  wisdom,
and  'then  proceeds  to  console  them  with  promises  of
restoration — Jerusalem  will  be  gloriously  re-establishe<l
for  ever  and  ever,  and  the  oppressors  of  Israel  are  to
be  humbled  to  the  dust.

It  will  be  seen  that  the  book  is  very  far  from  present-
ing the  appearance of  an org.inic  unity. After  the

_  .. heading  of  chap.  1,  '  These  are  the  words

2.  integrity.  ^^  ^^^  ,^^j.  ^^.^;^j^  Baruch  wrote,'  etc..
we  might  e.xpect  the  bt>ok  itself  to  follow  immediately  ;
but,  instead  of  this,  we  have  a  long  account  of  the  effect
produced  upon  the  people  by  the  reading  of  the  book.
Nor  are  we  clearly  informed  whether '  the  book '  sent

1  Schwally,  ;?/<r/r8  2i7.
402


BARUCH,  BOOK  OP

by  the  Jewish  exiles  to  Jerusalem  (1 14).  which  they
cite  at  full  length  in  tlu-  following  section  (1  is-38),
is  or  is  not  identical  with  '  the  hook  '  written  by  Haruch.
Moreover,  the  historical  situation  descril)e<l  in  the
narrative  (l3-«3)  does  not  agree  very  well  with  the  sub-
sec|ucnt  portion,  since  the  narrative  assumes  the  con-
tinued existence  of  the  temple,  whereas  2  26  implies
its  destruction,  l-'inally,  the  discourse  which  occupies
all  the  latter  half  of  the  book  lx.'gins  quite  abruptly  and
stands  in  no  definite  relation  to  what  precedes  :  it  pre-
supposes, indeed,  the  dispersion  of  Israel  ;  but  to  Haruch
aiifl  to  the  s[)ccial  circumstances  of  the  liabylonian
captivity  tiiere  is  no  allusion.

To  these  general  considerations  may  l)e  added  several
difliculties  of  detail.  The  date  given  in  1 2  is  so  ob-
scurely worded  that  several  modern  conunentators  [e.g. ,
I'.wald  and  Kiieucker)  have  felt  oblijjvd  to  emend  the
text.  Kven  if  the  omission  of  the  month  >k;  explained,
we  still  have  to  decide  whether  '  the  fifth  year  '  means
the  fifth  year  of  Jcconiah's  captivity  or  the  fifth  year
after  the  burning  of  Jcrusalen)  ;  and  to  both  views  there
are  .serious  objections.  Chap.  18  disturbs  the  sense,
and  if  it  be  genuine  must  originally  have  stood  in  some
other  place.

Though  the  Hook  of  Haruch  never  formed  part  of  the
Hebrew  Canon (for  which  reason  Jerome excluded it
from  his  Latin  translation  of  the  Hible),  it


3.  Origin.


regarded  as  authentic  by  many  of  the


Christian  fathers,  from  the  second  century  onwards.
Sometimes,  owing  to  the  place  which  it  occupies  in  the
LXX,  it  is  cited  as  a  part  of  Jeremiah.  I-".ven  in  quite
recent  times,  it  has  been  maintained  by  Roman  Catholic
theologians  that  the  book  is  a  translation  of  a  genuine
work  of  the  well-known  Haruch,  the  friend  and
secretary  of  the  prophet  Jeremiah.  .\11  competent
critics,  however,  have  long  ago  concluded  that  it  dates
from  a  very  nmch  later  period,  and  belongs  to  the
large  class  of  Jewish  books  which  were  put  forth
under  false  names.  Its  origin  and  history  remain,  how-
ever, in  some  respects  obscure.  That  1 15-!?  8  and  89-
5g  are  by  different  authors  is  generally  acknowledged  :
Ixjth  in  substance  and  in  style  there  is  a  marked  con-
trast, the  language  of  the  former  section  tx-ing  simple
and  full  of  Hebraisms,  while  that  of  the  latter  is  highly
rhetorical.  The  dates  of  the  various  parts,  however,  and
the  (|uestion  whether  the  whole  or  any  part  was  originally
written  in  Hebrew  are  matters  about  which  critics  dilTcr.
Ewald  ascriljed  the  first  half  (1  i-38)  to  a  Jew  living  in
Babylonia  or  Persia  under  one  of  the  latter  Acha-menian
kings,  and  regarded  the  rest  of  the  lx)ok  as  having  been
written  soon  after  the  capture  of  Jerusaleiu  by  Ptolemy
Soter  (320  H.c. )  ;  4  32  ICwald  explained  as  a  reference  to
the  depwrtation  of  Jews  to  Alexandria.  Very  few  critics,
however,  are  now  in  favour  of  so  e;irly  a  d.ate.  Kneucker
thinks  that  the  work,  in  its  original  form,  was  com-
posed in  the  reign  of  Domitian,  and  consisted  of  only  the
heading  [i.e.,  1 1  2  in  part,  3),  and  the  discourse  contained
in  89-59  ;  the  confession  of  sin  (1 15-88)  was,  according
to  Kneucker,  probably  written  a  little  earlier  (in  any  ca.se
after  the  year  73  of  our  era)  as  an  independent  work,
and  was  subsequently  inserted  into  the  Hook  of  Haruch
by  a  scribe,  who  himself  composed  I4-14.  Schtirer,  on
the  contrary,  whilst  admitting  that  the  middle  of  chap.  1
does  not  harmonise  very  well  with  what  precedes  and
follows,  thinks  it  on  the  whole  probable  that  all  the  first
half  of  the  book  (1  i-38)  is  by  the  same  author,  whom
he  places  soon  after  the  destruction  of  Jerusalem  (70
A.I).),  the  second  half  lieing  by  a  different  hand  but  of
about the same period.  With  reg.ard to the

original  Language,  Ewald,  Kneucker,  and  others  believe
the  whole  to  be  a  tran.slation  from  the  Hebrew,  whilst
Bertholdt,  Hiivernick,  and  Noldcke  regard  the  Greek
as  the  primitive  text.  Fritzsche,  Hilgenfeld,  Reuss,  and
Schiirer  maintain  the  theory  of  a  primitive  Hebrew  text
in  the  ca.se  of  the  first  half  only.  In  favour  of  this
hypothesis,  it  may  be  mentioned  that  on  the  margin  of

493


BARZILLAI

the  Syro-Hexaplar  text  of  Haruch  tlure  are  three  notes
by  a  scribe  .stating  that  certain  words  in  1  17  and  23
are 'not  found  in  the  Hebrew' (cp  Ai'<x.KVi'H.\,  §  6

As  to  the  question  of  historical  credibility,  it  is  obvious
that  if,  with  the  majority  of  critics,  we  .ascribe  the  Ixjok
_. .  ,  to  the  Roman  period,  its  value  as  a  record

valu  "''  ^'^"^^  '"*  reduced  to  nothing. Whether,

for  example,  the  statements  aljout  Haruch's
residence  in  Habylon,  the  river  i;oi55,  and  the  priest
Jehoiakim  are  based  upon  any  really  ancient  tradition
it  is  impossible  for  us  to  decide.  The  author  of  the
first  h.alf  borrows  largely  from  Jeremiah  and  from  Daniel ;
in  the  second  half  we  find  many  reminiscences  of  Job
and  of  the  latter  part  of  Isaiah  ;  and  it  may  Ix-  that
sources  now  lost  also  were  employed.  It  is  par-
ticularly important  to  observe  that  the  closing  passage
(4  se-.'jg)  Ijears  a  striking  resemblance  to  one  of  the  pieces
in  the  so-called  '  Psalms  of  .Solomon'  (Ps.  11 — see  the
edition  of  Ryle  and  James,  pp.  Ixxii.-lxxiv. ),  which  prob-
ably date  from  alxjut  the  middle  of  the  first  century  H.c.
Since  there  is  every  reason  to  believe  that  the  Psalms
of  Solomon  were  originally  composed  in  Hebrew  (cp
ArocAiAPTic,  Sj  83),  the  close  verbal  agreement  sc-ems
to  indicate  th.at  the  author  of  this  part  of  Haruch
u.sed  the  Psalms  of  .Solomon  in  their  present  Greek
form.

The  most  important  of  iht  M.SS  containing  the  Greek  text

ofI?arucharel!,A,.indthc.M.nrchali.-inus(9). In  K  this  book  Is

missing. Fritzsche's  edition  of  llie  Apocrypha

5.  Texts  and  (LiOriafocryphiveteristestaiiientigrtrn,  1871)

COmm.  Aoa  not  accurately  represent  the  H  text  of
Haruch  ;  but  trustworthy  information  about  this
M.S  may  be  obtained  fiom  Swcte's  Septuagint  iii.,  in  the  pre-
paration of  which  the  photograuhic  reproduction  of  H  was  used.

The  ancient  versions  are— (i)  the  old  l^atin,  contained  in  the
editions  of  the  Vg.;  (2)  another  Latin  version,  first  published  a^
Rome  in  1688  l)y  Joseph  M.iria  a  Caro  'lonun.asi  ;  (3)  the  Old
Syriac,  eilii,ril  !>  r.iul  de  Lagarde  in  his  Lihri  vetrris  tista-
tiwnti  ,'.  '.ue, i8cii, from a ,M.S in the Hritish

Museiii  ;  (  t)  the  Syro-Hexaplar-  /.c,  the  .Syriac

translat  I  lexaplaric  text— contained  in  the  Cotlex

.•\mbr()-.i  VIS  rcprotluced  in  photo -lithography  by

Ceriani  in  1-71  ;  (5)  the  I'ahiopic- a  much  abridged  form  of  the
text — ed.  by  IJillmann  (Herlin  1804)  in  the  5th  vol.  of  his  Vitus
'li-staiuentutii  ./Etliiopictim  ;  (6)  the  .Armenian,  of  which  the  best
edition  is  cont.iined  in  the  .\rmenian  Itible  published  at  Venice
in  1805  ;  (7)  the  Coptic,  edited  by  Rrugsch  in  ZA  x.-xii.

Of  modern  commentaries  the  most  valuable  are  those  of
FritTsche  (in  KurTgef.  HaitJh.,  1851),  Reusch  (ErkUirung  ties
Buchs  Baruch,  1853),  Kwald  (Proplutcn  lies  alien  Bumies,i.'i)
iii.  1867-68),  Kneucker  (Das  Buck  Baruch,  1879),  and  Gifford
(in  Wace's  Apoctyf"!'**,  1888).  The  best  general  .accoimt  of  the
book  will  be  found  in  .Schiirer  iCJl',  1886-00,  ii.  pp.  721-726,
ET).  The  reader  may  consult  also  Hertnoldt  (Kinltitung,
1812-19,  pt.  iv.),  Hiivernick  (De  lihro  Baruclii  covimentatio
critica,  1843),  Hitzig  (in  XUT  3262-273),  Hilgenfeld  (//■/>/.  5
199-203,  -22437-454,  '23412-422),  NOldeke  (ATliche  Lit.,  1868,
p.  214  n.),  Reuss  (Cesch.  d.  hciligen  Schri/len  ATs.^-)  1890),
and  the  article  on  this  book  in  Smith's  DB,^)  1893— an  article
valuable  chiefly  on  account  of  the  additions  made  by  Prof.  Ryle,

In  many  MS.S  and  printed  editions  the  apocryphal  Kpislle  of

Jeremiah  is  appended  to  Haruch,  and  it  is  reckoned  in  the  Vg.  as

the  sixth  chapter  of  the  book.  The  Kook

6.  Appendices, of  Haruch  is  not  to  l>e  confounded  with  the

Apocalypse  0/  Baruch  (see  Aiocai.yptic
LiTERATURK,  §  sff-)-  The  work  known  as  'The  Rest  of  the
words  of  Baruch,'  ext.-int  in  CJreek,  P^thiopic,  and  Armenian,
seems  to  be  a  ChristL-in  imitation  of  the  Apocalypse  of  Haruch.
We  possess,  moreover,  a  third  apocalypse  of  Baruch  extant  in
Greek  and  in  Slavonic,  and  a  fourth  extant  only  in  l-thiopic
The  Greek  text  of  the  former  has  been  published  by  James  in
his  Apocrypha  Anecdota,  second  series  [ '97 )(/V.r/i aw*/. '>7»«//m,
vol.  5,  no.  1),  where  some  information  will  be  found  also  about
the  Ethiopic  apocalypse  (Hi.).  A.  A.  B.

BARZILLAI  C^T")?  ;  BepreAA[e]i  [HXAL]).  The
meaning  can  scarcely  be  '  iron.'  for  such  a  name  would
be  without  a  parallel.  According  to  Nestle  (/.DFV
15257; cp  Kampfmeyer,  ib.  9),  the  name  is  .Aramaic

('son of ?'); but the latter part of  it is still

obscure.

I.  A  wealthy  Gileadite  of  Rogflim,  who  Ix^friended
David  in  his  flight  from  Absalom  at  Mahanaim  (a.S.
1727).  He  refused  David's  offer  to  live  at  the  court  at
Jerusalem, but entrusted to him his son Chimmam

494


BASALOTH

{f.v.  ;  2  S.  1932^). David  on  his  death  recomnu-ndod
the  sons  of  Barzillai  to  Solomon  (i  K.  27).

2.  A  Oileadite  [see(3)],  Ezra  2 61  l>{$fp^t\KaU]i.  [h],  -AAai  [ A))-^^
Neh.  7  63  i^  (-AAa  lA])=i  Ksd.  5  38 /-  (Hkkzki.us,  RV  Zokzhi.-
LEUS,  RV'i'B-  VHM7.y.l.UMv^;  4>ar)ie\Saiov  [H],  ^op^tWtov  |A]).

3.  A  man  who  married  one  of  the  daughters  of  (2)  and  changed
his  name  to  Harzillai.l  In  post-exilic  times  the  b'ne  Karzillai
were  among  those  deposed  from  tlie  priesthood  because  they  were
unable  to  prove  their  pedigree.  In  i  Ksd.  .'138  the  original  name
of  the  founder  of  the  family  is  s.iid  to  have  betn  Jauuus,  AV
Anns  (laSfious  [I?),  lO&S.  [A])— i.e.,  Jaddua  (cp  Jos.  An/,  xi.  84  ;
laSSous) ;— but  in  the  parallel  p.-\ssages  he  is  simply  called  Bar-
zillai; Ezra26i«  (^ap/SeA^ei  [H],  ^ep/SeAAat  [A])=  Neh.  V  (3  «
OepfeAAat  [.\]),  and  so  L  in  i  Esd.  5  38  (^»p^cAAet).  The  Siime
passage  gives  Augia  as  the  name  of  his  wife.

4.  A  man  of  Abel-meholah  (not  far,  therefore,  from  Gilead),
whose  .son  .\ukiki,  (i/.t.)  also  has  been  thought  to  bear  an
Aramaic  name  (2  .S.  - 1  k).

BASALOTH  (BaaAcoB  |A]), i  Esd.  531  =  Ezra 'J  52.

BAZMTH,  q.l\

BASCAMA  (Backama  [ANY];  Backa.  Jos.  -/;//.
xiii.  t)),  an  unknown  place,  in  Gilead,  where  Jonathan
the  .\Iaccabee  was  put  to  death  by  Trvpho  (i  Mace.
1,323).  Furrer's  identification  (/.DPVV2.  151)  with  /dV/-
liazitk  on  the  W.  Goramaye  (to  the  IC.  of  the  extreme  N.
of  Lake  Tiberias)  is  precarious  (see  Buhl,  J'al.  241).
luiually  unsukstantiated  is  the  identification  witii  Bk-
ZKK,  i.

BASE.  For  n:i33,  .1332.  m'khondh,  the  word  em-
])!oyei.I  to  denote  the  structure  upon  which  each  of  Solomon's
lavers  rested  (i  K..  7  27  /:  30  32  m  /■  7,1  ff-  ^'^  /■  '•  2  K-  1''  '7
L'r>  13  16  2  Ch.  4  14,  ^itx"*'"'^  [sing,  and  pi.]  ;  Jer.  27  (34J  ig  om.
KNA,  it.^x'^vuiB  [Theod.]  ;  Jer.  52  17  fia.(T(i.<;  [BNQF]),  see  I.avkr  ;
also  for  J3,  ken,  Ex.  31 9  etc.,  RV  [AV  'foot'].  For  -t,
r.lrc/ck,  Ex.  2.53,  37  17  RV  [.\V  'shaft'],  see  Candlfistick,
S  2,  n.  3  ;  and  for  3:1,  .^r?/',  Ezek.  4.i  13  RV,  .see  Ai.tak,  §  1 1.

BASEMATH  (n!?l"3),  Gen.  863  RV  ;  AV  B.xshk-


BASEMENT  (Pinil.
\\  kmp:n  r.


>,.  41  S RV. .See  G.vbhatha,


BASHAN  (|y'3,  always  in  prose  [except  iCh.'(2'3],
and  sometimes  also  in poetry,  with  the  art.  pj-^n  :  the

1  Namp appellative sense of the word, to judge

from  the  Arab,  bitfhaitiat"",  was  probably
'  fertile,  rich  and  stoneless  soil'  :  see  Wetzstein,  in  Del.
J/iob^^)  [.\pp.],  556/  :  6"'^'- iSao-aj'  or  i)  ^aaave'iTu),
the  name  of  the  broad  and  fertile  tract  of  country
on  the  E.  of  Jordan,  bounded  (somewhat  roughly)
on  the  .S.  by  the  Varmuk  and  a  line  passing  through
l-".dre'i  and  Salchah  (mentioned  as  torder  cities  in
l)t.  3io),  on  the  !•"..  by  the  imposing  range  of  extinct
volcanoes  called  the  Jebel  H.auran,  on  the  W.  by
Geshur  and  .M.a'acah  (see  Josh.  I25),  and  on  the  N.
stretching  out  towards  Hermon  (cp  Dt.  8822  :  see
further,  on  the  limits  of  Bashan,  Guthe,  ZDPV,  1890,
pp.  231-4).  The  name  (in  its  Gk.  form  Maravaia.,-
and  its  Arabic  form  Bathaiiiyeh'^)  was,  however,  after-
wards restricted  to  the  southern  portion  of  the  area  thus
defined,  other  parts  of  the  ancient  '  Bashan  '  being  dis-
tinguished as  Tk.Vchomtis  [q.v.) — i.e.,  the  remarkable
pear-shaped  volcanic  formation  in  the  NE.  now  called
the  Leja — .\uranitis  (probably  the  Jetiel  Hauran  and
its  environs  in  the  SE. ),  and  (iaulanitis  (which,  how-
ever, may  have  included  parts  of  Geshur  and  Ma'acah,
beyond  the  limits  of  Ba,shan  proper)  in  the  West.  The
principal  part  of  the  Bashan  of  the  OT  must  have
been  the  broad  rolling  prairie  now  called  by  the  Be-
dawln  en-Nukra,  a  word  properly  denoting  the  '  hollow
hearth  '  dug  by  the  Bedawi  in  the  middle  of  his  tent,
and  applied  to  this  great  plain  because, though  it  is

J  The  adoption  of  the  family  name  of  the  wife  suggests  that
she  was  an  heiress.

2  See  Schurer,  GJV  1  353.

3  Wetzstein,  Hauran,  83-88,  and  in  the  app.  to  Del.  Ih'ob,!!^)
553-558,  where  it  is  .shown  also  that  the  modern  '  'ard  el-
Bathanlyeh,'  or  '  L.and  of  Bathaniyeh,'  is  the  name  of  a  com-
paratively small  district  N.  of  the  Jebel  Hauran  and  E.  of  the
Leja,  which  can  never  (as  was  supposed  bj-  Porter  and  others)
have  formed  part  of  either  Bashan  or  the  province  of  Baravaia.

495


BASHAN

some  1800-2000  ft.  alx)ve  the  level  of  the  sea,  it  forms
a  depression  between  the  hilly  Jaulan  (across  the  Nahr
er-Rukkad)  on  the  W. ,  the  Zunileh  range  on  the  S. ,  and
the  Jebel  Hauran  and  the  Leja  on  the  E. :'  the  S.  and
SE.  part  of  en-Nukra  also  bears  the  special  name  of
Haukan  (q.7'.).

Bashan,  as  defined  al)Ove,  is  distinguished  geologically
from  the  country  .S.  of  it.  The  Yarmuk  forms  a  natural
2.  Character.  j"^«l'"g  1'"^'  «"  '^e  S.  of  which  the
limestone  comes  to  the  surface,  while
on  the  N.  it  is  covered  by  volcanic  deposits.  Jel)el
Hauran,  on  the  .SE. ,  is  simply  a  range  of  extinct  vol-
canoes ;  volcanic  peaks  extend  from  N.  to  .S.  in  Jaul.an,
along  the  edge  of  the  Jordan  valley,  on  the  W.  ;2  and
there  are  isolated  volcanic  hills  in  other  parts  of  the
country.  The  Leja,  that  strange  '  petrified  ocean  '  NW.
of  the  Jebel  Hauran,  which  measures  some  25  m.  from
N.  to  S.  by  19  from  E.  to  V\\  (.see  Trachom Tl.s),
owes  its  origin  entirely  to  streams  of  basaltic  lava
emitted  from  the  Ghararat  el-Kibliyeh,  a  now  extinct
volcano  at  the  NW.  corner  of  the  Jebel  Hauran.  The
soil  both  of  the  slopes  of  the  Jebel  Hauran  and  of  the
Nukra  is  a  rich  red  loam,-''  formed  by  the  lava  scoria,
which  has  become  disintegrated  under  atmospheric
.action.  The  soil  thus  constituted  is  celebrated  for  its
fertility  :  the  best  corn  grows  upon  it,  and  in  summer
time  the  plain  is  co\  ered  far  and  wide  w  ith  waving  crops.
The  country  is,  however,  in  general  almost  entirely
destitute  of  trees  :  only  on  the  slopes  of  JeM  Hauran,
especially  in  its  central  and  southern  parts,  are  there
abundant  forests  of  evergreen  oak*  (cp  the  allusions  to
the  '  oaks  of  Bashan  '  in  the  OT  :  Is.  213  Zech.  11 2  Ez.
'276,  alsols.  339((5^raX[e]tXaia),  Xah.  I4).  In  ancient
times,  also,  it  must  have  supplied  rich  pastures  :  the
.strong  and  well -nourished  herds  of  Bashan  are  men-
tioned in  Ps.  22 13  [12]  {B  omits)  Am.  4  i  Ez.  39i8  (©
omits)  Dt.  32 14  (^  Taupwv)  ;  cp  also  Mic.  7  14  Jer.  0019
(©  omits).  The  lofty  conical  simimits  of  the  volcanoes
forming  the  Hauran  range  (cp  Porter,  183.  186,  190,  227,
250)  are  no  doubt  the  '  mountains  with  peaks,'  which  the
poet  of  Ps.68i6/ [15/]  pictures  as  looking  enviously
at  the  comparatively  unimposing  mountain  of  Zion.

The  principal  towns  of  Bashan  mentioned  in  the  OT
are  the  two  royal  cities  of  'Og  (Dt.  I4  Josh.  124  (Baffa
„ „  [B]), 'AsiiTAKOTii, now probably either

6.  lOWns.  ,pgjj  '.\5htera  or  Tell  'Ash'ari,  in  the  middle
of  en-Nukra,  and  Eukk'i,  now  Der'at,  on  its  S.  border,
(jOI,.\.\  (Dt.  443),  somewhere  in  the  W. ,  and  Salchah
(Dt.  3io),  now  Salchad,  a  frontier-fortress  in  a  com-
manding position  overlooking  the  desert  in  the  SE.
corner  of  Bashan,  S.  of  Jebel  Hauran.  Bosra,  l>etween
Edre'i  and  .Salchah,  though  not  mentioned  till  i  .Mace.
hriitff.  {tiodop  [AHV*];  but  see  BosoK),  also  was,  no
doubt,  an  important  place  :  the  site  is  still  marked
by  extensive  remains  belonging  to  the  Rom.an  age.
'  Threescore  fenc(;d  cities,  with  high  walls,  gates  and
bars,'  forming  the  kingdom  of  'Og,  are  likewise  men-
tioned in  Dt.  84  (ep  1  K.  413)  as  situate  in  the  'region
of  Argob,'  in  Bashan.  The  position  of  Argob,  and,
consequently,  the  positions  of  those  cities  as  well,  are
uncertain  (see  Akgoh,  1);  but  there  are  remains  of
many  ancient  towns  and  villages  in  these  parts,  esp>eci-
ally  in  the  Leja,  and  on  the  sloping  sides  of  the  Jebel
Hauran  ;  according  to  Wetzstein,  for  example  [Hauran,
42),  there  are  300  such  ancient  sites  on  the  F"-.  and  S.
slopes  of  the  Jelx;]  Haiir.an  alone.

The  dwellings  in  these  deserted  localities  are  of  a  remark.-\ble
char.-icter.  Some  are  the  habit.itions  of  Troglodytes,  being
caverns  hollowed  out  in  the  mountain-side,  and  so  arranged  as

t  Wetzstein,  Hauran,  St  n.,  HioS,  552;  GA.Sm.  HO  536 /C
See  the  excellent  map  of  this  district  published  in  the  ZDPV,
1800,  Heft  4,  chiefly  on  the  basis  of  .StuHel's  survey.

2  Schumacher,  Tliejauiiin,  18-20.

3  Wetzstein,  Hauran,  ^o/.  Cp  the  map  at  the  end  of  the
volume.

•»  Porter,  Fire  Years  in  Damascus,!^*  186,  190,  200,  202,  etc.  :
Ci.XSm.  Gtog.  613^  The  mountainous  region  of  Jaulan,  \V.  of
the  kukkad,  also  is  well  wooded.

496


4.  History.


BASHAN

to  form  separate  chambers  ;  these  are  found  chiefly  on  the  E.  of
the  Iel)cl  Hauran.  Others  are  subterranean  alKKles  entered  by
shafts  invisible  from  above  ;  these  are  frenuent  on  the  \V.  of  the
Ztimleh  ranjje,  and  at  Kdrei  the  dwellings  thus  cotisiructcd
form  quite  an  underground  iit\-.  Commonly,  the  dwelliii^^
are  built  in  the  ordinary  niaiiner  above  ground  ;  but  they
are  constructed  of  massive  well -hewn  blocks  of  black  basalt
— the  regular  and  indeed  the  only  building  material  used  in
the  country — with  heavy  doors  moving  on  pivots,  outside  stair-
cases, galleries,  and  roofs,  all  of  the  same  material;'  of  this
kind  are,  for  example,  the  houses  at  Burak,  on  the  N.  ed^e
of  the  Leja,  at  isauwarah,  El-Hazm,  Deir  Kileh,  Hiyat,  Hit,
Bathanlyeh,  Shakfi,  Shuhba,  K.  of  it,  l^anawfit  and  Suweidch,
on  the  vV.  slopes  of  Jeljel  Hauran,  Salchad,  Kureiyeh,  and
Hosra,  on  its  SK.  slope,  and  Nejran,  Ezra',  Khubab,  Dfiiiia,
ana  Mismeiych,  within  the  Leja  itself.-  Many  of  these  cities  are
in  such  a  nood  st.ite  of  preservation  that  it  is  dilTicult  for  the
traveller  to  realise  th.it  they  are  uninhabited,  and  in  the  Leja
especially,  where  the  ground  itself  is  of  the  same  dark  and
sombre  hue,  unrelieved  by  a  touch  of  green,  or  a  single  sign  of
life,  a  feeling  of  weirdness  comes  over  him  as  he  traverses  their
desolate  and  silent  streets.

The  arciiitecture  of  the  buildings  contain^-d  in  these
cities  (comprising  temples,  theatres,  aqueducts,  churclies,
etc.)  stamps  them  as  belonging  to  the  (.ira-co- Roman
age,  and  is  such  as  to  show  that  between  the  first  and
the  seventh  centuries  A.D.  they  were  the  home  of  a
thriving  and  wealthy  people.  May  any  of  these  cities
date  from  a  remoter  antiquity,  and  be  actually  the
fortified  places  pointed  to  with  wonder  in  Dt.  '^\f.  and
iK.  4i3?  'i"he  ciuestion  was  answered  in  the  atifirma-
tive  by  Porter^  and  by  C\Til  (jraham,"*  who  believed
that  they  had  really  rediscovered  the  cities  '  built  and
occupied  some  forty  centuries  ago '  by  the  giant  race  of
the  Rephilim  ;  but  this  view  cannot  be  sustained.  The
best  authorities  are  unanimous  in  the  opinion  that,
though  in  some  cases  very  ancient  building  materials  I
may  be  preserved  in  them,  the  e.xtant  remains  are  not,
as  a  rule,  of  a  date  earlier  than  the  first  century,  A.n.''  |
Dt.  84/.  and  1  K.413  are  sufficient  evidence  that  in  1
the  seventh  century  B.  c.  there  were  in  Bashan  strongly  ;
fortified  places  which  were  popularly  supposed  to  have
belonged  to  the  ancient  kingdom  of  Og  ;  but  none
of  the  existing  deserted  cities  can  be  as  ancient  as  this.
At  the  same  time,  it  is  not  improbable  that  some  of
the  cities  built  during  and  after  the  reign  of  Herod
inay  have  stood  upon  the  sites  of  cities  belonging  to
a  much  earlier  age,  and  that  in  their  construction  the
materials  employed  in  building  the  more  ancient  cities
may  in  some  cases  have  been  utilised  and  preserved.

As  regards  the  history  of  Bashan,  it  is  stated  in  Xu.
21 33-35  that  the  Israelites  after  their  concjuest  of  Sihon,
king  of  Heshlxjn,  turned  in  the  direction
of  liashan,  defeated  Og  its  king,  who
came  out  to  meet  them  as  far  as  his  frontier  fortress  of
F2drei,  and  took  possession  of  his  territory.  The
passage  is  in  the  context  of  JE  ;  but  it  agrees  so  closely,
in  form  as  well  as  in  substance,  with  Dt.  3 1-3,  that
Dillmann  and  other  critics  consider  this  to  have  l)een
its  original  i^lace,  supposing  it  to  have  been  inserted
afterwards  into  the  text  of  Xuml)ers  for  the  purpose  of
supplying  what  seemed  to  l>e  an  omission.  |

All  other  notices  of  the  same  occurrence  in  the  historical  books
are  Deuteronomic  (or  later):  Israel's  ancient  victories  over
'  Sihon  king  of  the  Amorites  and  Og  the  king  of  Bashan  '  being
two  national  successes,  to  which,  especially,  the  writers  of  the
Deuteronomic  school  were  never  weary  of  referring  (Dt.  1 4
Si/?:  447  296[7]  3I4  losh.  2  10  9  10  12  4/  13  11  A  i  K.  4  19  ;
see  also,  later,  Nu.  32  33[R),  Neh.  9  22 Ps  IS,',  ii  13t;  19/)

The  territory  of  Bashan  fell  to  the  possession  of  the
half-trilx;  of  Manasseh  ( Dt.  3  13  4  43  Josh.  13  29-31  [/iacrai/ei
^  ^-  3°])- Golan  and  Wshtaroth  are  stated  in  P  to  have

'  See  more  fully  Wetzstein,  Hauran,  \\ff.  \  on  Edrei,  also,
Schumacher,  Across  the  Jortian,  121^

■-'  See  for  particulars  Porter,  Damascus,  c\\a.\>'>.  10-14;  Heber-
Percy,  A  I  isit  to  Bashan  and  Argoh,  1895,  pp.  40,  47,  etc.  (with
photographs).

3  Damascus, i"^)  2577:,  263/.  ;  Giant  Cities  0/ Bashan,  12  yC
30,  etc.  t'821.

*  Cainbritige  Essays  for  1858,  p.  i6oyr

"  Wetzstein,  Hauran,  49,  lo^yi  :  Waddington,  Inscriptions
Grecques  et  Latines,  etc.,  iii.  1 534 ;  and  De  Vogui,  the
principal  authority  on  the  architecture  of  Hauran,  Syrie
Centrale,  Archit.  Civile  et  Relig.  4  (cited  in  Merrill,  East
of  Jordan,  63) ;  GASm.  HG  624.

32  497


BASHEMATH

Ix-en  l^vitical  cities  (Josh.  21 27,  cp  iCh.  656[7i])  ;  the
fornter  also  is  named  as  a  city  of  refuge  (Dt.  443  Josh.
208  21  27).

Bashan  played  no  prominent  part  in  the  history  ;  and
it  is  rarely  mentioned  in  a  historical  connection.  In
iK.  4i3  it  forms  one  of  S<jlomon's  commissariat  dis-
tricts ;  and  in  2  K.  10  33  it  is  included  in  the  enumera-
tion of  trans-Jordanic  regions  which  were  •  smitten  '  by
Hazael.  Its  inhabitants  may  l)e  presumed  to  have
.suffered,  like  their  neighljoiirs  in  CJile.ad,  on  other
occasions  during  the  .Syrian  wars,  and  finally  to  have
been  carried  into  exile  by  Tiglath-pileser  in  734  (2  K.
1529)  ;  but  in  neither  connection  are  they  expressly
mentioned.  .Apart  from  the  prehistoric  '  threescore
cities  ■  of  the  .\rgob,  settled  civilisation  appears  to  have
begun  for  the  region  of  Bashan  about  the  time  of  the
(Christian  era,  when  its  .Semitic  inhabitants  first  fell
under  Greek  and  Roman  influence.  The  most  im-
[xjrtant  event  in  the  history  of  the  country,  however,
was  its  incorporation  by  Trajan,  in  106  A.D.,  in  his
newly-founded  province  of  .Vrabia.  Then  it  was  that
Roman  culture  impressed  itself  visibly  upon  both  the
surface  of  the  country  and  the  character  of  its  in-
habitants ;  and  towns,  with  great  public  buildings,  of
which  the  remains,  as  descriljed  aV)ove,  survive  to  this
day,  sprang  up  in  every  part  of  it  and  continued  to
thrive  for  many  centuries.'

The  most  important  works  on  the  topography  of  J?ashan  are,
Wetzstein's  Reisebcricht iihcr /fauran und  die 'I'rachcnen

('60), and Ciuthe  and  Fischer's  art. in  the
6.  Literature. /.DP\',  1890,  Heft  4,  pp.  225--,o2  (containing

Dr.  Stubersiiin,-r;„v;.n,l  n,an,  .-m,!  nnm.-rous
biblioL;rrii)hical  references);  on  ^  '  ■  ■ i!m-  \ :'- i:!.

Schuiiiachtr,  Z/W,  i8g7,pi).  ■  .11. ., ..

Schumacher, Across  the  J  or. urn.  ; ; I'-hm, ...r

Years  in  Damascus;  GASni.  //.,  575//..  n,,  ,-/.  Inscnptiuns
(chiefly  Greek  and  Latin)  have  been  published  by  Wetzstein  in
the  ^M.  of  the  Berlin  Ac.  1863,  p.  255-368;  Waddington,  <?/.
cit.  Nos.  2071-2548;  Clermont-Ganneau,  Rccueild Arch.  Orient.
1  1-23;  GASm.  Crit.  A',T'.,  1892,  p.  iiff.\  \V.  Ewing,  DiiFQ,
1S95  (4  papers) ;  CIS'li,  fasc.  2,  \os.  162-193.  s.  K.  I).

BASHAN-HAVOTH-JAIR  (-|\V  nvin  |l''|n)  occurs
in  Dt.  3 14  (BAcceM&e  AytoG  iAeip[R*].  Bacan  ayooS
lAeip  [H-^'MvHi.)  (ut  vid.)  .\FL]),  where  A\'  renders,  'and
(Jair)  called  them  after  his  own  name,  Bashan-havolh-
jair.'  This  version  does  justice  to  the  present  text,  but
certainly  does  not  represent  the  mind  of  the  original
writer.  The  awkward  (indeed,  impossible)  expression
Bashan -havoth -jair  can  Ik.'  accounted  for  only  on  the
hypothesis  that  the  first  element  in  it  (Bashan)  is  a  mis-
placed gloss  from  the  margin.  RV  seeks  to  evade  the
difiiculty  by  rendering,  '  called  them,  even  Bashan,  after
his  own  name,  Havvotii-j.MK.'  On  the  geographical
difficulty  which  still  remains,  see  H.wvoTH-J.MK.

BASHEMATH,  or,  as  R\',  correctly,  Baskmatu
(n?py"3  =  Apoo/v\ATiNH  ?  §  54  ; BAce/v\MA.9  [-VD]).

Other  readings  are:  Gen.  2('>  ^4  na(re/a/u.oe  t.\K]  ^acreienafl
/)vid.  fjLaa-fOaix  [L  ;  elsewhere  PatTe/jLaO]  ;  :i('i  3  ^acre/n/aafl  |l)l;
/3a  .  .  .  |D| ;  4  fia<r(^iiJia9  [D\  fia.<r(6fi.a0  [K]  :  10  ^a<7-<Tt>iM«^IE] ;
1^  IJia<T€.  l.\]  iJ.aa-<r(ixa6  [DK];  17  u.a<T(uua6  [AE]  [^ajcrcuatf
[Dvid].

I.  Daughter  of  Ishmael,  and  wife  of  FIsau,  called
Mahai.ath  in  Gen.  289  and  Hittile  (eyMOy  [-^J  !
X'-.TfA.  [K];  xeTTA.  [L])  in  Gen.  2634  U'l  The
names  and  tribal  origin  of  Esau's  three  wives  are  given
twice  (cp  Anah)  :  by  P  in  Gen.  2634  289.  and  by  R  (?)
in  Gen.  362/  A  wife  Basemath,  and  descent  from
Ishmael  and  from  Elon  the  Hittite  occur  in  both
accounts  (see  Cainitks,  §  9),  but  differently  assigne<l  ;
while  the  other  names  have  no  connection  whatever  ;
thus —

P  Beeri- Hittite Elon-IlUtite  Ishmael

I  I  I

I.  Judith  2.  Basemath  3.  Mahal.ath

R  (or  J) Elon-Hittitc Zibeon-Hivite  Ishmael

I  I [Horite?]  I

I.  Adah  Anah  3.  Basemath

2.  Oholibamah


'  See,  further,  GASm.  HG  616^.
498


BASILISK

2.  (AV Rasmath,  RV  Basemath),  daughter  of  Solomon,

BASILISK,  RV  rendering  of  r3>*  (Is.  14 29).  ^^li^PV
(Is.  11  8),  for  which  AV  has  Cockatrice  [q.v.].

BASKETS  of  various  kinds  were  used  by  the  Hebrews,
and  were  doubtless  not  unlike  those  which  are  often
found  depicted  up)on  Egyptian  monuments — large  open
baskets  for  fruit  etc.  (cp  illustration,  Wilk.  Ant:  Egypt.  1
379),  which  could  be  borne  upon  the  head  (ib.  383,  cp
Gen.  40 16/  ),  baskets  to  collect  earth  in  the  manufacture
of  bricks  (on  a  supposed  reference  to  which  in  Ps.  81  6,
see  Bkick),  or  deep  wicker  ones  slung  upon  a  yoke  [ib.
380).  Especially  noteworthy  is  the  large  carpenter's
tool-basket  made  of  rush  (a  kind  common  throughout
W.  Asia),  a  specimen  of  which  is  now  in  the  British
Museum  (cp  ib.  401).  The  references  to  baskets
present  m:uiy  points  of  interest  ;  suffice  it  to  refer  to  the
diiTicult  saying  in  Prov.  25  ii,  which  RV  renders,  'A
word  fitly  spoken  is  like  apples  of  gold  in  baskets  (AV
'pictures';  RV'"-^-  'filigree  work')  of  silver,'  where
the  implied  notion  is  that  the  golden-hued  apples  look
all  the  more  l>eautiful  in  silver  baskets.  But  (i)  go'den,
not  golden-hued  apples  (quinces)  must  be  meant,  if  the
te.xt  be  correct  ;  '  gold  '  and  '  silver '  must  both  be  taken
literally.  (2)  '  Baskets  '  is  an  impossible  rendering,  and
'  filigree  work,'  though  more  plausible,  is  still  hypo-
thetical. (3)  'Fitly'  has  no  sound  linguistic  basis.
This  is  a  case  in  which  no  weak  emendati<5n,  affecting
one  or  two  letters,  suffices.

Frankenberg  has  tried  such  a  one  ;  the  sense  produced  is—

Golden  gravings  ('nirs)  on  silver  chased  work,

(So  is)  a  word  spoken  to  the  trustworthy  (□■JICN-7J;,  cp  (S),

i.e.,  a  word spoken  to  the  receptive  is  as  ineffaceable  as  the

chased  work  referred to. Not  very  natural,  and not  a  good

parallel  to  v.  12.

By  emending the te.xt more boldly (but avoiding
arbitrary  guessing,  and  following  parallels  found  else-
where) it  is  possible  to  reach  this  excellent  sense ' —
A  necklace  of  pearls  in  sockets  of  wreathen  gold,
(So  is)  a  word  of  the  wise  to  him  who  hears  it.
It  is  really  only  a  slightly  different  version  of  the  ne.xt
proverb :

A  ring  of  gold  and  an  ornament  of  fine  gold,
(So  is)  a  word  of  the  wise  to  a  hearing  ear.
Of  the  other  Hebrew  words  rendered  'ba.sket,'  dtidiyf^,  fene'
(Xjp),  and  sti/  {'?D)  were  used  for  general  purposes,  see  Cooking,
§  2.  Xowack  (.Irc/t.  1  146)  suggests  that  these  were  similar  in
character  to  the  clay  and  straw  /rmvdii  of  the  modern  fellahin.
The  former  may  perhaps  denote  loosely  any  pot  or  jar,  since  we
find  it  used  for  cooking  in  i  S.  2  14  (cp  BDB  s.z'.).  The  last-
named  (.»vj/),  a  reed  basket  (equivalent  to  the  Gr.  Kavovv  [by  which
it  is  rendered]  and  Lat.  canistrum),'^  has  been  brought  into  con-
nection with  the  reduplicated  form  1117070,  Jer.  G9  (EV  'grape-
gatherers'  baskets  ' ;  ©  (caproAXos).^  This,  however,  is  doubtful,
and  indeed  the  te.xt  is  uncertain  (cp  Pesh.).  RV"iiJ-  renders
'.shoots';  but  this  is  C'^i^l  ;  cp  Vine.  For  31^3  (Am.  81;
ayyos-*  [©]),  used  also  of  a  bird-cage,  see  Cage.

1  0  helps  a  little:  crapScov  =  CHS,  which  should  take  the  place  of
fJOl  •  but  «!/  opfii'o-Koi  =  vna,  which  must  have  come  from  v.  12.
nVDCDl  's  ^  corrup-.ion  of  niiaaca  (Ex.  2Sn,  .see  Ouche.s).
an?  'n^Sn  evidently  conceals  the  name  of  some  precious  stone
or  the  like.  If  so,  there  is  but  one  possible  explanation  ;  3,^I•^
comes  from  o'lnn  ( jn^t  as  ^nt  'D>  Gen.  3(5  39,  comes  from  c>n:i::i ;
see  Bela,  2),  which  means  pearls  strung  together  (see  Neck-
lace). Lastly,  i2n  probably  comes  from  iin  (string  or  necklace).
Thus  V.  iia  corresponds  closely  to  v.  11a  ,  consemiently  v.  11b
must  correspond  to  v.  12b,  where,  with  Bi.  (I'rov.(2)),  we  should
read  CDn  -\21  (see  (S) ;  nOID  "s  based  on  HDD-  r:SX-^y  might
come  from  i.Tjyo'?,  '  for  its  purpose,'  but  more  prolably  comes
from  iyOir-Sj;,  which  is  equivalent  to  nyOE'  ]m-^]!  (v.  nb)
Render  as  above,  and  cp  Got.D.

*  On  the  sacred  canistrum  of  early  Christian  times,  see  Smith,
Z>ic/.  Christ.  Ant.,  s.v.

8  The  KapraWiyi  (also  in  2  K.  10  7  for  ho,  and  in  Dt.  26  2  4  for
K3")  was  a  basket  with  a  tapering  extremity.

*  ayyoi  (cp  Dt.  23  25  I  K.  17  10,  MT  <'?3)  used  of  vessels
of  various  kinds  :  cp  in  NT,  Mt.  13  48  2.';4  (WH  prefer  iyyerov).
In  Am.  i.e.  Sym.,  more  suitably,  has  KoXaOo^  (cp  (P  in  Jer.  "24  i
for  T;ri),  a  vase-shaped  basket ;  especially  the  basket  upon  the
head  of  Demeter  in  ancient  statues.


BASTARD

In  the  NT  mention  is  made  of  (a)  a-apyavn),  a  ba.sket  of  braid-
work  (used  especially  of  fish-baskets),  in  which  Paul  escaped
from  Damascus  (2  Cor.  11  33).  In  Acts  9  25,  however,  the  word
is  (b)  o-irvpis  (WH  prefer  a-tjivpU),  the  b.asket  in  the  miracle  of
the  4000  (Mt.  1537  etc.).  Both  were  probably  larger  than(r)  the
K6(f)ivo<:,  in  the  miracle  of  the  5000  (Mt.  14  20  etc.).  The  last-
mentioned  w.xs  an  essentially  Jewish  article  (quorum  copkinus
fanum^ue  supellex,  Juv.  814),  whose  size  may  perhaps  be
determined  from  the  use  of  the  word  to  denote  a  IJceotian  measure
of  about  2  gallons  (vide  Corp.  Inscr.  Gr.,  1625,  46). T.  K.  C.

BASMATH  (npL"2). i  K.  4is  AV; see Bashe-

MATH, 2.

BASON  (Amer.  RV  Basin).  That  all  the  words
(one  (jreek  and  four  Hebrew)  denote  hollow  vessels
adapted  to  receive  and  contain  liquids  is  certain  ;  but
what  was  the  general  form,  and  wherein  the  peculiarity
of  each  consisted  we  have  no  means  of  determining.
This  uncertainty  is  sufficiently  proved  by  the  frec|ucnt
variations  in  the  EV  renderings.  On  the  whole  subject,
see  Bowl,  Cup,  Gobi.kt,  and  cp  Altar,  §  lo;
Cooking  Utensils,  Food,  Meals,  §  12  ;  PcrrrEKv.

I.  fJN,  aggdn  (see  BDB  Lex.  s.v.;  Kpa.Tr)p  [P.KA  etc.]),  a  large
bason  (EV)  or  bowl  used  in  the  temple  ritual  (Ex.  24  6).  In  Is.
2224  EV.  'cups'(om.  BNAQr,  aya^oifl  [Theod.  Q^e.]).  On
a.  count  of  its  shape,  it  is  employed  in  Cant.  7  2  [3]!  as  a  simile
in  the  eulogy  of  the  bride  (EV  '  goblet ')  ;  see  Che.  iui  loc.  JQK,
April  1839.

2-  l'l£33,  k'/dr{cp  MH  "I'lES  goblet),  for  which  AV  'bason,
RV  '  bowl '  consistently,  occurs  only  as  a  vessel  used  in  the
temple  &  found  it  unintelligible.  1  Ch.  28 17  (.ni.  11,
Ksifi^avpe  [\]  K«f)tf).  and  Ke<j>cl><Dp  |L])  Ezra  1  10  (/cec^c^oupi^s  [P.],
Xf^oupj)  [A],  Ken^ovpai  [L.]~  I  Es  1.  2  13  (i^ioAai  ^pvarai  [B.\l.]),
and  Ezra  8  27!  {Ka<t>ovSrfe  [B],  Ka<j)ovpti  [A],  L  as  in  1  jo)=i
Esd.  8  57  (xpviTuifiaTa  [BAl.]).

3.  P^ID,  ntizrdk  (a  vessel  for  throwing  or  to'sing  a  liquid,
<^taA))).l  With  the  exception  of  Am.  G6  (©liAQj  t'ov  &i.v\i(Ty.ei'ov
olvov.  as  though  Pi^TD ;  see  Meals,  §  12  and  2  Ch.  4  11),  this
utensil  is  used  only  in  the  temple  sacrificial  rifual.  ICV  renders
varyingly  'bason'  {e.g.,  Ex.  '27  3  .SS  3  2  K.  12i3[i4]  etc.)  or
'  bowl '  (Am.  I.e.,  Zech.  9  15  14  20  Nu.  7  13  etc)  ;  see  Altar,  §  9.

4.  fjD,  sapk,  3l  temple  utensil  (i  K.  7  50  2  K.  1213114]  Jer.
52  19  [where  .\q.  (Qmfr)  vipi'a,  Sym.  c^toArj] ;  AV  '  bowls,"  but
RV  'cups'  [so  EV  in  Zech.  122]),  used  also  in  the  ritual  of
the  Passover  (Ex.  12  22).  The  pi.  niSD,  evidently  denoting
domestic  utensils,  occurs  in  2  S.  17  28  (©"al  Ae'^rjre?)  ;2  but  .see
Klo.  ad  loc.

5.  viTrrrjp  used  in  Jn.  185  of  the  'bason'  (EV)  in  which  Jesus
washed  the  feet  of  the  disciples  (cp  viTrrei.v=Yrr\  Gen.  18  4  etc.).
The  utensil  must  have  been  larger  than  any  of  the  above.
The  Pal. -Syr.  (Evang.  Hierosol.)  renders  by  ]i_a^<_CC ;  cp
Heb. ?pp^  and  see  Bowl,  7.

BASSA,  RV  Bassai  (Baccai  [B]),  i  Esd.  5i6  =  Ezra
2i7,  Bk/.ai,  q.v.

BASTAI,  RV  Basthai  (BacG&i  [BA]),  i  Esd.  531
=  Ezra 2  49,  Besai.

BASTARD  (ItpP).  The  mamzer  is  mentioned  along
with  the  Ammonite  and  Moabite  as  excluded  from  the
'congregation  ^  (Dl2%3  2  [3]).  The  Heb.  word  is  of
uncertain  derivation,  and  the  EV  rendering  is  ba.sed
upon  the  Vss.  (sk  Tropvrj^  [B^^  mg.  gj  sup  ras  A'^L],
B*F  om. ).  More  probably  the  word  means  one  of
mi.xed  or  alien  birth  (so  Zech.  96,  dWoyevrjs  [BNAQ]),
and  among  the  Rabbins  it  was  the  term  applied  to
relations  between  whom  marriage  was  forbidden  (cp
Mish.  Vebam,  4 13).  It  is  presupposed  by  (5  in  Nah.
3 17  (6  ffi'fjLfxLKT^i  aov  [BXAQ]),  where  MT  has  i-it:d
(EV  'thy  crowned  ones'),  and  is  rather  infelicitously
accepted  by  Wellhausen  who  thinks  that  the  refer-
ence is  to  the  mixed  population  of  Nineveh.  Rulxjn
is  certainly  right  in  conjecturing  :i'Tn:D,  '  thy  measuring

1  In  some  ca.ses  where  several  vessels  are  named  ©  appears
to  have  transposed  piTO  :  see  e.g.  Nu.  4  14.

2  Apart  from  the  two  exceptions  mentioned,  ©  rejrularly
thinks  of  no  'threshold,'  and  renders  Ovpa  npoOvpov  (in  Jer.
i.e.,  <Ta<tx)><o6).

'  The  only  kind  cS  foreign  marriage  which  D  contemplates
seems  to  be  found  in  Dt.  21  10-14.  In  Dt.  7  1-4  only  Canaanitish
peoples  are  excluded  ;  but  i  K.  11  i  2  assumes  the  exclusion  of
other  nations,  and  .so,  in  Ezra!),  D's  law  is  extended  to  cover  all
foreign  neighbours  (from  MS  note  of  VVRS).

500


BAT

clerks" (see  Scribk). For  bastardy,  in its  religious
connection,  cp  Council  ok  Jkrusalem,  §  lo.

BAT(?l;'py.  lit.  'night-flier'?!  NYKTCpiC  :  vesper-
it  I  to  :'^  Lev.  11  19  Ut.  14i3  Is.  220;  also  Bar.  62.).
The  bats  form  a  well-deliiicd  aiul  very  numerous  order
of  mammalia,  termed  by  naturalists  the  Cheiiopleni.
The  iK)silion  of  tlie  name  at  the  end  of  the  list  of  un-
clean birds,  and  immediately  Ixifore  the  list  of  reptiles.
accords  with  the  universal  opinion  of  anticjuity  that  the
bat,  in  .Vristotle's  words,  '  belonged  both  to  birds  and
to  Ijeasts,  and  shared  the  nature  of  both  and  of
neither '  ;  ^  nor  is  it  in  any  way  surprising  to  find
them  included,  apparently,  amongst  birds,  for  bats
alone  amongst  manunals  have  developed  the  faculty
of  true  riiglit,  and  have  become  so  modified  by  their
aerial  habits  that  their  power  of  progressing  on  the
ground  is  markedly  inferior  to  that  of  most  birds  and
insects.  They  show,  in  fact,  a  strong  aversion  to
being  on  the  ground,  and,  as  a  rule,  at  once  try  to
leave  it,  by  crawling  up  some  wall  or  tree  from  which
they  can  take  their  Hight.

The  nature  of  their  food  (either  insects  or  fruit)
makes  it  necessary  for  those  bats  which  inhabit  tem-
perate climatis  either  to  migrate  at  the  approach  of
winter  or  to  spend  the  cold  months  in  a  long  winter
sleep,  for  which  purpose  they  often  collect  in  large
colonies  in  caves,  ruins,  or  disused  buildings.  As  a
rule  the  bats  of  the  Old  World  choose  the  latter  alter-
native, and  this  seenis  to  be  the  case  with  many  of
those  found  in  Palestine.  When  food  again  becomes
abundant,  they  as  a  rule  sleep  during  the  day  sus-
pended head  downwards  by  their  feet,  and  leave  their
homes  onlv  to  search  for  food  at  the  approach  of  twi-
light. The  m.ajority  of  the  bats  of  Palestine  (and  they
are  very  numerous)  inhabit  caves,  caverns,  tombs,  ruins,
and  disused  buildings  of  all  kinds,  where  they  can  avoid
the  light,  a  fact  referred  to  in  Is.  220/.

As  many  as  seventeen  distinct  species  of  bats,  belonging  to
four  dilTerent  families  and  eleven  diOerent  genera,  have  been
described  by  Canon  Tristram.  Two  or  tbree  of  these  may  be
mentioned  by  name.  The  only  representative  of  the  fruit-eating
bats  (Meiiacheiroptcra)  is  Xantharpyia  (Cynoitycieris)  tfgy/>ti-
aca,  a  species  which  is  elsewhere  arboreal  in  its  habits,  but  in
Palestine  is  found  living  in  large  colonies  in  caves  and  tombs.
A  further  peculiarity  of  this  species  i-  that  individual  specimens
from  dilTerent  localities  vary  markedly  in  size,  those  from  Kurn
in  the  plain  of  .Xcre  being  much  smaller  than  those  from  the  hills
near  Tyre,  which  resemble  in  size  the  variety  found  in  Cyprus
and  Egypt.  This  species  is  very  commonly  found  mside  the
Pyramids  of  Kgypt  and  is  believed  to  be  the  one  so  often  figured
in  H^gyptian  frescoes.

The horse -shoe bat  Rhinolophus  ferrvm-equtnum is the
St  bat  in  Palestine,  swarming  in  immense  numbers  in


the  caverns  .along  the  Jordan  and  the  Red  Se.-i.  It  hns  a  wide  dis-
tribution, extending  from  lingland  to  Japan  and  all  over  Africa.
It  collects  in  large  colnnies  (180  have  been  found  together)  m
caves  and  ruins  for  its  winter  sleep,  and  these  colonies  are
peculiar  as  they  are  exclusively  of  one  sex.

Another  British  bat  very  common  in  the  hill  country  about
Bethlehem,  Jerusalem,  and  the  Sea  of  Galilee,  is  the  l-ng-eared
bat,  PUcotus  auritus,  usually  found  in  caverns.  It  is  always
very  late  in  leaving  its  restuig-pl.-\ce,  not  appearing  nil  twilight
has  changed  to  night;  but  it  continues  to  hunt  for  the  msects  on
which  it  feeds  the  whole  night  through.  N.  M. — A.  E.  S.


1  According  to  Schultens,  Clar.  Dial.  322,  from  die  root
which  appears  in  Ar.  as  ^alihi  '  to  be  dark  '  (of  night),  and  r]<j;
'to  fly.'  It  must,  however,  be  s.-xid  that  compounds  are  very
rare  in  Hebrew ;  and  the  modification  of  form  involved  in  this
ca>e  is  improbable.  It  might  be  thought,  from  the  absence  of
the  word  in  the  cognate  languages  (in  the  language  of  the  Tar-
gums  it  is  simply  borrowed  from  Hebrew),  that  it  is  a  loan-«ord
which  came  in  from  a  non-Semitic  source  ;  but  there  is  much  to
be  said  for  the  view  that  it  is  connected  with  Aram,  'artel,
•  naked  '  (from  the  char.icter  of  a  bat's  wings),  as  suggested  by
Low  (see  Ges.  Hir/mi),  or  with  the  root  rpjf,  which  in
Hebrew  has  the  sense  of  bein^  covered  or  darkened.

'•^  The  Peshitta  has  in  I.eviticus  and  Deuteronomy  the  curious
rendering  'peacock,'  but  in  Is.220  Bar.t5ai  employs  the  proper
Syriac  word  for  '  bat '  ;  the  Arabic  version  has  '  bat '  in  Leviticus
and  Deuteronomy,  but  (like  the  Targum)  goes  astray  in  a  mis-
taken paraphrase  of  Is.  '2  20.

3  De  Fart.  Animal.  4  13.  For  other  references  see  Bochart,
U  ierozoicon.

SOI


BATHSHEBA

BATH  (n3. deriv. uncertain; cp  BDB. s.v.). Is.
5 10. .See  Weights  AND  Measures.

BATH-EABBIM  (D'3Tri2,  '  daught<r  of  multi-
tudes,' [Hl)l!];  ByrATpoc  noAAcoN  [BXA] ;  ^Ua
multitudinis;  Cant.  7  4  LsJt)-  'Ihe  eyes  of  the  bride  are
likened  to  the  '  pools  in  Heshlxjn  by  the  gate  of
Bath-rabbim.'  With  true  insight,  tiriitz  in  1871
recognised  the  impossibility  of  the  reading  Bath-
rabbim  ;  he  suggested  Rabbath-.Ammon.  Certainly
this  is  possible;  and  N\V.  of  Heshbon,  in  a  lateral
valley  of  the  Wady  Hesban,  old  reservoirs  have  been
found.  We  cannot,  hovvever,  suppose  that  these  reser-
voirs were  so  famous  as  to  be  celebrated  in  a  popular  song
beside  Carmcl  and  the  Tower  of  Lebanon.  '  Heshbon "
as  well  as  '  Bath-rabbim  "  must  be  wrong.  Winckler's
suggestion  '  Helbfm'  {.lOF  1  293 /. )  fits  in  with  the
mention  of  I^banon,  but  has  no  other  recommendation.
Considering  that  there  is  deep-seated  corruption  in  the
next  verse  (see  H.MK,  Gam.kkv,  2),  we  are  justified  in
making  an  emendation  which  might  otherwise  seem  too
bold.  The  most  famous  pools  in  Palestine,  outside  of
Jerusalem,  were  no  doubt  those  known  as  the  Pools  of
Solomon  (see  Conduits,  §  3).  In  the  long  green  vale
of  '  Arias,  unusually  green  among  the  101  ky  knolls
of  Judaja,"  Solomon,  according  to  post-exilic  belief,
'  planted  him  vineyards,  and  made  him  gardens  and
paradises  .  .  and  made  him  pools  of  water,  to  water
therefrom  the  forest  where  trees  were  reared'  (Eccles.
2  4-6).  Probably  it  is  this  scenery  that  has  suggested
several  descriptive  passages  in  Canticles  (Stanley ;  Del. ) ;
it  was  worthy  to  be  mentioned  beside  Carmel  and
Lebanon.  Read  nb^B*  for  jucna.  and  (with  Wi. )
"ly  for  nyc',  and  render

Thine  eyes  are  like  Solomon's  pools
By  the  wood  of  Beth-cerem.

Beth-cerem,  '  place  of  a  vineyard,'  was  probably  the
name  of  some  part  of  the  garden-land  referred  to  in
Eccles.  24-6.  See  JQR,Avr\\  1899.  Cp  Bkth-
Haccerkm.  t.  k.  c.

BATHSHEBA  (raC^n?,  '  daughter  of  the  oath '  (?),
§  48  ;  in  I  Ch.  35  r-1"TI2,  where  the  pointing  should
be  corrected  to  rit^nS  ;  in  ©'^'^i-_  by  a  strange  con-
fuson,  BHpc<NBee'=  BeershebaV  wife  of  Uriah  the
Hittite,  afterwards  wife  of  David  and  mother  of  ."Solo-
mon 2  S.  ll2-1224(BHecABe6[A])  i  K.  1/  (BHecAEee
in  In  15).  Some  think  that  she  was  a  granddaughter
of  .AHITHOI'HEL  (q.v.)-

When  David  first  saw  Bathsheba,  Joab  was  engaged
in  the  siege  of  Rabbath  Anmion.  The  king  himself  was
reposing,  after  his  years  of  hardship,  at  Jerusalem.  The
story  (which  is  omitted  in  Chronicles)  is  that,  walking
one  evening  on  the  flat  roof  of  his  palace,  David  saw  a
beautiful  woman  bathing  in  the  court  of  a  neighbouring
house.  He  asked  who  she  was,  and,  learning  that  her
husband  Uriah  was  away  w  ith  the  army,  '  sent  messengers
and  took  her  '  (2  S.  11  4).  To  avert  the  shock  which  an
open  act  of  adultery  would  have  caused  to  the  ancient
Israelitish  sense  of  right,  he  devised  the  woful  expedient
related  in  2  S.  11 6-25.  First  he  had  Uriah  sent  to  him,
ostensibly  with  a  message  from  the  camp.  He  dismissed
him  to  his  house  with  a  portion  from  the  royal  table  ;
but  Uriah  remained  with  the  guard  of  the  palace  :  he
scrupled,  if  Robertson  Smith  maybe  followed  (AW.  Sent.  W
4S5.  484),  to  violate  the  talxx)  on  sexual  intercourse
applied  to  warriors  in  ancient  Israel.  The  next  night  the
king  plied  him  with  wine  ;  but  still  Uriah  was  obstinate.
Driven  desperate,  his  master  sent  the  brave  soldier  back
to  Joab,  bearing  a  letter  ordering  his  own  destruction.
Uriah  was  to  be  set  in  the  place  of  danger  and  then
abandoned  to  the  foe.  The  cruel  and  treacherous  plan
was  carried  out,  and,  when  Bathshclia's  mourning  for
her  husbitnd  was  over,  David  made  her  his  wife.

The  story  of  the  rebuke  of  Nathan,  of  the  revival  of
the  king's  better  self,  and  of  the  sickness  and  death  of


BATHSHUA

the  child  of  Bathsheba,  is  well  known.  It  is  a  question,
however  (see  Schwally,  /.AT IV  12  153  ^  ;  Bu.  SBOV
89),  whether,  in  the  original  form  of  the  narrative,  2  S.
1215/.  did  not  follow  on  11 27,  which  means  treating  the
most  edifying  |)irt  of  the  story  as  a  later  amplification
(see  David,  §11).  Considering  what  we  know  of  the
gradual  idealisation  of  the  life  of  David  (which  culminates
in  Chronicles  and  the  titles  of  the  Psalms),  this  appears
far  from  impossible.  The  story  gains  in  clearness  by  the
omission.  At  any  rate,  Wellhausen  is  right  in  regarding
12 10-12  as  an  interpolation  in  the  narrative  of  the  colloquy
between  David  and  Nathan.  It  was  suggested  by  an
intelligent  reading  of  the  subsequent  history.  David's
evil  examplewas  imitated  in  exaggerated  form  byAmnon  ;
and  Amnon's  sin  was  fruitful  in  troubles,  which  cul-
minated in  Absalom's  rebellion,  and  darkened  all  David's
remaining  years.

We  meet  Bathsheba  for  the  last  time,  just  as  David's
end  was  at  hand,  in  the  full  glory  of  a  queen-mother.
Solomon  rises  to  meet  her,  bows  down  before  her,  and
sets  her  on  a  seat  at  his  right  hand.  She  gained  her
object,  and  it  is  interesting  (if  Nathan  really  took  the
part  assigned  to  him  in  2  S.  I21-15)  to  notice  that  Nathan
was  one  of  her  chief  supporters.  w.  E.  A.

BATHSHUA  (yVJ'-n?,  §  48). I.  See  B.'vthshkb.x.

2.  The  words  j;Tiy"n3  rendered  '  daughter  of  Shua '  in  Gen.

382  12  (o-aua,  omitting  n3  [ADEL])  are  treated  in  RV  of  i  Ch.

23(7.  6vy.  a-ava';  [P>'  .\1  ;  t.  9.  ava^  [B*] ;  o-ove  [L])  as  a  proper
name,  li.'ith-shu.i.. See  Shua.

BATHZACHARIAS (BeGzAXApiA [^l)- ^ '^acc.

632/. Sec  HKTIlZ.XCilAKlAS.

BATTERING  RAM  (DnS  [plur.  ]),  Ez.  4  2  21 22  [27]t.
See  War.

BATTLE  AXE.  The  rendering  is  not  very  happy,
as  will  at  once  be  seen.

1.  }"30,  maf>pei  Jer.  51  20  (Siao-Kopn-t'^eis  <t\)  [BNAQF])  ;  or
f '£D,  7ne/<h}f  (Prov.  25  18  p6-rra.Kov  (BNc.a  A]  -na.vov  [N*]).  EVs
rendering  '  maid  '  introduces  an  arbitrary  distinction.  Better,
'battle  hammer,' or  'club'  (cp  H^'Sp).  In  Ezek.  9  2  isSO  'Vs
(n-Auf )  should  possibly  be  corrected  into  'inrJB'a  "Ss,  '  his  destroy-
ing weapon '1  (Che.);  'battle  axe'  (RVm.ij.),  'slaughter  weapon'
(EV),  '  a  weapon  of  his  breaking  in  pieces  '  (AVmg.)  are  all  difB-
cult  to  Justify.

2.  -1:0  Ps.  "•''  3  RViiig.  The  usual  rendering  (Del.,  Ba.,  etc.,
accepting  MT's  vocalisation  [nJD]  and  Verss.)  is  '  stop  the  way'
(®  (Tui'fcXeto-oi').  'J'his  involves  a  double  ellipsis — 'shut  up  [the
way),  [going]  against  my  pursuers.'  It  is  improbable,  however,
that  v,a  means  '  battle  axe '  ;  crayapis  may  mean  the  battle  axe
used  in  upper  Asia  ;  but  this  does  not  justify  the  inference  of
critics(I)rus.,Grot.,  Kenn.,  Ew.,  Dri.,  We., etc).  Thetextneeds
emendation  (see  J.wiii.iN,  7).

BATTLEMENT. For ,npyo,  mdakeh,  Dt.22  8EV,  see

HoLSK,  §  4.  For  niiis,  pinnoth,  zCh.  26  15  Zeph.  1 16  36  RV,
and  ^•j-:i-^,'!l'mdsoth  (plur.),  Is.  54 12  SBOT,  RV  pinnacles'
(cp  r^r  Ps.  Sti2  [Ba.]),  see  Foktkess,  §  5.  vn:^,  kdndph,  in
Dati.  !'27  K\''"K-  is  rendered  'battlement.'  It  is  better  to  read
1J3,  kanno  (see  Bevan,  ad  loc.\

BATUS  (Batoc).  T.k.  166  AV"?- ;  RV"'ff-  Bath.
See  \V'i':K;nrs  and  Mi-.asukios.

BAVAI  (M3), Neh.  3i8.  RV  Bavvai. See  Bi.nnui
(SI-
BAY  (I'bX),  Zech.  637. See  ( :()I,oURS,  §  17.
BAYITH  (rT'Sn),  Is.  l.-)2  RV  ;  .W  B.vjith.
BAY  TREE  (nn^X^  Ps.  373-),  or.  more  plausibly,  as

1  nMB'D,  'destruction,'  we  know;  but  fSO,  'breaking  in
pieces,'  is  unattested  elsewhere.  Co.  recognises  that  the  closing
words  of  Ezek.  9  i  are  no  part  of  the  true  text,  but  represent  a
variant  to  the  equivalent  words  in  v.  2.

2  (S  has  no  rendering  of  niTK  in  this  passage,  since  for  rniK3
p;n  it  reads  pa"?  'hnD  (w«  rat  <cc'«pous  toC  S.i.^i.vov  [BK.\RT]).
Aq.,  Symm.,  and  Editio  Sexta  all  render  in  the  .sense  of  'in-
digenous tree ' ;  and  neither  Pesh.  nor  Targ.  supports  the
rendering  of  A  V  or  that  of  RV.

503


BDELLIUM

RV,  '  a  tree  in  its  native  soil.'  The  word  ITITN,  'native
born,'  however  (from  the  root  mt.  'to  arise,'  'spring
forth"  [Barth,  152  c.'\),  cannot  Ix;  applied  to  a  tree,
whence  Celsius  [Hieroh.  i.  194^.)  supposed  the  phrase
to  mean  a.vr\p  iirix'^p'^oi-

As  Hi.,  Gr. ,  Che.,  Ba. ,  We.,  Dr.  agree,  the  right
reading  is  nx  'cedar.'  On  the  (probably)  corruiH
words  .Tiyns  ( Dr.  '  putting  forth  his  strength  ' )  and  an
(Dr. 'spreading'),  see  Che.  Psa/ms^-K

BAZLUTH  (n-lS-3,  'stripping'?; BacaAcoG  [N.\]).

The  b'ne  Bazi.utii,  a  faiuily  of  Nethinim  in  the
great  post-exilic  list  (see  Ezra,  ii.  §  9)  Ezra252
(/SatraSwe  [B],  ^abovwO  [L])  =  Neh.  754  Bazlith
{(iaaaud  [B],  ^aXovad  [  Lj)  =  i  Esd.  .")3i  Basai.oth
(^ao-aXe/A  [B],  ^aaXuiO  [A],  ^aXovud  [L]).

BDELLIUM (nVn?; Gen.  2 12 anOpaS [AEL]  ;
Nu.  II7 kpyctaAAoc'  [B.\FL]),  appears  in  Gen.  2 12
1 Bfidhfilah  ^'°'^S  ^^'''^  S°'^  ^'"^^  oiiy.x  or  beryl (see
—  B8'X.X '  O''^'^^)  ^s  a  characteristic  product  of  the
~"  '  land  of  Havilah  ; whilst in Nu.  II7  its

'  appearance  '  (so  RV,  lit.  '  eye,'  not  Colour  [i/.v. ,  §  3],
as  AV)  is  likened  to  that  of  manna — a  comparison  the
appropriateness  of  which  is  obvious  if  as  is  in  all  prob-
ability the  case,  the  OT  bUdholah  is  the  resinous  sub-
stance known  to  the  Greeks  as  ^MWiov,  fidSeXKOf.
j8oXx6i'2  (Dioscor.  1  80)  or^SAXo  [Peripl.  Mar.  Ervth.,
§§373948/.).

Peiser  identifies  n'?"I3  with  Bab.  btdlti,  a  spice  obtained  in
Babylonia,  and  often  mentioned  in  contract-tablets  {ZA  TIV
1"  347y-)i  'his  is  important  in  connection  with  the  Eden-
story  (see  Par.mmsk).  As  (Jlaser  has  shown  (Skizze,  2  364_^),
bdellium  was  distinct  from  storax  (against  Hommel,  GBA  613
n.  i).  Bochart,  identifying  Havilah  with  the  Arabian  co.-ist
opposite  Bahrain,  in  the  Persian  Gulf,  naturally  explained
n7l3  as  meaning  pearl  (^Hieroz.  ii.  5  5).  This  view,  however,
lacks  the  .support  of  any  ancient  version,  and,  though  upheld
by  .several  Jewish  authorities  (cp  Lag.  Or.  2  44),  has  no  solid
foundation.  The  renderings  of  ©  (avSpa^  and  Kpiio-raAAos)  point
I  to  some  kind  of  precious  stone  ;  but,  as  Di.  remarks,  f5?.  'stone,'
:  is  prefixed  to  D^t',  the  word  following,  and  not  to  TwlJ.  The
Pesh.  berulhd  (in  both  places)  seems  to  be  due  to  a  mere
scribe's  error  :  r  {ox  d.  It  cannot  be  supposed  to  be  a  genuine
Aramaic  word.

Bdellium  is  described  by  Dioscorides  {I.e.)  as  SdKpi'ov
difSpov  dpa'^iKod  ^  ; the  best  sort  being  '  bitter  in  taste,
2 Descrintiona  ""ansparent,  gelatinous  (ra.-po^oXXiSes,
Of  esJxXiov  ^''-  ■''!<«  bulls  hide  glue  ),  oily  through-
"  ■ out  and  easily  softened,  unmi.xed  with

chips  or  dirt,  fragrant  when  burnt  as  incense,  resembling
ony.K '  ;  *  he  speaks  also  of  a  black  sort  found  in  large
lumps,  which  is  exported  from  India,  and  of  a  third
kind,  brought  from  I'etra.  Pliny  (XH  12  9)  gives
some  further  details  :  the  best  sort  grows  in  Bactriana
(N.  Afghanistan),  on  a  'black'  tree  'of  the  size  of  an
olive,  with  a  leaf  like  the  oak  and  fruit  like  the  wild  fig' ;
it  also  grows  in  .Arabia,  India,  Media,  and  Babylon,
that  of  India  being  softer  and  more  gummy,  while  that
brought  through  Media  is  more  brittle,  crusted,  and
bitter.  The  author  of  the  Peripl.  mar.  Erythr.  speaks
of  it  as  growing  largely  in  (iedrosia  (Beluchislan)  and
Barygaza  (Gujerat),  and  as  exported  westwards  from
the  mouth  of  the  Indus.  In  the  older  classical  literature
bdellium  appears  to  be  mentioned  only  in  Plautus
{Cure.  loi),*  in  a  list  of  perfumes.

Two  Qf  the  kinds  of  bdellium  described  by  Dioscorides
_  .  are  generally  identified  by  the  authorities
with  the  two  substances  described  as  follows,


kinds.


which  are  still  met  with  in  commerce  :-


1  In  both  places  ot  Aonrot,  i.e.,  Aq.,  .Symm.,  and  Th.,  h.ave
/Sie'AAio;',  so  Vg.  bdelliuiit. Cp  Jos.  Ant.  iii.  1  6.

2  The  exact  form  of  these  two  words  is  uncert.ain.  Pliny
(129)  has  iitaldacon,  brochon.  On  the  connection  of  this  group
of  names  with  bedolah,  see  Del.  Par.  j6/.,  ioi.  Pott  in  II'ZKM
798^.  ■_

•*  The  reading  of  this  word  is  uncertain.
*  Perhaps  a  '  nail '  or  '  hoof. '
8  '  Tu  mihi  stacte,  tu  cinnamon,  tu  rosa,

Tu  crocinum  et  ca.sia  's,  tu  bdellium."


BEACON

1.  Oriiinary  HiU-ltiuin  (African). — 'The  driiR  isexporlcd  from
the  whole  Somali  coast  to  Mokha,  Jidda,  Aden,  Makulla,  the
Persian  (nilf,  India,  and  even  China'  (Fliickiger  and  Hanhury,
I'liarniacogrSP^  145).  HanUurv  says  he  had  it  sent  him  for
sale  in  London  from  C:hina  ;  but  in  matters  of  this  kind  the
immediate  port  of  origin  is  often  substituted  for  the  ultimate
source.

Dymock  {Pharmacogr.  /n/f.  1  310)  says :  '  From  Berbera
also  comes  Biiellium.'  Farther  on  he  explains  that  'to  a
certain  extent'  it  'resembles  myrrh,'  but  that  it  is  darker  .  .  .
less  oily  .  .  .  strongly  bitttr  and  has  hanily  any  aroma*  (I.e.
•?io).  According  to  Mohammedan  writers  (Ac.  312),  'Goo<l
bdellium  should  be  cle;in,  bright,  sticky,  soft,  sweet -smelling,
yellowish,  and  bitter.'  Its  Ixjtanical  source  is  BaUamodendron
africanum  (see  A'rw'  Bull.  1896,  p.  giyC).

2.  Indian  Bdellium.— \^ymoc\<.  {I.e.  310)  describes  this  as
somewhat  resenibling  the  African  drug  ;  'but  the  colour  is  lighter,
often  greenish.'  1  )ioscorides,  therefore,  must  have  had  a  very
dirty  s.-imple  • — a  not  infrequent  experience  still.  Its  source  is
Italsamodendron  Mukul,  a  plant  the  botanical  distribution  of
which— N\V.  India,  Heliichistan,  and  possibly  .\rabia— exactly
agrees  with  the  statements  of  the  old  authors.  The  only
tliniculty  is  the  description  of  Pliny,  which  it  does  not  (it  very
well,  as  it  is  a  small  tree  ;  but  Pliny's  statements  cannot  be
pressed  from  the  botanical  point  of  view  :  Lemaire  (Flore  de
yirgile,  125)  calls  Dioscorides  '  bien  pr6f6rable  2i  Pline.'

As  to  the  third  kind  of  bdellium  spoken  of  by
Dioscorides,  Dymock  (310)  conjectures  that  it  was
■  probably  a  kind  of  myrrh. '  n.  M. — \v.  t.  t.-d.

BEACON  (■pn,  perhaps  for  pXH  from  J'lK,  see  .^sh  ;
ICTOC  [l^NAOgr]),  or  rather,  as  in  K\''"k-,  M,\sr  (cp
Is.  3323  Ez. '275).  employed  in  Is.  3O17  as  a  simile  of
nakedness  and  desolation.  The  reference  is  to  the
poles,  etc.,  erected  in  i)rominent  places  for  signalling
purposes  ;  cp  Knskjns  (§  2).

BEALIAH  (nvra,  §  35,  •  Vahwe  is  Lord'),  a  Ben-
jamite,  one  of  Davids  warriors,  i  Ch.  Tis  (BaA&IA
[BX],  BaaAiA  [A].  BaAaiAC  [I']).  Ste  D.WID,  §  ir
a  iii.

BEALOTH im-^^i;?). Josh.  l.'>24. See 15.\.\l.\tii-

BEEK.

BEAN,  or  rather  Baean  (RV),  The  children  of  (yioi
Baian  [.VNVJ;  Bi.AX  [Vg.j;  y>-^  ;  BAANOy.  Jos.
Ant.  xii.  81),  an  otherwise  unknown  trilw  or  community,
who  in  the  pre-Maccab;ean  period  were  a  '  snare  and
offence"  to  the  Jews  '  in  that  they  lay  in  wait  for  them
in  the  w  ays. '  Their  robber  castles  or  '  towers '  lay,
apparently,  somewhere  Ixjtween  Idumiean  and  Ammon-
ite territory.  This  would  suit  the  lieon  of  Xu.  323  (see
Baal  mkon).  In  one  of  his  warlike  expeditions  against
the  unfriendly  surrounding  peoples  after  the  reconsecra-
tion  of  the  temple,  Judas  the  Maccabee  utterly  de-
stroyed the  children  of  Bean  and  burnt  their  towers
(i  Mace.  54/  ;  cp  2  Mace.  10  18/:).

BEANS  (Vis.  KY&AAOC  [BAL]  2S.  1728  Ez.  49)
are  twice  mentioned  as  material  for  food,  along  with
wheat,  Ixarley,  and  lentils  ;  in  the  second  pas.sage
Ezekiel  is  instructed  to  make  bread  of  a  mi.vture  of
wheat,  barley,  beans,  lentils,  millet,  and  spelt.  The
Hebrew  name  is  found  also  in  post-biblical  Hebrew,
Jewish  Aramaic,  .Arabic,  and  Ethiopic.  Beans  are
the  seeds  of  I'icia  Faha  (Linn.),  the  cultivated
plant  —  not  certainly  known  in  the  wild  state,  but
in  all  probability  a  domesticated  form  of  /■/(/(/  nai--
bonensis"^ — which  is  a  native  of  the  whole  Mediterranean
region  and  extends  eastward  to  X.  India.  It  was  the
*ci''a/xoj  of  the  CJreeks,  which  is  mentioned  as  far  back  as
the  Ili.ad  (ki'io/xoi /xeXaj'oxpofS.  13589).  \'irchow  found
the  seeds  in  the  e.xcavations  at  Troy,  and  the  plant  was
cultivated  in  Switzerland  and  Italy  in  the  age  of  bronze.
Beans  are,  without  doubt,  one  of  the  earliest  articles  of
vegetable  food  among  the  Europe;in  races  of  mankind.

Cp  FCK)D,  §  4.  C(KJKIN<;.  §  7.  N.  M. W.  T. F.-I).

1  Fliickiger  and  Hanbury  say  (I.e.  146)  that  it  is  regarded
both  in  London  and  in  India  'as  a  very  inferior  dark  sort  of
myrrh.'


On this  point see  Sir  Joseph Hooke
Magazint,  7220.


the Hotanieal


BEAR

BEAB. I. (SI). The  name,  common  to  Heb. ,
1 Name ^^''^'"  •  •^''-  •  ''*"''  '■•'^-  •  '^  ^''O'"  ^  ""oot  signify-
ing to  move  slowly  and softly.' and thus
befits  the  bear,  which  has  a  stealthy  tread.

The  Heb.  word  is  generally  masc.,  even  when  the  she-lxrar  is
intended;  thus  'a  iK-ar  roblied  of  her  whelps '  is  always  3^
S?2r.  On  the  other  hand,  the  pi.  Cai  Ukes  a  fern,  verb  in
2K.  224,  and  the  sing,  is  apparently  fem.  in  Is.  11  7.  (R

renders  apKot  [H.XLl,  but  in  I'rov.  17  12  wrongly  y.ipi.y.va.  (HK.\|
(connecting  prolwbly  with  2.\'i,  'to  Ix:  anxious');  'I'heixl.  has
dpKTO?.  In  Prov. '2S15  (P  has  Auicof  [HHA  twice],  easily  ex-
I  lained  when  we  rememljer  that  the  .Aram,  form  of  3KI,  wolf,  is
,::hh.

The  animal  is  frequently  mentioned  in  O  T  (in  the
.\pocr. in Wisd.  II17 Pxclus. '2.')  17  [NA  ; but  aaKKov

2.  Allusions.  <'^>L,r'^  5'"^.U""^,  ''"'*^  (Kev.132)
m  N  I .  No  difticulty  arises  m  con-
nection with  any  of  the  O T  passages  ;  the  attacks
of  the  lion  and  the  lx;ar  on  David's  flock  (i  S.  17 34 36),
and  of  the  she-lxiars-  on  the  children  who  mocked
l'",lisha  (2K.  224),  accord  with  the  ravenous  habits  of
the  animal;  'a  bear  robbed  of  her  whelps'  (2S.  178
I'rov.  17  12  Hos.  138)  or  'a  ranging  tear'  (I'rov.  2815)
is  naturally  regarded  as  the  most  dangerous  possible
object  to  encounter  ;  one  of  the  signs  of  profound  peace
in  the  Messiah's  kingdom  is  that  the  cow  feeds  side  by
side  with  the  bear,  its  natural  enemy  ( Is.  1 1  7).  The  roar-
ing, or  rather  moaning,  of  the  lx?ar  is  well  expressed  by
the  verb  ■^D■^  (Is.  59ii.  ©"n^C  aTtva^u)).  which  is  ap-
plied also  to  the  howling  of  a  dog,  the  cooing  of  a
turtle-dove,  the  sighing  of  a  man,  and  the  moaning  of
the  sea.  The  stealthiness  of  a  tiear's  attack  is  men-
tioned in  Lam.  3 10.  By  the  likening  of  the  second
(probably  the  Median)  kingdom  in  Dan.  75  to  a  bear —
which  '  was  rai.sed  up  on  one  side,  and  three  ribs
were  in  his  mouth  tx.'tween  his  teeth  ;  and  they  said  thus
unto  it,  .Arise,  devour  much  flesh,' — the  extreme  de-
striictivcni-s.%  of  the  Median  concjuests  is  probably  in-
dicated (see  further  Bevan's  Daniel,  in  loc. ).  In  Am.
.^)i9  '  as  if  a  man  did  flee  from  a  lion,  and  a  tear  met
him,'  we  have,  as  Bochart  remarks,  a  Hebrew  equivalent
to  the  classical

•  Incidit  in  Scyllani  cupiens  vitare  t'haryhdin.':'
In  the  combination  of  the  'feet  of  a  bear'  with  the
body  of  a  leopard  and  the  mouth  of  a  lion  in  Kev.  132,
we  have  an  instance  of  the  characteristic  re-combination
of  elements  borrowed  from  OT  apocalyptic.  The  hyper-
telical  treatment  of  old  history  in  later  Jew  ish  literature
is  illustrated  by  the  mention  in  Wisd.  11 17  of  wild
teasts,  such  as  lions  and  tears,  among  the  plagues  sent
upon  the  Egyptians,  and  by  the  statement  ateut  David
in  Ecchis.  473  that  "he  played  (Heb.  .  .  .  pnr  C'TEoS
D'anSi,  'he  mocked  at  .  .  .  ')  among  lions  as  among
kids,  anil  among  Ix-ars  as  among  lambs  of  the  flock."

Finally,  we  notice  the  interesting  reading  of  ©*<*  in
Ecclus.  2.')  17  :

A  woman's  wickedness  altereth  her  visage
And  darkeneth  her  face  as  doth  a  bear  (<uv  ap«to?).
If  this  reading  te  correct,  the  ver.se  will  allude  to
the  tristitia  or  moroseness  often  attributed  to  the  te'ar,
I  which  .several  ancient  writers  speak  of  as  expressed  in
its  countenance.  On  the  whole,  however,  it  is  more
probable  that  <5"  (supported  by  the  Syr.  and  .Ar.  ver-
sions) is  right  in  reading

-And  maketh  her  face  dark  like  sackcloth  (ci*  vclkkov).
I The  Syrian  tear,  sometimes  called  Ursus  syriacus,  is
not six,cifically  distinct from the brown tear, Ursus
; 3 Natural  '"'''"*• ^'though .somewhat lighter in
I ',  .  .  colour and smaller than the typical

I  18  ory- varieties. It has a wide distribution.

'  The  other  meaning  of  the  .Ar.  verb,  'to  have  a  bristly  skin,*
is  probably,  as  des.  thinks,  secondary,  and  derived  from  the
noun  dulib.

2  It  was  a  common  opinion  in  antiquity  that  she-bears  were
fiercer  than  the  males;  thus  Pliny;  (1149).  'Mares  in  omni
genere  fortiores  pr^eterquam  pantheris  et  ursis. '

3  Cp  also  Is.  '.'4  18  Jer.  4S  44.

506


BEARD

being  found  in  several  parts  of  Europe, — formerly  all
over  that  continent, — and  throughout  Asia  N.  of  the
Himalayas.  It  is  unsociable  in  its  habits,  though  some-
times male  ami  female  are  seen  together,  and  the  cubs
accompany  their  mother.  Bears  are  omnivorous,  kill-
ing and  eating  other  animals  ;  but  they  have  a  vegetable
diet  also.  They  are  particularly  fond  of  fruit  and
honey.  In  cold  climates  they  hiliernate  during  the
winter  months,  and  during  the  period  of  hibernation
they  subsist  on  the  stored-up  fats.  The  young  are
generally  born  towards  the  end  of  this  period.  They
are  now  practically  extinct  in  S.  Palestine,  but  are
still  to  te  met  with  in  the  Lebanon  and  Hermon
districts.

2. RV  rendering  of  vy  (Jobflg)  and  b>'J?  (Job3832),

AV  ARCTUKL'.S  (if.T.).  N.  M. — A.  E.  S.

BEARD. The  importance  attached  by  the  Hebrews

to  tlie  Ixjard  is  fully  borne  out  by  the  many  references
to  it  found  in  the  O T.

Two  worus  are  thus  rendered  :  (a)  f(51,  znknn,  (pnNAQrLn-oJycui/,
used  of  the  be.-\rd  proper,  cp  2S.  10  4yC  ^  i  Ch.  19  47^  Is.  7  20
15  2(  =  Jer.  4837)  etc.,  and  also  of  the  chin  1  (in  Lev.  Viig/.,  14  9
of  both  man  and  woman).  (f>)  Ctit',  sdpham  (from  HSb',  '  lip  '),
rendered  '  beard  '  in  2  S.  19  24  [25],  is  more  properly  the  mous-
tache or  '  upper  lip  '  (so  IpBAi,  ,xu(rTa| ;  EV  Lev.  18  45,  and  AV
mg.  Ez.  24  17  22  Mic.  3  7  where  EV  '  lip  ').

The  beard  was,  and  still  is,  in  the  East,  the  mark  of
manly  dignity.  A  well-bearded  man  is  looked  upon  as
honourable,  and  as  one  who  in  his  life  '  has  never
hungered'  (Doughty,  Ar.  Des.  1 250).  By  touching  the
beard,  or  by  swearing  by  it,  a  man's  good  faith  was
assured  [op.  cit.  1  268) — a  fact  which  may  possibly  throw
light  upon  Joab's  treachery  towards  Amasa  (2S.  2O9).
To  cut  it  off  wilfully  was  an  insult  (2  S.  IO4/,  cp  Is.  16),
and  to  cut  it  ceremonially  was  strictly  forbidden  ;  see
Cuttings  of  the  Flesh,  §  3.  To  shave  it  was  an
outward  sign  of  mourning  (Is.  152  Jer.  4Is  4837;  cp
Ep.  Jer.  [Bar.  6]  31)  :  see  Moi;kning  Customs,  §  i.^

Although  barbers  are  mentioned  only  in  a  late  pass-
age (Ez.  5i,  D'aVa  ■•  n'?J,  '  to  shave,' on  the  other  hand,  is
frequent.  Gen.  41 14  [E],  2  .S.  10  4  Judg.  16 17  22,  etc. ),  they
were  doubtless  in  great  request.^  In  Egypt  the  barber
is  described  as  industriously  journeying  from  place
to  place  seeking  employment,  carrying  in  an  open-
mouthed  bag  the  tools  of  his  craft — a  small  short  hatchet
or  recurved  knife  (cp  A'i"(''3i48).  The  razor  is  fre-
quently mentioned  in  the  OT,  where  it  is  called  ij;?),
taar  (Nu.  65  87  Is.  720  Ps.  523  [4]  ;  but  'sheath'  or
'  scabbard '  in  i  S.  17  51  2  S.  208  Ez.  21  4  [9]  etc. ),  or  .Tiio,'*
morah  (Judg.  IBs  I617  i  S.  1  n)  ;  see  Kniik.s

In  Egypt,  apart  from  priests  (and  high  officials,  Gen.  41  14),
the  practice  of  shaving  the  hair  does  not  seem  to  have  been
very  general  (cp  Egvh  r,  §  39).  On  the  other  hand,  the  beard
was  regul.-irly  shorn,  and  only  the  shepherds  and  foreigners
let  it  grow,  apparently  to  the  disgust  of  the  cleanly  Egyptians.
Hence  the  negligent  Rameses  Vll.  is  caricatured  in  his  tomb
at  Thebes  wearmg  an  unshorn  beard  of  two  or  three  days'
growth.  Nevertheless,  the  beard  was  looked  upon  as  a  symbol
of  dignity,  and  on  solemn  occasions  the  want  was  supplied
by  an  artificial  one.  Such  beards  were  made  of  a  piece  of
hair  tightly  plaited  and  fastened  by  two  straps  behind  the  ear.
The  king  wore  a  longer  beard,  square  at  the  bottom ;  one
even  longer  and  curled  at  the  end  was  the  distinguishing  mark


'  Unless  '  chin  '  is  the  primary  meaning  of  \/Jp1.  The  word  [pj
'  old  man,'  is  perhaps  a  derivative,  lit.  '  gray-beard.'

'-  In  2S.  I!i24[25]  Meribba'al  to  show  his  grief  leaves  his
beard  untrimmed.

3  Herod,  according  to  Jos.  (/4«A  xvi.  11 6),  was  nearly  as-
sassinated by  his  barber,  Trypho.  In  MH  the  barber  is  ISO ;
cp  Shabb.  1  2.

*  For  .niyo  (We.  TBS  146^!) :  hence  both  names  are  from  tlie
same  root,  .Tiy^  '  to  lay  bare.'

6  A  Phoenician  inscription,  fifth-fourth  century  B.C.,  from
Larnaka  in  Cyprus,  mentions  the  ciSj  in  a  list  of  charge-;  in
connection  with  a  temple  of  Ashtoreth.  Unless  they  were  there
to  attend  to  ceremonial  tonsures,  it  is  possible  that  Renan  is
right  in  taking  them  to  be  physicians  whose  business  it  w.as  to
heal  the  self-inflicted  wounds  of  the  worshippers  (cp  i  K.  IS  28,
and  see  CIS  1  86  «  ;  cp  95).

507


BECHORATH

ofagod.J  The  people  of  Punt  followed  the  Egyptians  in  all
such  customs.  Canaanites,  Assyrians,  and  Uabylonians,2  on  the
other  hand,  wore  long  hair  and  plaited  beards,  .and  in  strong
contrast  to  these  are  the  monumental  representations  of  the
desert  nomad  with  pointed  moustache  (cp  WMM,  As.  u.  hur.
J40,  296). i*

BEAST.  For  (i)  b'hemdh  (non?)  and  (2)  hayyah
(■^'n).  '  living  creature  ' — including  rpj;  and  ,-jcna,  Gen.  8  17  (P),
but  more  particularly  wild  beasts.  Gen. 7  14  (I')  872033  etc  —
.see  Cattle,  §  2  (2).  For  I's.  (js 30(31],  '  wild  beasl  of  the  reeds'
[RV],  see  Crocodile,  Dragon.  For  (3)  ^'//-(T^S),  'beast  of
burden,'  see  Cattle,  §2  (3).  For  (4)  Is.  13  22  (C"N;  'wild
beasts  of  the  islands'  [AV])  .see  Jackal  (4),  Wolf.  For
(5)  Is.  13  21  3414  Jer.  50  39  (D"li ;  'wild  beasts  of  the  desert'
[EV]),  see  Cat  (end).

(6)  IV  2/0,  ''wild  beasts' [AV]  Ps.  6O11  [12]  80i3[i4]  is  more
scrupulously  rendered  'that  which  moves  (or  roams)'  by  Dr.,
Ha;thg.,  We.  [bUOl].  BDB  recognises  -v/m  'to  move.
'Small  crcaturiis'  would  also  be  possible:  cp  Talni.  Kri
' a  worm,'  Ass.  zizanu,  an  animal  like  a  locust.  Ihe  probability
of  such  a  word  in  bibl.  Hcb.,  however,  is  not  great.  The  two
passages  have  to  be  considered  separately.  ®  gives  dilferent
readings  :  Ps.  'M  a)patoT>)s(cp  ri  Is.  CO  1 1),  P.s.  80  ovos  aypiot  [15],
/xeaono?  a.  [F.i;] /uLoi/ios  a.  [Nc.aAT], /lioi/os  a.  [R*].  The  Targ.
(in  both  passages)  finds  a  reference  to  the  Hooi'Oii.  See  further,
BDB  S.V.,  and  (on  the  text,  which  is  corrupt)  Che.  Psaliiisi-'i.

NT.  For  Rev.  11  7  etc.  ]3ii  etc.  (the  two  mystical  dtipia.)
see  Apocalypse,  §§  40  43-47,  Antichrist,  §  4^  and  cp  Behk-
MOTH  AND  Leviathan,  §  2;  Dragon,  §  2.  For  Rev. -1 6  (^uia :
the  four  'living  creatures')  see  Cherub,  §  3.  For  Rev.  18  13
etc.  {KTrivY))  cp  Cattle,  §  2,  (2),  (3).

BEATING (with rods), Dt.  25i-3 etc. See Law

AND  Justice,  §  12.

BEAUTIFUL  GATE  (h  coraia  nyAH  [Ti.  WH]).
Acts  3 10  ;  see  Temple.

BEBAI  C^a,  §  57  ;  Hilprecht  has  found  the  Jewish
name  Biba  on  a  tablet  from  Nippur;  BhB&I  [BA],
B0KX6I  [L])-

1.  The  b'ne  Bebai,  a  family  in  the  gre.at  post-exilic  list  (s^-e
Ezra,  ii.  §  9,  §  8<),  Ezra2ii  (reckoned  at  623)  (|3a/3ei  [B], -^ai
[A])=Neh.7i6  (reckoned  at  f28)  (^»)P[e]i  [BNA])  =  i  Esd.513;
of  whom  twenty-eight  are  included  in  Ezra's  caravan  (see
Ezra,  i.  §  2,  ii.  §  15  [i]  d)  EzraSii  (^a^ei  [liAl  /Sa^iei  |L  once])
=  1  Esd.837,  Bafi  [once]  (fiairjp,  ^rj^ai  [B],  ^a/3i  [.\  once],
fiaprit.  [L  once])  and  four  in  list  of  tho.se  with  foreign  wives  (see
EzRA,i.  §  s  end)ECTal028(|3a^[e]i[BNA])=i  Esd.029.  Itwas
represented  among  the  signatories  to  the  covenant  (see  Ezra,  i.
§7)  Neh.10.5  [i6](/3,,Sa.[BN]^^Pa.[L]).

2.  An  unidentified  place  mentioned  with  Chorai  and  Cola
[yy.7'.],  Judith  154  07))3at  [A],  ai3eA)3ai/ii  [N*}*'^-']),  perhaps  a
repetition  of  the  following  name  Chuiiai  (B  and  Vg.  omit  ;  if
the  reading  of  {<*,  tt'^-^  be  considered  trustworthy,  Bki.mkn
[y.f.],  a  locality  not  otherwise  improbable,  may  be  intended.

BECHER  ("133,  'first-born'  ;  §  61,  or  cp,  jjerhaps.
Ass.  bairu.  At.'  b.ikr,  'camel'  [so  BDB  Lex.']).  A
Benjamite  clan.  Gen.  4621  {xo^ojp  [A], -(Sop  [L],  -/3a)X
[D])  and  iCh.  76  8  {^oxop  [A],  x^t^^P  [I-li  ct^Setpa
[B  V.  6,  omitting  all  mention  of  Bela]  and  aliaxfi,
afiaxeip  [ib.  v.  8]).  The  name  is  wanting  in  i|  Nu.
2638-41,  but  it  is  possible  that  the  name  IJiccHRR  (gen-
tilic  npa,  Bachkiie,  R\'  Becherite)  in  the  Ephraimite
list,  ib.  V.  35  (©■'^^  om.)  was  originally  a  marginal
addition  to  the  Benjamite  clans,  which  after  being
misplaced  has  crept  into  the  text  (cp  Bered,  ii.).  To
the  clan  Becher  (^entilic  Bichri  [i/.v.])  belonged  the
rebellious  Siieba  [q.v.  ii.  (i)],  and,  if  we  adopt  two  very
probable  emendations  (see  Bechorath,  Matri),  also
Saul.  A  descendant  of  the  latter  bears,  according  to
the  MT,  the  cognate  name  Bocheru  (but  see  Bocheru).
It  is  possible  that  the  name  recurs  under  the  form
MiCHKi  [q-v.]. See  also  Benjamin,  §  9.

BECHORATH, RV  Becorath  (JTl'lDB),  apparently

1  .See  Erman,  Eg.  226  n.  4;  Wilkinson,  2333.

-  The  sculotures  represent,  however,  not  only  eunuchs,  but
also  what  seem  to  be  people  of  the  lowest  rank  —  peasants,
labourers,  and  slaves — without  beard.  In  the  oldest  Babylonian
sculptures,  on  the  other  hand,  the  head  is  completely  bare.
The  ancient  custom  w.as  perhaps  given  up  through  the  be.ard
becoming  a  sign  of  the  military  caste  (see  Perrot  and  Chipiez,
ArtinChalii.'ii-i-).

3  Illustration,  Benz.  Arch.  100,  109.

S08


BECTILETH

the  son  of  AriiiAii  [</.-■],  an  ancestor  of  Saul,  i  S.  9i
(BAxei  ['^].  BextopAG  [A],  MAxeip/  H-]-  '^'^^  "^"i®
is  really  to  be  read  as  BiicHER  [y. r. ];  it  is  the  name  of
Saul's  clan. C,"p  Klo.  on  i  S.  9i  and  Marq.  Fund.  14.

BECTILETH  (BaiktciAaiG  [B],  BeKTeAeG  and
haktaAai  [A],  B<MTOYAl<^  \y^*\  BeKTiAeO  [N<=-a] ;
Bcth-K'tilath,  'house  of  slaughter'  [Syr.  J),  The
ri..\iN  OK,  three  days'  journey  from  Nineveh,  '  near
the  mountain  which  is  at  the  left  hand  of  upper
Cilicia  '  (Judith22i).  (Irotius  has  suggested  Ttolemy's
(iuKTaiaW-rj  in  Syria  {P/o/.  v.  15 16;  cp  the  Hactiali  of
the  Tafi.  Pnit.  21  R.  m.  from  Antioch)  ;  but  this  does
not  agree  with  the  situation  as  defined  in  the  text.
The  name  of  the  mountain  is  given  as  Ange,  Agge
by  It.  Vg.  and  as  i-X^('  by  the  Syr.  (so  Lag.).
For  the  latter  Walton  gives  /x!^/  '  mountain  of
pots,'  which  suggests  that  the  name  may  have  arisen
from  reading  bnn.  'potsherd,'  for  an  original  ».y-\n,  or
KC'in  '?n.  which  actually  occurs  as  a  place-name.  See
Tki.-Harsha.

BED. Oriental  lieds  in  the  olden  time  cannot  always

have  been  so  simple  as  we  are  led  to  suppose  that  they

1 General S^"^''''i"y  are to-day. Both the frame-

_-_j-j.-  work  and  the  trappings  of  the  bed  were

conditions.  • •  ui  . i /-^r

sometmies  richly  ornamented. Of  course,

manners  changed  and  luxury  grew.  Kgypt  was  perhaps
in  advance  of  other  nations  ;  but  even  in  Egypt  the
priests  were  wont  to  use  beds  of  a  very  simple  kind.
If  they  had  any  frames  at  all,  they  were  wicker-
work  of  palm-branches,  resembling  the  kafas  of  the
modern  Egyptian  (cp  Wilkinson,  Anc.  Eg.  1  185/,
419/ ). 2  The  early  Israelites  were  naturally  slow  in
their  material  progress.  Shepherds,  for  example,
sleeping  in  the  open  air  (cp  Gen.  31 40),  would  wrap
themselves  in  their  simlah  or  rug*  (Ex.  2226[25]),  and,
if  need  were,  used  stones  for  their  head-rests  (Gen.
28 11).  Tent-dwellers  too  would  be  content  with  that
useful  article — the  simlah,  and  this  was  probably  what
Sisera  was  wrapf)ed  in  \\  hen  he  lay  down  to  sleep  ■*
(Judg.  4i8).  Those  who  dwelt  in  the  house  were
protected  from  the  weather,  but  knew  no  luxury.
Great  persons  had  special  sleeping-chambers.  Ishbaal
for  example,  was  murdered  in  such  a  room  (3?E'p  "nn),
28.  47;  cp  Ex.  83  [728],  2  K.  612  ;  also  -\-m  2^8.  13  10;
iK.  I15  Ps.  10530  (corr.  text),  and  in  the  highly
civilised  period  represented  by  Ecclesiastes  it  was  per-
haps the  usual  arrangement  (Eccles.  10 20).  Considering,
however,  how  rare  special  bedrooms  are  in  Eastern  houses
now,  and  also  the  poor  construction  of  the  houses  in
ancient  Palestine,  we  can  hardly  venture  to  suppose  that
a  'chamber  of  beds,'  (niED  Tin,  2  K.  II2  2  Ch.  22ii)
was  common  among  the  Israelites.  Guests,  however,
enjoyed  privacy  in  the  so-called  upper-story  [v-Kipi^ov
in  ©  and  NT),  which  was  on  a  part  of  the  flat  roof,
where  coolness  could  be  enjoyed  (m-p  n''?y,  2  K.  4io
Klo.  ,tS;;,  i  K.  17 19  23).  And  in  such  rude  houses
as  may  still  be  seen  in  parts  of  Palestine,  and  were
doubtless  common  in  antiquity,  the  upper  chamber  would
necessarily  be  the  sleeping-room  of  the  family,  as  long  as
the  weather  permitted  (see  House,  §  2). During  the

1  fiox«ip  might  point  to  tdo  ;  but  3  is  not  unfrequently  read
as  d;  cp  V^n,  eo4xa<r[e]t  [BA],  da.^.ia<jti  [L],  2  S.II21,  and  2T,
«op«^,  Hos.l06[BAQr*J.

2  Porphyry  calls  them  by  the  name  bajs,  from  the  Coptic  bai,
palm-br.-inch.' Cp  ^ai'a,  i  Mace.  1851  (where  the  form  of  the

Greek  i<  doiil)tfiiI)  Jn.  12  13  and  Symm.  Cant.  "9.

3  So  the  modern  Arab  sleeps,  e.g.,  on  the  roof  of  the  mosque
(Doughty) ;  a  ii„tlat»n  (nl^ob)  is  still  the  chief  article  of  his
wardrobe— an  oblong  piece  of  thick  woollen  stuff,  used  for  .-in
outer  garment  by  day  and  for  a  coverlet  by  night.  See  Dozy,
Did.  lies  I'etevients  ,ies  A  robes,  39.

*  For  the  unintelligible  .ID'Db-  (Judg. 4  18)  read  with  Che.
'''?9?'  •  ^  '"°''=  technical  term  than  '"IDpO  (Gratz)  is  required.
Moore  (ad  loc.)  frankly  states  that  the  main  exegctical  tradition
pomts  to  a  coarse  rug  or  wrap.


BED

summer,  in  the  absence  of  a  latticed  upper  chamber,  huts
of  boughs  on  the  fiat  roof  could  be  used  (tor  a  descrip-
tion of  such  see  Schunracher,  Across  the  Jordan,  89).

The  bed  itself  is  called  generally  (a)  ,ncD  mittah
(from  ,nt::,  'to  stretch,'  cp  K\ivr\  from  kXLvu}  ;  Gen.
2 Terms ^^"^^  *'''"^-  )=  (^)  ^re'C  miskdbh  (proix,-rly  ■  place

■  for  lying,'  Gen.  \\i^  etc.)  ;  and  [c)  bTy '  'eres
(properly  bedstead,  Prov.  7  16).

nED(once  Littek  \,q.v.  (i)),  Cant.  3  7  RV)  is  used  in  2  .S.  831
of  a  bier.  328*0  is  used  collectively  of  the  bedding,  etc.  in  2  S.
1728  (where  read  pi.).  There  seems  to  be  no  distinction
between  these  three  words  :  b  and  c  occur  together  in  parallelism
in  Job 7  13,  a  and  c  similarly  in  Ps.(i6  (7].  The  variant  render-
ing '  couch  '  is  employed  arbitrarily,  for  the  sake  of  differentia-
tion, by  EV  in  Job7  13(32^0),  by  AV  in  Am. 3  12  (cniO,  by
RV  ib.  (n:3D).  and  by  KV  in  Am.C4  (^-ij;).

Other  words  rendered  '  bed '  are  (d)  pjj"  yd^ud  (properly
'spread  out,"  Ps.  086  [7],  Job.  17  13),  used  also  of  the  bed  of
wedlock  in  Gen.  494  (cp  iCh.5:);  an  extension  of  meaning
similar  to  that  borne  by  icoitt)  in  Heb.  13  4  (but  cp  Lk.  11  7  etc.)  ;
cp  .Ar.  'its,  conjux.  From  the  same  root  is  derived  also  («-)  yvn
mnsuV,  Is.  28  20  (see  below  on  2  K.  3  1 5).

In NT Koc'nj  (cp  above),  (cAiVrj  '(Mk.  730  etc.''^,  Kki.vLlt.ov

(Lk.  61924, EV 'couch'), and (cpd^/Saros  =  Lat.  grabbalus,

Mk.  2  4  etc.). The  Book  of  Judith  adds  <rTpu)fivrj  (I89),  which

may  perhaps  =  ^3■^p.

I For  tV"lSK,  Cant.  39  AVmg.,  see  Palanquin,  and  for  WnV,

I ib.  5  13, cp  Garden.

j To-day  the  divan,  or  platform,  which  goes  along  the

j side  or  end  of  an  Oriental  room  serves  as  a  rest  for  the

I 3 Con bedding. This  arrangement  may  have  been

Btruction '^"°^^'"  '"  ^-  Israel  as  early  as  the  time  of

■  Amos  (see  below  §  5)  ;  but,  if  so,  it  was  con-
I  fined  to  the  rich.  What  we  know  for  certain  is  that  the
;  beds  were  movable  ( i  S.  19  15  :  Saul  wishes  to  have  David
;  brought  to  him  in  the  bed),  and  this  characterises  all
j periods  (see  Lk.  5  18  and  cp  arpwyvvw  in  Mk.  14  15  Acts

934).  Thus  (cp  below,  §  5)  they  could  be  used  by  day
j  as  seats  or  couches  (Ezek.  234i).  In  some  cases  the  bed
I  was  fitted  with  a  head  (cp  Gen.  4731),*  such  perhaps  as
we  find  represented  on  Egyptian  monuments  (cp  Wilk.
op.  cit.  1  416  fig.  191).  That  Og,  king  of  bashan,
had  an  iron  bedstead,  according  to  Dt.  3ii,  is  a  state-
ment of  EV  which  most  scholars  would  question.  The
wide  application  of  Semitic  words  for  '  bed '  justifies
the  rendering  '  couch  of  death  '  —  i.e. ,  sarcophagus.*

Basaltic  sarcophagi  abound  in  the  E.  of  Jordan,  and
a  giant  could  well  be  enclosed  in  '  Hiram's  tomb,'  as
the  Bedouins  still  designate  one  of  them,*  which  is  said
to  measure  twelve  feet  by  six.

The  cloths  or  rugs  spread  over  a  bedstead  were
called  Dn3>0  (Prov.  7  16),  and  very  possibly  the  singular
of  this  word  is  to  be  substituted  for  the  obscure  T33
and  1330  found  in  i  8.  19 13  16  and  2  K.  8 15  respectively
(see  above,  §  2,  on  Judith  ISg).  Neither  of  the  latter
words  was  understood  in  antiquity,^  and the  revisers

1  Cp  Ass.  eriu,  'bed,  couch,'  Aram,  ^■^■yj,  JLoO^J^  'couch,

cradle,  bier,'  new  Heb.  d'-;?,  'a  bower  in  the  vineyard'  ;  Ges.-
Bu.  illustrates  by  Ar.  ' ari,  'wooden  frame.'

2  In  "4  the  word  does  not  appear  in  the  best  texts  (so  RV).

3  For  nep,  however,  ©  Pe.sh.  Gei.  read  HED,  'staff';  cp  Heb.
II21.

••  We  can  hardly  say  with  Driver  (Deut.  53)  that  'the
supposed  meaning  of  bnj;  is  little  more  than  conjectural."  The
evidence  from  a  comparison  of  us.ages  is  overwhelming.  If
E5munaz.-ir  can  use  33e'Dforhis  death-couch,  the  Deuteronomic
writer  may  of  course  use  fyV  for  that  of  Og.  NC'li',  indeed,
occurs  in  a  Palmyrene  bilingual  from  et  -  "Tayyibeh  in  this
sense.  Cp  also  TCD  in  28.831,  and  the  Syr.  use  of  ^flPiiV.
(n.  I  above).  It  must  be  remembered  too  that  the  Deutero-
nomist  assumes  an  oratorical  style.  He  ought  not  to  be  required
to  use  the  technical  Hebrew  term  for  sarcophagus,  filN  (Gen.
6O26).  Cp  Schwally,  Z.A  TW,  1898,  p.  127,  n.  3  (who  would
render  either  '  bed  '  or  [cp  -Aram.  Nctj-l  '  bier ').

*  So  Robinson.  The  huge  size  of  the  sarcophagus  indicates
the  importance  of  the  man  whose  body  is  placed  in  it.  There
is  a  vast  .sarcophagus  of  a  saint  near  Samarcand.

8  It  should  be  mentioned,  howe'er,  that  in  2K.  S15  whilst
©B  represents  the  Hebrew  word  by  xofi^  Aq.  and  Symm.  (and
through  them  perhaps  L)  give  to  (TTpiifia  (laion).

Sio


4.  Pillowa.


BEDAD

have  shown  their  jx-Tplexity  in  the  former  passage  by
giving  three  alternative  renderings.

Of  pillows  we  hear  nothing  in 'OT. In  Mk.  438  we
have  TrpoffKe<(>d\aiov (cp Kzek.  HiiS  O,
A\'  '  pillow  '  ; but  it  was  an  extemporised
pillow  ; R V  better,  '  cushion. '

AV — even  sometimes  RV — does  indeed  assume  the  use  of
pillows.  Thus  (a)  Vnb'KTD  (with  suffix)  is  rendered  '  bolster '
by  AV  in  i  S.  19i^  16  2<;7'ii  16,  and  by  .Wmg.  in  i  K.  106 ;
and 'pillow' by  AV  in  Geri. '2Sii  18.  The  word,  however,  denotes
properly  '  the  parts  about  one's  head,'  and  is  thus  rendered  by
RV  everywhere  (e.g:,  iS.  H»i3,  'at  the  head  thereof),  and
once  even  by  AV  in  i  K.  I".i6,  The  Heb,  word  finds  its  exact
parallel  in  the  rn73"lip  (with  suffix),  'the  parts  about  (one's)  feet '
(Ruth;i8i4).  (/)  For  T33  in  iS.  19 13  16,  EV  has  'pillow,-
while  RVmg-  offers  'quilt'  or  'network'  (so  Ew.,  cp  ^133,  a
sieve) ;  but  see  §  3.  (c)  The  '  i)illows '  of  the  prophetesses  (so
®  Trpo<TKe(j>dKai.oy  ;  cp  Vg.  Pesh.  Targ.)  in  Ez.  13  18  20  are  purely
imaginary.  ninDS  appears  to  mean  some  kind  of  magical
amulet  carried  by  the  prophetesses;  cp  Ass.  iasii,  'to  bind,"
kasitu  (Del.  in  Haer,  Eztk.  xii.yC).

It  is  impossible  to  separate  the  subject  of  lieds  from
that  of  couches  or  divans.  Amos,  as  a  dweller  in  the
_  T)j„a.ns  ^"""^""y-  directs  his  scorn  against  the  luxury
■  of  the  rich  grandees  '  that  sit  in  Samaria  in
the  corner  of  a  couch,  and  on  the  silken  cushions  of
a  bed'  (.\m.  3 12^,  RV).  The  rendering  of  RV  is
indefensible  :  Damascus  and  damask  have  no  connec-
tion (see  Damascus,  §  6  n. ).  The  passage  has
been  cleared  up  with  an  approach  to  certainty  by
critical  conjecture  :  it  should  run  thus,  '  that  sit  in
Samaria  on  the  carpet  (n'Sxa)  of  a  couch,  and  on  the
cushion  (3|;;^C3)  of  a  divan.' '  From  another  pas.sagc,
which  also  can  be  restored  very  nearly  to  its  original
clearness  (see  D.WID,  §  12  n. ),  we  learn  that  the  couches
of  the  great  were  richly  adorned.  The  selfish  grandees
are  described  as  those  '  that  lie  upon  couches  (or  beds,
ni::D,  of  ivory,'  Am.  64).  Such  couches  were  sent  as
tribute  by  Hezekiah  to  Nineveh  [KB  297,  1.  :^6),  and  the
Amarna  Tablets  (5  20  ;  cp  27  2028)  speak  of  '  beds '  (irsu)  of
ivory,  gold,  and  wood  sent  to  the  king  of  Egypt.  So  too
in  Esther  (1 6  ;  cp  i  Esd.  36)  we  read  of  couches  adorned
with  gold  and  silver,  and  covered  with  rich  tapestry  an<l
deckings  from  Egypt  (cp  Prov.  7 16).  Some  of  the-,c
couches  would  of  course  be  used  as  beds.  .Such,  at  any
rate,  was  the  gorgeous  bed  [K\ivr\)  in  the  tent  of  Holo-
phernes.  The  description  of  it  contains  the  first  mention
ofa  '  canopy'  (/cwi'uiTrtov,  Judithl02i  ISg  16  19,  origin.illy
a  fly-net) — one  of  the  results  of  Greek  influence  ;
Hei.i.knism,  §  15.

BEDAD  (nn3  ;  Bar&A  [BADEL]),  the  father  of  Hadad
I.,  king  of  Edom,  (}en.  3635  iCh.  I46  (B&ApAM  [L])-
The  name  is  seemingly  a  corruption  of  Bir-dadda — i.e.,
probably,  Hir  is  Dadda  (two  names  of  the  storm-god
best  known  as  Ramman)  :  cp  with  this  Bir-zur  (n:»-i3,
Panammu  inscr.  from  Zenjirli,  i,  3).  Waiti,  the  'king
of  .Arabia '  concjuered  by  Asur-bani-pal,  had  for  his
father  Bir-dadda  (A'j9  2222/ ),  a  name  which  <inswers
to  the  -Assyrian  name  Bir- ramman  (the  eponym  for
848  B.C.).  Homniel  (Beitr.  z.  Ass.,  1897,  p.  270)
derives  from  Be-(Ha)dad — i.e.,  by  Hadad; — cp
Baana,  Be-eshtkrah.  t.  k.  c.

BEDAN  (|"15  ;  badan,  or  [Cod.  Am.]  bexedax).

I.  In  an  address  ascribed  to  Samuel  we  find  Bedan
mentioned  Ijetween  Jerubbaal  and  Jephthah  as  one  of
the  chief  deliverers  of  Israel  (i  S.  12  n  MT).  No  such
name  occurs  in  the  Book  of  Judges,  however,  and  the
form  of  the  name  is  suspicious.

Ew.  supposed  that  the  initial  letter  had  been  dropped,  and
that  we  .should  read  .\bdon  (|''n3y,  Judg.  I213).  Abdon,  how-
ever, is  one  of  the  six '  minor  Judges '  introduced  into  the

1  Cp  .\mos,  §  5  n. ;  Che.  Expositor,  vi.  b,-  366,  JQR  10  572,
and  on  n'BS,  'mat, 'rug,'  'carpet' see /«/n  Is.  i26n.  For  33^03
Gratz  and  Nowack  give  r3'0w*3,  'on  the  covering  of.'  But
jr  is  non-existent ;  in  Judg.  4 18  it  is  corrupt  (see  above).


BEE

historical  scheme  of  Judges  at  a  later  time. The  Targ.  fanci-
fully understands  the  name  a.s  ben-Uan— />.,  Sam.son.

The  mention  of  Sisera  in  v.  9  entitles  us  to  exf)ect
Barak,  which  name  is  actually  read  by  (3  {^apuK  [B.\I.,]),
Pesh. So  We. ,  Dr. ,  Klo. ,  Bu. ,  Moore,  H.  P.  Smith.

2.  A  Manassite,  i  Ch.  7  17  (/3a5a/ut  [H],  -Sav  [.\h]);  perhaps  a
corruption  of -Vbdon  (pay). See  .Machik.

BEDEIAH  (nn5,  more  probably  a  textual  corruption
for  n\S-|2,  I  Chy82it  [so  Gray,  NP.V  285.  n.  11,  who
cites  <5"  and  Pesh.],  than  an  abbreviation  for  HnSr
[so  Olsh.  2771^,  4,  followed  by  BDB],  a  Levitical  name
in  the  list  of  those  with  foreign  wives  (EzRA,  i.  §  5  end)
Ezral035  (Barma  [B],  BaAaia  [AL],  ma.  [S]  ;
;^('  =  i  Esd.  934  Pki.ias,  RV  Pedias  (neAl&C  [B],
TT&iAeiAC  [A],  BA2k(M&  UA)-  By  reading  Beraiah
(/.-'.)  as  above,  we  gain  a  second  name  in  which
creation  ( Ny^ia)  is  referred  to  by  the  distinctive  exilic
and  post-exilic  term. See  Cre.\tion,  §  30.

BEE  (n-jn-n,' MeAiccA; Dt.144  Judg.Hs  Ps.

II812  Pr.  68  (©]  Is.  7i8  Ecclus.  r)7  [X-^-^]  lis  4Macc.

Higt) has for its Hebrew name a word derived

from  a  root  meaning  to  lead  (or  to  Ix;  led)  in  order.

Thus it means properly a member of  a swarm (cp

e.xamen  from  ex-ago). Besides  the  familiar  incident  of

j Samson  finding  a  swarm  of  bees  in  the  lion's  carcase

I (recalling  Vergil's  story  of  .Xristaeus  and  other  classical

j allusions,  see  below),  we  have  in  the  OT  two  references

I 10  the  angry  a.ssaults  of  Ijees  on  those  who  meddle  with

their  hives  (Dt.  144  Ps.  llSi2  [.MT]  ; '-  cp  4  Mace.  14  19).

and  a  likening  of  the  .\ss)'rian  power  to  a  lx?e  summoned

by  the  sound  of  a  hiss  to  settle  on  the  land  of  Israel-'

i lis.  7 18). In Prov.  6, at the  close  of  the  exhortation

' iu  the  sluggard  to  learn  from  the  ant and  her  ways,

O  has  the  following  addition  to  the  Hebrew  text  : —

Or  go  thou  to  the  bee

And  learn  how  diligent  she  i.s,

And  how  noble  (o-e^inji')  is  the  work  th.at  she  doeth  ;

Whose  labours  kings  and  private  men  u-^e  for  health,

And  .she  is  desired  and  honourable  in  the  eyes  of  all  :

Though  she  be  weak  in  strength,

By  honouring  wisdom  she  is  advanced.

We  may  compare  the  words  of  the  son  of  Sirach  (11 3).
The  bee  is  little  among  such  as  fly,
l^jut  her  fruit  is  the  chief  of  sweet  things.

The  common  bee  of  Palestine  is  Apis  fasciata,  Latr. ;
some  authorities  regard  it  as  a  distinct  species,  others  as  a
sub-species  of  the  cosmopolitan  honey-bee  ^-^//w  mcllijica.
In  favour  of  the  latter  view  it  is  stated  that  when  crossed
with  races  of  the  same  species  it  breeds  freely  ;  but,  on
the  other  hand,  it  differs  in  size  and  colour  from  the
English  bee,  being  smaller  and  lighter,  and  beautifully
striped.  The  colonies  are  large  and  very  many,  Pales-
tine being  a  country  well  adapted  for  the  needs  of
insects  which  flourish  in  the  sun  and  feed  on  flowers.

Bees  are  found  wild,  making  their  hives  in  crevices  of

the  rocks  and  hollow  trees,  etc. ;  and,  even  at  the  present

day,  many  of  the  .\rabs  make  a  living  by  collecting  wild

honey  and  bringing it into  the  towns  for  sale. Bee-

I keeping is much practised in  the  East  (where  honey

I is largely used in cooking), the hives, according

I to  Canon  Tristram,  being  tubular  structures  3  or  4  ft.

' long, and  some 8 in. in diameter, roughly  made  of

sun-dried  mud. The  ends  of  the  tube  are  closed  with

\ a  tile  perforated  with  a  hole  for  the  access  of  the  l)ees.

I Many  of  the  hives  are  piled  up  together  and  covered

I with  boughs  for  the  sake  of  shade. When  the  combs

•  This  '-m.  word  is  a  nomen  unitatis;  the  collective  appears

in  .\rab.  as  dibr  or  dabr,  a  swarm  of  bees,  also  probably  in

j emended  text  of  i  S.  14  26,  ilS^,  its  bees  (for  B*?^)  ;  so  0,  We.,

Dr.,  Bu.,  H.  P.  Smith.

I ■-  ®  has  'as  bees  about  wax,'  which  Ba.,  Che.(l)  adopt ;  but

I j;n  comes  from  \yj^,  a  rival  reading  to  ni'3  (Che.  /V.C-')). In

I cod.  N  Ecclus. 57  a  corrector  h.-is  added  <o?  neAi<r<rai  ««crpi^ij<r»|.

^  The  ancients  believed  that  it  was  possible  to  summon  bees

by  sounds,  such  as  the  beating  of  metal  :  .see  Verg.  Georg.  46$,

and  the  other  passages  cited  by  Bochart  (Hicroz.  4  10).


i


BEBLIADA

are  stored  with  honey  the  end  is  removed  and  the  comb
pulled  out  with  a  hook.  It  is  jxissible  that  this  method
of  apiculture  is  of  considerable  antiquity — the  art  was
well  known  in  classical  times,  and  the  bee  has  lK;en,  as
Darwin  points  out,  '  semi  -  domesticated  from  an  ex-
tremely renjole  jieriod,' — but  there  is  no  reference  to
it  in  the  or  or  the  NT.

The  temper  of  this  race  of  bees  is  very  irritable,  and
they  are  very  revengeful  ;  indeed,  it  seems  that  the
farther  Kast  one  travels,  the  more  the  bee  is  to  be
avoided.  This  eagerness  to  attack  may  e.xplain  such
passages  as  Dt.  I44  I's.  II812,  which,  if  they  referred
to  the  English  \kc,  would  seem  exaggerated.  A  few
years  ago  some  hives  of  this  Kastern  race  were  introduced
into  the  South  of  England,  but  proved  so  aggressive  that
they  had  to  Ix  destroyed.  They  are  very  active  on  the
wing  and  fly  great  distances.

The  passage  in  Judg.  (148),  which  describes  Samson
finding  '  a  swarm  of  Ixjes  and  honey  in  the  carcase  of
the  lion,"  reads  strangely.  It  is,  however,  by  no  means
improbable  that  in  the  hot  dry  climate  of  Palestine  the
boily  of  a  lion  might  dry  up  (juickly,  and  it  is  possible
that  the  flesh  of  the  animal  might  have  been  removed
by  ants.  The  skeleton  might  then  form  an  attractive
shelter  for  a  hive.  On  the  other  hand,  liaron  Osten
.Sacken '  has  recently  drawn  attention  to  the  w  idely-
spread  myth  called  Bugonia,  which  is  that  bees  are
generated  in  the  bodies  of  dead  animals,  more  especially
in  the  carcases  of  oxen.  This  myth  frctiuenlly  occurs
in  ancient  and  medi;eval  literature,-  and  was  believed
and  quoted  by  distinguished  naturalists  as  late  as  the
middle  of  the  seventeenth  century.  Its  explanation,
according  to  our  author,  lies  in  the  fact  that  a  true  fly
(Erishtlis  lenax,  one  of  the  Diptera),  which  mimics  a
bee  so  closely  as  to  deceive  those  who  are  not  entomo-
logists, lays  its  eggs  in  decaying  meat.  This  provides
food  for  tile  maggots.  After  the  pupa  stages  emerges
the  mature  insect.  As  it  flies  away,  it  would  be  almost
certainly  taken  for  a  bee.  The  theory  is  ingenious  ;  but
it  does  not  account  for  the  honey  in  the  lion's  carcase,
and  at  present,  although  the  Eristalis  undoubtedly  lays
its  eggs  in  filth,  the  evidence  that  it  does  so  in  dead
bodies  is  somew  hat  scanty.

A  story  parallel  to  Samson's  is  to  the  effect  that
recently,  when  the  tomb  of  Petrarch  at  .\rqua  was  opened,
it  was  found  that  a  swarm  of  bees  had  made  their
honeycomb  on  the  remains  of  the  poet.

The  Palestine  bee,  which  is  found  S.  of  Mount
Carmel,  differs  from  the  Syrian  bee  found  in  Asiatic
Turkey  X.  of  that  district.  The  latter  is  of  a  deeper
gray.  Both  races  are  larger  than  the  Cyprian  bee,
which  is  slender  and  wasp-like.  The  Egyptian  bee
resembles  the  Syrian  in  size,  but  is  yellow  and  of  an
unusually  fierce  temperament. See  also  Honky.

N.  .M. — .\.  E.  s.

BEELIADA  (in*'?V3.  §42.  i-c,  'Baal  knows.' or
'whom  B.  deposits'  [for  safe  custody  ;  cp  Ar.  wada'a,
'  deposuit ' ;  see  Kerber,  /ugfnn.  39] ;  the  \Iassoretic
vocalisation  intentionally  disguises  the  word  ?1^3),  one
of  the  sons  of  D.WiD  {'/.'■.,  §  11  </]  (i  Ch.  14;.  jSaXeySae
[BS],  -\\iaoa[A],/JaaXta5a[L];  Ti.'stext  eXiaSe).  This,
the  original  form  of  the  name,  was  later  altered  by  the
scrupulous  copyists  to  Ei.i.^n.v  in  2  S.  5  16  (but  ^aaXiXad
[L]  and  -ei/jLaS  in  B's  secondary  [see  D.wiu,  §  11  (d)  /3]
list)  and  i  Ch.  38.  when  Baal  had  become  objectionable
as  a  name  of  God  (WRS,  OTVCC-)  68).  Cp  Baal.  i.
§5-

BEELSARUS  (BeeXcApoc  [BA]).  i  Esd.58  =  Ezra

22, HlI.slIAN.

BEELTETHMUS  (BeeAreeMOC  [B]).  i  Esd.  2i6.
See  Ri.iUM,  5.

1  Bullettino  dtlla  Societd  Entomolorica  Italiana, torn.  25
l'9il.
^  See  the  references  in  Bochart,  Hieroz.  4  10.


BEELZEBUL

BEELZEBUL,  as  in  RV'"k  ;  EV  Beelzebub ;  a
name  of  the  ruler  of  the  demons  (ftpxcoN  TcoN  A&r
moniojn).  Mt.  IO25  122427  Mk.3  22  Lk.  11  .5  iS/t

KV  follows  Text.  Rcc,  which  has  0«Af,/3ov^  (so  IVsh.) ;  l.ut
final /  is better atte.sud 03«Afe^ouA (cA  Syr.Hcl.); so '1  i.
Trcg.). W'H, following 15 and partly k, '■•^•"l
1.  Form everywhere  0«^.0ouA,  which,  Weiss  insists,  must
of  name, i's  oriKinal  ;  but this scepticism as to the A  in
pecA  is  paradoxical. The  word  ^«^«^ouA  is  in-
explicable and  hardly  pronounceable,  and  the  famous  p.-issjigc
in Mt.  IO25, where  the  oiKohtano-rn^  is  said  to  \x  insultingly
called liee(l)zebul, implies the speaker's consciousness that
^ya  is  one  element  in  the  title.

The  name  differs  in  two  respects  from  the  traditional
name  of  the  god  of  l':kron  :  ( i )  its  first  part  is  Aramaic,
and  (2)  its  last  letter  is  not  b  but  /.
2.  Explanation,  j^jj,,  ^.^  cannot  doubt  that  BCelzebnl  is
identical  with  Baal-zCbub.  This  heathen  god  seemed
at  one  moment  to  be  the  rival  of  Yahwe  (2  K.  1  3),  and
his  name  naturally  rose  to  Jewish  lips  when  demoniacal
possession  was  spoken  of,  because  of  the  demoniacal
origin  assumed  for  heathen  oracles.  The  title  occurs
nowhere  in  Jewish  literature,  and  must,  therefore,  have
lost  its  popiilarity  after  the  time  of  Christ.  There  were,
in  fact,  so  many  names  of  demons  that  we  cannot  be
surprised  that  some  once  popular  names  passed  out  of
use.  If  we  ask  how  the  name  Beel-zebub,  or  rather
Beel-zebul,  came  to  tje  popular,  the  answer  is — first,  that
the  title  Baal-zebul  was  probably  not  confined  to  the  god
of  Ekron,  but  was  once  known  in  Palestine  pretty  widely,
so  that  a  traditional  knowledge  of  it,  as  well  as  of  the
synonymous  title  Haai.-Zki'IKjN  [q.v.],  can  \x  presumed
among  the  Jews  and  their  neighbours  even  apart  from
2  K.  1  ;  and  next,  that  Lk.  954  shows  that  special  interest
was  felt  by  the  Jews  of  the  time  of  Christ  in  the  strange
narrative  in  which  the  natne  Baal-zebub  occurs.  That
the  form  Baal-zcbfil  was  generally  preferred  may  be
presumed  froin  the  best  accredited  Greek  text  of  the
Gospels — the  knowledge  of  this  form  nmst  have  come
to  the  Jews  by  tradition  and  by  intercourse  vith  their
neighbours — but  it  is  probable  enough  that  Bctl-zebhb
also  was  current,  and  from  Mt.  10  25  we  are  obliged  to
assume  that  some  teachers  pronounced  the  name  Beel-
zebud,  with  the  view  of  interpreting  it  Beel-debaitha  =
olKo5eaii6TT)%.  '  lord  of  the  house ' — n  and  n  Ix^ing  easily
interchanged.!  (.An  analogy  for  this  can  be  found  in
the  Elohist's  play  upon  Zebulun.  as  if  Zebudun,  in
Gen.  3O20. )  The  interpretation  was  correct  (see  Baai.-
zi-.Bi;n,  §  3),  though  the  'house'  of  which  Jesus  and
his  contemporaries  thought  was,  not  on  the  mountain
of  God  (cp  BAAi.-ZF.riiON,  '  lord  of  the  [niansi(jn  of
the]  north),  but  in  the  '  recesses  of  the  pit '  ^  (Is.  14  15).
Though  the  demons  might  be  allowed  to  pervade
the  upper  world  (cp  I'.ph.  22).  the  place  from  which
they  proceeded  was  the  'abyss'  (the  Abaddon  of  Rev.
9ii).

As  things  now  stand,  therefore,  it  is  best  to  suppose
Baai,-ZKBUB  [q.v. ,  §  3]  to  be  a  modification  in  the  direc-
tion of  cacophony  for  religious  reasons  (cp  Gog,  Magog)
which  did  not  hold  its  ground.  Baftl-zcbul  is  probably
the  original  form,  and  it  meant  '  lord  of  the  mansion ' —
i.e. ,  to  the  Jews  of  NT  times,  '  lord  of  the  nether  world."
The  reading  of  the  recei\ed  Greek  text  is  assimilated  to
the  reading  of  the  traditional  Hebrew  text.

Over  against  this  view  stands  that  of  the  old  scholar
Lightfoot  (still  defended  by  Am.  Meyer,  Jesu  Mutter-
sprache,  49).  which  connects  -zebul  with
3.  Other  ex-  1,3,  ■dung,"  Vai.  '?nn.  *  dung-making."  in
planationa.  ^  Hebrew  ;  cp  S31'.  '  to  offer  to  idols."
The  idea  is  that  '  lord  of  flies "  was  changetl  into  '  lord
of  dung,"  to  show  abhorrence  of  heathenism.  Such
transformations  are,  no  doubt,  in  the  later  Jewish  spirit;
1  Cp  ©."s  ZojSoufl  for  Zabud  [q.v.,  1].

»  She  Ol,  on  this  theory,  is  ironically  described  as  the  70T,  the
•  palace '  or  '  mansion  '  of  the  demons,  as  in  Ps.  40 1 5  (according  to
one  possible  view,  see  PsALMS,  ^.ffOr  where  We.  reads  ?3|0)  of
the  wicked  rich.

5»4


BEER

but  this  particular  one  is  improbable.^  '  Lord  of  flies'
(could  we  assume  that  this  was  the  original  meaning)  was
itself,  as  a  title,  bad  enough  ;  nor  would  the  people,  who
feared  the  demons  so  much,  have  ventured  to  speak  too
disrespectfully  of  the  archdemon  (cp  Ashmedai  or
AsmodOus,  which  to  a  Hebrew  ear  meant  the  '  destroyer'
—not  a  disrespectful  title)  ;  lastly,  on  Lightfoot's
theory  the  name  ought  to  be  Beel-zel>el :  it  is  shown
elsewhere  that  a  late  editor  detected  the  new  Hebrew
word  zebel,  'dung,'  in  the  name  I-zel)el  (Jezkbel).
Lightfoot's  theory,  then,  must  be  abandoned,  as  Baudis-
sin  holds.  But  Baudissin's  own  theory  (adopted  from
Hitzig)  is  not  really  more  satisfactory.  He  thinks  that
Baal-zebul  is  simply  a  euphonic  modification  of  Baal-
zebub,  the  consonant  which  closed  the  first  syllable
being  repeated  at  the  close  of  the  second  part  of  the
word.  2

This,  however,  leaves  Baal-zebub  unexplained,  for
Baudissin's  theory  of  the  name  is  scarcely  admissible.

See  Selden,  De  Dis  Syris,2(>;  Lightfoot,  Horcs
HebraiccB,  on  Mt.  12  24  Lk.  1 1 15  ;  Movers,  Die  Phonizier
('41),  1  260/  ;  Riehm's  article  in  HWB^"^).  The  latter
revives  an  old  theory  of  Storr  and  Doderlein  that  bi'el
dUbdbd  in  Aramaic  might  mean  either  '  lord  of  flies '  or
'an  enemy,'  ix^P^^  dfOptuwos  (Mt.  I328)  =  Sid/SoXos.
This  is  doubtless  plausible.  We  must  at  least  admit
that  the  common  people  cannot  without  instruction  have
attached  a  meaning  to  -zcbul.  But  how  has  Beelzcbul
(half  Hebrew,  half  Aramaic)  fixed  itself  in  the  Gospel
tradition?  Pesh.  too  retains  Beelzebub.  Baudissin's
article  in  Herzog,  /-'A'A"<^'  (learned  and  thorough)  adopts
the  ordinary  view,  as  far  as  Baal-zebub  is  concerned.

T.  K.  C.

BEER  (-1X2,  '  well,'  §  loi).  i.  [to  (Ppiap  [BAFL]).
A  station  of  the  Israelites,  apparently  between  Heshbon
and  the  Anion  (Nu.  21i6  [JE]).  See  Nahaliel  ;
Waxueking,  §  8  ;  and  cp,  below,  Bekr-Elim.  The
interest  of  Beer  is  not  geographical  but  literary.  The
discovery  of  the  well  was  commemorated  (the  narrator
gives  us  to  understand)  by  a  song.  The  song  with  its
context  runs  thus,  according  to  MT, —

And  from  there  to  Beer  :  that  is  the  well  whereof  Yahwfe
said  unto  Moses  :  .■\ssemljle  the  people,  and  I  will  give  them
water. Then  sang  Israel  this  song  :

Spring  up,  O  well  ;  greet  ye  it  with  a  song.
Well,  that  the  princes  have  dug,
The  nobles  of  the  people  have  bored,
With  the  sceptre — with  their  staves.
And  from  iMidbar[KV  the  wilderness]  to  Mattanah  ;  and  from
Mattanah  to  Nahaliel  ;  and  from  Nahaliel  to  liamoth.

The  historical  character  of  this  statement  has  generally
been  assumed.  Ewald,  however,  is  on  the  road  to  a
very  different  theory  when  he  remarks  that  such  a  well-
song  would  become  a  source  of  joy  to  the  labourers  who
thenceforward  used  it  {Hist.  2204).  He  sees,  in  fact,
that  it  is  essentially  a  popular  song.  Robertson  Smith,
too,  finely  speaks  of  '  the  exquisite  song  in  which  the
Hebrew  wonien  as  they  stand  round  the  fountain,
waiting  their  turn  to  draw,  coax  forth  the  water  which
wells  up  all  too  slowly  for  their  impatience.'^  We
should  not  expect  the  origin  of  such  a  song  to  be
remembered  ;  nor  is  there  anything  in  the  words  to
suggest  the  occasion  ascribed  to  it  in  JI-'.  More  prob-
ably it  arose  in  the  dry  country  of  the  south  of  Judah,
where  springs  were  the  most  valued  possession  (cp  Judg.
lis  Josh.  15 19  Gen.  2619/;).  The  '  princes,"  'nobles,'
and  '  captains '  (for  ppnaa  we  read  o'ppno  ;  cp  Judg.
59-14)  referred  to  are  the  sheikhs  of  the  clan. When

1  D'Sl^,  the  present  writer  thinks,  has  no  connection  with
^Sa,  'dung.'  It  is  pointed  in  imitation  of  D'S?pB',  'abomina-
tions,' and  should  really  be  read  D'Vlj'jl,  'heaps  of  stones,'  i.e.,
altars  of  stone. Cp,  however,  Idol,  $  2  (/').

'^  Hitzig  (A7.  Proph.,  by  Steiner,  267)compares(S.'s  K\i.&aKov\i.
(Habakkuk);  Baudissin  adds  Habel-mandel  for  Babel-Mandeb.

3  'The  Poetry  of  the  OT,'  Brit.  Quart.  Rev.  Jan.  1877;  cp
RS'^)  135.  The  expression  'coax  forth"  was  .suggested  by
Herder.  The  fountain  is  credited  by  primitive  races  with  per-
sonality.


BEER-LAHAI-ROI

a  fresh  well  has  been  found,  the  sheikhs  go  through  the
symbolic  form  of  digging  for  it  with  staves,  and  the  poets
of  the  clan  greet  the  well  with  a  song.

Does  MT  give  us  the  whole  of  the  song?  Can
Midbar  be  used  as  a  proper  name  ?  Surely  not.  And,
when  we  examine  the  MSS  of  ©,  we  find  some  justifi-
cation for  the  hypothesis  of  Budde,  that  the  text  of  the
itinerary  originally  ran,  '  .And  from  there  to  Beer  ;  and
from  Beer  to  Nahaliel  and  from  Nahaliel  to  Bamoth.'
and  that  an  editor  who  knew  the  song  of  the  well,  and
desired  to  do  it  honour,  inserted  it  Ijetween  the  first  and
the  second  items  in  the  list,  with  the  additional  line,
'Out  of  the  wilderness  a  gift '  (see  Mattanah).  See
Budde,  New  World,  March  1895;  Preuss.  Jahrbb.,
1895,  p.  491^  ;  Franz  Del.  ZA'II',  1882,  p.  449^

2.  A  place  to  which  Jotham  [i]  fled  from  his  brother
Abimelech,  Judg.  921  (^an.-i)p  [B],  papa.  \\\  §r)pa.  [L]).
In  OS  (23873;  106  20)  it  is  identified  with  a  village
called  Bera,  8  m.  N.  of  Eleutheropolis.  The  context,
however,  gives  us  no  data  for  determining  the  site  of
the  '  well '  in  question.

IJeekoth  ((l-v.)  and  even  Beersheba  have  been  suggested.
Kb.  el-lilreh,  W.  of  'Ain  Shems,  is  considerably  more  than
8  m.  N.  of  Beit  Jibrln.  t.  K.  C.

BEERA  (XnX?,  'well"  ;  BmmAa  [B],  BeHRA  [A],
cm.  L. ),  b.  Zophah,  in  genealogy  of  Asher  (i  Ch.
737)-

BEERAH  (n"lS3,  'well'),  a  Reubenite  prince,  son
of  Baal,  carried  off  by  Tiglath-pileser,  i  Ch.  56  (BchA
[B],  -HRA  [A],  B&PA  [I-])-  He  is  identified  by  the
rabbins  with  Beeri,  the  father  of  the  prophet  Hosea.

BEER-ELIM  (D'''?\S  IX?  [Ba.  Gi.],  'well  of  tere-
binths' (?)  or  'of  sacred  trees'  ;  4)pGAp  TOY<MA[e]iM
[BNAQF]),  a  place  apparently  on  the  northern  border
of  Moab,  answering  to  Eglaim  on  the  south  (Is.  158).
It  is  generally  identified  with  the  Bekk  of  Nu.  21 16.
Some  identify  it  also  with  the  Alema  of  i  Mace.  526  ;
but  see  Alema.

BEERI  ClX?,  '  belonging  to  the  well '  or  '  Beer,'  §
76  ; cp  above).

1.  A  Hittite,  the  father  of  Judith  (i.  1),  Esau's  wife,  Gen.
26 34  Oc7)p  [AD],  jSaijjA  [E],  /Saiiop  [L]).  It  is  impossible  to
reconcile  this  description  with  that  of  Ad.ih  in  the  genealogy  in
Gen.3t52,  for  which  see  B.\sue.math,  i.

2.  The  father  of  Hosea,  Hos.  1  i  (6  /3e.,p[e]t,  [BAQ]).

BEER-LAHAI-ROI  (^X'l  ^TO  nX?),  a  well  in  the
Negeb,  famous  in  Hebrew  tradition  as  the  scene  of
Hagar's  theophany  (Gen.  16 14),  and  no  doubt  connected
with  a  sanctuary  (St.  ZATW  1  349  ['81]).  Beside  this
sacred  well  was  the  abode  of  Isaac  (Gen. 'J462  25 11).
The  name  is  mentioned  only  by  J  ;  E,  who
gives  nearly  the  same  account  of  the  theophany
(21  8-21),  speaks  simply  of  '  a  well.'  According  to  RV,
Beer-lahai-roi  means  '  well  of  the  living  one  who  sees
me.'

So  the  Versions  (1(5 14  :  <l>peap  of  ci/aJTriof  [ellSof  [.\DE],  24  26
25  II  :  </).  riji  opao-eois  [ADEL] ;  Pcsh.  in  all  three  ).**.?  JJ^S
t*J  Ju»)-  This  rendering,  however,  is  inconsistent  with  that  given
of  El  Roi  in  1013,  '.\  God  that  seeth ' ;  we  should  expect,  not
'NT  'n,  but  "NT  'n,  and,  even  apart  from  this,  'n  cannot  be  equiva-
lent to  hit,  '  God  '  (the  phrase  'n  Vx  is  late).  Probably,  there-
fore, we  should  render  with  We.  {Prol.i*)  330;  ET  326),  'living
is  he  who  .sees  me,'  and  explain  this  by  the  liijht  of  H.-».!;ar's
words  in  v.  13,  which,  as  they  stand,  are  unintelligible,  but  may,
by  the  correction  of  U7TI  into  D'ri7K,l  and  the  insertion  of  TIKI
between  TI'NT  and  *"inN  (the  resemblance  of  these  three  words
accounts  for  the  omission  of  one),  be  interpreted  thus  :  '  Have  I
.seen  God  and  remained  alive  after  my  vision  (of  CJod)? '  El  Roi
(lit.  '  God  of  vision  ')  will  then  mean  '  the  God  who  is  seen '  (cp
Gen.  22  14).

These  explanations  of  El-R6'I  and  Beer-lahai-ro'i
are  too  plainly  not  original.  According  to  analogy,
'nV  (wrongly  vocalised  lahai)  ought  to  be  a  noun  in  the
construct  state. Instead  of  lahai  we  should  doubtless

1  Cp  dtV  in  MT  of  I  S.  3  13  :  read  D'n'^N  with  ®bal.
5'6


1.  Name.


BEEROTH

vocalise /<'/*/,  'jaw-bone';  ro/f?)  is  some  animal's  name,
not  known  in  the  later  Hebrew,  ami  perhaps  of  Arabic
origin.  Ttie  name  misread  Lahai-roi  should,  therefore,
be  renden-d  '  Antelope's  (?)  jaw-l)one. '

Another  explanation  is  proposed  by  Hommel  (AHT  209).
Adhering  to  the  points  as  regards  the  syllable  hat,  he  compares
the  S.  Ar.  name  Luhai-'atkt.  He  docs  not  account  for  ro'i.
Should  'm  l)e  lin (see  Reu)?  Samson's  Lehi,  however,  supplies
a  more  obvious  clue.

Uffi,  'jaw-bone.'  was  a  name  given  to  any  prominent
crag,  from  a  fancied  resemblance  to  a  jaw-bone.  .See
Lehi  ;  and  cp  Onugnathos  {tvov  71'd^oj),  a  promontory
on  the  coast  of  Laconia,  and  'Camel's  jaw-l>one'  (an
Arabic  name,  Yilkiit,  iv.  3539^  ;  cp  We.  Vakidi,  298,
n.  2).i

According  to  K.  the  well  was  in  the  wilderness  of
Beersheba  (Hen.  21 14)  ;  J,  more  precisely,  states  that  it
_..  was  'on  the  way  to  Shur'  (16 7),  'between
■  Kadesh  and  Bered '  {v.  14).  Jerome  knew  of
a  'well  of  Hagar'  ((>510l3);  does  he  mean  the  tra-
ditional well  in  the  tl  ddy  el-Muweileft  f  This  strangely
formed  wady  is  at  the  foot  of  mountains  of  the  same
name,  and  Palmer  thinks  that  there  was  once  a  large
city  here  ('  perhaps  one  of  the  "  cities  of  the  south  "  ').
One  of  the  wells  has  special  sanctity,  and  is  connected
by  the  Bedouin  with  Hagar.  Two  caves  appear  to  be
ancient.  The  siiialler,  at  the  upi:)er  end  of  the  wady,
on  the  right  hand,  was  apparently  a  Christian  chapel  ;
the  other,  on  the  opposite  side,  seems  to  have  served
as  the  hermitage  (Palmer,  Desert  of  the  Exodus,  2
354).  As  to  the  'jaw-bone'  rock  no  positive  state-
ment can  be  ventured.  On  the  geographical  state-
ment in  <■.  14,  see  Bkkkd,  i.  To  the  suggestions  there
made  it  may  be  added  that  the  'way  to  Shuk  '  [q.v.)
would  be  one  of  the  regions  called  by  the  Assyrians
Musri.  According  to  the  original  tradition  Hagar
seems  to  have  fled,  not  to  Egypt,  but  to  a  N.  Arabian
district  called  by  a  name  which  was  confounded  with
Mizraim  (ICgypt).  This,  and  not  Egypt,  was  really  her
native  country  ;  this  too  was  the  country  from  which,
according  to  E,  she  took  a  wife  for  her  son  Ishmael
(21 21).  SoW'i.  AOF  30/.  See  H.\GAR,  §  i  ;  Is.\.\c,
§  2  ; MizkAi.M,  §  2  ; MoKi.vu.  T.  K.  c.

BEEROTH  (nnXZ;  BhrcoG  [BXAL]),  a  city  of
Benjamin.

In  Josh.  IS  25,  P(r,poi0a  [H],  /3r,#u)pa>9  [I.],  2.S.  42  [A  omits];
gentilic  Beerothito  (•rnN^.T  ;  j3r,pa)eaio9  [I'.AL],  2  Sam.  42/
59;  Pr)9u>p.  [liA], /Siflapft  [L],  2  Sam.  2337;  'rf'^rr,  KV  Bero-
THITE,  1  Ch.  11  39  ;  o  Pfp0(i  [?,],  6  /3i7pwfl  [A],  o  /Sjjpojfli  [L]).

According  to  Josh.  9  17  {^etpuv  [B*],  ^r]Owf>  [B'^bmEf.]),
it  belonged  originally  to  the  Gitieonite  confederation  ;
and,  according  to  2S.  43,  there  was  at  one  time  a
migration  of  its  inhabitants  to  CJiitaim  (see  l.siii?.\.\L,  1).
Men  of  Beeroth  are  mentioned  in  the  great  post-exilic
list  (see  KzR.\,  ii.  §  9,  §  8  r)  ;  Ezra225  =  N'eh.  729  (/i7?pa.'s
[B],  afiripu)d  [L])  =  i  Esd.5i9  (i^vpoy  [B]  p(7/pwe?  [.\]).
It  is  named  by  Kus.  (cp  Reland,  618-19),  and  is  now
represented  by  the  modern  /-.V  /i/reh  (which  still  owes
its  name  to  its  abundant  supply  of  water),  a  village  of
about  800  inhabitants,  in  a  poor  district,  about  9  m.
N.  from  Jerusalem,  on  the  Shechem  road.  Tradition
assigns  it  as  the  place  where  Joseph  and  Mary  missed
Jesus  from  the  company  of  returning  pilgrims  (Lk.
24345).

BEEROTH  or  THE  CHILDREN  OF  JAAKAN,
RV  Beeroth  Bene-Jaakan  (Ii;'r'."\:?  nilX?.  •  wells
of  the  b'ne  J.i'akan  '),  a  halting-place  in  the  desert,  Dt.
106  (BHpco9  YICON  lAKeiM  [HAL]),  where  it  is  men-
tioned Ix-fore  MosKROTH.'-^  This  notice  is  pre-Deutero-
nomic,  and  belongs  to  a  fragment  of  E's  list  of  stations

>  So  first  We.  ProL  I.e.  ;  cp  Moore, /i«i'^«,  347.  It
natural  inference  that  Kl-roi  originally  referred  to  an  a
god  (so  Ball,  Genesis,  SHOT).

*  The  Samar.  text  has  lor  this  verse  :  '  And  the  children  of
Israel  journeyed  from  Moseroth  and  encamped  among  the  b'ne
Ja'ak2n.'

5»7


seems  a
antelope-


BEERSHEBA

which  has  been  inserted  by  the  editor  (Bacon,  Trip.
Trad.  207/;  cp  Meyer,  /.ATW  1  118  ;  Dr.  Deut.
120).  In  Nu.  3331/  the  same  name  occurs  (shortened
into  Bknk-Jaakan,  jpy*  '33  ;  (iavaia  [BJ  ;  -viKai'  [A] ;
-{i)aKav  [F]  ;  fiaviK.  [L])  after  Moseroth  ;  but  the  list
of  stations  in  Nu.  33  is  of  late  editorial  origin  (cp  Kue.
//ex.  98,  102).  The  sjKJt  probably  lay  somewhere  on
the  edge  of  the  Arabah.  Cp  Jakan,  and  Wander-
ings, §  8.

BEERSHEBA  (rT^IN?,  §  107— i.e. ,  'well  of  seven,'
rather  than  'seven  wells' — see  lx;low,  §  3  ; BHpCABee

1.  References,  t'^-^^r.]  •  'Vr^'  ^^^^  BHRCABeO  [A] ;
in  den.  21  31  4)peAp  opKICMOy
[.\DL],  2633  <|).  opKOy  [ADEL],  it  is  taken  as  mean-
ing '  well  of  the  oath  ').i  One  of  the  Simeonite  towns
in  the  southern  territory  of  Judah  (Josh.  I92),  on  the
border  of  the  cultivated  land,  came  to  be  regarded,
for  the  greater  part  of  history,  as  the  remotest  point
of  Canaan  in  that  direction  ;  whence  the  phrase
'from  Dan  to  Beersheba'  (2  8.17"),  which,  after
the  fall  of  the  \.  kingdom,  became  from  '  Geba  to
Beersheba'  (2  K.  238),  or  'from  Beersheba  to  Mt.
Ephraim'  (2Ch.  194  ^fnpaa^fe  [B]),  and  in  the  post-
e.xilic  period  '  from  Beersheba  to  the  valley  of  Hinnom  '
(Xeh.  11  27  /3f77/>(ra/ife  [B],  /3epcr.  [A],  30  littjpaafitf  [B],
^fpff.  [A]).  Vet  Beersheba,  though  the  practical,  was
not  the  ideal,  border  of  the  Holy  Land.  This  ran
along  the  '  river  of  Egypt,'  the  present  Wady  el-'Arish,
nearly  60  m.  SE.  of  Beersheba.

An  account  of  the  origin  of  the  name  and  the  planting
of  the  sacred  tamarisk  of  Beersheba  is  given  in  the  story
of  Abraham  (Gen.  21  22^.  E)  ;  but  another  story  fx;long-
ing  to  another  document  (J)  assigns  the  origin  of  the
well  and  its  name  to  Isaac  (Gen.  2626-33).  It  was  the
scene  of  more  than  one  theophany  in  patriarchal  times.
It  was  an  important  sanctuary  frequented  even  by  N.
Israel  in  the  time  of  Amos  (65  (ppeap  toO  8pK0v  [B.AQ]),
who  refers  with  disapproval  to  those  who  swear  by  the
life  of  the  divine  patron'-  of  FJeersheba  (814).  It  was
in  Beersheba  that  the  two  sons  of  Samuel  are  said  to
have  exercised  their  judgeship  (iS.  82),  and  a  day's
journey  thence  into  the  wilderness  is  placed  the  incident
of  the  'juniper'  tree  in  the  life  of  Elijah  (i  K.  193j5':
/3e/)<ra/3ff  [A]).  Beersheba  was  the  birthplace  of  the
mother  of  King  Joash  (2K.  r2i[2]  2Ch.  24i).  In
post-exilic  times  it  was  inhabited  by  men  of  Judah.

The  ruins  at  Beersheba  belong  apparently  to  early  Christian
days.  The  Onoviastica  describe  it  as  a  large  place  with  a
Roman  garrison  (103  32  '234  100). In  the  time  of  Jerome  the

Clace  was  of  some  importance  ;  later,  it  became  an  episcop.il  see  ;
ut  by  the  fourteenth  century  it  had  become  deserted  and  ruined.
It  is  represented  by  the  modern  />/>  es-Seba,  on  the
W.  es-Seba',  28  m.  s'w.  from  Hebron  (Rob.  Bk'  1  300
2 Identifi-  -^  ■ ' ^  '^''st  the  arable  land  of  Palestine
cation ' ^'"''"^"y  comes  to  an  end  with  Beersheba,
and  the  country  to  the  south  of  it  is  usually
barren, there  are, for  nearly  30  m. .S. of Beersheba,
ruins of old villages gathered round wells  ; they
evidently  date  from  Roman  times.

On  Tosh.  192,  '  Beersheba  and  Shelxi,'  see  Shema  (i. ).

[WRS(AV/.  Sem.C-)  181)  remarks  'The  sanctuary  of

Beersheba proix-rly consisted of the '  •  Seven Wells "

„ T\™i *• vhich  gave  the  place  its  name. ' Among

3.  Derivation.  ., » ,  ,  ,,,.,. ,,•  ,,  '.

the  .Arabs  a  place  called  '  Seven  \\  ells

is  mentioned  by  Strabo  (I64S4). Rot^ertson  Smith  has

also  given  abundant  evidence  of  the  sanctity  attaching

to  the  groups  of  seven  wells  among  the  Semites. Even

to-day  seven  wells  or  cisterns  seem  to  have  the  power  of

undoing  witchcraft (ZDFl'l i<^). This  view is due

to  Stade  (Gesch.  i.  127),  who  thinks  that  the  postposition

of  the  numeral  was  Canaanitish  ;  but,  as  in  the  case  of

Kirjaih-arta  (see  Hebron,  i. ).  the  theory  is  doubtful.

'  Well  of  Seven '  is  not  inexplicable  ; '  Well  of  (the)  Seven

J  The  Hebrew  verb  '  to  swear '  means  literally  '  to  come  under
the  influence  of  seven  things.' See  WRS,  Ket.  Stm.^t  161 J^.
2  MT  gives  '  way '  (cultus) ;  see  Amos,  i  ao.

518


BE-ESHTERAH

gods '  is  intrinsically  a  probable  meaning.  Few  persons,
it  is  to  be  hoped,  go  to  lieersheba  looking  for  seven
wells.  Gautier  affirms  that  there  are  now  only  three,
though  there  may  once  have  l«?en  more  {Souvenirs  de
Terre  Sainte,'^-''  147  ;  but  cp  his  letter  in  Exp.  Times,
IO328  (Apr.  99).  Trumbull  [Exp.  Times,  889  [Nov.
'96])  also  states  that  he  saw  three  wells,  but  adds  that
at  some  distance  he  saw  the  remains  of  a  fourth  and  a
fifth.  He  admits  that  there  may  once  have  been  more
than  five.  Cp  also  Dr.  Exp.  Times,  7  s(>l  f-  ('>^Y>-
'96).  For  descriptions  of  Beersheba  as  it  is  to-day,
see  Rob.  BR  1  204  ;  Gu(5rin,  Judde,  2  278  283  ;  Si^journ^,
Kev.  bibliqite,  1895,  p.  265.]  <;.  .\.  s.

BE-ESHTERAH  (Hnri'JT?)  in  Josh.  21 27  (Bocop&N
\^\  -??-\.^'\  BeeBApA  [A]),  perhajjs  an  abbreviation
for  n^riVT  jri'5'  'house  of  Astarte '  (cp  Ges. ,  Nestle,
Eig.  114,  etc. ).  Homniel,  however  (Ih-itr.f.  Ass. ,  1897,
p.  268),  explains  '  by  Ashtar ' ;  cp  the  S.  Ar.  nnnv^.  '  by
Athtar  (i.e. ,  Ashtar).'  Cjray  (I/PX  127)  also  is  against
the  supposed  abbreviation  of  bcfh  into  be-. See  A.sii-

TAROTH.

BEETLE,  RV  Crickkt  (^jl^n  ;  o(})iomaxhc^
[BAFL]  :  Lev.  Il22t).  By  the  word  so  rendered  is
almost  certainly  intended  a  species  of  locust  or  grass-
hopper ;  the  name  is  one  of  four  used  in  the  verse  to
denote  '  winged  creeping  things  that  go  upon  all  fours,
which  have  legs  above  their  feet,  to  leap  withal  upon
the  earth. '  The  Hebrew  name  has  passed  into  Aramaic,
post-biblical  Hebrew,  and  Armenian  ;  in  Arabic  harjala
means  '  a  troop  of  horses  '  or  '  a  troop  of  locusts  '  (cp
Joel24),  and  the  connected  verb  means  'to  proceed  in
a  long  train,'  as  do  locusts.  '  Beetle  '  is  at  all  events  a
wrong  rendering  ;  for  the  Coleoptera  have,  as  a  rule,  legs
ill  adapted  for  '  leaping  upon  the  earth,'  and  are  .seldom
or  never  eaten  ;  whereas  certain  kinds  of  crickets,  as  of
locusts,  are  fried  and  eaten  by  Eastern  nations.  It  is
impossible,  howe\er,  to  identify  the  species  (if  any)
referred  to. Cp  also  Ldcl'ST,  §  2.

BEGGAR,  BEGGING. See  Alms,  §  4.
BEHEADING. See  L.wv  .\nu  Justice,  §  12.

BEHEMOTH  and  LEVIATHAN,  two  real  or  sup-
posed animals  grouped  together  in  Job  40i5-41,  but
, ii/r i-  *  nowhere else in the canonical books

1.  Mention  Of  , however  below). •■' Di<hcmdth  (nicna)

Behemoth. ; , ,  ' . , ,  ,  -

IS  no  doubt  an  intensive  plural  form,  and
means  '  a  colossal  teast. '  It  occurs  [a)  in  Job 40 15-24,
probably  (b)  in  Is.  306,  but  hardly  (c)  in  Ps.  7322.3

In  (rt)  the  animal  so  called  is  described  at  length.  This
description  is  followed  by  a  sketch  of  Leviathan,  and  most
critics  have  thought,  specially  on  the  ground  of  the  '  hyper-
bolical '  expressions,  that  the  two  pictures  are  later  insertions  in
the  speeches  of  Yahwe  (see  Joii).  Whether  the  expressions
are  fitly  called  'hyperbolical,'  we  shall  .see  presently. Almost


all  modern  critics,  whether  they  separate  Job40i5-41  from  the
main  body  of  the  speeches  of  Yahwe  or  not,  have  thought  that
Behemoth  is  a  Hebraised  form  of  an  Egyptian  word  for  the


hippopotamus  (p-ehe-iitou,  '  water  -  o.\ '),  but  there  is  no  philo-
logical basis  for  this  opinion.*  In  ib)  Is.  306  3^J  nicna  NBp
is  probably  to  be  rendered  '  Oracle  of  the  monster  (behemoth)


1  '.\Kpts  according  to  the  order  in  ©uafl  ;  a.rrojc.i.'i  is  men-
tioned in  hexaplaric  MS.S  as  a  rendering  by  'dAAo?.'

2  It  will  be  seen  that  on  one  strongly  supported  theory  there
are  parallels  to  this  combination.

3  The versions render Behemoth  as  follows  : — in  (a)  Bripia


[LAAJ,  KTtfVI)  l.'\(]. ineoa.J,  m  (I')  TiaV  TfTpOLltOi

[.\q.  Sym.  Th.],  in  {c)  K-rrfvuiBr)^  [LXX,  .Sym.)


(Ml-no&UiV  [LXX],  (CTJJI'I)


*  So  independently  WALM  (Egyi'T,  §  9).  The  objections  are
as  follows  :-—(i)  The  final  t>i  in  Behemoth  is  un.-\ccounted  for
(Lejjsius).  (2)  The  Egyptians  had  several  names  for  the  hippo-
potamus (r.^.,  rert,  'a  beast  that  rolls  it.self  in  the  mud');  out
the  texts  nowhere  mention  p-ehe-uiou.  (3)  The  form,  if  it
existed,  would  be  tnOu-ehe  (F.  C.  Cook).  It  is  strange  that
Jablonski,  who  died  in  1757,  and  could  know  only  Coptic,  and
that  imperfectly,  should  be  consulted  in  preference  to  Birch,
who,  after  supposing  himself  to  have  found  the  old  Egyptian
original  of  Behemoth  in  bekhatna,  discovered  afterwards  that
the  name  was  really  AAi*^  (Renouf,  Expositor,  July  1897).  Cp
Remi'Han.  On  an  analogous  attempt  to  justify  the  interpreta-
tion of  Leviathan  as  a  crocodile,  see  col.  520,  n.  3.


BEHEMOTH

of  the  south  land.'l  Tliis  is  the  lit.iding  of  a  .short  fragmentary
passage  of  prophecy,  and  refers  to  the  description  of  E(|ypt  at
the  end  of  7'.  7  as  '  K.ihab  the  quelled  one  '  (.see  Rah  ad,  ii.  §  i).
'The  south-land'  (Negeb)  is  here,  as  in  Dan.  89  W^ff.,  a
designation  of  the  second  of  the  two  empires  which  endangered
Palestine,— /.f. ,  Egypt,  —the  other  being  ^iiplidn,  '  the  northland  '
(Jer.  Ill  15  Zech.  26  \io\y—i.e.,  in  a  large  sense,  Babylonia.  So
JJel. The  heading  in  ?'.  6  may  be  very  late.

Delitzsch  finds  Behemoth  also  in  (r)  Ps.  73  22,  '  .\s  for  me,  I
was  senseless  and  ignorant,  I  was  a  Behemoth  toward  thee'
(Del.,  Nowack).  This  rendering  is  correct,  if  the  text  is  .sound,
and  if  the  spe.iker  is  an  individual.  If,  however,  the  speaker
i.s  to  be  understood  collectively,  we  may  perhaps  render,  I  was
(like)  the  beasts  toward  thee.'  .So  Ba.  ;  but  the  absence  of  the
particle  of  comparison  is  a  difTiculty.  If  we  compare  49  10  [11]
026(7]  it  becomes  plausible  to  read,  with  Griitz,  n':i2B
'Fiirn,  '  I  was  devoid  of  understanding  toward  thee.'

Leviathan  (|n-iS,  livyathdn,  'wreathed' — i.e.,  'gather-
ing itself  in  folds'; or  perhaps  of Bab. origin) is  a
2.  Of  Leviathan,  designation of  a  mythic  serpent  in
all  the  passages  in  which  it  occurs,
unless  Job  41 1  be  an  exception.'-^ See  also  Li;vi.\TH.\N".

It  is  found  (if)  in  Job41i  (4O25),  'Canst  thou  draw  up-*
Leviathan with  a  hook,  (and)  press  down  his  tongue  with  a


cord  ? ' ;  (<^)  J  ob  3  8,  'Let  those  who  lay  a  ban  u  [xni  t  he  sea  ••  cu  rse

it,  (those)  who  are  apf)ointed  to  rouse  un " '

27 1, '  In  that  day  shall  Yahwe  punish  Leviathan  the  fugitive


Leviathan  ' ;  (/)  Is.


serpent,  and  Leviathan  the  coiled  serpent,  and  he  shall  slay  the
dragon  in  the  sea  ' ;  (^g)  Ps.74  14,  '  Thou  didst  shatter  the  heads
of  Leviathan,  and  gavest  his  [carca.se]  to  be  food  for  the  jackals  ' ;  5
(/()  Ps.  ]04  26,'>  'There  do  the  dragons  move  along,  (there  is)
Leviathan  whom  thou  didst  form  to  be  its  ruler.'  To  these  refer-
ences, two  supplied  by  apocryphal  writers  may  be  added  :  (/)
En.  CO7-9,  cp  247;  ;  (_/■)  4  Esd.  O49-52  ;  cp  Apoc.  Bar.  294.

In  the  present  article  we  shall  desert  the  zoological

explanation of  Behemoth and Leviathan, leaving  the

„ J, ., field  open  to  another  writer  to  represent  the

... , more  generally  received  opinion  (.see  Hll'PO-

my tea ,,q.[.amus, Ckocodii.k). Strong reason

monsters. •,,!,,  r  •

will  have  to  Ijc  shown  for  not  interpreting

the.se  strange  forms  with  some  regard  to  mythology.
No  one  would  assert  that  the  author  of  Job  had  an
altogether  distinct  mythological  conception  ;  but  modern
commentators  who  disregard  the  mythic  basis  of  the
descriptions  make  a  serious  mistake.

It  was  natural  in  1887  to  look  for  illustrations  of  the
Job  passages,  [d)  and  [e),  to  Egypt,"  though  reference
should  have  been  made,  not  to  the  fantastic  griffins  on
certain  wall-paintings,  but  to  the  idealisation  of  the
ordinary  monsters  of  the  Nile  in  the  mythic  narratives
of  Re'  and  Osiris.  '  There  are  supernatural  as  well  as
natural  hippopotamuses  and  crocodiles,  and  it  is  a
specimen  of  these  which  the  poet  has  given  us.  The
descriptions  are  hyperbolical  and  unplcasing,  if  referred
to  the  real  monsters  of  the  Nile  ;  they  are  not  so  if
explained  of  the  "  children  of  defeat,"  with  the  dragon
Apopi at their head,* which the poet, by a fusion

1  The  alternative  explanation,  '  Oracle  of  the  beasts  of  the
south  ' — i.e.,  of  the  desert  which  adjoins  the  south  of  Judah — is
le.ss  natural.  Why  '  the  .south  '  instead  of '  the  desert ' ?  And  why
are  serpents  called  niona,  '  beasts  '  ?  rii'n  would  have  been
more  in  place. Cp  SBOf  on  Is.  306.

2  (p  renders  Levifithan  as  follows  : — in  (ri')6pa»to>'Ta(Aq.  Sym.
Aeutaflai'),  in  (<')  to  /xeya  ictjtos  (.-Vq.  Sym.  Afuiadar,  Th.  hfio.-
(coi'Ttt),  in  (yO  rbi'  SpaKoi'Ta  (.Xi].  .Sym.  Th.  Xfviajffav)  [twice],  in
(^)  Tuiv  SpaKODTuiy  (.\q.  Afviadav),  in  (/«)  Spdxuiv.

3  -irpai  for  MT  -ii'pri.  The  final  letter  of  7/.  24  (now  iSK,  '  his
snout ')  and  the  first  letter  of  ?'.  25  became  effaced.  F^wald
(Lehrb.  d.  I/ebr.  Spr.  791)  makes  an  elaborate  attempt  to
account  for  the  absence  of  the  interrog.itive  particle  (n)  in  MT,
baseS  on  the  theory  that  the  Arabic  word  for  crocodile  (timsd{i)
existed  in  the  Hebrew  vocabulary  of  Job.  Similarly  Budde ;
Duhm  leaves  the  point  undecided.  Against  this,  see  Che.  Ex-
positor, July  1897.

*  Read  C  for  DV,  with  Gunkel,  to  restore  parallelism  ;  cp  Ps.
74i3/10J2s/,Is.27,.

B  Reading  C'^VC*^  ?3KS  finOiil  \nK Cp  Fox.

8  Reading  D'3'3n  for  the  scarcely  possible  ni'Jjjj  'ships';  and
correcting  13  pniJ'S  into  'l3-!»':iS. See  Che.  Ps.f^}

7  Che.  /ob  and  .?<>/.  56,  where  the  first  recent  critical  protest
was  made  against  the  dominant  theory. Cp  the  fantastic  forms
described  in  Maspero,  Struggle  0/ tlu  Nations,  84.
I ^  .See  Maspero,  op.  cit.  159.

520


BEHEMOTH

historically  most  justifiable,!  icU-ntifies  with  the  monsters
of  IJjihyloiiian  origin  called  elsewhere  Rahab  and  his
help«TS  (Job  5)13).  And  even  in  the  uncorrected  but
still  more  in  the  corrected  text  there  are  expressions  and
statements  wliich  are  hardly  explicable  except  on  the
mythological  theory. '  How,  for  exaniple,  can  the  hippo-
potanms  and  the  crocodile  lie  said  to  Ije,  not  niercly
dangerous  to  approach,  but  Ixjyond  the  range  of  hunters  ?
There  is  evidence  that  even  in  early  times  the  I'.gyptians
were  skilled  in  attacking  and  killing  thenj.  How,  too,
can  the  ordinary  hippopotamus  t>e  called  '  the  firstling
of  the  ways  of  God"  (Job  40 19),  and  the  ordinary
crocodile  Ix;  said  to  Ix;  feared  by  all  that  is  lofty,  and  to
be  king  over  all  the  sons  of  pride  -  (Job  41  u  [26])  ?

The  Babylonian  eiemciits  in  lic-hemoth  and  Leviathan,
however,  are  niore  important  than  the  ICgyptian.  They
have  been  pointed  out,  though  with  some  exaggeration,
by  Gunkel,  who  also  noticed  how  much  the  text  of  the
accounts  of  BChenioth  and  Leviathan  has  suffered  in
transmission.  It  may  be  hoped  that  by  the  light  of  the
mythological  interpretation  the  corruptions  may  l)e
partly  removed.  For  example,  Job4l9-ii  [1-3]  may  be
plausibly  emended  thus  (see  J(JK,  April,  1897)  : —

Surely  thy  self-confidt-iice  proves  itself  vain  ;

Even  divine  beings  ihe  fc.ir  of  him  lays  low.

An  angel  shudders  when  he  would  arouse  him  ;

Who  then  (among  mortals)  woidd  dare  to  meet  him  as  a  foe?

Who  ever  confronted  him  and  came  off  safe?

Under  the  whole  heaven,  not  one  !

The  un-emended  form  of  this  passage,  it  is  true,  does  not
favour  a  mythological  interpretation  ;  but  it  is  very
difficult  to  give  it  atiy  plausible  meaning,  whereas  the
emended  text  is  in  perfect  harmony  with  all  that  we
hear  of  Leviathan  elsewhere.  One  more  proof  of  the
helpfulness  of  the  new  theory  may  Ix;  given.  No
passage  has  pu/.zlcd  interpreters  more  than  40 19  b.
The  RV  rentiers  thus,  '  He  (only)  that  made  him  can
make  his  sword  to  approach  (unto  him). '  u"in.  however,
should  Ixi  n^n  (Giesebrecht).  The  real  meaning  is,  '  that
was  made  to  be  ruler  of  his  fellows  '  ('n  t"Ah  "lirvn) — i-^-  •
Behc-moth  is  the  king  of  all  land  animals.  Take  this  in
connection  with  Job  41  25  [33]*  and  Ps.  10426,  and  it
would  seem  that  Leviathan  was  regarded  as  lord  of  the
ocean,  and  Behemoth  of  the  dry  land.  The  former
notion  was  borrowed  from  the  Babylonians  ;  the  latter
perhaps  from  the  Egyptians.'*

Thus  the  liOhemoth  and  leviathan  passages  in  Job
represent  a  fusion,  from  every  ptiint  of  view  most
natural,  of  Babylonian  and  I'.gyptian  elements.  The
dragon  is  primarily  Babylonian  :  it  is  Tiamat  ( =  cinn  ;
see  Crk.ATIon,  §  2/).  Behemoth  may  be  ultimately
identified  with  Tiamat's  consort  Kingu.  Being  ignorant
of  the  mythic  monsters  in  question,  the  poet  naturally
filled  u|)  the  gaps  in  his  knowledge  from  two  monsters
of  the  Nile  which  the  Egyptians  regarded  as  represent-
atives of  the  evil  god  Sit.  *

Coming  now  to  (/),  Is.  27,  we  note  that  the  writing
belongs  to  a  prophetic  passage  which  has  a  strong
apocalyptic  tinge,  and  stands  at  the  head  of  the  period
which  produced  the  aix)calypse  of  Daniel.*  Nowhere
perhaps  in  the  OT  is  the  phraseology  more  distinctly

1  Hommel  {Der  hah.  L'rsf>r.  der  iifry/>t.  Kultur,  1892,  p.  40)
connects  Ajxjpi  or  Apep  with  Hab.  ahiihu,  'storm-flood.'  Apopi
is  the  Tiamat  of  heaven.  His  head  is  .split  by  the  conquering
Re'  into  two  parts  ;  Tiamat's  body  is  so  treated  by  Marduk.

2  Reading  VT^  narSa  IDK,  with  Hudde  (improving  slightly
on  Gunkel).  The  'sons  of  pride'  (if  j-ntr  's  correct)  may  be  a
phra.se  equivalent  to  '  Rabab's  helpers.  If  so,  mythic  monsters
are  referred  to.

»  nn-'Va'?  is  probably  a  corruption  of  n;n  Sj-aV  (Che.),
leviathan  w.as  made  to  be  lord  of  living  creatures  (i.e.,  those  of
the  ocean-depth,  tchum,  just  mentioned).

*  Che.  Expositor,  July  1897.

*  Cp  Maspero's  StruggU  0/  ihe  Nations.  Plutarch  (De  Is.
et  Osir.  56)  well  knew  the  connection  of  the  two  Nile-monsters
with  Typhon  or  Sit.

*  Che.  Intr.  Is.  150/,  155^  ;  Lyon,  JBL,  1895,  p.  131,
quoting  Smith's  Chaldaan  GeHtsis,  ed.  Sayce,  p.  90.

521


BEHEMOTH

mythical.  '  I>eviathiln  the  fleeing  serpent '  finds  its
explanation  in  the  carving  on  a  seal  representing  Marduk
with  a  dagger  pursuing  the  tiragon  which  flees  before
him  in  the  shape  of  a  .ser[x;nt,  and  '  I^-viathiln  the
coiled  serix.'tit '  is  the  mythic  phrase  for  the  ocean  which
surrounds  the  earth. '

In  (_i,'),  Bs.  74  14,  a  psalmist  gives  a  somewhat  different
view  of  I.eviathan.  To  him  the  destruction  of  leviathan
is  past.  This  is,  of  course,  the  original  view  represented
in  the  Babylonian  Creation-story  (see  Crkation,  §  2).
The  passage  should  most  probably  Ix;  read  thus  : —
Thou  didst  shatter  the  head  of  Leviathan,
And  gavcst  up  his  [carcase]  as  food  for  the  jackals.

There  is  no  reference  to  the  unburied  corpses  of  the
I'^gyptians  (Ex.  14  30);  'the  people  inhabiting  the  wil-
derness ■  is  an  impossible  rendering  of  a  corrui)t  text
(see  ?\)X).  We  have  here  sinjply  an  amplification  of  a
mythic  detail  in  the  story  of  Tiamat  (see  the  Babylonian
Creation-tablet  iv.  /.  104 1  —  the  same  detail  which
explains  a  fme  passage  in  the  latter  part  of  Isaiah
(Is.  5I9).

Taken  by  itself  {h),  Ps.  104 26,  it  must  be  admitted,
gives  no  confirmation  to  our  mythological  interpreta-
tions. Leviathan  appears  as  one  of  the  monsters  of  the
sea,  and  we  are  told  that  Yahwe  himself  '  formed  '  him  as
its  ruler.  The  writer  may  know  nothing  of  mythology.
He  has  heard  this  said,  and  repeats  it.

We  now  turn  to  {i)  and  (j),  the  apocryphal  passages.

The  former  (Knoch  (i07-9)  runs  in  Charles's  transhition  from
the  Kthiopic  version  (155)  : — '.Xnd  in  that  day  will  two  monsters
be  partecf,  a  female  monster  named  Levirahan,  to  dwell  in  the
depths  of  the  ocean  over  the  fountains  of  the  waters.  But  the
male  is  called  Hehemoth,  who  occupies  with  his  breast  (?)  a
waste  wilderness  named  Dcndain,  on  the  east  of  the  garden.  .  .  .
And  I  besought  that  other  angel  that  he  should  show  me  the
might  of  these  monsters,  how  they  were  parted  on  one  day,  and
the  one  was  placed  in  the  depths  of  the  sea  and  the  other  in  the
mainland  of  the  wilderness.'

The  latter  (4  Ksd.  O49-52)  is  as  follows  : — '  Et  tunc  conseruasii
duo  animalia,  nomen  uni  uocasti  Hehemolh  et  non\en  secundi
uocasti  Leuiathan.  Et  separasti  ea  ab  alterutro,  non  enim  poterat
septima  pars  ubi  erat  aciua  congregata  capere  ea.  Et  dedisti
Behemoth  unam  partem  qu.x  siccata  est  tertio  die,  ut  inhabitet  in
ea,  ubi  sunt  montes  mille  ;  Leuiathan  autem  dedisti  septimam
partem  humidam  :  et  seruasti  ea  ut  t'lant  in  deuorationeni  quibus
uis  et  quando  uis.'  (I'ehemoth  becomes  uehemoth  in  cod.  Si  and
Enoch  in  codd.  .S.\  [so  AV].)

It  is  needless  to  pause  long  on  the  purely  Jewish
elements  in  these  descriptions.-  That  Behemoth  was
created  on  the  fifth  day  was  an  inference  from  Gen.  1  21  ;
the  reference  to  the  '  thousand  mountains '  comes  from
a  faulty  reading  in  Ps.  50  10  (where  r-^«  should  be  Vn)
combined  with  an  aljsurd  interpietation  of  nima  in  the
same  passage.  The  chief  points  to  notice  are  these  :
Bfihemuth  and  Leviathan  are  not  two  great  water-
monsters,  but  have  their  habitation,  the  one  on  the  dry
land,  the  other  in  the  deep  ; '  the  Dcndain  of  Enoch
may  possibly  be  the  Babylonian  danninu,  which  is  a
synonym  of  irsitim,  'the  earth,"  and  is  hterally  'the
firm. '■•  .According  to  Gunkel,  the  female  monster
Leviathan  is  Tiamat,  and  the  male  monster  BihOmoth
is  Kingu,  Tiamat's  husband  (on  whom  see  Creation-
tablet  iv.  //.  119-122).  In  the  Babylonian  story  these
monsters  met  their  fate  at  creation  ;  in  Enoch  the
assignment  of  their  resjx-ctive  dwellings  is  an  incident  of
the  judgment  at  Noah's  flood  ;  in  4  Ezra  again  it  is  a
detail  of  creation.  It  is  not  safe,  however,  to  dogmatise
too  freely  on  the  sources  of  the  apocryphal  writers.
Their  notions  were  probably  a  strange  compound,  in
which  there  were  exegetical  inferences  side  by  side  with
corrupted  statements  of  Oriental  tradition.  One  of
these  statements  appears  to  have  related  to  the  habiuition
of  Behemoth — at  least,  if  we  may  accept  Zimmerns
explanation  of  DOndain,  which  Dillmann  and  Charles

1  Cp  the  mythological  .serpent  in  one  form  of  the  Babylonian
Deluge-story  (see  Dki.cge,  S§  6-q).

2  For  details  on  the  late  Jewish  fancies,  see  Drummond,
Jewish  Afessiah,  352-355  ;  Weber, /*(</.  Thtol.  160,  ao2,  4o-.i,  404.

S  C.  H.  Toy,  Judaism  and  Christianity,  162.
*  So  Zimmern,  in  SchSpJ.  6j  ;  cp  Jensen,  Kosmol.  161,  DeL
I Ass.  Hll  B  225.

522


unconvincingly  connect  with  pi  p-n  (comparing  Dudael,
Enoch  10 4,  which  is  certainly  not  a  mere  '  fiction  of  the
author  ').  The  view  here  taken  is,  of  course,  quite  con-
sistent with  Charles's  theory  [Bar.  53)  that  the  writers
of  4  Esd.  630-725  and  Bar.  27-30  both  used  the  text  of
an  earlier  work  which  contained  the  story  of  the  six  days
of  Creation.  This  lost  hexahemeron,  just  as  much  as
4  Esd.  638-64,  represents  not  a  homogeneous  tradition,
but  a  medley  of  notions  derived  from  different  sources,
Jewish  and  Oriental.

On  ihe  subject  of  this  article  consult  Gunkel,  SchSpf.  41-69 ;
Di.'s,  Ru.'s,  and  Du.'s  commentaries  on  Job;  Che.  'The  15ook
of  Job,' etc.,  Expositor,  July,  1897,  and  'The  Text  of  Job,'
IQli,  April  1897.  See  also  Dragon,  §  4/,  Rahab,  i.  and  cp
Hii'i'oi'OTAMUs,  Crocodile.  On  the  oscillation  of  mythic  and
semi-mythic  statements  between  the  dragon  and  the  crocodile
as  the  enemy  of  the  Sun-god,  cp  Clermont-Ganneau,  Horus  et
Saint  Georges  (e.xtrait  de  ia  rev.  archtol.),  1877,  pp.  8,  25.

T.  K.  C.

BEKAH,  RV  Beka  (rf?!),  Ex.  3826. See  Weights

AND  Mli.VSUKES.

BEL  ('pg  ;  ei'^^AQ  BhALoc].  '^^s).  Ass.  Hlu,  like
7L'3  (Rial),  is  a  simple  appellative  meaning  'lord'
quite  as  often  as  it  is  a  proper  name  (see  Phcenici.'\).
In  the  .Assyrio-Iiabylonian  pantheon  it  is  borne  by  two
deities  (see  B.\HYi.oNi.\,  §  26),  the  younger  of  whom,
identified  with  Marduk  (see  Merooac}!),  finds  mention
in  writings  of  the  Babylonian  and  Persian  periods  (Is.
46 1  Jer.  :.U2  \_--ra\  51  44  (©  omits)).i

The  extent  of  the  cultus  of  this  god  in  later  times
appears  from  the  many  proper  names  compounded
with  Bel  in  Phoenician,  and  more  especially  in  Palmyrene
inscriptions.^  lacob  of  Serug  states  that  he  was  the
g6d  of  Edessa  (ZDMG  29  131).

BEL  AND  THE  DRAGON,  See  Daniel,  ii.  §  21,
and  cp  §§  10,  19.

BELA  (y?3,  ' that  which  is  swallowed  up'?:  cp  Jer.
51 44;  BaA&k  [A/5L],  -AAA  [E  in  Gen.  142]),  one  of  the
five  royal  cities  in  the  vale  of  Siddim  at  the  time  of
the  invasion  of  Chedorlao.mer  [q.v.,  §  2),  Gen.  14  2  8,
where  the  name  receives  the  geographical  explanation,
'that  is  Zoar.'  In  fact,  in  Gen.  19 20-23  we  hear  of  a
small  city  near  Sodom,  the  name  of  which  was  called
Zoar  ('/.''.),  to  commemorate  the  escape  of  Lot  from
the  catastrophe  of  Sodom  and  the  other  '  cities  of  the
plain.'  The  writer  of  the  explanation  in  Gen.  142  8
evidently  means  us  to  suppose  that  the  original  name
of  Zoar  was  Bela.  The  author  of  Gen.  19  (J),  however,
does  not  appear  to  have  known  this.  In  13 10  the  same
writer  speaks  of  Zoar  as  bearing  that  name  before  the
catastrophe  of  Sodom,  and  a  comparison  of  the  phrase-
ology of  2030  makes  it  probable  that  the  etymological
myth  in  19  20-22  does  not  really  presuppose  a  change
of  name.  It  is  probable  that,  had  the  name  of  Bela
been  known  in  the  comparatively  early  period  when
Gen.  19  was  written,  an  etymological  myth  would  have
grown  up  to  account  for  it — '  Therefore  that  region  is
called  Bela,  because  the  ground  opened  her  mouth  and
swallowed  it  up'  (cp  Xu.  I630).

Such  a  myth  did,  as  a  fact,  spring  up,  but  long  afterwards,
and  not  as  a  fruit  of  the  popular  imagination.  In  the  Targum
of  Jonathan  the  phrase  the  king  of  Bela"  (Gen.  14  2)  is  para-
phrased as  '  the  king  of  the  city  which  consumed  its  inhabitants.'
The  same  interpretation  was  given  by  R.  Meir  and  his  con-
temporary Joshua  b.  Karcha  (Bacher,  Die  Agad  t  der  Tan-
naiten,  38),  and  is  repeatedly  given  on  the  authority  of  '  the
Hebrews'  by  Jer.  (Qucfst.  in  Gen.  14 2  19 30;  Comin.  in  Jes.
15s);  it  has  also  naturally  enough  found  a  place  in  the  Midrash
(Ber.  rabba,  par.  42).  Hommel  (/I //7"  195-198)  boldly  identifies
Bela  with  the  ancient  city  of  Malka,  which  he  surmises  to  h.-ive
been  in  the  trans-Jordanic  region  ;  but  his  authurity  for  giving


1  The  evidence  of  some  proper  names,  however,  may  seem  to
show  that  Bel  was  not  unknown  in  Canaan  at  an  earlier  date
(see  .\sniiEL,  BiLUAU,  Ebal,  and  cp,  doubtfully,  Balaam  and
Reuben).

2  Whether  the  Palm.  713  is  a  bye-form  of  7'3  =  73,  as  Hoffmann
supposes  (Ausziigc  aus  d.  Syr.  Act.  Pers.  Mart.,  1880,  p.  21,  n.
159),  is  uncertain.

523


BELA

this  situation  to  Malku  is  a  tablet  which  refers  not  to  Malka  but
to  Melkart  (Johns,  Expos.,  Aug.  1898,  p.  j6o).

It  is  remarkable  that  no  name  is  given  to  the  king  of
Bela.  When  we  consider  the  (probable)  corruptness
of  other  names  in  the  passage,  it  is  reasonable  to
suppose  that  the  name,  being  uncouth,  early  dropped
out  of  the  text.  To  supply  '  Bela,"  with  Bishop
Hervey  (Smith's  Z?^-'),  is  unnatural.  T.  K.  C.

BELA  (r'pS).  I.  (BaAak  [ADEL],  -Ack  [E  in  Gen.
3633]).  The  first  Edomite  king,  son  of  Beor  (or  perhaps
Achbor  ;  see  Baai.-Hanan  [i]),  of  the  city  of  Uinhabah
(Gen.  36  32/.  =1  Ch.  1 43/  ).  It  is  singular  that  a  diviner
famous  in  legend  was  called  '  Bil'am  (Balaam)  son  of
Beor."  With  NiJldeke  (L'nlersuch.  87)  and  Hommel
(AHT  153)  we  may  venture  to  identify  Bela'  and  Bil'an),
and  all  the  more  confidently  if  Bil'am  belonged  to  a
region  adjoining  Edom  (see  Petiior).  Obviously  the
temptation  which  the  name  presented  to  an  imaginative
narrator  must  have  been  irresistible.  Targ.  Jon.  and
Targ.  I  Ch.  1  44  had  already  suggested  the  identifica-
tion. The  list  which  contains  the  name  Bela  ben-Beer
is  regarded  by  Sayce  as  a  piece  of  an  Edomite  chronicle.
It  comes  before  us,  however,  as  a  thoroughly  Hebrew
document,  and  is  correlated  with  the  history  of  the  b'ne
Israel  (Gen.  3631-39  ;  probably  J E).  Certainly  it  is  no
sport  of  the  idealistic  imagination  ;  a  true  interest  in  the
fortunes  of  a  kindred  people  prompted  its  preservation.
It  may  be  incomplete,  or  it  may  have  had  some  lacuntc
filled  up  ignorantly,  not  to  speak  of  the  undeniable
corruptions  of  the  text.  Let  us  lake  the  list  as  it  stands,
and  see  what  we  can  gather  from  it.

The  list  contains  eight  names  (or  rather  seven,  for
Baal-hanan  has  come  in  through  a  scribe's  error).
Four  kings  have  their  fathers'  names  given  ; '  six  are
distinguished  by  the  name  of  their  city,  and  one  is
described  as  of  a  certain  region  (Hu.sham).  The  names
both  of  the  cities  and  of  the  persons  (or  apparent  persons)
are  not  all  correct.  Dinhabah,  Matkeu,  and  Me-
ZEHAB  are  corrupt,  and  the  corruptions  efface  the  im-
portant fact  that  Bela  (whose  city  was  not  Dinhabah
but  Rehoboth  ;  cp  z/.  37)  and  Mehetabel  came  from  the
N.  Arabian  land  of  Musri  or  Musur  (see  MiZRAi.M,
§  2  i^).  It  will  be  noted  that  one  of  the  names  occurs
twice  (in  v.  39,  '  Hadar '  is  certainly  a  wrong  reading)  :
it  is  properly  the  name  of  a  god — of  the  Aramaean  god
Hadad.  From  this  name,  and  from  two  other  items —
'  Bela  the  son  of  Beor '  and  '  Saul  of  Rehoboth  by  the
river' — Bishop  A.  C.  Hervey  inferred  (Smith's  Z?5,(-*j.i'.
'Bela')  that  there  had  been  an  Aramaean  conquest  of
Edom.  The  references  to  Bela  and  Saul,  however,  are
not  really  in  point  (cp  Balaam,  §  3),  and  all  that  the
doubly  attested  Hadau,  3  [i.  2]— together  with  Bedad
— can  be  held  to  suggest  is  that  Aramaean  influence  was
early  felt  as  far  south  as  Edom.

More  important  is  the  historical  notice  connected  with
the  name  of  Hadad,  son  of  Bedad  (see  also  Hush.\m).
It  tells  us  of  the  early  occupation  of  what  afterwards
became  the  land  of  Moab  by  the  Midianites,  whom  the
Edomites  under  Hadad  defeated.  We  can  understand
this  notice  in  the  light  of  Gideon's  defeat  of  the  same
plundering  hordes,  described  in  Judg.  7.  To  make  the
two  events  contemporary,  with  Kautzsch  in  Riehm's
//lVB(->  (art. '  Midian  '),  seems  needless  and  hazardous.

Oftr  most  interesting  as  well  as  most  certain  result,
however,  is  the  antiquity  of  regal  government  among
the  Edomites  ;  and,  from  the  fact  that  there  is  no  trace
of  dynasties,  and  from  the  continual  references  to  the
cities  of  the  respective  kings,  we  may  probably  infer,
with  Winckler,  that  the  kings  were  of  the  type  of
Abimelech,  or  at  the  most  of  Saul,  and  that  their  rule,
except  in  time  of  war,  was  little  felt  save  by  their  own
tribe.  It  is  true  that  this  will  not  apply  to  Saul  of
Rehoboth  of  the  River, for  this  place  seems  to  have

^  Baal-hanan  (<7.z'.)  was  perhaps  really  the  father  of
Hadad  II.  ;  ben  Acnbor  is  a  variant  to  ben  Beor  which  has
attached  itself  to  the  wrong  name.


BELAH

been  in  Musri,  not  in  Kdoni  ;  but  we  should  observe  the
variation  in  the  phraseology  of  the  account  of  Saul.  It
is  not  Kiid  that  his  city  was  Rchoboth,  but  that  he  was
'  of  Rchoboth. '  We  may  suppose  tiiat  he  entered  by
marriage  into  an  Edomite  family  and  then  obtained  a
tribal  sovereignty.  He  was  a  Musrite  (a  native  of  the
N.  .Arabian  .\Iusri).  The  name  of  the  last  king  (Hadar,
or  rather  Hadad)  is  unaccompanietl  by  the  historical
notice  which  we  should  have  e.xpected  ;  it  is,  however,
followed  exceptionally  by  the  name  of  his  wife,  of  whom
we  are  told  that  she  was  a  daughter  of  Matkkd,  and  a
daughter  of  Mi:-zahab.  The  former  name  is  a  corrup-
tion of  Mizran  (.Vlisran),  the  latter  of  Mizrim  (Misrim).
Misrim  was  really  a  correction  of  Misran.  Mehetaljel,
as  well  as  fJela  and  Saul,  was  a  Misrite.  This  is  a  fact
with  important  historical  bearings  (see  Hadad,  i.  2).

T.  K.  c.

2.  In  Renealogy  of  I'.injamin  [S  9  (i.)]  (BaA«  [R.-M.]);  Gen.
4ti2i  (RV  Hki.am,  (SaAa  [Ar)L])=  Nu.  2(>  38  40  ;  cp  i  Ch.  7  6
^oAai  IL  ;  r.A  omit]  7  (/3aAae  [L),  ;3aAe  [A],  /3aAe«  [1!]  ;  in  7'.  6
a/3«tpa  in  15  takes  the  pl;u;e  of  lielu  and  15echkk  [i/.t.])  and  8  i
(^eAeAojA  [i!]),  and  the  gentilic  Belaite  or  rather  Balite  CvV?),
Nu.  2t;  38  (/3aAe[e]i  [15ArL|).

■?.  b.  Az;iz,  in  genealogy  of  Reuben  (^oAck  [I!],  -Ae  [.\],  -Aaa
[LD,  iCli.  :,s.

BELAH  (r?2).  Gen.  4621  AV,  RV  Bhi.a,  ii.  2.

BELEMUS ( Bh AeMOC [BA]), i  Esd.  2 16  =  Ezra 4 7

Bl.siil.AM  {i/.z:).

BELIAL.  This  is  an  imperfect  reproduction  of  the
Heb.  /I?v3  (18  times  in  historical  books,  once  in  Job,
thrice  in  Proverbs,  thrice  in  Psalms,  twice  in  the  psalm-
like passage  prefixed  to  Nahum  (ln-15  [2i],  see  RV]).
On  2  Cor.  G15,  see  below  (§1).

It  is  generally  taken  to  mean  '  worthlessness,'  whether
1  Usaee  and  "^"'"•'^' "''  m^^t'^fial, so that the  familiar

'tradLon. I'''"-^*^; '  ^r  ^''''  T"*  f  ,^''''''' u."""';'
moan  '  good-for-nothmg  fellows ; RV"^-

gives  '  base  fellows. '

So  BDB,  from  '73,  'not,'  and  *?>"*,  'profit'  (?) ;  so,  too,
RVmj;.  in  2.S.  23  6  and  elsewhere.  Tliis  rendering,  however,  is
not  supported  by  the  earliest  tradition  ;  for  ©  renders  '  lielial '
by  a»'Ofi7)jio,  OTO/xia,  aTro<7Ta(Tia  (.Aq.  also  gives  aTrocTTacria),
and  the  qualification  '  of  15eli.il '  by  acre^^s,  a<l>puiv,  Aot^os,
TTopai'o/u.os,  with  or  without  ai/ija  as  the  case  may  be.  We
find  also  viol  napav6fiu}i/  (often),  and  (Symm.)  ai-UTroTa/cTOi,
on;»rdaTaToi.  These  renderings  may  imply  the  etymology  '^3
Viy,  al'sijueju^oQcr.),  and  this  etymology,  though  impossible,
is  yet  more  in  harmony  with  biblical  usage.  Tg.  gives  K'Dl'^Ci
'  oppressors.

Another  tradition,  however,  favours  the  use  of  Belial
asa  prop>er  name.  So  in  ©^  Jud.  20 13  {j3f\ia/j.),  Theod. ,
Judg.  1922,  and  occasionally  in  Vg.  ;  so,  too,  in  the
English  versions  including  even  RV  (on  RV'"8-,  see
above).  This  came  about  in  the  following  way.  How-
ever we  account  for  it,  it  is  a  historical  fact  that  in  the
interval  between  the  OT  and  the  NT  Belial  (sometimes  in
the  forms  Beliar  or  Berial)  was  used  as  a  synonym  for
the  arch-demon  Satan  ;  it  is  so  used  in  2  C^or.  6 15,  where
Paul  asks.  What  harmony  is  there  Ijetween  Christ
(parallel  to  '  light ')  and  Beliar  (parallel  to  '  darkness  ')  ?
[/ieXtap  (BXC)  ;  cp  Jer. 's  explanation,  cacum  lumen,
as  if  niK  -^-2,  in  OSS-)  764].  lieliar  stands  for  Satan
also  in  Test.  xii.  Patr.  (often  ;  e.g.  Test.  Rub.  2,  4,  6),
the  Asc.  Isa.  (Berial),  and  Jubilees  (ch.  15,  ed.  Charles).
In  the  Sib.  Oracles  (iii.  63^.  iv.  137^)  Nero,  under
the  name  of  Beliar,  is  to  lead  the  armies  of  Antichrist  ^
(see  Antichrist,  §  15)  ;  and,  according  to  Bousset,  the
phrase  6  dfOpuvoi  rijs  dvofiia^  {ib.  §  4)  in  2Thess.  23
(BX,  Tisch. ,  Treg. ,  WH  ;  aixaprias  for  di^ouias  has
also  good  authority)  may  be  a  translation  of  Belial.

\v.  H.  B.

Both  for  the  sake  of  exegesis  and  on  account  of  the
importance  of  Jewish  semi  -  mythological  modes  of
2.  Meanings *^°"Sht.  it  is needful to  be  clear  as  to

of  word *^^  course  of  development  of  the  mean-
ings of  Belial,  and  to  form  a  probable  con-

1  Cp  Deane,  Psevdcpigr.  22,  168,  249,  and  Bousset,  Der
Antichrist.

5=5


BELIAL

I  jecture  as  to  the  origin,  or  at  least  the  nature,  of  the
word.  G.  F.  Moore  (on  Judg.  19 22)  gives  a  better
rendering  of  Sy''?3  'J3  than  most  conmienlators,  viz. ,
'vile  scoundrels'  ;  this  recognises  the  fact  that  '3  sug-
gests not  merely  worthlessness  or  ordinary  viciousness,
but  gross  wickedness.  He  also  describes  the  different
etymologies  of  lielial  as  extremely  dubious,  and  cannot
find  in  the  Hebrew  language  any  analogy  for  the  word.
In  fact  the  seemingly  compound  word  ,"id"'?3  (Job  2(J7)  is
imaginary;  it  is  a  corruption  of  o"'?3n,  'utter  vanity."
But  Moore  passes  over  Lagarde's  acute  suggestion  (in
Proph.  dial  J.,  p.  47,  cp  Uebers.  139),  that  '?i"'73  13T
in  Ps.  418[9]  (cp  /.  2)  suggests  an  etymology  (a  popular
one?)  from  rhv"  ''?3,  'no  rising  up.'  In  Expos.  ('95*
435-439)  the  present  writer  sought  to  show  that  Belial
('?;"'?3)  is  found  in  the  OT  in  three  sen.ses  :  (i)  the  sub-
terranean watery  abyss,  (2)  hopeless  ruin,  (3)  great  or
even  extreme  wickedness.  The  third  meaning  is  com-
mon ;  the  first  and  second  are  rare,  and  found  only  in
late  passages  (see  Ps.  I84  [5]  =  2  S.  225,  I's.  418[9J  101  3
[383  '7y'73,  so  read,  =  deeds  of  destruction]  Nah.  In  15
[2i]),  but  should,  if  naturalness  of  development  is  to
count  for  anything,  be  more  nearly  original  than  the
third.  It  is  only  in  Ps.  I84  [5]  that  Belial  is  used  to
denote  the  abyss, ^  and  it  may  Ix;  objected  to  the  view
that  this  is  the  primary  meaning  that  in  Asc.  Jes.  4  2,
Berial,  like  Sammael  in  Tg,  appears  as  an  angel  of
the  firmament  (cp  I'2ph.  22).  However,  as  Bousset  has
shown,-  the  eschatological  tradition  of  Antichrist
\_q-v.,  §  13/],  one  of  whose  names  is  Belial,  is  derived
ultimately  from  the  old  IJabylonian  dragon-myth,  and
we  know  that  the  mythic  dragon  has  lor  his  pro[)er
sphere  the  sea,  though  in  some  mythic  developments
he  appears  as  a  temporary  inhabitant  of  heaven,  from
which  at  last  he  and  his  angels  are  cast  out  (Rev.  12 7-9).
It  is,  therefore,  in  perfect  harmony  with  the  old  myth
to  suppose  that  Belial  may  have  been  originally  an  angel
of  the  abyss,  not  of  the  firmament.

We  now  come  to  the  origin  of  the  word.  Beliyya'al
seems  to  be  a  Hebrew  modification  of  some  earlier  word,
planned  so  as  to  suggest  a  po[)ular  etymo-
logy, rhT  ''?3,  '  (from  which)  one  comes  not
up  again  '  (cp  mat  Id  tdraf,  the  Ass.  equivalent  of  a
Sumerian  title  of  the  underworld  meaning  '  the  land
without  return,"  Jensen,  Kusiiiol.  218,  222).  This
earlier  word  was  most  probably  borrowed  from  the
Babylonian  mythology  of  the  underworld.  The  original
word,  which  was  Hebraised  just  asab/ifitt,  'deluge,'  was
Hebraised  (see  Dici.UGE,  §  7),  may  very  possibly  have
been  Belili,"*  which  is  the  name  of  a  goddess  of  vegeta-
tion, and  hence  of  the  underworld,  the  sister  of  Du'uzu
or  Tammuz,  from  whom  she  differs  in  being  unable  to
ascend  again  to  earth  (see  Descent  of  Isiar,  /.  51  in
Jeremias,  Bab. -ass.  Vorstell.  23  ;  and  cp  Jensen,  Kosiiiul.
225,  272,  275).  There  may  have  been  a  middle  form
between  Belili  (which  appears  to  be  Sumerian — i.e.,
non-Semitic)  and  Ik-liyya'al  which  has  been  lost ;  cp
Nkphii.i.vi,  §  2.  The  Canaaniles  and  Israelites  prob-
ably took  the  name  (which  three  times  [i  .^.2025  2  S.
16  7  I  K.  21 13]  has  the  article)  as  a  synonym  for  the
abyss  of  Sheol.  Afterwards  it  seems  to  have  become
a  symbol  of  insatiable  and  malignant  destructiveness
(cp  niin).  and  hence  the  phrase  "sons  (son,  daughter)
of  Belial';  but  the  older  meaning  was  not  forgotten,
as  we  see  from  Ps.  184[5].  The  objection  of  Bau-
dissin  (Herzog,'')  s.v.  'Belial"),  that  'streams  of
the  under-world"  (Ps.  I.e.)  would  be  a  unique  phrase,
is  of  no  moment,  for  the  whole  context  is  in  some
important  respects  unique.  It  is  not  a  flood  from
the  sky  that  overwhelms  the  speaker ;  it  is  a  flood
from below — i.e., the 'waters  of death,' which are

1  In"  7/.  4  [sly:  TWO,  '7i"':»3.  Vixr.  and  nia  are  parallel,  pio
is  the  world  of  the  dead  (or  its  rulerX  as  49 15  [16] ;  7y'^3  and
SiXC  should  have  the  same  meaning.

'■i  Op.  cit.  60/.,  86/,  Q9-IOI.

8  Che.  iij-/.  Times,  S423/  ['97].

526


3.  Origin.


BELLOWS

a  primitive  element  in  Babylonian  mythology  (see
Cainitf.s,  §6).

Hoinniel,  while  accepting  this  identification,  proposes
a  modification  of  the  theory.  He  thinks  that  the  Assyrio-
Babylonian  phrase  quoted  above  was  simply  translated
^y'?3  by  the  Canaanites,  from  whom  the  name  was
borrowed  again  by  the  Babylonians  as  Belili  [E.xp.
Times,  8  472).  This  is  plausible  ;  but  we  should  like
to  know  how  far  this  theory  would  lead  us.

In  Exp.  Tiinrs,  'ia,off.,  Haudissin  returns  to  the  subject.  He
still  maintains  the  derivation  of  Beliyyd al  from  -'^■^  s.x\A^^-*,
and  thinks  that  some  of  the  occurrences  of  the  word  may
possibly  be  due  to  editorial  manipulation,  and  that  the  word
(explained  as  '  worthlessness '  =  '  wickedness  ')  does  not  look  very
ancient.  He  also  quotes  a  communication  of  Jensen,  which
Cheyne  in  his  answer  regards  as  favourable  rather  than  other-
wise to  the  new  theory,  though  Jensen  himself  expresses  his
agreement  with  Haudissin.  See  Exp.  Times,  ix.,  x.,  and  also
Che.  P>a/ms,^')  on  Ps.  1S4[5]  (popular  etymology  from  j;S3,
'to  swallow  up.'  y,  however,  is  intrusive,  cp  Kcjnig,  Lehtgeb.
ii.  I402).  §  I,  \V.  II.  B. ; §  2/,  T.  K.  C.

BELLOWS  (nS*?,  properly  '  instrument  for  blow-
ing'  ;  (JjYCHTHp).  mentioned  only  in  EVof  Jer.  629^
in  connection  with  lead-smelting  ;  see  Metal.s,  §  2.

In  Egypt  bellows  were  used  as  early  as  the  time  of  Thotmes
III.  A  leather  bag  was  fitted  into  a  frame  from  which  extended
a  long  pipe  to  the  fire.  Two  bags  were  used,  upon  each  of  which
the  operator  pl.-iccd  a  foot,  pressing  them  alternately,  while  he
pulled  up  each  exhausted  skin  with  a  string  that  he  held  in  his
hand  (Wilk.  Anc.  Kg.  23127:).  In  one  illustration  Wilkinson
notes  that  when  the  man  left  the  bellows  they  were  raised  as  if
full  of  air,  thus  implying  a  knowledge  of  the  valve.  The  earliest
forerunner  of  the  bellows  seems  to  have  been  a  mere  reed  or
pipe,  which  was  used  by  smiths  in  the  age  of  Usertesen  (i  234,
illustration  413,  fig.  3).

Whether  hand-bellows  were  used  by  the  Hebrews  for
domestic  purposes  is  c|uite  unknown  ;  for  a  description
of  a  primitive  kind  still  used  in  Egypt  see  Wilkinson
(ii-  313)-

BELLS,  in  the  modern  sense  of  the  word,  though
used  as  ornaments  at  the  present  day  in  Syria,  do  not
seem  to  ha\e  been  known  to  the  ancient  Hebrews.
The  words  so  rendered  require  examination.

I-  Ii::i'3.  p(i'ii>>iBn  (\/  =  to  strike),  used  of  the  golden  orna-
ments which,  .alternately  with  Pomegranates  [,7.7'.],  were  worn
upon  the  lower  part  of  the  Ephod  (Ex.i;S33_/:  'i'.^^s/.,  KiaSiaveq;
cp  also  in  the  Heb.  of  Ecclus.  457a  and  gn,  and  see  Cowley  and
Neubauer  tid  loc). Their  purpose  is  related  in  Ex.  28  35.

2.  niS-S,  7ite}illdth(c-p  c'PlSsD,  'cymbals'),  upon  which  were
inscribed  the  words,  'Holy  unto  Yahwe,'  were  worn  by  the
horses  in  Zechariah's  prophecy  (Zech.  14  20,  AV'mgr.  '  bridles '  ;
so  *!3  xaXi.v6%  and  \g./ri.nuin).

In  both  cases  small  discs  or  plates  are  meant,  the
mSso  being  posSibly  similar  to  the  C'Jhnb;  or  crescents
(see  Ni-:CKLACF.)  of  Tudg.  826.

BELMEN  (RV  Belmaim)  is  mentioned,  in  connection
Mith  the  defensive  measures  of  the  Jews  against  Holo-
fernes,  in  Judith  4  4t.  The  readings  are  BeAMAiN  [A],
BaiA.  [B].  &BeA.  [vS];  Syr.  JJa^^^^^/  (Abel-
meholah)  ;  Vet.  Lat.  Abelmam.  Belmen  would  thus
appear  to  be  the  same  as  the  Belmain  [EV]  (BeABMM
[BA],  ABeA.[X].  Syr.  ilcuOD'^a^^  Vg.  Dehna,  Vet.
Lat.  Ahelme)  of  Judith  7  3.  which,  obviously,  is  re-
garded as  lying  near  Dothan,  and  therefore  cannot  be
the  Abel-maim  of  aCh.  I64,  nor  perhaps  the  Baal-
Hamon  of  Ct.  811.  The  place  meant  is  probably
Ibleam  (modern  Btr  Bel'ameh),  a  town  of  strategical
importance.  In  Judith  8  3  this  place  is  probably  in-
tended by  Bai.amo,  RV  Balamon  (/3a\a/xa)v  [BXAj,
Syr.  <  o>»n\x^>  KiaA),  and  if  we  might  assume  that  the
translator  had  a  correct  text  and  understood  it  rightly,
we  should  be  justified  in  restoring  ^aXa/noju  for  fieX/xaiv
in  44.  Certainly  none  of  the  readings  in  44  can  be
accepted  as  reproducing  the  original  name. T.  K.  C.

BELSHAZZAR,  or  as,  following  the  Greek  form,  he

1  ©,  however,  not  inaptly,  finds  a  reference  to  the  '  bellows  of
the  smith"  in  Job.  32  19,  where  D'Vin  nUK,  'new  bottles,'  is
rendered  (j).  xoAict'uis  (reading  D'w'^^).


BELSHAZZAR

is called in Baruch  In/!, Balthasar,  R V  Baltasar

(■l-VSK'^3,  or,  less  correctly,  "1-V'4'J<^3  :  BaAtacar
i@87Thcod.j_  which  is  also  used  as  the  equivalent  of
")-V^?^'Pr5"  Belteshazzar,'  see  Daniel  ii.  §§213),  was,
according  to  the  Book  of  Daniel,  a  son  and  successor
of  Nebuchadnezzar,  king  of  Babylon.  The  length  of
the  reign  of  Belshazzar  is  not  given ;  but  we  read
in  Dan.  8 1  of  '  the  third  year '  of  his  reign.  In  Dan.
530/  [31/]  it  is  stated  that  he  was  slain,  and  that  on
his  death  the  empire  passed  into  the  hands  of  Darius
the  Mede.  All  references  to  Belshazzar  in  other  authors,
including  that  in  the  apocryphal  Book  of  Baruch  (In/),
appear  to  have  been  suggested  Vjy  the  passages  in
Daniel  ;  and,  since  it  is  now  recognised  that  the  Book
of  Daniel  was  composed  in  the  second  century  B.C.,
the  narrative  is  open  to  question.

Till  quite  lately  it  was  the  fashion  to  follow  Jos.  (.-i;//.
X.  11  2)  in  identifying  the  Belshazzar  of  Daniel  with  the
last  Babylonian  king,  Na/3odj'5r?Xos,  whom  Jos.  else-
where calls  ^al36i'i>r]dos  (in  a  citation  from  Berossus  ;
see  c.  Ap.  I20)  ;  in  Herod.  177:88  this  king  appears  as
\a.§vv<i)To<i,  and  in  Abydenus  (quoted  by  Eus.  Pr.  Ev.
941)  as  Na/ia»'fi5oxos.  Against  the  identification  of
Belshazzar  with  Nabonnedus  it  was  urged  that  the
latter,  according  to  Berossus,  was  not  even  a  relation
of  Nebuchadrezzar,  but  '  a  certain  Bab}lonian '  who
usurped  the  throne  in  consequence  of  a  revolution  ;  nor
was  Nabonnedus  slain,  like  the  Belshazzar  of  Daniel,
on  the  overthrow  of  the  Babylonian  empire,  but  is  stated
to  have  been  sent  to  the  province  of  Carmania  (the
modern  Kirman).  These  objections  were  so  serious
that  a  few  writers,  in  their  anxiety  to  defend  the  narra-
tive of  Daniel,  identified  Belshazzar  with  Evil-merodach
(2  K.  2527).

The  discovery  of  the  Babylonian  inscriptions  has  re-
futed both  of  the  above-mentioned  theories,  and  has  at
the  same  time  confirmed  the  opinion  that  the  narrative
in  Daniel  is  unhistorical.  An  unhistorical  narrative,  how-
ever, is  not  necessarily  a  pure  fiction,  and  in  this  case  it
appears  probable  that  the  author  of  Daniel  made  use  of  a
traditional  storj'.  It  is  now  known  that  Nabonnedus,
the  Nabu-naid  of  the  inscriptions,  who  reigned  from  555
to  538  B.C.,  had  a  son  called  Bel-sar-u.sur  [i.e.,  '  Bel,
preserve  thou  the  king'),  a  name  of  which  Belshazzar  is
evidently  a  corruption.  In  a  celebrated  inscription
Nabu-na'id  offers  up  a  prayer  in  behalf  of  '  Bel-sar-usur,
the  exalted  (or,  my  first-born)  son,  the  sprout  of  my
body  (///.  heart)':  see  Schr.  COT  2131,  and  also  A'B
Si  96/  Moreover,  in  certain  contract-tablets,  dating
from  the  first,  third,  fifth,  seventh,  eleventh,  and  twelfth
years  of  Nabu-na'id,  Bel-sar-usur,  the  son  of  the  king,  is
expressly  named.  Several  other  tablets  of  the  same  reign
speak  of  a  '  son  of  the  king '  ;  but  whether  in  all  these
cases  Bel-sar-u.sur  is  meant  cannot  be  determined,  since
Nabu-na'id  appears  to  have  had  at  least  one  other  son."-^
It  is,  however,  generally  believed  that  Bel-sar-usur  must
be  identical  with  the  prince  mentioned  in  an  inscription
of  Cyrus,  which  informs  us  that  in  the  seventh,  ninth,
tenth,  and  eleventh  jears  of  the  reign  of  Nabu-naid,
'  the  son  of  the  king '  was  at  the  head  of  the  army  in
Akkad — i.e.,  Northern  Babylonia.  Unfortunately,  this
very  important  inscription  is  mutilated,  so  that  we  learn
nothing  of  the  years  twelve  to  fifteen  of  Nabii-na'id,  and
in  the  account  of  the  sixteenth  year  only  a  few  words
are  legible.  Of  the  se\enteenth  and  last  year  of
Nabu-na'id  there  is  a  long  account ;  but  it  would  seem
very  doubtful  whether  '  the  son  of  the  king  '  is  mentioned

1  IPapraa-ap  ©Th.  (Aa?mg.)  in  Dan.  1  7  and  in  (P*  Dan.  226
456  16  thrice  5  i  8  i.]

2  Darius  Hvstaspis  tells  us  in  one  of  his  inscriiptions  (Spiegel,
Alipers.  Kci'linschr.i'^)  \o  f.  ['81])  that  early  in  his  reign  a
rebellion  was  raised  at  Babylon  by  an  impostor  who  professed
to  be  '  Nabukudra9ara,  son  of  Nabunita' — i.e.,  Nebuchadrezzar,
son  of  Nabfi-na'id.  This  proves,  at  least,  that  at  the  time  in
question  Nabu-na'id  was  believed  to  have  had  a  son  named
Nebuchadrezzar. See  Che.,  Jew.  Rel.  Life,  Lect.  i.

.528


BELT

again.*  In  any  case,  it  is  implied  that  Nabfl-nS'id,  not
BCl-s;ir-usur,  was  at  this  time  commander  of  the  army
in  Akkad  (see  yVSVA/ 7  i39-'76.  A'Z;  3 />  128-137.  and
O.  E.  Hagen,  '  Keilschrifturkunden  zur  Gesch.  des
Kbnigs  Cyrus  '  in  the /^^^//r.j^fc  s//r /^jjyr.  [e<l.  Delitzsch
and  HauptJ  '2214-225  ['94]).  We  |x)ssess,  moreover,
another  inscription  of  Cyrus,  describing  the  con()uest
of  Babylonia  at  considerable  length  and  expressly  men-
tioning King  Nabuna'id,  but  without  any  reference  to
a  'son  of  the  king'  (see  JKAS,  new  series,  1270-97,
A'^  3 /i  120-127,  and  lieilrdge  sur  y^w/.  2  208-215).
Hence  there  is  nothing  to  prove  that  liC-l-sar-usur
played  any  important  i)art  at  the  close  of  his  father's
reign,  and  it  is  even  possible  that  he  may  have  died
some  years  earlier.

Thus  it  will  be  seen  that,  apart  from  the  similarity
of  name,  the  historical  prince  Bel-sar-usur  bears  but  a
very  slight  resemblance  to  the  Belshazz.ar  of  Daniel.
The  one  is  the  son  of  the  usurper  Nabuna'id  ;  the  other
is  the  son  of  Nebuchadrezzar.  The  one  is,  at  the  most,
heir  to  the  throne  ;  the  other  is  actually  king,  for  docu-
ments are  datefi  from  the  year  of  his  accession  (Dan.  7  i
81).  Moreover,  if  the  ordinary  rendering  of  Dan.  5  7
1629  be  correct,  Ifelshazzar  is  represented  as  sole  king,
for  a  man  who  can  of  his  own  authority  make  any  one
he  pleases  '  third  ruler  in  the  kingdom '  must  clearly  be
supreme  in  the  state.  Since,  however,  the  word  trans
lated  '  third  ruler '  occurs  now  here  else,  and  is  of  very
doubtful  meaning,  it  would  be  unsafe  to  press  this
argument.

In  order  to  prove  that  Bel-5ar-usur  reigned  conjointly  with  his
father,  it  has  sometimes  been  asserted  that  king  Mardnk-iar-
usur,  who  is  mentioned  on  certain  Babylonian  tablets,  must  be
identical  with  Hel-5ar-usur ;  but  Assyriologists  now  admit  that
king  Marduk-5ar-usur  reigned  be/ore  Nabuna'id,  and  identify
him  with  Nergal-5ar-usur  (559-555  B.C.  :  see  7'SBA  ti  108,  and
Tide's  B.IO  476  n.  [i886-88]).  It  has  likewise  been  urged
that,  though  Bcl-5ar-usur  was  not  a  son  of  Nebuchadrezzar,  he
may  have  been  a  grandson  of  Nebuch.'idrezzar  through  his
mother ;  but  the  theory  that  Nabuna'id  married  a  daughter  of
Nebuchadrezzar  rests  upon  no  evidence  whatever.

It  remains,  therefore,  altogether  uncertain  how  the
story  in  Daniel  really  originated ;  but,  besides  the
similarity  of  the  names  Belshazzar  and  Bel-sar-usur,
there  is  at  least  one  reason  for  thinking  that  King  Bel-
shazzar was  not  invented  by  the  author.  Herodotus,
as  has  been  mentioned,  calls  the  last  Babylonian  king
Labynetus,  representing  him  as  the  son  of  an  earlier
Labynetus,  the  famous  Nebuchadrezzar.  Further,  in
a  Chaldaian  legend  related  by  Abydenus,  the  last  king
of  liibylon  seems  to  have  figured  as  a  son  of  Nebuchad-
rezzar (see  Schr.  '  Die  Sage  vom  W'ahnsinn  Nebuchad-
nezar's,"  in  the  /PT,  i88i,  pp.  618-629).  The  date
of  the  historian  Abydenus  is  indeed  doubtful  ;  but  he
can  hardly  have  borrowed  either  directly  or  indirectly
from  the  Book  of  Daniel,  so  that  the  agreement  of  these
three  accounts  in  wrongly  describing  the  last  Babylonian
king  as  a  son  of  Nebuchadrezzar  must  be  due  to  their
having  followed  some  popular  tradition. See  also  AsH-

I'K.SAZ, SHAKKZER.  a.  A.  B.

BELT (n'TO)  Jobl22it  RV. AV 'strength.' See

GlKDI.E, 3.

BELTESHAZZAR  (l-'iNti'^^a).  See  Daniel,  ii.
§  13.

BELTIS  (Is.  10 4  corr.  te.xt). See  Gebal.

BEN  (|5.  S  f>-\)>  ^  Levite,  enumerated  between  Zecha-
riah  and  Jaaziel  (i  Ch.  ISiSf).  0'-  renders  '  Zax-  vidi
leiT^X";  but  ©"ka^  ^o  doubt  rightly,  omits.  The  name
is  wanting  in  the  parallel  list  in  i  Ch.  152o.  Cp
Jaazif.i,.

1  ITie  passage  which  Schrader  in  1800  translated  '  the  wife  of
the  king  had  died'  is  supposed  by  Pincbcs  to  mean  '  tlie  son  of
the  king  died'  (see  Smith's  £>B(-),  1893,  article  '  Belshazjar '),
while  Hagen  renders  'he  [i.e.,  GulxxruJ  slew  the  .son  of  the
king '  (he  is  careful,  however,  to  indicate  that  the  word  '  son '  is
doubtful).  It  is  therefore  obvious  that  no  argument  can  be  built
upon  the  clause  in  question.


34


529


BENE-BERAK

BEN-ABINADAB (3nr3J<-19.  '  «>"  of  Abinadab,

so  .\\),  the  nami-  of  one  of  Solomon's  prefects,  1  K.
4  II  kV  AV'i:-  (yioy  aBinaAaB[A],  xinanaA.  [L];
0"  is  corrupt,  btit  perhajjs  xeiN  ANAAan  represents  the
name  [Swete  reads—  )(e|^g  ana  AanJi  ;  see  .Soi.o.mon.
Klostermann,  however,  suggests  nyax.  'Abiner';  i  and
n  are  easily  confounded,  and  the  final  2  in  au'SK  niay  Ije
really  the  pre|x)sition  ('in')  prefixed  to  'all  Naphath-
dor,"  or  'all  the  height  of  Dor'  (I'A'),  words  which
define  the  extent  of  the  prefecture.

BENAIAH  (-in^J-l  in  Nos.  i  /.  4/  11,  and  n;33  in
Nos. 1-3.  6-1  I  ; '  Yah  hath  built  up,'  §  31  [see  Bani]  ;

BanaiaLc]  Ll^AL],  Bangac.  BeNiAC  L*<*  '"  i  <-'i-
16  s]).

I.  (i.t:3  ;  but  in  2  .S.  20  23  1  Ch.  11  22  n'ls)  b.  Jehoiada.
a  '  valiant  man  '  (see  Isn-ii.\i,  the  son  OK),  only  second,
on  Davids  roll  of  honour,  to  'the  three."  He  was  a
Judahite  of  Kabzeel,  and  commanded  the  so-called
Chekktihtks  and  Pelktiiites  (2  S.  818  jSapai  \i].
^avayaias  [A],  2O23  1  Ch.  I817),  and  David  set  him
over  his  bodyguard  (nyccD  2  S.  2823).  He  gave  valu-
able support  to  Solomon  against  AdoNIJAH  (i),  and
after  executing  the  sentence  of  death  on  Joab,  was
appointed  to  the  vacant  post  of  general  ( 1  K.  1 32-38
234  [om.  6"]  35  ^avaiov  [BA]  44  [om.  ©"]).i  Three
(or  at  any  rate  two)  special  exploits  were  assigned  to
him  in  popular  tradition  (2  S.  2;32o/.  =  i  Ch.  11  22/
[Kavaia  B'']).  On  the  first  two  see  Akiee,  i  ;  a  correction
of  the  text  is  indispensable.  The  other  feat  consisted
in  his  slaying  a  '  Misrite  '  (2  S.  23  21) — i.e.,  a  man  of
Musr  or  Musri  (see  Mizkaim,  §  2).  This  hero  is  twice
mentioned  in  a  list  of  no  value  in  i  Ch.  27  (5/  34).  I-.ach
time  there  is  an  inaccuracy.  In  ?■.  5  (1<\')  Benaiah's
father  is  described  (by  an  obvious  confusion  of  names)
as  '  the  priest '  ;  in  v.  34  '  Jehoiada  son  of  Benaiah  '
takes  the  place  of  '  Benaiah  son  of  Jehoiada.'  Cp
Jehoiada,  2,  and  see  David,  §  11  (c)  i.

2.  One  of  David's  thirty,  a  Pirathonite ;  2  S."233o  (i,t:3  ;  0
corruptly  tov  E<f>paBaLov  [B],  om.  AL);  i  Ch.  II31  27  14  (,TJ3).

See  PiRATHON.

3.  A  Simeonite  chief  (1  Ch.  436  [om.  ®B]).

4.  A  Levite  singer  of  the  .second  grade,  one  of  those  who
played  with  psalteries  set  to  Ala.moth  (y.v.),  1  Ch.  IJ182024
OamifBNAI-Dl.-.s.

5.  An  overseer  in  the  temple  in  the  time  of  Hezekiah  (2  Ch.
31  >  3)-

6.  An  ancestor  of  Jahaziel  [^] ;  2  Ch.  2O14  (om.  ®b).

7-10.  In  list  of  those  with  foreign  wives  (see  EzR.\,  i.  §  5  end),
viz. — 7.  One  of  the  b'ne  Parosh  (17.?'.),  Ezral025  (/uoi-aia  [«])  =
I  Ksd.926,  Baanias,  RV  Bannkas  (fiawaiai  [BA]).  8.  One
of  the  b'ne  Pahath-Moab  (f.v.),  Ezral03o;  in  ||  i  Esd.  V'31
perhaps  Naidus  (vai&oi  [B],  vaei.  [.\],  Pavatav,  and  ^laSaai
[L]).  9.  One  of  the  b'ne  Bani,  Ezra  10 35,  in  II  i  Esd.934
MabdaI,  RV  Mamdai  QiatuSau  [B],  fiavSai  [A],  Pavaia  [L]).
10.  One  of  the  b'ne  Nebo  (^.7'.,  iv.)  (fiavai  [L]),  Ezral043
=  1  Esd.935  BANAlAsOSai-ai  [L]).

II.  P'ather  of  Pelatiah  (,f.z>.,  4),  Ez.  11 1  (i.Tja),  v.  13  (,TJ3,
6  ToO  pa^awv).

BENAMMI  (^pril).  Gen.  19 38. See  Ammon.  §  1.

BENCH  (wH"'),  Kz.  27 6t  AV. See  Ship.

BEN-DEKAR,  RV  Ben-deker  (If^V;.'^)  ;  one  of
Solomons  prefects,  in  charge  of  NW.  Judah(i  K.  49,
YIOC  PHXAC  [H],  .  .  .  -xa8[I-].  Y-  Aakap  [AJI.  The
name  is  improbable  ;  nor  is  (5''s  Ben-Rechab  any  more
probable.  It  is  reasonable  to  hold  that,  as  in  other
cases,  the  father  of  this  prefect  was  an  influential  officer
of  the  crown.  The  prefect's  real  name  has  certainly
dropped* out.  Klostermann  suggests  that  we  may  re-
store thus:  'Klihoreph,  son  of  .Shisha  the  secretary"
(v.  3).  Ben-dekar  is  not  impossibly  a  corruption  of
BenelK>rak  [1/.  v.  ]. The  locality  suits.

BENE-BERAK  (pn?"":?),  a  Danite  city,  the
modern  Ibn  Ihrdk,  about  an  hour  SI-',,  from  Joppa
(Josh.  1545: BanaiBakat [B], BanhBarak [AL] :

t  In  the  list  given  at  the  end  of  chap.  ii.  by  ©"t-  he  is  described
as  «iri  Ttfi  a.vXa.(t\i<K  «tai  «7ri  tov  -nKivBtiov ,  i.e.,  f3; 2^ of  3  S.
1231,  for  which,  however,  ®i-  has  fiaic^/So.
530


BENE  JAAKAN

bane  et  harach  [Vg.]  ;  .  ^y^Xs')-  It  appears  in  Ass.
(upon  an  inscription  of  Sennacherib)  as  banaibarka  (cp
KA  7<-'  172).  Jerome  mentions  a  village liareca,  which
was  situated  near  yVzotus.  The  name  (properly  a  clan
name)  may  be  paraphrased,  'Sons  of  the  storm-god '-^
Rammiin  or  Rimmon '  (who  was  sometimes  called
Rannuan-birku  ;  see  Barak),  and  is  thus  of  interest  as
a  survival  of  the  old  Canaanitish  religion.

BENE JAAKAN (ji?!;! *J3), Nu..333i/.t See
Bkkkuth  ok  tmk  Ciiii.drkn  of  Jaakan.


K.4.3 AV'"K- RV, AV


1.  Name.


BEN-GEBER  (^nri|:).

Gkhi;k,  i.

BEN-HADAD  (TtH  \^.  §§  43,  48  ;  yioc  AAep  [BAL]
Y.  AAep  [A]  in  2  K.  1824:  aAaA  [A]  in  2K.  I325;
jjj,;^),  or  rather  Bir-'idri  ;  (5  is  at  least  a  witness
to  the  letter  R  at  the  end  of  the  name.
The  divine  name  Bir  was  confounded  by  a
Hebrew  scribe  with  the  Aramaic  bar,  '  son,'  and  trans-
lated into  Hebrew  as  Ben  (=(5  vlbs),  and  DR  was
miswritten  UD  ;  hence  arose  the  wrong  form  Ben-hadad.
The  name  in  Assyrian  is  (ilu)  IM-'idri,  where  the
ideograph  IM  is  most  naturally  read  Ramman  (the
.Assyrian  thunder-god  ;  cp  En-RIMMON),  but  may  of
course  be  read  (and  probably  was  read  also)  Bir  or  Bur
(cp  the  name  Bir-dadda,  and  see  Bf.dau).  The  mean-
ing is  'Bir  is  my  glory."  See  Wi.  ATUnters.  68^,
who  controverts  Schr.  and  Del.  ;  but  cp  Schr.  A'A  T^^
200,  Del.  Ctihver  Bib.  Lex.<!~)  97,  and  Hilprecht,  As-
syriaca,  76-78.

The  name  Ben-hadad  is  used  as  a  general  name  for
the  kings  of  Damascus  in  Jer.  -19  27  ; but  as  this  passage

_  .  ,  ,  _  occurs  in  a  very  late  oracle,  made  up
■  of  borrowed  phrases,  the  use  is  of  no
historical  significance.  In  fact,  Amos,  from  whom  the
author  of  Jer.  I.e.  borrows  the  phrase  '  the  palaces  of
Benhadad,'  means  most  probably  by  Benhadad  (Am.
1 4)  the  first  king  of  Damascus  who  bore  that  name  :  he
sjieaks,  in  the  parallel  line,  of  'the  house  of  Hazael.'
Hazael  was  certainly  a  historical  person  :  he  was  the
successor  of  Benhadad  I.  (others  say  Benhadad  H.).
Consequently,  Benhadad — in  Amos's  phrase  'the  palaces
of  Benhadad ' — cannot  be  a  merely  typical  name,  as  in
the  imitative  passage,  Jer.  4927.  There  are  two  (some,
however,  say  three)  Benhadads  in  the  Books  of  Kings,
just  as  there  are  (really)  two  Hazaels  (see  H.\zael).

I.  Bkn-hadad  I.,  son  of  Tab-rimmon,  was  the  ally
of  .^s.'V  \_q.v. ,  i],  king  of  Judah,  against  Baasha,  king  of
Israel  (i  K.  If)i8^).  He  was  an  energetic  king,  and
constantly  involved  in  warfare,  not  only  with  Ahab  of
Israel,  whom  he  appears  to  have  besieged  in  Samaria
(2  K.  6/ ),  but  also  with  Shalmaneser  II.  of  Assyria.
In  854,  at  the  head  of  a  Syro- Palestinian  league  which
included  Israel,  he  opposed  Shalmaneser,  not  without
success.  For,  though  Shalmaneser  claims  to  have  been
victorious  at  Karkar  (near  Hamath),  he  certainly  had
to  return  to  .\ssyria  to  prepare  for  a  more  decisive
campaign.  Again  in  849  and  in  848  Shalmaneser,
though  nominally  victorious,  had  to  return.  Convinced
that  lie  had  no  ordinary  oppxjnent,  the  Assyrian  king
entered  on  his  next  campaign  with  a  much  larger  force
than  before.  Bir-"idri,  however,  had  taken  his  pre-
cautions, and  again  it  was  only  an  indecisive  victory  that
was  gained  by  Shalmaneser.  On  the  relations  between
Benhadad  and  Ahab,  in  which  there  was  apparently  a
change  for  the  advantage  of  Israel,  see  Aii.\B,  %  ^ff.
Benhadad  is  sometimes  referred  to,  not  by  name,  but
as  'the  king  of  Syria'  ;  see  i  K. '22  2  K.  .5  68^
Some  unnecessary  trouble  has  been  produced  ( i )  by  the
supposition  that  the  period  between  'Benhadads'
assistance to .\sa and '  Benhadad's ' death (which

1  Pesh.  seems  to  point  to  the  reading  pna-Syai  '  the  lightning
Baal.'
*  Cp  the  obscure  name  Boanerges.

531


BEN-HESED

occurred  between  846  and  842)  was  too  long  to  be
assigned  to  a  single  king  of  Damascus,  and  (2)  by  the
reading  of  the  name  of  the  opponent  of  .Shalmaneser  II.
as  Dad-'idri,  which,  again,  is  supposed  to  be  equivalent
to  Hadad-ezer.  On  the  first  point  it  is  enough  to
remark  (after  Wi.  )that  Tab-rimmon  may  (Rezon  and
Hezion  not  being  identical)  have  been  for  a  long  time  a
contemporary  of  Baasha  and  Asa,  so  that  only  about
forty  ye.ars  may  have  elapsed  between  Benhadad's  war
with  Baasha  and  his  death.  On  the  second  point,  it
may  be  doubted  whether  the  reading  Dad-'idri  is
tenable;'  the  equation  IM  =  Ramman  (or  Bir)  appears
to  have  been  made  out  (see  alwve)  ;  and  even  were  it
otherwise,  it  could  hardly  be  held  that  ' idri  is  '  the
Aramaic  form  oi  ezer'  in  niimn  (Sayce,  Crit.  and  Man.
316),  for  an  y  would  have  made  the  alteration  of  'idri
into  nn,T  impossible.  'Jdru  {'idiru),  whence  'idri
('my  .  .  .'),  seems  in  fact  to  be  derived  from  'adaru,
'  to  be  wide,  grand  '  (mx  ;  cp  Heb.  m,i).  On  the  narra-
tive of  the  death  of  Benhadad  (2  K.  87-15),  see  Hazaei,.

2.  Benhadad  II.  By  this  king  is  here  me;int,  not
the  contemporary  of  Ahab  (often  wrongly  so  designated),

_  I,  J  J  TT  but  the  son  of  Hazael  (possibly  the
3.  uennaoaoil. grandson  of  Benhadad  I.). The  op-

'P  ••\~ pression  of  Israel,  begun  by  Hazael,

'■  was continued by this lien-hadad

(2K.  133).  But  was  his  name  really  Ben-hadad?
Ramman-nirari  III.  (see  Assyria,  §  32)  mentions  a
king  of  Damascus  named  Mari',  whom  he  besieged  in
his  capital,  and  compelled  to  pay  tribute.  This  event
must  have  occurred  between  806  or  805  and  803.
Now  Benhadad  II.  is  represented  as  a  contemporary
of  Jehoahaz,  son  of  Jehu,  who  probably  reigned
(see  Chronology,  §  34)  from  814-798.  It  is  ditti-
cult  to  suppose  that  another  king  named  Mari'  came
between  Hazael  and  Benhadad.  More  probably  Mari',
and  not  Benhadad,  is  the  right  name  of  the  son  of
Hazael.  This  king  may  have  sought  to  compensate
himself  for  the  blow  inflicted  by  Assyria,  by  exercising
tyranny  over  Israel.  (For  a  different  view  of  the  l^n-
hadads  see  Damascus,  §  7.)  T.  K.  c.

BEN-HAIL  (7^n"|.'3,  'son  [man]  of  might"),  one  of
Jehoshaphat's  commissioners  for  teaching  the  Law  (2  Ch.
177).  The  name,  however,  is  suspicious.  Beriheau
quotes  Ben-hesed  ('son  of  lovingkindness '),  i  K.  4io
(MT)  ;  but  the  reading  there  is  doubtful  (see  Bkn-
HESED,  §  3).  ©BAL  and  Pesh.  read  ".^^  for  "|3  (toii
viovsTuiv  dvvarQv  ;  but  ©'-  adds  t6v  vidv  aiK)  ;  cpGray,
HPN  65  n.  2.  If  the  story  of  Jehoshaphat's  commis-
sion is  only  '  ideal,'  we  may  surmise  that  the  name  Ben-
hail  is  equally  unhistorical.

BEN-HANAN  (pn"j3 — i.e.  'son  of  a  gracious  one'
— a  patronymic  ;  yiOC  4)&NA  [B].  Y-  ANAN  [A],  -nn,
[L]),  a  son  of  Shimon  [q.v-),  a  Judahite  (i  Ch.  420).

BEN-HESED  (lDn"\3,  'son  of  kindness*  ;  an  im-
possible name,  see  below),  the  third  in  the  list  of
Solomon's  prefects  (i  K.4io,  AV  'son  of  Hesed';
YIOC  eccoe  [B],  .  .  .  ecA  [A],  aa&xci  Y'OC  exwLBHp]
[L])-

His prefecture included, at  any  rate, Socoh ; but

which  of  the  different  Socohs  ? If  we  look  at  the  sphere

•Pw»f f f '^'^  ^"^^  prefect  whose  name  precedes  his

ueoron  /  ^^^  ^^^^  southern  Socohs  mentioned  in
Joshua,  either  that  in  the  mountains  near  Hebron,  or
that  in  the  Shi5phelah,  SW.  of  Jerusalem.  If,  on  the
other  hand,  we  consider  the  sphere  of  the  two  prefects
whose  names  follow  his,  a  northern  Socoh,  which  is
possibly  referred to  in  early  Egj'ptian  name-lists  (see

I.Del.  (Caki<er  Bih.  /.f.r.<^)  97)  conjectures,  as  the  original
form  of  the  name  of  Henh.idad  II.,  Bin-Addu-'idri,  which  he
interprets  '  the  son  of  .^ddu  (  =  Ramman)  .  .  .'  Pinches  h.is,  in
fact,  found  the  names  Hin  (?) -Addu-natan  and  Bin(?)  -Addu-
amar,  which  occur  on  tablets  of  King  Nabuna'id.  See,  however,
Wi.  A  TUntcrs.  69,  n.  i.

533


k


BEN-HESED

SocoH,  a),  will  be  more  suitable.  The  decision  must
Ik.'  in  favour  of  one  of  the  two  southern  places  of  the
name,  ln-causc  otherwise  the  land  of  Judah  will  have
h.id  no  ijri'fi'ct.  Which  of  the  two  southern  Socohs,
then,  is  theri^ht  one?  I'rolwhly  that  in  the  rich  corn-
growing  country  of  the  ShC|)hil.ih,  lx?cause  the  prefects
had  to  supply  provisions  for  the  court.  '  The  whole
Lind  of  Hcphcr '  also  fell  to  his  lot.  There  are  traces
of  this  name  in  the  N.  (Hephkr,  i.  2  ;  cp  Gathhepher,
Hapharaini).  Hut  if  this  i)refect  is  the  only  southern
one,  we  must  cxjiect  the  land  of  Hcphcr  to  be  some
large  district  (this,  indeed,  is  implied  by  •  the  whole
land').  In  i  Ch.  4i8  we  hear  of  a  Hebcr  (lan)  who
was  the  father  of  Socoh.  Plainly  this  Heber  is  closely
connectcxl  with  Hebron  (as  the  licros  eponymus).  3  and
B  are  easily  confouiuletl  from  a  phonetic  cause :  we
should,  therefore,  proUibly  re;\d  lan  {"^K'^JS.  '  the  whole
land  of  llelKT,"  or,  better,  'of  Hebron"  (I'lian).

2.  His  place  of  residcnc-e  is  in  MT  called  Arubboth.
AimIj  in  Josli.  1552 (see  Klo.)does  not  help  us. ©*

2  Residence "'^''^'^^  '^"^  ^^^  ''"°'  ^^  reading  nmy
at  Mareahah  7  ^^  "^=^- -^"^^l^g""^  phenomena  else-
where suggest  that  nia  should  be  n'a,

and  that  it  h.is  bc-en  misplaced.  nNn'a  (cp  ^atup
in  I'.  8  [I!L],  i)orhaps  for  '  Heth-horon ' )  could,  of
course,  l)e  only  a  nuitilated  form  of  a  name.  To  read
•  Hcthlehem '  would  \>c  nuich  too  Ixjld,  and  Rietogabra
(moil.  />'(■/  Jihrin)  would  not  suit,  since  the  name  occurs
late,  and  (as  Huhl  points  out.  Pal.  192)  the  description
of  the  battle  of  .Mareshah  in  2  Ch.  14  9  is  opjjosed  to  the
assumption  that  there  was  a  town  on  the  site  of  Baeto-
gabra  in  early  times.  It  is  quite  possible,  however,
that  the  neighbouring  town  of  Mareshah  had  a  second
name — sc;ircely  IJelh-gibborim,  but  perhaps  Helh-horim,
'  place  of  caves'* — that  has  lieen  corruptefl  into  Arub-
both. Din*n"3  may  have  been  partly  mutilated  and
partly  corrupted  in  the  record  into  nxn"3,  whence  nmK.
especially  if  c"in  was  written  with  the  mark  of  abbrevia-
tion ('nn  or  Sn).  The  conjecture  is  geographically
plausible.  .\t  the  present  day  Bet-Jibrin  is  rightly
described  as  '  the  capital  of  the  .Shephelah ' ;  ^  this  is
set  forth  more  fully  elsewhere  (see  El.KUTHEROPOLls).
Suflice  it  to  remark  here  that  if  Het-Jibrin  became  the
'  centre  of  the  district  *  after  the  fall  of  Mareshah,  the
earlier  city  cannot  have  been  less  important  in  the  time
of  Solomon.  If  Taanach  and  Mcgiddo  are  mentioned
in  the  record  of  the  prefectures,  surely  Mareshah,
under  this  or  some  other  name,  must  have  been  men-
tioned too.  Now,  Het-Jibrin  is  only  20  min.  N.  of
Mer'ash  (Mareshah).

We  have  spoken  of  Iteth-horim  as  possibly  an  early
name  of  Mareshah.  This  designation  would  harmonise
excellently  with  the  natural  features  of  the  neighbour-
hood of  Mareshah  and  Ha'togabra.  The  excavation  of
the  caverns  which  now  fill  the  district  must  have  begun
in  ancient  times.  The  Christian  and  Islamic  marks
and  inscriptions  which  are  sometimes  found  do  not
oppose  this  obvious  supposition.  Sc-e  Ei.EUTHERO-
POI.IS,  §  2.

We  now  turn  to  consider  Ben-he.sed's  real  name.
Klostermann  has  made  it  probable  that the  first two

3  Real  na.ma P^^'fects were descrilied as sons of
Ahiiah  7 '^•idok,  the  priest,  and  Shisha  (Shavsha),

^  the  secretar}',  resfjcctively  (cp  v.  2/.).

It  is  viT)'  possible  that  non-p  should  be  read  isbn-j3.
'  son  of  the  secretary, '  and  that  the  prefect  was  in  fact
the  .\hijah  mentioned  in  v.  3.  This  is  slightly  favoured
by  ©i-'s  (/x)ax«>  but  really  rests  on  internal  probability
(cp  Bii)k.\k). The  misreading  non^ia  is  touching,  as  a

'  Beth-horim,  'place  of  caves,'  would  naturally  come  to  be
explained  '  pUice  of  the  Horitcs'  (see  Eleutheroi-oi.is,  S  2);
the  Horites  were  no  doubt  regarded  as  giants  (gibb<")r  =  yi'')<a9  £>),
like  the  Anakim.  Hebron  is  called  in  Targ.  Jon.  Gen.  232  '  the
city  of  the  giants.'

«  GASm.  HG  231.

533


BENJAMIN

monument  of  the  sufferings  of  the  later  Jews  under  a
Tpn-|J^  '\i,  'an  unkindly  (cruel)  people'  Ps.  43i.

T.  K.  C.

BEN  HINNOM(D5n-]9),  Josh.  15818.6;  EVsonof

HiN.NO.M  ' [i/.V.).

BEN  HUR,  AV  'son  of  Hur'  [</.v.]Cy\r\-\^,  'son  of
Horus'?;  B<MU)p[BL].  BCN  Yioc  copfA],  oypHC  IJos.
Ant.  viii.  2  3]),  one  of  Solomon's  prefects  (i  K.4  8);
sec  Solomon.  The  prefect's  own  name  is  omitted  ;
probably  his  father's  name  also  ;  for  the  evidence  tends
to  show  that  most  of  the  prefects  were  the  sons  of
famous  men.  The  name  of  his  city  also  is  wanting.
Yet  the  hill-country  of  Ephraim  was  not  deficient  m
places  of  importance.  Consetjucntly  either  Hur  or
Ben-hur  must  Ix;  incorrect.  Either  '  Hur '  stands  in
the  place  of  one  of  David's  and  Solomon's  heroes,
or  Berf-hur  is  a  corruption  of  the  name  of  the  prefect's
city.  6*'s  rendering  may  seem  to  protect  Ben.  But
nowhere  else  in  ©s  version  of  this  section  is  ^^»
given  instead  of  vl6s  (vl6^  is  of  course  an  interpolation) ;
if  the  j3  represented  by  0-^  is  correct,  we  m\iz\.  suppose
that  it  is  a  mutilated  form  of  j,-i3,  '  priest '  (as  -\o  in
non  in  v.  10  may  be  of  ib2).  In  this  case,  Arariah,
son  of  2^adok  the  priest  (v.  2),  will  be  the  prefect's
name,  and  his  city  will  be  nin==  Beth-horon.  Azariah,
therefore,  stands  first  in  both  lists,  which  is  intrinsic-
ally probable.  If,  however,  we  follow  the  ^aiwp  of
©"'-,  the  prefect's  city  alone  has  come  down  to  us  ;
/Sato)/)  may  represent  Bethhoron.  i;n  may  easily  have
come  from  j'nin  Horon  (abbrev.  from  Bethhoron).  So,
j in  the  main,  Klostermaim.  T.  K.  c.

BENINU  (•iy23,§  79  (3),  'our  son'?;  BCNiA/weiN
r^X].  Banoymm  t-^l  -OYIA  [I-]).  Levitc  signatory  to
the  covenant  (see  EzKA,  i.  §  7),  Neh.  10  13  [14].

I  BENJAMIN  (Wl^2  often  ;  but  pc;  =;3  [sic;  sc-e  Ba.

I  note]  I  S.  9i Kt. ;  Names,  §§  48.  73; BeNl&/v\[6]lN

I  or  Bain. [BALJ).

j  The geiuilic is Benjamlte, 'rD-|3 [i.s. O21I, 'rc'n-a

j  [Judg.315],  al.so  'j'??  in2b. '20i[iS.  !»i]ami  iS.'.i4;  perli.ips
!  also  in  iS.4i2  [cp  ©  ;  MT  p'ja) ;  pi.  •:";•  '-.2  [judg.  Ii>i6
i  1  S.  227I ;  «M[Ml[fl"'l>')atos,  [.].e^o-[f]i  (HAlV),  see  i  Ch.  27  12  ;
I  in  i.S.  227  iffiffvi.  l.\];  in  i.^.!t4  <pi>  has  ia<cnn  and  (Bl-
I  lafiiv;  in  2S.  2O1  ©L  has  apa\et  ;  in  2  S.  23  29  (B-^  /Saoiaou;
I in  Ne.  12  34  0l  /juafjidi' ;  in  Zcch.  14  10  ipN*  /Scto/xdc.

Though  popularly  explained  as  meaning  the  propitious

or  sturdy  tribe' — 'the  son  of  my  right hand'- — Ben-

-j  jamin  was  prolxibly  at first a geographi-

■  cal  name  for  the  people of the southern

\ portion  of  the  highland  district  called  Ephraim  (cp  the

expression  <j'0'  pjt  in the  old  narrative i S.  9-10  16),

just  as  a  district  of  Gilcad  (Gad)  seems  to  have  Ix-en

i called  Safon, 'North'  (see  Zei'Ho.v  ;  cp  also  Teman,

j Temeni, Yemiti,  and  on  the  other  hand  eih-Shiim).

I It  is  not  impossible  indeed  that  this  district  was  already

j known  to  the  Canaanites  as  '  the  South '  ;  but  there  is

nothing  to  suggest  that  it  was. Indeed,  it  is  a  good

' deal more probable that the name  means '  south  of

I Joseph,'  the  Hebrews  who  settled in the  highlands  of

I Ephraim  being  known as '  the  house ' or '  sons ' '  of

Joseph,'  a  designation  which  retained  this  general  sense

till  quite  a  late  date. The  question  is  rather  whether

I Benjamin,  at  first  a  distinct  tribe,  afterwards  became

1 the  southern  part  of  Joseph (e.g.,  by  the  energy  and

success  of  Saul  ;  as  Winckler  supposes),  or  whether  it

was  not  rather  the  southern  part  of  Joseph  that,  under

the influence of  forces immediately  to  be  described.

1  Another  interpretation  was  prolalily  'son  of  da>'s— /".r.,  of
old  age ' (so  in  Test.  xii. Patr. Hcnj.  1  ;— cp  Gen.  44  20  '  child


of  his  old  age,"  c'jpj  iS')-
2  In  the  uncertainty  how  the


ertainty  now  tne  present  text  of  Judg.  20  16  arose
(cp  Moore,  (!</  ioc),  there  is  perhaps  hardly  sufficient  ground
for  connecting  with  this  etymology  the  story  of  the  700  le/t-
handed  warriors.  Cp,  however,  also  Ehud,  and  the  story  of
the  Henjamite  deserters  to  David,  who  could  use  the  bow  and
the  sling  with  either  hand  (i  Ch.  1'2  2).

534


2.  Land.


BENJAMIN

came  gradually  to  be  distinguished  from  the  rest  of  the
highlanders  of  Isphraini  by  the  s|x;cial  name  of  Ifen-
janiites,  'men  of  the  south,"  the  S.  part,  as  being
the  smaller  (cp  i  S.  9  21),  receiving  the  distinguishing
epithet.

It  is  not  difficult  to  conjecture  how  this  would
naturally  come  about.  The  plateau  of  Henjaniin.  if  it  is,
as  we  have  seen,  historically  connected  with
Joseph,  is  hardly  divided  physically  from
Judah.  Incleed,  although  no  mean  country  (ffrei'uiTaros
di  6  KXrjpos  ovTos  Jjv  Sid.  rrjv  rrji  yiji  dfXT^fiv  :  Jos.  Ani.
i.  5  22),  it  differs  materially  in  its  physical  features  from
the  northern  part  of  Ephraim,  being  sterner  and  less
fruitful— in  fact,  more  Jud:ean.  Moreover,  valleys,
running  down  to  the  Jordan  (Suwenit,  Kelt)  and  to  the
sea  (Merj  ibn  'OniCr),  exposed  it  to  attack  from  the  E.
(Moab)and  from  the  W.  ( Philistines),  while  aline  of  strong
Canaanite  fortress-cities  (Gibeon,  etc.)  constituted  an
additional  source  of  danger  to  its  highland  peasants.
That  these  southerners  had  a  certain  traditional  fierce-
ness ^  (Blessing  of  Jacob)-  was,  accordingly,  only  a
natural  result  of  their  position  and  history.  We  cannot
be  surprised,  then,  that  they  won  the  right  to  a  special
name  and  place.

It  is  thus  hardly  necessary  to  assume,  with  Stade
(Z.ITIV  I  348  ['81]),  some  specific  attempt  or  series
of  attempts  to  overcome  by  force  the  Canaanites  of  the
cities  (Jericho,  Ai),  perhaps  under  the  leadership  of  the
clan  of  Joshua,  in  order  to  account  for  the  origin  of  a
separate  tribe  :  the  general  situation  might  be  sufficient.

Mixture  of  race  may,  however,  have  helped  to
diffcri'iitiate  the  trilie,  although  at  least  the  Canaanite
p  ...  elements  took  a  very  long  time  to
3.  I'opu  a  ion.  tjg^Qrng  thoroughly  amalgamated,  as
we  see  from  the  story  of  Gibeon  (Josh.  9  ;  St.  GF/  161),
and  still  more  from  the  hints  about  Beeroth  {^.v.,  i.  ),■*
which  appears  to  have  retained  its  distinctively  Canaan-
ite population  at  least  till  the  time  of  Saul  :  indeed,
even  the  radical  policy  of  the  latter  seems  to  have  been
only  partly  successful  (see  IsHii.\Ai.,  i ).  If  the  name
Chei'HAK-ii.\.\mmo.\.\i  {//■■!'■)  indicates  the  presence  of
immigrants  from  across  the  Jordan  we  must  look  for  the
explanation  to  nuich  later  times  (Josh.  18  24  P).  The
position  of  Iknijan-.in  on  the  marches  of  Joseph,  however,
doubtless  providetl  opportunities  for  mixture  also  with
other  tribes.

Benj.-imin  is,  ?.?-.,  explicitly  brought  by  E  (Gen.  35  18)  into
connection  with  a  tribe  called  HiiNONl  ('/.r'.),  while  the  first
appearance  of  one  or  both  of  them  is  connected  in  some  way  (at
least  etymologically)  with  the  disappearance  of  Rachei.  (?.r'.).
If  Simeon  really  temporarily  settled  m  this  neighbourhood  before
making  his  way  south  (cp  Israel,  §  7),  it  is  at  least  worthy  of
note  that  in  a  Simeonite  list  we  find  a  clan  name,  Javin  2  (i  Ch.
4  2^),  and  a  place  name  Bilhah  (?'.  29;  see  Baalah,  2).  Nor
is  It  impossible  to  find  suggestions  of  some  connection  with
Reuben  :  a  famous  landmark  on  the  borders  of  Benjamin  is  con-
nected with  his  name  (though  the  genuineness  of  the  te.xt  is  per-
haps not  bejond  question),-*  as  is  also  Bilhak  (g-z'-),  the  hand-
maid of  Rachel.  In  Bilhan,  on  the  other  hand,  to  which  the
Chronicler  in  his  first  genealogy  assigns  a  prominent  place
(iCh.  Tic),  we  cannot  safely  see  the  remains  of  a  Bilhah  clan
(see  Bii.hah),  for  the  name  may  liave  been  taken  from  the
Horite  genealogy,  as  Jeush  was  taken  from  the  Edomite  (below,
§  9  ii.  a).  Historical  probability  is  certainly  in  favour  of  the  idea
that,  after  Dan  failed  to  establish  himself,  Benjamin  eventually
spread  westwards— although  some  of  the  apparent  actual  traces
of  this  are  not  to  be  trusted  (see  Hushim,  Gen.  4623  [Danite;
see,  however,  Dan,  §  8]  compared  with  i  Ch.  88  11  [Benjamite]  ;
AljALoN  [i].  Josh.  r.»42  (Danite]  compared  with  Judg.  1  35
[house  of  Joseph]  i  Ch.  .S  13  [Benjamite  ;  see  Beriah,  3]).  The
confused connection  with Manasseh, however, that  seems  to

1  The  historical  figures  belonging  to  the  tribe,  too,  have  a
certain  passionate  vehemence  (Saul,  etc.).

2  Kor  a  suggestion  of  a  possible  original  connection  between
the  metaphor  employed  in  the  Blessing  and  the  constellation
Lupus  right  opposite  Taurus  (  =  Joseph),  see  Zimmern's  art.
'  Der  Jakobssegen  u.  der  Tierkreis,'  /^A  3  168  ['92].

3  A  late  editor  may  be  following  trustworthy  tradition  when
he  adds  CHEPHtRAH  in  his  list  (with  which  cp  Ezra  22025  =
Neh.  7  25  29=  I  Esd.  5  17  19).

■»  '  Son  (j3)  of  Reuben  "  may  be  a  corruption  of '  stone  (pn)  of
Reuben,'  which  may  be  not  an  alternative  name  of  the  stone,  but
an  alternative  reading  for  Bohan  (y.f.).

535


BENJAMIN

result  from  the  present  text  of  i  Ch.  "15  compared  with  v.  12
is  perhaps  due  merely  to  corruption  of  the  text.  (Shupham  and
Hupham  m.iy  have  had  no  place  in  the  original  system  of  the
Benjamite  list,  iCh.  76-ii,  and  being  perhaps  supplied  on  the
margin  [see  below,  g  9  ii.  a]  may,  by  some  confusion,  have  made
their  way  into  the  te.xt  also  in  Alanasseh,  7'.  15  [cp  Be.  ati  loc.].)
What  connection  with  Moab  is  intended  in  i  Ch.  88  the  present
condition  of  the  text  makes  it  impossible  to  divine  (the  clause
may  be  a  gloss;  see  below,  §  9  vi.fi).  Cp  Paiiath-Moab.
Nor  perhaps  can  we  venture  to  interpret  historically  the  sugges-
tion of  the  Chronicler  with  regard  to  a  later  transference  of  clans
from  Benjamin  back  to  Ephraim  (see  Beriah,  2,  3).  Clan
names  common  to  Benjamin  and  other  tribes  are  not  rare.

The  memory  of  the  derivative  or  at  least  secondary
character  of  Benjamin  still  lived  in  the  earlier  days  of
the  monarchy,  as  we  see  from  2  S.  19  20  [21]


4.  Age.


(cp  also  20  I  with  20  21)  and  (apparently)  from


Judg.  1  22, '  and  seems  to  lie  reflected  in  the  patriarchal
story  (JE)  which  tells  how,  last  of  all,  Benjamin  was
born  in  Canaan.-  That  the  differentiation  of  lienjamin
was  relatively  ancient,  however,  we  should  be  prepared
to  believe  from  the  fact  of  the  other  branches  of  Josejjh
being  called  not  brothers  but  sons.*  The  reference  in
the  Song  of  Detorah  is  too  obscure  (not  to  speak  of  its
perplexing  connection  in  some  way  with  Hos.  58)  to  La
of  much  use  as  positive  evidence  ;  while  the  story  of
Ehud,  if  it  is  perhaps  hardly  necessary,  with  Winckler
{Gesch.  1  138),  to  regard  the  single  explicit  reference  to
Benjamin  as  an  interiiolation  (see  below,  §  5),  may
perhaps  reflect  the  conditions  of  an  age  when  no  very
clear  line  was  drawn  between  Benjamin  and  the  rest
of  Josepjh  (Judg.  827)  —  the  men  of  the  south  and  the
men  of  the  more  northern  highlands.  At  all  events,
by  the  time  of  David  Benjamin  was,  owing  to  the  energy
of  Saul,  a  distinct  political  element  to  be  reckoned
with,  although  we  must  not  forget  that,  e.g. ,  in  the  story
of  the  first  appearance  of  Jeroboam,  the  '  house  of
Joseph'  is  an  administrative  unit  (i  K.  11  28). ■•

The  peculiar  condition  of  the  legends  relating  to
this  tribe  provokes  an  attempt  to  explain  it.  This
J  must  take  account  of  two  inconsistent
°  ' tendencies — a  tendency  in  favour  of  the

tribe  (Judg.  3  15  i  S.  4  12  i  K.  3  4  9  2),  and  a  tendency
against  it  (Judg.  19-21).  When  we  bear  in  mind  the
central  position  of  the  tribe,  and  the  abundEnce  and
ini[5ortance  of  sanctuaries  within  and  near  its  bounds  (see
below,  §  6),  it  cannot  surprise  us  that  there  were  many
traditions  of  incidents  in  which  the  tribe  played  a  part.
It  is,  however,  remarkable  that  some  of  them  have  no
special  reference  to  sanctuaries.

We  can  hardly  suppose  this  due  to  contending  politiial
interests  (those  of  Ephraim  and  Judah)  leading  to  a  sort  of
diplomatic  flattery  of  the  boundary  tribe  with  a  view  to  seem-
ing its  adhesion— just  as  there  evidently  was  rivalry-  of  a  less
peaceable  kind  (e.g.,  i  K.  15  17  22).  A.  Bernstein,  who  worked
out  this  view  in  great  detail  in  his  able,  if  unequal,  essay
Ursfirung  der  Sngen  Ton  Abraham,  I  sank  u.  Jacob,  1871  (see
especially  61),  does  not  take  account  of  the  stories  unfavourable
to  Benjamin  outside  of  Genesis ;  and  it  seems  clear  th.at
Benjamin  was  naturally  a  part  of  the  northern  kingdom  (i  K.
12  21  belongs  to  a  much  later  date  than  ?'.  20).  The  later
history  of  the  tribe,  especially  after  the  fall  of  Samaria  (see  below
§  7),  would  go  a  long  way  towards  accounting  not  only  for  the
preservation  but  also  for  the  mixed  character  of  much  Benjamin
tradition.  If  we  wish  any  further  explanation,  it  seems  reason-
able to  seek  it  in  a  natural  interest,  friendly  or  otherwise,  in  the
great  tribal  hero,  the  mystericjus  Saul  and  his  house.

The  interest  in  the  tribe  is  undeniable.

Israel  will  run  any  risk  rather  than  that  of  losing  Benjamin
(Gen.  42  38  J);  the  narrative  delights  in  detailing  the  various
signs  of  special  aflTection  on  the  part  of '  Joseph,'  and  even  Judah
offers  himself  as  surety  for  him  (Gen.  4.39  J)  or,  according  to  E,
Reuben  the  first-born  offers  his  two  sons  (Gen.  42  37).  On  the
other  hand,  all  the  tribes  led  by  Joseph  reprove  and  chastise
Benjamin,  but  relent  and  find  a  sub.stitute in  Jabesh  Gile.id


t  St.,  however,  supposes  that  the  account  of  Benjamin  has  been
lost  (Gesch.  1  138).

2  P,  however,  ignores  this  (Gen.  81  26).

3  Niildeke  (in  a  private  communication)  thinks  that  at  an  early
time  'Benjamin  was  a  powerful  tribe,  and  that  the  rise  of  the
story  of  Its  late  origin  (as  also  Judg.  19-21)  is  to  be  accounted
for  simply  as  the  result  of  the  crippling  of  its  power  by  David.

*  It  has  been  argued  by  St.  from  i  K..4i8  [19I  that  it  did  not
include  Benjamin  {/.A  TIV  1 115  n.);  but  could  we  argue  from
4  8  that  it  did  not  include  Ephraim  ?

536


BENJAMIN

(JucIr.  19-21),— a  story  that  is  strangely  parallel  to  Joseph's  accus-
ini;  Henjamin  (fajsely),  the  others  inlercrdini;,  and  Juduh  offering
to  become  Hubslitule  ((ien.  4433).  What  iiistorical  substratum
may  underlie  this  (iilicah  story  we  have  not  the  means  of
determininK.  Its  laic  date  and  its  unlrust  worthiness  in  its  present
form  apiwar  in  its  practically  wiping  <>ut  the  trilw  that  was  not
so  very  l<>n«  after  al.le  to  ^We  its  first  ruler  to  a  united  '  Israel '
(see  also  Itclow,  |  7,  end,  on  post-exilic  interest  in  Benjamin).

Benjamin  was  in  a  sense  at  the  centre  of  the  religious
life of the land. What the reliKioiis history of

6  Relitrioua-^^'^'^"*^'^"  <''"'••  '*  '""^y  ^^"'^  been  we

°  can only  guess  ; but there  were  sacred

post  on.  ,„;ij,j,i;.l)as  and  trees  that  l)ore  the  nantes
of  Ukuokah  (Gen.  358  Judg.  45)  and  Rachel  (Gen.
85  16  ao  Jor.  31  15)  ;*  and  Kaniah,  CJcba,  Gilieah,  Mizpeh,
Gibeon,  (jilgal,*  not  only  were  Canajinitish  sanctuaries
but  also  continueil  to  Ix;  of  iniiwrtance  as  such  in  Israel  ;
indeed,  Geba,  which  (or  jjerhaps  it  was  the  neighbouring
Gibeah)  one  writer  calls  '  (Jibeah  of  God'  (1  .S.  10  5),
was  perhaps  selectetl  by  the  Philistines  as  the  site  of
their  n'^sib  l)ecause  of  its  sanctity  (i  S.  13  3  and  especi-
ally 10  5;  cp  Saul,  §  2  «. )  as  well  as  because  of  its
strategic  position.^

More  iin|)ortant  still,  perhaps,  l^thel  itself,  the
famous  royal  sanctuary  (.\m.  713),  where,  according  to
the  story,  Israel  encamixxl  after  crossing  the  Jordan
(see  liocHiM),  is  said  by  P  to  have  belonged  to
Benjamin  (Josh.  18  22).  No  doubt  the  Chronicler
afterwards  (iCh.  728)  assigns  it  to  E]/nraim  ;  but
(though  it  may  well  have  been  a  border  town  with
connections  on  both  sides)  that  is  perhaps  only
because  he  could  not  conceive  of  Benjamin,  a  trite
that  he  reg.irded  as  belonging  to  the  southern  kingdom,
extending  so  far  north.  At  all  events,  there  was  reason
enough  for  the  words  used  of  lienjamin  in  Dt.  33i2
(cp  Di.  ad  loc.  and  see  below,  §  8),

'The  beloved  of  Y.ihwe,  he  dwelleth  secure;
He  (i.e.,  Vahwe)  eiicompasst-th  him  .ill  the  day,
And  Ijetween  his  shoulders'*  doth  he  dwell.'

It  seems,  therefore,  not  unfitting  that  this  tribe,  martial
though  it  was,  should  for  all  time,  whatever  view  we
take  of  the  character  of  .Saul,  be  associated  with  two  of
the  greatest  names  in  the  history  of  Hebrew  thought
and  religion,  representatives  of  two  of  the  greatest  of
religious  movements  :  Jeremiah,  who  was  a  native  of  a
Benjamite  town,  and  Paul,  who  at  least  lx."lieved  that  he
was  sprung  from  the  same  tribe  (Rom.  11 1  Phil.  35;
cp  Test.  xii.  Pair.,  Renj.  ch.  11).

Saul's  career  ended  in  gloom  ;  yet  his  work  was  not
entirely  undone. It  was, therefore,  a  matter  of  course

7  Later  *'^"^^ ^^^ '^^" ^^ Henjamin (especially the


history.


Fiichrites,  see  below, §  9  ii. ^\,  even  more


than  the  rest  of  the  house  of  Joseph,  should
dislike  being  sulxjrdinated  to  the  newly-risen  house  of
Judah  (SiiiMKi,  I »,  and  should  embrace  any  gootl  oppor-
tunity to  assert  their  claim  (Shkha,  ii.  i ),  and  that,
along  with  the  rest  of  the  house  of  Joseph,  they  should
throw  in  their  lot  with  Jkkoboam  ( i ).  We  have,  accord-
ingly, no  reason  to  (|uestion  the  accuracy  of  the  state-
ment in  I  K.  1220  :  '  there  was  none  that  followed  the
house  of  David,  but  the  tril)e  of  Judah  only,'*  (cp  Ps.
80  2  [3]  and  Hos.  58  with  We.'s  note,  and  see  IsRAF.l,,
§  28  ;  Jericho  is  regarded  as  north  Israelite  in  1  K.
1527  It)  15^).  However,  as  Jeroboam  was  not  a
Benjamite,  and  the  capitals  of  the  northern  kingdom
were  always  in  the  northern  parts  of  Josejjh  (cp
Zarethan II.), Benjamin  does not apix^ar to  have

1  On  the  stone  of  Bohan  or  Reuben,  see  alxjve  (S  3).

'  Baal-tamaralst)  was  probably  a  sacred  place.  On  the  special
importance  of  f'.il^al  in  early  times,  see  Cikcumcision,  $  2.

^  \Vi.  has  even  tried  to  show  that  Gibeah  was  l)elieved  by
some  to  have  been  the  seat  of  Israel's  famous  shrine,  the  'ark  ' ;
but  he  takes  no  account  of  the  discussion  of  Kosters  (ThT
27  361-378  ['93] ;  cp  .\rk,  8  5).

*  Note  the  Arabic  metaphor,  WRS,  Kin.  46  (foot).

*  We  cannot  argue  from  2  Sam.  24 1  9,  for  'Judah'  here
means,  not,  as  the  Chronicler  (i  Ch.  21  6)oddly  supposed,  a  tribe,
but  the  southern  kingdom  (the  Chronicler  thinks  it  necessary
to  try  to  explain  —  see  the  attempts  of  45hai.  to  understand
him— why  Benjamin  and  Levi  were  not  numbered).

537


BENJAMIN

really  g.iined  by  this  step.  In  fact,  it  seems  to  have
eventually  gravitated  more  and  more  southwards.
Indeed,  lying  on  the  border  between  the  two  king-
doms, it  was  important  strategically  rather  than  politic-
ally ;  and,  although  we  cannot  very  well  follow  the
details  of  the  process,'  sonic  of  its  towns  seem  to  have
been,  at  one  time  or  another,  and  more  or  less
permanently,  incorporated  in  the  southern  kingdom.
The  blow  that  the  northern  kingdom  receivetl  in  722
was  favourable  to  this  process,  and  in  another  sense  the
sack  of  Jerusalem  in  586.  Thus  in  Jer.  33 13  •  the  land
of  Benjamin'  is  included  in  an  enumeration  of  the
various  districts  of  the  territory  of  Judah-  viz. ,  the
Shephelah,  Negeb,  etc. — just  as  in  2  K.  238  'from
Geba  to  Beersheba,'  like  'from  Geba  to  Rimmon '  in
Zech.  14  10,  stands  for  the  whole  land  of  Judah,  and  in
Jer.  t)  I  Jeremiah's  clansmen  are  living  in  Jerusalem  ;
and  so,  in  the  century  following  the  rebuilding  of  the
temple,  Benjamin  is  regularly  mentioned  alongside  of
Judah,  the  combination  of  names  appearing  often  to
mean  the  families  that  were  not  taken  to  Babylon  (cp
Kosters,  Ilcrstel,  faisim),  and  the  Jews  came  to
believe  that  Rehoboam's  kingdom  had  from  the  first
consisted  formally  of  these  two  tribes  (cp  Ps.  6827  [28]"
Chron.  passim,  and  a  late  writer  in  i  K.  I221  23).
Hence  we  need  not  Ije  surprised  at  the  fulness  with
which  Ik'iijamin,  as  compared  with  the  other  Joseph
trilx.'S,  is  treated  in  the  book  of  Joshua  (Di.  505),  or
at  the  fre<|uent  and  copious  Benjamin  lists  in  the
Chronicler  (see  §  8/.).  Only  we  mu.st  rememter  that
these  tribal  distinctions  were  in  later  times  theoretical  ;
Simon  (2  Mace.  34),  Menelaus,  and  Lysimachus  were
Ik-njamites  ;  for  the  e.xplanation  of  Mordecais  mythic
genealogy (Shimei  —  Kish  —  Benjamin) see Esthkr,

(a)  Although  the  priestly  writer's  conception  of  the

frontier  of  Benjamin  is  not  even  self-consistent,  Beth-

8 I  atp Arabah, a point in Judah's N.

WritPr«t' boundary  (Josh.  15  6), being assigned

statistics-  ^'■''  <'"•  ^'^  ''^  J"'^^'^  ■'^"'^  '^^"^  *^^"'
geograpnicai.  .^^abah,  i)  to  Benjamin,  it  can  be
idcinifietl  roughly.

From  the  Jordan  near  Jericho  he  makes  it  pass  up  to
Beth-aven  and  Bethel  (/>V/V/«),  where  it  turns  S.  to  .Ataruth-
addar  (possibly  'Attini)  and  thence  \V.  to  Bcth-horon  the  nether
(Bn'/'l'r-),  returning  by  Kirjath-jearim  and  Nephtoah  (Li/ta),
circling  round  tlie  south  of  Jerusalem  through  the  vale  of
Hinnom  and  the  plateau  of  Rephaim,  and  by  the  spring  of
Rogel,  and  finally  returning  by  En-shemesh  (//(y-<"/-'--f  c/jr/^ir//)
and  the  valley  of  Achor  to  the  Jordan  at  Beth-hoglah  ('A in-,  or
t^a^r-llajla).

What  led  P  to  fix  on  this  line,  the  southern  stretch  of
which  he  repeats  with  greater  fulness  in  the  delineation
of  Judah  (Josh.  155- io|,  we  cannot  say;  nor  can  we
say  why  he  inakes  the  boundan,-  run  south  of  Jeru-
salem.-* The  ■  Blessing  of  Moses  has  indeed  been
taken  to  imply  (Dt.  33 12  ;  see  above,  j5  6)  that  in  the
latter  part  of  the  eighth  century  Jerusalem  was  held  to
lie  inside  the  boundary'  of  Benjamin  ;  but  '  by  him '  in
the  first  line  is  probably  due  to  a  clerical  error,  and
line  3  is  quite  indistinct  :  nothing  points  specially  to
Jerusalem.-'  Stade  ((;/'/ 1  162)  proposes  Gibeon  ;  i)er-
haps  Winckler  would  suggest  (iilx.-ah  ;  Oort,  however
(  ThT,  1896,  pp.  297-300),  pleads  vigorously  for  Bethel,
and  nothing  could  be  more  appropriate  in  a  poem  so
markedly  north- Israelitish.  It  is  pl.iin  enough,  on  the
other  hand,  that  Jerusalem  is  assignctl  to  Benjamin  by
P  (though  he  avoids  giving  the  name  of  the  town,  speak-

J  See  the  account  in  GASm.  HG.  ch.  12.

2  On  the  other  tribes  mentioned  in  this  verse  see  Zebulun,

NaI'HTALI.

3  .■\ccording  to  the  Talmud  the  Holy  of  Holies  and  some
other  parts  of  the  temple  sto<xl  on  Benjamite  soil  (.Sanhtiir.  54) ;
but  the  site  of  the  altar,  though  within  Benjamin,  was  a
piece  of  land  that  ran  into  Benjamite  territory  from  Judah
(\'oma,  12).

4  Unless  Jerusalem  may  be  thought  to  be  implied  in  the
mention  of  Benjamin  before  Joseph  (Dr.  Dl.  389).  But  on  the
order  of  the  tribes  cp  Di.

538


BENJAMIN

ing  simply  of  '  the  Jebusite ') ;  and,  if  we  do  not  know
precisely  why  he  does  so,  we  can  at  least  see  that  he
has  a  purpose  of  some  kind,  for  in  Judg.  I21  it  is  quite
clear  that  the  editor  has  for  the  same  reason  twice
substituted  '  Benjamin'  for  the  original  '  Judah,'  which
we  find  in  the  otherwise  identical  Josh.  I063.  VVe
must  conclude  that,  whatever  conceptions  prevailed  in
later  times,  in  the  days  when  tribal  names  were  really
in  harmony  with  geographical  facts  of  one  kind  or
another,  Jerusalem  was  counted  to  Judah.

(d)  Many  late  lists  of  Menjamite  towns  have  been
preserved.  i.  The  only  early  one  is  the  rhetorical
enumeration  of  twelve  places  on  the  path  of  the
Assyrian  invader  (Is.  10 28-32).

Of  the  six  names  in  it  which  are  not  mentioned  in  any  of  the
other  lists,  two  are  those  of  towns  the  sites  of  which  are  known
'with  certainty:  Michmash  {Muj»i<is)  uttd  Geuim  (,El-Jib).

2.  P's  list  (Josh.  I821-28)  comprises  an  eastern  and  a
western  group — viz.,  a  group  of  twelve  (to  which  he
adds  in  21 18  two  others)  and  a  group  of  fourteen  towns.

Of  these  twenty-eight  the  following  sixteen  may  be  regarded
as  identified,  some  with  certainty,  others  with  a  high  degree
of  probability  :  Jekicho,  Hkth-Hogi.ah,  Zemakaim,  Bethel,
Parah, (Ieba,  Gibeon, Ramah, Beekoth, Mizpeh,  Che-

PMIRAH, 'the JEnilSlTE,' GiBEATH, KiRIATH, AnATHOTH,

Almon  (see  Alemeth).

3.  Neh.  1 1 31-35  contains  a  list  of  some  sixteen  towns
alleged  to  be  settled  by  Beiijamites.  The  list,  which
may  be  incompletely  preserved,  is  more  and  more
assigned,  by  scholars  of  various  schools,  to  the  time
of  the  Chronicler  (see  Torrey,  Comp.  and  Hist.  Value
of  Ezra-Neh.  42  f.  ;  Mey.  Entsteh.  107,  189)  ;  at  all
events,  it  cannot  be  early.

Of  the  eleven  new  names  (unless  the  Aija  of  z/.  31  be  the
Avvim  of  Josh.  I823)  not  in  the  Joshu.i  lists,  four  may  be  re-
garded as  identified  beyond  dispute :  Hauid,  Neballat,  Lod
(see  Lypda),  Ono.

4.  In  the  list  Xeh.  7  =  F.z.  2  =  i  Esd.  5  (see  Ezra,  ii.
§  9),  vv.  25-37  2'J-34.  -T"!  17^-22  respectively,  seem  to
enumerate  places  (apparently  places  where  members
of  ICzras  '  congregation  '  were  resident),  mostly  within
old  Beiijamite  rather  than  old  Judahite  territorj'.

In  this  list,  excluding  Xeho  (iv.)  as  being  probably  merely  a
transposition  of  Nob,  we  have  still  five  other  new  names,  of
which,  however,  some  seem  to  be  spurious,  and  only  Netophah
and  Bkth-Azmaveth  (see  A/..\iaveih  [i.J)  can  be  regarded  as
identified  with  any  certainty.

Other  places  perhaps  in  Benjamite  territory  are  Baal-
HAZOR  (2  S.  1823)  and  XoiiAil  (see  Moore,  Judges,  443).
I  Esd. also  adds  a  Chadi.as  and  Ammidoi  (Chaui-

ASAl).

Lists  of  Benjamite  clan  or  personal  names  (sometimes,
_  of  course,  including  place  names)  are  many.

1  .  .  "  They  have  mostly,  however,  suffered  much
°^ ■ at  one  stage  or  another  in  transmission.

(i. )  P's  two  (Gen.  46  — Nu.  2t>)  are,  as  usual,  different
versions  of  the  same  list.

Thej'  probably  contain  two  triplets  («)  Bela  —  Becher —
Ashbel,  and  (/')  (iERA— N'aaman — .Ahiram  ;  and  a  third  triplet,
not  quite  so  certain,  (f)  Sliuphan  — Hupham — Ard.

(ii.)  The  Chronicler's  two  (i  Ch.  7  and  i  Ch.  8)  are
more  difficult  to  understand,  l)ut  are  constructed  more
or  less  on  the  sanife  scheme.

(a)  In  I  Ch.  1 6ff.  (sons  of  the  first  triplet  1 — of  which,  how-
ever, Ashbel,  '  Man  of  Baal, 'becomes  Jediael,  '  Intimateof  EI  ')2
we  have  what  is  of  all  the  lists  perhaps  the  most  symmetrical.
Certain  peculiarities  (such  as  apparent  doublets)  make  it  plausible
to  suppose  that  the  symmetry  was  once  even  greater.  Abijah,
a  name  that  occurs  elsewhere  in  the  Chronicler's  genealogies
only  in  priestly  families,'* should  perhaps  be  read  'the  father  of
(cp  '  father  of  Bethlehem,'  i  Ch.  44).  In  that  way  the  two  places
Anathoth  and  Alemeth  would  be  assigned  to  the  last-mentioned
son  of  Becher,  just  as  in  t>.  12  Shuppim  and  Huppiin  are  ascribed


1  Verse  i2rt  in  a  sense  represents  the  third  triplet,  and  12/'
has  names  connected  in  chap.  8  with  the  second.

2  Cp  "jK-n'.  I  Ch.  '.'7  32  =  '?yir'.  2  S.  23  8  (Manjuart  in  a  private
communication).  We  can  hardly  argue  from  the  Ashbal  or
AshbOl  of  the  Peshitta  th.-it  the  change  of  Ashbel  to  Jediael  is
due  to  an  accident ;  for  in  the  Peshitta  i  Ch.  76  simply  substi-
tutes'the  corrupt  Genesis  list  (46  2i)of  nine  names  (with  its  '  Khi
and  Rosh  Muppim  '  for  '  Ahiram  Shuppim  ')  for  the  Chronicler's
list  of  three  sons.

3  On  the  supposed  Abijah,  wife  of  Hezron,  see  Caleb,  ii.

539


BEN-ONI

to  Ir  =  In  the  last-mentioned  son  of  Bela.  Marquart,^  to  whom
the  detection  of  this  analogy  is  due,  suggests  that  n'^KI  should
be  read  ,133  Kin-  If  some  form  of  this  theory  he  adopted  it  will
be  only  natural  to  look  for  a  name  (or  names)  assigned  to  the
last-mentioned  son  of  Jediael  (the  remaining  branch  of  Benjamin)
and  to  find  it  in  Hushim  the  son  of  A\\cT  (v.  12).  This  will  be
still  more  plausible  if  we  may  adopt  the  re.st  of  Marquart's
theor)-,  that  Aher  ^^^t  is  a  miswritten  inriK — '•'^•1  AhihOr — and
that  Ahishahar,  nntJ"nN,  isacorruption  of  the  same  name(nn'nN).
If  Uzzi  and  Uzziel  in  71.  7  are  a  doublet,  '  five  '  in  the  same  verse
is  not  original.  Perhaps  Ehud  etc.,  in  v.  10  are  brothers  of
Bilhan,  the  intervening  words  being  a  parenthesis.*  Whilst  v.
12  is  thus  required  to  give  symmetry  to  the  genealogy,  it  may
nevertheless  be  in  a  sense  an  appendix.

O)  Chap.  8  ha-s  in  parts  the  appearance  of  being  constructed
in  a  very  schematic  form  (though  eflforts  to  detect  a  general
scheme  have  not  l>een  markedly  successful),  and  this  seems  to
warrant  the  conviction  that  the  present  obscurity  is  due  to
textual  corruption.  For  remedying  that  some  help  can  be  had
from  the  versions ;  but  it  is  not  sufficient.  Certam  suggested
emendations  (see  an  article  by  the  present  writer  in/Q/x  11  102-
114  ['98])  so  greatly  reduce  the  disorder  that  now  prevails  that
there  seems  to  be  reason  to  believe  that  the  genealogy  was  at
one  time  markedly  regular  in  structure,  and  that  considerable
boldness  in  attempts  to  restore  it  is  warranted.  It  has  always
seemed  difficult  to  explain  how  the  historically  important  Benja-
mite clans— the  clan  of  .Saul  and  .Sheba(viz.,  Becher),  and  that
of  Shimei(viz.,  Gera)— are  so  sulxjrdinated  in  this  extraordinarily
copious  list  (they  appear  to  be  omitted  altogether  in  Nu.  20;
see,  however,  Bechek).  It  is  probable  that  the  subordination
is  due  to  corruption  of  the  text.  When  emended  in  the  way
already  referred  to,  i  Ch.  81-7^  is  reduced  to  P's  three  triplets
with  the  .additional  statement  that  Gcra  was  the  father  of  [EJhl'd
(y.r'.)  and  .Shua[l],  or  rather,  as  .\larquart  acutely  suggests,
Shlmei  ({t.?'.  ;  cp  (BS'i  lafiei]-<Tana<;).  What  follows  is  obscure —
the  reconstruction  proposed  in  JQJi!,  I.e.,  Ls  in  parts  not  much
more  than  a  guess — but  it  seems  extremely  probable  that  the
names  in  in'.  1-27,  beyond  P's  three  triplets,  were  originally
attributed  to  Gera  through  Ahishahar  (once  corrupted  into
Shaharaim  ;  see  above,  [a])  and  Hushim  (v.  12  being  an  intrusive
repetition  of  a  later  part  of  the  list).  Then  7t.  30-38  gave  the
genealogy  of  the  Bichrites  (for  ni33,T  1:31,  'and  his  firstborn,'
read  n23.T  '331  'and  the  sons  of  the  liichrite'),  v.  -vib  being
perhaps  a  marginal  gloss  due  to  some  bewildered  reader  of  w.
30-32  (in  their  new  position  after  the  intrusion  of  v.  ■2i/.  from
chap.  9).  Marqiiart  suggests  that  these  nine  verses  originally
followed  the  mention  of  the  sons  of  Bela.  For  fuller  details  and
other  suggestions  the  reader  is  referred  to  the  article  already
cited.'  It  is  difficult  to  avoid  the  conviction  that  some  recon-
struction is  necessary.

(iii. )  In  Neh.  11 7/  and  iCh.  97-9  we  have  two
versions  of  a  list  of  Benjamite  inhabitants  of  Jerusalem,
the  original  of  which  it  is  quite  impossible  to  restore.

The  names  are  grouped  in  the  form  of  genealogies  of  a  few
persons  ;  for  which,  among  other  reasons,  Meyer  pronounces
the  list  an  invention  of  the  Chronicler  (Entstth. ,  iZg).
Kosters,  however,  suggests  that  the  genealogical  form  is  not
original  {/fcystfl),  and  that  the  authority  was  a  list  of  Jerusalem
Benjamites  living  in  Jerusalem  before  the  arrival  of  Ezra.

(iv. )  On  the  list  of  Benjamite  warriors  in  i  Ch.  I23-7,
see  David,  §  11  (a)  iii.  On  relations  of  Benjamin  to
other  tribes,  see,  further,  Raciikl,  Bilhah,  Joseph.

2.  A  Benjamite,  b.  Bilhan,  i  Ch.7iot  (see  No.  t,  §  9,  ii.  a)

3.  A  Levite,  of  the  b'ne  Harim,  in  the  list  of  those  with  foreign
wives,  Ezra  1032  (see  Ezra,  i.  g  5,  end).

4.  A  Levite,  in  the  list  of  wall-builders,  Neh. 823  (see  Nehe-


k'h,  §  1/.,  Ezra,  ii.  g§  i6[i],  15^/),  perhaps  the  same  as  No.  3.

In  the  procession  at  the  dedication  of  the  wall  (Ezra,  i.

§  13  J?),  Neh.  1234  Oxtafteii'  [L]) ;  on  which  see  Kosters,  Hct


5.  In  the

13  e),  Ne

Herstel,  59.

BENJAMIN,  GATE  OF  (jp;33  TKr),  Jer.  20  2  37x3
387  Zech.  14  10. See  JERUSALEM.

BENO  (iJ3)  is  taken  as  a  proper  name  in  i  Ch.  24  26/
by  EV,  in  v.  26  by  ©  (yioi  BoNNi  [A],  BoNNeiA  yioc
AYTOY  [I-]'  K  O'"-  '<  '"  ^'-  27  <S>'''^  has  yiOl  AYTOY,
©'^  Y'OC  <\y)  •'^"'^  ^y  J*^""-  ^""^^  Targ.  That  the  list
of  the  sons  of  Levi  is  in  a  most  unsatisfactory  state
is  evident  from  a  comparison  with  Ex.  617^^  i  Ch.
617  [2]^  29/  [14]  and  2321  /.  The  MT  is  most
obscure,  and,  according  to  Kittel,  -t.  20-31  are  one  of
the  latest  additions  ;  one  rendering  is  to  take  v.  26/
as  follows  : — '  Of  Jaaziah,  his  (Merari's)  son,  (even)  the
sons  of  Merari  through  Jaaziah  his  son,'  etc.

BEN-ONI  (*:iN-{3  ;  yioc  o^ynhc  moy  [ADEL],

1  In  a  private  communication  to  the  present  writer.

2  So  Marquart. On  foreign  names  in  this  list  see  above,  f  3.

3  .See  now  also  Marquart's  important  article  on  the  same
subject  (JQR  *"•)■

540


BEN-ZOHETH

rightly  interpreting  the  mind  of  the  writer),  the  first
name  of  IJtNjAMiN  (§  3).  g'vcn  to  her  new-bom  child
by  the  dyiny  kachel  (lien.  3j  18).  Ben-oni  must,  how-
ever, have  been  an  early  tril«l  name.  We  find  the
clan-names  Onam  and  Onan  (bolli  in  Judah.  the
former  also  Horile)  ;  also  a  lienjamite  city  Onu  ;  nor
can  the  existence  of  an  ancient  city  calletl  Betm-AVKN
(Bcth-on?)  be  tienied.  To  assume,  however,  with  Prof.
Sayce  {Fatrianh.  Pal.  191/),  first  that  Ileth-el  was
also  called  Heth-on,  anil  next  that  the  names  lieth-on
and  lien-oni  imply  that  the  name  of  the  god  worshipped
at  Luz  was  On,  and  next  that  this  divine  name  was
derived  from  On  =  Heliopolis  in  Egypt,  is  purely
arbitrary. Cp  Hkth-AVKN,  Aven  (3).  T.  K.  c.

BEN  ZOHETH  (nnirj?,  etym.  doubtful,  probably
corrupt).  /(Uii.TH  and  Ben-Zoheth  are  mentioned  in
1  (  h.  420  [viol  ^u>afi  [M],  vl.  ^ux'^O  [.A],  vl  faw^  [L]),
among  the  sons  of  Ishi  of  Judaii.

BEON  (li??).  Num.323. See  Raal-mkon.

BEOR  ("lira,  possibly  miswTitten  for  AcHBOR  ;  see
Haal-mana.v  |i];  Becop  [BAI> :  WH  in  2  Pet.  215]).
1.  Father  of  the  Fxlomite  king  Hki.A  [ii.  i],  Gen.  8632
(B&i(a)P  [L])=iCh.  I43  (BAicop  [A],  c€n<t)a)p.  «•'•.
ZipiX)r[L]).

2.  Father  of  Balaam  (Nu.  22$,  etc.,  /Satwp  [A],
except  in  Dt.  2:34[5]  Josh.  1322  Mi.6s;  in  Josh.  249
[(3»A  omits]),  called  HosuK  in  2  Pet.  2 15  AV  (^offop
[Ti.  following  .\5<cC];  Vg.  /iosor;  cp  the  conflate  reading
Peuiop<Top  [N*]).  RV  Bi:()R  ([/Jfojp  WH]).  In  Nu.  2422
gHAFL  reads  ry  /3ewp  ((iaiup  [A])  for  Heb.  ■i];^'?.

BEBA  (iri3.  -scarcely,  '  with  evil,"  cp  Rir.sha  ;  these,
like  oilier  names  in  Gen.  14,  may  Ijc  nmtilated  and
corrupted  forms;  BaAAa  [-ADL],  Bara  [I"-]-  BaA&C
[Jos.  Ant.  i.  q]),  king  of  So<lom,  who  joinetl  the  league
against  Chedorlaomer  (Gen.  14  2).  See  CllKDOR-
L.VOMKR,  §  2,  end.

BERACHAH,  RV  Beracah  (nn"!?,  'blessing';
BepxeiA  [BX],  BapaX'-^  [AL]).  a  Renjamite,  one  of
David's  warriors  (i  Ch.  I23). See  David,  §  11  [a]  iii.

BERACHAH (RV Beracah),  VALLEY  OF  (pr^V

nS-l?,  koiAaC  eyAoYIAC  [HM-l).  the  scene  of  tile
great  thank-Sgiving  of  Jehoshaphat  and  his  people
(2  Ch.  2O26;  in  26a  6  av\(j}i'  ttjs  evXoyia^  [l^A],  i)
KOiXaj  TTJi  fv\.  [L]).  The  geographical  knowledge  of
the  narrator  was  evidently  good  ;  but  that,  of  course,
does  not  make  his  narrative  any  m<jre  historical  (see
Jkho-SHAPHAt).  At  no  great  distance  from  Tekua
there  is  a  broad  open  wady,  on  the  west  side  of  which
are  extensive  ruins  named  Bereikiit.  Just  opposite  the
ruins  the  wady  itself  is  called  the  Wady  Bereikut  ( Rob.
LDR,  275).  From  the  form  Bereikut  we  gather  that
the  true  ancient  pronunciation  was  probably  Berechoth,
'  reservoirs. "  T.  K.  C.

BERACHIAH  (I'TDna),  iCh.624  [39].  RV  Bkre-
cniAii,  5.

BERALAH  (n\X-J5.  §  31.  '  Yahw6  creates'  ;  BApAiA
[I-].  BepipA'  KAI  B-  [n.\]).  I.  A  Benjamile,  assigned
to  the  b'ne  .Siii.mki  (8)  ;  i  Ch.  821.  The  name  is  \>ro\y-
ably  post-exilic,  '  creation'  l)eing  one  of  the  great  exilic
and  post-exilic  religious  doctrines.

2.  See  Bedkiah.

BEREA,  I.  An  unknown  locality  in  the  neighlxjur-
hood  of  Jerusalem,  where  Bacchides  encamjxxl  l)efore
the  battle  in  which  the  Jews  were  defeated  and  Judas
the  Maccaliee  was  slain  (Apr.  161  B.C.).  The  camp  of
Judas  was  at  FJasa,  Eleasa,  or  Alasa,  also  imknown,
but  probably  Kh.  iCasa  between  the  two  lietli-horons
on  the  main  road  from  Sharon  to  Jerusalem  (i  Mace.
94/).  The  liest  reading  seems  to  be  /Sepea  f.ANV]  ;
but there is MS authority also for Be7/p-fatf and

1  That  is  ,iyn3 ;  cp  i  Ch.  7  30.

S4I


BERED

6*17^^0^;  Vet.  I^t.  \vx&  Derethiim.  Joscphus  (/^w/.  xii.
IO2)  has  \ir\O^Ou),  or,  in  some  .\ISS,  Bi/pfT/O.  liwald
thinks  of  the  mo<lern  Bir  e/.-/eit,  i^  m.  NW.  from
Jufna,  or  of  lieeroth  (mod.  el  Birch).

2.  RV  BeroBa,  Wipoia.  [A],  -ptvo.  [V]),  the  scene  of
the  death  of  .Mknelaus,  the  modern  Aleppo  (a  Mace.
134).

3.  B^poto  [Ti.  WH]  (some  MSS  ^ipp.),  now  Verri.t,
or  Kara  Verria,  in  Ixiwer  Macedonia,  at  the  fofjt  of
Mt.  Bermios,  5  m.  alxjve  the  left  bank  of  the  Haliac-
mon  (I'istritza).  It  has  a  splendid  view  over  the
plains  of  the  Haliacmon  and  the  Axius  ;  plane-trees
and  abundant  streams  make  it  one  of  the  most  desirable
towns  of  the  district.  Yet  it  did  not  lie  on  the  main
road  ;  which  |x;rhaps  accounts  for  its  being  chosen  as
a  place  of  refuge  for  Paul  and  .Silas  in  their  midnight
escajje  from  Thessalonica  (.\cts  17 10).

A  curious  parallel  is  found  in  Cicero's  speech  acainst  Piso.
Un.ihle  to  face  the  chorus  of  complaint  at  Thessalonica,  Piv)
'  fled  to  the  out-of-the-way  town  of  Beroea  '  (inoppidutn  dez'ium
Beraam. In  Pit.  36).

In  the  apostolic  age  Beroea  contained  a  colony  of
Jews,  and  a  synagogue  (.Acts  17  10).  They  were  of  a
•  nobler  '  spirit  (evytviartpoi)  than  those  of  Ihessalonica
— possibly  because  they  did  not  belong  to  the  purely
mercantile  class.  Not  only  were  many  of  the  Jews  them-
selves converted,  but  also  not  a  few  of  the  (ireeks,  both
men  and  women  [rHiv  VAXrjvibojv  yvvaiKwv  tCip  (vaxv-
fi6i>uv  Kal  avSpCiv  ovk  dXiyoi,  .Acts  17  12:  the  language
seems  to  indicate  that  the  apostle  was  here  dealing
with  an  audience  at  a  higher  social  level  than  elsewhere).
Paul's  .stay  here  seems  to  have  been  of  some  duration
(.several  months.  Rams.  Paul,  234),  partly  in  order  to
allow  him  to  watch  over  the  converts  of  Thessalonica,
only  50  m.  distant  ;  he  may  have  been  still  at  Ber<x;a
when  he  made  those  two  vain  attempts  to  revisit  them  to
which  I  Thess.  2  18  alludes,  and  Timothy  may  have  been
sent  to  them  from  Bercta,  and  not  from  Athens,  on  the
occasion  mentioned  in  i  Thess.  82.  The  apostle  was  at
length  obliged  to  c|uit  the  town,  as  the  '  Jews  of  Thessa-
lonica' heard  of  his  work  and  resorteci  to  their  usual
tactics  of  inciting  to  riot  (aaXtvovre^  roi'i  6xXovi,  -Acts
71 13).  Silas  and  Timothy  were  left  in  Macedonia  ;  but
Paul  was  escorted  by  certain  of  the  converts  to  the  sea
and  as  far  as  .Athens  (.Acts  17  14/ ).  This  hurried  de-
parture (ei'^^ujs,  V.  14)  may  have  been  by  the  road  toDium.

The  omi.ssion  of  the  h.irbour  is  noticeable.  In  other  cases  the
name  of  the  harlwiir  is  given  :  so  in  Actsl425  ]6ii  I818.  The
omission,  however,  aflfords  no  proof  that  the  journey  to  .Athens
wa.s  performed  by  land — a  view  which  tlerives  some  colour  from
the  AV  '  to  go  as  it  were  to  the  sea'  (RV  'as  far  as  to  ihe  sea  ').

Possibly  one  of  his  escort  was  that  Sopater,  son  of
Pyrrhus,  a  Beroean,  who  is  mentioned  in  .Acts  20  4  as  ac-
companying Paul  from  Corinth  to  Macedonia.  The
Sosipater  of  Rom.  16  21  is  probably  another  person.  We
read  in  .Acts 20  5  that  the  escort  from  Corinth  preceded
Paul  to  Troas  :  this  may  have  been  partly  due  to  his
making  a  detour  in  order  to  revisit  Beroea. w.  j.  w.

BERECHIAH  (n;3n3.  in  Nos.  4/  -in:?"?!,  §  28,
'  Yahwe  blesses  '  =  Jeberechiali,  BApAx[e]lA  [BNA],
-X'AC  [L]).

1.  .Son  of  Zerubbabel,  i  Ch.  .3  20  (/Sapox;.a  [L],  -loi  (RJ).

2.  One  of  the  Lcvites  that  dwelt  in  the  villages  of  the
Netophathites,  iCh.  Uie  (-x"  [H],  -xio?  [.A],  afi.  (Lj),  not
included  in  ||  Neh.  11.  Probably  the  same  as  the  doorkeeper  for
the  Ark,  I  Ch.  1.^23.

3.  Father  of  Meshullam  in  list  of  wall-builders  (see  Nehkmiah,
S  i/,  F.ZRA,  ii.,  §§  i6[i],  15.0,  Neh.34  (-xtavlNAJ,  om.  B),
30  i^pxtid  [  HI*],  fiapia  [A])  ;  cp  t>  18.

4.  Father  of  the  prophet  Zech.iriah,  Zech.  1  i  7  (fiaftaxiat
[BK.AQ]).  Omitted  in  the  ||  Ezra  5  i.  On  the  question  of  his
identity  with  the  Barachias  (.AV),  or  Bakachiah  (RV)  of  Mt.
'2335,  see  Zacharias,  9.

5.  Father  of  Asaph,  a  singer,  i  Ch.  0  24(39l(-AV  Bekachiah),
15  17  (-via  (Lj).

6.  b.  Meshillemoth  ;  one  of  the  chief  men  of  the  b'ne  Ephraim,
temp.  Ahaz,  2Ch.  '28  12  (Zaxopias  [B],  Bopaxtof  [.A]).

BERED  (TI?  ; BapaA  [AD]  ; -pAK  [L]  ; b^xmd
[A'g.]). A place in S. Palestine, or perhaps  rather
542


BERED

X.  AraV)ia,  between  which  and  Kadesh  lay  Bker-
I.AIIAI-Koi  [i/.v.]  (Gen.  16 14).  Three  identifications
deserve  mention.  (i)  The  Targums  represent

it  by  the  same  word  as  that  given  for  Shur  in  v.  7 — Onk.
by  N-i;n  Hagra,  and  Jer.  Targ.  by  KsiSn  Hftlusa.  The
former  word,  however  (cp  Ar.  ^/Jr,  '  a  wall,  enclosure  '),
.seems  to  Ix:  meant  for  a  translation  of  the  name  Shur,
not  for  an  identification  of  the  j^lace.  The  second
name  is  clearly  the  I'.lusa  of  Ptol.,  which  is  now
probably  A'A.  A'halasn  in  the  \\'ady  '.Xsluj,  about
12  m.  from  Ifeersheba  on  the  way  to  Ruhailjeh  or
Rchoboth  (see  Palmer,  PliFQ,  1871,  p.  35;  Gudrin.
///</d'^,  2  269-273).  (2) Eus. and  Jer.  (05  299  76

1452)  identify  a  certain  'well  of  judgment'  with  the
village  Berdan  in  the  Gerarite  country  (in  which  lieer-
sheba  also  is  placed).  This  'well  of  judgment"  seems
like  a  confused  reminiscence  of  Enmishpat — i.e. ,  Kadesh
(Gen.  147).  Is  this  Iterdan  the  same  spot  which  Jerome
(O.S'lOl  3)  calls  Barad,  where,  he  says,  a  well  of  Agar
was shown  in  his  day?  (3)  If, with  Rowlands,

we  find  Bekk-lau.\i-roi  (^.7'.  )at 'Ain  Muweileh,  Bercd
may  be  some  place  in  the  Wady  esh-Sheraif,  on  the
E.  side  of  the  Jebel  Dalfa'a  (see  Palmer's  map).

T.  K.  c.

BERED  ("113).  nn  Ephraimite  clan,  1  Ch.  720
(BapaA  [A],  pAAM  [!>].  om.  [B]),  apparently  called
in  Nu.  2O35,  Iii:(iii:u — a  well-known  Bcnjamite  clan
name.  When  we  consider  the  close  relation  between
the  two  tribes,  the  occurrence  of  Becher  in  Ephraim
seems  not  unnatural  (cp  Bkriah,  2/.). See,  however,

BK(  Hlik.

BEEI  (*"}3,  prob.  ='''^X2,  §  76,  'belonging  to  the
well  ■  [or  to  a  place  called  Be'er]  ;  the  name  occurs
twice  in  Phoenician  ;  cABpei  [B],  BApi  [A],  BHpei  \}A)<
an  Asherite  family-name  (i  Ch.  736).

BERIAH  (nrna,  perhaps  'prominent,'  §  7 ;  cp  the
play  on  the  name  in  iCh.  723  with  the  play  on  the
name  Bkka  [/.i'.]  in  Targ.  ps. -Jon.  ;  B&p[e]lA
[BAL]).

I.  \n  Asherite  cl.-iii  indi\iihi.ilised  ;  Gen.  4<)i7  Nu.  2644/;
((P,  7'.  -2^/.  ;  in  7'.  28  Bepi  1 1,|,  in  r'.  29  it  is  omitted) ;  1  Ch.  7  30
(jSepi-yal  [H],  7'.  31  -xa  |1!|;  gentilic,  Berilte,  Nu.  2O44  (o
/SapcaUlt  [H^'  vkl  F],  /Sapm  [H*vid],  -pat  [.\\  /Sepci  [L]).

2.  An  Ephraimite  clan-name,  in  a  story  of  a  cattle-
lifting  raid  in  i  Ch.  721-23  (beginning  at  '  and  Ezer  and
Elead  '  ;  v.  23  j3apyaa  [B],  -pie  [L])  ;  cp  8  13.  Accord-
ing to  the  Chronicler,  lieriah  was  a  son  of  Ephraim,
born  after  his  brother  had  been  slain,  and  he  was  called
Beriah  because  '  it  went  evil  with  his  [father's]  house '
(note  the  assonance  ,nyi3— nyta)-  This  notice  of  the
conflict  with  the  men  of  Gath  is  enigmatical  ;  were
there  family  reminiscences  of  the  border  strifes  of  the
early  Israelites  which  were  recorded  in  documents
distinct  from  our  canonical  books  and  accessible  to  the
Chronicler  ?

We.  preserves  a  sceptical  attitude  (Pra/.W,  214);  Bertheau
and  Kittel,  however,  think  that  there  is  here  a  genuine  tradi-
tion, and  that,  on  the  destruction  of  the  clans  Ezer  and  Elead,
the  Ephraimites  of  the  border  districts  applied  for  help  to  the
Henjamite  clans,  Shema  and  Beriah  (i  Ch.  S  13).  .According  to
S.  A.  Fries,  the  basis  of  this  story  is  an  early  tradition  dealing
with  a  raid  made  by  F^phraimites  into  Palestine  from  the  land
of  Goshen  2  in  the  wider  sense  which  Hommel  and  he  himself
give  to  this  term  (see  Goshen).

It  would  be  unsafe  to  use  these  unsuppiorted  state-
ments of  the  Chronicler  as  historical  material.  See
below.

3.  A  clan  of  Benjamin  (§  9  (ii.)  (3)).  iCh.  813
{^epiya.  [B],  ^ap.  [A],  ^apaa  [L]).  16  (;:iap[€]iya  [BA]),
probably  to  be  identified  with  No.  2. It  appears  to  be

1  Note  that  in  Pepiya  (iCh.  730  [B],  and  813  [B]),  fiafyyaa
(i  Ch.  723  [B]),  and  ^apUVya  (8  13  [A],  16  [BA]),  ^  =  soft  j;  (i.e.,
Ar.  '«/"«),  which  is  usually  represented  by  a  breathing.  Eur  •y  =
rough  u  (i.e.,  Ar.  £)  see  Gaza,  Zoar,  Ziheon,  etc.

2  Pesh.  reverses  the  statement  of  the  MT  ;  cp  Barnes,  PesA.
Text  Chron.  xi.

543


BEROTHAI

stated  that  the  Bcnjamite  clan  Beriah  was  adopted  into
Ephraim  in  recognition  of  the  service  it  had  rendered
to  the  imperilled  territory.  So  liertheau  ;  cp  Bennett,
Chron.  89. Cp  also  Ephraim.

4.  A  Gershonite  (Levite)  family,  i  Ch.  23  10/  (Bepia  [BL] ;
om.  A  in  v.  10).  s.  A.  C.

BERITES,  THE  (Dn2n),  appear,  through  a  cor-
ruption of  tlie  text,  in  2 S.  20 14  (MT),  where  Kloster-
mann,  Kittel,  Biidde,  and  (with  some  hesitation)
Driver,  read  DHSan,  'the  Bichrites  (see  BicHRi).
The  consonants  n^a  are,  in  fact,  presupposed  by  the
strange  rendering  of  ©"*  {koL  Travres)  ev  x^'PPf'-  '•  ©''
Kal  vaaa  irdXis).  The  description  of  the  progress  of
Sheba  (^.v.  ii.)  now  first  l)ecomes  intelligible.

BERITH  (nn?),  Judg.  946  A\',  RV  El-berith.  See
Baai.-berith.

BERNICE  (BepNiKH  [Ti.  \VH]  for  BepCNlKH,  the
Macedonianform  of  c})epeNlKH).cld(-'Stdaughterof  Herod
Agrippa  I. ,  and  sister  of  the  younger  Agrippa(.-\cts2;'i  1323
2630).  She  was  married  to  her  uncle  Herod,  king  of
Chalcis  ;  and  after  his  death  she  lived,  not  without  sus-
picion of  incest,  with  her  brother  Agrippa.  She  next
became  the  wife  of  Polemon,  king  of  Cilicia.  This
connection  being  soon  dissolved,  she  returned  to  her
brother,  and  afterwards  became  the  mistress  of  Ves-
pasian and  Titus  (Jos.  ^«/.  .\ix.  5i;  x.\.  72/. ;  Tac.
I/isi.  ii.  8 1 ;  Suet.  7'ii.  7 )  ;  cp  Sch.  GVIi.,  and  see
Hekodian  F.vmii.y,  9.

BERODACH  BALADAN  (H^^?  "^"IN'13).  2  K.
20 12  EV  ;  EV"«-  Mickodach-Baladan.

BEROEA  (BepoiA),  2  Mace.  184  RV,  AV  Berea,  2.

BEROTH  (BHpcoe?  [A]),  i  Esd.  519  =  Ezra225,
Bekroth.

BEROTHAH  (nn'nZ),  a  place  mentioned  by  Ezekiel
(47 16;  <\BeHpA[Bg],  coceHpA[A],  BHpa)eV[Q"'sr])
in  defining  the  ideal  northern  frontier  of  the  Holy  Land.
It  is  apparently  the  same  as  Beroth.vi  [q.-'.).  and
may  be  regarded  as  a  lengthened  form  of  BcrOth  =
Beeroth,  'wells.'  As  yet  it  has  not  been  certainly
identified.  Ewald  [Hist.  3  153)  connected  it  with  the
well-known  Berytus  (the  Bi  riitu  and  Bi'runa  of  the
Amarna  letters,  the  Bi'arutii  of  the  List  of  Thotnies  III.
[so  W.  M.  Miiller],  and  the  mod.  Beirut)  ;  but  it  seems
clear  that  a  maritime  city  would  not  suit  Ezekiel's
description.  Tomkins  would,  therefore,  place  Berothah
in  the  neighbourhood  of  the  rock-hewn  inscriptions
in  the  Wddy  Brissa,  NW.  of  Baalbec,  down  which
wady  a  stream  is  marked  in  the  Carte  de  IJban  as
flowing  to  the  Orontes  (PEFQ  Ap.  1885,  p.  108)  ;
but  his  philological  argument  seems  unsound.  Furrer
[ZDP]'  8  34),  Socin  {Pal.^'\  369),  and  v.  Riess
{Bib.  Ail.)  have  thought  of  Bercitan,  a  village  not
far  to  the  S.  of  Baalbec  ;  but  this  is  only  a  plausible
conjecture,  and  must  be  judged  in  connection  with
Furrer's  general  theory  of  the  frontier  (see  HoR,  MOUNT  ;
RiBLAH  ;  Zidad). Cp  .Aram,  §  6.

BEROTHAI  (*n'"l3  ;  Klo.  would  read  "'n'l3),  a  town
belonging  to  Hadadezer,  king  of  Zobah,  2S.  88  (©"^i-
iK  TU'V  (tcXeKTQv  7r6Xec<;i',  perhaps  reading  n^"i2S  from
T13  'to  separate,  select'  [so  Klo.]),  possibly  another
form  of  Berothah  (see,  however,  Klo.  and  the  article
Tebah).  In  I  Ch.  188  (where  (5*  has  the  same  trans-
lation), which  is  parallel  to  2S.  88,  for  Berothai  we
find  the  name  Chun,  which  must  be  a  corruption,
either  of  the  first  three  letters  of  Berothai  {i.e.,  nij)  in
one  of  the  earlier  alphabetic  stages,  or  of  some  other
name  v^hich  the  Chronicler  found  in  his  copy  of  the  old
narrative.  ^  For  a  suggested  emendation  see  Mero.m,  end.

K  The  reading  'nn3  is  probably  supported  by  ©  in  fiot/i
places,  and  by  the  (coAAiVrais  (  =  (K\tKT<ov  of  (pBAL)of  Jos.  .'int.
vii.  63.  The  latter's  text,  however,  must  have  represented  a
conflate  reading,  for  he  reads  Max«ii<i),  which  points  to  psp
'from  Gun.'

544


BEROTHITB

BEROTHITE  ('n  Qn).  i  Ch.  11  39. Sec  Reekoth.

BERYL. The  Bcrvl  as  a  mineral  species*  includes,

1.  Description. •'^•si'l«  the  c.nmon  bc-ryl.  the  aciuam.-x-

*^  nnc  or  precious  ijeryl,  and  the  enterald.

J  he  similarity  l)etwcen  the  beryl  and  the  emerald
was  pointed  out  by  I'liny  (37 20);  the  only  points  of
distinction  are  the  green  colour  of  the  emerald  and  the
somewhat  sujx^'rior  hardness  of  the  beryl  (7.5  to  8  in
the  nuneralogical  scale; specific  gravity  from  2.67  to

If  we  leave  out  of  account  the  emerald,  the  colours  of
the  beryl  range  from  blue  through  soft  sea-green  to  a
pale  honey -yellow,  and  in  some  cases  the  stones  are
entirely  colourless.  The  aciuamarine  is  so  named  on
account  of  its  bluish -green  colour,  '  ^ui  viridilatem
puri  maris  imitantur'  (Pliny,  I.e.).  The  beryl  crystal-
lises in  six-sided  prisms  with  the  crystals  often  deeply
striated  in  a  longitudinal  direction.  The  great  abun-
dance of  aquamarine  and  other  forms  of  l)eryl  in  modern
times  has  very  nmch  depreciatetl  its  value  ;  but  it  is
still  set  in  bracelets,  necklaces,  etc.,  and  used  for  seals.
That  the  beryl  was  known  to  the  ancients  there  can
be  no  doubt.  Some  of  the  finest  examples  of  ancient
2  Greek  ^''^'^■'*  ''^"*^'  Koman  gem -engraving  are
nainea,  etc.  '^°"."'^.  '-■'''^''"'•^'l  '"  '^'O'l  (see  Kings  de-
scription of  a  huge  atjuama-.ine  intaglio
over  two  inches  seiunre,  Pirc.  Stones,  Gems,  and  I'rec.
Mftals,  p.  132)  :  the  Romans  cut  it  into  six-sided  prisms
{cylindri)  and  mounted  them  as  ear-drops.  It  is  also
clear  from  the  evidence  of  Pliny  (I.e.,  beiylli)  that,  in
later  times,  at  least,  lx.-ryl  was  called  by  the  same  name
as  now,  though  a|xirt  from  ©  (see  below)  the  name
does  not  appear  in  any  Greek  writer  till  considerably
after  Pliny's  time.-  It  ajjpears,  however,  to  have  lx.'en
called  also  a/jidpaySoi  ;  Theophrastus  seems  to  know
three  kinds  of  smaragtlos,  which  may  well  Ixj  our  true
emerald,  our  aquamarine,  and  our  common  Ixjryl
(/-(//.  23).  In  Herodotus,  too,  smaragdos  is  the
material  not  only  of  the  gem  engraved  for  the  ring  of
Polycrates  (.'i4i),  but  also  of  the  pillar  in  the  temple  of
Heracles  at  Tyre  ("244),  which  cannot  have  lx;cn  of  true
emerald,  as  the  noble  kinds  of  beryl  are  never  found
of  large  size.

The  Hebrews  must  be  presumed  to  have  known  the
beryl.  \\'e  may  perhaps  identify  it  with  the  shdham
3.  Hebrew  ^^^'^'^  '  '^°''  ^  ''^"'^  "^  ^^^^  '^e  ornaments
name.  °"  ^^^  ^'S'^  priest's  shoulder  (I'.x.  28920
=  80927)  were  of  shoham,  and  ©  renders
this  ff/xdpaydoi.  We  cannot  always  trust  ©'s  rendering
of  stone  names  (see  pRiccious  Stones)  ;  but  in  this
case  the  ideiitiiication  seems  suitable.  We  are  told  that
on  each  j,*c'7/r////-stone  were  inscribed  the  names  of  six  of
the  tribes  of  Israel,  for  which  purpose  a  natural  hexagonal
cylinder  of  beryl  would  be  admirably  fitted  if,  as  has
Ix-en  suggested,  the  six  names  were  inscril)ed  longi-
tudinally on  the  six  faces.  The  s/i<'ka m-slonvs  mounted
in  ouches  of  gold  were  probably  therefore  beryls  pierced
or  simply  mounted  at  the  end  with  bosses  (uindi/ici)  of
gold,  like  the  Ijeryl  cylinders  descrilx;d  by  Pliny.

The  importance  given  to  the  beryl  among  the  Baby-
lonians and  the  Phtjcnicians  (see  above)  makes  it  all  the
more  probable  that  the  Hebrews  would  specially  value
it.  From  CJen.  2  12  (later  stratum  of  J  ?)  it  would  appear
that  the  shoham  was  known  in  Judah  before  the  e.xile,
and  believed  to  abound,  with  good  gold  and  bdellium,  in
Havil.vh.  The  Chronicler  brings  shdham-%x.ox\*is  into
connection  with  the  construction  of  the  pre-exilic  temple
(iCh.  292;  but  the  reading  m.ny  be  incorrect,  see
Ebony,  c),  while  the  writer  of  Job  28 16  classes  it  with
gold  of  Ophir  and  other  precious  substances.

The  etymology  of  the  word  shOham  (which  occurs  in

1  On  the  stone  called  Rerjl  in  EV  see  g  4.

2  The  chrysol)erylus,  chrysopr.isus,  .ind  chr>-soUthus  of  ancient
jeweller>'  .appear,  to  some  extent  at  least,  to  have  been  names
applied  10  different  shades  of  beryl.


.35


545


BETAH

Chronicles as a proper name; see Sii«)|ia.m) is at

present  uncertain.

±. Ff,r™«i«^. <^e?-KOd.  Ukts.  ».v.)  traced  it  to  a  root

4.  LtymOlOgy mc-ining '  palenevs,'  an  if  '  the  pjilc  irtone,'

and  versions. «•"'<=  Haupt,  connecting  it  with  the  Asnyrian

j<i////«,  renders 'pearl.' Delitzsch,  however,

argues that silnitu mediis a '  dark  -  coloured [itoticl' (Ats

//irji^ZSfi;  cyiJ'ar.  to/.  130/),  and  Halfivy  tonne,  is  Assyr

siitHlu  with  Syr.  Htm  rather  than  Heb.  i/im  (A'ei:  Cii/.,  lESi.

P-  479).

.Shoham  is  rendered  in  the  various  versions  as
follows  ;  —

©I'Ai.  pffpvWiov  (as  in  Targ.  (pVlTal,  Saad.  etc.)  in  Ex.  ys  20
=  3!»r3,  reproiluced  in  Kzek.2813  (see  Prkcious  Stonis);
AtSo?  It>|«1  a^apaySov  in  Kx.  2«9  8'.  27  3«6  ;  A.  6  irpdatvoi  (Icck-
green)  in  (len.  2  1 2  ;  A.  (rapSiov  in  Kx.  3:>  9  ;  A.  <roo^  ( liA],  ow/vov
[  I.]  in  I  Ch.  -JU  2  ;  »»  Si-vx'  (as  in  Aq.  al  Kx.,  I  heod.  and  .Syinm.
at  Kx.  and  Gen.,  and  V«.  iDn^chiHus,  bm  onyx  in  Ezek.J  except
in  Job)  in  Job28i6;  Pesh.  everywhere  U^|«»  (hrwi.a)  or
//.  MO'i^  except  in  iCh.  L'9  2  where  its  text  differs;  Aq.  in
Gen.  J  12  and  Vg.  in  Job '28  16  sardonyx.

RV"'*.'-  adds  as  an  alternative  the  rendering  Hkkvi,,'
thus  supporting  the  identification  argued  for  alxjve.

EV  follows  throughout  the  usual  Vg.  rendering,  giving  every,
where  'onyx'  (see  Onvx),  reserving  'beryl'  for  the  Hebrew
'larshish  (see  Takshish,  Stc.nk  ok).  Jn  the  N'l",  however,
beryl  '  is  naturally  the  EV  rendering  of  PT)pvAAoi'(Kev.  21  2ot).

\V.  K.

BERZELUS  (zopzeAAeoc [A]), iEsd.533  AV  =

Ezra -261,  1',ak/.ii.i,ai,  2.

BESAI  0P3,  <5  52  ;  BAcep  [E]).  The  b'ne  Hesai,
a  family  of  N'ktiiimm  in  the  great  post-cxilic  list  (see
EzKA,  ii.  S  9),  Ezra  249  {^^oii^  [a\])  =  Neh.  7 -,2
(/ii77<ret  [lU],  ^a.i.a.  [N])  =  r  Esd.  03'  lUsTAl,  R\'
Hastiiai  {(iaffdai  [HA],  ^((ratp  [E]).

BESODEIAH  (nniO?,  '  in  the  secret  of  Yah,'  §  22  ;
the  form,  however,  is  very  im|:>robahle  [see  HiiZAl.KK.i,]  ;
read,  rather,  HHipn,  Hasadiah),  an  Israelite,  father  of
Mcshullani  in  the  list  of  wall-builders  (see  Xkiikmiah,
§  I/,  Ezra,  ii.  j;;;  16  [,],  ,5^.),  Xeh.  .'U  (BaAia  [H]!
<\BAei<\[N],  BaccoAia[.\"''J,  BaciAia  [L]).

T.  K.  C.

BESOM  (XPiStpP,  Is.  14  23t ;  Pesh.  \^^,^^  ■  Vg.

scopa ;  nHAoY  BapaGron  [HXor],  n.  BaGron  [A]K
a  word  occurring  nowhtTe  else  in  Hebrew  or,  in  this
sense,  in  any  .Semitic  dialect.'-  ,\ccordiiig  to  Taliii.I',.
A','sh  ha-shdnd,  26  b. ,  the  word,  though  unknown  to
the  Rabbis  (who  called  the  article  .ira^N),  was  still  in  use
among  the  women  (cp  Jer.  Mei^illa,  ii.  2).  There  is  not,
therefore,  any  reason  to  doubt  that  \'g.  and  Pesh.  are
right  in  understanding  something  to  sweep  (awavl  with
(cp  the  metaphor  in  Is.  30  28  [sieve]  ;  on  which  see  .\(;ki-
CLi.TUKE,  §  10).  The  Ijcsoni  of  death  is  not  unknown
to  mythology  (Otto  Henne  .\m  Rhyn,  Die  Deutahe
Volksa^'e,*'->  411/.);  but  the  figure  hardly  needs  any
mythological  warrant  (Che.  ad  loc).

BESOR  (mb'5,  Bocop  [H.AE],  Jos.  .-////.  vi.  14  6.
BACeAoc).  a  wady  (Sn;).  mentioned  in  the  account  of
David's  pursuit  of  the  Amalekites,  1  S.  3O9/  21  {z:  21
fifava  [B],  ^ex'^p  [.A]).  It  was  probably  this  wady
that  .Saul  '  crossed  '  when  he  chastised  the  Amalekites
(iS.  15s;  re.ad  hn:^  "'-i!*^  J^'"- ) :  a"<J  '"  the  two
definitions  of  the  .Amalekite  territorv  in  iS.  ir.7  ('and
Saul  smote  the  Amalekites,  from  Ilavilah,'  etc.),  and
278  ('  for  those  were  the  inhabitants  of  the  land,  which
were  from  old  time,"  etc.),  we  should  probably  read
'  from  the  torrent  Hesor  even  to  the  torrent  [land]  of
Musri.'  See  Tki.km  (i. ).  According  to  CJut^rin  (Judee,
2213),  it  is  the  modern  Wady  Ghazza  which  issuts  from
the  Wady  es-Seba'  and  empties  itself  into  the  sea  SW.
of  Gaza.  T.  k.  c.

BETAH  (npi),  a  city  of  Hadadezer,  king  of  Zobah.
2S.  88(MT)=iCh.  188(MT),  Tibhath. Pesh.,  how -

'  Omitted  (through  oversight  ?)  at  Ex.  35q  296 13  E7ek.28i3.
2  In  Arab,  the  root  means  'incline  (the  head),'  in  Eth.  'set
in  order.'

546


BETANB

ever,  reads  Tebah,  and  this  is  also  favoured  in  2  S.  I.e.
by  (5  {fiaa-^aK  [B],  -/3ax  [A],  (jure^aK  [L],  where  ^a
arises  from  a  corrupt  repetition  of  the  preceding  letter
in  this  translator's  Heb.  text).  Cp  Ew.  Hist.  8153,  and
see  Tebah.

BETANE  (Bmtanh  [B],  Bat.  [K].  BAit.  [A]),  one
of  the  places  to  which,  according  to  Judith  1 9,  Nebuchad-
rezzar SL-nt  his  summons.  The  BiiTll-ANOTH  {q.v.)
of  Josh.  1559  appears  to  be  meant.

BETEN  (|03— /.^.,  '  vale'  or  '  hollow"  ;—BATNe [A],
BaiBok  [B].  BexeA  [I-]),  an  unidentified  site  in  the
territory  of  Asher  (Josh.  192s)  called  BeGBeTCN  by
Eusebius  (05  236  41),  who  places  it  8  R.  m.  to  the  E.
of  Acco.

BETH  (n^3.  St.  constr.  of  D^?,  see  BDB) ;  the
most  general  term  for  a  dwelling  ;  used  of  a  tent  in
Gen.  27  15  33 17,  but  generally  of  houses  of  clay  or  stone  ;
also  of  temples  (cp  Bajith,  Beth-Bamoth  [MI,  /.  27]).
Combinations  of  Beth  with  other  words  are  frequent  in
Hebrew  place-names  (see  Names,  §  96).  In  Assyrian,
compounds  with  Bit  are  used  as  names  of  countries  :
e.g. ,  Bit-Humri  =  the  kingdom  of  Israel ;  Bit-Yakin  {i.e.,
Babylonia,  the  country  of  Merodach-Baladan).

Among  other  interesting  compounds  with  Beth  are  Beesh-
TERAH  CO,  Beth-eked,  Beth-haggan,  Beth-lehem,  Beth-meon  (see
Baal-mhon),  Beth-peor.

BETHABARA  (BhSaBapa  [C^  KT^  UAH]),  Jn.128
AV,  is  the  place  where  John  baptized,  according  to  the
reading  which  became  widely  current  through  the  ad-
vocacy of  Origen,  who  could  find  no  Bethany  across  the
Jordan,  but  found  a  Bethabara  with  a  tradition  connecting
it  with  the  Baptist.  Origen,  however,  admitted  that  the
majority  of  MSS  were  against  him. See  Bethany,  2.

Origen  was  followed  by  Chrysostom  ;  Epiphanius,  like  Arm.
(Lagarde),  h.is  BrjOafipa.  In  the  present  text  of  Origen  the  form
varies  between  BrjSapa,  Baeapa,  BijSaiSapa,  and  Bi)8apa;3a  (the
latter  also  in  Ncb.  syr.  hcl.(mg.),  a;th.  ;  see  \VH  274);  in  OS
240  12  lOS  6  we  find  firjOaafiapa,  Bethabara.

The  traditional  site  of  the  baptism  of  Jesus  is  at  the
Makhadet  Hajla  (see  Betharabah,  2,  where,  too,  it  is
suggested  that  we  should  read  Bethabarah  in  Josh.  18 22).
The  two  monasteries  of  St.  John  attest  the  antiquity  of
the  belief  in  this  site.

Conder  suggests  the  MakhrKJet  'Abara,  NE.  of  Beisan,  partly
because  of  the  nearness  of  this  ford  to  Galilee  and  Nazareth,
and  partly  because  the  river-bed  is  here  more  open,  and  the
banks  of  the  upper  valley  more  retired  {PEFQ.,  1875,  p.  73).

Another  suggestion  of  the  same  e.\plorer(A,  1877,  p.  185)13
philologically  weak.

As  stated  elsewhere  (Bethany,  2),  the  true  reading
in  Jn.  1  28  was  probably^77^a<'a/ipa— ?.e.,  Beth-NIMRAH,
now  Tell-Nimrin,  NE.  of  Jericho.

BETH-ANATH  (n;y  T\'^—i.e. ,  '  temple  of  Anath  ' ;
in  Josh.  BAieeAMe[Bl,  BMNAeAe[A],  BHeANAe[E];
injudg.  BAiGANAxiB], -eeNee[BAL],  BeeeNeK[A]),
an  ancient  Caiiaanite  fortress,  with  a  sanctuary  of  Anath
(cp  Beth-ANoth),  Josh.  I938.  It  is  mentioned  unmis-
takably by  Thotnies  III.,  Seti  I.,  Rameses  II.,  and
Rameses  III.  in  the  lists  of  places  conquered  by  these
kings  (see  RP^"-)  552638;  Sayce,  Pat.  Pal.  160,  236,
239  ;  W.\1M,  As.  u.  Eur.  193,  195,  220).  Accord-
ing to  Judg.  I33,  it  adjoined  Naphtalite  territory,  but
(like  Beth-shemesh)  remained  Canaanitish  down  to  the
regal  period,  subject  only  to  the  obligation  of  furnishing
labour  for  public  works.  Eus.  and  Jer.  (05  236  45
105  20)  inappropriately  refer  to  a  village  called  Batannea,
15  R.  m.  E.  from  Cresarea,  possessing  medicinal  springs.
But  the  site  now  most  in  favour — \4ini//ia,  in  a  valley
6  m.  WN'W.  from  Kedesh  —  is  hardly  strong  enough
to  have  been  that  of  such  a  fortress  as  Beth-anath
(Buhl,  Pal.  232  ; but  cp  Conder,  PEF  Mem.  1  200).

BETH-ANOTH  (ni3y-n'5  ;  BaiGanam  [B],
-Ganoon  [A],  BhGapcoG  [L])-  A  town  in  the  hill
country  of  J  udah  (Josh.  I559),  towards  the  eastern  border
of  that region,  identified  by  W.  M.  Muller  with  the

547


BETH-ARABAH

Bi-t- n-t  of  the  list  of  places  conquered  by  Shishak  {As.
u.  Eur.  168).  If  the  form  Beth-anoth  be  correct,  it  may
be  explained  as  =  Beth-anath,  '  house  of  Anath'  {q.v.) ;
cp  pi:;;  (Josh.  21  n)  and  pjy,  jnc'  and  ['rnc'.  To  sup-
pose a  popular  etymology  '  place  of  answering'  {i.e.,  of
an  echo?),  with  Kampffmeyer  {ZDPy  I63  ;  cp  Is.
IO30,  SBOT).  is  needless.

But  is  the  form  correct  ?  Conder  and  Kitchener  {PEF
j1/(?;«.  8311  351)  identify  Beth-anoth  with  Beit  'Ainun,
5  m.  N.  of  Hebron,  near  the  sites  of  IlALHULand  Beth-
ZUK  (cp  Betane).  This  appears  reasonable,  and  sug-
gests a  doubt  whether  the  ancient  name  may  not  have
been  ji:'V-n'3,  Bcth-'emm.  It  is  true  that  ©"^  favours
Cjy,  and  ©*  p^j;  (.  in  the  first  syllable  being  unex-
pressed) ;  but  the  case  of  Anem  (see  En-gannim,  2)
shows  that  the  absence  of  •  both  in  MT  and  in  the
te.xt  implied  by  ©  is  not  decisive.  A  spring  is  men-
tioned to  the  west  of  the  ruins  of  Beit  'Ainun.

T.  K.  c.

BETHANY  (  BhGan  ia  [Ti. WH]).  i.  A  small  village
first  referred  to  in  the  Gospels,  15  furlongs  to  the  E.  of
Jerusalem  on  the  road  to  Jericho  (Jn.  11 18  Lk.  I929,  cp
V.  i),  and  commonly  identified  with  the  Beth-Hini^of
the  Talmud.  It  is  no  doubt  the  mod.  el- Azariyeh
(from  Laz.arus  or  Lazarium — the  /  wrongly  taken  as
the  article).  El -"Azariyeh  lies  on  a  spur  SE.  of  the
Mt.  of  Olives  (cp  Mk.  lli  Lk.  1929).  Its  fig,  olive,
and  almond  trees  give  one  at  first  a  pleasant  impres-
sion ;  but  a  nearer  inspection  of  the  few  houses  is  dis-
appointing.

There  are  various  romantically  interesting  spots  connected
by  old  tradition  with  Lazarus  (cp  the  Itin.  Hieros.  ed.  Wessel,
596,  the  Bordeaux  Pilgrim,  and  OSi'^)  108  3  239  10).  The
Castle  of  Lazarus  (based  on  castellum,  the  Vg.  translation  of
the  Gr.  KuJjotT))  is  a  ruined  tower,  presumably  anterior  to  the
time  of  the  Crusaders,  and  hard  by  is  the  tomb  of  Lazarus ;  the
house  of  Simon  the  Leper  also  is  shown.

2.  The  Bethany  where  John  baptized  (Jn.128,  Ti.  WH
after  N*B.A.C*,  edd. ,  R\')  is  distinguished  from  the
Bethany  mentioned  above  by  the  designation  '  across
Jordan'  {iripav  tov  'lop.);  its  e.xact  situation  is  un-
known. The  reading  of  TR  and  of  AV  is  Bethabara
{q.v. ).  Another  suggestion  is  that  Bethabara  ( '  house  of
the  ford  ')  and  Bethany  (  =  ,t:i<  n'3.  '  house  of  the  ship  ')
are  one  and  the  same  place  (see  GASm.  7/(7  542,  n.  12).

The  analogy  of  some  corrupt  OT  forms  (cp  Kishion)
suggests,  however,  that  the  true  reading  in  the  traditional
source  of  Jn.128  would  be  one  combining  in  the  second
part  of  the  name  the  letters  N,  B,  and  R — such  a  name
as  ^ridava^pa.  We  actually  find  daivdavajSpa  in  ©■*
Josh.  1827  for  the  Bethnimrah  of  the  Hebrew  text.
Now,  the  site  of  Beth-nimrah  ['/.f.]  is  well  known.
It  is  accessible  alike  from  Jerusalem  and  from  the
region  of  Jericho  (cp  Mt.  85),  and  the  perennial  stream
of  Nahr  Nimrin,  which  flows  into  the  Jordan,  would
supply  abundance  of  water.  This  theory  belongs  to
Sir  George  Grove  ;  it  has  been  adopted  by  Sir  C.  W.
Wilson  (Smith's  Z>/?,'-'  s.z:  'Bethnimrah'),  and  has
strong  claims  to  favourable  consideration.  Of  course,
the  insertion  of  the  words  iripav  rod  'lopS.  would  be  a
consequence  of  the  faulty  reading  ^rjdavM. T.  K.  C.

BETH-ARABAH  (nn^yn  T\'2.  or  nnTT  n^3  ;  once,
Josh.  18 18,  by  a  scribe's  error  [sec  ©]  simply  nri"Trn  ;
Josh.  18  18,  BaiGapaBa  [BAL];  156i  GaraBaam  [B],
BhGaraBa  [AL],  I822  BaiGaBara  [B],  -araBa  [AL]).

I.  One  of  the  six  cities  in  the  'wilderness'  of  Judah
(Josh.  156i),  mentioned  also  as  on  the  boundarj'  lines  of
Judah  and  Benjamin  (156  [jSai^apa^a  BA  ;  ^-qdapa^a

1  We  may  therefore  dismiss  the  interpretation  'place  of  the
wretched  one  '  (cp  the  play  upon  Anathoth,  Is.  IO30  MT).  Beth-
Hini  is  generally  explained  'place  of  unripe  fruit'  (cp  NrnK,
'  unripe  fruit,'  esp.  of  figs).  The  Talmud,  however,  s,-iys  that
figs  ripened  better  at  15eth-Hini  than  anywhere  else  (Neub.,
Geog-.  Talm.  150).  If  so,  these  figs  may  have  led  to  the  name
Bethhhage — i.e.,  possibly,  '  house  of  young  figs ' — but  the  name
Beth-Hini  remains  unexplained.  Another  form  of  the  name
is  Beth-oni  ('jiK'n'^)-

548


BBTH-ARAM

L]  ]8i8) ;  see  niso  Betii-basi.  The  reference  in  18aa
must  be  considered  separately  (no.  2).  The  wilderness
of  Judah  in  156i  is  the  deep  depression  adjoining  the
Dead  Sea,  together  with  tlie  overhanging  mountains
and  the  barren  country  Ixjyond,  including  probably  a
district  in  the  neighbourhood  of  Arad  (see  Salt,  City
ok).  Heth-arabah  may  have  been  the  first  or  principal
settlement  in  that  desolate  corner  of  the  Arabah  or
Jordan  valley  which  forms  the  N.  end  of  the  Dead  Sea.
Though  mentioned  twice,  if  not  thrice,  with  lieth-
hoglah,  it  must  have  been  considerably  to  the  S.  of
that  place,  for  unless,  with  Knobel,  we  put  it  at  Kasr
Hajla  (which  seems  rather  to  have  been  Beth-hoglah),
there  is  no  other  suitable  site  for  it  till  we  come  to
the  copious  fountain  of  \lin  el- Feshkha,  near  the
NW.  corner  of  the  Dead  Sea  (31°  43'  N.,  35°  26'  Iv ).
The  name  lieth-arabah  ('the  house,  or  homestead,  in
the  Arabah ')  has,  therefore,  a  special  significance  (cp
that  of  Bkth-JK.shimoth,  q.v.).  This  indication  of
the  site  was  made  in  writing  by  Robertson  Smith.
Perhaps,  however,  it  is  best  to  suppose  that  there
were  two  settlementr  •  one  near  the  fountain  (viz.,
Beth-arabah),  the  other  (see  Middin)  at  the  fountain.

2.  It  will  be  still  casiiT  to  adopt  this  identification
if  we  may  follow  ©"  in  reading  not  'Beth-arabah'
but  '  Betli-abarah  ■  in  Josh.  I822.  The  ford  ('ulidrah)
referred  to  in  the  name  ('  house  or  place  Ci  the  ford')
might  then  be  the  famous  Makhadct  Hajla  near  the
mouth  of  the  IVdJv  el-Kelt,  the  bathing-place  of  the
pilgrims,  wliere  tradition  places  the  baptism  of  Jesus
Christ.  Such  a  Beth-abarah  would  be  more  naturally
mentioned  between  Beth-hoglah  and  Zemaraim  than
a  place  situated  at  ' Ain  el- Feshkha.  The  confusion
of  the  two  names  was  very  easy  (note  the  variant  Bt;^-
opo/ia  in  Jn.  1  28). Cp  Beth-abara.  t.  k.  c.

BETH-ARAM  (Dnn  n^2),  Josh.  13 27 .'W.  RV  Betii-

HAK.-\M  [q.v.).

BETH-ARBEL  ("pxanx  Jl^?  ;  eK  roy  oiKoy  lepo-
BoAM  [B].  .  .  .  toy  lepoBoAM  [Q*],  .  .  .  lepoBAAA
[A],  TOY  lepoBAAA  [Q^],  Symm.  rip  oIki^  Touap^erjX),
a  place  cruelly  destroyed  by 'Shalman' (Hos.  10i4t;

PVj'.  Baer  JD^C';  caAaman  [BAQ]).  Robertson
Smith  in  1881  (EBi^)  12296)  favoured  an  identification
of  Bcth-arljel  with  the  trans-Jordanic  Arbela  (see  Oi't^)
21472  886),  now  Irbid,  in  which  case  there  might  be
a  reference  either  to  Shalmaneser  III.  or  to  a  Moabite
king  Shalamanu  mentioned  in  an  inscription  {KB  £20)
as  a  tributary  of  Tiglath-pileser  III.  Schrader  {KAT^^)
440-442)  argues  ably  for  identifying  Shalman  with  the
latter  king,  who  very  probably  made  an  incursion  into
Israelite  territory.  The  combination  of  Beth-arbel  with
the  trans-Jordanic  Arbela  {Irbid),  however,  is  improb-
able :  Shalman  should  be  a  more  important  king,  and
Beth-arbel  (if  this  compound  phrase  may  be  accepted)  a
more  important  fortress,  than  Schrader's  theory  sup-
poses. Wellhausen  and  Kowack  think  that  Shalman
may  be  Shalmaneser  IV. — the  first  Shalmaneser  known
to  the  Israelites.  If  so,  the  latter  part  of  Hos.  IO14
will  be  a  later  insertion.  The  reference  to  Beth-arbel,
however,  remains  a  difficulty.  Surely  the  reading  must
be  corrupt.

©^  suggests  a  correction.  Read  oyaT  n-l,  and,  as
a  consequence,  for  jaSp  read  d^W-  The  murder  of
Zechariah,  son  of  Jeroboam  II.,  by  Shallum  [tj.v.,  i]
is  probably  referred  to  (ir,  or  mp?,  points  to  a  fate  like
that  of  Sisera  ;  cp  nnr,  Jndg.  627).  A  reader  of  Hosea
justly  assumed  that  Zechariah  was  not  the  only  person
who  was  murdered,  and  took  the  massacre  of  the  royal
family  to  be  a  fulfilment  of  the  stern  prophecy  in  v.  15,
which  ends  :  '  in  a  storm  (lyco.  We. )  the  king  of  Israel
shall  be  cut  off '  The  words  '  mother  and  children
were  dashed  to  pieces'  may,  however,  refer  to  the
cruelty of Menahem to the women of Tappuah


BETH-BASI

[q.v.,  2],  as  related  in  2  K.  15i6.  If  so.  the  inter-
jxjlator  combines  two  striking  events  which  ecjually
formed  part  of  the  divinely  threatenetl  judgment  u|x)n
Israel. See  Che.  F.xpos.  Nov.  1897,  p.  364.

For  a  new  but  diiricult  theory  of  Hos.  10  14  see  Herz,  Atiter.
J.  SeiH.  La-ig.  14207/  !'981.  The  versions  give  little  help
except  as  to  '  Arbecl '  ((B").  ®  A  preserves  a  trace  of  a  theor>'
that  the  reference  is  to  the  slaying  of  Zalmuniia  hy  (iidc<<ii,  in
which  case  Ps.  83ii  [12]  wouUI  be  p.irallel.  SoAa^af  {XArj],  it
is  true,  docs  not  .accord  wiih  this  theory  ;  but  .Syro-Hex.  points
•o  i'JD^S  ;  <TaXfi.ava  is  ©K*R  's  rendering  of  Z.ilmunna,  and
has  «ome  authority  in  Hosea.  Vg.  gives  .Sicut  vasta/us  est
Srtlinana  a  doino  eiiis  qui  iudicavit  Baal.  The  conclusive
exegetical  objections  to  this  view  need  not  here  be  stated.  See
also  Field's  Hexapla.  t,  k.  C.

BETHASMOTH  (BAiOACA^coe  [A]),  i  Esd.  5.8  RV.

See  .\ZMAVKT1I (l.).

BETH-AVEN  (jINTfa,  cp.  Benj.  'ben-Oni'),  a
place  to  the  E.  of  Bethel  near  Ai  (Josh.  72,  ^r)Oaiy
[A],  pi)Oav  [L],  from  which,  indeed,  it  has  been  pro-
posed, following  ©'"',  to  eliminate  the  name,  but  on
insufficient  grounds'),  and  to  the  \V.  of  Michma^h
(1S.I35;  where  BAietopcoN  [B*!-].  BAiecco-  [B^']
are  obviously  wrong;  iS.  I423  BAMcoe  [B].  ThOayn
[or  T^  daw,  A^"'],  BAiecopojN  [!-]).  The  site  has
not  been  identified  ;  2  but  it  must  have  been  the  last
village  on  the  edge  of  the  desert  country,  for  to  this
it  gave  the  name  Wilderness  of  Beth-aven  (Josh.  IS  12
(iaieavv  [A];  -Ouiv  [B]  ;  -0aovv  [L]).  All  the  data
point  to  the  neighbourhood  of  Deir  Diudn — either
that  village  itself,  or  Kh.  Haiyan,  immediately  to  the  S.
For  the  rest  see  BirniiiL,  §  4.  g.  a.  s.

BETH-AZMAVETH (niDjrn'3), Neh.728: sec

AZ.MAVKTII  (i.  ).

BETH- BAAL -MEON  (jiL'D  ^r?  71*3),  Jos.  13. 7.
See  Baal-meon.

BETH-BARAH  (mj  n*2,  BaiGhra  [BA],  -Bhra
[L]  ;  the  form  of  the  second  part  of  the  name  is  obscure)
is  not  to  be  identified  with  the  Bethabara  of  Jn.  1  28
(Reland)  ;  it  occurs  only  in  the  story  of  Gideon  (Judg.
724),  who  sends  to  his  fellow-tribesmen  in  the  hill  country
of  Ephraim,  bidding  them  cut  off  the  Midianites'  retreat
by  holding  against  them  'the  waters  as  far  as  Beth-
barah,  and  (also)  the  Jordan.'  The  latter  words
(p-i'n-riNi)  seem  to  be  a  gloss  on  'the  waters'  (c'C.-:)-
By  'the  waters,"  however,  are  really  meant,  not  the
Jordan,  but  the  streams  emptying  themselves  into  the
Jordan  which  the  Midianites  would  have  to  pass.  Beth-
barah  must  have  Ijeen  situated  somewhere  in  the  wady
formed  by  one  of  these  streams,  and  there  are  points  in
the  narrative  which  suggest  locating  it  near  the  mouth
of  the  Wddy  Fdri'ah,  between  which  and  the  Jordan
the  Midianites  would  find  then\=elves  in  a  cul-de-sac
(Moore).

BETH-BASI  (BeeSAC I  [A],  BAiGBAiccei  [K].  -Bacc.
[NV],  -Bag I  [V],  ^  \i^  [Pesh.],  Beth-besscren  \\<i\.
Lat.]),  a  fortified  city  in  the  desert  {iv  r^  iprjjjLif}),  the
ruinous  parts  {to.  Kad-Qprjfxtva)  of  which  Jonathan  and
Simon  repaired,  when  menaced  by  Bacchides  (i  Mace.
96264).  The  Syriac  (see  above;  cp  Vet.  Lat.)  reads
Beth-yashan  (cp  Jeshanah).  This  is  probably  correct  ;
the  corruptions  can  be  easily  accounted  for.  Jos.  {Ant.
-xiii.  I5)  calls  the  place  liet'h-alaga  {i.e.,  Beth-hoglah),
which  is  too  far  from  the  MS  readings,  but  may  be
a  correct  identification,  though  Beth-arabah  also
suggests  itself  G.  A.  Smith,  however,  thinks  that  the
second  i  in  Beth-basi  may  be  correct.  '  In  th;  wilder-
ness of  Judea,  E.  of  Tekoa,  there  is  a  Wddy  el-Bassah,
which  name  as  it  stands  means  "  marsh,"  an  impossible

1  We.  supposes  SkO'dS  cnpo  to  be  a  gloss,  and  pn  a  con-
temptuous distortion  of  ^k  in  the  manner  of  Hos.  4.5,  etc.  {CH
laO. So  Albers,  but  not  Di.  or  Bennett,  SHOT.

*  Possibly  it  was  early  destroyed.  This,  as  Muhlau  remarks,
would  account  for  the  disparaging  transformation  of  the  name
Bethel  into  Beth-aven  (Kiehm,  /('«''^(2)  1  213).

550


BBTH-BIREI

term, and  therefore  probably  an echo of an ancient
name.'  r.  K.  c.

BETH-BIREI.  KV  Beth-biri  (*N12  n*3),  i  Ch.  431.
Set-  Hi.  ni-i.i:ii.\()rii.

BETH  CAR  (13-IT5  ;  BaiGxop  [HL],  BeAx.  [A],
[/V\expi|  KoppAiooN,  Jos.  .////.  vi.  22  ;  jm*' [Targ.]),  a
place,  presumably  in  the  district  of  Mizpah,  to  which
the  Israelites  pursued  the  defeated  Philistines  (i  S.  7  11
[Dt.  ]).  The  phrase  'under  lieth-car '  is  remarkable.
Does  it  mean  '  imder  the  gates  of  Ueth-car '  (so  We.
riiS  68)  ?  or  does  it  mean  '  to  the  foot  of  the  hill  on
some  part  of  which  lieth-car  stood  '  ?  No  such  name
as  IJeth-car  is  mentioned  elsewhere  ;  hence  it  is  at  first
sight  too  bold  to  identify  it  (as  PJiF,  not  disapproved  by
GASm.  //(;  224)  with 'Ain  Karim,  thenameof  a  flourish-
ing village  a  good  way  to  the  S.  of  Nebi  Samwil,  and
W.  of  Jerusalem.  The  name  Heth-car,  however,  is
self-evidently  corrupt,  and  if  we  may  emend  it  into
'  Heth-haccerem '  the  identification  with  'Ain  K'drim
becomes  probable  (see  Bkth-haccekem).  Only  lA  m.
to  the  X.  of  'Ain  Karim  is  Der  Yasin,  not  improbably
to  be  identified  with  the  Jashan  or  Jeshanah  of  i\  12  (see
Shkn),  which  need  not  be  the  same  as  the  Jeshanah  of
2Ch.  1319.

The  alternative  is  to  read  '  Beth-horon  '  (Klo.) ;  3  and  n  were,
from  phonetic  causes,  easily  confounded.  '  Under  Beth-horon  '
would  be  a  very  intelligible  expression;  but  Beth-horon  is
certainly  too  far  north.  The  reading  '  Beth-jashan,'  quoted
from  Pesh.  (not  (P)  by  G.  A.  Smith  {/fC  22^),  is  no  readwig  at
all,  but  a  corruption  of  the  text  of  i  S.  7  11,  as  We.  has  pointed
out.  T.  K.  C.

BETH-DAGON  (jin  n-3,  §  95,  'house  of  Dagon,'
BHeAAr^AiiM  [AL]).  I.  A  city  of  Judah,  enumerated
in  the  third  group  of  'lowland'  towns  (Josh.  1041,
payadirjX  [B]).  The  list  is  so  scattered  and  irregular
that  nothing  can  with  certainty  be  inferred  from  it  as  to
the  site  of  Heth-dagon  ;  but  Makkedah  (i/.v.),  which
is  mentioned  in  the  same  verse,  must  have  lain  off  the
mouth  of  Aijalon  (Josh.  IO28).  Here  we  find,  6  m.  SE.
from  Joppa,  a  Beit-Dejan,  and,  li  m.  farther  S. ,  Diljun.
Each  of  these  has  been  identified  with  Beth-dagon  (see
Rob.  /iJ?  8298,  Clermont  Ganneau,  PF.FQ,  1874),
and  one  of  them  (the  former,  according  to  Eriedr.  Del. )
is  probably  the  Bit-daganna  mentioned  in  Sennacherib's
prism-inscription  (col.  2 /.  65  ;  KBI^-z).  It  must  be
rememlxired,  however,  that  the  name  occurred  in  several
places  through  Palestine — Beit  Dejan  nearly  7  m.  E.  of
Ndhlus  (see  /VrZ-'map),  and,  according  to  Jos.  {Ant.  xiii.
81  BJ\.  2  3),  Dagon  near  Jericho,  each  on  an  important
trade  route  from  Philistia  to  the  Jordan  Valley.  There
may,  then,  have  been  more  than  one  Beth-dagon  on
the  borders  of  Philistia,  and  it  ought  not  to  be  over-
looked that  neither  Dajun  nor  Beit  Dejan  lies  in  the
Shej)helah  proper.  On  the  doubtful  phrase  '  land  of
Dagon  '  in  Eshmunazar's  inscription,  and  on  the  god
Dagon,  see  Dagon,  §  i.  On  Dajun  see  especially
CI.  Ganneau,  Arch.  Res.  in  Pal.  126/:

2.  A  locality  not  yet  identified  (but  cp  Conder,  Hdbk.  to  the
Bible,  268),  on  the  Iwrder  of  .\sher  (Josh,  lit  27  ;  /3ai0€ye>/ee  [B]).

3.  The  temple  of  l)agon  in  Ashdod  (i  Mace.  10  83,  /Sr^dSayuf
[_^NC.a  cby, ;3oiayo,,.  [.N*]).  G.  A.  S.

BETH-DIBLATHAIM  ( Q^n^3^-n'2  ;  cp  Ass.  dublu,
'  foundation  '  ;  but  see  N.\MKS,  §  107),  a  town  in  Moab
mentioned  along  with Dibon  [i]  and Xebo  [iii.]  (Jer.

4822  =  ©  3I22,  en  oiKON  A<mBAa0aim  [Hg],  e-  o-
AeBAAeAiM  [NA]),  evidently  the  same  as  Ai.mon-dib-
I..^TH.\IM,  which  also  occurs  in  connection  with  Dibon
(Xu.  3346/.).  _  This  place  (called  pSan  n^),  Mehedeba,
and  Ba'al  Me'on  are  stated  by  Mesha  on  his  stele  to
have  been  fortified  by  himself  (/.  30).

BETH-EDEN,  AV'">.'-,  EV  'house  of  Eden"  (n^2
Di*' ;  el  ANAptON  x<^PPAN  [BAQF]),  an  Aramaean
city  or  land,  with  a  ruler  of  its  own,  but  presumably
allied  to  Damascus  (Am.  1  5).  No  satisfactory  identifi-
cation  of  this place  has  been  made. The  vocalisa-

551


BETHEL

tion  (|njj  not  py)  forbids  us  to  see  in  it  the  llapaSfuroi
of  Strabo  and  Ptolemy,  and  equally  forbids  us  to  regard
it  with  Wetzstein  (Del.  /«.(*'  702;  cp  Vg.  de  domo
voluplatis)  as  a  poetical  name  of  Damascus.  The  view,
however,  adopted  bySchrader  {KA  T^^  327)and  favoured
by  ©"*-""  (see  above),  that  Beth-eden  is  the  Bit-adini
of  the  inscriptions  (see  Euen),  is  not  less  inadmissible,
for  this  is  too  far  to  the  N.  of  Damascus,  and  had,
in  the  time  of  Amos,  long  been  subject  to  Assyria  (Wi.
ATUntcrs.  183;  cp  XiJld.  ZDMG  38326  ['79]).  No
doubt  there  were  other  places  called  I'.dkn  {q.v.,  ii. ).
There  is  equal  uncertainty  as  to  the  name  Bikath-aven
(see  AvKN,  3),  which  corresponds  to  Beth-eden  in  the
parallel  line.  T.  K.  C.

BETH-EKED  (li^r  H'?,  EV  'shearing  house';
R\"'C-  'house  of  gathering '),^  where  Jehu  met  Aha-
ziah's  brethren,  is  either  a  place-name  or  (more  probably)
the  designation  of  an  isolated  hou.se  used  on  certain
occasions  by  the  shepherds  of  the  district  (2  K.  10 12  14  ;
BAiGAK&e  [B];  but  in  v.  14  iv  ry  aK-qvri  [B>^'^'"ir].
■KaA  [AL]  ;  Pesh.  has  '  and  he  was  overthrowing  the
altars  that  were  on  the  way  '  [v.  12],  and  in  v.  14  lay  n'3.
cp  Cod.  \'ind.  of  Vet.  Lat.  Belhacar).

BETHEL  ("^NrT*?,  §§  r,  10,  always  one  word  [Bii.
on Gen.  128  Josh.  72], RV  wrongly  with  a hj'phen  ;

1  Site 'house  of  God'— «.^.,  BAiTyAiON— (cp  B&t-

■  TOyAlA.  Bphhulia);  see  Idoi..\tkv,  §  2,
MA.SSEBA  ;  BaiBhA  [B.VDEL];  but  Gen.  307,  BeB.
[D] ;  gentilic  Bethelite,  see  Hikl).  i.  A  town
on  the  border  between  Benjamin  and  Ephraim,  W.  of
the  wilderness  of  Beth-aven  (Josh. 18  12  ;  on  12i6,  where
6-^  omits  the  clause,  and  ©"••"  has  HXa5  for  Bethel  or
Makkedah,  see  Tai'PUAH,  2),  without  doubt  the  present
Beitfn  (from  Beitil,  by  the  common  interchange  of  /
and  n),  a  small  village  (said  to  have  400  inhabitants),
with  ruins  of  early  Christian  and  Crusaders'  buildings,
about  10  m.  N.  of  Jerusalem.  It  lies  on  the  back-
bone of  the  central  range,  a  little  E.  of  the  watershed,
and  2890  ft.  above  the  sea.  Erom  the  village  itself
the  view  is  confined  to  the  plateau,  which,  like  most
of  the  territory  of  Benjamin,  presents  a  bleak  prospect
of  gray  rocks  and  very  stony  fields,  relieved  by  few-
trees  and  a  struggling  cultivation.  A  few  minutes  SE. ,
however,  lies  one  of  the  g^eat  view-points  of  Palestine,
the  Burj-Beitln  or  Tower  of  Bethel  (probably  the  ruin
of  an  early  Christian  monastery),  supposed  to  mark
a  traditional  site  of  the  tent  and  altar  of  Abraham
'to  the  E.  of  Bethel'  (Gen.  128),  and  of  Lot's  view
of  the  '  Circle  of  Jordan  '  (183-10). Four  good  springs

2  Traditions '''"''  ^  ^'"'''''^  reservoir  amply  certify  the
.  xxauiwuuo.  present  village  as  the  site  of  the  city,

which  'was  called  Luz  at  the  first'  (Gen.  28  19  ;  oIko%
deov  [ADEL]).  The  sanctuary,  "God's  house,'  the
'  place'  (as  it  is  called  in  Gen.  28 n,  where  it  is  distinct
from  the  city)  which  grew  famous  enough  to  absorb
the  city's  name  in  its  own,  may  ha\e  Iain  either  on
the  site  of  the  Burj-Beitin,  or  on  one  of  the  neigh-
bouring slopes,  where  there  is  a  natural  stone  circle
[PF.FQ,  1881,  p.  25s);  and  the  curious  formation  of
the  rocks  in  terraces  and  ramparts  has  been  taken  as
the  material  suggestion  of  the  'flight  of  steps'  (see
Ladder)  which  Jacob  saw  in  his  dream  (Gen.
28 10  ff.)."^  There  he  raised  a  pillar,  or  massebah,
to  Yahwe,  and  afterwards  is  said  (Gen.  85 1-8)  by  the
same  narrator,  E  (it  is  J  who  gives  the  previous  story  of
Abraham's  altar),  to  have  built  an  altar  and  called  the
'place'  (not  yet  'city')  'God  of  Bethel'  (for  which  (P^'"'-,
Pesh. ,  and  Vg.  read  '  Bethel ' ). Here  Deborah,  Reliecca's

1  Cp  the  Targ.  Nvn  nr'JD  r*a.  '  place  of  the  gathering
together  of  the  shepherds.'  For  'eked,  however,  we  should
perhaps  read  nSkedun  (CliTi),  and  omit  the  next  word  (in  zi.  12,
not  in  V.  14)  hd-rlfUn  (C'J/in)  as  a  gloss  ;  ndkidlm  was  a  less
common  word  for  '  shepherds '  than  rd'int.

2  Schlatter  (/.ur  Topog.  236)  infers  from  Gen.  12 8  Jos.  7 2
(om.  ©A)  that  the  sanctuary  lay  E.  of  the  town,  in  Deir  Diwan.

5Sa


3.  ffistory.


BETHEL

foster-mother,  died.  She  was  buriwl  below  the  town,
beneath  an  oak  called  '  the  oak  of  weeping  "  (see  Ai.i.oN-
BACUTil,  Mui.iiKKKY) :  trees,  it  is  proUihle.  would  not
be  found  on  the  stony  plateau  above.  The  next  notice
of  Helhel  is  in  the  JIC  narrative  of  Joshua's  conijuests
(Jos.  7  J  8912  [om.  BAK  ;  j^r)0<xv  L]).  in  which  liethcl  is
not  yet  the  name  of  a  city  (so  also  the  Ueutcrononiist  in
Jos.'l2g  \yt9  [A]  :  in  v.  16  '  IV-thel '  is  with  6"'*''  to  Ix;
omitted),  but  is  still  distinct  from  Luz  (16a  [©"*  does
not  distinguish  them,  reading  Xoij'a  (H  in  i-.  1,  A  in  v.  3)
after  /ia<tf7;\j).  The  later  priestly  writer,  however,
makes  them  the  same  (18  13,  cp  2a  {^■t\aa.va.  [B],  /Stj^t/X
(.•\)]  ;  in  Judg.  1  23  the  p,-irenthesis  is  proljably  a  gloss).*
In  Judg.  45  the  prophetess  Delxirah  is  said  to  have  sat
under  the  palm-tree  of  Detxirah  l)ctween  Ramah  and
Bethel — a  statement  which  the  critics  who  understand
the  song  of  Delwrah  to  imply  that  she  belonged  to  the
tril)e  of  Issachar  su|)pose  t'^  have  arisen  from  confusion
with  the  <nhor  Delxjrah  (see  Ukbok.MI).  There  is  no
cogent  reason,  however,  for  their  inference  from  the  song,
and  while  a  palm  is  an  unusual,  it  is  not  an  impossible,
tree  at  the  altitude  of  Bethel  :  there  is  one  at  Jerusalem.
In  the  story  of  the  crime  of  the  Benjamitcs  the  priestly
writing  tells  of  a  national  gathering  before  God  at  Bethel
(Judg.  21  2).

In  the  reconls  of  the  period  after  tlx'  Judges  the
name  Luz  does  not  occur  ;  we  may  suppose  it  by  this
time  to  have  Ijeen  absorljed  in  that  of
Bethel,  which  was  still  a  sanctuary  ( i  S.
7  16  10_;V  The  division  of  the  kingdoms  brought  Bethel
.1  new  opportunity  :  its  ancient  sanctity  was  taken  ad-
vantage of  by  Jerolmam  for  ptjlitical  ends,  and  he  made
it  one  of  the  two  national  shrines  which  he  established
in  North  Israel  in  order  that  his  people  might  not  go
over  to  Jerusalem.  In  these  shrines  he  set  up  the  golden
calves — 'Thy  God,  O  Israel,  which  brought  thee  up  out
of  the  land  of  Egypt '  ( i  K.  I229).  .A  priesthood,  not
Levitical,  was  established,  and  a  new  altar,  pilgrimages,
and  feasts  were  ordained  (i  K.  I230/).  In  the  words
of  .\maziah  to  Amos,  Bethel  became  a  royal  and  national
temple  ( '  sanctuary  of  the  king,'  '  house  of  the  kingdom,'
Am.  7 13)- 2

A  later  (perhaps  post -exilic)  narrative  records  a
prophecy  as  made  by  a  prophet  from  Judah,  by  which
Jeroboam  was  judged  according  to  the  Deuteronomic
standard,  and  Yahwe's  overthrow  of  Bethel  was  predicted
(i  K.  13  ;  cp  2  K.  1029).  There  was  no  such  feeling  of
guilt  or  foreljoding  of  doom,  however,  among  the
prophets  of  the  northern  kingdom,  for  we  find  a
company  of  them  settled  in  liethel,  and  the  place
visited  by  Klijah  and  Klisha  (2  K.22/.  23).

For  a  national  sanctuary  the  position  was  convenient.
The  present  village  lies  alxjut  a  furlong  off  the  most
4  Imnortanfe  '^^*''^'''>'  °'  ^^  three parallel branches

Dosition  '"'"^  which  the  great  north  road  here
divides,  very  near  its  junction  with  the
ro.ad  by  Michmash  to  Jericho,  and  not  many  miles  from
the  heads  of  those  two  other  roads  which  come  up
from  the  coast  by  the  lieth-horons,  and  by  (iophna.
resfKJctively,  to  meet  the  north  road  just  mentioned.
That  is  to  say,  the  main  lines  of  traffic  N.  to  S.  and
E.  to  W.  crosst>d  at  the  gates  of  Bethel.  Like  other
ancient  sanctuaries,  it  must  have  h.ad  a  market ;  its  mer-
cenariness  and  wealth  are  implied  by  Amos  (84,  etc.).
Moreover,  liethel  lay  upon  the  natural  frontier  l)etween
the  two  kingdoms  on  the  plateau  between  the  passes  of
Beth-horon  and  Michmash  (on  the  Chronicler's  story  of
its  capture  by  Abij.ah  of  Judah,  see  Abij.mi,  i  ).  The
prophets  Hosea  and  .\mos  appear  in  opposition  to
Bethel,  not  on  the  ground  (taken  by  the  later  Deutero-
nomists)  that  it  was  the  seat  of  a  schism,  but  because  of

1  In  Judg.  2  I  a  Bethel  ought  proliably  to  be  read  for  liocillM

2  KM  r\2^  r-3»  K1.T  -Ss-P:if?p  'S,  AV  '  for  it  is  the  kings
ch.ipel,  and  it  is  the  king's  court '  ;  RV  '  for  it  is  the  king's
sanctuarj-,  and  it  is  a  royal  house.'

553


BETHBR

the  superstitious  and  immoral  nature  of  its  cult,  e>'en
though  the  object  of  this  w.is  Yahwe  himself.  They
regard  it  as  apostasy  from  Yahwe  (Am.  44,  'Come  to
Bethel  and  revolt  *  ;  r>  5  [ySa^TjX  t^**'''],  '  .V-ek  n».t
Bethel,  seek  Yahwe*),  and  its  crimes  culminate  (Ant.  7i3)
in  the  silencing  of  his  pro|)het  .\mos  by  its  priest  Amaziah
(sec  Amos,  §  20).  It  shall,  therefore,  Ijear  the  brunt  of
the  impending  doom  (Am.  814  Hos.  IO15  \oIko%  tov
iffpariX  BAQ]).  In  scorn  Amos  had  said  '  Bethel  shall
Ix'come  AVKN  ' — i.e.,  vanity,  falseness,  false  worship,
idolatry  (5  5) : — so  Hosea  calls  it  Beth-aven  (4  15  58  IO5)
oftener  than  he  calls  it  Bethel.  The  nickname  was  the
readier  because  of  the  actual  Bktii-.Avkn  (i/.v.),  which
once  stood,  and  perhaps  in  the  eighth  centurj-  still  stootl.
in  the  neighlx)urhood.  After  the  fall  of  the  northern
kingdom  the  heathen  colonists  naturally  adopted  the
cult  of  the  'god  of  the  land,'  and  Bethel  retained  its
importance  as  a  religious  centre  (2  K.  17 28).  Isaiah
and  Micah  do  not  meiuion  Bethel  ;  it  is  very  doubtful  if
Jeremiah  does  .so  (Giesebrecht  on  Jer.  48  13).  The  frontier
of  Judah,  however,  must  have  been  gradually  pushe<l  N.
so  as  to  enclose  it,  for  when  Josiah  put  down  '  the  high
places  in  the  cities  of  Judah '  he  destroyed  the  altar  in
Itethel  and  desecrated  the  site  (2  K.  2'54i5).  The  city
itself  must  have  Inxn  inhabited  by  Jews,  for  its  families
are  reckoned  in  the  great  post-exilic  list  [sc-e  EzR.\,  ii.
§§  9,  8c;  Ezra  228  {yaiOrjX  rB])  =  Neh.  732  (/St/^t/X
[BN*])  =  I  Esd.  i,2i  {fieroXio}  [B],  i^i/r.  [A])].  It  was  the
most  northerly  site  repeopled  by  Jews  ( Neh.  11  31  ;  j3ri$r)p
j^j^c.a  111;;,  inf.  .  q,,,  BX*.A]). '  \Ve  hear  nothing  more  of
Bethel  till  it  is  described  as  one  of  the  strong  places  of
Judah  which  Bacchides  refortified  in  161  B.C.  (i  M.acc.
950  ;  Jos.  An/,  xiii.  1  3),  and  then  it  disappears  from  OT
history.

In  69  A. I).  Vespasian  garrisoned  Bethel  before  his  advance

on  Jerusalem  (Jos.  ^/iv.  99);  and  circa  132  Hadrian  placed  a

post  there  to  intercept  Jewish  fugitives  (Midrash,

B.  Post-  AX/ia//,  ii.  3  :  Ncub.  (,V,y.  7a/m.  115).  The  Bor-
biblical,  deaux  Pilgrim  (333)  gives  it  as  Betthar  12  R.  m.
from  Jerusalem.  Kohins.m's  theory  {LBR,  270),
that  Bethel  is  therefore  the  Bether  of  Hadrian's  war,  is  un-
founded. Kuseb.  and  Jerome  call  it  a  vill.ige  :  the  latter
adds  (under  .Xggai)  that  where  Jacob  dreamed  there  was
built  a  church— })erhaps  part  of  the  ruins  at  Burj-Beitin.  The
Crusaders  exhibited  tlie  rock  under  the  llome  of  the  Rock  in
Jerusalem  as  Jacob's  Stone  ;  but  the  '  Cartulary  of  the  Church
of  the  Holy  Sepulchre '  ^ives  Bethel  as  a  cas;d'c  ceded  to  that
church  in  1160,  and  the  site  of  a  tower  and  chajK:!  bi:ilt  by
Huguesd'Ibelin(Rey,  378).  Sec-  <  .\\ir\n,Ju,/^e,  chap.  .'.S  ;  /•/>•
M(tu.  •.'2957;  3057;  ;  Stanley,  .S/'2i7  ;  (J.VSiii.  //</,  chap.  xii.
and  pp.  289^  298.

(2)  A  place  to  which  David  sent  part  of  the  spoil  of
the  .Amalekites  (iS.  8027!:  probably  the  «ame  as
BlCTllfl.,  if  we  are  not  with  ©"  (and  Budde)  to  read
/Sai('<Toip /.(■.,  r>KTii-zrK.  G.  .\.  s.

BETH-EMEK  (pCI'n  n'3.  §  99.  'house  in  the
valley),  a  place  on  the  boundary  of  .Asher  (Josh.  10  27).

Before  Beth-cmek  some  wortls  appear  to  have  dropped  out  :
perhaps  they  are  representeil  by  ©  s  <cai  tuTtXevat-rai  [ra]  opia.
(.\fter  opio  ©U  coiitiiuics  <Ta<i>6<u^ai6iJ.( ,  where  <ra.(f^ai  seems  to
be  a  corruption  o(  yaiil>9airj\  [-yai  i«t>9ari\],  prefixed  wrongly
to  fiaiBfxt  (  =  Patdf fieit  1  :  acraijfla  firjOaetifK  \.\],  croi^a  ^OarfitK
[L] ;  Symm.  tit  -niy  itoiAouSa).  The  dcscripiinn  in  ?■.  t; /.  is  not
cle.ar  ;  there  would  seem  to  be  two  descriptions  of  the  northern
lx)undary  (if  'on  the  left  hand,"  f.  28,  means  '  northward.' and
if  the  equivalent  of  <cat  tiatK.  opia  is  to  be  inserted  before
'  northward  '  in  v.  27).

Robinson  was  struck  by  the  resemblance  of  the  name
to  that  of  Wmka,  6^  m.  NE.  of  'Akka  (.\crei  ;  but,  as
he  himself  points  out  (/>'A'  4  103  108),  the  situ.ation  of
'Amka  is  too  far  N.  of  Jefat  (Jiphtah-el  ?),  and,  even  if
this  objection  lie  waived,  '.Amka  is  at  any  rate  too  far
N.  of  Kabul  (which  must  be  the  ancient  Cabul).

T.  K.  C.

BETHER  (eeOHp  [BE],  BaiOhr^  [A'),  one  of  the
additional  cities  of  Judah  in  Josh.  15 59  <P  (cp  SHOT).
mentioned  after  Karem  ("Ain  Karim)  and  Gallim  (cp
Gibbar). No  doubt  it  is  the  modern  Bittir(7  m.  SW.

1  On  this  list  see  Ezra,  ii.,  ii  5  [b],  15  I'l  «•
>  ficu00itp  also  occurs  in i  Ch.  tJ  59  [A),  as  a  substitute  for
oTTaf  [Bl— 1.^.,  Juttah.

554


BETHER

of  Jerusalem),  which  stands  on  the  slope  of  a  steep
projecting  hill  between  the  Wady  Hittir  and  a  smaller
valley.  If  we  asceiui  higher  we  shall  reach  a  site
admirably  adapted  for  a  fortress,  where  there  are  still
some  ruins  connected  by  popular  legend  with  the  Jews.
On  the  E.  side  are  chambers  in  the  rock  and  old  cisterns.
Neubauer  (ddog.  Talin.  103-114,  cp  90)  and  Gu6rin
(///(/.  2387-395)  had  all  but  demonstrated  that  this  was
the  Hether  (in'a)  or  rather  lieth-ter  (-inn-a).  within  whose
walls  Bar  Cochba  so  obstinately  resisted  the  Romans
under  Julius  Severus  (A.  o.  134-5).  The  proof  has  now
been  completed  by  the  discovery  of  an  inscription  stating
which  divisions  of  the  Roman  army  were  stationed
there.'  It  is,  therefore,  no  longer  possible  to  maintain
with  Gratz  [Hist.  2417)  that  the  Beth-ter  of  Bar  Cochba
was  identical  with  the  Betthar  of  the  itineraries,  which
was  situated  between  Antipatris  or  Diospolis  and
Cassarea  (see  ANTIPATRIS,  §  2,  end). See  Gibbar.

Only  two  ancient  statements  respecting  the  position  of  Bether
need  be  here  quoted.  Kus.  {/IK  5  6)  describes  pi.0dr)pa  in
these  terms  :  TroAiyi/ij  nv  fif  oxvpuiTOLTt},  tcoc  'lepoo'oAu/oicoi'  ov
<T(j>6Spa  iroppta  6ie(rT(i(ra,  and  the  Talm.  of  Jerus.  {Taanith,
48),  'If  thou  thinkest  that  Beth-ter  [spelt  with  two  n  almost
always  in  this  section]  was  near  the  sea,  thou  art  in  error  :
truly  it  was  40  m.  away  from  the  sea.'  t.  K.  C.

BETHER,  The  mountains  of  (102  ^"in).  Cant.  217
EV,  following  Vg.  {Bether).  The  word  Bether,  how-
ever, all  recent  critics  agree,  is  not  a  proper  name  :  it
qualifies  the  preceding  words.  Putting  aside  the  old,
forced  explanations  of  the  phrase,  such  as  '  mountains
of  ravines'  (©"NAcgp,^  KoiXw/xdrov — i.e.,  c"in3  'nn  ;  cp
BrniRO.x),  and  'mountains  of  separation  '  (between  the
lovers),  one  might  conjecture  that  'Bether'  was  the
Syrian  plant  malobathron,  from  which  a  costly  oil  was
procured,  used  in  the  toilet  of  banqueters  (Hor.  Od.  ii.
77),  and  also  in  medicine  (Plin.  JVH  x.xiii.  448).  So
Symm.  (Field,  He.v.  on  Cant.  217),  RV^s- ;  Wellh.
Prol.^*)  399;  ET  391.  Others  emend  inn  into  n"CC3,
'spices,'  in  conformity  with  814  (so  Pesh. ,  Theod. ,
Meier,  Griitz).  The  best  solution,  however,  has  yet  to
be  mentioned  :  nni  is  miswritten  for  [c'ln^a.  'cypresses' ;
cp  1  17  (Che.).  '  Mountains  of  cypresses'  is  an  appro-
priate term  for  Lebanon  ;  cp  '  mountains  of  panthers  '
(18). See  /(^>A' 10571,  and  cp  Canticles,  §  15  n.

BETHESDA  (BneecAA  [codieid]_^.^.,  xiDH  n^B
— '  house  of  mercy  '  ;  Bh6z<\6&  [Ti.  WH]),  the  reading
of  TR  in  Jn.  52,  for  whicli  the  best  authorities  have
Beth/.atha  or  Rktmsaida.  On  the  topographical
question,  see  Ji:rus.\lem.

BETHEZEL  ('PV'^C  ^''5  :  ©"*°  o''^""  fX^Me^o"  ai^ri^s,
i.e.,Tw^'^,  'near  her'),  an  unidentified  place  in  the
Shephelah  mentioned  by  Micah  (1  n),  who  foresees  the
captivity  of  its  noble  ones  (rS'sj;,  emended  from  inni;!?,
©'s  reading  [(JSiVt^s],  where  MT  has  irnoy  :  so  Che. ,
JQR,  July  '98).  It  is  scarcely  the  same  as  Azel  (cp
Azal).

BETH-GADER  (TlS  n'?  ;  BAiGr&iAcoN  [B],
TeA^P  f'^]'  BHereAAcop  [L]),  a  town,  whose
'father'  Hareph  was  of  Calebite  origin  (i  Ch.  25it);
the  genealogy  seems  to  represent  post-exilic  relations.
On  the  analogy  of  the  other  great  divisions  Shobal  abi
Kirjath-jearim  and  Salma  abi  Bethlehem,  Beth-gader
was  perhaps  no  unimportant  place,  and  we  may  possibly
identify  it  with  Gedok,  i.*  It  is  noticeable  that  the  further
divisions  of  Hareph  are  not  enumerated,  as  they  are  in
the  cases  of  Shobal  and  Salma.

BETH-GAMUL  ("piOi  JT*?,  '  place  of  recompense '  ?
[cp  Gamaliel,  ?Xv?p3];  O I KO  N  r<MMCO  A  [B],o.  fAMCO  A  A
[A],  o.  -A  [Q].  O-  -COAB  [{<'=•■''].  om.  X*).  In  Moab  on
the  table-land  E.  of  the  Jordan  (Jer.  4823),  identified  by

1  C\.  Can.  Acaii.  ties  inscr.,  Comptes  rendus,  1894,  p.  i;?yC

2  The  position  of  Geder,  with  which  it  might  otherwise  be
connected,  is  unknown.

555


BETH-HARAM

some  with  Kh.  /email,  which  lies  to  the  east  of  the  well-
known  DiBON  ;  according  to  others,  it  finds  its  modern
representative  in  Umm  ej-Jemdl,  about  five  hours  S.  of
Bosra.

BETH-GILGAL  ('pa'?5n  H"?).  Neh.  I229  RV ;  see
GILGAI.,  §  6  (5).

BETII-HACCEREM,  AV  Beth  -  Haccherem  (n^3
D"!3n,  §  103,  '  vineyard  place'),  is  expressly  called,  not
a  town,  but  a  '  district'  ("Sl/S),  near  Jerusalem,  N'ch.  814
(BhOaxaaa  FB],  -Oaxxapma  [A],  -Gakaaa  [N],  -&v-
XARAM  [1^])-  From  Jer.  61  it  appears  to  have  included
a  conspicuous  height  to  the  S.  of  Jerusalem  which  was
usctl  as  a  beacon-station  (Baid Oaxo-pf^  [B],  BeOd.  [K],
Br]ea.  [Q],  BvdOaxap  [A].

Jerome  (in  his  comment  on  the  latter  passage)  says  that  it  was
one  of  the  villages  which  he  could  see  every  day  with  his  own  eyes
from  Bethlehem,  that  it  was  called  Bethacharma,  and  that  it  lay
on  a  mountain.  Hence,  many  since  Pococke  have  placed  it  on
the  so-called  Fureidls  or  '  Frank  Mountain  '  (2487  ft.  above  the
sea-level),  between  Bethlehem  and  Tekoa,  and  very  near  the
latter  (so  even  Giesebrecht). Jerome's


we  are  unable
but  there  is  now  no  name  near  the  '  Frank  Mountain'
which  confirms  this  theory,  and  the  special  fertility  which  the
name  Beth-haccerem  implies  to  have  characterised  the  district
suggests  looking  elsewhere.  After  all,  it  was  rather  hasty  to  infer
from  Jer.  0  i  that  Beth-haccerem  was  bound  to  be  near  Tekoa.

Since  we  have  found  reason  elsewhere  (Beth-car)
to  correct  'Beth-car'  in  iS.  7ii  into  Beth-haccerem,
and  to  identify  this  with  the  beautiful  village  of  'Ain
Karim,  about  an  hour  and  a  half  W.  of  Jerusalem,
it  becomes  difficult  to  resist  the  conclusion  that  the  hill
referred  to  by  Jeremiah  was  the  /edel  'AH,  at  the  foot  of
which  lies  the  village  in  question.  The  fruitful  olive-
groves  and  vineyards  of 'Ain  Karim  are  watered  from  a
superb  fountain,  and  would  justify  the  name  Beth-
haccerem.  The  summit  of  the  Jebel  'AH  commands  a
view  of  the  Mediterranean,  the  Mount  of  Olives,  and
part  of  Jerusalem  ( Baed.  '^>  112).  Condor  mentions  that
tliere  are  still  cairns  on  the  ridge  above  'Ain  Karim  which
may  have  served  as  beacons  {PEFQ,  1881,  p.  271).
One  is  40  ft.  high  and  130  ft.  in  diameter,  with  a  flat
top  measuring  40  ft.  across.

Two  more  references  to  Beth-haccerem  may  be  indi-
cated. In  the  Mishna  treatise,  Middoth  3  4,  it  is
stated  that  the  stones  for  the  great  altar  in  the  second
temple  came  from  the  valley  of  Beth-cerem,  which  Adler
[JQR  8390)  identifies  with  Beth-haccerem  and  'Ain
Karim  ;  and  among  the  eleven  towns  which  ©"al  j^^^g
(but  not  MT)  in  Josh.  I559  occurs  Karem  (Kape/i),
which,  from  the  context,  can  only  be  'Ain  Karim.  Cp
Taiichemonite.  For  another  (probable)  Beth-carem
see  Batii-RABrim.  t.  K.  C.

BETH-HAGGAN  [\IJ\  n^3,  domus  horti  [Vg.],  EV
'the  garden-house';  better  in  6.  as  a  proper  name,
BAIGAN  [B],  BAlATfAN  [A'^'d-  sup  ras],  BAiecoptON  =
Beth-horon  [L]),  a  place,  apparently  to  the  S.  of  Jczreel,
on  the  road  to  which  Ahaziah  fled  in  his  chariot  when
he  saw  Jehoram  slain  by  Jehu  (2  K.927).  Jenin,  the
lirst  village  which  one  travelling  southwards  would
encounter,  may  very  well  be  Beth-haggan  (  =  Beth-hag-
gannim,  'place  of  gardens'),  i.e.,  En-GANNIM  (^.z'. ,  2).
If,  however,  we  hold  with  (Tonder  that  Megiddo,  which
.\haziah  reached  at  last — to  die— was  Mujedda'  at  the
foot  of  Gilboa,  a  little  to  the  S.  of  Beisan,  it  will  become
natural  to  identify  Beth-haggan  with  a  northern  Beit
Jenn,  between  Mt.  Tabor  and  the  S.  end  of  the  Lake
of  Gennesaret  (Beit  Jenn  is,  in  Arabic  nomenclature,  a
favourite  name).  Against  this  view  of  the  flight  of
Ahaziah,  see  GASm.  HG  387,  n.  i.  t.  K.  C.

BETH-HANAN. See  Ei.on-beth-hanan.

'BETH-HARAM,  AV  incorrectly  Beth-aram  (0*3
D"1in  ;  oGAprAei,  or  perhaps  -aAcom  [B],  BhGaram
[.AL]),  Josh.  1327  (P).  For  the  true  form  of  the  name
see  Beth-haran.

SS6


BETH-HAEAN

BETH-HARAN  (pn  n'3.  probably  'house  of
Hakan,'  BaiOap&n  [\i].  -AppA  [A].  -N  [FL]-  ^'u•
3236  [E\),  tlie  corri-ct  and  ori|;inul  pronunciation  of
the  name  of  the  place  also  called  Rktii-makam  (cp
Gkrsiiom  for  Ckksmon).  Ihe  place  thus  designated
was  an  ancient  Amoriie  city,  foriilied  by  the  conquering
Gadites.  The  site  is  occupied  by  the  modern  Tf/I  er-
Rameli,  which  stands  up  in  a  wfuly  of  the  same  name,
between  llesbfin  and  the  Jordan,  at  no  great  distance
from  the  river.  The  objection  to  this  raised  by  Guthe
l/.f>l'l'  2-i,  n.  i)  is  not  decisive.

Rrmich  docs  inclceiJ  imply  a  form,  neth-har3mah  ;  but  this
form  is  vouched  for  hy  the  existence  of  the  Aramaic  Beth-ramtha
(see  below).  It  arose  out  of  ISuth-iiaram  (a  phonetic  modifica-
tion of  Heth-haran)  when  the  older  and  correct  form  of  the
name  had  passed  out  of  use,  and  so  the  later  form,  Bclh-haram,
came  to  be  misinterpreted.  Moreover,  Tristram's  discovery  of
a  'conspicuous  mound'  called  Beit  Via.rTan(Lan<i 0/ Afoah,  348)
has  not  been  vcrilied  by  subsequent  travellers,'  though  it  is  still
recognised  in  Itaed.(S)  (map  of  Pera.'a),  and  the  identification
(which  stands  in  Di.'s  comin.)  is  retained  by  von  Riess  in  Bibel-
Atlasy^\,  on  the  assumption  that  licit  Harran  (or  Haram)  is
nearer  to  the  outlet  of  the  wady  than  Tell  cr-Kumeh.

The  really  conspicuous  mound  is  surely  that  of  Tell
er-Rameh,  which  is  673  ft.  alxsve  the  sea-level,  and
certainly  marks  the  site  of  an  ancient  town  of  importance
(Conder,  /V-.7'M/cw.,  /,'.  I'a!.  I238).  Such  a  town
was  the  lieth-ramtha  of  the  Talmud  (Xeuhauer,  Giog.
Talin.  247),  the  name  of  which  is  attested  by  Josephus,
Eusebius,  and  Jerome.'*

Herod  had  a  palace  here  (Jos.  Ant.  xvii.  10  6;  B/  ii.  4  2) ;
Herod  Antipas  walled  it  and  called  it  Julias  after  the  wife  of
Augustus,  at  the  same  time  that  Herod  Pliilip  relniilt  Belhsaida
and  gave  it  the  same  name  after  the  emperor's  d.uighter  (Jos.
<•(«/.  xviii.  2  I  ;  />'/ii.!)i).  Jerome,  however,  enables  us  to  correct
this  statement  ((>.V  103  17).  Theoldernameof  the  city  was  Livias  ;
the  name  was  chan>;ed  to  Julias  when  Livia  was  received  into
the  gens  Julia  by  the  emperor's  testament  (see  Scburer,  J/ist.
ii.  1  142).  Kus.  (f '.S' i;34  88)  and  Theodosius(53o  A.i).)also  call  it
Livias;  the  latter  (/)<r  ^ttu  Terrie  ^Vi«r /«■.  65)  describes  it  as
12  k.  m.  from  Jericho,  near  warm  springs  that  were  efficacious
against  leprosy.  X.  K.  C.

BETH-HOGLAH,  once  (Josh.  156)  AV  Beth-hogla
(n^jH  n'3,  §  104,  'place  of  partridge,'  cp  Hoglah),^
a  Hcnjaniite  city  on  the  border  of  Judah  (Jos.  156,
B(Me<^^^AAA^  [B],  -Aa  [I>].  -OaAa  [A];  I81921,
OaAaccan  and  BeeerMoo  [H],  BAiOAAAfA  [A],
BmBapAa  {}'•  -I"'!  A  in  21]).  It  is  the  modern  'Ain
(and  K.nsr)  Hajla,  a  fine  spring  and  ruin  situated  be-
tween Jericho  and  the  Jordan  S.  of  Gilgal  (cp  Di.  on
Gen.  In  and  Raed.W  I54)-'  Under  the  form  Reth-
alaga  it  is,  according  to  Jos.  {Ari(.  xiii.  1  5),  the  place
to  which  Jonathan  fled  Ixifore  Bacchides,  i  Mace.  863
(but  see  Bkthbasi).  The  Onom.  erroneously  identifies
Beth-hoglah  with  Atad  (see  Abkl-mizraim,  end).  The
interi^relation  '  Betha^la,  locus  gyri'  of  Jcr. ,  according
to  WKS  (AW.  SemJ-^  191,  n.  i),  may  rest  upon  a  local
tradition  of  a  ritual  procession  around  some  sacred
object  there  (cp  Ar.  hajala,  'hobble,  hop') — similar
perhaps  to  the  Ar.  ceremonial  fawdf  [for  which  see  We.
HeidS^"*  no).*  The  form  hajla  survives  also  in  Ma-
khadet  Hajla  (see  Kkth-arahah,  2),  a  noted  bathing-
place  for  pilgrims  at  the  mouth  of  the  Wady  el- Kelt
(Baed.  169).

BETH-HORON  (pin  D"?,  also  pin  "1  and  ph  "1,
and  in  C'h.  jilin  "1\  BAlBcopoaN  or  Bee.  [BAI.].
1.  Site  BeBcopA,  BaiO-,  -eoopco^  BhS.  in  Jos.  [cp
the  modern  form  Beit  'Ur],  probably  'the
place  of  the  hollow  '  or  '  hollow  way  ' )  was  the  name
ofjtwo  neighbouring  villages,  upper  Both-horon  ('n  "1
jivr,  Josh.  IG5;  ^■r\du}puv  \\S\)  and  lower  I^-th-horon
(jinnn  'n  "l,  josh.  I63;  but  in  2  Ch.85  )V7rn  and

J  See,  r.f.,  Schick,  ZDn'lix  ;  cp  p.  2.

2  Jos.  gives  the  name  as  prieapatiaOa  and  firfiapafL^a  ;  once
(Ww/.  xvii.106)  the  text  gives  i^^aJda.  Kus.  ((^23487)  ^yfi-
paft<f>0a,  with  a  fragment.-iry  reference  to  the  a<j-<rupioi.  Jer.
(OS '2b  1 1  ;  103  16),  '  Betharam  domus  sublimium  vel  montium ' ;
quae  a  Syris  dicitur  Bethramtha ').

^  The  o  in  Hoglah  is  not  supported,  and  all  the  evidence  points
to  the  reading  '  Haglah."

*  For  another  explanation  see  E.n-eglai.m.

557


BETH-HORON

pnnnn — hence  the  dual  form  preserved  by  upwvtiv^  [B  ;
but  prjdupwv  AL],  Josh.  lOio/. ),  near  the  head  and  the
foot,  resjiectively,  of  the  ascent  from  the  Maritime  I'lain
to  the  j)lateau  of  Bcnjamiii.  and  represented  to-day  by
/W/  'Or  el-Joka  and  lieit  'Ur  et-talit,i  (large  PEF  Surv.
Map.  Sheet  xvii. ).  The  road  leaves  Beit  Sira  (in  which
2.  Beth-horon  s°"'«^ce  Uzzen-sheerah  :  seeSMKRAU).
road.  '^° alx)ve sea-level, on the  high

plain  of  Aijalon  ;  climbs  up  the  .••|)ur  of
the  Benjamitc  hills  in  alxsut  50  minutes  to  the  lower  Beth-
horon,  1240  ft.  ;  and  thence,  dro{)ping  at  fust  for  a
little,  ascends  the  ridge,  with  the  gorges  of  Wady
Selnuln  to  the  S. ,  and  Wady  es-Sant  and  Wady  el-
'Imeish  to  the  N.,  to  the  uppei  Beth-horon,  i^  m.
from  its  fellow  and  2022  ft.  alxive  the  sea  ;  and  thence,
still  following  the  ridge,  comes  out  on  the  Bcnjamite
plateau  al>out  4 J  m.  farther  on,  to  the  X.  of  el- Jib
(dibeon),  at  a  height  of  about  2300  ft.  The  .iSi'D  or
ascent  to  Beth-horon  (Josh.  10 10)  may  Ix;  the  road
towards  the  up|)er  Beth-horon  from  (jilx;on  :  it  does
rise  at  first  from  the  plateau  before  descending  ;  the
Tito  or  descent  to  the  two  Beth-horons  (Josh.  10  n,  ©")
is  the  whole  road  from  the  edge  of  the  plateau.  More
probably,  the  two  are  the  same  taken  from  opposite
ends.  This  Beth-horon  road  is  now  no  longer  the  high
road  from  Jerusalem  and  the  watershed  to  the  Maritime
Plain  ;  but  it  was  used  as  such  from  the  very  earliest
times  to  at  least  the  sixteenth  century  of  our  era,  and
indeed  forms  the  most  natural,  convenient,  and  least
exposed  of  all  the  possible  descents  from  the  neighlxnir-
hood  of  Jerusalem  to  the  plain  of  Sharon.  The  line  of
it  bears  many  marks  of  its  age  and  long  use.  Carried
for  the  most  part  over  the  bare  rock  and  rocky  debris,
it  has  had  steps  cut  upon  it  in  its  sleeper  portions,  and
has  remains  of  Roman  pavement.  Standing  as  they
do  upon  mounds,  the  two  Beth-horons  command  the
most  difficult  passages  of  this  route  and  form  its  double
key.

The  constancy  with  which  the  Beth-horons  appear  in

history  is,  therefore,  easily  explicable  (they  do  not  occur,

^-l-i.  however,  in  either  the  lists  of  the  con(juests

hi  to  V  °f  Thotmes  III.  or  the  Amarna  letters).
^  ^^'  According  to  JE,  after  Joshua  had  won
for  Israel  a  footing  on  the  Benjamite  plateau  and  made
peace  with  Gibeon,  the  latter  was  threatened  by  the
Canaanites.  Joshua  defeated  them  at  Gibeon,  and
pursued  them  all  the  way  down  by  the  Beth-horons
(Josh.  10  lojj'! ).  In  the  days  of  Saul  the  Philistines  must
have  held  the  pass  from  their  camp  at  Michmash  (i  S.
13i8).'^  Solomon  fortified  Beth-horon  the  nether,  along
with  (jezer,  on  the  opposite  side  of  .Vijalon  (i  K.917
[om.  BL,  Jos.  firfTX(')po- ',  in  iK.'iss/  ^aidopujd,  A];
2  Ch.85  adds  Beth-horon  the  upper  [^aiOixjfujix.  BJ).
During  his  son  Rehoboam's  reign  .Shishak  or  Sosenk  of
Egypt  invaded  Judah  by  the  Beth-horon  passage,
it  would  appear,  for  both  Ai-yu-ru-u  (.Aijalon)  and
Bi-tj-h-va-ru-n  (Beth-horon)  occur  in  his  lists  of  the
towns  he  conquered  (Nos.  26  and  24  ;  see  WMM,  As.
u.  Eur.  166).

In  the  Syro-Maccabean  wars,  Seron,  a  Syrian  general,
advanced  on  Judah  by  IVth-horon  ;  Judas  with  a  small
force  met  him  on  the  ascent,  defeated  him,  and  pursued
him  out  upon  the  plain  (i  Mace.  813-24  [©■^  ?'.  16,
/ue^wpwi'j  ;  Jos.  Ant.  xii.  7  i).  A  few  years  afterwards,
Nicanor  having  retired  from  Jerusalem  upon  Beth-
horon,  Judas  attacked  and  slew  him,  and  routed  his
army  as  far  as  Gczer  ( i  Mace.  1 39  ff-  '<  Jos.  Aril.  xii.  IO5).
Beth-horon  was  among  the  places  fortified  by  Bacchides
(i  Mace.  9 so  [^TjOupuiy,  \'*],  Jos.  Anl.  xiii.  1  3).  See
also  Judith44  (fieOwpu  [A]).

1  A  similar  dual  (D]yih)  is  to  be  read  in  2S.  1834  with  We.,
Dr.,  and  Bu.  SBOT,  following  ©"'s  utprnvrtv  {optuv  i)  [.\»'d],
(rupatfi  [I.]).

'i  It  was  probably  by  the  Beth-horons  that  the  Philistines
were  routed  by  Saul  (i  .S.  13  14)  and  'from  Gibeon  south  to
Gezer,'  by  David  (a  S.  5  25).

558


BETH-JBSHIMOTH

In  66  A.n.  a  Roman  army  under  Cestius  Gallus,  ascending  by
Beth-horon,  had  tlicir  rear  disordered  by  the  Jews,  and  after  a
short  and  futile  siege  of  Jerusalem  retreated  pell-mell  by  the
same  way.  Josephus  descrilies  the  difficulties  of  the  ground  in
a  manner  that  leads  us  to  suppose  that  the  Romans  in  their
haste  cannot  have  kept  to  the  high  road  by  the  I!eth-horons,  but
were  swept  down  the  gorges  on  either  side  (/>y  >'•  '9)-  Perhaps
because  of  this  experience,  Titus,  in  his  advance  upon  Jerusalem
two  years  later,  took  another  road  ;  and  Heth-horon  is  not  again
mentioned  in  the  military  history  of  Palestine.

In  the  division  of  the  land  among  the  tribes  of  Israel,
the  border  line  lictween  lienjarnin  and  l^phraim  ran  by
,  ..  the  lieth-horons  (Josh.  I635  [I-  "-'-5.
4.  Population.  ^^^jjpy^]_  18  13/  )  which  were  counted
to  Ephraim  (Josh.  21 22).  They  remained  part  of  the
N.  kingdom  ;  and  we  do  not  re.ad  of  any  Jews  settled
there  in  post-exilic  times.  That  is  to  say,  they  were  held
by  the  Samaritans.  Sanballat,  one  of  the  chief  foes  of
the  lews  in  Nehemiahs  day.  is  called  '  the  Hokonite"
(Neh.  2io.  opw»'[€]i  [B.\].  avpuvei  [S^'''],  wpwviTrji  [L]
19  I32S,  om.  BS.V,  wpafiT-rji  [H^-^"'^],  etc.).  .Sclilalter
{Z»r  Topog.  u.  Gesch.  Pal.  4,  'War  Heth-horon  der
Wohnort  Sanballat's?")  seeks  to  prove  that  Horonite
means  'from  Horonaim,"  the  town  in  S.  Moab  (Is.  155
Jer.  483534,  and  Moabite  stone),  partly  on  the  ground
that  Sanballat  is  associated  with  Tobiah  the  Ammonite  ;
but  Ammonite  may  mean  '  from  Chkphar-Ammoni  '
(a  town  of  Benjamin,  Josh.  I824) ;  and  Buhl  (Gcog.  169)
poitits  out  that  ©s  form  of  Belh-horon  'ilpwvfLV  (Josh.
10io[B],  cp  2  S.  1334)  confirms  the  possibility  of //<irJ//«
meaning  'from  Beth-horon.'  By  161  B.C.  Beth-horon
had  become  a  city  of  Judoea  (i  Mace.  95°;  ]os.Ant.
xiii.  I3,  cp  7i).

.XccDrdiiii;  to  the  T.-ilmud,  it  w.-is  the  birthplace  of  many  rabbis

(Neul).  C„\\r_  Taint.  154). Jerome  gives  it  in  the  itinerary  of  S.

Paula,  who  came  to  it  from  Xicopolis  {Kfiit.

6.  Post-biblical  .v.  l\iul.JIu,:  op.,  ed.  .Misne,  i.  883). There

rAfprftnpM are  the  ruins  of  a  media;val  castle  in  upper

reierences. j5^,h.j,„ron_ but  the substructions  in  both

Tillages  are  probably  more  ancient. The  name  is  given  by  very

few  medi.cval  travellers  (Brocardus,  ch.  9  ;  Marin.  Sanutus,  249),

.and  not  at  all,  it  would  appear,  by  the  Arab  geographers— unless

the  'Ur.linah  mentioned  by  Yakut,  but  not  located,  be  the  same

place. The  mediiuval  pilgrims  went  to  Jerusalem  by  Ramleh

and  the  present  line  of  road. In  1801  Dr.  Clarke  (Tyavels,  pt.

ii.  vol.  i.  628)  rediscovered  the  name.

See  Rob.  A' A'  3  59  ;  Gu6rin,y»</.  1338,346;  Stanley,  .9/"  212;
GASm.  HG  210-213,  254.  C.  .\.  S.

BETH-JESHIMOTH,  once  (Nu.  8849)  AV  Beth-
jesimothiniO^'J^n  n*5.  BHCiMOye  [AL]),  is  assigned
in  Joshua  (12  5Ac[e]iMcoe  [B.A],  aicim.  [F™'],  Bne-
Ac[e]l/V\.  [LJ,  13  20  BAieeACeiNcoe  [B])  to  the
Reubenites  (cp  Xu.  3349.  ^^a  y-i<yov  ai<n/j.ij0  [BFL],
A.  M.  AC.  [A])  ;  but  probably  it  was,  like  most  of  the
neighbouring  i)laces,  in  the  possession  of  the  Moabites
during  a  considerable  period  of  the  Hebrew  monarchy.
We  know  that  it  was  Moabite  in  the  time  of  Ezekiel
(Ezek.  209,  oIkov  daffi/jLovd  [B],  0.  ^eOaff.  [B>>l^i>"A],
o.  ^ai^a.  [Q*J,  0.  jiaid'  laa:  [Q^]),  who  speaks  of  it
along  with  Baal-meon  and  Kiriathaim  as  '  the  glory  of
the  country. '  .Xs  ^-qcntxthd  it  is  mentioned  by  Josephus
(/?/iv.  7  5)  as  having  l>een  taken  by  Placidus  ;  Eus.  writes
^■qdaiixovd  [0S(-^  26627)  and  ^r)da<jinov0  (233  81);
Jerome  {if>.  103  9),  writing  liethsimuth,  describes  it  as  a
village  bearing  in  his  day  the  name  himuth,  opposite
Jericho  at  a  distance  of  10  R.  m.  'in  meridiana  plaga,
juxta  mare  mortuum. "  The  name  and  description  point
to  the  modern  Khirbet  es-Suweimeh.  The  name  Jeshi-
moth  may  be  comjiared  with  the  Jeshimon  '  on  the  face'
of  which  'the  headland  of  Pisgah  looked  down  '  (Nu.
21  20);  for  probably  this  Jeshimon  (  =  ' desolation ')  is
not  the  Jeshimon  of  Judah,  but  the  barren  land  off  the
XE.  end  of  the  Dead  Sea.  With  this  name  Honimel
[AHT  197)  compares  Yasumunu,  the  name  of  a
Palestinian  district  mentioned  by  an  early  Assyrian  king.
Cp  G.\Sm.  //(;  564,  n.  I.

BETH-LEAPHRAH  (n"1?l?7  n*3),  Mic.  1  lof  RV,

AV  Al'llR.MI, IIolSK  OK.

BETH-LEBAOTH (niNa?  n^3,  §§  93.  104,— /.e-..

•abode  of  lions,'— Josh.  196,  BAGARcae  [!'']•  BaiOaA-

559


BETHLEHEM

Bag  [A],  BHGAeBACoG  [L]),  or,  simply.  Lf.haoth  (Josh.
ir»32.  AaBcoc  [B],  -coG  [AE]1.  an  unidentified  site  m
the  Negeb  of  Judah  (Josh.  1632),  assigned  to  Simeon
(Josh.  196).  The  pamllel  passage  in  i  Ch.  43'  has
Bktii-biri  ('kts  n-a),  which  has  probably  arisen  from  a
corruption  of  the  text.  For  '  and  at  Beth-biri  and  at
Shaaraim '  C?  has  Ka.\  oIkov  ^paovfiaewpfifi  [  B],  k.  0.
PapovfJL  •  <T.  [.A],  K.  iv  tiai0^ap€ifi  k.  (v  ffaapi/i  [L].

BETHLEHEM  iDn^'n*?  Ru.  I19,  etc.  ;  Dn?  n*3
iS.  206,  etc.;  BHGAeCM  [I-  commonly]  some  codd.
BeGXeeM,  BAiGAee\\  [15A];  Jos.  BhGXccmh  and  BhG-
AeMA ;  gentilic  Bethlehemite.  *pn?ll"n*3,  BhG-
AeeMeiTHC.  i  S.  IGiS.  etc.)  meant,  to  the  Hebrew,
■house  of  bread'  ;  N.\.mks,  §10;  on  a  less  obvious
explanation  of  H.  G.  Tomkins,  see  Elh.\nan,  1,  end.
I.  Beth -lehem -judah  (nT.i^'a  Judg.  17? /^.  etc- )•
the  modern  Beit  Lahm,  2350  ft.  above  sea-level.  5  m.
_. .S.  of  Jerusalem  (Jos. ,  20  stadia,  ,////.  vii.  I24).

1.  Site.  ^  jjjjjjj  Qfj-  jj^g  j^jgf^  ro^j  JO  Hebron,  on  a  spur
running  \\.  from  the  watershed,  surrounded  by  valleys
among  the  most  fertile  of  Juda;a.  The  site  is  without
springs  (the  nearest  being  one  800  yards  SE.  of  the
town,  and  others  at  Artas  i^  m.  away),  but  receives
water  from  an  acjueduct  from  the  Pools  of  Solomon
(Conduits,  §  3)  compassing  the  SE.  end  of  the  spur,
and  from  many  cisterns— of  which  the  greatest  are
three  in  front  of  the  great  basilica  ;  there  are  three
others  from  12  to  21  ft.  deep,  on  the  X.,  called  Biar
Da'ud.  The  immediate  neighbourhood  is  very  fertile,
bearing,  besides  wheat  and  barley,  groves  of  olive  and
almond,  and  vineyards.  The  wine  of  Bethlehem
('Talhaml')  is  among  the  best  of  Palestine.

So  great  fertility  must  mean  that  the  site  was  occupied,

in  spite  of  the  want  of  springs,  from  the  earliest  times  ;

, but  the  references  to  it  in  Judges— as  the

2.  OT  refer-  j^^^^g ^f  tj^g ^evite  who sojourned in
ences. Mjc.ah's  house  (17?  9).  and  of  the  young

woman  whom  the  I5enjamites  maltreated  (19  1/  18)— and
in  the  Book  of  Ruth  are  of  uncertain  date,  and  into  the
clear  light  of  history  Bethlehem  first  emerges  with  David. '
It  was  his  home  (i  S.  206  28,  very  early),  for  the  waters
of  which,  when  it  was  occupied  by  the  Philistines,  he
expressed  so  great  a  longing— probably  as  a  pledge  of
his  fatherland's  enfranchisement— that  his  three  captains
broke  the  enemy's  lines,  and  drew  water  from  the  cistern
'  in  the  town's  gate  '  (2  S.  2Zuff.,  from  the  same  early
source),  which  tradition  has  identified  with  the  Biar
Da' fid  (but  Gu6rin,  /«</.  1  i3o#.  following  Quaresmius,
prefers  those  in  front  of  the  basilica).  Other  references
to  Bethlehem  as  David's  home  are  i  S.  I614  17 12  15  58
(from  later  strata).  .Asahel,  brother  of  Joab,  was  buried
in  Bethlehem  in  his  fathers  grave  (2S.  232).  Thus.
Joab,  like  his  leader,  was  a  Bethlehemite.  Except  for
a  statement  of  2  Ch.  116  (©«*'^  iSat^aeeAi).  that  Reho-
bo.am  fortified  Bethlehem,  the  town  is  not  mentioned
again  till  Micah,  who  describes  it  if) 2)  as  still  one  of  the
smallest  of  the  townships  of  Judah,  but  illustrious  as
the  birthplace  of  the  Messianic  king  (see  Micah,  ii.  %2b).
According  to  Jer.  41 17.  the  Jews  who  in  586  B.C.  fled  to
Egypt  rested  at  Gidroth-chimham  (see  Chimham),  near
Bethlehem.  The  Bethlehemites  carried  into  captivity
by  Nebuchadrezzar  repeopled  their  town  after  the  return
(Ezra22i  fiapOaXaifi  [B],  ^edXai/Ji  [.\]\  Neh.  726  Bom.,
BedWee/x  [S],  j3ai<TaXeeM  [A],  cp  7:  6  ;  i  Esd.  5i7  payed-
Xu/jxov  [B],  ffaidXiVfxuf  [A].  ^id\(en  [L]).  Bethlehem
is  the  scene  of  the  lx:autiful  story  of  Ruth,  in  connection
with  which  it  is  necessarj-  to  note  that  Moab  is  clearly
visible  from  about  Bethlehem  :  thus.  Ruth  in  her
adopted  home  must  often  have  had  her  own  fatherland
in  sight.  In  the  lists  of  the  MT  of  Joshua  (P)  Beth-
lehem is  not  given  ;  but  it  is  added  with  ten  others  in
the  <5"A'-  text  of  l.')59  (/cat  e(f>pada,  aimj  «tti  \^aid\(eii)  :
©'s  reading  must  be  genuine,  since  the  group  which  it
t  If  it  docs  so  even  then  :  see  Davio,  g  1  a.
560


Christian  ,
times.


BETHLEHEM

includes  is  too  important  to  have  been  omitted  from  the
original.

TIk;  name  Kphrathah  or  Kphrath  of  this  po-ssnge  is
assif;iiL(l  to  Ik'thU-hcni  also  in  Mic.  5a[i]  (the  rca<ling
«  rnhmth  '^■'-•* '""  •''''''EX  ^^  ""'  certain  ;  hut  tlu-  refer-
s.  tpnram.  ^^^^^  ,^  Ilcthlchem  is  clear),  in  Ku.  4ii.
virtually  in  Ru.  I2  (L  om. )  in  i  S.  17ia  (U  om.  ),*  and
probably  also  in  I's.  1326.  Apart  from  Micah.  the
documents  in  which  i:phrath[ah]  occurs  arc  proU-ibly
so  late  that  we  might  reasonably  suppose  that  Hethlehem
was  the  earlier  name  of  the  town.  On  the  other  hand,
these  documents  are  proliably  based  on  very  early
material  :  Micah  (if  Mic.  fn  is  his  work)  takes  the
name  as  well  known.  It  is  possible  to  argue  from
I  Ch.  21950  44  (fiaiOXaSfy  [B],  /3at^Xae/i  [A]),  that
Ephrath[ah|  was  the  name  of  the  whole  district  in
which  Ik-thlfhcnt  lay.

Bethlehem  is  not  mentioned  by  Joscphus  after  Solo-
mon's tiiiio,  nor  in  the  Hooks  o{  Maccalxms;  which
proves  how  insignilicant  it  continued  to  be.  As  the
place  conunanded  the  fertile  wadies  and  water-supply
around  it, — the  Philistines  had  deemed  it  important
enough  to  occupy  —  this  silence  is  very  remarkable.
Bethlehem  reappears  in  Mt.  2  I.k.  2  as  the
birthplace  of  Jesus,  distinguislied  still  as
lirjOXd/j.  TTji  'lovoaias  ( Mt.  2 1  5,  cp  6  8  16),
•the  city  of  David'  (Lk.'24i5  cp  Jn.742).  I.k.  de-
scribes the  new-l)orn  child  as  having  been  laid  in  a
manger  (X.ABDI.i  omit  the  dertnite  article  of  TA'),
'  because  tlure  was  no  room  for  them  in  the  A'Jiii/i ' ;
they  had  retired  then  '  to  a  stall  or  cave  where  there
was  rocjm  for  the  mother  and  a  crib  for  the  babje."

It  is  sij,'nilicant  that  Bethlehem  appears  to  have  been
chosen,  along  with  the  sites  of  the  crucifi.xion  and  the
resurrection,  for  special  treatment  by  the  Emperor
Hadrian.  .\s  he  set  up  there  an  image  of  Jupiter  and
an  image  of  Venus,  so  he  devastated  liethlehem  and
planted  u[xin  it  a  grove  sacred  to  Adonis  (jer.  l-.pist.  ad
Pan!.,  ri8  3).  This  proves  that  even  before  132  A.D.
Bethlehem  was  the  scene  of  Christian  pilgrimage  and
worship,  as  the  birthplace  of  Jesus.  (The  Talmud  also
admits  that  from  Bethlehem  the  Messiah  must  come  :
Berachoth,  5(1.)  .About  150  A.D.  Justin  .Martyr  (/^/'(i/.
c.  Tryph.  70  78)  de.scril)cs  the  scene  of  the  birth  as  in  a
cave  near  the  village.  This  tradition  may  be  correct  :
there  were  many  ancient  cave -stables  in  Palestine
(Conder,  Tent  Work,  chap.  10),  and  caves  are  still  used
as  stables.  In  315  A.u.  the  site  of  Bethlehem  was
still  'a  wild  wood'  (Cyr.  Jcrus.  dttcch.  12 20).  Con-
stantine  cleared  it  and  built  a  iKisilica.  Soon  after,  in
Jerome's  time,  a  cave  in  the  rock  near  the  basilica  w.is
venerated  as  the  staVjle,  and  in  a  neighlx>uring  grotto
Jerome  himself  prepared  his  translation  of  the  Bible.
From  that  day  to  this  the  tradition  has  been  constant.

The  centre  of  interest  in  modern  Bethlehem  is,  there-
fore, the  large  basilica  .S.  Maria  a  Pra-sepio,  surrounded
and  fortified  by  the  Latin,  the  Greek,  and  the  Armenian
monasteries.  .Although  the  architecture  is  mi.xed  and  of
many  |x;ri<Kls,  the  bulk  of  the  church  is  that  built  by
Constantine. Cp  De  Vogti<?, Ei,'lises  Je  la  Palestine,

Eutychius (<r/rra  937,  ouotecl  by  Ouirin,  2  i6i).isserts,  indeed,
that  the  church  is  ,i  building  of  Justini.in,  who  pulled  down  Con-
stantine's  as  tix)  small  and  raised  a  grander  edifice.  Procopius,
however,  in  his  Pe  .-Jidi/ic.  Justin.,  whilst  recording  that  this
emperor  built  the  walls  of  Bethlehem  (6  8),  does  not  mention  any
basilica  there  of  his  construction,  a.s,  had  there  been  one,  he  must
have  done.  Probably  Justinian  only  added  to  Constantine's
church,  and  the  building  is,  therefore,  the  most  ancient  church
in  Palestine  and  one  of  the  most  ancient  in  the  world.  The  fine
mosaics  are  from  the  court  of  the  Kmperor  Manuel  Comnenus
(«Vr<i  1169  A.I).),  and  the  rafters  by  Philip  of  Burgundy  (in  1482).

1  In  the  latter  two  passages  Ephrathite  means,  of  course,  '  of
Ephrath[.ihr=  Bethlehem.  It  is  interesting  that  in  PKF(^,  Jan.
1898,  .Schick  attempts  to  prove  that  Ramathaim-rophini,  the
town  of  Samuel  'an  Ephrathite,"  was  in  the  neighbourhood  of
Bethlehem.  'Ephrathite'  in  i  S.  1 1  probably  means  Ephraimite
(cp  Jadg.  125  where  for  'n"J2K  ®b  has  E</)pafleiTi)«  but  (S*L  «
Tov  Et^patfi).

36  561


BETH-MERH

Under  the  chancel  is  the  (irotto  of  the  Nativity,  called
also  the  Milk-Clrotto  and  the  (Irotto  of  our  I-ady,
'  mghAret  el  halib'  and  '  mghAret-es-Seiyidc.'  Wc  have
seen  the  precariousness  of  the  tradition  which  sanctions
it :  it  is  only  prolxible  that  Jesus  was  Ixirn  in  a  cave,  and
there  is  nothing  to  prove  that  this  was  the  cave,  for  the
site  lay  desolate  for  three  centuries.

Among  recent  works,  consult  Tobler'*  monograph,  Ptthldtrnt
in  J'aliistina,  and  Palmer,  '  I>a»  jetzige  iicthlchcni,'  iCDl'V
1789^,  with  map  an<t  name-lists.

2.  Bethlehem  of  Zebulun  (Josh.  19 15,  Battf^oi'  [B]),
now  lieil  l.ahm,  7  m.  NW.  of  Nazareth.  '  a  miserable
village  among  oak  woods'  (Gudrin,  CaliUe,  1  303  ;  Rob.
liR  8113).  In  the  Talmud  it  receives  the  designation
.Tns,  perhaps  a  corruption  for  ,Tn:i:,  '  of  Nazareth '
(NeuV>auer,  G^og.  Talm.  189/.)  The  combination  of
two  names  so  famous  in  the  Gos|x.-l  history  is  remark-
able. Most  scholars  take  this  Bethlehem  to  have  Ixhjii
the  home  and  burial-place  of  the  judge  Ibzan  (Judg.
128  10).  Joscphus  and  Jewish  tradition  assign  hint  to
liethlchcni  Judah  {Ant.  v.  7  13).  G.  A.  S.

BETHLOMON  (BaiGAcomcon  [A]),  i  Esd.  5i7  =
Ezra'Jji,  Hkihikhkm,  §  2.

BETH  -  MAACHAH  (nDin?TI'3),  2.S.  2O14.  See
Ani;i.-i(i.iii-M.\.\(:iiAH.

BETH-MARCABOTH  (nbanr^H  n'3,  §  96— ».^..

'the  house  of  chariots')  and  H A/AK-SfSAlI  ("^VH
np-ID,  — i.e. ,  '  station  of  horses  ' )  are  mentioned  together
in  Josh.  195/  (P)  in  the  list  of  Siineonite  towns.

The  (P  readings  are  :  for  Belh-marcal)Oth  ;  in  Josh.  19 5  3ai9-
lia\fptP  [B],  -OapL^apxaaPwO  |.\],  /3»)fla>iaAvaaxa>»  1 1-l  ;  in  I  Ch.
431,  where  the  Hebrew  article  is  omitted,  Pai0fiapttiiui0  [H],
-PXa^  (cai  f>/fiapia/3u>S  [L],  -0''  ijiap\afiw6  l.\].  For  Ha^ir-susah  ;
in  Josh.  1!*  5  <Tap<Tov<Tttf  [B],  actpaovaifj.  [\],  .\|<Talp<Tou<rif(I.I ;
in  I  Ch.  4  31,  Hazar-susim  [see  l>el(jw|  rjfii(TvtTt<Topafi  (B],  >)^i<rvf
t'wl  opan [B^'l>],  riiiiavfoxTipi  [A],  aafpaovai  \\.].

The  names  seem  to  indicate  posts  of  war-horses  and
chariots,  such  as  Solomon  is  said  to  have  established
(i  K.  919IO26).  The  two  places  may  possibly  be
identical  respectively  with  Maumannah  and  Sansan-
N.MI,  •  cities '  in  the  Ncgcb  towards  Edom.  The
latter  are  the  older  names  ;  for  Madniannah,  at  least,
appears  in  i  Ch.  249  (which  belongs  to  the  list  of  pre-
e.xilic  settlements  of  the  Calebites),  whilst  it  is  imjKjssible
to  assign  a  very  early  date  to  i  Ch.  431,  where  lieth-
marcabolh  and  Hazak-.sl-.si.m  (cn^O  nsn)  are  mentioned
as  Simeonite  towns  '  before  the  reign  of  Uavid. '  That
the  two  places  actually  were  regular  stations  for  horses
and  chariots  may  be  taken  for  granted  ;  but  it  may  be
questioned  whether  they  were  so  before  jxjst-exilic  tunes,
when  the  Persians  established  post-stations  on  the  route
from  the  Shfiphelah  into  Egypt  (by  (iaza  to  Pelusiuni).'
On  this  view  Sansannah  may  very  well  be  the  modern
Simsim,  a  village  in  an  olive-grove  on  the  road  from
Eleutheropolis  to  Ciaza  (9^  m.  NE.  from  the  latter
town),  and  Madniannah  may  be  conjectured  to  be  the
mcxlern  K'hdn  Yunus,  14  m.  S\\ .  from  Gaza  (.so
Gu(^rin,  ///</.  2  230).  A'hdn  Yi'inits  has  always  lieen
an  important  station.  It  may  te  noted  that  in  the  time
of  Micah  (1  13)  Lachish  (about  8  m.  from  Simsim)  also
was  a  chariot  city. C|)  Makc.XBOTH.  w.  R.  s.

BETH-MEON  (pI'O  n'5),  Jer.  4823.  See  Baal-
Mr-oN.

BETH-MERHAK,  AV  'a  place  that  was  afar  oft,"
RV"'*.'-  'the  Far  House,'  (pn")^n  n'3,  CN  OiKtxj
Tt)J  MAKRAN  [BAL],  procul  a  domo).  Beih-merhak
is  either  the  proper  name  (so  Ges."-",  BOB  doubtfully), —
in  which  case  the  name  is  Beth-hammerhak,  like  lieth-
haccerem, — or  a  description  (Iav.,  The.,  Ke.,  Kau.  US,
'  the  last  house ' )  of  the  place  outside  Jerusalem  where
David  waited  with  his  attendants  until  the  people  and  the
body-guard  had  passed,  2  S.  15  17  (on  the  text,  which
is  doubtful,  see  Dr.  HPSm.  and  KIo.  ad  Av. ).

1  It  is  evident  that  chariots  went  down  to  Eg>T)t  by  this  way
at  least  as  early  as  the  eighth  cent.  B.C. Cp  Gen.  465  Mic.  1 13.

S6a


BBTH-MILLO

BETH-MILLO  (SiVp  n^3),  Judg.  96  RV^-;  see
Jekusaijim.

BETH-NIMRAH  (H^pj  n*2.  perhaps  '  place  of  pure

water';  cp  Ar.  tuiviir.  Ass.  namri,  'transparent';  but
sec NlMKIM :iiul XaMKS, §104; Nu.  3236 NAMRAM

[I5l'l.  amBran  [A],  [n]a/w.  [1-]:  Josh.  1327  bainBan-
aBraLISJ.  BHeANA/v\pA[l-J,  BhGamna  [A]),  or  Niinrah
(Nu.  323  namBra  [B],  -MR-  L^'J'  amBram  [A],  mam-
Bran  [L]).  one  of  the  Aniorite  cities  which  were  after-
wards 'built'  by  Gad  (Nu.  3236),  is  the  ^rjOvafxfipii
and  Bethaynnaris  of  Eusebius  and  Jerome  (  OS1j2  43 ;  ib.
102  i).  a  village  still  extant  in  their  day.  about  5  R.  m.
N.  from  Livias  (Rktii-Hakan.  q.v.),  the  |-ioi  n"3  and
TD3  n"3  of  the  Talmud  (cp  Del.  ad  loc  ),  the  modern
Nimrin,  a  well-watered  oasis  on  the  brink  of  the  Jordan
valley  some  13^  miles  E.  of  Jordan  (cp  Baed.  /'«/.(•''  162).
Beth-nimrah  is  nowhere  mentioned  under  this  name  in
or  outside  of  Numbers  and  Joshua,  but  it  is  identified
by  many  modern  critics  with  the  waters  of  NiMRiM  (q.  v. ),
and,  as  stated  elsewhere  (BETHANY,  2),  Beth-nimrah
may  be  the  original  of  the  variants  Bethany,  Bethabara,
in  J 11.  ]28.

BETHORON  (Judith 4 4),  RV  Beth-horon  [q.v.].

BETH-PALET,  or  (Neh.  II26)  Beth-phelet,  RV
always  Bethpelet  (t27S"n*5,  'house  of  escape"),  an
unknown  Calebite  town  (cp  Pelet  [i],  i  Ch.  247),  on  the
Edomite  border  of  Judah,  Josh.  1;")27  (Baic})aAaA  [B],
BAie(t)AAe0  [A],  BHe4>eA.  [I-]),  mentioned  in  the  list
of  Judahite  villages  (see  Ezk.v,  ii.  §  5  [/'],  §  15  \i\a)  ;
Neh.  11 26  (BhBc1)aAt  [S'=-^  ■">•'•],  BHe(})AAAT  [L],  om.
BS*A).  For  the  gentilic  Paltite  ('c'^sn),  corruptly
Pki.onite  (i),  see  Pai.tite.

BETH-PAZZEZ  ((*-VSTI''5),  an  unknown  point  on
the  border  of  Issachar,  Josh.  192i  (BhrCA4)HC  [B],
BAiect)ACHe  [A],  BhGcJjacchc  [L]).  Compare  the
equally  obscure  name  Happizzkz.

BETH-PEOR  (nWS  Jl*?,  oiKOC  (t)OrwR  [BAFL]),  a
placenamedin  1)1.829  446  346  Josh.  1820.  Injosh.l32o
(BAl9cJ)oroOR  [BL],  Be0-  [A])  it  is  enumerated  among
the  cities  of  Reuben  ;  in  Dt.  829  446  the  ravine  (k';)  in
front  of  C^ic)  it  is  mentioned  as  the  place  where  Israel
was  encamped  when  the  Deuteronomy  discourses  were
delivered  ;  and  in  Dt.  346  the  same  ravine  is  mentioned
as  the  place  of  Moses'  burial.  The  exact  site  is  un-
certain ;  but  it  seems  clear  that  it  cannot  have  been
very  far  from  the  Pisgah  ridge.  Eusebius  states  (C>5('-'
23378)  that  Be^<^070/)  was  near  Mouut  ^o-^op  (cp  '  the
top,  or  head,  of  Peor,"  nivsn  vivtr\,  Xu.  2828),  opposite
to  Jericho,  6  m.  above  Livias  [i.e..  Tell  er-Rameh  ;  see
Beth-haran)  ;  and  (O^C-'  21847)  that  Mount  ^oywp
was  opposite  to  Jericho,  on  the  side  of  the  road  leading
up  from  Livias  to  Heshbon,  a  part  of  it  being  7  m.  from
the  latter  place  ( 1 15 1-2).  If  we  may  judge  from  the  map
in  the  Survey  of  E.  Palest. ,  the  ascent  from  Livias  to
Heshbon  would  be  made  naturally  either  along  the
Wady  Hesban  (cp  Palmer,  Desert  of  the  Exodus,  525/;
Tristram,  Moab,  346)  or  along  the  more  circuitous  road
N.  of  this,  said  by  Tristram  (p.  343)  to  be  the  one
ordinarily  used.  The  statements  of  Eusebius,  if  correct,
would  thus  point  to  a  site  near  one  of  these  two
roads,  some  four  or  five  miles  N.  of  Neba.  The
•head  of  Peor' (Nu. 23 28)  might  be  an  eminence  in
the  same  locality.  The  opinion  that  this  was  the  site
is  supported  by  the  mention,  in  Josh.  18 20,  of  Beth-
j)eor  next  to  the  'slopes  (mt?K)  of  Pisgah,' — i.e.,  in
all  probability,  the  declivities  on  the  S.  side  of  the
Wady  'Ayun  Musa.  The  '  ravine  in  front  of  Beth-
poor'  might  thus  be  the  Wady  Hesbfin.  Conder
\fRFQ  1882,  p.  85/;  Heth  and  Moah,^'^)  146  /)
suggests  a  site  farther  to  the  S. — e.g.,  on  the  crest  of  a
hill  above  "Ain  cl-Minyeh,  8  m.  SW.  of  Neba,  com-
manding (see  Nu.  2328  ;  and  242  compared  with  25 1)

563


BETH-REHOB

an  extensive  view  of  the  lower  valley  of  the  Jordan.
Peor,  however,  the  spot  at  which  Baal  of  Peor  was
worshipped  (which  can  hardly  have  been  far  from
Beth-peor),  would  seem  (Nu.25i-3)  to  have  been  more
readily  accessible  from  the  plain  of  Shittim  (the  (jhOr-
es-Seiscbfin)  than  'Ain  el-Minyeh  would  be;  Nu.  2828
compared  with  v.  \\  makes  it  probable  also  that  it  was
less  distant  from  Pisgah  ;  whilst,  as  we  have  seen,  what-
ever other  indications  we  jx>ssess  point  to  a  site  N.  of
the  Nebo-Pisgah  ridge  (the  modern  Neba,  Ras  Siaghah),
rather  than  to  one  S.  of  it.  Until,  therefore,  it  has
been  shown  that  there  is  no  eminence  in  the  neighbour-
hood of  the  Wady  Hesban  conmianding  the  prospect
implied  in  Nu.  2828  and  242  (ci)25i),  it  is  here  that
the  ancient  Beth-peor  must  be  sought.  Travellers  will
perhaps  explore  this  region  with  the  view  of  ascertaining
whether  there  is  such  a  height. Cp  Peor. S.  R.  d.

BETHPHAGE  (BHe4)ArH  [Ti.  WH],  Bf.thpiiage],
a  locality  near  the  Mt.  of  Olives,  on  a  small  hill  on  the
road  from  Jerusalem  to  Jericho.  It  is  mentioned
together  with  Bethany  \(].v.,  i],  and  probably  lav  to
the  E.  of  it  (Mt.  2I1  Mk.lli  Lk.1929).  Orige'n  in
Mt.  (vol.  xvi.  chap.  17)  describes  it  as  a  place  of  priests*
(c]5  05('-*  188  75).  According  to  various  passages  of
the  Talmud,  Beth-phage  was  the  name  of  the  district
extending  from  the  base  of  Olivet  to  the  walls  of
Jerusalem,  and,  according  to  the  Talm.  Bab.  {Men.  xi.  2,
78  b),  Beth-phage  was  one  of  the  limits  of  the  Sabbatic
zone  around  Jerusalem  (cpGEZER),  whence  CI.  Ganneau
would  identify  it  with  Kefr  et-Tur  (see  PEFQ  1878,
p.  60  ;  but  see  Beth-Zur).

The  current  explanation  of  the  name  is  a  little  more
plausible  than  that  of  Bethany  (q.v.).  BrjOtpay-r}  (the
"jxa  n'3  of  Talm. )  would  naturally  mean  '  place  of
young  figs'  ;  cp  :s  in  Cant.  2 13  with  Delitzsch's  note.
This,  however,  may  be  no  more  than  a  popular  ety-
mology. Nestle  (P/ii/.  Sac.  1896;  cpZlVT,  etc.  xl.
148)  is  convinced  that  the  narrative  of  the  barren  fig-
tree,  which  in  Mt. 21 17-19  Mk.  11 12-14  '^  localised  in
Bethany,  has  arisen  out  of  this  faulty  popular  explanation
of  Beth-phag^.  It  has  often  been  remarked  that  there
is  a  startling  peculiarity  in  this  narrative  as  compared
with  the  other  evangelical  traditions.  See  also  A.
Meyer,  /esu  Muttersprache,  166.

The  mediaeval  Bethphage  was  discovered  by  Guillemot
and  Clermont-Ganneau  in  1877  between  the  Mount  of
Olives  and  Bethany.  In  his  account  of  this  discovery
the  latter  scholar  offers  the  suggestion  that  the  '  Village
of  the  Mount  of  Olives  '  [Kefr  et-  Tiir),  which  admittedly
stands  on  the  site  of  some  important  ancient  village,
may  be  the  Bethphage  of  the  Gospels  and  of  the  Talmud.
This  view  would  clear  up  the  Talmudic  statement
respecting  the  Sabbatic  zone  already  mentioned.  See
PEFQ  1878,  pp.  51-61.

BETH-PHELET  (t:^S-n^3),  Neh.  11 26  AV.  See
Beth-palet.

BETH-RAPHA  (XDVn*?),  in  an  obscure  genealogy
of  Chelub  (=  Caleb),  iCh.  4i2  (BaGraian  [B],  -pe<})A
[A],  Bh0RA(})AN  [L]).  No  place  of  this  name  is
known  ;  Rapha  appears  to  be  a  clan-name,  unconnected
of  course  with  'Rcphaim.'  Rapha  [2]  appears  to
occur  as  a  name  in  Benj.\min  (§  9,  ii.  /3).

BETH-REHOB  [irr\,  n^3,  pocoB  [BAL]).  an
Aramaian  town  and  district,  which  with  Zob.\H  and
M.\ACAH  sent  men  to  the  help  of  Ammon  against
David  (2S.  106,  ih.  8,  RiaiOB  [roaB  A];  BaiBraaB
[L  in  both]).2 See  Aram,  §§  5,  6. It  is  stated  in  Judg.

y  In  the  Talmud,  k:s  also  means  ajaw  or  cheek,  and  from  Dt.
18  3  we  learn  that  the  cheeks  (Syr.  has  KJTS)  belonged  to  the
portion  of  the  priests  (cp  Reland,  653).  Hence^  on  the  .supposi-
tion that  IJcth-phage  meant  '  place  of  cheeks,'  it  was  presumed
that  there  was  a  school  of  priests  here.

2  A  reference  to  a  similar  defeat  at  the  hands  of  Saul  in  i  S.
1447  (cp  ©  Pai6tu}(>  [B],  -pow/Si  [L],  Pe0<op  [A])  is  open  to
suspicion  ;  see  Saul,  §  3,  and  cp  Wi.  (jy/  1  142^;


BBTHSAIDA

18 38  that  Laish-Dan  was  in  'the  valley  that  lieth  by
IJcth-ri'liob '  {oiKOi  /)oo/3  [H],  o.  pow^  [L],  o.  rwfi  [A]).
Bcth-rehob  is  doubtless  the  Kkiiob  of  Nu.  13ai,  which,
according  to  P,  was  the  most  northern  jxjint  reached
by  the  sf)ics*  (/>a«/^  [l^]-  po<^^  t'J)-  A  connection
with  the  Asherite  Rkhob  (i.  2,  3)  is  improbable  (though
not  injpossible,  see  Akam,  §  5).*

The  exact  site  of  Heth-rehob  is  uncertain.  It  can
hardly  be  the  JcIk-I  Hunm,  finely  situated  above  the
great  plain  of  Hiilch  to  the  W.  of  Bflnias,  and  re-
markable for  the  remains,  partly  ancient,  of  a  fortress
(so  Kob.  B/e  4370/.).  Others  have  thought  of  Kul'at
liusra,  about  1  hour  N.  of  Dan  ;  but  may  not  the
site  of  the  fmvn  Ik'th-rehob  be  placed  quite  as  reason-
ably at  Hani.is  itself  ='  (see  CiCSAKEA,  §  7/.)?

BETHSAIDA  (BneCAl^A  [Ti].  BhGcaiAa  [WH] ;

Syr.  J^> fcs-fci  ;  place  of  tishing  or  hunting). Josephus

J  .. tells us {Ant.xs''\\\.2i) that the  Tetrarch

■  ***■  I'hilip  raised  a  village  (koim'/)  liethsaida  on
the  Lake  of  Gcniu-sareth  to  the  rank  of  a  city,  and  called
it  Julias,  after  Julia  the  daughter  of  Aujjustus.  Else-
where he  descrites  Julias  as  in  the  Lower  Gaulonitis
(/^/ii.  9i),  close  to  the  Jordan  ( I'if.  72),  near  where  the
latter  runs  into  the  lake  {BJ'\V\.  IO7).  Pliny  (v.  15)  and
Jerome  (Comm.  Mt.  I613)  also  place  it  E.  of  Jordan.
In  conformity  with  these  data,  the  site  has  been  fixed  on
the  fertile  and  very  grassy  plain  El-Buteiha,  in  the  NE.
corner  of  the  lake,  either  at  et-Tell,  a  mound  with
many  ruins,  close  to  the  Jordan  where  the  latter  issues
from  the  hills,  or  at  Mas'adiyeh,  by  the  mouth  of  the
river  (to  which  Thomson  [Land  nnd  Book,  ed.  1877,
360]  heard  the  name  Bethsaida  attached  by  Bedouin).
Fish  abound  on  either  side  of  the  Jordan's  mouth  and
(presumably)  in  the  river  itself.  There  can  be  little
doubt  that  this  was  the  '  city  called  Bethsaida  '  (Lk.  9 10  ;
e/y  riirov  fprifiov  iroXews  Ka\oviJ.ivrj^  ^V^-  's  "ot  found  in
K'^-^BL,  etc. ,  which  reads  ds  iroXiv  KoXovfxivriv  ^r]d. ;
so  Ti.  \VH,  etc. )  to  which  Jesus  withdrew,  as  being
in  Philip's  jurisdiction,  when  he  heard  of  John's  murder
by  Antipas  (cp  Mt.  I413).  Lk.  places  near  it  the
feeding  of  the  five  thousand,  which  Mt.  (14  14^)  and
Mk.  (631^)  describe  as  in  a  desert  (i.e.,  uninhabited)
but  grassy  place  (Mt.  I419  Mk.  639  'green  grass,'  such
as  grows  in  the  Buteiha,  in  contrast  to  the  paler  herb-
age of  the  higher  and  drier  parts),  to  which  Jesus  pro-
ceeded by  boat,  followed  by  multitudes  on  foot.  J.
also  describes  the  scene  on  the  E.  shore  of  the  lake
(61),  and  says  'there  was  much  grass  in  the  place'
(v.  10).  A  site  on  the  Buteiha  suits  also  the  Bethsaida
of  Mk.  822,  for  Jesus  was  already  E.  of  Jordan  (v.  13)
and  went  thence  to  the  villages  of  Cassarea  Philippi
(v.  27).  All  interpreters  of  the  Gospels  are  virtually
agreed  about  this.

The  question  has  been  raised,  whether  there  was
not  a  second  Bethsaida. After  the  feeding  of  the  five

TVrv  f?  '  thousand,  Jesus,  it  is  said,  constrained  his
■  *^'  disciples  to  go  before  him  to  the  other  side
to  Bethsaida  (Mk.  645,  (is  t6  iripav  irpbs  §t]9.).  This
has  forced  some  scholars,  one  or  two  nmch  against
their  will  (Reland,  Pal.  653/:,  Henderson, /^rt/.  156/.),
to  conclude  that  there  was  a  Bethsaida  to  the  W.  of
Jordan,  either  a  suburb  of  Julias,  separated  from  it  by
the  river,  or  at  'Ain  Tabigha  (Rob.  LBR  358/.),  4  m.
along  the  coast,  where  there  is  a  b.ay  containing  fish
in  abundance,  and  the  modern  shrine  of  Sheikh  \-ily
es-Saiy<itf,  'Aly  of  the  Fishermen,  and  strong  streams
(F^wing).  But,  in  the  first  place,  the  phrase  '  to  go  to  the
other  side'  does  not  necessarily  imply  the  passage  from
the  E.  to  the  W.  coast  of  the  lake,  for  Josephus  speaks  of
'  sailing  over  '  {SifvtpanJJdriv)  from  Tiberias  to  Taricheae

1  The  mention  of  the  '  entrance  to  Hamath '  here  is  possibly
a  gloss  (cp  Moore,  Jud^.  399).

■■'  In  2S. 83  12  the  king  of  Zobah  is  called  'son  of  Rehob';
see  Hauauezer.

»  So  Thomson,  Land  and  Bcok,(^)7iS ;  Buhl,  Pai.  240;  Moore,
/•^r-  399-


BETH-SHEAN

(FiV,  59),  though  these  towns  lay  on  the  same  side;
and,  secondly,  Jesus  would  not  seek  agaiei  the  territories
of  Herod  Antipas  so  soon  after  leaving  them  for  those
of  Philip,  but  would  most  probably  return  to  what
Lk.  tells  us  he  had  just  chosen  as  his  lie.idquartt  rs.
We  may  \x  certain,  then,  that  the  Ikthsaida  of  Mk.  645
is  still  Itothsaida  Julias.

Nor  need  we  seek  for  another  in  the  '  liethsaida  of

Galilee'  to  which  the  Fourth  Gos[x;l  (1  44  [45]  122i)  says

a John  1 '''■''  ■'^"'^'''-■^'  I'eter,  and  Philip  Ix-longed.

f 112 ^ ^"  ''"''  '''"*^  °^  '^"^  Great  War  (66-70  A.D.)

'•*^  ■ the  name  Galilee  appears  to  have  been

extended  round  the  Lake  —  Josephus  calls  Judas  of
Gamala  the  Galilean  (.^«/.  xviii.  16) — and  at  e\cn  an
earlier  date  the  jurisdiction  of  the  ruler  of  Galilee  may
have  comprised  part  of  the  E.  coast  (cp  ///  xx.  4).
Besides,  a  town  which  lay  so  immediately  on  the  Jordan
might  easily  be  reckoned  to  Galilee.  In  any  case,
by  84  A.D.  the  E.  coast  was  definitely  attached  to  the
province,  and  Ptolemy  (v.  15),  writing  alx)ut  140,
places  Julias  'in  Galilee.'  That  being  so,  it  is  sijjni-
ficant  that  it  is  only  the  Fourth  Gospel  that  sj^aks
of  '  Bethsaida  of  Galilee.'  There  is,  therefore  (as  held
by  Wilson,  Recov.  of  Jerus.  ;  Thomson,  Land  and  Book,
ed.  1877,  372  _/;  Holtzmann, //^T',  1878,  pp.  383/.;
Furrer,  ZDPV  266  ff.;  Socin  and  Ben/inger  in  Baed.
ed.  1891,  p.  256;  GASm./JG4S7f-:  Buhl, /'a/.  241/:)
no  reason  conijx:lling  us  to  the  theory  of  a  second  or
western  Bethsaida.  It  is  interesting  that  the  disciple
of  Jesus  called  Philip  should  come  from  Philip's  Julias.

Karly  Christian  tradition  and  the  medi.-cval  works  of  travel
agree  in  showing  no  trace  of  more  than  one  Bettisaida.  The
site  shown  for  it,  however,  is  uncertain,  and  may  have  varied
from  age  to  age.  Eusebius  and  Jerome  define  it  only  as
on  the  Lake  (C?."^).  Epiphanius  (//ai-r.  ii.  51  13)  merely  says
it  was  not  far  from  Capernaum.  Willibald's  data  (722  A. P.),
which  place  it  on  his  journey  between  C;ipernaum  and  Chora-'in,
suit  the  E.  bank  of  the  Jordan  (in  spite  of  what  Robinson  says)
even  if  Chorazin  (y.v.)  be  Kerazeh,  but  Gergesa  (Khersa)  may
be  meant.

In  all  probability  Bethsaida  remained  locally  distinct
from  Julias  after  the  erection  of  the  latter  by  Philip.
The  custom  of  Jesus  was  not  to  enter  such  purely  Greek
towns  as  Julias  must  have  been  ;  yet,  according  to  Mt.
11 21,  he  did  many  'wonderful  works'  in  liethsaida.
Julias  had  fourteen  villages  round  about  it  (Jos.  .-/«/.
XX.  84).  Schumacher  suggests  for  Bethsaida  some  ruitis
on  the  Lake  called  el-'Araj,  which  were  joined  with
et-Tell  (Julias)  by  a  Roman  road  (ZDPr  9ig).

G.  A.  s.

BETHSAMOS  (B<M0ACMCoe  [A]),  i  Esd.5.8  AV ;
RV"'«-  .AZM.WKTII  {i/.v.,  i. ).

BETH-SHEAN  (JNy'Tl*?,  §  90,  cp  Ba-y-/i-.Sa-'d-ru,
i.e..  ^Nirn^3,  WMM  .-/.r.  u.  Eur.  153  ;  BaiGc^aJn
, pn-.-i.:--, [B.\L]),  or  Beth-shan  (ii.'-n*3,  in /<;//.?*

1.  i-osiuon.  ^.^.j^^.  BHecAN[Al,BAie.[L]).orBeth-
san  (i  Mace.  552  T2  40  {ptQaa.  (-A)]/),  niod.  Beisdn,
320  ft.  below  the  sea-level,  was  finely  situated  on  a  low
table-land  above  the  Jordan  valley,  at  the  mouth  of
the  W.  J.ilud,  which  leads  gently  up  from  the  Jordan
to  Zer'in  (Jezreel).  The  Jordan  itself  is  three  miles
ofr(cp  Zakkthan,  §  1)  ;  but  Beth-sh&in  was  unusually
well  supplied  with  water,  being  intersected  by  two
streams.  .Amid  the  extensive  ruins  rises  the  fell  of  the
ancient  fortress,  'a  natural  mound,  artificially  strength-
ened by  scarping  the  side*  (PEP  Mem.  2u>S).

The  illustration  given  in  the  Memoirs  of  the  Survey  will  enable
the  reader  to  divine  the  grandeur  of  the  prosptct  from  this
eminence.  '  The  eye  sweeps  from  four  to  ten  miles  of  the  plain
all  round,  and  follows  the  road  westward  to  Jezreel,  covers  the
thickets  of  Jordan  where  the  fords  lie,  .ind  ranges  the  edge  of  the
eastern  hills  from  Gadara  to  the  Jabbok '  (G.\Sm.  JJC  357).

This 'farthest-seeing, farthest-seen fortress' must

have been hard for the Israelites to conquer ; yet

„.  .  till  it  was  in  their  hands they  were  ex-

2.  History,  ^.i^jjgjj  from  one  of  the  main  roads  between
western  and  eastern  Palestine,  and  from  the  occupation
of  a  coveted  portion  of  the  Jordan  valley. That  Beth-

566


BETH-SHEAN

«;hean  was  included  in  one  of  the  prefectures  of  Solomon's
kinsjilom  is  certain  (i  K.  4  iz,  6  oIkos  Sav  and  [iaicra(l)ovT
—i.e.,  ly  'iff  'a  [B],  6  oikoj  crav  ami  ^edcrav  [A],  oIkos
aaav  and  ^aiOtr.  [L]).'  On  the  death  of  Saul,  on  the
other  hand,  we  find  it  in  the  hands  of  the  Philistines
(i  S.  31io,  jSai^e.u  [B],  12,  -dcrafj.  [B],  2  S.  21 12,  ^atO
[B])  ;  and,  though  Beth-shean  may  be  one  of  the
'cities  of  the  Jordan'  (i  S.  '.ilj,  corr.  text)  which  the
Israelites  deserted  after  the  battle  of  Gilboa,  it  is
equally  likely  that  it  was  still  a  Canaanitish  city  when
captured  by  the  Philistines.  We  know,  at  any  rate,
that  it  retained  its  Canaanite  population  for  some  time
after  the  Israelite  occupation  of  Palestine  (Judg.  1 27,
^aidrjX  [B],  ^eOffav  [L]  ;  Josh.  17",  Kcudoav  [B*''],
^aiOaav  [B""K],  16  ^aidaiirav  [B]).  It  may  possibly
have  been  as  late  as  the  time  of  David  that  this
great  fortress  fell  into  the  hands  of  the  Israelites.
Standing  on  the  road  from  Damascus  to  Egypt  and
also  from  Damascus  by  Shechem  to  Jerusalem  and
Hebron,  it  liad  a  commercial  as  well  as  a  military
importance  which  would  have  attracted  the  notice  of
such  a  keen-sighted  king  as  David.

From  the  Macedonian  period  onwards  Beth-shean
bore  the  strange  Greek  name  Scythopolis  (see  Judg.  1  27,
©  (3.  •^  eariv  I,KvdCov  ttjXis  ;  2  Mace.  1229-31,  etc.),
which  probably  records  the  fact  (or  belief)  that  some
of  the  Scythian  invaders  of  the  seventh  cent.  B.C.  (see
ScYTHi.\.N"s)  had  settled  here.  In  NT  times  it  was  one
of  the  most  important  cities  of  the  Dkc.-M'OI.is  (^.v.,  §2).

BETH-SHEMESH (::^D-J' n*2,  §95/—/.^.,  'temple
ofthcsun'— BaiGCAMYC  [B.\L]  ;  gcntilic  '•L^'Pt^nT!''?,
6  £V  /3.  [B.\],  6  eK  /3.  [L],  in  i  S.  614,  ''.  iS  ^aLdcra/jiv-
ffsiT-qi  [BL],  ^edda/jLvaiTijs  [A],  EVBeth-shemite).
I.  Bethshemesh  or  Ik-shemesh  (C'Ow'  Tl?,  Josh.  I941.
TTOAlC  CAMeC  [AL],  TTOAeiC  CAMM^YC  [B]).  a
Levitical  city  (Josh.  21 16,  BeGCAMec  [A],  thn  CAMec
[L]  ;  I  Ch.  659  [44].  BacamyC  [B])  on  the  borders  of
Judah  (Josh.  IT)  10,  noAiN  hAiOY  [B.\L])  but  assigned
to  Dan  (Josh.  I941),  is  the  modern  '.Ain  Shcms,
917  feet  above  sea  level,  on  the  south  side  of  the  broad
and  beautiful  and  still  well -cultivated  W.  es-Sarar,
opposite  Zorah  and  two  'm.  from  it  :  'a  noble  site  for
a  city  ;  a  low  plateau  at  the  junction  of  two  fine  plr'ns'
(Robinson).  It  is  a  point  in  the  lowland  on  the  road
from  Philistia  (Kkron)  to  the  hill-country  of  Judah
( I  Sam.  6  9  i2h  13  15  19  I3ee9atj.vs  [A],  i2'i  20  '^eOaa.  [A]),
and  probably  was  an  ancient  sanctuary,  since  the  field
of  Joshua  the  Beth-shemite  was  for  some  time  during
the  Philistine  domination  the  resting-place  of  the  ark.
In  truth,  it  is  difficult  not  to  identify  it  with  the  Sama-
sana  of  the  Palestinian  lists  of  Rameses  II.  (A'/^C-*627  ;
WMM  .4s.  u.  Eur.  166)  and  Rameses  III.  2  [RPV)
639),  whose  sanctuary  may  be  presumed  to  be  connected
with  the  myth  of  S.VMSON  [q.v.).  It  was  at  Beth-
shemesh that  Amaziah  of  Judah  was  defeated  and
made  prisoner  by  Jehoash,  king  of  Israel  (2  K.  14u-i3,
II  pT]d<TafJi.ve  [A],  13  ^€0.  [.\],  2  Ch.  2.")2i-23).  According
to  the  Chronicler,  it  was  one  of  the  cities  in  the  lowland
of  Judah  taken  by  the  Philistines  from  Ahaz,  '  king  of
Israel'  (2Ch.  28iS).  The  place  was  still  shown  in
the  days  of  Eusebius  and  Jerome,  who  give  its  position
as  10  R.m.  E.  of  Eleutheropolis  on  the  road  to  Xico-
polis — a  statement  which  suits  the  identification  given
above. There  are  many  traces  of  ancient  buildings.

2.  An  unidentified  city  within  the  territory  of  Naph-
tali.  apparently  in  its  northward  portion  (Josh.  19 38,
0€<ra-anvi  [B],  OacrfMoi'^  [.A],  fitOa-afii^  [L]).  From  Judg.
I33  ijieda-afj-vi  [.\])  we  learn  that,  along  with  Bethanath,
its  population  continued  to  be  chiefly  Canaanite.

3.  An  unidentified  city  on  the  border  of  Issachar
(Josh.  1922,  /3ai^(r/xas  [-A],  ^i^o-a/MS  [L]),  perhaps  =  (2),
if  the  latter  lay  in  the  extreme  south  of  Naphtali.

1  The  double  mention  of  Beth-shean  probably  ari.ses  from  a
corruption  of  the  text.

3  '1  he  latter  was  discovered  by  Sayce  at  Medlnet  Habu  in  1892.

567


BETHUL

4.  A  city  of  Egypt,  mentioned  in  Jer.  43 13,  (rjXtou
TToXews  [BNAQ])  '  he  shall  break  the  obelisks  of  I^'th-
shemesh  in  the  land  of  Egypt. '  It  is  commonly  supposed
(t'.i,--. ,  by  Griffith  in  Hastings'  DB)  that  what  is  meant  is
Heliopolis,  the  city  of  the  sun  (see  On)  ;  but  n'3  is
simply  dittographed  from  nu  in  nuss.  We  should
read  cdc  nuso,  '  pillars  of  the  sun '  or  obelisks  (Wi.
AT  Unters.  80/  ;  Che.  Intr.  Is,  102,  n.  2).

BETH-SHITTAH  (HtSt^H  71*3  — «.^.,  'place  of
acacias')  is  mentioned  in  Judg.  722  (Bh9C€At&  [B],
BACeeTTA  [A],  B&ieACeTTA  \yA)  as  a  point  to  which
the  panic-stricken  Midianites  fled  before  Gideon.  It
was  on  the  way  toward  Zererah  (see  Zaretiian,
begin. ),  but  has  not  been  identified  ;  probably  it  was
well  down  in  the  Jordan  valley,  at  the  mouth  of  some
wady  where  acacias  flourished.  The  identification  with
Shatta  on  the  north  side  of  the  W.  Jalud,  5  m.  NW.  of
Beisan  and  6  m.  E.  of  Zer'in  (cp  Rob.,  Conder,  etc.)
has  little  to  recommend  it :  it  lies  much  too  near  the
supposed  scene  of  the  surprise.  More,  perhaps,  could
be  said  for  Beisan.  Others  compare  el-Meshetta  (see
iMDPV,  1895,  pp.  8i  ff.;  Schumacher,  ZDPV,
1564  writes  mashatta)  14  m.  SSE.  of  Jogl>ehah.  The
whole  narrative  is,  however,  composite  (see  Judges,  §  8),
and  the  Heb.  construction  favours  the  assumption  that
Zererah  does  not  belong  to  the  same  source  as  Beth-
shittah.  In  J  Midian  flees  east  from  Shechem  to  the
other  side  of  the  Jordan,  whereas  from  v.  24  it  appears
that  in  E's  narrative  they  turn  S.  (to  Zarethan)  through
the  Jordan  valley,  where  they  are  intercepted  by  the
Ephraimites  (cp  Moore,  Judg.  212).

BETH-SURA  (h  BeBcoYPA  [A]),  i  Mace.  46i;
2  Mace.  11  5  k\'  Bethsuron. See  Beth-zur.

BETH-TAPPUAH  (msri-n^3.  §  103— ?.<?.,  'place
of  tappoah'  ;  sec  Ai'I'i.e),  a  town  in  the  hill-country  of
Judah  (Josh.  1553.  BaiGaxoy  [^^l  BeeeAnct)OYe  [A].
Bh09a4)-  [E])i  having  a  traditional  connection  with  its
greater  neighbour  Hebron  (i  Ch.  243,  see  Tappuah,  i),
and  very  possibly  identical  with  the  fortified  town  called
Taphon  [q.v.)  in  i  Mace.  950.  If  the  similarity  of
names,  the  vicinity  of  Hebron,  and  the  fruitfulness  of
the  district  prove  anything,  the  modern  Teffi'ih  is  the
ancient  Beth-tappuah.  The  village  so  named  is  3i  m.
W.  by  N.  from  Hebron,  and  stands  on  a  high  hill,  the
slopes  of  which  are  planted  with  aged  olive-trees;
indeed,  the  whole  of  the  Wddy  Tuffdh  abounds  in  fruit-
trees  of  all  kinds.  Traces  of  old  buildings  remain,  and
there  are  two  ancient  wells  (Rob.  LBR  2428  ;  Gu(5rin,
JudJe,  3374).  Several  ancient  sites  named  Beth  have
lost  this  prefix.  Thus  the  ,tcj  n'3  of  Xu.  32  36  is  modern
Nimrln.

The  notices  of  Eus.  and  Jer.  (a?  235  17  104  17  ;  cp  156  20)
are  of  interest  only  as  showing  that  there  was  another  place
on  the  confines  of  Palestine  and  Egypt  bearing  the  same  name.
Whatever  the  fruit  called  t.-vppuah  was  (see  Afi'Le),  it  was  as
common  in  Palestine  as  quinces  and  apricots  are  now.

BETHUEL  ('PN-'in?,  for  "pX-inO,  '  man  of  El  ?— cp
Methushael,  and  .see  Caimtks,  §  7  ;  hardly  for  Ass.
bit  Hi,  '  house  of  a  deity  '  ; BaBoyhX  [.ADEL]).

1.  B.  Nahor  ;  father  of  Laban  and  Rebekah  (Gen.
2222/.  24 15  [J]).  In  Gen.  252o285  [P]  he  is  called  an
'  Aramaean,'  as  is  also  his  son  Laban  in  31 2024.  See
Aram,  §  3.

2.  See  Bethul.

BETHUL  (>in3),  aSimeonitetown(Josh.  194,  BoyAa
[B],  BaGoyA  [AE]).  called  Bethuel  ("PN-IDa,  BaGoyn
[B],  -oyA  [A1.  -OYhA  [E])  in  i  Ch.  430,  and  corruptly
Chesii,  (^"-03)  in  11  Josh.  1030  (BaiGhA  [B],  XAceip[A].
CeieiA  [E]).  The  form  'yif.ni  may  perhaps  be  classed
with  Penuel ;  for  elision  of  N  cp  Hamul.  It  is
doubtless  the  Bethel  C^K-n^a.  ^aidr/X  [AL],  ^aiOaovp
—i.e.,  Beth-zur [B])i  of  i  S.  30 27,  mentioned  along  with
1  The  situation  of  Beth-zur  is  less  suitable  (We.,  Dr.).
568


BBTHULIA

Jattir  and  other  places  in  the  Negeb  ;  but  the  site  has
not  yet  been  identified.  Tiiere  was  probably  a  liethel
near  tjaza. '

BETHULIA  (BctyAoya  [I5XA1,  [the  preferable
reading;  but  B&itoyA{)YA  l'*'*!-  BaityAoya  C^XA]
are  also  found];  Hinmi.i.i  [\'g.];  «N'J>  f^.^^),  the
centre  of  the  action  in  tlie  book  of  Judith  ('2 21  [X*]
46  [N],  BaitoyAia  6iof.  h7 iff.).  In  the  shorter
version  of  the  narrative  its  place  is  taken  by  Jeru-
salem, and  there  is  little  doubt  that  Bethulia  (properly
Bctylua)  represents  Sk-H'S,  "•*  the  house  of  God — viz.,
Jerusalem  (sec  Judith,  ii. ).  So  already  Reuss,  who,
however,  together  with  Welte,  derived  the  name  from
n'i'?i«  n'3.  liertholdt's  conjecture  .tSw3,  '  virgin  of
Yahw(!>,'  may  b<!  worth  noticing.'

Accordingto  the  representations  of  the  book  (cp  4673),
Bethulia lay near Jezret;!, upon a rock  by a valley, i
commanding  the  pa.sses  to  the  S.  (so  Hulil,  J\il.  201, !
n.  627). \'arious  id(.'ntifications  have  been  suggested. |

Some  have  sought  for  it  near  the  nioilern  Kefr  Kud,  formerly  j
Capharcotia,  NE.  of  the  plain  of  Dolhan  (Hi.,  cp  also  Kiehm) ;
other  suKRestions  are  the  fortress  SAnur  (Grove  in  Smith's  DB),  \
Kh.  Haifiik  el-Mellah  (Marta,  quoted  in  ZOPl'  12  117),  lenln
(Ew.),  IJeit  Ufa  (Schultz),  and  plausibly  no  doubt  ('-  and  tii  being
often  confounded),  Mithiliyeh  or  Misilia  (Conder  ;  Socin,  also
inclines  to  this  view,  Biid.  (2),  226).  More  recently,  Torrey
(Joum.  Am.  Or.  Soc.  20  160 j:  ['99])  argues  ably  in  favour  of
Shechem.

So  large  and  important  a  place  as  Bethulia — with  its
rulers  and  ciders  (61416),  its  streets  and  towers  (72232),
and  its  siege,  lasting  for  foiir-and-thirty  days,  by  an
immensely  suijerior  army  (720) — cannot  reasonably  be
identified  with  any  small  and  insignificant  locality.  It
remains  to  be  added  that  the  mention  of  Jerusalem
and  Bethulia  as  two  distinct  places  (cp  46  I55/)  is
probably  to  Ije  assigned  to  a  time  when  the  identity  of
the  ideal  Bethulia  with  Jerusalem  was  forgotten.

s.  A.  C.

BETHZACHARIAS,  AV  (by  misprint?)  B.\th-
z.\cnAKi.\s(BeezAXApiA[A],  BA'tB.  [NV] ;  Jos.  Beez.,
BHT2.)r  the  scene  of  the  defeat  of  Judas  the  Maccabee
by  Lysias,  and  of  the  death  of  his  brother  Eleazar
(i  Mace.  632/).  Its  position  is  defined  by  Josephus
{An/,  xii.  94)  as  70  stadia  (N. )  from  Bethsur  ;  it  is  thus
represented  by  the  modern  Bi-i/-Sakdrid  (described  by
Robinson'-'  8283/.  and  PEF  Mem.  835108).

BETHZATHA  (BhOzaGa).  the  reading  adopted  by
Ti.WH  in  Jn.  62,  where  TR  has  Bictiiksu.v.  For  the
evidence,  see  WH.  ii.  App.  76  :  perhaps  the  purest
form  would  be  'R-qe^aj.da.,  '  the  place  of  the  olive '  (cp
Br.zi.TH).

BETH-ZUR  (1-1  Vrr-a,  BeecOYP  [AL],  §  96,  '  house
of  rock,'  or.  on  the  analogy  of  Belh-el,  '  house  of  /.ur'
— a  divine  name.  Nestle,  Eigennatitcn,.\7,r\.  i  ;  Honunel
AHT  319;  see  Zuk),  a  city  in  the  hill-country  of
Judah,  mentioned  between  Halhul  and  Gedor-»  (josh.
1558.  /3at^(Tocp  [B] ;  cp  i  Ch.  245.  where  Bethzur—
7e5(Toi'/)  [B],  [itjOarovp  [.\L]— is  the  'son'  of  Maon),  is
stated  in  2  Ch.  11 7  {^aiOffovpa  [B],  rr)v  ^ai0(T.  [.\],
Tr)v  jiaidffovp  [L])  to  have  lx;en  fortified  by  Rehoboam.
It  was  head  of  a  district  in  Nehemiah's  time  (Xeh.
3 16,  ^-rjffop  [BN],  jBijdffovp  [.\]).  FrcMjuently  an  object
of  struggle  in  the  Macc.abean  wars  (r;  ^aidffoi'pa,  ra
(/3.  [NV],  -^  ^eda-..  raji.  [AN],  i  Mace.  42961  6726314950
95»  ;  IO14  fiai0(Tovpoi  [V*]  ;  II65  I4733),*  it  was  in  the
time  of  Josephus  (An/,  .xiii.  56)  '  the  strongest  place  in

'  Rethel  (Ptj9(Xia),  a  populous  village  of  Gaza  with  very
ancient  and  mucb-revered  temples,  is  mentioned  by  Sozomen
(v.  I.'.  14,  p.  202). [  MS  note  of  WRS.]

2  For  the  form  lietylua,  cp  the  magical  stones  Rjetylia,  which
derive  their  name  from  Heth-el  ;  and  on  interchange  of  the
forms  Hethu-  and  Beth-,  see  Hethul.

*  So  Jerusalem  is  referred  to  as  (tomj  in  Sibyl!.  3784-786
(Apocalvptic  Litekatl'kk,  g  86  ^.). Cp  Daughter,  4.

*  Possibly  also  in  i  S.  30  27  (see  Bethel,  2).

*  In  2. Mace.  13  1932  ®a  has  t.  ^aiOo-.  11  5  Pt0<TOvpo>v  (A],
paiBaovputv  [V],

569


BEZAANANNIM

all  Judtca,'  and  was  still  an  inhabited  village  {^r)d<Tupu
Kethsoro)  in  the  days  of  i:u.sebiub  and  Jerome  (OS
10427;  32626).  It  is  represented  by  Be/  Stir  (liurj
Sur),  and  occupies  a  position  of  strategic  iniiwrt-
ance  as  commanding  the  road  from  Jerusalem  to
Hebron,  4^  m.  N.  from  the  latter  city.  The  modern
village  has  a  ruined  tower,  and  '  there  are  hewn  stones
scattered  about,  as  also  some  fragments  of  colunms,
and  many  foundations  of  buildings.  ...  It  must  have
been  a  small  place'  (Robinson).

If  the  statements  in  2  Mace.  11  5  (KV  BETHsuK<)N)are  reliable
there  must  have  been  a  second  Betli-zur  in  the  neighbourhtMxl  of
Jeru.salem.  Grimm  suggests  the  modern  village  of  Uet-Sahur,
half-an-hour  SE  from  Jerusalem.  .Schick,  with  more  probability,
identifies  it  with  the  modern  Kf/r-et- fur  (ihc  Kt.  form  of  Beth-
zur) on  the  central  height  of  the  Mount  of  Olives  (PEFQ,  Jan.
•895.  P-  37.  see  Camb.  liih/e  on  i  Mace.  429).  See,  however,
Beth  I'd  AGE.

BETOLIUS  (BeroAico  [B]),  i  I£.sd.  52.  AV  ;  RV
Betolion  ^  ICzra  2  28,  Bkthkl.

BETOMESTHAM,  RV  Betomesthaim  in  Judith
4  6,  or  Betomasthem,  1<\'  Betomasthaim  in  1.54
(BaitomaLiJcBaim  [BJ,  -AceeN  ,NJ,  BeTOMecBAiM
[A];  ^iSJa-»-  fcwwS  ;  om.  6»<  Vg.  in  46  and  ©*
Vg.  .Syr.  in  1^4)  lay  '  over  against  Jezreel  in  face  of  the
plain  thai  is  near  Uothan. '  If  '  toward  '  (Kara  irpbai>nrov)
can  be  taken  as  meaning  '  eastward  of '  the  plain  of
Dothan,  %ve  are  able  to  determine  its  position  pretty
nearly  ; but  the  exact  site  has  not  been  identified.

BETONIM  (D*Jb3,  §  103— «.?.,  'pistachio  nuts,'
BoTANei  [B],  -NIN  [•^].  -NeiM  [I']*,  in  Gadite
territory  (Josh.  1826),  may  perhaps  be  Ba/anah,  3  m.
W.  from  es-Salt  (Ramoth-gilead).

BETROTHAL.  The  Heb.  verb  is  tHN  'dras  (6
MNHCTeYec9Ai).  on  which  see  Makkiagk.  §  1.
In  2.S.  814,  RV  rightly  has  'betrothed'  instead  of  AV
'espoused.'  So  also  in  Mt.  1  18  Lk.  1  2  25.  InLev.  IQaot
the  verb  is  rpn,  and  seems  to  denote  marriage  by  capture
rather  than  marriage  by  purchase.  In  l^x.  21  8/. f  it
is  ij",  RV  '  espouse. ' There  is  some  disorder  in  tlie  text.

BEULAH(n^H;3.  'married';  01KOYAA6NH  [BN.XQ],
Aq.  ecxHAACNH.  Symm.  Theod.  CYNCOKiCMeNH).
the  symbolical  name  (Is.  624)  by  which  Zion  may  fitly
be  called  when  her  land  is  '  married  '  (Sysn  ;  cp  B.\al).
Two  primitive  and  related  ideas  underlie  the  expression.
The  first  is  that  the  people  of  a  land,  as  well  as  all
other  'fruits'  (Dt.  284),  arise  from  the  fertilising  influ-
ence of  the  land's  Baal  or  divine  Husband  (cp  A'i"'->
107/);  the  second,  that  a  peojile  which  remains
faithful  to  the  land's  divine  Husband  is  sure  of  his  pro-
tection. The  former  is  merely  hinted  by  means  of  the
contrast  of  the  two  names  '  Desolate '  and  '  Married '
(Is.  624)  ;  in  Is.  54  1-6,  on  the  other  hand,  it  engrosses
the  mind  of  the  prophetic  writer.  It  is  on  the  latter,
as  the  context  shows,  that  the  writer  of  Is.  62  (who  is
not  the  author  of  Is.  54)  wishes  to  concentrate  our
attention.  Zion  is  at  present  despised  (v.  7),  and  her
harvests  are  plundered  by  the  heathen  (f.  8/ );  but
when  her  land  is  once  more  '  married,'  she  will  be
entitled  to  the  protection  of  the  God  of  the  whole  earth.
The  sense  of  the  passage  has  been  obscured  by  an  error  in  the
vowel  points.  For  ^'J3,  '  thy  sons'  (p.  5),  read  ~":3  'he  who
buildeth  thee  up'  (cp  54iiy:  Ps.  147  2).  See  Du.,  Che.
(SBOV),  and  on  the  other  side  IJi.,  who  gives  no  parallel,  how-
ever, for  the  startling  play  upon  meanings  which  he  assumes.

T.  K.  C.

BEZAANANNIM  (D*3?ry3)  occurs  in  Josh.  19 33
RV'tr-'  '  the  c»ak  of  Bezaanannim,'  where  EV  has  'the
oak  in  Zaananmm,'  a  view  of  the  text  now  pretty
generally  abandoned.  The  '  oak  (or  sacred  tree)  of  Itezaa-
nannim  '  is  a  landmark  on  the  \\'.  border  of  Naphtali,
following  Heleph,  and  jireceding  Adami-nekeb  and
Jabneel,  and  is  usually  identified  with  '  the  oak  of  Bezaa-
naini'  (following  the  points),  or  of  '  Bezaanim,"  or  'of
Bezaanannim  (K're)  in  Judg.  4ii,  where  RV  has  'the

570


BEZAANANNIM

oak  in  J^anannim,'  and  has  inconsistently  omitted  to
record  the  modern  view  of  the  text  in  the  margin.  0
roads  in  Josh.  19  33  Kal  /twXa  Kal  (iecrefufiv  [B],  k.
/iijXwi'  Kal  (ifCfvavtn  [A],  at.  wXa/j.  attyavfijj.  [L]  ;  in
Judg.  4  II  ?a)j  Spi'is  trXfOfeKTOvvTUf  [IJ  ;  so  Thcod. ],
rpbi  Spvy  ava-travotJ.evwv  [AL]  ;  see  Field's  Hexapla.

The  difficulty  connected  with  the  phrase  is  twofold,
(i)  In  Joshua  I.e.,  this  famous  tree  is  placed  on  the
border  of  .Naphtali  ;  but  Judges  I.e.,  read  in  the  light  of
J'ldg.  4  17  624,  makes  the  tree  much  nearer  to  the  battle-
field, which,  according  to  Judg.  01921,  was  by  the
stream  Kishon.  (2)  The  name  is  inexplicable,  whether
we  read  Q-jysa  (Bezaanim?)  or  D':jys3  (Bezaanannim  ?).
If,  however,  several  times  in  Judges  (see  Kadksh),  and
once  in  Judg.  4  (see  HAROsiiETJi).  the  name  pB'-ii3  =
rnp  has  lieen  correctly  restored,  it  is  plausible  to
suppose  that  the  incomprehensible  name,  pronounced
sometimes  Bezaanaim  or  (better)  Bezaanim,  sonieliines
Bezaanannim,  may  conceal  the  same  old  name,  especially
as  in  Judg.  4 11  the  words  'which  is  by  Kedesh '  are
added.  It  is  extremely  probable  that  both  in  the
far  north  (see  Kauksh,  2)  and  in  the  territory  of
Issachar  there  was  a  place  which  bore  the  name  of
Kadshon  (Kidshon);  the  people  of  either  place  could
be  called  Kadshonim  (Kidshonim).  Nor  need  we
hesitate  to  emend  D'jysa  (the  form  which  the  best  critics
prefer)  to  D':iP"i3.  a  form  which  should  be  restored,
as  the  present  writer  has  sought  to  show,  in  Judg.  522^
(see  Kadesh^).  It  is  easier  to  suppose  that  the  '  oak'
or  '  sacred  tree '  which  forms  the  subject  of  this  article
was  near  the  Kidshon  (Kedesh)  of  Issachar  than  to  follow
the  Priestly  Writer  in  Joshua,  who  places  it  on  the  border
of  Naphtali.  The  error  of  the  latter  seems  to  have
arisen  from  the  statements  in  Judg.  469/. ,  which  place
the  mustering  of  the  Israelitish  warriors  at  Kedesh-
Naphtali.  The  error  of  the  scribe  who  wrote  c'jysa
was  facilitated  by  an  inopportune  recollection  of  the
form  D'Ji'jD  Kena'anim  (Canaanites).  Whether  he  also
thought  of  the  new  Heb.  nj;s3,  'ditch,  dike,  pond'  (cp
,15(3,  'marsh,'  Job  811  4O21),  cannot  be  determined
(cp  Neub.  Giogr. Talrn.  225).

An  identification  of  '  Bezaanim '  with  Kliirbet  BessOm,  E.  of
Tabor,  on  the  plateau  of  the  Sea  of  Clalilee,  was  proposed  by
Conder  in  PEFQ  '77,  p.  25  (so  Tent  Work,  2132);  cp
GASm.  HG  396,  who  considers  it  'well  supported.'  But  we
must  first  of  all  be  sure  of  the  reading  of  the  name.  It  is
remarkable  that  tradition  still  affirmed  that  the  'oak  of  .  .  .,'
which  was  a  fixed  element  in  the  story,  was  'by  Kedesh.'
Of  course,  cnp"nx  "IC'K  is  not  required  when  we  read
^-ytn'p  'iS^V.~~{'i< to  'he  sacred  tree  of  the  Kidshonim.'

T. K.  C.

BEZAI  (*V5.  §  52  ;  Hilprecht  has  found  the  Jewish
name  Bisa  on  a  tablet  from  Nippur  [PEFQ,  Jan.  1898,
P-  55])-  ^'^^  t)'ne  Bezai,  a  f;imily  in  the  great  post-
exilic  list  (see  Ezra,  ii.,  §§  9,  8^),  Ezra2i7  (Bacoy
[B],  -cc.  [A],  BAcei  [L])  =  Neh.723  (Becei  [BX],
Baci  [A],  -CCH  [L]  =  iEsd.5i6  Bassa,  RV  Bassai
(BacCAI  [B].  -CCA  [A],  -ccei  [I-]);  represented  among
the  sig;natories  to  the  covenant  (see  EzR.\,  i.  §  7),
Neh.  10 18 [.9]  (BHcei  [BA],  BHBei  [N],  Becei  [L]).

BEZALEEL,  RV  Bezalel  (Sn'?V3.  §§  22.  29.  '  in  the
shadow  of  God';  cp  Bksodkiah  ;  ^ecreXerjX  [BAL]).
The  form  is  improbable.  .Sil-Bel,  '  Bel  is  a  shelter,'  the
name  of  a  king  of  Gaza  in  Sennacherib's  time  {A'A  T^)
162),  even  if  correctly  represented,  is  not  parallel.  Read
VxsSn.  'God  rescues,'  and  cp  the  Phcen.  names  h'iZ^i^n,
\hnyaziK.  The  number  of  the  artificial  religious  names
of  later  times  has  been  exaggerated.

I.  b.  Uri  b.  Hur  of  the  tribe  of  Judah,  a  Calebite  (i  Ch.  2  20),
a  .skilled  workm.in  in  gold,  silver,  and  br.iss,  who  together  with
Aholiab  executed  the  work  of  the  tal>ornacle  (Ex.31  2  8630
8«  1/  37 1  38  22,  all  P).  He  is  mentioned  in  2  Ch.  1  5  as
having  made  the  brazen  altar.

a.  One  of  the  b'ne  Pahath-Moab  in  the  list  of  those  with

1  JQR,  10  567/C  rgS].

571


BIDKAR

foreign  wives  (see  Ezra,  L  j  5,  endX  Ezra  10  30  OttreATjA  [BA],
Ptva.  [K],  p*(T(r€Ktri\  IL]=  i  EsU.  9  31,  Sesthel  (<r«<r#j|X  [BA]).

T.  K.  C.


(PI?,  cp  §  100,  'gravel'?  cp  Syr.  ;  BezeK
[BAL]  ;  JiE^iu).  I.  A  place  at  which  Saul  mustered
the  force  he  had  raised  for  the  relief  of  Jabesh-gilcad  ;
1  S.  118  (a^if^eK  fv  (iafia  [H]  ;  fv  /Sefe/c  [A]  ;  ^aov\  tv
pafia  [L]).  Eusebius  {OS*"^  23752)  locates  two  neigh-
bouring villages  of  this  name  17  R.  m.  from  Neapolis
on  the  road  to  Scythopolis  ;  beyond  doubt  Khirbet  Ibzik,
14  Eng.  m.  from  Nabulus  and  nearly  opposite  the  lower
end  of  Wady  Yabis,  with  which  Eshtori  Parchi  (a.d.
1322)  identified  it. See  I'EF Mem.  2231237.

2.  A  place  at  which  Judah  and  Simeon,  in  invading
the  S.  of  Palestine,  encountered  and  routed  the
Canaanites  under  Adoni-bezek  ;  Judg.  1  4  /.  (jSoffic
[A] ;  om.  B*  in  v.  5).  Many  scholars,  from  Eusebius
downwards,  identify  this  with  No.  i  ;  but  this  is  in-
admissible.

Judah  and  Simeon  set  out  from  the  neighbourhood  of  Gilgal
(Judg.  1  \(>/.  '2  i)  to  invade  the  region  in  which  they  afterwards
settled  ;  the  end 'of  the  story  of  Adoni-bezek  conducts  him  to
Jerusalem,  which  was  probably  his  own  city  (Adoni-zedek,  king
of  Jerusalem  ;  see  Adoni-Hkzkk  and  Adoni-Zedec).  Ibzik
lies  wholly  out  of  this  sphere  of  action  and  in  a  quite  different
direction.

The  Bezek  of  Judg.  1  must  be  sought  much  farther
south.  Conder  would  find  it  at  Bezkeh,  6  m.  SE.  of
Lydda  {PEF Mctn.Z^lb)  ;  but  this  view  is  scarcely
probable.  In  view  of  the  change  which  the  name  of  the
king  has  suffered,  it  may  be  questioned  whether  the
name  of  the  place  has  been  correctly  preserved.

G.  F.  M.

BEZER("I>*3,  §  106,  'fortress';  Bocop  [B.\L]).  a
levitical  city  and  city  of  refuge,  Dt.  443  Josh.  208  21  36
(om.  MT  ;  Boctop  [E]).  i  <^h.  678[63j— the  Bozrah  [i]
(n^VH)  of  Jer.  4824  (6  /3offop)— is  described  in  Josh.  208
as  lying  in  the  wilderness  on  the  (.Amorite)  '  Mishor'  or
Tableland,  and  is  usually  identified  with  the  modern
fCesur  el-Besheir  (or  lieshir),  about  2  m.  SW.  of  Dibon,
and  about  the  same  distance  N.  of  Aroer.  King  Mesha
of  Moab  in  his  inscription  (/.  27)  says:  '  I  built  Bezcr,
for  ruins  had  it  become.'  With  this  place  some  have
identified  BosoR  (</.i'.,  2).

BEZER  ("1V3 ;  coBaA  [B],  Bacar  [AL]),  in  genealogy
of  .\SHER  [§  4  (ii.)],  I  Ch.  737t.

BEZETH  (BHzee  [A],  BhOzaiG  [S],  BaiGzhG  [V].
BHRZHeoi  [Jos.  .-/«/.  xii.  IO2  ;  but  BHezHeu),  ib.,
BHRZHGco.xii.  11  1  ;  Schlatter,  ZDPVlSt^:^]),  a  place
near  Jerusalem  where  Bacchides  encamped,  and,  having
slain  some  deserters  and  prisoners,  threw  them  into  '  the
great  pit '  which  was  there  ( i  Mace.  7  19).  'I"he  readings
of  @»<  and  Syr.  in  this  passage  (J»?  fc**»  [ed.  I-ag.])
point  to  an  original  Beih-zaith  (house  of  thtr  olive).
Hence  it  is  possible  that  Bezeth  may  lje  the  later  liezetha
('  place  of  olives '),  the  name  given  to  the  N.  end  of  the
plateau,  on  the  S.  part  of  which  lay  Jerusalem.  See
Bethz.\tha,  Jerusalem, Olives,  Mount  ok.

BIATAS  (c})iAeAC  [A]),  iEsd.948  AV  =  Neh.87.
Pei.aiah,  2.

BICHEI  {*"p3,  §  61  ;  Boxopei  [BA],  BeA^AAi  [L])
in  Sheba  b.  Bichri  (2S.  20 1/:),  a  gcntilic  from  Becher
y.v.\  The  plural  BichritieB  (D^^DSn)  is  postulated
by  (S"*  (fttl  irctires  iv  \appti)  in  2  S.  20 14  in  place  of
Bkrites [</.-.'.]. SeeSHKUA,  ii.  (i),  Benjamin,  §9,  ii.  /3.

BIDKAR  (ip^na  :  BAAeK  [L],  -ka  [B],  -kar  [B^A]).
BaAgkar  [B»™«],  Jehu's  adjutant  (K"X*),  2  K.  925.
The  name  is  noteworthy,  because  the  chief  support  of
the  theory  that  3  at  the  l>eginning  of  proffer  names  some-
times stands  for  '  son  of  is  that  Pesh.  here  has  bar-elikar
(hence  '3  =  "ijjTp.  '  son  of  piercing ' — a  suitable  name  for
a  warrior  ;  cp  Lanzknecht ;  cp  Ass.  bindikiri  [Del.  ZKF


i


BIBB

2i7»].  and  see  Bkndeker).  For  other  examples,  all
doubtful,  see  Ges.  Thes.  col.  349  ;  Kanig.  Uhrgeb.
2248;  and  against  this  Ols.  Heb.  Gr.  613.  Halevy
{Kech.  /m/.ui.,  KliJ,  Jan.-June  1885)  thinks  3  in  all
these  words  =  ['l^K.  For  this  3  =  p  theory  we  can  hardly
cite  the  one  or  two  cases  in  rhai-nician,  probably
accidental  {CIS  i.  192a,  3933).  Dofs  ©"-s  WaltK  imply
a  rendiri},'  vc''?p  n  fna.  '  H-  chief  (pNi)  of  his  (Jehu's)
captains  '  ?  w.  R.  s.

BIER  (n^p.  kAinh).  2S.331:  (copoc).  Lk.  7.4-
See  Dr. AD.  §  i.

BIQTHA  (Nn33  ;  Bcop&ZH  [BNL"].  [oApe]  BooA
[.A]),  a  chamberlain  of  Ahasucrus  (Ivstli.  1 10).  Marq.
\Fund.  71)  finds  its  Gr.  equivalent  in  i^rifiadaOa  [A],  for
Pa^tjOaOa,  whence  he  restores  httmi  (misre;id  Kmts)  =  O.
Pers.  biigaJdta,  '  given  by  God  '  ;  cp  UagoAS,  and  see
ESTHKK.  ii.  §  3.

BIOTHAN  (|n32.  etymology  doubtful  ;  BAfAQAN
[Xc.ai..,:  su|..]  .  lJX.\Lom. ;  Jos.  B&rA0coOc).  Kslh.  22i.
or Bigthana. Esih.  6a (NJOjII  ; ©  as  in  '2ai  ;  Jos.

EaBatmoc)p a chamlx^rlain of  Ahasuerns, who, in
sth.  12  I.  is  called  Gabatha  {yaSada  [BNAL*]). See
lusTHi.K,  ii.  §  3.

BIGVAI  ('133,  rather  lUr.oi, i.e.,  Bagoas  [(/.v.];

BAfOYA  r  '*^1'  -OYiA  [I-])-

1.  .\  Ic.iiltr  (see  K/ka,  ii.  8  8<-)in  the  great  post-exilic  list  (ib.
ii.  §  9),  Kzra  ;i  2  (fiarovai  IB],  ^ayouot  [L])=  N'eh.  7  7  (fiaroei
[BK],  /Sayomai  [Al)=i  Esd.  5  8,  AV  Reki.ius  (/3opoAftov  [I!\l,
fiayovai  [L])  ;  signatory  to  the  covenant  (see  Kzka,  i.  g  7),  Neh.
10  16  I17I  Oayo<ri  (I!),  -o"  1«<A1,  /3a<roui  [L]).

2.  Family  in  great  post-exihc  list  (see  Ezra,  ii.  $$  9,  8<r),
Ezra  '2i4'<fiaoyti  IH),  ^oyoua  [.\viclj,  .o„ai  (!.])=  Neh.  7  19
(fianti  [BKA])=i  Esd.  5  14,  Bagoi  OSocroi  [B],  ^ayoi  [A],  -ovat
[LI).

3.  Family  in  F^zra's  carav.-in  (see  Ezra,  i.  §  2,  ii.  §  15  |i.]  </),
Ezra  8  14  (fiayo  |l!|,  yafiovaei  (A),  yo^ovia  [L))=  i  Esd.  S40
BAl.oOal-ai  II'.],  ^ayo(AI). Cp  HkgAI.

BIKATH-AVEN  (JJX-nr|"52),  Am.  I5  AV^e  See
AVEN,  3.

BILDAD  n^)2.  §  43.  BaA^aA  [BNAC],  -Aac  [A]),
the  Shuhite  (see  SiiUAii),  one  of  Job's  friends  (Job  2  n
and  elsewhere).  The  name  either  means  '  liel  has  loved'
(cp  Nold.  7.DMG  42  479  ['88]),  or  is  a  softened  form
of  Bir-dad,  which  appears  to  lie  at  the  root  of  Bedad
(so  Del.  Far.  298). See  ElidaD,  and  cp  DoD.

BILEAM  (D;;*??,  §  ^^),  i  Ch.  6 7°  [55]- See  Ibleam.

BILGAH  (nS*??,  'cheerfulness'?).

1.  Hr.i(i  of  the  fifteenth  course  of  priests,  i  Ch.  24  14  (/3fAya
\A\,  -oi  |I-1).  (P"  lias  tji^rip,  which  must  represent  Immcr,  tne
bead  of  the  sixteenth  course.  (ytX/Sa,  the  name  of  the  head  of
the  fourteenth  in  ©"  (MT  3K3S''],  is  merely  a  transposed  form
of  Bilgah  in  a  different  pl.-ice  in  the  list.)

2.  A  priest  OSoAyat  [Kc.amfr.]^  p,A.  [L] ;  cm.  BKA)  in  Zerub-
bahel's band  (Ezra,  ii.  §6/0.  Neh.  12  5  ;  in z/.  i8(j3<iAya[Kc.ame.],
/5<Aya?  [L] ;  om.  RN.\)  a  '  father's  house.' Cp  also  Bit-CAi.

BILGAI  (BeArA[ell  [AL],  -Ac[eliA  [BN]).  a  priestly
sit;ii:itory  to  the  covenant  (see  l.ZKA,  i.  §§  6,  7),  Neh.
lOS  [9]. No  doubt  the  same  as  Bii.GAll.

BILHAH  (nnba  :  BaXAa  [BADEL],  but  I  Ch.  7  13
BaAam[B],  -Aaam[I.])-

1.  The  'mother'  of  the  tribes  Dan  and  Naphtali,
according  to  J  ;  also  represented  as  the  maid  of  Rachel
(mother  of  the  house  of  Joseph)  and  concubine  of  Jacob
and  his  eldest  son  Reuben.

We  have  not.  unfortunately,  the  means  of  detetmining
how  far  we  are  warranted  in  regarding  these  relations
as  representing  traditions  of  fact,  and  how  far  they  may
be  imaginative  incidents  of  the  story.  W.-is  Bilhah,  e.g. ,
a  tribe  (Canaanitish  ?  .\ram:ean  ?),  elements  of  which
were  taken  up  into  some  of  the  clans  of  the  house  of
Joseph  (the  first  Israel)  in  the  earliest  days  after  their
arrival  in  W.  Palestine  before  they  crystallized  into  the
three  well-known  branches  (Manasseh-NIachir,  Ephraim,

573


BINDING  AND  LOOSING

Benjamin)  ?  Or  does  the  name,  which  occurs  nowhere
outside  of  Genesis  (and  the  equivalent  i  Ch.  7  13),  simply
indicate  that  not  only  Uan  but  once  also  Naphtali  tried
unsuccessfully  to  settle  somewhere  in  the  Highlands  of
Ephraim  before  U:taking  itself  to  the  extreme  north  ?
Or,  once  more,  is  this  true  only  of  Dan,  the  inclusion
of  Naphtali  being  then  due  simply  to  its  geographical
nearness  to  Dan  in  its  later  seat,  and  to  its  worthiness
to  stand  by  the  side  of  the  noble  Rachel  tribes  (Judg.
5  18)?  Again,  is  the  Reuljen  story  (Gen.  35  aa  i  Ch.  [>  1)
to  be  brought  into  connection  with  the  other  traces  oif
the  extension  of  the  house  of  Joseph  (cp  Reuben's
interest  in  the  fortunes  of  Joseph  :  Gen.  37  aa  a9  :  E. )
beyond  Jordan  (Maciiik  ;  Ei-hkai.m,  Wool)  ui),  or  is  it
to  be  explained,  as  .Stade  {GescA.  1  119)  explains  it,  as  a
memorial  of  the  primitive  society  that  survived  E.  of  the
Jordan  when  there  had  be«.n  a  change  in  W.  Palestine ?
Or  are  we  to  give  serious  consideration  to  a  combination
(G.  H.  B.  Wright)  with  the  story  of  liOHA.v  (cjj  Bii.JiAH,
2)  the  son  of  Reuben  (Josh.  l.Ob  18  17),  as  an  indication
that  Reubenite  elements  were  once  actually  to  be  found
W.  of  the  Jordan  ( '  in  that  land  ;  '  Gen.  3;')  22)  ?  That
there  really  was  contact  between  Benjamin  and  the
Bilhah  trilje  Dan  was  a  matter  of  course  ;  Ono  and  Lod
ultimately  l>ecame  Benjamite  (cp  Be.njami.n,  §  3  ;  We.
L>e  lient.  12  n.  i).  It  was  Rachel,  however,  not  Bilhah,
that  died  when  Ben-oni  was  born.

2. In  Simeon  (i  Ch.  429). See  Baalah,  2.

n.  \v.  11.

BILHAN  (;n'?3,  %77;  cp  Bilhah  ;  BaAaan  [BA]).

1.  A  HoKiTE  {g.v.),  Gen.  8627  (^oAoo^  [D"''  EL]) ;  i  Ch.  1  4a
(-aoMlBLl).

2.  In  genealogy  of  Benjamin  (§  9,  ii.  o)  :  i  Ch.  7  10  OSoAaofi
I  LI).

BILSHAN  {\^h^.  §  83  ;  perhaps  Bab.  BeHun  ;  but
more  probably  we  should  read  Bel-sar,  a  mutilated  form
of  Bel-sar-ezer — i.e.,  liab.  Bel-sar-usur  ; — cp  ©»"•*'  in
I  Esd. ).  A  name  in  the  great  post-exilic  list  (see  EzKA,
ii.  §  9),  borne  by  one  of  the  ten  (Ezra),  or  eleven  (Neh.,
I  Esd. ),  persons  w  ho  accompanied  Zerubbabel  from
Babylon  (see  Ezra,  ii.  §  8  <•).  Ezra2a  {^affcpafi  [B],
^aXaffafx.  [A],  -Xacrai'  [L])  =  Neh.  77  {(iaaipav  [N],
^aaaav  [.\],  jiaKcr.  [  B].  Lom.)=i  Esd.  58  Beki.sakus
(^(eXaapov  [H.\],  /jaXcrap  [L]).  If  Bel-sar  is  correct,
may  not  this  be  the  Sharezer  of  Zech.  72  (see  Sharezer,
2)?  This  undesigned  coincidence  (if  accepted)  may
have  important  bearings  on  criticism.  T.  K.  C.

BIMHAL  (Sn?D3),  in  genealogy  of  Asher  (§  4  [ii.]),
1  Ch.  733  (imaBahA  [B],  BamahA  [A],  BaamaB  [L])-

BINDING  AND  LOOSING  (Mt.1619  18. 8+).  The
explanation  givi-n  uncU'r  Ma(;ic  (§  3  [4])  may  account
for  the  origin  of  the  Jewish  phrase  'binding  {~sti)  and
loosing'  (I'n.i)  ;  but  in  usage  'to  bind'  and  "to  loose'
mean  simply  '  to  forbid '  and  '  to  permit '  by  an  indis-
putable authority,  the  words  of  authoritative  prohibition
and  permission  being  considered  to  be  as  effectual  as  he
spell  of  an  enchanter  (cp  tok,  Targ.  Ps.  585[6]).  The
wise  men  or  rabbis  had,  in  virtue  of  their  ordination,  the
power  of  deciding  disputes  relating  to  the  Law.  A
practice  which  was  permitted  by  them  was  said  to  be
'  loosed '  (inio),  and  one  which  was  forbidden  was
called  '  bound '  (iick).  Such  pronouncements  were
made  by  the  diflferent  schools  ;  hence  it  was  said,  '  The
school  of  Shammai  binds;  the  school  of  Hillel  looses.'
Theoretically,  however,  they  proceeded  from  the  San-
hedrin,  and  there  is  a  Talmuilic  statement  that  there
were  three  decisions  made  by  the  lower  '  house  of  judg-
ment'  to  which  the  upper  'house  of  judgment'  {i.e.,
the  heavenly  one)  gave  its  supreme  sanction  {Afassoth,
23^).  Probably,  therefore,  Jesus  adopted  a  current
mode  of  speech  when  he  said  to  the  disciples  that  what-
soever they  bound  or  loosed  on  earth  {i.e.,  in  expound-
ing the  new  Law)  should  be  bound  or  looj^ed  in  heaven
(Mt.  18 18). Probably,  too,  it  is  a  less  authentic  tradition

574


BINDING  AND  LOOSING

which  makes  Jesus  give  the  same  promise  to  Peter
individually  (Mt.  I619).  Nowhere  is  it  recorded  that
the  great  Teacher  made  Peter  the  president  (kx-o)  of
his  council  of  wise  men.  The  words  which  immediately
precede  Mt.  lt)i9(J  —  self-evidently  taken  by  the  editor
from  another  context — rei)rcsent  Peter,  not  as  an  ex-
pounder of  the  new  transfigured  Law,  but  as  a  practical
administrator  (cp  Is.  2222).  It  is  in  favour  of  the  view
here  adopted  (viz.,  that  the  words  on  'binding'  and
'  loosing  '  were  addressetl  to  the  disciples  in  general  and
not  to  Peter  individually)  that  in  Jn.  20 23  the  power  to
remit  and  to  retain  is  granted  to  the  disciples  collectively,
not  to  any  one  of  them  individually.  Though  the  use
of  Kpareiv  in  that  passage  has  no  exact  Hebrew  or
Aramaic  equivalent,  the  saying  is  not  a  new  one,  but
a  paraphrase  of  Mt.  18 18.  T.  K.  C.

BINEA  (n^;2,  Ny:3),  in  genealogy  of  Bknjamin
(§9,  ii.  [ji}),  /Ch.837  (Bana  [B],  BA&N.  [AL])  =  943
(Baana[15XL],  Ban.  [A]).

BINNUI  ('"133, '  a  building  up"  ;  on  form  cp  Na.mes,

§5).

1.  F.-imily  in  great  post-exilic  list  (see  Ezra,  ii.  §§  9,  8  c),  Neh.
7  1 5  (/Sat-om  [BNA],  -v<xiOV  [Ll)  =  Ezra2  10,  Bani  [g.7:,  2]  Oai-ov
[H],  -oui  [.\],  -vaia  [L])=i  Esd.  612,  Bam  (/3ai/ei  [B.\],  -i/aia
[L]).

2.  A  Levite,  temp.  Ezra  (see  Ezra,  i.  §  2,  ii.  g  i;  [i}d),  Ezra
833  (aTrb  e^avvaia.  [B],  uios  /Saraia  [.\L])=  i  Esd.  863  Sabha.v,
R\'  Sadannus  {(Ta^avvov  [BA],  vibs  ^afaiou  [L]),  and  prob.ibly
Neh.  \i2\  (MT  'the  son  of;  Kai  vloi  [BNA],  k.  oi  v.  avrov
[L])  ;  so  Sinend,  /J/V  Listen,  etc. Most  probably  the  same  as

3.  A  Levite  in  the  list  of  wall-builders  (see  Nehe.miah,  §  \/.,
Ezra,  ii.  §§  i6[i],  15  ,T),  Neh.324  (/Sai-fi  [BNA],  -i/aifl.]):  sig-
natory to  the  covenant  (see  Ezra,  i.  §  7),  IO9  [10]  (^ava.iov
[BN.VL],  aj3.  [X*^-^]),  possibly  the  s.ame  as  the  Levite  Binnui  in
Zerubb-ibel's  band  (see  Ezra,  ii.  §  6/5)  128  0a>'ovi  [BN.\],  (cat  01
viol  amoO  [L]).  In  Neh.  3 '8,  Bavai  C.^a  ;  /3e«ei  [B],  /Sefep
fN),  /Sei/ei  [.\],  jSai'ttt  [L])  seems  a  textual  error.

4.  and  5.  One  of  the  b'ne  Pahath-nioab,  Ezra  10  30  (^avouei
[BN],  3arou[e]i  [\L])=i  Esd.  0  31,  Bai.nius  {&aXvov%  [B],  -ouos
[.\],  /Sai'oui  [L])  and  one  of  the  b'ne  15ani  (Ezra  10  38;  Bai/out
[BKA],  jSoi'm  [L])=  I  Esd.  834,  Ei.iALi ;  both  in  the  list  of  those
with  foreign  wives  (see  Ezra,  i.  §  5  end).

BIRD.  References  to  birds  generally  are  very  frequent
in  or  and  XT.

The  following  terms  (translated  in  EV  '  bird  '  or  '  fowl ')  are
used  to  denote  the  members  of  the  family  Avcs  collectively:

,,. , '■|iy,  'oph,  Eccles.  10  20  Is.  16  2  Hos.  9  11  :  niss.

1.  Kinds I ' '  •

referred  to.  •">^'"''  Gen.  714  Lev.uey:  ^x  ff.-.  r^i  "rya,

ha'al  kdnu/ih,  Prov.  1  17  ;  and  [of  birds  of  prey]
b;V,  'ayit,  Gen.  15  11  Is.  18  6  4;  11  Jer.  129  Ezek.  39  4  Job  28  7
(li.TN,  'ayyah);  ntTfiva.  and  ra  Trereifa,  Mt.820  1832  Lk.  0  58
Rom.  1  23  Jas.  3  7  ;  to.  nrriva,  i  Cor.  15  39,  and  [of  birds  of  prey]
opreov.  Rev.  18  2  19  17  21.

Birds  of  the  smaller  kinds  are  not  so  often  distinguished
as  the  larger  ;  but  special  reference  is  made  to  several
species,  both  large  and  small.  Mention  seems  to  be
made,  for  example,  of  the  Bittern,  Buzzard  (see
Glede),  Blue  Thrush  (see  Sparrow),  Cormorant,
Crane,  Dove,  Egyptian  Vulture  (see  Gier  Eagle),
Griffon  (see  Eagle),  Hawk,  Heron,  Hooi'OE.  Sacred
Ibis  (see  Swan),  Kite,  Night  Hawk  (?),  Osprey,
Ossifr.'\ge,  Ostrich,  Owl,  Pigeon  (see  Dove),  Par-
tridge, Peacock,  Pelican,  Quail,  Raven,  Stork,
Swallow,  Tern  (see  Cuckow),  Black  Vulture  (see
Vulture),  and  the  domestic  fowl  (see  Cock),  details
and  discussions  concerning  all  of  which  will  be  found
in  the  special  articles.  Sp.vrrow  occurs  occasionally  in
the  EV  as  a  translation  of  the  word  (i\s^)  which  denoted
any  small  passerine  bird.

That  feathered  animals  (f|33  Vya)  abounded  in  Pales-
tine is  clear  from  the  many  references  to  them  in  OT
_  and  NT,  and  lapse  of  time  has  produced
2.  use.  ^Q  change  in  this  respect  (see  Palestine).
Naturally  the  eggs  and  the  birds  themselves  were  used
for  food '(Ex.  16 12/  Nu.  11 32  Job66  Neh.  5i8  Ps.  7827
Lk.lli2  Acts  10 12  116;  see  Fowls,  §§  4,  6,  and  cp

575


BIRSHA

Food,  §  8)  ;  the  Torah  divides  them  into  clean  and  un-
clean (Lev.  11 13  Dt.  1420;  see  Clean  and  Unclean,
§  9).  Many  contrivances  for  capturing  birds  were  in
common  use  (PS.9I3  1247  Prov.  1 17  6s  723  Am. 85
Eccles.  9 12  Jer.  027  Hos.  7  12  98  Ecclus.  11  30).  The
Torah  protects  them  against  cruelty  (Dt.  226/.).
Sometimes  the  captives  were  tamed  and  treated  as  pets
(Job4l5  [4O29],  Bar.3i7  Ecclus.27i9  Jas.37).  Only
in  cases  of  extreme  poverty  does  the  Torah  allow  birds
to  be  used  for  sacrifice  (see  Sacrifice).  Naturally,
common  small  birds,  on  account  of  their  abundance,
were  of  little  value  ;  they  were  probably  so  numerous  as
to  prove  a  nuisance  (Mt.  10 29  31  Lk.  126/  ;  cp  LnnJ
and  Book,  43).  To  what  extent — if  any — birds  were
studied  for  omens  in  Israel  as  in  Babylonia  (see  Baby-
lonia, §  32,  Magic.  Babylonian,  §  3)  it  is  difficult  to
determine  (see  Lev.  I926  Dt.  I810  2K.2I6  2Ch.  336
iK.  433  [5 13],  and  cp  DiviN.vnoN,  §  2,  beg.,  and
Schultz,  OT  Theol.  1  250^  ET).

.Allusions  to  their  habits  in  metaphors, similes,  and
proverbial  expressions  prove  how  prominent  they  were


3.  Literary


in  the  life  and  thought  of  the  people  (cp


-Agriculture,


[5, and see Lowth,


^fiusXs'';;f-"  -  f  ^--t  ^-/.^  ^//^^^

J/ebrews,  Lect.  vii.  vol.  1.  E I  1787).
They  were  evidently  observed  with  the  keenest  interest
as  being  links  between  earth  and  heaven,  and  regarded
with  a  certain  awe  (Job  12 7  2821  35 11  Eccles.  10 20).  It
was  noticed  how  thev  cared  for  and  protected  their  young
(Dt.  32ii  E.x.  194  is.  31  5  Mt.  2837);  how  and  where
they  made  their  nests  (Ps.  IO41217  Ezek.  316) — some-
times (according  to  a  pleasing  but  very  doubtful  inter-
pretation) in  the  very  temple  itself^  (Ps.  843  [4]);  in
what  sad  plight  they  wandered  about  when  cast  out  of
the  nest  (Prov.  278  Is.  I62  Ps.  1027[8]);  how  swiftly
they  flew  away  when  .scared  (Hos.  9ii  Ps.  lli);  how
eagerly  they  returned  to  their  nest  (Hos.  11 11);  how
free  from  care  they  were  (Mt.  626) ;  how  regularly  they
migrated  (Jer.  87  Prov.  262);  how  voracious  they  were
(Gen.  40 17  Mt.  184  Mk.  44  Lk.  8s)  ;  how  they  descended
from  the  clouds  in  a  bevy  (Ecclus.  4817),  and  with  what
delight  they  gathered  in  a  leafy  tree  (Dan.  49 [12]  Ecclus.
279  Mt.  1832  Lk.  1819);  how  sweetly  they  warbled
(Eccles.  124  Wisd.  17i8  Cant.  2i2  [see,  however.  Vine]
Ps.  104  12) ;  how  God  recognises  and  protects  them  (Ps.
50 1 1  Lk.  1224);  and  how  they  praise  and  reverence
him  (Ps.  148io  Ezek.  38  20).  Further,  Israel's  enemy
is  often  pictured  as  a  rapacious  bird  that  sights  its  prey
afar  off  and  swoops  down  ujxjn  it  (Is.  46 11  Jer.  129''*
Dt.  2849  Rev.  19 17  21).  Thus,  '  to  destroy  '  is  to  give  a
man's  flesh  to  the  birds  of  the  air  for  meat  (Gen.  40 19
Dt.  2826  I  S.  174446  I  K.  14  II  I64  21 24  Ps.  792  Jer.  733
I64  197  3420  Ezek.  29s).  A  place  is  desolate  when
its  only  inhabitants  are  the  birds  of  the  air  (Jer.  Ezek.
31 13  324  Is.  186),  and  an  utter  desolation  when  even
these  too  have  perished  (Jer.  425  I24  Hos.  43  Zeph.  1  3).
The  saying  in  Mt.820,  where  Jesus  contrasts  himself
with  the  birds  which  have  nests,  has  not  yet  been  made
perfectly  clear  (but  see  Son  of  Man).

BIRSHA  (yu'n?.  scarcely  '  with  [or,  in]  wickedness  ':
the  name  is  corrupt ;  cp  Bera),  king  of  Gomorrah  who

1  Cp  WRS  Rel.Sem.f^>  160,  and  Che.'s  note,  Psa/msiV.  The
common  view  of  the  meaning  is  untenable  on  all  grounds- —
exegetical,  historical,  metrical.  1.  No  natural  exegesis  can  be
given,  if  'id  nx.  '  thine  altars,'  has  any  relation  to  the  bird.s.  2.
The  sanctity  of  the  temple  proper  would  certainly  have  excluded
the  winged  visitors ;  Jos.  BJ  v.  56  speaks  of  pointed  spikes  on
the  top  of  the  (Herodian)  temple  to  prevent  birds  from  sitting
even  on  the  outside.  This  seems  to  have  been  generally  over-
looked. 3.  The  psalm  consists  of  long  verses  (lines)  divided  by
a  caesura  into  two  unequal  parts.  '  Thine  altars,  my  King  and
my  tiod,'  is  too  much  to  form  the  second  and  shorter  portion
of  one  of  the.se  verses.  See  Che.  /'sa//its,(^l  and  cp  Baethg.  ati
ioc.  .who  attempts  an  exegetical  compromise.

2  Read  thus,  '  Do  I  count  my  heritage  a  carcase  torn  by
hyaenas  (i'ias  HEIpri ;  ©  o-TrijAaioc  vai'iT)?  =  's  nij'c)^  Are
vultures  round  about  it  ? '

576


BIRTHDAY

joined  the  league  anainst  «.  Heduki.ao.MER  (§  a),  Gen.
14  J  (BAPCA  [A/JKL]  ; B&A.MAC.  Jos.  Ant.  i.9i).

BIRTHDAY  (Dn^n  DV,  hmcra  reNecccoc  [ADK],
r.  H.  [I.].  (;<n.402o;  rCNeclA  LTi  ^VM].  Mt.  116
Mk.  tiiil.  The  only  express  nienlion  of  the  celebra-
tion of  the  anniversary  of  birth  in  O  T  or  NT  is  in  con-
nection with  kings:  Pharaoh's  birthday  (Gen.  40ao),
when  the  '  chief  butler '  was  restored  to  his  ottice  and
the  '  chief  Ixiker  '  hanged  ;  Antiochus  Kpiphanes'  birth-
day (a  .\Iacc.  (>7)  ; '  and  Herod's  birthday  (Mt.  146  Mk.
fiai),  when  Herodias's  dancing  was  the  occasion  of
the  execution  of  John  the  liaptist.  When  it  is  said
in  Jobl4  that  Job's  sons  'were  wont  to  go  and  feast
in  the  house  of  each  one  upon  his  day,"  'his  day'
denotes  a  weekly  and  not  an  annual  feast ;  and  in  Hos.
75  'the  day  of  our  king'  may  refer  to  the  anniversary
of  his  succession  quite  as  well  as  to  a  birthday.  How-
ever, this  silence  on  the  subject  is  no  warrant  for  us  to
conclude  that  the  Israelites  did  not  follow  the  general
custom  of  observing  birthdays,  especially  those  of  kings
(see,  for  Egypt.  A"/'"'*  4  77.  and  for  Persia,  Herod.  9  no).
The  curses  invoked  by  Job  (.'^i-ia)  and  Jeremiah
(20 14-18)  on  the  days  of  their  birth  imply  that  under
happier  conditions  these  days  would  have  been  re-
membered in  more  cheerful  fashion.

Doubts  have  been  raised  as  to  whether  Herod's  yeviaia,
meant  his  birthday  or  the  anniversary  of  his  accession.
The  Mishna  {Ahoda  /.ara,  1  3)  mentions  as  heathen
festivals,  calends,  saturnalia,  Kparrifffis,  kings'  days  of
ffv^ffia  (H-D'yj  cr).  and  the  day  of  birth  and  the  day  of
death.  It  is  probable  that  the  last  two  mean  the  actual
days  and  not  the  anniversaries  ;  the  /tpar^trets  would
naturally  be  the  anniversaries  of  accessions  and  the
tt'O-yi  cv  the  birthday.  So  Talm.  Jer.  Aioi/a  Zara,
\y)C  takes  'j  cv  as  .Tt'Sn  cv  (birthday),  but  Bab.  Aboda
Zara,  loa  understands  'j  cv  as  anniversary  of  accession.
Tfv^aia  is  used  as  birthday  in  late  Greek  (in  classical
Greek  it  is  anniversary  of  death)  and  never  as  anni-
versary of  accession  :  thus  the  sense  of  birthday  seems
well  established.  Cp  .Scliiirer,  Nisi. 226,  and  the  Talm.
Lexx.  of  Levy  and  Jastrow  on  H'D'yi  ;  also  Griitz,
A/GU7  2O230  ['71]. See  also  Lord's  D.\y,  §  2.

\V.  H.  B.

BIRTHRIGHT  {r^'i)22,  Gen.  2531:  npcoTOTOKiA,
Hob.  12 10)  ;  see  FiKsmoKN.  Law  and  Jistice,  §  14.
On  the  stcjry  of  Esau  and  Jacob  sec  I'.s.M',  g  2.

BIRZAITH  (n'na,  Kr. ),  AVBirzavith(nin3,  Kt. ;
BHZAie  [H],  Bepz&ie  [A],  B<\pzee  [L],  in  genealogy
of  AsiiKK  (§  4  i'-).  I  Ch.  73it.  The  name  (?  fl'T  1X3,
'  well  of  the  olive  tree  ')  seems  to  suggest  a  locality.

BISHLAM  (QX*'3  ;  eN  eipHNH  [RA],  cn  eipHNH
peOYV\  BeAxee/w  [L]),  Ezra47,  for  which  i  Esd.  2i6
has  Hki.k.mus  (BHAeAAOC  [HA]  or  BeeAciMOc  [L]).
the  name  of  a  Persian  otlicer  of  unknown  origin,  who
joined  with  others  in  writing  a  letter  of  complaint
against  the  Jews.  (5"*  takes  the  name  as  descriptive
of  the  tranquil  state  of  the  writers  of  the  letter  {it>
"'pV??)  ;  but  Bishlam  is  clearly  a  proper  name.  It
either  means  'in  jieace,'  cp  Bkzalkel,  Hiksiia,  or,
more  probably,  like  those  names,  it  is  a  corruption.
The  true  name  may  Ije  lialiylonian.  It  may  perhaps  be
recovered  if  we  start  from  one  or  the  other  of  the  forms
presented  in  the  MSS  of  i  Esd.,  where  the  proper
names  are  sometimes  more  accurately  preserved.  Ball
(I'ar.  A/>ocr.  ad  loc).  adopting  fi-fi\(fj.os,  supposes  a
corruption  of  Bab.  Bel -i bus  — /.<-.,  'Bel  made.'  It
would  seem,  however,  that  the  /SefXiriyuoj  of  <5'-  nuist
be  more  original,  and  this  form  may  have  arisen  from
Bel-Sum-i§kun— i.^.,  'Bel  m.ade  a  name  '  (Nestle,  A/arg.
23.  29)-  T.K.C.

V '  i?X/  '**'  *^^^'  °^  '*"  king's  birth  every  month  ' :  so  9  and
Pesh.,  \  g-  oni.  Kara piriva.  Grimm  siigRested  that  'every  month  '
IS  from  1  Mace.  1  59 ;  but  it  is  probably  genuine  (see  Lord's
^'^v,  g  2).

37  C77


BISHOP

BISHOP  (eniCKOnoc)-  The  word  is  of  rare  occtir-
rence  in  the  NT.'

'1  he  elders  of  the  church,  sunimonrd  from  KphcMis  to  .Milrlu*
to  receive  Pauls  farewell  charge  (Atls  •JO  17),  are  llius  addrc^vrd  :

, r, '  '  "'"=  '"=<='l  '"  yourselves  and  to  the  whole

1.  Occurrence  fl„tk.  wherein  the  Holy  Ghost  halh  set  you
of  name  in  NT.  a'*  overseers  (viiat  .  .  .  ierro  <iri<ricbirov«)  to
feed  (or  rule  :  irotfiotVeif)  the  church  of  God '
(t'.  28).  It  is  not  clear  from  this  passage  whether  the  word  ia
used  as  a  definite  title,  or  merely  as  a  description  implying  that
«»r»<r(to»r»j,  oversight  or  superintendence,  was  a  function  of  the
presbytcrate.  In  the  address  of  the  Kpistle  to  the  Philippians,
however,  we  have  '  bishops  and  de.-icons  formally  mentioned  ;  it
IS  difficult,  in  view  of  the  later  us;ige  of  the  words,  to  sup|x>se
that  this  is  merely  a  general  description  of  'those  who  rule  and
those  who  serve.  In  i  Tim.  3  j  J.  the  bishop  and  the  de.icon
are  again  brought  together.  The  qualifications  of  a  bishop  arc
enumerated  :  6ti  GUI'  t'ou  iiriaKowov  «.t.A.,  where  the  article  U
commonly  regarded  as  generic,  or  at  lea.st  as  not  implying  that
there  was  only  one  bishop  in  the  Kphesian  church.  In  "Tit.  1  sjf-,
in  connection  with  the  duty  of  appointinj?  presbyters  in  the
towns  of  Crete,  a  similar  description  of  a  bishop's  qualifications
is  given  (6tl  yap  TOy  iiti<TKonov  k.t.K.)  ;  but  no  reference  Ls
m.-ide  to  deacons.  The  only  other  occurrence  of  the  word  is  in
I  Pet.  225  where  it  is  applied  to  Christ  himself,  'the  shepherd
and  bishop  of  your  souls.  It  is  not  ncessary  to  interpret  these
titles  as  metaphors  drawn  from  the  Christian  ministry.

We  note,  then,  that  the  word  is  found  in  all  cases  on
Greek  ground,  and  it  \Mjuld  seem  as  if  those  who  in  the
Palestinian  churches  were  called  '  presbyters  '  were  in
the  Greek  churches  spoken  of  at  first  as  '  bishops '  and
then  indifferently  as  '  jjresbyters  '  or  as  '  bishops.'  This
view,  however,  assumes  that  iiriaKowo%  was  already  at
this  time  in  use  as  a  title  of  office  ;  and  the  assumption
requires  a  careful  examination.  It  will  Ix-  lH.-st  to  Ugin
such  an  examination  with  what  is  admittedly  the  latest
portion  of  the  NT  evidence.

I  Tim.  3i^  '  If  a  man  seeketh  iiriaKovT)  he  desireth
a  good  work.  The  bishop,  therefore,  luust  be  without
2.  (a)  Pastoral  ';<'P''oach,'  etc.  {d  ti%  iinaKoirr,s
Epistles.  opJyfTai.  KaXoO  (pyov  (iridvfiet  btl
olv  rbv  iiriaKoirov  avfiriXrjfjLirTov  (li>ai
Af.T.X. ).  The  whole  conception  of  the  function  of  an
iwluKovos,  as  it  is  here  descriljcd,  suggests  that  the
authority  which  he  wields  is  indeijcndent,  not  merely
that  of  a  memlx.-r  of  a  governing  board.  To  begin
with,  (iriffKoirri  does  not  give  any  idea  of  assessors  :  it
is  distinctly  personal.  It  is  a  position  of  independent
importance  and  control,  such  as  a  man  may  naturally
desire.  Secondly,  the  epithet  '  given  to  hospitality '
{(f>i\6^evos)  suggests  a  personal  responsibility  ;  the
Church's  duty  of  showing  hospitality  to  Christians  from
other  parts  seems  naturally  to  centre  in  some  one  person  ;
we  could  scarcely  have  had  '  Presliyters  must  be  given
to  hospitality'  {du  oT^v  irpta-^vT^pov^  (t>i\o^^voi>s  flyai).
In  like  manner,  '  apt  to  teach  '  (oiSanTiKoi)  would  scarcely
be  a  qualification  for  a  member  of  the  prcsbyteral  Ixsdy
as  such  ;  and  the  same  may  Ije  said  of  the  epithets  fj.r}
irdpotvos,  fj.r]  TrXriKTrji,  '  not  passionate  or  ungoverned  in
temper.'  The  control  of  his  own  house,  again,  gives
the  thought  of  independent  jurisdiction  in  the  case  to
which  it  is  made  a  parallel — ■  how  shall  he  act  as
(TTifjLfXtjTTfii  of  the  church  of  God  ?  '

The  singul.ar  noun  with  the  article  may,  according  to
Greek  usage,  be  taken  generically  ;  but  we  must  ob-
serve that  ( I )  when  the  w  riter  passes  on  to  give  a  similar
list  of  qualifications  for  a  deacon  the  plural  is  use<l  :
•  Deacons  in  like  manner  .  .  .  Women  in  like  manner
.  .  .  Let  deactnis  \>c  husbands  of  one  wife '  [diaKOfovs
uxraiTw^  .  .  .  7i'i'a(Acas  uxraiTwj  .  .  .  Sidicovoi  laTwaoty
fiids  yvvaiKos  &v5pfs  (in  the  last  case  the  use  of  the
singular  with  the  generic  article  would  have  avoidetl  an
awkward  phrase)];  (2)  in  Tit.  1  7,  we  have  an  e.xact
parallel:  Sti  yap  t6v  (Trianoirov  k.t.\.,  where  we
might  easily  have  had  5ft  yap  <Vt(7/c6iroij  k.t.X.  ;  (3)
the  usage  of  the  article  in  the  Pastoral  I'.pistles  is  a.
further  reason  for  hesitating  to  explain  it  here  as  generic,
for the  article  is  very  sparingly  employed, and  then:

1  (.\naIogous  to  MH  fjn,  superintendent  in  the  synagogue  or
elsewhere. See  Jastrow's  Z.*jr.].


BISHOP

seems  no  example  at  all  parallel  to  these  in  any  of  the
three  Epistles.

The  difficulty  is  to  some  extent  met  by  insisting  on
the  use  of  iiri(TKOiroi  as  a  descriptive  epithet  rather  than
as  a  formal  title  :  '  He  who  exercises  iiriaKOiry).'  In  so
far  as  his  status  in  the  Church  is  dwelt  on,  such  a  man
would  be  spoken  of  most  naturally  as  '  one  of  the
elders ' ;  but  here  the  subject  in  hand  is  the  function  to
be  exercised  by  him  individually.  That  function  is
iirtffKOTrr) :  in  the  exercise  of  it  he  is  (irLffKoiros.  The
watchful  oversight  which  is  regarded  as  '  an  excellent
work '  is  not  an  eminent  position,  but  a  responsible
activity.  He  who  is  lo  exercise  it  needs  to  have  certain
special  qualifications  We  feel  the  contrast  when  we
come  to  SiaKSvovT  waaiTus,  which  introduces  in  an
ordinary  way  the  members  of  a  large  and  subordinate
class.

The  passage  in  Acts  20  is,  as  we  have  seen,  quite
indeterminate. If  eirlffKoiros  can  be  shown  to  be  a  title
, ,,  ~^., in  use  at  the  time  in  question, we  may
1^  ■ '  .  .  render the words, '  hath set you as

JMl  writings,  jjj^^opg  .  Otherwise  we  should  perhaps
render  them,  '  hath  set  you  for  oversight.'  The  phrase
in  the  Epistle  to  the  Philippians,  if  taken  quite  by  itself,
would,  in  the  light  of  later  history,  be  naturally  rendered
'  with  the  bishops  and  deacons '  {ffvi>  i-jna-Kdiroa  Kal
SiaKJfois),  notwithstanding  the  absence  of  the  definite
article.  If,  however,  iirldKotros  be  not  yet  found  as  a
title,  a  less  definite  interpretation  may  be  allowed.  The
decision  between  the  two  views  must  depend  on  a
further  consideration  which  shall  include  the  use  of  the
term  5iaKovo%  at  this  period  [see  DEACON,  §  6],  and
the  use  of  (iriaKoiros  outside  the  NT,  in  other  than
Christian  contexts,  and  in  the  earliest  Christian
writings.

In  the  use  of  iwlaKOTro's, iiriffKOTre'li/, in  other  than

Christian  contexts,  a  great  width  of  meaning  is  notice-

^  able,  due,  no  doubt,  to  the  original  signilica-

_.  ■  . . .  ' tion  which  fitted  the  words  for  application


usage.


to  any  person  who  exercised  an office  of


superintendence.  The  commissioners  who
superintended  Athenian  colonies,  various  other  commis-
sioners or  inspectors,  magistrates  who  regulated  the  sale
of  provisions,  and,  apparently,  financial  officers  of  a
temple  or  of  a  guild  (Lightf  Phil.  95  ;  Hatch,  Organisa-
iion  of  Early  Christian  Churches,  2>7 /■) — ■^H  these  are
spoken  of  as  iiricTKOiroi,  or  are  said  iiricrKoirf'tv.  Nor
was  this  the  only  term  which  had  a  similar  largeness  of
reference  :  quite  parallel  is  the  usage  of  iwifieXelv  and
iirififX-qT-qs  (Hatch,  see  above).

In  the  EXX  the  word  eiriaKoiroi  is  equally  wide  in
the  persons  and  offices  which  it  embraces.  Taskmasters,
captains  or  presidents,  and  commissioners,  are  in  turn
so  entitled  ;  and  as  a  synonym  in  the  last  of  these  cases
we  find  also  iiriaraTai  (Lightf.;  see  above).

All  this  evidence  points  to  the  fact  that  i-rrlffKOiro^  and
iiriffKowfLi'  were  words  which  naturally  offered  themselves
as  descriptions  of  any  persons  charged  with  responsible
oversight,  and  were  the  more  available  in  that  they  had
no  predominant  association  with  any  one  class  of  officers
in  particular.  The  words  were,  as  far  as  possible,
colourless,  much  as  our  words  '  preside'  and  '  president'
are  to-day.

Hatch's  position,  adopted  by  Harnack,  in  reference
to  €iri(TKoiroi  is  as  follows : — The  most  important  corporate
B  Hatch's  '^u'^'^''""  °^  ^^^  earliest  Christian  communities
'. ,  was  that  of  providing  for  their  poor  and  sick

^'  memliers.  They  were,  in  fact,  benevolent
societies,  and  as  such  they  had  p.arallels  all  around
them  in  the  heathen  world,  in  the  countless  clubs  and
guilds  wliich  combined  social  purposes  with  certain
religious  practices.  The  finance  officers  of  these  heathen
societies  were  called  iiriaKoirot.  Now,  the  duties  which
the  Christian  iiri(TKOiros  had  to  perform  .are  described  as
intimately  connected  with  the  care  of  the  poor,  with
hospitality  to  travelling  brethren,  and  with  the  manage-

579


BISHOP

ment  of  the  common  fund  which  was  devoted  to  these
and  similar  purposes.  It  is  probable,  therefore,  that
both  the  title  and  the  functions  of  the  Christian  iwLaKOiroi
are  directly  derived  from  his  heathen  counterpart.

The  best  examination  of  this  theory  is  that  by  Loen-
ing  [Gemeindevcrfassung  des  Urchristenthums,  21  ff.).
6 Criticism  ^'^''^''  Pointing  out  the  very  general  signifi-


ofit.


cation  of  the word ivlffKowoi  in  Greek


literature — a  signification  which  enabled
it  to  be  applied  to  any  person  in  authority  for  whom
there  was  no  fixed  title  already,  and  so  to  be  used  with
great  freedom  by  the  LXX  as  a  rendering  for  various
officers  mentioned  in  the  O T — he  takes  up  the  evidence
of  the  inscriptions  on  which  Hatch's  theory  mainly  rests.
They  fall  chronologically  into  two  classes.  The  first
class  is  pre-Christian  :  one  inscription  of  the  Macedonian
period  in  the  island  of  Thera,  which  contains  a  decree
ordering  certain  iwlaKoiroi  to  receive  moneys  and  invest
them  ;  and  two  inscriptions  of  the  second  century  b.  c.  ,
in  the  island  of  Rhodes,  relating  to  municipal  officers
not  further  defined.  Those  of  the  second  class  lx.'long
to  the  second  and  the  third  century  A.  n. ,  and  are  found
in  a  district  E.  of  the  Jordan.  They  are  ten,  and
refer  to  municipal  officers.  In  one  case  the  officers  are
charged  with  some  responsibility  for  the  moneys  of  a
temple.  In  this  district  they  seem  to  have  formed  a
kind  of  municipal  board,  chosen  from  various  \.r\\y&s
or  divisions  of  the  community.  Further,  in  a  Latin
inscription  of  the  fourth  century  certain  episcopi  regulate
prices  in  the  market.

This  appears  to  Ix;  the  whole  of  the  evidence  on  which
the  statement  that  iirlffKoiroi  were  the  finance-officers  of
clubs  and  guilds  is  found  to  rest.  In  Loening's  opinion
it  points  exactly  in  the  opposite  direction.

As  to  the  other  part  of  the  argument, — viz.,  that  the
Christian  iirlcKoiros  is,  as  a  matter  of  fact,  a  finance-
officer, — that  is  no  peculiarity  of  function  linking  itself
especially  to  the  title.  To  the  presbyters  at  Jerusalem
gifts  are  brought  ;  and  presbyters  are  warned  not  to
e.xercise  their  office  '  for  filthy  lucre  '  (EV  ;  alffxpoKepSws,
1  Pet.  52)  :  moreover,  in  Polycarp's  letter  tp  the  Philip-
pians (chap.  11)  presbyters  are  charged  with  duties  to-
wards the  poor  and  are  warned  against  covetousness.
The  word  iiriaKoiros  in  itself  suggests  a  far  wider  re-
sponsibility than  the  mere  charge  of  finance  :  it  implies
superintendence  of  persons  as  well  as  of  things.

Loening  even  goes  so  far  as  to  suggest  that  the  word
iwi(TKoiros  was  chosen  just  because  it  had  no  fixed
associations  either  in  the  Jewish  or  in  the  Greek  world,
and  was,  therefore,  free  to  be  used  in  a  community
which  stood  in  contrast  to  all  other  communities  sur-
rounding it.

In  the  extreme  scarcity  of  evidence,  we  may  be
content  to  say  that  the  theory  that  the  Christian
iwl(TKOiros  derived  his  title  and  functions  from  those  of
the  officers  of  the  Greek  guilds  or  of  the  Greek  munici-
palities has  not  been  established.

We  may  say,  then,  that  the  NT  evidence  seems  to

point  to  the  existence  in  the  apostolic  age  of  two  classes

_  . oi  administration — a  class  of  rulers  and

* , .  a  class  of  humbler  ministrants  who  acted

conclusions,  ^^^j^^  ^^^-^  ^^^^^^ ^^  ^^  ^  ^j^^  j^^^,

of  these  has  a  distinctive  official  title  its  members  are
called  Elders  ;  but,  since  their  function  was  summed
up  in  the  general  responsibility  of  oversight  (iirurKOTrT/)),
they  could  be  spoken  of  as  'overseers'  {iiriffKOwoi).  a
term  which  was  already  passing  from  a  mere  description
of  function  into  a  definite  title.  The  men  of  the  second
class  aided  those  of  the  first  in  the  humbler  parts  of
their  ministration.  They  were  naturally  described  liy
the  general  designation  of  'servants'  {SidKovoi) ;  but
this  term  too  is  passing  in  the  apostolic  age  into  a
recognised  title.  On  the  whole,  it  seems  simpler  to
suppose  that  the  latter  stage  has  been  reached  in  Phil.  1 1
and  in  the  Pastoral  Epistles  ;  but  the  decision  of  this
point  is  not  a  matter  of  serious  importance.


BISHOP

In  the  later  history,  the  second  class  retains  its
desipnalion,  which  in  some  localities  conies  to  t»e  a.  title
of  considerable  dignity.  The  first  class,  on  the  other
hand,  presently  underRtxis  a  subdivision  :  one  nieniljer
comes  to  stand  out  alxjve  his  fellows,  and,  whilst  all
continue  alike  to  be  Klders,  the  title  of  iiriffKoiros,
which  in  itself  connotes  an  individual  responsibility  and
importance,  is  not  unnaturally  appropriate*!  as  the
designation  of  the  one  who  has  come  to  lie  the  supreme
officer  of  the  community.  The  causes  which  led  to  a
monarchical  development  are  still  wrapt  in  obscurity  ;
but  the  appropriation  of  the  name  iirla Koiroi  to  the
chief  ruler  is  not  hard  to  understand.  We  arc  fortunate
_.  .in possessing a document of the last

f  R^m  decade  of  the  first  century,  by  which  we
can,  to  some  extent,  test  the  position
which  we  have  taken  up.  The  Epistle  of  Clement  of
Rome  to  the  Corinthians  was  occasioned  by  the  ejection
from  their  oflice  of  certain  lilders  of  the  church  in
Corinth.  As  the  writer  may  cjuite  well  have  had
personal  knowledge  of  one  or  more  of  the  apostles,  his
evidence  is  of  high  importance,  not  only  for  determining
the  existing  organisation  of  the  church  in  Corinth  (and
probably  in  Koine  as  well)  in  his  time,  but  also  as
indicating  the  Iwlief  that  this  organisation  was  instituted
by  the  apostles  themselves.

First  let  us  consider  the  use  of  the  designations  in
question  in  the  most  important  passage.

(8  42)  '  The  apostles  .  .  .  appointed  their  first  fruits  (cp  i  Cor.
10 15),  having  tested  them  by  the  Spirit,  to  be  ori-rstYrs  and
servants  («U  eirtcritojrouv  »cai  ftoxoi'ovf)  of  them  which  should
believe.'  The  words  have  clearly  become  titles,  and  their  use
as  such  is  justified  as  being  not  new,  but  foretold  in  Is.  61 6.
It  is  curious  that  iioKoi/ous  in  this  citation  is  an  insertion  of
Clement's,  and  is  not  found  in  the  I-XX.  He  is  clearly  quoting
from  memory,  and  his  memor)-  h.is  played  him  false.  (8  44)  '  The
apostles  foresaw  that  there  wouKl  be  strife  about  the  title  (or
'oflTice  ')  of  oversight  (trtpl  toO  ofo^arot  tVj?  kir>.<iKoiri\<i).'  Hence
they  appointed  the  aforesaid  and  provided  for  successors  to
them.  It  is  a  sin  to  turn  such,  if  they  have  discharged  their
ministry  bhimelessly,  out  of  their  «jri<r>cojn}.  '  Blessed,'  he  goes
on  at  once,  'are  the  Ehicrs  who  have  gone  before,'  and  are  safe
from  such  treatment.  In  §  47  we  have  the  offence  described  as
a  revolt  '.igainst  the  KIders ' ;  in  8  54  we  re.id  '  Let  the  flock  of
Christ  be  at  pe.ice  along  with  the  appointed  KIders ' ;  and  in
f  57,  '  Do  ye  wlio  began  this  sedition  submit  yourselves  to  the
Elders.'

It  is  plain,  then,  that  the  persons  whom  the  apostles
'  appointed  as  iirlaKoiroi'  and  as  their  successors,  are
spoken  of  also  as  '  the  apjxjinted  l-llders."  These  Polders
are  not  to  be  rashly  ejected  from  their  XeiTovpryia  or
iirtffKotrrj.

The  difficulty  which  Clement's  epistle  presents  in  the
matter  of  these  designations  belongs  to  the  earlier
chapters,  liefore  he  has  come  to  speak  definitely  of  the
Corinthian  disorders  :  he  seems  to  use  the  term  '  elders  '
as  though  he  referred  not  to  an  office,  but  only  to  a
grade  of  persons  dignified  by  that  name  in  contrast  to
the  young  {oi  v^ot).

In  the  first  of  the  passages  in  question  (§  i)  he  praises  their
former  orderliness,  'submitting  yourselves  to  your  rulers  (or
"  leaders,"  roit  jfyovfitt^n  vfLutv),  and  paying  the  due  honour  to
the  elders  that  were  among  you  :  and  on  the  young  ye  enjoined
modesty  and  gravity  ;  and  on  the  women '  certain  appropriate
duties.  Similarly,  in  g  21  we  h.ive,  Met  us  reverence  our  rulers
(toit^  irpoTf-yovfifVout  rifiuiv),  and  let  us  honour  our  elilcrs,  let  us
instruct  the  young  ...  let  us  guide  our  women  aright."  Here
we  seem  to  have  a  contrast  between  'rulers'  and  'elders' :  and
it  has  been  held  (r.g^.,  by  Harn.ick)  that  the  '  nders '  are  a  class
of  persons  whose  authority  came  from  their  possessing  the
charisma  of  te.nching  (cp  Heb.  13  7  24),  whilst  the  KIders  are  an
undefined  grade  of  senior  members  of  the  Church  to  whom
honour  is  due  on  .iccount  of  age  and  length  of  disciplesbip.
But  the  word  I'f'oi,  occurring  in  f)oth  passages  (not  t'eioTtpoi,  as
elsewhere  so  often),  Ls  an  important  clue,  which  has  not  been
sufficiently  attended  to.  Clement  is  in  fact  alluding  to  a  pssage
of  Isaiah,  which  he  cites  with  some  additions  in  §  3  :  so,'  he
says, 'of  old  the  mean rose  up  against the honourable, the

Toung  against  the  elder  (oi  viox.  irii  Toiit  irp«<r^vT«'pout),'  Is.  85.
t  would  be  possible  to  interpret  'the  nders'  as  the  civil
rulers  to  whom  Clement  several  times  applied  the  term  ^you-
ftrrat  (I  37);  but  on  the  whole  it  seems  most  natural  to  sup-
pose that  at  first  he  is  c-\refully  avoiding  definite  references
to  the  Corinthian  revolt,  and  only  preparing  the  way  for  ius
direct  rebuke.  Thus  he  spteaks  in  the  most  general  terms  of
'the  rulers,'  and  passes  rapidly  away  from  the  word  'elders,'

581


BISHOP

just  introducing  it  as  a  hint  beforehand,  but  dwelling  on  the
root-meaning  which  was  still  strongly  felt  in  the  word,  and
contrasting  it  with  ot  vioi  in  accordance  with  the  OT  pasjtoge
which  is  in  his  mind.

No  argument,  therefore,  can  safely  be  baseil  on  the
rhetorical  use  of  the  word  '  elders '  in  the  o|)ening  part
of  the  letter.  No  doubt  the  KIders  were  elder  men  ;
and  no  doubt  the  revolt  came  from  some  of  the  younger
men  :  this  was  a  part  of  its  heinousncss,  and  the  covert
allusion  would  Ix:  understood  by  those  to  whom  the
letter  was  addressed.

The  development  of  the  monarchical  episcopate  lies
outside  the  limits  of  the  NT  ;  but  even


9.  Later


within  the  Canon  we  find  indications  of  a


op  t.  tj.nje„j,y  ^hich  the  later  history  enables
us  to  interpret  as  moving  in  this  direction.

We  have  noticed  that  all  passages  which  descrilw  the
functions  and  responsibilities  of  Elders  sjxink  of  them
as  a  class  and  in  the  plural  numljer  ;  whilst,  on  the
other  hand,  where  the  duties  of  oversight  {iitiaKoiri))
are  pourtrayed,  the  iirhKowo^  is  spoken  of  as  a  single
person,  charged  with  responsibility  —  and  this  in  one
place  in  sharp  contrast  to  the  diaKovoi,  and  in  the  other
immediately  after  KIders  have  been  mentioned  in  the
plural  number.  From  this  we  may  gather  that,  in  as
far  as  a  memljer  of  the  ruling  class  was  thought  of  as
^TTt'cr/iOTros,  it  was  natural  to  consider  him  by  himself  as
exercising  an  independent  control  and  holding  a  position
of  eminent  authority.

As  far  as  terniinologj',  then,  is  concerned,  the  way  was
prepared  for  the  distinction  that  presently  came  into  force.


10.  '  Episcopos '

easily
individualised.


The  word  Airier Kowoi  suggests  an  in-
dividual, just  as  the  word  irpfff^vTfpoi
suggests  the  nienilx.'r  of  a  ruling  class.


the  word  dtaKovoi  the  memV)er  of  a
serving  class.  The  class  of  rulers,  however,  did  not
need  two  designations,  and  when  the  course  of  develop-
ment led  to  a  suiireme  officer  it  was  easy  and  natural  to
appropriate  to  him  the  word  (■jrlaKoiroi.  while  his  inferior
colleagues  were  simply  termed  irpeff^vTepot.

But  this  consideration  does  not  really  give  us  any
guidance  as  to  the  causes  of  the  change  from  government
«,,  by  a  body  of  co-ordinate  iirianoiroi  or

foreshadowed  ^'p'''^'''^'P<''.'^  government  by  a  single
. „_,  f  7rt(r*.-07ro5  with  a  consultative  college  ot

TrptfffivTtpoi.,  among  whom  he  is  primi/s
inter  pares.  The  apostolic  age,  however,  presents  us
with  several  foreshadowings  of  the  monarchical  rule
which  presently  became  universal.  In  the  church  in
Jerusalem  the  position  of  James,  the  Lord's  brother,
was  one  of  real  if  undefined  authority,  and,  though  not
marked  by  any  special  title,  it  closely  resembles  that
of  the  bishop  of  the  second  century.  We  have  the
statement  of  Hegesippus  that  on  the  death  of  James  his
cousin  Symeon  was  appointed  by  general  consent  to
fill  his  place  (Kus.  HE  iii.  11).  Here,  then,  was  a
monarchical  type  of  government,  naturally  evolved  an<l
continuously  recognised  ;  and  such  an  example  could
not  fail,  as  time  went  on,  to  exercise  an  influence  on
other  communities.

In  the  Greek  world  the  churches  of  Paul's  foundation
were  from  the  first  controlled  by  the  strong  hand  of
their  foimder.  It  is  true  that  he  urged  them  to  corporate
action  of  their  own  in  the  exercise  of  juristliction  and
discipline  ;  but  he  himself  commanded  them  with  an
authority  beyond  challenge,  and  his  commands  were
otieyed.  In  certain  cases  he  transferred  this  his  apf«-
tolic  authority  to  delegates,  such  as  Timothy  and  Titus  ;
but  only,  it  would  stem,  for  a  period,  and  in  order  to
cope  with  s[XK.-ial  neetls.  Still,  in  doing  this,  he  had
given  a  practical  proof  of  the  advantage  gainetl  by  the
presence  in  a  conununity  of  one  who  could  rule  with
supreme  authority ;  and  this  temporarj'  sway  would
doubtless  help  in  determining  the  tendency  of  subse-
quent development.

These  examples,  however,  would  have  been  powerless

582


BISHOP

by  themselves  to  produce  so  great  a  change,  had  there  not

_.  , been  elements  in  the  life  of  the  communities

*^  which  made  for  the  concentration  of  authority

, .  in  particular  hands. It  is  often  said that

c  airman.  ^^^^^^  ^^  element  is  discoverable  in  the
working  of  the  presbyleral  college  itself.  Any  board
which  meets  for  the  transaction  of  business  nuist
needs  have  a  president.  The  ho  der  of  this  position
would  naturally  acquire  a  large  share  of  the  authority
of  the  Ixsard  itself ;  in  time  he  would  tend  to  become  a
supreme  officer  over  the  whole  community.  This
suggestion  is  open  to  two  serious  criticisms.  On  ihe
one  hand,  there  is  no  ground  for  thinking  that  in
parallel  cases  at  that  period  such  a  development  from
oligarchical  to  monarchical  rule  came  about.  Presidents
of  this  kind  were  often  elected  for  a  month  or  for  a
year,  and  in  any  case  did  not  acquire  an  independent
authority.  Moreover,  the  term  '  presbyteral  college '
may  be  challenged,  if  it  is  intended  to  suggest  that  the
practical  administration  of  the  Church  was  carried  on
by  means  of  formal  meetings  of  the  Elders  as  such.
We  have  no  evidence  of  any  kind  that  they  regularly
met  in  this  way.  It  is  probable  that  they  had  special
seats  in  the  assembly  of  the  community  ;  but  that  they
met  by  themselves  for  the  transaction  of  business  and
required  a  chairman  is  a  hypothesis  for  which  no  evi-
dence has  yet  been  given.

It  is  only  when  we  turn  our  attention  away  from  the
administration  and  fi.\  it  on  the  common  worship  of  the

.„ Rather '^'^"'''^'^'  ^^^'  ^^*^  begin  to  get  any  rays  of


leader  in
worship.


light  on  this  problem.  If  we  knew  better
the  history  of  the  eucharist,  it  is  not  un-
likely that  the  history  of  the  episcopate
would  cease  to  be  so  perplexing.  In  the  disorders
which  disgraced  the  Lord's  Supper  in  Corinth,  and  in
Paul's  regulations  for  checking  them,  we  hear  nothing
at  all  of  any  kind  of  presidency  or  leadership.  In  the
same  church  before  the  end  of  the  century  we  find
elders  spoken  of  as  the  leaders  of  the  eucharistic  worship
and  as  '  offering  the  gifts. '

The  picture  which,  fifty  years  later,  Justin  draws  of
the  eucharist  in  Rome,  shows  us  a  single  officer,  spoken
14  Justin's  °^  simply  as  'the  president'  (6  Trpoeorws
.  Tuiv  d8e\(pui'),  receiving  and  offering  the
eucharistic  elements,  and  making  the
eucharistic  prayer,  to  which  the  whole  congregation  re-
sponds with  the  Amen*  (§  3).  Likewise,  after  the  read-
ing of  the  Gospels  or  the  Prophets  '  the  president '  makes
an  exhortation  based  upon  what  has  been  read.  He  is,
moreover,  the  depositary  of  the  collection  made  in
behalf  of  the  poor,  and  has  a  general  responsibility  for
widows  and  orphans,  for  the  sick  and  needy,  for  prisoners,
and  for  travelling  brethren  from  other  communities
(.4/>.  i.  65-67).  This  president  is  clearly  the  bishop,
though  Justin's  language  does  not  help  us  to  decide
whether  he  was  at  that  time  known  in  Rome  by  the
title  iwiaKowos  or  not.  If  he  was,  it  by  no  means
follows  that  Justin  would  have  said  so.  He  is  writing
for  heathen  readers,  and  he  avoids  technical  terms  ;  or,
if  he  finds  it  convenient  to  use  them,  he  explains  them.
Thus,  in  speaking  of  the  deacons,  he  describes  them  as
'  those  who  with  us  are  called  SiaKovoL '  (oi  KoXovfievoi
Trap'  i]fjuv  dLOLKOvot)  ;  and  his  usual  term  for  the  Gospels
is  '  the  memoirs  of  the  apostles,'  to  which  in  one
place  he  adds  'which  are  called  gospels'  (A  KoXe'iTai
(uayyeXLa).  We  can  argue  nothing  from  the  absence
of  the  designation  '  bishop '  :  had  he  cared  to  introduce
it,  he  would  no  doubt  have  done  so  by  the  phrase  '  he
who  with  us  is  called  iiriffKOiroi'  (6  KaXoOfjievoi  trap'
rjfjuv  eiriffKoiroi).  But  the  person  is  there,  if  the  name
is  not  ;  and  we  see  that  important  collateral  functions
belong  to  the  officer  who  presides  at  the  eucharistic
service.  He  appears  as  at  once  the  instructor  and  the
almoner  of  the  whole  community.

It  is  a  long  step,  however,  from  Clement  to  Justin,  and
it  is  of  some  importance  to  us  that  we  should  have  evidence

583


BITHIAH

of  a  like  development  in  other  parts  of  the  Church.

Two  passages  may  be  cited  which  point  in  the  same

,  . P . direction  for  the  eastern  side  of  the  Medi-

Chiurch  ^'-"'■'"''^"•^''^"-  ^-  I"  'he  Didaa^  (chap.  10/  )
the  prophets  are  spoken  of  as  holding  a
position  of  special  importance  in  reference  to  the  eucharist:
they  are  not  bound  by  the  prescrilxid  formuUi;  of  thanks-
givings, but  may  '  give  thanks  as  they  will.'  This
implies  that,  if  present,  they  naturally  take  a  prominent
part  in  the  service.  They  may  order  an  atfa/)^  to  be
held  {opi^ftv  Tpiir fi^av)  ;  and  to  them  the  first  fruits  are
to  be  given,  '  for  they  are  your  chief-priests'  (chap.  13).
The  same  document  declares,  however,  that  the  ministry
(XfiTovpyia)  of  the  prophets  and  teachers  was  likewise
exercised  by  the  bishops  and  deacons  (chap.  15).  It  is
safe  to  suppose  that  if  no  prophet  were  present  the
conduct  of  the  service  would  \>e  in  the  hands  of  the
permanent  local  ministry,  .although  in  this  case  there
woulfl  be  no  exemption  from  the  duty  of  using  the
prescriljed  formulae.

2.  The  Ignatian  Epistles,  as  is  well  known,  portray
the  completed  development  of  the  three  orders  for
certain  Asiatic  churches  at  a  comparatively  early  period.
It  is  noteworthy  that  the  one  bishop  is  expressly  con-
nected with  the  one  eucharist  (for  references,  see
Eucharist).  No  eucharist  is  to  be  held  without
the  bishop,  or  some  person  deputed  by  him  to  conduct
it.  There  is  '  One  bishop,  one  altar,  one  eucharist '
(eh  iiricTKOiroi,  iv  dvcnacTTripiov,  fxla  evxcLpicrrla).

We  may  feel  confident,  then,  that  in  the  development
of  the  eucharistic  service  we  have  an  element — jx;rhaps
the  most  important  element — of  the  development  of  the
monarchical  episcopate.

As  soon  as  this  monarchical  rule  had  been  established
in  a  church  various  sacred  parallels  which  would  Ix;
_.  .  taken  as  confirmatory  of  the  divine  order  of
■  ^°*  the  institution,  would  l>e  observed.  The
°  '  bishop  and  his  presbyters  might  be  com-
pared with  Christ  and  his  apostles.  Or  again,  the  three
orders  of  the  Christian  Church — bishop,  presbyters,
and  deacons — would  find  a  ready  analogy  in  the  high
priest,  priests,  and  Levites  of  the  Jewish  ritual.  Such
parallels  would  serve  to  confirm  the  validity  of  the
institution,  and  would  facilitate  its  adoption  in  other
localities.

Meanwhile,  the  extraordinary  ministry  of  apostles
and  prophets  had  passed  or  was  rapidly  passing  away.
Some  of  the  functions  which  they  had  e.xercised  were
essential  in  the  Church ;  and  these  devolved  as  a  heritage
upon  the  permanent  ministry.  The  prestige  which  had
attached  to  their  e.xercise  passed  over  in  the  main  to
the  chief  officers  of  the  community,  who  thus  came  to
lie  regarded,  with  a  large  measure  of  truth,  as  the
successors  of  the  apostles,  wielding  apostolic  authority
as  the  rulers  of  the  Church  and  the  defenders  of  the
Christian  faith.  J.  A.  R.

BISON ip''!. dison), Dt.  14  st AV^e- ; RV l;as

PVGAKG  [q.V.].

BIT  (:n?D),  Ps.  329  EV.  See  Bridle,  3
BITHIAH  (n;n3;  reAiA  [B],  BeeeiA  [A],  <l)<\e-
Goyi'Sk  {}-•])'  '  daughter  of  Pharaoh,"  and  wife  of  Mered
ben  Ezrah,  in  the  genealogy  of  jLii.VH  (i  Ch.  4 18).  On
the  assumption  that  'Pharaoh'  (,ny-i9)  is  correctly  read,
Bithiah  (which  might  lie  explained  'daughter — i.e.,
worshipper — of  Yahwe '  [Olsh.  §  277^])  mi^ht  be  a
Hebraised  form  of  an  Egyptian  name  such  as  Bint-Anta,
'  daughter  of  Anta  '  ('Anath),  to  indicate  that  the  bearer
of  the  name  had  entered  the  Israelitish  community.

This,  however,  does  not  accord  with  the  view  implied
in  the  vowels  of  the  name  of  Bithiah's  husband.  Mered
apparently  means  'rebellion,'  and  suggests  a  warning
against  the  wickedness  of  taking  foreign  wives  (see
Ezra9i,  and  cp  2  Ch.  2426).  It  would  be  inconsistent
with  this  that  Mered's  wife  should  bear  the  honourable

584


BITHRON

name  '  daughter  of  Yahwi- '  :  we  should  expect  to  find
the  old  heathen  name  retained.  I'erhaps,  then,  Hithiah
is  not  the  rijjht  name  ;  ©"'s  ytXia  suggests  to  Kittcl
.tH'-  •'*"''  ®''  *  <t>ciOdovia  may  conceivably  Ix;  based  on
nina.  which  in  turn  may  have  sprung  from  nSna.  pro-
ducing a  description  of  Mered's  non-Jewish  wife  as  'a
young  Egyptian  princess'  (Mered's  otlier  wife  'the
Jewess' (JKIHIJIJAH  (</-t:)]  is  not  named).  However,
the  corruption  is  antecedent  to  ©,  and  the  whole  story
(half-told,  half-implied,  by  the  text  as  it  now  stands)  is
imaginary.  The  idea  of  the  double  m.arriage  of  Mered
had  not  occurred  to  the  original  compiler ;  the  true  text
conveys  no  warning  against  mixed  m.arriages.  Four  at
least  out  of  the  live  names,  Mered.  Hitliiah,  Pharaoh,
Jehudijah,  arul  Hodiah,  are  corrupt;  [x-rhaps  indeed
all  five  are.  Mered,  or,  more  strictly,  M-R-D,  has
probably  come  from  M-R-TH,  which  is  an  incorrect
form  of  R-M-TH — i.e.,  Ramoth — or  rather  of  Jarnmth
(see  Mkkku).  *  Hithiah  '  is  not  improbably  a  corruption
of  'Kcaliah'  (.rSya,  i  Ch.  12s  [<^^i-  ^i-  6]).  Pharaoh
should  rather  be  n^ps,  a  clan  name  (cp  Pirathon).
Ha-Jehudijah  (RV'"*.')  and  Hodiah  are  plainly  the
same  name  (in  v.  19  read  Snvit,  '  his  wife").  Accepting
this  view,  we  have  two  accounts  of  the  family  of  Mered.
It  is  not  cjuite  certain,  however,  that  the  i)erson  mis-
called Mered  is  represented  as  having  two  wives.
Hodiah  may  have  been  deliberately  substituted  for
Bealiah,  from  a  dislike  to  the  first  element  in  that  name.

We  are  now  rid  of  the  only  case  in  the  OT  of  a  name
compounded  with  Jah  (,t) — of  such  names  there  are  157
— being  borne  by  a  foreigner  (cp  Gray,  Hl^N  158).
Next,  another  mistake  has  to  be  noted.  It  is  plain  that
I  (h.  4  17  as  it  stands  is  not  right.  The  remedy  is  (with
Berth,  and  Kitt.)  to  transpose  j'.  \%b  to  the  middle  of
V.  17,  inserting  of  course  I'^m  after  n,nni.  This  gives  us,
as  the  children  of  Rithiah  or  Realiah,  Miriam  (?),
Shammai,  and  Ishbah  the  father  of  Eshtemoa.  Eshtemoa
also  occurs  (together  with  Keilah)  in  the  list  of  the
children  of  Hodiah  [v.  19),  while  Gedor,  Soco,  and
2^inoah  are  connected  with  Mered  through  Hodiah's
double,  Ha-Jehudijah — an  important  notice  (seeMERKu).
It  is  perhaps  sad  to  have  lost  what  was  supposed  to  Ixj
an  early  testimony  to  the  presence  of  an  l'",gyptian  ele-
ment at  and  about  Eshtemoa,  as  contrasted  with  the
more  purely  Jewish  character  of  Gedor,  Soco,  and
Zanoah  ;  but  we  gain  an  attestation  of  the  traditional
importance  of  Jarmuth.  It  may  be  added  that  in
Jewish  legend  Hithiah  becomes  the  foster-mother  of
Moses  {Wtyyikra,  K..  par. i ).  T.  K.  C.

BITHRON  (prisn.  THN  nARATeiNoycAN  [BAL],
)Qa^^  w»-djL,  beth-horon)  '  the  groove'  or  'cleft'
par  exieUrme  situated  between  the  Jordan  and  Maha-
naim  (2  S.  2291),  and  possibly  to  be  identified  with
the  \V.  'Ajliin,  along  which,  though  at  a  later  time,
ran  a  Roman  road  from  'Ajlun  to  Mahanaim  (Buhl,
Pal.  121);  see  Im'hr.mm,  Wood  ok.  For  the  sense
of  Bithron  cp  ©s  rendering  of  ina  in  Cant.  2 17  [iprj)
KoiXwfjArwv  (like  KoiXds  in  ©  for  pcy).  The  reading
Bithron  is  not  certain,  and  the  \'ss.  give  little  help.^
although  'Vg.  (cp  also  Aq.'s  fiedwpwy)  suggests  that
there  was  another  Beth-horon  E.  of  Jordan  (see  HoRO-
NAIM).  Thenius's  conjecture,  Beth-haram,  is  im-
probaV)le.

BITH'yNIA(BieYNlA[Ti.  WH]),  the  district  round
the  central  Sangarius  (SaJtaria)  in  the  NW.  corner  of
1  Oeopranh  '^^''^  Minor,  extending  from  the  mouth
6  P  y-  Qj-  ji^g  Rhyndacus  [EJrenos  Chai)  east-
wards to  that  of  the  Sangarius.

The  Ixiiimlary  between  liithynia  and  the  province  of  Asia
coinciiie<l,  not,  as  niisht  have  Ijeen  expected,  with  the  line  of  the
Rhvndacus,  hut  with  that  of  the  range  of  the  Mysian  Olympus
{Kcshish  Dagh)  lying  N.  of  the  river  (Fliny,  //.V5i4a). The

•  8  is  unintelligible  and,  to  judge  from  its  similarity  to  the
Heb.  (cp  We.  Dr.  iui  loc),  has  arisen  perhaps  from  a  trans-
literation.

585


BITHYNIA

eaxtern  frontier  is  often  made  to  coincide  with  the  Billaios  or
with  the  I'arlhenioit,  or  even  to  extend  Ixryond  the  Litter  river,
in  spile  of  Stralxj's  statement  that  the  mouth  of  the  .Sangarius
marked  the  Uiiindary  (543,  rrtv  BitfvKtay  opi'^tt  irpif  roit
cK/3oAaif).  Inland,  it  ran  out  far  K.  of  the  river  ;  but  the  line
is  indeterminate.  .\uCording  to  I'li.iy  (/AV  6  149),  the  Micro*  or
Sibcris  separated  iiithynia  from  the  province  (iaialia;  but  the
boundary  fell  some  la  m.  K.  of  that  stream  (Kanis.  Hist,  lirogr.
0/  A.M  195),  whence  it  ran  W.  between  the  Sangarius  and  its
tributary,  the  Tcmbris.

The  will  f)f  Nicomedes  III.,  the  last  of  its  kings,  left
Hithyiiia  to  the  Romans  in  74  B.c:.  ;  but  it  was  not  until
2  Ristorv  ^'*  "■'  ■'  ^'"-■"  '^'-'  sultan  of  Pontus  had  Ixren
^'  finally  exjielled  from  Asia,  that  Pomjjcius
could  undertake  the  organisation  of  the  jirovincc  (cp
Plin.  /•-'/.  aii  J'rai.  79).  With  it  was  now  combined
the  whole  of  the  kingdom  of  Pontus,  with  the  exception
of  those  districts  towards  the  IC. ,  as  well  as  those  in
the  interior  (Paphlagonia),  which  were  assigned  to  native
dynasts  in  recognition  of  their  services  to  Rome  (Str.
541.  See  Niese  in  Hermes,  1839,  and  Rhein  Mus.  38
567  ['83]).  Amisos,  which  lay  immediately  E.  of  the
Halys  {/s'izil  /rntck),  was  the  most  easterly  community
of  that  part  of  Pontus  which  was  combined  with  the  old
kingdom  of  Nicomedes  to  form  the  Roman  province.

This  dual  origin  of  the  province  was  recognised  in  its  official
title,  Pontus  et  Iiithynia  (so  generally  in  inscriptions,  both  Lat.
and  Gr.  ;  cp  Appian,  Mithr.  121,  CIG  3532  3548,  CI L  l>%iti).
The  reverse  order  is  perhaps  upon  the  whole  later,  encouraged
by  the  gradual  growth  in  importance  of  the  western  section.
Either  name,  apparently,  niigiit  be  used  to  denote  the  entire
province  (cp  Tac.  Ann.  12  21  with  Dio  Cas.  tK)33;  CH'i  ly^r,,
Bull.  Hell.  11  212).  In  administration  also  the  two  pans
retained  a  certain  degree  of  foriiLiI  independence,  each  having
its  own  metropolis  and  Diet  {com ilium).

In  the  distribution  of  provinces  by  Augustus  in 27

B.C. Pontus- Hithynia remained senatorial  —  i.e., its

p . governors, who were of Pnvtorian rank,

. °,.' bore  the  title 'proconsul'  (Str. 840,  Tac.

Apostolic.  ^^^  l74lt)i8).  The  ofticial  residence
was  Nicomedeia.  Under  the  ineffective  supervision  of
the  Senate  the  province  gradually  became  disorganised  :
its  finances  fell  into  disorder,  and  unregulated  collegia
gave  birth  to  turbulence  and  faction.  In  order  to  carry
out  the  necessary  reforms,  the  younger  Pliny  was  sent
into  the  province  in  112  A.d.  His  importance  arises
from  his  official  contact  with  Christianity  {£pp-  "d  'J'rai.
96  and  97.  See  Hardy,  Pliny'.':  Correspondence,  51  /,
Rams.  Church,  196/,  and  cp  Christia.v,  §  6/.).

In  the  early  period  of  post-apostolic  history  Hithynia
is  illustrious  ;  but  it  has  little  connection  with  the
apostles  themselves.  The  salutation  of  i  Pet.  1 1,  where
Pontus  and  Hithynia  are  mentioned  separately,  bears
witness  to  the  rapid  evangelisation  of  the  province.
Before  112  A.D.  Christianity  had  made  such  progress  in
Biihynia  that  jjagan  ritual  was  interrupted  and  the
temi^les  in  great  part  deserted  (Pliny,  Ep.  ad  Trai.  96).
We  get  a  hint  that  there,  as  in  Ephesus,  trade  interests
were  at  the  bottom  of  the  att.ack  then  made  upon
the  Christians.  The  conlagio  istius  superstition  is  (super-
stilio prava  immodica),  as  Pliny  calls  the  faith,  would
most  easily  enter  the  province  by  way  of  Amisus,  along
the  route  leading  from  the  Cilician  Gates  by  Ty.lna  and
Cit'sarea  MazAca  in  Cappadocia.  Ramsay  {Church,
225)  conjectures  from  Pliny's  letter  that  its  introduction
nmst  fall  about  65-75  A.D.

Amisus  is  now  Samsun.  Even  in  Strabo's  time  it  was
gradually  displacing  Sinopg  (Sinufi)  as  the  great  harbour  on
the  north  coast.  The  route  from  Carsarea  Ma/aca  northwards
T'/Vi  Aqux  Saravenx,  Euagina,  and  .\m.Tseia,  to  .\inisus,  is  even
to-day  '  the  only  ro.-id  practicable  for  arabas,  and  must  always
have  been  a  great  trade-route'  (Rams.  //ist.  Geo^r.  a/  AM,
268).

The  interpretation  of  the  word  Bithynia  in  Acts  I67

is  connected  with  the  question  concerning  the  Galatian

. . ., churches (see Galatia). On the N.

4.  Acts  107.  Galatian  theory,  the  object  of  Paul's  vain
attempt  to  enter  Bithynia  must  have  been  to  reach  either
Amisus  or  Amastris  ;  for  a  design  of  preaching  in  the
barbarous  interior  is  improbable.  The  direct  route  to
Amastris  went,  it  is  true,  by  way  of  AncjTa  in  Galatia. ;
586


BITTER  HERBS

but  on  the  other  hand  no  such  route  could  have  brought
the  apostle  '  over  against  Mysia '  (so  RV  ;  Kara  ryjv
"hlvalav).  F'urther,  both  in  Roman  and  in  ordinary
usage  Amastris,  and  still  more  Amisus,  was  a  city  of
Pontus,  not  of  Hithynia ;  and  only  the  word  Pontus
could  have  been  allowable  as  a  single  term  to  express
the  dual  province  to  which  it  belonged  (as  is  clear  from
Str.  541  compared  with  543,  in  sjieaking  of  Heraclea).
The  expression  '  to  go  into  Bithynia '  can  only  be  taken
to  imply  W.  Bithynia — i.e.,  the  district  round  Niccea
and  Nicomedeia,  where  the  wealth  and  administrative
machinery  of  the  province  were  centred.  Dorylaion
(E-iki-shehr),  only  a  few  miles  S.  of  the  Bithynian
frontier,  was  the  point  to  which  all  the  roads  from  the
south  converged  ;  Paul  and  his  companions  must  have
l)een  somewhere  in  this  neighbourhood  when  they  were
suddenly  diverted  westwards  (Acts  I67).  W.  J.  W.

BITTER  HERBS.  BITTERNESS  (Dni?? ;  ni-
KpiAec'  laitunr  agnstcs,  Ex.128  Xu.  9ii;  niKpiA.
ainarltudiries.  Lain.  3  15  ;  in  Mishna  also  in  sing.)  are
twice  mentioned  along  with  nWD  as  the  accompaniment
of  the  paschal  feast.  Probably  such  herbs  —  whether
separately  or  mi.xed — as  lettuce  [Lactuca  Scariola,  var.
sativa),  chicory  {Cichorium  Intybus),  and  endive  {Cich-
oriuin  Endivia)  are  meant.  Doubtless  they  originally
came  into  use  simply  as  a  relish  or  salad, ^  though  the
prescription  of  them  in  the  Law  may  have  to  do  with  the
atoning  significance  of  the  Passover  ;  their  association
with  the  sufferings  of  the  people  in  Egypt  is  probably
a  later  view  (Xowack,  HA  2  173). See,  further,  Pass-

OVKK.

'Bitter  herbs,'  rather  than  'bitterness'  (©,  EV),
seems  to  be  the  projier  rendering  in  Lam. 3 15,  where
D'TO  answers  to  n:v'?,  '  wormwood,'  in  the  parallel
clause.  N.  M. — w.  T.  T.-D.

BITTERN,  RV  Porcupine  ("liSf?,  eyiNOC,''  ej-icius  ;
Is.  II23  34ii  Zcpli.  2i4t).  The  identity  of  this  animal
1  Ph'l  Intnr  C^^'^- '^''/A'"') 's  far  from  certain  :  opinions
1.  rmioiogy.  ^j.  ^^^^^  variety  have  been  held.

The  ancient  versions  un.-inimously  render  'Hedgehog'  (or
'Porcupine' — the  two  were  scarcely  di.^Hinguished),  and  this  is
in  general  supported  by  Jewish  tradition,  though  Rashi  thinks
that  in  Is.  34 11  Zeph.214  a  bird  is  meant,  and  D.  J^imhi
interprets  'Tortoise''*  in  all  three  pass.iges  (see  their  com-
mentaries in  locc.\  Of  modern  Bibles  Wycliffe's  has  in  all
three  pl.-ices  'Urchin,'  and  so  Luther  (followed  as  usual  by  the
Dutch),  '  Igel.'  Junius  and  Tremellius  in  their  Latin  O T  render
anataria  ('  duck-eagle ') ;  Coverdale,  followed  by  the  Great
Bible,  has  'Otter'  in  Is.  I423  and  'Stork'  in  Is.  34 11  Zeph.
2i4,  while  the  Geneva  Bible  has  in  Isaiah  'Hedgehog'  (I423
mg.  or  'tortoise'),  and  ni  Zephaniah  'Owl'  (mg.  or  'hedge-
hog'). The  p'rench  Protestant  version  seems  alone  to  have
anticipated  AV  in  the  rendering  'butor'  (mg.  ou  '  bievre ').
The  Roman  Catholic  Bibles  follow  the  Vulgate. 5

The  etymology  of  the  Hebrew  word  is  not,  however,
uncertain.

It  is  derived  from  a  verb  which  in  Assyrian  means  '  to  plot,'
transitively  (Sargon,  KIB  2  b6/.),  and  in  Arabic  (i)  'to  inflict
a  blow  on  the  neck  of  another'  ;  (2)  '  to  have  a  thick  or  loose
neck.'  The  original  sense  is  perhaps  better  seen  in  Syriac,
where  the  saijie  verb  meatis  'to  gather  iiito  a  heap  orball
(trans,  or  intrans.);  the  sense  of  drawmg  together  also  underlies
the  Assyrian  use  (cp  'intrigue,'  intricarc).  The  verb  occurs
but  once  in  OT  Hebrew  (in  Piel  form),  Is.  38  12—'  I  have  rolled
up  (or  possibly  'shortened,'  see  Dillmann  ad  he.')  like  a  weaver
my  life,' — a  simile  referring  to  the  treatment  of  the  finished

J  iriitpi's  is,  according  to  Dioscorides  (2 159),  the  wild  variety  of
iript.%  (chicory  or  endive);  Pliny  (xix.  838)  mentions  it  as  the
bitterest  sort  of  Icutuca  (see  the  reff.  in  Di.  on  E.x.  128,  and
in  Nowack,  If. 4  2173):  Picris  echioides  is  probably  intended
by  both.  It  does  not  of  course  follow  that  the  meaning  of
On'nO  is  identical  with  that  of  niKpiSe^.

3  Vegetable  food  with  meat  is  a  dietetic  necessity,  and  wodld
naturally  be  e.iten  raw  until  it  was  disco'  ered  th.-it  certain  kinds
were  best  cooked.  It  is  a  matter  for  curious  inquiry  why  so
many  .salad  herbs  were  bitter,  at  any  rate  in  their  feral  form.
Dandelion  is  a  striking  example.

'  Also  used  to  render  fPl,  Is.  1823,  and  TIBp,  Is.34i5.

*  Which  he  wrongly  supposes  to  be  the  meaning  of  Ar.
kunfudh.

*  Explanations  of  these  various  renderings  will  1>e  found  in
Fuller's  Miscellanea  Sacra,  1  18  ;  Bochart's  Hieroz.  836.

587


BITUMEN

web :  t  the  use  of  the  noun  .TTSjp  in  Ezek.  725  accords  well  enough
with  this  derivation.

Kipp5d  is  equivalent  in  form  to  Aram.  kuppHdha,
Ar.  kunfudh  ;'-'  and  that  these  are  the  words  for  'hedge-
hog '  in  their  respective  languages  is  made  clear  for  Ar.
(e.g. )  by  Uamiri's  account  (Haydt  al-Haiwdn,  Bulak
edition,  ii.  219)  and  for  Aram,  by  the  Syr.  Physiologus
(Xjun^s  Anecdota  Syriaca,  442/.).'  The  instances  of
ni£3j3.  Kisip,  in  late  Heb.  and  Aram,  prove  the  same  for
post-biblical  Jewish  usage  (see  Lewysohn,  Zoologie  dcs
Talmuds,  100).

Whilst  the  philological  evidence  is  thus  entirely  in
favour  of  the  rendering  'hedgehog'  or  'porcupine,'  it
_  2oolooTr  "^"^^  ^^  admitted  that,  zoologically,
°^'  there  are  considerable  difficulties.  The
animal  is  always  spoken  of  in  connection  with  desola-
tion, and  once  in  relation  to  pools  of  water ;  and,
whilst  both  these  conditions  would  be  natural  in  the
habitat  of  the  Bittern,  they  have  no  particular  associa-
tion with  either  ths  Hedgehog  or  the  Porcupine.
Again,  in  Is.  34  n,  the  nisp  is  mentioned  among  birds  ;
and  in  Zeph.  2 14  it  is  prophesied  that  the  Pelican  and
the  kippod  shall  lodge  together  in  the  capitals  of  ruined
Nineveh,  while  'a  voice'  (if  the  text  may  be  trusted)
shall  sing  in  the  windows.  The  answers  made  by
Bochart  to  these  objections — that  the  Porcupine  or
Hedgehog  was  regarded  as  an  unfriendly,  desert-loving
animal  on  account  of  its  formidable  equipments  ;  that
we  can  find  parallels  to  the  mention  of  a  beast  among
birds  in  such  enumerations  as  Lucian's  '  large  oxen,  and
horses,  and  eagles,  and  bears,  and  lions ' ;  and  that  the
capitals  on  which  the  animal  is  to  sit  may  tie  those  of
fallen  columns — are  ingenious,  but  perhaps  scarcely
satisfying.  It  has  been  suggested  that  the  translation
'  bittern '  may  be  reconciled  with  the  etymology  by
considering  the  fact  that  this  bird  has  the  power  of
drawing  in  its  long  neck  so  that  its  head  almost  rests
upon  its  breast.'*  .Still,  it  is  not  easy  to  set  aside  the
argument  derived  from  the  meaning  of  the  word  in  the
cognate  languages.

The  Bittern,  Botaurus  stellaris,  is  found  in  marshy
and  reedy  places  throughout  Europe,  Asia  (including
India),  and  Africa,  Canon  Tristram  records  its  occur-
rence in  the  marshes  of  Hideh.  It  is  a  nocturnal  bird
of  considerable  size,  and  is  remarkable  for  its  loud
booming  note.  Formerly  a  conmion  bird  in  suitable
localities  in  Britain,  it  is  now  but  a  winter  visitor.  It
is  grouped  with  the  Herons  in  the  family  Ardeidce.
(Cp  also  CoRMORA.NT  and  Pelican.)

For  Is.  34  1 1  (I'lrr;  RVin*:.  '  bittern ')  see  Owl,  §  2(4)

N.  M. — A.  K.  .S.

BITTERNESS,  WATER  OF  (D-I^n -D),  Xu.  5i8
RV,  AV  '  bitter  water.' See  JEALOUSY,  Okdeal  ok.

BITUMEN,  the  proper  rendering  (i)  of  'HDn,'  as
RVniK- recognises (ac4)aAtOC  ; bitumen; EV has

t  This  evidence  seems  enough  to  show  that  the  original  sense
was  'to  contract  or  'cause  contraction  by  striking,'  not  to
'cut  ;  and  that  those  were  misled  who,  like  Fuller  and  nearly
all  the  older  scholars,  explained  the  name  of  the  animal  from
the  latter  sense.  In  post-biblical  Hebrew  and  W.  Aramaic  the
sense  of  cutting  is  fairly  common  ;  but  this  may  be  explained
partly  perhaps  from  a  misinterpretation  of  WEj?  in  Is.  38 13,
and  partly  from  association  with  Or.  kotttm  and  its  derivatives  :
cp  Syr.  Kupdd  (N.S.  kiipta),  'a  piece  of  flesh'  — late  Or.
KOiraZiov.

2  So  i^tbiopic  kefi/iz.  It  seems  more  probable  that  the
Arabic  word  is  a  loan-word  from  .Aramaic,  than  that  llEp  is
borrowed.  Frankel,  however  (/I  ra/«.  Fremdw.  xiv.),  holds  that
the  latter  is  the  case.

3  Cp,  for  Syriac,  the  other  references  cited  by  P.  Smith.
■Kuppedkd  appears  to  be  used  for  the  '  owl '  in  Kul.  iv.  Dim.
(367).

*  Cp  Brehm's  Thierleben  (Leipsic,  '79)  6  388.  '  When  it
(the  Bittern)  rests  and  is  at  ease,  it  holds  the  body  erect  in  a
somewhat  forward  position  and  draws  in  its  long  neck  to  such
an  extent  that  its  head  rests  upon  its  neck.'

5  Ar.  homar.  Perhaps  with  reference  to  the  reddish  colour
occasionally  observed  ?  (Diosc.  1  99).

588


BIZJOTHJAH

slime")  in  Gen.  11  3  14  10  Kx. 23t;  Imt  also  (a)  of
")^l3,  which,  like  its  Aram,  cognate,  is  an  .\ss.  loan-word
(KV  riTcil)  in  (Jen.  6  14!,  where  its  occurrence  furnishes
one  of  the  proofs  of  the  liabylonian  origin  of  the
Deluge- Story  (see  Dkluge,  §  13).  In  the  Ilab.
Deluge-Story  six  '  !ars'  of  kupru  (las.  '  bitumen")  and
three  of  »(W//*  (naphtha  :  Jensen)  are  poured  upon  the
outer  and  inner  sides  of  the  ship,  respectively.  Iddu,
'  naphtha,"  is  the  word  used  in  the  legendary  account  of
the  infancy  of  Sargon  I.  (3  K.  458a  ;  A'/^<''  556) : — '  she
placed  me  in  a  basket  of  reeds,  with  iddu  my  door
she  shut "  ;  in  the  similar  story  of  Moses  the  words
TOn,  'bitumen,'  and  npj.  Pitch  {q.v.),  are  combined
(I'.\.  23  do-^aXroj  tnaao.  [B*'*"],  but  d<r^aXr6m<ro'o
[U*.\K]).  The  origin  of  bitumen,  or  asphalt,  and
naphtha  need  not  delay  us  long.  Together  with
petroleum  and  mineral  tar,  they  form  a  series  of  sub-
stances which  are  the  result  of  certain  changes  in
organised  matter.  These  substances  merge  into  each
other  by  insensible  degrees,  and  it  is  impossible  to
say  at  what  point  mineral  tar  ends  and  asphalt  begins.

N.iphth.-i,  which  is  the  first  of  the  scries,  is  in  some  places
found  flowing  out  of  the  earth  as  a  clear,  limpid,  and  colourless
liquid.  As  such  it  is  a  mixture  of  hydrocarbon.s,  some  of  which
are  verv  volatile  and  evaporate  on  exposure  ;  it  fakes  up  oxygen
frocn  the  .-lir,  becomes  brown  and  thick,  and  in  this  state  it
is  called  petroleum.  A  continuation  of  the  same  process  of
evaporation  and  oxidation  graduallv  Iraiisfnrms  the  material
into  mineral  tar,  and  still  later  into  solid  ghissy  asphalt.

Asphaltic  deposits  are  widely  diffused  throughout
the  world,  more  especially  in  tropical  and  sub-tropical
regions — for  example  in  the  basin  of  the  Dkad  Sea
(q.v.,  §  6).  The  asphalt  of  the  Dead  Sea  (which  was
very  well  known  to  the  ancients)  is  not  at  present  of
commercial  importance  ;  but  the  sources  of  the  supply  of
ancient  Babylon,  the  bitumen  springs  of  Hit  (the  Is  of
Herod.  I179),  are  still  used.  At  this  very  old  city  on
the  Euphrates  the  shipwrights  adhere  to  the  ancient
fashion  of  boat-buikling.  Tamarisk  and  mulberry
branches  form  the  substratum,  which  is  covered  with
mats  and  thickly  Ixismeared  with  bitumen  (cp  Ex.  23).-
Bitumen  was  much  used  in  architecture  (see  Gen.  11  3).
Unburned  brick  protected  by  a  plaster  of  bitumen
proved  the  most  indestructible  of  materials  (see  Assyria,
§  6,  Bahyi.onia,  §  15,  and  cp  Peters,  Nippur,  2162).
Bitumen  was  used  in  ancient  times  as  a  fuel  (Verg.
Eel.  883),  for  medicinal  purposes  (Jos.  Zf/  iv.  84)
and  for  embalming  (see  I^.mhai.ming).

BIZJOTHJAH,  RV  Biziothiah  (H^nvn),  among
the  cities  of  Judah  in  the  Xegeb  (Josh.  I528).  C*-^  {koL
oX  Kuifiai  avrOiv  k.  at  €Trav\(ii  av.  [L  om.])  enables  us  to
restore  thus — .Tni:3l  ( '  and  her  villages  ').  See  We.  C//
132,  and  HoUenberg,  A/ex.  Uebers.  d.  B.  Jos.  ("76),  14.

BIZTHA  (Kn-T3  [Ba.,  Ginsb.  for  common  'T3],
AAAZAN  [BX»L^],'  B&Z.  [X<=-*].  -Z€A  [A]),  a  chamberlain
of.-\hasiierus  (lOsth.  lie).  If  any  reliance  could  be  put  on
the  reading  of  the  Vss. ,  one  might,  with  Marq.  (I-'und.
71),  compare /uaj'av  with  O.  Pers.  mazddna — i.e.,  pia,  or
(ia^av,  with  ^a^avrjs,  the  name  of  a  eunuch  of  Darius  III.

BLACK  (D-in.  "irrj*,  nii^,  "^^'n)  and  blackish

("l"ip)  Job6i6  ;  see  Coi.oL-Rs,  §  8.  "  BLACKNESS;  for
Prov.  79  RV  and  Joel  26  Xah.  2io,  see  Colours,  §  17  ;
for  Jol)3  5  ib.  §  8  n.,  for  Is.  0O3  id.  §  8.

BLAINS  (nyarn^X),  E.x.  99/ 1. See  Boil,  §  3.

BLASPHEMY  (nVKJ  2K.I93  Is.  373:  niVN3
Neh.  91S26; 'X: EzJk'soij; BA&c4)HMi<\ Tob.  TiS

1.  The  word. '  ^''''"-  '^^  ^"-  ^'-^3'  2665). The  word

so translated is derived from  a root

({•Kj) meaning  literally 'to  scorn or  reject"  (see  2  S.

12 14  Ps.  74 10  18  Is.  525). In  Hebrew,  therefore,  it  can

naturally  be used to  describe  an  attitude  of hostility

J  Perhaps  connected  with  hamtu,  '  burning,  fiery  '  (HaKvy).
2  .See  the  illustration  called  'A  Noachian  Boatyard  at  Hit,'
Peters,  Nippur,  2  16a.

589


BLASPHEMY

towards  God  or  man,  things  holy  or  things  pro  fan
(Jer.  3324  Is.  GO  14  i  S.  217).

*  lihi-sphemc'  (tp  the  verb  'to  blame"  Romanic  hlatimare,
L.  hlatphitmlre,  and  sec  Murray,  s.v.),  however,  occurs  in  (he

KV  as  a  rendering  also  of  the  following  words :  ina  i  K.
21  1013  AV  (RV  'curse'J  RVmg.  'renounce";  cp  DaC.  on  Job
I5);  (JIJ  aK..10633  EV:=^Is.37623  KV,  Kzek.2027  KV,  N„.
1530  KV(AV  '  reproach  "),  Ps.  44  i6[i7)  KV  ;  (Cy.TnK)  apj  Lev.
24ii  C'  DC*)  V.  16  EV,  and  the  Gk.  ^Ao<r<^i)>icif  2  Mace  10^4
(not  V)  12 14  Mt.  2739  Mk.  828  (followed  by  to  6»«m<»  toO  ««oC),
Rev.  136,  I  Pet.  4  14.

In  I  Mace.  738  'blasphemies'  is  the  rendering  of
8vff<priijdai ;  in  v.  41  '  to  blaspheme '  represents  the
related  verb  Svfftprjfxfiv  ;  the  object  of  the  blasphemies
is  the  temple.  It  is  important  to  determine  the  sen.se  of
(i\aff<pT]fi.(ii'  accurately,  lx.'cause  the  sense  of  '  to  blas-
pheme' in  EV  follows  this  exactly.  In  a  word,  the
conce[)tion  of  'blasphemy '  in  current  English  is  narrower
than  the  conception  that  we  find  in  this  supposed  pattern
of  English  speech,  which  includes  all  modes  of  reviling
or  calumniating  (jod  or  man  (see  0  on  2  K.  196  [Heb.
lEijJ  194  [Heb.  n':i,i]  and  Is.  525  [Heb.  ^kjo  uncertain
coiij.].  and  cp  Acts  1845  186  Jude  9  with  Lk.  521  Jn.
IO36).

.•\mong  the  Hebrews  (whose  view,  it  is  needless  to
say, profoundly affected our own common law)

2 OT  RAnti '''^^P'i''"'y  or  the expression  of unjust,
.  derogatory  opinions  regarding  God  or  his

government  of  the  world  was  made  a
capital  ofl'ence  (Lev.  24  11  ;  cp  i  K.  21 13,  and  see  Jos.
ylnf.  iv.  86)  ;  the  blasphemer  must  be  'cut  off'  from  his
people  (Lev.  24  15  P;  see  Law  and  Jr.sricE,  §  13).
It  was  forbidden  to  use  the  name  of  God  lightly  (can
Dt.  5  11),  whether  to  ask  a  blessing  or  to  invoke  a  curse
(cp  Ex.  2O7,  and  see  Blessi.n(;  and  Cl'Rsi.ng,  §  i,  and
Schultz,  OT  Theol.  2  122^  [I'"I  ])•  Whenever  I.sr..el
is  brought  to  shame  Gods  name  is  scoffed  at  by  the
heathen  (Ps.  74  10  18).  At  a  later  date  it  was  held  to  be
a  mark  of  profanity  even  to  pronounce  the  real  name  of
the  (jod  of  Israel  (see  Lev.  24  11  and  cp  Names,  §  loq).
Josephus  [Ant.  iv.  86),  and  the  Rabbis  interpret  I'^x.
2228  as  a  prohibition  of  blaspheming  'strange  gods'  ;
but  the  interpretation,  however  much  in  the  interests  of
the  Jews  themselves,  imjilies  a  misunderstanding  of  the
use  of  eiohim  (see  Schultz,  2127).  It  was  on  a  charge
j_p  of  blasphemy — claiming  to  be  the  Christ,  the
Son  of  God — that  Jesus  was  found  wortiiy  of
death  (Mk.  I461-64  Mt.  266s  ;  cp  Jn.  IO33),  and  '  for
blasphemous  words  against  '  the  holy  place  and  the
law"  Stephen  was  condemned  to  be  stoned  (.Actseis
756^).  See  Stei'iik.ni.  By  blasphemy  against  the
Holy  Spirit  in  Mk.  829,  Mt.  I232,  was  meant  originally
a  definite  offence  of  the  scrilx.'s  and  Pharisees,  who  had
ascribed  Jesus"  cures  of  demoniacs  to  a  power  derived
from  the  prince  of  the  demons.  This  was  blasphemy
against  the  divine  power  which  had  come  upon
Jesus  at  his  baptism  (.\Ik.  lio  Mt.  3i6  Lk.  822).  In
Mt.  1232,  however,  a  later  interpretation  is  given,  which
implies  that  the  disciples  of  Jesus  had  thorou.i;hly
absorbed  the  idea  of  the  indwelling  Spirit.  The  Holy
Spirit  is  put  in  .antithesis  to  the  'Son  of  Man.'  One
who  fails  to  pierce  below  the  humble  exterior  of  Jesus
may  be  forgiven.  One  who  not  merely  rejects,  but
o[x>nly  disp;irages,  that  great  gift  which  '  the  Heavenly
lather  will  give  to  those  who  ask  him"  (Lk.  II13)
cannot  Ix;  forgiven  :  the  inward  impediment  in  the  nuui
himself  is  too  strong.  The  idea  of  the  original  distinc-
tion was  suggested  by  that  in  the  Law  (Num.  1627-31),
•A  parallel  to  it  will  be  found  in  the  Mishna  (Sanhedr.
10  i) — '  He  who  says  that  the  Law  is  not  from  Heaven
has  no  ^wrt  in  the  world  to  come  '  (n3.t  oSiy)-  The
later  interpretation,  however,  has  no  parallel,  and  is  a

'  This  rendering of  Tp3 is  very  doubtful  ; but it is  quite

possible  that  in  passages  like  Job  1  5  i  K.21  10  13  a  later  editor

substituted  ij-q  for  siyp  or  J'kj. In  Ps.  IO3  we  may  even  have

side  by  side  the  correction  ^H?  *nd  the  original  reading  j'KJ.

S90


BLASTING

profhict  of  the  Spirit  of  Christ  working  in  the  hearts  of
tlie  lirst  disciples.

BLASTING  (liDTj';  e^^^^  ANeMo4)eopi&  [Dt.
2822  2Ch.  G28],  eNnypiCMOC  [i  K.  837];  ©"•"-'
nYPcocicL'*^m.  49];  6''»«^''Qr,  A(})opi<\.  6*  A<t)eo.
©><*  airo.  [Hag.  217])  is,  as  we  learn  from  Gen.  41,
a  term  specially  applied  to  the  blighting  effect  of  wind
upon  corn.  The  root  in  Arabic  means  blackness  ;  and
the  Heb.  word  thus  descrii)es  a  blackening  (almost
burning)  process  which  is  regarded  as  due  to  a  severe  wind
— a  sense  which  is  expressed  by  the  various  renderings
of  ©.  The  word  is  in  each  passage  coupled  with  pp-\-
'  mildew."  Nevertheless,  it  is  doubtful  whether  wind  is
in  itself  sufficient  to  account  for  such  a  blackening.  In
the  British  Islands  wheat  when  young  assumes  a  yellow
colour  from  cold,  a  well-known  physiological  effect.
Under  a  burning  drying  wind,  it  might  turn  brown,
but  scarcely  fi/aci.  Further,  it  must  be  noted  that  in
Gen.  41  6  the  corn  was  in  ear  ;  it  had  made  its  growth,
but  the  ears  were  /kin — i.e.,  diseased.  It  seems  prob-
able, then,  that  the  effect  conceived  in  the  dream  was
that  produced  by  '  corn  smut,'  Ustilago  Carbo ;  and  that
this  is  the  real  meaning  of  \-\tpr3.  '  Mildew  '  is  the  other
common  disease  of  corn,  Puccinia  graminis.

N.  M. — w.  T.  T.-D.

BLASTUS  (BAactoc  [Ti.  WH]),  the  chamberlain
(6  ivl  Tov  KOLTu)vos,  prcffectus  cubiculi)  of  King  Herod
Agrippa  I.  (.\cts  12  20).

BLESSINGS  and  CURSINGS  (Tjl?,  to  bless— a
denominative  from  "^IS,  tlie  knee,  with  the  lower  part  of
the  leg;  perhaps  'to  cause  to  make  progress,' — and
")"!X,  to  curse  [cp  Ass.  anini  (i)  'to  curse,'  ardru  (2)  'to
bind  '],  and  their  derivatives  n3"13,  rT^XP,  in  parallelism,
chiefly  in  poetic  and  legal  sources  of  JED  and  later
imitations  ;  cp  Gen.  27  29  Dt.  11  26  Josh.  8  34  etc. ).

©  represents  -^^  by  fvXoyeiu,  ^^-^.z  ^Y  fvXoyia  (also  NT
words).  In  Hebrew  for  'cursing'  we  find  also  (a)  77pi  ri7  7p
(prop,  to  belittle?)  frequently.  (/')  T\h«,  verb  and  noun,  cp  ny32'
,"I^X  '  oath  of  cursing  '  Nu.  5  21  (RVn'S-  '  adjuration  '),  rendered
'execration,'  Jer.  42 18  44  22,  and  RV  only  Jer.  29i8;  its
derivative  n7Nri  occurs  in  Lam.  365t.  (c)  CVn  Dnnrt)  see  Ban.
('0  3:ip  only  in  the  Balaam  stories  (Nu.  22ii  23  8  24  10)  and
possibly  to  be  connected  with  ^pj  (prop.  '  to  pierce')  rendered  in
Lev.  24  II  16  'blaspheme.'  From  the  Jewish  tradition  which
explained  it  to  mean  '  pronounce,  .speak  aloud '  arose  the  deep-
rooted  belief  that  the  divine  name  was  not  to  be  uttered  under
any  circumst.ance  (see  Names,  §  109  n.).  Idolatry,  §  8.  (f)
n^Ur,  Is.  65  15,  EV  '  curse,'  properly  '  oath  '  as  in  RVmg.  ;  see
Oath  and  cp  Covenant,  §  5.

The  NT  words  are  {a)  a^aee^ari^iu  Mk.  14  71  (in  ©  for
mn>  Cinn)  ;  KaTafaee/u.alTi^w],  Mt.  26  74  Rev.  22  3  ;  see  Ban.
(/')  (caTapafofiai]  Rom.  12  14  Jam.  89  (in  ©  for  ^Sp,  "IINX  also
KttTapa  lial.3ioi3  .and  (caTdSenia  (RV'"S-  'anything  accursed')
Rev.  22  3  ;  cp  also  cTriicaTapaTos  '  under  a  curse,'  Gal.  3  10.  (c)
KaKoKoyeiv  Mt.  15  4  Mk.  7  10,  RV  '  speak  evil  of  (in  ©  for  '?'?p)  ;
see  Oath.

In  the  primitive  sense  of  the  word,  a  blessing  or  a
curse  was  a  spell,  pronounced  by  '  holy  '  persons,  and
containing  a  divine  name,  or  divine  names,  which  drew
down  the  divine  favour  or  disfavour  {i.e.,  prosperity  or
adversity),  as  the  case  might  require,  on  certain  other
persons.  It  was  a  consequence  of  the  hardness  of  life
that  curses  were  more  frequently  in  demand  than
blessings.  Thus  (a)  the  breaking  out  of  hostilities
between  states  naturally  led  to  the  solemn  utterance  of
formulae  of  cursing  against  the  enemy.  These  invoca-
tions would  be  uttered  at  the  opening  of  a  campaign,  and
especially  when  the  warriors  were  on  the  point  of
advancing  against  the  foe.  Goliath,  we  are  told,
'cursed  David  by  his  gods'  (i  S.  I743).  The  battle-
shout  certainly  had  a  religious  character  ;  and,  if  it  did
not  always  devote  the  enemy  to  destruction,  at  any  rate
it  invoked  a  blessing  on  the  national  side.  Cp  Ps.  68  1-3
and  the  story  of  Bai.AAM  [q.v.].'^ (b)  The  laws  too  had

1  Nu.  22  6  shows  that  Balak,  according  to  the  narrator,  was
about  to  tight  with  the  Israelites.


BLUB

sometimes  an  increased  sanction  through  the  cursing
formulas  attached.  Thus  KB  iv.  mentions  a  statute
respecting  the  maintenance  of  boundaries,  which  is
enforced  by  a  curse  on  any  one  who  should  violate  it.
To  this  category  of  curses  belong  those  in  Dt.  28.

It  is  true  that  a  series  of  blessings  is  attached  to  the
series  of  cursings.  Moses,  from  his  close  connection  with
the  Deity,  had  a  special  power  of  blessing  and  cursing.
After  him  the  priests  had  a  similar  power,  which  they
e.xerted  in  the  interests  of  the  faithful  community  (cp
Ukim  and  Thu.mmim,  §  6).  The  uplifted  hands  of  the
priest  drew  down  (as  it  were)  a  blessing  on  Israel  (cp
Lev.  922  Nu.  623-27)  and  a  curse  on  Israel's  enemies.
So  potent,  indeed,  were  the  blessings  and  the  curses  ot
the  reputed  founder  of  Israel  that  they  could  be  said  to
lie  on  the  two  sacred  mountains  which  enclose  the
original  centre  of  the  people — the  valley  of  Shechem —
ready  to  descend,  as  the  case  might  be,  with  rewards  or
punishments  (Dt.  11  29).^

Within  the  family  it  was  the  father  who  (according  to
primitive  ideas  not  unconnected  with  the  worship  of
ancestors)  had  the  mystic  privilege  of  determining  the
weal  or  woe  of  his  children  (Gen.  925^),  and  more
especially  when  his  days  were  manifestly  numbered  (see
Esau,  §  2,  Isaac,  §  5,  Jacob).  Nor  does  it  appear
that  the  early  Israelites  limited  this  power  by  moral  con-
siderations (see  Gen.  27  35).  Obviously,  however,  such
a  limitation  was  a  necessary  consequence  of  a  pure
monotheism.  The  post-exilic  writers  declare  that  only
the  offspring  of  the  righteous  can  be  blessed  (Ps.  37  26),
and  that  the  observance  of  God's  laws  ensures  his  favour
without  the  aid  of  priests  or  enchanters.  Fear  not,
then,  said  the  later  sages  to  their  pupils,  if  thine  enemy
curses  thee  :  '  the  curse  causeless  shall  not  come  '  ( Prov.
262).

Still,  even  in  post-exilic  time  we  sometimes  find  a
strange  half-consciousness  that  curses  had  an  inherent
power.  It  was  worth  while  to  curse  a  bad  man,
to  ensure  his  full  punishment — such  is  the  idea  of  Ps.
109 — a  strange  survival  of  primitive  superstition.

In  the  discourses  of  Jesus  we  find  blessings  and
curses.  They  are,  however,  simply  authoritative  declara-
tions of  the  eternal  connection  between  right-doing  and
happiness,  wrong-doing  and  misery  {e.g.,  in  the  case  of
Judas).

Parallels  to  the  Israelitish  view  of  blessings  and
cursings  outside  of  the  Semitic  peoples  hardly  need  to  be
quoted.  The  objective  existence  of  both,  but  especially
of  curses,  was  strongly  felt  by  the  Assyrians  and
Babylonians,  as  the  magical  texts  show.  The  Arabian
beliefs  on  the  subject  are  also  very  suggestive,  as
Goldziher  has  pointed  out.  See  Magic,  §  2  n. ,  and
on  the  '  curse-bringing  water'  (Nu.  5i8^)see  Jk.-vlousv,
Watkr  of.  t.  k.  c.

BLINDNESS  (DniJD,  Gen.  19  n  2K.  618;  p-Vir,
Dt.  2828  Zech.  124). See  Eye,  Diseases,  and  Medi-

CI.\E.

BLOOD.  For  blood  in  law  and  ritual,  see  Sacrifice  ;
Passover  ;  Clean  and  Unclean,  §  iff.  ;  Covenant,  g  5/.  ;
Kinship,  §  ly.  ;  and  Food,  §  9.  For  'avenger  of  blood'  ("TKj
D^n  ;  Dt.  196),  see  GoEL.  For  '  issue  of  blood  '  (putrts  a'i^arot ;
Mk.  525),  see  Disease,  Medicine.

BLOOD,  Field  of  (Arpoc  AlMATOc).  Mt.  2/8.  See
Aceldama.

BLUE  (n^53^).  E.x.  254,  etc.,  a  variety  of  Purple.
See  Colours,  §§  13,  15.

'  Blue  '  is  employed  in  EV  of  Esth.  1  6  to  distinguish  certain
kinds  of  stones. "Thus  for  ^^  we  have  AV  '  blue  marble,'  AVmg.

1  The  blessing  and  the  curse  referred  to  were  those  attaching
to  the  fulfilment  and  the  non-fulfilment  of  the  commands  of  the
Law.  They  were  '  laid  before '  Israel  _  by  Moses,  and  were
to  be  '  laid '  by  them  on  their  arrival  in  the  promised  land,
probably  by  solemn  proclamation,  on  Mounts  Geririin  and  Ebal
respectively.  In  Dt.  27  i2y;  we  have  a  later  writer's  interpreta-
tion of  this  command. See  Kue.  ThT,  1878,  pp.  297.^


BOANERGES

'marlile,'  RV  'while  marl.le '  ;  ;inil  for  ninb  KVinK-  'stone
of  l)lue  colour,'  KV  '  black  inurbic'  See,  however,  iMakulk,
and  cp  Colours,  |  i6.

Kor  '  lilucnc-is  '  in  I'rov.  20  3i)t  AV  (yijg  n^Tan,  '  blucness  of
wouiul ')  k\'  lia>,  belter,  'Mriiws  that  wound.'

BOANERGES  (BoANHprec  [Ti.  Treg.  WH  follow-
ing NAIU',  etc.  ;  BoANAp.  L-^*J.  '^'^  BoANCp-)'  a  name
given,  according  to  Mk.  3 17,'  to  James  [i]  and  John
the  sons  of  /oliedce.  The  reading  of  N,  etc.,  points  to
Poavi)  pyti  as  the  accepted  an.ilysis  of  the  name,  and
the  evangelist  explains  it  by  viol  fipovrrjt,  '  sons  of
thunder."  Kach  element,  however,  presents  some
difficulty.

1.  The  difficulty  in  taking  Boane-  to  be  '33,  line,
'  sons  of, '  is  to  account  for  oa  =  sheivd.

Attempts  to  explain  it  as  ,-\  phonetic  'corruption'  have  been
unsatisfactory.  '1  here  does  not  appear  to  be  any  historical
foundation'-'for  Hretschneider'scxplanationSofoa  as  a  corrupt  pro-
nunciation of  a  provincial  (Galilean)  a,  or  for  Hugh  liroughton's
statement-'  {Works,  620)  that  the  Jews  pronounced  s/i,"!i'ii  as  oa.

It  is  more  plausible  to  regard  the  corruption  as  textual.
Since  shinuii  =  a.  is  natural  enough  (cp  jSanj-^opafc,  Josh.  11*45
(.•\]),  and  shnvit=o  is  not  unknown  (cp  e.g.  lepoPoafi),  oa
might  be  a  conflate  reading.*  Dalman  (Cram.  122,  n.  2)''
supposed  the  transposition  of  an  o  which  originally  stood  after
p  (see  l>elow).  He  now  prefers  to  regard  either  o  or  a  as  a
gloss  ((/  arte  Jesu,  39,  n.  4).  In  some  such  way  the  double
vowel  must  have  arisen  ;  it  is  strange  that  the  MSS''  have  not
preserved  any  trace  of  variation  in  the  first  syllabli-.

The  orthography,  therefore,  cannot  be  explained
quite  satisfactorily.  We  may  be  reasonably  certain,
however,  about  the  signification.

2.  This  cannot  be  said  of  the  second  element  in  the
word.  The  evangelist  (or  a  scholiast)  understood  p-^i^
to  njean  ^povT-fj,  '  thunder ' ;  but  we  do  not  know  what
Semitic  word  it  was  supposed  to  represent,  nor  can  we
say  whether  the  interpretation  was  an  original  hypothesis
or  a  really  current  belief.

(o)  In  the  Syriac  versions  (Pesh.  and  Sin.)  pye?  appears  as
Vi-\.  That  may,  however,  be  nothing  more  than  a  translitera-
tion. Only  in  Arabic  does  c*:!  me.^n  '  thunder.'  If  it  occurs  in
the  OT  at  all 8  it  probably  means  'throng.'  In  Aram,  it  means
'tumult,"  rushing,' etc.  Ifpyc^is  cit,  therefore,  it  can  hardly
mean  '  thunder.' i*

Jerome,  indeed,  conscious  of  this,  declares  {Connii.  ad  Dan.
1  7)  that  the  true  reading  is  {ciiieniiatius  Ugitur)  benercem  (var.
banertein,  banare/ieiii)  —i.e..  sons  of  r^'eiii,  C'JTI  (cp  V.\.  li' 16
Pseudo-Jon.) — and  this  reading  he  quietly  assumes  in  his  I.i/>.
tie  nomiit.  Heb.  under  '  John.'  That  he  ignores  it  in  the  Comm.
on  Mk.,  however,  probably  shows  that  it  is  a  mere  hypothetical
emendation,!"  not  a  variant  reading  (cp  IJartim^us,  §  2).
Apparently,  therefore,  we  must  adhere  to  pyfs.

(/3)  The  second  letter  of  pyes,  however,  might  represent  not  j
but  y,  as  in  pey^ii  =  ncy-l ;  but  pyT  is  no  nearer  ^pom;  than  c':n-
Hesides,  y  Iwcomes  y,  as  a  rule,  only  when  it  is  represented  in
Arabic  by  g,  not  by  '  ;  but  although  there  is  in  .\r.  a  word
ragasa,  the  phonetic  equivalent  of  which  in  Hebrew  would  be
Cjn>  ra'aSa  (not  ra'^asa)  agrees  most  closely  with  g-y-i  in
meaning,  and  a  B'jn  =  n»'a/a  would  not  as  a  rule  appear  as
py«.

The  common  word  for 'thunder'  in  Hebrew  and  Aramaic
would  not  conflict  with  this  phonetic  principle  ;  the  nearest  word
in  Arabic  to  Hebrew  ra'am  is  ragama.  Drusius  (.Jr/  voces  NT
Comm.  prior  30  [1616))  therefore  and  Glassius  (/',*//.  Sacra,
[1625])  revived  the  theory  of  Jerome  that  py«t  should  be  pytii,
regarding  the  s  as  merely  a  Greek  termination  substituted  for
a  final  consonant,  dropped  as,  e.^.,  in  Gehenna.  No  doubt  -es
would  be  rather  a  strange  termination  for  a  man's  name  ;  but
Boanerges  is  not  a  man's  name  :  it  is  the  name  of  two  men.
Indeed Suidas gives the name as ^ooi/epyet? (as if the

'  There  is  no  hint  of  such  a  name  anywhere  else  in  the  NT
(cp,  however,  ||  I,k.  ll  14  [D])  ;  but  too  much  must  not  l)e  made  of
that.  Glassius  pointed  out  that  Boanerges  is  professedly  a  name
shared  by  two  men  (more  conveniently  called  '  the  sons  of
Zebedee'),  one  of  whom  met  an  early  death  (Acts  12).

2  Cp  the  strong  language  of  Kautzsch,  Gram.  d.  Bibl.-
Aratn.  q.

3  NT  Lex.,  s.v.

*  Adopted  by  Lightf.  {Hor.  Heb.  ad  loc),  who  instances
Moao-fliia  (Slrabo,  764)  for  *<7>''?.

0  So  (practically)  GlassiusYd.  1656).

*  So  now  Arnold  Meyer, /fiw  Mutterspraclu.

7  See  below  ifi).

8  MT  has  B-n  in  Ps.  55  15  and  nifJT  in  (54  3  (cp  im  in  2  i) ;
but  m  each  case  it  has  been  questioned  whether  the  text  is
correct. See  Che.  /'f.<2i.

*  There  is  no  reason  to  suppose  that  in  the  passage  cited  by
Lightfoot  (Megillah  B.  acjrt,  mid.)  the  word  means  '  thunder."

1"  A  corruption  of  oyn  into  pyn  (see  /3)  would  be  easy.

38  593


BOCHIM

plural  of  PoaKtpvjjt).  Be/a,  on  the  other  hand  (Adnotationtt
majores,  ati  loc.  [1594]),  tried  to  improve  on  I>rusius  by  .suggest-
ing that  a  mistake  had  occurred  in  a  Semitic  text  :  cjn  was
misread  ojn-  It  's  difficult  to  sec  how  this  could  I>c.  A
Semitic  text  containing  the  name  Din'33  would  not  need  t<j  give
an  explanation  of  the  name  (cp  col.  490,  n.  i).  On  the  other
hand,  a  Greek  translator  could  not  have  given  the  supposed
Correct  translation  if  he  had  misread  the  word.l

(y)  There  remains  the  possibility  that  s  =  \  (see  e.g.  Ahaz,
BoAZ).  Kautz.sch  (.I.e.)  suggests  that  py«t  may  represent
Ml'^  ('"?!)>  '  anger '  (cp  Dan.  3  13  and,  as  used  of  thunder,  the  Ar.
irtajaza  'r-ra'd")  ;  and  this  solution  is  adopted  by  I  ).ilman  (I.e.),
who  further  accounts  for  the  translation  ^po»^<). by  comparing
Job  372,  'iVp  Tjn,  used  of  thunder^  l\  «  ^^*--> O*!^*).

The  historical  origin  of  the  name  not  lx.-ing  known
(cp  Jamks,  i.  §  i),  we  cannot  determine  the  second
Semitic  element  with  certainty.  There  is  no  evidence
that  '  Hoanergcs "  can  ever  have  meant  strictly  '  sons  of
thunder.'  On  the  other  hand,  what  is  said  in  the
Gospels  of  the  sons  of  Zebedee  gives  a  certain  appro-
priateness to  such  a  title  as  i:i  <33,  taken  in  the  sense  of
'  angry,"  '  soon  angered  "  (or  the  like).  h.  \v.  h.

BOAR  (Tm.  eye).  Ps.  SOisCm]- See  Swi.ne  (end).

BOAZ.  I.  (Tr'a  hardly,  'quickness'  [BDB  Lex.'\;
Ass.  piazu  or  biazu  means  a  wild  boar  or  the  like  ;
but  sec  jAcuiN  AND  HoAZ  ;  Booc  [HA],  ooz  A  and
L  in  Ku.  2i5  48iCh.2ii/.)  of  liethlehem.  kinsman
of  Naomi  and  husband  of  Rltii  [y.f.  ].  According  to
the  post-exilic  genealogy,  Ku.  4i8_^  (cp  i  Ch.  2ix  ff.),
he  was  the  son  of  Salmon  or  Sai.mah.  and  the  ancestor
of  David  (§  i,  n.  2). See  Ruth,  Huzitk.

2.  The  name  of  one  of  the  two  pillars  set  up  before
Solomon's  temple (i  K.  72i  =  2  Ch.  317). See  Jachin

AND  H().\Z.

BOCCAS(Bokka[HA]),  I  Ksd.  82=  !':zra74,  Hikki,  i.

BOCHERTJ  ("n^a,  §  61  ;  for  the  ending -u,  cp  Jethro
and  see  Gkshk.m),  a  son  of  Azrikam,  .Saul's  descendant
(rCh.  838  =  944).  ©'**<AL_  however,  punctuated  and
read  —  doubtless  correctly  —  '  Azrikam  his  firstborn  '
(TrpiiyTl}TOKo%  avToO  :  nba).

©'-  makes  up  the  six  sons  of  Azel  by  enumerating  irMpta  in
the  fifth  place,  besides  a^apias  in  the  third.

BOCHIM  (D'D3,  §  103,  'weepers,"  kA&y0mcon
[HAL]),  the  name  of  a  place  near  Gilgal,  where  tlie
b'ne  Israel  sacrificed  after  the  visit  of  the  angel  of  Vahwe
(Judg.  2irt  D-Sari;  S"  KAAYGMCONec  [H]).  and  also
probably  of  a  place  in  Judah  (Mic.  1 10  emended  text  ;
see  below).  The  name  of  the  former  place  is  interpreted
'  Weepers  "  ;  but  the  passage  which  refers  to  this  (tf.  i^-
5a)  is  an  insertion  (see  Judges,  §  4)  based  upon  la,
where  we  may  expect  to  find  the  older  and  more  gener-
ally used  name  of  the  place.  Here,  however,  ©  com-
bining two  readings  gives  ^Trt  rbf  KXaiO/j-Qva  Kal  iwl
^aiOijX  (on  the  corrupt  Kal  [firl]  rbv  oIkov  laparjX,  see
Moore  ud  loc. ),  and  the  latter,  which  suits  the  con-
text well,  is  accepted  as  correct  by  most  critics  ( Hu.
Ri.  Sam.  10  ff..  We.,  Mey. ,  Kue. ,  Hu. ,  Kilt.).
We  nmst  therefore  correct  Bochim  in  \a  to
'Bethel."  The  explanation  of  '  Itochim "  in  v.  5a
suggests  a  doubt  as  to  the  correctness  of  the  present
form,  which  may  have  been  changed  to  agree  with  a
more  than  half  sportive  derivation  from  n:2.  '  to  weep. '
The  correct  pronunciation  must  have  been  BCka'im
(d'K33.  D"23) — /.?., 'Baca-trees' (seeMui.BEKKY).  These
trees  were  probably  abundant  near  Bethel,  and  it  is
possible  that  the  'Tree  of  Weeping'  (Ai.i.on  B.vclth)
grew  near  them.  The  play  on  the  name  would,  at  any
rate,  be  familiar  to  the  ancient  Israelites,  and  may  have
led  to  a  variety  in  the  pronunciation  of  the  name  (cp
Mareshah,  Moresheth).

1  Of  course  a  gloss  embodying  a  true  tradition  may  have  made
its  way  into  a  translation  of  a  faulty  MS.

*  J.  F.  K.  Gurlitt  had  considered  this  word  in  his  careful
discussion  in  St.  Kr.  (1829,  pp.  715-738).

*  So  now  also  Arnold  Meyer,  Jesu  Muttersprache,  51/.

594


BOHAN

There  is  an  early  testimony  to  the  form  Bochim  in
Mic.  lio,  if  iodd^Vk  133  (I"'V  '  wt-ep  not  at  all ')  may  be
emended  into  i^^n  0"33a  (©'■!'"'•'•  [I^V]  /3ax«M).  ' '"
Hocliim  (HOka'im)  weep'  (Eihorst,  We.,  Now.,  Che.,
omitting  the  intrusive  Sk,  'not';  cp  Che.  JQR,  July
1898).  No  locality  called  Bekaim  near  Micah's  native
town  is  known  to  us.  This  causes  no  difficulty.  There
may  have  been  many  places  where  Haca-trees  grew.
Tiie  alternative  correction,  '  In  Acco  weep  not '  (Reland,
Hitzig,  etc. ),  is  geographically  inadmissible.  We  cannot
well  suppose  a  Philistine  city  of  that  name  (G.  A.  Smith),
nor  does  Micah  concern  himself  with  Philistia(cpGiLOH).

BOHAN,  THE  STONE  OF  (;n3  jaX,  Baicon  [BA]).
an  unknown  point  on  the  boundary  between  Judah  and
Benjamin  (§  3),  Josh.  156  (BecoN  [I^]).  I817  (Baam
[A],  -N  [I^])-  Bolian  is  called  in  both  places  the  son
(sometimes  sons  [©'"-  in  18 17])  of  Rkuhen  ;  possibly,
however,  the  stone  or  rock  was  a  well-known  landmark,
thus  designated  on  account  of  its  supposed  resemblance
to  a  thumb  (jna)-

BOIL,  BOIL  (Botch)i  of  Egypt.  The  Heb.  word
{*nr,  si'/iin  [\\U  'an  inflammation,'  from  a  root  found
1  OT  names  '"  ^^^'  ^"'^  '^'"- '  '"caning  '  to  be  hot ')  for
■  ,  ~  the  '  boil  ■  in  the  si.xth  plague  of  Egypt,
■  and  the  '  botch  of  Egypt '  in  Dt.  2827,  is
applied  again  to  the  '  boil '  of  Hezekiah  and  to  some
diagnostic  sign  that  occurred  in  one  or  more  of  the
various  contagious  and  mostly  parasite  skin-affections
included  under  the  common  name  of  njns  (see
Leprosy)  in  Lev.  13 18/  2023 — the  variety  called  '  burn-
ing boil'-  (really  a  pleonasm)  being  clean,  and  the  j
variety  of  boil  which  gave  place  to  a  white  or  bright  ■
spot  being  unclean.  The  reference  is  almost  certainly
to  local  or  limited  spots  of  inllammation,  although  it  is
hardly  possible  to  give  a  modern  name  to  them  or  to
identify  them.

In  Dt.  2835  and  Job  2  7,'  the  same  word  is  applied  to  a  skin-
disease  '  from  the  sole  of  tlie  foot  to  the  crown  of  the  head  ' ;  but
probably  it  is  so  used  without  any  precise  nosological  intention,
and  merely  to  express  a  peculiarly  loathsome  affliction.

It  is  only  the  boil  disease  specially  associated  with
Egypt  that  is  here  considered.

There  occur  four  other  references  to  diseases  specially
Kgyptian  but  not  called  ie/tin.  Two  of  these  (Dt.  7  15  and  2S  60,
Dni-2  nnp  ['in::],  'the  evil  diseases  of  Egypt,'  and  'all
the  diseases  of  Kgypt ')  are  in  admonitory  passages  written  in
a  popular  style.  In  the  third  (Zech.l4 18),  a  plague  is  to
smite  the  Egyptians  if  they  do  not  come  up  to  keep  the
Feast  of  Booths.  It  is  the  same  afTliction  that  is  to  befall
the  olher  peoples  who  neglect  this  ordinance,  and  there  is
nothing,  as  the  text  now  stands,-*  to  indicate  that  the  writer  is

1  Botch  is  a  name  commonly,  and  with  the  definite  article
distinctively,  given  to  plague  in  the  Elizabethan  and  the  Stuart
periods.  In  the  Edinburgh  treatise  on  pla^iue  by  Dr.  Gilbert
Skene  (1568)  it  occurs  in  the  form  of  '  boiche."  In  the  l-'ision  0/
Piers  Ploughman  the  spelling  is  bocke,  and  the  meaning  specific
or  generic  ('  byles  and  boches  and  brennyng  agues ').  The  most
probable  etymology  is  Fr.  />oche,  meaning  pocket,  poke,  pock
(cp  also  It.  bozza,  a  bubble),  and  applied  in  the  plural,  les
poches,  like  the  Spanish  las  bubas,  to  epidemics  of  camp  sick-
ness, about  A.  n.  1528,  which  seem  to  have  been  typhus,  but
may  have  included  bubonic  cases,  or  perhaps  cases  of  true
plague.  The  translators  of  the  AV  seem  to  have  meant  by
'botch'  the  familiar  bubo  plague  of  their  time.  Milton  also
may  use  the  word  in  its  exact  sense  of  bubo  plague,  where  he
says  of  the  sixth  plague  of  Egypt  :  '  botches  and  blains  must  all
his  flesh  emboss'  (PLVliZo).  With  the  disappearance  of
plague  from  Britain  after  1666,  the  word  lost  its  technical
incaaing.

2  Rather,  'scar  of  the  boll,'  J'na'.T  riDlS  (r/.  23  ;  cp  RV).

3  [.\s  Budde  points  out,  the  expressions  in  Dt.  I.e.  are
borrowed  from  the  Prologue  to  Job.  That  section  of  tho  book
appears  to  be  based  on  a  folk-tale ;  the  designation  which  it
gives  to  Job's  malady  is,  therefore,  general,  not  technical.  We
must  remember,  however,  that  in  Lev.  13  i8_^  the  pnc  is  the
forerunner  of  leprosy,  and  that  in  the  speeches  of  Job  the
symptoms  of  his  malady,  though  poetically  expressed,  point  (as
most  scholarsadmit)  to  leprosy  in  its  worst  form. See  Lei'«osv.]

••  [The  text  is  disfi,^ured  by  two  errors  due  to  dittography.
One  is  the  word  '  not '  before  '  ujxjn  them,'  repeated  from  v.  17  ;
the  other  is  '  the  nations  that  go  not  up  to  keep  the  Feast  of
Booths,"  repeated  from  v.  19. ®  has  simply  koI  cb-I  tovtovs,

59S


BOIL

thinking  of  the  '  botch  of  Egypt.'  The  reference  in  the  fourth
{Am.  4  10),  however,  may  possibly  be  to  some  actual  epidemic
in  the  liistory  of  the  northern  kingdom.  The  '  pestilence  in  the
manner  of  Egypt '  may  well  be  equivalent  to  the  yrx  or  '  botch '
of  Dt.  28  27,  which  should  mean  some  specific  disease,  such  as
the  '  cinerods '  (KV  '  tumours  ' ;  or  plague-boils)  of  i  S.  56,  with
which  it  is  coupled,  ceitainly  means.  As  the  sixth  plague  is
specially  called  one  of  '  boils  and  blains,'  this  also  may  be  taken
to  stand  for  some  definite  boil-disease  of  Egypt.

We  must  now  consider  which  of  the  boil  diseases  of
Egypt  is  meant  by  /<%/«.  It  is  stated  that  the  boil
2  Shfihin  ^'^'-■o'^P'^"''^^  ^X  blains  broke  forth  upon
of  Eeviit  ^^'''  '"^'^  ^"'^  beast.  This,  if  nosologically
°^"  ■  meant,  would  exclude  bubo  plague,  as  being
unknown  in  cattle.  On  the  other  hand,  anthrax,  which
might  be  correctly  described  as  the  boil  of  cattle,  is
equally  excluded,  inasmuch  as  in  man  it  is  never
epidemic,  but  only  sporadic.  If  we  might  suppose
the  narrative,  or  (as  the  critics  say)  the  interwoven
narratives,  of  the  plagues  to  be  based  on  a  simpler
narrative,  or  simpler  narratives,  which  would  bear  to  be
treated  as  matter-of-fact  description,  we  might  expect
that  in  the  original  narrative  the  sixth  plague  repre-
sented the  plague  proper  (bubo  plague),  which  is  con-
fined to  man,  whilst  the  fifth  stood  for  epizootic  disease
in  general.'

Certainly  the  special  association  of  bubo  plague  with
ancient  Egypt  is  historically  correct,  so  that  the  word
'botch'  in  the  AV  is  a  happy  choice  (cp  §  i,  n.  i).
Besides  the  constructive  evidence  as  to  the  disaster
which  is  said  to  have  befallen  Sennacherib's  army
before  Pelusium  (see  Pestilence,  and,  on  the  historical
points,  Hezekiah,  i),  there  is,  indeed,  no  extra-biblical
testimony  to  bubo  plague  in  Egypt  earlier  than  about
300  K.  c. ,  and  even  this  testimony  has  been  only  indirectly
preserved.

Oribasius,  who  was  physician  to  the  Emperor  Julian,  cites  a
passage  from  Rufus  of  Ephesus,  a  physician  in  the  time  of
Trajan,  wherein  he  describes  bubo  plague  with  singular  clear-
ness ;  it  is  indeed  rare,  as  Darembcrg  remarks,  to  find  in  ancient
authors  such  positive  marks  of  the  identity  of  a  pestilential  type.
Rufus  says  that  the  disease  was  most  common,  and  very  mortal,
in  Libya,  Egypt,  and  Syria.  He  adds  that  Dioscorides  and
Poseidonios  had  enlarged  upon  pestilential  buboes  in  writing
upon  the  pestilence  which  in  their  time  ravaged  Libya —
supposed  to  have  been  the  same  great  epidemic,  about  127  B.C.,
which  is  mentioned  by  Livy,  Julius  Obsequens,  and  Orosius.
Rufus  further  says  that  the  pupils  of  one  Dionysius,  6  KupTos,
make  mention  of  these  pestilential  buboes.  An  ancient  Greek
gloss  to  the  Vatican  codex  of  Oribasius  explains  that  Dionysius
with  the  above  surname  ('  Hunchback ')  comes  into  the  bio-
graphies of  Hetmippus.  This  would  fix  his  date  prior  to
280  B.C.

Whilst  the  botch  of  Egypt  cannot,  upon  independent
testimony,  be  traced  farther  back  than  300  B.C.,  it  is
highly  improbable  that  it  was  first  seen  then.  As
Lorinser  points  out,  the  endemic  influences  favouring
plague  in  Egypt,  depending  upon  the  peculiar  alterna-
tions of  wet  and  dry  soil  (caused  by  the  periodic  rise
and  fall  of  the  Nile),  were  there  long  before.

Pariset  {Causes  de  la  Peste.  etc.,  Paris,  1837)  has  argued
with  great  cogency  that  the  elaborate  pains  taken  in  the  best
period  of  ancient  Egypt  to  preserve  the  soil  from  putrefying
animal  matters,  human  and  other,  were  inspired  by  the  risk  of
plague,  and  must  have  been  in  a  high  degree  effective.  It  is
clear,  however,  that  any  failure  of  the  sanitarj'  code  would  give
plague  its  opportunity,  the  pressure  of  population  and  the
climate  or  hydrology  being  constant,  and  that  such  failure  may
reasonably  be  assumed  at  first  as  an  occasional  thing,  and  then —
from  the  time  that  the  ancient  civilisation,  with  sanitation  (en-
forced by  religious  sanctions)  a  principal  part  of  it,  began  to
decay  under  the  influence  of  Persian,  Greek,  and  Roman  con-
quests—as permanent.

without  the  negative  particle,  but  it  has  the  second  insertion.
A  critical  edition  should  give  the  text  thus:  'And  if  the
Egyptian  people  go  not  up  nor  come,  upon  them  will  the  stroke
come  with  which  Yahwfe  will  strike.  .  .  .'  The  close  of  the
sentence  may  early  h.ave  become  effaced.  The  plague  intended
A^as,  at  any  rate,  not  that  of  the  other  nations,  which  was  want
of  rain.]

1  The  qualification  (' in  general')  is  designed.  What  is  said
of  the  'murrain'  upon  the  horses,  camels,  asses,  oxen,  and
sheep  is  expressed  in  .-x  sense  too  comprehensive  for  any  single
epizootic  malady  (e.g.,  anthrax  is  a  disease  that  oxen  and  sheep
suflTer  from  in  common,  but  not  horses,  nor,  so  far  as  is  known,
asses  and  camels).

596


BOILS,  PLAGUE

That  the  sanitary  precautions  did  utterly  break  down
under  Mohamnictlan  con<iucst,  and  that  l)ul)o  plague
did  Ix'come  for  fourteen  centuries  the  standing  |x;stilenc-e
of  I'".gypt.  we  know  as  matter  of  fact.  We  know  also
that  it  was  from  IVlusiuin  that  the  great  plague  of
Justinian's  reign  (543  A.n. )  starte<l  —  to  overrun  the
whole  known  world.  It  is  probable,  further,  that
the  pestilence  in  Lower  Kgypt  at  the  time  of  the
mass;icrc  of  Christians  in  the  episcopate  of  Cyprian
included  bubo  plague.  The  valuable  testimony  pre-
served by  Orilxisius  as  to  Kgyplian,  Libyan,  and
Syrian  pestilential  bulxjes,  as  Kirly  as  300  B.C.,  has
been  already  cited.  If  beyond  that  date  we  are  left  to
conjecture,  there  is  still  a  high  probability  that  the  plague
was  known  in  Kgypt  at  a  much  earlier  date.

This  historical  bubo  plague  of  Kgypt  answers  best
to  the  sixth  plague.  The  bf^il  brt-aks  out  in  the
3  Nature  "^^^nncr  of  the  plague  bubo,  which  may  be
of  disease  '>'"K'«  or  niultiple.  Its  situations  are  the
armpits,  groins,  and  the  sides  of  the  neck  ;
and  it  consists  of  one  (or  of  a  packet)  of  the  natural
lymphatic  or  absorl)ent  glands  of  those  regions  enlarged
to  the  size  of  a  hen's  (or  even  a  turkey's)  egg,  often  of
a  livid  colour,  hard,  tense,  painful,  and  attended  with
inflanmiatory  swelling  of  the  skin  for  sciie  distance
around  it.  Just  as  in  Asiatic  cholera  and  yellow  fever
there  are  '  e.xplosive  '  attacks  so  suddenly  fatal  that  the
distinctive  symptoms  have  hardly  time  to  develop,  so
there  may  be  death  from  plague  without  the  bubo  or
the  botch.  Still,  the  latter  is  the  distinctive  mark  of
plague,  the  same  in  all  countries  and  in  all  periods  of
history.

Other  signs  of  plague  were  livid  or  red  h-xmorrhagic  spots  of
the  skin  (called  '  the  tokens '  in  Knglish  epidemics),  large  car-
buncles (especially  on  the  fleshy  parts),  and  blains  (niyay^K),
which  were  really  smaller  carbuncular  formations  or  cores  with
a  collection  of  lluiil  on  their  summits.  Besides  the  pain  of  the
hard  and  tense  buboes,  there  were  often  delirium,  gentle  or
raving,  vomiting,  quivering  of  muscles  (affecting  gait  and
speech),  and  many  other  symptoms  as  if  from  a  deadly  poison.
.\bout  three  days  was  perhaps  the  average  duration  of  fatal
cases.

Usually  half  the  attacks  were  mortal.  In  the  beginning
of  the  epidemic  there  would  Ixj  but  few  recoveries,  while

4  Mortalitv  '^^  ^^^  ^^^  °^  ''  ^^  many  as  four  out  of
^'  five  might  recover.  Recovery  was  most
likely  when  the  buboes  broke  and  ran  ;  sometimes  the
suppuration,  esjjecially  in  the  groin,  would  continue  for
months,  the  victims  being  able  to  go  limping  in  the
streets.  In  the  history  of  plague  in  London,  which  is
continuous  from  the  Hlack  Death  of  1348  to  1666,  the
great  epidemics  came  at  intervals,  and,  in  those  for
which  we  have  the  statistics,  carried  off  from  a  fifth  to  a
si.xth  of  the  population,  including  but  few  of  the  richer
class.  With  a  population  of  nearly  half  a  million  in
1665,  the  highest  mortality  from  plague  was  7165  in
the  week  i2th-i9lh  .Sejjtemlxjr.  Scjmetimes  for  a  suc-
cession of  years  the  deaths  from  plague  kept  at  a  high
annual  level,  especially  during  the  sunmier  and  autunm
months.  During  the  whole  three  centuries  of  plague
in  Ivondon  there  were  few  years  which  did  not  have
some  deaths  in  the  warmer  months.  From  what
is  known  of  the  mediaival  history  of  plague  in  Cairo
(from  Arabic  annals  ;  cp  von  Kremer  in  S  IVA  W,  Fhil.
Hist.  Class.  Hd.  .xcvi. ),  and  of  its  modern  history  (cp
Pruner,  h'rank.  des  Orients),  it  appears  to  have  come,
as  in  London,  in  terrific  outbursts  at  intervals  of  years,
and  to  have  l)een  at  a  low  level  or  apparently  extinct  in
the  years  between.

The  plague  season  in  Egypt,  within  the  period  of  exact
records,  h.-is  begun  as  early  as  September  and  as  late  as
Januarj',  has  reached  its  height  in  March  and  April,  and  has
ended  with  great  regularity,  almost  suddenly,  about  St.  John's
day  (24th  June),  the  height  of  the  epidemic  corresponding  with
the  lowest  level  of  the  Nile.  There  has  l>een  no  plague  since
1844.  The  last  Kr<-at  epidemic  was  that  of  1835,  described  by
Kingiake  in  '  Ilothcn.'  C.  C.

BOILS,  PLAOUE  (D'V^T).  Deut.28a7  RV°«. See

E,MERODS.


BOSOR

BOILING  PLACES  fni^V'50).  I-:2ek.46a3.  EV ;
and  BOILING  HOUSES  iQ''?¥'5?pn  n'3),  v.  a^, RV,

Sec  (  c;()Kl.N<.,  g  I.

BOLLED  {i.e.,  'swollen,'  see  Skeat,  Elym.  Diet.;
RV'-u-  'in  flower';  ^V'^l,  cnepMATlZON  [BAL] :
Ex.  93it).  The  Hebrew  word  occurs  only  once,  but
s  evidently  (see  Ges.  Thes.,  I^vy,  Targ.  IJ'^.  l4ai,
NHWB  1  296)  connected  with  yaj,  'cup';  and  the
Mishnic  usage  (Ges.  I.e.)  is  in  favour  of  its  referring  to
the  flower-cup  (perhaps  as  a  closed  bud),  rather  than
(as  <5  supposed)  to  the  formation  of  the  seed-pods  (see,
however, Tristram,  NUB^'^)  445).

BOLSTER  (nb'vS"!?),  I  S.  19 13  267. See  Bed,  §4  (a).

BONDAGE  (m'nr,  AoyAeiA).  Ex.  I14  Rom.  815.
etc.,  and  BONDMAN  (13^.  AoyAoc).  Dt.  15i5  Rom.
6 16,  etc. See  Slavery.

BONNET.  For  nrSJO,  migbadh.  Ex.  2840,  etc.  (RV
'headtire'),  see  Mitre,  §  1(1);  for  "IX^,  pl'er.  Is.
320 (RV 'headtire'). Ezek.44i8 (RV 'tire'), see

TL'RHA.N',  §  2.

BOOK  (IDD,  Gen.  5i  etc.;  BiBAoc,  Lk.  84  etc.,
BiBAiON,  Lk.4i7  etc.).  .Sec  \VRrn.N(i,  §  3,  end;
HisKJKicAL  Lit.,  ^g  3,  5,  16  ;  Ca.no.n,  §§  1-4,  20.

BOOK  OF  LIFE([h]BiBAoc  [thc]  zcohc).  Philip.
43  Rev.  85. Cp  Ex.  3232 Is.  43. and  see  Law  AND

JusTici:,  §  14.

BOOT  (jiXp),  Is.  95  Wt.  RV">c- See  Shoes,  §  3.

BOOTHS  (ni3D),  I^v.2342/.  See  Taber.naclk.
Pavilion,  i,  Succoth,  and  cp  Te.vt,  §  i,  and
Cattle.  §§  i,  5.

BOOTY  (T5,  etc.),  Jer.  4932,  etc. See  Si'oiL.

BOOZ  (Boec  [Ti.  WH],  MLI5,  Booc  [Ti-  WH],
Lk.  832). RV  has  BoAZ.

BOR-ASHAN  (IV'r^ia  ;  Bcopacan[A],  BhrcaBeg

[BL];  \^.  lacu  Asan;  Pesh.  btralan),  the  true  MT
reading  (Gi.  Bit.)  in  iS.  8O30,  where  many  printed
edd.  have  }trr~l"l3  (AV  Chok-ashan,  RV  Cuk-
ASHAN). Probably  the  same  as  Ash  AN  [q.v. ).

BORDER.  For  mJDD,  misgerefh  (a)  in  Ex.  2025  27
{(TToliavT)),  371214  ("S  oni.),  in  P's  description  of  the  'table,'
see  Ai.  lAK,  S  10  ;  (/')  in  i  K.  728y;  317;  357^  2  K.  l(i  17  in  descrip-
tion of  the  laver  bases  (trv^xAeta'^a  ;  in  7  28  trvvK^fifTTov  :  in
7  29  <7vy<Ai^a  [A);  in  7  31/;  ^laTnfya  [.\  ;  om.  HL]  :  KVnit'.
'  panels'),  see  Lavek,  §  i  ;  for  pj3,  i,,tti<i/>h  (Kpd<TneSoy)  in  Nu.
1538  (RV"!*:-  'corner'  [of  garment)),  see  Fki.sges  ;  for  Kpda-
nt&ov,  -Mt.  9  20  1436  RV,  see  Fkinoes.

60RITH  (soR/ru),  4E:sd.  I2. See  Bukki,  i.

BORROW  {hii'C',  E.X.  322;  AanicacGai,  Mt-  542).
and  LEND  (HiSh,  Ex.  2224  [25] :  Aanizgin,  I-k.  634).
See  Law  and  Justice,  §  16,  Trade  and  Com.merce.

BOSCATH  (ni^Va).  2  K.22i  AV  ; RV  IJozkath.

BOSOR (Bocop [Ti.]), 2  Pet.  2.5  AV, RV  Beor

(?.-.•..  2).

BOSOR  (Boccop  [A],  -oco.  [NV*],  -cctop  [V»].
and  in  t.  36  -qco-  [A  ;  cp  Is.  846  681,  in  ©]),  a  town  of
(jalaaditis,  taken  by  Judas  the  Maccabec  in  164  B.C.
(i  Mace.  52636),  is  identified  by  some  with  Rezkr  {f.v.,
i.)  in  Moab.  Galaaditis,  however,  was  the  name  of
the  country  N.  of  Moab  (G.\Sm.  f/G  549,  n.  5),  and
the  campaign  in  which  Judas  took  Bosor  was  waged
in  the  latitude  of  the  Yarmuk.  If  Bosora  {y.v.)  be
the  present  Busra,  Bosor  may  be  the  present  Busr-el-
Hartri,  in  the  SE.  corner  of  the  Leja,  which  the
Arabian  geographer  Yakut  in  1225  A.n.  (1  621)  still  calls
only  Busr  \_sic\  The  passage  in  which  it  is  mentioned
is  obscure;  w.idf.  are  probably  corrupt. (Cp  We.

598


BOSORA

//^W  212,  n.  i).  Herod  the  Great,  in  order  to  keep
the  Leja.  in  his  power  (Jos.  Ant.  xvii.  I2),  fortified  a
villaije  called  Bathyra,  and  this  may  have  been  the
same  as  Hosor  (cp  GASm.  HG  6i8).  G.  A.  s.

BOSORA  (B0CCOP&  [A],  -oco.  [N],  -ocoppA  [V  ;  cp
©  iCh.  I44].  I  Mace.  526;  Jos.  BocopA[--^«^- xii.  83]),
in  Gilead,  held  by  some  to  be  the  Bozrah  in  Moab
spoken  of  in  Jer.  4824,  must  have  lain  farther  N.  (see
BosoR,  ii. ).  Hence  many  (Ewald;  PEF  Map;  etc.)
more  plausibly  take  it  to  have  Ijoen  Bostra,  the  capital
of  the  Roman  province  of  Arabia,  modern  liusrd,  22  m.
SE.  of  Kdrei  (cp  Porter,  Fii'e years^'^\  12  ;  Merrill,  E.  of
Jordan,  53,  58  ;  Key,  Dans  le  Haouran  Atlas ;  Buhl,
Pal.  251). See,  however,  Bathyra  under  BosoR,  ii.

G.  A.  s.

BOSS  (33,  text  doubtful),  Job  1526. See  Shield.

BOTCH  (rnL*'),  Dt.  282735  AV;  RV  Boil  [q.v.,
§2/.).

BOTTLE.  The  statement  that  '  what  we  call
bottles  were  unknown  to  the  Hebrews'  (Riehm,
H\VB<-\  art.  'Flasche')  needs  qualification.  It  has
long  been  known  that  the  Egyptians  manufactured
glass  from  an  early  period.  The  Phoenicians  and  the
Assyrians  were  well  acquainted  with  glass  (see  the
relative  volumes  of  Perrot  and  Chipiez,  Hist,  de  l' Art,
etc. ),  that  manufactured  by  the  former  being  of  special
repute  in  antiquity  (see  Glass).  It  is  impossible,
therefore,  that  among  the  imports  from  Phoenicia,
glass  bottles  should  have  had  no  place.  They  must
alwavs,  however,  have  been  a  luxury  of  the  rich  (cp  Job
28  17'  [RV]).

The  '  bottles '  of  Scripture  fall  into  two  very  different
classes  :  ( i )  leather  skins  for  holding  and  carrying  water,
wine,  and  other  liquids,  and  (2)  earthenware  jars  for
the  same  and  other  purposes.

For  the  Hebrews  in  the  nomadic  stage  of  civilisation,
as for the Bedouin of  the present day, the  skins of
beasts  of  their  Hocks  supplied  the  readiest


1.  Skins  as
bottles.


and  most  efficient  means  of  storing  and
transporting  the  necessary  supply  of  water
in  the  camp  and  on  the  march.  This  method  was
found  so  simple  and  so  satisfactory  that  it  was  retained
in  a  more  settled  state  of  society,  and,  indeed,  has
prevailed  throughout  the  East  until  the  present  day.
The  writers  of  classical  antiquity,  from  Homer  down-
wards, contain  many  references  to  this  use  of  the  skins
of  domestic  animals.  The  skins  used  by  the  Hebrews
for  this  i^urpose,  as  in  modern  Syria  and  Arabia,  were
chiefly  skins  of  the  goat  and  of  the  sheep.  When  a
smaller  size  than  ordinary  was  required,  the  skin  of
a  lamb  or  of  a  kid  sufficed  ;  for  larger  quantities  there
was  the  skin  of  the  ox}  and,  perhaps,  of  the  camel
(Herod.  89).  Among  the  Hebrews  the  pig-skin  was,  of
course,  excluded.

The  method  of  preparation  varied  in  complexity  and
efficiency  according  as  the  peasant  prepared  his  own  skins  (cp
Doughty,  Ar.  Des.  1  227)  or  employed  a  professional  tanner.
The  head  and  the  lower  part  of  the  legs  are  cut  off  (such  is  the
method  at  the  present  day),  and  the  animal  is  skinned  from  the
neck  downwards,  somewhat  as  one  removes  a  tight-fitting  glove,
care  being  taken  that  no  incision  is  made  in  the  .skin  of  the
carcase.  When  the  tanning  process  is  completed  (cp  Tristram,
iV7/.5(6)  92,  Robinson,  .5A'(')  2  440),  all  other  apertures  having
previously  been  closed,  the  neck  is  fitted  with  a  leather  thong,
by  means  of  which  the  skin  is  opened  and  closed  (cp  Leathek).
In  the  OT  we  find  such  skin  bottles  designated  by  a
variety  of  names.

Such  are  (a)  non,  h?meth  (aa-Kot  [ADL]),  the  water-skin
(probably  of  a  kid)  which  .\braham  put  upon  Hagar's  shoulder
(Gen.  21  nj^-i)-  The  Hedouin  name  is  gi'riy — i.e.,  iirfiai""
(Doughty,  ofi.  cit.  index).  In  Hos  7  5  (RV  'heat'),  and  in
Hab.  2  15  (RV  '  venom.'  mg.  'fury'),  the  RV  more  advisedly  finds
another  word  of  similar  sound  (non).  {b)  1K3,  nodh,  like  the
senilly  (samilat"")  of  the  modern  Bedouin,  is  the  milk-skin  of
the  nomad  Jael  (Judg.  4  19  ;  cp  Doughty  op.  cit.  passim). It

1  According  to  Lane  (Afod.  Rg^.)  an  ox-hide  holds  three  or
four  times  as  much  as  a  goat-skin  {kirba).

599


BOX  TREE

also  occurs  frequently  as  a  wine-skin— Josh.  8413  1  S.  16  ao,  etc.
As  a  water-skin  it  is  used  metaphorically  in  Ps.  5(5  8(9]  ('  put  my
tears  into  thy  bottle'),  where  there  is  no  reference  to  the  much
later  '  tear-liottles,'  so  called,  and  where  the  text  is  doubted
(see  ®).  The  exact  sense  of  Ps.11983,  where  the  poet  likens
himself  to  a  'bottle  (RVnig.  "wine-skin")  in  the  smoke,'  is
doubtful  (see  the  comm.  in  loc.).  (c)  733,  nehhel,  and  733,  nebhel,
also  frequently  of  the  ordinary  wine-skin  (d<r<cdt  [BAL]),  i  S.
10  3,  etc.  {d)  3iK,  ''''/'/t,  has  the  .same  signification  in  Job  32  19,
where  we  read  of  'new  bottles  .  .  .  ready  to  burst.  Budde
('96)  renders  '  skins  with  new  (wine),'  which  gives  us  an  0 1"
parallel  to  the  familiar  passage  in  the  NT  (Mt.  i)  17=  Mk.  222
=  Lk.  637/;) — 'Neither  do  men  put  new  wine  into  old  wine-
skins,' etc. — where  the  RV  has  rightly  discarded  the  mislead-
ing rendering  'bottles.'  In  Judith  10 5  we  have  the  curious
word  ao-fcoTrvTiVr/  [BA], — RV a  leathern  l)ottle'  of  wine.

Vessels  of  earthenware  also  are  mentioned  in  the  OT
as  receptacles  for  wine.  Such  was  (a)  the  papa,  Jer.
2.  Earthenware  l^""  {^^^^o,  ^,,6,),  mad^  by  the
bottles.  potter, jxjrhaps with a  narrow neck

which  caused  a  gurgling  sound  {.\t.
bakbakat"'*)  when  the  jar  was  being  em[)tie(l.  It  was
also  used  to  hold  honey,  i  K.  I43  (ord/i^'os  [.\L  ;  om.
B] ;  EV  Cruse  {([.v.,  2]).  {b)  The  name  V33  was  also
given  to  wine-jars  or  ampullee  of  earthenware,  as  is
clear  from  Is.  30  14  ( EV  '  [potters' J  vessel ' ;  AV"'K-  '  bottle
of  potters'),  and  Lam.  42  (EV  'pitcher').  In  both
these  passages  ©  has  6.-y^iov.  We  have  no  indication
of  the  size  or  even  of  the  shape  of  the  earthen  nebhel
(see  PoTTKRY  ;  also  Crlsk).  a.  r.  s.  k.

B0W(ni:'i5),  Gen.  27  3,  Bowstrings  (Dnn^O),  Ps.
21 12,  RV. See  Weapons.

BOWL.  The  various  Hebrew  and  Cireek  words  will
be  dealt  with  in  the  articles  mentioned  below.

1-  i?'?i.  g'il<''a-',  Ex.  25  31. See  CuF,  Meals,  §  12.

2-  '"'^r'l  gullAh,  the  bowl  or  reservoir  of  a  lamp,  Zech.  4  2  yC
(AajnTToSioi/)  ;  see  Candlestick,  §  2.  Used  in  a  simile  in  Eccles.
12 6  (to  afSeVioi).  The  globe-shaped  bowls  or  capitals  of  the
twin  pillars  of  Jachin  a.su  ]jO.\z  (i  Y^.~ ^if.,  ra  <rTpenTa  [as
though  D'Sli?  see  Fringes]  1|  2Ch.  4i2/,  AV  'pommels,'
YuAae  [BA],  /3<i(Teis  [L]). See  Pii.i.ak.

3.  -liS3,  i-ep/ior,  I  Ch.  28  17,  etc.,  RV. See  Bason,  2.

4.  pniD,  fuizrak,  Ex.  27  3. See  Bason,  3.

5.  nVpyO,  vtenakkiyyoth,  icuaflos  [BAFL],  used  in  temple
ritual  especially  upon  the  table  of  shew-bread,  Ex.  25  29  3"  16
Nu.  4  7  Jer.  52  19  (where  AV  '  cups ').

6.  ^^,  kaph,  I  K.  7  50 ;  see  Bason,  4.

7.  7Sp,  sephel,  a  larger  bowl  or  bason,  probably  of  wood,
Jud.  525638  (A€»c<inj  [BAL];  in  525  Aok.  [.\L]);  cp  Pal.-Syr.

8.  <TKd<t>ri,  Bel,  33,  a  vessel  for  holding  food  (in  .\cts27  163032,
a  boat).

9.  (^laAij,  Rev.  5  8  15  7,  etc.  (.W  'vial').  In  OT  it  represents
p^JS;  see  Bason,  3;  Meals,  §  12,  and  cp  generally  Bason,
Cui',  Goblet,  Pottery.

BOX,  synonymous  in  AV  with  jar  or  cruise,  not  a
case  of  wood  or  metal.'

1.  -S./«/l-A(2K.9i3;  RV  and  in  i  S.  10  i,  AV  '  vial' ;  (ESbal
<j>aK6i). Shape  and  material  are  both  uncertain.

2.  For  the  '  alabaster  box  '  (r)  aAajSaerrpos)  of  Mk.  14  3,  etc.
AV  (RV  'alabaster  cruse  '),  see  Ckuse,  4,  Alabastkk.

3.  In  RVrntJ.  of  Jn.  12  6  13  29,  where  EV  has  lUo,  'box' is
suggested  as  an  alternative  rendering  of  yXuxraoKOiiov,  which
originally  and  etymologically  signified  a  case  in  which  the  mouth-
pieces (yKuxTtrai)  of  wind  instruments  were  kept.  Later  it
assumed  a  more  general  significance  and  denoted  any  similarly
shaped  box  or  case.  ©hal  employs  it  to  indicate  the  chest
(piK)  set  up  by  Josiah  in  the  Temple  (2Ch.  24  8^),  whilst
Josephus  uses  it  of  the  '  coffer '  (t;ix  i  S.  6  B^.  EV  ;  see  Coffer),
or  small  chest,  in  which  the  Philistine  princes  deposited  the
golden  mice.  In  the  Mishna  it  is  used  to  signify  a  cnse  for
books  (NDpDl^J  in  Lexx.)  and  even  a  coffin  (cp  the  parallel  u.se
of.  loculus) ;  in  the  latter  sense  also  in  Aquila  (Gen.  50  26,  of
Joseph's  mummy-case  ;  .see  Coffin).  Thus  it  would  appear
that  the  preferable  rendering  in  John  (I.e.)  is  that  of  RVnig.

A.  R.  S.  K.

BOX  TREE,  BOX, RV^g. -cypress"; once  (Ezek.
276 ; © otVoi'S d\<ra>5ets) RV'  Boxwood ("l-'ltJ'NJH,
1  For  this  EV  employs  'chest.'
600


i


BOZBZ

KCApoc*  Is.  41 19  60 13)  is  by  several  modern  scholars
idciitifie<l  as  the  'sherl)iir  (Ar.  and  Syr.),  a  kind  of
juni[H-r,  =  .\ss.  lurmenu  (see  Ix-Iow).  K V"'if-  and  SliO T,
however,  give  '  cypress '  ;  the  sherbin  resembles  the
cypress  in  its  habit  and  general  appearance  (Tristram).
Cp  note  4,  Ixilow.

The  Hebrew  word  was  formerly  explained  as  derived  from  the
rod  nc»K  (akin  to  ic*'!  Ar.  yanira),  '  to  be  straight  '  (lies.  Thet.),
and  so  as  denoting  a  tall  straight  tree  ;  but  such  different  views
h.ive  recently  been  put  forward  as  to  the  affinities  and  meaning
of  the  root  that  it  is  unsafe  to  form  any  inference  from  this
etymology.-  Hofrni.inn,-'  indeed,  rejecting  the  traditional  vocali-
sation of  llcKn,  suggests  that  it  is  philologically  akin  to  Assyr.
iurnihiu  (\ic\.  Par.  107),  Aram,  lartvaind  or  iurblnd.*  If  this
were  made  out  we  should  be  tolerably  certain  that  mp-Kn  is  the
ihtrbin  or  a  similar  tree  ;  but  the  pfiiloloiiical  step  is  difficult.
Cheyne  (Is.,  SHOT  [Heb]  129)  'can  hardlv  doubt  that  the
obscure  ^^CO  i"  Is.  4O20  is  a  corruption  of  pic -/.f.,  sherbin.'
If  so,  nifKB  would  seem  to  be  distinct  from  the  sherbin.

The  interesting  mention  of  this  tree  in  ICzek.  2/6  (RV
•  b(ix-wo6d ')  is  concealed  in  AV  by  a  false  division
of  the  word  in  MT;*  the  second  clause  most  probably
means  '  thy  deck  they  have  made  of  ivory  inlaid  in'
h'iissi/r-wood  from  Cyprus'  (see  ClirrriM).

It  is  clear  from  Is.  60 13  that  nio-Kn  was  a  familiar  tree
in  the  forest  growth  of  Lebanon  ;  and  this  favours  the
identification  with  the  box  [liuxus  loiii^i/olia),  which
grows  there  as  a  small  tree  about  20  ft.  hijjh  (Tristram,
NHli.  339).  In  support  of  this  Rosenmiiller  (Mineral,
and  Hot.  of  Bible  [ET],  301/.)  aptly  compares  Verg.
..^w.  10 137  (' quale  per  artem  inclusum  buxo  .  .  ,  lucet
ebur')  with  Ezek.'276.«  Others  (Ges.<'-''>- Bu.C-')  have
thought  that  the  latter  reference  rather  points  to  a//««
tree,  so  often  used  in  antiquity  for  ship-building  ;  but
"iiB'Kn  is  at  least  distinct  from  c'iia  (fir)  and  n,-nn  (pine?),
along  with  which  it  is  twice  mentioned  in  Is.  40-66.

The  sherbin,  according  to  Tristram  (I.e.)  is  Juniperus  phd'
nieea,  but  in  the  Survey  of  W.  Palestine  he  expressly  says  of  this
mm  vidi ;  nor  does  it,  according  to  the  authorities,  grow  on
Lebanon.  It  seems  more  prob.able  that  xhttskerlnn  i\i  Juniperus
o.vyeedrus,  which  is  known  to  grow  on  Lebanon.

On  the  whole  there  seems  no  sufficient  reason  for
abandoning  the  tradition  that  tb-kh  is  the  lx>x.

N.  M. — w.  T.  T. -D.

BOZEZ  (VVi3  ;  BAzec  [H],  -e  [I-l).  and  Seneh
(i^^'P  ;  ceNNAAp  [BI-]).  two  rocky  points,  one  on  the
N.  the  otlier  on  the  S.  side  of  the  Michmash  gorge  ( r  S.

14  4/ t). See  MlCllM.ASH.

BOZKATH,  and  2  K.  22 1  AV  Bosc.vth  (ni^Va  ;  BDB
Lex.  quotes  .Ar.  bcnkat"",  an  elevated  region  covered
with  volcanic  stones).  One  of  the  towns  of  the  lowland
of  Judah  mentioned  between  Lachish  and  Kglon,  but  as

1  O's  rendering  of  Is.  41  19  is  so  defective  that  it  is  im-
possible to  tell  wliich  Greek  word  represents  TB'Kn ;  but  in  60  13
it  is  Kt5po<;  [HN.\Q].  .\q.  and  The.  simply  tr.insliter.ite
(6aa<Tovp):  Sym.  h.is  jrufos  in  chap.  41  and  wcukj)  in  ch.i]).  tK)
(unless  TTufos  is  out  of  its  order).  I'esh.  also  is  defective  in  Is.
41  19,  giving  for  IIK'K^?  innn  ril^  simply  'goodly  cypresses'
(sanvaine),  while  in  Is.  GO  13  IIC'KB  is  rendered  'cypresses.'
Targ.  has  in  both  places  J'^iaCN.  '  l^ox  trees'  (so  the  Jewish
commentators) ;  Vg.  renders  fiu.rus  in  41  19,  but  pinus  in  t>0  13.

2  .See  especially  No.  in  /^P.MGWjiis  ['Sei ;  Honimcl,  il>.
^53'  ['92I;  Lag.  [//>ers.  143.  N<5.  connects  all  Heb.  deriva-
tives of  ^e•J^  with  the  single  root  (meaning  '  to  go '  or  '  step ')
which  appears  in  Ar.  '////rand  Syr.  alkni ;  Hommel  still  main-
tains a  second  root,  akin  to  -yo'  Ar.  yasara;  while  Lagarde  ex-
plains 7!>r?  (Ps.  1  I  etc.)  by  invoking  a  third  .\r.  root  asara.

'  P.  27  of  his tract  't'obcr  einige  phonik.  Inschriften'  (in ,
Ahhandl.  d.  A-Snifrl.  Ceselheliaft  d.  Ifiss:  zu  Gdtt.  v.il.  36).  !

4  Low  (387/)  holds  that  the  two  Syr.  words  do  not  mean
miite  the  same  tree  :  that  the  former  is  Juniperus  flxyeedms  ;
the  latter  (fern,  in  form  surMntd)  is  the  ordinary  cypress
Cupressus  sempemirens ;  but  he  does  not  make  out  a  clear
case.  Hoissier  ([•'lorn  Oricntalis,  5  705)  h.ns  under  Cupressus
setiiper!'it-rns—:\^  a  localitv—' Persia  borealis  in  montanis  ibi
Ssiin>i  Kuhi  audit.'  This  looks  as  if  it  might  be  philologically
akin  to  suri'an  and  sanvaina.

s  For  C*"ir><-n3  read  D"iyKn3.

*  According  to  Sir  Joseph  Hooker  the  wood  of  Pu.rus  lon^-
folia  is  still  prized  in  Damascus  for  making  domestic  utensils
and  inlaid  wood.

601


BRACELETS

yet  unidentified  (Josh.  1539  ;  fiaaridwe  [B],  -fftxaff  [L],
liaaxo-9  [.A]).  A  certain  Adaiah  (i)  of  Bozkath  was
the  grandfather  of  King  Josiah  (2K. '."2i;  -vovowB
[BALJ).

BOZRAH  (nnV3,  §  106  ;  BocoppA  [HAD  in  (Jen.
Ch.].  Bocop  [BN.\(^r  in  Is.]).

Elsewhere  ©  translates:  iv  ni<rv  avri)s  [B**AQ),  }cT.A9fi;
6xvpui^aTa<iuTi7t(BK.\Q],  r.  22;  TetVfiuc  oirriK  (H.\Q),  Am.  1  12;
€i'«At>.i(BA(^],  .Mit.aia.

1.  A  capital  of  the  land  of  Edom  (Am.  1 12  Is.  .34  6
63  I  ;'  /3o(rpa  [<J"'i>' ]  ;  Jer.  491322),  also  mentioned  in
Gen.  3633  (liwToppa  [L].  om.  K)=i  Ch.  1 44  i^oaa.
[L])  as  the  city  of  Jotjab  b.  Zerah,  king  of  Kdom,  and
less  certainly,  though  still  probably,  under  the  name
MiBZAR  (if.v.)  in  (ien.  3642.  All  these  passages  may
be  exilic  or  even  jwst-exilic  ;  but  it  is  hardly  safe  to  infer
that  Bozrah  was  not  known  to  the  Jews  before  the
Exile;  indeed.  Gen.  3633  may  be  ultimately  derived
from  a  pre -exilic  document.  Bozrah  is  the  JloM>r
(§o(iop)  of  f).S<-)  23258  102 18.  descrilxjd  as  'in  the
mountains  of  Idumaa.'  It  seems  to  Ije  the  modern
Buseire,  in  the  district  of  Jebal  (CJebalenc),  northward
from  I'etra,  and  2J  hours  SSW.  from  'I'afileh,  called
'  little  Bozrah '  to  distinguish  it  from  the  niore  famous
Bozrah  in  the  Hauran.  So  Buhl,  Edomiter,  37  ;  cp
Doughty,  Ar.  I)es.  1  31  38/.

2.  (Jer.  4824.) See  Bezkr,  ii.  T.  K.  c.

BRACELETS.  Bracelets  were  worn  to  protect  the
exposed  parts  of  the  arm  and  hand  against  physical
injury,  and  as  amulets  against  the  malign  influences
which  were  believed  to  affect  the  organs  of  action  (WKS,
Kel.  iV;«.<'^*  453)-  'I'hey  served  also  as  ornaments.
They  were  made  of  gold  (Gen.  24  22  Nu.  31  50)  ;  but
doubtless,  like  other  ancient  peoples,  the  Hebrews  em-
ployed other  less  precious  materials,  as  horn  and
enamelled  earthenware.  Signet  rings  were  sometimes
worn  round  the  wrist  (see  Ring).  Bracelets  were  worn
by  )nen  and  women  ;  the  finer  forms  were  among  the
insignia  of  royalty  and  the  adornments  of  brides  (for
references  see  below).

Five  words  have  to  Ix;  considered.

Of  these  we  may  first  of  all  reject  two  words,  (i)  nn  (Kx.
85  22),  and  (2)  '?'ri3  (Gen.  38  1825),  which  are  wrongly  rendered
'bracelet '  in  .W. See  Hook,  2  ;  Rino,  g  i,  and  cp  Conn.

3.  TCi,  s/i»iid  (Geti.  24  22,  etc.  Nu.  31  50  Kzek.  10  11  'J342
EV  'bracelets,'  (P  i^e'Aca)  ;  cp.Ass.  samiidu,  to  bind  on  ;  the  same
root  ap|X-ars  in  the  Heb.  IDij,  yoke.  Golden  Cn'OS,  weighing
ten  shekels,  were  given  to  Rebekah  by  Elea/ar,  who  placed  them
on  I'Oth  her  hands.  So  in  Kzek.  1(5  11,  the  br.icelels  are
worn  on  both  hands.  In  Nu.  (I.e.),  TCS  i"*  conjoined  with
.Til'^N,  a'ld  the  Conimenlators  mostly  explain  the  former  as
an  ornament  for  the  wrist,  the  latter  for  the  upper  part  of  the
arm.  Targ.  usually  renders  'S  by  K^I'C',  'chains.'  The  form
of  these  bracelets  varied,  a  favourite  device  being  the  serpent.
On  ICgyplian  br.icelets  see  Wilk.,  Anc.  £g.  2342  ;  on  .Assyrian,
Per.  and  Chip.,  Art  in  CItaldea,  2357,  and  see  fig.  241.

4.  T\-V0,  "ierdh.  Is.  3  19  (EV  '  bracelets,'  RV'nin.  '  chain.'  Targ.
***?'  ''!!'??>  'chains  of  the  hands').  Cp  modern  .Arabic  ornamtnt
j/^ivSr (Frank.  56).  The  root  Is  Ttc",  to  twist.  Perh.ips  a  nnv
of  spirals  made  of  twisted  gold  is  meant.  In  the  Mishnah  "^  '^'
is  applied  to  chains  round  the  necks  of  horses  and  al.so  to
bracelets  worn  by  women.

5.  rriysK,  ^ei ddah.  This  word  occurs  in  MT  in  Nu.  31  50
(AV  '  chains,'  RV  '  ankle-ch.iins ')  .ind  2  S.  1  10  (EV' bracelet ' ;
®  in  both  places  xAi'Swf).  Wellhauscn's  suggestion  to  read
'"^^l^V'??,  after  Is.  820,  has  been  widely  accepted;  but  Nestle
(Marg.  15)  defends  MT  and  supposes  that  .Saul  was  des|>oiled
by  the  Amalekite  of  only  one  of  the  several  bracelets  that  he
wore.  Hudde  in  SBOr  accepts  VVellhausen's  correction,  but
(on  the  basis  of  Nu.  81  50)  regards  •^^i'SJfJI  as  also  possible.
That  kings  went  into  K-tttle  with  various  ornaments  is  well
attested  (see  Crown);  this  is  further  supported  by  i  K.  2230.
It  may  l)e  that  .S.iul's  bracelet  contained  his  signet  (King,
Antique  Gems,  1  38).  As  with  .Saul,  so  with  Joash,  the  crown
and  bracelet  are  associ.ited  as  royal  insignia  if  (with  We.)
niiS^V.T  is  read  for  nnyri,  2  K.  11  12  (WRS,  (r/ycW  311,  n.)t

1  Text  doubtful :  see  Text,  |  64,  and  cp  SBOT\\ii\i.\  adloc.


BRAMBLE

^imhi,  however,  obtained  much  the  same  sense  by  connecting
nny  with  'ij;,  'ornament.'  The  Targum  on  2  S.  1  lo  renders
by  KnsalC.  which  is  usually  applied  to  the  phylactery  (Dt.
68).  A  phylactery  was,  however,  also  worn  on  the  left  arm.
'sK  is  apparently  connected  with  niys  (occurring  only  in  Is.
520),  into  which  We.'s  emendation  reduces  mysK-  If  the  ar-  I
rangcment  in  Is.  3  18-23  's  suggested  by  the  natural  order  of
the  parts  of  the  body,  niVi'  may  be  an  ornament  rather  of  the
arm  than  of  the  leg.  IJarth,  A7>  151,  compares  Ar.  W«</,  '  arm,'
which  removes  some  of  the  difficulty  presented  by  the  usual
derivation  from  ^y^i,  to  step  or  walk. See,  however,  Anklets.

I.  A.
BRAMBLE  has  in  EV  three  meanings.

1.  ISN,  'at,i<l  (fidtivof,  rhainntts);  Gen.  50  lo/T  (EV  Atad
as  in  ©'),  Judg.  9  147:,  EV  'brambles,'  and  Ps.  689  [10],  EV
'thorns.'  It  is  a  genuine  Semitic  word,  found  also  in  W.
Aramaic  as  ^-ycM  or  KQBKi  >"  Syriac  as  hatta  1  (?  hatela),  in
Arabic  as  atad  (ligna  rhamni  nigri,  Fr.),  and  in  Assyrian  as
etidu,  etidt'u  (Ges.-Bu.,  s.v.).  The  root  with  which  it  appears
to  be  connected  (cax)  has  in  Arabic  the  sense  of  '  uttering  a
rasping,  though  not  loud,-  sound];  and  the  possibility  of  a
connection  with  the  sense  of  pricking  or  tearing  like  a  thorn
Ls  apparent.  There  is  general  agreement  that  pdfi.vo%  was
about  equivalent  to  the  modern  botanical  genus  Rhatnnus.
Dioscorides-*  distinguished  three  sorts  (cp  Fraas,  Syn.  Plant.
Flor.  Class.);  while  in  modern  times  Tristram  (_FFP  264/;)
has  enumerated  sixteen  species  of  Rliamnece  as  found  in
Palestine.

Perhaps  the  most  likely  identification  for  ncK  is  with  Rhamnus
palirstina  (Boiss.),  which  represents  in  Syria  the  R.  oleoides  of
Greece  and  S.  Europe.

2.  nin,  ko^h,  very  frequent;  EV  usually  'thorn'  or  'thistle,'
AV  once  (Is. 34  13)  'bramble.'  It  denotes  a  plant  of  the  thorn
or  perhaps  of  the  thistle  kind  :  see  Thorn.

3  ^oTOV,  which  occurs  seven  times  in  ©  (in  six  of  these  as  the
rendering  of  ^30)  and  five  times  in  NT,  is  once  (Lk.  G44)
rendered  'bramble  bush,'  elsewhere  Bush  {q.v.,  §  i  [i]).

N.  M. — W.  T.  T.-D.

BRAN  (ta  niTYPA  [BAQ]).  The  '  burning  of  bran
for  incense'  {0vfj.iu>ffai  r.  ir.  ;  to  Mylitta?)  is  mentioned
in  Bar.  6  (Pip.  Jer. )  43  [42]!  as  one  of  the  incidents  in
the  unchaste  idolatrous  worship  of  the  women  of
Babylon. See  Incknse,  §  8.

BRASEN  SEA  [T\^n}r\  D^),  2  K.  25 13  ;  see  Layer  ;
Sea,  Brazen.

BRASEN  SERPENT  (n"J'n3il  ^U^),  2  K.  I84. See

NiCHLSHTAN, §  2.

BRASIER  (nX),  Jer.  8622/  RV. See  Coal,  §  3.

BRASS,  or  BRASEN,  EV's_  rendering  of  n^TO,
n'hoseth  (Gen.  422  and  often),  C^-inj,  ndhui  {]oh^x-2.-\),
Hw'-im,  n'hrddh  (Lev.  2619,  etc.),  VpIJ,  n'hui  (Dan.
232  etc.),  xaAkoc  (Mt.  IO9,  I  Cor.  13  I,  Rev.  18  12),
and  xaAkion  (Mk.  74)-

EV  invariably  renders  thus  except  in  Ezra  8  27  AV  (see
Coi'PEr),  in  2  S.  22  35  AV,  where  nrmj  'ndtoseth,  is  rendered
'steel,' and  in  Jer.  15  12  AV  has  'steel,'  see  Ikon,  §  2)  ;  cp  2  Tim.
4  14,  where  xa\Kev<;  is  '  coppersmith  '  In  Gen.  4  22  RVmg.  gives
'copper,  and  so  elsewhere'  as  a  note  on  'brass.'  In  Ezek.  I7
^Vd  ncn:  'S  rightly  rendered  'burnished  brass  '  (©  e^a.(TTp6.nTmv
XoAicos ;  Tg.  below),  as  also  is  x'J^^toAi/Sacos  in  Rev.  I15  2  18.
In  Ezra  8  27  T\Vni  is  qualified  by  the  epithet  3ni'P(RV  'bright'),
which  we  should  probably  point  an!sp  =  3n7sp,  'glittering'  (in
Tg.  Ezek.  I7  for  "rS,?,  'polished').  .1310,  which  follows  (EV
'fine'),  arises  out  of  dittography,  and  should  not  be  rendered
(Che.).

That  copf)er  is  meant  is  shown  by  the  words,  '  out  of
whose  hills  thou  mayest  dig  brass'  (Dt.  89);  cp  the
chapter  in  Holland's  Pliny  (1601),  headed  'Mines  of
Brass. ' See  Copper  and  cp  Egypt,  §  36  end.

1  This  the  Syriac  lexicographers  render  into  Arabic  as  'ausaj,
which  means  a  '  thorny  shrub  '  (this  is  the  right  meaning  of  our
word  bramble,  see  .Skeat,  s  i>.\

2  From  the  absence  0/  loudness  in  the  sound  is  derived  the
sense  of  Heb.  b« — properly  a  'whisper,'  and  thence  'softness,'
'stillness.' See  also  Divination,  §  4,  iv.

3  It  should  be  noticed  that  the  Auctarium  ad  Dioscoridem
confirms  the  identification  of  riBIJ  and  pdfivoi  by  the  gloss
'Pdiivof  'A.(t>po\  ('Africans'— /.r,  probably  Carthaginians)
'AraiiV.

603


BREAD

BREAD. From  the  earliest  times  of  which  we  have

any record, bread was the principal article  of food

among the Hebrews, a  fact which e.x-

1.  Prepara- ,.^^  ^j^^  ^^^  ^^  ^^^  ^^^  ^^^  ^^^^^^  ^^^

tion.  . , , , .  "  \ ™,  . •.

for food in general. The prmiitive

custom  of  making  the  ears  of  wheat  and  barley  more
palatable  by  the  simple  process  of  roasting  ( 'Sa,  '  parched
corn ' ;  i  S.  17  17,  etc. )  was  still  common  in  historical
times.  For  the  preparation  of  bread,  however,  the
ears  must  be  crushed  or  ground  so  as  to  admit  of
being  kneaded  into  a  paste.  In  early  times  the  flour
was  produced  by  crushing  the  ears  between  two  stones
(see  illustrations  of  these  primitive  '  corn -grinders'
found  in  Palestine  in  Bliss,  Mound  of  Many  Cities,  85),
a  process  common  in  Egypt  under  the  Old  Empire  and
later  (see  Ernian's  Egypt,  190),  and  still  practised  in
the  ILast.  The  mortar  and  pestle  were  a  later  develop-
ment. The  preparation  of  flour  by  pounding  the  ears
in  a  mortar  (nDTD,  Nu.  118)  is  a  familiar  scene  on
Egyptian  monuments.  The  flour  obtained  by  these  pro-
cesses must  have  been  of  a  coarser  grain  (c-nj)  than  that
procured  by  the  use  of  the  handmill  (D'rri ;  see  Ml  1,1,).
A  still  finer  quality  than  the  ordinary  npjD  was  named
nSo  (see  Food,  §  3  \b\).

In  the  earliest  times  bread  was  entirely  unleavened.
The  requisite  quantity  of  flour  or  barley- meal,  which
varied,  naturally,  according  to  the  size  of  the  household,
was  placed  in  a  shallow  wooden  basin  (rriKB'D  ;  E.\.  728)
— earthenware,  for  obvious  reasons,  is  little  used  by
nomads — well  mixed  with  water  and  kneaded.  Salt
was  no  doubt  added  when  procurable  (cp  Lev.  2 13/^).
When  the  kneading  was  completed,  the  dough  (pss)  was
ready  for  the  firing.  Cakes  thus  prepared  were  named
niva,  'unleavened  cakes,'  and  these  still  form  the
usual  bread  of  the  Bedouin.  In  a  more  advanced
stage  of  society,  the  bread  was  made  in  this  way  only
in  cases  of  emergency  (Gen.lQs),  or  for  purposes  of
ritual,  as  at  the  Passover.  The  ordinary  bread  of  the
Hebrews  was  made  lighter  by  fermentation.  A  small
piece  of  to-day's  '  batch  '  was  laid  aside,  and  when  the
time  for  the  next  baking  arrived  this  piece  of  leaven
(ixb)  was  broken  down  into  the  water  in  the  mxc'S,  the
flour  was  mixed  therewith,  and  the  whole  thoroughly
kneaded  and  allowed  to  stand  '  till  the  whole  was
leavened. '

The  next  stage  is  the  process  of  firing,  or  rendering

„.  .  the dough more digestible by the

,  .  ■  ,^^?'  application  of  heat.  Three  modes  of
kinds  of  cakes.  ^^\^^  ^^^  ^^^^^  -^  ^^^  q^_  ^  -^  ^^^

East  at  the  present  day.

{a)  The  simplest  method  is  that  still  in  use  among
the  Bedouin.  A  fire  of  wood,  or  of  wood  mixed  with
camel's  dung,  is  kindled  on  the  sand,  or  on  extempor-
ised hearthstones.  When  these  have  been  well  heated,
the  embers  are  raked  aside,  and  the  flat  pieces  of
dough  laid  on  the  hot  stones  and  covered  with  the
ashes  just  removed.  After  a  few  minutes,  the  ashes
are  again  raked  aside,  the  cakes  turned,  and  the  ashes
replaced.  In  a  few  minutes  more  the  cakes  are  ready
(see  Rob.  BA'  2416/.,  Doughty,  Aral/.  Des.  1  131  etc.).
Such  'a  cake  baked  on  the  coals'  was  termed  njy
D'Dyi  (IK.  196;  cp  Gen.  186  Hos.  78.  ©«ai-^  ^y^p^l
<pla$,  by  the  Vg.  correctly  rendered  fanis  subcinericius,
'  ash  cakes  ' ).

(b)  A  second  mode  of  firing  bread  is  one  much  in
vogue  at  the  present  day  among  Bedouin  and  fellahin
alike.  A  girdle  or  thin  iron  plate  (Siia  npnp  ;  Lev.  25
Ezek.  43,  ^^'^^  Ti](ya.vov),  slightly  convex  in  shape,  is
laid  over  a  small  fire-pit,  in  which  a  fire  has  been
kindled  as  before,  and  on  this  plate  or  girdle  the  cakes
are  fired.  Its  Syrian  name  is  sag  (Landberg,  Prov.  et
Diet,  du  Peuple  Arabe,  14). Cakes  baked  in  this  way

604


BREAKFAST

seem  to  have  been  called  by  the  Hebrews  D'nn  (i  Ch.

(c)  The  most  usual  mode  of  firing,  however,  especially
in  towns,  was  no  doubt  by  means  of  the  oven  ("n:ri).
The  tannur,  then  as  now,  was  a  large  earthenware  jar
in  the  Ixittom  of  which  the  fire  was  placed.  As
reprcsentLHl  on  Kgyptian  monuments,  the  cakes  were
fired  by  tn-ing  applicii  to  the  oulsiiU  of  the  jar  (Wilkinson
234;  Krman,  l:gypf,  191).  The  usual  method  at  the
present  day,  however,  is  to  allow  the  fire  to  burn  down,
and,  while  the  enibcrs  are  still  glowing,  to  api)ly  the
cake  to  the  inside  of  the  jar.  The  dough  is  first
pressed  into  flat  round  cakes  (like  a  .Scotch  bannock);
each  of  these  in  its  turn  is  made  to  revolve  by  a  rapid
movement  of  the  hands,  till  it  has  expanded  to  a
diameter  of  about  18  inches,  and  become  as  thin  as  a
sheet  of  thick  paper.  It  is  then  laid  on  a  cushion,  by
means  of  which  it  is  applied  to  the  wall  of  the  tannur.
These  thin  wafer-cakes  are  called  in  the  OT  p'p  (in
Syria,  markiik).  The  tannUr  may  be  larger,  and
consist  of  a  pit,  wider  at  the  bottom  and  narrowing
towards  the  top,  pl.astered  with  clay.  The  ovens  used
by  the  txikers  of  the  street  in  Jerusalem  named  after
them  (Jer.  3721)  were  jirobably  of  this  sort.  (For
further  details  see  FURNACK,  5).

The  preparation  of  the  daily  supply  of  bread  for
the  household  was  essentially  the  care  of  the  women
(Gen.  186  i  S.  2824  etc. ).  In  the  wealthier  households
this  duty  would  devolve  on  slaves,  male  and  female
(i  S.  813).  In  later  times  baking  became  a  special
trade  in  the  cities  (Jos.  Ant.  xv.  92),  and  especially  in
Jerusalem  (see  alx)ve  and  cp  the  '  oven  tower,'  Neh.  3  n
1238),  where  the  large  influx  of  pilgrims  at  the  great
festivals  would  promote  the  industry.

It  is  impossible  now  tD  identify  the  various  species  of
cakes  mentioned  in  the  O  T.  If  to  those  mentioned  in
the  course  of  this  article  we  add  133  the  ordinary  round
cake  or  bannock  (i  S.  236),  and  ,i^n,  the  etymology  of
which  points  to  its  being  pricked  or  perforated,  like
the  modern  passover  cakes,  we  have  exhausted  the
varieties  that  can  be  identified  with  any  approach  to
certainty. See  further  B.\kkme.\t.s,  also  F(X)D,  §§  1-3.

A.  K.  s.  K.

BREAKFAST  (aricton  [Ti.  WH]),  Lk.  II38  kV"i.'-
See  .\  1 1.  A  IS,  §  2.

BREASTPLATE,  COAT  OF  MAIL  (pntr  [^T.^
i_K.'J-Jj4  Is.r.917],  I'V-li,"  or  pnp  Jer.  464  51 3,  Syr.
Kl'iJk)-  ^^'e  find  the  Uryon  mentioned  as  part  of  the
defensive  armour  of  Goliath  and  David.  That  it  was
commonly  worn  by  Israelite  kings  is  evident  from  i  K.
2234  (aCh.  1833).  In  the  description  of  Goliath's
armour  in  i  S.  175  ( '  coat-of-mail'  KV)  the  addition
of  the  word  D'a'pirp  to  pny  gives  a  valuable  clue  :
Goliath's  coat  of  mail  was  covered  with  bronze  scales.

This  meaning  is  certified  by  Dt.  14  9  (Lev.  11 9),  where  nt-^rg
denotes  the  scales  of  .1  fish.  Moreover,  it  is  derived  from  a  root,
L-L"p,  ihat  signifies  rubbing  or  peeling  off.  Ar.  ka'ssa.  in  cunj.  iv.
expresses  the  peeling  off  of  .skin  during  recovery  from  disease.^

The  weight  of  Goliath's  armour,  according  to  i  S.
175,  was  5000  shekels,  which  m.iy  lie  roughly  computed
as  .ibout  200  lbs.  The  close  intercourse  that  tliere  was
between  Egypt  and  I'hilisiia'- makes  it  not  improbable

»  In  Job4l2«[i81  the  word  nnc*  (in-.  Xry.)  is  taken  by  ®,
Vg.,  and  Targum  as  =  jin;r>  and  modern  comm.,  including  Ew.,
have  adopted  this  view.  Some  colour  is  given  to  this  inter-
pretation by  V.  i5(Heb.),  which  describes  the  .scales  of  Levia-
than, which  the  coat  of  mail  of  the  enemy  might  be  held  to
resemble ;  biic  this  is  too  slight  as  an  argument.  The
immediate  context  suggests  weapons  of  offenct,  and  if  ©  is
correct  in  translating  the  preceding  aw.  Ary.  I'BD  by  lapv  we
have  a  fair  piesumption  that  Del.  is  ri^ht  in  comparing  Ar.
tiryafn  or  sinvat"»,  '  pointed  dart '  or  '  arrow,"  with  the  word
"■T??  in  this  passage  (so  RV).  Duhm  follows  Hoffm.  and  reads
n-jp  'javelin,'  cp  Syr.  itdkatthd.

»  Meyer,  GA,  it<iff.,  i-fiff.,  298.

60s


BREASTPLATE

that  the  heavy  coat  of  mail  worn  by  Goliath  trsrmWed
the  Egyptian  cuirass  worn  by  a  royal  (x5rsona;.:e,  in
which  yellow,  blue,  red,  and  green  metallic  scales  were
tastefully  arranged  in  symmetrical  rows  (Weiss,  Kos-
tiimkunde,  Abth.  1 56).  Wilkinson  has  descrilx-d  the
ICgyptian  cuira.ss  as  consisting  of  about  '  eleven  horizon-
tal rows  of  metal  plates  well  secured  by  bronze  pins.'
At  '  the  hollow  of  the  throat  a  narrower  range  of  plates
was  introduced.  The  breadth  of  each  plate  or  scale
was  little  more  than  an  inch,  twelve  of  them  suflRcing  to
cover  the  front  of  the  body,  and  the  sleeves,  which  were
sometimes  so  short  as  to  extend  less  than  half-way  to
the  cltjow,  consisted  of  two  rows  of  similar  plates.'

The  Assyrian  warriors  in  earlier  times  wore  a  heavy
coat  of  mail  covering  the  entire  Ixxly  with  the  exception
of  the  arms.  Occasionally  the  coat  of  mail  did  not
reach  farther  than  the  knees.  In  later  times  the  leading
warriors  were  i)rotected  by  jackets  made  of  leather  or  of
stout  material,  on  which  metal  plates  were  sewn  or
rivetted  (or  they  were  provided  with  iron  or  bronze
studs).  Broad  girdles  were  used  for  tying  in  the  long
coats  of  mail.  Upon  a  bas-relief,  from  Niiiirud,
portrayed  in  Layard's  work  we  see  an  Assyrian  chariot
in  which  the  bowman  is  mail-clad  even  around  his  neck
and  ears.  It  is  not  improbable  that  Ahab  wore  a  heavy
coat  of  mail  somewhat  resembling  the  Assyrian  (but
shorter),  as  we  know  that  he  took  every  precaution  for
personal  protection.

The  statement  that  he  was  mortally  wounded  by  an  arrow
which  pieiced  '  between  D"rl!'  a"d  the  coat  of  mail '  has  been
variously  interpreted,  ©hal  i„a  y.i„ov  toO  Tivt<>^ova%  k.-i.K.
does  not  yield  any  satisfactory  sense.  The  use  of  ^2^  in  Ls.  41 7
((B  <TuV^At)yu,«),  and  the  fundamental  signification  of  the  root,
point  to  'nvcis'  as  a  probable  rendering,  if  it  could  yield  any
ndecjuate  sense  in  the  context.  Thenius  and  other  authorities
follow  Luther  in  holding  that  what  is  meant  here  is  an  attach-
ment or  appendage  to  the  coat  of  mail.  The  coat  of  mail
protected  the  breast,  whereas  the  appendage  guarded  the  lower
portion  of  the  body,  and  the  arrow  jienetrated  through  the
intcrv.-xl  that  separated  them  (so  Kichm,  IllFIl).  This  ajjj^ars
to  be  the  only  intelligible  explanation,  and  etymology  warrants
the  rendering  of  the  word  c'pai.l  by 'attachments' or  'append-
ages '  {i.e.,  to  the  cuirass).

Respecting  the  coats  of  mail  or  corslets  with  which
Uzziah  is  said  to  have  provided  his  troops  (2  Ch.  2tii4)
we  have  not  definite  information  or  any  sufiicient  clue  to
guide  us.  The  corslets  (AV  '  brigandines ')  which
Jeremiah  (164)  bids  the  cavalry  of  Pharaoh  Necho
put  on  may  have  consisted  of  some  thick  woven
material  covered  with  metal  scales  ;  but  here,  as  in  the
case  of  Neh.  4 16  [10],  we  are  left  in  much  uncertainty.
For  Xeh.  4i6[io]  a  useful  hint  m.iy  be  derived  from
Herod.  763,  where  we  learn  that  the  ."-iyrian  (or  Assyrian)
contingent  of  Xerxes'  army  wore  \lveoi  OuiprjKei,  which
were  probably  close-fitting  sleeveless  jackets  of  co.irse
felt.  Probably  the  ta/ini  (unnn).  AV  '  hal«rgeon,*
RV  'coat-of-mail,'  of  Ex.2832  (cp  3O23.  both  passages
from  P),  was  a  corslet  of  this  character.

Etymology  here  does  not  help  us  as  the  word  is  from  the
Aramaic  root  .|;  ^^  {fthj>eal  'to  fight')  and  therefore  means
simply  'fighting  garb.'  Targ.  Onk.  renders  it  J^r,  'breast-
plate.' ®  (Ex.  28  28)  is  based  on  another  text.  Kn.'hcl  is  on  the
right  track  when  he  says  in  his  comment  (cited  by  Di.,  ad  loc):
'  We  are  reminded  of  the  KivoOwpa^  of  the  Greeks  (//.  2529  Sjo).
Egypt  excelled  in  its  manufacture.'

In  the  Greek  period  (300  P.C.  and  later),  the  ordinary
heavy-armed  soldiers  wore  coats  of  fine  iron  chain-mail
{OJipa^  aXi;<r(5arr6s),  a  series  of  links  connected  into  a
continuous  chain  (Rich).

It  is  significant  that  €5  gives  this  intcrjiretation  in
I  S.  175.  and  we  may  conclude  from  i  Mace.  635  that
during  the  entire  Greek  period  this  was  the  kind  of
cuirass  usually  worn.  What  form  of  breastplate  was
pictured  before  Pauls  imatjination  as  a  symbol  for  the
righteousness  of  a  Christian  w.irrior  (Eph.  614,  cp  Is.
59x7  and  i  Mace.  58) — whether  a  corslet  of  scale
armour  (column  of  Antoninus),  or  a  cuirass  of  ■  broad
metal  plates  across  the  chest  and  long  flexible  bands
606


BREASTPLATE

(laminct)  of  steel  over  the  shoulders '  (depicted  on
the  column  of  Trajan)  —  can  only  be  conjectured.
Excellent  woodcuts  representing  both  may  be  found
in  Rich's  Diet,  of  Roman  and  Greek  Antiquities.
Compare  also  Warre-Cornish's  Concise  Diet,  of  Greek
and  Roman  Antiquities.  O.  C.  VV.

BREASTPLATE,  Priestly  (]w''n  ;  Ex.  284.  nepi-
CTHSion  [I'AL];  elsewhere  jO  AoriON  [BAF],  to
AoreioN  [I'J.  '  oracle  '  ;  but  twice  [Hx.  256  (7)  3r.8  (9)]
6"'"  has  no^HRHC  where  MT  has  j^H)  or  BREAST-
PLATE OF  JUDGMENT  (DD^'P  '  ;t*n,  Ex.  '28 15  ;
A.  TOON  KRlcecON  [B.VL] ;  often  in  0).  an  object
worn  on  the  ephod  of  the  High  Priest.  It  seems  to
have  been  a  square  piece  attached  by  its  corners  to  the
shoulder-straps  of  the  ephod  (see  Ephod,  §  3)  and  of
like  material — probably  a  species  of  pocket  whose  outer
side  was  adorned  with  precious  stones.  The  etymology
of  the  word  is  uncertain.

Di.  rejects  the  probable  derivation  from  the  root  hasuna,  '  to
be  beautiful,'  and  would  prefer  to  connect  it  with  j^h,  sinus  or
'fold'  in  which  something  is  carried;  cp  Ewald,  Alterth.  390.
Oil  the  stones  in  the  breastplate,  see  I'KKCiors  Stones,  and
cp  Ukim  anl)  Thum.mim,  and  Nowack,  UA  -1 119.

O.  C.  W.

BREECHES,  in  the  proper  usage  of  the  word,  denotes
the  (iividcci  garment  reaching  from  the  waist  to  just
below  the  knees,  eciuivalent  to  the  Lat.  feminalia
and  Gr.  nepiCKeAH.  a.s  distinguished  from  braca
(jbracctr)  or  anaSyPI^^C.  which  reached  to  the  ankles
— the  garment  ordinarily  denoted  by  the  word  '  hosen '
at  the  time  when  the  AV  was  ntade.  The  earliest
form  of  the  garment  seems  to  have  been  simply  a  loin
cloth  (cp  GiRDi.K,  1).  Generally,  however,  the  long
mantle  worn  in  the  East  made  a  special  covering  for
the  legs  unnecessary,  and  even  the  warriors  who  are
depicted  upon  the  monuments  with  their  short  tunics
have  the  leg  l)elow  the  knee  wholly  bare  with  the
exception  of  sandals.  Noteworthy,  on  the  other  hand,
are  the  lacings  which  protect  the  shins  and  knees  of  the
follower  of  Asur-bani-pal  ( Per.  and  Chip. ,  Art  in  Chald.
ii.  pi.  X.);  see  further  .Shoi-.s.  Breeches,  in  fact,

seem  to  be  a  distinctively  Persian  dress  (see  Herod.  I71
7 61),  and  do  not  appear  to  have  been  known  among
the  Israelites—  at  all  events  not  before  the  exile.  1  Apart
from  the  ch.aracleristic  priestly  d'DJDO  (see  below,  3),
g.arments  of  this  nature  are  mentioned  only  in  Dan.  3  21

1.  ?2-ia,  sarhdl  (Dan.  821  27t),  RV  '  hosen,' ^  sup-
ported by  a  consensus  of  opinion  (Theod.,  Aq.,  Sym.
Pesh. ,  Hi.,  Ew. ,  Behrmann,  etc.).

In  this  case  the  word  is  derived  from  Gr.  (rapa^apa,  crapd^aXXa
(I.ag.  GVj.  AMi.  207,  p"ra.  Aram.  Lehniu.  48),  probably  of  Pers.
origin  (cp  mod.  Pers.  shahvdr).  In  Targ.  and  Talm.,  on  the
otlier  hand,  'q  (originally  not  connected  with  the  above)  denotes
a  'mantle';  so  Jewish  exegetes  (.\ben-Ezra,  etc.)  and  AV
('coats,'  mg.  'mantles')  in  this  passage.

For  more  than  one  reason  the  AV  is  probably
better.  '  Coats '  or  '  mantles  '  suits  the  climax  in  v.  27,
which  describes  the  powerlessness  of  the  fire  over  the
Three,  better  than  RV — their  bodies  were  uninjured  ;
nor  was  their  hair  singed  ;  their  mantles  (flowing  loose
robes,  easily  inflammable)  were  unchanged,  nor  had  the
smell  of  fire  passed  on  them.

2.  c"£29.  patlis,  in  j'i,T;r'DS  (or  rather  jirt'ras  [Bii.  Gi.  ]),
Dan.  821,  is  an  exceedingly  obscure  term  for  which  are
offered  such  diverse  renderings  as  '  hosen  '  ( AV),  '  tunics  '
(RV),  -turbans'  (RV">.').

'  Turb.ans '  m.ay  be  safely  dismissed  as  unphilological  and  im-
probable (see  TuRii an)  ;  for  the  rest  cp  Syr.  |>A^^  (")  Persian
tunic  (cp  RV)  (1^)  breeches,  also  a  kind  of  leggings  (cp  A V)  ;  .see
Payne-Smith,  Thes.  The  Jew. -Aram,  p'^s  occurs  in  only  one
passage  independent  of  Dan.  821,  and  apparently  denotes  some-

1  Much  later,  in  the  Roman  period,  hiaccte,  feminalid,  and
fascitr  all  found  their  way  into  Juda:a  (Hriill,  Trachten  d.
Judtn,  87).

2  Evidently  retained  in  its  older  sense.  The  modem  'hosen
is  applied  to  stockings.

607


BRICK

thing  worn  upon  the  feet  ;  but  the  text  is  prob.-»bly  corrupt  (see
I^vy,  S' tiW'li,  s.v.  rirs),  although  Kohut  (Aruch  Coni/ileluiii,
s.v.  c'as)  argues  for  its  authenticity.  It  is  not  improbable  that
POB  's  ?  ^''^-s.  '°  "^aio;  this  is  indirectly  suggested  by  the
philological  evidence  and  the  versions  (C^  reads  only  ttvo  of  the
three  terms),  and  is  directly  .supported  by  quotations  in  the  old
Latin  fathers.  For  a  discussion  of  ^310  and  tro^  see  further
Journ.  Phil.  'IfijpTff.  ['99].

3.  The  priestly  linen  breeches  (na-'pJDO  [0:3  to  cover,
hide],  ir(pi(TKe\rj  Xiva,  feminalia,  Pesh.  transliterates
Trepi^tofia)  were  to  be  worn  along  with  the  holy  linen
coat,  the  linen  girdle,  and  the  linen  turban  by  Aaron
on  the  Day  of  Atonement  as  he  entered  the  holy  place
within  the  curtain  (Lev.  I64  [P]).  It  is  probably
by  an  oversight  that  they  are  specially  mentioned  in
I'',cclus.  45  8  along  with  the  long  robe  and  ephod  (or
rather  the  kuttdneth  and  ine'il ;  so  Heb. )  as  part  of  his
'  apparel  of  honour. '  Ordinary  priests  also  wore  them
on  sacrificial  occasions  (Ex.2842  3928  Lev.  6 10  [3]  [all
P],  lizek.  44  18  [the  b'ne  Zadok]).

According  to  Jos.  {.'Int.  iii.  7i)  the  ixavaxatniv  [Niese]  was  a
girdle  (Siafujxa)  t  of  line  twisted  linen.  It  was  the  undermost
of  the  priestly  garments  and  possibly  the  most  primitive,  since
the  older  law  of  Ex.  'M  26  (J  E  (according  to  liacon,  E])  seems  to
imply  that  the  wearing  of  the  garment  was  not  originally
compulsory  for  priest  or  layman.  The  change  seems  to  l>e  due
to  a  primitive  conception  of  holiness.  Clothes  which  had  come
in  cont.act  with  a  holy  place  or  function  became  taboo  (Ar.
hartm),  and  therefore  useless  in  ordinary  life.  The  way  to
avoid  this  misfortune  was  to  perform  holy  ceremonies  naked
(just  as  the  Hedouins  made  the  sacred  circuit  of  the  Kaaba  at
IVIecca  in  a  nude  condition),  or  in  holy  vestments  borrowed  from
the  priests  (cp  2  K.  IO22).  The  law  of  Kx.  2026  is  apparently
aimed  against  the  former  custom  (for  which  see  further  WRS,
A'5"(-')  45iyC). See  Dkess,  Priest.  i.  a. — S.  A.  C.

BRETHREN  OF  JESUS  (Mt.  12  47  Mk.  832  Lk.  820).
See  Cl()1'.\s,  >i'itt-'  Ja.mks,  §  3,  Simon,  4.

BRICK  (n:?"?,  derived  by  Gcs.  from  ^/  p"?,  'to  be
white,'  as  if  bricks  were  originally  made  of  a  whitish


1.  Of  the
Hebrews


clay  ;  but  this  is  a  forced  etymology  ;  0
TtAinBoc)-^  The  Hebrew  word  for  brick
is  not  limited  to  sun-dried  bricks.  There
is  no  doubt,  however,  that  the  Israelites,  like  most
Eastern  nations,  used  this  kind  almost  exclusively  ;  in
Gen.  11  3  burning  bricks  is  mentioned  as  a  foreign
custom,  analogous  to  the  use  of  asphalt  (see  Bitumen)
for  mortar,  and  we  may  safely  disregard  EV''s  rendering
•brickkiln'  in  2  S.  I231,  N'ah.  814.*  Sun-dried  bricks
of  a  very  early  period  have  been  found  in  Palestine  ;
burnt  bricks  seem  to  date  generally  from  the  Roman
period.  It  will  be  remembered  that  the  houses  of  the
mass  of  the  Israelites  were  made  of  sun-dried  clay  (see
Housk)  ;  it  was  of  the  same  material  that  their  bricks
were  composed.*

The  true  countries  of  brick-m.^kers  and  brick-builders  were
Egypt'  and  Mesopotamia.  In  Egypt,  not  only  all  houses,  but
also  all  palaces,  many  tombs  (including  several  of  the  smaller
pyramids),  and  some  temples,  were  constructed  of  Nile-mud
bricks.

The  representations  of  brick-making  which  are  to  be
found  in Egyptian  wall  -  pictures  are  very  instructive.
_  .  . They  not  only  show  the  process  with  great
^ '  clearness, but also illustrate most vividly
° the  serfdom  of  the Israelites  on  Egyptian
ground. The  most  famous  picture,  for  example,  repre-
sents foreigners — chiefly  of  a  Semitic type — at work,

1  We  are  reminded  of  the  manner  in  which  the  Ar.  m'tzar  has
evolved  from  the  simple  izdr ;  see  Girule,  1.

2  Some  scholars  consider  itKivOa<i,  the  Greek  term  for  brick,
to  have  been  Imrrowed  by  the  Greeks  from  the  Phoenicians  in
the  form  H/)Hnth.  [rtj^'i.  Ass.  libitlu,  seems  to  come  from
latiUtu,  'to  throw  down  flat";  see  Libnah,  and  cp  Del.  J'rol.

93/1

3  See'the  commentaries  of  Driver,  H.  P.  .Smith  and  Lohr  on
2S.  I.e.,  and  on  the  whole  p.issage  see  David,  §  11,  c.  ii.  RV  at
Jer.  43  9  alters  the  unintelligible  'brickkiln'  of  AV  into  'brick-
work.'

*  .'Mtars,  also,  were  made  of  earth  ;  cp  the  obscure  Is.  653
(see  Sacrikice). On  the  law  in  Ex.  20 25  (E?)  see  .Ni.tak.  S  3.

8  Cp  the  fact  that  the  Eg.  word  for  brick,  dohel,  Coptic  t«/3«,
took  root  in  Asia ;  cp  Arabic  tfii  (whence  Etbiopic  tib.  Span.
adobe).

608


BRICK

su|x:rintendcd  by  Egyptian  '  task  masters '  armed  with
sticks.

The  onalogy  to  the  labour  of  Israel  as  described  in  Ex.  1  it
to  sirikini;  that  iimny;  » rilvrs  have  ventured  to  regard  the  uicture
OS  refeiring  to  the  circuiiiktaiiccii  wiih  which  that  record  deals.
'I'he  scene,  however,  rcpre.scnts  'brick -making  for  the  great
magazine  in  KaMcrn  Thebes '  (Opet,  mod.  A'armai),  ana  the
explanatory  legend  states  that  the  labourers  are  'captives
brought  by  his  ni.-tjcsiy  (I)hutmose  or  Tholmes  III.)  for  work
on  the  temple  of  Anion  '  ;  many  (not  the  majurity)  of  tlie  working
men  seem  to  be  African  c.ipiivcs.

The  picture  illustrates  the  whole  process  of  brick-
making.

We  see  the  lalx>urers  hoeing  the  ground  with  the  wooden
Egypti.in  hoe  (see  At;mcLi.ruKK,  fig.  3),  carrying  the  black
earth (.Nile-inuil  deposited  at  the  aimiial  inundation)  in  baskets  1
to  a  clean  (sandy  r)  place,  moistening  it  with  water  taken  from
shallow  ponds,  cvidetitly  at  some  distance  from  the  Nile,  and
kneading  it  with  their  feet.  The  wooden  moulding-frame  Is
filled  with  m.iterial  of  the  right  consistency,  and  emptied  on  the
ground  ;  then  the  square  heaps  of  mud,  placed  in  rows  side  by
tide,  are  left  to  dry.-

These  I-.qyptian  bricks  were  usually  twice  the  size  of
our  modern  ones. Many of  thcin (from dynasty 18
3 EcTrntian '^"^^■•'^'■''^)  ^■•^■"'^  stamix-d  with  the  name
bride  °^  ^ '^'"■'''' '"  ^^"^^  ''^'^'  '^''"^  belonged

to  public  buildings  ;  someliines  the
stamp  shows  the  name  of  the  building,  and  sometimes
in  addition  to  this  the  name  of  the  oflicer  charged
with  the  construction  of  the  building. ••  Stamps  as
well  as  moulds  have  been  preserved  to  modern  times,
and  bricks  with  the  name  of  Rameses  II.,  '  the  Pharaoh
of  the  oppression'  (but  see  Kcypt,  §  l,^  ff-),  are  shown
in  our  museums.  We  often  find  chopped  straw  or  reed
mi.xed  with  the  mud  to  make  it  more  consistent  and  to
prevent  cracking  during  the  drying.  According  to
E.x.  5i8  the  pharaoh  showed  his  malice  by  doubling  the
work  of  the  Isr.ielites.  Apparently  we  are  to  under-
stand that,  instead  of  furnishing  straw  from  the  royal
domains  and  from  the  magazines  of  a  fifth  part  of  the
other  fields,  he  forced  tlie  oppressed  strangers  to  gather
the  straw  from  the  fields  themselves.  This,  however,
they  could  not  well  accomplish  tluring  their  scanty
leisure  time  ;  besides,  the  stalks  wtre  used  (and  are
still  used)  as  fodtier,  esjx'cially  when  not  quite  dry.
Nor  is  it  any  e.isier  to  see  how  they  could  get  old  straw
of  the  previous  year  (from  the  refuse  heaps  of  farm-
yards, etc.  ?)  in  quantities  sufticient  for  their  '  tale  of
bricks."  For  the  rest,  we  frecjuently  find  not  only
foreign  captives,  but  also  the  I'.gyptian  serfs,  referred  to
in  Egyptian  texts  as  making  bricks  under  constraint.

We  now  turn  to  the  second  brick-building  country —
Mesopotamia. Owing to the scarcity of stone in
4.  Babvlonian ^'^^^-^'o"'^  proper,  brick  was  the  only
■'  '  building  material,  stone  iK'ing  reserved

for  the  ornamentation  of  edifices,  and  the  construction  of
certain  parts,  such  as  the  threshold(see  H.MiYi.oMA,  §  15).
Whilst  in  10gy])t  rain  is  so  scarce  that  buildings  of  sun-
dried  brick  have  a  certain  durability,  the  climate  of
Babylonia  is  less  favourable.  The  Babylonians,  accord-
ingly, made  their  constructions  more  solid.  They  built
walls  of  an  enormous  thickness  :  for  example,  the  great
enclosure  of  Ribylon  which  Nebuchadrezzar  erected
with  the  clay  dug  from  the  ditch  of  the  city  (cp
Babylon,  §  5).  Moreover,  their  unfavourable  climate
forced  the  liibylonians,  though  wood  was  at  least  as
scarce  in  their  country  as  in  I'^gypt,  to  use  burnt  bricks,
esixicially  for  the  outer  layers  of  their  thick  walls.
This  led  to  a  high  development  of  the  art  of  glazing
and  colouring  bricks.  We  find  large  walls  covered  with
elalxjrate paintings, whilst in Egypt  such enamelled

>  [Does  the  phrase,  'his  hands  were  freed  from  the  basket'
(Ps.  SI  6  [7)  RV;  'task-Uasket,'  I)e  Witt),  refer  to  these  baskets?
Cp  Del.  ad  lac.;  but  ^1'^0  is  open  to  grave  suspicion  (sec  Che.
Ps.n\  a.n,u:.).\

•  i-i^'i*  ''"Sypdan  method  of  representing  obiects  in  [perspective
IS  likely  to  give  the  impression  that  the  bricks  are  placed  one
above  another.

*  It  has  been  inferred  from  this  stamp  that  the  government
manufactured  bricks  for  sale,  and  even  that  it  had  a  brick-
monopoly  ;  but  this  is  verj-  improbable.

39  609


BRIER

tiles  were  used  much  more  rarely  and  always  on  a
smaller  scale.  Crude  bricks,  however,  sometimes  of
enormous  size  and  always  without  straw,  were  the
common  material,  especially  in  the  earlier  times.
Hence  we  have  brick  stamps  with,  for  example,  the
name  of  such  old  kings  as  Sargon  of  AgadiS  and
Naram-sin.

In  Nineveh,  sun-dried  bricks  seem  to  have  been  the
building  material  in  general  use.  On  Ezek.  4i,  which
mentions  Ezekiel  as  portraying  the  siege  of  Jerusalem
on  clay-tiles,  see  Ezek.  SHOT  (\Lng.),  p.  98^

w.  .M.  M.

BRICKKILN  (jaiptj).  2.S.  I'ij.  Nah.3.4  and  (RV
Brickwork  I  J<r.  489. See  alxne.  §  i.

BRIDE  (n^2)  Is.  025.  Bridegroom  (inn)  Jer.  7j4.
See  .\I.\KKiA(;i;.

BRIDGE  (re(t)YPOYN  [A]),  2  Mace.  I213  AV  ;  RV
Gkfuvkun.

BRIDLE.  The  various  I  leb.  and  Gr.  words  will  be
found  dealt  with  in  the  articles  s|>ecified  below.

1.  Di0.-.3,  nia/tsdin  (^vKoK^),  Ps.  3!»  1 1 12]  KV,  lA'nn;- '  muz/le  '
(cp  Catti.k,  8  9).  Most  inappropriate  ;  read  •'''•-•?,  '  a  guard  '
(Ps.  141  3  nT.CC'),  with  Her/,  Che.

2.  ni'?SS,  tn*sii/,Hh,  2ech.  14  2o  AVms;.,  KV  Hi:r.Ls  [^.r'.,  2].

3-  ^?>  nietlug,  2  K.  10  28(xaAivot)  ||  Is.3;29  (xoAti-o?),  I'rov.
263  (Kti-Tpof).  EV  is  no  doubt  correct.  Cp  the  place-name  in
3  S..SI,  .MKrHH<;-.\.M.MAii.

4-  19"}}  resen.  Is.  30  28  ((B  doubtful),  Job  30 11  ixakivot),
Ps.  32 9  («r>)(uos).  Job  41  13  [5]  EV  (flw/>a|).  Perhaps  '  bit '  would
be  a  better  renilcrint;.

5.  X"-^'""*  Jas.  33  RV,  .\V  'bit';  Rev.  14  20  KV  (cp  Eur.
Aicesiis,  492);  cp  HoKSK,  jj  2.

BRIER. Six  Hei)rcw  words  have  to  Ix;  considered.

I-  D':,713,'  barkdnhn  (Judg.  87  i6t),  are  mentioned
along  with  '  thorns  of  the  wilderness  '  as  the  instruments
with  which  Gideon  '  taught,'  or  rather  '  threshed  '  (r.  7  ;
C|)  Moore's  comm.  ad  loc. ),  the  men  of  Succoth.  The
etymology  of  the  Hebrew  word  being  unknown  and
its  occurrence  so  rare,  it  is  scarcely  worth  while  to
speculate  as  to  the  kind  of  thorn  intendeil.

We  may  notice  that  according  to  I5oissier,  3  602  (quoted  by
Aschcrson  in  l,o\v,  429),  h-rkiin  is  in  nio<iern  times  an  .Araliic
name  for  I'haceof'af'pus  scoparius,  Hoiss.  The  r'arallcli-in  witli
'thorns  of  the  wilderness'  in  lx)th  places  is  enou^ih  to  rt'";ite  the
absurd  idea  invented  by  Micbaelis  and  adopted  by  dtsenius
that  C'J^"13  meant  'threshing-wains.'  The  method  of  torture
alluded  to  is  that  of  carding  (see  Moore).

2.  TCC*.  samir,  occurs  eight  limes  in  Is.  (56  "232425
9 18  [17]  10 17  274  32 13),"-  in  seven  of  these  along  with
n'c*,  a  word  of  similar  meaning,  tc;?  is  a  genuine
Semitic  word,  and  Celsius  (2 188  cp  Friinkel,  89)
pointed  out  its  aftinity  with  Ar.  sumur,  some  kind  of
thorny  plant.  The  Hebrew  word  seems  a  general  one
for  thorny  plants,  of  which  there  are  many  kinds  in
Palestine  (Tristram  enumerates  sixteen  sjiecies  of  Kluiiii-
nctc,  Fl'P  263  ff. ).  The  ancient  versions  give  no
help  towards  a  nearer  determination  of  the  species.

3-  1S"0,  iii-par  (Kovvi'a  [Sym.  kvU]  Is.  55i3t).  a
wilderness-plant,  probably  of  the  nettle  kind,  as  its  name
is  apparently  connected  with  r^-c  ;=  rx-, '  to  burn.'

©  .Aq.  Theod.  took  it  to  Ije  the  '  fleah.nne'  ;  Sym.  and  Vg.  the
'nettle';  Pesh.  renders  ftitkra,  prolnbly  'savory.'  Any  of
these  will  suit  the  passage  well  ei)oiii;h  ;  under  the  new  dis-
pensation this  plant  was  to  give  place  to  the  myrtle.

4-  C"3T3.  sdrdbhini,  AV"'>:-  'rebels'  (irapoiaTp-fiaovai
[Sym.  Irafjiol,  Th.  5v<tko\oi]  Ezek.  26t),  is  not  a  plant
name.

According  to  the  testimony  of  all  the  ancient  versions,  the
word  is  almost  certainly  to  be  read  as  the  participle  (C':"I3)  of  a
verb  common  in  Aram.,  'to  gainsay  falsely"  or  'iilly'  ;  and  the

'  O  merely  transliterates ;  in  v.  7  .\q.  renders  rpayaxiu^ac
and  Sym.  rpt^oAot/f  (see  KiKi.D,  a  J  Ak:).

2  In  the  other  three  places  where  TCC*  occurs  (Jcr.  17  i  E/ek.
89  Zech.  "12)  it  is  rendered  'diamond'  or  'adamant'  (se«
AuA.MA.vT,  S  3)-

610


BRIGANDINB

following  word,  D'JPD,  is  perhaps  a  mistake  for  D^bb  ('  despising  ')
or  some  such  word,  so  that  the  clause  would  read  '  though  they
gainsay  and  contemn  thee '  (see  Co.  ad loc).  There  is  no  support
anywhere  for  a  word  D'3^0  meaning  'briers.'

5-  p'?p.  sillan  (<tk6\o^,  Ezek.  2824),'  is  connected  with
Jewish  Aram.  kiS'o.  Syr.  salwd,  Ar.  sulld,  Mand.  Kn'S'O
(Low,  150),  all  of  which  mean  a  'thorn'  or  'pricking
point.'

6.  pin,  hedek  (dKavdai,^  Prov.  15i9  [where  EV
•thorns'"]  Mic.  74t).  is  by  Wellhausen  (A7.  ProphS^^  149)
connected  with  Ar.  hadika,  .an  enclosed  garden  or
orchard  ;  he  reads  in  Micah  n3iD20  mtr'  pinp  D3ia  ('  ihr
Bester  ist  aus  der  Dornhecke  und  ihr  Gradester  aus  dem
Gestriipp '),  thus  producing  a  good  parallelism.  On  the
other  hand,  Low  (147),  following  Celsius  (ii.  35^),  ex-
plains the  word  by  reference  to  Ar.  hadak,  which,  accord-
ing to  Lane  [s.v.),  is  Solanum  cordatum.  Tristram
(FFP,  368)  identifies  it  with  Solanum  sanctum,  L.
(sometimes  called  the  apple  of  Sodom  :  see  Biid.*^'  152).
We  m.iy  at  all  events  gather  from  Prov.  15 19  that  a
thorny  plant  capable  of  forming  a  hedge  is  intended.
For  Heb.  68  AV  [r/st'/JoXotj,  see  THISTLE  [4]. N.  M.

BRIGANDINE  (|np),  Jer.  464,  RV  '  coats  of  mail' ;
see  Bkeasti'l.\te  (i. ).

BRIMSTONE  {i.e.,  brenston,  'burning  stone';
T\'''yZi\,  gophrith;  ddoy -.^  sulphur).

The  passages  are  Gen.  19  24  Dt.  29  23  [22]  Job  18  15  Ps.  11  6  [7]
Is.  30  33  349  Ezek.  3822  Lk.  1729  Rev.  917/  14 10  19  20  20  10
21  8t). Gophr'ith  is  apparently  connected  with  TS3i  '  bitumen  '


BUKKI


(cp  the  Aram,  and  Ar.  forms  with  initial  k\  but  surely  not  of
Bactrian  origin,  as  L.igardc-*  supposed.

Almost  invariably  the  passages  in  which  brimstone
is  mentioned  relate  to  divine  judgments  ;  there  is  no
direct  statement  of  any  use  to  which  sulphur  was
put  by  the  Hebrews.  They  cannot  have  known  any-
thing of  the  industrial  uses  of  that  mineral,  which  have
so  largely  added  to  the  wealth  of  the  regions  where  it  is
most  easily  obtained  [e.g.,  Sicily).  The  only  objects  to
which  it  was  applied  by  the  ancients,  according  to  Plin.
HNZhis,  are  the  making  of  lamp  wicks  [ellychnia],
the  fumigation  and  cleansing  of  wool,  certain  medical
remedies,  and,  lastly,  religious  purifications  *  (cp  Od.11
481  483  ;  after  the  slaughter  of  the  suitors).

It  may  be  conjectured,  however,  that  sulphur  was  used  in
the  so-called  Toi-heth  (q.v.)  of  the  Valley  of  Hinnom  (cp  Is.
80 33),  and  one  conclusion  may  safely  be  drawn  from  the  many
descriptions  in  which  brimstone  is  referred  to— that  the  Israelites
were  not  unacquainted  with  the  volcanic  phenomena  known  as
'solfatara  '  or  those  known  as  'fire-wells'  (as  emanations  of  car-
buretted  hydrogen,  when  they  take  fire,  are  frequently  called).
These  '  fire-wells 'occur  in  many  of  the  districts  where  mud-
volcanoes  appear,  in  Europe,  Asia,  and  N.  America.**  Reminis-
cences of  phenomena  of  this  kind  apparently  underlie  certain
parts  of  the  account  of  the  overthrow  of  Sodom  and  Gomorrah
in  Gen.  19  and  the  other  passages  (see  above)  where  the  same
narrative  is  directly  or  indirectly  alluded  to.

It  is  probable  that  the  Hebrews,  like  the  Greeks  (see
//.  14415  Od.  12417)  and  the  Romans  (Plin.  HN  Sois),''
associated  the  ozonic  smell  whicn  often  so  perceptibly
accompanies  lightning  discharges  with  the  presence  of
sulphur.  This  may  help  to  explain  the  passages  which
describe  or  allude  to  the  overthrow  of  Sodom  and
Gomorrah  as  having  been  brought  about  by  a  rain  of
fire  and  brimstone  from  heaven  (Job  18 15  ?  Gen.  19  25j
Ps.  116  Ezek.  3822  Lk.  1729).

BBOIDEBED  COAT, RV  '  coat  of  chequer  work '

1  On  D':i?D,  Ezek.  2  6  see  above,  4.

2  The  reading  of  ®  in  Mic.  7  4  (dn  <rr\<s  iKTjMyoiv)  presupposes
a  reading  pnh^J  (Vollers  in  ZA  TiVi  10).

S  Probably  from  the  same  root  as  dvia,/uinus,  and  wholly  un-
connected with  Seo9.

4  Beitr.  74  27  ;  .?^w.  1  64/  ;  Sym.  2  93/
CpOv.  Met.U^<)^/.,

Lurida  supponunt  foecundo  .sulfura  fonti,
Incenduntque  cavas  fumante  bitumine  venas.
8  See  Sir  Archibald  Geikie  in  Ency.  £r/f.fJ)  10  251.
7  Fulmina,  fuU^ura  quoque  sulpuris  odurem  habent,  ac  lux
ipsa  eorum  sulpurea  est.

611


()*2t?'n  nana),  ex.

Tunic,  §  2.


See Embroidery, § i  ;
See


BROIDERED WORK (Hap-I), Ezek.  16

E.MHkOIDKKV, § 1.

BROOCHES  (D^nn),  Ex.3522  RV  ;  AV  'bracelets'
[see  Hook,  2]. See  also  Buckle,  1.

BROOK.  The  Hebrew  word  usually  thus  rendered
is?n3,  nakal  {xeifidft^ovs;  cp  in  NT  Jn.  I81),  which,
like  the  Ar.  wiidy,  denotes  not  only  the  flowing  brook
itself  (cp  |n*X  7n3,  Am.  524),  but  also,  like  the  Ar.
%uddy,  the  drierl-up  river  bed '  (cp  the  term  3T3X,  Jer.
15 18).  Hence  Job  likens  his  unstable  brethren  to
a  brook  whose  supply  of  water  cannot  be  counted  on
(Job  615).

In  Is.  19  6,  lii-D  nk'i  y'Dre  mdfSr,  'the  brooks  of  defence,"
means  rather  '  streams  of  Egypt '  (so  RV).  ^^<',  y'Sr,  a  word
which  bears  resemblance  both  to  the  Eg.  'io{t)ru*,  '  river,'  and  to
the  Ass.  ia'uru,  'stream,'  is  applied  usually  to  the  Nii-E.

P*SX.  'aphik,  in  D^'O  'P'BK,  aphikc  mayim,  '  water-brooks,'  Ps.
42  2  [3]  Joel  1  20  (irijyou,  a<f>t<Tfii  v&dTiov),  is  a  poetical  word
which,  from  its  radical  idea  of  holding  or  confining,  denotes
properly  a  channel  (cp  Is.  8  7).  It  is  otherwise  rendered  '  stream,"
'river,'  '  waters,' etc.,  and  occurs  in  various  involved  figurative
meanings,  in  Job  12  21  (AV  'the  mighty'),  40 18  (AV  'strong
pieces'),  41 15  [7]  (D'^O  T?*^,  AV  'scales").

Vs'D,  mii/ial,  rendered  '  brook  '  in  2  S.  17  20,  is  a  word  of  un-
known etymological  history  (for  Fr.  Del. 's  identification  with  the
Ass.  mekaltu,  '  a  canal,'  cp  Dr.  ad  loc.  and  ZDMG  40  724).  The
word,  if  not  corrupt  (We.  conjectures  some  such  word  as
~ni)  or  out  of  its  place,  is  quite  unknown.'

'For  Brook  Of  Egypt  (cn-^O  Sn:),  Is.  27  12  RV,  see  Egypt,
River  ok.  For  Brook  of  the  Arabah  (.lanjjn  '^np).  Am.  614
RV,  sec-  Arauah,  Brook  of  the.  s.  A.  C.

BROOM  (Dn'l),  I  K.  194  RV^e-.  AV  Juniper.

BROTH  (P"1^),  Judg.  619/  Is.  65 4t.  See  Cooking,
§  3  ;  S.\ckifice.

BROWN  (Din),  Gen.  30 32/  AV  ;  see  Colours,  §  8.

BUCKET  [h'^,  cp  Ar.  dalw'"',  Ass.  dilAtu),  Is.  40 15
((cdSos  [BX.'\Qr])  ;  in  Nu.  1i^  {(r-KipjM  [BAFL]),  used
figuratively  of  Israel's  prosperity. See  Agriculture,

§5-

BUCKLE.  I.  According  to  some  authorities  the  nn
(c(|)pAr'AAC,  armillas)  of  Ex.3522  was  a  buckle  (AV
'bracelets,'  RV  'brooches'). See  Ring.

2.  So,  too,  the  mi'i'K  of  2  S.  1 10. See  Bracelet

(5)-

3.  irSpirr]  (iMacc.  IO89  II58  I444)  was  a  gold
buckle,  bestowed  in  one  instance  as  an  honourable
distinction  on  Jonathan  by  king  Alexander  Balas,  '  as
the  use  is  to  give  to  such  as  are  the  kindred  of  the  king
(i  Mace.  10  89).

Such  buckles  or  brooches  formed  the  fastenings  of  the  outer
garment  on  the  breast  or  over  the  shoulder.  They  were  of
various  shapes,  the  commonest  being  a  flat  circular  ring  with  a
pin  passing  through  the  centre  (Rawlinson).  The  use  of  golden
buckles  (like  that  of  the  purple  robe)  was  reserved  to  men  of  dis-
tinction (see  passages  cited,  and  cp  llivy,  3931)  ;  see  Crown,  S  4.

BUCKLER.  For  |3p,  mJgen  (2  S.  2231 --VV),  T\yi.
ftnnak  (Ps.  352),  •"I'lnb,  sohcrah  (Ps.  9I4)  see  Shield.  For
npn,  romah  (i  Ch.  l/s)  see  Spear  (so  R'V).

BUGEAN  (BoYfAlOC  [BNAL"],  bugaius),  Est.  126
AV. See  Agagite.

BUKKI  ("pa,  §  52 ;  abbreviated  from  -in'ipa ;
BOKx[e]i  [L];  see  Bukkiah).

1.  .'^aid  to  have  been  the  fourth  in  descent  from  Aaron  in  the
line  of  Eleazar  :  i  Ch.  0  5  51  [5316  36]  (?/.  5  B««  [B),  -luxai  [.\] ;

^  ^n:  is  accordingly  sometimes  rendered  '  valley ' :  cp,  e.g.,  Dt.
2  36  2  Ch.  -.'O  i6  33  14  in  RV.

2  The  Targ.  identifies  'j^'o  with  the  Jordan.  No  help  can  be
obtained  from  the  Versions,  unless  the  JieAjjAuflacri  (rireuioiTtsof
(Bl  be  correct,  in  which  case  Q'on  ^3*0  "i^y  ^  •>  corruption  of
some  such  word  as  D'lJSD  or  Q'ViiJJO  (elsewhere  late).  See
also  H.  P.  Smith,  ad  loc.

6l3


BUKKIAH

v.^i  .««t  (P.AD;  Ezra 7^  (BoK«(fli  (UAl)=i  E«d.8a,  Uoccas
(IloKita  [ItA]).  In4KMl.  la  the  name  appears  as  Ituritb
(Honth).

■1.  l>.inite  ;  one  of  the  chiefs  chosen  to  divide  Canaan  (Bax«i^
[I»l.  -XX'  I'  1.  -««"P  I'l.  »o««'  I'^l).  Nu.34aa  [P).

BUKKIAH  (•in'pa.  jx-rhaps  connected  with  the
Syr.  verb  \es.^.  and.  if  pointed  H^'i^S.  signifying
'Yahwe  has  tested,'  §§  39,  52);  one  of  the  sons  of
Hcnian.  l  C  h.  2r)4  13  (  BOYKCIAC  [B].  BOKKIAC,  KOKK.
[A],  BoKXiAC  \\'\  Ui-oa). See  Bakbukiah.

BUL  (713,  [xrhaps  '  r;un-month,'  from  7l3* ;  cp  in
Ph.  73,  CIS  i.  no.  31  ;  its  identification  with  the  Pahn.
divine  name  713  (in  7l313y,  etc. )  is  not  certain  ;  B&aA
[BA].  BoyA  ['^l).  '  K.  638. See  Month,  §§  2,  5.

BULL  (T,3.  Jt-r.  f>2ao;  19,  Gen.  32i5[i6] ;  litr.
Job21 10  ;  T3k  I's.  50 13.  and  T&YPOC,  Heb.  9 13).  See
Caitle,  §  2.  For  the  bull  in  mythological  representa-
tions, see  Calf,  Goi.dkn  ;  Catti.k,  §  14;  CiiKKtu.
§  7  ;  anfl  cp  Stars,  §  3  a.  For  the  brazen  bulls  (2  K.
16 17),  see  Ska,  Brazkn.  It  is  worth  adding  th.at
bull-lights  are  often  represented  on  wall-paintings  in
Egyptian  tombs  (see  P.  E.  Newberry,  El  Bersheh,
pt.  i. ,  p.  28,  n.  1).

BULLOCK  ("IS),  Ex.  29 10. See  Cattle,  §  2.

BULL,  WILD(Nin). Is.  51 20,  AV  ;  RV  Antelope

BULRUSH  (lb;iX).  Is.  585  (RV  'rush'),  and  BuL-
Rusiiics  (N^i),  K.\.  23  Is.  I82  (RV  in  the  latter  'papy-
rus'), both  words  elsewhere  Rushes  [q-v.).

BUL"WARK.  For  h^X),  hel  (AV  occasionally,  RV
usually  '  rampart '),  see  Fortress,  §  5  ;  for  n39,  pinnah,  2  Ch.
2615  (RV  '  battlements,'  mg.  '  corner  towers '),  see  Hattle-
MENT  and  FouTKEss,  §  s;  for  ^ii^D,  wa/A^  (Eccl.9  14),  and
•lisO,  ni.isor  ( I  )t .  20  20),  see  War.

BUNAH  (n:-13  'intelligence':  cp  in  Palm.  W13,
Vog.  Syr.  Ceri.,  no.  3),  a  Jerahmeelite  (BanaiA  [B],
Baana  [A],  amina[L]).  iCh.  225.

BUNDLE  (l'n>*),  Gen.  4235  of  money;  Ct.  I13  of
mvrrh  ; i  S.  25  29 of  life. See  Bag  (4).

'BUNNI  ('33,  '':-13  and  '])-13,  §§  5.  79  ;  cp  Bani).

1.  A  Levite,  Neh.  !>4  Oofnat  [L] ;  transl.  vi6<:  (BKA]),  see
Ezra,  ii.  §  i:j(y.);  possibly  identical  with  the  signatory  to  the
covenant  (see  Kzka,  i.,  8  7),  Neh.  10  15  [16]  Oan  [I5KA],  fioKxti
or  vioi  [1.]),  whose  name,  however,  is  perhaps  due  to  ditto-
graphyofliAM  [n.  4I  in  ;•.  14  (.-,].

2.  Another  Levite,  one  of  the  overseers  of  the  temple,  Neh,
11 15  (\\H.\  om.,  ^vva  [L],  -ou  [Kc.amg.  sup.])  ;  not  mentioned  in
y  iCh.'.ii4.

BURDEN  (Nb??,  massd—i.e.,  'lifting  up";  hence
either  '  burden  '  or  '  utterance  '  ['  to  utter  'is  'to  lift  up
the  voice']).  'Burden'  in  EV,  when  used  of  a  pro-
phetic revelation,  should  rather  be  'oracle'  (as  RV'"*.'-
2  K.  925  etc.).  Cp  Pkophecy.  The  term  innssd
became  a  subject  of  popular  derision  in  the  time  of
Jeremiah,  owing  to  its  double  meaning  (see  above),
so  that  Jeremiah  pronounces  a  divine  prohibition  of  its
use  (Jer.  23  33,^  ).  It  continued,  however,  to  be  used  in
the  headings  of  prophecy.  As  to  the  application  of
masui,  once  only  it  denotes  divine  judicial  sentence
(2  K.  925;  cp  Jer.  2336);  elsewhere  there  is  no  such
limitation  of  meaning.  In  Prov.  30i  beyond  doubt
K3p  should  be  emended  to  Scto,  in  31 1  to  VtrD  (see
Agur,  Lemuel).

©HKAQ  renders  variously  A^fx^xa  (In  the  Minor  Prophets
regularly),  pi^a  (Is.  \:>  i  17  i  22  i  and  21 1  [Q]),  opa/xa  (Is.  21  i
also  iK  15 1  [A],  22 1  [A],  and  23 1  [KAQn>K  ]),  and  opa<rit  (Is.

BURIAL  (n-yi3p),  Is.  14  20. See  Dead,  §  i.

BURNING  (ns-l^).  2Ch.21t9.  See  Dead.  §  i  ;
Law  and  Justice,  §  12.

613


BUSH

BURNING  AGUE(nnii?; iKT€poc[AFL],  ikthp

[?  B]i,  l.<v.  ijt;  lof  ;  see  Diseases,  §  6,  Medicine.

BURNT  OFFERING  (H^ir).  Ix.-v.l3;  see  Sacri-
fice.

BURNT  OFFERING,  ALTAR  OF  (H^yn  n3|p).
Ex.  3O28;  see  Altar,  §2/  ;  Sacrifice.

BUSH  represents  in  AV  three  different  Hebrew  words.

1.  njo.  ifn<!h  (/Sdroi,  rubus :  Kx.  82-4  Dt.33i6  Mk.
1236  Lk.  644  [EV  'bramble  bush']  2O37  ActsTsosst)
1 Hebrew  ^•^'"^'^'^ ^ rough thorny bush  —  which is

terms  '''*  original  sense  of  our  '  bramble  ' — as
is  shown  by  the  use  of  the  same  word  in
later  Hebrew,  in  Aramaic,  Arabic,  and  As.syrian,  and
confirmed  by  the  rendering  of  the  ancient  Versions.
Low  (275),  following  Forskfd  (Flor.  Aig.  Ar.  cxiii. ),
identifies  it  with  Kubus  fruticosus.  Some,  on  the
ground  that  the  bramble  is  not  found  on  Sinai,  assume
that  a  kind  of  acacia  is  referred  to.  These  Hebrew  and
Greek  words  are  used  in  OT  and  NT  respectively  only
in  connection  with  the  theophany  to  Moses  in  Iloreb
(Sinai),  except  in  Lk.  644.'  In  OT  (Kx.  82-4  I)t.  33 16).
and  in  Acts? 3035,  the  term  refers  to  the  actual  bush;
in  Mk.  1226=Lk.  2O37  (see  RV)  to  the  section  of
Exodus  containing  the  narrative  (see  below,  §  2).

2.  n'bi  iidh  (x^w/xij',  virgultum,  EV  'plant,'  Gen.
25;  AciTi7,  arbor,  EV  'shrub,'  Gen.  21  15  ;  also  Job
304  7t")  is  in  Gen.  25  probably  used  in  a  general  sense
of  any  wild-growing  shrub  ;  in  the  other  passages  the
reference  may  be  more  specific.  Low  (78),  who  cites
the  Syriac  and  Arabic  equivalents — sihd  and  //"// —
identifies  it  with  Artemisia  judaica  L,  but  allows  that
the  Arabic  word  is  used  by  Syriac  lexicographers  for
various  species. See  also  W'etzstein,  Keiseber.,  41.

3-  C'V^n^.'  nahilOiim  [JM-yas,  foramina,  AV  '  bushes,"
RV  'pastures,'  mg.  'bushes,'  Is.  7i9t)  is  almost
certainly  connected  with  the  root  Snj,  Ar.  nahata  (see
Barth,  /V/i2i5),  whose  projjer  sense  is  that  of  leading
cattle  to  the  drinking-place.  The  noun,  therefore,
means  '  drinking-places ' — like  Ar.  manhal  or  maurid.
This  is  better  than  the  more  general  rendering
'pastures.'  'Clefts'  (€5,  Vg. )  rests  on  a  false  ety-
mology; and  'bushes'  (Saad.  etc.,  A\')  is  seemingly
due  to  conjecture  (Ges. Thcs.).

The  theophany  in  the  bush  (Ex.  82-4)  is  remark.able.
Elsewhere  the  '  angel  of  Yahw6'  is  a  theophany  inhuman

2.  The 'burning  ^°''"\=^"' ^T ^^P^^^'^'y <"«'«
. , , °  x'-L'.ibT,)  the  only  special  appearance

^^ ■  is  that  of  fire. The  nearest  parallel

is  Judg.  1320,  where  the  angel  ascends  in  a  flame  of
fire  ;  but  the  human  form  of  the  appearance  is  there
unmistakable.  The  story  in  the  form  which  it  assumes
in  E.xodus  appears  to  have  resulted  from  a  fusion  of  two
widely  current  beliefs — that  fire  indicated  the  divine
presence  (see  Theoi-hany,  §  5),  and  that  certain
trees  were  the  permanent  abodes  of  deities.  It  seems
probable  from  the  character  of  the  reference  in  I)t.
3oi6  that  there  was  current  a  different  form  of  the
story,  according  to  which  the  bush  was  Yahwc's
pi-rmanent  dwelling  ;  for  the  phraseology  (.130  'J2C*.
'  who  dwelt  in  the  bush ' )  indicates  the  same  per-
manency of  the  divine  presence  as  was  subsecjuenlly
supposed  to  characterise  the  teniple.  Renaii,  however,
would  read  *3'o  -i,zc,  '  who  dwells  in  Sinai '  (cp  v.  2),  and
certainly  in  Exodus  the  fiery  appearance  is  clearly  re-
garded as,  like  other  thcophanies,  teni|X)rarj'.  Rolx-rt-
son  Smith  (A"*"/.  iVw.'-'  193/  )  cites  some  parallels  from
non-biblical  sources,  and  argues  that  '  the  origin.al  seat
of  a  conception  like  the  burning  bush,  which  must  have
its  physical  basis  in  electrical  phenomena,  must  prob-

'  mo  occurs  also  as  the  proper  name  of  a  Rock,  i  S.  I44  (see
Michmash).

3  Where  &  (^x*"*^''  '"^x""')  '>**  been  led  a.stray  by  the
likeness  of  the  word  to  the  verb  n'S?  i  but  Aq.  and  Sym.  have
^vrd  (in  r'.  7  .Sym.  ifivTa.  iypia).

611


BUSHEL

ably  be  sought  in  the  clear  dry  air  of  the  desert  or  of
lofty  mountains. '  We  need  not  rationalise  and  suppose
a  bush  of  the  nedk,  overgrown  with  the  Loranthus
acacift,  which  has  an  abuntiance  of  fire-red  blossoms
(so  the  botanist  traveller  Kotschy,  in  Furrcr's  art.
'  Dorn,"  DL2ii).  Cp  further  Baudissin,  Stud,  zur
sem.  Religionsgesch.  2  223  ;  Jacob,  Altarab.  Parallelen
sum  ATjf.  N.  M.,  §  i;  G.  B.  G.,  §  2.

BUSHEL  (MOAlOCi  modius),  a  measure  of  capacity  ;
Mt.  5i5 Mk.  421 Lk.  Il33.t See Weights and

Measures.

BUTLER  (ni5^"P),  Gen.  40 1  41 9;  cp  Cupbearer,
and  see  Mkals,  §11.

BUTTER  (HNOn).  Gen.  188. See  Milk.

BUZ  (n3).  I.  Second  son  of  Nahor,  Gen.  222i
(Bar^  [A]  -f  [L])-  As  Buz  is  mentioned  in  connec-
tion with  Dedan  and  Tema  in  Jer.  2523  (Pwy  [BN^AQ],
-d  [K*],  Bci^f  [Q'"^]),  it  must  have  been  an  Arabian
people.  Buz  and  Hazo  (q.v.)  are  connected  by  Del.
(Par.  307  ;  Riehm's  H\.VB(-),  124)  with  the  Biizu  and
Hazii  of  the  annals  of  Esarhaddon  (Budge,  Hist,  of
Esark.  59-61,  KB,  2130/". ),  two  districts  not  to  be
exactly  identified,  but  evidently  in  close  pro.vimity  to  N.
Arabia.  Esarhaddon's  description  of  the  land  of  Bazu
is  not  an  inviting  one  ;  it  was  a  desolate,  snake-haunted


CADES

region.  Probably  Buz  should  Ix;  vocalised  Boz  (t"i3),  to
accord  with  Bazu  and  the  vowels  av  and  w  in  the  Gk.
forms  (cp  Erankel, Vorstudien  su  der  Sept.  116).

2.  A  Gadite  {ia^ovx<Ht.  [BJ,  Bou^'  [L],  Axt/Sovf  (A  ;  see  Ahi,
I]),  iCh.6i4t.

BUZI  (*TU,  probably  a  gentilic  ;  see  Buz),  father  of
the  prophet  E/.ekiki.  {q.v.,  §  i),  Ez.  l3[2]  (BoyzLejl
[BAQ],  ne(t)<\YAiCMeNOC  [Q""-'])-

BUZITE  (nia.  o  BoYz[e]iTHC  [BNC],  oToy  Boyzi
[A];  ©uNAc  ajds  thc  AydellTiAoc  Xt*JPAc).  a
gentilic  noun  from  Buz  {q.v.),  applied  to  Elihu,  the
fourth  speaker  in  the  poem  of  Job  (Job322),  who  is
also  said  to  have  been  'of  the  family  of  Ram."  From
the  fact  that  Ram  is  the  name  of  a  Judahite  family,  to
which  Boaz  and  David  are  said  to  have  belonged  (Ruth
41921),  and  that  an  Milm  appears  in  i  Ch.  27i8  as
'one  of  the  brethren  of  David,'  Dcrenbourg  (REJlb)
conjectures  that  '  Buzite '  should  rather  be  "Bozite'  =
'  Boazite  '  ('lyia).  To  complete  this  theory  Elihu  ought,
it  would  seem,  to  be  David's  brother.  Unfortunately
'  Elihu '  in  i  Ch.  27  18  is  most  probably  corrupt,  and,
even  if  not,  '  brethren '  is  a  vague  and  uncertain  term
(see  Ei.iHU,  2).  Moreover,  dramatic  propriety  naturally
suggested  the  description  of  Elihu  as  an  Aramwan  Arab.
Ram  (q.v.,  2)  is  probably  a  fictitious  name,  like  Elihu
and  Barachel.  t.  k.  c.


c


CAB,  RV  Kab  (ip  ;  kaBoc  [BAL]),  2K.625t,  a
dry  measure,  one-si.\th  of  a  seah  (see  Wkights  and
Measures).  So  at  least  Jewish  authorities  (see  Bu.x-
torf,  s.v.  3i?)  ;  but  in  this  passage  2p  ('cab  ')  is  prob-
ably a  scribe's  error  for  13  ('cor').  See  Dove's
Dung,  Husks.

CABBON  (p23,  xaBra  [RA],  xaBBco  [L]),  an  un-
identified city  in  the  lowland  of  Judah,  mentioned
between  Eglon  and  Lahmas  (Josh.  I540).  It  is  pos-
sibly the  same  as  the  M.\chbe.n.\ — AV  M.\chbenah
(mzzrp;  /j-axaji-nva  [B],  -afxrjva  [A],  /xax^ava  [L]) —
mentioned  among  the  Calebite  towns  enumerated  in
iCh.  249,  and  may  perhaps  be  represented  by  the
present  el-Kubeibeh,  lying  between  Kh.  'Ajlan  and
Kh.  el-Lahm,  sites  that  have  been  proposed  for  Eglon
and  Lahmas.

CABINS  (nr.Jn),  Jer.  37  i6t,  AV  ;  RV  Cells  {q.v. ).

CABUL  ("p-na;  xooBa  [macomcA]  [B],  xaBcoA
[A].  XO.  [E]),  a  town  in  the  territory  of  Asher  (Josh.
1927),  the  xa^wXw  (variants  -\y\  -/3o\. ,  -^a\. ,
7a/xaXa)>')  mentioned  by  Josephus  ( I'it.  43,  44,  45)  as
a  village  on  the  confines  of  Ptolemais,  40  stadia  from
Jotapata  (modern  Jefat),  may  safely  be  identified  with
the  modern  A'a^///,  236  ft.  above  sea-level,  9  m.  SE.  from
Acco.  It  is  probably  the  xa/SonXw;/  (but  other  codd.
read  fa/3oi/\wv),  which  Josephus  (5/83)  gives  as  on
the  sea  coast  of  Tyre  and  forming  the  E.  frontier  of
Lower  Galilee.  The  name  was  current  at  the  time  of
the  Crusaders  as  Cabor  or  Cabour,  a  fief  presented
in  1186  to  Count  Joscelin  by  King  Baldwin  IV.,  and
it  gave  its  name  to  a  family  ( Rey,  Colonies  Franques  en
Syrie).

In  I  K.  9 10-13  it  is  told  how  Solomon,  on  the  com-
pletion of  his  buildings  in  Jerusalem  to  which  Hiram
contributed,  gave  to  the  latter  '  twenty  cities  in  the  land
of  Galilee,'  but  Hiram  was  dissatisfied  with  them  and
'  they  were  called  the  land  of  Cabul  unto  this  day '
^Heb.  Vns  jnx,  (S"-^'-  6piov  for  "joa ;  Jos.  ^«/.  viii.  53,

615


XO/SaXwy,  described  as  bordering  on  Tyre  ;  c.  A  p.  I17,
XO-^ov\(i3v,  '  a  piece  of  land  in  Galilee  ').^  For  the  state-
ment of  Josephus  that  in  Phoenician  the  name  means
'unpleasing'  (ovk  a.pi(jKOv)  there  is  no  evidence.  Yet
the  true  explanation  ought  not  to  be  far  away.  If  we
could  recover  it  we  should  see  that  the  popular  wit  was
not  so  poor  as  Hiller,  Ewald,  and  Thenius  supfwsed
[i^22-':'^.  'as  nought").  Cheyne  (PSBA,  21  inf.
['99])  would  correct  'land  of  Cabul'  into  'land  of
Zebulun  '  ;  ['?i3]  may  have  l)een  written  'Sist,  and  when
the  mark  of  abbreviation  had  been  lost,  some  learned
scrilje  may  have  corrected  ^ui  into  Su3.  The  witticism
would  be  like  that  which  explained  Beelzebul  as  '  lord
of  dung,'  and  'Izebel  as  'what  dung'  (see  Beelzebul,
Jezebel)  ;  it  would  be  a  new  popular  etymology  of
Zebulun.  The  '  twenty  cities,'  on  this  hypothesis,  were
in  the  lower  part  of  the  Galil,  which,  in  the  time  of
Josephus,  and  probably  also  when  iK.  911-13  was
edited,  extended  as  far  as  Xa/3oi'\wi'  or  Cabul.  Of
course  the  writer  does  not  mean  to  say  that  the  name
Zebulon  was  now  given  for  the  first  time  ;  he  only  offers
a  new  justification  for  the  name.  For  a  less  probable
view  C^ua  corrupted  from  '?''?j  ;  cp  S^a,  'dung'),  see
Klostermann.  (Cp  also  Bottg. ,  Topogr.-hist.  Lex.  zu
Josephus,  s.i'.  '  Chalabon.')  By  its  own  evidence  ('  unto
this  day')  the  story,  in  its  present  form,  is  by  no  means
contemporary  with  the  events  with  which  it  deals.

The  Chronicler,  whose  views  would  not  allow  him  to  record
the  cession  of  a  p.irt  of  the  Holy  Land  to  the  Gentile,  so  alters
the  story  as  to  make  it  appear  that  it  was  Hiram  who  'gave  the
cities  to  Solomon'!  (2Ch.8  2).  The  AV  translators  have
attempted  to  reconcile  this  with  the  story  in  Kings  by  rendering
'  gave '  '  restored  '  (RV  '  had  given  ').

CADDIS,  RV  Gaddis  (taAAic  [AV],  -ei  [N]),  sur-
name of  JOANNAN  (1  Mace.  22).  See  Maccabees,
J-  §§  I  3-

CADES.  RV  Kedesh  (KHAec  [AN],  kgA.  [V],
I  Mace.  11 63). See  Kedesh,  3.

1  A  scholiast  (Field's  //ex.,  I.e.)  interprets  Vl3D  l>y  iowA«o«.
616


CADBS-BARNB

CADES-BARNE  UaAhc  Barnh  [BNA]).  Juciith5M
AV  ; k\'  Kadimi-Haknka.

CADMIEL  (kaAmihAoy  [A]).  iEsd.5»6  AV.
k\'  Kaumh-.l.

C-SSAR  (kaicap  [Ti.  WH])  is  used  in  the  NT
as  a  tale  ol  Augustus  (Lk.  2i)  and  Tilierius  (id.  Si).
The  latter  emperor  is.  moreover,  the  '  C.x-sar '  of  Mt.
2217/:  Mk.  1-.>m/:  I.k.  2022^  (cp  232)  and  Jn.  19.2/:
Claudius  C';i'sar  is  named  in  Acts  11 28  (AV.  but  KV
om.  C;i'sar  with  Ti.  W'H).  and  is  alluded  to  in  ActslT;.
The  'C:vsar'  of  Paul  (Acts258/:  2632  2724  2819)  is
Nero,  whose  'household'  is  mentioned  in  I'hil.  422(0!
iK  TTJi  Kalffapos  olniai).  The  reference  here  is  hanlly
to  n)en>l>ers  of  his  family,  but.  as  in  the  case  of
Stephanas  in  i  Cor.  16 15.  to  ihe  /amt/ia  or  household
slaves.  See  further  Ai'OCALVPSE,  §  43^,  Iskakl,
§§87-115.

CSS  ARE  A. I. Csesarea  Palsestinse  (kaicaria

[Ti.  Wll],  -eiA  [Jos.];  in  Talm.  '<-\D'P.  mod.  Arab.
1  Earlipr  ^'■^-^'^'^'''''y''^^'  '''^  only  real  port  south  of
hiatorv  *^>*''"'*^''  *'^  built  by  Herod  the  CJreat  (on
■''  the  nanie,  see  §  3)  in  time  for  it  to  become
the  capital  of  the  Roman  province  of  Judrta.  and  to
play  the  great  part  in  the  passage  of  Christianity  west-
ward from  Palestine  which  is  described  in  Acts.  The
site  was  that  of  a  Phcinician  (cp  Jos.  ./«/.  xiii.  I54)
settlement  with  a  fortification  called  the  Tower  of
Straton  C^Tpdruvoi  llvpyos) — a  Hellenic  form  of  a
Phcenician  proper  name.  Astartyaton  (Pielschmann.
GescA.  der  I'hon.  81  ;  Hildcsheimer,  ]ieilr.  z.  Ccoi,'.
Palest,  ^ff.,  where  the  variant  reading  ti?  '?-i:a  or  ic,
'  Devil's -Tower,"  given  in  Talmud  W  Shchiith,  vi.  1  36,
and  in  Talmud  B  Mfi^i/la  is  explained  as  a  Jewish
nickname  for  a  town  called  after  a  worshipper  of
Astarte).  There  was,  according  to  Strabo,  a  landing-
place  {irpdaop/jiov  /x^")-  At  the  end  of  the  second
century  n.i. .  the  town  was  under  a  'tyrant.'  Zoilus
(Jos.  .Int.  xiii.  Pia);  but  Alexander  Jann.x-us  took  it  for
the  Jews,  along  with  the  other  coast  towns  {/fi.  15).
These  were  enfranchised  by  Pompey  and  made  suljject
to  the  province  of  Syria  (/</.  xiv.  44).  After  the  Rattle
of  Actiunj  they  were  presented  to  Herod  the  Great
along  with  Samaria  and  other  places  by  Augustus  (id.

2.  Rebuilt  by  "^•J.^'-  »yP  '°  !*^''  T^  ""'''^  ^"^'^
Herod  contmed  his  building  designs  to  the  L.

side  of  the  Central  Range.  Now,  how-
ever, in  alliance  with  Rome,  he  came  over  the  watershed,
and  out  of  Samaria  built  himself  a  capital  which  he
called  after  his  patron,  Sebast6.  Requiring  for  this  a
seaport  that  should  keep  him  in  touch  with  Rome,  he
chose  Straton's  Tower  as  the  nearest  suitable  site  to
Sebaste.  He  laid  the  lines  of  a  magnificent  city,  which
took  him  twelve  years  to  build  (id.  xv.  96  ;  '  ten  years,'
xvi.  5 1 ).

Josephus  describes  the  thorough  and  lavish  archi-
tecture.

In  the  usual  Creek  fashion,  there  were  palaces,  temple,
theatre,  ampliithentre,  and  many  arches  and  altars.  There  were
also  vaults  for  draining  the  city— as  carefully  constructed  as  the
buildings  .nlxjve  ground.  A  bieakwater  200  ft.  wide  was  formed
in  20  fathoms  depth  by  drooping  enormous  stones.  The  south
end  was  connected  by  a  mole  with  the  shore,  and  the  mouth  of
the  harlwur  looked  N.,  the  prevailing  winds  on  this  coast  Iwing
from  the  SW.  (id.  xv.  it6  ;  Ji/  i.  'Jl  5-8).  'lo-day  the  remains  of
the  breakwater  are  160  yards  from  shore,  and  the  mouth  of  the
harbour  measures  180  yariis  (P/:/-  At  em.).

Herod  called  his  litv,  like  Sebaste,  after  Augustus,  Kattro/Mta
"Xtfiatrrri,  and  his  harbour  .\ifi>)i'  2«^a<rTO«.  When  Cl.-tsarea
Philippi  was  built  (see  below,  §  8),  Herod's  sea-
8.  Names,  p^rt  came  to  be  diNtinguished  from  it  by  the  names
Kaiirapfta  irapoAiof,  K.  t\  iir'i  SaAoTTT),  and  even
K.  1^  »rp<K  Sc^aarijt  .\i^(Vt  (on  a  coin  of  Nero,  l)e  Saulcy,
NHiiiism.  de  la  Terre  Sninte,  116),  and  Carsarea  Palajstina;.
The  name  of  Straton  survived  long  (Jos.  Ant.  xvii.  11  4,  Slrab.
XV.,  Kiiiphanius  />«•  pond,  et  nuns.  125,  Ptol.  v.  16).  The
Talmud  calls  the  city  after  the  harbour,  Leminah.

Csesarea  became  the  virtual  capital  of  all  Palestine.
617


C^SAREA

'Ccesarea  Jud.i-.Ts  caput  est.'  says  Tacitus  {//isf.ijt).
A. A  nytman ''  ^''^  thoroughly Roman  ;  the  Talmud
ciU  '''' ■^''.<'^''*'''  ^)  <:»"* 't daughter  of

'■  Ildom.  the  mystic  name  for  Rome. The

Procurator  lived  there  ;  there  was  an  Italian  garrison
(ActslOi;  cp  CoKNKi.its.  §  1);  and  in  the  temple
there  were  two  statues-  of  Augustus  and  of  Rome.*
Though  there  were  many  Jews  (Jos.  Ant.  xx.  879.  BJ
ii.  13;  144/.  iii.  9:),  the  inhabitants  were  mainly
(Jcntile.

Here, then, very  fitly, was poured out upon the

(Jentiles  the  gift  of  the  Holy  (Jhost  (Actsl045). There

j-_ had  been  a  Christian  congregation  from

references.  '^^  •^•'"■""\  P"^^'*''^'  V"'" ''?"'•'■  °"^'  °'
the  seven  Deacons,  took  up  his  residence

there  ( Acts 8 40  ;  cp  21 8 16).  Atx)Ut  41  A.l).  there
came  to  a  Roman  centurion  CoKNKMLS  (q.v.)  a  divine
mess;ige  to  send  to  Jojjpa  for  Peter,  who  was  prepared  for
this  by  a  vision  which  taught  him  that  God  would  make
clean  all  that  the  Jewish  law  had  hitherto  prohibited  as
unclean.  Peter  came  to  C;vsarea.  made  the  profound
and  tiecisive  acknowledgment  that  God  accepts  in  every
nation  him  '  that  feareth  him  and  worketh  righteous-
ness." preached  Jesus,  saw  the  descent  of  the  Spirit
upon  the  little  Gentile  company,  and  baptized  them
(.\ctslO).  This  proved  the  turning-point  in  the  opinion
of  the  church  at  Jerusalem  (chap.  11).  and  prepared  the
way  for  the  acceptance  of  the  missionary  labours  of
Paul,  to  which  from  this  stage  onwards  the  Book  of
Acts  is  devoted.

Ca-sarea  is  next  mentioned  as  the  scene  of  the  awful
death  of  Herod  Agrippa  I.  (I219I,  to  whose  government
it  had  Ijeen  given  over  :  some  of  its  coins  bear  his
superscription  (.Madden,  Coins  of  the  Jeii's,  133,  136).
After  him  it  passed  again  to  the  Roman  procurator
of  Judaea,  and  became  tlie  chief  garrison  of  the  troops
under  him.  Paul  arrived  at  Citsarca  on  his  voyage
from  rCphesus  (Acts  18 22).  and  there  he  was  tried  with
a  fairness  and  security  that  were  impossible  in  Jeru-
salem (chap.  2.')).  The  contrast  between  the  two  cities,
which  is  so  evident  in  this  story,  proves  how  thoroughly
Roman  and  imperial  Ca-sarea  was.  liesides  receiving
so  fair  a  trial.  Paul,  during  his  two  years  of  residence
in  the  town,  was  not  threatened  by  the  Jews,  as  he  had
been  in  Jerusalem.  From  the  harbour  of  Ca.-sarea  Paul
sailed  on  his  voyage  to  Italy  (27  i).

The  subsequent history  of  the  town  is  soon  told. Contests

between  its  Jewish  and  CJentile  inhabitants  led  to,  and  were

among  the  first  incidents  of,  the  great  revolt  of

6. Later the  Jews  against  Rome,  66 y/;  a.d.  (Jos.  Ant.  xx.

history.  ''7  9;  /i/ii.iSy  ^^*/-  ISi  v'n.^j).  Vespasian
made  the  town  his  headouarters,  and  was  there
proclaimed  emperor  in  69.  He  established  there  a  colony,  but
without  the  'jus  Italicum,"  under  the  title  Piima  Flavia  Augusta
Carsarea,  to  which,  under  .\le\ander  Seveius,  was  added  Metro-
polis Provincial  Syri;e  Pale^tina;  (Pliny,  //A' v.  13 69  ;  and  coins
m  De  Saulcy,  Aum.  dt  la  V.S.  112  ^.  pi.  vii.).  This  deter-
mined the  rank  of  Ca;sarea  in  the  subsequent  organisation  of
the  Church.  Its  bishop  became  the  Metropolitan  of  Syria  :
Eusebius  occupied  the  oflTice  from  315  to  318.  Otigen  had  made
it  his  home.  Procopius  was  born  there.  When  the  Arabs  came
it  was  still  the  headquarters  of  the  commander  of  the  imiwrial
tro<jps ;  ill  638  it  was  occupied  by  'Abu  "Obeida.  Like  all  the
coast  towns,  it  lost  under  Arab  domination  the  supremacy  which
the  Greek  masters  of  Syria,  in  their  nccevsity  for  a  centre  of
power  on  the  sea,  had  Iwstowed  upon  it.  It  became  a  country
town,  known  only  for  its  agricultural  produce  (Le  Strange,  J'at.
uniter  the  .Mosleiiis,  474).  '1  he  advent  of  a  western  power  with
the  Crusaders  revived  it  for  a  little  ;  |{aldwin  II.  took  it  in  1102,
and  rebuilt  it  ;  the  present  niins  are  mostly  of  Crusaders"
masonry.  Saladin  took  it  in  1187,  Richard  I.  in  1191  ;  and  St.
Louis  added  to  its  fortiticati.ms.  It  wa.s  linally  demolished  by
the  Sultan  Hibars  in  1265,  and  since  his  time  has  lain  in  ruin.
(See  further  on  details  Keland,  J'al.  670^  ;  Schurer,  hist.
4  84if;  ;  GASm.  JIG  I  ;&  jr.).

2.  Casarea  Philippi  (KAiCAp[e]iA  h  4)iAinnoY.
both in NT  [Ti. WH] and  Jos.  1, so called after its
7 Site  of  C '^°""'''^'"'  I^""-"'  (see  Hkkodian  Family,
PhiliDDi ^*  ^^''  "-''"'"'^h,  son  of  Herod,  to  whom
""  ' the  district  w.as  granted  in  4  B.C.,  occu-
pied a  site  which had been of the utmost religious
1  Philo,  Legat.  adCaJum,  38,  mentions  the  'S.tfiacttlov.
618


CAGE

and  military  importance  from  remote  antiquity.  Just
under  the  S.  buttress  of  Hermon,  at  the  head  of  the
Jordan  valley,  alxjut  1150  ft.  .above  the  sea,  is  a  high
cliff  of  limestone  ('from  100  to  150  ft.,'  Robinson,
LBR  406)  reddened  by  the  water,  infused  with  iron,
that  oozes  over  it  from  above.  A  cavern  occupies
the  lower  part  of  the  cliff,  filled  with  the  debris  of  its
upper  portion,  and  from  this  debris  there  breaks  one  of
the  sources  of  the  Jordan.  It  is  probably  the  sanctuary
known  as  B.\.\L-c;.\i)  (q.v.)  or  Baal-hermon.'  Close
by  is  a  steep  hill,  crowned  with  the  ruins  of  a  mediaeval
castle,  Kal'at  es-Sulx-beh,  and  at  its  foot  the  miserable
village  of  Hiinias.  Probably  here  (G.ASm.  //(/  480),
rather  than  at  Tell  el-Kadi,  the  site  favoured  by  most
authorities,  lay  the  city  of  Laish  that  was  afterwards
Dam  [q.v.).

The place  must have been early  occupied  by the
Greeks,  both  because  of  its  sanctity,  and  because  of  its
_ ...  strategical position. Polybius (16 18

8.  its  mstory  ,^g^^  mentions  it  as the  scene  of  the
ana  name. ^^^^^ ,^^^^^^  j^  ^^^^^  Antiochus the
Great  won  Palestine  from  the  Ptolemies. The  Greeks
displaced  the  worship  of  Baal  by  that  of  Pan.

The  uave,  in  which  there  is  still  legible  an  inscription,  Ilai't
T«  <coc  Niific^ac?,  was  called  to  \\a.vti.ov  (Jos.  ^«i'.  xv.  IO3,  BJ
i.  21  3  iii.  10  7),  a  name  afterwards  extended  to  the  whole  hill
(lUis.  //A' "  17).  The  village  and  the  country  around  were
designated  bv  a  feminine  form  of  the  same  adjective,  Waviasi  or
IIawas(Jos.  'Ant.  xviii.  2  i  xv.  10  3  xvii.  8  i,  etc.  ;  Pliny,  v.  18 74).

In  20  B.C.  Herod,  having  received  the  district  from
Augustus  on  the  death  of  Zenodorus,  the  previous  lord
of  these  parts  {Ant.  xv.  IO3  B/  i.  21 3),  built  a  temple  to
Augustus  and  set  in  it  the  emperor's  bust.  The  first
year  that  it  came  into  his  possession,  3-2  B.C.,  Philip
the  Tetrarch  founded  his  new  town,  and  called  it
Cfesarea  after  Augustus  (--^w/.  xviii.  21 /?/ ii.  9i  ;  coins
in  De  Saulcy,  TVurn.  de  la  T.S.  313^  pi.  xviii.).  So
it  came  to  be  known  as  Philip's  Ccesarea  {A/it.xx.  93),
or  as  Caesarea  Panias  (see  the  coins).  When  Philip
died  the  Romans  administered  the  district  directly,  both^
before  Agrippa  I.  to  whom  it  was  given,  and  in  the
interval  Ixitween  him  and  .Vgrippa  II.,  who  embellished
it  and  changed  the  official  designation  to  Nepwcids  in
honour  of  .\ero  {.Int.  xx.  94).  The  town's  full  title  was
'  C;i'sarea  Sebasti,  Sacred  and  with  Rights  of -Sanctuary
under  Paneion '  (De  Saulcy,  pi.  xviii.  8).  Later  the
name  C;«sarea  was  dropped  and  Paneas  survived,  the
Arabs  when  they  came  changing  it  to  its  present  form
of  Bfinias.  A  shrine  of  El-Khidr  (  =  Elias  =  St.  George)
now  occupies  the  site  of  the  temple  to  Augustus.

CiKsarea  Phijijipi  is  twice  mentioned  in  the  Gospels.

Jesus  is  said  to  have  come  not  to  the  town  itself,  but  to

^j_, the  parts  {to,  fiipt),  Mt.  I613)  or  villages

references thereoH^ll^- 827). Probably  he  avoided

it <is he avoided other Gentile centres

(e.^^.,  Tiberias)  established  by  the  Herods, but  in  the

great  saying  which  he  is  said  to  have  uttered in  this

neighbourhood,  'Thou  art  Peter  and  on  this  rock  will

I  build  my  church,"  it  is  possible  to  see  some  reference

by  contrast  to  the  heathen  worship  founded  upon  that

cliff  of  immemorial  sanctity  above  the  source  of  Jordan.

In  the  Jewish  war  Vespasian  rested  his  troops  in  Cicsarea
(Jos.  B/  iii.  97),  and  in  celebration  of  the  close  of  the  war  Titus
and  .\grippa  II.  exhibited  shows  on  a  large  scale  (ib.  vii.  2  i).
In  Christian  times  Caesarea  Philippi  was  the  seat  of  a  bishop  ;  and
Eusebius  {HE  6  18)  relates  that  the  woman  whom  Christ  healed
of  an  issue  of  blood  (I.k.  843)  was  a  native  of  the  town,  where  a
statue  commemorated  her  cure.  Castle  and  town  were  the  sub-
ject of  frequent  contests  by  both  sides  during  the  Crusades.
For  further  details  see  Rel.  Pal.  '  Pane.xs ' ;  Schurer,  Hist.
iii.  132  ;  Stanley,  SP  391  ;  G.VSm.  HG  \Tiff.  G.  A.  S.

CAOE.  Cages  (or  rather  wicker-baskets,  cp  Am.
82)  for  confining  birds  in  are  mentioned  twice  in  EV
(see  Fowls,  §  10):  (i)  in  Jer.  527  the  houses  of  the
wicked  are  as  full  of  (the  grains  of)  deceit  as  a  cage  (aiSs
kilub  =  K\ia?b%,  AV"»B-  'coop,'  ira7ty  [BXAQ])  is  full  of
birds  ;  and  (2)  in  Ecclus.  11  30  the  heart  of  a  proud  man

t  Once  corruptly  Baal-hamon  {q.v.)
619


CAIN

is  like  a  decoy  partridge  in  a  cage  (or  basket :  iv  Kap-
TdWifi  [BX.\].  cp  Ar.  kirtall"",  a  fruit -Ijasket).  A
cage  (njiD)  for  lions  also  is  mentioned  in  Ezelc  lOg  RV
(see  Lion).

(3)  ^\iKaKr\,  rendered  'hold'  and  'cage'  in  Rev.  I82  (RV
'  hold  '),  denotes  rather  a  prison  (so  RVmit-).

CAIAPHAS  (K&i&ct>&c  [Ti.],  K&i&'<})AC  [WH],
K(\f4>AC  [CDabc]),  Mt.  20 3  Lk.  82  Jn.  18 13,  or  perhaps
Caiphas. See  .Annas  and  Caiaphas.

CAIN  ("i^ri ;  [zaJkanagim  [B],  [zanco]  akcim —
i.e.,  I^i'pn  :  m^T  [A],  [zANOy]  AKCN  [I^]).  a  town  in
the  hill  country  of  Judah  (Josh.  1557),  niay  possibly  Ije
the  mod.  Vakin,  3  m.  SE.  from  Hebron  {PKF Mem.  ii.
312,  371  ;  but  see  G.ASm.  HG  37Q). CpAMALKK,  §  6.

CAIN(Pi5;  KAIN  [.ADEL],  ca/n).  In  Gen.  4  we
have  accounts  of  two  different  Cains,  linked  together  by
the  editor.  The  proof  of  this  will  Ix:  briefly  indicated
below  (§§  2-4) ;  it  will  be  convenient  to  treat  first  the
more  ancient  and  simpler  of  the  two  stories.

I.  Cain  is  the  name  of  the  hero  who  in  Gen.  417  is
represented  as  the  founder  of  the  city


1.  The  city-
builder  of


of  Enoch'  (Hanok).  The  name  evi
r  X  tr  ^  ff  ^'^"''y  comes  from  an  early,  though  not
■  ^'^J'-'^^I'-  a  genuine  Hebrew,  tradition;  another
document  (5  ^ff. )  gives  it  as  Cainan  {q.v. ).  Its  natural
meanings  are  'smith,'  'artificer'  (Ar.  kain,  Aram.
kaindyd)  ;  '^  for  the  connection  with  kdndh,  '  to  produce  '
(also  '  to  acquire'),  suggested  in  Gen.  4i,^  is  philologi-
cally  difficult.  The  more  general  sense  '  artificer  '  suits
best  for  Cain  the  city-builder,  and  the  more  special  one
'  smith '  for  the  second  part  of  the  compound  name
Tubal-cain.  Both  these  names  are  attached  to  heroes
who  at  the  outset  of  the  tradition  must  have  possessed
a  divine  character  (see  Cainites,  §§  5,  10).

2. The  central  figure  of  the  narrative  in  Gen.  4  2^-16
also  is  called  Cain.
2. The  nomad  of The  story  has  come  to  us  in  a  somewhat
(Jen.  42^-16.  abbreviated form. Its  substance is as

follows.  Once  upon  a  time  Cain  and  his
brother  Abel  sacrificed  to  Vahwe.  Cain,  being  a  husljand-
nian,  brought  of  the  fruits  of  the  ground  ;  .Abel,  as  a  .shepherd,
offered  the  fat  parts  of  some  of  his  first-born  lambs  (cp  Nu.  18 17).
Both,  as  w.-is  usual  in  ancient  religion,  looked  for  a  visible  sign
that  their  gifts  were  accepted.  What  the  expected  sign  was  at
the  .sanctuary  to  which  they  resorted,  we  are  not  told  (cp  WRS,
Ret.  Sem.i"^)  178),  and  we  may  pass  over  later  conjectures.  At
any  rate,  we  learn  that  only  Abel's  sacrifice  wa.s  accepted  (see
AiiF.L  [i.]).  Now  Cain,  had  he  been  wise,  would  have  demeaned
himself  humbly  towards  Abel,  for  who  can  .say  to  God,  What
doest  thou?  (Job  9 12).  Instead  of  this,  he  cherished  evil
thoughts,-*  as  an  oracle,  perhaps  sought  by  Cain,  warned  him.
'  And  Vahw^  said  to  Cain,  Why  art  thou  wroth  ?  and  why  is
thy  countenance  fallen?  Surely,  if  thou  doest  well,  thou  ctnst
lift  up  thy  head,  and  if  thou  doest  not  well,  thy  sin  must  cause
it  to  fall  :  from  irritating  words  abstain,  and  thou  take  heed  to
thyself?  And  Cain  quarrelled  with  his  brother  .Abel,  and  when
they  were  in  the  open  country  .  .  .  ;  and  Cain  assaulted  his
brother  .Abel,  and  slew  him.'  Then  follows  a  fresh  oracle,
containing  a  curse  upon  Cain,  who  is  condemned,  not  only  to
banishment  (cp  Hom.  //.  2 6^5),  but  also  to  a  life  of  restless
wandering.  The  curse,  however,  is  mitigated  by  the  promise  of
protection  against  outrage,  by  means  of  a  'sign'  which  will
indicate  that  Cain  is  under  the  care  of  Yahwe.

According to  the  older commentators, with  whom

^  See,  however,  col.  623,  note  3.

2  Di.  and  Del.  support  this  etymolog>'  by  the  very  doubtful
^rj3  commonly  rendered  'his  spear'  (so  ©bal),  2  Sam. 21 16,
where  a  better  reading  is  i>3'p,  '  his  helmet '  (Kau.  JfS,  Bu.,
H.  P.  Smith,  .tfter  Klo.).

3  Kve  exclaims,  nn-nK  P'K  Tl'jp.  '•''•  'I  have  wrought,  or
produced,  a  man  with  the  help  of  Vahwe.'  This  can  hardly
be  right ;  "HK  is  too  vague,  and  the  variations  of  the  comment-
ators prove  their  dis.satififaction  with  the  text.  On  Marti's  view
see  col.  621,  n.  2.  Considering  that  .-jjp  is  one  of  the  words  mean-
ing '  to  create  '  (see  Crhation,  S  30),  we  may  as,sume  that  Eve,
in  the  pride  of  her  motherhood,  likens  herself  to  her  ( ".o<l,  and  says,
'  I  have  created  a  man  even  as  Yahwfe.'  Targ.  Onk.  re.-ids  for
nKi  DKO-  This  is  nearer  the  truth,  pio  probably  comes  from
r\T(i- ih  fell  out,  and  D  was  confounded  with  K  (cp  Judg.

*  Che.  Exp.  T.,  July  1899  ;  cp  Box,  ib.,  June  1899,  and  Ball
{SBOT).

6ao


CAIN

even  Delitzsch  must  be  grouped,  this  b  the  same  Cain
„  .  as  the  builder  of  the  first  city,  and  he  is

■  ,^^  ^°° also  the  first-born  son  of  the  first  man.
' This view is critically untenable (see
t  AIM  I  IS,  §  2),  mainly  on  account  of  the  improbabilities
of  the  course  of  events  which  it  assumes.

The  first  man  has  been,  as  we  know,  driven  out  of  Paradise
for  traiisKrevsinK  a  divine  command.  According  to  the  traditional
view,  however,  nis  first-born  son  Cain  is  so  little  imorcs-sed  by
the  punishment  that  he  murders  his  own  brother.  More  than
this,  he  Ix-comes  the  direct  .inccstor  of  another  murderer,  who
apparently  goes  unpunished,  and  who  is  also  (contr.iry  to  the
spirit  of  2is)  a  polygamist.  Now  note  another  point.  The
original  dwelling  of  Cain  is  not,  as  we  are  to  suppose  was  that
of  the  first  m.in  and  his  wife  after  their  expulsion  from  Paradise,
to  the  east  of  the  garden  of  Eden  (see  334),  but  in  a  cultivated
and  well-pcouled  land  where  Yahwi  is  worshipped  with  sacri-
fices, and  holds  familiar  intercourse  with  men  (even  with  Cain)
— apparently  S.  Palestine  (on  4  t6  sec  later).  Nor  is  there  any
curse  upon  the  ground  which  Cain  tills;  it  is  his  own  self-caused
curse  that  drives  him  unwillingly  into  the  land  of  wandering —
i.e.,  into  the  desert.  There,  however,  without  any  explanation,
he  gives  up  his  unsettled  life,  and  advances  further  in  civilisation
than  before.  He  builds  a  'city.'  This  is  not  to  be  explained
by  the  ingenious  remark'  that  even  nom.id  tril)es  in  Arabia
have  central  market  stations  (Ar.  karya,  plur.  iitrd),  for  'city'
is  evidently  used  as  a  general  term  ;  Cain  is  as  much  a  city-
builder  as  Nimrod,  and  only  .as  such  (or,  upon  IJudde's  theory,
as  the  father  of  a  city -builder)  could  he  find  a  place  in  the
Hebrew  legend  of  civilisation.  How  are  these  inconsistent
statements  to  be  reconciled  ?  Every  possible  way  has  been
tried  and  has  failed.  It  was  high  time  to  .ipply  the  key  of
analysis ;  and  no  one  who  has  once  done  this  will  wish  to
return  to  past  theories  (see  Cai.nitks,  §  2).

It  may  Ije  assumed,  then,  that  the  story  of  Cain  and

Abel  once  had  an  indeixjndent  existence,  and  circulated

,. rv_i • <  at one of the sanctuaries of  Southern
4.  Origin  of


story.


Palestine.  It  is  probably  not  a  borrowed
Canaanitish  inyth,  but  an  independent
Israelitish  attempt  to  explain  the  strange  phenomena  of
nomad  life — the  per{x;tual  wandering  in  the  desert  and
the  cruelly  excessive  development  of  the  custom  (in  itself
a  {xjrfectly  legitimate  one,  according  to  the  Israelites)  of
vengeance  for  bloodshed.  As  Robertson  Smith  (follow-
ing Wellhausen)  rightly  remarks,  Cain  is  the  embodiment
of  '  the  old  Hebrew  conception  of  the  lawless  nomad
life,  where  only  the  blood-feud  prevents  the  wanderer  in
the  desert  from  falling  a  victim  to  the  first  man  who
meets  him,"  .and  the  mark  which  Yahwe  sets  on  Cain's
person  for  his  protection  is  '  theskarf  or  tribal  mark  (cp
Dt-),  without  which  the  ancient  form  of  blood-feud,  as
the  nflfair  of  a  whole  stock,  however  scattered,  and  not
of  near  relatives  alone,  could  hardly  have  been
worked '2  (cp  KiNsmi',  §1/,  and  (Juttings,  §  i ).
Now  we  can  guess  why  the  nomad  of  the  story  is  called
_  Cain  ;  Cain  is  the  eponym  of  the  Kenites

of  name  (^^°  ''"'^ '"  '^'^^  called  ]]?. ;  but  cp  Amalek,
§  6  / ),  whose  close  alliance  with  the
Israelites  and  location  in  the  wilderness  of  Judah  are
well  known.  That  the  Kenites  should  be  so  well
acquainted  with  a  more  civilised  mode  of  life,  and  yet
adhere  to  their  nomadic  customs,  was  a  surprise  to  the
Israelites,'  and  the  stor)'  of  Cain  and  Alx;l  grew  up  to
account  for  it.  Nothing  but  a  curse  seemed  to  explain
this  inveterate  repugnance  to  city  life,  and  a  curse  im-
plied guilt  ;  while  the  unbridled  vindictiveness  of  the
nomads  (see  Gokl,  §  2/  )  was  explicable  only  by  a  com-
passionate command  of  Yahwi.  who  after  all  was  the
God  of  the  Kenites  as  well  as  of  the  Israelites,  so  that
the  distinguishing  mark  of  this  tribe  was  also  a  sign  that
its  members  worshipped  Yahwe  and  were  under  his
protection.  Cain,  then,  represents  the  nomad  trilx;  l)est
known  to  the  Israelites.  He  is  contrasted  with  Abel
(i.e.  the  'herdman' ;  see  Abel  [i.]),  because  the  pastoral

»  HaKvy,  RE/Un.

a  W.  R.  Smith,  Kinship,  ais/;  cp  Stade,  Z.-i  TW  14,  t^ff.
1*94].  Marti  (/,//.  Ccntraibl.  May  22,  1897)  finds  a  prophetic
reference  to  this  mark  in  Oen.  4  i,  pointing  rij<,  and  rendering  '  I
have  acquired  a  man,  a  bearer  of  the  sign  of  Yahwe.'  .So  inde-
pendently Zeydner  [Z.4Tlf^  IHiioJf.  ('98)];  but  the  sign  is
surely  not  circumcision. See  Stade,  o/.  cit.  267.

»  Ewald  suggested  this  (//isi.  1  271).  The  theory  is  most
fully  worked  out  by  Stade,  not,  however,  without  extravagances
(see  Amalek,  |  7).

631


CAINITES

life,  when  com  timed  with  a  fixed  domicile,  seemed  to
the  Israelites  the  ideal  one.  That  the  Kenites  them-
selves would  have  sanctioned  this  portrait  of  their
eponym  is  not  probable.  They  presumably  represented
him  with  some  of  the  noble  features  natural  to  a  hero  of
solar  origin.  We  cannot,  therefore,  say  with  Neubauer
(PSD A  11  283)  that  the  story  of  Cain  and  Abel  is  a
fragment  of  Kenite  folk-lore.

To  the  memlKr  of  the  Yahwist  circle  who  worked  up
the  two  (not  to  say  three)  Cain  stories  together  we  niay
ascribe  4  i  2<7,  and  the  words  '  on  the  east  of  Kden '
in  V.  16.  The  addition  of  the  latter  words  converts  nij
in  the  poetical  phrase  lij  j-ik.  '  land  of  wandering  ' — de-
rived presumably  from  the  old  tradition — into  a  prosaic
proper  name,  which  is  boldly  identifictl  by  Sayce  and
Boscawen  with  the  land  of  the  Manda  or  nomads — i.e.,
the  mountain  ranges  of  Kurdistan  and  Luristan.  The
original  narrator  meant  presumably  the  land  between
Judah  and  Edom,  where  the  Kenites  lived.

The  al)ove  contains  some  fresh  points ;  but  Stade's  es.say,
'Das  Kainszeichen,'  Z.XllV  14250^.  \')\^Tjff'.  l'94-'95]  =
Aktuieiiiische  Reiien  ['99],  229-273,  gives  the  most  complete
critical  treatment  of  the  subject.  Cp  Houtsnia,  '  Israel  en
(jain,'  Till',  '76,  pp.  82-98.  T.  K.  C.

CAINAN,  or  rather,  as  in  i  Ch.  1 2  and  RV,
Kk.nan  (|J'p. ;  KAINAN  [KAL]).  I.  Thesonof  Enosh
(Gen.  59-14).  That  Kenan  is  a  humanised  god  has
been  shown  already  (sec  Cai.n,  §  i)  ;  Cain  and  Kenan
are  forms  of  one  name  (cp  Lot  and  Lotan ).  pp  or  p'p,  it
may  be  added,  is  the  name  of  a  god  in  Himyaritic  inscrip-
tions ( ZZ;J/<7  31  86;  CIS  4.  no.  20;  WRS,  i<el.  iVw.«43).

2.  A  son  of  Arphaxad  in  ©aukl  of  (len.  IO24  (Kaicofi  [.A])
11 13,  and  therefore  in  Lk.336.  The  name  is  due  to  an  inler|)ola-
tion,  made  in  order  to  bring  out  ten  members  in  the  Kentalu;;y  of
(jen.  11  10-26.  The  real  tenth  from  Noah,  however,  is  1  crah,
the  failier  of  .\braham.  x.  K.  C

CAINITES. the name generally given to the

descendants  of  Cain  mentioned in  (ien.  417-24. Tra-

TT  V,  dition, as Kwald said long ago, is  the


Tradition.


commencement  and  the  native  soil  of  all


narrative  and  of  all  history,  and  its  circle
tends  continually  to  expand,  as  the  curiosity  of  a  peojile
awakens  to  fresh  objects,  and  as  foreign  tratlitions  are
intermixed  with  those  of  home  growth.  Questions  alxsut
the  origins  of  things  are  especially  prone  to  crowd  into
the  circle  of  tr.adition,  and,  when  the  various  traditions
respecting  remote  antiquity  come  to  lie  arrangetl,  it  is
natural  to  connect  them  by  a  thread  of  genealogy.
There  is  a  real,  though  but  half-conscious,  sense  among
the  arrangers  that  what  is  being  produced  is  not  history
but  a  working  substitute  for  it,  and  so  there  is  the  less
scruple  in  taking  considerable  liberties  with  the  form  of
the  traditions,  many  of  which  indeed,  being  of  tliverse
origin,  are  inconsistent.  The  Hebrew  traditionists,  in
particular,  were  evidently  filled  with  a  desire  to  bring
the  traditions  into  harmony  with  the  purest  Hebrew
spirit.  In  minor  matters  they  agree  with  the  tradition-
ists of  other  nations  :  in  particul.ar  they  limit  the  super-
abundant material  for  genealogies  by  the  use  of  round
numbers,  especially  ten.

Much  progress  has  been  made  in  the  study  of  Gen.  4

and  5  since  liwald's  time ; but  that  profound  critic  has

„ .  the  credit of having alre.ndv noticed

a.  lien.  4 17-24.  ,j,.^j  ^^^  ^j^^^y  ^^  (.^j„  .„,^j  ^j^.,  j^  ^^j
as  early  as  the  genealogy  which  follows.  This  conclu-
sion may  now  be  taken  as  settled  :  Gen.  4  f-t6  and  17-24
are,  generally  sjxiaking,  derived  from  separate  tradi-
tional sources.  1  Both  sections  are  indeed  Yaliwistic  ;
but  the  tone  and  character  of  their  contents  is  radically
different.

The  true  meaning  of  Gen.  4 17-24  was  seen  first  by
Wellhausen.  The  section  contains  relics  of  an  Israel-
itish legend  which  made  no  reference  to  the  destruction
of  the  old  order  of  things  by  a  deluge,  and  traced  the

I  See  Wellh.  JDT,  1876,  p.  -K^iJ-  {  =  C/r  10/),  who  was
followed  by  WRS,  EB{}'),  .art.  '  1-imech  '  (Sa),  .ind  Che.  EB(V^
art.  'Deluge'  ('77]. So  Ryle,  Early  Surrattvts,  79  [92].


CAINITBS

beginnings  of  the  existing  civilisations.  The  legend  is
partly  based  on  nature-myths,  for  the  Hebrews  wore
not  as  unmythological  as  Renan  once  supposed.  Their
myths,  however,  were  to  a  large  extent  borrowed :
when  the  Hebrews  stepped  into  the  inheritance  of
C.'anaanitish  culture,  they  could  not  help  adopting  in
part  the  answers  which  the  Canaanites  had  given  to  the
question, '  Whence  came  civilisation  ?  '

The  Canaanitish  culture-legend  is  unhappily  lost  ;  but

the  fragments  of  Philo  of Hyblus  (Miiller, Fr. Hist.

_  -t-  Vi ^'^-  3566/!),  when  critically  treated,

3.  Canaanitisn  ^^^,^^j  ^^^^^^  ^^  j,^^  elements  of  two
culture  legend.  Phoenician  culture-legends,  in  one  of
which  the  invention  of  the  useful  arts  and  of  occupations
was  ascribed  to  divine  lieings,  whilst  in  the  other  it  was
ascribed  to  men  (Gruppe,  Z>/V,^/-wA.  Culte  u.  Mythen,
\i,oT  ff.  ;  cp  Pucenicia).  HOrossus,  too,  as  far  as  we
can  judge  from  fragmentary  reports,  appears  to  have
accounted  for  knowledge  of  the  arts  by  a  series  of  mani-
festations of  a  divine  being  called  Oannes,  which  took
place  in  the  days  of  the  first  seven  antediluvian  kings  of
Babylon  ( Lenormant,  Les  Origines,  1  588/. ).  This  sub-
stantially agrees  with  the  statements  of  the  tablets  that
the  bringers  of  culture  were  the  great  gods,  such  as  Ea,
'  the  lord  of  wisdom,"  and  his  more  active  firstborn  son
Marduk  (Merodach),  the  creator.  A  striking  confirma-
tion of  this  is  supplied  by  the  mythic  story  translated  by
Pinches  [see  Creation,  §  16  (r)],  where  Marduk  is
said  to  have  made,  not  only  the  Tigris  and  the
Euphrates,  but  also  cities  and  temples.^  City-building
is  in  fact  everywhere  one  of  the  characteristic  actions  of
humanised  nature-deities  (Osiris,  Jemshid,  etc.),  and  it
would  be  inevitable  that  the  civilised  Canaanites  should
trace  the  origin  of  cities  to  semi-divine  heroes  {y)yj.Oiuiv
y^fos  av8pQv,  II.  12  33),  if  not  to  the  creator  himself.
Still,  though  the  Canaanitish  culture-myth  is  lost,  we
may  be  sure  of  one  point — viz. ,  that  it  was  largely  in-
fluenced by  Babylonian  myths,  the  supremacy  of  Baby-
lonian culture  in  Palestine  at  a  remote  age  being  amply
proved  by  the  Amarna  tablets.

When,  therefore,  we  find  in  Berossus^  a  list  of  ten

antediluvian  kings  at  the  head  of  the  mythic  history  of

... , Babylonia,  it  is  not  unnatural  to  suppose

_■  that  the  genealogy  of  the  ten  patriarchs  in

Uerossus.  ^^^  g_  ^^  ^^^^^^  ^^^  shorter  one  in  Gen.  4
is  so  closely  allied,  is  derived  from  it,  and  to  attempt
conjectural  identifications  of  the  Hebrew  and  of  the  Hel-
lenised  Babylonian  names.  This  course,  w  hich  has  lx;en
adopted  by  Hommel,  the  present  writer  does  not  think
it  prudent  to  take,  ( i )  because  we  are  ignorant  of  the
phases  through  which  the  Berossian  list  has  passed,  and
{2)  because  of  the  violent  hypotheses  to  which  this  course
would  often  drive  us.

By  taking  the  Hebrew  names,  however,  one  by  one,
and  using  I3abylonian  clues,  it  does  not  seem  hopeless
_ . to  reach probable  results. C.\IN,  for  in-
stance— the name which meets  us first — -
means  'artificer.' Can  we  avoid  regarding  this  as  the
translation  of  a  title  of  the  divine  demiurge, borrowed
from  Babylonia  through  the  medium  of  the  Canaanites  ?
p , Moreover  since  E.noch, the son of  Cain,
evidently  belongs  to  the  same  legend,  and
indeed  shares  with  his  father  the  honour  of  the  foundation
of  the  first  city'  (to  which  his  own  name  is  given),  we
cannot  hesitate  to  regard  Enoch  too  as  of  divine  origin.
This  view,  indeed,  is  as  good  as  proved  if  the  statements

1  RT*^  6  I  to;  Zimmern  in  Gunkel's  Schdff.  120.  Cp  these
lines  (01)v.  37,  39,  4c) —

Lord  Merodach  [constructed  the  housel,  he  built  the  city,
[He  built  the  city  of  Nifler],  he  built  K-kura  the  temple,
He  built  the  city  Erech,  he  built  K-anna  the  temple.

2  Fragm.  ix.-xi.  in  Lenormant,  Essai  de  Coiiim.  sur  liirose,
341-251.

3  Or  did  Enoch  not  rather  build  the  city  himself?  So  Budde,
who  emends  133  cr:>  '  '"ifter  his  son's  name,'  into  icrD.  '  af'er  his
own  name'  {Urgfst/t.  xioff.),  thus  making  'Enoch'  the  subject
of  the  verbs  '  builded '  and  '  called.'

623


CAINITES

in  Gen.  5 22-24  (P)  are  traditional.'  We  are  told  that
Enoch  lived  365  years  (a  solar  numljer).'-  that  he  '  walked
with  God,  and  (then)  disappeared,  for  God  had  taken
him.'  The  number  is  attested  alike  by  the  Hebrew,  the
Sam.  and  the  LXX  text,  and  even  if  we  lay  but  little
stress  on  that,  the  phrases  quoted  seem  unmistakably
primitive,  and  imply  that,  in  the  original  form  of  the
story,  Enoch  was  a  semi-divine  hero  who,  at  the  close
of  his  earthly  days,  was  taken  to  the  paradise  of  God.'
When,  too,  we  consider  the  clear  parallelism  Ixitween
Enoch  and  Noah,  and  Ixilween  Noah  and  Xisuthrus  or
Par-napistim  (the  hero  of  the  Babylonian  P'lood-story  ;
see  Dki.UGK,  §  2),  it  Ixjconies  reasonable  to  identify
Enoch  with  Par-nai)istim's  great  visitor  in  Paradise  (he
went  there  to  obtain  healing  for  his  leprosy),  whose
name  is  perhaps  most  correctly  reail  Gilgame.s.  Gil-
games,  like  Enoch,  is  a  divine  being  —  whether  we
regard  him  as  a  hero  who  becomes  a  god,  or  (more
plausibly)  as  a  god  who  becomes  a  hero,  is  a  matter  of
indifference — and  like  Enoch  he  is  associated  with  the
sun.''  As  Enoch  in  the  Hebrew  tradition  is  the  an-
cestor of  Noah,  so  (inverting  the  relation)  Par-napistim,
the  Babylonian  Noah,  is  the  ancestor  of  Gilgames.  The
latter  is  said  to  have  crossed  the  '  waters  of  death '  *  to
pay  a  visit  to  Par-napistim  in  Paradise,  and  we  may
presume  that,  in  the  earlier  form  of  the  Hebrew  narra-
tive, his  counterpart  (whose  original  name  was  certainly
not  Noah)  received  the  same  reward  as  Enoch  for
'  walking  with  God.'  Both  Par-napistim  and  Enoch  are
distinguished  for  their  piety,  and  not  only  Gilgames  but
also  Enoch  (as  we  may  infer  from  the  emended  text  of
Ezek.  283,  and  as  is  expressly  stated  in  the  Book  of
Enoch.,  which  has  a  substratum  of  genuine,  even  if
turbid,  tradition),''  has  been  initiated  into  secret  lore,
and  knows  both  the  past  and  the  future.  Lastly,  Enoch
gave  his  name  to  the  city  of  Enoch,  which  at  any  rate
implies  lordship  (cp  'city  of  David,'  2  .S.  579;  'castle
of  Sennacherib,'  KB  289  ;  and  see  2  S.  T228)  ;  and
perhaps  in  the  primitive  myth  was  even  represented  as
its  builder.  So  Erech,  of  which  the  ideographic  name
is  Unuki  or  Unuk  {i.e.  the  dwelling),  is  incidentally
called  in  the  epic  '  the  city  of  Gilgames,'  Gilgames  being
at  once  its  king  and  (according  to  an  old  text)  its
builder.^  Why  the  Hebrew  compiler  did  not  adopt
Gilgames  as  well  as  Unuk  from  his  Babylonian  in-
formant,^  we cannot tell. The foundation of the

1  It  is  plain  that  there  must  have  been  some  fairly  complete
account  of  P^noch  in  P's  time ;  indeed,  the  referenci;s  in  Kzek.
14 14  'J8  3  (emended  text)  imply  such  an  account  in  e.\ilic  times.
See  Enoch,  §  i.

2  The  Chaldeans  at  first  estimated  the  duration  of  the  astro-
nomical revolution  of  the  sun  at  365  days,  afterwards  at  364 J
days.  To  this  they  accommodated  their  civil  year  of  360  days
by  means  of  an  intercalated  cycle  (Lenormant,  Les  Urigines,
I250). Cp  Year,  85.

3  The  Egyptian  kings,  as  sons  of  Re',  were  said  (as  early  as
the  Pyramid  Texts)  to  ascend  to  heaven,  borne  by  the  mystic
griffin  called  ifr^(see  Sera fhim).

4  We  know  from  another  text  that  GilgameS  was  the  vicegerent
ofthesun-god  (Jeremias,  op.  cit.  3).  hommel  makes  Gilgamei
a  form  of  Gibil  the  fire-god  (Gibilgamis).  On  the  epic  of
GilgameS  see  Deluge,  g  2,  and  Jastrow,  Keligion  0/ liahy Ionia
and  .-Issyria,  chap.  ■-'3,  p.  467 T^T  [The  present  article  was
written  before  the  appearance  of  Prof.  Jastrow 's  work.]

*  On  the  'waters  of  death'  in  the  legend  see  Maspero,  585;
Jeremias,  87.  The  same  mythic  stream  is  found  m  a  ver>-
mythological  section  of  a  psalm  (Ps.  185(4]),  where  the  '  floixis
of  Death  '  (:na  •'^:cO  are  parallel  to  the  '  floods  of  Perdition  '
('?y'?3  '■?: ;  see  Belial,  §  2). So  Che.  /'s.f^

t>  On  both  points  see  Enoch,  §  2.  Di.  was  before  his  time
when,  in  1853,  he  admitted  that  the  late  legend  of  Enoch  might
conceivably  have  some  traditional  basis  (Das  Buch  Henoch,  p.
x.\vii).

1  See  Jeremias,  of-,  cit.  17,  and  cp  the  inscription  quoted
from  Hilpiecht  by  Winckler  (.AOF  377)  and  Hommel  (.-}//7"
129),  in  which  occur  the  words  '  the  walls  of  Erech,  the  ancient
building  of  Gilgames.'

8  The  theory  here  advocated  is  that  David's  Babylonian  scribe
Shavsha  brought  several  B.ibylonian  myths  and  legends  to
Palestine,  including  that  of  the  hero  GilgameS,  king  of  L'nuk  or
Erech.  He  thus  opened  a  fresh  period  of  Babylonian  influence
on  Palestine.  Hilprecht's  discoveries  give  increased  probability
to  the  identification  of  Enoch  with  Unuk,  which  was  already
proposed  by  Sayce  in  1887  (Hib.  Led.  185).

624


CAINITES

extremely  ancient  city  of  l>ech  (before  4500  B.C.,
Hilprccht),  however,  was  at  any  rate  well  worthy  of
mention  in  the  Hebrew  culture  -  legend.  It  is,  in  the
present  writer's  opinion,  not  improKnble  that  I-^noch
once  occujiied  a  still  more  dignified  position  as  hero  of
the  Israelitish  FhxKl-story  (see  NoAll,  Di.i.iCK,  §  17).

We  t-ike  the  next  three  names  together.  The  last  of
tlu-m  is  evidently  not  a  divine  title,  but  a  simple  hero-
.  J  nanie.  This  prepares  us  to  exixxt  that
„  V  .  '.  the  first  and  second  may  be  so  too.  In
Twr  fv!"^*f  V,  "•i»>vloMia,  if  Alorus,  the  first  king  in  the
metnuseian.  ,j^.r,-,^^j.jn  Ust,  may  be  identified  with  some
one  of  the  great  deities,  his  successors  at  any  rate  are
only  demi-g(Kls  or  extraordinary  men.  Moreover,  to
appreciate  the  Hebrew  culture-legend,  it  is  necessary  to
remind  ourselves  that  when  the  city  of  Enoch  had,  by
divine  help,  \xxn  erected,  there  was  still  plenty  of  work
for  senu-divine  men  to  do  in  triumphing  over  wild  beasts
and  barbarians.  The  hunting  exploits  of  Gilgames
(who  was  first  reduced  from  lx;ing  a  fire-god  to  the  pro-
portions of  a  heroic  man,  atid  then  restored  in  the  same
legend  to  the  divine  company)  have  in  all  probability  a
historical  kernel.  It  is  easy  to  believe,  too.  that  the
hero  called  Metiii".s.\el  ^S.s'C''n.'2  ;  as  if  Mittn-su-ili,
'  the  liegeman  of  Cod ' ;  Ma^oi«ra\a  [AL]  ;  Mathumel ;
Gen.  4iCt).  or,  following  the  tetter  re.nding  of  0'^'-,
Methuselah  ('the  liegeman  of  Sarhu'),  was  originally
viewed  as  a  king  who  taught  men  good  laws  and
restrained  wild  animals  and  wild  nien.

The  origin  of  the  first  of  these  names  is  obscure.
Jered  (so  i  Ch.  I2  W)  or  J.\KKU  (q.x\  for  Or.  read-
ings ;  (Jen.  515)  might  indeed  be  an  adaptation  of  the
Ribylonian  .\rad  in  Arad-Sin  ('servant  of  Sin,  the
moon-god'),  which  would  be  a  possible  title  of  the
hero  Gilg.ames  (see  tablet  ix.  of  the  epic).  Ikad  (q.v.  ;
Gen.  4  18)  or  nither  I'.rad  (cp  ©adkl  I'mgaJ)  is,  however,
text-crilically  a  lietter  reading,  and  to  connect  this  with
the  city  of  Eridu  ^  is  not  free  from  objections.  Probably
the  word  is  based  on  a  contraction  of  some  Babylonian
name.  The  next  name,  which  is  best  read,  with
Lagarde  and  Roljertson  Smith,  not  Mkiiuj.\ki,  ((/.-:)
but  Mahalalel,  can  Ix;  well  explained  by  the  help  of  the
Bcrossian  hero-names  'A/iTjXwc,  'A/u\\apoi.  -Mahnlal
is  a  Hebraised  form  of  the  conmion  Babylonian  word
am/'/,  'man'  (cp  Evir.-MKKon.Acn)  ;  the  final  syllable,
-e/,  is  a  substitute  for  some  Babylonian  divme  name.
Selah  in  Mf.thl'SELAH  {n^vtm,  Gen.  52i/  25^  i  Ch.
1  3t :  tmOovffaXa  [AL],  fiadd.  [B  in  i  Ch.  1  3]  ;  Afathit-
sal(i)  is  doubtless  Mabyloiiian  ;  it  is  reasonable  to  see
in  it  a  Hebraised  form  of  .un/ru,  'brilliant'  (Jensen)  or
'gigantic,  very  stiong'  (Del.),  which  is  an  epithet  of
Gibil  the  fire-god,  and  Xinib  (?)  the  god  of  the  eastern
sun.'-^  One  of  the  royal  names  in  the  lierossian  list  is
'Afi^lJ.\f/ifjLot,  which  Friedr.  IX'lit7..sch  and  Hommel  explain
Aviil  (Ainil)  Sin — i.e.,  'liegeman  of  Sin," — and,  with
great  probability,  identify  with  Methuselah.  The
moon-god  in  fact  well  deserves  the  title  Inrhti,  and  the
tradititmal  connection  of  the  Hebrews  with  Haran  and
Ur  makes  some  veiled  references  to  the  moon-god  almost
indispensable  in  the  culture-legend.

Lamech  (r;cS  ;  Xafxtx  [B.\L  ;  Ti.  W'H]  ;  Lamcck  ;
Gen.  4iS-24  525-31  i  Ch.  13  Lk.  336t)  must'have  \ytxn
8  Lamech  *"'  ""l'^"'''^"'  personage  in  the  old  Hebrew
culture-legend,  for  in  the  earlier  of  the  two
genealogies  not  only  his  three  .sons,  but  also  his  two  wives
and  his  daughter,  are  mentioned  by  name.  His  own
name  admits  of  no  explanation  from  the  best-known
Senntic  languages,  nor  is  it  at  all  necessary  that  it  should
be  specially  approijriate  for  the  barbaric  eulogist  of  blood-
vengeance  who  speaks  in  Gen.  4  23/. It  is  a  needless

'  So  Sayce  (////'.  Led.  185),  who  infers  from  Gen.  5  18  that
Krech  (Unuk)  rceived  its  earliest  culture  from  Kridu.  Gen.
4  18,  however,  makes  Knoch  the  father  of  Ir.-\d.

■-  Jensen,  Kosmol.  105,  464.  .So  Hommel  (e.g.  F.xf>.  Timet
8  463),  who  atlopts  the  form  Sarrahu  (this  is  found  with  the
determinative  ilu,  '  god ').

6aS


CAINITES

assumption  that  the  song  of  I.amech  is  'an  exultant  boast
and  menace  called  forth  by  l.amech's  savage  delight  at
finding  himself  possessetl  of  the  new  and  effective  wcj»|x»ns
devised  by  his  son  TuUal-cain.'  '  The  song  must  be
interpreted  by  it.self,  without  preconceivetl  opinions.  In
it  the  hero  declares  that  not  only  seven  lives  (.as  in  the
case  of  'Cain'),  but  seventy-seven,  will  Ix:  ret|uired  to
avenge  the  blo<xl  of  murdered  '  Laniech.'  This  implies
that  Lamech's  story  was  once  told  in  connection  w  ith  that
of  Cain  the  murderer  :  in  fact,  that  Lamech,  like  Cain,
is  the  representative  of  a  trilje,  and  siK-aks  thus  fiercely
out  of  regard  for  trilwl  honour,  which  to  him  consists
in  the  strict  exaction  of  vengeance  for  bIoo<l.'^  Still,  the
Lamech  who  is  descended  frf)m  Enoch  ought  to  have
some  importance  in  the  developtiient  of  culture  ;  he
camiot  Ijc  merely  a  bloodthirsty  nomad.  It  would  seem,
then,  that  the  Lamech  of  (jen.  4  18  was  originally  dis-
tinct from  the  Lamech  of  23/  The  latter  is.  pro|x.'rly,
the  personification  of  a  nomad  trilx;  which  named  itself
after  the  divine  hero  Lamech,  just  as  Kain  (or  the
Kenites)  named  itself  after  the  divine  hero  Kain  or  Cain.
What,  then,  does  the  divine  hero's  name  mean?  .Sayce
and  Honmiel  coimect  it  w  ith  Laiiiga  (  =  Ass.  noc.i,'"'''
'  artificer  '),  a  non-.Semilic  title  of  the  mcKjn-god.  This  is
plausible,  though  the  Assyrian  title  ti<ii,\!;iir  is  applied
also  to  Ea.  A  fragment  may  have  been  iiitnxluced  here
front  a  fresh  culture-legend  which  took  for  its  st.irting-
point  another  divine  teacher,  the  '  Ix-getter  of  gods  and
men,'  '  whose  will  created  law  and  justice.''*

The  names  of  Lamech's  two  wives  are,  of  course,  de-
rived from  the  poem  in  tjen.  423.  Sayce  and  Boscawen
- -  .  , would  make them  feminine  lunar  tleitics

— one  named  Darkness,  the  other  .Shadow
— but  without  indicating  any  similar  titles
of  the  moon  in  the  tablets.  I'robaljly  the  poet  simply
gave  the  tribal  hero's  wives  the  most  Itecoming  names
he  could  think  of.  Adah  {r.j;;  A5a  [AE],  A'56a  [LJ ;
Ada;  Gen.  419-23)  may  have  been  known  to  him
already  as  the  name  of  a  wife  of  Esau  (Cien.  3G2,  I'  ;
but  from  an  older  source  ;  see  Ai)AH,  2),  and  Zii.i.AH
(.i^s,  'shadow';  "^tWa  [.\EL]  ;  Selhi ;  Gen.  419-23)
w.as  a  suggestive  description  of  a  noble  chieftainess,
whose  presence  was  like  a  refreshing  and  protecting
shade  (Is.  322).  Naa.mah  \,icj,;3,  §  67;  votfjia  [Ai;].
-fj-fia  [L] ;  Noema ;  Gen.  422).  too,  the  daughter
of  Zillah,  may  derive  her  name  ('gracious')  from
her  supp<3sed  physical  and  moral  charms  ;  another
of  Esau's  wives  lx.-ars  the  equivalent  name  Basemath
(Gen.  363).  It  is  possible,  however,  that,  as  she  is  the
sister  of  Tubal-cain,  her  name  may  Ik."  of  mythic  origin,*
and  that  she  had  a  role  of  her  own  in  the  original  story.

TUUAI.-CAI.N  is  described  in  Cien.  422  (emended  text)
as  '  the  father  of  all  those  who  work  in  bronze  and  iron."

10.  Tubal-cain.  ;^\  '"■''  ''-''*  '''*'  "^""'^  ""^lit  seem  to
...  uw«.A-%,<»,4^ belong  to  the  heroseponynms  of  Tubal

(so  Lenormani,),  which  was  a  people  famous  for  its
'  instruments  of  bronze'  in  the  time  of  lizekiel  (Ezek.
2713).  Tubal,  however,  was  much  too  far  from  Pales-
tine to  be  mentioned  here,  and  1  ahal\x\  the  time  of  Asur-
bani-pal  seems  rather  to  have  been  famous  for  horses
{COT\(^).  .Mxjve  all.  it  is  diflicult  to  disregard  the
general  tradition  of  antic|uity  that  the  first  worker  in
metal  was  a  divine  Ijcing  (cp  Enoch  81,  where  the  fallen
angel  Azazel  teaches  this  art).  Tubal-cain,  then,  is
probably  like  xo''<rwp  (the  Phu-nician  Hephaistos*).  a
humanised  goil.  and  the  first  part  of  the  name  is  pre-
sumably not  of  Persian  but  of  Babylonian  oiigin.* It

1  Drysdale,  Early  Bible  Songs,  159,  following  Ewald  and
Budde.

«  Cp  St.  ZA  rn;  14298  1^4]  =  .-ii-a,l.  Reden,  259.

*  Hymn  to  the  miwn-gfxl,  .Sayce,  Hibbert  Led.  160/C

4  So  WR.S  (AA'(!*),  art.  '  I-imech '),  comparing  '  N'aaman,*
originallv  a  divine  title. Cp  I^normant,  Les  Origines,  aooyC

8  See  ^hiIo  of  Byblus  in  Eus.  PE  i.  IO9,  and  see  Creation,

I  7, PlItHNICIA.

«  We  can  h.irdly  derive  the  name  from  Bil-gi  (  =  Gibil)  with
Ball,  and  it  is  the  merest  coincidence  that  tshdl  or  /ii/U/  in

626


11.  Jabal,
Jubal.


CAINITBS

should  be  noticed  that  -coin  in  Tubal-cain  is  wanting
in  ®  {do^eX  [AEL]).  lYobably  it  was  added  to  explain
why  the  hero  was  regarded  as  the  father  of  smiths.
Tubal  is,  in  fact,  probably  a  pale  form  of  the  god  of
the  solar  fire,  Gibil  or  Nusku  ;  but,  of  course,  he  is
not  only  a  fire -god.  Like  Gibil  and  like  Hephaistos
(see  Roscher,  /.ex. ),  he  is  the  heavenly  smith  (©  fitly
calls  him  xa^ff^s.  a  term  which  in  //.  15309  is  applied
to  Hephaistos),  and  was  perhaps  once  addressed  in  the
words  of  a  famous  Babylonian  hymn  :  —

'Gibil,  renowned  hero  in  the  land, — valiant,  son  of
the  Abyss,  exalted  in  the  land, — Gibil,  thy  clear  flame
breaking  forth, — when  it  lightens  up  the  darkness, —
assigns  to  all  that  bears  a  name  its  own  destiny  ; — the
copper  and  tin,  it  is  thou  who  dost  mix  (?)  them, — gold
and  silver,  it  is  thou  who  meltest  them. '  *

We  may  well  suppose  that  in  the  earliest  form  of  the
Hebrew  legend  Tubal  was  the  instructor  of  men  in  the
art  of  getting  fire.  According  to  Philo  of  Byblus,  fire
was  discovered  by  three  '  mortal  men '  called  Light,
Fire,  and  Flame,  and  was  produced  by  rubbing  two
pieces  of  wood  together.  'This,'  remarks  Robertson
Smith, 2  '  is  the  old  Arabian  way  of  getting  fire,  and
indeed  appears  all  over  the  world  in  early  times,  and
also  in  later  times  in  connection  with  ritual.  Probably
some  ritual  usage  preserved  the  memory  of  the  primeval
fire-stock  in  Phoenicia.'  There  was  no  such  ritual  usage
among  the  Israelites,  and  so  the  legend  of  the  inven-
tion of  fire  disappeared.

Jabal  and  Jubal  have  names  descriptive  of  occupations,
and  evidently  of  I'alestinian  origin.  The  former  (^t  ;
o^eX  [A],  -13-nX  [L],  -7;5  [K]  ;  /aM ;  Gen.
42ot)  is  the  reputed  ancestor  of  tent-dwelling
shepherds.  His  name  describes  him,  not  as
a  '  wanderer '  (Dillm.  very  questionably),  but  as  a  herds-
man (cp  Heb.  S^r,  Phoen.  h2\  'ram');  it  is  another
form  of  the  name  Abel  (</.t;.  ,*end).  The  latter,  Jubal
(hzv  ;  toi'^aX  [AEL]  ;  Jubal;  Gen.  42it),  is  the  '  father*
of  the  guild  or  class  of  musicians  (cp  Var,  Ex.  19 13,
'ram's  horn').  That  the  inventor  of  the  kinnor  and
the  ' I'igiih  should  be  the  younger  brother  of  the  first
shepherd,  is  certainly  appropriate.  One  of  the  thirty-
seven  'Amu,  or  Asiatics,  represented  in  the  tomb  of
Hnum-hotep  (see  Music,  §  8,  Joseph,  §  10)  as  desir-
ing admission  into  Egypt,  carries  a  lyre.  (We  must
not  quote  the  parallel  of  David,  for  i  Sam.  16 14-23  does
not  recognise  him  as  a  shepherd  ;  see  D.wid,  §  i  «,
note).  Tubal,  however,  is  less  appropriate  in  this
company,  partly  Ijecause  of  his  lofty  origin,  partly  be-
cause smiths  belong  more  naturally  to  agricultural  and
city  life.

The  three  names  Jabal,  Jubal,  and  Tubal  stand
outside  the  genealogy  propjer,  just  as  Shem,  Ham,  and
to  o  •  •  1  I=^pheth  stand  outside  the  genealogy  of
12.  Unginai  -^^,^j^_  ^^^  Abram.  Nahor,  and  Haran
form  Ot  list.  Q^tside  that  of  Terah.  By  this  knot  in
the  genealogical  thread  the  editor  indicates  that  a  new
and  broader  development  is  about  to  begin  (Ewald).
How  is  it,  then,  that  the  Cainite  genealogy  as  it  stands
contains  but  six  names  ?  The  parallel  table  in  chap.  5,
which  has  virtually  all  these  names,  adds  three  to  them
at  the  beginning,  and  one  at  the  end.  Now  it  is
remarkable  that  the  three  prefixed  names  are  also  given
in  425/  It  is  not  improbable  (cp  ®)  that  this
passage  in  a  simpler  form — omitting  '  again,'  '  another,'
and  '  instead  of  .Xbel,'  etc. ,  and  adding  '  and  Enos  begat
a  son,  and  called  his  name  Cain  ' — once  stood  before  4 17,
and  that  Noah,  who  is  the  son  of  Lamech  in  5i8/. ,  once
took  the  place  of  Jabal,  Jubal,  and  Tubal.  This  would
make  the  table  begin  Adam,  Seth,  Enos,  Cain,  and
close  Lamech,  Noah. We  might  also  restore  it  thus,

Persian  means  (i)  dross  of  metal,  (2)  copper  or  iron.  'I  regard
the  h  as  resulting  from  a  radical  iv  or  v,  and  as  changing  later
to /and/' (.Mr.  J.  T.  Platts).

1  Maspero,  Daiun  of  Civ.  635  (see  references).

8  Burnett  Lectures,  second  series  (MS).

627


CALAH

Enos  \=ada.ni),  Seth,  Kenan  .  .  .  Lamech,  Jabal,
Noah.  This  would  have  the  advantage  of  retaining  the
founder  of  the  pastoral  mode  of  life  as  the  father  of  the
founder  of  agriculture,  but  seems  to  involve  the  excision
of  Jubal  and  Tubal.  We  might,  more  naturally
perhaps,  suppose  that  Jabal  and  Jubal  were  later
additions  from  another  cycle  of  legends,  and  that  the
earliest  genealogy  began  with  Cain  and  ended  with
Tubal,  both  originally  divine  beings.  We  should  then
get  a  genealogy  of  seven.  In  any  case  we  must  reject
the  common  view  that  \-iif.  is  a  fragment  of  a  Yahwistic
table  which  traced  the  genealogy  of  the  Sethite  side  of
the  first  family,  and  that  the  .Sethites,  according  to  the
Yahwist,  were  good,  the  Cainites  bad.  There  is  no
valid  evidence  that  the  genealogist  wished  to  represent
any  of  the  Cainites  as  wicked,  or  that  culture  was
opposed  to  religion.  Cain,  the  city-builder,  was  a
worthy  son  of  Enos,  who  was  the  first  to  use  forms  of
worship  (see  E.NOs).  For  there  was  no  more  truly
religious  act,  from  a  primitive  point  of  view,  than  the
building  of  a  city.  (For  the  continuation  of  this  subject
see  Sp:thites.  )

Buttmann's  Myihologus,  vol.  i.  ('28),  first  led  the  criticism
of  the  genealogies  into  the  right  track. For  recent  discussions,

besides  Siade's  article  alre.idy  referred  to
13.  Literature, and Dillmann's  Gen., see Lenorniaiit,  Les

Origincs,  1  5 ;  Ho^cawen,  Exp.  'limes,  5
351^  (M.-iy  '94);  Goldziher,  Heb.  Myth.  32,  113,  127-130,  200;
Bu.  Urgescli.  183-247  ;  Kyle,  Early  Narratives  0/  Genesis,
78-83.  On  the  Berossian  list  of  ten  antediluvian  patriarchs
see  Maspero,  Daivn  0/  Civ.  564/  ;  Del.  Par.  149;  Hommcl,
PSBA,  10243-246.  "The  last-named  scholar  holds  that  his
identifications,  especially  AmIlu  =  Enosh,  Ummanu  =  Kain.in,
and  Nuhnapi.sti  =  Noah,  prove  that  there  is  the  closest  relation
between  the  ten  Hebrew  patriarchs  and  the  ten  Babylonian
antediluvian  kings.  He  infers  from  this  that  the  author  of  the
so-called  priestly  code  must  have  written  centuries  before  the
exile.  This  hasty  inference  will  not  captivate  a  careful  student.
That  the  priestly  writer  had  access  to  early  traditions  is  a  part
of  the  critical  system  here  advocated.  _  The  identifications  of
Hommel,  however,  need  very  careful  criticism  (see  Noah).

T.  K.  C.

CAKE.  It  is  impossible  to  ascertain  precisely  the
meaning  and  characteristic  feature  of  certain  of  the
many  Heb.  words  which  are  rendered  '  cake '  in  EV,
and  it  must  suffice  merely  to  record  the  terms  in
question.

(a)  nV'VK,  asisah,  Hos.Si  (RV)  etc.,  see  Flagom  (3),
Fruit,  85.

(^)  ^i'Pl,  d'bhelah,  i  S.30i2  etc.,  see  Fruit,  §  7.

(c)  n'rn,  hallah,  2  S.  619  etc.,  see  Bakemeats,  §  2,  Bread,
§3- ^ '

(d)  p3, /tawt</rt«,  Jer.7i8  44i9,t  see  Bakemeats,  §  2,  Fruit,
§5. ^'

(e)  .1337,  I'bhibhdh,  2  S.  1368  io,t  see  Bakemeats,  §  3.
(_/)  (jOE'rr)  toS,  I'sad,  Nu.  11 8,  see  Bakemeats,  §  3.

ig)  WD,  maog,  I  K.17i2  etc.,  and  (Ji)  njj;,  'ug;gdh.  Gen.  186
etc.,  cp  Bread,  §  2.

(/)'?i'7!£,  stlol  (Kt.,  V'"?^  kr.),  Judg.  7 13,  see  Bakemeats,
§2.

C/)  P't?^.  raklk,  i  Ch.  2829  etc.,  see  Bakemeats,  §  3,
Bread,  §  3.

CALAH  (n*?!;  xaAax  [A].  "K  [EL],  kaA&X  l^y,
vs  12  XAAeK  [E]  ;  Chale ;  Ass.  Kalhu,  Kalah)  is
named  in  Gen.  10  n/  as  one  of  the  cities  originally
founded  by  Nimrod  in  Assyria.  Asur-nasir-pal,  king  of
Assyria,  ascribed  its  high  standing,  at  any  rate  as  a
capital,  to  Shalmaneser  I.  (A'/?lii6  //.  132-135).
Layard,  Rassam,  and  G.  Smith  proved  by  their
excavations  of  the  mounds  of  Nimrfid  20  m.  S.  of
Nineveh  (Kuyunjik)  that  the  city  lay  in  the  fork
between  the  Tigris  on  the  W.  and  the  Upper  Zab  on
the  E.  Protected  on  two  sides  by  these  rivers  and  on
the  N.  by  hills,  fortified  by  a  long  N.  wall  with  at  least
fifty-eight  towers,  it  was  a  strong  city.

The  town  was  an  oblong,  well  supplied  with  water  by  a
canal  led  through  a  covered  conduit  from  the  Upper  Zab.  and
richly  pl.inted  with  orchards  and  g.irdens.  At  the  SW.  are
the  remains  of  a  platform,  built  of  sun-dried  bricks  faced  with

638


ay  Nineveh. When  AJur-nisir-pal  rebuilt  the  town  and  palace,
finished  the  great  wall,  and  enclowed  Calah  with  its  canal,  he


CALAMOLiALUS

ttone,  600  yard*  from  N.  to  S.,  by  400  yards  wide,  and  13  feet

a)H>ve  the  level  <>f  ihc  Tigris,  which  once  washed  its  western
face.  On  this  platform  stood  palaces  built  or  restored  by  the
kings  Shalmane.scr  I.,  Aiur-nasir-pal,  Shalmaneser  II.,  Tiglath>
pilescr  III.,  Sargon,  Ksarhaddon,  and  A.fur-etil-ilani.  At  its
S'W.  corner  stood  the  sikkuratu  or  temple-lower,  167 J  feet
s(|uareat  the  base  and  still  140  feet  hit;h.  Next  to  it  was  the
temple  of  Nebo,  but  in  the  Sargonid  period  Ninip  was  the
town-god  {KB  4  133,  no.  i,  /.  16).

Of  municipal  history,  apart  from  the  history  of  the
country,  we  know  little.

Calah  was  faithful  to  Shalmaneser  II.  during  his  son's
rebellion  (KB  1  176,  //.  45-50),  but  revolted  from  Asur-nirari  in
746  ii.c.  (KB  1  in).  It  was  clearly  the  court  residence  under
the  alx)ve- mentioned  kings;  but  in  the  official  lists  it  never
stands  first  (cp  Eponym  lists  KB  1  ao8^). As  a  centre  of

jpulation  it  evidently  was  inferior  to  ASiur,  and  totally  eclipsed
r-nisir-pal  rebuilt  the  town  and  palace,
,nd  enclowed  Calah  with  its  can
peopU'd  it  with  captives.

Like  other  great  cities  of  Assyria  and  Babylonia,
C.ilah  probably  had  its  archives  which,  with  the  literary
collections  of  the  kings,  formed  the  nucleus  of  a  library.

Few  tablets  have  hitherto  l)ccn  found  at  Nimrfld,  and  it  is
inferred  that  Sennacherib  removed  the  Calah  librarr  to  Nineveh.
Many  astrological  and  omen  tablets  in  the  Kuyunjik  col-
lections were  executed  at  Calah  for  Nabu-7ukup-keni,  'principal
librarian,'  ra/'-iiu^-tarri',  716-684  B.C.  For  explorations  and
identification  of  site  cp  Layard,  Ninf7>eh  ami  its  Remains,  G.
Smith's  Assyrian  PiscoTejit-s.  For  further  conclusions  respect-
ing library,  see  C  .Smith,  Chald.  CenesisX^  c.  II.  VV.  J.

CALAMOLALUS  (  kaAamwAaAoc  [A]),  orCalamo-
calus  (-cokaAoC  l'^]),  i  Ksd.  522,  represents  the  '  Lod
(see  l.Yi)U.\)  Hadid' of  II  E/.ra233=Neh.737. ©'- has

CALAMUS  (n.3|^)  occurs  in  Cant.  414  Ezek.  27i9.
and  ■  sweet  calamus'  in  Hx.  3O23  Is.  4824  (RV""*!-  ;  but
EV  '  sweet  cane  '  in  Is. ),  for  the  usual  Kkkd  [q.v.,  i  b).

CALCOL  (>3"73  ;  on  the  name  see  Mahol  ;  xaAx^A
[A]),  a  son  of  Zerah  b.  JuDAH,  i  Ch.  26  (xaAka  [B],
KaAxaA  [I-]),  clearly  the  same  as  the  son  of  Mahol
of  1  K.  431  [5 11],  AVChalcol(xaAkaA  [B],  xaAkaA
[L]). See  Mahol.

CALDRON,  AV  rendering  of  the  following  words  : —
nn^p  I  S.  214  Mi.  33.  so  RV;  n*p  Jer.  52i8/  (RV
•pots')Ezck.  II3711,  soRV;  TH  2  Ch.  35i3,  so  RV—
for  all  of  which  see  Cooking.  §  5  ;  and  |b3N  Job4l2o
[12],  RV  RisiiKS  {q.v.,  2).

CALEB  (3 I'D,  §66;  on  the  meaning  see  below;
XAAeB  [HAL];  gent.  ^3^3.  'Calebite,'  EV  'of  the
house  of  Caleb,'  i  S.  'lil  Kr.  [kynikoc  (BAL)],
see  Nab.\l  ;  Kt.  reads  13^3  ;  cp  the  similar  variant  in
Judg.  1  15  ©BAL^ XAAcB  KATATHN KApAlAN  AYTHC).

No.  ZDMC,  40  164, n.  i.  ('86),  finds  the  sense  'raging  with

canine  madness,'  objecting  to  Robertson  Smith's  identification

with  3V3,  'dog  '  (see  /.  Ph.  989  ;  Kin.  200,  219).

1.  Name. Dog-totems,  nevertheless,  were  not  impossible  in

the  ancient  Semitic  world  (see  Dog,  §  4),  and  a

connection  with  373  was  early  surmised  (see  Nabal,  n.). We

find  the  name  Kalba  in  Babylonian  contract-tablets  as  late  as

the  times  of  Nebuchadrezzar  II.  and  Cambyses  (KB  4  199293X

Hommel  (.AUT  115)  makes  kalibu  or  kalahi  mean 'priest';

while  Sayce  (Early  Hist.  Heh.  265)  compares  kalhu  as  used  in

Am. Tah.  (e.^.,  54, 18)  for 'officer, messenger' (but this  is

improbable). The  name  seems  to  be  primarily  tribal.

Caleb was a Kenizzite clan which at, or shortly

before, the Israelite invasion of Western Palestine

- p . established  itself  in  Hebron  and  the  region

Histo south of it, and in the course of time

•'' coalesced  with  its  northern  neighbour,  the

tribe of  Judah (naturally, not without admixture of

blood; cp. Maacah, Caleb's  concubine, i Ch.  248).

The  b'ne  Kenaz,  to  whom  Caleb  and  Othnikl  belong

(Nu.  32i2 Judg.  I13J), were of Edomite extraction,

and  the  Calebites  were  nearly  related  to  the  nomadic

Jerahmeelites  in  the  south-eastern  quarter  of  the  Negeb

(i  Ch.  29  etc. ) ;  see  Jerahmeei^ (On  the  Kenites,  see

below,  §4.)

How  Caleb  came  to  be  settled  in  what  was  regarded
6a9


CALBB-BPHRATAH

as  the  territory  of  Judah,  is  variously  described  (Josh.
15i3,  cp  146_^  Dj,  etc.).  According  to  Josh.  1. '113  ^
(cp  Judg.  1 10^),  Caleb  invaded  from  the  N.,  in
company  with  Judah,  the  region  which  he  subsequently
occupied  (see  Anak)  ;  but  in  the  story  of  the  spies,  in
the  oldest  version  of  which  Caleb  alone  maintains  the
possibility  of  a  successful  invasion  of  Canaan  from  the
S.  and  receives  Hebron  as  the  reward  of  his  faith'  (see
Numbers),  we  seem  to  have  a  reminiscence  of  the  fact
that  Caleb  made  his  way  into  the  land  from  that  quarter.
In  David's  time  Caleb  was  still  distinct  from  Judah  ( i  S,
30 14  ytXfiovt  [B],  x<Aoi'/^  [L]  I  for  the  conjecture  that
David  was  a  Calebite  prince,  sec  Davio,  §  4,  n. ).

On  the  other  hand,  in  the  list  of  the  spies  (Nu.  136  P),
and in the  conmiission for  the  division of the  land

S Preexilic  <^'"-^^'9 ''>' ^'''''''*' ^- J'"-''"'-^'^*--"
oji.iiii<.  appg^jps  as  the  represent  a  live  of  Judah,  a

chief  {nasi)  of  that  tribe  :'■*  and  in  the  post-exilic
genealogical  systems,  Caleb  and  Jerahmeel,  '  sons  of
Hezkon  '  {q.v.,  ii.  [i]),  are  great-grandsons  of  the  patri-
arch Judah  (I  Ch.  29[CHEi.unAi  =  i  Ch.  4  I,  Cakmi(i)],
i&Jf.,  42  [xaXf/x.  A]i^.),  whilst  Kenaz  becomes  a  son  of
Caleb  (4  15).

These  representations  reflect  the  fact  that,  in  uniting
with  Judah,  Caleb  became  the  leading  branch  of  that
exceedingly  mixed  tribe.  The  Chronicler  indeed
hardly  knows  any  other  Judah  ite  stocks  than  these
Hezronites.

The  seats  of  the  Calebites  in  pre-exilic  times  are  to
be  learned  most  fully  from  1  Ch.  242_^,  where  we  find
set  down  as  sons  and  grandsons  (branches)  of  Caleb
the  well-known  cities  and  towns,  Ziph,  Mareshah  (so
read  for  Mesha),  Hebron,  Tappuah,  Jokdeam  (so  for
Jokko.vm),  Maon,  Beth-zur ;  for  Maon  and  Carmel
cp  also  I  S.  25  2/.  The  clan  had  possessions  also  in
the  Negeb  (i  .S.  3O14).

After  the  ICxiie  their  old  territory  was  chiefly  in  the
possession  of  the  l'"domites,  and  the  CalcLites  were
p  .  ...  pushed  northwards  into  the  old  seats
4.  rost-exilic.  ^j  j^^^j^  ^j^jg  situation  is  reflected
in  another  stratum  of  the  composite  genealogy  ( i  Ch.
2:8-24,  50-55,  cp  ig),  where  Caleb  takes  Ephrath  (the
region  about  Bethlehem)  as  a  second  wife  (observe  the
significant  name  of  the  former  wife  Azub.\h  \_q.v.'\  ;  cp
also  Jekioth).  Through  his  son  Hur  the  clan  falls
into  three  divisions  :  Shobal,  Salnia,  and  Hareph,  the
fathers  of  Kirjath-jearim,  Bethleheiu,  and  Bethgader.
The  further  notices  of  the  subdivision  of  these  clans  are
fragmentary  and  complex  (see  Beth-g.\uer,  Jabez,
Shobal).  It  is  at  all  events  noteworthy  that  the
passage  concludes  with  the  end  of  a  list  of  Kenites,
and  a  connection  between  these  and  the  Calebites
becomes  plausible  if  Chelub  and  Reciiah  in  1  Ch.
4 11/.  are  indeed  errors  for  Caleb  and  Rechab  (cp
Meyer.  Entsteh. 147).*

It  is  not  improbable  that  the  names  Azbuk,  Colhozeh,
Rephaiah  b.  Hur  (temple-repairers,  etc. ,  temp.  Nehe-
miah)  are  of  Calebite  origin  {ib.  147,  167).

See  further  Kknaz  ;  also  Kuenen,  Rfl.  Jsr.  1  135^,  176.^1
Gr.ntz,  '  Die  K'jlub.Yitcn  odcr  Kalebiten,' .1/G7<y  26461-492,  and
especially  We.  Dc  Cent.;  CII  337/

CALEB -EPHRATAH,  RV  Caleb -Ephrathah  (3^5
nn'^2N),  is  mentioned  in  i  Ch.  224!  -is  the  place  where
Hezron  died.  Wellhausen  and  Kittel,  after  ©"'^^^  {koX
fitrb.  rb  airodavdv  eaepuiv  [eerpw/t,  A  ;  -v,  L]  ^X^ei*
Xa\e/3  ds  e<f>pada  [L  dffrjKde  X«Ae^  irpbi  «ppada]),
read  :  '  after  the  death  of  Hezron.  Caleb  came  unto
Ephrath  the  wife  of  Hezron  his  father  '  ••  (We.  De  Gent.
14).  Klostermann  {Gesch.  112)  thinks  it  more  natural
to  read  Segub  (for  Caleb).

1  In  P  Joshua  is  named  along  with  Caleb.

2  The  name  Jephunneh  as  that  of  Caleb's  father  is  not  earlier
than  D3  ;  on  Josh.  146,  13  (JK  and  Dj),  see  Joshua,  |  9

S  Note also that xhv,  tbe  Targ.  rendering  of  Kenites,  is
possibly  derived  from  Salma. Cp  Neub.  Geogr.  427,  ^29.
*  l.e.,  n'3K  for  .T3K  ;  Abijah,  (4),  thus  disappears.
630


CALENDAR

'Even  after  the  Exile  the  Hebrew,  like  the  Arab  genealogists,
seem  to  have  used  the  marriage  of  a  son  with  his  father's  wife
as  one  device  for  throwing  the  relations  of  clans  and  townships
into  genealogical  form.'  (WRS  Kin.  90,  and  see  We.  Pro/A*)
2i7yC  ET  217.)

CALENDAR. See  Day.  Week,  Month.  Year  ;

cp  also  ClIKONOI.OGV,  §1^

CALF  (h:V.  Ex.324,  etc.;  mocxoc.  Rev.  47).  See
C.\  TILE,  §  2  a-c.

CALF,  GOLDEN.  Portable  images  of  a  bull  overlaid
with  gold  occupied,  down  to  the  time  of  the  prophets,
1.  References.  '"^  P'-o"""^'"'  Position  in  the  equipment
of  the  Israelitish  sanctuaries.  We
hear  of  them  in  the  great  sanctuaries  of  the  northern
kiiigflom  :  in  Dan '  and  Bethel,  where  they  are  said  to
have  been  set  up  by  Jeroboam  (i  K.  1223 jf.  2  K.  IO29
Hos.  IO5);  in  Samaria,  the  capital  of  the  kingdom
(Hos.  85/);  and  perhaps  also  in  Gilgal  (Am.  04/.
Hos.  4  15  9 15  12 II  [12]).  On  the  other  hand,  there  were
none  in  the  temple  of  Jerusalem  (which  had  the  brazen
serpent  :  see  Nehushtan),  and,  strange  to  say,  we
do  not  find  any  allusion  to  such  images  as  existing  in
the  otiier  sanctuaries  of  Judah — either  in  1  K.  I421-24,
where  such  reference  would  have  been  apposite,  or  in
Amos  or  Hosea.  The  last  named  in  particular,  who
pursued  the  calf-worship  of  the  northern  kingdom  with
such  bitter  invectives  (85/.  10s),  would  hardly  have
been  silent  on  the  subject  had  the  same  worship  prevailed
in  Jerusalem  also.  Though  Judah  appears  to  have
participated,  more  or  less,  in  the  cultus  at  Bethel,  the
worship  of  such  images  seems  to  have  been  confined
chieHy  to  the  northern  kingdom.

The  bulls  belonged  to  the  class  of  images  called  nzBD
('molten  images  ' ;  see  Idol,  §  i  c),  which  might  be  either
solid  or  merely  covered  with  a  coating  of  metal.  To
the  latter  class  the  golden  bull  of  Jeroboam  (Hos.  182)
probably  belonged  (see  luor.,  §  4/.).  Because  of  the
value  of  the  metal  it  is  not  probable  that  the  images  were
of  great  size.  Hence  we  can  understand  the  choice  of
the  word  Sjj?,  '  calf  :  not  the  youth  but  the  small  size  of
the  animal  represented  is  the  point  to  be  conveyed — not
perhaps  without  an  implication  of  contempt.

As  for  their  origin,  these  images  were  originally
foreign  to  the  Yahwe  religion.  To  the  nomads  of  the
2  Oriffin  ^^'•'^^erness,  who  did  not  breed  cattle,  the
°  '  idea  of  choosing  the  bull  as  an  image  of
divinity  could  hardly  have  occurred.  On  this  ground
alone  the  narrative  of  the  golden  calf  made  by  Aaron
in  the  wilderness  (Ex.32  JE)  can  prove  nothing  for
the  origin  of  this  form  of  worship  in  Mosaic  times.
Apart  from  the  impossibility  of  making  such  an  image
in  the  wilderness,  the  narrative  seems  rather  to  be
intended  as  a  scathing  criticism  on  the  absurdity  and
sinfulness  of  bull-worship  as  viewed  from  the  prophetic
standpoint.  According  to  the  Deuteronomist,  Jeroboam
was  the  originator  of  bull  -  worship  ;  but  it  is  hardly
likely  that  he  would  have  introduced  an  entirely  strange
image  into  the  sanctuaries  of  his  kingdom.  Probably
the  older  Decalogue  (Ex.  34i7;  cp  2O23),  in  speaking
of  '  molten  images '  as  distinguished  from  plain  wooden
images,  referred  to  images  of  this  description,  which
also  are  intended  perhaps  by  the  images  of  Micah
(Judg.  18).

It  has  often  been  held  {e.g.  by  Renan  and  Maspero,
and  doubtfully  by  Kbnig)  that  bull-worship  may  have
been  an  imitation  of  the  worship  of  Apis  at  Memphis
or  of  Mendes  at  Heliopolis  ;  but  the  Egyptians  wor-
shipped only  living  animals,  and  in  any  case  the
adoption  from  Egypt  is  unlikely.  The  nomad  inhabit-
ants of  (Joshen  took  over  from  the  Egyptians  hardly
anything  of  their  culture  and  religion. On the  other

1  The  text  of  i  K.  12  30  is  obviously  corrupt,  or  at  least
imperfect.  ©'-  adds,  'and  before  the  other,  to  Bethel."  Klo.
conjectures  th.it  the  original  text  said  nothing  of  a  ca(/"\n  Dan.
His_  restored  text,  however,  only  accentuates,  if  possible,  the
ancient  fame  of  the  sanctuary. See  also  Farrar,  i.e.,  §  2,  end.

631


CALNO

hand,  the  religion  of  Israel  shows  the  strongest  evidence
of  Canaanite  influence.  Among  the  Canaanites  the
bull  was  the  symbol  of  Baal  ;  ^  the  cow,  the  symbol  of
Astarte  ;  and  these  symbols  were  taken  over  from  the
Ph<jenicians  by  the  Greeks.  Thus  the  probabilities  are
that  the  Israelites  derived  the  practice  from  the  Canaan-
ites. They  changed  the  significance  of  the  symbols,
seeing  in  them  a  representation  of  Yahwe  and  his
conquering  might  and  strength  (Xu.  2822  248).  Though
in  the  time  of  Jeroboam  such  worship  was  regarded  as
allowable,  the  so-called  older  decalogue  certainly  forbids
molten  images  (see  above).  The  later  decalogue,  which
may  be  regarded  as  representative  of  prophetic  times,
forbids  all  idolatrous  worship  of  Yahwe.  Hosea  rails  at
the  worship  of  the  bull  (85  IO5).  The  Deuteronomistic
narrator,  too,  in  the  Book  of  Kings  regards  the  conduct
of  Jeroboam  as  an  apostasy  to  idolatry.  He  emphatic-
ally describes  bull-worship  as  '  the  sin  of  Jeroboam,
wherewith  he  made  Israel  to  sin  '  (i  K.  14 16  15  26  16  26
2  K.  IO29  etc.).  To  the  Apis-worship  of  Egypt  we
have  but  one  reference — in  Jer.  4615,  where  we  should
probably  read  'Why  hath  Apis  fled?  (why)  hath  thy
steer  not  stood  firm  ?  ' See  Apis.

See  Kon.  Haitptprobleme,  57;  Baethg.  Beitr.  198/;
Robertson,  Early  Kel.  of  Isr.  215-220;  Farrar,  'Was
there  a  Golden  Calf  at  Han,'  Expos. ,  i893(^,pp.  254-265  ;
and  cp  Sayce,  Hihhert  Lectures,  289/. ;  Jensen,  Kosinol.
88/.;  C.  W.  Goodwin,  TSBA22S2.  i.  B.

CALITAS (KAA[e]iTA[i]c [B]), i  Esd.  9 23  =  Ezra

IO23,  and  I  Esd.  948=Xeh.  87  Kelita.

CALKER(Ezek.  279»7t;  P"J3  'i^nTO). See  Ship.

CALLISTHENES  (KAAAicGeNHC  [AV]  .  a  follower
of  -Xicanor  [i],  who,  according  to  2  Mace,  was  burnt
for  firing  the  temple  gates  (2  Mace.  833).

CALNEH(n3^?).  I.  (xaAannh  [AD^L],  taAanni
[E]).  A  city  included  in  the  earlier  kingdom  of  Ximrod,
Gen.  10 10  (J). See  Nimrod,  §  i,  Shinar.

Rawlinson  {Anc.  Monarchies,  1  i8)  identifies  it  with  Nippur,
supposing  that  the  Talmudic  statement,  'Calneh  means  Nippar"
(foiiia,  loa),  represents  a  genuine  tradition.  The  context,  how-
ever, shows  that  it  is  a  pure  guess  ;  -13'j  is  connected  with  'nj-j,  a
Greek  loan-word  (i/v/i^j;)  meaning  'bride,'  and  m^-^  with
n^3,  the  old  Hebrew  for  'bride'  (see  Levy).  Pressel  (/'i^A'i2))
claims  a  consensus  of  critics  for  identifying  Calneh  with
Ctesiphon  NE.  of  Babylon,  on  the  left  bank  of  the  Tigris  (so
Targ.  Jer.,  Kphr.  .Syr.,  Eiis.,  Jer.),  which  Pliny  (ti 30)  places
in  the  province  of  Chalonitis.  'J'his  conjecture,  too,  may  be
dismissed.

The  inscriptions  alone  should  be  consulted  ;  and,
since  none  of  the  ordinary  names  of  the  Babylonian  cities
resembles  Calneh  (or  Calno),  we  are  justified  in  examin-
ing the  non-Semitic  (ideographic)  names.  .Among  these
we  find  Kul-unu  ('dwelling  of  offspring'),  which,  in
Assyrian  times,  was  pronounced  Zir-la-ba  or  (in  an
inscription  of  Hammu-rabi)  Za-ri-lab.  The  situation
of  Zirl,i!)a  is  uncertain  (see  Del.  Par.  226)  ;  but  the
fact  that  Sargon  mentions  Zirlaba  at  the  end  of  a  list
of  Bal)ylonian  cities  which  apparently  proceeds  from
south  to  north  (A'/?  252/ )  suggests  to  Hommel  that
it  was  not  far  from  Babylon  [Die  semit.  Vdlker,  1  234/ ).
To  P>ied.  Del.  in  1876  [Chald.  Gen.  293)  this  identifica-
tion appeared  certain.  It  is,  indeed,  not  improbable,
especially  if  we  may  point  .ij^p  (cp  ©  as  above,  and
\h'£)  ;  but  we  should  like  some  fuller  evidence  that
Kul-unu  was  really  remembered  as  the  old  name  of
Zirlaba.

2.  (©"-^"S  ?rdi/Tfs,  as  if  Da'?!),  a  N.  Syrian  city,  con-
quered by  the  Assyrians  (Am.  62,  on  which  see  Amos,
§  6  \b\). See  Cai.no.  t.  k.  c.

CALNO  (ij'??.  xaAannh  [BNAQF]),  Is.  lOgt.  the
city called Calneh [2] in .Am.  62 (on which see

1  Cp  Tob.  1  5,  'the  heifer  Baal' (r.  ^aaX  r%  SafidXei  [B],  t<S
lx6<rxH>  W)-

63a


CALPHI

Amos,  §  6  [*])  and  Cannkii  [j^.r.]-  (rather  Calneh)  in
E7.ek.'2723.

f>  ciiiiroiinds  it  with  Cai-nrh  [i],  and  connects  it  with  the
builiiini;  of  the  'tower,'  which,  since  Mabyloii  is  nientionetl  just
before,  can  only  mean  the  tower  of  Italx-I  (see  Hahki.);  itisnot  im-
probable ihiU  ^  idcnli.ies  Caliich  with  llorsipiia.  according
tn  the  Talinudic  tradition  that  the  tuwcr  of  Hai)el  was  at
Uon>ippa.  This  is,  "f  course,  worthless.  0's  Hebrew  text  was
corrupt :  p'cana  was  misread  T{^,  '  fort ' ;  tbik  became  aiy,
•Arabia.'

Doubtless  Calno  is  Kullani,  a  place  near  Arpad,  con-
quered in  738  by  riKlath-pileser  III.  (Tiele,  Wi.,  Fried.
Del.,  (Ik-.,  Killel).  T.  K.  C.

CALPHI,  RV  Ch.\lphi  (a  name  formed  from  the
root  fptl,  whereby  a  child  is  designated  as  a  substitute
for  one  lost  ;  cp  aA<J>AIOC.  and  sec  Names,  §  62),
father  of  judas  [3],  i  Mace.  11  7^^  (o  TOY  XAA<|>ei  [••^^' ]•

o  TOY  XA<t>-  L^J-  o  x^yeoY  [Jo^-  ^"''-  x"' ij?];  >"
the  Syr.  \S^^  s-^nt  and  ../wft.^V  Cp  Alph^klts,
Clopas,  §  I.

CALVARY  (kpan  ION  [Ti.  WH],  Calvaria).  Lk.  23
j^t  .W,  tlie  \'g.  rendt-ring  (I,at.  calvariu—?>V.\i\\)  of
Kpaviov  (kV  'The  skull  ).  The  ||  passages  preserve
the  .Si-mitic  form  G()i-(;<)Tii.\  ('/."•.).

CAMEL  (V0|,  ©  kamhAoc;  Gen.l2i6  24ioi4
etc., Kx.93 Judg.65 I  K.  IO2 iCh.2730 Ezra267


1.  Name.


Tob.  92, and  el.suwhere,  including  six  pro-


phetic passages;  Mt.  34Mk.  16  etc.  ;  see
also  Dkomkdakv).  The  Hebrew  name'  is  common
to  all  the  Semitic  languages,  which  proves  that  the
animal  was  known  before  the  parent  stock  divided
— one  of  the  facts  from  which  Hommel  and  others
have  inferretl  that  the  original  home  of  the  Semitic
race  was  in  Central  Asia.'''  The  name  was  borrowed
by  the  Egyptians ;  it  passotl  also  into  Greek  and
Latin,  and  most  modern  languages.  The  origin  of
the  word  is  uncertain  f  von  Kremer  {Sem.  Cultiirent-
lehnuiii^en,  4)  connects  it  with  Ar.  jamala,  '  to  heap,'  as
meaning  the  '  humped  animal '  ;  whilst  Lagarde  ( I  'ebers.
49)  follows  Bochart  in  his  etymology  from  Vpa.  '  to
requite.'  the  name  thus  indicating  the  revengeful  temper
often  shown  by  the  animal.

In  the  frequent  mention  of  the  camel  in  the  historical

books  of  the  OT  there  can  Ix;  little  doubt  that  Canielus

9 R'hr 1 dromedarius is  meant  (see  below, §  6),

references  *^""^'''  *''"  ^^^'^''''^  ambassador  may
conceivably  have  seen  a  two-humped
camel  at  Nineveh  or  Babylon. ^  We  naturally  expect
to  hear  of  its  use  by  the  Arabian  *  and  other  nomad
tribes  ;  and  accordingly  the  Ishmaelites  (Gen.  3725  [J]),
the  Midianites  (Judg.  65),'  and  the  Amalekites  (i  S.
153  279)  by  turns  come  before  us  as  possessors  of
camels.  The  mention  of  them  in  connection  with
Job  (Jobls),  and  with  the  Queen  of  Sheba  (i  K.
10  2),  also  needs  no  comment. David's  camels  (i  Ch.

1  n^33,  bikrHh,  like  the  Ar.  btUir  (Lane,  1 240)  and  Ass.
bakm  (Del.  Ass.  HWB)  denotes  the  'youiiK  camel,"  Is.iiOe  Jcr.
223(RVnii.'.).  EV  renders  less  aptly  Dko.mkdakv  (,/.j/.).  The
word  C'OTnrriK,  aliaitlranlm  (Ksth.  81014,  .\V  'camels,'
RVrng.'  mules'),  is  rather  an  adj.  qualifying  '  swift  steeds' ;  so  RV
'swift  steeds  that  were  used  in  the  kind's  service'  (cp  Pers.
khshatra,  realm;  V>V>V>  Lex.).  The  reauing,  however,  is  dis-
puted. See  HoKSK,  g  2.

*  See  this  and  other  views  summarised  in  Wright's  Comp.
Gram.  Son.  Lane.  \ff.

*  See  the  l)as-reliefs  on  the  Black  Obelisk  of  Shalmaneser  II.,
and  this  king's  monolith  inscr.,  obv.  28  (A'A  1  156^:),
'  dromedaries  (udrdti)  with  two  humps ' ;  cp  Del.  Par.  96.

*  For  an  account  of  the  numerous  references  to  the  camel  in
Arabian  literature,  and  of  the  many  names  of  the 'camel  in
Arabic,  see  Hommel,  .Sdui^ethiere,  \y)ff.

*  '  Iloth  they  and  their  cattle  were  numberless,'  says  the
narrator.  So  too  the  Reubenites  carry  away  50,000  camels
from  the  Hagrites  (i  Ch.  621).  Precisely  so  Tiglath-pileser  II.
states  that  he  had  taken  30,000  camels  as  prey  from  the  Arabs
(cp  Hommel,  GH.A  66!;),  and  A5ur-bani-pal  says  that  he  took  so
many  camels  from  the  Kedarenes  that  camels  were  sold  in
Assyria  for  from  \\  (silver)  shekels  to  half  a  shekel  (A'.5  2 225).
On  the  notice  in  Judg.  831  see  Crescents.

6^^


CAMEL

27  30)  may  have  been  kept  for  purposes  of  trade ;
they  were  put  under  the  charge  of  an  Ishmaelite,  who
from  his  calling  Ijore  the  name  of  Omi..  Other  kings
may  have  followed  David's  example  ;  Hezekiah's  camels
were  carried  away  by  Sennacherib  (Schr.  LOT  2  286).
That  Syrians  should  have  usetl  them  (2  K.  89)  is
natural  ;  but  in  the  hilly  region  of  Palestine  the  atmel
cannot  have  been  a  common  tjuadruixxl.  It  is  true
this  animal  appears  again  and  again  in  the  patriarchal
story,  and  there  is  no  difficulty  in  supixjsing  that  Jacob
acquired  camels  in  Mesopotamia.  There  i.s,  however,
great  difficulty  in  the  statement  (Gen.  12 16)  that  camels
formed  part  of  a  present  given  to  Abraham  by  the
pharaoh  (see  Ix;low,  §  3/ )•

The  camel's  saddle  is  mentioned  only  once,  Gen.  31  34
(•jo:!-!  13,  ©  TO.  aoL-yfuiTa,  EV  'the  camel's  furiiiture '),
and  derives  its  name  from  its  round  basket-shaped  form.
See  LiTTKK,  Saddi.k.

The  (lesh  of  camels  was  unclean  food  to  the  Israelites
(Dt.  14?  Lev.  11  4).  By  the  Arabs,  on  the  other  hand,
camels  were  both  eaten  and  sacrificed  (WkS  A'el.  Sem.  i'-'
218).  N.  M.— A.  K.  .s.

[The  assertion  that  the  ancient  Egyptians  knew  the

camel  is  unfounded. The  picture  of  a  camel  on  one  of

1 Not  known  "'*' C-'hiopian) pyramids at Meroc  ^

3.  wot  Known  ^j^^.^^g />/,>t/«. 028) and on Greek
"^ syP  • terra-cotta  figures — e.g. ,  of  a  travelling

Arab  (not,  as  has  been  supposed,  an  Egyptian)  in
Marietie  [Abydus,  240) — and  the  references  in  Greek
papyri,'-  prove  nothing  more  than  that  the  animal  was
known  in  Egypt  in  Roman  times.  It  is  surprising
that  it  never  appears  earlier — e.g.,  in  representations  of
battles  with  the  nomadic  Semites  who  rode  on  camels.
The  Egyptian  artists  evidently  disliked  to  represent  the
animal — not  lx;cause  of  its  ungainly  ap|x;arance,  for
they  have  rather  a  fancy  for  delineating  strange
creatures,  but  out  of  religious  antipathy  (WM.M  As.
u.  Eur.  142).  The  statement  that  the  camel  is
mentioned  in  Pap.  Anast.  i.  285  is  groundless.  The
passage  contains  an  exclamation  of  the  Asiatic  princes,
awe-struck  at  the  bravery  of  an  Egyptian  soldier —
''a-ba-ta  ka-ma  \i-r(l)ii  ma-ha-'ira  n-'-mu,  which  seems  to
mean,  'Thou  art  lost  (nian?)  like  God  ('?)«-icr)  a  hero
(n,io)  indeed  {Xr.na'am).'  Even  if  this  explanation'  be
rejected,  the  idea  of  Chabas  {Voyage,  220)  that  the
Asiatics  are  here  calling  for  '  camels  meat '  is  most
ridiculous.  The  other  passages  ajjpealed  to  refer  not
to  the  camel  (the  pretended  kamaly)  but  to  a  large
species  of  monkey  [kay.  ky),  which  is  said  to  come
from  Ethiopia  (where  there  were  no  camels  in  1300
B.C.;  see  above),  and  is  described  as  docile — learning
an  amusing  kind  of  dance,  and  carr)ing  its  master's
walking-stick.  See  the  pa.ssages  collected  by  \\MM
{As.  u.  Eur.  370), ■•  and  the  judicious  remarks  of  Wiede-
mann,  Sl>.-\  13  32.  Even  the  I'^gyptian  name  of  the
camel  X  (or  cr)  amOYA  (ph'ral  JaaaAY^I  )  's  foreign  (not
irom  gti  mil  I  [Lagarde,  i'ebers.  49]  but  from  an  original
*gaiii,'>/},  and  does  not  seem  very  old.  W.  M.  M.]

[  I'he  diflicuUy  of  the  narrative  in  Gen.  12 10-20  is  very

great  so  long  as  it  is  assumed  that  it  correctly  represents

^_ . the Hebrew tradition. Supposing, how-

4.  Ul  rei.  ^^,^^^  jj^.^j  jj^^  mention  of  the  pharaoh  were

^P  due  to  a  misunderstanding,  and  that  the
early  Hebrew  tradition  knew  only  of  a  visit  of  .Abraham

t  Roman  period  ?  Even  in  Persian  times  orthodox  Ethiopians
were  apparently  deterred  from  using  the  animal  by  fear  of
contracting  ceremonial  defdement.  The  more  southern  tribes
had  no  camels  ;  see,  e.g:,  Mariette,  .lAwx.  drv.  13,  87.  The  animal
can  hardly  live  in  the  regions  .S.  of  Mero€.

■-  /C.g-.,  in  Grenfell,  (7riei  Papyri  (245  etc.),  camels  appe.y
fretjuently  in  the  Kayum  after  100  a.i>.  It  is,  however,  signifi-
cant that  they  .sometimes  bear  'ApafiiKa.  xopayMo^a  as  brand-
marks  (i  /.  50  a).  The  camels  on  the  ro.'ds  to  the  Red  Sea
(Petrie,  Ko/>tos,  27,  /.  ai,  Strabo,  etc.)  were  driven  by  the  desert-
tril)es.

3  Partly  after  Erman,  Z.A  'tj,  36.

••  Add  the  passage  on  >frv-apes  from  the  St.  Petersburg  tale
and  De  Morgan,  Cat.  Monum.  i.  644  (^i-animals  from  th«
SQdan).

634


6.  NT  reff.


CAMEL

to  the  land  of  Musri  (see  Mizraim,  §  2  [3]),  the  difficulty
arising  from  the  mention  of  camels  in  Gen.  12 16  would
disappear.  The  dilliculty  of  Ex.93  (J),  where  a
murrain  is  predicted  on  pharaoh's  cattle  including  '  the
camels,'  cannot,  however,  be  removed  by  such  an
expedient.  Here  it  appears  simplest  to  suppose  that
the  narrator  gave  a  list  of  those  kinds  of  animals  which,
from  a  Palestinian  point  of  view,  would  be  liable  to  the
murrain.

Two  proverbial  expressions  about  the  camel  occur
in  the  Gospels  (the  one  in  Mt.  19 24  Mk.  IO25  Lk.  I825,
the  other  in  Mt.  2824).  The  reading
Ka/xiXos  (a  rope?)  for  KafirjXoi  has  been
suggested  for  the  former.  It  is  as  old  as  Cyril  of
Alexandria  and  is  evidently  the  conjecture  of  a  non-
Semitic  scribe  (see  Nestle,  ExJ>.  T.  9474).  Ka/xrjXot  is
correct.  Analogous  proverbs  can  be  quoted — e.g. ,  '  In
Media  a  camel  can  dance  on  a  bushel'  (/eiam.  45  a) —
i.e.,  all  things  are  possible.  T.  K.  c]

As  has  been  indicated  above  there  are  two  species  of  camel.

One,  the  Camelus  drometiurius,  is  found  in  SE.  Asia  ranging

from  Afghanistan  and Bokhara  through  NW.

6.  Zoology. India,  Persia,  Arabia,  .Syria,  and  AsiaiMinor,

and  in  N.  Africa ;  this  species  reaches  its  most

southern  point  in  Somali-land. The  second,  or  Bactrian,  camel,

C.  bactriantis,  lives  in  the  high  plateaus  of  central  Asia. Both

species  are  said  to  exist  wild,  but  it  is  generally  thought  that

the herds found in a state of nature are descended from

domesticated animals and are not truly  feral. This  view  is

supported by the recent  observations  of  Sven Hedin. They

have  been  introduced  into  many  parts  of  both  the  Old  and  the

New  World,  and  where  the  climate  has  proved  suitable  have

been  very  useful  as  beasts  of  burden.

Numerous  breeds  of  the  C.  dromedarius  are  found  in  the
East,  and  show  as  great  diversities  in  character  and  use  as  do
the  various  breeds  of  horse.  The  breeds,  many  of  which  are
distinguished  by  a  complex  system  of  branding,  may  be  roughly
divided  into  two  classes  :  the  riding,  called  in  Egypt  and  Arabia
Hagln  and  in  Indian  Saivari,  and  the  baggage  animal,  called
respectively  the  Gaiiial  and  Unt.  The  word  dromedary  is
often  restricted  to  the  former  animal,  which  often  maintains  a
pace  of  8-10  miles  an  hour  for  a  long  period, _  \yhereas  the
baggage  camel  rarely  exceeds  3  miles  an  hour.  Riding  a  camel
for  any  length  of  time  usually  induces  sickness^  the  movement
of  the  two  legs  of  each  side  together  producing  a  most  un-
pleasant swaying  motion.  Enormous  herds,  such  as  we  read  of
in  the  OT,  are  still  kept  by  the  natives  both  of  the  Sudan  and
of  NW.  India,  and  breeding  stables  exist  iti  many  parts  of  the
East.  Camels  produce  but  one  young  at  a  time  and  the  period
of  gestation  is  twelve  months  ;  the  young  are  suckled  for  a  year
or  Ic^nger.  The  average  length  of  life  seems  to  be  considerable
— from  forty  to  fifty  years— and  if  well  treated  the  camel  will
continue  to  work  hard  until  well  over  thirty.

The  power  which  it  undoubtedly  possesses  of  doing  without
food  is  to  some  extent  dependent  on  the  hump ;  when  the
animal  is  underfed  or  overworked  fhis  structure  begins  to  dis-
appear and  the  condition  of  the  hump  is  thus  an  unfailing  sign
of  the  state  of  its  health.  Similarly  the  power  of  doing  without
water  is  due  to  a  structural  peculiarity  of  the  two  first  compart-
ments— the  rumen  and  reticulum — of  the  complex  stomach  of
the  camel.  Each  of  these  chambers  has  its  wall  pitted  into  a
series  of  crypts  or  cells  which  are  each  guarded  by  a  special
sphincter  muscle,  and  in  these  crypts  a  certain  amount  of  water
is  stored — perhaps  two  gallons  at  most.  The  fluid  can  be  let
out  from  time  to  time  to  mix  with  the  more  solid  food.  Camels
ruminate,  and  their  masticated  food  passes  straight  into  the
third  division  of  the  stomach.  In  spite  of  this  provision  for
storing  water,  no  opportunity  should  be  lost  of  watering  camels,
as  it  is  most  inadvisable  to  trust  to  this  reserve,  and  they  are  apt
to  overdrink  themselves  if  kept  without  water  for  too  long  a
time.  The  stories  about  travellers  saving  their  lives  by  opening
the  stomachs  of  camels  when  dying  of  thirst  are  probably
imaginary  ;  the  camel  exhausts  its  own  supply  of  water,  and
even  if  a  little  be  left  it  is  quite  undrinkable.  Their  flesh  is
eaten  at  times  by  natives,  who  consider  the  hump  a  delicacy.
Their  dung  is  used  for  fuel  in  the  desert.

From  the  earliest  times  the  hair  of  the  camel  has  been  woven
into  fabrics.  The  hair  from  the  hump  and  back  is  torn  or  shorn
and  woven  into  a  tough,  har^h  cloth  ;  but  a  finer,  softer  material
is  also  prepared  from  the  under-wool.  The  milk  is  consumed
by  the  natives,  who  both  drink  it  and  convert  it  into  butter  and
cheese.

Although  the  camel  has  been  domesticated  from  a  very  early
date,  and  although,  without  its  aid,  vast  rej^ions  of  the  world
would  prove  untraversable,  and  consequently  it  has  always  been
the  servant  of  man,  there  is  considerable  divergence  of  opinion
as  to  the  real  character  of  the  animal.  Perhaps  the  Latest
writer,  Alajor  Leonard,!  may  be  quoted  as  one  who  has  had
sixteen  years'  '  practical  observation  and  experience  of  camels  in
India,  .Afghanistan,  Egypt,  and  the  Soudan';  he  says,  'To  sum


The  Camel,  its  Uses  and  Management  ('94).
63s


CAMP

up  the  average  specimen  of  a  camel.  He  can  abstain  from  food
and  water — the  latter  more  especially — longer  than  any  other
animal.  He  is  stupid  and  patient  to  excess,  submissive  and
tenacious  to  a  degree,  docile  and  obstinate  to  a  certain  extent,
vindictive  and  passionate  when  roused,  not  easily  excited  nor
usually  alarmed,  though  at  times  liable  to  a  panic  or  stampede
— an  animal  in  fact  whose  characteristics  are  every  bit  as
peculiar  as  his  structural  peculiarities.'  Another  admirable
epitome  of  the  character  of  the  camel  as  a  baggage  animal  is
given  in  kudyard  Kipling's  'Oont.'  a.  K.  S.

§  1/ 6  N.  M.  —A.  E.  S.  ;  §  3  W.  M.  M.  ;  §  4/  T.  K.  C.

CAMON  (pOj^;  pamnoon  [B].  -mmco  [A],  kaA-
KCON  [L]),  an  unknown  locality  in  Gilead  ;  the  burial-
place  of  Jair  {q.v.  1)  (Judg.  IO5).  It  was  doubtless  one
of  the  Havvoth-Jair  (q.v.).  Reland  (679)  rightly
combines  it  with  the  Kafj.ovv  which,  in  217  B.C.,
Antiochus  III.  the  Great  captured  along  with  Pclla  and
Gefrun  (Polyb.  v.  7O12).  To  the  W.  of  the  place
identified  by  Buhl  with  the  ancient  Gefrun  or  Ephron
(q.v.,  i.  2)  in  N.  Gilead,  and  i  m.  S.  of  the  high  road
from  Irbid  (Arbela)  to  the  Jordan,  lies  a  village  whose
name,  Kumeim,  'little  summit,'  is  doubtless  a  corrup-
tion of  the  ancient  Kamon.

Eus.  and  Jer.  (O^"  272  66  110  20)  identify  Camon  with  a  place
in  the  'great  plain'  called  Kaixfiiova,  Cimona,  situated  6  R.  m.
N.  of  Legio,  on  the  way  to  Ptolemais.  This  Koiiij-utva.,  however,
which  is  evidently  Tell  kaimun  (see  Jokneam),  is  clearly  on
the  wrong  side  of  the  Jordan.

CAMP (n:TO;i nARCMBoAH [BADEFL], Gen.
322[3]  Ex.  14  19  Heb.  1.3 n). A  camp  is  so  called  from
the  cut-c'in^  of  the  tents  over  their  occu-


1.  Military.


pants  ( i^'nn  ;  cp  MH  ni:n)."'^ The  term


(n:no)  is  applied  primarily  to  an  assemblage  of  tents  of
nomads  (Gen.  322i[22],  EV  'company';  Nu.  I319,
EV  'camps').  Of  the  early  Israelitish  nomad  camps
we  have  no  contemporary  records  ;  Doughty  (Ar.  Des.
I221  2309)  observes  that  some  Bedouin  tribes  pitch  dis-
persedly  and  without  order  ;  others  in  a  circle,  to  protect
the  cattle.  The  latter  style  is  that  of  the  m-a  (Ar.
duwdr),  of  which  we  hear  in  Gen.  25 16  Nu.  31io  i  Ch.
639  [54]  Ezek.  254  (AV  'castle,'  but  in  Ezek.  'palaces,'
RV  'encampment').

The  military  camps  of  a  later  age  are  referred  to
elsewhere  (see  War).  Suffice  it  to  remark  here  ( i )  that
the  encampments  of  the  Hebrews  were  probably  round
rather  than  square  :  this  was  a  legacy  from  their  nomad
state  (see  above)  ;  the  barricade  which  surrounded  the
camp  was  called  Vjyp  ([i  S.  1720265.'  AV  'trench,'
RV  'place  of  the  wagons,'  mg.  'barricade';  in  17 20
(S'^  and  in  265  Aq.  and  Sym.  or  Theod.  (TTpOY^vXucis,
Tg.  Nsipn.D — ie.,  xap'i'C'^Ma] — i.e.,  a  'round'  line  of
defence,  cp  hi^,  'round').'*  Also  (2)  that  their  camps
have  left  no  impress  on  names  of  places,  as  the  Roman
castra  has  on  English  place-names.  Mahaneh-D.'VN
\(].v.'\  owes  its  name  to  a  misunderstanding.  We  do
find,  how^ever,  the  strange  archaising  phrases,  '  the  camp
of  Vahw^'  (2Ch.  3I2)  and  'the  camp  of  the  Levites'
(iCh.  9i8;  cp  Nu.  2i7  P),  in  connection  with  the
description  of  the  temple  services.  Is.  29 1  has  been
thought  to  describe  Jerusalem  as  the  camp — i.e.,  dwell-
ing— of  David  (so  BDB)  ;  but  this  is  far  from  certain  ;
the  prophecy  of  Yahw^'s  encampment  against  Jerusalem
is  thereby  obscured.

This  leads  us  to  speak  of  the  camp  in  the  wilderness,

as  conceived by  P  (Nu.  1-4). Of  course, it  must  be

^ , . ,  historically  true  that  there  was  a  sacred

2.  In  the .__.  ■ .<  ,  .u 1 u.,,.  — ,„\^


wilderness  (P).


tent  in  which  the  ark  or  chest  contain-


ing the  sacred  objects  of  the  Israelitish
"nomads  was  placed  when  the  Israelites  halted  in  their
wanderings  (see  Ark,  4).  This  tent,  glorified  into  the
so-called Tabernacle (see Tabernaclf.), forms the

1  *ninn  2  K.  68  '(shall  be)  my  camp'  is  corrupt;  Th.  Klo.
Gratz.  Benz.  after  Pesh.  read  'N?nri,  '  ye  shall  be  hid.

2  On  'jn  in  Jer.  37  16  see  Cei.i..s._
8  AVing-  'midst  of  his  carriages.'

•*  ©L  in  17  20  has  jropt>ij3oAij ;  2(5  5  ©bal  Ao/uin^iTj  and  Aq.  also
Ka\}.irfi.

636


CAMPHIRE

centre  of  the  camp  as  dijscrit)0(l  by  P.  The  case  is
analogous  to  tliat  of  Kzc-kicl's  ideal  division  of  the  Holy
Land  in  tlie  future  ( Ilzok.  48),  in  which  his  sacerdotal  con-
ceptions tind  expression.  The  ralx;rnacle  is  the  place
of  Yahwe's  presence.  This  is  why  it  is  the  central
point,  ininiediately  round  which  the  Invites  encamp,
forming  an  inner  ring  of  protection  for  the  ordinary
Hebrew  lest  by  inadvertently  drawing  near  he  should
bring  down  upon  himself  the  wrath  of  Yahwe(Nu.  1  50-53)-

The  positions  of  the  various  tribes  are  i^iycii  in  Nu.  2j  on
each  side  of  the  tabernacle,  but  separated  from  it  by  the  Levite.s,
three  tril>es  encamp  -a  leading  trilje  flanked  by  two  other  triljes
with  their  '  ensigns  '  (hik)-  1  ""■•*  ""  *•"=  K.  is  Judah  flanked  by
Is-sachar  and  Zebuhm  ;  on  the  S.  keulien  flanked  by  Simeon  and
Gad  ;  on  the  W.  Kphraim  flanked  by  Manasseh  and  Benjamin  ;
u\d  on  the  N.  Dan  flanked  by  .\sher  and  N.iphtali.  It  has
generally  been  held  that  the  four  leading  tribes  were  dis-
tinguished by  the  possession  of  large  standards  {■}'),  whereas
the  other  tribes  had  only  sm.iller  ensigns  (niN) ;  but  this  rests
perhajjs  on  a  misinterpretation  of  7J31,  which,  as  the  contexts
and.  in  part  the  versions  show,  means  a  company ;  see  the
discussions  in/^^A^  "  ('98)  92-101  ;  and  cp  Knsu..s.

The  foregoing  details  are  to  be  gathered  from  what  have  been

fenerally  rej^arded  as  parts  of  the  primary  narrative  of  P.
"urther  details  as  to  the  Levites  are  given  in  3  14-3'',  which  has
been  attributed  (i-.jtr.,  by  We.  €//  179^)  to  secondary  strata
of  P.  Accordinc  to  this  section  the  various  Levitical  divisions
encamped  as  follows  :— Moses,  Aaron  and  his  sons  (3  38)  on  the
K.,  the  Kohathites  on  the  S.  (3 29),  the  C.crshonites  on  the  W.
^323),  and  the  Merarites  on  the  N.  (3  35)  of  the  tabernacle.

The  K.istward  is  manifestly  regarded  as  the  superior  position  ;
the  relative  importance  of  the  remaininc  three  positions  is  less
obvious ;  but  it  may  be  observed  that  the  E.  and  S.  sides  are
occupied  by  the  children  of  Leah  (exclusive  of  Levi)  together
with  ( ;.-id  ;  the  W.  by  the  children  of  R.-ichel,  and  the  N.  by  the
children  of  the  handmaids  (exclusive  of  Gad).

The  priestly  writers  appear  to  have  conceived  of  the
camp  as  sc|iiare,  and  this  is  probably  another  indication
that  we  have  to  do  with  an  ideal  (not  a  historical)  camp  ;
for  there  is  some  reason  for  believing  that  the  actual
encampments  of  the  Hebrews  approximated  to  the
round  rather  than  the  scjuare  form  (cp  §1).  Though
the  other  hexateuchal  sources  furnish  few  details  as  to
the  camp,  the  direct  statement  of  P^x.  33;  (E)  that  the
tabernacle  was  outside  is  quite  irreconcilable  with  P's
account  that  it  formed  the  centre  of  the  camp.  The
central  position  of  the  tabernacle,  the  intermediate
position  of  the  Levites  between  the  tabernacle  and  the
secular  tribes,  and  the  superior  position  assigned  among
the  Levites  to  the  sons  of  Aaron,  are  not  matters  of
history,  but  the  expression,  in  the  form  of  an  idealisation
of  the  past,  of  a  religious  idea.

T.  K.  c. ,  §  I  ;  G.  B.  G. ,  §  2.
CAMPHIRE  ("IS3;  KYnpoc  [BSAC] ;  Cant.  1 14
[om.  H],  4  13),  the  earlier  spelling  of  '  camphor,'  should
be  Hknn.V  (as  in  R\') — i.e.,  Lawsonia  alba,  Lamk. ,
a  plant  described  by  Tristram  (NIIB  2,2,9  f)  as  still
growing  on  the  shores  of  the  Dead  Sea  at  Engedi
(Cant.  1 14).  According  to  Boissier  (/•'/.  Orient,  ^t^a),
it  is  frequently  cultivated  in  Egypt,  Arabia  Petrnsa,  and
Persia ;  and  it  is  probably  indigenous  to  N.  Africa,
Arabia,  Persia,  and  W.  India  (Bentham  and  Hooker,
Gen.  PL  1  782).  The  '  cluster '  ^  of  Cant.  1 14  is  that  of
the  flowers.

Pesh.  and  Targ.  have  the  .same  word  as  _MT,  with  which
Kvirpof  also  is  identical  :  and  the  Syriac  lexicographers  st.^te
that  this  rneans  the  hannd  of  the  Arabs— the  plant  from  which
they  obtain  the  dye  for  the  nails.  The  Oreek  references  to
Ktnrpo--  will  be  found  in  Liddell  and  Scott,  s.v.

N.  M. — \V.  T.  T.-n.

CANA  OF  GALILEE  (kana  thc  taXiAaiac  [Ti.
WH]:  I'csh.  kiiina)  appears  only  in  thc  Fourth  Gos{)el,
as  thc  scene  of  Christ's  first  miracle  (John  2  i  n  446),
and  of  his  healing  of  the  nobleman's  son  lying  sick  at
Capernaum  (4  46-54),  and  as  the  home  of  Nathanael
(21  2).  The  only  evidence  as  to  its  position  is  that  it
lay  higher  than  Capernaum  ;  Jesus  went  down  from
it  to  the  hotter  (2  12).

Tradition  and  present  opinion  are  divided  between

^  73PK,  which  elsewhere  means  a  cluster  of  grapes — possibly
of  dates  I'n  Cant.  7  7/  [8/]. See  liudde.

637


CANAAN,  CANAANITB

the  modern  Kcfr  Kennil,  a  hamltt  almost  3J  m.  NE.  of
Nazareth,  ,with  a  fine  sjiring,  and  Khirbct  Kana  or
Kanat  el-{jelil,  on  a  promontory  of  Gebcl  Kana  over  the
plain  of  Buttauf,  alwut  8  m.  N.  of  Nazareth,  with
ruins,  tombs,  cisterns,  and  a  [xxjL

The  data  of  Antoninus  Placentinus,  570  A.  D.  (///».  4),  suit  Ke/r
Kenna,  at  which  the  media:val  writers  Phoca.s,  John  of  Wiirz-
burg,  and  QuaresmiuSjplace  it ;  so  also  in  modern  times  (Juerin.
De  Saulcy,  Porter,  Tristram,  and  Conder.  Kuscbius  and
Jerome  ((AS)  identify  it  with  Kanah  in  Aslier  (Josh.  I'.i  28);  to
them,  therefore,  it  would  not  have  been  at  Kefr  Kenna,  but  may
have  been  K3nat  el-Gelll.  The  data  of  Thcudosius  (530  a.d.)
suit  Kfinat  el-Gelll,  and  so  in  the  Middle  .Ages  do  those  of
Saewulf,  Hrocardus,  Ketellus,  Marinus  .Sanutus ;  and  others  ad-
here. Robinson,  who  was  the  first  modern  to  revive  thc  claims
of  Kanat  el-Gelll,  descril)es  the  position,  details  the  traditional
evidence,  and  points  out  that  the  name  is  the  equivalent  of  the
NT  one.  while  Kenna,  with  the  double  «,  is  not  (UK  3  204-8).
He  has  been  followed  by  Ritter,  Renan,  Thomson,  Stanley,  and
Socin.

The  name  K.anat  el-Gelll  is  not  above  suspicion  ;  it
may  be  the  creation  of  an  early  ecclesiastical  tradition,
just  as  Robinson  himself  points  out  that  an  attempt  has
been  made  by  the  native  Christians  in  the  present
century  to  transfer  it  to  Kefr  Kenna.  On  the  other
hand,  Josephus  resided  for  a  time  in  a  village  of  Galilee,
called  Cana  (/V/.  16);  if  this  be  the  same  as  his
residence  m  the  plain  of  Asochis  (/</.  41),  he  means
Kanat  el-(5elil.

Conder  {PKF  Mem.  \  288)  suggests  another  site  for  Cana  in
'  Ain  Kana,  on  the  road  between  Reineh  and  Tabor.

G.  A.  .S.

CANAAN, CANAANITE (jy33, ^:V33, xanaan,

XANANAlOl)- Coins from Laodicea of the time of

, _, . . .Aiitiochus iV. and  his  successors,  liear

1.  Fhoenician , , ,  . . n i-

usaire  1 ^^"^  '''-'^"'^  l>"=^  •=**  '*^^**- ' °^  ^'^'^^''^^'

°  '  a  metropolis  in  Canaan  ' — probably  the

Phcrnician  town  whose  position  is  indicated  by  the
ruins  of  Umm-el-'Awamid,  8.  of  Tyre.  Well  known,
too,  is  the  statement  (wrongly  assigned  to  Hecat;vus
of  Miletus)  that  Phoenicia  w.as  formerly  called  x"^
(Herodian,  irepi  /J.ovrjpovs  X^^ews,  19;  similarly  Steph.
Byz.  x""-  oi'^ws  7;  4'oiviKT]  (AraXetro).  In  accordance
with  this,  Philo  of  Byblos  (2,  27)  calls  the  eponym  of
the  Ph(i'nicians  '  Chna,  who  was  later  called  Phoinix '
(d5eX</>6j  x***  "^^^  irpwTov  fx.fTOPofxaaGd'Tos  <polviKos),  and
in  Bekker,  Anecd.  iii.  1181,  6  X"^^  (g*^"-  '''^^  X"^)  '^
identified  with  Agenor  (the  father  of  Phcu-nix),  '  whence
the  Phoenicians  also  are  called  Ochna'  [bBiv  Kal  17
'i'oiviKT]  dxi'a  \^yfTai).  Here  we  have  the  shorter  form
A'«<:' (;':3  ;  cp  Olsh.,  Lehrb.  d.  hebr.  Spr.,  2i^a),  so
often  met  with  in  the  Amarna  tablets  under  the  form
Kinahhi,  side  by  side  with  the  fuller  form  Kinahiii,
probably  with  the  article  prefixed  (v;2n)  as  in  Egyptian
inscriptions  (see  below,  §  6).

As  a  geographical  term  Canaan  shares  the  indefinite-
ness  that  characterises  much  of  the  O  I",  and  indeed  of
__  all  .ancient,  geographical  nomenclature.

^  ■  In  its  widest  sense  the  term  seems  to
have  been  used  to  denote  all  of  what  may  be  roughly
classed  as  Southern  Syria,  from  the  foot  of  .\It.  Hcrmon
to  the  lower  end  of  the  Dead  Sea,  including  territory
l)oth  to  the  E.  and  to  the  W.  of  the  Jordan  clear  to
the  Mediterranean.  Such  appears  to  lie  the  case  in  the
Book  of  Joshua  (11  3).  More  commonly,  however,  it  is
restricted  to  the  lands  lying  to  the  W.  of  the  Jordan —
that  is  Jud.i!a,  Phtrnicia,  and  Philistia  proix;r.  As
Judaj.a,  however,  became  more  sharply  marketl  off  from
Pha-nicia  and  Philistia,  it  is  natural  that  to  Hebrew
writers  Canaan  should  have  come  to  mean  the  latter
districts  more  particularly.  So  in  Is.  23  n  the  term  is
applied  to  Phoenicia  and  perhaps  to  the  entire  coast,  and
in  Zeph.25  to  Philistia.  As  an  ethnic  term,  C.anaanite
is  similarly  applied  to  the  inhabitants  of  the  W.  Jordan
district  in  general,  while  at  times — as  in  Nu.  13 29 — the
seats  of  the  Canaanites  are  more  specifically  limited  to
the  sea-coast  and  the  Jordan  valley. Corresponding  to

1  This  section  is  by  the  author  of  thc  article  Phcenicia,
638


CANAAN.  CANAANITB


3.  Geographical
inference.


the  identification  of  Canaan  with  Phoenicia,  which  is  also
in  accord  with  the  usage  of  the  term  Kinaljhi  in  the
Aniarna  Tablets  (§  lo  below),  the  term  Caniuinite
comes  to  be  associated  with  the  mercantile  activity  of
Phtrnicia,  and  in  consequence  appxjars  occasionally —
as,  e.g.,  in  Hos.  128  Is.  2:3  8  —  in  the  general  sense
of  merchant.  According  to  Targ.  and  many  moderns,
it  has  this  sense  likewise  in  Zech.  l-lai  ;  Wellhausen
and  Nowack  would  add,  emending  in  accordance  with
C"-^.  Zech.  11 7  II.

The  indefiniteness  and  the  shifting  character  of  both
the  geographical  and  the  ethnical  terms  point  to
political  changes  in  which  were  in-
volved the  people  to  whom  the  term
Canaanites  was  originally  applied  :
indeed,  the  indefiniteness  is  the  direct  outcome  of  these
changes.  .Analogy  warrants  us  in  assuming  as  the
starting-point  a  more  limited  district,  and  that  with  the
extension  of  Canaanitish  conquest  or  settlement  the
term  Iwcame  correspondingly  enlarged,  though  it  is
not  necessary  to  assume  that  the  correspondence  between
actual  settlement  or  possession  and  the  geographical
application  of  the  term  Canaan  must  have  lx?en  complete.
'Y\\ii  pn-d&ini nance  of  Canaanites  in  important  sections
of  the  W.  Jordan  lands  would  have  sufficed  for  imposing
their  name  on  the  whole  district.

The  Egyptian  inscriptions  come  to  our  aid  in  enabling
us  to  determine  where  to  seek  for  the  origin  of  the  term.
„  ..  In  the  accounts  of  their  Asiatic  campaigns,
T^  ^^  which  begin  about  i8oo  B.C.,  the  rulers
evi  enc  .  ^(.  ^j^^  ^-^j^  restrict  the  name  Ka-n-'-nj
to  the  low  strip  of  coast  that  forms  the  eastern  limit
of  the  Mediterranean  ;  and,  since  it  is  only  the  northern
section  of  this  coast  that  affords  a  sufficiency  of
suitable  harbours  for  extensive  settlements,  it  is  more
particularly  to  the  Phoenician  coast-land  that  the  name
is  apjilied.  From  the  Phoenician  coast  it  naturally
came  to  be  extended  by  the  Egyptians  to  the  entire
coast  down  to  the  Egyptian  frontier,  the  absence
of  any  decided  break  in  the  continuity  of  the  coast
leading  to  the  extension  of  the  nomenclature,  as  it  led
in  later  times  to  the  shifting  character  of  the  southern
boundary  of  Phoenicia  proper.  The  name  of  Philistia
for  the  southern  part  of  the  coast  does  not  occur  in  the
Egyptian  inscriptions.  It  was  from  the
coast,  therefore,  that  the  name  was  ex-
teniled  to  include  the  high  lands  adjacent
to  it  ;  and  it  is  interesting  to  note  that,  whilst  the  geo-
graphical term  never  lost  its  restricted  application  to  the
coast  strip,  the  ethnographical  term  Ka-n-'-ne-mau —
i.e.,  Canaanites — embraces  for  the  ICgyptians,  accord-
ing to  Miiller  [As.  u.  Eur.  206  / ),  the  population
of  all  of  Western  Syria,  precisely  as  in  biblical  sources.
The  combination  of  the  Egyptian  with  the  OT  notices
seems  to  justify  the  conclusion  that  the  coast  population
sent  into  the  interior  offshoots  which  made  permanent
settlements  there.  In  this  way  both  Canaan  and  the
Canaanites  acquired  the  wide  significance  that  has  been
noted,  whilst  the  subsequent  tendency  towards  restricting
the  name  to  the  sea-coast  is  an  unconscious  return  to
the  earlier  and  more  exact  nomenclature.

The  etymology  of  the  term  Canaan  bears  out  these
historical  and  geographical  conclusions.  In  the  Egyptian
inscriptions  (cp  also  aVjove,  §  i)  the
word  appears  with  the  article — '  The
Canaan  ' — which  points  to  its  being  a  descriptive  term  ;
and,  even  though  we  agree  with  Moore  {/'A OS,  1890,
pp.  Ixvii-lxx)  that  the  testimony  is  incomplete,  the,
use  of  the  stem  yjj  in  Hebrew  in  the  sense  of  '  to  be
humbled '  suggests  the  possibility  that  this  stem  may,
!n  some  other  Semitic  dialect,  have  been  used  to  convey
the  idea  of  '  low,'  even  though  that  may  not  have  been
the  original  sense  of  the  stem.  If  we  keep  in  view  the
prefixing  of  the  article  to  the  term,  and  its  original
application  to  a  strip  of  land  between  the  sea  and  the
mountains,  no  more  appropriate  designation  than  '  the

639


5.  History
of  Name.


6.  Etymology.


lowland '  can  well  be  imagined  ;  and  this  explanation
of  (Janaan,  though  not  unanimously  accepted,  is  at  any
rate  provisionally  tenable. '  Certainly  it  seems  to  be  an
ancient  one  ;  for  when  it  is  said  that  the  Canaanite  is
the  one  who  dwells  by  the  sea  and  along  the  side  of  the
Jordan  (Nu.  I329)  -».*.,  in  the  two  'lowland'  districts
of  Palestine — the  very  artificiality  of  the  indicated  limits
suggests  that  it  was  the  etymology  of  the  word  which
led  the  writer  to  such  a  view  in  contradiction  to  so  many
other  passages  where  Canaanites  are  spoken  of  as
occupying  mountainous  districts  also.

By  the  side  of  the  term  Canaiin,  however,  there  is  in
the  OT  another  which  is  used,  especially  by  the  Elohist,
1 Hmnniaa  ^'^  Cover  precisely  the  same  population —

"Sot  namely,  'the  land  of  the  Amorite.'  It
is  the  merit  of  Steinthal  {/..  f.  Volkcr-
psychologie,  12  267)  and  of  E.  Meyer  (ZATIVI  123
['81])  to  have  definitely  demonstrated  this  important
point.  See  Amokitics.  At  the  same  time,  it  is  to
be  borne  in  mind  that  when  the  coast -land  is  speci-
fically referred  to,  the  term  Amorite  is  not  used,  but,
as  already  pointed  out,  either  Canaan  for  the  whole
coast  or  Canaan  for  the  northern  and  Philistia  for  the
southern.  Whether  the  Yahwist  (J)  is  equally  con-
sistent, as  Meyer  claims,  in  using  'Canaanite'  for  the
pre-Israelitish  population  of  the  W.  Jordan  lands  is
open  to  question.  The  theory  cannot  be  carried  through
without  a  certain  amount  of  arbitrariness  in  the  distribu-
tion of  the  verses  belonging  to  J  and  E  respectively  (see
M'Curdy's  note,  Nisf.  Proph.  Mon.  I406-S).

Moreover,  the  cimeiform  documents  and  Egyptian
inscriptions  furnish  an  explanation  for  the  double
8  In  EffVDtian  nomenclature  that  places  the  facts  in
».  in  tgyptiian.  ^  somewhat  different  light.  From  the
Egyptian  side  it  is  clear  that  the  term  '  Amoritic '  land
was  limited  to  the  mountain  district  lying  to  the  east  of
the  Phojnician  coast-land  but  extending  across  the
Jordan  to  the  Orontes  (WMM,  As.  u.  Eur.  217^).
The  southern  and  the  eastern  boundaries  are  not  sharply
defined.  The  former  is  placed  by  Mtiller,  on  the  basis
of  Egyptian  inscriptions,  at  the  entrance  of  the  plain —
the  so-called  Beka — l)etween  the  Lebanon  and  the
Antilibanus,  and,  whilst  the  Orontes  might  seem  to
furnish  a  natural  eastern  boundary,  it  would  appear
that  the  early  Egyptian  concjuerors  extended  the  limits
still  farther  to  the  east.  At  the  time  of  Thotmes  III.
the  Hittites  had  not  yet  made  their  appearance.  Later,
in  the  days  of  Rameses  III.,  when  the  Hittites  form
the  most  serious  menace  to  Egyptian  supremacy  in
Western  Asia,  the  Orontes  l)ecomes  a  more  definite
boundary  of  the  '  Amoritic '  district,  while  as  the
Hittites  encroach  upon  the  territory  of  the  Amorites,
the  term  Hittite  begins  to  displace  '  .\morite '  for  the
northern  mountain  district  of  Palestine.  This  process
_  1 '^  completed  about 1000 B.C. .At that

1  . ' time,  however, the  term  '  Amoritic ' had

y  ■  already  been  extended  to  the  southern
range  of  Palestine — not  by  the  Egyptians,  but  by  the
Babylonians  and  Assyrians.  It  is  in  cuneiform  docu-
ments of  (about)  the  twelfth  century  that  we  first
come  across  the  term  '  land  of  A-mur-ri'  (as  the  signs
must  be  read,  instead  of  A-har-ri,  as  was  formerly
supposed).  Nebuchadrezzar  I.,  king  of  Babylonia,
whose  date  is  fixed  at  circa  1127,  calls  himself  the
conqueror  of  the  '  land  of  .Amor ' ;  and  Tiglath-pileser  I.
of  Assyria,  whose  reign  coincides  in  part  with  that  of
Nebuchadrezzar,  names  the  great  sea  of  the  Amoritic
land  as  the  western  lx)undary  to  his  conquests.

Long  ere  this,  however,  as  the  use  of  the  Babylonian
language  in  the  Amarna  tablets  {circa  1400  B.C. )  shows,

1  [So  G.  A.  .Smith,  //C  5,  whilst  BDB  .and  Buhl  (Pal.  42)
decline  a  decision.  Moore  and  E.  Meyer  (O'.-J  176)  reject  the
derivation  from  yjp,  'humilis  esse,'  which  is  the  property  of  the
uncritical  Augustme  (Knarrat.  in  Ps.  IO47).  .Augustine  says
(/■'xfios.  Ep.  ad  Rom.')  that  the  pea.sants  near  Hippo,  when
asked  as  to  their  origin,  answered  in  Punic,  Chartaiti,  id  est,
Chananaeos  esse.  ]

640


CANAAN,  CANAANITE


Babylonia  had  come  into  close  contact  with  the  I'hiu-
nician  coast  and  the  interior.  As  a  niatter  of  fact,  one
of  the  earliest  rulers  in  Southern  Babylonia  of  w lion*  we
have  any  record,  Sargon  I. ,  whose  date  is  fixe<l  at  3800
B.c:. ,  is  declared,  in  a  tablet  presenting  a  curious  mixture
of  'omens'  and  historical  tradition,  to  have  jx-netratefl
Ijeyond  the  western  sea  (i.e.,  the  Me<literranean),  and
there  arc  indications  that  he  actually  set  foot  on  the
island  of  C  yprus  (see  Max  Ohnefalsch-Kichter,  Kypros,
83).  Sargon  s|»eaks  only  in  a  general  way  of  having
proceede<l  to  the  '  west '  land  ;  but  the  ideographic
designation  in  the  text  in  cjuestion — Maktu — is  the
same  as  that  which  the  later  Assyrian  rulers  employ  for
the  territory  which  includes  Canaan  in  the  projx-r  s»-nse.
The  same  compound  ideogram  is  the  ordinary  term  for
'  west '  in  the  legal  literature  of  Habylonia  ;  and  the
suggestion  that  it  is  also  to  be  read  Anmrru — Mar
bemg  a  playful  acrologisni  of  Amur  and  Ti;,  indicat-
ing perhaps  direction — is  plausible.  In  any  case  there
apjxjars  to  he.  some  close  connection  between  Mak  Tl;
and  the  name  Amurru.'  The  text  in  which  Sargon's
western  contiuests  are  spoken  of  is  probably  of  a  very
much  later  date  than  Sargon  himself  ;  but  the  value  of
the  tradition,  and  at  all  events  of  the  geographical
nomenclature,  is  unimpaired  by  this  fact. The  Amarna

... .  tablets,  which  constitute  the  remains  of

10.  In  Amarna


tablets.


Egyptian archives of the fifteenth


century  B.C. ,  confirm  the  great  anticjuity
of  the  term  Amtirru.  In  the  letters  to  their  royal
master  written  by  otiicers  under  Egyptian  suzerainty,
the  term  is  of  not  infrecjuent  occurrence,  and  an  ex-
amination of  the  passages  proves  that  it  is  applied,  just
like  the  corresponding  term  in  the  Egyptian  inscrip-
tions, to  the  mountainous  district  lying  immediately  to
the  east  of  the  coast-land  of  '  Canaan  '  in  the  Egyptian
sense — /.  <r. ,  of  Northern  Palestine.  The  eastern  limits
are  again  not  sharply  defined.  In  the  period  to  which
the  Amarna  tablets  l)elong,  the  Hittites  are  lieginning
to  extend  their  settlements  l)eyond  the  Orontes  ;  but
lietween  '  Hatti '  and  'Amor'  land  there  was  a  district
known  as  Xiihassi,  which  reached  to  Damascus.  This
may,  roughly,  l>e  regarded  as  the  eastern  frontier
of  the  '  Anmrru '  district.  The  agreement  Ixitween
the  Egyptian  and  the  .Amarna  nomenclature  extends  to
the  term  'Canaan,'  which,  under  the  form  Kinahhi,  is
limited  in  the  Amarna  tablets  to  the  northern  '  lowland  '
or  sea-coast.  It  was  quite  natural  that,  from  being
applied  to  the  interior  district  of  Northern  Palestine,  the
term  'Amurru'  should  come  to  Ije  employed  for  the
interior  of  Southern  Palestineas  well,  just  as  the  I-",gyptians
extended  the  application  of  '  Canaan '  to  the  entire
Palestinian  coast.  When  the  Assyrian  conquerors  in
the  ninth  century  lx.-gin to  threaten the


11.  In  later
Assyrian.


Hebrew  kingdoms,  they  include  the
dominion  of  the  latter  under  the  land  of
'  Amurru. '  The  term  '  land  of  Ismel '  occurs  only  once
in  Assyrian  inscriptions,  and  even  this  passage  is
not  beyond  dispute.  .Again,  since  the  '.Anmrru'
district  in  the  pro[3er  sense  was  the  first  territory  that
the  earliest  Babylonian  and  .Assyrian  con(|uerors  set
foot  in  after  crossing  the  Orontes,  it  also  happens  that
the  term  t)ecomes  for  them  the  most  general  designation
for  the  '  W'est. '  On  the  other  hand,  it  must  be  noted
that  this  development  in  the  use  of  '  Amurru  '  is  directly
due  to  Babylonian  intluence.  and  forms  part  of  the
heritage  lxH|uealhed  to  later  limes  by  the  period  of  early
Babylonian  control  over  the  land  l)'ing  to  the  west  of
the  Orontes.

-At the comparatively late period when .Assyria,

12 Land  of  "^"""P'^K  ^^^  place  formerly  held  by  Baby-

Hittitea 'o"'-"^'  Ijegins  her  cont|uests,  the  '.Amoritic'

power  in  Northern  Palestine  was  seriously

1  For  a  discu.s.sion  of  the  .subject  and  a  somewhat  different

view,  see  .Schr.ider,  'Das  land  .Amurru,"  SBAW  Dec.  20,  1894.

Cp  also  Wi.  CI  1  ('95),  51-54. An  analogy  for  thus  indicating

•  westward  '  by  a  reference  to  a  land  lying  to  the  west  is  to  be

fiaund  in  the  OT  designation  oi Negeb  for  "^ south."

21  641


threatene<l  by  the  IIilTlTF.S  (</.7'. ).  In  extending  their
s«ttlemcnts  Ix-yoiul  the  Orontes  they  encroachi-d  u|X)n
"  .Amoritic  "  territory.  The  distinct  traces  of  this  west-
ward movement  of  the  Hittites  are  to  l»e  found  in  the
Amarna  tablets  already  mentioned.  Indeed,  the  move-
ment forms  the  key  to  the  [)olitical  situation  of  Palestine
in  the  fifteenth  century  B.C.  The  .Assyrian  coiu|uerors
accordingly,  when  procce<ling  to  the  W'est,  invariably
began  their  campaigns  by  a  passage  of  arms  with  the
Hittites.  This,  taken  together  with  the  waning  strength
of  the  'Amorites,'  led  to  another  change  in  the  geo-
graphical nomenclature  —  the  extension  of  the  term
Hatti  or  Hittite  to  Northern  Palestine  as  far  as  the
Mediterranean,  so  as  to  include,  therefore,  Phci-nicia
pro[>er.  For  Southern  Palestine  the  older  designation
'.Amurru'  held  its  own.  and  the  differentiation  thus
resulting  between  'Hatti'  and  'Amurru'  assumed  a
practical  significance  which  was  quite  independent  of
the  original  application  of  the  two  terms.

It  will  h.ave  Iteconie  evident  from  this  sketch  of  the
early  fortunes  of  Palestine  that  care  nmst  l^e  exercised
p  ,  in  draw  ing  conclusions  from  geographical

,  .  .'  nomenclature.  The  Hittite  power  does
j^'l^P  ^?*  not  extend  to  the  sea-coast  Ixjcause  of  the
msUncMons.  ^^^^^.^^.^^  ^f  1,,^.  geographical  term,  and
so  the  ethnographical  application  of  Amoritic  cannot  Ije
determined  from  the  geographical  usage.

That  '  .Amur '  originally  designated  a  particular  trilw,

or  possibly  a  group  of  trilx^s,  settled  chiefly  in  the  .Anti-

. .. libanus district, is one of the few

14.  Amontes.  ^^^^^  ^^  ^  deduced  from  the  early
ICgyptian  monuments.  These  .Amorites  of  Northern
Palestine  are  frec|ucntly  represented  by  the  Egy])tians
as  a  blond  j^eople  with  a  cast  of  countenance  that  marks
them  off  from  what  are  generally  considered  to  be
Semitic  traits  (see  Petrie,  Racial  Types  from  the  Egyptian
Monuments).  It  would  be  hazardous,  in  the  face  (jf
our  imperfect  knowletlge,  to  enter  upon  further  specula-
tions as  to  their  origin.  There  are  go<xi  reasons  for
„  .  believing that already  at a very early

]X"riod the population  of Palestine pre-
° . .. sented a mixture of races, and that

"  "  ■ through  intermarriage  the  dividing  lines

between  these  races  became  fainter  in  the  cour.se  of  lime,
until  all  sharp  distinctions  were  obliterated.  Hence  the
promi.scuous  grouping — so  characteristic  in  the  Hexa-
leuch — of  Amorites  with  Perizzites,  Hivites,  Hittites,
etc.,  of  northern  and  southern  Palestinians,  without  any
regard  to  ethnic  distinctions.  The  problem  of  differentia-
ting Ix-'tween  these  various  groups  whom  the  Hebrews
encountered  u])on  settling  in  Palestine  is  at  present
incapable  of  solution.  Future  discoveries  will  prob-
ably emphasise  still  more  strongly  the  heterogeneous
character  of  the  tribes.  Their  unorganised  condition
made them a comparatively  easy prey


conquerors and yet difficult to ex-
terminate. The early Babylonian and


16.  Their
absorption.

ligyptian  conquerors  were  content  with  a  general
recognition  of  their  supremacy  on  the  part  of  the
inhabitants.  Native  Palestinians  were  retained  in  con-
trol, and  all  that  was  demandt>d  was  a  payment  of
tribute  from  time  to  time.  When,  however,  the
Hebrews  jiermanently  settkxl  in  Southern  Palestine,
alxjut  1200  B.C.,  the  early  inhabitants  lost  much  of  their
political  prestige.  In  the  course  of  time,  also,  ntany  of
the  groups  were  reduced  to  a  state  of  subjection,  varying
in  degree,  but  in  all  cases,  except  in  the  case  of  the
inhabitants  of  the  co.ast,  sufficiently  conjplete  to  prevent
any  renewal  of  former  conditions.  With  the  successful
establishment  of  the  b' ne  Israel  in  the  lands  to  the  west
of  the  Jordan,  the  history  of  the  pre-Israelitish  inhabit-
ants comes  to  an  end  in  Southern  Palestine,  e.xcept  so
far  as  the  infiuence  of  these  Canaanitish  groups  upon
the  religious  life  of  the  Israelites  is  involvctl.  The
Hittites  in  the  north,  of  course,  survixe  ;  but  the  other
groups, including the  Amorites, gradually  disappear,

642


19.  Disunion.


bility  of  any  permanent  political  union


CANALS

either  sinking  into  a  position  of  utter  insignificance  or
aniali;amating  witli  the  Hebrew  tribes(seeGt)VKKNMKNT,
§  15  /; ;  IsKAKl.,  §  8).  Tlie  freciuent  injunctions  in  the
Hexaleuch  warning  the  people  against  intermarriage
with  these  conquered  groups  are  clear  indications  that
such  intermarriages  must  have  been  common.

A  new  element  in  the  ethnographical  environment  of

Palestine  that  appears  simultaneously  with,  or shortly

p.  ...  ..  before,  the  invasion  of  the  Hebrews  is

17.  rmiisiines.  represented  by  the  Philistines,  who,
coming  (it  would  apix:ar)  from  some  island  or  coast-land
to  the  west  of  i'alestine,  succeeded  as  a  sturdy  seafaring
nation  in  making  settlements  along  the  inhospitable
southern  coast  of  Palestine.  Their  non-Semitic  character
h:is  been  quite  definitely  ascertained  ;  but,  once  in  i
Palestine,  they  appear  to  have  exchanged  their  own
language  for  one  of  the  Semitic  dialects  spoken  in  the
land  to  which  they  came.  It  is  rather  curious  that
these  Philistines,  who  generally  lived  in  hostile  relations
with  the  Hebrews,  and  at  various  times  threatened
the  existence  of  the  Hebrew  settlements,  were  eventu-
ally the  people  to  give  their  name  to  a  district
which  they  never  possessed  in  its  entirety.  In
the  latest  Assyrian  inscriptions,  however,  Pilastu  still
appears  in  its  restricted  application  to  the  southern
coast-land,  and  it  is  not  until  the  days  of  the  Roman
conquest  that  the  equation  '  Palestine  =  Philistia -f-
Canaan '  becomes  established.

On  the  basis  of  the  Egyptian  and  the  Assyrian  inscrip-
tions and  of  the  OT,  the  history  of  Canaan  may  be
_.  .  .  .  divided  into  three  periods:  [a)  the
18.  Historical  pre-lsraelitish  period,  from  about  3800
penotts.  g^  j^  ji^^  definite  constitution  of  the
Israelitish  confederacy  ;  [h)  the  Israelitish  supremacy
from  circa  1100  H.C.  to  circa  740;  [c]  decline  of  this
supremacy,  ending  with  the  absorption  of  Canaan  by
Assyria  and  Babylonia  587  R.C.  After  the  return  of
the  Hebrews  from  the  so-called  Babylonian  exile,  the
history  of  the  north  and  south  Ixjcomes  involved  in  the
various  attempts  to  found  a  universal  empire,  under-
taken in  succession  by  Persia,  Macedonia,  and  Rome.

The characteristic note in the history of  Canaan
dow  n  to  the  period  of  Persian  supremacy  is  the  impossi


among  the  inhabitants.  liven  the
Hebrews,  united  by  a  common  tradition  and  by  religion,
yield  to  the  inevitable  tendency  towards  political  division
instead  of  union.  This  tendency  stands  in  close  relation-
ship to  the  geographical  conditions  (see  G..\..Sm.
Hist.  Geogr.).  The  land  is  split  up  into  coast-land,
highland,  and  valleys  ;  in  consequence  of  which,  it
presents  climatic  extremes  suflicient  to  bring  about
equally  sharp  contrasts  in  social  conditions.  The
resulting  heterogeneous  disposition  of  the  population
appears  to  have  rendered  united  action  (except  in  extreme
necessity)  impossible  even  among  those  sections  most
closely  united  by  blood  and  traditions.  [For  further
details  regarding  these  three  periods  of  Canaanitish
history  see  the  articles  I.sk.\kl,  §  6,  Hittitk.s,  I'hck-
NICIA.  Philistinls.  etc.].  M.  J..  JR.

CANALS  (DnS*).  E.x.  7 19  Nah.  3  8  RV^k-  See
Egypt,  §  6.  The  Hebrew  word  denotes  the  arms  or
canals  of  the  Nile  (ix-n).  On  artificial  water-courses  in
Palestine  see  Conduits.

CANAN.ffiAN  (o  KAN&N&IOC  [Ti.  WH],  cananceus
\S%-\  fif  Iff  [Pcsh.]),  the  designation  applied  to  Simon  ■
the  apostle  ( Mt.  104  Mk.  3 18  RV  ;  mg.  *  Zealot ').  The
word  does  not  mean  an  inhabitant  of  Canaan  (so  AV
Ca.n.VANITK,  based  upon  TR  Ka.vo.viTr\%),  which  in  Gr.
is  usually  expressed  by  xa''tt»'aios  (x  =  2);  nor  has  it
anything  to  do  with  Cana.  It  is  a  transliteration  of
l»':K:i3.  the  i)l.  of  jk3,t  (cp  Bib.  Heb.  \ni^),  which  in
Lk'  6  T5  Acts  1 13  is' represented  by  the  Gr.  equivalent
j;7j\<i)Tris,  Zealot  (^.t'.).

643


CANDLESTICK

CANDACE  (kanAakh  [Ti.  WH]),  queen  of  the
Ethiopians  {AldioTTuf},  is  incidentally  mentioned  in  Acts
8  27.  For  the  kingdom  of  Ethiopia  which  continued  to
maintain  its  independence  against  the  Roman  enijjerors,
see  Ethioi'IA.  Its  queen  was  often  called  Candace  ;
this  seems,  indecii,  to  have  been  regarded  as  an  oflicial
title,  somewhat  like  '  Pharaoh'  (or  rather  'Ptolemy'?)
in  Eg)'pt.  The  name  occurs  in  hieroglyphics  on  a
ruined  pyramid  near  ancient  Meroe  :  see  Lepsius,  Denk-
maler,  v.  pi.  47  (pyram.  20  of  Be^erauieh).  There,  a
queen  is  called  Ainen-'aryt  and  K{e)ne{e)kv.^  It  is
diflticult  to  say  which  of  the  two  or  three  queens  called
Candace  w;is  buried  in  that  tomb.

I.  Stral>o(82o;  see  also  I  )io  Cass.  6829;  54  5)  speaks  of  the
one-eyed  virago  Candace  (ttJs  ^aertAtVtrijs  .  .  KafSouojt,  ij  koB'
rjna^  Tip^t  noi/  X'lBioiriov,  av&piKt^  ns  ■yui'n  TTfTriipuijieVi)  TOr  irtpov
riiv  6()>0aXniov)  who  in  22  li.c.  attacked  Kgypt,  overiiowered  the
three  cohorts  of  Roman  soldiers  stationed  at  the  first  cataract
and  devastated  the  Thebaid,  but  was  easily  defeated  by  the
legate  Petronius,  and  pursued  to  her  northern  capital,  Napata,
which  was  destroyed.  2.  Pliny  (0  35)  seems  to  refer  the  reign  of
Candace  ('regnare  foeminam  Candacem')  to  the  time  when
Nero's  explorers  passed  through  Nubia ;  his  a.ssertion  that  the
name  had  become  somewhat  common  among  the  queens  of
Meroe  ('quod  nomen  multis  jam  annis  ad  reginas  transiit ')  is
usually  pushed  much  too  far  against  the  monumental  evidence.

The  Ethiopian  officer  of  .^cts  8  cannot  well  have  had
any  connection  with  the  Candace  of  Strabo  ;  but  his
mistress  may  not  improbably  have  been  the  contemporary
of  Nero.

Nero's  explorers  reported  the  southern  capital  as  in  ruins,  in
consequence  of  internal  wars  between  the  Ethiopians ;  most
likely,  the  royal  residence  had  already  been  shifted  .S.  to  Wady-
es-Sofra  and  Soba,  where  ruined  p.ilaces  and  temples  of  the  latest
style  have  been  found,  but  the  kingdom  appears  still  to  have
taken  its  name  from  the  capital  Meroe  where  the  kings  were,  at
least,  buried.

For  the  condition  of  the  Meroitic  kingdom  at  that
time  and  the  part  played  by  the  queens  (or  rather  kings'
mothers),  see  Etiuoi-ia.  \v.  m.  m.

CANDLE  (n:  ;  AyXNOc).  Job  186  Mt.  5.5  etc.  ;  cp
below,  and  see  Lamp.

CANDLESTICK,  the  P2V  rendering  of  (i)  m'nordh
rrilJp  Ex.  25  31  etc.  (AyXNIa).  'lie  well-known  candela-
brum of  the  temple,  and  (2)  Aram,  ncbrasta  NTOnSp
(deriv.  uncert. ),  Dan.  5$  {Kd^MTTd^C  [Theod.],  <j)a)C
[©]),  to  the  former  of  which  liie  present  article  will  con-
fine itself,  leaving  to  the  articles  Lamp  and  Tkmpi.E
further  remarks  upon  the  use  of  lights  in  temples  or
shrines,  and  of  lights  (and  'candlesticks'  or  rather
'  lampstands ' )  for  secular  purposes.

There  is  no  critical  evidence  to  support  the  supposition
that  the  temple  candelabrum  described  by  P  in  Ex.  25  31  jf.
2>~  \T  ff-  existed  before  the  Exile.  On
1.  Not  pre-  ^j^g  contrary,  an  old  passage  i  S.  3  3
exilic.  (written,  perhaps,  at  the  beginning  of
the  seventh  century  B.C.  [Bu. ,  SHOT;  cp  Sa.mikl,  i.
§  3  ('^)])  speaks  only  of  a  'lamp'  (nj)  which  seems  to
have  burnt  from  night-fall  until  the  approach  of  dawn.
Solomon,  it  is  true,  is  said  to  have  had  ten  golden
inTrtoroth  in  his  temple,  five  on  either  side  ( i  K.  7  49/- )  i  '
but  they  are  not  mentioned  in  2  K.  25 13-17  (in  the  d  Jer.
52 19  their  introduction  is  due  to  a  glossator),  nor  do  we
find  any  trace  of  them  in  the  templfe  descrilxjd  by  Ezekiel
(Ezek.  40/. ),  or  in  the  restoration  of  temple-treasures
by  Cyrus  (Ezra  1  6/.  ).^  These  facts,  as  well  as  internal
evidence,  support  Stade's  conclusion  that  the  passage  in
I  K.  is  an  interpolation  (ZATWiiti  f.  ['83].  GVI
I230  ;  cp  Now.  HA  240  n.  2,  and  Benz.  ad  loc). The


^^


1U?>


read


for


the  disficured  fifth  sign.  _  j, .  ,

2  .Apart  from  the  instruments  used  in  tending  thts  candlestick
an<l  the  lamps  themselves,  mention  is  made  only  of  the  '  flowers '
(rns,  ®  in  Ki.  Aofiiro«[(]ia  [in  Zech.  4  2  =  Vi, '  bowl '],  in  2  Ch.  4  21
Ao/s'iaes  [/./•.,  D^np^';'!?,  '  tongs  ']).

3  Unmentioned  also  in  2  Mace.  2  5  and  the  Apoc.  of  Baruch

644


CANDLESTICK

ten  candlesticks  of  the  temple  of  Solomon  have  probably
been  evolved  from  the  imaj^ination  of  a  later  scnlx.*,  who
seems  to  have  adopted  the  numl)er  ten  to  agree  with  the
ten  '  bases '  (n'llic) ;  cp  i  K.  7  39-  Obviously  it  is  no
real  objection  to  our  view  of  the  critical  value  of  i  K.
7  49  that  the  Chronicler  mentions  candlesticks  of  gold
and  silver  among  David's  gifts  to  Solomon  in  i  Ch.  '28  15.
That  this  verse  in  its  present  f(jrm  h;is  suffered  ampli-
fication api)cars  from  a  comparison  with  ©.

Tradition  tielii  that  these  ten  candlesticks  (Jos.  augments  the
nuin)>cr  to  10,000 1  [.-tnt.viii.'.ij])  citlicr  were  already  present
along  with  the  Mosaic  candelalirum,  or  were  exact  copies  of  it
(cp  a  Ch.  4  7,  CCSw'03).  Naturally  Solomon's  great  wealth  was
considered  a  sulTicienf  explanation  of  the  otherwise  curious  fact
that,  where.xs  he  employed  ten  candlesticks,  the  Mosaic  taber-
nacle and  the  second  temple  were  content  with  one.  Bammiiihar
Rahha,  15,  adds  that  the  candlestick  was  one  of  the  five  things
taken  away  and  preserved  at  the  destiuction  of  Solomon's  temple.

The  candlestick  of  gold,  called  also  the  '  pure  candle-
stick '  (Lev.  244),  is  described  at  length  by  P  in  Kx.
3  DeacriDtion.  253:^  (  =  37i7#)- It  was  placed  out-

shewbread  (see  the  \'g.  addition  to  Nu.  8 a).  The
m'ndrdh  comprised  the  t;v  (AV  shaft),^  njD  (branch,
KoXafdaKOi),  y'33  (AV  bowl,  RV  cup,  KpaHjp,  scyphus),
ninsp  (knop,  atpaipuj-fip  \  Targ.  Pesh.  'apple'), 2  and
rns  (flowers,  Kpivov  [similarly  Targ.  Pesh.  Vg.  'lily']),
perhaps  collectively  '  ornamentation.'  The  workman-
ship was  nc'i7a.  '  beaten-work '  or  repoussd  (so  0
Topf  I'Tiis  ;  but  /TTf/jf  6j  in  Xu.  8  4  Ex.  37  i4[i7]  ;  Jos. ,  on  the
other  hand,  has  Kfxwf'M^J'OJ.  'cast').  From  an  upright
shaft  three  arms  projected  on  either  side.  Each  branch
comprised  three  cups  described  as  C"li3rp>  '  shaped  like
[or  ornamented  withjalmonds' (^(creTVTrii/xfi'oi  Kapi'iffKoi'j
— see  .Almond),  together  with  ka/tornm\ />i!>a/i.  Under
each  pair  of  branches  w.as  a  kajior  (Kx.  2535),  and
four  sets  of  kaftor  and  pdrnh  were  to  be  found  '  in  the
candlestick'  (.Tiijr:3.  i.e.,  on  the  shaft,  v.  34).  These
four  may  have  included  the  three  of  v.  35,  in  which
case  the  fourth  was  between  the  base  and  the  lovsest
pair,  or  near  tlie  summit.  Possibly,  however,  the
four  sets  came  between  the  topmost  pair  of  branches
and  the  summit  (cp  the  illustration  in  Keland  Z>^  ^S>6i//V.f
Ttmpli,  facing  p.  35).  The  centre  shaft  in  Zechariah's
vision  was  surmounted  by  a  bowl  ( 1  2  Sj  XajuirdStoi').
From  Jos.  (.•/«/.  iii.  67)  we  learn  that  the  candelabrum  was
hollow,  and  comprised  o-i^aipia,  xpii'a  with  poitTKOi  and
KpartipiSia,  seventy  ornaments  in  all.^'  It  ended  in  seven
heads  '  (toToiAAriAai,' and  w.ns  situated  obliquely  (Aof<oO  before
the  t.-ihle  of  shewbread,  and  thus  looked  K.  and  ,S.  ® 's  version  of
Ex.  37  17^  (differing  widely  from  the  present  MT)  supplies  the
interesting  statement  that  from  the  brancbes  (icaAa/iicrKOt)  there
^oceedeti  three  sprouts  (fi\a<rroC)  on  either  side  '  c'f lo-ov^cfoi
oAAjjAois.' Rabbinical  tradition  (cp  Talm.  .l/(«ni</;.  28^^,  Abar-

>  -■];  (Ex.  25  3 1  37  1 7  Nu.  3  4)  is  difficult.  RV  renders  '  base ' ;
so  Pesh.  (aXLfldi  [i.e.,  ^ao-it],  l^) ;  but  AV  finds  support  in  <D
Vg.  (icauAov,  hostile,  stipes,  and  in  Ex.  37  iT^ovectis  [used  also  of
the  0*13  '  staves '  for  carr>'ing  the  ark]).  — 1»  when  used  of
inanimate  objects  denotes  the  'flank'  (cp  Ex.40  72  24  I.cv.  1  ir
Nu.  82935  2  K.  16  14).  The  specific  mention  of  the  'base'
of  the  candlestick  accordingly  seems  uncertain,  unless  perhaps
we  .should  read  1*2,  '.stand,'  '  base '  (cp  2  Ch.  (5 13),  instead  of  T'".
On  the  other  hand,  the  candlestick  may  have  had  originally  no
ba.sc  (cp  alwve,  ji  4).

3  Perhaps  a  pear-shaped  ornament  :  cpSyr.  J<K^  t/sx  and  see
BDB,  s.v.

*  It  is  difficult  to  see  how  he  obtains  this  numt)er.  Six
branches  each  with  3  sets  af  g,M,i,  kaftfir,  and /»•/-«//  (32  yl),
including  the  shaft  with  4  similar  sets  (f.  34)  arid  the  3
ka/tirlm  (v.  35),  amount  to  69  (54-1-12-^3).  Perhaps  to  this
we  mu.st  add  the  figure  at  the  summit  of  the  central  shaft
(iwssibly  ornamented  in  a  different  manner).  The  artist  in  a
Hebrew  MS  of  the  first  half  of  the  thirteenth  century  (Hrit.
Mus.,  Harley,  5710,  fi>l.  136a),  following  a  different  interpr.  ta-
tion  of  I'.x.  25  33,  assigns  only  one  perah  and  kaftfr  to  each
branch,  including  the  shaft.  Each  of  the  seven  branches  has
•^gtbl  hit,  and  at  the  extremity  a  lamp  (T3).  Below  the  ka/tdr
joining  the  lowest  pair  of  branches  the  artist  has  drawn
(reckoning  downwards)  s^ptrak,  a  ka/tdr,  and  a.gebla.

64s


S.  History.  '^^^^'''^^'


CANDLESTICK

banel,  Rashi.  etc.,  on  Ex.  I.e.)  maintained  that  the  candelabrum
stooti  three  ells  in  height  and  measured  twoclls  txrtwccn  the  outer
lights  ;  and  that  it  stood  upon  a  triixxl  (.Maimonides  ;  cp  C'rcniut,
0^sc.isk.sc.  vi.  22/.).  Tlie  seven  lam  jw  were  provided  with  pur«
olive  oil  (Ex.  27  30/.),  and  for  ihe  general  service  were  supplied
' tongs ■(D'n)?'^),  'snuff  dishes '(n'tPrC),  and  variotu  'oil  vessels'
(19?*  '??)•'  The  lamps  were  to  \x  tended  daily  (Ex.  30  7/.)  ;  hut
tr.idition  varied  as  to  how  many  were  kept  lit  at  one  time.'*  The
light  wa<  never  allowed  to  be  extinguished,  and  tradition  rekues
that  the  approaching  fall  of  the  temple  was  prognosticated  by  the
sudden  occurence  of  this  mishap  (Talm.  i'oma,  39;^);  cp  the
lament  in  a  Esd.  10  22  (written  after  the  fall  of  JerusalcmX
lumen  candelabri  nostri  extincluin  est.

It  was  forbidden  to  reproduce  the  candlesticks  exactly  (cp
Oni.is  and  the  temple  of  LeoiUopolis,  li/  vii.  10  3);  but  this  law
could  l>e  evaded  by  making  them  with  five,  six,  or  even  eight  arms
{Ah.  iCara,  43a).*

The  holy  candelabrum  is  referred  to  comparatively
seldom  in  subse(|uent  writings.*  It  forms  the  motive  in
ision  (/ech.  4,  cp  kev.  114).
C.  170  Antiochus  I'.piphanes  carried  it
off  along  with  the  golden  altar  etc.  (i  Mace.  1  21,  j^
\i<Xvla.  ToO  (t>urr6s  [AKJ,  om.  V)  ;  but  a  fresh  one
(tradition  relates  that  11  was  of  inferior  material)  was
reconstructed  by  Judas  after  the  purification  of  the
temple  ( 164  B.C. ,  i  Mace.  449).  Jesus  the  son  of  Sirach
employs  the  Xvxi'ot  (K\dfj.ircoi>  ^ni  Xi/xvtaj  ay ia^  as  a
simile  for  beauty  in  ripe  old  age  (Kcclus. '26 17).  The
same  is  doubtless  the  Xi'xvia  lepd  seen  by  I'ompey  (.-/n/.
xiv.  4  4),  which,  with  its  seven  Xi'^^oi,  was  one  of  the
three  famous  objects  in  the  temi)le  of  Herod  (///v.  55).
Its  fate  at  the  fall  of  Jerusalem  is  well  known.  The
holy  candelabrum,  or,  more  probably,  a  copy  of  it,  was
carried  in  the  triumph  of  Titus  (///  vii.  55),  and  was
depicted  upon  the  famous  arch  w  hich  bears  his  name.
X'espasian  deposited  it  in  the  temple  of  Peace,  and  after
various  vicissitudes  (.see  Smith,  D/P'^\  s.v. )  it  was  placed
in  the  Christian  church  at  Jerusalem  (533  A.O. ).  AH
trace  of  it  has  since  been  lost.  Possibly  it  was  destroyed
or  carried  off  by  Chosroes  II.  of  Persia,  when,  in  614,  he
took  and  pillaged  Jerusalem  (see  Levesque  in  V'igouroux,
L>B,  s.v. ).

Curiously  enough,  Joscphus,  in  his  account  of  the
triumi)h  of  Titus,  states  that  the  workmanship  (^^ok)  of
the  candlestick  was  not  the  same  as  that  which  had  been
in  the  temple.'  As  was  the  case  with  other  objects  in
the  triumph,  it  was  probably  constructed  from  the  de-
scriptions of  the  captives  ;  besides,  such  conventional
candlesticks  were  not  imknown  at  that  time.*  The
gritlin-like  figures  depicted  upon  the  base  of  tlie
candelabrum  may  be  possibly  ascribed  to  the  artist  ;  so
far  as  can  lye  judged,  they  do  not  resemble  the  mythical
symbols  from  Palestine  or  .Assyria.  Consef|uently,  in
endeavouring  to  gain  an  idea  of  the  original  seven-
branched  candlestick,  one  nuist  not  adhere  too  strictly
to  the  representation  upon  the  .Arch  of  Titus.

The  language  em()loyed  to  descrilx;  the  sacred
m'ndnih  shows  that  it  must  have  closely  resembled  a
tree.^  Seven-branched  trees  are  freciuenlly  met  with  in
sculptures,  etc.,  from  the  E,*  and,  as  Robertson  Smith
observes.  '  in  most  of  the  Assyrian  examples  it  is  not  easy
to  draw  the  line  Ijetween  the  candelabrum  and  the  sacred
tree  crowned  with  a  star  or  crescent  moon  '  (/i'5<-'  488).
Since  it  is  only  natural  to  look  for  traces  of  Assyrian  or

'  Zech.  4i2  mentions  also  riTFiJS,  'pipes,' for  conveying  the
oil  (fiufuiTJjp*^).

a  Cp  Ex.  27  20/  2  (  h.  13  II  and  Jos.  Ww/.  iii.  8  3.  Rabbinical
tradition  held  that  only  otu  was  lit  by  day.  This,  it  h.xs  l>een
suggested,  was  the  lamp  upon  the  central  shaft  (called  'lim  -uX

'  Thus,  e.g.,  in  the  \  east  of  Tabem.icles  (see  Succah,  o  2).

*  The  evidence  for  the  existence  of  more  than  one  in  post-
exilic  times  rests  only  upon  Jos.  iif/vi.  83.  With  Wm/.  xii.  64
(i  M.-ICC.  1  2i)  contrast  //•.  7  6.

*  BJ  vii.  55  [ed.  Niescj.  The  passage  is  not  free  from
olxscurity.  Noteworthy  is  the  remark  that  slender  arms
(xavAio-Koi)  resembling  the  form  of  a  trident  were  drawn  forth.
(See  \  4.)

8  Cp  their  use  as  symbols  in  Rev.  1  \-i/.  2iff'.i$.

7  Cp  simil.irly  the  candelabrum  in  the  temple  of  the  Palatine
Apollo  (Pliny,  34  8).

8  A  seven-branched  palm  upon  a  coin  of  the  Maccabees ;  see
Madden,  Coins  c/the  Jru>s,  71,  n.  7.

646


CANDLESTICK

Babylonian  influence  in  tlie  second  temple,  it  is  not
improljable  that  the  tn'nordh  was  originally  a  represent-
ation of  the  sacred  seven-branched  tree  itself,  possibly
indeed  the  tree  of  life.^  The  six  arms,  instead  of
coming  up  and  forming  a  straight  line  with  the  toji  of
the  central  shaft,  ])iobably  tapered  off,  the  extremities
of  each  pair  being  lower  than  those  of  the  pair  above
it,  thus  i)resenting  more  accurately  the  outline  of  a  tree.
Examples  of  candelabra  with  the  arms  thus  arranged
are  not  unknown.'^

It  is  not  imp<issible  that  the  Ethrog  and  Lulab
('citron'  and  'palm-branch'  ;  cp  Ai'PLt;,  §  2  [3])  of
the  Feast  of  Tabernacles  (wherein  c.indlesticks  played
so  important  a  part)  are  to  be  connected  also  with  this
sacred  seven-branched  tree,  from  which,  it  has  been  sug-
gested, the  m'nordh  has  teen  evolved.  The  specific  tree
represented  was  one  which,  for  various  re;\sons,  was  con-
siilered  the  most  unique  and  valuable.  The  choice  may
have  depended  more  strictly  upon  the  belief  that  it  was
supposed  to  represent  the  tree  of  temptation  in  the
Paradise  myth  (so  at  all  events  in  Christian  times  ;  cp
Didron,  .\fanut'l  J' /conoi^raphie  chrt'iienne,  80).

See  Reland, /A' .S><)///.f  Tcmf>li ;  H.O^xU,  Disguisitin  .  .  .  de
ccuitirlahri  .  .  .  struct  urn  (1708);  Reinach,  L'Arc  de  Titus
(Paris.  18.J0);  and  Vigouroux,  DB,  s.v.  'Chandelier,'  with  the
literature  there  quoted.  S.  A.  C.


CANON

CANE,  SWEET  (HJp),  Is.  4824  Jer.  620.  See  Reed,
I  (*).

CANKERWORM  (P^*  :  Broyxoc  or  akric).  Ps.
10034  Jer.  f)!  14  27  Joel  1  4  [twice],  225  Nah.  3i5i6t;  in
Ps.  and  Jer.  A\'  h.is  Catk.kj'1I,lkk.  The  Hebrew  jf/^*
is  usually  regarded  as  denoting  a  young  stage  in  the
history  of  the  locust  ;  but  this  seems  doubtful.  See
Locust,  §  2,  n.  6.

CANNEH  ( n33 ),  Ezek.  27  23,  MT,  usually  taken  for  the
name  of  a  ])lace  in  Mesopotamia  with  which  Tyre  had
commercial  dealings,  anil  identitied  with  Calneh  (see
Schr.  in  Riehm's  //IJV^^),  1  256).  Cornill  even  reads
'Calneh'  (,13^3),  appealing  to  a  single  Heb.  MS  which
reads  thus,  and  to  variants  of  (5 — viz.,  xa^Xo"  [AB],
XoXkoX  [V].  But  the  name  is  really  non-existent  ;  the
words  rendered  '  and  Canneh  and  Eden  '  should  rather
be  '  and  the  sons  of  J'"den.'

Everywhere  else  we  read  either  of  Beth-Eden  or  of  B'ne  Eden  ;
it  is  not  probable  that  there  is  an  exception  here.  The
Xa>'aa[H],  or  xavojav  [AQ]  of  ®,  is  not  ,1333,  but  yjj  or  jyj^,
where  y  or  jy  is  a  relic  of  py,  and  J3  a  corruption  of  '33.  NIost
M.SS  of  0  give  only  two  names,  and  the  second  name  is  not
Canneh  (as  Smith's  DJi*'^'),  but  a  corruption  of  IVne  Kden.  The
discovery  (for  such  it  seems  to  be)  is  due  to  Mez  (ircsch.  der
Stadt  Harrdn,  1892,  p.  34).  t.  K.  C.


i.  Contents  of  OT  canon  (S§  5-14).

Extent  and  cl.assification  (§  5).

Order  of  books  (SS  7-9)-

In  Sci)tuai;int  (§  loyC)

In (osephus, Ierome(§8  12-14).
ii. Cl-<>sfs<;  OF  CANON  (§S  15-22).

Early  tradition  (§§  15-17).


Gradual  growth  (§§  60-6^).

Evidence  of  orthodox  writers  (§§  65-68).

Evidence  of  unorthodox  writers  (§  69).


CANON

INTRODUCTION: THE  IDEA  OF  .\  CANON  (
A.  OLD  TESTAMENT.

The  Great  Synagogue


■4)-


Eli.as  Levitaand

(g§  .8-21).
Scientific  method  (8  22).
HiSTOKV  OF  CANON  (§§23.59).
First  canon  :  the  Law  (§§  23-27).
Second  canon :  the  Prophets  (§§  28-42).
Why  not  canonised  with  Law  (§§  28-35).
Traditions,  etc.  (§§  36-38).

B.  NEW  TESTAMENT.

Versions  (§  70).

General  traces  of  NT  (§  71).

Muratorian  canon  (§  72).

Bibliography :  OT  and  NT  (§  75/).


Date  (§§  39-42).

Tliird  canon  :  Hagiographa  (§§  43-59).

Principle  observed  (§§  43-47).

Date  (§8  48-55)-

Resume  (8  56).

Non-Palestinian  views  (8  577C)

O  r  canon  in  Christian  Church  (8  59).


Books  temporarily  received  (§  73).
Result  (§  74).


The word canon is Greek  ; its application to the
Bible  beloni^s  to  Christian  times  ; the  iclea  originates  in

1 Greek -'"^'=^'*'"-
■  I  he  Greek  (6)  Kavwv  (allied  to  Kayua,

Kavt},  '  a  reed '  ;  borrowed  from  the
Semitic  ;  Heb.  ,-::p)  means  a  straight  rod  or  pole,  a  rod
used  for  measuring,  a  carpenter's  rule  ;  and,  by  met-
onymy, a  rule,  norm,  or  law  ;  a  still  later  meaning  is
that  of  catalogue  or  list.

-As  applied  to  the  books  of  Scripture  Kavdof  is  first  met
with  in  the  second  half  of  the  fourth  century  ;  thus,  /3t/S\ta
KavoviKO.  (as  opposed  to  aKavoviffra)  in  can.  59  of  the
Council  of  Laodicea  {circa  360  A.D. ),  and  ^.  Kavovi^b-
fieva  in  .Vthanasius  {e/>.  fcsf.  39  ;  365  A.  D. ) ;  Kaviliv  for  the
whole  collection  is  still  later. The  original


2.  Early
usage.


signification  is  still  a  question. Did  the
term  mean  {a)  the  books  constituted  into


a  standard ; or {fi) the books corresponding to the
standard  {i.e.  of  the  faith  ;  cp  Kavujf  iKK\r)<na<XTLK6s,  k.

1  Perhaps  originally  a  symbol  of  the  universe— the  tree  of  life
beini;  viewed  as  distinct  in  its  origin  from  the  sacred  mount.iin  of
Elrihim  with  which  in  a  later  myth  it  was  combined.  (Cp  j  achim
and  HoAZ.)  It  is  noteworthy  that  a  seven-branched  palm  is
represented  by  the  side  of  an  altar  on  an  old  Greek  vase  .
(Ohnefalsch-Richter,  h'yfiros,  pi.  155,  fig.  3).

2  Cp  PEF  Twenty-one  Years  IVork  in  the  Holy  Land,  154,
the  representation  upon  an  amethyst  reproduced  in  Reland,  De
Sfiol.,  facing  p.  35,  also  ih.  facing  p.  42.  The  older  form  may  in
time  have  tended  toappro.ach  the  conventional  form  represented
upon  the  arch  of  Titus,  which  agrees  with  later  Jewish  tradition.
This  form,  resembling  a  trident  in  its  oiitline,  is  especially  noted
by  Jos.  .-IS  a  novelty  (B/  vii.  5  5).  For  illustrations  of  the  latter
variety  see  Martigny,  Diet.  Ant.  Chr/t.  ('77)  113 ;  the  plates  in
Calmet's  Dictionary  ;  and  one  at  Tabariyeh  (Perrot-Chipiez,  .,^ r/
in  Jud.  1 250).

647


T^s  d.\rjO€ia^,  K.  TTJt  irlffTeus)  and  measured  by  it  (cp
A.-ai'oi'ccrat  in  Ptolemy's  Letter  to  Flora,  circa  200  A.  D. ,
in  Holtzmann,  p.  115/.),  or  perhaps  underlying  it  ;  or
(( )  the  Ixioks  taken  up  into  the  authoritative  catalogue
or  into  the  normal  number?  The  subject  is  discussed
with  full  references  to  the  literature  in  Holtzmann,  pp.
142  ^  It  is  not  improbable  that  the  word  passed
through  various  phases  of  meaning  in  course  of
time.

The  idea  involved  is  clearly  fixed  ;  0f6irv€VffTai  ypa<pai
(.\mphilochius,  ofi.  395),  iriaTtvOivra  dtia  flvai  ^ifiXla
(.\thanasius,  ut  sup.)  are  expressions  concurrently  used
to  convey  the  same  meaning.  It  was,  as  we  saw  alxjve,
a  loan  from  Judaism,  and  within  the  Christian  domain
origin.ally  applied  only  to  the  sacred  b<X)ks  of  the
synagogue  —  the  OT.  So  already  in  the  NT  itself  (2
'Tim.  3 16).  The  doctrine  of  the  synagogue  was  that  all
the  writings  included  in  its  canon  had  their  origin  in
divine  inspiration,  and  that  it  was  God  who  spoke  in
them  (Weber,  §  20  1 ).  This  canon,  with  the  doctrine
attached  to  it,  passed  over  to  the  Christian  church  and
became  its  sole  sacred  book,'  until  new  writings  of
Christian  origin  came  to  be  added,  and  the  Jewish
canon,  as  the  Old  Testament,  was  distinguished  from
the  New.

The  composite  expression  '  canonical  books '  has  an
analogue  in  the  usage  of  the  synagogue.  From  the  first
century  A.D.  such  books  are  designated
C'T.T  m  C'KSas  ( '  that  defile  the  hands '  :  -
Yiidayiin  3 2  4  5'  4  5  6  ;  cp  F.duyoth 5 3,  and

1  But  see  also  below,  gj  57-59.  '  See  below,  g  40.

8  See  below,  (  53.

648


3.  Hebrew

terms.


CANON

WcIkt,  §21  i). Of  this  surprising  expression  still  more
surprising  explanations  have  Ixx-n  oftcrecl.

Thus  (<i)  Huhl  still  prtfcrs  iliat  drawn  fri)m  VaJayiiii,  456,
accDnlinK  to  which  the  drsiKiiation  was  intriidct)  to  prevent  pro-
fane uses  of  worn-out  synaKO^uc  rolls.  (/-)  Wel)cr,  Strack,  C
H.  H.  Wright,  and  Wildclxjcr  adopt  that  suKgested  hy  Shahbath,
13/*,  14a.  According  to  this  the  object  wjis  to  secure  that,  a»
unclean,  the  siicrcd  writings  should  always  l>e  kept  apart,  and
thus  kept  from  harm  such  as  might  arise,  e.g.,  if  they  were  kept
near  consecrated  corn,  and  so  exposed  to  attack  from  mice,  f )
A.  (leiger  (Hinlerlnsifiu  Scliri/Uti,  A  14)  actually  maintains  that
only  such  rolls  as  had  l>cen  written  on  the  skins  of  unclean  beasts
were  intended  to  be  declared  unclean.

All  such  explanations  are  disposed  of  by  Yadavim
84.  where  there  is  a  sixxial  discussion  of  the  question
whether  the  unwritten  margins  and  outer  coverings  of
sacred  rolls  detile  the  hands.  I'nder  none  of  the  aljove
explanations  could  any  such  c|uestion  as  this  possibly
arise.  The  fact  that  detilement  only  of  the  hands  is
4.  Sanctitv  •''*"''''"'*^'  ^°  '^^  sacred  writings  demands
^'  moreattentionthan  it  has  hitherto  received.
Interpreted  in  positive  terms  this  can  mean  only  that
contact  with  them  invohes  a  ceremonial  washing  of  the
hands,  esiK'cially  as  the  ruling  in  the  matter  occurs  in
that  Mishna  treatise  which  relates  to,  and  is  n.^nied  from,
such  hand -washings.  The  expression  would  be  an
unnatural  one  if  it  implied  a  command  that  the  hands
should  l)e  washed  before  touching  (so  Fiirst,  p.  83).  As
enjoining  washing  a'ter  contact  it  is  ciuite  intelligible.
The  Pharisees  (under  protest  from  the  Sadducees  ;  cp
rW.  46)  attributed  to  the  sacred  writings  a  sanctitv  of
such  a  sort  that  whosoever  touched  them  was  not  allowed
to  touch  aught  else,  until  he  had  undergone  the  same
ritual  ablution  as  if  he  had  touched  something  unclean. '
The  s;ime  precept,  according  to  the  stricter  view,  applied
to  the  prayer  ribljiinds  on  the  iephi/Dm  (Vad.'H^;  see
Fronti.kts,  end).  To  this  detilement  of  the  hands
the  correlative  idea  is  that  of  holiness  ;  "^  Vxjth  ciualities
are  attributed  together,  but  only  to  a  very  limited  numljer
of  writings,  namely  the  canonical  (cp  Yad.Zs).  See
also  Ci.EA.v,  §  3.

A. OLD TESTAMENT.

I. E.XTINT  AND  AKKANGEMKNT  OK  TIIK  OT  CANON.

—  The  extent  of  the  OT  canon,  so  far  as  the  synagogue
6 No of '^  concerned,  is  exactly  what  we  find  in  our
'books' '^*-"'"''^^^'  printed  texts  and  in  the  Protestant
translations. The  original  reckoning  of  the
synagogue,  however,  does  not  regard  the  books  as  thirty-
nine. The  twelve  nunor prophets  count  as  one  book
called  '  the  twelve,"  iry  c'W  (so  already  in  Haba  /iathra,
x-^b,  i5(Ztext),  Dodekapropheton  ;  soalso  Sanmel,  Kings,
and  Chronicles  ;  whilst  Ezra  and  Nehemiah  form  one
book  of  Ezra. Thus  1 1  -t-  3  -(- 1  =  1 5  have  to  be  deducted
from  our  39,  leaving  only  24.^ See  ^  w  ff.

The  twenty-four  canonical  books  fall  into  three  main

divisions: ,nin  (the law)  with five  books, c"k-3: (the

6.  ClaSBi-  P''0P'i<^'s)  ^''h  eight, and  o'^ina  (the  writ-

fication '"''^^' ^=i&'oSrapha) with eleven. ■• The

prophets consist of four historical books

(Joshua,  Judges,  Samuel,  Kings)  and  four  prophetical

( Isaiah,  Jeremiah,  Ezekiel,  and  the  Twelve  Minor). Since

the  Massoretic  period  (cp  Strack,  /^A'A'-*  "439)  the  first

group  has borne  the  name  of  d':ic-kt  C'N'3J  ( '  former

prophets') to distinguish it from the second, c-k"2j

C':T'.nK  ( '  latter  prophets  '). Among  the  Hagiographa  a

distinct  group  is  formed  by  the  five  (festal)  '  rolls ' — ~an

J  .SeeWRS,  Rel.  Sem.n\  ,6,,  452. He  well  adds  th.-it  the

nigh  priest  on  the  Day  of  .Atonement  washed  his  flesh  with  water,

not  only  when  he  put  on  the  holy  garments  of  the  day,  but  also

when  he  put  them  off(I.ev.  1(124  ; )Vw<i,  74).

'  With  this  corresponds  the  Mishnic  name  of  the  canon  «3n3
ITip.l.  while  the  names  isort.  DTao  tacitly  supplement  the  idea
of  holiness.  To  these  exactly  answer  the  NT  expressions  ypa<^l
oyiat,  Ifpo  ypoMuara,  y\  ypai^ij,  ax  ypa<f>ai.  For  other  names  sec
below,  and  for  fuller  details  cp  Strack,  438  /

*  Hence  a  very  common  old  name  for  the  collection,  still  fre-
quently in  use  :  '  the  twenty-four  books,'  C'IBO  nyaiKl  2'"li."V,
written  also  C"1E0  V  2-

♦  Hence  the  old  collective  title  D>3inD1  D'K'ZJ  niW  with  its
Massoretic  contraction  -yn-

649


CANON

n^Vjo — printed  in  modern  impressions  in  the  order  of  the
feasts  at  which  they  are  read  in  the  synagogue  :  Canticles
(Passover).  Kuth  (Pentecost).  I-imentations  (9th  Ab.
Destruction  of  Jeru.salem),  Ecclesi;istcs  (  Talwrnacles).
hjither  (  Purim ).  Only  once  ( in  the  liaraytha '  Uerachoth,
Ijb)  do  we  find  the  three  larger  |j<jetical  b<x)ks— Psalms,
Proverbs,  and  Job  —  grouped  together  as  c'l'nj  C'lw:.
and  the  three  smaller—Cai'iicles,  ixclesiastes,  I^-imenta-
tions  as  c';cp  C".":in3.  Finally,  Daniel.  Ezra,  Chronicles
close  the  list.

Compass  and threefold division of the canon are
already  taken  ;is  fully  settled  in  a  very  old  and  authori-
7 Uncertain ''''''^'^  passage  in  the  tradition of  the
order  synagogue, viz. the liaraytha liaba

Bathra,  i^b  i^a  ;  but  as  to  the  order
of  the  books  within  their  several  divisions  the  same
passage  gives  a  decision  for  the  first  time.  The  ex-
planation of  this  is  that  in  the  oldest  times  the  sjicred
writings  were  not  copied  into  continuous  co<iices.  Each
book  had  a  separate  roll  to  itself.'^  Accordingly,  in  the
preceding  Baraytha  (fiaba  liathra,  iT,b),  we  find  the
question  started  whether  it  be  jx-rmissible  to  write  the
entire  Holy  Scriptures,  or  even  the  eight  prophets,  on  a
single  roll.  On  the  strength  of  some  precedent  or  other
the  (|uestion  is  answered  in  the  afiirmative  ;  and  this
leads  up  to  the  further  question  as  to  the  order  in  which
the  single  Ixwks  in  the  second  and  the  third  divisions

I  ought  to  \y<i  written.  This  plainly  shows  that  there  was
as  yet  on  the  subject  no  fixed  tradition,  and  therefore  too
great  importance  ought  not  to  be  attached  either  to  the

I  Mishnic  determination  of  the  question  or  to  the  departure
from  Mishnic  u.sage  which  we  meet  with.*  Both,  how-
ever, are  worthy  of  attention.

The  order  of  the  prophets  proper,  according  to  our
passage, ought  to be: Jeremiah, Ezekiel, Isaiah, the

8  Pronhets '"*^'^'^- "^'^  jx)silion  of  Isaiah  seems  to

^  ■  have  struck  even  the  teachers  of  the
Gemara  as  remarkable,  and  is  explained  by  them  in  a
fanciful  way.  The  Massora  gives  Isaiah  the  first  place,
and  in  this  it  is  followed  by  the  MSS  of  Spanish  origin
(as  by  the  printed  texts),  while  the  Oerman  and  French
MSS  adhere  to  the  Talmudic  order.  Just  Ix.-cause  of
its  departure  from  strict  chronology,  we  are  justified  in
assuming  that  the  Talmudic  order  rests  on  old  and
good  tradition.  We  may  safely  venture,  therefore,  to
make  use  of  it  in  the  attempt  to  answer  the  (|uestion  of
the  origin  not  only  of  the  individual  books  but  also  of
the  canon.

For  the  first  books  of  the  Hagiographa, the  order
given in  our  printed  texts  —  Psalms, Proverbs, Job —

9  Haeio-  ^^'^''^^  '^  ^^^^  '^^  ^^^  (ierman  and  French
irraDha  •^'•'''■'^'  B'^es  place  in  our  passage  to  this
*^  P  *  order:  Ruth,  Psalms.  Job,  Proverbs.  .Sup-
posing this  to  be  the  original  place  of  the  Book  of  Ruth,
we  might  account  for  its  later  change  of  [xjsition  by
a  desire  to  group  together  the  five  festal  rolls.  This
explanation,  however,  is  impossible  for  the  reason  that
the  Massora  and  the  Spanish  MSS  put  Chronicles  in-
stead of  Ruth  in  the  first  place  and  lx;fore  the  Psalter.
Of  course,  the  same  purpose  is  served  by  either  arrange-
ment:  each  of  them  prefixes  to  the  (Davidic)  Psalter
a  lx)ok  which  helps  to  explain  it.  The  liook  of  Ruth
performs  this  service  inasnmch  as  it  concludes  with
David's  genealogical  tree  and  closes  w  ilh  his  name  ;  and
the  liook  of  Chronicles  does  so  in  a  still  higher  degree,
inasmuch  as,  in  addition  to  the  genealogy  ( i  Ch.  1<)ff.).
it  gives  an  account  of  David's  life,  particularly  of  his
elatx)rate  directions  for  the  temple  service  and  temple
music. Thus  the  claim  of  the  Psalter  to  the  first  place

1  Bara>nha  (J<n""^2)  is  a  Mishna  tradition  which  has  not  been
taken  into  the  c.nnon  of  the  Mishna,  but  comes  from  the  same
period  (about  200  A.n.).  On  the  very  important  passage  referred
to  cp  Marx, Traditio  etc.

"  The  Law  w.is  an  exception  ;  its  five  books  as  a  rule  consti-
tuted but  one  roll,  although  the  five  fifths  (prOW)  were  to  be
met  with  also  separately  (cp  Mei^i/la,  27a).

•'  Cp  the  excellent  synoptic  table  in  Ryle  {Cohch  o/OT,  281X


CANON

is  only  confirmed  by  both  variations  (that  of  the  Talmud
and  that  of  the  Nlassora)  from  the  usual  order. ^  On
the  other  hand,  the  Massora  and  the  Spanish  MSS
sujJixjrt  the  order,  Psalms,  Job,  I'roverbs  (Job  Ijcfore
Proverbs),  which  therefore  must  be  held  to  be  the  older
arrangement,  the  other  being  explained  by  the  desire  to
make  Solomon  come  immediately  after  David.

The  arrangement  of  the  five  "rolls"  in  the  order  of
their  feasts  is  supported  only  by  the  German  and  the
French  MSS.  The  M;issora  and  the  Spanish  MSS
have  —  Kuth,  Cant.  Keel.  Lam.  Esth.,  whilst  Baba
Bathra,  after  transjwsing  Ruth  in  the  manner  we  have
seen,  gives  the  order — Eccl.  Cant.  Lam.,  then  intro-
duces Daniel,  and  closes  the  list  with  P^^sther.  We
may  venture  to  infer  from  this  ( i )  that  the  arrangement
of  the  Megilloth  in  the  order  of  their  feasts  in  the
ecclesiastical  year  is  late  and  artificial  ;  (2)  that  about
the  year  200  .\.D.  they  had  not  even  been  constituted
a  definite  group  ;  (3)  that  the  inversion  of  the  order  of
Daniel  and  Esther,  and  the  removal  of  Ruth  from  the
head  of  the  list,  were  probably  designed  to  effect  this,
the  position  of  Daniel  before  Esther  having  thus  a  claim
to  t>e  regarded  as  the  older  ;''■  and  (4)  that  the  original
position  of  the  Book  of  Ruth  is  quite  uncertain,  because
the  first  place  among  the  rolls  may  have  been  assigned
to  it  by  the  Massora  simply  because  it  had  been  deposed
from  the  first  place  among  the  Hagiographa.  We  may,
further,  regard  it  as  probable  that  Proverbs  was  origin-
ally connected,  as  in  Baba  B.,  with  the  other  Solomonic
writings.  Finally,  it  may  be  taken  as  perfectly  certain
that  Ezra  and  Chronicles  closed  the  list.-*

The  definition,  division,  and  arrangement  of  books
as  given  above,  which  rests  on  real  tradition,  and  must
Th  T"3nr  constitute  the  basis  for  our  subsec|uent
investigations,  is  violently  at  variance
with  that  of  the  LXX.  It  will  be  sufficient  merely  to
indicate  the  differences  here,  for,  as  compared  with  the
canon  of  the  synagogue,  that  of  the  LXX  represents
only  a  secondary  stage  in  the  development.

(i)  The  arrangement  of  the  LXX  is  apparently  in-
tended to  be  based  on  the  contents  of  the  books.  The
poetical  books  are,  on  the  whole,  regarded  as  didactic
in  character,  the  Prophets  proper  as  mainly  predictive,
whilst  the  Law  leads  up  to  the  historical  books  and  is
closely  connected  with  the  Former  Prophets.  As  the
Prophets  are  placed  at  the  end,  the  progress  of  the
collection  is  normal — from  the  past  (historical  books)
to  the  present  (didactic  books)  and  the  future  (books
of  prophecy).

Certain,  however,  of  the  miscellaneous  collection  which  forms
the  Hagiographa — those,  namely,  that  are  historical — are  trans-
ferred to  the  first  division,  where  a  place  is  assigned  them  on
chronological  principl'js.  Ruth  (cp  1  1)  is  inserted  immediately
after  Judges,  whilst  Chronicles,  Ezra,  and  Esther  are  appended
at  the  end.  Lamentations,  on  the  other  hand,  regarded  as  the
work  of  Jeremiah  (cp  2  Ch.  3625  and  the  opening  words  of  the
book  in  (5),  is  transferred  to  the  third  division  (prophetic  books)
and  appended  to  Jeremiah  ;  whilst  Daniel  closes  the  entire  collec-
tion. Lastly,  Job,  regarded  as  a  purely  historical  book,*  serves
to  effect  the  transition  from  the  historical  to  the  didactic  writings.

Of  the  prophetical  books,  the  Dodecapropheton  heads  the  list
(in  a  somewhat  varying  order  of  the  individual  books),  pre-
sumably on  account  nf  the  higher  antiquity  of  the  writings  which
open  it.

(2)  Samuel  and  Kings  together  are  divided  into  four
books  of  Kings.  Chronicles  is  divided  into  two  books,
as  is  also  (subsequently)  Ezra.  (3)  In  varying  degrees
new  writings  unknown  to  the  Hebrew  canon  are  inter-
polated.

1  Cp  also  2  Mace.  2  13/  ;  Lk.  24  44.

2  This  is  supported  by  Jerome  in  Prol.  Gal.  (cp  the  text  in
Ryle,  287  ff.).  Other  variations,  it  is  true,  occur  in  the  same
author.

3  It  should  be  added  that  the  MSS  show  the  utmost
irregularity  in  their  arrangement  of  the  Hagiographa;  cp  Ryle,
Excursus  C,  aSiyC,  and,  for  some  important  details,  A.  Kahlfs,
'  Alter  u.  Heimat  der  vaticanischeii  Bibelhandschrift,"  GOJV,
1899,  Heft  I  (Philol.-hUt.  Klasse).

*  There  is,  however,  considerable  vacillation  as  to  its  position.
For  other  variations,  which  are  very  numerous,  cp  Ryle,  213
^. ,  and  the  table  appended  to  281.

651


CANON

The  very  various  arrangements  of  the  Hebrew  canon

which  have  been  adopted  in  the  Christian  Church  can

,, T>,.+i, J ^11  be  traced  back  to  the  LXX,  with

11.  Rutn  and  , ,  ,  .

T^^  more  or  less  far-reaching  corrections

biised  on  the  canon  of  the  synagogue.
Among  all  the  divergences  of  the  LXX  from  the  syna-
gogue arrangement,  there  is  only  one  concerning  which
it  is  worth  while  considering  whether  it  may  not  jx)ssibly
represent  the  original  state  of  things  as  against  the  syna-
gogue tradition  :  Ruth  is  made  to  follow  Judges,  and
Lamentations  Jeremiah.  If  the  actual  state  of  the  case
be  that  these  two  books  ranked  originally  among  the
projjhets,  but  were  afterwards  transferred  to  the  Hagio-
grajiha,  the  historical  value  of  the  threefold  division  of
the  canon  is  very  largely  impaired.  Now,  this  order
of  the  books  is  supported  by  the  oft-recurring  reckoning
of  twenty-two  books  instead  of  twenty-four  (cp  above,
§  2),  a  reckoning  which  can  be  explained  only  on  the
assumption  that  Ruth  and  Lamentations  were  not
12  Josenhua  '^^""'^  separately,  being  regarded
.  dO  epnus.  ^^  integral  parts  of  Judges  and  Jere-
miah. Our  sole  Jewish  witness  to  this  is  Josephus  (c.
A  p.  i.  8  ;  circa  100  A.I). ).  He  gives  the  total  as  twenty-
two,  made  out  as  follows:  Moses,  5;  Prophets  after
Moses,  13  ;  hymns  to  God  and  precepts  for  men,  4.
The  last-named  category  doubtless  means  the  Psalms
and  the  three  Solomonic  writings.  Thus  Daniel,
Esther,  Ezra,  Chronicles,  and  even  Job,  are,  as  his-
torical books,  reckoned  with  the  prophets,  and  Ruth
and  Lamentations  are  not  counted  at  all  —  that  is
to  say,  they  are  included  in  Judges  and  Jeremiah. ^
Here  clearly  a  compromise  has  been  struck  be-
tween the  threefold  division  of  the  synagogue,  which
places  the  prophets  in  the  intermediate  position,  and
the  division  of  the  Alexandrians,  which  arranges  the
books  according  to  subjects.  The  Alexandrian  canon
is  obviously  in  view  also  in  the  pointed  addition  [/3t/i\ta]
t4  dLKaiws  wein<jT€viJiiva,'^  by  which  the  lx)oks  not  con-
tained in  the  canon  of  the  synagogue  are  excluded.
\\'e  may  conclude,  therefore,  that  also  the  reason  why
Ruth  and  Lamentations  are  not  reckoned  as  separate
books  is  that  the  LXX  is  followed  ;  and  thus  we  have
no  fresh  testimony  here.  There  is  a  further  remark
to  be  made.  That  the  seven  books  just  mentioned
should  be  removed  from  the  prophetic  canon,  if  they
once  were  there,  to  a  place  among  the  Hagiographa**
could  be  explained  only  by  a  desire  to  have  the  festal
rolls  beside  one  another.  In  the  oldest  tradition,  how-
ever, there  was  no  such  group  of  rolls  (see  above,  §  9).

The  supposed  motive,  therefore,  could


13.  Origin  of
No.  22.


not  have  been  operative.  On  the  other
hand,  the  number  twenty-two  has  an
artificial  and  external  motive,  not  indicated  by  Josephus,
but  mentioned  by  all  the  Church  fathers  from  Origen
downwards :  ■*  there  is  thus  one  book  for  each  letter  of
the  Hebrew  alphabet.  This  childish  fancy  is  carried  to
an  extreme  point  when  the  books  are  reckoned  as  twenty-
seven  (an  alternative  which  is  offered  by  Epiphanius  and
Jerome)  to  do  justice  to  the  five  final  letters  also :  the  books
of  Samuel,  Kings,  Chronicles,  and  Ezra  are  divided,
the  fifth  being  sujjplied  in  Epiphanius  by  Judges  and
Ruth,  in  Jerome  by  Jeremiah  and  Lamentations.  That
this  is  mere  arbitrary  trifling  is  obvious.

On  the  other  hand  Jerome  gives also the number
twenty-four  (Prol.  Gal.),  cautiously  describing  it  as  a
reckoning accepted by '  nonnulli,'


14.  Jerome,  etc.


Ruth  and  Lamentations  thus  being


t  For  various  blundering  attempts  to  put  another  meaning
on  the  canon  of  Josephus,  cp  Str.ick,  428,  Ryle,  166.  Briggs
(see  o/.  (■;■/.  below,  §  75,  p.  127  yC)  inclines  to  the  opinion  that
Josephus  did  not  recognise  as  canonioil  the  Song  of  Songs  and
Ecclesiastes. See,  on  this  {>oint,  below,  $  52^

*  The  word  6tla  after  iucaiia^  is  disallowed  by  Niese  as  an
interpolation.

3  A  thing  improbable  in  itself,  as  implying  a  degradation.
See  below,  §  43.

*  Cp  the  passages  in  Ryle,  221,  and  still  more  exhaustively
in  Strack,  435  ^.

652


CANON

counted  among  the  Hagiogrripha.  A  symbolical  sense,
b;»s«-<l  on  Rev.  4  4  10,  is  found  for  this  nuiiilK-r  also.  In  the
ProIogiU"  to  Danii-1 ,  however,  Icromc  adojits  24  as  the  only
reckoning  :  he  counts  5,  8,  and  11  books  to  each  of  the
divisions  respectively,  thouj;h  he  docs  not  mention  the
total.  Sup|)ort  is  given  to  the  liaraytha  Itaha  D.  14^,  i  ^a
in  like  manner  by  the  contcmi>orary  testimony  of  liera-
cholh  i-jh,  which  cjuotes  Cant.  Keel,  and  Lam.  as  '  writ-
ings," and  by  the  Targum  of  Jonathan  on  the  prophets,
where  Ruth  and  Lam.  are  wanting.  Finally,  our  oldest
witness — 4th  Esdras,  proliably  written  under  Domitian
(85-96  A.  I). ),  and  therefore  contemiwrary  with  Josephus
— represents  F",zra  as  writing  at  the  divine  command  94
books  (chap.  14) — i.e. ,  after  deduction  of  the  70  esoteric
book.s.  the  24  books  of  the  canon.*

The  number  twenty-two,  therefore,  certainly  comes
from  a  Jewi.sh  source  ;  but  it  is  a  mere  play  of  fancy.
The  original  place  of  Ruth  and  Lamentations,  accord-
ingly, was  in  the  third  part  of  the  canon.

II.  Tradition  relating  to  the  close  of  the
CANON. — Even had  there  been  a  binding  decision  of


16.  No


a  qualified  body  by  wliich  the  numlx-T


■. . .  of  books  (twenty-four)  was  declared

canonization.  ,^.  ^^,,^^,^^\  j.^,,  ,.^,1  other  books  wt

excluded  from  the  canon,  there  could  hardly  have  beeh
any  tradition  of  it.  According  to  the  idea  of  the  mean-
ing and  origin  of  canonicity  entertained  by  the  synagogue
(the  sole  custodian  of  tradition),  and  inherited  from  it  by
the  Christian  Church,  canonicity  dei)ends  on  inspiration,
and  this  attribute  each  of  the  twenty-four  books  brought
with  it  into  the  world  quite  indei)endently  of  any  ruling,
and  in  a  manner  that  unmistak.ably  distinguished  it  from
every  other  writing.  The  growth  of  the  canon  was
represented  as  being  like  that  of  a  plant ;  it  began
with  the  appearance  of  the  first  inspired  book,  and
closed  with  the  completion  of  the  last.  The  cjuestion
accordingly  was  simply  this :  When  was  the  latest
canonical  book  coni|X)sed?  or,  if  this  admits  of  being
answered.  Who  was  its  human  author?

To  this  question  the  tradition  of  the  synagogue  actually
offers  an  answer, — in  the  same  Daraytha  liaba  Hat  lira
\j\b  15a  in  which  the  order  of  the Prophets


16.  Baba
Bathra.


and  the  Writings  is  determined.  The  passage
proceeds  thus  :  —  '  And  who  WTote  them  ?  '
— and  names  the  writers  of  the  several  books  in  exact
chronological  see] uence.  The  last  of  them  is  Ezra.  With
him,  therefore  {i.e.,  according  to  traditional  chronology,
about  444  B.C.),  the  canon  closed. -

One  can  easily  understand  that,  once  Ezra  had  been
named  as  the  latest  author  of  any  biblical  book,  men
did  not  remain  content  with  the  assertion  (cjuite  correct,
if  we  admit  its  premises)  which  attributed  to  him  the
closing  of  the  canon  merely  de facto,  without  deliberate
act  or  puqxjse.  Rather  did  each  succeeding  age,
according  to  its  lights,  attribute  to  him  (or  to  his  time)
whatever  kind  of  intervention  it  conceived  to  be  neces-
sary in  order  to  secure  for  the  canon  a  regular  and
17 4  E  d  orderly  closing. The oldest form  of

this  kind  of  tradition,  so  far  as  known
to  us,  goes  back  earlier  by  a  whole  century  than  the
tradition  of  the  synagogue.  It  is  to  be  found  in  the
passage  of  4  Esdras  (chap.  14)  that  has  been  referred
to  already.^*  lizra  {v.  \%ff.)  prays  God  to  grant  him  by
his  Holy  Spirit  that  he  may  again  write  out  the  books

J  The  numbers  differ  in  the  various  forms  of  the  text.  Besides
04  we  find  904,  204,  84,  974.  All,  however,  agree  in  the  decisive
figure  4  ;  cp  Ryle,  156^  285.

■•  The  real  date  of  Ezra  and  the  promulgation  of  the  law
related  in  Neh.  8-10  will  be  con.sidered  elsewhere  (see  Chkon-
OLOGY,  i  14;  Nemenuah).  The  results  of  the  present  article
would  not  be  altered  es.sentially  by  fixing  it,  e.g.,  in  the  year
427  or  even  397,  instead  of  444.  In  what  follow*,  (herefore,
444  B.C.  means  simply  the  date  of  Neh.  8-10.  A  full  discus-sion
of  the  point  and  a  survey  of  recent  literature  will  be  found  in  C.
F.  Kent,  A  History  o/the  Jetfish  people  during  tlu  Babylonian,
Persian,  and  Grrek periods.  New  York,  1899,  pp.  195^  354.

•  For  what  follows  cp  Ryle.  Excursus  A,  239  ff.,  where  a
very  copious  literature  with  fully  translated  quotations  is  (jivcn.

653


CANON

(here  called  'the  law,"  iorah.  in  which  perhaps  lingers
a  trace  of  an  oliler  form  of  tradition)  which  had  Ixwn
burnt  (with  the  temple,  one  understands).  Cjo<l  bids
him  take  to  himself  five  comjxinions,  and  in  forty  days
and  nights  he  dictates  to  them  ninety-four  Ixjoks  (see
alxjve,  §  14),  of  which  seventy  are  esoteric  writings,  and
the  remaining  twenty-four  are  the  canon  of  the  OT.  Of
this  legend  no  further  trace  has  hitherto  l>cen  found  in
the  remains  of  Jewish  literature  ; '  but  w  ithin  the  Christian
Church  it  shows  itself  as  early  as  the  time  of  Irenaeus,
frctiuently  recurs  in  certain  of  the  fathers  (so  Tertullian,
Clem.  Al.,  Orig. ,  ICuseb. ,  Jerome,  etc.  ),  and  is  prevalent
throughout  the  scholastic  ix,-riod,  although  there  it  is
weakened  by  references  to  the  powers  of  ordinary  human
memory.

The  fx;riod  of  the  humanists  and  of  the  reformation
extinguished  this  as  well  as  many  other  legends  ;  *  but
,_,  if  the  old  legend  disap|xsired,  it  was  only

^ .  to  make  way  for  .t  mo<lern  one,  not  mystic

_  , but  rationalistic  in  character. This  latter

y  ag  gu  .  Qi,t;,i„^.(i  credence  through  ICIias  I^-vita
{ob.  1549),  who  says**  that  Ezra  tuid  the  men  of  the  great
synagoi^ue  (nSnjn  nc:3  Tzk),  among  other  things,  had
united  in  one  volume  the  twenty-four  lK)oks  (which  until
then  had  circulated  separately)  and  had  classilied  them
into  the  three  divisions  alxjve  mentioned,  determining
also  the  order  of  the  Prophets  and  the  Writings
(differently,  it  is  true,  from  the  Talmuflic  doctors  in
Baba  Bathra).  This  assertion  satisfied  the  craving  of
the  times  for  a  duly  constituted  lx)dy,  proceeding  in  a
deliberate  manner.  Accordingly  the  statement  of  Elias
Levita,  especially  after  it  had  been  homologated  by  J.
Buxtorf  the  elder  in  his  Tiberias  (1620),  became  the
authoritative  doctrine  of  the  orthodoxy  of  the  seventeenth
and  eighteenth  centuries.  To  it  were  added,  as  self-
evident,  though  Ivcvita  said  nothing  of  them,  the  authori-
tative decree  (Ilottinger),  and  the  separation  of  the  non-
canonical  writings  (so  already  Huxtorf,  and  after  him
Leusden  and  Carpzov).*

It  is  vain  to  seek  for  the  tradition  on  which  Elias
Levita  based  his  rciirescntation.  The  Talmud,  which
j  says  a  great  deal  about  '  the  men  of  the  great  synagogue,"
has  not  a  word  to  say  alxjut  this  action  of  theirs  w  ith
reference  to  the  whole  l)ody  of  Scrii)ture.  The  medi«;val
Rabbins  also  touch  on  the  matter  but  lightly.  We  con-
clude therefore  that,  to  suit  the  needs  of  his  time,  Levita
merely  inferred  such  an  action  from  the  existence  of  the
body  in  question.*

The  evidence  for  the  very  existence  of  a  body  of  the
kind  reciuircd,  however,  is  extremely  slender.  From  the
^. .  middle of the seventeenth century it

t^  "**  was  continually  disputed  anew.  If  even
na  ure.  ^^.^  moderns  must  admit  that  there  was

a  body  of  some  kind,  the  kind  of  existence  that  we  can
accord  to  it  supplies  the  strongest  refutation  of  the  state-
ment of  Elias  Levita.  The  cjuestion  as  to  what  we  are
to  understand  by  '  the  men  of  the  great  synagogue '  (or

Strack  gives  the  originals  of  the  most  important  pa-S-sages ;  cp
also  Fabricius,  Codex  I'seudepigraphus  IT  1  (i7'3)i  »>53^.
2(1722),  2S9  j^

1  Cp,  however,  the  elucidation  of  the  passage  in  Baba  B.
nb  15a,  below,  I  21.

2  See,  for  the  attacks  directed  against  it  on  rationalistic
grounds  in  the  Protestant  as  well  as  in  the  Catholic  church,
Kyle,  247 /?:

3  See  third  preface  to  ,tfassorelh  hammassoretk  (1538,  ed.
Ginsburg,  1867,  p.  120);  cp  Str.ick,  416.

*  Cp  the  p.-issages  quoted  in  Kyle,  i^x  ff-  It  should  be
added  that  the  same  step  had  l)cen  taken  already  in  the  late
post-Talmudic  tractate  Aboth  de  K.  Xathan  (chap.  1).  where  it
is  said  of  '  the  men  of  the  great  synagogue  '  that  they  decided  on
the  reception  of  Proverbs,  Canticles,  and  Kcclesiasles,  again.st
objections  that  had  been  urged  (see  the  passages  in  C.  H.  H.
Wright,  11).  We  shall  see  below  that  an  artificial  antedating
can  l>e  clearly  demonstrated  here.

i  When  Iy;vita  points  out  that  the  order  of  the  Prophets  and
the  Writings,  as  fixed  there,  was  diflTcrent  from  that  in  Baba  B.,
this  only  goes  to  show  that  the  sages  of  the  Mishna  still  found
something  for  them  to  give  decisions  a)>out.  Elias  Lcviia  forgets
that  these  sages  found  the  books  written  on  separate  rolls,  and
that,  therefore,  there  was  not  \et  any  order  to  fix. Cp  above,  §  7.

654


CANON

rather  '  assembly ')  in  the  sense  in  which  the  expression
was  originally  used,  may  be  regarded  as  now  fully
cleared  up.  Hy  a  brilliant  application  and  criticism  of
all  that  tradition  had  to  say  and  all  the  work  of  his
modern  predecessors,  Kuencn  ^  demonstrated  that  tiiis
'  synagogue '  is  no  other  than  the  great  assembly  at
Jerusalem  described  in  Neh.  8-10 :  the  assembly  in
which  the  whole  txidy  of  the  j^oople,  under  the  presidency
of  Nchemiah  and  through  the  signatures  of  its  re|jre-
sentatives,  pledged  itself  to  acceptance  of  the  law-book
of  Ezra.  This  assembly,  as  the  latest  authority  men-
tioned in  the  OT,  was  afterwards,  by  the  tradition  of  the
synagogue,  made  responsible  for  all  those  proceedings
of  a  religious  nature  not  referred  to  in  the  OT,  which,
nevertheless,  so  far  as  known,  dated  from  a  period
earlier  than  the  tradition  laid  down  in  the  Talmud.
Since  this  last,  however,  with  its  most  ancient  (and
almost  mythical)  authorities,  the  five  '  pairs'  and  Anti-
gonus  of  Socho,  does  ncjt  go  back  farther  than  the  second
century  B.C.,  there  gradually  grew  out  of  the  assembly,
whose  meetings  began  and  closed  within  the  seventh
month  of  a  single  year,  a  standing  institution  to  which
people  in  that  later  time,  each  according  to  his  needs
and  his  chronological  theories,  attributed  a  duration
extending  over  centuries.  This  was  made  all  the  easier
by  the  chronology  of  the  Talmud  bringing  the  date  of
the  Persian  ascendency  too  low  by  some  150  years,  and
thus  bringing  the  beginning  and  the  end  closer  together. -
The  activity  as  regards  the  canon,  then,  which  Elias
Levita  and  his  followers  ascribe  to  '  the  men  of  the  great
svnagogue,  implies  for  the  most  part  a  comparatively
late  and  false  conception  of  the  character  of  that  sup-
posed body,  ^^■hat  ancient  tradition  has  to  say  about
it  remains  well  within  the  limits  of  time  assigned  to  it  by
criticism.  In  Daba  B.  14^  15^,  '  the  men  of  the  great
synagogue '  have  assigned  to  them  a  place  immediately
before  Ezra  ;  they  write  Ezekiel,  the  Uodecapropheton,
Daniel,  and  Esther.  When,  therefore,  Ezra  had  con-
tributed his  share  (l^zra  and  Chronicles),  forming  the
closing  portion  of  the  series  of  the  twenty-four  t)ooks,
the  canon  was  forthwith  complete.  It  is  evident  (i)
that  here  the  activity  of  '  the  men  of  the  great  synagogue  '
docs  not  extend  below  Ezra's  time;  and  (2)  that  it
extends  only  to  four  books,  not  to  the  whole  canon.
Therewith  the  absolute  untenableness  of  Levita's  as-
sertion becomes  apparent.  Expedients  have  been
'W  'f  '  ""^sorted  to  in  vain;  as,  for  example,
fh"t  ^  that  2T\-2,  'to  write,'  means  in  the
01  DOOKS.  Baraytha  to  '  collect, '  or  to  '  transcribe
and  circulate,'  or  both  together  (cp  Marx,  41).  'The
writer '  of  the  Mishna  most  certainly  means  the  author  of
the  books — so  far  as  there  can  be  a  question  of  authorship
where,  in  the  last  resort,  the  author  is  the  Holy  Spirit.
Of  authorship  nothing  but  writing  is  left.  This,  accord-
ingly, is  the  sense  assumed  by  Gemara  and  by  rabbinical
exegesis.  What  we  are  told  concerning  '  the  men  of
the  great  synagogue '  is  not  more  startling  than  it  is  to
learn  that  Ilezekiah  and  his  companions  wrote  Isaiah,
Proverbs,  Canticles,  and  Ecclesiastes, — books  of  which
tradition  is  unanimous  in  saying  that  the  last  two  were

t  Over  de  mnnnen  tier  groote  Synagoge  (.\msterdam,  1876),
translated  into  German  liy  K.  BuJde  in  his  edition  of  Kuenen's
collected  essays  {Gcsamiiiflte  Abhandl.,  1894,  p.  \(i\ff.').

-  Kuenen's  proof  has,  in  Great  Britain,  been  accepted  (among
others)  by  Robertson  Smith  (OT/Cl:-)  169/),  Driver  (IntrodA^
xxxiii),  and  (at  least  in  all  essentials)  by  Ryle,  to  whose  very  care-
ful Excursus  A  (239-272)  the  reader  is  especially  referred.  It  has
indeed  found  an  uncompromising  opponent  in  C.  H.  H.  Wright  ,
(^Koheleth,  5  ff".  475^),  whose  arguments,  however,  amount  to
little  more  than  this  —  the  necessity  (which  in  fact  prodiiced
the  legend)  for  some  corporate  body  by  whom  the  religious
duties  of  that  time  could  have  been  discharged.  This,  however,
cannot  convert  what  is  demonstrably  legend  into  history.  What-
ever has  to  be  conceded  is  granted  already  by  Kuenen  {Ges.
Abh.  I156,  158);  and  writers  like  Strack  (PRE(%  18  310,  foot-
note*) are  skilful  enough  to  reconcile  the  demand  for  such
'organised  powers'  between  Ezra  and  Christ  with  Kuenen's
results.  The  most  recent  apology  for  the  tradition  is  that  of  S.
Krauss  ('The  Great  Synod,'  JQR,  Jan.  '98,  p.  347^)-  Of
course  he  does  not  defend  the  theory  of  Elias  Levita.

65s


CANON

wholly,  and  the  second  in  great  measure,  written  by
Solomon  two  centuries  before  Hezekiah.  Here,  in  fact,
it  is  the  miraculous  that  is  deliberately  related.  The
meaning  is  that  .Solomon  had  only  spoken  (cp  i  K.  5  12/. )
what  is  contained  in  these  books,  and  that  200  years
later,  divine  inspiration  enabled  the  men  of  Hezekiah  to
write  it  out,  and  so  make  it  into  canonical  books.  By
exactly  the  same  operation  '  the  men  of  the  great  syna-
gogue '  were  enabled  to  write  out  what  an  Amos  and  a
Hosea,  a  Micah  and  a  Nahum,  and  so  forth  had  spoken
in  the  name  of  God.  There  is  nothing  to  surprise  us
about  such  a  view  as  this,  if  we  remember  what  we  have
already  found  in  connection  with  4  Esdras  (above,  §  14).
In  the  present  instance,  indeed,  it  is  only  a  portion  of
the  OT  that  comes  into  question,  not  the  whole  mass  as
in  4  Esdras  ;  but,  on  the  other  hand,  in  4  Esdras  it  is
only  the  reproduction  of  books  that  had  been  lost  that
is  spoken  of,  whilst  here  it  is  their  very  composition.'

That  stories  such  as  these  should  ever  have  passed
current  as  real  historical  tradition  resting  u[X)n  facts  is
surprising  enough. Almost  more  astonish-


21.  Origin
of  fancy.


ing  is  it  that  such  baseless fancies  should
not  yet  have  l^een  abandoned,  definitely  and
for  good,  by  the  theology  of  the  Reformed  Churches.

Whether  the  tradition  is  genuine  need  no  longer  be
asked.  The  only  (juestion  is,  How  was  it  possible  that
the  Mishnic  doctors,  and  perhaps  those  who  immedi-
ately preceded  them,  arrived  at  such  a  representation?
This  question  in  some  cases  already  greatly  exercised
the  exegetes  of  the  Gemara,  and  even  led  them  to
attempted  corrections;  and  Rashi  [ob.  1105)  gives  a
solution  of  some  of  the  knottiest  points  which,  if  we  are
to  believe  Strack,-  represents  the  view  of  the  Baraytha.
According  to  this  explanation,  Ezekiel,  Daniel,  and
Esther  did  not  write  their  own  books,  because  they
lived  in  exile,  and  outside  the  borders  of  the  Holy  Land
it  was  impossible  for  any  sacred  book  to  be  written.
Even,  however,  if  this  view  had  some  element  of  truth
in  it,  it  hardly  meets  the  main  point.  The  writing  of
each  book  the  scribes,  as  was  natural  to  their  order,
sought  to  assign  to  a  writer  like  themselves,  a  veritable
S(>/>her(see  Scribe),  and  attributed  the  authorship  of  any
book  only  to  one  to  whom  writing  could  be  assigned  on
the  authority  of  a  proof  text.  In  the  case  of  books
whose  reputed  authors  could  not  be  shown  to  have
been  sophh-Jm,  the  authorship  was  attributed  to  the
writers  of  such  other  books  as  stood  nearest  to  them  in
point  of  time.

That  Moses  was  a  scribe  was  held  to  be  shown  by  Dt.  31  9  24
(the  P.ook  of  Job  also  was  attributed  to  him  on  account  of  its
supposed  antiquity),  and  the  same  is  true  of  Joshua  (Josh.  24  26).
Similar  proof  was  found  for  Samuel  in  i  S.  10  25,  and  to  him
accordingly  w.-is  assigned,  not  only  the  book  that  bears  his
name,  but  also  Judges  and  Ruth.  In  the  case  of  David,  if  the
words  1S^7  in  2  S.  1  18  were  not  enough,  there  was  at  all  events
sufficient  proof  in  i  Ch.  23^  and  especially  in  28  11  ;  means
were  found  also  for  reconciling  the  tradition  that  he  wrote
the  whole  Psalter  with  the  tradition  (oral  or  written)  which
assigned  certain  psalms  to  other  authors.  It  was  declared  that
he  wrote  the  psalms,  but  '"1)  7j^  of  those  other  writers.  Of
Solomon  all  that  was  said  in  i  K.  5i2  was  that  he  spoke,  not
that  he  tvrote ;  but  no  one  felt  at  any  loss,  for  in  Prov.  25  i
the  production  of  a  portion  of  his  Hook  of  Proverbs  is  attri-
buted to  the  Men  0/  Hezekiah,  king  p/  Judah.  These  genuine
scribes  were  utili.sed  to  the  utmost.  They  had  ascribed  to  them
not  only  all  the  Solomonic  books,  but  also  the  book  of  their
contemporary  I.saiah,  although  Is.  8 1  might  well  have  been
taken  as  saying  something  for  the  prophet  himself.  Whether  in
this  in.stance  some  special  cause  contributed  to  the  result,  or
whether  it  was  merely  that  prophet  and  scribe  had  at  any  cost  to
be  kept  .separate,  it  is  impossible  to  .say.  For  Jeremiah,  the
one  prophet  in  the  narrower  sense  of  the  word  amongst  those
who  are  named,  Jer.  36  spoke  too  distinctly  to  be  ignored  ;  that
Kings  also  should  have  been  attributed  to  him  is  at  once  .suffi-
ciently explained  by  2  K.  24  i8,  and  chap.  25  compared  with  Jer.
52.  Next  in  order  as  biblical  authors  come  '  the  men  0/  the
great  synagogue,'  who,  as  contemporaries  of  Ezra  the  scribe  /ar
excellence  (himself  also  one  of  their  number)  but  at  the  same

1  That  the  two  legends  have  an  intimate  connection  is  by  no
means  improbable.

2  Op.  cit.  418,  with  the  quotation  there  given  ;  cp  also
Ryle,  263/

656


CANON

time  also  as  sif^atories  of  the  art  in  Nch.  10  i,  were  expressly
called  to  this.  Why  K/ckicI  (the  Ncrilw,  if  any  scril»e  there  was
aniunk;  the  pruphets),  to  whom  the  act  of  wntint;  is  re{>catc(lly
attribtitcU  (:)7  16^  43").  ■■•hould  not  have  heen  credited  with
his  own  hook,  may  t>crhaps  he  rightly  explained  by  Kashi.  The
twelve  prophets  could  not  have  written  severally  their  own
books,  fwcause  all  the  books  together  form  (see  g  6)  biit  one
book  (a  somewhat  different  turn  is  Kiven  to  this  in  Kashi),  and
as  the  latest  of  them  belonged  to  the  period  of  the  great  syna-
gogue, and,  indeed,  according  to  tradition,  were  actually
memljcrs  of  that  body,  the  assignment  of  the  authorship  to  it
presented  no  difficulty.  Finally  Daniel  and  Esther,  regarded
as  books  of  the  Persian  period,  easily  fell  to  their  domain.  Kzra,
with  his  account  of  his  own  time,  closes  the  series.  Some
explanation  is  needed  of  the  fact  that  whilst  '  the  genealogies  in
Chronicles  down  to  himself  (this  is  no  doubt  the  easiest
explanation)  also  arc  assigned  to  Kzra,  no  account  is  taken  of
the  remaintler  of  that  work.  The  most  likely  reason  is  that  the
main  portion  of  Chronicles  was  regarded  as  mere  repetition
from  Samuel  and  Kings,  the  origin  of  which  had  been  already
explained.

It  is  not  of  the  slightest  importance  to  consider  how
far  this  attempted  explanation  of  the  origin  of  the  various
books  is  in  agreement  with  the  real  thought  of  the
Baraytha  ;  in  any  case  it  remains  pure  theory,  the  pro-
duct of  rabbinical  inventiveness,  not  of  historical  tradi-
tion. Apart  from  a  fixed  general  opinion  about  certain
individual  l)ooks  and  alx)ut  the  Pentateuch,  the  tangible
outcome  of  the  lx;liefs  of  the  whole  period  with  which
we  are  dealing  is  that  the  canon  was  held  to  have  been
closed  in  the  time  of  lizni.  The  theory  upon  which
this  belief  proceeded  will  occupy  us  later  (§  44/  ).

.\s  against  this  congeries  of  vague  guesses  and
abstract theories, science demands that we should

22  Scientific  '^^''^"^'"'^  ^^'^^  ^^o^^  separately,  and
■  ..  J  endeavour,  with  the  evidence  supplied
™® ^  by  itself,  and  with  continual  reference

to  the  ixxly  of  literature  as  a  whole,  to  ascertain  its  date
and  to  fix  its  place  in  the  national  and  religious  develop-
ment of  the  Jews.  This  is  the  task  of  '  special  introduc-
tion ' ;  but  its  results  must  always  have  a  direct  bearing
on  the  history  of  the  canon.  This  history  must  give
close  attention  also  to  all  the  external  testimonies  relative
to  the  formation  and  to  the  close  of  the  canon,  and,  after
weighing  them,  must  assign  to  them  their  due  place.
Above  all,  it  must  trace  out  all  general  opinions  and
theories,  such  as  we  have  been  considering,  ascertain
their  scope  and  meaning,  and  satisfy  itself  as  to  the
period  at  which  they  arose,  and  as  to  their  influence  on
the  formation  of  the  canon.  In  so  far  as  we  succeed  in
these  endea\ours,  we  shall  arrive  at  a  relatively  trust-
worthy history  of  the  canon.

III.  History  of  tiik  OT  canon.— (i)  The  first
canon:  the  Law.^ — Whatever  difficulties  we  may  have

1  W.  J.  Reecher  (see  below,  §  75)  offers  a  solemn  protest  against
the  fundamental  proposition  of  this  article  (as  of  all  modern
discussions  of  the  subject) — a  triple  canon,  collected  and  closed
in  three  successive  periods.  He  denies  that  there  is  any  evidence
of  a  time  when  the  Law  alone  was  regarded  as  canonical,  or
of  a  time  when  the  Law  and  the  Prophets  stood  in  authority
alxive  the  Writings.  He  denies  that  the  other  OT  writings
were  originally  regarded  as  less  authoritative  than  the  Penta-
teuch. He  sees  in  the  canon  of  the  OT  an  aggregate  of  sacred
books  growing  gradually  and  continually  to  a  definite  time
when  the  part  written  latest  was  finished  and  the  collection  was
deemed  complete.  Law  [or  rather.  Message],  Prophets,  and
Writings  are  nothing  but  three  different  names  for  the  same
books — e-g.,  the  prophetic  writings.  We  are  not  told  how
these  terms  came  to  he  the  names  of  three  different  parts  of
this  collection.  The  fundamental  fact  that  the  Law  alone  was
promulgated  and  m.ide  authoritative  by  Ezra  and  Nehemiah,
IS  obscured  by  Heecher  by  the  .statement  that  the  term  '  book
of  Moses '  is  applied  to  an  aggregate  of  sacred  w'ritings  including
more  than  the  Pent.iteuch.  His  only  proof  is  Ezra  (5 18,  where
'  we  are  told  that  the  returned  exiles  set  up  the  courses  of  the
priests  and  Levites,  "as  it  is  written  in  the  book  of  Moses."
The  Pentateuch  contains  nothing  in  regard  to  priestly  or
Levitical  courses.  Possibly  the  reference  is  to  written  precepts
now  found  in  i  Chronicles.'  Beecher  does  not  translate  accu-
rately. The  text
courses  and  the  Levites  in

that  the  priests  and  the  Levites  are  set  up  '  as  it  is  written  in
the  book  of  Moses' ;  but  it  does  not  necessarily  mean  that  their
courses  and  divisions  were  based  on  the  same  authority.  Heecher
never  mentions  the  fact  that  the  Samaritans  accepted  only  the
Law  (see  below,  g  25),  nor  does  he  investigate  what  gram  of
truth  is  contained  in  the  same  statement  as  to  the  Sadducees

657


CANON

I in  dealing  with  the  later  stages  of  the  history  of  the  canon
and  with  its  close,  there  is  no  obscurity  alMUt  its  com-

23.  The  Torah.  '"*^"'^«--";'^"'-  1'  ^^^  '"deed  by  those
'  men  of  the  grtmt  synagogue,  to  whom
orthodoxy  assigns  the  close  of  the  canon,  that  its  founda-
tions were  laid,  in  the  clear  daylight  of  well-authenticated
history.  Front  the  twenty-fourth  day  of  the  seventh
month  of  the  year  444  B.C.  onwards,  Israel  possessed  a
canon  of  Sacred  .Scripture.  It  was  on  this  day  that  the
great  popular  assembly  described  in  Neh.  9/.  solemnly
pledged  itself  to  'the  Hook  of  the  Law  of  Vnhw6  their
God  ■  (83),  '  which  had  been  given  by  the  hand  of  Moses
the  servant  of  God '  (IO30),  and  had  been  brought  from
Babylon  to  Jerusalem  shortly  before  by  Ezra  the  scrilx:
(Ezra  76  11  14  Neh.  8i/. ).  In  virtue  of  this  resolution
the  said  law-book  at  that  time  became  canonical  ;  but
only  the  law-book.

.Already,  indeed,  in  the  eighteenth  year  of  King  Josiah,
between  623  and  621  B.C.,  there  had  been  a  solenni  act
of  a  similar  character,  when  the  king  and  people  pledged
themselves  to  the  law-book  that  had  Ixren  found  in  the
temple,  the  'book  of  the  covenant'  (2  K.  2:i).  The
entire  editorial  revision  of  the  liooks  of  Kings,  and
especially  the  express  references  to  the  law-lx>ok(i  K.
23  2  K.  2825,  and  above  all,  2  K.  146  compared  with
Dt.  24  16),  clearly  prove  that  it  had  canonical  valitlity
during  the  exilic  period,  whilst  the  book  of  Malachi
(cp  esp.  'l^ff.  85  8^  22)  shows  that  also  in  the  post-
exilic  period  down  to  the  time  of  Ezra  it  continued  to
hold  this  place  in  Jerusalem.'  The  critical  lalxiurs  of
the  present  century,  however,  have  conclusively  estab-
lished that  this  first  canonical  book  contained  simply
what  we  now  have  as  the  kernel  of  our  Book  of  Deutero-
nomy.

The  law  canonised  in  444  was  a  very  different  docu-
ment. The  only  possible  question  is  whether  it  was  the
oj.  Tf  ft  entire  Pcnt;\teuch  as  we  now  have  it,
24.  Its  extent.  ^^  ^^^j^,  ^^^  jviestly  Writing,  the  latest
and  most  extensive  of  the  sources  which  go  to  make  up
the  Pentateuch.  The  latter  is,  so  far  as  we  can  at
present  see,  the  more  likely  hypothesis.  In  that  case
what  happened  in  444  B.C.  was  that  the  Deuterononiic
Law,  which  had  until  then  ruled,  was  superseded  by
the  new  Law  of  Ezra.  A  determination  of  this  kind,
however,  was  unworkable  in  view  of  the  firm  place  which
the  older  book  that  had  been  built  up  out  of  J  V.  and
D  •^  had  secured  for  itself  in  the  estimation  of  the  people.
Accordingly,  the  new  law  was  revised  and  enlarged  by
the  fusing  together  of  the  Priestly  Writing  and  the  earlier
work,  a  process  of  which  our  Pentateuch,  the  canon  of
the  Law,  was  the  result.

This  last  stage  was  most  probably  accomplished  in
the  next  generation  after  that  of  Ezra,  and  completed
before 400 B.C. We have e\  itlence


26.  Samaritan
Torah.


They  .set  up  the  priests  in  {hy)  their
in  (fy)  their  dirisions.' This  means


of  this  in  the  fact  that  the  schis-
matic coninnmity  of  the  Samaritans
accepts  the  entire  Pentateuch  as  sacred.  It  is  true  that
the  solitary  historical  account  we  possess  (Jos.  Ant.
xi.  72-84)  places  the  separation  of  this  community  from
that  of  Jerusalem  as  low  down  as  the  time  of  Alexander
the  Great  (about  330  B.C. ) ;  but  the  cause  that  led  to

(see  below,  g  38),  or  consider  the  reason  why  the  T.aw  is  wanting
in  2  Mace.  2  13  (see  below,  g  27).  On  the  other  side,  it  may  be
hoped  that  he  will  find  the  difficulty  caused  by  the  Book  of
Joshua,  a  difficulty  greatly  exaggerated  by  himself,  removed
(in  fact  turned  into  a  nelp)  in  g  aSyi  of  this  article,  written  two
ye.-irs  before  his  paper  was  published.  This  is  only  one  of  many
instances.  The  theory  of  the  triple  canon  of  the  OT,  based
on  incontestable  facts,  is  not  as  mechanical  as  Beecher  repre-
sents it.  It  is  able  to  satisfy  every  demand  for  organic  growth
in  the  collection  of  O  T  writings.  Beecher's  paper  (a  total
failure,  it  seems  to  the  present  writer,  in  the  m.-iin  point)  may
do  much  good  in  cautioning  against  too  mechanical  a  concep-
tion ;  but  it  did  not  furnish  to  the  present  writer  any  occasion
to  alter  the  views  develo[)ed  in  this  article.

1  The  reasons  for  saying  that  the  references  in  Malachi  are  to
Dt.  and  not  to  Ezra's  law-book  cannot  be  given  here  (see
Now.  AV.  Proph.  391  ;  but  cp  Mai.achi).

3  On  this  and  on  the  larger  critical  question  cp  Hexateuch.

6£8


CANON

the  separation — the  expulsion  of  the  high  priest's  son,
the  soii-in-law  of  Sani)allat,  who  founded  the  community
and  sanctua.;.'  of  the  Samaritans — is  rather,  according  to
Neh.  1828,  to  be  referred  to  the  period  of  Nehemiah
(about  430  B.C.).  It  has  already  been  mentioned  (§
19)  that  Jewish  chronology  has  dropped  a  whole  century
and  a  half,  -o  bringing  the  periods  of  Nehemiah  and
Ale.\ander  into  immediate  juxtaposition  ;  and  this  is  the
explanation  of  the  confusion  found  in  Josephus.  We
may  suppose  that  Ix'fore  the  final  separation  of  the
Samaritans  there  elapsed  an  interval  of  some  decades
which  would  give  ample  time  for  the  completion  of  the
Law.^  This  does  not  e.xclude  the  possibility  that  adjust-
ments may  have  been  made  at  a  later  date  between  the
Samaritan  Pentateuch  and  that  of  Jerusalem,  or  that
later  interpolations  may  have  found  their  way  into  the
Samaritan  law.  The  compass  of  the  work,  however,  must
have  remained  (to  speak  broadly)  ^  a  fixed  quantity,
otherwise  the  Samaritans  would  not  have  taken  it  over.*
At  the  same  time  the  Samaritan  canon,  which  con-
tained nothing  but  the  (complete)  law,  is  our  oldest
witness  to  a  period  during  which  the


26.  Torah  =
entire  canon.


canon  consisted  of  the  Law  alone,
canon  and  Law  being  thus  coextensive
conceptions.  If  alongside  of  the  Law  there  had  been
other  sacral  writings,  it  would  be  inexplicable  why
these  last  also  did  not  pass  into  currency  with  the
Samaritans.  There  are  other  witnesses  also  to  the
same  effect.  The  weightiest  lies  in  the  simple  fact  that
the  name  Torah  or  Law  can  mean  the  entire  canon,
and  be  used  as  including  the  Prophets  and  the  Writings.
We  find  it  so  used  in  the  NT  (Jn.  IO34  I234  l.'jzs
I  Cor.  1421),  in  the  passage  already  cited  from  4  Esdras
(142o),  and,  at  a  later  date,  in  many  passages  of  the
Talmud,  the  Midrashim,  and  the  Rabbins  (cp  Strack,
439).  This  would  have  been  impossible  if  the  words
'canon'  and  'law'  had  not  originally  had  the  same
connotation,  other  books  afterwards  attaining  to  some
27  2  Maor  ^^^""^  '^^  '^"^  sanctity  of  the  Law.  The
o  Game  thing  is  shown  by  an  often-quoted

'^'  and much -abused passage in 2  Mace.

(213).  There  we  read  that  Nehemiah,  in  establishing
a  library,  brought  together  the  books  concerning  the
kings  and  prophets  (to.  trepl  tuiu  ^aaiX^uv  /cat  Trpo(p7jTuiv)
and  the  (i)ocms)  of  David  (to.  toD  AaviS)  and  the  letters
of  kings  concerning  consecrated  gifts  (to  the  temple  :
^TricTToXas  ^aaiXeijjv  wepi  avadefidruiv).  The  passage
occurs  in  a  letter  from  the  Jews  of  Palestine  to  their  com-
patriots in  Kgypt,  and  is  an  admitted  interpolation  in  a
book  which  is  itself  thoroughly  unhistorical ;  it  is  thus
in  the  highest  degree  untrustworthy  (cp  MACCABEES,
Second,  §  7).  As  evidence  of  what  could  be  believed
and  said  at  the  time  of  its  composition,  however,  in  the
first  century  B.C.,  it  is  unimpeachable.  When  we
find  the  Former  and  Latter  Prophets  and  the  Psalms
catalogued  as  forming  part  of  a  library,  and,  alongside
of  them  and  on  the  same  level,  letters  of  kings  (heathen
kings  of  course),  it  is  clear  that  there  is  no  idea  of  sacro-

1  This  explains  why  the  Book  of  Nehemiah  closes  with  the
expulsion  of  the  son-in-law  of  Sanhallat,  but  says  nothing  as  to
the  setting  up  of  the  temple  and  church  of  the  Samaritans.
There  is  no  occasion  for  scepticism  as  to  the  entire  story  in
Josephus  (as  in  Kautzsch,  PKEi"^),  art.  '  Samariter,'  343/;).

2  See  below,  g  37.

3  Against  the  completion  of  the  law  at  this  date  Duhih
(/esai'a,  iSgz,  p.  vyC)  urges  objections.  He  thinks  that  as  late
as  the  time  of  the  Chronicler  (third  century  B.C.)  the  so-called
Priestly  Document  had  not  yet  been  fused  with  J  E  and  D  ;  for
the  intention  of  the  Book  of  Chronicles  is,  in  his  opinion,  to
continue  the  Priestly  Document  (which  comes  down  only  to  the
end  of  Joshua),  not  the  older  work  embracing  the  Book  of
Kings,  which  indeed  it  sought  to  supersede.  Neither  intention,
however,  can  be  attributed  to  the  Chronicler.  In  fact,  he  begins
with  the  creation,  his  method  being  to  write  out  at  full  length
the  genealogies  from  Adam  downwards,  taking  them  from  the
work  that  lay  before  him  (JED  P).  Since,  however,  he  is  writing
a  history  only  of  Jerusalem  and  the  temple,  he  passes  over  all
that  does  not  relate  to  this.  At  the  same  time,  even  if  the
Chronicler  had  used  nothing  but  P,  this  would  not  prove  more
than  that,  after  its  fusion  with  the  other  sources,  P  continued
to  be  used  also  separately  for  a  long  time.

659


CANON

sanct  books.  The  Law  is  not  mentioned  in  the  same
connection  ;  as  the  sacred  canon,  it  receives  a  place  to
itself  and  has  nothing  to  do  with  the  library.  Whether
all  the  contemporaries  of  this  author  shared  his  view
is  another  matter  ;  in  any  case,  the  possibility  of  such
a  view  being  held  is  proof  of  the  original  isolation  of
the  Law.  Moreover,  it  appears  from  this  passage  that
at  the  time  when  it  was  written,  or  within  the  writer's
circle,  the  legend  of  the  closing  of  the  canon  by  I'.zra  can
have  teen  prevalent  only  in  the  (narrower  and  historically
much  more  accurate)  sense  that  the  canon  of  the  Law  re-
ceived its  validity  as  such  by  Ezra'saction.  Thefact,  more-
over, that  in  the  LXX  the  version  of  the  Law  appears  to  be
distinctively  an  official  work,  not  theresult  of  private  enter-
prise, confirms  the  inference  already  drawn  from  the
exclusive  attention  given  to  the  Law  in  the  period  repre-
sented by  Ezra.

( 2 )  The  second  canon  :  the  Prophets.  — The  nucleus
for  a  second  canon  was  laid  to  the  hand  of  the  scribes
oa  J  P  ^  of  the  fifth  century  in  the  very  fact  that  the
*  canon  of  the  Law  had  been  set  apart  to  a
place  by  itself.  It  is  one  of  the  certain  results  of  the
science  of  special  introduction  that  the  Priestly  Document
on  which  Ezra's  reform  rested,  followed  the  history  of
Israel,  including  the  division  of  Canaan,  down  to  the
end  of  the  Book  of  Joshua  :  the  portions  derived  from
it  can  still  be  distinguished  in  our  present  Book  of
Joshua.  The  same  holds  good  for  J  E  D.  We  can  go
further.  It  may  still  be  matter  of  dispute,  indeed,
whether  the  material  for  the  subsequent  books  (Judges,
Samuel,  Kings)  also  was  derived  from  J  and  E  ;  but  so
much  is  indisputably  certain,  that  the  Deuterononfic  re-
daction embraced  these  books  also,  in  fact,  the  whole  of
the  Former  Prophets,  and  that  at  the  end  of  Kings  the
narrative  itself  is  from  Deuteronomistic  hands.  As
even  now  each  of  these  books  is  seen  to  link  itself  very
closely  to  that  which  precedes  it,  it  follows  that  JED,
ultimately  at  least,  in  the  form  in  which  the  work
was  used  in  the  fifth  century,  included  the  Law  and  the
Former  Prophets.  That  the  Law  might  attain  its  final
OQ -D + form  as  a  separate  unity,  therefore,  it  was


teuch.


not  enough  that  P  and  JED  should  be


worked  up  into  a  single  whole.  This
whole  must  be  separated  from  the  history  that  followed
it.  How  and  when  this  was  effected  we  can  imagine
variously.  According  to  the  view  taken  above,  what  is
most  probable  is  that  in  444  the  entire  Priestly  Writ-
ing, including  the  closing  sections  relating  to  the
entrance  into  Canaan  and  the  partition  of  the  country,
was  already  in  existence  and  canonized  in  its  full  extent.*
Not  until  its  subsequent  amalgamation  with  the  corre-
sponding sections  of  J  E  D  did  the  hitherto  quite  insig-
nificant historical  appendix  to  the  'law,'  strictly  so
called,  acquire  such  a  preponderance  that  the  division
was  found  to  be  inevitable.  It  was  made  at  the  end
of  the  account  of  the  death  of  Moses,  and  thus  a  portion
of  the  Priestly  Writing  also  (as  well  as  of  J  E  D)  was
severed  from  the  body  to  which  it  belonged.  In  any
case,  however  we  may  reconstruct  the  details,  the  great
fact  abides  that,  after  the  Law  had  been  separated,  there
remained  the  compact  mass  of  writings  which  afterwards
,  _  came to be known as '  the former

P ^^J prophets,'  a  body  of  literature  which

take  an  exceptional  position  from  the  simple  fact  that  it
had  once  been  connected  with  the  sacred  canon,  and
must  necessarily  have  been  prized  by  the  community  as
a  possession  never  to  be  lost.

Equally  certain  is  it  that  by  far  the  larger  proportion

of  the '  latter  prophets ' was  already  in the  hands  of

'  T tt '^^  scribes  of  the  fifth  century. In  these

Pro  h«t  ^^  books  God  spoke  almost  uninterruptedly

P  by  the  mouth  of  his  prophets — in  itself

1  A  last  trace  of  some  reminiscence  of  this  short  period  during
which  the  Book  of  Joshua  still  belonged  to  the  '  law '  may  be
seen  in  the  Apocryphal  Book  of  Joshua  of  the  Samaritans.


CANON

reason  enough  for  assiRning  to  thcin  the  attribute  of
hohncss.  If,  m^vcrthelcss,  th(;  hooks  wi-n:  not  reckoned
to  the  canon,  the  explanation  is  to  be  sou);ht  in  the
practical  character  of  the  lirst  canon  :  lO/ra  gave  to  the
community  in  the  canon  of  the  I^iw  all  that  it  letjuircd.
It  was  not  new  when  he  gave  it  ;  he  only  gave  over
again  what  G<xl  had  once  already  given  through  Moses
to  the  people  as  his  one  anil  all.  If  the  {xxjple  had
remained  true  to  this  I^aw,  not  orly  would  they  have
escaped  all  the  dis;isters  of  the  past,  but  also  they  would
never  have  needi-d  new  revelations  from  (jod  through
his  prophets.  These  prophets  contributed  nothing  new  ;
they  were  sent  only  to  admonish  the  unfaithful  people
to  observe  the  Law,  and  to  announce  the  merited
--  Pro  punishment  of  the  imj)enitent.  The  I^w
."  thus  had  permanent  validity,  whilst  the
■  work  of  the  prophets  was  transitory  ;  the
l.»a\v  addressed  itself  to  all  generations,  the  prophets
each  only  to  his  own,  which  had  now  passed  away.
The  generations  that  had  sworn  olx.'dience  anew  to  the
l.aw  under  K/.ra,  therefore,  had  no  need  for  the  propliets.
Should  similar  circumstances  recur,  it  might  Ix;  ex-
pected that  Cjod  would  send  prophets  anevv  ;  but  the
prevailing  feeling  was,  no  doubt,  that  the  time  of  un-
faithfulness, and  consequently  of  the  prophetic  ministry,
had  gone  for  ever.*

The  view  here  set  forth  is  that  of  the  O T  itself,  pre-
eminently that  of  the  Deuteroiioniistic  school,  where  it
is  constantly  recurring. ^  Indeed,  since  the  Deutero-
nomic  and  the  Priestly  Laws  alike,  each  in  its  own
way,  had  assiniilated  the  results  of  the  work  of  the
prophets,  this  view  must  be  called,  from  their  point  of
view,  the  right  one.  Accordingly  it  has  throughout
continued  to  lie  the  view  of  the  synagogue,  as  can  be
proved  from  many  passages  in  the  Talmud  and  the
33.  Historical  '"^'i'l'-=^^him.-'  It  explains  at  the  same
books


tmie  why  it  is  that  the  historical  books


'  prophetic*


(Joshua-Kings)  are  called  'prophets.'
They  speak  just  in  the  manner  of  the
prophets  of  the  unfaithfulness  of  past  generations  to  the
law,  and  of  the  divine  means — chiefly  the  mission  of
prophets — used  to  correct  this.  Both  relate  in  a  similar
way  to  the  past.  For  the  same  reason  the  prophets,
conversely,  are  called  history  ;  for  '  tradition '  in  the
sense  of  'history'  is  what  is  meant  by  KnoScK  {ash-
lemtii),  the  Massoretic  term  for  the  canon  of  the
prophets,  the  d«j<<3j  {nSi'iin),  as  a  whole  (cp  further,
Strack,  439).

We  can  thus  very  easily  understand  how  it  was  that

the Pr<)[)hets  could not be canonized simultaneously

34 Not  vet  ^^'''^  '^^  Law. To  pledge  jjeople  to  the

canonized P''°Pl^*-"'s  '^'^^  not  possible,  and  the  obliga-

■ tion to  the  I^aw  would  only  have  been

obscured  and  weakened  by  a  canonization  of  the  Prophets

at  the  same  time. The  idea  of  canonicity  had  first  to

be  enlarged  ;  it  had  to  Ix;  conceived  in  a  more  abstract

manner,  on  the  basis  of  a  historical  interest  in  the  past,

before  the  canonizing  of  the  Prophets — that  is  to  say,

their Ijeing taken in immediate  connection with the

Law — could  become  possible.''

Of  course  a  considerable  period  of  time  must  have

been  required  for  this  ; and  the  same  result  follows  from

38 Freelv ^^^  established  facts  of  'higher  criticism.'

edited. ^^  *^^  Prophets  properly  so  called, not

only  are  Joel  and  Jonah later  than the

completion  of  the  Law,  but  also  the  older  books,  over

wide  ajeas  of  their  extent,  bear  more  or  less  independent

1  With  every  reservation  let  it  \yc  noted  here  that  in  Mai.  3  23
•he  promise  is  not  of  a  new  prophet,  but  only  of  the  return  of
Klijah,  an<i  that  in  Zech.  13  2_^  to  come  forward  as  a  prophet
is  to  risk  one's  life.

2  Compaie  also,  however  (especially),  the  confession  of  sin
which  in  Nehciniah  precedes  the  uking  of  the  covenant  (parucu-
larly  ?t/.  16  ff.  26  29  /  34).

»  .SeeWeW,  18/78/:

*  Cp  the  passage  (2  Alacc.  2  lO,  already  spoken  of,  in  which
such  a  historical  interest  appears,  but  leads  only  to  the  foundatioo
of  a  library,  not  to  the  canonizing  of  its  contents.

661


CANON

evidence  of  a  seconilary  literary  .activity.'  These  pheno-
mena are  so  manifold,  and  there  are  traces  of  periods
so  widely  separated,  that  we  must  believe  not  a  few
generations  to  have  borne  a  part  in  bringing  the  pro-
phetical books  to  their  present  form.  Yet  these  extensive
additions  and  revisions,  at  least  most  of  th(;m,  must  of
course  have  taken  place  before  the  canoniz;ition.

This  obvious  conclusion  is  indeed  contradicte<l  by  the
tradition  of  the  synagogue,  which  tells  us  that  the  books
36  Gan  in  °^  ''^*''  P''"P''<^'s  ^*'<^''^"  «  ritten  by  '  the  men
tradition.  "/  "^"^  great  synagogue  '  on  which  view
the  canon  of  the  prophets  was  already
complete  in  444  B.C.  Nor  does  this  assertion,  the
baselessness  of  which  we  have  already  seen,  stand  alone.
It  is  backed  by  others.  Josephus  (c.  Ap.  18)  says
e.\|)ressly  that  it  was  down  to  the  time  of  Artaxer.xes,
the  successor  of  Xerxes  (/.^.,  Artaxerxes  I.,  Ix)ngimanus,
465-424)  that  the  literary  activity  of  the  prophets  con-
tinued. The  passage  in  the  Mishna  in  which  the  un-
broken chain  of  tradition  is  set  forth  {I'irki  AbOth,  1  i)
repn;sents  the  Law  as  having  been  handed  down  by  the
prophets  to  the  men  of  the  great  .synagogue  ;  which
again  brings  us  to  the  same  date,  and  dispenses  with
the  need  of  any  further  testimony.

It  is  exactly  this  chain  of  tradition,  however,  that
supplies  the  interval  of  time  that  we  need.  1  he  passage
goes  on  to  say  :  Simon  the  Just  was  one  of  the  last
survivors  of  '  the  men  of  the  great  synagogue '  ;  he
handed  on  the  tradition  to  Antigonus  of  Socho.  by
whom''^  in  turn  it  was  transmitted  to  Jose  b.  Jo'czer
and  Jose  b.  Jolianan,  the  first  of  the  so-called  'pairs.'
That  the  chronology  of  this  section  leaves  much  to  be
desired  is  clear.-*  It  seems  to  be  as  good  as  certain,
however,  that  the  fourth  of  the  five  pairs  lived  about
50  B.C.,  the  third  about  80  B.C.  The  same  ratio  would
bring  us  to  somewhere  alxjut  140  or  150  B.C.  for  the
first  '  pair,'  whilst  the  time  of  Antigonus  and  Simon
would  fall  about  200  B.C.,  or  a  little  earlier.  In  that
case,  Simon  the  Just  would  Ixj  the  high  priest  .Simon  II.
b.  Onias  who  is  briefly  mentioned  by  Josephus  {Ant.
xii.  4  10).  The  cognomen  of  'Just,'  however,  is  given
by  Josephus  {Ant.  .\ii.  25  4  i)  to  Simon  I.  b.  Onias,  who
lived  almost  a  century  earlier,  soon  after  300.  If  we
must  consider  that  he  is  the  Simon  who  is  meant,  it
is  clear  that  the  alleged  chain  of  ti.adition  is  defective
in  its  earlier  portion,  only  a  single  name  having  leachcd
us  for  the  whole  of  the  third  century.  Further,  .Simon
the  Just  is  the  connecting  link  with  '  the  great  syna-
gogue,' and  as  the  assembly  that  gave  rise  to  this  name
was  held  in  444,  there  is  again  a  gap,  this  time  of  a
centurv',  even  if  we  concede  that  Simon  reached  a  very
advanced  age.  The  long  interval  between  Smion  the
Just  and  444  B.C.,  however,  is  not  to  be  held  as  arising
from  a  different  view  about  the  synagogue  ;  it  is  to  be
accounted  for  by  the  hiatus  (already  referred  to.  §§  19,
25)  in  the  traditional  chronology  between  Nehemiah  and
Alexander  the  Great,  similar  to  that  which  brings  Zcrub-
37  Activitv  ^^^'  '"'"  immediate  relation  with  the
in  interval  '''"*^  °'^  Fzra.'*  It  is  within  this  vacant
period  that  we  must  place  those  redac-
tions, the  fact  of  which  has  been  so  incontestably  proved
by  critical  inquiry.  The  main  reason  why  the  synagogue
has  no  recollection  of  this  period,  is  that  during  this
time  the  activity  of  the  scribes  (with  the  history  of
which  alone  the  chronology  busies  itself  from  Kzra
onwards)  had  no  independent  life,  but  devoted  itself
almost  exclusively  to  the  .sacred  writings  of  the  past,
and left its traces only there, so that whatever it

'  This  is  true  especially  of  Isaiah,  Micah,  and  Zechariah  ;  but
most  of  the  other  Ixjoks  show  the  same  thing  in  some  degree.
The  (If^iails  belong  to  the  special  articles.

2  '  i{y  whom  ■  is  plural  according  to  the  text,  the  reference
including  perhaps  Simon  the  Just.  Zunz  (37  n.)  would  interpret
'  from  the  successors  of  Antigonus,  mediate  or  immediate ' ;
but  this  is  hardly  permissible.

S  See  Schdrer,  CJV  'i-i^i^ff.

<  Cp  also  Jos.  Ant.  xi.  0  i,  with  7  i  andS  i.

663


CANON

accomplished  was  put  to  the  credit  of  the  earlier  times.
This  holds  good,  in  the  first  instance,  of  the  Law,  to
which  considerable  additions  were  still  made  as  late  as
the  third  century  (see  above,  §  25).  Still  more
extensive  was  this  activity  in  the  case  of  the  prophetical
books  ;  it  was  now  that  they  took  their  final  literary
shape.  1  The  additions  naturally  corresponded  to  the
thou;.;hts  and  wishes  of  the  age  in  which  they  arose  ;  on
the  lines  of  older  models,  the  elements  of  hope  and  of
comfort  received  a  nmch  fuller  development,  and  thus
the  prophets  were  made  of  practical  interest  for  a
present  time  that,  contrary  to  expectation,  had  turned
out  badly.  2

It  is  possible  that  we  even  possess  a  proof  that  the
canonization  of  the  prophets  did  not  take  place  quite
38 Canoniza ^''"^'3"' opposition and dispute, a
tion  Derhana ^^'"^  '"  "^''""  "°'  ''"P^bable. In  the
a  ttd <^hurch  fathers  we  meet  with  the  very
PP  *  definite  assertion that the Sadducees

had  scruples  about  acknowledging  any  sacred  writings
(especially  the  Prophets)  in  addition  to  the  Law.^  It
cannot  be  supposed  that  there  is  here  any  confusion
with  the  Samaritans,  who  are  expressly  named  along
with  them  as  sharing  the  same  view  ;  a  somewhat
easier  view  is  that  what  is  referred  to  is  their  rejection
of  the  oral  legal  tradition. ^  Let  it  be  borne  in  mind,
however,  that  we  here  have  to  do  with  our  best  Christian
authorities  on  matters  Jewish — Origen  and  Jerome,  the
former  of  whom  was  contemporary  with  the  period
of  the  Mishna.  That  neither  the  Mishna  itself,  nor
yet  Josephus,  has  a  word  to  say  on  such  a  dangerous
subject,  is  intelligible  enough.  It  is,  of  course,  not  for
a  moment  to  be  supjjosed — even  though  this  is  suggested
by  some  of  the  passages  cited — that  the  Sadducees  re-
jected the  prophets,  or,  in  other  words,  refused  to
recognise  them  as  having  Vx;en  channels  of  divine
communications.  On  the  other  hand,  it  is  not  difficult
to  believe  that  these  conservative  guardians  of  the  old
priestly  tradition  should  have  resisted  the  addition  of
a  second  canon  to  that  of  the  Law,  which  until  then
had  held  an  exclusive  place.  In  doing  so,  they  would
only  have  been  maintaining  the  position  of  444  B.C.,
whilst  in  this,  as  in  other  matters,  the  Pharisees  repre-
sented the  popular  party  of  the  time. The  controversy

1  Cp  We.  //G  i=;5^  2nd  ed.  190^;  Montefiore,  On\-in
anii  Crou'th  0/  A'f//ci<"i  (////'.  L,rt.  1892),  401  j:  the
assertion,  frequently  repeated  in  the  tradition  of  the  synagogue,
that  it  was  expressly  prohibited  to  commit  to  writing  the
traditional  law  cannot  of  course,  strictly  speaking,  be  main-
tained (cp  Strack,  art.  'Thalmud'  in  PR£n  18  331  /^).  Still
it  is  not  impossible  that  there  lies  at  the  bottom  of  it  a  true
reminiscence.  Hardly,  indeed,  such  a  one  as  Strack  supposes
(P-  3337^) ;  but  rather  this  :  that  the  addition  of  all  sorts  of
nm<ell<e  to  the  canonical  Law  was  definitely  put  a  stop  to,  and
that,  as  a  reaction  against  this  tendency  to  add,  there  arose,
some  time  (say)  in  the  course  of  the  second  century,  a  certain  I
reluctance  to  write  the  further  developments  of  the  law  —  the
Hal.'ikOth— until  at  last  the  codification  of  the  Mishna  put  an  end
to  this.

2  Kyle's  conjecture  (p.  117)  that  the  gradual  admission  of  the
Prophets  to  a  place  in  the  public  reading  of  the  synagogue  pre-
ceded and  led  to  their  canonization,  rests  unfortunately  on  an
insecure  foundation,  as  we  do  not  know  whether  th,-  Haphtara
goes  back  to  a  sufficiently  early  date.  The  first  mention  of  the
public  reading  of  the  Prophets  is  in  the  NT  (Lk.  4  i6_/C  ;  Acts
13  15  27),  the  next,  in  a  very  cursory  and  obscure  form,  is  in  the
Mishna  (Megilla,  846),  and,  very  full  and  clear,  in  the  Tosephta
(/J//rf ///a,  4  [3],  ed.  Zuckermandel,  225^).  This  much  may  be
taken  for  certain,  that  the  reading  of  the  Pronhets  came  in  very
considerably  later  than  that  of  the  Law.  That  what  led  to  it
was  the  destructive  search  after  copies  of  the  Law  in  the  time
of  Anliochus  Epiphanes  (i  Mace.  1  57)  is  pure  conjecture.  Even
if  proved  it  would  be  insufficient  for  Ryle's  purpose.  For  the
age  of  the  HaphtSroth,  see  Zunz,  $ /.,  Ryle,  iidyC;  and  on
the  Haphtaruth  in  general,  .see  Schi'irer,  23797!  It  is  necessary
to  raise  a  note  of  warning  as  to  Gr.'itz,  x'jbff.

3  See  the  passages  textually  quoted  m  .Schurer,  2342  :  Orig.
c.  Cels.  1  49  (ed.  Lommatzsch,  18  93);  Comm.  in  Matth.  17,
ch.ip.  35  yC  on  chap.  222931  /T  (ed.  Lomm.  4  166 169);  Jer.
Contin.  in  Matth.  22  31  /.  (Vail.  7  i  179);  conir.  Luci/erianos^


:.  223.  /
1;  Phitosi


'phumena,  U  29  ; Pseudo-Tert.  adv.


chap.  23  (v.  2  197) ;
llier.  chap.  1.

•*  Vet  in  the  last-cited  passage  there  follows  immediately :
'  Prajlermitto  Pharisa:os  qui  additamenta  quaedam  legis  adstru-
endo  a  Judacis  divisi  sunt.'

663


CANON

about  defiling  the  hands  (M.  Vadayim,  46)  may  have
been  a  last  echo  of  this.*

Lastly,  we  must  endeavour  to  fix  an  inferior  limit
for  the  date  at  which  the  prophetical  canon  was  fixed.

39  Inferior  ^""^  ^^  literary  close  of  the  prophetical
Umit  =  EcclU8.  '-■oH^-<-;'i«"..^^'-'  fortunately  have  an  ex-
tcrnal  testmiony  almost  three  centuries
older  and  much  more  exhaustive  than  4  Esdras  and
Josephus,  namely  the  hymn  to  the  great  men  of  the
past  with  which  Jesus  b.  Sira  (Kcclesiasticus),  in  chaps.
44-50,  concludes  his  didactic  poem.  From  Enoch
downwards  all  the  righteous  are  panegyrised,  exactly  in
the  order  in  which  they  occur  in  the  Law  and  the
Former  Prophets.  The  kings  are  treated  quite  on  the
Ueuterononiistic  lines.  David,  Hezekiah,  and  Josiah
receive  unqualified  praise  ;  Solomon  is  commended  only
half-heartedly,  whilst  Rehoboam  is  spoken  of  as  a  fool,
and  Jeroboam  as  a  seducer.  F^lijah  and  Elisha  find
their  place  in  the  series  immediately  after  these  two
kings,  whilst  between  Hezekiah  and  Josiah  comes  Isaiah.'
Of  him  we  are  told  in  one  and  the  same  sentence  what
we  read  in  chaps.  36-39  (  =2  K.  18-20),  and  that  under
mighty  inspiration  he  foresaw  the  far  future  and  '  com-
forted them  that  mourn  in  Zion  '  (cp  40 1 ).  This  proves
that  not  only  chaps.  36-39,  but  also  chaps.  40-66,  already
were  parts  of  the  Book  of  Isaiah,  and  thus  that  the  hist
essential  steps  to  its  final  redaction  had  been  made  (cp
Che.  Intr.  Is.  xviii. ).  Still  more  significant  is  it  that
after  Jeremiah  (who  is  associated  with  Josiah,  as  Isaiah
is  with  Hezekiah)  and  after  I-^zekiel,  the  twelve  prophets
{o'l  8J}d€Ka  irpo<}>riTai)  are  mentioned,  and  disposed  of
collectively  in  a  single  panegyric.  Here  already,  that
is  to  say,  we  have  the  same  consolidation  as  we  have
seen  (§  21)  in  the  Mishna  (where  a  single  authorship  in
the  persons  of  '  the  men  of  the  great  synagogue '  has  to
be  found  for  the  one  book  of  the  twelve).  We  may  be
sure  that  Jesus  b.  Sira  found  the  twelve  books  already
copied  upon  a  single  roll,  and  thus  in  their  final  form.
By  his  time  the  prophetic  canon  had  been  closed.*

The  conclusion  of  this  hymn  (chap.  ftO)  answers  the
question  as  to  the  date  of  its  author.  It  is  the  panegyric
on  Simon  b.  Onias  who  was  high  priest  in  Jesus  b.  .Sira's
own  day.  In  this  instance,  it  is  certainly  not  .Simon  the
Just  (cp  §  36)  that  is  intended,  if  it  were  only  on  account
of  the  absence  of  the  surname  distinctively  given  in
Josephus  and  the  Mishna.  The  question  is  decided  for
Simon  II.  (circa  200)  by  the  prologue  of  the  translator,
grandson  of  the  author,  who  made  his  version  later  than
132 B.C. (see  EcCLESiASTicu.s, §  S).-* We  therefore

1  The  arguments  for  utter  rejection  of  this  statement  can  best
be  read  in  Winer,  ///Fi?(3>2  353/  The  view  taken  in  the  text
seems  to  be  shared  by  We.  when  he  writes  {f/G  251  ;  2nd  ed.
2S6  ;  3ril  ed.  297)  :  '  They  (the  Pharisees)  stood  up  against  the
Sadducees  for  the  enlargement  of  the  canon.'  Another  view  is
expressed  in  /rra/.C)  514.

2  The  precedence  here  given  him  has  no  bearing  on  the  place
assigned  to  his  book  in  the  Prophetic  canon  (cp  above,  §  8).
1 1  is  the  chronological  succession  of  the  persons  that  is  being
dealt  with.

3  The  doubt  raised  (not  for  the  first  time)  by  Bohme  (in
ZATW  ~  ■2io  ['87])  against  the  genuineness  of  4!>  10a,  where
the  XII  are  referred  to,  was  excellently  disposed  of  by  Niildeke
(ZA  TII^S  156  ['88]),  by  the  evidence  of  the  Syriac  translation
(which  rests  immediately  on  the  Hebrew),  and  by  showing  that
in  T.  loi^,  according  to  Cod.  A  and  others,  the  correct  reading
is  the  plural  napeKa\eiTav  (followed  by  yap  instead  of  Se),  and
iKvTpMO-aino,  so  that  10*  refers  not  to  Ezekiel  but  to  the  XII.
Another_  circumstance  ought  to  be  noted.  If  the  praise  of
Ezekiel  is  completed  in  v.  By?,  it  agrees  in  length  and  substance
exactly  with  that  of  Jeremiah  in  v.  7,  with  that  of  Hezekiah
(apart  from  Isaiah)  in  4824/r,  and  finally  with  that  of  the  XII,
if  V.  10  is  taken  as  applying  wholly  to  them.  To  place  10*
before  loa  as  Zockler  {Die  Apokryphen  lies  AT,  etc.,  1891,
p.  3487?)  silently  does  is  quite  inadmissible.  To  all  this  must
now  be  added  the  testimony  of  the  lately  discovered  Hebrew.
The  genuineness  of  48  23  J^.  is  doubted  by  Duhm  (Jesaja,
1892,  p.  vii),  but  without  any  reasons  being  given.  On  p.  xiv.
he  appears  to  be  able  to  accept  the  genuineness.

4  The  arguments  by  which  J.  Hal^vy  {P.tude  sur  la  partie
du  texte  Hcbreu  de  t Eiclesiastique  reccmment  decou-jcrte,
1897)  endeavours  to  prove  that  Simon  I.,  the  Just,  is  the  hero
of  chap.  50,  have  failed  to  convince  the  present  writer.  Still
it  should  be  kept  in  mind  that  even  if  Halivy  were  right  the

664


CANON

conclude — and  the  conclusion  ajjrces  wiih  the  course  of
the  dcvdopmenl  traced  alx)vc — that  the  pro|)hi'tic  collec-
tion alreatly  existed  as  such,  pretty  much  in  its  present
form,  about  the  year  aoo  B.C.'

Notable  reasons  for  the  same  conclusion  are  suppHed

l)y  the  Mook  of  I  )anicl  ( written  aliout  164  B.  c. ). In  the  first

I )laie  there  is  a  reason  of  a  ixjsitive  character  :

40.  Other  ,„  y_,  ^^^.  ,j„j  j^.^ ^^u  /.  cited  as  oncca

■  ('in  the  [Holy]  Scriptures').  Of  greater
weight,  howrver,  is  a  negative  reason  :  the  Hook  of
Daniel  itself  found  a  place — not  among  the  Prophets,  but
— among  the  Writings.  Other  reasons  for  this  niight  Ix;
conjectured  ;  '■'  but  the  most  probable  one  still  is  that
at  the  time  of  its  recognition  as  canonical  the  canon
of  the  I'rophets  had  in  current  o|)inion  l)een  already
definitely  completed.  The  time  of  atlmission,  how-
ever, nmst  lie  taken  to  h.ive  been  considerably  later
than  the  dale  of  com|X)sition  (164  B.C.),  and  so  this
evidence  does  not  go  for  much.  Still  less  important
is  the  further  fact,  that  the  work  of  the  Chronicler  (com-
posed during  the  first  half  of  the  third  century)  is  not
included  among  the  I'ormer  Prophets.  Its  S[)ecial
character  as  a  Midrash  to  already  accepted  biblical
lx)oks  must  long  have  prevented  its  attaining  the  dignity
of  canonization  ;  but  a  further  circumstance  helped  to
impede  its  recognition.  The  immediate  contiguity  of  the
Former  I'rophets  and  the  Pooks  of  Jeremiah  and  Ezekiel
(brought  to  their  final  form  at  an  early  date)  must
comi)aratively  .soon  have  c(jme  to  be  regarded  as  fi.xed
and  unalterable.*'  whilst,  on  the  other  hand,  to  apjx'nd
Chronicles  to  the  later  prophets  w.is  plainly  imjx)ssible.
It  remains,  then,  that  the  completion  of  the  n;//<r//«//—
we  nii_L;ht  almost  sav  also  of  the  canon— oi  the  Prophets

41.  Prophetic  ''''') '''^*^!Lj"  /=°"'-^'^ ^f '^'^ ^hi'-'l

^  centurv. This,  however,  does  not  vet

canon v, ' .  ,. .  . •

subordinate.  \''']^  "'  ^l  ^"  altogether  unambiguous
rindmgwuh  reference  to  their  'canoniza-
tion.'  It  is  only  misleading  if  we  allow  ourselves,  with-
out (jualillcation,  to  carry  back  the  idea  of  '  canoniciiy,'
in  the  fulIy-develo|X'd  form  which  it  finally  reached,  to
the  earliest  beginnings  of  the  formation  of  a  canon.  It
was  impossible  for  the  Projihcts  ever  to  receive  a
canonical  value  in  the  .same  sense  in  which  this  was
given  to  the  Law  ;  the  subordinate  character  of  the  Pro-
phetic canon  remains  fixed  for  all  coining  time.^  Holi-
ness was,  and  continued  to  be,  a  relative  conception,
and  we  do  not  need  to  give  to  the  designation  d'tSCH
in  Dan.  82  the  same  fulness  of  meaning  that  it  has  in  the
Talmud.  The  gulf  lx.>tween  the  Law  and  all  the  remain-
ing Ixioks  could  be  bridged  only  artificially,  and  we
know  with  certainty  that  the  bridging  idea — the  idea  of
a  property  conmion  to  all  holy  Ixxjks,  that  of  '  defiling
the  hands  ' — was  an  invention  of  Pharisaic  scholasticism,
withstood  by  the  Sadducees  even  after  the  destruction
of  Jerusalem  (YaJ.  46).  Until  this  bridge  had  been
securely  constructed  there  was  no  idea  of  a  canonicity
that  included  all  three  portions  equally.  This  is  proved
by  a  fact  to  which  we  have  already  referred, — the  Saddu-
cean  recognition  of  nothing  but  the  Law.  liefore  a
definitive  union  of  the  Prophetic  canon  with  that  of  the

date  of  Ecclesiasticus  ought  not  to  be  pushed  back  more  than
fifty  or  -sixty  years.  The  author  may  be  describinj;  in  his  old
age  remembrances  from  his  early  youth.  See  Kautzsch  in  StK'r,
1808,  p.  198/

•  The  possibility  of  much  later  additions  to  the  books  admitted
to  this  canon  is  unfortunately  by  no  means  excluded,  as  is
sufficiently  evidcnceil  by  the  simple  fact  that  even  the  Pentateuch
continued  to  be  added  to  long  after  its  canonization  (see  §  37).
Thus  there  is  nothing  in  the  nature  of  the  case  to  prevent  us  from
attributing  the  appendices  to  Zechariah  (ch.ips.  9-14)  to  the  later
Maccabean  period,  as  We.  {f/G  228,  n.  2,  3rd  ed.  274,  n.  2)
appears  to  do  (cp  Zkchariaii  ii.),  or  admitting  the  interpo-
lation of  p.iss.iges  in  Isaiah  (already  enlarged  by  the  addition  of
chaps.  40t>f!)  .xs  is  indicated  by  Duhms  results.  In  these  cases,
however,  we  are  justified  in  demanding  very  conclusive  arguments.

-  Cp,  for  example,  Duhm,  o/.  cit.  vi.  n.  i.

S  llence  also  the  exclusion  o:'  the  Book  of  Ruth.

*  As  to  this  cp  the  very  significant  passage  (Mt^Ua,  aja)
quoted  in  Marx,  39,  n.  3.

665


CANON

I^w  could  be  eflfected  the  way  had  to  be  prcjjared  by  a
continually  rising  appreciation  of  the  proplietic  literature,
and  by  an  ever-growing  conception  of  its  s;mctity.  To
this  result  the  Maccalx^n  jxrritxl  must  unquestionably
have  contributed  much.  Such  [lassages  as  i  Mace.  4  46
5*27  l-l4»  ami  the  .Song  of  the  Three  C  hildren  (i'.  14  ;  cp
Ps.  749)  show  not  only  how  far  jx-ople  then  felt  them-
selves to  be  removed  from  the  prophetic  times,  but
also  how  highly  those  times  were  thought  of.  .Stiil  we
must  lx,'ar  in  mind  the  pas.sage  in  2  Mace.  ('213)  already
referred  to  (§  27),  which  seems  to  show  that,  even  in
the  last  century  B.C.,  it  was  still  possible  to  six;ak  of  the
Prophets  and  of  profane  writings,  in  the  same  breath,
as  jxirts  of  the  same  library.

On  the  other  hand,  it  can  Ixi  shown  that  there  was
once  a  tim<!  in  which  the Prophets,  but  not  the  Hagio-

42 PrODhets Si^'^P^i^.  could  be  spoken  of  along  with
nreceded ^''^  ''"'^  '^  included  among  the  sacred

HM-ioeranha  ^^'"'''"Ks-  -^s  the  name  '  the  Law  *  can
o  o  P  ■  ijg  uj^.(|  (Q  designate  the  whole  tripartite
canon  (see  alxjve,  §  26),  so  also  ean  the  double  name
'  the  Law  and  the  Prophets.'  (Cp,  in  NT,  .\lt.  617  7  12
Lk.  16 16  29  31  .Acts  2823,  and,  in  the  tradition  of  the
synagogue  J^cs/i  /nish-Shann,  46  ;  Jiabu  Ii.  8  14  ;  Talm.
J.  Me:{iiLi,  ,3  i  ;  also  Hiiha  Ii.  12,  t>).^  It  m.iy  also  be
pointed  out  that  the  name  Kabbald  ('Tradition')  in-
cludes the  Prophets  and  the  Writings  (cp  the  numerous
passages  in  Zunz,  44  n.  a),  but  the  synonymous  e.vpres-
sion  Ashlcm/a  (see  alxjve,  §  33),  if  we  are  correctly
informed  (Strack,  439),  the  prophets  only.

(3)  The  third  cation:  the  Hai^iographa.  —  Here,
again,  there  is  no  possibility  of  doubt  that,  at  the  time
43.  Distinction  ^f""/'^*-'  prophetic  collection  was
between  them.  !=^°^'''''  "'"^^^  «^  ^'^*'^'  ^^  now  find
in  our  third  canon  was  already  m
existence,  and  yet  it  did  not  gain  admi.ssion  into  the
collection  and  found  no  place  in  the  canon  of  that  day.
At  bottom  the  reason  is  self-evident  ;  it  was  a  collection
of  pro])hets  that  was  Ix-ing  made,  a  collection,  that  is  to
say,  of  writings  in  which  G(k1  himself  spoke,  enforcing
the  Law  by  the  mouth  of  his  messengers.  Such  other
writings  as  were  then  e.vtant  did  not  profess  to  be
m.T  CN3  ( '  oracle  of  Yahwe,'  i:V  '  thus  saith  the  Lord  '),
the  immediate  utterance  of  the  (io<l  of  Israel.  One  of
them,  indeed,  the  earlier  nucleus  of  the  Psalter,  was  in
use  as  the  hymn-book  of  the  Temple  services  ;  but  to
have  admitted  it  into  the  canon  on  that  account  would
have  Ix-en  very  nnich  the  same  .is  if  now  a  Christian
church  were  to  place  its  hynmal  among  its  symlx)lical
books.  There  was  necessary,  .tccordingly,  a  further  (cp
S  34)  extension  of  the  idea  '.Sacred  Writings'  or  (using
the  word  with  caution)  of  the  idea  of  the  'canon,'  and
(so  to  say)  a  reduced  intensity,  Ix'fore  any  further  books
could  find  admission,  not  of  course  into  either  of  the
canons  already  existing,  but  into  a  third,  suborilinate  in
rank  to  these.  It  is  obvious,  further,  that  again  a  con-
siderable period  must  have  elapsed  before  this  extension
of  the  idea  could  make  w.ay,  and  thus  render  jxjssible
the  admission  of  Ixxiks  which,  at  the  time  when  the
projjhetic  canon  was  closet!,  were  still  unwritten.

Hesides  the  (obvious)  condition  of  a  lx)oks  having  a
religious character, the only remaining  condition  de-

44 End  of '"•^"'^"' '^V  '''^' ''^^^ implied  in the ex-

nronhetie P''*"ded idea  of canon is  the  condition

^ -j^j of date. Those lxx)ks were accepted
™ * which were considered to have been
written  during  the  prophetic  periixl.

Our  earliest  witness  to  this  is  Josephus.  In  the  p.ossage  already
referretl  to  above  (c.  Ap.\»),  after  setting  forth  his  tripartite
division  of  the  sacred  writings  (5-^-13-^4),  he  goes  on  to  s.ny  : —
OTO  hi  '.KprcL(ip(ov  M'XP'  ''<'"  *<•*'  'i^'^'  ]^povov  ytypairrai  /liy
ixaa-ra,  nia-rtiu^  i'  oi'x  Ofioiat  rifiuirai  Ton  npi)  avnuf  ita  rb  fti|
•yevfo^ai  ttji'  Tuif  irpo</>ino»'  atcpi^TJ  {lajox'if.  I  hat  is  to  s.iy,  the
closes  with


prophetic  period


th  Artaxerxes  (Ezra  and  Nehemiah),


1  Oratz,  isoyr,  wishes  to  exclude  the  Hagiographa  in  both
cases.  It  must  be  concealed  that  the  evidence  for  their  inclusion
cannot  be  regarded  as  being  so  certain  in  the  case  of  the  '  Law
and  the  Prophets '  as  it  is  m  that  of  the  '  Law '  alotie.

666


CANON

snd  canonicity  (even  in  the  case  of  non-prophetical  books)  is
guaranteeil  only  by  coiitemporaiieouMness  with  the  continuous
series  of  the  prophets.  This  view  is  confirmed  by  the  Talmudic
tradition.  Tos.  Vadayim,  2  13  (p.  683)  rules  that  '  books  such  as
Ben  Sira  [Ecclesiaslicus]  and  all  books  written  -jS'iti  Jk30  do
not  defile  the  hands.'  This  i;S'K1  JK3p— /.^.,  'from  that  time
forward  '—is  the  standing  expression  for  the  cessation  of  the
prophetic  period.  Corresponding  with  it  is  the  other  phrase  ly
)K3  ('  ""til  then '),  denoting  this  period.  Further  confirmation
IS  found  in  San.  28/1  :  '  Books  like  Ben  Sira  and  similar  books
writ  ten  />y;«  7i<»/  //«/<>  omvar./s  may  be  read  as  one  reads  a  letter '
(cp  on  this,  Buhl,  8  a).  The  point  of  time  is  fixed  by  a  passage
in  Sfder  otam  rahba,  30,  .-is  the  time  of  .Mexander  the  Mace-
donian :  '  I'he  rou^^h  he-goat  (Dan.  821)  is  Alexander  the
Macedonian,  who  reigned  twelve  years  ;  until  then  the  prophets
prophesied  by  the  Holy  .Spirit  \  from  that  time/ortvardmcXvn^
thine  ear  and  hearken  to  the  words  of  the  ivise.''^  If  Alexander
the  Great  here  takes  the  place  of  Artaxerxes  in  Josephus,  the
explanation  is  simply  that,  according  to  the  Jewish  chronology
and  cotiception  of  history,  H.-iggai  and  Zechariah,  Ezra  and
Malachi  all  lived  at  the  same  time,  which  is  contiguous  with  that
of  Alexander.2

We  now  know,  therefore,  that  it  is  not  out  of  mei^
caprice,  but  in  accordance  with  a  settled  doctrine,  that
4  Esd.  r4  and  B.iha  B.ithra  \^a  declare  all  the  canonical
books  to  have  been  already  in  existence  in  Ezra's  time.
The  time  limit  was  a  fixed  one  ;  difference  of  view  was
possible  only  with  regard  to  the  person  of  the  author.
From  this  doctrine  we  deduce  the  proposition  :  Into  the
third  canon,  that  of  the  Hagiographa,  were  received  all
books  of  a  religious  character  of  which  the  date  was
believed  to  go  back  as  far  as  to  the  Prophetic  period,  that
is,  to  the  time  of  Ezra  and  the  Great  Assembly.

The  reason  for  the  setting  up  of  such  a  standard  is
easily  intelligible. Down  to the time of  the  Great

45  Rnaqon  -Assembly,  the  Spirit  of  God  had  been
of  limit  operative  not  only  in  the  Law  but  also
outside  of  it,  namely  in  the  Prophets  ;  but
'  from  that  time  onwards '  the  Law  took  the  command
alone.  '  Until  then '  it  was  possible  to  point  to  the
presence  of  the  factor  which  was  essential  to  the  pro-
duction of  sacred  writings,  but  '  from  that  time  onwarils '
it  was  not.  Hence  the  conviction  that  the  divine  pro-
ductive force  had  manifested  itself  even  in  those  cases
where  the  writing  did  not  claim  to  be  an  immediate  divine
utterance  ;  but  only  down  to  the  close  of  the  prophetic'
f)eriod.  The  proposition  we  have  just  formulated  is
sutticient  to  explain  the  reception  or  non-reception  of
all  the  books  that  we  now  have  to  deal  with.  Job  was
received  as,  according  to  general  belief,  a  book  of
venerable  antiquity  ;  Ruth  .as  a  narrative  relating  to  the
period  of  the  judges,  and  therefore  (as  was  invariably
assumed  as  matter  of  course  in  the  case  of  historical
narratives)  as  dating  from  the  same  time  ;  the  Psalms  as
broadly  covered  by  the  general  idea  that  they  were
'  David's  Psalms' ;  Proverbs,  Canticles,  and  Ecclesiastes
as  resting  on  Solomon's  name  ;  Lamentations  as  rest-
ing on  that  of  Jeremiah  ;  Daniel  as  a  prophet  of  the
Persian  period  (which  in  its  whole  extent  was  supposed
to  fall  within  the  prophetic  age)  overlooked  in  the  earlier
collection.  The  same  consideration  held  good  for
Esther,  regarded  as  a  history  book.  At  the  close  comes
the  Book  of  Ezra — separated  from  the  general  work  of
the  Chronicler-' — which,  in  its  account  of  the  Great
Assembly,  contained  the  original  document  on  the  close
of  the  Prophetical  period  and  so,  ;is  it  were,  puts  the

4fi  AnnAn  colojjhon  to  the  completed  canon.  Had
dkes  '^'^^'  ^'"^  "°'^'  *^''*"  Chronicles—/..?. ,  the  first
part  of  the  Chronicler's  work — been  in-
corporated with  the  canon  simultaneously  with  the
incorporation  of  its  second  part,  the  Rook  of  Ezra,  the
two  would  never  have  been  separated,  and  even  arranged'
in  an  order  contrary  to  the  chronological  (cp  Historic.m.
LiTEUATURK,  §15).  We  may  therefore  say  with  all
confidence  that Chronicles  did  not  come  in  till  after-

1  '  The  wise '  are  the  (pKJst  -  canonical)  scribes ;  cp  Weber,

121^

-  Cp  copious  proofs  for  this  point,  already  more  than  once
touched  on  above,  in  Marx  (see  below,  \  75),  53,  n.  4.
3  Cp  Chronici.es,  i  2  and  Ezka,  f  8.

667


CANON

wards,  as  an  appendix  to  the  canon.  The  reason  for
its  original  exclusion  w.as  no  doubt  the  consciousness  that,
strictly,  it  was  but  a  Midrash  to  other  canonical  books.
The  second  part  of  the  Chronicler's  work,  once  canonized,
tended  to  take  the  other  along  with  it ;  possibly  too  the
Book  of  Chronicles  may  have  been  helped  by  the  minute-
ness with  which  it  goes  into  the  temple  service — a  feature
to  which  at  a  later  date,  in  the  Massoretic  arrangement
(see  above,  §  8),  it  was  indebted  for  a  first  place  among
the  Hagiographx  From  this  one  certain  case,  the  last,
may  be  inferred  the  possibility  that  other  books  also,
especially  the  immediately  preceding  ones  ( Ezra,  Esther,
Daniel ;  perhaps  also  Ruth  :  see  above,  §  9),  were  only
gradually  added,  one  by  one,  to  the  third  canon  by
way  of  appendices.  At  least,  they  all  of  them  have  the
appearance  of  being,  as  to  their  contents,  appendices  to
the  two  halves  of  the  Prophetic  canon,  whilst  the  remain-
ing si.x  books  form  a  class  by  themselves.  W'e  are  not,
however,  in  a  position  to  speak  with  certainty  here.

Conversely,  all  other  writings,  so  far  as  not  excluded
by  reason of  their  language  or  some  exception  taken
47 Excluded  ^^  ^^^^^  contents,  may  safely  be  supposed
books.  ^°  have  been  excluded  either  because,

manifestly  and  on  their  own  confession,
they  did  not  go  back  to  the  Prophetic  time,  or  because
their  claim  to  do  so  was  not  admitted. ^  The  first-men-
tioned reason  must  have  been  what  operated  in  the  case
of  works  of  so  high  a  standing  as  i  Slacc.  and  Ecclesi-
asticus  ;  as  instances  of  the  application  of  the  second
principle,  we  may  take  (in  contrast  to  Daniel)  the  books
of  Baruch  and  Enoch.''

The attempt to determine the  date  at which the

canon  of the Hagiographa, and with it that of  the

48  Date cniir*-"  OT,  was  finally  closed,  is  again

• r  _j 1- '-A surrounded  with  the  vcrv  greatest  diffi-

inienor  limit. ,. , . . i • -.u c .u

culty. Let  us,  to  begm  with, fix  the

terminus  ad  quern.  It  is  given  us  in  the  passages,
frequently  referred  to  already,  in  Josephus  {c.  Ap.  1  8)
and  4  Esdras  (chap.  14),  where  the  entire  corpus  of  the
or  Scriptures,  in  twenty-two  or  twenty-four  books,  is
set  apart  from  all  other  writings.  As  to  the  extent  of
the  canon,  unanimity  had  been  reached  by  at  least
somewhere  about  the  year  100  A.D.

For  a  superior  limit  we  shall  have  to  begin  where  our
investigation as  to the prophetic canon ended — with
the  son  of  Sirach. In  his  hymn  he  com-
memorates,  as  the  last  of  the  heroes  of


49.  Superior
Umit.


Israel,  Zerubb.abel  and  Joshua  as  well  as
Nehemiah,  thereby  conclusively  showing  that  he  was
acquainted  with  the  work  of  the  Chronicler  (49  ii_^ ).
Moreover,  he  makes  use  of  p;issages  from  the  Psalms.
Neither  fact  proves  anything  for  a  third  canon  ;  the
fact  th.at  he  found  his  ideal  and  patterti  in  the  prophets
is  rather  against  this  (2433:  ert  hiha.(SKO.\ia.v  wj-  irpo-
ip-qreiav  iKX^^)-  The  prologue  of  his  descendant  (later
than  132  B.C.)  shows  still  more  unmistakably  th.at  no
definite  third  canon  w.as  then  in  existence,  even  although
already  a  certain  number  of  books  had  begun  to  attach
themselves  to  the  L.aw  and  the  Prophets.  Three  times
he  designates  the  whole  aggregate  of  the  literature  which
had  been  handed  down,  to  which  also  his  ancestor  h.ad
sought  to  add  his  quota,  as  6  vouos  /cat  oi  rpoip^at.
Kal  tA  dWa  ri  kut'  ai'ToiH  iiKoXovdTjKSra  ;  6.  y.  k.  ol
irp.  K.  TO.  dXXa  wdrpia  ^i^Xia  ;  6.  v.  k.  al  irpo<f)rjT(iai  (oi
xpofprJTai  [C])  K.  TO.  XoiirA  n^v  ^t^Xiwv.  What  is  thus
designated  by  three  different  indetermin.ate  expressions
cannot  have  lieen  a  definite  collection.  That  of  these
books,  in  whole  or  in  part,  there  were  already  Greek
translations  we  can  gather  from  the  Prologue  ;  but  we
get  no  help  either  from  this  or  from  the  LXX  generally.

1  '  Some  found  their  way  in,  others  not,  on  grounds  of  taste —
the  taste  of  the  period,'  says  Wcllhausen  (Kin/.l*'  557,  6th  ed.
512).  No  doubt  considerations  of  taste  must  have  had  influence
on  the  decisiori  whether  the  books  in  question  came  up  to  the
st.indard  ;  but  it  was  the  doctrine  that  formally  decided.

2  As  to  Ecclesiasticus  note  the  express  testimony  of  Tosephta
and  Gemara  (above,  §  44X

668


CANON

In  I  Marc.  7 16/  we  fui'l  I's.  79  2  /  cited  with  the
formula  <cara  TOf  \biyo¥  fle  (TOi>t  X^TOit  oOi  [A])  lypa^t,
in  other  words., a*  Holy  Scripture.  In  259/  I^aiiicl  and
his  three  friends  are  named  as  patterns  in  immediate
connection  with  I-^lijah,  David.  Caleb,  and  others  ;  1  54
seems  to  cjuotc  Daniels  prediction  ( Dan.  927).  We  here
see,  somewhere  about  the  close  of  the  second  or  the
beginning  of  the  last  century  H.c.  the  Hook  of  iMniel
for  the  first  time  coming  into  evidence  as  a  fully  ac-
credited authority — we  could  not  possibly  have  expected
so  to  find  it  at  any  earlier  date.

Unfortunately  these  testimonies,  such  as  they  are,  are
foUowetl  by  a  very  wide  hiatus.  Fhilo  (ob.  circ.  50
Phil  A.  i>. )  is  our  next  resort;  but,  great  as  is
■  the  extent  of  his  writings  (all  proceeding
uncompromisingly  on  the  allegorical  method  of  biblical
interpretation),  they  do  not  yield  us  much  that  is  satis-
factory in  our  present  inquiry.*  Nowhere  do  we  find
a  witness  to  a  tripartite  canon."  Of  the  canonical
books  he  nowhere  quotes  llzj,'kiel,  any  of  the  five
Megilloth,  Daniel,  or  Chronicles.'  The  blank  is  a  great
one.  Still  we  may  find  some  compensation  in  the  fact
that  at  least  the  IJook  of  Kzra  is  cited  with  the  solemn
formula  applicable  to  a  divinely  inspired  writing.*  A
certain  conclusion  as  to  the  incompleteness  of  the  canon
cannot  be  draw  n  from  this  silence  regarding  many  txx)ks.
On  the  other  hand,  real  importance  attaches  to  the
following  piece  of  negative  evidence  :  Philo,  although
(as  an  Alexandrian)  he  must  have  Ijeen  actiuainted  with
many  non-canonical  books,  and  indeed  actually  l>etrays
such  acquaintance,  in  no  instance  uses  them  in  the
same  way  as  the  canonical.  This  allows  as  probable
the  inference  that  a  definitely  closed  canon  was  known*
to  him  ;  only  we  are  not  able  to  say  from  any  data
supplied  by  him  what  was  the  extent  of  that  canon  in
its  third  part.

Our  next  witness  is  the  NT.  In  Lk.  2444  we  have
evidence  of  the  tripartite  division,  for  '  the  psalms  '  prob-
WT  '^'^'-^  stands  a  potiori  for  the  whole  of  the
third  canon.  I'xclesiastes,  Canticles,  E.sther,
and  lizra  are  not  referred  to  at  all.  Of  course  here
again  nothing  certain  is  to  be  inferred  from  the  silence  ;
but,  if  other  considerations  came  into  play,  this  fact
also  ought  to  \x.  taken  into  account.  On  the  other
side,  the  certain  reference  to  Chronicles  in  Mt.  2:^35.
Lk.  11  SI*  is  entitled  to  have  weight.  The  quotation
of  Dan.  722  in  i  Cor.  62  also  must  !«  referred  to.®

There  thus  remains  a  space  of  something  like  two
centuries — say  from  the  end  of  the  second  century  B.C.

1  Cp  Homemann  {Obtervatioms  ad  illustraliontm  etoctrinir
de  coHoru yr.  ex  /'hi/one,  1775,  copious  extracts  from  which
are  given  in  Eichhorn's  hint.***  1  123^).  Till  the  appearance
of  Prof.  H.  K.  Kyle's  Phi/o  and  the  Holy  Scripture  K^'i),  the
statements  of  Hurnemann  had  never  been  verified  with  sufticient
care  ;  though,  on  the  other  hand,  they  had  not  in  any  point  l»een
shown  to  l>e  inaccurate.  Prof.  Kyle  s  results  do  not,  however,
differ  much  from  those  of  Homemann.

'•*  Apart  from  De  I' it.  Lontemfil.,  f  3,  probably  a  work  of  a
much  later  time,  (.'p  Lucius,  Die  Tluraf>euten,  1879,  and
Schurer's  review  of  Conybcare's  Philo  about  the  Contemplative
Lite,  TLZ,  20th  July  1895.

*  That  I  Ch.  7  14  is  quoted  in  the  tract  De  rongr.  qiurr.  erud.
rni/ia,  8,  is  asserted  b^  Hcrzfeld  (CIV  3q6  (1B57I ;  but  cp  also
Kichter's  edition  of  Philo,  1828),  and  has  been  taken  over  from
him  l>y  all  subsc(|uent  writers  ;  but  it  is  rather  Cs  enlarged  form
(enlareed  perhaps  from  Ch.)  of  Gen.  4«5  20,  which  varies  from  Ch.
Kyle  (Philo.  etc.,  p.  289)  finds  i  Ch.  9  i  /.  quoted  (De  Prtem.  et
Porn.  I  13,  ii.  420);  but  there  is  very  little  likeness  Ijetwecn  the
two  pa.vsages  (see,  however,  the  next  note).  Of  the  minor
prophets  only  Hosea,  Jonah,  and  Zcchariah  are  made  use  of;
but  this  guarantees  the  entire  liodckapropheton.

*  Unless  here  (De  con/.  Linguarum^  i  28,  1/)  the  whole  of
I  Ch.  3  Ijc  intended,  rather  than  (as  is  universally  assumed)
Ezra  8  2  (see  in  iCh.3  22  the  one  descendant  of  David  men-
tioned in  E?ra  8  2).  Cp  the  plur.  oi  iui^axiain*^  «.t.A.  and  c»
0a(riA(«ou(  ^ifiAoif.

'  IJy  many  the  expression  'from  ...  to'  there  used  is
•ctually  taken  to  mean  '  from  the  first  book  to  the  la.st  lxx>k  of
the  OT."  TT)en  the  passage  would  prove  the  close  of  the  canon
with  the  Book  of  Chronicles,  and,  in  fact,  its  close  altogether ;
but  the  expression  may  refer  to  the  sacrilege  implied  in  the
locality  of  Zechariab's  murder.


CANON

to  about  100  A.I). — within  winch  we  are  unai)ie  to  jxjint

out  .itiy  sure  indications  of  the  close  of  the  third  canon.

62  NodecUion-  '^y'*^^  <!'•  i73-^)  thinks  it  can  l^e  made

2nd  CM^  B  O °"'  *"^  "^  ^""^y  ^'«^  '^"^'^  °'  P*""^
* ability  that  the  close took place as

early  as  the  second  century  B.C.,  between  106  and  105,
the  year  of  the  death  of  John  Hyrcanus  II.  His  one
p>ositive  reason  '  is  that  the  civil  wars  and  scholastic  con-
troversies of  the  last  century  B.C.  must  have  withdrawn
interest  from  such  things  and  made  impossible  any
union  of  schools  or  any  public  step  that  could  alter  the
slittus  quo.  That  there  ever  was  a  union  of  schools,
however,  wc  have  every  reason  to  deny  ;  the  extension
of  the  canon  w.is  in  all  proljability  only  one  of  the
internal  affairs  of  the  Pharisaic  school  (cp  alxjve,  §  37).
Prom  this  it  necessarily  follows  that  there  is  no  question
alxjut  any  public  step  being  taken  —  say  a  deliljcrate
decision,  reached  once  for  all,  or  a  decree  of  any
authoritative  assembly.

We  actually  have  express  information,  however,  of
such  a  decision  at  a  much  later  time.  It  is  obvious
M'  h  ^^'^*  ^°  ^"''^  thing  would  have  been
■  neces.sary  if  a  binding  decision  had  al-
ready lj<.'en  long  in  exi.stence.  Wc  refer  at  present  to
the  controversy  of  which  we  read  in  the  Mishna  (  Yad.
85  ;  tp  l.diiyoth,  53).

The  general  proposition  there  laid  down  runs  as  follows  :
'All  holy  scrintures  (cnpn  »3ri;)2  defile  the  hands '  (cp  alxjve,
I  3);  next  follows  the  particular:  'Catiticlc-s  and  Ecclc->iaste»
defile  the  hands.'  Then  wc  have  the  controversy.  '  K.  Juda
said  :  Canticles  indeed  defiles  the  hands  ;  .-is  regards  Ecclesiastes
opinion  is  divided.  K.  Jose  said  :  Ecclcsiastci  does  not  defile
the  hands,  but  as  regards  Canticles  opinion  is  divided.  K.
Simon  said  :  About  Ecclesiastes  the  schojl  of  Shaniniai  gives
the  laxer,  the  school  of  Hillel  the  severer  decision  (here  compare
the  elucidation  in  liduyoth,!)-},  that  according  to  the  former
(.Shammaij  Ecclesiastes  does  not  defile  the  hands,  according  to
the  latter  it  does).»  K.  Simon  b.  '.\z.-iy  said  :  To  me  it  has  l<een
handed  down  from  the  mouth  of  the  seventy-two  elders  that,  on  the
day  on  which  K.  Elitzer  b  '.A/arya  was  made  supreme  head,  it  was
decided  that  (Ijoth)  Canlicles  and  Ecclcsia.stes  defile  the  hands.
R.  'Akiba  said  :  God  forbid  that  there  .should  ever  have  been
difference  of  opinion  in  Israel  about  Canticles,  as  if  it  did  not
defile  the  hands;  for  the  entire  world,  from  the  l>eginning  until
now,  does  not  outweigh  the  day  in  which  Canticles  was  given  to
IsraeL  For  indeed  (•2)  all  .Scriptures  (c'2in:)  ^re  holy  (z:~p),
but  Canticles  is  holy  of  holies  (z'tr\p  tnp)-  If  people  were
divided  in  opinion,  it  was  as  to  Ecclesiastes  alone.  R.  Johanan
b.  Jehoshua,  the  son  of  K.  'Akiba's  father-in-law,  said  :  -As  the
son  of 'Azay  says,  people  were  thus  divided  in  opinion,  and  it  is
thus  that  the  matter  has  been  decided.' ■•

It  has  Ix^n  contended  that  the  dispute  here  was  not

about  the  question  of  canonicity,  Ixjth  Uxjks  Ijeing  clearly

^ .  included  in  the  ojxrning  sentences  under

, ®^^§r the  category  of  holy,  and  that  the  word

Of  aispute.  ^^.  .j^  preserve,  lay  aside,  hide,'  the
technical  exjjression  for  the  treatment  with  which  the
boTiks  in  question  were  threatened,  dfx-s  not  mc*an  '  to
pronounce  ajjocryphal '  but  only  something  like  '  to
exclude  from  public  reading.''  Iloth  contentions  are
incorrect.  The  word  in  question  is  not  used  v\ith
reference  to  Fxxlesiasticus  or  other  a[XKryphal  works,
simply  h>ecause  no  one  had  ever  sjxjken  of  canonizing
them,  and  thus  thcTe  could  not  possibly  be  any  (juesiion
alxjut  doing  away  with  them  or  removing  them.  And
that  our  passage  certainly  is  discussing  the  question
whether  the  two  books  are Holy  .Scripture  or  not, is

1  A  second  argument  adduced  by  Kyle,  that  ohuined  by
reasoning  backwards  from  the  position  in  Josephus,  is  toned
down  by  Buhl  (p.  27)  to  the  more  moderate  view  that  '  the  third
part  .  .  had  already  received  its  canonical  completion  before
the  Christian  era."

*  By  this  we  are  certainly,  in  accordance  with  82,  to  under-
stand the  entire  canon.  On  the  other  hand,  the  CZTS  men-
tioned later  may  mean  merely  the  Hagiographa.

'  One  easily  perceives  that  in  point  of  fact  here  also  the
stricter  school  of^Shammai  remained  true  to  its  reputation,  and
no  less  so  the  laxer  school  of  Hillel.

*  The  tract,  Aboth  de  h'abti  Nathan  (chap.  1),  as  we  saw
above  (I  18),  carries  this  decision  back,  as  also  in  the  case  of


»Ct


tity  _

•  Cp  Ryle,  p.  ,43^


669


Proverbs,  to  the  time  of  'the  Great  Synagogue.

'  '.p  especially  Buhl,  7  /  26,  and  Ryle,  187  /  On  the
other  hand,  Cheyne  (OPi,  457)  acknowledges  that  the  queuioo  ia
that  of  canonicity.

670


CANON

made  unmistakably  evident  by  the  words  of  R.  'Aklba.
In  this  tinal  stage  of  the  development  the  question
caiiniJt  jjossibly  be  whether  {x-'rhaps,  though  integral
[jarts  of  Holy  Scripture,  they  nevertheless  do  not  defile
tlie  hands  :  it  is  established  that  '  all  Holy  Scriptures
defile  the  hands.'  Then  follows  the  Mishnic  dfcision
that  the  books  of  Canticles  and  Kcclesiastes  also  belong
to  this  class  ;  after  this,  the  discussion  which  preceded
the  decision,  and  the  grounds  on  which  it  was  reached,
are  given.

In  this  connection  the  precise  fi.xing  of  the  day  on
which  this  decision  was  arrived  at  is  important — the  day
on  which  at  Janmia  (Yabna)  R.  Gamaliel
.  J  J  ^^.^^  incidentally  deposed  from  his
place  as  president  of  the  court  of  justice,  an  incident  for
which  we  have  also  other  early  testimonies.^  This
event  certainly  falls  within  the  decades  that  immediately
followed  the  destruction  of  Jerusalem — whether  so  early
as  90  A.D.  (the  usual  assumption)  is  questionable,  but
100  A.D.  will  not  in  any  case  be  very  wide  of  the  mark.
This  period,  then,  saw  the  settlement  of  a  twofold
controversy,  which,  as  regards  one  half  of  it  at  least,
had  already  occupied  the  schools  of  Hillel  and  Shammai
about  a  century  before.  This  last  point  is  conceded
even  by  a  zealot  like  R.  'Aklba ;  his  unrestrained
exaggeration  as  regards  Canticles  is  only  a  veil  to  cover
the  weakness  of  his  position.'^  We  hear  nothing  of  any
decision  of  the  question  preceding  that  of  Janmia.
That,  after  the  proceedings  of  that  stormy  day,  the
question  should  have  been  discussed  again  some  decades
later  ( R.  'Akiba  oh.  135),  need  not  surprise  us.  No
new  decision  is  arrived  at  :  the  c|uestion  is  answered
by  a  confirmation  of  that  of  Janmia.  ■*

Thus,  then,  about  the  year  100  A.  11.  there  was
still,  as  an  unsettled  controversy,  the  same  cjuestion
as  to  the  canonicity  of  two  books,  which  as  regards  one
of  them  ( Ecclesiastes  ;  see  Ecci,i:si.\STK,s,  §  3)  had
been  a  notorious  point  of  difference  between  the  two
great  schools  of  the  Pharisees."* By  that  time,  however,

1  For  brevity"^  sake  it  will  be  enough  to  refer  to  the  e.xceed-
ingly  careful  histury  of  the  activity  of  the  scribes,  with  copious
proofs,  given  in  ,Sch;ircr  (2  301^/.).

2  The  remark  has  a  wider  application  to  rabbinical  Judaism
generally  and  the  other  Megilloth  :  cp  We.  EinlXM  554,  6th  ed.

•>  The  reader  is  referred  to  Buhl  (28  ff.\  Wildeboer
(58  ff.\  Kyle  (192  _^),  and  the  articles  PuRiMand  Nicanor
for  the  later  and  less  amply  attested  disputes  about  Esther,
Pro\erbs,  Ezekiel,  and  Jonah  (mentioned  in  the  order  of  the
degree  of  their  attestation).  It  is  only  in  the  case  of  the  Book
of  Esther  (q.v.,  §  12)  that  such  disputes  can  have  been  really
serious.  In  the  case  of  Ezekiel,  there  may  be  a  genuine  remin-
iscence of  the  embarrassment  caused  to  the  .scribes  by  the
discrepancies  between  the  Law  and  Ezek.  40-48,  perhaps  al.so  of
the  objections  raised  by  the  Sadducees  on  this  account.  In
part  at  least,  we  must  admit  the  truth  of  Strack's  remark
(p.  429)  that  'in  many  cases  the  discussions  leave  one  with  the
impression  that  the  objections  were  raised  merely  that  they
mi;:ht  be  refuted."  This  impression,  however,  no  way  impairs
that  of  the  real  seriousness  of  the  decision  of  Jamnia.  That
the  four  books  mentioned  above  are  not  named  in  }'«</.  85
proves  in  any  case  that  at  that  time  serious  objections  to  them
were  no  longer  entertained,  and  as  we  are  here  dealing  only  with
the  close  of  the  canon,  not  with  the  individual  books  of  which  it
was  composed,  this  fact  must  .suffice  for  us.

■*  This  is  not  inconsistent  with  the  fact  (which  we  learn  from
various  sources)  that  Simon  b.  Shetah  (who  belonged  to  the  third
of  the  five  '  pairs,'  in  the  first  half  of  the  first  century  B.C.)
quotes  Eccles.T  12  as  Holy  Scripture  (for  details  see  Buhl, p.  157".).
He  represents  the  one  side  of  the  case.  _  The  subject  is  one
that  belongs  to  '  special  introduction  ' ;  biit,  in  passing,  the  present
writer  may  be  allowed  to  express  the  view  that,  in  the  present
text  of  Ecclesiastes,  traces  are  to  be  clearly  found  of  the
assistance  which  it  was  found  necessary  to  give,  in  order  to
secure  for  this  book  a  place  in  the  canon.  In  12  10  it  is  testified
of  the  preacher  (nSnp)  that  he  was  a  well-meaning  and  respectable
man  (of  course  otherwise  unknown).  The  contradiction  to  1 1,
where  he  is  represented  as  being  'the  son  of  David,'  'king  in
Jerusalem,'  is  glaring.  These  words,  as  also  1  12  16,  a  good  deal
in  24-9  and  perhaps  also  7  15^  and  certainly  12  11-14  are  inter-
polations, by  means  of  which  alone  the  reception  of  the  book
mto  the  canon  was  rendered  possible.  It  is  self-evident  that
Canticles  also  became  a  part  of  the  canon,  only  by  virtue  of  its
superscription  which  ascribes  it  to  Solomon.  A  valuable  light
is  thrown  on  R.  '.-^kiba's  a.ssertion  that  Canticles  had  never
been  disputed,  and  at  the  same  time  a  trustworthy  evidence,

671


CANON

the  question  had  long  been  (substantially)  a  settled  one,

as  is  shown  by  the  passages  <|uoted  from  Josephus  and

4  Esdras  ;  settled,  however,  not  by  any  single  decision,

but  only  by  the  gradual  clearing  up  of  public  opinion.

Of  other  books  in  addition  to  the  twenty-four  there  is

no  question  whatever,  and  as  regards  those  two  about

which  alone  any  difficulty  is  possible,  common  opinion

came  to  Ije  so  decidedly  in  favour  of  what  claimed  to

be  the  stricter  but in  reality  was the looser  opinion,

that  the  zealot  R.  'Akiba  comes  forward  fanatically  on

the  side  of  Hillel.

We  may  now  venture  to  figure  to  ourselves  what  was

the  probable  course  of  the  development,  and  what  the

w^  Ti  li  attitude  assumed  bv  various  sections  of  the
66.  Result.  ," , ,

community  towards  the  decisive  questions.

It  is  probable  that  among  the  Sopherim  (professional
students  of  Scripture)  of  the  last  century  B.C.,  but
without  the  co-operation  of  the  Sadducean  priestly
nobility,  there  was  gradually  formulated  a  scholastic
doctrine  as  to  which  of  the  many  religious  writings  then
current  ^  could  establish  a  just  claim  to  a  sacred  char-
acter. We  have  already  seen  by  what  standard  the
writings  were  judged.  As  this  doctrine  gradually  took
shape,  unanimity  was  reached  on  every  point  except
on  a  dispute  with  reference  to  two  minor  books,
in  which,  as  was  natural,  the  victory  was  ultimately
gained  by  the  more  liberal  view.  This  doctrine  of  the
Sopherim,  as  being  the  view  of  those  who  were  the  only
qualified  judges  on  the  special  subject,  readily  gained
admission  amongst  such  as  were  in  doubt  and  sought
to  inform  themselves.'-'  Thus  the  learned  Philo,  though
living  in  Alexandria,  takes  very  good  care  not  to  con-
travene the  stricter  practice  ;  what  we  know  about  the
opposition  offered  to  the  books  of  Ecclesiastes,  Canticles,
and  Esther,  even  suggests  the  possibility  (incapable  of
course  of  proof)  that  his  silence  about  certain  books
(cp  above,  §  50)  really  arises  from  a  still  greater  strict-
ness. -As  a  convert  to  Pharisaism,  Josephus  professes
the  school  doctrine  of  his  teachers  with  an  emphasis  all
the  greater  because  his  own  personal  leanings  were
(perhaps)  against  such  exclusiveness.  On  the  other
hand,  though  the  doctrine  made  way,  yet  the  majority
of  the  people  betook  themselves  quite  naturally  to  the
mass  of  apocalyptic  and  legendary  literature,  which,
in  the  century  immediately  before  and  after  the  birth  of
Jesus,  exercised  a  very  great  infiuence,  and  did  much
to  prepare  the  way  for  Christianity.  The  formulated
theory  possessed  obvious  advantages,  however,  and  the
Jewish  war  and  the  destruction  of  Jerusalem  left  the
Pharisees  in  sole  possession  of  the  leadership  of  Israel.
This  is  shown  most  clearly  by  4  Esdras.  Against  his
will,  the  author  of  that  book  is  constrained  to  acknow-
ledge the  divine  authority  of  the  canon  with  its  tuenty-
four  constituent  parts.  Being,  however,  a  thoroughgoing
partisan  of  the  apocalyptic  literature,  he  outdoes  the
Pharisees.  To  the  seventy  books-'  w  hich  they  exclude  he
attributes  a  still  higher  authority,  placing  them  in  an
esoteric  as  distinguished  from  an  exoteric  canon.

By  the  end  of  the  first  century  the  scribes  had  settled
the  last  of  the  questions  controverted  in  the  schools,
and  not  long  after  the  beginning  of  the  second  century
(R.  'Akiba  t)/^.  135),  to  refer  to  the  decision  at  Janmia
is  decisive.  Later,  following  in  '.Akiba's  footsteps,  the
scribes  succeeded,  not  only  in  obliterating  every  trace

showing  how  long  its  true  character  still  continued  to  be  known,
is  conveyed  by  the  information  that  R.  'Akiba  himself  hurled
an  anathema  against  those  who  sang  the  Song  of  Songs  with
wanton  voice  in  houses  of  public  entertainment  (Tosephta,
Sank.  chap.  12  ;  cp  WRS,  O/yO'^l  186).

1  To  this  period  and  not  to  the  fourth  or  the  third  century  B.C.
bel(Jngs  the  complaint,  e.xpressed  in  the  epilogue  of  Ecclesiastes
(Eccles.  12  12),  as  to  the  making  of  many  books.

2  If,  as  we  have  conjectured,  the  Sadducees  were  in  general
opposed  to,  or  suspicious  of,  the  recognition  of  any  sacred
writings  besides  the  Law,  there  would  be  an  open  field
for  a  view  like  that  of  the  Pharisees,  which  took  a  middle  course
between  Sadducean  rigour  and  the  fashionable  tendency  to  the
endless  multiplication  of  religious  literature.

>*  In  round  numbers  of  course.

672


CANON

of  variations  in  the  text,  but  also  in  driving  from  circu-
lation the  whole  bocly  of  extra-canonical  literature.'

Christianity,  however,  in  the  vigour  of  its  youth,
eniaiicii Kited  from  the  authority  of  the  scrities,  continued
_.  ,  to  pursue  the  old  ways.  In  the  rejected
♦1  ^*  literature  it  discovered  prophecies  of  the
tlanity.  .,p|^.;jring  of  Jesus  ;  and  what  the  Pharisees
(Icstioyi-d  in  the  origin.al  language  it  eagerly  handed
down  in  translations  and  revisions  to  succeeding  genera-
tions. The  N'T  writers  show  no  scruple  in  quoting
extra-canonical  Ixjoks  as  sacred,  and  we  find  ascril)ed
to  Jesus  some  expressions  quoted  as  Holy  Writ  (Lk.
Il4g;  Jn.  7,18)  which  are  not  contained  in  the  OT.''
What  is  more,  examples  of  this  form  of  Jewish  literature
fused  with  Christian  elements,  or  worked  over  from  the
Christian  ]M)int  of  view,  have  found  their  w.iy  into  the
canon  of  the  NT  itself— a  fact  which  only  lately  has
lx?gun  to  receive  the  attention  it  deserves.^

This  indei)eiulent  drift  of  tendency  within  the  Christian
Clnirtli  greatly  increases  the  difliculty  of  estimating  the
Al  so-called  'canon  of  the  Alexandrians. '■'  As
D8.  Alex-  jg  ^^.^.|j  j.„o^^.,^  py^.n  tl,y  oldest  extant
andnan  j^j^^^  ^^  ^^^  j^^  contain,  in  addition  to  the
canon,  canonical  books,  a  greatly  v.i.rying  number
of  writings  which  are  not  recognised  in  the  canon  of
the  synagogue,  and  indeed  in  some  cases  were  not  even
originally  written  in  Hebrew.  On  the  other  hand,  the
oldest  of  these  MSS  are  several  centuries  later  than  the
Christian  era,  and  are  the  work  of  Christian  copyists.
It  Ix'comes  a  question,  therefore,  which  is  the  earlier:
the  freer  praxis  of  the  Alexandrian  Jews  or  that  of
primitive  Christianity  ;  whether  the  greater  compass  of
the  LXM  canon  of  the  Alexandrians  influenced  the  view
of  the  Christian  conmiunities  or  whether  the  influence
flowed  the  other  way.*  The  probability  is  that,  in  fact,
the  influence  worked  both  ways.  What  principally  con-
cerns us  here,  however,  is  this.  About  the  middle  of
the  first  century  A.  I). ,  when  the  Greek-six!aking  Christian
comnmnity  began  to  break  entirely  with  Judaism,  the
narrow  Pharisaic  doctrine  of  the  canon  had  certainly
not  as  yet  ix.Mietrated  into  the  domain  of  Hellenistic
Judaism  so  deeply  as  to  delete  comjilotely,  or  to  exclude
from  the  M.SS  of  the  LXX,  all  the  books  that  Pharisaism
refused  to  recognise.  The  vacillation  in  individual  MSS
nuist  at  that  time  have  Ixjen  even  greater  than  it  is  in
thf)se  which  have  reached  us  ;  although  on  this  point
definite  knowledge  is  unattainable.  It  is  certain,  how-
ever, that  to  some  extent  precisely  those  txxiks  belong-
ing to  this  category  w  hich  Lay  nearest  to  the  heart  of  the
Christian  community  in  its  most  primitive  days  (especi-
ally Knoch  and  4  Esdras)  have  come  down  to  us  in  no
Creek  M.S.  The  conclusion  is  that  the  additions  to  the
LXX  are  for  the  most  part  older  than  Christianity.

The  doctrine  of  the  Pharisees,  however,  ultimately
won  the  day  also  in  its  pro[x.'r  home. Not  only  did

1  Indeed  it  was  supposed,  until  the  recovery  in  1896  of  part  of
Kcclesixsticiis,  that  they  had  actually  suctx-eded  in  extirpatinK
it  -so  far,  that  is,  as  it  was  not  able  to  hide  itself  under  the
veil  of  exegesis  in  the  Hagijada,  Midrash,  and  Talmud  (We.
/yC  2J2,  second  ed.  287).  Kven  Kcclesiasticus  would  lie  no
exception  if  we  coidd  admit  the  contention  of  I).  .S.  Margoliouth
(  '/'Ac-  Origin  0/  the  '  Orii^inal  Hchmv '  of  /'.cclesinsthusy  1899).
In  his  opinion  the  'Original  Hebrew'  is  a  l).id  retranslation
(from  the  Syriac  version  and  a  Persian  translation  of  the  Cireek)
made  after  looo  a.d.  by  an  Arabic-si>eaking  Jew  [or  Christian'?]
who  was  taught  Hebrew  by  a  Jew  with  a  pronunciation  similar
to  that  of  the  Christians  of  Urmi.  The  reader  will  probably
hesitate  to  accept  this  theory  ;  still  it  cannot  l)e  denied  that
M.irgoliouth  has  availed  himself  with  great  skill  of  many  weak
p)iiils  of  the  Hebrew  text,  which  in  any  case  need  a  thorough
investigation.

'-  .\s  to  this  cp  Wildeboer,  48  /.,  who  must  be  held  in  all
essentials  to  have  the  better  of  the  argument  as  against  the
vigorous  polemic  of  Ryle,  153^

•*  See,  for  example,  Ai'OCAi.ypse.

■*  In  fact,  to  speak  strictly,  there  never  was  such  a  canon.
The  Alexandrine  collection  of  Holy  Books  never  underwent  that
revision  in  accord.nnce  with  the  Pharisaic  conception  of  'defil-
ing the  hands '  which  finally  fixed  the  Hebrew  canon.

*  On  this  point  there  seems  to  be  some  self-contradiction  in
Uyle,  if  we  compare  pp.  146,  208 yC  with  i8oyC

22  673


CANON

it  succeed  in  extending  its  influence  over  the  Hellenists
by  means  of  the  new  (jreek  translation  of  A(juila  ;  but
p  . .  .  also  the  Church  itself  ultimately  surren-
t  to  '''^'''■■*'-  •^  strange  and  significant  fact !
Heh  ^anon  ''''*^'"  •il'oul  >5o  A.U.  onwards  there
■  constantly  occur  patristic  statements  on  the
extent  of  the  OT  canon,  which  avowedly  rest  ujKjn  Jewish
authority.  This  certainly  had  its  advantages  ;  for  in
this  way  many  Ixjoks  of  merely  tcmp<jrary  value  were
excluded  which,  if  rendered  authoritative,  could  hardly
have  furthered  the  interests  of  Christianity.  On  the
same  ground  trjo,  the  return  of  the  Reformers  to  the
canon  of  the  synagogue  is  justifiable,  esjjecially  when,
as  in  the  case  of  Luther,  the  relative  imjwrtance  of  the
Apocrypha  is  duly  recognised.  On  the  other  hand,  it
mu.st  im  confessed  that  even  the  unanimously  accepted
canon '  of  the  Church  is  not  without  Ixwjks  of  a  similar
character  (notably  ICsther  and  Canticles;  also  ICcclesiastes
and  Daniel),  and  that  thus  the  distinction  between
canonical  and  uncanonical  lx)oks  (if  they  are  judged
by  their  intrinsic  value)  is  a  fluctuating  one.'*  liesides
this,  it  is  certain  that  in  the  excluded  Ixxjks,  of  which
we  know  so  many  already,  and  are  continually  coming
through  new  discoveries  to  know  more,  there  has  come
down  to  us  a  treasure  of  unspeakable  value  for  a  know-
ledge of  religious  life  as  it  was  shortly  before  and  after
the  time  of  Jesus,  and  so  for  an  understanding  of  the
origin  of  Christianity  (see  AfcK  kyi'II.\,  Ai'ocai.vi'TK  I.

K.  H.

n. NKW TF-STAMMN  r.
The  problem  of  the  NT  canon  is  to  discover  by  wli.it
means  and  at  what jx-'riod  a  new collection  of  sacred
, books  came  to  Ix;  invested  with  all the


60.  Jesus'

Words  and

Deeds.


dignity  which lx.'longed to that of the
Synagogue. Jesus  had  claimed  to  sfx.-ak


with  an  authority  in  no  way  inferior  t<
that  of  the  OT,  and  had  placed  his  own  utterances
side  by  side  with  some  of  its  precepts  as  fulfilling  or
even  correcting  them.  The  renienilx;red  words  of  Jesus
thus  lx;canie  at  once,  if  the  expression  may  tx;  allowed,
the  nucleus  of  a  new  Christian  canon.  At  first  they
circulated  orally  from  hearer  to  hearer.  Then  narra-
tives were  compiled  recording  the  .Sacred  Words,  and
the  no  less  Sacred  Deeds  which  had  accompanied  or
illustrated  them.  Some  narratives  of  this  kind  underlie
our  (jos[x-ls,  and  are  referred  to  in  the  preface  to  the
Thinl  Gos|x.l.  In  course  of  time  these  were  superseded
bv  the  fuller  treatises  which  lx?ar  the
61.  UOspelS.  ^;^„,^.5  yf  apostles  or  the  chosen  com-
panions of  apostles  ;  and  their  superior  merit,  as  well  as
the  sanction  thus  given  to  them,  soon  left  them  without
rivals  as  the  authorised  records  of  the  Gosjx^l  history.
They  were  read  side  by  side  with  books  of  the  O'V
in  the  public  worship  of  the  Church,  and  were  appealed
to  as  historical  documents  by  those  who  wished  to  show-
in  detail  the  correspondence  between  the  facts  of
the  life  of  Jesus  and  the  Jewish  prophecies  alxiut  the
Messiah.  This  stage  has  lx;en  definitely  reached  by  the
time  of  Justin  Martyr  ;  but  as  yet  there  is  no  clear
proof  that  a  special  sanctity  or  inspiration  was  predicated
of  the  books  themselves.  The  final  siej),  however,
could  not  long  be  delayed.  The  sacredness  of  the
Words  and  Deeds  of  Jesus  which  they  contained,  the
afjostolic  authority  by  which  they  were  recommended,
and,  above  all,  their  familiar  use  in  the  services  of  the
Church,  gradually  raised  them  to  the  level  of  the  ancient
Scriptures  ;  and  the  process  w;\s  no  doubt  accelerated
by  the  action  of  heretical  and  schismatical  bodies,
claiming  one  after  another  to  base  their  tenets  upon

t  There  is,  however,  a  singular  passage  in  the  sixth  of  the
Anglican  Articles  of  Religion  limiting  '  Holy  Scripture  '  to  '  those
canonical  books  of  the  Old  and  the  New  Testaments,  of  whose
authority  wasneveranydoubt  in  the  Church, 'which  Bishop  West-
cott(('>«  the  Canon  oj'the  .\' /I*),  494)  cannot  undertake  to  explain.

■-  See  Cheyne,  Founders,  349,  and  cp  preceding  note.

674


62.  Epistles.


CANON

certain  of  these  documents  or  upon  others  peculiar  to
themselves.

Meanwhile  a  sinular  process  had  been  going  on  in
regard  to  other  writings  of  the  apostolic  age.  These
were  for  the  most  part  letters,  written
in  many  instances  to  particular  churches,
and  designed  to  meet  sjjecial  needs.  The  writers
betray  no  consciousness  that  their  words  would  come  to
be  regarded  as  a  permanent  standard  of  doctrine  or  of
action  in  the  Christian  Church :  they  write  for  an
immediate  purpose,  and  just  as  they  would  wish  to
speak,  were  they  able  to  be  present  with  those  whom
they  address.  In  their  absence,  and  still  more  after
their  death,  their  letters  were  cherished  and  read  again
and  again  by  the  churches  which  had  first  received  them,
and  by  others  who  naturally  welcomed  such  precious
relics  of  the  apostolic  age.  I"or  the  apostles  were  the
authori-sed  instructors  of  the  Christian  Church.  In  the
age  which  succeeded  them,  '  the  Lord  and  the  apostles'
became  the  natural  standard  of  appeal  to  which  reference
was  to  l)e  made  in  all  matters  of  faith  and  practice.
For  some  time  '  the  tradition  of  the  apostles,'  as  handed
down  in  the  churches  of  their  foundation,  was  regarded
as  the  test  of  orthodo.\y.  Oral  tradition,  however,  is
necessarily  variable  and  uncertain.  It  was  natural  that,
when  actual  disciples  of  the  apostles  were  no  longer
living,  ajipeal  should  more  and  more  be  made  to  their
written  words,  and  that  these  should  be  set  side  by  side
with  the  Gospels  as  the  primary  documents  of  the
Christian  faith.  Here  again  the  same  elements  as
before  come  into  play,  though  probably  at  a  slightly  later
period — viz.,  the  liturgical  use  of  the  epistles,  and  the
necessity  of  maintaining  them  intact  against  the  muti-
lations or  rejections  of  heretical  sects.

In the collection which was thus gradually being

formed by  the  pressure  of  various  circumstances  and

Oth \^''th  no  distinct  consciousness  of  the  creation


books.


of  a  canon,  a  place  was  found  beside  the


Gospels  and  the  epistles  for  two  otht
books.  The  Apocalypse  of  John  opened  with  the
salutation  of  an  epistle  ;  and,  even  apart  from  this,
its  ajjocalyptic  character  claimed  for  it  a  special  and
abiding  sacredness  ;  moreover  it  contained  an  express
blessing  for  those  who  should  read  and  listen  to  it,  and
a  warning  against  any  who  should  presume  to  alter  or
add  to  it.  The  Acts  of  the  Apostles  would  find  an
easy  entrance,  partly  as  an  authorised  account  of  the
deeds  of  apostles  written  by  one  who  had  contem-
poraneous knowledge  of  them,  and  still  more  as  being
in  form  the  second  part  of  the  Third  Gospel  and  properly
insejjarable  from  the  earlier  book.

Thus, side  by  side  with  the  old  Jewish  canon,  and
without  in  any  way  displacing  it,  there  had  sprung  up  a
,  new  Christian canon. Although  its  exact


64.  A  new


limits were not yet precisely defined.


and  local  variations  of  opinion  were  to
be  observed  with  regard  to  the  acceptance  of  par-
ticular books,  we  find  the  idea  of  such  a  new  canon
in  full  play  in  the  writings  of  great  representative
men  of  the  period  from  i8o  to  200  A.  n. — of  Irenaeus
speaking  for  Asia  Minor  and  Gaul,  of  Tertullian  in  N.
Africa,  and  of  Clement  in  Alexandria.  The  Church  is
by  this  time  fully  conscious  that  she  is  in  possession  of
written  documents  of  the  apostolic  age  ;  documents  to
which  reference  must  be  universally  made,  as  to  a  final
court  of  appeal,  in  questions  of  right  faith  and  right
action.  The  authority  of  Jesus  and  his  apostles  is,  in
the  main,  embodied  for  her  in  writings  which  she  reads
together  with  the  OT  in  her  public  services,  quotes  as
Scripture,  and  regards  as  the  inspired  revelation  of
divine  truth.  Of  the  stages  by  which  this  result  has
lieen  reached  the  writers  referred  to  have  nothing  to  tell
us.  It  was,  as  we  have  seen,  the  issue  ot  an  un-
conscious growth,  natural  and  for  the  most  part  un-
challenged, and  so  leaving  no  recorded  history  behind
it. If  the  Church  was  awakened  to  a  consciousness  of

675


CANON

her  great  possession,  and  to  the  importance  of  insisting
upon  its  integrity,  by  the  attempts  made  by  heretics  to
defraud  her  of  portions  of  it,  there  is  no  evidence  of
deliberate  efforts  on  her  part  to  build  up  the  conception
of  a  new  canon  in  opposition  to  them  ;  much  less  of
any  formal  declarations,  such  as  those  of  later  times,
defining  what  books  should  or  should  not  be  included
in  it.  In  the  stress  of  controversy  she  fell  back  on  the
treasures  which  she  possessed,  and  realised  that  in  the
books  which  she  was  accustomed  to  read  for  the  in-
struction of  her  children  she  had,  on  the  one  hand,  the
full  and  harmonious  expression  of  all  those  positive
truths  whose  isolation  or  exaggeration  formed  the
groundwork  of  the  several  heretical  systems,  and,  on
the  other  hand,  the  decisive  contradiction  of  the
negations  in  which  their  capricious  selections  had
involved  those  who  rejected  any  part  of  the  common
heritage.

2. That  the  sketch  given  above  of  the  gradual  growth
of  a  new  canon  with  its  twofold  contents,  in  the  period


6B.  Evidence
of  orthodox


wnters


anterior  to  Iren;x;us,  Tertullian,  and
Clement,  is  justified  not  only  by  in-
trinsic probability  but  also  by  the
riMnen't°ftt  references  of  early  Christian  writers
'  '  to  books  of  the  NT,  may  be  seen  by
consulting  the  collections  of  such  references  accessible
in  modern  treatises  upon  the  canon.  Here  a  brief
outline  of  the  evidence  must  suffice.

In  the  Epistle  of  Clement  of  Rome  to  the  Corinthians
{circa  95)  we  have  two  jirecepts  introduced  by  a  com-
mand to  '  remember  the  words  of  our  Lord  Jesus'  (cp
Acts  20 35)  :  in  neither  case  do  they  exactly  agree
with  the  language  of  our  Gospels  ;  they  may  be  the
result  of  a  fusion  due  to  citation  from  memory,  or  they
may  possibly  be  derived  from  oral  tradition.  The
epistle  is  saturated  with  the  phraseology  of  the  Pauline
Epistles  (Rom.,  i  Cor.,  Eph.  ;  less  certainly  Tim.  and
others)  and  of  the  Epistle  to  the  Hebrews  ;  but  these
are  not  directly  cited,  and  the  expressions  'Scripture'
and  '  it  is  written  '  are  applied  to  the  OT  alone.

In  the  genuine  Epistles  of  Ignatius  of  Antioch  (shorter
Greek  recension,  circa  no  A.  D. ,  Lightfoot)  the  only
direct  citation  of  words  of  Jesus  ( '  Lay  hold  and
handle  me  and  see  that  I  am  not  a  spirit  [Sai/xoviov]
without  body,'  Ad  Sinvrn.  3)  is  possibly  derived  from
an  apocryphal  book  or  from  an  oral  tradition.  The
language  of  these  Epistles  shows  traces  of  acquaintance
with  Mt.  and  Jn.  and  with  several  of  the  Pauline  Epistles.
The  Epistle  of  Polycarp  (circa  no  .^.D. ,  Lightfoot)  is
largely  composed  of  quotations  from  NT  books  |  especially
Mt. ,  Lk. ,  I  and  2  Jn. ,  i  Pe. ,  and  the  Pauline  Epistles).
There  is  but  one  (somewhat  uncertain)  instance  of  the
citation  of  NT  words  as  Scripture.

The  Epistle  of  Barnabas  (circa  98  A.D. ,  Lightfoot:
though  most  scholars  place  it  later)  prefixes  to  the
saying  '  Many  called  but  few  chosen,'  the  formula  '  it
is  written.'  If  this  be  cited  from  Mt.  22 14 — and  a  later
reference  makes  it  not  improbable — then  we  have  here
the  earliest  use  of  this  formula  in  reference  to  a  book  of
the  NT.

The  Teaching  of  the  Apostles  (date  uncertain :
perhaps  1 10-130)  introduces  a  form  of  the  Lord's  Prayer,
which  has  variants  both  from  Mt.  and  Lk. ,  by  the
words,  '  as  the  Lord  commanded  in  his  Gospel,  so  pr.ay
ye'  (chap.  8;  cp  chaps.  W,  L*)).  It  clearly  presup-
poses a  written  Gospel,  and  shows  acquaintance  with
Mt.  and  Lk.  It  has  embodied  an  ancient  (perhaps
Jewish)  manual,  '  The  Two  Ways '  (used  also  in  Ep.
Barn,  and  elsewhere),  and  also  certain  early  eucharistic
prayers  which  incorporate  the  language  of  Jn.

The  Apology  of  Aristides,  the  Athenian  philosopher
(circa  125-130  A.  D. ),  addressed  to  the  emperor  Hadrian
(ace.  to  Eus.  and  the  title  of  Arm.  vers.  ;  the  title  of
the  .Syr.  vers,  would  place  it  a  few  years  later,  under
Antoninus  Pius),  twice  refers  expressly  to  writings  of  the
Christians  ;  in  the  first  instance,  after  enumerating  the

676


CANON

main  events  of  the  life  of  Jesus — including  his  birth
•  from  a  Hebrew  virjjin  '  and  his  ascension — it  distinctly
ap|x.'als  to  the  written  Gosix;!  for  corroboration.  It
also  cintxMlics  lanKuage  from  the  E|jistle  to  the  Koinans.

The  Sht-phfiJ  of  Jlertnas  (date  uncertain  :  1 10-140)
betrays  a  close  acquaintance  with  many  NT  books,
though  it  makes  no  direct  citations  either  from  OT  or
fronv  NT.  The  language  of  our  four  Cjospels  (even  of
the  Apixjndi-v  to  Mk. ).  of  the  Pauline  Kpistles  including
the  Pastoral  Epp. ,  of  1  I'e. ,  Acts,  .\poc. ,  and  alxjve  all
of  J:is. .  is  adopted  by  the  writer  ;  and  even  2  Pe.  seems
to  have  lieen  used.

Hefore  we  come  to  the  fuller  testimonies  of  Justin
Martyr  and  subseciuent  writers  it  is  necessary  to
P  \  examine  the  evidence  to  Ix;  derived  from
"  ■  Papias.  His  date  and  the  interpretation
to  Ix:  [)laced  on  his  fragnientary  remains  have  been
the  subject  of  much  criticism  (see  esp.  Lightfoot,  Essays  on
Supernatural  Religion,  142-216).  He  was  the  hearer
of  at  least  two  {personal  disciples  of  Jesus,  and  his
great  work  may  V)e  i)laced  circa  130-140.  It  was
entitled  Xoyluv  KvpiaKdv  i^yjyi^afit,  '  Expositions  of  the
Oracles  of  (or  'concerning')  the  Lord.'  As  \6yia  is
a  term  used  in  the  NT  of  the  OT  writings,  the  title
of  the  book  naturally  suggests  some  kind  of  com-
mentary on  the  writings  relating  to  Jesus — i.e.,  on
written  Gospels  which  held  a  recognised  position  of
sacredness  in  the  Christian  Church.  It  is  probable
that  similar  conmientaries  on  one  or  more  of  the  Gosix;ls
had  already  tjcen  composed  by  Gnostic  writers  :  thus
Basilides  is  said  to  have  written  twenty-four  books  on
'  the  Gospel '  [circa  1 1 7- 1 38 ).  Such  books  are  disparaged
by  Papias  as  wordy  and  misleading  ;  he  prefers  to  fall
l)ack  on  the  testimonies  of  the  living  disciples  of  those
who  had  seen  the  Lord.  He  gives  accounts,  not  free
from  diflicultics,  of  the  composition  of  Gosfx-ls  by
Matthew  and  Mark.  On  the  whole,  the  facts  seem  to
be  most  readily  accounted  for  if  we  suppose  that
Papias  in  his  five  books  expounded  and  illustrated  by
traditional  stories  the  four  Gospels  as  we  at  present
know  them.  Euscbius  further  expressly  informs  us  that
Papias  used  i  Jn.  and  i  Pe.  There  can  be  little
doubt  that  his  chiliastic  views  were  based  on  the
Apocalypse.

Justin  Martyr  (circa  152),  when  mentioning  the
words  of  the  institution  of  the  Eucharist,  says  :  '  So  the
y^^  a[)ostIes  handed  down  in  the  Memoirs
made  by  them,  which  are  called  Gospels '
(Afi.  166).  In  descrit)ing  the  Sunday  worship,  too,  he
refers  to  'The  Memoirs  of  the  Ajxistlcs'  {A/>.  1  67  ;  see
L<)Kn'.s  D.AV),  and  these  Memoirs  (dirott.VT)txovtuft.aTa)
are  placed  on  a  level  with  the  '  Writings  of  the  Prophets  '
as  an  alternative  means  of  edification  in  the  gatherings
of  the  Christian  Church.  Justin's  >ise  of  them,  here
and  in  his  Dialogue  with  the  Jew  Trypho,  is  conditioned
by  the  necessities  of  his  argument.  In  tliemsclves  they
would  have  no  weight  w  ith  heathen  or  Jewish  o|)ponents.
The  OT  prophecies,  however,  could  l)e  freely  appealed
to  in  either  case,  as  the  argument  rested  on  their  fulfil-
ment rather  than  on  their  sacredness.  Justin  accordingly
uses  'The  Memoirs  of  the  Apostles'  as  historical
documents  in  proof  of  the  fulfilment  of  Messianic
predictions  in  the  recorded  events  of  the  life  of  Jesus.
Twelve  times  he  refers  to  them  directly  in  the  Dialogue
— all  the  instances  being  in  connection  with  his  exposi-
tion of  Ps.  '22.  In  every  case,  both  here  and  in  the
Apologv,  the  reference  is  fully  accounted  for  by  the
supposition  that  these  '  Memoirs  '  were  our  four  (iospels,
the  phraseology  of  each  of  which  can  be  traced  in
his  writings.  Where  he  most  carefully  describes
them,  after  referring  to  an  event  recordetl  only  by  Lk. ,
he  says  that  '  they  were  compiled  by  Christ's  apostles
and  those  who  companied  with  them."  This  exactly
agrees  with  the  traditional  authorship  of  our  Gospels,
as  written  two  by  apostles  (Mt.,  Jn. ),  and  two  by
followers  of  apostles  (Mk.,  Lk.). Justin  likewise  refers

677


67.  Justin.


CANON

for  corroboration  of  his  statements  to  official  Acta
/'ilati :  he  may  perhaps  have  lieen  accjuainted  with  a
more  primitive  form  of  the  a[xjcryi>hal  materials  still
surviving  under  that  debignation.  There  is,  however,
no  satisfactory  evidence  that  he  used  any  ajxxryphal
Gospel  (unless  perhaps  a  '  Protevangel '  or  Gospel  of
the  Infancy).  He  refers  directly  to  the  Apocalypse  as
written  by  the  apostle  John  (Tryf>h.  81),  and  shows
acquaintance  with  most  of  the  Pauline  lipistles.

From  Justin  we  pass  to  his  pupil  Tatian  [circa  150-
160  A.u. ),  who  helps  to  confirm  our  conclusions  as  to
„  . .  Justin  himself  by  his  use  of  our  four
'  Gospels  and  no  other  in  his  Dialessaron.
This  remarkable  lx)ok,  which  for  a  long  period  must
have  Ixien  the  only  (j(>s(x;l  of  many  .Syrian  churches,  is
known  to  us  mainly  through  a  Comnientary  upon  it
written  by  Ephraim,  and  preserved  to  us  in  an  Armenian
translation  ;  and  also  through  an  Arabic  version  of  the
Dialessaron  itself — made,  however,  after  the  later  text
of  the  Peshitta  Syriac  had  been  substituted  for  Tatian's
own  text,  which  had  many  interesting  variants  of  an
early  type.  The  two  sources  of  evidence  suiJplement
each  other,  and  make  it  certain  that  Tatian's  Gos(x.'ls  were
none  other  than  our  own.  There  is  some  reason  for
thinking  that  Tatian  also  introduced  into  Syria  a  col-
lection of  the  Pauline  Epistles.

3. Although  Tatian  adopted  heretical  opinions  after

the  death  of  his  master,  his  great  work  on  the  Gosjx:ls

_ appears to be  quite indejjendent  of  these

■ , and  was  accepted  without  question  by  the

ortnociox  :  .^,.^- <  j^^^^.^ ^  ..iU  be  well,  however,  to

Basilides,


etc.


notice  at  this  pomt  the  evidence  to  Ix:  derived
from  other  heretical  leaders  in  regard  to  the
estimation  in  which  various  books  of  the  NT  were  held
by  those  who  were  dissatisfied  with  the  teaching  of  the
main  body  of  the  Church.  It  will  suffice  to  take  three
writers  of  whom  we  have  a  considerable  amount  of
information  preserved  to  us.  Basilides  of  Alexandria
flourished  in  the  reign  of  Hadrian.  His  Expositions
on  the  Gos[x:l,  in  twenty-four  books,  have  already  been
mentioned.  Accepting,  with  Hort,  the  account  pre-
served in  the  Refutation  of  Heresies  (generally  ascrilx-d
to  Hippolytus)  as  representing  portions  of  this  work,
we  meet  with  the  striking  fact  that  quotations  from  the
NT,  introduced  with  the  words  '  The  .Scripture  saith,'
and  '  as  it  is  written,'  are  found  in  a  heretical  writer  at
a  period  at  which  they  cannot  with  certainty  be  said  to
be  so  introduced  by  any  writer  within  the  Church.
Several  passages  from  the  Pauline  Epistles  are  so  cited
by  Basilides.  He  also  used  Mt. ,  Lk. ,  Jn. ,  and  appar-
ently I  Pe.

Marcion  (circa  140)  undertook  to  restore  the  sim-
plicity of  Christianity  on  the  basis  of  Paul,  whom  he  re-
garded as  the  only  true  apostle.  He  rejected  the  OT
and  retained  of  the  NT  only  Lk.  in  a  nmtilated  form,
and  ten  I'pislles  of  Paul  ;  the  Pastoral  Epistles  and
the  I-'pistle  to  the  Hebrews  not  being  included  in  his
canon.  There  is  no  indication  that  he  applied  any  other
standard  than  that  of  correspondence  with  his  own
dogmatic  position,  in  making  what  must  be  considered
the  earliest  attempt  at  the  conscious  definition  of  a  NT
canon.

Heracleon  (circa  170,  or  earlier),  a  disciple  of
Valentinus.  wrote  a  Commentary  on  Jn. ,  of  which  con-
siderable fragments  are  preserved  by  Origen.  His
system  of  interpretation  shows  that  he  held  the  exact
words  of  the  Evangelist  in  the  highest  veneration,  as
instinct  with  spiritual  meaning.  He  also  commented
on  Lk. ,  and  shows  acquaintance  with  Mt. ,  Heb. ,  and
the  Pauline  Epistles  including  2  Tim.

Thus  the  first  certain  citations  of  NT  writings  with
the  formula  familiarly  used  of  the  OT,  the  first  attempt
at  defining  a  NT  canon,  and  the  first  commentary  on
a  NT  book,  come  to  us  not  from  within  but  from  without
the  Church.  These  are  striking  evidences  of  the
authority  generally  accorded  to  the  NT  writings ; in

678


CANON

the  words  of  Irenreus  (iii.  2?) :  'So  strong  is  the  position
of  our  Gospels,  that  the  heretics  themselves  bear  witness
to  them,  and  each  must  start  from  these  to  prove  his
own  doctrine.'

4.  The  early  history  of  the  Old  Latin  and  the  Old
Syriac  versions  is  wrapt  in  obscurity ;  but  there  is
„  .  reason  for  believing  that  the  translation  of
■  .^^  ^  parts  at  least  of  both  these  versions  must
versions.  ^  pieced  not  much  later  than  the  middle
of  the  second  century  (see  Tkxt,  §§  20,  32).  The  Old
Latin  version  seems  to  have  been  made  in  N.  Africa,
and  to  have  included,  probably  before  the  time  of
TertuUian,  all  the  books  of  the  later  canon,  excepting
Jas. ,  2  Pe. ,  and  possibly  Heb.  When  the  Scillitan
Martyrs  (N.  Africa,  180  A.  n. )  were  examined  as  to
what  was  contained  in  their  book-chest,  their  brief
recorded  reply  was  '•  Rooks  and  Epistles  of  Paul,  a  just
man.'  Such  was  their  description  of  the  writings  which,
doubtless,  were  used  by  them  in  their  services.  It  is
conditioned  by  the  circumstance  of  its  utterance  before
heathen  judges  ;  it  would  be  wrong  to  conclude  from
it  that  the  Pauline  Epistles  were  placed  by  them  on  a
different  level  from  the  other  sacred  writings.  The  Old
Syriac  of  the  Gospels  has  till  lately  been  known  only
from  Cureton's  imperfect  MS ;  but  the  palimpsest
recently  found  at  Mt.  Sinai  enables  us  to  reconstruct
this  version  for  the  most  part  with  approximate  certainty.
A  selection  of  comments  by  Ephraim  on  the  Acts  of  the
Apostles,  and  his  Commentary  on  the  Pauline  Epistles,
preserved  in  Armenian  translations,  point  to  an  Old
Syriac  version  of  these  books  also.  The  older  MSS  of
the  rexised  Syriac  version  (the  Peshitta)  do  not  contain
2  and  3  Jn.,  2  Pe. ,  Jude,  and  Apoc.

We  have  been  concerned  hitherto  with  tracing  the
growth of the conception of a XT canon, without
considering, except incidentally, the


71.  General
traces  of  NT.


range  of  writings  included  in  it.  The
influence  of  the  main  body  of  the  NT
literature  upon  the  writers  of  the  period  with  which  we
have  been  dealing  cannot  be  at  all  fully  appreciated
from  our  scanty  analysis.  Their  writings  must  them-
selves be  studied  line  by  line,  if  we  are  to  understand
the  debt  xshich  they  owed,  as  regards  both  ideas  and
phraseology,  to  the  documents  of  the  apostolic  age.
In  that  age  new  conceptions  had  been  given  to  the
world,  and  a  new  terminology  had  been  formed  for
their  expression.  The  next  age  reproduced  these  ;  but
it  was  not  itself  creative.  This  is  seen,  for  instance,  in
the  technical  terms  of  even  the  boldest  of  the  Gnostic
speculations.  Whatever  may  have  been  men's  conscious
attitude  towards  the  XT  writings,  it  is  clear  that  they
are  dominated  by  them  from  the  very  first.  Gradually
they  come  to  recognise  them  more  and  more  as  their
masters  ;  and  then,  both  within  the  Church  and  outside
it,  we  find  them  definitely  declaring  the  limits  of  the
canon  to  which  they  owe  this  allegiance.

Marcion's list of sacred books has already been
noticed. The  next  list  of  which  we  have  any  knowledge  is

72.  Muratorian


unfortunately  a  fragment,  and  tells  us
neither  its  date  nor  its  author's  name


■  or  locality. It  was  published  in  1740

by  Lodovico  .-\ntonio  Muratori,  the  librarian  at  Milan.
Hence  it  is  known  as  the  Muratorian  canon.  It  is  in
barbarous  Latin,  in  a  seventh  or  eighth  century  MS  ;
but  its  original  must  have  been  Greek,  and  it  is  generally
agreed  that  it  was  written  in  the  West  (perhaps  at
Rome)  towards  the  close  of  the  second  century.  Light-
foot  conjectured  that  it  was  a  portion  of  the  '  Verses
on  all  the  Scriptures'  assigned  to  Hippolytus.  The
fragment  commences  with  the  end  of  a  description  of
Mark  ;  it  goes  on  to  speak  of  Luke  and  John,  and  refers
to  the  different  beginnings  of  the  four  books  of  the
Gospel.  .After  .-\cts  come  the  Epistles  of  Paul  ;  the
seven  churches  to  which  he  wrote  being  paralleled  with
the  seven  of  the  Apocalvpse,  and  enumerated  in  the
following  order — Cor. ,  Eph. ,  Phil. ,  Col. ,  Gal. ,  Thess. ,
679


CANON

Rom.  Then  come  four  private  letters — Philemon  and
the  Pastoral  epistles.  Two  other  epistles  are  de-
clared forgeries — viz. ,  those  to  the  Laodiceans  and  to
the  Alexandrians.  Then  we  have  Jude,  two  epistles
of  John  (i  Jn.  has  been  quoted  from  at  an  earlier
point,  so  that  these  may  perhaps  be  2  and  3  Jn. ),  and
the  Wisdom  of  Solomon,  'written  in  his  honour.'
Then  the  '  apocalypses  of  John  and  Peter  alone  we
receive,  which  (sirtg. )  some  among  us  will  not  have
read  in  the  church. '  The  Shepherd  of  Hermas  '  ought
to  be  read,'  but  not  reckoned  either  with  the  prophets
or  with  the  apostles.  After  a  few  more  lines  as  to
rejected  books,  the  text  being  very  corrupt,  the  fragment
suddenly  closes.  The  omissions  are  deserving  of  notice —
nothing  is  said  of  i  and  2  Peter,  James,  and  Hebrews —
but  the  omitted  epistles  were  undoubtedly  (if  we  e.xccjit
2  Peter)  known  at  this  time  in  the  Roman  church.  It
is  difficult,  therefore,  to  draw  conclusions  from  their
omission  in  a  fragment  of  whose  history  so  little  can  Ijc
ascertained  and  whose  text  is  so  obviously  corrupt.  The
Muratorian  canon  is  fully  discussed  by  Zahn,  Hist,  of
the  Canon  ('90)  21-43: quite  recently  Dom  Amelli  of

I Monte  Cassino  has  published  fragments  of  it  from  other

! MSS  [Misc.  Cassin.,  1897).

' 5.  The inclusion (though with an expression of
P , variance  of  opinion)  of  the  Apocalypse  of

1 , *  .. Peter  in  the 'Muratorian  Fragment'  leads

temporarily  ^^  ^^  ^^^.  something  of  books  which  for

I  ■ a  time  claimed  a  place  in  the  canon,  but

[ were  ultimately  excluded.

The  Epistle  of  Clement  to  the  Corinthians,  and  the
Homily,  miscalled  his  'Second  Epistle,'  are  contained,

I  after  the  Apocalypse,  in  Cod.  A  (the  great  Greek  BiVjle
of  the  5th  cent,  in  the  Rrit.  Mus. ).  The  Epistle  of
Barnabas  and  the  Shepherd  of  Hermas  hold  a  similar
place  in  the  Sinaitic  Bible  (X,  4th  cent. ).  The  two
latter  books  are  occasionally  cited  as  Scripture  in
patristic  writings,  and  this  is  the  case  also  with  the
Teaching  of  the  Apostles.

Of  apocryphal  (iospels  two  deserve  special  notice.
The  Gospel  accorditig  to  the  Hebrcivs  is  known  only
by  a  few  fragments,  which  show  that  it  bore  a  close
relation  to  our  First  Gospel.  Clement  of  Alexandria
and  Origen  quote  from  it,  although  they  insist  on  the
sole  authority  of  our  four  Gospels.  The  Gospel  accord-
ing to  Peter,  a  considerable  fragment  of  which  was
published  in  1892  from  a  MS  found  in  Egypt,  is  known
to  have  been  used  in  the  church  of  Rhossus  near
Antioch.  Serapion,  Bishop  of  Antioch  (190-203),  at
first  permitted  its  use,  but  subsequently  disallowed  it  on
the  ground  of  Docetic  errors.  The  extant  portion
embodies  the  language  of  all  our  four  Gospels,  though
it  often  perverts  their  statements.  There  is  no  trace  of
the  use  of  any  other  Gospel  in  its  composition,  though
certain  phrases  may  possibly  be  borrowed  from  some
earlier  apocryphal  book.  Its  composition  may  with
probability  be  assigned  to  circa  165.  Its  testimony  to
the  canon  is  thus  somewhat  parallel  in  date  and  extent
to  that  of  Tatian's  Diatessaron.

The  Apocalypse  of  Peter,  of  which  a  fragment  was
recovered  at  the  same  time,  was  an  early  book  which
powerfully  influenced  subsequent  literature  of  a  similar
kind — e.g.,  the  Apocalypse  of  Paul.  It  seems  to  be
responsible  for  much  of  the  mediaeval  conception  of
heaven  and  hell.  It  presents  curious  coincidences  with
2  Peter.  It  is  c|uoted  as  Scripture  by  Clement  of
Alexandria  ;  and  as  late  as  the  fifth  century  it  was  read
on  Good  Friday  in  certain  churches  of  Palestine.

6. Our  inquiry  has  revealed  to  us  that  towards  the

close  of  the  second  century, by  the  time  of  Irenneus,

_ . TertuUian,  and  Clement  —  writers  whose

^ ■ testimonies  are  so  abundant  that  we  need

] not  dwell  upon  them  here — the  Church  had  attained  to

i  a  conscious  recognition  of  a  canon  of  the  New  Testa-
ment. Three  classes  of  books  have  come  into  view :

1 (i) the  main  bulk  of  the  NT  books,  as  to  which  no
680


76.  Biblio-
graphy :  OT,


CANOPY

doubt  at  all  is  expressed  by  writers  within  the  Church  ;
(2)  books  whose  |)<)sition  in  the  canon  was  challenged
in  certain  (|uartcrs,  although  they  ultimately  were
included  ;  (3)  Ijooks  which  were  read  in  certain  churches,
but  were  ultimately  classed  as  non-canonical.  With
regartl  to  books  of  the  second  of  these  classes  the  later
history  of  their  reception  will  be  found  under  the
special  articles  devoted  to  them,  and  in  the  works  to
which  reference  is  made  lx;low.  With  regard  to  the
third  it  may  suffice  to  say  that  the  verdict  of  the  Church
has  been  fully  justified  by  the  fact  that  no  serious  effort
has  ever  lx.'en  made  to  reinstate  them.  J.  A.  K.

Literature  of  the  Subject.  i.  OT  Crt«e?«.— The
following  works  dealing  with  the  OT
canon  may  tie  mentioned.  The  authors
are  arranged  in  alphalx-'tical  order.

\V.  J.  Heecher,  'The  alleged  Triple  Canon  of  the  OT,"
J  HI.  1896;  C.  .\.  \W\%'g,i., General  Introduction  to  the  Study  0/
Holy  Scripture,  1899  ;  liuhl,  Ka'ion  u.  le.xt  d.  .A  Ts,  1891  ;  I)e
Wctte-Schratler,  Kinl.  in  d.  .11',  8th  ed.  1869;  Duhni,  /)as
lUich  Jesaiii,  1892,  Die  Kntstehung  des  .■{  T,  1897  ;  Kiirst,  Der
Knnon  des  .-//',  1868;  (Iraetz,  Koheleth,  1871  ;  Holtzmann,
Kinl.  in  d.  X t',  3rd  ed.  189-'  ;  Koenig,  Hssni  sur  la/oriiiation
du  Canon de  I'Ancicn  Testament,  1S94;  Marx,  Traditio  Rahhin-
orum  veterrima,  etc.  1884;  WRS,  OTJO-^,  1892  ;  Kyle,  The
Canon  0/  the  OT,  1892;  Schiirer,  CJl'  ii.  i8?6;  Strack,  art.
'  Kanon  des  .\T '  in  /'A'A(2|  7  ;  Weber,  System  der  altsyn.  fial.
Theotogie,  1880;  We.  '  Die  Sammlung  der  Schriften  des  .M  '  in
IMeek,  /.7«/.(-»»  ('78)  and  /■.'m/.i«l  ('93);  Wildehoer,  Die  Kntste-
hung  des  .{'/'-lichen  Kanons,  1891  (KT  95);  C.H.H.  Wright,
The  Hook  0/  Koheleth,  1883  ;  Zunz,  Die  gottesdienstlichen
I'ortriigc  der  Judeii,  irtA  ed.  1832.  Moreover,  Wildeboer  in
his  valuable  article,  '  De  voor-Thalmudische  Joodsche  Kanon'
{Thcologische  Studii'n,  1897)  cites  the  following  books  and
articles,  written,  with  the  exception  of  the  first,  by  Roman
Catholics:  T.  Mullen,  The  Canon  0/ the  OT,  1893;  A.  Loisy,
Histoire  du  Canon  de  r.AT,  1890;  Magnier,  ktude  sur  la
Canonicitf  des  Saintes  Kcritures,  I.  1892 ;  B.  Portner,  Die
Autoritiit der  dcuti  rokanonischen  Biicherdes  .A  Ts,  1893  ;  J.  P.
van  Kasteren,  De  Joodsche  Canon  (Stud.  op.  godsd.  nvtensch.
en  leiterk.-gehied,  xxviii.),  1895.  K.  B.

ii.  NT  Canon. — A  brief  outline  of  a  subject  of  the
highest  importance,  which  bristles  with  jjoints  of  contro-

76  Biblio-  ^^"''^y'  "^^^  necessarily  passed  over  in
BxaDhv  •  NT  ^'''-'"'^'^  ^  \Mg^  portion  of  the  evidence,
°  "  ^  ■  ■  and  needs  to  be  supplemented  by  a  list
of  books  in  which  the  various  topics  are  treated  in  de-
tail and,  in  some  cases,  from  a  different  point  of  view.
The  following  will  prove  most  useful  to  the  modern
student : —

\Vestcott  On  the  Canon  0/  the  NT  (7th  ed.  1896),  a  mine
of  information  on  the  early  Christian  writini;s ;  Liglitfoot's
Essays  on  Suf>ernatiiral  Religion  (rcpuhlislicd  1889),  specially
importantfor  Papiasand  other  early  writers  :  Salmon's  Historical
Introduction  to  the  .i'V7"(8th  ed.  1897),  a  vigorous  examination
of  adverse  criticism  ;  Sanday's  Hampton  Lectures  on  lnsf>iration,
a  careful  and  sympathetic  account  of  the  present  position  of
controversy;  'VVeiss's  Introd.  to  the  NT  (1886;  ET,  1887),
aclear  exposition  of  the  early  history;  Zahn's  Gesch.  d.  NT
A'rtJ^'wi  (1888-92),  together  with  his  Forschungcn  (in  five  parts
1881-83),  by  far  the  most  exhaustive  treatise  that  has  appeared  ;
Harnack's  examination  of  vol.  i.  pt.  i  of  this  work  in  Das  N'T
um  das  Jcthr  200  ('89),  a  severe  criticism — his  own  position  is
stated  Dositively  in  his  Dogmengesch.  (1885;  2nd  ed.  1888,  pp.
304-328) :  Jiilicher's  h'.inl.  in  das  A"/' ('94),  an  able  statement
of  a  position  intermediate  between  Weiss  and  Harn.-ick.  Har-
pack's  preface  to  his  Chronologie  der  altchr.  Litteratur  ('97)
is  a  noteworthy  utterance,  indicating  the  abandonment  of  the
Tiibingcn  positions  in  regard  to  the  dating  of  N  I"  documents.

[Holtzniann  may  also  be  mentioned  as  an  eminently  fair-
minded  guide,  and  abundant  in  literary  references  (AY«/.  in  das
A'7'Pi,  1894).  Among  older  books,  see  Credner,  /.ur  Gesch.
des  Kanons  ("47),  and  his  Gesch.  des  A' 7"  Nations;  edited  by
Volkmar  ('60),  important  for  the  historv  of  the  study  of  the
canon  ;  also  Hilgenfeld's  Einl.  in  das  N'T,  1875.]  j.  a.  R.
60-74,  76,  J.  A.  K.


SS  1-59.  75.  K-  B.

CANOPY (HSn), Is.  45 RV. AV 'defence'; see
Tknt,  §  4.

CANTICLES. We have  before  us  a  book which

has siii;i;(stod as many problems as Shakespeare's

1 Problems •^"""*^'s- ^he  name  which  we  give  to

it,  therefore,  should  not  be  a  question-

liegging  name. We  will  call  it  in  this  article  neither

'Canticles*  nor  'Song  of  Solomon."  but,  following  the

best interpretation of 1 1, 'Song of Songs' — the

681


CANTICLES

choicest  of  all  songs  (like  'servant  of  servants,'  Gen-
9 as — i.e. ,  '  lowest  of  servants  ').

The  first  ditficulty  arises  when  we  seek  to  determine
precisely  the  subject  of  the  .Song  (§§  2-4) ;  the  next,
when  we  investigate  its  poetical  forni  (§§  5-1 1),  and
seek  to  fix  its  date  (§§  13-15).  We  will  consider  these
difticulties  in  order ;  but  the  first  cannot  be  treated
completely  (§§  10/  17)  until  we  have  overcome  the
second.

I.  ^w^yVr/ (preliminar}').  Jewish  tradition  laid  down
very  positively  that,  l)oth  as  a  whole  and  in  its  several
_ Tj.  . -  - parts,  the  Song  descrilx;s  the  phases  of

tefpretatiS:  f "^'-'J-^ |-f "--'j' '^ ^^T'l
^  love. I  he bride was the syinlxjl of

Israel,  the  bridegroom  that  of  its  divine  king;  and  by
the  labours  of  countless  homilists  the  .Song  lx:canie  a
lyric  record  of  the  intercourse  Ix-'tween  the  Lord  and
his  people  from  the  I-',.\odus  (cp  jer.  22)  to  the  Messianic
time.  Of  tho.se  exegetical  labours,  or  rather  poetic.il
bro<jdings,  we  have  a  summary  in  the  Midrash  ha-
Shirini  (transl.  Wunsche,  liihlioth.  h'abbin.  i  /.  6),
with  which  the  not  less  fervidly-written  Targum  (of
post-Talmudic  origin)  may  Ix;  compared.'  This  theory
was  introduced  in  a  modified  form  into  the  Christian
Church  mainly  through  the  influence  of  Origen,  of
whom  Jerome  says  that,  '  while  on  the  other  books  he
surpassed  all  others,  on  the  Song  of  .Songs  he  surjjassed
himself  (Origen,  Op.  3ii).  This  theologian  treated
the  bride  as  being  either  the  Church  or  (an  important
variation)  the  soul  of  the  believer.  The  lx)ldly  avowed
heterodoxy  of  Theodore  of  Mopsuestia,  who  interpreted
the  Song  solely  as  relating  to  the  Lgy[)tian  marriage  of
Solomon,  was  fruitless.  Its  condenuiation  at  the  second
coimcil  of  Constantinople  (553  .\.I). )  postjjoned  the
acceptance  of  the  literal  interpretation  in  the  (  hurch  for
a  thousand  years.  The  great  .St.  Hernard  w  role  eighty-
six  sermons  on  Song  1  and  2  alone,  and  his  exami)le
fostered  similar  mystical  studies  in  the  Latin  Church.
Only  among  Jew  ish  commentators  was  a  natural  exegesis
not  wholly  unrepresented.^  Ibn  I-",zra,  in  particular,  is
so  thorough  in  his  literal  exegesis  that  it  is  doubtful
whether  he  is  serious  when  he  proceetls  to  allegorise.
Though  Luther  was  moving  in  this  direction,  no
CJhristian  scholar  before  Sebastian  Castellio  (i:;44)
ventured  to  maintain  the  purely  secular  character  of  the
poem,  and  all  that  medi.tval  mysticism  could  do  was
to  exercise  its  right  of  selection  from  the  two  allegoric
views.  The  idea  that  the  bride  was  the  Christian  soul
became  the  favourite  :  partly  because  it  seemetl  to  pro-
mote edification,  and  partly  because  it  conunendcd
itself  to  the  romantic  spirit  of  the  young  western
nations.  Thus,  Dante  surprises  us  when  [Cffii'iiio.  2
15,  end)  he  identities  the  bride  with  Heavenly  Wisdom.*
Even  in  the  time  of  the  Reformation  we  find  the
evangelical  '  Horace  of  the  cloister,'  Fray  Luis  de  Leon,
translating  the  .Song  mystically  in  '  ottava  rima';  and
in  our  own  d.iy  Bishop  Alexander,  though  a  Hebraist,  has
made  an  earnest  poetic  protest  in  favour  of  a  mystic
and  against  a  dramatic  theory  (Am-wj,  1886,  pp.  26-51).
Grammatical  exegesis,  however,  destroys  the  basis  of
the  old  verse-by-verse  allegorical  interpretation.  The
- „  .  only  question  possible  is,  whether  a  general

■,,  allegory  of  subject  may  have  been  intended

legory.  ^^.  ^j^^  poet  — whether  he  considered  the
earthly  love  that  he  descrilx.'d  to  have  a  true  symbolic
resemblance  to  the  sjjiritual  love.* The  answer  is,  that

1  On  the  Jewish  interpreters  see  S.  Salfcid,  Das  Hohelied
Salomds  hei  denjiid.  Erkliirertt  des  .Mtttelalters  ('79)  ;  on  both
the  Jewish  and  the  Christian,  W.  Riegel,  Die  Auslegung  des
Hohenliedes  inderjtid.  Gemeinde  u.  dergriech.  KirrMe  ('qi).

2  See  Salfeld,  52;  Gratz,  Schir  ha-.Schirim,  ug/".,  and  cp
M.-xthews,  Abraham  Ibn  Ezra's  Commentary  on  the  Canticles
('74),  Preface.

3  Dante's  Jewish  friend,  Immanuel  ben  Sh'lomoh,  identified
the  bride  with  the  '  material  intellect '  (Salfeld,  91).  The
biblical  point  of  contact  is  Prov.  8.

*  Hp.  Lowth  is  one  of  the  chief  defenders  of  a  secondary  and
gener.-il  allegorical  sense. He  appeals  not  only  to  '  the  most

68a


CANTICLES

such  a  symbolic  resemblance  is  inconsistent  with  the
spirit  of  Hebraism.  It  is  true  that  the  relation  between
Yahw6  and  his  people  is  described  in  the  prophets  by
the  symtx)lism  of  wedlock  (Hos.  1-3  ;  Jer.  22  3  ;  Ezek.
16  ;  Is.  50 1  5456).  It  is  true,  also,  that  the  phrase  '  to
love  (anw)  Yahwe'  occurs  frequently  in  Deuteronomy
and  (less  often)  in  the  Psalter,  and  that  the  word  nii
(used  in  the  Song)  is  applied  once  by  Isaiah  (5 1)  to
Yahw6.  Still,  the  notion  implied  by  the  prophetic
allegory  of  wedlock,  as  well  as  by  the  phrase  ■  to
love  God,'  is  not  that  of  free  inclination  on  Israel's
part  towards  the  All-beautiful  One,  but  rather  of  an
obedience  which  is  in  the  first  instance  the  condition
of  divine  protection,  though,  as  favours  multiply  and
the  essential  goodness  of  the  divine  commands  appears,
it  becomes  a  habit  and  a  passion.  In  Deuteronomy,
therefore,  the  love  of  Yahwfe  is  prescribed  as  a  duty
not  invited  or  presupposed  ;  and  even  in  the  Psalter,
where  devotional  feeling  finds  the  freest  expression,
there  are  only  three  passages  in  which  the  phrase
'to  love  Yahwe'  occurs  (Ps.  3I23  97  io(?)  HSzo),
and  in  the  first  of  these  it  occurs  in  the  imperative
mood.  It  is  in  harmony  with  this  that  three  other
passages  (Ps.  on  6936  119132)  contain  the  fuller  phrase
'  to  love  Yahwe's  name,'  which  appears  to  mean  (see
Is.  566)  the  performance  of  religious  duties  with  a
certain  fervour.  Such  a  conception  of  the  love  of
God  we  find  in  the  Koran  (Sur.  829;  cp  I996).  It
was  one  of  the  Jewish  elements  in  Mohammed's
teaching,  and  failed  to  satisfy  later  generations  of
Moslems.  In  Syria  and  in  Egypt,  and  still  more  in
Persia,  arose  a  mystic  type  of  devotion,  which  sought
by  contemplation  to  lift  the  veil  between  man  and  God.
The  mystic  love-songs  of  the  Cairo  dervishes,  and  the
fine  love-poems  of  the  SQfi-poet  Hafiz,  have  been  com-
pared by  Orientalists  with  the  Song  of  Songs  ;  but  it  has
been  forgotten  that,  fervid  as  the  love  of  God  became
among  the  later  Jews,  it  never  divested  itself  of  the
chastening  restraints  of  legalism,  and  that,  in  Persia  at
least,  mystic  poetry  is  one  of  the  fruits  of  a  national
reaction  against  the  aridity  of  Islam.  It  is  still  stranger
that  Sir  William  Jones  and  Sir  Edwin  Arnold  have
compared  the  Gitago\inda  of  the  admired  Indian
poet  Jayadeva  (14th  cent.  A.  D. ),  in  which  it  would
appear  (but  may  we  not  suspect  an  afterthought
of  the  poet?),  'from  the  few  stanzas  scattered  through
the  poem  where  the  author  speaks  in  his  own  person,
that  he  means  his  verses  to  be  taken  '  in  a  mystic  sense — ■
Krishna  symbolising  the  human  soul,  the  shepherdesses
the  allurements  of  sense,  and  Radha  the  knowledge
of,  or  meditation  on,  divine  things.  Surely  the  pan-
theistic atmosphere  in  which  Jayadeva  lived,  and  the
excessive  imaginative  fervour  of  the  Indian  genius,  are
altogether  unlike  the  conditions  under  which  the  Song
of  Songs  must  have  been  penned.

How  came  it,  then,  it  may  be  asked,  that  the  Jews

of  a  later  time,  in  their  exegesis  of  the  Song,  adopted  a

-. . . , theorv  which is, strictlv, contrary to

4.  Ungin  01  j,^g  gj-j|.;^  ^f  Hebraism  ?  'Probably  thus.
.  allegorical  y^r^  ^^^^^^  ^^^^^^  ^^^^  Mishna  ( Taanith,
interpretation,  ^g^  ^^,^^  ^^^^^  j,^^  destruction  of  the
temple,  passages  from  the  Song  were  sung  at  certain
popular  yearly  festivals.  We  know,  too,  that  after  the
great  catastrophe  all  expression  of  exuberant  joy  was
forbidden. Now,  what  in  those  gloomy  days  was  to  be

ancient  authority,'  but  also  to  the  analogy  of  P.s.  45  and  (more
safely)  to  pas.sages  in  the  prophets.  Such  a  position,  however,
was  tenable  only  provisionally.  The  Rishop  expressly  rejects  the
most  poetic  form  of  the  allegorical  theory,  for  which  alone  most
Christians  have  cared  — it  was  defended  by  Bossuet  — that
which  explains  the  Song  of  the  lovin?  intercourse  between
Christ  and  the  soul.  Surely  the  election  of  a  Gentile  Church
('dark  but  comely')  might  have  been  foreshadowed  at  a  less
expenditure  of  poetry.  Rightly,  therefore,  did  J.  D.  Michaelis
and  the  acute  Bp.  Warburton  criticise  Lowth  for  not  going
further.  Lowth  answered  th.it  without  allegory  the  place  of  the
Song  in  the  canon  could  not  be  justified.  All  his  literary  taste
could not dissolve  his  narrow  notion  of  the  authority  of  the


683


CANTICLES

done  with  the  S>ong,  which  tradition  already  ascribed  to
Solomon  ?  The  answer  was  ready  : — Consecrate  it  by
allegorical  interpretation.  This  course  corresponded
to  the  change  which  had  passed  upon  the  national
character.  The  enthusiastic  element  in  Jewish  piety
was  becoming,  in  adversity,  more  intense.  This  element
needed  the  expression  which  it  found  in  the  Song  of
Songs  (see  Berachoth  57^,  where  nn'on  is  ascribed  to
the  Megilla  of  the  Song  of  Songs  as  well  as  to  the  Book
of  Psalms).  It  should  te  added,  however,  that  even
after  70  A.  i).  the  natural  interpretation  found  some
supporters.  At  the  synod  of  Jamnia  (90  A.D. )  K.
'Akiba  had  still  to  defend  the  sacredness  of  the  Song  of
Songs  (Mishna,  Yadayim,  35),  and  in  Sanhedrin,  loi  a,
we  find  a  solemn  anathema  on  those  who  treat  the  Shir
ha-Shirim  as  a  secular  song  (icj  J'cd)-  The  grounds  on
which  this  secular  character  was  asserted  may  be  guessed
from  \\\&  Aboth  de  R.  A'afan,  chap.  1,  which  states  that
'formerly'  some  counted  the  Song  'apocryphal'  (ii«),
quoting  in  support  of  this,  not  7  1-9,  but  7  u/

It  is  about,  or  soon  after,  90  A.D.  that  we  find  the  first
traces  of  the  allegorical  view  (see  4  Esdras  52426  726,
and  R.  Simeon  ben  Gamliel's  allegorical  interpretation
of  Song  3  II  in  TaanithAZ).  Before  that  time  Jewish
teachers  seem  to  have  shrunk  from  quoting  the  Song  ;
even  Philo  neglects  it.  Nor  is  any  use  made  of  it  (or  of
Koh^leth)  in  the  NT.  Eph.  527  alludes  perhaps  to  Ps.
45  13,  but  certainly  not  to  Song  4?  ;  and  the  parallelism
between  Rev.  320  and  Song  52-6  (Trench,  Snrn
Churches,  225  /. )  is  incomplete.  This  silence  on  the
part  of  early  Jewish  and  Christian  writers  shows  the
weakness  of  the  argument  from  tradition  adduced  by
the  allegorists.

II. Poetical  form. Is  the  Song  of  Songs  a  drama  or

a bundle of loosely connected songs? The earliest

-J , . . advocate  of  a  definite  dramatic  theory

5.  Foetical  ^^,^g  ^j^g  learned  Jesuit,  Cornelius  a
form :  history  L,^pj^jg  (t  1637),  who,  like  Ewald,
of  views.  divided  the  poem  into  five  acts.  Our
own  Bishop  Lowth  takes  up  a  middle  position.  He
finds  no  trace  of  a  regular  plot,  and  only  one  thing  in
which  the  Song  closely  resembles  the  Greek  dramatic
models — the  chorus.  He  allows,  however,  that  the
Song  may  be  classed  with  imperfect  dramatic  poems,
such  as  the  Eclogues  of  \'irgil  and  some  of  the  Idylls  of
Theocritus.  The  first  scholar  to  adopt  the  second
solution  of  the  problem  was  Richard  Simon  ;  but  the
first  to  make  it  plausible  was  Herder.^  Influenced  partly
by  the  disintegrating  tendency  of  the  newer  criticism,
but  still  more  by  an  irresistible  impulse  to  search  for
traces  of  old  popular  poetry,  he  boldly  denied  the  con-
tinuity of  the  poem,  dividing  it  into  about  twenty-one
independent  songs  (with  a  fragmentary  conversation  for
an  appendix),  threaded  like  so  many  pearls  on  a  neck-
lace. These  songs  are  sometimes  very  short  ;  but
brevity.  Herder  thinks,  is  the  soul  of  a  love-song  ;  nor
is  it  important  to  determine  the  exact  numl)er  of  songs.
Herder  does  not  deny  a  certain  pleasing  appearance  of
unity,  but  ascribes  this  to  the  collector,  who  wished  to
show  the  gradual  growth  of  true  love  in  its  various
nuances  and  stages,  till  it  finds  its  consummation  in
wedlock.  In  its  present  form  the  .Song  may  be  taken
to  consist  of  six  '  scenes '  ;  but  the  critic  apologises  for
the  term,  and  insists  that  the  poem  was  intended  to
be  read,  and,  as  it  stands,  is  neither  a  theatrical  piece
nor  a  cantata.  Herder's  *  exquisite  little  treatise '  ^
could  not  fail  to  make  an  impression.  It  gained  the
approval  of  Eichhorn  and  Goethe  ;  but,  without  a  more

1  'Lieder  der  Liche.  Die  altestrn  und  schdnstcn  aus  dem
Morgenlande  (1778).  See  Herder's  W'erke  by  Suphan,  Bd.  8,
and  cp  Havm's  Herder^  i  175,  where  it  is  shown  that  it  was  really
Bishop  Percy's  Keliques  which  opened  Herder's  eyes  to  the
element  of  folk-song  in  the  OT.  Herder,  however,  came  to
recognise  that  this  element  was  somewhat  modified  in  the  Bible
by  a  certain  inherent  and  distinctive  sanctity.

2  We  have  borrowed  this  and  a  few  other  characteristic  phrases
from  the  EH  article  '  Canticles '  by  Robertson  Smith  for  the
pleasure  of  quoting  from  such  a  fine  piece  of  critical  exposi:ion.

684


I


CANTICLES

thorough  justification  than  Kichhorn  gave,  it  could  not
permanently  subvert  the  rival  theory.  Apart  from  its
cKxiuent  defence  of  the  literal  interpretation,  its  chief
contribution  to  biblical  study  is  perhaps  this — that  it
has  unintentionally  proved  the  im|)ossibility  of  recover-
ing the  original  songs  (if  songs  there  were)  and  of
retracing  the  plan  (if  plan  he  had)  of  the  hypothetical
collector.  Goethe  apix,'ars  to  have  felt  this.  Tempted
himself,  as  he  tells  us  in  the  Westostlicher  Divan,  to
select  and  arrange  some  of  '  these  few  leaves,'  he  took
warning  from  the  failure  of  previous  efforts,  and  left  the
poem  in  its  hopeless  but  lovely  confusion.

A  first  step  in  the  criticism  of  the  Song  was  taken  by
Evvakl  in  his  early  commentary  (1826).  He  did  not
as  yet  venture  to  suppose  that  the  '  cantata'  was  really
acted  on  the  stage  ;  but  from  the  first  he  asserted  its
genuinely  dramatic  character,  and  in  1839  he  repaired
his  original  omission  {Die  poet.  lUicher  ties  A  T,  Btl.  i. ).
Was  this  a  step  backward  ?  Only  in  appearance.
Until  the  necessity  of  disintegration  had  been  convin-
cingly proved,  l-'.wald  was  always  on  principle  opposed
to  it.  The  cleverness  and  moderation  of  his  critical
theory,  aided  by  his  growing  reputation  for  broad  and
deep  scholarship,  led  to  a  very  general  adoption  of  the
dramatic  hypothesis,  though  the  names  of  De  Wette,
Cjesenius,  Bleek,  and  Magnus  may  be  quoted  on  the
other  side.  The  last-named  scholar,  however,  did  not
effect  much  for  his  cause.  His  theory  '  involved  the
assumption  that  the  editor  often  displaced  part  of  a
song,  sacrificing  the  unity  of  the  original  lyrics  to  an
artificial  composition  of  the  whole. '  It  is  only  fair  to
add  that  in  1850  Rottcher  did  his  best  to  make  the
opposite  view  absurd  by  introducing  into  the  supposed
Hebrew  drama  '  the  complexities  and  stage  effects  of
a  modern  oiicretta. '  In  i860  Renan  obst.-rved,  with
truth,  that  the  dramatic  theory  had  become  '  almost
classic,'  and  in  1891  and  1893  it  was  put  forward  as
correct  in  the  Introductions  of  Driver  and  Konig.  Other
eminent  defenders  of  this  theory  are  Hitzig  (1855),
Ginsburg  (1857),  Kuenen  (1865),  Delitzsch  (1875),
RolxTtson  Smith  1  (1876),  Kaempf  (1877),  Kohler
(1878),  Stickcl  (t888),  Oettii  (1889).  Bruston  (1891),
Martineau  (1892),  and  Kothstein  (1893).

By  degrees,  however,  the  theory  of  the  separatists
recovered  from  the  effects  of  Magnus's  imprudence.
It  began  to  pass  into  a  new  phase,  and  to  e.xercise
a  stronger  attraction.  Diestel  (art.  '  Hohes  Lied,'
Schenkel's ///i^.  Lex.  iii.  ['71])  ;  Reuss  ('79,  in  La  liible,
etc. .  also  Gesch.  der  Schriften  des  A  Ts^"^^  ['90].  231-239);
Stade  (GVf, 2i<)7  ['88]);  Cornill  (/••////.  ['91],  pp.
236-240);  \i\.\dd&  (New  World,  March '94,  pp.  56-77);
Kautzsch  (HS,  '94;  /,//.  of  t/ie  OT,  148-151),  and
Siegfried  {Holieslied,  '98)  have  done  much  to  show  that
the  view  of  Herder  had  not  yet  Ijeen  adefjuately  con-
sidered. Among  these  Buckle  deserves  prominence  for
being  the  first  to  utilise  adec|uately  the  information  re-
specting Syrian  marriage  customs  given  by  Consul  Wetz-
stein  in  1873.

Before  reviewing  this  theory  ourselves,  we  shall  do
well  to  examine  the  dramatic  hypothesis  more  attentively.
6 Dramatic  '"^ ^'^^  forms which it has  taken  are


hypothesis


numerous and varied ; in dividing  the


considered  l"^'"  '""^  '^^^^  ^"'^  scenes  critics  are  by
no  means  unanimous.^  According  to
Reuss,  this  wide  divergence  is  fatal  to  the  hypothesis.
It  seonis  foirer  to  admit  that  if  it  could  be  made  out  (i)
that  there  is  a  plot,  and  (2)  that  there  is  any  reason  10

'  Of  this  lamented  scholar's  later  views  we  have,  unfortunately,
no  record.

2  The  dramatic  schemes  of  Ew.  and  Del.  are  given  in  full  by
Dr.  /«/'rc*/.(«)  438-444.  Delitzsch  finds  only  two  chief  characters,
Solomon  and  the  Shulammite.  Passages  like  2  10-15  and  4  8-15,
which  seem  to  speak  of  a  shepherd-lover,  really  refer,  he  thinks,
to  Solomonj  who  adopts  the  circle  of  ideas  and  images  familiar
to  his  rustic  love.  Against  this  absurd  view,  see  Oettii,  157.
M.-irtineau,  on  the  other  hand,  eliminates  the  king  altogether.
So  too  C.istelli,  who  describes  the  poem  as  an  idyll  in  dialogue,
the  chief  personages  of  which  are  the  Shulammite  and  her  lover.

685


CANTICLES

expect  a  drama  among  a  Semitic  people,  we  might
excuse  this  divergence  as  an  unfortunate  consetjuence  of
the  absence  of  stage  directions.

i.  First,  then,  is  there  any  plot?  The  dramatists  (as
we  may  call  the  defenders  of  this  the<jry)  answer  that
there  is.  Stickel  even  discovers  two  plots,  developed
by  distinct  pairs  of  lovers — the  Shulanunite  (who  is  a
vine-dresser)  and  her  'friend'  (lii),  and  a  shepherd
and  shepherdess  of  Lelxinon  (besides  the  royal  suitor,
Solomon).  The  two  latter  are  intro<luced  in  three
scenes,  1  7-8  1  15-24  4  7-5  i.  They  know  nothing  alxjut
the  Shulammite  and  her  '  friend. '  The  fxjot  has  inter-
woven the  two  movements  to  amuse  the  audience  and
produce  a  jjleasing  contrast  Ijetween  the  different  fortunes
of  the  two  pairs  of  lovers.  All  very  conceivable !
Double  musical  themes  can  be  treated  in  fugues  :  why
not  also  in  Hebrew  drama,  granting  that  a  regular
Hebrew  drama  ever  existed,  and  that  Stickel's  view  of
the  text  is  justified  ?  However,  all  that  this  critic  has
shown  is  that  1  q f.  and  1 15-17  are  out  of  connection
with  the  previous  verses  ;  and  in  the  case  of  the  latter
passage  an  easy  emendation  ^  enables  us  to  recognise  a
continuous  speech  of  the  bride  in  1  i2-2i.

Most  critics,  on  the  other  hand,  are  content  with  one
plot,  and  approach  more  or  less  closely  to  the  dramatic
scheme  of  Ewald,  according  to  which  the  heroine  is  a
maiden  of  Shulem  or  Shunem  in  Issachar  (see  Shi;.ni;.m),
who  has  two  lovers,  the  one  at  a  distance,  the  other  (till
he  finally  disappears)  near  at  hand  ;  the  one  poor  but
favoured,  the  other  royal  but  treated  with  disdain.  In
chap.  I4/.  we  find  the  maiden,  who  makes  no  secret  of
her  country  origin,  in  the  '  chamlxirs  '  of  the  king  among
the  '  daughters  of  Jerusalem  '  (the  ladies  of  the  palace)  ;
but  in  85  she  suddenly  appears,  approaching  her
mountain  home  on  the  arm  of  her  betrothed.  FVom

the  context  it  is  thought  to  be  clear  that  the  suitor
whose  riches  are  contemned  (87,  cp  11/.)  is  King
Solomon,  to  whom  the  flattering  compliments  offered
to  the  maiden  in  previous  chapters  must  be  assigned.
How,  then,  came  '  the  Shulammite '  to  exchange  her
free  country  life  for  the  irksome  splendour  of  the  court  ?
It  is  inferred,  from  611/.,  that  she  had  been  surprised
by  Solomon's  courtiers  (who  had  often  lx.-en  employed,
no  doubt,  in  similar  abductions)  on  a  royal  progress  in
N.  Israel.  She  '  had  gone  down  into  the  nut-garden
to  look  at  the  green  things  of  the  valley,'  when
'suddenly,'  she  says,  'my  desire  brought  me  to  the
chariots  of  my  noble  people'  (Ewald).  It  is  some
excuse  for  Solomon  that,  if  Ewald  may  be  followed,
'  the  Shulanmiite '  had  not  even  been  betrothed  to  the
shepherd  when  she  was  carried  off.  (R.  Martineau,
however,  thinks  that  between  the  third  and  the  fourth
scene — i.e.,  between  the  3 6- 11  and  47-16 — '  the  Shulam-
mite '  and  the  shcjiherd  lover  have  l)een  formally  l)e-
trothed. )  Then,  how  came  the  girl  to  be  delivereti

from  her  royal  captor?  Renan  has  offered  a  very
modern  solution  of  the  problem  ;  but  it  is  one  w  hich
has  no  basis  in  the  text,  and  may  be  safely  neglected.
Most  have  supposetl  (cp  89/.)  that  the  escape  of  '  the
Shulanunite'  was  due,  not  to  any  favourable  combina-
tion of  circumstances,  but  to  the  effect  produced  upon
Solomon  by  her  own  frank  and  loyal  character ;  '  all
the  actors,'  says  Ewald,  '  recognise  the  restraints  of  the
true  religion. '  Will  this  view  hold  ?  Is  it  conceivable
that  the  luxurious  Solomon  should  have  lieen  represented
by  any  p>opular  p)oet  as  releasing  one  of  the  '  maidens
innumerable'  in  his  'chambers'?'^  Is  it  probable  that
such  a  maiden  would  have  had,  in  the  poet's  fancy,  the
liberty  implied  in  the  early  scenes  of  the  'drama,'  or
that  she  would  have  met  Solomons  advances  m  thatextra-

1  1  15  has  evidently  been  interpolated  from  4  i,  and  the  opening
word  of  7'.  16  has  been  put  in  to  match  the  first  word  of  7'.  15.  An
address  of  the  heroine  to  her  lover  is  out  of  place  in  this  context
(Bickell).

*  Stickel  quotes  an  examnle  of  such  magnanimity  from  the
life  of  the  Caliph  Mahdi  (Krenier,  Culturgesch.  dcs  Orient,
2  127) ;  but  can  we  compare  the  characters  of  the  two  sovereigns?


CANTICLES

ordinarily  absent  manner  which  Ewald's  view  of  1 9-26

sii|)|)oses?  Wli)-  slioukl  the  recurring  phrase  '  daughters
of  Jerusalem  '  (cp  '  daughters  of  Zion,'  3ii)  have  such  a
limited  reference  as  the  dramatic  theory  requires  ?  Then,
as  to  the  Shulammite  and  her  abduction.  Theory  apart,
what  right  have  we  to  assume  that  the  intercourse
iniplied  in  the  poem  between  the  girl  and  her  lover
was  prior  to  marriage?  To  this  point  we  shall  have
to  return.  Can  we  safely  infer  from  the  title  that
Shulem  or  Shunem  was  the  girl's  home?  The  title
occurs  in  a  single  passage  (H 13  [7i]);  but  there  is
no  allusion  elsewhere  to  confirm  this  supposition.
Next,  how  can  Ewald  base  such  a  romantic  story
simply  on  the  very  obscure  passage,  6"/.?  Lastly,
how  do  we  know  that  the  Solomon  of  history  or
legend  plays  any  part  in  the  poem?  As  Castelli,
himself  one  of  the  dramatisers,  has  well  pointed
out,  Solomon  is  mentioned  by  name  only  in  some
simile  or  figurative  contrast.'  Thus  in  Is  the  heroine
likens  herself  for  comeliness  to  the  curtains  of  the
pavilions  of  Solomon  (but  we  should  rather  read  with
Uriill,  We.,  and  Wi.,  nsS:r,  the  name  of  a  nomad
Arabian  tribe;  see  S.\i,M.\H,  2).  In  87-11  Solomon's
litter  is  spoken  of  jestingly;  and  so,  in  811,  'to  the
costly  vineyard  of  Solomon  the  heroine  prefers  her  own
symbolic  one,  which  does  not  require  the  anxious  super-
vision of  others.'  There  is  a  fourth  passage  in  which,
according  to  an  extremely  probable  correction  of  the
text,  Solomon  is  named,— 68 y]  :

'  Sixty  cjueens  had  Solomon,  and  eighty  concubines,
and  maidens  innumerable.  One  is  my  dove,  my  spotless
one.'

Here  again  there  is  a  contrast  between  Solomon's
large  harem  and  the  speaker's  single  incomparable  bride.

Can  we,  then,  be  sure  that  where  the  phrase  '  the
king '  occurs  alone,  it  is  not  a  honorific  designation  of
the  bridegroom  ?  And  this  suggests  the  question,  which
Castelli,  however,  does  not  raise,  whether  the  term  '  the
Shulammite '  is  not  as  purely  figurative  as  '  the  king '  ?
Several  writers  (e.j^. ,  Klostermann)  have  conjectured
that  the  story  of  Abishag  the  Shunammite  ( i  K.  I3/)
supplied  the  plot  of  the  supposed  drama  ;  but  consider-
ing the  difficulty  of  making  out  any  plot  at  all,  and  the
fact  that  'the  Shulammite'  is  referred  to  only  in  one
passage,  we  may  ask  whether  it  is  not  more  probable
that  the  term  is  applied  metaphorically,  and  is  equivalent
to  'the  fiiirest  of  women'  (18  59  61)?  If  we  omit
611/.  as  misplaced  (doubtless  a  correct  view),  and  read
tiio  and  13  [7i]  together,  we  shall  see  how  natural  it
was  for  the  poet  to  seek  out  some  striking  variation  on
the  rather  hackneyed  phrase  just  mentioned.  The
passage  will  run  thus  :

'  Who  is  she  that  looketh  down  as  the  dawn,  fair  as
the  moon,  clear  as  the  sun?  Turn,  turn,  thou  Shulam-
mite, that  we  may  look  upon  thee.'

It  is  usual  to  assume  that  the  spectators,  being
ignorant  of  the  heroine's  name,  address  her  with  blunt
directness  as  a  girl  of  Shunem,  and  that  she  answers  by
the  modest  question,  '  What  do  you  see  in  the  simple
Shulammite  girl  ?  '  It  is  much  more  natural  to  suppose
that  '  the  Shulammite'  (.Shunammite)  is  a  term  not  less
complimentary  than  '  fair  as  the  moon '  in  v.  10,  and
points  back  to  the  Abishag  of  tradition.  ^  And  should  it
be  asked  why  .Abishag's  name  is  not  mentioned,  we  may
venture  to  express  the  opinion  that  when  the  song  was
written  there  was  probably  in  the  Hebrew  text  of  i  K.
I31S,  I  Sam.  etc.,  not  jf3X.  but  a  very  different  word
(see  Shulammite).

There  are  many  other  difficulties  of  interpretation
which  might  be  mentioned.  For  example,  how  are  we
to  understand  the  movements  of  '  the  beloved '  ? Are

'  Castelli,  Delia  poesia  hihlica,  311

2  This  view  was  proposed  by  Stade  in  1887  {GVI 1  292),  and
adopted  by  Hu.  in  his  excellent  essay,  Nenv  World,  Mar.  1894,
pp.  62-64.  Budde  desiderates  an  OT  analogy.  Perhaps  '  Zimri '
insK.  »3i(seeRV)issuch.

687


CANTICLE

all  the  meetings  of  the  lovers,  except  the  final  reunion,
in  reminiscence  or  in  sleeping  or  waking  imagination
only  ?  Can  we  conceive  of  a  drama  in  which  each
of  the  actors  seems  almost  if  not  quite  uninfiuenced  by
the  sj)eeches  of  the  other?  Not  so  did  the  Vahwist  and
the  Elohist  and  the  author  of  the  Prologue  of  Job
manage  their  dialogues.  Less  important  is  the  difficulty
which  arises  from  the  changes  of  scene,  a  weakness
which  need  not  surprise  us  in  primitive  plays.  We
must  be  careful,  however,  not  to  attach  too  much
imi)ortance  to  European  parallels.  Kenan,  for  ex-
ample, goes  too  far  when  he  refers  to  the  comparatively
elaborate  pastoral  play  called  Li  Gieus  de  Robin  et  de
Marion,  or  Li  Jens  du  Bergier  et  de  la  Bergiere,
composed  in  1282  by  Adam  de  la  Halle  for  the  diversion
of  the  court.'  It  would  be  more  natural,  with  R.
Sanmel  ben  Meir  (Kasnoam),  to  compare  the  simple
pastoretas  of  the  Troubadours  ;  but  even  that  might  be
misleading.

ii. We  have  now  to  ask,  further.  Have  we  a  right  to
exjject a  Semitic drama, however primitive  in form '


7.  No  Semitic
drama.


That  Semitic  nations  are  not  at  all
devoid  of  general  dramatic  capacity
may  be  granted.  In  Mohammedan
countries  the  rdwi  ( '  reciter ' )  still  displays  all  the
faculties  of  an  actor,  and  stirs  his  hearers  to  the  depths
as  he  tells  the  story  of  'Antar  or  the  tales  of  the  Arabian
Nights  ;  and  there  is  an  unmistakably  strong  dramatic
element  in  Arabic  works  such  as  the  '  .Sessions  '  of  Hariri.
It  cannot  have  been  otherwise  with  the  Israelites.
They  too  must  have  laughed  and  wept  as  they  listened
to  their  story-tellers.  At  all  events,  the  relics  of  their
literature  contain  genuinely  dramatic  passages  :  see,  for
example,  the  stories  of  Jacob  and  Samson  (evidentU-  of
traditional  origin),  of  Ruth  and  Job.  Even  in  the
psalms  and  prophecies  we  have  pieces  like  Ps.  2  24
7-10  Is.  63 1-6  28  8-11  Mic.  6  6-8,  and  the  colloquies
in  the  Book  of  Job  have  at  least  a  distant  affinity  to
the  drama  of  character.  Still,  there  is  no  evidence
that  the  transition  to  a  drama  was  ever  made  by  a
Semitic  people.  We  have  an  Assyrian  epic,  but  no
Ass\rian  drama.  Least  of  all  can  we  reasonably
expect  to  find  one  in  the  OT.  Theatrical  performances
were  not  known  at  Jerusalem  before  the  time  of  Herod,
and  to  all  good  Jews  such  heathenish  practices  were
detestable  (Jos.  Ant.  xv.  81  ;  cp  BJ  i.  21  8).  Hence
the  dramatic  theory  of  the  Song  is  plausible  only  if  the
composition  of  the  poem  be  placed  at  Alexandria
(during  the  Greek  period).  \\'hy,  upon  this  sup-
position, did  not  the  dramatist  write  in  Greek,  as  did
Ezekiel,  the  author  of  the  drama  on  the  Exodus  called
'E$a7co7T7?  In  a  word,  the  difficulties  of  the  dramatic
theory  are  insuperable.

{b)  The  Israelites,  however,  had  a  still  more  character-
istic gift — that  of  lyric  poetr)-.  Singing  and  dancing
p .  formed  essential  parts  of  their  festivities,

8.  f  opuiar ^^  ji^g^.  g^j„  jQ  among  the  Bedouins  ;

yn  P  ry-  ^,^^  when  these  festivities  were  occa-
sioned by  some  great  local  or  national  event,  a  dramatic
element  would  naturally  infuse  itself  into  the  popular
songs,  and  this  all  the  more  easily  because  the  custom
of  alternate  song,  which  is  in  its  nature  dramatic,
was  very  ancient  (cp  Ex.  152i  iS.  21ii).  Ewald
thinks  that  the  Song  (which  is,  according  to  him,  a
cantata)  was  originally  intended  for  a  festival  of  the
independence  of  the  N.  kingdom,  and  that  it  was  per-
formed in  five  days,  an  act  in  a  day.  This  view  suits
his  theory  of  the  '  plot '  of  the  Song  ;  but  it  is  no
longer  tenable — we  have  seen  that  the  references  to
'  Solomon  '  are  figurative,  and  that  '  the  Shulammite '  is
also  a  mere  eulogistic  term.

Why  should  not  we  take  up  again  the  suggestive
idea  of  Bossuet  and  Lowth  that  the  Song  was  intended
for  use  on  the  seven  days  of  the  marriage  festival  (cp

1  TM&tre  franfais  au  vtoyen  age,  par  Monmerqui  et  Michel,
102-135. (Renan's  account  differs.)


9.  Syrian

wedding

festivities.


CANTICLES

Gen.  29a7  Judg.  14i2  Tot),  n  19)?  On  such  occasions
there  would,  of  course,  Ix;  altiTuale  songs  by  the  bride-
groom and  the  bride,  and  to  this  Jeremiah  refers  when,
describing  the  calamities  of  invasion,  he  says  that  Gotl
will  '  cause  to  cease  from  the  cities  of  Judah  and  from
the  streets  of  Jerusalem  the  voice  of  mirth  and  the  voice
of  gladness,  the  voice  of  the  bridegroom  and  the  voice
of  the  bride"  (Jer.  734  2rMo).  There  is  also  an  illus-
trative p.nssage  in  the  Mishna  (TiuiHtlhAi,  already  re-
ferred to),  and  the  strangeness  of  the  notice  affords  the
best  guarantee  of  its  truth.  It  was  customary  at  the
'  Wood  Festival '  (^v\o<(>opia)  on  the  1 5th  of  Ab  (August)
and  at  the  close  of  the  Day  of  Atonement'  for  the
'  daughters  of  Jerusalem '  (cp  Song  1  5,  etc. )  to  go  out
ami  dance  in  the  vineyards,  and  whoever  had  no  wife
went  thither  also.  (Was  it  a  relic  of  'marriage  by
cai)ture'?  Cp  Judg.  21  21. )  There  was  also  alternate
sinjjing,  and  the  youths  were  wont  to  use  the  words  of
Song  3  II. See  D.XNCK,  §  6.

It  is  from  .Syria,  where  so  many  old  customs  have
survived,  that  we  get  the  fullest  confirmation  of  Hossuet's
idea.  Let  us  turn  to  .Song36-ii  (trans-
lated by  the  present  writer  in  JQR,
July  1899),  where  the  words  referred
to  so  strangely  in  the  Mishna  occur.
Solomon  is  here  introduced  riding  in  his  palanquin
'with  the  crown  with  which  his  mother  crowned  him
on  his  wedding-day,' escorted  by  sixty  warriors  'with
the  hand  on  the  sword.'  What  this  means  we  can  tell
from  von  Kremcr's  account  of  the  nmrriage  processions
in  Moslem  villages  in  the  Lebanon.'^  The  procession
goes  from  the  house  of  the  bridegroom  to  that  of  the
bride,  and  in  it  there  is  a  band  of  youths  armed  with
long  poles,  which  they  keep  striking  together,  and  hold
in  such  a  way  as  to  form  a  kind  of  roof  over  them.
The  poles  were  probably  in  olden  times  lances  :  the
open  country  was  not  secure  from  bandits  (Hos.  69  ;  cp
Ps.  lOS).**  The  '  crown  '  is,  of  course,  that  of  the  bride-
groom (cp  Is.  61 10)  ;  '  in  the  war  with  Vespasian,'
says  the  Mishna  (iV/*;,  914),  '  the  crowns  of  bridegrooms
were  forbidden."  The  Solomon  of  3  11,  then,  is  not  the
Solomon  who  made  himself  a  state-litter,  but  a  happier
though  a  humbler  mortal.  It  is,  in  sooth,  a  pretty  jest
to  liken  the  bridegroom  with  his  nu[)tial  crown  and
the  sixty  '  companions"  (Judg.  14  11)  who  roof  him  over
with  their  [xjles  to  the  luxurious  Solomon  in  his  gorgeous
palan(iuin  with  his  martial  bodyguard  around  him ;
and  the  jest  has  a  wholesome  moral.

A  nmch  fuller  account  of  the  customs  of  the  Syrian
peasants  in  the  month  of  weddings  (March)  is  given  by
Wetzstein.*  During  the  seven  days  after  a  wedding,
high  festivity,  with  scarcely  interrupted  singing  and
dancing,  prevails.  The  bridegroom  and  the  bride  play
the  parts  of  king  and  cjueen  (hence  the  week  is  called  the
'  king"s  week  " ),  and  receive  the  homage  of  their  neigh-
bours ;  the  crown,  however,  is  at  present  in  .Syria  (as  in
Greece)  confined  to  the  bride  (contrast  Song3ii).  The
bridegroom  has  his  train  of  '  companions  '  (to  borrow  the
ancient  term,  Judg.  l-lii),  and  the  grander  the  wedding
the  more  of  these  there  are.  The  bride  too  has  her
friends  (cp  '  daughters  of  Jerusalem,"  Songls,  etc. ),  the
maidens  of  the  place,  who  take  an  important  part  in
the  reception  of  the  bridegroom  (cp  I's.  4514  Mt.
25 1-13).  In  the  evening  of  the  great  day  a  sword-dance
is  performed. In  the  Arabian  desert  it  is  the  young

1  The  tenth  of  Tisri  must  anciently  have  had  a  festive  char-
actir  :  can  it  have  been  a  prelude  to  the  joyous  Feast  of  booths
(Kohlcr)V

2  Mttti-lsyrien  urui  Damascus  (^'$-i),  p.  123.

3  Wetzstein  says  that  the  bridegroom's  friends  are  really
armed.  He  thinks  that  '  by  reason  of  fear  in  the  night '  (.Song
3  8)  may  allude  to  the  insecurity  of  the  villages.

■•  .Appendix  to_  Delitzsch"s  Hoheslieii  (1875),  165-167,  170-
177  ;  cp  Wetzstein  in  Zt.  /I'ir  F.lhnologie,  1873,  pp.  287-2^4.
Even  among  ihc /ella It }n  of  Palestine  there  seems  to  be  a  vestige
of  the  sword-dance.  The  bride  on  her  camel  is  conducted  to
the  house  of  the  bridegroom  holding  a  drawn  sword,  /'JiJ-'Q,
April  1894,  p.  136.


CANTICLES

men  of  the  trilx;  who  thus  display  their  agility  (Doughty,
ylr.  Dei.  2 118);  but  in  the  Syrian  wedding  festivals
the  sword-dancer  is  the  bride.  When  tak<ti  in  con-
nection with  another  Syrian  custom  and  with  the  passage
of  the  Mishna  mentioned  alwve,  this  may  Ix;  thought  a
relic  of  primitive  'marriage  by  capture."  (The  con-
nected custont  referred  to  is  this  —  that  when,  on  the
morning  after  the  wedding,  the  royal  seat  has  Ixen
erected,  a  crier  comes  forward  declaring  that  the  '  king'
—  the  bridegroom  —  has  made  a  campaign  against  a
hitherto  impregnable  fortress,  and  calls  ujxjn  him  to  say
whether  he  has  succeeded  or  not.  The  '  king '  answers
in  the  affirmative,  and  upon  this  the  seven  days  of
rejoicing  begin. )  However  this  may  Ix;,  the  sword-
dance  at  the  Syrian  weddings  has  a  significance  of  its  ow  n.
It  not  only  displays  the  physical  gifts  and  capacities  of  the
bride,  but  also  syndwlises  her  womanlyself-respect,  which
keeps  all  intruders  afar  off  (cp  SongSg  10).  '  The  figure
of  the  dancer,  her  dark  waving  hair,  her  serious  noble
bearing,  her  downcast  eyes,  her  graceful  movements,
the  quick  and  secure  step  of  her  small  naked  feet,  the
lightning-like  flashing  of  th(;  blade,  the  skilful  movements
of  her  left  hand,  in  which  she  holds  a  handkerchief,  the
exact  keeping  of  time,"  form  a  .scene  which  contributes  not
a  little  to  make  the  'king"s  week  "  the  happiest  in  a  .Syrian
peasant's  life.  The  dcscrijition  throws  a  bright  light  on
SongG  10  13  7  1-6  (which  forms  a  connected  passage).'
The  opening  verse  is  probably  six)ken  by  the  chorus  of
neighbours  on  the  approach  of  the  bride  with  the  sword  ;
it  abounds  with  res|>ectful  compliments  suitable  to  the
occasion.  / ".  13^  also  Ijclongs  to  the  neighlxjurs,  who
call  to  the  bride  to  turn  that  they  may  see  her  tetter.
Then,  to  draw  out  their  admiration  further,  the  bride-
groom asks  them  why  they  are  gazing  as  fixetlly  at  this
paragon  of  beauty  —  this  second  .Shulammiie — 'at  the
dance  of  warlike  hosts,"  i.e.  at  the  \\ar-dance,  or
sword-dance  (c'^rrrn  n'^r.irs  ;  u>s  x°P°'-  ^'^'''  Tapf/i/ioXiIi' ;
so  Budde).  It  often  happens  in  the  Syrian  desert,  says
Wetzstein,  that  when  a  woman  performs  this  dance  on
occasion  of  a  victory  of  one  trilx;  over  another,  and  some
young  man  shows  special  a<lmiration  of  the  dancer,  he
is  called  upon  to  fight  unarmed,  according  to  certain
rules,  with  the  dancer,  and  may  chance  to  pay  for  his
boldness  with  his  life.  To  this  the  question  in  Song
613^  may  allude.  Song  7 1-6  (which  is  in  a  different
metre  from  6  10  13)  exactly  answers  to  the  .Syrian  ■uuif/
{i.e.,  'laudatory  descrijition")  sung  during  the  sword-
dance  by  the  leader  of  the  chorus.  We  must  not  criticise
it  too  severely.  The  tone  is  that  which  popular  taste
required  and  (to  judge  from  the  7^v/.f/ quoted  by  Wetz-
stein) still  requires  in  Syria.

On  the  day  after  the  wedding,  w hen  the  '  king "  has
announced  his  'victory'  over  the  'fortress,'  Jinolher
was/  is  sung.  This  time  the  attractions  of  the  lady  are
described  with  less  unreserve,  in  deference  to  wifely
dignity.  Such  a  7i'<!s/  we  seem  to  have  in  Song  4  1-7.
Is  the  bridegroom,  then,  exempt  from  laudation?  Not
in  modern  .Syria,  nor  in  the  .Song.  True,  in  Song  36-ii,
sung  (it  would  seem)  during  the  procession  from  the
bridegroom's  house  to  that  of  the  bride,  flattery  goes
no  further  than  to  liken  the  crownetl  bridegroom  to
Solomon.  The  young  wife  naturally  goes  further.  The
W'(/.r/  itself  is  found  in  Song  5 10-16.  Prefixed  to  it  is
a  speech  of  the  bride  describing  a  weird  dream  that
she  has  had,  in  which  she  believes  so  firmly  that
she  begs  for  the  help  of  the  '  daughters  of  Jcriusalem '
in  restoring  her  to  her  beloved.  These  are  the  chief
songs  of  this  class;  but  in  Song64-7  we  have  at  least
a  fragment  of  a  laudatory  description  of  the  bride,  part
of  which  is  an  ill-connected  quotation  from  4  1-3.  Wetz-
stein assures  us  that  the  7<'(ijr/"- passages  are  the  weakest
p.art  of  the  wedding-songs,  and  accordingly,  he  adds,
the  7<w.r/-portion  of  the  Song  of  Songs  is  much  inferior
poetically  to  the  rest. Certainly  the  most  striking  part

'  On  rt  iiy^,  see  above,  S  10.  Reiiss  despairs  of  0  10-13  with-
out reason.

690


CANTICLES

of  the  Sonsf  of  Songs  is  the  passage  which  contains  7  xi-
87  (excepting  the  interpolated  verses  83-5').  It  is  a
song  such  as  might  have  been  sung  on  the  evening  of
the  wedding-day.  The  opening  description  is  true  in
idea,  though  imaginary  in  its  incidents.  It  is  true  in
idea  ;  for  every  marriage,  according  to  the  poet,  should
arise  from  the  free  affection  of  one  man  and  one
woman.  It  is  imaginary  in  its  details,  for  the  incidents
are  inconsistent  with  what  was  allowable  in  courtship.
For  real  songs  of  courtship  such  as  an  Israelite  might
have  used,  see  Riickert's  Hamdsa,  bk.  iv. ).  The  closing
eulogy  of  love  as  '  strong  as  death,  inflexible  as  Sheul,
whose  flashes  are  flashes  of  fire,  [whose  flame  is]  a  flame
from  heaven  '  '■'  (86),  is  noble.

The  poetical  form,  and  therefore  also  the  origin,  of
the  Song  of  Songs  seems  to  be  no  longer  doubtful.

Fully  twenty years ago  (1878)  the present  writer rejected
Ewald's  interpretation  of  Song  (5 11/.,  but  still  thought  it  possible,
1  n Prpqpnf ^^  omitting  interpolations  and transposing
. •'^^®°®"'' certain  misplaced  passages,  to  restore  some-
Writer's  rela- thing  like  the  original  sequence,  and  to  re-
tiOQ  to  WetZ-  cognise  a  loose  imperfect  plot  such  as  quick-
i. ;  witted hearers and spectators might have

divined.  He  saw  also  that  the  poem  was
based  on  pl)pul.^r  songs,'*  and  admitted  the  critical  significance
of  the  information  furnished  by  Wetzstein.  '  When  we  consider,'
he  then  wrote,  '  that  processions  and  the  choral  performance  of
lyric  poems  were  familiar  to  the  Israelites  from  Samuel  down-
wards, it  becomes  a  highly  probable  conjecture  that  this  custom
of  the  Syrian  peasants  was  already  in  vogue  in  the  times  of  the
or  writers.  This  is  confirmed  by  the  remarkable  coincidence
between  the  time  when  the  incidents  of  the  Song  are  supposed
to  take  place  (see  Song  21-13)  and  the  time  of  the  peasants'
weddings  in  Syria  (March  is  the  most  beautiful  time  of  the
Syrian  year).'  He  further  noticed  two  or  three  of  the  ivasf-
passages  in  the  Son^,  and  (after  Kohler)  the  implied  reference
to  the  sword-dance  in  Song  61013  ('''•  '^y-  being  misplaced).
He  was  far,  however,  from  realising  the  extent  to  which  the
Hebrew  songs  were  analogous  to  the  traditional  Syrian,  and
thought  that  a  part  of  the  Song  related  to  the  happy  courtship
of  the  rustic  lovers  ;  nor  did  he  understand  the  reference  to
Solomon  or  the  meaning  of  'the  Shulammite.'  To  Budde
he  owes  it  that  he  has  adopted  a  more  consistent  theory.*

The  book  is  an  anthology  of  songs  used  at  marriage
festivals  in  or  near  Jerusalem,  revised  and  loosely  con-
_  . .  nected  by  an  editor  without  regard  to
temporal  sequence  ;  in  saying  which,  we
do  not  deny  that  the  kernel  of  the  work  may  have  been
brought,  from  some  other  part  of  the  country,  perhaps
in  the  north.

What  of  the  supposed  indications  of  unity? These
are  found  partly  in  the  phraseology  ('Solomon,' 'the
king,' 'daughters  of  Jerusalem,' 'my


12.  Apparent
unity.


beloved,'  'my  friend,'  the  seeming  re-
frains in  27  85  84  ;  as  well  as  in  '2,17(1
46rt  ;  and  in  2i7^  814/^),  partly  in  the  poetical  colour,
partly  in  the  feeling  or  spirit,  and  of  course  in  the
circumstances.  This  agreement  tetween  the  several
parts  of  the  poem  is  not  as  great  as  has  been  supposed.
As  Bickell  observes,  '  (jeneratim  omnia  verbotenus
repetita  serius  inserta  sunt '  ;  in  ©  such  repetitions  are
even  more  plentiful  than  in  MT.  The  genuine  points
of  phraseological  agreement  are  quite  accounted  for  by
the  traditional  conventions  of  these  love  songs.  That
the  feeling,  the  poetical  colour,  and  the  circumstances
are  the  same,  harmonises  with  the  assumed  origin  of
the  songs.  The  prominence  of  the  mother  (1684
825)  is  to  be  explained  not  (with  Ewald,  334)  by  '  the
Shulammite's'  supposed  loss  of  her  father,  but  as  a  vestige
of  the  matriarchate  ( Mutterrecht).  With  regard  to  Song
I4  and  Song  8 10,  which,  taken  together,  may  seem  to
show  that  the  heroine  had  been  placed  in  a  royal  palace
but  had  '  comjjelled  her  assailant  to  leave  her  in  peace '

t  These  verses  are  not  in  the  metre  of  the  rest  of  the  passage  ;
the  two  former  come  from  2  6_/C  (cp  3  5),  while  the  last  has  been
suggested  oy  3  6.

2  Or,  'a  most  vehement  flame.'  The  final  ,t  may  be  simply
an  aftormative  (Jiiger,  Jastrow).


3  See  Foutulers  o/OT Crit.  (1893),  350.

■*  r.udde's  attempt  (Neiv  World,  March  1894)  to  show  that
some  of  the  less  poetical  passages  are  due  to  the  collector  and
reviser  of  the  songs,  who  now  and  then  misunderstood  the  texts,
cannot  here  be  considered.

691


CANTICLES

(Robertson  Smith's  paraphrase  of  8ioi^),  we  should  hold
that  the  '  chambers '  of  1 4  are  those  of  the  crowned
bridegroom,  and  that  the  '  peace'  of  810  belongs  to  the
characteristic  figure  of  the  '  fortress  '  (see  above).

Historically,  the  Song  would  gain,  could  it  be  shown
to  be  pre-exilic.  What  would  not  one  give  for  the
-J  .  light  likings  of  ancient  Hebrew  maidens,
■  and  for  a  nol)le  popular  protest  against
the  doubtful  innovations  of  the  unpatriotic  Solomon?
Robertson  Smith  in  1876  held  that  the  Song  of  Songs
was  just  such  a  protest.  '  The  conservative  revolution
of  Jeroboam  was,'  he  remarks,  '  in  great  measure  the
work  of  the  prophets,  and  must  therefore  have  carried
with  it  the  religious  and  moral  convictions  of  the  people.
An  important  element  in  these  convictions,  which  still
claims  our  fullest  sympathy,  is  powerfully  set  forth  in
the  Canticles,  and  the  deletion  of  the  book  from  the
Canon  .  .  .  would  leave  us  without  a  most  necessary
complement  to  the  Judaian  view  of  the  conduct  of  the
ten  tribes  which  we  get  in  the  historical  books. '  The
reference  to  the  harem  life  of  Solomon,  however,  is  con-
fined to  two  verses  (Song 6 8/. )  ;  it  is  rather  sportive  than
polemical,  and,  attractive  as  the  protest-theory  is,  it  is
opposed  to  a  sound  exegesis  (see  above).  *

For a pre-exilic date  there is no  solid  argument,
(a)  The  title,  which  is  not  by  the  author  (note nrx),
„  ,  is  of  course  not more  trustworthy  than

..."  '  the  headings  of  the  '  Solomonic  '  psalms.
exUlC.  ^^^  .pj^g  points  of  contact  with  Hosea  (cp
Song2i3  4ii  611  with  Hos.  14 6-9)  and  Prov.  1-9  (cp
Song  4x1  14/.  with  Prov.  53  7  17  5 15-17)  prove  only  that
different  poets  used  similar  (conventional)  images.  More-
over, recent  criticism  tends  to  show  that  Hos.  14  2-10  and
Prov.  1-9  are  post-exilic,  {c)  The  phrase  d"ic'*c3  '  (going
down)  straight,"  used  of  wine,  in  Song  79  Prov.  2331,
is  indecisive,  whether  Prov.  I.e.  is  early  or  late.  (</)  The
mention  of  Tirzah  beside  Jerusalem  (Song 6 4)  need  not
point  to  '  the  brief  period  when  that  city  was  the  capital
of  the  dynasty  of  Baasha '  (but  see  TiKZ.\H),  for  (if  MT
is  correct)  it  is  the  beauty  of  the  site  of  Tirzah  that  is
referred  to — a  beauty  which  could  not  pass  away  with
a  dynasty.  Most  probably,  however,  we  should  emend
the  text  thus,  '  Thou  art  beautiful  as  the  narcissus,  comely
as  the  lily  of  the  valleys '  ^  (cp  2i).  If  so,  Tirzah  is
not  mentioned,  [e)  That  the  references  to  Solomon
prove  nothing,  we  have  seen  already.  It  will,  therefore,
be  absurd  to  base  an  argument  on  the  comparison  of
the  lady  in  Song  I9  with  one  of  Pharaoh's  mares.  If
the  bridegroom  could  be  likened  to  Solomon,  the  bride
could  be  likened  to  one  of  Solomon's  finest  Egyptian
horses,  especially  if  the  songs  were  written  while  Pales-
tine formed  part  of  the  Grseco- Egyptian  empire  (cp
Theocr.  Id.  15  52/  ).  Whether  Solomon  really  obtained
horses  from  Egypt,  is  a  question  which  need  not  be
discussed  here  (see  MiZR.MM,  §  2a).

For  a  post-exilic  date  the  main  arguments  are  these  :
(rt)  The  position  of  the  book  among  the  Hagiographa.
(/;)  The  beauty  of  Jerusalem  is  mentioned  late  (Ps.  482
50 2  Lam.  215).  (<r)  The  absence  of
striking  archaisms  of  thought  and  ex-
pression, {d)  The  importance  attached  to  rare  exotic
plants  and  to  garden-cultivation  points  to  Babylonian
influence  (see  Garden).  See  Song  4  12-15,  where  the
following  plant-names,  which  are  of  foreign  origin,  and
very  possibly  late,  deserve  attention.

T\-hr\v(.  (also  Ps.  45  9,  l^te,  where,  as  here,  it  is  coupled
with  lb ;  cp  Prov.  717,  and  see  Aloes),  [ic^p  (also
Prov.  7  17  Ex.  30  23, both passages late),  D3n3  (&""•

1  MT  is  hardly  defensible.  Fair  women  would  not  be  com-
pared to  cities.  Tg.  paraphrases  '  as  the  women  of  Tiran  (jjnn),'
or  Tirzah  (Neub.  Gfogr.  du  Tahn.  \Ti).  Bickell  and  Bu.  omif
'as  Tirzah,  comely  as  Jerusalem,'  as  weakening  the  effect  of
'  terrible  '  which  follows;  but  nC'N, 'terrible,' is  simply  a  corrup-
tion of  D'pOi/  (in  the  phrase  'V  rUCIC,  '  lily  of  the  valleys ').  On
m'?jn:3i  see  Ensigns,  §  i  b.

693


15.  Post-exilic.


CANTICLES

Xf7,),  TT)  (also  1  12),  and,  following  Grtitz,  D"ni  (for  the
tautological  omj),  new  Hch.  for  'roses. '^

The  fondness  of  the  poet  of  Canticles  for  spices  led  the  ancient
scrihcs  into  some  very  strange  textual  errors — viz.,  (i)  4  6,  'to  the
mountains  of  myrrh  OS'I)  and  the  hill  of  frankincense  '  (W^V.l),
where  -on  should  be  pcnn.  'Hermon,'  and  njiaV  should  be
JUaVn  (cp  ©HKA) ;  very  probably,  also,  the  correct  reading  in
r.  8  is  '  from  the  hills  of  the  cedars,  from  the  mountains
of  the  cypresses'  (cTTID  m.-IO  O'llH  HU'^iC);  (2)  814,  in  the
'  mountains  of  spices' (D'Cra),  'F3  should  certainly  be  n'tyiia,  to
which,  if  We.'s  view  of  -una  n.l,  'mountains  of  malobathron  '
(We.  /'»<>/.(*>  409), '•'  was  that  of  the  early  scribes,  we  may  add
217  where  we  should  read  C'nh3  H,  '  mountains  of  cypresses '
(see  Bether).

Add  njK  =  new  Heb.  niiJK.  6  n,  and  perhaps  -isb
=  Kt'<TTpo%,  1  14  4  13  (plur. ).  Last,  not  least,  we  have
the  Persian  loan-word  for  plantation  or  park,  D^":!3,  4  13  ;
elsewhere  only  Nch.  2  8  Eccl.  2  5,  though  the  exact
history  of  the  form  is  doubtful.

One  Greek  loan-word S  has  been  found  in  [VnSK,  'palanciuin,'
S9  =  </>op€ioc  (so  O  ;  but  .see  Littkr).  In  the  Midrash  '«  is  ex-
plained by  Kcr-ie— /.^.,  <i>6pr\ij.aL.  In  Sota  49^  it  is  said  that  the
use  of  the  bridal  litter  (pnSN)  was  forbidden  by  the  Jewi.sh
authorities  during  the  Bar-Cochba  war.  On  the  gorgeous
<l>op(la  of  the  .Syrian  l.idies  under  Antiochus  K^piphanes,  .see
Polybius  (ap.  Athen.  .'J  22).  The  only  doubt  can  be  whether  'j<
is  not  a  gl()>s. .Metrical  rea.sons  .suggest  its  excision  (Hickell).

(e)  Among  the  distinctly  late  words  are  pn-)H
3 10  76*  (for  Judg.  822-27  is  not,  as  it  stands,
ancient; see  Budde) ; vv.  5  15  Esth. 16;  3n  (plur.).


6it Job 812;


i  5  ; nSi'3n, 2  I Is. 35  i ;


C'inn,  1 10  (nn,  Aram,  and  new  Heb. ) ;  Sna.  n'ac'n.  rsrt
'  to  glance,'  D'3'in  '  smoke-holes,'  29  ;  3dd,  1 12  ;  rtiiir:,
2i4  Ezck.  3820  (.\ram.  Kj-n)  'a  step'  ;  -n-jp,  21315  7  12
and  perhaps  Is.  168  (for  ItlD^c^  see  SBOT,  ad  loc.  ;
op  Duval,  REJ  I4277) ;  inp.  'winter,'  2ii ;  nisip,  f)2ii  ;
0"0'P7,  52  ;  pic*  (plur. ),  32  Prov.  78  Eccl.  I245  (cp  Griitz.
49);  ^Ja  (Piel),  53;  i'Dp(Piel),  'to  spring,' 28  ;  nt:],  '  to
keep,'  1  6  8  II 12  ;  ,ij?o,  'enclosed,'  73.  (/)  Grammatical
forms.  Note  n-jn,  1 15,  etc.;  n'na,  I17;  nrx,  'where,'
I7  (cp  -il,  Dan."728);  njrx,  ■how'?53,  Es'th.  86.  Also
rfornc-K,  22  times.  na^cJ,  I7,  like  'pW,  Jon.  1  7,  and
irK  "7^3,  Eccl.  817,  ,i|iS  icJk,  Dan.  lio.  '^r,  16  812  ;
Vr,  37  (exactly  the  Mishna  usage),  [g]  Tn,  44,  for
Ti^,  may  perhaps  point  to  the  post-exilic  period  (see
li^nk.  Z^ 7- mi  127).

The  preceding  list  of  arguments,  though  not  ex-
haustive, should  be  sufficient.  Linguists,  such  as  Gesenius
among  Christians  and  M.  Sachs  among  Jews,  long  ago
recognised  the  modern  character  of  the  Hebrew.  The
question,  however,  was  a  complicated  one,  and  ingenuity
did  its  best  to  save  an  early  date,  and  with  it  (it
appeared)  the  historical  value  of  the  Song.  It  is  time  for
critical  students  to  look  at  the  facts  more  frankly.  We
can  now  show  that  this  anthology  of  songs  is  post-exilic,
and  may  conjecture  that  it  is  nearly  contemporary  with
that  'song  of  love'  (and  of  spices),  Ps.  45.  It  is  not
easy  to  find  a  period  more  suitable  to  all  the  data  than
one  of  the  early  and  fortunate  reigns  of  the  Ptolemies
(cp  rounders,  353).  A  still  later  date  is  suggested  by
W'inckler  [Altor.  Forschungi-n,  295).

Like  the  other  poetical books, the  Song  of  Songs
suffers  from  many,  often  most  unfortunate, corruptions
16.  Text °^  ^^  ^^^^  •  ^'"^  dislocations  of  passages
have  added  to  the  difficulties  of  the  inter- j

1  The  first  mention  of  roses  elsewhere  is  in  Ecclus.  (see  RoseX j
This  would  allow  us  to  date  the  .song  in  300-250  ii.c. There  were


roses  in  liabylon  in  Herodotus's  time  {llerad.  1  195).

2  He  was  anticipated  by  Field  (Otii:.  Hix.  2415),!
''•e  rendering  of  Sexta  as  ^aAa(3<i)ep(ou). '  Dat  ct  malobathron

»ria, says  PI.  (//.\'12i).

8  Another  of  the  supposed  Greek  words  arises  from  a  corrup-

)n  of  tlie  text. See  Armoury.


tion  ot  the  text. See  Armoury,
*  pjIK  in  7  6,  however,  is  corrupt,

693


CANTICLES

preter.  Grktz  was  the  first  to  recognise  the  bad  state
of  the  text.  Among  recent  scholars  Hickell  and  Budde
have  done  most  ;  Hickell's  chief  results  have  been  in-
corporated in  Hudde's  excellent  commentary.  Pcrles,
in  his  Analeklen  ('95),  has  considered  aIx)Ut  ten
passages,  and  the  present  writer  has  endeavoured  to
correct  some  of  the  chief  errors  UQH  and  Exp.  Times
for  1898-99  and  A-t/oi/Vor,  Feb.  1899,  14s/:).  Among
these  corrections  it  may  Ix;  mentioned  that,  according
to  Bickell,  ■  the  Shulammite  '  in  7  i  is  due  to  corruption  ;
against  this  view,  however,  see  Hudde,  who  points  out
that,  since  the  phra.se  '  the  Shulammite'  is  not  tantamount
to  a  declaration  that  the  bride  is  a  Shulammite  damsel,
and  only  means  '  one  who  is  as  fair  as  Abishag  the
Shulaiumite,'  it  is  no  gain  to  the  adherents  of  the  dramatic
or  idyllic  theory  to  have  the  correctness  of  n-a^w.T
assured  to  them.  Contrary  to  ISeries  (who  on  this  point
is  an  adherent  of  (Griitz),  Bickell  further  thinks  that  3'ij  <Ey
in  612  (see  Amminadik)  also  is  not  the  true  reading.
He  regards  3-1:  "cy  na  (n3  derived  from  ni3  in  ni33-o
which  is  corrupt)  as  a  doublet  of  [,i]  anj  [<cj,']  na  in  72,
and  renders  '  my  noble  kinswoman  '  ;  Budde  prefers  to
wait  for  more  light.  Perles  has  pointed  the  way  to  a
better  solution  by  grouping  612  and  72  with  77.  Here,
the  present  writer  thinks,  we  should  read  na  na.iK
iTEJity,  'loved  one,  Shunammite  damsel,'  and,  con-
sequently, he  makes  the  same  restoration  in  612  and
72 — t.?. ,  p'OTr  na.  Certainly  Bickell  is  right  in  re-
fusing to  have  anything  to  do  with  the  '  chariots '
of  which  MT  and  therefore  also  EV  speak  in  6 12.  The
whole  story  of  the  Shulammite's  having  been  surprised
in  the  nut-orchard  by  the  king's  retinue  (cp  Driver,
In/rod.,  442,  446)  breaks  down,  when  strict  criti-
cism is  applied  to  the  text.  On  Cant.  36-ii,  which
is  disfigured  by  curious  corruptions  (one  of  which  is  the
famous  j'v-iSN,  RV  'palanquin'),  see  Litter.

We  must  now  endeavour  to  estimate  the  value  of  the
Song.  We  shall  not  Ije  ungrateful  for  the  material
17  Value  ^^'^''^^  ''  supplies  to  students  of  manners
■  and  customs  and  the  distribution  of  plants  ;
but  it  is  nuich  more  iniportant  that  it  opens  a  window
into  the  heart  of  ordinary  Israelites.  {a)  The  Song
reveals  a  very  pure  conception  of  true  love,  as  springing
out  of  a  free  inclination  of  one  man  and  one  woman,*
and  rising  into  a  passionate  and  indestructible  union  of
hearts.  If  the  songs  were  written  (or  even  if  they  were
only  edited,  revised,  and  suppleiuented)  in  the  early
Greek  period,  what  a  contrast  they  offer  to  much  that
was  current  at  the  luxurious  court  of  the  Ptolemies !
{b)  The  Song  shows  also  a  genuine  love  of  nature.
'  The  writer  inspires  us  with  his  own  delicate  joys.  The
breath  of  spring  still  breathes  through  his  words,
its  scents,  its  fresh  moist  greeniiess,  the  old  hopeful
spring  notes  heard  in  the  woods,  again  are  all  here. '^
There  is  nothing  more  lovely  than  the  spring  of
Palestine,  and  this  old  fjoet  felt  it.  Where  the  images
are  bizarre,  we  need  not  put  it  down  to  him.  The  was/-
songs  were,  and  still  are,  governed  by  strict  convention
(cp  Wetz.  in  Del.  174-177).  Ovid  and  Theocritus
are  not  without  some  of  these  strange  love  images.'
(c)  '  Race -psychology '  also  may  gather  something.
Twice  the  heroine  falls  into  a  perplexing  confusion
between  dreamland  and  reality  (Song3i-4  52-7).  This
can  be  paralleled  from  Arabic  love  [X)etry,  in  which  the
dream-form  of  the  beloved  receives  an  objective  exist-
ence, and  lovers  even  give  their  respective  apparitions
a  rendezvous  (see  Hiiiruxsa,  Kreytag,  22  ;  Lyall.  Trans-
lations, 12). *  ((/)  If  the  poem  is  post-exilic,  it  shows
us  that  there  were  times  and  seasons  (cp  Eccl.  34)  of
which  legalism  could  not  overshadow  the  joyousness.
^  It  reminds  us  of  the  fine  love-sentiment  of  the  Arabic
HaniAsa.

■  2  W.  G.  Forbes,  Serifwns  C85),  p.  147.
3  Cp  especially  Song  1  9  with  Theocr.  Id.  18  30.
••  See  JJamdsa,  612,  and  Cf  Journal  Asiatigue,  1838,  p.  374
etc.

694


CAP

In  this  and  in  other  respects  our  notion  of  the  post-exilic
period  may  perhaps  need  revision.

Is  this,  then,  the  whole  worth  of  the  Song  for  us?
Being  canonical,  must  it  not  have  some  subtle  religious
value  which  has  teen  overlooked  ?  ^

The  answer  is  (i)  that  wfc  have  no  right  to  assume
that  R.  'Akiba's  well  known  saying  about  the  Song  at
the  Synod  of"  Jamnia  (see  Canon,  §  53)  represents  the
point  of  view  of  those  who  first  admitted  this  popular
and  supposed  Solomonic  work  among  the  Kethubhim  ;
and  (2)  that  the  mistake  of  a  Jewish  Synod  cannot  be
perpetually  endorsed  by  Christian  common -sense  and
scholarship.  We  have  therefore  to  revise  our  con-
ception of  the  word  '  canonical '  in  its  application  to  the
OT  writings.

Hesiiles  the  commentaries  of  E\v.,  Hitz.,  Gratz,  Del.,  Stickel,
Oettli  (AV/C,  98),  etc.,  consult  WRS,  art.  'Canticles,'  /iBW,
Hriill's  review  of  Kaempf,  Jalirh.  f.  jiid.  Gfscli.  u.  Lit.  1877,  p.
138^  ;  Hu.'s  rev.  of  Stickel,  TL/,  24th  March  18S8,  his  art.  in
Neil'  li'orld,  March  1894,  and  his  fine  commentary,  1898;  also
R.  Martineau,  Ann-r.  Journ.  0/  Philolof^y,  1892,  pp.  307-328;
Bickell,  Carmina  VT  »u-trice  (^%2)\  Siegfried,  C,  Prcd.  u.
iro/iesHcd  (:<)9');  Riedel,  Die  Aus/cg:  ties  Holienlicies  in  <icr
jiid.  Geiitein<ie  u.  der  christl.  Kirckc  ('98).  T.  K.  C.

CAP  (rreTACOC  [AV] ;  according  to  one  view  it  has
been  borrowed  in  Aramaic  under  the  form  tJ'tDD  Dan.
821  ;  hut  see  Hkkkchks,  2  ;  Tukb.vn,  2  ;  and  c^  Journ.
Phil.l^yx)/.).  the  Greek  broad-brimmed  (fr.  irerdi'-
vvfii)  felt  hat  which  Jason  made  the  Jewish  youth
wear  (2  Mace.  4 12  RV  ;  AV  'hat').  It  was  worn
(originally)  chiefly  by  shepherds  and  hunters,  was  an
attribute  of  Hermes,^  and  so  became  the  badge  of  the
palajstra.

This  a'isumes  that  the  te.\t  is  genuine  (note  that  vnoTaaa-uiv
in  ©A  precedes).  The  Syr.  reads  Jl^^aA^B  fc^Jl-l:  cp  2  S.
1231  (Pesh.),  where  MT  has  jaSp.  Did  the  translat.^r  think  of
eTTiTaais?  Equally  obscure  is  the  origin  of  the  Vg.  in  liipa-
naribus,  though  the  infamy  and  vice  of  the  later  gymnasia,  the
fact  that  the  'Ep;oiaia  were  celebrations  of  a  more  or  less  free
and  unrestrained  character,  and  the  alhislon  to  vicious  practices
in  2  Mace.  64,  make  \\.  possilUe  that  a  genuine  tradition  has  been
followed.

CAPER-BERRY  (HjVaX,  KAnnARlc  [BKAC]).
Eccles.  r2  5t  RV.  That  the  Hyssop  (q.v.)  is  the
caper-plant  {Capparis  spinosa,  L. )  is  a  favourite  theory.
Still  more  prevalent  is  the  view  that  the  word  rendered
'desire'  in  .\V  RV'"e-  of  Eccles.  I.e.  ('the  almond  tree
shall  flourish,  and  the  grasshopper  shall  be  a  burden,  and
desire  shall  fail')  denotes  the  berry  of  the  caper-plant.^
The  difficulties  of  translation  are  as  great  in  the  third  of
these  clauses  as  in  the  others  (.^i.mond.  Grasshopper).
The  Revisers  of  O T  changed  '  desire  '  into  '  the  caper-
berry,'  but  could  not  determine  on  a  satisfactory  verb  ;
'  fail '  therefore  remains,  with  '  Or,  burst '  in  the  margin.
Thus  much  at  any  rate  is  plain  :  the  noun  in  this  clause
must  denote  some  object  in  the  physical  world.

The  rendering  'the  caper-l>erry '  (©,  Aq.  Vg. )  •*  has
been  adopted  by  nearly  all  modi-rns,  among  whom  G.
F.  Moore  ^  deserves  special  mention  because  of  the
fresh  light  which  he  has  brought  from  Mishnic  and
Talmudic  sources.  The  rendering  '  desire '  ( Abulwalid  ;
Parchon)  is  a  worthless  modern  guess.

In  spite  of  the  agreement  of  scholars,  the  clause
remains  obscure,  mainly  from  the  difficulty  of  interpret-
ing the  predicate  nan.  (i)  Plutarch  {Sym/).  62)  speaks
of  the  caper  being  used  as  a  relish  to  induce  appetite
for  food  ; medi;Bval  Arabic  writers  mention  its  effects

1  Even  Herder  fell  into  this  error ;  see  Haym,  Herder,  287.

2  In  middle  and  low  Latin  petasunt  becomes  the  winged
shoe  of  .Mercury  (Uufresne,  ed.  Favre).

3  That  this  fruit,  and  not  the  berr>'-like  bud  familiar  in
modern  times,  is  intended  appears  clearly  from  the  Talmudic
references  (see  I^w,  Pjtanz.  264),  and  the  exhaustive  discussion
in  Moore's  art.  referred  to  below.

■*  Pesh.  has  a  double  rendering  :  (i)  the  caper,  (2)  misery —
the  latter  seemingly  based  on  a  supposed  (but  impossible)
abstract  use  of  the  fern,  of  |1'31<  ;  cp  Sym.  ^  (iriiroi'o;  and  Field,
Hex.  i\oT,.

6  See  his  article,  JDL  10  55-64  ('91).

69s


CAPERNAUM

in  stimulating  sexual  impulse  (Wetz.  in  Del.  Koh.
452) ;  ^  and  it  was  in  traditional  use  (especially  the  fruit)
in  the  middle  ages  as  a  stinmlant  in  senile  disorders.'^
It  has  been  sought,  accordingly,  to  explain  -isn  as  mean-
ing 'fail  of  effect'  (so  RV  text),  and  this  will  do  as  a
makeshift  :  when  even  the  caper  fails,  nothing  is  left  to
try.  Unfortunately,  it  is  ditficult  to  believe  that  the
Heb.  verb  can  have  this  meaning  ;  Delitzsch's  explana-
tion of  it  as  a  case  of  internal  Hiphil  ( '  produces  failure '
— i.e.,  '  fails')  is  most  unlikely.

(2)  Others  have  thought  of  the  bursting  of  the  ripe  berry  and
the  scattering  of  its  seeds  as  a  synonym  for  death  (so  RVniK);
but  this  is  quite  untenable,  (a)  because  of  the  fact  that  the  root  Tlfl
is  nowhere  used  in  a  physical  sense  in  Hebrew,*  (/')  because  the
context  requires  a  phrase  descriptive  of  old  age  rather  than  of
death,  and  (f)  because  of  the  botanical  impossibility  of  the  inter-
pretation, there  being  no  evidence  that  the  fruit  of  Capparis
spinosa  is  dehiscent.

Unless,  therefore,  we  give  the  Heb.  verb  the  very
unusual  sense  of  '  fail '  we  can  only  say  that  probably,
as  in  the  other  clauses,  the  metaphor  indicates  some
feature  in  the  old  man's  appearance  or  physical  state,
and  Moore's  suggestion,  to  emend  isn  into  some
derivative  of  ms  appears  a  good  one.

N.  M. — vv.  T.  T.-n.
CAPERNAUM is the transliteration of  the Text.
Rec. KATTepNAOYM  ; but  KBDZ,  followed  byTisch.,

1  TJnmo  '1''<=S-.  WH,  etc.,  read  KA(})ApNA,OYM  (so
•  "*™«-  Pesh.  and  Jos.).  The  original  was,  there-
fore, cinj  1S3.  village  of  Nahum.  It  is  not  mentioned
before  the  NT,  and  this,  coupled  with  the  fact  that  ied
prevails  in  the  composition  only  of  comparatively  late
names,  is  proof  of  an  origin  shortly  before  the  time  of
Jesus.  Whether  by  N'ahum  is  meant  the  prophet,  we  do
not  know.  In  Jerome's  time  it  was  another  Galilean
town  that  was  associated  with  him  (GASm.  Tiwlve
Proph.  279).

Capernaum  became  the  home  of  Jesus  (kv  oi'/cCfJ
iariv, Mk.  2i)  and 'his  own city' (Nit.  9i) after  his

2  References  rejection  by  the  townsmen  of  xNazareth.
2.  Keierences. j^^^^ he preached (Mt.85 Mk.  I21

93336  Jn.  6  etc.);  did  many  wonderful  works,  healing
Peter's  mother-in-law  and  many  others  (Mk.  I3134),  a
paralytic  (Mt.  9i  Mk.  2i  Lk.  018),  a  centurion's  servant
(Mt.  85  Lk.  7i),  a  man  with  an  tmclean  spirit  (Mk.  I23
Lk.  433),  and  (by  a  word  from  Cana)  a  nobleman's
servant  (Jn.  446)  ;  and  called  the  fishermen  Peter  and
Andrew  (Mk.  I16),  and  Matthew  or  Levi,  who  sat  to
receive  toll  (Mt.  98  Mk.  2i4  Lk.  527).  In  spite  of  all
this,  the  body  of  citizens  remained  unmoved,  and  Jesus
pronounced  woe  upon  the  place  (Mt.  II23  Lk.  Idis,
R\').  These  passages  imply  that  Capernaum  was  a
TroXis,  with  a  Roman  garrison,  a  synagogue  (built  by
the  centurion),  and  a  customs-station  ;  and  that  it  lay
down  in  the  basin  of  the  lake  (Jn.  2 12  Lk.  431),  and  on
the  lake  shore  (Mt.  413),  and  (presumably  from  the
customs  station)  on  the  great  high  road  from  Damascus
past  the  N.  end  of  the  lake  to  the  Levant  (cp  way  of
the  sea  quoted  in  Mt.  415/.  from  Is.  9i[S23]).  A
comparison  of  Jn.  617  with  \It.  14  34  would  seem  also  to
imply  that  it  lay  on  or  near  the  plain  of  Gennesaret  at
the  NW.  corner  of  the  lake.

The  name  has  entirely  disappeared,  and  amid  the
scattered  evidence  of  writers  since  the  NT  and  the
,  various  groups  of  ruin  which  strew  the
.  ?■  °.^f^®  .  *  lake  shore  between  Gennesaret  and  the
Identifications.  ^^^^^^^  ^^  ^^^  j^^^^^^  diversity  of  tradi-
tion and  of  modern  opinion  has  naturally  arisen.
Two  sites  divide  the  authorities  —  Khirbet  el-Minyeh
(several  mounds  with  indistinguishable  ruins  and  an  old
Khan  also  called  Minyeh  on  the  N.  corner  of  Gen-
nesaret) ;  and  Tell-Hum,  a  heap  of  black  basalt  ruins

1  It  should,  however,  be  noted  that  neither  Dioscorides  (2  204)
nor  Pliny  (13  127  20165^)  mentions  either  of  these  effects.

2  So  Tragus  (l^e  Stirp.  Hist.  Comm.  1552,  8968)  writes  to
the  effect  that,  cooked,  and  taken  with  oil  and  vinegar,  it  is
used  with  benefit  in  cases  of  palsy,  gout,  'phlegm,'  'spleen,'
sciatica,  in  urinary  troubles,  and  as  an  emmenagogue.

3  Even  if  it  were,  the  Hiphil  would  not  mean  '  to  burst.'

696


CAPERNAUM

with  the  remains  of  a  wliite  marble  edifice  and  a  curious
tomb  two  miles  and  a  half  farther  west,  und  two  miles
and  a  half  from  the  mouth  of  the  JoiJan.  Between
these  two  the  evidence  is  not  quite  conclusive.

For  Tell-Huin  there  is  usually  cjuoted  the  evidence  of
Josephus,  who  says  that,  having  lieen  thrown  from  his
To  nhuB  '^°''^  '"  '^  skirmish  with  the  Roman  forces
P  ■  in  Jordan,  he  was  carried  to  a  village
called  Kf<f>apvo}>jui)v  {fiifi.  72).  and  thence  to  Tarichea;.
Even  if  this  reading  were  correct,  Josephus,  with  injuries
so  slight  as  ho  reports,  might  as  easily  have  been  carried
the  5  m.  to  Gennesaret  as  the  two  and  a  half  to  'I'ell-
Hum,  especially  as  his  desire  seems  to  have  been  to  get
to  Tariche;«.  It  is  suspicious,  however,  that  he  calls
the  place  a  village  (kui/hij),  and  Niese  fixes  the  proper
reading  as  K€<papvu}K6v.  The  only  other  evidence
Josephus  gives  favours  Khan  Minyeh.  He  descrilxis
(/Viii.  108)  the  plain  of  Gennesaret  as  watered  by  'a
most  copious  fountain '  called  by  the  people  of  the
country  Capharnaum.  Tliis  Robinson  Ijelieves  to  Ije
the  'Ain  et-Tin,  close  by  Khan  Minyeh  ;  more  proli-
ably  it  was  the  'Ain  el-labigah,  whose  waters  were
conveyed  in  an  aqueduct  past  the  site  of  Khan  Minyeh
into  the  plain.  Tell-IIum,  on  the  other  hand,  has
neither  fountain  nor  spring.

The  Christian  and  the  Jewish  traditions  are  divided.
Jerome  places  Capernaum  2  R. m. from  Chorazin,  a

K ni._;„*j datum  which, if Chorazin be Kerazeh,

6.  Christian  .  ,  ,,,  ,,  ,,_ t. 1 u' 1 e

.  T j„v,  agrees  With  I  ell-Hum. So  do  the  data  of

and  Jewish ,..,/■ , ,  , r

traditions  heod<.suis(.7mz53o).  who,  workmg  from
Magdala  round  the  N.  end  of  the  Lake,
places  Capernaum  2  R.  m.  on  the  other  side  of  Hepta-
pegon,  presumably  'Ain  el-'labigah.  Isaac  Chilo  in  1334
\Carmoly  ItiiUtaires,  etc.,  la  Terre  Sain/e  des  xiii.-
x--ii.  Sih/fs,  260)  came  to  Kefar  Nachum  from  Irbid,
and  found  it  in  ruins  with  the  tomb  of  Nahum.  In
1561  the  Jichiis  /la-Tsrdikim  {/fi.  385)  mentions
Tanchum  with  the  tombs  of  Nahum  and  Rabbi
Tanchum  {c\>  Jichus  hu-Abot  id.  448).  Taking  Kefar
Xachum  and  Tanchum  as  identical,  some  find  in
'Toll-Hum 'a  corruption  of  'Tanchum.'  This  is  the
case  for  Tell-Hum.  It  really  rests  on  the  evidence
of  Jerome  and  Theodosius  (for  it  is  not  certain  either
that  Kefar  Xachum  and  Tanchum  were  identical  or
that  'Tell-Hum'  is  derived  from  'Tanchum')  ;  and  it
is  opposed  to  the  evidence  of  Josephus.  Yet  in  recent
times  it  has  received  a  large  increase  of  support  (Dr.
Wilson,  Lands  of  the  Bible, '2.\y!)-\\()\  Thomson,  Land
and  Hk.  ed.  1877,  352-356  ;  Sir  C.  Wilson,  Rain-oy
of  Jerusalem,  375-387;  Guc'rin,  Galil.  '\^i-jf.\  Schaff,
ZJil'V^  \-nff.  \  Furrer,  id.  ^Id-x,  ff. ,  and  in  Schenkel's
liib.  Lex.  8495;  Frei,  ZDPV  2 115;  van  Kasteren,  ib.
11 219/;  Schiirer's  ///'v/.  471  ; Buhl,  Pal.  224/.).

On  the  other  hand,  .\rculf  s  description  of  Capernaum
(670  .\.D. ),  as  being  on  'a  narrow  piece  of  ground
V)ctween  the  mountain  and  the  lake.'  suits  Khan
Minyeh,  but  not  Tell-Hum.  Arculf  adds  that  it  lay
on  the  shore  non  longo  circuitu  from  the  traditional
spot  on  Gennesaret  where  the  loaves  were  blessed.
He  did  not  visit  it,  but  saw  from  a  distance  that  it
had  no  walls.  Willibald's  data  (722  A.O. )  suit  any
point  l)etween  Mejclel  and  Bethsaida,  and  equally  in-
definitive  are  all  other  references  till  Isaac  Chilo
in  1334  states  that  the  town  is  now  in  ruins,  but
was  formerly  inhabited  by  Minim — i.e.,  Jews  who  had
Ixicome  Christians — all  sorcerers  (cp  Neubauer,  Gt'oi^.
du  Taint.  221).  Many  find  Minim  in  Minyeh.  In
answer  to  objections  to  this  (Furrer,  ZDPl'2si  ff;),
another  derivation  has  I)een  suggested  through  the  older
Arabic  spelling  el-mutiya,  common  in  Kgypt  and  Spain
for  'villa,'  'steading,'  'hamlet,'  etc.  =  Lat.  mansio,  Gr.
fjiOiH) — from  which  it  is  said  to  be  derived  (Gildemeister,
y.DPJ' ii^^ff.).  In  any  case,  a  place  lay  here  in  the
eleventh  century  called  Munyat  Hisham  (Kazwini's
Lexicon),  and  in  1430  El-Munja,  a  village  so  large  that
the  whole  lake  was  called  after  it. (Tristram  gives  the

697


CAPHTOR

form  'Miniyeh,'  which  Delitz.sch  derives  from  Mineh,
harljour).  And  (Juaresniius  in  i6i6-a6  (Llucid.  'J'err.
Sane.  2568)  says  that  by  the  site  of  Capernaum  there
was  in  his  time  a  KhSn  called  by  the  .Arabs  Menieh — i.e. ,
Minyeh.  Ruins  have  l)een  found  lK)th  on  the  plain,  by
Robinson  {LPh'  348-358)  and  Merrill  (/;.  of  Jordan,
301  /),  who  traced  a  city  wall,  and  on  the  hill  by
Schumacher  {/.DPI'  1870).

On  the  whole,  then,  the  balance  of  opinion  is  in  favour

of  '  Khan  Minyeh.' So  Robinson,  Conder,  Henderson

6 Probablv  <^'''- '58/). Keim (Jesus. Engl. ed..

"°,* ^  '^367^). Stanley  {SP  384), G.  A.  Sm.


Khan
Minyeh.


{//is/.  Ceo^.  456/.),  Ewing  (in  Hastings,
D/{).  The  site  suits  the  biblical  data,
is  required  by  the  data  of  Josephus,  and  has  tradition
in  its  favour  from  the  seventh  century  onward.

G.  A.  s.
CAPHARSALAMA (x(\4)<\pc&A(\M& [N'V  ; so

J^yr.],  KA^). Ul'S.  |,  (JJAPC.  [*<*].  X<^P4>APCAPAMA  [A]  I.
the  scene  of  .Nicanor's  unsuccessful  att.ick  U[)on  Judas.
1  Mace.  731  (cp  Jos.  .-/«/.  .\ii.  104).  The  name  is  ob-
viously c'^e'  "1B3,  which  is  met  with  in  the  Talnmd  also.
Most  commentators  (.Michaelis,  Grimm,  Keil)  seek  the
site  somewhere  to  the  .S.  of  Jerusalem,  on  the  ground
that  Nicanor's  subsequent  movements  were  first  to  Jeru-
.salem  and  then  farther  northwards  to  Heth-horon.
liwald  and  Schiirer,  however,  prefer  to  identify  it  whh
the  Carva  Salim  mentioned  in  a  pilgrimage  of  the  year
1065  as  near  Ramleh  and  not  far  from  Lydda  (Ew.  //is/.
ri32i,  Schiir.  GJV\i(x)  n.  ;  cp  Le  .Strange,  /\il.  under
Moslems,  471/! ).  In  the  time  of  the  crusaders  '  Capar-
salcm  '  is  again  mentioned  as  a  casale  of  the  Knights
Hospitallers.  Mukaddasi's  location  of  it  '  in  the  district
of  Caesarea  on  the  high  road  from  Ramleh  northwards '
agrees  with  the  data  in  i  Maccabees.  In  that  region
we  find  at  the  present  day  a  village  .Selmeh  3  m.  E.  of
Joppa  and  Khirbet  es-Sualimiyeh  6  m.  farther  N.  across
the 'Aujeh.  Kh.  Deir  Sellam^  12^  m.  \V.  of  Jerusalem
and  I  m.  S.  of  the  present  high  road  to  Joppa,  suits  the
Maccabean,  but  not  the  mediaeval  data.  The  same
remark  applies  to  the  other  Kh.  Deir  Sellam  4  m.  N.
of  Jerusalem.  Cp  also  the  important  W.  Selman  up
which  runs  one  of  the  main  roads  from  the  Maritime
I'lain  to  Jerusalem.  G.  A.  s.

CAPHENATHA,  RV  Ciiai>hi:natha  (xA(})eN<N0A
[ANV],  Jl^i^amo  [I-ag.],  but  jj^v^Aa^caa  [Walton]),
a  locality  on  the  E.  of  Jeru.salem,  which  Jonathan
the  Maccabee  repaired  {iweuKevaai),  i  Mace.  1237t.
The  reading  is  uncertain,  and  the  etymologising
attempts  of  the  older  Lighifoot  and  others  (Kn':sr,  '  un-
ripe dates,'  Kn2D2,  from  silversmiths  or  some  treasure
house)  are  best  avoided.  Sepp  and  Furrer  (  77,/,  1896,
col.  470)  identify  the  place  with  the  Tyroptron  valley
(see  Jkrls.M-KM),  in  which  case  ivtaKfvaae  (dirfffKiaaaf
[\'])  will  have  to  be  emended.

CAPHIRA (K&(t)ipAC [A]), I  Esd.  rji9  =  Ezra225.

ClIKI'llIKAH.

CAPHTOR  (linD?  ;  Dt.  2  23  Am.  9  7.  KATinA-
AOKIAC  [BAQL],  KAnA.  [F]  ;  Jer.  47  [6  20]  4t.  om.
1  Not  PrptP  HN.VQ.  a'b'kai  KAnnA.  [(.'"'^ll.  also
1.  woi  ^>reLe.  o^.^^,rring  in  plural  form  Caphtorim
(Dnh23;  KA(})eopieiM  [I-l  om.  H),  Gen.  IO14  (x&.
[AEJ)=  I  Ch.  1 12(  AVCaphthorim;  XA<}>op.[-\='-]) :  Dt.
223t  (.W  Caphtorims,  KAnnAAoKCC  [MAFL]) ;  the
land  and  properly  the  |x>ople  whence  came  the  Philistines.
In  Gen.  IO14  (see  lielow)iand  Dt.  223  Caphtorim  is  a
synonym  for  Philistines.  Caphtor  is  now  generally
identified  with  Crete,  an  important  island  of  which  the
mention  is  perhaps  to  be  expected  ;  see  Gkogkai'HV.

t  The  words,' whence  came  the  Philistines,' in  Gen.  10 14  should
follow  'Caphtorim.'  Probably  they  are  a  misplaced  (incorrect)
gloss  from  the  margin.

698


CAPHTOR

§  15(7).  In  Jer.  47  4 't  is  expressly  called  an 'k  ('island'?),
and  the  Philistines  (?)  are  sometimes  called  '  Cherethites. '
The  Zeus  Cretagenes  in  Gaza  may  also  suggest  a  con-
nection of  the  Philistines  with  Crete.  These  are  Dill-
mann's  arguments.  Mut  ( i )  Crete  does  not  appear  to  be
mentioned  in  the  Assyrian  or  the  Egyptian  monuments  ;
(2)  the  sense  of  »«  is  not  to  be  limited  to  '  island  "  (BDH,
'coast,  border,  region');  and  (3)  in  Jer.  I.e.  <5^  gives
rov%  KaraXoiirov!  tC>»  v:/)ffo)v — i.e.,  the  text  which  it
followed  was  without  '  Caphtor '  ;  the  '  islands '  or
'  coast-lands  '  miijht  be  the  Phoenician  colonies  (WMM).
As  for  'Cherethites,'  the  current  explanation,  'Cretans'
,p,  (so  too  (5,  Pesh. ),  is  very  uncertain  ;  cp

■  . ,'^®" •n'jB  probably  =  Pulasati  (Purasati),  which
_ .  is  the  name  of  one  of  the  trilies  of  sea-

pirates  from  the  coasts  of  Asia  Minor
which  harassed  I^i^ypt  under  Rameses  III.  The  prob-
ability is  that  <ni3  is  a  slightly  modified  form  of  the  name
of  another  such  trilje.  Now,  the  tribe  which  is  constantly
coupled  with  the  Pu-ra-sa-ti  in  the  Egyptian  inscriptions
is  tliat  of  the  Ta-k-ka-ra  or  Ta-ka-ra-y.  It  is  reasonable
to  infer  that  "rn3  is  a  form  of  Takaray,  which  was
Hebraised  in  two  ways  :  ( i )  by  placing  the  first  con-
sonant third  instead  of  first  ('ma,  as  if  =  cut  off?),  and
(2)  by  omitting  the  first  syllable  (na  ;  but  see  Cakites).
We  look  to  Egyptology,  therefore,  for  light  on  this
problem.

According  to  Ebers,!  Caphtor  is  the  Egyptian  Kaft-ur,  '  Great

Kaft." This  scholir  held  that  Kaft  was  the  name  current  in

Rijypt,  first  of  all  for  the  populous  Phcenician

3.  Caphtor  not  colonies  in  the  Delta,  and  then,  more  widely,
FhOBnicia~ for  the Phoenicians  of  Phoenicia  and  their

colonies.  Kaft-ur  would  therefore  mean
'Great  Phoenicia'  (cp  Magna  Graecia).  This  view,  however,
though  not  without  plausible  justification,  is  no  longer  tenable,
as  W.  M.  Miiller  has  fully  shown  CAs.  u.  Eur.  z^i  ff.\

Keftd  is  the  name  of  a  country  which,  together  with

Asi  (the  Alasia  of  Am.  Tab. ) — i.e.,  Cyprus — represents

-, i  p-i-  • the  western  quarter  of  the  world  in  the

4.  UUt  l^ilicia.  ^gg  ^f  Thotmes  III.  No  doubt  it  is
Cilicia  that  is  meant  ;  hence  in  Lepsius's  Denkinaler,
63,  it  is  mentioned  with  Mannus  (  =  Mallus,  a  region  of
silver  mines)  as  inhabited  by  the  same  people.  E.
Meyer  (who  himself,  however,  still  inclines  to  identify
Caphtor  with  Crete)  writes  thus^  of  the  land  of  Kaft
(i.e.,  Miiller's  Kefto)  : — '  The  inhabitants  of  this  land,
the  Kafti  (formerly  wrongly  read  Kcfd)  carried  on  a
sea  trade,  and  possessed  a  richly-developed  decorative
art  which  is  closely  related  to  the  MycenjEan.  Upon
the  ligyptian  monuments  they  present  throughout,  in
contrast  with  the  inhabitants  of  the  Phoenician  seaports,
a  wholly  non-Semitic  type  of  features,  and  appear  in  the
inscriptions  as  a  western  people  outside  the  pale  of  the
Semitic  world.  Rightly,  therefore,  have  Pietschmann,
Steindorff,  and  W.  M.  Miiller  rejected  the  equation
Kaft  =  (jboii'iKT;  of  the  bilingual  decree  of  Canopus  and
sought  for  Kaft  in  Asia  Minor,  perhaps  in  Cilicia.'

N^ow,  when  we  consider  that  tlie  sea-pirates  called
Purasati  and  Takaray  are  stated  to  have  come  from  the
'  islands  '  [i.e. ,  coast-lands),  it  is  obvious  that,  if  Purasati
(at  any  rate)  has  been  rightly  identified  in  Hebrew  litera-
ture, Caphtor,  whence  the  PClistim  (Philistines)  came,
must  be  a  name  for  some  part  of  the  sea-board  of  Asia
Minor,  and  we  may  expect  to  find  its  original  in  the
Egyptian  inscriptions.  That  original  must  surely  be
Keft6  (or  Kaft),  which  appears  to  have  been  Hebraised
as  Caphtor.  That  Caphtorim  should  be  called  a  son  of
Mizraim(Gen.  10 14)  is  not  surprising,  for  Caphtorim  here,
as  well  as  in  Dt. '223,  means,  not  the  people  of  Caphtor
(the  coasts  of  Asia  Minor)  but  the  Philistines,  who,  as
Miiller  has  shown,  were  subject  to  Egypt  in  Shishak's
time  and  earlier  (cp  David,  §  7).  It  is  indeed  doubtful
whether  either  Amos  or  the  Yahwist  (J)  can  be  pre-
sumed to  have  known  the  true  meaning  of  Caphtor,  for

1  Ag.  u.  die  BB.  Mosis,  130  jf.  ['68].  So  formerly  Sayce,
{Prit.  MffH.i-^)  136).

*  In  a  special  communication  for  the  present  work.  Cp
WMM,  As.  u.  Eur.  ZAlff-

699


CAPPADOCIA

as  early  as  the  fourteenth  century  the  name  Keftd  had
passed  out  of  general  use.  As  a  name  for  Cilicia  it
was  superseded  by  Hilakku  (see  Cii.K :IA,  §  2).  Hence
the  false  tradition,  identifying  Caphtor  with  Cappa-
docia,  could  easily  arise,  just  as  another  incorrect
tradition  identifying  the  Cherethites  with  the  Cretans
(on  the  other  side  see  Chkrethites)  arose.  See
WMM,  As.  u.  Eur.  337,  390,  to  whom  this  (probably)
right  explanation  of  Caphtor  is  due.  That  the  final
r  in  Caphtor  still  needs  to  be  accounted  for  is  admitted.

T. K.  C.

CAPPADOCIA  (KATTnAAoKiA  [Ti.  WH])  Acts 29
I  Pet.  1  if.  Cappadocia,  from  a  similarity  of  sound,
was  wrongly  identified  by  the  translators  of  (5  with
C.M'HTOR  (see  readings  in  previous  article).  It  is
allowable,  however,  to  find  it  in  the  Gomer  (see
Geography,  §  20,  i)  of  Gen.  IO2;  certainly  the
region  called  Gimir  by  the  Assyrians  was  in  or  near
Cappadocia.  A  still  older  name  for  Cappadocia  seems
to  have  been  Tabal  (see  Tubal)  ;  the  Tabalreans  were
scattered  abroad  on  the  invasion  of  their  lands  by  the
Gimirrai.  The  connection  of  Cappadocia  with  the
early  Hittites  can  only  be mentioned  here  (see HlT-

TITES).

Cappadocia  is  mentioned  twice  in  the  NT  :  Cappa-
docian  Jews  listened  to  Peter's  sermon  (Acts 29),  and
his  first  epistle  is  addressed  to  Christian  residents  in
the  province  (i  Pet.  li).  Jews  must  early  have  found
their  way  into  this  part  of  Asia  Minor,  which  is  inter-
sected by  the  commercial  highways  leading  to  Amisus
on  the  Euxine  and  to  Ephesus  on  the  .i^gean.

Strabo  (534)  sketches  the  area  included  under
the  name  of  Cappadocia.  In  the  earliest  times  it
embraced  the  entire  neck  of  the  Anatolian  peninsula.
Subsequently  it  was  split  up  into  the  two  independent
monarchies  of  Cappadocia  Proper  (7;  ir/)6s  rep  Tai''p(f>,
r\  fxeydXr])  and  Pontus  {ij  irpbi  t<^  II6vT(f)  K.),
separated  from  each  other  by  the  broad  irregular
elevation  of  the  Tchamli  Bel  and  Ak  Dagh  (Strabo,
540  ;  Rams.  Hist.  Geogr.  315).  In  the  south  the
Pylne  Cilicias  and  the  ridge  of  Taurus  marked  the
frontier  against  Cilicia.  Lake  Tatta  was  part  of  the
western  boundary.  In  the  S\\'.  Cappadocia  merged
into  the  vast  level  plains  of  Lycaonia  and  South
Galatia  ;  eastwards  it  extended  to  the  Euphrates.  The
frontier  varied  greatly,  however,  at  different  epochs,
especially  towards  the  N.  and  the  E.  Cappadocia

is  a  cold  elevated  table-land,  intersected  by  mountains,
deficient  in  timber,  but  excellent  for  grain  and  grazing
(Str.  73,  539).  Its  chief  export  seems  to  have  been
slaves  (Hor.  i^/.  i.  639:  Mancipiis  locuples  eget  crris
Cappadocum  rex)  ;  but  they  were  not  of  much  account
(Cic.  Post  Red.  614).  Red  ochre  (Zu'WTrtKTj  yoiXros  :
Str.  540)  of  good  quality  was  exported  :  the  em-
porium was  Ephesus — not  Tarsus,  as  we  might  have
expected.  Several  monarchs  of  Cappadocia  Proi^er
bore  the  name  Ariarathes  (cp  i  Mace.  I522).  Its  last
king,  Archelaus,  was  deposed  by  Tiberius,  who  reduced
the  country  to  the  form  of  a  province,  in  17  A.  D.  (Tac.
Ann.  242;  Jos.  Ant.  xvi.  46).

In  Imperial  times  the  C.-xppadocian  ro.ids  fall  into  three
groups  :—(x)  those  on  the  north,  and  (2)  those  on  the  south,  of
the  river  Halys,  in  both  cases  leading  eastwards  to  the  fords  of
the  upper  Euphrates ;  (3)  transverse  roads  leading  northwards
from  the  Cilician  Gates :  one  of  the  chief  among  these  last  was
that  which  afterwards  became  the  pilgrims'  route  to  the  Holy
Land  (Rams.  of>.  cit.  255).  The  capital,  Mazaca  (Ma^<uta,  from
Mosoch,  the  ancestor  of  the  Cappadocians:  Jos.  Ant.  1.  li  i.  Gen.
10  2),  occupied  a  central  position  actually  upon  the  Euphrates
trade-route,  at  the  northern  foot  of  Mt.  Argseus.  It  was  re-
founded  by  Claudius,  who  gave  it  the  name  Caesarea,  about  41
A.V).  Because  of  the  strength  of  the  new  religicm  in  it,  Julian
expunged  it  from  the  list  of  cities.  By  his  time  the  whole
town  had  been  christianized  (irai/fiijinei  Xpcirriai-i^oi'Te?)  and  its
great  temples  of  Zeus  Poliuchus  and  Apollo  Patrous  had  long
been  destroyed  (.Sozom.  HE  U\:  Rams.  of>.  cit.  303).  This
is  the  more  remark  ible  as  southern  Cappadocia  was  the  strong-
hold of  the  worship  of  Ma  (Enyo),  whose  priest  rivalled  the
king  himself  in  power  (Str.  535).  At  the  time  of  Strabo 's  visit
the  Hieroduli  of  the  temple  numbered  over  six  thousand,  and

700


CAPTAIN

almost  all  the  [wople  of  Comana  were  connected  directly  ur  in-
directly with  the  worship.  At  Vcnasa  there  was  a  similar
cstahlishnicnt  dcvolcil  to  the  worship  of  Zeus  (Sir.  537,  Hams.
•/.  cit.  392).  It  is  only  in  later  ecclesiastical  history  that  the
towns  of^C.-jppadocia  are  celeliratcd— j-.^.,  Nyssa,  ISIazian;Jus,
Samosata,  Tyana.  For  the  Chri.stianity  of  Cappadocia,  see
Rams.  Ch.  in  K.  /;«//.(»»  443.^  W.  J.  W.

CAPTAIlf .  The  lavish  use  of  this  old  Knglish  word
in  KV  is  |)cr|ilcxing.  We  shall  mention  the  words
which  it  represents,  suggesting  in  some  cases  substitutes.
EV  is  by  no  means  consistent  :  the  words  referred  to  are
sometimes  rendered  differently  (cp  Ofkicek,  I'RINCK,
Ruler).

I.  lia'al,  7j,'a  in  rinpS  3,  properly  'one  who  was  on  the
watch,'  Jer. 37i3t.

a.  liphsilr,  TODO  Jer.  51  37,  Nah.  8  17  (RV  '  marshal ").  See
Scribe.

3.  Si\g1d,  TJ3  I  S.  13 14,  prop,  the  foremost  one ;  hence
■prince'  [RV  usu.illy)  or  '  leader  "  [EV  1  Ch.  12  27  13  i).

4.  Kilsl,  K'ir:  Nu.  23  etc.  (RV  'prince';  better  'chief '—/.^.,
one  who  is  entrusted  with  authority).  In  Kzekiel  often  for  the
.secular  head  of  the  Messianic  kingdom.  Often  too  in  P  if.g-,
Nu.  1  16  2  3).

5.  Pihdh,  nnD  a  K.  I824  Is.  869.  Here  and  here  only  the
word  means  'general ' ;  a  glossator  (see  SBOT,  Is.)  used  it  in  a
wrong  sense.  Elsewhere  it  means  '  governor,'  '  satrap '  (see
GOVKRNOK, i).

6.  Kiifin,  I'S^  Jud.  Il6  (a  'decider'—/.^.,  chieftain,  RV
'chief,'  except  Dan.  11  18).

7.  Kai,  3T  in  late  Heb.  for  11,  e.g.,  2  K.  258,  'captain  of
the  guard  '  (.\Vn>K-  '  chief  marshal ' ).

8.  Kdi.  c'K-i  '  head,'  Nu.  14  4  1  Ch.  11  42  (RV  '  chief)  ;  2  Ch.
18  12  (RV  '  he.id  ') ;  cp  Government,  §  26  n.

9.  Saint,  1i'\v  Dan.  215;  syn.  with  'captain  (an  see  7)  of
the  guard,'  r.  14.

10.  Sails,  IT'Sr  2  K.  S>  25  ;  see  Akmy,  §  4,  Chariot,  §  10.

II.  Sar,  nir  in  'explain  of  the  host,'  i  K.  1  25  ;  'captain  of
thousands,  hundreds,'  i  S.  22  7.  Elsewhere  '  prince,' even  Is.
10 rt  and  31  9  (where  read  'captains  ').  See  Army,  §  4,  Govern-
MliNT,  §  21.

12.  13.  14.  Three  words  mistranslated  'captain'  are  T|,  n|,
and  »]?^N  in  2  K.  11  4  19,  Ezek.  21  22  (AVniff.  and  RV  'battering
ranis')  and  Jer.  13 21  respectively.

The  (Jrcek  words  are  : —

15.  opxijyos  Heb.  2  10  (RV  'author'),  prop,  'one  who  takes
the  lead  '  ;  cp  i  Mace.  IO47  Heb.  12  2.

16.  o-TpaT>)-ybs  ToO  Itpov  (I,k.  22  4  5'  Acts  4  i  etc.),  the  com-
mander of  the  temple  Levites  ;  see  Army,  8  6-

17.  <rrpaTO»r«5<ipx»)?  Acls2S  16  (RV  after  K[.\Bom.]),  'captain
of  the  guard,'  a  military  tribune  ; cp  Jos.  />'/  ii.  19  4.

18.  x"'^'apxo«  J"-  !'>  '2,  chiliarch,  see  Ar.mv,  §  10.

CAPTIVITY,  EXILE.  These  parallel  and  practi-
cally synonymous  expressions  ('ac',  .T3t:',  n'3B',  v^'^'X"
/ioXwTfi'eti',  -ri^fiv,  ^uyptiv,  and  nS:,  niS:,  ^'nSj,  '  to
strip,  make  bare  [a  country],'  fieroLKi^fiv,  etc. )  occur
together  in  such  phrases  as  '  the  captives  of  Egypt
and  the  e.xiles  of  Ethiopia'  (riD  ni'''J-nN1  D'lsD  "ivnK  ;
Is.  2O4),  '  into  e.xile,  into  captivity  shall  they  go"  (nSlJ3
isS' '3t;-a  ;  Ezek.  12  n),  'the  children  of  the  captivity
which  were  come  out  of  exile'  (nVun-'^a '3r~0  D'Kan  ;
Ezra  835).  The  captivity  and  exile  incidental  to  conquest
are  intended.  On  what  is  known  as  The  Captivity  or
Exile  par  excellence,  see  Israel,  §  32^,  and  cp
Dispersion.

In  Is.  51 14  nys  (EV  'the  captive  exile")  means,  literally,
nothing  more  than  '  he  that  is  bent  down '  (see  RVnitj),  but
the  text  is  corrupt  (see  Che.  SBOT,  '  Isa.,'  Addenda).  In
Js.22i7  -'tj^TS.  'will  carry  thee  aw.iy  with  a  mighty  captivity,'
in  AV,  ought  to  be  rendered,  as  in  RV,  '  will  hurl  thee  away
violently.'

CARABASION  (kapaBacCeIicon  [HA].  E  om.)in
I  Esd.  9  34  .seems  to  stand  for  the  '  Vaniah  and  Meremoth  '
of  II  rj!ral036.

CARAVAN  nnnX,'  which  is  properly  the  fern, col-

1  Strictly,  the  rendering  rests  upon  the  change  of  finiK  and
rSmn  ('  ways,'  cp  AV)  into  n'irriKi  which  b  supported  by  most
moderns.


CARCHEMISH

lective  form  of  HIX,  '  a  traveller,'  Jud^,'  56  RV"*-,  Job
618/  RV  ;  elsewhere  (in  CJen.;i7.5  Is.  21  13),  '(travel-
ing) company,"  which  in  JobGiyrcprcicuis  n^vH.  See
Trade  .^^I)  Commerce.

CARBUNCLE  is  given  in  RV^e-  as  rendering  ndpAei.
T\^2  {&  ANBpAi).  for  which  EV  has  'emerald.'  Both
renderings  are  uncertain  ; for  a  third,  see  E.MKRAl.D.

Whilst  under  the  head  of  carbunculus  Pliny  prob-
ably includes  the  ruby,  which  is  simply  the  red
corundum,  and  the  spinel,  we  may  with  safety  assume
that  neither  of  these  stones  can  have  licen  in  the  high-
priest's  breastplate.  For,  Jlrit,  there  is  no  proof  that
the  ruby,  which  is  only  found  in  Ceylon  and  in  Hurmah,
or  the  siiinel,  were  known  to  the  Hebrews  and  their
neighbours  any  more  than  they  were  to  the  Greeks  till
after  the  time  of  Theophrastus  ;  secondly,  owing  to  its
hardness  the  ruby  has  hardly  ever  been  engraved  on,
and  any  instances  that  are  known  Ix^long  to  the  late
Roman  period.  On  the  other  hand,  '1  heopliraslus
{La/>.  18)  descriljes  his  carbuncle  {AvOpaC^}  as  a  stone
red  in  colour  {ipudpbu  fiif  ti^  xP'^Moti,  jr/j6s  5^  t6v
ijXiov  Ti.04ix(vov  AfOpaKOi  Kaiofxivov  irotei  xpoav),  a
statement  that  fits  well  the  carbuncle,  and  tells  us  that
it  was  engraved  for  signets  (i^  &v  kuI  to.  a<Ppayi5ia
yXi'xpovaiv).  The  nophck  of  the  breastjjlate  may
therefore  have  been  a  garnet.  See,  further,  Precious
Stones.

2.  On  the  np-^a  ofEx.28i7  89ioEz.  2813!  (EV  'carbuncle*)
see  Emerald.

3.  On  the  rniJK  ':2K  of  Is.  54i2t  (EV  'carbuncle')  see
Crystai,.  vv.  r.

CARCAS  (D3-13  ;  GaraBa  [BNL(^)],  oaBaz  [A]).
a  chamberlain  of  Ahasuerus  (Esth.  1 10).

CARCHEMISH  (^J'^D?"!?.  in  Jer.  and  Is.  CrbSIS  ;
Egyptian  A'a-ri-ka-ma'i('})-I<i ;  early  Babylonian  [circa
2200  B.  C.  ]  Karkamis ;  1  Assyrian  Gargamil,  Gargarmei),
a  city  on  the  Euphrates  (Jer.  462  ;  so  also  Sargon,  la
kisad  Piiratti[see'^"\.  Sargon,  172]).

The  readings  of  the  versions  are  :  Jer.  46  2  xapM<'«  ["".Al,
(tapxa/m.  ((,)]  ;  2  Ch.  35  20  .\V  Cl/ARCHFMlSlf.  xapxafi-  1  l.j.  H.\
om. ;  cp  I  Esd.  1  23  (25)  A  V  CHARCHAMIS  xapxa/iu^  ( IJ],  itaAxo/i.
[.\],  xa.p\a^ii<;  [L]  ;  in  Is.  10 9  CCSISJ  ''■  represented  by  ttji'
^utpav  •riji'  (ndvtt)  Ba/SvAuirof  [HR.\Q]  [?] ;  Charcatnis.

The  site  of  Carchemish  was  fixed  by  G.  Smith,  shortly
before  his  death  at  Aleppo  in  1876,  as  being  at  Jerabis
on  the  W.  bank  of  the  Euphrates.  .Such,  at
least,  apixjars  to  be  the  most  probable  form  of
the  name  (G.  Smith  in  his  latest  diary  speaks  also  of
a  place  called  Yaraboloos).  Maundrell  gave  the  name
as  Jerabolfls  (Bohn's  ed.  508)  ;  Sayce  (Hist.  Nev.,  Jan.
1888,  p.  109,  n. )  adopts  Jerablils  for  Carchemish  on
the  authority  of  Skene,  Wilson,  and  Trowbridge.  The
form  Jerabis  is  that  heard  by  Sachau  (Reise  in  Syrien,
168)  ;  and  Pococke  long  ago  gave  Jerabecs  as  the
name  of  a  place  distinct  from  Hierapolis  (  Travels  in
the  East,  2  164).  Jerabis  (variously  spelled)  is  there-
fore adopted  by  .'^^chrader,  Delitzsch,  G.  Hoffmann,  and
Professor  W.  Wright  of  Cambridge  ;  Peters,  however
[S'ippur,  text,  map,  and  index),  adopts  Jerabus  [sic).
Jerabis  is  the  plural  form  of  Jirbas  given  by  Yakut.'-'
If  Jerablus  were  correct  it  would  still  remain  to  be
shown  historically  how  Hierapolis  (of  which  it  is  an
obvious  corruption)  came  to  be  applied  to  the  ruins  of
Carchemish,  seven  hours  away.  The  Syrian  Hierapolis-
Mabug  (the  Turkish  Benibi,  from  Greek  Ba^/it^v?;,  cp
Ass.  lia-am-bu-ki),  to  which  the  name  Jerabliis  certainly
does  belong,  was  the  seat  of  the  worship  of  the  Arama?an

1  Cun.  Texts  from  Bab.  T.-ib.,  etc.  in  the  British  Museum.
Pt.  ii.  no.  I,  obv.  8  ;  no.  6,  obv.  11.

2  Nold.  and  Hoffmann  identify  with  the  Greek  Europe?  or
Oropos  (Syr.form  Aghropos).  Yakut's  words  (2688)  are:
'  D.-iir  ^Cinnisri  is  on  the  E.  bank  of  the  Euphrates  in  the  region
of  el-Jeziraand  Diyar  Mudar,  opposite  Jirbhs  (Jirbis  is  SyrianX
From  Dair  IjLinnisri  to  Manbig  the  distance  is  four  farsahs,  and
from  Dair  IjLinnisri  to  Sarfl^  seven  farsahs.'


1.  Site.


CARCHEMISH

goddess  Atargatis  (g.v.).  G.  Smith's  words  are  (see
Del.  Par.  266/),  '  Grand  site[;]  vast  walls  and  palace-
mounds  8000  feet  round [;]  many  sculptures  and  mono-
liths with  inscriptions  [;]  site  of  Karchemesh. '  Some  of
the  sculptures  and  inscriptions  are  now  in  the  British
Museum.  The  ruins  extend  half  a  mile  from  N.  to
S.  by  a  quarter  of  a  mile  from  W.  to  E.  (Pococke,
i.e.).

Carchemish  was  the  northern  capital  of  the  Hittite
empire,  the  Assyrian  mat  Hatti,  clearly  a  great  trade
_.  .  centre,  and  seems  to  have  been  a  fortress-

^*  city  commanding  the  principal  ford  of
the  Euphrates  on  the  trade  route  from  the  Mesopotaniian
plains  into  Syria.  As  the  mounds  lie  between  Berejik
and  the  junction  of  the  Sajur  with  the  Euphrates,  it  is
certain  that  a  strong  force  at  Carchemish  could  block
the  route  of  an  Egyptian  army  into  Assyria.  About
1600  B.C.  the  army  of  Thotmcs  III.  had  to  meet  the
people  of  Ka-ri-ka-mai(?)-sa  (W'.MM,  Asien,  263)  ;  and
the  I'2gyptian  captain  Amenemhbe  took  some  of  the
inhabitants  prisoners.  Tiglath-pileser  I.  [circa  iioo
B.C.)  says  that  he  defeated  and  plundered  people  be-
longing to  the  city  of  Carchemish,  and  when  the  rest
fled  and  crossed  the  Euphrates  he  sent  his  troops  across
on  floats  of  inflated  skins  and  burnt  si.x  cities  at  the
foot  of  Mount  Bisri  (A'/>l32,  /.  49 ff.).  It  is  clear  that
his  victory  did  not  give  command  of  the  ford  and  that
he  did  not  take  the  city  itself.  Asur-nasir-pal  (circa
880  B. c. )  received  from  Sangara,  king  of  (mat  Hatti)
the  Hittites,  in  the  neighbourhood  of  Carchemish,  tribute,
the  magnitude  and  variety  of  which  attest  the  wealth
and  prosperity  of  the  land  (A'Z?lio6,  /.  65^.).  Shal-
maneser  II.  about  858  B.C.  defeated  an  alliance  of
Sangara  with  his  neighbours  and  received  an  enormous
tribute  from  him  {k'B\i62,  I.  27  ff.).  On  the  bronze
gates  of  Balawat  a  picture  of  the  fortress  is  twice  given
in  relief.  Sargon  II.  in  717  B.C.  actually  captured  the
city,  took  its  king  Pisiris  prisoner,  deported  its  people,
and  settled  Assyrians  in  it  (A'/?238,  //.  10,  22  ;  Wi.
Sarg.,  passim).  From  this  time  it  was  the  capital  of
a  regular  province  of  Assyria,  and  had  its  own  saknii
or  governor,  who  took  his  place  among  the  Eponyms
(692  B.C.).  A  strong  proof  of  its  commercial  import-
ance is  afforded  by  the  fact  that  by  far  the  most  common
unit  of  monetary  value  in  Assyria  down  to  the  last  was
the  maneh  of  Carchemish.  On  the  battle  of  Carchemish
in  605  B.C.,  see  Egypt,  §  68  ; Isk.\el,  §  40.

See  further  Hittites,  and  cp  Maspero,  Dc  Carchemis  of>pidi
situ,  etc.,  Struge:le  of  Nations,  144/;  Schr.  A'G/'"  ('78),  p.
221  ff.;  G.  HofTmann,  Ahkamil.  /.  d.  Kunde  dcs  Morgcnl.
(D.  M.  C),  vii.  no.  3,  p.  161:  Del.  Par.  265-268  ;  Wright,  PSR.A,
1880-81,  pp.  y>/.;  iSIenant,  Kar-Kdniis,  sa  position,  ttlc,  1891.

C.  H.  \V.  J.

CAREAH  ( K(\pHe  [BA])  2  K.  2023  AV,  RV  Kareah,

CARIA(thn  Kd.piAN[XV],  t. -i^a[-A]),  the  southern
part  of  the  Roman  province  of  Asia,  mentioned  as  one
of  the  countries  to  which  a  Roman  note  in  favour  of
the  Jews  was  sent  in  139  B.C.  (i  Mace.  1023)  ;  see  Mac-
cabees, First,  §  9.  At  that  date  Caria  was  autonomous.
Previously  the  greater  portion  had  been  assigned  to
Rhodes  (in  189  B.C.),  but  after  the  war  with  Perseus
(168  B.C.,  cp  I  Mace.  8s  Pol.  30 5)  it  was  declared  free.
After  129  B.C.  Caria  was  part  of  the  province  of  Asia
(Cic.  Pro.  Flac.  65).  Jews  were  settled  in  many  Carian
towns — Cnidus,  Halicarnassus,  Myndus,  Miletus — and
in  the  islands  off  the  coast — Cos,  Rhodes,  etc.

w.  J.  w.

CARITES  (nsn),  used  thrice  in  RV  of  the  royal
body-guard,  2  K.  114  19  (.W  Captains  ;  ton  XOppCell
[B.\L],  xopei  [A  7'.  19],  and  2  S.  20  23  mg.  (so  Kt.,
Kr.  wrr;,  EV  Ciieretmites  \q.v.\  xeAeGGei  [B],
Xepe.  [A],  TOY  TtAinGiOY  [L,  see  Benaiah]).  Perhaps
the  Carians,  the  famous  mercenary  folk  (cp,  e.g. ,  Herod.
2152),  are  meant  (see  Dr.  ad  loc,  Caria,  above,  and
,  cp  Cherethites). Even  so,  we  must  not  infer  a  real

703


CARMBL

acquaintance  with  the  western  part  of  Asia  Minor.
The  name  may  have  meant  little  more  than  foreigners.
(For  another  view  see  Capmiok,  §  2.)  f.  b.

CARMANIANS,  RV  Carmonians  (Carmonii  [ed.
BenslyJ,  -mini  [.-\*],  -;/<?  [.\**]),  for  which  some  MSS
read  Armenii,  on  the  principle  of  substituting  the  un-
known for  the  known,  a  people,  mentioned  in  the  '  vision
horrible'  (4  Esd.  l.')3o),  who  were  to  go  forth  'as  the
wild  boars  of  the  wood '  and  '  waste  a  portion  of  the
land  of  the  .Assyrians  with  their  teeth'  (so  RV)  ;  see
Swine.  They  are  probably  the  inhabitants  of  Kerman
a  province  on  the  N.  shore  of  the  Persian  gulf,  lying  to
the  W.  of  Gedrosia.  Kerman  is  now  the  name  of  a
province  in  the  SE.  of  Persia.

In  language  and  customs  they  were  akin  to  the  Persians
They  were  not  unknown  to  ancient  classical  authors  (e.g.,
Nearchus,  Arrian  Ind.  38 ;  Strabo,  15  727,  the  latter  of  whom
gives  a  very  gruesome  account  of  some  of  their  crueltiesX

The  events  hinted  at  in  the  vision  probably  refer  to  the
conquests  of  the  Sassanides,  more  especially  of  Shdpur
or  Sapor  I.  (242-273  A.d.  ),  and  to  their  expeditions
against  Valerian  (258  A.D.)  and  other  generals.  We
may  thus  see  in  the  wasting  of  a  '  portion  of  the  land
of  the  Assyrians '  (v.  30)  Sapor's  expedition  towards
the  NW.  where  he  overran  Syria  and  destroyed
Antioch.  The  dragons  of  .Arabia  (v.  29  ;  cp  the  '  fiery
flying  serpents '  of  Is.  306)  would  then  be  the  Arabian
forces  of  Odenathus  and  Zenobia,  who  drove  him  back
beyond  the  Euphrates  ;  and  the  retaliation  described
in  V.  33  would  refer  to  the  repulse  of  the  Palmyrene
troops,  their  dislodgment  from  the  banks  of  the  Orontes,
and  the  fall  of  Zenobia  at  the  hands  of  Aurelian
(272  A.D. ).

See  E^SDKAS,  FOURTH  BOOK  OF,  §  5  {h).  [For  the  history  of
this  period  cp  WRS,  '  Palmyra,'  and  No.  '  Persia,"  A/H'JK]

CARME  (XAPMH  [B.\])  I  Esd.  525.  AV=Ezra239
Harim,  I.

CARMEL  ("PO-I?  orhm;3r}—i.e..  'the  garden-land';
KAPMhAoc  [B.\L]). I. (.Sometimes also Sai^n nri,

1 Name  and '^P'^^ """^ kapmhAion-) The name
Carmel, which is properly a common
*^  ■ noun meaning a plantation of choice

trees  (cp  Span,  carmen),  is  employed  both  with  and
(Josh.  1926  Jer.  46i8  Nah.  I4)  without  the  article  as  the
proper  name  of  a  mountain.  The  reference  is  to  the
richly  wooded  character  which  Mt.  Carmel  had  anciently
and  possesses  still  in  a  large  degree  (cp  'The  Black
Forest ' ).

It  is  convenient  to  distinguish  three  separate  applica-
tions of  the  name  :  (i)  as  denoting  the  range  of  hills
extending  for  some  12  or  13  miles  from  the  sea  coast
in  the  NW.  to  the  W.  el-Milh  in  the  SE. ;  (2)  as
including  also  the  farther  prolongation  (called  er-
Ruhah)  of  this  range  for  other  12  or  13  miles  in  a
south-easterly  direction,  as  far  as  to  the  neighbourhood
of  Jenin  ;  (3)  as  designating  the  promontory  or  head-
land in  which  the  range  ends  at  its  northern  extremity,
leaving  only  a  narrow  passage  between  the  mountain
and  the  sea.  The  range  and  the  promontory  combine
to  form  a  striking  feature  in  the  configuration  of  Palestine.
The  symmetrical  arrangement  by  which  the  country  as
a  whole  falls  into  longitudinal  sections,  running  north
and  south,  distingu  shed  as  the  littoral  zone,  the  hill-
country,  and  the  zone  of  the  Ghor  (see  Palestine,
§  6/.),  is  broken  by  Carmel  alone,  intruding  into  the
Mediterranean  plain,  and  interrupting  the  continuity  of
the  mountain  zone  so  as  to  form  the  plain  of  Jezreel.
'  Topographically  it  is  thus  important  ;  and,  though
Carmel  is  not  often  expres.sly  named,  the  presence  of
this  natural  barrier  and  the  adjoining  plain  had  a
considerable  influence  on  the  course  of  immigrations
or  invasions  from  the  time  of  the  Philistines  and  Pharaoh
Necho  down  to  that  of  Bonaparte.

The  eastern  slope  of  Carmel  falls  sharply  towards
the plain of Esdraelon ; but  westward  its declivity
704


CARMEL

towards  the  Mediterranean  is  gentle.  On  this  side  its
CDiitifjiiration  presents  a  series  of  divergent  buttresses
n U  *  sejiarated  by valleys  and  oixning  up  like

*  a  fan  towards  the  coast.  This  western
region,  properly,  belongs  to  the  massif  of  Carinel,
and  Conder  says,  quite  rightly.  'Carmel  is  Ijcst
deseril>ed  as  a  triangular  block  of  mountains.'  From
the  summit  of  tiie  main  range  and,  indeed,  from
almost  every  [xjint  along  the  ridge  extensive  views  to
Sf)uth  and  north  are  obtained,  and  Carmel  in  turn  is
visible  and  conspicuous  from  a  great  variety  of  distant
points.  The  range  reaches  a  maximum  elevation  of
1810  feet  a  little  to  tlie  south  of  the  village  of 'Msfiyeh.

Ocolu^ically  it  is  cretaceous  and  nummuliiic  limestone,  con-
taining fo.ssil  cchinoderms  and  'gcodes' — /'.^.,  .silicious  contre-
lioiis  known  as  septarium  or  vulgarly  as  cats'  heads,  called  by
the  ancient  \i\\^nm«.  lapiiiti  juiiiiici  or  KUJah's  melons  (l.ortct.
La  Syrie  ifaujounfhui,  172).  There  are  many  caves,  and  sonic
volcanic  rocks.  The  fauna  includes  the  roelnick,  the  leopard,
and  the  wild  rat.  The  flora,  which  is  luxuriant,  is  wholly
wild.  The  most  common  trees  are  the  pine,  oak,  lentisk,  carob,
olive  ;  traces  of  modern  agriculture  are  to  be  found  only  in  the
neighl)ourhood  of  the  villages  and  of  the  sea-coast.  It  was
otherwise  in  ancient  times,  as  is  shown  by  the  very  name  (above,
g  1).  At  various  points  in  the  range  ancient  wine  and  oil
presses  have  been  discovered,  and  traces  of  Roman  n«ds  have
been  pointed  out  to  the  present  writer  by  Dr.  .Schumacher.

There  is  every  ground  for  believing  that  formerly
Carmel  was  covereil  much  more  luxuriantly  than  n  is
-  OT  rAff  ""^^'  H""nce  the  comparison  m  Cant.  7  5[6]
3.  Ul  ren.  ^.jf^j^^^  ,^^.^^  j^  ,,^g  Carmel'),  and  the  allu-
sion to  the  •  sjilendour  of  Carmel'  in  Is.  352.  Its  pro-
minence is  referred  to  in  Jer.  4618,  where  it  is  said  that
the  king  of  Babylon  will  come  '  like  Tabor  among  the
mountains  and  like  Carmel  by  the  sea.'  In  conjunc-
tion with  Sharon,  Lebanon,  and  Bashan,  Carmel  serves
as  a  type  for  a  land  that  has  been  singularly  blessed
by  (iod  (Jer.  .^iOig  Mic.  Tm).  The  devastation  of  Carmel
implies  the  severest  chastisement  for  Israel  (Is.  889  Jer.
426  .\m.  I2  Nah.  I4).  Its  thick  woods  offered  shelter
to  the  fugitive,  as  .Amos  (93)  indicates  in  an  allusion
that  admits  of  explanation  without  supposing  that  the
mountain  was  held  to  give  protection  against  Yahw6
(for  the  i'ea  cp  Ps.  I397-12).  The  passages  which
assign  to  IClisha  an  abode  on  Carmel  do  not  necessarily
mean  that  he  was  comix-lleti  to  seek  an  asylum  there
(2  K.  225  425).  In  the  time  of  Strabo  Carmel  was  still
a  place  of  refuge  for  the  p>er.secuted  (I6759).

We  cannot  say  with  certainty  to  which  tribe  Carmel
belonged.

'fhe  one  reference  in  this  cmmection  (Josh.  19  26)  in  the
delimitation  of  .\sher  is  somewhat  enigmatical  (see  Ashkk,  §  3),
and  in  any  case  tan  relate  only  to  the  extreme  headland.  The
trilies  of  Manasseh,  Is.sachar,and  Zebulun  must  all  have  touched
on  C.irmel.  Ooubtless  the  tribal  limits  varied  from  age  to  age,
and  there  must  have  been  periods  of  Pha;nician  ascendancy.

In  later  times  ("armel  belonged  now  to  Samaria,  now
to  Galilee,  sometimes  even  to  the  province  of  Tyre.

In  Ahab's  time  it  certainly  formed  [xirt  of  the  do-
minions of  that  monarch,  and  it  Ix-came  the  .scene  of
the  memorable  contest  between  Elijah  and  the  prophets
of  Raal.

Tradition  places  the  scene,  and  the  altar  of  Yahwi  which  Elijah
repaired,  at  a  point  called  KI-MohrakaC  place  of  burning '),  where
there  is  a  Roman  Catholic  sanctuary  1 700  feet  above  the  sea-level,
two  hours  south  from'  Esftyeh.  Beneath  this  spot,  at  the  base  of
the  mountain,  near  the  Kishon,  there  is  a  hillock,  the  so-called
Tell-el-KassIs  ('  hill  of  the  priest,'  not  '  of  the  priests  '),  which  is
pointed  to — but,  of  course,  with  no  historical  certainty — as  the
place  where  the  prophets  of  Haal  were  put  to  death.

There  are  no  data  for  fixing  the  scene  of  i  K.  18  in
one  locality  more  than  another,  and  tf.  41-46  leave  us
as  much  in  the  dark  as  the  rest  of  the  narrative.  Some
interpreters  take  the  'mountain'  in  2K.  I9-15  to  be
Carmel  ;  but  it  is  natural  to  look  for  it  somewhere
on  the  road  Ixjtween  Samaria  and  Ekron.  It  h.-is  also
l)een  supjiosed  to  be  intended  in  Dt.  33i9  (' Issachar
.nnd  Zebulun  .  .  .  shall  call  the  peoples  unto  the
mountain');  but  'what  mountain  is  meant  is  quite
indeteniiinate.  There  may  have  been  more  than  one
mountain  sanctuary  in  Zebulun  and  Issachar ;  and  the
reference  may  be  to  these  generally  '  ( Ur.  ad  loc. ).
23  705


CABMI

Carmel had  a widespread rejiutation for sanctity.
Thotmes  III.  has  been  quoted  as  a  witness. Mas|xro,
. rw*i,«_  ~^m i'l fa*-"', thinks that  he  can  recogtii.se
*•  "*°"  ""• the  •  holy  headland '  (rnp  cKi)  of  Carmel
in  the  name  Ru-4Q-kds,  no.  48  in  the  Palestinian  place-
list  of  Thotmes  III.  {NH<->h^^)  ;  but  this  is  uncertain.'

Jamblichus(/'i/.  J'ylh.3  i5)asserts  that  Pythacoras  sojourned
on  Carmel.  Tacitus  (Hi^t-'-l^)  speaks  of  it  as  a  place  con-
secrated by  the  presence  of  an  oracle,  Ix-sidc  an  aliar  that
was  unadorni-d  by  any  ima^e  of  the  deity.  Suetonius  (/ Vj/.  5)
relates  that  Vespasian  s.icriticed  at  this  sfKit,  and  heard  from  the
priests  the  prophecy  of  his  greatness.  Among
6.  Later  times.  Alahommcdans  the  memory  of  Elijah  is  in-
<liss<)lubly  .issociated  with  Carmel,  which  the
Arabs  to  this  d.iy  call  Jclxrl  .Mar  Ely.-.s,  Mount  St.  Elias,  where
they  have  set  up  wclys  and  mosques  in  his  honour.

Still  greater  h.as  its  importance  been  in  the  Christian
world.  Many  anchorites  established  themselves  there
from  the  earliest  times.  In  1156  St.  Berthold  of
Calabria  founded  the  order  of  Carmelites  and  built
their  first  monastery  at  the  north-western  extremity  of
the  range  near  '  Elijah's  grotto.'

In  1253  the  monastery  was  visited  by  St.  Ix>uis  (Louis  IX.)
of  France,  who  is  sometimes,  but  wrongly,  represented  as  its
fou'ider.  Dedic.ited  to 'Our  lady  of  Mount  Carmel,'  it  has
had  a  very  chequered  historj'.  The  Carmelites  were  often  per-
secuted ;  and  their  house  was  destroyed  or  turned  into  a  mosque.
In  1799  it  was  used  as  a  hospital  for  the  sick  and  wounded  of
Napoleon's  army.  In  1821  it  was  destroyed  by  'Abdallah-pasha  ;
but  a  Carmelite  friar,  (iiovanni  liattista  di  Frascati,  success-
fully undertook  to  collect  funds  for  its  restoration.  The  present
building,  560  feet  above  the  sea-level,  is  due  to  his  efforts  ;  by  its
side  stands  a  lighthouse.  '  FJijah's  grotto'  forms  the  crypt  of
the  church  ;  another  grotto  near,  which  formerly  belonged  to
the  Christians  bat  has  now  been  taken  by  the  Moslems,  is
represented  as  having  harboured  a  school  of  the  prophets  in
Elijah's  time,  and  as  having  given  shelter  to  the  Holy  Family  on
their  return  from  Egypt.

A  little  way  above  the  monaster)-,  on  the  crest  of  the
hill,  a  large  sanatorium  {l.uftkurhaus)  has  been  built
by  the  German  colony  in  Haifa.
^  These  colonists  pursue  agriculture  on  the  sIojkjs  of  Mount
Carmel,  and,  by  their  success  in  vine-culture  es|>ecially,  have
d"nionstrated  the  possibility  of  bringing  b.ick  to  the  scene  of
their  labours  some  portion  of  its  ancient  prosperity.

Besides  papers  in  PKFQ,  .see  especially  v.  .Schuljert,  Rrist  in

das Moi-genland, 8202-220; Guerin,  Palestine: Samarie,

2240-250,  260-273; Furrer, W'andertingen

6.  Literature, durch  das  heil.  Latuii-\  317-329; Conder,

Tent-Uork, 88-95: (lASm.  //(/  337-340;

L.  Gautier,  Souvenirs  de  'Jerie-Sainte^"^^,  227-248. Lu.  G.

2.  A  town  in  the  hill-country  of  Judah  (Josh.  I555)
{XfpfJ-f\  [B.\L]),  the  scene  of  incidents  in  the  life  of
Saul  (i  S.  L'.i2i  and  David  (i  S.  252  f.).'^  The  gentilic
•Sp-iliri,  Carmelite  (Kap/iTJXtos),  is  apjilied  to  David's
wife  Abigail  [^.v..  i]  (2S.  22  KapurjXdTov  [A],  etc.)
and  to  Hkzro(i  Ch.  11  37).  The  town  is  mentioned
(Xep/uaXa,  Carrnr/a)  hyV.us.  and  Jer.  ((^A  n03i27276/. )
as  situated  10  m.  from  Hebron,  and  as  having  a  Roman
garrison.  It  is  the  modern  Karmal,  2887  ft.  alx)ve
the  sea-level,  about  8  K. m.  SIC.  from  Hebron  (accord-
ing to  Robinson,  who  thinks  Eusebius  and  Jerome  have
exaggerated  the  distance ;  see  also  Palestine  Survey
map,  sheet  xxiv. ).  Robin.son  speaks  of  the  ruins  as
'  extensive  ' ;  the  principal  ruin  is  that  of  the  castle,  which
he  assigns  to  Herod  or  the  Romans,  but  Conder  to  12th
century  .\.  n.  The  site  is  upon  the  edge  of  the  wilder-
ness of  Jud.-ea  ;  but  to  the  west  the  land  is  broad  and
fertile,  not  unlike  scenes  of  upland  agriculture  in  Scotland.
The  name  Carmel  is  therefore  suitable.  There  are  many
remains  of  vineyard  terraces,  and  a  reservoir.

G.  A.  S.

CARMI  (W3.  §  70;  xaPm[€]i  [R-AFL]),  appar-
ently shortened  from  lieth-hac-cerem  *  or  Beth-haccarmi
[see  T.miciikmomtk],  and  note  in  Josh.  I559  the  name
Carem  (karcaa  [BAL]).

1  More  precisely,  Maspero  places  the  tmvn  of  Rosh  Kodshu
on  the  slope  of  the  promontory  (Struggle  f/  the  Aatioiis,  136  ;
ZA,  1879,  p.  55).  W.  .M.  Midler  (As.  u.  Eur.  165),  however,
points  out  that  the  grouping  of  the  names  proves  that  Ru-
sa-kd$  cannot  have  been  fiir  from  Carmel.

2  Carmel  ought  also  to  be  read  for  Rachal  in  iS.  SOag;  so
©HI . See  Rachal.

S  In  that  oue  it  cannot  be  compared  with  the  Nab.  n.  pc

706


CARMONIANS

1.  Father  of  Achan  (?.f.) ;  Josh.  7  1 18  [R  om.]  i  Ch.  2  7t.  In
I  Ch.  4i  Carmi,  el>ewhcre  c.illed  son  of  Zabdi  (or  iCh.  26  of
Zimri),  is  m.ide  sor.  of  Judah ;  but  we  should  rather  read
Cheluhai  (cp  29)  with  We.

2.  b.  Reuben,  sui>jK)sed  ancestor  of  the  Carmltes  ('D13n)i
Gen.  40 9  Ex.614  Nu.266  iCh.  631.

CARMONIANS  (Carmonii  [ed. Bensly]).  4  Esd.  15

30, AV C.\RM.\NIANS.

CARNAIM  (kapnain  [AXV]).  i  Mace.  543/:  and
Camion (karnion [AV]),  2Macc.  I221. See  Ash-

T.vKoni.

CAROB  TREE  (to  Kep&TiON  [Ti.  WH]),  Lk.  15 16
RV"'K Sec  Hl'sk.s.

CARPENTER  {XV  t^'lH.  2  Sam.  5  n  ;  tcktcon.  Mt.
1355). See  Handicrafts,  §  2.

CARPUS  (KApnoc  [Ti.  WH])  appears  to  have  been
Paul's  host  at  Troas  ;  it  was  with  him  that  the  aposile
left  the  cloak  and  books  mentioned  in  2  Tim.  4 13.  He
is  named  in  the  lists  of  '  the  seventy  disciples  of  our
Lord'  compiled  by  the  Pseudo-Dorotheus  and  Pseudo-
Hippolytus  (see  Disciple,  §  3)  as  bishop  of  Bercea  in
Thrace.

CARRIAGE.  This  English  word,  which  has  else-
where in  KV,  with  various  special  applications  as
indicated  by  the  context,  the  obsolete  sense  of  '  some-
thing carried,'  is  found  in  the  sense  of  '  vehicle'  in  Lev.
159,  RV"'?-  (see  Saddle),  and  perhaps  in  iS.  ITzo
257,  AV"'c-  (see  Camp,  §  i,  War).

CARSHENA  (N3L;n3)  in  Esth.  1 14  MT,  one  of  the
'  seven  princes '  at  the  court  of  Ahasuerus.  ©'s  equiva-
lent seems  to  be  apKeffatos  [HN'^^AL^],  -caoi  [^*]r
whence  Marq.  {Fund.  67)  would  restore  njc^-ii  ;  cp  O.
PcTS.  7t>ariM'i/id, 'wolfish.' See  Admatha.

CART  (n^U')  I  S.  67. See  Chariot,  §  2.

CARVING,  CARVED  WORK. See  Handicrafts.

CASEMENT  (nrJ'X),  Prov.  76,  RV  Lattice  (§2(2)).

CASIPHIA  (X"'QD3).  An  unknown  place,  near
Ahava  and  Babylon,  whence  Ezra  obtained  Iddo  (i. ),
the  chief  man  there,  and  his  brethren  '  the  Nethinim,
Ezra  8  17  {Macrcpev  rod  tottov  [L])=i  Esd.  845  [47]  (see
below ).

The  other  renderings  are  based  on  the  connection  of  x'SD3
with  <"|D3  'silver,  money,'  Ezr.1817  (apyvpioi  rov  Tonov  [BA])  =
I  Esd.  8  45  [47], EV  'the  pl.ice  of  the  treasury'  (rwron-oi  [toO]

ya^O<i)vKa.KtOV [HA], T. T. TUlf -Kl'lOl' [L], . . . TOIS fv T. T.

ya.^o<^vKa.^iv  [13.\L]).  It  is  perhaps  possible  that  thi<  place  was
no  town,  but  merely  a  college,  or  a  locality  where  Levites
were  educated  (cp  He.-Ry.  Kzr.  ad  loc.).

CASLEU  (xAceAey  [AN"^-^])  i  Macc.ls4  AV. See

Chisi.ki;.

CASLUHIM  (D^n^p?,  Gen.l0i4  iCh.lijf).  See
Geography,  §  15  (3).

CASPHOR,  in  i  Mace.  .'^36  AV  Casphon  (xACct)CON
[X]  :  KA-  [V]  ;  xAC(t)coe  [A],  but  in  --.  26  KAC(t)a)p
[.VN":*],  KAI  CKACJJW  [V],  KACc{)a>  [X*];  Jos.  Ant.  xii.
83.  XAC4>0MAKH.  etc. ,  where  m&KH  =  the  nameMaked),
a  town  of  Gilead  (see  under  B(jsor),  taken  by  Judas
the  Maccabee  in  his  campaign  beyond  Jordan  ( i  Mace.
536).  It  is  doubtless  the  same  as  the  Caspis,  RV
Caspin  (see  Gkphyrun),  of  2  Mace.  1213  (KAcn[e]lN
[V.\],  A'aspa  [Syr.]),  a  fortress  described  as  strong  and
fenced  about  with  walls  and  near  a  lake  2  stadia  broad.
These  data  suit  the  present  el-Muzeirib,  the  great
station  on  the  II.ijj  road,  which  is  not  identified  with
any  other  OT  name  (but  see  .XsiiTAROTH,  §  2),  and
in  antiquity  must  have  Ix^en  a  place  of  importance :  its
ancient  name  has  not  been  recovered.

The  identification  of  Casphon  with  Khisfin  (see  Furrer,  in
Riehm's  Ull'B  1  834^;)  is  philologically  improbable,  and  has  no


I  For  vnK  '(to)  his  brother,'  we  must  read  VnKI,  'and  (to)
his  brethren,"  with  Vg.  and  I!  i  Esd.  ©bal.


CASTOR  AND  POLLUX

special  recommendation.  With  Khisfin  cp  Talm.  Ha.sfi\-a.  On
Muzeirib  see  Schum.icher,  Across  Jordan,  157^  There  is
another  large  lake,  el  K hob,  16  m.  N.  of  iMuzeirib. G.  A.  S.

CASSIA  represents  two  Hebrew  words.  i.  ,Tip
(Ex.  30 24  Ezek.  27i9t)  appears,  along  with  myrrh,
cinnamon,  calamus,  and  olive  oil,  as  an  ingredient  of  the
holy  anointing  oil.  It  is  mentioned,  along  with  bright
iron  and  calamus,  among  the  wares  brought  into  the
Tyrian  market.  The  origin  of  the  word  is  unknown,
nor  is  it  found  in  any  of  the  cognate  languages  :  some
have  thought  that  it  reappears  in  the  kittC)  spoken  of  by
Dioscorides  (1 12)  as  one  species  of  cassia.

(G(BAl-L  renders  Tpij  in  Ex.  3O24,  where  Ka<r<ria,  (v^aXor),  and
Koo-Tot  are  mentioned  in  other  M.SS  as  alternative  renderings  :
in  Ezek.  27 19,  where  ®"AQ  omits,  Aq.  has  (nrapriov,  Sym.
trTOKTri,  and  "Tlieod.  KaiSSa.  Pesh.  and  Targ.  identify  it  with  the
niyxp  or  '  cassia  '  of  Ps.  458  [9]  (see  below).

Scholars  are  agreed  that  probably  what  is  intended  is
some  kind  of  cassia.

Celsius  (2 186)  notices  the  mention  in  Mish.  AV/.  i.  §  8  of
nj^S  riip,  'white  cassia,' as  cultivated  in  Palestine;  but  this,
according  to  Low  (349),  must  have  been  quite  a  different  plant.

2.  n'lysp  Ps.  45  8  [9],  the  word  which  passed  into
Greek  as  Kaala'^  and  thence  into  other  languages,
is  almost  certainly  a  derivative  of  the  root  ysp  ( =  Ar.
kada'a),  to  'scrape' — properly  'to  reduce  to  fine  dust'
(WRS  in  /.  Phil.  I671/).  A  'powdered  fragrant
bark'  is  thus  indicated.  The  word  is  too  general  to
allow  of  certain  identification  with  any  particular  species  ;
but  probably  what  is  intended  is  something  akin  to  the
modern  'cassia  bark'  (i.e.,  the  bark  of  other  kinds  of
Cinnamormim  than  that  which  yields  the  true  cinnamon).
The  use  of  the  Heb.  plural  to  denote  a  substance  of
this  kind  is  natural. ^  The  word  in  the  singular  is  found
as  a  female  name  ;  see  Keziah.

Fl.  and  Hanb.,  Pliarm.fi)  519,  say:  'That  cinnamon  and
cassia  were  extremely  analogous  is  proved  by  the  remark  of
Galen,  that  the  finest  cassia  differs  so  little  from  the  lowest
quality  of  cinnamon  that  the  first  may  be  used  for  the  second,
provided  a  double  weight  of  it  be  used."

A  very  probable  source  of  cassia  is  C innatnomum  iners^  Bl.
The  Pharmacopwia  indica  says  :  '  May  be  used  as  a  substitute
for  Cinnamon,  to  which  it  can  hardly  be  reckoned  inferior.'
C.  iners  occurs  in  S.  India  and  throughout  the  Malayan  region.
It  yielded  the  'cassia  bark'  once  so  largely  exported  from  N.
Canara. See  Cinnamon.  n.  M. — W.  T.  T.-D.

CASTANETS  (DTJWO),  2  S.  6 st  RV.  See  Music,
§3(3)-

CASTLE.  Two  buildings  are  distinguished  in  AV
by  this  title:  (i)  the  '  citv  [rather,  citadel]  of  David'
in  I  Ch.  II5  (nniVP)  7  (HV^)'  ^'^^'■^^  ^^  harmonizes
with  2S.  5?  by  rendering  'strong  hold,'  and  (2)  the
barracks  (lit.  camp)  attached  to  the  fort  Antonia  (Acts
21 34  37;  xa/jcju^oXi)). See  Jerusalem,  Temple.

3.  RV  also  gives  the  title  to  the  btrah^  (nT3)  of  Susa  (AV
'palace '). See  Palace,  Shushan  ;  also  Fortress,  Tower.

4.  The  word  is  also  used  in  AV,  quite  wrongly,  for  ."TI'B'
prah,  which  is  rather  a  nomad  'encampment'  (so  R\0,  Gen.
25  16  etc.  (distinguished  from  C'lsn.  '  villages ').  See  Camp,  f  i,
Catti.f.,  §  I  n.

CASTOR  AND  POLLUX.  RV  The  Twin  Brothers

(AlOCKOYPOi['l"iAVH] ;  so  RV'"K-  'Dioscuri'),  the  sign
\'Kapa.(T-r\fx.ov)  of  the  Alexandrian  ship  in  which  Paul
sailed  from  Melita  to  Puteoli  (Acts28ii).  Castor  and
Pollux,  the  sons  of  Zeus  and  Leda  and  brothers  of
Helen,  appear  in  heaven  as  the  constellation  Gemini.*
See  .Stars,  §  3/  They  were  the  tutelary  deities  of
sailors,  and  (it  may  be  interesting  to  note)  were  held  in
especial  veneration  in  the  district  of  Cyrene,  near
Alexandria {Schol. Pind. Pyth.  56). Catullus (427)

1  The  spelling  with  one  s  is  correct  in  Greek  and  Latin  (Lag.
Mittheil.  2357).

a  For  niP'sp  Hcrz  and  Che.  (Pf.P))  would  read  P«B,  'are
shed."

3  A  longer  form  is  Mraniyyak  (only  in  plur.),  2  Ch.li  12  2.  4
(cout>Ied  with  micdnllm,  '  towers ').

*  On  their  mythological  forms  see  more  fully  E£W  s.v.,  and
Roscher  J.?'.  'Dioskuren.'

708


CAT

speaks  of  a  boat  dedicated  to  the  same  deities,  and  for
other  examples  of  names  of  ships  see  Smith's  Class.
Diet.,  s.v.  'Insigne.'  It  is  probable  that  images  of
Castor  and  Pollux  were  fixed  at  the  lx)w  of  Paul's  ship,
since  it  was  customary  for  a  ship  to  carry  at  the  Iww
a  representation  of  the  sign  which  furnished  the  name
(the  insiirnf),  and  at  the  stern  a  representation  of  the
tutelary  deity  (tiie  tutela).  Herod.  (837)  makes  refer-
ence to  the  Pataikoi  (origin  doubtful),  figures  of  hideous
muscular  dwarfs  which  the  Pha-nicians  stuck  up  on  the
bows  of  their  galleys  (cp  Phcknicia,  and  see  Perr.
Chii).  Phacn.  2x7/.,  and  note  the  illustration  of  such  a
galley,  ib. 19).

CAT.  Cats  (F.V)  or  rather  Wii.n  C.XTS  (oAoi/poi) —
for  the  context  retjuires  us  to  take  a.l\.  in  this  sense —
are  mentioned  in  the  '  Kpistle  of  Jeremy'  (Bar.  622)
with  bats,  swallows,  and  birds,  which  alight  upon  the
bodies  and  heads  of  idols.  Wild  cats  (pSinn)  are  recog-
nised by  the  Tg.  of  Is.  1822  (for  0'3B,  see  Jackal)  34 14
(for  D"N,  see  Jackai,  [4]),  but  not  of  Hos.  96  (where
'nn  is  a  faulty  reading  for  r^'iin,  'thistles').  We  must
not  infer  from  the  lateness  of  these  words  that  it  was  only
at  a  late  date  that  the  Israelites  became  acquainted  with
wild  cats.  They  no  doubt  knew  the  felis  maniculata
(the  original  of  our  own  domestic  cat),  which  to-day  is
very  common  on  the  K.  of  Jordan  (though  it  is  scarce
on  the  W.  side),  and  is  found,  indeed,  throughout
Africa,  Arabia,  Syria,  and  Palestine  (Tristram).

We  need  not  wonder  that  no  reference  is  made  in  the
OT  to  the  domestic  cat.  The  Egyptians  themselves
had  prob;ibly  tamed  the  wild  cat  only  to  a  certain
extent  ;  it  accompanies  the  fowler  on  his  expeditions
(see  woodcuts  in  Wilk.  Anc.  Eg.  1 236/  ).  The  stories  of
Herodotus  (-266)  are  absurd.  Bastit,  the  goddess  of
Bubaslus,  was  'a  cat  or  a  tigress'  (Maspero).

The  rendering  '  wild  cats '  in  Tg.  of  Is.  (see  above)
is  not  a(loi)ted  by  modern  translators.  All  that  we
can  be  sure  of  is  that  the  writers  of  the  descriptions
referred  to  had  in  view  some  definite  wild  animals.
Wolves,  hyenas,  jackals,  and  wild  cats  (including
'  martens')  were  in  their  minds;  but  it  is  not  easy  to
distribute  them  among  the  various  Hebrew  terms.
Many  commentators,  after  Bochart  [Hieros.  862),  give
'wild  cat'  for  Heb.  d"'.s  (Is.  132i  34i4  Jer.5039  fs.
7-1 14  [text  doubtetl]).  Certainly  EV's  'wild  beasts  of
the  desert '  (as  if  from  ,ts)  is  inappropriate  ;  the  ety-
mology assumed  also  is' very  doubtful.  The  ancient
versions  are  inconsistent,  and  the  Heb.  writers  would
not  have  condemned  them. See  Jackal,  Wolf.

CATECHISE  Cl^n)  Prov.  226  AV™?-;  EV  •  train  up,'
with  wliich  cp  Lk.  I4  mg. ,  '  the  things  which  thou  wast
taught  (/caT7;x77<^'7s)  by  word  of  niouth';  Acts  1825  mg.
'taught  byword  of  month  {Kary)xi)lxivo<i)  in  the  way
of  the  Lord.'  That  oral  instruction  is  meant  by
KUTTixfiv  is  undeniable  ;  cp  Jos.  Fi/.  65,  '  when  thou
meetest  me,'  Kal  avros  <re  iroXXd  KaTtjxriffU),  '  I  will  inform
thee  of  many  things. '

The  Revi.sers  of  the  OT  seem  to  have  thought  that  sjich  a
peculiar  word  a.s  -[jri  may  have  had  a  technical  meaning  such  .is
KOTTixeri'  at  length  .acquired.  In  MH  a  derivative  of  i:n  (~»n)
means  the  'gradual  introduction  of  children  into  religious
pr.ictice":  e.g^.,  'Wherein  consists  the  child's  training  C^'Sn),
)'oma  S2a,  with  reference  to  the  fasting  on  the  Day  of  Atone-
ment. Certainly  the  word  -jjn  elsewhere  always  has  a  technical
meanmg.  It  seems  to  mean  religious  initiation  or  dedication,
whether  of  a  person  (so  perhaps  --jn  Oen.  14  14)  or  of  a  building
(see  Dkdicatk  ;  cp  -pjn,  Enoch).  The  first  part  of  Prov.  U.
IS  very  obscure,  and  probably  corrupt  (see  Che.  £jrfi.  7.  .Sept.
1899).  Oral  instruction  there  doubtless  was  in  the  post -exilic
period  to  which  Proverbs  seems  to  belong  (see  Education,  |  i)  ;
bu'  "IJn  is  not  one  of  the  technical  words  of  the  wise  men  for
communicating  instruction.

CATERPILLER  (p^J),  Ps.  IO534,  etc.  AV,  RV
Cankkkwok.m,  see  Loc'fST,  §2  (6),  and  (S'pn)  i  K.
837  etc.  EV,  see  LocusT,  §  2  (9).

709


CATTLE

CATHUA  (koy&  [R].  kaBoya  [A],  reAAhA?  [I-]),
a  family  of  .Nkthinim  in  the  great  post-cxilic  list  (see
Ezra,  ii.  §  9)  i  I-Isd.  5jo,  immentioned  in  ll  Ezra 247
Nch.  749.  unless  the  name  may  Ix:  identified  with
Gahar  (in3  for  inj?),  or  perhaps  with  (Jiui^kl
[</./.v.].

CATTLE. '  The  nomad  origin  of  the  Semites  is  plain
from  the  fact  that  numerous  words  relating  to  the  life
1  Nomadic  life  '''"'*  ■'Associations  of  nomads  (e.g..  ox,
■  shc-ep,  etc. )  are  conmion  to  all  the
dialects.  In  the  case  of  the  b'ne  Israel,  not  only
idioms  and  figures  of  speech,  but  also  old  traditional
names  and  even  direct  statements,  confirm  the  view,
which  is  in  itself  highly  probable.  Note,  for  example,
the  name  Rachel,  'the  ewe'  (WKS  /eei.  Sem.f-'  311),
and  the  description  of  Abram  as  a  '  nomad  Aram.x-an  '
(n3k  'OIK  Dt.  26  s)-  A  still  earlier  ancestor,  Jabal  (the
name  is  again  significant),  is  called  the  '  father '—».^.,
founder — of  nomadic  life  (Gen.  4  20  ;  cp  Cainites,
§")■.

It  is  important  at  the  outset  to  bear  in  mind  the
difference  between  nomads  ('tent-dwellers,'  Gen.  i.e.)
and  those  who  have  settled  down  as  agriculturists.
Of  the  constantly  recurring  struggle  between  these  two
classes  a  vivid  picture  is  presented  in  the  narrative  of
Zeeb  and  Zalmunna  (Judg.  8),  chiefs  of  the  Midianites,
a  people  which,  as  depicted  in  the  OT,  may  serve
as  a  good  illustration  of  the  nomad  class.  The  dif-
ference between  the  two  ckisses  may  not  be  complete  ;
for  traces  of  nomadic  origin  will  continue  to  be  visible,
even  after  the  shepherd's  tower,  or  the  cattle  kraal,  with
its  nucleus  of  tents, ^  has  develo{jed  by  successive  stages
into  the  fortified  city  (liro  i-y  ;  see  2  K.  17  9  18  8  and
cp  Benz.  NA  125  /).  It  is  equally  important  to
remember  that  the  state  of  civilisation  of  a  settled  peojile
is  not  readily  assimilated  by  those  on  a  lower  grade.
The  importance  of  this  in  its  bearing  on  the  early  history
of  Israel  can  hardly  be  exaggerated^:  with  the  b'ne
Israel  the  transition  from  the  nomadic  to  the  settled  state
was  a  long  process.  The  compilers  and  expanders  of
the  patriarchal  legends  shrink  from  representing  their
heroes  as  pure  nomads  :  they  feel  that,  if  so  represented,
these  heroes  would  be  grossly  inadequate  types  of  their
far-off  descendants.  We  have,  however,  evidence  that
the  later  Israelites  had,  in  the  more  northern  parts  of
their  own  land,  representatives  of  the  old  nomadic  life
in  all  its  simplicity  (see  Reciiakites).

The  words  commonly  employed  in  Hebrew  to  denote
cattle  in  general  are  :

1-  '■'JifP.""'^«<-A(cp  •l,:pe,  'property'),  EV  usually  'cattle'(so
•"VPP  T^**  , 'nomads, 'Gen.  4032),  a  term  denoting 'possession,*

-y  , comprising,  therefore,  the  things  which  are  the

2.  Names  for  u>ual  and  almost  pcculi.ir  property  of  nomads,
cattle.  I'  is  used,  accordingly,  in  a  much  wider  sense
than  jKs  (EV  'flock';  but  AV  'cattle,'  Gen.
8O40  etc.),  which  denotes  the  small  cattle,  sheep,  and  goats,
or  sheep  alone  (cp  i  S.  25  2).  Miknrh  does  not  include,  however,
servants  ;  nor,  as  a  rule,  horses  or  as.ses  (but  see  Ex.  It  3  Job  1  3X

2-  '"'?.^'?^  bfhemaJi,  ••nji'ov,  includes  all  the  larger  domestic
animals  :  in  Neh.  2  12  14  it  means  a  .saddle-animal.  It  is  usually
contrasted  with  man,  wild  beasts  (I'n,  icttjmk),  birds,  and  crawl-
ing things  (cp  Ps.  148  10).  The  word  is  not,  however,  free  from
vagueness,  for  it  may  l:>e  applied  to  wild  animals,  and  even  (in
plur.  form)  to  an  imaginary  animal  (see  Uehk.moth,  ||  i,  3X

3.  fy?,  be'ir,  KTi\vo'i  ('  cattle '  Nu.  20  4  Ps.  78  48),  '  beast,"  used

1  In  the  present  article  will  be  found  what  requires  to  be  said
about  large  cattle.  Small  cattle  also  are  included  in  treating  of
pasturing,  tending,  breeding,  etc. ;  but  their  species  and  Hebrew
names  will  be  con.sidered  under  Sheep  and  Goat.

*  '"'7*?>  properly  the  circuhr  encampment  of  nomadic  tribes:
cp  Gen.  1^  16  Ezek.  1h  4.

3  Hommcl  (.-!// 7"  20S)  remarks  on  the  resistance  to
Babylonian  civilisation  displ.iyed  by  the  nom.-id  Aramaran
trilws  mentioned  in  the  Ass.  inscriptions  of  the  eighth  and  the
seventh  centuries.  Strong  historical  evidence  would  have  to  be
shown  to  justify  the  conclusion  that  the  Israelite  1
essentially  different  from  these.


CATTLE

of  beasts  of  burden  (Clen.  45  17  cp  44  3  13)  and  of  cattle  generally.
The  Ar.  ba'lr""  is  used  of  both  the  camel  and  the  ass.

4.  nSxVs,  mlla'khah  '  property '  (cp  Ex.  22  7  [6],  10  [9]),  used
of  cattle  in  Gen.  83  14  and,  as  including  them,  in  i  S.  1.^9.

5.  N-ID  ;«<V/-'  '  fat  cattle,'  1  K.  1  9  (RV  fatling,  cp  ftdcrxot
<riT«uTOs) ;  generally  used  with  11!?  or  "^i^S-

C.  nif,  se/t,  rendered  '  small  cattle '  or  '  cattle '  in  Is.  43  23  Ezek.
34  17,  is  the  n<i»t.  unitntis  to  jNi,  see  Skeep.

7. C'b'^K,  aldphlm  (pi.),  '  oxen ' ;  cp  Prov.  14  4  Is.  30  24,  etc.
To denote the animals of the bovine kind the
Hebrews  used  :

(a)  ni?3,  ixittar,  a  generic  word,  which  frequently  occurs  in
parallelism  with  [KS.  It  is  often  used  individually  (cp  ""i^^'ja,
a  single  ox  or  calf:  see  Gen.  18  7),  and  frequently  employed  to
define  a  word  more  closely — e.g.,  with  SjJ?  Lev.  9  2,  is  Ex.  29  i.
Its  usual  nom.  unit,  is  -li")  i^*".  used  without  reference  to  age  or
to  gender,  to  denote  an  ox  or  cow.  It  is  used  of  a  young
calf  in  Ex.  22  30  [29],  Lev.  22  23,  and  is  once  collective.  Gen.
32  5  [6].  (/')  ia,/rtr,  fem.  nns,  parclh,  bull,  cow,  defined  by
ipa  J3  Ex.  29  I  and  used  of  a  seven-year-old,  Judg.  625.  (c)
'rjy,  -egel,  fern,  n^^'j^',  'eglah,  a  calf,  used  of  a  three-year-old  (Gen.
159  cp  Is.  15  5),  and  also  of  a  young  cow  that  already  gives  milk
(Is.  7 21);  see  Heii-kk.  (</)  1"3N,  'ahhir  '  mighty,' used  poetically
of  oxen  (Is.  34  7),  but  also  of  horses  (Jer.  8  16,  etc.).

With  regard  to  the  practices  of  ancient  nomadic
pastoral  peoples  we  are  but  ill-informed.  It  is  probable
_  ,.  that  formerly  (as  now  in  Arabia)  the  same
re  g.  ^,|^^  would  not  breed  more  than  one  kind
of  domestic  animal.  Tliere  is  still  a  broad  distinction
between  the  camel-breeding  tribesof  the  upland  plainsand
the  shepherd  tribes  of  the  mountains  (WRS  Rel.  Sem.^^>
311).  The  steppes  of  E.  Palestine  have  always  been
more  suitable  for  sheep  and  goats,  and  the  northern
mountains  for  oxen.  E.  of  the  Jordan,  however,  cattle
were  turned  loose, 1  and,  becoming  wild,  acquired  a
name  for  their  ferocity  and  from  their  habit  of  gathering
in  circles  round  any  object  that  attracted  their  attention
( Ps.  '22  12  [13]  f. ).  At  the  present  day  shepherds  frequent
the  cool  mountain-heights  in  the  summer,  and  find  late
in  the  autumn  an  abimdant  supply  of  green  leaves  and
twigs  for  their  sheep  and  goats  in  the  cedars  round
Lebanon  and  Raalbek.

The  parts  of  Palestine  which  were  most  suitable  for
the  pasturing  of  herds  —  the  parts  which  deserve  the
name  of  n:pa  jnx  (Xu.  32  i  4) — were  those  situated  to  the
E.  of  Jordan  (the  modern  region  of  Belka)  and  in  the  S.
plains  of  Judah.  The  enormous  tribute  paid  annually
by  Mesa,  *  the  shepherd '  {ip}),  attests  the  richness  of
the  country  (cp  Nu.  I.e.).  Places  specially  mentioned
in  connection  with  herds  and  flocks  are  Carmel  ( i  S.
202),  Shechem  ((Jen.  37  12),  Dothan  (Gen.  37  17).  Sharon
(i  Ch.  2729  Is.  65  10),  Tekoa  (.\m.  1  i),  Gedor  (i  Ch.
439),  Bethlehem  (i  S.  I611),  Midian  (Nu.  31  32  cp  w.
8/.).  Edom  (Is.  34  6),  and  Kedar  (Ezek.  27  21).

In  prehistoric  times  there  were  several  kinds  of  oxen,

all  wild  :  a  Eurojiean  bison.  Bison  bonasus,  Linn.,  still

. preserved  in  the  forests  of  SE.  Europe;  the

4.  apecies.  ^rus,  Dos  primigcnius,  and  Bos  longifrons,
now  extinct,  probably  belonging  to  the  same  race  as
our  Bos  taiirus  or  domesticated  oxen.  Our  modern
cattle  are  derived  from  the  last-named.  In  Palestine
at  the  present  day  horned  cattle  are  found  only  where
fresh  pastures  are  easily  accessible. In  the  wilderness

5.  of  Judah  horned  cattle  of  a  rather  undersized  kind
may  be  seen  in  great  numbers.  Farther  to  the  N.  there
is  a  larger  and  better  bred  race,  used  for  tilling.  These,
as  a  rule,  belong  to  the  same  species  as  our  cattle,  the
Bos  taurus.  N.  of  Esdraelon  there  is  a  light-coloured
and  stalwart  variety  usually  known  as  the  Armenian.  In
the  valley  of  the  Jordan,  especially  towards  the  N.,  there
is  a  species  of  Indian  buffalo,  Bos  bubalis  (Ar.  gdmus),  a

1  Each  tribe  has  its  own  ivasm  (see  WRS  Kin.  212^.)  or
special  mark  (cp  perhaps  niK>  Gen.  4  15  Nu.  2  2,  and  see  Cain.
S  6  ;  Cuttings,  g  6).  With  this  it  was  customary  to  brand
the  cattle.  See,  for  .specimens  of  such  cattle  marks,  Doughty,
Ar.  Des.  1 125,  and  cp  Drake,  Unexplored  Syria,  1  ZAi/.


CATTLE

cluinsy  animal  with  remarkably  long  horns  (generally
flattened  and  angulated).  From  its  size  and  general
appearance  the  species  has  been  confounded  with  the
ancient  ri  '^/«  (see  Unicok.n)  ;  but  it  belongs  to  compara-
tively recent  times.  It  has  been  introduced  into  several
of  the  Mediterranean  countries  —  e.g.,  Egypt,  Asia
Minor,  and  Italy.  E.  of  the  Jordan  horned  cattle  are  rare
(Tristram,  Moab,  251),  although  the  best  country  for
them  is  said  to  be  there  (cp  Buhl,  Fal.  60).

Cattle-breeding  holds  a  large  place  upon  the  Egyptian
monuments  ;  their  evidence  goes  to  show  that  the  so-called  Zebu
was  most  common,  and  that  several  species  of  it  were  bred.
The  long-horned  kind  generally  had  their  horns  bent  like  a  lyre
or,  less  commonly,  in  the  shape  of  a  cre.scent.  Short-horns
appear  rarely  in  the  Old  Empire,  but  are  more  frequent  in  later
times.  Another  kind  was  hornless  ;  it  is  never  represented  as
ploughing  and  threshing,  and  hence  may  have  been  regarded
as  belonging  to  a  '  fancy  '  class.

A  new  kind  appears  in  the  New  Empire.  It  has  horns  some-
what wide  apart,  and  bears  a  big  hump.

We  have  no  means  of  ascertaining  any  of  the  ancient

methods  of  breeding  (a  certain  kind  of  which  is  pro-

_ ... hibited by the law in Lev.  19 19) or of

B.  tattle- j.^,^jjj,j.jj^g  ^^j.^g^j  pj^^jg  j^jj^.j,,jj,g They  were

rearing.  ^.^^  earliest  of  domesticated  animals.  They
preceded  by  a  long  time  the  domestication  of  the  sheep.
The  bones  of  one  species,  the  Bos  primigcnius  or  Urus,
have  been  found  in  the  remains  of  the  neolithic  Swiss
lake-dwellings.

The  pastures  were  probably  free  to  all  comers,  since
in  primitive  times  there  was  hardly  any  property  in
land.  A  pasture  is  useless  without  a  watering-place  (cp
Judg.  1 15,  where  the  importance  of  the  possession  of
water  is  clearly  shown  ;  see  Moore,  ad  loc. ),  and
property  in  water  is  doubtless  older  and  of  more  import-
ance (cp  WRS  Rel.  Sem.^'^>  104/.).  The  right  to  a
pasture  was  obtained  by  digging  a  well  ;  and,  among
the  Hebrews  as  among  the  Arabians,  the  wayfarer  was
always  allowed  to  water  his  beasts  so  long  as  he  ditl  not
hinder  the  owners  of  the  water.  1  See  .Spkings.  The
district  upon  which  cattle  pastured  is  called  njns,  lit.
'place  for  feeding.'  Cp  'yn  i  K.  4  23  \y.  3]);  arn:  ^^
'a  broad  pasture'  (Is.  3O23)  is  doubtful  {SBOT).
"1310  (EV  'desert,'  'wilderness')  denotes  properly  a
pasturing  ground  where  herds  are  driven,  from  nan  '  to
drive  (herds)' ;  cp  BDB  Lex.  s.v.  •i3t''^

Other  words  to  denote  the  pasturing  ground  are  HN:,  nU
the  pastoral  abode  (gen.  rendered  'pasture,' or  'sheep-cote,'
once  'stable,'  Ezek.  25  5  EV).  Similarly  J'^T  couching-place,
Jer.  .')06  (Ilni:  Piov.  24  15  of  an  abode  of  men).  To  denote  more
narrowly  confined  areas,  we  find  }NS  nil-lDS  sheep-folds  (i  S.  243
Zeph  26,  etc.),  ms3  an  enclosure  (Mi.  2  12),  niSD  (Gen.  33  17)
'  booths,'  temporary  night-shelters  (see  below).

When  required  to  be  specially  fattened,  cattle  were
withdrawn  from  the  open  pastures  and  kept  in  a  stable
P3-1D-  See  Am.  6  4  i  S.  28  24  Jer.  46  21  Mai.  4  2  (320)  ;
'  stall,"  lit.  a  place  for  tying  up  ;  cp  also  "sn  (Hab.  3  17)
and  ,1^30  (Hab.  3 17  Ps.  5O9  7870)  '  fold.'

The/f«j4  are  called  D-THBV  (Ps.  68  13  [14]  RV  '  sheepfolds,'  AV
'pots'),  or  c;nsc'3  U"dg.'5  16  Gen.  4914),  properly  perhaps
'double-pens.'  Moore  (on  Judg.  I.e.)  and  Che.  (on  Ps.  I.e.)
prefer  the  sense  'dung-heaps.'

The  manger  or  crib  is  D13N  (Is.  1  3  cp  Lk.  27  13is
<f>dTvri), whence the denominative D13N •  fattened,'

1  A  stricter  law  is  alluded  to  in  Dt.  2  6  28.

2  Similarly,  E'^Jp,  the  common-lands  of  a  city  (especially  a
Leviticil  one),  in  Nu.  35  2  'suburbs'  [EV],  is  perhaps  originally
'place  of  driving'  (BDR);  cp  RVmg.  '  pasture-l.inds.'  Che.
(loubts  the  sense  of  '  driving  '  and  proposes  a  fresh  explanation,
making  the  word  practic.-illy  syn.  with  nif  '  field.'  Hence  the
applied  sense  'reserved  land'— /.<•.,  belonging  to  the  community
or  to  the  sanctuary. Sec  JQ A',  July  1898,  p.  566.

3  ,T113  wall,  like  the  Ar.  gadtraf-,  denotes  the  fold.  Here
may  be  added  "l?>n,  which  may  originally  have  meant  a  '  cattle-
yard  ' :  cp  BDB,  s.v.

4  ,inj<  (cp  BDB,  s.v.)  '  stall '  is  used  generally  for  horses,  but
also  for  other  animals  ;  cp  2  Ch.  32  28.

712


CATTLE

applied  to  oxen  (Prov.  ISi;  ;  and  also  birds  i  K.  4 43
[53]).  'l"o  eat  the  '  stalled  ox  '  (which  was  looked  upon
as  a  luxury ;  cp  Prov.  15  17)  is  termed  a  reproach  by  Amos
(Am.  ()4)— himself  once  a  herdsman.

Apart  from  the  ordinary  herbage  (jyT,  Nu.  224  afc-j;),
cattle  had  si)ecial  foo<l  (K'iBOa),  which  was  either
chopix'd  straw  (pn)  or  'mixed  fodder'  (S'Va; '  cp  Job
65)  made  more  palatable  by  the  addition  of  salt,  or  a
salt  herb  (pen ^'^2.  Is.  30 24).

From  the  references  in  the  OT  we  are  able  to  gain  a

„. , , fairly clear  idea  as to  the duties and

P  '  customs  of  those  who  had  charge  over

^^'^^  cattle.

The  usual word to  denote  such an  occupation is njTl  (or

IKS  '•),  nj|7p  't  ;  less  frequently  "Cfc* nxi,  and  1^}  (for  the  !a.st

see Shkki'). Hy far the greater  numlwr  of  references deal,

as  we  should  naturally  expott,  with  the  tending  of  sheep  and

goats,  and the specific  word  for  a  'cattle-man'  (^p.^)  occurs

only  once  (.Vmos  7  14).

The  shepherd,  clad  in  a  simple  garment  (Jer.  43i2)
like  the  mod.  Ar.  humus,  goes  forth  at  the  head  of  his
flock  (-ny  ;  cp  Jn.  IO4),  all  of  which  kno'v  his  voice  and
respond  to  the  name  he  gives  them  (ib.  v.  3).  He  takes
with  him  his  shepherd's  bag  (c'pn  'Sa,  i  S.  I740)  or
wallet  (t25pV'.  ib.,  I.V  Scrip),  staff  (Vpp,  see  esp.  Gen.
32io  [11]  ;  and  cp  B^l".  njVf?,  Ps.  284).  and.  as  a  means
of  defence,  a  sling  (I'S;?,  i  S.  17 40).  He  '  gently  leads'
his  flocks  I^^V.,,  Is.  40  II  Ps.  282)  to  the  best  pastures,
where  he  makes  tiu-in  lie  down  by  streams  (Ps.  282);'^
though  it  must  Iw  admitted  that  the  reading  in
Ps.  232^  is  uncertain  (see  ^,'he.  /^j. '-').  The  dangers
from  wild  beasts^  [''-S-,  lions.  Is.  31 4  i  S.  17 34)
and  nomadic  marauders  (Job  1  14 17)  were  very  real.
No  doubt  there  was  the  solace  of  the  pastoral
reed'*  (see  Judg.  .'116,  and  cp  Job  21  12  i  S.  16 18),  and
later  writers  s])oak  of  the  sheep-dog  (Job  30 1  Is.  56 10/ ,
see  Doc,  §  i),  well  known  to  the  Assyrians.  By
night  the  shepherd  had  to  keep  watch  in  the  open
air  (Lk.  28,  cp  Nah.  3i8)  ;  but  sometimes  a  temporary
shelter  was  made  (.Ass.  tarhasu=  j-3n  and  masallii
are  so  explained),  whence  'shepherd's  tent'  ('j;t  Sr\»^
Is.  3812;  cp  DTin  nijsrp,  Cant.  18)  becomes  the  type
of  an  uncertain  dwelling-place.*  In  other  cases
towers  were  built  for  the  shepherds  (cp  Gen.  35  21,  and
see  2  Ch.  26 10)  ;  traces  of  them  are  to  lie  found  at  the
present  day.  The  'duars'  in  the  Sinaitic  peninsula
consist  of  stone  towers  put  together  without  mortar,  and
bear  a  striking  resemblance  to  the  '  Talayot '  of  the
Balearic  Isles,  and  to  the  beehive -shaped  houses  of
Scotland.  They  are  enclosed  by  low  walls  of  massive
rough  stones,  and  are  occupied  by  cattle  (cp  Maspero,
Dawn  of  Chi.  ^S^ /■  '>  see  also  Doughty,  .-i r.  Des.  1 13).
The  sheepfolds  also,  as  their  name  implies,  were  sur-
rounded by  walls  (cp  Jn.  10 1).

When  the  shepherd  returned  to  his  master  the  sheep
were  carefully  counted  by  l:)eing  made  to  pass  under  the
staff  (cp  Lev.  2732  Jer.  33 13  Ezek.  2O37) — a  representa-
tion of  the  shepherd  '  telling  his  tale '  is  not  infrequent
on  Egyptian  monuments.  As  for  wages,  it  may  be
doubted  whether  the  practice  described  in  (icn.  3028^
was  usual  :  possibly  the  usual  reward  was  the  milk  of
the  flocks  (see  i  Cor.  9? — cp,  on  the  other  hand,  Zech.
11 13,  which  speaks  of  a  money  payment).

t  From  SSl  'to  pour  out';  or,  'to  pour  over'  (so  Ass.
baliilii) ;  hence  '  to  mix.'  Cp  \^a.X../arritgo,  and  see  Anointing,
i  I. The  denominative  occurs  in  Judg.  1921.

2  Frd.  Oel.  makes  'jVnj' = '3S3T,  ««'<«/«  (  =  Sn3)  in  Ass.  being
a  syn.  of  rabiisu 'to  lie  down.' But  see Franz  Del.'s note.

3  .Similarly  in  Assyria:  cp  Maspero,  Daivno/Cw.  767^".

*  Cp  the  illustration  from  Assyria,  Maspero,  I.e.  The  shep-
herd seated  plays  upon  a  reed  to  the  delight  of  his  dog.

*  .At  the  present  day  a  sheep-pen  is  made  of  boughs.  It  is
called  liailra  (see  Hazor),  and  the  trail  of  boughs  in  the  sandy
desert  is  always  a  sign  of  the  nomad  mamil  (encampment);  cp
Doughty,  A  >:  Des.  2  220/!

713


CATTLE

The  status  of  the  shepherd  varies  according  to  the
society  in  which  he  lives.  Among  primitive  pastordl
7  8ta.tna  P*-""!''*^*  *^*-'  sh'^'^'h  himself,  or  even  his
daughters,  tend  the  flocks  (cp  Gen.  29  9
Ex.  2 16 — //.  6423),  as  is  the  case  at  the  present  day
in  various  parts  of  the  Sinaitic  peninsula  (see  Kn. -Di.
Ex.,  ad  loc).  The  early  kings  of  Israel  owned  large
flocks,  and  the  post  of  chief  shepherd  (cp  ,i:;:p  -ur,  Gen.
476,  also  I  Ch.  2729  I  Pet.  64.  dpxffolfjLtju,  and  magiiter
regit  pec  oris,  Liv.  1  4)  was  important  and  full  of  dignity.
Hence  the  designation  '  shepherd  '  (.ntn)  was  a  noble  one
and  was  used  of  the  kings  of  Israel  (Jer.  234,  ep  ,ip  '  to
rule  '  2  S.  52)  as  well  as  of  those  of  Assyria,  and  becomes
the  origin  of  the  lieautiful  NT  phrase  '  the  good
shepherd.'  Perhaps  it  is  inevitable  that  the  adoption
of  a  more  settled  mode  of  life  should  Ix;  unfavourable  to
the  repute  of  the  shepherd.  To  the  Egyptians,  for  more
than  one  reason,  shepherds  were  an  'alxjinination  '  (Gen.
4634:  cp  Aho.mination,  4)  ;  '  Asiatic '(/.«'.,  barliarian)
and  '  shepherd '  were  to  them  synonymous  terms  (see
Ec.VPT,  §  31).  Similarly  in  Palestine,  as  the  Jews
advanced  in  prosperity,  the  prestige  of  the  shepherd's
calling  diminished.  In  Rabbinical  times  a  shepherd  was
precluded  from  bearing  witness,  because  one  who  must
have  fed  his  flocks  upon  the  pastures  of  others  would
naturally  be  dishonest  (cp  Sanfi.  252,  Jos.  .Int.  xvii.  IO7).
Besides  the  use  to  which  cattle  were  put  in  ploughing
and  threshing  (see  Agrk lltlkk.  §  8),  they  were  also
_ .  used as  draught animals (cp iS.  67_^).

■  .^?  " Their  MiLK  (q.'c:)  formed  one  of  the  main

articles  of  diet,  and  their  skins  were  used
for  clothing  (see  Le.vtiier,  Wool).  Pastoral  life
probably  meant  usually  a  diet  of  milk  and  game  ;  and
the  use  of  cattle  for  food  was  somewhat  restricted  (see
Rel.  Sem.<-^  296/.).  The  young  animal  was,  however,
preferred  and  considered  a  special  dainty.  At  the
present  day,  it  is  said,  the  sheep  is  eaten  only  at
festivals,  and  goat-flesh  is  not  used  as  food  save  by  the
very  poor.  In  sacrifices  cattle  were  frequently  used,
and  huge  hecatombs  are  mentioned  in  connection  with
the  temple  services  ^  (cp  i  K.  863  2  Ch.  56  75  2933  etc. ).
Cattle,  being  almost  the  only  property  of  nomads,
become,  among  primitive  people,  a  medium  of  exchange.
When  the  first  coins  were  made  in  Greece,  this  was
commemorated  by  stamping  the  head  of  an  ox  upon
the  ingot.  Cattle  and  wealth  are,  therefore,  almost
synonymous  terms.

Cp  n^:p 'possession  and  Ass.  j«^«//rt/K 'herd*;  . "ijpp 'cattle,'
and  '"litP ;  D"03:  and  Syr.  |<w»'\i ;  1^ ^jjj  orig.  an  animal
for_  riding  (Nestle,  ZDMG  33,  707  ['79]  ;  />tcus  and  pecunia  ;
KTifVO<i  and  icni/xa).

The  earliest  legislation  (Ex.  20-23)  was  intended  for

a people  who, having advanced beyond  the  pastoral

9 Treatment ^^^^'^'  ^""^^^  occupied  chiefly  in  agricul-

■  , ...  ture. The  prominence  given  to  the  ox,
0 ca e. ji^g  sheep,  and  the  ass  is  as  noticeable

as  the  ab.sence  of  all  reference  to  the  horse  and  the
camel.  Remarkable  also  is  the  humanity  which  char-
acterises these  regulations.  Cattle  are  not  to  l)e  muzzled
(con,  cp  ccnci  while  threshing  (Dt.  254) — a  law  which
holds  good  to  the  present  day  (cp  Dr.  ad  loc),  and
was  in  vogue  in  Egj'pt,  where  one  sees  representa-
tions of  an  ox  and  an  ass  threshing  unmuzzled  (cp  Erm.
Eg.  432,  and  see  Agricui.tire,  §  8).  According  to
another  enactment,  oxen  were  not  to  work  upon  the
sabbath  (Ex.  23 12).  Notwithstanding  the  strictness  of
the  sabbath,  it  was  customary  to  water  the  cattle  on
that  day  (Lk.  I315).  Other  laws  respecting  cattle-
stealing  and  damages  caused  by  oxen  are  given  in  Ex.
21 28/:;  cp  ib.  22 10  [9]/:  The  law  dealing  with  the
case  in  which  a  beast  entrusted  to  one's  care  has  been
maimed  or  torn  (P^x.  22io  \ji\ff.)  provides  that  the  pro-
>  nao,  properly  'slaughterer  (of  cattle),'  is  applied  to  a  cook
and,  strangely,  to  a  member  of  the  royal  body-guard.  See
Executioner,  and  cp  OT/C^)  262,  n.  i.


CAUDA

duction  of  the  maimed  part  is  to  suffice  as  a  guarantee
of  good  faith  and  that  no  restitulion  is  to  be  required
(see  UiiJ'Osrr).  It  was,  therefore,  to  the  advantage  of
the  shepherd  to  be  able  to  produce  a  leg  or  a  piece  of  an
ear  as  a  proof  (cp  Am.  812).  Jacob,  however,  declares
to  Laban  that  instead  of  producing  '  that  which  was
torn  of  beasts  '  (nSTa)  he  has  made  good  the  loss  himself

(Gen.  31  39).

The  early  Semites,  like  other  pastoral  peoples,  paid

great  reverence  to  cattle,  their  kinship  with  whom  they

_  long continued to recognise. This

10.  Keverence  „•...,„ „,i,i;,; , „„;„. .„ vt„.i •,.


for  cattle.


gives additional point to Nathan's


parable  :  the  ewe  lamb  was,  to  a  poor
man  who  nourished  it,  more  nearly  a  daughter^  than  it
could  Ije  in  later  times.  No  doubt  the  special  veneration
for  cattle  was  connected  with  the  idea  that  man  owes
his  food  in  large  me;isure  to  them  (cp  WRS  I.e.).

A  full  treatment  of  this  subject  would  lead  us  too  far.
Nor  can  we  consider  here  the  Israelitish  form  of  the
legend  of  the  '  Golden  Age '  (cp  Hesiod,  ll'orks  attd
Days,  109^),  and  the  contrast  between  J's  description
of  the  peace  between  man  and  the  lower  animals  (cp
Is.  116/)  and  P's  representations  of  man  as  their  lord
and  master.  The  worship  of  the  domestic  animals  is
another  subject  which  invites  attention.  The  most
ancient  evidence  for  it  is  supplied  by  the  Babylonian
zodiacal  mytholot^y. '-^  In  Egypt,  too,  the  worship  of
sacred  animals  takes  us  back  to  an  incalculable  antiquity.
Witness,  for  example,  the  bull-worship  of  Memphis  and
other  cities  (see  Egyi'T,  §  14),  which  has  been  connected
with  Israelitish  idolatry.  Notice,  too,  the  worship  of
the  cow  Ha'thor,  the  '  lady  of  heaven,'  which  reminds
us  of  the  cow-headed  Ashtoreth  of  Sidon.  See  further
Cam-,  Golden;  Ashtoreth;  Azazel;  Clean,  §  17.''
A.  E.  s. — s.  A.  c.

CAUDA(kay^A  [Ti.WH]),  Acts 27 16. SccClauda.

CAUL  (properly  a  close-fitting  cap  or  net- work),  as
applied  to  an  article  of  dress,  occurs  as  the  EV  rendering
of  D'p*3"'  Is.  3i8  (mg.  '  networks,"  as  though  =  "2LJ' ;
©  eMTTAOKidv)-  To  complete  the  parallelism  of  the
verse,  we  should  read,  with  Schroeder  and  others,
D^D'lDL",  '  little  suns  '  ;  see  Necklace,  n.

In  its  anatomical  sense,  'caul'  in  Hos.  138  ([Da"?]  ^^Jp;
(7vyK\ei(T/j.6i  Kapdia^)  apparently  refers  to  the  peri-
cardium. It  is  used  similarly  in  E.x.  29  13  Lev.  34  10  15
etc.  to  render  n^n'v  (lit.  'excess';  ©  Xo/iis),  an  uncertain
expression  which  has  occasioned  difficulty  from  the
earliest  times.  It  denotes  probably  '  the  fatty  mass  at
the  opening  of  the  liver  which  reaches  to  the  kidneys,
and  becomes  visible  upon  the  removal  of  the  "lesser
omentum,"  or  membrane  extending  from  the  fissures  of
the  liver  to  the  curve  of  the  stomach'  (Dr.  Lev.  SDOT,
ET).  On  the  Vss. ,  and  various  interpretations,  cp
Di. -Rys.  on  Lev.  33;'*  and,  on  the  probable  reason
of  the  choice  of  this  particular  part  of  the  body  for
offerings,  see  Liver.

CAVES  (iTiyJp,  ml'drah;  cnHAAION  ;  spelunca).
The  limestone  strata  of  Syria  and  Palestine  readily  lend
themselves  to  the  formation  of  caves  and  ravines.  The
springs  issuing  from  limestone  rock  generally  contain
carbonate  of  lime,  and  most  of  them  yield  a  large
quantity  of  free  carbonic  acid  upon  exposure  to  the  air.
To  the  erosive  effect  of  water  charged  with  this  acid,
combined  with  the  mechanical  action  of  the  sand  and
stones  carried  along  by  the  currents,  the  formation  of
caves  and  ravines  in  such  rocks  is  chiefly  to  be  ascribed.

1  Cp  the  Egyptian  paintings  which  represent  men  talking  to
cattle,  and  decking  them  with  fringes.

2  On  the  '  Bull '  of  the  Zodiac,  which  is  the  Bab.  Gud-an-na
(equivalent  to  our  Taurus,  or  else  to  Aldebaran),  see  Jensen,
Kosmol.  (njff.

3  J.  U.  Diirst's  Die  Rinderv.  Bab.  .Ass.  u.  Ag.  (Berlin,  '9q)
— a  contribution  to  the  history  of  domestic  cattle — appeared
after  the  present  article  was  in  type.

■•  The  old  view  that  ydthereth  was  the  greater  lobe  of  the  lung
has  nothing  in  its  favour.

71S


CEDAR

What  are  now  ravines  have  in  many  cases  originally
been  subterranean  watercourses,  which  have  been  un-
roofed by  the  degradation  of  the  rock.  Some  of  the
Syrian  caverns  are  of  great  size  ;  Strabo,  for  example
(756),  speaks  of  the  ffTrrjXaia  fiadvffTo/xa  of  Ituraea,  and
mentions  one  capable  of  holding  4000  men.  Books  of
travel,  from  William  of  Tyre  and  Quaresmius  onwards,
abound  with  references  to  such  caves  and  the  local
traditions  respecting  them  (Tavernier,  Maundrell,  Shaw,
Robinson).  Those  of  Palestine  are  frequently  men-
tioned in  the  Bible  as  places  ofrefuge  and  shelter  for  the
terror-stricken  (Is.  219  Rev.  615  cp  Zech.  I45),  the  out-
lawed (David),  the  oppressed  and  the  persecuted  (Judg.
62  iS.  136  I  K.  18  4  13  199 '3  Ezek.  3327  2  Mace.  611
Heb.  1 1 38),  and  the  criminal  (Jer.  7  n  Mk.  11 17  and  |]),
and  as  places  of  sepulture  (Gen.  23  n  Jn.  II38).
Whether  the  word  Horite '  means  '  cave-dwellers '  has
been  questioned  ;  yet  that  in  many  parts  of  Palestine
the  earlier  inhabitants  continued  to  use  caves  not  only
as  storehouses  but  also  as  dwelling-places  cannot  be
doubted.  Of  their  connection  with  worship  in  pre-
Christian  times  there  is  little  or  no  direct  evidence.
Still,  it  appears  safe  to  hold  '  that  the  oldest  Phoenician
temples  were  natural  or  artificial  grottoes,  and  that
the  sacred  as  well  as  the  profane  monuments  of  Phoe-
nicia, with  their  marked  preference  for  monolithic  forms,
point  to  the  rock-hewn  cavern  as  the  original  type  that
dominated  the  architecture  of  the  region'  (WRS  /?(•/.
Sem.P>  197),  and  it  is  probable  that  the  Greek  fxiyapov
was  borrowed  from  the  Phoenician  myD  {ib.  200).  The
association  of  so  many  of  the  Christian  sacred  sites
in  Palestine  (<?.,^.,  Birth  of  Mary,  Annunciation,  Meet-
ing of  Mary  and  Elizabeth,  Birth  of  the  Baptist,  Trans-
figuration and  Agony  of  Christ,  Repentance  of  Peter)
with  grottoes  is  the  arbitrary  invention  of  legend-
mongers.  See,  further,  Maarath,  Mearah,  Hebron
(Machpelah),  Makkedah,  Etam,  Eleutheropolis  ;
also  Aduli.am  (where  it  is  shown  that  'cave'  ought
to  be  read  '  hold'),  and  (on  the  grotto  of  the  Nativity)
Bethlehem,  §  4.

CEDAR  (nX ;  KeApoc  [BAL]),  Cedrus  Libani
Loud.,  bears  in  Heb.  a  name  which  is  found  also  in
Aramaic,  Arabic,  and  Ethiopic,  and  is  probably  derived
from  a  root  signifying  '  to  be  firm'  or  'well-rooted,'  of
which  another  derivative  might  be  the  D'HS  '^  of  Ezek.
2724.  It  appears  that  Aram,  'arzd  and  Ar.  'arz,  like
Kibpo^,"^  may  denote  not  only  the  cedar,  but  also  the
juniper  {/uniperus  Oxycedrm),  and,  possibly,  pines  of
various  sorts.*  It  may  be,  then,  that  nx  is  not  to  be
strictly  confined  to  Cedius  Libani;^  but  it  is  highly
probable  that  this  tree,  which  has  been  associated  with
Lebanon  from  early  times,  is  the  one  usually  intended,*
and  in  such  a  passage  as  Is.  41 19  the  cedar  is  expressly
distinguished  from  other  conifers.  OT  writers  em-
ploy the  cedar  as  a  type  of  beauty  (Nu.  246),  majesty
(2  K.  149),  strength  (Ps.  295),  and  loftiness  (2  K.  I923).
The  wood,  which  was  much  more  precious  than  that  of
common  trees  like  the  sycamore  (i  K.  10 27),  was  largely
used  in  the  construction  of  great  buildings  like  the  temple
(see  also  Alt.\r, §  8)  and Solomon's palace; cedar

1  Cp  iin  '"  Job306  I  S.  14  II. See  Horite.

2  Best  translated  'durable';  certainly  not  (as  EV)' made  of
cedar- wood.' [But  the  text  is  in  disorder.]

3  On this  see  the  Index  to  Schneider's  Theophroitus,  s.v.

KtSpOi.

*  So  in  modern  times  we  are  told  of  el- Arz — 'in  the  mouth  of
uneducated  Syrians  it  designates  one  of  the  pines,  Phius
haUpf'emsis,  which  grows  in  great  numbers  on  the  mountains
{Joum.  Linn.  Soc.  16  247).

B  Lovv  (57)  says,  '  V^H  seems  to  have  denoted  both  the  cedar
and  the  /uniperus  Oxyceiirus,  L.'  According  to  the  same
authority,  Aram,  arzd  denotes  first  Pinus  cedrus,  then  all
conifers.

8  Hooker,  however,  regards  it  as  'an  open  question  whethei
the  C.  Libani  is  one  of  those  which  supplied  most  of  the  timber
employed  in  building  Solomon's  temple  (Nat.  Hist.  Rev..  1862,
p.  14),  and  there  seems  to  be  a  general  consensus  of  opinion
that  the  wood  used  for  purification  (Lev.  14  Num.  19)  was  the
juniper.

716


CEDRON

beams  were  most  highly  esteeim-d  for  covering  interiors
(Cant.  1  17  Jcr.  2214).  The  ust-  made  of  this  wood  in
the  ccri-mony  of  cleansing  the  leper  (I^ev.  14  4^)  or
the  person  rendered  unclean  by  contact  with  a  dead
body  (Nil.  15)6),  seems  to  lie  due  to  the  esteem  in  which
it  was  held  for  durability  and  incorruptibility  (see  Ui.
on  Lev.  14.  Nowack.  HA  2289). See  Cl.KAN,  §  16/

Of  the  existing  cedars  of  1  .ebanon  the  first  accurate
account  was  that  given  by  Sir  J.  D.  Hooker  in  Nat.
Hist.  Rev.,  1862,  pp.  11-18.  The  group  which  he
visitetl  was  that  in  the  Kadisha  valley,  N.  of  Beirut,
near  the  sunmiit  of  Lebanon  (Dahr  el  Kodib).  He
found  there  about  400  trees,  disix)sed  in  nine  groups —
the  trees  varying  from  about  18  inches  to  upwards  of
50  feet  in  girth.

Another  interesting  account  is  that  of  Dr.  Leo  Anderlind,
who  \isited  them  in  1884. 1  He  speaks  of  three  groups — one  at
Haruk,  a  second  4  m.  KSF..  of  Bsherre,  and  the  third  18J  m.  N.
of  that  place  It  is  the  second  of  these,  the  same  that  Hooker
visited,  which  he  particularly  describes.  The  greatest  height
of  any  of  the  trees,  he  savs,  is  alx)ut  82  ft.;  but  the  majority  are
between  46  and  72  ft.  The  oldest  of  them  were  the  strongest
trees  he  had  ever  seen.

According  to  Tristram  (NHB  344),  '  at  least  nine
distinct  localities  are  now  ascertained."

[.According  to  Dr.  Post  (Hastings'  DB  236^),  it  is  uncertain
what  tree  is  meant  by  'lirazlm  in  Nu.  24  6.  He  remarks  that
'  the  cedar  of  Lebanon  does  not  grow  in  moist  places,'  but  '  seeks
the  dry  sloping  mountain  side,  where  nothing  but  the  moisture
in  the  clefts  of  the  rocks  nourishes  it.'  He  concludes,  therefore,
that  '  unless  we  suppose  that  the  location  of  the  'ardzim  is
poetic  licence,  we  must  suppose  some  water-loving  tree  to  be
intended  in  this  passage.'  It  was  well  to  bring  forward  this
difficulty,  which  is  overlooked  by  Di.  The  remedy  lies  close  at
hand.  iJsage  requires  that  the  'cedars'  should  be  described  as
the  trees  which  Yahwe  planted.  We  have  to  read  in  a  D'llJtD
'like  cedars'  and  in  l>  probably  D'3^V^  'like  poplars'  (Che.
Kxp.  T.  IO401  6  [June  '99]).]

N.  M.— W.  T.  T.-D.

CEDRON  (KeApcoN  [ASV]),  iMacc.153941  AV.
See  (jKDKK.mi,  i.

CEDRON  (toy  KeApoY  [Ti.],  toon  KeApcoN  [WH]
Jn.  18 1,  RV  KiDKO.N.

CEILAN,  RV  KiLAN  (K[e]iAAN  [BA,  om.  L]).  The
sons  of  Ceilan  and  Azetas  are  a  family  in  the  great  post-
exilic  list  (see  E/R.\,  ii.  §  9,  §  8  f)  i  Esd.  5i5,  not
mentioned  in  ||  Ezra  (2 16)  or  Neh.  (7 21).

CEILINO,  in  modern  house-architecture,  means  the
covering  of  a  room  which  hides  the  joists  of  the  floor
above,  or  the  rafters  of  the  roof.  Down  to  the  seventeenth
century,  however,  the  word  was  applied  also  to  the  inner
lining  of  the  walls  of  a  room,  and  in  modern  shipbuilding
it  still  denotes  the  inside  planking  of  a  ship's  bottom
(see  AVw  I'^'tg.  Diet.  s.  v. ).  The  Hebrew  words  (see
below)  rendered  '  ceil.'  '  ceiling.'  in  E\'  are  to  be  taken
in  this  more  extended  sense.  See  further,  Chambkr,
HOL'.SE.  Tkmplk.

1.  JSp.  sippun,  1  K.  6  15  (aoKOs)  ;  cp  "irED,  sifklnSh,  Jon.  1  5
(the  '  sides '  or  '  innermost  parts  '  of  the  ship).  The  verb  is  used
in  I  K.  tig  "37  Jer.  'li  14  Hag.  1  4.

2.  In  2  Ch.  3  5  C'rn3  'i'V  .IBn  means  'he  covered  "(or  panelled)
[the  greater  house]  'with  fir.'

3.  1'nr,  sahif'h,  Kzek.41i6t,  a  word  otherwise  unknown.
Co.  proposes  to  emend  yy  ri'nc'  to  ry  'i2n  ;  see  2  Ch.  3  5  as
above,  and  ip  the  'iris  of  Nu.  173/:  [1638^:;  a  'covering' of
the  altar].

CELLS  (nV.3n),  Jer.  37 16  AV^e-  RV,  .\V  '  cabins,' 2
a  questionable  rendering  of  a  Hebrew  word  which
is  probably  corrupt.  The  words  '  and  into  the  cells '
are  quite  unnecessary  after  '  into  the  dungeon  house '
("iia.T  n-a^Sx),  and  may  be  a  gloss. See  Prison.

AVrng.  RV  (cp  ,Tv>KA«i<r/xo«  [QmK])  is  a  guess.  In  late  Heb.,
Syr.,  etc.  (K)ni3n  denotes  'shop'  (cp  ipiya.vn\^ia.  [.\q.),  er-
gastulnm)  or  'tavern.'  Moreover  the  form  is  difficult  (Hevan,
Dan.  30,  n. 1). Cs  x*P**  (BAQ,  xa.  [K],  al.  yij.)  points  to  the

1  Published  in  the  Allgem.  Fors'-  u. Jagd-Ztitung,  at  the
end  of  1885,  and  also  in  the  /.DPI'  10  8gJ^
*  '  Cabins '  in  the  sense  of  '  cell '  is  now  quite  obsolete.


CENSER

reading  n('hn. Cheyne suggest*  reading nVlirvi  '  the  lowest
part  (of  the  pit)' :  cp  Ps.  88  7  Lam.  8  55.

CEL08YRIA (koiAh cypiA  [BAL]), i  Esd.  217.

RV  ((Kl.l  SVKIA.

CENCHREA,  or  rather,  RV,  CKNCiikK^;  (KeNXP€Al
[Ti.  VVHj).  A  town  and  harlxjur  on  tjie  Saronic  gulf,
now  marked  by  the  village  of  h'ifhries.  It  served  as
the  eastern  port  of  Corinth,  which  lay  alxnit  s*ven  miles
(Str.  380,  says  70  stadia)  to  the  west,  just  as  I>echa;um
was  the  port  for  the  Italian  trade.  Strabo  calls
Cenchre.TE  a  village  {klj/jlti),  which  indicates  its  sub-
ordination to  Corinth  :  it  was,  in  fact,  merely  a  landing-
place  for  goods  and  passengers.

AI)out  4  m.  to  the  north,  at  Schoenus  (modem  Kalamaki),  was
the  jioAxot  or  tramway  upon  which  vessels  of  small  tonnage
made  the  passage  from  the  one  sea  to  the  other  (to  iTTtvuiTa-
rov  ToC  "laflfioO:  Str.  335,  369:  cp  Thuc.  87,  Pol.  4  ig,  Die
Cass.  51  5).  The  idea  of  substituting  for  it  a  canal  cut  through
the  Isthmus  was  very  ancient.  The  scheme  was  entertained  in
turn  by  Periander,  Demetrius  Poliorcctes,  Julius  Cajsar,  Caligula,
Nero,  ard  Herodcs  Atticus.  Nero  actually  began  the  work  in
67  A. o.,  bout  the  time  of  Paul's  final  visit  to  Corinth.  Ves-
pasian sent  him  six  thousand  Jewish  prisoners  from  Galilee
(Jos.^/  iii.  10  10).  Traces  of  this  cutting  were  to  be  seen  on
the  line  which  has  been  adopted  by  the  modern  engineers  who
have  brought  this  ;(p6»-ov  M*y*  ayu»»'t<rna  to  completion  (i88i-
1893)-

Half  a  mile  to  the  SW.  of  the  .Saronic  entrance  to  the
canal  are  the  remains  of  the  Isthmian  sanctuaries  and
Stadium  which  furnished  Paul  with  the  imagery  of
I  Cor.  924-27.

The  pines  from  which  were  cut  the  victors'  garlands  are
mentioned  by  Strabo  (380)  and  Paus;inias  (ii.  1  7).  The  road  to
Corinth  led  through  groves  of  pine  and  cypress  and  was
bordered  with  tombs  —  among  them  those  of  the  Cynic  Diogenes
and  the  courtezan  I^is(l'aus.  ii.  'J^).  Coins  (of  .\ntoninus  Pius)
give  a  representation  of  the  harbour  of  t  enchrea;  flanked  on
either  side  by  a  temple,  and  containing  a  standing  brazen
colossus  of  Poseidon  (Pans.  ii.  2  3)  and  three  ships.  Coins  of
H.adrian  show  the  two  harbours,  Lecha-iim  and  Cenchreae,  as
nymphs  turned  opposite  ways,  each  holding  a  rudder,  inscribed

LECH.,  CKNCH.

It  was  from  Cenchreas  that  Paul  sailed  at  the  close  of
his  first  visit  to  .Achaia  (.Acts  18 18  cp  'JO3).  The
voyage  between  Greece  and  .\sia  took  a  fortnight  in
Cicero's  case  {Ep.  ad  Att.  51369);  but  he  sailed  slow  ly
(cp  Thuc.  .3  3).  Phoebe,  a  deaconess  of  the  church  at
Cenchrea,',  '  carried  under  the  folds  of  her  robe  the  whole
future  of  Christian  theology'  (Renan,  Saint  Paul,  219),
for  to  her,  on  the  eve  of  her  departure  to  Italy  on  her
private  affiiirs.  Paul  entrusted  his  letter  to  the  church
at  Rome  (kom.  1(5 1  2).'  See  Erazer,  Pausanias,  87/.
Good  map  of  the  Isthmus  in  Baedeker's  Greece,  EI',
229.  \v.  J.  w.

CENDEBEUS,  RV  Cendebaeus  (KCNAeBAioc
[AXV];  but  KCNAeBeoc  [A  once],  AcBaioc  |N*V
once],  and  AAlBeoc  [N  once]),  the  general  left  by
Antiochus  VII.  in  command  of  the  sea-coast,  who  '  pro-
voked the  people  of  Jamnia,'  and  also  fortifie<l  Kidron
for  the  purpose  of  invading  Juchva.  He  and  his  army
were  put  to  flight,  near  Modin,  by  Judas  and  John,
the  two  sons  of  Simon  the  Maccabee  (i  Mace.  I538-
16  10).  According  to  Zockler.  he  is  the  Cendd  of  the
Arabian  legends,  a  N.  Kx.  prince  hostile  to  the  Jews
(cp  Blau,  /.DMG  25  577)-  Schurer(r;/7  1,  §  7.  n.  31),
however,  derives  Cendebeus  (as  also  koi»5i'/3£i/j)  from  the
Lycian  town  KdvSv^a.

CENSER,  the  utensil  used  for  offering  In'CENSE.

In  Il^V  it  represents  i.  n'T^iTD  the  vessel  for  oflTering  T\'pp
'incense'  with;  Ezek.  811  2Ch.  20iot(©  Bvnian^otoi',  which
is  found  once  in  NT— Heb.  84  [R\n,>i.  'altar  of  incense']).
From  the  same  root  is  derived  niiri^S,  2  Ch.  30  14,  '  altars
(RVn>B-  vessels]  for  incense.' Cp  In'CENse,  {  i.

2.  ■■'Bnp  (.y/  snatch  up  ;  irvp(e]<oi)  Lev.  10  i  16  12  Nu.  166  ^
17=^  EV,  but  AV  alone  in  Nu.414  (irvpioy)  i  K.  750  (.WmR.
'ash  pan';  SuiVicri)  2Ch.  4  22  (fluto-iti)  and  miptiot').  In  these
passages  RV  gives  'firepans,'  and  both  .W  and  RV  in  Ex.  27  3

'  [Unless  it  be  held  that  Rom.  16  i-ao  is  a  letter  of  introduc-
tiori  given  to  Pha:be  by  Paul  for  the  Church  at  Ephesus.  So
JiJlicher,  Eint.  in  das  y  /',  73  (cp  Colossi ans,  j(  4)  ;  M'GifTert,
Chr.  in  Ap.  Age,  275. Cp,  however,  Roma.ns,  \\  ^  10.)

718


CENTURION

883  2  K.  25  IS  and  Jer.  52  19  (where  .W"'S.  'censers').  The
rendering  '  snuffdishes '  occurs  in  Ex.  2038  3*23  Nu.  49  (see
Canolestick,  8  2).  ®  generally  irvpMiov  which  recurs  in
Ecclus.  50  9  (EV  'censer'). See  Incknsk,  §  4.

3.  Ai^afuTOf  (Rev.  835)  etymologically  '  frankincense  ' :  cp
njia^n  in  i  Ch.  0  29  (©  Ai^>/u>tos  :  here  only,  but  once  in  A  and
cp  3  Mace.  5  2).

CENTURION  (eKATONTAPXHC  [Ti.]  -oc  [WH]),

Mt.  8  5. .See  .\KMV,  g  10.

CEPHAS  (kh({)AC  [Ti.  WH],  Aram.  N20  'a  rock,'
cp  Ass.  A'ti/>u,  and  Heb.  D'D?,  Jer.  429  Job 30 6;  see
Lag.  Pfiers.  58). See  Peter.

CERAS  (khrac  [BA]),  I  Esd.  529. See  Keros.

CETAB,  RV  Ket.^b  (kht&B  [BA  ;  om.  L]).  The
b'ne  Cetab  are  a  family  of  Nethini.m  in  the  great
post-exilic  list  (see  Ezra,  ii.  §  9)  i  Esd.  5  30,  not  men-
tioned in  II  Ezra  (2  46)  or  Neh.  (7  48).

CHABRIS  (xABpeiC  [BXA]  ;  in  Judith  8  10  xa/^P""
[HX],  x«»/^Pf'M  [A];  in  106  xa/^P""  [BN.\]),  son  of
(lOthoniel,  and  one  of  the  rulers  of  Bethulia.  (Judith
615  8  10  10  6.)

CHADIASAI  (AV  they  of  Chadias)  and  Ammioioi
(.W  Ammidoi),  two  clans  in  the  great  post-e.xilic  list  (see
E/.R.\,  ii.  §  9,  §  8c).  I  Esd.  5  2ot  XA^ilACAl  [B],  x&A-
'<\C<M  [A"'']  ;  AMMlAlOl  [B],  -Aioi  [A]  [Lorn.]),  where
they  occur  after  the  Men  of  Beeroth  (i  Esd.  5  i9  =  I£zra
5  25  =  Neh.  7  29).  The  names  may  be  identified  (though
not  with  confidence)  with  Kedesh  [i]  (Josh.  1623),  or
perhaps  Hadashah  {ifi.  2:  37)  and  Hlmt.ah  (ib.  v.  54).

CHJEREAS (xMpeAC [A]). 2 Mace.  10  32  37.  AV

CHKKK.\S.

CHAFF  (I'b  etc.). See  Agricultl'ke,  §§  9,  15.

CHAINS  is  the  word  used  in  EV  in  translating
Hebrew  terms  which  signify  ( i )  ornaments  and  insignia,
and  (2)  means  of  confinement  and  punishment.  Though
chains  were  no  doubt  well  known  to  the  early  Semites,
it  is  chiefly  the  latter  variety  that  we  find  depicted  upon
the  monuments  ;  actual  remains,  moreover,  have  been
found  in  excavating  (Place,  Nineve,  iii.  pi.  70).  Chains
for  confinement  consisted  of  rings  around  each  foot
joined  together  by  a  single  link  ;  the  arms  were  similarly
treated  (see  Botta,  Monuments  de  Ninive,  i.  pi.  82).

1.  Chains  were  worn  as  articles  of  adornment  upon  the  foot
(mV:»X,  see  Anklkts,  Bracelet,  5),  arm  (mc',  see  Bracelet,
4),  and  neck  (D\mn,  p:j;,  see  Necklace).  For  chains  .such'as
were  worn  by  Joseph  and  Daniel,  as  expressive  of  rank  (T31,
and  Bibl.-Aram.  N^'jon),  see  Necklace.  To  denote  some
kind  of  architectural  ornamentation  we  find  nipwi^  iK.  621
(Kr.  'W;  Ezek.  723,  doubtful),  and  niip^!?,!  iK.  717  2Ch.
3i6(cp  2Ch.  35),  see  Pillar,  Temple.  Of  these  Heb.  words
the  former  is  used  in  Is.  40 19  (nipni,  text  doubtful)  of  the  chains
fastening  an  idol,  the  latter  denotes  the  chain  worn  upon  the
high-priest's  ephod  (ni"i;^'lir,  Ex.2822,  niiyiC*,  39x5;  jcpocrd?
[B-M-],  Kpiaa-a-.  [I.];  also  Ex.  2814  (cpoo-falioTos  [BAFL]);  see
Breastplate,  ii.,  Ephod,  Ouches.  For  chain-armour  see
Breastplate,  i.

2.  As  a  means  of  confinement,  ropes  or  cords  were  perhaps
more  commonly  employed.  For  chains  the  general  term  is  CpUNJ
Nah.  3 10,  etc.,  or,  with  closer  reference  to  the  material,  '733
''l"!?i  '  fetters  of  iron '  (Ps.  1498)— both,  in  parallelism,  in  Ps.
105 18.  Other  terms  are  pj'S  (Collar,  3)  and  T\vn},  'brass'
(Lam.  3  7).2  The  use  of  the  latter  in  the  dual  (C'nfm,  Judg.
16  21  2S.  334,  etc.)  does  not  necessarily  imply  the  binding  of
both  hands  and  feet  by  these  bronze  fetters.  The  <  -reek  words
are  Seo-fiO?  (Jude  6),  tretpd  (2  Pet.  24),  ire'iij  and  aAucrij  (in
parallelism,  Mk.  54  I,k.  829);  the  last -mentioned  term  is  used
in  Acts  126,  where  the  Roman  custom  of  chaining  a  prisoner  to
two  waiders  is  exemplified. See  Prison.

CHALCEDONY. What  the  ancients  understood  by
•  The  .\ramaic  form  of  this  word  (unSrSr)  's  represented  also

in  the  new  Hebrew  nSc'Sc',  which  became  a  regular  word  for

chain,  and  meant  also  a  chain  for  measuring.

2  The RV 'chains' for D'nin  2  Ch.  33ii  is  too  bold. See

Manasseh.

719


CHALDBA,  CHALDEAN

the  word  is  uncertain,  i.  It  is  met  with  only  once  in
the  Bible  (Rev.  2119;  xaAkeAcon  [Ti.],  xaAkhAcon
[WH]  ;  others,  karxhAcon  ;  culciJonius).  In  modern
mineralogy  chalcedony  is  a  variety  of  amorphous  cjuartz
'  semi-transparent  or  translucent  ;  white,  gray,  blue,
green,  yellow,  or  brown  ;  stalaclitic,  reniform,  or
botryoidal,  and  in  pscudomorphs  or  petrifactions '  [Ency.
Brit.^^  16  389).  The  word  chalcedony  is  usually  applied
to  the  white  or  gray  variety,  the  brown  chalcedony  lieing
known  as  the  sard  (Sardius),  the  red  as  the  carnelian
(see  S.aruius).  The  chalcedony  also  occurs  in  stratified
forms ;  when  white  layers  alternate  with  black  it  is
called  onyx  (see  Onyx).  When  the  white  alternate
with  others  of  red  or  brown  colour  it  is  called  sardonyx
(see  S.VRDONYX).  Pliny,  who  lived  not  far  from  the
time  when  the  Apocalypse  took  shape,  does  not  speak
of  the  chalcedony  as  a  distinct  stone,  but  only  of
'  Calchedonii  [or  'carched.']  smaragdi '  as  an  inferior
kind  of  emerald,  mentioning  that  the  mountain  in
Chalcedon  where  these  stones  were  gathered  was  in  his
day  known  by  the  name  of  '  Smaragdites'  ^  (HN  37  72-73).
Symmachus,  on  the  other  hand  {circa  200  .\.D. ),  gives
Kapxv^^"'-'"^  for  -\3i3  in  Is.  54 12  (AV  'agates,'  RV
'  rubies  ' ).  This  rendering  suggests  an  original  nana
(cp  the  reading  x°PX°P  [BQ].  Kopxopos  [A])  for  1213
in  Ezek.  27 16  (AV  'agate,'  mg.  '  chrysoprase,'  RV
'rubies'). See  Precious  Stones,  Rlbie-s.

2.  Chalcedony  {karkedmi)  is  the  usual  Pesh.  render-
ing of  uc.  s'bho  (axoLTT)^,  achates,  'agate'  of  Ex.  2819
39  12).  Notwithstanding  the  reference  in  Ezek.  2722  to
the  precious  stones  imported  from  Sheba  -  we  can  hardly
connect  the  stone  uc  with  the  country  called  Sheba.
As  Fried.  Del.  points  out  {Heb.  Lang.  36)  it  is  the  Ass.
Subu — i.e.,  the  shining  or  precious  stone  {abnu  tiosku  or
akru),  KaTi^oxTfjf.  This  stone  occurs  among  others  in
a  list  of  stones  enchased  in  gold  for  the  royal  breastplate.
On  Delitzsch's  suggested  identification  with  the  diamond
{Prol.  84  f.)^  or  the  topaz  {Heb.  Lang.  36)  cp  what  is
said  under  Precious  Stones,  Diamond,  Topaz.
Tradition  is  in  favour  of  the  rendering  '  agate. '

.•\gate,  so  named,  according  to  Theophrastus,  from  the  river
Achates,  in  Sicily,  is  one  of  the  numerous  modifications  of  form
under  which  silica  presents  itself,  almost  in  a  state  of  purity,
forming  98  per  cent  of  the  entire  mineral.  The  silicious  particles
are  not  so  arranged  as  to  produce  the  transparency  of  rock-
crystal,  but  a  .semi-pellucid,  sometimes  almost  opaque  substance,
with  a  resinous  or  waxy  fracture  :  and  the  various  shades  of
colour  arise  from  minute  quantities  of  iron.  The  same  stone
sometimes  contains  parts  of  different  degrees  of  translucency,
and  of  various  shades  of  colour  ;  and  the  endless  combination  of
these  produces  the  beautiful  and  singular  internal  forms,  from
which,  together  with  the  high  polish  they  are  capable  of  receiving,
agates  acquire  their  value  as  precious  stones.  Agates  are
usually  found  in  detached  rounded  nodules  in  that  variety  of
trap  rock  called  amygdaloid  or  mandelstein,  and  occasionally  in
other  rocks.  The  varieties  of  the  agate  are  numerous,  and  are
now,  as  in  the  time  of  Pliny,  arranged  according  to  the  colour
of  their  ground.

3.  It  is  not  apparent  why  RV"?-  should  suggest
•chalcedony'  for  r't'in  in  Ex.2820  (EV  'ber}'!').
See  Tarshish,  Stone  of.  w.  r.

CHALCOL  (xA^x^^  [A].  \d.KKd.\  [L]).  i  K.  4  31
[5 11],  RV  Caixol.

CHALDEA,  CHALDEAN,  CHALDEAN  (D^"=lb?.
XaAAaioi  [BXAEQL],  Ass.  A'aldu),  is  used  in  Gen.  11 28

X.  ineis^amu.  ^n  equivalent  for  Babylonia.  The  land
of  the  KaldQ  proper  lay  Sli.  of  Babylonia  projjer,  on
the  sea  coast  as  it  then  was. Its  true  capital  was  Bit

1  Cp  Aiflbs  (TuapaySirrii  of  Esth.  l6  (S  and  see  Marble.

*  Theophrastus  (La/>.  34)  tells  us  that  the  best  precious  stones
came  from  Pseplio  (€<c  ttj?  i/(e<^a)  KoAou/ttfi'J)?  X"/"")-  This  is
probably  the  same  as  the  P.sebo  of  Strabo  (822)  a  lake  and
island  S.  of  Meroe  (mod.  T.sana  or  Tana)  near  the  head  of  the
Blue  Nile  (see  Reclus,  GA>^.  Univ.  10  258  262).

3  The  difficulty  of  believing  that  the  Israelites  knew  and
perhaps  even  engraved  the  diamond  is  only  minimised  by  Del.,
not  removed  (see  Adamant,  Diamond),  though  it  is  not  so
serious  in  the  case  oS  S'hhd  (mentioned  only  in  P)  as  in  that  of
JWw/<'w(Ezekielan<l  P).

720


CHALPHI

Yakin  ;  its  usual  name  in  the  Assyrian  inscriptions  was
mill  Tanitini.  the  Stra-laiid.  If  Dclitzbch  (Par.  128,
etc.)  be  c«rrect  in  his  derivation  of  the  name  from
the  Kassitc  |)coplc,  the  wider  application  to  liiibylonia
may  have  been  a  leRacy  from  the  Kassite  dynasty  there.
On  the  other  hand,  the  Kassites  (Del.  calls  them  A'ossiier)
had  a  lanRunRe  quite  distinct  from  that  of  the  Kaldu,  w  ho
spoke  Semitic.  The  Kaldu  are  carefully  distinguished
by  .Sennacherib  both  from  the  Arabs  and  from  the
Aranuvans.  Mero<lach-lialadan,  the  usurper  in  Ikibylon
during  Sargon's  reign,  and  the  inveterate  foe  of  Assyria
till  .Seiuiacherib  hunte<i  him  from  Ilabylon  to  Hit-Yakin
and  thence  to  e.\ile,  v.as  a  Kaldu.  There  is  no  reason
to  think  he  had  any  right  in  Habylon  ;  on  the  other
hand,  nothing  shows  him  to  have  been  more  foreign
than  were  the  Assyrians.  In  fact,  the  Chaldeans  not
only  furnished  an  early  dynasty  of  Habylon,  but  also
were  incessantly  pressing  into  Babylonia  ;  and,  despite
their  repeated  defeats  by  Assyria,  they  gradually  gained
the  up|>er  hand  there.  The  founder  of  the  New- Baby-
lonian kingdom,  Nal)opolassar  {circa  626  n.c. ),  was  a
Chaldean,  and  from  that  time  Chaldea  meant  Babylonia.

The  use  of  the  term  Chaldee,  introduced  by  Jerome
to  distinguish  the  language  of  ccrtam  chapters  in
2.  'Chaldee,'  ^■^"'^'  ''^"'^  Ezra  (o-'irs  ]ic*S:  L)an.  I4),
gtg^  is  incorrect. The  only  correct  expression

is.\ramaic(seeCn.\l,l)K.\,§2  ;  D.WIEI.,
§  12;  Aram,  §  2;  Ar.\m.\ic  Language,  §  i  # ).
Another  jjeculiar  usage  must  be  mentioned.  We  find
'  Chalfieans '  used  in  Dan.  as  a  name  for  a  caste  of
wise  men.  As  Chaldean  meant  Babylonian  in  the
wider  sense  of  a  member  of  the  dominant  race  in  the
times  of  the  New  Babylonian  Empire,  so  after  the
I'ersian  conquest  it  seems  to  have  connoted  the  Baby-
lonian literati  and  lx?come  a  synonym  of  soothsayer  or
astrologer  (see  Daniki.,  §11).  In  this  sense  it  passed
into  classical  writers.  Whether  any  association  of
sound  with  kall7,  the  specific  name  for  magician  in
Assyrian,  helped  the  change  of  meaning  is  difficult  to
decide.  The  modern  so-called  Chaldees  have  no  racial
claim  to  th»  name,  and  it  is  very  questionable  whether
the  traces  of  alleged  Chaldean  culture  discovered  at
Telloh  are  correctly  assigned  to  this  people.

See  Dclattre,  Lcs  Chaldeens,  \Vi.  Unters.  Alior.  Gfsc/i.,
Mff-1  a"d  die  Histories  of  Assyria  and  Babylonia;  also  Beitr.
tur  Assyr.  8  1 13.  C.  H.  W.  J.

CHALPHI (xAA4)ei [VA]), i  Mace.  11 70  RY, AV

CAI.I'UI.

CHAMBER.  Of  the  structure  of  the  chamber  of  the
ancient  Hebrew  house  we  know  but  little  ;  it  would
naturally  depend  upon  the  style  of  the  rest  of  the  build-
ing. In  modern  Syria,  floor,  wall,  and  ceiling  are
commonly  made  of  beaten  clay  (cp  n'o  Ezek.  ISn),
which  is  often  coloured  with  ochre.  Wood,  neverthe-
less, is  not  rare.  The  Ckii.ing,  if  of  wood  and  flat,  is
of  curious  and  complicated  joinery  ;  or,  if  vaulted,  is
wrought  into  many  coves  and  enriched  with  fretwork  in
stucco  ;  the  walls  (n'p)  are  adorned  with  arabesques,
mosaics,  and  the  like,  which,  set  off  by  the  whiteness
of  the  stucco,  present  a  brilliant  effect.  Enamelled
inscriptions,  specimens  of  the  most  intricate  Arabic
caligraphy,  originally  intended  to  keep  oft"  harmful y/V/wf,
surround  the  walls.  On  the  number  and  arrangement
of  chambers,  see  House,  i.

Of  the  various  Heb.  words  for  '  chamber '  Tin  and  •Tf^  (cp
vtrtpwof)  are  used  of  rooms  in  private  houses ;  see  Bed,  §  i.
nan  is  used  particularly  of  the  nuptial  chamber  ;  see  Tent,  f  4.
Other  terms  are  used  especially  of  rooms  in  a  temple  or  palace.
nSP^  (i  Ch.  9  26  Jer.  35  2  4,  etc.)  or  r\2m  (Neh.  3  30  12 44  13  7),
a  room  in  the  temple  occupied  by  priests  and  temple-servants,
also  a  room  in  the  royal  palace,  Jer.  3iii2  2o;  and  (once)  ot  a
meal-chamber  1  in  a  ^<t/n<z/<  (i  S.  9  22  A V  '  parlour ') ;  see  Hu.h-

^  Or,  'feasting  hall."  For  another  probable  instance  see  2  K.
10  22  emended  text  (see  Vestry).  WRS  Rel.  Sem.P)  254  n.
suggests  that  A«<ryTj,  club-room,  is  derived  from  '^ ;  but  see  Lewy,
Die  sctHit.  Ftemdu:  im  G  rice  It.,  94.

721


CHAPITER

Place,  |  3. V^sf  (i  K.  0  5  7  3  Eak.  41  $^)  and  kp  (,  K.  U  211

aCh.  12it  Ezek.  407_^)  are  similarly  u«ed  of  temple-chambert.
In  the  case  of  two  words  the  suggested  rendering,  'chamber,'  it
certainly  incorrect  ;  J/'X^  (i  K.  »I  5  AV)  means  properly  a  '  story,"
as  in  RV  (see  Tkmplk),  and  3J  (K/elc.  10  24  31  39  RVmtj.
'vaulted-chamber'),  in  parallelism  with  nZ"^,  refers  evidently  to
some  mound  for  illicit  worship  (KV  better  'eminent  place').

CHAMBERLAIN.  In  Esth.  I1012  etc.,  EV  uses
'chamljerlain  '  (for  D'lD),  perhaps  as  a  more  English-
sounding  title  than  Eu.NUCH  [q.v.\  On  Jer.  51 59
(AV"'K-  'chamlxirlain')  sc-e  Skraiaii  [4].

Blastus,  in  Acts  12  20,  is  a  court  officer  in  ch.irge  of  the  king's
bedchamljcr  (o  «»rt  toO  xotTufot  toO  fiactKiut^);  but  in  Rum.
Its  23  oiKoraMOt  (AV  '  chanil>erlain  ')  is  used  in  a  wide  sense  (R V
'treasurer');  cp  I,at.  arcariut,  and  a  gloss  of  Philox.,  o  «'iri
■njt  iimo<ri'ac  rpant^r)^.  The  same  title  occurs  in  iiiM.ripiions
(cp  Marni.  Oxon.  85,  ed.  1732,  NciAu  oixofOfiai  '.Vcriat ;  see
W.  A.  Wright  in  .Smith's  DH^'i^  s.v.).

CHAMBERS  OF  THE  SOUTH  (ID'H  nnn).  Job  99,
and  probably  879  (emended  text). See  SfAKS,  §  3  r,

EAKTII, I'oi  K (QUARTERS OF,  §2(_ia).

CHAMELEON,  i.  RV  Land-crocodii.e  (HS,  etym.
uncertain),  one  of  the  reptiles  mentioned  as  unclean
in  Lev.  11  30.  6  (x&AAAiAetON  [KE].  x&mh.  [BA])  and
Vg.  [chatmrlcon)  have  the  same  rendering  as  AV  ;  the
Arabic  version  has  hardaun,  which  means  probably
a  species  of  land -crocodile.  Bochart  (Ifieroz.  43)
argues  from  the  Hebrew  name,  which  is  the  same  as
the  word  for  '  strength,'  that  what  is  me.uit  is  the  Arabic
-uHiral,  the  largest  and  most  powerful  sort  of  lizard.
The  Talnmdic  references,  on  the  other  hand,  seem  to
point  to  a  smaller  animal  ;  but  they  are  too  general  to
convey  any  definite  information  (Lewysohn,  Zoologie  da
Talmuds, 223/.).  N.  M.

2.  .W  MOLE  (ncr:B)  in  the  same  verse.  See
Lizard,  6.

CHAMOIS  ("ICT,  derivation  uncertain,  cp  Lexx.;
KAMHAon&pAAAic[B.\FL],  Dt.l 45!).  a 'clean' animal,
nienti<Mied  along  with  the  fallow-deer  (S*k),  the  roebuck
('3S  and  -flon').  the  wild  goat  (ipj*),  the  addax  ([irn),  and
the  antelope  (ikb)  ;  see  Clean,  §  8.  Many  ancient
interpreter.-  {©,  Vg. ,  Arab. ,  .Abulw. ,  Kimhi,  etc. )  thought
that  what  .vas  meant  was  the  giraffe  ;  but  the  home  of
the  giraffe  lies  far  away  from  Palestine.  A  more
probable  rendering  is  the  ,xs'T  or  '  w  ild  goat '  of  the
Targums,  which  suits  the  context  better.  1  he  chamois
(Rupicapra  tragus)  extends  from  the  I'yrenees  to  the
Caucasus,  but  is  not  known  to  have  ever  inhabited
Palestine,  whereas  of  mountain  sheep  and  goats  there
have  been  found  three  kinds.  Tristram  and  Post  think
that  zcmer  may  be  the  wild  sheep  [Oiii  tragelaphus)  ;
but,  though  that  sheep  lives  in  Northern  Africa,  and  an
allied  or  identical  s{x;cies  occurs  in  .Arabia,  it  is  doubtful
whether  it  has  lived  in  Palestine. See  Goat.

X.  M.

CHAMPION.  For  i  S.  17  4  23  EV  (D'32n  -J'^N)
see  Goliath,  §  2.  For  1  S.  17  51  EV  (113^)  see  War
and  cp  Giant,  3.

CHANAAN  (xanaan)  .•\cts  7  n  13  19  Judith  5  3  etc.
AV,  RV  Canaan;  and  Chanaanite  (xananaioc)
Judith5i6  AV,  R\'  Canaanite.

CHANCELLOR  (DIt:  hv^),  Ezra4 8^  SeeREnUM,  5.

CHANNUNEUS, RV Chanuneua (xanoynaioc

[B.V'Ji, I  i:sd.  848  =  E/.ra8io,  .Mkkaki,  3.

CHAPEL  (C;''JPP).  Am.  7 13  -^V,  RV  Sanctiary
(if.v. ). Cp  Bethel,  §  3,  «. For  i  Mace.  1  47  2  Mace.

10  2  11  3  .AV  see  SANCTUARY.

CHAPHENATHA  (xA(J)eNAeA  l^^^l).  1  Mace.
21 37  RV,  .\V  Cahhenatha.

CHAPITER  (i.e.,  capitellum  ;  'capital':  so  Amer.
RV).


CHAPLET

(')  B'^i^.  f^^y  of  '^e  heads  of  the  pillars  in  P's  account  of  the
tabernacle  (Ex.3638  881719;  ®UAiL  Ke<j>a\L^).  See  Taber-
nacle.

(2)  T\'y\2,  kOthJreih  (■\/T]3  'to  surround,'  whence  1713  'crown')
is  used  (a)  of  the  crowning  portion  of  Solomon's  pillars  Jachin
and  HoAZ  (i  K.  7  16-20,  iirCdttia  (H.\L] ;  2  K.  -lb  17,  xui9ap  [HA],
inieetia  [L] ;  2  Ch.  4  12/,  -peS  [HA],  -pcuS  [L] ;  Jer.  52  22,  ytltroi
[HK.AQ],  <ce</>aAiSe?  [Q'"*.']);  see  Pillar  :  and(/')in  the  descrip-
tion of  Solomon's  '  bases  '  for  the  lavers(i  lC.7  3i);  but  see  Layer.

(3)  nS;i,  s^pheth  (\/nSi  'to  overlay'),  also  of  the  crowning
portion  of  Solomon's  pillar  (2  Ch.  3  15,  ®bal  doubtful).  See
Pillar.

(4)  "liBM,  kaphtdr  (deriv.  uncertain)  occurs  with  the  same
meaning,  if  we  are  to  follow  RV  and  AV"ig-  (Amos9i,  to  XKaa-
rrjpiov  [BQ>»g]  =  n']23,  0v<TLa<rTrjpLOV  [AQ*]  =  ri3Ta ;  Zeph.214;
Toi  <t>a7vu)ii.aTa  [BX.\Qr]).  But  /-a/A/^r  elsewhere  has  a  different
sense  (see  Candlestick,  §  2). Read  perhaps  mnis  (Che.).

CHAPLET,  RV  for  n^f?  Prov.  1949!  (AV  'orna-
ment' ;  ©  CTe4)ANOc)-  Wisdom  isa  chaplet,  or  wreath,
or  garland  of  grace,  upon  a  man's  brow.  Chaplets  or
garlands  of  flowers  were  common  in  the  second  century
B.C.,  at  banquets  (Wisd.  Sol.  28  cp  3  Mace.  48):  see
Meals,  §11.  f'or  the  chaplets  of  bridegrooms,  see
Crown.  Of  similar  import  are  the  ariiiixara  of  Acts
14  13  (EV  '  garlands  '),  the  usual  headgear  of  sacrificers
to  Zeus.

Some  critics  hold  that  there  is  a  hendiadys  in  the  passage
and  that  the  meaning  is  raupous  e<rTe;a;u.eVovs  (garlanded  oxen).
Ornaments  resembling  crowns  were  placed  on  royal  animals  by
the  Assyrians  (cp  also  Ksth.  08  and  see  Crown),  and  on  victims
for  t!ie  altar.  'The  very  doors,  the  very  victims  and  altars,  the
very  servants  and  priests,  are  crowned  '  (Tertul.  £>e  Cor.  x.).

CHARAATHALAR  (xApAAeA\Ap  [A]),  lEsd.  536
=  Ezra '259  =  Neh.  76i. See  Cherub  (ii. ).

CHARACA,  RV  Char.'vx  (ton  X^PAKA  [VA],  a
town  in  Gilead,  with  a  Jewish  colony  (2  Mace.  12 17,  see
Ton),  described  as  750  stadia  from  C.\sphon  {q.v.).
The  distance  must  be  exaggerated.  About  120  stadia
NE.  from  Muzeirib  appear  el  Hurak  and  el  Hureiyik.

G.  A.  S.

CHARASHIM,  THE  VALLEY  OF,  {a)  iCh.  414
(RV  Gk-h.vrashim),  called  in  (b)  Neh.  11 35  '  the  valley
of  craftsmen  '  (RV'"*.'-  Ge-uaharashim).  In  [a)  MT  has
D'cnn  N'3  ;  in  {b)  'nn  'J.^  The  fundamental  rendering
of  ®  is  777  apaaeifji,  which  assumes  various  distorted
forms. ^  In  i  Ch.  I.e.  this  valley  is  described  as  occu-
pied by  craftsmen  (workers  in  wood,  stone,  or  metal  ;
cp  EV'"B),  who  traced  their  origin  to  Kenaz.  The
'  father '  or  founder  of  the  family  was  Joab  b.  Seraiah.
According  to  Kittel's  analysis,  however,  the  words  '  father
of  the  valley  of  craftsmen,  for  they  were  craftsmen,'  are
a  later  addition  to  an  old  record  (Chron.  in  SBOT).  If
so,  it  becomes  easier  to  admit  that  the  name  D-tnn  N'J
must  be  corrupt.  The  statement  of  the  Talmud  (Jer. ,
Meg.  1  r)  that  Lod  and  Ono  were  situated  in  the  Ge-
harashim  is  surely  impossible.  The  '  plain  of  Ono '
(Neh.  62)  is  the  natural  phrase.  Most  probably  'j  (ge)
is  a  corrupt  fragment  of  <33  [b'/ie],  and  the  name
originally  meant,  not  'valley  of  craftsmen,'  but  'sons
of  sorcerers,'*  i.e. ,  members  of  a  guild  of  sorcerers.  It
was  a  spot  connected  by  ancient  tradition  with  Philistine
sorcery  (cp  Is.  16  Mic.  7i3).  Conder's  identification,
therefore  {PEFQ,  '78,  p.  18)  falls  to  the  ground.

T.  K.  c.

CHARCHAMIS,  i  Esd.  1 25  AV  and  CHAR-
ClIEMISH,  2  Ch.  3520  AV. See  Carchemish.

CHARCOAL  (anGpakia  [Ti.  WH]),  Jn.  18 18  2I9
R\'"'K. See  Coal,  §  3.

CHARCUS  (Baxoyc  [B]).  1  Esd.  532  AV=  Ezra 2 53.
Bakkos.

1  The  pointing  is  exceptional ;  the  '  effect  of  analogy '  (KSnig,
i.  Ih9)? Dirferently  Olsh.  348. R.ither  corruption  of  the  text.

'■^  In  I  Ch.  4  14  ayeaSSaet'p  [B],  yijv  patrei^i  [A],  (f>apai  [L] ;  in
Neh.  11  35  Y^  apa(r[«]i/x  [ c.a  nig.  inf.  L],  om.  B«<*A.

3  In  Is.  33  cx'nn  =  ' charmers'  ;  cp  RV"'*,'-.

723


CHARIOT

CHAREA (xApeA [A]), i  Esd. 5  32  =  Ezra  2  53,

Haksha,

CHARGER,  a  somewhat  archaic  expression  denoting
a  'platter'  (which,  indeed,  takes. its  place  in  the  Amer.
Vs.  of  OT),  is  employed  by  the  EV  to  render  : —

(i)  iViyp,  ie  drd/i  (Nu.  7  13  19  and  throughout  the  chapter  [P] ;
0  Tpu/SAioi'  as  in  Mt.  2623  Mk.  14  2o),  the  tabernacle  offering
given  by  the  heads  of  the  tribes,  elsewhere  rendered  '  dish.'
See  Meals,  §  9.

(2)  ^'}}^,, 'igartdl ;  'chargersof  gold  ..  of  silver,"  enumerated
among  the  temple  vessels  restored  by  Cyrus  (Ezra  1  9,  om  B,l
\livKriipei, — i.e.,  wine-coolers  [AL],  phialce  [Vg.];  ||  i  Esd. '2 13,
<x-Kovh\i\ia.  [BAL]).  Agdrtdl  (yi\\\Qh  is  found  with  slight  varia-
tions in  Aram.,  MH,  and  Arab.)  is  taken  to  be  a  loan-word  from
the  Hellen.  Or.  )cdpTaA[A]o9  'basket';  cp  Basket.2

(^)  TTiVaf  (.Mt.  148  II  Mk.(i25  28),  the  dish  upon  which  was
brought  the  head  of  John  the  Baptist  ;  Lk.  11  39,  EV  'platter,'
along  with 'cup.' See  Meals,  §  9. In  Mt.  23  25  7rapoi//ts.

CHARIOT  (naa-ip,  nS-ip.  nDn).  Of  the  three
Heb.  words  denoting  '  chariot '  merkdbh  is  post-exilian
1  Names  (^  ^-  ^^  [4  26]).  It  is  employed  in  Lev.  log
■  and  Cant.  3 10  for  the  seat  of  the  chariot  or
palanquin  (©  iwLaayfjLa  [another  transl.  has  KdOicr/xa'],
i-n-ifiacns  [Vg.  Rashi]).  In  nearly  every  case  rckhebh  is
used  collectively  for  a  body  of  chariots.  The  instances
where  it  is  employed  to  denote  a  single  chariot  (like
merkabhdh)  are  comparatively  few  (Judg.  528  2  K.
921  24).  Occasionally  it  designates  the  chariot-horses
and  riders  (2  S.  10x8),  or  the  horses  only  (2  S.  84  ;  cp»
Is.  21 7  9).  On  the  other  hand,  merkdbhah  expresses
the  individual  chariot,  Ass.  narkabtu,  Ar.  markahat"" ,
Syr.  markabhtha — all  alike  derived  from  the  common
Semitic  root  [rakhabh),  to  mount  or  ride,  and  corre-
sponding in  meaning  to  Latin  currus  and  Greek  &pfj.a..
The  word  in  Heb.  is  frequently  employed,  not  in  a
purely  military  sense,  but  to  denote  a  state  carriage  or
travelling  conveyance.  Examples  of  this  use  may  be
found  in  Gen.  41  43  4629  Lev.  1.^9  i  K.  12  18  and  Is.
2?  (?).  This  word  must  be  kept  quite
distinct  from  another  term,  'agdldh  (,-i^jj,'),
'  cart '  or  '  waggon, '  employed  in  the  conveyance  of
agricultural produce (Am.  213).^ The  cart  was em-


FlG.  X. — Assyrian  Cart  (temp.  Tiglath-pileser  III.).
Brit.  Mus.  Nimrud  Gallery,  no.  84.

ployed  in  very  early  times  by  the  Israelites  (i  .S.  67
2  S.  63)  before  chariots  were  introduced  among  them.
Its  form  probably  approximated  to  that  of  the  accom-
panying figure  (fig.  i),  taken  from  one  of  the  reliefs
of  Tiglath-pileser  III.  Each  cart  holds  three  occupants
and  is  drawn  by  two  oxen  ;  the  wheels  have  eight
spokes.  A  still  more  primitive  kind  of  cart,  employed
by  the  Asiatic  nations,  possessed  wheels  which  con-
sisted simply  of  circular  discs,  whilst  the  earliest  and
most  primitive  form  of  all  consisted  in  a  mere  frame-
work with  '  a  board  or  seat,  placed  between  two  asses
to  which  it  was  strapp>ed,  on  which  the  person  sat  as

1  The  first  word  in  fw  XP""''<"  k.t.A.  [B,  om.  AL],  has  per-
haps come  in  by  mistake  for  kB"  representing  the  evvfd  Kal
eiKoo-i  at  the  end  of  the  verse  ;  so  H.  A.  Redpath  (in  a  private
communication).

2  But  Kap'  itself  is  possibly  a  Pers.  or  Sem.  loan-word  (BBM,
s.v.  ;  cp  Frii.  Aram.  Fremdva.  jT_f.).

3  The  poetical  use  of  this  word  (in  the  pi.)  for  war-chariot
in  Ps.  469  [10]  is  isolated;  indeed,  the  text  is  not  undisputed
(see  Weapons). On  Am.  213  see  al.so  Agkicultuke,  §  8.

724


CHARIOT

on  an  open  liuer'  (Dr.  Samuel  IJirch).  The  appended
illustration  (fig.  a),  taken  from  a  nionunient  belonging
to  the  fourth  Kgyplian  dyn-
asty, clearly  exhibits  this
earliest  nuxle  of  conveyance.
It  should  Ix  remembered
that  in  the  luxst  camels,
asses,  and  mules  are  more
convenient  and  general  as
a  means  of  transport,  both
for  burdens  and  for  human
beings,  than  are  wheeled
vehicles ;  and  this  was
specially  true  of  ancient
times.

The  subject  of  the  present
article, however, is  mainly
the IVar-chariot. The  striking  fact  that  the  ancient
_  Hebrews  for  centuries  refused  to  employ

so  valuable  a  military  aid  as  the  chariot,
ith  the  Canaanites


Fig.  2.  —  Ancient  Kg>ptian
conveyance  (4lh  dyn.)
After  Wilkinson.


chariots

introduced

late.


their  encounters

was  due  to  several  co-operating  causes.

I''irst  among  these  was  the  nomadic

origin  and  character  of  early  Israel. The  Cana.-inites,

like  the Egyptians, may  have borrowed the form  of

their chariots from their northern neighbours, the

Syrians  or Hittites. This, however, is by  no means

certain, for among the  Amarna  Tablets, we  have  a

despatch to the Egyptian monarch from  one of  his

vassals  in  Canaan,  in  which  the  latter,  in  anticipation

of  an  invasion  by  the  Hittites,  requests  the  aid  of  chariots

and  troops  from  the  king  of  Eg)pt. ' Not  improbably,

therefore,  Egypt  may  have  Ijeen  the  pro.ximate  source

whence Caiiaanite civilisation borrowed the chariot

From  Josh.  17 16  Judg.  43,  however,  we  learn  that  the

Canaanite  war-chariot  was  plated  or  studded  externally

with  iron,  a  feature  which  seems  to  l)e  more  probably

Hittite  than  Egyptian.-  A  second  reason  why  Israel

_...  . remained destitute of this imjxjrtant

1 COimtry  ^^1:^,^^.^  j^  (^  ^  found  in  the  physical

unsuitable.  ,-  r  ^  t^ • .

configuration  of  Canaan. Dunng  the

earlier  period  of  the  Hebrew  occupation,  the  district  seized
by  the  sons  of  Jacob  was  the  central  or  mountainous
region,  where  chariots  and  cavalry  could  not  easily
operate.  Interesting  illustrations  of  this  difficulty  in
emjiloying  chariots  may  be  derived  from  the  inscriptions
of  Tiglath-pile-ser  I.  {circa  iioo  B.C.).  In  Prism  Inscr.
col.  ii.  70-74  we  read  :  '  mighty  mountains  and  difficult
country  I  passed  through — so  far  as  it  could  be  traversed,
in  my  chariot ;  and  that  which  could  not  be  traversed,
on  foot.  By  the  mountain  Aruma,  unsuited  for  the
advance  of  my  chariots,  I  left  my  chariots  behind
..."  (Winckler  in  A"/?  i  ;  cp  also  col.  iii.  47-49).
How  difficult  the  Canaanites  found  it  to  make  effective
use  of  them  against  the  Israelites,  may  be  inferred
from  the  later  experience  of  the  Syrians,  who  attributed
their  constant  defeats  to  the  fact  that  the  deities  of  the
Hebrews  were  potent  in  the  mountainous  country  (i  K.
20  23)  whilst  their  own  operations,  which  were  largely
carried  on  with  cavalry  and  chariots  (cp  v.  21  and
Shalmaneser  II. 's  Obelisk  Inscr.  65,  Monolith  Inscr.
col.  ii.  90),  would  be  successful  only  in  the  plains.  It
can  readily  tx;  understood,  therefore,  how  the  Hebrew
race,  by  clinging  to  the  central  mountainous  region  and
not  venturing  too  far  into  the  Shephtlah  or  low  country,
as  well  as  by  dint  of  sheer  braver}'  and  the  skilful  u.se  of
bow,  sling,  and  spear,  were  able,  down  to  the  time  of
David,  to  defy  successfully  the  armies  of  Canaan  and
Syria.  A  third  reason  was  that  reli-

gion— in  its  tendency,  ever  conservative
of  a  nation's  past — sanctioned  the  an-
cient custom  of  warf;ire,  and  regarded  horses  and  chariots

1  Cited  by  Zimmern  in  ZDPy  13  134^

2  See  the  representation  of  a  chariot  of  the  Rutennu,  figured
in  Wilkinson,  Anc.  Mg:  1  230,  in  which  the  four-spokeii  wheel,
as  well  as  the  body  of  the  chariot,  is  evidently  plated  with
metal ;  and  cp  Iron,  |  2.

7^5


6.  Religious
conservatism.


CHARIOT

as  a  foreign  innovation  corrupting  Israel's  allegiance  to
Yahw6.  This  view,  constantly  reflected  in  prophecy
(Hos.  I7  14 4  [3]  Mic.  59[ioJZech.  9io),  becanieembxxlied
in  the  Ueuteronomic  legislation  (Dt.  17  16),  and  expressed
in  song  (Fs.  2O7).  When,  however,  under  Uavid,  Israel
became  an  aggressive  state  and  entered  into  conflict
with  Syrian  and  Hittite  cavalry  and  chariots  in  the
plains,  the  stress  must  have  been  severely  felt  by  the
Hebrews,  and  it  is  not  surprising  that  chariots  and
horsemen  were  gradually  introduced  into  Israel's  military
service.  This  is  clear  from  2  S.  84,  where,  following
©,  we  should  restore  S^  ('  for  himself  ;  ontitted  in  MT
from  religious  scruples)  ;  the  passage  means  that  David
reserved  100  chariots  and  horsemen  for  his  own  use.
His  successor,  Solomon,  is  said  to  have  provided  Israel
with  1400  war  chariots,  which  were  quartered  in  sp)ecial
cities  (i  K.  9  19  10 26  ;  see  Hkth-makcahoth).  In  his
reign  the  purchase  of  horses  and  chariots  Ixicame  an
organised  trade  ;  they  were  imported  (though  Winckler
denies  this  ;  see  Mizkaim,  §  2  [a])  from  Egyjjt,  at  the
cost  of  600  shekels,  or  about  ;^8o  for  each  chariot '  (v.
28/.).  From  this  time  onwards  we  constantly  read  of
chariots  and  horsemen  both  in  the  northern  and  in  the
southern  kingdom  (i  K.  I69  2234  2  K.  821  13?  Is.  2?
Mic.  59  [Heb. ]).  In  col.  ii.  91  of  Shalmaneser  ll.'s
great  monolith  inscription  we  are  startled  to  find  that
Ahab's  contingent  of  chariots,  2000  in  number,  largely
exceeded  that  of  any  other  state  in  the  confederacy  that
encountered  the  Assyrian  army  at  Karkar  in  854  B.  r.
(cp  Ahab,  §  7).  From  Is.  30i6  31 1  369  we  may  infer
(with  Kamphausen)  that  the  supply  of  chariots  and
horses  from  Eg)pt  was  one  of  the  grounds  of  alliance
between  that  power  and  Judah.

Since  Egypt  was  the  land  from  which  the  Hebrews

obtained  their  supply  of  this  arm,  we  turn  to  its  nionu-

„ .. ments  for  illustrative  material ;  and  this  we

• Byy  obtain  in  abundance  from  the  eighteenth

dynasty  onwards  (vol.  vi.  m  I.cpsius
Denkmciler).  Before  the  eighteenth  dynasty  ( 1 500
B.C.)  chariots  and  horses  were  unknown  in  Egypt,  and
there  is  good  evidence  to  show  that  they  were  borrowed
from  the  North  Palestinian  race  called  Rutennu.''*
The  Egyptian  chariot  usually  contained  two  persons.
Nowack  (HA  1  367),  however,  is  wrong  in  his  a.sser-
tion  that  this  was  invariably  the  case.  In  Lepsius'
Denkmdler  (Abth.  iii.  Bl.  iS7f)  ^'^  have  numerous
illustrations  of  chariots  with  three  figures.  According
to  Sir  Gardner  Wilkinson,  however,  this  was  not
common,  except  in  triumphal  processions,  '  when  two
of  the  princes  or  noble  youths  accompanied  the  king  in
their  chariot,  bearing  the  royal  sceptre,  or  the  flabella,
and  required  a  third  person  to  manage  the  reins."  On
the  other  hand  Hittite  chariots  frequently  contained
three  occupants  (see  below,  §  9).  Lepsius  [Denkmdler,
Abth.  iii.  Bl.  160)  exhibits  figures  of  Eg>ptian  chariots
in  which  the  right-hand  warrior  lx:ars  the  bow  while  the
left  carries  the  shield.  Here,  as  in  many  other  cases,
we  find  the  reins  tied  round  the  body  of  one  of  the
combatants  while  he  is  engaged  in  action.  On  another
page  (BL  165)  we  have  a  chariot  with  the  soUtary  royal

1  In  I  K.  IO28  (2  Ch.  I16)  the  text  is  ver>'  uncertain  in  the
latter  part  of  the  verse.  In  MT  of  i  K.  IO28  we  read  .tipo?
"!TO3  nipp  injp^  -l^sri  nn:.  h  .seems  simplest  with  Kamph.
(in  Kau.  HS)  to  cancel  the  first  nipa  a"'!  '"  render  the  whole
verse  '  And  the  export  of  the  horses  of  Solomon  was  from  Egypt  >
and  the  royal  merchants  used  to  fetch  a  troop  for  pa;>-ment.
This  is  certainly  preferable  to  the  other  suggestion,  to  which  Ki.
in  his  note  on  2  Ch.  1 16  (SBOT)  refers— viz.,  to  make  a  trans-
position  and  read  .  .  .  Kijao  Kipo  l^Cn  "inai  '  the  king's  traders
getting  every  time  a  troop  .  .  .'  This  use  of  the  distributive
construction  is  very  forced.  Ki.  himself  finds  a  reference  in
nii::icl  to  Kue— ;.f.,  E.  Cilicia.  See  the  note  referred  to  and
cp  MiZRAIM,  S  2  (d).

2  Sayce  (traces  0/  the  OT  123/  134)  has  shown  that  thU
Egj'ptian  name  included  the  Hittites.  It  is  signific.-»nt  that
the  Palestinian  peoples  chiefly  associated  chariots  with  the
Hittites  and  the  Eg^'ptians;  3  K.  76  (on  which,  however,  se«
Ahab,  I  6).

726


^-  3-  —  Egyptian
Archer  (Thebes).
After  Wilkinson.


CHARIOT

occupant,  Rameses  II. ,  drawing  the  bow,  while  the  reins
of  his  two  horses  are  tied  around  his  middle.  Indeed,
one  of  the  most  striking  features  in  these  vivid  scenes  of
combat,  is  the  multiplicity  of  functions  discharged  by
the  chariot  rider.  The  accompanying  figure  (fig.  3)
exhibits  an  archer  in  the  act  of
drawing  his  bow  with  the  right
hand.  A  whip  consisting  of  a
stick  handle  with  leather  thong
attached,  is  suspend-
ed from  his  wrist,
while  round  his  waist
are  fastened  the
horses'  reins.

It  is  obvious  from
the representations
which portray the
manufacture  of  differ-
ent portions of the
Egyptian chariot,
that it was almost
entirely constructed
of  wood. It  was  light and open from
behind,  so  that  it  could  be  easily  mounted,
and consisted of '  a wooden framework, sometimes
strengthened  and  ornamented  with metal and  leatlier
binding. The  tlat  bottom was  formed of  a  kind  of
network,  consisting  of  interlaced  thongs  or  rope,  which
gave  it  elasticity  and  mitigated  the  jolting  '  (Wilkinson).
The  occupants  of  a  chariot  nearly  always  stood. In
rare  instances  the  car  was  provided  with  a  seat  in  which
the  royal  personage  sat. The  furniture  consisted  of  a
bow-case, which was placed in a slanting position
pointing  forwards,  and  was  often  ornamented  with  the
figure  of  a  lion. There  were  also  receptacles  for  arrow's
and  spears,  which,  as
a  general  rule,  slanted
backwards  (see  fig.  4).
The diameter of the
wheel  was  a little over
three feet. The felloe
was  in  si.x  pieces  and  the
tire  was  fastened  to  it  by-
bands of hide passing
through long narrow
holes.  'The yoke,  resting
upon  a  small,  well-padded
saddle,  w.xs  firmly  fitted
into  a  groove  of  metal ;
and the saddle, pl.iced
upon  the  horse's  withers,
and  furnished  with  girths
and a breastband, was
surmounted  by  an  orna-
mental knob ; and in
front  of  it  a  small  hook
secured  the  bearing  rein.
The other reins passed
through  a  thong  or  ring
at  the  side  of  the  saddle,
and  thence  over  the  pro-
jecting extremity  of  the  yoke,  and  the  same  thong  secured  the
girths.' Further  details  may  be  found  in  Sir  Clardner  Wilkinson's
exhaustive  work,  from  which  the  above  description  has  been
borrowed.

The  chariots  of  the  Assyrians  were  of  stouter  and

more  solid  construction  than  those  of  the  Egyptians,

.  . since  the  former  were  intended  to  sustain

, •  t •  ■ ^^^  w-ear  and  tear  of  rough  and  rugged

9th  cent.


CHARIOT

, and  in  a  slanting  position  as  in  the  Egjptian  examples.
We  notice,  in  one  case  depicted  in  Asur-nasir-pal  s
obelisk,  an  attendant  on  foot  bearing  a  shield,  and
holding  the  reins.  This  meets  us  again  on  one  of  the
monuments  of  Tiglath-pileser  III.

\'ivid  representations  of  the  chariots  of  this  period
may  be  found  in  the  reliefs  of  the  Nimrud  gallery  in
the  British  Museum.  One  excellent  example,  rej^rotluced
in  the  accompanying  figure  (fig.  5),  is  borrowed  from  a


Fig.  4. — Egyptian  chariot  with  bow-
and  arrow-cases  (Thebes).  After
Wilkinson.


paths  in  distant  campaigns.  Thus
often  find  that  the  tires  and  felloes  of  the
wheels  amoimted  together  to  as  much  as  eight  or  ten
inches  in  thickness.  In  the  early  part  of  the  ninth  century
B.C.  we  find  chariots  of  this  description  employed  by
Asur-nasir-pal.  Upon  the  obelisk  of  this  monarch  we  find
the  archer  standing  on  the  right  hand  and  the  driver  on
the  left,  and  these  are  their  respective  positions  in  nearly
all  the  examples  depicted  on  the  Assyrian  monuments.
We  observe,  moreover,  in  all  the  portrayals  belonging
to  the  ninth  century  and  the  early  part  of  the  eighth,
that  the  two  receptacles  for  arrows  are  placed  on  the
right  side,  and  are  disposed  crosswise  over  one  another,
727


Fig.  5. — Hunting-chariot  of  A5ur-nasir-pal. Brit.  Mus.  NimrOd  Gallery.

hunting-scene  in  which  the  monarch  Asur-nasir-pal  is
engaged.  Note  that  we  have  here,  as  in  many  other
instances  of  this  period,  three  horses — a  contrast  with
Egyptian  usage,  in  which  the  number  never  exceeded  two.
The  pole  of  the  chariot  is  fixed  to  the  base  of  the  '  body,'
to  the  upper  part  of  which  is  fastened,  on  the  left,  a  large
heavy  shaft  ^  attached  to  rings  upon  the  shoulder-pieces
of  the  central  as  well  as  the  outer  horse  on  the  left  side.
The  rein  on  the  right-hand  steed  passes  through  a  ring
on  his  shoulder,  and  is  attached  to  the  bit.  The
use  of  bits  with  ancient  Egyptian,  as  well  as
Assyrian,  war-horses  can  admit  of  no  doubt.  As  in
other  examples,  the  two  receptacles  for  arrows  cross
each  other  slantwise  on  the  right  side  of  the  chariot —
for  that  was  obviously  tlie  side  on  which  the  archer
most  conveniently  stood,  thus  preserving  his  right  hand
and  side  unencumlx;red  by  his  companion  in  the  use
of  the  bow.  A  battle-axe  stands  among  the  arrows  in
one  receptacle,  whilst  an  extra  bow  is  inserted  among
those  in  the  other.  We  notice  in  this  example,  as  in
all  others  portrayed  on  the  monuments  of  this  period,
that  the  axle  of  the  wheel,  as  in  the  Egyptian  chariot,
is  placed  under  the  hindermost  extremity  of  the  body
of  the  vehicle,  in  order  to  ensure  more  steadiness  ;  con-
sequently part  of  the  weight  of  the  chariot  and  its  occu-
pants rested  on  the  horses.  In  another  specimen  on
the  reliefs  of  this  period  we  again  observe  three  steeds
harnessed  to  the  chariot,  while  in  this  case  the  driver
holds  a  whip.  Near  the  front  of  the  chariot,  between
the  two  occupants,  rises  a  pole  surmounted  by  a  sym-
bolic device,  from  which  hang  ornamented  tassels.  In
other  examples  a  spear  may  be  seen  in  the  receptacle
that  slopes  backwards.  Often  the  horses  are  richly
ornamented  with  crests,  sometimes  with  a  necklace-  or
collar.  Leather  straps  pass  beneath  and  in  front  of
the  animal.  We  find  tassels  hanging  down  apparently
from  a  metal  boss  on  its  side.  Otherwise  the  animal
is  unprotected.

Among  the  reliefs  of  Tiglath-pileser  III.  we  observe
a  state-chariot  with  two  horses  and  three  occupants.
There  is  no  archer.  The  king  stands  on  the  right  and
the  driver  on  the  left. The  driver  has  three  reins  in  each


1  Weiss  (in  Kostiimkunde  under  the  head  of  Ass)Tian  chariots)
describes  this  as  merely  'a  broad  strip  of  cloth  or  leather,'  but
confesses  that  it  is  obscure  as  to  its  nature  or  purpose.  The
present  writer's  personal  inspection  of  numerous  examples  in
the  Nimrud  gallery  leads  him  to  regard  it  as  much  more  solid
in  structure,  and  as  probably  intended  to  yoke  the  third  steed
to  the  other  two  horses.  When  a  third  horse  ceased  to  be  yoked
to  the  chariot,  at  the  close  of  the  eighth  cent.,  this  large  and
heavy  shaft  no  longer  encumbered  the  Assyrian  chariot.

2  Not  improbably  this  contained  amulets  or  charmSj  like  the
crescents  on  the  camels'  necks  in  Judg.  8  21.  See  \Vhitehoiise,
Primer  of  Hebrew  A  ntiguities,  yt/.  and  footnote.

728


CHARIOT

hand,  a  whip  in  his  right.  In  front  stands  an  attend-
ant holding the  reins. The  monarch is shaded by

an  umbrella. We  notice  two  new  points.

The  receptacle  for  arrows  stands  upright.

Also  the  wheels  are  now  njuch  enlarged,
being  aljout  4^  feet  in  diameter,  with  tire  and  felloes  of


8.  In  8th
cent.


Fig.  6. — State-chariot  of  Sentuicherib. Brit.  Mus.  NimrQd
Gallery.

considerable  thickness.  Mr.  T.  G.  Pinches  is  disposed
to  think  that  the  inner  rim  of  the  wheel  was  of  metal,
and  appearances  would  seem  to  justify  this  conclusion.
It  is  pxjssible,  however,  that  we  have  here  plating,  not
solid  metal.

The  state  chariot  of  .Sennacherib,  which  we  here  repro-
duce (fig.  6),  exhibits  wheels  at  least  4^  feet  in  diameter,
with  eight  spokes.  We  notice  the  thickness  of  the
tire  and  felloes,  and  the  metal  studs  or  nails  on  the
outer  circumference.  .\  large  umbrella  is  fi.xed  in  the
chariot.  Here  the  driver  is  on  the  right  hand,  the
king  on  the  left.  We  also  observe  no  receptacle  for
arrows,  lx)w,  or  battle-axe  ;  from  the  close  of  the  eighth
century  onwards  the  archers  become  dissociated  from
the  chariots  ;  in  the  tinie  of  A§ur-bani-pal  they  usually
constitute  a  separate  corps.'


Fi(..  7.— Hittite  Chariot. After  Meyer.

Of  the  Ilitlitc  chariot  we  obtain the  clearest  con-
ception fronj  Egyptian  portrayals,  and  a  special  interest
9 Hittita  ^'°"S^  *°  '^  because  it  is  probably  to  be
chariots ''•^S''^"'*-"*^  ^^  '^^  prototype  from  which  the
Egyptian was derived, and the Israelite
vehicle  was  ultimately, if  not  proximately, borrowed.

1  In  one  case,  however  (45),  we  have  a  single -horse  chariot
carrying  two  archers  with  quivers  on  their  backs.  Moreover,
the  large  upper  shaft  to  which  reference  has  been  made  dis-
appears altogether  from  the  time  of  Sennacherib  onwards.  Not
more  than  two  horses  are  harnessed  to  the  chariot.  Also  it
becomes  simpler  in  form,  while  the  wheels  become  larger.  In
the  repre-sentation  of  ASur-bani-pal's  war  against  Klam  (Nimrud
gallery  <S,  49)  we  observe  that  the  wheels  have  as  many  as
twelve  spokes.  In  some  cases  there  is  only  a  single  occup-int.
In  others  there  are  several  occupants,  and  an  umbrella  is  fixed
in  the  chariot  when  it  conveys  a  royal  personage  or  some
nobleman  of  distinction.

729


CHARIOT

In  one  respect  it  differed  from  the  Egyptian,  \\t.  in
carrying  three,  not,  as  a  rule,  two  occup.ints.  This
is  important,  as  it  seems  to  throw  light  ujkju  Hebrew
usage,  to  which  we  shall  presently  refer.  The  ordinary
weapons  of  the  chariot-fighter  were  bow  and  arrows.  In
the  annexed  figure  (fig.  7)  it  will  be  observed  that  the
two-horsed  chariot  h;is  among  its  three  riders  a  shield-
bearer,  who  apparently  occupies  the  central  position.
The  driver  on  the  left  holds  only  a  single  rein  in  each
hand,  though  he  is  driving  two  stc-eds,  which  are  held
together  by  a  strong  collar  and  undergirths.  Simplicity
and  strength  combined  with  lightness  are  the  chief
characteristics  of  the  Hittite  chariot.

Among  the  ancient  Hebrews,  as  among  the  Assyrians,

Egyptians.  Hittites,  and  Greeks,  the  horses  were  always

in T !♦•  1,  arravcd  side  by  side,  never  one  Ix.'hind

hS^t • •'^""'^^'^■'■- Mor.over,  with  the  Assyrians

cnanois  . „„,,  .,...  j.j,^.p,i.^„s  fj,^.  chariot  usually


'Shalish.'


and

held  two  p<"rsons.  This  was  the  case
perhaps  occasionally  in  Israel  ;  but  various  considera-
tions lead  to  the  inference  that  the  chariots  as  a
rule  held  thrt-e,  as  among  the  Hittites,  the  occupants
Ix-ing  the  driver,  the  bowman,  and  the  shield -bearer.
(In  the  case  of  Jehu,  he  himself  handles  the  bow,
2K.  924. )  It  is  therefore  as  something  [.eculiar  and
exceptional  that  we  find  Jehu  recalling  to  IJidkar  that
they  were  riding  in  pairs '  behind  Ahab,  as  his  Ixxly-
guard,  when  the  latter  w.as  confronted  by  Elijah  near
Naboth's  vineyard  (2K.925).  This  Hebrew -Hittite
usage  may  explain  the  word  c^'Vc*  (/<'///,•  see  Akmv,
§  4)  which,  in  its  origin,  signified  one  of  the  three
occupants  of  the  royal  chariots  that  accompanied  the
king  to  battle.  The  word  is  used  during  the  regal  period
in  the  .sense  of  a  distinguished  attendant  of  the  king  who
accompanied  him  in  his  chariot.  This  is  evident  from
2  K.  925  where  Hidkar  holds  this  position  in  relation  to
Jehu.  It  is  significant  that  in  i  K.  922  the  lalisiin
(cz'^v)  are  placed  in  close  connection  with  captains  of
chariots  (331  '^j;-),  and  formed  a  body-guard  conmianded
by  a  sjxicial  officer,  "chief  of  the  Hdlisim'  (c"tr"'3'.T  iTKi) ;
1  Ch.  11  n  [2  S.  238].  Compare  the  use  of  /i////  in  Ex.
147  l.'>4.  That  the  sdlis  held  a  high  position  is  clearly
shown  in  2  K.  7  2 17,  where  he  is  descrilx.'d  as  one '  on  whose
hand  the  king  leans."  (Probably  the  term  is  used  here
as  equivalent  to  cr'^'B"!  rKt- )

In  addition  to  the  shalish  the  king  w.as  frequently
accompanied  by  '  runners '  (c'sn),  who  were  prepared
to  render  assistance  when  the  king  dismounted  from
the  chariot,  or  to  hold  the  reins  (as  in  the  reliefs  of  the
Assyrian  kings  to  which  we  have  already  referred),  or
to  discharge  any  other  duty  in  the  king's  service,  2  S.
l.'ii  iK.  I5  2K.  IO25II4  (see  Army,  §  4).  In  the
time  of  David  there  was  a  special  body  of  fifty  men
detailed  for  this  special  function.

We  know  that  the  Persian  kings  took  with  them  on
their  exiseditions  ap/xdfM^ai  —  four  -  wheeled  carriages
covered  with  curtains,  specially  employed
for  the  conveyance  of  women  and  children,
may  be  inferred  from  Herod.  7  41
Xenoph.  Cyrop.  vi.  4 11.  Probably  these  closely  resembled,
or  were  identical  with,  the  dx^/"*""*  ("Opdvia  (vdvaia — •
adapted  for  sitting  or  lying  down.  According  to  2  Ch.
3023/.  Josiah,  when  mortally  wounded,  was  removed
from  his  war -chariot  into  a  reserve  chariot  (.n:ro3yi)
which  was  probably  regarded  by  the  Chronicler  as  par-
taking of  this  character.

In  later  times  chariots  were  provided  with  scythes
{dpfxara  SpciravTi<p6f>a,  Xenoph.  ^nafi.\.7  to  Diod.  Sic.
1  7  53).  This  device  does  not  meet  us  among  the  .ancient
Egyptians  and  Assyrians  ;  ^  but  we  know  that  scythe-
bearing  chariots  were  employed by  the Persians  and

1  So  C'TCX  Q'331  should  be  interpreted  (Thenius  and  others).
Oral  m.ikes  cncs  the  object  of  the  participle.

3  Against  the  view  that  scythes  are  referred  to  in  N'ab.  2  3  [4I
see  Ikon,  f  2.

730


11.  Persian
chariots.


CHARITY,  FEASTS  OP

later  still  by  the  Syrians  (2  Mace.  182).  It  was  probably
the  Persians  who  introduced  this  formidable  addition
to  the  war-chariot. (Cp  Xenophon,  Cyrop.  vi.  1  30. )

The  diflerent  portions  of  the  chariot  receive  special  names  in
the  Heb.  of  the  OT.  '  Wheels,"  D'SBIK,  are  mentioned  in  Nah.
3  2(cp  Is.  2827  Prov.  2O26).  Another  name,  more
12.  Parts  Of  jiescriptive,  was  '  rollers,'  O'ViSjI  (Is.  5  28  Ezek.
Chanot.  10  2  e  23  24  20  to).  I  he  '  spokes '  of  the  wheel
were  called  C'|:3a'n,  while  the  'felloes'  had  the  name  D'33  or
ria^.  The  wheel  revolves  by  a  nave  (onffn),  round  an  axle(T).
See  Wheel.  All  these  terms  are  to  be  found  in  the  locus  das-
sicus,  I  K.  7  32yC

The  pole  of  the  chariot,  Sj7,  was  (according  to  Mish.  Kelim
144  24  2)  fastened  below  the  middle  of  the  axle,  passed  under  the
base  of  the  'body'  of  the  chariot,  and  then,  curving  upwards,
ascended  to  the  neck  of  the  horses.  To  this,  draught-animals
were  fastened  by  means  of  the  yoke,  assisted  by  cords  or  wide
leather  straps.  Beyond  these  broad  features  it  is  doubtful
how  far  we  are  justified  in  following  the  details  contained  in  a
treatise  of  the  Mishna  composed  centuries  after  the  latest  OT
literature.

That  the  chariot,  which  was  so  closely  associated  with

the  public  functions  of  Oriental  monarchs,  both  in  war

_ .. .  and  in  peace,  entered  into  the  religious

13.  ice  igl  conceptions  as  an  indispensable  portion

conceptions.  ^^^^^  paraphernalia  of  divine  monarchy,
cannot  awaken  surprise.  The  chariot,  therefore,  has  its
place  in  ancient  Semitic  religion.  Just  as  the  Hellenic
religious  imagination  endowed  Helios  with  horses  and
chariot  (as  the  Homeric  Hymn  clearly  testifies),  so
Canaanite  religion  endowed  the  Sun-god  .^/wo*^  with  the
same  royal  accessories  (cp  Horsk,  §  4).  This  feature
in  the  cultus  of  the  Sun  the  Hebrews  blended  with  the
worship  of  Yahw^  in  the  precincts  of  the  sanctuary  at
Jerusalem,  in  the  days  that  preceded  the  Reformation  of
Josiah  ( 2  K.  23 1 1 ).  The  combination  of  Yahwe,  the  God
of  Israel's  armies  and  of  the  sky,  with  the  Sun  was  not
unnatural  to  the  Hebrew  mind,  as  their  literature  testifies
both  early  and  late.  Cp  i  K.812/.  (an  old  fragment
of  the  Book  of  Jashar  restored  by  We.  from  ©-^  in  i  K.
853);  Ps.l9i-784ii[i2].'  Yahw^,  as  Lord  of  hosts,  has
chariots  among  his  retinue.  These  were  the  '  chariots
and  horses  of  deliverance '  whereon  Yahwe  rode  forth  to
conquer  and  terrify  Israel's  foes  in  the  days  of  the
Exodus  (Hab.  38  /.)  With  this  graphic  touch  in  the
Prayer  of  Habakkuk  we  may  compare  the  fiery  chariots
of  2  K.  2 II  617  1814-  as  well  as  a  phrase  occurring  in
the  magnificent  triumphal  ode,  Ps.  68 18.  o.  c.  w.

CHARITY,  FEASTS  OF  (m  Ar^nAi  [Ti.  WH]),
Judei2  .-W. Sec  1-acii.\kist.

CHARME  (xAPMH  [H.\]),  i  Esd.  525  RV=Ezra239

=  Neh.  "42, H.\RIM, I.

CHARMER  (inn  inn,  Deut.  ISn,  etc.;  D3n
D'Cnn,  Is.  33  RV'ng'). See  Magic,  §  3.

CHARMIS,  one  of  the  three  rulers  of  Bethulia  :  Judith
6.5  S"  106  (xAp/weiC  [BN],  xaAm.  [A];  in  810  106
X&pM[e]lN[BSA]).

CHARRAN  (x&PRAN  [Ti.  WH]),  Acts  72  4.  RV
Hakan,  i.

CHASEBA  (xAceBA.  [B.\],  om.  L),  an  unknown
family  of  NkthiniM  in  the  great  post-exilic  list  (see
Ezra,  ii.,  §9),  mentioned  only  in  i  Esd.  531,  between
the  Nekoda  and  Gazzam  of  ||  Ezra  248  Neh.  750/

CHAVAH  (n-in).  Gen.  820  AVne-.  EV  Eve.  See
Adam  and  Evf.,  §  3.

CHEBAR  ("132,  xoBAp[BAQ]),  the  name  of  a  Baby-
lonian stream,  near  which  Ezekiel  had  prophetic  visions

1 But  cp  nATTI.EMENT.

3  The  Kakiib-el,  'chariot  of  El'  (line  22).  of  the  Zenjlrli
Panammu  inscription  furnishes  an  interesting  parallel.  It  is
possible,  however,  that  Rakub  (cp  the  Ar.  rakuh"",  'a  camel
for  riding')  may  mean  the  divine  steed  (cp  the  Heb.  Kcn'ib,  Ps.
18  II  ;  but  see  Cherub, 8  i,  begin.).  It  is  mentioned  frequently
along  with  the  deities  Hadad,  El,  Shemesh,  and  Reshef.  See
D.  H.  Miiller'sart.  in  Contemp.  Rev.,  April  1894.

731


2.  Its  date.


CHEDOR-LAOMER

(Ez.  li  [adnot.  Q™8-  Barycmoc]  3  823  1015:^-^22  483  ;
on  815,  which  is  a  gloss,  see  Tel-abib).  In  spite  of
the  apparent  resemblance  of  the  names  (but  note  the
different  initial  letters),  the  Chebar  cannot  be  the  same
as  the  Habor  (iian)  —  Babylonia  never  included  the
region  watered  by  this  river — but  must  be  one  of  the
Babylonian  canals  (Bab.  ndrdti ;  cp  ^zi  nnnj,  Ps.  137  i).
This  was  first  pointed  out  by  Noldeke  (Schenkel,
BL,  I508  ['69]).  The  final  proof  has  been  given  by
Hilprecht,  who  has  found  mention  twice  of  the  {ndru)
kabaru,  a  large  navigable  canal  a  little  to  the  E.  of
Nippur  '  in  the  land  of  the  Chaldeans.'*

CHEDOR-LAOMER  [-\'dV'>'\13,  so  eastern  reading,
but  '1Cy?T13  western  reading  [Ginsb.  Intr.  to  Mass.
_.  crit. ed. 203/. ; conversely Strack, Kohut

^'  Semitic  Studies,  566]  ;  xoAoAAofOMOp
[AEL]-A\A.  [Z>],  -AAr-  [D]).  according  to (ien.  Hi  was
aking  of  Elam,  whosedominion  extended  as  far  as  the  SE.
of  Canaan,  where  five  kings,  of  whom  those  of  Sodom
and  Gomorrah  were  the  chief,  served  him  twelve  years.
In  the  thirteenth  year,  however,  they  rebelled,  and  in
the  fourteenth  year  they  were  defeated  by  the  Elamite
and  his  allies.  In  the  sequel  of  the  story  (I'v.  12-24)
we  are  told  how  Abram  with  his  own  servants  and  some
allies  pursued  the  victorious  army  and  rescued  not  only
the  captured  kings  but  also  his  nephew  Lot  (see
Abraham,  §  2).  The  question  whether  this  narrative
is  trustworthy,  and  whether  the  Chedor-laomer  of  the
story  and  his  allies  are  historical  personages,  is  ruled  by
the  other,  as  to  the  date  of  the  chapter  containing  it.
That  the  chapter  is  quite  an  isolated  piece,
and  formed  no  part  of  the  writings
from  which  the  Hexateuch  was  composed,  may  be
considered  ascertain.  Some  scholars,  however,  (e.j^.,
Kittel)  assign  it  to  the  eighth  century  B.C.,  and
are  of  OD'r.icn  thai  the  author  had  an  older  writing
before  him  ;  according  to  others,  it  is  not  older  than
the  fourth  century  B.  c.^  The  former  hold  that  the
antiquity  and  the  authenticity  of  the  story  are  attested
by  the  following  facts  : — ( i )  that  at  least  the  name  of
the  chief  king  is  purely  Elamitic  ;  (2)  that  the  Rephaim,
the  Zamzummin(  =  Zuzim),  and  tjie  ICmim  really  occupied
in  ancient  times  what  afterwards  became  the  dwelling
places  of  the  Ammonites,  Moabites,  and  Edomites,
whilst  the  Horites  (Gen.  8620),  according  to  Dt.  2 10/:
and  20^,  were  the  oldest  inhabitants  of  Seir  ;  (3)  that
Amorite-S  if. v.),  the  name  of  the  people  established,
according  to  v.  7,  in  Hazazon-tamar  ( =  Engedi,  2  Ch.
20 2),  is  the  ancient  name  of  the  people  of  Canaan
(Gen.  1.516  4822  Am. '29),  and  that  several  names
(En-mishpat,  Hobah,  Shaveh),  words,  and  expressions
not  occurring  anywhere  else,  as  well  as  the  exact
description  of  the  campaign  (vv.  5-7),  bear  the  impress
of  antiquity  and  trustworthiness.

The  arguments  of  those  who  ascribe  the  narrative  to
a  post-exilic  Jew,  whose  aim  was  to  encourage  his
contemporaries  by  the  description  of  Abram's  victory
over  the  great  powers  of  the  East,  his  unselfishness,
piety,  and  proud  magnanimity  towards  heathen  men,
mostly  take  their  starting-point  in  the  second  part  of  the
chapter.

It  is  pointed  out  that  the  names  of  Abram's  allies,  Mamre
and  Eshcol,  occur  elsewhere  (Gen.  13  18  23  17  19  209  8627  50  13
Nu.  13  23)  as  place  names  ;  that  Melchizedek  (Malkisedek)  and
Abram  are  represented  .is  monotheists  ;  and  that  the  patriarch
pays  tithes  to  the  priest-king,  a  duty  not  prescribed  at  all  in  Dt.
(see  1422-29  2tii2  7?!),  but  characteristic  of  the  post-exilic
sacerdotal  law  (Xu.  18  21-28).
' The  criticism  extends  also,  however,  to  the  first  part,

1  A  tablet  published  by  Dr.  Clay  in  vol.  ix.  of  Hilprecht's
Bnbylonian  Expedition  0/  the  Unrv.  of  Pennsyhania  (pi.  50,
No.  84,  I.  2).  It  should  be  added  that  Clubar=%,rfaA,  so  that
naru  Knt{b1')aru  =  Gxax\A  Canal.

2  See,  e.g.,  E.  Meyer.  GA  1  1(^5/:  ('84);  Kue.  Hex.  324  (R=):


St.  ^y4»'6  323('86);  We.  t // ^o /:  ('89);  Che.  OPs.  4^2,  165,

270  ('91),  cp  Foundtert,  ■iyjf. ;  Holzinger,  Einl.

(■93)-


d.  Hex.  425


CHEDOR-LAOMER

with  which  we  are  here  chiefly  concernc-d.  It  is  remarked
that  there  is  no  evidence  of  the  historicity  of  the  campaign
in  question,  which  is,  in  fact,  as  closely  as  possible  con-
nected with  a  view  of  Abraham  which  we  know  to  have
been  |)Ost-exilic  (cp  Ei.IK/.F.K,  i  ).  Moreover,  it  is  difficult
to  resist  the  impression  that  the  names  of  the  kings  of
Sodom  and  Gomorrah— viz. ,  Bera'  and  Birsha'  (com-
pounds conveying  the  idea  of  'evil,'  'Ixidness') — and
the  name  given  in  the  narrative  to  the  town  of  Zoar —
viz.,  IJela"  =  '  jx-'rdition  ■  (see  Hei.a) — perhaps  also  that
of  the  king  of  Zelxj'im,  which  the  Samaritan  text  gives  as
Shem-ebed  =  '  slave- name ' — are,  some  of  them  at  least,
purely  symbolical  and  therefore  fictitious.  (See,  how-
ever, in  each  c;ise,  the  special  article. )

What  is  certain is  this  : Chedor-laomer,  =  Kudur-

lagamar, is a purely IClainitic name, which is not,

-J  indeed, found as a royal name on the

p. ,  monuments, but is of the  .same type  as


laomer.


Kudur-nanhundi (Kutir-iiahhuiite in Old


Susian).  the  name  of  a  king  who  in  the  be
ginning  of  the  twenty-third  century  B.C.  conquered  the
whole  ;  and  Kudur-mabuk,  the  name  of  another  king,
who,  probably  later,  was  master  of  a  part  of  Babylonia.
Lagamar(u)  (I^ikamar)  occurs  as  the  name  of  an
Elamitic  deity,  not  only  in  5  R  (p.  vi. .  coll.  6,  33),  but
also  in  the  Inscriptions  of  Anzan-Susinak,*  and  seems
to  be  the  same  as  Lagamal,  the  (jueen  of  the  town  of
Kisurre  (2  R  pi.  Ix.  15^  =  14^^).  Hence  the  name  cannot
be  the  invention  of  a  Hebrew  writer.  It  can  hardly  be
doubted,  either,  that  Arioch,  king  of  Ellasar,  is  really  no
other  than  Eri-aku  {i.e.,  servant  of  the  Moon-god),
the  well-known  king  of  L.arsa,  son  of  Kudur-mabuk.'-'

These  discoveries  h.ive  opened  a  wide  field  for  ingenious
combinations.  It  hxs  been  observed  th.it  Kudur-mabuk  is
called  in  one  of  the  inscriptions  of  his  son  by  the  name
Adda-martu,  '  Father  of  the  West.'  Now,  the  word  Martu
being  commonly  use<l,  at  least  in  later  times,  to  designate
Western  Asia,  especi.illy  Canaan  {t/iat  Aharri,  or  perhaps
better  vtat  Amurri,  the  land  of  the  .Amorites),  .'\dda=  Father
has  Ijeen  interpreted  to  mean  conqueror,  and  this  has  been  taken
as  evidence  ihat,  in  a  very  remote  period,  Cana.in  fell  under
EIninite  domijiion.  It  is  a  pity  that  we  must  call  attention  to
a  weak  p<  int  in  this  theorising.  Kudur-mabuk  is  not  the  same
as  Kudur-lag.nmar,  and  Aiida-martu  seems  to  be  only  a  synonym
o{  Aiitia-yainuihala,  a  title  which  the  .same  kin^,  as  ruler  of  a
western  province  of  Elam,  bears  in  other  inscriptions  (see  Tiele,
BAG  123/).

The attempts to make  out the two  other  Eastern
kings  to  be  historical [XTSoiiages  must be  considered
4 Amraohel  ^•^''"'■''^- According to Jos. Hal(5vy,
Td 1  Amraphel  is  the  famous  Babylonian  king

Hammu-rilbi  him.self,  whose  name  is  ex-
plained in  Semitic  as  Kimta-rapaUu  ['atn  =  kim(a,
rap/iel=rapaltu  =  rapa^tu);  whilst,  according  to  Hommel
{on A  364^.),  he  is  Hammu-rabi's  father  Sin-muballit,
because  Sin  is.  sometimes  named  Amar  and  inuhallit
may  conceivably  have  been  condensed  itito  pal  {phel).
(See  also  .Xmraphei..  )  With  more  confidence  Shin'ar
is  stated  to  Ije  a  Hebraised  form  of  Suiner  (see  Schr.
A'.'f  T).  Unfortunately,  this  is  by  no  means  certain.
Though  Hammurabi  was  king  of  Babylon,  and  there-
fore of  Akkad,  he  was  not  king  of  Sumer  so  long
as  Eri-aku  was  king  of  Larsa.  Not  till  he  had  put  an
end  to  the  Elamite  dominion  in  Babylonia  could  he  be
called  king  of  Sumer,  and  then  neither  Eri-aku  nor  an
Elamite  king  could  join  with  him  in  the  contjuest  of
Canaan.  As  to  Tid'al,  king  of  (ioyim,  we  may  read
his  name  Thargal,  following  (5'''- ;  we  may  identify
the  Goyim  with  the  jjeople  of  Gutium  ;  we  may  even
go  so  far  as  prudence  permits  in  theorising  on  the  latest
discoveries:  but  all  this  d<ies  not  make  TiDAl,  ('/.f. )
historical. All that  we  can  say  is  that  the  writer  of


6.  Conclusion.


Gen.  14 no more  invented  the  names
of  Amraphel  and  Tid'al  (or  Thargal)

1  F.  H.  \\'cisst).-\rh,  '  .Vnzanische  Inschriften,'  in  Ahh.  d.
phif.-hist.  Ciaise  ,i,->  K.  Sachs.  Cfsellscli.  d.  H'issensch.  xii.,
Leips.,  1891,  p.  I.';  (9  > 't' -.cparate  copy).

2  This,  ratlu-r  lluin  Riiii-sin,  has  been  proved  by  Schr.  to  be
the  correct  reading  of  the  name  (Sitz.'ber.  k.  I'reuss.  Ak.  Pkil.-
hist.  Classe,  24  Oct.  1895,  xli.).

733


CHEESE

than  those  of  Chedor-laomer  and  Arioch  ;  the  former
are  very  possibly  corruptions  of  the  niimes  of  histcjrical
personages  whom  we  are  as  yet  unable  to  iilcntify.
Nor  do  we  assert  that  the  whole  story  is  the  product
of  the  inventive  faculty  of  the  author.  That  m  very
remote  times,  Babylonian  kings  extended  their  sway
as  far  as  the  Mediterranean,  is  not  only  told  in  ancient
traditions  (e.g. ,  of  Sargon  I. ),  but  has  also  been  proved
by  the  Amarna  tablets.  From  these  we  learn  that  as
late  as  the  fifteenth  century  B.C.,  when  the  kings  of
Babylon  and  Assyria  had  no  authority  beyond  their  ow  n
borders  and  Egypt  gave  the  law  to  Western  Asia,
Babylonian  was  the  official  and  diplomatic  language  of
the  Western  Asiatic  nations.  Hence  it  is  not  imjxjssible,
it  is  even  probable,  that  a  simil.ar  suzerainty  was
exercised  over  these  nations  by  the  Elamites,  who  were
more  than  once  masters  of  Babylonia.  Our  author,
whether  he  wrote  in  the  eighth  century  B.C.,  or,
which  is  more  probable,  in  the  fourth,  may  have  found
this  fact  in  some  ancient  record,  and  utilised  it  both  for
the  glorification  of  the  Father  of  the  Faithful  and  for
encouraging  his  contemporaries.

So  much  appears  to  be  all  that  can  be  safely  stated
in  the  present  state  of  research.  Scheil,  however,  is  of
6  Further  °P'"'°"  (  9^)  that  the  Ku-dur-la-a'g-ga-
'.,  .  mar  (?)  whom  he  finds  in  a  cuneiform
■  epistle  was  the  Elamite  king  of  I^rsa  who
was  conquered  by  Hanmiu-rabi  and  .Sin-idinnam,  and,
therefore,  cannot  have  Ix.-en  any  other  than  the  son
of  Kudur-mabuk,  who,  as  king  of  Larsa  (Ur),  had
adopted  the  name  of  Rim-sin  (Eri-aku?).  Pinches  has
discovered  a  cuneiform  tablet  in  the  Brit.  Mus.  col-
lection which  has  naturally  excited  great  hopes  among
conservative  critics.  It  is  sadly  mutilated  ;  but  it  is  at
least  clear  that  names  which  may  be  the  prototyi^es  of
Arioch,  Tid'al,  and  possibly  Chcdorlaomer,  were  known  in
Babylonia  when  the  tablet  w.is  inscrited.  The  tablet
dates,  probably,  from  the  time  of  the  Arsacid.x' ;  but  it
is  tempting  to  assume  that  the  inscription  was  copied
from  one  which  was  made  in  the  primitive  Babyloni.an
period.  It  should  l>e  noticed,  however,  that  the  form
of  the  first  name  is  not  Eri-aku  but  Eri-(I)P)[E]-a-ku,
and  that  the  third  name  is  not  read  with  full  certainty,
the  second  part  lieing  -ma/,  which  is  only  conjecturally
made  into  lah-mal.  There  is  also  a  second  tablet  on
which  two  of  the  names  are  mentioned  again.  Pinches
reads  the  one  Eri-e-ku  (possibly  Eri-e-ku-a),  and  the  other
Ku-dur-lah(?)-gu-mal.  In  a  third  inscription  the
name  Ku-dur-lah(?)-gu-[mal]  appears.  The  second  of
the  three  names  is  mentioned  only  in  the  first  tablet
as  Tu-ud-hul-a,  where,  since  the  Babylonian  n  answers
to  the  Hebrew  y  in  S;nn.  Pinches  and  Schrader  agree
in  recognising  the  Tid'al  of  Gen.  14.  But  not  by  a
single  word  do  these  inscriptions  confirm  the  historicity
of  the  invasion  '  in  the  days  of  Amraphel. '

[The  doubts  here  expressed  are  fully  justified  by
L.  W.  King's  more  recent  investigations.  Both  Scheil's
and  Pinches'  readings  of  the  res[)ective  inscriptions  are
incorrect,  and  'though  Ku-dur-ku-ku-n»al  (Kudur-KU-
KU-mal)  is  styled  (in  Pinches'  inscriptions)  a  king  of
Elam,  there  is  no  reason  to  suppose  that  he  was  a
contemporar>'  of  Hammu-rabi.  He  might  have  occupied
the  throne  at  any  period  before  the  fourth  century  n.c]

To  the  references  already  given  may  be  added— G.  Rawlinson,
Fri'e  Monarchies,  \H)/.,  where  older  works  are  cited;  Tiele,
B.-\G  65/.:  Hommel,  GHA  i23jf. ;  Schr.  AW  7"-'  li^  jr.=
COT  1  \ioff.  ;  Opi)ert,  Voniptrs-rendtis  dr  FacaJ.  des  inscr.
9  dte.  1887  ;  Pinches,  Acts  of  the  Geneva  Oriental  Congress,
also  his  paper  read  Ijefore  the  VictorLi  Institute,  Jari.  20,  1896 ;
Schr.  '  Ueber  einen  altoriental.  Herrschernamen  '  in  SR.Al^',
1895,  no.  xli.;  Fr.  v.  Scheil  in  Keciieil  lie  /"rot'rtw.r  (Maspcro)
\^^jff.,  ' correspondance  de  Hammurabi,  roi  de  liabylone,  avec
Sinidinnam,  roi  de  Larsa,  oil  il  est  uuestioii  de  Codorlahomor  ;
cp  Hommel,  AHT,  173-180;  L.  W.  King,  Letters  and  Inscrip-
tions 0/  IJanimuriiH,  vol.  i.,  1898.  c.  V.  T. — \V.  H.  K.

CHEESE  (aVnin  *v*in,  i  s.  i7i8 ;  np*i.  2s.  1739;

nraj.  Job  10 io[. "  See  MiLK.
734


CHELAL

CHELAL  (T'73),  one  of  the  b'ne  Pahath-moab  in  the
list  of  jKTSons  with  foreign  wives  (see  E/.KA,  i.  §  5  end),
Kzni  10  30  ((5  has  joined  Chelal  with  the  preceding
name  Adna  (nnjj)  and  reads  Aidaiue  XarjX  [B  ;  with
ESatve  B'lb].  ESei'fx  H\  [X],  E5^e  Kai  Xa\r)\  [A],
Aiavaarjif  XaXfiavaL  [L]).  The  ||  i  Esd.  931  has  quite
different  names — 'and  of  the  sons  of  Addi  ;  Naathus,
and  Moossias,  Laccunus,'  etc.  (©'-,  however,  reads  ESva
A-ai  2::i5ta  /cai  XaXa/j-avai). See  Lac:i;nus.

CHELCIAS,  RV  Hei.kias,  i.e.,  Hilkiah,  g.v.  (xeA-
k[€]iac  [BAQ  cod.  87Theod.]).

1.  The  father  of  Susanna  (Hist,  of  Sus.,  tv.  2,  29,  and  [cm.
cod.  87]  63).

2.  .\n  ancestor  of  Baruch  (Bar.  1  i).

3.  .\  priest  (I!.-ir.  I7)

CHELLIANS  (xaAAaicon  [B],  xeAecON  [N*A],  Syr.
Lj^a).  In  Judith  223  mention  is  made  of  'the
children  of  Ishmael,  whicli  were  over  against  the  wilder-
ness to  the  S.  of  the  land  of  the  Chellians.'  The  com-
paratively easier  reading  Chaldeans,  which  is  attested
by  (S'^,  Syr.  and  Vet.  Lat. ,  is  no  doubt  rightly  con-
sidered by  Grimm  to  be  a  deliberate  rectification  of  the
te.\t. See  Ciikllus.

CHELLUH,  RV  Chkluhi,  mg.  Cheluhu  (^n-"l?5.
Kt. ;  •"ini'pS,  Kre;  xeAlACOyB  [L  ;  probably  through
the  influence  of  eAlAC.  "'■  3^]).  mentioned  in  the  list
of  persons  with  foreign  wives  (see  EzK.\,  i.  §  5,  end),
Ezral035  (xeAKeiA  [BX],  xeAiA  [A])  =  i  Esd.  934.
EV  Enasihus  (eca(T[e]c/3os  [BA]).

CHELLUS  (xeAoYC  [BA];  xecA.  [N],  ^ci:::^^  [Syr.]),
one  of  the  places  to  which  Nebuchadrezzar  sent  his
summons,  according  to  Judith  1  9.  The  Halhul  of  Josh.
1058  may  be  meant  ;  but  the  reading  xeo'Xoi'S  suggests
rather  Chesum.oth  or  CE^ISLOTH-TABOR,  which  is
given  by  Jerome  and  Eusebius  as  C/iasa/us  or  x'^^'f^oi'^
{OSi^K  91 4,  etc.,  30264).  See  Chellian-.s.  Another
identification  should  be  mentioned.  Chellus  is  perhaps
the  same  as  the  place  which  in  Jos.  An(.  .xiv.  1 4  is  called
a\ov(Ta,  by  Jerome  and  Eusebius  a//us,  aWovS  {OSi-K
8r>6  211 89),  viz.  nsi'jn  (Targ.  Jer.  Gen.  16 14 ;  cp
Gen.  20 1  in  Ar.,  and  see  Bered),  or  Elusa.  Cp  We.
Net\/.i-<  48,  n.  I  ;  WRS,  A'in.  293/.

CHELOD  (xeAeoyA  [B],  xecAMoyAA  [«*].
XeAAloyA  [X":-^].  xeAeoyA  [A]).  'Very  many  nations
of  the  sons  of  Chelod  '  (Judith  1 6)  assembled  themselves
to  battle  in  the  plain  of  Arioch  in  the  days  of  Nebu-
chadrezzar and  Arphaxad  (!).  What  we  ought  to
understand  by  Chelod  is  cjuite  uncertain.

Vet.  Lat.  has  Chelteuth,  and  Syr.  has  '  against  the  Chalda;ans.'
One  very  improbable  conjecture  is  that  \a.\iMV  (Calnkh)  is
intended  ;  another,  hardly  less  unlikely,  is  that  the  word  is  the
Hebrew  "I7h  (' weasel '),  and  that  by  the  opprobrious  designation
of  'children  of  the  weasel'  are  meant  the  Syrians  (Ew.  GV'I
a  543)-  ,

CHELUB  (3173,  §  67,  probably  a  variation  of  Caleb,
cp  below).

(i)  .\  Judahite,  doubtless  to  be  identified  with  Caleb  (§  4);
similarly  We.  (Gent.  20),  who  reads  'Caleb  b. Hezron  '  (i  Ch.

4 II  xaAe^  [BAL],  Caleb  [Vg.]  •  ">N'^  [Pesh  ]).  His  designa-
tion 'brother  of  Shuhah'  (,nmtI'"'nN)  is  not  clear;  ©ba  read
'father  of  -Xchsah,'  possibly  a  correction  (Ki.  SBOT).  Cp  the
still  further  corrupt  Pesh. '  brother  of  .'\hiah'(JL»ji»ff  wkOtClAti  )•
(2)  Father  of  Ezm,  i  Ch.  27  26  (xo/3ouS  [R],  xeAou^  [A],  ^a-  [L]).

CHELUBAI  (*3-'l'??,  §  67,  a  gentilic  [  =  ''3'?3  :  see
I  S.  203  Kre]  used  instead  of  the  proper  name  Caleb),
b.  Hezron.  i  Ch.  29  (o  X^AeB  [A],  o  X^BeA  [B],  o
XaAcoBi  [E],  .  .o\  <v,  [Pesh.,  a  corruption]);  see
Cai.kh,  §  3,  Cakmi,  I.

CHELUHI  (xeAiA  [A]).  Ezra  10  35  RV,  RV"'g-
Cheluhu,  .\V  Chei.i.uh.

CHEMARIM  (QnpS),  Zeph.  I4  RV  2  K.  23  s  mg.
Hos.  10  5  nig.  ;  AV  Chemarims,  Zeph.  I4.  Rather
Kfimarim.

735


CHEMOSH

The  original  Heb.  word  appears  also  in  2  K.Ms,  where  EV
gives  'idolatrous priests,' and  in  Hos.  10 5,  where  EV  has  'priests.'
It  is  also  highly  probable  that  in  Hos. 44  we  should  read,  with
Beck  'for  mypeople  is  like  its  Chemarim  '  1  (®,  however,  (09
ai'TiA<y6/i.(i'o;  ttpfiif,  perhaps  an  error  for  -01  Itftivai  (Schleusnerj)
©  transliterates  Xiu/iapet^  ([B.^]  2  K. /.f.  ;  but  Itptlt  is  also
supported,  see  Field,  //ex  eui  loc.)  ;  it  apparently  omits  in  Zeph.;
(in  Hos.  it  had  a  different  Heb.).  Vg.  varies  between  aruspices
(2  K.)  and  trditui  (Zeph.  Hos.);  Targ.  between  k'TCID  (2  K.
Zeph.)  and •nin'?D  ' 'ii«: ministers  thereof ' ; Pesh.  adheres to

As  to  the  meaning,  if  we  appeal  to  the  versions,  we
find  only  the  dim  light  which  an  unassisted  study  of  the
context  can  supply.  Evidently  the  term  was  applied  to
the  priests  of  Baal,  who  served  at  the  high  places  under
royal  authority,  but  were  put  down  by  Josiah.  But
what  special  idea  did  the  word  convey?  In  itself  it
meant  simply  '  priests '  ;  in  Zeph.  1 4  KHmdrim  and
Ko/itinim  are  put  side  by  side  to  express  the  idea  of  a
priesthood  of  many  members  ;  and  in  Hos.  84  (if  the
view  proposed  above  be  adopted)  we  have  lihndrim  used
of  the  priests  of  N.  Israel,  when  these  are  spoken  of
objectively,  and  then  ko/ien,  when  the  priests  are  ad-
dressed as  an  organic  unity.  But  the  word  Klmdrim
probably  also  conveyed  the  idea  of  a  worship  which
had  Syrian  affinities.  Certainly  it  cannot  be  explained
from  Hebrew  ;  -cd  does  not  mean  '  to  be  black '  (cp
Eci.ii'SE),  and  even  if  it  did,  the  '  black-rol>ed  ones  '  is  a
most  improbable  designation  for  ancient  priests.*  The
word  is  no  doubt  of  Syrian  origin  (see  the  Aram,  inscrip-
tions in  CIS  2  nos.  113  130).  The  primitive  form  is  liumr,
whence  Aram,  kumrd  (never  used  in  an  unfavourable
sense)  and  Heb.  /cfmdrim  are  normally  formed.  Lagarde
{Armen.  Stud.  2386)  compared  Arm.  c/iourm ;  but  it  is
more  obviously  reasonable  to  compare  the  Assyrian
kummaru,  which  is  given  as  a  synonym  of  lubaru  za/iu
—  i.e.,  'a  clean  vesture'  (Del.  Ass.  HWB  2,'i7  b.,  cp
254  b. ).  The  term  fiUmdrim  probably  described  the
Syrian  and  Israelitish  priests  in  their  clean  vestments
(cp  2  K.  IO22,  the  Baal  festival)  when  ministering  to
their  God.  To  derive  it  from  an  Aram,  root  meaning
'  to  be  sad  '  is  much  less  natural.

Delitzsch  compares  Ass.  kaiiidrv,  '  to  throw  down ' ;  the
term,  he  thinks,  describes  the  priests  as  those  who  prostrate
themselves  in  worship  (.4 Ji.  and  Heb.,  41,  42;  so  Che.  I/os.
103,  III).  Finally,  Robertson  Smith,'^  noting  that  the  word
belongs  to  a  race  in  which  the  mass  of  the  people  were  probably
not  circumcised  (Herod.  '2104,  cp  Jos.  Ant.  viii.  IO3,  c.  A/>.  i.
22)  while  the  priests  were  (Dio  Cassius,  "9ii;  Ep.  Barnab.
96  ;  cp  Chwoison,  Ssabier,  2  114),  conjectures  that  /iuiii>n  means


'  the  circumcised  '  {.\r.  /en.


I,  '  glans  penis ').


CHEMOSH  (:^'10^,  in  M/  E;'03  ;  on  name  see  §  4,

end; x^MCOC  [B^bXAFQE],  amcoc  [B*  Judg.  11  24],

1 TW K' Oa;wj),  the  national  god  of  the  Moabites

1.  moaDS (jK.  II7, Jer.  48713). Moabisthe

nauonai p^^pig  ^f Chemosh  ; the Moabites  are

^' his  sons  and daughters (Nu.  21 29; cp

the  relation  of  Yahwe  to  Israel, Judg.  5 11 Nu.  11 29

Judg.  11 24  Is.  45 II,  etc.). A  king  of  Moab  in  the  time

of  Sennacherib  was named  Chemoshnadab  (A'amusu-

7iadab;* cp Jehonadab)  ; the father of Mesha  was

Chemoshmelech  ;  ^  a  gem  found  near  Beirut  is  inscribed

'nx'OD^  *  (cp  Heb.  n;n;,  "^x-n' ;  Phccn.  >n'Ta,  iVcin-). The

stele  of  Mesha  king  oif  Moab,  contemporary  with  Ahab,

Ahaziah,  and  Jehoram  of  Israel  (2  K.  1  3),  in  the  middle

of  the  ninth  century  B.C.  (see  Me.sha),  was  erected  to

commemorate the deliverance which Chemosh had

wrought  for  his  people.

1  Continue,  DOV  jnsn  B?r3l,  'and  thou  shall  stumble,  O
priest,  in  the  daytime ' ;  at  the  close  of  the  verse  read,  with
Ruben,  ^'C.n,  '  thy  Thummim  '  (addressed  to  the  priest).

2  Cp  Mishna,  Middnth  64.  .\  priest  who  had  become  unfit
for  service  put  on  black  garments  and  departed.  One  who  was
approved  by  the  Sanhedrin  clothed  himself  in  white,  and  went
in,  and  ministered

3  /T^'OI  s.v.  '  Priest.'

*  KB '2  go/.;  CO'/' 1  281.

*  Others  read  Chemoshgad.

6  Kenan,  Miss,  de  P/ifn.  35a.

736


2.  Other
Moabite  gods.


CHENAANAH

The  injicnplion  tells  us  that  Omri  had  oppressed  Moab  for  a
loiiK  time  Iwcaiisc  Chemosh  was  wioih  wiili  his  land  (/.  4/);
the  Israelites  had  occupied  the  district  of  Medelia  forty  years,
hut  Cheiiiosh  had  now  restored  it  to  Moali  {//.  7-9) ;  Cheniosh
drove  out  the  kinj;  of  Israel  lK:forc  Moiih  from  Jaiiaz  (//.  18-21);
at  the  bidding  of  Cliemo>h,  .\l»:>ha  foujjht  a^jainst  Nelx)  and
look  it  (//.  14-17);  at  his  command,  he  mailc  war  on  Horonaim,
and  Chemosh  restored  it  to  Moab  (//.  31-33);  the  inhabitants  of
captured  cities  were  slaughtered,  '  a  spectacle  (?  fi'i)  for  Chemosh
and  Moab"  (//.  iiy.);  men,  women,  and  children  were  devoted
to  Ashtar-Chemosh  (//.  15-17)— the  D^n  (sec  Ban);  the  spoils  of
Israelite  sanctuaries  were  carried  off  and  presented  to  Chemosh

(//. 12/. 17/).

The  religion  of  Moab  in  the  ninth  century  was  thus  vciy
similar  to  that  of  Israel  : the  historical  books  of  the  OT |
furnish  parallels  to  almost  every  line  of  the  inscription.

We  learn  from  the  OT  that  human  sacrifices  were
offered  toChemosh,  at  least  in  great  nation.il  emergencies;
the  king  of  Moab,  shut  up  in  Kir-hareseth  and  unable
to  cut  his  way  out,  ofiercd  his  eldest  son  upon  the  wall ;
the  effect  of  this  extraordinary  sacrifice  w.os  a  great
outburst  of  Chemosh's  fury  upon  Israel,  which  compelled
the  invaders  to  return  discomfited  to  their  own  land
(2  K.  827).  Priests  of  Chemosh  are  mentioned  in  Jer.
487;  the  language  of  Mesha,  'Chemosh  said  to  me"
(//.  14,  32),  supposes  an  oracle,  or  i)erh;i()S  prophets.

The  worshi])  of  Chemosh  rus  the  national  god  did
not  cxchulc  the  worship  of  other  gods  ;  Mesha's  inscrip-
tion speaks  of  Ashtar-Chemosh  (/.  17)
—  that  is,  most  probably,  an  'Ashlar
(.Astarte)  who  was  associated  in  worship
with  Chemosh,'  perhaps  at  a  particular  sanctuary.  The
worshij)  of  Haal-peor  (Nu.  2."),  cp  Hos.  9 10)  was  prob-
ably a  local  Moabite  cult  —  there  is  no  ground  for
identifying  the  god  with  Chemosh.  (See  B.'\al-pkok.  )
[Mcth]  I'.aal-meon  (Mesha,  //.  9,  30;  OT)  was,  as  the
name  shows,  the  seat  of  another  local  Baal  cult.  Mount
Nebo  may  have  received  its  name  in  the  period  of
Babylonian  supremacy  ;  but  we  do  not  know  that  the
worship  of  the  Babylonian  god  was  perpetuated  by  the
Moabites. Cp  Xi;no.

The  statement  of  Eusebius  (OS  228  66/?:,  s.7>.  'Apivd)  that
the  inhabitants  of  Areopolis  in  his  day  called  their  idol  'Api^A,
'  Ijecause  they  worship))ed  Ares,"  seems  to  be  the  product  of  a
complex  misunderstanding.

In  Judg.  1124,  in  the  arguiuent  of  Jcphthah  with  the

king of the .Xnunonites, 'Chemosh thy god' is set

p.  , over  against  '  Yahw6  our  god  '  in  such  a

3.  onemosn  ^^.^^,  ^^  ^^  .^^^^^,  ^^^^  Chemosh  was  the

Mb  n-it''">-'^l  K'^*'  "f  -^'"'"on.  From  many
passages  in  the  C)  T  we  know,  however,
that  the  national  god  of  the  Anmionites  was  Mikoin
(see  Mll.roM)  while  Chemosh  was  the  god  of  Moab.
The  hypothesis  that  Chemosh  and  Milcom  are  but  two
names  of  the  .same  god  (.Milcom  originally  a  title)  is
excluded  by  the  contexts  in  which  they  ajj'pear  side  by
side  {e._^.,  i  K.  II33).  N'or  is  it  sufiicient  to  sujipose
that  Chemosh  in  Judg.  11 24  is  merely  a  slij)  on  the  part
of  the  author  or  a  scribe  for  MiUom  :  closer  examination
shows  that  the  whole  historical  argument  applies  to
Moab  only,  not  to  Anunon.  Whatever  explanation
may  lie  given  of  this  incongruity  (see  Moore,  Judi^es,
283  ;  Bu.  tiiihter,  80/ ),  the  passage  caiuiot  be  taken
as  evidence  tliat  t!hemosh  was  the  god  of  .\nmion  as
well  as  of  the  sister  people  Moab.  The  statement  of
Suidas  {s.v.  Xafius)  that  Chemosh  was  a  god  of  the
Tyrians  and  .\mmonites  is,  as  the  context  shows,  a
confused  reminiscence  of  1  K.  1 1  5  7.

From  the  name  viufiaa/SijAo?,  the  second  mythical  Babylonian
ruler  after  the  flootl  (Frat^.  Ifisi.  (7r.  2  503),  it  has  been  surmised
that  the  worship  of  Chemosh  was  of  Babylonian  oriRin  ;  the
narnc  of  the  city  Carchcmish  on  the  Euphrates  has  been  ex-
plained as  'Citadel  of  C"hemosh ';_  neither  of  these  theories  has
any  other  basis  than  a  fortuitous  similarity  of  sound.

.Solomon  built  a  high  place  for  Chemosh  on  the
MoiNT  OK  Oi.iVKS  (1  K.  Il7<i),  where,  according  to
2  K.  '23 13,  it  stood  until  Josiah's  reform — more  than
three  hundred  years.

1  Cp  Phocn.  rnncUDVo  and  'the  Astarte  in  the  ashera  of
El-hamman,'  in  the  Ma'sub  inscription.


inscription.

737


CHEPHIRAH

During  the  long  reign  of  the  theory — not  yet  univer-
sally abandoned — that  all  the  gods  of  the  nations  were
4  N  t  ftf  heavenlylxxliesor  njetetjricpheiKjmena,
cy,  'If®  (  hemosh  was  by  some  thought  to  \k.  the
i^nemoBn ;  re-  ^^^^  ,  ^^^^^^  identified  with  Milcom-
presentations.  M„i^^.h.saturn  ;  the  one  opinion  has
as  little  foundation  as  the  other.  In  Roman  times
Rabbath-moab,  as  well  as  the  more  northern  .\r-moab,
was  called  Areopolis,  and  this  name — perhaps  originally
only  a  Gra;cising  of  Ar  (Jerome) — w.as  understood  as
•  City  of  .Xres. '  Coins  of  Kabbath-moab  in  the  reigns  of
Getaand  .Severus  ( Kckkel ,  iii.  504  ;  cp  .Mionnet,  v.  591,
Sup|)l.  viii.  388)  exhibit  a  standing  warrior  in  whom
the  tyix;  of  Mars  is  to  Ix;  recognised  ;  but  even  if  we
were  sure  that  the  old  Moabite  god  of  the  city  is
represeiUed,  and  not  the  Nabataan  Dusares,  we  could
learn  nothing  alxjut  the  nature  of  C  hemosh  in  O  T  times
from  so  late  and  contaminated  a  source.  Confusion  of
Chemosh  with  Dusares  is  probably  to  Ixj  assumed  in
the  statements  of  Jewish  writers  that  the  idol  of  Chemosh
was  a  black  stone — the  same  which  is  now  adored  by
Moslems  in  the  Caaba  at  Mecca.  ^

The  etymology  of  the  name  Chemosh  is  quite  un-
known :  a  fact  which  gives  good  reason  to  believe  that
he  is  one  of  the  older  Semitic  gods.

I).  Hackmann,  '  Ue  Chemoscho  Moabitarum  idolo,'  1730  (in

Oelrich's Cotleclio of>uscutorum, 1768, pp. 17-60), Movers,

J  hSiiizit-r, 1  3347?!  ; Scholz, Cotzendienst

6.  Literature. ««</  '/.auhcrivtsen  hei  di-n  aiten  Hehriiern,

\-](iff-  \  Baudissin,  in  PKE'!^)  s.v.  '  Kemosch '

(with  full  literature);  IJaetlit'en,  Beitr.  13-15.  G.  Y.  M.

CHENAANAH  (njyj?,  §  73,  '  towards  Canaan  '  (?) ;
XANAAN  [HL]).

1.  In  genealogyof  Benjamin  (89(11.)),  i  Ch.  7  \o(\avo.vav  [.^1).

2.  Father  of  the  false  prophet  Zedekiah,  i  K. 'J- 11  (^aoi-a
[B],  x<iv<xva.\\\)i^;  2Ch.  18io(xai'aoi'a[.\])23.

CHENANI  ("333  :  cp  Chenaniah),  Levite  officiating
at  constitution  of  '  congregation  '  (see  I'",/.k.\,  ii.  }:§  12,  13
[/.J);  Xeh.94  (om.  B..  Yioi  xanani  [for  MT  Bani
Chenani,  N-'-'A],  xoONeNlAC  [l-])-

CHENANIAH  ("in^m  and  n;33?,  §31 :  [eJiexoNiAC
[I'>NLJ  ;  cp  Chenani),  chief  of  the  Levites,  who  was
over  '  the  song,'  or  '  the  carrying'  (viz.,  'of  the  ark' —
text  obscure:  see  Ki.  and  Be.  ad  loc.)  \  i  Ch.  I.'j22
(kconenia  [HN],  xo).  [-^ll.  27  (kai  xencniac  [-^1.
XONCN-  [L]),  '2t)29  (xcoNjeNeiA  [1^].  X'*>xeNiAC  L-^].
XONeNIA  [l']»-

CHEPHAR-HAAMMONAI,  R\'  Chephar-ammoni
(••yifSyn  1D3 — /'.(•.,  'village  of  the  Ammonite';  see
Bknjamin,  §  3  ;  — Kr.  has  n^itOyn  ;  KAPA(t)A  K.
Ke4)eipA  KAI  MONei  [B;  MONei  represents  also  *3Ei;];
KA(i)HpAMA,\IN  [A];  KA4)ApAMMC0NA  L'-l*'  ^"  """
identitied  place  in  Benjamin,  mentioned  with  OriiM
[</.T'.]  (Josh.  18  24  P).  The  name  is  possibly  of  post-
exilic  origin  (cp  P.\h.\tii-m().\b).  See  A.mmon,  §  6,
and  Bi niiioKo.N,  §  4,  Tohij.mi,  4.

CHEPHIRAH  (nTD3;  in  Josh.  n-l'Mn  ;  'the
village'?  or  'the  lion'?  KA(|)[elipA  [BX.\].  Ke4)eipA
[l,]i,  a  town  of  the  Hiviles,  member  of  the  Gibeonite
confederation  (Josh.  917:  xt<pnpa.  [A],  kc^.  [BK],  Kfcfnjpa
[LJ),  afterwards  assignee!  to  Benjamin  (Josh.  18  26:
Xf<pfipa  T-V].  <f>-  [B]).  and  mentioned  in  the  great  post-
exilic  list  (see  V.7.HA,  ii.  §  9,  tj  8  r. )  Kzra  225  =  Xch.  729
(xa^tpa  [•■^3)='  ^sd.  5  19,  C.\i'iiiK.\  (01  (k  irapas  [B],
.  .  .  Ka^tpas  [.\],  K((f>npo-  [I-]),  's  the  modern  Kefireh,
alKHit  5  m.  WSW.  from  el-Jib  ((iibeon).

In  I  Ks<!.  .'iiq  PiRA  (AV,  oni.  RV  ;  weipa.^  [B]),  the  second
n.-ime  after  Caphira,  is  apparently  a  corrupt  repetition  (cp  ®B's
form  of  Caphira).  Buhl  (/'«/.  169)  suggests  that  Kephirim  (EV
'villages')  in  Neh.  62  may  l>e  the  same  as  Kephirah.

1  Lek-iuh  Toh  on  Nu.  21 20.  By  a  strange  blunder  W.  L.
Bevan  and  Sayce  (in  Smiths  DB<>')  s.v.)  have  turned  this  into  a
black  s/nr.

2  The  forms  Kiavtvia,  etc.,  point  to  a  reading  n'ii^3  (cp  aCh.
31i2yC),  whilst  I(xoi"af  points  to  n'32'  or  rather  to  ri'313%  a
.scribe's  error  for  n*33131  (cp  Ki.,  Chron.,  SBOT).

738


CHEQUER  WORK

CHEQUER  WORK  (|'5*^*n),  Ex.28439  RV.  See
Emhkoidkky,  WicAviNG  ;  also  Tunic.

CHERAN  (p?  ;  XAPPAN  [ADEL],  a  Horite  clan-
name  (CJen.  8626). See  DiSHON.

CHEREAS.  RV  Ch.kkeas  (xaircac  and  ^ep-  [A],
Xep&iAC  [\jl.  brother  of  TiMOTiiKis  (i/.v.).  and  com-
maiuk-r  of  the  fortress  at  CJazara  (2  Mace.  IO3237).

CHERETHITES  (D^niS,  'niSn.  ©  in  Sam.  and
K. o xcpe99ei. or [by assimilation to Pelethites]

0  xe^eeeei  ;  Vg.  Ct-rethi ;  ®'in  Prophets  KpHTCc).  a
people  in  the  south  of  Palestine.  In  the  days  of  Saul
and  David  a  region  in  the  Negeb  adjoining  Judah  and
Caleb  bore  their  name  (i  S.  ;30i4  xo^^"  [B]  XfP'?^"  [A]
XO/)/)t  [L]).  From  v.  16  it  appears  that  the  inhabitants
of  this  region  were  reckoned  to  the  Philistines  ;  in  Zeph.
25  and  Ez.  25 16  (AV  Cherethims),  also,  Philistines  and
Cherethites  are  coupled  in  such  a  way  as  to  show  that
they  were  regarded  as  one  people.  P'inally,  in  the
names  mentioned  in  the  prophecy  against  Egypt
in  Ez.  30 5,'  where  AV  gives,  'the  men  of  the  land
that  is  in  league,'  we  should  restore  'the  Cherethites'
('n-i3n  '33? ;  so  Cornill,  Toy).  It  is  to  be  inferred  that
the  Cherethites  were  a  branch  of  the  Philistines  ;  or,
perhaps,  that  they  were  one  of  the  tribes  which  took  part
with  the  Philistines  in  the  invasion  of  Palestine,  and  that,
like  the  latter,  they  remained  behind  when  the  wave
receded  (see  Philistines,  §  2,  Caphtor,  §  2).  The
©  translators  of  Zeph.  and  Ez.  interpreted  the  name  by
Cretans ;  and  in  this,  although  they  may  have  been
guided  only  by  the  sound,  they  perhaps  hit  upon  the
truth.  ■■'  An  early  connection  between  Gaza  and  Crete
seems  to  be  indicated  by  other  evidence  (see  Gaza).

Except  in  the  three  passages  already  cited,  the  name
occurs  only  in  the  phrase,  '  the  Cherethites  and  Pele-
thites'  (-nl^srii  'nirn  ©gen.  (peXeddei)  as  the  designation
of  a  corps  of  troops  in  the  service  of  David — his  body-
guard (2S.  8  18  15 18 -207  23  Kr.,  i  K.  I3844  i  Ch.  18 17  ;
ffijuaTo<pv\aK€s  Jos.  Ant  vii.  64,  etc.  ).^  They  were
commanded  by  Benaiah,  i,  and  remained  faithful  to
their master  in  all the  crises  of  his  reign  (2  S.  15  20

1  K.  1).

Only  the  strongest  reasons  could  warrant  our  separat-
ing the  C'herethites  of  David's  guard  from  the  people  of
the  same  name  spoken  of  in  the  same  source  (i  S.  3O14).
There  are  no  such  reasons  :  'niDn  has  the  regular  form  of
a  gentile  noun  ;  and,  although  much  ingenuity  has  been
expended  on  the  problem,  all  attempts  to  explain  the
word  as  an  appellative  have  failed.  The  name  Pelethite,
which  is  found  only  coupled  with  Cherethite  in  the
phrase  above  cited,  also  is  a  gentile  noun  ;  the  etymo-
logical explanations  are  even  more  far-fetched  than  in
the  case  of  the  Cherethites.  The  presumption  is  that
the  I'elethites  also  were  Philistines  ;  *  and  this  is  confirmed
by  the  passages  cited  from  Zeph.  and  Ez.  ;  'rt^s  is
perhaps  only  a  lisping  pronunciation  of  'nii'Ss.  to  make
it  rhyme  with  'niD-

It  need  not  surprise  us  that  David's  guard  was  com-
posed of  foreign  mercenaries.  The  Egyptian  kings  of
the  nineteenth  dynasty  recruited  their  cor/>s  d'^lile  from
the  bold  sea-rovers  who  periodically  descended  on  their
coasts  ;  Rameses  II.  displays  great  pride  in  his  Sardinian

1  \Kf>i\Tf<i  in  ®  is  obviously  misplaced  ;  this  version  has  been
conformed  to  the  Hebrew ;  hence  the  insertion  xal  tutv  vliiv
■njs  fiioflnicT)?  jiiov.  Davidson's  view  (icpiJTes  =  Put)  will  hardly
stand.  In  three  places  ®  has  At/Sues  for  Put.  See  Chub,
Gkographv,  §  ?2.]

-  Lakemacher,  Ewald,  Hitzig,  Stade,  and  others.  For  another
view  see  Cachtor.

8  [The  readings  var>' :  thusx'peSi  [L  in  2  S.  8  i8],  x^TTfi  [R  in
doublet  2  S.  15  18],  xfT«i  (L  ib.\,  A  om.  doublet  xopfO0ei  [A  in

2  S.  207  ;  L  omits  and  in  t.  23I ;  trpeis  [RL]  and  xep»)Si  [A]  in

1  Ch.  18 17,  xoPfx-  [L  in  1  K.  I38  44]).  Variants  for  Pelethites
are  <^eA«TT«t  [B  in  2  S.  818]  <o<^fAee»«  [A  ti.]  -rflfi  [R  in  doublet

2  S.  1.5i81,  .ind<fraATeta[R]-Tia[K]4aA6eflt[A]iniCh.  1817.  L
has  uniformly  </)eATi,  but  <f>f\9i  in  2S.  15  18,  (^ep<0t  in  i  Ch.  18 17,
and  n\ivOiov  in  2  S.  2O23  ;  see  Renaiah,  1.]

*  Abulwalid,  Laketnacber,  Ewald,  etc.

739


CHERITH

guards,  and  Sardinians  and  Libyans  are  the  flower  of
the  army  of  Rameses  III.'  The  Philistines  were  more
skilled  in  arms  than  the  Israelites,  and  doubtless  liked
fighting  better  :  cp  Ittai  the  Gittite,  and  see  Army,  §4.
It  is  the  opinion  of  some  recent  scholars  that  where
David's  j^Mon'm  (EV  '  mighty  men  ')  seem  to  Ix;  spoken
of  as  a  Ixxly,  the  Cherethites  and  Pelethites  are  meant ;
see  especially  i  K.  1  8  10  compared  with  v.  38.  This  is,
however,  not  a  necessary  inference  from  the  verses  cited ;
and  conflicts  with  2  S.  20?  (cpl5i8  6).  More  prob-
ably the  ^bborim  were  the  comrades  of  Da\id  in  the
days  of  his  outlawry-  and  the  struggle  with  the  Philistines
for  independence.  See  Davip,  §  11.  In  2  S.  20 23  for
'Cherethites'  the  Heb.  text  (Kt.)  has  Carites  ('-en).*
In  2  K.  II4  19,  where  this  name  again  occurs,  it  prob-
ably means  'Carians.'  The  Carians  were  a  famous
mercenary  folk,  and  it  would  not  surprise  us  tcj  find
them  at  Jerusalem  in  the  days  of  Athaliah  (sec  Cakites).
That  the  soldiers  of  the  guard  in  even  later  times  were
usually  foreigners  has  been  inferred  from  Zeph.  18/  and
from  Ez.  446^:  see  WRS  O/yCW  260/.,  but  also
Threshold.  For  mercenary  troops  in  post-exilic  times
see  Army,  §  7.

Literature. — Dissertations  by  Joh.  Benedict  Carpzov  (1661),
and  Hen.  Opitz  (1672),  in  Ugol.  Ihes.  27423^.,  451  ff.\  ].G.
Lakemacher,  Ohservaiiones Philolngicee,  P.  II.  (1727),  pp.  11-44  ;
Conrad  Iken,  Dissertationes  Philologiio-Tfieolo^ine  (i-ng),  pp.
111-132;  B.  Rehrend,  Die  Kreti  uud  Plcti ;  ihre  inhaltliche
Bedeutung  und  Geschichte  ('88)  — extract  from  MGIVJ  ('87),
pp.  1 1 7- 1 53  ;  Riietschi,  PRE(^)  8  268 ^^  g.  F.  M.

CHERITH  (nn?,  xopp^e  [BAL]  ;  xoppA  \_Onom.-\).
Elijah  {q.v.)  has  just  informed  .-Xhabof  the  impending
drought,  when  we  are  abruptly  told  that  '  Yahwes  word
came  unto  him,  saying.  Get  thee  hence'  [i.e.,  pre-
sumably from  Samaria),  'and  turn  to  the  east  (,^c^g)
and  hide  thyself  in  the  torrent-valley  of  Cherith  which
is  before  (<33-'?l')  Jordan'  (i  K.  1735)-  This  occurs  in
the  first  scene  of  the  highly  dramatic  story  of  Elijah.
In  the  second  he  appears  in  the  far  north  of  Palestine
— at  Zarephath,  which  hardly  suits  Robin.son's  identifi-
cation {RR\^=,^)  of  Cherith  withthe  VVady  el- Kelt
(which  is  rather  the  Valley  of  Zeboim  \q.v.,  i.]).  at
least  if  these  two  scenes  stood  in  juxtaposition  from  the
first.  Besides  this,  the  two  names  Kelt  and  Cherith
begin  with  different  palatals  and  since  the  expression
■  l^efore  Jordan  '  is  most  naturally  explained  '  to  the  E.
of  the  Jordan,'  ^  it  is  plausible  to  hold  with  Prof  G.  A.
Smith  that  the  scene  of  Elijah's  retreat  must  be  sought
in  Gilead  {HG  zfio).  Let  us, then, look  across

the  Jordan  eastward  from  Samaria  (where  Elijah  may
have  had  his  interview  with  Ahab).  The  \\TKly  'Ajlim
and  the  Wady  Rajib  have  been  proposed  by  Thenius  ;
the  Wady  el-Yabis  by  Miihlau.  But,  as  C.  Niebuhr
{Gesch.\-i()\)  points  out,  Elijah  would  certainly  go  to
some  famous  holy  place.  Of  the  burial-place  of  Moses
(Niebuhr)  we  know  nothing  ;  but  i  K.  I93  9  suggests
that  the  sanctuary  was  in  the  far  south.  It  is  true,
Eus.  and  Jer.  (O5  30269  II328)  already  place  Cherith
{Xoppa,  Chorath)  bej-ond  Jordan.  Josephus,  however,
makes  Elijah  depart  'into  the  southern  parts'  {Ant.
viii.  132).  What  we  have  to  do  is  to  find  a  name  which
could,  in  accordance  with  analogies,  be  worn  down  and

^  Many  other  examples  in  ancient  and  modem  times  will  occur
to  the  reader.

2  In  2  S.  20 23  Kt.  'n^rt  is  perhaps  not  a  purely  graphic
accident ;  cp  also  i  S.  30 14  L  x°PP<->  ^^'^•

*  ['3S"'?y  in  geographical  and  topographical  expressions  means
commonly  .^«.f/ ;  cp  i  K.II7  2  K. 23  13  Dt.3249  Gen. 23 19  2.5
_iS,  etc.  Besides  the  vaguer  meaning  of  be/ore  (e.g.,  Clen.  16 12)
it  is  sometimes  made  definite  by  the  addition  of  a  word  or  of  an
expression  in  order  to  denote  a  particular  direction — e.g..  Josh.
l-efore the Valley of Hinnom tfes/ivard


158, the

(Zech.  144),  and  the  Mount  of  Olives,  which  is^^/ijfr  Jerusale
the  F.nsi  iZ-}r)ri) :  cp  Nu.  21  11  Josh.  18  14.  Lastly,  it  is  used  in
the  sense  of  overlooking;  cp  Gen.l8i6  1928  Nu.'23  28  (cp  Dr.
on  I  Sam.  1;")7,  Di.  on  Josh.  17  7,  and  especially  Moore, /«<J^«,
10 3).  In  iK.  173,  TDij?,  'eastward,'  should  be  corrected  to
in^SIO,  '  towards  the  desert '  (as  19 4).]

740


CHERUB

corruptfKl  into  nna.  Such  a  name  is  hbhi,  Rehoboth.
The  valley  of  Rehoboth  (the  W'ddy  Riihailjch)  would
Ix:  fitly  described  as  onsO  '3B"Sy,  'fronting  Misrim'
(see  MiZRAiM)  ;  cp  Gen.  25  i8.  The  alteration  of  c'lXD
into  f-pi'n  was  made  in  order  to  suit  the  next  story,  in
which  Zki'HATH  {i/.v.)  had  been  already  corrupted  into
ZAKEI'HATH.  t.  k.  c.

CHERUB,  plural  form  Cherubim  (3n3.  D'2-J3.
D^anS;  xepoyB-  xepoYB(e]i/v\,  -re]iN  Li^-'^M:  e'y

1  Lata  Jewish  "'"'"«y  ••'si'ute.l  ;  I's.  104  3  may  allude
oClr.nW,,  l"'"^  popular  [p:.st-cxilii]  identification
angeioiogy. ^^^  ^riS  and  nn").  but  >t^r«*  being,

like  ypr\(/,  a  loan-word,  a  Hebrew  etymology  is  in-
admissible). In  the  composite  system  of  Jewish  angei-
oiogy the  cherubim  form  one  of  the  ten  highest  classes
of  angels,  while  another  class  is  distinguished  by  the
synonymous  term  'living  creatures"  {Aajyd/A).  These
two  classes,  together  with  the  'ophannim  or  '  wheels,"  are
specially  attached  to  the  throne  of  the  divine  glory,  and
it  is  the  function  of  the  cherubim  to  be  bearers  of  the
throne  on  its  progresses  through  the  worlds.  The
Jewish  liturgy,  like  the  '  Te  Deum,'  delights  to  associate
the  '  praises  of  Israel "  (Ps.  '22  3 [4])  with  those  offered  to
God  by  the  different  cla.sses  of  angels,  and  singles  out
for  special  mention  in  a  portion  of  the  daily  morning
service  the  'ophannim,  the  hayyoth,  and  the  slraphim.
We  find  an  approach  to  this  conception  in  the  Apocalypse,
where  the  four  fwa  (Rev.  46-8),  though — like  the  twenty-
four  Trpfa^vTfpoL — they  are  always  mentioned  apart  from
the  angels,  and  discharge  some  altogether  peculiar
functions,  are  yet  associated  with  the  angels  in  the
utterance  of  do.xologies  '  (Rev.  48011-14191-7).

A  siniilar  view  is  suggested  in  the  '  Similitudes '  in
Enoch,  in  one  passage  of  which  (61 10/. )  '  the  cherubim,
seraphim,  and  'ophannim,  and  all  the  angels  of  power  '
are  combined  under  the  phrase  '  the  host  of  God,"  and
unite  in  the  ivscription  of  blessedness  to  the  '  Lord  of
Spirits,"  while  in  another  (chap.  xl. )  the  'four  faces  on
the  four  sides  of  the  Lord  of  Spirits  "  (a  reminiscence  of
Ezek.  16)  are  identified  or  confounded  with  the  arch-
angels. Elsewhere,  however,  a  somewhat  different
view  is  presented  of  the  cherubim.  They  are  the  sleep-
less guardians  of  the  '  throne  of  His  glory  '  (71  7)  ;  they
arc  t!ie  '  fiery  cherubim  '  (Hii),  and  together  with  the
seraphim  (exceptionally  called  '  serpents,'  SpaKovrcs)  are
closely  connected  v.ith  Paradise,  and  placed  under  the
archangel  Gabriel  (20 7).  From  these  facts  we  gather
that  in  the  last  two  centuries  B.C.  there  were  different
ways  of  conceiving  the  cherubim. Some  writers  had  a

2  Ezek  ''Si/'  6  ^""""Ser  sense  of  the  peculiarity  of
Isa ifi-'i- * ^^^ nature of the cherubim than

^'  others,  and  laid  stress  on  such  points
as  their  connection  with  the  divine  tire,  and  with  Paradise
and  its  serpent-guardians.  Whence  did  they  derive  a
notion  sr)  suggestive  of  mythological  comparisons?

The  most  reasonable  answer  is,  I'rom  the  earlier
religious  writings,  supplemented  and  interpreted  by  a
not  yet  extinct  oral  tradition.  A  tale  of  the  serpents  by
the  sacred  tree  (once  probably  serpent-demons)  may
have  been  orally  handed  down,  but  the  conception  of  the
fiery  cherubim  in  God's  heavenly  palace  is  to  be  tracetl
to  the  vision  in  Ezek.  1,  and  to  the  account  of  the
'  mountain  of  God  '  in  Eden,  with  its  '  stones  of  fire '  and
its  cherub -guardian,  in  Ezek.  28 13/ 16.  These  two
passages  of  Ezekiel  form  the  next  stage  in  our  journey.
The  latter  nmst  be  treated  first,  as  being  evidently  a
faithful  report  of  a  popular  tradition.  Unfortunately
the  received  Hebrew  text  is  faulty,  and  an  intelligible
exegesis  of  the  passage  is  rarely  given.  Keil,  for
instance,  admits  some  reference  to  Paradise, but  feels

'  "The  differences  lictween  the  fia  of  Revelation  and  those  of
Ezekiel,  both  as  to  their  appearance  and  as  to  their  functions,
are  obvious.  But  without  the  latter  how  could  the  former  have
been  itnagined?  The  traditional  Christian  view  that  the  apoca-
lyptic fia  symbolise  the  four  Gospels  can  hardly  be  seriously
defended.

741


CHERUB

obliged  to  infer  from  the  epithet  '  that  covereth'  (^3^o.^)
that  '  the  place  of  the  cherub  in  the  sanctuary  (Ex.  2.')  20)
was  also  present  to  the  prophet's  mind. '  .\or  is  the
diflliculty  confined  to  this  epithet  and  to  the  c<)ually  strange
word  (nrcc)  which  Vg.  renders  'extentus,'  and  EV
'  anointed  '  (so  Thcodot.);  the  opening  phrase  ariTnu,
whether  renderetl  '  thou  wast  the  cherub '  or  1  pointing  r\H
differently)  'with  the  cherub,''  baffles  comprehension.
It  is  necessary,  therefore,  to  correct  the  text  of  w.  13/.
16^  ;  we  shall  then  arrive  at  the  following  sense  : —

'  Thou  wast  in  Eden,  the  divine  garden ;  of  all
I  precious  stones  was  thy  covering — cornelian,  etc. ;  and
of  gold  were  thy  .  .  .  worked  ;  in  the  day  when  thou
wast  made  were  they  prepared.  To  be  .  .  .  had  1
appointed  thee  ;  thou  wast  upon  the  holy,  divine  moun-
tain ;  amidst  the  stones  of  fire  didst  thou  walk  to  and
fro.'-  Then  wast  thou  dishonoured  (being  cast)  out  of
the  divine  mountain,  and  the  cherub  destroyed  thee
(hurling  thee)  out  of  the  midst  of  the  stones  of  fire."

The  sense  now  becomes  fairly  clear.  We  have  here
a  tradition  of  Paradise  distinct  from  that  in  Gen.  2  and
3.  Favoured  men,  it  appears,  could  be  admitted  to
the  divine  garden,  which  glittered  with  precious  stones
(or,  as  they  are  also  called,  'stones  of  fire)  like  the
mythic  tree  which  the  hero  (jilgames  saw  in  the
Babylonian  epic,**  or  like  the  interior  of  the  temples  of
Babylon  or  Tyre,*  or  like  the  walls  and  gates  and
streets  of  the  new  Jerusalem  in  the  .\f>ocalypse.  But
these  privileged  persons  were  still  liable  to  the  sin  of
pride,  and  such  a  sin  would  l)c  their  ruin.  This  Ezekiel
applies  to  the  case  of  the  king  of  Tyre,  who  reckoned
himself  the  favourite  of  his  god,  and  secure  of  admission
to  Paradise.

The  idea  of  the  passage  is  closely  akin  to  that  ex-
pressed in  Is.  1413-15.  The  king  of  Babylon  believes
that  by  his  unique  position  and  passionate  devotion  to
the  gods  he  is  as.sured  of  entering  that  glorious  cosmic
temple  of  which  his  splendid  terrace-temples  are  to  him
the  symbols.  Towards  Marduk  he  is  humility  itself,
but  to  the  unnamed  prophet  of  Yahwe  he  seems  proud
even  to  madness.  From  that  heaven  of  which  in  his
thoughts  he  is  already  the  inhabitant,  the  prophet  sees
him  hurled  as  a  lifeless  corpse  to  an  ignoble  grave.
This  is  just  what  Ezekiel  holds  out  in  pros[)ect  to  the
king  of  Tyre,  and  the  destroying  agent  is  the  cherub.
How  different  this  idea  of  the  cherub  from  that  of  the
apocalyptic  fwa  !

We  have  again  a  different  conception  of  the
cherubim  in  Ezekiel's  vision  (Ez.  1).*  The  prophet
has  not  the  old  untjuestioning  belief  in  tradition,  and
modifies  the  traditional  data  so  as  to  produce  effective
_  .  .  ^  symbols  of  religious  ideas.  Out  of  the
■  ^  ■"'  elaborate  description  it  is  enough  to
select  a  few  salient  points.  Observe  then  that  the  one
cherub  of  the  tradition  in  ch.  28  has  now  become  four
cherubim  (cp  Rev.  46-8),  each  of  which  has  four  faces,
one  looking  each  way,  viz.  that  of  a  man,  a  lion,  an  ox,
and  an  eagle,  and  human  hands  on  his  four  sides.
They  are  not, however, called  cherubim, but  hayyoth.

1  So  Co.,  following  ®BAQ,  Sym.,  but  in  other  respects  reading
p.  T  4  as  above.

2  According  to  the  ordinary  view  which  m.ikes  the  Tyrian
prince  a  cherub,  the  plumage  of  the  cherub  of  K/ekiel's  tradition
was  resplendent  as  if  with  gold  and  precious  stones.  But  surely
it  wxs  not  merely  as  a  griffm,  nor  as  a  grirTins  fellow,  that  the
Tyrian  prince  was  placed  (as  the  prophet  dramatically  states)  in
Paradise,  but  as  one  of  the  '  sons  of  Elohim"  ;  and  the  covering
spoken  of  is  a  state-dress  besprinkled  with  precious  stones.
'Stones  of  fire"  means  'flashing  stones,"  like  the  Assyrian  aban
t'sdti,  '  stone  of  fire,"  one  of  the  names  of  a  certain  precious  stone
(Friedr.  Del.  /'an  118).

3  Tablet  IX. See  Jeremias,  [zduhar-Ximrod,  70.

*  For  Babylon  see  >f  ebuchadre?7ar"s  inscription,  R r<^  S  \cnff-,
where  he  describes  the  beautification  of  the  temple  R-sagila  at

freat  length. Gold  and  precious  stones  are  specially  mentioned.
or  the  temple  of  Tyre  see  Herod.  244  (the  two  brilliant  pillars).
Gold  was  also  lavishly  used  in  the  temple  of  Solomon.

*  There  is  a  second  description  in  IO8-17,  but  it  is  the  attempt
of  a  later  writer  to  improve  upon  Ezekiel's  account,  and  to  pre-
pare the  way  for  v.  20.  K.  14  should  be  omitted  as  a  verj-  care-
less gloss. See  Comill,  and  on  r.  14  cp  Davidson.

74a


CHERUB

('living  creatures'),  until  we  come  to  93,  and  Ezekiel
tells  us  (lOzo)  that  he  did  not  'know  that  they  were
cherubim'  till  he  heard  them  called  so  by  God  (10 2).
By  this  he  implies  that  his  own  description  of  them
differed  so  widely  from  that  received  by  tradition  that
without  the  divine  assurance  he  could  not  have  ventured
to  call  them  cherubim.  Sometimes,  however,  he  sixjaks
of  them  in  the  singular  ('the  living  creature,'  1  20-22  ;
'the  cherub,'  93  IO24,  if  MT  is  correct),  apparently  to
indicate  that,  being  animated  by  one  'spirit,'  the  four
l>eings  formed  but  one  complex  phenomenon.  The
fourfold  character  o''  the  cherub  is  caused  by  the  new
function  (relatively  to  the  account  in  ch.  28)  which  is
assigned  to  it  ;  in  fact,  it  has  now  become  the  bearer  of
the  throne  of  God  (more  strictly  of  the  'firmament'
under  the  throne  I2226).  But  the  whole  appearance
was  at  the  moment  bathed  in  luminous  splendour,  so
that  the  seer  needed  reflection  to  realise  it.  We  will
therefore  not  dwell  too  much  on  what  must  be  to  a
large  extent  peculiar  to  Ezekiel  and  artificially  symbolic,
and  in  so  far  belongs  rather  to  the  student  of  biblical
theology.  All  that  it  is  important  to  add  is  that  the
divine  manifestation  takes  place  within  a  storm-cloud,
and  that  a  fire  which  gives  out  flashes  of  lightning  burns
brightly  between  the  cherubim  ;  also  that  there  are
revolving  wheels  txiside  the  cherubim,  animated  by  the
same  '  spirit '  as  the  living  creatures,  and  as  brilliant  as
the  chrysolith  or  topaz  ;  and  that  in  his  vision  of  the
temple  Ezekiel  again  modifies  his  picture  of  the;  cherubim,
each  cherub  having  there  but  two  faces,  that  of  a  man
and  that  of  a  lion  (-11 18/  ).

.Another  group  of  passages  on  the  cherubim  is  found
in  the  Psalter,  viz.  Ps.  18 10/  [11/.]  80 1  [2]  99 1,  and  to

^ „  . the  latter  we  may  join  not  onlv  I's.

4  Some  post-  33 [4],  but  phrases  in  i  S.  U  2S.  62
exihc  passages.  ^  ^l^'\^^  2  K.  19  15  (  =  Is.  37  16).
All  these  passages  are  post-exilic.^  In  the  first  we  read,
'  He  bowed  the  heavens  and  came  down,  and  thick
clouds  were  under  his  feet  ;  he  mounted  the  cherub  and
flew,  he  came  swooping  upon  the  wings  of  the  wind.'
That  there  is  a  mythical  conception  here  is  obvious,
but  it  has  grown  very  pale,  and  does  not  express  much
more  than  Ps.  104  3(^.  The  conception  agrees  with
that  of  Ezekiel  ;  the  cherub  (only  one  is  mentioned,  but
this  does  not  exclude  the  existence  of  more)  is  in  some
sense  the  divine  chariot,  and  has  some  relation  to  the
storm-wind  and  the  storm-clouds.  The  other  psalm-
passages  appear  at  first  sight  to  give  a  new  conception
of  the  cherubim,  who  are  neither  the  guards  of  the
'mountain  of  God,'  nor  the  chariot  of  the  moving
Deity,  but  the  throne  on  which  he  is  seated.  It  may
be  questioned,  however,  whether  the  phrase  '  enthroned
upon  the  cherubim '  is  not  simply  a  condensed  expres-
sion for  '  seated  on  the  throne  which  is  guarded  by  the
cherubim. '  Both  in  the  Psalter  and  in  the  narrative-
books  it  is  the  heavenly  throne  of  Yahwfe  which  is
meant,  the  throne  from  which  (as  is  implied  in  Ps.
80i[2]99i  and  2  K.  19 15)  he  rules  the  universe  and
guides  the  destiny  of  the  nations.  That  is  the  only
change  which  has  taken  place  in  the  conception  of  the
cherubim  ;  they  have  been  definitely  transferred  to
heaven,  and,  strictly  s[>eaking,  their  occupation  as
bearers  of  the  Deity  should  have  gone,  for  the  '  angels  '
are  sufficient  links  between  God  and  the  world  of  men
Or  rather  there  is  j-et  another  point  in  which  the  cherub
idea  has  been  modified;  it  is  indicated  in  Ps.  223(4)
where,  if  the  text  is  correct,^  Yahwe  is  addressed  as
'enthroned,'  not  upon  the  cherubim,  but  'upon  the
praises  of  Israel.'  The  idea  is  that  the  cherubim  in
heaven  have  now  the  great  new  function  of  praising
God.  and  that  in  the  praiseful  services  of  the  temple,
where  God  is  certainly  in  some  degree  present,  the
tin  the  three  passages  from  S.  and  i  Ch.  the  phra.se  20^
C'lisn  has  been  interpolated  (cp  Ark,  §  i).

2  See  Che.,  PsJ^', ad  loc,  where the  text of  the  deeply
corrupt  verse  is  restored  with  .some  confidence.

743


CHERUB

' congregation  takes  the  place  of  the  cherubim. This  at

any  rate  agrees  with  later  Ixjliefs,  and  may  be  illustrated

by  the  direction  in Ex.  2020  (P)  that  the  faces  of  the

cherubim  on  the  ark  shall  be  '  towards  the  mercy-seat '

[kapporeth). The  meaning  of  the  priestly  theorist  (for

the  description  is  imaginary,  the  ark  having  long  ago

tlisappeared)  is,  that  the  cherubim  are  a  kind  of  higher

angels  who  surround  the  earthly  throne  of  Yahwe  and

contemplate and praise  his  glory. It  is  also  stated

that their faces  are to be 'one to  another,' and, if

we  add to this  that  they  have  to  guard, not  Yahwe,

i but the  sacramental  sign  of  his  favour,  we  get  three

j points  in  which  the  cherubim  of  the  priestly  writer  are

I cl().sely  analogous  to  the  seraphim  of  the  vision  of  Isaiah

I (Is.  6).

We now  come  to  the  cherubim in the temple  of
Solomon. Carved  figures  of  cherubim  were  prominent
„  .  , in  the  decoration  of  the  walls  and  the

.  doors,  and  two  colossal  cherubim  stood

"  ■  in  the  dfblr  or  'adytum,'  where  they
'  formed  a  kind  of  dais,  one  wing  being  horizontally
stretched  towards  the  lateral  wall,  whilst  the  other  over-
shadowed the  ark,  a  felicitous  arrangement  resulting  in
charming  effects'^  (see  i  K.  623-35).  Obviously  they
are  the  guards  of  the  sacred  ark  and  its  still  more  sacred
contents. (Jp  Temi'I.e.

There is no record of any myth which directly

accounts  for  the  temple-cherubim. But  an  old  tradition

p ,. said  that  after  the  first  human  pair  had

6.  i'araaise ^^^^^  driven  out of  the  divine  garden,

story.  Yahwe 'stationed at the east of the

(iarden of  Eden  the  cherubim and the  blade  of  the

whirling  sword,' ''' and  the  function  of  these  two  allied

but  independent  powers  was  '  to  guard  the  way  to  the

tree  of  life'  (Gen.  824). Neither  in  this  case,  nor  in  the

jircceding  one,  is  any  account  given  of  the  physiognomy

of  the  cherubim. In the height  of  the  mythological

period  no  such  account  was  needed.

We  see  therefore  that  the  most  primitive  Hebrew
myth  descrited  the  cherubim  as  beings  of  superhuman
power  and  devoid  of  human  sympathies,
whose  office  was  to  drive  away  intruders
from  the  abode  of  God,  or  of  the  gods.
Originally  this  abode  was  conceived  of  as  a  mountain,
or  as  a  garden  on  the  lower  slopes  of  a  mountain,  and
as  glittering  with  a  many- coloured  brightness.  But
when  the  range  of  the  supreme  god's  power  became
wider,  when  from  an  earth -god  he  became  also  a
heaven-god,  the  cherub  too  passed  into  a  new  phase  ;
he  became  the  divine  chariot.  We  have  no  early
authority  for  this  view,  but  the  age  which  produced  the
story  of  Elijah's  ascent  to  heaven  in  a  fiery  chariot
(2K.  2ii)  may  be  supposed  to  have  known  of  fiery
cherubs  on  which  Yahw^  rode.  At  a  still  later  time,
the  cherubim,  though  still  spoken  of  by  certain  writers,
were  no  longer  indispensable.*  The  forces  of  nature
were  alike  Yahwe's  guards  and  his  ministers.  Mythology
became  a  subject  of  special  learning,  and  its  details
acquired  new  meanings,  and  the  cherub-myth  passed
into  an  entirely  new  phase.

There  is  much  that  is  obscure  about  the  form  of  the
primitive  Israelitish  cherub.  It  was  in  the  main  a  land-
animal,  but  it  had  \yings.  That  is  all  that  we  know,
though  a  probable  conjecture  (see  below)  may  lead  us
further.  As  to  the  meaning  of  the  cherubim,  they  have
been  thought  to  represent  the  storm-clouds  which  some-
times hang  around  the  mountain  peaks,  sometimes
rush  'on  the  wings  of  the  wind,'  sending  forth  arrow-

1  Perrot  and  Chipiez,  Art  injudcra,  1  245-

2  The  sword  is  not  the  sword  of  the  cherubim  but  that  of
Yahwe;  it  is  the  same  with  which  he  'slew  the  dragon'  (Is.
'J7i).  M.-irduk,  too,  has  such  a  sword  (see  Smith,  Chald,
Gen.  86  I'So],  and  the  illustration,  opp.  114).

3  In  Hab.  3  8  a  very  late  poet  speaks  of  Vahwb  as  riding,
not  upon  a  cherub,  but  upon  horses.  This  is  a  return  to  a  very
old  myth  (see  tablet  4  ot  the  Babylonian  Creation  epic,  p.  52,
Zimmern's  restoration  in  Gunkel's  SchSpf.  411).

744


7.  Develop-
ment.


CHERUB

like  flashes  of  li(;htning.  This  theory  is  consistent  with
the  lanRuafjc  of  I's.  IX9/  liz.  1  4/  24,  and  the  passages
ill  l-.nixh,  but  hardly  explains  the  symbolism  of  the
_  ,  ,  cherub  in  its  earliest  historically  known
6"*'  forms.  At  any  rate,  we  can  aftirm  posi-
tively that  the  myth  is  of  foreign  origin.  Ixnorntant
thoui,'ht  that  he  had  tracctl  it  to  Babylonia,*  on  the
grounil  that  kirubu  occurs  on  a  talisman  as  a  synonym
for  .tWw,  a  common  term  for  the  divine  bull-guardian  of
temples  and  palaces.  This  theory  however  is  not  con-
firmed as  regards  the  derivation  of  ana  (see  ZA  1  68/
['86]).  \\c  may  indeed  admit  that  Rzekiel  probably
mingled  the  old  I'alestinian  view  of  the  cherub  with  the
iinalogoui  U;ibylonian  conception  of  the  divine  winged
bulls.  But,  so  far  as  can  be  seen  at  present,  the  early
Hebrew  cherub  came  nearer  to  the  griffin,  which  was
not  divine,  but  the  servant  of  the  Deity,  ?nd  the  origin
of  which  is  now  assigned  to  the  Hiltites  of  Syria.*  The
idea  of  this  mythic  form  is  the  combination  of  parts  of
the  two  strongest  animals  of  air  and  land — the  lion  and
the  eagle,  and  a  reminiscence  of  this  may  perhaps  be
traced  in  the  reference  to  these  animals  in  Ez.  1  10.  It
was  adopted  by  various  natif>ns,  but  to  understand  its
true  significance  we  must  go,  not  to  l'"gypt  nor  to
Cireccc,  but  to  the  Hiltites,  whose  originality  in  the  use
of  animal-forms  is  well  known.  The  Hittite  griffin
apjx-ars  almost  always,  in  contrast  to  many  Babylonian
representations,  not  as  a  fierce  Ijeast  of  prey,  but  seated
in  cahn  dignity  like  an  irresistible  guardian  of  holy
things.  It  is  only  on  later  Syrian  monuments  that  the
Sun-god  is  represented  in  a  chariot  ■''  drawn  by  griffins,
wiiich  agrees  with  a  statement  respecting  the  Indian
sun-god  in  I'hilostratus's  Life  of  Apollonius  (348).
The  Egyptians  imported  this  form,  probably  from  Syria
or  Canaan  at  the  beginning  of  the  New  Empire,  but
the  griffin  never  ac(|uire(l  among  them  the  religious
significance  of  the  Spiiin.x.''  The  I'hccnicians,  and
probably  the  Canaanites,  and  through  them  the  Is-
raelites, evidently  attached  greater  importance  to  the
grilfin  or  cherub,  and  it  is  said  that  among  the  dis-
coveries at  Zeiijirli  in  X.  Syria(see  Ak.\m.mc  Lanou.\(;i;,
§  2)  is  a  genuine  representation  of  this  mythic  form  as
described  in  Ez.  41 18/.*  Whether  the  sculptured  quad-
ruped with  a  l)earded  human  head,  Assyrian  in  tyfx;,
discovered  by  M.  Clermont-tJanneau  in  the  subterranean
quarries  in  the  north  of  Jerusalem,''  is  rightly  called  a
cherub  seems  very  doubtful.

For  a  Keneral  sketch  of  the  different  conceptions  of  winged
composite  animals,  see  H.  Teloni,  /,A  1)124-140  ['91I,  and  cp
Fiirtu.iiiglcr's  art.  in  Roscher,  Lex.,  cited  alre.ady  ;  also,  for  OT
criticism,  Valke,  Die  Rel.  des  A  /',  329-334  ['35I. T.  K.  C.

CHEKUB  (in?:  XApoyB  [BN».\]).  a  town  or
district  in  Babylonia,  unless  Cherub- Addan- ImnuT
should  be  taken  as  one  name,  I-'./ra'Jsg  (xApoyc  [BJ.
XepoYB  [.}!-]) -N«-h.  76,  (xepoyB  L»'<'-'^^ -"A],  ax-  [>-])
=  iEsd.  r)36  (xapaaGaAan  [B],  xepoyBiAAN  [E].
XApA  AAaAap  [-^l'.  where  the  former  two  of  these
names  are  run  together  (Cl!.\R.\.\TH.\l,.\R,  RV  Cll.\K-
.\.\iii.\i..\n)  and  the  names  are  regarded  as  personal
rallier  tiian  as  local.

CHESALON  (p^D?;  xacAcon  [B].  -caA-  [AE]>.
on the  N. side  of  Mount  Jearim,  one  of  the places

1  See  I-enormant,  Les  origines,  \wijf.\  Schrader,  COT
I40;  Frd.  Del.  Par.  153;  Che.  is.^^)  'Jag?/  Delitzsch,
however,  still  holds  to  a  connection  between  3n3  and  Ass.
kMrahu  (?)  =  karilhu  '  mighty  '  (Ass.  //ll  7>,  352).  Sayce  com-
pares the  quasi -human  winged  figures  represented  on  .^s-
syrian  walls  as  fertilising  the  'tree  of  life,"  the  date-palm  (Crit.
Mon.  102;  cpTylor,  PSR.l,  Vi^^^ff.  [iSSg-qo]).

'  Furtwangler,  in  Roscher,  Lex.  Bd.  ii.,  art.  'Gryps.'

>  Rakubel(D.  H.  Midler)  or  perh.-ips  Rek.nb'el  or  Rakkfd.el
(G.  Hoffmann)  is  one  of  the  gods  of  the  Syrian  district  of
Ya'di  (Zenjirli  inscriptions).  G.  Hoffmann  explains  Rekab'cl
'charioteer  of  El '  (ZA,  11  ['96],  2V^).

■*  Furtwangler,  in  Roscher,  Lex.  Bd.  ii.  (ut  suf>.) ;  cp  Ohne-
falsch-Richter,  Kyf>ros,  434/I

5  See  ZA  <i  420/  ['94).  «  Rtv.  crit.,  16  Mai,  1892.

745


CHILMAD

'  which  in  Joshua  (15 10)  mark  the  northern  frontier  of
the  tribe  of  Judah.  It  is  the  modern  Kesld,  2087  ft.
above  sea-level,  on  a  high  ridge  immediately  to  the  S.
of  the  Wady  (ihurab,  and  about  half-way  between
Karyat  el  "Enab  (Robinson's  Kiriath-jearim)  and  EshiV
(Eshtaol).  (See  Rob.  HR 'lyo  3 154)  In  the  time  of
Eusebius  and  Jerome,  who  pl.ice  it  on  the  Ijorder,  the  one
in  Benjamin  and  the  other  in  Judah,  it  was  '  a  very  large
village  in  the  confines  of  Jerusalem'  (OS,  \a\o.cij)v,
Chasalon).  Stanley  (.S7^  496)  fitly  comp.ires  the  name
and  situation with that of  Chesulloth or  ChisLoth-

TAHOK  (iJ-V.).

CHESED  (nb'3,  xacaA  [Z>],  x&czaA  [A].  XA2&9
[L]),  son  of  Nahor  by  Milcah  (Gen.  2222),  the  eponym
of a branch of the Chalda;ans. See Aram, § 3,

ARI'HAXAI).

CHESIL  ('?'P5),  Josh.  1530  =  194.  Bktmll.
CHESNUT  (poll?).  Gen.  3O37.  RV  I'i.ank.
CHEST.  1.  p^<l,  in  2  K.  I29  /•  [10  /.]  =  2  Ch.
24  8  ^,  used  of  a  box  with  lid  [rh^,  see  Door)  and
hole  (in)  into  which  money  might  be  dropped  (pAcoC-
COKOMOC  [B.\L],  eHC&YPOC  [Jos.  Ant.  ix.  82]).  The
same  word  is  used  of  a  coffin  (Gen.  50 26,  see  Dkau,
§  1 ),  and  of  the  Ark  of  the  Covenant  (see  Ark,  and  cp
Coki-kr).

2. c"ana  't:3,  Ezek.  2724,  EV  '  chests  of  rich  apparel,'

but  though  t:3  (see  Treasure  Holski,  like  6riaaip6i

(Mt.  2 11), might conceivably mean a re|)ository for

costly  objects,  yet  the  parallel  expression  '  mantles  (not

1 '  wrappings,'  as  R\')  of  blue  and  broidercd  work  '  shows

that  'ijj  must  mean  'garments,'  or  the  like, n  and  i

I are  so  easily  confounded  that  we  need  not  hesitate  to

j read  'ija  (Che. ),  rendering  '  rolx-'S  of  variegated  stuff.'  ^

See  Emhroihery,  and  cp  Uress,  §  4.
I CHESULLOTH (ni-JD?), Josh.  19.8. See Cms-

LOTU-TABOK.

CHETTIIM  (xeTTieiM  [ANV]),  i  Mace.  1 .  AV.
RV  CiiiTTiM. See  KrrriM.

CHEZIB  (2*T3),  Gcn.SSst- See  Anizin,  i.

CHIDON  ip'3),  I  Ch.  139. See  Na(  iio.v.

CHIEF,  CHIEFTAIN.  The  former,  like  '  captain.'
is  often  used  in  .W  as  a  substantive  witli  a  convi  nicnt
vagueness  to  render  various  lleb.  words  (surh  as
K'r:,  C'Ni.  .132.  ['iip)  which  apjx-ar  to  be  used  in  a  more  or
less  general  sense.

For  'chief  ruler  '  or  'chief  minister '  (2  S.  8  is  20  26  iCh.Sa),
cp  Priest  and  Prince;  for  'thief  man'  (Trptiros  Actsjs;),  see
Mei.ita  ;  and  for  'chief  of  .Asia,' (.Acts  1!)  31)  see  Asiakc  h.

Chiektai.v  occurs  only  in  Zech.'.>7  12  5/  RV  for  ']•''»<,  for
which  see  Duke.

CHILDREN, SONG OF THE THREE. See

DA.MI.I., ijj! 19, 22.

CHILEAB  (2i62,  §  4).  son  of  David  (2  .s.  33I  In
I  Ch.  3i  he  is  caUed  Damki.  (</.;•.  4).

CHILIARCH  (xiAiApxoc  [Ti.  WlIJi,  Rev.  19.3
R\"'n- .See  Army,  §  10.

CHILION  {]vh3;  §  74.  xe\\d.\OJN  [L]).  and
Mahi.on  (ppnp,  MA&AcON  [B.\L].  §  74).  'sickness'
and  'wasting,'  the  names  given  to  the  sons  of  Naomi
in  the  narrative  of  Ruth  (Ruthl2  KeAAicoN  [B],
XcAecoN  [-Vl ;  J'- 5  xe^<M'j^>N  [B].  xeAeooN  [-^] ;  49
XeAAitoN  [B].  XAiAecoN  [■'<])■

CHILMAD  (np^3,  XAPMAN  [B.\Q]),  Ez.2723.  MT.
usually  supposetl  to  be  a  place  or  land  not  far  from
Assyria.  If  this  be  correct,  it  must  at  any  rate  be  some
fairly  well-known  place  or  lancl.  But  no  name  re-
sembling Chilmad  occurs  anywhere  else,  and, as  two

t  Cp  Ass.  burrumu,  '  variegated  cloth '  (Muss-AinoItX
746


CHIMHAM

corruptions  of  the  text  have  already  been  found  in  this
verse  (Canneh,  Shkba,  ill.),  we  may  presume  a  third.
Read  with  Targ.  'and  Media'  (nci).  Less  probably
(iriitz,  '  Babylon  and  Media '  (not  Saa)  ;  Mez  and
Bertholet,  'all  Media'  ('la-^a).  \>2  should  be  dis-
regarded. It  came  from  '?3i ;  the  scribe  began  to
write  Sdt  too  soon,  t  fell  out  owing  to  the  t  which
precedes  ;  restore  i.  T.  K.  c.

CHIMHAM  (DnpS,  §§  66,  77,  or  [2S.  I941]  tTO?.!
or  [Jer.  41 17  Kt.]  DniD?— ;.^.,  if  the  text  is  right,
'  blind'  [cp  o».AA.  cictrus  fuit,  and  note  Nestle's  view
on  the  Aramaean  origin  of  Barzillai]  ;  XAMA&M
[B],  XANAAN  [A],  AXIMAAM  [L],  AXIMANOC.  Jos.
.-///A  vii.  11 14  ;  in  Jer.  41 17  -XAMAA  [B].  "XAMA  [S],
"XAMAAM  [AQ*]),  one  of  the  sons  of  the  Gileadite
Barzillai,  in  whose  stead  he  entered  the  service  of  David
(2  S.  1937  [3S]/.  XAAW  [B*]  40  [41]).  Most  probably
his  real  name  was  .\hinoam  (avrnn)  ;  note  the  i  in
Jer. 's  form,  the  j  in  2S. ,  the  Gr.  forms  with  a^t  and  v,
and  the  Egyptian  form  (?  see  below)  with  n-ma  (Che.).
Following  Kw.  [Hist.  8216),  Deans  Stanley  and  Plumptre
have  supposed  that  he  carried  on  the  family  tradition  of
hospitality  by  erecting  at  Bethlehem  a  khan  or  hospice
for  travellers  (see  Jer.  41 17,  cnps  rrna,  RV-uK-  '  lodging-
place  of  Chimham').  This  view,  however,  is  based
on  the  faulty  reading  nnp-  This  should  be  corrected
into  niTiJ,  which  is  the  reading  of  Jos.  (see  Ant.  .\.  95),
of  .^q.,  and  of  the  He.vaplar  Syri.ac  (see  Field),  and
has  been  adopted  by  Hitzig  and  Giesebrecht.  In  the
text  represented  by  ©  [see  Swete]  the  t  in  rmij  had
become  a  3.  Gidroth-chimham — i.e.,  '  the  hurdles,  or
sheep- pens,  of  Chimham' — seems  a  probable  name
for  a  locality  in  a  pastoral  district.  '  Chimham '  (or
.\hinoam  ?)  is  appended  to  distinguish  this  Gederoth
from  other  places  of  the  same  name.  It  is  just
possible  that  the  family  of  Chimham  or  Ahinoam  had
property  there.  Among  the  names  of  the  places  in
Palestine  conquered  by  .Seti  I.  we  find  Ha(?)-ma-he-mu,
'  the  city  of  Kaduru  in  He(?)-n-ma.,'  which  m^y  possibly
belong  to  the  same  place  (WMM  As.  u.  Eur.  193,
202).  -viz.,  Gidroth-chimham  (Sayce,  Pat.  Pal.  157),
or  rather  (jitlroth-ahinoam.  T.  K.  C. — S.  A.  C.

CHIMNEY  (na-lNI),  Hos.  133.  See  Coal,  §  3.
Lattice,  §2(1).

CHINNERETH  (n-133,  in  Josh.  1827  yeNepee  [B],
xeNcptoe  [AL];  1935.  KGNepee  [B],  xen.  [L],
XGNepoG  [A];  in  Dt.,  JT^JSp,  'from  Chinnereth '  ;
MAXANApee  [B],  AnO  MAXGNep.  [AF],  AHO  X  [L]).
the  name  of  one  of  the  'fenced  cities'  of  Naphtali
(Josh.  1935).  Possibly  it  is  also  referred  to  in  i  K.
1020,  where  we  should  perhaps  read  'and  Abel-beth-
maacah,  and  Chinneroth,  and  all  the  land  of  Naphtali. '^
It  is  of  great  antiquity,  for  it  occurs  under  the  form
kn-na-ra-tu  in  the  list  of  places  conquered  by
Thotmes  III.,  n.  34  (i?/--)  5  45  ;  WMM  As.  u.  Eur.
84).  It  is  also  given  (i),  with  the  prefix  'sea  of
to  the  Galilean  lake  (Xu.  .34ii  \xfvapa  BF,  -epf.d
AL]  Josh.  1827);  (2)  to  the  same  inland  'sea'
without  that  prefi.x  (Dt.  8 17,  cp  Josh.  112  and  see  below).
The  site  of  the  town  can  no  longer  be  identified.

Jerome  identified  it  with  Tiberi.is  (0.9n'2  29)  ;  some  rabbins
with  a  town  .it  the  S.  of  ihe  Lake  called  Beth-jerach  (probably  the
Tarichxa  of  Josephus).  Others  included  Sanbari  (the  Senna-
brisof  Jos.  j9/iii.  O7)  under  the  designation;  a  third  extended
the  application  of  the  name  to  Heth-shean  (Ber.  raJ'ha,
par.  98,  Wiinsche).  This  vagueness  sufficiently  shows  that  •
nothing  was  known  as  to  the  site  of  the  ancient  town.  Cp
Neubauer,  Grog.  'I'alm.,  ■2n/.

On  the  derivation  of  Chinnereth,  see  Gennesaret.

T.  K.  c.

1  The  Kt.  reading  DniC2,  Jer.  41  17,  may  safely  lie  disre-
gardeii.

^  ''7rE3  p^r'7^  rm  m:3  nx'!-  i11  in  MT's  rinaa  may  conceal
TKI.  ©,  in  2Ch.  Ifli4,  however,  presupposes  '"jniJJ  nnss
(rav  ircpixwpovf  ;  see  Ki.,  SBOT).


CHISLOTH-TABOR

CHINNEROTH  ([Gins.]  fin:3  or  [Ba.]  nn33,  the
' pluralis  f.x/insivus'  of  Chi.n.n'ERKTii)  is  the  name
applied  (i).  with  the  prefix  'sea  of  to  the  Galilean
lake  in  Josh.  I23  {xevepfO  [BFL],  x^^v.  [A]),  (2),  with-
out this  prefix  (cp  Dt.  8 17),  to  the  same  lake  in  Josh.  11  2
((cei-f/jwtf  [B],  xffpe^^t  [A],  -f0[FL]),  (3),  in  the  spelling
CiNNEKOTH  (.-VV  only),  to  a  district  (?)  in  Naphtali
laid  waste  by  Benhadad  king  of  Damascus  (r  K.  15  20,
XevepfO  [AL],  x^^po-O  [B]).  See  CiTY,  §  2  (/. ),  n.  The
second  and  third  passages  need  a  brief  comment.  In
I  K.  l.")2o,  Ewald  [Hist.  2290,  n.  6)  explains  'all  Chin-
neroth '  to  mean  the  W.  shore  of  Lake  Merom  and  the
Sea  of  Galilee  and  of  that  part  of  the  Jordan  which
flows  between  those  lakes  ;  Theiiius,  the  basin  which
extends  from  Lake  Merom  to  the  upper  point  of  the
Sea  of  Galilee.  Such  a  large  extent  of  meaning,
however,  is  improbable.  Unless  we  adopt  the  cor-
rection suggested  above  (Chinnereth)  it  is  best  to
suppose  Chinneroth  to  mean  here  the  shores  (or  the  W.
or  E.  shore  alone)  of  that  famous  lake.  In  support  of
this  explanation,  the  second  passage  mentioned  above
(Josh.  11 2)  may  be  appealed  to.

The  text,  however,  is  not  quite  correct.  The  rendering  '  in
the  Arabah  south  of  Chinneroth  '  (RV)  can  hardly  be  defended.
The  difficulty  lies  in  333,  for  which  it  is  better  with  Di.  to  read
133  ((Bhafl  a.-neva.vTi.) ;  we  shall  then  get  the  phrase  '  in  the
Arabah  over  against  Chinneroth.'  This  may  be  a  designation
of  the  fertile  plain  called  el-Ghuiveir,  the  Gennesaret  of  the
Synoptic  Gospels,  in  which  the  town  of  Chiunereth  was  presum-
ably situated. Cp  Gennesaret,  and  Judah  upon  Jordan.

CHIOS  (xiOC  [Ti.  WH]: Chius),  the  beautiful  and

fruitful  Scio,  the  central  member  of  the  triad  of  large

islands  lying  off  the  coast  of  Asia  Minor. It  has  little

connection  with  biblical  history,  but  the  solitary  mention

of  it  (Acts  20 15)  very  clearly  indicates  its  geographical

position. Paul returning from Macedonia, to keep

Pentecost  at  Jeru.salem,  touched  at  Mitylene  in  Lesbos  ;

next  day  he  was '  over  against '  Chios  [Ka.Tt)VTi](Tap.iv

j dvTiKpvi  Xtof)  ;  probably  somewhere  about  Cape  Argen-

j num.  mod.  Asprokavo,  which  was  a  place  of  anchorage

(Polyb.  168). On  the  third  day  at  Samos. The  ship

1 evidently  anchored  each  night  and  sailed  with  the  early

! morning  trceze,  which  prevails  generally  in  the  ^gean

; during  the  summer, blowing from the N. and  dying

i away  in  the  afternoon. The  run  from  Mitylene  to  Chios

is  something  over  50  m. Herod's  voyage  as  related  in

Jos.  Ant.  xvi.  22,  in  the  reverse  direction,  illustrates  the

apostle's  journey.

I Strabo  describes  the  town  as  having  a  good  harbour  with

: anchorage  for  eighty  ships  (645). Paul  possibly  lay  becalmed

in  the  channel  (about  7  m.  wide),  and  may  not  have  landed. The

i island  was  noted  for  its  wines  (Stralxj,  645,  657X \v.  j.  w.

i  CHISLEU,  RV  Chislev  (I'Pp?,  in  Assjt.  Kisilivu,
cp  KAT^)  380. in Palm. '?"l'rD3  DeVog. Svr. Cent.

1  nos.  24,  75):  Zcch.  7i  x^^ceAey  [ABF-*],  -ciA.
[Xi?"^-b].  -cA.  [r*],  pACiAey  or  r^c.  [X*]);  Neh.  1 1,
cexeHAoy  [Bl,  -xgnA.  [B*^'''],  -xehA  [^^*].  xeceAey

; [X-:-^ '"?•], xAcenAoY  [A], XACAAey  \.^A)- AV  has

I Cast,EU  in I  Mace.  154  452  (xacrtXev  [AN<:n'].  -aa\.

', [.S*],  but  xAceAeoy  [A  in  452J). -See  Month,  §  5.

! CHISLON  (fl'?p3  '  confidence '  ?  xAcAcxiN  [BAFL]),

I the  father  of  Elidad  (Nu.  34  21).

CHISLOTH-TABOR  (lUri-ni^M  ;  §  99  '  loins  '  or
'  flanks  '  of  Tabor  ;  cp  .Xznoth-tabor,  '  ears  '  or  '  peaks
of  Tabor;  xACeAa)BAie  [B],  -caA^^oG  BaGoiR  [A],
-ceAAAB  BaBcop  [L]),  Josh  19  12  or  in  v.  if  Chksll-
LOTH  (ni^D?  ;  XACA\6oe  [B],  AXAceA-  [AL]),  lay
on  the  border  between  Zebulun  (Josh.  19 12)  and
Issachar  {v.  18).  It  is  the  Xaloth  (SaXwtf)  of  Josephiis
(B/'\\\.Zi  Vit.  44\  the  Chasalus  or  XaireXoi'S  of
Eusebius  and  Jerome — desiTilied  by  them  as  a  small
village  on  the  plain  below  Mount  Tabor,  8  R.  m.  from
DiocjEsarea  or  Sepphoris  (O.S"<2)9l4  9435  22859).  It  is
represented  by  the  modern  Iksdl,  460  ft.  above  sea
level,  7  m.  SW.  from  Sepphoris,  5^  m.  N.  from  Shunem,

748


CHITHLISH

and  nearly  3  m.  W.  from  the  base  of  Mount  Tabor.
The  name  has  been  suggested  as  an  emendation  for
Mai<Ta\w0  or  yieffffa\ti>6  in  i  Mace.  9a  and  of  Chellus
in  Judith  1 9  (sec  CiiKi,t.t;s).  The  position  of  tlie  place
on  the  main  road  N. ,  in  the  pass  between  'ral)f>r  and
t!ie  hills  of  Na/.areth,  explains  its  strategical  value,  as
witinssed  in  its  various  ap[)earances  in  history.

CHITHLISH  (L*'^^n3).  Josh.  IS^oRV.  AV  KrniLisH.

CHITTIM {D*n3). Is.  23i AV. etc.; Gen.  IO4

KllIlM {./.-:).

CHIUN  (I-V3)  and  SICCUTH  (n"l3p).  Am.  526  RV.

'  Vca.  yc  [O  house  of  Israel]  have  borne  .Siccuth  your

.  , ..„ kinj;,  and  Chiun  vour  iniaRcs,  the  star  of

1. Idenwn-  y^^^j^  ^,^^^1  . ,\v,  kv-mf  differ  by  rendering

catlOiL  j^,|2D.  •  the  talx-rnacle  (of). '  These  words
have  long  been  a  puzzle  to  scholars.  The  priniary
question  is,  whether  they  should  Ite  considered  apjjella-
tives  or  proper  nouns.  The  i)roblem  is  ancient,  as
appears  from  the  phenomena  of  the  versions  (.see  l>eiow,
§  2).  Into  the  syntactical  and  cxegetical  difficulties  of
V.  26,  taken  with  its  context,  we  cannot  here  enter  ;  our
object  is  to  consider  the  explanation  of  the  above-
mentioned  words  offered  by  Schrader  (6V.  A>.  324  Jf.
[■74],  and  COT  2 141/. ),  which,  though  widely  acccjjted,
fails  to  satisfy  some  good  critics.  According  to  Schrack-r's
theory  n'33  is  to  be  pointed  n?30  and  |V3  |V3,  the  former
representing  the  divine  name  Sakkut,  the  latter  Kaiwan.
0(ipert  had  already  recogni.sed  in  Chiun  the  Babylonian
Kaiwan,  and  this  identification  may  be  regarded  as
almost  certain.  The  word  is  of  frequent  occurrence  in
Babylonian  mythological  and  religious  texts  as  the  name
of  the  planet  Saturn.  It  is  of  uncertain  meaning  and
etymology.

Other  .Semitic  peoples  have  preserved  the  same  name,  prob-
ahly  as  loan  words,  for  Saturn  is  called  by  the  Mandsans  [xr3,
by  the  Syrians  t  OjLO,  and  by  the  Persians  Kahvdn  (for
references  to  the  occurrence  of  the  word  in  Babylonian  texts,  see
JciKcn,  h'osiiiol.  iMjf.).

The  name  Siccuth  presents  much  greater  difficulties.
Schrader  has  sliown  that  the  name  Sak-kut,  which  is
probably  the  same  as  the  Siccuth  of  the  text,  is  used  in
a  H.ibylonian  list  as  a  name,  or  an  ideographic  writing,
for  the  god  Ninib  (2  R.  5740).  Ninib,  however,  appears
to  be  the  god  of  the  planet  Kaiwanu  or  Saturn  (see
Jensen,  A'osmol.  136^  ;  Lotz,  Qiurst.  de  hist.  Sabbati,
27^).  We  seem,  therefore,  to  be  brought  to  the  con-
clusion that  Sakkuth  and  Kaiwan  are  the  same  (which
would  he.  still  more  clear  if  it  could  be  shown  with
certainty  that  S.\G-u5,  2  R.  32  no.  3  /.  25,  might  be  read
Sak-kut,  as  Opjiert  and  Schrader  believe).  Not  all  the
steps  in  the  argument  made  to  coimect  Sak-kut  and
Kaiwan  are  perfectly  clear.  Still,  indirect  confirmation
of  the  correctness  of  the  result  h;is  lately  come  to  hand,
the  two  words  having  been  found  together  in  a  mytho-
logical text.  In  the  Surpu  texts  S;ik-kut  and  Kaiw.anu
are  invokeil  together  (4  R.  52  col.  4  /.  9;  cp  Zimmcrn,
Beit,  zur  Kenntniss  der  Bab.  Rel.,  1896,  p.  10/.  179).
In  this  text  at  least  the  two  words  Sak-kut  and  Kaiwan
appear  together  as  they  do  in  Amos.

[Not  impri)l>ably_,  according  to  Che.,  there  is  a  reference  to
Saccuth- Kaiwun  in  2  K.  17  30  (see  Si'c. orn  -  P.f.noth)  and
another  to  Kaiwan  in  a  pa-is.ige  of  Kzekiel.  'The  ini.ni;e  of
jealousy"  in  lizek.  8  3  5  is  not  a  possible  title;  .nKjip  sei-nis  to
be  a  corruption  of  IK1'3.  The  word  for  'image'  is  7DO  ;  it  was
probably  a  statue  of  Kaiw.nn  which  E/ekicl  saw  (in  ecstasy)
"HDrthward  of  the  .nltar  gate'  in  the  outtr  court  of  the  temple,
unless  indeed  '<C3  (Idol,  g  i  c.)  should  rather  be  QoS— '/-i
laniassu,  one  of  the  names  for  the  colossal  winged  bulls  which
gu.inlcd  the  entrances  of  Assyrian  and  ISabylonian  palaces  and
temples  (cp  Ezek.  835  where,  however,  read  Hie?,  'at  the
entrance,'  with  Gra.  for  nK33)-  At  any  rate,  we  now  seem  to
know  the  period  to  which  the  inter|K)lation  of  Am.  626  refers
(see  further  Che.,  Kxp.  Times,  lOi^j,  Dec.  '98)].

The  connection  of  Siccuth  and  Chiun  with  the  Baby-
lonian name  and  the  ideographic  value  for  the  planet
Saturn  agree  well  with  their  juxtaposition  in  Am.  526,
and  if  'Sk  330  and  ds'dSx  are  transposed,  the  verse

749


CHOIR

becomes  at  least  intelligible  (see  Schr.  ib.,  and  cp  Orelli,
ad  loc. ).  'Ihe  phenomena  of  0's  text,  however,  and
2  Tart  **'*"  ''"^''*^  ^^  '^*  ^\'X ,  suggest  the  inference
■  that  there  may  be  a  more  deeply  -  se;iied
corruption  (see  Amos,  §  13).

[Korthefiijo  of  Heb.  text  €*u*0  Symm.  give  tt)i»  <jKi\vr\¥ —
i.e.,  nSO  (cp  Acts7  43).  ''e»h.  oiUajOC,  A<j.  <ri«r«ta<r/iovt,
Theo<l.  T^v  oftaaiv,  Vg.  tal>ei-naculuni,  Tg.  (I-ig.)  ni3'D.  which
confirms  MT.  For  n'3  (Heb.  text  and  1  g.),  Aq.  and  .Symm.
have  xi-oitv,  Theiid.  a.y.tt.vaui<Tiv ,  Vg.  iiiiaii;inetn  iSnr  ®  sec  Kf.m-
I'HAN).  Tlic  pointing  of  MT  seems  to  \x  suggested  by  that  of
ppP,  '  al>omination  '  = '  idol ' ;  cp  7\^i.  For  references  to  recent
critics  see  Amos,  |  13,  and  cp  Che.,  Exp.  Jan.  1897,  pp.  42-44.]

R.  W.  K.

CHLOE  (xAoH  [Ti.  WH]).  a  woman  of  whom
nothing  is  known,  save  that  '  they  of  Chloe '  (01  xAoHc)
were  the  first  to  let  Haul  know  at  Kphesus  of  the
division  which  had  arisen  in  the  Corinthian  church
(t  Cor.  In).

Whether  she  belonged  to  Ephesus  or  to  Corinth,  who  the
members  of  her  household  were,  whether  even  .she  was  a
Christian  or  not,  are  questions  on  all  of  which  only  conjectures
can  be  offered.  It  is  possible,  but  hardly  probable,  that
Stephanas,  Fortunatus,  and  Achaicus  (i  Cor.  1(J  \T /.)  may  have
been  servants  of  Chloc.

CHOBA  (xojBa  [HA],  x&B&  (s).  <..»  O^  [L-U'],
j  t.  »*  [Walton]),  called  in  Judith  ir>4y:  Chobai
(xcoBai  [BX^'A],  xcoBa  [N*],  in  If.s  xojBa  [BNA],
^^  <^  .,,.  [l^ag. ]),  is  mentioned  in  connection  with  the
defensi\e  measures  of  the  Jews  against  Holofernes
(Judith  4  4).  Reland  (p.  721)  proposed  the  Coabis  oi
the  Tab.  Pent,  near  Jericho,  a  site  that  would  agree
with  both  the  Greek  and  the  Syriac  of  Judith  4  4  ;  and
in  connection  with  it  Conder  {PEF .Mem.  2231)  ])oints
to  the  ruin  el-Mekhubby  and  the  cave ' Ardk  el  K hubby
on  the  Roman  road  3  m.  from  TUbds  (see  Thebez)  and
1 1  from  Beisdn.

CHOENIX  (xoiNi5:  in  Ezek.45io/  ©"aQ  for
Bath),  a  measure  of  capacity  Rev.  66  RV™?-  (EV
'  measure  '). See  Wkight.s  and  Mkasl-kk.s.

CHOIB.  The  subject  of  the  hereditary  choirs,  or
better,  guilds  of  singers  is  considered  elsewhere  (see
1  M  ho  PSAI.M.S).  We  content  ourselves  here
em  rs.  ^-^^^  ^^^  Talmudic  statements  relative  to
the  Temple  choir  in  the  narrower  sense  of  the  word,
postponing,  however,  the  question  of  choral  psalms.
The  Talmud  affirms  that  the  choir  in  the  Second
Temple  consisted  of  not  less  than  twelve  adult  Levites,
nine  of  whom  played  on  the  instrument  called  the
Kinnor  (lyre?),  two  on  the  Neliel  (lute?),  while  the
remaining  one  beat  the  .selsOlim  (cymtwls).  This
number  might,  however,  be  exceeded  on  the  occasion
of  festivals  (Mish.  Erach.  23-5).  No  statement  is  made
as  to  the  number  of  the  singers  whom  these  musicians
accompanied,  from  which  Cratz  infers  that  the  instru-
mental and  the  vocal  music  were  performed  by  the
same  persons.  This  seems  to  illustrate  Ps.  92i[i]  3[4]
(Che.)-

Good  is  it  to  give  thanks  to  Yahw^,
To  m.ike  melody  to  the  name  of  the  Most  High,
'I'o  the  sound  ofthe  horn  and  the  lute,
To  the  sweetly  sounding  notes  ofthe  lyre.
Certainly the most important duty of the choir of
Levites  was  the  service  of  song. The  Talmud also
states that  boys' voices  were  called in  to  modify  the
deep  bass  of  the  men's  voices. The  choir-boys  did  not
stand  on  the  platform  with  the  Ix»vites,  but  lower  down,
so  that  their  heads  were  on  a  level  w  iih  the  feet  of  the
Levites. They  were  sons  of  persons  of  rank  in  Jeru-
salem  ('trn' *Tp"33, Talm. Erach. 13/^). See  Griitz,
Psalmen,  65/  ; Del.,  Ps.  26/.,  372  ;  and  cp  Music,
§  1.3/

The  duty  of  the  choir  is  briefly  summed  up  in  Neh.

1224  2  Ch.  513. It is  T^\Th\  \Sjh,  i.e.,  to  raise  the

„  _ . strain of  praise ( HallfilQ  =  praise  ye) and

■ **  y* thanksgiving  (H6du  =  give  ye  thanks). See

IIallel, Conkession,  §3. The  formula  of  'thanks-


CHOLA

piving  which  served  as  a  refrain  in  the  later  eucharistic
songs  was,  '  P"or  he  is  good,  for  his  loving-kindness  is
for  ever'  (2  Ch.  5  13  736  Ezra  3  n  Jer.  3:iii— the  last
passage  has  been  expanded  by  a  late  writer — and  cp
the  psalms  beginning  'Give  thanks  unto  Yahwe').
Were  there  any  female  singers  in  the  temple  choirs?
From  Xch.  767  Pcritz  infers  that  there  were  ('Women
ill  the  Ancient  Hebrew  Cult.'  /BLlI  nZ  ['98]).

Strange  to  say,  the  word  'choirs'  occurs  but  once,  and  only
in  RV'iitJ.  Mattaniah  (if  this  mg.  is  right)  was  '  over  the
choirs'  (MT  nn;.-!),  Neh.128.  Del.  {Psalmen  26),  Ry.,  and
Kau.  (//.?),  however,  give  'choir'  as  the  rendering  of  niin
in  Neh.  1231,  where  RV  has  'companies  that  gave  thanl;s.'
This  may  be  accepted,  but  the  mg.  'choirs'  in  12  8  is  but  a  con-
fession of  the  great  improbability  of  MT.  Neither  n'n'H  "*""
r'T.T  (which  Ry.  and  Ron.  prefer)  can  be  naturally  defended.
Re.-id  niliTSy.  'over  the  thanksgiving'  (Bottch.,  Ol.,  Guthe).
EV  in  Neh.  12  8,  therefore,  virtually  corrects  the  text,  ©l  irt\
ruiv  i^oixoKoyr)(T(iav  :  (puNA  pointed  mi^ri  (ejri  Ttt>»'X"P<"'')-  Cp
Neh.  11  17,  and  see  M.\ttaniah,  2.  t.  K.  C.

CHOLA (xooAa [B]),  Judith  15  4 RV, AV Coi.a

(,/.r.).

CHOR-ASHAN,  RV  Cor-.vshan  (|L*'y-li3),  1S.3O30.
See  AsHAN  and  BoK-ASiiAN.

CHORAZIN  (xopAzeiN[Ti.  WH]Mt.  1121  Lk.  IO13
F.us.  OS^-^'.iO'iT!  xtop)-  III  these  two  passages  Jesus
calls  woe  upon  Chorazin  andBethsaida  (and  immediately
after  on  Capernaum)  as  towns  in  which  his  wonderful
works  have  produced  no  effect.  From  his  direct  address
to  all  three,  they  appear  to  have  lain  together  within  his
sight.  Jerome  (C>.S'(-'  114  7  Chorozain)  places  Chorazin
2  R. m.  from  Capernaum  (Euseb.  12  R.m.,  but  this
seems  a  copyist's  error).  In  his  commentary  on  Is.  9i
Jerome  describes  the  town  as  on  the  shore  of  the  lake —
like  Capernaum,  Tiberias,  and  Bethsaida.  From  this
Robinson  (A'A'Sasg/; )  argues  for  the  site  at  Tell  Hum.
But  about  I  m.  N.  of  Tell  Hum,  in  a  shallow
wfuly  running  from  the  Lake  into  the  hills,  there  are
black  basalt  ruins,  including  those  of  a  large  syna-
gogue, with  Corinthian  columns,  which  bear  the  name
AVracM  (/V:/-M/<v//.l  400-2).  Now,  Willibald  (722)
says  that  he  went  from  Capernaum  to  Bethsaida,  thence
to  Chorazin,  and  thence  to  the  sources  of  the  Jordan — a
course  which,  in  spite  of  what  Robinson  asserts,  suits
Kerazeh  as  it  does  not  suit  either  Tell  Hum,  or  any
other  site  on  the  Lake.  Accordingly,  most  moderns,
since  Thomson  discovered  the  site  in  1857,  agree  that
Kerazeh  is  Chorazin,  and  take  Jerome's  statement  as
either  vague  or  inaccurate.  (Robinson  thinks  the  name
may  have  drifted  from  Tell  Hum  to  Kerazeh.)  Jesus
calls  Chorazin  a  city  and  treats  it  as  comparable  with
Tyre  and  Sidon.  The  ruins  are  extensive,  and  there
are  traces  of  a  paved  road  connecting  the  site  with  the
great  trunk  road  from  Capernaum  to  Damascus.

The  15ab.  Talmud  (Mfnahoth  85(1)  praises  the  wheat  of
Chorazin  (cvi^  cp  Neubauer,  Geog.  Talin.  220).  In  the  days
of  Eusebius  and  Jerome  (330  and  400  a.d.)  the  place  was  in
ruins. Willibald  found  a  Christian  Church  there. G.  A.  S.

CHOREE  (xopBs  [BA]),  i  Esd.  5i2  RV=Ezra29
Zacc.m.

CHOSAMEUS  (xocAMAOC  [B],  -omaioc  [A],
I^a-VXm  cxd  qj  cia(*i  a_!O.*09)  [Syr.  ] ),  i  Esd.  9  32.  The
name  follows  .Siiuon  (=.Shimeon  in  ||  Ezra  IO31),  and
hence  may  represent  one  of  the  three  names  in  Ezra
10  32  otherwise  omitted  in  i  Esd.  Possibly  in  a  poor
MS  only  the  final  -;  of  Malluch  and  the  third  name
Shemariah  were  legible,  and  out  of  these  the  scribe  made
Choshamiah(Ban,  I'ar.  Apoc).  Otherwise  the  name  has
arisen  from  Hashum  (ciiE^n),  "v.  33  ;  but  the  Syr.  }  ;-v»-r
still  remains  a  difficulty.

CHOZEBA,  RV  Cozeba  (n3T3),  iCh.  422t.  See
AcHzin,  I.

CHRIST  (o  XPICTOC  [Ti.  WH]),  Mt.  24.  See
Messiah,  §  2,  end.

75'


CHRISTIAN,  NAME  OF

CHRISTIAN,  NAME  OF.  A\e  can  readily  under-
stand that  the  followers  of  Jesus  confessed  to  the  name
of  their  Master  whenever  occasion  arose.  On  the  other
hand,  the  time,  the  place,  and  the  circumstances  of  the
origin  of  the  name  Xpi(rria«'6$  as  a  specific  designation
are  obscure.  According  to  Acts  11 26  the  matter  seems
a  sinii)le  one  ;  but,  with  this  passage  before  us,  it  is
1  Infreauencv  •"em-irk^We  how  seldom  the  name
"  ^' occurs elsewhere in the records of

early  Christianity.  In  the  NT  the  only  other  places
where  it  is  found  are  Acts  2628  and  i  I'et.  4i6.  It  is
certainly  not  alluded  to  in  Acts  5  41  ;  for  '  the  name'  on
account  of  which  the  apostles  here  suffer  dishonour  was,
as  we  are  expressly  told  in  v.  40,  the  name  of  Jesus.
This  passage,  accordingly,  lielongs  to  the  same  category
as  Mk.  93741 — where,  Ijesides,  the  words  'because  ye
are  Christ's'  after  kirl  T<p  dySnari  fxov  (so  Ti. )  may  be
merely  the  explanatory  marginal  gloss  of  some  early
reader — and  ^lk.  13 13.  In  Ja.  27  also,  the  '  honourable
name  '  by  which  the  readers  are  called  is  not  the  nanie
'Christian,'  but  the  name  of  Christ  himself  as  their  Lord  ;
for  the  expression  is  to  be  explained  in  the  same  sense
as  .Am.  9 12  ( '  the  heathen,  which  are  called  by  my  name  ' )
— viz. ,  by  reference  to  2  S.  I228  ( '  lest  ...  it  be  called
after  my  name ' ).  All  passages  of  this  class  must  here  be
left  out  of  account,  inasmuch  as  they  do  not  presuppose
the  specific  name  '  Christian. '  The  name  is  presupposed,
as  far  as  the  NT  is  concerned,  only  in  Lk.  622  [rb  dvofia

Outside  of  the  NT,  according  to  the  exhaustive  re-
searches of  Lipsius.i  the  name  does  not  occur  in  either
of  the  epistles  ascriljed  to  Clement  of  Rome ;  it  is
absent  from  Barnabas,  Hernias,  Polycarp,  the  Pse'udo-
Clementine  Homilies,  Tatian,  and  the  Cohortatio  ad
Circvcos.  The  Pseudo-C/emenfi/ie  Recognitions,  as  also
the  Catholic  Acts  of  Peter  and  Paul,  have  it  only  in  a
few  passages  of  later  insertion  ;  so  also  with  the  Gnostic
writings.  As  a  word  in  regular  use  it  makes  its  earliest
appearances  in  the  Apologists  —  Justin,  Athenagoras,
Theophilus,  Minucius  Felix — and  in  the  '  Epistle  to
Diognetus,'  in  Ignatius,  who  uses  also  the  word  Xpiar-
laviafxhs,  in  the  '  Martyrdom  of  Polycarp,'  in  the
Catholic  Krjpvyfxa  TliTpov,  in  the  letter  of  the  churches  of
LugdQnum  and  \'ienna  (I^us.  //A'5i/),  in  Irenosus,
TertuUian,  and  Clement  of  Alexandria.  To  this  list
must  be  added  the  passage  in  the  Teaching  of  the  Twelve
Apostles  (124),  discovered  after  the  publication  of
Lipsius's  essa)'.

Lipsius,  it  is  true,  points  out  allusions  to  the  existence
of  the  name  '  Christian  '  in  older  writings.  As  far  as
Hernias,  however,  is  concerned,  the  only  valid  passage
is  Sim.  ix.  174-

The  phrase  is  tTrl  tuj  oi'dfiari  toC  viou  toO  6tov  Ka\ei(rCai.
Such  expressions  as  to  oi/o^ia  toO  vlov  toO  ficoO  <f>opelv  (ix.  13  2^?
14  s_yC  H5  3)  or  Aa^i^arcif  (ix.  13  7)  or  <j>epeiv  (Polycarp,  *i  3)  do  not
necessarily  presuppose  the  word  XpicTtaro?,  and  the  simple
phrase  to  ovofia  (j)opdv(Si»i.  ix.  13  2yC),  or  na.(rxfi-v  Sia  to  ora/ua,
or  €veKa  tou  ofo/xaros  (ix.  28  3  5  ;  F/V.  iii.  1  q  2  i),  in  several  cases
is  clearly  in  juxtaposition  to  the  words  to  oro^ta  toO  vlov  Toi)
6eov  or  ToO  Kvpiov  (Sim.  ix.  13  3,  28  2-6  ;  /  'is.  iii.  5  2).

Even  I  Clem.  143  /.  cannot  with  certainty  be  taken  in
the  sense  which  is  so  abundantly  plain  in  Justin  {.-Ipol.
1  4)  :  Xptcrtaj'oi  elvai  KarriyopovfieOa  '  t6  di  xpujarbv
/McrelffOai  ov  SiKaiov.  This  play  upon  words  seems,
besides,  to  be  sufficiently  explained  by  the  consideration
that  xP'^o'Tiis  had  at  that  time  the  same  pronunciation
as  xP«<'"''(5s-  TertuUian  {A/>.3;  Ad  A'at.  I  3),  however,
expressly  says  that  the  Gentiles  perperam  or  corrupte
pronounced  it  Chrestiani.  XprfffTiavoi  is  the  reading  in
all  three  NT  passages  of  the  uncorrected  N  ;  it  pre-
ponderates in  the  inscri[)tions  ;  and  Justin,  according  to
.Blass  (Hermes,  1895,  pp.  465-470),  associates  this  word
with  xpiJcTiis  in  his  Apology  {'\.  4  46  49  ;  ii.  6,  where,  as  he
says,  KiXPV<^Oa.i  ought  to  be  read),  just  as  in  his  Dialogue
with Trypho  he  associates  it  with  XP^^*-"- Blass  con-

1  '  Ueber  den  Ursprung  u.  d.  altesten  Gebrauch  des  Christen-
namens ; '  Gratulationsprogramm  der  theologischen  Facultiit
Jena  fiir  Hase,  1873,  pp.  6-10.


CHRISTIAN,  NAME  OP


jectures  from  this  that  the  PaRiiiis  to  wliom  the
ApoU>g\'  is  addressed  had  derived  ihe  words  '  anointed,
followers  of  tlie  anointed,'  which  were  mysterious  to
them,  by  a  [xjpular  etymology  fron»  x/"?*'"'""* :  ""<^'  Justin,
for  simphcity  s  sake,  accepted  the  derivation  without
seeking  to  correct  it.

We  have  thus  seen  that  the  name  was  left  unusetl  by
a  series  uf  Christian  writers  at  a  time  when  it  was  already


2.  Possible
early  origin.


familiar  to  the  younger  I'liny  {Epist.  10
96  [97])  in  112  A.D. ,  to  'I'adtus  [Ann.
1544)  in  1 16-1 17  A.  I). ,  and  to  Suetonius
(AVr.i,  16)  ill  120  A.  I).  'I'he  plain  fact  is  that  they  did
not  necil  it.  I'or  designating  their  conununity  there  lay
at  their  command  an  ample  variety  of  expressions,'  sucli
as  'brethren,'  'saints,'  'elect,'  'called,'  'that  lx;lieved,*
'faithful,'  '  disciples,'  '  they  that  are  in  Christ,'  '  they  that
are  in  the  Lord,'  'they  that  arc  Christ's,' and  ['any  .  .  .
of  the  way'?].  It  follows  that,  notwithstaruling  its
absence  from  their  writings,  the  name  of  Christian  may
very  well  have  originated  at  a  comparatively  early  time.

It  can  hardly,  however,  have  been  current  at  so  early
a  date  as  that  indicated  in  .Acts  11 26.

The  famine  predicted  at  that  time,  according  to  Acts  11  28,
occurred  in  Palestine  l)ct\veen  the  years  44  and  48.  (The  belief
that  it  extended  over  the  whole  of  the  habitable  world  is  a  mis-
take.) The  prediction  itself  must,  of  course,  have  been  earlier.
Indeed,  the  expression,  '  which  came  to  pass  -n  the  <lays  of
Claudius,"  may  be  held  to  imply  that  it  was  made  before  tlie
accession  of  that  emperor— that  is  to  say,  before  41  A.u.  Wiih
this  it  agrees  that  the  death  of  Henxl  Agrippa  I.  (44  A.u.)  is
mentioned  in  the  following  chapter  (I'J).

Some  fifteen  years  later,  or  n)ore,  the  claim  to  be
'  of  Chri.st '  was  made  by  a  single  party  in  Corinth
(iCor.  112^

I'resumably  certain  personal  disciples  of  Jesus  had  first  applied
this  designation  to  themselves,  whilst  denying  to  Paul  the  right
to  l)c  so  called,  as  also  his  right  to  the  apostleship  (2  Cor.  In  7).
Paul,  on  the  other  hand,  takes  great  pains  to  establish  the  right
of  ail  believers  in  Christ  to  the  designation  (i  Cor.  1  13  823  ;  also
7  22  10  23  Rom.  8  I  Gal.  3  29  5  24).

Thus  it  can  hardly  have  been  already  a  current  name.

As  for  Jesus  himself,  it  is  permissible  to  doubt  whether
he  used  in  their  present  forms  such  e.xpressions  as  we
now  find  in  Mk.  it 37  41  13 13 — that  is  to  say,  with  the
eiui)hasis  upon  his  own  name.  The  theory  that  he  pre-
supposes the  currency  of  the  name  '  Christians '  in  Lk.
622  is  absolutely  excluded  by  the  consideration  that,
according  to  the  same  gospel,  he  does  not  himself  lay
claim  to  the  name  of  Christ  till  later  (9  20),  and  even  then
wishes  it  to  be  kept  secret,  and  further  that,  according  to
the  same  author  (.Acts  1 1  26),  the  name  '  Christians '  did
not  arise  till  a  considerable  time  after  his  death.

All  this  makes  it  more  than  doubtful  whether  the
writer  had  even  here  any  trustworthy  authority  for
assigning  the  occurrence  to  so  early  a  dale.  I  lis  reason
for  doing  so  may  have  been  simply  that  the  founding
of  the  first  Gentile  Christian  church  seemed  to  be  the
most  likely  occasion  for  its  coming  into  u.se.

The  suddenness  with  which  the  name  '  Christian '
becomes  one  of  frcciuent  occurrence  in  the  writings  of
the  a|)ologists  shows  that  the  word  first
:x>came  necessary  for  Christians  in  their
dealings  with  Pagans.  In  speaking  to
the  Letter,  such  periphrases  as  '  those  of  Christ '  were
found  to  be  inadecjuate  :  a  definite  name  was  wanted.
In  fact,  it  is  probable  enough  that  the  name  came  from
the  heathen  themselves  in  the  first  instance.  With  such
a  view  of  its  origin  Acts  11  26  fits  in  very  well.  -\t  all
events,  the  name  did  not  come  from  the  Jews.  These
were  still  looking  for  their  Messiah.  By  using  a  name
which  signified  '  those  of  the  Messiah,'  they  would  by
implication  have  justified  the  sect  that  regarded  Jesus
as  such,  and  so  have  stultified  themselves.  Even  Herod
Agrippa  II.,  notwithstanding  his  Greek  training  and  the
indifference  towards  his  ancestral  religion  which  this
carrietl  with  it,  could  not  have  gone  so  far  ;  moreover,
he  still  held  by  Judaism  to  the  extent  at  least  that  he

t  a5«A(^ot,  ayiot,  eicAeicToi,  kAijtoi,  TrterrcvoKT*?,  irttrrot,  /ia^rai,
01  iv  Xpio-Tu),  ot  oyrri'i  iv  Kvpi(f,  oi  tou  Xpiorou,  oi  nis  65o0  oi'Tts.

753


3.  Used  by  and
with  Pagans.


insisted  uiK)n  King  .Azizus  of  F.mcsa  and  King  Polemo  of
Cilicia  l)cing  circumcised  Ix-'fore  being  allowed  to  marry
his  sisters  Drusilla  and  Ikrrenicc  (Jos. .-/«/.  xx.  7  i  3  [§S
'39.  145/])-  If-  accordingly,  the  saying  attributed  to
him  in  Acts  2628'  is  authentic,  the  name  'Christian'
must  by  that  time  have  become  so  thoroughly  established
that  its  etymological  meaning  was  no  longer  thought  of.

The  whole  scene,  however,  is  in  full  accord  with  the
tendency  of  Acts  (see  Acts,  §  Si)  to  set  forth  Paul's
innocence,  and  at  the  same  time  the  truth  of  Christianity,
as  accepted  by  the  Roman  authorities;  and  this  of  course
is  more  effectively  done  by  the  mouth  of  a  Jew.  An
obvious  iiarallel  is  the  statement  of  Merod  Antipas  in
the  gospel  by  the  same  author  (Lk. '2.'J6-i5) ;  but  its
historicity  is  oix.'n  to  grave  suspicion,  both  in  view  of
what  we  know  of  Henxls  relations  to  John  the  Haptist
and  in  view  of  the  fact  that  the  story  is  absent  from  the
other  gos|K.'ls.  Even  if  Pauls  meeting  with  Herod
Agrippa  II.  is  historical,  the  word  Xpiariavds  may  very
easily  have  come  into  the  narrative  out  of  the  author  s
own  vocabulary.  We  are  informed  by  the  same  writer
(.\cts  2 1  5)  with  much  greater  precision  that  'sect  of  the
Nazarenes  '  (aipeffis  tu)p  Naj'wpatwi')  was  the  name  given
by  the  Jews  U)  the  Christians,  as  we  learn  also  from
Tertullian  (.hh:  Marc.  4  8)  and  Jerome  (in  Jes.  ch.  5  i8y.
4'J7  52  s).  It  was  not  till  afterwards  that  the  expression
was  restricted  to  a  particular  sect  of  t'hristians  — a  fact
by  which  Epiphanius  allowefl  himself  to  Ix;  misled.  He
tells  us  [Har.  289)  that  the  Jews,  in  their  public  prayers,
which  were  oftered  ihree  limes  daily  in  their  synagogues,
pronounced  a  .solemn  curse  upon  this  sect — a  curse
which,  as  we  learn  from  Justin  (Diul.  16  and  elsewhere),
and  indeed  as  we  see  from  the  nature  of  the  ca.se,  applied
rather  to  all  Christians.-  Its  Hebrew  name,  Hirkat-ha-
Minim,  shows  that  the  Jews  liad  still  another  name  for
the  Christians — and  this  name  could  also  be  Graecised
into  'S\ivaloi.

As  for  the  ])lace  where  the  name  Christian  arose,  the
apparent  Latin  termination  used  to  be  thought  to  (joint  lo


4.  Place  of
origin.


a  western,  indeed  (lac. ./«//.  If)  44)  to  a
Roman,  origin  ;  but  that  it  was  there  that
the  name  first  came  intcj  use  is  by  no
means  said  by  Tacitus,  whilst  in  such  a  word  as
Herodian,  '\lpi^5iavo%  (Mk.  36and  elsewhere),  we  have
evidence  that  in  the  Greek- s[x-aking  domain  this  col-
loquial Latin  fcjrmation  of  personal  names  (f.^.,  Citsa-
riani),  in  incorrect  imitation  of  forms  like  Pompeiani
(where  the  /  is  part  of  the  root),  was  not  unknown.
The  ancient  Greek  grammarians  recognise  the  termina-
tion -avos  for  derivatives  from  town  .ind  country  names,
and  even  designate  it  specially  as  the  rvnoi  ' Xaiavos,  as
being  met  with,  not  in  Circcce  itself,  but  in  .Asia
(Buttmann,  Am:/.  Gr.  Sprachlehre,  §  11954;  many
examjyles  in  Lipsius,  13-16).  In  this  matter,  therefore.
Acts  11  26  is  not  open  to  criticism  (yet  sec  alxjve,  §  2).

The  time  at  which  the  name  arose  could  not  with
assurance  be  placed  earlier  than  79  .A.  U. ,  even  if  a  certain
p  .. inscription  (which  disappeared  soon  after

0.  rompeu  ^^^  discovery)  at  Pompeii,  on  the  wall  of
inscription.  ^  j^uji^ing  ,';u  first  sui)poscd  to  have  bc-cn
a  Christian  meeting-house),  had  actually  contained  the
letters  iiKisTi.Wt.

This  reading  might  very  well  have  Ken  a  derivative  from  the
tolerably  frequent  proper  name  Chrestus  (see  above,  §  1);  but,
in  point  of  fact,  the  reading  is  only  a  conjecture,  and,  according
to  Kies<lings  original  transcription  (which  is  still  extant),  the
word  really  was  ct'pistiru- — whatever  that  may  mean.

The  architecture  of  the  house  shows  it  to  have  been
an  'inn'  (caupona),  provided  even  with  a  cei/a  mere-
tricia,  where,  accordingly,  it  is  hardly  likely  that  Christian

1  The  best-attested  rcidinj:,  iv  oKiytf  fie  ireifl«i?  XpiiTTiavov
irot^O'ai  (unless  we  are  to  read,  with  IK,  yfi-«aSai  or,  with  .A,
ire«*]7,  or,  to  conjecture  with  Hon,  Troroitfat  (instead  of  fit
rrtiBfii)  is  perhaps  most  e.-\sily  explained  as  a  Laiinism  :  '  you
are  persuading  me  somewhat  to  act  the  part  of  a  Christian '
{(Shristianutn  agere ;  so  Potwin,  Bihl.  Stur.  iSSg,  p.  562_/C).

2  This  solemn  curse  is  said  to  have  first  taken  shape  at  Jabneh
in  the  time  of  Gamaliel  ii.  (80-177  a.d.).

754


CHRISTIAN,  NAME  OF


6.  Early  per-
secutions.


meetings  would  have  been  held  ;  in  fact,  the  inscription,
which  ixji^ins  with  the  words,  '  Vina  Nervii,'  was  prob-
ably an  advertisement  of  wines. '

An  answer  to  our  question  can,  therefore,  be  hoped
for  only  from  examination  of  the  history  of  the  Christian
persecutions.  The  character  of  these
has  been  placed  in  an  entirely  new
light  by  the  proposition  of  Moinmscn
in  1885  {Rom.  Gesch.  6520,  n. ),  which  has  since  then
been  more  fully  and  elaborately  develojjcd  by  him
in  .Sybel's  Hist.  Ztschr.  64389-429  [90],  and  accepted
by  C.  J.  Neumann  [Der.  roin.  Staat  u.  d.  Allgeni.
kirchf,  1  16  [90])  and  by  Ramsay  (chap.  10,  g  5)
— that  '  the  persecution  of  the  Christians  was  always
similar  to  that  of  robbers.'  On  this  view,  every  pro-
vincial governor  had,  without  special  instructions,  the
duty  of  seeking  out  and  bringing  to  justice  latrones,
Si7cn7f^n>s,  plagiarios  (kidnappers),  and  fures  [Dig.
i.  18  13  xlviii.  134),  and  for  this  end  was  invested,  over
and  alwve  his  ordinary  judicial  attributes,  with  a  very
full  power  of  magisterial  coercion,  which  was  not
limited  to  definite  offences,  or  to  a  regular  form  of
process,  or  to  any  fixed  scale  of  punishments.  Only,
as  far  as  Roman  citizens  were  concerned,  banishment
was  forbidden,  and  the  capital  penalty  was  reserved  for
the  judgment  of  the  emperor.

i.  'Lr^i^al  Status  of  Christians.  — While  actually  throw-
ing into  still  further  obscurity  the  date  of  the  origin
of  the  Christian  name,  this  discovery  of  Mommsen's
(above,  §  6)  sheds  much  light  upon  the  question  of  legal
position.  The  points  on  which  the  scholars  named,  as
well  as  others,  are  agreed  are,  brieliy,  these.  Among  the
duties  of  a  Roman  citizen  a  fundamental  place  was  held
by  that  of  worshipping  the  ancestral  gods.  Hy  these  in
the  earliest  period  were  meant  only  those  of  the  city  of
Rome  ;  but  subsequently  those  of  Latium  were  included,
and  finally  all  those  of  Italy  and  Greece,  as  soon  as
they  had  been  formally  recognised  by  decree  of  the
senate.  Non-citizens  were  forbidden  to  proselytise  to
strange  gods,  but  not  to  worship  them,  so  far  as  this
did  not  appear  to  Ije  of  danger  to  the  state.  The
Christian  religion,  however,  was  held  to  be  dangerous
in  this  way,  as  denying  the  existence  of  the  gods  of  the
state.  The  Jewish  religion  was,  strictly,  under  the
same  ban  ;  and,  therefore,  circumcision  w.as  laid  under
severe  penalties  by  Hadrian,  and,  as  far  as  non-Jews
were  concerned,  by  Antoninus  Pius  and  Septimius
Severus  also.  For  themselves,  however,  the  Jews,

apart  from  the  prohibition  by  Hadrian  just  mentioned,
possessed  religious  freedom  on  the  ground  of  special
privileges  conceded  to  them,  particularly  by  Julius  Caesar
and  .-Vugustus,  in  accordance  with  the  favoured  position
which  they  had  enjoyed,  long  before  the  Roman  rule,
in  F^gypt  and  elsewhere  in  the  East.  These  privileges
included  exemption  from  military  service,  which  would
have  interfered  with  their  strict  observance  of  the
sabbath,  and  exemption  from  the  obligation  to  appear
before  the  courts  on  th..t  day.  When  Caesar,  on
account  of  susj^ected  political  activity,  suppressed
curtita  collegia  ftrirter  antiquitus  constituta  {Snel.  Cces.
42),  the  Jews  were  expressly  exempted.  New  cor[X)ra-
tions  in  the  older  {i.e.,  senatorial)  provinces  required
the  s.anction  of  the  senate  ;  in  the  imperial  provinces
still  under  military  government  that  of  the  emperor
himself  was  doubtless  sufficient.  It  is  probable  that
burial  societies  had  a  general  sanction  from  the  senate.
Apart  from  these,  however,  there  were  many  societies
which  had  never  obtainerl  any  special  concession.
They  were  left  alone  if  they  did  not  apjxiar  to  be
dangerous  ;  but  at  any  moment  they  could  be  suppressed
by  the  pcjlice.  In  the  cases  of  those  wliich  had  lx«n
sanctioned  by  the  senate,  suppression  was  made  lawful
1  So  Victor  Schultze,  Z./i  Kircluns^csch.  1S81.  pp.  125-130,
and  also,  as  regards  the  text,  C/Libjt)  ('7;)-  }"^  inscription
ought  not,  therefore,  to  be  relied  on,  as  it  is  still  relied  on  by
Ramsay  (CAKrc/jP)  chap.  12,  §  5,  p.  268,  and  St.  Paul,  chap.  15,
§  I.  ed.  1896,  p.  346).

755


only  by  a  new  senatorial  decree.  Now,  the  Christians
could  never  have  obtained  such  a  concession,  for  their
religion  did  not  belong  to  the  class  of  permitted  re-
ligions. In  their  case,  accordingly,  the  well-known
rule  (Z>/>.  xlvii.  22i)  did  not  apply:  ( '  permittitur
tenuioribus  stipem  menstruam  conferre,  dum  tamen
semel  in  mense  coeant  .  .  .  sed)  religionis  causa  coire
non  i)rohib^'ntur,  duin  tamen  per  hoc  non  fiat  contra
senatus  consultum,  cjuo  illicita  collegia  arcentur."
They  had,  therefore,  to  hold  their  meetings  simply  on
sufferance,  and  were  never  for  a  moment  free  from  the
risk  of  |>olice  interference.  Still,  they  did  not  expose
themselves  to  {Xirsecution  or  to  death  merely  by  holding
unauthorised  meetings.  l-'or  such  an  offence  these
[XMialties  were  much  too  severe.  When  a  sodalitas
of  this  sort  was  broken  up,  unless  its  object  had  bwn
in  itself  criminal,  the  members  were  subjected  only
to  a  mild  jiunishment.  In  fact,  they  were  allowed
to  divide  among  themselves  the  funds  of  the  society,
which  were  confiscated  in  the  case  of  all  capital  offen-
ces. Persecution  and  capital  punishment  fell  to
the  lot  of  the  Christians,  therefore,  only  because  their
religion  was  regarded  as  criminal.  In  the  case  of
Roman  citizens  it  implied  a  violation  of  the  duty  to
worship  the  gods  of  the  state  ;  in  the  case  of  pro-
vincials who  were  not  citizens,  ddtJTrjs  as  against  the
local  gods  of  the  place  was  in  like  manner  implied.
In  a  (legally)  very  lax  sense  they  were  accused  of
saci-ilegiuvt,  which  originally  meant  only  theft  of  sacred
objects.  Over  and  above  this,  all  Christian  subjects
were  chargeable  with  the  offence  of  refusing  to  worship
the  Emperor,  an  offence  legally  construed  as  majestas,
or  crimen  Iccsic  majestatis — more  precisely,  as  iiiajestatis
imperaloruin — the  majestas  popiili  Romayii  not  being
touched  by  this  class  of  offences.  Thus,  either  as
sacrilege  or  as  majestas,  Christianity  could  at  all  times
be  prosecuted,  and — certainly  in  the  case  of  non-
citizens,  probably  also  in  that  of  citizens — by  the  mere
exercise  of  arbitrary  coercive  power.  The  penalties
under  either  charge  were,  approximately,  the  same.

ii.  Correspondence  of  Pliny  and  Trajan. — Thus  we
gain  a  new  light  on  the  correspondence  between  Pliny
and  Trajan  (see  above,  §  2).  Let  it  be  premised  that
by  the  Jlagitia  (2),  as  may  be  gathered  from  the
allusion  in  the  words  cibum  promiscuum  et  innoxium
(7),  were  certainly  intended  the  cpulcv  Thycstecv  and  the
concubitus  Oedipodei,  which,  as  we  learn  from  Justin
{Apol.  I26  2 12)  and  other  writers  of  the  second  century,
were  laid  to  the  charge  of  the  Christians.  Acts  20  8
already  appears  to  be  inti^nded  to  meet  the  familiar
accusation.  The  story  ran  th.at  tefore  the  beginning  ot
these  orgies  all  lights  were  jiut  out.  Pliny's  question,
then,  whether  the  mere  fact  of  being  Christian  {nomen
ipsmn),  or  whether  only  the  crimes  a.ssociated  therewith
ought  to  be  punished,  is,  from  what  we  have  seen,
already  answered  in  the  first  sense,  and  is  so  decided
by  Trajan  also.  On  the  other  hand,  Trajan's  injunction,
conquirendi  non  sunt,  with  which  also  is  to  be  associated
his  order  to  disregard  anonymous  letters  of  accusation,
is  an  important  mitigation  of  the  law,  as  is  his  other
direction  that  a  Christian  who  formally  renounces  his
Christianity  by  sacrificing  to  the  images  of  the  gods
shall  be  exempt  from  punishment.  Such  a  degree  of
favour  could,  from  the  nature  of  the  case,  never  be
shown  to  the  robber  or  to  the  thief,  with  whom,
nevertheless, the  Christian is  classed.  Let  it  be

noted,  also,  that  Pliny  had  no  difliculty  in  deciding  on
his  own  responsibility  the  earlier  cases  that  came
before  him  (2-4).  His  reference  of  the  matter  to  the
emperor  was  first  occasioned  by  the  largeness  of  the
numlx'r  of  those  who  ultimately  came  to  be  denounced,
and  by  certain  leanings,  on  grounds  of  pwlicy,  towards
clemency  (49/  ),  to  which  Trajan  gives  his  sanction  by
both  of  his  decisions.

We  must,  therefore,  no  longer  hold  to  the  view  that
in this  rescript (which, although originally intended

756


CHRISTIAN,  NAME  OP


only  for  Pliny,  was  shortly  afterwards  piiblishrti,  along
wilh  the  whole  correspondence,  and  taken  as  a  norm
by  other  provincial  governors)  the  |)ersecution  of  the
Christians  was  now  for  the  first  time  authorised.
Accordingly,  we  must  proceed  to  investigate  such  notices
;is  we  have  of  earlier  persecutions,  and  esjK-cially  to
discuss  the  (|uestion  whether  in  these  cases  the  notnen
Chiititiuum  w;xs  known  to  the  authorities  and  consti-
tuted the  ground  of  accus;ition.

iil.  Claudius.  — Of  Claudius  we  arc  informed  by
Suetonius  {CltiuJ.  25)  that  Judaus  impulsore  Chresto
assidue  tumultuantes  Kama  expulit.  It  is  quite  im-
possible, however,  to  determine  whether  by  Chrestos
(on  the  form  of  the  name,  see  above,  §  1)  we  are  here
to  understand  Jesus,  the  preaching  of  whom  by
Christians  divided  the  Jews  in  Koine  into  two  parties,
or  whether  Suetonius  conceivetl  him  to  have  been
|)ersonally  present  in  Rome,  or  whether  we  should  lake
hiin  to  be  a  Jewish  agitator  of  whom  nothing  further  is
known,  .\clsl82  is  by  no  means  decisive  f<jr  the  first
or  the  second  alternative,  even  if  we  are  to  supjwse  that
Aquila  and  Prisca  were  already  Christians  when  they
came  to  Corinth.

iv.  romponia  Grercina. — Of  Toniponia  Grascina  wc
learn  from  Tacitus  (Ann.  I332)  only  that  in  57  :\.v.  she
was  accused  superstttionis  externa',  and  that  she  was
ac(|Uittc(l  of  the  charge  by  her  hustxiiul.  the  consular
A.  I'laiiiiiis,  before  whom  she  had  Ix-en  brought  for
trial.  At  that  time,  however,  the  Jewish  and  I'gyiHian
religions  were  regarded  as  foreign,  just  as  much  as
the  Christian,  which  has  been  supposed  to  be  meant  in
her  case  (Tac.  Ann.  '1  85  ;  Suet.  Tib.  36).  For  full
details  see  Hasenclever,  JPT,  1882,  pp.  47-64.

V.  A'eronian  Persecution. — Tiie  notices  we  have  of
the  Neronian  persecution  are  very  obscure.

Tacitus  (.-(««.  1544)  says:  'abolcndo  rumori  (of  havinj;
planned  the  burning;  of  Rome)  Nero  subdidit  reos  et  qujesi-
tissimis  ptcnis  alTecit,  quos  per  flagitia  invisos  vulgus  Christi-
aiios  appellabat  .  .  .  prinium  correpti,  <|ui  fatebantur,  deinde
iiulicio  eorum  multitiido  ingens  baud  proiiide  in  crimine  incendii
quam  odio  generis  humani  coniuncti  sunt.'  Conjuticti  here
could  mean  only  that  the  ingen.i  ntuttitmio  was  added  to  the
primuni  c(Jrrf/^/(Ramsay,  chap.  1 1,  §  3) ;  the  reatling  ( onvicti  for
coniuncti  is  a  conjectural  emend^ition  almost  universally  adopted.

At  the  outset  the  only  thing  quite  clear  is  that  the
Christians  were  from  the  first  accused  not  as  Christians,
but  as  incendiaries.  Otherwise  Nero  could  not  have
been  freed  from  the  suspicion  of  being  the  guilty  party.
The  Christians,  however,  were  innocent  (subdidit)  ;  and
the  ground  on  which  they  were  condemned,  accordingly,
was  not  so  much  (hand  proinde)  the  evidence  that  they
had  tjeen  incendiaries  as  the  odium  generis  humani.
liy  this  expression  there  cannot  be  understood  a  hatred  of
which  they  were  the  objects  :  Roman  society,  w  hich
alone  could  be  regarded  as  cherishing  it,  cannot
possibly  have  been  spoken  of  as  genus  humanum  by
Tacitus,  .^till,  understood  as  cherished  by  the  Christians,
'  hatred  of  the  human  race '  is  no  less  an  idea  foreign
to  all  legal  conceptions,  nor  could  it  be  supposed  to
represent  another  ground  of  accusation  against  them,
over  and  above  that  ot  incendiarism.

Weizsacker  (.4/.  Zeitalt.  478,  2nd  ed.  462  ;  ET  2  143)  and
Ramsjiy  (chap.  II ,  8§  2  4)  try  indeed  to  make  out  that  this  actually
was  brought  as  a  charge  against  them  by  referring  to  Suetonius
(S'ero  16) :  afflicti  suppliciis  Cltristinni,  genus  hominum
superstitionii  nova-  ac  ntaleficir,  holding  that  by  tnaUficiuni
witchcraft  and  poisoning  are  meant,  and  that  it  was  precisely
for  these  offences  against  society  that  the  two  punishments
bestiis  ohjici  and  crucibus  affigi  were  thre.itened,  and  (according
to  Tacitus)  inflicted.  These  same  punishments,  however,  were
attached  to  many  other  crimes  also.  Suetonius  says  nothing
about  the  conflagration  as  having  occasioned  the  accusation
against  the  Christians.  In  other  words,  he  follows  an  entirely
different  account,  and  we  are  not  justified  in  seeking  to  explain
Tacitus  by  referring  to  Suetonius.  The  two  authors  agree  only
in  believing  that  the  occurrence  in  question  was  confined
to  Rome.

The  main  question,  then,  in  the  case  of  Tacitus,  is  as
to  what  it  was  that  the  persons  first  accused  made
confession  of  ( fatebantur).  The  answer  seems  to  lie  to
our  hand  :  se  incendium  fecisse. Such  a  confession  may

757


very  well  have  lx?en  made  by  them,  though  innocent,
under  torture.  As  regards  the  ingens  multitudo  nothing
more  was  re(|uirttl  than  merely  some  v.igue  suspicions,  or
a  few  false  witnesses,  to  whom  the  judges,  on  account  of
the  conmionly  assumed  general  perversity  of  the  Chris-
tians (iheiT  odium  generis  humani),  were  only  too  ready
to  give  cretlence.  There  remains,  therefore,  a  possi-
bility that  the  religion  of  the  accusetl  did  not  come  into
(juestion  at  all,  and  that  Tacitus  and  Suetonius  have,
unhistorically,  carried  back  the  name  Christiani  from
their  own  time  into  that  of  Nero.  W  ere  this  not  so,
the  reader,  moreover,  would  expect  to  find  in  Tacitus  a
name  indicating  the  characteristic  attribute  of  those
denoted  by  it  ;  after  quos  per  Jlngitia  invisos  vulgus  one
would  exiX!Ct  not  Christianas  but  some  such  expressi<jn
as  Jlagitiarios  appellabat.

Another  interpretation  oi  fatebantur  is  not  less  i)os-
sible.  It  is  tliat  at  hist  only  those  who  h.ad  already
habitually  confessed  thcin.selves  in  public  to  Ix;  Christians
(fatebantur  se  Ciiristiano^  esse)  were  apprehended,  and
that  only  aftenvards,  on  the  evitlence  obtained  from  these
in  the  course  of  the  legal  jiroceedings,  a  great  number
(ingens  multitudo)  of  those  who  had  not  hitherto  made
any  such  public  profession  shared  the  same  fate.  The
Christians  were  laid  hold  of  lx:cause  it  was  hoped  that
popular  belief  would  readily  attribute  the  incendiarism
to  them.  Although,  on  this  supposition  also,  their  re-
ligion con.stituted  no  ground  of  accusation,  it  was  recog-
nised as  distinct  from  the  Jewish  ;  whereas  if  the  other
inlerj)retation  o[ fatebantur  is  adopted  the  Christians  may
have  been  regarded  simply  as  Jews  :  Tacitus  {Hist.  5 5)
attributes  adversus  omnes  hostile  odium  to  the  Jews  also.

Clement  of  Home  further  (i.  5i-()2)  tells  us  only  that
the  (.hristians  suflered,  without  informing  us  why  ;  and
I'aul's  trial  in  Rome  could  throw  light  upon  the  question
before  us  only  if  we  knew  what  was  its  result,  (ja'lio
was  not  led  by  the  accusation,  as  cited  in  Actsl.Hi3,
to  suppose  that  Paul  taught  a  religion  dangi-rous  to  the
.state.  The  representation,  too  (though  not  necessarily
the  fact),  is  oj)en  to  suspicion  on  account  of  the  '  tcnd-
ency '  observable  in  Acts  (see  Acts,  §  5i).  In  a

word,  the  little  that  we  really  know  of  the  Neronian
period  does  not  enable  us  to  tome  to  a  decision  on
the  question  as  to  the  date  and  origin  of  the  name
'  Christian. '

Ramsay,  however  (chap.  11,  S8  2  6/1),  considers  that  in  the
second  stage  the  Neronian  persecution  was  permanent,  otherwise
than  in  the  first  stage.  As  the  persecution  is  mentioned  by  Sue-
tonius along  with  oihermc;isures  of  police  which  must  have  Iwen
of  a  permanent  nature,  he  holds  that  it  must  have  had  the  same
character  :  in  the  .sei:ond  stage,  of  course,  the  persecution  was  not
on  account  of  incendiarism,  but  on  account  of  alleged  witchcraft
and  o\.\\v.r jiagiti a.  Tacitus,  Ramsay  believes,  al.so  gives  proof
of  this  permanence  of  the  persecution  under  Nero  when  he  says,
untie  .  .  .  vtiseratio  oriebatur  tanquam  non  utiiitate publica
seJ  in  stnrtiatn  unius  ahsuiiierentur;  and  Sulpicius  .Severus
(ii.  '.'03)  is  understood  to  speak  to  the  same  etTect — hoc  initio  in
Christianos  satiiri  caeptum :  post  ctiavt  datis  legibus  r,  tigio
vetabatur  pnlamque  edutis  propositis  Ckristianuiii  esse  non
licehat.  Immediately  up<  in  this,  however(ll7  Vl\  ;  3rd  ed.pp.
244,  255),  Ramsay  e.\:plains  that  the  word  post  refers  to  other
emperors  th.in  Nero,  and  also  concc-des  that  the  e.vpressions
edicta  and  leges  are  'loosely  and  inaccuratelv '  employed  by
Sulpicius.  Further,  the  unde  in  Tacitus  traces  the  niiseratio
to  the  horrors  of  the  public  celebration  of  the  executions  and
Nero's  personal  participation  in  them — incidents  which  were,  of
course,  not  of  constant  recurrence.  The  argument  based  on  the
context  in  Suetonius  is  too  precarious  to  rest  history  upon,  even
apart  from  the  doubtful  interpretation  o(  nialrficir.

vi.  Titus  and  Vespasian. — We  read  in  Sulpicius
Severus  (ii.  306-8)  that,  in  a  council  of  war,  Titus  finally
decided  on  the  destruction  of  the  temple  in  Jerusaletn
quo  plenius  Jud<eorum  et  Christianorum  religio  toile-
retur  :  quippe  has  religiones  licet  contrnrias  sibi,  iisdem
tamen  (ab)  auctoribus  profectas  ;  Christianas  ex  Judetis
exstitisse :  radice  sublatc  stirpem  facile  perituram.
Now,  even  were  we  to  reject,  as  a  falsification  of
history  from  motives  of  complaisance,  the  very  different
statement  of  Josephus,  an  eye-witness  (IJJw.  43-7),  that
Titus  wished  the  temple  to  be  preser^■ed,  and  were  we
to  carry  back  the  words  of  Sulpicius  Severus  to  Tacitus,

758


CHRISTIAN.  NAME  OF


whom  he  elsewhere  always  follows,  we  should  still  be  a
long  way  from  having  proved  the  account  of  Scverus  to
be  historical.  It  is  in  the  highest  degree  improbable
that  Titus  had  such  erroneous  ideas  as  to  the  depend-
ence of  the  Christians  on  the  temple,  while  attributing
to  them  such  dangerous  qualities  and  so  great  a  degree
of  independence  as  apart  from  the  Jews.  Even  Momni-
sen(/?i>m.  Gesch.  5539  ;  ET  Provinces,  2216/. ).  on  whose
authority  Ramsay  relies,  detects  here  traces  at  least  of  a
Christian  editor.  Ramsay,  however  (chap.  r2i/. ),  re-
garding the  speech  as  a  progranmie  for  treatment  of
Christians,  holds  it  to  be  'a  historical  document  of  the
utmost  importance,'  and  further  .assumes  that  the  pro-
gramme was  actually  carried  out  by  Vesp.asian.  For
this  he  has  not  a  word  of  proof  to  allege  apart  from  the
statement  of  Suetonius  ( /  'vsp.  1 5 ) — nequc  cirde  cujusquam
unquain  hvtatHS  est  et  (by  the  three  last  words  he
conjecturally  tills  a  hiatus  )y'//5//j  suppliciis  ilhcrimavit
ctiain  et  ingemuit — which,  he  considers,  we  are  entitled
to  interpret  as  referring  to  processes  against  Christians.
\\'ere  this  the  case,  it  would  be  natural  at  least  to
e.xpect  that  these  should  have  begun  immediately  after
the  destruction  of  the  temple ;  but,  according  to
Ramsay,  they  did  not  begin  till  towards  the  end  of  the
reign  of  Vesp.asian.  As  far  as  the  documents  are
concerned,  this  last  hypothesis  finds  still  less  support
than  that  of  Vespasian's  Christian  persecution  as  a
whole.  All  that  can  be  said  for  the  hypothesis  is  that
it  is  requisite  in  order  that,  by  the  shortness  of  the  per-
secution under  Vespasian,  the  silence  of  Christian  writers
respecting  them  may  be  explained  (see  below,  §  16).

vii.  Domitian.  — With  regard  to  Domitian,  Suetonius
(Dom.  15)  tells  us  that  eight  months  before  his  death
Flavium  Clemcntem  patnielcm  sit  inn  contemptissim.e
inert  ice  .  .  .  repenteex  tcnitissimasiispicione  tantumnonin
ipso  ejus  consulatu  in  te  rem  it.  Cassius  Uio  ( Ixvii.  14  i/. ).
according  to  the  excerpt  of  the  monk  Xiphilinus,  adds
that  at  the  same  lime  his  wife,  Flavia  Domitiila,  wp.s
banished  to  the  island  of  Fandataria:  eirrjxt>V  oe  ajx<poli'
fyK\r]fj.a  adeorrjTOS.  i<4>  '^s  ^i'  dWot  i's  to.  tQv  'lov8aiu}i'
ijdr]  fJo.ve'XXovres  ttoWoI  KaTe5iKda0r](Tav.  Now,  Chris-
tian legend,  and  in  particular  the  Vseudo-C/emcntii/e
Keco^nitiLiiis  and  Iloiiiilies,  speak  of  Flavius  Clemens
as  Bishop  of  Rome,  and  of  his  father  as,  like  the
consular  in  Suetonius,  related  to  the  imperial  family  ;
the  daugliter  of  his  sister  (also  called  I'lavia  Domitiila)
became  involved  in  ,a  Christian  per.stcaiion,  .and  was
banished  to  I'cjntia  (the  island  adjacent  to  Pandataria).
This  Last  statement  is  all  the  more  important  because
Eusebius  {('/iron.  ann.  2110,  2112  Abrah.:  HEm.  I84)
takes  it  from  a  heathen  chronographer,  Bruttius  or
Brettius,  who  wrote  before  221  a.d.  For  further
details  see  Lipsius,  Chronol.  d.  riiin.  Bischbfe,  152-161.
It  is  alike  natural  and  difficult  to  assume  that  Clement
and  Domitiila  represent  each  only  one  person,  and  that
person  a  Christian.  The  charges  in  Cassius  Dio,  taken
by  themselves  alone,  show  either  that  the  question  was
one  not  of  Christi.ans  but  of  Jews,  or  that  Christians  at
that  time  still  remained  undistinguished  from  Jews.
The  view  that  they  were  Jews  can  hardly  be  main-
tained.

In  the  heathen  writer  Rruttius,  Domitiila  figures  expressly  as
a  Christian,  and  in  all  later  Christian  writings  Domitian  is
represented  as  a  violent  persecutor  of  the  faiih  (see,  e.g.,  Melito
ap.  Euseb.  HE  iv.  iiig).  He  is  called  by  Tertullian  {.■if>ol.  5)
portio  Xeronis  de  crudelitate  ;  and,  though  the  heathen  Juvenal
(\y]f.\  it  is  true,  says  something  to  the  same  effect,  the
Christian  bases  his  .iccusation  e.xpressly  upon  the  persecution  of
his  brethren  in  the  faith.

We  are.  then,  left  with  the  second  interpretation  of
the  words  of  Cassius  Dio,  that  they  relate  to  Christians.
Rams,ay's  method  of  evading  this  (chap.  12,  §  4)  is  surely
forced— that  in  Dio's  time  (211-222  A.D.)  it  w.as  'a
fashion  and  an  affectation  among  a  certain  class  of
Greek  men  of  letters  to  ignore  the  existence  of  the
Christians  and  to  pretend  to  confuse  them  with  the
Jews.' Further, in the collection of  temple money

759


(now  a  state  tax)  from  the  Jews,  according  to  Suetonius
(Dom.  12),  those  also  were  taken  account  of  qi/i  vel
improfessi  Judaicam  vixerent  vitant  (or :  Judaicam
fidem  similem  viverent  vitam)  vel  dissimuiata  orii;ine
imposita  genii  tributa  non  pependissent.  As  at  that
time  \.he  judaicus  /iscus  acerdissime  cutus  est.  it  would
be  very  remarkable  if  here  we  were  not  intended  to
understand  both  the  Jewish  Christians  regarded  as  cir-
cumcised persons  and  the  Gentile  Christians  regarded
as  proselytes.  The  Roman  officers,  we  know  fiom
.Suetonius,  in  cases  where  it  was  necessary,  satisfied
themselves  as  to  the  fact  of  circumcision  by  ins|)ection.
Even  though  greed  may  well  have  been  a  motive  for
conniving  at  the  profession  of  the  Christian  religion,  it  is
plain  that  the  danger  to  the  state  presented  by  the  Chris-
tians cannot  have  been  taken  very  seriously.  We
are  led  to  the  same  conclusion  by  the  story  (as  far
as  it  can  be  believed)  of  Hegesippus  (in  Eus.  HE
819/)  that  Domitian  released  the  graiulcliildren  or
Jude,  the  brother  of  Jesus,  as  not  Ix'ing  dangerous
persons,  although  they  confessed  themselves  to  be  not
only  descendants  of  David,  but  also  Christians.  It  was
not  till  the  end  of  his  reign  that  the  persecution  began,
viii.  A'en'a. — As  far  as  the  accusations  under  Domi-
tian had  reference  to  Christians  they  are  covered  by  the
regulations  of  Nerva  (Cassius  Dio,  Ixviii.  1 2,  after
Xiphilinus).

Tertullian  {Afifll.  5)  and  Hegesippus  (Eus.  HE  iii.  20  5)
erroneously  .attribute  the  regulations  to  Domitian  himself.  Tlie
text  of  Cassius  Dio  is  :  -ous  re  KptfOfj-fvovi  in'  acre^tia  aii>rfKt  Ka'i
TOVT  f^ei'yorra?  KaTTyyoyc  .  .  .  T015  6e  hr^  aAAot?  ovr*  a(7e/)eia9  OVT
'louOaiKoO  fiiov  KaraiTia<T0ai  Tiva^  <Tvi'fXuipri<Tei'.

The  preceding  discussion  of  the  Christian  persecutions
m.akes it evident that the grounds upon  which  these
were  conducted  were  by  no  means  clearly


7.  Result  of
discussion.


set  forth,  .and  that  (partly  on  this  account,
but  mainly  from  want  of  information)  we
can  hardly  venture  to  suppose  the  persecutions  to  have
been  of  so  great  frequency  as  we  should  have  expected
on  the  principles  laid  down  by  Monuusen  and  Ramsay.
In  particular,  had  they  been  so  frec|uent,  the  hesitation
of  Pliny— or,  at  all  events,  that  of  Tr.ajan — would  be
quite  inexplicable.  Ramsay's  answer  (chap.  10,  §  6),  that
Tr.ajan's  words — neque  eniin  in  universiim  aliquid  quod
quasi  certain  formam  haheat  constittii  potest— refer  to
Pliny's  doubt  whether  or  not  the  question  of  age  should
be  allowed  to  make  a  difference  in  the  punishment,  is
quite  inadmissible.  Xeque  eniin  does  not  refer  to  the
decision  upon  a  matter  which  was  still  in  question.  It
refers,  in  commendation,  to  a  judgment  which  Pliny  had
already  taken  :  actum  quern  debuisti  .  .  .  secutus  es.
Thus  R.amsay's  conjectures  of  .some  archive  which
Trajan  caused  to  be  searched  for  the  decisions  of  his
predecessors  upon  previous  references  by  other  pro-
curators luust  also  be  rejected.  Whatever  the  principles
of  the  government,  and  however  strongly  they  may
have  led,  if  rigidly  interpreted,  to  unieni  tting  search
for  and  punishment  of  Christians  once  tluse  had  been
definitely  distinguished  from  Jews,  they  can  have  been
carried  into  practice  only  in  an  intermittent  way.  In
the  conditions  of  privacy  in  which,  as  we  know,  the
Christians  carried  out  the  exercises  of  their  religion,
no  direct  danger  to  the  state  can  have  manifested
itself.  In  Pergamum  Antipas  was  the  only  martyr
(Rev.  213).  Therefore, Trajan's  conquirendi  non

sunt  was  a  mitigation  in  principle,  indeed,  but  not
necessarily  in  practice.  If  only  parties  could  be
found  to  denounce,  persecutions  could  be  instituted,
after  Trajan's  time,  on  a  much  greater  scale  than
before  under  the  infiu-nce  of  the  stricter — but  seldom
used — principle  of  conquirere.  Such,  according  to  all
documents,  was  in  reality  the  case.

For  the  period  before  Trajan  we  know  of  persecutions  only
under  Nero  and  Domitian.  Tertullian,  for  example,  was  not
aware  of  any  others  (.-ipot.  5),  and  .Melito  in  his  .Apology  t  >
Antoninus  Pius  {ap.  Eus.  //A"  iv.  269)  expressly  says  that  only
Nero  and  Domitian  (fiovoi  wdvriov  ^tpiov  Kai  Ao/ieriatvf)  had
given  up  the  Christians  to  the  slanders  of  denouncers. To  the

760


CHRISTIAN,  NAME  OF


*»me  purpose  we  have  the  Malemeni  of  Ori^cn  (r.  Cr/s.  .''h)
that  oAtyoi  xard  icatpovt  xai  c^oipa  ti/apiSuijroi  .  .  .  T*0yri-
Kaaii' ;  liver  a(;ain!tt  which  tlie  iroAv  n-Aijtfof  cjcAcktwc  spoken  of
liy  Clemens  Kumanus  (i.  I)  i)  in  (he  reit;n  of  Nero,  and  the  ingem
tnu/titut/o  o(  'tiu:ilU!i,  must,  of  course,  not  be  overlooked.

In  view  of  such  delinitc  statements  as  these,  it  is  not
|X>ssible  to  explain  the  silence  of  our  authors  —especially
that  of  Christian  authors — on  the  persecutions  which
Kamsay  infers  to  have  been  instituted  under  \'csiiasian
and  Titus,  as  being  due  only  to  the  shortness  of  those
reigns — or  rather  the  shortness  of  the  portions  of  them
in  wliich  jx^rsecutions  occurred  (above,  §  6.  vi.  end) —
or  to  the  fact  that  the  Christians  had  no  eyes  for  any-
thing except  the  imminent  end  of  the  world  (kamsay,
chap.  12.  §  2).

Kamsay,  it  is  true,  finds  support  by  assigning  i  Pet.
to  about  the  year  80  A.  I)  — that  is  to  say,  the  reign  of
'I'ilus  (chap.  13 1-3) — or  to  75-79  .\.  D. ,  in  the


8.  Date  of
1  Pet.


-•ign  of  \'csi)asian  (ExpuMlor, Oct. 1893,
p.  286). He  does  so,  however,  on  grounds
the  validity  of  which  de|x;iids  on  liiat  of  his  hyfwjthcsis.

He  show>  M  ith  truth  thai  the  ci)istle  presupposes  accusations
on  acciiuni  of  the  mere  noiiifn  Christianiiiii  (ii^/.),  and  that  it
was  conifiosed  at  the  beginning  of  a  jwrsecution  (4  12  3  14  17  2  14).
It  has  also  Ijcen  rightly  urged  that  there  is  no  reason  for  assign-
ing  it  to  the  year  112  on  the  mere  ground  that  then  for  the  first
time  a  persecution  of  Christians  over  the  whole  oiKovf<«V>)  (.'19)
liecime  i)os>il)le.  On  the  other  hand,  before  that  date  there
had  l)cen  no  persecution  which  had  touched  or  threatened  the
provinces  named  in  1  1  and  gave  cause  to  anticipate  its  extension
over  the  whole  habitable  wiirld.

When  the  contents  of  this  letter  are  considered,  no
one  who  can  Ix.'  reached  by  critical  considerations
will  unreservedly  maintain  its  genuineness,  containing
as  it  does  so  little  that  is  characteristic  of  I'eter  and  so
much  that  is  reminiscent  of  I'aul.

The  presence  in  1  1  7  of  the  words  Biairnopa  and  ioKi)xioi',
which  here  are  superfluous  and  disturbinjj,  and  have  their
appropriate  place  only  in  Ja.  1  i  3,  shows  its  dependence  on
that  epistle,  which  in  its  turn  depends  not  only  on  the
J-.pistles  of  I'aul  but  also  on  that  to  the  Hebrews  (I  I  31,  cp  Ja.
'J  25).  Dependence  on  James  is  shown  also  in  i  IVt.  05 /I,  which
is  Twrrowed  from  }a..-ii<J'.  In  the  latter  passage  the  our  is
logical  (Beou  44...  0(ut),  and  in  the  former,  therefore,  in  like
manner,  the  oAArJAois  of  7'.  5  should  have  Ijeen  followed  by  some
such  expression  as  'submit  yourselves  one  to  another,'  if  the
writer  had  been  following  a  natural  and  not  a  borrowed  train  of
thought.

.As  for  the  word  aWorpLociriaKoiroi ,  the  only  satis-
fiictory  explanation  of  its  use  m  i  Pet.  4  15.  to  di-note  a
criminal  of  the  same  class  as  <j!>oi'ei''s  antl  K\iwTr)^,  is
that  of  Hilgcnfeld,  according  to  whom  what  is  intended
is  the  class  of  dflatores,  who  made  a  trade  of  denunci-
ation, which  was  first  made  criminal  by  Trajan  (Plin.
Panei;yr.  34/.).  Hy  aWoTpiofinaKOiroi  Ramsay  under-
stands people  who  stir  up  .strife  Ixnween  memlxtrs  of
the  same  family,  or  between  servants  and  masters.
This  accusation  could  lie  very  easily  brought  against
Christians,  as  soon  as  they  began  to  attcmjjt  conversions.
Ramsay's  assertion,  however,  that  Nero  gave  power
to  the  courts  of  justice  thenceforward  to  regard
such  persons  as  magicians  and  to  punish  them  as
criminals  (chap.  15  i),  rests  upon  no  documentary  evi-
dence :  it  proceeds  solely  upon  his  own  imerijrotation  of
the  muli-JictP  of  Suetonius  (.above,  §  6,  v. ).  Nor  has
Ramsay  made  out  (chap.  8,  §§  i  2,  pj).  280 /'.  290)  that
I  Pet.  presupposes  search  for  Christians  to  have  been
made  by  the  state.

Were  this  so,  the  epistle  could,  of  course,  have  been  written
only  either  before  Tr.ii.in's  decision,  coiujuiremii  non  sunt,  or
after  the  re-enactment  of  c<»«^«;'»fr6-  by  Marcus  Aurelius ;  but
here  again  it  has  to  be  remarked  that,  if  only  there  were  de-
nunciations enough — and  Ramsay  himself  (chap.  10,  g  2)  is  aware
how  readily  these  could  at  any  time  appear  among  the  class  of
sellers  of  s.icrificial  animals  (  Fliny  to  Tmjan,  10),  or  among  people
in  the  position  of  Demetrius  (Acts  19  24-34),  or  of  the  masters  of
the  damsel  with  the  spirit  of  divination  (Iti  16-19) — 1  Pet.  31568
become  intelligible  enough,  even  after  the  publication  of  Trajan's
contjuirendi  non  sunt.

We  may  still  hold,  therefore,  that  1  Pet.  was  written
in  112  A.  D.

The  one  new  thing  we  have  learned  is  that,  when
I  Pet.  touches  upon  the  subject  of  punishment  for  the
mere  name  of  Christian  (4t6), it  is describing  not a


new  attitude  of  the  authorities  but  one  that  \\w\  have
JK-en  taking  for  .vjme  time.  This  very  fact  makes  it
im{X)ssible  to  use  this  passage  as  Ramsay  does  as  fixing
the  date  of  the  epistle  for  the  transition  jK-riofl  during
which  puni.shment  of  Christians  only  for  flat^itia  was
giving  place  to  a  system  of  ix:r>ecution  for  the  mere
name.  Ramsay  (chap.  1 3,  §  i )  argues  that  this  last  mode
of  jH-Tsecution  ntust  have  been  new  to  the  author,
Ijccause  at  the  same  time  his  language  const.mtly  pre-
supposes the  continuance  of  the  old  state  of  things  ;
but  the  exhortation  in  \  15  that  none  should  .suffer  as  a
flagitious  jxjrson  is  not  in  any  case  out  of  place,  even  if
Jiagitia  had  not  thitherto  been  the  only  ground  on  wliich
the  |)unishment  of  Christians  procveticd  ;  against  such
Jlagitid  Paul  also  constantly  warns  his  readers  ((jal.
5  19-21  I  Cor.  &<)  /.  2  Cor.  122<j  f.  Rom.  I.'ii-i3),  and
that  at  a  time  when  there  was  no  thought  of  (  hristian
I>ersecution.  Further,  the  hoix;  of  being  able  by  '  seemly
behaviour '  and  '  good  works  '  to  convince  the  secular
jxjwer  of  the  injustice  of  jK-rsecution  ( i  I'et.  2  12  3  13  etc. )
is  one  that  Christians  can  never  have  wholly  abandoned,
and  it  found  a  reasonable  justification  in  the  plea  of
Pliny  (27-10)  for  mild  treaunent  of  those  who  had  Ix'en
denounced.  We  can  understand  its  jx-rsistence  most
easily  on  the  assumption,  as  made  alxne,  that  [Xfrsecu-
tion  was  only  then  beginning.

The  very  positions  argued for  by Mommsen (and
accejited  by  Ramsay)  make it clear that there never


9.  Conclusion.


had Ixen a ]x.'riod during which


Christians,  although  recognised  as  a
distinct  religious  society,  were  ]ninished  for  /liii^'ilia
merely,  and  not  on  account  of  the  iionieu.  The  strength
of  Mommseiis  view  lies  precisely  in  this  :  that  the
name,  as  soon  as  it  w.is  known,  also  became  punish-
able. .According  to  Mommsen, we  must  also  conclude,
conversely,  that  where  flagitia  alone  are  punished  the
noiinn  is  not  yet  known.  Kven  for  the  time  of  Nero
this  argumentation  would  be  conclusive,  had  he  not
wanted  incendiaries.  But  if,  as  Ram.say  says.  Chris-
tians under  Nero  were  already  recognised  as  distinct
from  jews,  then  J/ai;iti(i  other  than  fire-raising — as,  for
example,  witchcraft — cannot,  even  in  the  second  stage
of  the  Neronian  [X-Tsecution  (on  the  assumption  of  theie
having  Ix-en  such  a  stage  at  all),  have  been  the  sole
ground  on which  condemnation [iroceeded.  On

the  (|uestion  as  to  the  date  at  which  Christianity  first
began  to  be  recognised  as  a  distinct  religion  we  must
confess  ourselves  comjiletely  at  a  loss.  Only  this  much
is  certain  :  that  it  had  come  alxaut  l^efore  the  time  of
Pliny's  governorship.  From  what  has  Ixen  said  al  ove.
the  view  of  Neumann  (and  Lipsius)  appears  the  most
plausible  :  the  view,  namely,  that  the  distinction  first  re-
ceived recognition  under  Uomitian,  and,  more  precisely,
in  the  last  year  of  his  reign.  To  this  Weizsacker  and
others'  object,  with  good  reason,  that  it  is  highly  improb-
able that  Christians  should  have  pas.setl  for  jews  so  long.
The  simple  facts  that  they  ilid  not  accejjt  circumcision,
and  frec|uented,  not  the  synagogues  but  meeting-places
of  their  own,  and  moreover  often  came  into  conflict
with  the  Jews,  made  the  recognition  of  a  distinction
inevitable — especially  as  the  Roman  authorities,  most
notably  in  matters  affecting  societies,  were  wont  to
take  careful  cognisance  of  even  the  minutest  trifles,  and
of  course,  in  a  forntal  investigation,  had  means  readily
at  their  disposal  for  eliciting  every  detail.  If  we  had
nothing  but  Suetonius's  account  of  Nero  to  go  ui>on,
these  considerations  would  certainly  Ix  held  to  Ix
conclusive  even  for  the  time  of  Nero  ;  but  we  have
Tacitus,  who  makes  us  hesitate  ;  aiW  what  is  said  alxjut
Domitian  goes  against  Weizsiicker's  conclusion.  Chris-
tian sources  give  no  hope  of  a  decision.  Ramsay's  citation
of  I Pet. does  not  hold  good  ;  that  of  the  Apocalypse

1  E.g.,  Keim,  the  only  one  besides  Lipsius  (and  Carr,  E.rf'Oi.,
June  "98,  pp.  456-463)  who  has  r J- /*r^/tMt»  taken  up  the  Question
of  the  origin  of  the  name  of  Christian  (Aus  dem  L'rchriiten-
thum,  1878,  1  171-181).

762


CHRONICLER

is  worthless  as  long  ;»s  the  unity  and  the  date  of  the
t)Ook  continue  to  be  as  iiuesiionahle  as  they  are  ;  and
the  Pastoral  Epistles  are  loo  doubtful. Moreover,  it  is [
not at all certain that  they sjjeak of  flagitia  as  the [
ground  of  persecution,  so  as  to  necessitate  their  being
assigned to the period of Nero, even if Ramsay  s
view  is  adopted as  correct ; for 2 lirn. 29  does  not
necessarily  mean  that  Paul  suffers  ^icfrtwjf  he  is  rejjarded 1
as  a  Ka.KOvpyo% — it  can  just  as  well  mean  that  he  suftirs j
the  same |X"nalties  as those to  which  a  K(j.Kovp-^o%  is
liable,  but  that  the cause  of  them is in his  case  his
pre.ichmg of the  gosptjl (eV <^)— in  other  words, his
Christianity. In  like  manner,  it  is  quite  as  conceivable  in
2  Tim.  3 12  that  the  nomen  is  the  cause  of  the  sufferings
of  all  Christians  as  that  jlagitia  are. As  for  the  Third
Gospel  and  Acts,  according  to  what  has  been  said  above
(§  2), they  show  only  that  their  author,  about  100-130
A.  D. ,  was  acquainted  with  the  name,  and  knew  nothing
as  to  its  origin  that  rendered  it  impossible  for  him  to
place its  date  ab:)Ut the  year  40.  All  that the

present  discussion  can  be  regarded  as  contributing
towards  the  solution  of  the  question  is  the  conjecture
that  the  ]\agans,  in  as  far  as  they  knew  the  true
character  of  Christianity  at  a  time  before  that  which  we
have  definitely  ascertained,  hardly  took  any  cognisance
of  it  —  on  account  of  the  infrequency  with  which  it  came
under  public  notice.  i'.  vv.  s.

CHRONICLER (T3Tp), 2S.  8162O24, Is.  3G3,
R\'"'*-'-  ; E\'  kK.roKDKR  ^/.k  ).

CHRONICLES  (D'p^nna"n)

TOKICAI. LlTKK.ATUKE, § 13/

CHRONICLES.  BOOKS  OF.

Chronicles is a single book
Events  uf  the  Times.

The  full  title  would  be  D'Cn nm  Ifia,  Book  oj  Events  of
the  Times  ; and  this  again  appears  to  have  been  a  designation
commonly  applied  to  special  histories  in  the  more
1. N{III16> detiuite shape  —  Events  0/  tlie Times  0/  King
David, or the like  (iCh.-jr24 Esth.  IO2 etc.).
The  Greek translators divided the long book into  two,  and
adopted  the  title  nopoAeiTrd/xei/a, Things  {o/tcn\  otniited  \scil.
in  the  other  historical  books  ;  cod.  A  adds  /3ao-iAeu»i/  respecting
the  kings  or  Tiii'  Waaiktiiav  Iou6a  :  see  Bacher,  ZA  I'M'  V'iy^sff-
('95)1- Jerome, following the  sense  of  the  Hebrew  title,  sug-
gested the  name  o'iChronicdn  instead  o^  Paralipomenon  primus
et  secumius. Hence  the  English  Chronicles.

The  book  of  Chronicles  begins  with  Adam  and  ends
abrujjtly  in  the  middle  of  Cyrus's  decree  of  restoration.
The continuation of the narrative is


K.  14i9- SeeHis-


In  the  Hebrew  canon

entitled DVO'H "-QT^,


2.  Connexion
with  Ezra-
Nehemiah.


found in the Book of lizra, which
begins  by  repeating  2  Ch.  3t)22/. ,  and


tilling  up  the  fragment  of  the  decree  of
Cyrus.  A  closer  examination  of  those  parts  of  E/.ra  and
Nehemiah  which  are  not  extracted  word  for  word  from
earlier  documents  or  original  memoirs,  leads  to  the
conclusion  that  Chronicles-Ezra-Nehemiah  was  origin-
ally one  work,  displaying  throughout  the  peculiarities
of  language  and  thought  of  a  single  editor  (see  §  3).
Thus  the  fragmentary  close  of  2  Chronicles  marks
the  disruption  of  a  previously-existing  continuity.  In
the  gradual  compilation  of  the  canon  the  necessity  for
incorporating  in  the  Holy  Writings  an  account  of  the
establishment  of  the  post-exilic  theocracy  was  felt,  before
it  was  thought  desirable  to  supplement  Samuel  and
Kings  by  adding  a  second  history  of  the  pre-exilic
period.  Hence  Chronicles  is  the  last  book  of  the
Hebrew  Bible,  following  the  book  of  Ezra- Nehemiah,
which  properly  is  nothing  else  than  its  sequel.

Whilst  the  original  unity  of  this  series  of  histories  can
hardly  lie  questioned,  it  will  be  more  convenient  in  th^
present  article  to  deal  with  Chronicles  alone,  reserving  the
relation  of  the  several  books  for  the  article  Histokic.'M.
Literature  {q.v. ,  §  14/ ).  The  author  used  adifterent
class  of  sources  for  the  history  of  the  pre-exilic  and  the
post-exilic  periods  respectively  ;  and  thus  the  critical
questions  affecting  Chronicles  are  for  the  most  part  quite
distinct  from  those  w  hich  meet  us  in  the  book  of  Ezra-

763


CHRONICLES,  BOOKS  OP

Nehemiah.  Besides,  the  identity  of  authorship  cannot
be  conclusively  demonstrated  except  by  a  comparison  of
results  drawn  from  a  separate  consideration  of  each  book.

Of  the  authorship  of  Chronicles  we  know  only  what
can  be  determined  by  internal  evidence.  The  colour
,  Date  °'^  '^^'^  language  stamps  the  book  as  one
of  the  latest  in  the  OT  (see  §  11);  but
it  leads  to  no  exact  determination  of  date.  In  i  Ch.
29?,  which  refers  to  the  time  of  David,  a  sum  of
money  is  reckoned  by  darics  (but  see  Dram),  which
certainly  implies  that  the  author  wrote  after  that
Persian  coin  had  long  been  current  in  Judea.  'J  he
chief  passage  appealed  to  by  critics  to  fix  the  date,
however,  is  iCh.  319^,  where  the  descendants  of
Zerubbabel  seen  to  be  reckoned  to  six  generations  (so
Ewald,  liertheau,  etc. ).

The  passage  is  confused,  and  ©  reads  it  so  as  to  give  as
many  as  eleven  generaliDns  (so  Zunz,  NOld.,  Kuen.  \  'JS*  5 ;  cp
Kiln,  g  54  3/') ;  whilst  on  the  other  hand  those  who  plead  for  an
earlv  date  are  disposed  to  a.ssume  an  interpolation  or  a  corruption
of  tlie  text,  or  to  separate  all  that  follows  the  naiiie  of  Jesaiah
in  V.  21  from  what  precedes  (.Movers,  Keil).  It  seems  impossible,
however,  by  any  fair  treatment  of  the  text  to  obtain  fewer  than
six  generations,  and  this  result  agrees  with  the  probability  that
Hattush  (v.  22),  who,  on  the  interpretation  which  we  prefer,
belongs  to  the  fourth  generation  from  Zerubbabel,  was  a  con-
temporary of  Ezra  (Ezra  .S  2).

Thus  the  Chronicler  lived  at  least  two  generations  after
Ezra.  With  this  it  accords  very  well  that  in  Nehemiah
five  generations  of  high  priests  are  enumerated  from
Jeshua  (Tiio/),  and  that  the  la.st  name  is  that  of
Jaddua,  who,  as  we  know  from  Josephus,  was  a
contemporary  of  Alexander  the  Great.  That  the
Chronicler  wrote  after  the  period  of  the  Persian
supremacy  was  past  has  been  argued  by  Ewald  (Hist.
1 173)  and  others,  from  the  use  of  the  title  King  oi
Persia  (2Ch.  3623).

The  official  title  of  the  Achaemenidae  was  not  '  King  of  Persia,'
but  'the  King,'  'the  Great  King,'  t .e  'King  of  Kings,'  the
'Khig  of  the  I--ind.s,'  etc.  (see  KW)  1  iii^  0151  ^  '■'('SjT-Y,
and  ttie  first  of  these  expressions  is  that  used  by  Ezra  (7  2- /.  8  1
etc.),  Neh.  (1  11  Siff.),  and  other  Jews  writing  under  the
Persian  rule  (Hag.  1  i  15  Zech.  7  i  Ezra 4 8  11  b6/.  etc.).

What  seems  to  be  certain  and  imijortant  for  a  right
estimate  of  the  book  is  that  the  author  lived  a  consider-
able time  after  Ezra,  probably  indeed  (Nold.  Kuen.)
after  300  B.C.,  and  was  entirely  under  the  influence  ot
the  religious  institutions  of  the  new  theocracy.  This
standpoint  determined  the  nature  of  his  interest  in  the
early  history  of  his  people.

The  true  importance  of  Hebrew  history  had  always
centred  in  the  fact  that  this  petty  nation  was  the  people  of  1

4  Character  •  ^''^^"■^^'  ^'^''"  spiritual  God.  The  tragic
it<»'pvr>lanatinn  '"terest  which  distinguishes  the  annals  |
Its  explanation,  ^f  Israel  from  the  forgotten  history
of  Moab  or  Damascus,  lies  wholly  in  that  long  con-
test which  finally  vindicated  the  reality  of  spiritual  things
and  the  supremacy  of  Yahwe's  pur[)ose,  in  the  political
ruin  of  the  nation  which  was  the  faithless  depositary  01
these  sacred  truths.  After  the  fall  of  Jerusalem  it  was
impossible  to  write  the  history  of  Israel's  fortunes  other-
wise than  in  a  spirit  of  religious  pragmatism.  Within
the  limits  of  the  religious  conception  of  the  plan  and
purpose  of  the  Hebrew  history,  however,  more  than  one
point  of  view  might  be  taken  up.  The  book  of  Kings
looks  upon  the  history  in  the  spirit  of  the  prophets — in
that  spirit  which  is  still  echoed  by  Zechariah  (I5/):
'  Your  fathers,  where  are  they  ?  and  the  prophets,  could
they  live  for  ever  ?  but  my  words  and  my  statutes,  which
I  commanded  my  servants  the  prophets,  did  they  not
overtake  your  fathers  ?  so  that  they  turned  and  said,  Like
as  Yahwe  of  Hosts  thought  to  do  unto  us  ...  so  hath  he
dealt  with  us. '  Long  before  the  Chronicler  wrote,  how-
ever, there  had  been  a  great  change.  The  new  Jerusalem
of  Ezra  was  organised  as  a  municipality  and  a  church,
not  as  a  nation.  The  centre  of  religious  life  was  no
longer  the  living  prophetic  word,  but  the  ordinances  of  the
Pentateuch  and  the  liturgical  service  of  the  sanctuar)-.
The  religious  vocation  of  Israel  was  no  longer  national,
764


CHRONICLES,  BOOKS  OP


but  ecclesiastical  or  municipal,  and  the  historical  con-
tinuity of  the  nation  was  vividly  realised  only  within  the
walls  of  Jcriis  iliin  and  the  courts  of  the  temple,  in  the
solcnui  assembly  and  stately  ceremonial  of  a  feast  day.

These  intluencos  naturally  operated  most  strongly  on
those  who  were  olttcially  attached  to  the  sanctuary.  To
a  Ix;viie,  even  more  than  to  other  Jews,  the  history  of
Isra»l  meant  aljove  all  things  the  history  of  Jerusalem,
of  the  temple,  and  of  the  temple  ordinances.  Now
the  author  of  Chronicles  lx;trays  on  every  page  his
essentially  levitical  habit  of  mind.  It  even  seems
possible,  from  a  close  attention  to  his  descriptions  of
s;icred  ordinances,  to  conclude  that  his  special  interests
are  those  of  a  common  l>;vite  rather  than  of  a  priest,
and  that  of  all  levitical  functions  he  is  most  partial  to
those  of  the  singers,  a  member  of  whose  guild  Ewald
conjectures  him  to  have  been.

'lo  such  a  man  the  older  delineation  of  the  history  of
Israel,  es|xx;ially  in  Sanmcl  and  Km^s,  could  not  but
apiHjar  to  be  delicient  in  some  directions,  whilst  in  other
respecis  its  nairative  seemed  superlluous  or  open  to
misunderstanding,  as  for  example  by  recording,  and
that  without  condemnation,  things  inconsistent  with  the
pentateuchal  law.  The  hisioiy  of  the  ordinances  of
worship  holds  a  very  small  i)lace  in  the  older  record.
Jerus;\lem  and  the  temple  have  not  that  central  place  in
the  Book  of  Kings  which  they  occu|)ied.  in  the  minds
of  the  Jewish  community  in  post-exilic  times.  Large
sections  of  the  old  history  are  devoted  to  the  religion  and
politics  of  the  northern  kins;dom,  which  are  altogether
unintelligible  and  uninteresting  when  measured  by  a
strictly  levitical  standard  ;  and  in  general  the  whole
problems  and  struggles  of  the  earlier  period  turn  on
[joints  which  had  ceased  to  Ix;  cardinal  in  the  life  of  the
new  Jerusalem,  which  was  no  longer  called  upon  to  de-
cide lx;tween  the  claims  of  the  Word  of  Yahwe  and  the
exigencies  of  political  affairs  and  social  customs,  and
which  could  not  comprehend  that  men  absorlx;d  in
deeper  spiritual  contests  hatl  no  leisure  for  such  things
as  the  niceties  of  levitical  legislation.

Thus  there  seemed  to  be  rcwni  for  a  new  history,
which  should  contine  itself  to  matters  still  interesting  to
the  theocracy  of  /ion,  keeping  Jerusalem  and  the
temple  in  the  foreground,  and  developing  the  divine
pragmatism  of  the  history,  with  reference,  not  so  much
to  the  prophetic  word  as  to  the  fixed  legislation  of  the
Pentateuch  (especially  the  I'riest's  Code),  so  that  the
whole  narrative  might  be  made  to  teach  that  Israel's
glory  lies  in  the  observance  of  the  divine  law  and  ritual.
1.  Outline  of  Chronicles.  The  book  falls  naturally
into  three  parts,  i.  htlrodiictory  nsmnt!  (i  Ch.  1-9). —
_  .  .  For  the  sake  of  systematic  completeness
^on  en  S.  ^j,^^  author  begins  with  Ailam,  as  is  the
custom  with  later  Oriental  writers.  He  had  nothing,
however,  to  add  to  the  I'entateuch,  and  the  period  from
Moses  to  David  cotitained  little  that  served  his  purpose.
He,  therefore,  contracts  the  early  history  ( i  Cli.  1-9)  into
a  series  of  genealogies,'  which  were  doubtless  by  no
means  the  least  interesting  part  of  his  work  at  a  time
when  every  Israelite  was  concerned  to  prove  the  purity
of  his  Hebrew  descent  (see  Kzra259  62,  and  cp  Genk-
Ai-cxilES,  I.  §  3).  The  greatest  space  is  allotted  natur-
ally to  the  trilxjs  of  jLi).\n  and  Levi  (</</. v.)  (23-423
6  [5  27-6  66])  ;  but,  except  where  the  author  derives  his
materials  from  the  earlier  historical  books  (as  in  1  3i-i6
654-81),  his  lists  are  meagre  and  imperfect,  and  his  data
evidently  fragmentary.  Already,  however,  the  circum-
stances and  interests  of  the  author  betray  thentselves  ;
for  even  in  these  chapters  his  principal  object  is  evidently
to  explain,  in  a  manner  consonant  with  the  conceptions
of  his  age,  the  origin  of  the  ecclesiastical  institutions  of
the  post-exilic  comniunity-

Observe  th.it  i  Ch.O^-ija  is  excerpted  (with  merely  clerical
differences)  from  Neh.  11  ^I'-i^  (on  the  passage  see  Kzka,  ii.  §
which  Uii


5  [*1.  8  15  I'l  ") ;  and  that  the 'age  to  '


tie  genealogies  in


t  See  the  articles  on  the  several  tribes.
76s


I  Ch..Si7-j4  ;4nil  Hjj.4o(cp9  35-44>  and  »ee  Hknjami.s,  |  o)  are
carried,  jihows  that  ihcir  puriiose  i*  to  give  the  pedigree  of  ptjst-
exilic  families  who  traced  tlicir  descent  frum  iJavid  and  S.uil
re»pectivelj'.  In  ch. 'J  We.  {Degftii.;  cp  more  briefly  /'ro/A*l
i\iff.  [K  1  ib.\)  ha.s  shown  that  xn>.  ^  25-33  43-5oa,  funning  the
kernel  of  the  chapter,  reUite  to  pre-exilic  Judah,  whilkt  vt>.  1017
18-34  34-4'  5o^'55  (like  the  greater  part  of  4  1-23)  have  reference
to  the  circumstances  of  the  p<»t-cxilic  community  ;  the  chief  aim
of  ch.  2  is  to  explain  how  the  Calebiu-s,  who  Ijclore  the  fall  of
Jerusalem  had  their  home  in  the  S.  of  Judah,  liad  in  post -exilic
times  to  find  new  homc-s  in  the  more  northerly  parts  of  Judah
(sec  Caleb,  |  3/).

2.  Israel  before  the  schism  ( i  Ch.  IO-2  Ch.  1 1. — From
the  death  of  Saul  (1  Ch.  10)  the  history  becomes  fuller
and  runs  parallel  with  .Sanmel  and  Kings.  The  limita-
tions of  the  authors  interest  in  past  times  appear  in  the
omission,  among  other  i)articulars,  of  David's  reign  in
Hebron,  of  the  disorders  in  his  family  and  the  revolt  of
Absalom,  of  the  circumstances  of  .Solomon's  accession,
and  of  many  details  as  to  the  wisdom  and  splendour  of
that  sovereign  as  well  as  of  his  fall  into  idolatry.

3.  I  he  Soulherii  Kingdom  \-i  Ch.  12-30) — In  the
later  history  the  northern  kingdom  is  quite  neglc-cted,  and
political  affairs  in  Judah  receive  attenti'.n,  not  in  pro-
portion to  their  intrinsic  importance-,  Inr.  according  as
they  serve  to  exemplify  (Jod's  help  to  the  obedient  and
his  chastisement  of  the  retmllious.  That  the  author  is
always  unwilhng  to  speak  of  the  misfortune-,  of  gcxnl
rulers,  is  not  to  be  ascribed  with  some  critics  to  a
deliberate  suppression  of  truth,  but  shows  that  the  Ixxjk
was  throughout  composed  not  in  purely  historical
interests,  but  with  a  view  to  inculcate  a  single  i>r.iclical
lesson.

U.  Additions  to  Kinx-s-  i-  'he  more  ini|j<jrtant
additions  which  the  Chronicler  makes  to  tlie  old
narrative  consists  of  (1/)  statistic.il  lists  (1  Ch.  12,  see
D.wiD,  §  II,  iii.);  [b)  full  details  on  points  coiukh  ted
with  the  history  of  the  sanctuary  (see  HlsroKK.M.
LlTEKATUKK,  §  15)  aiid  the  great  fe.lMs  (see  I'l  Asl'-s),
or  the  arch;eology  of  the  Levitical  ministry  (see
Lkvites),  iCh.  l;J15  1G  (these  three  chapters  ex-
panded remarkably  from  2S.  6)  22-29  2  Ch.  29-31
3.'>  1-17  etc. )  ;  and  (t)  narratives  of  victories  and  defeats,
of  sins  and  punishments,  of  ol)edience  and  its  reward,
which  could  be  made  to  point  a  plain  religious  lesson  in
favour  of  faithful  observance  of  the  Law.

See  the  following  pass.nges  : — 2Ch.  13;-2i  (.M'ijah),  14  9-15
(Zerali).  l.')  i-i5(.\s.-i  and  the  prophet  A/ariah),  107-10  (Asa  and
Haii.mi),  l!i  1-3  (Jehoshapliat  and  the  prophet  Jihu),  20  Ichosha-
ph.it  and  .Moab,  etc.),  21  i  i-i7(Jehoram),  25  5-10  12-16  (.Vnia/i.ih)

These  narratives  often  include  jirophetical  discourses,
inculcating  the  same  principle  of  the  theocratic  loii-
dilions  of  success  and  failure,  with  nmch  uniformity  ot
expression,  and  in  a  tone  very  different  from  that  of  the
prophets  who  ajipear  in  .Samuel  or  Kings.

2.  Attention  should  Ijc  iliiected  also  to  the  short
insertions,  introduced  often  into  the  narratives  excerpted
from  the  older  historical  books,  for  the  puri)ose  of
supplementing  them  at  some  point  where  they  api>-ared
to  the  author  to  ncx.'d  explanation  or  correction.

Such  are  the  notes  on  ritual  i  Ch.  l.')27(i  28/'  (David);  2  Ch.
hiil'-iyi  61376  8  13-15  (Solomon);  236f/'  13  (mid.ilf)  18  (from
TS)  i<»  (deposition  of  Athaliah);  3*9  ('the  Levitcs')  12  (from
'and  the')  13,  etc.  ;  the  reflections  in  i  Ch.  21 1/.  (joabs census);
2  Ch.  S  I li (Solomon's  wife's  palace);  12  i.;  (Kehoboani  humbling
himself);  X^-^ib  (Yahwe  delivers  Jehoshapbat)  ;  2'J  3/'  ^b  (cause
of  .Ahaziali's  wickedness);  2'i  27<z  (to  '  N'ahwe,'  cause  of  plot
acainst  .Ama/iah);  20  21  (miitdlc)  23  {middle;  consequences  of
Uz/iah's  leprosy)  ;  27  6  (eflects  of  Jolham's  piety)  :  33  23  (char-
acter of  Anion).

The  minor  variations  of  Chronicles  from  Samuel  and
Kings  are  analogous  in  principle  to  the  larger  additions
and  omissions,  so  that  the  whole  work  has  a  consistent
and  well-marked  character,  presenting  the  history  in
quite  a  different  perspective  from  that  of  the  old
narrative.

Here,  then,  a  critical  question  arises.  Is  the  change
of  perspective  wholly  due  to  a  different  selection  of
items  from  authentic  historical  tradition  ?
May  we  assume  that  everything  which  is
new  in  Chronicles  has  been  taken  exactly  from  older


6.  SoTiTces.


766


CHRONICLES,  BOOKS  OP


rources,  or  must  we  judge  thnt  the  siandpoint  of  the
author  has  not  only  governed  the  selection  of  facts,  but
also  coloured  the  statement  of  them  ?  Are  all  his
novelties  new  data,  or  are  some  of  them  inferences  of
his  own  from  the  same  data  as  lie  before  us  in  other
books  of  the  OT?

To  answer  these  questions  we  must  first  inquire  what
were  the  materials  at  his  command.  The  Chronicler
makes  frequent  reference  to  earlier  histories  which  he
cites  by  a  great  variety  of  names.

1.  I'he  Book  of  the  Kinj^^s. — That  tlie  names  '  Hook
of  the  Kings  of  Israel  and  Judah,'  '  Ikiok  of  the  Kings
of  Judah  and  Israel,'  '  Hook  of  the  Kings  of  Israel,'
and  '  At^airs  of  the  Kings  of  Israel'  (2Ch.  33i8,  Ileh.)
refer  to  a  single  work  is  not  disputed.  Under  one  or
other  title  this  book  is  cited  some  ten  times  (iCh.  9i
2Ch.  IGii  2r)26  27?  2826  33i8  8627  368,  also  2O34
3232,  noted  Ijelow).

That  it  is  not  the  canonical  Kings  is  manifest  from
what  is  said  of  its  contents.

It  must  have  been  i|iiite  an  extensive  work,  for  among  other
tilings  it  contained  genealogical  statistics  (iCh.!>i),  as  well  as
other  particulars,  not  mentioned  in  the  existing  Bouk  of  Kings
(see  2  Ch.  '2.1 7  'i'i  18  3t58) ;  and  it  incorporated  certain  older
writings  of  (or  about)  prophets  -in  particular  the  Dcbariin
{Words,  or  r.ither  J/a/A-ri-,  i.e.,  History')  of  Jehu  ben  Hanani
(jCh.--'034,  where  read  with  RV,  'which  is'inserted  in')  and
th^  Vision  of  Isaiah  (2Ch.3232).

Now  it  is  noticeable  that,  where  the  Chronicler  does
not  cite  this  comprehensive  work  at  the  close  of  a  king's
reign,  he  generally  refers  to  some  special  authority
which  bears  the  name  of  ^  proplu-t  (i  Ch.  2929,  Samuel,
Nathan,  and  Gad  ;  2  Ch.  929,  Nathan,  Ahijah,  and  Iddo  ;
12i5,  Shemaiah  and  Iddo;  1822,  Iddo;  2622,  Isaiah).
Never,  howe\'er,  are  both  the  Book  of  the  Kingx  and
a  special  prophetic  writing  cited  for  the  same  reign.  It
is  therefore  highly  probable  that,  in  other  cases  as
well  as  in  those  of  Jehu  and  Isaiah  (see  above),  the
writings  cited  under  the  names  of  various  prophets  were
known  to  the  author  only  as  parts  of  the  great  Bo^k  of
the  Kings.

Even  2  Ch.  33  19  (cp  v.  iS),  where  AV  departs  from  the  received
Hebrew  te.xt,  but  probably  expresses  tlie  correct  reading,!  seems
r.ither  to  confirm  than  to  oppose  this  conclusion  (which  is  now
disputed  by  very  few  scholars)  except  in  the  case  of  Isaiah's
historv  of  U/ziah  (2  Ch.  2(522),  where  the  form  of  the  reference
is  different.

The  references  to  these  Dclbarim  will  thus  not  imply
the  existence  of  historical  monographs  written  by  the
prophets  with  whose  names  they  are  connected  ;  they
will  merely  point  to  sections  of  the  Book  of  the  Kings,
which  embraced  the  history  of  particular  prophets,  and
were  hence  familiarly  cited  under  their  names.

2.  The  Midrash  of  the  Book  of  the  Kings.  — Whether
the  Book  of  the  Kings  is  identical  with  the  Midrash
{  RV,  badly.  Commentary)  if  the  Book  of  the  Kings  (2  Ch.
2427)  is  not  certain.  On  the  one  hand,  the  peculiar
title  would  suggest  a  distinct  work  ;  on  the  other  hand,
it  is  not  apparent  wh)',  if  (as  its  title  shows)  it  was  a
comprehensive  work,  dealing  with  the  kings  generally,
it  should  be  cited  for  only  one  reign.  The  term
'Midrash,'"-  moreover,  from  v-p  to  search  out,  investi-
gate,— as  applied  to  Scripture,  to  discover  or  develop  a
thought  not  apparent  on  the  surface, — denotes  a  didactic
or  homiletic  exposition,  or  an  edifying  religious  story
(such,  for  instance,  as  that  of  Tobit  or  Susannah)  ;  the
Midrash  here  referred  to  will  thus  have  been  a  work
intended  to  develop  the  religious  lessons  deducible  from
the  history  of  the  kings.  This,  however,  is  just  the
guiding  motive  in  many  of  the  narratives,  peculiar  to
Chronicles,  for  which  the  author  cites  as  his  authority,
the  Book  of  the  Kings  ;  the  last-named  work,  therefore,
even  if  not  identical  with  the  Midrash  of  the  Book  of

1  '  The  Seers '  :  .so  ®,  RVmj,'.,  Bertheau,  Kuenen,  Ball,
Oettli,  Kautzsch.  Budde  and  Kittel  read  Vlin  his  seers  (cp
j:  18).  Those  who  follow  MT  (as  Ew.  Hist.  I184,  Keil)  find
in  v.  19  an  unknown  prophet  Hozai  (cp  AV"ig-  RV).

2  Though  common  in  Rabbinical  literature,  it  occurs  other-
wise in  the  OT  only  in  2  Ch.  13  i2.

767


the  Kings  (as  ILw.  We.  Kue.  with  much  probability
suppose),  will  nevertheless  have  been  similar  in  character
and  tendency  (cp  below,  §  9,  end).

The  Midrash  of  the  prophet  Iddo  (aCh.  1822)  will
have  been  either  a  particular  section  of  the  Midrash  of
the  Book  of  the  Kings,  or,  more  probably,  perhaps,  a
separate  work  of  the  same  character,  which  was  attributed
to  Iddo  as  its  author,  or  in  which  the  prophet  Iddo
played  a  prominent  part.  For  allusions  to  other
authorities,  see  i  Ch.  5 17  2827  2724  2  Ch.  3025.

3.  Conclusion. — All  these  writings  must  have  been
/AfZ-exilic  works  ;  nor  is  it  probable  that,  except  for
some  of  his  statistical  information,  the  Chronicler  had
access  to  any  sources  of  early  date  other  than  the
canonical  histories  of  the  OT.  The  style  (see  below,
§  1 1 )  is  conclusive  evidence  that  no  part  of  the  additional
matter '  peculiar  to  Chronicles  is  an  excerpt  from  any
pre-exilic  writing.

The  general  conclusion  is  that  it  is  very  doubtful
whether  the  Chronicler  used  any  historical  work  not
accessible  to  us,  with  the  exception  of  this  lost  Book  of
the  Kings.  Even  his  genealogical  lists  may  have  been
derived  from  that  work  (iCh.  9i),  though  for  these  he
may  also  have  had  other  materials  at  command.

4.  Sources  of  the  Canonical  Kings. — Now  we  know
that  the  two  chief  sources  of  the  canonical  book  of
Kings  were  entitled  Annals  ['events  of  the  times']  of
the  Kings  of  Israel  and  Judah  resfjcctively.  That  the
lost  source  of  the  Chronicles  was  not  independent  of
these  works  appears  probable  both  from  the  nature
of  the  case  and  from  the  close  and  often  verbal
parallelism  between  many  sections  of  the  two  biblical
narratives.  Whilst  the  canonical  Book  of  Kings,  how-
ever, had  separate  sources  for  the  N.  and  the  S.  king-
doms, the  source  of  Chronicles  was  a  history  of  the  two
kingdoms  combined,  and  so,  no  doubt,  was  a  more
recent  work,  in  great  measure  extracted  from  the  older
annals.  Still  it  contained  also  matter  not  derived  from
these  works,  for  it  is  pretty  clear  from  2  K.  21  17  that
the  Annals  of  the  Kings  of  Judith  gave  no  account  of
Manasseh's  repentance,  which,  according  to  2  Ch.  83  iZf  ,
was  narrated  in  the  great  Book  of  the  Kings  of  Israel.

5.  Dependence  of  Chronicles  on  Kings.  —  It  was
formerly  the  opinion  of  Bertheau,  and  other  scholars  (e.g. ,
Keil),  that  the  parallelisms  of  Chronicles  with  Samuel
and  Kings  are  sufficiently  explained  by  the  ultimate
common  source  from  which  both  narratives  drew.
Most  critics  hold,  however,  that  the  Chronicler  also
drew  directly  from  the  canonical  Samuel  and  Kings,  as
he  unt|ucstionably  did  from  the  Pentateuch.  This
opinion  is  probable  in  itself,  as  the  earlier  books  of  the
or  cannot  have  been  unknown  to  the  author  ;  and  the
critical  analysis  of  the  canonical  Book  of  Kings  shows
that  in  some  of  the  parallel  passages  the  Chronicler
uses  words  which  were  not  taken  from  the  annals  but
written  by  the  author  of  Kings  himself.  In  particular.
Chronicles  agrees  with  Kings  in  those  short  notes  of  the
moral  character  of  individual  monarchs  which  can  hardly
be  ascribed  to  a  hand  earlier  than  that  of  the  final
author  of  the  latter  book  (cp  e.^.,  2Ch.2032/.  [.Asa]
with  1  K.  2243 ;  242  [Joash],  with  2  K.  I23  [2]  [Jehoash] ;
25i-4  [Amaziah],  with  2K.  I42/.  5/,  etc.).  It  is  of
course  possible,  as  Bertheau  (xliv.  / )  and  Kuenen
(§  32  15)  suppose,  that  the  author  of  the  chief  source  of
Chronicles  had  already  incorporated  extracts  from  our
canonical  book  of  Kings  ;  and  in  general  the  connec-
tions of  the  successive  historical  books  which  preceded
the  present  canonical  hi.stories  are  sufficiently  complex
to  make  it  unwise  to  indulge  in  positive  assertions
on  a  matter  in  which  so  many  poss1t)i+itJes  may  be
suggested.

1  Including  the  genealogies  and  statistical  matter,  which  (in
.so  far  as  they  are  not  colourless  lists  of  names)  .show  unmistak-
able marks  of  the  Chronicler's  hand,  and  must  therefore  be
regarded  as  his  compilations:  see,  e.g.,  the  late  expressi»ns  in
I  Ch. '230  4  21  2233383942  5i  2  etc.

768


CHRONICLES,  BOOKS  OP


In' studying Chronicles  a  sharp  distinction onpht

always  to  l>».-  drawn  lx;tween  the  parts  exccrptwl  (without

_.  . substantial  alteration)  from  the  earlier

7.  ITeatmenti  p,,„^,„ipaj historical books and the

01  sources.  ^^.^^^^  peculiar  to  the  Chronicler.  The
recently  pul)lishcd  edition  of  Chronicles  by  Kittel
(SHOT),  in  which  such  excerpts  are  coloured  light  red,
will  materially  assist  the  reader  in  doing  this.

The  question  arises,  What  is  the  historical  value  of
the  passages  peculiar  to  Chronicles?  After  what  has
iM-en  saitl,  it  can  hardly  Iw  doubtful  that,  excej)!  for
some  of  his  statistical  information,  his  one  genuine
ancient  source  was  the  series  of  the  '  Former  Prophets,'
Sanmel  and  (more  largely)  Kings.  The  MS.S  of  these
lx)oks  which  he  employed  preserved  occasionally  a
better  reading  than  is  found  in  the  existing  M  T  ;  but
where  he  adds  to  the  earlier  narrative  or  departs  from
it,  his  variations  are  seldom  such  as  to  inspire  con-
fitience.  In  large  measure  these  variations  are  due  to
his  assumption,  the  validity  of  which  he  never  questions,
that  the  religious  institutions  of  his  own  time  must  have
existed  in  the  same  form  in  old  Israel.

1.  Hii^k  Places. — Living  in  a  time  when  high  places
were  universally  regarded  as  idolatrous,  the  Chronicler
could  not  imagine  that  a  good  king  had  tolerated  them.

Thus,  whereas  i  K.  15i4"J243  state  th.it  As.-i  and  Jehoshaphat
dill  not  abolish  the  hijjh  places,  the  Chronicler  (aCh.Hs  176)
says  that  they  did  abolish  them.

2.  Ln'itical  Choirs. — .\gain,  he  assumes  that  the
Levitical  organisation  of  his  own  time,  and  esjxicially
the  three  choirs  of  singers,  were  established  by  David.

Had  this  really  been  the  case,  the  silence  of  the  older  history
would  be  inexplicable ;  indee<l  the  Hook  of  Ezra-Nehcmiah
shows  that,  even  at  the  time  of  the  return  from  Habylon,  the
system  with  which  the  Chronicler  was  familiar  had  not  been
elaborated,  for  the  '  singers '  there  still  form  a  separate  class
not  yet  incorporated  with  the  Levites.

(rt)  The  narrative  in  2  S.  t>  of  the  removal  of  the  ark  to  Zion
does  not  say  a  word  respecting  the  presence  of  Levites  upon  the
occasion.  In  iCh.l3  \b/.  this  omission  is  made  good:  the
Invites,  including  the  singers,  take  a  prominent  part  in  the
ceremony  ;  the  mishap  of  Uzzah  is  represented  (1513)  as  due  to
the  fact  that  the  ark  had  not  at  first  been  properly  carried  by
the  Levites,  and  a  psalm  composed  of  parts  of  three /oiZ-exilic
psalms  (105  J-15  90 1-13(1  100 1  \t /■)  is  placed  in  David's  mouth
(IO8-36).

(J))  In  I  K.83  the  ark  is  borne  by  priests  (in  accordance  with
Dt.  31 9,  and  all  pre-exilii:  allusions);  but  in  2Ch.  .'>4  'Levites'
is  substituted  for  '  priests,'  to  bring  the  passage  into  conformity
with  the  later  Levitical  law.

(c)  In  2K.II  Jeholada's  assistants  in  the  revolution  which
cost  .\thaliah  her  life,  are  the  foreign  body-guard,  which  we
know  to  have  l)een  employed  in  the  temple  down  to  the  time
of  Kzekiel  (44  7)  ;  but  in  2  Ch.  'I'i  the  Carians  (see  Ciiekkthites)
and  the  foot-guards  give  place  to  the  l^cvites,  in  accordance
with  the  rule  of  the  second  temple,  which  did  not  allow  aliens
to  appro.-ich  so  near  to  the  holy  things.  '  Delilierate  altera-
tions'  (He.)  are  in  conse<nience  introduced  throughout  the
narrative :  and  a  new  colouring  is  imparted  to  the  whole
occiirrencak

((/)  There  are  other  incidental  allusions,  also,  which  show  that
the  author  is  really  describing  institutions  of  a  date  later  than
the  age  to  which  he  refers  them.  Thus  (i.)  not  only  do  the
gates  mentioned  in  iCh.'iO  (under  David)  presuppose  the
existence  of  a  temple,  but  also  the  Persian  name  Pakiiar  {q.i>.\
given  to  one  of  them  (7».  18),  shows  that  the  writer  is  thinking  of
the  po-.t-exilic  temple,  (ii.)  The  allusions  in  2Ch.l3ii  (in  the
speech  put  into  Abijah's  mouth)  to  the  golden  candlestick  and
the  evening  burnt-offering,  point  also  to  the  usage  of  the  same
age  :  in  the  pre-exilic  tenmle  the  number  of  golden  candlesticks
was  not  one  but  ten  (iK. "49;  see,  however,  Candlestick,
$  i),  and  the  evening  sacrifice  of  the  pre-exilic  temple  was  not  a
holocaust  but  a  cereal  oblation  (nmo  :  iK.  I836  2  K.  16 15
Ezra  9  4).  2

In  his  descriptions  of  pre-exilic  solemnities,  as  in  the
s(x;eches  which  he  places  in  the  mouth  of  pre-exilic
characters, the  Chronicler is unconsciously  an unim-

'  S.  portion  of  Rol)ertsoii  Smith's  article  in  the  /•."/>  is  here
omitted  ;  and  this  and  the  following  section  (§  8)  exhibit  the  (pre-
sumably) more  matured  view  expressed  by  the  author  in  OTJCW
(92),  pp.  140-148  (cp  ed.  I,  pp.  419-423).

2  Cp  1  Ch.  2l28-22i  (exciismg  David's  sacrifice  on  Araunah's
threshing-floor  and  explaining  why  he  could  not  go  to  Giljeon);
3 Ch.  1  3^6<l (legalising  the  worship  at  the  high-place  of  Gibeon  ;
cp  iCh.  IO39/);  ~g/.  (i  K.865/,  altered  to  harmonise  with
the  practice  of  the  post -exilic  temple);  and  the  short  notices
rclatmg  to  ritual,  especially  the  functions  of  the  singers,  instanced
above  (J  s,  end  ;  cp  |  7I2]).


peachable  witness  to.  the  religious  usages  and  beliefs
of  his  own  time  ;  it  is  inconsistent  with  sound  historical
principles  to  treat  his  testimony  with  regard  to  antiquity
as  of  etjual  value  with  that  of  the  older  and  more
nearly  contemporary  historical  writings,  where  the  two,
whether  directly  or  by  legitimate  inference,  are  at
variance.

Another  principle  traceable  in  the  Chronicler's  addi-
tions is  the  tendency  not  merely  to  lay  .stress  upon  the
doctrine  of  divine  retribution,  but  also  to


8.  The


represent it as  acting immediately  (see


25


769


prophets  the  nnributive  justice  of  (jod  is
manifest  in  the  general  course  of  the  history—  the  fall  of
the  I  lebrew  nation  is  the  fruit  of  sin  and  relx-llion  against
Yahwes  moral  commands — but  (jods  justice  is  mingled
with  long-suffering,  and  the  prophets  do  not  suppose
that  every  sin  is  punished  promptly,  and  that  temporary
good  fortune  is  always  the  reward  of  righteousness.
The  aim  of  very  many  of  the  additions  made  in
Chronicles  to  the  old  history,  is  to  show  that  in  Israel
retribution  followed  immediately  on  gnf)fl  or  l^id  con-
duct, especially  on  otx;dience  or  disoln-'dience  to  pro-
phetic warnings.

(a)  In  I  K.2248  we  read  that  Jehoshaphat  built  Tarshish-
ships  (/.<■.,  great  merchant  vessels)  at  Ezlon-geber  for  the  S.
Arabian  gold-trade  ;  but  the  ships  were  wrecked  before  st:irliiig.
For  this  the  Chronicler  seeks  a  religious  reason.  .\s  i  K.
proceeds  to  relate  that,  after  the  disaster,  .Ahaziah  of  Israel
oflfered  to  join  Jehoshaphat  in  a  fresh  enterprise,  and  the  latter
declined,  the  narrative  of  i  K.  2248  is  so  altered  in  2Ch.2035y:
3ji  as  to  represent  the  king  of  Israel  as  having  been  partner  in
the  ships  that  were  wrecked;  whilst  in  7'.  37a  there  is  an
addition  stating  that  Jehoshaphat  was  warned  bvapiopbetof
the  certain  failure  of  an  undertaking  in  which  he  was  assocuited
with  the  wicked  Ahaziah.

ii)  In  2  K.  3  we  read  of  a  war  with  Moab  in  which  Jehosha-
phat was  associated  with  the  wicked  house  of  -Ahab,  and  c.ime
offscathless.  In  Chronicles  this  war  is  entirely  omitted,  and  in
its  pl.ice  we  have  (2  Ch.  20)  an  expedition  of  Jehoshaphat  alone
against  Moab,  Ammon,  and  Edom,  in  which  the  Jewish  king,
having  opened  the  campaign — with  the  assistance  of  the  Levites
— with  suitable  prayer  and  praise,  has  no  further  task  than  to
siK)il  the  dead  of  the  enemy  who  have  fallen  by  one  another's
hands.

(c)  Kings  states  simply  as  a  fact  that  Shishak  invaded  Judah
and  carried  off  the  treasures  of  the  temple  and  palace  :  the
Chronicler  inserts  between  i  K.  1425  and  26  a  notice  explaining
that  this  was  because  Rehoboam  had  forsaken  Yahwe,  but  that,
as  he  and  his  princes  had  humbled  themselves,  they  should  not
be  entirely  destroyed  (2  Ch.  122/'-8  ;  cp  7'.  12).

00  'n  Kings,  Asa,  who  according  to  i  K.  1.5  14  was  a  good
king  all  his  days,  had  in  his  old  age  (7'.  23)  a  disease  in  his  feet.
With  the  object,  apparently,  of  accounting  for  this,  the  Chronicler
explains  (2Ch.  I67-10  ;  cp  the  addition  in  7'.  i2Al)  that  three
years  previously  he  had  shown  a  distrustful  spirit  by  contracting
ari  alliance  with  Benhadad  (which  is  mentioned  in  i  K.I517-22,
without  any  mark  of  disapproval  on  the  part  of  the  narrator).
The  singular  dates  in  2Ch.  I.')i9  10 1  (which  place  Haasha's
invasion  at  a  period  which,  according  to  i  K.  1^33  1<)8,  was  ten
years  after  his  own  death)  are  most  naturally  explained  as  an
attempt  to  bring  the  fault  sufficiently  near  the  punishment.

(e)  Similarly  the  misfortunes  of  Jehoash,  Amaziah,  and  .\zariah
are  explained  by  sins  of  which  the  older  history  knows  nothing
(sCh.  24  23_/C  2.')  14-1620^  20  5  16-20);  2  and  Pharaoh  Nccho
himself  is  made  a  prophet,  that  the  defeat  ai.d  death  of  Jusiah
may  be  due  to  his  rejection  of  a  divine  warning  (2Ch.  352iy;),
whilst  on  the  other  hand,  Manasseh,  whose  character  as  dcpicte«l
in  2  K.  21  1-18  2326  (cp  24  3 y:  Jer.  I54)  is  without  a  redeeming
feature,  is  represented  as  a  jienitent  (2  Ch.  33  12^  15^^)  in  order,
it  would  seem,  to  justify  his  long  reign.-*

All  this  is  entirely  in  the  style  of  the  Jewish  '  Midrash  ';
it  is  not  history,  but  '  Haggada,'  moralising  romance
attaching  to  historical  names  and  events.  The  Chronicler
himself,  it  will  be  remembered  (see  above,  §  6  [2],  gives
the  name  of  *  Midrash  '  to  two  of  the  sources  from  which

»  Where  the  'yet'  of  RV  should  be  'and  also"  (viz.,  as  well
as  in  the  alli.-ince  with  Henhadad).

2  2  K.  15  5  mentions  only  the  feet  that  Uzzi.ah  became  a  lcj>er.

'  Cp  1  Ch.  10  f}/^  (the  cause  assigned  for  Saul's  death),  2  t  t  .
122(^(causeof  Shishak's  invasion),  21  io(^(causeof  Libnah's  rev  olt),
227  25 20.*  28 5  19  2ayC(Ahaz's  troubles  attributed  to  his  idolatrv),
3O12A  In  2Ch.244-i4  2822/ 24yC  the  older  narratives  of
Kings  have  been  not  less  curiously  transformed  than  in  aCh.  "3
(see  .ibove,  §7^);  Be.,  ad  loc.\  Kue.«),  |  .SO  ai,  |  81  2 ;  We.
ProlA*),  1Q3,  \()i/.  (ET  194,  i^i/.\.  The  correspondence
between  Hiram  and  Solomon  (2Ch.  23-16:  cp  iK.52-9)  has
been  rewritten  bj-  the  Chronicler  (with  reminiscences  from  other
parts  of  Kings)  in  his  own  style.

770


CHRONICLES,  BOOKS  OP


his  materials  were  derived.  There  need  be  no  uncer-
tainty, therefore,  as  to  the  nature  of  his  work  when  it
departs  from  the  older  narratives  of  S.  and  K.

Another  peculiarity  of  the  Chronicler  is  to  be  found
in  the  incredibly  high  figures  with  which  he  deals.

David  (i  Ch.  22  14)  amasses  100,000
9.  Exaggerations.  t.ilents  of  gold  and  1,000,000  talents  of
silver  for  the  temple  (contra.st  the  much
more  modest  estimate  of  even  Solomon's  revenue  in  i  K.  10  n/.) ;
the  army  of  Abijah  numbers  400,000  men,  that  of  Jeroboam
800,000,  of  whom  500,000  perish  in  one  day  (2  Ch.  13  3  17)  ;  Asa
musters  580,000  soldiers,  Zerah  1,000,000  (Hsg),  Jehoshaphat
1, 160,000  (17  14-19), — although  in  20  12  he  complains  that  he
has  '  no  might,' — Uzziah  307,500  (2613);  of  the  army  of  Ahaz
120,000  are  sl.iin  in  one  day,  while  200,000  women  and  children
are  taken  captive  (286  8).

Manifestly  such  figures  cannot  be  historical.  The
past  was  magnified,  as  it  was  also  idealised.  The
empire  of  David  and  his  successors  was  imagined  oh  a
scale  of  unsurpassed  power  and  magnificence  ;  pre-exilic
Judah  was  pictured  as  already  in  possession  of  the  in-
stitutions, and  governed — at  least  in  its  greater  and
better  men — by  the  ideas  and  principles  which  were
in  force  at  a  later  day.  The  past  was  read  in  the
light  of  the  present,  and  the  history,  where  necessary,
re-written  accordingly.  No  doubt  in  many  instances  a
traditional  elentent  lies  at  the  basis  of  the  Chronicler's
representation  ;  but  this  element  has  been  developed
by  him,  and  embellished  with  fresh  details,  for  the  pur-
pose of  giving  expression  to  the  ideas  which  he  had  at
heart,  and  of  inculcating  the  lessons  which  he  con-
ceived the  history  to  teach.  It  is  probable  that  the
new  conception  of  Israel's  past  history,  and  the  char-
acteristic didactic  treatment  of  it,  did  not  originate  with
the  Chronicler  himself,  but  had  already  appeared  in
the  Book  of  the  Kings  of  Israel  and  Judah  or  the  Midrash
of  the  Book  of  Kings,  which  he  so  frequently  cites  as
his  authorities  (cp  Be.  xxxvii. ).

A  usage,  not  peculiar  to  the  Chronicler  among  OT

writers,  which  must  be  carefully  taken  into  account  by

in Th  ^^^  historical  critic, is that  of giving

, .  information  that  is  reallv  statistical  in

genealogies,  ^^^  ^^^^  ^^  ^  narrative.'  This  is  the
principle  which  underlies  many  of  the  OT  statements  of
genealogical  relationships,  and  which  alone  explains  the
variations  between  different  accounts  of  the  genealogy
proceeding  from  a  single  ancestor  :  information  as  to
the  subdivisions  of  clans,  the  intermingling  of  popula-
tions, and  the  like,  is  thrown  into  a  genealogical  form
(see  Genealogies,  §  i).  The  most  striking  example  of
the  application  of  this  principle  is  the  ethnographical
table  of  Gen.  10  (cp  also  2220-24  25 1-4  13-16,  and  parts
of  36)  ;  but  these  instances  by  no  means  stand  alone  ;
there  are  many  in  i  Ch.1-9.

Thiis  it  is  avowedly  the  intention  of  22442-45^9-55  42-5  11-14
17-23  to  indicate  the  origin  of  local  populations:  in  243  Hebron,
the  town,  has  '  sons.'  .Several  of  the  names  in  2  4  are  also  those
of  Kdomite  clans  (Wellh.  Dc  Geitti/'us  etc.  2^/.) ;  these  came
gradually  to  be  treated  as  belonging  to  Judih,  and  the  cnn-
nection  was  afterwards  exhibited  artificially  in  a  genealogical
scheme.  Caleb  and  Jerahmeel  were  not  originally  Israelite;
Caleb  belonged  to  the  Edomite  clan  (Gen.  3<)  11)  of  the  Keniz-
zites  (Jos.  146-14);  and  clans  bearing  the  name  of  Caleb  and
Jerahmeel  are  in  David's  time  (i  S.  27  10,  cp  30  29;  note  also
the  terms  of  Jos.  1415a)  still  distinguished  from  Judah:  in
course  of  time,  however,  they  were  regarded  as  an  integral  part
of  the  tribe,  and  a  genealogy  was  formed  (i  Ch.  2  18  25)  to  give
expression  to  the  fact.l

A  different  application  of  the  same  principle  seems

1  So  in  722  Ephraim  is  not  an  individual,  but  the  tribe  ;  and
in  1.  21  kzer  and  Elead  are,  no  douht,  Ephraimite  clans.  Cp
Bennett  in  Expos.  Bib.  chap.  iv.  esp.  p.  87^


to  lie  in  the  account  of  the  institutions  of  Levitical
service  which  is  introduced  in  connection  with  the  trans-
ference of  the  ark  to  Jerusalem  by  David.  The  author
is  not  concerned  to  distinguish  the  gradual  steps  by
which  the  Levitical  organisation  attained  its  full  develop-
ment. He  wishes  to  describe  the  system  in  its  complete
form,  especially  as  regards  the  service  of  the  singers,
and  he  does  this  under  the  reign  of  David,  who  was  the
father  of  Hebrew  psalmody  [cp  OTJC^^^  223/.]  and
the  restorer  of  the  sanctuary  of  the  ark.

The  style  of  the  Chronicler  has  remarkable  peculiari-
ties. It  is  not  merely  that  it  presents  characteristically
11  Stvle  ^"^^^  linguistic  novelties  (which  are  not  con-
^  ■  fined  to  the  vocabulary,  but,  as  Konig's
Syntax  der  hebr.  Spiachc  fully  shows,  extend  to  the
Syntax),  but  it  has  also  a  numl)er  of  special  mannerisms.
Even  the  reader  of  a  translation  can  see  that  this  must
be  the  case.  Modern  words,  often  with  Aramaic  affini-
ties, inelegant  syntax,  cumbrous  and  uncouth  sentences,
in  strongest  possible  contrast  to  the  ease  and  grace  of
the  earlier  Hebrew  historical  lx)oks, — these  are  the
predominant  marks  of  the  Chronicler's  style  ;  and  so
constant  are  they  that  there  is  hardly  a  sentence,  not
excerpted  from  Samuel  or  Kings,  in  which  they  are  not
observable.^  For  details  we  must  refer  to  the  Intro-
ductions and  Commentaries  (see  e.g..  Be.  xiv.-xviii. ;
Dr.  Introd.  535-540  ;  V.  Brown,  Hastings'  DB
1  389-391).  It  might  be  thought,  by  those  unacquainted
with  the  Chronicler's  manner,  that  the  speeches  in
Chronicles  might  form  as  a  whole  an  exception  to
what  is  here  stated,  and  that  they  might  conceivably
be  based  on  some  special  sources  of  older  date.  But
this  would  be  a  great  mistake.  The  tone  and  literary
style  of  the  speeches  which  have  parallels  in  Samuel
and  Kings  are  both  very  different  from  those  which
have  been  added  by  the  Chronicler.  The  latter  not
only  reflect,  almost  uniformly,  the  ideas  and  point  of
view  of  the  Chronicler  himself,  but  also  exhibit  frequently
the  same  literary  peculiarities.  There  can  be  no  reason-
able doubt  that  they  are,  one  and  all,  his  own  compo-
sition.'^

He.'s  work  in  the  Kurzgef.  Hdh.  (ed.  2,  1873)  is  still  a  most
helpful  commentary ;  .see  also  Keil  ('70) ;  Zockler  in  lunge's
Bibelweik  ('74);  Oettli,  Kg/.  Komm.
12.  Bibliography.  ('89);  Rawlinson,  speakers  Comm.  ('73);
Ball  (learned),  EUicott's  Cotnm.  ('83);
Bennett  (suggestive).  Expos.  Bib.  ('94).  On  isagogic  questions
(structure,  sources,  credibility  of  narrative,  etc.),  the  principal
works  are  De  Wette,  Krit.  I'ersuck  iiber  die  Gtaub^viirdigkeit
d.  Cliron.  i8o5  {Bciirage,  vol.  1);  Keil,  Apolog.  I 'ersuch.  ('33),  and
Eiiil.^^)  ('7.3)1  §§  138-144  ;  Movers,  Krit.  Unterss.  fiber  die  Bibl.
Citron.  ('34)  ;  Graf, '  Das  Buch  der  Chron.  als  Geschicht.squelle,'
in  Die  Gesch.  Biicher  dcs  ATs  (66),  p.  114-247  (see  also  Be.
viii.);  Ew.  Kist.\i6g  ff.;  De  Wette- Schr.  Einl.  ('69),  U
224-2^(3;  We.  t'roU*)  169-228  [ET,  171-227];  Kue.  Ond.i'^)  §§
28-32  (very  thorough) ;  Dr.  /«/>%/.  (")  516-540 ;  Wildeboer,  Letter-
kunde,  §  25  ;  Konig,  Einl.  §  54.  Cp  al.so  Bu.  '  Vermutungen
zum  "  .Midrash  "  des  Buches  der  Konige'  in  ZA  77/',  1892,  p.  37
ff.  (speculative) ;  Ki.  Chronicles,  Critical  Edition,  etc.,  with
Notes,  .SAY) 7' (Hebrew),  '95;  W.  E.  Barnes,  '  Religious  Stand-
point of  the  Chronicler,'  Avi.  Joum.  Sent.  Lang,  ami  Lit.,
Oct.  '96:  'Chronicles  a  Targum,'  Ex.  Times,  8316  yC  ('97);
An  Apparatus  Criticus  to  Chronicles  in  the  Peshitta  Version
('97)  (contains  a  rather  surprising  number  of  variants  in  the
primary  MSS);  F.  Brown,  art.  'Chronicles,'  Ha.stings'  DB
('98).  \V.  R.  S. — S.  R.  D.

,  1  The  peculiarities  in  question  may  often  be  observed  even
in  the  short  .sentences  which  the  Chronicler  sometimes  intro-
duces into  a  narrative  otherwise  e.xcerp'ed  without  material
alteration  from  Samuel  or  Kings :  e.g.,  i  Ch.  21  t  (icjO>  3  end
(nrCN).  "  end  (Sap),  2Ch.  23(2)  5ii^i3a  12  12  I83  end,  -^ib,
etc.

2  For  illustrations  see Dr., 'The  Speeches  in Chronicles,'
Expositor,  Apr.  and  Oct.  1895,  pp.  247-254,  294/;,  304-307.


771


CHRONOLOGY


CHRONOLOGY


I.  Difficulties  (if  1-15X
LmIcIc  of  System  (§  i/l).
Must  dates  late  and  hypothetical

(««  3-.5)-

II. SOORCKS  OK HkI.P.

Astronomy  {§  16^!).

Egypt  m  18-22).


Introductory  ({|  3ij-4a).

I. LiKKOK  jKSUs(gji43-63X

1.  Baptism  (jj  43).

2.  Length  of  public  ministry  (|J

44-46).

3.  Its  begmning  (Jt  47-49).


OLD  TESTAMENT-*

1.  OT  data  as  10  reigns  (§  7)

2.  Mahler's  theories  (§  17).

3.  Assyriological  dates  (§  25).

4.  Reigns  :  Solomon  to  Jehu  (§  32).


CHRONOLOGY

CONTENTS.

A.  OLD  TESTAMENT.

Assyriology  (88  23-26).
Menander  (J  30).
Caution  (»  27).

III.  Results.

Karlicst  certain  OT  dates  ($  28).
Approximate  earlier  dates  (§8  29,  3

B.  NEW  TESTAMENT.

4.  Year  of  death  (88  50-56).

5.  Ve.-ir  of  birth  (§8  57-62).

6.  Conclusions  (8  63).
II.  Life  ok  Paul  (88  64-80).

I. Entry  into  Europe  to  imprison-
ment at  Rome  (88  64-71).

TABLES.

5.  Survey  :  Solomon  to  Herod  (8  38)

B.  NEW  TESTAMENT—

6.  Secular  History  (8  41).

7.  Life  of  Jesus  (8  63).

BIBLIOGRAPHY  (8  85).


Chronology  of  the several periods
(IS  3'-37).

1.  Solomon  to  Jehu  (I  32).

2.  Certain dates  : Jehu  to  fall  of

Samaria  (8  33).

3.  Chronology  of  N.  Israel  (8  34).

4.  Chronology  of  J  udah  (88  35-37).


2.  Earlier  period  (88  72-75)-
Confirmation  of  results  (88  76-78).

3.  Closing  period  (8  79/).

III.  Churches  in  Palestine  (|  81/).

IV.  Other  Dates  (8  83/.)


8.  Paul's  middle  period  (8  71).

9.  Paul  :  first  period  (8  75).
to.  Paul  :  last  period  (8  80).
II.  Other  dates  (8  84).


A. OLD TESTAMENT.
The advant.iges afforded  by  a fixed and uniform
chronological  system  of  delining  historical  events  seem
1 No  fixed  ^"  *-"^'''''^"'  ^'^^'  °"^  might  exi)ect  to  find
era  some  such  method  of  determining  dates

in  use  from  the  very  earliest  times.
History,  however,  shows  that  a  long  development
was  needed  to  lead  to  this  simple  result.  Only  in
connection  with  a  universal  history  did  the  desire
for  a  uniform  and  comprehensive  method  of  determining
dates  spring  up.  The  impulse  towards  a  real  universal
history  and  a  general  chronology  came,  not  when  the
attempt  w.as  made  to  collect  and  record  all  human
events,  but  when  men  learned  to  look  at  them  from  a
single  point  of  view  and  to  comprehend  them  in  a  single
plan.  The  roots  of  such  a  universal  history  lie  in  the
prophets  of  Israel,  who  regarded  the  plan  of  Yahw6
as  realising  itself  in  the  experience  of  the  nations  of
the  earth  as  well  as  in  the  history  of  Israel  ;  and  its
actual  tx'ginnings,  strange  as  it  may  seem,  are  to  be
found  in  the  Apocalyptic  writers,  who  regarded  history
as  a  comprehensive  whole  (see  Apocai.yi'Tic,  §  2).
This  mode  of  regarding  history  was  continued  by
Christianity.  It  is  not  strange,  therefore,  that  Chris-
tianity felt  the  need  for  a  universal  chronology  and
found  a  way  of  meeting  that  need,  thus  proving  its
own  world -embracing  significance.  This  is  not  the
place  to  enter  upon  the  long  and  involved  history  of
the  adoption  of  the  Christian  era.  which,  after  its  author,
the  Roman  abbot  Dionysius  Kxiguus  of  the  first  half
of  the  sixth  century,  is  also  called  the  Dionysian  era.
In  order,  however,  to  obtain  a  fixed  starting-point  from
which  to  reckon,  we  must  simply  state  here  that  the
year  i~i.e. ,  the  year  of  the  birth  of  Christ— is  equivalent
to  the  year  754  of  the  era  of  Varro— /.^. ,  the  era  of  the
city  of  Rome,— and  to  the  first  year  of  the  195th
Olympiad  ;  and,  also,  that  King  Herod  died  in  the
year  750  of  the  city  of  Rome,  and  so  in  the  year  4  b.c.
(cp.Schur.  c;//'l  343.345).

The  same  phenomenon  of  gradual  arrival  at  a  satis-
factory chronological  method  is  reixiated  in  the  narrower
sphere  of  the  national  history  of  the  several  nations.
We  never  find  a  settled  era,  a  definite  date  from  which
years  were  counted,  at  the  very  Ix'ginning  or  even  at
an  early  period  of  a  nation's  history.  If  anything  of
this  kind  h.as  seemed  to  appear  in  early  times,  it  has
always  turned  out  to  be  in  the  highest  degree  uncertain,
or  really  to  rest  on  later  calculations.  Nor  is  the

773


OT  any  exception  to  this  rule.  Only  once  had  the
Jews  before  Christ  a  national  era,  and  that  was  for  a  very
short  time.  When  .Simon  the  Maccabee  had  obtained
from  the  .Syrians  complete  freedom  from  taxation  along
with  the  acknowledgment  of  the  political  inde{x;ndence
I  of  Judea,  documents  and  contracts  were  dated  by  years
of  Simon,  the  High  Priest  and  Prince  of  the  Jews,  the
first  year  of  Simon  the  High  Priest  ( i  Mace.  1 3 41/
1427)  representing  the  170th  year  of  the  era  of  the
Seleucides  (  =  143-142  B.C.  ).i

On  the  other  hand,  since  the  time  when  the  Jews
fell  under  the  dominion  of  .Syria,  they  had  used  the
so-called  era  of  the  Seleucidaa  {^aciXela  'EWtjvuv.
I  Mace.  In;  ^a<rt\e/a  'Aa<rvplu}v  [Assyrian  =  Syrian],
Jos.  Anf.  xiii.  67  ;  nncc  p:!;  =  «'^<i  contractuum  amongst
the  Jews,  and  year  d'yawnaye  amongst  the  Syrians).
This  era  has  for  its  starting-point  the  defeat  of  Nicanor.
the  general  of  Antigonus.  by  Seleucus  .N'icator,  and  the
final  est.ablishment  of  the  dominion  of  the  Seleucidfe
in  Syria  and  Babylonia  in  the  year  OI.  117,  \—i.e.,  312
B.C.  It  is  used  in  the  Books  of  the  Maccabees,  but
there,  it  would  seem,  with  this  difference,  that  in  the
first  book  it  begins,  not,  as  was  usual  elsewhere,  in
the  autumn,  but  in  the  spring  of  312,  thus  about  half
a  year  earlier. ^  This  era  reached  in  general  as  far  as
the  Syrian  power,  and  although,  usually,  where  states
were  able  to  obtain  freedom  they  introduced  new  eras
of  their  own,  none  was  able  to  maintain  itself  so  long
as  that  of  the  Seleucidas.  It  remained  in  use,  indeed,
among  the  Syrians  for  centuries  alongside  of  the  Arabic
era,  which  counts  from  the  Hegira  {hijra,  flight  of
Mohammed),  i6th  July,  622  a.d.

Real  eras  are  not  met  with  in  the  OT  in  earlier  times.
We  cannot  cite  as  an  exception  the  practice  of  the  Jews
during  the  Exile,  of  counting  the  years  since  they  were
carried  away  from  their  land  (ijniSj'?,  Ezek.  33  21  and
40i  ;  pa'i.T  niSA  2  K.  2527  ;  also  Jer.  5231,  and  Ezek.
1  2,  and,  without  mention  of  the  point  from  which  the
reckoning  is  m.ade,  Ilzek.  81  20i  '29i  17).  In  truth,
they  desired  nothing  more  eagerly  than  to  be  delivered
from  the  need  of  counting  in  this  way. Besides,  there

1  ^Vhether  the  numljers  1-5  that  are  found  on  silver  shekels
and  half- shekels  with  the  inscription  ,icnp  O^CIT  or  D'ScnV
nenp.T  refer  to  another  era  than  this  of  Simon's,  and,  if  so,  to
some  pre-Christian  era,  h.-is  not  been  decided.  That  Simon
had  coins  stamped,  however,  is  hardly  to  be  doubted  (cp
1  Mace.  15  6;  al-so  Schfirer,  «/.  cit.  1  192^  6367?".).

2  So  Schurer,  o^.  cil.  1  33 ;  We.,  however  (IJG  it^/.  ao8X
regards  this  assumption  as  unnecessary  (cp  Year,  8  9).


CHRONOLOGY

was  along  with  it  a  reckoning  from  the  final  fall  of
Jerusalem  (Kzek.  40i),  while  Kzek.  1 1  (if  the  text  has
reached  us  intact)  must  rest  on  still  a  third  mode  of
reckoning.^  It  is,  moreover,  a  very  unsafe  hypothesis
which  ventures  to  retain  in  the  case  of  the  statement  of
2  Ch.  16 1  (as  a  whole  clearly  untenable)  at  least  the  num-
Ih-t  36  as  based  on  trustworthy  tradition,  and  proposes
to  find  therein  a  trace  of  a  Judjean  era,  thought  to  date
from  the  division  of  the  kingdom  (Sharjje,  Chronoloiry
of  the  Bible,  29;  cp  Hrandes,  Ahhandl.  62).  Nor,

lastly,  are  we  any  more  justified  in  finding  any  trace
of  a  real  era  counting  from  the  Exodus  in  the  late
passage  1K.61,  where  the  building  of  Solomon's
temple  is  assigned  to  the  480th  year  after  that  event.
This  number  does  not  rest  on  tradition  :  it  has  been
reached  by  calculation  based  on  some  hypothesis.  No
corroboration  can  be  obtained  from  the  numbers  in
the  late  Priestly  Code — if  the  |)assages  containing  them
are  original  even  there — numbers  which  date  the  events
of  the  journey  through  the  wilderness  by  years  from  the
deliverance  out  of  Egypt  (onsp  i'lND  Vxib'-'ja  nxs'^;  cp
Ex.  16 1  19 1  Nu.  li  9  I  3338).  Nor  can  any  support,
in  fact,  be  found  for  the  notion  that  the  Jubilee  period
was  turned  to  chronological  purposes.  There  is  not  the
slightest  trace  of  a  real  carrying  out  of  the  regulations
concerning  it  mentioned  in  Lev.  209^:  even  the  Books
of  the  Maccabees  speak  only  of  Sabbatic  years,  never  of
Jubilee  years  ( i  Mace.  649  53  ; cp  Jos.  Ant.  xiv.  I62).

In  spite of  this lack of  a proper era, the  OT  is
not without notes and data intended to  serve  as a
means  of  fixing  events  chronologically.


2.  Miscel-


In addition to isolated observations


laneous  data.  |^q,^^.  ji^g  i^^g  important  that  they  are
incidental )  setting  an  occurrence  in  relation  to  another
prominent  event  {e.g.,  to  the  death  of  the  king,  as  in  Is.
61  I42S,  or  to  an  important  expedition,  as  in  Is.  20 1,
to  the  building  of  a  city,  as  in  Nu.  1822,  or  to  an
extraordinary  natural  phenomenon,  as  in  Am.  li),  we
generally  find,  in  the  case  of  any  important  OT  person-
age, the  year  of  his  life  or  his  reign  specified  ;  and  in
the  books  edited  during  the  Exile  the  date  of  the  events
narrated  begins  to  be  given  by  years  of  the  reigning
king.  Besides,  there  are  the  various  synchronistic  data
often  supplied  by  headings  of  books  {e.g.,  in  the  case  of
certain  of  the  proj)hets),  and  by  the  Books  of  Kings,
which  have  a  complete  .synchronistic  record  for  the  time
of  the  coexistence  of  the  two  kingdoms  of  Israel  and
Judah.  Finally,  the  evidence  of  the  contemporaneous-
ness of  certain  events  furnished  at  times  by  the  historical
narrative  itself  is  of  the  highest  imjiortance.

The  weightiest  question,  however,  is,  to  what  degree
of  credibility  this  chronological  material  can  lay  claim.
Before  undertaking  the  examination  of  this


3.  Late
origin.


CHRONOLOGY

sources  have  been  worked,  they  are  due,  in  the  main,  to
the  latest  exilic  editors.  Then,  it  must  I)e  regarded  as
])roved  that  the  superscriptions  of  the  prophetic  books
containing  detailed  information  concerning  the  time  of
the  res[)ective  prophets  do  not  come  from  the  prophets
themsdves,  but  are  much  younger  additions,  such  as  the
erudition  of  later  ages  delighted  in.  This  a[)|)ears  from
the  inexplicable  double  date  (by  kings  of  Judah  and  of
Israel)  found  in  Hosea  and  Amos,  as  well  as  from  the
inaccuracy,  or  the  crowding,  of  the  data  in  Is.  Jer.  and
Ezek.  Nor  is  the  remarkalile  addition  in  Amosl  i,  '  two
years  before  the  earthquake,'  any  excejition  to  this  rule  :
the  fact  that  a  later  event  is  employed  to  define  the  date
shows  that  the  statement  is  a  subsecpient  addition,  and
it  is  therefore  very  probable  that  it  rests  on  the  exegesis
and  calculation  of  the  scriljes  (cp  Hoffmann,  /.ATW
3 123  ['83]).  lastly,  it  is  remarkable  that  the  text
presents  no  uniformity  of  reading  in  the  matter  of  re-
cording dates  :  nay,  that  there  are  even  to  Ije  found  un-
filled blanks.  Thus  in  iS.  13i  the  numl>ers  have  Ix.'en
omitted  from  the  formula  giving  the  age  of  .Saul  and  the
length  of  his  reign,  and  in  (5"  the  whole  ver.se  is
omitted.'  There  are  also  other  places  in  the  LXX  where
such  chronological  data  are  lacking  —  c-g-,  Jer.  47 1
[B.AN] — and  elsewhere  in  the  old  versions  we  come  on
considerable  variations  from  the  traditional  Hebrew  text.
All  these  are  marks  that  indicate  a  late  origin  for  the
chronological  numljers  and  warn  us  in  the  most  emphatic
way  to  submit  them  to  a  thorough  examination.

As regards the  oldest period, with which Genesis
deals,  the  time  down  to  the  Exodus,  it  is  known  that
the numbers supplied by the Samaritan


4.  Oldest
period.


question  for  the  .several  points  of  the  history,
we  must  premise  some  general  considera-
tions that  thrust  themselves  on  our  notice.  First  of  all,
there  is  the  remarkable  fact  that  these  chronological
notes  are  to  be  found  in  greatest  abundance  in  those
parts  of  the  historical  books  that  are  confessedly  to  be  re-
garded as  the  youngest.  In  the  Pentateuch  they  belong  to
the  post-exilic  Priestly  Code  or  to  additions  of  even  later
date  ;  in  the  other  historical  books  into  which  the  older

1  In  that  case  nothing  would  meet  the  requirements  of  the
passage  but  a  reckoning  that  counted  from  the  reform  of  Josiah
(622).  Of  any  such  mode  of  reckoning  we  know  nothing,  any  more
than  we  do  of  a  reckoning  by  Jubilee  periods,  or  of  a  Babylonian
era  meeting  the  requirements  of  the  text  (cp  Kue.  Kinl.  260  n.
4).  Wi.  (.1  T  Unters.  94-96)  therefore  alters  the  text,  and  reads
Ezek.  I  I  thus,  'yann  [read  T\'V^^Vr\\  'B'-ScT  nwi  \T1,  "or
'C'Sra.  [read  n'y'3inl  'yain  r\WZ  M'I.  which  must  be  under-
stood like  81,  and  give  an  earlier  date  than  81.  It  would  be
better,  however,  to  assume  the  original  reading  to  have  been  '  in
the  fifth  year  '  (cp  the  following  verse)— /.<•.,  ri''c"Onn  .13r3i — and
that  from  the  fact  of  Jeremiah's  having  predicted  seventy  years  j
for  the  Exile  ('2.'j  11,  cp  2<J  10)  while  Ezekiel  gave  only  forty  (4  6),
a  later  writer  drew  the  inference  that  Ezekiel  prophesied  thirty

nars  after  Jeremiah,  and  accordingly  inserted  as  a  date  in  Ezek.
the  thirtieth  year  of  the  Exile  (Duhmt.  '

77.=;


and  the  LXX  texts,  and  even  by  the  Book  of
Jubilees  (dating  from  the  first  century  A.D. ),
differ  in  many  points  from  those  of  the  Massoretic  text.
The  divergence  will  be  made  most  plain  by  a  comparison
showing  the  sum  of  the  years  according  to  each  tradition.  In
Gea  ."i  the  period  from  the  creation  of  the  world  to  the  beginning
of  the  flood  is,  according  to  the  Hebrew  text,  1656  years;  accord-
ing to  the  Samaritan,  1307  ;  and,  .-iccording  to  (B",  2242.  In  Gen.
11  ro^  the  interval  from  the  birth  of  Shem  to  the  birth  of  Abra-
ham IS,  according  to  the  Hebrew  text,  390  years ;  according  to
the  .Samaritan,  1040;  and,  according  to  the  text  of©",  1270.
In  this  no  account  is  taken  of  the  variations  exhibited  by
the  other  MSS  of  0  itself,  nor  is  it  inquired  whether  the
tradition  represented  by  any  one  given  text  is  free  from  internal
inconsistency  (cp,  e.g..  Gen.  11  10,  'two  years  after  the  flood,'
with  Gen.  632  76,  and  Gen.  11  loa;  further  Gen.  12  4  with  Gen.
11  26,  32).

This  state  of  matters  shows,  what  was  indeed  prob.able
to  begin  w  ith,  that  there  was  no  fixed  tradition  concern-
ing the  early  history  of  Israel  :  that,  indeed,  even  at  so
late  a  time  as  that  of  the  LXX  and  the  Book  of  Jubilees,
there  was  no  clear  idea  of  how  the  period  in  question
.should  be  measured.  Thus  the  numbers  of  the  Hebrew
text,  since  they  are  not  earlier  than  the  Priestly  Code,
go  back  at  the  best  only  to  the  fifth  century  B.C.,  and
do  not  rest  on  tradition,  but  have  been  reached  by  the
application  of  some  artificial  theory.  Since  they  are
useless,  therefore,  at  least  for  chronology  (if  indeed  one
could  ever  have  hoped  to  obtain  such  a  thing  for  those
earliest  times)  it  is  unnecessary  to  attempt  to  discover
what  the  actual  theory  underlying  thein  is.

It  will  be  enough  to  mention  that  v.  Gutsclunid  observed  that
2666 — the  number  of  years  resulting  from  the  summation  of  the
Massoretic  numbers  for  the  period  (Gen.  h  to  Ex.  I240)  from
the  creation  of  Adam  to  the  ExckIus-  is  exactly  two-thirds  of
4000  years.  These  4000  years  he  took  to  represent  a  period  (of
100  generations  of  40  years  each)  assigned  for  the  duration  of
the  world.  In  this  way  he  sought  to  explain  the  artificial
origin  of  the  sy.stem  (cp  Nold. Untcrsuch.  zur  Krit.  des  AT


1  ©L  follows  MT,  ®A  is  lacking  at  this  point  (see  further
Dr.  T/}S).

2  The  number  2666  results  from  the  addition  of  1656,  the
number  of  years  from  the  creation  of  the  world  to  the  beginning
of  the  flood  (cp  Gen.  5),  -(-290,  the  sum  of  the  years  from  the
flood  to  the  birth  of  Abraham  (cp  Gen.  11  10^)  -I-75  to  the
departure  of  Abraham  from  Haran  (Gen.  12 4)  +2r5  to  the
departure  of  Jacob  for  Egypt  (  =  25  to  the  birth  of  Isaac  [Gen.
21  5I,  -i-6o  to  the  birth  of  Jacob  [Gen.  25  26|,  -(-130  years  o*"
Jacob's  life  (Gen.  47  g  28]),  -I-430  years  of  stay"  in  Egypt
(Ex.  I240X

776


CHRONOLOGY

III).  It  l«  worth  while,  however,  iioliciTin  the  rol.ilion  in  which,
according  to  Oppcrt  ((/O'.V,  1877,  pp.  aoi-aaA  the  C  haldean
numl>cts  for  the  first  ages  in  l^rOsLsus  and  tlic  statements  in
Genesis  stand  to  each  other.  The  Chaldeans  reckon  from  the
beginning  of  the  world  to  Alexander  215  myriads  of  years,  of
which  17  myriads  represent  the  time  Irom  the  first  inan  to
Alexander.  Tlius  they  allow  for  the  creation  168  myriads  of
years.  Now,  the  7  days  of  the  hihlical  account  of  the  creation
give  168  hours.  Thus  in  the  creation  age  a  myriad  of  years  is
represented  in  the  hihlical  account  hv  an  hour.  Again,  for  the
time  of  the  first  ten  men  down  to  the  Hood,  the  Chaldeans  reckon
433,000  years,!  ( leiiesis  1656.  If  both  numliers  Iw  divided  by  72,
we  get  6txx)  and  23  respectively,  and  33  years— /.r.,  8400  days^
represent  i»oo  weeks,  while  6000  years  is  5  times  1200  years.
Hence  the  Chaldeans  seem  to  have  reckoned  5  years  (i.e.  60
inonths)asa/i/f/>-«/«(fOJ«),  whercClenesis  has  reckoned  1  week.
1656  years  (('•enesis)  =  7aX33  years  =  72X  1200— ;.^.,  86,^oo—
weeks;  4i2,oQoyears  (Chaldean)  =  86,400  lustra.  This  remark-
able rel.nlion,  which  can  hardly  rest  on  pure  accident,  presupposes
a  coinpUcalcd  calculation,  and  a  very  late  origin  for  these
nunilwrs.  Whatever  be  the  theory  underlying  the  numlwrs  of
Genesis,  one  thing,  therefore,  is  certain  :  for  a  sure  chronology
of  the  times  Iwfore  the  Kxodus,  the  OT  nurnliers,  appcariiTg  .is


they  do  for  the  first  time  in  the  youngest  sources  of  the  Penta-
teuch, afford  no  security.

Tlic case is no  better  with the  chronology  of  the
Intel  \al  that  extends  front  the Kxodus  to  the  building
of  the  tcniiile  of  .Solomon. We  have
here,  indeed,  a  check  in  i  K.  61  which


6.  Exodus  to


Temple.


makes  the  buildinjj  of  the  temple  Ix-gii


in  the  .jSoth  year  after  the  I-",xoiius  ;  but  this  number
did  not  make  its  aijjxarance  till  a  time  when  the  temi)Ie
of  Solomon  was  no  more  (cp  above,  §1).  It  bears,
moreover,  the  clear  impress  of  Ixing  artificial  ;  for  it
plainly  counts  from  Moses  to  David  twelve  generations
of  forty  years  each,  which  we  can  easily  identify  as
follows  :  Moses,  Joshua,  Othniel,  Khud,  Deborah,
Gideon,  Jephthah,  .Samson,  l-'.li,  Samuel,  Saul,  and
David.  This  explanation  of  the  origin  of  the  numljer
480  is  corroborated  by  the  fact  that  the  five  'little"
judges  in  Ju.  10  and  12  ap[)ear  to  have  lx}en  inserted
into  the  Deuteronomistic  Hook  of  Judges  later  (on
the  object  of  their  insertion,  see  Jl'DGKS,  §  9).  Nor
can  anything  certain  be  obtained  from  the  individual
numliers,  since  they  are  neither  quite  clear  nor  free
from  gaps.

It  remains  obscure,  e.g^.,  how  the  numbers  relating  to  the
supiemacy  of  the  Philistines  and  the  judgeship  of  Samson  (13  i
1 '1  -'o  and  lli  31)  are  related  to  each  other  ;  how  the  twenty  years
from  the  arrival  of  the  ark  at  Kirjath-jearim  to  the  victory  of
Samuel  over  the  Philistines  are  to  be  fitted  into  Samuel's
history  (1  S.  7  2) ;  and  how  the  ninety-four  years  of  foreign
oppression  are  to  be  combined  with  the  data  concerning  the
length  of  rule  of  the  individual  Judges.2

The  tradition  also  presents  gaps,  however,  since  it  does  not
mention  the  time  during  which  Joshua  was  the  leader  of  the
Isr.ielites,  and  in  r  S.  13  t  the  numbers  for  Saul  are  entirely
wanlinii.  Finally,  ©hal  allows  Kli  in  i  S.  4  18  only  twenty
years  instead  of  the  forty  of  M  T  :  and  the  frequently  recurring
round  numl>ers— such  as  40  for  .Moses,  Othniel,  Deborah-Barak,
Gideon,  Kli  (0  20)  and  David:  ?o  ( =- 2  X  40)  for  Ehud;  and
20  (^«,")  for  Samson,  for  Eli  (according  to  ®),  for  Samuel,  and
(approximately)  for  lola  (23),  and  Jair  (22)-go  to  set  in  still
clearer  light  the  unhistorical  character  of  the  data.

The  matter  may  rest,  then,  as  Noldeke  left  it  at  the  end
of  his  chronology  of  the  period  of  the  Judges  (op.  cit.  197),
with  the  verdict  that  '  neither  for  the  several  divisions
of  the  period  of  the  Judges  nor  for  its  whole  duration

1  Cp  KA  7-(2)  419  n.

2  If  we  reckon  together  the  numbers  for  this  period,  we  get  a.s
follows  :— 40  (stay  in  the  wilderness)  4-40  (Othniel,  Ju.  3  it)+8o
(Ehud,  830)  +40  (Deborah- Harak,  5  3r)  +40  (Gideon,  828)  4-23
(Tola,  10 2)  -f  22  (Jair,  10 3)  -f  6  (Jephthah,  Vl^')  +7  (Ibzan,  Vl^
-f  10  (Elon,  1-2  11)  +8  (Abdon,  VI 14)  -f-20  (Samson,  1(5  ^r)  -f-40
(Eli,  I  S.  4  18) -1-20  (.Samuel,  1  S.  7  2) +40  (David,  rK. 'iti)+4
(Solomon,  i  K.  ti  i)  =  440  years.  If  we  deduct  the  '  little' Judges
(Tola,  Jair,  Ibzan,  Elon,  and  .\lxlon  =  7o),  we  shall  have  a  total
of  only  370  years.  For  Joshua  and  Saul,  for  whom  the  numtjers
are  lacking,  there  still  remain,  to  complete  the  480  years,  accord-
ing to  the  first  calculation  40  years,  according  to  the  second
no. If,  however,  we  are  to  insert  between  the  periods  of  the


several  Judges  the  94  years  of  foreign  oppression  (-=8  (Cushan
Rishathaim,  Ju.3  8]  -l-t8  [Kglon,  ;(  14)  -H20  (Fabin,  4  3]  +7
(Midi.-»nites,  6r]  +3  [Abimelech,  922)  -(-t8  [Alnmonii.s.  IOh]
+  20  [Philistines,  cp  13  i  l.'iao  and  lt>3r]),  we  get  534  or  464
years— according  to  the  first  reckoning  already  54  years  too
many,  with  nothing  left  for  Joshua  and  Saul ;  according  to  the
second,  onjy  sixteen  years  for  these  two  together,  a  period  far
from  sufficient  for  the  deeds  of  both.

m


Nebuchad-
rezzar.


CHRONOLOGY

is  a  chronology  any  longer  attaiiiable. '  It  is,  therefore,
also  useless  to  seek,  by  calculation  from  these  iiumlnrs.
to  ascertain  the  time  of  the  leadership  0/  Joshua  and
the  reign  of  Saul.  The  furthest  we  can  go  is  to
conclude,  from  passages  like  Am.  2  to  625,  that  an  old
tradition  estimated  the  journey  through  the  wilderness
at  forty  years.  (On  the  chronology  of  the  Book  of
Judges,  seejL'lKiKS,  §  15.)

It is much harder  to  deal with the chronological

dates  for  the  jjeriod  from  the  building  of  the  temple  by

.  .Solonjon  to  the  concjue-st  of  Jerusiilem

irlK™?a/i_  '^y  Nel>uchadrezzar.  In  various  im-
portant instances  we  now  meet  with
st.ttements  concerning  the  year  of  the
reigning  king  to  which  the  event  narrated  Ix-longs.
Thus  in  regard  to  events  of  war  we  read  :  'In  the
fifth  year  of  King  Kehotoam  .Shishak  King  of  I'.gypt
came  up  against  Jerusalem'  (i  K.  I425),  and  '  In  the
ninth  ye-ar  of  Hosea  the  king  of  Assyria  took  Samaria  '
(2  K.  176).  .So  also  in  regaid  to  home  affairs  :  '  In  the
thiT-e  and  twentieth  year  of  King  Jehoash  the  priests
had  not  rejiaired  the  breaches  of  the  house'  (2  K.  Vli).
Clear  as  such  passages  seem  to  l»e,  we  need  to  know
which  year  of  a  given  king  was  called  the  fiist  the
year  in  the  course  of  which  he  ascended  the  throne,  t)r
the  first  comijlete  year  at  the  Ix-ginning  of  which  he
was  already  seated  on  the  throne.  Sound  information
on  this  point  is  still  more  indisix'tisable,  however,  for  the
understanding  of  the  further  data  for  our  period  supplied
by  the  Hooks  of  Kings.  These  give  the  sum  of  the
years  of  reign  of  each  several  king.  If,  however,  for
any  interval  that  can  be  defined  by  means  of  events
rel.ated,  we  add  together  these  amounts,  the  totals  for
the  parallel  kingdoms  of  Judah  and  Israel  do  not  agree.
The  question  becomes  very  complicated  when  at  each
accession  the  date  is  regularly  defined  synchronistically,
by  years  of  the  contemporary  ruler  of  the  neighbouring
kingdom  of  Israel  or  judah.  This  synchronism  again
leads  to  a  reckoning  of  its  own.  What  we  have  first
to  do  is  to  estimate  the  value  of  the  various  chrono-
logical data  which  form  a  sort  of  framework  for  the
whole  history  of  the  period.  Then  we  can  determine  the
importance  and  range  of  the  individual  dates  assigned  by
years  of  accession.

The  statements  concerning  the  duration  of  a  reign  as
well  as  the  synchronism  of  its  l)eginning  form  parts  of
_ .  J  the  brief  reviews  which  pass  judgment

7.  Keigns  ana  ^^^  ^^^j^  Vwiv  from  the  standpoint  of
Bynchromsms.  ,,^,.  i:)euteronomic  law  (see  KiNf.s,
BtJOKS  OK,  §  ^  ff.)-  The  two  chronological  elements,
however,  have  a  diverse  origin  ;  for  the  synchronistic
notes  betray  their  character  as  '  subjective  additions  of
the  I".i)itomator. '  It  is  clear,  to  begin  with,  that

this  noting  of  synchronisnt  was  not  in  actual  use  during
the  existence  of  the  two  kingdorus  :  apart  from  dates
of  accessions,  we  find  it  only  once — at  the  fall  of
Samaria  (2  K.  I89  10),  the  point  where  the  system  comes
to  an  end.

It  would  be  natural  to  maintain  that  the  very  construction
of  the  chronological  notes  leveals  their  tlivcrse  origin :  the
verb  "jSd  ^^^  '"  'he  same  sentence  one  meaning  for  the  words
that  precede,  and  another  for  those  that  follow.  It  is  to  l>c
construed  as  inchoative  (  =  'he  ticcame  king')  as  well  as  pro-
gressive (  =  'he  reigned').  P"or  instance,  in  2  K.  14  23  'In  the
fifteenth  year  of  .Vniaziah  the  son  of  Joash,  king  of  Judah,
Jeroboam  the  son  of  Joash,  king  of  Israel  -^D  (  =  became  king,
and  also  =^  reigned)  forty-one  years  in  Samaria.'  If  here  and
there  (i  K.  1625  1(5  29  2252  :  2  K.  3  r  15  13)  -U;;..,  is  added  to
"iSd>  'hi'*  only  proves,  it  would  seem,  a  sense  of  the  irreconcil-
ability of  expressing  both  the  date  of  accession  and  the  duration
of  the  reign  by  the  simple  verb  -^yQ.  The  double  sense  of  this
verb,  however,  is  peculiar  to  such  annals,  and  is  to  be  explained  by
the  brevity  of  the  style.  Exactly  so  in  the  list  of  kings  of  Tyre
given  by  Josephus'(f.  .-<i».  1  18)  from  Mcnandcr  of  Ephesus,
i^aikfvatv  is  used  in  both  senses  at  the  same  time:  'he
became  king'  as  well  as  'and  he  reigned.'

The  decisive  proof,  however,  of  the  secondary  char-
acter of  the  synchronistic  numbers  is  reached  only  when

778


CHRONOLOGY

we  compare  them  with  the  years  of  reign.  It  then
appears  that  the  former  has  been  attained  by  calculation
from  the  latter,  although  the  method  that  has  been
followed  cannot  in  all  points  be  discerned.^ A  tabular


CHRONOLOGY

exhibition  of  the  data  will  be  the  best  way  to  make  this
clear.  In  the  first  column  we  give  the  date  reckoned
from  an  imaginary  era  of  the  division  of  the  kingdom,
and  in  the  last  the  references  from  the  Books  of  Kings.


TABLE  I. — Old  Testament  Data  as  to  Reigns  :  Solomon  to  Fall  of  Samaria.

SVNCHRONISM.S AND Ll.NGTH OK REIONS.


ii

:!!

Israel.

JUDAH.

References

Length  of  Reign.

Length  of  Reign.

to  the  Books

It

Synchronistic  Date.

0  ,  e

Synchronistic  Date.

lA

°.=.i

2.1

of  Kings.

u-S

0  >-=

^1

1.-0

1°

iq

<&

<1

^

ist  year  of  Jeroboam

22  years

^

ist  year

ofRehoboam

17  years

17  years

I  K.  14  20/

18

i8th „ Jerobo.iin  .

..

=

ist ,,

Abijah .

2 ,1

3 .1

iK.  15i/

20th „ Jeroboam  .

ist ,, Nadab

20  years

=

ist ,,

Asa  . . .

4< 1.

.K.i5  9y:

21

I  year

2 II

=

2nd „

Asa .

I  K.  16  25

ist „ Baasha .

23  years

24 11

=

3rd „

Asa .

I  K..  1533

i 45

ist „ Ela .

I  year

2 11

=

26th „

Asa . . .

lK.l.i8

46

ist „ Zimrl

4  years

7  days

=

27th „

Asa .

I  K.  If,  15

50

ist ,, 'Omrl

7 ).

12  years

=

3ist „

Asa .

.K.16  23

57

ist „ Ahab

22 „

=

38th „

Asa .

4° II

I K.  16 29

60

4th „ Ahab

19 ,.

—

ist „

Jebostaaphat .

25 II

I  K.  2241

76

ist „ Ahaziah .

I  year

2 „

=

17th „

lehoshaphat

I  K.  2252

77

ist „ Jehoram  .

12 ,,

=

i8th „

jehoshaphat .

21 J,

2K  3,

8.

5th „ Jehoram . .

—

ist ,,

Jehoram  .

7 II

8  "„

2  K.  8  ,6/

83

i
89

I2th ,, Jehoram .

12  years

"-

ist „

Ahaziah .

— '

1  year

2K.825/
r2K.1036

L.V2?2

Sum  of  Ye.ars  of  reign  in

srael  .

98

=

Sum  of  Years  of  reign  in  J
ist  year  of  Athallah  .

udah . . 95

ist  year  of  Jehu

28 years

6  years

6  years

95

7th „ Jehu  .

ist „ Jehoahaz.

28  years

_

ist „

Jehoash .

40 II

"7

14 >>

17 ,.

—

23rd „

lehoash .

2K.13I

'31

ist „ Jehoash .

..

16 „

=

37th „

jehoash .

37 II

2K.  l:!io

:72

2nd „ fehoash .

,5

—

ist „

Araaziah  .

29 ,,

2  K.  14  I  2

.46

ist „ Jeroboam  (IT.).

_  "

41 11

—

15th „

Amaziah .

40 II

2K.  U23

172

27th ,, Jeroboam  (11.)  .
ist „ Zechariah

63  "'„

=

ist „

Azariah .

52 ,1

2K.15,2

209

I  year

iyear

=

38th ,,

Azariah .

2K.  l.'.S

ist „ Shallum .

0 ,.

h „

=

39th  "

Azariah

2K.15.3

210

ist ,, Menahem

1 1  years

10  years

=:

39th  „

Azariah .

2K.IO.7

ist „ Rekahlah

2 ,,

2 II

=

50th  „

Azariah

2  K.  1.123

223

ist „ Pekah .

20 „

=

52nd  ;;

Azariah

52 1,

2  K.  15  27

224

2nd „ Pekah .

=

1st  „

Jotham .

15 II

16  ■„

2  K.  1532/

239

17th „ Pekah .

27 ..

=

ist „

Ahaz

16 „

2K.  I61/

250

ist „ Hoshea .

9 II

=

I2th „

Ahaz  .

•3  ",i

2K.171

252

3rd „ Hoshea ,

-

ISt ,,

Hozeklah  .

2K..81

258

9th „ Hoshea .

9 „

7th „

Hezekiah  to  Fall
of  Samaria

7^ II

62, 1

1  so  2  K.  18 1
2so  2  K.  18  10

258  years

24It'.  yrs.

258  years

260  years


This  table  shows  that  at  the  end  of  the  258th  year
after  the  division  of  the  kingdom,  there  had  elapsed  258
.synchronistic  years,  24iy^j  years  of  reign  in  Israel,  and
260  such  years  in  J  udah  ;  and  we  have  thus  the  singular
equation  258  =  241^5^  =  260.  The  result  is  even  more
singular,  however,  when  we  examine  separately  the  parts
Ixjfore  and  after  the  first  point  of  coincidence  obtained
through  a  contemporaneous  accession  in  both  lines.
Before  the  year  of  accession  of  Jehu  and  Athaliah  there
were  only  88  years  according  to  the  synchronisms  for
98  years  of  reign  in  Israel  and  95  in  Judah  ;  but  for  the
second  part  there  are  170  years  according  to  the  syn-
chronisms for  only  143/5  years  of  reign  in  Israel  and
165  in  Judah.  Whilst  thus,  in  the  first  period,  the
number,  according  to  the  synchronistic  calculation,  is
smaller  than  the  sum  of  the  traditional  years,  in  the
second  period,  which  is  longer  by  about  a  half,  it  ex;
ceeds  the  traditional  years  not  inconsiderably.  Similar
variations  for  smaller  periods  can  easily  be  proved  by  a
glance at the table. Nor  can  we  equalizer  the  syn-

1  It  has  recently  been  shown  by  Benzinger  (Comm.  zu  den
Kffnigen.  1899,  pp.  xviii.-xxi.)  that  the  synchronisms  start  from
two  different  points  and  proceed  upon  two  distinct  methods  of
reckoning,  one  ot  which  is  followed  by  preference  in  the  Hebrew
text  and  the  other  in  (Bl.

779


chronistic  and  the  traditional  numbers  by  assuming  that
the  latter  represent  a  popular  way  of  counting  according
to  which  from  the  middle  of  the  first  to  the  beginning
of  the  third  year  was  considered  three  years,  as  in  the
case  of  the  siege  of  Samaria  (2  K.  18 10).  The  excess
of  the  traditional  values  in  the  period  before  Jehu  could
perhaps  be  thus  explained,  but  not  their  defect  in  the
following  period.  Nor  is  it  possible  by  altering  the
individual  numbers  to  bring  the  synchronisms  into
harmony  with  the  years  of  reign  ;  even  were  one  to  alter
all  the  synchronistic  statements,  this  would  do  nothing
towards  removing  the  differences  between  the  numbers
for  Israel  and  those  for  Judah.  Thus,  almost  along  the
whole  line,  the  discrepancy  between  synchronisms  and
years  of  reign  is  incurable.

We  must  not  fail,  however,  to  appreciate  a  remark-
able agreement.  The  sum  of  the  synchronistic  years  is
very  nearly  equal  to  the  sum  of  the  years  of  reign  for
Judah  (258  =  260).  The  slight  dift'ereiice  of  two  years
can  have  no  weight,  and  can  perhaps  be  entirely
removed.  In  the  surprising  statement  of  2  K.  13 10  that
the  accession  of  Jehoash  of  Israel  happened  in  the  37th
year  of  Jehoash  of  Judah,  we  may  follow  v.  i  and  change
37  to  39  ;  for,  according  to  that  verse,  Jehoahaz,  who
had  acceded  in  the  23rd  year  of  Jehoash  of  Judah,


CHRONOLOGY

tfigncd  17  years.  In  this  way  the  sum  of  the  years  of
rfiRn  in  the  hnes  of  Israel  and  Judah,  according  to  the
synchronisms,  would  be  increased  in  each  case  by  two
years — for  Jchoahaz  would  have  reignetl,  according  to
the  synchronism,  i6  years  instead  of  14,  and  Jchoash
39  instead  of  37 — while  the  iradiiioual  numbers  would
undergo  no  alteration.  Kven  without  this  slight  cmen-
d.ition— adopted  in  the  ^/t/Z/K-eilition  of  the  LXX.  and
demanded  by  Ihenius.  Klosterniann,  and  Kamphausen
— it  IS  apfwrent  that  it  is  the  sum  of  the  Judean  years
of  reign  that  forms  the  basis  on  which  the  synchronistic
iui!nl)ers  are  calculated.  In  this  process,  however,
though  the  individual  sums  have  not  Ixx-n  disregarded,
it  has  Ixx-n  impossible,  especially  in  the  case  of  the
kings  of  N.  Israel,  to  avoid  important  variations.

Care,  however,  has  been  taken  not  to  alter  the  synchronism  of
events.'  It  is  worthy  of  note  that  the  following  requirements
are  s,itisfied  : — Jeroboam's  reign  runs  parallel  with  those  of
Rehoboam  and  .Abijah  (i  K.  14  30  1.^7)  ;  ISaasha  is  king  during
the  reigy  of  Asa  (i  K.  1.^)  16) ;  Jehoshaphat  .survives  Ahab
and  .\haziah,  and  reigns  contemporaneously  with  Jehoram
of  lsr.-iel  (i  K.  -J-J  2 /f.  50  ;  2  K.  ^jjf-)  ;  the  deaths  of  Jehoram  of
Israel  and  Ahaziaih  of  Judah  fall  in  the  same  year  ('2K.1>);
Amazi.ih  and  Jehoash  of  Israel  reign  contemporaneously  (2  K.
14  »jr.) ;  and  Pekah  is  a  contemporary  of  Jotham  and  Ahaz  (2  K..
1537  ir,  5^).

.Although  the  synchronistic  dates  have  thus  not  Ijeen
attained  without  regard  to  tradition,  they  are  obviously,
as  belonging  to  the  youngest  parts  of  the  te.xt,  not  a
standard  for  chronolog}'.  They  apply  to  the  past  a
method  of  dating  with  which  it  was  quite  unacquainted.
This  is  true  not  only  of  the  practice,  which  could  never
be  carried  out  in  actual  life,  of  connecting  the  years  of
one  kingdom  with  reigns  of  kings  in  a  neighlxjuring
kingdom,  but  also  of  the  methodical  practice,  pre-
su|)[X)sed  in  such  a  custom,  of  indicating  in  an  e.vact
and  regular  way  the  years  within  one  and  the  same
kingdom,  by  the  years  of  reign  of  its  king  for  the  time
iK'ing.  In  such  te.xts  as  we  can,  with  any  confidence,
assign  to  pre-e.\ilic  times,  we  find  nothing  but  popular
„ .  chronologies  associating  an  event  with

..  ■ . . some other  important  event contcm-

ronJlog^' P^T  ^^•■?  '  ^''  '%''  ''-'"  '"'V
"^ The  few  dates accordmg  to  years of

kings  given  in  the  older  history  (as,  e.g. ,  i  K.  14  25  ;  2  K.
127)  may  be  ignored.  They  are  too  isolated,  and  must
rest  (r.i,'.,  in  the  writings  and  portions  which  treat  of  the
latest  pre-exilic  times)  on  subsec]uent  calculation,  or  be
due  to  interpolation  (cp  also  the  dates  introduced  by
the  Chronicler  in  deference  to  the  desire  felt  at  a  later
date  for  exacter  definition  of  time,  of  which  the  Books
of  Kings  still  knew  nothing:  2C"h.  1823  I510-19,  .ind
especially  16 1)— though  it  is  perhaps  possible  that,
even  without  there  being  a  settled  system,  some  pro-
minent events  might,  occasionally  and  without  set
purpose,  be  defined  by  years  of  reign.  In  any  case,
dating  by  native  kings  must  be  regarded  as  at  least
older  than  the  artificial  synchronism  between  Judah  and
Israel.

Dating  by  the  years  of  kings  was  thus  never  sys-
tematically used  by  the  Hebrews  so  long  as  they  had

9  Babvlonian "•'^''o"-'^! "^'"g^- Th'^X learned this
' ,  useful  method  from  the  Babylonians,

and  then  introduced  it  into  their  his-
torical works  compiled  during  the  exile  (cp  Wi.  AT
Untersuch.,  esijecially  pp.  87-94).  Thus  the  question
how  the  Hebrews  dealt  with  the  year  of  a  king's  death
— i.e.,  whether  they  reckoned  the  fraction  of  a  year  that
remained  before  the  teginning  of  the  next  year  to  the
deceased  king,  or  made  the  first  year  of  the  new  king
begin  at  once — disappears.  There  can  Ix;  no  doubt
that  the  synchronisms,  as  well  as  the  dates  and  ye.ars
of  reign  in  general,  presup[X)se  the  Babylonian  method
(the  only  satisfactory  one),  according  to  which  the  rest
of  the  year  in  which  any  king  died  was  reckoned  to  the

^  1  W'c  need  take  no  account  of  the  independent  narratives  of
CnKDNiCLKS  {q.T., f 5); they do  not  agree even with the
traditional  years  of  reign.
*  Whether  the  account  is  correct  need  not  here  be  considered.


CHRONOLOGY

last  of  his  reign,  and  the  first  year  of  the  new  king  was
the  year  at  the  Ijeginning  of  which  he  already  wore
the  crown.

By  giving  up  the  synchronisms  we  are  thrown  back
for  the  chronology  of  the  monarchy  on  the  sums  of  the

10 Yaara "i*^^^  ^^  reign of the individual kings.
^'  llie ho|x.'  of finding in these numbers

o  reign,  trustworthy  material  for  chronology,  and
thus  sohing  the  singular  e<iuaiioii  «iiereby  alwut  342
Israel itish  yejirs  represent  aoo  Judean  years,  could  be
realised  only  on  one  condition.  One  might  simply  sub-
tract the  242  Israelitish  year.«  from  the  total  for  Judah,  and
regard  the  excess  of  18  years  as  falling  after  the  con()uest
of  Samaria.  Nor  is  there  anything  in  the  synchronism
to  prevent  this  operation,  for  that  may  have  started  from
an  incorrcxt  calculation  in  putting  the  fall  of  Hoshea  as
late  as  the  reign  of  Hezekiah.  A  clear  veto,  however,  is
laid  on  this  procedure  on  other  grounds.  If  we  subtract
the  superlluous  18  years  (6  years  of  Hezekiah  and  the
last  12  of  Aha/.)  from  the  total  for  Judah,  all  that  is  left  of
Ahaz's  reign  parallel  with  the  Israelitish  years  of  reign
is  the  first  4  years.  Therefore  I'ekah,  who  was  nuirdered
nine  years  Ix.fore  the  fall  of  Samaria  (2  K.  176),  nmst,  at
the  accession  of  Ahaz,  have  Ix.-en  already  five  )ears  dead,
which  is  impossible,  since,  according  to  2  K.  \^iff.,  this
king  was  attacked  by  him.  The  exjx-'dient  of  simple
subtraction,  therefore,  fails  ;  the  embarrassing  etjualion
remains,  alxiut  242  Israelitish  years  =  260  Judean  :  nay,
since  no  objection  can  be  raised  against  the  contem-
poraneousness of  the  deaths  of  Jehoram  of  Israel  and
Ahaziah  of  Judah,  144  Israelitish  years  =  165  Judean.

If  the  totals  are  thus  une(|ual,  very  great  inequalities
appear,  naturally,  in  the  details.  F.lforts  have  been
made  to  remove  them  ;  but  this  has  not  been  achieved
in  any  convincing  way.

2  K.  l.'i  5,  e.g.,  slates  that  during  the  attack  of  leprosjr  from
whicli  his  father  Azari.ih  suffered  in  the  last  years  of  his  life,
'Jotham  was  over  the  palace  and  judged  the  ijcople  of  the  l.ind.'
Kvcn  were  we  to  found  on  this  statement  tlic  theory  that  the
years  of  reign  of  father  and  son  ih.nt  ran  parallel  to  each  other
were  counted  twice  over  in  the  mimlR-rs  52  and  16  assigned  to
their  respective  reigns,  and  also  to  suppose  that  during  all
these  16  years  the  father  was  still  alive,  there  would  still  remain
144  Israelitish  ye.-irs=  149  Judean.

Mistaken  attempts  of  this  kind  are,  moreover,  the  less
to  be  taken  into  consideration  that,  as  \\  ill  appear  (ij  35/'),
even  the  lowest  total  of  144  years  for  the  inter\'al  from
Jehu  to  the  fall  of  Samaria  is  more  than  20  years  too  high.
Frc)n\  all  this  it  results  that  the  individual  numbers  of
years  of  reign,  as  well  as  the  totals,  are  untrustworthy  and
useless  for  the  pur[X)ses  of  a  certain  chronolog)-,  even  if
it  be  admitted  that,  within  certain  limits  or  in  some
points,  they  may  agree  with  actual  fact.

„ . , The  untrustworthiness  of  the  numbers
\ , ,. lx;comes plainer  when the  principle  ac-
ca  cu  a  ion.  ^,^i.jji^g to which they are formed is
clearly  exhibited.

In  1S37  K.  Krey  ^see  below,  \  85)  argued  that,  at  le.ist  in  the
case  of  the  Israelitish  kings,  the  several  sums  assigned  to  the
respective  reigns  rest  in  general  on  an  arlilicial  fiction.  He
then  thought  that  the  series  of  kings  uf  Judah,  and  indeed  those
also  of  the  house  of  Jehu,  'show  no  such  artificiality  ' ;  but  (ace.
to  Bleek-We.  JiinM  265)  he  soon  observed  a  playing  with
figures  also  in the  items  for  Judah.  'lo  begin  with  the

kings  of  Israel  down  to  Jehoram,  we  find  an  average  reign  of  12
years.  In  the  case  of  Omri  and  Jehoram  tliis  is  the  exact
number,  whilst  for  Jeroboam,  liaasha,  and  .\hab  we  have  22  1
(/.<■.,  in  round  numbers  2X  12),  and  for  the  rest — Nadab,  £lah,
and  .'\haziah  (the  immediate  successors  of  the  kings  provided
with  the  double  period)— 2  years  e.ich.  This  is  as  if  we  had  8
kings  with  12  years  each,  making  a  total  of  96— more  exactly  98
years.  Moreover,  the  totals  for  the  first  and  the  last  four  of
these  are  each  almo.st  exactly  48.  In  the  ne.\t  part  of  the  series,
as  We.  emphasises,  we  have  for  the  9  kings  from  Jehu  to  Hoshea
a  total  of  144  years,  which  makes  an  average  of  16  for  each.
One  might  also  urge  the  remarkable  fact  that,  even  as  Jehu
with  his  a3  years  reigned  about  as  long  as  his  two  successors,
so  the  41  years  of  Jeroboam  II.  also  exactly  equal  the  sum
of  the  reigns  of  his  successors.  In  the  Judean' line,  on  the

other  hand,  a  similar  role  is  played  by  the  figures  40  and  80.
Thus,  down  to  the  destruction  of  Samaria  in  the  6th  year  of
Hezekiah,  we  have  Rehoboam -f-.Abijah  20,  .Asa  41,  Jehoshaphat

1  Strictly,  Baasha  has  exactly  34  assigned  him.


CHRONOLOGY

+  Jehoram  +  Ahaziah  +  Athaliah  40,  Jehoash  40,  Amaziah  +
Azariah  81,  Jotham  +  Ahaz+Hczekiah  38  years;  and  from  this
point  onwards  till  the  last  date,  the  37th  year  of  Jehoiacliin,  we
have  Hezckiah  +  Menasseh  +  Ainon  80,  and  also  Josiah+Joahaz
+Jehoiakim+Jehoiachin  79!  years.  If  we  might  still,  with
Kamphausen,  be  inclined  to  find  in  all  this  only  a  freak  of
chance,  our  suspicion  would  be  raised  on  comparing  the  total
for  the  kings  ol  Israel  (circ.  2^0)  with  the  number  in  i  K.  0  i
(480),  and  still  more  on  observing  that  480  is  also  the  total  of
years  from  the  building  of  the  temple  of  Solomon  to  the  begin-
ning of  a  new  epoch— the  epoch  that  opens  with  the  conquest  of
Babylon  by  Cyrus  and  the  consequent  possibility  of  founding  the
second  Theocracy  and  setting  about  the  building  of  the  second
temple.  (The  36-7  years  of  Solomon  from  the  building  of  the
temple  +260  years,  to  the  fall  of  Samaria  +1332  years,  to  the  fall
of  Jerusalem  +50  years  of  the  Exile,  give  e.xactly  410  ye;irs  )

There  can  hardly,  then,  be  any  ntistake  about  the
artificiality  of  the  total  as  well  as  of  the  various
items.  If  .so,  the  origin  of  the  present  numbers  for  the
years  of  reign  of  the  individual  kings,  on  which  the
synchronistic  notices  are  founded,  must  fall  in  a
period  later  than  the  victory  of  Cyrus  over  Babylon,
and  chronology  cannot  trust  to  the  correctness  of  the
numbers.

For  all  that,  it  may  be  conjectured  the  numbers  in
individual  instances  an;  correct  ;  but  which  are  such
.  cases,  can  be  known  only  in  some  way
■  independentof  the  numbers.  Sometimes,
indeed,  the  narrative  of  Kings  or  a  prophetic  writmg
can  decide  the  point  ;  but  without  help  from  outside  we
could  not  go  fixr.  In  itself  it  cannot  be  more  than
probable  that  the  last  kings  of  Judah  appear  with  the
correct  numbers.  'rhes.i  numbers  give  Hezekiah  29
(2  Is..  I81  2),  Manasseh  55  (21 1),  Anion  2  (21 19),  Josiah
31  (22i),  Jehoahaz  \  (232i),  Jehoiakim  11  (2.336),
Jehoiachin  |  (248),  and  Zedekiah  1 1  years  (24  18)  ;  thus,
139I  years  in  all,  embodying  an  estimate  of  133  years
front  the  fall  of  .Samaria  to  the  conquest  of  Jerusalem.
Thus,  the  earliest  that  the  dates  according  to  years  of
kings  can  lay  claim  to  consideration  is  in  Jeremiah  and
lO/cekiel.  Here  grave  mistakes  in  retrospective  calcula-
tion (for  even  they  rest  on  that)  seem  to  be  excluded  by
the  nearness  of  the  time.  Naturally  no  account  can  be
taken  of  the  statements  of  the  Book  of  Daniel,  which
did  not  originate  till  the  .second  century  B.C.  ;  it  knows
the  history  of  the  fall  of  the  kingdom  of  Judah  and  of
the  exilic  period  only  from  tradition,  and  cannot  be
acc|uitted  of  grave  mistakes  (.see  D.\nikl,  ii.  §  9/". ).

For  the  last  period,  reaching  from  the  fall  of  Jerusalem
to  the  beginning  of  the  Christian  era,  we  have  in  the
Hebrew  OT  itself  but  few  historical  re-


13.  From

Fall  of

Jerusalem

onwards.


cords.  Beyond  the  introduction  of  the  law
in  the  restored  community  the  historical
narrative  does  not  conduct  us. For  the


short  interval  preceding  it  we  are  referred
to  the  statements  in  the  prophets  Haggai  and  Zechariah
and  in  the  books  of  Ezra  and  Nehemiah.  These,  how-
ever, show  that  the  Jews  had  learned  in  the  interval
how  to  date  exactly  by  years  of  reign.  The  writings
mentioned  give  dates  by  years  of  the  Persian  kings.
All  difficulties  in  the  way  of  a  chronology  of  this  period,
however,  are  not  thus  removed.  The  names  Darius  and
Artaxerxes  leave  us  to  choose  between  the  several  bearers
of  these  names  among  the  Persian  kings.  Hence  both
the  first  and  the  second  of  the  three  Dariuses  have  been
regarded  as  the  Dariawesh  mentioned  in  the  OT,  and
even  all  three  Artaxerxes  have  been  brought  into  con-
nection with  the  Artahsasta  of  Ezr.  -Xeh.  Then,  again,
the  transpositions  and  actual  additions  that  the  Chronicler
allows  himself  to  make  increase  the  difficulty  of  know  ing
the  real  order  of  events.  In  the  case  of  Darius,

indeed,  only  the  first  can,  after  all  (in  spite  of  Havet  and
Imbert),  be  seriously  considered.

The  chief  interest,  accordingly,  lies  in  deciding  as  to
the  date  in  Ezra 7 7/  which  sets  the  return  of  Ezra  in
the seventh year of Artahsasta. It is


14.  Advent
of  Ezra.


to  be  noted  that  this  passage  (i


.)  has


CHRONOLOGY

date  is  open,  from  its  position  or  lack  of  connection,  to
the  suspicion  of  not  being  original.  Kosters  accordingly,
leaving  this  datum  wholly  out  of  account,  maintained
(Hers/el,  '94)  that  Ezra  made  his  first  appearance  in
Jerusalem  with  the  Cola  (see  Iskakl,  §  57)  immediately
after  Nehemiah's  second  arrival  there,  while  Arta.xer.xes
I.  was  still  on  the  throne,  and  introduced  the  law  then.
V'an  Hoonacker,  on  the  other  hand,  accepted  the  datum
of  Ezra  7  7/.,  but  believed  that  it  had  reference  to
Artaxerxes  II.,  and  accordingly  set  down  the  date  of
Ezra's  arrival  as  in  the  seventh  year  of  that  king
(397  H.C. ).  [Marquart  ('Die  Organisation  der  jiid.
(jemeinde  nach  dem  sogenannten  Exil,'  Fundamenfe
isr.  u.  jiid.  Cesch.,  '96)  ^  thinks  that  the  careers  of
Nehemiah  and  Ezra  can  fall  only  a  few  decades  earlier
than  the  reported  deportation  of  Jews  to  Hyrcania
under  Artaxerxes  III.,  Ochus.  Nehemiah's  Artaxerxes
was,  he  thinks,  Artaxerxes  II.,  Mnemon.  He  finds  no
trace  of  I%zra's  presence  in  Jerusalem  during  the
twelve-years'  governorship  of  Nehemiah  ;  the  reference
to  I",zra  in  Neh.  1236  is  an  addition  of  the  Chronicler.
Nehemiah,  too,  is  nowhere  mentioned  in  Ezra  (Neh.
89  IO2  are  interpolated).  Internal  evidence  alone  can
determine  the  date  of  Ezra.  Neh.  13  is  connected
naturally  with  Ezra9i-1044.  Ezra's  arrival  then
follows  in  the  time  after  Nehemiah's  return  to  Susa  ;
the  text  of  Iv.ra  77  (which  belongs  to  the  redactor)  has
suffered  in  transmission  ;  368  or  365  was  the  original
date  reported.  Nehemiah's  second  arrival,  at  any  rate,
fell  after  the  promulgation  of  the  Law  (Neh.  13 1);
Marcjuart  proposes  to  read  in  Neh.  136  'at  the  end  of
his  days'  [vz^\.  implying  a  date  between  367  (364)  and
359.  Cheyne,  in  a  work  almost  devoid  of  notes,  but
called  '  the  provisional  .summing  up  of  special  re-
searches,' differs  in  some  respects  in  his  chronological
view  of  the  events  alike  from  the  scholars  just  referred
to,  and  from  I^d.  Meyer,  who  is  about  to  be  mentioned.
(See  his  Jnvish  Religious  Life  after  the  lixile,  '98,
translated,  after  revision  by  the  author,  by  H.  .Stocks
under  the  title  Das  religiose  Leben  der  Ji/den  nach  dem
Exil,  '99).  Like  Marquart  he  doubts  the  correctness
of  the  text  of  Neh.  5 14  ;  but  he  is  confident  that  the
Artaxerxes  of  Ezra-Nehemiah  is  Artaxer.xes  I.,  and
that  Nehemiah's  return  to  Susa  precetles  the  arrival
of  Ezra  with  the  Gola.  The  incapacity  of  Nehemiah's
successor  (the  Tirshalha?)  probably  stimulated  Ezra  to
seek  a  firman  from  the  king,  though  the  terms  of  the
.supposed  firman  in  Ezra  7  cannot  1)6  relied  u|)on.
Ezra  seems  to  have  failed  at  the  outset  of  his  career,
and  it  was  the  news  of  this  failure,  according  to
Cheyne,  that  drew  Nehemiah  a  second  time  from  .Su.sa.
Klostermann's  treatment  of  the  chronology  in  Herzog
cannot  be  here  sunmiarised. — El).]

Ed.  Meyer's  thorough  discussion  [Eittst.  '96K  how-
ever, has  convinced  the  present  writer  that  we  are  not
entitled  to  call  in  question  the  arrival  of  Ezra  before
Nehemiah,  and  consequently  that  the  datum  of  Ezra
77/  may  be  right  after  all.  If  so,  Ezra  returned  to
Jerusalem  with  the  Gola  in  458  B.C.,  having  it  for  his
object  to  introduce  the  law  there.  In  this,  however,  he
did  not  succeed.  It  was  not  until  after  Nehemiah  had
arrived  in  Jerusalem  in  445  B.C.  clothed  with  ample
powers,  and  had  in  the  same  year  restored  the  city  walls
with  his  characteristic  prudence  and  energy,  that  Ezra
was  at  last  able  to  come  forward  and  introduce  the  law
under  Nehemiah's  protection  (445  B.C.).  From  this
date  onwards  till  433  B.C.  (cp  Neh.  136)  Nehemiah
continued  in  Jerusalem.  Shortly  after  433  B.C. —
perhaps  in  432  B.C. — he  obtained  a  second  furlough.
How  long  this  lasted  we  do  not  know  ;  but  its  import-
ance is  clear  from  Neh.  184-31.

The  OT  offers  no  further  chronological


been  revised  by  the  Chronicler  (see  EzKA
AND  Nehemiah,  Books  of),  and  in  l»th  verses  the

783


16.  Later
times.


material  for  determining  the  dates  of  the
last  centuries  before  Christ.


But  the  essay  was


npleted  29th  .\ugu.st  1895 '  (p.  28).
784


CHRONOLOGY

The  apocalypse  of  Daniel  cannot  be  held  to  bridge  over  the
gap  between  Kzra  and  ibe  lime  of  the  Maccal»ccs  with  any
certainty,  for  it  is  the  peculi;>rity  of  these  a)>ucalypscs  to  point
to  past  events  only  in  a  veiled  way,  and  it  is,  in  fact,  only  what
we  know  otherwise  of  the  complications  |>etwecn  Syria  and
Egypt,  and  of  the  doings  of  Antiochus  Kpiphaiies,  that  niake:<
an  understanding  and  an  estimate  of  the  descriptions  in  the
Rook  of  Daniel  possible.  Besides,  its  intimation  (S^i^ff.)  that
from  the  destruction  of  Jerusalem  by  Nebuchadrezzar  (586)  to
the  death  of  Antiochus  Kpiphanes  (164),  we  are  to_  reckon  a
periixl  of  70  year-weeks  —  490  years  —  shows  how  inaccurate
the  chronological  knowledge  of  the  writer  was,  and  how  much
need  we  have  to  look  around  for  other  help.

-Astronomy  would  furnish  the  surest  means  for  deter-

iniiiinij  the  cxait  year  and  day  of  events,  if  the  OT  con-

j,  J taiiK-d  indubitable  accounts  of  solar  or

ABtronXTcal  ^""''"^  "^^^^ ^^^'^^VV^^y^^-^^-^.^l'
,  such  accounts  are  lacking. One  might

be  tempted  to  go  so  far  as  to  supixjse
a solar eclipse to explain the sign on the sun-
dial  of  Ahaz given to Hezekiah by Isaiah  (Is.  388);
|)crha|)s  also  the  'standing  still  of  the  sun  at  (iitjeon'
17 MnhlAT-'a (Josh.  10 12-14). Rationalistic  as  this

8  stem "'^y  ^'^■"'- '■'''• ^^''''''-'''  ^'^'^  §  38  f'""
^  ■ title  of  work)  has  not  been  content  to

stop  here,  but  has  discovered  many  .solar  eclipses  in-
timated in  the  OT  :  he  even  finds  them  in  every  pro-
phetic passage  that  speaks  of  a  darkening  of  the  sun.  In
this  way  he  has  been  able  to  determine  astronomically
a  whole  series  of  events.  Before  we  can  accept  these
results,  however,  we  must  examine  more  carefully  the
foundation  on  which  they  are  reared.

For  example,  Mahler  assigns  the  Exodus  to  the  27th  March
1335  n.c.  which  was  a  Thursday,  because  fourteen  days  before
that  d.iy  there  occurred  a  centr.il  sol.ir  eclipse.  This  calculation
rests  on  T.ilmudic  data  1  that  assign  the  darkness  mentioned  in
Ex.  10  21  to  the  ist  of  Nisan,  and  explain  that  that  d.-\y,  and
therefore  also  the  15th  of  Nisan,  was  a  Thursday.  In  Kx.  10  22,
indeed,  we  read  of  a  darkness  of  three  days  ;  but  Mahler  argues
that  this  note  of  duration  really  belongs  not  to  v.  22  but  to  v.  23,
and  is  meant  simply  to  explain  how  'intense  and  terrifying  was
the  impression  which  the  darkness  produced  on  the  iiiliabitants
of  Egypt' — 'so  that  no  one  d.ired  for  three  days  \.o  leave  his
house."  It  is  just  as  arbitrary  to  assume  in  (Sen.  15  '^ff.  an  eclipse
enabling  .■\braham  to  count  the  stars  before  sunset,  and  then  to
use  the  eclipse  for  fixing  the  date  of  the  covenant  then  con-
cluded (Berith  ben  hab-lx-thfirim). The  time  at  which  search


CHRONOLOGY

Is  to  be  made  for  this  eclipse  Mahler  reckons  x<  410  yearn
before  the  Excxlus,  since  Kabbinic  tradition  thus  explains  the
number  430  assi)jned  in  Ex.  1*240  to  the  itlay  in  Egypt,  whilst  on
the  other  hand  it  makes  the  400  years  a.vsigned  in  (>en.  15  it
to  the  bondage  l)cgin  with  the  birth  of  Isaac.  The  desired
eclipse  Mahler  finds  on  8th  Oct.  176*  h.c.  about  430  years
before  tlie  Exodus  (1335  B.C.  ;  .sec  above).  Even  more  artihcial,
if  possible,  is  the  Kabbinic  exegesis  of  (Jen. '28ii  and  8232  on
which  Mahler  relies  for  the  determination  of  the  beginning  and
the  end  of  the  twenty-years]  stay  of  Jacob  in  Haran.  The
solar  eclipse  indicated  according  to  him  in  (ien.  28  11  ('  l>ecausc
the  sun  w.is  set ')  must  have  been,  he  argues,  in  the  evening,  and
would  thus  l>e  the  eclipse  that  occurred  on  the  17th  Feb.  if  01
li.c,  whilst  (Ien.  3*232  ('and  the  sun  rose  upon  him")  must
indicate  a  morning  eclipse,  which  occurred  on  3olh  .May  1581
B.C.  If  we  add  that  for  the  victory  of  Joshua  at  ( iil>eon  (Josh.
10  12-14)  he  has  found  a  solar  eclipse  calculated  to  have  occurred
on  31st  Jan.  1296  B.C.,  we  have  for  the  earliest  period  the  following
items : —

Mahler's  supi'oski>  Earlv  Dates.
Abraham's  Berith  lx5n  hab-l)elb;'irim  (Gen.  165  ff.)  \-jf)\  B.C.
Jacob's  journey  to  Haran  (Gen.  L'S  11)  . . 1601 ,,

Jacob's  return  home  (Gen.  8231  (32)) . . . 1581 ,,
Exodus  (Ex.  IO21)  .  27ih  .March  1335 ,,

Joshua's  victory  at  Gibeon  (Josh.  10  12-14)  .  •  "296  ,,
The  attempt  to  do  justice  to  Is.  38  8  by  the  assumption  of  a
.solar  eclipse  is  at  least  more  interesting.  According  to  this
theory,  all  the  requirements  of  the  narrative  would  l)e  met  if  a
solar  eclipse  had  occurred  ten  hours  Iwfore  sunset,  since  in  that
case  the  index  could  have  traversed  over  again  the  ten  degrees
which,  owing  to  the  eclipse,  it  had  'gone  down,'  and  the  dial  would
have  again  made  its  usual  indication.  Such  an  eclipse  has,  more-
over, been  found  for  17th  June  679  B.C.,  whence,  since  the  sign  in
question  belongs  to  Hezekiah's  fourteenth  year,  his  reign  must
have  covered  the  years  693-1  64  B.C.

The  further  calculations  which  fix  a  whole  series  of  dates  on
the  ground  of  misunderstood  passages  are  likewise  quite  unsatis-
factory. Thus,  .Vinos  is  made  (897;)  to  announce  to  Jeroboam
II.  the  solar  eclipse  of  5th  May  770  n.t.  ;  Is.  1(>3  and  .Micah36
are  made  to  refer  to  that  of  the  nth  Jan.  689  B.C.  in  the  time  of
Hezekiah  ;  and  J<x;l,  who  is  represented  as  living  in  the  time  of
Manasseh,  is  made  10  indicate  no  fewer  than  three  solar  eclipses
(21st  Jan.  662,  27th  June  661,  and  15th  .April  657  n.c;  cp  Joel
210834415).  It  is  further  urged  that  we  should  refer  Ezek.
30  18  and  32  8  to  the  solar  eclipses  of  19th  May  557  and  ist  Nov.
556  ;  Nab.  1  8  to  that  of  i6th  March  581  ; '  Jer.  4  23  28  to  that  on
2ist  Sept.  582  (in  the  time  of  Josiah);  and  Is.  8  22  to  that  on  5th
March  702  B.C.  (in  the  time  of  .Ahaz) ;  and,  finally,  ih-it  even  the
light  against  .Sisera  can,  according  to  Ju.  ^20,  be  wiih  certainty
fixed  for  9th  -Aug.  1091  B.C.

By  combining  these  '  results '  with  the  numbers  of  the  OT
Mahler  believes  himself  justified  in  producing  the  following
chronological  table  for  the  time  of  the  Monarchy  :—


TABLE  II. — Mahler's  remarkable  Chronology  :  Divujed  Monarchy.


Kings  of  Judah.
945-928  Rehoboam
928-925  Abijam  (  -  Abijah) .
925-884  Asa


883-858  Jehoshaphat

860  (j/V)-852  Joram
852  Ahaziah

852-845  Athaliah .
845-805  Joash
805-777  Amaziah .
777-725  Uzziah


17  years
3 »


I  year
7  years


725-709  Jotham
709-693  Ahaz .
693-664  Hezekiah  .
664-610  Manasseli  .
610-609  Amon
609-579  Josiah
579  Joahaz

579-568  Jehoiakiin
568  Jehoiacliin

568-557  Zedekiah .


Kings  of  Israel.
945-924  Jeroboam 22

924-922  N.-idab 3

922-899  Baasha 24

899-898  Elab 2

898  Ziniri

898-892  Oniri  and  Tibni  \

892-887  Oniri  / ■ ' ■

887-866  .Ab.1l)

866-864  Ahaziah

864-852  lehoran.


days
years


31

3  months
II  years

3  months
II  years


It  is  only  a  pity  that  the  imposing  edifice  thus  erected
in  the  name  of  astronomical  science  rests  on  a  founda-
tion so  unstable — an  artificial  phantom,  dependent  on  a
Rabbinical  exegesis,  it.self  a  ntere  creation  of  fancy.
The  or  itself  having  thus  failed to  give  sufficient
1  B.  Talm.  Shahbdth,  87-5,  etc.  ;  see  Mahler, Bibl.  Chron.

Ajr.

78s


852-824  Jehu 28 „

824-807 lehoaha/ '7 ,,

807-792  Joash 16 ,,

792-751  Jerobo.-im  II 4' .1

739  Zechariah  6  months.  Sh.illuni . .  i  month

738-728  Menahem  ben  Gadi  ....  10  years

727-726  Pekahiah  ......  2 ,,

726-706  Pekah  ben  Remaliah  .  .  20 „

697-688  Hoshea  ben  Elali  . . ■  9 .1


1  Mahler  finds  here  a  reference  to  the  fall  of  Nineveh.  He
argues  that  the  battle  against  the  Lydians  in  which  the  day
became  night  (cp  Herod.  1  103),— a  battle  which  preceded  the
fall  of  Nineveh— fell,  not  on  30th  Sept.  610  B.C.  but  on  28th  May
585  n.c.  -Again,  the  solar  eclipse  with  the  announcement  of
which  Zephaniah  (1  15)  connects  an  allusion  to  the  expedition
undertaken  by  Phraortes  against  Nineveh  at  least  twenty-five
years  before  its  final  fall  is  (ace.  to  Mahler)  one  that  happened
on  30th  July  607.


CHRONOLOGY

chronological data, we  have  to inquire  whether the

.  foreign  nations, which  so  often  come

18.  Help  from  jj^^ough the events of history into

Egyptian contact  with Israel,  can  help  us. In

cnronology. ^^  ^^j^^g  ^.^  ^^^^^^  consider  in  the  first

place  the  Kgyptians. It  is  to  Egypt  that  the  narrative

of  the  origin  of the  people  of Israel  points  ; thither

escaped  the  remnant  of the  community  of  Gedaliah  ;

and  in  the  interval  between  these  times,  as  also  later,

the  fortunes  of Palestine  were  often  intertwined with

those  of  Egypt.

The  Egyptians  themselves  possessed no  continuous

era  :  for  the  quite  unique  mention,  on  a  stele  from  Tanis,

of  the  400th  year  of  the  king  Nubti  (accord-

19.  NO  jj^g  j^  Stcindorff  probably  none  other  than
Hxed  era.  ^^^^  ^^^  ^^.^  ^j-  'Y-Ams),  is  too  obscure  and

uncertain, and  would  not  help  us  at  all even  were  it
more  intelligible. Nor  yet  does  the  Sothis-period  help
us  much. This  was  a  period  of 1461  years, at  each
recurrence  of  which  the  first  days  of  the  solar  year  and
of  the  ordinary  year  of  365  days  once  again  coincided
for  four  years,  or,  what  amounts  to  the  same  thing,  the
Dog-star,  from  whose  rising  the  solar  year  was  reckoned,
again  appeared  on  the  ist  of  Thoth. The  period  was
never  used  for  chronological  purposes.  ^ Nor  have  the
monuments  fulfilled  the  expectation,  not  unreasonable  in
itself,  that  by  the  help  of  inscriptions  giving  dates  accord-
ing to  two  methods  it  would  be  {X)ssible,  by  calculation,
to  reach  a  more  exact  chronology  for  Egyptian  hiotory.
The  most  learned  Egyptologists,  indeed,  can  themselves |
determine  Egyptian  chronology  only  through  combina- '
tion  with  data  from  outside  sources. The  conquest  of |
I'-gypt by  Cambyses in the  year 525 B.C. furnishes i
their cardinal point. Erom this event, the years  of |
_ . , reign  of  the  kings  of  the 26th dynasty

20.  i-enoa  ^^^^  ^^  ^^^^  ^.j^j^  certainty  by  the  help
Of  certainty.  ^^  ^^^  ^^^^  supplied  by  the  monuments,
Herodotus,  and  ManC-tho.  What  lies  before  Psamlik  I. ,
the  first  pharaoh  of  this  dynasty,  however,  is  in  the
judgment  of  Egyptologists  more  or  less  uncertain,  and
therefore  for  other  chronological  determinations  the
records  of  that  earlier  time  are  either  not  to  be  used  at
all  or  to  be  used  with  the  greatest  caution.

Still,  even  this  short  period,  from  664/3  (the  accession
of  Psamtik  I.)  to  525  B.C.,  is  a  help  to  us  by  supplying
points  of  reference.  Through  synchronisms  of  Egyptian
and  Judean  history  several  events  of  the  time  are  to  a
certain  extent  fixed.  Thus  Necho  II.  (middle  of  610
B.C.  to  beginning  of  594  B.C.)  is  admitted  to  be  the
king  who  fought  the  battle  at  Megiddo  that  cost  Josiah
his  life.  So  mention  is  made  in  the  OT  of  Hophra
(Apries),  who  reigned  588-569  B.C.,  and  was  even  down
to  564  nominally  joint  ruler  with  Amasis  (see  Egypt,  §
69).  Thus  we  gel  fixed  points  for  the  contemporaries
of  Necho  II. — Josiah,  Jehoahaz,  and  Jehoiakim  ; — and
for  the  contemporaries  of  Hojihra — Jeremiah,  and  the
Jews  in  Egypt  (Jer.  4430) — although  neither  for  the
battle  of  Megiddo  nor  for  that  of  Carchemish  can  the
year  be  determined  from  Egyptian  data.  On  the  other
hand,  these  Egyptian  data  are  sufficient  to  prove  that
the  astronomical  edifice  of  Mahler  is  quite  impossible.
For  the  time  before  Psamtik  I.  the  rulers  of  the
..  25th  dynasty  may  be  fixed  approximately.
21.  25tn  'p.^„m,-^n,on  ruled  alone  only  a  short  time.
Dynasty.  ^^^^  therefore  may  fall  out  of  account.  The
data  for  his  three  predecessors  do  not  agree  (cp  Egypt,
§66/.).

Taharka  reigned,  according  to  the  monuments,  26  years  ;  ac-
cording to  Manetho,  18  (var.  20).
Sabatako's  reign,  according  to  the  monuments,  was  uncertain  ;

according  to  Manetho  it  was  14  (var.  12).
1  The  confirm.ition  that  \\?i\\\KX  (op.  cit.,  p.  56  ^.)  seeks  for
1315  B.C.  as  the  date  of  the  Kxodus  in  the  .statement  that  under
Menephthah,  whom  he  holds  to  Ije  the  pharaoh  of  the  Exodus,
was  celebrated  the  beginning  of  a  Sothic  period,  which  may
have  happened  in  the  year  1318  B.C.,  is  certainly  weak,  since
the  pharaoh  who  according  to  Ex.  14  was  drowned  could  not
have  reigned  after  that  for  17  years. See  Exodus.

787


CHRONOLOGY

Sabako  reigned,  according  to  the  monuments,  12  years;  ac-
cording to  Manetho,  8  (var.  12).

If  we  assign  to  Saba/ako  Manftho's  number  of  years
( fourteen  y^and  take,  as  our  basis  for  the  rest,  the  numbers
of  the  monuments,  we  get  the  following  : — Taharka,
690-664  B.C.,  iabattiko,  704-690  B.C.,  and  Sabako,
716-704  B.C.  Still,  according  to  the  view  of  .Steindorff,
to  whom  we  are  indebted  for  these  data,  Taharka  may
have  reigned  even  longer  than  twenty-six  years,  perhaps
along  with  Sabatako.  ^  Since,  however,  Ed.  Meyer
gives  .^abako  728-716,  Sabatako  circ.  704,  and  makes
Taharka  as  early  as  704  real  master,  although  not  till
689  official  ruler,  of  Egypt  (cp  Gesch.  Ae_^.  343^).
all  sure  support  is  already  gone.  Besides,  although
according  to  Meyer  (op.  cit.  344)  the  identity  of  i^abako
with  the  Assyrian  Sab'i  and  the  Hebrew  niq  (So',  or,
more  correctly,  Save'  or  Seweh)  in  2  K.  17  4  is  indubit-
able, Steindorff  has  grave  doubts  as  to  the  phonetic
equivalence  of  these  names,  and  finds  no  Egyptian
datum  for  the  battle  of  Altaku.  It  is,  therefore,  very
difficult  to  get  from  Egyptian  chronology  any  certain
light  on  two  OT  statements  relating  to  Egypt — viz.,
that  Sennacherib  sent  messengers  to  Hezekiah  when  he
heard  of  the  expedition  of  Taharka  (2  K.  I99  ;  Is.  37  9).
and  that  Hoshea  of  Israel  had  dealings  with  j<io  of
Egypt,  and  was  therefore  bound  and  put  into  prison  by
Shalmaneser  (2  K.  174)-

For  the  chronology  of  the  OT  in  still  earlier  times,
there  is,  unfortunately,  nothing  at  all  to  be  gained  from
Egyptology. According to i  K.  11  40


22.  Earlier
times.


14  25  (cp  2Ch.  122),  .Shishak  (.Sheshonk)
was  a  contemporary  of  Solomon,  and  in
the  fifth  year  of  Rehoboam  went  up  against  Jerusalem.
In  spite,  however,  of  the  Egyptian  monument  at  Karnak
bearing  the  list  of  cities  conquered  by  him,  his  date
cannot  be  determined  on  Egyptological  grounds  (on
biblical  grounds  it  is  usually  given  as  about  930  B.C.).
As  to  'Zerah  the  Cushite'  (2Ch.  149^),  we  need  not
expect  to  find  any  mention  of  him  in  Egyptian  sources

(ZER.A.H).

The  clay  tablets  found  at  Tell  el  Amarna  (see  IsR.\F.L,

§  6), indeed, make  some important contributions to

I our  knowledge  of  the  relations  of  Palestine  to  Eg>-pt  ;

: but for the chronology  they  afford nothing certain.

: We  must  get  help  from  the  chronology  of Babylonia

; before  we  can,  even  approximately,  determine  the  date

j of the  correspondence. Then  it  seems  probable  that

I Amen-hotep  III.  and  Amen-hotep  IV.  reigned  in  Egypt

I either  about 1450  B.C. or  about  1380  B.C., at  which

time, therefore, Palestine  must  have  stood under  the

I sceptre  of  Egypt  : the  contemporaries  of  Amen-hotep

I III. — Burnaburias  I.  and  Kurigalzu  I.  of  Babylon — are

assigned  by  Winckler  to  1493-1476  and  1475-1457  B.C.

respectively,  and  the  contemporary  of  Amen-hotep  IV.

— Burnaburias  II.— to  1456-1422,  whilst  R.  W.  Rogers,

on the  other  hand ( Outlines  of  the  History  of  Early

Babylonia,  1895,  p.  56),  gives  1397-1373  as  the  probable

date  of  Burnaburias  II.,  and  C.  Niebuhr  [Chronol.  der

Gesch. Isr., Ae^^., Bab. u. Ass. von 2000-700 £.c.

untcrsucht, 1896) accepts only  one Burnaburias and

places  him  and  his  contemporary  Amen-hotep IV. in

the beginning  of the fourteenth century  B.C. As in

these  tablet  inscriptions  the  name  of  the  Hebrews  has

! not  so  far  been  certainly  discovered,  so,  in  the  Egyptian

monuments  generally,  we  cannot  find  any  reminiscence

of  a  stay  of Israel in Egypt  or  of their  departure.  1

Theories  about  the  pharaoh  of  the  oppression  and  the

pharaoh  of  the  Exodus  remain,  therefore,  in  the  highest

degree  uncertain. Neither  Joseph  nor  Moses  is  to  l>e

found  in  Egyptian  sources  :  supposed  points  of  contact

(a  seven-years  famine,  and the  narrative  of  ManCtho

alx)ut  Osarsiph-Moses  in  Josephus,  c.  Ap.l^jiS; on

this  cp  Ed.  Meyer,  Gesch.  Aeg.  376  f. )  have  proved,  on

1  On  the  inscription  of  Menephthah  discovered  in  1896,  see
Egypt,  §  58/,  and  Exodus,  §§  i,  3.


CHRONOLOGY

nearer  examination,  untenable.*  Apart,  therefore,  from
the  dates  of  the  rulers  of  the  twenty-fifth  and  the  twenty-
sixth  dynasties,  there  is  very  little  to  be  gained  for  OT
chronology  from  Kgyptology.  On  Egyptian  Chronology
see  also  ICoYPT,  §  41.

Assyriology  offers  much  more  extensive  help.  It  is
much  better  sujjplicd  with  chronological  material,  since

23  HelD  from  "  P«-^sesses.  for  a  scries  of  228  yt^rs,
,'  ".  inscriptions  containing  careful  itsts  of
Asaynoiogy. pp^)„y^^  X\iA%,  that  is.  giving  the  name

of  tlie  oflicer  after  whom  the  year  was  called,  and
mentioning  single  important  events  falling  within  the
year.  These  brief  notes  alone  are  quite  enough  to  give
the  lists  an  extraordinary  importance.  Their  value  is
further  increased,  however,  by  the  fact  that  the  office  of
I-4X)nym  had  to  be  held  in  one  of  his  first  years,
commonly  the  second  full  year  of  his  reign,  by  each
king.  Hence  the  order  of  succession  of  the  Assyrian
kings  and  the  length  of  their  reign  can  be  determined
with  case,  especially  as  names  of  kings  are  distinguished
from  those  of  other  E[X)nyms  by  the  addition  of  the
royal  title  and  of  a  line  separating  them  from  those  that
precede  them  (cp  Assyria,  §  19^).  The  monumental
cliaracter,  too,  of  these  documents,  exem;>ting  them,  as
it  docs,  from  the  risk  of  alteration  attaching  to  notes  in
books,  gives  assurance  of  their  trustworthiness.  Nor  is
the  incompleteness  of  the  list  supposed  by  Oppert  a
fact.  In  regard  to  the  order  of  succession  no  doubt  is
possible.

The  establi-shment  of  this  uninterrupted  series  of  228
years  can  be  accomplished  with  absolute  cert.^inty  (as

24  MAthod ^^^  ^^^^^  ^**  below) by  the  help  of  an

eclipse  of  the  sun  assigned  by  the  list  to
the  Ei)onym  year  of  Pur  Sagali  of  Gozan.^  In  order
to  be  able  to  determine  the  eclipse  intended,  however,
and  thus  to  fix  the  year  astronomically,  we  have  first  to
bring  into  consideration  the  so-called  Canon  of  Ptolemy*
— next  to  these  Assyrian  Eponym  lists,  px-'rhaps  the
most  important  chronological  monument  of  aiitic|uity.
This  Canon  is  a  list  giving  the  names  of  the  rulers  of
Babylon — T^abylonian,  Assyrian,  and  Persian —from
N'abonassar  to  Alexander  the  Great  (the  Egyptian
Ptolemies  and  the  Romans  are  appended  at  the  end),
with  the  nuiulK-r  of  years  each  of  them  reigned,  and  the
eclipses  observed  by  the  Babylonians  and  the  Alex-
andrians— the  years  being  reckoned  according  to  the  era
of  Nalwnassar^/.i'. ,  from  that  prince's  accession.  The
trustworthiness  of  this  document  is  proved,  once  for  all,
by  the  astronomical  observations  it  records,*  from  which
we  le;\rn  that  the  beginning  of  the  era  of  Nabonassar
falls  in  the  year  747  H.c."

The  Canon  can  be  combined  with  the  Assyrian
Eponym  lists,  and  the  establishment  of  the  latter  with
certainty  effected  in  the  following  way.  On  the  one
hand,  the  Ptolemaic  Canon  assigns  to  the  year  39  of
the  era  of  NalK)nassar,  709  B.C.,  the  accession  of
Arkeanos  (  =Sargina  on  the  fragment  of  the  Babylonian
list  of  kings) ;  and,  on  the  other  hand,  As.syrian  cl.ay
tablets  identify  this  year,  the  first  of  the  rule  of  Sarrukln
(/.^. , Sargon or Arkeanos) over Babylon with the

1  Cp  also  Wiedemann's  review  {TI.Z,  1894,  No.  25,  p.  633),  of
fjiroche's  Questions  chrcinoloi^iques  (Angers,  1892),  where  the
Exodus  is  assignoil  to  1492.  The  judgment  of  this  competent
reviewer  is  that  '  the  book  is  well-meant,  but  brings  the  question
of  the  Rxodus  no  nearer  to  a  solution.'

2  KB,  1  210/

!*  It  liears  the  name  'Ptolemaic  Canon'  because  it  was  in-
cluded in  his  astronomical  work  by  the  geographer  and  mathe-
matician Claudius  Ptolemaeus,  the  contemporary  of  the  Emperor
Antoninus  Pius  (therefore  circ.  150  A.t>.).

■*  The  proof  is  strengthened  by  the  fragments  of  a  Babylonian
list  of  kings  published  by  Pinches  in  PS  HA  ft  193-204  (May,  '84 1,
part  of  which  constitute  an  exact  parallel  to  the  beginning  of  the
Circek  list,  and  completely  confirming  its  statements  concerning
tlic  names  and  reigns  of  the  rulers.

*  More  exactly  (since  the  dates  are  reduced  to  the  common
Egyptian  year)  on  the  first  of  Thoth  (  =  26th  Feb.),  not  (as
according  to  Babylonian  oflficial  usage  might  have  been  ex-
pected) on  the  ist  of  Nisan  (  =  3ist  March)  (cp  Hommel,  CBA,
488,  and  see  below  §  26X

789


CHRONOLOGY

Eponym  year  of  Mannu-ki-A.5ur-Ii'  (.Schr.  KAT^,  491)
the  thirteenth  of  Sargons  rule  in  Assyria.'  Hence  we
may  identify  this  Eponym  year  of  Mannu-ki-A5ur-li'
(the  thirteenth  year  of  Sargon's  reign  in  Assyria)  Iike^*'ise
with  the  year  709  B.t:.  ;  and,  as  the  series  is  uninter-
rujited,  all  its  dates  become  known.  We  can,  then,
obtain  astronomical  confirmation  of  the  correctne.ss  of
this  combination  (and  so  also  of  the  tnist worthiness  of
the  Ptolemaic  Canon  and  the  Assyrian  Eponym  lists)  in
the  way  hinted  at  already.  For,  if  the  Eponym  year  of
Mannu-ki-A^ur-Ii'  is  the  year  709  B.f'. ,  the  Eponym
year  of  Pur-Sagali,  to  which,  as  we  saw  above,  there  is
assigned  a  solar  eclipse,  must  I)e  the  year  763  B.C.;
and  astronomers  have  computed  that  on  the  15th  June
of  that  year  a  solar  eclipse  occurred  that  would  be
almost  total  for  Nineveh  and  its  neighbourhood.  Thus
the  Assyrian  F-ixsnym  list  may  safely  be  used  for  chrono-
logical {)ur[)oses.

On  the  ground  of  the  statements  of  this  list,  then,
we  have,  for  the  years  893-666  B.C.,  fixed  points  not  to
„_  »-_„ii.  be  called  in  question  by  which  to  date
the  events  of  this  period  in  Israel  ;  for
the  Assyrian  inscriptions  not  only  supply  direct  informa-
tion concerning  certain  events  in  Israel's  own  history,
but  also  in  other  cases  fix  the  date  of  contemporaneous
events  which  the  narrative  of  the  OT  presupposes.
Then  the  Ptolemaic  Canon,  which  from  747  B.C.  on-
wards accompanies  the  Assyrian  Eponym  list,  continues
when  the  Eponym  list  stops  (in  666  B.C.),  and  conducts
us  with  certainty  down  to  Roman  times.

We  are  thus  enabled  to  determine  Ijeyond  all  doubt
the  background  of  the  history  of  Israel  and  Judah  from
893  downwards,  and  obtain  down  to  Alexander  the
Great  the  following  valuable  dates  : —

TABLE  III. — AssvRio-B.\BVi.oM.\N  u.ates
893  B.C. TO  Alkx.andkk  thk  Gkk.vt

890-885 Tuklat-Adar.

8S4-860 Asur-nfisir-pal. ,

85  1-325 Shalmaneser  II.  (.Sal-ma-nu-u55ir)

824-S12 .Sam5i-Rammfin.

811-783 Ramman-nirari  (III.).

782-773 Shalmaneser  III.  (.Sal-ma-nu-uS-iJir)

772-755 A5ur-dan-ilu  (.V.^urdan  I II.)

754-746 A5ur-niraru.

745-727 Tiglat-pileser  III.  (Taklat-habal-iSarra)

726-722 Shalmaneser  III.

721-705 Sargon  (.Xrkeanos,  709-705,  king  of  Babylon).

704-681 Sennacherib  (Sin-achi-irib).

680-668 Esarhaddon  (.Vsarhaddon,  A5ur-ab-iddin  =  Asaridinos

in  Pt.  Can.).
667  =  first  year  of  the  reign  of  A5ur-bani-pal,  who  perhaps  reigned

till  626.
The  continuation  is  supplied  by  the  Ptolemaic  Canon
which  specifies  the  rulers  of  Babylon  : —
667-648 Saosduchinos  (  =  .^ama5-5um-ukin).
674-626 Kinilanadanos.

625-^05 Nabopolassaros  (  =  Nabfi-habal-usur).
604-562 Nabokolassaros  (=Nabu-kudurri-u.sur,  njfK'^"l3?23  and

nVKn3133).
561-560 Illoarudamos(  =  AviI-Marduk,  ^l^D  S'Ik).
550-556 Neriga-solasaros  (  =  Nirgal-Sar-usur).
553^539 Nabonadios  (  =  Nabu-na'id).
538-530 Kyrus  (=  KuruJ,  V^^t).
529-523 Kambyses  (=  Kambuyija).
521-486 Dareios  I.  (  =  Darayavu5,  trvi^).
485-465 Xerxes  (  =  KhSayarSa,  trillC'-Nl).
464-424 Artaxerxes  I.  (  =  Artakh.^atra,  KWB'nrnK).
423-405 Dareios  II.
404-359 Artaxerxes  II.
358-338 Ochus.
337-336 Arogos  (  =  .\rses).
335-332 Dareios  HI.

Here  follows  Alexander  the  Great,  who  died  in  323  B.C.

With  regard  to  this  summary  it  is  to  be  noted  that  (as  is  %
matter  of  course  in  any  rational  dating  by  years  of  reign— it
is  certainly  the  case in the  Ptolemaic  Canon)  the  year  con-

1  From  the  thirteenth  year  of  his  reign  down  to  hLs  death  in
the  .seventeenth  (and  so,  as  the  Ptolemaic  Canon  states,  for  five
years)  Sargon  must  have  reigned  over  Babylon  also.


27.  Care


CHRONOLOGY

sidered  as  the  first  of  any  king  is  the  earliest  year  at  the  begin-
ning of  which  he  was  already  really  reigning  ;  in  the  preceding
year  he  had  begun  to  reign  on  his  predecessor's  death. Short
reigns,  accordingly,  which  did  not  reach  the  beginning  of  the
new  year,  had to  remain  unnoticed, as that of  Laborosoar-
chad  (I^ba5i-Marduk)  in the  year  556,  which,  according  to
. . HerOssus,  lasted only  nine months. It is
26.  Beginning  further  to  be  noted that the  beijinning  of
of  year.  'he  year  did  not  fall  in  the  two  lists  on  the

s.-ime  day.  The  Eponym  lists  make  the
year  begin  on  the  first  of  Nisan,  the  21st  of  March,  while
the  I'tolemaic  Canon  follows  the  reckoning  of  the  ordinary
Epypti.-in  year  of  365  days,  the  beginning  of  which,  as  compared
with  our  mode  of  reckoning,  falls  one  day  earlier  everv  four
years.  Thus,  if  in  the  year  747,  as  was  indeed  already  the
case  in  748,  the  beginning  of  the  year  fell  on  the  26th  of
February,  the  year  744  woidd  begin  on  the  25th.  For  a  period
of  a  hundred  years  this  difference  would  amount  to  twenty-five
days.  Thus  the  beginning  of  the  year  647  ii.c.  would  fall  on
the  ist  of  February; ;  and  so  on.  Therefore  for  the  period  747-
323  B.C.  the  beginning  of  the  year  would  always  fall  somewhat
near  the  beginning  of  ours.

If,  then,  the  chronological  data  of  the  OT  were  trust-
worthy, as  soon  as  one  cardinal  point  where  the  two  scries
— that  of  the  OT  and  that  just  obtained
— came  into  contact  could  \x  established '
necessary, ^^.j^j^  certainty,  the  whole  chronology  of  tlie |
OT  would  be  at  once  determined,  and  the  insertion  of ;
the  history  of  Israel  into  the  firm  network  of  this  general
background  would  become  possible. In  the  uncertainty, |
however,  in  which  the  chronological  data  of  the  OT  are j
involved,  this  simple  method  can  lead  to  no  satisfactory '
result. All points  of  coincidence  must  be  separately
attended  to  ;  and, although  we  may  start  out  from  a
fi.xed  point  in  drawing  our  line,  we  must  immediately |
see  to  it  that  we  keep  the  ne.xt  point  of  contact  in  view. -
Unfortunately, in going backwards from the  earliest
ascertainable  date  to  a  remoter  antiquity  such  a  check |
is  not  available.  j

The  earliest  date  available,  as  being  certain  beyond '
doubt,  for  an  attempt  to  set  the  chronology  of  the  OT

28.  Earliest  "".\*^'^'"  ^T  ''  '^V''\  ^^'^  "''••  '"f '
, . ^rp which  Ahab king  of Israel was one  of :

certain  Ul  ^^^^  confederates  defeated  by  Shalman-  I
aates.  ^^^^  jj  (g^^.g^^^  ^^  Karkar  (Schr.
KGF,  356-371  and  A'AT^-\  193-200).  Since,  how-
ever, the  OT  contains  no  reference  to  the  event,  it  is
of  no  use  for  the  purpose  of  bringing  the  history  of
Israel  into  connection  with  general  history  till  we  take
into  consideration  also  the  next  certain  date,  842  B.C.,  ;
in  which  year  presents  were  offered  to  the  same  .\ssyrian  !
king,  Shalmaneser  II.,  by  Jehu  (A',-//'*-',  208-211).
Within  these  thirteen  years  (854-842)  must  fall  the  death  I
of  Ahab,  the  ri'igns  of  .\haziah  and  Jehoram,  and  the
accession  of  Jehu.  Of  this  period  the  most  that  need
be  assigned  to  Jehu  is  the  last  year,  which  may  have
been  at  the  same  time  also  the  year  of  Jehoram's  death  ;
for  it  may  lie  regarded  as  ciuite  probaljle  that  it  would
be  immediately  after  his  accession  that  Jehu  would  send
presents  to  the  Assyrian  king  to  gain  his  recognition
and  favour.  On  the  other  hand,  the  traditional  values
of  the  reigns  reciuire  for  .\haziah  two  years  (i  K.  2252),
and  for  Jehoram  alone  twelve  years  (2  K.  3i) :  so  there
appears  to  be  no  time  left  for  Ahab  after  854.  The
death  of  Ahab,  however,  cannot  he  assigned  to  so  early
a  date  as  854.^  The  reigns  of  Ahaziah  and  Jehoram,
therefore,  must  be  curtailed  by  more  than  one  year.
The  course  of  events  from  854  to  the  death  of  Ahab  in
the  struggle  with  the  Syrians  has,  accordingly,  been
ranged  in  different  ways.

Wellhausen  (//Cl*),  71)  .suriposes  that,  in  consequence  of  the
universal  defeat  in  854,  Ahab  abandoned  the  relation  of
vassalage  to  .\ram  that  had  lasted  till  then,  and  thus  prcjvoked  •
a  Syrian  attack  on  Israel.  Then,  by  the  victory  at  .Aphek  in
the  second  year  and  the  capture  of  Benhad.id,  he  compelled  the
Syrians  to  conclude  peace  and  to  promise  to  deliver  up  the
Gileadite  cities  they  had  won  from Israel  (i  K.  20). .Xs the


CHRONOLOGY

Syrians  did  not  keep  their  promise,  he  undertook  in  the  third
year  of  the  peace  the  unfortunate  expedition  for  the  conquest  of
Ramoth-gilead,  in  which  he  met  his  death  (i  K.  22).  Thus  the
death  of  .Ahab  would  fall  about  the  year  851.  Schrader,  on  the
other  hand,  sees  in  Ahab's  taking  part  in  the  battle  of  I^arkar
a  consequence  of  the  conclusion  of  peace  with  Aram  tfiat
followed  the  battle  of  Aphek,  and  finds  it  thus  pos.sible  to
assign  Ahab's  death  to  so  early  a  date  as  853.  Kven  if  we
inclined  to  follow  the  representation  of  Schrader  (Wellhausen's
is  much  more  attractive),  the  Assyrian  notice  of  the  battle  of
^arkar  in  854  establishes  at  least  one  point,  that  the  beginning
of  Jehu's  reign  cannot  be  earlier  than  842,  and  the  traditional
numbers  must  be  curtailed.  On  the  question  just  discussed  see
also  An  A II.

The  year  842  B.C.  may,  therefore,  be  assigned  as  that

of  the  accession  of  Jehu. In  the  same  year  also  perished

.  . Jehoram,  king  of  Israel,  and  Ahaziah,

. pproxi- j.jj^g  ^j.  jmjj^j, whilst  Athaliah  seized


1  Victor  Floigl  (G.\,  1882,  pp.  94-96),  indeed,  supposes  that
Ahab  fc-M  before  Karkar  (/.(•.,  in  854),  and  not  before  Kamoth-
Gilead  ;_but  to  accomplish  this  he  has  to  treat  the  narratives  of
the  Syrian  wars  (i  K.  20 1-34  38-43  221-37)  as  quite  untrust-
worthy.

791


mate  earlier
dates.


the  reins  of  government  in  Jerusalem.

If  from  this  date,  ecjually  important  for
both  kingdoms,  we  try  to  go  back,  we  can  determine
with  approximate  certainty  the  year  of  the  division  of
the  monarchy.  The  years  of  reign  of  the  Israelitish
kings  down  to  the  death  of  Jehoram  make  up  the  sum  of
ninety-eight,  and  those  of  the  kings  of  Judah  down  to
the  death  of  Ahaziah  the  sum  of  ninety-live  ;  whilst  the
synchronisms  of  the  Books  of  Kings  allow  only  eighty-
eight  years.  Since  the  reigns  of  Ahaziah  and  Jehoram
of  Israel  must  be  curtailed  (§  28),  if  we  assume  ninety
years  as  the  interval  that  had  elapsed  since  the  partition
of  the  kingdoms  this  will  be  too  high  rather  than  too
low  an  estimate.  The  death  of  Solomon  may,  accord-
ingly, be  assigned  to  ±  930  B.C.  Wellhausen  (//(/''-',
g  f. ),  indeed,  raises  an  objection  against  this,  on  the
ground  of  a  statement  in  the  inscription  of  Mesha  ;  but
the  expression  in  the  doubtful  passage  is  too  awkward
and  obscure  to  lead  us,  on  its  account,  to  push  back
the  death  of  Solomon  to  950  B.C.,  or  even  farther.^

In this connection it is  not unimportant that  the
statements  of  Menander  of  Ephesus  in  regard  to  the


Menander.


Tyrian list of kings confirm the


assignment  of  930  B.C.  as  the  approxi-
mate date  of  the  death  of  Solomon.

According  to  the  careful  discussion  that  Franz  Ruhl  has
devoted  to  this  statement  (see  below,  §  85  end),  preserved  to  us
in  three  forms  (first,  in  Josephns,  c.  ^/.  1 8 ;  second,  in  the
Chron.  of  Euseb.,  and  third,  in  Theophilus  «<//////<'/.  iii.  100  22),
we  may,  assuming  v.  Gutschmid's  date  of  814  B.C.  for  the
foundation  of  Carthage,  fix  on  969-936  as  the  period  of  reign
of  Kipa)/u.o«  or  Hiram,  and  on  878-866  B.C.  as  that  of  EtflolPaAot
or  Ethb.Val.  Now,  Ahab  was  son-in-law  of  Ethba'al  (1  K.  IC  13),
and  since  Ethba'al  at  his  accession  in  the  year  878  B.C.  was
tliirty-si.x  years  old,  he  could  quite  well  have  had  a  marriageable
daughter  a  few  years  later,  when  Ahab,  who  according  to  i  K.
1(3  29  reigned  twenty-two  years  (about  872-851  B.C.),  ascended
the  throne.  Moreos'er,  Menander  mentions  a  one-year  famine
under  Eithobalos,  which  even  Josephus  {Ant.  viii.13  2)  identities
with  the  three -year  famine  that,  according  to  i  K.  17,  fell
in  the  beginning  of  the  reign  of  .Ahab.  Further,  Eiromos  (grg-
936)  may  be  identified  with  Hiram,  the  friend  of  Solomon  (cp
1  K.  5182477  329107?;),  and,  whether  we  adopt  the  opinion
that  Hiram,  the  contemporary  of  David  (2  S.  5  11),  was  the  same
person  as  this  friend  of  Solomon's,  or  suppose  that  the  name  of
the  better -known  contemporary  of  Solomon  has  simply  been
transferred  to  the  Tyrian  king  who  had  relations  with  David,
the  year  ±  930  n.c.  for  the  death  of  Solomon,  agrees  excellently
with  this  Phifnirian  synchronism.

1  We.  translates  lines  7-9  thus  :— '  Omri  conquered  the  whole
land  of  Medaba,  and  Israel  dwelt  there  during  his  days  and
half  the  days  of  his  son,  forty  years,  and  Kamos  recovered  it
in  my  days.'  He  thus  arrives  at  an  estimate  of  at  least  sixty
years  for  Omri's  and  Ahab's  combined  reigns,  since  only  by
adding  the  half  of  Ahab's  rei^n  to  the  part  of  Omri's  reign  during
which  Moab  was  tributary,  is  the  total  of  f.irty  years  attained.
It  is  to  be  noted,  however,  that '  Israel,'  which  We.  (so  also  Smend
and  Socin,  Die  Inschr.  des  K.  Mesa  von  Moab,  1886,  p.  13)
supplies  as  the  subject  to  'dwelt'  (3P'l),  is  lacking  in  the
inscription,  and  that  even  with  this  insertion  the  construction  is
not  beyond  criticism.  Is  it,  in  the  undoubted  awkwardness  of
the  passage,  not  possible  to  translate  thus — '  Omri  conquered  the
whole  land  of  Medaba,  and  held  it  in  possession  as  long  as  he
reigned,  and  during  the  half  of  the  years  of  vty  reign  fiis  son,
in  all  forty  years.  _  Hut  yet  in  my  reign  Chemosh  recovered  it.'
In  that  case  there  is  no  ground  for  ascribing  so  many  as  sixty
years  to  the  reigns  of  Omri  and  Ahab.  Nay,  the  possibility  is
not  excluded,  that  2  K.  3  5  is  right  in  making  the  revolt  of  .Moab
follow  the  death  of  Ahab,  and  then  the  futile  expedition  of
Jehoram  of  Israel  and  Jehoshaphat  of  Judah  against  Moab
could  be  taken  as  marking  the  end  of  the  forty  years.

792


CHRONOLOGY

If  it  has  been  dinTuult  to  attain  sure  ground  in  the

early period  of  tlic  divided monarchy, it  is  even  less

_ -  |xj.ssil)ie to determine anything with

f^ r1,°" certainty atmut the period preceding

tne  bcnism. Solomons  death. If  the  data  of  the

OT  concerning;  the  reigns  of  Solomon  and  David  (40

years  each,  i  K..2ii  11  42)  have  any  value, David  must

have attained to jjower alxiut the year 1000 B.C.

Concerning  Saul, even iS.  l;Ji gives  us no real in-


CHRONOLOGY

I  formation,  and  regarding  the  premonarchic  perifxl  the
most  that  can  Ix;  .s;\id  is  that,  according  to  the
discoveries  at  'rell-el-Amarna  the  Hebrews  were,  al>out
the  middle  of  the  fifteenth  century  B.C.,  not  yet  settled
in  Canaan.'

For  the  time,  tlicrefore,  from  the  partition  of  the
kingdom  down  to  the  year  842  B.C.,
we  must  Ix:  content  with  the  following
estimate  : —


32.  Schism
to  Jehu.


TABLE  IV


-ELSTIMATE OF ReIGNS  : DEATH OF  SOLOMON TO  ACCESSION OF  JeHU.
Kings  of  Israici..  Kings  of  Juoah.


030  (?)  -854 Jerohoamof  Israel  and  his  contemporaries  Rehoboam  and  Abijah  in  Judah.
N.idab  „

Ha'asha  ,,  Asa  of  Judah  (irtainly  contempurary  with  Ua'asha.

Klah
Zimri

Omri  ,,

Ahab  ,,  Jehoshapliat,  king  of  Judah,  contemporary  with  Ahab,

Ahab  at  battle  of  Karkar  Ahaziah,  and  Jehoram.

Ahab's  death
Ahaziah,  king  of  Israel

Jehoram ,,  ,,  Jehoram,  king  of  Judah.

Death  of  Jehoram  of  Israel  Death  of  Ahaziah  of  Judah.


8S4
854-842


842


From  842  B.C.  onwards,  there  is  no  fixed  point  till
we  come  to  the  eij;hth  century. Then  we  have  one  in
the eighth year of the Assyrian king


}.  Certain
dates


842-721.


Tiglalh-pileser  III.  (745-727)— /.f.,  738
1!.  (  .  In  that  year,  according  to  the  cunei-
form inscriptions,  this  king  of  Assyria
received  the  tributu  of  Men.-ihem  of  Israel.  When  the
OT  tells  of  this  (2  K.  15  19  /: )  it  calls  the  Assyrian  king
I'ul  :  although  elsewhere  (2  K.  I029  16 10)  it  uses  the
other  name,  Tiglalh-pileser.  Of  the  identity  of  the  two
names,  however,  there  can  he  no  doubt  (A'.//''"'  223
ff.,  COT,  1  219),  and  we  are  not  to  think  of  the  reference
l)eing  to  a  Hal)ylonian  king,  or  an  Assyrian  rival  king,
or  to  assume  that  Tiglath-pileser  himself,  at  an  earlier
j)eriod,  twenty  years  or  more  liefore  he  Ix-came  king
over  Assyria,  while  still  bearing  the  name  of  I'ul,  made
an  expedition  against  the  land  of  Israel  (so  Klo.  Sam.
u.  Kfl.  ['87]  p.  496).  If  we  add  that  .Ahaz  of  Judah
procured  for  hiin.self  through  a  payment  of  tribute  the
help  of  Tiglath-])ileser  against  the  invading  kings,
Pekah  of  Israel  and  Rczin  of  Damascus  ;  that,  accord-
ingly, the  As.syrian  king  took  the  field  against  Philistia
and  Damascus  in  734  and  733  ;  and  that  in  732,  after
the  conquest  of  Damascus,  Ahaz  also  appeared  in
Damascus  to  do  homage  to  Tiglath  -  pileser,  there
remains  to  Ix,-  mentioned  only  the  etiually  certain  date
of  the  l)eginning  of  the  year  721  11. C.  (Hommel,  (UiA
676)  for  the  conciucst  of  Samaria,  to  complete  the  list
of  assured  dates  between  842  and  721.

The  attempt  to  arrange  the  kings  of  Xorth  Israel
during  this  [)eriod  is  hampered  by  fewer  difliculties  in  the
interval  842-738  than  are  to  Ix;  found  in
that  Ix,'tw(x'n  738  and  721.  If  we  assume
that  Menahem  died  soon  after  paying
tribute,  we  shall  still  ha\e  in  the  113  years
reckoned  by  the  traditionary  account  from  the  accession
of  Jehu  to  the  death  of  Menahem  a  slight  excess,  since
for  the  period  842-738  we  need  only  104  years.  Still,
we  can  here  give  an  approximate  date  for  the  individual
reigns.  The  latest  results  of  Kautzsch  (in  substantial
agreement  with  Rrandes,  Kaniphausen,  and  Riehm)
are  the  following:' — Jehu  841-815,  Jehoahaz  814-798,
Jehoash  797-783.  Jeroboam  II.  782-743  (or  l)efore  745),
Zechariah  and  ."-ihallum  perhaps  also  in  743,  Menahem
742-737 (or  ±  745 to  after  738).  I'or  the last

period,  on  the  other  hand,  from  the  death  of  Menahem
to  the  conquest  of  Samaria,  the  traditional  reckoning
gives  thirty-one  years,  whilst  from  737  to  721  we  have
hardly  sixteen. The  necessary  shortening  of  the  reigns

'  We  modify  them  only  to  the  extent  of  giving  as  the  first
year  of  a  rcipn  the  year  .it  the  K-ginning  of  which  the  king  was
already  in  power,  and  adding  in  parentheses  the  figures  of  We.,
in  so  far  as  they  are  to  be  found  in  his  IJG.

793


34.  North

Israel

842  721.


is  accom])lished  by  Kautzsch  in  this  way  :  l''kahiah
736,  I'ekah  735-730,  Hoshea  729-721.  Wellhausen
has  abandoned  his  former  theory  that  I'ekahiah  and
I'ekah  are  identical,  and  makes  the  latter  l«i,'iii  to
reign  in  ±  735.  To  Hoshea,  the  last  king  of  Israel,
he  assigns  an  actual  reign  of  at  least  ten  years,  although
he  assumes  that  according  to  2  K.  17  4/.  he  came
under  the  power  of  Assyria  before  the  fall  of  .Saniari.i.

For the  Judiaii line of  kings the starting-point is
hkewise  the  year  842 H.r.,  in  which  Ahaziah  of  Judah


35.  Judah
842-734.


■t  his  death  at  the  hanti  of  Jehu.  :md
.\thaliah  assumed  the  direction  of  the
gosernment.  On  the  other  hand,  we  do
not  find,  for  the  next  hundred  years,  a  single  event
independently  determined  with  jx-rfcct  exactness  by
years  of  the  reigning  king  of  Judah.  We  must  come
d<nvn  as  far  as  734  It. <;.  before  we  attain  certainty.
We  know  that  at  that  time  Ahaz  had  already  come
to  power,  and  we  can  only  suppose  (according  to
2  K.  l.'i^y/!  I  that  he  had  not  long  Ix^fore  this  succeeded
his  father,  during  whose  lifetime  I'ekah  of  Israel  and
Rezin  of  Damascus  were  already  preparing  for  war.
The  presents  of  King  .Ahaz  to  Tiglath-pileser  in  the
year  734  B.r.  delivered  Judah  from  the  danger
that  threatened  it,  and  in  732  K.r.  in  the  conquered
Damascus  the  same  king  did  homage  to  the  victorious
Assyrian,  and  offered  him  his  thanks  (cp  2  K.  I67/:  and
Schrnder,  K.\T'''''  257/:).  It  is  still  diflicult,  how.ver,
to  allot  the  intervening  time  to  the  se\eral  kings  of
Judah  ;  for  the  traditional  values  for  the  reigns  require
no  less  than  143  years  from  the  first  year  of  .\thaliah
to  the  death  of  Jotham,  whilst  between  842  B.C.  and
734  H.c.  there  are  only  108  years  at  our  disposal.
It  is,  therefore,  necess.ary  to  reduce  seM-ral  of  the
items  by  a  considerable  amount,  and  it  is  not  to  be
wonderefl  at  that  different  methods  of  adjustment  have
been  eiuiiloyed.  The  synchronism  of  events  Ix-tween
the  hist<jry  of  Israel  and  that  of  Judah  is  too  inadecjuate
to  secure  unanimity,  and  the  mention  (not  quite  certain)
of  Azariah  of  Juflah  in  .Assyrian  inscriptions  for  the
ye.ars  742-740  (cp  Schr.  K.\l''-'',  217^)  does  not  make
up  the  lack.  On  one  point,  hovsever,  there  is  agree-
ment :  that  it  is  in  the  cases  of  .\maziah,  Azariah
(Uzziah),  and  Jotham  that  the  deductions  are  to  be
made.

The  years  841-836  B.r.  for  .Athali.ah  are  render»*<l
tolerably  certain  by  the  data  concerning  Jeho.ash,  the
infant  .son  of  Ahazi.ah  (2  K.  11 1^4^).  Then  we
need  have  no  mi.sgivings  alxiut  giving  Jehoash,  who
was  raised  to  the  throne  at  so  young  an  age,  about
forty  years. If  we  take  these  years  fully, we  obtain

1  On  early  traces  of  certain  elements  afterwards  forming  part
of  Israel,  see  Iskaei  ,  f  7/  ;  Egypt,  |  58/  ;  Asher,  |  1/

794


CHRONOLOGY

for  the  reign  of  Jehoash  835-796  B.C.  The  date  of
his  death  may,  indeed,  \ye  pushed  still  farther  back  ;
but  in  any  case  his  tinie  as  determined  by  these  data
cannot  Ixi  for  wrong,  for  he  must  have  been  a  con-
temporary of  Jehoahaz  the  king  of  Israel  (814-798),
and,  according  to  2  K.  12  18  j^. ,  also  of  Hazael  of  Aram
(ace.  to  Winckler  844-abou'.  804  [?]  ).  I'Voni  795  to
734  there  are  left  only  61  years,  and  in  this  interval
room  must  be  found  for  Amaziah  with  twenty-nine
years,  Azariah  with  fifty-two,  and  Jotham  with  si.xteen
— no  less  than  ninety-seven  years.  Even  if  we  allow
the  whole  sixteen  years  of  Jotham,  who,  according  to
2  K.  Ids,  conducted  the  government  during  the  last
illness  of  his  father,  to  be  merged  in  the  fifty-two  years
of  Azariah,  we  do  not  escape  the  necessity  of  seeking
other  ways  of  shortening  the  interval.  Amaziah's  reign
is  estimated  too  high  at  twenty-nine  years.  The  only
thing  that  is  certain  about  him  is  that  he  was  a
contemporary  of  Jehoash  of  Israel  (797-783;  cp  2  K.
14  8^).  It  is  pure  hypothesis  to  assign  him  nine
years  (We.),  or  nineteen  years  (Kamph.  and  Kau. ),
instead  of  twenty-nine.  The  smaller  number  has  the
greater  probability,  since  the  defeat  that  he  brought  on
himself  by  his  wanton  challenge  of  Jehoash  of  Israel
best  explains  the  conspiracy  against  him  (2  K.  14  19/  ),
and  he  would  therefore  hardly  survive  his  conqueror,
but  much  more  probably  meet  his  death  by  assassination
at  Lachish  not  long  after  790  R.c.  (cp  also  St.  (J  17,
I559).  From  the  death  of  Amaziah  to  734  reigned
Azariah  and  Jotham.  To  discover  the  boundary  between
the  two,  we  must  bear  in  mind  the  Assyrian  inscriptions
already  mentioned,  which  apparently  represent  Azariah
as  still  reigning  in  the  years  742-740,  and  nmst  keep  in
view  that  Isai.ah,  who  cannot  be  thought  of  as  an  old
man  when  Sennacherib  marched  against  Jerusalem  in
the  year  701,  receiv^ed  his  prophetic  call  in  the  year  of
the  death  of  Uzziah  (Isa.  61).  Accordingly,  we  cannot
be  far  wrong  in  assigning  the  death  of  Azariah  and  the
accession  of  Jotham  as  sole  ruler  to  740  B.C.  More
than  this  cannot  be  made  out  with  the  help  of  the
materials  at  our  disposal  up  to  the  present  time.

If  now  the  year  of  the  conquest  of  Samaria  (721  B.C. )
were  fixed  with  certainty  according  to  the  year  of  the
king  then  reigning  in  Judah,  this  would
appear  the  next  resting-point  after  734  B.C.
The  data  of  the  O'V  do  not  agree,  how-
ever, and  none  of  them  is  to  be  relied  upon.  This
is  true  even  of  the  datum  in  2  K.  18 13,  lately  much
favoured  by  critics,  that  Sennacherib's  expedition  against
Palestine  in  the  year  701  B.C.  was  in  the  fourteenth
year  of  Hezekiah  (so  We.  /D'/'  ['75]  p.  635^  ;  Kamph.
Die  Chrotiol.  der  Hebr.  Kdnige  ['83  |  p.  28  ;  Guthe,  Das
ZukiinftsbUd  des  Jes.  ['85]  p.  37,  and  St.  (7^7, 1 606  /  ).
In  order  to  maintain  the  datum,  it  is  not  enough  to  say,
■  The  people  of  Judah  are  more  likely  to  have  preserved
the  year  of  Hezekiah  in  which  their  whole  land  was  laid
waste  and  their  capital,  Jerusalem,  escaped  destruction
only  through  enduring  the  direst  distress,  than  to  have
preserved  the  year  of  Hezekiah  in  which  Samaria  fell.'
The  unusual  (cp  2K.  I819)  prefixing  of  the  numeral
before  r,ia  (cp  Duhm,  Jesaja,  235)  of  itself  indicates  a
later  origin,  and  this  is  confirmed  by  what  we  have  already
found  as  to  these  chronological  data  not  belonging  to
the  original  narrative.  The  number  fourteen  is  based,
not  upon  historical  facts,  but  upon  an  exegetical  inference
from  Is.  385,  and  a  consideration  of  the  twenty-nine
years  traditionally  assigned  to  Hezekiah,  and  must  there-
fore rank  simply  with  the  scribe's  note  Am.  1 1  :  '  two
years  before  the  earthquake. '  ^

Kven  when  we  come  to  the  seventh  century,  the
expectation  that  at  least  the  death  of  Josiah  in  the  battle
of  Megiddo  would  admit  of  being  dated  with  complete
accuracy  by  material  from  inscriptions  is  not  fulfilled.
From Egyptian  chronology, which does not mention

1  This  is  forcibly  urged  by  Kau.  (cp.  Kamph.  op.  cit.  94)  and
ha.s  received  the  assent  of  Duhm  {I.e.)  and  Cheyne  (Jntr.  Is.  218).

795


36.  734-686
B.C.


CHRONOLOGY

the  date  of  the  battle,  we  gather  only  that  it  must  have
been  after  610  B.C. ,  since  the  conqueror,  Necho  II.,  did
not  begin  to  reign  till  that  year.  There  is,  therefore,
nothing  left  but  to  take  as  our  fixed  point  the  conquest
of  Jerusalem  in  the  nineteenth  year  of  Nebuchadrezzar
— i.e.,  586  B.C.  (2  K.  253  8).  For  the  intervening  time
we  have  to  take  into  consideration,  besides  the  death  of
Josiah,  the  data  supplied  by  Assyriology,  which  place
Sennacherib's  expedition  against  Hezekiah  in  701  B.C.
and  imply  Manasseh's  being  king  of  Judah  in  the  years
681-667  (cp  Schr.  KAT(2),  p.  466).

For  the  whole  time  from  the  death  of  Jotham  to  the
conquest  of  Jerusalem,  tradition  requires  155  years  of
reign,  whilst  from  734  B.C.,  when  Ahaz  was  already
seated  on  the  throne  of  Jerusalem — which  year,  if  not
that  of  his  accession,  must  have  been  at  least  the  first
of  his  reign — to  586  B.C.,  we  have  only  148,  or,  since
we  may  reckon  also  the  year  734  B.C.,  149  years.  The
smallness  of  the  difference  of  seven  years,  however,
shows  that  we  have  now  to  do  with  a  better  tradition.
Where  the  mistake  lies  we  cannot  tell  beforehand.  All
we  can  say  is  that  it  is  not  to  be  sought  between  the
death  of  Josiah  and  the  fall  of  Jerusalem,  since  for  this
interval  twenty-two  years  are  required  by  tradition,  and
this  agrees  with  our  datum  that  Josiah  must  have  died
shortly  after  610  B.C.

Let  us  see  whether  another  cardinal  point  can  be
found.  In  701  Hezekiah  was  reigning  in  Jerusalem.
When  it  was  that  he  came  to  the  throne,  whether
before  or  after  the  fall  of  Samaria  (721  B.C.),  is  the
question.  In  Is.  1 428  we  have  an  oracle  against  Philistia,
dated  from  the  year  of  the  death  of  king  Ahaz, — a
chronological  note  which,  like  Is.  61,  may  have  import-
ance, if  the  oracle  really  belongs  to  Isaiah.  Winckler
and  Cheyne  [but  cp  Isaiah,  SDOT,  Addenda^  regard
it  as  possible  that  the  oracle  may  refer  to  agitation
in  Syria  and  Palestine,  in  which  the  Philistines  shared,
on  the  accession  of  Sargon  (721  B.C.),  when  Hanun,
king  of  (Jaza,  induced  them  to  rebel,  in  reliance  on  the
help  of  Sib'e,  one  of  the  Egyptian  petty  kings  (cp  above
on  Sabaka,  Sab'i,  So',  Seweh,  §  21).  On  this  theory-
the  death  of  ,'\haz  would  have  to  be  set  down  about
the  year  720  B.C.  As,  however,  the  authenticity  of
the  oracle  is  not  certain, — in  fact  hardly  probable  (cp
Duhm,  who  even  conjectures  that  originally  there  may
have  stood,  instead  of  Ahaz,  the  name  of  the  second
last  Persian  king.  Arses  [  =  .\rogos]) — it  is  not  safe  to
take  it  as  fixing  the  death-j-ear  of  Ahaz.  Of  greater
value  is  the  section  relating  to  the  embassy  of  Merodach-
Baladan  of  Babylon  to  Hezekiah  (2  K.  20  =  Is.  39).
Merodach-Baladan  was  king  of  Babylon  from  721  to
710.  When,  later,  he  attempted  to  recover  his
position,  he  held  Babylon  for  so  short  a  time  that  an
embassy  to  the  west  would  be  impossible.  Thus,
Merodach-Baladan  must  have  sought  relations  with
Hezekiah  between  721  and  709.  The  beginning  of  the
reign  of  Merodach-Baladan,  when  in  the  year  721
or  720  he  obtained  possession  of  Babylon  and  held  it
against  Sargon,  commends  itself  as  the  point  of  time
most  suitable.  After  the  battle  of  Diir-ilu,  which  both
parties  regarded  as  a  victory  for  themselves,  it  must
have  seemed  natural  to  hope  that  the  overthrow  of  tl.e
Assyrian  kingdom  would  be  possible,  if  the  west  joined
in  the  attack.  Moreover,  Sargon  once  describes  himself
(Nimrud  inscr. ,  1  8)  as  '  the  subduer  of  Judah,'  ^  which
seems  to  mean  that,  on  the  suppression  of  the  revolt  in
Philistia,  Hezekiah  resumed  the  payment  of  the  tribute
that  had  been  imposed.  In  view  of  this,  Winckler  seems
to  be  justified  in  placing  the  appearance  of  the  embassy
of  Merodach-Baladan  before  Hezekiah  in  the  year  720
or  719.  Approximately,  then,  the  year  721  may  be
regarded  as  assured  for  the  year  of  the  death  of  .Ahaz.

The  first  year  of  Hezekiah's  reign  is  thus  720  B.C.

rather  than  728  (Kau. ),  or  714  (We.  and  others). Tlie

discrepancy  of  four  years,  which  is  all  that  now  remains

1  For  fuller  details  see  Isaiah,  i.  §  6,  Sargon.

796


CHRONOLOGY


TABLE  V. — ^Tabular  Survey  :  Death  of  Solomon  to  Herod  the  Great.


Certain
Dates.

Probiible
Dates.

ISRABI-

JUOAH.

circ.  930

ist  year  of  Jeroboam.

ist  year  of  Bahoboam.

93«>-8S4

Reigns  of  Jeroboam,  Nadab,  Baatha,  EUh.  Zimri.
Omrl,  part  of  reign  of  Ahab.

Keigns  of  Rehoboam,  Abljah,  Ala,  part  of  reign  of

854

Ahab  at  battle  of  l^arkar.

854-843

Jeboram.

Rest  of  reign  of  Jehoshaphat :  reigns  of  Johoram
and  Abazlah.

84a

Death  of  Jehoram  (at  the  hands  of  Jehu). Tribute  of
Jehu  to  Shalmancser  11.

Death  of  Ahaziah  (at  the  hands  of  Jehu).

738

841

lil

797

743

742

739

736

ist  year  of  JehU  (841-815).

ist  year  of  Jehoahaz  (814-798).
1st  year  of  Johoash  (797-7<'3)-

ist  year  of  Jeroboam  n.  (782-743).

Zecharlah,  Shallum.

ist  year  Menahem  (742-737)-

Tribute  of  Menahem  to  Tlglath-plleser  IH.
Pekahlah.

ist  year  of  Athallah  (841-836).
ist  year  of  Jehoash  (835-796).

ist  year  of  Azarlah  (789-740).

ist  year  Jotham  (739-734)-

734
732
721

701

604

5B6

735
733
729

720

til

607

597
596

ist  year  of  Pekah  (735-730)-

ist  year  of  Hoshea  (729-721).

Tribute  of  Ahaz  to  Tlglath-plleser.

ist  year  of  AhaZ  (733-721).

Ahaz  does  homage  to  Tiglath-pileser  at  Damascus.

ist  year  of  Hezeklah  (720-693). Embassy  of  Merodach-baladan  from  Babylon.

.Sennacherib's  army  before  Jerusalem.

ist  year  of  Manasseh  (692-639).

ist  year  of  Amon  (638).

ist  year  of  Josiah  (637-608).

liaitle  of  Megiddo. Jehoahaz,  king.

ist  year  of  Jeholaklm  (6r,7 597).

ist  year  of  Nebuchadrezzar  (604-562).
Jehoiachin,  kinp.
ist  year  of  Zedeklah  (596-586).
FALL  OF  JERUSALEM.

Dates.

The  more  important  dates  of  the  succeeding  centuries.

561 i  ist  year  of  Evil -Merodach(56i-56o). Liberator  of  Jehoiachin  from  prison.
538 1  ist  year  of  Cyrus  (538-53°)-
S2I ist  year  of  DarlUS  I.  (521-486).
515 Completion  of  biiildinR  of  second  temple.
464 1st  year  of  Artaxerxes  I.  (464-424).

445 ist  Visit  Of  Nehemlah  to  Jerusalem. Building  of  city-wall.
433 Return  of  Ncli.iniah.
circ.  432 2.Ki  Visit  Of  Nehemiah  to  Jerusalem. On  the  advent  of  Ezra  and  the  Introduction  of  the  law  see  above,  §  14-
332 ;  End  of  Persian  Power  :  Alexander  the  Great.

320
312
.97^

167

165

160

143
i42-«35
134-104

103
102-76
75-67
66-63

62-40

40

37-4  B.C.

Be^inninu  of  Ptolemaic  dominion  in  Palestine,  which  continued  with  short  interruptions  till  198.
lic^itinii,;;  of  the  Era  of  the  .Seleucidae.

Palestine  under  Syrian  dominion.

Antlochus  IV. Epiphanes.

Insurrection  of  Mattathlas  the  [.riest,  of  Modein  (ti66).

Reintrodtution  of  regular  service  in  the  temple.

Judas  Maccabaeus  (166-160)  falls  in  battle  against  Bacchides.

Kxecutioii  of  Jonathan  (kader  of  M.-\ccabean  revolt  since  160X

Simon  Hi>;h-priest  and  Prlnoe.

Hyrcanus  I.

Arlstobulus  I.  kini;.

Jannseus.

Alexandra.

Hyrcanus  II.  and  Arlstobulus  11. 1

Taking  of  Jerusalem  by  Pompoy. P.ilestine  a  part  of  the  Roman  Province  of  Syria.

Hyrcanus  II.  under  Roman  sovereignty.

Invasion  of  I'arthians. AntlgOnUS  made  king  (40-37)-

Herod  the  Great.

1  On  the  dates  of  the  Maccabees  cp  We.  //(;(2),  229,  n.  2 ;  and  ed.  263,  n.  3 ;  3rd  ed.  275,  n.  2.
797  798


38.  Summary
of  Results.


chronology
importance.


events  in  the  primitive  jieriod  it  will  txi
possible  to  draw  conclusions  with  regard
to  the  influence  of  one  event  upon  another ;
the  rapidity  of  the  historical  development  will  enable
us  to  measure  the  power  of  the  original  impulse  ;
and  only  when  the  events  have  received  their  place  in
contemporary  history  can  they  be  fully  understood.

799


CHRONOLOGY

between  the  sum  of  the  years  of  reign  from  the  death  of
.Ahaz  to  the  conciuest  of  Jerusalcn),  and  the  interval  720-
586  B.C. — i.e.,  l)etwoen  1 39  years  of  reign  and  135  actual
vears — cannot  be  removed  otherwise  than  by  shortening
the  reign  of  one  or  more  of  the  kings.  'Ihe  account  of
the  closing  portion  of  the  line  of  kings  has  already  IxMsn
found  to  merit  our  confidence.  The  shortening  must  j
therefore  l)e  undertaken  somewhere  near  the  Ijcginning
of  the  line  of  kings  from  Hezekiah  to  Josiah.  The  most
obvious  course  is  to  reduce  the  long  reign  of  Manasseh
from  fifty-five  years  to  fifty-one  ( VV'e. .  indeed,  assigns  him
only  forty-five).  This,  however,  may  seem  arbitrary,  and
it  will  be  simpler  as  well  as  less  violent  to  divide  the
shortening  among  all  the  four  reigns.  If,  that  is  to  say,
in  the  case  of  the  years  of  reign  of  the  kings  from
Hezekiah  to  Josiah,  tradition  included  (according  to
popular  practice)  the  year  of  accession  and  the  year  of
death,  we  may  reduce  the  numbers  for  Hezekiah,
Manasseh,  Anion,  and  Josiah  by  one  each,  and  assign  j
them  twenty-eight,  fifty-four,  one,  and  thirty  resjxjctively.
Thus  we  get  the  following  series  : — Hezekiah  720-693  i
(28  years),  Manasseh  692-639  (54  years),  Anion  638  (i  |
year),  Josiah  637-608  (30  years),  Jehoahaz  608  {\  year),
Jehoiakim  607-597  (n  years),  Jehoiachin  597  (|  year),  ;
and  Zedekiah  596-586  (11  years).  The  control  over  |
the  date  of  the  death  of  Josiah  from  Egyptian  history
which  is  to  a  certain  extent  possible  turns  out  to  be  not
unfavourable  to  our  results,  since  I'haraoh  Necho  II.
began  to  reign  in  610  B.C.,  and,  as  early  as  the  end  of
606,  or  tlie  beginning  of  605,  encountered  the  crown
prince  Nebuchadrezzar  at  Carcheniish  (cp,  on  the  date
of  this  battle  which,  in  Jer.  462,  is  inaccurately  assigned
to  the  fourth  year  of  Jehoiakim,  Winckler,  A  T  Untersuch.
81 ).  Hence  the  year  608  B.C.  for  the  battle  of  Megiddo
possesses  the  greatest  probability.  That,  among  the
numerous  dates  for  the  last  decades  of  the  kingdom
of  Judah  which  the  OT  furnishes,  little  inaccuracies,
such  as  that  in  the  passage  (Jer.  462)  just  cited,  appear,
is  intelligible  on  the  ground  (ajiart  from  others,  as,  e.g.,
in  the  case  of  Ezek.  332i)  of  their  being  the  result  of
later  calculation.  At  all  events,  these  variations  are  not
to  be  accounted  for,  with  Hommel  (GBA  755),  by  the
sui)position  that  the  Jews  reckoned  theyears  of  Nebuchad-
rezzar, as  well  as  those  of  their  own  kings,  from  the  day
on  which  they  ascended  the  throne  to  the  corresponding
day  in  the  following  year.  The  Jews,  in  adopting  the
exact  Babylonian  chronological  system,  and  applying  it
to  their  own  past  history,  did  not  mutilate  it  and  render
it  futile.

Keyond  the  points  already  referred  to  (§  13/.),  the

chronology  of  the  times  after  the  conquest  of  Jerusalem

...  in  586  B.C.  presents  no  difficulties  worth

■  mentioning. The C!anon of Ptolemy

■ ■  supplies an assured framework into

which  the  data  that  have  been  preserved  can  be  fitted

without  trouble.

The  tabular  sur\ey  on  the  preceding  page  gathers
together  the  dates  we  have  established.
At  the  end  is  appended  a  continuation
indicating the most important dates
down  to  the  last  century  B.C.  K.  M.


/?. NEW  TliSTAMENT.

The  chronology  of  the New  Testament  is  of  great
(subsidiary)  importance  for  the  study  of  the  origins  of
NT Christianity. From the order of the


CHRONOLOGY

Unfortunately,  the  task  is  attended  with  serious  diffi-
culty, the  causes  of  which  need  to  Ix;  brietly  descril)cd.
40  Difficulty  ^'^  "'*'  *'''^'  Christians  themselves  had
"'■  no  interest  in  chronology,  whether  with
reference  to  events  concerning  them  as  Christians,  or
with  reference  to  events  of  secular  history.  This  was
due  not  only  to  their  separation  from  the  world  and
their  limited  horizon,  but  also,  and  still  more,  to  their
sense  of  superiority  to  the  world  (Phil.  820),  which
seemed  to  them  already  in  process  of  dissolution  ( i  Cor.
731),  and  to  their  feeling  that  they  had  already  begun
to  live  in  eternity.  (2)  The  historical  traditions  of  the
Christians  were  formed  wholly  with  the  purpose  of
promoting  Christian  piety,  and  were  therefore  restricted
to  a  small  number  of  events,  the  choice  of  which  was
often,  as  it  were,  accidental,  and  the  arrangement  ac-
cording to  subject  rather  than  to  time.  Our  chrono-
logical interest  has,  accordingly,  to  be  satisfied  with
inferences  and  combinations  which  often  remain,  after
all,  very  problematical  ;  and  the  gai)s  in  the  traditions
prevent  us  from  constructing  anywhere  a  long  chrono-
logical sequence.  (3)  Of  at  least  a  part  of  the  traditions
the  historical  trustworthiness  is  subject  to  such  grave
doubt  that  we  can  venture  to  use  them  only  with  great
reserve,  if  at  all.  (4)  In  the  NT,  apart  from  some
vague  notices  in  the  I'ourth  Gosjiel,  the  only  writer  who
professedly  gives  chronological  data  is  the  author  of  the
Third  (Jospel  and  Acts.  He  gives  no  account,  however,
of  the  means  by  which  he  obtained  these  data.  We  are,
therefore,  unable  to  check  his  statements,  and  can  treat
them  only  as  hypotheses.  As  far  as  we  know,  the  old
Catholic  fathers — Irena;us,  Tertullian,  Clement  of  Alex-
andria, Julius  Africanus,  and  Hippolytus— were  the  first
to  make  chronological  calculations.  Whether  they
based  them  on  any  independent  tradition  or  limited
themselves  to  inferences  from  our  Gospels  is  uncertain  ;
the  latter  is  the  more  probable  view.  Their  data  can
receive  only  occasional  mention  here.i  (5)  It  has  not
yet  been  found  possible  to  give  exact  dates  to  certain
of  those  events  of  profane  history  which  come  into
question.  (6)  Further  difficulty  is  caused  by  the
complicated  nature  of  the  ancient  calendar,  and  by
the  different  usages  in  reckoning  time  and  in  beginning
the  year.  .Side  by  side  with  the  various  eras  we  have
various  methods  of  reckoning  by  the  years  of  reigning
monarchs.^

In  the  following  article  the  years  are  designated  by
the  numlx.TS  of  our  current  Dionysian  era,  on  the  origin
of  which  see  Ideler  i^Hamib.'l^t^ff.).  Hy  this  reckon-
ing the  year  i  B.C.  coincides  with  the  year  753  A.IJ.C.
and  the  year  i  a.d.  with  the  year  754  .x.L'.c.  The
years  are  treated  as  beginning  on  ist  Jan.,  as  was  the
case  according  to  the  Varronian  reckoning  in  the  period
under  consideration.

^  The  facts  in  detail  are  to  a  large  extent  given  by  Bratke  and
Hilgenfeld  in  articles  on  the  chronological  attempts  of  Hippo-
lytus in  ZU'T,  1892.

2  An  excellent  guide  through  this  labyrinth  is  Ideler's //aWii.
abridged  and  in  part  improved  in  his  Leiirb.  (see  below,  §  85).
The  most  important  tables  (of  the  Sun  and  moon,  and  of  eras)
are  brought  together  from  astronomical  works  by  (hinipach,
Hiilfsiiiittel  d.  rechnend.  Chronol.  1853.  See  further  liouchei,
Hemerologie,  1868;  E.  Muller  in  Pauly's  ReaUncyc.  d.  class.
Alt.  s.v.  Mra.;  Matzat,  Kdm.  Chronol.  two  vols.  1885-84.
Special  service  to  NT  Chronology  has  also  been  rendered  by
Clinton,  Fasti  Hellenic!,  1830,  2  ed.  1851  ;  Fasti  Komani,  1845-
50  ;  and  by  J.  Klein,  Fasti  Consulares,  Leipsic,  1881.  Further
bibliographical  notices,  and  many  original  contributions  to  the
subject,  are  to  be  found  in  Schiirer,  CJl',  i.  (1690),  where,  in  an
appendix,  is  given  a  table  (taken  from  Clinton)  of  parallel  years
by  Olympiads,  and  by  the  Seleucid,  Varronian,  and  Dionysian
eras.  The  third  appendix  discusses  the  months  of  the  Jewish
Calendar,  and  on  p.  630  /.  a  bibliography  of  the  very  large
literature  of  that  subject  is  to  be  found. — Important  for  the
chronology  of  the  NT  are  also  Wie.seler,  Chronol.  Syn.  der  vier
Evangelien,  1843;  Chronol.  d.  a/>.  Zeitalters,  1848;  and  art.
' Zeitrechnung '  in  PKE,  1866;  Reitr.  zur  richtigen  li'Hrdi-
gung  der  Kvang.  1869;  Lewin,  Fasti  Sacri,  1865;  Lightfoot
on  '  The  Chronology  of  St.  Paul's  Life  and  Epistles'  in  Biblical
Kssays  (posthumous),  215^  See  also  B.  W.  Bacon,  'A  New
Chronology  of  the  Acts,'  Kxposiior,  Feb.  1898.

800


CHRONOLOGY

41.  Parallel lAHLK  VI.— NT  : Parai.i.ki.  Da  n:  s
Dates.  FROM  Secular  History.

.Vl'GlST
TlMKRIli


HAK,  30  n.c.-ipth  AuR.  14  A.I).,  and
*  JK.  14  A.i>.-i6ih  M
L-.-4  in.,  lltroU  thf  Cfi-al.


^  A.I).,  atv
191(1  .\uK.  14  A.D.-ifilh  March  37  A.U.

^i>-iQ  11.C.,  JtmpU  begun  (Jon.  Ant.  xv.  11  i  ; see  Schdrer,


4  U.I.  6  A.I).,  Arthtlaus  cihnarch  of  JudKa,  Samaria,  and

Idiimea  (deposed  and  banished  to  Vieniic  in  (laul).
4  u.e.-39  A.U., Antipas, telrarch of (iaiilee and Pcra:a

(banished  to  Lugdunum). On  his  relations  10  Aretas

see  «  78.
4  H.c.  34  A.D.,' Philip, telrarch of the north-eastern

districts. (.After  his  death  his  tetrarchy  was  governed

UN  |>art  of  the  province  of  Syria.)
The  territory  of  .Xrchelaus  was  governed
6-41  A.  11. by  Kom.in  prtKunitors,  with their  roidence  in

Cicsiirea. Of  these  the  fifth,
a6-lK-giiining  of  36  a.d.,  was  Pontius  Pilate.

36,  Pilatf>K\\\  to  Rome  to  answer  for  his  conduct.

36,  I'assover,  V'iteliius  in  Jerusalem.

37,  Vitellius  made  war,  at  the  Hmjicror's  command,  on
Aretas  in  retaliation  for  the  lalter's  war  against  .VntiuiLs.
At  the  news  of  the  emperor's  death  hosiih:ics  sus(>ended.

Calicvla,  i6th  March  37-24th  Jan.  41.

37.  Uovd  Ag'ippa  I.  receives  from  C;iligiila  the  title  of
king,  with  the  telrarchies  of  Lysanias(see  Schurer,  1  600-
6oj)  aiid  of  I'hilip  ;  in

40,  also  that  kX  Antipas ;  and  in

41,  also  the  provinces  of  Juda:a  and  Samaria,  previously
governed  by  procurators.

Clai  I.ILs,  24th  Jan.  4i-i3th  Oct.  54.

44,  lJeathof/A/-t)ri'.-/AVv//>a/.  at  Ca.-s;irea.  Theterritor>-
of  .Vgrippa  after  his  death  governed  by  procurators.

ICxpulsion  o^JiU's  from  Roiiu.
Neko,  13th  Oct.  54-<)th  June  68.

52-56/60,'^  Antonius  J-elix )

56/60^2  (61?],  Porciiis  Festus  -  pro<urators  of  I'alesline.

^4,  19th  July,  Burning  0/ Rome.
66,  Outbreak  of  Jeiuisli  war.
Oalha,  Orno,  and  \iTKi.Lus,  gih  June  68-2oth  Dec.  69.
Ves»"Asi AN  — Proclaimed Kmperor ist  July  6y  in Kgypt  while
engaged in putting down the Jewish insurrecti.m.
Recognised  as  Emperor  in  the  Kast  at  once,  throughout
the  Empire  not  until  after  the  death  of  Vitellius. llied
23rd  June  79.
70,  Destruction  o/yerusahm.
Tl  rus,  79-81.

Do.MITIA.N, 81-96.

93-96,  J'ersecutions  <if  Christians,  esjiecially  in  Rome  and
Asia  Minor.
Nekva,  96-98.
Tkaja.s',  98-117.

111-113,  Correspondence  with  Plin^,  governor  of  Bithynia,
on  the  subject  of  the  Christians  in  that  province.
Hadrian,  117-138.

Insurrection  of  the  Jews  under  liar-kokheba.

Our  investij^ation  will  treat  the  problems  of  NT
itironology  in the  following  order  : the  clironolog}-  of

42  Plan  Of ''"-"  '''^^"  °^  •'*'^"'*  ^'^^  43-^3). H'^it  of' the
article '"'^^  '^^  '''^"'  ^^'^  ^4-80).  that  of  the  churches

in  Palestine  (§  8 1  /. ),  other  dates  (§  83/  ).
The  first  and  second  of  these  divisions  are  wholly
sei)arate  from  each  other.

I.  C'iiKON()i.(x;v  OK  THK  LiiK  OK  Jksus.— The
questions  here  relate  to  the  year  of  Jesus'  birth  '^  {%  57/: ).
the  year  of  his  public  appxsirance  (.§  47#).  his  age  at
his  entrance  upon  his  ministry  (§  43),  the  duration  of
his  mini.stry  (§  44/: ),  and  the  year  of  his  death  (§  ^o  ff. ).
I.  The  A^e  of  Jesus  at  his  liaptisw. —  \\  is  not
surprising that tradition is  meagre. In itself, as a

43  Baotism  ""-''^'-' ''^''-'  '^^  years, ttie  matter  hatl no
of  Jesus ''"^■''*-'^' '^or 'he early Christians. That

Jesus  was  a  man  of  mature  years  was
enough  : why  should  they  care  to  incjuire  how  long  he

1  Legates in Syria who had occasion to interfere in ^h«
government  of  Palestine  were  :
(i)  perhaps  at first  3 B.C.-2  B.C.,  and certainlv  I , •

later  6  A.D. -(at  latest)  1 1  a.i..  ' /  Q"""""^-

7  A.D.  Census  instituted  in  Juda^t  and  Samaria.
(2)35-39  A.I >.,  /,.  I'ite/lius.

'*  That  Felix  entered  on  his  office  in  52  (or  possibly  5.3)  and
that  Albinus  arrived  in  Palestine  at  latest  in  tbc  summer  of  62
are  directlv  attested  facts.  That  Festus  succeeded  Felix  in  60
or  56  is  only  inferred. See  below,  $  65/

*  On  the  day  of  his  birth,  for  determining  which  there  are  no
historical  data,  but  for  which  the  church,  after  much  vacillation,
finally  settled  on  25th  Dec,  see  Usener,  Rcl.-gesch.  Inters.
vol.  I.


26


801


CHRONOLOGY

1  had  livoil  quietly  at  Nazareth  ?  We  have  to  consider
only  twt)  jiassjiges.  ( 1 )  Jii.  857.  If  the  foolish  question.
I  '  Thou  art  not  yet  fifty  yejirs  old,  and  hast  thou  mxii
I  .Xbraham  ?  '  were  autlientic.  it  would  only  give  a  su|Jcrior
limit,  plainly  put  as  high  as  fxjssibie  on  the  ground  of
the  general  impression  from  Je.sus  s  ap|)earance.  From
this  no  inference  as  to  any  definite  iuiml)er  could  Ijc
drawn,  for  among  the  Jews  a  man  Ix-gan  to  l)e  elderly
at  fifty  years,  and  the  remark  would  merely  have  ine:iiit,
'  You  are  still  one  of  the  younger  men.'  If  the  (|uestioii
is  not  authentic,  it  either  te.stifies  to  the  impression  n)ade
by  the  account  of  Jesus  in  the  tradition,  that  he  wius  in
the  best  years  of  life  (cp  Nu.  43  39  824/  |.  or  else  the
half-century,  as  an  age  which  he  had  not  yet  .-ittained.  is
intended  to  form  an  ironical  contrast  to  the  many
centuries  from  .\braham  to  the  then  pres«-nt  time.  In
the  anci«-nt  church,  Irenieus  (ii. 'J'25)  is  the  only  writer
to  make  use  of  this  p.nssage  for  chronology  ;  he  remark.5
that  the  presbyters  in  Asia  .Minor  had  on  the  ground  of
it  ascrilx-tl  to  Jesus  an  age  of  forty  to  fifty  years.

(2)  Lk.  ;i23.  The  text  is  here  not  quite  certain,  and
the  sense  of  the  most  probable  reading  is  obscure.
(What  does  dpx^ficoi  mean?  In  the  Sin.  Syr.  it  is
omitted  from  the  translation. )  In  any  case,  the  presence
of  w(Tfl  { '  al)out ' )  forbids  us  to  use  the  number  as  if  it  were
e.xact.  It  merely  tells  us  that  Jesus  stood  in  the  Ugin-
ning  of  adult  manhood,  and  leaves  undecided  the
c|uestion  whether  he  had  just  entered  on  his  thirtieth  year
or  was  already  over  thirty.

.Moreover,  whether  the  numl)er  comes  from  actual
historical  recollection  at  all  is  made  uncertain  by  the
fact  that,  according  to  Nu.  4  3  39.  from  thirty  to  fifty  was
the  canonical  age  for  certain  ritual  acts.  It  is  signilicant
that  these  two  gosix;ls,  from  Asia  .Minor,  in  so  many
ix)ints  similar,  give  for  the  age  of  Jesus  in  these  two
pass;iges  the  two  limits  of  this  canonical  term  of  years.

2. V/ir  Length  of  Ihi-  Public  .Ministry  of  Jesus.  —The

evidence  here  points  on the  whole  to  one  year. The

44 Public ''^'^'^'^  years  '  in  the  jiarable  of  the  fig-trix-

Ministry  ^^'^'  ^'^^'  '"^*^  either  arbitrarily  chosen  to
•''  designate  a  short  period  or  are  to  be
coniKcted  with  the  fact  that  the  fig-tree  commonly  lx?ars
fruit  in  three  years  (for  the  opposite  view,  see  Wieseler,
.Synopsr.  202  Jf. ).  The  '  three  days  '  of  Lk.  I,'i32  e.xpress
by  a  [)roverbial  numlx-r  l)oth  brief  time  and  fi.xed  limit
(for  the  opposite  view,  Wei/.siicker,  Untersuchungen,
311).  From  Mark  and  Matthew  we  get  no  light,  be-
cause of  the  arrangement  of  the  material  by  subjects.
The  plucking  of  the  e.ars  in  .Mk.  223  may  indicate  th«
time  when  the  grain  was  ripe  ;  but  that  nmst  have  been
lx;twt"en  the  middle  of  .\pril  and  the  middle  of  June,
before  which  time  the  harvest  in  Galilee  is  not  endetl.
Thus,  if  the  incident  was  in  the  early  months  of  Jesus'
ministry,  it  does  not  imply  a  duration  of  more  than  one
year.  One  ye;\r  seems  to  have  been  the  idea  of  the  third
evangelist,  w  ho,  like  all  the  writers  of  the  second  century
except  Irenaus,  and  like  many  Fathers  of  the  third
century,  may  very  well  liave  understood  literally  the
quotation  from  Is.  61 1/.  which  he  puts(Lk.  4  19)  into
the  mouth  of  Jesus.

In  any  case,  a  place  can  l)e  fouiul  without  diflficuky
within  the  limits  of  one  year  for  the  entire  contents  of
the  .SynoiJtical  gospels,  while  to  fill  out  several  years
the  material  is  rather  meagre.  The  feeling,  shared  (for
insuince)  by  Beyschlag  {Lehen  Jesu,  1  133).  that  it  is
a  ■  violent  and  unnatural  prtx:ess '  to  crowd  the  whol«
development  into  the  space  of  one  year,  is  balanced  by
the  feeling  of  the  men  of  the  second  and  third  centuries.
F'.ven  repe;ited  visits  to  Jerusiilem,  if  the  Synoptical
gospels  really  imply  them,  .ire,  in  view  of  the  nearness
of  Galilee  to  Jerusalem  and  of  the  many  feasts  (cp  the
Ciospel  of  John),  easily  conceivable  within  one  year.
The  early  (Christian  lathers  were  not  tiisturlied  in  their
assumption  of  a  single  year  by  the  Fourth  Gospel  with
its  journeys  to  the  feasts.

In  the  Fourth  Gospel,  apart  from  64,  if  wc  accejjt  the
802


CHRONOLOGY

most  common  interpretation  of  ioprrj  (Jn.  5i)  as  mean-

_ . ing  Pentecost,  the  feasts  group  themselves

lf° J into the course  of  a  single  year: 2 13

"  ■  Passover  ;  5 1  Pentecost ;  7  2  Talx:rnacles  ;
IO22  Dedication;  11 55  Passover.  Irenaeus  alone
(ii.  223)  finds  three  passovers  mentioned  in  the  public
life  of  Jesus  ;  and,  since  he  takes  the  second  not  from  64
but  from  5 1,  he,  as  well  as  Origcn  (on  Jn.  43s
lom.  1339).  must  have  had  at  64  a  different  te.xt  from  any
known  to  us.  The  Alogi,  also,  according  to  Kpiphanius
[I her.  51 22),  found  mentioned  in  Jn.  only  a  passover
at  the  beginning  and  one  at  the  end  of  the  ministry.
I'ositive  ground  for  assuming  the  later  inter[X)lation  of
64  (which  could  well  have  lieen  suggested  by  the
substance  of  the  following  conversation)  may  1x3  found
in  the  designation  of  the  feast  there,  which  is  d.fferent
from  that  in  213  and  11 55,  a  designation  combining
(so  to  speak)  5i  and  72.  So  also  the  introductory
formula  ^v  U  i-y-^vs  ( '  was  at  hand  ' )  is  suitable  only
in  2 13  72  11 55.  where  a  journey  to  the  fe;xst,  which
does  not  here  come  in  question,  is  to  be  mentioned.

Moreover,  the  meagreness  of  the  narrative  in  Jn.
is  much  more  comprehensible  if  the  writer  thought  of
the  whole  ministry  as  included  between  two  passovers.
He  can  hardly  have  regarded  the  narrative  in  chaps.  3-5,
and  again  that  in  chaps.  7-11.  as  sufficient  to  fill  out  in
each  case  a  whole  year.  Otherwise,  if  the  saying  with
reference  to  the  harvest  (Jn.  435)  is  to  be  regarded  as
anything  more  than  a  proverbial  phrase  (u.sed  for
the  purpose  of  the  figure  which  Jesus  is  employing)
there  would  be  a  period  of  nine  months  for  which  no-
thing would  be  told  but  the  conversation  with  Nicodemus
and  the  bajnizing  work  of  the  disciples,  and  a  stay
of  si.x  months  in  (lalilee  for  which  we  should  have
nothing  but  chap.  6.  If,  on  the  other
y  ■  hand,  only  one  year  elapsed  from  the
purification  of  the  temple  to  the  destruction  of  the
'temple  of  his  body,'  we  should  have:  2 13-5 1,  only
fifty  days  ;  5i-72,  perhaps  127  days  ;  72-10 22,  perhaps
fifty-eight  days;  1022-121,  perhaps  119  days.  In
reality,  however,  even  this  year  will  have  to  he
shortened  somewhat  at  the  beginning  ;  for  the  purifica-
tion of  the  temple,  which  the  Synoptists  likewise  connect
with  a  [jassover  (but  with  the  last  one),  cannot  have
happened  twice,  and,  while  it  is  incomi)rehensible  at
the  beginning,  it  cannot  be  spared  at  the  end  of  the
ministry.  Whether,  then,  the  baptism  of  Jesus  was
before  a  passover,  or  whether  the  journey  to  John
in  the  wilderness  may  have  followed  a  journey  to  the
passover  in  Jerusalem,  it  is  wholly  impossible  to  decide.
In  the  latter  case  the  complete  absence  from  the
narrative  of  the  baptism  of  all  recollection  of  such  a
connection  would  be  singular  ;  in  the  former  it  would
be  strange  that  Jesus  stayed  away  from  the  passover  in
Jerusalem.  On  the  other  hand,  since  the  forty  days  of
the  temptation  are  surely  a  round  number  drawn  from
OT  analogies,  they  may  safely  Ix:  somewhat  reduced  ;
and  the  walk  with  the  disciples  through  the  ripe  corn-
fields in  Cialilee  on  the  sabbath  is  then  chronologically
quite  possible,  even  if  the  baptism  was  not  until
immediately  after  the  passover.

3. T/ie  Year  of  the  Public  Appearance  of  Jesus.— {\)

In Lk.  3i  / we have, as the last of  Lk.'s several

„. . chronological  notes ( 1  5  26  2  i  /  ), a

notice  of  the  date  of  the  public  appear-

^^Lk^T/^' •'^"^^ °'" ^^^'^ li^M^tist. This notice  is

■  '  ''  clearly  the  product  of  careful  investiga-
tion, and  it  is  extremely  unlikely  that  the  evangelist
would  have  taken  so  much  pains  about  fixing  this  date
if  he  had  not  supposed  himself  to  be  at  the  same  time
fi.xing  the  year  (for  the  Christian,  the  only  year  of  real
importance  in  the  history  of  the  world)  of  at  least  the
beginning  of  the  Messiah's  ministry,  which  last,  together
with  the  baptism  of  Jesus,  Lk.  regarded,  as  appears
from  the  whole  tenor  of  his  narrative,  as  the  immediate
consequence  of  the  appearance  of  the  Baptist. WTiether

803


CHRONOLOGY

he  was  right  in  this  .short  allowance  of  time  for  the
preaching  of  the  Baptist  we  need  not  decide ;  if
the  ministry  of  the  Baptist  really  did  last  longer,  it  is
easily  comprehensible  that  the  previous  time  should  have
escajjed  his  knowledge.  What  year,  then,  does  Lk.
mean  ?  Following  previous  writers  on  the  life  of  Jesus.
B.  Weiss  and  Beyschlag  have  taken  as  the  starting-
point  for  Lk.'s  reckoning  the  year  12  A. D. ,  in  which
Tiberius  was  made  co-regent  with  Augustus.  There
is  no  proof,  however,  that  such  a  method  of  reckoning
was  ever  used.  Neither  the  coins,  to  which  Wieseler '
appealed,  nor  the  great  dignity  of  Tiberius,  adduced  by
Schegg,'-^  which  is  in  any  case  to  be  ascribed  to  flatterers,
can  establish  this  hyjx>thesis  ;  and  we  shall  have  to  take
the  death  of  Augustus  as  the  starting-point.  Now,
Mommsen*  has  proved  that  until  the  time  of  Nerva
the  reckoning  usually  employed  was  by  consuls,  but
that  when  for  any  rea.son  a  reckoning  by  the  years  of
the  emjieror's  reign  was  desirable,  the  years  were
counted  from  the  exact  date  of  the  beginning  of  the
reign.'*  Accordingly,  Lk.  njust  have  reckoned  the  years
of  Tiberius  as  Ijeginning  with  19th  August,  14  A. D.*
The  fifteenth  year  ran  from  19th  August  28  A.  D. ,
to  i8th  August,  29  .\.u.  Although  we  cannot  control
the  sources  from  which  Lk.  derived  his  information,'*
it  is  plain  from  the  table  of  dates  given  above  that  the
notices  in  Lk.  3 1  do  not  contradict  one  another,  and  we
have  no  reason  to  doubt  Lk.'s  information.  We  say
this  in  spite  of  the  fact  that  in  one  point  he  shows
himself  not  perfectly  well-versed  in  Jewish  affairs  :  the
Roman  custom  of  having  two  consuls  has  perhaps  led
him  to  misinterpret  the  fact  that  in  the  time  of  the
high-priest  Caiaphas  (from  about  18  A.D.  to  Easter
36  A.u. ),  the  latter's  father-in-law,  Annas,  who  had
been  high  priest  in  6-15  A.n. ,  was  the  real  leader  of  the
Sanhedrim.  Lk.  has  taken  this  to  mean  that  the  two
were  high  priests  at  the  same  time  (cp  the  same  error  in
Acts  4  6).

(2)  In  Jn.  220,  forty-six  years  are  said  to  have  elapsed
from  the  beginning  of  the  building  of  the  temple  to  the
beginning  of  Jesus' ministry  and  the


48.  The  temple.


cleansing  of  the  temple. If  the  forty-


six  years  are  treated  as  already  past,  this  brings  us  to
A.D.  28.  Everything,  however,  is  here  uncertain — the
position  of  the  cleansing  of  the  temple  at  the  lx;gin-
niiig  of  the  ministry,  and  the  authenticity  of  the
conversation,  as  well  as  the  evangelist's  method  of
reckoning  (on  the  supposition  that  the  number  comes
from  him).^

(3) The public appearance of Jesus was con-

1  Beitr.  190-92.

2  Todesjahr  lies  Konigs  Herodes  und  Todesjahrjesu  Christ i,
18S2.  pp.  61-63.

3  Das  romisch-germanische  Herrscherjahr '  in  Neues  Archiv
der  Geselhcha/t  fiir  alterc  deutsche  Gesihichtikunde,  1890,
pp.  54-65.

*  The  imperial  era  introduced  by  Nerva,  which  took  as  a
basis  the  tnbunician  year  beginning  with  loth  December,  the
tribunician  ycir  in  wliich  the  emperor  ascended  the  throne
counting  as  the  first  ot"  his  reign,  did  not  actually  come  into
common  use  until  the  time  of  Trajan.

8  The  method  of  reckoning  the  years  of  the  emperor's
reign  (namely  beginning  with  ist  Tishri  766  A.u.c.)  represented
by  Gumpach  {I.e.  93)  as  having  been  the  universal  custom,
according  to  which  he  makes  the  fifteenth  ye.ir  of  Tiberius
begin  with  ist  Ti.shri  27  A.D.,  no  one  besides  himself  has
ventured  to  accept.

6  Keim  assumed,  without  any  foundation,  that  Lk.  had
Josephus  {.A  nt.  xviii.  3  ^)  before  him,  and  th.-it  he  supposed  the  two
revolutions  there  mentioned  as  occurring  in  the  procuratorship
of  Pontius  Pilate,  which  began  in  the  twelfth  year  of  Tiberiu.s,
to  have  been  in  the  thirteenth  and  fourteenth  years  of  Tiberiiis,
and  so  hit  on  the  fifteenth  vear  for  the  Baptist.  This  is,
however,  in  contradiction  witii  the  fact  of  the  large  number
of  single  notices  in  Lk.  3  i,  which  implies  careful  investigation  ;
and  is  in  itself  impossible,  since  Josephus  first  mentions  the
Baptist  in  xviii.  62,  and  has  already  relate*!  the  death  of  Philip,
which  happened  so  late  as  the  twentieth  year  of  Tiberius.

7  Has  the  evangelist  perhaps  used  Nerva's  method  of
reckoning?  That  yields  the  year  28  A.D.  On  the  different
interpretations  of  the  number,  sec  Sevin,  Chronol.  Jesu^),  1874,
pp.  11-13.

804


CHRONOLOGY

tcm|xinuicou.s  with  the  imprisonment  of  tlie  liaptist
M  Th«  Rftnki.t  ( "^k.  1  M  -  Ml.  4  ..  ;  Mk.  6  .7/  =  Mt.
49.  The  Baptist, j^^^. ^^ Lk.  3  .S-^,). Jesus  was

baptized  shortly  before  that  (Mk.  lu/.  and  parallels).
and  the  e.\ccution  of  the  liaptist  happened  in  the  course
of  Jesus'  public  ministry  (Lk.  7i8/.  =  Mt.  11  a/.  ;  Mk.
()i9-a9=  Mt.  Us-xa  ;  with  Mk.  614-16=  Lk.  97-9=  Mt.

The  execuliuii  is  related  also  by  Joscphus  (.J/i/.  xviii.  5  i/".),
who  docs  not  nive  the  c.vact  date,  but  is  led  to  mciitioti  the  matter
in  coniicctiun  with  the  defeat  of  Antijias  hy  Arctas  (in  the
summer  or  autumn  of  36  A.U.),  which  the  nation  believed  to  l>c
a  judgment  of  (iod  fur  the  murder  of  John.  Arctas's  reasons
for  making  the  war  are  said  to  have  been  two  :  (1)  the  divorce
of  his  daughter  by  Antipas  in  order  that  the  latter  might  marry
Herodias;  (2)  boundary  disputes.  From  this  K.eim,  Holtzm.tnn,
Hausrath,  Schenkel,  and  Sevin  have  inferred  that  this  divorce,
the  rebuke  of  which  by  John  led,  according  to  the  Synoptists,
to  John's  death,  must  have  been  not  lonj;  Iwfore  36  a.d.  A
judgment  of  Clod,  however,  may  well  be  delayed  for  six  years,
provided  the  crime  which  the  people  believe  to  be  punished
by  it  is  not  forgotten  ;  whilst  a  favourable  moment  for  executing
human  vengeance  does  not  always  arrive  immediately.  More-
over, it  appears  that  boundary  disputes  were  fuially  needed  to
bring  about  the  actual  lontlict.l

From  this  war,  therefore,  we  can  draw  no  inferences  about  the
date  of  the  l!a|jti-ii's  martyrdom.  Aa  to  the  marriage  itself,
there  is,  in  the  tirst  place,  no  reason  to  doubt  the  synoptical
tradition  that  the  baptist's  courage  occasioned  Iiis  imprison-
ment, riie  account  of  Josephus  neither  excludes  the  assumption
tliat  the  tetrarch  waited  for  a  good  pretext  Ijcore  arresting
John  nor  makes  it  imixjssible  that  his  arrest  and  execution
should  have  liecn  separated  by  a  short  imprisonment  (cp  Mk.
6  20 ;  Mt.  1 1  2).  That  Herodias's  daughter  w.-is  too  old  to  d.ince
at  the  feast  is  shown  by  A.  von  Clutschmid  (Literarisclus
Centralblatt,  1874,  p.  522)  to  l>e  wholly  undemonstrable,  and  a
banquet  at  M.ichaerus  is  not  inconceivable.  That,  according  to
Josepiius,  Macharnis  should  have  been  at  one  time  in  the
possession  of  -Gretas  and  shortly  afterwards  in  that  of  Antipas,
we  cannot  indeed  explain  (cp  Schiirer,  I  365)  ;  but  since  Josepluis
finds  no  difficulty  in  it,  it  has  no  force  as  an  argument.  Since,  I
however,  we  cannot  fix  the  date  of  the  marriage,  the  whole  1
matter  does  not  help  us  much, 2  and  we  can  only  say  that  there  '
is  no  sufficient  evidence  that  the  journey  to  Rome,  on  which
Antipas  made  the  acquaintance  of  his  brother's  wife,  and  liis
return  to  the  tctrarchy,  >oon  after  which  the  marriage  occurred,
were  not  between  27  and  30  A.l).

The  history  of  the  Baptist  presents,  therefore,  no
insujierable  obstacle  to  the  view  that  the  fifteenth  year
of  Tilxjrius  =  29  A.D.

4. The  VfLir  of  Jesus' Death. — Since  the  ci^cifi.xion

_-  T -j-^*!. certainly liapwned under Pontius

60.  Jesus  death,  j,;,^,^  'j^^  ^^^^^^^ p^^^^,^,^  ^,^^^. .^ ,

36  A.D. .  the  latest  35  A.o.

The complete publicity of Jesus' death and its
character as  a civil event, its well-understood im- 1
portance  as  the  starting-point  of  Christianity,  its  unique i
impressiveness, and its connection with the Jewish ;
passover, must have m.ade it a chief  object  of the ]
awakeiiinsj  chronological  interest  of  the  early  Christians,
and  at  the  same  time  have  given  ground  for  Ixilieving j
that  the  date  could  be  fixed  with  reasonable  certainty.
Bl Tk' ^^^ "^'^ suggests that probably the
math  d chronological interest of the third '
Evangelist (Lk.  3i  /. )  was  engaged  as :
little for the first public  appearance  of  Jesus  as  for
that  of  the  Baptist : that  it  was  directed  towards  the
date  of  the  Lord's  death. He  prefcrreil,  however,  not  to
interrupt  his  narrative  of  the  Passion  by  a  chronological
notice,  and  therefore  worked  back  from  the  date  of  the
cnicifixion  to  the  date  of  the  beginning  of  Jesus'  ministry,
and  so  to  that  of  the  beginning  of  the  ministry  of  the
Baptist. This  is  confirmed  by  the  fact  that  the  date  in
Lk.  3i/  is,  with  the  exception  of  the  'acceptable  year
of  the  Lord'  in  1 19,  the  last  date  that  Lk.  gives. If,
as  we  have  concluded  above,  Lk. really  had  a  whole
year  in  mind,  he  must  have  put  the  death  of  Jesus  into
the  next  (the  sixteenth)  year  of  Tiberius — that  is,  at  the
passover  of  30  a.d.=»

\  Sec  the  account,  with  criticism,  of  Keim's  theory  and  of
Wieseler's  objeciinns  to  it,  in  Schiirer,  1  368 ./C

^  Clemen,  Chron.  iter  ^aul.  BrUfe,  thinks  otherwise,  and
reckons  out  33  a.d.  ;  but  hi>  argument  is  wholly  inconclusive.

»  A  different  view  is  held  by  Hratke,  Sttui.  it.  h'rit.,  1892,
who  holds  that I.k. regarded  the  fifteenth  year  of  Tiberius  as

805


62.  Pilate.


CHRONOLOGY

That  Lk.  had  worked  back  one  year  from  the  sixteenth  ye«r
of  I  iberius  wxs  the  view  of  Julius  Africanus.'  On  the  other
hand,  C:iemcnt  of  .\lcxandria  took  Lk.'»  fifteenth  year  of
Tiberius  .-us  the  year  of  Jesus'  death  ;  as  did  probably  'I'ertullian,
whose  statement  that  Christ  was  crucified  in  the  consulate  of
the  two  liemini  (2(^  A.D.)  doubtless  rests  on  Lk.  'A  i /.,  and  wa.s
perhaps  made  on  purpose  to  avoid  confuhion  from  the  later
method  of  reckoning  (cp  above,  i  47)  whicli  would  have  led
him  to  the  year  38  A.o.  The  statement  in  the  received  text  of
Tertullian  that  Jesus  revealed  himself '  anno  xii.  Tibcrii  Ca»aris '
cannot  be  harmonised  with  Terlullian's  other  notices,  and  looks
like  an  ancient  correction  intended  to  combine  the  statement  in
the  text  th.it  Jesus  was  crucified  in  the  fifteenth  year  of  1  iberius
with  the  later  tr.-iditional  view  of  a  three-year  ministry.

{b)  The  theory  explaining  the  conduct  of  Pilate  at
the  trial  of  Jesus  by  the  censure  rftci\cd  from  Rome
Ix-'tween  31  and  33  A.u.  lacks  all  founda-
tion ;  and  so  does  the  theory  (Sevin,  p.
135)  that  the  hostility  lietween  Pilate  and  Hero<l  (Lk.
2312)  was  possible  only  after  the  complaint  against
Pilate  (as  to  the  date  of  the  complaint,  cp  SchUrer
I411),  in  which  Antipas  had  a  share.  Hostility  l)etwe<-n
the  Roman  procurator  and  Herod's  heir  must  have  been
the  rule,  not  the  exception.

(< )  If,  in  spite  of  what  has  been  said  atove,  the
fourth  I'.vangelist  counted  three  passovers  in  the  public

63  Temple  '"'^''"."'^  •'"""^  (cp  al>ove,  §  45),  and  the
^  '  jjeriod  of  forty-six  years  front  the  Ix*-
ginning  of  the  building  of  the  tem|jle  is  to  l)e  taken
seriously  (cp  §  48),  his  chronology  also  would  yield  the
year  30  for  the  death  of  Jesus.

((/)  A final decision cannot be reachetl from the

Jewish  Calendar. On  the  one  hand,  the  .Synoptists  |)ut

K4 n f ^^^  crucifixion  on  Friday,  the  15th  Nisan,

Crucifixion.  ,^.5^^ ^,^  ._,^^^ ^^  ^p^_ y, ^^^  ^,^^  ^^j^^^

hand,  although  the  astronomical  new  moons  have  lieen
computed  for  the  possible  years  with  a  diflerence  of  but
a  few  minutes  between  the  computation  of  Wurms  and
that  of  Outiemans,  and  the  days  of  the  week  can  Ix;
y ■  h '^O""^'''  difficulty is caused by various


Calendar.


irregularities in the Jewish calendar-


system.  First,  the  beginning  of  the  month
was  determined,  not  by  the  astronomical  new  moon,  but
by  the  time  when  the  new  moon  was  first  visible,  which
depends  partly  on  the  weather  and  on  the  se.-xson  of  the
year,  ami  is  always  at  least  from  twenty-four  to  thirty
hours  later  than  the  astronomical  new  moon.  In  order
to  prevent  too  great  divergence  of  the  calendar,  it  was
prescrilxjd,  however,  that  no  month  should  in  any  case
last  more  than  thirty  days,  and  that  no  years  should
contain  less  than  four  or  more  than  eight  such  '  full '
months.  Secondly,  the  intercalary  years  create  com-
plication.

A  thirteenth  month  was  added  to  the  year  whenever  on  the
i6th  Nisan  the  barley  was  not  yet  ripe;  but  this  was  forbidden
in  the  sabbaticiil  years,  and  two  intercalary  years  in  succession
were  not  .-illowed.  I  he  only  sabbatical  year  in  our  j)eriod  (com-
puteil  by  the  aid  of  i  .\lacc.  (54953,  »"<'  J"*-  -'''"'  "i^'-  l'**  '•  cp
1j  I  2)  u-.as,  according  to  Schiirer,  33-3^  A.D. ;  according  to  Sevm
and  others,'*  34-35 A.D. Any  one  of  the  six preceding  years

identical  with  the  '  .icceptable  year,'  and  put  the  death  of  Jesus
into  that  ye.ir,  29  a.d.  Arguments  similar  to  Hratke's  are  to  be
found  in  Sanclemente,  /V  vulgaris  irrtr  emetuiationf,  1703,
and  in  Caspari,  C lironolo^sch-gtographisclu  KinUitung  in  das
Lebrn  Jtsu,  1869.

'  So  also  Schiirer,  1  369.  Cp.  Gelzer,  S.  Julius  A/ricanus
utui die  byzaif.iiiische  Chronolot;ie ,  1S80,  1  4"^.

-  On  the  attempts  to  reconcife  this  discrepancy  see  the  com>
mentaries  and  the  books  there  mentioned.

»  Cp Wurms  in  Bengel's  .•/ri7/.y:  d.  Th^ol.,  1886,  vol.


Ideler, Hamib. 1 477-583 ; Wieseler, Ckronol. Sytwpse  der

Belr. zur  richtigen It'iirdi^'HH^
Ew.  UHidereviiHgelisehenOesch.,  1869;  Clumpach,  X'eberden


Vier  J<Tz>.  (1843), ^"^^  Betr. zur  richtigen M'urdigiing  der


altjUd.  Kaletuler,  1848 ;  Oudemans,  Kct'.  dt  I'h^oi.  1863 ;
Caspari,  Chronol.-geogr.  Einl.  i.  d.  Ltb.  Jesu  Chrisii,  1869;
Schwarz,  Der Jiid.  Kal.  historisth  w.  a%trotu>misch  untersnckt,
1872  ;  Zuckermann,  Materialien  zur  EttHvickelung  der  altjAd.
Zeitrechn.  im  Talmud,  1882.

<  Cp,  besides  the  above-mentioned  work  of  Gumpach,  Caspari,
21-25;  Sevin,  58-61;  Anger,  De  tfi/xtrum  in  Atis  Aposto.
lorum  rntione,  1833,  p.  38;  Herzfeld,  GescM.  d.  Isr.  2458^;
Zuckermann,  Veber  Sabt'athjahrcyclus  und  Jobel-perntde,
Kreslau,  1857 ;  GrStz,  Gesch.  d.  Jud.  iii.  1878,  p.  636-639 ;
Rilnsch, in  Stud.  u.  Knt.  1870,  p.  36iyC, 1875,  p.  589^;

806


CHRONOLOGY

might  have  been  an  intercalary  year.  At  the  end  of  28-29  a.d.,
however,  lli(;rc  was  no  need  of  an  intercalated  month,  because
the  15th  Nisaii  fell  on  i6ih  April  29  A.U.,  and  on  5th  April  30
A.D.  (so  according  to  Wurms  ;  according  to  (iauss  and  -Schwarz
one  day  lat>;r).  At  the  end  of  30-11  there  may  have  been  an
intercalar>'  month,  for  the  islh  Nisan  would  otherwise  have
fallen  on  26th  or  27th  March,  31  a.u.,  but  with  an  intercalary
month  on  24th  .April.  In  32  a.d.,  the  15th  Nisan  fell  on  12th
.April ;  in  33  A.u.,  on  2nd  -Vpril.  If,  however,  33-34  \vas  a
sabbatical  year,  an  extra  month  would  have  had  to  be  inter-
calated at  the  end  of  32-33,  and  then  the  15th  Nisan  would  have
fall-^n  on  ist  May,  33  a.u.,  and  21st  .\pril,  34  a.u.  ;  whereas  if
34-35  was  the  sabbatical  year,  the  extra  month  would  not  have
l)een  inserted  until  the  end  of  33-34-  Thus,  in  31  a.u.  the  15th
N  isan  would  have  remained  2nd  .\pnl.  The  Jewish  empirically
determined  dates  all  fell,  however,  one  or  two  days  later  than
these  astronomical  dates.

If  we  take  the  days  of  the  week  into  account,  in  the
years  29, 32, and  35  .\.u., neither  the 14th  nor  the


69.  The  Census.


56.  Days  of
week.


[5ih  Nisan  could  possibly  have  fallen  on
Fritlay. On the other hand, if 33*34


was  not  a  sabbatical  year  (and  so  32-33
not  an  intercalary  year),  the  i4ih  Nisan  may  have  been
celebrated  on  Friday,  4th  April  33,  which  would  corre-
spond to  the  view  of  the  Fourth  Gospel.  This  year,
however,  is  excluded  if  Jesus  died  on  the  15th  Nisan,
and  it  is  impossible  in  either  case  if,  as  is  more  likely,
33.34  was  the  sabbatical  year,  and  so  32-33  had
thirteen  months.  >  There  is,  therefore,  no  great  prob-
ability on  tiie  side  of  33  A.D.  On  the  other  hand,
the  15th  Nisaii  may  have  fallen  on  Friday,  23rd  April
34  .\.D.  This  is  hardly  possible  for  the  14th  Nisan,  as
the  astronomical  new  moon  occurred  at  6.42  p.m.,  7lh
April,  so  that  the  ist  Nisan  can  have  been  put  at  the
latest  on  9th  .April  (so  Sevin,  144).  No  other  line  of
evidence,  however,  points  to  the  year  34,  and  this  reckon-
ing by  the  calendar  suits  just  as  well  the  year  30  of  Lk.
3i  /,  for  in  that  year  the  astronomical  new  moon
occurred  at  8.08  p.m.,  22nd  March,  so  that  the  ist
Nisan  may  have  been  put  on  Friday,  24th  March,  and
the  15th  have  fallen  on  Friday,  7th  April. -

5. The Year  oj  Jesus' Birth. — Dionysius E.xiguus,
according  to  the  proofs  given  by  Sanclemente  (/.t:.  4  8)
and confirmed by Ideler {Handbuch,


57.  Jesus'


;  383  f. ), started  in his reckoning from


Birth  ;  Dion,  ^j^^  incarnation,  and  followed  the  common
ExigUUS.  ,^^gti^Q(j  for  the  years  of  reigning  monarchs.
His  view  was  that  Jesus  was  born  on  the  25th  De-
cember, 754  A.U.C. ,  and  so  he  counted  the  whole  year
754  as  I  .A.D.  The  view  defended  by  Noris  and  Pagi,
that  he  assigned  the  nativity  to  25th  December  753,  and
ignored  the  five  following  days,  is  wrong.

In  this  reckoning,  which  gradually  came  to  be
universally  accepted,  Dionysius  departed  from  the
dating  for  which  Irenaeus  [Adv.  hcBr.  iii.  25)  and  Ter-
tuUian  {Adv.  Jud.  8)  are  the  oldest  witnesses;  which
dating,  based  only  on  the  information  given  in  the
Gospels,  put  the  nativity  in  751  .A.U.C.  =  3  B.C.
Dionysius,  perhaps  because  he  had  no  means  of  fixing
the  date  of  the  census  under  Quirinius  in  Lk.  2,  or  the
death  of  Herod  in  Mt.  2.  seems  to  have  reached  his
result  by  putting  the  public  appearance  of  Jesus  one
year  later  than  that  of  John  ( 1 5th  year  of  Tiberius,  Lk.
3 1  /  ),  and  reckoning  back  thirty  years.  Since  we  have
seen  that  the  thirty  years  of  Lk.  3  i  /.  is  a  round  number,
perhaps  drawn  from  the  O T,  we  are  thrown  back  on  the
narratives  of  the  nativity.

(a)  Lk. gives  two  points, (i.)  He says  (I36)  that

Jesus  was  six  months  younger  than  the  Baptist,  whose

nru T» *•  4. conception happened under Herod

68.  The  Baptist.  ^^.^ j^ ^^^  ^^^ however, follow

that  the  birth  of  Jesus  fifteen  months  later  was  also
under  Herod, and,  even  if  the  evangelist  thought  so,

Wieseler  in  Stud.  u.  Krit.  iSgs,  p.  527.^  '>  Caspar!  in  Stud,
u.  Krit.  1877,  pp.  181-190;  Riess,  Geburtsjahr  C/iristi,  18S0,
p.  457^  229-236 ;  and  other  works  mentioned  in  Schiirer,  I  297;

1  See  for  the  year  33  a.d.  the  exact  reckoning  in  Schegg,
p.  49/1

2  So  also  Gumpach,  HUlfsm.  d.  rechnend.  Chronol.  1853,
p.  94.

807


CHRONOLOGY

1  his  view  cannot  have  rested  on  documentary  evidence.
Perhaps  Lk.  may  have  drawn  his  inference  from  the
fact  that  the  Baptist  died  six  months  before  Jesus.

(ii. )  Lk.  says  (2 1-5)  that  Jesus  was  born  at  the  time
when  a  census,  ordered  by  Augustus  for  the  whole
empire,  was  being  taken  in  Jud;ea  and
Galilee,  and  that  this  was  while  Cyrenius
(undoubtedly  Publ.  Sulpicius  Quirinius)  was  governor
in  Syria.  ^  Such  a  census,  however,  was  legally  im-
|X)ssible  in  the  reign  of  Herod,  and  a  governorship  of
Quirinius  in  .Syria  before  Herod's  death  is  chronologically
impossible,  since  at  the  time  of  Herod's  death  (4  B.C.)
Quinctilius  Varus  (who  put  down  the  insurrection  follow-
ing that  event)  was  still  governor  in  S\Tia.  whilst  his
predecessors  were  Sentius  Saturninus  (9-6  B.C.)  and
Tilius  (attested  for  10  B.C. ).  Joscphus,  who  relates  the
last  j'ears  of  Herod  in  much  detail,  has  no  knowledge
of  such  a  census,  but  says  that  the  census  of  7  A.D.  was
the  first,  and  something  altogether  novel  for  the  Jews.
It  may  Ije  that  Quirinius  was  governor  of  Syria  for  a
short  time  (3-2  B.C.)  as  successor  to  Varus,  as  he  cer-
tainly was  afterwards  from  6  a.d.  until  (at  the  latest)
II  .v.D.  ;  but  in  his  first  (problematical)  governorship  a
census  for  Judea,  which  had  fallen  to  the  share  of
Archelaus,  is  likewise  impossible.  On  the  other  hand,
the  census  in  Judaea  under  Quirinius  in  6-7  A.  D. ,  after
the  deposition  of  Archelaus,  is  well  attested  (cp  Jos.  Ant.
.wii.  125  xviii.  1 1  and  2i  .xx.  62,  BJ,  xi.  1 1.  Acts  [=  Lk.  ]
537).  and  may  have  been  in  fulfilment  of  a  general
imperial  command  intended  to  be  executed  as  occasion
should  arise  in  the  several  provinces.  This  could,  how-
ever, have  applied  only  to  imjx^rial  provinces  (including,
therefore,  Jud  Ka),  not  to  senatorial  provinces  :  that  is,  it
would  not  be  universal.  Further,  (i)even  this  census
could  not  have  included  the  (ialileans,  who  were  subjects
of  Antipas  ;  and  (2)  it  must  have  been  taken  as  the
basis  for  a  poll  and  property  tax,  at  the  actual,  not  at
tiie  ancestral,  home  of  the  subject,  for  the  latter  would
have  been  in  most  cases  hard  to  determine,  and  such  a
procedure  was  in  general  impracticable.  (3)  Moreover,
Mary  could  not  possibly  be  affected  by  it,  because  she
was  not  of  the  lineage  of  David  (cp  Gk.veai.ogiks,  ii.  K
and  in  such  cases  the  authorities  dealt  with  the  male
representatives  of  the  women.

The  account  in  Lk. rests,  therefore,  on a  series  of

mistakes,  and  the  most  plausible  view  is  that  the  evange-

... , list,  or  the  tradition  which  he  followed,  for

*^  .T!  '/ some  reason  combined  the  birth  of  Jesus  with

method. ^^^  census  under  Quirinius,  and  assigned  to

the  latter  a  wrong  date.''^

Perhaps  Lk.  simply  confused  Archelaus  with  his
father,  for  the  former  was  very  probably,  like  .\ntipas,
occasionally  called  Herod.  This  confusion  of  the  two
Herods  would  have  been  all  the  easier  if  after  Herod
the  Great's  death  Quirinius  really  was  for  a  while
governor  of  Syria.  The  same  confusion  may  have
caused  Iren.-eus  and  Tertullian  to  adopt  the  year  3  B.C.
for  the  birth  of  Jesus.  The  imperial  census  of  Lk.  is
perhaps  a  confusion  of  the  census  under  Quirinius,  put
incorrectly  into  the  year  3  B.C.,  with  the  remembrance
of  the  census  of  Roman  citizens  throughout  the  empire
which  was  actually  ordered  by  Augustus  in  6  B.C.,  for
the  two  events  lay  only  two  years  apart.  Lk. ,  who
(cp  §  47  above,  on  the  two  high  priests  in  Lk.  82)
was  none  too  well  informed  on  Jewish  matters,  may
have  inferred  from  '  the  family  of  David  '  that  Joseph  s
home  was  really  in  Bethlehem,  antl  have  suppo.sed  this
fact  to  be  the  true  means  of  combining  the  already
current  tradition  of  the  birth  in  Bethlehem  with  the
incontestable  tradition  that  Jesus  was  a  Nazarene. If

1  See  the  conclusive  investigation  by  Schfirer,  1  ^33i^

2  A  chronological  error  is  not  without  analogies  in  l.k.  The
case  of  Thoudas  (.\cts  >  ^6/)  is  well  known,  and  the  colleclioii
for  the  poor  in  -Acts  1 1  28/  is  perhaps  confused  with  that  of
Acts  21,  whilst  the  combination  of  the  various  famines  in  the
time  of  Claudius  into  one  world-wide  famine  (Acts  11  28)  is  ver>-
closely  analogous  to  the  case  of  the  census.


CHRONOLOGY

these  suppositions  are  ndinissihie,  the  kernel  of  truth  in
the  narrative  would  \x  that  Jesus  was  l»rn  not  far  from
the  end  of  the  Hcrodian  peri(xl.  and  that  the  Roman
rule  was  set  up  in  his  earliest  thildhcxKl.  In  lx)th  thcM-
political  occurrences  an  inner  connection  with  the  events
which  brought  in  the  Kingdom  of  God  was  doubtless
obs»Tved  in  very  early  times,  and  the  interest  in  making
the  closeness  of  this  connection  as  clear  as  possible  may
have  led  to  the  enrichment  of  the  narrative.

(d)  I'rom  Mt.  we  have  as  chronological  evidence  the
star  and  the  slaughter  of  the  innocents.  Rationalis-
«1  Th«  Star  '"*»'  ""*''"P«'*.  however,  to  subject  this
oww.  j,j,^|.  j^  astronomical  laws  do  violence  to
the  idea  of  the  narrator.  The  star  moves  in  its  own  free
paths,  ajjix-iirs  and  disappears,  travels  and  stands  .still.
Kven  if  the  evangelist  is  wrong,  and  a  conjunction  or  a
coniet  lies  at  the  basis  of  the  story,  it  is  imi>ossible  to
determine  from  what  phenomena  astrologers  of  '  the  East '
sup|X)sed  themselves  able  to  draw  such  inferences.  The
star  shines  only  in  the  legend,  and  derives  its  origin  from
Nu.  2I17  and  the  aixxalyiJlical  imagery  (cp  Rev.  12  i).
It  has  l>een  matched  by  similar  legendary  stars  at  the
birth  and  at  tlie  death  of  many  of  the  great  men  of  the
heathen  world.

.\s to the murder of the innocents, if it were a
liistorii.il  fact.  Jesus  nmst  l)e  supfx)sed,  since  the  male
. children  were  killed  '  from  two  years  old  and
^  . under.'  to  have  beeti  not  less  than  a  vear

Innocents.  ^,^j  ^^.^^^  -^  j^^.  „,urder  was  just  lx.-fore
Hcrfxls  death  ;  and  in  that  case,  since  Herod  died
shortly  Ixfore  the  Passover  of  4  B.C.,  Jesus  nmst  have
lieen  born  at  the  latest  in  5  B.C.  Josephus.  however,
although  he  narrates  with  the  most  scrupulous  exactness
all  the  horrors  of  Herod's  last  years,  has  no  knowledge
of  the  nnirder  of  the  children.  On  the  other  hand,  he
gives  almost  exactly  the  same  storj'  as  relating  to  Moses
[Jn/.\\.9  2).

All  the  other  suspicious  circumstances  in  the  narrative
in  Mt.  2  cannot  l)c  set  forth  here.  In  view  of  the
natural  tendency  of  legends  to  connect  im[X)rtant  events
with  one  another  and  to  mirror  their  nmtual  relations,
we  cannot  infer  from  .Mt.  more  than  that  Jesus  was
probably  l)orn  shortly  liefore  or  after  the  death  of
Herod — the  s;ime  result  that  we  reached  from  Lk.

The  only  results  which  have  a  very  high  degree  of
probability  are  the  date  30  AW  for  the  death  of  Jesus,
and  the  |x;riod  of  al)out  one  year  for  the
length  of  his  public  ministry.  Hesides  this,
it  is  also  probable  that  Jesus  was  Ijorn  in
the  :ii,'it.it>(l  times  when  death  was  snatching  the  sceptre
from  tin-  hand  of  Herod  the  (ireat.  and  when  with  his
sucoi-sM>rs  the  Roman  rule  in  Jud;ea  was  coming  again
in  sight.

TABLE  VH.— Life  of  Jescs.  pkob.-\blk  Dates,

circa  4  B.C.  ? — Birth  of  Jesus.

circa  Qil^q  A.I).  — beginning  of  public  work.

30  A.D. — Death  of  Jesus.

II.  Chronology  of  the Like ok 1'.\ll.  —  The

starting  -  point for Pauline chronology must be the

p ., journey  to Rome, for here we can make

connection with the dates supplied by

? -D  Roman history. The events innnediately

o ome. preceding — namely,  the  arrival  of  Festus  in

Palestine, the beginning of the proceedings against

Paul  (.\cts  2r>i-6).  the  hearing  and  the  appeal  (2.')6-ii),

and (27 1) the shipment of the prisoner — probably

followed  one  another  rapidly  ; but  the  actual  date  of

the  arrival  of  Festus  is  matter  of  dispute

(see the literature in Schiirer. C/l', 1

484/.  n.  38,  to  which  must  now  Ije  added  O.  Holtzniann,

XT  Zeif^^'cscA.. 1805.  p. 125/:  248; Blass,  Acta  Ap.

1895,  p.  21/.  ; Harnack.  Die  C/iron.  <ier  ultchristl.  Lit.

1 [97])- I"  or  the  most  part the  preference  is  given

to  the  year  60  or  59  A.D. ,  since  it  was  at  the  latest  in

the  summer  of  62  (more  probably  in  that  of  6 1 )  that


63.  Con-
clusions.


66.  Festus.


CHRONOLOGY

Albinus  succeeded  Festus.  and  for  the  events  related
of  Festus"  s  term  of  office  one  year  will  suffice.  'ITie
objection  to  an  earlier  date  is  that  it  might  not  leave
room  Un  the  events  of  the  life  of  I'aul,  an<l  that,  ac-
cording to  Acts24io.  at  the  imprisonment  of  I'aul,
Felix  had  alre-ady  lieen  in  (jftice  '  many  years '  Hk
iro\\Q)V  iriiiv).  (That  the  courtly  Josephus  casually
mentions  Po|)p.Ta  as  Nero's  wife,  which  she  did  not
become  till  si-veral  years  later,  caimot  Ije  adduced  as  a
serious  argument  in  the  same  direction. )

Hy  the  sitle  of  this  conmionly  received  date,  however,
a  much  earlier  one  h;is  been  advocated  recently.'

Thus  Kellner  pro|)oses  Nov.  54  A.D.  ;  W'elxrr  and
O.  Holtzmaim.  the  summer  of  55  ;  Hlass  and  Harnack,
56  (Harnack.  55?).  Whilst  C).  Holtzniann  takes  his
start  from  Tacitus.  Harnack  starts  from  the  chronology
of  Eusebius.  the  claims  of  which  to  our  confidence  his
lalxjurs  have  materially  enhanced.  I  le  shows  that  there
is  no  ground  for  the  common  suspicion  of  the  dates
given  by  Eusebius  for  the  procuratorships  preceding  and
following  that  of  Festus.

Kusel)iuss  d.itc  for  the  year  preceding  the  .-xccession  of  Felix
dilTers  from  that  of  Tacitus  bv  only  one  year.  Nor  is  the  difference
.my  greater  in  the  date  of  his  removal.  According  to  Tacitus,
Pallas  fell  into  disfavour  a  few  days  Ixrfore  the  fourteenth  birth-
day of  Hritannicus,  which  fell  in  the  middle  of  Feb.  J5  A.IJ.
According  to  Josc-jihus,  Pallas  obtained  of  Nero  an  acijuittal  for
his  brother  Felix  from  an  accusation  made  by  the  Jews  after  hi>
recall.  Now,  as  Nero  ascended  the  throne  on  the  13th  Oct.
54  A.I>.,  the  time  left  under  him  by  these  two  dates  is  clearly  too
.short  for  the  events  narrated  by  Josephus.  'Iwo  solutions  are
possible.  Tacitus  may  be  wrong  by  a  year  in  the  age  of
Britannicus ;  it  may  have  been  his  fifteenth  birthday,  so  that  it
was  not  till  56  that  Pallas  fell  into  disfavour;  or  else  even  after
his  fall  Pallas  may  still  have  had  access  to  the  Km|)eror.  Now,
Kusebius  in  his  Chronicle  supports  the  year  56  as  that  of  the
accession  of  F'estus,  since  he  assigns  it  to  the  second  year  of
Nero  (Oct.  55  to  Oct.  56;  on  the  textual  certainty  of  this  date
see  Harnack,  236,  n.  2).  If  Felix  entered  on  his  office,  as
according  to  Fusebius  he  did,  between  Jan.  51  and  Jan.  52
(according  to  Tacitus  between  Jan.  52  and  Jan.  53),  he  could  in
the  summer  of  56  be  described  in  ca.se  of  need,  if  we  compare
the  avenige  length  of  procuratorships,  as  having  been  in  office
(K  iroAAuf  cruif.

Any  objection,  in  fact,  to  this  nunilx.T  56  for  the
accession  of  Festus,  sup|K)rted  by  Tacitus  and  1  u.sebius,
could  come  only  from  the  recjuirements  of  the  life  of
Paul.  We  shall,  therefore,  leave  the  question  open  for
the  present.

From  the  date  thus  obtained  for  the  relegation  of  the
prisoner  to  the  tribunal  at  Rome,  let  us  in  the  first
place  make  our  way  backwards.

If,  as  we  shall  see  to  lie  probable,  Paul  carried  out
the  plan  mentioned in  -Acts  20 16.  his  arrest  must  have


66.  Felix.


been at Pentecost under the procurator


Felix,  who  (24  27)  prolonged  the  proceedings
for  two  years  until  his  retirement  from  office.  This
mention  of  Felix  and  the  two-years  impri.sonntent  in
Caesarea  are.  indeed,  regarded  as  unhistorical  by
Straatman  {J'aulus,  1874).  van  Manen  {/'aulus,  1,  De
handelingen  dfr  Apostelen,  1890),  and  esi^ecially  by
Weizsacker  (.//.  Zei taller,  1886,  pp.  433-461);  but
the  improbability  of  certain  details,  on  which  they  rely,
is  not  conclusive,  and,  on  the  other  hand,  the  rise  of
this  circumstantial  narrative  cannot  be  explained  on
the  ground  that  it  is  a  doublet  to  Acts  2;')/.  That
Felix  should  hold  over  the  pri.soner  for  the  chance  of  a
change  of  sentiment  in  Jerusalem,  and,  this  change  not
having  come  about,  should  finally  leave  him  in  pris<in
in  the  hope  of  leaving  one  |X)pular  deed  to  \yc  remem-
bered by,  agrees  with  his  character  and  the  habit  of
procurators.  That  Acts  tells  nothing  about  these  two
years  is  much  less  surprising  than  its  silence  about  the
year  and  a  half  in  (T'orinth  and  the  thrt^  years  in
Ephesus.  That  a  provisional  imprisonment  of  two
years  could lie imposed even  on  a  Roman  citizen is

1  By  Kellner  (the  article  '  Felix '  in  HergenrOthcr's  Kirchfn-
Ux.m  (Roman  Catholic).  1887  ;  Z./.  kutk  Thfol.  1888),  Weber
(Kritische  Gach.  tier  Kxegtst  des  q.  Kaf>.  des  Kditicrhriffit
1889,  p.  ijjJF-),  O.  Holtzmann  (  .c),  Blass  (Ac),  Harnack  (I.e.)
following  such  older  scholars  as  Bcngel,  Suskind,  and  Kettig.

810


67.  Philippi
to  Jerusalem. "


CHRONOLOGY

shown  by  the  two-years  imprisonment  in  Rome.  It
is  likewise  obvious  that  Paul  would  not  have  had  his
case  transferred  to  Rome  except  in  dire  necessity.
The  dry  notice  in  Acts  24  27  is,  therefore,  without
doubt  trustw\)rthy,  and  the  arrest  of  Paul  is  to  be  put
two  years  earlier  than  the  arrival  of  Festus — that  is,  at
Pentecost  54  or  58.

I'or  the  events  liefore  the  arrest  in  Jerusalem  we
give  the  dates  in  two  numbers  :  one  on  the  as.sumption
that  this  hapix-'ncd  at  I'entecost  54  ;  the
)ther,  that  it  was  in  58.  The  journey  to
Jerusalem  from  Philippi  (Acts  204-21 16),
which  is  related,  with  the  exception  of  the  episode  at
Miletus  (2O16-3S),  from  the  'we-source,'  was  Ijegun
after  '  the  days  of  unleavened  bread,'  and  there  is  no
reason  for  supposing  that  Paul  did  not  carry  out  his
j)lan  (20 16)  of  arriving  at  Jerusalem  by  Pentecost.  The
itinerary  from  the  beginning  of  the  Passover  is  given
us  as  follows; — At  Philippi  (P;\ssovcr)  seven  days;  to
Troas  five  days  ;  at  Tro.as  seven  days  ;  to  Patara  eight
days,— in  all  twenty-seven  days.  This  leaves  twenty-
two  days  before  Pentecost,  which  was  ample  for  the
journey  to  Jerusalem  except  in  case  of  a  very  exception-
ally unfavourable  passage  from  Patara  to  the  co.ast  of
Syria.  Of  these  twenty-two  days  twelve  were  occupied
as  follows  : — At  Tyre  seven  days,  to  Ptolemais  one,  to
Ca;sarea  one,  to  Jerusalem  two  to  three  ;  so  that  ten
days  remain  for  the  voyage  from  Patara  to  Tyre  (which
in  ordinary  weather  required  four  to  five  days)  and
for  the  stay  at  Ctesarea,  the  duration  of  neither  of
wliich  is  stated.  From  the  stops,  which  in  view  of
the  brisk  coasting -trade  were  surely  not  necessary,
we  may  infer  that  satisfactory  progress  was  made  by
the  travellers.  The  departure  from  Philippi,  which  was
the  conclusion  of  Paul's  missionary  career,  is,  therefore,
to  be  put  just  after  the  Passover  of  the  year  of  the  arrest.

For  the  dates  earlier  than  this  point,  the  chronologist
would  be  wholly  at  sea  without  Acts  ;  and  no  good
reason  appears  for  not  trusting  the
68.  Ephestis  information  which  it  gives.  On  the
to  rnilippi.  gp^..^{  journey  which  ended  at  Jerusalem,
Paul  had  started  from  F.phesus  (i  Cor.  168/.;  Acts
19),  and  journeyed  by  way  of  Troas,  where  he  carried
on  his  work  for  a  short  time  (.\cts20i  does  not
mention  Troas  at  all),  to  Macedonia  (2Cor.  2i2  /.  Ts)-
That  he  st.ayed  there  long  is  not  likely  ;  for,  if  he  had
done  so,  the  length  of  his  stay  would  probably  have
bien  given  as  in  the  case  (Acts 20 3) of  Greece  (Corinth).
Moreover,  the  plans  made  in  Ephesus  (iCor.  I65;
2  Cor.  1  15/)  had  in  view  only  a  short  stay  in  Mace-
donia, for  (i  Cor.  168  cp  c'.  6)  Paul  expected  to  leave
Ephesus  after  Pentecost  (which  fell  somewhere  between
15th  .May  and  15th  June)  and  to  be  in  Corinth  so  early
that,  even  if  he  should  not  decide  to  pass  the  winter
there,  his  visit  should,  nevertheless,  not  be  too  short.
This  would  allow  at  most  three  months  on  the  way.
Now,  he  may  have  waited  rather  longer  in  Macedonia,
in  order  to  learn  the  impression  made  by  Titus  (the
bearer  of  2  Cor. ) ;  but,  even  so,  we  cannot  reckon  more
than  from  four  to  five  months  for  the  whole  journey.
In  Corinth  itself  he  stayed  (Acts203)  three  months,
and  then  returned  to  Macedonia,  where  he  surely  did
not  stay  long,  since  he  had  been  there  just  three
months  earlier.  Moreover,  he  had,  no  doubt,  formed
in  Corinth  his  plan  of  being  in  Jerusalem  by  Pentecost,
and  the  additional  time  which  the  unexpectedly  long
journey  (occasioned  by  Jewish  plots.  Acts 20 3,  which
m.ade  the  direct  route  impossible)  nmst  have  cost  him
would  of  itself  have  forbidden  an  unnecessarily  long  stay.
He  probably,  therefore,  reached  Philippi  but  little  before
the  Passover  ;  and  we  have  for  the  whole  journey  from
Ephesus  through  Troas,  Macedonia,  Greece,  and  back
to  Macedonia  perhaps  eight  to  ten  months— namely,
about  the  space  of  time  from  Pentecost  53/57  to  Pass-
over 54/58.  In  the  summer  1  of  53/57  in  Macedonia
1  Or  autumn  ;  see  Corinthians,  |  3.


69.  Ephesus.


CHRONOLOGY

Paul  wrote  2  Cor.;  at  the  end  of  this  year  or  the
beginning  of  the  next  in  Corinth,  Romans,  and  the
letter  of  introduction  for  Phoebe  to  the  Christians  at
Ephesus  (Rom.  16 1-20).  About  this  time  may  belong,
too,  the  undoubtedly  authentic  note  Tit.  812-14;  in
which  case  the  Macedonian  Nicomedia  is  meant,  and
the  plan  for  the  winter  was  not  carrietl  out.

The  st.ay  in  Ephesus  had  lasted,  according  to  Acts  19
81022,  over  two  years  and  a  quarter  (Acts 20 31  speaks
of  three  years),  so  that  Paul  must  have
come  to  liphesus  at  Pentecost  or  in  the
summer  of  50/54.  From  there,  after  he  had  already
sent  one  letter  to  Corinth  (iCor.  ."jg),  he  wrote  in  the
beginning  of  53/57  our  i  Cor. ,  and  later  had  occasion
to  write  to  Corinth  for  yet  a  third  time  (2  Cor.  73  :  the
letter  is  perhaps  preserved  in  2  Cor.  10-13).'

From  this  long  st.ay  in  llphesus,  which  doubtless
formed  the  .second  great  epoch  in  Paul's  missionary
70 r ■ th ^'^''^''^^' '"  '^^  Greek  world,  we  go  back  to

.  onn  .  j^j^g  first— namely,  the  first  vi^it  to  Corinth
(.•\ctsl8i-i8  ;  cp  I  and  2  Cor. ).  This  ap[)ears  to  have
la.sted  about  two  years,  since  to  the  one  year  and  a  half
of  18  n  must  be  added,  in  case  18 11  refers  only  to  the
time  spent  in  the  house  of  Tilius  Justus,  the  previous
time,  in  which  Paul  was  trying  to  work  from  the  syna-
gogue as  a  Ixase,  as  well  as  the  later  'iKaval  rnxipan  of
18 18.  How  much  time  lay,  however,  lx;tween  the
departure  from  Corinth  and  the  arrival  at  iiphesus  in
50/54  vve  cannot  tell,  although  the  very  sketchiness  of
our  only  authority  (.\ctsl8  i8-19i)  makes  it  easier  to
believe  that  the  author  is  drawing  here  (except  for  the
words,  V.  19,  €l<7e\dJ)i>-v.  21,  ^Aojtos)  from  a  written
source  than  that  he  relies  on  oral  tradition  or  his  own
imagination.  Oral  tradition  would  either  have  omitted
the  journey  altogether,  or  have  narrated  what  happened  at
Jerusalem  in  some  detail.  All  suspicion  of  '  tendency  '  is
excluded  by  the  brevity  and  obscurity  of  the  passage.
For  the  journey  thus  barely  mentioned  in  .Acts  one  year
would  be  ample  time.  In  that  case  Paul  would  have  left
Corinth  in  the  summer  of  49/53,  having  arrived  there  in
the  summer  of  47/51.  In  the  beginning  of  this  jjeriod
of  two  years  i  I'hess.  was  written.  (The  genuineness
of  2  Thess.  nmst  be  left  undetermined. )

Before  the  long  stay  in  Corinth  falls  the  Macedonian
mission,  with  the  necessary  journeys,  which,  however,
occupied  but  one  day  each  (.Actsien-lS  i).  For  the
whole  journey  from  Troas  to  Corinth  a  few  months  would
suffice.  It  is,  therefore,  possible  th:it  Paul  set  out  after
the  opening  of  navigation  in  March  of  the  same  year
in  the  summer  of  which  he  arrived  for  his  long  stay  in
Corinth.

Up  to  this  point  the  probability  of  the  chronology  is
very  considerable.  The  results  may  be
summarised  as  follows  :  —


71.  Results.


T.ABLE  VIll— Life  of  P.^ul  :  Entk.\nce  into
Europe  to  I.mi'kisg.nme.nt  at  Rome.

Spring 47/51. — Departure  from Troas,  followed  by  mission

in  Macedonia.
Summer  47/51-Summer  49/53. — Corinth  and  .\chaia. i  Thess.
Summer  49/53-Summer  50/54. — V'i.sit  to  Jerusalem  and  .\n-

tioch  ;  journey  through  .\sia  Minor  to  Ephesus.
Summer  50/54-Pentecost  53/57. — Ephesus.
Pentecost  53/s7-Passover  54/58. — Journey by way  of  Troas

and  Macedonia  to  .\cliaia  and  return  to  Philippi.
Passover- Pentecost  5»/58. — Journey, with the  contribution,

from  Philippi  to  Jerusalem.
54/58-56/60. — Imprisonment  in  Oesarea.
Autumn  56/60- spring  57/61. —Journey  to  Rome.
57/61-59/63. — Imprisonment  in  Rome.

Passing  now  to  the  period  Ixifore  47/51  A.D. ,  we  find

that  -Acts  supplies  us  with  far  less  trustworthy  accounts

_ .. and  is  wholly  without  elites  ; nor  have  we

72.  EarUer  ^^^  Pauline  epistles  written  in  these  years.

period. Highly  probable,  nevertheless  (just  because

of  the  peculiar  way  in  which  it  is  given),  although  not

1  See,  however,  Corinthians,  §  18.

8l3


CHRONOLOGY

without  editorial  additions,  is  the  representation  preserved
in  Actsir)4o-lG8,  that  Iroas  was  the  goal  of  a  zigzag
journey  from  Antioch  in  Syria  through  the  interior  of
Asia  Minor.  The  seeming  rt-stlessness  (Acts  166-8) —
at  any  rate  in  the  laiter  jxirt  of  tlie  inland  journey — may
injply  that  the  time  occupied  was  comparatively  short.
In  that  case,  the  start  from  Antioch  might  fall  in  the
ye;u-  46/50  ;  but  even  that  is  very  problematical.  W'c
are,  therefore,  thrown  Iwck  for  the  chronology  wholly
TK  n  }  1  f  °"  *''^^'  ^  f'  ^^*^''^'  however,  it  is  not
[jcrfcctly  jjlain  whether  the  fourteen  years
in  2 1  include  or  follow  the  three  years  in  1 18.  Kor  the
former  view  ntay  he  adduced  the  change  of  prepositions
/terd  ( ■  after ' )  and  5id  ( '  in  the  course  of,'  RV™*.')  ;  but
this  can  be  explained  lx;tter  thus.  .\n  firtira  ('then')
having  Ixx-n  introduced  in  1  21  Ixnwccri  the  two  tireira
of  1 18  and  2  I,  btd  was  used,  instead  (jf  /ufrd,  in  order
not  to  exclude  the  space  of  time  lietwecn  the  two  firfira.
of  IT.  i3  and  21 — namely,  the  fifteen  ilays  in  Jerusalem.
(Perhajjs,  also,  in  2i  the  three  years  had  completely
elapsed  before  the  first  visit,  whereas  the  second  visit
may  have  been  made  in  the  course  of  the  fourteenth
ye;ir. )  On  this  view  seventeen  yexrs  would  have  elapsed
from  theconversion  of  I'aul  to  the  conference  in  Jerusalem,
out  of  which  time  he  h.id  sf)ent  three  years  in  Arabia  and
fourteen  in  Syria  and  Cilicia  (1 17  21 ).  The  latter  period
was  certainly,  the  former  (at  least  for  Damascus)  proliably,
occupied  in  the  work  of  an  ajxistle  (CJal.  I23  2?/.).
After  the  conference  in  Jerusalem  followed  a  stay  in
Antioch  (2 11-21).  Since  3i/.  is  introduced  without  any
sign  of  transition,  the  simplest  supposition  is  that  this
irpoypa.((>(tv  (;ii;  RV  '  ojxjn  setting  forth")  and  its
results  (that  is.  the  mission  in  Galatia)  come  chrono-
logically after,  but  not  too  long  after,  the  events
narrated  previously.  This  would  agree,  also,  with  the
most  natural  interpretation  of  Gal.  2s.

If  we  Ux)k  now  at  the  parallel  narrative  in  Acts,  there
is,  in  the  first  place,  no  doubt  that  in  If)  1-35  we  have
.  .  the  same  events  described  as  in  (jal.  2.  In
.  AC  8.  ^^^^  ,^_.  j^  {Jalatians,  Paul  and  Barnabas
come  with  others  in  their  company  to  Jerusalem,  and
return  to  Antioch  after  arriving  at  an  understanding  with
the  church  in  Jerusiilem.  To  .\ntioch  come  also,  in  Ixnh
cases  (although  in  Acts  no  mention  is  made  of  a  visit  of
Peter),  members  of  the  Jerusalem  church,  who  niii;ht  in
Acts  also,  just  as  in  Galatians,  have  been  saiti  to  come
from  James.  In  Acts  11  27-30  1224/.  however,  we  find,
besides,  mention  of  another  earlier  journey  of  Paul  and
Barnabas  from  .Xniioch  to  Jerusalem  and  back  again,
after  the  journey  from  Damascus  to  Jerusalem  (Acts
926-3o  =  Gal.  I18).  Since  Clal.  l2o-2i  makes  this  im-
possible as  a  separate  visit  to  Jerusalem,  the  two  visits
from  .Vntioch  (.'\cts  11/  and  .Acts  1.'))  must  have  been
really  one  ,  and  this  would  explain  the  further  ix)ints  of
resemblance  that  on  both  occasions  (in  one  case  after,
in  the  other  iK'fore,  the  journey  of  the  ai)ostles)  prophets
come  from  Jerusalem  to  Antioch  11  27  I532),  and  that
both  times,  although  in  different  ways,  a  contribution  of
money  plays  a  part  ( .Vets  1 1  28/  Gal.  2 10).  C'p  also  '  to
the  elders'  (.Actsllio  102).  Now,  although  this  visit
is  in  general  more  accurately  described  by  Actsl.'),  there
are  many  reasons  for  thinking  that  it  is  chronologically
placed  more  correctly  by  .Acts  1127^

The  insertion  by  mistake  at  the  end  of  ch.ap.  14  is  easy  to  under-
.stand  :  for  whilst  large  parts  of  chap.  13/1  and  the  whole  of  chap.
15  are  certainly  the  work  of  the  final  author  of  Acts(  .otice  that
the  style  is  the  same  as  in  Acts  1-V.'),  at  the  s.-inie  time  the  'we
source '  can  be  detected  (as  is  now  more  and  more  widely  held)
as  far  back  as  13  i,  and  we  can  ascribe  to  it  the  return  to  .\ntioch

!14  26<j)  as  well  as  the  later  departure  for  the  journey  of  lli6_/fl
without  the  intervening  narrative),  although  we  can  no  longer
restore  the  original  connection.  Accordingly,  since  the  author
had  not  been  able  beiore  .Acts  IS/T  to  give  a  coni  rete  account  of
any  Gentile  mission,  an  undated  account  (perhaps  not  perfectly
accurate)  of  a  conference  in  Jerusalem  (to  which  the  missionaries
came  from  Antio  h)  which  treated  the  subject  of  Gentile
missions  could  be  inserted  after  13/.  better  than  e.-irlier.  The
author  m.iy  have  had  some  reason  to  suppose  that  the  contri-
bution of  money  (the  fact  but  not  the  date  of  which  he  had
learned  : it  was  not  mentioned  in  his  source  as  the  occasion

813


CHRONOLOGY

of  the  la«  viitit  of  Paul  to  Jerusalem:  Act* 21)  mu«t  have
l>ecn  brought  on  the  occ.ikion  of  the  earlier  slay  in  Antioch.  If
so,  we  c;in  see  how,  in  cunscijueiicc  of  the  two  period*  of
roidcnre  in  Anti<x:h,  he  w.n.s  led  to  sujjpose  that  there  had  been
two  visits  to  Jerusiilcm,  and  so  to  create  a  contradiction  to  (iai.
I/.  All  this  ticcumcs  still  more  proliabie  if  the  districts  visited
in  Acts  isy.  could  be  called  (jalatia  by  I'aul  :  a  possibility  which
can  now  lie  regarded  as  proved,  as  is  the  im(>us»,bility  that  Paul
should  have  t.illed  them  Cilicia  (Gal.  1  21)  (see  Galatia).
On  the  other  hand,  it  can  l>e  seen  in  Acts  l.'>  1 /]  yoff.  that  at  the
conference  the  great  question  was  about  the  .Syrian  Christians,
not  about  those  whose  conversion  is  related  in  Acts  Vi/.

If  these  hypotheses  are  correct,  between  the  con
ference  in  Jerus;ilem  (Gal.  2i^. )  and  the  journey  from
Troas  to  Macedonia  (.\ctsl68-ii)  lie  the  missionary
journey  (Acts  18/. )  lx.-gun  and  ended  at  Antioch,  and
the  zig-zag  tour  through  Asia  .Minor  (Aclsl536-168),
the  lx.'ginning  of  the  original  account  of  which  has  Ix-en,
doubtless,  somewhat  confused  by  the  insertion  of  .Acts  ir>.
One  year, however, is  not  enough for  these  journeys.

The  hindrance  hinted  at  in  Acts  166  /.  may  jjerhaps
have  lxx;n  connected  with  the  winter  season,  if  the  date
(.March  47/51)  which  we  have  ventured  to  give  above
for  the  passage  from  Tro.as  to  .Macedonia  is  correct.  In
that  case  the  missionaries  would  perhaps  have  passed
the  preceding  winter  in  .Antioch  (.Acts  14  26);  the
missionary  journey  of  .Actsl3y'.  would  then  fall  in  the
open  se;ison  before  this  winter  ;  and  thus  the  departure
from  .Antioch  related  in  Acts  13i  ^i  \\ould  have  been
two  years  before  the  passage  from  Troas  to  Kuro|)e
(that  is,  in  the  spring  of  45  49),  and  the  conference
in  Jerusalem  immediately  b«-fore — perhaps  (if  we  may
infer  from  analogies)  at  the  time  of  the  Passover.
The  conversion  of  Paul  would  fall  ((jal.  1  18  2i)
fourteen  or  seventeen  years  earlier— that  is,  in  the  year
31/35  or  28/32.  When  Gal.  was  written  is  for  the
general  chronology  a  matter  of  indifference.'

__  T>  li.  lo  the  table  given  alxjve  should  there-
fore  be  prefixed  :  —

TABLK IX.— LiiK OK P.\UL : C  onvkksio.n to

KNTKA.NCK INTO ICUKOPK.

31/35  or  28/32. — Conversion  of  Paul.

Three-years  stay  in  .Arabia  and  I)amascus.
34/38  or  31/35. — First  visit  to  Jerusalem.

Eleven-  or  fourtetn-years  work in  .Syria  and
Cilicia.
45/49- — Conference  in  Jerusalem,  mission  in  Galatia.
One-year  journey  through  .Asia  Mino'  to  Troas.

Three  further  passages  can  perhaps  serve  as  proof  of
the  results  reached  above. '-^ The  first (.ActsllzS),  con-
_ .  taining  the  mention  of  the  famine  under

Claudius,  loses,  iiuleed,  its  significance,
if  the  visit  there  mentioned  had  .as  its  object  the  agree-
ment aljcut  the  mission-fieUls,  not  the  bringing  of  a
contribution  ;  but  it  perhaps  explains  the  mistaken
combination  (.Actsl  1  30  12  i)  of  this  journey  (of  45/49
A.  n. )  with  the  death  of  James  the  son  of  Zebedee,  which
hapixined  (.Acts  12 19-23)  iK-tween  42  and  44.  Josephus
tells  {Ant.  XX.  62  and  26  iii-  ir>3)  of  a  famine  in  Jud:ea,
which  can  well  be  put  in  one  of  these  years,  .and  so
could  have  hcen  foreseen  in  the  preceding  year  (cp
Schiircr,  1  474,  n.  8).  By  a  singular  coincidence  there
was  in  49  also,  one  of  the  alternative  years  for  the
journey  of  Paul  and  Barnalxis  to  Jerusalem,  a  much
more  widely  extended  famine  (see,  for  authorities,
Schurer,  ib.).  It  is  possible,  then,  that  the  author
knew  that  the  conference  was  in  a  famine  )ear,  but
connected  it  by  mistake  with  the  famine  of  44  instead
of  that  of  49,  and  that  this  assisted  the  confusion
which resulted in the creation of an extra visit to

1  For  the  different  possibilities  see  the  Introductions  to  the
NT  ;  for  the  latest  hypotheses,  Clemen,  Chrotiol.  d.  /auiin.
Brifft,  18  .3.

2  VVe  can  make  nothing  of  the  statement  in  .Acts  21 38.
Even  were  its  .-luthenticity  beyond  dispute,  we  have  no  means
whatever  of  determining  the  year  of  the  sedition  referret  to,
and  Wieseler's  choice  of  56  or  57  A.i>.  (Chron.  79)  is  devoid  of
any  solid  foundation.  Nor  is  it  pos.sible  to  infer  any  date  from
the  account  in  Acts  'Ihf.  of  .Agrippa  and  Berenice's  presence  in
Ca«arca  at  the  time  when  Paul's  case  was  decided.

814


78.  Aretas :
Paul's  con-
version.


CHRONOLOGY

Jerusalem.  Tlie  confusion  of  the  two  famine  years  is
the  more  pardonable  Ixxause  l)oth  fell  under  Claudius  ;
the  transformation  of  the  two  local  famines  into  one
which  affected  the  whole  empire  is  easily  explicable.
All  tiiis,  hcjwever.  is  simply  a  possibility.  If  the  year
of  the  conference  was  45  A.I).,  the  two  journeys  dis-
tinguished by  Lk.  would  fall  so  close  together  that  we
can  easily  understand  their  being  regarded  as  distinct,
on  the  supposition  that  Lk.  knew  nothing  of  the  raising
of  a  collection  and  its  delivery  on  the  occasion  of  Paul's
last  journey  to  Jerusalem,  but  did  know  of  a  famine
alwul  the  time  of  the  conference  and  of  succour  given
to  the  primitive  church  through  Paul.

Tile  second  notice  is  that  of  the  expulsion  of  the  Jews
from  konu;  under  Claudius,  which  was  (ActslSiy. ),
_„  „  ,  .  before  Paul's  arrival  at  Corinth.  The
77.  Expulsion  y^^^  however,  of  this  edict,  which
0  Jews.  Suetonius  {Claud.  25)  also  mentions,
is  not  certain.  "Wieseler  ( Chronol.  1 20- 128)  conjectures,
without  conclusive  arguments,  that  it  was  issued  in  the
year  of  the  expulsion  of  the  mathematici  (  Tac.  Ann.  xii.
,')2;  l)io(^assius606) — that  is,  in  52  A. D. — whilst  Orosius
(76,  15  ed.  /^ngemeister,  1882)  gives  as  the  date,  on
the  authority  of  Josepiius  (in  the  existing  text  of  whose
writings  we  find  no  mention  of  the  matter),  the  ninth
year  of  Claudius  =  49  .\.D. — a  date  not  fa\ourablc  to
the  earlier  alternative  reached  above  for  the  year  of  Paul's
arrival  in  Corinth,  the  summer  of  47/51.  Orosius's
statement,  however,  cannot  be  verified.

Finally,  from  Acts  9  24  ff.  and  2  Cor.  11 32  f.,  it
appears  that  Pauls  first  visit  to  Jerusalem  was
occasioned  b\'  a  persecution  at  a
time  when  a  viceroy  of  Aretas,  king
of  the  Xabatteans,  resided  at  Damascus.
The  latest  Damascene  coins  with  the
head  of  Tiberius  (which  form  one  of  the  proofs  brought
together  by  Schtirer,  1  615 /.  n.  14,  to  prove,  against
Marc]uardt  and  Mommscn,  that  Damascus  was  not  all
the  time  under  Arabian  rule)  belong  to  the  year  33-34,
and  it  is  in  itself  not  probable,  though  it  is  ])0ssible,
that  Damascus  was  given  to  Aretas  by  Tiberius,  who
died  in  March  37  A.D. ,  while  under  Caligula  such
favours  are  well  known.  If  Caligula's  reign  had
already  begun,  the  flight  of  Paul  would  have  fallen  at
least  two  years  later  than  all  but  one  of  the  dates  assigned
for  it  alx)ve.  However,  the  argument  is  uncertain.
Nothing  known  to  us  makes  the  possession  of  Damascus
by  Aretas  in  the  last  years  of  Tiberius  actually  impos-
sible. If  that  should  be  excluded  by  discoveries  of
coins  or  other  new  evidence,  we  should  then  (the
often  assailed  genuineness  of  2  Cor.  1132/.  being  pre-
supposed) have  to  combine  the  numbers  in  Gal.  1 18
2 1  (so  that  there  would  be  only  fourteen  years  between
Paul's  conversion  and  the  conference  in  Jerusalem),
or  to  shorten  the  time  estimated  for  the  mission  in
Asia  Minor  and  Europe,  or  else  to  omit  from  the
life  of  Paul  the  two-year  imprisonment  in  Ciesarea
under  the  procurator  Felix.

At  the  same  time,  the  coins  of  Tiberius  for  the  year
33-34  exclude  the  j'ear  28  as  that  of  Paul's  conversion.
If  we  assign  the  imprisonment  to  54,  the  data  of  (jal.  1  /".
must  Ix.'  explained  as  referring  to  the  total  of  fourteen
years,  so  that  Pauls  conversion  would  fall  in  31.  In
favour  of  this  is  its  nearness  to  the  death  of  Jesus.
For  1  Cor.  l'»3^  does  not  well  permit  an  interval  of
any  length  lx;tween  Jesus'  death  and  Paul's  arrival  at
Damascus.  Conver.sely,  the  same  consideration  de-
mands that,  if  we  regard  58  as  the  date  of  the  imprison-
ment, we  should  calculate  from  the  statements  in  (Jal.  \  f.
a  perio<i  of  seventeen  years,  so  that  32  would  Ije  the
year  of  Paul's  conversion.  Neither  series,  accordingly,
conflicts  with  what  we  know  of  those  times  ;  but  it  may
readily  Ije  asked  :  Are  we  warranted  in  casting  discredit
on  the  statements  of  Eusebius  ?

How now stands the case with reference to the
close of Paul's life? The travellers set out for
81S


CHRONOLOGY

Rome  in  the  autumn  of  56  or 60,  and  arrived  in  the
70 rinBititr SP""K °f *h^ subsequent year  (Acts

"  ■ was kept  in  easy  imprisonment,  and  to

I this i)eriod belong  Colossians  and Philemon, though
some assign them to the Cpesarean imprisonment.
After the lapse of the two years began the trial,
j about which we  have  some information from  a  note
I to Timothy now incorporated in 2 Tim., and from
Philippians. Of its duration and i.ssue we know
I nothing. The  prediction  that I'aul  would  die  without
i meeting his friends  again (Acts 20 25-38), the sudden
breaking  off  of  Acts,  and  the  utter  absence  of  all  trace
of  any  later  activity  on the part  of  the  apostle, will
always  incline  one  to  believe  that Paul's  presentiment
was  fulfilled,  and  that  his  trial  ended  in  a  sentence  of
death. If  so,  the  great  ajxjstlc  died  in  the  course  of
the year 59 or 63. In either case his martyrdom
was before the persecution of Nero, and hatl no
connection  with  it.  Nor  does  any  of  the  older

narratives  conflict  with  this.  When  Eusebius  in  his
Chronicle  assigns  the  death  of  Peter  and  Paul  to  the
fourteenth  or  thirteenth  year  of  Nero  (the  numl)er
varies  in  different  texts) — i.e.,  68  or  67  .\.D. — he  is  in
conflict  with  himself,  for  he  elsewhere  sets  this  event  in
the  beginning  of  the  persecution  of  Nero,  which  beyond
all  question  was  in  the  summer  of  64 ;  and  more-
over, as  Harnack  insists  {I.e.  2^1  f. ),  his  date  lies  under
the  suspicion  of  being  occasioned  by  the  legendary
twenty-five  years  stay  of  Peter  at  Rome,  in  combination
with  the  story  that  the  ajx^stles  left  Jerusalem  twelve
years  after  the  death  of  Jesus;  30 -i- 12  +  25  'u^ke
67.  But neither is the tradition of  the con-

temporaneous death  of  the  two  apostolic  leaders  by
any  means  so  well  grounded  as  Harnack  assumes
{I.e.).  In  Eusebius,  the  contemporaneousness  lies
under  the  same  suspicion  as  the  date.  Clem.  Rom.
chap.  5  gives  no  hint  of  it,  and  the  summary  introduction
of  other  sufferers  in  chap.  6  gives  us  no  right,  in  face  of
the  enumeration  of  the  sufferings  enduretl  by  Peter  and
Paul  during  the  whole  of  their  apostolic  activity,  to
apply  all  that  is  said  in  chap.  6,  and  therefore  the  death
of  these  apostles,  to  the  persecution  of  Nero.  'The
testimony  of  Dionysius  (Eus.  //A'  ii.  2r>8).  &ix<f>u)  (h  tt]u
'IraXiav  o/xoae  SiSd^avTes  iiJ.apT6frr)aav  Kara  top  avrov
Kaipov  ('  AhcT  both  teaching  togetiier  as  far  as  to  Italy,
they  suffered  martyrdom  at  the  same  time")  is  to  lie
taken  e»m  grano  salts.  If  the  two  great  apostles
died  a  violent  death  for  their  faith  in  Rome  under  Nero,
it  is  easy  to  see  how  tradition  might  lose  sight  of  the
interval  of  one  year  or  five  years,  and  bring  the  two
martyrdoms  together.  The  rapidity  with  which  in  the
popular  memory  Paul  receded  behind  Peter,  a  pheno-
menon already  noticeable  in  Clem.  Rom.  and  Ignat.
{ad  Rom.  4),  admits  of  a  peculiarly  simple  explanation
if  Paul  was  withdrawn  from  the  scene  so  much  sooner.

Whatever  testimony  can be  found  in  the  literature

down  to  Eusebius  for  the  liberation  of  Paul  from  his

Oft  TXT !> 1 ^^""^^  imprisonment  at  Rome  has  been


liberated  ?


collected  anew  by  Spitta  ( Zur  Gesch.


Lit.  des  Urchrist.  1).  In  truth,  all
that  can  be  taken  account  of  before  Eusebius  is  the
apostle's  intention  intimated  in  Rom.  1524and  mentioned
in  the  Muratorian  fragment  (except  that  the  a|X)stle's
plans  were  so  often  upset  by  events),  the  Pauline
fragments  of  the  Pastoral  Epistles  (if  they  ought  not
also  to  be  brought  within  the  period  of  missionary
activity  known  to  us,  since  otherwise  they  would  present
the  post-captivity  labours  as  a  strange  repetition  of
\\hat  preceded  the  captivity),  and  the  expression  Wp^a
r^j  Si'trewj  '  boundary  of  the  west '  in  Clem.  Rom.  It
is  only  the  last  that  we  can  take  seriously.  Since,
however,  Ignatius  sjaeaks  of  Rome  as  hvai.%  {'  west,'  ad
Koin.1-2),  and  Clement  himself  has  immediately  before
opposed  5i''<r«  to  ii»o.ro\i]  ('east'),  meaning  therefore
at least Rome among  other  places, it is  not  at  all

816


\


CHRONOLOGY

(liflicult,  fspecially  k<fping  in  view  the  Pauline  metaphor
of  the  dviiv  (conriict),  to  sup[K)se  that  it  is  this  SOffn,
[i.e..  Koine)  that  is  indicatetl  as  T«p>xa.  If,  in  spile  of
this,  the  hyix)thesis  of  the  liberation  of  Paul  should  Ix*
accepted,  we  should  have  to  add  to  our  chronological
table:  59/63. — Liberation  of  Paul;  July-Auj;.  64.--
Martyrdom.  The  a[xjstle's  eventful  life  would  thus
end  with  a  period  completely  obscured  in  the  [xjpular
memory,  a  period  the  events  of  which  have  not  left  a
trace  behind.

TABLE  X.— Life  of  Paul:  Last  Pkkiod.

56/60  (autumn).— Paul  set  out  for  Rome.

57/61  (spring).-  Arrival  in  Koine.

57/61/  — Kasy  imprisonment ;  Col.  Philem.

59/63.  — Death  of  Paul.

jotherwise]
[59/63.— I. i  Ik:  rat  ion  of  Paul.l
[64  July-AuH.— Martyrdom.]

III.  Chronology  of  the  Chi:rche!;  in  Pales-
iim:.  —  I.  If  the  dates  so  far  accepted  are  correct,  the
81  Earliest  ^'^^^^'^  Palestinian  development  descrilx.-d
events  ''-''  ''^^'  •'^*"'^°''  °^  ''^'■"^^  (almost  our  only
authority  for  this  i)crio<l)  Ix-tween  the
death  of  Jesus  and  the  conversion  of  ''aul,  finally
culminating  in  the  death  of  Stephen  and  the  (lis[)ersion
of  the  church  in  Jerusalem,  must  be  crowded  into  the
limits  of  two  years,  or  [)ossibly  even  of  a  single  year.

The  traditions  are,  however,  very  scanty.  According
to  I  Cor.  15  1-7  there  haiajx-ned  in  this  space  of  time  the
appearance  of  Jesus  to  Peter  and  the  twelve  (as  to  the
time  and  place  of  which  it  is  not  {xjssibk;  to  reach  a
certain  conclusion,  hut  with  which  the  return  to  Jeru.salem
is  most  clearly  connected),  his  apix-arance  to  the  500
brethren  ([jcrhaps  to  be  identified  with  the  occurrence
narrated  in  Acts  2,  which  in  that  case  was  in  Jerusalem,
and,  if  Acts  2  is  correct,  fifty  days  after  the  death  of
Jesus),  the  conversion  of  him  who  afterwards  b.-came
head  of  the  church  of  Jerusalem,  James  the  Lord's
brother  (since  this  lx>yond  doubt  happened  at  the  time
of  the  ap[)earance  to  him  mentioned  in  i  Cor.  l.'>7),  and
the  conversion  (by  the  same  means)  of  many  who  after-
wards Ix'came  missionaries.  The  necessitv  of  a  repre-
sentation of  the  Hellenists  (.-\cts  ti  1-6)  suggests  that  from
the  return  of  the  twelve  until  that  time  a  considerable
[x-riod  hadelat'sed,  which  is,  however,  very  insufficiently
filled  out  by  the  narratives  in  chaps.  3-5.

2.  As  to  the  later  events,  in  the  narratives  in  Acts
84-4  .  !ti-3o  9  ji-11  18  11  19-24  illustrating  the  geographical

extension  of  Christianity,  the  author
plainly  does  not  nu-an  to  assert  that  the
events  descrilx.'d  followed  one  another  in
mutually  exclusive  periods  of  time.  If  the  accounts  are
historical,  the  missionary  ojx'rations  of  Philip  and  Peter
were  undertaken  while  Paul  was  working  in  Damascus
and  Antioch  (including  Syria)  in  31/35  or  32/36^  A.D.
The  anonymous  beginnings  of  Christianity  in  Damascus
and  .Antioch  belong,  of  course,  to  the  time  before  Paul
took  hold  in  those  places.  If  the  recollections  lying  at  the
basis  of  Acts  1 1  22-26  are  approximately  correct,  Harnabas
nmst  have  left  Jerus;ilem  finally  for  Antioch  not  very
long  after  Pauls  first  visit  to  Jerusalem  in  34/38  or
35/39  A.I).,  and  Philip  may  by  that  time  have  already
removed  to  Ca;sarea  (.\cts840).

3.  After  these  events  we  hear  nothing  until  the  death
of  James  the  son  of  Zebedee  betwetin  41,  the  year  in
which  Mero<l  .\grippa  I.  began  to  rule  over  Judrea,  and
44,  the  year  of  his  death  (Actsl2i/' ).  If  the  account  in
Acts  is  correct,  alxjut  this  same  time  Peter  left  Jerusalem
permanently  (.\ctsrj  17 i,  and  James  the  Lords  brother
must  have  already  Ix-i-ome  the  leader  of  the  church
(Actsl'2i7).  With  this  agrees  excellently  the  abun-
dantly attested  old  Christian  tradition  that  the  twelve
left  Jerusalem  twelve  years  after  Jesus'  death  (see  relT.
in  Hamack,  Chronologic,  243).  It  may  be  in  error
simply  in  transferring  to  the  twelve  what  applied  only
to  their  head.  Peter. At  all  events.  Acts  tells  us  nothing


82.  Later
events.


CHRONOLOGY

I  of  the  ten  left  after  the  death  of  James.  The  twelfth
year  would  Ix.-  42  A.D.  In  that  case  Herod  must  have
sought,  imme<liately  after  his  accession,  by  his  proceed-
ings against  the  Christians  to  secure  the  confidence  of

I the  Jews.

i  4-  'f  the  results  reached  alxjve  with  reference  to  what
we  read  in  Acts  15  11  27.^  and  L'}/  a""*-*  "ght,  our  next

i information  relates  to  the  year  45  or  49,  when Peter,

j  Paul,  and  liarnabas  gather  again  at  the  conference
round  James,  at  whose  side  (Gal.  29)  ap[x-ars  John,  the
son  of  Zelxxlee.  Paul  and  Harnabas  return  to  Antioch  ;
Peter  Ic-aves  Jerusiilem  again  very  soon,  and  lives  for  a
while  among  the  Christians  at  Antioch  ((Jal.  'In  ff.).

5.  In  54/58,  when  Paul  comes  to  Jerusalem  with  the
contribution,  James  is  master  of  the  situation  (Acts
21 18).  This  is  the  hist  information  from  the  N  1'  about
the  church  in  Palestine.

6.  According  to  the  received  text  of  Josephus  (,-/«/.  xx.
9i),  James  .suftered  martyrdom  in  62— that  is.  under  the
high  priest  Ananos  (son  of  the  high  priest  of  the  same
name  known  to  us  from  the  tJospels) — but  Ixfore  the
arrival  in  Judiea  of  Albinus,  the  successor  of  the  pro-
curator I'estus.  (.After  I'estuss  early  tleath  Annas  had
Ixicn  a|ji)ointed  high  priest  by  Agrippa  II.)  The  passage
is  not  free,  however,  from  the  suspicion  of  Christian  inter-
polation. Hegesippus  ( Kus.  Hli  ii.  23 11-18)  seems  to
have  put  the  death  of  James  somewhat  nearer  to  the
destruction  of  Jerusalem.'

Shortly  before  the  destruction  of  Jerusalem  (A.n.  70)
the  Christians  removed  to  Pel  la  in  Peraa.  The  year  is
not  certain,  but  was  probably  67,  when,  after  the  down-
fall of  Cestius,  Jewish  fanaticism  overreached  itself.

IV.  Otjiek Dates i.\ the History ok Pkimi-
83  Other  ^'^'"'  ^"^''^''■'•^N''"^'— Here  can  be  men-
dates t'on^'fl o"'y those few points on  which  a
stray  ray  of  light  happens  to  fall. In  the
nature  of  the  case,  detailed  discussions  can  be  given  only
in  tiie  s[x;cial  articles.

1.  Piter. — That  Peter,  the  last  trace  of  whom  we
found  in  A.D.  45/49,  or  foniewhat  I.Uer,  at  Antioch,
was  later  a  travelling  missionary  after  the  manner  of
Paul,  is  to  be  inferred  from  the  allusions  to  him  in
I  Cor.  1  12  822  95.  I  Pet.  5  12/.,  even  if  the  epistle  was
not  written  by  Peter,  implies  his  intimate  association
with  Paul's  former  companions  ,Silvaiuis  and  Mark,  and
I  Pet.  li/.  his  missionary  activity  in  the  jjrovinces  of
.\sia  Minor.  For  this  latter  there  was  rixjm  at  any  rate
after  the  imprisonment  of  Paul  in  54/58,  and  for  most  of
the  provinces  even  before  that  time  :  namely,  from  the
moment  when  Paul  transferred  his  chief  activity  to
Macedonia,  Achaia.  and  Asia.  In  regard  to  Peter's  stay
in  Rome,  for  which  1  Pet.  5 13  is  an  argument  (it  is
certainly  to  Ixi  put  later  than  the  en<l  of  Paul's  trial),
and  in  regard  to  the  question  whether  it  was  in  the
persecution  a.^ter  the  fire  in  Rome  (July  64)  that  he
suffered  martyrdom  (cp  Clem.  Rom.  5),  see  Peter.
The  as.sum[)tion  of  a  contemporaneous  martyrdom
of  Paul  and  Peter  finds  no  support  in  the  earliest
documents  :  see  above,  §  79.

2.  John. — As  to  John's  residence  in  I".phesus  and  his
end,  see  John.

3.  Whilst  the  persecution  under  Nero  was  doubtless
in  the  main  limite<l  to  Rome,  the  last  years  of  Domitian.
especially  in  Asia  Minor,  in  consecjuence  of  the  insistence
on  the  worship  of  the  Emperor,  may  have  been  a  jx;riotl
of  many  contlicts  with  Christianity."

To  this  time  ( s;\y  93-96 )  niany  scholars  assign  Hebrews

and  I  Peter  (while  others  carry  them  down  to  the  reign

_- nrr of  Trajan),  as well as  the  Apocalypse  of


writings.


John  (see  the  special  articles). Not  nuich
later, perhaps  about the  end  of  the first


1  For  further  discussion,  with  references  to  sources  and  biblio-
graphy, -see  Schiirer,  1  486/

*  Cp  especially  Neumann,  Der  rdmiscke  Staat  u.  die  tUlgt-
meine  Kirche,  :8r,o,  \Tjff'.;  Ramsay,  The  Church  in  the
Koman  EtHpirf,  1893,  p.  i^iff.


to  Antioch.

.,  son  of  Zebedee  ;  Peter


CHRYSOLITE

century,  were  written  Ephesians,  the  Third  Gospel,  and
Acts.  Otir  Gospel  of  Mark  must,  apart  possibly  from
some  later  additions,  have  been  written  before  this  ;
there  is  no  need  to  suppose  a  nuich  later  date  than  70.
The  Fourth  tiospel,  after  which,  probably,  came  the
Johannine  epistles,  can  well,  by  reason  of  its  near  rela-
tion to  Lk.  and  for  other  reasons,  have  been  written  at
the  same  time  as,  or  not  long  after,  the  Third  Gospel.
The  first  third  of  the  second  century  best  suits  the  latest
books  of  the  NT — Matthew,  the  Pastoral  Epistles,  and
James,  all  of  them  doubtless  products  of  the  Roman
church.  Jude  may  have  been  written  somewhat  earlier,
2  Peter  somewhat  later.  See  the  Introductions  to  the
NT  and  Harnack,  Chronologie,  246-50,  245/.,  451-64.
475-91,651-81.

TABLE  XL— So.ME  Other  Dates

(.Al'PKO.XlMATIONS).

31/35  or  32/36^— Work  of  Philip  and  Peter  in  Palestine.

34/38  or  35/39^-Barnabas  removr-  -  *-:-"»-

Between  41  and  44. — Death  of  Jan
leaves  Jerusalem  ;  James  leader.

45/4g._Conference(Gal.  29).— Peter  soon  resides  at  .Vntioch
(Gal.  2  Hi/:).

5^/53._Paul  brings  contribution  to  Jerusalem  (Acts 21  18).

Later. — Peter  becomes  a  travelling  missionary.

62  or  later?— Death  of  James.

67  V  Christians  remove  from  Jerusalem  to  Pella.

70. Destruction  of  Jerusalem.

Not  much  after  70.— Our  Gospel  of  Mark  written.

g3-(;6  (?)— Heb.  and  i  Pet.  (ace.  to  many)  ;  Apoc.

About  end  of  century.— Kph.,  Lk.,  Acts,  Jn.,  Epp.  of  Jn.

First  third  of  2nd  century.— Jude,  Mt.,  Past.  Epp.,  Ja.,  2  Pet.

H.  v.S.

Rini.ioGRAPHY.  A.  Old  Tesiameni. —lde\er,  Handb.  Her
math.  u.  tech.  Chron.  2  vols.  1825-26,  and  Lchrb.  dff  Chrou.
^^ -D-ui-- -u^ 1831; H. Brandes, Ahluuidlungcn zur

85.  Bibliography,  q^^^,^  ^^^  Q^^.„f,  i,„  Aiterthu,,,,  1874;

Schrader,  Kcilinschri/tcn  u.  Geschichtsforschuiig,  1878 ;  B.
Netfler,  Ziisanuiicnhaiig  dcr  A  Tlk/ten  /.eitrcchnung  iiiit  der
Pro/a)ii;rsi/i.  .Miinster,  1879,  P'-  ■'•  '885,  pt.  iii.  1886;  Hommel,
Ahrissdi-rbal'.-as..  ti.  israelii.  Gesch.  in  Tahellcnfonn,  Leipsic,
1880;  Floigl,  Gesch.  des  semit.  Alterthums,  Leipsic,  1882;
Schrader,  KAT^),  1S83  (CO/',  1885-88);  Mahler,  Bibiische
Chron.  u.  Zeitrechnungder  Hebr.  1887  ;  Lederer,  l^ie  Bibiische
Zeitrechnung-,  1888  ;  Winckler,  .4  T  Untersuch.  1892  ;  Kautzsch,
HS,  1894,  BeilaKen,pp.  1 10-135  (a  tabular  chrorological  =iiimmary
from  Moses  to  the  end  of  the  second  century  B.C.;  ET  by  J.
Taylor) ;  '  Zeitrechnung  '  by  Riehm  in  his  H li  B,  1884,  pp.  1800-
1825;  andbyGust.  Rosch, /"/v"  A'(2)  17  444-484;  Carl  Niebuhr,Z>/V
Chronol.  der  Gesch.  Israels,  Aeg.  Bab.  u.  Ass.  von  2000-700  v.
Chr.  untersuclit,  18,6.

Oh  particular  points  also  the  follo'Ming : — For  the  time  of  the
Judges  :  Noldeke,  Unterstich.  zur  Kritik  des  A  T,  173-198.  For
the  Monarchy  (besides  the  histories  of  Israel):  Wellhausen,  _'  Die
Zeitrechnung  des  Buchsder  Runige  sell  der  I  heilungdes  Reichs  '
in  the /DT,  1875,  pp.  607-640;  Rrey,  'Zur  Ziitiecbnung  des  B.
der  Konige  in  ZIl'J',  i»77,  pp.  404-408  ;  W.  R.  Smith,  Proph.
1882,  pp.  145-151,  401-404  (2nd  ed.  403-406),  413-419  (2nd  ed.  415-
421);  Kamph.  I'ie  Chron.  iter  hebr.  t\  anise,  1883,  cp  ZA  TIV,
8193-202  ['85];  Klostermann,  Sam.  u.  h'on.  ['87],  pp.  493-498;
Riihl,  'Die  Tyri>che  Konigsliste  des  Menander  von  Ephesus'
in  the  Rhcin.  Mus./iir  Pliil.  n.s.  [  95],  pp.  565-578,  and  'Chron.
der  Konige  von  Lrael  u.  Juda,' in  Deutsche  Zt.f.  Gescltichts-
luiss.  1244-76,  171  [95]; Benzinger,  '  Kon.,'  1899  (A'//C).

For  the  Chronology  of  the  Persian  times. — Kuencn,  '  De
chron.  van  het  Perz.  tijdvak  der  Joodsche  geschied."  in  Proc.
Amsterdam  Royal  Academy,  Literature  Section,  1890,  trans-
late! into  German  in  Bu.'s  edition  of  Kue.'s  Biblical  essays,
Gesammelte  Abhandlungen,  etc.  ['94],  212-251  :  A.  van  Hoo-
nacker,  Zorobabel  et  le  second  temple,  etude  sur  la  chron.  des
six  premiers  chapitres  du  livre  cfpsdras,  1S92,  and  Nehemie
en  Ian  2 1  ct A rtaxerxes  I. ;  l.sdras  en  tan  7  cC A rtaxerxi-s  II.
(reply  to  Kue.),  1892  ;  Kosters,  Hei  herstel  van  Israel  in  het
Perz.  tijdvak,  i*'94  ;  Ed.  Meyer,  Die  F.ntstehung  des  Juden-
tums,  1896;  Charles  C.  Torrey,  I'/ie  Compos  tion  and  Hist.
Value  0/  Ezra-Neh.,  1896.

B.  New  Testament. — See  the  literature  cited  in  the  course  of
the  article,  especially  §  40  (note)  and  §§  51-56  (notes).  Cp  also
C.  H.  Turner  in  Hastings'  DB.

K.M.  (§§1-38,  85); H.v.S.  (§§39-84). _

CHRYSOLITE  (xpycoAiGoc).  one  of  the  found-
ations of  the  wall  of  the  New  Jerusalem  in  the  Apocalypse
(Rev.  21 10).  It  is  not  improbable  that  in  ancient  times
the  term  was  applied  to  a  particular  shade  of  Keryl
{q.v.).  See  Precious  Stones.  In  modern  usage
Chrysolite  is  the  name  generally  given  to  the  yellow  or
yellowish -green  varieties  of  olivine,  the  transparent
varieties  being  known  as  peridote  (cp  Topaz).
819


CHURCH

XpvtrdAtOos  in  ®  is  used  to  translate  tarsii'm  Ex.  28208931
Ezek  '28  13  (cp  Ezek.  1  16  Aq  [BAQ  transliterate],  Dan.  106
Theod.  [see  Sw.]).  In  Ezek.  28  13  AVi'g.  has  'chrysolite,'  but
elsewhere  EV  'beryl,'  which  more  proliably  represents  loham ;
see  Bi-.KYi.,  §  3,  TakshisH,  -SroNiiOK.

CHRYSOPRASE,  CHRYSOPRASUS  (xpyconpA-
COC).  one  of  the  foundations  of  the  wall  of  the  New
Jerusalem  in  the  Apocalypse  (Rev.  21  lof).  In  ancient
times  the  term  was  perhaps  applied  to  a  shade  of  Beryl  ;
cp  Pkeciol's  Stones.

The  word  does  not  occur  in  (S  ;'  but  AVnig.  has  '  chrysoprase '
for  1313,  kadhkodh,  in  Ezek.  27  16  where  AV  has  'agate'  and
RV  'ruby' (see  Chalcedony);  and  has  ' chrj-soprase '  also  for
-3:,  ndphekh,  in  Ezek.  28  13,  where  EV  has  '  emerald  '  and  RV»>g.
'  carbuncle  *  (see  Carbuncle,  Emerald).  In  mod.  mineralogy
the  chrysoprase  is  an  agate  coloured  apple-green  by  the  presence
of  oxide  of  nickel.

CHUB,  RVCUB(2'13  ;  Aq.,  Sym.,  Theod.  xoyBaA).
if  correct,  is  the  name  of  a  people  (Ezek.  30 st)  I  but
©"AQ  has  AiByec.  ^^^  Cornill  is  doubtless  right  in
regarding  3^3,  Cub,  as  a  corruption  of  3-,'?,  Lub,  which
occurs  repeatedly  in  the  plural  form  LUBIM  (q.v. ).  See
also  Mingled  People.

CHUN,  RV  CuN  (113,  I  Ch.  188).  an  Aramaean  city
identified  by  Ges.-Buhl  (following  ZZ>/^r 8 34)  with  the
modern  Kuna  (Rom.  Cunnce)  between  Laodicea  and
Hicrapolis.  The  reading  Chun  is,  however,  certainly
corrupt  (cp  Ki.  in  SJ30T).  See  Berothai,  and,  for  a
suggested  emendation,  Merom.

CHURCH  (ckkAhcIA)- I-  Art/«<?  and  Idea.— The
word  Ecclesia  has  an  important  history  behind  it  when
„.  ,  it  first  appears  in  Christian  literature. It

1.  History  ^^^  jj^g  regular  designation  of  the  as-
Ot  word.  ggjj^yy  Qf  the  whole  body  of  citizens  in  a
free  Greek  state,  'called  out'  or  summoned  to  the
transaction  of  public  business.  It  had  then  been
employed  by  the  Greek  translators  of  the  OT  as  a
natural  rendering  of  the  Hebrew  "jnp  (see  .Assembly),
the  whole  '  congregation '  of  Israel,  regarded  in  its
entirety  as  the  people  of  God.  A  less  technical  Greek
usage,  current  in  the  apostolic  age,  is  illustrated  by  the
disorderly  assemblage  in  the  theatre  at  Ephesus  (Acts
1  y  32  41 ) ,  where  we  find  also  by  way  of  contrast  a  reference
to  '  the  lawful  assembly'  {v.  39,  iv  t%  ivvop-i^  eKKXtjcria).
The  Jewish  usage  is  found  in  Stephen's  speech  when
he  speaks  of  Moses  as  having  been  '  in  the  church  in
the  wilderness'  (738).  Thus  the  traditions  of  the  word
enabled  it  to  appeal  alike  to  Jews  and  Gentiles  as  a
fitting  designation  of  the  new  people  of  God,  the
Christian  society  regarded  as  a  corporate  whole.

In  this  full  sense  we  find  it  in  Jesus'  declaration  to
Peter,  '  I  will  build  my  church '  (olKooofiria-u}  fxov  t^jv
2  TfTusara  « ^'^^rycria,' :  ML  16 18).  Here  it  is  re-
z.  sii  usage  g^^^g^  ^^  the  divine  house  that  is  to
m  Gospels.  ^  builded,  '  the  keys '  of  which  are  to
be  placed  in  the  apostle's  hands:  see  Binding  and
Loosing.  It  is  thus  ec]uated  with  '  the  kingdom  of
heaven '  which  Christ  has  come  to  establish,  each  of
the  designations  being  derived  from  the  past  histor>'  of
the  sacred  commonwealth.  The  force  of  the  phrase,
as  well  as  the  emphasis  given  by  the  position  of  the
pronoun  in  the  original,  comes  out  if  for  a  moment  we
venture  to  substitute  the  word  '  Israel '  for  the  word
'  church'  (Hort)  ;  and  the  thought  thus  finds  a  parallel
in  the  quotation  of  Amos  9 11/  in  Acts  15 16/.,  '  I  will
build  again  the  tabernacle  of  David  which  is  fallen
down. '

The  only  other  passage  where  the  word  occurs  in  the
Gospels  is  Ml  18 17,  where  'the  church'  is  contrasted
with  the  '  one  or  two  more '  whom  the  erring  brother
has  refused  to  hear.  We  are  here  again  reminded  of
the  whole  congregation  of  Israel  from  which  offenders
were  cut  off :  the  delinquent  becomes  henceforth  as  one
who  belongs  to  the  '  nations '  outside,  and  as  a  traitor

'  Though  6  Ai'floc  6  irpo<rti'Of  represents  C^V  (Beryl)  in  Gen.


CHURCH

to  the  chosen  people  {ufftrtp  6  iOviKbi  Kal  6  rtXihvifi).
It  is  possible  indeed  that  the  primary  reference  in  this
[)lace  may  Ix;  to  the  Jewish  ecclrsia  ;  but  if  so,  the
principle  remains  unchanged  for  the  Christian  ecclesia  ;
and  in  either  case,  while  some  local  embodiment  of  the
Chijrch  is  thought  of  as  the  means  by  wliich  action  is
taken,  the  meaning  is  that  the  whole  weight  of  the
divine  society  is  to  be  brought  to  bx?ar  upon  the  offender.

While  the  Christian  society  is  still  contined  within  the

walls  of  Jerusalem,  '  the  church  '  is  the  designation  of

- . . the  whole  Ixxly  of  the  believers,  !is  con-

.  n  C  8.  jraslcd  with  the  other  residents  in  the
city  (Acts  5 II  cp  8  i  3)  ;  but  it  is  possible  that  the
appellation  is  here  due  to  the  historian  himself,  recount-
ing the  events  many  years  later.  When,  as  the  result
of  Stephen's  testimony  and  death,  believers  are  to  be
found  in  all  parts  of  Palestine,  they  are  still  summed  up
in  the  same  single  word  :  '  the  church  (RV  ;  not  '  the
churches,'  AV)  throughout  the  whole  of  Judaea  and
Galilee  and  Samaria  had  peace,  txjiiig  builded '  (Acts  9 31 ;
cp  Mt.  IG18  as  above).  The  same  full  sense  of  the
^  _  .  word  is  found  in  Paul  s  epistles  at  a  time
when  Christian  communities  were  estab-
lished in  various  cities  of  Asia  Minor  and  of  Gre<x.e  :
apostles,  prophets,  and  teachers  are  set  '  in  the  church '
by  (jod  (1  Cor.  I'izS)  ;  'the  cluirch  of  God'  is  con-
trastetl  with  Jews  and  Greeks  (IO32).

The  Church  is  thus  the  new  chosen  people  :  it  is
'the  Israel  of  Ciod '  (cp  Gal.  616).  Jews  and  Gentiles
who  enter  it  are  mergetl  into  unity  ;  the  two  are  n.ade
one  (l~ph.  2 14  16).  It  is  'the  botiy  of  t'hrist,'  and  as
such  in.separable  from  him.  Christ  and  the  Church
are  not  two,  but  one  —  as  it  was  written  of  earthly
marriage,  '  they  twain  shall  be  one  flesh  '  (liph.  531/! ).
The  main  practiail  an.xiety  of  Paul's  life  ap^jears  to
have  been  the  preservation  of  the  scattered  communities
of  Christians,  which  had  sprung  up  under  his  preaching,
in  a  living  unity  with  the  earlier  comnmnitics  of  Palestine,
so  as  to  form  with  them  a  single  whole,  the  undivided
and  indivisible  representative  of  Christ  in  the  world.

It  is  noteworthy  that  Peter  never  uses  the  word
ecclesia.  Yet,  in  spite  of  the  absence  both  of  this
_  -  Peter  ^^^"^^  •'^"'^  °^  ^^^^  Pauline  metaphor  of
'the  Ixxly,'  no  writer  displays  such  a
wealth  of  imagery  in  describing  the  holy  society.  Once
he  speaks  of  it  as  'a  holy  nation'  (i  Pet.  29),  twice  as
a  'people'  (29  10),  twice  as  a  'house'  (2$  417),  twice
as  a  '  Hock '  (5  2  3),  twice  as  a  '  priesthood  '  (25  9),  and
twice  again,  in  a  word  wholly  his  own,  as  a  '  brother-
hood'(' Love  the  brotherhood,'  217:  ■  your  brotherhood
which  is  in  the  workl,'  59).

Side  by  side  with  the  full  sense  of  the  word  ecclesia
we  find  another  and  a  wholly  natural  use  of  it,  which

^,  .  .  seems  at  first  sight  to  contlict  with  the  con-
■,  ,  ce[)tion  of  unity  which  is  dominant  in  the
p.-i.ssages  we  have  hitherto  examined.  The
new  '  Israel  of  God,'  like  its  predeces.sor,  was  scattered
over  a  wide  area.  Wherever  Christians  were  gathered
as  such,  there  was  the  Church  of  God.  Hence  we  find
such  an  e.xpression  as  '  at  Antioch,  in  the  church,  there
were  prophets  and  teachers  '  (Acard  Tr]v  ol>aa.v  (KKXtjffiav,
the  participle  throwing  emphasis  upon  the  noun,  '  in
what  was  the  church,'  Actsl3i);  and  again,  'the
church  of  God  which  is  in  Corinth';  and  even,  'the
church  that  is  in  their  house'  (Rom.  16s).  In  '"^H  these
cases  the  sense  of  unity  may  be  felt :  it  is  the  one
Church,  thought  of  as  existing  in  various  localities.
From  this,  however,  it  is  an  easy  passage  to  speak  of  '  the
church  of  the  Thessalonians '  ( i  Thess.  1 1  2  Thess.  1  i )  ;
and  even  to  use  the  word  in  the  jjlural,  '  the  churches
of  Galatia'  or  '  of  Asia'  (i  Cor.  Itii  19),  '  the  churches
of  God"  (2  Thess.  1 4).  The  transition  is  naturally
found  on  Greek  ground,  where  the  use  of  ecclesia  in
the  |)lural  would  be  helped  by  its  common  emplopnent
for  the  ecclesiis  of  Greek  cities  ;  whereas  in  Palestine,
where  the  Jewish  connotation  of  the  word  was  more
821


CHURCH

sensibly  felt,  it  was  more  natural  to  speak  of  the  local
representative  of  the  ecclesia  under  the  designation  of
jy«,/4',;^'<!' (cp  Jas.  2a).

The  churches,  then,  are  the  local  embodiments  of
the  Church  :  the  distribution  of  the  one  into  many  is
7 Outsida  P"""^"')'  geographical. The unity remains


Canon.


unaftected  : there  is  no  other  Church  than


the  church  of  Gcxl. '  When  we  pass
outside  the  canon  we  find  the  same  conception  of  the
Church  l»oth  as  a  living  unity  and  as  the  divinely  pre-
ordainetl  successor  to  the  ancient  Israel.  Thus  in  the
ShcJ'herd  the  Church  ajipears  to  Hcrmas  as  an  aged
woman,  even  as  Sion  had  appeared  to  Hsdras  as  a
barren  woman  (4  I'Lsd.  938  10  44).  She  is  aged,  '  because
she  was  create<l  first  of  all  things,  and  for  her  sake  the
world  was  made'  (Herni.  I'is.'i^).  .\gain,  in  the
ancient  homily  formerly  ascriljed  to  Clement  of  Rome
(chap.  14),  we  read  of  the  pre-existent,  spiritual  Church,
'created  Ix'fore  sun  and  moon,"  and  manifested  at
length  in  the  flesh.  In  the  X'alentinian  system,  more-
over, Ecclesia  ap{)ears  as  one  of  the  icons.  Cp,
too,  Clem..\lex.  Protrept.  8,  Strom,  iv.  8.  The  earliest
use  of  the  term  '  the  Catholic  Church  '  (Ignat.  Smyrn.
8:  circa  117,  Lightf )  empha-sises  the  unity  and
universality  of  the  whole  in  contrast  with  the  individual
congregations  ;  not,  as  in  the  later  technical  .sense,  its
orthodoxy  in  contrast  w  ith  heretical  systems  :  '  \\  herever
Jesus  Christ  is, there  is the  catholic  church ' (e\€t  ij

KatioXlKT}  iKK\r]iTia).

II. Organisation. — The  primitive  conception  of  the

Church  thus  regards  it  (a)  as  essentially  one,  admitting

_  . ... of  no  plurality  except  such  as  is  due  to

.  local  distribution,  and  (/')  as  succeeding

concep  ion.  ^^  ^j^^  peculiar  position  of  privilege
hitherto  occupied  by  the  sacred  Jewish  Commonwealth,
so  that  even  Paul  in  writing  to  Gentiles  thinks  of  it  as
'the  Israel  of  God.'  In  correspondence  with  the  two
parts  of  this  conception  it  is  natural  to  expect  in  the
development  of  its  organisation  (a)  a  general  unity  in
spite  of  local  and  temporary  variety,  and  (/')  a  tendency,
both  at  the  outset  and  from  time  to  time  afterwards,  to
look  back  to  the  more  prominent  features  of  Jewish
religious  institutions.  W'eekl)'  gatherings  for  liturgical
worship,  the  recognition  of  holy  seasons  and  holy  books,
are  examples  of  elements  of  religious  life  which  passed
over  naturally  and  at  once  from  the  Jewish  to  the
Christian  Church  ;  and  these  were  elements  which  the
experience  of  the  scattered  Judaism  of  the  Uisijersion
had  proved  atui  warranted  as  amongst  the  strongest
bonds  of  practical  unity.

Had  the  apostles  separated  immediately  after  Pente-
cost for  the  evangelisation  of  the  world,  it  might  easily


9.  Earliest
period.


have  hapfiened  that,  while  the  general
needs  of  the  societies  founded  by  their
labours  were,  to  a  large  extent,  the  same
in  various  districts,  the  institutions  (levelo]wd  to  meet
those  needs  might  have  f)resented  a  most  astonish-
ing variety.  .As  a  matter  of  fact  such  a  mexle  of  pro-
cedure on  their  part  was  impossible.  The  direct
command  of  Christ  had  indicated  Jerusalem  as  the
first  scene  of  their  work  ;  but,  even  apart  from  this,
the  very  clearness  with  which  from  the  first  they
recognised  the  new  society  to  be  the  divinely  appointed
issue  and  climax  of  the  old,  nmst  have  hindered  them
frono  perceiving  at  once  all  that  was  involved  in  the
complementary  triuh  of  its  universality.  .As  a  matter
of  fact  they  clung  to  the  sacred  centre  of  the  old
national  life  until  the  development  of  events  gradually
forced  them  into  a  wider  sphere.  Hence  a  jieriod  of
years  was  passetl  within  Jerusalem  itself,  and  m  the
most  intimate  relation  with  the  religious  institutions  of
the  Jewish  people,  of  whom,  at  that  time,  all  the
believers  formed  an  integral  part.  Accordingly  the
new  society  had  time  to  grow  into  a  consciousness  of  its
own  corporate  life  within  a  limited  area  ;  the  pressure
of  practical  difficulties  led  to  the  experiment  of  institu-


CHURCH

tions  specially  designed  to  meet  them  ;  and,  when  the
earlier  limitations  began  gradually  to  disappear  in
consequence  of  Stephen's  wider  conceptions  and  the
crisis  which  they  brought  u[X)n  his  fellow-believers,  and
the  society  was  now  scattered  like  seed  over  the
countries,  this  corporate  life  had  already  given  signs  of  an
organised  growth,  and  the  home  church  at  Jerusalem
had  become  in  some  sense  a  pattern  which  could  not
fail  to  inthience  all  subsecjuent  foundations.  These  first
years  in  Jerusalem,  then,  demand  careful  study,  if  the
development  of  Christian  institutions  is  to  be  securely
traced.

The  brotherhood  which  was  formed  by  the  baptism
of  the  earliest  converts  was,  at  the  outset,  practically  a
guild  of  Judaism,  faithful  to  the  ancient


10.  A  Jewish
guild.


creed  and  worshij},  and  with  no  thought
of  a  sever.ance  from  the  religious  life  of
the  nation.  Its  distinctive  mark  was  not  the  neglect  of
Jewish  ordinances,  but  the  adherence  to  new  duties  and
privileges  of  its  own.  '  They  were  continuing  stead-
fastly in  the  teaching  of  the  apostles  and  the  fellowship,
the  breaking  of  bread  and  the  prayers'  (Acts  2  42).
The  temple  worship  was  not  forsaken  (3i) ;  but  it  was
supplemented  (246)  by  the  '  breaking  of  bread  at  home."
The  first  note  of  this  brotherhood  was  its  unity  :  '  they
had  one  heart  and  soul'  (432);  they  claimed  nothing
that  they  possessed  as  their  private  right,  but  held  all  as
a  trust  for  the  good  of  the  whole  ;  they  would  even  on
occasion  sell  their  property  and  bring  the  proceeds  to
the  apostles  for  distribution  to  the  needy  (432-35).  As
the  numbers  increased,  these  simple  and  extemporaneous
methods  were  found  to  Iw  inadeeiuate.  Thus  the
common  tables,  at  which  the  poorer  dependents  re-
ceived their  daily  provision,  proved  an  occasion  of
friction  between  the  two  elements  of  Hebrew  and  Greek-
speaking  Jews,  of  which  the  brotherhood,  from  the
Th outset,  was composed. Organisation was

, ■  , necessitated, if  the  unity  of  the  body  was

seven. .  . . .  ^  ^

to  remain  unmipairetl  ;  and  seven  men  were

accordingly  appointed  to  '  serve  tables  '  (6 1-6). [On  the

criticism  of  these  narratives  cp  Community  of  Goods.]

Thus  was  made  the  first  essay  in  providing  for  the
discharge  of  the  functions  of  the  whole  body  through
representative  members.  No  distinctive  title  is  given
by  the  historian  to  these  seven  men.  Their  office  was
to  serve  [hiaKOveiv)  ;  in  respect  of  it,  therefore,  they
could  be^  termed  servants  (SmKovot)  ;  but  it  is  probable
that  the  word  '  deacon  '  remamed  for  some  time  a  mere
description  of  function,  rather  than  a  title  such  as  it
afterwards  became.  The  naturalness  of  this  institution
— the  response  to  a  new  need  which  was  certain  in  some
form  or  other  to  recur,  wherever  the  society  was  planted
— is  a  most  important  feature  of  it.  There  is  no  reason
to  suppose  that  it  was  suggested  by  any  Jewish  institu-
tion. The  number  of  the  persons  chosen  was  a  natural
number  in  a  community  consisting  of  Jews  ;  but  the
institution  itself  was  a  purely  spontaneous  development,
designed  to  meet  a  necessity  which  was  wholly  new.

Thus  far  we  find  but  two  kinds  of  distinction  which
in  any  way  mark  off  individual  members  of  the  society
from  the  general  mass. The  apostles  are


12.  The
apostles.


the  natural  leaders  :  to  them  all  look,  both
for  religious  teaching  and  for  practical
guidance  ;  through  them  discipline  on  one  memorable
occasion  is  enforced  ;  it  is  they  who  suggest  a  remedy
for  the  first  difficulty  which  was  occasioned  by  increas-
ing numbers  ;  and  their  hands  are  laid  on  the  seven
men  whom,  at  their  bidding,  the  whole  brotherhood
has  selected  to  serve  on  its  behalf.  The  seven,  on  the
other  hand,  are  ordained  to  humble  duties ;  their
function  is  not  to  rule,  but  to  serve  ;  through  them  the
society  fulfils  its  common  responsibility  of  providing  for
the  needs  of  its  poorer  memliers.

The  dispersion after Stephens  death  distracts our

t  On  the  fact  that  they  are  nowhere  styled  hiaxovoi,  see  also
Community  ok  Goods,  §  5.

823


CHURCH

attention  from  the Church  in  Jerusalem  for a  while.

13  The '^<>"'<-' years  later, when  the  apostles  had
'  eiders  ' '^"8""  '°  evangelise  other  parts  of  Palestine,

we  get  another  glimpse  of  it  at  a  time  of
threatened  famine.  Contributions  are  sent  from  the
disciples  at  Antioch  to  aid  the  poorer  brethren  in
Judrea  ;  it  is  not  to  the  apostles,  however,  that  tlie  gifts
are  brought,  but  to  'the  elders'  (.Acts  11 30),  a  class  of
which  we  now  hear  for  the  first  time  in  the  Christian
Church.  Thus  it  would  seem  that  the  necessity  of
leaving  the  apostles  free  for  wider  work  had  issued  in  a
further  development  of  organisation  in  Jerusalem  ;  but
it  is  only  incidentally  that  we  learn  that  a  new  step  has
been  taken.  We  have  no  indication  in  Acts  of  the
relation  of  '  the  seven  '  to  these  '  elders. '

Peter's  imprisonment,  which  immediately  follows,  is
the  occasion  of  a  further  notice  Ijearing  on  the  practical

14  Jajnea go^'^rnment  of  the  church  in  Jerusalem.

'  Tell  these  things  to  James  and  to  the
brethren,'  says  the  apostle  after  his  release  (I217).
The  position  of  prominence  thus  indicated  for  '  the
brother  of  the  I.ord  '  prepares  us  for  the  leading  part
which  he  subsecjuently  takes  in  the  conference  of  the
apostles  and  elders,  when  a  question  of  vital  imjxjrt-
ance  has  been  referred  from  Antioch  to  Jerusalem
(1013).  Many  years  later,  when  Paul  arrives  on  an
important  errand,  his  first  act  is  thus  described  by  an
eye-witness  :  '  On  the  morrow  Paul  entered  in  with  us
unto  James,  and  all  the  elders  came  together'  (21 18).
It  is  clear,  then,  that  James  had  come  to  occupy  a
unique  position  in  the  church  at  Jerusjilem — a  position
gained,  it  may  be,  by  no  formal  accession  to  power,
resulting  rather  from  his  relationship  to  Jesus  and
his  well-known  sanctity  of  life  ;  yet  a  position  clearly
recognised  by  the  apostles,  and  foreshadowing  the
climai  of  a  series  of  developments  in  the  universally
established  rule  of  the  monarchical  episcopate.

We  have  thus,  in  the  early  history  of  the  church  in
Jerusalem,  notices,  for  the  most  part  merely  incidental,
of  the  gradual  development  of  organi-
sation in  response  to  the  growing
necessities  of  a  corporate  life.  The  humblest  offices  of
the  daily  service  (7/  Ka6rj/j.epLVTi  SiaKovia)  by  which  the
bodily  needs  of  the  poorer  members  were  supplied,  are
discharged  by  the  church  through  seven  representatives.
The  guidance  of  the  whole  body  is  found  to  have
devolved  upon  men  whose  title  of  '  elders '  reminds  us
of  the  elders  of  the  Jewish  people  ;  and  in  this  case
there  is  no  reason  for  doubting  that  the  new  institution
was  directly  suggested  by  the  old.  These  elders  are
the  medium  by  which  the  church  in  Jerusalem  holds
formal  intercourse  with  the  church  elsewhere.  Lastly,
at  the  head  of  all,  but  acting  in  close  concert  with  the
elders,  we  see  James  holding  an  undefined  but  unmis-
takable position  of  authority.

\V'e must be  careful to  avoid  a  confusion  between

this  development  of  administrative  organs  of  the  body

,«  m 1. ^'id  that  other  form  of  service,  rendered
16.  Teachers,


15.  Summary.


etc.


to  it  by  those  who  discharged  the  various
functions  of  evangelisation,  exhortation,
and  instruction  (r;  BiaKOvia  roO  \6yov.  Acts  64).  The
two  kinds  of  service  might  often  meet  in  the  same
persons  :  thus,  at  the  outset,  the  apostles  themselves
were,  necessarily,  at  once  the  instructors  and  the
administrators  of  the  society — at  their  feet,  for  example,
gifts  for  the  community  were  laid,  as  at  a  later  time
they  were  brought  to  the  elders — and,  on  the  other
hand,  we  read  of  '  Philip  the  evangelist,  who  was  one
of  the  seven'  ("218).  Quite  apart  from  these,  however,
we  have  a  mention  of  '  prophets,"  of  whom  Agabus  is
one,  as  coming  from  Jerusalem  (11  27).

The  incidental  nature  of  the  references  to  those  who
discharged  these  functions  of  administration  and  instruc-
tion prevents  us  from  knowing  to  what  extent  the
church  in  Antioch  resembled  in  its  organisation  the
church  in  Jerusalem. We  only  learn  that  it  contained

824


CHURCH

•  prophets  and  teachers'  (l;5i)  :  we  hear  nothing  of  its
eliicrs  or  other  ofticers.  When,  however,  Paul  and
,. Harnabjis,  going  forth  from  the  church  in


17.  Pauls
churches.


\nlioch,  founded  conununities  in  variou.s
•itics  of  .Asia  .\lin(5r,  tlu-y  app<jinted,  wc  are
<-xl)rcs.sly  told,  elders  to  administer  them  (Haa).  In
this  they  probably  reprotlucid  an  institution  already
known  at  .•\nti(Kh,  with  which  lK)th  of  them  had  together
l)een  brought  into  contact  in  Jerusaleni  (11. 50).

.As  Paul  travelled  farther  west,  and  Christian  societies
sprang  up  in  a  more  jjurely  Greek  soil,  the  (Jhurch's
iiideix.-iuk-nce  of  Judaism  became  continually  clearer  ;
and  we  might  reasonably  e.xpect  to  tind  elements  of
(Jreek  scKial  life  exerting  an  inHuence  ujjon  the  develop-
ment of  Christian  organisation.  .At  the  same  time
we  must  Ijear  in  mind  that  Paul  himself  was  a  Jew,  that
to  the  Jews  in  every  place  he  made  his  lirst  appeal,
that  his  epistles  indicate  that  there  was  a  considerable
Jewish  element  among  those  to  whom  he  wrote,  and
that  we  have  clear  evidence  that,  at  first,  at  any  rate,
his  organisation  of  administration  was  basefl  upon  a
Jewish  precedent.  In  his  earliest  letters  to  a  lAiro|x:an
church  Paul  urges  the  recognition  and  esteem  of  •  those
who  labour  among  you  and  jiresiile  over  you  in  the
Lord,  and  admonish  you,'  thus  inijjiymg  a  local
ailministration,  though  not  further  defining  it  (i  Thess.
r)i2);  but  at  the  same  time  he  demands  absolute
otx.'tlience  to  the  injimctions  which  he  sends  them  in
the  joint  names  of  himself  and  -Silvanus  and  Timotheus
2 Thess.  3  14).

If  we  try  to  draw  from  the  study  of  Pauls  epistles  a
jjicture  of  a  Christian  society  in  a  (jreek  city,  we  may  start
l)y  observing  that  the  nienilters  of  it  are  distinguished
one  from  another  mainly  by  their  spiritual  'gifts'
( Xapiff^caTa).  Of  these  the  highest  is  prophecy,  which
is  freely  antl  sometimes  distractingly  exercised,  by  any
who  possess  it,  in  the  ordinary  meetings  of  the  society.
Otiier  gifts  too,  such  as  those  of  healing,  give  a  certain
natural  pre-eminence  to  their  possessors.  Over  all  we
recognise  the  (nidelined  but  overshadowing  authority  of
the  apostolic  founder.  Such  is  the  most  elementary
stage,  and  we  cannot  sharply  distinguish  it  from  that
which  innnediately  follows.  Leading  men  fall  into
classes,  with  obvious  divisions  (not  in  any  sense
stereotyjx'd  orders)  .sejmrating  them  from  the  general
ma.ss  :  ai><)stles,  prophets,  teachers — clear  grades  of
spiritual  prestige,  though  by  no  means  marked  off  as  a
hierarchy.  The  teachers  are  mainly  local  in  the  exercise
of  their  fimctions  ;  the  prophets  are  local  to  some
extent,  but  moving  from  church  to  church,  and  recog-
nised everywhere  in  virtue  of  their  gift  ;  the  apostles
are  not  local,  but  essentially  itinerant,  telonging  to  the
whole  Church.

This  ministry  expresses  the  more  distinctly  spiritual
sule  of  the  Church's  activities.  Hut  the  comnmnity
needs,  Ixisides,  to  be  governed  ;  and  discipline  nmst  be
exercised  in  the  case  of  miworthy  meml)ers.  It  must
have  representatives  who  can  formally  act  on  its  tx.'half,
either  in  dealing  with  individuals  or  in  carrying  on  com-
munications with  sister  communities.

.Again,  there  are  other  functions  of  the  Church's  life
w  liich  call  for  executive  officers.  The  care  of  the  sick
and  the  poor  was  a  primary  duty  ;  so,  too,  was  the  exer-
cise of  the  Church's  hospitality  to  travelling  brethren.
These  duties  involved  ati  administration  of  the  conunon
funds  collected  for  such  j)iirjx)ses,  and  generally  of
corporate  property.  S>ervants  of  the  Church  were  thus
called  for  to  perform  these  humble  but  necessary
functions,  and  responsible  suix;rintendents  to  see  that
they  were  duly  performed.  This  class  of  executive
ministers  we  lind  in  the  '  bishojis  and  deacons '  (iirl-
ffKovoi  Kai  SioiKoyoi)  whom  Paul  greets  in  the  opening
words  of  his  epistle  to  the  Philippians  ;  and  the  qualifi-
cations tiemanded  of  them  in  the  Pastoral  P^pistles
afford  valuable  indications  of  the  nature  of  their  service.

All  these  elements  of  moral  or  formal  authority  would

82s


18.  The
Didache.'


CHURCH

he  more  or  le.ss  distinctly  present  in  ever)'  community,
expressing  the  activity  and  life  of  the  community  itself
in  various  forms.  In  different  localities  development
would  proceed  at  different  rates  of  progress  ;  but  in  all,
the  same  general  needs  would  have  to  lie  met,  and  inter-
conunimication  would  help  towards  a  comparatively
uniform  result.  The  earlier  and  the  more  rajiitlly
developing  societies  would  sene  as  a  natural  model
to  the  rest.

In  six-aking  thus  we  do  not  lose  sight  of  the  control-
ling inspiration  of  the  divine  .Spirit  promised  by  Jesus
to  l)e  the  Church's  guide.  We  rather  recogni.se  the
presence  of  a  continuous  inspiration,  developing  from
within  the  growth  of  a  living  organism,  not  promulgating
a  code  of  rules  to  Ix;  imposed  from  without  upon  each
conununity  at  its  foundation.

The  scanty  and  .scattered  notices  of  church  organisa-
tion in  the  NT  need,  for  their  interpretation,  all  the
light  that  can  Ix;  thrown  u[Kjn  them  by  the
practice  of  Christian  conununities,  .so  far  as
it  can  Ix;  a.scertained  from  the  remains  of
their  earliest  literature.  Here  again,  however,  the
evidence  is  still  sjxirse  and  incidental,  though  of  late
years  it  has  been  increased,  esp<cially  by  the  recovery
(1883 1  of  the  Ti-aihnii;  of  the  Apo'.f'hs.'  The  date  of
this  book  is  (juite  uncertain.  It  is  of  a  com[X)site  nature
and  preserves  very  early  documents  in  a  motlitied  form.
There  is  no  agreement  among  .scholars  as  to  the  locality
to  which  it  telongs.  It  may  re[)re.scnt  a  community
lying  outside  the  general  stream  of  develojiment  and
))re.serving,  even  to  the  middle  of  the  .second  century,  a
I)rimitive  condition  which  had  elsewhere,  for  the  most
part,  passed  away.  This  view  does  not  materially  lessen
its  value  as  an  illustration  of  an  early  stage  of  Christian
life  ;  but  we  nmst  be  careful  not  to  generalise  hastily
front  its  statements  when  they  lack  confirmation  from
other  quarters.

In  the  reaching  (chaps.  7^),  then,  we  have  instruc-
tions relating  to  Hai'IIS.M  ((/.7'. ,  §3),  fasting,  and  the
Ll(  H.\RIST  [q.v. ).  The  following  chapters  imrwluce  us
to  ajxistles  and  projjhets  ;  they  provide  tests  for  their
genuineness,  and  instructions  as  to  the  honour  to  l)e
jjaid  to  them.  l  he  apostles  travel  from  place  to  place,
making  but  the  briefest  stay  ;  the  prophets  appear  to  Ix;
the  most  prominent  persons  in  the  conununity  in  w  hich
they  reside  (see  pRurHKT).  In  comparison  with  them,
bishojjs  and  ileacons  seem  to  hoUl  but  a  secondary
place.  The  connnunity  is  charged  to  appoint  fit  persons
to  these  offices,  and  not  to  des|)ise  them  ;  '  for  they  too
minister  the  ministry  of  the  prophets  and  teachers.'
There  is  no  mention  whatever  of  presbyters.  In  all  this
we  seem  to  I  le  on  the  verge  of  a  transition.  The  ministry
of  extraordinary  gifts  is  still  dominant  ;  but  the  abuses
to  which  it  is  liable  are  keenly  felt  :  the  humbler  local
ministry,  though  despised  by  coni[)arison,  has  the  future
before  it.'

Other  illustrations from  the  early  literature  will be

found  under  Hisiiup  (§  14/ )■ It  must  suffice  here  to

.« n J r •''^iv  in  conclusion  that,  before  the  close  of
19.  End  of


2ud  cent.


the  .second  century, the  long  ])riKess  of


development  had  issued  in  a  threefold
ministr}'— a  bishop,  presbyters,  and  deacons — l)eing  at
length  generally  recognised  in  all  Christian  churches.
In  jx)int  of  time,  ;xs  well  as  of  method,  we  have  an
exact  parallel  to  this  develoi)ment  lK)ih  in  the  settlement
of  the  canon  and  in  the  fornuilaiion  of  the  .A])ostolic
Creed.  The  more  abundant  literature  of  the  end  of  the
second  century  shows  us  a  generally  accepted  standard
of  ministry,  of  canon,  and  of  creed.  In  each  case  the
need  of  definiteness  and  of  general  uniformity  had
gradually  made  itself  felt,  and  the  Christian  con-
,  sciousness,  guided  and  expressed  by  eminent  leaders,
had  slowly  solved  the  problems  presented  to  it.  In
each  case  we  have  e\ idence  of  that  growth  which  is  the

'  Cp  Harnack  on  3  Jn.,  St.  Kr.  1.'..


CHURNING

prerogative  and  proof  of  life  in  the  social  as  in  the
individual  organism.  J.  A.  K.

CHUENINQ  (V^).  Prov.  :]0  33  ;  see  Milk.

CHUSHAN  RISHATHAIM  (Q'nr"Jn  j^'-IS),  Judg.

38  ; KV  CUSHAN-RISHATIIAIM.

CHUSI  (XOYC  [BS],  -cei  [A],  akO-S),  a  locality  men-
tioned in  Judith  7  18  to  define  the  position  of  Ekrcbel
(see  Akrabattink).  It  may  possibly  be  the  mod.
K'lisah,  5  m.  W.  of 'Akrabeh.

CHUZA  (xoyzA  [Ti.  WH] ;  Amer.  RV  prefers
Ciic/.As),  the  house-steward  of  Herod  (Lk.  83),
husband  of  [oanna.  The  name  is  probably  identical
with  the  Na"bat;ean  mn-  'l"he  steward  may  well  have
been  of  foreign  origin  as  were  the  Herods  themselves.
See  Burkitt,  Expos.  Feb. 1899.  1 18-122.

CIELING. See  Ceiling.

CILICIA (kiXikia [Ti. WH]). From southern

Cappadocia  the  range  of Taurus  descends  in  a  S\V.

p, . . direction  to  the  sea,  reaching  it  in  a  com-

1.  rnysical.  ^^j^^  ^^  mountains  constituting  that  pro-
jection of  coast  which  divides  the  bay  of  Issus
(Skanderun)  from  that  of  Pamphylia.  The  Cilicians
extended  partly  over  the  Taurus  itself,  and  partly  be-
tween it  and  the  sea  (Strabo,  668),  thus  bordering  upon
Pamphylia  in  the  W.,  and  Lycaonia  and  Cappadocia
in  the  -N. ;  in  the  E.  the  lofty  range  of  Amanus  separated
them  from  Syria.  The  country  within  these  boundaries
falls  into  two  strongly  marked  sections.

'Of  Cilicia  beyond  Taurus  a  part  [W.J  is  called  Tracheia
(rugged),  and  the  rest  [E.]  I'edias  (plain).  The  former  has  a
narrow  seaboard,  and  little  or  no  level  country  :  that  part  of  it
which  lies  under  Taurus  is  equally  mountainous,  and  is  thinly
inhabited  as  far  as  the  northern  flanks  of  the  range— as  far,  that
is,  as  Isaura  and  Pisidia.  This  district  bears  the  name  Trachci-  [
Otis.  Cilicia  Pedias  extends  from  Soli  and  Tarsus  as  far  as
Issus,  and  as  far  N.  as  the  Cappadocians  on  the  N.  flank  of
Taurus.  This  section  consists  for  the  most  part  of  plains  and
fertile  land  '  {I.e.).  i

Four  considerable  streams — Pyramus,  Sarus,  Cydnus,
and  Calycadnus— descend  from  Taurus  to  the  bay  of
Issus. For  a  long  time  the  rude  \V. district  remained
practically  outside  the  pale  of  civilisation  : we  are  here ]
concerned  only  with  the  eastern  part,  Cilicia  Pedias  or
Campestris. Difficult  passes,  of  which  there  are  only
a  few,  lead  through  the  mountains  into  the  neighbouring j
districts. The  famous  Pylce  Cilicins,  some  30  miles  N. ,
of  Tarsus, gave  access to Cappadocia and  W. Asia ;
Minor  ; in  the  other  direction  the  Syrian  Gates  and  the |
pass of  Beilam communicated with Syria  ; through ;
these  two  passes  ran  the  M  trade  route  from  Ephesus. :
The  military  importance  of  the Cilician  plain  thus  in- j
eluded  within the  angle  of  the  Taurus  and Amanus '
ranges  is  finely  expressed  by  Herodian  (84).

Owing  to  the  barriers  of  Mount  Taurus,  the  geographi-
cal affinity  of  Cilicia  is  with  Syria  rather  than  with  Asia j
_.„ Minor. It  would  be  only  natural,  therefore, !

2.  In  OT.  jj^^j  jj^g|.g  gj^Qui^i  bg  references  to  it  in  OT
(cp  also  aSuk-bam-pal,  §  4,  end).  Nor  are  these
wanting.  Archreological  criticism  indicates  three  OT
names '  as  more  or  less  certainly  meaning  Cilicia.'-^  The
first  is  Caphtor  {q.v.,  §  4),  which,  however,  probably
had  a  more  extended  application,  and  referred  to
coast-regions  of  Asia  Minor  besides  Cilicia.  Caphtor
was  the  first  home  of  the  Philistines  ;  it  probably  repre-
sents the  Egyptian  Kefto.  The  second  is  Kue  or  Kuah
(j,ip)_/.^.,  i-l  Cilicia' — from  which  Solomon  imported
horses,  as  we  learn  from  the  emended  text  of  i  K.  IO28
(see  HoRSK,  §  3,  n. ). The  third  is  Helak,  the  Hilakku

1  Josephus  identified  with  Cilicia  the  Tarshlsh  of  Cen.  IO4,
Jon.  l3(.-J«/.  i.  61).

2  The  land  of  Musri  also,  which  adjomed  Is-ue  (Wi.  Gesch.
Bab.  u.  Ass.  175),  must  have  included  a  part  of  Cilicia  (cp
MiZRAIM,  §20).  . . , „ .

3  According  to  Maspero  {Recueil,  10  210),  Cilicia  is  the  Keti
(cp  K»JTi5)  which  is  often  mentioned  with  N.-iharin  in  the
Egyptian  inscriptions. Is  this  name  connected  with  Kue?

827


CINNAMON

of  the  Assyrians,  which  has  been  restored  by  Hal^vy
(MiHanges,  '74,  p.  69),  Geiger  (7ud.  Z/.  11 242),  and
Lagarde  (MUtheil.  \-2\i)  in  Ezek. -2711  (MT  has  the
impossible  tj'^ti  '  thine  army  '  ;  read  '  the  sons  of  Arvad
and  of  Helak).  The  same  name  probably  occurs  in
Egyptian  inscriptions  under  the  form  Ka-ra-ki-sa,
originally  Kilakk(u).*  It  follows  from  Hal^vy's  res-
toration that  there  was.  according  to  Ezekiel,  a  Cilician
as  well  as  a  Phu_-nician  and  a  Syrian  element  in  the
garrison  of  Tyre  in  586  B.  C.

The close physical relation of Cilicia and Syria

explains their political connection during the early

_ . Roman  Empire. Cilicia  was  usually  under

■  *  ^^'  the  legatus  of  Syria  (Dio  Cass.  53 12  where
Coele-Syria,  Phoenicia,  Cilicia,  Cyprus  are  iv  rrj  toO
Kalffapoi  fiepidi  ;  cp  Tac.  Ann.  278).  Cilicia  is  found
under  a  separate  governor,  however,  in  57  A.i).  (Tac.
Ann.  T533),  perhaps  as  a  temporary  measure  after  the
disturbances  of  52  A.  O.  {Ann.  I255).  Vespasian  is
credited  with  its  reconstruction  as  a  distinct  province,
in  74  A.  D.  ;  but  his  action  was  apparently  confined  to
the  reduction  of  part  of  (  ilicia  Tracheia  to  the  form  of
a  province,  which  was  united  with  that  of  eastern
CMIicia  (Suet.  resj>.  8).  In  117-138  A.n.  Cilicia,  in-
cluding Tracheia,  was  certainly  an  imperial  province,
under  a  prcetorian  legal  us  Augusti :  but  in  what  year
this  state  of  things  began  is  not  known.  No  infer-
ence can  be  drawn  from  the  use  of  the  word  pro-
vince" ( eVapxf 'a )  in  the  question  of  Felix  (Acts  2334).
The  connection  between  Cilicia  and  Syria  is  illustrated
in  the  NT  by  such  passages  as  Actsl5234i  (jal.  I21,
where  '  Syria  and  Cilicia '  are  almost  a  single  term  ;
and  conversely  the  omission  of  Cilicia  from  the  super-
scription of  I  Pet.  1 1,  where  the  enumeration  of  provinces
sums  up  all  Asia  Minor  N.  of  the  Taurus,  is  based
upon  the  close  connection  between  the  churches  in
Cilicia  and  the  church  of  Antioch  in  Syria.

The  presence  of  Jews  in  Cilicia  must  date  principally
from  the  time  when  it  became  part  of  the  Syrian  king-
dom (cp  Jos.  Ant.  xii.  34).  It  must  have  been  the  hill-
men  of  Cilicia  Tracheia  that  served  in  the  guard  of
Alexander  Jannasus  (Jos.  Ant.  xiii.  135.  ^'V  i.  43).  In
apostolic  times  the  Jewish  settlers  were  many  and
influential  (Acts  69).

Paul  visited  his  native  province  soon  after  his  con-
version (.Acts  930  Gal.  I21),  and  possibly  founded  then
the  churches  of  which  we  hear  in  Acts  102341.  It  is
probable  that  in  his  '  second  missionary  journey '  he
followed  the  usual  commercial  route  across  the  Taurus
to  Derbe  (.Acts  1.^)41  ;  cp  .Str.  537).

One  article  of  Cilician  export  is  interesting  to  the
student  of  the  NT.  The  goats' -hair  cloth  called
Ciliciiim  was  exported  to  l)e  jused  in  tent-making  (c]i
Varro,  R.R.  2ii).  Paul  was  taught  this  trade,  and
supported  himself  by  means  of  it  in  the  house  of  Aquila
at  Corinth  (Acts  18 3  and  elsewhere;  cp  Acts  20 34).
(See  Sterrett,  '  Routes  in  Cilicia,'  in  Arch.  Ins!.  Amer.
36.)  \v.  J.  w.

CINNAM0N(pD3p ;  kinn&moomon[-oc][BNAFL:
Ti.  WH]  ;  E.x.  3O23  Pr.  7  .7  Cant.  4  .4  Rev.  18  i3t)  bears
the  same  name  in  Hebrew  as  in  Greek  and  English,  and
this  is  almost  certainly  a  word  borrowed  from  the  farther
East.'-  Lagarde  (Uebers.  199)  maintains  that  Hebrew
borrowed  the  name  from  Greek  ;  but  against  this  there
is  the  statement  of  Herodotus  (3iii)  that  the  Greeks
learned  the  word  from  the  Phoenicians.

Kmndindn  is  the  fragrant  inner  bark  of  Cinnamomum  zeylani-
cum  Nees  that  is  now  called  cinnamon.  As  is  correctly  stated
by  Fliick.  and  Hanb.  (520),  however,  'none  of  the  cinnamon  of
the  ancients  was  obtained  from  Ceylon.' 3  and  '  the  early  notices
of  cinnamon  as  a  product  of  Ceylon  are  not  prior  to  the
thirteenth  century"  (;A  468).  Accordingly,  it  is  probable  that,
as these  writers  suggest,  the  cinnamon of  the  ancients was

Tw.  M.'Muller,  As.  u.  Eur.  352.

2  The  derivation  from  "JiJ  is  most  unlikely.

3  Cp  I'ennent,  Ceylon  1  575.


CINNEROTH

Castia  lignta,  which  was  olrtaiiicrf,  as  it  it  still,  from  S.  Chin*.l
The  Mjurce  of  this  is  Cinnamomuni  Cmsia,  HI.,  a»  has  \xcn
shown  by  Sir  W.  Thiseltoii-Dyer  in  Journ.  Linn.  Soc.  20  i  )ff.
The  name  cinnamom i/era  rfgio,  given  to  the  itistcict  W.  of
Cape  (.iiiardafui,  must  be  taken  in  a  lootie  senxe  as  referring  to
the  comnicr.  c  of  the  Krythrean  Sea.  Like  lign-aloes  cinnamon
Wis  thus  brought  along  the  regular  trade-route  from  K.  Asia.
See  Ai-oKS,  |  3.

From  whatever  source  cinnamon  was  obtained,  it
appears  thrice  in  the  O T  anions  aromatic  spices,  and
in  Rev.  18  13  amonR  the  merchandise  of  the  a[xx:alyptic
Babylon.  Thus  the  Jews  must  have  been  tolerably
familiar  with  it. See  Cassia,  Incensk,  §  6.

N.  M. — W.  T.  T.-D.

CINNEROTH  (ni-133),  i  K.  ISao.  RVChinnkroth.
CIRAMA  (KipAA\A  [A]), lEsd.  520  AV  =  Ii:zra226

R.\MA1I.

CIRCLE  OF  JORDAN  ({lyn  133),  Gen.  13 10.
Sec  1M..\1N  (4).

CIRCUIT  (133n),  Neh.  822,  RV-nK See  Pi.Ai.v  (4).

CIRCUMCISION  (n^D.  nepiTOMH).  the  cutting
away  i)f  ih.-  foreskin  (ri';^^.  AKpoByCTiA)-  '"'or  surgical
1 Adminis-  '^"^ other details of the o;x;ration as

tration  of  P'^^^tised  in  later  Judaism,  reference  may
^^^  *"  be  made  to  the  Mishna  (Shabb.  192
Yore  lie  ah,  §  264)  and  to  the  literature
cited  at  the  end  of  this  article.  It  was  performed  not
only  on  the  (male)  children  of  the  Israelites,  but  also
upon  all  slaves  (as  being  memljers  of  the  household  and
sharers  in  its  worship),  whether  born  within  the  house
or  brought  in  from  abroad  (Gen  \1 -21  ff.) — a  usage  which
plainly  points  to  a  great  antiquity.  In  P  it  is  enjoined
that  all  aliens  (d~ij)  who  desire  to  join  in  the  Pas.sover
shall  be  circumcised  (Ex.  I248) ;  in  the  Grreco- Roman
period  it  was  also  the  condition  for  the  admission  of
proselytes.

The  age  for  receiving  the  rite  is  fi.xed  by  the  Law  for
the  eighth  day  after  birth  (I^v.  I23,  cp  Gen.  21  4  [P],
etc. )  ;  even  on  the  sabUith  the  s;icred  ordinance  had  to
be  observed  (Jn.  7  22  Sluihb.  V^^ff.),  although  in  case
of  sickness  of  the  child  a  short  delay  was  permitted
(cp  ZDMC  20 529  [66]).  For  the  performance  of  the
office  all  adult  male  Israelites  were  fully  qualified  ;  but
customarily  the  duty  fell  to  the  head  of  the  house  (Gen.

17  23/^  )•  'yhM  in  the  earlier  times  it  could  be  performed
(of  course  only  in  exceptional  cases)  by  women  appears
from  Ex.  4  25  ;  but  this  was  not  allowed  by  later  custom.
According  to  Joscphus  (Ant.  x.x.  24)  it  was  not  unusujil
to  employ  the  physician  ;  at  the  present  day  it  is  the
business  of  a  specially-appointed  otVicial,  the  ntohi'l.

At  the  close  of  the  first  century  n.c.  the  naming  of
the  child  accompanied  his  circumcision  (cp  Lk.  1  59  221) ;
but  there  is  no  indication  of  any  such  usage  in  the  OT  ;
indeed,  in  the  older  times,  the  two  things  were  wholly
dissociated,  the  child  receiving  its  name  as  soon  as  it
was  Ijorn  (cp,  for  example,  Gen.  21  j  'l^^if.  306^  35

18  38  28//^,  etc.).

The  origin  of  the  rite  among  the  Hebrews  is  obscure.
One  of  the  views  represented  in  the  OT  is  that  it  was
2.  Hebrew '""'"'^''.'^^'-*'^  ^'>'  J^^l^i'^^  (Josh.  52/:),  who.  at
icKends  ^'^^'  ^^'"  ''^^  ^^^  Foreskins,"'*  by  ilivine  com-
mand circumcised  the  people  with  knives  of
flint,  and  thereby  rolled  away  '  the  reproach  of  I-:gypt.'
'  wherefore  the  name  of  that  place  was  called  Gilgar(/".<r.
' '  rolling  " )  unto  this  day. '  \'erses  4-7  are  an  interpolation
designed  to  bring  the  narrative  into  conformity  with  the
view  of  P  that  circumcision  had  merely  lieen  in  abeyance
during  the  years  of  wandering  ;  cp  Hollenberg  in  St.
A>..  -74,  493^,  St.  in  ZATIV  Qii2  f.  ('86),  and
see  Joshua,  §  7. The  '  reproach  of  Egj-pt,'  unless  we

1  Hence  in  Persian  and  Arabic  it  is  called  Darsini  (Chinese
wood).

2  So  EV,  EVne.  Gibeath  ha-arahth ;  Povv'o^  toii'  o«po/3u<7-Ti«i-
(BAK).  According  to  ®ual  in  Josh.  •J4ioa  the  knives  of
flmt  referred  to  were  buried  with  Joshua  in  limnath-semh.

829


CIRCUMCISION

are  to  do  violence  to  the  narrative,  can  only  \x:  inter-
preted as  meaning  that  in  that  country  the  children  of
Israel  had  been  uncircumcised,  and  thtTefore  objects  of
contempt  and  scorn.  It  is  impossible,  however,  to
regard  the  narrative  in  Joshua  as  strictly  historical  ;  it
belongs  rather  to  the  category  of  etymologizing  legend,
being  designed  to  explain  the  name  and  origin  of  the
sanctuary  of  Gilgal.  Possibly  Stade  is  right  in  his  con-
jecture (see  alx)ve)  that  the  legend  arose  from  the  circum-
stance that  in  ancient  times  the  young  men  of  Benjamin
or  of  certain  Benjamite  families  were  circumcised  on  the
Hill  of  the  Foreskins  at  Gilgal. See  GiLGAl..

Another  view  of  the  origin  of  the  rite  is  given  in  the
account  of  the  circumcision  of  the  S(jn  of  Moses  (Ex.  4
'5^-  U])'  fw  here  aLso  the  intention  manifestly  is  to
describe  its  first  introduction  among  the  Israelites  ;  there
is  no  suggestion  of  any  idea  that  it  had  been  a  long-
standing 1  lebrew  custom.  The  general  meaning  of  the
story  is  that  .Moses  had  incurred  the  anger  of  Yahwd.
and  made  himself  liable  to  the  |x;nalty  of  death,  becau.se
he  w;is  not  'a  bridegroom  of  blood"  —  i.e.,  because  he
had  not,  l)efore  his  marriage,  submitted  him.self  to  this
rite.  /AppoTdh  accordingly  takes  a  Hint,  circumci.ses  the
son  instead  of  her  husband,  and  thereby  symbolically
makes  the  latter  a  '  briiiegroom  of  blotxl,"  whereby  the
wrath  of  Vahwe  is  appeased  (see  We.  /^ru/.(*i  345).

B<jth narratives notwithstanding, it is ncces.sary  to

carry  back  the  origin  of  this  rite  among  the  Hebrews  to

3 Earlv ^  "^U'^h  earlier  date. True,  it  is  no  sufficient

origin  P'^°°'^  °^  *^'^  "^^'  ''  *^""-  ^ ^ *  carries  it  back
to  .-\braham,  and  that  everywhere  in  the  Unw
the  custom  is  assumetl  to  be  of  extreme  antiquity.  More
to  the  point  are  the  facts  that  Gen.  34  also  represents  it
as  pre-Mosaic,  while  the  use  of  knives  of  Hint  (which  was
long  kept  up  ;  see  Ex.  425  Josh.  52/:)  also  indicates  a
high  antiquity.  What  most  of  all  comix^ls  us  to  this
conclusion,  however,  is  the  well -ascertained  fact  that
circumcision  was  in  no  way  a  practice  peculiar  to  the
Israelites.  It  was  common  to  a  numlxr  of  .Semitic  peoples
in  antiquity:  Edom,  .Ammon,  Moiiball  were  circumcised
(Jer.  925  [26])  ;  of  the  nations  of  Palestine  the  Philistines
alone  were  not  (cp,  for  example,  Herod.  236  /".  104)  ;
the  Arabs  also  practised  this  rite,  w  hich,  in  the  Koran,
is  taken  for  granted  as  a  firmly-established  custom.  Nor
is  it  less  widely  diffusetl  among  non-.^emitic  races.'  Of
special  interest  for  us  here  is  its  existence  among  the
Egyptians  ;  for  from  a  very  early  jx-rifxl  we  meet  w  ith
the  view  that,  withm  the  lands  of  the  ancient  civilisations,
circumcision  had  its  native  home  in  I'^gypt,  from  which
it  had  spread  not  only  to  the  other  pei'iples  of  Africa,
but  also  to  the  Semites  of  .\sia  (so  HercKl.  236204  Diod.
Sic.  331  Strabo  17824).  It  certainly  was  known  in
Egypt  from  the  earliest  times  (Ebers.  /■j:^v/'t  u.  d.  lib.
A/os.  I283),  and  we  have  the  express  testimony  of
Herodotus  (236)  and  Philo  (22io,  etl.  Mangey)  that
all  Egyptians  were  circumcised  (cp  Josh.  r>2^,  where  the
same  thing  is  presupjxjseil  ;  Erman,  lig}'pt,  32/,  539  ;
El>ers,  op.  cit.  278,/),  although,  it  is  'true,  their  testi-
mony has  not  been  allowed  to  pass  wholly  uncjuestioned.
One  piece  of  evidence  for  the  Egyptian  origin  of  the  rite
would  be  the  fact  that  to  the  Semites  of  the  I'.uphrates,
who  had  no  direct  contact  with  Egypt,  circumcision  was
unknown.  In  any  case,  however,  it  would  Ix;  illegitimate
to  suppose  that  it  w.is  borrowed  from  Egypt  directly  by
the  Hebrews — say,  for  example,  at  the  time  of  the  sojourn
in  Egypt  ;  for  the  nomads  of  the  Sinailic  jieninsula
appear  to  have  practised  it  from  a  very  remote  periwl.

As  to  the  original  meaning  of  the  rite  efiually  divergent
views  have  been  heUl. The  explanations  ofierwl  fall  in

4  Views  of  ''^'' '"•''" '"^" ''"'  fi""""?^  —  ( '  > '1  he
" iry  : Herodotus asserts that the


meaning.


Egyptians  had  adopted  it  simply  for  the


sake  of  cleanliness,  whilst  other  ancient  writers  regard  it

1  The  facts  of  its  present  diffusion  have  been  collected  most
fully  by  Ploss,  Das  Kind  ih  Branch  u.  Sittt  der  I'SlMerO,  \
34a/  [32].

830


CIRCUMCISION

as  a  prophylactic  against  certain  forms  of  disease  (Phil.
lie  Circumcis.  2210,  ed.  Mangey ;  Jos.  c.  Ap.  'Iit,).
A  similar  theory  is  still  put  forward  here  and  there  by
various  nations  (cp  Ploss,  op.  cit. ),  and  it  was  in  great
favour  with  the  rationalists  of  last  century  (see,  e.g.,
Michaelis,  Mos.  Kecht,  4 186 ;  also  Saalschiitz,  Mos.
Kecht,  1  246).  Recent  anthropologists,  such  as  Ploss,
give  greater  prominence  to  the  fact  that  with  many
peoples  (if  not  with  most)  circumcision  sUmds,  or  origin-
ally stood,  closely  connected  with  marriage,  and  regard
it  as  an  operation  preparatory  to  the  e.\ercise  of  the
marital  functions,  suggested  by  the  belief  that  fruitfulness
is  thereby  promoted  (so  already  Philo,  he.  cit.  ;  cp
Cl-TTIN(;s  of  tiik  Fi.ksii,  ^  4).  (2)  The  religious  :  It
is  impossible  to  decide  the  ([uestion  by  mere  reference
to  the  present  conditions,  or  to  the  explanation  which
ancient  or  modern  peoples  themselves  give.  On  the
one  hand,  it  is  not  to  i)e  expected  that  the  original  mean-
ing of  the  act  should  be  permanently  remembered  ;  on  the
other  hand,  evidence  can  be  adduced  in  support  of  either
theory.  There  are  broad  general  considerations,  how-
ever, which  lead  inevitably  to  the  conclusion  that,  in  the
last  resort,  the  explanation  is  to  be  sought  in  the  sphere
of  religion.  All  the  world  over,  in  every  uncivilised
people,  whether  of  ancient  or  of  modern  times,  practices
such  as  this  are  called  into  existence,  not  by  medical
knowledge,  but  by  religious  ideas.  It  is  to  the  belief
about  the  gods  and  to  the  worship  of  the  gods  that  all
primitive  ethics  must  be  traced.  In  this  there  is  nothing
to  prevent  practices,  grown  unintelligible  through  the
religious  motives  having  gradually  faded  into  the  back-
ground, being  supplied  with  other  reasons,  in  this  case,
sanitary.  On  the  other  hand,  inasmuch  as,  to  judge  by
its  wide  diffusion,  circumcision  must  have  arisen  spon-
taneously and  independently  in  more  places  than  one,
there  is  nothing  to  exclude  the  possibility  of  diverse
origins.

The  primarily  religious  nature  of  circumcision  being
granted,  we  must  nevertheless  be  careful  not  to  carry
back  to  the  earlier  times  the  interpretation  put  upon  it
by  later  Judaism.  According  to  P  the  rite  is  a  sym-
l)olical  act  of  purification  (in  the  ritual  sense)  ;  the
foreskin  represents  the  unclean.  This  conception  of
circumcision  is  presupposed  in  the  symbolical  applica-
tions of  the  expression  to  be  met  with  in  the  discourses
of  the  prophets  (see  lx;low,  ^  7).  For  the  earlier  period,
however,  we  have  no  evidence  of  the  presence  of
any  such  idea,  nor  is  there  any  analogous  conception
to  make  its  existence  probable.  The  notion  so  fre-
tjuently  brought  forward  in  explanation  of  the  idea, —
that  the  sexual  life,  as  such,  was  regarded  as  sinful, — is
in  trutli  nowhere  to  be  met  with  in  the  OT.  The
ancient  conceptions  of  clean  and  unclean  are  all  of  them
of  a  wholly  different  nature  ;  see  Clk.vn  AND  Un-
ci. K.\N.

In  general,  circumcision  is  to  be  regarded  as  a  ritual
tribal  mark.  This  view  is  favoured  by  several  con-
siderations. Not  only  among  the  Jews,


6.  A  tribal
badge.


l)Ut  also  among  the  Egyptians  and  most
other peoples  by whom circumcision is


practised,  the  uncircumcised  are  regarded  as  unclean-
i.e.,  as  aliens  from  the  trite  and  its  worship — and  as
such  are  looked  upon  by  the  circumcised  with  contempt.
Among  peoples  who  do  not  practi.se  circumcision  we
find  analogous  tribal  marks  ;  filing  or  removal  of  teeth,
special  tattooings,  in  some  cases  still  more  drastic  muti-
lations of  the  sexual  organs  (semi-castration  and  the
like).  Finally,  with  most  peoples,  circumcision  used
to  l)e  performed  at  the  age  of  puterty.  By  its  means
the  grown-up  youth  was  formally  admitted  among  the
men,  received  all  the  rights  due  to  this  position,  and,
in  particular,  the  permission  to  marry  (hence  the  fre-
<|uent  connection  already  alluded  to  between  circum-
cision and  marriage).  The  full-grown  man  becomes
for  the  first  time  the  fully-invested  member  of  the  trite,
and,  in  particular,  capable  of  taking  part  in  its  religious

831


CIRCUMCISION

functions.  It  is  fitting  then  that  he  should  wear  the
badge  of  his  trite.

Such  a  badge  has  always  a  religious  significance,
since  memte-rship  of  a  clan  carries  with  it  the  right  to
participate  in  the  tribal  worship  (see  Govkknmknt,
§  8),  and,  for  early  times,  to  te  outside  the  trite  and
outside  its  worship  meant  the  siime  thing.  Thus  the
act  of  circumcision  had,  in  the  earliest  times,  a  sacral
meaning.  Like  all  other  initiation  ceremonies  of  the
kind  in  the  Senutic  religions,  circumcision  had  attributed
to  it  also  the  effect  of  accomi)lishing  a  .sacramental
conmmnion,  bringing  alxjut  a  union  with  the  godhead.
To  this  extent  the  explanation  of  circumcision  as  of  the
nature  of  a  sacrifice  (F'.wald)  is  just  ;  originally  circum-
cision and  sacrifice  served  the  same  end.

For  the  old  Israelite,  in  particular,  the  view  just  stated

is  confirmed  by  the  identification  of  the  two  conceptions

- In  parlv un'^ircumcised ' and '  unclean '  ; see

■  T„_gi  ^  especially,  in  this  connection,  Fzek.  31 18
3".i  19-32,  where  in  the  under-world  the
uncircumcised  have  assigned  to  them  a  place  by  them-
selves, away  from  the  memters  of  the  circumcised  people.
The  receiving  of  the  tribal  mark  is  a  condition  of  con-
nubium  (Gen.  S4).  -Among  the  Israelites  also  it  was
the  marriageable  young  men  who  were  circumcised
(Josh.  ^2  ff.,  see  above,  §  2).  In  like  manner,  as
already  noticed,  in  Ex.  425  circumcision,  as  a  token  of
marriageability,  is  brought  into  connection  with  marriage
itself  ;  cp  the  expression  '  bridegroom  of  blood. '  The
same  narrative  also  explains  the  circumcision  of  young
boys  as  a  surrogate  for  that  of  men  (cp  We.  Prol.^*'
345/  ).  This  custom — of  circumcising  boys  when  quite
young  —  may  have  arisen  very  early,  as  soon  as  the
political  aspects  of  the  rite  fell  into  the  background.
'  When  the  rite  loses  political  significance,  and  tecomes
purely  religious,  it  is  not  necessary  that  it  should  te
deferred  to  the  age  of  full  manhood  ;  indeed  the  natural
tendency  of  pious  parents  will  te  to  dedicate  their  child  as
early  as  possible  to  the  god  who  is  to  be  his  protector
through  life'  (WRS  Rel.  Sem.C-)  328).  This  last
general  statement  is  particularly  apposite  in  the  case  of
circumcision.

No  mention  of  circumcision  is  made  either  in  the
decalogue  or  in  any  other  of  the  old  laws.  This  silence
.  .  cannot  te  explained  on  the  ground  merely
■  that  as  a  firmly  established  custom  the  rite
did  not  require  to  te  specially  enjoined  ;  rather  does  it
prove  that,  for  the  religion  of  Yahwe  in  the  pre-exilic
period,  circumcision  had  ceased  to  possess  the  great  im-
portance which  we  are  comjjelled  to  assume  for  it  in  the
old  Semitic  religion  ;  nor  was  the  same  weight  assigned  to
it  which  it  subsequently  acquired  in  Judaism.  In  par-
ticular the  prophets  took  up  towards  it  the  same
attitude  as  they  held  towards  sacrifice,  that  is  to  say,
they  looked  upon  it  as  of  no  consequence  so  far  as  the
worship  of  Yahwe  was  concerned.  Such  a  prophet  as
Jeremiah,  for  example,  sets  himself  in  the  niost  marked
manner  against  the  high  appreciation  of  circumcision
still  prevalent  among  the  masses  in  his  day,  when  he
places  the  circumcision  of  the  Israelites  exactly  on  the
same  level  with  that  of  the  Egyptians,  Edomites,
Ammonites,  and  Moabites,  and  threatens  all  alike  with
the  divine  judgment  as  teing  '  circumcised  in  uncircum-
cision  '  or  as  '  uncircumcised  ' — that  is,  as  not  having
the  circumcision  of  the  heart  (Jer.  925  [24]/^,  cp  44  610
Lev.  2641).  By  this  very  fact — that  they  contrast  with
the  circumcision  of  the  flesh  that  of  the  heart,  the  ears,
the  lips — the  prophets  gave  the  first  impulse  to  the
later  symbolical  interpretation  of  the  rite  as  an  act  of
purification.

This  last,  as  already  stated,  is  dominant  in  Judaism.
In  the  post-exilic  period  the  rite  acquired  a  quite  differ-

_  _  ,  .  ent  position  from  that  which  it  had
8.  in  Juaaism.  previously  held.  As  substitutes  for
the  sacrificial  worship,  no  longer  possible,  the  sab-
bath and circumcision became the cardinal com-

832


CIS

mnnds  of  Judaism,  and  the  chief  symbols  of  the  religion
of  Vahwi  anil  of  membership  of  the  reliKious  conmion-
wcalth.  For  this  re;ison  neither  Greek  nor  Roman
culture  was  able  to  suppress  this  relic  of  barbarism.
Antiochus  ICpiphaiies  indeed  prohibited  circumcision,
but  with  no  jjreat  effect  (i  Mace.  1  48  60  246).  On  the
other  hand,  however,  the  spread  of  (Jrecian  culture  so
wrought  among  those  Jesvs  who  had  yielded  to  its
influence,  that  they  became  ashamed  of  their  circum-
cision, as  in  the  exercises  and  games  of  the  arena  it
ex[K>sed  them  to  pagan  ridicule  ;  they  accordingly  took
steps  by  means  of  a  special  o|K'ration  to  obliterate  the
signs  of  it  (iro(«(«'  fai'TOii  i-Kpojivcrlav,  1  Mace.  1  15.
iviairaadak,  i  Cor.  7 18).  In  order  to  reniove  the
ptissibility  of  this  in  future  the  Talmudists  and  Har
Cochba  ordered  that  after  the  ordinary  cut  had  been
made  the  Hesh  should  also  Ix;  torn  with  the  thumb  nail.
Michaolis,  Atos.  Kciht,  fi  184-186;  Saalschiitz,  Mas.  Kecht,
1  240  ;  the  commentaries  on  Gen.  1"  ;  the  handbooks  of  biblical

archajoloKy  ;  Hamburger's  Kncy.  s.v.  '  He-
9. Literature,  schneldung  ■ ;  Schultz, AT Theol., 174^.;

Smend,  A  T  Rel.-Cesch.,  rj /•',  Marti,  Cesch.
d.  Isr.  Rel.  43,  ii>i/-y  etc.  ;  (ll.-issberg,  Die  Beschntidung,
Berlin,  1896.  On  the  later  customs  connected  with  the  rite,
see  Huxtorf,  Syn.  Jud.  and  Otho,  Lex.  Rahb.  For  the  practice
of  Judaism,  .Schiirer,  GJ  r'2$(nff.  3(Sli22^,etc.  On  the  present
diffusion  of  tlie  rite,  Ploss,  Vas  KituH^),  360 _^;  on  circumcision
among  the  Arabs,  We.  Ar.  Heid.i}),  154.  j.  b.

CIS  (KGic  [Ti.  WH]).  Acts  1321,  RV  KisH  {q.i:).

CISAI  iK[eliCAiOY  [BXALo^]).  Esth.  11 2,  RV
KisKT.-,. .Sec  Kisii.

CISTERN  (1X3,  lia),  Jcr.  213  etc.  See  Conduits,
§1  (I)-

CITHERN  (Kie&pA  [ASV]),  1  Mace.  454-  -See
MiMc,  §  7/A

CITIMS  (KlTiecON  [iS*]).  i  Mace.  85,  AV.  See
Ki  rriM.

CITRON. SeeApi'i.K,  §2(3).

CITY  ("l*r  ; n^lp, almost confined to  poetry  and

place-names ; TTp, frequent in Phoinician, V>ut  only

- „ five times in O  T ; cp also Kakt.mi,

1.  Names. ^^,^^.  ^^^,^^

A  synonym  of  I'V  ?r=Ass.  uru  dlu  'settlement,  city';  cp
Cain,  81;  for  Heb.  kiryah  and  kereth,  cp  Aram,  ktfitha,  \r.
karyuu'i.

The  influence  of  the  old  Babylonian  culture  is  manifest.
We  note,  too,  that'/>,  in  virtue  of  its  origin,  is  an  elastic
term  including  the  settlements  of  those  who  were  once
nomads  (see  Hazor,  Vii.i.agk),  and  thus  we  can
account  for  the  'cities  (read  ny  with  ©"'•,  Klo. )  of
Amalek '  in  iS.  15$,  and  the  description  in  2  K.  I79.
'  in  all  their  cities,  from  the  tower  of  the  watchmen
(see  Towkr)  to  the  fortified  city.'  Uillmann,  too,  thus
explains  the  phrase  'the  wilderness  and  its  cities'  in
Is.  4'2ii,'  and  some  have  supposed  that  the  '  city'  built
by  Cain  was  but  a  settlement  such  as  we  have  just
referred  to — -a  most  uncritical  supjxisition  !  *  We  may
safely  assume  that  the  Israelites  acquired  the  word  'ir
in  Canaan.  There  they  encountered  highly  civilisctl
peoples  and  strongly  fortified  cities.  The  Deuteronoinist
remarks  (Josh.  11 13;  cp  Jer.  30i8)  that  places  which
stood  u[x)n  //////;/' — i.e.,  on  artificially  heightened
mounds  or  hills — the  Israelitish  immigrants  did  not
burn  down,  with  the  single  exception  of  Hazor.  Of
course,  mountain  cities  were  still  more  difficult  to  take
(see  I'oKruKss).

'  The  text,  however,  is  corrupt.  For  riyi  'and  its  cities'  we
should  read  ,^a-|^'1  'and  the  desert'  (see  SHOT  ad  Inc.).
^  It  was  not  a  dweller  in  the  land  of  Nod  ('  wandering  ')  who
huilt  (or  whose  son  built)  a  city,  and  obtained  the  first  place  in
the  Hebrew  legend  of  culture.  Cain  w.is  originally  a  divine
beiig,  or  semi-divine  hero. See  Cainiths,  §  3.

'  Read  oVn  (/>.);  cp  De  Dicu,  Critica  Sacra  (1693),  49.
The  '?B  (see  BOB  s.v.)  or  /<•/  (//•//)  on  which  Lachish  {q.v.)
was  built  is  a  good  specimen  of  these  hills.  Tell  al>ounds  in  the
Arabic  geographical  nomenclature  of  Syria  and  the  Euphrates
Valley.


27


833


CITY

(a)  Citadels. — In  Gen.  11  4  the  builders  of  Rahylon

say, '  Let us  make  a  city  and  a  tovser'  ; the  mi^^ddl

n Ytiionm ^^ tower here rej)resents the citadel.

'. . .,  Klsewhcre  it is the  '/>  {•\'ji) that  is  the

aeLailS. citadel— <'.^. ,  the  '  city  of  I )avid. '  '  city  of

MilcoMj ' '  (see  Rabhath  Am.Mo.v)  ; but  observe  that  in

Jer.  4841  nvip  appears  to  be  used  of  the  lower  cities  as

opposed  to  the  rrnsD  or  citadels.

(d)  Gates. — .\t  the  gates'  of  the  town  (see  FoRTRKSS)
there  were  '  broad  places,' 'expressly  distinguished  from
the  'street'  in  Prov.  7",  devoted  in  turn  to  judicial
business,  traffic,  popular  assemblies,  and  gossip.  See
2  K.  7i  2Ch.  3'26  Neh.  81  16  Job  29?  ;  also  I's.  55  n,
where  we  might  render,  '  Extortion  and  deceit  depart
not  from  its  market-place.'

(c)  Streets. — Except  in  GrfEco  -  Roman  cities  like
Ca.'sarea  and  Sebast^  —  cities  the  importance  of  which
is  shown  by  the  continuance  of  their  names  in  an
alniost  unnnxiified  form — the  streets*  were  presumably
as  narrow  as  those  in  a  modern  Oriental  city.  That
the  houses  before  the  (Jreek  jjeriod  were  for  the  most
part  poor  and  perishable  is  remarked  elsewhere  (see
HoLSK,  §1).  Still,  the  increase  of  wealth  nuist  have
had  some  effect  on  the  architecture  (cp  Jer.  22  14) — at
any  rate,  in  the  merchants'  (|uarters,  the  existence  of
which  may  Ij<3  inferred  from  Zeph.  In  Xeh.331/.  Jer.
3721  (the  'bakers'  street').  Whether  the  Aramaean
merchants  in  .Samaria  had  whole  streets  (M  T  of  i  K.
2O34)  or  simply  caravanserais  (ninsn.  Klo.,  for  nisin)
may  be  left  undecided.  On  the  question  whether  the
streets  were  paved  it  may  l)e  said  that  the  soil  was  so
often  rocky  that,  paving  would  fre(|uently  be  uncalled
for.  We  have  no  evidence  of  paving  in  Jerusalem
l)efore  the  Roman  period  (Jos.  ,-/«/'.  xx.  97).  Herod
the  (jreat  is  said  to  have  laid  an  ojien  road  in
.Antioch  with  polished  stone  (Jos.  yint.  xv\.  [>i).  On
the  'street  called  Straight,"  see  Damascus.

(d)  Watchmen. — Watchmen,  apart  from  the  keepers
of  the  gates,  are  mentioned  only  in  two  almost  identical
passages  of  Canticles  (33  57),  a  work  ])o.ssil)ly  of  the
(Jreek  period  ;  it  is,  of  course,  the  capital  that  is
referred  to.

{e)  Water-supply.  — The  excellent  water-supply  of
ancient  Jerusalem  is  treated  elsewhere  (see  CoNDL'irs) ;
smaller  places  had  to  be  content  with  the  fountains
which  were  the  origin.al  cause  of  the  settlements.

The  student  will  now  be  able  to  judge  how  far  the
Hebrew  and  the  Greek  conception  of  a  city  diflered.
Pausanias  (2nd  cent.  A.D. )  thus  presents  the  (ireek
conception  (Paus.  x.  4i,  Fra/.er.  1  503):  'It  is  twenty
furlongs  from  Chaeronoa  to  Panopeus,  a  city  of  Phocis,
if  city  it  can  be  called  that  has  no  government-offices,
no  gymnasium,  no  theatre,  no  market-place,  no  water
conducted  to  a  fountain,  and  where  the  people  live  in
hovels,  just  like  highland  shanties,  perched  on  the  edge
of  a  ravine.  Yet  its  territory  is  marked  off  by  Ixsun-
daries  from  that  of  its  neighlx)urs,  and  it  even  sends
meinljers  to  the  Phocian  parliament.'  Jerusalem,  at
any  rate,  had  its  conduits  and  a  substitute  for  a  market-
place, nor  were  large  and  high  houses  (niC"!N)  altogether
unknown  (see  HoL'SK,  §1). The  gymnasium  spoken  of

1  'City  of  the  house  of  Ha-il'  (2K.1025)  is  not  a  correct
phrase. For  'ciiy  '  {'ir)  read  'sanctuary'  (delrir). See  JtHU.

«  In  EV  I  K.837  a  Ch.  6  28  Ruth  3  11  "1^?  '*  actually
rendered  'city'  (and  in  this  sense  is  characteristic  of  I)),  but
pr;icticallv  is  equivalent  to  'jurisdi  tion.'  Cp  'The  .Sublime
Pone  '  and  the  Japanese  '  Mikado,'  literally  '  exalted  gate.'  So
in  (B  TToAit  and  irvAr;  are  often  confused. See  Gate.

»  So  RV  for  mairi  in  Prov.  I.e.  ;  in  Cant.  82  EV  has  'broad
ways':  cp  "I'i'.n  -\^'V  2rn,  2Ch.S2  6;  see  Neh.  .Si.  ff5  always
irAarcia,  except  Is.  l.')3  (pvfil)  because  of  irAorfia  preceding.

*  nr\-  ®  has  irAarcta  five  times,  64o«  five  or  six  times,  itoJo«
once  or  twice,  !(oSo^  nmre  than  twelve  times,  but  most  fre-
quently renders,  with  reference  to  the  etymology,  simply  i^uiOtv,
efiuT«pot,  or  i(u.  pxp,  Prov.  7  8  Keel.  1'24  5  Cant.  82!;  •
ayopa.  In  NT  the  words  are  irAarcca  and  pviii)  (in  Lk.  14  21,
'  fane  ') ;  cp  Tobit  13  18  Ecclus.  9  7.

834


CITY  OF  MOAB

in  I  Mace.  1 14  2  Mace.  4912  was  only  a  temporary  in-
novation.

(/)  Store-cities. — This  phrase '  means  cities  in  which
grain  (aCh.  3228)  or  other  royal  provisions,  valuable
for  war  or  for  peace,  were  stored  ( r  K.  9  19  etc. ).  It  is
implied  that  such  cities  were  fortified.  In  K.\.  1  n  ©
gives  ir6\fts  dx^pd^  ; cp Pithom, Raamses.

On  citizenship,  cp  Govkknment,  §  4;  Law  and  Justice,
I  14  :  and  iJisiM- KsioN,  §  15.

For  the  cities  of  the  Plain  (nasn  ny)  see  Aumah,
etc. ;  on  the  cities  of  refuge  (a'^ps"!  ny),  see  Asylum,

§3-

CITY  OF  MOAB  (3XiO  l^r), Nu.  2236. See Ar

OF  Mci.M!.

CITY  OF  SALT. See  Salt,  City  ok.

CLASPS  (D^pip),  Ex.  266  RV ;  AV  'taches.'  See
Tabeknaclk.

CLAUDA,  RV  Cauda  (kAayAa  [Ti-  with  N*  13,
etc.],  KAY^A  [^^'^  ^^'^'^  ^^^^J'  <^''^""''i.^Acts  27 16),  is
described  as  a  small  island  (vy)ffiov)  under  the  lee  of
which  Paul's  ship  ran  for  shelter  {viroSpa/jiovTes)  when
blown  off  the  Cretan  shore.  She  was  driving  Ijefore  an
ENE.  wind  {z'.  14),  which  caught  her  between  Cape
Lithinos  (called  also  Cape  Matala)  and  Lutro  harbour
(see  Piia-:.\ix,  2).  Hence  Clauda  must  be  the  small
island  now  called  Gavdhonisi  [VavSovrjcn)  or  Gozzo,
lying  about  20  m.  due  S.  of  Lutro.  Ptolemy  (iii.  17")
has  KXoCoos  vrjcro^  ev  y  iroXit,  and  remains  of  a  small
town  are  found  on  the  island.  There  is  some  variety
in  the  ancient  appellation  (KXavSLa,  Stad.m.m.,  §  328  ;
Gaudos.  Pomp.  Mela,  2 114;  Pliny,  iV.V  iv.  12  6i).  It
became  the  seat  of  a  bishop  (cp  Hier.  Syn.  p.  14,
N^aos  KXaOSoj,  and  Notit.  Epis.  8  240,  etc. ).

\v.  J.  w.

CLAUDIA  (kAay^ia  [T'-  WH])  unites  with  Paul  at
Rome  in  sending  greeting  to  Timothy  at  Ephesus  (2  Tim.
421). Nothing  further  is  known  concerning  her.

For  the  ingenious  but  unconvincing  argument  by  which  it  has
been  sought  to  identify  her  with  the  Claudia  who  marries  Fudens
in  Martial's  epigram  (4  13),  and  to  prove  her  the  daughter  of  the
British  king  Tiberius  Claudius  Cogidubnus,  see  Alford,  NT,
vol.  iii.,  Prol.  to  2  Tim.

CLAUDIUS,  the  fourth  emperor  of  Rome  (41-54),
was  the  son  of  Nero  Claudius  Drusus  and  the  successor  of
Caius  Caligula.  His  advancement  to  this  position  came
chiefly  through  the  energies  of  Herod  Agr"ippa  I.,  whom
he  rewarded  with  consular  honours  and  the  enlargement
of  his  territories  by  the  addition  of  JudiKa,  Samaria,  and
certain  districts  in  Lebanon.  For  the  history  of  the
Jews  during  his  reign,  see  ISRAEL.  Claudius  is  twice
mentioned  in  the  NT.  In  Acts  11  28  the  famine  fore-
told by  Ag.vbus  is  said  to  have  been  in  the  time  of
Claudius  Civsar  {iirl  KXauSiou  [Ti.  WH]  ;  AV  after
TR,  L  KX.  KaiVapos  ;  but  see  C.ksar),  and  in  I81/.
reference  is  made  to  the  expulsion  of  the  Jews  from
Rome  which  he  was  induced  to  order  (as  Suet.  Claud.
25  tells  us)  on  account  of  their  tumults  :  '  Jud;vos
impuhore  Chrcsto-  assidu^  tumultuantes  Roma  e.vpulit."
The  precise  dates  of  both  famine  and  expulsion  have
been  disputed  ;  see  Chronology,  §  76/.

CLAUDIUS  LYSIAS  (kXay^ioc  Xyciac  [Ti.WH],
Acts  2:526),  '  chief  captain  '  (military  tribune,  or  chiliarch)
in  command  of  the  Roman  garrison  of  Jerusalem  in  the
governorship  of  Felix  (Acts  21  31  ff. ).

CLAY  is  derived  mostly  from  the  decomposition  of
felspathic  rocks  (especially  granite  and  gneiss)  and  of

1  The  Heb.  phrase  is  nijSDO  "lijf ;  cp  F,x.  1  1 1  (.\V  '  treasure
cities'),  zCh.  846  (L  adds  rmv  (^opiov),  17  12  (EV  'cities  of
store  ■).  nv  is  omitted  in  2  Ch.  32  28  (EV  '  storehouses,'  ttoAcij
[BAL]).  In  I  K.O19  (D5n  '-iV)  ©*  renders  iroAec?  tui'  <TKr]vu>-
liiTuv,  apparently  ni;2-i.a  I?L  (Tide  10  23)  omit.  miDDD  in
a  Ch.  I64  is  corrupt ;  see  ||  i  K.  l.'izo,  and  cp  Chinnkketh.
.  2  For  the  question  of  the  identity  of  Chrestus,  see  Christian,
Name  of,  S  6,  iii.

83s


CLEAN  AND  UNCLEAN

the  crystalline  ;  but  the  materials  are  so  varying  that
there  is  clay  of  several  kinds  suitable  for  several  uses.
The  term  '  clay  '  is  often  applied  loosely  to  '  loam  ' ;  of
such,  for  example,  is  the  clay  of  Egypt  and  of  Palestine,
although  a  bituminous  shale,  easily  convertible  into  clay,
is  said  to  occur  at  the  source  of  the  Jordan  and  near  the
Dead  Sea  ;  see  Bitumen.

In  Palestine,  and  indeed  throughout  the  E. ,  clay  is
used  chiefly  ( i )  in  building,  either  retained  in  its
natural  state  (for  ceilings  and  floors)  or  manufac-
tured into  bricks  (see  Habvlonl\,  §  15,  Hkick,  Cham-
ber, House);  (a)  in  the  manufacture  of  utensils  (see
Pottery);  (3)  in  providing  a  material  for  documents
public  and  private  and  a  means  of  safely  preserving
them.  Very  many  deeds  and  other  records  have  been
found  in  the  form  of  inscriljed  clay  tablets  in  Assyria
and  Babylonia.  '  The  deed  or  record  was  first  written
on  a  small  tablet,  or  brick,  of  clay,  with  the  names  of
the  principals,  witnesses,  etc. ,  appended.  This  tablet
was  then  enclosed  in  an  enveloi^e  of  clay,  on  which  was
written,  apparently  from  memory,  the  contents  of  the
document,  the  names  of  the  witnesses,'  etc.  (Peters).
In  Palestine,  where,  so  far  as  we  know,  clay  tablets  were
not  customary  in  the  historic  Isiaelitish  period,  clay,
instead  of  wax,  was  used  for  sealing.  See,  besides.  Job
38 14  14 17*,  where  AV's  '  sewest  up'  should  rather  be
'  smearest  (clay)  over' — parallel  to  '  sealed  up'  in  v.  tja.
In  Egypt  jars,  mummy-pits,  etc.,  were  frequently  sealed
with  clay.

The  Heb.  and  Gr.  words  which  are  rendered  'clay'  are  (i)
"Oh  hdmcr,  Gen.  11  3,  etc.;  (2)  13'D  ///,  used  of  the  mire  of
streets,  also  of  brick  (Nab.  3  14)  and  potter's  clay  (Is.  41  25)  ;  (3)
the  biblical  Aram,  representative  ^iCri /;rtja//«(Dan.2  33);  and  (4)
iTTjAos,  Rom.  9  21:  see  further  Pottekv.  t:^^ /«<•/<•/,  Jer.  489
AV  (RV  '  mortar ')  is  uncertain  {ev  npoOvpoi^  [B.\Q]A  iv  tw  Kpv4>im
[Qi"H]).  A  possible  meaning  is  '  earth  '  (Gieseljr.)  ;  l>ut  it  may
be  a  corruption  for  a^3  'secretly'  ;  see  Ges.  Lex.{^^}.

CLEAN  and  UNCLEAN,  HOLY  and  PROFANE.

Of  the  Heb.  terms  which  convey  the  idea  of  cleanliness
.  or  holiness  the  most  prominent  is  (i)

ofthTTeSil  '^■-P  ^'^•"e-  ''•^^-  •^''=->'  '^«  °^'^"'^^
meaning  of  which  is  not  clear.  Smend
in  AT  Rel.-gesch.^'^'^  334  (cp,  however,  2nd  ed.  150,
223,  325),  expresses  the  common  uncertainty  of  the
moment.  The  older  view  of  Ges.  ( Thes. ),  defended
now  only  in  a  much  modified  form,  is  that  the  root
means  'clear,'  'brilliant.'  Baudissin,*  writing  in  1878.
finds  the  fundamental  idea  in  '  separation,'  a  view  which
is  still  widely  held.

[Baudi.ssin  says,  '  .\  comparison  with  cnn  makes  it  natural
to  conjecture  that  thp  meant  from  the  first  "  to  be  separated  " —
"  to  be  pure  "—i.e.,  that  V\-\^  was  from  the  beginning  synonymous
with  'Tl''12;  cp  "Q,  "pure,"  from  113,  "tocut"  or  "cut  out.'"  It
is  certain,  too,  that  Vahwe's  holiness  and  his  glor>'  are  correlative
ideas  (as,  in  the  ATCsta,  Ahura  Mazda's).  In  Is.  O3  this  is
very  clearly  indicated,  and  in  t.  5  the  thought  of  Vahwfc's
holiness  suggests  to  Isaiah  that  of  his  own  (moral)  uncleanness
(cp  Ps.  l.'iiy;  ii-i/.).  May  there  not  have  been  a  time  when
np  suggested  the  idea  of  purity  without  any  moral  reference  ?
Zimmern,  followed  by  Whitehouse  ( rA/«-fr?r,  July  1892,  p.  52),
connects  C'n^  with  Ass.  kuddtiiu  {Busspsalmen,  37,  n.  2;
Bcitr.  zur  Assyr.\  105;  Vater,  Sohn,  Furs/>recher,  11,  n.  3),
which  means  'bright,'  'pure,'  or,  more  precisely  (  =  e/liisu),
'  bright,'  '  pure  '  (very  frequently),  '  illustrious,'  '  holy  '  (so  Sayce,
in  a  private  letter).  According  to  Aliel  (in  Baudissin,  38),  words
which  originally  denoted  '  purity '  are  used  in  Coptic  to  denote
the  divine  or  the  consecrated.  This  is  quite  in  accordance  with
the  spirit  of  the  old  Egyptian  religions  and  with  that  of  the  old
Semitic  religions.  If,  however,  this  tempting  comparison  l)e
accepted,  we  must  frankly  admit  that  the  original  meaning  had
become  forgotten,  or  was  but  obscurely  felt,  by  the  OT  writers.
Only  once  is  'the  Holy  One'  distinctly  p.ir.-illel  to  'light'  (Is.
10  1 7); but  the  ideas  are,  at  .-iny  rate,  implicitly  .synonymous  J

in Is.  31  9^  33  14/ In usage, as Davidson (Kzek. xxxix.),  i

remarks,  the  term  '  holy '  expresses,  not  any  particular  attribute

1  Possibly,  however,  iv  wpoBvpoit  represents  pSoa.  and  oSca
is  omitted  by  ©baq.

2  Studien  zur  semit.  Rei.-^eich.  2  20  (in  his  important  dis-
sertation, 'Der  Begriffder  Heiligkeit  im  Alten  TesUment').

836


CLEAN  AND  UNCLEAN,  HOLY  AND  PROFANE


Kcncral  _

thinit;li  slill  early  sense,  it  is  applied  to  that  'which  bcloiiR)
to  the  sphere  of  dcily,  which  lies  near  Cod's  presence  or  has
come  into  it  (Kx.  3s  Nu.  '837/  (17a/]),  or  which  beionfjs  to
him,  whetlicr  as  part  of  himself  or  as  his  property.'  Davidson
also  remarks  that  the  root  'prolubly  expressed  some  phvsical
idea,  thuii);h  the  idea  is  not  now  reasonnlile.'  See  also  WRS
ProtkS^  414,  who  points  out  (after  Nnldekc)  that  the  Arabic
evidence  for  the  supposed  root-idea  of  purity  will  not  hold.
In  A'iy.*),  150,  the  same  scholar  finds  'some  probability'  that
the origni.-tl  meaning  was  'se(»ration'  or  'withdrawal.'

Other  less  prominent  terms  are  b,ir  (13),  la/ck  ("[j),  and  tdhflr
(lineX  nil  of  which  are  rcnderetl  indifferenlly  by  'clean'  and
'pure.'  (a)  Of  these  the  most  definitely  religious  in  its  applica-
tion is  tahOr.  No  doubt  jjo'*!  »»•>>■  ^  tdhflr,  i.e.,  refined
(Ex.  li.*)!!  Job 28  10);  so  also  a  tur>>an  (Zech.aj),  vessels  (Kx.
'J4  f>),  etc.  ;  but  the  levitical  sense  is  s|>cci.illy  promment  (Lev.  7  19
Nu.i>i3,  etc.)  The  eyes  of  (;<xl  also  can  I*  tdhflr  {\\a.h.  1  i  ,) ;
therefore  he  cannot  tolerate  wickedness.  Similarly  innocence  in
man;  lob  17  9  Ps.  61ia  [lo).  God's  promises  are  tdJtflr — i.e.,
perfectly  veracious  (I's.  12  7  UJ).

(3)  TjJ  zaJc,  also  means  refined  (as  oil,  Ex.  27ao);  incense
(Ex.  3O34X  morally  pure,  'upright  '  (Job  8  6  [II  "KT),  Prov.  SOn
21  %\  It  is  used  of  a  prayer  (Job  IC  17),  of  the  heart  (it  has  to
be  m.ide  or  kept  '  pure  '  or  'clean,'  Ps.  73  13  Prov.  2O9  [|1  vtBl),
or  the  conduct  (Ps.  IH'q).

(4)  13,  har,  'separated' — i.e.,  'pure'  (cp  [i]  above).  Some
Rabbins  interpret  13  in  Ps.  2  12,  'selected  '  =  Trial  !>"'  't  would
be  c.isier  (though  not  the  best  solution)  to  re.id  Mrn^-  In  a
physical  sense  ^ar=  spotlessly  Ixrautiiiil  (Cant.  <i<)/-'i.  Spolk-ss
purity  belongs  to  (Jod's  commandments  (Ps.  Itfg).  It  is  used
of  moral  puriiy  (Jobll  4  Ps.  244  73  i).

The  NT  terms  which  have  to  be  noticed  are  (5)  oycd?  '  pure '
(,  =  tdhflr),  in  a  physical  sense  of  modesty  or  chastity  (1  Cor.
11  2  Tit.  2  5  I  Pet.  3  a);  sacred,  for  ceremonial  use  (2  .Mace.  13  8)  ;
pure  — ethically— of  men  (a  Cor.  7  11  Phil.  48  i  Tim.  632),  of
God  (i_  Jn.  3  3),  and  of  his  wisdom  (Ja.  3  17).

(6)  ayicK,  worthy  of  veneration,  whether  of  things  connected
with  ( '.oil (I.k.  1  4  Heb.9i24Xorofpersons(«-.^.,Johnthe  Baptist,
Mk.  t>  21  ;  Christian  disciples,  Acts9  13,  etc.).  Thus  the  church
—like  Israel  (Tit.  2  14,  see  Peculiar  Picoile)— is  called  eSiot
ayiov  (cp  Ex.  l'J6,  cmp  »ij).  oiyiot  stands  in  the  same  relation
liajCLOi  as  13^  (see  Lovingkinii.s'ess  and  cp  Assideans)  to  pIS
(see  Thayer,  Lex.  NT,  s.v.  ayio's).

(7)  oaio«  corresponds  chiefly  with  TDPI :  see  (6)  above  :  (so
also  in  ®).  It  is  used  of  men  (Tit.  l»  Heb.  726),  of  the
Messiah  (Acts2  27  1835),  of  .Messianic  blessings  (Acts  13  34
toL 6<Tia  :^aviS),  and  of  God  (Rev.  164  16  5  cp  Dt.  324  Heb.

y:x

(8)  i«pos,  consecrated  to  the  deity,  belonging  to  God,  used  of
the  'sacred'  writings  (2  Tim.  815  KV,  AV  'holy').  In  i  Cor.
9 13  tA  Ifpi  means  all  the  sacred  objects  pertaining  to  the
worship  of  God  in  the  temple.  P'or  the  negatives  of  these
qualities,  see  Co.mmon,  Pkokane.)

Baudissin's  view  (above  [i])  suits  many  passages  :  the
holiness  of  the  k'^disim  and  the  A't'deSotk'^  (see
iDOi-ATKy,  §  6),  who  were  certainly  found  in  Israel
very  early,  can  have  consisted  only  in  their  separation:
either  they  were  dedicated  to  foreign  gods,  or  pcrha[)S
they  were  set  apart  at  puberty  from  the  households  in
which  they  grew  up.  according  to  a  custom  which  ranges
from  the  (iold  Coast  to  Tahiti  (see  Frazer's  Golden  Hough,
2225^),  and  never  returned  to  them  or  entered  others.
The  hire  of  the  '  harlot '  Tyre  (Is.  '23 18)  is  to  In;  '  holiness
unto  Yahwe,'  not  Ixxause  the  reviving  trade  of  Tyre  is  to
be  conducted  in  a  Ix^tter  spirit  than  before,  but  liecause  it
is  to  be  taxed  at  the  new  Jerusalem  (which  is  presumably
to  Ije  a  staple  town  of  the  wool  and  spice  trade)  in  a
way  to  absorb  all  its  profits.  Again  (Zech.  I420/. ),
everything  in  the  new  Jerusalem  after  its  last  great  trial
is  to  be  so  holy,  so  perfectly  the  property  of  God,  that
the  very  horse-liells  will  bear  the  same  motto  as  the
High  Priest's  mitre ;  the  pots  in  which  the  sacrificial
flesh  is  Ix)iled  for  priests  are  to  be  as  holy  as  the  Ixjwls
which  hold  the  sacrificial  blood  reserved  for  God  ;  the
common  cooking  pots  of  Jerusalem  are  to  be  holy
enough  for  pilgrims  to  boil  their  sacrifices  in.  Jerusalem
(Joel  3  [4]  17)  is  to  be 'holy'; no  stranger  is  to  pass

1  [See  Dr.  Di.  264/  ;  St.  GVl  1  479/  :  Movers,  Die  Phdn.
1  ^Tiff-  Henzinger  (//.4,  {  61)  rem.-irks,  'It  may  !>.-ifely  be
affirmed  that  this  form  of  consecration  to  the  deity,  and  es-
pecially the  violation  of  nature  combined  with  it,  was  unknown
to  the  Israelitish  nomads;  but  also,  that  with  so  many  other
details  of  Itaal-worship,  it  penetrated  into  the  service  of  Yahwe,
and  there  spread  to  a  considerable  extent.')

837


through. There  Ls  to  l)e  through  the  wilderness  of  Judah
a  '  \\u\y '  way  (Is.  3.'>8)  in  which  no  uncl<:in  .shall  walk.

S<j  far  it  seems  as  if  holiness  might  l>c  explained  as  a
relation  rather  than  a  quality.  The  flesh  and  blorxl  of
the  sacrifice  are  holy  Ijcc-ausc  they  Ijelong  to  (io«l  ;  the
pots  and  bowls  have  to  lie  holy  that  they  may  hold  the
flesh  and  blood.  So.  too,  the  vessels  (the  Ixxlies  ?  or
the  wallets?)  of  David's  followers  (i  .S. 'J  1  5 [6])  have
to  be  holy  that  they  may  receive  the  shewbread,  which
is  holy  because  it  is  set  l>efore  Gfxl.  David  (whom  all
the  writers  who  speiik  of  him  regard,  from  their  several
pcjints  of  view,  .xs  a  model  of  wisdom  and  jiiety)  vouches
for  the  negative  holiness  of  his  men,  and  any  accidental
defilement  which  he  does  not  know  will  have  had  time
to  wear  off  :  he  appears  to  think  that  the  shewbread  will
sanctify  their  'vessels,''  and  implies  that  if  they  had
been  specially  sanctified,  as  for  a  holy  war  or  a
pilgrimage,  they  might  have  eaten  the  shewbread
though  they  were  not  priests.

The  '  sanctification  '  of  persons  and  things  falls  under
the  s;ime  notion.  '  Holiness,"  as  Rol)ertsfjn  Smith
2.  Contagion  "'?'•''■'■"•  (^'•'>"''-\45o^).  is  contagious:
of  holiness,  ^^'^^^/--^'^-^f  'holy  thing  or  a  -holy-  person
touches  becomes  holy.  VN  hen  Klijah
casts  his  mantle  over  Elisha,  the  latter  has  to  follow
till  Mlijali  releases  him  ;  the  worshiiijjcrs  of  liaal,
whose  ordinary  dress  might  '  profane '  the  house,  are
provided  with  special  vestments  from  the  stores  of  the
house  of  H.-ial  ;  otherw ise.  when  they  came  outside,  their
ordinary  dress  would  make  w  hatever  it  touched  '  holy  to
Rial, '  and  unavailable  to  the  former  owners.  The  prii'st
on  the  great  Day  of  Atonement  (the  rule  is  older  than  the
day)  is  to  take  off  the  holy  linen  garments  and  leave
them  in  the  holy  place,  and  to  wash  his  flesh  in  water
lest  any  of  the  contagion  of  holiness  should  cling  lo
him.  In  a  te.\t  which,  though  l>elonging  to  the  mam
stock  of  P,  seems  to  represent  a  later  state  of  the  law,
the  consecration  of  .Aaron  and  his  successors  seems  to
consist  in  their  investiture  with  the  (hereditar)- ?)  st.ite
dress  of  Ex.  "28  ;  cp  Nu.  20  25-28.  According  to  another
view,  which  is  older  than  Zech.  4 14,  the  consecration
consists  in  the  anointing  (cp  Anointi.vg,  §  3,  r).
The  doctrine  of  the  contagion  of  holiness  is  at  its  height
in  Ezek.  (4624),  who  provides  Sjjecial  kitchens  where
the  priests  are  to  cook  the  most  holy  things,  and  special
chamljers  in  which  they  are  to  eat  them,  without
bringing  them  forth  into  the  outer  court  to  sanctify  the
people  (who  are  eating  their  own  sacrifices).  Other-
wise, they  might  become  the  pro|x:rty  of  the  sanctuary,
or  at  least  would  be  subject  to  the  same  obligations  as
the  priests.  For  the  s.ime  reason,  it  is  expressly  stated,
they  are  to  leave  the  holy  garments  in  the  holy  place,
though  all  the  top  of  the  mountain  is  most  holy.  So,
too,  a  little  later,  the  profane  sacrificers'^  of  Is.  6.')  5  either
threaten  to  sanctify  the  poor  who  approach  them,  or
claim  to  be  too  holy  to  l)e  approachetl.  In  Hag.  '2 12/
we  find  a  distinct  change.  The  contagion  of  uncleanness
is  stronger  than  the  contagion  of  holiness.  A  garment
in  which  holy  flesh  is  carried  does  not  sanctify ;  a
garment  which  h.is  touched  the  dead  pollutes  (cp
Egypt,  §  19,  and  see  Drk.ss,  §  8>.  The  stricter  view  is
still  presupi)o.sed,  at  least  for  the  '  most  holy '  things ;  any
garment  sprinkled  with  blood  has  to  be  washed  in  the
holy  place  (Lev.  6  27[2o])  ;■'  otherwise  it  would  sanctify.
For  the  same  reason  the  earthen  pots  used  in  cooking
are  to  be  broken;  brass  pots  (too  valuable  to  break)
may  be  usetl,  but  only  after  having  been  rinsed  and
scoured — obviously  to  remove  the last vestige  of  the

1  Everybody  dedicated  a  new  house  (Dt.  20  5) :  was  it  ever  a
custom  to  dedicate  vessels?

*  They  wish  to  fors.-ike  God's  holy  mountain  and  set  up  a
temple  of  their  own ;  they  ate  rebuked  in  a  «ay  to  imply  tnat
no  temple  exists  or  is  needed  (cp  Is.  DO  xff.  and  see  Isaiah,  ii.,
I  ").

*  Is  this  the  reason  why  the  holy  garments  are  of  linen T
Woollen  garments  would  naturally  be  sent  to  the  fuller  at  long
intervals.

838


CLEAN  AND  UNCLEAN,  HOLY  AND  PROFANE


holy food. The rank of  the priests is determined

by  their  right  to  eat  of  both  the holy  and  the  most

TT  ..  holy,  which  are  often  cited  as  if  they  were


of  priests.


known,  and  never  descritjed:  though  we


are  told  that  the  '  sin  '  and  the  '  trespass '
offering  are  most  holy  and  must  be  eaten  in  the  holy  place,
and  hence  could  not  be  eaten  by  the  households  of  the
priests.  Why  these  special  offerings  are  specially  holy
is  discussed  elsewhere  (see  Sackifick).  The  scribes,
to  whom  we  owe  this  law,  are  the  fathers  of  those  who
decided  that  a  book  was  or  was  not  canonical  according
as  it  did  or  did  not  '  defile  the  hands. '  After  touching
a  really  holy  book,  a  man  had  to  wash  before  touching
common  food  lest  his  hands  should  sanctify  it  (cp  Canon,
§  4).  In  the  oldest  practice,  it  would  seem,  it  is  the
contact  with  the  holy  Mesh  that  is  the  essence  of  the  con-
secration of  priests  :  the  sacrificer  who  wishes  to  institute
a  priest  '  fills  his  hand. ' '  As  sacrifice  and  slaughter  are
nearly  synonymous  (as  late  as  Is.  346;  Isaiah,  ii. ,  §  14),
we  seem  to  find  in  one  of  the  stories  of  the  golden  calf
that  the  share  of  the  Levites  in  the  slaughter  of  the
worshipp<Ms  is  virtually  their  consecration.  '  They
have  filled  )  our  hand  forYahw^'  (i.e.,  'Ye  have  been
to-day  appointed  priests'),  'for  every  man  was  against
his  son  and  his  brother  '  (Ex.  3229). '•^  In  i  K.  1833
Jeroboam  fills  the  hand  for  the  priests  of  the  high
places:  in  2Ch.  189  each  candidate  brings  a  bullock
and  seven  rams  to  fill  his  hand.^  This  seems  an  echo
of  old  tradition  ;  for  in  Kx.  29  (P),  Moses  takes  only
two  rams  and  a  bullock  when  he  fills  the  hand  of  Aaron
and  his  sons  :  the  blood  of  the  ram  of  the  '  fill  offering '
is  put  on  the  right  ear,  the  right  thumb,  the  right  great
toe,  of  each  priest  ;  the  pieces,  which  as  a  rule  are  burnt,
and  one  of  those  which  in  ordinary  sacrifices  fell  to  the
priest  as  his  fee,  are  both  laid  with  cake  on  the  hand  of
each  priest  and  waved  before  God  (to  assert  the  priest's
right  to  the  '  wave-breast '  and  the  '  heave  shoulder ' )
and  then  burnt.  There  seems  to  be  an  afterthought
{v.  26)  in  which  Moses  as  the  officiating  priest  takes  the
wave  breast  to  himself;  the  priests  eat  the  rest  of  the
sacrifice  (which  in  ordinary  cases  the  worshipper  would
eat)  in  the  holy  place.  The  idea  seems  to  be  that  jvist
as  the  worshijjper  in  the  old  profession  (Dt.  2613)
declares  '  I  have  put  away  the  holy  out  of  my  house,'
so  the  sacrificer  passes  on  the  dangerous  holy  food  to  a
priest  who  will  take  the  risk  and  the  privilege  of  sharing
the  table  of  God,  and  bear  the  inicjuity  of  the  people  in
their  holy  things.  Possibly  the  Levites  in  Ex.  3226^
may  point  to  a  time  when  the  priest  was  not  chosen  by
the  sacrificer,  but  handselled  his  office  by  laying  hands
on  the  holy  flesh.

The  cjuestion  whether  '  holiness '  to  begin  with  is
nothing more than '  separateness ' bears  very  directly

.• ne  r> J on  the '  holiness ' of  God. If  holiness  is
4. UI  vcOu. • ■ 1.  ,  1-

originally  a  relation  rather  than  a  quality,

if  things  and  persons  are  holy  to  God  as  persons  and

acts  are  righteous  before  him,  then  God  himself  is  holy

simply  as  the  centre  of  the  circle  of  sanctity  :  if  all  that

belongs  to  the  sanctuary  is  holy, how  much  more  he

who dwelleth Ijetween the cherubim, who inhabiteth

the  praises  of  Israel  (Ps.  223[4])? He  is  the  object  of

worship  whom  his  worshippers '  sanctify. ' He  is  the

'  Holy  One '  : '  I  am  God  and  not  man,  the  Holy  One

1  If  Micah  (Judg.  17  5)  had  begun  with  the  Levite  we  might
suppose  that  the  filling  of  his  hand  consisted  in  his  salary.  He
is  not  likely  to  have  given  his  son  a  salary  ;  yet  he  'filled  his
hands.'

2  [So  Racon  (Triple  Tradition  0/  the  Exodus,  137),  who  re-
marks, '  In  the  story  before  us  the  consecration  of  the  bene  Levi
to  the  priesthood  is  explained  atiologically  by  their  having  filled
their  hand  with  the  blood  of  their  brethren.'  It  is  doubtful
whether  'they  have  filled  your  hand'  is  the  meaning  of  the  Heb.
Theexpression,  '  Fill  your  hands'  (if  this  l)e  the  meaning),  is
admitted,  however,  by  Baudissin  (Gesc/i.  des  AT Prie.<iterih.  60)
to  be  '  very  suspicious."  It  is  always  another  who  fills  the  new
priest's  hand.s.  Perhaps  in  an  interpolation  (see  Kue.  Hex.  247)
the  phrase  may  be  conceivable.]

*  Can  we  suppose  that  if  anybody  was  allowed  to  qualify
Jeroboam  found  the  qualification  for  all  comers?

839


of  Israel  in  the  midst  of  thee'  (Hos.  119  cited  Is.  126  :
'  Rejoice  and  shout,  O  inhabitant  of  Zion,  for  gre.at  is
the  Holy  One  of  Israel  in  the  midst  of  thee').  Yahw6
is  the  God,  the  Holy  One  of  the  prophet  (Hab.  I12).
So  Jacob  (Gen.3l53,  cp  v.  42  [!•;])  swears  by  the  fear
of  his  father  Isaac — i.e.,  the  God  whom  his  father
feared.

There  are  other  texts,  however,  in  which  holiness  seems
to  be  absolute.  The  men  of  Ueth-shemesh  (i  Sam.  620)
ask,  'Who  can  stand  before  Yahwe,  this  holy  god?'^
In  Am.  42  Yahwe  swears  by  his  holiness.  Does  that
mean  his  character  ?  or  the  reverence  due  to  him  ?
The  answer  will  govern  the  sense  in  which  his  name
is  holy  in  27.  In  Is.  5 16  (authoritative  enough  by
whomsoever  written)  God's  being  exalted  through
judgment  and  sanctified  through  righteousness  are
closely  parallel.  The  song  ascribed  to  the  mother  of
Samuel  (i  S.  2)  is  an  unambiguous  echo  of  the  song  of
the  seraphim  (Is.  63)  —  'Holy,  holy,  holy  is  Yahwe
Sftbaoth,  the  whole  earth  is  full  of  his  glorj',' — where
holiness  and  glory  are  clearly  parallel.  So,  too,  in
Jer.  17 12,  '  a  high  throne  is  the  place  of  our  sanctuary,'
and  in  Ex.  15ii,  'Who  is  like  thee,  glorious  in  holi-
ness, fearful  in  praises,  doing  wonders  ? '—  the  holiness,
the  praises,  the  wondgrs,  seem  to  belong  to  God's  ex-
ternal majesty.  Throughout  the  OT  God's  worshippers
rehearse  his  acts  much  oftener  than  his  attributes.
We  find  his  'righteous  acts'  as  early  as  the  song  of
Deborah  (Judg.  .')ii)  ;  but  not  till  Jer.  12 1  do  we  read,
'  righteous  art  thou,  Yahwe,  when  I  plead  with  thee ' ;
where  the  sense  is  still  half  forensic,  <as  in  Ex.927  (JE)
Ps.  51  4  [6].  In  Ps.  11 7  we  have  '  The  righteous  Yahwe
loveth  righteousness.'  The  parallel  between  holiness
and  glory  is  reinforced  by  the  contrast  between  holy
and  profane,  for  profane  certainly  seems  to  mean  what
is  cast  down  to  be  trodden  under  foot  (E/.ek.  28  16,  '  Cast
thee  as  profane  out  of  the  holy  mount';  Ps.  8939  [40],
'  Thou  hast  profaned  his  crown  to  the  ground  ' ;  cp  44).
Israel,  again  (Dt.  2619),  is  made  high  above  all  people,
that  it  may  be  a  holy  people.

The  demand  that  Israel  shall  be  holy  is  common  to
every  stage  and  aspect  of  the  Law.  In  Ex.  22  31  [30]
5  Of  Israel  '^^'  '^""^^  Dt.  I421,  it  is  the  ground  on
■  which  Israel  is  to  abstain  from  all  meat
not  killed  by  men  for  human  food  ;  in  Dt.  14i/.  Israel
as  a  holy  people  is  forbidden  to  make  to  the  dead
blood-  or  hair-offerings,  intended,  doubtless,  to  keep  up
a  physical  comnmnion  with  them  (cp  Escii.\TOLOGV).
The  spiritual  tie  between  God  and  his  peculiar  people
who  are  his  children  is  not  to  be  impaired  by  a  rite  the
sense  of  which  was  still  clear  when  the  book  which
Hilkiah  found  was  written,  though  in  Jer.  166  the  rite
seems  harmless  and  unmeaning,  .\gain,  the  tithe  of
the  third  year  is  profane  if  any  of  it  has  been  '  eaten  in
mourning  '  or  '  given  for  the  dead  '  (Dt.  2614).  Are  we
to  think  of  the  mere  unluckiness  of  .any  thing  connected
with  the  dead  (Hos.  94)?  or  of  some  form  of  worship,
as  in  Is.  819?  Consecration  for  one  mode  of  worship
would  be  a  defilement  for  another.  In  I^v.  I927  (cp
21 5)  we  have  the  law  against  cuttings  for  the  dead  pre-
ceded by  a  law  against  an  Arab  tonsure,  which  probably
marked  consecration  to  an  Arab  god.  This  might  go
back  to  Hezekiah,  who,  according  to  Sennacherib  [KB
294),  entertained  Arab  mercenaries.  Gratian  adopted
the  dress  of  his  Alan  guard.  If  we  suspect  with
Robertson  Smith  *  an  invasion  of  Arab  totemism  in  the


t  Holiness  in  the  sarne  sense  is  a.scribed  to  other  gods ;  Esh-
munazar  of  Zidon  on  his  sarcophagus  (circa  400  B.C.)  speaks  of
the  holy  gods  in  the  same  way  as  do  Nebuchadrezzar  and  the
queen-mother  in  the  Book  of  Daniel,

2  ['  Here,  therefore,  we  have  a  clear  ca.se  of  the  re-emergence
into  the  light  of  day  of  a  cult  of  the  most  primitive  tjtcm  type
which  had  been  banished  for  centuries  from  public  religion,  but
must  have  been  kept  alive  in  obscure  circles  of  private  or  jocal
superstition,  and  sprang  up  again  on  the  rising  of  the  national
faith,  like  some  noxious  weed  in  the  courts  of  a  deserted  temple'
^'.  357)' See  the  context,  and  cp  Che.  /ntr.  Is.  368^]


taitn,  I
(/f5(2),


840


CLEAN  AND  UNCLEAN,  HOLY  AND  PROFANE


time  of  Kzek.  (87-n),  I^v.  IQaS  will  forbid  the  tattooing
of  totem  marks.

In  the  lUM)k  of  the  Covenant  and  in Oeuterononiy
the  holiiu'ss  of  the  covenant  people  is  demanded,  so  to


6.  In  the  Codes.  '^''


•ak,


dentally,  and  without ex-


press reference  to  the  holiness  of  the
covenant  (jod.  If  one  were  to  try  to  find  a  keynote  for
the  older  lK)<)k  it  would  be  'Justice';  for  Deuteronomy
perhaps  '  I.oving-kindness.  'hcsed,'  the  dutiful  love  of
the  worshipjxT  to  his  (iod,  which  includes  kindness
for  Gotl's  sake  to  men  (see  also  Li)VIN(;kinijnkss).
'  Holiness '  is  certainly  the  keynote  of  the  oldest  stratum
of  the  l^vitical  law  (see  Lkvitk  i:s).

Deuteronomy  is  clearly  a  development,  as  compared
with  the  H<K)k  of  the  Covenant  ;  a  deeper  insight  into
the  vocation  of  the  chosen  people  has  \xxn  gained.  Is
the  Law  of  Holiness  a  development  in  the  same  sense,
compareil  with  Deuteronomy?  The  interval  between
Kzekiel  and  Jeremiah  is  shorter  than  that  Ixjtween
Deuteronomy  and  the  Book  of  the  Covenant  ;  yet
F.zekiel  is  almost  as  full  of  the  ideas  of  H  {i.e.,  the
\j\\\  of  Holiness)  as  Jeremiah  of  those  of  D.  Has  he
inherited  a  relatively  old  tradition  ?  Short  as  H  is,
it  is  full  of  variations  and  repetitions.  Would  not
an  elder  or  a  younger  contemjxjrary  of  Ez.ekiel,  giving
expression  to  a  ncsv  religious  movement  that  had  grown
out  of  Josiah's  covenant,  have  imparted  more  unity  to
his  work  ?  Again,  in  more  than  one  way  H  seems  to
be  older.  No  reader  of  Frazer  (see  especially  Golden
Boui^h,  1279  n.  2)  would  think  the  law  which  forbids
the  reaping  of  corners  later  than  the  law  against  gleaning
(Lev.  \9<)f.).  Nor  is  the  holiness  required  of  priests
yet  extended  to  the  whole  j)eople  ;  thus  if  a  layman  eats
.I'^aa  he  is  defiled  for  the  clay  and  must  wash  his  clothes  ;
but  for  priests  the  prohibition  is  absolute.  There  seems,
too,  to  be  a  recognition  of  other  gods  (Dt.  24 15/ )  :  if  a
man  curses  his  own  god  he  shall  bear  his  iniquity  (i.e.,
he  must  not  come  to  the  priest  of  the  God  of  Israel  to
make  atonement  for  him).  Certainly  in  D  the  demand
for  '  holiness '  is  based  on  the  more  characteristic  de-
mand for  monolatrj',  whilst  in  H,  though  the  demand
for  monolatry  is  not  superfluous — Israel,  we  are  told,
went  after  the  Shedim  (see  Dkmons,  §  4)  in  the  wilder-
ness (Lev.  17  7) — it  is  not  fundamental.  The  giving  of
the  seed  to  Moloch  is  treated  as  analogous  to  the  moral
abominations  of  the  nations,  for  which  the  land  spewed
them  out,  rather  than  to  turning  away  to  idols  or
making  molten  gods.  It  was  a  profanation  of  God's
holy  name  just  Ixicause  those  under  his  wrath  (Ezek.
20  25/)  regarded  it  as  part  of  his  service.  Upon
the  whole,  the  demand  for  holiness  in  H  seems  to
be  an  intensification  of  the  demand  that  worshippers
shall  sanctify  themselves,  which  we  may  suppose  the
better  priests  to  have  insisted  upon  as  long  as  there
were  feasts  in  Isr.iel.  In  many  ways  the  holiness  is
still  external  :  'ye  shall  be  holy,  for  I  Yahwe  am  holy,"
appears  (Lev.  20  26)  as  a  sanction  for  the  law  against
abominable  food  (cp  1144/};  in  19  2  218  the  con-
text takes  off  nothing  from  the  text.  These  passages
mark  the  culmination,  not  the  starting  |X)int,  of  a  line
of  teaching.  Generally  the  sanction  of  the  precept  is,
'  I  am  Yahw6,'  '  I  am  Yahw^  your  god,'  '  I  am  Yahw6
your  god  who  brought  you  out  of  I'gypt,'  '  I  am  Yahw6
who  sanctify  you.'  Logically  and  theologically  God's
holiness  is  the  source  of  all  others :  he  is  holy  in  himself
and  therefore  what  he  takes  for  his  must  be  holy  too  ;
but  possibly,  as  Koliertson  Smith  held,  holiness  may  in
the  beginning  have  been  regarded  as  a  mysterious
virtue  inherent  in  things  external  to  the  worshipper  —  in
trees,  in  waters,  in  stones,  in  the  mysterious  animal
life  of  well-wooded  and  well- watered  sjwts, — each  of
which  may  have  served  to  suggest  a  higher  power
beyond  the  phenomena  in  which  it  was  first  recognised.
Historically,  however,  the  evidence  that  holiness  is  an
attribute  of  the  object  of  worship  is  neither  so  early  nor
so  copious  as  the  evidence  that  holiness  is  a  relation

84X


bringing  the  worshipper  and  his  holy  things  into  a  new
sphere  with  something  worship|x;d  at  its  centre.

Obviously  '  holy  and  profane,'  '  clean  and  unclean,'  is
a  cross  division  ;  holy  things  and  |x.'rsons  are,  or  may
7  Cleana.ndun  **'  ^  unavailable  for  common  life  as
Clean  animals  '^  ^^""^  ^"''^  unclean,  though,  on  the
other  hand,  holiness  necessarily  pre-
sujiposcs  and  includes  cleanness.  Again,  uncleanness
often  seems,  like  holiness,  to  have  something  super-
natural atxjut  it :  unclean  animals  often  seem  to  Ijc
'  alxjnjinablc,'  like  '  idols  ' ;  the  uncleanness  of  the  dead,
and  of  women  at  certain  times,  is  as  likely  to  savour
of  awe  as  of  disgust.

In  historical  times  clean  and  unclean  beasts  are  those
which are lit  or  unfit  for  food  rather than for  sacri-

8.  Quadrupeds.  l"'^\<^'-'^,^7*-'^'--''  ^•'""■'  §  "):.  ^f
*  *^ the  law  of  clean  and  unclean  anmials

is  puzzling.*  The  law  which  limited  the  eatable
quadru]x.'ds  to  the  old  order  of  ruminants  (with  the
exception  of  the  camel)  was  valuable  incidentally  from
the  hygienic  point  of  view.  If  this  was  the  origin  of
the  law,  it  must  have  rested  rather  on  instinct  than
on  observation  ;  at  most,  shepherds  and  herdsmen
may  have  noticed  what  Ixsasts  they  found  feeding  in  the
pastures  of  the  wilderness,  and  decided  that  these  were
as  fit  for  food  as  their  own  flocks  and  herds.  All  the
patriarchs  have  camels,  and  Rachel  ((ien.  31  34  [L])  hides
the  teraphim  in  the  camel's  furniture  :  in  later,  perhaps
more  historical,  times  camels  seem  to  Ix-long  to  aliens
(cj)  C.AMKL,  §  2_f.).  In  the  oldest  stratum  of  the  story
of  CJideon  (Judg.  825)  we  find  the  gold  rings  round  the
necks  of  the  camels  of  the  Midianites  ;  in  the  oldest
stratum  of  the  story  of  David  (i  S.  30  17)  400  of  the
Amalekites  escaj^e  on  camels.  As  far  as  we  know,  camel-
riders  have  always  killed,  eaten,  and  sacrificed  their
camels,  though  the  meat  is  inferior  to  beef  and  mutton.
Possiblythe  camel  was  unclean  because  it  was  the  domestic
animal  of  alien  nomads.  If  so,  the  rule  '  whatever
divideth  the  hoof  and  cheweth  the  cud  shall  be  clean '
may  have  been  settled  before  the  question  of  eating  camels
l)ccame  practical.  This  question  was  decided  by  the  ob-
-servation  that  the  camel  does  not  strictly  divide  the  hoof,
or  at  least  rests  part  of  its  weight  on  an  undivided  pad.
The  express  prohibition  of  eating  hares,  rock-badgers,
and  swine,  as  food,  is  curious.  No  reason  except  a
possible  connection  with  totemism  has  yet  been  suggested
why  the  rock-badger  was  forbidden  ;  and  for  the  prohi-
bition of  the  hare  we  have  only  guesses — perhaps  it  is
worth  while  to  mention  the  idea  that  hares'  flesh  is
unhealthy.  The  uncleanness  of  switie  is  at  its  height
when  they  are  kept  in  sties  and  left  dirty  ;  but  in  O  T  and
NT  times  they  seem  to  have  fed  in  herds  out  of  doors.
Compared  with  sheep  and  goats,  they  are  fond  of  mud
— but  so  are  buffaloes  in  mcKlern  Palestine,  which  are
not  regarded  with  the  same  horror  as  swine.  On  the
other  hand,  tribes  of  herdsmen  and  shepherds  have  much
more  in  common  with  each  other  than  with  s\\  ineherds,
and  if  we  are  to  look  for  a  natural  explanation  of  the
abhorrence  of  swine  we  niay  look  for  it  here  :  the  droves
of  swine  of  the  alien  were  abominable  to  the  flocks  and
herds  of  the  I  lebrew.  As  for  the  actu.al  feeling,  whatever
its  cause,  it  is  significant  that  in  Harran,  traditionally
the  last  station  of  Abraham  on  his  way  to  Canaan  and  the
land  to  which  Jacob  returned,  the  land  where  he  won  his
wives  and  his  wealth,  swine  were  sacrificed  once  a  year
and  eaten  only  then. A  sacrifice  which  is,  for  whatever

1  With  regard  to  sacrifices  it  is  men  that  are  clean  or  unclean.
When  men  sacrifice  of  the  flock  and  the  herd,  only  the  clean
may  eat  (when  Saul  misses  David  at  table  the  first  thought  that
occuni  to  him  is  '  he  is  unclean  ')  :  that  wa.s  the_ common  law  till
slaughter  without  .sacrifice  was  allowed  in  D  in  the  interest  of
the  one  sanctuary.  Of  game,  on  the  other  hand,  of  the  roebuck
and  the  hart  the  clean  and  the  unclean  may  eat  alike — though
possibly  there  is  a  trace  of  a  blood-oflTering  by  hunters  in  the
rule  in  H  (I^v.  17  13)  that  the  blood  is  to  be  not  simply  poured
out  but  covered  with  earth— a  prescription  which  might  be  either
a  survival  or  a  development.

«  [Cp  Dr.  Dt.  164  WRS  OT/C<^)  366 ;  Now.  HA  1  116/:]

84a


CLEAN  AND  UNCLEAN,  HOLY  AND  PROPANE


reason,  rare,  is  also  mysterious,  awful,  and  potent.
Dogs  too  were  sacre<l  in  Harran  ;  and  both  swine  and
dogs  seem  to  tigure  in  the  profane  sacrifices  of  Is.  65
and  66.1 See  Dou,  §  4.

Whatever  the  reason  for  the  express  prohibition  of
camels,  hares,  rock-badgers,  and  swine,  the  prohibition
is  as  old  as  any  part  of  the  law  which  we  can  trace  ;
but  the  list  of  prohibited  animals  in  Lev.  11  29^  (P)  has
integral  relation  to  the  rest  of  the  law  ;  the  weasel,  the
mouse,  and  different  kinds  of  lizards  are  '  the  uncleanest
with  you  of  swarming  things'  ;  except  dry  sowing  seed,
everything  that  comes  into  contact  with  their  carcase
is  unclean.

The  rule  is  meant  to  work:  one  of  these  abominations  does
not  defile  a  whole  cistern  or  fountain  ;  every  earthenware  vessel
which  they  touch  is  to  be  broken  ;  other  vessels  are  to  be  washed
in  water  and  lo  be  unclean  until  even  ;  the  water  which  washes
the  vessels  pollutes  all  meat  on  which  it  falls  ;  any  drink  in  the
polluted  vessels  is  of  course  unclean.

Two  questions  arise  :  Why  should  people  wish  to  eat
weasels,  mice,  and  different  kinds  of  lizards?  and  why
are  these  charged  with  special  uncleanness?  The
traditional  answer  to  the  second  is  that  they  are  in  a
sense  domestic  vermin  which  haunt  houses  and  are
always  getting  into  whatever  is  stored  there,  and  so  are
worse  than  vermin  out  of  doors  ;  but,  as  most  com-
mentators think  that  one  of  the  lizards  enumerated  is
an  iguana  or  a  land  crocodile  3  or  4  ft.  long  (see  Liz.vkd
[i]),  the  explanation  has  to  bear  a  heavy  strain.  If
Robertson  Smith's  theory  of  totemism  is  established,
much  will  become  clear. ^  The  elders  of  Israel  who  wor-
shipped '  creeping  things  '  in  '  chambers  of  imagery  '
(Ezek.  810^)  made  it  necessary  to  cultivate  a  special
religious  horror  of  their  low-class  totems  :  they  were  at
the  same  stage  as  the  Harranians,  who  are  said  to  have
worshipped  field-mice.  Indications  of  high-class  totems,
however,  are  not  wanting  ; see  Leop.akd,  Wolf.

There  is  neither  a  category  nor  a  list  of  clean  birds  :
of  the  unclean,  as  enumerated,  most  are  uneatable —
either  birds  of  prey  or  feeders  on  carrion.
The  lapwing  is  especially  forbidden  :  the  only
possible  reason  yet  discovered  is  that  it  haunts  marshy
places  and  that  its  flesh  has  sometimes  a  bad  smell.
Nothing  is  said  one  way  or  other  of  doves  or  pis^eons, —
which  is  remarkable,  as  they  do  not  ap[)ear  at  Solomon's
table,  and,  though  they  are  the  only  birds  which,  as  far
as  we  know,  were  sacrificed,  they  were  used  for  sacrifices
of  which  the  worshipper  at  least  did  not  eat.  In  Syria,
at  any  rate,  they  were  always  associated  with  the  worship
of  Astarte,  and,  wherever  that  worship  spread  to  the
West,  they  went  with  it,  and  according  to  Lucian  [Dca
Syra,  14,  54)  none  of  the  worshippers  at  Hierapolis
ventured  to  eat  or  touch  them — they  were  too  holy,  — and
whoever  touched  them  was  ivayq^  or  '  unclean  '  for  a
day,  and  it  was  a  question  whether  swine  were  '  holy '
or  'abominable.'  Probably  the  question  of  clean  or
unclean  birds  was  only  of  secondary  importance  :  it  was
not  easy  to  keep  ducks  or  geese  ;  there  were  no  cocks
(see  Cock)  or  hens;  the  'fowls  of  heaven'  generally
appear  as  feeding  on  sacrifices  or  corpses  ;  the  '  fowler  '
(who  appears  as  early  as  Hos.  98)  probably  caught  small
birds  for  the  rich.*

The  prohibition  of  '  flying  swarming  things  that  go  on
all  fours '  looks  as  if  at  first  it  included  locusts,  the  only


9.  Birds.


10.  Insects.


insects  which  anybody  could  wish  to  eat  ;


if  so,  subsequent  scribes  discovered  that,
as  they  leap  on  their  hind  legs  and  do  not  strictly  go  on

1  [See  WR.S  Rcl.  Setn.Ci^  igojf.  Were  these  sacrificiaLrites
practised by  the early  Samaritans? Cp  Che.  /n/r.  Is. 367.]

2  [Cp  Stade,  Th.  LZC,  i8g6,  n.  i,  col.  10,  who  remarks
against  Nowack  that  '  W.  R.  Smith's  hypothesis  has  the  special
merit  of  explaining  why  certain  .^nimals  are  sacred,  and  why
certain  kinds  of  flesh  may  not  be  eaten.  The  theory  that  these
animals  were  regarded  as  the  property  of  the  (iodhead  only
throws  the  question  back.  P'or  how  came  people  to  embrace
such  a  remarkable  theory?'  For  Nowack's  view  see  his  HA
1  118.I

3  See  Fowl,  81.  In  i  S.  2'»2o,  if  the  text  is  right,  partridge-
hunting  seeii»  to  be  beneath  the  dignity  of  a  king.  See
Partridok*.

843


all  fours,  they  might  lie  eaten  in  all  stages  of  their
growth.

The  law  of  aquatic  food  is  clear  :  '  whatever  hath  fins
and  scales '  is  clean  ;  this  limits  the  dietary  to  true  fishes,
11  Fish  ^"'''  ^''i^"?  these,  excludes  eels  and  shads, —
'  popular  and  common  articles  of  food  in  Egyi>t,
Greece,  and  Italy.  According  to  Pliny  (//yVxxxii.  lOi),
Numa  thought  fish  without  scales  unfit  for  funeral
banquets  ;  Piankhi  Meri-.Amen  thought  well  of  a  king  of
Lower  Egypt  who  ate  no  fish ;  according  to  Lucian  {Dea
Syra,  54),  fish  in  general  is  forbidden  food.  The  Law
knows  nothing  of  sacrificial  fish.  Perhaps  the  prohibition
of  fish  was  general,  and  the  permission  of  what  had  fins
and  scales  an  exception  ;  see  Fish,  §  8  _^  There  is
certainly  a  tendency  to  identify  what  is  clean  and  what  is
fit  for  sacrifice.  Thus  Hosea  (9  3)  regards  food  eaten
p.  .  out  of  the  land  of  Israel  as  unclean,  because
it  cannot  be  purified  by  acceptable  sacrifice
to  the  God  of  Israel  ;  in  Amos  7  17  a  foreign  land  is
polluted  for  the  same  reason  ;  and  in  H  the  fruit  of  all
trees  is  to  be  uncircumcised  the  first  three  years  (i.e.,
the  fruit  is  to  be  picked  off  as  fast  as  it  forms  while  the
trees  are  establishing  themselves  ?)  ;  for  the  fourth  year
the  whole  crop  is  to  l)e  holy  to  praise  Yahwe  withal  [i.e. ,
to  be  used  for  sacrificial  feasts).  There  is  no  distinction
anywhere  between  clean  and  unclean  herbs  ;  the  first
fruits  of  all  are  to  be  offered,  though  only  corn  and  wine
and  oil  figure  in  sacrifice.  In  P  (Gen.  1  29)  every  herb
.  _.~  .  and  tree  that  yieldeth  seed  is  given  for
.  ^^^^^  meat  from  the  first ;  so  after  the  flood  is

P  ■ all  animal  food  ;  ^  as  sacrifice  was  instituted

(according  to  P)  for  the  first  time  at  Sinai,  the  distinction
lx.'tween  clean  and  unclean  animals  was  still  in  abeyance.
The  distinction  between  clean  and  sacrificial  animals
which  is  presupposed  throughout  D  is  perhaps  to  be
ex[)lained  by  the  transition  from  the  nomadic  state.  If
Levi  the  sacred  tribe  be  a  metronymic  formed  from
Leah  the  wild  cow,  wild  animals  must  have  been  sacred
once  (sec  Lk.mi).

The  law  of  clean  and  unclean  meats  obtained  special
prominence  in  the  Greek  period  :  the  first  proof  of  the
religious  fidelity  of  Daniel  and  his  companions  is  their
resolution  not  to  defile  themselves  with  the  king's  meat  ;
when  Antiochus  Epiphanes  resolved  to  alxjlish  '  Jewish
particularism  '  eating  swine's  flesh  was  the  test  of  con-
formity. If  we  go  back  fifty  or  seventy  years,  Joseph,
the  enterprising  revenue  farmer,  whom  his  namesake
idealised  (Jos.  Ant.  xii.  4  10)  as  Machiavelli  did  Ca-sar
Borgia,  had  clearly  no  scruple  of  the  kind  ;  ^  yet  even
he,  though  his  kindred  in  the  next  generation  [ib.  5i)
were  prominent  on  the  heathen  side  and  he  himself
fell  in  love  with  a  pagan  [ih.  8),  was  heartily  thankful
when  his  own  niece  was  substituted  for  her  in  order  to
save  him  from  polluting  his  seed  among  the  heathen.  A
psalmist  (see  Ps.  141),  who  still  instinctively  draws  his
imagery  from  a  time  before  the  institution  or  revival  of
tlie  evening  burnt  sacrifice,  may  be  an  older  witness  for
the  view  (hardly  to  be  traced  in  Ezra  or  Xehemiah)  that
the  law  of  clean  and  unclean  meats  is  given  to  separate
Israel  from  the  heathen  :  he  appears  to  be  thinking
simply  of  fellowship  at  the  table,  not,  like  the  author  of
Is.  6.'),  of  sacrificial  communion.  If  so,  a  Maccabean
editor  may  have  revived  a  psalm  which  suited  the  times.
Probably  older  psalms  from  18  onwards  lay  the  stress
rather  on  cleanness  of  hands  and  innocency  ;  in  Is.  6  5
the  unclean  lips  of  prophets  and  people  are  generally
explained  as  relating  to  sins  of  speech,  after  the  analogy
of  Zeph.  89  13.  After  the  destruction  of  the  temple,
and  still  more  after  Palestine  ce;\sed  to  be  the  centre
of  Jewish  life,  the  law  of  clean  and  unclean  was  less
zealously  observed, though portions  of it  prove  still

1  Observe  that  in  P's  account  of  the  deluge  there  is  no  dis-
tinction between  clean  and  unclean  beasts  ^Dhi.uge,  8  12  ^).

2  His  son  Hyrcanus  (Jos.  Ant.  xii.  49)  is  the  first  person  we
know  of  whom  they  tell  tlie  story  of  the  wise  man  wliose  place
at  the  king's  board  is  piled  with  bones  by  enviou.s  detractors.


CLEAN  AND  UNCLEAN,  HOLY  AND  PROFANE


14.  Human
uncleanness.


to be of considerable sanitary value. See Food,

Human  uncleanness'  is  of  two  kinds.  It  may  arise
from  external  contact,  or  fron»  something  in  the  man  or
woman  who  is  unclean.  The  unclean-
ness of  (li-ath  falls  under  both  ;  the  dead
is  unclean  and  makes  others  unclean.
Disciises  like  leprosy  or  issue,  natural  processes  like
menstruation  and  prob;ibly  copulation,  cause  unclean-
ness too.  If,  as  W'ellhauscn  holds  (T//  151  ;  but  cp
//(/■  108),  Ix'v.  12a  implies  Lev.  J.'iig,  the  law  of  un-
cleanness after  childlx^iring  might  lie  an  extension  by
analog)'  of  the  older  law  of  the  uncleanness  of  menstrua-
tion.' If  so,  as  the  Vendidad  h.-\s  much  to  say  respect-
ing the  uncleanness  of  childbetl,  we  might  sus|)ect
Persian  intluence — the  rather  that  there  is  no  hint  of  it
in  the  older  Hebrew  literature,  w  hile  the  '  menstruous
cloth'  apiK-'ars  (Is.  3O22)  in  a  passage  still  generally
assigned  to  the  .Assyrian  period. Cp  I'AMII.Y,  §  n.

Perhaps  a  common  element  in  all  cases  of  unclean-
ness not  caused  by  external  cont.nct  is  that  the  unclean
in  .some  way  is  disgusting  or  alarming.  The  law  of
leprosy  is  not  to  be  e.\plained  from  the  risk  of  contagion  :
ordinary  sickness,  even  pestilence,  does  not  occasion
uncleanness  ;  the  lejxT  is  '  unclean '  because  he  is
smitten  of  God,  just  as  the  madman  in  Moslem  coun-
tries is  '  holy,"  and  epilepsy  was  the  It  pit  viffoi  in
Greece.  In  general,  [x-rsons  who  are  in  a  state  to
make  ordinary  people  shrink  from  them,  because  their
ncighlKJurhood  is  uncomfortable  or  terrifying,  are  un-
clean.

Casual  uncleanness,  according  to  P  in  its  final  state,
does  not  require  an  offering  for  its  removal.  It  is
IB Pi 'fi  enough  to  observe  the  prescribed  term

y  ' of  seclusion,  generally  'until  the  even,'

and  the  prescrilK-d  washing  ;  if  either
Ix;  neglected  and  the  unclean  negligently  or  ignorantly
intrude  among  the  clean,  a  'sin-offering'  is  necessary.
This  is  Uillmaim's  inference  from  Lev.  02.  According
to  Nu.  5  2,  the  unclean  is  excluded  not  only  from  *  the
congregation,'  but  also  from  'the  camp,' — i.e.,  not  only
from  the  temple,  but  also  from,  at  any  rate,  walled
towns.  No  offering  is  prescribed  for  the  menstruous
woman  ;  but  after  childbed  and  after  issues  a  '  sin  offer-
18  f  a  of  '"^  '^  prescribetl,  whilst  the  leper  has  also
'.  to  bring  a '  trespass '  offering  before  he

P  '  can  come  into  '  the  congregation,' though
he  is  admitted  to  '  the  camp '  after  the  performance  of
an  (older?)  rite  with  two  birds,  running  water,  cedar,
hyssop,  and  scarlet.  After  he  comes  into  the  camp  he
must  still  wait  several  days  before  he  comes  to  his
'  tent. '  Here  it  is  hard  to  doubt  that  the  law  has  a
sanitary  purpose :  it  imposes  a  short  quarantine  to
make  sure  that  the  cure  is  complete,  and  not  improbably
to  guard  against  the  hereditary  transmission  of  the  dis-
ease. The  '  trespass '  offering  of  the  le[x.'r  looks  like  a
'  development ' ;  it  is  necessary  to  assert  expressly  that
it  belongs  to  the  priest  ( l^v.  1 4  33)  ;  the  leper  is  anointed
with  the  bl(jod  and  oil  of  the  trespass  offering,  exactly
as  .\aron  and  his  sons  (Lev.  822)  are  anointed  with  the
blood  of  the  ram  of  consecration,  whose  flesh  is  boiled
for  Aaron  and  his  sons  to  eat,  while  the  '  wave  breast '
falls  to  Moses  as  the  sacrificer's  fee.  Possibly  the  re-
consecration  of  the  le[x.'r  .is  one  of  the  holy  people  by
sacrificial  blood  is  older  than  the  theory  that  he  w.as  not
to  eat  of  the  sacrifice.  The  sin  and  the  burnt-offering
prescribed  after  all  the  graver  kinds  of  uncleanness  are
to  'make  an  atonement,'  which  may  imply  that  the
uncleanness  was  a  [x-nal  infliction,  though  this  is
nowhere  state«l.  The  (older?)  rite,  which  reatlmits  the
leper  to  the  camp,  is  the  only  one  prescribed  for  the
cleansing  of  a  house  from  the  plague  of  leprosy,  whilst

1  [Cp  WRS  Kfi.  Sem.d)  428,  447/I

2  .-Vccoriling  to  surviving  folklore,  many  things  will  not  'keep'
if  made  or  handled  by  a  person  in  a  state  of  Levitical  '  uoclean-


845


leprosy  in  a  garment,  if  it  ceases  to  spread,  is  sufficiently
I  purgcHl  by  two  washings.'  Much  of  the  rite  is  still
transjjarent.  One  of  the  birds  is  to  Ije  hcltl  over  an
I  earthen  vessel  full  of  living  water  into  w  hich  the  blood
I  of  the  dead  bird  falls  ;  the  living  bird,  the  cedar,  the
I  scarlet,  and  the  hyssop  are  to  Ije  dipjietl  in  the  water  and
blood  ;  the  leper  who  is  to  \>c  cleansetl  is  to  Ije  s[)rinkled
with  lx)th  ;  and  then  the  living  bird  is  to  fly  away  with
the  plague  of  leprosy,  as  the  women  with  the  wind  in
their  wings  (Zech.  59)  fly  away  with  the  wickedness  of
the  land  of  Israel,  or  as  the  goat  for  .Azazel  (see  Azazel)
carries  away  the  sin  of  the  congregation  into  the  wilder-
ness. Probably  the  living  bird  is  dijjix-d  in  the  blood
and  water  to  establish  a  kind  of  bkxxl  brotherh'xxl
between  it  and  the  leper.  If  the  blotnl  and  water  were
on  the  leper  alone,  the  relc-:ise  of  the  living  bird  might
symbolise  that  he  who  was  hitherto  shut  up  in  Israel
was  now  free  as  the  fowls  of  the  air.  Living  water  is,
of  course,  a  natural  element  of  all  purifications  ;  Hyssop
iq.v.),  certainly  a  popular  means  of  purification  (Ps.
51  7  [9]).  ixccording  to  Pliny  (/AVxvi.  7(1)  is  good  for
the  complexion,  and  according  to  others  is  a  sajx)-
naceous  herb.  What  are  the  cedar  and  the  scarlet

for  ?  Cedar  wood  is  aromatic  ;  the  bright  c(jlour  of
scarlet  may  betoken  strength  and  splendour.  In  the
ancient  domestic  rites  of  India  {SHE  bO  281)  children  are
made  to  touch  gold  and  j^hi-e,  that  when  they  gr<nv  up
they  may  have  riches  and  fo<xl.  Remote  as  the  analogy
is,  we  may  ask.  Is  the  leper,  in  virtue  of  the  rite,  to
dwell  in  cedar  and  be  clothed  with  scarlet  ?  Sie  Ci;u.\R.
The  cedar,  hyssop,  and  scarlet  appear  again  in  the
mysterious  rite  of  the  Red  Heifer  whose  ashes  are  used
17.  Red  Heifer, '"'"■  '^'^  ''"''''''  °^  separation. It  had


etc.


a whole tre;itise to it.self in the


Mishna,  where  its  qualifications  were
elaborated  to  such  a  point  that  at  last  R.  Nisin  said
that  no  one  since  the  days  of  Moses  had  l)een  able  to
find  one  fit  to  Ix;  slain.  'I'here  is  an  analogous  rite  in
D  (Dt.  21  if. )  When  the  land  is  defiled  with  blood  the
ordinary  way  of  putting  away  bloodguiltiness  is  to  shed
the  bkxKl  of  the  slayer.  If  he  cannot  be  found  the
land  is  made  clean  again  with  the  blood  of  an  unyoked
heifer  killed,  either  by  beheading  or  by  breaking  the
neck  (the  meaning  of  the  verb  'draph  is  not  clear),  in  a
barren  valley  with  a  running  stream  in  it,  where  the
elders  of  the  city  nearest  the  place  where  the  dead  man
is  found  wash  their  hands  of  bloodguiltiness  over  the
heifer.  A  barren  valley  is  chosen,  according  to  Dill-
mann,  Kwald,  and  Keil.  in  order  that  the  purifying
blood  may  not  be  uncovered  and  lose  its  virtue  ;  according
to  Robertson  Smith  (AV/.  iV;//.<-'  371 ),  to  avoid  all  risk
of  contact  with  sacrosanct  flesh.  We  might  ask,  Would
running  water  in  a  fertile  valley  used  for  such  a  rite
pollute  the  fields  of  offerings?  The  goat  for  AzAzel  is
sent  into  the  wilderness.  If  the  heifer  is  Ix-headed.  her
blood  is  almost  certainly  intended  to  'cover'  the  blood
of  the  slain.  If  not,  are  we  to  think  of  Sauls  first
muster  (i  S.  1432^)?  Do  the  elders  by  implication
invoke  on  themselves  the  doom  of  the  heifer  if  their  pro-
testation is  false  ?  What  is  the  meaning  of  the  obviously
popular  rite  (see  Covkn.wt,  §  5)  of  dividing  victims
when  a  covenant  is  made  (Gen.  1.5 10  Jer.  34  18/. )  ?  The
rite  of  the  Red  Heifer  is  more  general  in  its  intention.
Its  principal  use  is  not  to  do  away  blcxxlguilliness,  but
to  cleanse  those  who  are  detiled  by  cont.act  w  ith  the  dead.
Incidentally  we  learn  that  it  w.as  requireil  for  the  purifi-
cation of  the  vessels  of  all  spoil  which  will  not  abide  the
fire  (N'u.  3I33)  ;  and  the  Levites  on  their  consecration
are  to  \y&  purified  by  what  is  probably  the  same,  '  the
w.ater  of  sin  '  (it.  87).  [.\aron  and  his  sons  (Kx.  'J94  and
parallels)  are  washed  at  their  consecration  with  common

1  Xeitherof  these  l.iwsl)clongs  to  the  main  stnck  of  P,  though,
if  they  were  later  developments,  we  should  expect  that  the
cleansmg  of  a  house,  at  any  rate,  would  have  required  an  ofTcriiig.
In  I)  the  dedication  of  a  house  has  all  th*-  look  of  a  survivu,
and  was  probably  accomplished  at  one  time  by  sacrifice.

846


CLEAN  AND  UNCLEAN

water.]  Both  texts  are  late,  and  represent  the  views
of  antiquaries  rather  than  the  claims  of  legists  with
practical  interests  to  satisfy.  The  tendency  to  ascribe
the  whole  law  to  Moses  naturally  brought  with  it  an
increasing  zeal  for  the  oldest  rites  that  could  be  recol-
lected ;  it  does  not  follow  that  the  water  of  separation
was  invented  in  or  after  the  Exile,  because  the  occasions
for  its  application  were  prescribed  then.  Possibly,  as
the  Persians  removed  the  uncleanness  of  the  dead  by
elaborate  ceremonies  with  ,i,^Si/i'-s,  the  priests  thought
that  in  similar  cases  water  hallowed  with  the  ashes  of
a  cow  would  be  specially  efficacious.  The  law  of  a
purification  on  the  third  and  the  seventh  day  (Xu.
19ii-i3  or  14-16?)  looks  older  than  the  original  law  of
the  Red  Heifer,  which  seems  to  end  at  v.  10  ;  in  v.  \t  ff.
we  have  the  rule  for  its  application.

The  rite  itself  is  as  obscure  as  its  history.  .  For  one
thing,  at  every  stage  its  ministers  must  be  clean,  and
they  become  uncle.in  by  their  ministry  ;  the  priest  who
su])erintcncls  the  burning  is  unclean  till  the  even  ;  so  is
he  who  burns  ;  he  who  collects  the  ashes  (though  they
must  be  laid  up  in  a  clean  place)  is  unclean  ;  so  is  he
who  sprinkles  or  even  touches  the  water,  which  is  the
one  means  which  can  make  those  defiled  by  contact  with
the  dead  clean.  Naturally,  we  suppose  that  those  who
were  '  unclean  '  at  the  stage  of  the  law  implied  in  our
records  were  '  sanctified '  at  an  earlier  stage.  Twice
the  heifer  [vv.  9  17)  is  called  a  sin-offering.  The  ritual
has  interesting  analogies  with,  and  differences  from,  that
of  other  sin-offerings.  Like  the  sin-offering  for  the
priest's  own  sin,  and  that  for  the  sin  of  the  congregation,
it  is  to  be  burnt  outside  the  camp — hide,  dung,  and  all.
Unlike  them  it  is  to  be  killed,  not  in  the  place  of  the
burnt  offering,  but  without  the  camp.  There  is  another
contrast.  The  blood  and  fat  of  all  sin-offerings,  includ-
ing the  sin-offerings  for  priest  and  congregation  and  the
bullock  offered  at  the  consecration  of  Aaron,  is  presented
in  the  sanctuary  ;  the  blood  seems  specially  used  there,
as  in  the  ritual  of  the  Day  of  Atonement,  to  rehallow  the
altar  profaned  by  sin.  The  heifer's  blood  is  not  brought
into  the  sanctuary  ;  it  is  sprinkled  towards  it  seven  times.
But  for  this  we  might  suppose  that  the  uncleanness  of
death  was  driven  away  from  the  camp  or  the  city  and
burnt  with  the  heifer  ;  but  her  blood  is  hallowing — else
why  is  it  sprinkled  toward  the  holy  place  ?  Are  all
these  rites  compromises  between  the  old  custom  of  wor-
shipping outside  the  city,  which  maintained  itself  as
late  as  David  (2  Sam.  1032),  and  the  new  custom  of
hallowing  the  city  by  a  sanctuary  ?  As  late  as  the  As-
syrian period  (Is.  3:5 14,  if  this  be  Isaiah's),  the  close
neighbourhood  of  an  ever-burning  altar  made  many
uncomfortable.^  For  this  reason,  among  others,  the
rarer  and  more  solemn  sacrifices  were  still  performed
outside.  Then  perhaps  the  old  rite  in  the  old  place
took  on  a  new  meaning.  Kings  were,  as  a  rule,  buried
in  the  city,  and  it  was  customary  (Jer.  345)  to  make  a
burning  for  them.'^  In  2  Ch.  16 14  we  read  of  a  very
great  burning  for  Asa  :  the  Chronicler,  who  may  be
quoting  a  relatively  old  authority,  thinks  of  perfumes,
at  which  Jeremiah  does  not  hint.  Were  valuables  Ijurnt
in  honour  of  kings?  Have  the  cedar,  the  hyssop,  and
the  scarlet  burnt  with  the  heifer  any  analogy  to  such  burn-
ings? Is  the  putting  away  of  the  heifer  with  something
of  a  royal  funeral  an  almost  unconscious  reminiscence
of  a  well-nigh  forgotten  cultus  of  sacred  animals?  Is
the  red  heifer  the  last  trace  of  a  cow  goddess  (see  Calf,
Goi.dk.n)?  There  are,  of  course,  many  instances  .of
mortal  representations  of  the  Godhead,  honoured  for  a
time,  and  then  ceremoniously  put  away.  In  any  case,
the  efficacy  of  the  heifer's  ashes  seems  to  lie  in  the  fact
that  they  reconsecrate  rather  than  purge  the  unclean.
All  Israel  were  originally  hallowed  (Ex.  248  JE)  by  the

1  Have  we  a  trace  of  the  same  feeling  in  Is.  32  19?  Is  not  a
fenced  city  on  God's  Holy  Hill  at  once  superfluous  when  God
delivers  his  people,  and  also  in  some  sense  profane  ?

2  Cp  Abodah  Zarah,  1  3  and  the  Gemara.

847


CLEOPATRA

blood  of  the  covenant  ;  so  the  priests  are  hallowed  by  the
blood  of  the  '  fill  offering ' ;  so  the  blood  of  the  atone-
ment rehallows  the  holy  place  and  the  altar  that  has
been  profaned  ;  so  the  leper  is  rehallowed  after  his
uncleanness  with  blood,  and  the  ashes  of  a  peculiar  sin-
offering  serve  the  same  end.  On  the  other  hand,  water
and  fire  (except  in  Is.  &$f.)  seem  simply  to  remove  ex-
ternal pollutions,  not  to  renew  communion  with  aholy  life.

Robertson  Smith  {Kinshi/>  ['85I,  Kcl.  Sf»t.Ci)  ['94]),  and
Weilhau.sen  (,/iesU  Arai.  Hi-idSi)  [97])  are  the  Ix-st  authorities
for  the  Semitic  world.  The  subject  is  best
18.  Literature,  studied  from  a  comparative  point  of  view,  for
which  Fr.-izer's  Golden  Bouk:h  ('00)  is  indis-
pensable. The  critical  treatment  of  the  subject  is  of  recent
growth  and  is  capable  of  further  development.  CpJ.C.  Matthes,
'De  begrippen  rein  en  onrein  in  het  OT,"  /"A.  7.  33  293-318  r99].
The  only  earlier  work  of  importance  is  Spencer's  he  Lcgihus
Hebrirorum  Rituatihus  (Cambridge  1727) — see  Robertson
Smith's  estimate  in  liel.  SeiiiA'^)  p.  vi.  g.  A.  Si.

CLEMENT  (kAhmhc  [Ti.WH]),  a  Philippian  Chris-
tian who  had  taken  an  active  part  in  building  up  the
church  at  Philippi,  in  which  he  had  the  co-operation  of
Euodia  and  Syntyche  (Phil.  43).  In  the  allusion  to  him
there  is  nothing  to  imply  that  he  was  a  companion  of
Paul  in  his  journeyings,  or  to  justify  his  traditional
identification  (in  the  Western  Church)  with  the  Roman
Clement.

In  the  list  of  the  'seventy  disciples"  compiled  by  tlie  Pseudo-
Dorotheus  he  is  spoken  of  as  having  been  the  first  of  the  Gentiles
and  ( Ireeks  to  believe  in  Christ,  and  as  having  afterwards  become
bishop  of  Sardica.  The  Pseudo-Hippolytus  has  Sardinia,  for
which,  however,  we  should  probably  read  Sardica.

CLEOPAS  (KAeonAC  [Ti.  WH],  abbrev.  from
KAeonATROc).  according  to  Lk.  24  18  the  name  of  one
of  the  two  disciples  who  accompanied  the  risen  Jesus  to
Emmaus.  The  narrative  in  question,  however,  is  one
of  the  latest  of  those  which  attached  themselves  to  the
accounts  of  the  resurrection  of  Jesus.  Paul,  who  had
spent  fifteen  days  in  the  society  of  Peter  (Gal.  1 18)  and
was  strongly  interested  in  establishing  the  fact  of  the
resurrection,  knows  nothing  of  it.  Byeira  .  .  .  fireira
.  .  .  iirura  .  .  .  eira  .  .  .  ^(txo-tov^  oi  i  Cor.  15  5-8  he
unquestionably  intends  to  enumerate  exhaustively  all  the
appearances  of  the  risen  Lord  which  were  known  to
him  ;  and  he  had  the  most  urgent  occasion  to  do  so,
for  the  resurrection  of  Jesus  had  been  brought  in
question  at  Corinth.  The  narrative  of  the  third  evan-
gelist conveys  in  a  highly  concrete  form  the  thought
that  it  is  from  Jesus  himself  we  receive  the  knowledge
that  his  Passion  and  Resurrection  had  been  foretold  by
Moses  and  all  the  prophets  (2425-27).  In  reality,
however,  this  conviction  must  have  been  gradually
reached  as  the  result  of  a  prolonged  and  evcr-deeijening
study  of  the  OT  by  the  whole  church.  That  it  is  in
the  Eucharist  that  his  presence  is  made  known  to  his
church  is,  in  like  manner,  an  experience  still  repeated
in  every  renewal  of  the  act.  Here  too,  accordingly,
the  thought,  that  in  the  nearness  of  Christ  as  experi-
enced in  the  sacrament  which  commemorates  his  death
we  have  our  most  convincing  assurance  that  he  truly
lives,  finds  concrete  expression.

After  what  has  been  said,  it  becomes  a  question
whether  Cleopas  is  a  historical  person  at  all,  though
there  is  nothing  in  the  mere  name  to  suggest  that  he
is  not.  There  is  no  sufficient  ground,  philological  or
other,  for  regarding  him  as  a  veiled  representation  of
the  apostle  Paul.

Several  MSS  of  the  Itala  and  Vg. ,  as  also  the  Coptic
and  the  Armenian  versions,  read  K\e6iraj  or  KXfojTa?
in  Jn.  1925  also  ;  but  if  this  were  the  original  reading,
the  substitution  of  the  more  difficult  form  KXwTras
would  be  incomprehensible.  For  the  evidence  that
different  [persons  are  intended  in  Jn.  and  in  Lk.,  and
that  the  confusion  of  the  two  is  due  to  later  writers,
see  Clui'As,  §  5/  P.  W.  s.

CLEOPATRA  (kAcottatpa  [ANV]),  i.  , sister  and
wife  of  Ptolemy  Philometor,  Est.  1 1 1.

1  RV  'then  .  .  .  then  .  .  .  then  .  .  .  then  .  .  .  last  of  all,"  and
AV  '  then  .  .  .  after  that  . .  .  after  that  .  .  .  then  .  .  .  last  of  all.'

848


I


CLEOPHAS

2.  Daughter  of  no.  i  (i  Mace.  lOs?) :  see  Ptolemies.

CLEOPHAS  (kAcohac  [Ti.WH]).  Jn.  19  25  AVf.
AV'"k.'  and  KV  C  j.oi'.vs  (</.v.).

CLOAK  (ci.oKK).

For  '^'VP,  »»/<•'//,  ill  Is.  59 17  see  Tunic.  In  this  passage  the
fMt'l/  was  a  milit.-iry  over-garment,  and  cloak  well  expresses
this.

Kor  ifiartor  (see  cs|>ecially  Mt.  840;  in  ^n.  19  a  5,  AV  'robe,'
KV  'garment'),  the  outside  mantle  {fiailtuni,  as  dislin|;uishcd
from  the  \itviv  or  tunica),  representing  the  Hebrew  kuttdntth,
see  Mantlk.

Other  garments  rendered  cloak  are  the  Macedonian  \ka.^.\)^,
or  military  cluak  of  2  M.ncc.  12^5  RV  ('coat'  AV),  and  the
^(Aotiff ,  or  travelling  cloak  of  3  'I  im.  4  13. See  Man  ILE.

CLOPAS  (KAtonAC  [Ti.WH]).  This  name  cannot
be  (Ictived  from  the  same  Hebrew  (Aramaic)  word  as

&A<t)Ai()C-

In  the  first  place,  the  vocalisation  is  not  the  same  :  Clopas
would recjuire  some  such form  as  'S7n,  while Alphxus  pre-
1. Name supposes  'oSn  or  'Byn  (see ALl'HiKUs). In  the
perhaps second  place, as  regards  pji  •'•'l that  is  certainly
p 1^ known  is  that  it  licciimes  k  at  the  end  and  in  the
UreeK. „,iii,|ic  of  certain  words  (2  Ch.  30i  Nch.  36  [</>a<r.icl,
C.en.  2J24  \tafitK\,  Josh,  li)  6  [laiuKa]). True,  it  l.ts  lK.-eii  con-
jectured  that  the  same  holds  good  at  the beginning  of  words
(H.  I,ewy,  Die  Sent.  Ftt-nuiivorter  im  Griech.,  1895,  pp.  17 27
51 1 10  119  137;  add,  conversely,  K-nosSn  as  tr.-xnsliteration  of
icA<i//vipa). Ihis  hardly  conies  into  consideration,  however,  in
the  present  case,  for  a  Hebrew  (or  Aramaic)  derivation  is  never
probable  in  the  case  of  a  word  beginning  with  two  consonants.
In Greek transliteration of Hebrew names, initial sli^nvd is
always  represented  by  a  full  vowel  (e.g.,  /KIDtj',  Sofiou^A)  :  tlie
opposite  instances  given  by  Lewy(iiyr,  34,  45>  54.  59.  69,  98,  105,
118, 122  /., 129,  206,  211,  2467;)  are  more  or less  doubtful,
and relate to words which were susceptible of such a
modification in the transference as was hardly possible


in the cisc of biblical proper


versions  of  the  N'l"  betray  no  consciousness  that  both  names
are  derived  from  a  ci  miiion  Semitic  source :  with  tlitin
the  initial  letter  of  'oA^atot  is  always  n(or  «),  of  (cAwn-os  invari-
ably p.

It  is  not  likely  that  »cXwiray  is  derived  by  metathesis
from  Ks'^p  ( '  club ' )  ;  nor  is  there  the  least  certainty
that  /(Xwiras  is  a  contraction  from  K\ibira.%.

On  purely  Creek  soil,  .-it  any  rate,  icAeo-  when  contracted  would
become  either  kA«w-  (e.g.,  KXfVKpdrq^,  esi«;cially  in  l)oric)  or
kAov-  (as  BtoSmfmi  becomes  0ovSu>poi  ;  see  Meisterhans,
Granim.  d.  atlisclun  Inschrr.  §  19,  and  cp  Theudas).  At
the  same  time,  the  contraction  of  (cAtdn-a?  into  icAojjras  must  be
admitted  to  be  at  least  possible,  inasmuch  as  we  know  of  no
Greek  word  from  which  the  syllable  icAa>-  can  come.  In  this
case  the  original  form  of  the  name  will  be  KAcoTrarpov.  Fur  this
reason,  the  .nccentualion  (cAuiiros  is  preferable  to  KAuiirat,
especially  as  the  accent  is  allowed  to  retain  its  original  place  in
icAcbirat. '

In  Jn.  1925,  the  only  place  where  the  name  occurs  i.i
NT,  Clopas  is  mentioned  as  somehow  related  to  a
« u  r  «i certain  Mary. Hegesippus  ( Kus.  HE

2-  Mary  Of  Clo-  ^^ jj  3.,,.^  .^. ^.^^^  {;|;^J,3  ^^  ^^^^

^"f^'^^oW  t:iopas  w.is  the  brother  of  Joseph  the
father  of  Jesus.  Whether  this  is  the
Clopas  referred  to  in  Jn.  19 25  depends,
in  the  first  instance,  on  the  answer  to  the  question,  who
is  intended  by  the  '  Mary  of  Clopas '  there.  As  there
is  no  '  and '  before  her  name,  she  would  seem  to be


not  -=--  Jesua'
mother's  sister.


1  [The  name  is  possibly  the  ;
the  form  mcEdlSp-l


as  tht


CLOPAS

identical  with  the  sister  of  the  mother  of  Jesus  who  has
Ixx-n  referred  to  immetliately  Ix-forc  ;  but  it  is  quite
improljable  that  two  sisters  alive  at  the  Siinte  time
shouUl  have  borne  the  same  name,  at  least  in  a
plebeian  family.

With  a  royal  house  the  case  U  somewhat  different.  Of  the
sons  of  Herod  the  (.;reat,  two  who  never  attained  royal  dignity
lx>re  the  name  of  their  father  :  one  by  his  m.irriage  with  the
second  .Mariamme,  and  one  by  his  marriage  with  Cleopatra  of
Icrus;dem  (Jos.  Ant.  xvii.  I3  A/ '284,  \  562).  There  uas,
besidcn,  his  secoixl  son  by  Mafthakc,  who,  however,  as  far  as  we
know,  took  the  name  only  as  a  reigning  prince  (see  Lk.Si  and
frequently),  whilst  Ijcfore  his  acccssiuii  he  is  in  Joscphus  invari-
ably designated  by  his  other  n.inic,  Aiitip;is.  His  first  son  by
Malihakc,  too,  whom  Josephus  always  names  Archclaus,  is
adled  Herod  on  coins  and  in  Cassius  l»io (.>.'< 27  ;  cpSchiir.  GJV
1  375,  KT  i.  2  39).  Thus  the  name  Herod  seems  already,  to  some
extent,  to  have  acquired  the  character  of  a  family  name.

If  (^lAin-n-ou  be  the  correct  rcjidiiig  in  Mk.«i7  (so  also  in  Mt.
H  3,  though  not  .!■  cording  to  the  western  group),  the  son  of
Mariamme  just  mentioned,  who,  in  ponit  of  fact,  was  the  first
husband  of  Herodias,  must  have  borne  the  name  Philip  also,  in
addition  to  that  of  Herod,  while  at  the  same  time  this  name,
Pliilip,  was  borne  by  his  biother,  who  is  known  to  us  from
Lk.  3i  as  the  tctrarch  of  NK.  Palestine.  As  we  are  without
evidence  that  the  former  Herod  was  called  Philip,  doubtless
we  must  here  conclude  that  .Mk.  and  Mt.  have  fallen  into  an
error,  which,  however,  has  l>eeii  avoided  by  Lk.  (819).

.■\gain,  according  to  Jos.  (Ant.iin.bi  xv.3i  xix.02),  not  only
OniiLs  III  (high  priest  till  174  H.c,  died  171  li.c.)  and  Jesus
(Jason)  his  successor  (high  priest  174-171  B.C.),  but  also  Onias
(usually  known  as  Menelaus)  who  came  after  Jason,  were  sons
of  the  high  priest  .Simon  11.2  2  Mace.  (84423),  however,
which  is  here  very  detailed,  expressly  speaks  of  .Menelaus  as
brother  of  a  Benjamite  named  Simon,  whilst  the  high  priest
Simon  11.  was  of  the  tribe  of  Levi.

If,  accordingly,  one  is  determined  to  hold  by  the
identity  of  .Mary  of  Clopas  with  the  sister  of  the  mother
of  Jesus,  this  must  lie  on  the  assumption  not  only
that  she  and  the  mother  of  Jesus  were  not  children  of
the  same  marriage,  but  also  that  they  had  neitlicr  father
nor  mother  in  common — that,  in  fact,  each  s()ou;e  had
brought  into  the  new  household  a  daughter  by  a  fi inner
marriage,  named  Mary.  It  is  no  argument  for  the

identity  of  the  two  to  allege  that  we  are  not  at  lilierty
to  tiiul  more  women  mentioned  in  Jn.  IO25  than  in
Mt.  2756  Mk.  lf)4o  (Itii)  and  I,k. '2410;*  for  John
mentions  the  mother  of  Jesus,  though  she  does  not
appear  in  any  of  the  synoptists.  In  other  words,  he
did  not  hold  himself  bound  by  what  they  said,  though,
according  to  all  scholars,  their  narratives  lay  before  him.
The  only  point  on  which  he  is  distinctly  in  agreement
with  them  is  as  to  the  presence  of  Mary  Magdalene.
If  we  will  have  it  that  he  enumerates  also  the  Salom6
of  Mark  (whose  identity  with  the  mother  of  James  and
John  the  sons  of  Zelxxlee  cannot  setiously  l)e  doubted),
we  can  find  her  only  in  the  sister  of  the  mother  of
Jesus.  Mary  of  Clopas  nmst  in  that  case  bo  distinct
from  the  latter,  and  may  possibly  l>e  identified  with  the
Mary  who  in  Mt.  is  called  the  mother  of  James  and
Joses  (or  Joseph),  in  Mk.  the  mother  of  James  the  Less
and  Joses,  or,  more  briefly,  Mary  [the  mother]  of  Jo.ses
(so  1547)  or  Mary  of  James  (so  16 1  and  Lk.  24io).  In
this  case,  however,  not  only  is  it  remarkable  that  the
relationship  of  the  apostles,  James  the  (ireater  and  John,
with  Jesus — as  children  of  sisters — is  nowhere  mentioneil

Palm.  KElSp  (Chabot,  no. 12). In MH  the  name  'Cleopatra'  usually  appears  under
2  For  a  somewhat  different  account  of  these  relations,  see  O.nias.


Further, the  .Syi


MT.2756.

Mk.L'mo.

Mk.  It5i.

Lk.23  49.

Lk.  24  .0.

jN.Ut2:.

(At  the  cross.)

(At  the  cross.)

(At  the  sepulchre.)

(At  the  cross.)

(At  the  sepulchre.)

(At  the  cross.)

Mary  Magdalene.

Mary  Magdalene.

Mary  Magdalene.

irai^cf  oi  yvtaimX

Mary  Magdalene.

Marj-  the  mother
of  Jesu-s.

Mary  the  mother
of James and
Joses(or  Joseph).

Mary,  the  mother
ofjames  the  Less
and  of  Joses.

MaryofJame.s.

.  .  . airb T^
roAiAatas.

Joanna.

The  sister  of  the  -.
mother  of  Jesus. »

Mary  of  Clopas. ^

The  mother  of  the
sonsof  Zebedee.

Salome.

Salome.

Mary  of  James.

Mao'  Magdalene.

849


850


OLOPAS

or  in  any  way  alluded  to  ;  but  also  it  is  almost  unthink-
able that  the  fourth  evangelist  presupposes  the  presence
of  the  mother  of  John  when  in  1926  he  proceeds  :
'  when  Jesus  therefore  saw  his  mother,  and  the  disciple
standing  by,  whom  he  loved,  he  saith,  etc.'  As  far  as
the  fourth  evangelist  is  concerned,  this  scene  furnishes
a  clear  motive  for  thinking  not  only  of  the  mother  of
Jesus  as  present,  but  also  of  the  mother  of  John  as
absent.  Lk.  24  lo  (at  the  sepulchre)  puis  in  the  place  of
the  mother  of  John  a  certain  Joanna.  If,  as  he  often
does,  the  fourth  evangelist  is  here  taking  Lk.  rather
than  Mt.  or  Mk  for  his  guide,  it  would  be  impossible
to  identify  Mary  of  Clopas  with  the  sister  of  the  mother
of  Jesus,  whose  name  on  this  assum[nion  must  be  taken
to  be  Joanna.  It  is  certain,  however,  that  in  Lk.  this
Joanna  is  identical  with  the  Joanna  who  is  mentioned
in  83  as  the  wife  of  a  certain  Chuza  and  not  stated  to
have  been  related  to  the  mother  of  Jesus.  Thus  we
may  take  it  that  it  was  not  she,  any  more  than  any  of
the  others,  that  was  intended  by  the  fourth  evangelist,
and  that  most  protmbly  his  reason  for  mentioning  the
sister  of  the  mother  of  Jesus  is  that,  according  to  Lk.
2849,  'all  his  acquaintance'  (yvucrroi)  are  standing  by
the  cross.  There  is  no  evidence  of  any  allegorising
intention  that  he  could  have  had  in  the  enimieration  of
these  four  (or  three)  women.  Apart  from  the  mother
of  Jesus  and  her  sister,  therefore,  the  names  of  the
women  seem  simply  to  have  been  taken  over  from  the
Synoptists.

Who  was  the  mother  of  James  and  Joses,  with  whom,
according  to  this  view,  Mary  of  Clopas  would  have  to  be
identilied  ?  The  James  in  question  is  often
suj^posed  to  be  the  second  James  in  the  list
of  the  apostles.  With  this  it  seems  to  agree
that  Mk.  calls  him  James  the  Less.  Now,  this  James  was
a  son  of  .A-lphiieus.  Thus  .Mphajus  would  appear  to  be
the  husband  of  the  Mary  mentioned  by  the  Synoptists
as  present  at  the  cross.  From  this  it  is  not  unusual  to
proceed  to  the  further  combination  that  in  Jn.  Clopas
is  named  as  the  husband  of  Mary  and  that  he  is
identical  with  .\lph;tus.  Phiiologically  the  names  are
distinct  (see  above,  §  i)  ;  but  the  identification  is  possible
if,  according  to  a  not  uncommon  Jewish  custom  (Acts
I23  1225  13i9  Col.  4ii),  Clopas  had  two  names.  A
further  step  is  to  bring  in  at  this  point  the  statement  of
Hegesippus  that  Clopas  was  a  brother  of  Joseph  the
father  of  Jesus.  Over  and  above  this,  many  proceed
to  the  assumption — shown  above  (§  2)  to  be  untenable
— that  his  wife  Mary  was  identical  with  the  sister  of  the
mother  of  Jesus.

In  this  case  two  brothers  would  have  married  two  sisters,  and
the  second  James  in  the  list  of  apostles  would  be  a  cousin  of
Jesus,  and  that  both  on  the  father's  and  on  the  mother's  side.
Even,  however,  if  we  regard  Mary  of  Clopas  as  a  different
person  from  the  sister  of  the  mother  of  Jesus,  her  son,  the
second  James,  as  long  as  he  is  regarded  as  the  son  of  Clopas
the  uncle  of  Jesus,  remains  a  cousin  of  Jesus,  whilst,  according
to  the  identification  of  the  sister  of  the  mother  of  Jesus  with  the
wife  of  Zebedee  (spoken  of  above,  §  2),  this  honour  would  belong
rather  to  the  first  James  and  John  the  sons  of  Zebedee  as  being
sons  of  the  aunt  of  Jesus.

The  next  question that  arises  is. Who was Joses,
the  second  son  of  Mary, according  to  the  Synoptists  ?
In  Mk.  63  a  Joses  is  named,  along  with


3.  Clopas  =
Alphaeus '


4.  The  sons
of  Mary


James, Judas, and  Simon,  amongst  the
__ .,  brethren of Jesus. This has given

~  occasion  for  crowning  the  series  of  com-

■  binations  which  has  been  already  ex-
plained, and  completing  it  with  a  hypothesis  whereby
it  becomes  possible  to  deny  the  existence  of  literal
brethren  of  Jesus,  and  to  affirm  the  perpetual  virginity
of  his  mother.  Once  it  is  admitted  that  James  and
Joses  were  sons  of  Clopas  (  =  Alphneus)  and  of  Mary  his
wife,  the  same  seems  to  hold  good  of  all  the  '  brethren
of  Jesus. '  In  that  case  they  would  be  '  brethren  of
Jesus'  only  in  the  sense  in  which  'brethren'  (d5eX<^oi)
is  used  instead  of  6,v{\piol  (children  of  two  brothers  or
two  sisters)  in  2  S.  2O9  (cp  11 2$).

851


OLOPAS

Finally,  to  this  is  added,  not  as  a  necessary  but  as
a  welcome  completion  of  the  hypothesis,  the  suggestion
that  of  the  '  brethren  of  Jesus '  not  only  James  but
also  Simon  and  Judas  were  among  the  apostles.

Both  names,  in  point  of  fact,  occur,  at  lea.st  in  Lk.  0  \$/,  Acts
1  13  (Simon  alone  \n  iMk.  3  18  Mt.  10  'i/.).  With  regard  to  Joses,
the  fourth  of  the  '  brethren  of  Jesus,'  some  have  conjectured  (carry-
ing out  the  same  hypothesi.s)  that  it  was  he  who,  according  to  Acts
1  23-26,  was  nominated  (though  not  chosen)  as  successor  to  the
vacant  place  of  Judas  Iscariot.  It  is  true  that  all  the  belter
authorities  here  read  Joseph,  not  Joses  (see  Baksabas)  ;  but,  on
the  other  hand,  this  reading  being  accepted,  it  can  be  pointed
out  that  according  to  the  better  MS.S  (at  least  in  Mt.  13  55)
Joseph,  not  as  in  Mk.  63  Joses,  is  the  name  of  the  fourth
brother'  of  Jesus.

This  whole  identification  of  the  '  brethren  of  Jesus '
with  apostles  or  aspirants  to  the  apostleship,  however,
is  quite  untenable.  According  to  Mk.  32i  31  Mt.  I246/
Lk.  819  Jn.  75,  the  brethren  of  Jesus  disbelieved  his
Messiahship  while  he  was  alive,  and  in  Actsl  14  i  Cor.
95  they  are  distinctly  separated  from  the  apostles.

Even  if  we  give  up  the  identification  with  apostles,
^Lary  cannot  be  the  mother  of  the  cousins  of  Jesus.

Had  she  been  so  related  to  Jesus,  Mt.  and  Mk.,  in  seeking
to  indicate  her  with  precision,  would  have  named  not  two
sons  but  four ;  or  rather  they  would  have  mentioned  no  names
at  all,  but  simply  said  'the  mother  of  the  cousins  of  Jesus.'
Moreover,  it  isonly  of  Symeon,  the  second  '  bishop  '  of  Jerusalem,
that  Hegesippus  says  he  was  son  of  Clopas  and  cousin  of  Jesus.
If  Hegesippus  had  regarded  the  four  '  brethren  of  Jesus '  as  his
cousins,  he  would  surely  have  designated  Symeon's  predecessor
also  (James  the  '  brother  '  of  Jesus)  as  son  of  Clnpas,  and  Symeon
himself,  by  whom  in  this  case  tbe  Simon  of  ilk.  O3  Mt.  I355
would  be  meant,  he  would  have  designated  as  brother  of  James.
This,  however,  is  what  he  does  not  do  :  he  calls  James  simply
'the  Just'  (6  SiKaios),  and  says  (Eus.  JfE  iii.  3'2  6)  that  men  'of
the  race  of  the  Lord  '  (airh  yeVous  tov  Kvpiov)  had  presided  over  the
church  (in  Palestine)  in  peace  until  Symeon  the  son  of  Clopas,  the
uncle  of  Jesus,  was  arraigned  and  crucified  ;  cp  iii.  206.1

Lastly,  it  is  idle  to  deny  the  existence  of  actual
'  brethren  of  Jesus  '  :  that  is  distinctly  vouched  for  by  the
wpuToToKov  of  Lk.  27 — an  expression  all  the  weightier
because  it  has  been  already  suppressed  in  Mt.  1 25.

If  James  and  Joses,  the  sons  of  Mary  according  to
the  synoptists,  are  thus  no  cousins  of  Jesus,  we  could  all
5.  Conclusion,  ^^e  more  readily  believe  that  they  were
really  apostles  or  at  least  constant  com-
panions (.\ctsl  21)  of  Jesus.  Such  an  assumption,  how-
ever, is  not  borne  out  by  a  single  hint,  and  at  the  stage
of  the  discussion  we  have  now  reached  it  has  no  more
interest  than  the  other  which  makes  Clopas  identical
with  Alphaeus  and  regards  him  as  the  husband  of  .Mary.
The  Mary  in  question,  we  are  forced  to  conclude,  was
simply  a  woman  not  known  otherwise  than  as  the  mother
of  a  James  and  a  Joses.  Why  is  it,  then,  that  the  fourth
evangelist  designates  her,  not  by  reference  to  these  sons
of  hers,  but  by  calling  her  '  of  Clopas  '  ?  That  he  here
intends  the  Cleopas  of  Lk.  24 18  is  quite  improbable  (see
Cleopas)  ;  but  neither  is  it  likely  that  he  can  have
meant  a  man  named  Clopas  who  was  wholly  unknown
to  his  readers.  His  allusion  must  rather  have  been  to
the  Clopas  whom  we  know  from  Hegesippus  as  the
brother  of  Joseph.  There  is  no  trace  of  any  allegorising
intention  in  this  :  we  may  take  it  that  the  evangehst  is
following  tradition.  It  is  possible,  therefore,  that
Clopas  was  the  husband  of  Mary,  in  which  case  James
and  Joses  are  cousins  of  Jesus,  but  not  to  be  identified
with  his  brothers  of  the  same  name,  nor  yet  with  the
apostle  James  and  the  Joseph  (or  Joses)  Barsabas  of
Acts  1 23. It  is  more  probable,  however,  if  the  prevailing

1  In  Eus.  ///Tiii.  20  i  Hegesippus  speaks  of  oi  anh  -ytVou?  roi)
Kvpiov  VLUvoi  'Iov6a,  toO  Kara  (xapxa  Ae-yo/xeVov  avTOv  a6cA<^oO  ;
and  in  iv.  '22  4  he  says  that  6  tic  6fCov  ai/Tov  [Jesu]  2vjoteo)i'  6  row
KAcojra  was  ifei/zibs  toO  Kvpiov  fieurepos.  Inasmuch  as  he  does
not  regard  James  as  aveijjio^  npuiro^,  as  has  been  .shown,  the
words  Seurepos  and  Aeyo/ieVou  can  mean  only  that  he  regards
Symeon  as  '  cousin  '  and  Jude  as  '  brother '  of  Jesus  in  a  modified
sense.  He  ai)pears,  then,  to  favour  the  assumption  of  the  irapOtvCa
of  .Mary  at  Jesus'  birth.  .-Vll  the  more  remarkable  is  it  that  he
does  not  yet  seem  to  have  drawn  the  further  consequence  of
denying  other  sons  to  her.  His  statement  that  Clopas  was  the
uncle  of  Jesus,  therefore,  does  not  proceed  upon  any  such  theory
as  that  in  favour  of  which  it  has  (as  we  have  seen)  been  applied,
and  therefore  in  respect  of  trustworthiness  is  open  to  no  suspicion.

852


CLOTH,  CLOTHING

ust4s  loi]uendi  is  to  Ix;  taken  as  a  j^uiilir,  that  Clopas  is
designated  as  the  father  of  Mary.  In  this  case  it  is
Mary  herself  who  is  the  cousin  of  Jesus.  In  either  case
it  is  remarkable  that  in  the  synoptists  she  should  be
characterised  not  by  her  relationship  to  Jesus,  but  simply
by  mention  of  her  sons  ;  and  this  on  the  assumption
that  it  is  the  uncle  of  Jesus  who  is  intended,  suggests  a
doubt  as  to  whether  the  mention  of  Clopas  in  this  con-
nection is  correct.

The  apocryphal  Acts  of  the  Apostles,  following  the  combina-
tion mentioned  above  (8  4),  for  the  most  part  identify  .Symeon,

son  of  ClopJis,  the  second bishop  of  Jeru>alcni

6.  Lator s|joken of by Hcgesippiis, with the apostle

traditions. Simon  the  Canana:an  (AV  '  the  Zealot ') ;  some

give  him  in  addition  the  name  of  Judas,  and
some  make  the  name  of  his  father  his  own  proper  name  also,  but
in  the  form  Cleopas  or  Cleophas,  so  that  he  is  identified  also  with
the  disciple  mentioned  in  I,k.  24  18.  He  is  at  the  same  time
enumerated  among  '  the  Seventy '  of  Lk.  10  i  (Lipsius,  Apokr.
Ap.-gesch.  ii.  2  142/^).  According  to  the  'l'ieasure-cave(Schatz-
hehU,  ed.  Hezold,  1888,  p.  267,  5;  see  Tlies.  Syr. ^A.  Payne-
.Smith,  col.  3629),  a  Syriac  collection  of  legends  dating  from  the
sixth  century,  he  was  brother  not  only  of  NicodemusCa  statement
made  of  the  apostle  Judas  also  in  a  Latin  list  of  apostles  given
in  Lipsius,  1  195),  but  also  of  loseph  of  Arimatha:a. p.  w.  S.

CLOTH,  CLOTHING.  On  these  and  similar  words
.see,  generally,  Dkkss,  §  i.

The  words  are  used  with  considerable  looseness  and  fre-
quently interchange  with  others  of  similar  meaning.  '  Cloth  '
(and  'clothes')  occasionally  render  1J3  (Drkss,  §  l[i]),  and
nVpc'  (Mantle),  also  once  1330,  2  K.'sis,  AV  (Bed,  §  3);
for  aivhuiv,  Mt.  2759,  see  Linkn.  '  Cloth  '  to  denote  material
or  fabric  is  found  only  in  Esth.  1 6,  KVmg.  For  'cloths
of  service'  (Ex.  31  30,  etc.,  AV  ;  Tlij-n  '133)  see  Dkess,
§  3  n.  For  'striped  cloths'  (Pr.  7i6  KV,  niacn)  see  Linen.
RV  prefers  'cloths'  in  Kzek.  27  20  (1:13),^  Lk.  24  12  {oQoviov),
where  AV  has  'clothes,'  and  'clothes'  otherwise  recurs  in  Gen.
49  IS  AV  (niD,  RV  'vesture'),  i  S.  4  12,  EV  (^a),  Ezek.  2724,
AV  (diVji  RV  'wrappings':  see  Dkess,  g  i  [2]).  'Clothing'
is  used  to  render  the  general  terms  t^U'?  (Job  24/),  nj3  (ib.
22  16),  noap  (Is.  23  18),  nc'3^ri  (ib.  59  17),  as  well  as  the  specific
nSpif',  Ls.  36  (Mantle).

CLOUD.  PILLAR  OF  (|3rn  niGr),  Exod.  13  2i;
see  Pii.i.AK  OK  Clouu.

CLUB  (nn'in,  tothdh  ;  c(t)YPA  Jol^  4I29  [21]  RV,  AV
'  dart '). Read  tarlah  'javelin,'  and  see  WEAPONS.

CNIDUS  (kniAoc  [AXV  :  Ti.  WH]),  a  city  on  Cape
Crio  (anc.  Trioiiium)  in  the  extreme  SW.  of  Asia  Minor,
between  Cos  and  Rhodes.  It  was  originally  built  upon
the  rocky  island  (v^(tos  v\f/rj\T]  dearponSr)^,  Strabo,  656)
forming  the  cape,  united  to  the  mainland  by  a  causeway,
— thus  making  two  harbours,  one  on  the  N.  and  the
other  on  the  S.  of  the  isthmus  (cp  Mitylene  and
Myndus).

The  inhabitants  soon  spread  eastwards  over  the  neighbouring
part  of  the  peninsula.  1  he  moles  of  the  large  southern  port  are
still  in  existence,  as  well  as  much  of  the  ancient  city.  The
situation  of  Cnidus  was  eminently  favourable  to  its  development
as  a  commercial  and  naval  power  ;  but,  curiously  like  Cos  in  this
respect,  it  played  no  part  as  a  naval  state— probably  owing  to
the  repressive  influence  of  Rhodes.

The  commercial  importance  of  the  city  was  inevitable.
It  lies  upon  the  maritime  highway  (cp  Thuc.  835,  irepl
Tpidirioi'  TOLS  air'  Alyvirrov  6X^'d5a5  Trpoa/SaXXoiyeras
^vWafi^dvfiv).  Very  early  it  had  trade  with  Egypt
and  shared  in  the  Hellenion  at  Naucr.atis  (Herod.  2178).
At  least  as  early  as  the  second  century  B.  c.  Cnidus  had
attracted  Jewish  settlers,  for  in  i  Mace.  1523  it  appears
in  the  list  of  places  to  which  the  circular  letter  of  the
Roman  senate  in  favour  of  the  Jews  (circa  139-8  B.C.)
is  said  to  have  been  addressed.  Paul  must  have  passed
the  city  on  his  way  to  Caesarea  (Acts  21 1/);  but  its
name  occurs  only  in  Acts  277  (lipa5vTr\oovvTei  Kai  /itoXis
yevdfievoi Kara ttjc KvLSov) after Myra had been

1  For  CSn  n:33  Gra.  reads  j'Sn  33  ;  but  we  should  more
probably  emend  to  cn'no  '333  'with  young  suhirs '  (cp
Horse,  Mizraim,  §  2  a  end);  '33  became  33,  and  from  the
transposition  and  confusion  of  letters  B'Em  easily  arose  (Che.).

853


COAL

passed,  on  the  voyage  to  Rome.  The  continuotis  NW.
(Etesian)  winds  had  made  the  voyage  over  the  130  m.
between  Myra  and  Cnidus  tedious  ;  and  rendered  the
direct  course  from  Cnidus,  by  the  X.  side  of  Crete,
impossible  (fxrj  irpo<rtu>vTO%  ij/xas  rou  dv^fiov).

The  wines  of  Cnidus,  es|)ccially  the  kind  called  Protropos,
excelled  any  produced  in  Asia  (Str.  637).  '1  he  best  claim  of  the
city  to  renown  lies  in  the  intellcctuar  activity  of  its  inhabitants
and  their  encouragement  of  art.  'I'hey  possessed,  at  the  I/Csche
at  Delphi,  two  pictures  by  I'olygnOtus  (middle  of  fifth  century  ;
I'aus.  X.  2.')  lyC).  They  lx)ught  the  Aphrcxiite  of  Praxiteles  (his
masterpiece,  quatii  ut  vidirent  multi  navigaverunt  Cnidutii  ;
Plin.  //A'xxxvi.  ,'14  :  the  Cnidians  especially  worshipped  Aphro-
dite, Pans.  i.  1  3).  In  addition,  they  had  works  by  Bryaxis  and
•Scopas.  Eudoxus  the  astronomer,  Ctesias  the  physician  and
historian,  Agatharchides,  and  Sostratus  the  architect  who  built
the  I'haros  of  Alexandria,  all  belonged  to  Cnidus  (cp  Str.  119,
656).

For  plan  and  views  of  the  remains  see  Newton's  Hist.  0/
Discoferiis  at  Halicarnassus,  etc.,  1861-63;  J  ravels  and
Visco7>crics  in  the  Ln'ant,  2  1677:  VV.  J.  VV.

COACH  (nV),  Is.  6620  AV-ne- See  Littkk.
COAL. The  coal  of  OT  and  NT  is  undoubtedly  char-
coal. A  piece  of  black  charcoal  was  termed  ens  ( pehhdtn  ;

. fp__„_ cp perh. Ass. phttu [or  pi'mlu*'\ '  fire '  ;

i.  lerms.  j,^^^,  26  2,  [ecrxdpa].  Is.  44  12,  54  i6t
[dvdpa^ ; carbo\) ; pieces in jjrocess  of  combustion,

'live  coals,'  rhni,  Q'hni  [gahhilHth,  gehlidllm ;  cp  Ar.
jahima  to  glow,  and  perh.  Ass.  guhlu,  a  shining  precious
stone  ;  dvOpa^  ;  pruna),  and  often,  more  precisely,
E'K  -hn}  (coals  of  fire),  Lev.  16 12,  etc.  In  this  distinction,
which  is  not  uniformly  observed  (cp  Is.  44  12  54  16),
lies  the  point  of  the  vivid  comparison  Prov.  2621  (RV
'  as  coals  are  to  hot  embers,'  etc. ).

Of  the  other  words  rendered  by  'coal'  in  theOT  it  is  sufficient  to
say  that  nSS"l,l  rispcih  (Is.  66)  is  rather  a  '  hot  stone  '  (so  RV"'*,'-  ;
avOpa^',  the  D'E^T  [nzy],  r^sap/iim,  of  i  K.  U»6  (fUKpvtfiCai
oAiip[j]tn)s)  being,  in  like  manner,  the  hot  stones  on  which  Elijah's
cake  was  baked  (see  Bkkad,  §  2[a]) ;  that  ffcn,  reseph,  identified
by  the  Rabbins  with  l^'l,  rctjeph,  and  twice  rendered  'coals'
(Ct.86  AV,  Hab.35  AV,'  RVihk-;  AV'"K.  'burning  diseases'),
is  rather  'flame'  or  fire-bolt  (cp  RV);2  and  that  lin;;',  fehgr
(Lam.  4  8;  (l<r/3oAr) ;  carbones ;  EV,  '  their  visage  is  blacker  than
a  coal'),  is  properly  '  blackness'  {so  the  margins;  others  'soot'
[fuligo]).

The  Hebrews  doubtless  used  for  fuel  as  great  a
variety  of  woods  as  the  modern  Syrians  now  use  (see
2  PiiPl  ^'"^'  '"  PEFQ.  '91.  PP-  118^).  Several
z.  ruei.  ^^^  named  in  Is.  44  14-16.  Ps.  I2O4  (RV'K)
mentions  'coals  of  broom  (cni),'  a  desert  shrub  which,
when  reduced  to  charcoal,  throws  out  an  intense  heat
(on  the  text  see  JUNIPKR).  The  references  to  thorns  as
fuel  (c'TD,  D'^ip)  are  many  ;  particular  mention  is  made
of  the  buckthorn  or  perhaps  bramble  (icN,  Ps.  589  [10]),
of  chaff — chopped  straw  (tibn),  the  refuse  of  the
threshing-floor  (Mt.  812),  —  and  of  withered  herbage
(Mt.  630  Lk.  1228).  At  the  present  time  the  favourite
fuel  of  the  Bedouin  is  the  dung  of  camels,  cows  (cp
Ezek.  415),  asses,  etc.,  which  is  carefully  collected,  and,
after  being  mixed  with  tibn  or  chopped  straw,  is  made
into  flat  cakes,  which  are  dried  and  stored  for  the
winter's  use.  We  may  assume  that  this  sort  of  fuel
was  not  so  much  rcxjuiretl  before  the  comparative
denudation  of  the  country,  though  Ezek.  4  12-15  certainly
suggests  that  it  was  not  altogether  unknown.

The  charcoal  was  burned  in  a  brasier  (nK,  Jer.  36  22^  ;
AV 'hearth,' RV 'brasier')  or  chafing-dish  (rn  "iVa,

q  TViB.  ViooT^k  Zech.  126,  RV  'pan  of  fire'), — at  least
6.  xne  neanin.  j^ j,^^ ^^^^^^ ^^  j,^^  wealthy. The

'fire  of  coals'  (avOpaKid)  at  which  Peter  warmed
himself  in  the  high  priest's  palace  was  no  doubt  a  fire
of  charcoal (so RV™ff) in a  brasier  =*  (Jn.  18 18  21 9).

*  l^n.  .IBSI.  '  coal '  (  =  Ar.  mf/i">)  is  to  be  kept  distinct  from
nssi,  '  pavement  ■  (cp  verb  in  Cant.  3  10),  which  corresponds  to
Ar.  rasa/a,  'to  arrange  side  by  side'  :  see  Dr.  Tensesi^},  231.

'•  See  Dr.'s  elaborate  note  on  Dt.3224.

3  For  the  arrangement  of  a  modern  S>Tian  '  hearth,'  sec
Landberg's  Prm'erbes  et  Dictons,  73/,  155  (with  illustration).

854


COASTLAND

In  the  houses  of  the  humbler  classes,  the  hearth  (mpiD,
only  of  altar-hearih  Lev.  62  [9];  mod.  Ar.  mawkiJa)
was  probably  a  mere  depression  in  the  floor,  the  smoke
escaping,  as  best  it  could,  through  the  door  or  the
latticed  window  (^3^K,  Hos.  183,  EV  'chimney').  See
Lattice.  Chimneys  there  were  none  ;  the  AV  render-
ing, '  ere  ever  the  chimneys  in  Zion  were  hot '  in  4  Ksd.
64,  is  based  on  a  corruption  of  the  Latin  te.xt  (RV  '  or
ever  the  footstool  of  Zion  was  established  ').

Coal  and  coals  supply  a  variety  of  metaphors. Thus
■  to  quench  one's  coal '  (n'^na  2S.  14?  ; cp  the  classical
4.  Metaphors,  ^'^'^''^"''■/"d  see Dr. ad loc.) is a
*^  pathetic  figure  for  depnvmg  a  jjerson

of  the  privilege  of  posterity,  otherwise  expressed  as  a
putting  out  of  one's  candle  (rather,  'lamp') — Prov.
139  etc.  To  heap  '  coals  of  fire,'  or  glowing  charcoal,
on  an  enemy's  head  must,  it  would  seem,  be  to  adopt
a  mode  of  revenge  calculated  to  awaken  the  pains  of
remorse  in  his  breast  (Prov.  25  22^  (MT).  Rom.  I220).
Again,  '  kindle  not  the  coals  of  a  sinner' — that  is,  do
not  stir  up  his  evil  passions — is  the  sage  advice  of  the
son  of  Sirach  (Kcclus.  810) ;  cp  Kcclus.  11 32,  'from  a
spark  of  fire  a  heap  of  many  coals  {ivOpaKid)  is
kindled,'  which  finds  an  echo  in  Ja.  85. A.  K.  s.  K.

COASTLAND  (Is.  20  6t  RV;  Is.  11  n  2826  24  15
5O18  Jer.2522  Ezek.3!'6  D.in.  11  18  Zeph.2ii;  KV"ig-,  in  Jer.
474  '  sea  coast ')  ;  a  rendering  of  'N  (itjctos  ;  KV  usually  '  isle  '  or
'island,'  AVn't,'-  occasionally  'country'  or  'region  '). See  Islk.

COAT,  an  inexact  rendering  :

(i)  Of  n:n3  (see  Tu.sic)  in  Gen.  373  EV  (RV'msr.  'long
garment '),  Ex.  284,  etc.  ;  (2)  of  V'VD  in  i  S.  2  19  .W  (RV  '  robe  '  ;
see  I'UNIC);  (3)  of  ^37)0  in  Dan.  821  AV  (AV"itr-  'mantle',  RV
'  hosen  ' ;  see  Breeches);  (4)  of  \i.tuiv  in  Mt.  540  EV  (see
Tunic)  ;  (5)  of  vAa^iis  in  2  Mace.  1235  AV(see  Mantle).  For
'  broidered  coat see  Emuroidekv,  §  i.

COAT  OF  MAIL  occurs  as  a  rendering  of  tonn,  tahrd
(E.X.  2832  3923  RV;  AV  'habergeon'),  jnc',  i/>jvJ«  (Is.  59 17
RVnig.,  EV  'breastplate'),  and  C'iS'pi;',^  p-lC*,  iS.  I75  EV ;
see  Breastplate.

COCK.(AAeKTa)p).  Mt.  26 34  74  Mk.  1835  143°  72
Lk.  223460  Jn.  I838  I827.  On  the  '  cock -crowing  '
{a.\fKTopo(p(i}vla)  spoken  of  in  Mk.  1835  information  is
given  elsewhere  (see  DAY,  §  4).  Mt. ,  Lk.,  and  Jn.
speak  of  only  this  cock-crowing.  The  tradition  preserved
in  Mark,  on  the  other  hand  (though  the  te.xt  in  the  MSS
differs),  refers  to  a  second.  Thus  the  cock  had
completed  its  journey  to  Palestine.  Its  home  was  in
India ;  thence  it  came  to  Babylonia  '-^  and  Persia.
Homer  indeed  gives  AXe/crwp  as  the  name  of  a  man  ;
but  Aristophanes  (Av.  438)  considers  the  cock  the
'  Persian  bird.'  To  the  Jews,  too,  as  well  as  (presum-
ably) to  the  Egyptians,  it  was  a  Persian  bird,  even
though  the  Targumic  and  Talmudic  word  for  cock
(Sunn)  may  have  a  Babylonian  origin.^

Not  improbably  we  have  in  Prov.  30 31  a  reference  to
the  impression  which  it  produced  not  so  long  after  its
introduction  into  Palestine.  The  evidence  of  the
versions  ■*  in  favour  of  the  rendering  '  cock  '  cannot  be
regarded  lightly,  and  there  is  no  proof  whatever  of  the
sense  of  'well  girt  up'  for  tiii,  or  for  the  application
of  the  term  to  the  greyhound.  The  Talmudic  -i-Tit  also
certainly means  some  bird (a  kind of  raven).' The

1  For  another  view  of  this  passage,  involving  an  emendation
of  the  text,  see  Che.  Jew.  Rel.  Life.  142,  who  follows  Bickell.

2  There  is  said  to  be  a  representation  of  a  cock  on  a  cylinder
seal  of  the  reign  of  Nabu-na'id.

8  So,  at  least,  Hommel,  Hastings'  DB  \  214.

4  ®BKAC  (2466)  oAeKTup  ivTrtpi-na-Tutv  OrjAeCai^  tvij/vxoi;  simi-
larly Aq.,  Theod.,  Quinta,  Pesh.  ^>^-s^ ;  gallus  succinctus
lumbos  (Vg.).  Wildeboer  ('97)  speaks  inconsistently,  but  favours
the  rendering  '  cock,'  if  Q'jnD  "n^V  he  altered.  For  '  greyhound  '
he  has  nothing  to  say.

*  See  the  Diets,  of  Levy  and  Jastrow:  Rashi  here  renders
'  starling  '  (cp  Syr.  )  ^  >  J*  Ar.  zurzur).

8SS


CCELESYRIA

key  to  the  difference  of  usage  is  supplied  by  Ar.  sarsara,
'to  make  a  shrill  noise";  hence  sarsar""  is  used  in
Arabic  for  both  the  cricket  and  the  cock.  The  kin-
dred Hebrew  word  also  might  Ije  widely  used  :  ( 1 )  for
the  cock,  (2)  for  the  starling.  The  second  element  in
the  phrase  o^Jno  I'lii  is  seemingly  a  difficulty.  The
word  is  no  doubt  corrupt.  Dyserinck  and  Gratz  would
read  kb-jjio  ;  cp  (S  (virepiiraTwv.  To  keep  nearer  to
the  Hebrew  and  to  find  a  more  striking  phrase,  it  is
better  to  read  cpjnp  and  render  '  the  cock  who  loves  to
take  up  a  quarrel. '  EV  rather  uncritically  gives  Grey-
HOUNU  {i/.v. ) :  cp  Fowl,  §  2.

There  is  a  word  in  Job  8836  ('i2r)  which  'Vg. ,  the
two  Targs. ,  and  Delitzsch  render  '  cock  '  (AV  '  heart,'
RV  'mind,'  mg.  'meteor').  As,  however,  it  is  evident
that  some  sky-phenomenon  is  meant,  we  should  almost
certainly  read  for  'idb-,  nrp,  '  the  bow  star,'  to  cor-
respond to  nmn  (so  read  for  nino),  "the  lance  star.'
The  bow  star  is  Sirius,  the  lance  star  Antares.  See
Che.  /BL,  1898.  T.  K.  c.

COCKATRICE  is  an  archaic  English  word,  derived
or  corrupted  from  the  mediaeval  Lat.  aiL  atrix  [see  the
New  Eng.  Diet.,  s.v.\  but  often  confounded  with
'  crocodile  ' ;  the  form  of  the  word  suggested  the  fable
that  the  animal  was  hatched  by  a  cock  from  the  egg  of
a  viper.  For  Pr.  2832  AV  (EV'nB-  Adder;  RV'"*.'-
'basilisk')  and  Is.  118  595  Jer.  8i7t  AV(RV  'basilisk,'
EV"'K-  '  or  adder '  ;  'j^b^,  siph'oni)  see  Serpent,  §
1(7).  For  Is.  14  29t  (j'Es,  sepka,  EV  as  before,  \'g.
regulus)  see  Serpent.  §  r  (6).  ©  has  ^a<n\icrKos  in
Is.  59s  (EV  Viper,  Heb.  'e/>/u'/i)  and  in  Ps.  90[<»1]  13
(EV  Adder,  Heb.  pethen).  Horapoilon  (1 1)  identifies
the  basilisk  with  the  Egyptian  urajus,  a  golden  image  of
which  is  the  usual  ornament  of  the  divine  or  royal
head-dress.  Probably  this  was  the  kind  of  serjjent
meant  by  ©  ;  the  urieus,  being  divine,  had  of  course
extraordinary  powers  (see  Serpent,  §  i,  nos.  6  and  7).
According  to  Furetiere,  the  cocatrix  (cock.itrice)  is  a  kind  of
basilisk  which  haunts  caverns  and  pits.  The  name  cakatrix,
however,  properly  means  the  ichneumon.  Under  the  form
Chalcadri,  we  tind  it  in  the  Slavonic  Secrits  of  Enock{V2.i  15  i),
where,  however,  the  writer  may  be  thinking  of  the  crocodile.
See  Ck()Ci>uile.  T.  K.  c.

COCKLE,  EV">tr,  better  'noisome  weeds'  (inC'N3,
bd'sdh;  Batoc  [BXAC]),  JobSUof.  The  cognate  vei^b
means  in  Hebrew  '  to  stink '  ;  but  the  primary  sense
of  the  root,  according  to  N'oldeke  (/.D.\/G-iO  727  ['86]).
is  the  more  general  one  of  badness  or  worthlessness.
A  kindred  substantive  is  D'VVta,  '  wild  grapes  '  (Is.  62  4).
As  nvKZ  occurs  only  once  in  Hebrew  and  is  unknown
to  the  cognate  languages,  there  is  no  evidence  to
justify  the  identification  with  a  particular  plant,  such  as
the  '  cockle'  of  EV  ;  still,  as  etyiuology  seems  to  point
to  some  'stinking  weed,'  there  is  something  to  be  said
for  the  suggestion  of  Sir  Joseph  Hooker,  that  i^erhaps
the  reference  is  to  the  stinking  arums.

Several  of  the  arums  are  plentiful  in  Syria — e.g-..  Arum  Dios-
coridis,  Sibth.,  .Arum  Paltestinum,  Boi.ss.,  and  species  of  Helico-
phyllum  (cp  'Tristram,  NH/i  ^39).  The  ancient  versions,  in
supposing  that  a  thorny  plant  is  intended,'  were  no  doubt  guided
by  the  parallelism  of  the  verse.  The  older  English  Versions  use
'  cockle  as  the  rendering  of  <I'i^d»'ia  in  Mt.  13.  See  Tarrs.
N.  M. — W.  T.  T.-D.

C(ELESYRIA  (koiAh  cypiA  [BAL])— «.<•..  'hollow

Syria,' first mentioned in i  lisdras, where (koiKti)-

"Zvpia  K.  ^oiviKrj  represents  Hinj  131?,  the

1.  Name, j^^^^^ equivalent  of  the  Heb.  "insn  lar  (cp

Ezra  836  Xeh.  87).

The  name  occurs  in  lEsd.  21724/!  27  =  Ezra  4  10  16/;  20;
I  Esd.t>37i7  29=E;zra536t)68;  i  Esd.  7  i  867  =  EzratJi3  S36.
(P's  vrsioii  of  the  canonical  Ezra  regularly  renders  by  iripav
(but  irifM  Ezra<i6  7  2i25  (B.\])  toO  jroTdfiou  : once,  however,

1  So  ®bXaq  renders  C'CKS  by  aicai^at  in Is.  624. Pesh.,
however,  'carobs'(see  HusK.s).
!2  K.  is  a  few  times  omitted — e.g.,  i  Esd.  225  63,  etc.

856


COPPER

ianipa  t.  wot.,  in  Kzra4  3o[DA].  With  ihit  we  may  compare
the  "•pav  Eu^parov,  which,  wi(h  ra  icarw  rqt  '\triax  u'pq
(Asia  Minor,  N\V.  of  Tauruk)  appears  in  the  famouii  Gaifatas
ins.rii.tion  of  I  larius  \.  (Hull.  Corr.  Hell.  13  5j,>  (89),  14  6.8;
cp  iNleyer,  Entst.  19/.).  I  he  name  Aramaic  designation  is
found  upon  a  coin  of  the  Persian  period  '  M-i/dai  .  .  .  who  is
over  Kinj  nay'  (cp  Hal.  .»/«•/.  Epig.  6^/.),  and  seems  to  be  the
origin  of  the  name  of  the  I'ersian  province  Ar/iiijia  (fur  another
weTi-supiMirted  \iew,  >ee  Ahaiiia,  f  3).  ^ifiici)  and  'Apafiia
occur  together  as  one  archonship  in  the  epilogue  to  the  .-ina/'asii
(see  Marq.  Eutul.  yiff.)-^  That  the  Minican  p.nj  n;y  is  to  be
connected  with  121".  arhilya.  though  affirmed  by  Hartmann
(/..^  11  Hi),  Meyer  (;/-.  327),  and  Marq.  (.</.  lit.  74/,  cp  KliKK,
i),  is  strenuously  denied  by  (ilascr  (cp  .l//'<»",  1897,  3  3  yf.  ;  see
Hommcl,  A  HI  ynff.),  who  is,  however,  perhaps  too  strongly
prejudiced  in  fa>our  of  an  exceedingly  remote  date  for  the
inscriptions  in  question.

CoL-li'syrin  is.  strictly,  the  designation  applied  since
the  time  of  the  Sfleucid.-v  to  the  depression  between  the
o  Vt\t,y\\  '^*°  Ix-'lxinons,  otherwise  known  as  the
i.  txteni.  ^^.^..^  ^^  Lebanon  (cp  Josh.  11 17  I27),  the
mod.  lieka  ;  cp  Lkh.vnon.'''  In  the  (Jrecian  period
the  term  includes  all  E.  I'alestine.  Thus,  according  to
Josephus  {.Int.  i.  11  5),  the  seats  of  the  Ammonites  and
Moabites  were  in  it,  and  among  its  towns  he  mentions
Scythojwlis  and  (iadara  [ih.  xiii.  \\\tf.).  In  its  widest
sense  it  included  Kaphia  (so  I'olyb.  58o),  and  stretched
'  as  far  as  the  river  Euphrates  and  Kgypt '  {.Ant.  xiv.  4  s).
In  I  Esd.  and  Maccal)ees  (see  below)  these  are  its
limits  ;  and,  rou'^hly  ust-d,  rather  in  a  political  than  in  a
geographical  sense,  it  and  Phoenicia  constitute  the  more
southerly  part  of  the  kingdom  of  the  Seleucidiu.  At
this  periwl  the  districts  referred  to  appear  as  one  fiscal
domain,  under  tlie  suzerainty  of  one  governor  (viz.,
A|)ollonius  [2.\Iacc.  35]  Ptolemy  [88]  Lysias  [10  u]).
Under  the  Romans  the  term  was  again  restricted,  and
Coelesyria  ( with  Damascus  as  its  capital ;  cp  .Ant.  xiii.  152
DJK.M)  was  officially  separated  from  Phoenicia  and
Iud;va(.-7«/.  xii.  4  i  and  4  ;  Pliny,  5  7).  When,  therefore,
in  47  and  43  B.C.,  Herod  was  in  command  of  Ca-le-
syria,  he  seems  to  have  possessed  no  authority  over  the
southern  jirovince.  s.  A.  C.

COFFER  (TnN).  iS.Gs.nst.

(P  h.is  :  in  v.  8  (v  OffiaTi  peotx^av  [B*],  -p(T(x-  [H-it' vid.],  (,,  0.
apyoi  I A  I,  (f  e.  Paipyai  [  L]  ;  in  rr:  1115,  to  fl.><a  fpyafi  [  U],  to  fl.
apyo^[.\],  tv  Sf/naTi  /Safpya^  and  to  6.  ^aepyaCi  |  L).  Aq.  Xdpi'af
(or  tx^of) ;  Sym.  XapvoKiov ;  Jos.  yAuxTcrbKOfioi'.  Vg.  always
ea/'sella.

The  foreign-looking  but  really  corrupt  word  argiiz
illustrates  the  need  of  a  more  correct  Hebrew  text  (see
Tk.xt,  §  44/  )■

We  cannot  accept  the  far-fetched  etymologies  of  Lag,
(Uhtrs.  85)  and  Klo.  (.SViw.,  nilloc).  The  i  probably  sprang
out  of  a  'final  nun"  (j),  which  was  attached  as  a  correction  to
an  ordinary  nun— thus  pnx  (cp  -av  [B]).  In  this  case  the
'  coiier '  was  really  not  distinguished  in  name  from  the  ark
(piXX  Or  tv  Be^ari  (ip,  cp  Lev. '246)— ;.f.,  ri3>'C3  —'in  a
pile,'  may  represent  the  true  text  ;  but  more  probably  6tiia  =
0ritia  =  9riKr}  'box.'  .See  Che.  E.t/>.  7".  10 521  (Aug.  '09),  and  on
the  narrative  which  contain-  the  word,  see  Budde  (.SHOf),  who
carefully  separate-  the  interpolations.  T.  K.  C.

COFFIN  (jhS,  copoc).  Gen.  5O26  ;  also  Lk.  7i4
AV""-'- .See  De.\U,  §  i.

COHORT  (cneip&). -VtslOi. See Akmv, § 10;

COKNKI.ILS, § I.

COLA,  RV  Cnoi..\  (xcoAa  [H],  k(o.  [-A].  KeeiAA
[N*^-^], — om.  Vg.  Syr.), — mentioiud  with  Betomks-
THAM,  Hkb.M,  and  Chobai  (see  Choba),^  as  places  to
which  orders  were  sent  to  follow  up  the  pursuit  of  the

1  It  i.s  mentioned  in  the  Behistun  Inscription  of  Darius
Hystaspis  t)etween  Babylonia  and  Assyria.  In  another  in-
scription of  the  class,  however,  this  position  is  occupied  by
Arbaya  (cp /.>ttr.  Koy.  .-is.  Soc.  10  28"  ['47  J.

-  On  the  supposed  reference  to  this  valley  (rich  in  heathen
remains)  in  .\m.  1  5  ('  valley  of  Aven  ' — /'.<•.,  of  Sin),  see  .'Xvk.s,  3.
"I'his  district  is  also  called  Maacrvat  (.Strabo,  2  16  17,  ed.  Meineke
1'661),  or  y\af»rua.^  (Polyb.  5  45),  a  name  which  may  l>e  derived
from  a  hypothetical  rnyS,  'depression' ;  cp  \/  nid  nnr,  'tosink.'

'  Considerable  confusion  appears  in  the  treatment  of  this  and
the  preceding  names  in  the  Greek  Versions,


COLOSSB

enemy  after  the  death  of  Hoiofernes  (Judith  164).
Possibly  the  Hoi.ON  of  Josh.  15  51  may  be  intended
(Zockhr). ©N'-' identifies the place  with Kkii.AM  ;

cp  Josh. l.'')44.

COLHOZEH  (TV(rrh2,  §23,  as  if  he  sceth  all),
a  Jerusalemite  of  Nehemiah's  time  (.\eh.  815;  otn.  li{<A,
XoAozei  [\']\  lis.  XAAeA  (HN].  -Aaza  [A],  xo.  [L])-
As  misleading  a  name  as  Pahath-moab  or  as  Hallohesh.
A  clan  of  '  seers  '  at  this  |)eriod  would  of  course  lie
interesting;  but  the  name  is  miswritten  for  rn  Sn  (I'-V
'  Hallohesh  ').  [jrobably  under  the  influence  of  the  name
Hazaiah,  which  follows  in  Neh.  11 5.  pmSn  itself  is
miswritten. See  Hai.lumesii.  t.  k.  c.

COLIUS  (kcoAioc  [A]),  1  P:sd.  923  =  Kzral023,
Kki.aiaii  {</.;•.  ).

COLLAR.  I.  'Collars'  in  AV  Judg.  826  become  in
RV  '  pendants  '  (mS'U:). See  RiNt;,  §  2.

2.  '  Collar '  is  also  applied,  inappropriately,  to  the
round  hole  (.ns)  for  the  head  and  neck  in  a  garment.
So  in  Job 30 18,  'It  bindeth  me  alK)ut  as  the  collar  of
my  coat'  (K\'),  and  in  Ps.  1332  (R\"'«),  'that  Hows
down  to  the  collar  of  his  robes'  (Kay).  'Collar  '  here
should  be  'opening.'

In  I's.  t.c  ,  however,  it  is  thoiight  that  the  border  of  the
opening,  rather  than  the  opening  itself,  mu-l  lie  interrded.  ©
Sym.  have  iitX  tiji/  way — i.e.,  the  lambskin  trimming  or  edging
on  the  neck-opening  (cp  Tg.,  H'CH  'fringe').  I-.V,  however,
ventures  on  'skirts  (skirt)  of  his  garments';  the  revisers  felt
that,  even  if  .W  gave  an  iniprol)al)le  rendering,  they  had
nothing  letter  to  set  in  its  place.  The  text  can  |>erhaps  be
corrected  (see  Che.  /'j.i2i);  it  is  certainly  not  right  as  it  stands.
In  Job  Ac,  Budde  and  Duhm  prefer  to  render  'even  as  my  tunic' ;
but  this  does  not  make  the  passage  clear.  There  is  reason
to  think  (Che.  A>/».  Tinus,  IO382J  [May '9,])  that  we  .should
read  t'Sn\  in  v.  iSa  (©  tireAo^eTo)  and  'B3  and  '3inK'  in  1:  186,
and  render

By  (his)  gre.-it  power  he  takes  hold  of  my  garment,
By  the  opening  of  my  tunic  he  grasps  me.
The  word  rendered  in  these  two  passages  'collar'  becomes
'hole'  in  KV  of  Kx. -'S  32  ;  the  context  suggested  this.  The
'hole  for  the  head  '  (RV)  in  the  priestly  >«f'/7  (rolw)  was  to
have  a  '  binding  (lit.  lip)  round  about  ' ;  the  material  cut  out
was  to  be  folded  over,  and  so  to  make  what  might  fairly  l>e
called  a  collar.  In  later  Heb.  we  find  the  terms  nnEO  (opening)
or  iKlsn  n'3  (receptacle  of  the  neck).

3.  RX'""*-'-  gives  '  collar '  for  a  certain  instrument  of
punishment  (pVs,  si'noi,  Jer.  2926,  AV  'stocks,'  RV
'shackles').  The  root  (like  pa)  in  Aramaic  and
Talmudic  means  to  bind,  to  confine.  Kimhi  takes  it
to  be  a  manacle  for  hands,  not  a  collar.  Orelli,  on  the
other  hand,  compares  .-\rab.  zi'mii  (necklace).  0«»«ao
its  rbv  KarapaKTr/v  represents  nijs  and  can  scarcely  be
correct.

COLLEGE,  RV  Skcond  Qiartkr  (nJl'TD  ;  Vg.
Secumiii ).  as  if  the  '  new  town  '  of  Jerusalem  (2  K.  2'2 14  =
2  Ch.  34  22  ;  Zeph.  1 10). i  he  reiidering  '  college  '  is  due

toTg.  Jon.  2  K.'22i4  WB^IN  n''3a.  'in  the  house  of
instruction.' .See  JKKLSAI.EM.

The  text  is,  however,  plainly  corrupt.  In  Zeph.  1  10  the
natural  parallel  to  the  '  lish  gate'  is  the  'gate  of  the  old'
(see  Neh.  lL'39,  where  these  gates  are  mentioned  together).
For  njCTJ.T-p,  therefore,  read  .IJC*  .T  lys-p  'from  the  gate  of  the
old  city.'  Similarly  in  2  K.  and  2  Ch.  I.e.  (see  Hui.dah).  See
also  Hassem  AH.  In  2  K.  •-'"J  14,  fiavtva  (B.\],  -two.  [\.\,
AVin«.  'second  part,'  RV'nK-  '  Heb.  .Mishneh.'  In  2  Ch.  84  22,
y.aia.aava.1  [B|,  \i.t<java.i.  \\\.  fiavtrti'va  |  I-l,  .AV">»r.  '  in  the  .school,"
or  '  in  the  second  part,'  RVintf.  '  Heb.  Mishneh."  In  Zeph.  1 10,
TTJt  itvTepa'!  [\'k\Q]  ;  -W  'the  second."

COLONNADE  (D^'N),  Ezek.  40 16.  RV"'e-  See
P()K(  11, TiMHi.t:.

COLONY  UoAcoNiA  [Ti.  WH]),  Actsl6i2.t  See
Pmi.n'i'i.

COLOSSE. iKtter Colosaa (koAoccai  [Ti.  WH.
and  coins  and  inscrip.]; koAacc&I.  later  MSS,  Byz.
858


COLOSSB

writers,  and  some  mod.  edd.  :  the  latter  form  was
1.  Description. 1'°''"''^' '^^^f''^ pronunciation  i).

(Churuk  Su),  a  tributary  of  the  Ma.'ander,  in  that  part
of  the  Roman  province  of  Asia  which  the  Greeks
called  Phrygia.  In  the  neighbourhood  of  Colossai  were
Hierapolis  and  Laodicea  (cp  Col.  2i  41315/.).  As
tho.se  two  cities  rose  in  importance,  Colossce  seems
to  have  continuously  declined  (cp  Rev.  1  n  814,  where
the  church  in  Laodicea  ranks  among  tiie  seven  great
churches  of  Asia).  Herodotus  (730;  cp  Xen.  Anab.
i.  2  6)  speaks  of  Colossa;  as  'a  city  of  great  size':
but  in  Strabo's  time  Laodicea  is  numbered  among
the  greatest  of  the  Phrygian  cities,  '•hilst  Colossas,
although  it  had  some  trade,  is  only  a  woXia/xa  (Strabo,
576,  578).  In  Paul's  time  I 'liny  (//A' .5  41)  enumerates
it  among  the  ccleherrima  oppida  of  tlie  district  ;  but  that
is  merely  historical  retrospect.  Its  geographical  position,
on  the  great  route  leading  from  Kphesus  to  the  Kuphrates
(it  was  passed,  e.g.,  by  Xerxes  in  his  march  through
Asia  Minor,  Herod.  I.e.),  was  important.  Hence  arises
the  question  as  to  whether  the  place  was  ever  visited  by
Paul.

On  his  third  journey  Paul  '  went  over  all  the  country  of

Galatia  and  Phrygia  in  order'  (Actsl823),  and,  'having

p ., passed  through the  upper  coasts  [to.  cIj'w-

conne^Jtion^r'^  ^^^'^\  '^™''  '°  Kphesus'  (Acts  19.).
...  .  1  he  natural  route  would  certamly  be  that
followed  by  commerce,  which  would  i)ass
through  Colossa;,  though  travellers  might,  as  Ramsay
suggests  [Ch.  in  R.  Em  p.  94),  take  a  road  to  the  north-
ward, avoiding  the  Lycus  valley  entirely.  It  is,  how-
ever, open  to  us  to  admit  that  the  apostle  may  have
passed  through  the  town  without  making  any  stay.  It
seems  distinctly  to  follow  from  Col.2i  ('as  many  as
have  not  seen  my  face  in  the  flesh  ' )  that  at  the  date
of  writing  Paul  was  not  personally  acquainted  with  the
Colossian  church  ;  but  it  would  be  unsafe  to  argue  that
he  had  not  seen  the  town  itself  If  he  did  no  missionary
work  there  on  his  third  journey  through  Asia  Minor,  it  is
impo.ssible  to  assign  his  assumed  activity  at  Colossae
to  the  second  journey  on  the  strenijth  of  the  expression
'  gone  throughout  Phrygia  and  the  region  of  Galatia '
(.\cts  166)  :  on  that  occasion  he  diverged  northwards
from  the  eastern  trade  route  leading  by  way  of  Colossas
to  Ephesus,  and  ultimately  reached  Troas  {v.  7/).
Further,  although  ethnologically  Colossae  ranked  as  a
Phrygian  town,  politically  it  belonged  to  Asia,  a  province
which  was  altogether  barred  to  missionary  effort  on  the
occasion  of  the  second  journey  (Acts  166;  see  Asi.-\,
Phrygi.-\).

It  would  still  be  possible  to  argue  that  Paul  established
the  Colossian  church  on  an  unrecorded  visit  made  from
Ephesus  during  his  three  years'  stay  there  (cp  .Acts  19 10,
'  so  that  all  they  which  dwelt  in  Asia  heard  the  word  ').
Nevertheless,  Col.  I4  ('since  we  heard  of  your  faith')
1  8  2 1  are  opposed  to  tlie  idea  of  personal  effort  on  his
part,  especially  when  contrasted  with  such  passages  as
Gal.  16  I  Cor.  3i-io,  where  we  have  positive  claim  to
the  foundation  of  the  churches  addressed.  Nor  is  it
allowable  to  insist  that  Epaphras  and  Philemon,  who
were  certainly  Colossians  (Col.  412),  must  necessarily
have  been  converted  by  Paul  at  Colossa;  itself.  The
r'olossian  church  was  an  indirect  product  of  the  apostle's
activity  at  Kphesus.  To  whom,  then,  must  the  actual
foundation  be  ascribed  ?  Probably  to  Epaphras,  who
is  called  '  a  faithful  minister  of  Christ '  for  the  Colossians
[virkp  vfiCbv,  so  AV  :  better  virkp  i)fi2v,  '  on  our  behalf,'
RV),  and  their  teacher  (Col.  1  7,  cp  4 12  13),  although  the
honour  has  been  claimed  for  Timotheus,  on  the  ground
that  his  name  is  joined  with  that  of  Paul  in  the  Salutation
(Col.  li).

1  The  name  is  probably  connected  with  Koloe  (lake  near
Sardis.  Str.  626),  the  form  being  grecized  to  suggest  a  connection
with  icoAo<7(ros.  The  more  educated  ethnic  was  KoAoo-otji/os,
the  illiterate  form  KoAaorcraeus  being  perhaps  nearer  the  native
word. See  Rams.  Cilies  and  Bishoprics  0/ Phrygia,  1  212.

859


COLOSSIANS  AND  EPHESIANS

It  is  clear  from  Philem.  22  that  Paul  looked  forward

to  visiting  Colossiv  after  his  first  imprisonment  at  Rome  :

3  The ^'^'^'her  he  effected  his  purpose  is  not  known

Colossian  ^^"'  ^^  ^  T\m.  420). Among  the  members

Church  °'^  ^^'^  Colossian  church,  Ijesides  l-"paphras,
F^hilemon  with  his  wife  .-Xi'i'iii.v  and  slave
Onesimus  (Philem.  2  10'),  we  hear  of  Archippus,  perhaps
son  of  Epaphras  (Philem.  2  Col.  417).  With  regard  to
the  conifxjsition  of  the  church,  we  may  say  that  it  con-
sisted chiefly  of  (ientiles,  in  this  case  the  descendants  of
Greek  settlers  and  native  Phrygians,  deeply  imbued  with
that  tendency  to  mystical  fanaticism  which  was  charac-
teristic of  the  Phrygian  race.  Very  soon,  therefore,  they
fell  away  to  angel-worship  and  a  misdirected  asceticism
(Col.  2  16-18  21-23).  The  former  heresy  is  illustrated  by
the  famous  vaib%  dpxayjfXiKos  or  vab^  rod' Apxt<rTpaTrjyov
(church  dedicated  to  Michael),  mentioned  by  Nicetas
Choniates  as  standing  at  the  chasm  of  the  Lycus.
The  tradition  is  that  the  archangel  opened  the  chasm
and  so  saved  the  Christians  of  Chonas  from  destruction
by  an  inundation.  In  the  fourth  century  a  Council  at
Laodicea  condemned  this  angel-worship.  Theodoret
also  speaks  of  the  existence  of  the  heresy  in  this  region.
Cp  .\.\GEL,  §  9.

The  construction  of  a  strong  castle  at  Chonai  (mod.  Chflnas),
3  m.  S.  of  Colossa;,  wa.s  perhaps  the  work  of  Justinian.  During
the  seventh  or  eighth  century  A.D.,  under  the  pressure  of  Arab
incursions,  the  town  in  the  plain  was  gradually  deserted  and
forgotten.  Hence  Nicet.is  says  that  Chonai  (his  own  birthplace)
and  Colo.ssa;  were  one  and  the  .same  place  (ed.  Bonn,  403).  The
idea  even  arose  that  the  Colossians  of  the  epistle  were  the
Rhodians  (cp  Rams.  Cit.  nfui  Bish.  1  214).  The  Colossians  of
Cedr.  1  758  are  the  Paulicians  of  the  Church  of  Argaous  in
Armenia.

[Authorities  :  besides  Lightfoot,  Colossians,  see  Rams.  Cit.
and  Bish.  vol.  i.  with  map  ;  id.  Church  in  the  Roman  Empire,
chap.  19  with  map  of  the  Lycus  valley.]  \v.  J.  \V.

COLOSSIANS  2  and  EPHESIANS.''  Epistles  to  the.

These two epistles are related so closely that they
cannot  without  disadvantage  be  considered  separately.

Colossians  consists  of  two  distinct  p>ortions  :  the  one
didactic  and  polemical,  the  other  practical  and  hor-
tatory, the  whole  being  rounded  off  by
the  superscription  ( 1 1  /. )  at  the  begin-
ning, and  by  commendations  of  the
bearer,  greetings  and  other  messages,  and  the  writer's
autograph  greeting  at  the  close  (47-18).

In  the  introduction,  1  3^,  Paul,  a.s  his  custom  is,  gives  thanks
for  the  conversion  of  those  whom  he  is  addressing,  and  expresses
the  wish  that  they  may  continue  to  grow  in  all  wisdom.

At  V.  13,  by  a  gentle  transition,  he  pas.ses  over  into  a  Christo-
logical  discourse  setting  forth  the  transcendent  glory  of  the  Son,
and  how  he  is  head  of  the  universe  and  of  the  Church,  in  whom  all
hea\en  and  the  whole  earth  are  reconciled  to  God  {v^'.  14-20) ;
in  7'.-'.  21-23  the  re.-iders'  personal  interest  in  Christ's  work  of
reconciliation  is  affirmed,  and  in  tzk  24-25  Paul  goes  on  to  say
that  he  has  had  it  committed  to  his  special  charge  to  proclaim
the  great  secret  of  the  universality  of  salvation,  whence  it  is  that
he  labours  and  cares  .so  specially  for  the  interests  of  hi;;  readers.
In  2  1-23  the  main  bu.siness  of  the  epistle  is  entered  upon  —  an
earnest  warning  against  false  teachers,  who,  holding  out  hopyes
of  an  illu.sory  perfection,  wi.sh  to  substitute  all  sorts  of  Gentile
and  Jewish  religious  observances  in  the  place  of  '  Christ  alone.'

With  the  exhortation  (3  1-4)  to  live  their  lives  in  the  heavenly
manner,  and  conformably  to  the  new  life,  the  apostle  passes  to
the  practical  portion  of  the  epistle.  Here  in  the  first  instance
(3  5-17)  the  sins  of  the  old  man  that  are  to  be  laid  a.side  and  the
virtues  of  the  new  man  that  are  to  be  put  on  are  indicated
somewhat  generally ;  then  (3  i8-4  i)  the  duties  of  wives  and
husbands,  children  and  p.arents,  servants  and  masters  are
specially  described,  with  (4  2-6)  an  urgent  call  to  continual
prayer  (including  prayer  for  the  success  of  his  own  mission)  and
to  wise  and  discreet  employment  of  speech  in  their  dealings
with  the  unconverted.

The  contents  of  Ephesians  are,  on  the  whole,  similar  to
those  of  Colossians  ;  but  the  polemical  part  and  epistolary
_  «  i  1.  accessories  are  given  much  more  briefly
2.  Contents  , ,  , -- . ^

f  P y~ (only  a  superscription  1  i  /. ,  and  in  621-24,

01  Ijpn. ^  sentence  devoted  to  the  bearer  of  the

epistle,  with  parting  good  wishes),  w^hilst  all  the  rest  is

1  Cp  'Am^ioit  .  .  .  yivti.  M.o\aaa-<\v%,  CIG  84380  k ;  and  Wolfe
Exped.  482,  '0»Tj«ri>iO«  '.\<^i<}  yuvatici.

2  Trpos  KoAao-<raeis  [WH]. irpo?  KoAo(Tcro«s  [Ti.].

3  irpos  E<^«<rtov«  [Ti.  WH].


1.  Contents
of  Col.


COLOSSIANS  AND  EPHESIANS


treated  with  greater  amplitude.  The  doctrinal  jxirtion
exiends  from  1  3  to  3  21.  Here  it  cannot  Ik;  said  that  any
one  h:xs  as  yet  quite  succeeded  in  jwinting  out  any  very
clear  and  consecutive  pr<Kess  of  thought,  or  methodical
elaboration  of  definite  themes.  To  lind,  for  example,
in  I3-14  'the  operations  of  divine  grace,'  and,  more
explicitly,  in  vv.  7,ff.  '  \vhat  God  the  Father,"  in  in<.  j  ff.
'  what  God  the  Son,'  and  in  in:  13^  'what  (jod  the
Spirit  has  done,"  is  to  force  the  te.vt  into  moulds  of
thought  that  are  foreign  to  it.  Strictly,  this  part
of  the  epistle  is  sim[)ly  a  parallel,  carried  out  with
unwonted  fulness,  to  the  thanksgivings  with  which  Paul
is  accustomed  to  introduce  all  his  letters  : — an  act  of
praise  to  God  who  has  wrought  for  all  mankind  deliver-
ance from  sin  and  misery  through  Christ  and  his
gosjjel,  and  who  has  made  the  Church,  of  which  Christ
is  the  head,  to  be  the  centre  of  a  new  and  glorious
world.

In  1  3-14  Paul  begins,  then,  with  praise  to  God  who  from  all
eternity  has  graciousl]^  chosen  his  people  to  salvation  ;  in  1  15-^3
he  expresses  his  special  joy  that  his  readers  are  among  those
who  have  thus  been  chosen.  2i-io  brings  into  a  strong  and
viviti  light  the  absoluteness  of  the  contrast  between  their  former
and  their  present  state,  and  the  fact  that  the  happy  change  is
due  to  divine  grace  alone  ;  further,  it  is  taught  that  the  distinc-
tion between  the  uncircumcised  and  the  circunic'  .cd  people  of
the  promise  has  been  obliterated  by  the  blood  of  C  hrist  (2  i  j  i  j),
and  that,  in  the  new  spiritual  building,  where  Christ  is  the  chief
corner  stone,  those  who  were  afar  off  are  incorporated  as  well
as  those  who  were  nigh  (214-22);  there  are  no  more  strangers
and  foreigners.  To  prix;laim  the  full  and  unimpaired  interest
of  the  Gentiles  in  the  gospel  has  been  the  noble  function  divinely
assigned  to  Paul  (3  1-12) ;  his  readers  must  not  allow  his  present
tribulations  to  shake  their  confidence  in  any  vay  (813).  His
prayer  (3  n^.\  closing  with  a  dcxology  (20/),  is  that  they
may  ever  go  on  growing  in  faith,  in  love,  and  in  knowledge,
until  at  last  nothing  more  is  wanting  in  them  of  all  the  fulness
of  CJod.

4  1-16,  at  the  beginning  of  the  practical  section,  urges  the
readers  to  give  practical  effect  to  the  union  that  has  thus  been
brought  about,  to  walk  worthily  of  the  Christian  vocation,  and
each  to  take  his  part  in  the  common  task  according  to  the  measure


3.  Chiirch
of  Colossae.


of  his  power,  so  that  the  whole  may  ever  grow  up  more  fully  into
Christ.  What  yet  remains  of  the  old  man  and  heathen  life
must  be  sedulously  put  away  (4  17-24) ;  truthfulness,  uprightness,
and  kindliness  of  speech  and  act  must  be  cultivated  as  rhe  true
bases  of  social  life  (4  25-32)  ;  of  these  we  have  the  best  examples
in  the  love  of  God  and  Christ  (5  i/?).  In  5  3-21  personal  holiness
and  the  walk  of  believers  as  wise  and  pure  children  of  light  are
further  descriljed.  In  5  22-t;g  the  duties  of  members  of  house-
holds in  their  several  places  and  relations  are  treated  in  the
same  order  as  in  Col.  3i3^;  and  the  very  elaborate  figure  of
the  Christian  panoply  in  t>  10-20  with  the  exhortation  to  carry
on  the  warfare  against  the  powers  of  evil  with  counige  and
boldness — a  warfare  in  which  he  too  would  be  so  glad  to  join
them  as  a  free  man— forms  a  fine  close.

CoLOSSK  {q.  -i'. )  lay  not  far  from  the  larger  cities  of
Laodicea  and  Hierajjolis,  with  the  churches  of  which
the  Colossian  (christians,  it  is  clear,  had
kept  up  intimate  relations  from  the  first
(Col.  2 1  4  13 15^  ).  These  churches  were
not  among  those  which  had  been  directly  founded  by
Paul;  according  to  2i  (123)  they  had  not  yet  seen
him  personally;  their  founder,  according  to  4 12/.  I7,
had  been  a  certain  h'.paphras.  The  fact  that  at  the
time  when  the  epistle  is  Ixjing  written  Epaphras  is  with
Paul  of  itself  goes  far  to  prove  that  he  stood  to  him  in
the  relation  of  a  disciple  ;  in  any  case  Paul  recognises
the  gosixil  proclaimed  by  him  as  the  true  one  and  not
requiring  correction.  When  these  churches  were  founded
is  not  said  ;  but  they  do  not  seem  to  have  had  a  long
history  ;  we  may  venture  to  fi.\  the  date  somewhere
between  the  years  55  and  60  A.D.  As,  according  to
4  11/.,  their  founder  was  a  Gentife  Christian,  we  may
take  it  that  the  great  majority  of  the  meml)ers  also
were  (Jentile  Christians,  an  inference  that  is  enforced  by
1  21  27/  'J  13.  Thus  Paul  had  a  double  right  to  regard
them  as  belonging  to  his  missionary  field.

Epiiksus (q.7\)  is  the  city in which, according  to
Actsl98io  (cp  '2O31),  Paul  for  more  than  two  years —

4 Of  Pnh«aii« ■iPPr«x>">''itely  between  55  and  58  A.D.

*•  "^  ^P'»«»^B-  (see  Chronology,  §68/.)  -in  the  teeth
of  great  hindrances  (see  i  Cor.1532),  had  lalxmred  with
unwonted  success  in  the  cause  of  the  gospel,  which.


until  his  arrival,  h.ad  been  practically  unheard  of  there.
At  last  the  riot  stirred  up  by  Demetrius  the  silversmith,
descriljed  in  Acts  1923^,exi)osed  his  life  to  such  serious
danger  (2  Cor.  \Z//.)  that  he  was  comf»elled  to  abandon
the  city  for  gtxKl,  and  l>etake  himself  elsewhere  — to
Macedonia,  in  the  first  instance  (.Acts20t).  The  events
of  that  period  did  not  prove  fatal  to  the  church  at
Ephesus  :  in  Rev.  2 1-7  it  stands  at  the  head  of  the
churches  in  Asia,  and  it  is  highly  probable  that  Rom.  16
is  a  fragment  of  a  letter  addressed  to  it  by  Paul  (.\quila
and  Pri.sca,  x:  3/,  as  well  as  Epaenetus.  'who  is  the
first-fruits  of  Asia  unto  Christ,'  v.  5,  are  among  the
saluted).  In  any  case  the  apostle  kept  up  a  lively
interest  in  this  church,  and  maintained  intimate  rela-
tions with  it.  The  writer  of  the  '  we-source,"  however,  in
Acts 20 17-30,  descriljc-s  a  most  affecting  leave-taking
between  Paul  and  the  elders  of  Ephesus,  whom  the
former  had  asketl  to  meet  him  at  Miletus  as  he  was  on
his  way  to  Jerusalem,  and  plainly  he  regards  it  as  having
bt>en  final.  Of  what  elements  the  Ephesian  church  was
composed  we  have  no  means  of  judging,  apart  from
Rom.  16  ;  the  probability  Is  that  the  majority  were
converted  pagans  ;  but  it  is  nevertheless  certain  that  the
Jews  in  Ephesus  were  numerous,  atid  we  can  well
suppose  that  others  of  their  number  V)esides  Aquila  and
Prisca  had  joined  themselves  to  the  company  of  believers
in  Jesus  as  the  risen  .Messiah.  In  fact,  when  Paul,  in
Acts2029^,  In  looking  forward  to  the  time  after  his
departure,  speaks  of  the  apjjcarance  of  fal.se  teachers
and  ravening  wolves  in  Ephesus,  Judaisers  may  very
Weil  have  been  meant.  Unfortunately  the  references
to  Ephesus  in  the  Pastoral  Epistles  ( i  Tim.  1  3  2  Tim.
lis  18  4 12)  throw  no  light  on  the  subsetjuent  history  of
Christianity  there.  All  we  can  be  sure  of  is  that  the
apostle,  after  so  long  a  residence,  must  have  become
acquainted  in  a  very  special  manner  with  the  peculiarities
of  the  situation.

Even  without  any  special  occasion,  perhaps,  Paul
might  very  well  have  written  an  epistle  to  the  church
5  Occasion  °'^  ^"lossie  at  the  time  he  did.  Its
of  Col  founder  had  informed  him  of  the  orderly
walk  and  steadfastness  in  the  faith  of  its
members,  and  doubtless  also  of  their  sympathy  with
himself.  It  was  natural  etiough,  therefore,  that  he
should  at  least  assure  them  of  his  gladness  over  the
good  beginnings  they  had  made,  all  the  more  as  a
suitable  opportunity  had  offered  itself  for  communicating
with  them.  Onesimus  (49)  was  lx.'ing  sent  back  to
his  master,  Philemon,  with  a  short  letter  ;  Tychicus,  a
member  of  the  Pauline  circle,  was  accompanying  him,
and  it  was  almost  a  matter  of  course  that  he  should  be
entrusted  with  letters  of  introduction  to  the  churches
whose  hospitality  he  expected  to  enjo}'.  The  epistle  to
the  Colossians,  however,  is  more  than  a  mt-re  occasional
writing.  The  probability  is  that  Paul's  determination
)  write  it  was  formed  immediately  on  receiving  the
conmmnication  from  Epaphras  as  to  the  condition
of  Christianity  in  the  Eycus  valley ;  false  teachers  had
made  their  appearance  in  Coloss;t,  and  Epaphras
himself  felt  unable,  single-handed,  to  cojx'  with  their
sophistries.  To  deal  with  these  is  the  writer's  main
object;  even  where  he  is  not  expressly  polemical,  as  in
chaps.  1  and  3,  his  aim  is  to  establish  a  correct  under-
standing of  the  gospel  as  against  their  wisdom,  falsely
so  called.

If  the  picture  of  the  Colossian  false  teachers  does  not

present  such  well-marked  features  as  that  of  the  CJalatian

6 False ^'^'^^  apostles,  there  is  no  occasion  for  sur-

teachers P*^'^^-  ^""^ \^av\  knew  the  latter  personally,

the  others  only  by  hearsay.  That  the

Colossian  agitators  must  have  belonged  to  the  same  class

as  others  that  we  read  of  in  other  places  is  too  much  to

assume. Many  of  the  observations  of  Paul  would  apply

well  to  Judaisers — as  for  example  the  marked  emphasis

with  which  it  is  said  (2 11/.)  that  the  Colossians  are

circumcised  with  a  circumcision  not  made  with  hands,

862


COLOSSIANS  AND  EPHESIANS


and  (214)  that  the  handwriting  against  us  has  lieen  nailed
to  the  cross  and  so  cancelled.  In  particular  the  exhorta-
tion of  2 16,  '  I^t  no  man  judge  you  in  meat  or  in  drink,
or  in  respect  of  a  feast  day  or  a  new  moon  or  a  sabbath
day,'  seems  decisive  as  to  the  Jewish  character  of  the
new  teachers  ;  in  this  connection  the  cjuestion  of  220  (cp
28)  cannot  fail  to  suggest  Gal.  43-9,  and  one  is  strongly
inclined  to  presume  the  condition  of  matters  in  Colossas
to  have  been  similar  to  that  in  Galatia.  Only,  it  is
commands  and  precepts  of  men  that  are  being  imposed
with  a  'touch  not,  taste  not,  handle  not'  (2822),  it  is
an  '  arbitrary  religion,'  {ideXodpijaKia)  that  is  Ixiing  thrust
upon  the  Colossians  (223) — in  such  terms  I'aul  could
hardly  have  described  a  return  to  compliance  with  the
injunctions  of  the  O  T  law.  As  the  ascetic  interest

(223,  'severity  towards  the  body'  ;  21823,  'humility')
has  a  foremost  place  with  the  false  teachers,  many  take
them  to  have  been  Christian  Essenes  or  ascetics  of  an
Esscne  character  (cp  Es.sknes,  §  3/).  But  it  has  to
l)e  rememlxired  that  ascetic  tendencies  were  very
widely  spread  at  that  time,  and  that  they  first  came
into Judaism from without.  According to 28

the  agitators  gave  themselves  out  to  tx;  philosophers.
Paul  indeed  regards  their  wisdom  as  '  vain  deceit '
— according  to  2 18  they  'are  vainly  puffed  up  by  their
fleshly  mind,'  and  with  deceiving  speeches  seek  to
lead  their  hearers  astray — and  when  he  so  strikingly
emphasises  that  in  Christ  Christians  already  possess  the
'truth'  ('all  wisdom  and  spiritual  understanding,'  "all
the  treasures  of  wisdom  and  knowledge,'  1691026^
23),  and  so  zealously  points  out  what  is  the  right  way  to
perfection  (I28  814  4 12),  all  that  we  can  infer  from  this
is,  that  the  innovators  in  Colossns  came  forward  with  a
claim  to  be  able  to  lead  their  followers  from  faith  to
knowledge,  true  wisdom,  and  a  perfect  Christianity.
In  doing  so  they  appealed  to  visions  they  had  seen  (2  18)  ;
their  knowledge  of  the  celestial  world  entitled  them,  they
contended,  formally  to  set  up  a  worship  of  angels,  by
which,  however,  Christ  was  thrust  out  from  his  central
position  as  the  only  redeemer  (219).  Paul  supplies  no
details  of  their  speculations  as  to  the  powers  and  functions
of  these  celestial  spirits  ;  but  any  such  theosophy  as  this
cannot  be  called  Jewish  in  any  specific  sense.  How  far
a  religiously  objectionable  dualistic  view  of  the  universe
lay  at  the  bottom  of  the  peculiar  doctrines  and  precepts
of  these  men  will  probably  never  be  known  ;  Isut  that
Paul  should  raise  his  voice  so  earnestly  against  them
while  taking  up  an  attitude  so  different  towards  the
'Essenising'  weak  brethren  in  Rome  (Rom.  14/) —
although  they  do  not  appear  to  have  attacked  him
p)ersonally  at  all — shows  that  he,  for  his  part,  discerned
in  them  a  spirit  that  was  foreign  to  Christianity  and
hostile  to  it.  As  their  philosophical  tendencies  and  their
worship  of  angels  do  not  fit  in  with  the  theory  that  they
were  Jews  (here  Ale.xandrianism  helps  us  no  better  than
Essenism),  it  will  doubtless  be  lx,st  to  regard  these
Colossian  false  teachers  as  baptised  '  mysteriosophists,"
who  sought  to  bring  their  ascetic  tendencies  with  them
into  the  new  religion,  and  had  found  means  to  satisfy
their  polytheistic  instincts  by  the  forms  of  a  newly-
invented  worship  of  angels.  In  doing  so  they  prided
themselves  on  their  compliance  with  all  the  demands  of
the  OT,  though  in  detail  they  of  course  interpreted
these  in  an  absolutely  arbitrary  way.  It  was  this  method
of  an  affected  interpretation  of  the  OT,  claimed  by
them  to  be  a  guarantee  of  wisdom,  that  gave  them
something  of  a  Judaising  appearance  ;  but  in  so  far  as
their  ideas  had  any  individuality  (as,  for  example,  the
notion  that  between  man  and  the  extra-mundane  God
there  is  a  series  of  intermediate  beings,  and  that  the  thing
of  essential  importance  is  to  secure  the  fav6ur  of  these
mediators  or  to  know  how  to  avoid  their  evil  influences)
they  were  of  heathen  not  Jewish  origin.

The  Pauline  authorship  of  Colossians  has  been  denied
in  various quarters since Mayerhoff  (1838), and, in
particular, by the Tubingen School en masse. The
863


external  testimony  to  its  genuineness  is  the  best  possible


7.  Genuine-
ness :  vocabu-
lary, etc.


— ^ever  since  a  collection  of  Pauline
letters  existed  at  all,  Colossians  seems
to  have  Ixjen  invariably  included.  In
form,  nevertheless,  the  epistle  presents
many  striking  peculiarities.  It  contains  a  large  numljer
of  words  which  Paul  nowhere  else  uses— amongst  them,
especially,  long  composites  such  as  iridavoXoyia  (24),
ifijiaTei'eiv  (2 18)  ;  and  on  the  other  hand  many  of  the
apostle's  most  current  expressions,  such  as  fri,  did,  Apa,
are  absent,  and  in  the  structure  of  the  sentences  there  are
fewer  anacoloutha  than  elsewhere  in  Paul,  as  well  as  a
greater  number  of  long  periods  built  up  of  participial
and  relative  clau.ses.  These  difficulties,  however,

apply  only  to  the  first  half  of  the  epistle,  and  even  here
the  genuine  Pauline  element  is  still  more  in  evidence
than  the  peculiarities  just  indicated  ;  the  difticulty  and
obscurity  of  the  style,  so  far  as  old  age  or  passing  ill-
health  may  not  be  regarded  as  sufficient  explanation,
can  be  accounted  for  on  the  ground  that  Paul  had  not
so  lively  and  vivid  a  realisation  of  the  exact  opponents
with  whom  he  had  to  do,  as  in  the  case  of  those  of
Galatia or Corinth.  But in substance  also the

8  Ideas  ^'^P'^"^'*^  'i''^^  been  held  to  be  un-Pauline.  It
has  lx;en  held  to  represent  the  transition
stage  between  the  Pauline  and  the  Johannine  theology
— a  further  development  of  the  Pauline  conception  of
the  dignity  of  Christ  (lisjT-),  in  the  direction  of  the
Alexandrian  Logos-doctrine,  according  to  which  he  is
regarded  as  the  centre  of  the  cosmos,  the  first-born  of
all  creation  (I15),  no  longer  as  the  first-born  among
many  brethren  only  (Rom.  829).  Eormula;  like  that  in
29,  '  in  him  dwells  all  the  fulness  of  the  Godhead  bodily,"
it  is  urged,  have  a  somewhat  gnostic  ring  ;  the  repre-
sentation of  the  Church  as  being  the  body  of  Christ  ( 1  24
219),  further,  is  said  to  be  post-Pauline,  whilst  Paul  him-
self never  gave  ethical  precepts  in  such  detail  as  we  find
in  3i3f.

In  answer  to  all  this,  it  can  hardly  be  denied  that
Colossians exhibits a new development of Pauline

9.  Genuineness  f^-^^^'f^^y:  hut  why  should  not  Paul

...  J hmiself  have  carried  it  on  to  this  de-

not  disproved. ,  . . ^  ...

^  velopment  in  view  of  new  errors,  which

demanded  new  statements  of  truth?  The  fact  is,  that
in  some  cases,  probabl}',  he  has  simply  appropriated
and  applied  to  Christ  formulre  (as,  say,  in  29)  which
the  false  teachers  had  employed  with  reference  to  their
mediating  beings  ;  and  his  theology  as  a  whole  never
became  fully  rounded  and  complete  in  such  a  sense  as
to  exclude  fresh  points  of  view  or  new  expressions.

Unmistakable  traces  of  an  undoubtedly  later  agecannot
be  shown  in  the  epistle,  while  whole  sections,  such  as
chap.  4,  can  hardly  l)e  understood  tis  the  work  even  of
the  most  gifted  imitator.  None  of  the  gnostic  systems
of  the  second  century  known  to  us  can  be  shown  to
be  present  in  Colossians,  whilst  the  false  teachers  with
whom  the  epistle  makes  us  acquainted  could  have  made
their  appearance  within  the  Christian  Church  in  the
year  60  a.d.  just  as  easily  as  in  120.

There  seems  no  cogent  reason  even  for  the  invention
of  a  mediating  hypothesis — whether  that  of  Ewald,  which
makes  Timothy,  joint-writer  of  Colossians,  responsible
for  certain  un-Pauline  expressions,  or  that  of  Holtz«-
mann,  according  to  which  an  epistle  of  Paul  was  gone
over  in  the  second  century  by  the  author  of  Ephesians.
With  the  one  hypothesis  it  is  impossible  to  figure  clearly
to  oneself  how  the  work  of  writing  the  letter  was  gone
about  ;  and  the  other  it  is  impossible  to  accept  unless
we  choose  to  admit  irreconcilable  traits  in  the  picture
of  the  false  teachers — as,  perhaps,  that  Paul  himself
wrote  only  against  '  Essenising '  ascetics,  whilst  the
theosophic  angelology  was  due  entirely  to  the  inter-
polator, who  had  other  opponents  in  his  mind.  ICven
in  its  most  difficult  parts,  however,  the  connection  in
the  epistle  is  not  so  loose  as  ever  to  force  upon  one
the  impression  that  there  must  have  been  interpolation  ;

864


COLOSSIANS  AND  EPHESIANS


»


and,  as  regards  certain  of  the  difficulties  raised  by
criticism,  it  is  to  be  remarked  that  caution  is  always
necessary  in  dealing  with  literary  productions  of  a  jx-'riod
so  obscure.  Colossians  may  be  Pauline  quite  as  well
as  Pliilippians  or  i  Thessalonians.  The  number  of  those
who  doubt  its  genuineness  does  not  grow.

Colossians  was  written  in  captivity  (431018),  at  the
same  time  as  Thilemon,  probably  from  Rome  (not  from
_  .  Cifsarea),  alxiul  63  A.D.  The  apostle  is
surrounded  by  friends — Epaphras,  Mark,
Aristarchus,  Uenias,  Luke,  Jesus  Justus.  Whether
Philippians  was  written  before  Colossians  and  Philemon,
or  whether  Philippians  should  be  regarded  as  the  apostles
last  writing  is  diflicult  to  decide,  quite  apart  from  the
question  of  a  second  captivity.  The  Chrbtological
portion  of  Philippians  ('24 J^.)  has  much  in  common
with  Colossi.ins.

If  Ephesians  also  is  really  the  work  of  Paul  (see  below,

§15/), it must have been written almost contem-

T?  1 ♦■ poraneouslv  \\ith  Colossians. It  is  true,

t E h '"'^'-''-■'^' ^^'""^  '" *  "'•  ^'' '"^  '" ''^''-  ••'•
° P ■ Timothy  is  named  as  Joint-writer,  while

he  is  not  mentioned  in  Ephesians.  P'rom  this,  however,
it  cannot  lie  argued  tliat  the  situations  were  materially
ditt'erent,  any  more  than  it  could  be  argued  that  Colos-
sians and  Philemon  must  l)e  of  different  date  because  in
the  list  of  those  who  send  greetings  in  I'hilcm.  23/.  we  do
not  find  the  Jesus  Justus  named  in  Col.  4ii,  or  Ixjcause,
in  Philem.  23/.,  Epaphras  is  called  a  fellow-prisoner  and
Aristarchus  a  fellow-worker,  whilst  in  Col.  4  10^  Aristar-
chus, as  a  fellow-prisoner,  heads  the  list  of  those  who  send
greetings,  and  ICpaphras  .seems  to  be  regarded  as  one  of
the  fellow -workers.  In  Eph.  3i  13  6  20  also  Paul  is  a
prisoner,  yet  as  much  burdened  with  work  as  in  Col.  1
24-29  43/  Tychicus  is  introduced  in  Eph.  621/.  as
bearer  of  the  letter,  and  as  one  who  will  Ije  able  to  give
further  particulars  as  to  the  apostle's  state,  in  almost  the
same  words  as  in  Col.  4?/.;  and  although  there  is  no
mention  of  Onesimus  in  Ephesians,  we  must  hold  that
both  epistles  refer  to  the  same  mission.

The  frecjuent  verbal  coincidences  between  Colossians
and  I'lphesians  even  in  points  in  which  the  phraseology
is  a  matter  of  indifference  (cp,  for  example,  Eph.  1 15/.
and  Col.  1 3/ 9;  Eph.  21  and  (Jol.  1  21  213;  I'.ph.  620
and  Col.  434),  unless  we  have  here  a  case  of  deliberate
imitation  by  a  later  writer,  are  intelligible  only  if  we
assume  the  one  letter  to  have  Ixien  written  when  Paul's
mind  was  still  full  of  the  thoughts  and  expressions  of
the  other.  Of  Colossians  the  only  portions  not  finding
a  parallel  in  Ephesians  are :  the  jx)leinical  section,
2 1-34  (although  indeed  2 10-14  is  again  an  exception),
and  the  greetings  in  4  lo-iSa  ;  of  Ephesians,  on  the
other  hand,  the  only  portions  not  finding  a  parallel  in
Colossians  are  :  the  introduction  ( 1  3-14),  the  liturgically-
phrased  section  (813-21),  the  exhortation  to  jx-aceful  co-
operation (4 1-16),  and  the  figure  of  the  spiritual  armour,
although  in  this  case  also  some  reminiscences  are  not
wholly  wanting  in  Colossians.

That  the  one  letter  is  a  pedantic  reproduction  of  the
other  cannot  be  said.  If  we  possessed  only  one  of  them
it  could  not  be  called  a  mere  compilation  or  paraphrase.
The  parallel  passages  to  Col.  1 ,  for  example,  lie  scattered
up  and  down  Eph.  1-4  (or  5)  in  a  wholly  different  order,
and  there  is  no  trace  of  any  definite  method  according
to  which  the  one  writing  has  l)cen  used  for  the  other.
There  is  no  sort  of  agreement  among  critics  on  the  ques-
tion as  to  which  of  the  two  is  the  original  form  ;  but  the
present  writer  inclines  to  consider  Ephesians  the  later,
partly  Ixjcause  in  Colossians  the  various  details  and
peculiarities  are  Ijetter  accounted  for  by  the  needs  of  a
church  not  yet  far  advanced  ethically,  and  ex|x>sed  to
danger  from  false  teaching,  and  it  would  h:;ve  Ijct-n  rather
contrary  to  what  might  have  been  expected  if  Paul  had
first  sought  to  meet  these  very  special  needs  by  means
of  a  letter  of  a  more  general  character.

Of  all  Paul's  epistles  addressed  to  churches,  Ephesians


is certainly the least epistolary in character. One
_.  . vainly  examines the  circumstances  of

f  E  h  '^"^  *°  ^'''"'"  '^  '*  addressed  to  find

^  '  occasion  for  its  comp<Jsition.  The
epistle,  which  has  a  |jersonal  tinge  in  only  a  few
places,  could  have  been  written  etjually  well  to  almost
any  other  church  ;  it  is  more  of  a  sermon  than  of  a
letter — a  sermon  on  the  greatness  of  that  (jospel  which
is  able  to  bridge  over  all  the  old  contradictions  in
humanity,  and  on  the  grandeur  of  that  one  Church  of
Christ  by  which  salvation  is  made  sure,  and  on  the
precepts  by  which  the  memljers  of  this  Church  ought  to
regulate  their  lives.  One  conmientator  imleed  g(X"s  so
far  as  to  say  that  in  Ephesians  '  we  have  the  most
mature  and  sustained  of  all  the  statements  of  (  hristian
doctrine  which  have  come  down  to  us  from  tlie  hand
of  the  great  ajxistle.'  Other  students  may  jx-rhaps
think  Galatians  and  Corinthians  more  vivid  and  jx)wer-
ful,  Romans  richer,  Philii)pians  more  sympathetic,  but
certainly  so  far  as  the  thing  can  be  done  at  all  within
the  compass  of  one  short  letter,  Paul  has  laid  down  in
Ephesians  something  like  an  exhaustive  outline  of  his
Gospel.  Viewed  on  its  anti-Jewish  or  supra-Jewish
side,  however,  it  is  much  too  slightly  wrought  out.

With  regard  to  the  cjuestion,  to  whom  Ephesians  was

addressed, the  only  thing  quite  certain  is, that  if  the

„ ,  epistle  was  written  by  Paul  it  cannot

■ °  ^ 5*°^  have  Ix-en  addressed  to  Ephesus. I'.ven

aaoreBsea. ^^^^^  ,^„  ^^^  ^^^^  ^^-^  ^^  ^j^^  apologists

it  remains  incredible  that  he  should  have  written  to  a
church  to  which  he  had  devoted  three  years  of  his  life
and  to  which,  even  after  his  final  parting,  his  heart  still
yearned  so  tenderly,  in  so  cold  a  tone  as  here, — without
a  word  of  greeting  to  anybody,  without  reference  to  any
of  their  common  memories,  in  short  without  a  single
individualising  note  of  any  kind.  Even  apart  from  1  15
and  82-4  no  one  could  suspect  that  the  ajxistle  is  here
speaking  to  a  church  with  which  his  accjuaintance  was
so  intimate  as  it  was  with  the  Ephesians.  If  his  ac-
quaintance with  the  Colossians  was  formed  only  by
report,  every  reader  of  the  present  epistle  must  hold  the
same  to  be  true  of  this.  If  the  words  '  in  Ephesus'  in
1  I  are  to  \x  held  to  t)e  original,  we  have  here  no  com-
position of  Paul  the  prisoner,  writing  in  63  A.D.,  but
the  work  of  a  later  hand  who  has  artificially  adapted
himself  to  the  part  of  the  apostle  but  who  wholly  failed
to  reali.se  how  grossly  improbable  were  the  relations
between  Paul  and  the  Ephesians  as  indicated  by  him.
But  these  decisive  words — iv  'E<p4(T(f) — are  critically
open  to  the  gravest  suspicion.  It  is  true  that  from  the
date  of  the  Muratorian  Canon  (about  180)  onwards
they  are  attested  by  witnesses  innumerable ;  but  an
older  authority — Marcion — about  140,  cannot  have
read  them  where  they  now  stand,  since  he  took  the
epistle  to  Ix;  addressed  to  the  Laodiceans  ;  they  are
absent  also  from  both  of  the  oldest  extant  MSS.  (N  and
B)  ;  and  learned  Church  fathers,  such  as  Origen  in  the
third  century  and  Basil  in  the  fourth,  agree  in  their
omission.  Not  till  the  fifth  century  do  we  find  the
words  regularly  established  in  the  recognised  texts.
But  it  is  highly  improbable  that  an  original  reading  tu
'E<pdcrcf}  should  ever  have  come  to  be  deleted  (let  us
suppose)  on  critical  grounds  ;  for  the  exercise  of  criticism
in  this  sense  was  unknown  in  the  second  century,  and,
if  it  had  lx.'en,  its  exercise  here  would  not  have  lx*en
content  with  a  mere  negative,  but  would  have  gone  on
to  substitute  the  reading  that  was  considered  to  l)e  more
appropriate.  It  is  absolutely  impossible  that  the  oldest
text  should  not  have  contained  the  name  of  some  place  ;
a  name  is  rendered  quite  indispensable  by  the  context
'  to  the  saints  which  are  ..."

The onlv  remaining alternative is that we should

A  ip fv  V .  supixjse the original name to have

14.  A  UatnoUC  accidentally disappeared and that  ^v

" ■  'E^'(T(f>  was  conjecturally insertetl in

its place, the determining consideration being that

866


COLOSSIANS  AND  BPHBSIANS


Paul  must  surely,  once  at  least  in  his  life,  have  written  a
letter  to  his  beloved  Ephesians.  If  Marcion  read  iu
AaodiK(i(/.  instead  c."  iv  'Kcpeffip,  it  was  only  because  he
thought  this  a  preferable  conjecture  ;  what  he  had  in
his  mind  was  Col.  4 16,  where  an  epistle  to  the  I^iodi-
ceans  is  spoken  of,  w  hich  the  Colossians  also  are  bidden
obtain  a  reading  of.  'I'he  letter  alluded  to  must
have  been  nearly  contemporaneous  with  that  to  the
Colossians  ;  we  may  venture  to  conjecture  that  the  then
conditions  in  Laodicea  were  very  similar  to  those  in
Coloss.e,  so  that  on  the  present  assumption  the  corre-
spondences between  tlie  two  letters  become  easily
explicable.  Tychicus  then  also  will  become  the  bearer
of  both  letters.  Only,  on  the  other  side  again,  it  is  not
easy  to  understand  in  this  case  how  it  is  that  Paul  treats
the  Colossians  with  so  much  greater  intimacy  and
cordiality  than  he  treats  their  neighbours  the  Laodiceans  ;
how,  further,  he  should  invite  comparisons  b)'  bidding
the  churches  exchange  letters  with  each  other  ;  and,
lastly,  how  in  spite  of  the  laljour  expended  in  behalf  of
the  Laodiceans  by  F.paphras  (Col.  4  13),  Paul  should  not
think  it  necessary  to  enclose  a  greeting  from  him.
The  attitude  of  Ephesians,  with  its  absence  of  explicit
and  detailed  reference  to  the  circumstances  and  stage  of
growth  of  its  readers,  is,  on  the  assumption  of  its  being
a  Pauline  letter,  intelligible  only  if  its  destination  excluded
such  individual  reference  ;  in  other  words,  if  it  was  really
not  addressed  to  any  one  church,  but  was  a  circular
intended  for  a  number  of  Gentile  Christian  churches  (in
the  jjresent  case  in  Asia  Minor,  or,  more  precisely,  in
I'hrygia)^ — which  Tychicus  on  the  occasion  of  his
journey  to  Colossoe  was  to  visit,  conveying  to  them  at
the  same  time  also  a  direct  message  from  the  great
apostle  of  the  Gentiles.  It  is  not,  after  all,  beyond

possibility,  however,  that  Ephesians  may  Ix;  the  epistle
referred  to  in  Col.  4i6;  for  there  it  is  called,  not  the
epistle  fo  Laodicea,  but  the  epistle  y>v)w  Laodicea,  by
which  expression  may  have  been  intended  nothing  more
than  a  copy  of  ICphesians  to  be  obtained  at  Laodicea.
In  the  original  superscri|)tion,  if  this  be  so,  %ve  may  sup-
pose Paul  to  have  named  the  province  or  provinces  to
the  churches  of  which  he  wished  to  address  himself  (cp
1  Pet.  1 1 )  ;  the  epistle  would  then  have  an  almost
'  catholic '  character,  and,  in  point  of  fact,  next  to
Colossians,  i  Peter,  of  all  the  other  NT  epistles,  is  the
one  that  comes  nearest  Ephesians  in  substance.

The  whole  preceding  discussion  (§  13/)  falls  to  the
ground  if,  as  was  done  by  the  Tiibingen  school  and  still
15  O-pnuin  '^  done  by  many  recent  writers,  the
Pauline  authorship  is  denied.  The  ex-
ternal testimony  is  the  best  possible :
from  NLircion's  time  onwards  the  epistle  is  included  in
all  lists  of  Paul's  writings,  and  from  the  second  century
onwards  the  citations  from  it  are  exceptionally  fre(|uent.
On  the  other  hand,  in  form  and  style  it  is  removed  still
further  than  Colossians  from  the  manner  of  the  earlier
epistles  of  Paul  ;  the  nimiber  of  dna^  \ey6fj.eva  is
astonishingly  great  ;  whilst  in  Paul  the  devil  is  called
Satan,  here  (Eph.  427  611)  he  is  called  5id/3o\os  or
(22)  '  prince  of  the  kingdom  of  the  air '  -.^  the  structure
of  the  sentences  is  strikingly  lumViering  ;  substantives
closely  allied  in  meaning  are  constantly  linked  together
by  prepositions — especially  ^v — or  b)-  the  use  of  the
genitive,  an  expedient  that  conduces  neither  to  freedom
nor  to  clearness  of  style.  At  the  same  time  the  epistle
has  a  numl)er  of  characteristically  I'auline  expressions,
including  some  that  do  not  occur  in  Colossians,  and  at
every  step  genuinely  Pauline  turns  of  thought  -  are
recalled.

The  absence  of  concrete  details  in  Ephesians  has  al-
ready been  noted  ;  but,  if  it  lie  true  that  we  have  here
a  circular  letter,  the  standards  which  we  might  apply
to  Corinthians  or  Philippians cease  to  be  applicable.


2  In  Paul  he  is  called  also,  however,  ^fAi'ap  (2Cor.  6  15)  and
'  the  god  of  this  world '  (I'i.  4  4). See  Belial.


Peculiarities in statement of individual doctrines  or

in  theological  outlook  generally,  indifference  of  attitude

upon  controverted points  of the Pauline  period, and

a  preference  for  the  ideas  of  the  old  Catholicism  that

w;is  beginning  to  take  shape  cannot  be  denied  ; but  here

again, as with Colossians, the case is met if we

postulate  a  growth  in  the apostle himself, under the

influence  of  new  conditions. We fail  to find  in  the

epistle  any  direct evidence  that the  writer is a man

of  the second Christian generation, addressing men

who  have  fx;en  born  Christians  ;  on  the  contrary,  the

readers  are  addressed  as  persons  who  had  formerly  been

heathens.

The main obstacle to  the traditional view  of  the

authorship  of  the  epistle  is  found  in  4 1 1  2 20  3 5. In

ifi  TT-««-+„i^  4 II,  in  the  enumeration  of  church
16.  Uncertain. „-  .,  ,.  .  . , .,

officers, the  peculiar  spiritual  gifts  to

which  so  great  prominence  is  given  in  i  Cor.  12  /.
are  almost  entirely  passed  over  ;  in  220  it  is  the  glory  of
the  Church  that  she  is  '  built  on  the  foundation  of
apostles  and  prophets,  Christ  Jesus  himself  being  the  chief
corner  stone,'  and  in  85,  as  if  there  had  never  been  any
such  thing  as  a  dispute  in  Jerusalem  or  in  Antioch,  the
present  time  is  spoken  of  as  that  in  which  the  (ientiles"
equality  in  privilege  has  been  '  spiritually  revealed  to
his  holy  apostles  and  prophets."  In  the  mouth  of  the
apostle  who  has  devoted  the  unremitting  efforts  of  a
lifetime  to  the  establishment  of  this  equality  of  privilege,
this  lixst  expression  has  a  peculiar  sound.  In  a  disciple
of  the  apostle,  on  the  other  hand,— one  who  has  in  view
the  accomplished  fact,  the  one  and  indivisible  Church
for  which  all  the  apostles  and  prophets  are  equally
sacred  authorities — the  phrases  quoted  are  natural
enough  ;  and  on  the  whole  the  hypothesis  that  a  Pauline
Christian,  intimately  familiar  with  the  Pauline  epistles,
especially  with  Colossians,  writing  about  90  A. D. ,  has
in  Ephesians  sought  to  put  in  a  plea  for  the  true  Catholi-
cism in  the  meaning  of  Paul,  and  in  his  name,  is  free
from  any  serious  difficulty.  It  is  very  hard  to  decide  ;
perhaps  the  question  ought  to  be  left  open  as  not  yet
ripe  for  settlement,  and  Ephesians  in  the  meantime  used
only  with  caution  when  the  Pauline  system  is  being
construed.

Like  the  Pauline  epistles  in  general,  Colossians  and
Ephesians  are  among  the  test  preserved  parts  of  the  N'T.
They  have  hardly  at  all  been  subjected


17.  Text  of
Col.  and  Eph.


to  '  smoothing  '  revision  ;  the  majority

of  the  variants  (which,  it  must  be  said,
are  very  numerous)  are  clearly  mere  cojiyists'  errors.
At  the  same  time  the  readings  vacillate  at  several
important  points — e.g.,  (Eph.  89)  between  Koivuvia
and  oLKovofxia,  (Col.  2 18)  between  &  fiT}  eopaKev  and  A
iopaKev,  (Col.  3 13)  between  xp«rr6s  and  Kvpios.  Influence
of  the  text  of  Ephesians  upon  Colossians  can  be  some-
times traced — e.j^. ,  Col.  36,  has  Ix.>en  supplied  from  I'.ph.
56.  The  obscurity  of  many  of  the  sentences  may  have
helped  to  protect  them  from  gratuitous  change  ;  in  any
case  the  exegete  of  cither  epistle  has  a  much  harder
task  than  the  text-critic.

H. J. Holtzmann,  Kritik  tier  Epheser  u. Kolosserhriefe,
{'T2),  a  most  careful  comparison  of  the  two  letters  with  each

other  and  with  those  Pauline  epistles  of
18.  Literature,  which  the  genuineness  may  be  regarded  as

certain.  Holtzmann's  hypothesis  Ls  that  in
Colossians  we  have  a  genuine  epistle  of  Paul  to  CoIossje,  which
has  been  expanded  by  later  interpolations ;  the  interpolator  is
the  author  of  theepistle  to  the  Kphesians, — a  Gentile  Christian,
of  Pauline  training,  who  belonged  to  the  post-apastolic  age.
Alb.  Klopper,  Der  Brie/ an  <iie  Colosser  Q%-2\  and  Der  Brie/
an  die  Kpheser(^(j\),  a  very  thorougli  if  somewhat  stilT  exposi-
tion :  Colo.ssians  is  held  to  be  genuine,  Ephesians  not.  H.  v.
Soden  in //'r,  1885,  pp.  320^,  497 i?:,  672^  and  1887,  103^,
^yzff.  substanti,illy  accepted  Holtzmann's  hypothesis,  and  in  the
ilC  ('91)  has  given  a  luminous  commentary.  H.  Oltramare,
Coiiim.  sur  les  £pitres  tie  S.  f^aul  aux  Colcssiens,  aux  Kph.  et
Phil..,  3  vols.,  1891-92,  maintains  the  genuineness  of  both
epistles.  In  the  ca.se  of  Colossians  this  had  already  been
argued  most  brilliantly  by  J.  B.  Lightfoot  (St.  Paul's  Epistles  to
the  Colossians  and  to  Philtnicm,  1875,  8th  ed.  1886).  J.  Mac-
pherson  in  Commentary  on  St.  Paufs  Ep.  to  the  Ephtsian.^.
('92),  has  sought  with  a  painstaking  care,  worthy  of  Lightfoot


867


COLOURS

himxelf,  to  vindicate  tradition  and  solve  the  difficulties  of  the
epUile.  Kr.  Haupt  (tiie  Ct/aHgfHuha/lshrit/t,  1899,  an  entirely
new  recast  of  the  Krit.-Kxfgtl.  Komm.  of  H.  A.  W.  Meyer)
takes,  as  regards  the  genuineness,  a  (HMiiiun  similar  to  that  of
the  present  article,  but  decides  agninsi  the  Komun  oriein  and
in  favour  of  Cxsarea.  Some  new  points  of  view  arc  offered  in
Zahn's  Einl.  i.  d.  N.T.,  1897,  310-398,  \wk\\  on  the  question  of
introducliun  and  on  details  uf  exegesis.  The  once  justly
pouular  commentaries  of  Kllicott  ('55)  and  Harless  (and  eel.
58)  on  Kphesians  are  now  somewhat  out  of  date.  .See  also
tne  (posthumous)  FrolenomtHa  to  the  Ef>f>.  to  the  Romans  a>ui
Kfhetians  ('95)  by  Prof.  J.  A.  Hort  ;  and  T.  K.  Ablxjtt,  Coiitni.
OH  F/>hesiaMs  and  Coiossians  ('97).  '  A.  J.

COLOURS. If  in  certain  branches  of  art  ihc  ancient
Hcliiiws  tell  far  l)chin(l  their  contemporaries,  they  were
Arti  tic "^'  without  artistic  feeling  ;  if  they  had
■- J.  no  drama,  they  were  not  devoid  of  dra-

*■  maticinstinct(CANTlCl,K.s.§7;  Poktk  AL
LiTKKAiURK,  §  5)  ;  .Hid  if,  through  no  inherent  fault
of  their  own,  they  were  unable  to  attain  any  degree  of
competency  in  the  hif^hest  form  of  art,  yet  they  had,  as
their  ix>etry  shows,  a  very  real  appreciation  of  -the
sublime  and  lieautiful.  The  neglect  to  cultivate  this
taste  was  a  necessary  consequence  of  the  effort  to  fulfil
the  ancient  conuiiand  in  V.x.'lO^, — a  command  which
would  of  course  apply  as  much  to  painting  .is  to  sculp-
ture— and  of  the  monotheism  to  which  they  subse-
quently attained.  (See  Rushin,  Tivo  Paths,  7  f.  ;
Perrot  and  ("hipiez.  History  of  Art  in  Sardinia,
Judica,  etc.,  1  III  /.  ;  and  cp  Atiikns,  §  i.)'

A  simple  style  of  decoration  and  the  use  of  some  of
the  dyes  and  dyed  stuffs  they  may  indeed  have  learned
at an early  date."'^ When, however,
the  post-e.xilic  writers  wish  to  descrilie
ecorations  of  an ideal  sanctuary,  they  are  obliged


2.  Decoration.

the  ^


to  borrow  their  ideas  of  ornament  from  Egjpt,  Baby
Ionia,  Persia,  or  (jreece.  (See  Wornum,  Analysis  of
Ornamoit,  51  /. ,  and  cp  Israkl,  §67.)  Character-
istic of  this  style  of  decoration  was  a  love  of  costly
display  combined  with  brilliancy  of  colour  (Analysis  of
Ornament,  5,  and  Habvi.oma,  §  18,  Assyria,  §  10,
ICr.vi'T,  §  36).  From  these  countries,  then,  in  which
art  was  the  ally,  if  not  the  offspring,  of  idolatry,  came
the  jiractice  of  dcct)rating  sculpture  in  the  round  with
1)01(1  colours  and  costly  raiment,*'  a  practice  condenmed
by  Kzekiel  (2.'}  14)  as  Ix-ing  an  insult  to  Vahwe.  That
such  cases,  however,  were  exceptional  among  the
Hebrews  appears  probable  from  the  fact  that  their
language  contains  no  words  for  'paint,'  'painting,'
and  'painter'  (see  Paint).  Nor  (k)es  this  striking
phenomenon  stand  alone.  It  is  also  noteworthy  that  in
the  original  texts  no  term  is  found  to  express  that
projierty  of  light  known  to  us  as  lolour.

When  a  Hebre\v  writer  wishes  to  compare  one  object
with  another  in  resjx-'ct  to  its  colour  he  finds  it  necessary
to  use  the  word  'ayin  (j-y  '  eye ')  in  the
sense  of  nppforaiia:  So  in  Lev.  13  55
the  pl.inue  is  spoken  of  as  changing  'its
appe;irance  '  (KV,  here  and  in  the  following  examples,  '  colour  '),
and  in  Nu.  II  7  the  ap|)earance  of  manna  is  descril)ed  as  lieing
like  the  appearance  (so  here  RV)  of  Ixlellium.  The  same  word
is  used  of  the  appearance  of  wine  (Prov.'.'.S  31),  of  amber  (Kz.
1  4  27  8  2),  of  burnished  brass  (K/.  1  7  Dan.  lOe),  of  a  beryl  (Kz.
1 16  106),  and  of  crystal  (Ez.  1  22).  Ccitainly  the  term
colour  occurs  frequently  in  the  I'.V  ;  but  in  such  cases
the  translation  is  seldom  warranted  by  the  original  text.
In  the  .\()ocrypha,  on  the  other  hand,  a  word  does  once
occur  ixpuJAia,  Wisd.  1.54)  with  reference  to  a  painted

1  On  the  natural  stages  in  the  '  expression  of  the  imagination,'
sec  Shelley's  Dt/rnce  0/ Poetrj;  part  i.  />eg.

*  Already  the  poet  who  sang  of  the  glorious  victory  over
Sisera  knew  of  dyed  stuffs  (Cy?^  '?';)C),  and  seems  to  a.ssume
that  Israel  could  be  expected  to  provide  its  enemies  with  booty
of  this  kind  (Judg.  .'iio).  Of  what  colours,  however,  thLs  stuff
was  composed  is  not  stated  ;  nor  is  it  .said  with  what  colours  the
needlework  (TOJin,  cp  i  Ch.  20  2  Kz.  17  3)  mentioned  in  the  same
passage  was  embroidered. See  Kmbrcmukrv.

3  For  specimens  of  early  tlr.  coloured  tieures  see  Ohnefalsch-
Richter,  Kyfros,  die  Bibel  und  Homer,  T.ifel-Band,  Ixviii.  and
cp  the  notes  in  Text-Band,  317,  418.


3.  Colour
vocabulary.


COLOURS

image  ;  but  in  this  instance  the  term  denotes  rather  the

fMiinl  or  pigment  used.

Just as the  want  of  a  word  to  express  the idea of

'  painting ' tends  to  prove  that  the  art  was  very  little

cultivated,  so  also  the  want  of  a  word  for  ivlour  (found

in .Syriac gawna, Arabic lawn"", Kgyptian ' ;w»)

naturally  suggests  that  colours  were  not much  talked

alxnit  by  the Hebrews. This inference  could indeed

t)e  shown  to  l>e  unwarrantable  if  we  found  many  names

. «_, for  different  colours,  anti  could  prove

4.  uolour  8611B6. 1 . . ,, ,  ,

archieologically that many colours

were  in  use.  When,  however,  we  come  to  examine  the
Hebrew  colour-terms — and  this  aj)plies  also  to  those  in
use  among  the  Greeks  and  the  Romans^ — at  any  rate  in
biblical  times,  we  find  that  very  few  of  them  are  real
colour-terms  at  all,  such  terms  Ix^ing  used  as  denote
rather  a  contrast  l)etween  light  and  darkness,  brightness
and  dimness,  than  what  we  commonly  understand  by
colour.  Still,  if  colours  are  not  sharjily  distinguished
in  the  languages  of  the  ancient  worltl  it  does  not  follow
that  the  Hebrews  and  otlier  primitive  races  were  unable
to  distinguish  shades  of  colour  for  which  their  language
possessed  no  distinct  terms,  or  that  they  were,  at  least
with  respect  to  certain  colours,  colour-blind.'

It  is  not  so  much  a  question  of  deficiency  of  colour-sense  (as
was  contended  some  vears  ago)  as  of  an  undeveloiK-d  colour-
vocabulary.  (See  Del.,  Iris,  20,  and  P.enzinger,  Arh.  under
'Farben  ;  also  (;r.-int  .Mien,  C,>/iJ//r  .SV«j<-,  chaps.  1 1  l.S.)  If
colour-blind  people  are  in  common  life  able  to  use  correctly  the
names  of  colours  that  they  do  not  .see,  so  conversely  a  people
may  be  able  to  discriminate  colours  for  which  their  language
has  not  .set  apart  names.-*  Besides,  it  now  seems  clear  that
even  the  lower  animals  are  sensitive  to  colour  (see  drant  Allen,
221  ;  CloHd,  Tke  Story  0/ Crration,  87/.  :  and  cp  Drunmioinl,
Ascfnt  0/  Stan,  if>sjf^-,  Mont.iiKiie,  /assays  ICotton],  1  vn  [-jj]).

IVom  the  use  of  the  terms  which  the  Hebrews  did

possess,  we  are  led  to  conclude  that  one  and  the  same

B Scarcitv ^^'^'"'^  ^^•''^  \\i<(id  to  denote  several  shades

-f  „«i  »_i»r._  of  one  colour  ; the  context  or  object  to

of  real  colour . , ■ ,  , ■ <^. ,■

1  „ „  whu  h  the  colour  was  applied  aflording

I  names. ..1  . 1  ' ■ •_ ■ •

the  clue  as  to  the  particular  shatle  in-

•  tended.  Sometimes,  however,  in  order  to  distinguish
I  the  shade  of  colour  quite  unmistakably,  the  thing
I  dcscrilx'd  is  comp;\red  with  anothi-r  object  of  which  the
[  colour  in  question  is  peculiarly  characteristic  (cp  Eng.
salmon-pink,  emerald-green,  etc.).

It  is  indeed  remarkable  how  few  real  colour-terms
occur  in  the  OT.  Only  three  of  the  natural  colours  are
distinguished  by  names,  while  for  blue  and  yellow  dis-
tinct terms  arc  entirely  wanting.  The  deficiency,  how-
ever, is  made  up  for  by  the  ti.se  of  the  terms  expressing
degrees  of  light  or  dark  ;  and  in  aildition  to  these  are
found  artificial  colours  with  the  name  of  the  object  from
which  they  were  derived  like  our  crimson,  cochineal,
indigo,  etc.  Substances,  t(K),  of  which  a  particular
colour  was  characteristic,  may  have  Ix^n  used  to  repre-
sent the  colour  itself  (like  I'.iig.  oraiit;e,  etc.).

It  will  Ix;  convenient  to  gr(iu|)  and  examine  the  words

employed under the follow  ing headings ; terms ex-

6 Classifi P"""^'"!?  (^)  ''^'^t  a"'' degrees of  light,

cation *^* darkness and degrees of  dark, (3)

natural  colours,  (4)  variegated  surfaces,

(5)  pigments,  (6)  objects. Finally,  it  will  Ix;  necessary

to point out instances  in  which the  E\'  expresses  tr

implies  a  reference  to  colour  where  no  such  reference

1  Cp  /««/,  which  means  originally  '  skin,'  'complexion.'

2  Cp  De  Quincey,  Autchiogrupky,  note  to  chap,  tn  Laxtcn  :
'  The  truth  is,  colours  were  as  loosely  .-ind  latitudinarially
distinguished  by  the  Greeks  and  Romans  as  degrees  of  affinity
and  consanguinity  are  everywhere.'  See  further  Smith's  Diet.
ofClass.  Antiqq.,  s.v.  '  colorcs, '  and  Robertson  Smith  vnNat^re,
L)ec.  fcili,  1877.

3  Hroiidly  speaking  we  may  say  that  all  people  see  alike.
Where,  however,  as  in  the  c.i-^e  of  artists,  the  colour-sense  has
been  .specially  trained,  colours  are  seen  diflerentlv.  Colour-
blindness can  only  be  regarded  as  a  disea-e.  [Cp  Ruskin,
A/odem  Painters,  new  ed.  in  small  form  (<  7),  1  7?,  $  6.)

♦  Kven  the  nuxlern  Knglishman  does  not  i  s:  more  il:.nn  about
half  a  dozen  colour-names  (red,  yellow,  preen,  blue,  pink,  gray,
brown,  white,  and  black),  though  he  is  quite  able  to  distinguish
many  other  shades  of  colour  for  which  the  Kr^lish  dicticr.ary
has  names,  as  well  as  probably  others  for  which  it  has  n..r.e.

870


COLOURS

necessarily  exists.  Except  in  the  case  of  (5)  and  (6)  it
is  impossible  to  arrive  at  very  definite  conclusions,  the
interpretation  being  based  mainly  on  philological  con-
siderations.

( 1 )  Light  and  de,;rees  of  light.  — The  word  ns.  sah,
(from  nn^,  Syr.  .c//;, 'to  shine),  used  in  Cant.  0  10  to

7 Den-ees  of  '''-""'^*^''^<^g'o^^o'^''i  healthy  complexion
j.°y  .  and  translated  '  white'  in  the  EV,  means

^ ■  primarily  ^/</7t//«^  or  glistening  (cp  its

use  in  Jer.  4ii,  if  the  text  is  correct,  of  a  wind  [.\V
•  dry.'  RV  '  hot '].  in  Is.  18 4  of  heat  [EV  '  clear  '].  and
in  324  as  an  adverb  [nini-  EV  'plainly']).  ®  repre-
sents it  in  Cant,  by  \eu»c6s,  a  word  which  originally  con-
tained a  similar  idea,  as  is  shown  by  its  use  in  Mt.  17  2
Mk.  93  and  Lk.  929.

Similarly  nhs,  sdhor,  seems  to  mean  literally  '  dazzling,"
though  in  Judg.  .'no  it is  applied to  asses  of  a light
colour,  perhaps  reddish-while  (cp  Ass,  col.  344,  n.  2).
What  particular  shade  of  colour  the  word  denotes  in
this  passiige  is  doubtful  ; but  Moore  may  tje  right  when,
following  .A.  Muller  (Das  Lied  der  Deborah),  he  supixsses
it  to  Ix; '  gray  or  tawny  inclining  to  red. ' ©"'s  rendering,
fjie(rr]fj.fipias,  is  a  mere  guess,  intended  to  connect  the  word
with  D"ins  (cp  Jer.  20 16  ©). A  derivative  (ins)  from  the |
same  root  is traditionally  found  in  Ez.  27i8 ("ini'ncs,
EV'  'white  wool'  ; but  see  J.vv.\n),  and  probably  also j
the  name  ZOhar (Gen.  46  lo irrs  \ see  N.\mks, §  66) |
is  to  l>e  derived  from  the  same  root.  !

The  term  2ns,  .f.'AJM  (from  an-i.  Ar.  sahiba).  'glitter-
ing like  gold,'  starts  with  the  same  idea. It  is  used  of '
leprous  hair  in  Lev.  18303236,  where  the  EV  represents !
it  by  'yellow,'  and  in  Ezr.  827  the  Hophal  participle  of
the  same  root  is  applied  to  '  brass'  (.\V  'fine  copper,' j
RV  •  bright  brass'). In  Lev.  13 3032  ©  translates  it  by |
^avOi^i^v,  and  in  1836  by  ^av^js,  whereas  in Ezra  827 j
( =  I  Esd.  857) it would seem  to rentier by ariX^uiv I
[B.\L].' To express 'brilliant,' as contrasted with j
'white,' the NT employs Xa/j-irpoi in Lk.  23ii (EV I
'gorgeous'), Actsl03o (EV 'bright'), Ja.  22 (AV I
'goodly,' RV 'fine'). Rev.  156 (AV 'white,' RV |
'bright'), and Rev.  198 (AV 'white,' RV 'bright'). \
In  .\ctsl03o  Ja.  22  Rev.  156  the  Vulgate  translates  the
word  by  Candidas.

(2)  Darkness  and  degrees  of  dark. — To  express  the
idea  of  darkness  the  term  inr,  sahor  (from  nnc*, Syr.

8.  Degrees  Of ^'•^''''^' to  l.eWk')  is  employed. It
dark  "^  "  ^^"'  '"  ^  leprous

rising  (Lev.  1831 37),  of  a  sunburnt
skin  or  comple.vion  (JobSOso,  (aKorwrai  [BX],  /xf/ie\d-
vurai  [.\] ;  Cant.  1  5),  and  of  dark  horses  (Zech.  62);
and  a  diminutive  form  nrnnc*,  s'harhor,  is  applied  in
Cant.  1 6  (©  fifUfXavwfjuivy))  to  dark  ringlets.  When  it  is
desired  to  express  a  particularly  dark  colour  another
substantive  is  sometimes  added,  as  'oven-black,'  Lam.
5io  (of  skin  ;  ©  ojs  KXL^avos  eweXiuidT)),  'raven-black,'
Cant.  5 II  (of  hair),  and  in  the  NT  'sackcloth-black'
(Rev.  612).  In  the  EV  .uihor  is  represented  by  'black,'
and  in  ©  and  NT  by  ^Aos.  From  the  same  root  are
derived  nine*,  ^hor  (Lam.  48;  seeCo.vi,,  §1),  and  prob-
ably lirrr,  iihor  (Josh.  183),  another  name  for  the  Nile
(see  Shiiior).

Another  word  c?n,  hum  (from  nn  =  ccn),  applied  to
sheep  whose  wool  has  been  scorched  by  the  sun,
though  really  meaning  simply  'dark,'  may  be  trans-
lated 'brown,'  as  is  done  by  AV  in  Gen.  8032/  3540.
In  ©  it  is  rendered  by  ipaidi  and  once  {v.  40)  by
jrotAciXoj.  - To  express  the  idea  of  gloom  and  sorrow

1  The  Hcb.  has  anjs  rnisn  d;5P  nzia  ansa  nc'n:  'Spv

For  this  i  Esd.  ha.s  icat  <ricrvT)  x"^*''  ""■<>  X"^*"''  XP')""''*'"  O'tCK-
^vTa  (TKfvri  SfKa  [B]  and  «.  a:  x-  ""O  X-  XPI"^"''  o'Ti'A/Soi'TOt
XpviTottSovf  itKa  Svo  [L].

2  There  is  also  a  form  TTCa.  Icatnrlr  (Job  3  5  plur.  constr.
I®  om.J)  which  occurs  in  job  (AV  blackness),  and  has  often
been  connected  with  an  Aram,  root  .  ^»^.  '  to  be  black." BDB,

871


COLOURS

we  meet  with  the  root  mp,  kddhar,  which  has  the
primary  meaning  '  to  be  dirty."  Thus  it  can  be  applied
to  the  turbid  water  of  a  brook  (Jobt)i6),  to  a  sorrowful
countenance  (Jer.  821),  to  mourning  garments  (142),
and  even  to  gates  of  a  mourning  city  (Jer.  Ha)  and  to
the  heavens  (Jer.  4  28  i  K.  1845)-  In  Is.  5O3  a  derivative
(nn-1,7)  from  the  same  root  is  used  of  the  mourning  garb
of  the  heavens  (EV  'blackness').  To  the  same  root
also  probably  belong  the  names  Kedar  (nip  Gen.  25 13)
and  Kidron  (jimp  2.S.  I523;  see  Namk.s,  §  102).
Further,  rtyg,  hdsak,  'to  lie  dark,"  a  word  generally
used  of  the  darkness  of  approaching  night  (cp  Job
186  Is.  630),  is  used  in  Lam.  5 17  of  the  eyes  Ixicoming
dim,  in  Ps.  6^24  of  their  becoming  blind  ;  and  in  Lam.
4  8  the  same  term  is  applied  to  a  dark  complexion.
This  root  gives  us  the  common  word  for  '  darkness "
{~vr\).  Both  mp  and  T^xin  are  represented  in  ©  by  OKora-
^(iv,  OKOTovv,  ffWiTKord^di'  :  and  r-;,-,  also  by  a Kori^eiv.

Finally,  to  this  class  tx?long  also  app.arently  '^•'yzn
hakhlUi  (Gen.  49 12,  6"'^'-  ^apoTotot)  and  niS'V-jn,
hakhliluth  (Prov.  2829  ©"na  correctly  ireXioi) :  both  of
them  seem  to  refer  to  the  dull  ( E V  '  red ' )  appearance  of
the  eyes  after  excessive  drinking  (cp  the  name  Hachilah
[.T^'sn  I  S.  2819],  and  see  N.wiE.s,  §  102).

(3)  Natural  colours.  — Under  this  heading  are  included

those  Hebrew  words  which  more  closely  resemble  our

9 Natural "'^'"''^^  colour-terms. There  are  three

colours- '^'-'^^S'-'S  : («) ^^hite, (^3) red, (7) green.

white ''  "'  '^'""'^tless  true  that  primarily  white

denoted  simply  purity,  green  paleness,  and

red  depth  of  light  ; but  the  use  to  which  the  words  are

applied  shows  that  the  Hebrews  attached  to  them  fairly

definite  ideas  of  colour.

(a)  White  is  commonly  represented  by  jaV,  labhdn.
Thus  it  is  used  of  the  colour  of  goats  (Gen.  8O3537),  of
teeth(49 12),  of  manna  (Ex.  16  31),  of  leprous  hair  (Lev.  183
1020/.),  of  the  leprous  spot  (Lev.  I82438/),  of  garments
(Eccl.  98),  and  of  horses  (Zech.  1  8  63  6).  Here  also,  as
with  the  sh.ades  of  dark,  different  shades  of  colour  seem
to  be  clearly  distinguished,  as  '  milk-white'  (Gen.  49 12),
'coriander-seed  white'  (E.\.  I631),  'snow-white'  (Nu.
12 10  2  K.  527  Ps.  68 14  Is.  1 18),  and  in  the  NT  '  wool-
white'  (Rev.  I14),  'bright-white'  (Mt.  172  Lk.  929),
and  'harvest- white"  (Jn.  435)-  We  even  find  in  Lev.
13  39  a  compound  expression  (niiaS  nin?)  used  to  describe
a  shade  of  white  (AV  '  darkish  w'hite,"  RV  '  dull  white  ').

From  the  same  Hebrew  root  seem  to  be  derived  the  names
L.ib.->n  (pS  Gen.  24  29),  Libni  (-j^S  E.x.(5i7),  Libn.ih  (.nj-''
Josh.  10  20;  hut  see  Lih.nah),  Lebanah  (n:3S  Ez.  245),  and
Lebanon  (jijn'i  i  K.  5  2o[6]),  .so-called  either  on  account  of  its
snow-capped  pe.ak  or  from  the  colour  of  its  stone,  as  well  as  the
substantives  .-j^S  I'bhdiuih  'moon'  (Ca.  (i  10),  nj^S,  tibhneh,
'  white -popl.-ir"  (Gen.  30  37),  and,  possibly,  mz^,  I'l'liindh,
'  brick '  (Ex.  1 14  ;  see,  however,  Brick,  §  i,  n.).  See  Names,
§§  66,  102.

The  corresponding  root  in  Aramaic  is  Tn,  hiir,  which
in  Is.  2922  is  used  (as  a  verb)  of  the  face  becoming  pale
with  shame,  and  in  Dan.  79  of  a  snow-white  garment.'
Both  these  words  are  usually  represented  in  ©  by  Xe hkos
(cp,  however.  Gen.  30 37  where  x^'»'P<Js  =  pS).  and.  more-
over, there  occurs  in  the  .Apocrypha  a  word  Xei'KUfia
which  is  used  of  a  disease  of  the  eyes  ( Tob.  2io3i768ll
813,  but  in  Ecclus.  43 18  XevKdrrii,  Heb.  jz*?)-

To  the  same  class,  perhaps,  belongs  also  nil.  Gen.
40 16.  In  the  R V  it  is  translated  '  white  bread ' ;  but  from
what  follows  in  the  context  the  word  would  seem  to  refer,
not  to  the  contents  of  the  baskets,  but  to  the  baskets
themselves  (AV  'white  baskets").  Finally,  to  express
the  idea  of  the  hair  becoming  graj'ish-white  through  old
age,  there is  the root z't: sibh (iS.  122 Job  15 10),

however,  appends  a  query,  and  Che.  denies  the  existence  of
a  root  Tcj  in  OT  (Expositor,  June  1897,  p.  406 ;  JQR,  July
'897.  p.  575)- Cp  Eclipse,  Chemarim.

I  Robes  of  state  seem  to  have  been  of  white  as  well  as  of
purple  (see  below,  g  15).  Cp  lo.s.  Ant.  xvii.  8  3,  viii.  ~  3,  xix.  8  2  ;
BJ  li.  1  I  ;  see  Keim,  Gesch.Jesu  von  Nazara,  3  380  \ET  6  104].

87a


COLOURS

whence  the  derivative  nyt.  sibhdh,  '  gray  hair '  (Gen.
4238  44»93i  Deut.  3225  Hos.  79  Prov.  2O39)  or  'old
age'  (Is.  464).  In  0  it  is  usually  represented  correctly
by  iroXid  or  t6  "y^pas.

(jS)  Perhaps  the  most  clearly  distinguished  of  the
iwtural  colours,  as  being  the  colour  of  blood,  was  red,  to
10  R«d  '-'''P''*^^^  which  the  Hebrews  commonly  used
the  root  dik,  adham.  That  it  denoted  a
brilliant  hue  is  evident  from  the  fact  that  Isaiah  uses
the  verb  c'lKi  in  the  sense  of  lx;coming  like  scarlet
(ySin.  see  below,  §  14),  and  the  Priestly  Code  speaks  of
skins  dyed  red  (CJ^C).  The  adjective  C"iK,  'ddhom,  is
applied  to  blood  in  2  K.  822,  to  blood-stained  apjjarel
in  Is.  ()32;  and  verbal  forms,  to  a  blood-besmeared
shield  (c^Ks)  in  Nah.  24  [3],  and  to  wine  (cnNrr)  in  Prov.
2331.  That  the  root,  however,  was  also  employed  to
describe  other  colours  of  a  reddish  hue  is  apparent
from  its  use  as  applied  to  a  heifer  (Nu.  192)  or  a  horse
(Zech.  18),  to  a  reddish-brown  (>:c^K,  Gen.  2525  i  S.
16 12  ; '  cp  Lam.  47,  Cant.  5  10,  anclseeGOLi.\TH,  §  2,  n. )
skin,  as  well  as  to  reddish  or  brownish-yellow  lentils
(Gen.  2530).'  The  Priestly  Code  uses  also  a  diminutive
form  (ctcik)  to  express  merely  'reddish,'  applying  it  to
the  colour  of  the  leprous  spot  (Lev.  181924)  or  sore
(Lev.  1342/.).

From  the  same  root  are  derived  the  names  Edom  (CIN  Gen.
25  30),  Admah  (,l,'^^K  Gen.  10 19),  and  Adummim  (cpnn  Josh.
167  18  17;  see  Names,  §  102)  as  well  as  the  precious  stone
called  D^K  (see  Ruuv  and  Precious  Stones).  To  DIK
■<»<///<■';«,  corresponds  irvopos  (lit.  '  having  the  colour  of  fire ')  in
&  .^nd  NT;  and  in  Mt.  1023
used  of  the  sky.


we find the verb iruppaffi


Other  roots,  however,  besides  this  are  occasionally  employed  to
designate  this  colour.  Thus  the  root  j"Cn,^7«/a^^  which  usually
conveys  the  idea  of  '  acidity,  fermentation,'  seems  to  be  used  in  Is.
Gli  I  to  denote  a  colour  ;  and  the  context  rec|uires  a  blood-  or
wine-like  appearance  (cp  Eng.  sorrel,  (i)  tron  sur  =  sour  ax\A.
(2)  from  saur-  reddish-brown).  C'iOK  i"  Zech.  t)  7  is  also,  from
the  context,  possibly  to  be  read  C'spn  (Che.);  cp  Ges.-Buhl,
•f.r'-  rON-  The  root  -v^n,'^  hamar  'to  be  red,'  is  traced  by  some
in  Ps.759,  and,  with  more  justice,  in  Job  16  16  (Poal'al  form).
To  this  class  we  may  also  probably  assign  p"li;',  sarok,  '  reddish-
brown '(cp  At.  as!karu,  'a  sorrel -horse,'  and  Heb.  P'y^) — a  term
used  in  Zuch.  1  8  of  a  horse.

(7)  The third natural colour term describes those
uncertain hues  ^colours which it has, in all ages,
p  been found difficult to distinguish  —  that

I  waver between blue, yellow, and green.

In  Hebrew  the  adjective  employed  (from
pT,  'to  Ix;  pale,'  cp  Assyr.  ardku,  'to  grow  pale'
[of  the  face],  arku,  'yellow,'  and  Aram.  j3^,  'to
be  pale')  can  be  applied  to  the  colour  of  vegeta-
tion (Job  398  2  K.  1926  Is.  3727);  and  a  substan-
tive p-v,  yerck,  derived  from  the  same  root  denotes
vegetable  produce  in  general.  As,  moreover,  the  root
idea  of  the  word  was  originally,  like  that  of  x^wp6j
its  Greek  equivalent,  merely  paleness  or  faintness  of
colour,  a  derivative  [\ypr\')  can  l)e  used  to  describe  a
panic-stricken  countenance  (Jer.  306)  or  the  fading  colour
of  decaying  vegetation  (Deut.  2S 22  Amos  4 9  Hag.  217).
Further,  to  express  simply  '  palish,"  a  diminutive  form
(pnpi")  can  be  used  of  plague  spots  (Lev.  1849  14
37)  or  of  the  appearance  of  gold  (Ps.  68i3).'*  On  the
word  pin,  hdrui  ( ;^/pn  '  to  be  yellow?"  ;  cp  Names,
§66)  which  is  applied  to  gold  (Ps.  6814.  etc.)  and  seems
to  denote  a  shade  of  yellow,  see  Gold.

(4)  I'ariegated  surfaces. — A  few  words  occur  which,
though  their  precise  meaning  is  uncertain,  undoubtedly

1  Che.,  DS^  -iDlK;  cp  Lam.  47  (^j-/.  T.,  Aug.  1899).  If,
however,  1  S.  Ifi  12  refers,  not  to  David's  complexion,  but  to  the
colour  of  his  hair,  the  word  will  then  mean  '^reddish.'

2  Unless  we  point  D\*<'7  (see  Esau,  §  i).

3  From  this  root  some  derive  TCn,  liitndr, '  asphalt, '  "Ch,  hSmer,
'  cXsiy,'  ixani,  yahmiir,  'roebuck.'

*  Cp  Me-jarkon  (a  doubtful  place-name  in  Josh.  19  46).
873


13.  Pigments.


COLOURS

denote  a  parti -coloured  appearance  of  some  kind;
\1  'Va.rinev.tad  '''^'"^  employment  being  for  the  most
12.  vanegacea  ^,^^^  restricted  to  the  description  of
animals.  Of  these  the  term  rendered  in
AV  by  '  ringstraked  ■  and  applied  to  goats  (-{^v.'dkodh.
Gen.  30  35  39 /.  31  8  10  12),  proliably  has  reference  to
white  stripes  on  an  otherwise  dark  skin  ;  that  translated
'speckled'  (ijsj,  ndkodh.  Gen.  3032/  3539  31  8  10  12)  to
light  spots  on  a  dark  skin  ;  and  that  represented  by
'  grisled  '  (ina.  bdrodh)  and  used  of  both  goats  ((jen.  31
10  12)  and  horses  (Zech.  636)  to  light  patches  on  a  dark
skin.  The  last  word  would,  therefore,  probably  corre-
spond to  our  piebald.

In  Jer.  129(RV)  we  meet  with  the  phrase  'a  speckled  (iT;s)bird
of  prey.'  The  commentators  have  sought  to  justify  and  explain
it;  but  it  remains  improbable.'  A  combination  of  different
colours  is  expressed  in  Gen.  30  32  ff.  by  Kl'^D,  tdlu,  probably
'  besprinkled,'  '  flecked  '  (cp  sparsus).  The  same  term  is  used  in
Ezek.  16  16  of*  the  dyed  stuffs  of  manv  colours  with  which  other
peoples  were  wont  to  decorate  their  shrines.

(S)  Pigments. — The  Hebrews  knew  and  made  use  of
several  pigments,  three  of  which  were  derived  from
animals.  These  three  dyes  were  all
manufacturetl  by  the  Pha.'nicians :  the
one  '  scarlet '  or  '  crimson  '  (whence  its  Gr.  name  <poivi-
Kovv  and  Lat.  phxnicium),  from  an  insect  (coccus)
which  gave  its  name  to  a  species  of  oak  on  which  it
was  found  [lle.x  cocci f era)  ;  the  other  two  from  a  slimy
secretion  found  in  a  sjjecial  gland  of  a  species  of  shell-
fish called  Mitre.v  trunculiis  and  Mure.x  brandaris.
By  infusing  the  insect  (coccus)  in  boiling  water  a
beautiful  red  dye  was  produced,  superior  in  effect  and
durability  to  cochineal  ;  the  other  dyes  when  applied
to  articles  became  at  first  of  a  whitish  colour,  but
under  the  infiuence  of  sunlight  changed  to  yellowish
greenish  and  finally  to  purple,  the  purple  being  red  or
blue  according  to  the  species  of  shell -fish  employed.
These  three  colours  were  held  in  high  estimation  by  the
ancients  on  account  of  both  their  brilliancy  and  their
costliness.  The  purple-blue  is  translated  '  blue  '  in  the
EV,  but  must  have  corresponded  rather  to  our  violet,  by
which  it  is  once  rendered  in  the  W  ( Esth.  1 6  and  in  the
margin  815).  The  Hebrews  knew  no  blue  colour  with  which
to  compare  it,  and  hence  it  is  said  in  Ucrachoth  1  2  that  '  purple-
blue  is  like  the  sea,  and  the  sea  is  like  the  plants,  and  the  pl.ants
are  like  the  firmament  of  heaven  '  (see  also  Mtnach.  4,  and  cp
Del.  in  y'AVilS)  iv.  488.  /ris,i&/.,  and  the  articles  Purfle,
Scarlet,  Klle,  Crimson).

(a)  To  designate  the  first  of  the  dyes  mentioned
above,  the  Hebrews  sometimes  used  simply  ^-Vin,  told',
„  .  'worm,'  just  as  we  speak  of  crimson
14.  scarlet,  ^j-j.  ^^^^  iirmis  =  Sansk.  krimi)  and
cochineal  (really  a  term  denoting  the  insect  Coccus  cacti
found  in  Mexico).  Thus  it  is  used  in  Is.  1 18  as  the
most  natural  example  of  a  glaring  and  indelible  dye,
and  in  Lam.  45  (where  ©'"-'  gives  the  simple  term
KOKKos,  'berry'  [A,  koXtto;!'],  the  insect  being  regarded  in
early  times  as  a  species  of  berry)  of  princely  raiment.
It  even  occurs  as  a  verbal  derivative  (D'y^na.  Nah.  23
[4]  ;  ©  ifivoi'i^ovra.^)  with  the  meaning  •  to  be  clothed
in  scarlet'  (see,  however,  Dkkss,  §  3,  n. ).  More
often,  however,  the  form  ny^'w,  tola'ath,  is  found
with  the  addition,  either  before  or  after  it,  of  the
word  <:e',  Sdnl — a  word  which  has  been  derived
from  the  root  niv.  landA  (cp  Ass}t.  iinitu,  pos-
sibly fr.  sanli),  supposed  to  mean  '  to  glitter,'  and
is  thought  to  refer  to  the  brilliant  colour  derived  from
the  yViri.  In  this  form  it  is  mentioned  as  a  costly  pos-
session (E.x.  3523),  and  as  being,  therefore,  suitable
for  an  offering  (Ex.  254  356  Lev.  144  ["n  *:c']  649515a
["nri  •:c]  Nu.  196  ["n  '3S']i.  for  the  hangings  (E.x. '2636
1  ©  inrfiKaiov  vaivrn  (BkQ;  but  AjjoTiif  [.\)).  J'iZS  seems  to
be  an  old  word  for  hya;na  (see  Zeboim).  wmjA.  =  rnvc>  which
may  have  been  miswritten  nyTS.  <>"'  of  which  we  may  lieduce
a  false  reading  DBTB  (see  Siegf.-Sta.,  s.r.  D'i').

874


COLOURS

2716  30 37  38 18),  for  the  ephod  (Ex.  2856  3928),  for  the
priests'  girdle  (Ex.  288  39529),  for  the  breastplate  (Ex.
2815  398),  and  for  the  embroidered  pomegranates  (Ex.
2833  3924),  etc.  In  Ecclus.  45 11,  also,  it  is  used  of
some  kind  of  embroidered  work  (Gr.  K(K\uffnivri  K6KKtf} ;
vet.  Lat.  torlococco).  A  thread  of  this  colour — expressed
by  !dnt  alone — was  commonly  used  in  the  times  of  the
Jahvist  as  a  mark  (Gen.  382830;  Josh.  '221,  JE),  and
the  single  term  is  employed  in  two  p>oetical  passages
(2S.  I24,  where  the  maidens  of  Israel  are  called  upon
to  lament  Saul,  who  used  to  clothe  them  in  scarlet  ;
and  C'a.  43)  as  ec|uivalent  to  the  longer  expression.  In
the  acrostic  on  the  '  Capable  Woman  '  the  same  word
is  used  in  the  plural  (c-rj?,  Mnlm^)  to  describe  the  warm
clothing  provided  against  the  cold  of  winter  (Prov.
31  21),  and  in  Is.  1  18  to  denote  probably  sciu-lct-stuff  as
distinguished  from  the  dye  itself  (y'^in).  As  a  substitute
for  these  expressions  we  lind  the  Chronicler  using  a
word  S'cn.?.  karmil  (2  Ch.  2714  814,  cp  Ex.  8635),
derived  from  the  Persian  {kirm,  'aworm,'  see  Crimson,
and  cp  alwve).  In  ©  kSkkivo^  is  chosen  to  represent
all  these  expressions,  and  there  can  Ijc  no  doubt  that
where  the  same  word  occurs  in  the  NT  it  denotes  this
dye  (Mt.  2728  Heb.  9  19  Rev.  I734  I81216).

Later  OT  writers  knew  of  another  pigment  of  a
like  shade  of  colour,  called  -\vv.  sd'ser  (EV  '  vermilion  ')
— perhaps  oxide  of  lead  (cp  ©  luKra  and  see  Riehm,
// n  7i  '  Mennig  ' ).  It  was  used  for  painting  ceilings
(Jer.  22 14,  ©  iJLi\TO%)  and  images  (  Ezek.  jji  14.  (5  ypa(pis).

(^)  The  Purple-blue  (nl^DB,  U'kheleth,  Assyr.  ta-kil-tu)
and  Purple-red  (panN,  'argdmdn.  Bib.  Aram.  p:-iN_
p^  .  Ass\T.  rtr^awa«««)  dyed  stuffs  also  figure
IB.  iTirpies.  largely  in  the  decoration  of  the  Taber-
nacle and  the  priestly  robes  ;  but  they  can  hardly  have
been  known  as  early  as  the  scarlet  (cp  C.ANTICLKS,  §  15),
their  employment  being  characteristic  of  P  and  later
writers.  They  also  can  be  used  for  an  offering  (Ex.
204  3r)6),  as  being  a  valuable  possession  (Ex.3523),
as  well  as  for  the  curtains  (Ex.  26i  368),  for  the  veil
(Ex.  2G31  3635),  for  the  hangings  (Ex.2636  27 16  8637
38 18),  for  the  priest's  ephod  (Ex.286  392),  for  the
girdle  (E.\.  288  89529),  and  for  the  breastplate  (Ex.
2815  398),  etc.  A  late  prophet  knows  both  colours
as  part  of  the  splendour  of  heathen  worship  (Jer.  IO9).
It  seems  natural  also  to  another  late  writer  to  assume
that  the  Midianitish  chiefs  would  wear  robes  of  purple-
red  (Judg.  826);  and  Ezekiel  tells  how  the  robes  of
purple-blue  worn  by  the  Assyrians  had  struck  the  im-
agination of  the  women  of  Israel  (236),  whilst  he  also
knows  (27?)  of  purple-blue  and  purple-red  from
Elishah  (q.v.).  In  Ecclus.,  too,  both  dyes  are  men-
tioned (45 10)  as  occupying  a  prominent  place  in  the
raiment  of  Moses,  and  in  630  ribbons  of  purple -blue
are  said  to  form  part  of  the  adornment  of  Wisdom.
On  the  defeat  of  Gorgias  dyed  stuffs  of  both  colours
were  taken  by  Judas  Maccabaius  among  the  spoil
(i  Mace.  423).  Of  the  two  purples  red  seems  to
have  been  preferred.  Solomon's  '  seat  of  purple  '  (Cant.
3  10)  is  [jerhaps  due  to  error  (see  Pukpi.e)  ;  but  purple
robes  of  oftice  were  common.  Judas  was  struck  by  the
fact  that  the  Romans,  notwithstanding  their  power  and
riches,  were  not  clothed  in  purple  ( i  Mace.  8 14).  When,
however,  Alexander  appoints  Jonathan  high  priest,  he
sends  him  a  purple-red  robe  (10 206264  [N\'])  ;  so  like-
wise ,-\ntiochus  when  he  confirms  him  in  the  office  (11  58).
On  the  other  hand,  when  the  treachery  of  Andronicus
is  discovered,  he  is  at  once  deprived  of  the  purple  rotx:
(2  Mace.  438).  Similarly  in  the  NT  in  Mt.  2728  (xXa/ui>s
KOKKivri)  Mk.  15i7  (irop^upa)  and  Jn.  192  (ifiirkov
irop<pvpovv),  the  red -purple  robe  is  used  as  a  mock
image  of  majesty;  while  in  Lk.  I619  (irofKlivpa)  it  is
one  of  the  characteristics  of  a  rich  man. In  Rev.  174

1  9  Ua<rdK(v.  22)  however  suggests  D'?;?  'double.'  So  Vg.
Schleusner,  Gra.,  Che.

875


COLOURS

{irop<f>vpov»  Kul  k6kkivov)  it  is  part  of  the  attire  of  the
great  harlot,  and  in  18 12  {irofHfxjpai)  is  referred  to  as
valuable  merchandise  (cp  also  v.  16  irop<f)vpovv).  It  is
also  worthy  of  note  that  one  of  Paul's  converts  made
her  living  by  selling  this  dye  {■7rop<t>vp6ir(i}\ii,  Acts  16 14).
In  Cant.  76  the  hair  of  the  bride  seems  to  be  compared
with  purple  (jcnx),  and  Greek  parallels  for  this  are
quoted.  The  comparison,  however,  can  hardly  be
trusted,  for  -;Sd  |D:-ikd  ICKT  11^11  is  a  dittogram  of  ~^rtr\
Voids  "I'Sy  which  precedes.  Each  form  of  the  clause
seems  to  be  more  correct  in  one  half  than  the  other.
Read,  perhaps,  with  Cheyne  '  The  locks  of  thy  head  are
like  Carmel  (Vm;:);  they  are  pleasant  (.icy:)  as  an
orchard  of  pomegranates'  (see  (JALLERY,  2).  |cj  in
JOJIXD  is  plainly  some  word  which  should  follow  ^0133  ;
probably  ncy:  (written  'cyj,  and  corrupted  jo: ;  cp
H.\IR,  §1).  In  the  Gr.  n'^DP  is  commonly  represented
by  vcLKivdos  and  vaKlvdivos,^  and  jcaiK  by  irop<f>vp6i  in
both  or  and  NT  (see  Rev.  9  17  21  20).

(6)  Objects. — The  words  included  under  this  heading
denote  objects  of  which a  particular  shade  of  colour
Oh'  rt ^^^^  characteristic. Thus  j-u.  biis  ( 2  Ch.
■ _^  5 12,  © 8v(T(Tivoi)  was  the  fine  cotton  or

linen  manufactured  by  the  r.gyptians,
and  called  elsewhere  (Ex.  2Gi  Gen.  41 42,  etc.)  trtr.  iel
(see  Erman,  Li/e  in  Ancient  Egypt,  448,  and  the
articles  Egypt,  §  35,  Cotton,  and  Linkn).  -iin,  Ifur,  in
listh.  16  probably  means  'white-stuff'  (whence  "nn  in
Is.  199),  and  Dsn?  (Pers.  kdrpas)  '  white  cotton.'  Three
more  rare  words  occur  in  the  same  verse  which  have
been  thought  to  denote  ditferent  species  of  valuable  stone
or  plaster:  z'V,  ses,  (also  in  Ca.  615)  which  has  been
supposed  to  be  identical  with  c''C',  layis  (i  Ch.  292),
and  to  mean  '  white  marble '  or  '  alabaster '  ;  c.-ia
iaAaf  (©»«  crfiapaySiTri^.  ©'^  ufjidpaySoi)  denoting  per-
haps 'porphyry'  (so  BDIi ;  EV  'red  marble,'  R\''ne-
'porphyry');  t^,  tiar,  meaning  possibly  '  jxjarl '  or
'  pearl-like  stone  ' ;  ©  wivvivos  \i6os) ;  and  nnrio  {sohereth
YX  '  black  mnrble, '  R V"'8-  '  stone  of  blue  colour ' ),  which
has  been  derived  from  -|^a  =  ^^tr,  and  taken  to  mean
'  black  marble  '  (see,  however,  Marbi.k).

Lastly  it  remains  to  notice  a  few  passages  in  which
the  EV  unnecessarily  implies  a  reference  to  colour.
,,. A I.- -x- Thus  the  colour  '  green  '  is  sometimes

'^  Ev"  "^'^'^  '"  '^"^ ^^ "■"  '■'^P'-^ent words

denoting  not  colour  but  a  healthy
and  flourishing  condition.  Of  such  words  jjp,  rdaiidn,
which  means  rather  'luxuriant,'  is  correctly  translated
in  ©  by  various  words  expressive  of  luxuriance  (Scwi'j
Dt.  122  Is.  .')7  5  ;  (JxxjKi.o'i  3  K.  1423  Ca.  1 16  Ez.  613  ;
d\o-u)5T;s4  K.  164l7io  2  Ch. 28 4  Jer.  8613  178  Ez.  276).
Very  similar  is  the  use  of  nS,  lah,  '  fresh,  moist  '(x^wpij
Gen.  30 37  Ez.  17 24  20 47  [21  3] :  vyp^i  Judg.  I67  8)  and
3cn.  rd/obh  '  juicy '  {vyp5s  Job 8 16).  .^gain  2'lH,  'dbhibk,
denotes  'fresh,  juicy  ears  of  corn'  (Lev.  214),  and  3K.
cbh,  can  be  used  of  '  fresh  young  plants'  (Job 8 12  Cant.
611);  whilst  C'3S,  paggim,  seems  to  denote  tender  young
fruits  (Ca.  2i3,  see  Del.  ad  loc).  and  Sdis,  karmel,
(Lev.  2814)  applies  to  'garden  fruit'  in  general.

To  this  category  belong  also  such  compound  expressions  as
NE''n  nix:  'grassy  pastures '(Ps.  23 2)  and  nil-  'TCS  '  .sprouw  of
the  field'  (Ecclus.  40 22).  In  all  these  cases  the  term  'green,'
used  in  AV,  might  indeed  serve  as  a  paraphrase ;  but  it  is  other-
wise with  the  following  examples: — In  Job  66  the  word  TT
translated  '  white '  (of  an  egg)  is  thought  by  many  to  mean  '  the
juice  of  purslain '  (so  RVnig.  ®  pq/xa<r(i'  ittvoit  but  see  Fowl);
but  whichever  interpretation  be  adopted  it  will  be  admitted
that  the  Hebrew  word  contains  no  idea  of  colour.  Similarly
ion.  the  reading  adopted  by  EV  in  Is.  272  (.W  '  red  wine,'  RV
'  wine ')  instead  of  "Cn  (RV™K-  '  a  pleasant  vineyard ' ;  see
SBOT),  means  really  '  foaming  wine '  (Driver  on  Dt.  32 14)  ;  and

1  ©  also  gives  vojciviivo^  for  E'nB  (Ex.  25  5  26  14  35  7  i-;,  etc.),
t.-iking  it  as  the  equivalent  of  fi/pP.
876


COMFORTER

mo  in  *he  expression  mo"D'(Kx-  'Oiq,  etc,  Wisd.  10 18  9aXair<ray
ipvOpav),  meaning  'reed,'  contains  no  reference  to  colour.
Moreover,  in  the  expressions  ^S'^  \)sf'H(^^  'black  night,'  KV

'blackness  of  night")  in  Pr.  "9  and  "I'iKfl  (AV  'blackness")  in
loci  26  Nah.  2 10  the  Knclish  renderings  are  purely  paraphrastic.
In  the  same  way  the  long  robe  (perhaps  white  with  a  blue
border)  worn  by  Joseph  (Clen.S/  3)  and  by  Tamar  (2  S.  13  ic)  is
transformed  in  the  £V  into  'a  coat  of  m.tny  colours.'  In
Pr.  20  30  (nnan  AV  'hlueness")  and  Ecclus.  23io  OxciAwi^  AV
'blue  mark")  the  words  mean  literally  '  bruise."

Literature.  —  Riehm,  HiVIi  '  Farben,"  1  436 ;  Benzinger,
A  rch.  269/;  '  Karben-iiamen  " ;  Nowack,  //A  263  /  '  Malerei '  ;
Del.,  Iris,  and  'Farben"  in/'A'A'W;  Perrot  and  Chipiez  (W.
Armstrong),  Hist.  0/  Art  in  Sardinia,  Judtea,  Syria,  and
Asia  Minor,  1  109-370;  and,  since  the  above  was  written,  an
article  by  G.  W.  Thatcher  in  Hastings'  DB.  m. A.  C.

COMFORTER  (n&p&KAHTOC  [Ti.  WH]).  Jn.  H16.

See  I'vkaci.kh;.

COMMENTARY  CJniP).  aCh.  1822  RV.  AV'?-
Sw  CiiKoNici.Ks,  §  6  [2] ;  Historical  LrrERATURE,
§  ■■»•

COMMERCE. See  Tradk  and  Commerce.

COMMON.  The  negatives  of  the  qualities  'clean,'
•holy'  (see  Clean,  §  i)  are —

1.  'Gammon,'  a  synonym  for  'unclean'  (see  Clean),  con-
st.nntly  in  RV  for  ^n,  h5l  (properly,  '  that  which  is  open,'
Kaudissin,  Studien,  2  23).  AVj  however,  only  twice  renders  AOi
thus  (i  S.  21  4/);  elsewhere  it  has  'unholy"  (Lev.  10  io)'or
'profane"  (Kzek.  22  26  42  20  44  23  48  15).  In  NT,  the  RV  is
less  strict  with  icoti-os,  which  is  almost  indifferently  rendered
'common," 'unclean,' 'unholy,' 'deliled," 'polluted.' So  in

I  Mace.  1  47  62,  RV  (with  AV)  gives  '  unclean  '  for  Koivoi.  No
injury  is  done  to  the  sense;  cp  .\cts  10  15,  'what  God  hath
cleansed  (  =  pronounced  clean),  that  call  not  thou  common  '  ;  v.

I I  '  cominon  and  unclean."  That  which  is  '  common  "  is  free,  or  at
any  rate  is  tre.ited  as  if  free,  from  ceremonial  restrictions  ;  it  can
be  used  in  the  common  life -the  life  of  the  jnNn  DV,  the  unin-
telligent '  people  of  the  land  '  (6  o;^Aos  oCtos  o  jutj  yivMiTKtau  t'ov
i^/noi',  Jn.  "49).  And  those  who  use  what  is  only  treated  as  if
'  common  '  or  open,  when  it  has  no  right  to  be  so  treated,  l>ecome
'common'— />.,  unclean— themselves.  'Common,"  therefore,
becomes  a  wide  term,  dangerously  wide  from  a  truly  religious
point  of  view. What  an  irony  in  the  ev.ingelist's  expression

with  common  (EV  defiled),  that  is,  unwashed  hands'  !

2.  '  Unclean,'  the  strict  rendering  of  aKdOixpTOi  in  NT,  of
•*??.  Ai/«t",  in  OT  (&  aKdOapTOi).  Both  '  common  "  and  '  un-
clean' can  be  used  (i)  of  forbidden  foods  or  of  animals  which
may  not  be  eaten  (Acts  10  14  1 1  8  Rev.  LS  2).  (2)  Of  persons  who
are  not  Jews,  or  who  do  not  belong  to  the  Christian  community
(Acts  10  28  I  Cor.  7  14  2  Cor.  1517;  cp  Koivout,  Mk.  7  15  and
parallels,  Heb.  9  13  Rev.  21  27  (RT  and  RV]).

3.  'Unholy,'  given  in  AV  of  Lev.  10 10  (Ad/)  becomes
common'  in  RV. In  Ezek.  2226  422o  4423  (same  formula),

AV  renders  //<>/,  '  profane.'  The  influence  of  0  and  Vg.  may  be
suspected  ;  these  versions  respectively  give/Se'^TjAoj',  f>ro/a>ium,
so  also  in  Ezek.  48  15,  AV  profane,  \'%.  pro/ana.  'Profane'  is
best  reserved,  however,  for  other  Heb.  words  (see  Prokank).
RV  of  NT  retains  '  unholy '  in  i  Tim.  I9  2  Tim.  82  (di/daios),
Heb.  10  29(<totfov).

4.  On  the  peculiar  technical  term  'JJn, '  to  be  polluted,'  see

Hvi'OCKISY.

COMMUNITY  OF  GOODS,  in  the  widest  sense  of
that  expression,  is  usually  consiciered  (on  the  authority
of  Acts'242-47  432-5ii  61-6)  to  have  been  one  of  the
established  institutions  of  the  earliest  Christian  society
at  Jerusalem.  This  opinion  recjuires  strict  limitation  ;
but  that  limitation  is  not  to  be  based,  as  it  has  been,
either  on  the  intrinsic  improbability  of  the  institution
itself,  or  on  a  vague  conjecture  that  the  writer  of  Acts
has  idealised  the  facts.  It  arises  from  an  investigation
of  the  sources  of  his  narrative  (cp  Acts,  §  1 1 ) — a  method
which  has  to  record  one  of  its  most  assured  results  in
connection  with  the  subject  of  the  present  article.

We  have  in  Acts  not  one  account  of  the  institution
but  three. [a)  One  account comprehensively  records
1  Three ^^^  ^^''''  °*^  ^'^  lands  and  houses  (^wp/wi'  ^
accounts  *''*''"^'' '  -^'^'5434/);  according  to  245  the
in  Acts. ^■'^'*''  ^^'"^^  °''  ^'^  possessions  and  goods  what-
soever (rd Kri)fi.a.ro. Kal  raj i"'7rdpfett), a
common  fund  being  thus  formed,  out  of  which  all  were
supplied  according  as  any  man  had  need, (i)  Accord-
ing to  another  account,  the  sale  of  property  {KTfjfjia.  5i ;
Xupiav,  63)  cannot  have  been  universally  prescribed,  or

877


COMMUNITY  OP  GOODS

even  generally  customary  ;  for  Peter  (.'>4)  expressly  de-
clares that  Ananias  was  free  to  retain  in  his  private
possession  either  his  proixirty  or  the  money  for  which  it
was  sold.  Moreover,  although  there  is  no  hint  of  there
being  anything  to  mark  out  the  act  of  liarnalxis  (4  36/ )
from  the  universal  practice  assumed  in  (</)— such  as  that
the  estate  was  his  only  one,  or  was  particularly  valuable
— it  is  thought  worthy  of  special  honourable  mention.
In  436/,  therefore,  it  is  not  assuined,  as  it  is  in  434/,
that  the  sale  of  property  was  expected  of  all.  (c)  In  4  32,
however,  where  we  find  '  said  "  {tXcytv)  and  not  some
word  implying  '  retained  as  private  profx;rty,'  there  is
no  idea  of  any  sale  of  projxTty  at  all.  The  idea  simply
is  that  the  owners  placed  their  property  in  a  general  way
at  the  disposal  of  the  community  at  large.  There  is  no
assumption  of  a  common  fund.

(d)  A  fourth  account  may  possibly  Ix;  distinguished
in  Acts  2  44.

The  statement  in  244*— that  they  had  all  things  common—

by  itself  alone  agrees  well  enough  with  the  last-meniioned  and

_ .  simplestaccount  of  the  institution  (that  there

2.  Possibly  a was  no  actual  sale),  and  244  a,  which  declares

fourth  account,  'hat  all  that  believed  were  together  in  one

place,'  might  by  itself  be taken, like  1  15

2  I  I  C^or.  11  20  14  23,  to  refer  merely  to  the  exigencies  of  social
worship;*  but  the  connection  of  the  clause  with  the  statement
that  follows  (that  they  had  all  things  in  common)  appears  to
imply  that  the  entire  community  lived  in  common,  dwelling  in
the  same  house  and  having  common  meals.

This  inference,  however,  may  safely  be  set  aside,  as
it  may  well  be  doubted  whether  the  collocation  in  Acts
244  has  not  arisen  from  the  authors  having  inadvertently
combined  two  heterogeneous  ideas  without  perceiving
the  possible  misleading  effect.

A  social  institution  of  the  nature  indicated  would  scarcely
have  been  practicable  in  a  community  of  120  persons  (Acts  1  15)
— much  less  in  one  of  3000  (241)  or  more  (247).  The  other
statements  in  Acts  do  not  preclude  the  supposition  that  the
meals,  even  love-feasts  and  the  observance  of  the  Lord's  Supper
associated  with  them,  were  held  in  difli'erent  houses  at  the  same
time.  Kar'  oikoi'  (AV  'from  house  to  house."  AV'"K-  and  RV
'at  home  ')  in  246  (cp  542)  need  not  be  intended  to-convey  that
the  whole  comnmnity  assembled  on  one  occasion  in  one  house
and  on  another  occasion  in  another  ;  it  may  have  a  distributive
ineaning  like  Kara  mkiv  ('in  every  city')  in  15  2t  (and  Kar
ot/cous,  that  is  '  in  every  house,'  in  20  20).  In  Rom.  16  5  n/.  we
find  several  household  churches  in  the  same  city  ;  cp  also  i  Cor.
Ii>i9  Col.  415.  The  complaint  al>out  the  neglect  of  certain
widows  in  the  daily  ministration  (Acts  61),  which  the  word
Ka9j\tifpi.irrj  proves  to  have  referred  to  their  sustenance,  could
not  have  arisen  if  there  had  been  common  meals  (.ilthouuh
indeed  the  expression  '  tables  '  [Tpan-e'^aisI  might  seem  to  jKjint
to  these).  It  could  have  arisen  only  if  the  widows'  share  of
provisions  was  brought  to  their  houses.

A  misrepresentation  of  the  original  idea,  similar  to
that  which,  as  has  just  teen  shown,  may  be  present  in

3  Acts') ^*'*'  '^  unquestionably  to  be  found  in  02/.

The  writer  of  this  verse  held  Ananias  to  have
sinned  in  keeping  back  part  of  the  money  obtained  by
selling  his  estate.  The  duplicity  with  which  Peter  charges
him  docs  not  consist  in  his  having,  when  (|uestioned,
passed  off  as  the  whole  a  part  of  the  money  thus  obtained.
It  is  only  Sapphira  (.'(8)  who  does  this.  Ananias,  accord-
ing to  52/.,  has  already  committed  the  crime  of  keeping
back  some  of  the  money  before  he  could  be  questioned
by  Peter.  This  cannot  possibly  be  reconciled  with
Peter's  declaration  in  64,  that  .Ananias  had  a  jH-rfect
right  to  retain  the  whole.  Notwithstanding  that  i)lain
declaration,  the  author  must  have  had  before  his  mind,
in  writing  b-i  f.,  the  stricter  view  that  it  was  an  absolute
duty  to  sell  all  the  property  and  to  hand  over  the  whole
of  the  money.

The hypothesis that the narratives are based on

4  Acts  4 various  sources  receives  material  support

f'  . ^^'  from  the  impossibility  of  discovering  any

/ . real  coherence  within  the  passages  them-

°  ■ selves.

Acts  4  33  treats  of  a  subject  quite  diflferent  from  the  matters

J  This  will  also  be  the  sense  if  we  accept  the  reading  of  WH,
which  omits  fi<rav  and  the  following  cat ;  they  are  retained  in
their  marginal  reading.

'  tni  TO  ain6  in  the  NT  always  refers  to  place  ;  AV  '  into  one
place."

878


COMMUNITY  OF  GOODS

dealt  with  in  the  preceding  and  the  following  verses.  Nor  can
434  be  connected  with  4  32.  It  could  be  connected  with  it  only
if  the  absence  of  poor  persons  were  the  reason  (yap)  why  all
property  was  common  (r'.  32)  instead  of  being  the  result  of  the
community  of  goods.  Further,  according  to  4  34/,  the  absence
of  poor  is  due  not  to  community  of  goods,  but  to  the  sale  of  all
property  in  land  and  houses  and  the  establishment  of  a  common
fimd,  whereas,  in  4  36-6  ii  again,  tliesale  of  any  property  appears
as  a  voluntary  .net  of  certain  individuals.  In  like  manner  242
is  so  definitely  repeated  in  "246  that  the  narrative  can  hardly  be
an  independent  composition.  It  must  l)c  a  compilation.  Kven
more  marked  is  the  repetition  of  the  first  clause  01'  24^,  eyiVero
Si  TTOCTT)  il)v\ji  <^6^o<,iii  the  third,  (j>6fio^  re  7iv  fiiyaf  iwi  ndyra^.
But  even  if  this  last  clause  l)e  omitted,  with  W  H  (though  it  is
difficult  to  explain  how  it  could  have  arisen  as  a  variant  to  the
first  clause),  -'^4,  with  the  reading  icai  ndvTff  St,  cannot  be  con-
nected with  what  precedes.  The  opening,  '  but  also  all  that
believed  («-eri)  toijcther,'  implies  that  others  were  together  as
well.  The  omission  of  the  Kai  sanctioned  by  WH  is  clearly  an
attempt  to  remove  the  difficulty.

All  attempt  to  prove  that  all  these  passages  have  been
compiled  by  an  editor  from  various  sources,  could  be
based  only  on  an  examination  of  the  whole  book.  Such
proof  is  not  needful  to  our  present  purpose.  It  will  be
sufficient  to  have  shown  that  the  book  presents  three
different  views  on  the  subject  of  community  of  goods.

If  it  l)e  asked  which  of  the  three  is  the  most  likely  to
he  ihc  true  view,  it  will  lie  safe  to  answer  that,  if  any
■nn,-  V. +Ti  °'"^  '^  '"  ^  l^referred,  it  is  that  which  is
'^■^^V^"^^®  simplest  (§  ir).  An  account  of  any
most  trust-  institution  of  the  kind,  clothed  with  the
^°^  ^'  glamour  of  the  ideal,  is  sure  to  have  been
exaggerated  by  writers  with  iticoniplete  information.

It  is  certain,  however,  that  the  general  idea  of  com-
munity of  goods  was  not  strange  to  the  primitive
Christian  society.  ^

It  is  indicated  in  such  sayings  of  Jesus  as  those  recorded  in
Mt.  tiigy:  IO9  lit2i-24,  and  in  such  information  about  his  own
life  as  we  find  in  Lk.  8  3.  Besides,  we  know  there  was  a  dis-
tinctly Kbionite  tendency  which  applied  a  literal  interpretation
to  the  blessings  pronounced  on  the  poor  and  hungry  (Lk.  (iio/I
24  f.),  and  saw  the  path  of  salvation  in  giving  away  all  property
in  alms  (Lk.  634^;  11  41  1221  33  ll>9).  It  is  not  certain  indeed
that  this  Kbionite  tendency  was  dominant  in  the  period  im-
mediately following  the  death  of  Jesus.  (The  passages  cited
were  taken  up  by  the  Third  ICvangelist  from  a  document  which
itself  rests  upon  an  older  written  collection  of  sayings  of  Jesus.
This  is  proved  by  the  remodelled  words  in  Lk.  (i  20-26,  which,
not  having  any  reference  to  the  disposition  of  the  persons
addressed,  certainly  did  not  come  in  their  present  form  from  the
lips  of  Jesus.  Besides,  what  is  here  recommended  is  not  so
much  community  of  goods  as  almsgiving.)  The  epistles  of  Paul,
which  are  our  most  trustworthy  authority,  only  show  that  in  his
time  (20-30  years  after  the  death  of  Jesus),  the  community  at
Jerusalem  was  poor,  or,  at  least,  contained  a  good  many  poor
members,  and  stood  in  need  of  assistance  from  the  Gentile-
Cliri-tian  churches  (ei?  tows  ayt'ous,  iCor.  Ifii  2  Cor.  84  9i;
but  Toil-  WTio^iot'  alone.  Gal.  2  10  ;  eis  rout  tttioxoiii  tCiv  iiyiiov,
Kom.  1526).

The  Gosjiels  prove  that  many  poor  people  had  already
attached  themselves  to  Jesus  in  his  lifetime.  An  active
care  for  these,  and  consequently  a  more  or  less  organised
ttaKOvia,  must  be  assumed  in  the  original  church  at
Jerusalem.  We  may  well  suppose  that,  in  as  far  as
this  ministration  took  the  form  of  a  community  of  goods,
it  led,  according  to  the  usual  le.sson  taught  by  other
attempts  of  the  kind,  to  the  increase  of  jOTverty.  It
may,  moreover,  lie  conjectured  that  in  the  earliest
Christian  times  the  institution  of  community  of  goods
increased  the  tendency  to  forego  the  pursuit  of  wealth,
which,  even  without  that  institution,  was  occasioned,
according  to  i  Thess.  4ii-i8  2  Thess.  2i/.  86-13,  ^'X  'he
belief  that  the  end  of  the  world  was  near  at  hand  and
by  the  unrest  to  which  this  belief  gave  rise.  W'e  may
suppose  that  wealthy  meml)ers  of  the  community  in
Jerusalem  allowed  their  projxjrty  to  become  available
for  the  use  of  poor  brethren  ;  and  this  does  not  preclude
the;  belief  that  of  their  own  free  will  certain  persons,  such
as  Barnabas  and  Ananias,  went  further  and  sold  their
belongings  for  the  benefit  of  the  community.

.Still,  it  is  certainly  not  true  that  communism  was
prescril>ed  as  obligatory.

The  uncertainty  01  the  subject  is  shown  also  by  .\cts  61-6. It

1  We  can  here  only  mention  the  possible  iiiduence  of  Es-
senism. See  Kssenes,  |  3.

879


CONDUITS  AND  RESERVOIRS

would  I>e  very  remarkable  if  there  were  no  necessitous  persons
whose  support  could  be  neglected  but  widows.  The  phrase
seems  to  be  due  to  a  usage  of  the  author's  own  (comparatively
late)  period,  in  which,  according  to  i  Tim.  5  3-16,  the  '  widows '
had  an  official  po.sition  in  the  community.  It  is  strange  also
that,  although  the  mention  of  the  names  of  the  seven  men
appointed  to  '  serve  tables'  (Jiaxofetc  Tpan-<Y<"«)  points  to  a
genuine  tradition,  their  (unction  —  they  are  nowhere  styled
SidKovoi  —  is  never  referred  to  afterwards  (they  are  not  to  be
identitied  with  the  irpfapvTtpoi  of  11  30),  and  that  only  the
Helleni.sts  had  to  complain  of  the  neglect  of  their  widows.  Just
as  in  Acts  1636-39  a  less  .serious  dispute  is  narrated  in  place  of
one  that  had  more  important  issues(see  CouNCil.  t)K  Jkkusalkm,
8  3),  so  here,  at  the  Iwttom  of  the  narrative  before  us,  there  really
lies,  we  may  conjecture,  some  di.ssension  occasioned  by  different
conceptions  of  Christianity  entertained  by  the  natives  of  Pales-
tine and  by  the  Christian  Jews  who  had  come  in  from  abroad.

In  any  case,  the  community  of  goods  did  not  last
long,  though  the  view  that  it  came  to  an  end  when  the
society  was  dispersed  by  the  persecution  (Acts  8 1-4)  is
no  more  than  a  conjecture.

The  subsequent  influence  of  the  idealised  picture  in

Acts  is  very  noteworthy. In  the  exhortation  to  works

„ .  .of  charity  in  the  lipistle  of  Harnabas

6.  bUDsequent  ^^^g^ ^^^  similarly  in  the  Teaching  of

"the^Sea**  ^''^  Twelve  Apostles  (4  8),  the  statement
of  Acts4  32  is  repeated  as  a  command  :
'  Say  not,  "  It  is  private  property  "  '(ow  ipih  tSia  elvai).
Lucian,  De  morte  Peregrini,  13,  states  that  the  Christians
supi)orted  those  in  need  from  a  common  fund  {airb  rod
Koiuov),  and  ridicules  the  credulity  with  which  they
allowed  themselves  to  be  cheated  by  imp>ostors  in  so
doing.  The  influence  of  the  same  ideal'on  the  monastic
life  is  obvious.  p.  w.  s.

COMPASS.  For  n>"inp,  m'hiigah  {vepiywyia  [Q
mg.  ?]  Hw"<.\(,)r  oni. ),  RV  CoMP..\ssKS,  Is.  44i3,t  cp
H.-\NDicKAi-T.s,  §  2.  For  33-13,  karkobh,  Ex.275  38 4t.
AV  •  ledge,'  see  Alt.-\R,  §  9  [a).

CONANIAH  (-in^jyia,  Kt.,  •in;;!:^,  Kr.,  but  accord-
mg  to  Baer  in  2  Ch.  31 13  ■'iri'333  ;  cp  Cuknamah,
•in^j33  ;  §  31  ;  'God  hathst.iblished,'  XCONCNIAC  [BL]).
I.  Chief  of  the  temple  overseers,  temp.  Hezekiah,  in
conjunction  with  his  brother  Shimei,  according  to  tlie
Chronicler,  2  Ch.  31 12  /  (AV  Cononiah)  (Xwxf'''S
[A],  -ufiev.  [B  V.  12]).

2.  A  '  chief  of  the  Levites  '  (Ch.)  or  '  captain  over  thousands'
(i  Ksd.),  temp.  Josiah  ;  2  Ch.  809  (jfiovenas  [.A*],  -aixev.  [A'])=
I  Esd.  I9  (ifxaviai  [B.V],  ^avaias  [L]  ;  EV  Jeconia.s).

CONCUBINE (u"3^''3, Gen.  2224; BibL Aram.

njn?,  Dan.  02).  See  Marriage,  §  5,  Family,  §  5  «,
and  Slavkrv.

CONDUITS  AND  RESERVOIRS.  In  a  country
where  the  rain -supply  is  small  and  irregular,  which
possesses  scarcely  more  than  one  perennial  stream  (^n:
[n'K;  cp  Am.  524),  and  is  not  rich  in  springs,  the  preserva-
tion of  water  in  cisterns  and  reservoirs,  and  the  employ-
ment of  trenches  or  conduits  to  convey  it  to  the  place
where  it  was  most  needed,  must  have  been  of  paramount
importance.  Hence  the  indispensability  of  rain  and
the  trust  placed  in  the  continuance  of  its  supply
form  the  basis  of  some  of  the  best-known  and  most
beautiful  metaphors  in  OT.

Leaving  to  the  article  Springs  [^.».]  what  needs  to
be  said  upon  the  natural  supply  of  water,  we  propose
here  to  notice  the  artificial  means  by  which  it  was
stored  and  conveyed.

The  ordinary  method  of  preserving  water  was  to  dig
(ma.  l£3n)  or  hew  (3'in)  out  of  the  living  rock  a  reservoir,
. _.  .  varying  in size  from  a  small pit  to  an

extensive  subterranean  vault  lined  with
masonry.  Such  cisterns  go  back  to  pre-Israelite  times
(Dl  611  Neh.  925).  To  dig  them  was  the  work  of  a
benefactor  and  deserving  of  special  mention  [e.g. ,  2  Ch.
2*3  lo),  and  the  o[x,'ning  ceremony,  on  one  occasion  at
least,  becomes  the  subject  of  a  song  (see  Bker).

The  ordinary  Heb.  term  is

I.  n'l3,  bir  (for  variant  forms  cp  BDB  s.v.  ;  Aavxot  (B.\L]),

880


CONDUITS  AND  RESERVOIRS


properly  an  artificial  excavation,  and  thus  distinct  from  IKS
Mv,  a  natural  well  (see  Springs).  When  dry  the  bdr  is  a  pit
(cp  Gen.  3"  20)  which  can  be  used  as  a  prison  (J  er.  386  Gen.  40 15,
etc.;  cp  113,1  n'3  Kx.  12 29).  In  poetical  language ^^r  is  applied
to  the  pit  of  the  grave  (Hr.'.'Si?)  or  to  ShOOl  (I's.  ;i03(4l).  In
only  two  cases  does  bdr  occur  as  part  of  a  place-name  ;  see  BoK-

ASIIAN,  SiRAH.

Other  terms  .ire  : —

2-  •*??!  i'''^'''"  (cp  \r.  jilbiyai""  'watering  trough'),  Is.  30 14
(AV  'pit*;  in  K2ck.47iit  EV  '  marish '  [niorass]),  and

3.  C'3:.  Jer.  143  2K.  3i6  (AV  'ditch,'  KV  'trench'),  perhaps
used  for  purposes  of  irrigation  (cp  2  K. 'J5  12  ^  Jer.  5'.' i«,  39 10
after  Klo.);  see  Agkiculturk,  g  5.

4-  "^IP^t  bfrikhah  (kpjji'j),  icoAu^^TJepa)  is  used  of  an  artificial
pool,  Eccl.  26  (with  ncj'),  hut  elsewhere  appears  to  refer  to
natural  springs.  Several  pools  were  found  in  and  around
Jerusalem  (cp  below,  and  see  Jerusalkm),  also  in  Gibeon
(2  .S.  213),  Hebron  (/A  4  12),  and  Samaria  (i  K.  2238) ;  for  Cant.
74(5],  see  Haih-kahbi.m.

5.  n;,'5p,  miktuith.  Is.  22 II,  AV  'ditch,'  RV  'reservoir.'

It  was  of  the  utmost  importance  that  citadels  should
be  well  supi)lied  with  tanks  for  collecting  the  rain-water
(so  at  Masada  and  Macha-rns,  Jos.  ^liit.  xiv.  14  6,  BJ
vii.  62,  ^vSoxetof).  A  cistern  in  the  teni|jle  is  mentioned
in  Ecclus.  ;j03  [aiirobo\iiov)  :  cp  below,  and  sec  SEA,
Brazen.  In  the  towns  it  seems  to  have  been  customary
for  every  house  to  possess  a  cistern  ^  (cp  2  K.  18 31  Prov.
5 15).  The  best  e.xample  of  this  is  found  in  Mesha's  stele
(//.  24/.);  -there  was  no  cistern  (13)  in  the  midst  of
the  city  in  nmp.  and  I  said  to  all  the  people,  "Make
ye  every  man  a  cistern  in  the  midst  of  his  house."'
The  same  king  records  that  he  made  pla'?  mlrxn  'nSd,
'  the  locks  or  dams  of  the  reservoirs  ^  for  water ' ;  but
whether  nm3,':n  (the  cutting[s]  /.  25)  which  Mesha  made
with  the  help  of  his  Israelite  prisoners  was  a  conduit
which  fed  these  reservoirs  is  uncertain.  The  view  is
not  improbable,  however,  since  the  art  of  forming
channels  to  convey  water  was  common  to  all  the  Semitic
races  and  was  not  due  to  foreign  influence.

Remains  of  conduits  (,i^p,  v^po.-^(jiyo%  [B.\QL],
aquccductus'^),  connected  as  a  rule  with  pools,  are  to
2  Conduits  ^  f"""'!  '"  many  places  in  Palestine  ;
■  they  are  usually  mere  trenches  running
along  the  surface  of  the  ground,  subterranean  channels
being  somewhat rarer.  Certain of the rock-cut

channels  and  cisterns  in  Jerusalem  (as  well  as  the
Siloam  conduit)  may  be  pre-exilic  ;  in  many  cases,
however,  they  have  Ijeen  enlarged  or  repaired  to  such
an  extent  as  to  make  it  extremely  difficult  to  tell  to
what  period  they  bx;long.

Jerusalem  was  well  supplied  with  water.  Perhaps
the  most  important  of  its  supplies  was  that  which  came
3  Pools  of  '^™'"  '^'^  so-called  Pools  of  Solomon  beyond
Solomon  '^'-'''''''^'^em  (13^  m.  distant).  These  pools
•  (situated  close  by  the  Kal'at  el-liurak)
are  near  '.Atan  and  .Xrtas,  and  must  have  been  devised
for  a  more  important  work  than  that  of  merely  irrigating
gardens  ■«  (Eccles.  '26  Ecclus.  24  30/  ,  sec  Bath-r.\bkim).
There  are  three  of  them,  partly  hewn  and  partly  enclosed
by  masonry.  The  lowest  seems  to  have  been  used  at
one  time  as  an  amphitheatre  for  naval  tlisplays.

The  pools  are  fed  by  two  large  conduits.  The  one,
after  cutting  through  the  valley  of  '.Atan  (Etnm)  by  a
tunnel,  runs  through  the  W'ady  Der  el-Henat,  along  the
W'ady  el-Hiar  (Valley  of  Springs),  and  ultimately  enters

1  .\s  Robin.son  rem.irks(^A'  1  ^'ioff.),  '  the  main  dependence  of
Jerusalem  at  the  present  d.iy  is  on  its  cisterns,  and  this  has
probably  always  Iwen  the  c.-\se.'

'•J  The  meaning  is  not  certain  :  perhaps  it  is  '  two  reservoirs."

3  The  Heb.  n^J'B,  ifdln/i,  is  used  of  ditches  for  irrigating
trees  (F.zok.  31  4  trviTTtuLa  or  criiorrifia  [H.\Q]),  of  a  trench  round
an  altar  (i  K.  18 32  3s  38  ;  in  these  pass-i^es  OaaAa  [L]  »dAa<T<Ta.
[H.VD,  and  of  conduits  or  aqueducts  in  the  ordinary  .sense  of  the
word  (Job3825,  pv<rtt  [BKA]  Is.73[om.  (0uNA<jr]  2  K.  I817  Is.
362  2  K.2O20).

4  The  name  'Solomon's  Pools'  is  based  solely  upon  Eccles.
26,  and,  notwithstanding  the  statement  of  Josephus,  we  have  no
evidence  that  the  gardens  of  Solomon  were  situated  in  the  fiP".
Artiis{  =  horius,  garden?);  Baed.(3;  129^:

881


the  Bir  el-Derej  (Spring  of  Steps).  The  other  is  much
longer  and  full  of  windings.  Starting  fn^m  a  large
reser\oir,  the  Birket  el-'Arrub  (now  converted  into  a
garden),  it  leaves  the  Wady  of  the  same  name,  and
after  crossing  the  plateau  of  Teku'  Hows  into  the
middle  pool.  Conduits  connect  also  the  .Sealed  Spring
(mcKl.  'Ain  Sdlih),  identified  by  a  nuxlern  tradition
with  the  Viyj  [3  in  Cant.  4  12,  and  the  'Ain  Atan  ^  with
this  water-system.

From  the  Pools  of  Solomon  the  water  is  led  into  the
city  by  two  conduits.  The  higher  g(x.'s  along  the  N.
slope  of  the  valley  of  Burak,  descending  near  Rachel's
tomb  and  rising  again.  (A  syphon  was  used  and
remnants  of  the  piix;s  may  still  be  seen.)  It  then
proceeds  towards  the  hill  of  'lantur  and  the  W.  er-
Rababi  (see  HinN(JM,  Vai.i.ky  ok).  It  is  partly  rock-
hewn  and  partly  made  of  mas<jnry.  The  lower  conduit
(still  complete)  goes  with  many  windings  from  tne
lowest  pool,  E.  along  the  ^Xoyxi  of  the  valley,  and  then
W.  above  Artas.  One  arm  of  the  conduit  was  con-
nected (probably  under  Herod's  government)  with  the
spring  of  Artas  and  ran  to  the  Frank  mountain.  The
main  arm  passes  Bethlehem  and  Rachel's  tomb  on  the
S. ,  proceeding  sometimes  alxjve  ground  in  a  channel
about  I  ft.  square,  and  sometimes  underground  in
earthen  jjipes.  It  then  crosses  the  Hinnom  valley  by  i
bridge  of  nine  low  arches  and  meets  the  oth^  r  conduit
hard  by  the  Birket  es-Sultan.  It  finally  runs  Si:.  and
E.  along  the  valley  over  the  causeway,  under  the  Bab
es-Silseleh  (Chain-gate),  and  supplies  the  '  Elkas '  and
the  king's  cistern  in  the  Haram.'-^  These  conduits  were
repaired  by  the  Sultan  Mohammad  ibn  Kalaun  of
Egypt  about  1300  A.  u.  Their  date  is  unknown.  The
upper  conduit  is  more  artificial,  and  probably  the  older.
Some  refer  them  to  the  golden  age  of  Judah,  and
tradition  (oral  and  Rabbinical)  ascriljes  them  to  Solomon.
It  has  also  been  pointed  out  that  they  exactly  resemble
the  conduits  which  were  made  by  the  Arabs  in  Spain.-*

The  well-known  Siloam  conduit  runs  from  the  Virgin's
Spring {'Ain Siiti Maryam) to  the  Pool of Siloam

4  The  ^^^^  Jerusale.m).  It  runs  underground  in  a
Siloam ^'■''^"''°'^s  course  and  is  586  yds. in  length  ♦

Conduit  ^'^*'"  '^""^^'^  distance  Ijctween  the  two  pools  is
368  yds.).  At  its  lower  end  it  has  a  height
of  16  ft. ;  but  this  gradually  decreases  to  3^  ft. ,  and  then
to  2^  ft.  This  low  part,  however,  is  near  the  surface,
and  perhaps  was  originally  an  open  channel.  It  is  a
dangerous  conduit  to  explore,  as  the  water  is  apt  to  enter
unexpectedly  and  fill  the  passage.  In  various  places
false-cuttings  and  set-backs  are  found,  indicating  subse-
quent changes  in  the  direction  taken  by  the  workmen.
About  19  ft.  from  the  Siloam  end,  on  the  right-hand  side
as  one  enters,  is  an  artificial  niche  which  contained  a
B Siloam ^^^^^^  bearing  on  its  lower  face  an  inscrip-

Inacrintion.  *'°"'  '^^'^  ^^'"^^  '^''^^  observed  in  1880,  and
^  was  brought  under  the  notice  of  Schick.

The  tablet  was  alx)ut  27  inches  scjuare,  and  its  top  only
one  yard  above  the  bottom  of  the  channel.  The  inscrip-
tion,  known as the Siloam inscription, is  the  oldest

1  In  the  Jer.  Talmud  it  is  stated,  moreover,  that  a  conduit
led  from  'Atdn  (Etam)  to  the  temple  (Jer.  Voitta,  iii.  fol.  41  ;  cp
Lightfoot,  bescriptio  Teiii/ili.  chap.  23).

2  Many  subterranean  passages  and  structures  have  been
found  under  the  Haram.  Cp  Jos.  HJ  vi  73  84  94,  and  Tacitus  :
'  Templum  in  modum  arcis  .  .  .  fons  perennis  aqu.t,  cavati  sub
terra  montes,  et  piscinae  cistema;que  servandis  imbribus '  {Hist.
5  12).  Many  of  these  were  for  removinij  the  water  and  blood  of
the  sacrifices,  or  for  flushing  the  blood -channels  (cp  Vonia,  56,
Pesachim,  22,  Me'ila,  33,  Middoth,  82).

5  Jos.,  indeed,  speaks  of  a  conduit  which  Pilate  began  to  build,
taking  funds  for  the  purpose  from  the  temple  treasurj-  and
thereby  causing  grave  disturlances  (Jos.  Ant.  xviii.  3  2,  BJ  ii.
94),  and  in  one  place  gives  the  length  as  400  stadia— a  measure
which  would  suit  the  conduit  which  leads  from  the  Wady  Arrub.
It  is  more  probable,  however,  that  Pilate  simply  repiiired  the
existing  conduits ;  his  reign  w.-is  so  often  disturbed  by  Jewish
seditions  that  he  could  hardly  have  had  time  to  carrj-  out  such
an  immense  undertaking.  See  Schur.  GVl  I410,  and  cp  Eus.
HE  \x.  66.7.

*  More  precisely,  1757  ft.  (Gender);  but  Warren  gives  1708.


CONEY

Hebrew  inscription  extant  (cp  Dr.  TBS  xv.  /.  [facsimile
opposite].  Writing,  §  4).

ItrunsasfoUows:— '(i)lHeholdl  the  piercing  through  (nnpjn).
Now  thus  was  the  manner  of  the  piercing  through.  Whilst  yet
[the  miners  were  lifting  up]  (2)  the  piclc  (jp.j)  each  towards
his  fellow,  and  whilst  there  were  yet  three  cubits  to  be  struck
through,  there  was  hc.ird  the  voice  of  each  man  (3)  calling  to
his  fe.low,  for  there  was  a  fissure  1  in  the  rock  on  the  right
hand.  .  .  .  And  on  the  day  of  the  (4)  piercing  through,  the
hewers  (D3snn)  smote  each  so  as  to  meet  his  fellow,  pick  against
pick;  and  there  flowed  (5)  the  water  from  the  channel  (ksIS)''^
to  the  pool  (.i3na)  1200  cubits;  and  a  hundred  (6)S  cubits  was
the  height  of  the  rock  over  the  the  head  of  the  hewers."

The  difference  of  level  in  the  bed  of  the  channel  is  so  slight
that  one  i^  led  to  sup|>ose  that  the  excavators  had  some  kind  of
test.  .Shafts  were  made  here  and  there,  probably  in  order  that
the  men  might  find  out  their  whereabouts.  Tlie  first  shaft  is
470  ft.  from  tile  Siloain  end. After  that  the  pass;(gc  is  straighter.

The  conduit  is  the  work  of  a  people  whose  knowledge
of  engineering  was  in  its  infancy.  Its  date  is  uncertain.
It  may  be  the  one  referred  to  in  2K.  "iOzo  {  =  2  Ch.
3230);'*  but  the  allusion  in  Is.  86  to  the  'waters  of
Shiloah  that  How  gently '  suggests  that  it  may  have  lx;en
in  existence  in  the  days  of  Ahaz.'

More  or  less  parallel  with  this,  but  straighter, is  a
channel,  evidently  connected  with  the  Birket  el-Hamra
(Red-pool), which lay to the E. of the


6.  Other

Conduits.


Siloain  pool.  It  is  older  than  the  .Siloain
conduit  (see  Schick,  FEl-'Q,  Jan.  1891).
The  conduit  of  the  upper  pool  in  the  highway  of  the
fullers  field  (2  K..  18 17)  is  identified  by  Wilson  with
the  acjueduct  which  seems  to  have  run  over  the  Cotton
Grotto  to  the  convent  of  the  .Sisters  of  Zion."  Among
other  conduits  may  l)e  noticed  the  one  which  connects
the  Citadel  or  Castle  of  David  (el-Kala'a)  with  the
Birket  Mamilla.  It  is  possibly  referred  to  in  Jos.
BJ  \.  73,  where  mention  is  made  of  the  'gate  where
water  was  brought  in  to  the  tower  of  liippicus '
(the  latter  is  usually  identified  with  the  NW.  tower  of
the  citadel).

For  others,  less  important,  .see  the  memoirs  of  the  PEF.
Many  remains  of  conduits,  more  or  less  well  preserved,  have
been  found  in  other  parts  of  Palestine.  It  will  be  sulTicient  to
mention  the  aqueduct  at  Jericho  across  the  Wady  el-Relt  (see

{OS.  Ant.  xvii.  13  i,  Schiir.  Gl  \ '  1  276)  ;  another  on  the  road  from
)amascus  to  Palmyra,  not  far  from  jerfid  ;  the  kaiifit  Fir'aiin,
which  crosses  the  Wady  Zeda  near  Do' at  (Edrci);  and  the
aqueduct  conveying  water  from  'Ain  et-Tabigha  (Perrot-Chip.
Art  in  J  ud.  I330;  BaedS^)  ■2()i).

(See  'Die  Wasserversorgung  der  Stadt  Jerusalem,'  ZDP\'
1  132-176  (1878);  Henzinger,  Ileb.  Arch.  ^1  jff'.  ■230  /.  ;  Warren
and  Condcr,  Joitsalem ;  Perrot  and  Chipiez,  Art  in  Judiea;
B.ied.  passim,  and  the  many  notes  and  articles  in  the  PEF
publications).  S.  A.  C.

CONEY  (iDL'*,  see  Shaphan  ;  xoiporPY^^ioc
[BAIL]  [Th.  and  many  MSS  of  LXX  have  AArcooc
in  Ps.  104i8],  Lev.  lis  [in  ©"ai-_  unless  the  order  of
the  verses  is  accidentally  reversed,  jac*  is  translated
3tt<n'7roi's]  Dt.  14?  Ps.  104i8  Pr.  a026t)  should  rather
be  'rock  badger'  (RV"'e),  the  animal  having  been
identified  with  certainty  as  Ilyrax  syriacus — called  in
Syriac  b'l^asa  and  in  Arabic  wabr''  (Rob.  LBR  3 387,
Tristram,  /''/•■/'I/.).

'  m'i,  wholly  unknown,  is  translated  by  .S.iyce  {RPi-)  I175)
'excess,'  referring  to  a  .set-back.  For  the  illegible  part  in  the
middle  of/.  3  he  suggests  'and  on  the  left.'

2  kxt;,  like  Ass.  turifu,  seems  to  mean  'channel,'  'water-
course '  ;  cp  CO riyiiff.

3  So  most,  reading  nCK  nlxla  \  but  the  surface  of  the  rock  is
here  only  about  10  ft.  above  the  top  of  the  tunnel  whilst  towards
the  N.  It  is  170  ft.  This  reailiiig  may  represent  the  average
thickness  of  the  rock.  Since,  however,  at  the  place  of  juncture
(812-18  ft.  from  the  b.-ick  of  the  Virgin's  fountain)  there  is  a
difference  of  height  of  just  13  inches,  another  reading  nOK  rhlSi
'  a  portion  '  [of  a  cubit],  has  been  proposed  (cp  Sayce,  ioc.  cit.).

*  It  is  otherwise  identified  with  the  one  whose  remains  running
W.  and  E.  were  discovered  during  the  digging  of  the  founda-
tions for  the  English  church.

*  So  Stade,  Cyi  1  594.

6  Jos.  (BJ  v.  4  2)  places  the  Royal  Caverns  (Cotton  Grotto)
near  the  Fuller's  .NIonument. .See  Athenirum,  6th  Feb.  1875.

1  The  name  thu/un,  which  is  almost  the  same  word  as  I^;^,  is
stated  by  Fresnel  C/iV/l^",  1838,  p.  514)  to  have  been  found  by
him  in  use  among  the  southern  Arabs  for  thejerdoa,  an  animal
somewhat  resembling  the  hyrax.


CONFESS,  CONFESSION

The  origin  of  the  Hebrew  word  is  quite  uncertain  :  it  has
been  derived  by  Rodiger  and  others  from  a  root  meaning  'to
bide,'  akin  to  jsj.  The  rendering  '  coney  '  (the  probable  mean-
ing of  the  Targumic  KiBc)  is  due  to  Jewish  tradition  ;  but  the
habits  of  the  rabbit  do  not  suit  the  references  in  Ps.  104  18  I'r.
30  26.  .Still  less  is  to  be  said  for  0's  rendering  \oifo^f,vKXu><i —
i.e.,  hedgehog.'

The  shdphdn  of  OT  is  known  to  naturalists  under  the
name  of  Frocavia  (Hyrax)  syriaca  (Schrb. ).  It  is  a
memtxir  of  the  Hyracoidea,  one  of  the  most  remarkable
orders  of  the  Mammalia.

The  Syrian  hyrax  is  about  the  size  of  a  small  rabbit,  and  has
a  superficial  resemblance  to  that  rodent.  It  is  of  a  dull  orange-
brown  or  fawn  colour,  and  has  prominent  incisor  teeth,  one  pair
in  ilie  upper  jaw  and  two  in  the  lower;  the  former,  as  in  the
rodents,  grow  throughout  life,  but  instead  of  being  chisel-shaped
at  their  tip  are  pointed,  and  the  teeth  are  triangular  in  section.
As  in  the  rodents,  there  is  a  wide  gap  between  the  incisor  and
the  molar  teeth.  The  zoological  position  of  the  order  Ls  obscure.
Cuvier  pointed  out  certain  anatomiciil  features  which  they  share
with  the  rhinoceros ;  but  this  rclation>hip  has  not  been  universally
accepted,  and  at  present  it  is  better  to  regard  lliem  as  an  isolated
order.  Palajontology  has  so  far  thrown  no  light  on  the  subject.
About  fourteen  species  of  hyrax  are  known,  all  of  them  from
Africa,  Arabia,  and  Syria.  'I'he  /'.  (Hyrax)  syriaca,  like  most
of  its  congeners,  lives  in  holes  in  rocky  ground ;  usually  many
animals  are  found  together,  and  they  are  ver>'  shy  and  easily
frightened.  When  alarmed  they  utter  a  shrill  cry  and  hastily
retreat  to  their  holes.  According  to  Nassonow,2  they  are  easily
tamed.  They  eat  green  leaves,  fruit,  h.iy,  etc.  They  are  said
to  make  a  nest  of  grass  and  fur,  and  to  bring  forth  from  two  or
three  to  six — three  .seems  the  usual  iiumljer— young  at  a  time.
'J'he  .Vrabs  esteem  them  as  food,  though  Canon  Tristram  found
them  'rather  dry  and  insipid.'  n.  M. — K.  E.  S.

CONFECTION.  CONFECTIONARIES  (Ex.  .30 25  35.
A\' ;  i.S.  613,  I'A'),  old  words  meaning  a  comjxisition
(co/tfectio),  or  mixture  of  drugs  or  dainties,  and  those
who  prepare  such  mixtures — i.e.,  'apothecaries' —
respectively.  RV  correctly  translates :  '  a  perfume
(npT)  after  the  art  of  the  perfumer  (ngn).'  In  i  S.  I.e.
female  perfumers  are  meant  (ninpi,  fj.vp€\f/ol,  unguen-
tarice).  It  is  the  masc.  pl.  of  the  same  word  (cnpi)
that  is  rendered  'apothecaries'  in  EV  (R\'"'>.'-  'per-
fumers ')  in  Xeh.  38  (twaK-et/*  [BN],  puKeti/x  [.\],  fivpexpoi
[L],  pigmeiitarii').

CONFESS.  CONFESSION.  The  verb  .it  in  Hiph.
and  Hiihp.  means  either  to  acknowledge  aloud  in  ritual

1  Th t  worship  God's  great  and  glorious  attri-

e  term. Yt,^^^^  ^  _  ^^ praise him )  or to  make  a
solemn  confession  of  sin.

The  former  meaning  is  far  the  commoner  in  Hiph.,  the  latter
in  Hithp.  (a)  For  rn\r\  '  to  confess,'  see  Ps.  32  5  Prov.  28  13  t ;
(/')  for  n^^n"?  '  to  praise,'  2  Ch.  30 22!  (RV  '  making  confession  ').
For  the  more  usual  senses,  see  (<z)  Ps.  7  17  [18]  42  6  iCh.  KI834
and  elsewhere,  (i)  Lev.  65  1(5  21  20  40  Nu.  67  Ezra  10  i  Neh.
16  9  2/.  Dan.  9  4  20.  Note  also  that  the  noun  'TJW,  generally
'  thanksgiving,' has  in  Josh.  TigF^zralOii  the  sense  of  '  confes-
sion (of  sin).'  0  renders  the  verb  usually  by  (^o/jiokoytiv,
tfo(ioAoyT)<ris,  once  by  o/JioKoytlv ;  it  never  renders  the  noun  by
bfioKoyCa.

No  doubt  there  is  primitive  Semitic  symbolism  in  the
choice  of  ,it  to  express  the  religious  act  of  confession  ;
but  here,  as  elsewhere,  we  painfully  feel  the  uncertainty
of  the  subject  (cp  Lag.  Or.  222).  The  root-meaning
of  the  verb  is  '  to  throw,'  or  perhaps  (cp  Ar.  wadd  and
m.i,  Is.  118)  'to  extend."  Some  peculiar  gesture  used
in  confession  seems  to  be  indicated  (cp  BDB,  s.v.  .it).
In  rK.  838  'spreading  forth  the  hands'  is  specified;
but  this  was  simply  the  ordinary  gesture  in  prayer.

Individual  confession  of  sin  must  be  assumed  to  have
been common, though references to it are scanty.

2  Individual  J°s'^- ''9  is  a  passage  by  itself:  Achan
COnfeBsion '^ ^"^"""^ ^° confess, to 'give glory'

thereby  to  the  all-seeing  God  ;  but  he
is  not  forgiven.  Prov.  2813  (but  not  Ps.  32s,  where
pious  Israel  speaks)  extols  the  Ixsnefit  of  it.  i  K.  838
virtually  refers  to  it. WTien  God  touches  the  heart  or

J  That  this  and  nox.  jerboa  (as  supposed  by  ROdiger)  is  the
meaning  of  the  Greek  word  is  made  certain  by  the  testimony  of
Suidas  and  Hesychius  :  see  also  Ducange,  s.v.

2  Zffol.  Anz.  no.  490,  1895.

884


CONFISCATION  OF  GOODS

conscience  of  the  sinner  ("133S  pj,  6  A^V*  KopSlat
avTov,  but  EV  '  the  plague  of  his  own  heart ' ),  the
sinner  spreads  forth  his  hands  (see  §  i)  towards  'this
house'  and  obtains  forgiveness.  It  has  Ix'i^n  suggested
that  the  liturgical  formula  T^in*?  '  to  bring  to  remem-
brance'(?)  in  the  hciulings  of  Pss.  38  and  70/  (viewed
ns  a  single  psjilin)  means  that  those  i)salms  were  to  be
used  by  a  man  confessing  his  sin  at  the  offering  of  a
special  sacrifice  ;  ■•'  but  the  view  is  not  very  proliable.
After  the  destruction  of  the  temi)le,  the  confession  of
sin  by  the  high  priest  for  the  whole  ixx)ple  having
ceased,  the  duty  had  to  be  discharged  by  axch  Israelite
for  himself  in  the  synagogue.  Various  formuhe  came
into  use,  for  which  see  the  interesting  conspectus  in
the  article  '  SUndenbekenntniss '  in  Hamburger's  A'/i/,
Abth.  2.

(a)  Of  liturgical  confession  of  sin  there  are  three  great
examples: Nell.  U Is.  G37-()4  11  [12]  Uan.  9  (psalms  like
;'>1 may also be compared). F.arly


3.  Liturgical
confessions.


formuliB  use<J  by  the  high  priest  on  the
great  fast  have  bem  preserved  (see
A  roNKMKN  1",  I>AY  OF,  §7).  Sc"e  also  the  short  general
formula  quoted  by  Weber  (///</.  Theol.  321),  from  Talm.
ler.  Yoma,  end.  Such  comixjsitions  belong  to  the
class  called  <?-m,  -viddui.

(^)  There  were  liturgical  confessions  of  another  kind
—  Thanksgiving  confessions.  A  sacrifice  of  min  (con-
fession =  thanksgiving)  is  one  which  is  accompanied  by
a  loud  (because  earnest)  acknowledgment  of  God's
gracious  guidance  (Ps.  IO722;  cp  Jer.  33ii,  post-
e.xilic).  The  so-called  //cW/c-psalms  (I(.i5-107)  also  may
be  mentioned  here.  On  the  phrase  '»'?  ^i^■^^h,  descriiHive
of  a  special  service  of  the  Invites,  cp  Choirs,  §  2.

The  point  of  contact  between  confession  of  sin  and
eucharistic  confession  is  given  in  iK.  833.  When
Israel  is  defeated  because  of  its  sins,  '  if  they  turn  again
to  thee,  and  confess  thy  name,  and  pray  .  .  .,  then
hear  thou  in  heaven,  and  forgive';  and  it  is  in  harmony
with  this  that  two  out  of  the  three  liturgical  prayers
mentioned  above  liegin  with  a  glowing  acknowledgment
of  Yahwe's  gootlness.  (The  prayer  in  Dan.  9  merely
recognises  the  duty  of  thanksijiving  in  a  few  words
relative  to  God  s  fidelity  to  his  covenant. )

In the New Testament we find both senses of

i^ofxoKoyfiv  (10  thank, and  to  confess); e.g.,  Mt.  II2S

y—, 36. In  Rom.  14  11  the  verb  represents  j-arn  ;

see  Is.  4023. 'O/uoXcryeti' and  6/io\o7ia  usually

signify  '  profess,'  '  profession  '  ;  so,  e.g.,  i  Tim.  612,  AV

Heb.3i,  AV,  etc.

Confession  and  repentance  are  necessarily  connected —
the  Baptist's  hearers  are  baptised,  confessing  (e^ofxoXo-
yovftevoL)  their  sins  (Mk.  I5  Mt.  36) — and  therefore  so
also  are  confession  and  forgiveness.  See  ijn.  I9  and
especially  Ja.  5 16,  where  the  '  healing '  spoken  of  has
reference  to  the  sins  confessed-*  (moral  and  physical
troubles  connected  ;  cp  Is.  ftSs  1  Pet.  224).  The  dWijXot
( '  one  another  ' )  are  Christian  disciples.

The  '  confession  '  of  i  Tim.  612  may  be  that  made  at
Timothys  ordination  ;  but  that  of  Heb.  3 1  seems  to  lie
the  confession  of  the  divine  sonship  of  Jesus,  such  as
was  made  at  baptism  (see  H.m-tism,  §  3). T.  K.  c.

CONFISCATION  OF  GOODS  (Pp23  L"3y),  Ezra  726

(ZHMIA  TOY BlOY  ['^-^J' ZHMIUJCAI TA, YnAPX^NTA

[1.]):=  I  l-.sd.  824  (appypico  [-rikhJ  ZHMIA  [HA]).
Cp  Law  anij  Jlstick,  §  12.  i  Esd.  632  has  to.
vTrdpxovTa  aiTov  ett'ot  [ei's]  ^acriXiKci  '  all  his  goods  to
be  seized  for  the  king,'  for  I'.zra  611,  '  let  his  house  be
made  a  dunghill'  (©  otherwise).

For  the  'forfeiture'  threatened  in  Ezra  108  (iffiavSa  Ciri^,
axa9€f(aTt(r#7)<r(Tac  n-aera  rj  vnap(ii  avroO ;  i  Ksd.  94,  avitpu-
9ri<rovTCLL  TO.  KTJJnj  [-d^fferai  ra  virpaxovTa,  L]  ainitv  "seized  to
the  use  of  the  temple  ')  see  Ban,  §  3.


1  Cp  I  S.  10  26. For  y:3  in  7'.  37  (B  has  trvvatrnnia.

a  B.  Jacob,  ZA  Tiy  17  63/  ['97).

3  Read  rds  afiaprCat  (WH),  not  ra  irapairrufxara  (TR).

885


CONSECRATE

CONGREGATION.  For  HTJ?  'eddA.  and  (less  cor-
rectly) '?•^5  kdhal,  aiid  IVVD  md'fd,  .see  Assk.mblv.

' Thy  congreEation,'  Pi>. AS  10(11),  kV'ine-  'thy  troop'  (cp
aS.  •J3iii3, EV  ; but  see  Lkhi),  represents  a  corrupt Heb.

word,  "jn'ri  shoidd  probably  be  --n''-  Canaan  was  a  land  of
corn;  cp  Is.  'MS  17.  I'ully  correiteii,  the  line  becomes,  '  with  thy
bread  they  were  satisfied  therein  '  (Clie.  /'j.P)).

<rava-fwrfi\  (Acts  13  43)  is  in  RV  .Svnagocuk  (q.v.).

For  A<ls7  38  RVi'Hf-  as  in  Tyndalc,  etc.  (c'(CKAr)<ria),  see
CilUKtil  (so  in  Y.\).

CONGREGATION,  MOUNT  OF  (tnO  "iri;  iv  6p(i
v\l/i]\(^  [HNA(^r];  in  manic  tcslanieuti ;  jcasi  )*^i'.
kV's  modification  of  the  unfortunate  '  mount  of  the
congregation '  of  AV,  which  suggests  an  impossible
identification  with  Zion  (Is.  Hist).  The  phrase  occurs
in  the  boast  of  the  king  of  Habylon,  and  descrilx-s  a
mountain  whose  summit  was  above  the  '  stars  of  God '
(the  brightest  constellations),  and  its  base  in  '  the  recesses
of  the  north.'  The  best  rendering  is  'Mountain  of
(the  divine)  assembly.'

No  one  would  b.ive  thought  of  Mount  Zion,  but  for  llie
accidental  parallelism  of  Hipo  SnK  (.\V  'tabernacle  of  tlie
congregation,'  RV  'tent  of  meeting '),  and  the  supposed  nfur-
ence  to  a  passage  in  I's. -18213],  rendered  in  EV  Alount  Zion
(on]  ihe  sides  of  the  north,  the  city  of  the  great  king.'

lyia  IS  a  perfectly  vague  expression,  and  Ps.  48  2  [3]  is
under  too  great  a  suspicion  of  corruptness  to  serve  as  a
commentary.  1  It  is,  in  fact,  no  mountain  known  in
terrestrial  geograjihy  that  is  meant,  but  the  '  holy
mountain  of  Elohim  '  (Kzek. '2813/. ),  where  there  were
the  'flashing'  stones  (see  Chkkub,  g  2,  n. ),  and  the
cherub,  and  (so  the  prophet  thought)  the  king  of  Tyre
(see  Cheruh,  §  2).  It  is  not  stated  that  this  holy
mountain  was  in  the  north  ;  but  we  may  presume  from
Ezek.  1  4  that  it  was  regarded  as  l)eing  there.  This  is
confirmed  by  Job  3722  (emended  te.\t).

Out  of  the  north  cometh  (supernal nral)  brightness  ;2
On  Eloah  there  is  awe-inspiring  splendour.

That  the  Babylonians  Ijelieved  in  a  similar  northern
mountain  can  hardly  be  doubtful,  in  spite  of  Jensen's
learned  argument  [Kosniol.  203-209)  against  comjxiring
the  -lyio  -in  with  the  £-hars.ig-kurkiua  ('Mountain-
house  of  the  lands  ')  of  the  Prism  Inscription  of  Tiglath-
pileser  I.  (Del.  Par.  118).  It  appears  that  the  later
OT  writers  supposed  the  north  to  be  alx)ve,  and  conse-
quently the  south  below  the  earth  (see  Job 26 7,  and  cp
Earth,  Folk  (,)uakteks  ok).  The  expressions  •  I
will  scale  the  heavens,'  and  '  in  the  recesses  of  the
north,"  are  therefore  strictly  accurate.'

CONIAH  (in^JS ),  Jer.  2224. See  Jehoiachin.

CONONIAH  (-in^;??).  2Ch.31i2/  AV,  RV  Con-
amah.

CONSECRATE.  For  pij?  kiddei,  '  to  separate  '  (E.\.
283),  see  Ci.i-AN,  §  z/.  For  T  h'tO  viilli'  ydd,  'to  fill  the
hand  '  (i  Ch.  '-'O5),  whence  C'n'^0  millu'liii,  EV  CoNShCRAn  loN
(Ex.  -JO  22),  see  Clean,  §  3.  For  C'"}nn  heherim,  '  to  devote
(Mic.  413),  see  Ba.v,  |  i.  For  Tt.l  'to  dedicate  (oneself)'
(Nu.  0  12),  whence  "ly  nezer,  AV  Consecration,  RV  'separa-
tion' (Nu.  C7),  see  Nazikite.

TerfXtiufievo^  in  Heb.  7  28  is  better  rendered  'perfected'
by  RV  (cp  AV  2 10  69).  For  ivtKaivi.<nv  (Heb.  10  20),  RV
'dedicated,'  see  Deuicatk.


1  Some  (Olsh.,  Che.  PsJl),  We.)  omit  pSS  'nsn'  as  a  glos.s.
Che.  Z'j.P)  begins  a  new  stanza  with  the  words  ^'riS^-?  I^*^  "'-
WSS  '  Mount  Zion — in  its  recesses  is  his  jewel. '  J'BS  'jewel '  =
the  holy  city,  .is  in  Ezek.  7  22  (see  Smend,  ad  loc.).  Those  who
accept  neither  solution  of  the  problem  n-.ust  adopt  the  view
described  in  OPs.  317,  which,  however,  Baethg.  rightly  pro-
nounces not  quite  satisfactory.

2  Read  1'?i"  with  Che.  (Expos.  July  1897)  and  Duhm.

'  Hommel  (Hastings'  DBX  216)  adopts  this  view,  and  com-
pares lyiD  ^^  with  a  Bab.  title  of  the  sacred  mountain,
E-iarra,  'house  of  assembly."  Karppe  (■/<»»/>■«.  As.  9  ['97],  104)
thinks  that  the  sacred  mountain  w.is  originally  the  earth  itself.


CONSTELLATIONS

CONSTELLATIONS  (D^b'D?).  Is.  13io  EV.  See
Staks.  §3(/').

CONSUL.  A  letter  of  '  Lucius,  consul  of  the
Romans  '  {viraroi  'Pu)/xalwv  [ANV])  to  King  Ptolemy  of
F.gypt  is  given,  in  i  Mace.  1")  16-21.  See  LucifS,  i,  and
M.'^CCABKKS, !■  iK.sr.  sj  9.

CONSULTER  WITH  FAMILIAR  SPIRITS  (^Xb*
a'lN),  l)t.  iSii. See  Divi.NATIoN,  §  4(ii.).

CONVOCATION,  HOLY  {'SI?  N-1|5p).  E.x.12.6.
See  .Vssi-.MHi.v,  3.

CONVOY  (iTjnr),  2S.  19 18 [19],  RV^e-,  KV  Fkrry
Boat  (-/.t-.).

COOKING AND COOKING UTENSILS. The

task  of  preparing;  the  daily  footl  naturally  fi'll to the

- T7--i  1-  women  of  the  household,  even  women  of

1,  ii.iLCiiGns. , ,  ■  .

the  highest  rank  attendmg,  on  occasion,

to  this  part  of the household duties (2  S.  1.38/.  ; cp

below). An  apartment  or  apartments  specially  devoted

to  the  prejjaration  of  food — in  other  words,  a  kitchen —

can  have  been  founil  only  in  the  houses  of  the  wealthy.

We  can realise without  dilViculty  the kitchen of the

Hebrew  kings  and  nobles  from  the  life-like  picture  of

that  of  Rameses  111.  as  figured  on  his  tomb  at  Thebes

(reproduced in Wilk. .}//<■. Kgyl^t. 23234). In such

establishments  there  were  cooks,  niale(o'n3a:  i  S-  823/)

and  female  (nin2D: i  s.  8  13). In  connection  with  the

great  sanctuaries, too, such as Shiloh  (iS.  I49)  and

Bethel,  there  must  have  lx:en  something  of  the  nature

of  a  public  kitchen,  where  the  worshippers  had  facilities

for  preparing  the  sacrificial  meals. In  his  sketch  of  the

restored  temple  at  Jerusalem,  l'",zekiel  makes  provision

for  such  kitchens  (both  for  the  priests  [4tii9/".  ]  and  for

the  people  [21-24]),  which  are  here  called  'boiling-places'

(ni'?r23,  Mttveipe'tt  [BAQ]  :  v.  23)  and  'boiling  houses'

(RV V.  24 Q-SKinSTi'a, oiKOt tC}v fj.ayeipwi'). See

Cl.KAN,  §  2.

In an ordinary Hebrew household, whose food,

except  in\  great  occasions,  was  exclusively  vegetarian,

_  the  culinary  arrangements  were  of  the

2.  Culinary  si,npiest  kind.  Two  large  jars  (ir. -^w-Z/t,
arrangeuLents.  =>  j >  .

the  vSpia  of  Jn.  428  '16 jf.)  of  sun-dried
clay  had  a  place  in  the  meanest  house,  one  for  fetching
the  daily  supply  of  water  from  the  spring — carried  then
as  now  upon  the  head  or  on  the  shoulder  1  by  the  women
of  the  household  ((ien.  24  15/.  ;  cp  i  K.  18  33  [34]:  EV
'barrel') — the  other  for  holding  the  store  of  wheat  or
barley  for  the  d.iily  bread  ( i  K.  1 7  12  14  16  :  EV  '  barrel ' ).
In  both  the  passages  last  cited  the  American  revisers
rightly  prefer  the  rendering  '  jars. '  To  these  we  must
add  some  instrument  for  crushing  or  grinding  the  grains
of  the  various  cereals  used  as  food,  in  particular  wheat
and  barley  (see  Food,  §  i,  Bkkad,  §  i).  The  most
primitive  method  was  simply  to  crush  the  grains  between
two  stones  or  rather  to  rub  them  upon  a  fiat  stone  by
means  of  another.  Such  primitive  corn-grinders  or
'  grain-rubbers  '  (as  they  were  called  in  Scotland)  were
found  by  Mr.  Bliss  at  all  stages  of  his  excavations  in
Tell  el-Hesy — the  probable  site  of  Lachish — '  long  slabs
flat  on  one  side  and  convex  on  the  other,  w  ith  rounded
ends'  (Bliss,  A  Mound  of  Many  Cities,  83,  illustr.  p.
85).  They  are  found  also  tjoth  in  ancient  and  in
modern  Egypt  (see  illustr.  in  Erman's  Egypt,  190,  for
the  former;  for  the  latter,  Benz.  //./  85,  Nowack,
//.-/  liio).  The  pestle  and  mortar  (see  Moktak)  re-
present a  later  stage  in  the  art  of  preparing  food.
The  still  more  effective  hand-mill  or  quern  (n'nn)  with  its
upper  and  nether  millstones — hence  the  dual  form — is
the  last  to  appear  (Erman,  op.  cit.  189  ;  see  also  MiLi,).^

J  The  practice  varies  in  different  part.s  of  S>Tia.  In  some
parts  the  jar  when  empty  is  carried  on  the  head  ;  when  filled,
on  the  shoulder  (/.DMC  11  516).

2  Cp  DouKhiy,  Wr.  />«.  2179:  'After  the  water-skins  a
pair  of  millstones  is  the  most  necessary  husbandry  in  an  Arabian
household.'

887


COOKING

Milk  (y.w.)  was  kept  in  skins  (Judg.  419),  but  more
usually  in  bowls,  wine  in  skin  bottles  (see  Botti.E,  1),
oil  and  honey  in  earthenware  Jars  (see  Cku.>^k,  2).
Olives,  grapes,  figs,  and  the  other  fruits  of  the  soil  were
no  doubt  kept  partly  in  similar  jars,  partly  in  baskets,
of  which  several  varieties  are  named  in  OT  and  NT  (see
Basket).  Such  were  the  sal  (Sp.  Gen.  40 17  etc.;
K0.VOVV  [.ADEL]),  a  basket  of  wicker-work  ;  the  thie
(nj;:,  Ut.  2ti2;  KctpraWos  [BAFL];  canistrutn,  cp  \'erg.
A^.ii.  8180)  for  carrying  wheat  from  the  threshing-floor,
to  judge  from  the  passage  Dt.  28$  17  ('  blessed  shall  be
thy  basket  and  thy  kneading-trough  '  RV  ;  ©  aX  dirod?]-
Kai  ffov)  ;  ^  and  the  dud  (in),  a  basket  in  which  figs  were
gathered  (Jer.  242  Ps.  81  6  [7]  RV).  The  preparation  of
bread,  always  the  staple  article  of  diet,  recjuired  the
kneading-trough  (niNC'D)  of  wood,  earthenware,  or  bronze
according  to  circumstances,  and  the  oven  (tjb) — men-
tioned together  Ex.  83(728) — for  which  see  Brkad,  §2^.
Coming  now  to  cooking,  in  the  ordinary  sense — that
is, the preparation  of food  by  the agency  of fire. —

^ Prpnaration ^""^  ^"''  ^^'^^  ^^*^  various  methods  of
,? ,  cooking  to  which reference is  made

Of  lOOCl.  ,  ,  ,  , ,

may be grouped under two  heads.

The  food  w.as  cooked  either  ( 1 )  by  bringing  it  into
immediate  contact  with  the  source  of  heat,  whether  as
in  the  case  of  the  ash-cakes  {s///fiinericius pa?iis,  i  K.
196,  described  under  Bkkad,  §  2  «)  or  in  the  rough
and  ready  method  of  roasting  on  the  live  embers  (see
below)  or  in  the  more  civilised  method  of  roasting  by
means  of  spit  or  gridiron  ;  or  (2)  by  using  a  suitable
liquid  as  the  medium  for  transmitting  the  heat  required
— such  as  water,  milk,  oil,  or  fat  (in  frying).  It  would'
seem  that  the  Hebrews  originally  included  these  various
processes  under  the  general  term  '?c'3.

The  original  signification  of  this  verb.il  root  was  evidently  '  to
be  or  to  i)ecome  ripe,'  'to  ripen'  applied  to  grain  (Joel 3(41 13)
and  fruit  ((ien. 40 10),  from  which  the  transition  to  the  idea  of
'  making  (food)  eatable  ' — i.e.,  cooking — was  easy  (cp  post-biblical
TC'^,  something  cooked,  a  '  dish  ).  Hence  we  find  C'K3  7£r3
'cooked  with  fire'  (2Ch. 35i3)  and  D"23  7B\20  'cooked  with
(or  in)  water'  (Ex.129),  when  it  is  important  that  'ro.-jsted'
and  '  boiled  shall  l>e  precisely  distinguished.  In  ordinary
langu-ige,  however,  ?C'3  was  used  only  in  the  sense  of  'boil,'
while  for  the  various  forms  of  '  roasting '  indicated  under  (i)
above  (i  S.  215  Is.  44 16 19)  use  was  made  of  the  word  nh'i-
That  which  was  roasted,  a  roast,  was  '?S  (Is.  44 16 ;  cp  "Sj7
roasted  or  parched  corn  ;  see  Food,  §  i).  In  the  Talmud  a
third  verb  is  frequently  found  alongside  of  n7S  and  7S'3— viz.,
PPf",  which  is  applied  not  only  to  the  cooking  of  flesh  but  also  to
the  boiling  down  of  fruit  to  make  preserves  (.Ma'as.  4i,  AV/.
88).  These  three  verbs  are  generally  taken  to  represent  the
Latin  assare,  coqiiere,  and  elixare  respectively,  in  which  case
yhv  would  signify  '  to  boil  thoroughly  '  (cp  Cn.l  in  Ezek.  '24  10,
R  V  '  to  boil  well,'  and  nm.  "^-  7'.  5) :  it  is  probably  equiva-
lent to  our  'stew,'  since  in  the  absence  of  knives  and  forks  (see
Meai..s)  the  Oriental  has  to  stew  his  meat  till  it  can  be  readily
pulled  in  pieces  by  the  hand.

WTien  the  meat  was  boiled  in  a  larger  quantity  of
water  than  was  necessary  for  stewing,  the  rich  licjuor
which  resulted  was  known  as  pio.  mdrdk  (Judg.  6 19/.
Is.  604  kr.  [Kt.  pnE]  EV  '  broth  '),  also  perhaps  as  •""Ji^'O
(Ezek.  24  10,  RV  'make  thick  the  broth').  The  meat
and  the  broth  might  be  served  together  or  separately
(the  latter  by  Gideon,  Judg.  loc.  cit.).  When  the  meat,
on  the  other  hand,  is  set  on  with  a  smaller  quantity  of
water,  to  which  onions  or  other  pungent  vegetables  or
spices  have  been  added,  the  result  is  the  favourite
Arab  stew  yahni  {^.),  perhaps  the  p^Vr  [Ned.1)
and  nip^c*  (^Ab.  Z.ar.  '2s)  of  the  Mishna.  The  '  savoury
meat '  (ceyBOi  Gen.  274  :  cp  Prov.  283)  which  Rebekah
prepared  from  '  two  kids  of  the  goats '  was  doubtless  a
spicy  stew  of  this  kind.

A  reference  to  another  modem  dish,  kibbeh,  which  has  been

1  The  Mishnic  Heb.  'po  is  a  large  metal  basket ;  cp  BDB,
and,  for  this  and  other  vessels,  J.  Krengcl,  Das  Hausgerat  in
dtr  Mishnah,  1  Theil,  1899  (see  index).


COOKING  AND  COOKING  UTENSILS


called  the  national  dish  of  S^ria,  has  been  fuund  by  various
scholars  in  Prov.  'JTaa  kV  :  '1  hough  thou  shoulde'st  bray  a  fool
in  a  mortar  with  a  pestle  anions  bruised  corn,  yet  will  not  his
foolishness  depart  from  him.'  This  exactly  describes  the  opera-
tion of  inakiniJ  kihhth  :  the  mutton  is  first  (K>uiidcd  to  shreds  in
a  wooden  or  stone  mortar ;  it  is  then  mixed  with  hurghul  (see
Kdoo,  (  i).  and  the  whole  boiled  and  served. I  [Hut  on  the  text
SCO  Exp.  T.  viii.  I '97],  432;  where  niB'in  'bruised  corn'  (?)  is
emended  to  Vian,  'his  fellows.'J

When  an  animal  of  the  herd  (npa)  or  of  the  flock
(|^is■  see,  further,  Food,  §  11,  and  Sacrifice)  was
to  l>e  prepared  for  food  it  was  first  slaughtered  accord-
ing to  the  prescrilxxl  method  and  the  carcase  thoroughly
drained  of  its  blood.  For  skinning.  Hint  knives  (cp  rhzva
Judg.  1929)  were  used  in  early  times  (cp  Josh,  iiiff.,  RV
*  knives  of  Hint ') — such  as  those  recovered  from  Tell-el-
Hesy  (Bliss,  op.  cit.  194,  illustr.  106).  Sacrificial
knives  were  later  known  as  D's'^no  (F-zralg;  cp  post-
biblical  fii57n)  ;  a  knife  for  ordinary  domestic  purposes
was  |'2r  (I'rov.  2^2) — in  later  Hebrew  always  pso.  The
animal  was  then  cut  up,  the  technical  term  for  which  was
nn:  (Lev.  16  12,  and  often) — a  single  p'ece  nnj" — the
priests  received  the  portions  that  were  their  due  and  the
remainder  was  consigned  to  the  pot.  The  latter,  if  of
copper,  had  in  later  times  to  be  scrupulously  scoured
(p-c)  and  rinsed  (rcc-,  Zebah.  \\i,ff.;  cp  Mk.  74)
when  the  cooking  was  over.

The  primitive  hearth  was  formed  of  a  couple  of
stones  by  which  the  \>o\.  was  supported,  room  being  left

4  Firinc- ^"-'"'^•'^''^ '^^''  ''^^' f"^' — wood or  dung  (see

°'  Coals,  §  2).  Large  pots  might  be  placed
on  the  top  of  the  tatiniir  or  baking  oven,  as  at  the
present  day  ;  such  an  arrangement  was  found  to  have
been  in  use  in  the  ancient  Lachish  (see  Bliss,  op.  cit.
97).  The  sinaller  pots  were  boiled  on  a  chafing  dish
or  pan  containing  charcoal  (c'n  its,  Zech.  126  AV
'hearth  of  fire,'  RV  'pan  of  fire'),  as  in  Rameses'
kitchen.  In  Lev.  11 35  there  is  mention,  alongside  of
the  tannur  or  oven,  of  the  kiraim  (d'TD,  Kvdpbirohi%
[BF],  xi'-rpoTToSes  [AL]  ;  EV  '  range[s]  for  pots,'  RV"'S-
'  stew-pan  ').  According  to  the  Talmud,  it  was  a  port-
able cooking-stove,  capable  of  holding  two  pots  (hence
the  dual)  as  distinguished  from  the  kuppdh  (,1313,  better
nsz),  a  stove  which  had  room  for  only  one  pot  (Jastrow,
Diet.,  S.V.).  Like  the  tannur,  it  was  of  baked  clay,
and,  therefore,  easily  broken  (cp  Di.  in  lac.  and  Now.
HA  2280,  n. ).  The  kirHh  (in  the  sing. )  and  the  kiippdh
are  frecjuently  mentioned  together  in  the  Mishna  (see
esp.  Kflim).  For  carrying  the  necessary  charcoal  a
ladle  or  firepan  (nnns)  was  used  (E.\.  273883  ;  in  Num.
166^  'censer'  ;  Kel.  237)  ;  for  stirring  and  adjusting
it,  a  pair  of  tongs  (D;ni;'?p  Is.  66)  ;  07;  shovels  {pala  or
rutrum),  for  removing  the  ashes,  are  mentioned,  but
only  in  connection  with  the  great  altar  (see  Ai,t.\r,  §  9).
The  bellows  (nsp  ;  <pv<TriT-fip  [BNAg])  of  Jer.  629  was
probably  used  only  by  the  metal  smelters — for  a  descrip-
tion and  illu-stration,  see  Wilkinson,  op.  cit.  2312.
The  ordinary  housewife  was  content  to  fan  the  charcoal
with  a  fan  (nsjs,  AV/.  I67)  of  feathers,  as  pictured  in
the  representation  of  Rameses'  kitchen  referred  to  above.
The  names  of  various  utensils  in  which  food  was
actually  cooked  are  differently  rendered  in  EV  without

5  CookiniT  ^'^- ''*'''-"'"P'  ^^  consistency  : pan, kettle,
utensils ^"^''''■""'  P"'  ('"  this  order  is  the  list  given

in  I  .S.  2  14).  The  data  at  our  command
do  not  permit  of  these  being  accurately  distinguished
one  from  another. In  the  houses  of  the  poor  they  were

1  For  other  modern  dishes  see  Lane  (.^/ol/.  Egypt.  5)  and  esp.
the  elaborate  menu  of  a  native  dinner  in  Klunzinger  (.Upper
Kgypt,  59/).;  see  also,  for  Syria,  Landberg  {Fr<jver6es  et
Dictons,  passim).

a  The  j;ood  piece '  (.W)  or  '  portion  '  (RV)  of  flesh  which
David  distributed  among  the  people  at  the  inbrinying  of  the
ark  (2  S.  6 19  I  Ch.  16  3)  is  only  one  of  several  traditional  render-
bgs  of  the  doubtful  Heb.  word  ff «,  the  real  signification  of
which  has  been  lost. See  Dr. TBS  in  loc. [Since  the  word


doubtless  of  glazed  or  even  unglazed  earthenware  ('Va
fcnn,  Lev.  628[2i];  see  roTTKKY)  ;  in  those  of  the
wealthier  classes,  of  bronze  [^f^\  "^3,  loc.  cit.,  Ezek.
24  11).  The  difference  of  rank  (so  to  say)  Ijctween  the
two  materials  gives  point  to  Ben  Sira's  illustration.
•  What  fellowship  shall  the  earthen  jxjt  have  with  the
[brazen]  kettle?'  (x"T/)a  irp6j  X^/iT/ra  :  Ecclus.  182/ ).
In  connection  with  the  temple  we  read  not  only  of  pots
and  caldrons  made  of  bronze  (i  K.745  2  K.  2i)i4  Jer.
52 18)  but  also  of  such  vessels  of  silver  and  gold
(Jer.  52 .9).

i.  For  boiling  meat  various  vessels  were  employed
(cp  I  S.  214).  (a)  The  most  fre(|uently  mentioned  is
the  TD.  sir,  pot  or  caldron.  It  was  used  for  cooking
the  ordinary  family  meal  (2  K.  438/  Mic.  83  Ex.  I63
[flesh  pots  of  l':gypij),  and  for  boiling  the  sacrificial  flesh
(Zech.  1420).  It  served  also  for  a  '  wash  pot '  (Ps.  608
[10]).  It  must  have  Ijeen  one  of  the  largest  of  the  cook-
ing vessels,  to  judge  from  the  incident  rc-corded  in  2  K.
438^  ('the  great  pot'  for  the  whole  comjjany  of  the
prophets).  (/>)  'Y\\<i  kiyydr  (^y-^)  must  have  been  a  wide,
shallow  pot  of  considerable  size,  since  the  same  name
is  given  to  the  '  laver  of  brass '  (E.\.  80 18)  at  which  the
priests  were  to  wash  their  hands  and  feet.  It  served  as
a  chafing-dish  (Zech.  126).  Wherein  the  kiyyor  differed
from  (<r)  iha  pdrur  (nns)  in  which  the  manna  was  boiled
(Nu.  118  RV),  and  {tf}  the  i//,ct  (n^r,,  Job  41  2o[i2]),  and
{e)  the  kalldhath  (nn'";;,  Mic.  83),  we  do  not  know.

In  Job  41 20 [12]  caldron  (AV)  is  a  mistranslation  of  pcJK  (see
Rush,  2).  In  2  ti  1^9  MT  has  nnc'S,  not  found  elsewhere  (EV
pan);  but  the  true  re.-iding  is  probably  '[and  she  called  the]
servant '  (mro :  so  Klo.  followed  by  Ki.  and  liu.).

These  various  pots,  pans,  etc.,  were  probably  used  without  a
lid  (in  late  Heb.  '?E2),  although  the  obscure  TCS  of  Nu.  19  15
is  taken  by  some  to  have  this  signification.

ii.  A  fork  (jSip,  jSia)  of  two  or  three  (iS.  213)
prongs  was  used  to  lift  the  meat  from  the  pot,  and  also
to  stir  the  contents  of  the  latter  (see  illustration,  Wilkin-
son, op.  cit.  32).

iii.  The  spoons  (niss)  mentioned  among  the  furniture
of  the  table  of  shewbread  (Ex.  2529)  and  elsewhere  were
more  probably  shallow  bowls.  We  find,  however,  in
the  Mishna,  real  spoons  (inn)  made  of  bone  {Shabb.
8  6,  AV/.  17  2)  and  of  glass  (AW.  30  2).  There
is  also  mention  of  a  wooden  cooking  ladle  (ry  ttb
Besdh,  1  7),  which  was  probably  used  for  removing  the
scum  (,nxVn,  Ezek.  246  n,  so  AV  ;  but  this  word  is  more
probably  '  rust '  as  RV)  from  the  contents  of  the  pdrHr
or  pot  (otherwise  explained  by  Levy,  s.v.  -ins).

While  boiling,  to  judge  from  the  comparative
frequency  of  the  OT  references,  was  the  favourite
6  Roastinc  "^°*^''^  °^  cooking  flesh-meat,  there  need
^'  be  no  hesitation  in  saying  that  roasting
also  was  practised  from  the  earliest  times.  In  its  most
primitive  form,  roasting,  as  we  have  seen,  consists  in
laying  the  meat  directly  on  the  ashes  or  other  source  of
heat,  either  kindled  on  the  ground  or  in  a  pit  specially
dug  (Burckhardt,  A'otes,  etc.  1  240,  Rob.  jyA' ['41],  1 118
304).  The  fish  of  which  the  disciples  partook  by  the
lake  of  Galilee  was  cooked  by  being  laid  on  the  charcoal
(6\pa.piov  iTrLKfifjiivov,  Jn.  2I9).

The  spit,  the  6(i(\6s  of  the  Homeric  poems,  is  not
mentioned,  as  it  happens,  in  the  OT  ;  but  of  its  use
there  need  be  no  doubt.  In  Egypt,  Erman  tells  us,
'  the  favourite  national  dish,  the  goose,  was  generally
roasted  over  live  embers  ;  the  spit  is  very  primitive,  a
stick  stuck  through  the  b<'ak  and  neck  of  the  bird.
They  roasted  fish  in  the  same  way,  sticking  the  spit
through  the  tail'  (E^pt,  189,  illustr.  ib.,  and  Wilk.
23s).  The  wooden  spit  was  favoured  by  the  Romans
(cp  Verg. Georg.  2396, '  Pinguiaque  in  verubus torre-

appcars  to  be  corrupt,  the  emendation  "IKJr  Dp,  'a  piece  of
flesh,"  has  been  suggested  by  Cheyne.  This  easy  alteratioti
suits  the  context.]

8qo


COOKING

bimus  exta  colurnis).'  Later  Hebrew  legislation— in
iliis,  no  doubt,  perpetuating  an  ancient  practice — ref|uired
that  the  Passover  lamb  should  be  roastetl  on  a  spit  of
pomegranate  (jisy'jr  nSsp  [Levy,  nttr]  ^".  7i).  The
ordinary  spit,  being  of  iron, — so  much  we  may  infer
from  llie  demand  that  a  spit  purchased  from  an  id(jlater
must  be  cleansed  in  the  fire  (Ai.  Zara.  612) — was  not
allowed  for  the  above-mentioned  purpose  ;  neither  was
the  gridiron  (n^roK.  Pes.  7  2).  The  spit,  we  may  sup-
pose, rested  on  andirons  ^  (/Sdo-ets,  vara),  on  which  it
could  be  turned  by  the  hand.

The  passage  of  the  treatise  Pesdhim  above  referred
to  speaks  further  of  roasting,  or  more  exactly  of
broiling,  on  a  gridiron  placed  apparently  ovir  the
mouth  of  a  tanniir  or  baking  oven.  The  gridiron  was
perhaps  used  to  prepare  the  piece  of  broiled  fish  [ix^vo^
diTToO  fji^poi)  of  Lk.  2442.  Not  only  flesh  and  fish  but
also  eggs,  onions,  etc.,  were  roasted  by  the  Jews
(SAadi.  1 10).

The  favourite  mode  of  roasting  meat  for  ordinary  household
purposes  at  the  present  day  in  Syria  is  by  means  of  skewers.
The  meat  is  cut  into  small  pieces,  which  are  stuck  upon  the
skewers  and  roasted  over  a  brazier.  Meat  thus  prepared  is
termed  kfbiib.

With  regard  to  the  food-products  of  the  vegetable
kingdom  (see  P'ood),  many  vegetables  were  of  course
„  _  ...  eaten  raw  (wm6j.  in  Hebrew  'n.  literally
7.  Vegetable ,.  . ,  ^ ...  ",

fw)d  'livmg, a  word  applied  not  only  to  raw

animal  flesh  [i  S.  liis  Lev.  13io_/], but
also to  fish  [AV(/ar.  64].  to  vegetables  \ib.\  and  even
to  unmixed  wine). They  were  also  cooked by  being
boiled,  alone  or  mixed  with  various  ingredients— such
as  oil  and  spices. The Hebrew  housewives, we  may
be  sure,  were  not  behind  their  modern  kinsfolk  of  the
desert,  of  whom  Doughty  testifies  that  '  the  Arab  house-
wives make  savoury  messes of any  grain, seething  it
and  putting  thereto  only  a  little  salt  and  samn'  [Ar.
Des.2130). Thus, of  the  cereals, the  obscure  'drisdh j
(,iDny.  Nu.  1520/".)  was  probably  a  porridge  of  barley 1
groats  (see, further.  Food, § 1),  whilst  Jacob  sod  for !
himself  a dish (rij. EV 'pottage')  of lentils (Gen. j
252934)  ;  the  same  name  is  given  to  the  vegetarian  dish
prepared  for  the sons of the prophets (2  K.  438/:;
cp  H.igg.  212). In  NT  times,  at  least, it  was  known
that  tlie  pulses  or  pod-plants  were  improved  by  being
soaked  (MH  .mc-)  before  being  boiled. \'arious  kinds,
such as beans and  lentils, miglu l>e b(jilod together
(Orlah.  I7): they  might  also, like  our  French  beans, j
be  boiled  in  the  pods  (niS-Sp). In  the  OT  we  find  men- 1
tion  of  the  mahabath  (nano,  TTp/a.vov, W 'pan,' RV
'baking-pan,' mg. 'flat  pkate,'  Lev.  2s  621 [14], etc.) |
and  the  marhisheth  (nrn-C,  LV 'frying  pan,'  Lev.  2? j
79). The  mahabath  certainly  (see  Ezek.  43),  and  the |
marht'shcth  probably,  was  of  iron  ; and,  although  both
are  u.sed  with  reference  only  to  the  s;icrificial  cakes  (see
B.\Ki:MiiAr.s,  Bkkad),  we  may  legitimately  infer  from
the  fact  that  the  martyrs  of  2  Mace.  7  were  roasted  alive
on  the  r-r)'ya.vov  [vv.  35;  cp  late  Heb. word  jj-a)  that
both  may  have been  used also  in  the  preparation  of
meat.

To  judge  from  the  prepositions  employed  ('7^,  'on',  and  3, '  in"),
the  mahabath  was  deeper  than  the  marMsheth.  This  inference  is
confirmed  by  the  tradition,  which  we  find  in  the  Mishna,  that  the
difference  between  the  marliishtth  and  the  tnaJtdbath  consisted
in  the  former  having  a  lid  ("Dr)  while  the  latter  had  none  ;  to
which  another  authority  adds  that  the  former  is  deep  and  its
contents  fluid,  the  latter  flat  and  its  contents  firm  (Menali.  58).
The  mahabath,  in  sliort,  was  a  stewpan,  the  marhtslitth  similar
to  a  Scotch  '  girdle,'  a  flat  iron  plate  on  which  oatcakes  are  baked.
A  striking  illustration  of  Kzek.43  is  furnished  by  Doughty
(Ar.  Des.  1  593),  who  describes  an  iron -plated  door  in  the
castle  of  Hayil  :  '  the  plates  (in  the  indigence  of  their  arts)  are
the  shield-like  iron  pans  (tannur)  upon  which  the  town  house-
wives bake  their  girdle-bread.'

Other  utensils  named  or  implied are  {a)  the sieve,

1  Some  would  give  this  or  a  simitar  sense  to  rthjDtt- See
Jastrow,  Diet,  j.j:

891


COOS

ndphdh  (,iBj,  Is.  3O28;  SAaM.  82,  AiotA,  bis),  for
sifting  the  flour,  and  (6)  the  strainer,  m/Iamm^re/A,
n-nvD  (Shabb.  20 1,  Ab.  ;»i5  [especially  for  wine]  ;  cp  Is.
256,  Mt.  23  44).  An  ordinary  bowl,  however,  might  be
perforated  so  as  to  serve  as  a  strainer,  as  we  see  from
the  pottery  of  Tell-el-Hesy  (Bliss,  op.  cit.  85).  To
these  may  be  added  (f)  one  of  the  commonest  of  the
post-biblical  terms  for  a  jxjt,  ,TTip ;  hence  .ttij?  .irj'3
came  to  signify  'cooked  food'  (Nedar.  61).  For  the
vessels  used  for  serving  food,  see  MicALS,  §  8.

The  importance  of  oil  in  the  Hebrew  kitchen  will  \x:
noticed  under  OIL  (q.v.).  In  early  times  the  custom,
„ _ ,.  . so  popular  among  th<;  modern  .\rabs,

8.  Condiments. ^^^  ^^-^^  ^^^^^  j,^  ^^j,^  ^^.^„^^  ,^  ^^^.^

prevailed  among  the  Hebrews.  The  oldest  legislation
— confirnjed  by  the  Deuteronomic — limited  this  practice
so  far  TKS  to  forbid  (for  reasons  that  are  still  obscure  :  cp
Foon,  §  13,  and  see  Magic,  Sackifick)  the  seething  of
a  kid  in  its  mother's  milk  (Ex.  23 19  3426  Dt.  14 21).
In  NT  times  this  prohibition  had  been  extended  far
beyond  its  original  intention.

Thus  we  read  in  the  Mishna :  '  It  is  forbidden  to  seethe  (Sv!Z)
any  sort  of  flesh  in  milk,  except  the  flesh  of  fish  and  locusts  ;  it
is  also  forbidden  to  set  flesh  upon  the  table  along  with  cheese '
(with  the  same  exceptions,  Khullin,  8  i).  It  was  still  delated
whether  the  prohibition  applied  to  fowls  and  game  or  only  to
cattle,  sheep,  and  goats  (ih,  4).  In  the  course  of  time,  however,
it  became  part  of  the  Jewish  dietary  law,  that  two  distinct  sets
of  cooking  utensils — one  for  meat  alone,  and  another  for  dishes
into  the  preparation  of  which  milk  or  butter  enters — are  required
in  every  orthodox  Jewish  kitchen  (see  on  this  law  of  ::'7na  '\Z'1
esp.  Wiener,  Die  jiid.  Speisegesetzt,  41-120  ['95]).  Extreme
purists  have  gone  the  length  of  using  three  (Jb.  115/O  and  even
four  such  sets.  A.  K.  S.  K.

COOS,  or  rather,  as  in  RV  and  i  Mace.  I523  EV,
Cos  (kcoC  I  »ow  Stanchio — i.e.,  es  Ty)v  koj),  the  least
and  most  southerly  of  the  four  principal  islands  off  the
coast  of  Asia  Minor.  It  lies  at  the  entrance  to  a  deep
bay,  on  the  two  projecting  promontories  of  which  were
Cnldus  and  Halicarnassus.  It  owed  its  fertility  to  its
volcanic  origin,  and  its  commercial  importance  to  its
position.  It  lies  on  the  high  road  of  all  maritime  traffic
between  the  Dardanelles  and  Cyprus  :  vessels  coasting
in  either  direction  must  pass  within  half  a  mile  of  the
capital  (also  called  Cos),  which  was  on  the  E.  extremity
of  the  island,  and  had  a  good  anchorage  and  a  port
sheltered  from  all  winds  except  those  from  the  SE.
Lucan  {Phar.  8243)  thus  sketches  the  usual  route  of
ships: —

Ephesonque  relinquens
Radit  saxa  Saiiii ;  spirat  de  litorc  Coo
Aura  Jiuens :  CnidoH  inde/u^it,  claramque  relinquit
Sole  Rhodon.
In  precise  agreement  with  this  is  the  account  of  Paul's
voyage  from Macedonia  to  Palestine  (Acts  21 1). His
ship  ran  before  the  wind  (ei^^uSpo/u^ffavTes)  from  Miletus,
about  40  ni.  to  the  N.,  down  to  Cos  {i.e.,  either  the
island  or  the  capital  :  probably  the  latter is  meant ) ;
next  day  it  reached  Rhodes.

In  spite  of  its  geographical  advantages,  Cos  remained  historic-
ally unimportant.  Its  inhabitants,  apparently  of  deliberate
choice,  eschewed  foreign  relationships,  and  devoted  themselves
to  the  development  of  internal  resources.  No  colonies  were
sent  out  ;  for  long  the  capital  was  in  the  west  of  the  island  ;
the  strategic  and  commercial  importance  of  its  present  site  was
ignored  until  366  B.C.  When  at  last  the  Coans  were  compelled
to  emerge  from  their  seclusion,  it  was  only  to  echo  the  voice  of
Rhodes  in  all  matters  of  foreign  policy.  The  success  of  this
concentration  of  energy  is  indicated  by  the  fact  that  Cos  ranked
with  Rhodes,  Chios,  Samos,  and  I^sbos  as  one  of  the  fioxcipuf
iWjtroi  (Diod.  Sic.  581  82),  and  by  the  existence  of  the  saj-ing
'He  who  cannot  thrive  in  Cos  will  do  no  better  in  Egypt.' 1
Allied  with  this  material  prosperity  was  the  development  of
liberal  arts.  Under  the  Ptolemies  Cos  became  an  important
literary  centre.  With  it  are  connected  the  names  of  Theocritus
the  poet,  BerOssus  the  historian,  Apelles  the  painter,  and,  at  an
earlier  date  (5th  cent.  B.C.),  Hippocrates  the  physician.  Cos
was  one  of  the  great  centres  of  the  worship  of  Aesculapius,  and
of  the  caste  or  medical  school  of  Asclepiadae.  Claudius  in  53
A.D.  gave  the  island  the  privilege  of  immunity,  mainly  for  its
medical  fame  (Tac.  Ann.  126i).

1  &i>  ov  Opiifiti  Kwt  ixtivov  ovSi  Alyvirrot.
892


COPPER

Among  the  commercial  proclucts  of  the  island  were  unguents,
two  kinds  of  wine,  poUery  (amphora-  Cotr,  Pliny,  //.V  .15  i6i),
and  silk  for  Konian  ladies  (C'lxr  pur^unr,  Hor.  Oii.  iv.  13  13
vtites  tenues,  Tibull.  ii.  3  55).  Cos  Is  still  an  active  port.
.Strabo  (657)  notes  the  fair  aspect  of  the  city  to  one  entering  the
roads.

Interesting  is  the  connection  of  Cos  with  the  Jews.
As  Mithridates  seized  800  talents  deposited  in  the  island
by  the  Jews  of  Asia  (Jos.  Ant.  xiv.  7  a),  there  must  then
have  been  a  Jewish  settlement  there  engaged  in  banking.
In  I  Mace.  1623  Cos  is  mentioned  in  the  list  of  places
to  which  the  circular  letter  of  the  Roman  senate  in
favour  of  the  Jews  [circa  139-8  B.C. )  is  said  to  have  been
addressed.  In  86  n.  c.  (Jaius  Fannius  wrote  to  the
Coan  authorities  enclosing  a  setia/us  cofisiiltum  to  secure
safe  convoy  for  Jewish  pilgrims  to  Jerusalem.  The
island  was  connected  also  with  Herod  the  Great  (Jos.
B/  i.  21 11),  and  with  his  son  Antipas  (Boeckh,  2502).

Best authority, Inscriptions 0/  Cos,  hy  I'aton and Hicks,
1891  ; an attempt at direct combination of cpigrai)hy and i
history.  W.  J.  VV.  1

COPPER  (n'^'m  ;  x&Akoc  ;  cp  Bk.\ss). The  com- '
pound  of  copix,T  and  zinc  that  we  ca'.i  brass  appnxirs :
.. „  to  have  been  little  known  to  the  ancients  ;

bTP  ■  l,^,t we have abundant evidence that
copper  was  early  known,  and  that  it  was  hardened  by I
means  of  alloys  into  bronze. .Seneferu, a  conquering
pharaoh of the fourth dyn;isty, worked the Sinaitic j
copper mines, and M. de Morgan has found some
articles  of  cop[x;r  in  the  tomb  of  .Menes  (traditionally
regarded  as  the  first  king  of  I'"gypt),  explored  by  him  in j
1897. M. Amclineau  appears  to have proved that j
copper  was  known  at  an  even  earlier  date,  and  from
his  researches  and those  of  Mr. Quiljell at Kuni  el-
.Mimar  we  may  probably  conclude  that  the  Pharaonic ]
l-",gyptians  were  from  the  first  not  ignorant  of  the  use j
of  gold  and  copper  [hint). Theinines in the  Sinaitic I
pLMiinsula  continued  to  be  the  chief  source  from  which 1
the  Kgyptians  drew  their  copjjer  (see  Masjjero,  Dawn  of 1
Civ.  355,  and  cp  .Si.SAi)  ; but  in  the  fifteenth  century I
they  obtained  it  also  from Al.a.sia — i.e.,  CvHKUs' (see
Am. Tab., 25 and 27), where Cesnola has found
both  copper  and bronze  celts  in Thoenician remains.
The  oklest  Habyloninn  sjiecimens  of  copper  are  those
found  by  M.  de  Sarzec  at  Tello  (lx;fore  2500  B.C.);  at
„  T T>  I. 1 ■ fell  es-.Sifr,  in the  same  neighlxjur-
2.  In  Babylonia. ^^,,j ^,^ j^^^^^,^  ,^^^^  found  even  a

large  cop[)er  factory  (1500  B.C.).  In  Babylonian
graves,  and  also  in  what  Dr.  J.  P.  Peters  calls  a
jeweller's  shop  (at  Nippur),  objects  made  of  copj^er
(belonging  to  circa  1300  n.  c. )  have  been  found.
Honimel  thinks,  on  philological  grounds,  that  the
Semitic  Babyloni.ans  as  metallurgists  were  pupils  of
the  .Sumerians,  and  dates  their  acquaintance  with
copjjer  and  iron  very  early.-  The  inscriptions  make
frecjuent  mention  of  copper  [.yiparu]  and  bronze ^  [crU,
also  ku,  and  urudu  ;  cp  Lat.  rc.udus  =  <es  infect  urn).
The  ancient  hymn  (in  Sumerian  and  .Assyrian)  to  Gibil,
the  tire-god,  e.vtols  him  for  his  services  in  the  mixing  of
cop;>;r  and  tin  (cp  Tulxil-c.ain,  and  see  C.\initks,
§  10).  The  .\ssyrians  used  bronze  a.\es  as  late  as  the
ninth  century.  They  derived  their  copper  and  bronze
largely  from  the  so-called  Nairi  countries  ;  ultimately,
therefore,  from  Armenia  ;  the  copper  in  the  tribute  paid
to  Kanunan-nirari  III.  by  Damascus  is  mentioned
elsewhere  (Iron).*

The  C.inaanites,  naturally  enough,  were  well  ac-
quainted with  copper. According  to  Ritter  ( Erdk.\'i  1063

„ , „  cited  bv  Knolxil),  there  are  still  traces  of

3.  In  Canaan.  . ....  «

ancient  copper-mmes  m  the  Lebanon  ;'

1  Flinders  Petrie  also  accepts  Winckler's  identification  of
Alalia  in  .Am.  Tab.  with  Cyprus  (wliere  copper  was  worked).
See  his  argument,  Syria  ami  Kgypt,  44  ('98).

a  Diesftnif.  /'^y/Xrr,  I410.

3  Cp  Lenornuint,  TSHA  6334^

*  On  iron  and  bronze  among  the  Babylonians  and  Assyrians,
cp  Winckler,  AOt\  ii^fT.

*  Cp  the  important  descriptive  phra.se  quoted  in  Del.  Par.
333,  &id  Ba'ali-sapOna  sadu  rabO  siparri the  mountain  Baal-

893


COPPER

this  is  confirmed  by  what  seems  to  be  an  assertion  of
the  fact  in  Dt.  89  and  Zech.  61  (see  below,  g  5).
On  the  E.  of  the  Lclxmon  range  copper  nmst  have
been  abundant  in  the  'land  of  Nuhassi '  [Am.  Tab.),
which  Halt'vy  ingeniously  identifies  with  ZoBAH  ;  and  in
later  times  there  were  cop[jer  mines  in  Edoni  at  Phainon,
or  Phenon  (cp  Pino.n).  1  he  Phoenicians  early  employed
bronze  for  works  of  art,'  and  the  great  mound  of  lell
el-lle.sy,  believed  to  l)c  Lachish,  proves  that  the  Amoritcs
who  dsvelt  there  had  usetl  their  opportunities.  '  In
the  remains  of  the  Amorite  city  (iH;rhaps  1500  B.C.)
there  are  large  rough  weapons  of  war,  in.ade  of  copjK'r
without  admixture  of  tin  ;  alxjve  this,  dating  perhaps
from  1250  to  800,  appear  bronze  tools,  but  the  bron/e
gradually  becomes  scarcer,  its  place  being  tiiken  by
....  ,  iron"-*  (see  Ikon).  Whatever,  therefore.
4.  in  Israel.  ^  j,^^  ^^^^  ^j.  ^  j^  jjr^  .^^  ^  document.

we  may  feel  (|uite  certain  ihat  the  I'hilistine  warriors  had
.irmour  of  bronze  ;  indeed,  their  ancestors  in  Asia  Minor
doubtless  had  bronze  weapons  long  Ix;fore  Davids
time."*  Goliath,  however,  uses  weapons  of  attack  made
of  iron  (the  kidon  [?]  of  bronze  can  hardly  be  a  javelin  ;
see  Goliath).

The  statement  in  Josh.  624  (copper  or  bronze  vessels
found  in  Jericho)  will  be  in  the  main  correct ;  al.so  that
in  2  S.  8  8,  in  as  far  as  it  relates  to  the  abundance  of
bronze  in  Syria.  Whether  the  serpent  of  bron/e  called
Nkhlshian  \q.v.'\  was  earlier  than  the  temple  of
Solomon  may,  perhaps,  be  doubled.  At  any  rate,  the
notice  in  Xu.  'i-lg  (JK)  is  as  much  of  an  anachroni.sm  as
that  in  Ex.  382-8  (P).  The  Israelites  in  the  wilderness
had  no  workers  in  bronze.  Nor  could  David  find  a
competent  bronze-worker  in  all  Israel  ;  the  statements
resjiecting  Hiram  the  artificer  in  i  K.7i3#  are  no
doubt  historical.'*  In  the  later  regal  period  it  was,  of
course,  quite  otherwise  (cp  Jer.  628/!  Ezek.  22  18  20).
From  2  K.  25 13/'.  Jer.  52 17  /  we  learn  that  the
Babylonians  broke  the  sacred  vessels  of  bronze  and
carried  away  the  metal  to  Babylon  ;  no  doubt
Rehoboam's  shields  of  'brass'  (i  K.  I427  2  Ch.  12io)
went  there  too  ;  but  the  chief  losses  were  probably
repaired.  The  cymbals  in  the  second  temple  were
certainly  of  copper  or  bronze,  as  we  may  infer  from
I  Ch.  15 19  Jos.  Ant.  vii.  I23  (cp  i  Cor.  13  1).  Gates  of
'  brass'  are  mentioned  in  Ps.  107  16  Is.  -102  (cp  Herod.
I179,  and  see  Mr.  Pinches'  account  of  the  bronze  gates
of  Balawat)  i'  mining  implements  of  '  brass  '  in  Ecclus.
48 17  (Heb.  Text).

That  '  brass  '  (bronze)  should  be  used  to  symlxilise
hardness  and  strength  is  natural.  In  time  of  drought,
it  seemed  as  if  the  heavens  were  bronze.


6.  OT  usage.


so  that  no  rain  could  pass  through  them


(Dt.  2823),  or  as  if  the  earth  were  bronze,  so  that  it  could
never  be  softened  again  (Lev.  2619).  A  sufferer  asks  if
his  '  flesh  '  [i.e. ,  body)  is  of  brass  (Job6 12),  as  the  Ixmes
of  Behemoth  (Job  40  i8)and  the  brow  of  disobedient  Israel
(Is.  484)  are,  by  other  writers,  said  to  be.  To  \x  com-
pared with  brass  is  not,  however,  the  highest  distinc-
tion. It  was  the  third  empire  in  Nebuchadrezzar's
vision  that  was  of  '  brass'  (Dan.  239  cp  f.32).  On  the
other  hand,  '  brass '  in  the  obscure  phrase  '  mountains
of  brass  "  (Zech.  61)  has  no  symbolic  meaning  :  '  brass  '
[i.e. ,  copper)  is  merely  mentioned  to  enable  the  reader  to
identify  the  mountains  (cp  Nuhassi,  the  '  copperland  ' ;
see  §  3).

DilTicult  as  the  passage  is,  we  need  not  despair  of  e.xplaining
it. 'I'he  '  mountains  of  brass '  are  parallel  to  the  '  mountains

sapun,  great  moimtain  of  copper ' ;  also  Sargon,  .Ann.  23.  where
ba'il-japuna,  '  llie  great  mountain,'  is  spoken  of  as  containing
mines  (copper?).

1  Perrot  and  Chipicz,  A  rt  in  Phimicia  and  Cyprus.

2  Dr.  J. H.  Gladstone,  'The  Metals  of  .Vntiquity, '  .Va/«rr,
April  21,  1898.  p.  596.

3  Schliemann's  discovery  of  weapons  of  copper  and  bronze  on
the  site  of  Troy  is  well  known.

*  On  the  right  reading  of  1  K.  746,  see  Adam,  i.

*  The  bronze  ornaments  of  the palace  gates  from Balaw^i
(parts  i.-iv.)  published  by  Soc.  o/Bibl.  Archteol.

894


COR

(iS  n>v  opiiov)  in  the  river-land '  (^^^S3 ;  cp  nSiS  Is.  44  27)— />.,
those  visible  from  Babylonia — in  Zech.  1  8,  and  must  have  been
ai  well  known  as  these  to  Zechariah's  hearers  or  readers.  They
were  no  tloubt  the  '  hills  out  of  which  thou  inayest  dig  copper  '
(Ut.  Hg)— /.<•.,  Lebanon  and  Hermon  (see  above,  §  3),  which
formed  the  northern  boundary  of  the  Holy  Land.  It  is  the
'  land  of  the  north'  (the  seat  of  the  empire  of  the  Selcucidie?)
that  chiefly  occupied  the  thoughts  of  the  speaker'  (lis).  See
ZiiCHARiAH,  Book  of.  On  2J'?>p  nrn:  Ezra  8  27,  cp  Colours,
S  7-  .  -  -  T.  K.  C.

COR  (13,  perh.  Ass.  idr/t  [v.  Muss-Arnolt,  s.7:],  or
from  ^/  -113  ;  see  No.  ZDMG  40  734  ['86]),  a  measure  of
ca]3acity  =  an  homer  (10  ephahs  or  baths);  of  wheat
and  barley  (i  K.  422  [52];  EV  'measure,'  mg.  'cor';
2  Ch.  2  10  [9]  27  5  ;  RV"'K-  '  cors  ' ).  As  a  liquid  measure
[■^zek.  4514.  2  K.  625  (emended  te.xt)  speaks  of  ^  cor  of
carobs  (see  HusKs).

In  I  K.  5ii  [25]  'measures  of  oil'  is  wrong;  read  JCC' PS
'  baths  of  oil,"  after  0  and  II  2  C"h.  i  9.  Kopos  [BAL]  a  loan-word,
which  in  <S  represents  both  13  and  TOh,  occurs  once  in  NT  (Lk.
107  RVing.  'cors';  .VVi"H-  says  '  about  14  bushels  and  a  pottle ').
See  Weights  and  Mkasukes.


n  Job 28  18  Ezek.  27i6  of
irigin,  which  occurs  also
,here EV treats it  as a


2.  P6nliilin
perhaps  coral.


CORD

would  seem  to  imply  that  a  fishery  was  in  the  case,^  and,
if  two  of  our  best  critics  may  be  followed,  the  nobles  of
Jerusalem  are  described  in  Lam.  4?  as  '  purer  than  snow,
whiter  than  milk,  more  ruddy  than  branches  oi pitiinim  '
{i.e.,  obviously,  of  coral ).'^  Another  reference  to
plniniin,  of  considerable  interest,  occurs  in  Ps.  45 14  [13],
where  we  should  no  doubt  read  cV'JSt  for  no'JS  ;  the
whole  line  should  perhaps  run,  '  on  her  neck  is  a  wreath
oi pUninim  '  (see  Che.  Pi.C-'  <2ii  loc. ).

In  the  somewhat  obscure  c|uestion  as  to  identification
of  the  substance  or  substances  intended  by  rdmoth  and
pininlm,  it  ought  not  to  be  overlooked


_CORAL  is  EV's  rendering
niDSI,  a  word  of  uiiknowi

l.Ram6th '"  ''•■-^•-'7.

unidentified,  j^j^^g^  commentators,  however  (Hitz.,
Siegfr.  -Sta. ,  etc. ),  suppose  that  there  is  a  reference  to  a
precious  object  called  ra  moth — as  if  the  wise  man  meant,
•  Wisdom  is  as  much  out  of  the  fool's  reach  as  coral.'
Neither  explanation  is  satisfactory.'^

The  word  occurs  only  twice,  and,  since  the  Vss.  shed
an  uncertain  light  on  the  meaning,  we  must  be  content
to  make  the  most  of  internal  evidence.

Ezek.  has  Aa/iia>8  [MQ),  pa;oifi«d  [.\],  serkuin  ;  Job  has  nereupa
[r.N.VC  Theod.],  v>prj\a.  tSym.],  excelsa-  Prov.  has  ao<\>ia.  xai
ivvoio.  aya^T  iv  ■nvKa.i'i  [B^A]  for  -\]:ci  niC3n  '?'•«'?  ITSNT  [Vg.,

The  context  in  Job  {rdmoth,  gdbis,  pUniiiim)  shows
that  some  precious  and  ornamental  substance  is  intended,
and  Dillmann  infers  from  the  language  that  rantdth
Wiis  regarded  as  less  valuable  iUan  phii/iim  (see  below).
According  to  MT  of  Ezek.  27 16,  rdmoth,  with  ndphek,
argdmdn,  rikmah,  bfis,  and  kadhkodh,  was  brought  into
the  Tyrian  market  by  merchants  of  Syria  ;  but  probably
(see  CoriiiU,  ad  loc. )  we  should  read  for  Aram  (cnx)
Edom  (nnx);'*  as  Cornill  remarks,  Edoni  was  an  im-
portant stage  in  the  transport  of  merchandise  westward
from  S.  Arabia  and  India.  This  last  indication  of  the
provenance  of  rdmoth  makes  against  the  usual  rabbinic
rendering,  '  coral '  ;  for  the  red  coral  of  commerce — the
hard  calcareous  skeleton  of  the  colonial  Actinozoon,
Corallium  /lof-ile.  Pal.  {riihrum.  Da  Costa),  which  is
widely  distributed  in  the  Mediterranean  and  the  Atlantic
as  far  as  the  Cape  \'erd  Islands,  and  is  a  considerable
source  of  weaUh  in  the  Mediterranean  basin — occurs  in
its  natural  state  much  less  frequently  S.  and  E.  of  Suez.
2.  In  R\'"''>'-  'corals'  (Lam.  47),  'red  coral,'  and
'fsearls'  (Job28i8  Prov.  ;?i5  811  2O15  31 10)  are  suggested
as  renderings  alternative  to  '  rubies '
(see  RUBV,  i)  for  c'r:3  pUninim.
Certainly  '  rubies  '  is  not  a  good  render-
ing. The  words,  '  the  catching' (7iir,p  ;  EV,  improbably,
'  price  ■)  of  wisdom  is  above  that  of  rubies,'  in  Job 28 18,

1  This  interpretation  is  due  to  GratzC/''^'-  Zt.  1885,  pp.  549/)  ;
it  has  been  overlooked  by  even  the  most  recent  commentators.
For  other  views,  on  the  whole  very  improbable  ones,  see  Wright,
Zcchariali,  124  /.  ;  Now.  and  G.VSm.  decline  to  offer  any
opinion.

»  Bickell :  '  If  thou  hold  thy  peace  (niS'i])  before  a  fool,  thou
art  wise."

3  Targ.  Job  28  16  has,  for  niONn.  n3Si:D  =  o-«i'*iP'»'"7  of
Theophr.,  etc.,  viz.,  native  realgar,  or  ruby  .sulphur  (disulphide
of  arsenic).  It  is  used  to  a  limited  extent  as  a  pigment,  but  can-
not be  intended  here  (indication,  however,  of  colour).

4  With  Aq.,  Pesh.,  some  Heb.  MSS,  and  virtually  ©  (ai^p<i-
!rous  =  cnK)' Sym.  and  Theod.  support  MT.

895


Coral-lik3
stones.


that  certain  stones  valued  by  the  ancients
seem  to  have  been  named  from  their
resemblance  to  coral.  Pliny,  Ijefore  passing  from  the
onyx  and  alabaster  group,  speaks  of  a  valuable  '  corallite
stone'  found  in  Asia,  of  a  white  hue,  somewhat  approach-
ing that  of  ivory,  and  in  some  degree  resembling  it  {HN
3613);  also  of  corallis,  a  native  of  India  and  Syene,
resembling  minium  in  appearance  ;  and  of  coralloachates
or  coral-agate,  commonly  found  in  Crete,  and  there
called  the  '  sacred  '  agate,  similar  to  coral,  and  spotted.
all  over,  like  the  sapphire,  with  drops  of  gold  (3754  56).

Cp  M.VKHLE.

COR-ASHAN  (;C'r~li3),  I  S.  30  30. See  Borashan.

CORBAN  (korB&n  [Ti.],  korBan  [WH],  Mk.  7iit.
transliteration  of  Heb.  |3"1f3,  an  oflering  ;  ^  explained
by  h^cpov,  'gift'  (cp  Mt.  los;  similarly  Jos.  ^i«/.  iv.
44:  Kop^av),  a  kind  of  votive  offering;  an  object
devoted  to  the  deity,  and  therefore  taliooed.*  Josephus
{I.e.)  uses  the  word  in  speaking  of  the  Nazirites  who  were
dedicated  to  God  as  a  corban,  and  of  the  temple  treasure,
which  was  inviolable  (/i/ii.  94  ;  .  .  .  rbv  lepbv  d-quavpov,
KaXeiTM  5i  KopjSwvds  ;  cp  Mt.  276  Kopfiavas).  Theo-
phrastus,  among  foreign  oaths,  especially  quotes  the
corban  as  one  belonging  to  the  Jews,  which  was  forbidden
to  the  Tyrians  (cp  Jos.  c.  Ap.  1  22,  §  167).  It  is  easy
to  see  that  by  interdicting  himself  by  a  vow  a  man  was
able  to  refrain  from  using  or  giving  away  any  particular
object,  and  might  thus  evade  any  troublesome  obligation.
Several  abuses  crept  in  (cp  Ned.  56),  and,  in  the  passage
cited  (Mk.  7ii  cp  Mt.  ISs),  Jesus  denounces  a  system
which  allowed  a  son,  by  pronouncing  the  word  '  corban  '
(and  thus  vowing  a  thing  to  God),  to  relieve  himself  of
the  duty  of  helping  a  parent.  Cp  comm.  on  Mt.  los
Mk.  7ii,  and  especially  L.  Cappellus  on  Mt.  ISs;  also

CORBE  (xopBe  [B.\]),  iEsd.5i2  AV  =  Ezra29.
Zaccai.

CORD.  There  is  no  scarcity  of  Hebrew  terms  to
denote  cord  of  one  kind  or  another.

Among  the  commonest  words  are  San  Itcbcl  (\/to  bind),  and
in;,  yctker  {^10  stretch),  both  used  of  cords  or  ropes  for  drawing,
hauling  (cp  2  S.  17  13  EV  '  rope '),8  of  tent-ropes  (Is.  33  20  Job
4  2i),6  and  of  ship's  tackle  ;  see  Ship,  Tent,  §  3.  Vether  (®
in  Judg.  vfvpa.),  which  seems  to  denote  rather  'gut,'  and  its
derivative  TTI'D,  are  used  also  specially  of  bowstrings  (Ps.  II2
21  12 [13]). Less frequent terms  are  : tjin hftt  (v^to  sew),

1  The  text  may,  however,  be  corrupt ;  -jk'O  is  a  singular  term.
We  might  emend  to  ,inrm%  '(wi.sdom)  is  esteemed  '  (Che.).

2  The  common  rendering  is  ' .  .  .  more  ruddy  in  body  than
ptninim'  (cp  EV).  But  'in  body'  (csj;)  appears  superfluous
here  ;  whereas  if  we  transpose  the  preposition,  and  read  "lij-o
instead  of  'd  csVi  we  get  a  good  sense  (see  above).  ©  does  not
represent  either  '^y  or  Qsy. See  Bu.  and  Bickell,  ad  loc.

^  In  P  of  the  Hexateuch  it  is  the  comprehensive  term  for  all
offerings  '  presented  '  to  God,  bloody  or  bloodless  ;  see  also  Ezek.
'20  28  40  43.

4  See  Levy,  Chald.  WSrterb.,  s.v.  JSTip,  NHWB,  s.v.  D:'ip,
C:iip  [mutilations  of  the  formula,  which  are  equally  binding,
NedariDi,  1  2,  as  will  be  explained  under  Vow,  §  4),  and  also
Ban,  §  I,  Sackikice,  Vow.

8  For  I  K.  20  31  see  Turban.

6  Job  4  21  RV  'tent-cord,'  RVmg-  AV  'excellency.'  ®,  how-
ever, expresses  ib'3'1  Cn3  Hr:  N*?,!)  'Surely  when  he  blows
upon  them,  they  wither." This  is  preferable  (so  Beer).

896


CORE

'thread'  (Gen.  14  2?  Jiidg.  Itiia  Cant.  43;  AV  'fillet,'  RV
'line'  in  Jer.  6J21);  .TE,73  nikf>nh  (v/to  encircle,  go  round),
Is.  824  RV  'rope'  (AV  rent);  Diy  Wblidth  {c'p  \ss.  ahuttu,
•fetter'XJudg.  15i3,  etc.;  ^'TlB  /.dthll,  Nu.  I538,  etc.,  Judg.
IC.9  (.\V  thread,  RV  string),  (for  Gen.  38  18  25  see  Ring,  §  i)  ;
;iiid  1(7, '1,^7^:  see  Line.

The  nialerials  available  were  strips  of  skin  or  hide  (cp
the  kgciid  of  the  Carthaginian  Jiyrsa),  or  the  intestines
of  animals,  especially  the  goat  or  camel  (cp  in'  above),
flax  (I'.zek.  4O3),  and  rushes.  It  is  ropes  of  rushes  that
are  meant  by  ffxoiWoi'  and  airapriov,  (5's  e<iuivalents  for
San  and  t;in  resi)ectively.  ilx""'""'  o^-'^-'U^s  twice  in  NT —
In.  2  15  (a  scourge  of  cords),  Acts '.i? 32  (ropes  of  a  ship).

The  weaving  together  of  two  or  more  ropes  for
greater  strength  was  customary  :  cp  ICccles.  4  12,  '  the
threefold  cord  (r'^r^n  Cinn)  is  not  (|uickly  broken.'
C'n>  cnn'  'green  withes'  (1".\'),  "which  had  not  been
dried,'  were  employed  in  binding  Samson  (Judg.  KiS).
Greater  llcxibiiity,  for  the  purpose  of  tying,  was  thus
ensured,  and  the  knots  were  less  liable  to  slip  and  the
cord  to  split.

From  the  idea  of  Mine,  cord,'  etc.,  is  rcaiiily  ulilaintd  the
meaning  of  '  measuring-line  '  (cp  ^2n  2  S.  8  2  Am.  7  17,  t:in  i  K..
7  15,  ip  I  K.  723,  "rons  Kzck.403);l  hence,  further,  diat  of  the
part  'measured  olT,'  the  'lot'  or  'inheritance'  (cp  '>2T\  Josh,
lilg,  pi.  inl's.  Ui6l5J).

On  the  'cords'  (<rxoi>'ia)  worn  by  the  unchaste  women  of
r.ahylon  (l'.ar.  0  43),  see  I'ritzsclic  ad  loc.

CORE  (Kope  [l^^^A  Ti.  \VH).  Kcclus.  45iS  Jude  i.
.\V,  RV  KokAii  [q.v.).

CORIANDER  (1^;  korion  [BAFL];^  i:x.  I631
Nu.  llyt)  is  a  plant  indigenous  to  the  Mediterranean
area,  Coriandrum  sativum,  L. ,  as  all  agree.  The
Hebrew  name,  which  Lagarde  (f/'.-i  57)  believes  to  be
of  lndo-l".uropean  origin,  seems  identical  with  the  7ot5-'
which  the  sclioliast  on  Uioscorides  (864)  aflirms  to  be
the  Punic  equivalent  of  Kopiov  ;  and  the  identity  of  the
plant  is  thus  assured.  The  mamia  which  is  likened  to
its  seed  is  also  said  to  be  '  small,  Haky,*  small  as  hoar-
frost upon  the  ground,'  and  is  elsewhere  said  to  resemble
bdellium.  These  characters  suit  the  so-called  seed
(really  fruit)  of  the  coriander,  which  is  about  the  size  of
a  pcpijcrcorn.  N.  M. — w.  T.  T.-i).

CORINTH  (kopinGOc)-  The  secret  of  Corinthian
histDry  lies  in  the  close  relation  of  the  city  to  the  com-
merce of  the  .Mediterranean.  Even  before  the  develop-
ment of  trade  by  sea  the  wealth  of  Corinth  w as  inevitable
owing  to  its  position  on  the  Isthnuis,  the  'bridge  of  the
sea'  (Pind.  hth.  iii.  38,  'door  of  the  Peloponnese,'  Xen.
Aoes.  2):  For  navigation  and  far-reaching  commercial
enterprises  no  city  was  more  favourably  placed.  Its
territory  was  unsuited  fcjr  agriculture  (.Strabo  382)  ;  the
more  distinct,  therefore,  was  the  vocation  of  its  inhabit-
ants for  a  seafaring  life.  The  Plxmicians  were  early
attracted  by  the  advantages  of  the  site.  There  are  many
traces  of  their  presence  at  Corinth.  At  the  foot  of  the
Acrocorinthus,  Mclkarth,  the  god  of  Tyre  (see  Plicy.-
.NICI.V),  was  adored  by  the  Corinthians  as  the  protector
of  navigation  under  the  name  Melicertes  (Pans.  ii.  1  3).
The  armed  Aphrodite  (Astarte),  had  a  temple  on  the
siunmit  of  the  hill  (.Str.  379,  va'Siov  :  Pans.  ii.  46/.,
sharing  it  with  the  sun-god  ;  id.  ii.  ."u)  ;  to  her  in  later
times  a  thousand  female  votaries  ]);\id  service  with  their
bodies,  adopting  a  custom  well  known  in  Syrian  worship-
(Strabo,  378).

'  The  juxtaposition  of  the  two  Corinthian  harbours
(Lech;eum  on  the  Corinthian  Gulf,  and  Cenchr&t?,  with
Schtjenus,  on  the  Saronic)  made  it  easy  to  tranship
cargoes  ; and, as the  voyage  round Cape  Malea  was

1  Similarly  a-xotviov  and  (riraprioi'.

'-'  The  Greek  name,  according  to  Fluck.  and  Hanb.  (293),  is
due  to  '  the  offensive  odour  it  e.xhales  when  handled,  and  which
reminds  one  of  hugs — in  Greek,  (copiv.'

»  The  I'unic  yoi5  appears  .igain  in  \^t.  git  or  gitk,  which  is
black  cummin,  Xigelia  sati7'a,  L. See  FncH,  i.

4  This,  rather  than  '  round,'  seems  to  be  the  meaning  of  CSCnp
(Di.  on  Exod.  IC  14).

29  897


CORINTH

difficult,  the  mariners  of  Asia  and  Italy  found  it  desirable
to  land  their  goods  at  Corinth,  so  that  the  possessors  of
the  Isthmus  received  dues  from  these  as  well  as  from
whatever  was  brought  from  the  Peloponnese  by  land '
(.Str.  378  ;  cp  Uio  Chrys.  Or.  viii.  5,  ^  iroXtj  uairtp  iv
Tpi.u5(fi  (KfiTo).  In  consequence  of  her  rapid  commercial
expansion,  the  arts  also  awakened  in  Corinth  to  a  new
life,  especially  those  of  metal-work  and  pottery,  heirlooms
of  Ph(x-nician  influence  (cp  Paus.  ii.  83  ;  PI.  //A'.  ?>4  3).
Trade  became  wholesale.  The  establishment  of  the
Isthmian  games  in  the  sanctuary  of  Poseidon,  near
the  bay  of  Scha-nus,  in  '  the  wooded  gorge  of  the
isthmus'  (Pind.;  Str.  380),  elevated  Corinth  into  a
distinct  centre  of  Hellenic  life  (.Str.  378).  So  from  the
earliest  times  the  epithet  '  wealthy '  was  especially  re-
served for  Corinth  {u(py<L6s,  Iloni.  //.  2  570 1  oXjila,
Pind.  Ot.  13  4  ;  Thuc.  1  13),  and  although  the  rise  of
Athens  finally  destroyed  her  dreams  of  naval  empire
she  remained  the  first  mercantile  city  of  (jreece.

This  ])rosperity  found  a  rude  ending  in  146  B.C.  when
the  i)lace  was  jjillaged  by  the  Kcjinan  consul,  Lucius
Mimnnius,  and  levelled  with  the  ground  ;  but  the  re-
establishment  of  the  city  was  inevitable.  In  44  B.C.
Julius  C:esar  founded  on  the  old  site  the  Colonia  Laus
Jniia  Corinthus.  The  nucleus  of  its  population  consisted
of  freedmen  (Paus.  ii.  ]  2,  Str.  381).  Most  of  the
names  of  Corinthian  Christians  indicate  cither  a  Roman
or  a  servile  origin  {e.g.,  (jaius,  Crispus,  i  Cor.  1  14  ;
lortunatus,  Achaicus,  i  Cor.  16 17;  Tertius,  Rom.
It) -■2;  CJuartus,  Rom.  I623  ;  Justus,  Acts  IS 7).  The
New  Corinth,  by  the  mere  force  of  geographical  causes,
became  as  of  old  the  most  prosix;rous  city  of  (Jreece,
and  the  chosen  abode  of  luxury  and  'abysmal  ];rotiigacy '
(.Str.  378  382  ;  Athen.  13  573  ;  c[)  the  saving,  01''  TravTOJ
L-uopos  is  KbpivOov  i(jd'  6  TrXoi's).  It  was  also  the
capital  of  the  province,  and  the  seat  of  the  go\ernor
of  Achaia  (.\cts  18 12).

For  description,  see  Paus.  ii.  i/l  ;  cp  Frazer,  Paus.  820-38.
Pausanias  distinguishes  the  Roman  from  the  (ireek  remains;
few  vestiges  are  now  found  of  either  city,  though  the  American
aicha;ologists  have  recently  made  important  di>coveries  (see
J I  IS  18  333  ['98]  :  among  other  inscriptions,  one  '  of  uncertain
('ate,  hut  as  late  as  the  imperial  times,  reading  ond'a-ywyrj
■i:/3paca,..').

Corinth,  like  .\thens  and  .\rgos,  naturally  attracted  a
k.rge  Jewish  po])ulation  (I'hilo,  Leg.  ad  Cai.  36;  cp
Justin,  Dial.  1).  The  edict  of  Claudius,  banishing  the
lews  from  Rome,  must  have  augmented  the  numl)er  of
Hebrew  families  in  Corinth  (.\tts  18 2  ;  cp  Suet.  Claud.
251;  see  A<,)lil,.\.  As  in  other  cities  {e.g.,  Iconium,
Acts  14 1,  Thessalonica,  Acts  I74),  a  considerable
numter  of  gentiles  had  lieen  attracted  to  the  Jewish
synagogue,  and  their  conversion  would  be  the  first-fruits
of  Paul's  work.  His  decisive  breach  with  the  Jews,
and  his  adoption  of  the  house  of  the  Roman  or  Latin
Titius  Justus  as  his  place  of  instruction  (cp  Acts  I99),
enabled  Paul  to  reach  the  otherwise  inaccessible  gentile
i;o()ulation  (mostly  of  Italian  origin:  Acts  188,  iroXXoi
tZv  KopLvOiwv  dKovovTd  iiriaTivov).  Aquila,  on  the
ether  hand,  seems  to  have  enjoyed  his  greatest  success
among  the  Jews  (.Acts  I828),  though  the  Corinthian
church  remained  predominantly  gentile  in  character.

In  conformity  w  ith  his  principle  of  seeking  the  centres
of  commercial  activity,  Paul  visited  Corinth  on  his  de-
parture from  .\thens  (.\ctsl8i).  For  the  importance  of
this  step  as  regards  the  development  of  Paul's  mission-
ary designs,  see  PAUL.  Converts  were  made  chiefly
among  the  gentiles,  of  the  poorer  class  (.\cts  188  i  Cor.
126611  122),  although  some  Jews  believed  (seeCKisPfS) ;
and  some  persons  of  importance  (see  ER-Astls,  Gaius,
perhaps  also  Chi.ok).  The  accession  of  Crispus  and
of  Gaius  was  so  important  that  Paul  forsook  his  rule
and  baptized  them  with  his  own  hand  (iCor.  114-16).
He  lays  sj>ecial  stress  upon  his  claim  to  be  regarded  as
sole  founder  of  the  Corinthian  church  (iCor.  36  4  15).
This  claim  is  not  contradicted  by  2  Cor.  1 19  ( '  who  was
I  reached  .  .  .  by  me  and  Silvanus  and  Timothy '),  for
898


CORINTHIANS,  EPISTLES  TO  THE


2  Cor.  is  addressed  to  the  Christians  of  Achai.i  generally
as  well  as  to  the  Corinthians,  wliile  I  Cor.  is  written
more  especially  to  the  church  of  Corinth.

The  apostle  sjjent  eighteen  months  in  Corinth  on  this
occasion  (.\ctsl8ii).  On  his  ne.xt  recorded  visit  he
stayed  three  months  (.\cts  20 3).  On  a  supposed  inter-
mediate visit  to  Ct)rinth  and  on  the  correspondence  that
took  place,  see  CoRiNriii.\NS,  ij§  9/.,  13.  On  the
character  of  Paul's  teaching  see  below,  and  cp  Paul,
Apollos.

As  to  the  effect  of  Paul's  letters  and  presence  the  NT
gives  no  information  ;  but  the  letter  of  Clement,  written,
perhaps,  about  97  .\.  i). ,  shows  that  the  moral  tone  of
the  Corinthian  church  improved,  though  the  friction
between  parties  continued,  as  indeed  we  should  exjiect
from  the  social  cDuditioiis  obtaining  in  such  a  city.
Hegesippus  visited  the  church  about  139  A.D. ,  and  was
favourably  impressed  by  the  oberlience  aiul  lilx.Tality  of
its  members,  and  the  activity  of  its  bishop  Diony:iius
(Eus.  HE  iv.  22).

The  two  epistles  written  to  the  Corinthians  are  re-
markable for  the  variety  of  their  local  colouring.  The
illustrations  are  drawn  chiefly  from  gentile  life  : — the
wild-beast  fight  (i  Cor.  1532)  ;  the  stadium  and  boxing
match  (i  Cor.  924-27)  ;  the  theatre  (i  Cor.  49  7  31)  ;  the
garland  of  Isthmian  pine,  the  prize  in  the  games  ( i  Cor.
925)  ;  the  idol  festivals  ( t  Cor.  8  10  IO20  /". )  ;  the  syssitia,
so  common  a  feature  of  Cjreek  social  life  (i  Cor.  10 27).

W.  J.  W.
CORINTHIANS,  Epistles  to  the.^  It  will  be  un-
necessary to  repeat  here  the  familiar  story  of  the  founding
of  the  church  at  Corinth,  which  is  else-
where .set  in  its  place  in  the  life  of  the
apostle  (see  P.\UI,).  According  to  the
scheme  of  chronology  adopted  in  this  article  it  would
fall  in  the  years  50-52  A.D.  (48-50  Harnack,  52-54
Lightfoot,  otherwise  von  Soden  ;  see  Chronoi.ouv,  §
71).  In  the  spring  of  the  latter  year  Paul  left  Corinth.
Acjuila  and  Priscilla  accompanied  him  as  far  as  ICphesus,
where  they  stayed  behind  while  he  went  on  to  Jerusalem.
This  journey  and  the  visit  to  the  (ialatian  churches
(Acts  18 23)  would  take  up  the  whole  of  the  later  spring
or  summer  of  .v.  I).  52,  and  it  would  not  Ixi  until  the
autumn  of  that  year  that  the  apostle  returned  to
Ephesus.

In  the  meantime  events  had  moved  at  Corinth.  The
Alexandrian  Jew  Apollos,  by  this  time  an  instructed
Christian,  had  gone  thither  and  his  preaching  had  a
great  effect.  Other  teachers  were  at  work  there  in  a
spirit  less  friendly  to  Paul.  Factions  were  formed,  and,
when  Paul  wrote  his  first  extant  letter  to  the  Corinthians
some  two  years  later,  had  begun  to  make  serious
mischief. The apostle  was now  settled at T'.phesus,


1.  Relations
with  Corinth.


2.  Earlier  cor-
respondence.


which,  on  an  average  voyage,  would  not
be  more  than  a  sail  of  a  week  or  ten
davs  from  Corinth.-  News  would  thus
pass  easily  to  and  fro  :  and  Paul  was  evidently  kept
well  informed  of  what  passed  at  Corinth.  At  least
one  earlier  letter  of  his  has  been  lost  to  us  (i  Cor.  59),
unless,  as  some  have  thought,  a  fragment  of  it  remains
embedded  in  2  Cor.  6i4-7i  (on  this  view,  which  should
probably  on  the  whole  be  rejected,  see  below,  §  18).
The  purport  of  the  letter,  which  the  Corinthian  Christians
somewhat  misunderstood,  was  to  warn  them  against
intercourse  with  immoral  heathen.  Wlien  we  remember
the  laxity  of  Corinthian  morals  we  cannot  be  surprised
that  other  and  graver  aberrations  of  this  kind  had  taken
place  among  them.  The  state  of  things  disclosed  by
some  of  the  apostle's  visitors  at  Ephesus,
_  .  ,  notablv  by  memters  of  Wvifamilia  of  a  lady
Epistles. ^^j,^.^j  -Q-^^^  ( I  (jor.  In),  gave  him  so  much

t  npb?  Kopii^tous  [Ti.WH].

2  It  took  ArisiiJes  four  clay.s  to  get  from  Corinth  to  Miletus
(Friedlunder,  Sittcngesch.  2  15);  but  Cicero  and  his  brother
Quintu.s  were  both  about  a  fortnight  on  shipboard  {ad  Attic.
39,  6  8,  9:  quoted  by  Heinrici  (after  Hug),  Das  z-.veite
Sendschreiben,  etc.,  48).

899


3.  Extant


anxiety  that  he  took  pen  in  hand  to  write  our  First
Epistle.  At  the  s.ame  time  he  rejjlied  to  a  series  of
questions  put  to  him  in  a  letter  which  he  had  received
(perhaps  through  Stephanas,  Fortunatus,  and  Achaicus  :
I  Cor.  10 17)  from  the  church  at  Corinth.  These  two
things — the  tidings  which  he  had  heard  of  disorders  in
the  church,  and  certain  definite  in(]uiries  put  to  him —
account  satisfactorily  for  the  contents  of  the  First
Epistle  (see  below,  §§  14-16).  So  far  all  is  clear,  except
perhaps  as  to  the  exact  date  at  which  the  epistle  was
sent,  though  it  may  Ix;  placed  provisionally  about
Easter  of  A.D.  55.  There  is  also  no  d<iubt  as  to  the
general  nature  of  the  circumstances  under  which  our
Second  Epistle  was  sent.  The  interval  which  separated
it  from  the  First  Epistle  cannot  have  been  very  long.
It  may  Ix:  assigned  to  the  late  autumn  (about  November)
of  the  same  year.^  From  some  cause  or  other,  it  is
clear,  the  anxiety  of  the  ajiostle  had  increased,  and  had
indeed  reached  a  pitch  of  great  and  painful  tension.
The  return  of  Titus,  whom  he  had  sent  to  Corinth,
relieved  him  of  this,  and  he  warmly  expresses  his
satisfaction.  Then  he  turns  to  the  practical  ([uestion
of  the  collection  which  he  was  organising  for  the  poor
Christians  at  Jerusalem.  Before  the  letter  is  concluded,
however,  he  comes  back  (in  the  text  as  we  have  it)  to
his  opjjoncnts  and  writes  again  with  no  little  emotion
about  them.  This  letter  was  written  on  the  way  to
Corinth,  probably  from  Macedonia,  and  the  apostle  is
about  to  pay  to  the  church  a  visit  which  he  repeatedly
calls  his  third  (2  Cor.  Vli^  13.).

This  brief  outline,  however,  evaiU-s  a  numVjer  of
difficulties.

Considered  quite  bro.idly  and  generally,  the  course  of  events

is  clear  enough  ;  but,  when  we  attempt  to  i^ive  them  precision  in

detail,  dilTicuUies  spring  up  at  every  step, /ihe

4.  Difficulties  questions  which  arise  are  also  exceedinrly  intri-

in  detail,  cate,  .so  that  to  .state  them  satisf.ictorily  is  no
e.-isy  matter.  They  have  nearly  a^l  been  brought
out  by  tlie  research  of  the  last  five-and-twenty  years ;  and  we
sh.ill  ijerliajis  sucxeed  best  in  threading  our  way  through  them
by  taking  the  several  steps— logical  if  not  exactly  chronological
— by  which  they  may  be  supposed  to  have  arisen.

The  data  which  we  take  over  from  the  First  Epistle
are:  (i)  the  existence  of  an  active  opposition  to  P.aul
on  the  part  not  only  of  unbelieving  Jews  but  also  of
certain  sections  of  Judaising  Christians  at  Corinth  ;  and
(2)  the  occurrence  in  the  church  there  of  a  gross  ca.se  of
what  we  should  describe  as  incest  (i  Cor.  5i).  The
main  question  which  meets  us  is,  how  far  does  the
Second  Epistle  deal  with  these  same  data,  and  how  far
have  the  circumstances  altered  ?  Before  we  can  formu-
late an  answer  to  this  question,  however,  it  is  necessary
first  to  decide  whether  or  not  we  are  to  interpose  a  lost
epistle  between  the  twd  which  have  come  down  to  us.

The  Second  Epistle  is  full  of  allusions  to  a  previous
letter,  and  the  older  commentators  with  one  consent
assuiued  that  this  was  the  First  Epistle.


6.  Intermediate


Such  an  assumption  was  obvious  and


letuCr.  natural ;  but,  when  the  language  of  the

Second  i:pistle  came  to  be  closely  examined,  doubts
began  to  arise  as  to  whether  that  language  could  really
be  satisfied  by  the  First  Epistle  as  it  has  come  down
to  us.

In  particular  it  w.as  asked  whether  the  strong  emotion  under
which  it  seemed  that  this  previous  letter  had  been  written  could
apply  to  the  First  Epistle  :  '  out  of  much  affliction  and  anguish
of  heart  I  wrote  unto  you  with  many  tears"  (zCor. 'J4);  arid
aicain,  the  severe  heart-searchings  described  in  2  Cor.  V7-11  did
not  seem  to  agree  with  the  calm  practical  discussions  of  the
First  Epistle.

Since  Klopper  ( 1874)  an  increasing  numter  of  scholars
have  replied  to  this  decidedly  in  the  negative.  Perhaps
somewhat  too  decidedly.  Although  it  is  perfectly  true
that  a  great  part  of  the  First  Epistle  is  taken  up  with
calm  practical  discussions,  the  whole  epistle  is  not  in
this  strain.

1  On  this  reckoning  k-no  jre>vo-t  (2  Cor. 9  2)  will  mean  not  'a
year  ago'  but  'last  year."  The  Macedonian  year,  like  the  Jewish,
began  with  October. See  Year.
900


CORINTHIANS,  EPISTLES  TO  THE


8.  Other  ex-
planations of


different  explanation  of  the  state  of
Z  UOr  •'  -ii"  ''^'"K^  implietl  in  the  Second  Epistle.
They,  as  a  rule,  take  the  offence  on
whicli  the  situation  turns  in  this  epistle  to  be  some
personal  affront  or  insult  put  upon  Paul  (so  Hilgenfeld,
Mangold,  Wei/siicker,  PHeiderer,  Schniiedel,  Jiilicher  ;
Beyschlag  gives  the  alternative  that  the  insult  may  have
been  offerefl  to  Timothy),  not  in  connection  with  the
case  of  the  incestuous  man,  but  rather  growing  out  of
the  revolt  against  his  authority  as  an  apostle.  In  keep-
ing with  this,  most  of  them  would  explain  tou  dSiK-q-
diuTos  as  an  indirect  reference  to  Paul  himself.

This,  however,  again  seems  strained  and  unnatural,  and  indeed
inconsistent  with  theexegesisof  the  verse  where  Paul  is  mentioned
("'•-'-  'your  earnest  care  for  us';  rrfv  Knrovi'rfv  Vfimv  tt)I'  virep
»)ji.u)r)  in  such  a  way  as  almost  certainly  to  distinguish  him
from  the  injured  person.  Krenkel,  it  .seems  to  us  rightly,  urges
this  and  would  take  the  passage  as  referring  to  some  private
quarrel  between  two  members  of  the  Corinthian  church  {/ieitr.
304-307). We  know  from  i  Cor.  C  that  such  quarrels  were  rife


Many  pa.^sages,  especially  in  the  earlier  chapters,  must  have
cost  the  writer  no  slight  emotion.  Such  would  l>e  (e.g.)  the
scathing  irony  of  i  Cor.  48-13  (die  Corinthians  already  enjoying
the  rich  abundance  of  the  Messianic  reign  while  the  poor  apostles
are  maltreated  like  gladiators  in  the  arenri);  the  whole  of  the
next  section,  i  Cor.  414-21,  which  ends  with  a  threat  th.nt  the
apostle  will  come  to  them  with  a  roil  ;  and  then  the  section  on
the  incestuous  man,  in  which  he  projects  himself  in  spirit  into
the  president's  chair  in  their  assembly  and  solemnly  hands  over
the  offender  to  .Satan.

It  is  by  no  means  incredible  that  passages  like  these  would
stand  out  in  Paul's  memory  after  he  had  despatched  his  letter,
and  that  he  should  work  himself  up  into  a  state  of  great  and
even  feverish  .anxiety  as  to  the  way  in  which  they  would  be
received.  The  fact  that  a  considerable  fraction  of  the  church
should  have  m.ide  themselves,  as  it  .seems,  in  some  sort  nccomplices
with  the  offending  person,  might  well  make  the  aposile  feel  that
the  moment  was  extremely  critical  and  tliat  the  result  might  be
nothing  less  than  the  bre;ik-up  of  the  cluir..h.

This  leads  us  to  the  further  question  with  which  that
just  stated  is  bound  up. Along  with  the  allusions  to  a

e  o-t  *.-  l)rcvious  letter  there  are  in  the  Second
6.  Situation  !■■.,, ,, • . , .  •  1 .1

in  2  Cor  P'stle  also  allusiotis  to  what  was  evidently

a  great  crisis  in  the  liistory  of  the  church.
Was  this  crisis  the  same  as  that  which  is  contemplated
in  the  First  I",j)istle.  or  was  it  wholly  disiinct  ?

The  .scholars  who  first  maintained  the  view  that  there  was  a
lost  letter  between  the  two  extant  epistles  were  content  to
aciiuiesce  in  the  older  view  that  the  descriptions  of  2  Cor25-ii
75-16  h.-id  reference  to  a  st.itc  of  thi;i  : ;  i:rowing  directly  out  of
the  situation  ]ire-<ntcd  i:i  i  ''  '  '  '  .•  too  there  is  a  single
olTender,  who  ai';>i  :iis  h. '  ii  the  church,  and  the

apostle  is  .luiirc  lliat  thi-  ;  nl;uiger:  the  machina-

tions of  .'^auui  are  ii.it  hi!. ;  I  I.  i

It must l)o confessed tliat the  situation  of I  Cor.  5 j
fits  oil  extremely  well  t(}  that  of  2  Cor.  25-11,  except  in |
7 Partial ''"^  particular. That  is,  as  the  more .
oo^^^-rno^f  /^f  recent writers on the epistles (Wiiz- '
agreement  Of ..^.^^.^ PHeiderer,  Krenkel  VBeiM^r].

1  Cor  5  '^^'^'"''^*^^^'  -'^'''''-'''*^'")  '^^"'  ''"^  "lost  P"'"'
urge,  that  the  treatment  described  in
2  Cor.  26,  which  is  accepted  as  adecpiate  to  the  occasion
by  Paul,  seems  inadequate  to  the  very  gross  offence  of
I  Cor.;')!.  There  is  also  considerable  difficulty  in
assii^ning  the  part  of  the  injured  person  in  2  Cor.  7  12  :
'  .So  although  I  wrote  unto  you,  [I  wrote]  not  for  his  cause
that  did  the  wrong,  nor  for  his  cause  that  suffered  the
wrong,  but  that  your  earnest  care  for  us  might  be  made
manifest,'  etc.

If  the  offending  person  of  i  Cor.  5  was  really  let  off  with  a
comparatively  slight  punishment  there  must  have  been  extenuat-
ing circumstances  of  which  we  are  not  told.  Such  circumstances
might  be  that  the  'father's  wife' w.-is  not  in  the  strict  sense  a
wife  hut  a  concubine  (tlie  father  being  probably  a  lieathen)  ;  and
we  inii^ht  h.ive  supposed  that  the  father  w.as  dead.  In  such  a
case  Paul  with  his  strong  sympathy  for  human  infirmity,  and
liis  readiness  to  m.ike  allowance  for  a  convert  brought  up  in  the
laxity  of  heathenism,  ml.i^ht  conceivably  have  accepted  an
expiation  short  of  that  which  the  circumstances  would  seem  at
first  siiiht  to  demand.  The  supjjosition  that  the  father  was  de.id
would  fall  through,  however,  if  '  liis  cause  that  suflered  the  wrong '
(toO  a&i.icrf8ivT0<:)  referred  to  him  ;  and  it  does  not  seem  satis-
factory that  a  sin  of  this  kintl  should  be  regarded  only  in  the
light  of  personal  injury  to  another.

Accordingly  the  tendency  among  those  recent  German
writers  who  have  gone  into  the  question  more  fully  than
any  others,  has  been  to  offer  a  wholly


at  Corinth,  and  the  interpretation  thus  suggested  suits  the  choice
of  w'ords  (aJiK^crat  ami  a£tK>)6c(0  better  than  any  other.  The
ol)jection  would  be  that  ue  have  to  draw  lar;ely  U]X)n  the
imagination  to  expl.ain  how  a  matter  like  this,  which  we  should
have  thou^^ht  mi-ht  Ijc  settled  calmly  enough,  became  the
cause  of  such  acute  tension  between  the
section  of  the  church.
\V(


apostle  and  a  large


have  then  three  hypotheses,  each  with  some
advant.ages  and  some  counterbalancing  drawbacks  :  (i)
that  the  reference  is  to  the  incestuous  man — which
would  greatly  simplify  the  situation  so  far  as  the  two
epistles  are  concerned,  but  could  Ix;  held  only  on  the
assumption  of  peculiar  qualifying  circumstances  in  the
case  which  it  is  not  e.asy  for  us  to  imagine  ;  (2)  that
the  reference  is  to  some  direct  [x;rsonal  insult  to  Paul  —
a  hypothesis  which,  by  introducing  an  intermediate  letter,
enables  us  to  construct  one  whicli  will  suit  the  allusions
somewhat  Ix^tter  than  the  extant  First  I-".pistle,  but  in
our  opinion  forces  6  ddiK-qdeii  and  makes  the  situation
in  the  Second  Epistle  a  tantalising  duplicate  of  that
in  the  First,  tesides  (it  might  seem)  inconveniently
crowding  events  between  the  two  epistles  ;  (3)  that  the
reference  is  neither  to  Paul  nor  to  the  incestuous  man,
hut  to  a  c|uarrel  between  two  unknown  jx-rsmis— which
satisfies  6  dui.KT]Ofii,  but  is  open  to  some  of  the  same
objections  as  the  last,  and  is  not  so  helpful.

We  shall  see  Ijclow  that,  in  sjjite  of  its  apparent
attractiveness,  the  first  of  tliese  hypotheses  must  be
given  up.  There  is  a  break  lietween  the  two  e])istles  :
there  must  have  been  at  least  one  intervening  communi-
cation— and  if  one,  probal  ly  two  conimr.nications —
between  Paul  and  the  church  at  Corinth  ;  and  the
aspect  of  things  h.as  cluiiiged  not  simply  once,  but
probably  twice.  The  fact  of  the  new  situation,  and  the
fact  of  the  intermediate  letter,  thus  seem  to  be  assured  ;
but  in  regard  to  particulars  we  have  hardly  data  enough
to  enable  us  to  judge.  We  cannot  easily  bring  ourselves
to  think  that  the  person  directly  injuretl  is  Paul  :  at  the
same  time  he  appears  to  be  someone  closely  coimected
with  him.  Timothy  would  meet  the  conditions  belter
than  any  one  we  can  think  of ;  but  neither  the  injured
person  nor  the  aggressor  can  be  identified  more  precisely.

Along  with  the  question  as  to  an  intermediate  letter
goes  the  further  question  as  to  an  unrecorded  visit  paid
by  Paul  to  Corinth.

Unlike  the  letter,  this  visit  is  not  purely  hypothetical. In  2
Cor.  1214  and  13i  the  apostle  speaks  e.\r)ressly  of  his  approachinjj
visit  as  the  third. Ibis  implies  th.it  ue  imist
9. UnreCOraed  insertanother,  not  mentioned  by  thelii-toriaii,
visit.  somewhere  between -Acts  ISiSand  ".'O-j — or

rather,  we  may  .say,  somewhere  in  the  three
years  spent  by  Paul  at  Kpliesus.  We  have  seen  that  his  com-
munications with  the  church  at  Corinth  were  freijuent  ;  we  have
seen  also  that  the  voy.age  was  easy.  The  silence  of  Acts  (which
dismisses  two  years  in  a  verse:  10 10),  therefore,  is  no  real
obst.acle.

Is  the  visit  to  he  placed  beioie  or  after  the  First
Epistle  ?

It  is  most  tempting  to  go  with  the  majority  of  recent  critics
and  place  it  after.  The  conspicuous  fact  about  this  visit  is  that
it  was  a  painful  one  {iv  Avtttj  :  2  Cor.  2  i).  If  so,  what  could
be  more  natural  than  to  connect  it  with  the  letter  which  was
written  '  with  many  tears  ?  '  Roth  alike,  it  mi^Tht  seem,  should  be
placed  on  the  line  of  strained  relations  which  led  up  to  the
Second  Kpistle.  The  unrecorded  visit  would,  in  that  case,  pre-
cede the  lost  letter.  We  might  ima;.;ine,  in  \  iew  of  2  (or.  10  10,
that  Paul  had  been  summoned  over  to  Corinth  hastily,  that
there  his  malady  had  come  on,  that  he  luid  broken  down
physically  and  been  obliged  to  return,  leaving  matters  to  all
appearance  worse  than  he  found  them ;  that  he  then  wrote  a
letter  to  undo  the  effect  of  this  disaster;  that  this  letter  was
strongly  worded,  and,  after  it  had  been  sent,  caused  him  great
anxiety;  and  that  it  was  his  relief  from  this  anxiety  on  the
coming  of  Titus  that  was  the  immediate  occasion  of  the
Second  Epistle.

Such  combinations  are  tempting;  but  they  lead  us  on  to  the
discussion  of  the  next  point  which  has  a  direct  and  perhaps  a
crucial  bearing  upon  them.

In  I  Cor.  165  the  apostle  announces  his  intention  of
coming  to  Corinth  by  the  longer  land  route  through
10 Paul's  •^'•''^'^'l'*''^- This,  as  a  matter  of  fact,  is  the

Diana '^""'*^  ''^^'  ^'^  ^^^^  actually  taking  at  the  time

P  ■  when  he  wrote  the  Second  Kpistle.  In  the
interval,  however,  he  must  have  changed  his  mind,  not

903


CORINTHIANS. EPISTLES  TO  THE


once  but  twice  ;  or,  rather,  he  must  have  changed  it
and  afterwards  reverted  to  his  original  plan.  From  2
Cor.  1 15/  we  learn  expressly  that  he  had  at  one  moment
decided  to  go  straight  from  Ephesus  to  Corinth,  thence
to  Macedonia,  and  then  to  return  again  to  Corinth.

When  he  formed  this  decision  he  seems  to  have  been  well
pleased  with  the  Corinthians  and  they  with  him  ;  his  motive  is
that,  twice  over,  both  on  Koinjjand  returning,  they  may  have
the  benefit  of  this  presence  {2  Cor.  1 15).  He  did  not  carry  out
this  plan  because,  after  it  h.ad  been  formed,  his  relations  to  the
Corinthians  underwent  a  change.  He  tells  us  that  he  would
not  KO  to  them  because,  if  he  h:id  gone,  it  must  have  been  '  in
grief  (2  Cor.  2i).  None  the  less  his  change  of  plan  was  made
one  of  the  accusations  against  him,  and  was  set  down  to  fickle-
ness of  purpose  (2  Cor.  1 1 7).

This  being  so,  however,  are  we  not  precluded  from
interposing  any  visit  between  the  conceiving  of  the  in-
tention descriljed  in  2  Cor.  1 15  (the  short  voyage  and
the  double  visit)  and  the  writing  of  the  .Second  I".j)istle?

It  is  not  only,  .is  Schmieilel  argues  (//f  5^),  that  the  feelings
of  the  apostle  when  he  ni.-ide  his  plan  and"  when  he  paid  the
supposed  visit  were  difTereiit— in  the  one  case  satisfaction  with
the  Corinthians,  in  the  other  c.xse  pain — but  that  a  visit  of  any
kind  is  inconsistent  with  tlie  langu.ige  used.  If  Paul  had  paid
.such  a  visit  he  would  have  kept  to  his  intention  (not  broken
it),  and  the  charge  of  fickleness  must  at  least  have  assumed
another  form.

We  must  therefore,  with  some  reluctance,  abandon  the
idea  of  bringing  the  painful  visit  and  the  painful  letter
into  juxtaposition.  The  only  other  jjlace  for  the  former
seems  to  be  in  the  part  of  Paul's  stay  at  I-".phesus
anterior  to  the  First  Kpistle,  and  towards  the  middle  or
later  part  of  it  (/.<•.,  not  far  from,  and  i>robabIy  lx.-fore,
the  lost  letter;  i  Cor.  .'.9;  cp  .Schniiedel,  o/>.  cit.  54).
The  supi)osition  that  the  second  visit  was  only  contem-
plated, not  paid,  apyx-ars  to  tie  excluded  by  2  Cor.  132.

We  observe  also,  in  passing,  that  the  history  of  these
changes  of  jilan  goes  far  to  dispose  of  the  arguments  in
favour  of  the  supposition  that  there  is  no  lost  letter
Vx'tween  the  two  epistles.

The  only  way  to  make  tlie  First  Epistle  referred  to  directly  in
the  -Second  is  to  re,i;ard  certain  passages  in  it  as  haunting  the
apostle  and  causing  him  trouMe  as  to  its  reception.  .\t  the  time
when  he  conceived  tlie  plan  set  down  in  2  Cor.  1 15,  however,
his  mind  w.is  free  from  trouble  :  the  Corinthians  and  he  were  on
the  best  of  terms.  This  aIo:ie  would  sever  the  links  which  h.ive
seemed  to  bind  the  two  letters  together.  They  must  be  con-
nected clos'.ly  or  not  at  all.

\\  hen Paul  wrote  i  Corinthians  Timothy  was  not  with  him.

We  should infer  from .\ctslii22 that before  that  date  he  had

been already  sent into M.icedonia. This

11.  Movements  agrees  perfectly  with  the  turn  of  phrase  in  i

of  Timothy.  Cor.  IC.  10  :  '  If  Timothy  come,  see  that  he  be
with  you  without  fear.'  P.efore  the  despatch
of  the  Second  Kpistle  he  had  rejoined  Paul,  as  he  is  associated
with  him  in  the  opening  salutation  (2  Cor.  1  i).  If  the  suggestion
abos'e  holds,  it  w.is  probably  he  who  brought  news  of  the  events
which  led  up  to  the  second  crisis.  In  any  case  the  dealing  with
that  crisis  at  its  height  w.as  committed  not  to  Timothy  but  to
the  stronger  hands  of  Titus.

.\ssuming  that  there  was  an  intermediate  letter
between  i  and  2  Cor.  it  is  probable  that  Titus  was  the

12.  Of  Titus ''*'■■""''■''  '^^  ''  '^  *^'"''  ■''■^'°*' •^■''  ^^'^  '"'"^

also  the  bearer  of  our  Second  Epistle

(2  Cor.  816-24).

.\  small  group  of  scholars,  including  Hausrath  and  Schmiedel,
would  assign  to  Titus  yet  another  earlier  visit,  on  the  business
of  the  collection,  .soon  after  the  writing  of  the  First  Kpistle;
but  the  hypothesis  is  invented  to  suit  tlie  theory  that  2  Cor.l2
is  not  an  integr.al  part  of  our  Second  Kpistle,  and  necessitates
the  invention  of  a  number  of  other  purely  hypothetical  occur-
rences (among  them  a  fifth,  or  third  lost  letter),  nearly  all  of
them  duplicates  of  others  that  are  better  attested.  It  may  be
rejected  without  hesitation.

The  sequence  of  events,  as  far  as  we  can  ascertain  it,
seems  to  have  Ijeen  this  ; — '

(i.)  While Paul is  absent at Jerusalem

13.  Sequence .\pollos  arrives  at  Corinth,  where  he  preaches
of  e'VentS. with  succe.ss  (Acts  18  27).

(ii.)  Paul  takes  up  his  abode  at  Ephe.sus
in  the  summer  of  a.d.  52,  remaining  there  until  the  summer  of
•^■'?:.55-,

(iii.)  Karly  in  this  period  .\pollos  quits  Corinth  and  certain
Judaising  teachers  arrive  there.  The  beginnings  .are  laid  of
oifferences  which  soon  harden  into  parties.

(iv.)  .-Vbout,  or  somewhat  after,  the  middle  of  the  period  Paul
pays  the  church  a  brief  disciplinary  visit,  iv  Auinj  (2  Cor.  2  i  ;

1  With  the  dates  given  here  cp  those  in  Chronology,  g  71.

903


see  above,  (  10). He  also,  after  his  return,  writes  the  lost  letter
of  I  Cor.  5  9.

(v.)  The  household  of  Chloe  bring  news  of  an  ominous  develop-
ment of  the^  spirit  of  faction  (i  Cor.  lit),  and  a  little  later
Stephan.as,  Fiirtunatus,  and  .\chaicus  arrive  at  Ephesus  (i  Cor
li5i;),  perhajK  as  bearers  of  a  letter  to  the  apostle  from  the
church  at  Corinth  seeking  his  advice  on  various  matters.

(vi.)  Partly  in  consequence  of  wh.at  he  had  heard,  and  partly
in  answer  to  that  letter,  Paul  writes  First  Corinthians  in  the
spring  of  a.d.  55,  taking  occxsion  to  correct  a  wrong  impression
drawn  from  the  lost  letter  (i  Cor.  !K)ff.).

(vii.)  The  epistle  thus  written  has  the  desired  effect,  and  for
the  moment  all  goes  well  (2C"or.  1  12-16).  The  .apostle  lets  the
Corinthians  know  his  programme  of  2Cor.  lisyC  Timothy
arrives  at  Corinth  and  now,  or  at  the  time  of  chap.  8,  returns
to  Ephesus.

(viii.)  Another  sharp  controversy  arises,  beginning  perhaps  in
some  well-meant  but  feeble  action  on  the  part  of  Timothy,  and
soon  involving  the  whole  question  of  the  apostle's  position  and
authority.

(i.\.)  On  hearing  of  this  from  Timothy  Paul  writes  a  secomi
lost  letter,  the  tone  of  which  is  severe  and  uncompromi.sing.  It
is  sent  by  Titus,  who  at  the  same  time  has  instructions  in  regard
to  the  collection.

(\.)  .\fter  Titus  has  gone,  Paul  becomes  more  and  more  anxious
as  to  the  effect  his  la.st  letter  is  likely  to  have  on  the  Corinthians.
He  leaves  Ephe.sus,  having  about  this  time  been  in  imminent
peril  there. He  stops  at  Troas. Still  no  news.

(.\i.)  Titus  at  last  returns  to  him  in  Macedonia  and  di-s]>els  his
fe.ars.  The  Second  Ef>istle  is  written  and  is  sent  by  Titus  and
two  others  (2  Cor.  8  1822).  Its  main  tenor  is  thankfulness  ;  but
the  collection  is  pressed,  and  the  growth  of  one  party  (probably
the  Christ-party)  leads  to  some  emphatic  strictures.

(.\ii.)  Towards  the  end  of  December  A.u.  55  Paul  reaches
Corinth.  He  stays  there  three  months  (.•\cts203),  during  which
he  writes  the  Kpistle  to  the  Romans.

FiK.ST  1':pisti.k. — We  have  seen  that  the  occasion  of
the  First  ]".pistle  was  two-fold  :  ( i )  certain  tidings  which


14.  Occasion  of


had  reached I'aul  as  to  various  dis-


iCor.


orders  existing  in  the  church  at
Corinth  ;  (2)  certain  questions  put  to
him  in  an  official  letter  from  the  church.  The  dis-
orders were  :  (i. )  a  numlier  of  factions  which  raised  the
flag  of  party  spirit  and  used  the  names  of  prominent
leaders  to  give  colour  to  their  own  self-assertiveness.
On  these  more  will  lx>  said  lx;low  (§  16).  The  subject
covers  1  io--l2i.  (ii. )  .\  bad  ca.se  of  immoral  living
which  too  much  reflected  a  general  laxity  in  the  church
(. 'J  612-20).  (iii.)  Litigiousness,  which  did  not  scruple
to  have  recourse  to  he.athen  law-courts  (61-11).  (iv. )
.\n  indecorous  freedom  in  worshijj,  exemplified  by  the
disuse  of  the  female  headdress  (11 2-16).  (v.)  Still
worse  disorders  at  the  ngapt  or  love-feast,  which  was
followed  by  the  eucharist  (1117-34).  .\nd  we  may
perhaps  include  under  this  head  (vi. )  the  tlenial  by  some
of  the  resurrection,  dealt  with  in  chap.  \{>.

The  last  three  points  may  have  been  raised  by  the
official  letter.  This  certainly  contained  questions  about
marriage  (answered  in  ch.  7);  probably  also  about  re-
lations to  heathen  practices,  such  as  the  eating  of  meats
offered  to  idols  (ch.  8  continued  in  9  i-ll  i) ;  and  possibly
some  inquir}'  as  to  the  relative  value  of  spiritual  gifts.
Chap.  1 1-9  is  introductory,  and  ch.  16  an  epilogue  of
j)ersonal  matter  containing  instructions  as  to  the  collec-
tion, and  details  as  to  Paul  him.self  and  his  companions.

The  only  points  th.at  need  perhaps  to  be  more
particularly  drawn  out  are  the  connection  of  chaps.
1 10-4 21  and  81-11 1.

The  first  tracks  out  the  spirit  of  faction  to  its  origin  in  the

conceit  of  .a  worldly-minded  wisdom,  which  is  contrasted  with

the  simplicity  of  the  Gospel— a  simplicity,  how-

18.  1  Cor,  ever,  which  does  not  exclude  the  higher  wisdom
lio-l2iand  that  comes  from  God  (I  17-2 16).  Then,  in
gj-j^i  J  3i-t5,  the  true  position  of  human  teachers  is

stated.  They  are  but  stewards,  whose  duty  is
not  to  put  forward  anything  of  their  own,  but  only  to  administer
what  is  committed  to  them  by  God.  The  Christian  has  but  one
foundation  and  one  judge,  namely  Christ.  4  6-21  applies  these
general  truths  to  the  circumstances  of  the  case  with  biting  irony,
which,  however,  soon  ch.anges  to  affectionate  entreaty,  and  that
again  to  sharp  admonition.

The  sequence  of  the  argument  in  8  i-ll  i  should  not  be  lost
sight  of.  _  In  ch.  8  is  laid  down  the  principle  which  should  guide
conduct  in  such  matters  as  the  eating  of  meat  that  might
have  come  from  heathen  sacrifices.  This  principle  is  the  sub-
ordination of  personal  impulse  to  the  good  of  others.  In  ch.  9
Paul  points  out  the  working  of  the  principle  in  his  own  ca.se ;
it  is  in  deference  to  it  that  he  waives  his  right  to  claim  support
from  the  Church,  in  deference  to  it  that  he  exercises  severe  .self-

904


CORINTHIANS,  EPISTLES  TO  THE


control,  like  that  of  runners  in  a  race. The  history  of  Israel

xhowcil  what  an  utter  mistake  it  was  for  even  the  most  hij;hly-

privilcuctl  to  stimjose  themselves  exempt  from  the  necessity  of

such  self-coiiirol  (10  1-13). The  very  nature  of  the  Christian

Kui  hari^t  prcMjrilwtl  care  in  relation  to  heathen  feasts  (10  14-aa).

This  Ic.uls  to  some  practical  suKKeslions  and  advice  (lOaj-ll  i).

Of  the  subject  nuitter  of  the  epistle  the  j)oints  which

p . most  invite  discussion  are  the  nature  of

16.  fartles.  j,^^.  parties,  and  the  spiritual  gifts. The

lattt-r  arc  dealt  with  elsewhere  (see  CilKTS,  Si'lRlTfAl.).

As  to  the  parties,  we  may  remark  ( i )  that  the  names

'Paul.' '.\ix)llos.' 'Cephas.' and 'Christ' reijn-scnt

real  titles  which  the  parties  at  Corinth  gave  themselves.

When  Paul  says  in  46  'These  things,  brethren,  have  I  trans-
ferred by  a  fiction '  (to  adopt  Dr.  F  leld's  elegant  translation,
Otiitni  S'orfic.  ad  loc.)  'to  myself  and  Apollos  for  your  sakes,'
the  fiction  consisted,  not  in  usinji  names  which  the  Corinthians
did  not  use.  but  in  speakiii;;  as  if  he  and  .\|k>IIi>s  had  lM;h;ivctl
like  |)arty-leaders.  wlu-n  tliL-y  had  not  so  Iwhavcd.  'I'lic  whole
movcmeiil  came  not  from  them  but  from  thcjse  w  ho  invoked  their
names  against  their  will  and  without  their  consent.

(2)  The  nature  of  the  Paul  and  the  .\ix)llos  parties
is  dear  :  they  were  no  doubt  lilteral  in  ttMulency.  giving  a
free  welcome  to  (jentile  converts,  and  apt  to  deal  too
tenderly  with  the  vices  which  these  brought  over  with
them.  I'rom  this  side  would  come  such  premature
emancipation  as  that  d<-scrilied  in  1 1  2-16.  The  follow(.TS
of  .\pollos  probably  also  prided  tlieniselves  on  a  kind  of
Alexandrian  (ino.  h,  which  is  by  inference  condemned  in
chajjs.  1  i3-l2i6.  The  Petrine  and  the  'Christ'  parties
were,  on  the  other  hand.  Judaistic,  claiming  the  authority
of  the  apostles  at  Jeriisalem.  Both  disparaged  and
attacked  Paul.  The  Christ  party,  however,  seems  to
have  gone  to  the  greater  lengths.

The  Christ  party  were  Jews  in  the  strictest  sense,  probably
Jews  of  Palestine  (2  Cor.  1 1  22).  They  came  with  commendatory
lettersfroni  Jerusalem  (2  Cor.  'i  i).  They  ibeniselvcs  bore  the  title
of  'apostle,  ill  the  wiiler  aicentatioii  (2Cor.  11  13  \-  11).  They
claimed  to  li.ive  Clirivt  for  llicir  .Master  in  a  sen-e  in  which
others  had  not  (.>C'or.  IO7).  .\ncl  in  particular  they  insisted
th.it  Paul  h.ad  not  (be  full  qu;dila.ni<)iis  of  an  aposlle,  a.s  these
are  laid  down  in  .Vets  1  -21/.  :  he  was  not  an  eye-witness  of  the
acts  of  Jesus,  aiul  did  not  l>clon^;  to  the  .select  conii>any  which
he  had  Kathereti  around  bim  (iC'or.  !•!).  Their  teaching  laid
such  stress  on  Jesus'  Jewish  Messiabship  (conceived  a.s  the  Jews
conceived  it)  as  to  amount  to  preacbinj;  'anotbcr  Jesus' (2Cor.
11 4).  Paul  takes  firm  ijroiind  in  bis  opposition  to  them.  He
will  not  bate  one  jot  of  his  ( '.ospel  (/V/V/.)  ;  he  will  not  allow  that
he  is  behind  the  most  ajxistolic  of  the  ajiostles  (aC'or.  11  5) ;  be
had  'seen  the  Lord'  as  truly  as  they  had  (i.t.,  on  the  road  to
Damascus,  ;ind  in  ecstatic  vision,  i  C"(ir.  0  i  l.')8  2  Cor.  I'i  i^) ;  be
had  better  prcxjf  of  his  ajwsilcsbip— in  his  miracles  (2  Cor.  1  "J  12),
in  his  iiisi>;ht  into  Christian  triuh  (2  Cor.  11  <),  in  his  labours
(2  Cor.  1 1  237/".),  and  especiallv  in  the  success  of  his  ministry
among  the  Corinthians  themselves  (i  Cor.  !•  \ /.  2  Cor.  82/).

There  can  be  little  doubt  that  Paul's  masterly  Apologia
carried  the  day  ;  the  curtain  drops  for  us  with  the  close
of  the  .Second  I'.pistle  ;  but  the  subsetjuent  history  of  the
controversy  shows  that  the  worst  part  of  the  crisis  was
past,  and  the  power  of  the  Judaisers  broken.

Skcono  lu'isTi.K. — The  Second  Kpistle  is  even  more

a direct product of the historical situation than the

_ • '■  ''■^*- ^*^  "i-'^y  "^'^P  *'"'  ^^^  main  bodj-

■ . .  ■  ■ of  the  epistle thus  :  ( i )  an  outpouring  of

thanks  for  recent  deliverance  (1  3-11)  ; (2)

explanations in reference to the  apostle's change  of

plan  and  the  treatment  of  the  offending  [jerson  by  the

Corinthian church (1  12-217); (3) a  deeper Apologia

for  his  apostolic  position  and  the  distinctive  character

of  his  Gospel  (S-.*))  ; (4)  more personal explanations

(6-7); (5)  the  collection  (8/)  ; (6)  a  warmer  defence

against  Judaistic  attacks  (10-13 10).

The  principal  literary  question  affecting  the  epistle  is
as  to  its  integrity.

Putting  aside  mere  wanton  and  extravagant  theories,  sub-
stantial arguments  have  been  urged  for  maintaining  that  the
short  jxiragraph  of  six  verses,  t>  14-7  i,  and
18.  Integrity,  the  longer  section  lO-lS  or  10i-13io,  though
the  work  of  Paul,  were  not  originally  part  of
this  epistle,  but  belonged  to  other  epistles  now  lost:  tlt4-7i
to  the  missing  letter  alluded  to  in  i  Cor.  .')9,  and  the  I'ierkapitel-
hrit/(as  the  (iermans  call  it)  to  the  intermediate  letter  which  we
have  seen  reason  to  assume  between  the  two  extant  epistles.

We  may  admit  at  once  that  there  is  a  real  break  in
the  Second  Epistle  at  both  the  places  noted.
The  subject  changes,  and  changes  abruptly,  both  at  6  14  and

90s


at  10  I.  The  epistle  would  read  continuously  if  we  were  to
skip  from  013  to  7  2,  and  the  few  con.  luiiing  word*  I3ii-i4
would  come  as  well  at  the  end  of  ch.ip.  »  as  of  chap.  13.

We  may  admit  further  that  the  subjci  t  matter  of  the  first
passage  resembles,  (hough  it  is  not  identical  with,  that  of  the
missing  letter  referred  lo  in  the  First  Kpistle  ('not  to  keep  com-
pany with  fornicators '  was  the  keynote  of  the  one,  '  not  to  Iw
unei|nally  yoked  with  unljelievcrs '  of  the  other);  and  the
vehenKiit  iMjIemic  of  the  last  four  chapters  would  l»c  not  unlike
what  »e  should  expri  t  to  find  in  the  letter  which  we  are  led  lo
postulate  by  the  Second.

In  spite  of  these  favouring  considerations,  however,
and  in  spite  of  the  a.ssent  which  it  has  met  with  from
certain  critics!  Ptliiderer.  Hausrath,  Krenkel.  .S<hmie(lel),
this  latter  hyixnhesis  of  the  letter  of  four  chapters  must,
we  believe.  Inr  dismissed.

There  was  but  one  painful  letter  (2  Cor.  7  R.  eJ  Koi  «'Av>nj<7a
ilia?  kv  Tjj  •iricTToAfi,  cp'J4);  which  is  referred  lo  in  thi-e
chapters  (10 10/.),  and  therefore  is  not  to  lie  identified  wilh
them  ;  if  it  were,  then  we  should  have  to  ptjstulate  a  previous
painful  letter  further  Imck.  When  the  aixr.tle  wrote  his  painful
letter,  he  wrote  in  order  loaNoid  the  necessity  of  making  a  \  isit
in  person  (1  23);  but  when  he  wrote  these  chapters  he  was  on
the  point  of  p.aying  a  visit  (1-  14  13  i).  .Again,  there  are  many
coincidences  of  expression  which  connei;t  the  four  chapters  with
the  preceding::  7  6  lOi  (Tairfiidt,  of  Paul  himself) ;  5/,  8  7i''  =
10  I  f.  (dapptii',  not  elsewhere  in  Kpp.  Paul.);  1  15  84  872=  IO2
(jreiroiOjjcri?,  only  twice  besides);  Kara  (rapKo.  three  times  =  thrte
times,  always  in  reference  lo  himself;  O7-IO4  (oirAo) ;  forj/ia
three  limes  =  twice,  only  once  besides  ;_  7  15  -  IO5  yC  (tin-axoi) ) ;
95- 106  16  («VoiMO«,  only  once  besides  in  Knp.  Paul).  These
are  samples  from  the  first  six  verses  alone.  \Ve  cannot  use  the
comijarison  of  12  18  with  8  ij/.  22  quite  as  it  is  used  by  Jiilicher
(Kin/.  65),  liecause  the  two  passages  really  refer  to  different
occasions;  824  is  proof  that  the  aorists  which  precede  are
epistolary  and  describe  the  circumstances  connected  with  the
sending  of  the  present  epistle,  where.is  in  l'_' 18  the  aorists  are
strict  aorists  and  point  back  to  a  former  visit  of  Titiis  and  his
companion.  The  parallelism  of  expression,  however,  is  so  t'reat
as  to  suii.nest  strongly  that  both  passages  lielong  lo  the  s;ime
letter.  There  is  a  p.-irallelisin  ec]ually  marked  l)etween  the  use
of  irAeofdCTfii'  in  I217  /and  in  72(cp'2ii);  the  word  occurs
only  once  besides  in  N'f  (i  1  bess.  4o).

If  the  one  hyi)othctical  intrusion  breaks  down,  the
other  slKJuld  in  all  probability  go  with  it.

Not  one  of  the  analoyous  c.iscs  to  w  hicli  Schmiedel  appeals
really  holds  goxl  ;  for  the  balance  of  argument  is  also  a;;aiii>t
detaching  Rom.  It)  from  the  epistle  lo  the  Romans  (see  the
commentary  on  that  epistle  by  the  present  writer  and  .Mr.  .\.  C.
Headlam).  The  attestation  of  the  NT  text  is  so  varied  and  so
early  that  a  displacement  of  this  magnitude  could  hardly  fail  to
leave  traces  of  itself.  .At  least,  before  it  can  \k  assumed,  the
major  premise  that  such  a  displacement  is  pos>ible  needs  lo  lie
more  fully  established.

In  the  cases  which  might  V)e  quoted  from  the  OT  the
conditions  are  really  ditVerent.  It  would,  however,  be
well  if  the  whole  question  of  the  editing  and  trans-
ntission  of  ancient  Jewish  and  Christian  books  coulil  be
more  systematically  investigated.  [For  a  discussion  of
6i4-7i  see  C.'iiss.  A'n:.  1890,  pp.  12.  150/.  317.  359  ;
and  the  authorities  mentioned  in  the  last  place.]

If  the  epistle  has  come  down  to  iis  in  its  integrity,
no  doubt  we  must  recognise  the  abruijtness  of  Pauls
manner  of  writing  or  dictation.  In  that,  however,  there
is  nothing  very  paradoxical.  Resides  the  ra[)id  fluctua-
tions of  feeling,  which  are  so  characteristic  of  this
epistle,  we  must  rememl)er  that  a  letter  of  this  length
could  not  all  be  written  at  a  single  sitting.  It  was
prolxibly  written  in  the  midst  of  interruptions  (  '  the  care
of  all  the  churches.'  11  28).  Moreover,  its  author  was
one  whose  mind  responded  with  singular  c|uickness  to
every  gust  of  passing  emotion.

Ai'OCRYi'H.M. Lkttkrs. — III the  .\rntenian version
after  2  Corinthians  there  stand  two  short  letters,  from
.  . ,  the  Corinthians  to  Paul  and  from  Paul

19.  Apocrypnai  ^^  ,j^^  Corinthians  (cp  Ai-ockyi-h.a.  §
leiwrs.  294),  the  substance  of  which  is  briefly
as  follows  : — The  Corinthians  inform  I'aul  that  a  certain
Simon  and  Cleobius  have  come  to  Corinth  teaching  that
the  prophets  are  not  to  l>e  Ix-lieved.  that  the  world,  in-
cluding man.  is  the  work  not  of  God  but  of  angels,  that
there  is  no  resurrection  of  the  Ixxly,  that  Christ  has  not
come  in  the  flesh,  and  that  he  was  not  born  of  Mary.
Paul  replies  asserting  the  orthodo.x  doctrine  on  each  of
these  heads.

.Attention  was  first  called  to  these  apocr>-pha  by  Archbishop
Ussher  in  1644. A  complete  text  u  as  published  in  the  Armenian

oc6


CORMORANT

Bible  of  Zohrab  in  1805  (incomplete  translations  earlier);  also,
with  a  mouosjraph  by  Ritick,  in  1823.  Just  as  interest  in  the
sul)ject  was  being  revived  by  TlieoJ.  Zahn  {Gesc/t.  <i.  h'anons,
1386^  2592-611)  and  Dr.  P.  V'etter,  professor  in  the  Roman
Catholic  P'aculty  at  Tubingen,  a  Latin  version  was  discovered  by
M.  Samuel  Herger  in  a  tenth-century  MS.  at  ^Iilan,  and  pub-
lished by  him  in  conjunction  with  Prof.  A.  Carricre  (La  Corre-
spontiance  Afrocryfrhe  de  Saint  Paul et  des  Corinth'fns,  Paris,
i8gi). \  second MS.  (13th  cent.),  containing  a  dilVercnt  but

frobably  not  alto.;ether  independent  version,  w.is  found  at
,-ion,  and  publislied  by  Prof,  liratke  in  TLZ,  1892,  col.  586/
There  is  also  extant,  in  Armenian,  a  commentary  on  the  epistle
by  Kphrem  Syriis.  The  texts  are  most  conveniently  collected
by  Dr.  P.  Vetter  in  a  Tiibingen  programme  (Dcr  apocryplu
dritU  Korintlierhrief;  Vienna,  1894).

The  facts  at  present  ascertained  in  regard  to  the
apocryphal  letters  are  these  :—

(1)  They  were  from  the  lirst  (i.e.  from  the  5th  cent.)  admitted
into  the  Armenian  version  as  part  of  the  canon.  (2)  They  also
existed  in  Syriac  and  were  accepted  as  canonicil  in  the  fourth
century  by  .\phr.aates,  Ephrem  Syrus,  and  the  .Syriac  Didascalia.
[The  quotation  in  Aphr.iates  is  recognised  by  both  Harnack  and
Zahn,  thoui;h  questioned  (as  we  think  wrongly)  by  Carricre  and
Vetter.)  (3)  The  letters  were  also  known  and  had  some  small
circulation  i.i  the  West.

The  problems  whicli  still  await  solution  have  reference
to  the  (juestion  of  origin.

(i)  Zahn,  and  now  also  Vetter,  think  that  the  greater  part  of
the  letters  was  in  the  first  instance  incorporaleii  in  llie  apocryphal
Acts  of  Paul.  [Since  this  was  written  Zalins  hypothesis  h.as
been  verified  through  the  discovery,  by  Dr.  C.  Schmidt,  of  con-
siderable portions  of  the  Acts  of  Paul  in  Coptic  ;  cp  Neue  I/eidci-
berger  JaJtrb.'icher,  1897,  pp.  117-124,  and  Harnack  in  TL/.,
1897,  col.  627.]  In  any  case  it  seems  probable  that  they  gained
their  place  in  the  Syri.ac  version  in  connection  with  the  controversy
against  Bardesanes  early  in  the  third  century.  Their  composition
can  hardly  be  much  later  thin  200  a.d.  (2)  It  is  coming  to  be
generally  agreed  that  the  ni.dn  body  of  the  epistles  existed  first
in  Greek.  Vetter  and  Zahn  now  think  that  the  concludini;
portion  was  added  in  Syriac,  and  /.dm  goes  so  far  as  to  make
the  Latin  versions  translated  not  fro:n  the  Greek  but  from  the
Syriac.  In  this  he  certainly  has  not  proved  his  case  ;  but  the  age
of  th^se  versions  needs  further  investigating.

Besides  th  .•  general  commentaries  (uliich  still  deserve  mention)
of  Bengel,  Wetstein,  and  Meyer  (recent  editions  by  Heinrici),
we  have,  in  English,  in  The  Speaker s  Colit-
is. Literature,  mt-ntary,  that  on  i  Cor.  by  T.  S.  Evans
(primarily  exegetical  and  marked  by  fine
schoIar^Uii)),  and  that  on  2  C  ^r.  by  Dr.  Josei)h  Waite  (general),
aN  ;•.;,  Ill -irleson  i  Cor.  by  Dr.  T.  C.  Edwards  (exegetical

an  i  : ^  1.  and  by  Bishop  Ellicott  (grammatical  and  exe-


g ;; ' 1  Manley on both epistles is picturesque and

iiit.  :  ■•,i  14  t)  1:10  goneral  reader,  but  has  inevitably  fallen  behind
thi  present  position  of  inciuiry,  and  w.as  never  exact  in  .scholar-
ship. In  this  element  the  later  English  editions  are  strongest  :
they  are  moU  deficient  in  historical  criticism.  The  fullest  recent
commentary  in  German  on  the  two  epistles  is  by  Heinrici  (Berlin,
ijSj,  13S7):  well  meant,  and  with  new  illustrations  from  later
Greek,  but  inclined  to  press  Greek  analogies  too  far.  Perhaps
the  best  on  the  whole  is  Schmiedel's  in  the  IIC  (91),  which  is
searching  an  J  ex.act  but  inclined,  as  we  think,  to  multiply  entities
beyond  what  is  necessary.  In  this  respect  J  iilicher's  £■/«/.  (94)
seems  to  us  to  be  the  most  judicious.  Godet  published  a  com-
mentary on  I  Cor.  in  1B80  ;  and  mention  should  be  made  of  a
monograph  and  commentary  on  2  Cor.  by  Klopper  ('69,  '74),
and  of  the  discussions  of  special  points  in  Krenkel's  Beitrcige
('90),  and  of  the  missing  epistle  and  its  identification  with  parts
of  2  Cor.  in  the  l-:.xf>ositor  (iZ()i  h  231^  285^,  1898  a  1 13  jf!).

On  the  apocryphal  letters,  besides  the  literature  quoted  above,
a  sumtnary  will  be  found  in  Harnack's  Gesch.  d.  altchr.  Lift.
1  37-39,  .-md  Zahn's  last  words  on  the  .subject  in  Theol.  Liieratiir-
bhitt,  1894,  col.  i23i?i  The  important  discussion  in  Zahn's
Einleitung,  1  1S3-249,  was  too  late  for  notice.  \v.  S.

CORMORANT,  i.  The  cormorant  of  i:V  is  the
Mldkh,  r^'yz'  (Lev.  11 17  Dt.  14  i7t),^  a  word  connected
with  the  common  Hebrew  verb  for  'to  throw  down'
(-•Vr.i),  and  therefore  denoting  some  bird  that  sw^oops
or  dives  after  its  prey.  ©"a^-  in  Lev.  11 17  rightly
renders  KaLTa[p]odKTi]i,  as  this  denotes  a  fish-eating  Bird
which  dives  and  remains  under  water  for  some  time
(Arist.  //.4  913).  In  Dt.  14  17  the  order  of  (5  is  different
from  that  of  the  MT.  Vg.  has  Mcri^ulus,  the  little  Auk,
and  Targ.  and  Pesh.  \\a\g  shdle  niini' — i.e.,  '  extrahens
pisces.'  Many  writers,  following  Bochart,  believe  ^'^c'
to  be  Sula  bassana,  the  '  gannet '  or  '  solan  goose  '  ;  but,
although  this  bird  is  sometimes  alleged  to  have  been  seen
in  the  reed-marshes  of  Lower  Egypt  (Di.  on  Lev.  11 19),

1  n'^r  is  restored  by  Herz  in  Job288<i: -^^  vVv T^WTvh
'no  cormorant  darteth  upon  it.' Cp  Lion,  Ossikrace.]
907


CORNELIUS

there  is  some  reason  for  doubting  whether  it  has  so  wide
an  E.  range.  A  more  likely  bird,  in  view  of  its  common
occurrence  on  the  coast  of  Palestine  (Tristram,  NUB
252),  is  the  '  cormorant,  '  which  likewise  plunges  after
its  prey.

"Two  species  of  cormorant  are  described  from  Palestine :
the  Phalacrocorax  carbo,  which  fretjuents  both  the  sea-
shore and  inland  waters,  and  the  pygmy  cormorant,  P.
fvi^mivus,  which  is  found  in  lakes  and  rivers.  Canon
Tristram  states  that  the  P.  carbo  is  always  to  be  seen
near  the  mouth  of  the  Jordan,  watching  for  the  fish,
which  seem  on  entering  the  Dead  Sea  to  be  stupefied  by
the  saltness  of  its  waters.  Cormorants  are  fish -eaters
and  extremely  voracious.  Like  the  bittern  and  the
pelican  they  are  looked  upon  as  inhabitants  of  solitary
jjlaces.

2.  For  nKJJ  (soBii. :  Gi.  nx,-',  ka  ath;  Is.  34  11  Zeph.  214,
AV  text),  see  Pelican  (so  AVint;.,  .\V  elsewhere,  RV  every-
where). N.  M. — A.  E.  S.

CORN.  On  the  cultivation  of  corn  and  its  use  as
food,  see  Agkicultlkk,  Bread,  Food,  §  i,  and  the
various  cereals  (on  which  see  P.\I,ESTINE,  §  14).  On
other  points,  see  the  articles  cited  in  the  references
given  in  the  following  list  of  expressions  : —

1.  3'^N,  dbh'ibh,  the  fresh  young  ears  of  corn.  Lev.  2  14  ('  green
ears  of  corn,'  RV  'corn  in  the  ear');  .see  also  Month.

2.  '?-^3,  A'///,  Job  24  6  AV  (mg.  'mingled  corn  or  dredge'),
properly  'fodder';  see  Cattle,  g  5.

3.  12, /.ar.  Gen.  41 35  49,  etc.  (E),  Am.  5ii  S6  perhaps 'purified
[cleansctl]  grain  ' ;  cp  .\r.  burr>»',  'wheat,  grain  of  wheat,'  and
see  Fo(jo,  §  I.

4-  n^'  Soren  ('3"1j"|3,  Is.  21  10,  EV  'corn  of  my  floor';  cp
Dt.  10  13  AV);  properly  '  threshing-fioor';  .see  .\gricultukk,§8.

5.  C'T",  gen's,  Lev.  2  14  '  corn  beaten  out,'  RV  '  bruised  corn  ' ;
cp  7'.  16.

6.  ]y^,  dagnn,  ( len.  27  28  37,  etc.,  grain  (of  cereals),  used  widely,
along  with  c'n'n  '  must '  (see  Wink),  of  the  jiroducts  of  Canaan
(Dt.sy  2L);  see  Food,  §  i.  Its  connection  with  the  god  Dago.v
[^.w.]  is  uncertain.

7.  Sp73,  karfuel,  2  K.  442,  I'.V  'ears  of  corn'  (cp  Lev.  2;J  14
'ears'),  preferably  'fruit'  or  '  garden -growth  '  ;  cp  Car.mel.
See  Food,  §  i.

8.  "I'-y,  'abliur,  Josh,  'ni/.,  EV  'old  corn,'  RVmg.  'produce,
corn.'

9.  nD"iy,  'areindli,  Ruth  87,  EV  'heap  of  corn';  see  Agri-
cultuki:,  §  9/

ii^. : /^,  ¥iil>,  I  S.  17  17,  etc.,  '  parched  corn  ' ;  see  Food,  §  i.

11.  TOj^,  ^dmali,  Judg.  liJ  5,  etc.,  '  standing  corn  ' ;  see  Agri-
culture, §  7.

12.  nia"!,  riphoth,  2S.  17ig  Prov.  27  22,  '  bruised  corn  '  ;  cp
Cooking,  §  2.

13.  '^'yi',\eber,  Gen.  42  i,  etc.,  perhaps  'broken  (corn),'  but
uncertain.  As  a  denom.  T^c-.i,  'to  sell  corn '(Gen.  42  6  Am.
857:,  etc.).

14.  KOKKOs,  Jn.  1224,  'a  corn  (RV  grain).'

15.  criTOs,  Mk.  428  etc.,  a  general  term  like  |3^  (above,  6).

16.  ra  cTTTopi/ixa,  cornfields,  Mt.  12  i  Mk.  223.

17.  <Tt6.i(v%,  Mt.  12  I  Mk.  2  23,  'ear  of  corn';  cp  Heb.  n^ac",  Job
24  24.

CORNELIUS  (kornhAioc  [Ti.  WH]),  one  of  the
centurions  of  the  so-called  Italian  cohort  (ActslOi).

In  the  regular  army  composed  of  Roman  citizens  dis-
tinctive names  of  this  sort  were  not  given  to  the  separate
_,  cohorts  ;  only  the  legions  were  so  designated

•ItaJial-  (I^^"'s^y'  ^^-  ^''«^'""'  <^hap.  14,  §  i.  p.  314)-

_  In  .Vets  10, accordingly, what  we have to

■ do  with  is  a  cohort  of  the  auxiliary  troops

which  were  raised  in  the  provinces  and  not  formed  into

legions.^ As  for  the  meaning  of  such  names  : '  cohors

Gallorum Macedonica,' for example, would denote

1  Legions  were  stationed  only  in  the  great  provinces  that
were  governed  by  the  emperor  through  a  le^atus  Augustipro
prcetore ;  the  smaller  provinces — those  administered  by  an  ofnctr
of  lower  rank  (J>rocurator),  such  as  Eg\  pt,  or  Judsea  from  6-41
A.D.,  and  again  from  44  a.d.  onwards— had  only  auxiliary  troops.
The  old  provinces,  where  war  no  longer  threatened  and  tie
administration  was  in  the  hands  of  the  senate,  had  no  standing
army  properly  so  called.

908


CORNELIUS

that  the  cohort  mentioned  consisted  of  Gauls  but  had
distinguished  itself  in  Macedonia.  If  this  interpretation
were  applicable,  an  Italian  cohort  would  mean  one
which  had  fought  in  Italy.  In  Arrian,  h<jwcver  (Acics
(antra  Alarms,  §  3,  p.  99),  the  cohort  which  in  §  13,  p.
102,  is  callctl  17  ffwflpa  i)  'IraXuTj,  the  Italian  cohort,
figures  simply  as  ol'lraXoi,  the  Italians,  and  with  this
agree  all  the  other  mentions  (entirely  in  inscriptions)  of
a  cohors  Italica.

These  are  (i)  CfA(ors)  I  Italica  civium  Romanorum  volun-
tiinoriim;  (2)  C(>h{ors)  /«//viaria) — i.e.,  having  1000  instead  of
as  usual  500  men)  Jtalicia)  fo/««/(arioruin)  qtue  est  in  ^yrin.  ;
U)'0/t.  II.  Italica;  (4)  the  epitaph  of  a  sulxiniinate  ofTicer
found  at  Carnuntum  in  Pannonia  and  first  published  in  the
Arclurol.-efiigr.  Mirtheilunren  aus  Oestcttrich-Utignm  (1895,
p.  2i&)-p/>tio  <ro//(ortis)  //  Itaic(ii:)  t^ivium)  A'(omanoruiu
centuria)  /'^aus)/;«/  ex  i'*jr»/(lariis)  sagit{l2iT\is)  exer(c\\.w^)
Syriaci.

Thus  the  fftrtlpa  'IraXt^crJ  of  ActslOi  really  consisted
of  Italians,  probably  of  Italian  volunteers.

N  )W,  Schiirer^  has  pointed  out  that  according  to
Josephus  (Ant.  xx.  87,  §  176)  the  garrison  of  C.esarea
about  60  A.  D.  consisted  mostly  of  Caesareans  and
SebastCni  (Sebaste  having,  from  27  B.C.,  been  the
name  of  Samaria).  As  early,  however,  as  41-44  A.  n.
(at  latest),  when  Caisarea  was  not  under  a  Roman
procurator  but  under  a  grandson  of  Herod  "the  Great,
King  Herod  Agrippa  I.  (whose  death  is  recorded  in
Acts  1220-23,  and  during  whose  reign,  or  shortly  before
it,  the  story  of  Cornelius  will  have  to  be  placed),  the
garrison  at  Cajsarea  nmst,  according  to  Schiirer,  have
been  similarly  comiwsed.  For  in  44  .V.D. ,  the  emperor
Claudius  desired  to  transfer  the  garrison — which,  at  that
time,  and  according  to  Josejihus  (Z//iii.  42,  §  66)  also
twenty-three  years  later,  in  67  A.D. ,  consisted  of  an  a/a
(=t\j; — i.e.,  cavalry  detachment  of  500  men)  of  the
t.i-sareans  and  Sebasteni  and  five  cohorts  —  to  the
province  of  Pontus,  because,  after  the  death  of  his
friend  King  Agrippa  I.,  they  had  publicly  insulted  the
statues  of  his  daughters  ;  but  there  was  no  change  of
garrison  until  the  time  of  Ves[)asian  (Jos.  Ant.  xix.  9  i/. ,
§^  35'J-3<^<j)-  This  led  Schiirer  to  conjecture  that  a
cohort  of  Italians  may  have  come  to  Ca-sarea  (there
was  in  Syria,  as  shown  above,  one  such  at  least)  under
Vespasian,  and  that  the  author  of  Acts,  or  of  the  source
from  which  he  drew,  may  have  transferred  the  circum-
stances of  his  own  lime  to  the  time  of  Peter.

Ramsay,  on  the  other  side,  adduces  the  fourth  of  the  inscrip-
tions given  above.  liiis  inscriptijn,  however,  docs  not  .say
more  than  that  in  69  A.D.  there  was  a.<;}/iars  Italica  in  Syria;
and,  aUliough  there  may  have  bein  such  a  coliort  there  as  early
as  about  40-45  a.I).,  it  is  not  said  that  tlicre  was  one  in  Caesarca.
It  is  especially  improbable  that  that  ciiy  w.is  so  garrisoned  in
the  reign  of  Asrippa  I.  (41-44  A.n.),  for  he  was  a  relatively
independent  .sovereign,  not  likely  to  have  h.ad  Italians  in  his
service;  but  even  for  the  period  preceding  41  a.d.  Schiirer
argues  for  a  probability  that  the  garrison  of  C^sarea  was  the
same  as  it  was  afterw.ards,  and  that  it  was  simply  taken  over  by
Agrippa  at  his  accession.  For  the  rest,  Ramsay  can  only
appeal  to  a  possibility  that  Cornelius  may  have  been  temporarily
at  C.csarea  on  some  'detached  service.'

Oscar  Holtzmann  (NTlic/ie  Zfifs^csch.  §  11,  2,  p.
108)  thinks  that  perhaps  the  enrolment  at  some  time  or
other  of  a  considerable  number  of  Italian  volunteers
may  have  sudicetl  to  secure  for  such  a  cohort  in
perpetuity  the  honorary  epithet  of  'Italica.'  All  this,
however,  is  mere  conjecture.

Mommsen  (Sitztdtiji^sbcr.  d.  Akad.  zii  Berlin,  1895,
PP-  501-3)  seeks  to  deprive  of  its  force  the  statement  of
Josephus  on  which  Schurer  relies.  Starting  from  the
view  that  the  trooi)s  of  Agrippa  must  certainly  have  been
drawn  from  the  whole  of  his  kingdom, — that  is,  from
all  Palestine — he  maintains  that  Caesarea  and  Sebaste
are  singled  out  for  special  mention  by  Josephus  merely
as  being  the  two  chief  towns  in  Agrippa's  dominions.
He  lays  emphasis  on  the  fact  that  in  BJ  \\\.  4=,  §  66

1  ZIVT,  187s,  pp.  4I3-4J5;  C/Kl  382-6  (ET  i.  24S-54 :  where,
on  p.  54,  accorduig  to  Kxp.  1896,  ii.  470n.  for  'in  reference  to  a
later  period  '  should  be  read  '  iii  refcr«nce  to  a  preceding
period").  In  Kxp.  1896,  2469-472,  Schiirer  replies  to  Ramsay
ib.  i94>2oi;  Ramsay  replies,  1897,  1 69-72.

909


CORNELIUS

(see  above)  and  Ant.  xx.  6i,  §  122,  it  is  said  only  of
tlie  ala — not  of  the  cohors — that  it  was  composed  of
Caesareans  and  Sebastenes.  At  the  same  time  he  does
not  use  this  fact  to  establish  the  probability  of  a  cohors
Italica  in  Ciesarea.  On  the  contrary,  his  conclusion  is
that  '  We  arc  unable  to  identify  with  any  certainty
either  the  cohors  Augusta  of  Acts  27 1  or  the  ffiretpa
'IraXiK-ii  of  Acts  10 1.'

The  special  importance  of  Cornelius  in  Acts  lies  in
the  representation  that  his  conversion  by  Peter  brought

2  Narrative  ^^'  original  Christian  community  of
irreconcilable  J--usalem  in  spite  of  violent  recalci-
with  Council  of  "■^"^'^'^/i'  fi'-s'  (11-/)'  to  th«  <:«"V'c-


Jerusalem.


tion that the Gentiles  aLso, without


circumcision  and  without  coming  under
any  obligation  to  observe  the  law  of  Moses,  were  to  Ix;
received  into  the  Christian  Church  if  they  had  faith  in
Christ  (1117/.).  The  hi.storical  truth  of  this  representa-
tion has  to  be  considered  in  connection  with  what  we  are
told  elsewhere  concerning  the  Council  of  Jerusalem  (rco
CoLNCii,,  ii.  §  4  ;  Acts,  §  4 ).  That  council  could  never
have  been  necessary,  and  the  Judaising  Christians  in  it
could  never  have  stood  out  for  the  circumcision  of  the
Gentiles  or  their  obligation  to  observe  the  whole  Mosaic
law  (.\ctsl5i5).  if  they  had  already  come  to  see  and
acknowledge  in  the  case  of  Cornelius  that  such  demands
were  contrary  to  the  divine  will.  In  his  controversy
with  Peter  at  Antioch  also  (Gal.  2 11-21),  Paul  could
have  used  no  more  effective  weajion  than  a  simple
reference  to  this  event  ;  but  he  betrays  no  knowletlge  of
it.  No  one,  it  is  to  be  jiresumed,  will  attemjjt  to  save
the  credibility  of  the  narrative  by  the  exijcdicnt  of
transferring  it  to  some  date  subse(|uent  to  the  Council
of  Jerusalem.  As  at  that  council  (we  are  told)  Peter
himself  e.\pres.sly  agreed  that  the  Gentiles  should  have
unimpeded  entrance  into  the  Christian  Church,  that
circumcision  and  observance  of  the  law  should  not  Ix;
demanded  of  them,  he  did  not,  at  a  later  date,  refjuire
to  be  instructed  on  the  matter  by  a  di\ine  revelation.
Had  the  Cornelius  incident  been  later  than  the  Council
the  novelty  woulil  have  lain  simjily  in  Peter's  preaching
the  gospel  and  administering  l)aptism  to  Cornelius  and
his  household  in  prol^ria  pt-rsinia.  This,  however,  is
precisely  what  would  have  been  contrary  to  the  principle
ado[)ted  at  the  Council  as  laid  down  in  Gal.  "Jg,  which
settled  that  he  should  confine  his  missionary  activity  to
born  Jews.  (On  the  importance  of  this  principle,  see
Couxcir.,  §  9.)

As  the  story  of  Cornelius  must  thus  be  retained,  if
anywhere, in  its  present  place, before the Council of
Jerusalem,  its  credibiKty  can  be  allowed


3.  Credibility
of  narralive


only  on condition that it is ackiiow-

as  an  incident.  ["'^-^'^"^  "°'  *"  1^°'^"^^^  ''!*^  important
bearmg  on  questions  of  prmciple  which
is  claimed  for  it  in  Acts.  11 1-18.

(<7)  To  meet  this  requirement,  it  is  usually  thought
sufiicient  to  say  that  the  occurrence  was  an  '  exceptional
case'  (so,  for  example,  Ramsay  also,  .S7.  Paul*\  chap.
3,  p.  44).  This  may  be  true  in  the  sense  that  Peter  con-
verted and  baptized  no  more  Gentiles  ;  but,  unless  at  the
same  time  it  is  denied  that  in  the  case  of  Cornelius  Peter's
action  proceeded  on  a  divine  revelation  and  command,  the
reference  to  the  exceptional  character  of  the  case  has  no
force.  The  conditions  of  missionary  activity  which  God
had  revealed  to  Peter  in  the  case  of  Cornelius  must
surely,  when  Paul  also  began  to  n\^p\y  them,  have  been
acknowledged  by  the  original  Church ;  and  thus  the
controversy  resulting  in  the  Council  of  Jerusalem  could
never  have  arisen.  On  this  ground  alone,  then,  to
begin  with,  Peter's  vision  at  Joppa  is  unhistoric^il  ;  and
aversion  from  miracles  has  nothing  to  do  with  its
rejection.  The  whole  account  seems  to  Ix;  intluenced
by  reminiscences  of  the  story  of  the  sunmioning  of
Balaam  by  Rilak  (Nu.  225-39);  see  Krenkel,  Josephus
u.  Lucas.  193-9  [■94]-

{/')  It  is  further  urged  (so  again  Ramsay,  St.  Pau^*>,
910


CORNELIUS

ch.  3  §  I  and  16  §  3,  pp.  42/.  and  375,  and  Exp. ,  1896.
2200/)  that  Cornelius  according  to  Actsl02  22  35  was  a
semi-proselyte — i.e. ,  gave  a  general  adhesion  to  Judaism,
without  being  circumcised  or  yielding  definite  obedience
to  the  details  of  the  Mosaic  Law ; ' — but  neither  does  this
contention  avail.  The  fact  is.  as  stated  in  Acts  10  28  11 3,
that  Cornelius  and  his  house,  according  to  Jewish  and
Jewish-Christian  ideas,  were  unclean  ;  and  if,  notwith-
stantiing  this,  (iod  had  commanded  his  admission  within
the  pale  of  the  Christian  Church,  the  command  had
essentially  no  less  significance  than  it  would  have  had  if
he  had  ])reviously  been  tiuite  unattached  to  Judaism.
Ramsay  (43)  says,  it  is  true,  that  Peter  '  laid  it  down  as
a  condition  of  reception  into  the  Church  that  the  non-
Jew  must  approach  by  way  of  the  synagogue  (10 35)
and  become  "one  that  fears  God."'  But  Peter  does
not  say  this  until  after  he  has  been  taught  by  God  in  a
vision.  Without  this  instruction  it  would  have  been
incumbent  on  him  to  exact,  as  conditions  precedent,
acceptance  of  circumcision  and  submission  to  the  entire
law  (10 14).  As  soon  as  the  divine  command  is  re-
cognised as  a  historical  fact  the  dispute  at  the  Council  of
Jerusalem  becomes,  as  already  stated,  an  impossibility.

(c)  On  one  assumption  alone,  then,  will  it  be  possible
to  recognise  a  kernel  of  historical  truth  in  the  story  of
Cornelius  :  the  assumption,  namely,  that  he  was  a  full
proselyte, — circumcised,  that  is  tc  say,  and  pledged  to
observance  of  the  entire  Law.  Such  a  supposition,
however,  is  in  direct  contradiction  of  the  te.xt  (10 28  11  3).
It  would  be  strange  indeed  if,  in  order  to  make  the
narrative  credible,  one  liad  first  to  change  it  in  so
important  a  point.  It  would  be  necessary  to  depart

still  further  from  the  text  if  it  were  desired  to  put  faith
in  what  is  said  in  the  pseudo- Clementine  Homilies
(20  13),  according  to  which  Peter  did  not  convert  Cor-
nelius at  Cajsarea  to  Christianity  at  all,  but  merely
freed  him  from  a  demon's  possession.  It  is  not  in-
trinsically imjjossible  that  here  we  have  a  fragment  of
good  tradition  ])reserved  from  some  ancient  source  (see
Simon  M.\gl"s)  ;  but,  on  account  of  its  combination
with  manifest  fancies  (see  below,  §  6),  to  trust  it  would
be  unsafe.

.Ml  the  more  urgent  becomes  the  ciuestion  whether
the  narrative  in  Acts  is  derived  from  a  written  source.
Of  the  scholars  enumerated  under  Acts
Sources,  (g  „)  i]^^  majority  assume  that  it  is,  and
point  out  verses  in  ch.  10,  the  proper  connections  of
which  (they  say)  have  been  obliterated  by  the  final
redactor  of  the  book.^  They  further  emphasise  the
point  that  in  the  narrative  by  Peter  (11 5-17)  certain
details  are  not  given  precisely  as  in  ch.  10.  Still,  even
the  most  serious  of  these  differences — namely,  that  in

1  That  this  is  the  meaning  of  the  phrase  crePofievot  [or
^o^oufiero?)  Tor  9f6v  is  shown  in  Schiirer  G/i',  ET  4  3,ii_^.\  also
SBAH\  1897,  Heft  13,  'Die  Juden  im  bosporanischen  Reich,'
especially  i<)/.  =  -ziZ/.  of  the  volume  :  see  also  Proselyte.

2  10367;,  however,  ought  not  to  he  reckoned  among  these:
no  redactor  would  have  introduced  such  violent  abnormalities
into  his  text.  The  words  from  apfafiei'os  ('  beginning  ')  down  to
roAiAaiosC  Galilee'),  or,  it  may  be,  to  'IwaviTj^  (end  of  t.  37),
are  absolutely  foreign  to  the  construction,  and  certainly  ought
to  come  between  6s  ('who')  and  &i.rjK6fv  (EV  'went  a'oout ")
in  V.  38,  whether  it  be  that  they  originally  belonged  to  this
place,  or  that  they  originally  stood  on  the  margin  as  a
reminiscence  by  a  very  early  reader  from  Lk.  23  5  or  Acts  1  22.
In  10  36  the  reading  of  \VH  ('[He]  sent  the  word  unto  .  .  .
Lord  of  all.  Ye  know  the  word  which "  :  cp  RVn's)  is  un-
questionably a  copyist's  attempt  to  remove  the  ditTiculties  of
the  construction  ;  but  their  marginal  reading  (toi/  Aoyoi'  ok
a.iti<nei.Ktv,  etc.;  'The  word  which'  as  in  EV)  it  is  as  difficult
to  make  dependent  on  the  oiSore  (ye  know)  of  7'.  37  as  it  is  to
construe  in  apposition  to  the  whole  sentence  in  v.  35.  If  we
refuse  to  suppose  that  before  v.  36  some  such  words  as  '  you
also  hath  he  thought  worthy  to  hear'  h.-ive  fallen  out  before
Toi'  Aoyoi'  'ov  aiTf<TTfi\fv,  etc.  (the  word  which  [he]  sent),  it  will
be  necessary  to  take  tov  Aoyoi-  of  ('the  word  which ')  down  to
Sia  'Iijo-oO  XpicTToO  ('  by  Jesus  Christ '_),  as  a  marginal  explanation
of  TO  ytvofitvov  p-qtia  Ka6'  oAtjj  tijs  'lovSaCa<:  ('  the  word  which
was  throughout  all  Judaea'),  whereoTJjxa  (RV  '  saying ')  is  wrongly
understood  in  the  sense  of  '  word '  inste.-id  of  the  Hebraismg
sense  of  'event,  occurrence'  as  in  Lk.  215;  and  ofrot  imv
itavTuv  niptot  ('  he  is  lord  of  all ')  will  be  a  further  addition.

911


CORNELIUS

ch.  11  the  Holy  Spirit  fell  upon  Cornelius  and  his
household  at  the  very  beginning  of  Peter's  discourse
(v.  15)  —  admits  of  explanation:  IO34-43  may  have
been  supj)Osed  to  represent  only  a  comparatively  small
part  of  what  Peter  meant  to  say.  Were  it  necessary
to  make  a  choice  between  ch.  10  and  ch.  11,  it  would
be  the  worst  possible  course  to  try  to  see  in  the  latter
the  source  from  which  the  fuller  narrative  of  ch.  10  was
originally  derived  by  amplification  (so  Wendt,  ZTK,
189 1,  pp. 230-254,  esp.  250-4).  That  principle-deter-
mining character  which,  as  we  have  seen,  can  in  no
case  have  attached  to  the  assumed  event,  is  imparted
precisely  by  the  justification  which  in  ch.  11  the  event
receives  before  the  church  of  Jerusalem  ;  and  against
this  it  is  of  no  avail  that  Wendt  chooses  to  attribute
some  of  the  strongest  passages,  such  as  lli  and  11 18,
to  the  latest  redactor  of  Acts.

More  important  than  any  of  the  indications  hitherto
dealt  with  is  the  clue  supplied  in  10  44-47  11 15,  17.  The
'  speaking  with  tongues '  of  Cornelius  and  his  house-
hold is  here  placed  on  a  level  with  that  of  the  apostles
at  the  first  Pentecost  after  the  resurrection,  but  is  not
yet  (as  it  is  in  the  other  passage)  described  as  a  speaking
in  the  languages  of  foreign  nations  :  it  is  undoubtedly
meant,  as  in  i  Cor.  I'i  14,  to  be  taken  sinijjly  as  a
speaking  in  ecstatic  tones  (see  Gifts).  Certainly  this
representation  of  the  matter  does  not  seem  as  if  it  had
been  clue  to  the  latest  redactor  of  the  book  as  a  whole.

In  favour  of  the  credibility  of  the  narrative,  however,
nothing  is  gained  by  all  this  search  for  a  written  source.
It  is  a  great  error,  widely  diffused,  to  suppose  that  one
may  ipso  facto  take  as  historical  everything  that  can
be  shown  to  have  stood  in  one  of  the  written  sources
of  the  NT  authors.  As  far  as  the  source  was  in
substance  identical  with  what  we  now  have  in  the
canonical  Acts,  it  is  equally  exposed  to  the  criticisms
already  offered.  There  is  one  assumption  which  would
escape  the  force  of  that  criticism  —  the  assumjjtion,
namely,  that  Cornelius  was  a  full  proselyte  (§  3c) ; —
but  it  cannot  possibly  by  any  analysis  of  sources  be
made  out  to  have  been  the  original  tradition.

All  the  more  remarkable  is  the  clearness  with  which
the  tendency  of  the  narrative  may  be  seen.  The
initiative in missions to the Gentiles,


5.  Tendency.


which historically belongs to Paul, is


here  set  down  to  the  credit  of  Peter  (see  Acts,  §  3  /. ).
According  to  the  representation  given  in  Acts,  it  was
preceded  by  the  conversion  of  the  Samaritans  (85-25),
who,  however,  were  akin  to  the  Jews,  and  consequently
not  Gentiles  (Schurer,  GJV^s-7,  £TZs-i).  H  had  Ijeen
preceded  also  by  the  baptism  of  the  Ethiopian  eunuch
(826-39) ;  but  he  had  not  thereby  been  made  a  member
of  any  Christian  church.  The  really  difficult  problem
was  this  :  In  what  manner  ought  Jewish  Christians  to
live  together  in  one  and  the  same  church  with  Gentile
Christians,  who  did  not  hold  by  the  Mosaic  Law  ?  This
question  is  brought  by  Peter,  in  the  case  of  Cornelius,
on  the  basis  of  a  divine  revelation,  exactly  to  the
solution  w  hich  in  reality  it  was  left  to  Paul  to  achieve
after  hard  battle  at  a  much  later  date  (see  Council,
§§  4,  7).  With  a  certain  reserve,  which  bears  witness
to  right  feeling  for  essential  historical  truth  in  spite  of
all  unhistoricity  in  the  narrative,  the  author  attributes
no  more  conversions  of  Gentiles  to  Peter  ;  and  even  the
conversion  of  Cornelius  himself  is  in  some  measure  toned
down  by  the  previous  Jewish  sympathies  with  which  he
is  credited.  There  is  thus  a  further  step  left.  It  is
not  till  later,  in  Antioch,  that  the  gospel  is  preached
to  Gentiles  who  had  not  previously  stood  in  any  close
connection  with  Judaism,  and  the  new  step  is  taken
(as  in  the  case  of  the  Samaritans)  in  the  first  instance
by  subordinate  persons,  and  not  sanctioned  by  the
authorities  at  Jerusalem  till  after  the  event  (11 19-24).
None  the  less  are  mission  to  the  Gentiles  and  the
abolition  of  the  distinction  between  Jewish  Christiins
and  Gentile  Christians  so  essentially  vindicated  in  the
912


CORNER

cise  of  Cornelius  thai  I'eter  hr\s  necessarily  to  \x  con-
sidered their  real  initiator  as  far  as  Acts  is  concerned.
The  narrative,  accordingly,  is  incomplete  contrast  to  Cjal.
2ii-ai.  In  Galatians  the  historical  Peter,  on  account
of  Jewish  Christian  prejudice  not  yet  fully  overcome,
withdraws  from  table -fellowship  which  he  had  begun
with  Cjentilc  Christians,  and  thereby  exijoses  himself
to  the  sharp  censure  of  Paul  (see  CouNcil.,  §  3)  ;  in
Acts  he  has  completely  overcome  those  prejudices  long
before  Paul  begins  his  Christian  activity.  It  is  not
necessary  on  this  account  to  sujjpose  that  the  author
of  .Vets  freely  invented  the  whole  story,  including  oven
the  name  of  Cornelius  ;  but,  considering  how  mark<.>dly
he  Ijrings  it  into  the  service  of  his  theory,  we  have  little
prosjiect  of  ultimately  l)eing  able  to  retain  more  than
a  very  small  kernel  as  historical.

.According  to  the  pseudo-Clementine  Homilies  (20 13;
sec  above,  §  3  c)  and  Recognitions  (IO55)  Cornelius  took


6.  Later
traditions.


the  side  of  Peter  as  against  Paul.  When
-Simon  the  Sorcerer  {i.e. ,  Paul ;  see  SiMoN
M.\GUS)  had  stirred  up  all  Vntioch  .against
Peter,  Cornelius  comes  upon  a  mission  from  the  lim-
jx-ror  and  arrives  at  an  understanding  with  the  friends
of  Peter,  at  their  request,  to  set  abroad  the  rumour
that  his  imperial  commission  has  reference  to  the  arrest
of  Simon.  Thereupon  Simon  makes  his  escape  to
Jud;ta.  Thus  Cornelius  here  plays  the  \xnl  which  in
Acts  21  33  2823-33  is  assigned  to  Claudius  l.ysias.

Ai'cordiiic;  to  llie  '  uird/Li»o7fia  oil  the  Holy  Apostles  I'eter  and
P.-iul,'  .-iitribiited  to  Symcon  .Met.nphr.aste^,  Cori'.elius  is  coiise-
tr.iled  by  I'eter  bishop  of  Iliiiin  ;  according  to  the  Greek
Mimra  (13th  Sept.),  he  is  sent  by  Peter  to  Skepsis  on  tlie
Hellesfxjnt  (Lipsms,  A/>okry/>h.  A^.-(it'sih.\\.l  ^t,  and  9/).
According  to  the  pseiido-Cleinentine  Homilies  (3  63-72)  and  ke-
coijnitions  (:!6sy^),  Zacclia;us  was  consecrated  first  bishop  of
Cxsarea  l>y  Peter  ;  in  .-//.  Const,  vii.  40  i  Zucchaius  is  sviciecded
by  Cornelius.  !>.  \v.  S.

CORNER  (HNS).  Lev.  I9927  21  5:  (i)  of  a  field  :  cp
Ci.KAN,  §  6  ;  (2)  of  the  beard  :  see  CrTTiNGS  oi-  TiiK
I-'i.i:.sii,  §  5,  Mourning  Customs  ;  (3)  of  a  garment
('■p, KRAcne^ON),  N'u.  ir.38  KV'"*.'- :  see  Fkingf.s.

CORNER,  ASCENT  OF  THE  (n32n  nhl'), Xeh.

3  u R\'. Sec ll.KlSAI.KM.

CORNER  GATE (D'3Si^  TI'L"), Zech.  14.o. See

JKUrsAI.K.M.

CORNER-STONE  (in  Job  HSS  ^nX  ;  AiGoc
rcoNiAioc;  in  ^^-  njS,  K.  AKporcoNiAioc.  ^nd  so  in
NT; in Ps. Jl'IT KeKAAAconiCAAeN&i  ; Arj.  eni-

rooNIA, Sym. rcoNiAl?). (-') Job386; {b) Is.  28i6
I  Pet.  2  6  i:i)h.  220  (without  AlBoc)  ; (<:)  Ps.  144  12.

In  (rt)  tlie  phrase  ' fiinna/t-stone,'  KV's  'corner-stone,'  is
parallel  to  ^'J"]-'  ' ''*  foundations'  (or  bases),  just  as  in  Jer.
61  26  'a  stone  for  a //«//«/« '  (nssS  |aN)  is  parallel  10  'a  stone
for  foundations '  (nnnic?  J3K).  In  (/»)  we  find  the  same  con-
nection between  ri3S,  pinnah,  and  the  foundation-stone.
Clearly,  therefore,  the  traditional  rendering  'corner-stone'  for
n3£3  pK  is  unsuitable.  Indeed,  the  word  '133  elsewhere  only  in
some  cases  means  'corner'  (see  Ex.  2"  2  4  Kzek.  43  20  4.'»  19
Job  1  19  Prov.  7  k).  Besides  this,  the  architectural  term  c'KT
njS  in  Ps.  1  IS  22  (A.  aicpoYbii'tatot  in  i  Pet.  2  6  cp  Eph.  2  20 ;  but
not  in  Mt.'Jl42  and  parallel  passages,.  .\cts  4  1 1  i  Pet.  27)  evi-
dently means,  not  '  corner-stone,"  but  '  top-stone  of  the  battle-
ment,'and  'battlement' is  RV's  rendering  of  n|S  in  2Ch.26i5
Zeph.  1:6  36.

In  spite  of  tradition,  therefore,  it  would  seem  that
n39  I3K  means,  not  a  comer-stone,  but  a  principal  stone
(cp  c*:B,  Ass.  pdnu,  'front'),  one  selected  for  its
solidity  and  beauty  to  fill  an  important  place  in  a  build-
ing, whether  in  the  foundation  or  in  the  battlement.
Hence  the  metaphorical  sense  of  nis.  '  principal  men,"
Is.  19 13  (so  point),  I  .S.  1438  Judg.  20  2.  [c)  The  third
EV  passage  (Ps.  144  12)  with  the  word  'corner'  is  ex-
tremely obscure  in  MT.  That  Jewish  maidens  could
be  likened  either  to  'corner-stones'  (FA',  Del.)  or  to
'corner-pillars'  (Baethg.,  We.  in  SDOT,  comparing  the

913


COSAM

Caryatides)  puts  a  severe  strain  on  the  imagination.
The  student  may  con.sult  the  three  critics  named.
Zech.  9 15  ('corners  of  the  altar')  by  no  niciins  justifies
either  of  the  above  interpretations  of  n'M.  The  parallel
jKissage,  Ps.  1283,  indicates  the  sort  of  figure  retjuircd  ;
the  text  necils  emendation. .See  further  Che.  /'j.*'-'

In  Is.  28 16  the  stone  described  as  a  finnah-sUme
syml)olises,  not  the  theocracy  or  the  Davidic  dynasiy,
nor  yet  the  (Jewish)  Messi.ah,  but  the  revealed  relation  or
Yahwe  to  Israel,  which  Yahwe  was  establishing  e\er
more  and  more  by  the  words  of  his  prophets  and  the
solemn  acts  of  his  regal  sway.  That  it  should  l)e
applied  to  their  divine  Messiah  by  Christians  is  intelli-
gible ;  and,  since  they  read  the  Psalter  as  a  Iwxjk  with  a
living  power  of  self-adaptation  to  their  own  changing
needs,  it  was  natural  that  Christian  disciples  should  find
the  words  of  Ps.  II.H22,  which  originally  referred  to  the
Jewish  people,  verified  in  their  Master.  In  Kph.  22j
there  is  no  absolute  need  to  interpret  oLKpoyuviaiov  other-
wisc  than  ,-3S  jan  ;  but  in  I  Pet.  2  6  we  seem  to  reijuire
the  traditional  sense  'corner-stone'  (see  i'.  7).

CORNET.  For  Dan.  Ssf.  i]':Pj  and  i  Ch.  I528,  etc.
(lEir)  see Music, § 5^. For  2  S.  Ost  (CyJi':-:),  see  .Music,

§3(3).

CORONATION.  Anointing  (,/.:■. ,  §  3]  was  by  itself
an  efficient  mode  of  investiture  with  royal  functions  ( i  .S.

10  I  I  K.  1341.'  It  is  only  in  the  case  of  Joash  that
coronation  is  mentioned  as  accompanying — intleed,  it  is
mentioned  as  preceding— the  anointing  (2  K.II12).
Perha|)s  2  .S.  1  10  refers  to  an  older  custom  of  trans-
ferring to  the  successor  the  personal  adornments  of  the
de.ad  king ;  see  CuovvN'.  Perhaps  too  the  anointing
occurred  near  or  on  a  particular  via<sPbah  or  u|)right
stone,  as  in  the  case  of  Abimelech,  for  we  can  hardly
doubt  that  IC\"srenderiiig  the  '  pillar  that  was  in  .Shechem '
(Jutlg.  96)  is  correct,  though  the  final  letter  of  ,-2X2  has
been  lost  or  removed  (see  Moore,  ad  loc. ).  Joash  too  is
said  to  have  stood  '  by  the  pillar  as  the  manner  was  '(2  K.

11  14)  ;  but  here  the  word  for  '  pillar'  is  difllerent  (ni^i't,
and  we  should  perhaps  follow  RV"'c-  and  Klostermann
in  rendering 'platform'  (cp  2  K.  283  RV'"*.')."'^

After  the  anointing  the  people  greeted  the  new  king
with  a  nourish  of  trumi>ets  ( i  K.  1  34  39  2  K.  9 13  ler^  i'pn,
2  K.  11  14  nni'-inn).  In  the  case  of  Jehu  and  .Absalom
(2  S.  If)  10)  the  trumpet  soimds  were  the  signal  of
accession,  though  they  may  have  lxx;n  simply  an  element
in  the  popular  expressions  of  joy  (i  S.  11  15  i  K.  I40),
which  included  hand-clapping  (pj  j,'j:n.  nsn  2  K.  11 12  Ps.
47  I  [2])  and  the  exclatnation  '  Live  the  king '  {-'^t\  'n' ;
I  S.  IO24  2  S.  16  16  I  K.  1  3439  2  K.  11  12).  Sometimes
there  was  a  procession  with  music  ;  the  new  king  rode
on  the  royal  mule  (i  K..  1  33  38)  and  finally  took  his
seat  on  the  throne.

It  is  possible  that  'to-day'  in  Ps.  27  refers  not  to  the  birth
but  to  the  coronation  of  the  kmg.  See  Baethg.,  Che.  a<//.'c'«  The
latter  illustrates  from  the  sculptures  representing  the  coronation
of  the  Egyptian  queen  Hat-shepsut,*  Naville,  ToiifU  0/ Dcirt-t-
Balinri,  III.,  1899,  pp.  i-o).  See  W'einel's  essay  on  nc^  i"
/..ATU-  IS  1-92  ['98]  and  Diehl,  Erkl.  von  /V.xlvii.,  Giessen,
j894.  I.  A.

CORRUPTION,  MOUNT  OF  (n'ri'if^rrnri),  2  k.

23 13,  R\'"'*-'-  'mount  of  destruction.'  See  Dkstruc-
TiON,  Mount  of.

COS  (kcoc  [-^SV]),  I  Mace.  If.  23. See  Coos.

COSAM  (kcocam  [Ti.  WH]^,  fifth  from  Zerubbabel
in  the  genealogy  of  Joseph  (Lk.  828).  See  Genea-
LOGIKS,  ii.,  §  3.

1  .According  to  R.-ibbinic  views,  not  all  kings  were  anointed  ;
but  the  term  rn.T  n'trO  seems  the  generic  designation  of  a  king.
On  the  association  of  crowning  with  anointing  sec  Is.  61  3  (cp
SHOT  ad  loc).

2  L.  Oliphant  {Haifa,  147)  conjectures  that  the  (artifici.il)
footprints  in  the  rocks  in  difrei;ent  parts  of  Palestine  (e.g.,  at
Hebron  and  at  the  Neby  Shaib  near  Hat!'")  indicate  ver>'
ancient  cornnation-stones.

S  Ha't-Sepsut,  formerly  wrongly  written  Hatasu  (see  Egypt,
153)-

914


COSTUS

COSTUS  (n-li^;  ipic  [BAFL]:  casta),  Ex.  30 24
RV'"^'-  [in  Kzek. 'J7 19  Vg.  stacte.  EV  cassia  0  kai
TpoxiAC  '  'Tid  drugs?  ']. See  Cassia,  Incknse,  §  6.

COTTAGE. I.  For  Is.  1  8(n3D)and  2420 (nrSa)see  Hut.

2.  In  Zeph.  26  (EV  'cottages'  RVni);.  'caves')  the  an.  Aey.
n"i3  is  probably  a  (littograph  of  Tt^i  '  dwellings '(Bohme,  ^-4 '/'/K
7  212  ['87]:  Rothstein  in  Kau.  /A? ;  and  Schw.-illy,  ZATIV
10  186  ['90]),  under  the  influence  of  C"n"13  inf.  5;  or,  transposing
the  two  words,  we  may  adopt  with  We.  the  reading  of  <B  ea-rai
Kp))n)  co/nij,  with  the  meaning  '  Philistia  shall  become  dwellings
for,'  etc.

COTTON!  or  Fine  Cloth  (RV'e),  or  Grkkn
(hnn,-;ings),  EV  (DS")?,  karpas ;  KApnACINA
[H.^ALaS]:  Esth.  16)).  The  Heb.  word,  which
ajipears  also  in  Arab. ,  Arm. ,  Gr. ,  and  Lat. ,  is  derived
from  Pers.  /t/>/<z.f  and  ultimately  from  Sans,  karpdsa,  'the
cotton  plant.'  *  As  a  derived  word  it  means,  in  the
various  languages,  primarily  'muslin,'  the  fine  cotton
cloth  which  came  from  India,  and  also  such  stuffs  as  are
nained  'calico.'  The  nature  and  home  of  the  cotton
plant  were  known  to  the  Greeks  as  early  as  Herodotus
(3  106)  ;  but  it  was  the  expedition  of  Alexander  that  first
nude  them  familiar  with  the  use  of  cotton  faV)rics.
Tiie  earliest  known  occurrence  of  Ka.pTr<x.<sos  =  carbasus
in  Greek  or  Latin  is  in  a  line  of  C,';ucilius  (219-
166?  B.C.) — '  carbasina,  molochina,  ampelina '^which
appears  to  be  a  transliteration  of  a  line  in  a  Greek
l^l.Tv.  Strabo  (l,')i,  §  71)  and  the  author  of  the  Peri  pi.
Maris  F.iy/hr.  (cliap.  11),  Lucan  (8239),  and  Quintus
Curtins  (89,  §  21)  used  the  word  in  special  connection
with  India ;  but  other  references  in  classical  writers
show  that  the  word  obtained  a  wider  sense,  jiarticularly
in  the  poets.  Thus  it  is  used  of  fine  Spanish  1  nen  or
cambric  (Pliny  19  i,  §  2),  of  the  .awnings  of  theatres*
(Lucr.  6  109),  often  of  sails  (^«.  8357  4417,  etc. )  and  of
robes  of  fine  material  {ib.  834  11  776,  etc.  :  see  these
and  other  passages  discussed  in  Yates,  Tcx/ri/iiiin
Antiquoriim,  1  338^).  We  cannot,  therefore,  be  certain
as  to  the  material  called  karpas  in  the  particular  case  of
Esth.  16,  since  according  to  the  later  usage  any  light
material  might  be  so  called  ;  but  in  view  of  the  un-
doubted meaning  of  tiie  original  word  in  Sans.,  the
presumption  is  in  favour  of  cotton -muslin.  Karpas
certainly  denotes  a  material,  not  a  colour  (the  latter
is  a  Jewish  idea,  found  in  Vg. ).

Asiatic  cotton  in  ancient  times  (like  most  modern  cotton)  was
derived  from  the  cotton  plant,  Gossypiutn  heiltacenm,  L. —
perennial  in  the  tropics,  but  elsewhere  annual — which  had  its
first  home  in  India,  but  by  the  time  of  Alexander  had  spread  to
Bactriana  (De  CandoUe,  Origine,  y^Zjlf-)-  ^ ''C  cotton  shrub
(Gossyfiium  arhoreuvt,  L.),  on  the  other  hand,  which,  though
little  known  to  the  ancients,  is  described  in  one  place  by  Pliny,''
had  its  first  home,  according  to  modern  investisjation,  in  '  Upper
Guinea,  .Vbyssinia,  Sennfir,  and  Higher  Egypt'  (/(5.  325^).
This,  brought  down  from  the  Soudan,  was  probably  the  earliest
cotton  cultivated  in  Lower  Egypt.  Prosper  Alpinus  saw  it  in
Egypt  in  the  sixteenth  century  {Jb.,  327).  It  was  afterw.ards
displaced  by  the  Indian  G.  hcrbaceum.

For  Gen.  41  42  Ex.254,  RVmg.  (pV^Te's;  EV  Fine  Linex,
AVmsj.  Sii.K  [cp  Pr.  31  2?,  AV]),  see  Linkn  (7);  for  Is.  lOgt
RVnig.  (.-T,n,  horai),  see  Linen  (8).  N.  M. — \V.  T.  T.-U.

COUCH  (H'Jjp),  Amos.  3 12. See  Bkd,  §  2.

COULTER  (riN;  cKeyoc  [BAL]),  iS.  1820/,
elsewhere  rendered  'plowshare'  (^pOTpON  [B.\Q]),
Is.  '24  Joel  3 10  [4 10]  Mic.  43. See  Agricultukic,  §  3.

COUNCIL.

I. CTOj-I, ri^ndthdm, Ps.  68  27  [28] (EVmg. '  their com-

1  According  to  Klostermann's  conjectural  emendation  of
1  S.  2  19  (njnj  or  jnD  for  jap),  the  word  '  cotton '  is  itself  a
Hebrew  word,  though  it  has  come  to  us  through  the  Arabic
Kutn,  cp  Tunic),  and  apparently  it  meant  '  linen  '  not  '  cotton  ' ;
XeCo/xe'iT)  [njnsl.M**'  KaAfiTat,  AiVeof  ie  tovto  a-fiftaCffi.  ^iSov
yap  TO  AtVoi'  17^*'?  icaAoCjxei',  Jos.  Ant.  iii.  7  2. Cp  I.INEN.

-  The  adjectival  form  karpdsa  means  'cotton  stuff.'

3  These  may  possibly  have  been  of  calico.

*  xix.  1  2  ;  superior  pars  iEgypti  in  Arabiam  vergens  gignit
fruticem  quem  aliqui  gossyjpion  vocant,  plures  xylon  et  ideo
Una  inde  facta  xylina.' Cp  Oliver,  Fl.  Trap.  Africa,  1  211.

91S


conversion, and for the second
fourteen  years  after  his  first


COUNCIL  OP  JERUSALEM

pany':  prop,  'heap  of  stones';  ©I5Nc-aR  ^yt^l.6ve<i  avrCiv)  is
surely  corrupt.  Che.,  .^.-f  7'/K19  i  6  ['99]  reads  D'D'DnlnL  '  the
blameless  ones.' See  also  Hupf.,  Haethg.

2.  nyce'p,  miimaath, 28.2823  (okoij [B.\],  <?.vA<«q  [L])=

1  Ch.  11  25  (irarpta  [BKAL]  EVmg.,  EV  '  guard  '),  the  body-
gu.ard  of  David,  at  the  head  of  which  was  J5enaiah  (i);  cp
1  S.  22  14  (RV  'council,'  AV  '  liidding,'  dp^wv  .  .  .  irapayye'A-
ftoTOS  [H.\L])and  .see  Dr.  oii  loc.'^

3.  lia,  i(>(/ (doubtless  to  be  connected  with  .Syr.  sttuddd  '  talk,*
estaunvad  '  to  speak ' ;  cj)  Hommel,  ZDMG  4(5  529,  who  similarly
explains  the  Sab.  -iiqo  ^s  'speaker,  or  place  of  oracle  ')  is  used,
not  only  of  a  council  or  meeting  (cp  Jer.  •>  11  15  17  Ezek.  13  g,
etc.  ;  see  Assembly  [4]),  but  also  of  its  deliberations  and  their
result  (' secret,'  'counsel';  Am.  3  7  Pr.  11  13  Ps.  833(4],  etc.;
cpesp.  Ps..';5i4[i5]).

4.  ooi/u^ouAtoi'  in  Acts  25  12  is  the  jury  or  board  of  assessors
who  aided  the  procurators  and  governors  of  a  province  ;  cp  Jos.

5.  crui'e'Spio;',  the  supreme  council,  Mt.  5  22  Jn.  11  47  Acts  621
etc.  avvihpia.  in  pi.  (.Mt.  10i7  =  Mk.  13  9)  are  the  smaller  local
tribunals;  cp  (cpio-c?  (LV  'judgement')  Mt.52iy;,  and  see
GoVKNNME.NT,  §  31  end  ;  cp  .'^YNEDKIUM.

COUNCIL  OF  JERUSALEM.  This  council,  if  not
the  most  important  occurrence  of  the  apostolic  age,  is
the  one  that  bears  the  most  official  ciiaracter.  The
more  contradictory  the  accounts  of  it  which  we  seem  to
possess  in  Gal.  2  and  Actsl5,  the  more  necessary  is  it
to  adopt  a  careful  method  for  its  investigation.  The
first  question  that  arises  is  whether  both  accounts  really
relate  to  the  same  occurrence.  In  order  to  answer  this,
it  is  needful  to  determine  ,the  times  of  Paul's  journeys
to  Jerusalem  after  his  conversion.

In  Gal.  1  i8  '2  I  he  protests,  very  solemnly  (1  20),  that  he
visited  Jerusalem  for  the  first  tiine  three  years  after  his

1.  Paul's  Journeys  .•

. T  1 • time

to  Jerusalem  in ^^^^^  ^^ ,^^3  probably,  after  his
Gal.  and  Acts.  ■ ^ , .  , " , .

conversion). L  nless  we  deny  the

genuineness  of  the  epistle  to  the  Galatians  we  cannot
but  give  unqualified  acceptance  to  this  statement.

Paul  was  endeavouring  to  show  how  little  he  was  dependent
in  his  apostleship  upon  the  original  apostles.  He  was,  therefore,
bound  in  the  interests  of  truth  to  mention  all  the  occasions  on
which  he  had  come  into  contact  with  them.  Moreover,  to  p;iss
over  any  such  occasion  would  have  been  highly  imprudent ;  for
his  opponents  naturally  were  aware  of  all  of  them,  and  would
have  promptly  exposed  the  falsehood  to  the  Galatians.

Now,  the  journey  mentioned  in  Acts  926  must  un-
hesitatingly be  identified  with  that  in  (Jal.  1 18,  even
though  the  narrative  of  Acts  contains  not  the  smallest
hint  that  it  was  not  made  until  three  years  after  Paul's
conversion,  and  had  been  preceded  by  a  sojourn  in
Arabia  and  a  second  sojourn  in  Damascus.

a.  It  would  seem,  then,  that  the  second  journey  re-
corded in  Galatians  (2i)  must  coincide  with  the  one
in  Actsllso,  which,  according  to  Actsl22s,  did  extend
to  Jemsalem.

The  famine  during  the  reign  of  Claudius  (by  which  the  journey
was  occasioned)  occurred  in  Palestine  -  before  48,  at  the  earliest  in
44 — i.e.,  as  the  i-.arrative  of  Acts  appears  to  imply  (12  23),  at  the
time  of  the  death  of  Herod  .^grippa  I. — and,  if  the  conversion  of
Paul  occurred  .shortly  after  the  death  of  Jesus,  and  this  Last
not  much  more  than  a  year  after  the  appearance  of  the  Baptist
in  the  fifteenth  year  of  Tiberius  (i.e.,  28-29  a.d.  ;  Lk.  3  i),  there
remains  the  interval  of  seventeen  (or,  at  least,  fourteen)  years
(lem.-mded  by  Gal.  1  i8-2  i  between  Paul's  conversion  and  the
famine,  cp  Chuonoi.ogv,  §  74^  Thus  the  account  of  the
journey  in  Acts  requires  correction  only  in  one  point  :  the  alms
were  sent  not  before  but  after  the  beginning  of  the  famine.

Still,  since  it  mentions  no  object  for  the  journey
l)esides  the  sending  of  alms,  the  narrative  of  Acts  may
be  charged  with  having  passed  over  in  complete  silence
the  conference  mentioned  in  Gal.  2i-io.

This  is  no  trifling  matter.  It  is  remarkable  that  a  confereiice
upon  the  same  subject  should  follow  in  Acts  15,  for  a  repetition
of  the  discussion  within  the  next  few  years  is  not  conceivable  ;
observe,  too,  that  no  reference  is  rnade  in  Acts  15  to  an  earlier
decision.  The  journey  mentioned  in  ActsUyT — at  all  events,
as  far  as  Paul  is  concerned  — may,  on  other  grounds,  be  con-
sidered open  to  the  suspicion  of  having  been  detached  from
the circumstances recorded in Acts  20  3  21  17 (cp  i  Cor.  10  4

1  The  word  is  used  in  a  concrete  sense  ('obedient  ones')
in  Is.  11  14  :  cp  MI  28,  nV2C"0  pn  Sd,  'all  Daibon  was  obedient.'

2  That  it  extended  over  the  whole  world  (oiicouficVT))  is  an
error  of  Acts.

916


COUNCIL  OF  JERUSALEM


Rom.  16  25yC),  and  of  having  been  transferred,  whether  by
mistake  or  purposely,  to  a  far  too  early  position  in  the  narrative
(see  Simon  Magus).

b.  In  order  to  avoid  recognising  the  contradiction
between  (lal.  2  and  Acts  15,  a  whole  class  of  writers
have  assigned  the  Council  of  Jerusalem  to  the  journey
recorded  in  ActslSaa.  They  ignore  the  objection  that
on  this  view  Paul  in  Galatians  suppresses  important
facts  so  far  as  to  pass  over  two  journeys  to  Jerusalem
without  mention.

c.  On  the  other  hand,  it  is  a  mistake  to  suppose
that  Acts  18  22  does  not  imply  a  visit  to  Jerusalem
at  all.

.\lthough  avafia.<;  might  signify  the  journey  up  from  the  shore
to  tlie  town  of  Ca;sarea,  a  ni.in  could  not  possihiy  be  said  to  go
down  (icaTf'/3>))  from  a  seaport  town  to  an  inland  city  like  Antioch.
Thus  we  art-  bound  to  supply  'to  Jerusalem  '  in  7i,  7.1a — as  is  dune
by  many  interpreters  even  when  denying  the  historical  actuality
of  the  journey.  On  this  last  point,  however,  we  cannot  in  fair-
ness appeal  to  the  negative  evidence  of  Galatians.  True,  it  i.s
silent  as  to  this  journey  ;  but  its  historical  review  never  reaches
the  point  at  winch  mention  of  it  would  have  come  in  ;  instead
of  continuing  such  a  review,  after  describing  the  occurrence  at
.\ntioch  (2  11-21)  the  writer  passes  on  to  dormatic  and  thence
to  practical  questions,  entirely  losing  sight  of  his  original
purpose,  which  was  to  enumerate  all  his  personal  encounters
with  the  original  apostles.  It  may,  indeed,  be  thought  remark-
able that  Jerusalem,  if  intended,  is  not  mentioned  in  Acts  18  22  ;
but  this  does  not  warrant  the  assumption  now  to  be  mentioned.

(/.  Some  critics  have  assumed  that  the  Council  of  Jeru-
salem was  really  held  on  this  occasion  (Acts  I822),  and
not  earlier — the  author,  having  purposely  transposed  it
to  an  earlier  date,  would  express  himself  as  briefly  and
obscurely  as  ])ossit)le  when  he  came  to  the  point  at
which  it  really  occurred.

This  assumption  h.-is  the  advantage  of  bringing  not  only  the
first  (.Xctsi^yT)  but  also  the  second  (l(Ji-18  22)  missionary
journey  within  the  first  seventeen  years  after  Paul's  conversion,
thus  providing  materi.-il  to  fill  up  a  period  otherwise  inexplicably
barren  of  events.  It  cannot,  however,  be  urged  in  its  favour
that  Barnabas  was  personally  know  n  to  the  (ialatians  and  the
Corinthians,  and  that  he  cannot  have  been  separated  from  Paul
(Acts  15  35-40)  until  after  the  second  missionary  journey,  during
which  the  communities  in  Calatia  —  i.e..  Old  Galatia  (see
Oai.atia) — and  in  Corinth  were  established;  for  the  passages
(jal.  'J  I  9  13  I  Cor.  06  are  perfectly  intelligible  on  the  assumption
that  liarnabas  was  known  to  the  readers  by  report  alone.

The  assumption  of  such  a  transposition  is  entirely
wanting  in  probability.

The  motive  prompting  the  writer  to  transpose  the  Council  of
Jerusalem  to  an  earlier  date  is  supposed  to  have  been  the  desire
to  bring  the  whole  of  Paul's  missionary  work  from  its  beginning
within  the  scope  of  the  decree  of  the  apostles  (Acts  15  28 /T) ;
but,  had  this  really  been  the  writer's  intention,  he  would  have
introduced  the  council  not  before  Acts  10,  but  before  Acts  13.
What  should  have  hindered  him  from  so  doing,  if  it  be  assumed
that  he  allowed  himself  to  make  free  with  his  materials  in  this
way  at  all,  is  not  apparent.

e.  Others  actually  transpose  the  journey  described  in
Acts  13/  so  as  to  make  it  come  between  the  Council  of
Jerusalem  and  the  separation  of  Barnabas  from  Paul,
and  therefore  after  Acts  1 5  34.

Their  strongest  reason  is  the  fact  that  Paul  mentions  only  Syria
and  Cilicia  as  his  places  of  residence  up  to  the  Council  of  Jeru-
salem (Gal.  1  21).  This  is  hardly  conclusive,  for,  although  Paul
was  pledged  to  enumerate  all  his  meetings  with  the  original
apostles,  he  was  not  bound  to  mention  all  the  provinces  in  which
he  had  resided  without  meeting  them.  In  any  case,  even  if  the
transposition  of  Acts  13  yC  and  Acts  15  1-34  be  accepted,  thi;,
gives  no  support  to  the  assumption  mentioned  under  a,  .since  for
that  assumption  the  writer  of  Acts  has  put  the  two  sections
exactly  in  the  wrong  order  :  his  supposed  purpose,  as  well  as
the  motive  of  historical  accuracy,  would  have  led  him  to  put
16  1-34  before  13  i-14  28.

f.  It  is  only  by  very  bold  treatment  of  the  different
sources  of  Acts,  by  which  the  accounts  of  Paul's  journeys
in  Acts  11  y!  15  18  become  inerely  the  result  of  an
erroneous  combination  of  the  writer's  authorities,  that
Clement  [Chronol.  d.  Paulin.  fir.  1893)  contrives  to
identify  Gal.  2  with  Acts  21 .  and  Joh.  Weiss  (St.  u.  Kr. ,
1893,  pp.  480-540  ;  1895,  pp.  252-269),  on  the  contrary,
withActsP  and  (at  the  same  time)  with  Actsl5i-4i2.
It  is,  in  fact,  quite  impossible  to  deny  the  identity  of  the
events  related  in  Gal.  2  and  in  Acts  15.  See  Chrono-
logy, §  74.

In  view,  however,  of  the  doubts  cast  upon  Acts,  it  is

917


an  error  of  method  to  make  that  book  the  basis  for  an

2  Oal  2  investigation  of  the  jjresent  (juestion. It

the  primarv  "''^^'  ^'"^^  *^'"  ^''"  '°  ^^'"  ^^  '""^'"^
na.aaa.s'e  aside  Acts  altogether  and  ascertaining
"  °  *  the  facts  from  (Jalatians  alone.  That
method,  however,  would  prevent  certain  questions  from
receiving  adequate  consideration,  and  no  harm  need  Ije
apprehended  in  treating  both  accounts,  circumspectly,
together.  It  is,  however,  of  unciualified  importance  to
take  Gal.  2ii-2i  as  the  starting-point,  Ixjcause  that
passage  alone  throws  any  really  clear  light  upon  the
circumstances.

Peter  was  no  uncompromising  Judaiser.  Before  the
dispute at Antioch recorded in Gal.2ii-2i he had

3  The  dianute  *^'''^"  ^''^ (Jentile Christians. If  he
at  A t h abandoned  this  practice  after  the  arrival

of  the  followers  of  James,  he  could  not,
accustomed  as  he  was  to  adopt  the  attitude  of  a  Iwader,
have  been  influenced  in  the  least  by  the  fear  of  the  repre-
sentatives of  circumcision —  his  alleged  motive^ — had  he
not  himself  recognised  their  position  as  the  right  one.
He  must  in  his  inmost  heart  have  still  been  continuing
to  attach  some  importance  to  the  Mosaic  laws  relating
to  food.  Thus,  he  could  not  yet  have  attained  to  that
liberty  in  principle  which  belonged  to  Paul.  This  free-
dom Paul  conceivably  assumed  to  be  present  in  I'eter,  as
it  was  in  himself;  in  which  case  he  could  attribute  Peter's
antagonism  only  to  hypocrisy.  Critics  have  softened
the  charge  of  hypocrisy  into  a  charge  of  inconsistency,
such  as  is  very  frequently  to  be  observed  at  times  of
transition  in  natures  that  have  no  very  firm  grasp  of
principles.

Different  from  Peter's  position  was  that  of  James.
Whether  the  'certain'  (rives)  were  expressly  sent  by
him  in  order  to  recall  Peter  to  the  Law,  or  whether  tlicy
attempted  to  do  this  on  their  own  account  without  his
commission  ('  from  James,'  a.Trb  'laKwfSov,  in  NT  Cjreek
does  not  go  necessarily  with  'came,'  eXOt'iv,  and  it  may
equally  well  betaken  with  '  certain,'  rivds),  is inmiaterial.
Peter,  the  leader  of  the  apostles,  would  certainly  never
have  submitted  to  their  commands  if  they  had  not  had
behind  them  the  authority  of  James.  Now,  the  position
of  James  as  distinct  from  that  of  Peter  can  only  have
been  that  a  man  born  a  Jew  was  still  under  religious
obligation  even  as  a  Christian  to  observe  the  whole  of
the  Mosaic  Law.  It  cannot  be  supposed  that  he  upheld
this  obligation  only  as  convenient  for  the  time,  or  even
merely  as  a  beautiful  custom  ;  a  motive  of  the  most
serious  kind  must  have  been  actually  held  out  to  Peter,
if  he  was  to  submit  to  be  driven  to  so  absolute  a  renunci-
ation of  brotherly  intercourse  with  the  Gentile  Christians.

As  we  are  not  informed  of  any  answer  from  Peter  to
Paul's  reprimand  in  Gal.  214-21,  it  is  commonly  (though
very  rashly)  assumed  that  Peter  admitted  his  error.
That  Paul  should  record  an  exculpatory  answer  from
Peter,  however,  was  hardly  to  be  expected,  if  only  for  the
reason  that  he  must  have  thought  it  inconclusive.  Still,
even  if  Peter  was  thought  to  have  yielded,  the  others  who
shared  his  opinion  did  not  yield.  Otherwise,  v.hy  is  the
scene  at  Antioch  followed  so  quickly  by  the  entrance  of
the  Judaising  party  into  the  churches  founded  by  Paul
in  (Jalatia  and  Corinth,  in  complete  contravention  of
the  agreement  in  Gal.  29,  and  by  the  nearly  successful
attempt  to  induce  the  Galatians  to  adopt  circumcision
(Gal.  52/  612/.  4 10)  and  to  alienate  the  Corinthians
from  Paul  altogether  (2  Cor.  11  4  12 16  43-5  5 13/  75-16)?
How  could  so  important  and  persistent  a  movement —
it  had  already  been  encountered  by  Paul  on  two  separate
occasions,  both  in  Galatia  and  in  Corinth  (Gal.  1963
1  Cor.  9 1  2Cor.  II4) — have  been  carried  on  if  it  had
been  opposed  by  the  first  apostles?  Whence  came  the
letters  of  recommendation  which,  according  to  2  Cor.  3  i,
these  emissaries  brought  with  them?  As  they  formed
the  ground  upon  which  the  suspicion  against  Paul  as
one  who  had  never  known  Jesus  (i  Cor.  9i)  proceeded,
what  weightier  credentials  could  they  have  contained
918


COUNCIL  OP  JERUSALEM


than  the  statement  that  their  bearers  represented  im-
mediate disciples  of  Jesus?  Would  the  sceptical
Coriiuliians  have  been  satisfied  if  the  authentication  had
conic  (let  us  say)  from  Ephcsus,  or  from  some  other
town  outside  Talestine?

How  comes  it,  again,  that  even  at  the  end  of  the
second  century  the  pseudo-Clementine  homilies  (ITio)
represent  Peter  as  reproaching  Simon — under  whose  name
Paul  is  there  attacked  (see  Simon  Magus)— for  having
called  him  a  KaTeyvosafxivo^  (Gal.  2ii  ;  RV  '  stood  con-
demned ' )  ?  This  shows  how  deep  a  wound  was  inflicted
on  Judaising  Christianity  by  Paul's  bold  attack  on  Peter.
For  this  reason,  not  a  word  is  said  in  Acts  about  the
scene  ;  though  it  is  quite  inconceivable  that  the  author
had  no  knowledge  of  it  (see  Acts,  §  6).  F"urther,  in
the  place  in  .Acts  where  this  scene  ought  to  have  been
mentioned  there  is  recorded  a  similar  dispute  {irapo^vcr-
fi6s  ;  Acts  15 39)  between  Paul  and  Barnabas  (see  Bar-
NABAS),  who,  according  to  Gal.  213,  had  gone  over  to
the  side  of  Peter.  This  disi^ute,  however,  does  not  turn
on  any  question  of  principle.  It  was  merely  a  personal
matter  (Acts  1036-40).  The  conjecture  is  a  tempting  one
that  this  scene,  if  not  an  invention,  is  at  least  an  inter-
polation, based  on  some  written  source,  introduced  for
the  purpose  of  effacing  the  memory  of  the  more  im-
portant quarrels.

We  are  now  in  a  position  to  investigate  the  Council
of  Jerusalem  itself. It  was  occasioned,  on  the  part  of


4.  Occasion  of


Judaistic Christianity, by  the  appear-


the  council.


ance  of  the  'false  brethren,'  who  had
made  their  way  unauthorised  into  the
Pauline  and  other  churches,  seeking  to  spy  out  and  to
suppress  the  freedom  from  the  Mosaic  Law  that  had
there  been  attained  ((ial.  24).  As  this  cannot  have  been
in  Jerusalem,  we  may  accept  the  statement  of  Acts  (15  i,
cp  1426)  that  it  was  to  Antioch  they  came.  Up  to  that
time  no  such  intrusion  had  occurred,  althoutjh  the
circumstances  at  .\ntioch  cannot  have  long  remained  un-
known to  the  leaders  at  Jerusalem.  It  is,  therefore,  not
improbable  that  the  new  and  sudden  aggressive  move-
ment proceeded  from  recently  converted  Pharisees,  even
though  the  statement  to  this  effect  in  Acts  15s  is  made
without  reference  to  15 1,  and  therefore  appears  to  come
from  another  source.  Paul  was  prompted  to  go  to

the  council  of  the  apostles  by  a  revelation  (Gal.  22).
Probably  it  came  to  him  not  as  a  bolt  from  the  blue,  but
only  after  the  c|uestion  to  be  decided  by  the  council  had
already  stirred  his  soul  to  its  depths.  No  less  than  his
entire  life-work — that  of  bringing  the  heathen  to  Christi-
anity without  binding  them  by  the  Mosaic  Law — was
at  stake.  According  to  Acts  (152),  he  and  Barnabas
were  deputed  to  go  to  Jerusalem  by  the  church  at
Antioch  in  consequence  of  a  fruitless  discussion  there.
This  motive  for  the  journey  is  not,  of  course,  absolutely
incompatible  with  the  revelation  mentioned  by  Paul  ;  but
it  is  in  any  case  significant  that  Paul  speaks  only  of  the
revelation  and  Acts  only  of  the  delegation.  What-

ever the  motive,  what  is  it  that  Paul  can  have  gone  to
Jerusalem  in  search  of?  A  tribunal  to  whose  verdict  he
would  voluntarily  submit,  whatever  its  tenor?  By  no
means.  He  had  from  a  higher  authority  his  gospel  of
freedom  from  the  Law,  and  cared  very  little  for  the
original  apostles  (Gal.  1 1  6-9  15-17  25/).  Or  did  he
e.xpect  to  find  among  them  assistance  against  the  '  false
brethren '  ?  We  think  that  he  did  not ;  if  he  did,  his
expectation  was  not  justified  by  the  event  (see  below,
§§  7,  8).  The  purpose  with  which  he  went  to  Jerusalem
was  to  discover  the  source  from  which  the  '  false  brethren '
drew  their  support.  He  intended  to  take  that  support
away  from  under  them,  and,  in  order  to  do  so,  it  was
necessary  that  he  should  appear  in  person.  *  Lest  by
any  means  I  should  be  running  or  had  run  in  vain '
(Gal.  22;  fxriirijjs  eis  Kevbv  Tp^x^  ^  iSpafxov)  is  not  an
interrogative  ;  Paul  would  never  have  made  the  justifi-
cation of  his  work  dependent  on  the  judgment  of  the
original  apostles.

S19


Were  the  conferences  at  Jerusalem  public, or  were

B Public  or  ^^^^  private? No  clear  picture  of  them

. ,. is presented in Acts — perhaps because

" . „'  the account is compiled from various
cussions? ^^^^^^^

A  general  as.sembly  is  set  before  us  in  Acts  15  4.  We  may
suppose  the  private  assembly  mentioned  in  15  6  to  have  been
on  another  day  (though  the  author  says  nothing  as  to  this).
Suddenly,  however,  in  15  12,  'all  the  multitude'  (nav  to  irAijeos)
is  present ;  and  it  reappears  in  15  22  as  responsible  for  the  final
decision,  although  in  15  23  this  is  attributed  to  the  apostles  and
elders  only.  Paul,  on  the  other  hand,  in  the  words  (car'  l&iav,
'  privately  '  (Gal.  i  2),  passes  from  a  public  to  a  private  conference,
as  also  probably  in  2  6— for  the  discussion  about  the  circumcision
of  Titus  (2  3-5)  can  most  easily  be  supposed  to  have  occurred  in
a  public  assembly,  in  which  expression  was  also  given  to  the
position  which  the  original  apostles  did  not  themselves  finally
adopt.

So  far  there  is  no  inconsistency  between  Galatians
and  Acts  :  both  know  of  meetings  of  both  kinds.  The
crucial  question,  however,  is,  Was  any  final  decision
arrived  at  in  a  public  assembly  ?

If  the  decision  was  not  in  Paul's  favour,  the  claims  of  truth
and  of  prudence  alike  must  have  led  him  to  mention  it.  Much,
however,  of  what  is  recorded  in  Acts— ^.^.,  the  speech  of  Peter
(15  7-1 1) — points  very  clearly  to  a  decision  in  P.aul's  favour  ;  and
to  pass  this  over  in  silence  would  have  been  folly.

The  picture  presented  in  Acts,  therefore,  of  a  decisive
public  assembly  is  entirely  incorrect.

The  case  is  similar  with  what  is  said,  or  implied,  as
to  Paul's  attitude  towards  the  original  apostles.  Accord-
ing to  Acts,  he  holds  quite  a  subordinate


6.  Paul's
attitude  to
the  original


position.  He  is  allowed  to  state  his
case,  but  not  to  take  part  in  the  debate  :
he  has  simply  to  submit  to  the  decision.


apost  es.  According  to  Galatians,  he  debates  as
with  his  ecjuals.  Indeed,  he  e\en  refers  to  the  original
apostles  ironically  as  'of  repute,'  'reputed  to  be
pillars,'  'to  be  somewhat'  [01  SoKOVvres  [crruXoi  elvai  or
elvai  Tt]  ;  22  96).

Even  if  it  be  granted  that  the  title,  'pillars'  (oi  o-tOAoi)  may
have  been  originally  applied  to  them  by  their  adherents  as  a
term  of  honour,  the  phrase  '  reputed  '  (oi  SoKovvm)  cannot  have
been  so  used.  It  is  e.xplicitiy  derogatory.  The  most  that  can
be  done  to  soften  the  force  of  Pauls  irony  is  to  conjecture  that
he  did  not  invent  the  expression  until  the  incident  at  Antioch
had  diminished  his  respect  for  them.

Paul took Titus as  his  companion  of  set  purpose.

The  uncircumcised  assistant  of  his  missionary  labours

.would serve  as  an 'object-lesson' in

7.  yuestion  0 syppQ[.(  q{  j^jg  fundamental principle.

"^  rrt^^^^^  An  attempt  was  made  to  procure  his
0  1  us.  circumcision;  but,  owing  to  the  opposi-
tion of  Paul  and  Barnabas,  it  had  to  be  abandoned.

This  is  clearly  the  meaning  of  Gal.  2  3-5,  and  only  the  most
violent  feats  of  critical  ingenuity  can  find  any  other  explanation
of  the  passage.  One  interpretation  is  that  no  atternpt  whatever
was  made  (ovk  -qvayKda-Bri)  to  procure  the  circumcision  of  Titus.
If  so,  why  the  opposition  of  Paul  and  Barnabas?  Again,  the
attempt  was  made,  yet  not  on  grounds  of  principle,  but  in  the
interest  of  Paul,  to  save  him  from  daily  defilement.  How  did
he  avoid  defilement  from  other  Gentile  converts,  with  many  of
whom  he  associated  daily  ?  Perhaps,  on  account  of  the  '  false
brethren,'  Paul  did,  after  all,  of  his  own  accord,  allow  Titus  to
be  circumcised.  Did  he  hope  thereby  to  maintain  the  truth  of
the  gospel  (Gal.  2  5)  that  no  man  need  be  circumcised?  It  has
even  been  proposed  to  follow  the  Greek  text  and  the  Latin
version  of  D  with  Irenasus,  TertuUian,  and  other  Western  fathers,
in  omitting  the  negative  (oiifie)  in  Gal.  25  (whether  '  to  whom,'
ots,  also  be  omitted  is  of  less  importance),  as  if  Paul  could  have
been  so  blind  as  to  consider  compliance  at  the  most  critical
moment  to  be  harmless,  because  only  temporary  (n-pbs  topav).
It  is,  on  the  contrary,  probable  that  after  2  5,  to  complete  the
sentence  beginning  with  2  4,  we  ouijht  to  supply  not  '  we  did  not
give  place'  (ovk  eifa/u.ei'),  as  if,  had  the  false  brethren  not
appeared,  Paul  would  have  been  prepared  to  comply,  but  '(on
account  of  the  false  brethren)  it  was  all  the  more  necessary  to
offer  a  strenuous  opposition.'  For  at  the  outset  they  had  de-
manded the  circumcision  of  all  Gentile  converts  even.  As  this
is  expressly  stated  in  Acts  15  i  5,  it  is  the  more  cert.iin  that  it  is
necessarily  presupposed  by  the  negative  (ovSt)  of  Gal.  2  3  ;  no-
thing worse  occurred,  and  not  even  Titus  was  compelled  to  be
circumcised.  The  worst  thing  that  might  have  occurred  would,
according  to  2  2,  have  been  that  Paul  should  have  run  in  vain
(eU  Ktv'ov  eSpafnevf—i.e.,  that  a  decree  should  have  been  p.issed
prohibiting  the  admission  of  Gentiles  into  Christianity  without
circumcision.

Thus  the  demand  for  the  circumcision  of  Titus  appears


COUNCIL  OF  JERUSALEM


ns  a  compromise  proposed  for  the  first  time  when  the
original  proposal  for  the  circumcision  of  all  Gentile  con-
verts met  with  insuperable  opposition  from  I'aul  and
Barnabas.  The  very  circumstantiality  of  a  conference
that  passed  through  so  many  asjx'cts  is  enough  to  show
that  these  projjosals  could  not  possibly  have  been  made
without  at  least  the  moral  support  of  the  original  apostles.
Had  the  latter  Ix-en  on  I'aul's  side  from  the  first  (it  has
been  held  that  they  are  to  be  included  in  the  subject  of
'gave  place,'  {[^afifv),  any  attempt  of  the  kind  must
have  been  instantly  frustrated  by  their  authority.

It  is,  therefore,  useless  to  construe  Cial.  24  as  a  reason  subse-
quently introduced  to  explain  "J  3,  as  though  the  circumcision  of
Titus  was  refused  by  all  parties  alike,  for  the  reason  that  it  was
demanded  by  the  'false  brethren'  alone.  Considerations  of
language  also  render  inadmissiljle  the  other  interpretation,  which
supplements  so  as  to  read  'and  indeed  on  behalf  of  the  "false
brethren  "...  it  was  said  that  he  ought  to  be  compelled  to  be
circumcised  (iji/ayicdcrSr)  without  ovk).'  The  importance  attached
to  the  memory  of  the  case  of  Titus  is  best  shown  in  Acts  ;  his
name  is  never  mentioned  at  all,  those  who  accompanied  Paul
to  the  conference  being  '  liariiabas  and  certain  others'  (rii/es
oAAoi,  Acts  15  2;  see  Acts,  g  9).  It  is  not  going  too  far,
therefore,  to  say  that  the  original  apostles  were  at  the  outset
undecided  in  their  attitude  ;  indeed,  if  we  may  judge  by  what
occurred  soon  afterwards  at  .\ntioch,  this  understates  the  case.

In  harmony  with  this  attitude  was  that  which  they

adopted  towards  the  subsequent  mission  to  the  Cientiles.

8.  The  apostles '^•'^"''^  l^™'^''^^,  °^  admitting  GtMUiles

and  the  mission  ^'  '"^''"•^'^'"'  ""^  ''^°  Chr.stian  Church


to  the  Gentiles.


without  circumcision  cannot  have  ol


tained  the  sanction  of  the  other
apostles  at  the  outset.  .Assent  was  wrung  from  them
with  lUniculty.  Indeed,  they  did  not  give  way  on  any
ground  of  principle  ;  otherwise  their  behaviour  in  the
dispute  at  -Antioch  would  have  been  impossible.  They
ga\  e  way  only  because  of  the  divine  verdict  as  shown
by  the  event  (t'Scures  .  .  .  'Yv6vTes  rijv  X'^^pi-"  ^V"  Soddadv
fioL,  (ial.  279;  cp  Actsl;")4i2),  to  which  they  submitted
perforce,  though  without  recognising  its  underlying
justilication.  Peter  and  James,  therefore,  cannot  have
expressed  themselves,  even  api)ro.ximately,  as  in  Acts
1 07-21  they  are  said  to  have  spoken.  Had  what  Peter
(157/ )  enjoins  in  regard  to  Cornelius  really  occurred,
there  would  have  been  no  Council  of  Jerusalem  at  all
(Acts,  §  4).

Peter  is  further  said  (15  9)  to  have  declared  that  God  had  re-
moved the  difference  between  Jews  and  (jentiles  by  purifying  the
hearts  of  the  Gentiles — as  though  in  the  eyes  ofa  Jew  the  impurity
of  the  Gentiles  were  impurity  of  the  heart  alone.  He  is,  moreover,
represented  as  saying  (15 11)  that  his  hope  ofs.ilvation  was  through
the  grace  of  tiod  alone,  whereas  at  Antioch  he  maintained  that
the  observance  of  the  Law  was  necessary  to  salvation.  Finally
(15  10),  he  calls  the  Law  a  yoke  intolerable  even  to  the  Jews  ;  yet
at  Antioch  he  again  submitted  himself  to  it.  He  calls  it  a
tempting  of  God  to  put  the  yoke  on  the  Gentiles  also ;  yet  at
Antioch  he  broke  with  the  Gentiles  because  they  did  not  take
it  on  themselves,  thus  putting  moral  pressure  upon  them  to
Judaise  '  (iouSaifeic  :  Gal.  '2  14).  In  short,  the  speech  of  Peter
is  so  eminently  Pauline  that  Weizsacker  found  it  possible  to
believe  that  the  author  of  Acts  took  the  speech  of  Paul  against
Peter  in  tJal.  '2  14-21  as  the  foundation  for  its  composition.

There  is  evidence  on  the  other  side  that  the  author  did  to  some
extent  correctly  estimate  the  positions  of  the  speakers— in  the
fact  that  the  speech  of  James  is  considerably  more  reserved.  The
reference  to  Cornelius  in  15  14,  however,  is  just  as  unhistoricalas
that  in  Ibj/.  James  cannot  possibly  have  employed  the  quota-
tion from  Amos  unless  it  be  maintained  that  the  discussion  was
carried  on  in  the  language  of  the  hated  foreigners;  for  in  the
original  it  is  not  said  that  the  residue  of  men  and  all  nations  to
whom  God's  name  had  been  made  known  should  seek  the  Lord
— it  is  only  said  that  the  Israelites  should  again  attain  to  political
dominion  over  Kdom  and  the  other  nations  that  had  at  any  time
been  under  the  dominion  of  God  {i.e.,  of  Israel).!  And  James
pays  his  tribute  to  Paulinism  if  he  implies  that  the  impo.sition  of
the  whole  Mosaic  Law  upon  the  Gentiles  is  a  burden  to  them
from  which,  as  being  such,  they  ought  to  be  relieved  (15  19).
Furthermore,  he  did  not  make  the  positive  proposal  of  15  20.
See  below,  g  10.

The  result  of  the  conference,  according  to  Galatians,
was  a 'fellowship'  (Koivuvla)  (29). What  the  precise

'  It  was  the  LXX  that  first  read  ic'^T  instead  of  i55n"i  pointing
Q-m  instead  of  DIN,  and  making  DIK  nnxt:',  etc.,  subject
instead  of  object  ;  and  only  a  few  MSS  of  the  LXX  have  gone
so  far  as  to  supply  the  now  lacking  object,  without  any  support
from  the  original,  by  interpolating  toi'  xvpioi'.


extent  of  this  Koiviavia  was  can be  learned only  by
9 Result  of '"^'^'■^'"ce from the incidental facts.
Council  accord-  ^  '^'''"'T  of  ntissionary  districts  was
ingtoGaL '"''^'^^f- The reason why the
°  original apostles desired to carry

on  their  work  only  among  the  Jews  can  be  gathered
with  absolute  certainty  from  the  situation  of  affairs
which  had  Ik-cii  brought  about.  The  separation
of  the  missionary  districts  had  Ix-en  the  result  of
the  conference  concerning  the  circumcision  of  the
Gentile  converts.  Had  the  circumcision  of  these
converts  lx.'en  decided  on,  the  original  apostles  need
have  felt  as  little  cause  to  shrink  from  missions  to  the
Gentiles  as  a  Jew  had  to  shrink  from  the  work  of
winning  proselytes.  As  the  sequel  at  Antioch  shows,
what  they  found  intolerable  was  the  idea  of  that  intimate
daily  association  with  uncircumcised  brethren  which
would  have  become  unavoidable  if  missionary  work  had
been  engaged  in  by  them  without  circumcision  of  the
Gentiles.  That  was  the  reason  why  they  abandoned
this  part  of  the  work  to  Paul  and  Barnabas.  To  look
for  the  reason  of  the  .separation  of  missionary  districts
in  differences  of  aptitude  for  winning  either  Gentiles  or
natural  Jews  is  to  misapprehend  the  causes  that  were
really  at  work.  Such  considerationc  as  those  mentioned
may  have  had  some  concurrent  influence ;  but  how
could  the  scene  at  Antioch  have  been  possible  if  difl'er-
ence  of  aptitudes  had  been  the  sole  or  even  the  chief
cause  of  the  separation  ?  Not  a  word  is  there  said  about
Peter's  missionary  work  :  the  only  question  is  w  hether
he  is  prepared  to  eat  at  the  same  table  with  Gentile
converts.

It  is  eciually  certain  that  the  separation  of  districts
was  intended  in  an  ethnographical,  not  in  a  geographical,
sense.  Had  the  original  apostles  undertaken  to  labour
for  the  conversion  of  the  Gentiles  as  well  as  for  that
of  the  Jews  in  Palestine  without  insisting  upon  cir-
cumcision, they  would  immediately  there  have  found
themselves  face  to  face  with  all  the  difficulties  which
had  caused  them  to  avoid  the  Gentile  countries  and
confine  their  efforts  to  the  land  of  their  fathers.
The  separation  had  no  purpose  unless  missions  to
natural  Jews  were  to  be  assigned  to  them  as  their
province.  Conversely,  Paul  and  Barnabas  were,  of
course,  to  go  only  to  men  of  Gentile  birth  :  Jews  seek-
ing salvation  whom  they  met  in  Gentile  countries  they
were  bound  to  turn  away,  referring  them  for  guidance
to itinerant Jewish-Christian missionaries.  This

might  have  led  to  the  further  conseciuence  that  in  one
and  the  same  town  there  would  have  ari.sen  two
Christian  conmmnitics,  one  of  Jews  and  one  of  tjentiles.
Association  at  meals,  as  well  as  at  the  Lord's  Supper,
would  have  been  impossible  between  them.  'Ihis
intolerable  state  of  affairs,  however,  was  exactly  what
the  Pauline  churches  had  long  ago  contrived  to  avert  ;
and  this  success  was  regarded  by  Paul  as  the  highest
triumph  of  the  view  of  Christianity  which  he  advocated.
It  is  very  reasonable  to  ask  how  he  could  have  had  any
share  in  an  arrangement  by  which,  in  the  churches  he
had  founded,  the  wall  of  separation  between  Jewish
and  Gentile  Christians,  which  it  had  cost  so  much
labour  to  destroy,  was  again  raised  up.  To  fall  back
on  the  view  that  the  separation  was  intended  to  be
geographical  would,  liowever,  be  wrong.  A  separation
on  such  a  basis  the  apostles,  as  has  already  been
shown,  could  not  possibly  have  accepted.  It  would  be
necessary  to  draw  the  conclusion  that  the  statement  of
Galatians  must  be  pronounced  unhistorical,  and  the
epistle  itself  non- Pauline,  were  there  really  no  other
way  out  of  the  difficulty.  Before  taking  this  step,
howevei ,  we  shall  do  well  to  remember  that  men  have
often  enough  agreed  upon  a  compromise  without  hav-
ing formed  any  adequately  clear  conception  of  its
consequences.  The  Christian  church  would  speedily
have  fallen  asunder  into  two  separate  communities,  the
one  of  Jewish  and  the  other  of  Gentile  Christians,  had
922


COUNCIL  OF  JERUSALEM


no  agreement  been  reached.  Neither  of  the  parties
was  able  to  abandon  its  view  :  each  felt  itself  under
a  strict  religious  obligation  to  maintain  its  own  principles.
There  must,  therefore,  have  been  the  greatest  eagerness
to  grasp  at  any  fcjrmula  that  presented  itself  as  a
solution.  '  We  to  the  Jews,  you  to  the  Gentiles,'
appeared  to  be  a  fornuila  of  the  kind,  and  joy  in  the
renewed  sense  of  brotherhood  may  have  blinded  men's
eyes  to  the  impracticability  of  the  proposal.  This
would  happen  all  the  more  readily  if  the  formula  was
so  loose  that  each  party  could  understand  it  in  a
different  sense.  In  the  absence  of  more  precise  de-
finition, the  geographical  interpretation  must  have
seemed  to  Paul  as  obviously  the  correct  one  as  the
ethnographical  interpretation  appeared  to  the  other
apostles — to  Paul,  who  became  not  merely  to  the  Gentiles
a  Gentile,  but  also  to  the  Jews  a  Jew,  that  he  might  by
all  means  win  some,  and,  in  order  to  save  those  belong-
ing to  his  own  race,  would  willingly  have  been  accursed
from  Christ  (i  Cor.  9 20/  Rom.  93  ;  cp  B.^VN,  §  1).  In
the  scene  at  .\ntioch  the  misunderstanding  revealed  itself
only  too  clearly  ;  l)ut  this  does  not  prove  that  there  was
no  misunderstanding  at  Jerusalem.  Even  in  the  aspect
under  which  the  matter  had  to  be  presented  -A  the  con-
ference at  Jerusalem,  the  unity  sought  for  was  limited.
The  '  right  hand  of  fellowship'  (de^ia  Koivuvia?)  which
they  held  out  to  each  other  was  at  the  same  time  a
parting  handshake.  According  to  their  fundamental
principles,  the  Jewish  Christians  neither  would  nor  could
have  any  very  intimate  communion,  any  really  brotherly
intercourse,  with  the  Gentile  Christians.  It  is  worthy  of
notice  that  the  support  of  the  poor  is  represented  in  Gal.
2 10  less  as  being  the  only  demand  made  upon  the
Pauline  churches  than  as  being  the  only  bond  by  which
the  two  halves  of  Christendom  were  to  be  kept  together.
There  is,  however,  no  necessity  for  assuming  that  these
alms  from  the  Gentile  Christians  were  like  temple  dues,
or  intended  to  express  a  position  of  inferiority  as  com-
pared with  that  of  Jewish  Christians.  In  view  of  the
notorious  poverty  of  the  church  at  Jerusalem  (see  CoM-
Mi'NiTY  OF  Goods,  §  5),  it  would  have  been  unreason-
able to  require  reciprocity,  and  doubtless  Paul  was  glad
to  evince  his  goodwill  on  such  neutral  ground.  For
the  rest,  it  was  quite  impossible  that  the  Gentiles  should
be  treated  by  the  Jews  as  having  equal  rights  and  full
citizenship  in  the  kingdom  of  God.  The  OT  promises
applied  only  to  the  chosen  race  and  to  those  who  had
been  received  into  it  by  circumcision.  The  Jewish
Christians  had  made  the  concession — from  their  point
of  view  a  concession  of  real  magnitude — of  sanction-
ing the  mission  to  the  Gentiles  without  circumcision  ;
but  it  was  not  to  be  supposed  that  this  could  be
granted  except  on  the  basis  that  this  class  of
converts  was  to  hold  somewhat  the  same  position  as
that  of  the  semi-proselytes  [ffe^bixevoi  rbv  debv)  among
the  Jews  ;  they  figured  only  as  a  '  younger  branch  in
the  kingdom  of  God. '  In  no  case  could  the  original
apostles  have  set  the  same  value  on  the  conversion  of
these  Christians  of  the  second  class  through  the  agency
of  Paul  as  on  their  own  missionary  activity.  It  is
remarkable  that  Gal.  2&b  does  not  run,  on  the  analogy
of  2  8rt,  'unto  the  apostleship  of  the  Gentiles'  (f^y
airoaTo\r)v  t2v  idvuv).  Freedom  of  construction  is,  of
course,  a  characteristic  of  Paul's  style,  and  thus  '  unto
the  Gentiles'  (etj  tA  idvi))  also  may  be  explained  ks
a  case  of  brachylogy.  Still,  it  is  noteworthy  that  — ^.;»-. ,
in  I  Cor.  9  1 — he  does  not  base  any  appeal  on  the  fact
that  apostleship  (dTrotrroXij)  had  been  conceded  to  him
by  the  original  apostles.  How  effective — if  op)en  to  him
— this  appeal  would  have  been  against  the  Judaizers  at
Corinth  who  called  his  apostleship  in  question,  and  set
up  those  very  apostles  as  the  supreme  authority  I  The
truth  is  that  he  does  not  appear  to  have  received  any
such  recognition.  Thus  he  would  seem  to  have  been
recognised  only  as  a  fellow-worker,  in  the  Christian  field,
not  as  a  iully  accredited  apostle.

923


According  to  Acts,  the  result  of  the  Council  was  the
decree  in  15  23-29. Nevertheless,  as  long  as  the  words

10.  The  decree '  !^P^""'^  "°^^ing  to  me '  {i,.oi.  .  .
in  Acta  ovoif  irpoaaviOevTo),  m  Gal.  2  6, are

allowed  to  stand,  we  shall  be  pre-
cluded from  accepting  this  finding  as  a  formal  decree.
"Whether  the  words  mean  '  The  SoKovvrtt  imparted
nothing  further  to  me ' (so  according  to  1 16),  or  that

'  They  made  no  further  rejoinder  to  my  communication  '
(so  according  to  22),  is  immaterial.  Their  meaning  is
made  clear  by  '  contrariwise  '  (Tovvavriov)  in  2  7  :  '  Not
only  did  they  say  nothing  unfavourable  to  me,  but  also
they  pledged  themselves  to  fellowship  with  me.'  We
cannot  better  convince  ourselves  of  the  certainty  of  this
conclusion  than  by  examining  the  attempts  that  have
been  made  to  avoid  it.

Theologians  have  done  their  utmost  to  maintain  that  Paul
was  justified  in  using  the  words  iiioX  ovSev  npo<ravt8evro,  instead
of  mentioning  the  decree  of  the  apostles,  because  the  decree  was
known  to  the  (lalatians  already,  or  because  he  did  not  want  to
put  a  weapon  into  the  hand  of  his  opponents,  or  because  the
decree  was  only  temporary — perhaps,  not  binding  at  all,  but
merely  having  reference  to  a  custom,  the  object  of  which  has
been  even  discovered  to  be  the  protection  of  the  (lentiles  against
trichinosis.  In  the  last  of  these  methods  of  evading  the
interpretation  stated  above,  all  idea  of  a  formal  decree  having
been  promulgated  is  ^iven  up  ;  but  even  if  the  agreement  on  the
substance  of  the  decision  had  been  only  verbal,  Paul  could  not
have  said,  e/xol  ovSev  irpocraveBd'TO.

Apart  from  this,  the  dispute  at  Antioch  conclusively
disproves  the  historicity  of  the  decision,  whether  in  the
form  of  a  regular  decree  or  not.  It  is  clear  that  any  such
arrangement,  had  it  been  come  to,  would  have  had  the
effect  of  rendering  it  possible  for  Jewish  and  Gentile
Christians  to  associate  with  one  another  at  meals.  If
(as  is  stated  in  Actslt^)  Paul  and  Silas  continued  to
enforce  the  decree  during  their  next  journey,  we  are
bound  all  the  more  to  suppose  that  it  came  into  force
at  Antioch  innncdiately  after  its  pronuilgation  there.
In  that  case,  James  and  his  followers  had  no  reason  for
taking  offence  at  Peter's  eating  with  Cientile  converts.

If,  then,  we  are  forced  to  admit  that  no  arrangement
of  this  nature  was  made  at  the  Council  at  all,  there  are
many  who  would  like  to  retain  the  opinion  that  Paul
was  substantially  in  favour  of  such  an  arrangement.
This,  however  is  a  mistake.  The  four  prohibitions  are
taken,  either  from  the  seven  '  Noachic
precepts '  (as  they  are  called  in  the
Talmud),  by  means  of  which  a  modus
Vivendi  is  said  to  have  been  arrived  at  between  the  Jews
and  the  '  sons  of  Noah  '  (the  Gentiles),  or  directly  from
the  original  ordinances  on  which  those  are  based  (Lev.
1710-1830),  which  likewise  were  promulgated,  not  for
the  Israelites  alone,  but  also  for  the  foreigners  in  their
midst.  The  latter  source  is  the  more  probable,  for
the  Talmud  prohibits  actual  unchastity  ;  but  it  cannot
be  doubted  that,  had  such  a  prohibition  appeared  to  l)e
at  all  necessar)'  in  Acts  15,  the  prohibition  of  murder  and
of  theft  would  also  have  been  adopted  from  the  Talmud.
In  its  association  with  ordinances  so  far  from  being
common  to  all  mankind,  so  peculiarly  Jewish,  as  the
prohibition  of  blood,  of  the  flesh  of  animals  that  had
died  or  been  strangled,  and  of  the  flesh  of  animals
sacrificed  to  idols,  it  is  much  more  likely  that  the
interdict  upon  what  is  here  called  iropvela  refers  to
marriages  within  the  degrees  of  affinity  forbidden  in  Lev.
I86-18  (cp  Bastard).  Moreover,  as  the  passage  in
Leviticus  lies  at  the  foundation  of  Acts  15,  in  a  general
way  only,  it  is  possible  that  marriages  with  Gentiles  also
may  have  been  included  ;  these  were  prohibited  by  Ex.
34 16  Dt.  73  Ezra  9  2,  and  would  have  made  it  quite  im-
po.ssible  for  a  Jewish  Christian  to  enter  the  house  of  a
Gentile  who  had  contracted  such  a  marriage.

Now,  as  to  Paul's  view  in  regard  to  eating  things  sacri-
ficed to  idols,  we  have  full  and  exact  information.  As  a
general  rule  (i  Cor.  8  IO23-33  Rom.  14  14)  he  allows  it :
it  is  to  be  avoided  only  in  cases  where  it  might  cause
offence  to  a  weak  Christian  who  mistakenly  thinks  that
the  Levitical  prohibition  of  it  is  of  perpetual  obligation.

924


11.  Its  prohibi
tions.


COUNCIL  OP  JERUSALEM


Paul  does  recognise,  it  is  true,  one  exception,  which  he
mentions  in  i  Cor.  10 14-22,  though,  curiously,  not  in
the  exactly  similar  case  in  810  (cp  Dkmons,  §  8)  ;  but
even  this  passage  contains  no  prohibition  of  the  practice
excepting  at  a  religious  ceremony  of  this  kind.  In  the
decree  of  Acts,  on  the  contrary,  the  eating  of  things
offered  to  idols  is,  it  need  hardly  be  said,  forbidden  in
all  circumstances,  just  as  to  partake  of  blood,  or  of  the
flesh  of  animals  that  have  died  or  been  strangled,  is
forbidden.  Here  the  prohibition  turns  on  the  nature
of  the  thing  itself  (cp  dXlayrifia,  Acts  1.')  20)  :  the  soul
was  thought  to  reside  in  the  blood  (Ixv.  17  u  m).  -ind
to  eat  the  soul  would  have  been  an  abomination.  Now,
as  Paul  docs  not  concur  in  the  decree  of  the  apostles
on  the  question  of  eating  animals  sacrificed  to  idols,  it
would  not  l)e  wise  to  assume  his  agreement  in  regard
to  the  prohibition  of  blood  and  of  the  fiesh  of  animals
that  had  died  or  been  strangled,  about  which  we  have
no  expression  of  opinion  by  him.  As  to  the  question
of  marriage,  he  carried  on  an  uncompromising  warfare
against  unchastity  of  every  kind  (i  Cor.  5  612-20)  ;  but
unchastity  does  not  appear  to  have  been  what  was
intended  in  the  decree  of  the  apostles.  Marriages  with
unbelievers,  on  the  contrary,  he  did,  it  is  true,  advise
against  (i  Cor.  739),  but  in  no  case  on  grounds  of
principle.  Otherwise  he  could  not  have  enjoined  that
a  Christian  married  to  an  unbelieving  spou.sc  should
continue  the  relation  if  the  other  consented  ;  nor  could
he  have  declared  that  the  unlxjlieving  spouse  was
sanclilied  by  marriage  with  a  Christian,  and  that  even
the  children  of  a  mixed  marriage  were  holy  (iCor.
712-14).  The  children  were  not  bapti.sed  ;  if  they  had
been,  their  sanctity  would  have  been  a  consequence  of
their  baptism,  and  not  deducible  from  their  connection
with  their  parents  simply.  Accordingly,  if  Paul  dis-
courages marriages  with  unbelievers  for  the  future  (739),
his  reason  cannot  have  lieen  that  they  were  in  themselves
wrong,  but  only  that  they  were  incompatible  with  the
deeper  spiritual  sympathy  of  true  spouses.  On  these
grounds  we  are  obviously  still  less  entitled  to  assume
that  Paul  would  have  pronounced  to  be  wrong  all
marriages  within  the  degrees  of  affinity,  down  to  that
with  a  sister-in-law,  forbidden  in  Lev.  I86-18,  except  in
those  cases  which  are  manifestly  contrary  to  nature,  as,
e._^.,  that  given  in  i  Cor.  5 1-8.  On  no  single  point,
therefore,  does  Paul  even  express  substantial  agreement
with  the  restrictions  imposed  by  the  decree  of  the
apostles.  ^

The  last  attempt  to  rescue  some  renmants  of  credi-
bility for  Acts  connects  itself  with  21 25.  Here  I'aul
is  acquainted  with  the  decree  of  the  apostles  as  if  it
were  something  new.  It  is  absolutely  impossible  to
reconcile  this  with  the  representation  of  Acts  15  ;  but
it  is  suggested  that,  if  the  latter  has  to  be  abandoned
on  account  of  Galatians,  it  may  be  possible  to  retain  at
least  what  is  said  in  Acts  21.  On  this  view  the  apostles
issued  the  decree  simply  on  their  own  responsibility,
without  consulting  Paul  ;  and  this  version  of  the  matter
was  derived  by  the  author  from  one  of  his  sources.
Unfortunately,  the  source  of  this  passage  (at  least,
according  to  all  attempts  hitherto  made  to  distinguish
the  sources  of  Acts)  is  made  out  to  be  the  same  as
that  of  Acts  1 020,  or  of  I528/. ,  or  of  tolh.  those
p?5sages.  To  avoid  this  conspicuous  failure  in  the
ar;Tunient, J. Weiss deletes from the account in

1  Some  scholars  have  upheld  the  modified  view  that  these
restrictions  were  at  all  events  customarily  observed  at  the  time
among  the  (ientile  Christians,  many  of  whom  had  previously
been  semi-proselytes  to  Judaism  and  would  therefore  have
naturally  continued  to  obey  these  ordinances  as  Christians ;
and  these  would  have  been  followed  by  the  other  Gentile  con-
verts. The  only  church,  however,  concerning  which  we  have
any  information  in  this  conneciion  proves  the  contrary.  In
Corinth  Paul  had  to  contend  with  the  very  worst  modes  of
unchastity,  and  with  practices  in  regard  to  things  offered  to
idols  that  went  too  far  even  for  him  ;  and  mixed  marriages  were
quite  usual.  It  is  hardly  possible  to  believe  that  things  could
nave  been  so  completely  different  elsewhere,  even  if  Corinth  was
exceptionally  bad  in  these  respects.

925


155-1113-33  (for  15  1-4 13,  see  above,  §  i  div. /.)
all  references  to  Paul  and  Barnabas  (15 2225)  as
editorial  additions,  and  assumes  that  in  the  original
source  I55-11  13-33  related  only  to  the  conference  of  the
original  apostles  among  themselves,  which  is  then
called  to  mind  in  21  25.  Apart  from  the  extreme  bold-
ness of  this  assumption,  it  is  to  l>e  remarked  that
this  particular  source  is  considered  by  W'ei.ss  himself,
as  well  as  by  all  other  critics  of  the  sources  of  Acts,  to
be  untrustworthy.  In  particular,  the  verse  in  question
(21  25)  has  been  actually  taken  to  be  an  interpolation,
and  in  fact  is  so  little  necessary  to  the  context  that  if  it
were  wanting  its  absence  would  not  be  noticed.  Read
with  the  context,  it  causes  no  difficulty  ;  but  the
context  itself  is  not  historical  (see  Acts,  §  7).  In
any  conceivable  view,  therefore,  suspicion  is  thrown
on  the  verse  by  a  critical  examination  of  the  sources.
In  the  absence  of  any  confirmation,  it  certainly  does
not  possess  enough  of  internal  probability  to  justify  its
acceptance.

In  fine,  it  appears  that  the  Tubingen  school  is  not
without  justification  n  maintaining  that  the  decree  of
the  apostles  is  a  fiction  invented  by  the  author  for  the
purpose  of  promoting  a  union  of  Jewish  and  Gentile
Christians.  Only,  in  the  second  century  it  would  have
been  little  calculated  to  secure  this  object.  The  as-
sumption is  that  these  regulations  were  new  at  the  time
of  writing.  Now,  they  contain  very  stringent  restric-
tions upon  the  freedom  of  the  Gentile  Christians  in  the
interests  of  the  Jewish  ;  but  the  Gentiles  were  at  that
time  so  largely  in  the  majority  and  so  full  of  the
consciousness  of  their  title  to  membership  in  the  Church,
that  they  would  hardly  have  ac(|uiesced  in  such  re-
strictions then.  Besides,  the  regulations  contained  in
the  decree  of  the  apostles  must,  in  their  essence,  have
l)een  actually  in  force  at  the  time  of  the  composition  of
Acts  (see  Acts,  §  16),  however  little  they  may  have
been  so  in  the  first  century.

The  Epistle  of  Barnabas  (36  4  6)  betrays  traces  of  this  in
the  complaint  that  Christians  believed  themselves  bound  to
observe  the  Mosaic  Law,  and  from  the  middle  of  the  second
century  there  is  evidence  of  this  on  all  hands  (/?/</.  f>  3  ;  Justin,
Dill/.  35  ;  Luc.  r/t*  »ii>r/.  Pc'Cgr.  16  ;  Epistle frovi  Liigdunumo/
the  year  177;  in  Kus.  //A"v.  I26;  Irensus,  artV'.  Hirr.x.di
[ch.  I,§i2]);  Tertullian,  .4/^/.  chaps.  7  9  ;  Min.  Felix,  Octav.y>\
Chut.  Hoiii."!  T,/.  8,  and  i^rrfijf.  4  36  ;  Clem.  Alex.  }\rii.  iii.  25
(ii.  8/,  Strom,  iqt),  ed.  Svlburg,  62,  98,  ziq/.);  Origen,  c.
Cels.  8(24)30;  Orac.  Si7'y//.2g6).

Possibly  the  first  traces  of  such  a  custom  or  of  an
attempt  to  introduce  it  are  to  be  found  in  Rev.  2 14  20-25.
where  the  writer  speaks  only  of  meat  ofifered  to  idols  and
of  vopveicL.

The  solution  of  the  question  would  thus  seem  to  be
that  the  author  of  Acts,  finding  this  custom  in  his  own
day,  assumed  in  simple  faith  that  it  must  date  back  to
the  time  of  the  apostles,  and  (by  a  bold  process  of
combination)  represented  its  establishment  as  being  the
settlement  of  the  dispute  which  he  knew  to  have  raged
in  those  early  times.  His  reverence  for  the  apostles
and  the  assumption  (to  him  a  matter  of  course)  that
complete  harmony  had  prevailed  among  them  supplied
colours  for  the  picture  which  differs  so  widely  from  the
truth.  In  any  case,  the  gradual  rise  of  the  custom
itself  finds  its  explanation  in  the  effort  to  establish  a
modus  Vivendi  between  Jewish  and  Gentile  Christians.
Only,  it  was  due  not  to  the  demands  of  the  strict  Jewish
Christians  of  the  Council  of  Jerusalem — men  who  could
not  have  been  satisfied  by  the  observance  of  so  small  a
portion  of  the  Law— but  rather  to  the  demands  of  the
Jewish  Christians  of  the  Dispersion,  who  had  on  their
own  side  long  ago  emancipated  themselves  from  strict
obedience  to  the  Law,  yet  could  not  overcome  their
repugnance  to  certain  extreme  deviations  from  it.

In  conclusion,  we  learn  from  our  investigation  of  the

subject  that  the  Council  of  Jerusalem  did  not  possess

. the  importance  which  its  comparatively

12.  Conclusion,  ^^^j^,  ^.^amcter  appears  to  claim  for

it. It  had  far  less  influence  upon  the  history  of  primitive

926


COUNSELLOR

Christianity  than  the  dispute  at  Antioch,  which  speedily
undid  everything  that  the  Council  of  Jerusalenj  had
achieved.  The  discussion  of  the  question  has  led  to
elucidations  of  the  h'ghest  value  for  a  knowledge  of  the
position  of  ]iartics  among  the  early  Christians.  These
were  not,  as  the  Tiibingcn  Scliool  assumed,  only  two.
They  were  at  least  four^the  parties  (or,  as  they  should
rather  be  termed,  the  'schools')  of  Paul,  of  I'eter,  of
James,  and  of  the  'false  brethren.'  Thus,  even  from
the  earliest  period,  there  were  the  intermediate  positions
between  extreme  parties,  which,  according  to  the
Tubingen  School,  onlv  arose  from  compromises  in  the
second  century.  Prnnitive  Christianity  presents  a
picture  far  more  rich  in  detail  and  in  colour  than  that
view  supposes.  Its  critics  must  be  prepared  to  take
into  account  the  finest  distinctions  of  shade.

The  critical  discussion  of  the  subject  was  initiated  by  the
Tubingen school: Haur {/'aiiliis, 1S45); Schwegler (Xadi.

a/>osfc<lfsr/,f  Znta/Ur,  1846)  ;  Zeller(.J/.vA7'-
13.  Literature,  i^wc/;.  1854). The  laterphosesof  the  critical

position  are  represented  by  Lipsius  (Sclicn-
kel's  Bib.  Lex.  s.7'.  '  Apostelconvent,'  and  Handcoiiiiii.  2  2) ;
Weizsiicker  (//>/",  1873,  pp.  191-246,  .and  A/:  /.citalt.');
Pfleiderer(.//'7'.  i383,  pp.  7S-104,  241-262,  and  y'a»//«'VwM) ;
Hohzmann  (/.U'l'.  10S2,  pp.  436-464,  and  1883,  pp.  159-165);
Hilgenfeld(Z/;'/',  in  v.irious  articles,  the  latest  in  1899,  pp.  138-
149,  with  a  new  edition  of  the  text).  Of  an  apologetical
character  are  the  contributions  of  I.  Ch.  K.  v.  Hofniann,  Die
heil.  .SV/ir.  NT  1  12J-140,  2nd  ed.  126-145):  Carl  Schmidt  (^Dc
apostolorum  tiixirti  sententia,  1874,  and  in  ri\Ey^\  s.7'.
'Apostelkonvent');  Zimmer  (^Vj/a/tv/.;-.  ;^.  .•)/,-,? VA,vv</r.  1882);
Fr.-vnke  (.S7.  A';-.  1800,  pi>.  659-687).  Of  the  '  mediating  '  school  ;
Keimirn/iri.f.  i.  1,4.89  \'7^\):  (Irimm  (,S7.  A>.  1880,  pp.  405-
432).  C"p  M.  \V.  Jacobus  (i'r,-s/'j'/.  txmi  R,/.  Kfriew,  1897,  pp.
509-528.  P.  W.  S.

COUNSELLOR,  EV  twice  Cf)rNCii,i,ou  (4,  below).
I'retjucnt  in  l'.\'  in  a  general  sense,  without  any  official
meaning,  or,  mure  si^ecifically,  of  the  king's  personal
adviser  or  advisers,  for  which  the  technical  term  is
T'STD  (FA'  Rkcokdhk)  ;  .see  (iovF.KNMKNT,  §  21.

The  following  terms  come  into  consideration  : —

I.  rj-V,  yoi's,  as  a  title,  applied  to  .Vhithophel  (2S.  I.'ii2
I  Ch.  il  33),  and  Jonathan  (i  Ch.  27  32  |i  nSIDI  ]-2:2  r'N).  Why
Zechariah  [57.7'.,  <\  is  styled  '  wise  counsellor '  (?pb'  j'J,'V)  in  1  Ch.
•2()i4  is  hard  to  say;  the  te.vt  is  prob.ably  faulty,  j'i^i"  may
mean  'giver  of  oracles'  (see  context);  similarly  in  Is.  41  28
(cp  ■l-t26)  2  Ch.  •J.'iiO.  It  is  otherwise  used  generally;  cp  Is.
l!>ii  Pr.  11  14  Job  3  14,  etc.  <P"Na  renders  by /SovAevTjj?  in
Job;^i4  I-17:  but  more  conununly  <ru/ix^ouAos.  In  2S.  Sis
(Bi:ai,  incorrectly  .applies  the  term  crvn^ouAos  to  J'i;\.\iAii  (i),
apparently  reading  j-yv  for  yTin'  ;  i"  <PBi.'s  addition  to  i  K.  2
46  h)  on  the  other  hand,  6  crv^^ouAos  referring  to  Kaxoup(HP  93,
^a[<tl)(Oup)  uib?  Naeai/ inay  rest  upon  old  tradition.  He  can  be
no  other  than  Zabud  «axoup  [LI.  HI'  93  ia.K\ovp)h.  Nathan  who
is  mentioned  in  i  K.  45  as  the  'king's  friend'  (so  ,MT  ;  see
Zabld,  i).  The  Aram,  equivalent  "'yi'L:!*;  (pi.  with  suff.)  in
Ezra  7  14^;  is  used  in  reference  to  the  seven  counsellors  of  the
Persian  king  ;  cp  the  seven  princes  of  Media  and  Persia  in
Esth.  1  13.

2.  K^'^?"'^,  ii'-tliah<rayyn,x>\.  Dan.  3  2  3,  the  Pers.  data-bara,
law-giver,  hence  a  judicial  authority.

3-  '*^"!'?5!!',  hadddbfrayya,  pi.  D.an.  82427  436133]  f)  7  [s],  an
unknown  .\ram.  official  title.  No  doubt  a  compound  of  the
Pers.  bara  (cp  above)  ;  the  first  part  of  the  name  is  perhaps
corrupt.  The  context  plainly  shows  that  the  personal  attendants
of  the  king  are  intended.  For  2  .and  3,  see  Comm.  ad  loc,  and
cp  E.  Meyer,  F.ntst.  23.

4.  /SouAeuTT)?,!  Mk.  i.5  43  Lk.  23  50,  RV  'councillor,'  applied
to  Joseph  of  .Vrimathaea  (Joseph,  15),  see  GoveknmivNT,  §  31.

5.  <riin3ouAos,  used  genenally,  Rom.  11  34  (quoting  Is.  40  13).
crufijSouAos  occurs  also  in  the  Apoc,  cp  Ecclus.  66  37  7y.,  and
42  21  (where  Hcb.  j'32).

COURT  (iVn,  ay^h).  'an  open  enclosure,'  used
commonly  in  EV  with  reference  to  the  Tkmi'LE  [^.f.]
(Ex.279  Ezek.  816  and  often)  also  of  the  court  of  a
house  (2.S  17  18),  or  p.alace  (i  K.  78) ;  see  Hou.se,  §  2.
For  the  'court  of  the  guard"  (RV,  AV  ' .  .  .  of  the
prison'),  n-^sD  "i^n,  Jer.  322,  etc.,  see  Jerusai.km.

'  Court '  in  Is.  34  13  EV,  35  7  EVniK-,  is  used  indefinitely  of  an
abode.  The  MT  h.as  the  corrupt  form  "l>'n  (a.v\i\  in  34 13
[BN-^QD). In  2  K 2O4  the  AVm?.  RV  'city'  follows  the  Kt.

1  In  Palm.  KBlS'3.
927


1.  Terms.


COVENANT

TJ'>  for  which  the  I-  r.  correctly  presents  Isn  '  court '  (of  the
citadel:  see  AV,  RV"is.).  Finally,  'court'  in  Am.  7  13  AV
is  used  in  a  different  sense,  with  reference  to  the  royal  '  palace '
(cp  RV).

A  later  designation  of  the  temple  court  is  ,tiij?,  'dzdrdh
(2Ch.  49,  along  with  -isn,  and  613!  ;  avXi)),  a  word  Oi
uncertain  origin  common  in  MH,  not  to  be  confused
with  the  ecjually  obscure  .i-iij;,  EV  'settle,'  RV"'K-.
better,  '  ledge,"  viz.  of  the  altar  (Ezek.  4.314-20  45i9t).

In  NT  ai'Xj?  is  applied  to  the  sheepfold  (Jn.  IO116),
and  the  temple  enclosure  (Rev.  11 2).  Elsewhere  (in
the  Gospels)  RV  regularly  reads  '  court '  for  AV
•palace'  (<-.,^.,  Mt.  26369  Mk.  I45466)  or  '  h.all"  (Mk.
]."»i6  Lk.  2255),  and  nowhere  recognises  (with  Meyer,
etc. )  the  classical  usage  of  ai'Xij,  to  denote  a  house  or
building.

The  'fore-court'  (Mk.  14  68  RV"'e-,  irpoavXiov)  is
the  first  of  the  two  (or  more)  courts  which  the  larger
buildings  contained  :  see  HofSK.

COUSIN  (ANeyiOC;  Col.  4 10  RV,  .\V  'sister's
son'),  in  classical  Cireek  a  'first  cousin"  or  'cousin'
generally;  also  'nephew,"  'niece.'  In  Xu.  3«3ii  it
renders  -i'n  p.  Tobit  is  called  the  autxpio^  of  Raguel
( Tob.  7  2  ;  also  96  [S]).

In  I-k.  1  36  58  the  word  (ovyyenJ!,  (Tvyyei'i<;)  is  quite  gener.al  ;
RV  in  NT  rightly  aKvavs  'kinsman,'  'kinswoman,'  pi.  'kins-
folk.' In  ii:sd.:i7  442  1  M.acc.1131  (RV  'kinsman')  it  is  a
title  given  by  a  king  to  one  whom  he  desired  to  honour.

COUTHA,  RVCuTHA  (KOYeA[A\  om.  BL),  a  family
of  Netliinim  in  the  gre.at  post -exilic  list  (see  Ezra,  ii.  §  8)  i  Esd.
,^.32|.\1  unmeniioncd  in  i:zra2  52  Neh.  7  54— whose  name  may
possibly  be  connected  with  CuTMAU  (2  K.  17.24).

COVENANT.  The  word  JT'IS  (bi'rWi)  probably
occurred  about  285  times  in  the  original  OT.  Its
constant  rendering  in  ©  is  diadrjKrj  (cn>vdi)KT]
Dan.  116;  ivroXai  [Pj]  or  irpocTTd-yfjiaTa
[.\],  I  K.  11 11).  AiadrjKT]  is  used  in  a  few  instances
for  a  kindred  term.  Vet  it  is  safe  to  assume  that  in
the  original  Hebrew  texts  of  Ecclesiasticus,  i  Maccal>ees,
Psalter  of  Solomon,  Assumption  of  Moses,  Jubilees,
Judith,  the  .Apocalypse  of  Ezra,  and  Testaments  of  the
Twelve  Patriarchs,  n"ia  was  used  at  least  seventy
times  where  our  versions  give  biadr}K-r],  ffvvdi)K-q,  or  an
equivalent.

.■V<iuila  and  Symm.achus  usually,  Theodotion  frequently,
rendered  the  word  OMvOriKr).  Hoth  words  are  found  in  Wisdom  o<
Solomon  and  2  Maccabees.  The  NT  writers,  fijllowing  the  Alex-
andrian version,  used  exclusively  6iae>JKT),  and  this  determined  the
usage  in  early  Christian  literature.  The  Targums  translated
invariably  c«<p ;  the  Pesh.  of  the  OT  gives  ),.>a.»f>,  but  in
M.al.  24  Zech.Oii  transliterates  hiaey^Kr],  the  method  adopted
also  by  the  Edessene  versions  of  the  NT.  In  Enoch  t>06,
Ethiopic  viafjala  probably  represents  Siafl^KT),  originally  p-p.

It is  significant that  the  .Assyrio-Habylonian  is  the
only  cognate  language  in  which  the  word  has  lx;en  found.
,  ////-/7«  means : (i)  fetter; (2)  alliance,

2.  Larly  covenant ;  (3)  firmness,  solidity.  Fetters
,  were  placed  upon  the  culprit,  the
vanquished  enemy,  the  representative
of  a  conquered  city  or  country,  to  hold  him  and  to
signify  power  over  him  ;  in  chains  he  received  his  own
sentence  or  the  decree  touching  his  home  and  people
(Sennacherib,  ii.  71  ;  5  R.  2,  109  etc.).  .\  fettered
rival  might  be  put  under  obligations  and  made  an  ally,
and  such  an  enforced  sulwrdination  might,  by  a  simple
metaphor,  be  designated  'enchainment.'  This  term
was  then  extended  to  every  alliance,  even  where  the
parties  were  in  a  position  to  decide  upon  a  mutually
binding  decree,  as  in  the  ca.se  of  Kara-inda.s  and
.■\sur-l)el-nisisu,  2  R  65  (K.  4406).  .\s  etjuals  did  not
actually  lay  shackles  upon  each  other,  this  is  evidently
a  figurative  use  of  the  word  ;  and  as  the  thought  of
mutual  obligation  cannot  have  lx:«n  immediately
suggested  by  the  iinposition  of  fetters,  it  is  as  clearly
secondary.  The  royal  word  of  judgment  or  assurance,
particularly  when  strengthened  by  an  oath,  was  the
fetter  that  could  not  Ije  broken. A '  fettered '  house


history  of
word  'berlth.


COVENANT

was  one  firmly  built,  a  '  fcttorcil '  place  one  surrounded
\>y  solid  walls,  2  R  38,  15-17  (ip  birtu ;  fortress,
fortified  town,  from  the  same  root,  Shalni.  ob.  34,  and
see  Del.  Ass.  llWIi,  185).

From  the  Amarna  correspondence  we  know  that  some
time  U'fore  the  Hebrew  invasion  a  Habylonian  dialect
was written, and uniloulUedly also to


3.  Primary


some  extent  spoken,  in Palestine. The


™*H*'h^  ^^  Israelites  may  therefore  have  tx^come
acquainted  with  this  term  through  the
Amorites.  'In  the  nomadic  state,  the  priestly  oracle  by
the  casting  of  lots,  the  ,iTn,  probably  sulficcxl.  Agri-
cultural and  city  life  called  for  increased  civil  authority.
It  is  possible  that  n""a  in  the  sense  of  'binding
ordinance,"  'sentence,'  was  adopted  to  supply  the  need
of  a  corresponding  word  to  designate  the  judicial
decision  of  a  ruler.

In  the  Klohistic  narratives  the  denominative  ,113  occurs  with
ihe  signiricance  '  to  appoint  '  (i  S.  17k).  The  noun  was  still  used
l)y  the  author  of  Kcclcsiasticus  to  denote  the  sentence  pro-
nounced by  ."x  judge  (3833).  The  fact  that  the  dominant  idea
attached  to  the  word  at  all  times  was  that  of  u  binding  decree  is
better  accounted  for  by  this  Babylonian  derivation  than  by
recourse  to  the  Arabic  banl  'to  sever.'  It  also  yields  a  satis-
factory explanation  of  the  early  appearance  of  nna  in  the  sense
of 'alliance,' and  its  occurrence  wiil>  the  signification  of  'com-
munity,' 'nation.'  On  the  other  hand,  the  sometimes-observed
ceremony  of  passing  between  the  severed  pieces  of  an  animal  in
making  a  solemn  pledge  may  have  been  an  inheritance  from  the
nomadic  period.  In  the  phrase  ri"i3  n"lD>  possibly  testifying  to
tl\is  lite,  the  verb  throws  no  more  light  upon  the  noun  than  in
the  Greek  bpitta  i4ii.vfi.v  \  whilst  the  secondary  meaning  of  rnr.
'to  ilecree'  (cp  the  gloss  to  Hag. 'J 5),  bears  witness  to  the
jnimary  and  persistent  significance  of  nns-

Tile  classical  distinction  between  diaOrjKT]  {dialheki,
will)  and  avvOrjKr]  {syntheke,  agreement)  was  not  entirely
lost  in  Hellenistic  Greek.

av\'Sr\KTi\  is  exclusively  used  of  a  political  alliance  in  r  and
2  Mace.  A<iuila's  preference  for  avvQr)KT\  cannot  be  explained
l)y  prejudice  ;  its  use  by  Symmachus  was  evidently  dictated  by
considerations  of  style  ;  even  Tbeodotion's  conservatism  did  not
l)revcTit  him  from  abandoning  at  times  the  uniform  rendering  of
ilic-  iilclcNi  (ireek  version.  In  view  of  this,  the  deliberate  choice
of  huiOt'iKi}  by  the  .Mexandrian  translators  can  scarcely  have
lieen  due  to  anything  else  than  a  consciousness  of  the  funda-
mental meaning  of  ri'l^-  This  likewise  applies  to  the  indepen-
dent rendering  of  the  word  by  c>p  in  the  Targums.

(i. )  0'7'//.  — In  civil  life  the  Hebrews  seem  to  have
employed  the  word  to  denote  sentence,  decree,  ordin-
ance, statute, law,  pledge,  testament,


alliance,  covenant,  community,  nation.
.\  successful  leader  against  the  enemy


4.  Specialised
significations.

was  in  early  Israel  designated  a  judge  (csic),  because
the  foe  was  regarded  as  a  transgressor,  the  victory  as
a  judgment,  and  the  valorous  chief  as  the  natural  arbiter
in  internal  feuds  (cpGovKKNMKNT,  §  17).  Even  the  king
was  a  judge  as  well  as  a  warrior,  i  K.  3  xtff.  fj],  i  S.820
[E].  \\'hen  this  unity  of  the  judicial  and  administrative
functions  ceased,  the  old  term  designating  the  decision
of  a  ruler  remained  in  legal  phraseology.  A  collection
of  judicial  decisions  (c'aECu!)  was  called  a  bfirith-book,
Ex.247  ['*-]•  *'i6  Sentence  was  termed  a  bfirith  (Ecclus.
3833).  Hut  it  also  continued  to  denote  the  victor's
decree  affecting  the  condition  of  a  city  that  capitulates
(e.g.,  Jalx'sh,  1  S.  11 1  [J]),  a  territory  that  is  ceded  [e.g.,
Ishbaal's,  represented  by  Abner,  2.S.  812/.  21  [J]),  a
rival  kingdom  that  is  forced  to  come  to  terms  (e.g. ,
Benhadad's,  i  K.  2O34  [E]),  or  a  kingdom  reduced  to  a
state  of  dependence  (e.g.,  Zedekiah's,  Kz.  17 13-19)  ;  and
it  was  applied  to  the  ordinance,  statute,  law,  or  con-
stitution imposed  by  a  king  upon  his  own  people,  as
David's  (2S.  .53  pj),  Josiah's  (2K.233),  Zedekiah's
(Jer.  34  8j^),  Anliochus's  (Dan.  927:  'he  shall  imix)se
severe  regulations  on  the  many  during  one  week").
Such  a  royal  declaration  was  considered  inviolable  ;  a
king  would  not  go  beyond  his  word  in  severity,  nor  fail
to  fulfil  his  promise.  The  Jalieshites  regarded  their
lives  as  safe,  if  Nahash  would  solemnly  declare  his
willingness  to  rule  over  them  as  his  servants.  Antiochus
lutpator  is  severely  censured  (Is.  338)  for  himself
violating  the  constitutional  rights  he  had  granted  (i
30  qao


COVENANT

Mace.  659^;  2  Mace.  13  22_^).  Thus  the  word  assumed
the  meaning  of  '  pledge.'  The  captains  jjlcdgcd  them-
selves to  ol)ey  Jehoiada  (2K.II4),  the  nobles  of
Jerusalem  to  set  their  slaves  free  (Jcr.  34  8^),  Zcchatiah
and  other  citizens  to  drive  away  their  wives  (Ezral03).

(ii. )  Domestic.  —  Applied  to  domestic  relations  the
bfrith  was  at  first  simply  'the  law  of  the  husband*
(Koni.  72).  Since  a  wife  was  captured,  bought,  f)r  given
in  marriage,  her  absolute  subjection  to  a  mans  authority
w;is  i)roix-'rly  characterised  as  'enchainment.'  Social
development,  however,  without  intrtKlucing  the  idea  of
eq Utility,  tended  to  emphasise  the  obligations  that  go  w  ith
power.  The  husbantl's  bC-rith  became  a  solemn  pledge
given  before  witnesses  ( Ez.  1G8  Mai.  214).  In  this  sense
the  word  could  be  used  ahso  of  the  wife.  In  I'rov.  2  17
.t.-iVn  ma  seems  to  mean  '  the  promise  by  her  God  ' ;
the  same  pledge  of  faithfulness  is  alluded  to  in  Ez.  ](J6i
('  not  for  the  sake  of  thy  promise"),  and  pcjssibly  also  in
4  Esdr.  25.  A  father's  decision  was  binding  \\\y<n\

his  children.  Especially  the  last  paternal  decree,  the
testament,  was  irrevocable.  Whether  it  was  a  dis-
jxrsition  of  profx^rty  or  a  dispensation  of  blessings  and
curses,  deemed  effectual  in  antiquity,  it  was  termed  a
I)erith  (Gal.  3 15  Heb. 'J16/;  Test.  xii.  fair,  passim),
and  had  the  nature  of  a  promise.

(iii. )  International.  —  Between  nations  equal  in  jx>wer
a  favour  conferred  or  promised  calls  for  <a  gift  in  return.
To  perpetuate  mutually  .advantageous  relations,  pledges
are  exchanged.  In  this  way  political  alliances  may
arise  with  mutual  obligations.  The  l)est  example  of
such  a  covenant  is  that  lietween  Solomon  and  Hiram
(provided  the  Deuteronomistic  note,  i  K.  526  •r2],  can  be
relied  upon).  Of  this  nature  were  probably  .il.so  the
agreements  l>etween  Hezion  and  Abijah,  Benh.idad  and
Asa,  and  Benhadad  and  Baasha,  referred  to  in  i  K.  ir>i9
[I].  The  Ijerith  with  Assyri.i,  Hos.  122  [1],  was  originally
intended  as  an  alliance  of  this  kintl,  though  Hosca  had
reason  to  complain  that  out  of  such  alliances  there
grew  only  new  rights,  i.e.,  demands  (IO4).  Simon's
league  with  Rome  was  of  the  same  character  (i  Mace.
14242640;  Jos.  Ant.\\\\.1  t).^

(iv. )  fictions. — .Since  the  relations  of  nations  were
thus  frequently  regulated  by  a  beritli,  it  is  not  strange
that  such  a  basis  should  sometimes  have  Ijeen  assunied
without  sufficient  foundation.  When  the  once  peaceful
Arabic  neighbours  began  to  push  the  luiomites  out  of
Mount  Seir,  Obadiah  lookt-d  upon  this  as  a  breach  of
covenant  on  the  part  of  allies  (v.  7).  The  simultaneous
attack  of  several  p>eopIes  on  the  Jewish  commonwealth
described  in  i  Mace.  l\\  ff. ,  seemed  to  the  author  of  Ps.
836  to  l)e  the  result  of  an  alliance  against  Yahwe — i.e.,
Israel.  If  Amos  1 9^  is  in  its  right  jjlace  (.see  Amos,
§  9  a).  Tyre  is  charged  with  forgetting  the  '  covenant  of
brothiTs'  with  some  other  city  or  people,  probably
PhoL-nician  ;  kinship  is  the  basis  of  the  assumption.
Zech.  11 10/  probably  descrilx-s  a  change  in  the  policy
of  the  reigning  pontiff  as  regards  the  Gentiles,  rather
than  actual  alliances  with  neighlxjuring  states,  as  the
corise(|uent  internal  feud  suggests.  It  is  also  natural
that  recourse  should  be  hacl  to  the  same  fiction  to
justify  or  to  condenm  present  conditions  and  demands.
In  the  Negeb,  tril>es  of  Israelitish  and  Iduma'an  extrac-
tion assured  themselves  of  their  rights,  against  the
Philistines,  to  certain  wells  and  oases,  by  virtue  of  a
solemn  pledge  given  by  Abimelech  of  Gerar  to  their
hcros  eponymus,  Isaac  (Gen.  2628  fJ]  21 27 /T  [E]>.
Similarly,  the  torder  lines  Ix-'tween  Arama;an  and
Israelitish  territory  in  Gilead  were  regarded  as  fixed  by
an  agreement  between  Eaban  and  Jacob,  securing  also
the  rights  of  certain  Aram.tan  enclaves  on  Israelitish
soil  (Gen.  1844  fJ]).  Certain  remarkable  facts  in  the
history  of  the  Gilxjonites  (see  Gibkon),  gave  rise  to  the
story  told  in  Josh.  96/  15/  fJ]  9ii  [E] — a  story  which
shows  how  unobjectionable  such  alliances  with  the
natives  were  considered  in  earlier  tintes.  When  pro-
1  I  Mace.  8 17  a  Mace.  4 11  are  scarcely  historical.
930


COVENANT

phetic  teaching  had  led  to  a  recognition  of  the  baneful
influences  upon  the  life  of  Israel  of  Canaanitish  modes
of  thought  and  worship,  the  warning  took  the  form  of
a  prohibition  of  alliances  projected  into  the  period  pre-
vious to  the  invasion  (Dt.  72  Jud.  22  [Dt.  ]  Ex.2332
[E]  Ex.  34  12 15  [J]).  Gen.  14  13,  though  found  in  a  late
Midrash,  may  retiect  the  memory  of  a  long  dominant
Canaanitish  majority  in  Hebron,  since,  with  all  the
glorification  of  Abram,  the  three  chiefs  Mamre,  Eshcol,
and  Aner  are  designated  as  nna.T  'SvD.  '  holders  of  the
pledge."  To  legitiniatise  the  Davidic  dynasty,  Jonathan
was  represented  as  having  abdicated  the  throne  in  favour
of  David,  while  Saul  was  still  alive,  on  condition  of
remaining  next  to  the  king  in  rank  (iS.  23i7/.  [E]).
Such  an  action  on  his  part  was  then  accounted  for  by
the  story  of  a  still  earlier  Yahwe-bCrith  of  friend-
ship (i  S.  I83  [EJ).  referred  to  again  in  i  S.  208  16
[RJ.  The  friendship  itself  is  sufficient  to  explain  David's
kindness  to  Jonathan's  family  ;  but  the  passage  testifies
to  the  custom  of  pledging  friendship  by  an  oath  and  a
solemn  ceremony.

(v.)  Birith^'  nation.' — In  Dan.  11 22  nna  TJ3  is  the
title  given  to  Onias  III.  This  probably  means  prince
or  ruler  of  the  nation.  The  cnp  m3.  Dan.  11 28  30,  is
the  holy  nation  against  which  Antiochus  Epiphanes
directed  his  attention  and  his  fury  ;  and  rip  nna  '3iy
are  the  apostates  who  abandoned  the  holy  nation  and
lived  like  the  Gentiles  (cp  i  Mace.  1 15,  also  Judith  9 13
I  Mace.  1 63).  These  renegades  are  called  nna  "vxna.
Dan.  11  32;  '  those  that  bring  condemnation  upon  the
nation,"  are  responsible  for  its  misfortunes.  This
significance  should  probably  also  be  given  to  the  word
in  Ps.  7420  (Hitz. ,  Che.).  The  n""i3  -]N'?a.  Mai.  3i,
may  be  the  angelic  representative  of  the  nation.  At  a
somewhat  earlier  period  in  some  inserted  passages  in
II.  Is.  (see  IsAi.XH,  ii.  §  16,  Che.  SBOT)  nna  seems
already  to  occur  in  this  sense.  The  context  indicates  that
cy  m:3.  Is.  426  49  8,  is  meant  to  designate  Israel  as  an
independent  organised  community  (lit.  'a  commonwealth
of  a  people').^  Until  Israel  had  regained  its  status  of
indepencience  it  could  not  rebuild  the  ruined  cities,  or
restore  the  land  to  its  former  glory.  This  meaning
may  possibly  be  traced  still  further  back;  B.'\AI.-BEKITH
{'/■v.),  as  the  I'^lohist  designates  the  god  of  Shechem,
may  mean  'god  of  the  comnumity.'  The  word  used
of  the  city-kingdom  of  Shechem  in  the  seventh  century
(cp  .\ss.  bir/u,  i^Ituz,  fortified  town)  may  well  have  been
applied  to  the  ardently  desired  kingdom  of  Zion  at  the
end  of  the  sixth.

(vi. )  Metaphorical. — Metaphorically  nna  is  used  in
Job 31 1  of  the  law  that  Job  has  imposed  upon  his  eyes
that  they  shall  not  look  upon  a  virgin  ;  in  4O28  [41 4]  of
the  pledge  which  Leviathan  is  not  likely  to  give,  that  he
will  allow  himself  to  be  captured  and  become  a  slave  ;
and  in  523  of  Job's  agreement  with  the  stones  of  the  field
that  they  shall  not  prevent  the  cultivation  of  his  land.

No important transaction was done in anticjuity

without religious sanction. The  oath and the  curse

„  .. .  were  extensively  used  in  judicial  proceed-

.9^ ings,  legislative  enactments,  and  political

treaties. Before passing sentence, the

judge  pronounced  a  curse  or  adjuration  to  arouse  the

conscience  and  elicit  a  confession  (i  K.831  [D]  Nu.52i

[I'] Lev.  5 1 [P] Prov.  2924 Mt.  2663). A  pledge or

promise  was  made  more  binding  by  a  curse  (,!*?«,  Ez.  1.7 16

Deut.  29ii  [12]  20  [21]). To  set  forth  symbolically  this

curse,  animals  were  cut  into  pieces,  and  the  person  giving

the  pledge  passed  Ijetween  the  severed  parts,  signifying

his  readiness  to  be  thus  destroyed  Tiimself,  if  he  should

fail  to  keep  his  promise. It  is  to  be  observed  that  in  the

only  passages  where  this  ceremony  is  referred  to  (Gen.


/lid


Gen.


1  Cp  CHH  K19  'a  wild  ass  of  a  man,'
10  12.  So  in  the  main  Duhm,  though  his  conception  of  ri'ia  is
different.  I)i.,  Kraetzsch::iar  (/?/>  Iiunden<orstellung,  169),  and
Kosters  explain  'a  covenant  with  the  people' — /.?.,  one  in  or
through  whom  my  covenant  with  the  people  is  realised.

931


COVENANT

15  and  Jer.  34 18/. ),  there  is  no  question  of  an  alliance,
and  only  one  party  passed  between  the  pieces  (cp  Dictys
Cretensis,  Ephenuris  belli  Trojani,  i.  15).  Whether
this  custom  was  observed  also  in  the  conclusion  of
treaties,  as  was  the  case  in  Babylonia,  if  Ephrem  was
correctly  informed  {Comment,  to  Gen.  15),  is  uncertain,
and  there  seems  to  be  no  justification  for  connecting
this  rite  in  particular  with  an  agreement  between  two
parties,  or  for  supposing  nna  to  have  been  the  name  of
a  ceremony  of  which  it  was  an  essential  part.  In  most
instances  no  doubt  the  oath  sufficed.  Sometimes  the
right  hand  was  given  in  addition  (Ez.  17 18,  2  Mace.  1822),
or  a  handshake  took  the  place  of  the  oath  ( Ezra  1 0 19
Prov.  61  17 18  2226).  It  is  possible  that  during  the  oath
salt  was  sometimes  thrown  into  the  fire  to  intensify  by
the  crackling  sound  the  terror -inspiring  character  of
the  act,  originally  to  render  more  audible  the  voice  of
the  deity  in  the  fire,  hence  the  salt-bOrith  (Lev.  213  [P]
Nu.  18i9[P]  aCh.  135).  As  vows  were  taken  and
agreements  made  at  some  shrine,  the  numen  dwelling
in  the  sacred  stone  or  structure  was  the  chief  witness
(Gen.  31  48  [J]  52  [E]  Josh.  242?  [E]"  2  K.  1 1 4  283),  and
a  sacrificial  meal  preceded  or  followed  the  act  (Gen.
26  30  [J]  31  46  [J]  Ex.  24 1 1  [J]  2  S.  32o[J]).  The  sprink-
ling of  sacrificial  blood  upon  the  worshipper,  a  survival
of  the  custom  of  sharing  it  with  the  deity,  appears  to
have  disappeared  early  from  the  cult.  But  it  may  have
continued  longest  in  the  case  of  persons  taking  a  solemn
pledge,  as  is  suggested  by  its  use  in  the  installation  of
priests  (Ex.  29 20  [P]  Lev.  823  [P]).  This  would  account
for  the  term  benth-t)lood  (Ex.248  [E]).  Where  an
alliance  was  desired  presents  were  offered  by  the  party
taking  the  initiative  ((Jen.  21 27  [E] :  probably  the  sacri-
ficial animals  ; Hos.  122  [i]^).

Since  a  decree, pledge, or  compact  was  thus, as  a

_. . rule, ratified by some sacred rite at a

'hSrTth  ' ^'"^"ctuary, the  word nna  readily  assumed

a  religious  significance,  and  was  applied  to

a  solemn  declaration  of  the  deity.

(i. )  In  /,  E,  and  early  Prophets.  —  In  the  earliest
Judasan  narrative  Yahwe  gives  to  Abram  a  promise
that  his  descendants  shall  possess  Palestine  and  symboli-
cally invokes  upon  himself  a  curse,  if  he  shall  fail  to
keep  it  (Gen.  15 18  [J]  ;  cp  Gen.  24?  [J]).  When  Moses
is  reluctant  to  leave  the  mountain-home  of  his  god  and
pleads  for  an  assurance  that  Yahwe  shall  go  with  him,  a
solemn  promise  is  given  him  (Ex.  34 10  a  [J]  ;  add,  with
<5'"'''>  1^)-  The  original  context  can  scarcely  have  been
anything  else  than  a  declaration  that  Yahwe  will  ac-
company his  servant,  probably  in  'the  messenger,"  the
ni.T  "[xSd-  This  promise  was  no  doubt  also  referred  to
by  the  Elohist,  though  the  importance  of  the  ark  in  his
narrative  (cp  Nu.  10 33/  [E])  renders  it  probable  that
Yahwe's  presence  was  here  connected  with  this  palladium.
After  the  subjugation  of  the  Canaanites  by  the  first  kings
of  Israel  the  question  arose  as  to  the  justice  of  this  deed.
Israel's  right  to  the  land  was  then  established  by  the
fiction  of  a  promise  given  to  the  mythical  ancestor.  A
religious  problem  of  grave  importance  was  how  Yahwfe,
whose  home  was  on  Sinai,  or  Horeb,  could  manifest
himself  at  the  Palestinian  sanctuaries.  The  solution
was  that  he  had  pledged  himself  to  go  with  Mo.ses  in
'  the  messenger. '  The  story  of  Elijah's  visit  to  Horeb
was  probably  written  early  in  the  eighth  century ;  in  it
nn3  occurs  in  the  sense  of  commandment  (i  K.  19 14)-
This  is  also  the  meaning  of  the  term  in  Dt.  33 9^  (the
Blessing  of  Moses),  as  the  parallel  -n"CJ<  shows,  and  in
Josh.  7 II  [E].  Hosea  uses  the  word  to  denote  an
injunction  of  Yahwe  upon  the  beasts  of  the  field  not  to
harm  Israel  (22o[i8]),  and  a  commandment  of  Yahwe  in
general  (81;  possibly  also  67).  It  is  noticeable  that
this  prophet,  who  through  a  sad  domestic  experience
learned  to  apply  the  figure  of  a  marriage  to  Yahwe's
relation  to  Israel,  never  employs  bfirith  in  the  sense  of
a  covenant.  The  p-K.i  nna  was  probably  still  simply
the  law  of  the  husband,  and  the  idea  of  a  covenant  with

932


COVENANT

Yahwi  had  not  yet  been  formed.  The  covenant  with
death,  the  con»[xict  with  Shi^ul  (Is.  28isi8^  appears  to
\)c  an  alliance  with  the  powers  of  the  netlier  world,
implying  mutual  stipulations.  Men  who  preached  the
destruction  of  Israel  and  Yahwr's  intk'|x:ndence  of  the
people,  would  not  be  likely  to  characterize  the  existing
relation  by  a  term  current  in  necromancy.

(ii. )  Deitleronomiit.  —  I'.ven  the  transformation  of  the
Yahwistic  and  l.lohistic  narratives  of  the  Horeb-l)<^rith,
in  the  reign  of  .Manasseh,  by  which  the  promise  given
to  Moses  l>ecame  a  solemnly  imposed  law  (the  IX-calogue
of  J,  ICx.  31 15-26,  and  tliat  of  K,  Ex.  'iOi-i?),  and  the
judicial  decisions  of  the  Writh  lxx)k,  Ex.  20 23-2.3 33,  Ix.--
came  divine  injunctions,  does  not  contemplate  an  alliance.
In  the  law  promulgated  by  Josiah  in  621  (not  likely  to
be  found  outside  of  Dt.  12-26  ;  but  see  Dkutkko.nomy,
§5/.)  tlie  word  does  not  occur.  Hut  this  law  was
design.ated  at  the  outset  as  a  bCrith-lKX)k  (2  K.  28221).
It  seems  to  have  tx:en  intended  to  take  the  place  of  Ex.
20  23  ff.  The  promise  to  Abraham  is  strongly  emphasised
by  the  Deuteronomistic  writers  and  enlarged  to  one  given
to  Isaac  and  Jacob  as  well  (Dt.  431  7  12  8  18  2  K.  13 23
[Dt.];  cp  also  Dt.  I835  6101823  78  81  etc.).  At  a
time  when  Judah  was  in  inuninent  danger  of  losing  its
heritage,  faith  took  refuge  in  this  divine  assurance,
manifesting  Yalnve's  love,  and  justified  by  the  otx-'dience
of  the  patriarchs  (Dt.  431  IO15  (k-n.'264  ^  [Dt.]).
One  writer  of  this  school  declares  that  Yahwi!;  announced
on  Iloreb  his  bOrith  consisting  of  the  ten  words  (Dt.
4  13  b-iff.).  and  that  this  b<;rith  Wiis  written  on  tablets
of  stone  (99)  and  placed  in  the  ark  (see  Akk,  §  i/. ,
3,  9).  Anotlicr  author  made  the  Josianic  code  the
basis  of  a  covenant  concluded  in  the  fields  of  Moab
(Dt.  29  9  12  14  21  [811  etc.]  2617-19;  cp  the  later  gloss
29 1  [2869]).  Here  the  idea  of  a  compact  between
Yahw6  and  Israel  involving  nmtual  rights  and  obliga-
tions is  fully  developed.  Yahwe  pledges  himself  to
make  Israel  his  own  people,  distinct  from,  honoured
above  all  others ;  Israel  declares  that  it  will  make
Yahw6  its  god  and  ol)ey  his  conmuuidmcnts.  This
conception  was  subsecjuently  transferred  also  to  the
Horeb-bCrith  ;  cp  Judg.  2i^  [Dt.].

(iii. )  Jeremiah  and  lisekiel. — Jeremiah  does  not  seem
to  have  participated  in  this  development.  He  used
b€rith  only  to  designate  Josiah's  law,  which  he  regarded
as  having  been  given  through  Moses  at  the  time  when
Yahw^  brought  Israel  out  of  Egypt  (11  2/  6810  34  13).
It  is  evident  from  the  context  that  nnn  Tsn  ( 1 1 10)
indicates  not  the  disannulment  of  a  covenant,  but  the
breaking  of  a  law  by  disolx-'dience,  the  law  still  remain-
ing in  force.  Ezekiel,  on  the  other  hand,  not  only
employs  nn^  in  the  sense  of  '  law '  (2O37  :  '  the  fetter  of
the  law,'  447),  but  also  applies  it  for  the  first  time  to
the  conjugal  relation  of  Yahwe  and  Israel  (168 59 60).
Marriage  is  here  Ixisedon  mutual  pledges:  it  is  a  covenant.
According  to  Ezekiel's  view  of  history,  Yahwe  had
entered  into  such  an  alliance  with  Israel  in  Egypt,  but
the  people  had  by  a  long  career  of  unfaithfulness  forced
its  dissolution  (1659).  Yet  he  hopes  that  in  the  future
Yahwi  will  renew  his  intimate  relations  with  Israel.
There  will  lie  no  covenant,  however  (for  Israel's  pledge
cannot  be  trusted  ;  I661),  but  a  gracious  dispensation  of
Yahw6  (IG62),  everlasting  (3726),  and  full  of  prosperity
(3425),  ushered  in  by  the  restoration  of  the  Davidic
rule  and  the  temple-service  (372526).

(iv. )  I'.xilic  times. — How  ardently  the  next  generation
expected  that  the  fallen  tent  of  David  would  be  raised
up  again,  may  be  seen  in  the  appendix  to  Amos  (9ii^)
and  in  the  more  pregnant  form  given  to  the  promise
2  S.  7i6  [Ej]  in  2  .S.  235  (nSiy  nn:)-  Such  hopes  may
have  l)een  awakened  by  the  honour  shown  to  Jehoiachin
by  Amil  Marduk  in  561,  and  may  have  attached  them-
selves to  his  son  Shkshbazzak  {q.v.).  They  were
naturally  encouraged  by  the  sympathetic  tone  of  Eteutero-
Isaiah's  message  (Is.  40-48),  even  though  this  writer
himself  knows  no  other  Messiah  than  Cyrus. With  the

933


COVENANT

freer  intercourse  tietween  the  holy  city  and  the  Jews  of
the  di.spersion,  jjossible  after  the  Persian  conquest  (cp
Zech.  610),  and  the  ap|xjimment  of  .Slieshlxizzar.  and
after  him  of  Zerublxilx-1,  as  governor,  the  .Second  Isaiah's
evangel  w;is  brought  to  I'alestine  and  changed  the
comfortless  lamentations  of  the  native  population  (Lam.
3)  into  songs  of  redemptive  suffering  (Is.  42i-4  49i-6
5O4-9  ."<2ij-53i2),  or  of  future  restoration  (the  Zion
songs  in  Is.  49-55).  It  was  felt  that  by  the  accession
of  a  king  of  the  old  dynasty,  a  living  witness  would
appear  of  Yahwd's  faithfulness  to  David  (Is.  554  a),  a
restorer  of  the  territory  once  jx)ssessed  (Is.  554  ^  Mic.
4  8  13  5 1),  a  surety  of  the  promised  disiK-nsation  of  ever-
lasting peace  (Is.  54  10  553),  and  that  Zion  would  thus
become  again  an  organised  community  (oy  n'i3),  able
to  build  up  what  had  fallen  into  ruins,  to  attract
the  exiles  to  their  sj)iritual  home,  and  to  teach  the
nations  the  manner  in  which  Yahwe  should  be  worshipjx^
(Is.  426  498).

(v.)  I/aggai,  '/.cchariah,  etc. — The  prophecies  of
Haggai  and  Zechariah  Ix-ar  witness  to  the  strength  of
the  royalist  sentiment  at  Jerusalem.  The  hopes  of  the
Jews  proved  illusory  ;  but  in  the  midst  of  disiippoint-
ment  the  belief  in  Yahwe's  promises  lived  on.  '  .Malachi '
felt  assured  that  Yahwe  would  riturn,  and  accounted  for
his  delay  by  the  sins  of  the  degenerate  priestly  descend-
ants of  the  faithful  and  reverent  Levi,  to  whom  Yahwe's
promise  (n"i:)  of  life  and  prosperity  w:is  given  (2i-g),
and  of  those  who,  fascinated  by  foreign  women,  had
forgotten  the  pledge  (n't;)  given  to  the  wives  of  their
youth  (214).  The  author  or  authors  of  Is.  56-66  also
deplored  the  marriages  with  aliens  and  the  survival  of
forbidden  forms  of  worship,  but  saw  the  remedy  in  the
law  :  the  keeping  of  Yahwe's  conunandments  (nna)
would  render  the  very  euimch  fit  for  memlxTship  in
Israel  (064)  ;  the  distinction  of  Israel  lay  in  that  gracious
arrangement  (nTi)  by  which  Yahwe's  law,  proclaimed
by  men  of  the  spirit  and  repeated  by  a  mindful  people,
would  be  its  peri^etual  possession  (59 ii),  a  divine  dis-
pensation involving  prosperity  as  a  rew.ard  of  olx;dience
(618).  ITie  author  of  Jer.  30/,  however,  rises  to  a  far
greater  height.  He  looks  forward  to  a  new  regime
based  solely  on  Yahw6's  love,  which  will  take  the  place
of  the  old  and  less  fxjrmanent  relation  (Jer.  31  31  _^).
This  work  may  perhaps  Ije  assigned  to  the  time  of  the
Graeco-Persian  war,  when  the  writer  confidently  lcK)kcd
for  extraordinary  proofs  of  Yahwe's  pardoning  grace
(see  Jerkmi.\h,  ii.  §§  7  [iii.]  8  [ii.]).

(vi. )  P. — The  conception  of  the  bCrith  as  a  gracious
act  on  the  part  of  God,  by  wliich  he  binds  himself  to  a
certain  course  of  action  in  reference  to  Israel  and  the
world,  implying  the  l)estowal  of  blessings  and  the  revela-
tion of  his  will,  becomes  dominant  in  the  Priestly  Code.
The  bf^rith  or  engagement  is  here  carried  back  to
Abraham  and  Noah.  Beside  the  Noah-Writh  (Gen.
91-17)  there  is  no  room  for  an  Adam-bi^rith  ;  beside
the  Abrahamic  (Gen.  17  ;  cp  Ex.  224  64),  no  need  of  a
Sinaitic.  The  Noah-bCrith  secures  the  stability  of  earth's
conditions  and  of  man's  life,  and  the  accompanying  law
of  blood  is  but  a  lieneficcnt  provision  for  the  preservation
of  the  race  ;  the  Abrahamic  guarantees  to  Israel  the
land  of  Palestine  and  a  large  population,  and  the
command  of  circumcision  implies  only  a  distinction
conferretl  upon  this  jKHiple  from  which  all  further  favours
flow.  The  sign  in  the  sky  and  the  sign  in  the  body  are
constant  reminders  to  the  deity  of  these  merciful  engage-
ments. Hy  the  use  of  '3  p:  and  '3  C'pn  ('establish,'
occasionally  'maint.ain')  instead  of '3  ni3  the  nature  of
the  Writh  as  a  gift,  a  divine  institution,  is  emphasised.
Though  the  word  has  thus  Ix;come  a  religious  terminus
technicus  in  this  code,  it  still  occurs  with  the  sense
simply  of  commanilment,  Ex.  31 16  (the  law  of  the
sabbath),  I^v.  248  (the  ordinance  of  the  shew-liread).
Lev.  2 13  (the  injunction  ojncerning  salt),  or  of  promise,
Nu.  25 12/.  (the  assurance  to  Fhinehas  of  an  everlasting
priesthood  in  his  line).

934


COVENANT

(vii. )  Later  writers. — The  author  of  Jer.  50/  (see
Jkkkmiau,  ii.  §§  7,  8  [iii.])  refers  to  the  Abrahamic  dis-
[wnsation  in  the  spirit  of  the  Priestly  Writer  (see  that
vividly  expressed  passage  on  tiie  return  of  the  men  of
Israel  and  Judah,  Jer.  5O5)  ; '  and  Jer.  14 21  reflects  the
same  concoption.  Ps.  8929  lOuSio  IO645  111 5  also
show  the  influence  of  this  idea.

On  the  other  hand,  in  Ps.  25 10  14  132 12,  nna  is  only
a  synonym  of  nny,  and  in  44  18  50 16  78 10  of  mm-  In
Ps.  50  5,  nai  Vy  'nna  "ma,  '  those  who  pledge  their  troth
to  me  by  sacrifice,'  are  graciously  told  that  Yahwe  will
not  demand  excessive  offerings,^  and  in  78 10  the  men  of
the  Mosaic  period  are  charged  with  not  being  faithful  to
the  pledge  given  to  Yahwe.  Besides  the  Abrahamic

dispensation  (i  Ch.  I615  2  Ch.  614  Neh.  I5  9832),  the
("hronicler  particularly  emphasises  the  engagement  made
with  David  (2  Ch.  13$  21  7),  but  also  uses  bOrith  of  a
pledge  in  general  (2  Ch.  29 10  3432  Neh.  13  29).  The
Prayer  of  Jeremiah  (Jer.  3216-44)  is  quite  after  the
fashion  of  the  Chronicler  ;  in  32  40  the  author  has  in
mind  31 33,  but  interprets  the  bCrith  vaguely  as  a  promise
that  Yahwe  will  not  cease  to  show  mercy  to  Israel.

The  author  of  Kcclesiasticus  [circa  200)  introduces  for
the  first  time  an  .Vdam-biJrith  as  an  everlasting  dispensa-
tion (17i2),  is  led  by  his  biographical  interest  to  mention
severally  the  divine  promises  to  Noah  (44  iB),  Abraham
(7'.  19/),  Isaac  (7 '.  22),  Jacob  ( 7/.  23),  Aaron  (4')7  15),
Phinehas  (v.  23/),  and  David  [v.  25  47  n),  and  employs
the  term  in  the  sense  of  law  (2423  455),  and  of  covenant
(14  12,  based  on  Is.  28 15,  but  Si^runderstood  figuratively ;
cp  \Yisd.  1  t6).  The  thought  of  Ecclus.  45  15  [iv  rj/x^pais
ovpavov,  c'Cti'  "Cd)  25,  is  further  developed  in  Jer.  3314-26
(wanting  in  (S"**'^,  but  translated  by  Theodot. ;  see
Jekkmi.\H,  §  ii);  the  divine  arrangements  as  respects
the  house  of  Le\  i  and  the  house  of  David  are  as  inviol-
able as  the  divine  arrangements  in  nature,  the  laws  of
day  and  night,  of  heaven  and  earth.  Deutero-Zechariah
(Zech.  9-14 — after  198  B.C.;  see  Zkch.\ki.\h,  ii.  §  5)
promises  deliverance  to  the  Jews  of  the  dispersion  on
the  ground  of  the  faithful  observance  of  the  sacrificial
cult  at  the  sanctuary  by  which  Israel  continually  pledges
its  troth  to  Yahwe  ("nna  ci2.  '  because  of  thy  pledge-
blood  '  ;  9  II  :  cp  Ps.  5O5).  Dan.  94  ( 164  B.C. )  refers  to
God's  merciful  promise  to  bless  his  people.  The  nna
cSiy,  Is.  245  (c.  128  B.C.-')  is  most  naturally  understood  in
the  light  of  Ecclus.  17  12,  where  the  Adam-bdrith  also
involves  the  revelation  of  God's  laws  and  judgments.
In  I  Mace.  250  c2'nuK  nna  may  be  a  designation  of
the  holy  nation,  the  theocracy,  whilst  4 10  probably
refers  to  the  promise  to  the  patriarchs,  as  254  does
to  that  to  Phineh;is.  In  Ps.  Sol.  IO5,  the  law
apjjears  as  a  testimony  of  the  eternal  dispensation
established  with  the  Fathers  (919).  The  author  of
Jubilees  quotes  (616)  from  Gen.  9  12/  and  (15  19)  from
Gen.  177,  but  in  his  inde[)endent  use  of  the  term  shows
no  trace  of  the  conception  prevailing  in  the  Priestly
Code.  He  introduces  the  Noah-borith  as  a  pledge
given  by  the  patriarch  (the  original  seems  to  have  read
"'  '3B'?  cSij;  n'"i2  niD).  610,  which  is  renewed  by  the
jjeople  every  year  through  observance  of  the  feast  of
weeks  (617),  and  the  Sinai-ljCrith  as  a  pledge  which
Moses  takes  from  the  people  (611);  he  employs  the
word  as  a  synonym  of  'law,'  'statute'  (liol53424ii
30 21),  and  possibly  uses  it  also  in  the  sense  of  '  theocraoy '
(^35).  where  the  feasts  of  the  Jewish  community  are  con-
trasted with  those  of  the  (jentiles.  '  Arbiter  testament!
illius  '  (r^s  diaOriKTji  avrou  /xeirirri^).  Assumption  of  Moses
[Charles]  1 14,  seems  to  be  a  translation  of  'inna  n'3ic  (tp
Job  933),  and  represents  Moses,  not  as  a  third  party
effecting  an  agreement  between  God  and  his  people,  but

1  Read  with  Co.,  ,ni^l  and  insert  '3  before  nns,  'Come  let
us  join  ourselves  (anew)  to  Yahwe,  for  a  lasting  biritk  cannot
be  forgotten.'

2  Cheyne,  however,  takes  Ps.  .50  to  have  been  written  as
an  expression  of  non-sacrificial  religion.

3  Following  Duhm. But  cp  Isaiah,  ii.,  {  13.

935


COVENANT

as  the  preacher  proclaiming  his  law  (cp  Amos  5 10  Prov.
2  J 12  etc. ).  This  is  to  Ix;  inferred  already  from  the  suffix
— it  is  God's  liC-rith — and  it  is  distinctly  stated  in  3ii  ;
'  the  commandments  in  respect  of  which  he  was  to  us  a
mediator ' — i.e. ,  which  he  was  the  means  of  revealing  to
us  (cp  27).  The  Abraham-l)erith  is  mentioned  in  I2
3 10  4  12/.  Enoch  606  is  a  fragment  of  a  lost  Apocalypse
of  Noah  ;  it  presents  the  Noah-b€rith  as  the  all-
SufTicient  blessing  of  the  elect.

(i. )  Ciospels. — Lk.  I72,  which  refers  to  Cod's  promise
to  Abraham,  would  seem  to  have  belonged  originally  to
U-Ti  ^  Jewish  Apocalypse  of  Zechariah  current
among  the  Baptist's  disciples.  Jesus  him-
self does  not  seem  to  have  used  the  term  in  any
sense.  The  thought  of  a  new  dispensation,  so  attrac-
tive to  his  disciples,  may  not  have  been  foreign  to  his
own  mind.  If  it  is  not  foimd  even  where  it  might
most  naturally  be  expected,  as  in  Mt.  2I43,  the  reason
may  be  that  his  favourite  expression,  the  kingdom  of
God,  was  intended  to  convey  a  similar  idea.  His
words  at  the  paschal  table  have  evidently  undergone
successive  modifications  and  expansions ;  and  it  is
difficult  not  to  trace  Pauline  influences.  At  any  rate
the  declaration,  '  This  is  the  new  BiadrjKrj  in  my  blood'
(i  Cor.  11  25  Lk.  2220),  seen\s  to  lie  an  expansion  of  the
earlier,  'This  is  my  blood  of  the  SiadrjKri'  (Mt.  2628
Mk.  1424).  It  is  not  inconceivable  that  Jesus  actually
said  -cp  DT  \'-\n,  meaning  thereby  '  This  is  the  blood  in
which  I  pledge  my  loyalty  '  (cp  Ps.  50  5  Zech.  9 11).  But
the  CJreek  translation  suggests  an  Aram.  KZ-p  >ci  y-\n,
in  which  the  last  word  is  likely  to  be  an  explanatory
addition  by  a  later  hand,  the  original  utterance  lx.-ing
simply  'This  (is)  my  blood.'

(ii. )  Paul. — In  Gal.  3i5_^  Paul  compares  God's
assurance  to  Abraham  with  a  man's  testament  (Sia^^K?;),
which  cannot  lose  its  validity  by  any  arrangement  sub-
sequent to  his  d(;ath,  and  in  addition  seeks  a  proof  of
the  inferiority  of  the  law  in  the  fact  that  it  was  given  not
directly  by  God  himself,  but  through  angels  and  a
human  agent  {/jieffiTrjs,  used  as  in  Assump.  Mos.  1 14  3 12).
In  424  he  contrasts  the  present  Jewish  common-
wealth (t)  vvv  'JfpovffaXrjfj.),  deriving  its  existence  as  a
theocracy  {SLadrjKi])  from  the  legislation  on  Sinai  with
the  heavenly  society  {ij  (ivw  'JfpovffaXruj.)  from  which  by
spirit-birth  the  new  theocracy  derives  its  life  (cp  Heb.
1222).  The  new  form  of  government  {SiadrjKr]),  accord-
ing to  Paul,  was  possible  only  through  the  death  of
Jesus  abolishing  the  authority  of  the  Law  (hence  the
change  to  ^v  T<p  e/i(j3  ai/xari,  '  through  my  blood,"
I  Cor.  11 25),  and,  as  opposed  to  the  maintenance  of
social  order  by  enforced  obedience  to  external  statutes,
consisted  in  a  free,  love-prompted  surrender  of  life  to
the  divine  spirit's  guidance  (2  Cor.  36).  The  idea  of  a
special  arrangement  (SiaOriKrj),  still  in  the  future,  by
which  all  Israel  is  to  be  saved  (Rom.  II26/. ),  does  not
introduce  a  foreign  element  into  Paul's  conception  of
the  spiritual  theocracy  (for  it  implies  only  deliverance
from  sin),  but  is  a  concession  to  particularism,  out  of
harmony  with  his  general  attitude,  and  due  to  his
patriotic  feelings  (Rom.  9^).  Paul  also  uses  the  word
as  a  designation  of  the  OT  (2  Cor.  3 14).

(iii.)  Ot/ter  writers. — In  the  epistle  to  the  Hebrews,
the  Abrahamic  disjiensation  yields  to  that  of  Melchizedek.
Abraham  is  introduced  only  as  an  example  of  patient
reliance  upon  God's  promises  (615),  and  as  a  repre-
sentative of  a  priestly  order  inferior  to  that  of  Mel-
chizedek (74^);  Jer.  31  31  _f.  is  recognised  as  a  descrip>-
tion  of  the  often  promised  new  constitution  (SiaBr)KTi
S&J".  10 16) ;  but  it  is  argued  that,  as  a  man's  testament
(diaOrjKTi)  is  not  valid  until  after  his  death  (9i6/. ),
and  as  consequently  the  Mosaic  constitution  possessed
no  validity  until  a  death  had  taken  .place  (that  of  the
sacrificial  animal),  so  the  better  Christian  disjxinsa-
tion  could  not  be  ushered  in  e.xcept  by  the  death  of
Jesus  (9isi8^);  this  departure  of  Jesus  is,  besides,
regarded  as  necessary  in  order  that  he  might  be  a
036


COVERLET

priest — as  he  could  not  be  on  earth  (7 13/) — in  the
celestial  tcniplc  (620  9 11),  and  as  such  bear  the
responsibility  for  the  new  arrangement  {(yyvoi  lii),
and  on  God's  behalf  make  it  oix-rative  (neairtj^  86  9  15
1224)  by  sprinkling  the  blood  on  men's  consciences,
thus  pledging  and  devoting  them  to  the  new  priestly
service  (10  19,  cp  Kx.  292o  [P]  Lev.  823  [P]).  The  '  ark
of  the  law'  (oiaOriKj))  is  mentioned  in  Heb.  94  (cp
Kev.  11  19).  In  llph.  "J  12  the  one  great  promise  is  con-
sidered as  renewed  by  a  scries  of  solemn  assurances
(al  diaOiJKai  ttJj  iirayytXia^).  Peter's  contemporaries
are  represented  in  Acts325  as  'sons' — i.e.,  heirs,  who
might  enter  into  possession  of  the  promise  (StaOrjKrj)
to  Abraham,  whilst  in  7  8  the  word  hiaOi)Ki)  is  used  to
designate  the  ordinance  of  circumcision.'

Tlie  most  recent  inquiry  into  the  historical  meaning  of  blrith
is  Kraelzxhinur's  Die  /{um/i'ST'ttrstf/Zun^'-  im  Aiten  Testament
('96).  See  also  Vaieton,  /^.-l  TU'Vi  1-22  224-26013245-279
l'92yri;  Bertholet,  Die  Stellunf;  d.  Israeliten  u.  Juden  zu  d.
Frnmien,  46,  87/  176,  214  ['96I ;  WRS  Kel.  .SVw/.(2),  269^
■^12  ff.  479//^,  A7».  A,(iJF.;  \V.  M.  Ramsay,  'Covenant'  in  the
'K.x'posit.o,  Nov.  '98,  pp.  321-336.  N.  S.

COVERLET  ("1330),  2  K.  8  .st  RV. See  Bkd,  §  3

COVERS  (niL"i7),  E.\-.37.6,  etc.  ;  see  Cup,  6.

COW  (H-IS),  Is.  11  7. See  C.XTTI.k,  §  2.

COZ,  RV  strangely  Hakkoz  (]*ip  ;  Kcoe  [B'^A],
etKcoe  lee  superscr.]  [B-'->'''],  kooc  [I^:)  of  Judah
(ic'li.4  8).  The  name  is  probably  not  connected  with
I^akkoz.  As  it  occurs  nowhere  else,  perhaps  we  should
road  TiCKOA  (i'ipp,  QfKWi  \  cp  ©"'^).  See  Hakkoz,
Tkkoa.

COZBI  ('3T2,  'deceitful.'  ;»  79;  cp  .\s.s.  kuzhu,
'  lasciviousiH'ss,'  Haupt,  SHOT  on  Gen.  885),  daughter
of  Zur  (\u.  251518),  a  Midianite,  who  was  slain  by
Phiiiohas  at  Shittim  (Xu.256-i8,  P  ;  XAcBiell  [BAFL],
X()cBia[Jos.  Ant.  iv.  610  12]).

COZEBA,  AV  CiiozKBA (n2T3), i  Ch.  4  22t. See

A(  II/.IH, I.

CRACKNELS  (D^i?:),  i  K.  143. See  Bakemeats,

§  2-

CRAFTSMEN,  VALLEY  OF  (D-L'^nn  >l),  Neh.
11  35  1-',V See  CllAKASHl.M.

CRANE  (■|-i:y;  crpoyeiA  [BNAQ]),  Is.3S.4  Jer.
87+  \<\' ,  AV  by  an  error  [.see  below]  'swallow.'  In
Is.  3814  there  is  no  '  or '  between  the  first  two  names  in
MT,  and  (p'^N^Qr  omits  'agur  altogether,  rendering  the
other  word  (a?n)  correctly  xf^'^ci"  (see  Swallow,  2) ;
in  the  second  passage  where  in  MT  the  same  two
words  occur  (Jer.  87)  the  connective  particle  is  again
omitted,  this  time  by  ©.  Hence  it  has  l>een  suggested
that  in  neither  place  should  both  words  occur  ( Kloster-
mann,  Duhm,  etc.,  omit  nijj;  in  Is.)  ;  this  receives  some
countenance  from  the  fact  that  the  M  T  order  of  the
words  is  reversed  in  Targ.  and  Pesh.  in  Jer.  87.  The
transposition  tuisled  most  Jewish  authorities  as  to  the
real  meaning  of  the  two  words  respectively,  and  our
translators  followed  them.  That  oiD  (or  rather  d'D  :  see
SwAi.i.ow,  2)  means  'swallow'  or  'swift'  there  can  be
no  doubt,  and  so  the  words  'crane'  and  'swallow'
should  at  least  change  places  (as  in  RV).

What  'iigur  means  is  somewhat  uncertain  :  *  probably
Griis  communis  or  cinerca,  which  is  the  crane  of
Palestine.  Once  it  bred  in  England.  The  passage  in
Isaiah  refers  to  its '  chattering ' ;  *  and its  powers  of

1  On  the  meaning  of  tt.aAr\ia\,  see  Hatch,  Essays  on  Biblical
Gretk,  p.  47.

2  I^garde  suggested  that  it  means  '  bird  of  passage '
^  j^  =■  J^  '  'o  turn  back,  return,'  C'ebers.  59).

3  '  The  Heb.  CjIfES)  properly  signifies  a  shrill  penetrating
sound,  and  is  therefore  more  applicable  to  the  stridulous  cr>'  of
the  swift  th.in  to  the  deep,  trumpet-like  blast  of  the  crane.'  .See
the  rest  of  Che. 's  note  in  I'roph.  Is.,  ad  loc.

937


CREATION

giving  utterance  to  loud  and  trumpet-like  sounds  both
when  in  Hight  and  when  at  rest  are  well  known.

Cranes  arc  migratory  birds,  spending  the  summer  in  N.
latitudes  and  the  winter  as  a  rule  in  Central  Africa  and  S.  Asia ;
but  some  pass  the  cold  season  in  the  plains  of  S.  Juda.-a.  While
travelling  they  fly  in  great  flocks,  and  at  limes  come  to  rest  on
the  borders  of  some  stream  or  lake.  They  appear  to  have  fixed
rixjsting-pl.ices,  to  which  they  return  at  night  in  large  numbers.
Jeremiah  notices  the  regularity  <>f  their  seasonal  migrations.

N.  M. — A.  E.  S. !

CRATES  (kpathc  i  A ',  -hcac  [V]),  the  name  of  a
former  viceroy  'in  Cyprus'  (iwl  tQv  Kvirpiuv),  who
was  left  in  charge  of  the  citadel  (of  Jerusalem)  by
SosTKATUS  in  the  reign  of  Antiochus  Kpiphanes :
2  Mace.  4  29.

CREATION. I. yicrounts^  0/ Creation. —]t  mnyhe
regardi-d  as  an  a.xiom  of  modern  study  that  the  descrip-
tions of  creation  contained  in  the  biblical


1.  Critical
standpoint.


records, and  especially  in  Gen.  li-24fl,^
I  *  are  permanently  valuable  only  in  so  far

as  they  express  certain  religious  truths  which  are  still
recogni.sed  as  such  (see  lx,'low,  §  25).  To  seek  for  even
a  kernel  of  historical  fact  in  such  cosmogonies  is  incon-
sistent with  a  scientific  point  of  view.  We  can  no
longer  state  the  critical  problem  thus  :  How  can  the
biblical  cosmogony  lie  reconciled  with  the  results  of
natural  science  ?  The  question  to  lie  answered  is  rather
this  :  From  what  source  have  the  cosmogonic  ideas  ex-
pressed in  the  OT  l^een  derived  ?  Are  they  ideas  which
Ixloiiged  to  the  Hebrews  from  the  first,  or  were  they
borrowed  by  the  Hebrew  s  from  another  peoj^le  ?

This  question  has  passed  into  a  new  phase  since  the
most  complete  form  of  the  Creation-story  of  the  Baby-
lonians has  become  known  to  us  in  its


2.  Babylonian
epic.


cuneiform  original.  True,  the  story
given  in  the  tablets  lies  before  us  in  a
very  fragmentary  condition.  The  e.xact  ntmiber  of  tablets
is  uncertain.  Considerable  lacuna,  however,  have  been
recently  filled  up  by  the  discoveryof  missing  passages,  and
there  is  good  hoi>e  that  further  excavations  will  one  day
enable  us  to  complete  the  entire  record.  At  any  rate
we  are  now  able  to  arrange  all  the  extant  fragments  in
their  right  order — which  was  not  the  case  a  few  years
ago — and  so  to  recover  at  least  the  main  features  of  the
connection  of  the  cuneiform  narrative.  Only  a  brief
sketch  of  the  contents  can  be  given  here.-*

The  'Creation-epic'  begins  by  telling  us  that  in  the
beginning, before  heaven  and  earth  were  made,  there
was  only  the  prima;val  ocean-flood. This  is  personified
as  a  male  and  a  female  being  (.Apsu  and  Tiamat).
Long  since,  when  alx)ve  |  the  heaven  had  not  been  named,

when  the  earth  l>eneath  |  (still)  bore  no  name,
when  Apsu  the  primaival, — the  generator  of  them,

the  originator  (?)Tianiat,''  |  who  brought  them  both  forth
their  waters  in  one  |  together  mingled,

when fields  were  (still)  unformed,  ]  reeds  (still)  nowhere
seen —


1  On  conceptions  of  creation,  see  below,  §g  25-29 ;  on  words,
see  8  30.

2  It  may  be  observed  here  that  Gen.  24a  was,  originally,  the
superscription,  not  the  subscription.  Schr.,  in  his  reproduction
of  the  two  narratives  of  the  primitive  story,  rightly  restores
it  as  the  he.iding  (Stud ten  zur  Kritik  der  Urgesih.,  1863,  p.
172).  In  that  c.ise  the  priestly  narrator  axn  hardly  have
continued  with  Gen.li.  Restore  therefore  with  Vh.iCenesis,
'7.  39).  'This  is  the  birth-story  of  heaven  and  earth  when
Elohim  created  them '  (cTl'^K  CNi:r)-  Then  continue,  '  Now
the  earth,'  etc.  (v.  2).  '  Then  God  .said,  Let  light  be  ;  and  light
was.' See  Kautzsch's  translation  (Kau.  IIS).

3  Cp  Del.  Das  Bah.  WeltschSp/ungsepos  ('97);  Jensen,
Kosntol.  268-300;  Zimmern,  in  Gunkel,  SchSp/.  ^01-41^;  and
Hall,  Light  from  the  East,  i-2t  ('99).  The  metrical  divisions
are  well  marked.  The  epic  is  mainly  composed  in  four -line
stanzas,  and  in  each  line  there  is  a  ca;sura.

*  [.Ass.  .Mutntnu  Tiamat.  In  line  17  of  this  first  tablet  we
meet  (most  probably)  with  a  god  called  Mummu.  The  name
corresponds  to  the  Muvfxit  of  Damascius  (see  Iwlow,  %  15,  endX
and  is  rendered  by  Krd.  Del.  in  /.  4,  'the  roaring.'  "This  is  by
no  means  certainly  right ;  for  the  grounds  see  Del.  1 19.  Pinches
renders.  Lady  Tiamat  (Exp.  Times,  3  166).  But  Jensen  warns
us  that  there  is  another  mummu.  .-Vt  any  rate,  the  supposed
connection  with  oi.l  must  be  abandoned.]

938


CREATION

long  since,  when  of  the  gods  |  not  one  had  arisen,

when  no  name  had  been  named,  |  no  lot  [been  determined],
then  were  made  I  the  gods,  [  .  .  .  ].

Thus  the  world  of  gods  came  into  being.  Its  harmony,
however,  was  not  long  maintained.  Tiamat,  the  mother
of  the  gods,  was  discontented  with  things  as  they  were,
and  from  hatred  (it  would  seem)  to  the  newly  pro-
duced Light,  relxilled  against  the  supreme  gixls,  and
drew  some  of  the  gods  to  her  side.  She  also  for  her
own  l)ehoof  produced  monstrous  beings  to  help  her  in
her  fight.  This  falling  away  of  Tiamat  called  for  divine
vengeance.  To  reply  to  the  call,  however,  required  a
courage  which  none  of  the  upper  gods  possessed,  till  at
last  ^Iarduk  (Merodach)  offered  himself,  on  condition
that,  after  he  had  conquered  Tiamat,  the  regal  sway
over  heaven  and  earth  should  be  his.  In  a  solemn
divine  assembly  this  was  assured  to  him.  He  then
equipped  himself  for  the  fight,  and  rode  on  the  war-
chariot  to  meet  Tiamat  atid  her  crew.  The  victory  fell
to  Marduk,  who  slew  Tiamat,  and  threw  her  abettors
into  chains.

This  is  followed  by  the  account  of  the  creation  of  the
world  by  Marduk.  The  process  is  imagined  thus.
Marduk  cuts  in  two  the  carcase  of  Tiamat '  (the  per-
sonified ocean-flood),  and  out  of  the  one  part  produces
heaven,  out  of  the  other  earth. ^

He  smote  her  as  a  ...  |  into  two  parts  ;

one  half  he  took,  |  he  made  it  heaven's  arch,
pushed  bars  l)efore  it,  |  stationed  watchmen,

not  to  let  out  its  waters  |  he  gave  them  as  a  charge.
Thus  the  upper  waters  of  Tiamat,  held  back  by  bars,
form  heaven,  just  as  in  Gen.  1  the  first  step  to  the
creation  of  heaven  and  earth  consists  in  the  separation
of  the  upper  from  the  lower  waters  by  the  firmament.
Then  follows  a  detailed  description  of  the  making  of  the
heavenly  bodies  ( '  stations  for  the  great  gods  ' ).

After  this  most  unfortunately  comes  a  great  lacuna.
We  can  venture,  however,  to  state  so  much  as  this— that
the  missing  passage  must  have  related  the  creation  of
the  dry  land,  of  plants,  of  animals,  and  of  men.  In
support  of  this  we  can  appeal  (i)  to  separate  small
fragments,  (2)  to  the  account  of  Berossus,  (3)  to  the
recapitulation  of  the  separate  creative  acts  of  Marduk
in  a  hymn  to  that  god  at  the  close  of  the  epic,  and  (4)
to  the  description  of  the  creative  activity  of  Marduk  in
a  second  cuneiform  recension  of  the  Creation  -  story
lately  discovered  (on  the  various  Babylonian  Creation-
stories,  see  also  below,  §  13^).

What  then  is the  relation  between  this  Babylonian
and  the  chief  biblical  cosmogony? We  have  no  right
to assume  without investigation that


3.  Relation  to

Gen.  1 1-24


the  Hebrew  myth  of  Creation  appears
in  its  original  form  in  Gen.  li-24a.  The
present  writer  is  entirely  at  one  with  Hermann  Gunkel,
whose  work  entitled  ^chopfung  u.  Chaos  in  Urzeit  uvd
Endzeit'^  (95)  contains  the  fullest  collection  of  the
relevant  evidence,  that  this  myth  has  passed  through  a
long  development  within  the  domain  of  Hebraism  prior
to  the  composition  of  Gen.  li-24«.  Only  with  a  clear
perception  of  this  does  critical  method  allow  us  to  com-
pare the  latter  document  directly  with  the  Babylonian
Creation-epic.  Then,  however,  our  surprise  is  all  the
greater  that  in  spite  of  the  preceding  development  there  is
still  in  the  main  points,  a  far-reaching  coincidence  between
the  myths.  For  instance,  both  stories  place  water  and
darkness  alone  at  the  lx,'ginning  of  things,  and  persomfy
the  prinueval  flood  by  the  same  name  (Tiamat  =  TChom).
Ill  both  the  appearance  of  light  forms  the  lieginning  of
the  new  order. Whether  the  production  of  light  in

1  Jensen  denies  that  Tiamat  is  anywhere  in  the  Creation-epic
represented  as  a  dragon  ;  she  Ls  always,  lie  thinks,  a  woman.
It  is,  however,  not  probable  that  the  popular  view  of  Tiamat  as
a  serpent  had  no  effect  on  the  poet  of  the  Creation-epic.  .See
Dra<;on,  §  ^ff.

2  (pL«sibly  the  head  of  Tiamat  is  referred  to  at  a  later  point  of
the  story  by  BCrossus. See  below,  815.]

3  The  sub-title  of  this  work,  which  will  be  referred  to  again,
b  '  Kine  relisionsefichichtliche  Untersuchung  iiher  Gen.  i.  und
Ap.Joh,  xii. Mit  Ueitragen  von  Heinrich  Zimmern.'


CREATION

the  Babyloni.an  account  was  specified  as  a  separate
creative  act  or  not  (a  point  on  which  complete  cer-
tainty cannot  as  yet  l)e  obtained),  Marduk  is  at  any  rate
the  god  of  light  /car'  ii,oxh^,  and,  consequently,  his
battle  with  Tiamat  is  essentially  a  battle  between  light
and  darkness.  In  both  accounts  the  creation  of  heaven
is  effected  through  the  divine  creator's  division  of  the
waters  of  the  primaeval  flood,  so  that  the  upper  waters
form  the  heaven.  In  the  Bat)y Ionian  epic  this  division
of  the  waters  of  the  flood  is  in  the  closest  relation  to  the
battle  with  Tiamat  ;  nor  can  we  doubt  that  a  paralle
description  once  existed  in  the  Hebrew  myth  of  crea-
tion, though  it  is  but  faintly  echoed  in  Gen.  16/  The
list  of  the  several  creative  acts  runs  thus  in  the  two
accounts  : —

Babylonian.

1.  Heaven.

2.  Heavenly  bodies.

3.  E^arth.

4.  Plants.

5.  Animals,

6.  M^-n.


Gen.  1,  IN  Present  Order.^

1.  Heaven.

2.  Karlh.

3.  Pbnts.

4.  Heavenly  bodies.

5.  Animals.

6.  Men.


There  is  much,  however,  to  be  said  for  the  view  that  the
present  position  of  the  heavenly  bodies  after  the  plants
is  secondary,'^  and  that  originally  the  creation  of  the
heavenly  bodies  was  related  directly  after  that  of  heaven  ;
the  order  will  then  be  the  same  in  both  accounts.
Further  coincidences  can  be  traced  in  points  of  detail :
e.g.,  the  stress  laid,  in  both  accounts  of  the  creation  of
the  heavenly  bodies,  on  their  being  destined  to  serve
for  the  division  of  time  (see  also  below,  §  6).  Can  we
doubt  that,  between  accounts  which  have  so  many  coin-
cidences, there  is  a  real  historical  connection?

We must now inquire how this connection is to
be represented. There are two ways  which  are  his-
torically conceivable. Either the


Babylonian
background.


are  independent  developments  of  a
primitive  Semitic  myth,  or  the  Hebrew-
is  borrowed  directly  or  indirectly  from  the  Babylonian.
Dillmann  proposes  the  former  view  in  connection  with  a
remark  that  the  Hebrew  story  cannot  have  been  simply
borrowed  from  the  Babylonians  on  account  of  the  patent
differences  between  the  two  narratives.  '  There  is  no
doubt  a  common  basis  ;  but  this  basis  comes  from  very
early  times,  and  its  data  have  lx.'en  developed  and
turned  to  account  in  different  ways  by  the  Israelites  and
the  Babylonians.''  In  reply  we  may  concede  to  Dill-
mann that  the  cosmogony  in  Gen.  1  cannot  have  been
simply  taken  over  from  the  Babylonians,  and  that  there
are  strong  a  priori  reasons  for  admitting  the  e.\istence
of  a  common  stock  of  primitive  Semitic  myths.  Still,
that  the  Hebrew  myth,  which  is  still  visible  in  Gen.  1,
was  borrowed  at  a  later  lime  from  the  Babylonians,  i.s
the  only  theory  which  accounts  for  the  phenomena
before  us.  There  are  features  of  the  utmost  importance
to  the  story  which  cannot  Ix;  .satisfactorily  explained
except  from  the  Babylonian  point  of  view.

At  the  very  outset,  for  instance,  why,  from  a  specifically
Hebrew  point  of  view,  should  the  waters  of  the  tchotn  be  placed
at  the  Ijeginning  of  all  things?  Or  we  may  put  our  objection  to
Di.'s  theory  thus,  the  question  to  be  answered  by  a  cosmogony
is  this,  '  How  did  the  visible  heaven  and  earth  first  come  into
existence?'  The  answer  given  in  Gen.  1  is  unintelligible  in  the
mouth  of  an  early  Israelite,  for  it  implies  a  mental  picture  which
is  characteristically  Babylonian.  .As  the  world  still  arises  anew
every  year  and  every  day,  so,  thought  the  Babylonian,  must  it
origmally  have  been  produced.  During  the  long  winter  the
Babylonian  plain  looks  like  the  sea  (which  in  Babylonian  is
tidmiu,  tiamat),  owing  to  the  heavy  rains.  Then  comes  the
spring,  when  the  god  of  the  vernal  sun  (Marduk)  brings  forth
tne  land  anew,  and  by  his  potent  rays  divides  the  waters  of

1  Most  critics,  however,  reckon  eight  or  seven  creative  acts.
Cp  Wellh.  Cff  x'&Tjpr.  ;  Bu.  V,^rscii.  4?8jf.  :  I)i.  dn.  16,  37.

■•2  See  Gunkel,  Schff>/.  14;  'this  unnatural  arrangement  may
be  explained  by  supposing  that  when  the  framework  of  the  seven
days  was  introduocd,  the  plants,  for  which  no  special  day  re-
mained, were  combined  with  the  earth,  and  so  came  to  stand
before  the  stars.'

3  Di.  Gen.  ('02),  p.  11  ;  cp  his  Ueher  die  Herkunft  der
urgeschichtl.  Sngen  (Berlin  Acad.  1882),  p.  427^,  and  Ryle,
Early  Narratives  o/Gen.,  12/.

940


8.  Mythical

basis  of  Gen.

li-


CRBATION

Tiamat  which  previously,  as  it  were,  formed  a  whole,  and  wnds
thetn  [larlly  upward  as  clouds,  partly  downward  to  the  rivers
and  canals.  So  must  it  have  lieen  in  the  first  spring,  at  the  first
New  Year,  when,  after  a  fight  between  Marduk  and  Ti.'tmat,
the  organised  world  came  into  being.'  Or  (for  Marduk  is  also
the  gcS  of  the  early  morning  sun),  just  as  the  sun  crosses  and
conquers  the  cosmic  sea  (Tiamat)  every  morning,  and  out  of  the
chaos  of  night  causes  to  appear  first  the  heaven  and  then  the
earth,  so  must  heaven  and  earth  have  arisen  for  the  first  time  on
the  first  morning  of  creation.  To  imagine  a  similar  origin  of  the
myth  from  a  Hebrew  point  of  view,  would  lie  hopeless.  The
picture  rcijuircs  as  its  scene  an  alluvial  land,  which  Habyloni.i
IS,  and  Palestine  or  the  Syro-Arabi.in  desert  is  not,  and  it  requires
further  a  sjieciiil  god  of  the  spring  sun,  or  of  the  early  morning
sun,  such  as  Marduk  is  and  Vahwfe  is  iiot.^

In  short,  rightly  to  understand  the  Babylonian  .iccount
as,  in  its  origin,  a  mythic  description  of  one  of  the  most
fiimiliar  natural  phenomena  of  Haliylonia  gives  the  key
to  the  probienj  before  us.  The  Israelitish  cosmogony
must  have  Ijeen  borrowed  directly  or  indirectly  from  the
Babylonian  (cp  also  §§  5  and  1 1 ).  H.  I.

The  precetling  sections  contain  (i)  an  account  of  the
gre;it  Hnbylonian  creation  epic  (§  2),  (2)  a  comparison
of  this  with  the  chief  Hebrew  cosmogony,
and  a  criticism  of  Dillmann's  theory  (§
3),  and  (3)  an  explanation  of  the  Baby-
lonian myth  antl  of  its  pale  Jewish  copy
(§  4).  Of  these  §  3  and  §  4  relate  to  subjects  on  which
it  is  not  unbecoming  for  the  present  writer  to  si)eak.-'
That  there  is  more  than  one  Hebrew  cosmogony,  will  be
shown  presently ;  we  will  l)egin  with  that  in  Gen.  1  x-l^a.
It  is  a  very  unfortunate  statement  of  Wellhausen  ■*  that
the  only  detail  in  this  section  derived  from  mythology  is
that  of  chaos  in  v.  2,  the  rest  being,  he  thinks,  due  to
retlection  and  systematic  construction.  Reflection,  no
doubt,  is  not  absent — e.i;. ,  the  framework  of  days  is
certainly  late — but  the  basis  of  the  story  is  mythical.
Nor  can  we  content  ourselves  with  comparing  the  data
of  (ien.  1  with  any  single  mj'thology,  such  as  the  Baby-
lonian. Circumstanced  as  the  Israelites  were,  we  must
allow  for  the  possibility  of  Phajnician,  Egyptian,  and
Persian,  as  well  as  Babylonian  influences,  and  we  must
not  refuse  to  take  a  passing  glance  at  cosmogonies  of
less  civilised  {x-oples.  For  some  elements  in  the  Jewish
Creation-story  are  so  primitive  that  we  can  best  under-
stand them  from  the  wide  f>oint  of  view  of  an  anthro-
pologist.

The  Babylonian  parallelisms  may  \yc  summed  tip
briefly  (cp  above,  §  3).  The  points  of  contact  are^(  i )
6.  Parallelisms:  '''*'  P^n^aival  flood  (mnn- Tiamat).
Babylonian.  (^^  ^^*^  primreval  light  (Marduk  was  a
god  of  light  V>efore  the  luminaries  were
created),  (3)  the  production  of  heaven  by  the  division  of
the  primiKval  flood,  (4)  the  appointment  of  the  heavenly
bodies  to  regulate  times  and  seasons,  (5)  the  order  of
the  creative  acts  (the  parallelism,  however,  in  the  present
form  of  Gen.  1  is  imperfect),  (6)  the  divine  admonitiims
addressed  to  men  after  their  creation.*  To  these  may
be  added  (7)  creation  by  a  word  (see  below,  §  27),  an
idea  which  was  doubtless  prominent  in  the  full  Baby-

1  [The  Babylonian  New  Year's  festival  called  Z.ikmuk,  which
has  clearly  influenced  the  corresponding  Jewish  festival,  stands
in  close  relation  to  the  ccsmogoiiic  myth.  For  the  '  tablets  of
destiny,"  on  which  the  fates  of  all  living  were  inscribed  on  New
Year's  Day,  were  taken  by  Marduk  from  Kingu,  the  captive
consort  of  TiAmat  (Tab.  iv.  1  121).  In  its  popular  conception,
Zakmuk  was  probably  at  once  the  anniversary  of  creation  and
the  day  of  judgment. .So  Karppe.j

'■^  Cp  Jensen,  h'osmol.  307-309  ;  (hinkel,  Schdf/.  24-26.

3  The  germ  of  what  follows  is  to  Ijc  found  in  the  Eli,  art.
'Cosmogony,'  1877.  The  view  of  the  history  of  mythological
ideas  among  the  Israelites  is  that  which  the  writer  has  advocated
in  a  series  of  works  (some  of  them  are  referred  to  later),  and
which,  with  a  much  fuller  array  of  facts,  but  with  some  question-
able critical  statements,  has  l)een  put  forward  lately  by  Gunkel
(■ps).  On  the  general  subject  of  cosmogonies,  cp  Fr.  Lukas,
Crundhfgriffe  su  den  Kosiiiogoniten  dfr  a/ten  yelker  ('93),
pp.  i-M,  on  the  Babylonian  myths  and  Genesis.

••  rrol.  KT  2<j8.

S  See  the  fragment  in  Del.  Weltsch5p/ungsff>os,  $i/.  iti.  The
admonitions  relate  to  purity  of  heart,  early  morning  prayer,  and
sacrifice.  The  passage  on  the  creation  ©("^man  has  not  yet  been
found  ;  but  there  is  an  allusion  to  thU  creative  aa  in  the  con-
cluding tablet.

94«


CREATION

Ionian  epic,  and  (8)  the  creation  of  man  in  the  divine
image,  and  the  participation  of  inferior  divine  I>eings  in
the  work. '

Phdiiician  mythology  is  an  embarrassing  combination
of  B;il)ylonian  and Egyptian  ([xjssibly  we  should  add

7  Phoenician.  J'-"^^''*^  ■*)  elements,  and  is,  moreover,
known  to  us  only  from  fragments  of
older  works  cited  by  I'hilo  of  Byblus  and  Damascius.'
Still,  distorted  and  disc»)lourcd  as  the  myths  presented
to  us  may  Ix;,  the  main  features  of  them  have  a  very
primitive  api)earaiice.  The  source  of  all  things  is
descrilR'd  in  tlie  first  of  Philo's  cosmogonies  *  as  a  chaos
turbid  and  black  as  Krebus,  which  was  acted  ujxjii  by  a
wind  (the  nn  of  Gen.  I2  [cp  below,  col.  944,  n.  2])
which  Ixcame  enamoured'  of  its  own  elements  (apxai).
These  d/>xa/  are  the  two  sides  or  asjx^cts  of  the  duine
being  referred  to" — the  male  and  female  principle,  the
latter  of  which  in  another  of  the  Byblian  cosmogcjiiies
(Miiller,  up.  cit.  iii.  500/)  is  called  Baoi'.  We  may
perhaps  compare  this  Haai^  with  BOhu^  in  the  Hebrew
phrase  tohu  xvd-bohu  (wasteness  and  wideness  =  chaos)  in
Gen.  1  2.  Some  would  also  connect  it  with  the  Baby-
lonian Ba'u,  the  'great  mother.'  True,  this  goddess
was  held  to  Ix:  the  consort  of  Xinib,  the  god  of  the  rising
sun,  where.is  Baai>  is  the  spouse  of  d«'e/ios  KoXfl-iai  and
her  name  is  said  to  mean  '  night '  (  =  chaos  ?).  The  con-
nection of  Ba'u  with  Xinib,  however,  may  perhaps  Ijc  of
later  origin.  The  result  of  the  union  of  the  two  divine
dpxa-i  was  the  birth  of  Mujt — i.e. ,  according  to  Halevy,'
t6  Ma;T  =  m':nn  (cp  Prov.  824,  nicnn-j'N2).  Mwt,  we  are
told,  was  egg-shaped.  Here  one  may  detect  Egyptian
influence,  for  Egyptian  mythology  knows  of  a  world-egg,
which  emerged  out  of  the  watery  mass  (the  god  Xuii).
This  is  confirmed  by  a  reference  in  the  cosmogotiy  of
Mochus  (in  Dama.scius,  385)  to  Xovcup  'the  opener,"
whom  it  is  tempting  to  connect  with  I'tah,  the  di\iiie
demiurge  of  Memphis  ;  the  name  of  I'tah  ni.ay  have  Ixen
explained  in  Phu'uician  as  the  '  opener  (nrs).'  vi/..  of  the
cosmic  egg.  To  the  same  cosmogony  (Philo  gives  a
different  account)  we  owe  the  statement  that  this  Xovcwp
split  the  egg  in  two,*  upon  which  one  of  the  pieces  Ijecame

1  .See  the  Rerossian  story  referred  to  below  (5  15).  In  the
epic  the  cre.-ition  of  man  was  ascriljed  to  Marduk  (but  cp  Jensen,
Koitn.  2()2/.)\  but  it  ispo.ssible(see  Del.  of.cit.  no)  that  .Marduk
committed  some  part  of  the  creation  of^  the  world  to  the  other


greater  divinities.  May  we  thus  account  for  the  evolutionary
language  of  some  parts  of  (^>en.  In?'  Let  the  earth  bring  forth '
would  then  mean  '  Let  the  earth-god  (a  divine  energy  inherent
in  the  earth)  cause  the  earth  to  bring  forth.'

2  Considering  the  late  date  of  the  reporter,  we  cannot  exclude
this  possibility.

3  Cp  Baudi.ssin,  Studd.  zur  sent.  Rel.-gesch.  L  (Essay  I.);
Gruppe,  Die giUxh.  Ctilte  u.  Mythen,  1  351^

•»  Aliiller,  J-ragm.  Hist.  Gra-c.  8565.

8  The  two  later  Targums  explain  C'riVx  nn  '"  Gen.  1  2  by
[CnTl  Nnn  'the  spirit  of  love'  (cp  Wisd.  11  24).  The  love
expressed  here,  however.  Is  that  called  forth  by  the  need  of  help.

*  De  Vogiii,  Milanges,  bo/.

1  Holzinger  (note  on  Gen.  1  2)  objects  to  the  combination  of
Boav  and  IJohu,  that  Boav  appears  as  the  mother  of  the  two
first  men,  which  will  not  suit  Ik'hu  ;  but  the  Byblian  mytholo^Lst
isinerror,asWR.S(Burnett  Lectures[.1/.S"]) has  pointed  out.  .Viwk
is  not  properly  a  'mortal  man,'  and  itputjayovo'i  is  a  late  inven-
tion based  upon  a  wrong  theory  ;  here  as  el.sewhere  the  dualism
is  artificial.  S.\iav  Ls  identical  with  the  OOAiu^ot  of  Mochus,  the
Xporof  of  Eudemus — i.e.,  D^ij;  'the  world  '  (see  Eccl.  3  1 1).  The
connection  with  Bab.  Bdu  is  more  doubtful.  Cp  Jensen,  Kostiiol,
245  ;  Hommel,  Diesem.  I'dlkcr,  i.  370^,  .4/1'/',  66,  C/i.l,  255  ;
Haupt,  /Ititr.  zur  .-Issyr.  i.  181  ;  and  see  K/i,'iain.  Whether
Trihu  (?np)  also  was  from  the  first  a  mythic  word,  is  uncertain.
The  combination  of  tuhQ  and  tx  hQ  may  be  artificial ;  cp  Jabal,
Jubal,  Tuba!  (Gen.  4  20-22),  .nwrCI  nKip  Oob  30  3),  .lEPCI  TOD^
(E7ek.(ii4).

•*  .'/«'/.  387  ;  WRS  in  Burnett  Lectures  agrees.

*•  Elsew-here  Xov<7<o/>andhisbrothcraresaid  to  havediscovered
the  use  of  iron,  like  the  Hebrew  Tubal-Cain,  himself  probably  a
divine  demiurge  (see  Cainites,  |  10).  \VKS(Burnett  Lectures)
suggests  that  he  may  have  invented  iron  to  cut  open  the  cosmic
eggj  (cp  the  arming  of  Marduk  in  the  Creation-epic,  Tab.  iv.X
This  is  clearly  correct.  K/M>»ot  in  I'hilo's  theogony  makes  apin|
and  I6(n>  to  fight  against  Ovpavo^.  Originally,  however,  the
weapon  of  the  demiurge  was  the  lightning ;  see  Jensen,  A'otttui,


CREATION

heaven,  and  the  other  earth.  Here  we  have  a  point  of  I
contact  with  the  Babylonian  and  also  with  the  Hebrew
cosmogony,  for  the  body  of  Tianiat  is,  in  fact,  as
Robertson  Smith  in  his  Burnett  Lectures  ^  remarks,  '  the
matrix  or  envelope  of  the  dark  seething  waters  of
prini;t;val  chaos,'  and  the  separation  of  the  lower  from
the  upper  waters  in  (jcn.  1 7  is  only  a  less  picturesque
form  of  the  same  mythic  statement.  These  are  '  poor
and  beggarly  elements,'  no  doubt;  but  then  l'h(jcnicia
lacked  what  Babylonia  possessed,  a  poet  who  could
select,  and  to  some  extent  moralise,  such  parts  of  the
tradition  as  were  best  worth  preserving.  We  shall  see
later  (55  28)  that  Juda;a  had  a  writer  who  in  some  im-
portant respects  excelled  even  the  author  of  the  epic.

Egyptian  mythology,  which  had  perhaps  an  original
kinship  to  the  Babylonian  ^  cannot  be  passed  over,  when
,e  consider  the  close  relations  which  long
xisted  Ixjtween  Hgypt  and  Canaan.  The
common  l-'gyptian  belief  was  that  for  many  ages  the
latent  germs  of  things  had  slept  in  the  bosom  of  the
dark  flood  (personified  as  -N'ut  or  Nuit  and  Nun).  How
these  germs  were  drawn  forth  and  developed  was  a  story
told  differently  in  the  different  nomes  or  districts.

.>\t  Eleph.^nti^c,  for  instance,  the  demiurge  was  called  Hnumu  ;
he  was  the  ])otter  who  moulded  his  creatures  out  of  the  mud  of
the  Nile  (which  was  the  earthly  image  of  Nun);  or,  it  was  also
said,  who  modelled  tlie  world-egg.  His  counterpart  at  Memphis,
the  .artizan  god  Ptah,  gave  to  the  light-god,  and  to  his  body,
the  artistically  perfect  form.  At  Hermopolis  it  was  Thoth  who
made  the  world,  speaking  it  into  existence.  'That  which  flows
fiom  his  mouth,'  it  is  said,  '  happens,  and  what  he  speaks,  comes
into  being.'  In  the  east  of  the  Delta,  a  more  complicated  account
was  given.  Earth  and  sky  were  originally  two  lovers  lost  in  the
piim;Eval  waters,  the  god  lying  under  the  goddess.  '  On  the  day
a  new  god,  Shu,  slipped  between  the  two,  and  seizing


8.  Egyptian.


Niiit  with  both  hands,  lifted  her  above  his  head  with  outstretched
aims.'  Thus,  among  other  less  striking  parallelisms,  we  have
in  Egypt,  as  well  as  in  Babylonia  and  in  Palestine,  the  primeval
flood,  the  forcible  separation  of  heaven  and  earth,  and  creation
by  a  word,  as  elements  in  the  conceptions  of  creation.-*

The  subject  of  Iranian  parallelisms  has  been  treated

at  great  length  by  Lagarde,'*  who  argues  for  the  depend-

- .  ence  of  the  Priestly  Writer  as  regards  the

.  ranian.  ^^^^^^.  ^f  ^^^e  works  and  days,  on  a  Persian
system,  against  which,  however,  in  the  very  act  of
borrowing  from  it,  this  writer  protests.  It  is  not
probable,  however,  that  the  indebtedness  of  the  Jews
to  Persia  began  so  early  ;  it  is  not  before  the  latter  part
of  the  Persian  rule  that  the  direct  influence  of  Persian
beliefs  (themselves  largely  influenced  by  Babylonian)
begins  to  be  clearly  traceable  in  Judaism.  If  we  could
venture  to  identify  the  .Vkta.xerxks  (</.?'.)  of  Ezra  with
Artaxerxes  II. ,  it  would  be  easier  to  adopt  Lagarde's  view.
In  the  present  stage  of  critical  inquiry,  however,  this  course
does  not  appear  to  be  advisable.  Nor  is  it  at  all  certain
that  the  Iranian  belief  in  the  creation  of  the  world  in
six  periods  goes  back  so  far  as  to  the  time  of  Artaxer.xes
II.  It  is  referred  to  only  in  the  late  book  called
Bundehish,  and  in  one  or  two  passages  of  the  Yasna
(19248)  and  the  Vispered  (74),  which,  on  philological
grounds,  are  regarded  as  comparatively  late.  Caland,
indeed,  has  endeavoured  to  show^  that  in  the  Yasht  of
the  Fravashis  (or  protective  spirits)  a  poetical  reference
is  made  to  the  creative  works  of  Ahura  Mazda,  in  the
order  in  which  these  are  given  in  the  Bundehish.^  But
what  object  can  we  have  in  tracing  the  Hebrew  account
to  the  Iranian,  when  we  have,  close  at  hand,  the
liabylonian  story,  from  which  the  Iraniati  is  plaiilly
derived? The  reference,  or  at  least  allusion,  to  chaos

1  Second  series  (.l/.T).

2  Cp  Hommel,  Der  bob.  UrsprUng  tier  d^ypt.  KuHur,  1892
(inter  alia,  the  Egyptian  Nun  is  connected  with  Bab.  Anum,
the  god  of  the  heavenly  ocean).

3  See  Btugsch.  A't-/.  u.  My  lit.  der  alten  Aegypter,  22  107  161
and  elsewhere  ;  Maspero,  Dawn  o/Civ.  128  146  ;  Meyer,  GA  74.

••  l^uriiii,  ein  Beitr.  zur  Ccsch.  der  Rel.  ('87).

«  ThT-n  179-185  ('89].

6  The  order  is— heaven,  the  waters,  earth,  plants,  animals,
mankind.  Light,  the  light  in  which  God  dwells,  is  itself  un-
created— an  inconsistency  due  to  Babylonian  influence  (see  col.
950  n.  i).  In  JobS87  there  maybe  a  tendency  to  this  belief
(see  §  21  [<rD.

9',  3


CREATION

in  Gen.  1 2  is  at  any  rate  not  Iranian  ;  why  should  the
other  features  in  the  narrative  V)e?  It  would  no  doubt
be  possible  to  give  the  epithet  '  Iranian  '  to  the  ascription
of  ideal  perfection  to  the  newly  created  world  in  the
Hebrew  cosmogony.  But  it  is  by  no  means  necessary
to  do  so.  Such  idealisation  would  tie  naturally  suggested
by  the  thought  that  the  evil  now  so  prominent  in  the
world  cannot  have  lain  within  the  purpose  of  the  divine
creator.*  Besides,  Jewish  thinkers  would  inevitably  be
repelled  by  Zoroastrian  dualism.  The  existence  of  the
two  primtfval  antagonistic  spirits  is  not  indeed  alluded
to  in  the  rock-cut  inscriptions  of  Darius  and  Xerxes  ;
but  the  best  scholars  agree  that  it  formed  part  of  the
old  Zoroastrian  creed;  it  is  indeed  expressly  recognised
in  the  Gathas  (Yasna  xxx. ).  Ahura  Mazda,  the  '  much-
knowing  Lord,'  assisted  by  the  six  Amshaspands,  is  the
creator  of  all  the  good  things  in  the  world.  He  is  opposed,
however,  by  Angra  Mainyu,  to  whom  the  material  and
moral  possession  of  the  world  is  ascrilied.  All  that  we
can  venture  to  suppose,  is  a  possible  indirect  influence  of
the  high  Zoroastrian  conception  of  .Ahura  Mazda  on  the
conce])tion  of  Yahwe  formed  by  the  Babylonian  Jews.
The  tlctails  of  the  Jewish  Creation-story  arose  inde-
pendently of  Persia.

Points  of  contact  with  more primitive  mythologies

also  are  numerous. Abundant  material  will  be  found  in

10 Mn  ^''^  George  Grey's  Polynesian  Mytho-

'. ...  ^'^Sy<  ^"'^  ^'ol- ^''- of  Waitz  and  (jer-

■'■^., , . land's  Atithropolos^ie  der  Naturi'olker.

mytnoiogies. ,j.j^^^  ^^^,  ^^^^^^  ^^\^  animate  life,  but  not

matter,  had  a  beginning,  and  that,  before  the  present
order  of  things,  water  held  all  things  in  solution,  are
opinions  common  among  primitive  races,  and  one  of  the
most  widely  spread  mythic  symbols  is  the  egg.  The
expression  in  Gen.  1  2,  '  and  the  breath  of  Klohim  was
brooding'-  (nsms)  over  the  surface  of  the  waters,"  has  its
best  illustration  (in  the  absence  of  the  m3'thic  original
which  probably  represented  the  deity  as  a  bird)  in  the
common  Polynesian  representation  of  Tangaloa,  the  god
of  heaven,  and  of  the  atmosphere,  as  a  bird  which  hovered
over  the  ocean-waters,  till,  as  it  is  sometimes  said,  he
laid  an  egg-*  (the  world-egg).  This  egg  is  the  world-
egg,  and  we  may  suppose  that  '  in  the  earliest  form  of
the  [Hebrew]  narrative  it  may  have  been  said  "  the  bird
of  ElGhim  "  ;  "  wind  "  appears  to  be  an  interpretation.''*
The  forcible  separation  of  heaven  and  earth  (Gen.  1  7  10)
is  illustrated,  not  only  by  the  interesting  Egyptian  myth
mentioned  above  (§  8),  but  also  by  the  delightful  .Maori
story  told  by  Sir  George  Grey,  and  illustrated  by  Lang
in  a  not  less  delightful  essay  (Cus/otn  and  Myth,  ^^  ff. ).
The  anecdotal  character  of  myths  like  these  adds  to
their  charm.  It  is  only  in  the  last  stage  of  a  religion
that  cosmogonies  are  systematised, —

Greek  endings,  each  the  little  passing-bell
That  signifies  some  faith  's  about  to  die,

though  the  death-struggle  may  be  prolonged,  and  may
issue  in  a  higher  life.

We  have  thus  seen  that  the  Creation-story  in  Gen.  1 1-

1  Gunkel  less  naturally  thinks  that  in  the  formula,  '  .\nd  God
saw  that  it  was  good,'  there  is  an  implied  contrast  to  the  evil
state  called  idhu-hohii  (chaos).

2  The  word  Pjm  (Piel)  occurs  only  twice,  and  both  times  (as  in
Syriac)  of  a  bird's  brooding.  See  Dt.  32ii,  and  Driver's  note
{^Deiit.  358,  foot),  also  We.  ProlA*)  395  (^EriTjer.  289,  should
be  '^i^^  [Gratz]).  Hence  the  Talmudists  compared  the  divine
spirit  '\o  a  dove  (cp  Mt.3i6  Mk.  1 10  Lk.  822).  The  Phoe-
nician myth,  in  the  very  late  form  known  to  us,  h.is  lost  all
trace  of  the  bird-symbol ;  it  speaks  only  of  a  wind  (nn).

3  Waitz-Gerland, --l«M>rJ/^>/.  0241.  In  Egypt,  too,  the  first
creative  act  begins  with  the  formation  of  an  egg  ;  but  it  is  the
egg  of  the  sun,  and  nothing  is  said  of  a  bird  which  laid  the  egg
(see  Brugsch,  Rel.  n.  Myth,  der  alten  Aegypter,  laijf.).

*  KB  art.  'Cosmogony,'  1877.  In  i8v5  the  same  idea
occurred  to  Gunkel  (SchUpf.  8).  It  is  of  course  not  a  storm-
bird  that  is  meant;  storm-birds  are  not  uncommon  :  see,  ?.^.,
the  Babylonian  myth  of  Adapa,  in  which  the  south  wind  is
represented as having wings, and cp Ps.  18 10  [ii]). See


repri


944


CREATION

2417  is  not,  as  Wellhauscn  represents  (alwve,  §  5),  merely
the pro<luct of reflection. It has a


11.  Fuller
account  of


Gen.  1 1  -J  4''.


considerably  niytiiic  substratum.  That
substratum  is  mainly  liabylonian  ;  but
'*"*"■  Egyptian  and  even  Persian  influence  is  not
e.xcludcd.  Indeed,  for  that  singular  passage  Gen.  1  2,
Egyptian  influence,  either  direct  or  more  probably
(through  Phoenician  or  Canaanitish  mythology)  indirect,
seems  to  be  suggested.  We  are  thus  brought  face  to
face  with  a  new  problem.  How  is  it  that  the  Priestly
Writer,  with  his  purified  theology,  and  his  comparatively
slight  interest  in  popular  tradition,  should  have  adopted
so  nmch  mythology  as  the  basis  of  his  statement  that
'  God  created  the  heaven,  the  earth,  and  all  that  is  in
the  e;irth,  and  hallowed  the  seventh  day  '  ?

If the  Yahwist  had given a creation -story, corre-
sponding to  his  I-'lood-story,  the  phenomena  of  Gen.  1

12.  Lost  J._,  ^^Y^■^^^,^  might  thus  Ixi  taken  to  have  acted


consistently  by  giving  an  improved  version


13.  Develop-
ment of  the
Epic.


would  not  l)e  so  surprising. The  Priestly

original.

of  both  traditional  stories.  •  But  we  have  no  Yahwislic
creation-story,  except  indeeil  in  a  fragmentary  form,
and  though  the  lost  portion  of  the  cosmogonic  preface
to  J's  Paradise-story  (based  probably  on  a  Canaanitish
story)  must  have  differed  greatly  from  the  cosmogony
in  Gen.  1,  yet  it  is  most  improbable  that  P  would
spontaneously  have  thought  of  competing  with  J  by
producing  a  new  semi-Babylonian  cosmogony.  In  the
next  place  it  should  be  noticed  that  the  Flood-story
whicii  J  has  borrowed,  directly  or  indirectly,  from
Babylon,  stands  in  Babylonian  mythology  in  close
connection  with  the  creation-story  ;  the  two  events  are
in  fact  only  separated  by  the  ten  antediluvian  Chaldasan
kings  and  an  uncertain  interval  between  creation  and
the  foundation  of  a  dynasty.  The  list  of  the  ten  kings
is  certainly  represented,  however  imperfectly,  by  J's
Cainite  genealogy  (see  C.MMtks  §  3/!)  ;  it  is  probable
therefore  that  J  (as  represented  by  the  stratum  called  ].,)
originally  had  a  creation-story  with  strong  Babylonian
affinities,  and  that  P  used  this  story  as  the  basis  of  his
own  cosmogony.

Accepting  this  hypothesis,  we  are  no  longer  surprised
at  the  echoes  of  mythology  in  Gen.  1  i-'24<t.  Underneath
P  we  recognise  the  dc^bris  of  the  cosmogony  of  Jo.  The
Priestly  Writer  did  not  go  out  of  his  way  to  collect
Babylonian  mythic  data ;  he  simply  adopted  and
adapted  the  work  of  a  much  earlier  writer.

The  hypothesis  is  due  to  the  sagacity  of  Hudile,^  and  the  more
clearly  we  discern  the  mythic  elements  in  P's  cosmogony,  the
more  probable  and  indeed  inevitable  does  the  hypothesis  become.
That  the  old  cosmogony  has  been  lost,  is  much  to  be  deplored  ;
but  we  can  easily  believe  that  it  would  have  been  too  trying  to
devout  members  of  the  'congregation'  to  have  had  before  them
in  the  same  book  the  early  and  almost  half-heathenish  recension
of  a  Can.aanitish- Babylonian  cosmogony  produced  hyj.t  and  the
much  more  sober  but  in  all  essentials  thoroughly  orthodo.f  recast
of  this  recension  due  to  the  Priestly  Writer.  Whether  the  latter
found  any  reference  to  the  sabbath  in  the  older  story  which
might  seem  to  justify  his  insertion  of  the  divine  appointment  of
the  sabbath,  we  do  not  know.  Jensen  finds  a  reference  to  the
17th  and  14th  days  of  the  month  in  the  fifth  tablet  of  the  epic
(//.  17  yl),  and  Zimmern  even  inserts  conjecturally  'on  the
sabbath  '  (line  18)  ;  but  whether  any  part  of  ihis  obscure  passage
lay  in  any  form  before  J._>,  must  remain  uncert.ain.

The  e.xplanation  given  by  Zimmern  (above,  §4)  does
justice,  as  no  other  e.vplanalion  can  do,  to  the  circum-
stances and  the  ideas  of  the  ancient
Babylonians  at  a  comparatively  remote
period.  If  it  somewhat  closely  re-
sembles the  explanation  of  the  Baby-
Ionian  flood-story,  this  is  no  olijection.  The  post-
diluvian earth  may  in  a  qualified  sense  lie  called  a  new
earth,  and  some  mythologies  expressly  recognise  that
the  present  creation  is rather  a  re-creation.' Still, it

1  P  has  in  fact  given  his  own  Flood-story  in  which  the  tradi-
tion of  J  is  harmonised  with  P's  theory  of  the  history  of  cultus.
See  Deli  GE,  §  4/

2  Urf:esch.  470-492;  ZATW^yj  ff.  ['86].  Cp  Bacon,  Gtn.
335u^  r92]-

3  See,  e.g.,  the  legend  of  the  (non- Aryan)  Santals  of  Bengal  in
YinrAcr'i  Rural  Bengal,  lyj/.

945


CREATION

would  be  rash  to  suppose  that  even  this  explanation
entirely  accounts  for  the  Babylonian  myth.  It  may
very  possibly  have  Ijeen  the  theory  of  the  most  thought-
ful of  the  Babylonian  priests — <jf  those  who  did  most
for  the  systematising  of  the  mythic  details.  The  details,
however,  are  themselves  so  [jeculiar  that  they  invite  a  close
examination  and  a  fuller  application  of  the  com|)arative
method.  When  this  has  iK-cn  given  we  see  that  a  long
mythic  development  must  have  preceded  the  story  of  the
creation  epic,  which  is  not  like  an  isolated  rock  rising
out  of  a  vast  plain,  but  like  a  tree  which  derives  its
sustenance  from  a  rich  vegetable  mould,  itself  of  very
gradual  formation.  It  is  out  of  the  mould  of  prinuL-val
folklore  that  the  great  creation-myth  lias  drawn  its  life  ;
later  ages  recombined  the  old  material,  and  gave  the
result  a  new  meaning.  Man  invents  but  little  ;  the
Babylonians,  we  may  be  sure,  borrowed  their  dragon-
myth,  and  much  Ijesides,  from  earlier  races,  whose  modes
of  thought  lie  outside  of  our  |)resent  field  of  study.

The  comparative  lateness  of  the  'epic'  (the  title  is
not  inap])ropriate)  which  A.sur-bani-pal  added  to  his  royal
library,  is  too  obvious  to  reejuire  argument  ;  liut  it  is
plain  also  that  it  is  based  upon  archaic  materials.  In
particular  the  myth  of  Apsu  and  Tiamat  can  be  traced
as  far  back  as  to  1500  H. C.  through  inscriptions  which
refer  to  the  '  abysses  '  or  '  seas  '  of  Babylonian  temples
(see  Nkiicsiitan  §  2);  these  'seas'  were  in  fact
trophies  of  the  victory  of  the  j'oung  .Sun-god  over  the
primaeval,  cosmic  sea,  with  which  Tiamat  is  to  be
identified.  In  1500  B.C.  this  myth  was  doubtless
already  of  immemorial  antiquity.

Other less  elaborate  creation-stories are known to

us — specimens  of  the  very  varied  traditions  which  had

. .  T.  11  1  at  least  a  local  circulation.  Some  are
14.  Parallel  ,  ■ r  r  r^-  -

,  preserved m  fragments  of  Berossus  anil

Uamascius,  others  have  only  lately  been
revealed  to  us  by  T.  G.  Pinches  and  his  predecessor  the
lamented  G.  .Smith,  whom  Asur-bani-pal  would  certainly
have  recognised  as  worthy  to  have  Ijcen  one  of  the
diipsiirri,  or  scribes,  of  his  library,  for  it  was  he  who
was  the  discoverer  and  the  first  translator  of  Asur-bani-
pal's  great  '  Creation-epic'

The  CJreek-reading  world  owed  its  chief  acquaintance
with Babylonian  mythology  to  a  Greek-writing priest
„  of  Bel named Berossus (about 280 B.C.).

.  "  It  is  unfortunate  that  we  know  his  book
Sian,  etc.  XaXSaiVd  only  from  very  imperfect  extracts  ;  ^
but,  considering  his  comijetence  ami  his  unique  oppor-
tunities of  consulting  ancient  documents,  we  cannot
afford  to  neglect  these  extracts.  One  of  the  most
important  of  them  is  a  fragment  of  a  cosmogony.  Its
resemblances  to  statements  in  both  the  creation-stories
of  Genesis,  especially  the  first,  are  obvious.  Among
them  we  may  mention  ( i )  the  description  of  the
primaeval  darkness  and  water,  (2)  the  name  Oa/ire  -  (cp.
Ci.in),  translated  ddXoiCTtTa,  which  is  given  to  the  woman
who  ruled  over  the  monsters  of  chaos,'  and  (3)  the
origin  ascrilied  to  heaven  and  earth,  which  arose  out
of  the  two  halves  of  the  body  of  Gaure,  cut  asunder  by
Bel,  while  the  creation  of  man  by  one  of  the  gods  (at
Bel's  connnand),  who  nii.xed  with  clay  the  blood  which
flowed  from  the  severed  head,  not  of  Bel,  but  of  the
dragon  Tiamat,*  may  be  compared,  or  contrasted,  with
Gen.  27.

1  See  Miiller,  Frag.  Hist.  Griec.  2497;  Budde,  L'rgesck.
474-4S5  ;  and  cp  Tieic,  /i.AO  n  ;  .Schr.  COTlii/.

2  .\ccording  to  Kol)ertson  Smith's  happy  restoration,  ZA
O33Q. The  text  h.as  eoAarfl.

•>  Cp  those  monsters  with  the  '  helpers  of  Rahab '  in  Job
9 13  kV,  and  with  the  'four  beasts  which  came  up  from
the  '  great  .sea '  (Dan.  7  2-4).  The  latter  pas.sage  is  e.schatologicaI.
The  powers  of  evil  will  again  be  let  loose  and  rule  upon  earth,
but  will  at  last  be  overcome  (cp  Antichrist,  g  4).

*  The  correction  of  iavrov  (twice)  in  the  text  of  BcrOs.sus  (in
Syncellus,  52  y^)  is  due  to  Dindorf;  but  its  importance  was
noticed  first  by  Stucken  {.■istralmythcn  1  55).  The  text  is
translated  by  Lenormant,  Lesorigittfs,  1  507,  and  Ciunkel,  Schef>/.
19. Just  before  mention  has  been  made  of  the  formation  of  earth

946


CREATION

The  theogony  of  Damascius'  (6th  cent.  a.d.  )  is  at
first  sight  of  less  importance.  It  shows,  however,  more
clearly  than  the  Iterossian  fragment  that  the  essential
features  of  the  story  of  the  epic  were  well  known,  for
the  two  cliicf  mythic  names  mentioned  by  I  )ama.scius —
viz.,  Tavdf  and  ATraiTWJ' — are  plainly  derived  from
'Piamat  and  Apsu,  whilst  the  only  begotten  son  of  this
couple  is  Mosvfiis.  which  corresponds  to  the  obscure  name
Mummu  in  the  epic  (Tab.  i,  //.  4,  13  ;  see  above,  §  2,
second  note).

We  now  turn  to  the  cuneiform  records,  among  which

the  so-calK-d Cutha-an cosmogony  ( A'A'*-*  1 149^)-  is

Ifi Th  ft "°'  '°  ''^  included, {a}  The  chief  of  these

■ .,  is the great Creation-epic, of which the

cuneiform , r , . ^ > , ,  ,■

. reader has already  heard. Its place of

origin  was,  of  course,  Babylon,  as  appears
from  the  fact  that  its  hero  is  the  god  Marduk,  who
was  the  patron  of  Babylon.  Obviously  this  is  only
one  of  several  kical  ver.sions  of  llie  primitive  myth.
In  the  original  story  Bel  of  NipiKir  was,  no  doubt,
the  great  god  who  overcame  Tiamat,  and  prepared
the  way  for  creation.  The  jjriests  of  the  other  sacred
cities,  however,  hud  to  protect  the  interests  of  their
patron  deities,  and  local  Creation-myths  were  the  result.

{fi)  In  another  version  of  the  myth,''  the  fight  Ixjtween
the  divine  champion  and  Tiamat  occurs  after  the
creation,  and  is  waged  for  the  deliverance  of  gods  and
men  alike.  '  Who  will  set  forth  (to  slay)  the  dragon,
to  rescue  the  wide  earth  and  .seize  the  royal  power  ?
Set  forth,  O  (jod  SUH,  slay  the  dragon,  rescue  the
wide  earth,  and  sci/e  the  royal  power.'  An  extravagant
account  is  given  (in  the  manner  of  the  Jewish  Talmud)
of  the  dragon's  size,  and  it  is  said  that  when  the  dragon
was  slain  its  blood  fiowcd  night  and  day  for  three
)-ear:s  and  three  (si.\?)  niontlis.  Tliis  may  suggest  the
ultimate  mythic  origin  of  'a  linio,  times,  and  a  half  in
Dan.  127  Rev.  12  14.

((-)  A  much  fuller  and,  if  we  assume  its  antiquity,  more
important  narrative  is  the  '  non-Semitic '  one  translated
by  Pinches  in  1890  from  a  bilingual  text  discovered  by
G.  Smith.'*  It  is  a  mixture  of  creation-  and  culture-
myth,  and  as  a  culture -myth  we  have  already  had
occasion  to  refer  to  it  (see  Cainitks,  §  3).  The
creation-story  is  given  only  in  allusions.  It  is  stated  that
once  upon  a  time  ther--  was  no  vegetation,  and  '  all  the
lands'  (of  Babylonia  ?)  were  sea.  Then  there  arose  a
movement  in  the  sea,  and  the  most  ancient  cities  and
temples  of  Babylonia  were  created.  Xe.xt  the  sub-
ordinate divine  beings  called  Anunnaki  were  created,
after  which  Marduk  set  a  reed  on  the  water, '  formed
dust,  and  poured  it  out  beside  the  reed.  Then,  '  to
cause  the  gods  to  dwell  in  a  delightful  place,'  he
made  mankind  (cp  Gen.  1  26  /'. )  w  ith  the  co-operation  of

and  lieaven  uut  (.f  the  two  parts  of  0/uop(w)(caT  (with  whom  the
reporter  of  HerOssus  identities  Tiamat).  It  stands  to  reason
that  the  .severed  head  spoken  of  in  connection  with  the  creation
of  man  must  be  Tiamat's,  not  that  of  the  Creator,  though
Eusebius  already  had  before  liim  the  reading  eawroO  (see  Hudde,
Urgesch.  479).  The  passage  is  therefore  not  a  statement  of
the  kinship  of  God  and  man  (WKS  Kel.  .9^w.(2)  43),  though
it  is  of  course  to  be  assumed  that  the  god  spoken  of  m.ide  man
in  his  own  physical  likeness  (cp  Maspero,  Dawn  of  Cw.  no).
Strange  to  say,  the  name  < Vop(")*«  .seems  to  liave  come  into
the  text  of  BerOssus  by  mistake.  For  most  likely  it  is  a  cor-
ruption of  Marduk  (Jastrow,  AV'.  0/  Bab.  and  Ass.  5;  cp
J.  H.  Wright,  /(AlOjijf.).  The  story,  however,  is  only
intelligible  on  the  theory  adopted  in  this  note.
1  .See.Schr.  COTl  12;  Jen.sen,  A'osnio/.  270^

*  See  Zimmern,  ZA,  1897,  317^  The  .story  relates  to  the
mythological  history  of  a  king  of  the  primitive  age,  and  is  not
cosmogonic.

i*  See  Zimmern's  transl.  in  Gunkel,  Schdfif.  417-419.  The
colophon  a.ssigns  this  tablet  also  to  the  library  of  A5ur-bani-pal.

*  Pinches,  !^/'(2;  0  109^  ;  c^\\ov[\mfi\,  Deutsche Rutidschau,
('91),  pp.  105-114.  A.  Jeremia.s  represents  this  and  similar
myths  as  artificial  products,  composed  in  a  Babylonian  interest
(Beitr.  zur  Assyr.  iii.  1 108)  ;  but  the  priests  certainly  did  not
invent  altogether.

5  C"p  the  name  '  land  of  reeds  and  canals,"  given  to  .S.  Baby-
lonia on  the  vases  of  Ksaganna,  king  of  Erech,  before  4';oo  B.C. ;
and  see  the  illustration  of  gigantic  Chaldican  reeds,  Maspero,
Dawn  o/Civ,  552.

947


CREATION

the  goddess  Aruru  (whom  we  shall  have  to  refer  to
again,  col.  949,  n.  4).  We  are  allowed  to  infer  that
this  waste  of  water  had  been  converted  into  a  fruitful
plain  by  the  industry  of  the  newly  created  men.  acting
under  the  flirection  of  the  gods  ;  and  to  these  gods  is
ascril)ed  the  greatest  of  all  human  works,  the  erection
of  the  sacred  cities  of  Babylonia  with  their  temples.
Thus  the  most  characteristic  part  of  the  Babylonian
myth— viz. ,  the  fight  of  the  sun-god  with  Tiamat— is
conspicuous  by  its  absence.  The  reader  should  notice
this,  its  it  illustrates  one  of  the  two  chief  Hebrew
cosmogonies  (see  lx;low,  §  20  [c]).

The  statement  that  the  myth  which  underlies  Gen.  1
is  of  Babylonian  origin  may  now  lie  supplemented  thus.

1.  The  epic  of  .Asur-bani-pal's  library  stands  at  the
height  of  a  great  mythic  development.  We  cannot
17 Proviainnnl  therefore presume that we have re-

result  '^°^'^''"'  the  exact  form  of  the  Babylonian

myth  on  which  the  narrative  in  Gen.  1
(or  the  earlier  narrative  out  of  which  that  in  Gen.  1
has  grown)  is  based.

2.  Since  there  were  several  creation-stories  in  Baby-
lonia, it  is  a  priori  probable  that  other  stories  tesides
that  referred  to  may,  either  as  wholes  or  in  parts,  have
inrtiienced  tlic  creation-stories  in  Palestine.

These  reasonable  inferencessuggest  two  fresh  inquiries.
We  have  to  ask,  i. What  is  the  earliest  date  at  which
the adoption of Babylonian myths by


19.  Date  of
natural-


isation.


the  Israelites  is  historically  conceivable?
and  2.  What  evidence  have  we  of  the
existence  of  other  Hebrew  creation-myths
than  that  in  Gen.  1  1-24(7,  some  of  which  may  even
enable  us  to  fill  up  incomplete  parts  of  that  narrative?

In  reply  to  the  first  question  it  is  enough  to  refer  to
recent  studies  on  the  Amarna  tablets.  The  letters  in
Babylonian  cuneiform  sent  by  kings  and  governors  of
Western  .\sia  to  Amen-hotep  III.  and  Amen-botep  I\'.
prove  that,  even  before  the  Egyptian  conquests  and  the
rise  of  the  Assyrian  kingdom,  Babylonian  culture  had
spread  to  the  shores  of  the  Mediterranean.  '  Religious
myths  must  have  formed  part  of  this  culture."'  It  is
therefore  in  the  highest  degree  probable  that  Babylonian
creation-  and  deluge -myths  penetrated  into  Canaan
before  the  fifteenth  century  B.C.,  and  as  soon  as  the
Israelites  Ixjcame  settled  in  Palestine  they  would  have
opportunities  enough  of  absorbing  these  myths.

.At  the  same  time  it  should  hn  noticed  that  there  are
also  several  other  periods  in  Israelitish  history  when
either  an  introduction  of  new  or  a  revival  of  old  myths
is  historically  conceivable."  The yfrj/  is  the  time  of
David  and  Solomon.  The  former  appears  to  have  had
a  Babylonian  secretary  (see  SnAVSH.-\) ;  the  latter
admitted  into  his  temple  a  brazen  '  sea '  (representing,
as  shown  already,  the  primaeval  tl'hom  or  tiamat)  and  a
br.ozen  serjjent  (representing  the  dragon ;  see  N'khush-
T.V.n).  The  second  is  the  eighth  and  seventh  centuries
B.C.,  when  Aramaean,  Assyrian,  and  neo-Babylonian
influences  became  exceedingly  strong,  and  were  felt
even  in  the  sphere  of  religion.  The  third  and  fourth
are  the  exilic  and  post-exilic  jjeriods,  when  (see  e.g..
Job  and  Is.  40-55)  there  was  a  revival  of  mythology
which  the  religious  organisation  of  Judaism  could
neutralise  but  not  put  down.

In  replying  to  the  second  question  (as  to  the  evidence

for  other  cosmogonic  stories  in  the  OT), we  must  of

OT ff course  be  satisfied  with  very  incomplete

. ■ . , ■ ■ references. Such we  can find both in

to  other  cos-  ■■■  . ■  •,.

pre -exilic  and in post  -  exilic writings.

° ... ■ Pre-exilic references occur in  («) Gen.
pre-exilic. ^j,^^^  j^^  ^^^  j^^,g  jj^ ^^^  especially  in

(c) the  introduction to  the  Eden-storj- ; post-e.\ilic  in

1  Che.  Nineteenth  Century,  Dec.  1891,  p.  964.

2  This  has  been  repeatedly  shown  by  Cheyne  (see  e.g.,  fob
and  Solomon,  76-78  :  Ot's.  202,  268-270,  279,  391);  cp  Gunkel,
Schd/>/.,  which,  in  spite  of  some  critical  deficiencies  (sec  notice  in
Crit.  Rev.,  July  1895),  is  too  ingenious  and  instructive  not  to  be
recommended  to  ads'anced  students.

948


CREATION

{d)  Job  167/  (<•)  3S4-11  (/)  Prov.  822-31  (besides  the
passages  on  the  L)ka(;on).

{a)  The  phrase  in  the  Blessing  of  Joseph,  '  the  Hood
{tihom)  couching'  lx:nealh '  (cp  tien.  7").  is  certainly
the  echo  of  a  Tiatnat-myth,  and  {h)  the  'stars  from
their  roads'  (a  Babyjonian  phrase'^)  in  Judg.  620  of  a
myth  like  that  in  the  fifth  tablet  of  the  epic.

(c)  Gen.  i^l>-y  needs  more  special,  even  if  brief,  treat-
ment. It  runs  thus,  the  original  intrcxluction  of  the
Eden-story  having  been  abridged  by  the  editor  of  J  Ml'.

'.  .  .  when  Vahwe  [Klohinil  made  earth  ami  heaven.  Now
there  were  no  hushes  as  yel  u|.wn  the  earth,  ami  no  hert)ai;i;  as
yet  sprouted  forth,  for  Yahwc  IKIr.hini]  had  not  oiuscd  it  to
rain  ii[)on  the  earth,  and  there  was  no  man  to  till  the  ground,
but  a  flixxi^  used  to  come  up  from  the  earth  and  drench  the
whole  face  of  the  ground  ;  then  V'ahwfe  [KiOhim]  formed  man  of
dust  from  the  ground,  and  breathed  into  his  nostrils  breath  of
life,  and  man  became  a  living  being.'

l':vidently  this  lieloiigs  to  the  second  .section  of  a
mythological  creation -story,  and  its  details  arc  all  of
Babylonian  origin.  Like  Pinches'  non-Semitic  creation-
story  (alxave,  §  16  [(/J),  it  descriljcs,  though  with
mythic  exaggeration,  the  phenomena  witnessed  by  the
first  colonists  of  Babylonia.  The  extremely  small  rain-
fall in  Lower  Mesopotamia  was  rem;irked  upon  by
Henxlotus  (1  193)  :  conscc|uently,  without  the  careful
direction  and  control  of  the  yearly  inundation  of  the
I-Aiphrales  and  the  Tigris  the  land  would  l)e  either
marsh  or  desert.  Water-plants  there  must  have  been
for  a  season  even  in  the  most  desolate  tracts  ;  but  the
myth-writers  imagine  a  time  when  even  reeds  had  not
yet  appeared,  and  when  "all  the  lands  were  sea'  (myth,
/.  to),  since  'a  flood  used  to  come  up  (it  seemed)
from  the  earth'  (Gen.  26).  Ne.xt,  the  Hebrew  writer
tells  us  that  Yahwe  formed  man  out  of  dust  (2?),  just
as,  in  the  myth  (//.  20/.),  Marduk,  with  the  help  of
the  potter-goddess  Aruru,-*  makes  man  (no  doubt)  of  clay,
and  somewhat  as,  in  the  story  of  Bcrossus  (see  alxjve,
§  1 5),  one  of  the  gods  forms  men  out  of  earth  moistened
with  Tiamat's  (not  Bel's)  blood.  The  sequel  in  the
Hebrew  story  has  obviously  l)een  abridged.  There
must  have  been  some  reference  to  the  peaceful  subjuga-
tion of  the  yearly  flood,  otherwise  how  could  Yahwe
have  *  planted  a  garden  (or  park)  in  Eden  '  (v.  8)  ?  So
in  the  old  myth  we  hear  next  that  Marduk  made  the
Tigris  and  the  Euphrates  '  in  their  places,"  the  reeds  and
the  woods,  and  the  green  of  the  fields  (//.  23-26).
liesides  this  aflinity  of  its  contents  to  the  non-Semitic
Creation -myth  the  Yahwistic  passage  has  a  striking
resemblance  in  form  to  the  first  tablet  of  the  Creation-
epic,  which,  as  it  now  stands,  is  of  course  a  Semitic
work.

On  (</)  JobL^.7/,  ('•)  384-11,  (/)  Prov.  822-31  we
must  l)e  brief

In  ((/)  we  have  apparently  a  reference  to  a  more
heroic  irpuirbyovoi  than  the  Adam  of  tlie  \'.iiiwist  (like


21.  Post-exilic.


the  YiiTia  of  the  Avesta  and  the  Maui


of  New  Zealand  mythology,  and  some-
what like  the  Adapa  of  a  Babylonian  myth),'  who  shared
the  privileges  of  the  divine  or  semi-divine  members  of
the  council  of  I21ofth.  This  first  man  was  an  embodi-
ment of  absolute  Wisdom,  and  it  is  noteworthy  that  the

t  The  name  suggests  a  wild  bea.st  (Gen.  499).  The  same
epithet  {rdbis)  is  given  to  Nerjjal,  the  god  of  the  nether  world
in  the  Gilgame$-epic  (Tab.  xii.,  in  Jeremia.s,  I'orsUUungen,
69).

••*  ni'»0.'2=Bab.  alkdte,  plur.  of  alaktu  {^^  =  ^^.  Cp  }a
kakkahiini  samdtiie  al-katsunu  '  the  way  of  the  stars  of  heaven '
(Del.  Ass.  //ir/,'  63/.).

»  =Ass.  r/u  ((du),  'flood,  waves,  high  tide'  (so  Frd.  Del.,
Lyon,  Hommel).  The  cylinder  inscription  of  Sargon  states
that  he  planned  gre.it  irrigation  works  for  desert  lands,  opening
the  dams,  and  causing  the  waters  to  flow  everywhere  ki gitis
edi,  '  like  the  exuberance  of  a  flood.'

*  Aruru  probably  means  '  potter  '  (Jensen).  In  the  Oilgame.?-
epic  (8  34)  this  goddess  kneads  Kabani  out  of  clay  (titu).  The
Yahwi.st  puts  'dust'  (tpy)  for  'clay'  (-en):  but  we  find  the
latter  word  in  Job  336,  "Bsnp  "OhO  (the  same  root  mji  is  used
in  the  epic).

5  Cp  Maspcro,  Dawn  o/Civ.  659^

949


CREATION

same  word  S^^  'to  be  brought  forth,'  is  ased  of  this
wondrous  personage  and  of  the  Wisdom  w  ho  is  descriljed
in  Prov.  8,  and  that,  equally  with  the  Wisdom  of  Proverbs,
the  first  man  spoken  of  by  Eliphaz  came  into  existence
l)efore  the  hills.  This  myth  h;is  a  very  Babylonian
appearance,  and  m.^y  conceivably  Ijelong  to  the  same
cycle  as  the  myth  of  i;noch  (  -  .Noah,  the  '  first  man  *
of  the  second  age  of  the  world),  who  was  said  to  have
derived  his  wisd<jm  fronj  his  intercourse  with  angels.

In  [e)  Job:i84-ii  we  find  the  singular  notion  {v.^)
that  the  stars  are  older  than  the  earth.  In  the
creation-epic  the  creation  of  the  stars  as  '  stations  for
the  great  gods'  (see  Sr.\KS,  §  3  </|,  follows  on  the  sub-
jugation of  the  dragon  of  chaos  and  the  creation  of
heaven  and  earth  (out  of  the  carcase  of  Tiamat).  The
Hebrew  poet,  however,  does  not  jxirhaps  consider  this
story,  or  even  its  purified  offshoot  in  (ien.  1 ,  to  Ix-  a
worthy  representation.  Heaven  and  its  stars  must
always  have  existefl  for  Yahwe  and  the  '  holy  ones '  to
dwell  in  (cp  Is.  2619  'dew  of  lights'  and  the  •endless
lights'  where  .-Vhura  dwells, Hn  the  Avesta).  He  admits,
indeed,  that  the  ocean  once  on  a  lime  resisted  Yahwe,
and  was  forced  into  oljedience  (cp  Ps.  IOI6-9).  Of  a
separation  of  upper  and  lower  waters,  however,  he  has
nothing  to  say.

In  (/)  Prov.  822-31  we  find  the  same  careful  restriction
of  the  mythological  element.  The  mysteri<jus  caprices
of  the  ocean  still  suggest  a  prima-'val  relx-llion  on  its
part  against  Yahwe  ;  but  this  is  descril)ed  in  the  simplest
maimer.  Of  a  tiiue  when  chaos  reigned  supreme  we
hear  nothing.  Yahwe  and  Wi.sdom  were  together  Ix^-fore
the  earth  was.-  In  fact  the  new  qu;isi-mythic  representa-
tion of  Wisdom  was  incompatible  with  the  antique
Babylonian  cosmogony.

These  passages  seem  to  show  that  there  was  a  great
variety  of  view  in  the  post-exilic  period  respecting  the
22.  Prophetical  ^^^'  ^"^^  °^  i"''^gi"in.':>reation. Some
and  historical  "^''''l^^^^^^^  '^  have  refused  the  dragon-
writers  myth  (except  m  the  palest  form) ;  others

seem  to  have  found  it  symbolically
useful.  To  this  we  shall  return  presently  (§  23).  There
is  a  remarkable  phenomenon  respecting  the  pre-exilic
time  which  has  a  prior  claim  on  our  attention.  Though
both  Ji  and  Jo  have  a  cosmogony  (g  12),  there  is  an  almost
complete  silence  respecting  such  myths  in  the  pre-exilic
prophetic  literature.  There  is,  in  fact,  only  one  jjassage
(.Am.  93)  that  remotely  suggests  the  existence  of  a
creation-myth.  This  obscure  p;issage has loeen  considered
elsewhere  (.see  Skri'ENT,  §  3/  ),  and  it  may  suffice  here
to  point  out  that  mythology  did  not  come  naturally  to
the  early  Israelites,  and  that  one  great  aim  of  the
prophets  w.as  to  recall  their  countrymen  to  old  Israelitish
ways  :  Solomon  \n  ho  affcx-ted  foreign  fashions  was  no
true  Israelite.  We  need  not  l)e  surprised,  therefore,  at
the  scanty  references  in  the  greater  prophets  to  such
figures  of  tlie  Babylonian  and  Can.aaiiitish  myths  as  the
Dragon,  the  Cherubim,  the  Seraphim.  It  is  to  a
historical  writer  that  we  are  indebted  for  the  information
that  there  was  a  brazen  serpent,  symtx)lising  proliably
the  Dragon  (see  Nkhusht.vn,  §  2),  in  Solomon's  temple.
At  a  later  period  (post-exilic)  references  to  the  Chaos-
dragon,  to  the  subjugation  of  the  prim;eval  sea  by
Yahw^,  and  to  some  other  features  of  mythic  tradition,
alx)und.  Nor  was  the  spring  of  mythic  imagery  dried
up  even  in  still  later  times,  as  the  apocalyptic  writings
show.  .See  Dk.vgon,  R.\hab,  Skkcknt,  Antichrist,
Akominatio.n'  ok  Desolatio.n,  Abyss,  Armageddon,
Apocalypse.

If  the  above  presentation  of  facts  be  correct,  it  is  a

1  So,  in  Babylonian  mythology,  the  sky-god  Anu  dwells  in
the  highest  region  of  the  universe,  in  the  north  towards  the  pole,
where  no  storm  can  dim  the  perpetual  brilliance  (see  Jensen,
Kosiiiol.  651).  It  is  the  '  heaven  of  Anu,"  in  which  the  inferior
gods  take  refuge  at  the  Deluge  (Deluge-story,  /.  108).

2  The  text  of  this  fine  passage  is  not  free  from  corruption.
See  Che.  Jewish  Rel.  Life,  Lect.  iv.,  and  cp  Gunkel,  Schdjif.
93/

950


23.  General
result.


CREATION

mistak<3  to  assert  that  the  Israehtes  had,  from  their
entrance  into  Canaan  onwards,  a  fairly
complete  creation-myth,  in  which  Yainve
tooit  the  place  of  Marduk,  and  tflioin,
liwyathan,  tannin,  rahab,  etc.,  that  of  the  dragon
Tiamat.  This  theory  has  indeed  l)een  vigorously  defended
by  CJunkel ;  but  it  is  liable  to  grave  critical  objections.
It  is  a  significant  fact  that  .\nios  (see  last  §)  has  little  if
any  comprehension  of  the  mythical  serpent  (dm),  and
that  the  Israelites  who  worshipixxl  in  Solomon's  temple
completely  misunderstood  the  true  meaning  of  '  Nehush-
tan,'  while  from  the  time  of  the  Babylonian  '  e.xile '  un-
mistakable references  to  the  dragon-myth  abound.
This  implies,  not  of  course  that  there  was  not  previously
a  Hebrew  dragon-myth,  but  that  a  revival  of  mythology
had  brought  tlie  old  mytli  into  fresh  prominence.  It  is
probable  that  lx.'fore  the  'exile'  the  cosmogonic  myths  of
the  Israelites  at  large  were  in  a  very  fragmentary  state,
and  that  if  the  myth  on  which  the  creation-story  of
Gen.  1  is  based  then  existed  (as  it  most  probably  did),
it  was  uncomprehended  by  the  people,  and  had  no
influence  ui)()n  their  thoughts.  It  appears,  however,
that,  from  the  last  pre-exilic  century  onwards,  increased
contact  with  Syria  and  (especially)  Babylonia  brought
about  a  reawakening  of  the  mythological  interest,  and
that  the  mytlis  which  at  a  very  early  date  had  been
derived  by  the  Israelites  from  the  Canaanites,  were
revived  by  religious  writers  (not  prophets,  at  any  rate
in  the  proper  sense  of  the  woril)  and  adapted  to  general
use.  This  was  done,  sometimes  with  a  rougher,
sometimes  with  a  gentler  hand,  but  always  without  any
dangerous  concession  to  anticiuated,  naturalistic  religion
— a  grand  result,  which  the  Babylonian  priests,  noble
as  their  own  higher  religion  was,  never  accomplished.
To  inquire  into  the  cause  of  this  success  Ijelongs  to  the
history  of  Jewish  religion.

The  question  has  been raised whether  Gen.  \i-i4,ii
is,  or  is  not,  a  poem. The  theory  was  first  propounded
_, „ , ^^ by d'Eichthal, Tcxte primifif dii
'^'^■^^'^■^'-^-'"  premier n'cit de la CrMion ('75).
a  poem  ^^-^^  found  a  true  poem,  composed  of

perfectly  regular  strophes,  which  had  Ixjen  distorted  by
the  editor  {2,2  f.).  Briggs  (Old  Test.  Student,  April
'84)  added  to  this  the  discovery  of  a  metre  (five  tones
in  each  line  with  ca;sura).  The  possibility  of  this  is
established  by  the  undoubted  existence  of  metre  in  the
Babylonian  creation-epic  (see  Del.  W'eltschopf.)  \  but
unless  we  had  before  us  Jj's  form  of  the  creation-story,
how  could  we  expect  to  restore  without  arbitrariness  the
true  Hebrew  metre?

II.  Conceptions  of  Creation.  — It  has  l)een  shown  above
that  there  circulated  in  Judah  in  the  regal  period  at
r  TV  i.  •  r  iL-ast  two  nivthic  stories  of  creation
.25.  Doctrine  Of  (^,pg  ^^^^  ^^^\^  ^f  ,vhich  were  directly
creation  late.  ^^  indirectly  of  Babylonian  origin.  It
is  still  with  the  former  that  we  are  specially  concerned
for  the  present.  That  there  is  no  clear  reference  to
this  myth  in  the  fragmentary  remains  (cp  below,
§  29)  of  the  pre-exilic  prophets,  is,  no  doubt,  a  fact
which  has  to  Ix;  accounted  for  ;  but  when  we  consider
the  Canaanitish- Babylonian  origin  of  the  myth  we
cease  to  be  surprised  at  it.  Certainly  Isaiah  and
the  other  great  prophets  believed  in  the  creatorship
of  Yahwe  ;  but  they  could  not  have  given  their  sanction
to  even  a  simplified  edition  of  any  of  the  grotesque
and  heathenish  myths  of  the  Canaanites  and  the
Babylonians.  Why,  then,  it  may  be  asked,  did  they
not,  like  the  Second  Isaiah  (Is.  40-48),  preach  the
creatorship  of  Yahw6  without  any  mythic  ornamenta-
tion ?  The  answer  is,  that  their  object  was  not  to  teach
an  improved  theology,  but  to  dispel  those  illusions
which  threatened,  they  believed,  to  involve  good  and
bad  Israelites  alike  in  one  common  ruin.  The  pre-exilic
prophets  were  preachers  of  judgment :  the  truth  the\-
had  to  announce  was  that  Yahwe  was  not  merely  the
god  of  Israel,  but  also  the  moral  governor  of  the  world,

951


CREATION

who  would  pimish  all  guilty  nations,  and  more  especially

the  most  favoured  nation,  the  Israelites. It  was  for  the

late  exilic  and  the  post-exilic  prophets  and  other  religious

writers,  whose  function  was,  not  so  much  threatening,

as  edification  and  consolation,  to  tlraw  out  the  manifold

applications  of  that  other  great  truth  that  Yahwe  is  the

creator  of  the  world.

On the  pre-exilic  conception of  creation,  therefore,

not  much  can  be  said. There  were,  no  doubt,  hymns  to

->- T»  •!• Yahwe  as  the  creator  ; but  the  divine

26.  Pre-exihc


traces.


creatorship  was  not  a  central  truth  in
that  early  age,  and  could  not  have  l)een
expressed  in  a  form  congenial  to  the  later  worshippers.
We  have,  however,  a  fragment  of  a  song  in  the  Book
of  Jashar  (i  K.  8:2/),  which  the  narrator  who  quotes
it  ascribes  to  Solomon.  With  the  help  of  the  LXX  we
may  restore  it  thus  : —

The  sun  did  Yahwe  settle  in  heaven.

But  he  said  he  would  (himselQ  dwell  in  dark  clouds.

I  have  buih  a  lofty  house  for  thee,

A  settled  place  for  thy  perpetual  habitation.!

Here  Yahwe  is  descrited  as  the  creator  of  the  sun.
He  is  therefore  greater  than  the  solar  deity  Marduk,
the  creator  in  the  Babylonian  cosmogony.  None  of  the
heavenly  bodies  serves  Yahwe  as  a  mansion  ;  dark  clouds
are  round  about  him  (cp  Ps.  972  18 ii,  Vsi;;  again).  It
is  of  his  condescension  that  he  dwells  in  Solomon  s
temple,  which  will  therefore  be  as  enduring  as  the  sun  in
the  firmament  (cp  Ps.  7869).  Considering  that  Solomon
(it  would  seem)  put  up  in  the  temple  a  trophy  of
Yahwe's  victory  over  the  Dragon  of  chaos  (see  Nkhlsii-
tan),  it  is  conceivable,  though  scarcely  probable,  that
a  hymn  to  the  creator  which  contained  these  four  lines
was  actually  written  for  use  at  the  dedication  of  the  first
temple.  At  any  rate,  even  if  not  of  the  Solomonic  age,
the  fragment  is  presumably  pre-exilic,  and  confirms  the
idea  that  the  creation  of  the  world  ( /.  e. ,  the  world  know  n
to  the  Israelites)  was  early  spoken  of  as  a  proof  of
Yahwe's  greatness.  Nor  can  we  be  surprised  that  some
scanty  reference  to  Yahwe  as  the  Maker  kot'  i^ox^v  is
traceable  in  pre-exilic  proper  names  (see  N.XMK.s,  §  30,
and  cp  the  Bab.  and  Ass.  names  Sin-bani.  Bel-bani,
Bel-ibni).

It  was  the  Second  Isaiah,  however,  so  far  as  we  know,
who  made  the  creatorship  of  Yahwe  a  fundamental
TT  T  •  Vi  T<2^^''sh  lielief.  Is.  40  gives  the  key  to
27.  11  isaian.  -,^^  j^^^j.  doctrine  of  creation.  Living
after  the  collapse  of  the  ancient  state,  and  amidst  new-
scenery  and  other  men,  gifted  moreover  with  a  tenderly
devout  spirit  and  a  rich  poetic  imagination,  the  Second
Isaiah  felt  what  was  needed  to  regenerate  Jewish
religion  —  a  wider  view  of  the  divine  nature.  To
him  Yahwe  was  far  too  high  for  the  common  sacrificial
cultus,  far  too  great  to  be  merely  a  local  deity  ;
both  nature  and  mankind  owed  their  existence  to
Yahwe.  He  had  indeed  chosen  Israel  for  a  special
possession  ;  but  it  was  for  purely  moral  ends.  There-
fore Israels  fall  could  not  be  for  ever  ;  Israel's  and  the
world's  creator  would  certainly,  for  liis  own  great  ends,
restore  his  people.  Let  Israel  then  look  up  to  him  as
the  creator  of  all  things,  and  therefore  also  as  the
Redeemer  ('?i<i)  of  Israel.  However  the  Second  Isaiah
does  not  stop  here.  He  rectifies  some  of  the  notions
which  were  presumably  current  among  the  Israelites — old
notions,  now  awaking  to  a  fresh  life  under  Babylonian
influence.  Israel  was,  no  doubt,  one  of  the  youngest  of
the  nations ;  but  Yahwe  was  not,  like  Marduk,  according
to  the  old  myth,  one  of  the  youngest  of  the  gcxls  ;
'  before  me  (Yahw6)  no  god  was  made'  (Is.  43 10). Nor

1  The  passage  is  given  in  a  fuller  form  in  ©bal  after  v.  53
(than  in  MT),  with  an  introductory  and  a  closing  formula.  The
former  runs,  '  Then  spike  Solomon  concerning  the  house  when
he  had  finished  building  it";  the  latter,  'Surely  it  is  written  firl
^i/3Aio«  Tijt  i(i5^9.'  In  line  i  read  e(rn)<r«»'=  j'2.n,  with  ®l-,
rather  than  iywopiatv  which  Klo.  prefers,  and  in  line  2  iv  yi^w
t.\L]  rather  than  «  yvi^v. Cp  Jasher,  Book  of,  §  3.

95a


CREATION

could  it  Ih?  right  either  to  make  an  image  of  Yahw6  (as
if  he  were  no  better  thaii  the  sun-god  Marduk),  or  to
say  that  other  KlOhim  hel[>ed  Yahwe  (as  they  were  said
to  have  heljxid  Marduk)  in  the  work  of  creation  (Is. 40
i8,  etc.  4424).  Whether  there  was  really  a  chaos  at
the  beginning  of  all  things,  he  docs  not  expressly  say.
He  does  tell  us,  however,  that  there  is  nothing  chaotic
(tuhu)  in  the  earth  as  it  came  from  Yahwe  ;  the  inference
from  which  is,  that  lK)th  in  history  and  in  prophecy
Gods  dealings  are  clear  and  comprehensible,  and  de-
signed for  the  gofwl  of  man  ( Is.  A'>  18/. ).  I  Ic  ])oinledly
declares  that  Yahwi  not  only  formed  light  but  also
made  darkness  (Is.  457),  whereas  the  old  cosmogony
of  J2  (see  §  12)  ascrilxjd  only  light,  not  darkness,
to  the  creative  activity  o(  IClohim.

The  Second Isaiah  does  not  assert  that  the  creator-
ship  of  Yahwe  is  a  new  truth. .Ml  that  he  professes  to
do  is  to  \mfold  the  meaning  of  one  of  the  great  truths
of  priin;Kval  tradition  (Is.  40 21  ;  see  SHOT). His  view
of  creative  activity  is  a  large  one. (rcatorship  consists,
he  thinks,  not  only  in  bringing  into  cxister.ce  tliat  which
before  was  not,  but  also  in  the  direction  of  the  course  of
history  (41  20  458  487). He  affirms  that  both  men  and
things  are  "called'  into  existence  by  Yahwe  (41 4;  cp
4O26  4426  4813)  ; but  he  dfx;s  not  refuse  to  speak  also
of  Yahwe's  hand  (4813  cp  4022,  etc.),  or  of  his  breath
(443  cp  40 24),  as  the  agent  of  production, l^ase  and
irresistibteness  are  two  leading  characteristics  of  Yahwe's
action,  and  hence  it  is  that  the  Second  Isaiah  prefers
(though less distinctly than the I'riestly Writer) the
conception  of  creation  by  the  voice  to  that  t)f  creation
by  the  hand. Creation  by  the  voice  is  also  a  specially
characteristic  idea  of  Zoroastrianism  ;  ^  but  the  Jews  prob-
ably derived  the  idea,  directly  or indirectly,  not  from
Persia  but  from  Babylonia. No  more  striking  expression
of  it  could  be  wished  for  than  that  contained  in the
following  lines  from  the  Creation-epic  (Tab.  iv. ) :  —
Then  in  their  midst  they  laid  a  Rarment,
To  Marduk  their  tirst-born  thus  they  spoke :
I-et  th}-  rule,  O  Lord,  surpass  that  of  the  gods,
Perishinj;  and  becoming — sneak  and  let  it  be  !
At  the  ojiening  of  thy  mouth  let  the  garment  perish  ;
Again  command  it,  then  let  the  garment  reapi)ear  !
He  spoke  with  his  mouth,  and  the  g.irment  perished  ;
.\gain  he  conmianded  it,  and  the  garment  reappeared.2

Did  the  Priestly  Writer  really  Ixilieve  in  a  pre-existent
chaos,  out  of  which  the  world  was  made?  Or  is  the
p  retciuion  of  chaos  in  his  cosmogony  simply  due
to  educational  considerations?  Considering  the
line  taken  by  the  Second  I.saiah,  and  still  more  by  the
later  wise  men,  we  may  venture  to  class  the  reference
to  chaos  in  Gen.  1 2  with  those  other  concessions  to  i
popular  superstition  which  make  Ezra's  law-book  an
ecclesiastical  compromise  rather  than  an  ideal  standard."*
.•\  similar  remark  applies  to  the  other  mythic  features
in  the  cosmogony  ;  all  that  the  Priestly  Writer  really
cares  for  are  the  religious  truths  at  the  base  of  the
story,  such  as  the  creatorship  of  Yahwe,  the  divine
image  (surely  not,  according  to  P,  physical)  in  man,
and  the  fundamental  cosmic  importance  of  the  sabbath.

The later writings show that the teaching  of the

Second  Isaiah  and  the  Priestly  Writer \vas  not  thrown

29 Later  ^"^^y- ^'''"'^  '^^  *'^*-'  "^°^'  Ixiautiful  psalms


writings.


(8  104)  are  suggested  by  the  priestly  cos-


mogony, and  in  Ps.  339  1485  creation  by
the  word  of  Go<l,  without  any  mention  of  chaos,  is
affirmed  with  emphatic  conciseness.  The  fragments  of
the  older  prophetic  writings  were  deficient  in  references
to  creation  ;  the  post-exilic  adapters  and  supplementers
of  prophecy  have  remedied  this  defect  (see  r  "■. ,  Am.  4 13
Jer.  423-26  .')22^  10 12  31  35-37),  whilst  the  Hook  of  Job  is
pervaded  by  the  belief  in  the  Creator.  The  Praise  of
Wisdom,  too  (Prov.  822-31),  gives  a  grand  picture  of  the

1  The  Avesta,  however,  connects  creation  with  the  recital  of
a  certain  potent  formula  called  Ahuna-vairya  (Honover).  Gen.  1
knows  nothing  of  sp>ells.

2  Del.  M'eltschSf/.,  104  ;  Zimmern,  in  Ounkcl's  SchSp/.,  410/
>  But  cp  Smend,  A  T  Rel.-gcsch.'^)  457.

953


CRESCENS

activity  of  the  CJreator,  who  re<)uires  no  sabbath-rest,
for  he  cannot  lie  fatigued.'  Nothing  is  s;»id  here,  or
in  the  Hook  of  Job,'-  of  chaos  or  pre-existent  matter.
The  first  of  the  late  didactic  writers  who  distinctly
asserts  the  creation  of  the  world  out  of  matter  is  the
author  of  the  Hook  of  Wisdom  '  ( 1 1 1 7  Kriaaaa.  ibv  Kba\u>v
i^  d/i6p<pov  D\r}t).  He  may  no  doubt  be  said  to  I'lato-
nize  ;  but  Philo  Ix-'fore  him,  not  indee<i  without  some
hesitation,  held  the  Ijelief  of  the  eternity  of  matter,*  and
he  appears  to  have  been  influenced  \>y  contemjxjrary
Jewish  interpretations  of  Gen.  1 2.  In  2  Mace. ,  however
(a  Pharisa.'an  record),  we  find  the  statement  that  the
world  and  its  contents  were  made  oiiK  (^  6vtwv  (72E).
a  guarded  phrase,*  which  reminds  one  of  Hcb.  11  3,  and
is  at  any  rate  incompatible  with  a  belief  in  i/xop<pos  i\r]  ;
and,  in  two  fine  passages  in  A/>oc.  Bur.  (Charles),  Go<l
is  addressed  thus,  '  O  I  hou  .  .  .  that  h:u>t  called  from
the  begimiing  that  which  did  not  yet  exist,  and  they
obey  thee'  (lil4).  and  'with  a  word  thou  quickenest  that
which  was  not'  (488).  Parallel  passages  in  NT  are
Rom.  4  17  Heb.  II3  (where,  however,  fii]  tie  (paivofUywy
is  not  to  Ix"  confused  with  (k  fxi]  <f>aii>ofi(vwi>).^  We

nmst  not,  however,  overlook  the  fact  that  in  one  of
the  latest  books  a  distinct  reference  to  chaos  occurs.
In  2  Pet.  85  the  earth  is  described  as  '  conjpacted  out
of  water  ...  by  the  word  of  God. '  Here  "  water '
obviously  means  that  portion  of  the  chaotic  waters
which  was  under  the  firmament  ;  out  of  this,  accortling
to  ( Jen.  1 6,  the  dry  land  emerged  at  the  fiat  of  Yahw^.
The  importance  given  to  the  Logos  in  Jn.  1  3,  and  to
the  Son  of  God  in  Heb.  I2,  as  the  organ  of  the  divine
creative  activity,  is  best  treated  in  another  connection
(see  Logos).  On  the  doctrine  of  the  re-creation  of
heaven  and  earth,  see  Delugk,  §  19.

K"13  ("jf  which  .'Xss.  banu, 'to  make,  create,'  is a phonetic

modilicalioii)^  is  a  characteristic  word  of  P  (tJen.  1  often,  2  ^/.

__ , -'i/.; <P TTOielv  [.\K1,1,  but  in  2  4  ot«  tyeVero

30.  words  [AEI,]);«  also  cp  Is.40.0ii  (twenty  times;  tp
for  'create.'  various  renderings).  Di.  (</»•«.  17)  wishes  to
claim  K13  for  J  H  ;  but  Kx.  34  10  Nu.  1(5  30  have
been  maniiJulated  by  R.  In  l'.cn.C7  'riJ<"l3  (f^""  'n"C"i") '*  ^'''*'B'»-"'l
to  K  by  1  )i.  himself.  Is.  4  5  and  Am.  4  13  are  intcriK>lations  (see
Amos,  8  12,  Is.mah,  ii.,  §  5).  Jer.  31  22  occurs  in  a  section  written
or  rewritten  late.  1)1.4  32  (where  }<^3  staniis  of  the  creation  of
man)  is  hardly  pre-e.\ilic  (cp  Dkctekcj.no.mv,  $  19).  In  spue  of
these  facts,  it  would  be  unwise  to  say  that  the  narrative  in  J
(see  above,  g  1 2)  cannot  have  contained  the  word  K-13,  correspond-
ing to  Ass.  hani'i.

."!jp  'to  f;ibricate,  make,  create,'  Gen.  14 19 22  ('creator  of
heaven  and  earth  ' ;  ix;  e<cTi<T«i'  |.M  >I.l),  Dt.  32  6  ('  thy  father  that
made  thee";  but  €(C7TJ<TaTo  [li.M' LJ);  Prov.  S  22  (Vahwes  creation
of  Wisdom,  fKTKTfv  (Hn.\]):  Ps.  13i»  13  ('thou  didst  create  my
reins';  but  «itTTi<rai  [Hk.XRT]).  All  these  passag-.s  are  late;
but  yp  is  probably  a  divine  title  (see  Cain,  §  5),  and  Eve,  in
Gen.  4  I,  says  (probably)  '  I  have  produced,  created  (but  «<cn}<ra-
/it).-  [ADEL]),  a  man  like  (the  Creator)  Yahwe'  (nin*  nS^S?).
npy,  '  to  make,'  Gen.  '24  18  (I),  Is.  437.  i^'  'to  form,'  Gen.  2  7  19
0)  l.s.  43i7  Jer.  10  16  Am.  4  13  Zcch.  12  i.

II.  /.. ,  §g  1-4  ; T.  K.  C. ,  §§  5-30.

CREDITOR (HL"]), 2 K.  4  i. See Law and

JUSTK  K, 5; 16.

CRESCENS  (kphckhc  [Ti.  WH^},  a  companion  of
Paul  who  had  gone  to  Galatia  (2Tim.  4iot).  In  the
Ap.  Coitstl.  (746)  he  is  named,  as  '  liishop  of  the
churches  of  Galatia,'  among  those  bishops  who  had
been  ordained  in  the  lifetime  of  the  ajx>stles.  There  is
some authority  (X C, etc. Ti. ) for  reading raWi'av

1  Cp  Jn.  5  17,  and  contrast  Gen.  2  2.

2  Except  in  the  faint  allusion  (Job 38  8).  The  same  wTiter
would  almost  seem  to  have  believed  in  pre-existent  light  (v.  7).
See  above,  8  21  (»•)•

'  See  Drummond,  Philo  Judtrus,  1  188,  who  also  refers  to
4i«TV7roOTo  (l'J6)  as  implying  the  same  doctrine.

■•  Drummond,  o/.  cit.  1  ■2tyijf.

8  Vg.  boldly  renders  here  ouic  «f  ovntv  by  ex  nikilo.  So  in
Pastor Jitrmtr,  2i,  the  old  translator  gives  ex  nikilo  for  ck
ToO  fit)  a\rt<n.

•  Vg.  boldly,  ex  intnsibilibus  (cp  (jen.  1  2,  ©).

7  Barth,  ZD.MG,  18S7,  p.  640.

8  Cp  Frankel,  PaldstiH.  Exegete,  36  ;  Geiger,  Urschrt/l,
343^

954


CRESCENTS

instead  of  FaXaTia^  in  2  Tim.  4  10.  Gallia  is  a  natural
emendation,  possibly  a  right  intor|iretation,  of  Galatia —
'  in  accordance  with  the  later  usage  as  regards  Gaul,  both
Galatia  and  Gaul  having  in  St.  I'aul's  time  usually,  if
not  always,  alike  been  called  TaXaria  by  the  Greeks '
(WH). Cp  GAI.ATIA.

In  the  list  of  the  seventy  apostles  compiled  by  the  Pseudo-
Di>rotheiis  (see  Chron.  Pasc/i.,  Bonn  Kd.,  2 121)  Crescens  is
enumerated  as  '  bishop  of  Chalcedon  in  (laul '  {\aX.Kr)66vo<;  rrj^  iv
TaAAio);  in  that  drawn  up  by  Pseudo- Hippdlytus  he  appears
as  "Crisces  bishop  of  Carchedon  in  Gaul.'  According  to  the
Pseudo-Sophronius,  who  enumerates  Timothy,  Titns,  Crescens,
and  the  Ethiopian  einiuch  immediately  after  the  twelve  .■lpo^tk•s,
he  was  founder  of  the  church  of  Vienne  in  (laul.  The  Latin
church  commemorates  him  on  June  27  ;  the  (jreek  on  July  30
(along  with  Silas,  Andronicus,  and  Epaenetus).  See  LIpsius,
A/'ol.-r.  .  l/'.-Crsr/i.

CRESCENTS  (D^pnb),  Judg.  82.  26  RV  (AV  ■  orna-
ments'),  Is.  ;^ia  RV  (AV  'round  tires  like  the  moon').
See  Xkcki.Ac  K.

CRETE  (kphth  :  mod.  Camiia),  the  largest  island
in  the  /Kgcan  sea,  of  which  it  is  also  the  S.  limit.

Crete  extends  140  m.  from  W.  to  E.,  consisting  of  an  irregular
ridge  of  mountains  which  fall  into  three  distinct  groups,  the
central  and  loftiest  (mod.  I'si/criti)  being  the  Mount  Ida  of  the
ancients.  The  N.  coast  is  broken  into  a  series  of  large  bays
and  promontories  ;  on  the  S.  there  are  few  harbours,  and  oiily
one  lonsiderable  l)ay— that  of  Messara,  under  .Mt.  Ida.  The
physical  character  ol'  Crete  is  succinctly  tiescribed  by  Strabo
(475,  opeu'j)  (cai  iduela  t)  I'ljaos,  ex^'  ^'auAuii'as  ei/KapTTOus).

Lying  at  almost  e(|ual  distance  from  Kurope,  Asia,
and  Africa,  Crete  was  one  of  the  earliest  stages  in  the
l)assage  of  Oriental  civilisation  to  the  W.  In  historical
times  it  was  of  little  importance — chieHy  as  a  recruiting
ground  for  mercenary  troops  (Pol.  31  26,  Jos.  Ant.  xiii.
43;  cp  I  Mace.  1131).^  (.Jiiintus  Metellus  reduced  the
island  in  67  B.C.,  and  it  was  combined  with  the
Cyrenaica  to  form  one  province — senatorial  under  the
eiTi]5erors.

The  jews  were  early  connected  with  Crete  (cp  the
story  told  in  Tac.  J /is/.  r>2  tliat  the  Jews  were  originally
fugitives  from  Crete).  In  ©'■'-'*  of  Ezek.  •2i>  16  and  Zeph.
25  [BX.AQ]  Kprjres  is  read  for  the  '  Cherethites '  or
•  Cherethims'  (n'nis)  of  EV,  and  KprjT-q  [BX.\Q]  in
Zeph.  26  for  mD,  which,  however,  is  certainly  not  Crete,
but  denotes  'land  of  the  Cherethites' — i.e.,  Philistia.
KprJTCs  also  occurs  in  ©  of  Ezek.  3O5  npparently  for
CIS.  See  CHKUKrHrrK.s  ;  and,  on  the  hypothesis  con-
necting the  Philistines  with  Crete,  Cafiitok,  Piiil.i.s-
TINKS.  Gortyna  (near  modern  //.  Deka  in  the  Messara,
the  only  consideral)le  plain  in  the  island)  is  mentioned
as  containing  many  Jews  ( i  Mace.  I523  cp  IO67),  and
Philo  {Le^.  ad  Cai.  36)  says  that  Crete,  like  all  the
Mediterranean  islands,  was  full  of  thetn  (cp  Acts2ii
Tit.  1 10  14,  Jos.  Ant.  xvii.  Vli, J'ita,  §76).

The  account  of  Paul's  voyage  to  Rome  furnishes
several  geographical  details.  From  Cnldus  his  ship
ran  under  the  lee  of  Crete  (.\cts277  virewXeva-afiei'  tt}i>
KpTjTTji'  Kara  ZaX/JLuiPrju),  and  soine  time  appears  to
have  l)cen  spent  in  the  shelter  of  the  I'"air  Havens.
Whether  the  apostle  was  able  to  accomplish  there  any
missionary  work  cannot  even  be  guessed;  and. we  are
thus  left  without  any  information  as  to  the  process  of
the  evangelisation  of  the  island.  When  we  ne.xt  hear
of  it  the  gosi^l  has  apparently  been  widely  established
(see  Pastorai,  Episti.ks).

The  character  of  the  Cretans  as  gathered  from  the
epistle  to  Titus,  is  entirely  in  accord  with  what  is
known  from  other  sources.  The  epistle  (Tit.  1  12)  quotes
'a  projjhet  of  their  own'  (i.e.,  Epimenides,  called
6{?os  dvTip  by  Plato,  Laws,  1 642  ;  6eo<f>i\ri%  Plut.  Sol.
12),  who  stigmatised  them  as  liars  and  beasts.  It
was  a  popular  saying  that  it  was  impossible  to  out-
cretan  a  Cretan  (Pol.  821,  cp  Pol.  646/  818  33 16).
Polybius  (646)  writes  that  'greed  and  avarice  are  so
native  to  the  soil  in  Crete,  that  they  are  the  only  people

1  They  were  mostly  archers :  Paus.  i.  284,  'EWrjiTiv  on  firi
KpTja'if  oiiK  inix'opi.oi'  ov  Tofev«i'.  Their  internal  di— "-•"""
kept  the  Cretans  in  miliury  training  :  cp  Pol.  48  24  4.

955


CROCODILE

among  whom  no  stigma  attaches  to  any  sort  of  gain
whatever'  (cp  Tit.  1  11,  'teaching  things  which  they
ought  not  for  an  ignominious'  §ain  ' — a  similar  phrase
occurs  in  Tit.  I7).  The  repetition  of  the  thought  of
Tit.  1  7  fXT]  irdpoivov,  22  vri<t>a.\iovi,  23  (iy)dk  oivi^i  iroWt^
deSovXuj/jL^vas  is  equally  ominous  (Cretan  wine  was
famous  in  antiquity;  cp  Juv.  Sat.  14 270).  Tit.  3i
bears  obvious  reference  to  the  turbulence  of  the  Cretans,
a  characteristic  which  runs  through  their  history.

I'or  Crete  as  the  'stepping  stone  of  Continents,'  see
A.  J.  P2vans  on  'Primitive  I'ictographs  from  Crete '  in
y.  //<//<■//.  .S'/W.  14  ('94).  ^  w.  J.  vv.

CRIB  (D-UN).  I.s.  1  3,  etc. See  Catti,i-,  §  5.

CRICKET  (^nn).  Lev.  11 22,  RV.  AV  Bketi.e
('/•■■•)•

CRIME  (HtilT),  JobSlii;  see  Law  and  Justice,
Sio/.  •■

CRIMSON,  ypin,  to/ci',  a  word  common  in  the  fem.
form  nryin,  toleah,  or  nrpin,  tola'ath,  is  used  in  Ex.
It) 20  in  the  general  sense  of  'worm'  [EV],  in  Is.  1  i3
( E V  '  crimson ' ),  Lam.  4  5  ( E V  '  scarlet ' )  for  the  crimson
dye  prepared  from  the  body  of  the  female  Coccus  ilicis,
a  Homopterous  insect  belonging  to  the  family  Coccida;.

The  female,  wliich  grows  to  the  size  of  a  grain  of  corn,  is  in
the  adult  or  imago  stage  attached  by  its  inserted  proboscis  into
the  leaves  and  twigs  of  the  Syrian  Holm-oak,  whose  juices  it
lives  on.  The  male  is  winged  and  flies  about.  The  bodies
of  the  females  are  collected  and  dried,  and  from  them  are
prepared  the  colouring  matters  known  as  Cochineal,  Lake,  and
Crimson.  Since  the  discovery  of  America  a  Mexican  species
of  Coccus,  C.  cacti,  which  lives  on  the  India  fig,  has  largely
supplanted  the  first-named  species  as  the  source  of  the  pigment,
and  at  the  present  day  both  have  lost  their  commercial  value
owing  to  the  invention  of  aniline  dyes.  In  old  literature  the
name  Kermes  (see  below)  is  frequently  used  for  Coccus.

Other  names  for  this  colour  are  'pa,  sdni  (Jer.  430,
RV  '  scarlet ' ;  elsewhere  EV  '  scarlet ' ;  see  Colour.s,
§  14)  and  the  late  equivalent  h-rp2,  karmW^  (2Ch.  2714
[6  13]  3  nt  -)■  The  origin  of  the  termination  -il  in  S'pis
is  obscure  ;  it  can  scarcely  be  explained  (as  in  Ges.''-"*')
by  the  Pers.  affix  -in  ;  for  there  is  no  word  kirmin  in
Pers. ,  nor  would  it  signify  the  colour  if  there  were.

For  Is.  63 1  (j-i,':n,  RV'-'K.  -crimsoned,'  EV  'dyed'),
see  CoLOL'RS,  §  13/.  n.  m. — .\.  e.  s.

CRISPING  PINS  (Unn),  Is.  322. See  B.\g  (2).

CRISPUS  (Kpicnoc  [Ti.  WH] ;  a  Roman  name),
ruler  of  the  .synagogue  at  Corinth,  and  one  of  Pauls
converts  there  (Acts  188  i  Cor.  1 14).

In  Ap.  Const t.  7  46  he  is  said  to  have  been  ordained  bishop  of
jEgina. In  Mart.  Rom.  Vet.  he  is  commemorated  on  Oct.  4.

CROCODILE.  '  Beasts  of  the  reeds  '  is  an  alternative
rendering  (in  AV"'B  )  of  nj]?  n?n,  Ps.  6830  [31]  (©
Bhria  toy  K^^<^/V\OY).  -^^  'company  of  spearmen,'
RV^  rightly  'wild  beast  of  the  reeds.'  This  means  the
crocodile  (hardly  B(>hemoth  —  i.e.,  the  hippopotamus),
used  to  symbolise  the  Egyptian  power.  Cp  Hupfeld
and  Del.  tid  loc.

According  to  (5  the  3s  of  Lev.  11 29  (.AV  'tortoise')
was  a  'land-crocodile';  see  Lizard,  i.  For  'land-
crocodile,'  RV's  rendering  of  n3,  a  kind  of  lizard  (Lev.
11 30),  see  Chameleon,  i.  For  Jer.  146  RV^t-  (c'3n  ;
.■\V  'dragons,'  RV  'jackals'),  see  Dragon,  §  4.  For
Job  41 1 i':  RV'K-  [40 25]  (EV  'Leviathan.'  AV"'ir-
'  whale,'  '  whirl[xx)l ' ),  see  Behemoth  and  Leviathan.

The  animal  descriljed  poetically  in  Job  has  generally
been  identified  with  the  crocodile  (seeesi:)ecially  Bochart
^lyiff-)- Until recent times, when the  propriety  of

1  Probably  from  Pers.  ^/rj;/,  'a  worm,' and  perhaps  akin  to
our  'crimson'  and  'carmine'  (see  Skeat,  s.71.  crimson').  Cp
Sans,  kritni,  which  is  probably  identical  with  our  word  '  worm  '
(/A  s.v.  '  worm  ').  On  the  other  hand,  Del.  (ZL  7' 39  593  ['781)
may  be  right  in  connecting  Ar.  and  Pers.  kirmut,  from  which
carniesitius  and  crimson  are  most  n.-ituraljy  derived,  with  an
independent  Turkish  root  beginning  with  p  instead  of  3.

2  The  word  l^'oia  seems  to  have  been  read  for  ^^-^2  ^V  ®  '"
Cant.  7  5  [6). See  Haik.

956


CROCODILE,  LAND

making  any  zoological  identification  has  tjeen  questioned,
the  chief  dissentient  has  lx;en  Schultciis.  This  great
eighteeiiih-century  scholar  tliinks  that  the  arguments  for
the  crocodile  anil  the  whale  are  atK)ut  etjual  ;  tiie  poet
does  not  seem  to  him  to  have  lx*en  consistent  in  liis  de-
scription. Tristram,  however  (.Vy7//  258),  is  of  opinion
as  a  naturalist  that  the  crocodile  is  descrilxjd  under  the
name  Leviathan,  and  if  Huildes  translation  and  ex-
position be  adopted,  the  characteristics  of  the  crocodile
— the  difficulty  of  capturing  or  taniing  it,  its  vast  size,
its  formidable  row  of  teeth,  its  impervious  scales,  its
gleaming  eyes,  its  violent  snorting,  and  its  immense
strength.  —  all  come  out  with  niarvellous  exactness.
Riehm  {Hllli,  s.v.  'Leviathan')  leaves  it  an  open
question  whether  the  poet  may  not  even  have  seen
crocodiles  in  Palestine.  Certainly  the  Nahr  ez.-Zerk{i
near  C'a;sarea  is  believed  to  have  had  crocodiles  quite
ateiy.'  and,  as  the  climate  of  this  marsh  region  re-
sembles that  of  the  Delta,  there  is  in  this  nothing  sur-
prising. Still,  tliough  Pliny  ( I/X  i>  19)  speaks  of  this  river
as  the  Crocodile  river,  and  mentions  a  tow  a  called  ( "ro-
codilon.  we  have  no  evidence  that  there  were  crocodiles
there  in  biblical  times.  A  thirteenth-century  tract  gi\es
a  strange  story  of  fierce  beasts  called  '  cocatrices  '  having
lx?cn  brought  there  (see  Cockatkk.k).  Sir  John
Maundeville  designates  them  corcodrils.  See  further
Budde's  elaborate  conmientary  on  Job  40/  ;  and  for
another  view  (connecting  the  description  in  Job  with
mythology)  see  Behkmoth  .xnd  Lkviatha.v,  §  3.

CriKotiilus  nilotkus,  formerly  common  throughout  the  Nile,
h.-is  been  ahuosl  exterminated  in  the  lower  part  of  the  river,
though  it  still  flourishes  above  the  second  cataract.  It  is  found
fron  the  Nile  and  the  Senegal  to  the  Cape  of  ( lood  Hope,  ami
in  .Madagascar  and  Syria.  Large  specimens  attain  a  leni;t!i  of
15  feet.  It  was  worshipped  hy  the  ancient  Egyptians  at  Omhos
and  in  the  Kayfim  (by  Lake  Moeris)  under  the  name  of  Sobku
(tr;ui>crilitd  in  Cik.  as  iou^o?) ;  for  a  possible  explanation  of
this,  sec  .NLispero,  Da-i.n  of  Civ.  ioj_/:  n.  M. — A.  E.  S.

CROCODILE. LAND (n2). Lev.  11 30, RV ; AV

CiiAMKi.i'ON  ('/-T'. ). See  also  above.

CROCUS  (nS->*nn),  cam.  2i,  RV"'e-;  t:V  RosK
{q..:\.

CROSS.  We  shall  not  attempt  to  introduce  the
reader  to  the  arch;vological  study  of  the  .symlxjiism
of  the  cross.  Interesting  as  the  task  would  be,  it  is
really  superfluous.  If  there  was  a  time  when  it  could
l)e  supposed  that  lietween  Christianity  and  the  non-
Christian  religions  there  was,  in  respect  of  the  symbol
of  the  cross,  an  affinity  that  was  divinely  apix)inted,
that  time  is  passed.  We  are  no  longer  tempted  to
imagine  that  iK-lween  the  sign  of  the  cro.ss  in  baptism,
and  the  heathen  custom  of  Ixiaring  a  mark  indicat-
ing the  sixjcial  religious  communion  of  the  individual,
there  is  a  kind  of  pre-ordained  relation.  On  the
other  hand,  the  fact  that  heathen  notions  did  affect
popular  Christian  tieliefs  in  very  early  times,  cannot
l)e  denied  :  the  magic  virtue  ascribed  to  the  cross
has  doubtless  a  non-Christian  origin.  For  these  matters
it  is  enough  to  refer  to  Zockler  {Das  A'reus  Christ i),
who  fully  recognises  the  original  purity  and  simplicity
of  the  earliest  Christian  view  of  the  cross.  His  sobriety
contrasts  with  the  fantastic  subjectivity  of  E.  von  Bunsen
(Das  Symbol  des  Kreiizes,  1876).

First  as  to  the  meaning  of  the  Greek  word  ffravpds,

which has  a wider  range  than the  word '  cross ' by

^  which  it  is  rendered  in  English. We  find

■ ,  it fretiuently used for the most primitive

and  use. ■  r  1  •  l 1

mstrument  of  execution,  the  upright  stake

{(■rux  simp/ex)  to  which  the  delinquent  was  bound
when  no  tree  was  at  hand  (cp  itifelix  arbor  and  infclix
lignum;  Liv.  1 26  Cic.  Pro  Rabir.  4),  or  on  which
he  was  impaled  (cp  HANGING),  as  well  as  for  the
fabricated  cross  (crux  cowposita)  of  various  shapes.

1  Schumacher  says  that  he  has  .seen  a  crocodile  there,  but
that  there  are  very  few  crocodiles  left  (PK/-Q,  Jan.  1887,  p.  1).
For  a  sifting  of  the  evidence  down  to  1857  see  Tobler,  Drift*
IVanderung  nach  Paldstina  ("59),  375  ff.  Cp  Rob.  Phy.
Geog.  Ce;),  1757: ;  Baed.  /"a/.P)  272.

957


3.  NT  cross.


CROSS

The  origin  of  crucifixion  is  traced  back  to  the
Phoenicians.  The  cross  was  also  u.sed  at  quite  an  early
date  in  some  form  or  other  by  I'.gyptians  ( Thuc.
liio),  Persians  (Herod.  9i2o),  Carthaginians  (Valerius
Maximus  ;  Polyb.  lii,  etc.),  Indians  (Diod.  '2i8),
Scythians  (Justin,  25),  and  others,  besides  the  Greeks
((J.  Curtius,  44)  and  the  Romans.'  Among  the  last-
named,  however,  this  cruel  form  of  punishment  (cp
Cic.  /  'err.  It  64  '  crudelissimuni  teterrimunujue  sup-
piiciunt";  Jos.  lij  v.  11  i)  was  originally  reserye<l  for
slaves  (seri'ile  suppliiium  ;  compare  the  application  of
the  \iixw\  furcifer  to  slaves)  and  criminals  of  the  worst
kind.-'  It  was  at  tirst  considered  too  shameful  a  punish-
ment to  l)e  inrticted  upon  Roman  citizens  (Cic.  I'err.
I5  56i  etc.).

Of  the  cross  proi>er  there  were  three  shapes — the  crux
immissti or four-armed cross, the  crux cummissa or
_,  three-armed  cross,  and  the crux  decussata

"  ■  wiiich  is  more  commonly  known  as  St.
•Andrew's  cross.  Following  the  old  tradition  of  the
Clmrch  (Iren.  }laer.\\.  'J  1  4  ;  Justin.  Tryph.  91  ;  Tert.  adv.
JuJ.  10,  etc. )  which  finds  some  support  in  the  assertion
of  the  Gospels  that  above  the  head  of  Jesus  was  placed  a
title(Mk.  1 ;')  26  f7r(7/)a</>7;  T77S  atrial ;  Lk.  23  ^8  e7ri7/)a0')) ;
Mt.  '^737  aiTia  ;  Jn.  19  19  rtrXos),  the  cro.ss  of  the  NT
has  conunonly  lx;en  taken  to  be  the  crux  iininisssn.'^
The  accounts  of  the  manner  of  the  crucifixion  being
so  meagre,  any  degree  of  certainty  on  this  point  is
impossiljle  ;■•  but  the  evidence  seems  to  preponderate  in
favour  of  the  traditional  view.

The  four-armed  cross  in  use  at  the  time  of  the  cruci-
fixion of  Jesus  was  most  probably  of  the  following
description.  It  consisted  of  two  pieces —
an  upright  stake  [stipes,  staticutum),  which
was  firmly  fixed  in  the  ground  with  pegs  or  fastened  to  the
stump  of  a  tree,  and  a  cross-lx;ani  {artleuna,  patibulum),
which  was  carried  by  the  condennied  to  the  place  of
exi'cution.  High  up  in  tlie  upright  stake  ,an  indentation
was  probably  made  in  which  to  fasten  with  cord  And
perhaps  also  to  nail  the  cross-beam  (cp  Lucian's  ^v\a
TiKTaivtiv  ;  also  Hor.  Carm.  1  35  ;  (  ic.  ]'err.  f>2i).  At
a  suitable  height  from  the  groinid  was  fixed  a  [jeg
{TTTjyfMa,  sedilc ;  see  Iren.  J/acr.  ii.  24 4)  on  which  to  set
the  body  astride  (cp  Justin,  Dial.  91  ;  Iren.  I.e.  ;  Tert.
cant.  Marc.  3  18)  so  that  the  whole  weight  might  not  rest
upon  the  hands  and  arms.''  This,  together  with  the
fastenings,  made  a  rest  for  the  feet  [viroiriidiov ,
suppedaneu7n  lii^nuiii;  cp  (ireg.  of  Tours,  De  Glor.
Martyr.,  chap.  t5)  uimecessary.

It  is  probable  that  on  such  a  cross  as  this  Jesus
was  crucifie<l,''  and  that  the  execution  was  carried  out
.  _  ._  .  in  the  regular  manner.  Soon  after  the
*•  C"^°^^°°-  sentence  (Val.  Max.  1  ,6  ;  Dion.  Hal.
948),  or  on  the  way  to  execiuion  (Liv.  3336;  cp  Cic.
V^err.  5  54)  the  condemned  was  scourged."  He  was
led,  bearing  his  own  cross,  or  rather  part  of  it  (Plut.
De sera numinis vindicta, chap. 9  ; Artemid. 256

1  In  some  of  these  cases  (e.g.,  Persian.s),  no  doubt,  only  the
crux  simplex  is  intended.  The  cros.s'  in  the  strict  sense  of  the
word  was  not  u.sed  by  the  early  Jews.  In  Esth.  "9  S13  ^  re-
presents ,-i''n  '  to  hang '  (cp  the  application  of  the  term  vSn  '"
Jesus  by  the  later  Jews),  by  (navaovv.  See,  however,  Hang-
ing. It  was  iiuroduced  into  Palestine  by  the  Romans  (.see
Law  and  Ji'.stice,  g  12  ;  and  cp  Jos.  Ant.  xii.  14  2  xx.  62,  BJ
ii.  126).  Pesh.  in  the  Go-spels  uses  zekapit,  which  seems  to
mean  primarily  '  to  elevate.' Qur'an  (4  156)  uses  salaba.

^  Cp  Lk.  2332,  Sen.  Ep.  7,  Cic.  Patron.  71,  Dion.  J  52,  Jos.
Ant.  13  22,  .■\pul.  Asin.  3.

5  This  too  is  the  shape  of  the  cross  in  the  old  (3rd  ceiit.)
caricature  of  the  crucifixion  which  was  found  on  the  Palatine
hill  at  Rome.

••  Some  scholars  (Keim,  etc.)  have  contended  for  the  crux
commissa  (cp  Seneca,  Consol.  ad  Mar.,  20,  Jos.  H/  v.  Hi).

*  Jeremy  Taylor  (ZZ/i-  ij/"  C//r»j.7)  supposes  the  body  to  have
'rested  upon  nothing  but  four  great  wounds.'

6  The  offence  alleged  (Lk.  23  2)  was  a  political  one.  Stoning
was  the  Jewish punishment  for blasphemy. See  Law  and

JU.STICE,  i  12.

7  The  scourging  of  Lk.  23  22  Jn.  19  i  was  probably  a  i>ri -
liminary  and  therefore  an  irregular  one.

958


CROSS

and  cp  the  symbolical  phrase  in  Mt.  10  38  16  24)  to
which  he  was  bound,  along  the  public  roads  to  an
eminence  (see  (ioLGOTiiA)  outside  the  city  gates  (Cic.
l^err.  i>b6\  I'laut.  A/il.  glor.  ii.  4  6).  In  front  of
him  went  a  herald  l)earing  a  tablet  [titulus  ;  Suet.,  Cal.
32)  of  condemnation,  or  he  himself  carried  the  alria.
(cp  (j(xvl%,  Socr.  HE  1  17  ;  irlva.^,  Euseb.  HE  v.  I44;
Xfi'KWfia,  Soz.  HE  I17)  suspended  by  a  cord  from  his
neck  (Suet.  Calig.  32  ;  Dotnit.  10  ;  Dio  Cass.  54  3  ;
Euseb.  HE  v.  I44).  On  arrival  at  the  place  of  execu-
tion the  cruiiarius  was  stripped  of  his  clothing  and
laid  on  the  ground  upon  his  back.  The  cross-beam
was  then  thrust  under  his  head,  and  his  arms  were
stretched  out  across  it  to  the  right  and  left  and  perhaps
bound  to  the  wood  (cp  Lucan,  Phars.  6543/'.  I'lin.
y/.V  xxviii.  4ii),  the  hand  being  fastened  by  means
of  a  long  nail  (cp  cruet  Jigcrc,  affigere).  .Already,  before
or  after  the  arrival  of  the  coinlemned  (see  Cic.  Verr.
V.  66,  and  cp  Polyb.  i.  86  6;  Uiod.  .\xv.  f)  2  ;  Jos.  BJ
vii.  64),  the  upright  stake  had  been  firmly  fastened  in  the
ground.  The  cross-beam  was  then,  with  the  lielp  of
ropes  (cp  perhaps  Plin.  HN  .xxix.  4  57)  and  perhaps
of  st)me  other  simple  contrivance,  raised  to  its  place  on
the  stake.  Here  it  was  hung  provisionally,  by  a  rope
attached  to  its  ends,  on  a  firm  nail  or  notch, ^  whilst
the  body  was  placed  astride  tlie  lower  peg  in  the  stake,
and  the  legs  bound.  The  beams  were  then  probably
bound  and  nailed  together  at  the  point  of  intersection.
Nails  like  those  already  used  for  the  hands  would  be
employed  to  fix  the  feet  (Lk.  24  39  ;  cp  Plautus,  Mostel.
ii.  1 13  ;  Just.  Dial.  chap.  97;  Tert.  Adv.  Marc.  3 19,
etc.),  which  were  only  slightly  elevated  above  the
ground.  The  nails  were  driven  through  each  foot
either  in  front,  through  the  instep  and  sole,  or  at  the
side,  through  the  tendo  Achillis.'^  The  body  remained
on  the  cross  until  it  decayed  (Hor.  Ep.\.  16  48  Lucan,
Pilars.  6543),  or  (from  the  time  of  Augustus)  until  it
was  given  up  to  the  friends  of  the  condemned  for  burial
((^uinlil.  Decl.  69;  cp  Jos.  BJ  iv.  62).  Soldiers  were
set  to  watch  the  crucified  (Cic.  Pro  Kabir.  4ii ;  Petron.
5,//.  3;  Quint.  Decl.  69;  Mt.  2766  Jn.  1923).  Death
resulted  from  hunger  (Euseb.  H E  %"&)  or  pain  (Seneca,
Ep.  loi).  To  alleviate  the  latter  the  Jews  offered  the
victim  a  stupefying  draught  (Mk.  15  23  Mt.  2734  Bab.
Sanh.  /.  43i).  Breaking  of  the  legs  {(TKeXoKowia  ;  see
§  6)  was  a  distinct  form  of  punishment  among  the
Romans  (Seneca,  De  Ira  832  ;  Suet.  Aug.  67  ;  cp,
however,  Origen  on  Mt.  2754)-  ^'-  •\-  C.

Modern realism  takes an interest in these painfiil
details which was unknown  to primitive Christianity
„  y . ,and to the evangelists. From an

■  .  ° .  archaeological point  of  view  this  may

point  01  view,  j^^  justified  ;  but  it  is  necessary  to  point
out  that  the  evangelists  are  entirely  indifferent  to  the
archivology  of  the  circumstances  of  the  Passion.  All
indeed  that  they  seem  to  care  for  is  ( i )  the  opportunity
which  the  Cross  gave  for  Christ  to  make  fresh  disclosures
(in  speech)  of  his  wonderful  character,  and  (2)  the
proofs  which  the  Passion  gave,  as  it  appeared  to  them,
of  a  '  pre-established  harmony  '  between  prophecy  and
the  life  of  Jesus.  When  the  ecr/JLUpvicrfxevoi  oluos  (wine
mingled  with  myrrh)  or  6^05  (vinegar)  is  mentioned,  it
is  chiefly,  we  may  presume,  to  suggest  a  connection
with  Ps.  6921.^ So  the  'casting  lots'  doubtless  fixed

1  Jeremy  Taylor  (Li/e  0/ Christ)  and  Farrar  (Li/c  0/ Christ),
assume  that  the  body  was  nailed  to  a  prostrate  cross  which  was
afterwards  raised  and  fixed  in  its  socket.  Cp  however,  the
expressions  crucem  ascendere,  in  crucem  excurrere,  ava^aivfiv
iiri  Toi'  or.,  etc.

2  See  Urandt,  Z>ie  Rvangelische  Geschichte,  from  which  this
part  of  the  description  is  borrowed.  For  the  two  nails  cp
Plautus,  .Mostetl.  ii.  1  13  and  see  .Meyer.  Others  (Keim,  Farrar,
etc.)  think  tliat  only  one  nail  was  used.

3  This  seems  to  be  plain  from  the  expression  in  Mt.  2734
(WH  and  RV)  '  wine  mingled  with  gall.'  The  allusion  is  to
Ps.  O'.tai  (xoA^,  'gall,'  would  never  have  come  in  otherwise),
and  one  remembers  that  Ps.  22  (from  which  the  '  Eli,  eli,'  etc.,
of  .\It.  27  46  is  taken)  is  a  fellow  psalm  to  Ps.  69. See  also  Lk.

959


CROSS

itself  in  tradition  because  of  the  parallelism  of  Ps.  22i8.''
The  only  NT  passages  in  which  a  clear  trace  of  sympathy
with  the  physical  pains  of  Jesus  is  discernible  are  Lk.
2244  and  Heb.  67,  especially  the  former.  Here  also
great  reserve  is  noticeable.  Though  W'etstein  (.V7',
1 751)  quotes  several  ancient  writers  who  state  that
sweat,  in  some  circumstances,  is  really  tinged  with
blood,'-  yet  the  early  writer  of  Lk.  224;,/^  contents
himself  with  saying  that  the  sweat  of  Jesus  in  his
agony  w'as  'as  it  were  clots  of  blood'  (wLcret  0p6ixfioL
_  . .  -  aifiaroi).  'I'here  is  no  evidence  that  any
6.  ue&tn  or  j^..^,  ^,^.^^^  ^^^^  formed  the  idea  that  Jesus
died  of  a  broken  heart,  as  W.  Stroud,
M.D. ,  supposed  (Treatise  on  the  Physical  Cause  of  the
Death  of  Christ,  1847) — certainly  an  idea  for  which
many  modern  readers  of  the  Gosijel  would  be  glad  to
find  sufficient  evidence.  The  hypothesis  is  based  on
Jn.  1934,  where  we  read  that  '  one  of  the  soldiers  with  a
spear  pierced  (^vi'^e)  his  side,  and  forthwith  there  came
out  blood  and  water.'  From  a  critical  point  of  view,
we  can  hardly  say  that  the  fact  that  Jesus  received
this  wound  after  he  had  breathed  his  last  is  well
established  ;  theorising  upon  it  therefore,  with  a  view
to  determine  the  cause  of  Jesus'  death,  is  excluded.
We  have  reason  to  believe  (see  Orig.  on  Mt.  2754)  that
a  lance  wound  was  sometimes  given  to  those  who  were
crucified  to  accelerate  death.  The  probability  is  (if  the
kernel  of  Jn.  1931-37  be  accepted  as  historical)  that  the
two  malefactors  first  had  their  legs  broken  [crucifragium)
and  then  received  their  coup  de  grace  by  being  pierced
with  a  lance.  This  is  not  opposed  to  the  literal
interpretation  of  v.  34,  for  all  that  the  evangelist  denies
is  that  the  legs  of  Jesus  were  broken.  That  the  state-
ment of  the  'eye-witness'  (6  iwpaKilis)  has  come  down
to  us  in  its  original  form,  cannot,  however,  safely  be
asserted,  because  of  the  impossibility  of  explaining  the
issuing  of  '  blood  and  water  '  from  an  internal  source
pliysiologically.  Perhaps  one  may  suppose  that  the
writerof  Jn.  19  31-37  in  its  present  form  has  accommodated
the  facts  of  tradition  (the  tradition  attested  by  the  '  eye-
witness ' )  to  his  theological  needs.  There  is  a  theological
commentary  on  the  '  blood  and  water'  in  i  Jn.  bjZf,
where  the  '  water '  and  the  '  blood '  have  Ixicome,  as  it
were,  technical  expressions  for  permanent  suix-rnatural
channels  of  divine  grace,  though  the  commentary  may
to  us  (not  to  its  first  readers)  be  as  obscure  as  the  text.

'  With  regard  to  the  hypothesis  of  Dr.  Stroud  (viz.,  that  death
was  sud<ien  from  rupture  of  the  heart,  and  that  the  blood  and
w.-iter  were  the  separated  clot  and  serum  of  the  escaped  blood  in
the  pericardial  sac,  which  the  spear  had  pierced),  it  is  sufficient
to  mention  the  invariable  fact,  of  which  this  physician  appears
to  have  been  ignorant,  that  the  blood  escaping  into  a  serum
cavity  from  rupture  of  a  great  organ,  such  as  the  heart
(aneurysmal  aorta)  or  parturient  uterus,  does  not  show  the
smallest  tendency  to  separate  into  clot  and  serum  ("blood  "  and
"  water,"  as  he  takes  it),  but  remains  thick,  dark-red  liquid
blood.  The  notion  that  the  wound  was  on  the  left  side  is  com-
paratively late.  It  is  embodied  in  some  of  the  newer  crucifixes,
where  the  wound  is  placed  horizontally  about  the  fifth  costal
interspace ;  but  in  most  modern  crucifixes,  and  probably  in  all
the  more  ancient,  the  wound  is  placed  soniewhat  low  on  the
right  side.  That  it  was  deep  and  wide,  is  inferred  from  the
language  of  Jn.  2O27,  where  Thomas  is  bidden  to  "  re.-ich  hither
thy  hand  and  thrust  it  into  my  side" — namely  the  side  of  the
spiritual  body.'

[The  ordinary  view  of  the  motive  of  the  soldier  (In.  19 34) —
viz.,  that  he  wished  to  make  sure  of  the  death  of  Jesus— is  of
course  a  mere  conjecture.  If,  therefore,  the  expression  i^tKev-
T7)<rai/  (  =  npi,  'they  thrust  through,' in  Zech.  12  jo)  will  permit  it,
some  may  prefer  to  accept  a  new  hypothesis  that  the  wound
inflicted  hy  the  lance  was  only  a  slight  one.  The  author  of  this
liypothesis  thus  explains  it. — El>.]  'May  it  not  have  been  a
thoughtless,  rather  than  a  brutal  .ict,  the  point  of  the  lance  being
directed  at  .something  on  the  surface  of  the  bo<ly.  perhaps  .t  dis-

2.^1  3-5  and  especially  Jn.  10  7^/.,  wliich  allude  to  the  same  passage
(the  iin//a)  of  Jn.  corresponds  to  the  eis  rJ|i'  iii^av  fiov  of  the
Ijsalm).  ofo9  is  most  naturally  rendered  Vinegak  [q.v.];  cp
iiuotations  in  Wetstein. This  too  suits  Ps.  Oi».

1  This  is  not  inconsistent  with  the  fact  that  the  second  part  of
Mt.  27  35  is  wanting  in  the  best  MSS,  and  omitted  by  recent
editors. See  Jn.  I924.

2  '  Numerous  more  or  less  unauthentic  modern  instances  have
also  been  needlessly  brought  together.' — c.C

3  .\n  early  addition  to  the  original  text  (WH).

060


CROW


coloured  wheal,  bleb,  or  exudation,  such  as  the  scourging  (Mt.
27  26)  might  have  left,  or  the  prcs-ure  of  the  (assumed)  ligature
supporting  the  weight  of  the  body  mi;;ht  have  produced?
Water  not  unmixed  with  blood  from  some  such  sujierficial
source  is  conceivable ;  but  blood  and  water  from  an  uuernal
source  are  a  mystery." — c.  C.

Apart  from  the  references  to  the  cross  in  the  evangeli-
cal nairatives, there  are  a  few  passages  in  which  the
. _.. .. . cross  is  mentioned,  or  has  been  thought
7.  BiDllcai j^  j^,  mentioned,  in  a  manner  which  has
Beterencea.  ^^^  ^^^^  ^^  originality.

I.  If  .Scllin  [Serubbal'fl,  106)  were  right  in  reading
iiB  c'l'ri^rKi  in  is.  539  we  should  get  a  striking  though
unconscious  anticipation  of  the  cross  of  Jesus  in
prophec)-.  It  is  this  writer's  rather  strange  theory  that
Zkkl'HH.\hkl  [i'-i'.],  whom  he  idealises  in  the  light  of
Is.  53  and  kintlred  passages,  suffered  impalement  as  the
Jewish  Messianic  king.  Unfortunately  the  sense  of 'cross'
(o-Tai/p5s)  for  in  is  justified  neither  by  its  etymology  (see
Ges.-Buhl) nor  by  usage.  Taw  means properly a

tribal  or  religious  sign,  and  is  used  in  l-.zek.  946  for  a
mark  of  religious  import  on  the  forehead  (cp  CUTTlNG.s,
§  6)  and  in  Job  31  35  (if  the  text  is  right)  for  a  signature.  1
Xo  Jew  would  have  used  w  for  arax'pjs,  though,  the
crux  coinmissa  lx;ing  in  the  shape  of  a  T,  the  cross  is
often  referred  to  by  early  Christian  writers  as  the
mystical  Tau.

'2.  .\lt.  IO3S  'He  that  taketh  not  (oi'  \aixjiavfL)  his
cross,  and  followelh  after  me,  is  not  worthy  of  me '  ;  cp
Lk.  1427  'doth  not  l)ear  {ov  ^xcrdi^ei)  his  cross'  ;  Mt.
IO24  'let  him  take  up  (dpclrw)  his  cross'  (so  Mk.  S34
Lk.  9i23).  Two  views  are  held:  (i)  Ihat  to  take,  or
take  >ip,  or  bear  a  cross  was  a  proverbial  jihrase  for
undergoing  a  great  disgrace,  suggested  by  the  si.-ht  of
the  Roman  punishment  of  crucifixion  ;  and  (2)  that
though  the  substance  of  the  saying  may  l)e  due  to  Jesus
himself,  the  form,  as  perhaps  in  many  other  cases,  is  due
to  tlie  recasting  of  the  saying  by  a  later  generation,
possibly  under  the  influence  of  the  highly  original
phraseology  of  Paul.

3.  (lal.  220  XP'<''^V  (Ti'veffTavpcofxat  ;  '  I  have  been
crucified  with  Christ'  (cp  tji4).  It  would  Ixi  difficult  to
assert  that  this  strong  expression  was  suggested  by  any
saying  of  Jesus  ;  it  has  obviously  arisen  out  of  the
previous  statement,  '  through  the  law  I  died  to  the  law.'
The  crucifixion  of  Jesus  is  of  slight  interest  to  Paul  as
a  mere  historical  event  ;  it  becomes  all-important
through  the  apostle's  mystical  connexion  with  Christ.
The  crucifixion  has  an  ideal  as  well  as  a  real  character,
and  the  former  gives  a  value  to  the  latter  (cp  Ad.\m  .\nu
EvK,  §  2). On  Cal.  3 13  see  H.VNGing.  T.  k.  c.

See  further  Jesus,  §  29/ ,and  Oosi'KI.s,  §§  12  14;  also
Brandt,  Die  E  range  Use  he  Gesehieh/e  ('g^),  I7Q#  ;  Keiin,
/esu  von  Nasara,  3409/:  ;  Meyer,  Das  Matlhdus-Eraii-
gelium  (7th  ed.,  1898),  488/  ;  Godet's  Commentary  on
Luke  ;  and,  in  particular  O.  Ziickler's  Das  K'reiiz  Chrisli
(1875  ; ET  1878). §§  1-4  .M.  A.  c,  §§  5-7  T.  K.  C.
CROW  ( KOptONH).  Bar.  (1 54- -See  R.WKN.
CROWN. In  considering  the  crown  of  the  Hebrews
the  primary  signification  of  the  Knglish  word,  and  the
„ . . origin of the crown itself, nmst not
1.  Varieties. ^^ j^^^ ^j^j^^ ^^ Originally crown,
garland, fillet,  chaplet,  and  diadem  were  hardly  to  be
distinguished  from  one  another.

.\s  to  the  form  of  the  Israelite  crown  we  have  no
certain  information.  The  ancient  Egyptian  forms  of
the  upper  and  lower  country  crowns,  the  one  with  high
receding  slojje,  the  other  l)ottle-sha(ied  (see  hieroglyphs
in  luJVi'T,  §  43  n.),  are  less  to  l)e  thought  of  than  the
.Assyrian  truncated  cone  with  its  snuill  pointed  elevation
rising  in  the  centre.  The  latter  was  worn  by  the  highest
classes,  and  may  well  have  been  the  head-dress  of
1  So  RV,  with  most  critics  ;  but  the  text  of  i'.  34/;  is  certainly
in  disorder  (see  Deer,  ad  loc.\  'IB  '  my  sign  '  (  =  '  my  signature  ")
is  a  most  improbable  expression.  Tg.  and  Vg.  presuppose  'r^^^n
'my  desire.'

31  961


CROWN

Hebrew  royalty.  .\nother  important  variety  was
the  Ui.MiK.M  \_q-v.\  which  was  worn  as  a  fillet  (see
TuK».\N,  i),  or  encircled  the  high  imperial  hat  of
Persian  sovereigns.  From  this  has  probably  Ijecn
derived  the  high  priests  MriKK  [(/.?'.,  2].  The  Persian
hat  is  perhaps  referred  to  in  the  late  Heb.  kether  (nri^
Ksth.lii  2i7  68  and  perhaps  Ps.  459  ['o]  [f^^ra.  Che.],
in  I'^sth.  5td57;/ta),'  and  in  the  Kidapii  of  i  Esd.  3  6  (EV
'headtire').  The  Hebrews  must  have  been  familiar
with  the  ancient  custom  of  distinguishing  rulers  by
special  forms  of  headgear  ;  but  in  the  fretjuent  allusions
to  the  ceremonies  of  a  royal  accession


2.  Royal  crown.


■a/ion  is  nientioned  only  once —


in  the  case  of  Joash  (2  K.  II12).  See  CoKoNATioN.
Besides  the  bracelets  (ni-iJ'Vn  ;  so  We. 's  emendation  :
see  Bracelet),  we  see  that  the  distinctive  ornament
worn  by  King  Joash  was  the  nizer  -113.  It  means  simply
'  mark  of  separation  or  consecration,  "■'and,  originally,  was
perhaps  nothing  more  than  a  fillet  (WHS  A'e/.  iV/«.<2)
483  /. ).  In  post-exilic  literature  it  forms  part  of  the
high  priest's  headdress  (see  MiTKE.  34).  Of  its  earliest
use  we  are  ignorant.  It  is  true  that  according  to  2  S.
1 10  Saul's  nezer  was  transferred  to  his  rival  David  ;  but
we  cannot  Ije  sure  that  the  statement  is  historical.  The
representation  that  kings  went  into  battle  wearing  their
insignia  need  not  l)e  disputed  ;=*  but  there  is  good  ground
for  suspecting  that  the  writer  (who  is  an  l".])hrainiite)  is
imaginative.  See  Sa.mlel,  i.  §  4  (2).  Now.nck  {//A
I307)  holds  that  Solomon  was  the  first  to  introduce
a  royal  crown.  Certainly  David  did  not  have  his  son
crowned  (anxious  though  he  was  to  have  Solomon's
right  popularly  recognised  :  i  K.  1 33),  and  neither
Absalom  nor  Adonijah  went  through  the  rite  of  corona-
tion when  claiming  the  throne  ;  but  it  is  remarkable
that,  when  so  nmch  is  said  of  Solomon's  throne  (i  K.
10 18),  nothing  is  hinted  about  a  crown.  That  the
'atdrdk  (.-n-^v)  was,  at  least  for  a  limited  period,  the
usual  ornament  of  Jewish  kings  may  be  taken  as  certain.
It  is  possible  that  this  also  was  originally  a  diadem  or
fillet,  although  in  Job  31 36  we  reail  that  it  could  be
'  bound '  upon  the  head  (i:i').  which  suggests  that  it
was  a  turban.  In  Cant.  3 11  it  represents  the  bride-
groom's (Hellenic?)  garland.-*  Not  only  does  the
\'ifdrdh,  by  a  common  metaphor,  typify  dignity  and
honour,  but  also  in  late  passages  its  possession  implies
sovereignty  and  its  loss  is  synonymous  with  the  king's
degradation.  A  case  of  the  former  is  Ps.  21  3  [4],  '  Thou
settest  a  crown  (ni::j')  of  fine  gold  on  his  head  '  {aTi<pavov
tK  \ldov  TL/jLLOv)  ;  of  the  latter,  I'.zek.  21  26  [31],  '  Remove
the  mitre  (ns:^i:>  KtSapis).  and  lake  off  the  crown  (n-cy
aT^(pat'o^).'  Here  we  may  follow  Smend  and  Bertholet
in  explaining  tx)th  mitre  and  crown  of  the  m'l;/ insignia:
Zedekiah  is  to  be  stripped  of  all  his  dignity. For  the

1  It  is  in  Esther,  too,  that  the  decoration  of  the  horse  with  the
king's  crown  is  most  clearly  associattd  with  the  royal  dignity
(tontmst  Esth.  Or  with  i  K.  1  33).  See  also  Ciiaii.kt.  In  later
Hebrew  nns  became  the  ordinary  word  for  crown.  It  is  used
in  the  phrase,  '  the  crown  of  the  law,'  a  precious  crown-shaped
ornament  of  the  scrolls  of  the  Pentateuch,  also  of  the  crowns
on  cert;iin  Hebrew  letters  and  in  the  famous  Mishnic  .sentence
(.\both  4  19),  '  There  are  three  crowns  :  the  crown  of  Torah
(Law),  the  crown  of  priesthood,  and  the  crown  of  royalty;  but
the  crown  of  a  good  name  excels  them."  Lagarde  (Cesam.
Al'handt.  207  13-15)  regards  in^  as  a  Persian  loan-word:  but
the  root  is  common  in  Hebrew.  As  in  most  other  words  for
crown,  the  root-meaning  must  l)e 'to  encircle."

2  ©  uses  different  words  for  it:-  In  2  S.  1  10  it  has  poaiAeior
[RA],  «.a«r„ia  (LI,  in  Kx.-.'06  -nizaXov,  whilst  in  2  K.ll  12  the
word  is  left  untranslated  (if^ep  [HI,  «<fp[Al;  but  iy.'ao-^a  (L)).
In the last-mentioned place the Targum and Pesh. have

3  Thenius  refers  to  Layard,  Kinn<ek,  fig.  18.  Rameses  put
on  a  distinguishing  ornament  when  he  went  agauist  the  Khita
(Brugsch,  Gesch.  .-F.g.  499).

•»  The  mCV  which  David  captured  (2  S.  12  30)  belonged  to  the
idol  o(\.\\c  Ammonites  (see  Ammon,  8).  For  the  Talmudic  view
on  this  and  other  p.-vssages  connected  with  r^  yal  and  priestly
crowns,  see  Leopold  Liiw  s  excellent  essay  '  Kranz  und  Krone '
in  his  Ces.  Schr.  3  407^:

962


CRUCIFIXION

priestly  may  (cp  Ecclus.  45i2),  see  MiTRE ;  and  for
other  Heb.  words  to  designate  distinguished  head-gear,
see  Diadem,  Tukhan.

Crowns  or  garlands  were  worn  by  brides  (Ezek.  IG12

niKsn  nT:j;) and by bridegrooms (Is.  61 10 nxs, KV

_  .  , garland).^ The 'oil  of  joy"  (»(>.,  t'.  3)  recalls

^  ,  '  the  royal  anointing  (see  Cokonatujn),  and

*^  it  may  l>e  that  the  bridegroom  wore  a  chaplet

crown. ^^  ^jijg  ^^f  ^^^.  festival. Delitzsch  thinks  that

the  bridegroom's  //rr  w.is  a  turban. Solomon  (Cant.

3ii)  is  represented  as  wearing  a  diadem  or  'd/Jrdk  on

the  day  of  his espousals (cp Cantici.es, § 9). In

the  time  of  Vespasian  the bridegroom's chajjlet  was

abandoned  (Mish. Sotah  9  14). In the Middle  Ages

the  Jews  resumed  the  use  of  wreaths  for  brides.

Josephus  asserts  that  after  the  return  from  the  exile
Aristobfilus,  eldest  .son  of  Hyrcanus  I. ,  was  the  first  to  put
'  a  diadem  on  his  head  '  {Bi.a.5r}fia,  Aiit.


4.  Post-exilic
and  NT  usages.


xiii.  11 1).  From  Zech.  6  9-15,  however,
it  would  appear  that  Zechariah  was
directed  to  select  from  the  exiles'  gifts  enough  gold  and
silver  to  make  crowns  (nii^y)  or  a  crown  (jrpj,  Wc. ,
Now. )  for  Zeruljbalxil.-  Josephus  was  perhaps  thinking
solely  of  the  Ha.smoii:i;an  kings  ;  those  priest-kin^s  wore
'  buckles  of  gold  '  on  their  shoulders,  not  crowns  on
their  heads  (i  Mace.  10 89  I444,  Tropir-t)v  xp^'^^d" '<  see
Buckle,  3).  The  Talmud  thinks  that  Hyrcanus,  the
'second  David,'  wore  two  separate  crowns,  one  royal
and  one  priestly  (h'iiLi.  66  u)  ;  and  Josephus  re]jo:ts
a  present  to  this  kiii;.^  of  a  golden  crown  from  Alliens
{(TTifpavos,  .4/itxW.Si).

The  Gr.  (rrecpavoi,  which  properly  denotes  the  badge
of  merit  as  distinct  from  5id5j?,ua  the  badge  of  royally
(see  Di.\ni;M),  is  fre;iuently  used  by  O  to  represent
.nT.:jf ;  but  tiie  distinction  between  5Ld5r]/j.a  and  <TT(<pavoi
was  not  consistently  obser\'ed  in  Hellenistic  Greek.

In  the  NT  ffTi<f)avos  is  used  of  the  garlands  given  to
the  victors  in  games  ( i  Cor.  9  25  ;  cp  2  Tim.  2s),  of  the
ornaments  worn  by  the  '  elders,'  etc.  in  the  visions  of  the
.Apocalypse (Rev.  44  10  62  O7  14i4[hcre,  Ihe.Sonof  Man]),
and  of  Jesus'  crown  of  thorns.  The  last  perhaps  affects
the  Roman  rather  than  the  Jewish  idea  as  to  the  symbolism
of  the  crown  ;  but  Jud;t^an  ideas  on  such  matters  must  by
that  dale  have  Ixien  assimilated  to  the  Roman.

InRViM.icc.  1029ll35l337  39  2Macc.l44((rW(/)aj'or)
'  crown  '  ( AV'  'crown  tax  ' )  refers  to  a  '  fi.xed  money  j^ay-
ment  like  the  Roman  atiruin  coronarium  (Cic.  in  Pis.vi.
ch.  37),  in  vom\  of  the  wreath  or  crov.'n  of  gold  which
at  one  time  it  was  customary,  and  even  obligatory,  for
subject  peoj)les  to  present  as  a  gift  of  honour  (cp  2
Mace.  144  and  S  2  above)  to  the  reigning  king  on
certain  occasions'  (Camb.  Bib.  ad  1  Mace.  IO29);  see
Taxation.

On  ther.V  of  the  altar  (Ex.  30  3/.  3726/.  EV  'crown,'
RV'e-  'rim'  or  'moulding'),  see  Ai.tak,  §11;  on
that  of  the  ark  [ih.  25ii  372),  see  Akk,  §  13  ;  and  on
that  of  the  table  of  shewbread  '  ^ib.  2^t-2^f.  37ii  /!),  see
Al.TAR,  § 10. (5  renders by  KPfidriov arpiirTJv  and

See  CiiAPi.ET,  MiTKE,  TfRRAN  ; and  cp  Goi.n.

I.  A. — S.  A.  C.

CRUCIFIXION. See  Cross.

CRUSE.  I.  The  cruse  of  water  (HnSV-  sappdhatjt)
which  stood  by  Saul's  he  id  when  he  was  surprised  by
David  (i  -S.  26111216:  cp  i  K.  196)  was  probably  a
small  water-jar  of  porous  cl.ay  like  the  'ibrik  (vulg.ar
pronunciation,  hrik)  of  the  modern  Syrians  and
Egyptians.  The  porosity  of  the  clay  enables  the
water  to  be  kept  cool  if  the  brik  is  placed  in  a  draught.

1  The  re.iding  i<  difficult.  Many  follow  Hitzig  and  read  yy
for  jnr  (.Isa.,  SHOT  no):  'like  a  bridegroom  who  orders
his  coronal.'  Crowns,  it  may  he  added,  are  still  used  in  the
marriage  rites  of  the  Greek  Church.

2  The  MX  assicrns  Zechariah's  crown  to  Joshua  the  high  priest ;
but  this  can  hardly  be  maintained  (see  Zkkuiiuaiiki.,  and  cp  Ki-nhi
adloc.-).

963


CUCKOW

The  same  vessel  was  used  by  the  poor  to  hold  oil  (cp
I  K.  17 12  14  16,  where  it  is  distinguished  from  the
larger  13  or  water-jar  [lA'  '  pitcher ']  in  which  the
household  supjilv  was  fetched  from  the  well  [Gen.
24.4^  6  tV*])-

In  I  K.  17  //.<•.,  in  106  and  in  Judith  IO5,  ©  uses  the  word
tca/zaicT)?.  also  WTitten  (cafii//airr)9,  which,  if  from  xo/itiru),  would
sug^^est  the  shape  of  the  Roman  ampulla.

2.  The  cruse  of  honey  which  Jeroboam's  wife  took  as
part  of  her  present  to  Ahijah  (i  K.  I43)  was  the  bakbiik
or  earthenware  bottle  (see  Bottle).  The  Greek  trans-
lators ((D'^'-  Aq.)  render  by  crrafwos,  a  wine-jar,  which,
it  is  interesting  to  note,  is  also  used  by  <J5"'^'''-  for  the
sinsencth  (EV  '  pot  of  manna')  laid  up  in  the  sanctuary
(Ex.  16 33).  This  cruse  or  jar  of  manna  was  of  earthen-
ware according  to  the  Targum,  but  of  gold  according
to  (5  {loc.  cil.).

3.  The  cruse  (n*n^s,  vSpUrKrj)  of  2  K.  22ot,  used  by
Elisha  to  hold  salt,  was  proljahly  a  flat  dish  or  plate
rather  than  a  bottle  or  jar  (cp  rtnSs,  2Ch.  3Ji3  [G  Kal
evodii)0ri] ; rn^s; in 2  K.  21 13  6  aXd^aarpos [B], rb

dXd^ffTpOV  [.\], TO  TTV^lJV  [L], P.\n).

4.  On  the  cruse  (17  dXdjSaffTpoi  ;  AV  Box,  2)  of  Mt.
267,  etc.,  strictly  a  jar  or  pliial  of  alabaster,  usually
pcar-shajxid or pyramidal (Pliny, J/.V 9  56), see

Al.AHAMKR.  A.  R.  S.  K.

CRYSTAL.  There  can  be  little  doubt  that  rock
cryst.al  is  intended  by  the  KpvaraWos  of  Rev.  21 11  :  glass
is  represented  by  va\oi  (see  Gl.\SS).  Thcophrastus
(54)  reckons  crystal  among  the  pellucid  stones  used  for
engraved  seals.  In  modern  speech  we  apply  the  term
crystal  (as  the  ancients  apparently  did)  to  a  glass-like
transparent  stone  (commonly  of  a  hexagonal  form)  of
the  flint  family,  the  most  refined  kind  of  quartz.

In  (5  KpvdToXKo'i  represents —

a.  nn^.  '  frost '  or  '  ice,'  perhaps  even  in  Ezek.  122.^

b.  n^ipx  ["3J<]  (Is.  54i2,  EVf  'carbuncles'), — that  is,
'stones  of  fire'  (cp  Ass.  aban  isdti,  'stone  of  fire'=:
hipindu),  on  an  assumed  derivation  from  mp,  'to  kindle'
(lit.  by  rubbing):  hence  the  rendering  of  Aq.  \IQ.  rpiira-
VLafxov,  Sym.  Theod.  [XiO.  ]  yXv<prji,  Vg.  lapidcs  sculptos
\_scalptos\. LXX  and  Pesh.  have  KpvoTdXXov  (mp?).

c.  rh-a,  EV  'bdellium'  Nu.  II7  (cp  Field,  Hexap.).

d.  n'm-p,  I'-V  'vapour'  (Ps.  1488).

For  Job2Si7t  .-\V  (n"p?Di),  RV  '  glass'  ;  see  Gi,AS.s.

C''3-,  gdbls  []o\>1%i^;  RV  'crystal,'  AV  'pearls'),
is  of  obscure  origin  ;  cp  perhaps  Ass.  gabdhi,  '  be  thick,
massive. '

The  RV  'crj-star  finds  support  in  the  Heb.  P'DJ^K,  'hail*
(on  the  relation  of  meanings  see  BDI!,  s.t'.  p''2i),  and  possibly
intheTarg.  pSn3(Lag.  a.Uo  y^-\-^2  =  ^^fipviov,  ob > isu»i  [Dan.  10 5
2Ch.  35  Vg.  ;  cp  Oi'Hik]),  which,  like  Ar.  Pers.  itila^fr  (the
word  is  sli^jihtly  transpos -l),  means  'cryst.al  or  even  'gla.ss,'  as
well  as  '  beryl." Blau  understands  'glass  pearls.'

pBXAC  transliterates  yo.Sfn  and  so  Theod.  ya/Sts ;  the  Pesh.
is  too  paraphrastic  to  be  of  any  use  ;  and  vireprjp/oitra  [.Sym.]
Jl^^-VJO  [Syr.  He.\.,  mg.  juXSD  CuX]  are  appellatives
derived  from  MH  jy^j,  'to  heap  up,' C"r"w  23,  'heap,'  'hill.'

CUB  (212),  Ezek.305  RV ;  AV  Chub  (^.r.).
CUBIT. See  Weights  and  Measures.

The  common  term  is  HSK,  'aiiiitiaJi  (prop,  length  of  fore-arm?
see  r.DB;  Ass,  ainmatu,  ,nax  in  the  Siloam  inscription  [jyT]),
Gen.Ois;  cp  r'KTI^N,  'an  ordinary  cubit'  (Dt.Sii)  rirx
nsbi  nSNS  one  handbreadth  longer  than  the  usual  cubit  ("Ezek.
40  5),  etc."

ICi,  gbined,  Judg.  3  i6t  seems  to  be  a  short  cubit  ;  so  Jewish
tradition  ;  see  Moore,  ./AV,  \-  104  ['q3).

The  NT  term  is  wi\xv%,  Mt.  t>  27  Lk.  12  23.

CUCKOW, RV '  seamew  ' (e)n*4* ; Xci^oy [BAFL]  ;

1  Hitz.  and  Co.  delete  'terrible,'  K^ijn  (so  «5ha,  but  not  0Q
Vg.  Pesh.).  It  is  of  course  possible  that  we  should  read  rnp  \
cp  b.

964


CUCUMBERS

Lev.  11 16  Dt.  14  ist),  is  mentioned  among  unclean  birds.
It  cannot  be  identified  with  certainty.  1  lie  Hch.  root
probably  signifies  le;inness  ;  thus  the  kindred  word
nBrtc*.  iahhi'pluth  (cp  Ar.  suhdf),  denotes  consumption
or  phthisis.  There  is  no  settled  Jewish  tradition  ;  but
©  and  \'g.  are  very  likely  right  in  understanding  some
kind  of  atjuatic  bird,  jx-'rhaps  the  tern  [S/i-rna  fliiviatilis,
FFP,  135).  The  AV  '  cuckow  '  comes  from  the  Geneva
Bible.

Two  species  of  cuckoo  spend  the  summer  in  Palestine:  Cuculus
canorus,  the  widely-spread  common  cuckoo,  which  returns  frum
its  winter  quarters  towards  the  end  of  March  ;  and  the  great
spotted  cuckoo,  Cociystcs  glantlarius,  which  arrives  rather
c-u-lier.  Canoi  Tristram  enumcr.ites  nine  s|>ecies  of  tern  hclong-
ing  to  two  genera  found  in  I'lilestine,  some  of  which  are  plentiful
along  the  sea  coasts  and  around  the'inland  waters,  especially
in  wmter.  The  shearwater,  Puffinus,  is  another  identification
suggested  for  the  Sahafh.  P.  yelkouanus,  an  inhabitant  of
the  Mediterranean  and  other  seas,  lias  acquired  the  name  of
'Sme  damnie'  from  the  French-spe:iking  inhabitants  of  the
Hosphorus,  its  restless  habits  having  given  rise  among  the
Moh.immedaii  population  to  the  notion  that  it  is  the  corporeal
habitation  of  lo-<t  souls.  N. M.  — A.  K.  S.


CUCUMBERS  (D-Nu'p.  X/Xv/'/w  ;  ciKyAi  [-YOI
B^i'L],  Nu.  11  si )  and  Garden  of  Cucumbers  (H'^'pO,
viikhih;  ciKyHp&TON.  Is.  18  Bar.  67o[69't).  Forms
analogous  to  the  word  rendered  'cucumber'  occur  in
Arabic,  Aramaic,  ICthiopic,  A.ssyrian,  and  Carthaginian;
and  probably  Gr.  aiKvi] '  is  the  same  word  with  tlie  first
two  consonants  transposed.^  It  is  thus  known  that  what
is  meant  is  some  kind  of  gourd,  cucumber,  or  melon,
perhaps  primarily  Cucumis  Chute,  L.  (Low,  330),  which
is  now  regarded  as  a  variety  of  the  melon  [Cucumis
Melo ;  see  Hassekjuist,  I/cr  Palcrst.  491).

The  cucumber  itself,  Ciiciiiiiis  sativus,  originated  in  NW.
India,  and  certainly  the  .S.-inscrit  name  soul-as.t  looks  strikingly
like  o-iiciios.  It  seems  clear  that  the  cuciimb<r  reached  the
Mediterranean  region  pretty  early.  De  Candolle  {(If.  PI.
Cult.  212)  says  that  there  is  no  e\  iilence  th.it  it  was  known  in
ancient  Kgypt  ;  this,  however,  applies  equally  to  the  melon  (208).

^z'^0  (for  riKC'pc)  is  simply  •  place  of  cucumbers '  ;
Ar.  and  Syr.  have  similar  words  with  the  same
meaning. Cp  Food,  §  5.  N.  M. — vv.  T.  T. -i).

CUMMIN  (1^3;  kyminoN.  cytninum.  Is.  282527
Mt.  •2.323!)  is  the  seed  of  an  umbelliferous  herbaceous
plant  {Cuminum  ivmiuum,  L. )  which  is  used  as  a  condi-
ment with  different  kinds  of  food.  A  native  of  the
Mediterranean  region,^  it  was  from  an  early  period
largely  spread  over  W.  Asia.*  The  Heb.  name,  which
is  of  unknown  origin,  is  found  also  in  Arab.,  Syr.,
Eth. ,  and  Carthaginian,  and  has  passed  into  Greek,
Latin,  and  many  modern  languages,  including  ICnglish.

Cummin  is  often  referred  to  by  ancient  writers.  Thus  two
early  Greek  comedians  include  it  in  lists  of  condiments  (.Meiiieke,
378437);  Dioscorides  (36i/)  and  Pliny  ('JO  14(57])  descri  e  its
medicinal  properties,  the  latter  noticing  especi.illy  its  effect  in
producing  p.-ileness — referred  toby  Horace  (A/,  i.  !!•  18,  'exsangue
cuminum  ')  and  by  Persius  (v.  55,  '  pallentis  grana  cumini ').

The  mention  of  the  seed  in  Mt.  2823  as  a  trifling
object  on  which  tithe  was  rigidly  imposed  by  the
Pharisees  reminds  us  of  the  Greek  use  of  Ki'/uvoirpiarrji
(' cuinmin-sawer ')  for  a  niggard  or  skinflint  (.Arist.
Etk.  N.  iv.  1  39).  In  Is.  2827,  where  Yahwe's  varied
discipline  of  Israel  is  illustrated  by  the  care  and  dis-
crimination with  which  the  husbandman  performs  his
appointed  task,  it  is  noticed  that  finer  grains,  cummin
and  nsp  (see  Fitchks),  are  threshed  with  staff  and  rod,
the  heavier  treatment  by  the  threshing  wain  Ijeing  re-
served for  coarser  seeds.  N.  .M.

CUN  (1-12),  I  Ch.  188  RV  ;  AV  CiiUN.

CUNNING  WORK,  CUNNING  WORKMAN. The

'cunning  workman,'  2un,  is  distinguished  from  the
'craftsman' — cfin — in  Ex.3535  3823,  and  the  recur-
rence of  the  phrase  arin  ntrya  in  connection  with  certain

1  Theophrastus  has  <rtirvof  and  <rt«tw>) ;  according  to  Fraas  the
former  was  the  cucumber,  the  latter  the  melon.

a  So  Ces.  r/i,s.  s.v.  ; L.ig.  Arm.  S/.,  1975,  J)fittfi.2  3s(>-

8  Kentham  and  Hooker,  Cm.  PI.  1  526.

'  Dioscorides  knows  it  chiefly  in  Asia  Minor.


CURSE

textile  fabrics  (Ex.26131  286  15  86835  3938  [P])  sug-
gests some  S|}ecialised  meaning  (see  liMHKolUKKV). '

©  u.sually  has  v^Kn;«  or  in^f  rot ;  Vg.  \xs,\ia\\y  polymitariut
or  opus  polyiiiitariuni,  the  work  of  the  dama.sk  weaver  (see
Wkavin<;).  AVniK.  (Kx. '2(5i),  perhaps  less  accurately,  ha.*
'embroiderer'  (sec  KMiiKoiuiikv).  On  the  other  hand,  the
'  cunning  work  '  (n3B'TC)  of  Kx.  :il  4  S-'j  32  33  35  a  Ch.  2  14  [13]  is
mainly  that  of  the  metal  worker  and  jeweller;  in  zCh.  2615  it
i:.  that  of  the  military  engineer.

CUP.  The  seven  Hebrew  and  (jreek  words  rendered
'  cu])'  in  EV  can  Ije  but  imperfectly  distiiigui.shed  ;  see,
however,  Fl,.\GON.  (ioBi.KT,  Mf.M.s,  Pottkky  ;  also,
on  Joseph's  divining  cup,  DiviSATiON,  §  3  [3],
JosF.i'ii  ;  and  on  the  'cup  of  blessing'  (i  Cor.  10 16),
Elciiaki-st,  Passover.

The figure of a wine -cup occurs fretjuently to

e.xpress  the  effect, whether  cheering (Ps.  285) or  the

„ . .  reverse,-  of  providential  apjiointments.

antihrattona '^'^^  P'"op''^-ls  '^''"B  primarily  messengers
appiications.  ^j-  ^^.^  j,^^.  ^^^^^^  ^^  j^^,^  applications

predominates.  In  the  N'T  the  figure  descril>es  the  suffer-
ings willingly  accepted  by  Christ  and  his  followers  (Mt.
20 22/.  2C39,  etc. ),  and  is  u.sed  in  the  older  Jewish  sense
in  Revelation  [e.g. ,  1-4  10  16  19).  Nowhere  does  the  term
'  cup  '  stand  by  itself  in  the  .sense  of  '  destiny  ' ;  the  use
dcscrilx;d  above  never  pioduied  what  ni.ay  be  called
a  technical  sense  of  013,  'cup.'  In  Ps.  116  16s  it  is
a  second  oia.  meaning  'appointment,  destiny,'  from
\/0D3  =  ruc,  'to  number,  to  ileterininc,'  that  is  used.
'The  portion  of  my  (or  their)  cup'  should  be  'my  (or
their)  destined  portion.'  No  one  can  drink  '  fire  and
brimstone,'  nor  can  'cup'  and  'lot'  stand  as  parallel
expressions.  From  the  list  of  passages  we  designedly
omit  Ps.  1 1 6 13  ;  'lift  up  the  cup  of  salvation  '  should  be
'  lift  up  the  ensign  of  victory  '  (reading  o: ;  see  Ensig.n).
Yox'aggiln,  px.  Is.  2224  EV,  .see  Hason,  i.  For  Jer.  36  5,
J?*?^>  ^'''''''i  Joseph's  silver  divining  cup.  Gen.  44  2  12  \(>/.,  see
above.  For  the  bowls  upon  the  golden  candlestick  (Kx.  'lh-i,iff.
S"i7  7^t)see  Ca.ndlestick,  g  2.  For  ci2>  kos,  the  common
term  (Gen.  40  11,  etc.),  see  Mkals,  $  12.  For  Jer.  52  19,  JTpjS,
vi'nalikltk  (AV  'cup'),  and  Jer.  52  19,  '"D,  i*»///  (RV  'cup'),
see  I'.ASON,  4.  For  Nu.  4  7  RV,  i  Ch.  2S  17  KV,  nil",-;,  k'sdu-oth,
see  Fr.AGON.  The  NT  term  is  7roT^pioi'(in  (B  for  kos),  Mt.  23  25
20  27,  etc.

CUPBEARER  (n|?^*p,  lit.  '  one  who  gives  to  drink  '  ;
01  NOyooc)-  I"  Eastern  courts,  wherethe  fear  of  intrigues
and  plots  was  never  absent,  cup1)e.arers  were  naturally
men  whose  loyalty  was  above  suspicion  ;  they  frec|uently
enjoyed  the  sovereign's  confidence,  and  their  post  was
one  of  high  imjiortance  and  honour  (so,  e.g.,  at  the
court  of  Cambyses,  Her.  834;  cp  Marquart,  J'hiUilogus,
f).')229).  The  only  reference  to  cujibearers  in  Israel  is
in  the  uni(iue  chapter  describing  Solomon's  court,  i  K.
IO5  (euvoi'-xoi'S  [L])  =  2Ch.94.  Elsewhere  cupl>earers
are  spoken  of  in  connection  with  Egypt  (Gen.  40 1-23
41 9),  Shushan  (N'ch.  1  n  tvvoZ'xo^  [HN"^^]).  and  Nineveh
(Tob.  I22).  It  is  perhaps  hardly  necessary  to  add  that
the  Assyrian  Rabshakj:h  ['/.f. ]  has  nothing  to  do  with
*  cupbearer. '

In  Gen.  I.e.,  EV  'butler'  C',7r2.T-3n,  'chief  butler'  (40a
o.f)(yoi.vo\6a%  [A  PL]).  In  -'.  13  ©  aptly  uses  ap;(ioti'0\oia  where
the  Hebrew  has  JS,  'position,  oflice.'  With  reference  to  Neh.
Ill,  it  is  worth  noticing  that  Nehemiah  was  only  one  of  the
cupbearers  to  .Xrta.xerxes  (not  the  cupbearer;  cp  l!e. -Kys.).
0  finds  a  reference  to  male  and  female  cupbearers  in  Lccles.
28  (niic'l  •TJC',  oi.vDxoov  [-OVV  K'^-^A]  koI  0(W>x<>aO ;  but  see
Ecci.FSiASTES,  \  2.  The  chance  allusion  in  Jos.  Ant.  xvi.  8  i
shows  that  at  the  court  of  Herod  (as  was  iilso  the  case  in
Assyria)  the  cupbearers  were  eunuchs  ((P's  tiivoiiyoK  al)Ove  may,
of  course,  be  nothing  more  than  an  error).  See,  generally,
Meai_s,  §  II  end.

CURDS  (nxpri),  is.  7  is  RV"*- See  Milk.
CURSE. See Blkssings and  Cursings, Blas-

1  Cp  Fr.  gfnir,  applied  in  a  sjieciali.sed  sense  to  civil  and
militarv  engineerins:  (ingeniuii:),  and  the  Eng.  eni:iHe.

2  P.s.'t>0 3  [5I  V5 R  [9]  Is. 51  T7  Jer.  25  15-17  49  13  Lam.  4 31  Ezelc
23  33-34  ;  cp  also  Jer.  51  7  Zech.  12  3.

966


CURTAIN

PHEMY, Ban, Covr.NANT  ; and cp Urim and
Thimmim.

On  C'jri,  Iterem  (Mai.  4  6  [824),  etc.),  see  especially  1?AV.
On  n^*?3;y,  Ubha'ilh,  Is.  (55 15  (RV"it.  prefers  Oath  \q.v.\);
hSk  in  Nu.  5  21  (RVrng.' adjuration);  nSxPl  (H^KFI  Lam.  865],
n")Xp,  Dt.  2820  (RV  'cursing'):  n^Sp,  Karaflt/ota,  Rev.  223
(RVrntr.  'anytliinf;  accursed'),  an  J  icaripa,  Gal.  3  1013,  see  Bless-


AND  CU)

CURTAIN. For Ex.  26  i  ff., etc. (nj/n;


and


Nu.  3  26  [31],  etc.  ("2.1 ;  more  usually  'h.inging'  in  AV,  gener-
ally 'screen'  in  RV),  see  Taiiernacle.  p'^  (xofioipa :  Is.
40  22t),  RV'"'K  'gauze,'  is  properly  infin.  of  ppi,  'to  be  fine  or
thin."  Thi;  lieawns  are  likened  to  a  fine  gauzy  expanse.  The
rendering  'curtain'  is  loose,  and  is  due,  no  doubt,  to  the  use  of
ny'T  in  the  parallel  Ps.  104  2.

CUSH.  I.  A  (non-.Semitic)  people  called  Kasse  is
mentioned  in  the  cuneiform  inscriptions  as  ihvelling  in
,  _  ,  ,  .  the  border  country  between  X.  Elam
1.  Babylonian.  ^_^,,  ^j^.^;^  Sennacherib  (Tayl.  Cyl.
164^;  A'Z?187)  describes  this  region  as  difficult  to
traverse,  and  as  not  subjugated  by  any  of  his  pre-
decessors. In  fact,  it  was  a  conquering  race  that
dwelt  there.  To  it  belonged  the  dynasty  which  ruled
over  Habylonia  for  nearly  six  centuries^a  lengthened
rule,  the  conse(|uence  of  which  was  the  infusion  of
a  large  Kassite  element  into  the  population  of  liaby-
lonia,  especially  S.  Babylonia,  which  might  fitly  be
called  the  land  of  Kas.  It  is  this  Kas  or  Kos  (whence
MT's  KQs)!  thit  is  intended  in  Gen.  108,  where
NiMKOi)  ['/.f.  ]  is  called  the  son  of  Cush.  That  the
Babylonian  Kas  is  meant  in  (jen.  2 13  as  the  passage
now  stands,  is  nnuh  less  easy  to  make  out  (see  Paka-
DISk),  while  to  h:)ld  with  Wincklcr  [AT  Utitcrsuch.
■i.J,bff.)  that  Isaiah  refers  to  the  S.  I',al)ylonian  Kas  in
the  difficult  prophecy.  Is.  IS,  can  be  rendered  possible
only  by  somewhat  improbable  textual  criticism  and
exegesis.

Wi.'s  result  (1892)  is  that  the  embassy  mentioned  by  Isaiah
is  that  of  .Merodach-bal.-idan  to  Hczckiah  in  720  H.c,  and  his
stron:.;est  argum.-nt  is  that  '  the  streams  of  Cush  '  in  18  i  is  not
applicable  to  the  kiiij;do:n  of  Ethiopia,  which  had  but  one
stream,  the  Nile.  The  answer  is  that  the  geographical  know-
ledge of  the  writer  was  naturally  but  small,  and  that  the  island
of  Meroe,  to  w'lijh  the  residence  of  the  Ethiopian  kings  was
removed  after  laharka's  time,  is  formed  by  the  union  of  the
Nile,  the  Atbara,  and  the  Klue  Nile.  On  grounds  independent
of  Wi.'s  hypothesis,  the  words  ciD'nn^S  lajfD  "ICX  •ire  correctly
held  to  be  a  late  interpolation.  (See  further  Che.  and  Haupt
in  Isaiah,  ilch.  SJSOT.)

2.  The  question  of  the  existence  of  an  Arabian  Cush
has  passed  into  a  new  phase  since  the  discovery  by
Winckler  (  \/i/sn,  2  ['98])  of  a  X.
Arabian  land  of  Kus  contiguous  to  the
X.  .-\rabian  Musr  or  Musri,  and  together  with  it  forming
the  region  called  Meluhha  (see  NJiZKAiM,  §  2/').  The
land  being  known  as  Kus  (  =f-3)  to  the  Assyrians,  we
cannot  avoid  a  re-examination  of  the  more  difficult  OT
passages  in  which  a'"3  (Cush)  or  'C'i3  (Cushi)  occurs.
Referring  first  to  the  Pentateuch  and  reserving  the
complicated  question  arising  out  of  Gen.  2 13  for  sub-
sequent consideration,  we  see  at  once  (u)  how  probable
it  is  that  in  the  list  of  names  in  (Jen.  106  Cush  is  an
Arabian  and  not  an  African  country  ;  for  none  of  the
eleven  names  in  Gen.  10  6  7  can  be  supposed  to  be
African  except  Cush,  Mizraim,  Put,  and  .Seba,  and  of
these  Mizraim  (read  rather  Mizrim)  has  been  claimed
elsewhere  for  Arabia,  while  Pur  [</.v.]  is  at  any  rate
not  Libya,  and  Seba  (n3d),  which  resists  all  attempts
to  localise  it  in  Africa,  may  well  be  susjiected  to  be
only  another  form  of  Sheba  (khc-) — i-e.,  the  well-known
Arabian  Sabasans.  It  is  true  Sheba  appears  in  v.  7  as
a  son  of  Raamah  ;  but  no  objection  can  lie  based
upon  that.  The  same  name  probably  fixed  itself  in
slightly  diflferent  forms  in  different  localities,  and  in  Ps.
72  lo  we  even find k3d  (which  has intruded into the

1  Unless  we  suppose  the  vocalisation  KQ.5  (e'53)  to  be  produced
by  the  confusion  of  the  Babylonian  and  the  African  py

967


2.  Arabian.


CUSHAN-RISHATHAIM

text)  as  a  variant  to  kic  (Possibly  Shclxi,  k3B'  should
everywhere  rather  be.Scba,  KStr. )  This  conclusion  greatly
reduces  the  error  committed  by  the  redactor  of  Gen.  10
in  inserting  w.  8  10-15  18/^-19  (which  behjng  to  J)  between
vv.  6/.  and  v.  20  (which  belong  to  P)  ;  for  the  popu-
lation of  the  Babylonian  lanil  of  Kas,  to  which  Ximrod
belonged,  was  largely  formed  by  the  immigration  of
'  Chald;ean  '  tribes  (c'lB's)  whose  home  was  probably
in  E.  Arabia.  If  Kas  Ix;  taken,  not  ethnically  but
geographically,  as  a  designation  of  the  Arabian  home
of  the  ancestors  of  a  large  part  of  the  people  of  S.
Babylonia,  it  was  not  incorrect  to  regard  Ximrod  as
related  to  the  Cush  mentioned  in  v.  6/.  (For  J's  view
see  XiMRDi),  MiZKAi.M. )

{fi)  In  .\u.  11  I  (E)  we  hear  of  '  the  Cushite  woman'
whom  Moses  had  niarried.  In  Ex.  21621  (J)  his  wife
Zijjporah  is  represented  as  a  Midianite.  A  northern
locality  for  Midianites  is  probable  even  without  the  very
doubtful  passage  1  K.  11 18  (cp  H.\UAI),  3).  There
is  no  necessity  to  follow  W'ellhausen  in  his  excision  of
the  whole  of  Xu.  12 1/>  ;  at  any  rate  '  the  Cushite
woman '  comes  from  an  early  source. See  Moses.

if)  On  2  S.  I821  see  Ci;siii,  3.

(</,  e, /)  Is.  2O3  4.33  45i4,  see  Mizkai.m.

{^^r)  Am.  97.  \\'ho  are  the  □-rp  ':2?  Hardly  the
'children  of  the  Ethiopians'  (EVJ.  What  evidence
have  we  that  the  IClhiopians  were  regarded  with  con-
temiJt  in  .\inos's  time?  Probably  the  prophet  looked
nearer  honn;,  and  saw  the  misery  inflicted  on  the  Arabian
Cusii  by  some  great  mischance  in  war  (cp  \Vi. ,  op,
cit.  8).

(//)  Hab.  37,  'the  tents  of  Cushan.'  ysxz  should
perhaps  become  ^'3,  Cush  ;  at  any  rate,  X.  Arabian
peoples  are  meant  in  both  parts  of  the  verse. See  Ci;sn.\N.

(/■)  Job  1  17. It is  cjuite possible to read c"n3  or

C'TD, Cushi(yi)m (Che.  JQR 4575) for c"ir3 (EV

'  Chaldeans'  [(/-t'.]),  which  is  not  without  difficulty,  and

I to  explain  this  of  the .\.  Arabian  Cushites,  who  must

at  any  rate  be  referred  to.

(y)  In  2  Ch.  21 16  we  hear  of  'Cushites'  lx;side  the
Arabians  (cp  Akahi.\),  a  rennniscence  of  whcjse  pre-
datory raids  probably  underlies  the  distorted  tradition
of  '  Zer.ah  the  Cushite'  (see  Zekam)  in  2  Ch.  W^ff-
I  [k)  Ps.  887  [S].  nii-  -ru^'-cy,  'with  the  inhabitants  01
Tyre,'  should  be  r?3}  nisc,  'Musri  and  Cush';  a
similar  emendation  is  required  in  Ps.  874.  The  com-
bination of  Philistines  and  Tyrians,  Tyrians  and  Ethi-
opians, presented  in  MI",  is  extremely  improbable.

(Besides  W'i.  Musri  2  \^MDV'G,  1898],  cp  Glaser,
Skizze,  2326/:)

3. Egyptian. See  Ethiopia.  T.  K.  C.

CUSH  (r-IS,  xoYc[eli  [BXAR],  chusi  [Vg.],  t'^p
[Tg.])  a  Benjamite  (Ps.  7,  heading).  The  text,  how-
ever, is  corrupt.

Cushi  (®  al.^  is  a  very  poor  conjecture  (see  Ci'SHi,  3).  No
doubt  '  Cush '  should  be  '  Kish '  (see  Tg.),  and  the  text  .should
run  "3»a'-j3  B'"p'i3  •  •  •  '■13T'?y.  The  missing  name  was
either  Mordecai  (Esth.  2  5  ;  cp  Che.  OPs  229/)  or,  perhaps  more
probably,  Shimei  (q.v.,  ic),  a  member  of  the  clan  of  Kish  (so
Kay,  Che.  Ps.'>"'i).  In  the  former  c.xse,  David  w.as  supposed  to
be  speaking'in  the  name  of  Mordecai  •  1  in  the  latter,  the  curses
of  Shimei  are  the  supposed  occasion  of  the  psalm.

CUSHAN  (|V""I3;  AiGionec  [BS<:-<^>'.\Q].  ee.
[X*]),  H.ab.  37!.  The  name  should  mean  '(a  clan)
belonging  to  Cush.'  on  the  analogy  of  Ithran,  Kenan,
Lotan  (but  see  CrsH,  i.  §  2h).  It  is  at  any  rate
parallel  to  Midian.  This  agrees  with  OT  passages
which  appear  to  place  the  Midianites  in  X.  Arabia,
where,  according  to  the  evidence  produced  by  Winckler,
there  was  a  region  known  to  the  Assyrians  as  Kiis
or  Cush. See  Cfsii,  i.  2  ;  Midian.

CUSHAN -RISHATHAIM  RV ;  \V  Chushan-
rishathaim  (D'nrL'h  |l,"-12,  i.e.,  'Cushan  of  double
wickedness ' ).

1  Ps.  7  was  a  Purim  psalm.

968


CUSHAN-RISHATHAIM

The  versions  have  :  Xov<rap<Ta8atn  |ltAI,  •aipurnniuB  (I.)  (not
original!;  N'et.  l-at.,  C/imiirsa/tm ;  Naples  SynupMs,  Xui/o-ap-
a'U/utf[sit.] ;  Jos.  \ov<Tap<ra0ov  iKen.) ;  ^  g.  Chtisaii  J\asiitliiiii4  :
(sec  \lcr,  Dit  liibtl  liesjiis.  ii  ;  l^t;unle,  itfptuag.  StiuiUn,
i4=»/2  74).

The  name  of  a  king  of  Aram  (MT  Akam-naiiaraim
[./.v.]: a  very  rare  expression), who is  said to  have
o|)pressi'(l  the  Israelites  after  their  con-


CUTH


1.  The  story.


((uest of  Canaan for  eiglit years, till


CHliniel  l)en  Kenaz  overthrew  him  (Judg.  .'57-11 ).  'I'll
story  of  this  oppression  and  deliverance  is  introduced  a
a  typical  illustration  of  the  edifyinjj  theory  of  Isr.nelitish
history  put  forward  in  Judg.  211-19,  an  1  was  wanting  in
the  pre-Ueuteronomic  book  of  heroic  stories  which  forms
the  iiasis  of  our  Ji;ih;ks  [q.v. ,  S§  3  5).  Hence  we  are  not
surprised  that  it  presents  none  of  the  characteristics  of
narratives  founded  ujjon  genuine  popular  traditions,
and  that  only  two  assertions  emerge  out  of  the  phrases
of  which  it  mainly  consisis— vi/. ,  that  the  land  of  Israel
was  coiKjuered  by  an  early  .\ramaan  king,  and  that
the  Israelites  were  deliveretl  by  the  Judahite  (Kenizzite)
hero  Othniel.  These  assertions,  howeviT,  are  contra-
dictory. I'.ven  in  the  early  time  of  David  the  clans
of  Judah  had  but  a  slight  connection  with  Israel,  and
in  the  time  of  Deljorah's  insurrection,  it  appears,  they
stood  entirely  aloof  from  the  Israelites  (see  Judg.  5).
It  is  hi.storically  impossible  that  the  Judahite  clan  of
Othniel  couUl  have  playoil  the  glorious  iiart  ascribed
to  it  in  the  story.  Hudde  (A'/.  Sa.  95),  therefore,
w  hile  admitting  that  the  oppression  of  Cuslian-rishathaim
may  conceivably  rest  on  a  trailitional  basis,  rejects
Cithniel's  championship.  The  editor  of  Judges,  he  re-
marks, belonged  no  doubt  to  the  tribe  of  Judah,  and
took  a  pleasure  in  giving  it  a  representative  among  the
'judges.' .Similarly  W'ellhausen  and  Stade.

It  is  more  probable,  however,  that  the  whole  trouble
is  caused  by  an  error  in  the  text.

There  is  some  reason  to  think  thai  the  true  re.iding  of©  in

Ju(.l>^.  3  8  10  is . . . Xoi/craptraf^aijLi  ^aatAcwf OaaiAta) ^vpt'ac

—^  , (note  the  position  of  trorafxux'  in  7'.  8,  and  see

2.  Probable Fields  Hex.  on  v.  10  .1 Kvcii  apart  from  this,

origin  of it  is  not  too  bold  to  emend  cix,  '.\rain,'  into

the  name.  DIK.  Kdom  (as  in  2  K.  Itlb),  aid  to  omit  c'■l,^J
.as  a  gloss  (with  Griitz,  Klost.).  '1  hat  Othniel
the  Keniz/ite  should  he  the  deliverer  of  judah  from  the
Kdomite  tyranny  is  only  natural.  Observe  that  the  next
oppressors  are  the  Moabites.  Whether  we  may  go  on  to
correct  Rishaihaim  into  Rosh-hat-titiuin'i,  'the  chief  of  the
Temanites,'  with  Klo-.i.  (fiiscli.  122),  and  to  work  into  this  para-
graph the  isolated  passage  1  36  by  prefixing  "'],  'and  he  smote,"
IS  problematical.  It  seems  to  the  present  writer  enough  to  read,
for  □'nyc'n.  ':C'nn  n»tS,  '  from  the  land  of  the  Temanites,'
which  is  the  description  attached  to  the  n:ime  of  the  Kdomite
kin,i  Hu>ham  in  Cien.  3l5  34.  The  letters  became  partly  defaced,
and  an  editor  wittily  read  D'nj'cn.  It  is  very  possible,  too,  that
the  name  \V^Z  (Cushan)  is  a  corruption  of  Dwin  (Crn)  Husham
(cp  Klost.  119).  .  The  writer  was  at  a  loss  for  a  name,  and  took
one  from  the  list  of  Kdomite  kings.  Husham's  son  Had.id  was
a  great  warrior  (?'.  35);  it  was  natural  to  make  the  father  equal
to  him  in  this  respect.  Whether  we  may  suppose  that  the  editor
to  whom  we  are  indebted  for  '  Cushan-rishathaim,  king  of  .\ram-
naharaim,'  had  in  his  mind  Kassite  (Cushitc)  incursions  such
as  some  scholars  connect  with  NiMKon  and  Zkkaii  (qq.v\
which  might  be  loosely  statetl  to  have  proceeded  from  '  Aram-
naharaim,'  may  1)C  doubted.  For  a  different  view  of  the  origin
of  the  story  as  given  in  MT  see  Moore  ( ludges,  88  /.),  w  ho
thinks  that  we  have  here  a  distortion  of  the  tradition  of  a  raid
of  Midianiti.sh  'Cushites'  into  Judah.

Those  who  prefer  to  take  the  book  of  Judges  as  it
Oth stands, without applying  critical  metho<ls,

■  ^  have two recent hyix)thrses respecting

■ Cushan-rishathaim  to  choose  from.

Prof.  M 'Curdy  (///.vC.  Prof-h.  Men.  1  230;  cp  221)  thinks  that
the  '  whole  land  '  (of  Canaan)  may  have  been  suMued  by  the
Aram<-Eans,  who,  during  the  enfeeblement  of  Assyria,  h.-»d  re-
occupied  the  land  of  Mit.ini,  the  Kgyptian  Naharina,  which
includes  W.  Mesopotamia  (see  A'/'l^l  850),  some  time  before
the  accession  of  Tiglath-pilescr  I.  (1120  B.C.).  In  the  ease  with
which  the  asserted  conquest  of  the  strong  cities  of  Oinaan  was
effected  by  the  Aramaeans,  in  the  name  ("«f/i/»«-rishathaim,  a^d
in  the  championship  of  a  Kenizzite  or  Judahite  hero,  he  finds  no
difficulty. Prof. Sayce, too, in his ingenious  defence of  a

1  (8b  has  in  r.  8  XovtraptraOaiiiL  PatriKiu^  iroTaftuic  'S.vpiai,  and
in  z:  10  X.  p.  SvptVt  n-orauti"'.

969


non-critical  view  of  the  nariative  ((>//.  i>/<'«.  7<)t-2'^j),  make*
no  remark  on  die  n.iine  of  Isr.iel's  oppressor,  and  holds  Othniel
to  have  Ijceii  the  deliverer  of  '  S.  Palesiinc  '  from  the  tyranny  of
th:  army  of  the  king  of  Mil.'ini  at  the  time  of  the  invasion  of
Kgypt  by  the  N.  (icoplcs  somewhere  about 1210  B.C.  (leign  of
Kanicscs  III.). The  imaginativeness  of  I'tof.  .Sayce's  statements
respecting  ihe  king  of  Mituni's  niuvcmcnts  has  tacen  pointed
out  by  Driver {Ci>HU»it.  Rci'.  W  420/:  1'94J). In  fact,  the  itate-
inrnt  that  tlie  king  of  Miluni '  (larticipated in the  M^ulhward
movement  of  the  peoples  of  the  .N.,'  but  'lingered  on  the  way,'
Mild  presumably sought to  secure  that dominion  in  Canaan
uhich  had  liclonged  to  some  of  liis  predecessors,'  has  no  monu-
mental evidence  in  its  favour. If  tradition  had  preserved  the
! memory of any incident in the great migration of  the N.
I |M:oples,  would it  not have been the  desolation  of  the  land  of
I .Amur  (N.  Palestine)  caused by  the  N.  peoples  themselves? It
should^  l)e  added  that  Stade  (OVkA.  1  6<y)  i>osiii\ely  denies  that
there  is  any  basis  of  tradition in the  story,  and  lx)th  Hudde
and  G.  F.  Moore  (whose  treatment  of  Judg.  37-11  is  thoroughly
I good)  are  half  inclined  to  agree  with  him. .^lade,  however,  goes
I too  far  when  he  says  that  the  form  of  the  name  Cushan-ri-haihaim
! is enough to  prove it unhistorical  (Cestli.  1  6q  ; cp Kucnen.
Ein/fitiinc,  1,  j  19,  n.  i). Nor  is  this  assumption  at  all  essential
I to  his  theory. (Since  the  above  was  written,  Klost. 's  view  has
been  adopted  by  J.  .Marquart  (l-unU.  11).]  T.  K.  ('.

CUSHI  ("t'-IS,  'Cushite';  cp  Jehidi  and  the  Moalj-
ite  name  Musuri  (man  of  Mu.sur)  in  the  lists  of  I-.sar-
haddon  and  Asur-baiii-pal,  A'^  7"'-' 356,  no.  4;  voYCei
\\V\\.\chusi{\^.\).

1.  All  ancestor  of  Jkhidi  Xq.v.^  der.  Sil  14).

2.  Father  01  ZtifllA.MAll  1  {q.v.\  ("/eph.  1  1).

3.  'c-'sn,  R\' '  the  Cushite,'  the  messenger  whom  Joab
desfiatched,  in  i)reference  to  Ahimaaz,  to  inform  David
of  the  death  of  Absalom.  Ahimaaz,  we  are  told,  follow-
ing later  ran  by  the  way  of  the  plain '-^  and  reached
David  first  (2  .S.  18  19-32).  Two  tjueslions  .arise.  Who
was  '  the  Cushite '  ?  and  why  did  Joab  prefer  him  to
.Ahimaaz  as  the  messenger?  The  account,  which  has
been  taken  from  a  fuller  narrative,  does  not  say.  Evi-
dently ■  the  Cushite '  was  a  foreigner,  and  this  was  the
reason  why,  like  the  Amalekite  in  2  .S.  ] ,  he  could
without  oftnce  be  the  bearer  of  evil  tidings.  1  hat
David  had  foreign  soldiers  (c.^. ,  the  Hittite  Uri.ah)  is
well  known.  '  '1  he  Cu.shile '  was  not  (as  H.  1'.  Sm.
supposes)  a  negro.  \\'e  can  hardly  doubt  that  he
beloii".  (1  to  the  N.  .\rabian  Cush  =«  (see  Clsii,  §  2).

CUSHIONS  ( C"=|.}1-1!?.  I'rov.  7  16  31  22  RV
Ke(^<^^<M()N Mk.  438 R\'|. See
cp  kiMii


npoc-
Bed, § 3/, and


CUSTOr,  ( I )  i'??  i:zra  4  13  20  7 24  R\'  {W  '  tribute' ),
(2)  -^bn  Ezra  //.f.  ■•  .-\V  (RV  'toll).  (3)  reAooNiON
Mt.  99  etc.  AV  '  receipt  of  custom,'  RV  '  place  of  toll."
See  Ta.xatio.n.

CUTH  (ni2;  xoye  \\^\  A  omits],  xooGa  [I-]:
Chut,ui :  \(^  and  Cuthah  (nn-IS  ;  xoynGa  [H'.
XOYA  l-'^].  Xw8a  [L];  Cutha),  a  place  in  Habylonia
from  which  colonists  were  brought  to  N.  Israel  (2  K.
1724),  identified  with  Tell-Jbraliim,  NE.  of  Babylon,
where  remains  of  Nergals  temple  have  been  found.
It  is  the  Kuta  or  Kiitfi  of  the  cuneiform  inscriptions.
Bt^fore  the  rise  of  Babylon,  Kuta  and  Sijijiar,  it  appears,
were  the  chief  cities  of  N.  Babylonia.  As  late  as  the
tinte  of  Asur-bani-pal  it  was  obligator)'  on  the  kings
of  Assyria  to  sacrifice  to  Sam.as  and  N'krgal  [vf-i'. ]  at
SiiJjwr  and  Kuta  resi^ectively,  a  custom  apparently
due  to  the  primitive  imjxirtance  of  these  cities  in  the
'  kingdom  of  the  Four  Quarters  of  the  'World ;
(Winckler.  (/A./ 33281).

^  We  have  a  record  of  the  building  of  the  temple  of  Ncrgal  in
Kuta  by  Dungi,  King  of  Ur  (A'A'3aSi);  and Nebuchadrezzar

J  This  is  apparently  the  Cusi  who  fipires  .is  the  father  of  Ezra
in  a  SiKuiish  MS  of  4  Ksd.  ;  sec  Uensly,  Fourth  Ezra,  xliv.y;
Ixxx.

a  "1337  (.MT),  but  perhaps  rather  jiinan, 'the  gorge '(Klo.).

See  KlHRAIM. W<«.D  OF.

3  The  alternati\e  would  be  to  suppose  kak-kiisi  (21^  Kttli)
to  l>e  an  old  corruption  of  Huskai  (see  the  readings).  This
reminds  us  too  much  of  1  heodore  of  Mopsuestia's  confusion  of
the  Gush  \q.v.\  in  the  title  of  Ps.  7  with  the  Archite  Hushai.

■*  The  third  term  in  these  passages,  PrKVlZ,  is  rendered  'toll
(AV)or  *  tribute '(RV).

970


CUTTING  OFF

mentions  among  his  pious  nets  that  he  restored  the  temples  of  I
the  great  gods  at  Kutfi  {A'Jl'^si).  It  was  from  the  temple  of
Nergal  that  one  of  the  creation-stories  brouRht  from  As;ir-b5nt-
pal's  library  is  stated  to  have  come  (A'/'(2|  I  1^7-153) ;  see
Crkation,  §  16.  The  name  'Culhaians'  lies  hidden  under
Archkvitks  (i/.v.)  in  Ezra  4  9.  In  the  pnra-ieology  of  the  later
Jews  '  Cutha;ans  '  is  equivalent  to  '  Samaritans '  (so  in  Jos.  and
the  T:ilmiul).  With  this  name  is  probably  to  be  connected  the
CoUTHA  of  I  Esd.  532  (not  in  the  lists  of  Ezra  and  Nehemiah).

T.  K.  C.

CUTTING  OFF.  This  penalty  ( '  I  [Vahwe]  will  cut
him  off  from  among  his  people,"  'he  shall  be  cut  off
from  his  pi'0]ile,'  'from  Israel, '  'from  the  assembly,'
and  the  like  ;  i,'2j;  mpo  inx  'man)  is  first  met  with  in  H  1
(see  Leviticus),  where  it  is  attached  to  a  variety  of
offences,  many  of  them  of  a  cer^-monial  or  technical
character  (Lev.  17  49,  failure  to  bring  slain  ox,  lamb,  or
goat  to  the  tabernacle;  17  10  14,  eating  blood;  18 29,
various  'abominations';  20  3  5/.,  Moloch- worship  ;  20
17/.,  incest,  etc.  ;  223,  unclean  approach  to  holy  things).
It  occurs  frequently  in  P  (Cien.  17  14,  neglect  of  circum-
cision ;  Ex.  12  15,  eating  leaven  in  paschal  season  ;  Ex.
'^03338,  imitating  or  putting  to  secular  use  the  holy  oil
or  incense  ;  Ex.  :U  14,  sabbath  profanation  ;  Lev.  720/. ,
unclean  sacrificial  eating  ;  7  25  27,  eating  of  fat  or  blood  ;
198,  eating  sacrifice  on  third  day  ;  2829,  non-observance
of  day  of  atonement;  Nu.  9i3,  failure  to  ktx-p  the
passover  though  clean  and  not  on  a  journey;  I530/. ,
high-hanfled  sin,  insult  to  Yahwe  ;  19 13,  contact  with
dead  ;  19  20,  failure  to  remove  uncleanness  from  contact
with  dead  by  sprinkling).

The  view  of  the  older  interpreters  was  that  the  ex-
pression meant  the  death  penally.  It  is  worth  noticing,
however,  thit  in  Ex.  ;U  14/.  sejiarate  emphasis  is  laid  on
'he  shall  be  put  to  death'  (nnv  mr)  as  distinguished
from  '  that  soul  shall  be  cut  off'  (nmh  r3:n  nm^j)  ;  cp
Lev.  20 27  (death  penalty  on  witchcraft),  the  Deutero-
nomic  expression  ynn  lya.  '  put  away  the  evil,'  Dt.  IBs
[6]  (in  connection  with  the  death  penalty  on  the  false
prophet  or  dreamer  of  dreams),  and  perhaps  also  Lev.
2329/. ,  nma:  followed  by  Ti-inxa,  gradation  of  penalties.
If  account  be  taken  of  the  actual  circumstances  amid
which  H  and  P  arose,  it  seems  more  probable  that  the
writers  had  in  their  mind  either  some  such  idea  as  that
which  was  carried  into  practice  under  Ezra  and  Nehemiah
(Ezra  108,  'separated  from  the  congregation  of  the
captivity,'  ]|  i  Esd.  94,  'cast  out  from  the  multitude  of
them  that  were  of  the  captivity'),  and  ultimately  de-
velope  1  into  the  minor  and  major  excommunications  of
the  synagogue  (see  SYNAGOGi;r.),  or  that  they  thought
onlv  of  death  through  divine  agency,  not  of  punishment
inflicted  at  the  hands  of  the  community  (Driver  on  Lev.
720/.). See,  further,  B.\N.

CUTTINGS  OF  THE  FLESH  (Ceremcnial  Mutila-
tions). The  former  heading  is  derived  from  the  EV
of  Lev.  19 2S  21  5.  It  is,  however,  too  narrow  in  its
range.  Circumcision  cannot  altogether  be  left  out  in
dealing  with  the  '  cuttings  '  referred  to  in  these  passages  ;
nor  can  we  forget  how  intimately  the  laceration  of  the
flesh  in  mourning  is  associated  with  the  practice  of
shaving  the  head  or  cutting  off  part  of  the  hair.  The
origin  and  significance  of  Circumcision  [>/.v.]  is  treated
elsewhere.  The  present  article  will  deal  with  (i)  in-
cisions (§  i/).  (2)  the  cutting  off  of  the  hair  (§§  3-5).
and  (3)  tattooing  (§  6  /),  regarded  as  ceremonial
mutilations  (see  further  S.\CRIFICE).

The  technical  Hebrew  terms  for  ceremonial  incisions
are  tj-iir,  ddic'  (verb  Dir)  ;  2  the  verb  Tiina  also  is  used.


In  Lev.  21 5  [H]  we  read  (with  refer-
Thev


1.  References  ^^^^^  ^^  mourning  for  the  deadl
to  cuttings, gj^^jj  jjQj  j^^j^g  ...  any  cuttings  in
their  flesh '  (point  nbib,  as  plur.  of  tJiB-  ?). The  practice

t  It  may  be  noted  that  the  '  I '  is  peculiar  to  H,  as  also  the
phrase  '  I  will  set  my  iare '  (Lev.  1"  10  20  3  6  26  17)  or  '  put  my
face  '  (20  5)  against  the  offender.

3  Aram.  V^^iiflO,  Ass.  tardiu,  Ar.  iarafa,  strictly  'to  cut
into,'  '  nick,'  or  '  notch.'

971


CUTTINGS  OF  THE  FLESH

was  forbidden  especially  to  the  priests,  who  would
thereby  '  profane '  themselves.  The  substantive  cnc'
occurs  in  Lev.  1928  :  'Ye  shall  not  make  any  cutting  in
your  flesh  for  a  (departed)  soul.'  (On  the  only  other
passage  [Zech.  123]  in  which  bie'  occurs  no  stress  can
be  laid).i  There  is  no  exact  parallel  for  this  Hebrew
usage  in  Assyrian  ;  but  we  do  find  Hardfit  used  of
rending  a  garment  in  token  of  grief  (a  passage  in
Sargon's  Annah,  294,  gives  a  striking  parallel  to  2  S.
I2),  and  pro<)ably  enough  this  rending  was  an  attenu-
ation of  the  more  savage^custom  of  rending  the  flesh.'
Asur-bani-pal  (.Smith,  127  81)  too  speaks  of  his  warriors
as  those  who  '  at  the  lx;hest  of  the  gods  let  themselves
be  hacked  to  p-eces  in  the  fray'  [ittanasi-atu).  On  this
it  may  be  remarked  that  the  case  of  mourners  who
shed  their  blood  to  feed  the  manes  of  departed  friends
is  analogous  to  that  of  soldiers  who  do  this  on  the
battlefield  in  obedience  to  the  gods.  A  supposed  second
term  for  ceremonial  incisions  (riTij)  is  simply  due  to
misunderstanding.  In  Jer.  4S37  we  should  read  with
guA  Q..,,  t,^  ('all  hands  are  cut  into');  the  prefi.xed
Sy  in  MT  is  an  error  ;  nnj  is,  in  fact,  participial.
The  reflexive  form  -\-\it\t\  occurs  in  Dt.  14i  (parallel  to
the  already  cited  passage  of  I^v. ),  and  at  least  six
times  elsewhere.  The  primary  meaning  of  the  simple
stem  is  obviously  '  to  cut  off '  ;  cp  Ar.  jadda,  jadda,
T]3.  j^^.  The  ceremonial  cutting  referred  to  was  an
ordinary  custom  of  mourners  in  the  time  of  Jeremiah,
to  disjjense  with  which  would  have  been  something  very
strange  and  unusual  (Jer.  166  41  5  47  5)  ;  evidently  the
contemporaries  of  the  prophet  did  not  recognise  the
law  in  Dt.  14i.  The  incisions  referred  to  in  Mic.  5
[4 14],  '  Now  hack  thyself  [so  Nowack],  O  daughter
of  attack,'  must  also  be  signs  of  mourning;  and  this
may  well  be  the  case  too  in  Jer.  67,  where  mijn".  '  they
would  cut  themselves,'  implies  that  the  apostate  Jews
who  resorted  to  the  Whore's  House  (i.e.,  the  idol
temple)  wished  to  bring  over  the  Deity  to  their  side  by
self-mutilation.  This  description  of  the  prophet  may
be  illustrated  by  i  K.  18  28,  where  the  '  cutting  '  practised
by  the  priests  of  Baal  is  said  to  have  been  after  this
custom  or  ritual,  and  to  have  followed  the  ritual  dance
by  or  round  the  altar  (see  D.anck,  §  5).  Hosea,  too
(714),  speaks  of  Israelites  who  'because  of  corn  and
new  wine  cut  themselves,'  to  propitiate  their  god  (read-
ing mun-  with  &'^'^,  We. ,  Che. ,  RV^e-).

The  practice  of  shedding  the  blood  in  one  way  or
another  as  an  honour  due  to  the  dead  is  world-wide.

_. ._  It  is  found  not  only  among  the  Hebrews

2.  Significance,  ^^^j  ^^^  ^^j^^  ^^,^  ^^ -^  ,,,  ^qi).  but

also  among  the  ancient  Greeks  and  the  modern
African  and  Polynesian  peoples.  '  The  blood  is  the
life '  ;  and  it  is  probable  that  when  in  primitive  times
the  mourning  kin  '  cut  themselves  for  the  dead,'  they
did  it  in  the  belief  that  the  departed  drank  in  new
life  with  the  blood  thus  poured  out  by  the  willing  self-
sacrifice  of  sorrowing  friends,  and  at  the  same  time
renewed their bond of union with the living (cp

ESCHATOLOGY  §  3.  4)-

Such  acts  doubtless  had  a  sacrificial  or  .sacramental  asjject ;
and  in  view  of  the  fact  that  the  disembodied  spirit  was  conceived
as  possessing  a  quasi-divine  or  daemonic  character,  with  un-
defined potencies  for  good  and  evil,  it  may  be  assumed  that  the
blood-offering  was,  or  became,  as  much  a  conciliatory  present
to  the  manes  of  the  dead  as  that  of  slain  victims  was  intended
to  be  to  the  higher  gods.  It  may  even  have  been  thought  that,  as
the  dece.ised  man  had  pa.ssed  into  another  world  on  leaving  the
circle  of  his  kin,  he  had  in  some  sense  become  a  stranger  to  them,
and  that  therefore  it  was  neces.sary  to  make  a  blood-covenant
with  him,  and  so  .secure  his  good-will  for  the  tribe  or  family.
The  radical  change  of  death  might  suggest  that  as  the  corporate
unity  of  the  departed  with  his  clan  had  been  broken,  it  must  be

1  If  the  text  is  correct  the  meaning  must  be  '  to  strain  oneself
to  pieces,'  'to  break  down  under  a  lo.-id.'  Nowack,  however,
holds  that  a  gloss  has  been  taken  into  the  text.

2  There  was  no  longer  any  consciousness  of  this  when  the
post -exilic  prophet  Joel  wrote,  'Rend  vour  heart,  and  not  your
garments'  (Foel2i3).  Else  he  would  have  said,  'Rend  your
heart,  and  not  your  flesh '  (cp  Jer.  4  4).

972


CUTTINGS  OF  THE  FLESH


restored  by  giving  the  dead  to  drink  of  the  blood  of  the  living
kindred.

Hearing  in  mind  that  ritual  practices  acquire  a  new
synil)olisin  as  time  goes  on,  and  that  affection  for
the  dead  has  often  evinced  itself,  even  at  a  high  stage
of  culture,  by  suicide  over  the  corjjse,  and  by  such
customs  as  the  Hindu  Sat!,  we  may  Ije  inciinetl  to  see
in  the  '  incisions  for  the  deail,"  as  practise*!  in  the  |)eriod
of  tiie  great  prophets,  a  symbolical  expression  for  the
willingness  of  the  mourner  to  depart  and  be  with  the
lovwl  and  lost  one.

The passages  which  niention  incisions  of  the  flesh

also  niciition  cutting  off  the  hair  as  a  sign  of  mourning.

3 Cuttina- '^"''"^  Lev- 21  s  [H]  : '  They  (the  priests)

■  _  .  .  *  shall  not  make  a  kire  bald  patch  on  their
head,  and  the  corner  of  their  beard  they
shall  not  shave  off'  (cp  Lev.  1S>27  Dt.  14i,  '  An<l  ye
siiall  not  set  baldness  between  your  eyes' — i.e.,  on  the
forehead — *  for  one  that  is  dead  ')  ;  Kzekiel,  too  (44 20),
forbids  artificial  baldness  to  the  priests.  The  preval-
ence of  the  custom  of  cutting  off  the  hair  in  token  of
deep  grief  is,  however,  presupposed  by  the  earlier
prophets,  who  take  no  e.xception  to  it.  Micah  says,
addressing  a  city  community,  '  Make  thee  bald  and
shear  thee  for  tliy  darling  children  ;  make  broad  thy
Ixildness  like  the  vulture's  ;  for  they  are  carried  away
captive  from  thee'  (Mic.  I14).  See  also  Am.  810  Is.  22
12  (cp  824)  Jcr.  729  166  Kzek.  7i8  ;  such  passages  show
that  the  prohibition  of  the  custom  referred  to  belongs
to  a  later  age  of  religious  legalism.  In  Dt.  14i  these
practices  are  forbidden  to  Israelites  generally,  on  account
of  their  relation  to  Yahw6,  on  the  principle  on  which
Aaronites  with  any  physical  defect  are  e.xcluded  from
the  service  of  the  altar  (Lev.  21  16-23).

Cutting  off  the  hair  was  also  the  most  characteristic
expression  of  an  Arab  woman's  mourning.  When
Halid  b.  al-Walid  died,  all  the  women  of  his  family
offered  their  hair  at  his  grave  (Agh.  15i2  ;  W'e.  Hcid.C^)
182).  It  was  a  sacrifice  to  the  dead,  and  the  under-
lying idea  of  the  offering  is  suggested  by  the  story  of
Samson.  '  If  I  be  shaven,"  said  that  hero,  'my  strength
will  go  from  me'  (Judg.  I617).  In  other  words,  the
hair,  the  growth  of  which  was  continually  renewed,
appeared  to  the  ancients  a  centre  of  vitality,  like  the
blood  ;i  and  thus  to  offer  it,  whether  to  deity  (Nu.  618)
or  to  the  spirits  of  the  dead,  had  essentially  the  same
ini[)ort  atid  purpose  as  to  offer  one's  blood,  the  aim
being  to  originate  or  to  renew  a  bond  of  vital  union
Ix-tween  the  worshipper  and  the  unseen  power.  Re-
4  I  'tiato  V  f^''"'''*-'^  ^^  sacrificial  acts,  Ixjth  blood-
.  .^  letting  and  offering  the  hair  were  •  private
ceremonials. . ",  i  • • r j w .u ■

acts  of  worship, jx-rformed by  the  m-

dividual  for  his  own  good  as  distinct  from  that  of
the  community  ;  and  both  are  common  elements  in
ceremonies  of  initiation  by  which  youths  are  admitted
to  the  rights  of  manhood,  especially  to  marriage  and
particip.uion  in  the  tribal  worship.  Thus  Cikclm-
cisiON  [q.v.,  §  4]  was  originally  a  rite  preliminary  to
marriage  (Ex.  424-26);  and  Lucian  (Dca  Syr.  60)
informs  us  that  the  long  locks  of  young  p)eople  were
shorn  and  dedicated  at  the  old  Syrian  sanctuaries  on
the  same  occasion.  In  the  course  of  time  the  barbarous
character  of  the  blood-offering  caused  it  to  lapse  from
general  use,  except  among  certain  priesthoods  and
votaries  ;  whilst  the  hair-offering,  which  in  origin  and
principle  was  identical,  survived  to  the  close  of  Pagan-
ism, and  may  be  recognised  in  the  tonsure  of  early
Christian  Monachism.

The  passage  Lev.  I927  (H  ;  about  570  B.C.)  has
already  Ix-en referred to. It is a  prohibition of  a

_  Qijj.j.  practice,  in  vogue  among  certain  Arabian
BDeciaiised "''*'^'  °^  shaving  off  the  hair  all  round

",  the  head,  a  circular  patch  lx;ing  left  on

the  crown  (Herod.  38) — a  practice  indi-

1  See  WRS  A"./.  5<-«/.0  324,  and  note  the  Chinese  phrase,
mao  hsiich. '  h.iir  and  blocnl,'  and  the  saying,  '  Am  I  not  of  the
same  hair  (scil.  as  my  father)?'

973


cate<I,  it  seems,  by  the  nickname  '  Shom-patcs '  ('xixp
hkd)  applieil  by  Jeremiah  to  some  Arabian  [X-'oplcs  (RV,
al.so  AV  mg. ,  '  all  that  have  the  corners  [of  tjfjeir  hair]
jjolled'  ;  Jer.  926  [25]  25  23  4932).  There  can  be  little
doubt  that  this,  like  most  other  ancient  trilal  Ixidgcs  and
customs,  had  religious  asstx,iations  and  a  religious
significance  ;  in  fact,  Hero<U»tus  (38)  expressly  says
that  the  .Arabs  pretended  to  imitate  their  national  god
Orotal-I)iony.sos  by  their  peculiar  tonsure.  Hence,  no
doubt,  the  practice  was  forbidden  to  the  Jews  by  the
older  Levitical  code  (Lev.  192;),  the  object  being  to
isolate  the  people  of  Yahwe  from  the  neighbouring
nations  and  their  worships.  On  the  other  hand,
there  were  some  important  religious  customs  which,
though  of  ethnic  origin,  were  not  abolished  by  the
law.  Hence  it  was  that  the  Nazirite  continued  to  make
an  offering  to  Yahwe  of  his  shorn  hair  (.see  N.v/.iKrri.)
— a  practice  which  survived,  in  a  shape  modified  by
circumstances,  in  the  days  of  Paul  (Acts  21 23-26  ;  cp
18  18). See  H.\IK,  §  2/

What  we  call  '  tatiofjing '  also  is  prohibite<l  (Lev.  19
28). The  expression  y-j-p  n3.''3  does  not  occur  again

Tattooing, '"  "^^  ^^^  =  '•^"'  '"  ^'•""^  Hebrew  j.pfP
.  *• ^ZTXi means the  same  as the Greek

etc.  "^ "^ ,1.  ,  ,  ■

ariyixtni^uv,  to  set  a  mark  on  a  thing

by  pricking,  puncturing,  or  branding  (see  Buxtorf ; it

is  also  used  of  fowls  scratching  the  grtjund).

The object of  graving or branding marks on the

flesh  would  appear  to  be  dedication  of  the  person  to

his god. Herodotus (2  113) mentions a tcniijle of

llerakles  at Taricheia, by  the  Canopic  mouth  of  the

Nile,  where  a  runaway  slave  might  find  asylum  if  he

'  gave  himself  to  the  god  ' by  h.iving  certain '  sacred

stigmata'  made  on  him.' In Is.  44$  wc  have  a  good

instance  of  graving  a  divine  name  on  the  hand,  in  token

of  self-dedication  : "  One  will  say,  I  am  Yahwe's  ;  and

another  will  name  himself  by  the  n;imc  of  Jacob  ;  and

aiunher  will  mark  on  his  hand  Wilmji:  s,  and  receive  the

surname  Israel '  (5//C>  7"  ;  cp  critical  notes). .\s  far  as

they  indicated  the  ownership  or  pro[x.Tty  of  the  god,

such  marks  are  analogous  to  the  j»7/f/./«  or  cattle-marks

of  the  Hodawi  trili«s,  and  may  have  had  their  origin  in

that necessary practice of  primitive pastoral life (cj)

col.  711, n. 1). In Kzek.  946  we  read  of  marking  a

Tau  or  cross,  the  symbol  of  life  (cp  the  Eg}'ptian  ^,

'nh,  life,  with  ▼J-,  the  Phoenician  form  of  the  letter
Tau)  on  the  foreheads  of  the  faithful  in  Jerusalem,  who
are  to  be  spared  from  slaughter  ;  which  recalls  the
sealing  of  the  144,000  servants  of  God  on  their  fore-
heads ( Rev.  73/. ),  and  further,  the  mark  of  the  Beast
(xapa7Ma.  something  graven.  Acts  17  29)  on  the  right
hand  or  the  forehead  of  his  worshi[)pers  (Rev.  13i6y.
20  4).  The  strongly  metaphorical  words  of  Paul,  too,
/  bear  in  my  body  the  marks  (or  brands)  of  Jesus,  ra
ariyfiaTa  toO  'IrjcroO  (Gal.  617)  clearly  presuppose  a
custom  of  tattooing  or  branding  the  flesh  with  sacred
names  and  symlxjls,  which  would  be  familiar  as  a
heathen  practice  to  Paul's  Asiatic  converts.''

In  Ex.  139  Dt.  68  II18  and  elsewhere  we  have  what
may  be  regarded  as  a  substitute  for  the  painful  processes
7  Substitutea.  of  tattooing  and  branding.  The  Israel-
ite is  to  bind  the  precepts  of  the  Law
on  his  hand  for  a  si^n  /  they  are  also  to  serve*  as
Ekontlkts  [^.».]  (ni:t:ia.  phylacteries)  be/ween  his  eyes,
— i.e.,  on  his  forehead  (cp  Dt.  68  Rev.  73).  The  sign
on  the  hand  recalls  the  sign  which  Yahw6  set  on  Cain
(Gen.  415:  see  C.MN,  §4),  whilst  those  strips  of  inscrilx^d
vellum,  the  phylacteries  (  =  ' frontlets,"  EV  of  OT)  of
Mt.  235,  were  looked  upon  as  having  magical  qualities,

1  Thus  Ptolemy  Philopator  branded  the  Alexandrian  Jews
with  the  sign  of  the  ivy  to  identify  them  with  the  cult  of
Dionysus;  see  Hacchls.  Cp  Frazer,  Totcmism,  36 Jf.  For
the  hr.-inding  of  .serfs  see  KoYCT,  (  ^o.

2  Cp  Deissmann,  BibeUtuditn  (95),  262-276  (a  new  and  in-
genious theory).

974


CYAMON

not  less  than  the  old  tattooings  and  brandincjs  ;  they
were  a  protection  against  harm,^  and  probably  also
secured  health  and  good  fortune  (cp  Targ.  Cant.  S3).

For  the  literature  of  the  subjects  here  treated  of,  see
the  works  referred  to  under  Cikcimcision,  Molkning
Customs,  Fkonti.kts,  Sackii-ick,  etc.  See  also
WRS  Rel.  iVw.l-'  ch.  9,  and  the  authorities  there
cited  ; !•:.  H.  Tylor,  Prim.  Cult.  2  18.  c.  J.  B.

CYAMON  (kyamoon  [BX.A]  ;  c/w/mon  [Vg.]  ;
^^.^iO^ii.**  [•'^y]).  'which  is  over  against  Esdraelon '
(hulith  73).  looks  like  a  corruption  of  Joknkam  or
(Movers)  Jokmkam.  Robinson,  however,  noting  that
Kva/jLibv  means  '  beaiifield,'  identifies  it  with  the  modern
£1  l-'iilch,  'the  lx!an,'  on  the  plain  itself  but  'over
against'  the  city  'of  Jezreel.'  Cp  Hu.  /'(//.  210.  The
name  Cyanion  sh)ulii  |>robably  be  resloied  in  Judith  44
for  \\iiiva.  [!'.]. .See  KoNAlC.

CYLINDER  l^"^:).  Cant.  5  14  RV'"*.'- See  Ring.

CYMBALS.  For  i  Ch.  138,  etc.  (DT.^V??),  2  S.  65
Ps.  I6O5  {Z'\-i--i\  and  for  i  Cor.  13  i  (Ku/i^aAoc)  see  Misic,
§  3  (2).

CYPRESS,  RV  Holm  Tki:i-;  (HnPl,  Is.44i4h,  a
tree  which  in  the  siiij;le  pass;it;;e  where  it  occurs  is
coupled  with  the  oak.  'I'lie  Hebrew  tirzdh  docs  not
appear  in  any  cojjnate  language,  but  may  be  connected
with  .\r.  tarnza,  '  to  be  hard. '  -  LXX  ancl  I'csh.  omit  llie
word  ;  Aq.  and  Th.  render  dypioSaXavos  { '  wild  acorn  ').
\'g.  has  ilex,  which  is  defended  by  Celsius  (2269^),
and  has  been  wisely  adopted  by  our  revisers.  It  is
difficult,  however,  to  be  certain  ;  for  the  evergreen  oak
(Quercus  ilex,  L. )  is  at  the  present  ilay  rare  in  I'alestine
{FFF  412).  The  heavy,  hard  nature  of  its  wood
would  harmonise  well  with  the  probable  etymology  of
tirzdh.  '  Cyi^ress'  (perhaps  a  mere  guess)  comes  from
the  Genevan  Hible.  David  Kimlii  and  others  thousrht
that  what  was  meant  was  the  fir  tree  ;  Luther  prefern d
the  beech.  Cheyne  (Is.  SBOT.  Heb. )  thinks  rtnn
corrupt,  and  with  Gr.,  reads  n,nn  (see  Pink).

For  Cant.  1  14  4  13  .A.V"iff.,  see  Cami'HIRF.  [so  AV]  ;  and  for
Is.  41  19  KVmtr.,  see  V.ox  Tree  Lso  EV].  .n.  m.

CYPRUS  (kyttpoc  [Ti.  WH]),  the  third  largest
island  of  the  Mediterranean,  placed  in  the  angle  l)et\veen
the  coast  of  .Syria  and  that  of  .Asia  Minor  (Strabo,  681 ),
called  Alalia  in  the  Amarna  letters,  where  its  copper
is  specially  referred  to  (so  E.  Meyer,  Petrie,  etc.),  'Asi  by
the  Egyptians,  Yavnan  by  the  Assyrians,  and  KrniM
{</.''■:  )  by  the  Hebrews.  Its  physical  structure  is  simple.
1  DescriDtion.  ^'  consists  of  a  central  plain  running
^  across the island from E. to W. ,

bounded  by  a  long  mountain  ridge  to  the  X. ,  and  by
a  broader  mountain  district  to  the  S.

The  central  plain  was  likened  in  antiquity  to  the  valley  of
the  Nile,  being  flooded  annually  by  the  Pedi;eus,  wlii.h  left  rich
deposits  of  mud.  Strabo  sketches  the  productiveness  of  Cyprus
(684  :  evotvoi  « trrt  (cai  eue'Aaios,  (Ti'toi  re  avrapKei  xpiirai).  Copper
(named  after  the  island)  was  found  in  the  mountains,  and  timber
for  shipbuilding.

In  situation,  climate,  and  productions,  Cyprus  belongs
to  all  the  three  surrounding  continents,  and  historic-
ally it  has  constantly  shared  in  their  vicissitudes.  It
is  most  accessible  from  the  E.  and  the  S. ,  and,  lying
right  over  against  .Syria,  was  early  visited  by  the  Pha.'ni-
cians,  who  founded  Amathus,  Paphos,  and  Citium,  the

t  The  Tg.  on  2  S.  1  10  takes  Saul's  bracelet  for  a  totat>hah —
i.e.,  an  amulet.  The  He.\ap.  on  Ezek.  13  18  gives  <<)uAaitr>jpia  as
a  '  Hebrew'  or  'Jewish'  interpretation  of  rinOD  (EV  'pillows,'
see  Dress,  $  8),  which  is  connected  with  Ass.  kasu, '  to  bind.'  The
Rabbis  (Talm.  .Slmlih.  ^t  h)  also  explain  totn^hoth  as  amulets.
The  word  cannot  lie  explained  from  the  Semitic  languages,  and,
since  the  Jewish  ideas  of  magic  came  ultimately  from  the
Sumerians  of  primitive  Babylonia,  may  reasonably  be  explained
by  the  Sumerian  dibdih  (from  liahiiah),  'to  bind '  =  Ass.  kastt
(see  above),  kainti.  For  an  analoj^y,  cp  ncB3.  ,'*r.  51  27  Nah.
817  from  Ass.  ituf'sar,  'tablet-writer,'  which  fs  of  Sumerian
origii  (Jjih  'tablet,'  i/ir  '  write'). See  COT-lwZ/.

2  We  should  perhaps  associate  with  this  Syr.  t'ras,  '  to  be
Straight.'

975


CYPRUS

last,  the  Phoenician  capital,  giving  its  name  to  the  whole
island.  1

Tiie  Phoenicians  were  not,  however,  the  earliest
inhabitants  of  Cyprus.  They  found  in  possession  a
2  Historv  P*^"P'^  closely  connected,  as  their  art  and
^'  alphal)et  show,  with  the  primitive  races
of  Asia  Minor  (for  W'MM's  theory  see  Kittim,  and  cp
.'Is.  «.  /.«/-.  337).  The  Greek  colonists  arrived  before
the  eighth  century  B.C.  The  discoveries  in  the  island
indic.ue  clearly  its  partition  l>etween  the  Phoenician
element  in  the  S.  and  the  Hellenic  in  the  central  de-
pression stretching  from  Soli  in  the  \V.  to  Salamis  in
the  J"..,  at  which  latter  site  we  find  an  art  that  is  largely
(ireck.  The  Cypriote  character  was  wanting  in  energj',
and  the  island  was  almost  wholly  under  the  influence
alternately  of  Asia  and  of  Egypt.

(i)  In  709  B.C.  Sargon  II.,  king  of  Assyria,  was  recognised  as
over-lord  by  seven  Cypriote  princes  ;  their  tribute  was  continued
to  his  grandson  Esarhaddon,  Schr.  K.lTi-)  368355.  (2)  In  the
sixth  century  .'\masis,  king  of  Egypt,  comjuered  the  island
(Herod.  2  182.  Perhaps  it  had  been  comiuered  even  before  his
time,  by  Thotmes  III.  In  any  case  the  Trpwros  atSpuinmv  of
Herod,  is  an  error).  (3)  After  the  conquest  of  Egypt  by
Cambyscs,  Cyprus  fell  to  Persia,  being  included  in  the  fifth
satrapy  (Herod.  3  19  91).

The  connection  with  Greece  and  with  Hellenic  ideals
was  brilliant  but  purely  episodical  (Evagoras,  king  of
.Salamis:  410  B.(.).  The  island  fell  into  the  hands  of
Alexander  the  tjreat,  and  finally  remained  with  the
Ptolemies  as  one  of  their  most  cherished  po.ssessions
until  its  conquest  by  the  Romans  (cp  2  Mace.  10 13:
Mahaffy,  /;/;//.  of  the  Ptolemies,  pass.).

The  Jews  probably  settled  in  Cyprus  before  the  time
of  Alexander  the  Cjreat  (i  Mace. I523). Many  would

„ T .  , be attracted later by  the fact that its

3.  Jewish  / .• r 1

. . coi)per  mmes  were  at  one  tune  farmed  to
connection,  u ,  ., ,  ■ .  ;  r , . ■ ,

Herod the Great  (Jos.  Ant.  xvi.  45: a

Cyprian  inscr. ,  Boeckh  2628,  refers  to  one  of  the  family).
After  the  rising  of  the  Jews  in  116  .\.n.  in  Cyrene,  in
I'^gypt,  and  in  Cyprus  had  been  suppressed,  it  was  decreed
that  no  Jew  might  set  foot  upon  the  island,  under
penalty  of  death,  even  for  shipwrecked  Israelites  (Dio
Cass.  G832.  See  Salamis).  In  the  history  of  the
spread  of  Christianity  Cyprus  holds  an  honourable  place
(.\cts  436,  Joseph  surnamed  Barnabas).  Its  Jewish
population  heard  the  Gospel  after  Stephen's  death
from  those  whom  the  persecution  had  driven  from
Judasa  (.Acts  11 19).  Some  of  these  were  men  of  Cyprus
and  Cyrene,  who  fled  to  Antioch  and  addressed  the
(Greeks  of  the  city  {v.  20).  Cyprus  was  in  turn  the  first
scene  of  the  labours  of  Paul  with  Barnabas  and  Mark
(.Acts  134-12),  afterwards  of  Barnabas  and  Mark  alone
(.Acts  1.^)39).  One  of  the  first  Christian  missionaries
may  have  been  that  '  old  disciple '  Mnason  with  whom
Paul  lodged  at  Jerusalem  (.Acts  21  16).  Returning  to
Palestine  at  the  close  of  his  third  journey,  Paul  and  his
companions  sighted  Cyprus  (.Acts  21 3,  ava<}>a.vavTi%  ttjv
K.  ;  AV  'discovered'),  leaving  it  on  the  left  hand  as
they  ran  from  Patftra  to  Tyre.  In  the  voyage  to  Rome
from  Cassarea  the  ship  '  sailed  under  Cyprus  '  (Acts  '274,
i'7re7rXei^<Ta/ue»')  —  i.e.,  northwards  'over  the  sea  of
Cilicia  and  Pamphylia'  {v.  5:  cp  .Str.  681) — taking
advantage  of  the  northerly  and  westerly  set  of  the
current,  in  order  to  reach  Nlyra.

After  its  seizure  by  the  Romans  in 58 B.C. Cyprus
had  been  united  for  administrative  purposes  with  Cilicia  ;
. .  , . . but  in  the  first  partition of  the  Roman
traf  o*^**"  ^■°''''^  ^^^^^  Actium  it  was  made  an  im-
perial province  (Dio  Cass.  53 12) — i.e.,  its
governor,  if  it  had  one  of  its  own,  and  were  not  rather
united  with  Cilicia  to  form  a  single  province,  bore  the
title  legatus  Aiit^usti  propnrtore  {Trpeffjiei'Tris  ^fj:iaffTov
duTiffTpdrrryoi, cp Dio Cass. 53 13 ; in NT always
rjytf^uv, cp Lk.  22, Str. 840 rfytfibvai Kal SioiKrjras
Kaiffap  irifjiireL). Why  then  does  the  writer  of  Acts  187

1  Josephiis  (Ant.  i.  6  i)  says  Xe9i;xa  .  .  .  KuTrpo?  avrri  vvv
KoAetrai.  Epiphanius,  a  Cyprian  bishop,  writes,  KiVior  r)  Kvirpiiov
vrjiroi  KoAeirai  '  Kmot  yap  Kvirpioi,  Ilirr.  50  25  (see  Kitti.m).

976


i


CYRENE

call  Sergius  Paulus  '  proconsul '  (dvOi'nraroi,  the  proper
title  of  governors  of  senatorial  provinces,  AV  '  dcpuiy  ' ;
cp  Acts  18 12  1938)?  Some  have  argued  that  he  used
the  word  loosely,  and  appeal  to  Stralxj  (685.  fyivtro
ivapx^o-  V  "WOi  KaOitrtp  Kai  vvv  (an  ffrpaTrfyiKT]}'  to
prove  that  the  island  was  governed  \>y  a  proprietor
appointed  by  the  eni[x.'ror  ;  but  the  writer  of  Acts  is
quite  correct.  I-roni  Uio  Cassius  (53  12)  we  learn  that,
in  22  B.C.,  Augustus  restored  Cyprus  to  the  Senate  in
exchange  for  S.  (iaul  (cp  Dio  Cass.  544).  In  Paul's
time,  therefore,  its  governor  was  j)roperly  called  '  pro-
consul.' The  passage  <|uoted  from  Strabo  is  misunder-
stood, as  is  clear  from  id.  840  [d%  5i  rds  S-q/xoaias  6
SrjfWi  arparqyov%  i)  vw6.tov%  irifXTro. — i.e.,  governors  of
senatorial  provinces  were  either  of  consular  or  of
pra-torian  rank,  in  either  case  the  oflicial  title  lx,'ing
proconsul).  In  the  case  of  Cyprus,  authors,  inscriptions,
and  coins  have  preserved  the  names  of  some  twenty  of
her  propraitorian  governors  with  the  '  brevet '  rank  of
proconsul.  Lucius  Sergius  I'aulus  (governor  at  the
time  of  Paul's  visit,  about  47  .\.i). )  is  knov.  n  to  us  from
an  inscription  from  the  site  of  Soli  (see  Hogarth,  Devia
Cypria,  114/!  and  Appendi.x).

_  See  P.  Gardner,  Xeiv  cha/>s.  in  Gr.  Hist.  153  /  For  cvcava-
tions  in  the  island  J/l.S  pass.  Pcrrot  and  Chipiez,  Ari  in
I'ltun.  and  Cyprus.  For  the  archii-'ology  Max  Ohnefalsch-
Richter,  Kypros,  die  Hil<i-l  u.  Hoiin-r  is  esjiecially  valuable.
For  Christian  times  the  most  recent  work  is  Hackett's  Ilistoiy
of  the  CIturch  in  Cyprus,  1899.  W.  j.  w.

CYRENE  (kyPHNH  [Ti. WW]), a  city  on  the X.

coast  of  Africa. It  was  the  capital  of  that  part  of  LiiiV.V

1 Position ['7'']  l^^tween  the  Egyptian  and  Cartha-

_  ■  J  .  . . ginian  territories,  which  bore  the  name  of

ana  nistory. ,.  u . i- .■ 1

' Cyrenaica  or Pentapolis  ; the  phrase  in

Acts  2  10,  'the  parts  of  Libya  about  Cyrene, 'rd  /ifpi;
r7]%  Ai/ii'Tjs  TTjy  /v-ard  Y^vp-i]vr)v ,  is  e<iuivalont  to  the  \i'^i"r)
ij  irepi  K.  of  Dio  Cass.  (,')3i2)  and  r;  Trpos  Kvprjvri  Aifi.
of  Jos.  .'hit.  xvi.  61.  The  city  was  thoroughly  Greek  in
character,  and  won  a  high  reputation  as  the  mother  of
physicians  (Herod.  8131;  temple  of  Asklepios,  Paus.  ii.
2G9  ;  Tac.  A/in.  14  18),  philosophers,  and  poets.  Calli-
machus,  Carneades,  Eratosthenes,  Aristippus  (Strabo,
837),  and  Synesius,  bishop  of  Ptolemais,  are  only  a  few
of  the  many  famous  men  who  were  sprung  from  the  Cyre-
naica. After  the  death  of  Alexander  the  Great,  Cyrene
with  its  territory  was  absorbed  by  Egypt.  Though  so
thoroughly  Hellenic,  it  had,  since  the  time  of  Ptolemy  son
of  Lagos  (Jos.  c.  Ap.  2  4,  end  of  4th  centurj'  B.  c. ),  a  large
Jewish  poi)ulation.  Stralx),  quoted  by  Jos.  Ant.  xiv.  72,
says  that  the  Jews  formed  one  of  the  four  classes  of  the
inhabitants.  The  privileges  granted  to  the  Jews  by
Ptolemy  were  continued  and  augmented  by  the  Romans
(Jos.  Ant.  xvi.  65),  who  received  the  Cyrenaica,  under
the  will  of  the  childless  Ptolemy  Apion,  in  96  B.C.,
though  for  twenty  years  they  shirked  the  responsibility
of  the  legacy.  In  74  B.C.  the  territory  was  made  a
province,  which  was  combined  with  Crete  when  that
island  was  subjugated  in  67  B.C.  (see  Cki.tk).  In  27
B.C.  the  Cyrenaica  and  Crete  were  definitely  united  to
form  a  single  province,  under  the  title  Cri-tti  Cyrenu-,  or
Creta  et  Cyrente  (but  either  name  might  lie  used  to
denote  the  dual  province:  cp  Tac.  Ann.  83870).  The
province  was  senatorial — i.e.,  governed  by  proconsuls
of  prajtorian  rank,  and  so  remained  to  the  time  of
Diocletian.  The  subsec]uent  history  of  Cyrene  is  con-
nected with  its  Jewish  inhabitants,  the  chief  event  being
their  terrible  massacre  of  the  Greek  and  Roman  citizens
in  the  reign  of  Trajan  (Dio  Cass.  68  32).

The  modern  province  of  v^rtrra,  on  the  E.  of  the  gulf  of  .V/Vrm
represents  the  ancient  Cyrenaica,  and  in  this  province  Grennah
marks  the  exact  site  of  C>Tene,  which  was  placed  on  the  edce
of  a  plateau  1800  feet  above  the  sea-level,  overlooking  the
Mediterranean  at  a  distance  of  ten  miles  (Str.  837 ;  iroAeus
^ryoAr)?  (r  Tfta-nt^ntitti  -nftiitii  (tfififiTft,  a)«  fic  toO  jrfAa-you?
tcopw^fi'  ai')T>;i).  The  port  w.is  called  ApoIIonia.  The  sur-
rounding district  was,  and  is,  of  remarkable  fertility  (Str.  I.e.,
'i.inroTp6<t>o^  dpt'o-Tij,  KoAAtKopTrot ;  Herod.  4  is8_/;).  The  pros-
perity  of  Cyrene  wa.s  based  upon  its  export  of  the  drug  silphium,
derived  from  an  umbelliferous  plant,  not  yet  certainly  identified,

977


CYRUS

growing  in  the  S.  desert  (see  Mon.  d.  Inst.,  PI.  47  :  a  va!«e  repre-
senting King  ArcesilaussuiJcrintending  the  weighing  of  f/////;Kw/;
cp  the  coins  ;  Aristoph.  I'tut.  925,  to  Barrov  ait^^i.ov).

That  the  Jews  of  Cyrene  were  largely  Hellenised.  is
beyond  question.  Jason  of  Cyrene  is  mentioned  as  an
2  Jewiah  ""*'!"''  '"  2  Mace.  224  (see  Macc.\bkks,
conntstion.  ^-^'-^^ "•§=)■  I"  »'-  NT  we  hear  of
Sunon  of  Cyrene  who  bore  the  cross  of
Jesus  (.\lk.  1521  Lk.  2826,  '  S.  a  Cyrenian  '  AV ;  cp
Matt.  2732.  'a  man  of  C  ;  RV,  'of  Cyrene'  in  all
three  passages :  the  adj.  K  vprjvaios  is  used  in  each
case).  Jews  from  the  Cyrenaica  were  in  the  Pentecostal
audience  of  Peter  (.Vets  2  10  ;  see  atxne  on  the  phrase
used).  Cyrena-ans  Joined  with  the  Alexandrian  and
Asiatic  Jews  to  attack  .Stephen  (.Acts  69),  and  Cyrenaan
converts  hel[x-(l  to  found  the  first  (iontiie  church  at
.\ntioch  (eXdXoi'V  Kai  irphs  Toi's'EWrji'ai  (-ncrrds  W'Hj  ;
Acts  1 1  20).  One  of  their  first  missionaries  may  have
been  the  '  Lucius  of  Cyrene'  of  Acts  13 1,  one  of  the
'  prophets  and  teachers  '  who  '  ministered  to  tiie  Lord  '
in  .Antioch.  He  is  said  to  have  been  the  first  bishop
of  Cyrene.  Other  traditions  connect  Mark  with  the
foundation  of  the  Cyrenaic  church.

Plan  and  Description  of  the  site  in  .\nnual  0/ the  I^rit.  Sell,
at  .ithens,  1'  1  \ if.  ;  cp  Studiiiczka,  Kyrene.  \\.  j.  \\\

CYRENIUS  (kyPHN'OC  [Ti.  WH]),  Lk.22AV;  RV

QUIKINILS.

CYRUS  (L*ni3  ;  kyroc  [BAL]),  the  founder  of  the
old-Persian  emijire,  belonged  to  the  ancient  princely
1  Oriein.  '^^'^'^  ^^^  ^'"^  .\cha;menid.x',  so  called  after
°  their  ancestor  Achai-nienes  (Hakhamanish).
He  w.as  the  second  ^  of  his  name,  his  grandfather
having  been  called  Cyrus  [Kiirush,  in  the  Habylonian
inscriptions  Kii-ra-as,  Kur-rns,  K u-ur-ra-hi\."  Cyrus
was  thus,  without  a  doubt,  an  Aryan  and  Persian  by  de-
scent— not  an  1  '.lamite,  as  has  recently  l)een  conjectured.
I'"or  Darius  Hysta.s])is  speaks  of  Cambyses  the  son  of
Cyrus  as  being  one  '  of  our  race '  [ainakhani  taiivniyd
[Bekist.  i.  11]),  and  calls  himself  a  Persian,  son  of  a
Persian,  an  Aryan  of  Aryan  descent  (N'aks-i- Rustam,
a.  §  2  ;  Suez  c.  §  3).  At  first  Cyrus  w.as  king  only  of
Persia  and  of  Ansan,  or  Anzan,  an  Elamite  province —
probably  with  Susa  (Shushan)  for  capital — which,  after
the  fall  of  the  Elamite  kingdom,  and  certainly  as  early
as  the  time  of  his  ancestor  Teispes  ((  i.'pis),  had  come
under  tlie  dominion  of  the  Achanienid.-i'.^  In  Baby-
lonia Cyrus  calls  himself  by  preference  king  of  Ansan ;
but  once,  in  the  annals  of  Nabu-nil'id  (Naboimedus),  col.
2,  15,  he  is  spoken  of  as  '  king  of  Persia.'  Neither  state,
however,  was  then  of  much  importance  in  comparison
with  the  great  Median  andChaldean  enjpires  ;  both  states,
too,  were  tributary  to  Media.  Nabu-na'id  mentions
Cyrus  as  the  '  petty  vassal '  of  Astyages,  w  ho  had  only
a  very  small  army  at  his  disposal  (5  R  64,  i.  28^).
The  career  of  this  vas.sal-king,  who  rose  till  he  brought
under  his  sw.ay  the  whole  of  Western  Asia,  so  struck
the  popular  imagination  that  a  legend  of  world-wide
diffusion  resix-cting  the  foundling  prince  who  was
brought  up  among  poor  jx?o|)Ie  and  afterwards  became
a  famous  monarch  was  applied  to  him  as  it  had  already
been  applied  to  others  ;  and  this  Persian  tradition  is
the  source  from  which  Herodotus  (1107^),  and  the
authority  u[X)n  whom  Justinus  depends  (i.  48-13),  may
be  supposed  to  have  drawn.  From  Cjtus's  own  in-
scriptions, however,  it  appears  that  at  least  three  of  his
ancestors  had  the  same  kingdom  before  him.  It  is
possible,  but  not  certain,  that  Cyrus  in  his  youth  may

t  In  Herod.  5  11 — from  which  Noldeke  {Au/sdtze  zur  pers.
Gesch.  15)  seeks  to  show  that  Cyrus  w.is  the  third  of  the  name
— Herodotus  simply  places  the  genealogies  of  Cambyses  and
of  Xerxes  one  above  the  other.

2  According  to  Herod.  1  113^^,  Gyrus  had  previously  borne
another  name,  and  Strabo  (l.*)  729)  sa>-s  that  he  was  originally
called  .Agradates,  and  that  he  did  not  assume  the  name  of  Cvrus
till  his  accession  to  the  throne.  On  this  point  cp  R.  Schubert,
Herodot's  Darstellung  der  Cyrussaee,  (mJF.  (Rrcslau,  'o").

8  See  C.  P.  Tiele,  '  Het  Land  Anshan-Anzan  '  in  Feestbundel
voor  P.  J.  I'eth,  195^  (Leyden,  '94).


CYRUS

have attended the  Median  court,  and that  cither  he
himself  or  liis  father  was  son-in-law  of  Astyages.'

Astyai;(.vs  {/shfuvegu  on  the  inscriptions  of  Nabu-nil'id)
is  called  at  one  time  king  of  Media,  at  another  king  of


2.  Career.


the  U mmdn-manda,-  by  which,  it  has  been


conjectured,  are  meant  the  Scythians.  On
this  assumption,  Astyages  might  with  some  reason  be  re-
garded as  a  Scythian  usur|jer.  In  the  third  year  of
Nabu-na'id  (553  B.C. )  there  seems  to  have  arisen  within
the  Median  kingdom  a  revolt  against  the  foreign  domina-
tion. At  least,  at  that  date  the  Umman-manda  who
were  in  occupation  of  Harran  were  recalled  (5  Kawl.
64,  i.  28^)  Some  time  had  still  to  elapse,  however,
before  Cyrus  contrived,  by  treachery  in  the  Median
camp,  to  liecome  master  of  Astyages  and  at  the  same
time  of  the  throne  of  Media.  This  happened  probably
in  the  si.xth,  or  at  all  events  before  the  seventh,  year  of
Nabu-na'id  (before  550  H.C. ),  Ann.  col.  1  I.  \  ff.  The
two  te.vts  cited  can  hardly  otherwise  be  brought  into
agreement  with  each  other.  In  the  following  years
Cyrus  extended  his  dominion  over  the  whole  Median
empire,  and  after  subjugating  Lydia  he  directed  his
energies  against  Babylon.  By  the  fall  of  Croesus  the
alliance  between  that  monarch,  Nabu-na'id,  and  .-\masis
of  Egypt  (Herod.  \  ^^  ff.)  was  broken  up,  and  each
one  had  to  look  out  for  himself.  In  538  the  end  came.
I-"or  several  years  the  king  of  Babylon  had  withdrawn
himself  from  Babylon,  and  alienated  priests  and  people
alike  by  neglect  of  the  sacretl  feasts  and  of  the  worship
of  Marduk,  as  well  as  by  other  arbitrary  proceedings.
When,  in  his  seventeeiiih  year,  he  returned  to  his  capital,
it  was  already  too  late.  Cyrus  with  his  victorious
bands  had  been  steadily  advancing  upon  the  northern
frontier  of  .\ccad,  which  the  king's  son,  probably  the
BC-l-sar-usur  who  (in  i  R  69,  col.  2,  26  ;  59  and  68,
n.  I,  col.  2,  24/)  is  called  his  first-born,  was  guard-
ing with  the  army.  The  brave  prince  did  what  he
could  ;  but  after  his  army  had  l)een  defeated — first  near
the  city  of  Opis  (Upc),  and  again  as  often  as  he  rallied
it — and  after  'the  Accadians  or  North  Babylonians  had
revolted  against  the  Chaldajan  king,  Sippar  opened
its  gates  to  the  enemy,  and  Babylon  also  fell  into  his
hands  without  further  resistance.  After  Gobryas  ( Ug-
baru  or  Gubaru),  governor  of  Gutium,  had  taken
possession  with  the  vanguard,  Cyrus  himself  made  his
entry  into  the  city  with  the  main  body  of  his  troops  on
the  third  day  of  the  eighth  month,  539-38,  being  received
(so  at  least  his  inscriptions  tell  us)  by  all  classes,  and
especially  by  the  priesthood  and  nobles,  as  a  lilierator,
with  every  manifestation  of  joy.  Some  days  afterwards
Gobryas  seems  to  h.ave  pursued  BC4-sar-u.sur  and  put
him  to  death;  but  the  place  where  decipherers  think
this  ought  to  be  read  [Ann.  col.  3,  22/)  is  very  much
injured.  Nabu-na'id  had  already  been  captured.
Cyrus  reigned  about  nine  years  from  this  time.  In  his
last  ye.ir  he  handed  over  the  sovereignity  of  Babylon
to  his  son  Cambyses  (see  Strassmaier,  In.'^chriften  von
Camhvses,  Leipsic,  1890,  Pref. ).  Cp  B.\liVi,o.\i.\,  §69.
Under  the  name  of  Kores  (see  above,  §  1 ),  this  Cyrus
is  repeatedly  referred  to  in  the  OT,  usually  as  '  king  of
« T„^-v.'»  the Persians' (2  Ch.3622/.  Kzral  1/887


hopes.


43  Dan.  10  I ),  once  as  'the Persian'  (Uan.


629),  once  as  '  king  of  Babylon  '  (Ezra,*"!  13).
Great  expectations  were  cherished  of  him  by  the  Jews.
When,  after  his  defeat  of  Croesus,  he  advanced  to  the
concjuest  of  the  whole  of  Asia  Minor,  there  arose  one
of  the  exiles  in  Babylon,  who  pointed  him  out  as  the
king  rai.sed  up  by  Yahw6  to  be  Israel's  redeemer.
From  his  pen  comes  Is.  40-48  (so  much  wnll  be  admitted
by  all  critics),  where  Cyrus  is  represented  as  e-xpressly
called  to  accomplish  the  divine  judgment  upon  Babylon,

1  See  Schubert,  I.e.  ti  ff.,  and  the  works  of  Evers  and  Bauer
there  referred  to.

2  Del.  Ass.  HIVB,  writes  :  '  Ummdn  mandu,  horde  of  peoples,
a  eeneral  designation  of  the  northern  peoples,  hostile  to  Assyria,
subject  at  anyone  time  to  Media — e.g.,  the  Cimirrai,  the  Mannai,
the  Scythians.' Cp  Sayce,  PSBA,  Oct.  1896.

979


CYRUS

to  set  the  captives  free,  and  to  restore  Jerusalem  and
the  temple  (4814/  44  28  45 13).  It  was  for  this  end,
we  are  told,  that  Yahw6  had  given  Cyrus  victory  upon
victory,  and  would  still  lead  him  on  to  fresh  trium|)hs
(41 25  45 1-8).  Whether  he  received  recompense  for
his  services  or  not  is  left  uncertain  (cp  483/  with  45 13) ;
but  at  any  rate  he  was  no  mere  p.-issive  tool  in  Yahwes
hand.  He  did  not,  indeed,  know  Yahw6  Ixifore  he  was
called  (453/) ;  but,  once  called,  he  fulfilled  his  mission
invoking  Yahwe's  name  (41  25)  and  received  the  honour-
able titles  of  '  Yahwe's  friend '  and  '  Yahwe's  anointed '
(4428  45i).

Bitter  must  have  been  the  disappointment  of  the
Jews  ;  for,  whatever  else  Cyrus  may  have  done  for
_  them,  he  did  not  realise  the  high-pitched

formation  ^^•''I^ctations  of  the  Exile  jjrophet.  Hence
a  yoimger  prophet,  living  in  Palestine  (see
IsAiAU,  ii.  §  21),  announces  that,  for  the  deliverance  of
Israel,  Yahw6  alone  will  judge  the  nations,  without  any
allies  from  among  '  the  peoples  '  (Is.  63  1-6,  cp  51)16^),
thus  reversing  the  old  expectation  respecting  Cyrus.
The  later  Jews,  however,  fountl  it  difficult  to  believe
that  the  deliverance  which  Yahw^  was  to  have  wrought
through  the  instrumentality  of  the  great  Persian  king
had  never  been  accomplished.  The  prophecy  must
somehow  or  other  have  come  to  pass.  Cjtus  was  not
regarded,  it  is  true,  as  the  man  who  had  finally  delivered
Israel^the  deliverance  was  still  one  of  the  hopes  of  the
future — but  the  Jews  desired  to  recognise  in  him,  at
least,  the  initiator  of  the  restoration  of  Israel.  Such  is
the  reflection  inevitably  suggested  by  a  strictly  critical
reading  of  the  work  of  the  Chronicler  (see  EzRA,  ii.
§7). '

The  restoration  of  Israel  might  be  considered  to  have
begun  with  the  rebuilding  of  the  temple,  and  the
y. ....  ,  problem  now  arose,  how  to  bring  this

Tom«U.  .^thT-oo  '^^*^"'  '"'°  connection  with  Cyrus,  .-l
ismpie  .  xnree  jj^^^jjy  instantly  presented  itself.
{a)  According  to  the  evidence  of
Haggai,  of  Zech.  1-8  and  of  Ezra5i-io,  the  building
was  first  Vjegun  under  Darius,  in  whose  reign  it  w.as  also
completed.  This  made  it  necessary  to  give  another
account  of  the  origin  and  course  of  the  building,  if  the
work  was  to  be  attributed  to  Cyrus.  More  than  one
way  of  effecting  this  was  found,  [b]  .According  to  the
author  of  Ezra5 13-17  63-5,  Cyrus  committed  the  task  of
rebuilding  the  temple  to  his  governor  Sheshbazzar,  and
the  work  thus  begun  by  him  was  carried  on  without
interruption  till  the  reign  of  Darius,  (c)  The  Chronicler,
however,  from  whose  hand  we  have  Ezra  1  81-4524,  gives
another  version.  He  too  has  it  that  Cjtus  ordered  the
restoration.  The  work  was  not  taken  in  hand  by  the
king  himself;  but  permission  was  given  by  him  to  the
exiles  to  return  to  Jerusalem  for  the  piu-pose.  Immedi-
ately on  their  arrival  in  the  holy  city  they  set  up  the
altar  and  laid  the  foundations  of  the  temple  ;  but  while
C'yrus  was  still  on  the  throne  they  were  compelled  to
stop  the  work  by  order  of  the  king  himself,  who  had
been  stirred  up  by  the  adversaries  of  the  Jews.  Not
till  the  second  year  of  Darius  could  the  building  be
resumed.

However  widely  these  accounts  may  differ  from  one
another  in  detail,  they  agree  in  stating  that  the  restora-
tion of  the  temple  was  originated  by  Cyrus,  and  in
representing  him  as  a  worshipper  of  Yahw^,  whom  he
recognised  as  the  one  true  God.  Yahw6  is  the  God  of
heaven,  who  has  bestowed  universal  empire  upon  Cyrus
in  order  that  he  may  restore  the  true  worship  in
Jerusalem  ;  the  temple  there  is  for  Cjtus  no  mere
ordinary  temple,  of  which  there  were  so  many,  but  the
veritable  House  of  God.

.At  the  same  time,  the  discrepancies  which  we  find  in
the  narratives  b  and  c  are  by  no  means  unimportant.
According  to  the  older  [b),  the  building  of  the  temple
was  entirely  the  work  of  Cjtus,  which  he  caused  to  be
t-arried  on  uninterruptedly,  defraying  the  entire  cost  out
980


i


CYRUS

of  the  royal  trcasur}'.  According  to  the  other  {c),  it
was  carried  out  at  the  instance  of  ("yriis;  not  by  himself,
liowever,  but  only  by  returned  exiles,  who,  along  with
their  comrades  left  behind  in  Babylon,  contributed  the
cx[jenses  of  the  undertaking  (146  268/!  87).  So  far,
inileed,  is  the  restoration  of  the  temple  from  being,
according  to  this  account,  the  work  of  C  yrus,  that  it  is
actually  represented  as  broken  off  during  his  reign  at
his  command.  Probably  the  Jews  in  the  long  run  found
the  idea  unbearable,  that  the  sanctuary  should  have
been  built  by  a  foreigner,  even  though  the  foreigner
was  Cyrus,  and  therefore  his  share  in  the  Wf)rk  was
reduced  by  the  Chronicler  to  more  modest  dimensions.

The  importance  of  Cyrus  for  Israel  lies  less  in
anything  he  actually  did  for  them  than  in  the  great
exjiectations  that  he  exciteti,  exixxtations  which  in
their  turn  exercised  a  great  influence  on  the  ideas
ultimately  formed  by  the  Jews  as  to  the  earlier  stages
of  their  restoration  after  the  misfortunes  of  the  'exile.'

Cp  lSK.\KI.,  §  50  ; UlSI'KKSION, §  5.

In  the  OT  Cyrus  is  mentioned  also  in  Dan.  628  [29]
10 1  ;  in  the  first -cited  passage  as  the  successor  of
Darius,  that  is,  of  '  Darius  the  Mede  '  (Dan.  631  [(JiJ).
See  D.VKii.s,  i.

The  preceding  sketch  of  the  result  of  a  critical
examination of the passages of the OT relating to

6 Policv  of ^y*'^  '^  "°'  contradicted  by  anything
the  victorious  «'"tained  in  the  inscriptions  of  C)tus
Cvnia  himself discovered some years ago.

^ ■  It is certainly worthy of note how

closely,  even  down  to  details,  the  representation  of  the
Persian  con(|ueror  in  these  inscriptions  agrees  with  that
which  is  found  in  Is.  44  28  and4r>i.  Evidently  the
second  Isaiah  had  a  correct  idea  of  w  hat  a  Persian  king,
as  opposed  to  a  Babylonian,  would  be  likely  to  do.
In  the  cylinder  inscription  (5  R  35;  cp  Hagen,  '  C)tus-
texte'  in  /id/r.  z.  Assyriol.  2  205  _^,  and  A'li  Zb
120  ff. )  C_\TUS  is  the  deliverer  of  oppressed  peoples,
chosen  by  Marduk  himself,  and  hailed  by  all  Sunier
and  Accad  as  a  saviour,  exactly  as  with  the  Israelite
prophet  he  is  the  called,  the  anointed,  of  Yahwe.  A
difference  there  is  between  the  joyous  hope  which  the
Jewish  exiles  cherished  and  the  official  statements  which
Babylonian  scribes  at  royal  command  had  to  chronicle
on  their  cylinders  ;  but  the  coincidences  referred  to  are
too  close  to  tx;  entirely  accidental.  Moreover,  priests
and  people  alike  had  reason  enough  to  tx;  dissatisfied
with  the  arbitrariness  and  misgovernment  of  their  former
sovereign,  and  Cyrus,  with  fine  political  tact,  knew
how  to  utilise  this  temper  and  win  hearts  by  deference
towards  the  national  religion,  restraint  of  robbery  and
violence,  and  rctiress  of  grievances.  No  wonder  that
the  Jewish  exiles  also  hoped  for  enlargement  at  his
hands.  That  he  fulfilled  this  expectation  does  not
appear  at  least  from  his  inscriptions.

The  cKissage  in  which  some  scholars  have  thought  that  this  may
be  re.id  demands  another  interpretation.  In  Cyl.  /.  1 1  the  words
irt,ih'  taaira  kullat  luatdta  were  taken  together  and  tran.slated,
'he  (Mjirduk)  decreed  return  from  all  lands';  but  it  is  certain
that,  with  Hagen  and  Del.,  we  must  connect  the  words  irtaii  |
taaira  with  those  which  precede,  and  kullat  matdta  with  those '


CYRUS

which  follow,  so  that  the  meaning  is  :  '  [after  that  Mnrduk,  in
his  wrath,  had  brought  all  sorttt  of  miseries  upon  the  land)  he
changed  [his  disuosition  Ij  and  had  coin|iassion.  Round  all
lands  he  looked  ;  lie  sought  [and  so  found  as  the  right  prince,
the  fulfiller  of  his  gracious  decrees,  Cyrus,  etc.  j'  In  this  passage
nothing  is  said  of  any  restoration  of  exiles  to  their  native  land.

More  interest  attaches  to  the  pa.ssage  /.  30^,  where,
however,  the  names  on  which  the  <|uestion  chiefly  turns
are,  unfortunately,  obliterated.  Here  Cyrus  says  that
he  returned  to  their  places  the  gods  of  a  great
many  towns,  brought  together  the  inhabitants,  and
restored  Ixjth  temples  and  dwelling-houses.  The  towns
referred  to  were  all  named,  and  it  was  added  that
they  lay  on  the  banks  of  the  Tigris,'-  and  that  their
territory  extended  from  [lacuna  in  the  text]  to  Assur
and  ."^usan  (according  to  the  correct  interpretation  of
Delit/.sch  and  Hagen),  by  which  exjires-sions  are  in-
tended not  the  cities  of  the  name  but  the  countries  of
Assyria  and  West  IClam  (the  city  of  Asur  lay  on  the
right  bank  of  the  river).  The  obliterated  names  (or
name)  can  have  denoted  only  the  western  and  southern
boundaries  of  the  district  referred  to — probably  Suiner
and  Accad,  which  are  separately  mentioned  immediately
afterwards.  Accordingly,  there  can  be  no  doubt  that
reference  is  here  made  to  Cyrus's  care  for  the  restoration
of  neglected  worships  and  for  the  return  of  the  in-
habitants of  certain  cities  to  their  former  habitations  ;
this,  however,  only  in  the  immediate  neight)ourhood  of
Babylon.  At  the  same  time,  although  in  these  inscrip-
tions, which  doubtless  belong  to  the  earlier  period  of
Cyrus's  rule  over  Babylon,  no  mention  is  made  of  any
general  measure  extending  also  to  exiles  from  the  West,
there  remains  the  possibility  that  the  Persian  confjueror
may  have  taken  up  this  work  of  restoration  at  a  later
time.^  At  all  events  the  conciliatory  policy  of  which
he  had  already  given  positive  evidence  can  very  well
have  aroused  among  the  Jews  the  hojje  and  expectation
that  they  also  would  one  day  benefit  by  it.

The  tomb  of  Cyrus  'the  king,  the  Achrrmenid,'  at
Afuri^hab  (Pasargada;  ?)  is  now  assigned  by  Weissbach
(ZDMG  48653/)  to  the  younger  Cyrias.  At  any
rate  the  EgA-ptian  head-dress  of  the  king  on  the
monument  shows  that  it  can  have  been  erected  only
after  the  conquest  of  Egypt  by  Cambjses.

C.  V.  T.— VV.  H.  K.

1  Probably  the  words  iisahhir  ka  .  .  .  should  be  completed
so  as  to  read  either  ka[/>ittaiu]  or  ka\ah-/>a-as-su]. (So  1  lele.)

2  The  words  sa  I's/u  apnama  ruulii  luhatsun  are  not  clear.
Schr.  translates  :  '  whose  place  from  of  okl  lay  in  ruins  ';  Hagen,
Del.,  'founded  in  the  most  ancient  time.'  But  does  nadu  ever
mean  this?  In  our  present  inquiry  the  question  is  of  sub-
ordinate import.ince.

3  [Cp  the  very  interesting  inscription  in  the  last  section  of
Brugsch's  Hist.  0/  Ef:ypt  ('  the  Persians  in  Eg>pt "),  which
describes  the  religious  patriotism  of  an  Egvptian  Nchemiah.
The  deceased  is  represented  on  his  statue  (now  in  the  Vatican)
as  telling  the  events  of  the  Persian  period  of  his  life.  Being  in
high  favour  as  a  physician  with  C'ambyses,  he  was  able  to  induce
that  monarch  to  give  orders  for  the  restoration  of  the  temple  of
Neith  at  .'^ais,  and  of  the  religious  services.  He  was  physician
also  to  Darius,  who,  when  he  \v.as  in  Elam,  sent  him  to  Eg\-pt
to  restore  the  arrangements  for  the  .scribes  of  the  temples.
This  last  mission  appears  to  synchronise  with  the  erection  of
the  (second)  temple  at  Jerusalem.  Cp.  Meyer,  EntU.  71  ;
Che.  Jew.  ReL  Lt/e.  T K C  ]


981


98a


DABAREH


DAGON


D


DABAREH  (nin^),  Josh.  21 28  AV;  RV  Dabkrath.

DABBASHETH,  RV  Dabbesheth  (n'C'2'^.  §  99;
BaiBapaSa  [15].  AABAceAi  [A],  -ee  [L] ;  'a  hum]),'
i.e.,  'a  liiU  '  ;  cp  Jos.  B/  iv.  li),  a  place  on  the  W.
border  of  Zebuluii  (Josh.  19ii).  Conder  identities  it
with  A'/i.  Dabsheh,  on  the  left  bank  of  the  W.  el  Karn
{i.e.,  according  to  hin'  the  Valley  of  Jiphtah-ki.,
mentioned  in  v.  14)  ;  bui  inis  spot  is  too  high  up  in  the
hills,  and  is  scarcely  on  the  boundary  line,  in  addition
to  which  the  name  is  not  a  probable  one.

€5*  reads  'ncm  I  ®"  .nanj;n'3-  AH  the  readings  may  be
reconciled  by  reading  I^n'nT'a-  The  initial  3  was  lost,  owing
to  the  preposition  3  which  precedes  ;  71'  ("n)  was  transferred  to
the  end  of  the  name,  thus  producing  'riCOT  \  '  was  lost,  and  so
MT's  reading  was  produced  :  ,^31J•  (tS'O  's  simply  a  conjecture
for  z'1-\-  T. K.  c:.

DABERATH  [T\~\y\  or  n-!n"^^  ;  AaBraO  [AL]  ;
Josh.  19 12,  dalieipud  [B],  l^i  [Pesh.];  Josh.  21 28,
5e/3,3a  [B],  de^pad  [A],  fc^i  [Pesh.],  AV  Dabareii;
I  Ch.  672  [57],  SelSepei  and  Sajiwp  [B — a  doublet],
yaSep  [A],  Sa^rjpwd  [L],  loiS?  [Pesh.]),  a  Levitical
city  (Josh.  21  2S)  on  the  border  of  Zebulun  (Josh.  19i2),
but  belonging  to  Issachar  (Josh.  21  28  i  Ch.  672[57]),  is
the  SajiapLTTO.  of  Jos.  [Vil.  62),  the  Dai im  (oa/ieipa)
of  Eus.  and  Jer.  (OS  115 20  250 54),  the  modern
Dabunyeh,  a  small  and  unimportant  village,  '  lying  on
the  side  of  a  ledge  of  rocks  at  the  W.  ba.se  of  Mount
Tabor'  (Rob.  BR  8210).  It  occupies  a  strategic
position  above  the  great  plain  at  the  mouth  of  the  pass
leading  northwards  between  Tabor  and  the  Nazareth
hills.  Apparently  it  was  here  that  the  Israelite  forces
mustered  under  Barak  (GASni.  HG  394)  ;  and  it  is
possible  to  trace  a  connection  between  the  name  of  the
village  and  that  of  Deborah,  without  rushing  to  the
extreme  represented  by  C.  Niebuhr  [Reconstellation
dcs  Debjrdliedes,  11  /. ).  May  not  the  home  of  the
prophetess  have  been  at  Daberath  ?  (so  Moore,  Judges,
113/).  We  learn  from  Jos.  BJ  \\.  21  3  that  there  was
a  Jewish  garrison  here  in  the  Roman  war,  '  to  keep
watch  on  the  Great  Plain. '

DABRIA  (n.iBKr.t),  4  Esd.  14 24,  ascribe:  cp  perhaps
the  name  Dibri  [q.v.).

DACOBI.  RV  Dacubi  (AAKoyBi  [A]),  i  Esd.  528t  =
Ezra242,  .Vkkub  (i/.r. ,  2).

DADDEUS,  RV  Loddk us  (\oAaioc  [B]),  i  Esd.
8  46  =  Ezra  8 17,  Inix)  (i.).

DAGGER  occurs  as  a  rendering  of :

1.  3^ri,  hcrebh,  Judg.  816217:  (/Liaxaipa ;  Vg.  hzsgladium  in
IT'.  16  22,  but  sicam  in  v.  21). RV  'sword.' See  Weatons.

2.  eyxetpi'Sioi/,  l?ar.  0  i5[i4l.  This  word  represents  a^ri  four
times  in  ©,  but  in  Jer. .0042  it  represents  pi'S.  Bel's  'dagger'
wa~,  on  mythological  grounds,  a  javelin.  See  Weatons,  and
cp  Javelin.

DAGON (pj"!  ; Aapcon [BAL]), a god of the

Philistines, who had  temples  at Gaza (Judg.  1621^)

, ™v„ and Ashdod ( i  S.  5 i  Mace.  IO82-85

1.  Tne  name,  n \  i i.  <• ..

11  4).' It appears from the passages

cited, especially  from the  story  of  Samson, that the

worship  of  Dagon was  general  among  the Philistines

(Jerome  on Is.  46i),^ though  it  would perhaps be  a

mistake  to  regard  him  as  a  national  god. Places  bearing

1  The  temple  of  Dagon  in  iCh.  lOio  is  an  error  for  Beth-
shan,  I  S.31  10,  and  in  Is.  46  i  (©NAQ)  Dagon  is  a  mistake  for
Nebo. AayiuK  in  Ezek.  '.'046  (21  2)  [B.\]  is  cornipt.

2  Jerome  s  knowledge  is  doubtless  derived  solely  from  the
OX.

983


the  name  Bkth-d.\gon  {■].-•.)  are  found  in  the  Judncan
Lowlands  and  on  the  boundary  of  .Asher  ;  in  Christian
times  there  was  a  Caferdago  between  Diospolis  and
Jamnia  (Jerome).^  All  these  places  lie  within  a  region
which  had  been  for  a  time  in  the  possession  of  the  Philis-
tines, and  it  is  conceivable  that  they  received  the  name
from  them.  This  can  hardly  \x.  the  case,  however,  with
Beit  Dojan,  SE.  of  Nabulus,  which  also  seems  to  re-
present an  ancient  Beth-dagon  ;  and  it  is  at  least  equally
possible  that  the  worship  of  Dagon  to  which  these
names  bear  witness  preceded  the  Philistine  invasion — in
other  words,  that  Dagon  was  a  god  of  the  older  Canaanite
inhabitants.  Philo  Byblius  gives  Dagon  a  place  in  his
Phoenician  theogony,  making  him  a  son  of  Ouranos
and  Ge,  and  brother  of  Elos  (El)  or  Kronos,  Baitulos.
and  Atlas  ;"^  but  we  should  hesitate  to  conclude,  on  this
testimony  alone,  that  Dagon  was  worshipped  among  the
Ph(finicians.  A  cylindrical  seal  now  in  the  Ashmolean
Museum  at  Oxford,  attributed  by  Sayce  to  the  seventh
century  B.C.,  is  inscribed  with  the  words  '  Baal  Dagon  '
in  Phoenician  characters  (Sayce,  Higher  Criticism,  32J).
Of  the  character  of  the  god  we  know  nothing
definite.  Philo  Byblius,  deriving  the  name  from  ddgdii,
corn,  interprets  (t'ltwv,  and  makes  Dagon  a  god  of
husbandry,  Zei'/s  dporpios.  Others  derived  the  name
Dagon  from  dag,  fish  (cp  Shimshon  [S.\.\iso.\],  from
shemcsh,  sun).^  It  w.as  natural,  therefore,  to  imagine
that  the  god  was  represented  in  the  form  of  a  fish  (so
Rashi).  From  1 S.  54  we  learn,  however,  that  the
idol  of  Dagon  at  .Ashdod  had  a  head,  and  hands  which
projected  from  the  botly  ;  by  its  fall  these  were  broken
off,  leaving  only  the  trunk  of  the  image.  The  Hebrew
text,  by  some  corruption,  reads,  '  only  Dagon  was  left
on  him,'  which  David  Kimhi  (ob.  circa  1235  A.D. )
ingeniously  interprets,  only  the  form  of  a  fish  was  left,
adding,  '  It  is  said  that  I)agon,  from  his  navel  down,
had  the  form  of  a  fish  (whence  his  name,  Dagon),  and
from  his  navel  up,  the  form  of  a  man,  as  it  is  said,  his
two  hands  were  cut  off.'*  It  is  not  impossible  that
this  theory,  for  which  there  does  not  seem  to  he  any
older  Jewish  authority,*  merely  transfers  to  Dagon,  by
the  help  of  etymology,  the  description  given  by  Lucian
and  others  of  the  goddess  DercOto,  who  was  worshipped
on  the  same  coast.*  Not  a  few  more  modern  scholars
have  identified  her  with  Dagon.  The  prevailing  opinion
that  Dagon  was

sea  monster,  upward  man

j  And  downward  fish,

j has no other foundation than these verj' doubtful
etymological  and  mythological  combinations.

What  relation  there  is  between  Dagon  and  Marnas,
the  principal  god  of  Gaza  in  the  early  centuries  of  our
era,'  whom  the  writers  of  the  time  identify  with  Zfi'j

1  OS  235 14  (Ktirap  aSayiav)  104 15.  In  the  inscription  of
Eshmunazar,  king  of  Sidon,  in  connection  with  Dor  and  Joppi,
occur  the  word.'  pt  ns-ix>  which  Schlottmann  interpreted,  '  land
of  Dagon,'  others,  'cornlands.'  Aayuii/  near  Jericho  (Jos.  Anf.
xiii.  Si  =  B/  i.2  2  1  =  Swk,  i  Mace.  10  15I)  has  nothing  to  do  with
the  name  of  the  god  (>ee  Docus).

2  Miiller,  /"'r.  Hist.  Gr.  %^b-j /. ;  cp  Etyin.  Afagn.s.7'.  BTjToycoi'
6  Kpdfot  iiTTO  ^oiviKiov.

3  Jer.,  piscis  tristitia  (px,  cp  Sidon,  venatio  iristitier).  Other
interpretations  :  fl^o%  tx^uos  x)  Avrnj.  Ae'ytToi  &i  KaX  Bwpov  i<rTiv
ayia  r)  6  Zcii?  o  dpovpaios  ((\?  ]!<!•  14).

■*  Thenius  would  put  this  explanation  into  the  text,  emending
vSy  nxcj  )1JT  i-\  pi ;  similarly  We.  (iKr:  Ml  pi).  WRS  ;  cp  Dr.

*  It  is  unknown  to  the  Targum,  Josephus,  and  the  Talmud.
Other  Jewish  commentators  represent  Dagon  with  the  head  of
a  fish  ;  see  a  I>yra,  Abarb.

"  See  Atargatis.

7  First  attested  on  coins  of  Hadrian.  See  Jer.  E/.  10"  2,
yit.  S.  Hilar.U'iQ;  esp.  Marc.  Diac,  /':"/.  i".  Porphyrii,
passim.

984


DAISAN

Kpr)Tayet>Tlit,  is  not  certain.  Marnas  is  the  Aramaic
mantii,  our  Lord,  and  it  is  not  im|K)ssible  that  the  god
worshipiH-'d  under  this  appellation  was,  by  his  proper
name,  the  old  Dagon.

In  the  fragments  of  Rcrossus,  one  of  the  mythical
monsters,  jiarl  fish,  part  man,  who  at  long  intervals
o B  1 ♦• ♦ came  up  from  the  Persian  (julf  to  reix-at

f^®^  -t^  »"  »'!'-'  Chaldaans  the  original  reveia-
otner  aeiwes.  _^^^^^  ^^  Oannes,  is  named  Odacon
{ilbcLKuiv)  ;  '  and  as,  since  Kimhi,  a  like  form  was
generally  attributed  to  Dagon,  it  was  natural  to  com-
bine the  two  names  (Selden  and  many  others).  Layard
published  a  figure  of  a  merman  from  Khorsabad,  and
in  a  note  suggested  that  it  might  represent  Odacon-
Dagon  (Xim-eh,  1840,  2466/.).  Some  Inter  Assyri-
ologists  reproduce  Layard's  cut  with  the  legend  '  the
fish-god  Dagon. '  "^

There  was  a  Haby Ionian  god  Dagan,  whose  name
appears  in  conjunction  with  Anu  and  often  with  '  Xinib  '  :
he  was,  therelore,  probably  a  god  of  heaven  (Sayce,
Jensen).*  As  Sir  Henry  Kawlinson  perceived,  there  is
no  connection  whatever  between  this  god  and  ROrossus"
sea-monster,  Odacon.  Whether  the  Philistine  Dagon  is
originally  the  same  as  the  Babylonian  Dagan  caimot,
with  our  present  knowledge,  Ixi  determined.  The  long
and  profound  influence  of  Babylonia  in  Palestine  in  early
times,  which  is  attested  by  the  Amarna  tablets,  makes
it  (|uite  possible  that  Dagon,  like  Anath,  came  thence.*
Dagon,  however,  does  not  seem  to  have  occupied  a
I^lace  of  much  importance  in  the  Babylonian  religion,
and  is  much  less  often  mentioned  than  the  other  great
gods.  The  Assyrians  did  not  recognise  the  name  of
the  god  Dagan  in  the  town  Beth-dagon,  Bit-daganna
(Semiacherib,  Prism  Inscr.  265),  and  possibly  the
similarity  of  the  names  may  be  accidental.

Of  the  worship  of  Dagon  we  know  nothing,  .\ccord-
iiig  to  I  S.  55  the  priests  and  others  entering  his  temple

_^  ,  .  at  Aslidod  were  careful  not  to  set  foot
i.  worsnip  ^^^  j^g  ^jj,  {;/.i:\>\\.  I9)  ;  cp  Marc.  Diac.  76.
0  agon,  -^^-j^^j  ^^^.  1^..^^,^  j-,.Q,^j  jj^g  last-named  author
about  the  worship  of  Marnas  at  Gaza — for  example,
that  the  god  was  invoked  to  send  rain  ;  that  he  gave
oracles  ;  that  there  were  certain  iiiannora  in  the  temple
which  were  peculiarly  sacred,  and  guarded  from  the
apjjroach  (especially)  of  women  ;  that  there  were  wells
in  the  temple  precincts — is  not  distinctive.  \\'hether
human  sacrifices  were  offered  there  in  the  writer's  day
may  be  dOubted  ;  the  indictment  in  66  6S  may  refer  to
an  earlier  time.

See  Selden,  De  dis  Syrls,  73  with  Reyer's  Adiiitaiiicnta  ;
Th.  Roser,  Dc  J)agone  fhilistuvruiit  iif,ilo,  m  Ugulini,
Tliesaurus,  23955-961  :  .Stark,  Gaza  u.  die  fhilistiiische  Ki'iste
(■52),  248-250,  cp  576-580 ;  Scholz,  Getzcndienst  ('77),  238-244 ;
Baudissin,  art.  'Dagon 'in  P  l\  hK''*  ;  .Menani,  '  Le  mythe  de
D.igon,'  Kn>.  de  niisf.  d,s  K,-l.  11  {'85)  295  ^  ;  Jensen,  Vie
Kosiiiologie  der  /><ji*j/i)«/ir  ('90),  pp.  449-456.  (;.  i'.  M.


DAISAN (Aaican [R])

RlV.IN, 2.

DALAIAHin-'?-^


Esd.


Ezra  248,


Ch.  824  A\'  ; kV  l)i;i..\i.\u,  3.

DALAN  (AaAan  [A]),  i  Esd.  .'.37  kV=Ezra26o,
Di:i..\i.\ii,  4.

DALMANUTHA  (t&  mcrh  AaAmanoyGa  [Ti.
WHJ)  takes  the  place  in  Mk.  810  of  the  Mac.vd.xn
(q.v.)  of  li  Mt.  l.")39.  It  was  'into  the  parts  of  Dal-
manutha,'  we  are  told  (Mk.  810),  that  Jesus  came  in
'  the  boat '  with  his  disciples  after  he  had  '  sent  away
about  four  thousand '  whom  he  had  fed. Since  in  v.  13

1  M Oiler,  Fr.  Hist.  Gr.  2500.

2  Schrader  in  Richm,  HUB^'^S  (cp  A'W  rW  182);  Fr.  Del.  in
Caliiier  Iiil>.  lex^%  .See  esp.  .Menant,  '  I.e  Mythe  de  D.-igon,'
Ri-t'.  de  t Hist,  des  Rel.  ('8;)  11  295^,  where  a  great  variety  of
Assyrian  fish-men  may  be  found.

••  According  to  the  Heb.  version  of  Tobit,  Sennacherib  was
killed  in  the  temple  of  his  god  Dagon  (ed.  Ncubauer,  p.  2U,
1.  4)  ;  but  this  is  a  mere  blun<ler.

*  Cp  the  name  D.tgantakala  in  the  Am.  Tab.,  and  see  Ash-
DOD  (col.  326,  n.  2).


DALMATIA

he  'departed  to  the  other  side'  (tit  ri  itipav),  it  has
seemed  natural  to  look  for  Dahnanutha  on  the  W.  co.x«;t
of  the  lake.  No  such  place,  however,  is  knf)wn.  The
name  does  not  appear  in  Eus.  or  Jer.  ;  nor  is  there
any  tr.ace  of  an  analogy  to  it  in  any  of  the  ancient
itineraries  or  mediaeval  travels.

I-ightfootC  DecasChorocr.'  in  Of-era,  1^\-^/.  \  cpOf-ft.  Posth.
71)  suggested  that  it  miuht  be  an  Aramaic  form  of  Salmrin,
J1d'?S.  several  times  mentioned  in  Talniudic  writings  (.Slishna,
Veliamoth,  1B6;  Kelaini.  49;  Orlah,  \i\  Talm.  Ral<a  liathr.
821*.)  as  if  in  the  neighlxjurhood  of  'lilierias;  and  similarly
Kwald  ('list.,  KT,  <l34H,  n.  4)  interprets  it  .-is  the  (jalilean
pronunciation  of  Salmon.  Keim  (Jrsus,  ET,  4238)  lakes  it
for  Salmfinfit— /.I-.,'  '  Sh.idy  Place.'  .Schwarz  (Das  lleil.  Land,
189)  suggests  th.it  Talnianutha,  as  another  name  fur  Magdal.1.
may  l)c  derived  from  the  cave  of  "Teliman  j»{D''?B  ( I'alm.  Jcrus.
Deiiiai.  1i\  for  which  he  proposes  the  caves  on  the  cliff  behind
Mejdel.  Neubaucr,  however  (i'.coi:.  Titliii.  268),  says  that  this
c  ive  should  be  in  the  neighbourhood  of  Herod  s  Ca.-sare.T.
Recently  two  other  derivations  fr^m  Aramaic  have  been  pr.j-
piised.  W<tx/.(E.vp.  7.8  563  [Sept.  '97]) suggests  tbat  Dalmanuth
is  a  translileralion  of  nn";C*'n.  'he  emphatic  form  of  ,n:"cS,  'he
Talmudic  name  for  harbour — i.e.,  the  bay  or  harlxiur  in  which
Magdala  stood— a  designation  'one  might  expect  of  the  evan-
gelist whose  gospel  is  founded  on  the  preacbiiig  of  Peter  the
fisherman.'  Then  Nestle  (//'.  'J45  [Oct.  '97J),  a:'ler  pronouncing
Herz's  xn'jC''?'!  ;>"  impossible  form  for  the  emphatic  of  nycS
suggests  Nni;cS(7)  =  *is  Ttt /i.e'p»/,  '  into  the  parts'— /.?.,  of  Mag-
dala. Herz  replies  (///.  O95  (Nov.  '57])  that  Kn':C'Vl  's  possible
in  the  ba.xity  of  1  .dinudic  transliteration  and  points  out  that  in
Nestle's  suggestion  the  -\  remains  unaccounted  for,  as  well
as  the  intrusion  of  a  needles^  Syri.ic  e<]uivalent  of  the  Greek.
'I'hose  who  place  M.igiiala  on  the  SK.  shore  of  the  lake
have  sought  there  for  traces  of  the  name,  and  Thomson  (LB
393)  suggests  a  ruined  site  half  a  mile  up  the  Yarmfik  from
the  Jordan,  called  Dalhamia  or  Dalmamia  (Rob.  BR  8264
Delhemiyeh) ;  but  this  is  some  distance  from  the  I-ike.  None
of  these  derivations  and  identifications  seems  perfectly  satis-
factory. G.  A.  S.

DALMATIA  (AaXmatia  [Ti.  WH],  Tac. ,  Dio  Cass. .
Di'hnalia:  Inscr.  Dclnuitia  m\(.\  IMlmatia.  The  name
docs  not  occur  in  early  (ireek  writers).  The  Dalmatians
were  an  Illyrian  tribe,  or  ])erhaps  rather  a  confederation
of  tribes,  round  the  town  Delmion  or  Delminium,  from
which  their  name  was  derived  (Straljo,  315).  They  had
fifty  settlements  {Ka.TOi.Kio.%  dftoXoYois  ;  but  cp  Cic.  ad
Fain,  f)  lofl),  of  which  some  ranked  as  cities— <'.,^'. ,
Salome  or  Salona  (mod.  Saloiia  near  Spalato).  These
tribes  had  in  earlier  times  been  loosely  de[)endent  upon
the  rulers  of  .Scodra  (mod.  Skutari),  and  had  therefore
suffered  from  the  Roman  expeditions  directed  against
Queen  Teuta  (229  B.C.)  and  Demetrios  of  Pharos  (219
B.C. ).  On  the  accession  of  (Jenthius  they  revolted,  and
thus  escaped  the  fate  of  southern  lUyricum,  which,  on
the  subjugation  of  Macedonia,  became  permanently
dependent  upon  Rome  (see  Il.l.VKlciM).  Brigandage
and  piracy  were  the  only  native  trades  (.Str.  317).  In
155  B.C.  Publius  Scipio  Nasica  took  the  capital,  and
the  Dalmatians  prof<-ssed  subjection.  A  series  of
almost  endless  wars  had  to  be  waged  before  this  central
p.art  of  lUyricum  was  finally  reduced  by  Octavian  (33
B.C.).  In  the  partition  of  provinces  in  27  B.C.  so
peaceful  was  lUyricum  (t6  XaXuaTtKov,  Dio  Cass.  53  12)
that  it  was  made  senatorial  ;  but  sixteen  ye.ars  later  the
Emperor  was  compelled  to  take  charge  of  its  two  main
sections,  Dalm.atia  and  P.annonia  [id.  5434).  A  final
struggle  for  freedom  (6-9  A.I). ;  cp  Suet.  lib.  16,  who
compares  the  crisis  with  that  of  the  Punic  Wars)  was
crushed  by  Tiberius.  The  co.astland  from  Lissus  to
the  .-Vrsia  was  thereafter  organised  as  an  independent
province  (for  its  imjx)rtance,  see  Tac.  Ami.  4s).  The
title  of  the  province  was  '  Superior  Provincia  Illyricum'
(C/^  3,  1741),  or  '  maritima  pars  Illyrici '  (Veil.  ii.
125  5).  .After  .Augustus  '  Dalmatia '  is  apparently  the  more
usual  title  (cp  Jos.  i^/ii.  I64).  Its  northern  Ixiund.ary
towards  Pannonia  is  not  clearly  marked  ;  in  the  S.
it  extended  to  the  province  of  Macedonia.  The  mention
of  Dalmatia  in  the  NT  is  confined  to  a  single  instance
('Titus  is  gone  to  Dalmatia,'  perhaps  from  Nicopolis  :
2  Tim.  4 10).

The  connection  may  be  illustrated  from  Tac.  .4««.  253:
konorem  (consulatus)  Germanicus  iniit  apud  urbttn  Achaia

986


DALPHON

Nicopolim,  quo  venerat  per  Illyricam  oram,  visofratre  Druso
in  Dalmaiia  agente.

It  is  unnecessary  to  suppose  that  the  term  '  Dalmatia  '
is  used  by  Paul  in  a  '  vague  and  general  sense'  (Cony-
beare  and  Howson,  2  155).

See  ("oils,  L.i  Prcn'ince  Kotii.  de  Dalmatic:  Evans,  Anti-
quarian Kiscarc/us  in  Illyricum.  w.  J.  \V.

DALPHON (psj'^. ;  AeA(t)coN  [BALfl]. ton  \.  [S^-''].
(\Ae\4)a>N  [N*],  ton  &^eA(|)ON  AyToy  [L"*]).  a  son
of  Hanian,  Ksth.  97. Cp  EsTHKK,  §  3.

DAMARIS  (Aamaric  [Ti.  WH],  a  woman,  appar-
ently of  some  importance,  named  in  Acts  1734  fis  one
of  those  who  were  converted  by  Pauls  ]5reaching  at
Athens.  Chrysostom  {de  Saa-rd.  4?)  makes  her  the
wife  of  DioNYSius  the  Areopagite  ;  so  Lat.  of  cod.
E  [cum  iixore  sua),  whilst  its  Greek  has  only  •^vvt].
Wetzstein  (XT  Gr.  2573)  quotes  a  gloss,  Aa/tap,  yvvf),
ya/jLtr^.  X^ytrai  Kal  Aafxapis.

DAMASCUS. The  English  Damascus  is  the  Greek

A&MACKOC- The  Heb.  is  usually  pw'tS'^,  Dammesek  ;

but  twice  (i  Ch.  18  5  2  Ch.  28  s  ;  cp  2  K.

1.  Name. ^^^^ pbD-H) pi^D-ll, Darmesek. The

origin  and  meaning  of  the  name  arc  unknown.


Environs  of

DAMASCUS.

1  iv-Hsli  .Miles


Both  forms  occur  in  the  Targums.  The  Aramaic  form  is
Darmesek,  later  Syri.ac  Darmcsuk  ;  Talmud,  Durmaskln.  Both
forms  occur  in  the  Egyptian  lists  :  Ti-mas-ku  in  the  sixteenth
century  B.C.,  and  Sa-ra-maski  for  Ti-ra-mas-ki  inthe  thirteenth
(W.MM,  As.  u.  .Eur.).  In  Assyrian  the  town  is  Dimaski  or
pimaska;  the  kingdom  (in  Heb.,  Aram  of  Damascus)  Mat  Sa
imerisu,  a  phrase  of  uncertain  meaning.  The  Arabic  is  Dimask,
or  Dimisk  e5  Sam — i.e.,  Damascus  of  Syria — usually  contracted
to  e5-S;1m.  The  instances  of  the  form  with  rm  in  OT  are  later
than  those  with  double  ;«;  but,  if  the  Egyptian  transliieration
be  correct,  r>«  is  as  old  as  the  thirteenth  century  B.C.  Whether
mm  arose  by  assimil.ation  (see  below,  §  6)  from  rjii,  or  rm  by
dissimilation  from  mm,  is  not  clear.

Damascus  has  occupied  its  preeent  site  certainly  since
Greek times, probably from the remotest antiquity.

_ -, , The  city  lies  in  the  NW.  corner  of  the

2.  Geography,  ^s.^^ ^  ^^^^jj^ p,^;^ ^^ ^^^ p, ^^

Hermon. To  the  E.  of  the  city  this  is  known  as  el-
Merj,  the  .Ager  Daniascenus.

The  (*.uta  is  some  30  m.  by  8  or  10,  and  2300  ft.  above  sea-
level.  It  is  bounded  on  the  W.  by  Hermon,  on  the  N.  by  a  long
barren  offshoot  of  Antilibanus,  on  the  E.  by  a  long  line  of
volcanic  hills,  the  Tellfll,  which  shut  out  the  great  desert,  and
on  the  S.  by  the  Jebcl  '.\swad,  beyond  which  lies  Hauran.  It
is  traversed  on  the  N.  by  the  seven  streams  of  the  Baradd  and
on  the  S.  by  the  Barl>ar  and  A'luaj  {%ec  Abana,  Phakpak).
The  fertility  is  very  great. There  are  many  fields  of  corn  and

987


DAMASCUS

maize ;  but  groves  of  poplar  and  walnut,  orchards  of  apricot,
pomegranate,  pistachio,  and  almond,  with  hedges  and  underwood,
so  abound  (.see  below,  §  10),  that  the  distant  view  of  the  Gfija
is  as  of  an  almost  unbroken  sea  of  verdure.  From  this  the
white,  smokeless  city  rises  like  an  island,  near  the  barren  lime-
stone bills  on  the  north  of  it.

The  bulk  of  the  city  is  set  along  the  main  stream  of

the  Baratlfi, 2  m. from  where  the  latter  breaks  upon

_. _.. the  plain. It  sjireads  about  a  mile  from

3.  ine  oity.  y  ^^  ^^  ^^^,  ,^^jj.  ^  ^^jj^  ^^^^^  ^  ^^  ^  .

but  from  the  southern  gate  a  suburb,  the  Meidan,
consisting  almost  wholly  of  one  street,  stretches  for
another  mile.  The  city  is  thus  mallet-shapxjd,  the  head
lying  N.  totheBarada,  the  shaft  .S.  along  the  Meccanroad.
Between  the  Baradil  and  the  hills  there  is  another  suburb,
Salihiyeh  ; but  it  is  scattered  and  half  hidden  in  trees.

The  position  is  almost  absolutely  level,  and  commanded  by  the
hills.  There  is  no  real  citadel  ;  a  castle  surrounded  by  a  moat
lies  a  little  to  the  .south  of  the  river.  The  wall,  ]>ierced  by  seven
gates,  runs  straight  along  the  river  and  then  round  the  bulk  of
the  city,  the  mallet  head.  The  upper  part  of  it  is  Arab  or
Turkish  work  ;  but  much  of  the  lower  half  may  date  from  NT
times  (.\cts  1'25;  cp  2  Cor.  11  32^;).  Through  the  .southern
part  of  the  city  and  parallel  to  the  river  ran  (as  through  every
other  Creek  town  in  Cocle.syria)  a  long  colonnaded  street,
generally  identified  with  that  'called  Straight '  (.\cts 9  11).  The
ba.ses  of  some  columns  are  still  standing.  E.  of  the  castle,  the
Great  Mosque  (partly  burned  in  1894)  occupies  the  site  and
contains  some  of  the  struc-
ture of  the  CathetlTal  of  St.
John,  built  by  Arc.idius  in
the  beginning  of  the  fifth
century  on  the  ruins  of  a
(ireek  temple,  which  again
was  probably  the  successor
of  the  house  of  Rimmon  (2
K.  618;  cp  10  10-16).  The
rest  of  Damascus  is  occupied
by  bazaars,  mosques,  a  few
open  places,  and  streets  of
private  houses.  On  its  ap-
proach to  the  walls,  the
J.iradn.  has  much  of  its
water  drawn  off  through
channels,  by  which  it  is  con-
veyed to  every  corner  of  the
city.  The  chief  gardens  lie
along  the  N.  bank  of  the
river  ;  but  others,  inter-
spersed with  cemeteries,
stretch  all  round  the  wall.
Despite  various  drawbacks,
her  rich  .stre.ams,  bursting,
as  they  do,  on  the  very  edge
of  the  desert,  and  creating
a  delicious  verdure,  have
won  for  Dam.^scns  the  name
of  the  earthly  Paradise  of  the
Arab  world.

That  a  site  so  defence-
less and  so  shut  off  by
fty  mountains  from  the
iiaifcerd-BoutaUic. most  of  Syria  should  yet
have  held  in  perennial  vigour  one  of  the  most  ancient  of
_ . ,  cities,  the  real  capital  of  Syria,  and  enabled
it  to  survive  wars  and  changes  of  empire
V V !• which have overthrown or reduced to
poverty  every  other  great  city  of  that  part  of  the  world,
is  due  to  the  combination  of  so  rich  a  fertility  with  a  posi-
tion so  forward  on  the  desert  and  so  central  to  Western
Asia.  Damascus  is  an indispensable  harbour  of

refuge  on  the  desert  ;  the  market  of  the  nomads  ;  the
outpost  of  the  Mediterranean  world  towards  farther  Asia  ;
central  to  Eg}'pt,  the  Levant,  Arabia.  Me.sopotamia,  and
Khurdistan.  Her  great  roads  lead  to  N.  S)Tia,  the  upper
Euphrates  by  Palmyra  to  Baghdad  and  the  Persian  Gulf ;
by  the  Gulf  of  "Akaba  to  Mecca  ;  through  Sjria  to  Cairo  ;
and  by  the  upper  Jordan  and  Galilee  to  Acre,  which  is
her  natural  ijort  on  the  Mediterranean— though  at  times
political  exigencies  have  connected  her  more  closely  with
Tyre,  Sidon,  or  Tripoli,  and  to-day  the  great  French  road
and  railway  across  the  Lebanons  carry  her  western
trade  to  Berfit.  She  thus  lay  on  the  commercial  lines
of  traffic  between  Western  Europe  and  India  by  the
Persian  Gulf :  between  the  valleys  of  the  Euphrates  and
the  Nile  ; between  Arabia  and  Asia  Minor.  So


DAMASCUS

inevitable  an  emporium.  Damascus  was  only  less
favourable  a  seat  of  empire.  She  has  always  been  the
natural  capiUil  of  Lebanon  and  I-Lastcrn  Palestine.  As
onR  as  an  Mistern  jKJWcr  ruled,  she  remained  the
capital  also  of  Syria ;  but  during  the  Greek  and  Roman
dominion  (330  n.c— 634  A.u.)  she  yielded  her  supre-
macy to  .Antioch.

The  Arabs  first  made  for  Dsunasciis,  and  then  used  h«  as  the
ba.se  of  their  Syrian  conquests.  Under  the  Oma>  yad  Khalifi
she  was  the  capital  of  the  Moslem  empire  from  Spam  to  India.

With  so  many  comniunicntions  Damascus  has  always
bc«-n  tht; home of a motley  crowd— Syrians. Arabs.
.  (^.reeks. and Kurds, with Turks and  Jews.

B.  Arts.  Y^.j jj  j^^g  preserved,  apparently  through  all
ages,  a  very  distinctive  character  for  skill  in  handicrafts.
Damascus,  though  it  has  never  been  a  great  schwjl  of
letters,  has  always  been  a  school  of  arts  ;  even  more  a
manufactory  than  a  market  or  a  garden. The  Knglish
terms. Damask (originally any figured or patterned
te.\tile)>  and Damascene  blade  ; the  German  Damast
and  1  )amascieren  and  Damascener  ;  the  French  Damas-
quinerie and Damasquinure (emlxjssing on steel)  are
proofs  of  the  inventiveness  and  technical  skill of  the
peoi)le.  %\  hich  seem  to  reach  back  to  a  very  remote  tiiue.
In the middle ages Damascus was famous for its
patterned and brocaded cloths, esijccially silks and
wools  ('  an  inimitable  i)erfection  of  work"  according  to
Idrisi). its glass, sword-blades, and embossed and
enamelled metal-work. In the beginning of the
Christian  era,  to  '  carry  wool  to  Damascus'  was,  accord-
ing to  the  Talmud,  a  proverb,  eciuivalent  to  our  '  carry-
ing coals  to  Newcastle.' Ezekiel  (ii"  18)  sjieaks  of  the
city's  exportation  of  wine  and  wool  for  the  manufactures
of  I'hcenicia  (cp  Toy,  SHOT,  but  see  Cornill,  ad  lor.) ;
2 K.  89 mentions the  'goods of Damascus.' Ahaz
made  a  copy  of  its  richly  decor.tted  altar  (2  K.  \&ioff.).
The extreme anticiuity of Dama.scus (Jos. Ant.
i.  6472)  was  a  not  unnatural  inference  from  its  perennial
vigour  throughout  historical  times. Down
6.  Early ^^  ^^^^  eleventh  century  B.C.,  however,  the
History, i-gfgrcnces  to  it  are  few  and  uncertain. A
local  tradition  (found  also  in  Nicolaus  Dam.  /•>.  30,  a;>.
Jos.  Ant.  i.  72)  connects  Damascus  with  Abraham  ; and
there  is  twice  mention  of  it  in  the  JE  narrative  of  the
patriarch'slife(Gen.  His  15  2;  seeHoB.XH,  Eliezkk,  i  ).
In  the  sixteenth  century  Ti-mas-ku  occurs  as  the  thir-
teenth in  the  list  of  the  Syrian  conquests  of  Thotnies  111.
( AV'-T)  44)  ;  Timas-gi.  Dimas-ka  are  read  in  the  .Amarna
tablets (15th cent.) (1:^63 142  21). These tablets
describe the invasion of N. Syria by the Hittites,
before  whom  the  I'.gyptian  outposts  had  to  give  way,
and  for  the next iliree  centuries Damascus lay  upon
the  vacillating  frontier  lielween  the  two  powers. In  the
fourteenth  century,  Rameses  11.  extended  his  conquests
to IJeiriit  and probably included Damascus. At  the
close  of  the  thirteenth  century,  in  lists  of  the  con(|uests
of Rameses  III.,  Sa-ra-maski  for  Ti-ra-m.is-ki  (WMM
As.  u.  Eur.  227)  is  mentioned. The  addition  of  r  to
the  name  is  taken  {ib.  234)  as  proof  that  the  regions
of Damascus had meanwhile come  under  Aranuvan
influence  (but  see Ak.\m). and  so  when  at  last they
appear  in  the  OT  historical  books, in  the  campaigns
of  David  toward  the  end  of  the  eleventh  century,  we
find  them  possessed  by  a  nunilx;r  of  Arama-an  states,
for  the  rise  of  which  room  had  been  made  by  the  over-
throw of  the  Hittites  nearly  a  hundred  years  previously
by  Tiglath-pileser  1.  {circa  1106). The  chief  of  these
Aramjean  states  was  Sobah  (see  David,  §  8  ^)  under
king  Hadadc/er, to whose help  against David  came
Aram  of  Danmiesek  (2  S.  8s  ; cp 1  Ch.lSs). David.
1  It  is  not  at  all probable  that Damascus  had  acquired  a
reputation for the manufacture of dam.xsk as early as the
time  of  Amos,  thouRh  RV  of  Am.  8  121*  assumes  this  ;  '  Damask  '
and  '  Damascus  'may  have  noconnection. In  Ar.  the  forms  are
different— rt'///f(»>frj  for  the  stuff,  and  DiuiaiHor  the  city.  Proliably
(as  Frankel.  FrctmhvSrtcr,  40,  referred  to  by  Driver,  ad  loc.,  is
of  opinion)  Himaks  comes  by  metathesis  from  midaks. On  Am.
I.C.,  see  Amos,  |  '5  n.  ;  Bed,  S  S-
989


DAMASCUS

after  his  victory,  is  said  to  have  planted  garrisons  in  the
territory  of  Damascus  ;  but  that  these  had  no  per-
manence is  plain  from  what  we  hear  of  keson  l>en
Kliadii  the  freelxx)ter,  who  'came  to  Damascus,  and
dwelt  there,  and  reigned  in  Damascus,  and  was  a  foo
to  Israel  all  the  days  of  Solomon  '  (i  K.  11  23-25)-

We  have  now  reached  the  point  at  which  DamaKus
becomes  chief  of  the  Aranuvan  confederacy,  and  enters
,  iqxjn  her  first  great  period  of  political
7.  Ben-hadad.  supremacy  (nna  1000-733  n.f\  ).  Her
history  is  articulate,  and  we  have  a  pretty  full,  though
not  complete,  list  of  her  kings.  Who  ResOn  b.  Eliada
(i  K.  11 23)  was  is  disputed;  probably  (see.  however,
HicziON)  he  was  tl.e  same  as  Hezion.  father  of  Tab-
rimmon.  father  of  the  Ben-hadad  (I'.ir-idri.  known  as
Ben-hadad  I.)  who  about  925  ):.c:.  helix-d  Asa  {,/.i:)
against  IJaasha  (i  K.  If.  18/:).  It  was  perhaps  the
same  15en-hadad  who.  some  twenty  years  later,  defeated
Omri  and  won  the  right  of  '  establishing  quarters'  (see
Tkadk  and  Com.mkkc  k)  in  Samaria  (i  K.  2O34;  Nic
Dam.  /•>.  31).  The  son  of  Hen-hadad  I.  (or  Ben-hadad
himself?  See  Bkn-iiadad,  §  2),  whom  also  the  OT
calls  Ben-hadad,  but  a  contemporary  inscription  of
Shalmancser  II.  of  Assyria  (854  n.c. )  calls  Hadadezer
(see,  however,  Ben-hadad.  §  2),  besieged  Ahab
(q.v.)  in  Samaria,  but  was  repulsed  there  and  again
at  Aphek.  on  wliich  .Ahab  received  the  right  to  'establish
quarters  for  himself  in  Damascus.  In  854  the  com-
bined forces  of  N.  Israel.  Damascus,  and  other  states
were  defeated  at  Karkar  (see  AliAB)  by  Shalmaneser
II..  who  again,  in  850  and  in  847.  overthrew  Ben-
hadad.  The  .Assyrian  empire  was  thus  steadily  advancing
on  Damascus ;  but  the  latter  was  still  the  terror
of  Israel  (2  K.  f);.  the  story  of  Naaman).  tuade
regular  raids  over  Jordan,  and  even  besieged  Samaria
(2  K.  6  7  ;  see  Jkiioka.m,  i)  till  Ben-hadad  was  drawn
off  by  rumours  of  northern  war.  Disgraced  by  defeats
so  numerous,  he  was  slain by  Hazael

8.  Hazael. ^^  ^.^ ^^  ^^^^^  jf  ^^^  ^^^^  ^f  ^y^ 3  is  is

correct.  Hazael  then  became  king,  and  warred  with
Jehoram  {ib.  28/),  also  with  Shalmaneser  II.,  by  whom
he  was  defeated  in  843  and  in  840,  the  second  time
with  the  loss  of  four  cities  and  much  spoil  out  of
Damascus.  Still,  he  succeeded  in  depriving  Jehu  of
all  Israel's  territory  E.  of  Jordan,  and  in  extending  the
dominion  of  Damascus  southwards  to  the  Anion  (2  K.
IO32;  cp  Am.  I3).  He  al.so  took  Gath.  and  was
bought  off  from  an  invasion  of  Judah  only  by  large
tribute  from  Jehoash  {Vlij  [18]/).  Hazael  and  his
son  Ben-hadad  III.  (or  II.)  were  able  to  oppress  Israel
through  the  reigns  of  Jehu's  successors  Jehoahaz  and
Joash  (2  K.  13325),  for  under  Samii-ramman  the
Assyrian  armies  did  not  cross  the  Euphrates  (.\ssvRiA,
§  32),  and  Damascus  was  free  for  the  time  from  the
Northern  terror.  By  805  Assyria  was  again  pressing
_- ., towards  Palestine,  and  in  803  King  Mari*

9.  Man.  (i^n.hadad  H.  ?)  of  Damascus  (see  Ben-
UAD.^D,  §  3)  was  successfully  besieged  by  Ramman-
nirari  III.  This  disaster  to  Damascus  permitted
Jeroboam  II.  (i/.v.)  to  recover  the  territory  that  Hazael
had  taken  from  Israel,  and  for  a  time  Israel  held
part  of  the  territory  of  Damascus  (2  K.  14  28;
not  necessarily  the  city).  In  773  Damascus  again
suffered  from  the  Assyrians,  who  invade*!  the  country
also in 772, 767, 755, and 754 (A.ssvria. § 32).

_  .  It  was  the  beginning  of  the  end.  In  743-
10.  Kezin.  „^^  Tiglath-pileser  III.  made  his  first
Syrian  campaign,  and  his  annals  (A'//23o)  contain  the
name  Ra-sun-nu  {mat)  Gar-imeri-su  {i.e.,  of  Damascus)
as  paying  tribute.  This  Ra-sun-nu  is  the  Rezin  of  the
Syro-Israelitish  war  (see  AiiAZ.  Tabeei.).  whose  in-
vasion of  Judah  brought  about  an  .Assyrian  interven-
tion (2  K.  167^).  Perhaps  the  danger  which  now
threatened  Damascus  was  the  occasion  of  the  allusions
to  the  city  in  Is.  17 1.  In  733  Tiglath-pileser— whether
before  or  after his  subjection  of  N. Israel and th«


DAMASCUS

Philistine  cities  is  not  quite  clear — defeated  Rczin,  shut
him  up  in  Damascus,  cut  down  the  plantations  (see
above,  §  2)  round  the  city  (he  numbers  the  trees  at
13,520),  took  the  city,  executed  Rezin,  and  carried  the
people  into  captivity  (Schr.  COTl  252^;  cp  2  K.  I69).
It  was  after  this,  in  732.  that  Ahaz  visited  Damascus,
and  obtained  the  pattern  of  the  altar  which  he  saw
there  (id. 10).

Up  to  this  time  Damascus  had  possessed  great
political  influence  :  her  confidence  in  herself,  her  puwer
11  Decline  °^  recuperation,  and  her  military  skill
are  anijjly  proved  by  her  restless  energy
in  Syrian  jwlitics,  even  while  she  was  bleeding  from
the  reiterated  attacks  of  Assyria.  The  blow  which
Tiglath-pileser  inflicted,  however,  absolutely  destroyed
her  political  power.  She  seems  to  have  been  reduced
to  the  same  position  as  Samaria.

Sh.nlmaneser  IV.,  S.irgon,  and  .Sennacherib  mention  no  king
of  Damascus  in  all  their  Syrian  lists ;  and  the  only  notice  of
the  town  for  a  century  is  in  the  Khorsabad  inscription  of  .Sargon,
where  (about  the  year  713)  Damascus  is  said  to  have  joined
Arpad,  Simirra  (sjc  ZK.MANrrK),  and  Samaria  in  a  league  formed
by  Hamath  against  .Assyria.  The  allied  forces  were  crushed  by
Assyria  at  Karkar  (A'/V  2  57).  Next  century  Damascus  is  omitted
from  '!ie  list  of  twenty-two  kingdoms  given  by  Esarhaddon.

She  is  not  mentioned  by  the  prophets,  except  in
a  doubtful  passage  of  the  Book  of  Jeremiah  (4923-27)
\vhei-e  she  is  given  over  to  fear  and  flight,  and  by
Ezekiel  who  names  her,  only  in  passing,  as  a  customer
of  Tyre  (27  iS),  and  a  point  of  measurement  for  the
Holy  Land  (17i6J^).  If  then  important,  she  would  be
certainly  occupied  by  Pharaoh  Xecho  in  610  and
Nebuchadrezzar  in  604^

Under  the  Persians  Damascus  was  a  scat  of  authority,
and  very  prosperous  (Strabo  xvi.  220).

Cambyses  died  there  (Jos.  A>tt  xi.  2  2),  and  there  Darius
deposited  his  family  and  treasures  before  the  battle  of  Issus,
after  which  they  were  .surrendered  to  Alexander's  general  I'ar-
menio  (Quint.  Curt.  3  13).  .After  an  unsuccessful  revolt  the
Greek  supremacy  was  established  (//'.  4  i),  and  there  are  extant
coins  of  Alexander  issued  from  the  city.

At  the  death  of  Alexander,  Syria  with  Phoenicia  fell
to  LaomedOn,  the  capital  being  Damascus  (Id.  10 10).

12.  Supplanted  T'""-  '''''''"'"  '^'""f"'  ^'''"''''"^'' ,'°  '^'^"'"
.  A  i-  u  Svna  was  now  subject,  required  a  centre
by  Antioch. ■ , ,  .A

ujf  .ixiiuiwv.li.  j^^^.^j.  jj^^  ],o\ant,  and  Damascus  be-
came second  in  Syria  to  Antioch,  tlie  upstart  cajMtal  of
the  Seleuci(l.-B.

The  diminished  impoitance  of  Damascus  is  well  illustrated
by  the  small  part  it  plays,  as  contrasted  with  Antioch,  in  those
books  of  the  Antiquities  of  Josephus  (xii.  yC)  which  deal  with
the  third  and  second  centuries  n.c.  Its  more  natural  connection
with  N.  Syria  than  with  S.  kept  Damascus  in  the  hands  of  the
Seleucida:,  even  when  Palestine  and  Phoenicia  were  held  by
the  Ptolemies;  but  several  times  it  fell  to  the  latter:  e.g..,  in
320  under  Ptolemy  I.  (regained  by  Antigonus  in  314);  in  2S0
when  Ptolemy  II.  probably  occupied  it  (regained  by  Anti-
ochus  I.  280-262);  in  246  when,  however,  it  was  only  be^ieued
by  Ptolemy  III.  and  relieved  by  Seleucus  II.  in  242  (cp  Schurer,
Hist.  3  95).

In  the  Books  of  the  Maccabees  Damascus  is  men-
tioned only  as  being  twice  visited  by  Jonathan  (cina
144  B.C.: I  Mace.  11 62  I232  ;  Jos.  Ani.  xiii.  0510).

The  kingdom  of  the  Seleucidie  was  divided  in  iii  B.C.,  and
Damascus  must  have  fallen  with  the  .southern  part  to  .\ntiochus
IX.  or  Kyzikenus  (cp  Eus.  C/iron.  ed.  Schoene.  in  .Schiir.  o/>.
cit.  97,  and  Jos.  Ant.  xiii.  184).  It  was  retained  by  Antiochus'
son,  and  then  fell  to  Demetrius  Euk<erus,  and  after  his  over-
throw {circa  86  n.c.)  to  .Antiochus  XII.  or  Diony.sus,  from
whom  it  was  transferred  (though  only  for  a  short  time)  by
Milesius,  the  governor  of  the  citadel,  and  the  populace,  to
his  brother  Philip  (Jos.  ib.  15  1).

Antiochus  XII.  was  defeated  by  Arktas  {(J.v.),  the

Nabatitan, and  with Ctrlesyria Damascus  continued

.•o T>  _ in  Arabian  hands  (though  pressed hard

times  ' Alex.  Jannasus  [in.  103],  and  Ptolemy

Menneus,  against  whom  Queen  Alexandra

of  Jud;ta [78-69 B.C.] sent her son Aristobulus  [ib.

16 3  ; B/  i.  53])  till  the  occupation  in  65  by  the  Roman

legions  under  LoUius  and Metellus (.4«A  xiv.  2$ ; BJ

i.  62),  who  were  followed  in  64  by  Pompey.

After  this  the  exact  political  position  of  Damascus  is
difficult  to  define.

991


DAN

Though  Josephus  does  not  know  Damascus  as  a  member  of
the  Decapolis  (he  calls  Scythopolis  the  greatest  town  of  the
latter),  the  name  is  in  Pliny's  list  (HNb  16).  Under  Ca.ssius
(44-43  B.C.)  there  w.is  a  Roman  commandant,  Fabius,  in
D.-ima.scus  (Jos.  Ant.  xiv.  11  7  12  i  ;  lij  i.  12  i  f.\  and  the
Nabatajans  appear  to  have  been  driven  to  the  E.  and  to  the
S.  of  Hauran.  Somewhere  alxjut  38  n.c.  Mark  Antony  gave
Cleopatra  'Ccelesyria'  and  parts  of  the  Iuda;an  and  Ar.abian
territories  (Jos.  Ant.  xv.  3  8  4  i/.;  lij  i.  8  5)  ;  she  visited  Damas-
cus, and  we  have  coins  of  37,  36,  and  32  that  were  struck  in
her  honour,  though  other  coins  of  about  the  same  d.ite  do  not
bear  any  mark  of  her  (De  Saulcy,  Numisin.  de  la  Terre  itainte.

In  31  B.C.  occurred  the  battle  of  Actium,  and  the
Damascene  coins  bear  till  33  .\.D.  the  names  of  Augustus
and  Tiberius,  under  the  latter  of  whom  the  Damascenes
had  a  dispute  with  the  .Sidonians  about  their  boundaries
(Jos.  Ant.  xviii.  63),  <a  fact  which  shows  how  extensive
their  territory  must  have  been  (.Schiirer,  98).  There
are,  however,  no  coins  of  Caligula  nor  of  Claudius,  nor
any  of  Nero  till  his  ninth  year  in  63.  It  was  during
this  time  that  the  apostle  Paul  tells  us  (.see  Arktas)
that  not  the  Romans  but  '  an  ethnarch  under  Aretas  the
king  held  the  city  of  the  Dama.scenes  '  (a  form  of  exjires-
sion  which  betrays  the  fact  that  it  was  usual  to  think
of  Damascus  as  an  independent  city);  see  Ethn.-vrch.

We  do  not  know  to  what  degree  power  in  Damascus  passed
from  the  Romans  to  the  Nabataian  king.  Nor,  indeed,
whether  Rome  actually  held  it  then  (cp  Schiir.  ///  2  356^  3  98  ;
M'difTert,  A/>ost.  .-\ge.  164  n.  2).  .At  any  rate,  the  city  again
came  under  Rome  in  Nero's  reign  (53-68  a.d.);  but  the
N.-ibata;ans  continued  to  hold  the  neighbourhood  to_  the  E.
till  106,  when  Trajan  brought  their  whole  kingdom  into  the
Empire.  Under  H.idrian  and  his  successors  Damascus  bore
the  title  fterpon-oAcs  (De  Saulcy,  37^),  under  Alexander  Severus,
colonia  {ih.  43).

Under  both  Romans  and  Byzantines  the  city  continued  to

flourish  ; yet  so  long  as  these  Westerns  ruled  .Syria  she-  was

only second  to  Antioch  ; and  it  was  not  till

14.  Under  the' Moslem  invasion— they  took  Damascus  in
Islam.  654,  -Antioch  in  635— that  the  city  in  the  desert
resumed  the  first  rank,  and  the  city  on  the
Levant  began  to  decline.  For  a  century,  650-750,  Dama.scus
had  the  Klialifate  under  the  Omayyads  ;  she  was  never  taken
by  the  Crusaders,  whose  pivot  was  Antioch  ;  she  was  the  capital
of  SaLadin,  and  being  bound  to  Mecca  by  the  Hajj,  which
starts  from  her  gates,  she  has  kept  her  place  in  the  regard  of
Islam,  while  her  fertility  and  her  unique  position  have  enal  led
her  to  survive  the  depopidations  to  which  she  has  been  sub-
jected by  conquerors  like  Timur,  and  the  awful  pestilences  witli
which  she  has  again  and  again  been  infected  by  her  annual
connection  with  ^lecca.

Besides  the  works  mentioned  above  and  general  treatises
on  the  history  and  geography  of  Syria,  see  Noris,  Annus  et
K/>i>chie Syroi;iiict\/<>nu>it,cXc.,  Leipsic,  1696;
16.  Literature.  MciunAxaXX'^Journcy  to  Damascus;  .Arnold's
art.  in  P/<:/A^\  and  Noldeke's  art.  in
Schenkel's  j5/;  ;  Rob. /,/>■./?,  3442-468  ;  Porter,  Ccgr.  Jourttal,
'2C,2,  '  Five  Years  in  D.imascus'  ;  Kingl.ake'siiy ///<■«;  Thomson,
Land  ami  Book;  GASm.  //C,  chap.  30.  G.  A.  S.

DAN  (|"=1  see  below,  §  i  ;  Aan  [B.\L]  ;  gentilic
Danite,  ''3'in  ;  Aangi [H],  Aan  [B.\L], AanLgIitai


1.  Name.


[BX.\  I  Ch.  1235]),  eponymous  head  of  the


tribe  of  the  same  name.  The  name,  like
many  other  tribal  names,  is  obscure.  It  appears,  how-
ever, to  bear  the  same  relation  to  the  personal  names
Daniel  and  Abidan  as  the  clan  name  Ram  does  to
Jehoram  and  Abiram,  or  on  the  other  hand  Jacob  and
Joseph  to  two  ancient  town  names  ending  in  -el  (see
Jacob,  Joskph,  §  i).  It  is  therefore  no  doubt  a  divine
title,  'judge'  [i.e.,  'deliverer'?).  Cp  the  Assyrian
repeate<ily  recurring  royal  name  .\sur-dan — 'Asur  is
judge'  (cp  Xabudan) — and  the  name  of  Shalmaneser
Il.'s  general  Dayan-.Asur,  as  also  the  epithet  ddnit
(daicinu)  applied  to  the  sun-god  (cp  Samson,  §  i)  and
the  moon-god.

Dan  is  apparently  etymologically  related  to  the  name
of  another  Israelitish  tril«  of  whose  history  still  less
is  known  (see  Dinah)  ;  but  it  would  be  less  safe  to
assume  any  etymological  connection  with  Midian.  That
the  meaning  of  the  name  was  not  quite  forgotten  appears,
e.g.,  from  the  popular  derivation  in  Gen.  30  6  (E)  and
the  paronomasia  in  Gen.  49 16  (J),  although  the  latter
passage  applies  the  epithet  to  the  tribe  itself,  not  to
its  god.

99a


DAN

The  verb  ilUn  is  used  quite  freely,  not  only  in  the  earlier
literature  (JE,  lien.  1&  14  ;  Is.  3  13)  hut  also  (especially)  from  the
'exile' onwards (Jcr.  Pss.etc);  so  also  the  derivatives  ;  but,  as  in
the  case  of  other  old  trilic  names,  the  root  does  not  seem  to  have
been  used  in  the  forniatioii  <if  proper  names  in  later  limes  (see
Aui-tJAN,  Emk  H,  y  i),  its  place  Iwing  apparently  taken  by  the
synonymous  shaf>luit  (see  iKHosHArHAj),  which  on  the  whole
prevailed  in  Hebrew  and  Phoenician,  while  less  used  in  Assyrian
and  not  certainly  used  at  all  in  the  southern  Semitic  dialects
where  ddn  continued  to  prevail,

Uan  evidently  belonged  to  the  N.  (Joseph)  group  of

Israelitish clans. Not.  however,  in  the  same  sense  as

_  , . . Benjantin. Uan  was  a  liilhah  clan  and

2.  Relations  to  |^^.^y ^^^  impossibly,  have  been  older

otner  tnoea.  j,^^^^  Joseph,  as  the  jxitriarch  stories
represent  (see  Bll.HAil).  If  so,  the  onward  pressure  of
Joseph,  though  probably  not  hostile,  may  have  co-
operated with  the  other  influences  that  prevented  it
from  settling  permanently  in  central  Palestine  — though
the  apparent  southwarii  movement  of  the  Danites  from
Zorah-Kshtaol  to  Kirjath-jearim  (Judg.  1812)  could
not  well  \yG  (|UOted  in  support  of  such  a  possibility
(see  Mahankii-Ua.n).  Whilst  Dinah,  if  it  was  a  pre-
historic clan  of  the  same  or  a  kindred  stock  (it  is  called
indeed  daughter  of  Leah  ;  but  Dan  took  as  its  priest
a  Levite  of  Judah),  suffered  the  fate  of  absorption  (see
Dinah),  Dan,  though  it  may  have  allied  itself  with
Joseph  for  a  time,  was  eventually  compelled  by  its  own
energy  and  the  force  of  circumstances  to  emigrate,  just
as  [x*rhaps  the  older  Leah  tribes  emigrated  in  the
opposite  direction.  If  Dan  was  not  older  than  Joseph,
it  must  Ije  regarded  as  an  unsuccessful  precursor  of
Bknja.min  {q.v.,  §  i/.  ;  so  Stade).

The  earliest mention of  the tribe is in the '  Song

of  Deborah." The poet upbraids Dan for seeking

3.  Contempo- P'-^^ection  of  (or  living  heedlessly  by)

^ the  ships,  instead  of  coming  forward

rary  reterencea  „,,^„fy„y  uj-e  the  brother  Hilhah  tribe

to  Dan.  j^  ^^^ .  ^^  j|^^  heights  of  the  open

field' (see X.M'HTAl.l). This reference to  ships  is

obscure. It  has  l)een  interpreted  of  the  southern  seat

of  the  tribe  ;  ' but  its  proximity  and  resemblance  to  the

phrase  alxnit  .Asher  seems  to  suggest  that  the  tribe  is

thought  of  as  in  its  northern  seat  (so  Moore  and  Bu. ,

ad  loc. ).

The  expression  used  of  Dan  is  quite  unique.  One  shrinks
from  drawing  any  definite  conclusion  from  the  passage.  If  the
text  is  sound,'-  it  may  mean  that  Dan  was,  like  Asher,  though
no  doubt  to  a  less  extent  (IS  7c),  under  the  sway  of  Ph(ji;-
iiician  influence.  It  is  much  more  likely,  however,  to  have
been  involved  with  the  Arama;ans  than  with  the  Phoenicians ;
for  although  Tell  el-Kadi  is  fully  40  m.  distant  from  Damascus
and  not  3c  from  Tyre,  the  latter  w:ls  not  in  historic  times  .so
energetic  in  extending  its  influence  in  the  Palestine  hinterland
as  Damascus  was  (cp  Damascus,  §  4).  Although  we  do  not
know  when  the  Arama;ans  l>egan  to  press  southwards,  there  is  no
rea.son  to  suppose  that  the  ."Vramajan  element  represented  by  such
places  as  Heth-M;iacah  appeared  only  after  the  times  of  the
Song  of  Delxjrah.  However  that  may  be,  in  time  at  lea.st
the  Aramajans  made  their  influence  felt  very  decidedly.  We
are  still  far  from  understanding  fully  the  history  of  their
relations  with  Israel  ;  but  it  may  well  \xt  doubted  whether
there  ever  was  a  stable  or  even  a  definite  line  between  their
respective  domains.  The  population  of  the  border  region  seems
to  have  been  largely  Arania;an.  Hcnhadad  I.  had  no  difficulty  in
seizing  Dan  and  other  places  in  its  neighlxjurhood,  and  it  does
not  appear  whether  Israel  was  ever  able  politically  to  assert
a  serious,  or  at  least  a  lasting,  claim  to  them.  The  fact  that  the
operations  of  Tiglath-pileser  II  I.  (180  years  later),  in  suppression
of  the  plot  of  Rezon  and  his  accomplice  Pekah,  were  confined  to
this  same  di.strict,  would  Ije  accounted  for  if  it  were  more
unequivocally  connected  with  Damascus  than  the  rest  of  Israel
was  (so  Winckler).

t  NOldeke  suggests  (in  a  private  communication)  that  it  is  not
inconceivable  that  members  of  the  tribe  may  have  taken  to
fishing.

^  nt'J.K  niight  easily  ari.se  by  transposition  from  vmw  (the
suggestion  was  made  also  by  Bu.  Ki.  Sa.  16,  n.  2,  followed  by
Marq.  Fund.  7;  cp  Ki.  Gesch.  i.  265,  n.  1.  Hu.  has  since
abandoned  it  :  KlfC,  ad  ioc.).  riK:i  however,  occurs  oftenest
in  the  phrase  l^np.T  piKJ,  and  Nuldeke  argues  that  neither  of
the  districts  in  which  Dan  was  settird  contained  .such  pasture-
land.  Perhaps  jninj  need  not  lie  quite  so  definite  in  meaning  ;
but  if  we  accept  VnK3>  'his  would  presuppose  the  Song's  having
been  committed  to  writing  some  time  before  the  Hles.sing  of
Jacob  was  brought  into  its  present  form  (cp  Gen.  49  13).


32


993


DAN

When  J  wrote,  Dan  was  still  indeed  honoured  (a  S.
20  18  (5),  but  possibly  somewhat  as  a  survival  of  a
time  gone  by  ;  it  was  not  felt  to  l>e  a  living  force  in
Israel — Bilhah  was  but  a  concubine  ((Jen.  3622).  It
ntust  not,  however,  Ije  inferretl,  from  the  fact  that  the
'Blessing  of  Jacob'  says  Dan  judges  its  pet^ple  like
an  Israelitish  tribe  (v.  16),  that,  when  the  lilessing  took
shape,  Dan  was  felt  to  be  hardly  in  reality  a  part  of
genuine  Israel  at  all.  It  is  cle;ir,  from  the  early
authority  referreti  to  alxjve  (2  S. '20  18  (5),  that  the  city
of  Dan  was  proverbial  as  a  well-known  home  of  genuine
old  Israelitish  ideas  and  practices,  which  is  the  more
credible  that  we  are  told  that  its  priests  traced  their
origin  to  Moses'  himself  (Judg.  18  30).  We  need  not
wonder,  then,  if  the  importance  of  this  sanctuary  was
formally  acknowledged  in  some  way  or  other  (see  (JAI.F,
(Joi.UKN,  §  I)  by  Jeroboanj  I.  ['/.i-J-  The  N.  settle-
ment of  Dan,  however,  perhaps  did  not  amount  to
much  more  than  the  town  of  that  name.  Nor  in_-ed  the
repeated  mention  of  the  town  in  the  standing  phrase
'from  Dan  to  Beersheba,"'' which  not  unnaturally  sug-
gests that  it  had  some  importance,  have  really  had  any
political  significance.  Both  places  may  have  owed  their
celebrity  to  their  ancient  sanctuaries.

This  may  perhaps  help  us  to  understand  the  preservation  of
such  an  unrivalled  collection  of  popular  legend  as  we  find  in  the
latter  part  of  Judges,  unless  indeed  the  stories  of  the  .Samson
cycle  are  quite  as  much  connected  with  the  geographical
ilistrict  about  Zorah,  etc.  (cp  the  mention  of  a  place  called
.Sa-ma-5:i-na  in  that  neighbourh<X)d  at  least  as  early  as  Kameses
II.;  Lepsius,  Denkiii.  1441.;  cp  Hkth-she.mesh,  i;  Samson)
as  with  any  particular  Israelitish  trilw ;  they  involve  Hebron,  if
in^n  ill  Judg.  10  3  is  correct,  and  may  be  thought  to  have  some
relation  to  the  stories  of  .Sha.m.mah  and  Sha.mgar  (qq.v.').

In  Amos's  time  the  northern  Dan  still  ranked  with
Bethel  (?  so  We.  ad  loc. )  and  Beersheba  as  a  represent-
ative sanctuary  (Am.  8  14  ;  on  the  reading  cp  A.MOS,
§  20)  ;  but,  whatever  it  was  then,  the  troublous  time
which  ended  with  the  AiU  of  the  N.  kingdom  (2  K.
1 5  29)  and  the  changed  conditions  which  resulted  must
have  profoundly  modified  the  position  even  of  an  ancient
sanctuary  town.  This  would  perhaps  account  for  the
absence  of  all  mention  of  it  from  P's  geographical
scheme.  Still,  even  in  the  days  of  Jeremiah,  although
the  phrase  'Dan  to  Beersheba'  had  given  place  to
'Geba  to  Beersheba'  (2  K.  '23  8),  an  invasion  was  felt
to  be  begun  when  the  enemy  passed  Dan  (Jer.  4  15
816).

If  any  legends  ever  gathered  round  the  name  of  the
eponymous  head  of  Dan,  they  have  entirely  perished.
.AH  the  more  noteworthy  is  the  abun-
lance  of  traditions  alwut  the  tribe.
These  are  of  two  kinds.  First  there  are  the  stories  which,
after  circulating  orally  for  many  generations,  were  eventu-
ally committed  to  writing,  and  afterwards  given  so  large  a
place  in  the  latter  portion  of  our  present  Book  of  Judges
\q.v.,  §  16).  These  are  among  the  liest-known  of  the
traditions  of  Israel.  Then  there  are  the  most  valuable
fragmentary  notices  in  Josh,  lit  47-'' Judg.  1  34 /. — mere
scraJps  rescued  from  what  the  pre-exilic  histories  had  to
tell  of  the  fortunes  of  this  tribe  (on  the  *  Blessings  '  see
below,  §  8).  All  these  traditions,  however, — both  those
that  may  fairly  be  treated  as  historical  in  their  nature,  and
those  that  are  mainly  legendary — deal  with  two  closely
related  [xjints,  the  struggles  which  the  tribe  had  with  its
non- Israelite  neighbours,  and  its  migration  northwards.

Dan,  it  would  seem,  made  the  attempt  to  push  its
way  down  from  the  highlands  of  Ephraim  (see  above,
§  2)  into  the  territory  still  completely  dominated  by  the

1  On  the  true  reading,  see  Masasseh.

2  This  phrase  really  occurs  only  seven  times  (all  between
Judg.  'JO  and  i  K.  4  25  \b  5]),  and  in  certain  of  these  p.issages  it
may  be  suspected  of  being  late.  The  Chronicler  (jjerhaps
naturally)  prefers  the  reverse  order  (Beersheba  to  Dan:  1  Cn.
'JI2  [  =  2S.-242  'Dan  to  Beersheba),  2Ch.  SOst).  See  Ex-
positor, Dec.  '98,  pp.  4II-42'  ('.'*="!  'o  Beersheba:  the  literarj'
history  of  the  phrase  and  the  historical  problems  it  raises').

3  ®n  has  lovha.  for  hav  in  v.  47  (/.<•.,  47  ba.  of  -MT),  lou  having
been  dittographed  from  the  preceding  viou.

994


4.  Traditions.


DAN

Canaanites. Whether  it  at  first  succeeded  (Josh.  1 9  47a .

6.  Attempts  ;( '"^  ^^--^^  J'  '  '^P  ®  ;"^f,^'^•  f  '^^'^
to  settle  ''^''"  ^'■''^  '^'■"'^"  ^'•^'^^  <-'"'^S'  1  34  by
w)  seiue. j^^  Philistines  (cp  Bu.  J^i.  Sa.  18.  n.  i)

or — since  it  is  dirticult  to  see  how  '  Philistines '  could
be  changed,  editorially  or  by  a  gloss,  to  Amoritcs
— by  the  Canaanites  (Judg.  1  34/  ),  or  whether  it  never
really  established  itself  at  all  satisfactorily  to  the  SW.  of
Ephraim,  l>eing  forced  back  before  it  had  really  settled,
we  can  hardly  say.  On  some  grounds  it  would  perhaps
seem  probable  either  that  it  separated  quite  late  from
Ephraim  or  that  it  settled  for  some  considerable  time.
Otherwise  we  should  perhaps  hardly  have  such  clear
traditions  of  the  incidents  of  the  subsequent  migration
(contrast  the  legendary  character  of  the  Samson  stories) ;
although  it  is  not  at  all  clear  what  the  history  of  these
traditions  is  (see  above,  §  4).  In  any  case,  it  seems
pretty  clear  that  the  main  strength  of  the  clan  (,^58*0)
migrated  northwards  ;  but  did  not  some  remain  ?  Prob-
ably.

Not  so  much  because  the  MT  represents  the  600  fighting  men
as  being  soi/ie  0/  the  clan  (Judg.  ISii  ;  ©  'clans,'  hi^Luiv)  of
Dan  (for  the  partitive  preposition  D,  which  here  has  the  same
letter  not  only  after  it  but  also  before  it,  might  very  well  be  due
to  dittography),  nor  perhaps  because  the  existence  of  a  remnant  is
needed  to  explain  the  copious  traditions  of  the  early  fortunes  of
the  tribe  already  referred  to  (see  also  below),  but  because  it  is
difficult  otherwise  to  account  for  the  priestly  writer  assigning
it  solely  to  the  southern  territory.

Those  who  remained,  however,  seem  hardly  to  have
been  able  to  make  good  a  separate  tribal  e.xistence  ;  for
it  was,  according  to  J,  not  Dan,  but  the  house  of  Joseph,
that  finally  gained  the  upper  hand  over  the  Canaanites
(Judg.  1  35) — whatever  that  may  refer  to  (see  Bu.  Ri.  Sa.
18,  n.  2).

According  to  Josh.  19 47  (emended  text),  the  border
of  the  children  of  Dan  was  too  narrow  for  them,  and  so

6.  Migration.  '"^^  ^^'^"f  "P  '-^"^  ^f^g^t  agamst
°  Leshem  (Lesham?) and  took it, and

smote  it  with  the  edge  of  the  sword,  and  jxjssessed  it,
and  dwelt  therein,  and  called  it  Dan.  It  is  possibly
the  same  writer  who  explains  in  Judg.  1  34  that  the  over-
crowding of  Dan  was  because  '  the  Amorite '  forced
them  into  the  hill  country.  This  Dan  (see  next  article)
became,  as  we  have  seen,  if  it  was  not  already,  a
famous  sanctuary,  and  it  is  not  surprising  that  the
story  of  its  incorporation  into  Israel  was  a  favourite
with  those  who  put  into  literary  form  the  traditions
of  Israel's  early  days.

Many  as  are  the  obscurities  of  the  narrative  as  we  now  have
it  in  judg.  17  y;,  one  thing  is  clear:  several  hands  have
worked  at  it  (see  Judges,  §§  3  12).  A  deputation  of  Danites,
after  consulting  a  priest  in  Mount  Ephraim,  find  a  roomy
district,  easy  of  attack,  in  the  far  north,  and  return  to  Zorah
to  conduct  their  tribesmen  thither.  On  the  route  they  manage
in  one  way  or  another  to  get  the  priest  they  had  con-
sulted to  accompany  them  with  the  image  he  tended,  which,
having  settled  in  their  new  home,  they  constitute  their  national
palladium.

The  main  points  in  this  story  must  be  facts.  How
long  the  sanctuary  maintained  itself  we  do  not  know

7  Cvcle  of ^•"'^'-"''y  (^^^  ^^  *^^'°  independent  repre-
le^nds. sentations in Judg.  18  30/, and cp

^  Shilou, Jonathan, i). Of a very

different  character  are  the  stories  that  have  gathered
round  the  name  of  Samson  ;  but  they  are  more  naturally
treated  elsewhere,  the  more  so  that  we  cannot  be  quite
sure  how  far  they  are  really  to  be  regarded  as  Israelite
in  any  ordinary  sense,  not  to  say  Danite.  See  Samson.
Whether  the  metaphors  of  the  serpent  (Gen.  4917)
and the  lion's  whelp  (Dt.  8822)  in  the  several '  Bless-

8  Later  '"^^  ^^'^  simply  later  echoes  perpetuating
•writinea ^^^  memory  of  the  famous  raid  on  Leshein,

°^'  or  whether  they  point  to  a  repetition  of  such
raids  by  this  lion-city  itself  (Stade,  Gr/li68),  we  do
not  know  ;  the  latter  is  not  perhaps  unlikely.^

1  The  metaphor  of  the  serpent  on  the  way,  biting  the  horse's
heels  and  throwing  the  rider  backwards,  has  been  .supposed  to
refer  to  embarrassment  of  the  Aramaans  in  their  wars  with
Israel.


DAN

At  a  later  date,  indeed,  these  references  came  to  be  interpreted
of  the  southern  Dan  (  Targ.  Onk.)  and  of  .Samson  in  particular
(  I'arg.  Jon.  and  Jerus.).  'J'he  fact,  however,  that  P  has  nothing
whatever  to  tell  us  of  the  territory  of  the  N.  Danites  perhaps
shows  how  this  might  come  about. 1  On  the  other  hand,  the
eulogistic  sense  in  which  the  words  are  explained  is  remark-
able in  view  of  the  ill  odour  that  attached  to  the  name  of  Dan
in  later  times  (see  below,  §  9).

What  the  outlines  of  the  district  assigned  by  P  to
Dan  were,  P  nowhere  states  ;  perhaps  he  was  himself
unable  to  formulate  any  (cj)  the  case  of  Simeon,  Josh.
19 1-9).  That  he  meant  them  to  be  inferred  from  his
account  of  the  adjacent  tribes  (Benjamin,  Judah.
Ephraim)  is  possible  ;  but  he  is  not  usually  afraid  of
repetition.  Of  the  sixteen  (in  MT  seventeen)  places
which  P  assigns  to  Dan,  eight  may  be  regarded  as
identified  beyond  reasonable  doubt  (see  ZoKAii,
EsHTAOL,  Ik-Shemesh,  Aijalon,  Timnah,  Ekkon,
Jeiiuu,  BENE-BiiKAK),  while  Me-Jarkon  [q.v.,  and
see  Rakkon,  Makaz)  must  probably  be  sought  in  the
neighbourhood  of  Rds  el- Ain.  In  Josh.  15  the  same
writer  assigns  not  only  Timnah  [v.  57)  and  Ekron
{v.  45),  which  are  historically  best  known  as  Philistine
cities,  but  also  Zorah  and  Eshtaol,  where  if  anywhere
the  Danites  were  settled,  to  Judah.'^

Still  less  to  be  trusted  is  the  account  of  Josephus
{Ant.  V.  I22,  end),  which,  likewise  ignoring  altogether
the  N.  Dan,  actually  makes  S.  Dan  extend  as  far  X.
as  Dor  and  as  far  .S.  as  Ashdod.  Although  P  re-
presents Dan  as,  next  to  Judah,  the  largest  tribe
at  the  end  of  the  nomadic  period  (Nu.  2643),  both
P  and  the  Chronicler^  tend  otherwise  to  give  the
tribe  the  scantiest  possible  consideration.  In  Joshua  it
is  the  last  to  have  its  lot  assigned  it  (1940^).  The
Dan  fragment  is  the  last  of  those  collected  in  Judg.  1
{''■'■  34/ )•  The  tribe  stands  last  in  the  list  in  i  Ch.
27 16-22.  In  Rev.  (chap.  7)  it  is  omitted  altogether
(see  below,  §  9),  and  the  same  fate  seems  to  have
befallen  it  in  the  genealogical  lists  in  i  Ch.  1j/.^  In
the  form  of  the  list  now  appearing  in  Gen.  46  23  =  Nu.
2t5  42/.5  (both  P),  indeed,  Dan  is  credited  with  one
family  ;  but  one  cannot  be  quite  sure  that  the  statement
may  not  be  a  very  late  addition  founded  on  the  notion
(propounded  in  modern  times  by  Bertheau,  ad  loc. )  that
Aher  (=' another')  in  '  HusHiM,  the  sons  of  Aher '
(i  Ch.  7  i2i5),  was  a  circumlocution  for  Dan  rather  than
a  corruption  of  Ahihor  or  some  other  name  (see  Ben-
jamin, §  9,  ii.  a).  At  all  events,  the  omission  of  a  D.an
list from his lists by the Chronicler would be no

1  It  might  indeed  be  argued  from  four  of  P's  lists  of  tribes—
the  twocensus  lists(Nu.  1  20^  2(i),  and  the  two  camp  lists(2 1 /'C
10)--that  Dan  is  regarded  as  a  northern  tribe,  being  grouped  in
a  triplet  with  Asher  and  Naphtali.  But  (i)  it  is  immediately
preceded  by  Benjamin,  and  (2)  in  the  list  of  tribal  retjresenta-
tives  who  took  part  in  the  census  Gad  is  not,  as  in  the  census
and  camp  lists,  oddly  classed  with  Reuben  and  Simeon,  but
with  the  triplet  in  question :  that  is  to  .say,  the  four  concubine
tribes  are  taken  together.

^  On  the  other  h.and,  the  Chronicler  probably  did  not  really
mean  to  make  Gath-rimmon  Ephraimite  (i  Ch.  (5  69  [54]) :  see
next  note  but  one.

3  A  peculiar  fact  is  that  P  makes  the  associate  of  Bezaleel
of  Judah  in  the  construction  of  the  tabernacle  a  Danite  (Ex.
31 6),  whilst  the  Chronicler  makes  Huram-abi,  who  had  the  same
position  in  the  work  of  Solomon's  temple,  a  man  of  Tyre  whose
mother  was  of  Dan  (but  see  1  K.  7  14,  with  Klo.'s  note,  and  cp
HtJKAM-ABi).  P  makes  the  mother  of  the  man  who  '  blasphemed
the  Name  '  son  of  a  woman  of  Dan  by  an  Egyptian  (Lev.  24  loy;).

4  In  the  Chronicler's  list  of  tribes  in  which  Levitical  cities
were  appointed  (i  Ch.C54  1391./!'^)  Dan  appears  to  be  omitted;
but  7'.  61  [46]  is  obviously  corrupt.  A  comparison  with  its
source  in  Josh.  21 20-26  [P]  shows  that  the  name  of  Dan  has
dropped  out,  whilst  the  fact  that  Ephraim  also,  though  preserved
by  ©L  in  i  Ch.  tiet  (46],  is  dropped  in  MT  shows  that  the  omis-
sion IS  not  intentional.  It  has  accordingly  been  restored  by  Kau.
in  ns  and  Ki.  in  SBOT.  In  the  enumeration  of  the  towns  by
n.ime  farther  down  (w.  67  [52]-8i  [66])  Dan  is  again  omitted  (this
time  without  the  company  of  Ephraim) ;  but  the  probable  ex-
planation of  this  omission  of  Dan  is  that  either  the  Chronic'cr
or  .some  cop);ist  has  accidentallY  omitted  Josh.  21 23;  for  the
con.sequence  is  th.it  7'.  24  is  copied  as  if  it  belonged  to  r-.  22,
Aijalon  and  (jath-riminon  being  assigned  to  Ephraim,  and  the
Kohathite  cities  becoming  eight,  instead  often,  as  suted  above
in  I  Ch.Gei  [4s].

5  Hushim(HSM)  =  Shuham(§HM).

996


DAN

stranger  than  his  omission  of  Zebulun,  which  has  three
families  assigned  it  by  1'  in  (jcri.  •16  14=  Nu.  '2»)  36.

It  is  .1  fact,  however,  that  in  later  times  Dan  was  in  disrepute.
In  the  I  argums,  indeed,  as  we  have  seen,  the  tribe  is  held  in
. .  high esteem  ; but in Talmudic times this is

9.  Apoca-  changed.  Thus  Afi,ir.  Ra6.  on  Numb,  declares
lyptic  that  when  Jeroboam  went  from  tribe  to  trilw  none
notions,  joined  him  so  readily  as  Dan.  In  the  Talmud
\Shabhath  66),  accordingly,  Dan  represents
idol.itry.  Further,  out  of  the  very  same  passages  so  favourably
interpreted  in  the  Targunis,  there  was  evolved,  in  connection
with  Icr.  S16,  the  remarkable  notion  (appearing  in  Test.  xii.
fair/)  th.-it  Hcliar  is  in  some  peculiar  way  connected  with  the
trilie,  which,  it  is  declared,  will  transgress  against  Levi  and
ludah,  'for  in  the  Book  of  Enoch  it  is  said  that  their  ruler  is
Satan  ;  but  the  salvation  of  the  Lord  will  arise  out  of  Judah  and
Levi,  and  he  will  fight  against  Beliar."  With  this  is  connected
the  tradition  that  the  Antichrist  is  to  come  of  the  tritje  of  Dan.
Already  in  Ircii.  (v.  3O2)  we  find  the  fancy — it  may  be  more  than
a  fancy  tli.it  this  is  the  explanation  of  the  omission  of  Dan  from
the  list  uf  those  that  are  sealed  (Kev.  "5-8).  n.  w.  H.

DAN  (|1  ;  A&n)-  I-  A  city  'in  the  valley  which
lx;luii>,'s  to  Beth-kkhob  [q.v.y  Judg.  I828  ;  conquered
1  References  ^^  ^^^  Uanites.  It  was  the  most
nortliern  city  of  Israel  :  note  the  phrase
'  from  Dan  as  far  as  Hcersheba  '  (see  above,  994,  n.  2).
Its  original  name  was  L.-\l.sn  [ij-v.]  ;  in  Judg.  ISzg  the
change  of  name  is  accounted  for.  Historical  references
to  it  occur,  not  only  in  Judg.  18,  but  also  in  2  .S.  '246
(where  jaun  is  appended  to  Dan  by  a  singular  error  of
the  text  ;  see  Da.n-ja.'VN)  ;  also  in  i  K.  I229  (golden
calf),  and  i  K.  152o,  and  2  Ch.  I64  (Benhadad's  in-
vasion). The  reference  to  the  name  Dan  in  Gen.  14  14
need  not,  in  the  present  writer's  opinion,  be  counted  ;
it  is  true,  the  city  afterwards  called  Dan  is  meant,  but
the  anachronistic  '  Dan  '  is  simply  a  scribe's  error  for
■  Laish  ' ;  the  true  text  probably  is,  ' .  .  .  and  pressed
after  them,  he  and  his  servants,  as  far  as  Laish,  and
smote  them.' '

One  of  the  supposed  arguments  for  the  late  date  of
(jen.  14  must  therefore  be  abandoned  ;  but  this  by  no
means  involves  regarding  that  strange  narrative  as
historical. The  anachronism  in  Dt.  34  i  remains.

The  site  of Dan  has  recently  been  tixed  by  G. A.

Smith (JJC. 473, 480/.)  at Banias, on the ground

o tA^^na^^i-i t'l'i' 'he situation of Banias is so

2.  Identification.  ^^^,^  ^^^^^^^^^  ^^^^  ^^^^  ^^  .,.^.„  ^,

Kadi  (cp  C'.KSARF..\,  §  7).  The  fact  is  undeniable,  yet
not  decisive.  From  Judg.  18  we  do  not  gather  that
Laish  was  a  place  of  exceptional  natural  strength  ;  its
inhabitants  were  a  jxjaceful  folk,  \\ho  trusted  not  in
their  fortress  but  in  their  remoteness  from  troublesome
people  like  the  Danites.

Theodoret  no  doubt  favours  our  eminent  geographer's  view.
'The  present  Paneas,"  he  says,  'was  called  i)an,  2  and  even
Jerome  (on  Ezck.  48  18  and  on  .Xm.  8  14)  speaks  of  Dan  as  being
where  Paneas  now  is.  The  Jerus.  Targ.,  too  (on  Gen.  14  14),
calls  Cajsarea  Philippi  '  Dan  of  Cajsarea."  These  vague  state-
ments, however,  do  not  carry  much  weight.  On  the  other
hand,  Josephus  {Ant.  i.  10  i  v.  3  i  viii.  ,84  ;  It/  iv.  1  i)  expressly
says  that  Dan  stood  at  the  '  lesser '  fountain  of  the  Jordan,  in
the  plain  of  Sidon,  a  day's  journey  from  that  city,  and  that  the
plain  around  it  was  extremely  fertile.  Eus.  and  Jer.  {OS^^)
114  26  24932)  sprak  still  more  definitely.  'A  village y<>«r  miles
distant  from  Paneas,  on  the  road  to  Tyre  ;  it  was  the  boundary
of  Judaea  (optoM  ttjs  'loofiai'a?),  and  at  it  the  Jordan  takes  its
rise.'  Jerome  adds:  '  De  quo  et  Jordanis  flumen  erumpens  a
loco  sortitus  est  nomen.  lor  quippe  oelBpoi'  (id  est  fluvium  sive
rivum)  Hebrxi  vocant '  (cp  Jmkdan).  A  glance  at  any  hand-
book of  geography  will  show  what  spot  is  here  meant.

Four  miles  west  of  Banias,  in  a  well-watered  district,
is  one  of  the  two  great  fountains  of  tlie  Jordan.  It
rises  at  the  W.  base  of  an  extensive  cup-shaped  mound,
called  Tf//  el-Kadi.  Now  Kadi  in  Arabic  and  Dan  in
Hebrew  both  mean  '  judge, '  and  tlie  fountain  bears  a

1  There is a corrupt duplication. Read [On'Sj,*] pS"!*^.

nr'Sny  o.^Sy  pari  jyiy. p3Ti  for  pSn']  is  due  to  Ball ;  but

it  is  also  the  original  of  P|TI*1.  C.  Niebuhr  has  already  suspected
a  place-name  in  ,-rS<S.  In  fact,  the  Pa.sek  after  o.T*?!'  warns  us
that  the  text  is  doubtful.  Ewald  (CVI  I73)  supposed  that  JT
was substituted late  for E*'^  —  an  arbitrary  and inadequate

2"0n  Jer.  4.5  (Opera  (.770),  2433).

997


DANCE

name  (LetldSii)  which  also  may  perhaps  be  an  echo  of
the  name  of  the  old  city.  The  very  fact  that  Tell  el-
Kadi  is  now  said  to  Ijc  unhealthy  suggests  one  rea&on
more  for  identifying  it  with  Dan,  for  Josephus  (lij  iv.
1 1 )  expressly  says  that  the  marshes  of  Lake  .Semachonitis
(Hiileh)  extend  northwards  as  far  as  Daphne  (Dan),
where  are  the  sources  of  the  Little  Jordan  (I^dddn).
Probably,  however,  in  antiquity,  when  irrigation  was
better  cared  for,  the  place  now  called  Tell  el- Kadi  was
perfectly  healthy.  On  the  whole,  the  grounds  of  the
jiroposed  identification  seem  to  the  present  writer  to  \yn
strong.  Robinson,  Gu^rin,  Porter,  I  uhl,  and  Moore
have  given  their  support  to  the  same  tl  eory.

Tell  el- Kadi  rises  out  of  a  dense  jungle  of  thorn-
bushes  and  rank  weeds.  '  Its  circumference  is  al)out
half  a  mile,  and  its  greatest  elevation  above  the  plain
eighty  feet.  There  are  some  traces  of  old  foundations,
and  heaps  of  large  stones  on  the  top  and  sides  of  the  S.
part  of  the  rim,  where  perhaps  the  citadel  or  a  temple
may  have  stood.  There  are  also  ruins  in  the  plain  a
short  distance  N.  of  the  tell.  There  are  doubtless
other  remains,  but  they  are  now  covered  with  grass  and
jungle'  (Porter).

See  Rob.  BR :  Gu^rin,  GaliUe,  2338^;  G.  A.  Smith,  HG,
I.e.;  PEF Mem.  1139^;  Buhl,  (.'leog.  iy]/.\  Moore,  Judges,
390-

2. For  Dan  in  Ezek.  27  19  AV,  see  Javan,  §  \  g.

T.  K.  C.

DANCE.  '  There  is  a  time  to  raise  the  death-wail
antl a time to dance,' says the Preacher (F.ccl.  84).

1.  Among  the  ^e  'lave  not  now  to  discuss  the  origin
ancients:  in of  the  practice  of  dancmg.  nor  its  con-

p  .  .  nection  with  funeral,  as  well  as  with
°'^  '  ■  festival,  observances.  We  may  assume
that  from  a  very  early  period  it  h;is  been  an  expression
of  joy,  and  has  been  accompanied  by  music  and  song.
The  musical  instrument  employed  may  be  no  tietter
than  a  wooilen  drum  ;  ^  but  without  some  music  there
can  be  none  of  that  rhythmic  movement  which  we  call
dancing.  The  principal  occasions  of  dancing  are,  in
an  ancient  community,  religious.  If  these  assumptions
are.  as  far  as  our  evidence  goes,  true  for  Polynesia,
still  more  obviously  are  they  true  for  early  I'gypt  and
Babylonia.  The  happy -tempered  Egyptians  loved
their  various  dances,  and  cultivated  the  art  both  in
public  and  in  private  festivities,  both  in  war  and  in
peace  ;  but  the  primary  impulse  was  religious.-  In
Babylonia  and  .Assjria,  too,  the  art  of  dancing  flourished.
'To  dance'  {rakddu)  is  a  synonym  for  'to  rejoice";
and  so  great  was  the  demand  for  singers  (music  and
singing  naturally  go  together  with  dancing)  that
HcEckiah  king  of  Judah  was  made  to  send  singers  as
well  as  other  women  of  the  palace  to  Nineveh  (Prism
Inscr.  .339).*

Neither  Egypt  nor  early  Babylonia,  however,  can  be
presumed to have influenced the  primitive Israelitish

2.  Amone  the  ^^^to"'^.' except indeed, through  the
Bedauin Canaanites. Of  much  greater  import-

.ince  .are  our  scanty  notices  of  Arabian
dancing.  What  the  Bedouin  dancing  is  to-day  can  te
seen  as  near  to  civilisation  as  Jericho.  Wild  as  it  is,  it  is
not  without  rhythm  and  measure.  ••  There  are  also  still
some  relics  of  the  primitive  religious  dance.  Besides
the  dancing  at  the  merry  Circumcision  Feast  (mutayyin).
combined  with  sacrifice,  there  is  the  well-known  custom
of  '  circumambulating "  the  Ka'ba  or  Holy  House  at
Mecca  seven  times.  This  procession  is  a  true  substitute
for  a  very  old  heathen  rite.'  The  prince- poet  Imra-
al-Kais  likens  a  herd  of  wild  kine  (ox  antelopes)  to
a  group  of  girls, gown-clad, going  swiftly  round  the

1  Gill,  From  Darkness  to  Light  in  Polynesia,  252.

*  See  Erman,  Eervpt,  216.

3  Correcting  KB-ii^j  by  Del.  Ass.  HWB  257^.

*  Cp  Doughty,  .-}r.  Des.  1  31.

»  See  We.  Ar.  Heid.(^)  106,  165;  and  cp  Hesiod,  Theog.  259
(the  Muses  dancing  round  the  altar  on  Helicon);  Thucyd.  4
30;  Liv.  2t>9;  Verg.  ^«.  8 285  ;  Plut.  Thes.  ai,  ixoptwt  irtpi
TOf  KtfMniva  ^u/iidf.

998


DANCE

Dawar  or  sacred  stone.  Mohammed  himself  could
not  abolish  this  custom.  The  procession  round  the
Kaaba  is  really  the  HajJ :  this  term  is  now  applied  to
the  Mecca  pilgrimage  ;  but  its  root-meaning  plainly  is
to  go  in  a  circle  (cp  Ps.  107  27  uin;).

Pre- Islamic  .\rabia  explains  much  that  is  characteristic
in  Israelitish  life.  This  is  specially  true  of  religious  rites.
3  Hebrew  hair  "^''^  "^'^"^  original  Hebrew  term  for  a
o.  iio  . 6-  religious  dance  was  doubtless  :n,  ha^.

The  rendering  '  feast '  or  '  festival '  will  indeed  suffice  in
most  cases,  but  only  liecause  religious  festivals  necessarily
included  the  sacred  dance,  at  least  as  long  as  the  sacred
stones  remained  in  the  sanctuaries.  In  Ps.  II827
Cheyne  [Psalins^^^)  renders  '  Hind  the  procession  with
branches,'  with  reference  to  the  swiftly  moving  proces-
sion which  took  the  place  of  the  older  dance  ;  Baer,
more  boldly,  'Bind  the  dance'  {i.e.  the  dancers).
Unfortunately,  the  te.\t  of  this  j)assage  is  not  free  from
corruption  ;  '  but  it  is,  at  any  rate,  permissible  to
recognise  the  sacred  dance  in  E.\.  10 9,  '  Let  my  people
go  that  they  may  keep  a  feast  with  dancing  to  me  in  the
desert' — not  that  all  would  take  part  in  the  dance:
the  dancers  would  represent  the  people,  all  of  whom
would  '  rejoice  before  Vahwe,'  as  the  phrase  was.
Perhaps  we  may  compare  i  S.  80 16,  if  c"j:n  (applied
to  the  Amalekites  who  had  plundered  Ziklag)  means
'  circling  in  the  sacred  dance '  (see  BUH).  At  any  rate,
in  Ps.  424  [5]  the  best  sense  is  obtained  by  reading,  not
Jjin  Jion,  'a  muhitude  that  kept  holyday '  (AV),  but
C'j^iin  [121,  '  the  music  of  those  who  kept  festival '  "^
(pc.-!,  'music,'  Am.  .023  Ezek.  2613).  That  dancing  is
here  referred  to,  however,  is  not  evident.

Words  for  dancing  in  general,  (i)  pnii,  si/tck,  or  priw,  sikek
(Arab,  (fahika 'to laugh,'  whence  vtadliak'tn  'mimus'; Syr.

g'/takk;  (P  Trai^'eLv)  meaning  'to  .sport,
4.  OT  Vocabulary, or'  jest.' Though commonly used to

denote  any  kind  of  sport  (Gen.  21  9,
RVnig.  'playing';  268  RV  'sportuig'),  it  may  denote  simply
'  dancing  •  (see  2  S.  65  =  1  Ch.  13  8  Judg.  I625  Jer.  31  4).

2.  In  late  writings  we  meet  with  ipn,  nikadh,  prop,  'to  leap."
I  Ch.  1529;  Ass.  rakadu  [see  above];  Syr.  nkcuih,  Pa.  'to
dance,'  Aph.  '  to  lament '  (plangcre) ;  Tg.  tSB ;  ©  6px«'''^<^'>
(TKipTai' ;  cp  Ar.  rakada,  '  to  move  the  feet,  to  hop.'

3.  The  root  S^n,  /'«/,  'to  writhe,  whirl,' Judg.  21  21  (whence
SinO,  niahol,  nVinp,  m'hOlah,  'dance,'  xop6<:)  suggests  a  more
intricate  movement.

4.  Lastly,  we  have  in  2S.  616  the  two  an-.  Aey.  HS,
pizzcz,  and  "1313,  kirkcr  (the  latter  also  in  v.  14)  (Ar.  karra,  '  to
advance  and  retreat,'  karkara,  id.;  2S.  014  HSISD,  Targ.,
n2tya,  Pesh.  m'hihbah,  Vg.  sultahat').  Most  probably,  how-
ever, "13^30?  I'EO  should  rather  be  read  Hi'S'TOI  riDSD  (Che.);
the  former  of  these  participles  is  justified  by  the  facts  brought
together  by  Toy,  JUL  10  \^'&  f.  ['97]),  which  show  that  nOS
{/>dsah),  the  root  of  flDS,  means  virtually  '  to  dance,'  and  the
latter  by  the  authority  of  i  Ch.  15  29.

Dancing, then, was  of  the  essence of  a primitive
religious  festival. It  was  not  the  choral  dances  (n'Siip)
that  provoked  the  wrath  of  Moses  (Exod.


5.  A  part  of  ,^


3219)  : Miriam's  '  dances  '  were  evidently


congenial  to  all  (E.xod.  If) 20/.  ;  cp  Judg.


primitive

religion.  ^^^^  iS.18  6  21  i.  [12]).  It  was  the
worship  of  the  steer-god  that  angered  the  great  leader.
The  Hebrews  never  ceased  to  be  religious  dancers,
though  the  form  of  the  ceremony  may  have  changed.
Some  idea  of  the  early  rite  may  be  gained  from  the
account  in  2S.  614  of  Davids  dancing  'before
Yahwe'  (i.e.,  before  the  ark  ;  cp.  v.  5).  Michal  indeed
took  her  husband's  act  amiss.  She  was  too  un-
imaginative to  .see  the  meaning  of  a  practice  which  was
beginning  to  be  antitjuated.  She  thought  that  by
leading  the  dance  in  such  attire,  and  mixing  with  the
common  people,  her  husband  was  playing  a  part  which

1  Che.  reads —

Make  melody  with  dancing  (Sinoa)  and  with  timbrels,
Make  melodv  to  our  king,  make  melody.

a  Che.  Psaliiii^-i'.


DANCE

was  within  the  province  of  a  woman  only,  and  unworthy
of  his  character  and  office.  Davids  answer  well  expresses
his  own  devoutness,  though  he  cannot  have  guessed
what  issues  of  world-wide  importance  hung  upon  the
transference  of  the  ark  to  Jerusalem.  1

Again,  at  the  great  religious  crisis  in  the  reign  of
Ahab  it  is  not  the  'dancing'  that  Elijah  disapproves,
but  its  connection  with  a  bad,  foreign  religion.  The
prophets  of  Baal,  we  are  told,  'leaped' — i.e.,  danced
after  a  special  rite — around  their  altar,  not  eucharistic-
ally,  but  as  suppliants  (iK.  18  26).  Elijah,  though
too  confident  of  his  God's  favour  to  attempt  to  work
upon  him  by  ritual,  does  not  hesitate  to  use  the  word
nos  ('  to  leap')  in  his  taunting  address  to  the  Israelites
(v.  21).'*  Indeed,  Toy  seems  to  have  shown  that  the
spring-festival  called  Pesah  (EV  Passover)  derived  its
name  from  the  dances  (nOB,  see  above,  §  4  4)  connected
with  it.  A  conservative  prophet  like  Elijah  could  never
have  opposed  religious  dances.

Indeed,  one  may  fairly  say  that  prophecy  itself — at
any  rate,  that  represented  by  Elisha — was  under  some
obligations  to  dancing.  The  inspiration  of  those  who
belonged  to  the  guilds  of  prophets  (see  Prophi-XV)
was  prepared  for  by  music  and  rhythmic  movements  of
the  body  (cp  iS.  lOioii  I920-24).  It  was  the  wild
proceedings  of  prophets  when  in  this  preparatory  state
that  degraded  the  whole  order  in  the  eyes  of  many
Israelites  (cp  2  K.  9ii).  It  is  difficult,  when  looking  at
dervishes  performing  their  exercises,  not  to  think  of  the
so-called  'sons  of  the  prophets'  (again  see  Pkophkcv).
'  Ulemas  and  dervishes  with  the  chief  muftis  at  their
head  were  leaping,  lx)unding,  swaying  their  arms,  and
whirling  in  time  to  the  din  of  drums,  trumpets,  and
cymbals  which  followed  them  '  (Tristram).

Eor  the  stated  religious  ritual  of  the  pre-exilic  age
we  are  ill-provided  with  authorities.  Still,  we  know  that
the  three  great  festivals  (especially
that  of  Tabernacles)  were  celebrated
with  an  exuberant  joy  which  expressed  itself  in  dancing.
The  Psalter  proves  that  even  in  the  post-exilic  age
dancing  as  well  as  music  formed  part  of  divine  service
(see  Pss.  1493  L5O4).  Eucharistic  procession  (no  doubt
at  a  quick  pace)  round  the  altar  was  customary  (266,
and  according  to  MT  [see  above],  II827).  Processions
of  God  also,  which,  from  the  mention  of  maidens  with
timbrels,  may  be  presumed  to  have  been  a  dance-
festival,  are  spoken  of  (Ps.  6824[25].  SDOT).  Ps.  876,
however,  is  too  obscure  to  be  quoted.

There  was  dancing  at  tribal  and  family  festivals
(cp  the  place-name  Abel-Meholah  [q.v.],  'dancing
meadow  ' ;  i  K.  19  16).  It  was  at  a  yearly  tribal  festival
that  the  daughters  of  Shiloh  came  forth  for  choral
dances  (Judg.  21 21  ni^iiEa  h-^rh),  and  there  is  a  singular
story,  which  almost  seems  like  an  attempt  to  account
for  marriage  by  capture  (see  M'Lennan,  Primilive
Marriage),  respecting  the  Benjamites  who  chose  wives
from  among  the  dancers  (niSSnsrrip).  \\'e  must
apparently  take  this  in  connection  with  the  curious
custom  referred  to  elsewhere  (C.^NTici.e.s,  §  9  ;  Ato.n'K-
MKNT,  Day  of),  which  was  evidently  greatly  toned
down  in  post-exilic  times.  The  young  men  and
maidens  of  Jerusalem  danced  in  the  vineyards,  not
without  results,  on  the  evening  of  the  15th  of  Ab  (this
was  the  festival  of  Wood-carrying'')  and  of  the  Day  of
Atonement,  and  sang  edifying  songs  on  marriage
(Mishna,  Tdanith,  iv.  8).  A  dance  performed  by  the
chief  men  of  the  city  was  a  special  incident  in  the
festivities  of  the  Feast  of  Tabernacles. At  the  close  of

1  Che.  Aids  to  Criticism,  55/.

2  On  this  passage  see  Klo.,  and.  for  a  fuller  development  of
the  meaning,  /QK,  July  1898  (p.  56S);  cp  Jastrow,  /BL,  1S98,
1  1087?;  It  is  useless  to  compare  the  Phoenician  divine  title
^oA/napicios— /.<■.,  ip-o  Sya,  'Baal  of  dancing'  (Haethg.  Bei/r.
25261)— and  other  similar  forms. They  have "  *"

lelkart,  the  name  of  the  Baal  of  Tyre  (Texier).

3  See "

Iris,  96.


6.  At  festivals.


261)— and  other  similar  forms. They  have  all  grown  out  of
Melkart,  the  name  of  the  Baal  of  Tyre  (Texier).
3  See Jos. jSyii.  17  6, and cp Neh.  10  35  [36] 13  31, Del.


1000


J


DANIEL

the  first  day  men  of  piety  anti  repute,  singing  hymns,
danced  with  torches  in  their  hands.  No  one  who  has
not  seen  this  joy,  s;iid  a  proverb,  has  seen  true  joy
(Succa,  5  1-4).  Thus  the  severity  of  the  Law  could  not
extinguish  the  impulse  in  the  Jewish  people  towards
rhythmic  movement.

There  was,  however,  one  kind  of  dancing  against
which  wise  men  protested.  It  is  no  doubt  of  Greek
dancing-girls  that  Ben  Sira  is  thinking  when  he  warns
his  readers  not  to  '  use  the  company  of  a  woman
that  is  a  singer'  (licclus.  94).  Hellenism,  indeed,  was
even  more  dangerous  morally  than  religiously.  It  is
just  possible,  ttxj,  that  when  on  Herod's  birthday  the
daughter  of  Herodias  came  forward  to  amuse  the  guests
((V  Ti^  fi^ffif),  Mt.  116;  cp  Mk.  622  Lk.  152$)  her  style  of
dancing  was  derived  from  the  pantomimic  solo-dance  of
the  hiretl  female  dancers  of  (jrc-cce. '

The  few  occasions  in  the  Mible  in  which  dancing  is
referred  to  may  be  said  to  have  an  interpretative  value.

7 Bhlioal ''  ^^'^^  "°'  always  necessary  to  niention
■  ^ '  that a happy  event was celebrated by

dancing,  because  early  readers  would
supply  this  detail  mentally  for  themselves.  We  are
thankful,  however,  that  the  writers  did  sometimes
mention  the  dancing,  and  that  so  they  interpreted  for
us  many  other  passages.  Dancing  was  continually  in
request  in  Israelitish  and  in  Jewish  society  (Jer.  3I413
Mt.  11 17  Lk.  732  1525).  Thus  (as  in  Assyrian)
■  dancing '  and  '  rejoicing '  were  synonymous  terms
(Lam.  5 15  Eccles.  84  Vs.  30 11  [12]).  It  is  an  imijrobable
idea  of  Leyrer  {PA'/i^->)  that  there  is  a  reference  to  a  kind
of  square  dance  in  Cant.  7 1  [613]  (c':nsri  nSnpa  ;  see
M.\ii.\.n.\IM).  Much  more  safely  may  we  suppose  a
reference  to  a  sword-dance,  such  as  Wetzstein  found  as  a
part  of  the  wedding  ceremonies  in  Syria  (cp  CANTICLK.S,
§  9).  Dancing  has,  of  course,  alw-iys  been  popular  at
weddings  ;  and  the  virgins  in  the  parable  who  go  out  to
meet  the  bridegroom  no  doubt  looked  forward  to  a
merry  choral  dance.  Modern  Arabs  still  sing  and
dance  with  lighted  torches  on  the  day  of  a  wedding.

Lucian, De .Saltat.  ; Speiicor, De Saltat. Tet. Hehr.  ;

'Saltatio' in Diet. 0/ CIc. and  Rom. Antigq.; '  Tanz '  in

/'A'£Ci\V,2o6:  kiehm, ///r'A"(*  1636/;  Wetz-

Literature. stein, Zeitsch.  /Ur  Etitnol. 1873, p. 285/  ;
Kranz  Delitzsch,  Iris  (KT),  189-206  ;  'Iristram,
I'astvrn  Customs,  207-210;  Grove  (Lilly),  Dancing  (^()^)\ R.
\'ijss,  Pi-r  J'anz  u.  seine  Gesch.  ('69).

DANIEL  (^X3"n,  Kt.;  Kr.  '?S.»3-n  [Ba.  and  Ginsb.],
Kzek.  14  1420  283  ;  Sk^O^ — it- ,  God  is  my  judge,  or,  the
defender  of  my  right  ;  A&NIhA  [BX.KQF].  The  name
SwT  occurs  in  a  Falmyrene  inscription  (De  \'ogU(5,  La
Syrie  centrale,  no.  93).  On  the  name  Daniel  in  Ezek. ,
see  the  suggestion  in  Enoch,  §  i.

1.  A  man  of  extraordinary  wisdom  and  righteousness
(Ezek.  ;  see  above).  This  Daniel  api)ears  to  have
become  proverbial,  as  did  Noah  and  Job ;  but  when
and  where  he  was  thought  to  have  lived  we  are  not  told.

2.  A  Jewish  captive,  said  to  have  Xxxn  carried  to
Babylon  '  in  the  third  year  of  Jelioiakim  '  when  Jeru-
salem was  taken  (Dan.  I126),  and  to  have  become,
through  his  supernatural  wisdom,  chief  of  the  sages  of
Babylon  and  the  minister  of  successive  dynasties.  The
latest  date  mentioned  in  his  life  is  the  third  year  of
Cyrus  (Dan.  ]0i  ;  cp,  however,  I21).  Outside  the
book  which  bears  his  name,  and  the  apocryphal  additions
to  it,  the  only  biblical  passages  which  mention  this
Daniel  are  i  Mace.  26o  and  Mt.  24  15  (  =  Mk.  ISm).
The  former  contains  only  a  didactic  reference  to  the
story  of  the  lions'  den.  The  latter  apparently  makes
Jesus  speak  of  '  Daniel  the  prophet ' ;  but,  as  the  form
of  the  citation  shows,  it  is  rather  the  evangelist  who
speaks  (cp  B.  Weiss,  Das  Matthdnsevang.  508).  See
Daniel,  Book  of.

1  Or,  if  Oriental  analogies  be  preferred,  we  may  consult
Thomson,  LB,  555-6;  Tristram,  Eastern  Customs,  208;  Lane,
MoiL  Kg.  1  240  294/;  ;  cp  also  Erman,  Arte.  Eg.  349-350).


divisions.


DANIEL,  BOOK  OF

3.  A  priest  of  the  line  of  Ithamar  in  Kzra's  caravan  (see  Ezra,
i.  i  2  ;  li.  i  15  (i)  </),  Ezra  «  2  -  I  EmI.  S  29  yyOfLttKo^  |H),  ycuxaifA
(A|,  a  corruplixn  <if  Ja><t>)A|of  |,  nut -( •uinalicl,  as  van  Hoo-
nacker) ;  ami  si(;natory  to  the  i;t>venant  (see  KzKA,  i.  |  7),  Neh.
lOft  (7).  Aniont;  his  ciintenip<iiarics  we  hnil  a  .MisihacI  (Neh.
«  4),  an  Azariah  (Neh.  10  2  I3I),  anJ  a  Hananiah  (Neh.  10  23  (24]).
Cp.  Dan.  1  7.

4.  One  of  the  six  sons  Iwrn  to  David  in  Ffehron  ;  his  mother
was  Abigail  (1  Ch.  3  i  ;  .sec  Davih,  |  ii,  iii.  it).  Accordiii(j  to
He.  the  name  is  miswrittcn  for  Dclaiah  (cp  ©) ;  but,  as  Klo.
more  plausibly  thinks,  it  is  rather  a  corruption  of  D<xliel
(Sk'I^)  ;  ©Al.  reads  AoAouia— /.<•.,  Aoioi/ta  Dodiah  (nn^),  an-
other form  of  the  same  name.  Cp  the  names  Do<lai,  Dixlo,
Dodavahu.  «D",  however,  has  Aafii>ii)A  ;  Jos.  (.Int.  vii.  1  4)
Aai-i'ijAot-  The  li  2  .S.  3  3  has  Chileab  (3»(^2)  in  Ml',  but  ©HAi.
has  AaAovia  ;  the  other  versions  (Cod.  243,  in  Field,  1  5^0)  A/3<o.
Chileab,  though  adopted  by  Ki.  (Chrot\.  .Sl>'l> /"),  is  surely
wrong  •  (cp  Berachot/i,  ^a).  This  was  David's  second  son,  and
after  the  death  of  Amnon  would  be  the  heir  to  the  throne.  His
brothers  .Absalom  and  Adi>nijah  played  so  important  a  p.i  t
that  it  is  surprising  that  nothing  is  told  of  their  elder  brother.
Perhaps  he  died  early  or  was  removed.

DANIEL,  BOOK  OF.  If  we  adopt  the  mediajval
division  of  the  Iwxjk  into  twelve  chapters,''^  the  first  six

■I  aii>^  '^'"^"'  '^  n.arrative  half,  which  can  be  dis-
tinguished naturally  enough  from  the  second,
in  which  Daniel  recortis  his  visions.  .More
important,  however,  than  any  such  division  into  twice
si.x  chapters  is  a  recognition  of  the  fact  that  the  aim  of
the  Ixjok  is  not  historical  but  parenetic  :  it  aimed  at
exhortation  and  encouragement.  It  falls,  accordingly,
into  several  more  or  less  detached  and  (so  to  Sf)eak)
independent  pieces  or  pictures,  designed  to  lift  the  minds
and  hearts  of  its  original  readers,  the  contemporaries  of
the  tyrant  .Antiochus  I\'.  Epiphanes,  al)ove  the  oppressive
present  to  the  heights  of  a  glowing  piety  and  a  strong
spiritual  faith.  These  detached  pieces,  of  which  there
are  ten,  K\\ald  groups  so  as  to  divide  the  Ixiok  into  (a)
an  introductory  part  (chap.  1/. ) ;  (b)  a  second  part  (chap.
3-6),  containing  four  narratives  prefiguring  events  ;  and
[c)  a  third  part  (chap.  7-12),  containing  four  prophetic
pieces.  This  threefold  division  is  favouretl  by  the  con-
sideration that  the  twice  four  pieces  contained  in  parts
(b)  and  (t)  then  serve  as  further  amplifications  of  part
[a) — for  [a)  also  contains  a  narrative  prefiguring  e\ents
(chaj).  1),  and  a  Messianic  prophecy  (chap.  2)  in  which
four  kingdoms  (corresponding  to  the  four  beasts  of
chap.  7)  are  followed  by  the  everlasting  Messianic  king-
dom which  brings  the  history  of  the  world  to  its  close.

TheyJ'/-i;' of  the  ten  pieces  thus  indicated  (chap.  1)  tells  how
Nebuchadrezzar  king  of  Babylon,  after  a  siege  and  capture  of
Jerusalem  in  the  third  year  of  Jehoiakim  king  of
2.  Contents.  Judah  (605  n.c.),  took  Daniel  and  three  other
youths  of  noble  descent  from  Judah  to  Habylon,
where  he  had  them  brought  up  for  the  service  of  the  royal  coiirt.
Casual  mention  is  m.ide  of  some  of  the  sacred  vessels  having
been  conveyed  to  Habylon — as  the  author  intends  afterwards
(chap,  f))  to  speak  of  their  desecration— and  we  are  told  with  some
minuteness  of  the  scrupulosity  with  which  Daniel,  Hanani.ih,
Mishael,  and  Azariah  guarded  themselves  again>t  certain  pollu-
tions, and  how  marvellously  God  rewarded  them  for  this  :  when
they  came  to  stand  Ijefore  the  king,  he  found  them  ten  times
better  than  all  the  m.tgicians  and  enchanters  in  his  realm.

The  second  piece  (chap.  "2)  relates  an  astonishing  proof  of  the
supernatural  wisdom  of  Daniel,  by  means  of  which  he  was  able
to  save  his  own  life  and  the  lives  of  the  other  magicians.  1  he
king  insists  on  having  the  dream  which  h.-is  disturbed  him  not
only  interpreted  but  also,  first  of  all,  recovered  for  him,  and
Daniel  meets  the  unreasonable  demand.  The  great  image  seen
by  the  king  is  interpreted  as  signifying  bv  its  he.id  of  gold  the
present  kingdom  of  Nebuchadrezzar,  whilst  the  remaining  parts
of  the  body,  of  silver,  brass,  and  iron,  are  referred  to  three  king-
doms which  are  destined  to  follow  the  Babylonian.  The  fourth
kingdom,  to  which,  as  a  divided  kingdom,  the  legs  (of  iron)  and
the  feet  (partly  of  iron  and  partly  of  clav)  correspond,  is  followed
by  the  everlasting  kingdom  set  up  by  the  God  of  heaven.  Just
as  the  stone  cut  out  without  hands  breaks  in  pieces  the  whole
image,  and  itself  becomes  a  great  mountain  that  tills  the  whole

1  anV  in  3kSd  is  'he  beginning  of  S*3'2lt'^  I  3  is  a  miswritten
fragment  (for  3)  of  the  true  name  of  David's  son  (cp  Names,
f  4).  Kerber's  derivation  of  the  name  from  '  Caleb  is  surely
too  precarious  (Hehr.  Eigennam.  ^d).

2  The  division  into  chapters  has  been  unskilfully  made  at  three
points  :  chap.  11  ought  not  to  begin  till  11  2^ ;  and  in  MT  chaps,
3  and  5  ougnt  to  end,  as  in  EV,  with  3  30  and  631  [61]  respec-
tively.


DANIEL,  BOOK  OP


earth,  so every  earthly  dominion must  give  way  before the
imperishable  kingdom  of  God.

In  the  third  piece  ()  1-30)  we  are  told  how,  as  a  punishment
for  their  refusal  to  worship  the  great  golden  image  which
Nebuchadrezzar  h;<d  set  up,  the  three  friends  of  Daniel  (himself
silently  passed  over)  were  cast  into  the  burning  fiery  furnace,
and  how  at  last,  when  the  fire  had  not  been  able  to  hurt  the  men
of  Judah  who  had  been  thus  steadfast  to  their  faith,  the  great
kiim  was  compelled  to  do  homage  to  their  god.

TVi  fourtk  piece  (4  i  [3  3i)-4  37  [34))  tells,  in  the  form  of  a
proclamation  by  Nebuchadrezzar  to  all  the  peo[)les  of  the  whole
world — a  form  which  is  not  carried  out  with  uniform  consistency
—how  an  evil  dream  (which  the  king  himself  in  this  instance
relates)  had  thrown  him  into  dismay,  anil  how  Uaniel  alone  was
able  rightly  to  interpret  the  vision,  prophesying  to  the  king  that
as  a  punishment  for  his  pride  he  should  for  a  long  time  be  bereft
of  reason.  \ebuchadrezz;ir  is  thus  for  a  third  time  constrained
to  give  the  glory  to  the  Ruler  of  hea\en.

Next,  in  the./f/?/«  piece  (51-631  [tii]),  we  have  Belshazzar's
feast  and  overthrow  :  we  are  told  how  in  a  wild  orgy  this  king,
unwarned  by  the  fate  of  his  father  Nebuchadrezzar,  desecrated
the  sacred  vessels  of  the  temple,  and  thereupon  was  horror-
stricken  by  the  miraculous  handwriting  on  the  wall.*  The
explanation  of  this,  which  Daniel  alone  was  able  to  give,  was
soon  shown  to  have  been  correct,  for  that  very  night  the  king
was  slain,  and  his  crown  passed  to  Darius  the  Mede.

The  sixth  piece  (ti  1-28  [2-29]),  that  of  Daniel  in  the  lions'  den,
has  reference  exclusively  to  Daniel — just  as  a  corresponding
section,  that  of  the  burning  fiery  furnace,  relates  only  to  his
three  friends.  We  here  read  how  King  Darius  suffered  himself
to  be  induced  by  his  nobles,  who  were  envious  of  Daniel,  to
promulgate  the  foolish  decree  that  any  one  who  for  the  space
of  a  month  should  offer  any  petition  to  god  or  man  should  be
thrown  to  the  lions.  Naturally  Daniel  transgressed  this  com-
mand ;  but  the  king,  who  had  been  compelled  against  his  will
to  consign  his  faithful  servant  to  punishment,  soon  became
convinced  of  his  error  by  the  protection  which  Daniel's  god
vouchsafed  to  his  worshipper,  and,  condemning  the  accusers  to
the  fate  which  they  had  prepared  for  Daniel,  commanded  all  his
subjects  to  serve  Daniel's  god.

The  snrn/h  piece  (7),  the  first  in  the  prophetic  section,
is  a  picture  in  companionship  to  chap.  "2,  and  dates  from
the  first  year  of  Helshazzar,  not  from  the  time  of  Nebu-
chadrezzar, to  which  the  first  group  of  four  pieces
belong.  If,  moreover,  as  we  read  in  10 1,  the  last
great  vision  which  Daniel  saw  immediately  before  his
death  is  to  l>e  assigned  to  the  third  year  of  Cyrus,
e.vactly  seventy  years  after  Daniel's  deportation  from
Judah,  it  seems  fitting  that  the  eighth  piece  also  should
be  assigned  to  the  Babylonian  period,  and  that  only
the  last  two  prophetic  sections  should  be  given  to  that
of  the  Medes  and  Persians.  .Most  of  tiie  years — they
amounted  to  an  ordinary  lifetime — that  Daniel  spent  in
the  Vas<\.  must  have  fallen  under  the  reigns  of  the  Baby-
lonian kings  ;  for,  whilst  Darius  the  Mede  was  already
in  his  si.xty-second  year  when  he  ascended  the  throne
of  Babylon  (ii^i  [61]),  Daniel  saw  only  the  beginning
of  the  reign  of  his  successor  C'yrus  the  Persian.

In  chap.  7  we  have  Daniel's  account  of  his  vision  of  the  four
be.asts,  from  each  of  which  successively  the  supremacy  is  taken
away  to  be  at  last  and  for  ever  bestowed  upon  the  Messiah,  one
'  like  a  son  of  man  '  who  comes  from  heaven,  and  so  at  the  same
time  the  kingdom  is  possessed  by  the  .saints  of  the  Most  High.

If,  in  7  25,  tha  angel's  interpretation  of  one  of  the  horns  of
the  fourth  beast  has  already  unmistakably  pointed  to  a  king  who
persecuted  the  Jews  on  account  of  their  religion,  it  is  made  still
more  apparent  in  the  ^/^/tM  piece  (in  the  interpretation  which
Gabriel  gives  of  Daniel's  vision  in  the  third  year  of  Helshazzar)
that  by  the  fourth  kingdom,  which  arises  after  the  reigns  of  the
Medes  and  Persians,  we  are  to  understand  the  Grecian  empire
of  Alexander  the  Great  and  his  successors.  By  the  rexider
acquainted  with  Jewish  history  the  description  of  the  horn  which
at  first  was  small,  or  of  the  bold  overbearing  king  who  deprives
the  Most  High  of  his  continual  burnt-ofl^'ering  and  gives  up  his
sanctuary  to  wanton  desecration,  and  at  the  same  time  rages
furiously  against  the  holy  people,  cannot  fail  to  l>e  understood
as  referring  to  the  Syrian  king  Antiochus  IV.  Epiphanes  (175-
164  B.C.)  who,  by  his  religious  edict  (i  Mace.  1  ^i/.),  designed
to  bring  about  the  establi.shment  of  the  Greek  cultus  throughout
his  whole  dominions,  and,  by  setting  up  an  altar  to  the  Olym-
pian Zeus  upon  the  altar  of  burnt-offering  in  Jerusalem  (Dec.
16S),  provoked  the  revolt  of  the  Maccaljees  (167).  The  eighth
piece  contains  the  comforting  promise  that  after  2300  evenings
and  mornings  the  temple  of  God  will  be  again  restored  to  its
rightful  position,  and  the  shameless  king  overthrown,  but  not
by  human  hand.

The  ninth  piece  (chap.  9),  after  a  prayer  of  Daniel
which,  notwithstanding  its  borrowings  from  Ezra9  and

1  Clermont  Ganneau's  theory  (/.4,  1 880.  accepted  by  Nold.
{ZA  1  414  j^)and  Bevan,  that  the  mysterious  inscription  consists
really  of  names  of  weights,  is  rejected  by  Behrmann. See  Menil.

1003


Neh.  9,  is  still  pathetic,  gives  Gabriel's  interpretation
of  the  seventy  years,  predicted  by  Jeremiah,  as  mean-
ing seventy  weeks  of  years,  after  the  lapse  of  which  the
day  of  salvation  is  to  dawn.

■Whilst  this  vision  comes  to  Daniel  in  the  first  year  of
the  reign  of  Darius  the  Mede  over  the  kingdom  of
Babylon,  the  last  or  tenth  piece  (chaps.  10-12)  is  dated
from  the  third  year  of  Cyrus  his  successor.  In  corre-
spondence with  the  great  importance  of  this  last  vision
is  the  long  introduction,  after  which,  by  a  sketch  (chap.
11)  mainly  devoted  to  the  complicateti  relations  I)e-
tween  the  Seleucids  and  the  Ptolemies,  and  a  picture
of  the  downfall  of  the  SjTian  tyrant,  the  final  destiny
of  the  people  of  God  is  brought  more  preci-sely  into
connection  with  universal  history.  Chap.  12,  however,
does  not  give  any  one  alwolutely  precise  indication  of
the  exact  time  when  the  troublous  days,  such  as  have
never  before  liecn  known,  are  to  come  to  an  end  :
it  vacillates  Ixitween  1290  and  1335  as  the  number  of
days  that  are  to  elapse  between  the  setting  up  of  the
idolatrous  worship  in  the  temple  and  the  coming  of  the
glorious  time  of  the  end.

The  view  taken  over  by  the  church  from  the  syna-
gogue, which  makes  Daniel  not  only  the  principal  hero

3.  Authorship.  ^'""^  ^^^  *^^  ^?'^°''  °f,  ^^^  ^'°°*''  ^•'^^
*^ not  unreasonably  passed  current  among

theologians  down  to  the  present  century.  To  the  un-
prejudiced reader  the  book  appears  to  claim  to  have
been  written  by  Daniel.  The  narratives  in  the  first  si.\
chapters  do  not  e.xpressly  make  this  claim  ;  but  in  7  2
we  find  Daniel  himself  presented  as  the  narrator  by
the  use  of  the  first  person  singular.  The  use  of  the
third  person  in  chaps.  1-6  and  in  the  lieginnings  of
chaps.  7  and  1 0  is  not  against  the  authorship  of  Daniel
(cp  Am.  7  12^),  who,  at  the  beginning  of  chap.  8  and
of  chap.  9,  speaks  in  the  first  person  in  giving  the
date.  The  close  connection  of  chaps.  1-6  with  the
visions  which  follow  may  fairly  be  held  to  carry  over  the
claim  for  Daniel's  authorship  to  the  teginiiing  of  the
book  also.  No  attentive  reader  will  allow  himself  to  be
misled  as  to  the  oneness  of  the  authorship
of  the  took  by  the  fragmentary  or  detachetl
character  of  the  ten  pieces  of  which  it  is  composed,  if  he
attentively  observes  how  the  earlier  portions  allude  to
the  later,  and  conversely  how  the  later  portions  attach
themselves  to  the  earlier,  and  how  the  same  general
manner  of  presentation,  thought,  and  language  pervades
the  whole.

The  organic  unity  of  the  Book  of  Daniel,  denied  by  Reuss  and
Lagarde,  has  been  once  more  defended  by  Frhr.  von  Gall  in  a
monograph  (see  below,  g  23).  The  grounds,  however,  which  he
offers  (123^)  for  regarding  9  4-20  as  a  late  insertion  are  no  more
than  plausible.  The  contents  of  this  section  are  of  a  higher  type
than  those  of  the  hymns  in  the  apocryphal  additions  to  Daniel.
A  certain  solemn  fulness  is  characteristic  of  the  liturgical  style,
and  is  not  wanting  in  passages  which  may  have  served  the  author
as  his  models — e.g.,  Ezra  9  and  Neh.  9.  'Von  Gall's  changes  in
9  2^.  are  arbitrary;  the  change  in  the  names  of  Gotl,  which  is
quite  appropriate,  proves  nothing.  It  is  a  pure  fancy  that  the
author  of  Daniel,  who  was  acquainted  with  the  Book  of  Jeremiah,
does  not  regard  misfortune  as  penal ;  see  434  622  3o,"etc.  Be-
.sides,  if  we  expunge  9  4-20,  how  much  remains  for  chap.  9?  Only
ten  verses.  "This  is  surely  not  enough  for  the  ninth  of  the  pieces
which  form  the  book.

\\ha.t  has  been  said  as  to  the  true  unity  of  the  \yodk

_ T_* 1 's  onlv  apparently  contradicted  by  the

5.  Interchange  ^,^^  ^^-^,^,  .^^^  ^^  j,^^  ^.,^^,  ^^  ^^^^^-  -  ^^

0  anguage.  ^^^  Aramaic  language  in  a  book  other-
wise written  in  Hebrew.

This  interchange  of  language  has  given  rise  to  many  hj-pothcses.
Spinoza  thought  the  first  seven  chapterx  might  be  an  extract
made  in  the  time  of  Judas  the  Maccabee  from  old  writings  of  the
Chalda:.ans  (cp  Berlholdt.  Eint.  1508^?).  Huetius,  on  the  other
hand,  suggested  that  the  whole  Book  of  Daniel  had  been  ori^;in-
ally  written  in  Aramaic,  and  shortly  afterwards  translated  into
Hebrew,  and  that,  the  original  work  having  been  partly  destroyed
in  the  dark  days  of  the  .Seleucida;,  the  text  was  restored  by
borrowing  the  Heb.  sections  that  we  now  have  from  the  Heb.
version  (cp  Berth.  Einl.  1544,  1549)-  It  is  hardly  an  improve-
ment on  this  view  when  J.  D.  Prince,  adopting  the  theorj'  of
Lenormant  and  Bevan,  says  :  '  The  work  was  probably  written
at  first  all  in  Hebrew  ;  but  for  the  convenience  of  the  general

1004


4.  Unity.


DANIEL,  BOOK  OP


reader,  whose  language  wan  Aramaic,  a  translation,  possibly
fruin  the  suiiic  pen  as  il)c  uriginal,  w.ih  made  into  the  Aranuiic
vernacular.  It  inust  be  suj)ik»ciI  then  that,  certain  parts  of  the
Hib.  manuscript  bring  lo>l,  the  missing  ]>laces  were  supplied  from
the  current  Aramaic  translation  '  (lifok  oj  Danitl  ['a()\,  p.  13).

The  hypothesis  that  'the  Heb.  edition  was  partly  destroyed
in  the  troubled  Scleucidan  ■perioil,  and  the  missing  portions
supplied  from  the  Aramaic  version,"  leaves  unexplained  why
the  change  of  language  should  occur  precisely  at  2  4,  wliurc
the  Aramaic  language  happens  to  be  mentioned.  This  name
cannot  be  regarded  as  a  gloss,  although  '  the  author  of  Daniel
evidently  fell  into  the  error  of  regarding  "Chaldscan"  as  ihe
language  of  Babylonia.'  If,  to  l>cgin  with,  the  loss  <A  fxirt  of  a
M.S  of  no  great  length  is  in  itself  very  improbable,  still  less
satisfactory  is  the  assertion  that  in  the  second  century  before
Christ  such  Palestinian  lews  as  were  able  to  read  books  at  all
could  hardly  understand  any  Hebrew.  Reusch  is  right  when
he  says  {liinl.  in  das  Al\*),  1870,  p.  118):  'The  c-liange  of
language  occurs  in  the  middle  of  a  section  that  cannot  be
divided  (24),  which  shows  that  the  author  w.is  so  familiar  with
both  languages  that  he  could  glide  from  one  into  the  other
without  noticing  it,  and  could  assume  for  a  great  proportion  of
his  contemporaries  a  knowledge  of  them  both.'  No  one  asserts,
as  Prince  expresses  it,  that  both  languages  'were  used  quite
indifferently':  the  author  of  Daniel  ami  his  readers  were
certainly  more  at  home  in  the  Aramaic  vernacular.  When
Prince  asks  why  chap.  7,  '  which  is  indivisible  troin  the  succeed-
ing prophetic  Hebrew  p'lrtions,'  was  written  not  in  Heb.  but
in  .\ram.,  we  may  answer  that  chap.  7  was  written  in  the
same  .■\ramaic  idiom  as  chap.  2  simply  in  order  to  make  every
observant  reader  feel  that  the  book  was  one,  and  that  the  four
visions  were  inseparable  from  the  six  narratives.^

The  change  of  dialect  is  made  C|uite  naturally  thus  :
In  chap.  2  the  author  h;is  introtluced  the  '  Chaldaans  '  as
spe;iking  the  language  which  he  lx.-lieved  to  lie  customary
with  them  ;  afterwards  he  continues  to  use  the  same
language  on  account  of  its  greater  convenience  both  for
himself  and  for  his  original  readers,  both  in  the  narrative
portions  and  in  the  following  (seventh)  cliapter,  the
piece  in  companionship  to  chap.  2  ;  for  the  last  three
visions  (8-12)  a  return  to  Hebrew  was  sut;gested  by  the
consideration  that  this  had  from  of  old  been  the  usual
sacrtKl  language  for  prophetic  subjects.  Whether  the
Aramaic  of  Daniel,  which  is  closely  allied  to  that  in
Ezra,  can  really  be  taken  as  historically  the  language
spoken  in  the  Babylonian  court  in  the  sixth  century  B.C. .
or  for  the  native  language  of  the  Chaldaeans,  cannot  be
discussed  until  we  have  faced  the  whole  question  of  the
historical  validity  or  invalidity  of  the  lK)ok  (see  §  10).
It  is  enough  in  the  meantime  to  say  that  the  Aramaic
or  'Chaldee'  portion  of  Daniel  cannot  possibly  have
formed  an  independent  work  ;  on  the  contrary,  the
change  of  language  serves  to  bind  the  different  parts  of
the  work  into  a  firmer  uni .

The  position  of  the  Book  of  Daniel  with  reference  to
historical  fact,  a  question  most  intimately  bound  up
6  Ranire  ^^'^^  '^'^'  ^^  '^^  date,  can  be  discussed  to
nfiHainn  »<^l^'in''^ge  only  after  we  have,  in  a  purely
01  viBion.  exj.g^.,i^.^i ^^.jjy  ( Bleek  in  JD T,  1 860,  p.  53^ ).
firmly  established  the  fact  that  makc-s  for  the  unity  of
authorship  in  all  five  prophetic  pieces(chaps.  2and  7-12) :
the  fact,  namely,  that  the  range  of  vision  in  each  case
reaches  down  to  the  time  of  Antiochus  Epiphanes,  in
whom  afHicted  Israel  discerned  the  culmination  of  all
that  had  been  hostile  to  God  in  all  history,  and  that,
with  Epiphanes'  destruction,  which  is  regarded  as  immi-
nent, the  daw  n  of  the  Messianic  time  is  e.vpected.  This
done,  we  shall  have  no  difticulty  in  finding  other  weighty
reasons  for  fi.xing  the  composition  of  the  Ixxjk  of  Daniel
at  a  date  shortly  before  the  death  of  Antiochus  IV.

The  extraordinary  precision  with  which  the  exilic
Daniel  seems  to  prophesy  about  things  that  are  to
happen  several  centiu-ies  afterwards  is  particularly  con-
spicuous in  chap.  11,  where,  for  example,  reference  is
made  in  -.:  18  to  the  victory  which  the  C  onsul  Lucius
Scipio  gained  over  Antiochus  III.  at  Magnesia,  in  Lydia,
in  190  B.C..  or  in  i:  30  to  Popilius  L.Tnas,  who  in  the
name  of  the  Roman  Senate  forced  .Xntiochiis  Epiphanes
in  1 68  B.  C.  to  quit  Egypt  with  great  precipitancy,  upon

1  Considerations  of  space  prevent  us  from  considering  the  hint
thrown  out  by  v.  Oall  (123)  that  it  is  not  yet  critically  estab-
lished that  the  LXX  was  based  on  the  text  in  the  two  l.-inguages,
or  the  complicated  hypotheses  of  KOnig  {Einl.  384)  and  Kyssei
(TLZ,  1895,  col.  i6o/).

1005


which  the  king,  as  we  learn  from  1  Mace,  \yoff.,
wreaked  his  wrath  upon  his  Jewish  subjects.  Alth  jugh
predictions  of  this  sort  are  nowiiere  fotind  in  the  writ  ngs
of  the  prophets  of  the  O'V  (cp  I'koi'UKCv),  orthtnloxy
was  long  accustotned  to  take  special  delight  in  con-
templating predictions  which  had  lx;en  so  wonderfully
fulfilled  (cp  the  case  of  the  name  of  Cyrus  in  Is.
44  28).  In  the  present  century,  however,  as  the  historical
sense  became  cjuickened,  difficulties  began  to  jjrescnt
themselves  against  assumptions  which  were  contrary  to
the  analogy  of  the  prophetic  writings  and  found  their
support  merely  in  the  dogma  of  a  magical  inspiration.
7  A1wfl.v  '"  spite  of  I'usey's  energetic  warn-
AntiochuB  IV  '"^  against  '  half- measures,'  nuxlern
apologists,  pressed  by  the  constantly
increasing  historical  dilliculties  caused  by  cuneiform
decipherments,  have  Ixen  driven  more  and  more  to
seek  refuge  in  the  'half-measures'  thus  deprecated,  so
that,  as  Bevan  {Don.  8)  humorously  says,  '  the  defLiukrs
of  Daniel  have,  during  the  last  few  years,  been  em-
ployed chicHy  in  cutting  Daniel  to  pieces. '

It  may  suffice  if  reference  is  made  here  to  but  one  of  the
equally  arbitrary  and  nugatory  attempts  which  have  been  made
to  save  the  authenticity  of  the  book  as  a  whole  by  surrendering
its  oneriess  (if  authorsliip.  Zockler  in  his  exposition  of  the  1  <x>fe
of  Daniel  Cyu)  declared  U  5-39  to  be  a  later  interuylation  ;  he
had  come  to  see  quite  clearly  that  such  a  piece  of  fiisiory  could
never  have  been  penned  by  an  exilic  prophet.  The  attempt,
however,  was  just  as  vain  as  the  attempt  made  elsewhere  to
change  the  name  of  Cyrus  (Is.  45  i)into  an  appellative,  for  it  left
altogether  out  of  account  Dan.  'J43  and  the  relation  of  that  verse
to  1 1  6  17.  These  two  verses  treat  of  two  unlucky  intermarriages
between  .Scleucids  and  t!ie  Ptolemies:  namely,  t.  6,  of  the
marriage  of  IJerenice,  daughter  of  Ptolemy  II.  Philaiielphus,
with  Antiochus  II.  Theos,  aid  v.  i;,  of  that  of  Cleopatra
(daughter  of  the  Seleucid  Antiochus  HI.,  the  Great,  and
thus  sister  of  Antiochus  IV.  Kpiphanes),  from  whom  all  the
K-syptian  Cleopatras  have  taken  their  name,  with  Ptolemy  V.
Kpiphanes.  But  these  inarriaLes  are  quite  plainly  alluded  to
in  243,  where  we  read  as  follows  regarding  the  kingdom
represented  in  the  vision  by  the  legs  of  iron  and  the  feet  partly
of  iron  and  partly  of  clay  :  'And  whereas  thou  saw  est  the  iron
mixed  with  miry  clay,  they  shall  mingle  themselves  with  the
seed  of  men,  but  they  shall  not  cleave  one  to  another,  even  .is
iron  doth  not  mingle  with  clay.'  From  this  it  follows  at  once
that  by  the  fourth  kingdom  in  chap.  2  is  meant  that  of  Alexander
the  Great,  which  became  divided  into  that  of  the  Seleucids  and
that  of  the  Ptolemies  (the  other  kingdoms  of  the  successors  of
.Mexander  have  here  no  interest  for  the  author,  and  are,  there-
fore, passed  over).  But  if  in  chap.  2  the  first  of  the  four  kingdoms
has  been  made  tut  to  he  the  Babylonian,  and  the  Greek  to  be
the  fourth,  it  follows,  from  what  we  are  told  of  ihc  <i\i,.i^M,s
under  which  Daniel  him.self  lived,  that  the  sec' '  1

kingdoms,  touched  upon  so  lightly  in  Daniels  1  1

2  .9,  must  be  the  Median  and  the  Persian,  .'s;
than  in  chap.  2  does  the  author's  special  irtere^i  in  hm-  p'  m  1,1  ,jf
the  fourth  kingdom  disclose  itself  in  the  \isions  ot  I).inici  ;  the
relations  of  the  people  of  God  to  Antiochus  Kpiphanes  possess
such  great  importance,  because,  immediately  upon  the  fall  of
this  tyrant — which  is  to  be  brought  about  without  human  inter-
vention (cp234  45  with  825) — the  Messianic  kingdcmi  is  forth-
with to  l>e  set  up.  It  is  universally  admitted  that  the  reference
to  .\ntiochus  l^piphanes  is  as  plainly  manife^<  in  the  second
vision  (89-14  23-i5)  as  it  is  in  the  last  vision  (1121-4:),  which
occupies  Itself  wholly  with  the  reign  of  this  king.  Chap.  12  1  7
iiy;  also  relates  to  his  persecution  of  the  .saints  and  its  longed-
for  cessation.  To  the  unprejudiced  interpreter  there  cui  be
no  possibility  of  doubt  that  in  the  three  other  pieces  also  the
rang.;  of  vision  is  limited  to  the  time  of  Antiochus  Kpiphanes.
What  is  true  of  24;  is  true  also  of  7  8^  ^o/F.,  where  the  little
horn  (cp.  89),  to  whose  power  the  saints  are  delivered  up  for
three  times  and  a  h.ilf  (cp  7  25  with  12 7),  must  again  be  the
same  persecutor  who  had  m.ide  him.self  so  hateful  to  the  Jews.
The  .same  holds  good,  finally,  of  chap.  9.  Here  the  sixty-two
year-weeks  which  follow  the  first  seven  present,  it  is  true,  a
historical  difficulty  which  will  have  to  l)e  discussed  (see  g  20);
but  thus  much  at  least  is  certain,  that  the  'anointed  one'  in
9a6  is  the  high-priest  Oni.is  III.,  who  was  put  to  death  in  171
B.c.,1  so  that  the  last  ye.ir-wcek  comes  down  to  164  B.C.,  and
the  suspcn.sion  of  .sacrifice  and  offering  which  is  predicted  in
9  27  (of,  'he  .second  half  of  this  week  enables  us  plainly  to  see
that  it  is  the  action  of  Antiochus  Kpiphanes  that  is  referred  to.

Now,  on  the  assumption  of  the  authenticity  of  the
book,  it  is  verj'  hard  inde<>d  to  understand  how,  out  of

8.  Authenticity.  '^'-*  *''"  P'*''""*'!  "^  ''^''^^  .'^  '^  composed.

' so  many  as  five,  in  which  the  coming

of the Messianic kingdom is predicted, should stop

short  at  the  reign  of  a  Seleucid  sovereign  whose  king-

1  Cp.,  however,  Israel,  |  69.
1006


DANIEL,  BOOK  OF


flom — not  to  speak  of  the  Greek  kingdom  out  of  which
it  and  the  other  Seleucid  kingdoms  had  arisen—  had  no
existence  in  the  days  of  the  exilic  Daniel.

Even  the  early  father  Hippolytus  did  not  fail  to  notice
the  allusions  to  the  history  of  the  Seleucidae  and  the
Ptolemies  which  occur  in  the  book  of  Daniel ;  but  it
was  the  Neo-platonist  PorphjTy  {ofi.  304  A.D. )  who
first  drew  the  right  inference  from  the  acknowledged
facts,  and  took  Daniel's  professed  authorship  to  be  a
mere  literary  form,  ascribing  the  book  to  a  Jew  who
wrote  during  the  reign  of  Antiochus  Epiphanes.  As,
however,  this  denial  of  the  authenticity  of  the  book
came  from  an  opponent  of  Christianity,  it  produced  no
effect.  It  was  necessary  that,  within  the  Church  itself,
a  truly  scientific  and  historical  method  of  dealing  with
the  OT  should  arise.  ^  This  has  at  last  come  to  pass.
As  the  result  of  the  labours  of  several  generations,  we
can  safely  hold  it  to  have  teen  established,  as  one  of  the
ascertained  results  of  science,  that  in  chap.  7  we  are  to
understand  by  the  fourth  beast  the  Grecian  Empire,  by
the  eleventh  horn  Antiochus  Epiphanes,  and  by  what  is
related  regarding  this  horn  the  religious  persecution  under
that  king  ;  as  also  that  the  author  of  the  book  wrote  in
his  reign.  A  fundamental  rule  of  all  sound  exegesis
was  violated  when  the  utterances  of  chap.  7  were  not
interpreted  in  the  light  of  the  other  four  parallel  texts,
but  were  torn  from  their  connection  in  the  book  in
order  to  give  them  a  meaning  divergent  from  the  sense
of  the  rest  of  the  book,  as  if  the  fourth  beast  signified
not  the  Grecian  but  the  Roman  Empire.  To  interpret
the  four  kingdoms  as  denoting  those  of  Babylonia,
Medo- Persia,  Greece,  and  Rome,  seems,  indeed,  by
grouping  the  Medes  and  Persians  under  one  empire,
to  offer  a  series  which,  from  a  historical  point  of  view,
can  1)6  more  easily  accepted  than  that  of  Babylonia,
Media,  Persia,  and  Greece  ;  but  this  last  series  alone
gives  the  true  sense  of  the  book,  wliich  represents  the
Median  kingdom  of  Darius  as  Ixjing  the  second  of  the
four  world-monarchies,  and  places  this  as  an  indepen-
dent intermediate  link  tetween  the  Chaldnsan  and  the
Persian  monarchies  (cp  61  [031]  832091),  distinguishing
it  quite  plainly  from  the  Persian,  which  it  makes  out  to
be  the  third.  With  our  perfectly  certain  knowledge,
derived  from  the  cuneiform  inscriptions,  that  there
never  was  any  such  Median  empire  between  those
of  Babylonia  and  Persia  (cp  Pkrsi.\),  the  authenticity
of  the  Book  of  Daniel  falls  to  the  ground.  Quite
apart,  however,  from  the  lumierous  contradictions  of
history  to  be  afterwards  spoken  of  (§  10,  etc. ), — contra-
dictions which  absolutely  exclude  the  supposition  that
the  author  was  an  eye-witness  living  during  the  period
of  the  'exile,' — the  fact  that  the  horizon  of  the  book  is
throughout  tounded  by  the  time  of  Antiochus  Epiphanes,
the  fierce  persecutor  of  the  Jews  and  their  religion,  with
whose  fall  the  Messianic  salvation  is  represented  as
being  ushered  in,  makes  it  abundantly  plain  that  the
figure  of  the  exilic  Daniel  is  employed  only  as  a  literary
form.  The  Messianic  hope  could  not  possibly  have
taken  this  special  form  so  early  as  during  the  '  exile, '  but
only  under  the  oppression of  the  Syrian tyrant who

1  Gunkel,  Schol>/.  325.  [Doubts  as  to  the  authenticity  of
the  Hook  of  Daniel  were  uttered  again  in  the  seventeenth  century
by  Hobbes  (^Leviatlian,  33)  and  Spinoza  (Tract,  theol.  polit.
10) ;  but  Anthony  Collin.s,  the  '  free-thinker,'  was  the  first  who
treated  the  subject  with  something  like  modern  thoroughne».s.
As  Lechler  has  shown,  the  eleven  grounds  which  Collins  adduces
(Scheme  of  Literal  Priiphecy,  1726,  p.  149^)  are  mostly  those
on  which  recent  criticism  relies  for  proving  the  Maccabjean  date
of  Daniel.  It  would,  however,  be  a  mistake  to  suppose  that
critical  doubts  were  confined  to  sceptical  theologians.  Richard
Bentley,  scholar  and  apologist,  had  reached  by  17-)!  a  con-
viction of  the  late  origin  of  I  )aniel.  Jebb  in  his  monograph
isn  f.)  makes  too  light  of  Bentley 's  doubts.  _  In  spite  of
VVhiston's  somewhat  disparaging  language,  it  is  clear  that
Bentley  found  serious  difficulties  both  in  the  narratives  and  in
the  predictions  of  Daniel,  in  consequence  of  which  he  '  supposed
the  ix)ok  to  have  been  written  after  the  time  pf  Onias  the  high
priest,  and  that  this  Onias  was  Daniel's  Messiah '  (see  Whiston's
Memoirs  by  himself,  Lond.  1749,  p.  ic8 /:)  Whiston  was  a
Boyle  Lecturer.]

1007


sought  to  extirpate  the  religion  of  Israel,  and  to
compel  the  Jews  to  adopt  the  idolatrous  worship  of
Greece.

The  book  of  Daniel  being,  as  Wellhausen  well  describes
it  (//O'"^',  240/),  'a  hortatory  and  consolatory  writ-
9  Aim  '"^  ^^^  *^^  persecuted,  designed  to  strengthen
and  cheer  them  by  the  knowledge  that  within
a  very  short  time  the  overbent  bow  will  break,'  its
atithor  was  able  to  allow  himself  great  freedom  in  the
use  of  his  materials.  His  aim  was  not  the  communica-
tion of  historical  information.  Using  as  a  vehicle  the
materials,  historical  or  unhistorical,  that  tradition  had
placed  at  his  disposal,  he  availed  himself  of  the  literary
artifice  of  employing  the  name  of  the  exilic  Daniel  to
gain  weight  for  the  ethical  and  religious  truths  which
he  desired  to  set  forth.  ^  As  in  the  cases  of  Job  and
Jonah,  so  also  in  that  of  the  book  of  Daniel,  a  great
injustice  is  done  if  the  standard  of  strict  historicity  is
applied, — a  standard  by  which  the  book  is  not  in  the
least  intended  to  l)e  tried.  We  find  in  it  (cp  Kamph.
Daniel, 16/, 28^, 45) not only


10.  "CTnconcem
about  history.


many  historical  errors  but  also,  fre-
quently, a  magnificent  unconcern  alx)ut
historical  possibilities,  of  which  the  author,  in  spite
of  his  great  literary  art,  certainly  was  not  always
conscious.  If  it  is  permissible  to  find  in  68,  no  less
than  in  the  demand  mentioned  in  2 11,  a  scornful  refer-
ence to  that  religious  edict  of  Antiochus  Epiphanes
which  the  pious  Jew  could  regard  only  as  a  piece  of
insanity,  these  passages  without  doubt  contain  other
conscious  allusions  to  historical  fact.  In  many  cases,
we  can  quite  confidently  conjecture  their  presence,
though  we  do  not  always  quite  understand  them.  If  it
is  only  with  diflficulty  that  we  are  able  to  form  any  visual
image  of  the  fiery  furnace  (3),  or  of  the  lion's  den  (tj),
still  less  are  we  able  to  comprehend  how  Daniel,  who
had  constantly  remained  steadfast  to  the  God  of  Israel,
could  have  come  to  be  the  chief  of  the  heathen  Magi
(243)  ;  and  in  like  manner  we  fail  to  make  clear  to
ourselves  how  Daniel  (cp  826  I24)  could  have  managed
to  secure  that  what  he  had  seen  should  remain  a  secret
for  centuries.  The  matter  becomes  at  once  natural  and
intelligible  if  we  suppose  that  the  exilic  Daniel  was
simply  employed  as  a  literary  device  by  a  writer  of
much  later  date,  who  regarded  the  fury  of  Antiochus
Epiphanes  as  the  last  visitation  of  the  people  of  God
Ixifore  the  blessed  time  of  the  end  should  come.
Anachronisms  and  historical  difficulties  of  every  sort
occur  throughout  the  whole  of  the  book,  not  only  in  its
preliminary  narratives.

Orthodoxy  shows  a  natural  reluctance  to  recognise
the  unhistorical  character  of  the  book.  As  even  its
latest  expounder,^  although  dating  it  in  the  Maccabean
period,  greatly  exaggerates  its  historical  value,  and
justifies  himself  in  his  refusal  to  recognise  its  true
character  by  urging  that  in  substance  the  book  is  not
pure  invention,  but  rests  upon  tradition,  it  seems  fitting
to  call  attention  to  one  outstanding  instance  in  which
tradition  is  no  guarantee  of  historical  truth,  before  we
proceed  to  enumerate  some  samples  of  the  unhistoricity
of  the  book.  — Among  the  apocryphal  additions  to
Daniel  contained  in  <&,  that  of  the  '  Dragon  at  Babel"
(cp  Schr.  in  Riehm's  HWB)  is  certainly  not  pure  inven-
tion. This  legend,  which  in  its  present  literary  form
is  very  late,  had  already  been  brought  into  relation
with  the  old  Babylonian  mythology  by  Schrader  and
Ball  (Wace,  Apocr.  ii.  348  ff.)\  but  quite  recently
Gunkel  («/  sup.  320/:)  has  conclusively  shown  that
what  lies  at  the  root  of  it  is  the  primeval  Babylonian
myth  of  the  conquest  of  the  Chaos-monster  or  the  great

I'll  is  possible,  no  doubt,  that  he  derived  some  part  of
these  narratives  from  Jewish  or  Babylonian  popular  stories.
But  even  if  we  accept  this  conjecture,  the  historical  setting,  the
moral  purpose,  and  the  skill  m  presentation  are  all  his  own'
(Che.  AM91,  art.  '  Daniel ').

2  Georg  Behrmann,  Hand<ommcntar,  1894.

1008


DANIEL,  BOOK  OF


dragon  Tiamat  by  the  god  Marduk.*  Instead  of  merely
pronouncing  this  apocryphal  narrative,  as  Zockler
(Apocr.  ['91],  215  231 )  somewhat  imprudently  does,
foolish  and  silly,  we  ought  rather  to  learn  from  it  that
dependence  on  ancient  tradition  is  not  incompatible
with  complete  unhistoricity.

As  a  contemporary,  the  author  of  Daniel  llai-39  was
in  circumstances  which  enabled  him  to  depict  with  the
utmost  accuracy  the  reign  of  Anticx;hus  i:piphanes  and
his  two  Egyptian  campaigns  ;  but  for  the  concluding
portion  of  ch.  11  he  can  no  longer  be  taken  as  a  historical
source,  inasnmch  as  ii:  40-45  go  beyond  the  author's
present  ;  the  actual  course  of  events  in  which  Antiochus
Epiphanes  perished  on  an  eastern  raid  in  the  Persian
city  of  TalxK  in  164  h.  c.  is  glaringly  inconsistent  with
the  author's  anticipation  that  the  king,  after  a  successful
ex[x.'dition  against  Egypt,  was  to  meet  his  end  suddenly
in  Palestine.

\N'e  are  thus  led  to  the  conclusion  that  the  book  was

written  during the life -time  of  Antiochus  Epiphanes.

_  The conclusion that it Ijelongs to a

.  Language.  ^.^^^  j^^^  ^^^^  -^^  ^^^  post-e.xilic  period

is  forced  upon  us  also  by  its  language.

The  many  Persian  words  in  the  book  are,  in  the
mouth  of  Daniel,  anachronisms  which  clearly  testify
against  the  authenticity  of  the  book  ;  as  also  testifies
the  use  of  the  word  Kasdiin  (EV  '  Chalda:ans  '  [</.  j'.  ])  for
the  Habylonian  priests,  soothsayers,  or  magicians.
True,  our  book  sometimes,  in  agreement  with  those
prophets  who  lived  under  the  new  IJabylonian  kingdom,
understands  by  the  Kasdim  the  people  who  had  the
predominance  in  liabylon  (cp  Dan.  38  5301*1  with  Is.
4314);  but  it  stands  alone,  opposed  not  only  to  the
Assyrio-Babylonian  usus  loquendi  but  also  to  that  of  all
the  rest  of  the  O  l",  in  the  manner  in  which  it  everywhere
else  (cp  224,  etc.)  makes  Kasdim  synonymous  with
'  Magi,'  a  practice  which  is  found,  long  after  the  down-
fall of  the  IJabylonian  empire,  in  Greek  and  Roman
authors.  As  the  number  of  words  borrowed  from
Persian  certainly  exceeds  a  dozen,  the  few  Greek  ex-
pressions do  not  come  so  much  into  account ;  but
attention  is  worth  calling  to  psanterin  in  Dan.  3s,
because  this  form,  alongside  of  the  Greek  psaltirion,
proves  the  influence  of  the  Macedonian  dialect  (which
substituted  n  for  /),  and  because  it  is  in  the  case  of  this
word  that  the  Semitic  derivation  of  the  foreign  words  in
Daniel,  so  much  insisted  on  in  the  apologetic  interest,
is  strikingly  seen  to  be  untenable.

The  noil- Hebrew  language  of  Dan.  24^  is  introduced
as  being  the  speech  of  the  •  Chaldajans,'  and  is  kept  up
.  . by  the  author  down  to  the  end  of  chap.

■  7,  because  in  his  time  (though  not  so
in  2  K.  18  26)  both  languages  were  readily  understood  ;
it  is  thus  possible  for  us  to  form  definite  conclusions  as  to
its  character.  .Although  it  is  called  Aramaic  correctly,
it  is  at  the  same  time  intended  to  tje  taken  as  the  language
of  the  '  Chaldajans,"  and  this  on  any  assumption  involves
a  historical  error.  The  biblical  Aramaic  (see  Akamaic
Languagk,  §  3  / )  is  now  known  to  belong  to  the
■West  Aramaic  group  and  to  be  closely  related  to  the
language  of  the  Targums  and  of  the  Palmyrene  and
other  inscriptions.  We  know  also  that  this  language,
of  which  the  remains  preservetl  to  us  come  for  the  most
part  from  Palestine,  did  not,  as  the  language  of  current
intercourse,  supersede  the  old  Hebrew  (which  had  now
begun  to  assert  its  claim  to  be  regarded  as  a  sacred
languagy)  until  the  end  of  the  third  century  B.C.  The
actual  language  of  the  '  Chald;eans  '  also  we  know  from
the  cuneiform  inscriptions  to  have  been  Semitic,  but
very  different  from  the  West  .Aramaic,  so  that  Luther's
free  translation  of  24 — 'Then  spake  the  Chaldees  to
the  king  in  Chaldee" — is  indeed  exegetically  correct  but
historically  false.  If,  on  the  other  hand,  in  order  to
avoid supposing that Aramaic  was confoundetl with

1  .Simil.irly  Mardiik  reappears  later  in  the  Christian  knight
St.  Georiie.


'  Chalda-'an,'  it  is  maintained  that  the  court  language  at
Babylon  was  Aramaic,  we  may  point  to  the  linguistic
peculiarities  of  the  old  Aramaic  inscriptions,*  which
abundantly  show  that  the  Aramaic  of  the  B<xjk  of  Daniel
could  not  have  lieen  spoken  in  Ikibylon  in  the  sixth
century.

How  little  the  H<x>k  of  Daniel  can  be  depended  on  in
matters  of  history  apjxsirs  from  its  very  first  verse.  Not
n MiatalTAa  ""'y ''"  '^*=  ^'^^  contemporaries  (cp  Jer.

.  ""STiaKes  jg^  l.:z.267)ofthefamousChald;eanking

in  names.  ^,^|j  ^^^^  Nebuchadrezzar  ;  but  also  Stralio,
in  transliterating  the  name,  comes  ne;ir  the  cuneiform
form.  In  Dan.  1 1,  on  the  other  hand,  the  name  is  given
in  a  later  corrupt  form  (with  n  instead  of  r)  in  connection
with  the  unhistorical  statement  (cp  Jer.  25 1  3(5 1  9  29)  that
Nebuchadrezzar  conqueretl  Jerusalem  in  the  third  year
of  Jehoiakim.  Whatever  be  the  case  with  the  rest  of
the  OT,  Daniel  betrays  no  trace  of  acquaintance  with
cuneiform  ;  the  error  made  in  4  8  [5]  is  an  urgent  warn-
ing against  any  attempt  to  interpret  the  writing  on
the  wall  in  5  25  by  reference  to  the  real  sjjeech  of  the
'  Chald;eans.'  In  4  8  [5J  Daniel's  name  Belteshazzar,
which  is  already  taken  in  the  LXX  to  Ix:  the  same  as
Belshazzar  (5i),  the  name  of  the  alleged  last  Babylonian
king,  is  wrongly  supposed  to  be  a  compound  of  the  divine
name  liel  (Is.  46i),  although  Bel-sar-usur  (that  is,  '  Ikl
])rcserve  the  king  ')  and  Belatsu-u.sur  (that  is,  '  may  his  life
i)e  preserved  ')  are  philologically  distinct.-  It  would  take
us  too  far  afield  were  we  to  show  how  even  Nebuchad-
rezzar's insanity  and  the  equally  unhistorical  conception
of  Belshazzar  or  even  of  the  legendary  Darius  the  .\ledc
(whom  Xenophon's  romance,  the  Cyrofxcdia,  cannot
make  a  historical  person )  carry  us  back  to  traditions  which,
widely  different  as  they  seem,  in  part  at  least,  to  have
been,  were  in  any  case  greatly  distorted.  How  strainetl
are  the  author's  relations  with  history  can  Ix;  seen  by  a
glance  at  chap.  11  2/  As  only  two  Babylonian  kings  are
known  to  him,  so  he  knows  of  only  three  Persian  .sovereigns
besides  Cyrus  (lOi),  their  names  being  tho.se  of  the  four
that  occur  elsewhere  in  the  OT  (cp  !■  zra4  5-7)  ;  as  Xerxes
is  clearly  intended  by  the  fourth,  this  sovereign  is  made
to  be  the  successor  of  Artaxer.xes  (whom  he  really  pre
ceded),  and  the  contemporary  of  Alexander  the  (jreat.

In these circumstances Drivers correct statement

[Introd.1^^  510).  that  '  the  lx)ok  rests  upon  a  traditional

^ . . basis,'  ought  not  to  have  lKi;n followed

th  ^  *jy  the  statement  that  '  Daniel,  it  cannot
®  ®'^°'  Ije  doubted,  was  a  historical  person,  one
of  the  Jew  ish  exiles  in  Babylon. '  A  Ixjok  w  hich  does  not
admit  of  being  used  as  a  historical  source,  save  for  the
author's  own  time,  cannot  possibly  be  a  guarantee  for
the  existence  of  an  exilic  Daniel.  Wlien  we  cast
about  us  for  information  concerning  Daniel  independ-
ent of  our  present  Ixwk,  we  find  that  the  name  Daniel
is  of  rare  occurrence  in  the  OT,  Ixiing  met  with  (see
Daniki.  i.  1)  only  once  on  perfectly  historical  ground;
and,  moreover,  what  is  very  remarkable,  we  find  also
in  Ezra's  time  (see  Daniel  i.  3)  a  Mishael,  an  .Azariah,
and  a  Hananiah  (cp  Dan.  16)— a  coincidence  of  rare
names  w  hich  le<l  Bleek  to  conjecture  that  our  author  had
thrown  back  the  contemporaries  of  Ezra  by  more  than
a  century  in  order  that  he  might  represent  them  as  living

t  Cp  Dr.  Introd.'^)  503  /  (the  language  of  D.iniel,  [c  ]  end).
We  possess  monuments  of  the  official  use  of  .Aranuiic  for  the  times
of  the  Assyrian,  the  Babylonian,  and  the  Persian  supremacies,
which  indicate  that  there  was  in  the  case  of  the  smaller  parts  of
speech,  such  as  the  relative  and  demonstrative  pronouns  which
have  special  value  for  the  determination  of  the  age  of  a  language,
a  notaole  difference  of  form  between  the  older  and  the  younger
Aramaic.  Whilst  the  old  Aramaic  of  the  inscriptions  from  the
eighth  to  the  fifth  centuries  B.C.  h.xs  <ii  K1  and  r\l\,  in  biblical
Aramaic  these  much  used  particles  have  the  forms  n,  kt
and  nj^.  The  Book  of  Daniel  is  thus,  in  its  ase  of  t  for  the
older  1,  quite in  agreement  with  what  we  know  of  the  usage

Eevailing  in  Aramaic  in.scriptiorLs  and  books  dating  from  the
st  centuries  n.c.  and  the  first  centuries  a.d.
3  On  the  name  and  asserted  kingship  of  Bclsh.azzar,  and  on
Darius  the  Mede,  see  Belshazzar,  Dakius,  i.


DANIEL,  BOOK  OF


in  the  time  of  the  '  exile '  at  a  heathen  court,  and  showing
an  example  to  his  countrymen  under  the  oppression  of  the
heathen.  This  hypothesis  and  that  of  Cheyne  ( OPs.  107)
are,  at  any  rate,  preferable  to  the  view  of  Ewald,  who
places  the  original  Daniel  among  the  North  Israelitish
exiles  at  the  court  of  Nineveh  {/'rophe/s,  5iii).

In  confirmation  of  the  date  (during  the  lifetime  of
Antiochus  Epiphanes)  already  made  out,  we  have  many
additional  facts  which  point  to  the  early


15.  Other  signs
of  late  date.


Maccabean  periotl  even  if  they  do  not
enable  us  to  fix  the  time  with  absolute
precision.  Among  these  are  the  argumenta  e  silentio
supplied  by  the  fact  that  Daniel  is  not  named  by  the
son  of  Sirach  who  wrote  atxjut  190  H.c.  (Ecclus.  48
f.),  and — a  still  weightier  argument — by  the  complete
absence  of  any  influence  of  Daniel  upon  post -exilic
prophetic  literature.  Conversely  this  book,  to  which  the
angelic  names  Gabriel  and  Michael,  the  resurrection  (122  ;
cp  Escii.XToi.OGv),  and  a  collection  of  sacred  books
that  included  the  prophecies  of  Jeremiah  (92)  are
known,  plainly  reveals  its  dependence  not  only^on  Jeremiah
and  12zekiel  but  also  on  the  post-exilic  Book  of  Zechariah.
If  the  absence  of  Daniel  from  Ecclus.  496-io  is  itself  a
proof  of  late  origin,  a  still  stronger  proof  lies  in  the  fact
that  it  has  found  its  place  in  the  Hebrew  canon,  not  in  the
second  division,  the  collection  of  prophetic  books,  but
in  the  third  or  hvst  division,  between  Esther  and  Ezra
(cp  Canun',  §  49).  Not  until  the  time  of  the  LXX
(which,  moreover,  has  treated  the  text  of  Daniel  in  a
very  arbitrary  fashion)  does  it  find  a  place,  after  Ezekiel,
as  the  fourth  of  the  '  great '  prophets,  and  thus  it  comes
to  pass  that  once  in  the  NT  ^  Daniel  is  designated  as  a
prophet.

The  very  arbitrary  treatment  of  the  \IT  of  Daniel  in

the  LXX,  particularly  in  chaps.  3-6,  and  the  false  inter-

p , pretation  of  925  ^  (.((f/5;^//'/w, 'weeks'

. ■  1  ^^^  confounded with sibh'im, 'seventy')

translations. j^^Q^g^j j^ ^^^^^ d^^t ]o„g ^gfo^e

Jerome's  time,  Thcodotion's  translation  of  Daniel  (already
employed  by  Irenttus)'-  superseded  the  LXX  in  ecclesi-
astical use.  Though  Theodotion  did  not  remove  the
apocryphal  additions  not  found  in  M  T,  yet,  by  making
use  of  A(|uila's  version,  he  brought  the  text  of  the  LXX
.into  closer  relation  with  MT.  From  a  MS  (Cod.  Chisi-
anus)  of  the  LXX  in  the  library  of  Cardinal  Chigi,  not
very  old,  but  supplied  with  Origen's  obeli  and  asterisks,
an  edition  of  the  LXX  Daniel  was  published  at  Rome  in
1772,  and  another  and  better  one  by  Cozza  in  1 877.  The
Syriac  Hexaplar  version  of  Paul  of  Telia,  edited  by  Bugati
in  1788  and  photographically  reproduced  by  Ceriani  in
1874,  is  justly  held  to  be  purer  than  the  te.xt  of  the  Cod.
Chisianus  (Swete's  87),  which  is,  indeed,  full  of  errors.
The  text-critical  importance  of  (5  is,  for  the  Book  of
Daniel,  fortunately  very  small  ;  so  far  as  the  integrity
of  the  consonants  of  the  original  text  is  concerned,  the
book  is  one  of  the  best  preserved  in  the  whole  O T.

As  distinguished  from  the  older  prophets  the  Book  of
Daniel  is  often  spoken  of  as  the  first  apocalypse  (cp
Dan.  2191.  It  makes  a  revelation  of  the  coming  end  of
the  world,  although  in  a  veiled  manner,  so  as  to  avoid
the  dangers  of  open  speech.  Upon  the  basis  of  his  study
of  earlier  writers  (92),*  and  conscious  of  his  own  divine

1  In  Mt.  24  15,  but  not  in  the  i|  Mk.  13  m-

-  Porphyry,  too,  made  use  of  Thcodotion's  translation,  aud
even  (according  to  Jerome's  express  testimony)  regarded  it  as
the  original  (cp  Bevan,  op.  cit.  3).

•*  Following  out  a  suggestion  of  Noldeke  (.^ ///«/.  Litt.  224),
Prof.  Bevaii  has  offered  this  interpretation  of  9 2,  'I  understood
the  number  of  years  by  the  Pentateuch,'  the  special  reference
being  to  Lev.  '2')  18  21  2428,  where  it  is  declared  that  the  Israelites
are  to  be  punished  seren  times  for  their  sins.  '  The  70  weeks
become  intelligible  if  we  suppose  that  the  author  of  Daniel  com-
bined Jer.  '25  1 1  29  10  with  Lev.  2(5  18^.'  'The  70  years  of
Jeremiah  were  to  be  repeated  7  times,  and  at  the  end  of  the  490th
year  the  long  -  promised  deliverance  might  be  confidently  ex-
pected.' But  the  expression  '  seven  times  '  has  here,  as  in  Prov.
*24  16,  simply  the  sense  of  '  often.'  The  text  in  9  2  cannot  ascribe
to  Daniel  a  comprehension  of  '  the  number  of  the  years  by  the
(holy)  books,'  because  such  a  comprehension  is,  as  a  fact,  only


enlightenment,  the  author  wrote  his  work  of  admonition
and  comfort  in  the  name  of  the  ancient  Daniel  ;  it  is  only
17  Pseudo  'i"°''*"'^^  (cp  ^^^  excellent  remarks  of  Ball
in  Wace's  y4/(j<rr.  2307)  or  misapprehen-


njrmity.


sion  that  can  lay  to  his  charge  as  a  fault


his  employment  of  a  literary  form  which  was  common
throughout  antit|uity.  We  must  not,  of  course,  unduly
exaggerate  the  feeling,  no  doubt  prevalent  in  the  Mac-
cabean jxjriod,  that  prophecy  had  Ijecome  extinct  —  a
feeling  which  may  have  contributed,  along  with  other
causes,  to  the  choice  of  this  literary  form.  Our  author
pursues  the  same  lofty  moral  and  religious  aims  which
were  sought  by  the  older  prophets,  and  it  is  by  no
means  his  intention  to  gratify  a  merely  idle  curiosity.
In  presenting,  as  still  future,  past  occurrences  in  which,
as  one  world-empire  perished  after  another,  he  saw  the
hand  of  his  God  only  as  preparing  the  way  for  that
which  was  still  really  in  the  future,  the  downfall  of  the
last  and  most  direful  enemy  of  the  good,  and  the  coming
of  Messiah's  salvation,  there  was  a  double  advantage.
The  people  who  were  in  the  secret  were  able  to  recog-
nise in  what  he  wrote  the  circumstances  of  their  own
time,  although  only  darkly  alluded  to  ;  and  what  had
happened  already  supplied  a  guarantee  for  the  certainty
of  that  which  was  still  to  happen.  The  author  lives  in
the  firm  faith  that  everything  has  been  fully  foreordained
in  the  counsels  of  God  (cp  7  12)  :  the  Almighty  is  steering
the  whole  course  of  history  towards  the  salvation  of  his
people  (cp  Smend's  lecture  on  'Jewish  Apocalyptic'  in

ZATIV, 1885, p. 222/:). Cp  ESCH.'\T0L0GV.

If  we  turn  now  to  the  question  how  our  author  set
about  fixing  by  computation  the  date  of  the  accomplish-
18 Ch  o o '^*^"'  '^^  ^^^  Messianic  hojxjs  of  the  Jews,

logical  data ^^'^  ^^^  ^^'^^  ^°  ^''"^^  ^*  ^  "^°'"*^  precise
°  ■  determination  of  the  date  of  his  writing.

It  must  have  teen  either  soon  before,  or  soon  after,  the
purification  of  the  temple.  This  we  learn  from  the
number  given  in  814.  As  already  said,  the  years  of
weeks  (cp  2  Ch.  8621)  present  some  historical  difficulty,
inasmuch  as,  after  the  first  seven  weeks  of  years  (which
suit  the  Babylonian  '  exile  '),  instead  of  the  62  x  7  =  434
years  of  the  interval  which  we  should  expect  to  find
between  Cyrus  and  the  death  of  Onias  III.  (538-171
K.c. ),  we  are,  according  to  the  actual  chronology  (which
gives  367  years),  67  years  short.  As  the  Jewish  Hellenist
Demetrius,  however,  who  wrote  about  210  B.C.,  has
fallen  into  a  mistake  precisely  similar  to  our  author's —
a  mistake  which  could  easily  be  made  in  the  absence  of
a  fixed  era — we  need  not  be  surprised  at  such  an  error
in  a  book  historically  so  inaccurate  as  that  of  Daniel.
The  last  week  of  years,  which  begins  in  171  B.C. ,  extends
(precisely  reckoned)  to  164  K.c,  and  it  has  certainly
contributed  greatly  to  the  esteem  in  which  the  book  ha.s
been  held,  that  Antiochus  Epiphanes  actually  did  die  in
the  year  164.  For  our  author  the  division  of  the
seventieth  week  of  years  into  two  equal  parts  was  sug-
gested by  the  history  of  his  time,  inasmuch  as  towards
the  end  of  168  B.C.  the  Alxjmination  of  Desolation  was
set  up,  and  idolatrous  worship  in  the  temple  began.
The  ihree-years-and-a-half  which  remain  after  deduction
of  the  historical  three- years-and- a- half  stand  for  the
still  incomplete  period  of  the  last  and  greatest  tribula-
tion in  the  course  of  which  our  book  was  written.  For
the  correctness  of  this  second  number  (3^)  faith  had  to  be
the  guarantee  ;  and  that  it  was  known  to  Ije  a  round
numlier  or  a  number  of  faith  is  shown  not  only  by  the
vague  periphrasis  in  725  and  12 7,  where  the  plural  '  times'
takes  the  place  of  the  linguistically  imp)Ossible  dual,  but
also  by  the  three  numbers,  1150  (cp  the  2300  evenings
and  mornings  in  814),  1290,  and  1335  days,  used  in  an
approximate  way  to  express  three  years  and  a  half —
apparently  with  precision  but  in  reality  only  in  round
obtained  through  the  angel  in  Tr.  24-27.  Besides,  it  is  unnatural
to  explain  the  phrase  '  the  books '  as  referring  to  the  Penta-
teuch when  the  context  speaks  only  of  Jeremiah.  Behrmann's
rendering  of  'pj'-j  ('I  took  notice  of)  is  preferable  to  that  of
Be\-an  and  of  EV  (  I  understood').


DANIEL,  BOOK  OP


numbers.  Behrmann,  with  Cornill.  continues  to  fix  the
date  of  the  boolt  as  in  the  beginning  of  the  year  164,
because  the  number  in  814,  which  does  not  seem  to  be
symbolical,  is  held  to  pxjint  to  the  purification  of  the
temple  as  having  alrcjidy  bi-en  accomplished ;  but
Cornill.'  reckoning  backwards  1150  days  from  25th
Decemljer  165  «.c. ,  sought  to  make  out  27th  October
168  as  the  probable  tlatc  of  the  religious  edict  of
Antiochus  lipiphanes.  The  difference  of  45  days  Ix:-
tween  the  numlx;r  iu  12 11  and  that  in  12  la,  which  it  is
merely  arbitrary  to  attempt  to  explain  as  a  gloss,  points  to
months  of  30  days.  In  that  case  the  1290  days  (v.  11),
or  43  months,  would  fit  in  if  we  were  to  add  an  inter-
calary month  to  the  42  months  of  the  three  years  and  a
half.  However  we  may  reckon  (cp  H.  Oort  in  TA.  T  28,
450  ['94]),  the  end  of  chap.  9  forbids  the  dissociation
of  the  restoration  of  the  temple  service  from  the  final
close  so  tlecidedly  that  the  present  writer  now  unites
with  Kuenen  and  Wellhausen  in  preferring  the  usual
view,  according  to  which  814  still  lies  in  the  author's
future,  and  holds  the  date  of  the  lx)ok  to  oe  165  H.c.

When  the  book,  which  rapidly  became  popular,  first
l)egaii, ix-rhaijs  as  e;irly  as 150 B.C. (cp i  Mace.  1 54
■J  59/.). to  Ik;  translated  by  l-.gyptian


19.  Apocryphal
additions.


Jews  into  Greek,  the  legends  of  Susanna,
and  of  Bel  and  the  Dragon  (cp  I5evan,
45),  which  may  very  well  have  had  an  independent
circulation,''^  had  certainly  not  as  yet  Ix.-en  taken  up
into  it.  In  fact,  iis  late  as  the  fifth  century  A.n.  we  have
it  on  the  authority  of  Folychronius  that  the  Song  of  the
Three  Children  was  still  absent  alike  from  the  Syriac
version  and  from  the  original  text.  We  cannot  tell  at
what  date  it  was  that  these  apocryphal  additions  (which
are  contained  in  all  the  MS.S  that  have  reached  us)
were  taken  up  into  the  Greek  and  the  Syriac  Daniel.  In
view  of  the  great  popularity  of  their  contents,  shown  by
the  variety  of  the  forms  in  which  they  are  presented,  we
can  only  conjecture  that  they  nmst  have  been  adopted
comparatively  early  (the  Ixxjk  from  the  first  was  freely
rendered  rather  than  faithfully  translated  in  the  LXX),
although  the  growth  of  the  four  different  SjTiac  texts  of
Susjuuia  (cp  Wace,  2  330/-)  niay  have  lieen  later.  'Ihe
so-called  genuine  LXX  text,  which  we  possess  in  the
Cod.  Chisianus  (Sw.  87)  and  (in  Syriac)  in  a  valuable
Milan  MS  (cp  Swete,  Septuagint,  vol.  3,  p.  \\f. )  contains,
of  course,  the  additions  just  as  fully  as  do  the  many  MS.S
which  give  us  Daniel  in  the  text  of  Theodotion,  already
described  above  (§  i6)  as  a  revision  of  the  LXX.  Swete
(as  above)  has  conveniently  printed  together  the  text  of
Theodotion,  which  obtained  ecclesiastical  sanction,  and
that  of  the  LXX,  which  had  lain  in  oblivion  for  almost
fifteen  centuries.  Even  if  we  su])pose,  with  Schiirer
(PRE<^>  I640),  that  the  LXX  text  nnist  have  been  in
existence  before  the  Daniel  legend  received  new  develop-
ments in  Greek,  we  may  safely  assume  that  the  additions
to  the  Greek  Daniel  had  been  made  before  the  beginning
of  the  Christian  era.  The  balance  of  probability  is  that
they  were  not  translated  from  any  Semitic  source,  but
were  originally  written  in  Greek  (cp  Pusey,  Daniel,  378/. ).
They  are  distinguished — as  indeed  is  the  LXX  version
of  Daniel — from  the  Jewish  Greek  that  prevails  in  the
rest  of  the  LXX  by  their  purer  and  more  elegant  diction  ;
another  indication  in  the  same  direction  is  the  well-
known  play  upon  Greek  words  in  Susanna  (it.  54  f.
58/.,  cp  HoLMTREE).  which  even  Julius  .Africanus  urged
as  proof  of  the  spuriousness  of  the  piece  in  his  letter  to
Origen,  who  wished  the  narrative  to  be  retained  in  the
canon. As I'rotestants  are in no  wav  bound  bv  the

20.  Susanna. '^^'"^  "JJ"^  ,^i""f ^  ^'T,  («=?
\Vace,  Apocr.  I368/. ),  which  declares

the  apocryphal  additions  to  \yc  true  history,  and  as  we

hardly  rcfjuire  a  full  enumeration  of  reasons  such  as  is

given,  e.g.,  by  Reuss  \Das  AT  iibcrsetxt.  1894,  7411/ )

in  proof  of  the  unhistorical  character  of  the  Susanna

'  See  his  Die  Siebzig  Jahrwochtn  Daniels,  1889.
'  Cp  above,  |  10.


legend,  we  are  able  to  approach  without  any  prejudice
the  question  as  to  the  language  in  which  it  was  originally
written.  It  may  be  frankly  conceded  that  in  view  of
the  small  extent  of  the  additions — plainly  the  work  of  a
Hellenistic  Jew  (or  Jews) — and  in  view  of  the  fact  that
even  in  the  ca.sc  of  a  comparatively  poor  language  it  is
always  possible  by  free  translation  to  imitate  any  play
up>on  words  whatever,  we  have  not  the  means  that  would
enable  us  to  prove  conclusively  that  the  original
language  was  Greek.

'I"o  estimate  the  additions  correctly,  we  must  consider
their  substance  rather  than  their  present  Greek  form.
Without  prejudice  to  the  literary  freedom  which  is  mani-
festly presupposed  by  their  present  forn*  and  by  the  fact
that  the  Susanna  legend  appears  in  several  shapes  (cp
Salmon  in  Wace,  p.  xlvi),  it  is  clear  that  they  contain
more  or  less  of  traditional  matter,  and,  like  the  canonical
book  itself,  cannot  Ix;  regarded  as  pure  invention.  So
long  ago  as  1832  Zunz  (Gottesdienstl.  Vortr.  122/)
called  attention  to  the  fact  that  traces  are  preserved  in
the  Haggada  of  wonderful  doings  of  a  Daniel  famous
for  his  wisdom — e.g.,  the  fight  w'Wh  the  dragon,  already
mentioned,  in  Midrash  Ber.  h'ab.  par.  68  (in  Wiinsche's
transl. ,  lA;ipsic,  1881,  p.  334).  As  for  the  jx>silion  of
the  legend  of  the  beautiful  Susanna,  whom  Daniel
(represented  in  v.  45  as  a  very  youthful  Ixiy)  saves
from  the  false  accusation  of  the  two  elders  by  his  wise
judgment,  Theodotion,  for  the  sake  of  the  presumed
chronological  order,  has  placed  it  lx;fore  Dan.  1  (though
after  chap.  1  would  be  more  appropriate),  while  the  LXX
and  \'g. ,  on  the  other  hand,  place  it  as  a  thirteenth  chapter
after  the  twelve  canonical  chapters  ;  liel  and  the  Dragon
being  a  fourteenth.  Daniel's  wise  judgment  recalls  i  K.
3 16^  ;  but  the  lascivious  old  men  recall  still  more  .-^hab
and  Zedekiah,  the  two  adulterous  false  prophets  living
in  Ikibylon  and  threatened  by  Jeremiah  (cp  Jer.  2920-23
with  Sus.  V.  57),  alxjut  whom  the  Talmud  and  Midrash
have  so  much  to  say.  Briill  even  thought  that  he  had
discovered  the  explanation  of  the  flower-name  Susanna
in  the  Midrash  U'ayyikra  Piabda,  par.  19  (p.  129  in
Wiinsche's  transl.),  antl  Ifell  (Wace,  2330)  would  fain
have  it  that  the  piece  is  an  anti-Sadducean  '  tendency '
writing.  More  likely  is  the  connection  suggested  by
Ewald  (fj /'/'•'•  4636)  of  the  Susanna  story  with  a  Baby-
lonian legend,  an  allusion  to  which  occurs  in  the  Koran
{Sur.  296).  of  the  seduction  of  two  old  men  by  the
goddess  of  love.

While  in  Susanna  Daniel,  as  his  name  implies,
appears  as  a  judge, he  conies  Ixjfore  us  in the other


21.  Bel  and
the  Dragon.


two  related  piece
of  Babylon (see


-Bel  and  the  Drjgon
:  24  28)  —  which  im-
mediately follow  in  all  .\ISS  and  editions,
as  the  successful  o|)ponent  of  heathenism,  distin-
guished for  \sis(lom  and  piety.  In  the  first  of  the  two,
Daniel  convinces  the  king  (called  Cyrus  only  in  Theod. )
of  the  fraud  practised  by  the  priests  of  Bol,  who
pretended  that  their  god  was  an  actual  living  deity,
while  it  wiis  they  themselves  with  their  wives  and
families  who  consumed  the  Uiod  and  drink  offered  to
Bel.  -After  the  e.vecution  of  the  priests  and  tho  destruc-
tion of  the  helpless  Bel  and  his  temple  {v.  22)  we  read
(?T.  23-42)  of  further  exploits  of  Daniel  in  liabylon.
He  subdued  the  invulnerable  dragon  (Job  41 18  [26]^)
which  they  worshippetl  with  divine  honours,  by  throw-
ing indigestible  substances  into  its  jaws,  whereupon
the  king  at  the  instigation  of  his  enraged  people  caused
the  destroyer  of  their  gtxis  to  be  cast  into  the  lions'  den
(cp  Dan.  6)  ;  here  he  was  divinely  protectetl,  and  sup-
ported by  food  miraculously  brought  to  him  from  the
land  of  Judrpa  by  the  prophet  Habakkuk  (cp  Kzek.  S3).
In  0  87  (see  .Sw. )  the  superscription  of  the  twofold  narra-
tive of  IVl  and  the  Dragon  runs  :  '  From  the  prophesy  of
Habakkuk,  the  son  of  Jesu,  of  the  tribe  of  I  A^vi. '  Here.
doubtless,  there  is  a  reference  to  some  Jewish  prophetic
legend,  although  only  The<xlotion  calls  this  Habak-
kuk a  prophet  (see  Hab.\kkuk).  The  only  addition
1014


DAN-JAAN

which,  strictly  speaking,  supplements  the  canonical  book
of Daniel is the  double  hymn introduced after 823,
consisting  of  67  verses  nuniljered  in  Greek  and  Vg.  as
„  ,  vv. 24-90. The EV treats this entire

Q  r«^"?^  section  as  one,  headed  '  The  Song  of  the

3  Children.  .^.^^^^  children '  ;  Luther,  following  the
Vatican  superscription,  divides  it  into  two,  under  the
titles  '  The  Prayer  of  Azariah  '  and  '  The  Song  of  the
Three  Men  in  the  I'iery  Furnace.'  The  prayer  named
after  Azariah  (cp  Dan.  I7)  is  spoken  in  the  name  of  the
three  friends  ;  but  its  language  is  as  general  as  if  the
entire  Jewish  people,  oppressed  and  penitent,  were
speaking.  After  a  brief  connecting  narrative  relating
their  miraculous  preservation  from  the  devouring  fire —
a  preservation  regarded  as  an  answer  to  Azariah's
prayer — we  have  in  zt'.  52-90  the  song  of  praise  sung
at  the  same  time  by  all  three  together.  This  speaks  of
the  deliverance  from  the  fire  only  in  the  verse  where
they  call  upon  themselves  by  name  [v.  88),  whilst  the
rest  takes  the  form  of  a  prolonged  litany,  reminiscent  of
Ps.  10320/:  and  still  more  of  Pss.  136  148  and  Ecclus.
43,  where  in  quite  general  terms  all  created  things  are
summoned  to  praise  the  Lord.

To  the  bibliography  in  Hevan's  Short  Comm.  on  Daniel
(Cambr.  '94),  p.  9,  and  in  Strack's  Einl.  ('98),  p.  inf.,  add
Kamph.  'Daniel'  in  SBOT;  Dr.  IntrotiA')
23.  Literature.  488-515;  Sayce,  Crit.  Man.  524-537",  Che.
OFs.  94,  105  107,  Founders,  363-371  ;  Behr-
mann,  Das  />'.  Daniel,  Giittingen,  1894  (his  exegesis  is  con-
scientious and  sober  ;  his  etymologies  are  weak,  but  he  criticises
Kautzsch's  Gramm.  in  several  points  successfully) ;  Breasted,
Hehraica,  July  ('91),  p.  ■2a,\ff.  (on  the  proof  of  the  recent  origin
of  Daniel  derived  from  synta.\) ;  Lohr,  '  Text-krit.  Vorarb.
zu  einer  Erklarung  des  B.  Daniel,'  ZATIV,  1895-96;  Dillm.
A  Tlichc  Theol.,  Leipsic  ('95),  p.  5227^,  538  ;  Baer,  Libri  Dan.
Ezr.  et  Nek.  Text  Mas.  etc.,  1882  (with  pref.  by  Franz  Del.,
and  '  Babylonian  glosses '  by  Friedr.  Del.) ;  J.  D.  Prince,  A
Critical  Comvicntary  on  the  Book  of  Daniel  ('99) ;  Nestle,
Marg.  u.  Mai.,  1893  (see  pp.  35-42)  ;  ^Larti,  A'urzi,'.  drain,  des
Bibl.-Aravi.  Sprache,  1896  (note  especially  the  Texts  and
Glossary).  The  commentary  of  Hippolytus  on  Daniel  has
recently  been  edited  by  Bonwetsch  {Hippolytus'  IVerke,  i.  ;
Leipsic,  '97) ;  see  also  Bonwetsch,  'Studien  zu  den  Komm.
Hippolytus'  in  Archiv  f  d.  dlteren  christl.  Schriftsteller,  i.
('97);  Bludau,  Die  Alexatulrin.  Uebersetzung  des  B.  Dan.  u.
ihr.  Verhdltniss  z.  Mass.  Text  ('97),  an  instructive  exposition  of
the  problems  presented  by  the  LXX  :  chaps.  1-3  7-12  in  the  LXX
are  a  real  translation  of  text-critical  value  ;  the  deutero-canonical
parts  are  most  probably  based  on  a  Semitic  original.  G.  A.  Bar-
ton,'The  Comp.  of  the  Book  of  Daniel, '/A'/-,  17  ('98)62-86  (against
unity  of  authorship);  F.  Buhl, /'7?  £"(3)  ('98),  4445-457. a.  K.

DAN-JAAN  {\V\  r\r^\  eic  Aan  eiAa^N  k<m  oyAan
[B].  eic  Aan  iapan  k\\  ioyAan  [A],  eooc  h.ts.u  [L] ;
IX  n.tx  siiJiiSTRiA  [Vg.]),  a  place  mentioned  (2  S.  246)
in  a  description  of  the  limits  of  David's  kingdom,  after
the  '  land  of  Tahtim-hodshi  '  [q.v. ).  Conder  {Hdbk.
408),  following  Schultz,  identifies  it  with  Ddnidn,  a
ruined  place  between  Tyre  and  Akka,  4  m.  N.  of  Achzib.
That,  however,  is  too  far  west.  '  Dan '  must  be  the
historic  Dan,  and  -j'aan  (for  which  Ges.'s  j^'ar  '  forest'  is  a
poor  conjecture  ;  but  see  ©  "^  Vg. )  is  plainly  corrupt.  To
emend  the  text  so  as  to  read  '  (they  went)  to  Dan,  and
from  Dan  they  went  round  (laao  JTOi)  to  Zidon '  (We.,
Dr. ,  Ki. ,  Bu. )  is  possible.  It  is  better,  however,  especi-
ally if  Klostermann  is  right  in  his  emendation  of  Tahtim-
hodshi,  to  change  -jaan  into  w^-iyyon,  'and  (to)  Ijon';
Ijon,  like  Kedesh,  belonged  to  the  territory  of  Naphtali.
We  should  then  continue,  '  and  they  went  round  (53b'\
©BAL  ^jjj  iK{<K\(j}<ja.v)  to  Zidon.'  Observe  that  Kloster-
mann's  emendation  (pyi)  is  easier,  and  probably  gives  a
better  sense  than  that  of  Wellhausen  and  Driver.  It  is
also  proposed  by  Griitz.  T.  K.  C.

DANNAH  (n31  ;  pcNNA  [BAL]),  a  city  of  the  hill
country  of  Judah  (Josh.  15  49),  mentioned  between  Socoh
(.Shuweikeh)  and  Debir.  Suitable  to  this  position  is
the  modern  Idhna,  the  leSva  of  the  OS,  6  m.  .SE.  of
Beit-Jibrin  ;  the  variation  in  the  form  of  the  name  is  a
not  unusual  one  (cp  Ibzik  and  Bezek).

DAPHNE  (Aa(J)NH  [AV]), 2 Mace.  433-  SeeANTiOCH,
2.  §  I-

1015


DARIUS

DABDA  (y^ll).  one  of  three  wise  men,  sons  of
Mahoi,  (the  Chronicler  differs  ;  see  Zerah),  compared
with  Solomon  (i  K.431  [5ii];  ©427:  AaraAa  [B].
TON  Aaraa  [A],  AarAac  [L]).  In  I  Ch.  '26  the
name  appears  as  Dara  (5apa  fB.A],  dapaSe  [L])  ;  but,
as  it  seems  intended  to  be  analogous  in  form  to  Chalcol
(Chalcal?),  a  second  d  is  indispensable.  The  largest
group  of  MSS  of  ©  read  in  1  K.  and  i  Ch.  tov  Sap5a  ;
three  cursives  in  i  K.  have  tov  SapSav  (so  Arm. ).  Pesh.
Targ.  and  some  MSS  ( Kenn. )  support  MT  in  both
passages.

DARIC  (D^yS-inN,  D*yi»?lT),  RV  iCh.297  etc.,
AV  Dkam  [q.v.].'

DARIUS  (t^'VI^;  Old  Pers.  Darayavaus,  DarayavaS ;
Bab.  Dari'amuS  (v7d);  Sus.  viTariyamaui  (vaui)\
Aar[6]ioc  [BXAQL  87]).

1.  Darius  the  Mede,  son  of  Ahasuerus,  Dan.  61  [2]
28  [29]  9.  and  11 1  (/f.-poi-  SJAh.(^—i.e. ,  Theod. ;  87
— i.e.,  the  LXX],  Aapetoi;  [.Aq.  Sym.]).  The  name  is
here  applied  in  error  to  the  conqueror  of  the  new  Baby-
lonian empire.  In  Dan.  9i  Ahasuerus  is  the  father  of
Darius  the  Mede,  who,  we  are  informed  (cp  11 1),  '  was
made  king  over  the  realm  of  the  Chaldeans '  after  the
death  of  Helshazzar.  We  are  told  of  Darius  that
he  was  then  (638  B.C.)  sixty-two  years  old,  from
which  it  follows  that  Ahasuerus  his  father  must  have
been  a  contemporary  of  Nebuchadrezzar.  With  this
agrees  Tob.  14  15,  where  it  is  said  (but  not  by  N*)  that
the  population  of  Nineveh  was  deported  by  Nebuchad-
rezzar and  Ahasuerus.  -All  this  proceeds  upon  a
mistake.  Nineveh  was  conquered  by  Cyaxares  (Old
Pers.  Uvakhshatara),  the  predecessor  of  Astyages,  with
the  assistance  of  Nabopolassar  (Nabu-pal-usur)  the
father  of  Nebuchadrezzar.  In  the  list  of  Median  kings
one  searches  in  vain  for  a  name  that  can  by  any
possibility  be  taken  for  that  of  Ahasuerus  or  Darius.
Even  if  it  be  argued  that  Darius  was  indeed  a  Mede,
though  nowhere  called  king  of  Media,  we  have  to  reckon
not  only  with  the  notices  given  by  the  Greek  historians
but  also  with  the  Nabu-na' id -Cyrus  cylinder,  from  which
it  appears  that  Cyrus  himself,  immediately  after  the
fall  of  the  capital,  ascended  the  throne  of  Babylon,  and
appointed  to  the  governorship  of  the  province  of  Babylon
Gobryas  (Old  Pers.  Gaubaruva,  Bab.  Ugbaru  or
Gubaru),  governor  of  Gutium,  who,  it  would  appear,
was  superseded,  as  king,  by  Cambyses  the  Persian.
This  Gobryas  may  very  well  have  been  the  person  who,
seventeen  years  afterwards,  joined  forces  with  Darius
Hystaspis  against  the  pseudo-Smerdis.  As  governor  of
Gutium,  which  lay  on  the  Median  frontier,  he  may  well
have  been  called  a  Mede,  and,  as  the  ally  of  Darius,
have  been  confounded  with  him.  The  name,  however,  of
the  father  of  Gobryas  was  Mardonius  (Marduniya),  not
Xerxes,  and  it  is  not  to  be  supposed  that  C\tus  made
such  a  political  blunder  as  to  entrust  the  control  of  so
important  a  province  as  Gutium  to  a  Mede.  See
D.VNiEL,  Book  of,  §  13.

2.  Darius  I.  Hystaspis,  king  of  Persia  (521-485
B.C.),  who  allowed  the  Jews  to  rebuild  their  temple,  is
referred  to  in  Ezra 4 524  65  61  Hag.  1 1  2ioZech.  I17,
and  probably  in  Neh.  12  22.1  His  liberality  towards  the
Jews  is  in  complete  accord  with  what  we  know  otherwise
of  his  general  policy  in  religious  matters  towards  the
subject  nations.  He  took  the  great  Cyrus  for  his
model,  and  contrasts  strongly  with  Cambyses.

If  Caml)yses  dealt  the  sacred  Apis-bull  of  Memphis  a  mortal
wound,  Darius  presented  the  city  with  a  new -Apis,  and  restored
the  temple  of  Amun-Ra  at  the  oasis  of  El-Khargeh  with  great
splendour.  In  Asia  Minor  and  the  islands  of  the  /Egean,
temples  were  indeed  sometime.s  destroyed  by  his  generals,
especially  where,  as  at  Naxos  and  at  Eretria  (Herod.  696  loi),

1  It  is  stated  in  Neh.  12  ■21  f.  that  the  priests  were  registered
under  '  Darius  the  Persian  '  ;  the  I.evites  (if  we  emend  the  text)
not  till  the  period  from  Eliashb  to  J.addua.  The  text  of
V.  22  f.  has  passed  through  changes,  probably  through  the
redaction  of  the  Chronicler.  So  Rosters,  Hcrstel,  tog.  [For
other  views  see  Meyer,  Entst.  103,  and  Nhhemiah,  ft  i.]

1016


1.  The  story ;
in  Numbers.


DARKON

revenge  was  to  be  gratified  ;  but  he  himself  gave  special  orders
to  spare  Delos,  and  also  caused  three  hundred  talents  of  incense
to  be  burnt  on  the  altars  of  Apollo  and  Artemis.  If  he  discerned
some  affinity  between  Apollo  and  his  own  god  Mithra,  he  may
well  have  seen  resemblance  enoui^h  between  Yahwe  and  Ahura-
mazda  to  lead  him  to  do  homage  to  the  god  of  Israel.

('.  I*.  T.

3.  Darius  III.  Codomannus,  the  last  king  of  Persia  (i  .Mace.
1  1). Cp  Danikl,  Hook  ok,  8  13  ;  Pkksia.

4.  :  NIacc.  I'-* 7  AV  ;  KV  Akius. See  Si'akta.

DARKON  (jipl"!!  :  BL)B  compares  Ar.  daraka,
•  h:\su-i\.' t/umiui"",  'shield' ;  Aarkoon  [B],  Aep.[AL]).

The  line  U.irkon,  a  group  of  children  of  '  Solomons  servants  '
(see  Nk THlNiM)  in  the  great  post-exilic  list  (see  Kzka,  ii.  §  9)  ;
Ezra2  56=Neh.  "58(AopK<;oi/[l5»<Al)=i  Esd.  633,  LozoN  follow-
ing  IP"*  .Vofioi'  (StpKiay  [L]).

DART.  Uii  the  various  Heb.  and  (Jk.  words  see
Wk.M'ons.

DATES  (w'31),  2  Ch.  ;51  s  .W'"^- ;  K\'  Ho.nky  (y.v.).

DATHAN  AND  ABIRAM  (jni.  AaBan,  meaning

obscure; and  O'l'IlX,  see  .Ahika.m),  Reubenites  who  led

a  revolt  against  Moses  in  the  interval  between  the  return

of  the  spies  and  the  final  march  towards  Canaan.

In  Nu.  15-17  the  revolt  of  Dathan  and  Abiram  is
ntinglcd  and  confused  with  another  revolt,  that  of  Korah.
Consequently,  it  is  difticult,  indeed
imi)ossible,  to  interpret  the  narrative
as  it  stands.  There  are  sections  of  the
narrative  from  which  Korah  disappears  altogether.  We
have  three  causes  for  the  revolt  :  impatience  with  the
civil  authority  of  Moses,  discontent  with  the  exclusive
right  of  the  Levitical  tribe  (as  against  Israel  in  general)
to  exercise  priestly  functions,  and  a  desire  on  the  part
of  the  Levites  who  were  not  descended  front  Aaron  to
vindicate  their  equal  right  to  the  priesthood.  These
various  motives  are  not  combined,  but  appear  in  various
parts  of  the  narrative  independently.  The  confusion
reaches  its  highest  point  when  we  are  told  that  the
company  of  rebels  who  had  already  been  swallowed  up
by  the  open  earth  were  devoured  by  fire  from  Yahwe  (cp
1633  with  35).

If,  however,  we  turn  to  Dt.  116,  we  find  the  means  of
escaping  from  this  confusion  ready  to  our  hand.  There
n  f  -n  1.  Moses  begs  the  Israelites  to  remember
2.  in  ueuter-  ^^.^^^  y^h^y^  their  God  '  did  to  Dathan
^'  and  .Abiram  the  sons  of  Eliab,  the  sons  of
Reuben  ;  how  the  earth  opened  her  mouth  and  swallowed
them  up  and  their  households  and  their  tents  and  every
living  thing  that  followed  them,  in  the  midst  of  all
Israel."  From  this  passage,  with  which  cp  Ps.  IO617,
we  might  naturally  conclude  that  the  Deuteronomist
had  a  text  of  early  Israelite  history  Ijefore  him,  in  which
the  revolt  of  Dathan  and  Abiram  was  mentioned  with-
out any  reference  to  Korah,  and  the  reljels,  instead  of
being  devoured  by  fire,  were  swallowed  up  alive  by  the
earth.

We  ask,  therefore,  if  any  such  independent  narrative
of  the  revolt  led  by  Dathan  and  .Abiram  can  be  extracted
from  the  composite  text  of  Nu.  16.  The
answer  nmst  be  given,  and  is  in  fact
given  by  all  recent  scholars,  in  the  affirma-
tive. We  have  but  to  read  16  i/' za  12-15  25  26  27/'-32a
33  34  I'y  themselves,  in  order  to  obtain  an  account  which
is  nearly  complete  and  is  also  consistent  and  intelligible.
This  is  the  history  from  which  the  Deuteronomist  has
borrowed  his  summary — from  which  he  has  taken  not
only  his  f;icts  but  also  his  words  and  phrases.  That,
however,  is  not  all.  The  verses  just  mentioned  form  a
literary  unity.  Their  style  is  partly  that  of  the  Vahwist,
partly  that  of  the  Klohist,  whose  allied  works  here,  as
elsewhere,  have  lieen  combined  by  an  editor  into  a
whole.  ITie  rest  of  the  n.arrative  in  ch.  1 6/.  is  in  the  style
of  the  priestly  writer  (P),  a  style  so  clearly  marked  and
uniform  that  it  cannot  be  mistaken.  The  Deuteronomist
makes  no  allusion  to  the  priestly  narrative — for  the  simple
reason  that  in  his  time  it  did  not  exist.  One  difficulty
remains.  In  f.  i  On  is  mentioned  as  one  of  the  rebels  ;
1017


3.  Original
narrative.


DATHEMA

but  not  a  word  is  said  of  him  in  the  sequel.  Here  in
all  probability  the  text  is  corrupt,  and  most  scholars
accept  the  eniendation  proposed  by  Graf  (Gesch.  BUiher,
89)  :  '  Dathan  and  Abiram,  sons  of  Kliab,  son  of  I'allu,
son  of  Reuben. '  The  emendation  is  abundantly  justified
by  a  compari.son  of  Gen.  469  Kx.  6 14  Nu.  265  8  i  Ch.  63.
When  disentangled  from  the  later  priestly  story  of
the relx-'Uion of Korah, with which it was mingled


4.  The  old
tradition.


by  the  c(jmpiler  of  the  Ilexateuch,  the
old  tradition  is  in  substance  as  follows.
Dathan  and  Abiram  l>elonged  to  Reuljen,
the  oldest  tribe,  which  had,  however,  forfeited  its
claim  to  the  hegemony  or  princedom  among  the  sons
of  Jacob  (see  the  so-called  Blessing  of  Jacob  ;  Gen.  49
3/).  As  Reubenites,  Dathan  and  Abiram  resent  the
supremacy  of  Moses.  When  M(jses  bids  them  come
up  to  judgment,  they  insolently  refuse.  They  reproach
him  with  his  unfitness  for  rule.  Instead  of  leading  them
into  a  land  flowing  wjth  milk  and  honey,  he  has  led
them  away  from  Egypt,  which  deserved  to  be  so  de-
scribed, and  has  exposed  them  to  the  deadly  perils  of
the  wilderness.  It  is  only  by  blinding  the  people  that
he  can  maintain  his  position.  Moses,  in  answer,  protests
that  he  h.as  neither  done  them  any  hurt  nor  robbed
them  of  so  much  as  an  ass,  and  he  begs  Yahw6  to  pay
no  respect  to  their  offering.  These  last  words  refer,
apparently,  to  the  sacrifice  which  every  Israelite  might
otfer  for  his  household,  and  may  Ixi  compared  with
(jen.  \i,f.,  where  the  Vahwist  tells  us  that  Yahwe  looked
favourably  on  the  offering  of  Abel  but  not  on  that  of
Cain.  The  writer  is  not  thinking  of  any  special  priest-
hood, but  simply  takes  for  granted  that  Yahwe,  whose
favour  was  always  sought  by  sacrifice,  will  not  accept
the  offering  of  rebels  against  just  authority.  Thereupon
Moses,  accompanied  by  the  elders  of  Israel,  goes  down
to  the  tents  of  his  opponents.  He  predicts  the  divine
chastisement  which  will  fall  upon  them,  and  his  threat
is  fulfilled.  The  earth  opens  her  mouth  and  Dathan
and  Abiram  go  down  into  .Shft")l,  the  receptacle  of  the
shades  :  only,  they,  unlike  other  men,  go  down  into  it
alive. Their  wives and  little  ones  perish  with  them.

We  have  made  no  attempt  to  distinguish  lietween
the  work  of  the  Vahwist  and  that  of  the  Elohist.  There
are  marks  of  style  and  expressions
proper  to  the  one  and  to  the  other,
and  again  and  again  the  same  thing  is  mentioned  tw  ice.
Kuenen  ((>;/(/.'-'>:;  8,  n.  14)  and  Kittel  (///V.  1  212  n. )  attri-
bute the  narrative  (of  course  after  exclusion  of  1')  as  a
whole  to  the  Elohist;  Cornill  (/;/«/.<■"  20),  with  lx.'tter
right,  to  the  Yahwist.  The  frec|uent  doublets  show  that
two  hands  have  Ixsen  at  work.  We  believe  that  Yahwist
and  Elohist  told  much  the  same  story,  and  that  the
editor  who  combined  their  histories  into  one  here  made
the  Yahwist  his  basis,  adopting  at  the  same  time  some
expressions  from  the  Elohist.  We  cannot  see  any  solid
ground  for  Dillmann's  lx,>lief  that  the  Yahwist  repre-
sented Dathan  and  .Abiram  as  claiming  the  priesihootl.
He  urges  the  words  in  v.  15,  '  resix.>ct  not  thou  their  offer-
ing ■ ;  but  such  a  curse,  while  all  Israelites  were  allowed
to  sacrifice,  might  be  naturally  invoked  against  any
enemy.  The  Yahwist  makes  little  or  no  mention  of  a
s[jecial  priesthood,  and  though,  no  doubt,  he  was  familiar
with  the  institution,  assuredly  did  not  impugn  the  right
of  lay  Israelites  to  offer  sacrifice.  The  whole  narrative
now  l)efore  us  depicts  a  relx;llion  directed  against  Moses
as  a  civil  ruler.  Had  Dathan  and  Abiram  claimed  to
exercise  priestly  functions  we  should  have  heard  more
about  it. .Sec  KoRAii.  W.  K.  A.

DATHEMA  (AAee/wA  [A],  -Gaima  [X],  -MeBA  [V].
Syr.  il^9  in  i  Mace.  59;  AiaOhma  TO  <})pOYPiON,
Jos.  Ant.\\\.  81),  one  of  the  strong  places  in  (jilead  to
which  the  Jews  had  I)etaken  themselves  when  threatened
by  Timotheus  and  his  host.  It  was  relieved,  with  great
slaughter  of  the  enemy,  by  Judas  the  Maccal)ce  (i  Mace.
69/:  24/:  29/:).


6.  Redaction.


DAUGHTER

Dathema  has  not  been  identified  ;  from  the  description  it  must
have  lain  between  Bosora  and  Maspha  (Mizpeh).  The  Syr.  read-
ing may  be  only  a  mistake  for  Danitha  (Ew.  Hist.  5  314)  ;  but
within  the  distance  from  Bosra  of  a  night's  march  (cp  Jos.  Ant.
xii.  8  3)  lies  the  modern  Kemtluh,  a  considerable  village  and
station  on  the  Hajj  road  (Doughty,  Ar.  Ves,  1  7).

DAUGHTER.  The  word  'daughter  '  (DS,  eyr^THp)
in  EV  often  has  Hebraistic  senses,  the  chief  of  which
are  here  mentioned.

1.  Native  Cana.-inite  or  Philistine  women  are  '  daughters  '  of
Canaan  (den.  30  2)  or  of  Philistia  (2  S.  1  20).

2.  '  Daughter '  is  a  synonyTO  for  '  girl '  or  '  woman  '  (Gen.  30 13
Judg.  129  [30  'daughters']  Cant.  22  69);  in  addressing  a  person
(Ruth  28  Ps.  4.5 1 1  Mt.  922).

3.  The  population  of  a  place,  or  the  place  and  its  population,
may  be  called  collectively  a  'daughter.'  A  typical  phrase  is
J'vs;  na  (Is.  1  8  10  32,  etc.):  lit.  'daughter  of  Zion,' but,  since  the
genitive  is  appositional,  more  correctly  rendered  '  people  of  Zion  '
(so  sometimes  in  SHOT)-  So,  too,  'daughter  of  Babylon  '  (Ps.
1378),  'daughter  of  Egypt '  (Jer.  46  11  1924);  also  '  daughter  of
my  people'  —  i.e.,  my  country-people  Js.  224  Jer.  4ii).  A
phrase  which  is  generally  synonymous  is  'sons'  {i.e.,  inhabitants)
of  Zion,  Babylon,  etc.  See  /CDMC,  40  i6g;  Kdmg,  Sjmiax,
§  255  e.

4.  Dependent  towns  may  be  called  'daughters.'  Thus  the
'daughters  of  Judah'  in  Ps.  4811(12]  are  the  cities  of  Judah
(cp  Genkai.ogies,  i.  §  i).  Cp  the  use  of  'mother'  for  a
provincial  capital  in  2  S.  20  19. .See  Town,  Village.

5.  'Daughter,'  like  'son,'  in  combination  with  a  noun,  may
also  express  some  speciality  of  character  or  capacity.  Examples
of  this  are  few  in  number.  A  'daughter  of  Belial'  is  certainly
a  'grossly  wicked  person'  (i  S.  1 16).  'Daughter  of  troops'
(inrna ;  Mic.  5 1  [4 14])  is  explained  '  those  who  subject  to
attack  '  ;  but  the  text  is  doubtful.  '  Daughters  of  music  '  (ri1J3
TB'n,  'daughters  of  song')  in  Eccles.  12 4  might  be  singing
women  ;  but  others  think  that  the  sounds  of  music  are  thus
figuratively  described.

DAVID  (-in^,  nni  ;  A&y[6]iA  [BAL]1).  The  name
may  be  explained  ( i )  as  meaning  'beloved,  a  friend,
Na.mes,  §§  5,  56  ;  or  (2)  as  meaning  '  paternal  uncle,'  if
we  pronounce HTH  (i.e. ,  Dod),  for  which  Gray  (//PN  83)
offers  Semitic  analogies,  though  the  explanation  is  cer-
tainly '  at  tirst  sight  unlikely'  ;  or  (3),  best  of  all,  as  an
abbreviation  of  Dodicl,  which  was  perhaps  the  name  of
one  of  David's  sons  {see  Daniel  i.  4),  or  of  Dodijah
=  DoDAi  [t/.v.). See  also  Dodo.

The  chronology  of  the  life  of  David  is  most  un-
certain. We  have  elsewhere  (see  CHRONOLOGY,  §§
29,  37)  assumed  930  B.C.  as  the  first  year  of  the  reign
of  Rehoboam.  To  accept  the  round  number  of  forty
years  assigned  to  the  reign  of  Solomon  in  i  K.  11 42
and  to  that  of  David  in  2  S.  64  and  in  i  K.  2 11  as
strictly  historical,  would  be  uncritical.  The  chrono-
logical statements  referred  to  are,  at  most,  editorial
guesses  which  may,  as  good  critics  think,  be  not  very
far  from  the  mark.^  The  early  history  also  of  David
is  in  many  respects  uncertain.  It  intertwines  to  a
great  e.xtent  with  the  still  obscurer  record  of  his  pre-
decessor (see  S.VUl)  ;  and  keen  criticism  is  necessary  to
arrive  at  the  kernel  of  fact  which  there  undoubtedly  is
in  the  legends  that  have  come  down  to  us.  Winckler
indeed  denies  that  there  is  such  a  kernel  of  facts  in  tlie
romantic  story  of  David's  early  vicissitudes.  Such  ex-
aggerated distrust,  however,  ajspears  to  arise  from  a  pre-
conceived theory  respecting  David,  and  most  critics  hold
strongly  to  the  view  that  the  imaginative  element  in  the
story  of  David  is  but  the  vesture  which  half  conceals,
half  discloses,  certain  facts  treasured  in  popular  tradition.
If  it  should  appear  that  this  imaginative  element  contains
some  details  which  we  have  allowed  a  warm  place  in  our
regard  and  it  would  pain  us  to  miss  from  the  history  of
Israel,  we  must  comfort  ourselves  with  the  thought  (i)
that  what  remains  unshaken  becomes  more  precious  than
ever,  and  (2)  that  even  pure  legends  are  of  great  his-
torical value  for  the  characterisation  of  the  age  which
produced  them.

(a)  First  appearance. — The  only  ancestor  of  David

1  The  MSS  generally  have  idj.  Lag.  gives  AafiiS  in  a  few
places.

2  See  Kamphausen,  Die  Chronol.  der  hebr.  Kdnigre,  \(>/. ;  cp
(for  David)  St.  GVI 1  264  297. Wi.  (C7/  1 174)  questions  this.

1019


DAVID

known  to  early  traditions  was  his  father  Jesse,*  who  was

_. . , believed to have been a citizen of

^- ir°"!^°„ Bethlehem.  •■^ David  was  the  youngest

earner  aays. ^^  ^^^  ^^^^.3  ^^^^  ^^^ ^^ 171314  [B

omits] ;  cp  16  5-9),  and  was  sent  to  keep  his  father's  sheep
in  the  steppes  of  Judah.  Such  at  least  is  the  statement
of  one  of  our  traditions,  which,  at  any  rate,  has  the  merit
of  accounting  for  the  agility,  endurance,  and  courage,  so
constantly  ascribed  to  David  (cp  1  S.  17  34  242  2S.  17  9).
There,  too,  David  is  supposed  to  have  acquired  that  skill
in  music  (cp  Gen.  420/. )  which  led  to  his  first  introduction
to  Saul,  after  which  he  became  the  king's  armour-bearer
and  slew  Goliath.  This,  however,  is  not  in  accordance
with  the  older  and  more  trustworthy  account,  which
simply  tells  us  that  David  was  a  valiant  Israelitish
warrior  who  happened  to  be  also  clever  with  his  tongue
and  with  his  lyre,  and  who  was  sent  for  from  Bethlehem
(a  feature  borrowed,  perhaps,  from  the  other  tradition)
to  charm  away  Saul's  melancholy.  Nor  is  the  statement
that  the  shepherd-lad  slew  Goliath  the  Philistine  con-
sistent with  the  plain  and  thoroughly  credible,  because
unlegendary,  tradition  given  elsewhere,  that  the  slayer
of  Goliath  was  Elhanan,  and  the  period  of  his  exploit
not  in  Saul's  but  in  David's  reign'*  (see  Elhanan,
Goliath).  We  must,  therefore,  if  the  superior  antic|uity
and  probability  of  a  narrative  are  to  count  as  recom-
mendations, give  up  the  more  romantic  of  the  two  sets
of  statements  respecting  David's  introduction  to  Saul
and  his  early  prowess.  That  he  became  Saul's  armour-
bearer  and  musician  need  not  be  disputed.

[b)  Break  with  Saul. — .-Vnother  point  in  which  the
ordinary  view  of  the  life  of  David  needs  rectification  is
the  occasion  which  gave  birth  to  Saul's  jealousy  of
David.  The  MT  of  i  S.  186  states  that  'when  David
returned  from  the  slaughter  of  the  Philistines,'  the  women
came  out  of  the  cities  of  Israel,  singing,  '  Saul  hath  slain

1  This  is  intelligible  enough  in  the  light  of  David's  words  in
I  S.  18  18  (not  in  ©b).  That  a  later  age  claimed  descent  for  the
most  popular  of  the  kings  from  the  ancient  princes  of  Judah
(Ruth  4  18^)  is  also  intelligible  (see  Ruth,  Book  of);  David
was  not  to  be  of  less  distinguished  origin  than  .Saul  (i  S.  9i).
Cp  the  case  of  Sargon.  It  was  only  in  the  time  of  PLsar-haddon
that  a  genealogy  was  produced  giving  the  Sargonic  dynasty
(which  had  simply  usurped  the  throne)  the  necessary  line  of
ancestors.  See  the  inscriptions  quoted  by  Wi.  (Hebraica,  4
52/)-

2  The  connection  with  Bethlehem  has  been  rendered  doubtful
by  Marq.  {Fund.  23^^),  who  thinks  that  the  belief  in  it  arose
from  a  false  reading  in  i  S  20  28,  where,  for  '  asked  leave  of  me
unto  Bethlehem'  (cp  (B»al)  he  reads  (with  Klo.)  'asked  leave
of  me  until  the  meal-time  '  {'eth  lelteiii  for  heth  leheni) — a  sound
emendation.  From  the  fact  that  David's  sister  Abigail  (i)  {q.y.)
married  a  man  of  Jezreel  (near  Carmel  in  Judah,  the  nativ«
place  of  David's  favourite  wife  Abigail),  and  that  David  himself
took  his  first  wife  from  that  place  (see  .■\hino.'\.m),  Marquart
suspects  that  the  hero's  real  home  was  farther  south  than
Bethlehem,  perhaps  at  Arad.  This  view  he  .supports  by  a
plausible  but  unprovable  conjecture,  viz.,  that  Shammah  the
Aradite  (so  he  reads  in  28.2825;  see  Harodite) — i.e.,  the
man  of  Arad — is  Shammah,  David's  brother,  and  that  Ahi.nm  b.
Shobab  the  Aradite  (2  S.  23  33 ;  .see  Hararite)  was  also  a
relation  of  David.  Both  these  persons  were  enrolled  among
David's  'thirty.'  The  name  of  the  home  of  David  may  con-
ceivably have  been  forgotten,  and  (quite  apart  from  i  S.  2628)  a
tradition  such  as  that  in  2  S.  23  14-17  may  have  suggested  to
narrators  the  choice  of  Bethlehem  for  his  birthplace.  This  is
probable. Cp  Winckler,  Gesch.  1  24.

3  A  later  tradition  incre.ased  the  number  to  .seven  (i  Ch.  2  13
15)  or  rather  eight  (i  S.  16  loyC  17  12  [B  om.]).  The  names  of
three  out  of  the  .seven  in  i  Ch.  I.e.  (viz.,  Nethanel,  2  ;  Ozem,
I  ;  and  R.^DDAI)  appear  to  be  fictitious;  cp  Gray,  HPN  233,
Marq.  Fund.  25.

•»  The  duplicate  narratives  of  Saul's  first  meeting  with  David
and  of  the  slaj'ing  of  Goliath  respectively  are  : —

(a)  I  S.  16  14-23  17  1-I84  (p.irt),  and

{b)  I  S.  17  i-lS  4  (part),  2  S.  21  19.
On  these  passages  what  is  most  necessary  has  been  stated  by
Dr.  Introd.  169 ;  cp  also  the  writers  referred  to  in  Goliath.
WRS  {OT/Ci'f)  433)  finds  .some  of  the  arguments  for  the  existence
of  two  opposite  traditions  as  to  David's  introduction  to  .S.iul
inconclusive.  But  there  seems  no  strong  objection  to  regarding
the  words  Jt»s3  ICK  '  *ho  is  with  the  sheep '  in  i  S.  16  19  as  a
harmonistic  interpolation  (see  St.  CK/  1  224  n.  2  ;  Bu.  Ri.  Sa.
2n),  and  it  seems  unnatural  to  take  the  words  of  Saul's  servant  in
I  S.  16 18  proleptically.  The_  true  continuation  of  i  S.  16  23  is
not  17  I,  but  a  lost  description  of  David's  early  exploits  (see
above),  which  was  followed  by  18  6  (in  a  shorter  form)— 8(i.


DAVID

his  thousands  and  David  his  ten  thousands,'  from  which
(see  vM)  Saul  inferred  tliat  the  ambition  of  his  spoiled
favourite  would  not  rest  satisfied  without  the  crown
itself.  It  is  certain,  however,  that  MT  does  not  give  the
original  form  of  this  passage.  Whether  the  Hebrew  text
underlying  the  LXX  contained  the  words  'when  David
returned,'  etc. ,  and  the  clause  at  the  end  of  v.  8,  is  a  point
on  which  critics  difter.  Kven  if,  ;is  Bmide  supposes,  the
LXX  translator,  to  produce  a  simpler  narrative,  omitted
these  clauses,  it  is  not  denied  by  that  critic  that  the  former
clause  is  an  editorial  insertion  ;  *  it  was  not,  therefore,
the  shiughter  of  Goliath  by  the  shepherd  lad  that
(accoriling  to  the  tradition)  made  Saul  suspect  that
David  nourished  hopes  of  Ijecoming  king.

This,  however,  is  merely  a  negative  statement.  What
was  it,  we  may  a.sk.  that,  according  to  the  lx.'st  analysis  of
chap.  17,  aroused  the  jealousy  of  Saul  ?  To  the  present
writer,  as  well  as  to  Stade  and  Wellhausen,  i  S.  186
(with  the  omission  of  the  reference  to  Goliath)  seems  to
presuppose  some  account  of  Davids  early  exploits  as  a
warrior  which  stoo<l  in  no  connection  with  the  story  of
Goliath,  and  indeed  was  removed  by  the  editor  to  make
room  for  it.  It  was  these  early  exploits  of  a  trained
warrior  that  excited  the  jealousy  of  Saul,  but  (since  v.
8*-ii,  which  0"  omits,  are  derived,  like  i-v.  17-19,  which
also  0"  omits,  from  another  source)  did  not  suggest  the
thought  of  David's  wish  for  the  crown.  This  is  no
doubt  psychologically  intelligible.  Saul  could  not  bear
the  sight  of  his  too  popular  armour-bearer,  and  so  he
transferred  him  to  a  post  which  would  remove  him
from  his  own  immediate  presence.  The  tradition  adds
that  this  served  to  promote  David's  interests.  Kven
Michal,  Saul's  daughter  (see  MiciiAL,  Ec;l.\h,  Ith-
KK.am),  fell  under  his  fascination,  and  her  jealous  father
resolved  to  put  the  young  captain  on  a  perilous  enter-
prise, promising  him  his  daughter's  hand  in  return  for
the  customary  proofs  of  victory,  but  secretly  hoping  that
he  would  never  return.  David  went  forth,  slew  a
hundred  Philistines,  and  won  his  wife;'^  but  the  anxiety
of  Saul  went  on  increasing  after  such  a  manifest  proof
of  the  divine  protection  of  David.

This  is  certainly  an  improvement  upon  the  ordinary
view  which  treats  chap.  18  as  a  homogeneous  narrative  ;
but  who  can  assert  that  this  view  of  the  facts  produces
the  impression  of  being  perfectly  historical?  It  will  be
noticed  that  we  have  laid  no  stress  on  the  song  of  the
women  (IS 7).  The  fragment  is  indeed  clearly  ancient  ;
but  it  seems  best  understood  as  coming  from  a  time  when
David  was  already  king.  This,  however,  is  not  the  most
important  |X)int.  We  need  a  narrative  of  still  greater
simplicity  and  verisimilitude.  It  is,  as  Stade  remarks, ■*
more  credible  that  Saul  gave  his  daughter  in  mar-
riage to  David  of  his  own  accord,  in  order  to  bind
the  young  hero  to  the  family  of  his  benefactor,  and
that  Saul's  jealousy  broke  out  after,  not  before  the
marriage.  Besides,  it  would  be  inconsistent  in  Saul,
first,  to  send  David  away  as  a  captain  of  a  thousand
(18 13),  and  then  to  bring  him  back  to  the  court  as  the
king's  son-in-law.  I-"or  this  po.  ition  had  attached  to  it
the  captaincy  of  the  body-guard  (see  1  S.  22i4,  (S"-^'-),
which  gave  its  holder  a  rank  next  to  Abner  the  general
(i  8.20 25),  so  that  Saul  would  Ix;  continually  liable  to
fresh  irritation  from  the  sight  of  David.  We  cannot,
however,  positively  assert  that  Stade's  correction  of  the
tradition  brings  us  face  to  face  with  facts,  and  nmst  be
content  to  believe  that  the  early  story  of  David's  life  is
not  altogether  a  popular  fiction, without  insisting  too

1  See  Budde's  interesting  analysis,  as  embodied  in  SBOT,
Heb.  edition.  This  critic  seems  to  hold  that  the  Coliath-story
wa.s  originally  closed  by  a  description  of  the  festal  rejoicing
which  greeted  the  returning  warriors  and  especially  David,  and
that  the  same  document  then  went  on  to  relate  the  terror  with
which  David's  .success  inspired  Saul,  the  king's  removal  of  David
to  a  high  military  post,  and  the  episode  of  Merab.  For  Stade's
view,  sec  Sam  lei.,  ii.

3  On  the  coarse  but  not  in  itself  incredible  requirement  of  Saul
(i  S.  IS  25  27  2  S.  3  14),  see  Makkiace,  and  cp  St.  Gesch.  1  232.

a  (;/-/  1  233;  cpWe.  C^25i.


DAVID

much  on  the  most  romantic  and  interesting,  and  therefore
least  certain,  parts  of  it.  One  of  these  least  certain  parts
is  the  account  of  David's  early  relations  with  MiCHAL
^q.v.).

(c)  Various  late  narratives. — On  the  epi.sode  of  Saul'.s  broken
promise  of  Merab  as  a  wife  for  David  (i  .S.  18  17-19)  it  is  un-
neccs-sary  todwell.  The  story,  as  all  agree,  interrupts  the  origiruki
context  of  chap.  18.  to  which  the  insertion  has  been  clumsily
fitted  by  an  interpolation  in  v.  i\b.  We  have  here,  therefore,  a
notice  drawn  from  a  distinct  source.  The  language  of  tt'.  17
and  19  seems  to  nresuppose  the  story  of  David  and  (ioliath  (17
25  speaks  of  the  king's  promise  of  his  daughter,  and  the  whole
narrative  imolic-s  that  David  is  as  yet  a  mere  lad,  too  young  in
fact  to  marry).  It  mi^ht  of  course  be  historical  in  spite  of  its  close
connection  with  that  highly  imaginative  story.  Smce,  however,
Michal,  not  Merab  (iB' ,  however,  has  M<po0),  appears  in  2  S.
'Jl  8  as  the  mother  of  Adriel's  children,  it  is  more  tlian  probable
that  the  whole  episode  of  Merajj  rests  on  a  confusion  of  names.'
In  short,  we  has'e  two  variants  of  the  same  tradition,  and  the
form  given  in  IS  20^  is  the  more  likely  to  be  historical.

Nor  need  we  pause  long  on  some  other  late  narratives,  (i.)
The  account  of  Samuel's  solemn  consecration  of  David  as  king  in

1  S.  10  1-13  has  evidently  not  a  historical  but  a  religious  motive.
To  devout  readers  the  '  man  according  to  God's  mind '  would
liave  .seemed  to  be  disparaged  if  he  had  not,  equally  with  his

£redeces,sor,  been  anointed  by  Samuel,  (ii.)  The  episode  of
>avid's  visit  to  the  prophetic  community  at  Kamah  (11»  18-24)  's
an  attempt,  in  the  style  of  the  midrash,  to  explain  the  proverb,
'  Is  Saul  also  among  the  prophets?'  On  this,  as  well  as  on  (i.),  see
Sami'KL,  ii.  8  5.  (lii.)  The  pretended  madness  of  I  )avid  at  Galh
(21  H-16;  seeAcHisn).  To  these  we  should,  not  inconceivably,
add  (iv.)  a  part  of  the  story  of  David  and  Bathsheba  (see  BArii-
sheua).

Let  us  now  resume  the  thread  of  the  narrative.
David  was  at  first  known  to  the  servants  of  Saul  as  a

2  At  the  court  ^'^^^'^  warrior  and  a  skilled  musician,

,  ~ ,  and  also  as  clever  of  speech  and  comely

ni  person.  W  hatever  he  did  seemed
to  prosper,  for  he  had  not  only  unusual  abilities,  but  also
a  power  of  fascination  which  seemed  a  special  sign  of
the  divine  favour  (cp  Ps.  452).  His  prowess  in  the  war
against  the  Philistines  marked  him  out  as  one  worthy  to
be  the  king's  friend.  He  was,  in  fact,  rewarded,  first
of  all  w  ith  the  position  of  a  royal  armour-ljearer,  and
then  with  the  hand  of  Saul's  daughter,  Michal.  Lor  a
time  all  went  well.  In  the  intervals  of  military  service
he  played  on  his  harp,  and  by  his  skill  in  music  chased
away  the  '  evil  spirit '  of  melancholy,  which  already
threatened  to  mar  the  king's  career.  Saul's  gratitude,
however,  was  not  proof  against  the  severe  trial  to  which
it  was  ex[X)sed  by  David's  growing  popularity,  and,
it  would  seem,  by  his  close  intimacy  with  Jonathan.
The  heir  to  the  throne  had,  like  Michal,  passed  under
the  spell  of  David,  and  become  his  devoted  friend,
probably  his  sworn  brother,'-  and  the  disturbed  mind  of
the  king  conceived  the  idea  that  Jonathan  had  stirred
up  David  to  Ix;  his  father's  enemy,  in  the  expectation
(we  must  supjjose)  of  succeeding  him  as  king  (228).
Saul  brofxled  over  this  idea,  and  even  reasoned  with  his
son  on  the  folly  of  supposing  that  his  crown,  if  he  came
by  these  unholy  means  to  wear  it  before  the  time,  would
be  secure  from  such  a  powerful  and  ambitious  subject  as
David  (2O31).  Hence,  tradition  reports,  Saul  "spoke
to  Jonathan  his  son,  and  to  all  his  servants,  that  they
should  slay  David'  (19i),  and  even  sought,  in  a  fit  of
frenzy,  to  pierce  David  with  his  javelin  (18 10/  [<5"  omits]
199).  Whether  it  was  due  to  Jonathan's  influence  that
the  final  breach  between  Saul  and  David  was  averted,
we  cannot  tell  ;  the  story  in  19 1-7  seems  really  another
version  of  that  in  chap.  20.  It  is  ec|ually  uncertain
whether  the  story  in  19 11-17  has  any  claim  to  represent
the  closing  scene  in  David's  life  at  Gibeah.  There  are
difficulties  in  regarding  it  as  the  true  sequel  to  198-io.
It  may  possibly  come  from  another  source,^  and  refer

1  This  is  the  view  expres.sed  in  /:/.'(!>>,  art.  'David.'  WRS
there  emphasises  the  fact  that  the  episode  of  Merab  (including
V.  -ill'),  like  the  .section  of  chap.  17  to  which  it  specially  refers,  is
wanting  in  iP",  the  te.\t  represented  by  whicn  he  regards  a.s
suuerior  to  that  of  .MT  in  chaps.  \~ /.  (cp  OTJC^)  431 /.).

*  See  WRS  Kel.  Sem.<-\  335  ;  Covenant,  f  4  ;  and  cp  also,
with  caution,  Trumbull,  Blood-cmienant  ('85).

s  Verse  10  should  end  at  'escaped,' and  f .  11  .should  begin,
'And  it  came  to  pass  that  night  that  Saul  sent'  (so  ®ua,  but
not  L).


DAVID

to  a  slightly  later  period  in  David's  life.  The  daring
spirit  of  that  hero  might  prompt  him  to  visit  his  wife,
even  after  his  first  flight,'  or  at  least  the  first  reciters  of
the  tale  may  have  meant  it  to  \x  so  understood.  There
remains  the  story  in  chap.  20,  which  (putting  aside  the
opening  words  as  a  misleading  editorial  insertion,  and
ft'.  4-17  as  an  expansion,  due  to  an  early  editor  "•^  who
loved  the  theme  of  Jonathan's  friendship  for  David)
evidently  gives  a  traditional  account  of  the  rupture
Ixitween  Saul  and  David.  Whether  it  is  historical,
however,  is  quite  uncertain.  There  were,  of  course,
gaps  in  the  tradition,  especially  as  regards  the  earlier
period  of  Davids  life.  Two  great  facts  were  certain,
viz.,  the  transformation  of  Saul's  original  kindness
towards  David  into  its  ojiposite,  and  the  firm  friendship
between  David  and  Jonathan.  Out  of  these  facts  the
reciters  of  legends,  aided  by  a  traditional  accjuaintance
with  the  general  circumstances  of  the  time,  had  to
produce  the  liest  detailed  account  of  David's  flight  from
Saul  that  the)'  could.

As  was  natural,  David  turned  his  steps  southward.
In  the  hill-country  of  Judah  he  would  fuul  hiding-places
TV  ht  '^"o^gh.  and  if  the  arm  of  Saul  threatened
°  ■  to  reach  him  even  there,  he  could  easily
seek  the  hospitality  of  some  one  of  the  neightxjuring
peoples.  This,  it  is  true,  would  be  most  displeasing  to
a  worshipper  of  Yahwe  (see  2619)  ;  but  it  must  have
already  occurred  to  David  as  a  possibility,  for  he  soon
afterwards  placed  his  father  and  mother  under  the
protection  of  the  king  of  Moab  (223  /  I  see  Moab).
At  present,  his  first  impulse  was  to  fly  with  his  men
to  the  sanctuary  at  Nob,  or  perhaps  rather  (Jibeon
(see  Nob),  where  he  had  already,  it  would  seem,  had
occasion  to  consult  the  priestly  oracle  (22 15).  On  his
arrival,  so  the  tradition  declares,  he  obtained  bread,  by
a  plausible  but  fictitious  story,  from  the  consecrated
table,  and,  as  a  pledge  of  victory  in  the  king's  '  business,"
the  mighty  sword  of  Goliath  (see  Goliath,  §  3).  We
can  hardly  venture  to  accept  this  account  as  correct  ;  •*
it  is  most  probably  a  later  writer's  attempt  to  fill  up  a
gap  in  the  old  tradition.  Whatever  took  place,  it  is
certain  that  David  very  soon  hastened  on  to  the  forti-
fied hill-town  of  AduUam.  Here  he  was  still  in  his  native
land,  though  probably  not  among  Israelites  (see  Aull-
LA.m)  ;  he  could  worship  his  own  god,  and  might  hope
to  be  safe  from  his  pursuers.  In  the  fort  (not  the  cave)
of  AduUam  he  was  joined  by  his  family,  and  by  a  small
band  of  fellow-outlaws  (about  400  in  number).  Mean-
time Doeg,  the  Edomite,  who  had  seen  David  conversing
with  the  priest  Ahimelech  at  Nob  (or  Gibeon),  had  re-
ported the  circumstance  with  details,  which  may  or  may
not  have  lieen  his  own  invention,'*  to  Saul,  and  the  king  in-
ferred from  the  report  that  .Vhimelech  had  used  the  sacred
oracle  in  support  of  treasonable  designs  of  David.  It  is
only  ills  rooted  belief  in  David's  treason  that  e.\c uses  the
fierceness  with  which  Saul  destroyed,  not  only  the  eighty-
five  priests,''  but  also  the  entire  population  of  the  city
of  Nob  or  rather  Gibeon  (22 18/  )  ;  see  Gibkon.  Doeg,
Ariathar,  Ban.  He  also  indicated  the  expulsion  of
David  from  the  royal  family  by  giving  Michal,  David's
wife,  to  a  new  husband  (see  MiCHAL).

David  now  became  a  captain  of  freebooters,  levying

1  The  danger  of  such  an  enterprise  was  dimini.shed  by  the
reluctance  10  violate  the  apartment.s  of  women  and  to  attack  a
sleeping  foe,  which  appears  also  in  Judg.  1()2,  and  among  the
Arabs.  Wellhausen  cites  a  closely  parallel  case  from  Sprenger's
Leben  Aluhammad,  2  543.

2  See  the  text  as  exhibited  by  Budde  in  SHOT.

3  It  is  incredible  that  David  should  have  passed  by  the  sanctu-
ary without  'inquiring;  of  Yahwe,'  nor  does  the  reference  to  the
'  sword  of  Goliath '  incline  us  much  to  accept  the  rest  of  the
story.  That  the  words  assigned  to  Saul  in  2'2  8  rightly  express
the  kind's  belief  is,  however,  more  than  probable.

*  It  is  certainly  not  impossible  that  David  did  take  the
opportunity  of  consulting  tlie  sacred  oracle.  The  reference  to
the  sword  of  (loliath  in  '11  icJ>  is  interpolated  (see  Budde).

8  So  MT  Pesli.  and  Vg.;  ®ha^  by  a  manifest  error,  305.
Jos.,  combining  the  two  readings,  385  {Ant.\\.\'lt).  ®>-  has
350.

1023


DAVID

blackmail  on  those  who  could  pay  it,  in  return  for  pro-
4  An  outlaw ^*-''^^'""  against  Amalekites,  Philistines,
or  other  enemies. We  have  an  attrac-
tive and  sympathetic  sketch  of  his  conduct,  and  of  the
generous  spirit  which  softened  the  harsher  details,  in  chap.
25. Hesides  the  means  of  subsistence,  David looked,
of  course, for  timely  warning  of  the  approach  of  his
bitter  enemies. In  this  way  he  held  his  ground  man-
fully (with  the  support  of  the  priest  Abiathar)  against
almost  overwhelming  odds,  trusting  that  he  was  being
preserved  for  high  ends. He  must  have  felt  that  none
but he could provide Israel  with the  leader that it
needed, though  to  work  directly  towards the  attain-
ment  of the  crown would  have  been  contrary  to  his
loyal  nature. One  point  in  his  favour  there  was,  the
value  of  which  can  hardly  be  overrated — viz. ,  the  peculiar
conformation  of  the  hill-country  of  Judah. It  is  necessary
for  the  untravelled  student  to  form  by  books  and  photo-
graphs some  idea  of  those '  tossed and broken hills
where  the  valleys  are  all  alike,  and  large  bodies  of  men
may  camp  near  each  other  without  knowing  it. ' Major
Conder goes even further, and claims  that through
recent  identifications  the  narrative  a.ssumes  a  consistency
which  traditional  sites  have  destroyed. '  From  Gibeah
j (Jeba near  Mukhmas)  David  flies  southward  to  Nob,
I thence  down  the  great  valley  to  Gath  (Tell  es-.Safieh),
1 from Gath he^returns into the land of  Judah, then
[ bounded by the  .Shephelah, most  of  which  seems  to
have  been  in  the  hands  of  the  Philistines  ;  and  on  the
I edge  of  the  country  between  Achish  and  Saul,  I'hilistia
I and  Juflah,  he  collects  his  band  into  the  strongest  site
to  Ix!  found  in  the  neighbourhood  of  the  rich  cornlands
' of  Judah. At  the  advice  of  the  seer  he  retires  to  the
' hills,  and  if  my  identification  of  Hareth  be  correct,  it  is
but  a  march  of  4  m. distance. Here,  as  at  Adullam,
he  was  also  within  easy  reach  of  his  family  at  Bethlehem.
At  Haras  he  hears  that  the  Philistines,  whose  advance
he  probably  barred  when  holding  Adullam,  had  invaded
Kfi'ilah  immediately  beneath  him,  and  it  is  this  propin-
quity  alone which accounts  for his  attack  upon the
marauders. ' ' There can be no doubt that exact
identifications  of  the  sites referred to  would give  the
narrative  of  Davids  outlaw-period  a  greater  approxima-
tion to  consistency. But  this  able  explorer's  identifica-
tions are  too  often  (like  that  of  Gath  above)  unproven,
and  he  has,  on  principle,  omitted  to  take  account  of  the
composite  character  of  the  biblical  narrative.  "-

We  left  David  at  Adullam  ;  we  ne.xt  find  him  Ijefore
another  fortified  town  ( i  S.  281-13),  called  Keii,.\h  (i/.t'.),
of  which  .Ahithophel  was  perhaps  a  native  (see  GiLOll).
His  hope  was  to  secure  the  gratitude  of  the  inhabitants
by  chastising  the  Philistines  who  were  besieging  it.
Supported  by  an  oracle,  he  attacked  and  defeated  those
most  dangerous  of  foes.  He  was  disturbed,  however,  by
another  oracle,  warning  him  that  the  men  of  KC'ilah
would  surrender  their  benefactor  to  Saul.  The  king
was,  in  fact,  on  his  way  with  his  whole  fighting  force,
and  David  would  sooner  trust  himself  to  the  intricacies
of  the  wilderness  than  to  the  '  bolts  and  bars '  of
Ke'ilah.  Whether  David  really  went  from  the  '  forest
of  Hareth '  to  Ke'ilah,  is  highly  uncertain.  The
anecdote  in  23i-i3  is  not  necessarily  the  sequel  of
the  connected  narrative  in  21 1-9  22.  Nor  can  we
assume  (with  Conder)  that  the  generous  action  related
in  chap.  24  took  place  immediately  before  the  events
described  in  chap.  25  ;  for,  as  critics  agree,  the  narrative
is  but  a  duplicate  of  the  traditional  story  given  in  a
better  form  in  chap.  26.^ If  we  ask  how  much  of  the


1  PEFQ^,  '75,  p.  149.

2  See Conder, '  The


PKFQ,  '75,  pp.  41-48
That the  story  i


Scenery of David's Outlaw Life,'


chap.  2rt  is  more  original  than  that  in
The  conversation  which  it  gives  is  full  of


chap.  24  is  obv

antique  and  characteristic  ideas,  wanting  in  chap.  24.  That
David  is  recognised  by  his  voice  is  meaningjcss  in  24  16  (cp.
-'.  8),  but  appropriate  in  26  17.  See  Bu.  I\i.  Sa.  2277^  ;  and  cp
Che.  Aids,  58-62.

1024


DAVID

details  of  these  hairbreadth  escapes  is  historical,  the
reply  must  be  equally  disappointing  to  literalists.  The
central  facts  of  the  stories  are  all  that  we  can  safely
rely  upon.  Such  a  detail,  for  instance,  as  the  njccting
of  l)avid  and  Jonathan  in  the  wilderness  of  Ziph  ('23i6-i8)
is  obviously  an  inntK-ent  piece  of  romance  ;  in  fact  it  is
but  another  version  of  tlie  favourite  story  of  the  '  covenant '
lx>tween  the  friends.  Nor  can  we  venture  to  assume
that,  if  David  once,  in  accordance  with  a  chivalrous
rule  still  common  in  Arabia,  spared  the  life  of  his  sleeping
foe,  either  he  or  Saul  displayed  that  delicacy  of  senti-
ment which  a  later  age  attributed  to  them.

Strangely  enough,  the  two  accounts  of  David's
generosity  towards  Saul  are  the  setting  of  a  perhaps
more  completely  historical  story — that  of  David  and
Nalxil  (chap.  25).  The  portrait  of  David  here  given  is
less  idealistic,  but  seems  nuich  more  truthful  than  that
in  chaps.  24  and  26.  Not  less  interesting  is  the  sketch
of  Abigail.  To  her  it  was  that  David  owed  his  avoid-
ance of  blood-guiltiness.  To  her,  too,  he  was  indebted
for  the  improvement  which  took  place  in  his  social
status.  As  the  husband  of  Abigail,  he  was  no  longer
a  mere  freelx>oter,  but  the  wealthy  head  of  a  powerful
Calebite  family,  and  so  took  one  step  forward  towards
his  ultimate  enlhronenjent  at  Hebron  as  king  of  Judah.  *

How  long  David  remaineci  in  the  Calebite  district  of
Carmel,  we  do  not  know.  He  is  next  introduced  as
despairing  of  l)eing  able  to  hold  out  any


6.  With  the
Philistines.


longer  against  his  foe  ;  '  there  is  nothing
better  for  me,'  he  said,  'than  speedily  to
escape  into  the  land  of  the  Philistines'  (27  i).  So  he
placed  himself  and  his  6oo  at  the  dispos.al  of  Achish,
king  of  Gath.  Ill  at  ease,  however,  among  the  Philis-
tine chieftains,  he  induced  his  new  suzerain  to  give  him
as  a  residence  the  outlying  town  of  Ziklag.  Here  he
still  maintained  amicable  relations  with  his  friends  in
Judah,  and  though  he  craftily  professed  to  be  engaged  in
raids  against  the  Negeb  of  Judah,  he  was  in  reality  more
honour.ably  employed  (see  AcHiSH,  Am.\lek,  §  3).

At  length,  in  the  second  year,  a  change  in  his  relation
to  Achish  became  inmiinent.  The  Philistine  lords,  who
had  probably  long  been  suspicious  of  his  intentions,
refused  to  let  David  join  them  in  their  campaign
against  Saul.  David  on  his  side  professed  eixgerness
to  fight  for  Achish  ;  but  we  are  not  bound  to  take  his
words  too  literally.  Historians,  it  is  true,  differ  in  their
view  of  David's  conduct.  It  seems  psychologically  prob-
able, however,  that  David  was  only  too  glad  to  be  sent
back  by  Achish  to  Ziklag,  with  a  charge  not  to  cherish
revengeful  thoughts  against  his  friendly  suzerain  (i  S.
29 10,  0).  A  picture,  Homeric  in  its  vividness,  is  given
of  the  effect  produced  on  David  and  his  men  by  the
sight  that  met  them  at  Ziklag,  which  the  cruel  Amalek-
ites  had  plundered  (30  3-6).  An  oracle  encouraged
David  to  pursue  his  foes.  He  came  up  with  them,  and
chastised  them  severely.  The  account  closes  with  a  list
of  the  towns  in  Judah,  to  which  David  sent  politic  gifts.
His  ambitious  plans  were  no  doubt  maturing.

Meantime  Saul  had  fallen  on  Gillxia  and  Israel  was
in  a  state  of  chaos.  The  Philistines  were  masters  of  the
fi  At  Hebron  '^''*''^  lowlands  of  Jczreel  and  the
Jordan,  but  disdained  to  interfere  with
the  poorer  country  of  Judah.  There  were  some  even
in  northern  Isr.ael  who  thought  that  David  and  David
alone  could  help  them,  and  among  these  were  probably
the  men  of  Jal)esh-gilead,  to  whom  he  sent  graciously
expressed  thanks  for  their  chivalrous  rescue  of  the
bodies  of  Saul  and  his  sons  (2  S.  25-7  cp  817). David,

1  Wi.  (GT,  1  25)  sees  underlying  the  Nab.il-story  a  tradition
that  David  was  '  prince  of  Caleb '  (a  tril>e  or  district),  and,
following  C.  Niebiihr,  he  even  finds  this  tiile  in  28.88,  where,
according  to  EV,  Abner  says,  '  .\m  I  a  dog's  head?"  but  where
Wi.  renders,  '.\m  1  the  prince  of  Caleb?"  (3S|).  Marquart's
theory  (see  above,  §  i,  note  2),  that  DaWd  was  really  a  man  of
S.  Judah,  might  be  used  to  corroborate  Wi.'s  opinion.  In  any
case,  the  facts  on  which  Marquart's  theory  is  based  illustrate
this  period. See  Dog,  i  3  (5).

33  loas


DAVID

however,  was  content  to  let  Abner  have  his  way,  and
attempt  to  consolidate  the  weakened  regal  authority  in
the  North,  nominally  for  Sauls  incompetent  son,  Ish-
baal.  For  the  present,  David  transferretl  his  residence,
in  oljedience  to  an  oracle,  to  Hebron,  placing  his  men
in  the  neighlxmring  towns  or  villages.  The  ciders  of
Judah  took  the  hint,  and  solemnly  acknowledged  him
as  their  king.

It  was  not  a  grand  position.  As  king  of  Judah,  David
w.as  no  less  a  vassal  of  the  Philistines  than  when  he  was
only  lord  of  Ziklag  ; '  indeed,  he  still  retained  Ziklag.
This  only  shows  his  caution,  however,  not  his  want  of
patriotism.  ICven  Abner  could  not  venture  to  let  the
puppet  king  Ishlxial  revolt  front  the  Philistines  ;  '■*  rest
was  the  first  need  both  of  Israel  and  of  Judah.  We
cannot,  however,  suppose  that  David  and  his  band  were
idle.  It  is,  on  the  whole,  probable  that  the  conquest  of
the  Jebusite  fortress  of  Zion  t^longs  to  the  period  of
David's  tribal  kingship,*  and  not  (as  is  generally  sup-
posed) to  the  commencement  of  his  enlarged  sovereignty.
When  the  Philistines  made  that  bold  attempt  to  seize
David  which  is  related  in  2S.  5i7,  David,  we  hear,
took  refuge  in  'the  stronghold."  It  is  diflicult  to  sup-
pose that  a  different  '  stronghold '  is  meant  from  that
mentioned  in  w.t^  (which  there  is  reason  to  assign  to
the  same  document).  The  Philistines  themselves  are
uncertain  where  they  will  find  David  ;  clearly  then
David  had  more  than  one  place  of  residence.  We  are
also  told  that  they  '  came  up'  to  seek  D.avid.  and  spread
themselves  out  in  the  valley  of  Rephaim  near  Jerusalem.
It  is  true  that  where  the  narrative  2  S.  56-9  is  placed,  it
seems  to  have  reference  to  the  beginning  of  David's
kingship  over  Israel.  Probably,  however,  something
has  fallen  out  lx;fore  v.  6.  The  lost  p:issage  presumably
referred  to  David's  removal  of  his  residence  to  Jeru-
salem ;  the  narrative  which  has  been  preserved  explains
how  the  king  and  '  his  men  '  possessed  themselves  of
the  all  but  impregnable  fortress.

By  this  important  conquest  David  secured  his  position
from  all  possible  enemies,  whether  Philistine  or  Israelite.
He  also  doubtless  hoped  to  make  Zion  what  it  ulti-
mately Ijecame — the  capital  of  united  Israel.  We  may
assume  that  this  caused  uneasiness  to  Abner,  who
doubtless  had  dreams  of  a  reunited  Israel  under  the
sceptre  of  a  descendant  or  kinsman  of  Saul.  These
dreams  must  have  been  rudely  interrupted  by  the  news
of  David's  success.  Abner  well  understood  what  the
conquest  of  Zion  portended,  .and  it  was  natural  that  he
should  seek  to  counteract  David's  ambition.  He  had
no  occasion  to  form  an  elatorate  plan  of  operations  ;
he  had  but  to  allow  the  unsleeping  jealousy  of  Israel
and  Judah  to  display  itself.  There  would  l)e  constant
border  hostilities,  and  Judah,  as  the  weaker  of  the  two,
would  (he  must  have  hoped)  lie  reduced  to  vassalage  to
Israel,  and  in  tinte  perhaps  incorporated  into  the  king-
dom. A  '  very  sore  battle '  is  reported  between  the
men  of  Ishbaal  and  those  of  David  by  the  pool  of
Gibeon.  It  liegan  with  a  mere  sham  fight  ;  but  such  a
contest  could  not  be  expected  to  end  without  bloodshed,
and  Abner  must  have  foreseen  this  when  he  and  the
men  of  Ishbaal  set  out  from  Mahanaim  (2  S.  212-17).
The  result  was  disastrous  for  the  cause  of  Ishbaal,  and
year  after  year  the  war  was  renewed  with  constant  loss
of  prestige  to  the  house  of  Saul.  Fierce  private  passions,
too,  added  to  the  horrors  of  the  time  (see  Abnkr  ;  ISH-
BAAI.,  i;  JoAB,  i).  At  length,  Ishliaal  lx:ing  removed,
David  stood  alone,  sad  but  confident,  for  who  else
could  be  thought  of  in  this  hour  of  need  ?  Had  he  not
in  the  olden  time  been  Isr.ael's  leader  against  the
Philistines,  and  was  he  not  by  marriage  a  member  of

1  This  view  is  accepted  by  St.,  E.  Mey.,  We.,  Kiunph.,
Khtel.

a  See  Kamph  ZATW  i^■^■^^  ("861;  Ki.  Hist.  ii.  The
older  view  (see  .St.)  was  that  Abner  upheld  the  banner  of  Israel
against  the  Philistines  ;  but  Kamph.  shows  at  great  length  that
the  evidence  will  not  justify  this.

3  See  Klo.  Sam.  u.  Kin.  \^tff.  \  Gesch.  159.

1096


DAVID

Saul's  house  (2  S.  62  813-16)?  So  the  elders  of  Israel
accepted  the  inevitable,  and  anointed  the  son  of  Jesse
king  over  Israel.

David  was  now,  according  to  a  not  very  early  tradi-
tion,* in  his  thirty-eighth  year  ;  seven  and  a  half  years
^.  had  elapsed  since  he  first  became  king

7.  Bang  over ^^  Hebron. His  training had been


Israel
the  Philistines.


long  and  varied,  and  he  might  now
fairly  hope  to  finish  the  work  which
Saul  had  begun,  and  remove  for  ever  the  danger  of
Philistine  invasions.  The  Philistines  knew  what  they
had  to  expect  from  the  new  king  of  '  all  Israel  and
Judah,'  and  lost  not  a  moment  in  '  seeking  him.'  They
felt  towards  him  as  the  Syrian  king  felt  towards  Ahab  :
if  he  were  only  slain  or  captured,  the  fate  of  Israel  was
settled.  They  knew,  too,  the  rapidity  of  his  move-
ments, and  sought  to  capture  him  before  he  could
retire  into  his  newly-won  stronghold  of  Zion.  They
were  too  late  for  this,  and  challenged  him  to  battle  in
the  valley  of  Rephaim  westward  from  Jerusalem  (2S.
518-25;  cp  Baai.-i'EKAZIm).  Two  great  victories  are
said  to  have  been  won  on  this  occasion  by  David.  We
have  also  a  record  of  individual  exploits  and  of  personal
dangers  run  by  David  in  2  S.  21 15-22  238-i7  (see  IsHBi-
BKNOB,  etc.),  which  must,  it  would  seem,  have  stood
originally  close  to  56-i2  17-25.  It  is  singular  that  this
should  be  almost  all  that  is  told  us  respecting  what,  if
entirely  David's  work,  would  be  the  greatest  of  all  his
achievements.  One  more  notice  indeed  has  come  down
to  us  (2S.  81)  ;  but  it  is  tantalisingly  short.  It  states
that  •  David  smote  the  Philistines  and  subdued  them,
and  took  '  something  of  importance  '  out  of  the  hand  of
the  Philistines.'  The  Chronicler  thinks  that  what  David
'took'  was  '  Gath  and  its  towns'  (i  Ch.  18 1),  and  this
is  certainly  plausible,  for  deeds  of  high  renown  were
performed  near  Gath  (see  Elhanan,  1),  and  afterwards
we  find  600  men  of  Gath  in  David's  service  (2  S.  15  18  ;
see  l>elow,  §  11).  It  is  more  probable,  however,  that
Ashdod  was  the  city  spoken  of  in  the  true  text  (see
Mktheg-Ammah).  Still  it  is  doubtful  whether  such  a
total  defeat  of  the  Philistines  as  the  passage  just  quoted
ascribes  to  David,  is  historical.  That  the  Israelites
were  delivered  from  the  dread  of  these  foes  is  indisput-
able ;  but  that  David  broke  the  power  of  the  Philistines
is  not  probable.  It  is  a  reasonable  conjecture  that  the
deliverance  of  the  Israelites  was  helped  either  by  an
Egyptian,  or  by  a  Musrite  (N.  Arabian)  intervention. '-
Moreover,  the  friendly  terms  on  which  David  appears
to  have  stood  with  the  Philistines  at  a  later  time  suggest
that  he  had  made  a  treaty  of  peace  with  this  people  on
conditions  equally  honourable  to  both  sides,  one  of
which,  as  we  have  elsewhere  seen  reason  to  think,  was
the  restoration  of  the  ark  (see  Ark,  §  5).

However  this  may  be,  David  was  certainly  not  de-
ficient in  the  qualities  of  a  general.  This  is  plain  from
_ _.,  his  wise  measures  on  the  retellion  of

8.  Uiner  wars,  ^i^g^j^^^  ^f  ^.^jch  we  have  very  full
particulars.  His  other  wars,  with  neighbours  only  less
dangerous  than  the  Philistines,  may  be  conveniently
referred  to  here.  We  have  a  summary  of  them  in  the
same  section  that  refers  to  the  suVxluing  of  the  Philis-
tines ( 2  S.  81-14,  cp  I  S.  1447,  and  see  Saul,  i  §  3),
and  further  information  respecting  the  Ammonite  war
in  2  S.  10  11 1  1226-31.  It  is  important,  however,  to
study  these  notices  critically,  both  from  a  purely  literary,
and  from  a  historical,  point  of  view.  The  two  points  of
view,  it  is  true,  cannot  be  kept  very  long  apart.  A  pre-
liminary literary  analysis,  however,  will  quickly  show  us
that  in  2. S.  81-14  we  are  dealing,  not  with  an  original

1  See  2  S.  64  (the  work  of  a  Deuteronomistic  editor).

2  If  an  Efiyptian  intervention  be  suppo.sed  we  must  place  it
during  the  twenty-first  Egyptian  d>;nasty.  See  WMM  {/ts.  u.
Eur.  389),  who  thinks  that  the  notice  in  i  K.  9  i6  presupposes
the  Egyptian  occupation  of  Philistia.  Observe  that  Capntorim
is  called  a  '  son  '  of  Mizraim  (see  Caphtor,  8  4).  'i  he  alterna-
tive theory,  however,  seems  much  more  probable  {^cc/QR  11
1'99]  559i  ^"d  cp  Mizraim,  g  2  b).

vxrj


DAVID

narrative,  but  with  a  panegyric  made  up  from  various
sources,  containing  strong  traces  of  editorial  work.  As
to  2S.  10  the  case  is  not  at  first  sight  so  clear  ;  but  a
further  investigation  reveals  here,  too,  the  hand  of  the
editor.  The  contents  also  must  be  criticised,  and  this
will  greatly  clear  up  the  problems  of  literary  analysis.
The  historical  results  of  the  whole  process  are  not  unim-
portant. *

{a)  Moab. — Little  enough  is  told  us  of  David's  war
with  the  Moabites  (cp  Moab);  but  that  little  is  suggestive.
With  cold-blooded  precision  the  conqueror  destroyed
two-thirds  (such  is  the  meaning  of  2  S.  82)  of  the  entire
fighting  force  of  Moab.  The  description  seems  to  imply
that  it  was  an  act  of  national  retaliation,  and  the  offence
which  caused  this  may  be  plausibly  conjectured.  The
kingdom  of  Ishbaal,  as  Kamphauscn  has  shown,  was
by  no  means  so  powerful  as  the  early  writers  supposed.
The  defeat  on  Gilboa  had  brought  the  Israelites  to  the
verge  of  ruin,  and  Saul's  feeble  successor  had  to  make
terms,  not  only  with  the  Philistines,  but  also  with  the
Moabites  and  the  Ammonites,  to  whom  his  capital,
Mahanaim,  was  only  too  accessible.  It  is  probable  that
both  Moab  and  Ammon  granted  him  peace  only  under
insulting  conditions,  and  we  can  form  some  idea  of  the
insults  that  were  possible  in  such  circumstances  from
I  .S.  11 2  2S.  10  4.  David  of  course  had  to  give  these
insolent  neighbours  a  lesson.

{h)  Ammon. — Passing  on  to  the  Ammonites,  we
notice  that,  if  there  is  a  doubt  as  to  the  degree  of  the
severity  of  their  punishment  (2  S.  I231),'-  there  is  none  as
to  the  gravity  of  their  offence  (2  S.  10 1-5).  The  account
of  the  details  of  the  war  requires  very  careful  criticism.
The  conduct  of  the  host  of  Israel  was  entrusted  to  Joab,
and  it  was  owing  to  the  politic  self-restraint  of  this
general  that  David  in  person  stormed  the  Ammonitish
capital,  and  carried  away  the  crown  of  the  idol-god
Milcom  (see  .Vmmon,  §  8).  The  difiiculty  of  the  narra-
tive is  caused  by  the  statements  which  it  contains  re-
specting the  Aramrean  allies  of  the  Ammonites  and  the
successes  which  David  gained  over  them.^  Was  the
Zobah  mentioned  in  2S.  106  (undoubtedly  an  ancient
passage)  as  joining  with  Beth-rehob  to  send  help  to  the
Ammonites,  a  powerful  kingdom  N.  of  Damascus,  to
which  all  Aram  W.  of  the  Euphrates  was  sutjject  (as
stated  in  2. S.  10 16),  or  was  it  a  small  state  near  the
land  of  Ammon,  which  on  various  grounds  agrees  best
with  our  expectations  ?  If  the  latter  view  be  adopted,
we  must  regard  2.S.  lOis-ig^  as  a  late  editorial  in-
sertion, akin  to  the  much  edited  passage  83-8,  and  all
that  we  know  respecting  David's  relations  to  the
Aramaeans  is  that  Joab  routed  the  forces  sent  by  them
to  help  the  Ammonites,  so  that  they  '  feared  to  help  the
Ammonites  any  more'  (2  vS.  10 13 19*).  The  statement
of  86,  in  itself  so  improbable,  that  David  annexed
Damascus,  is  due  to  a  misreading  of  a  passage  which
appears  over  again  in  v.  14.  The  editor,  by  mistake,
read  'Aram'  instead  of  '  Edom,"  and  then  interpreted
'  Aram  '  as  '  Aram-Damascus.'  *

(t)  Edom. — Lastly  we  come  to  the  war  with  Edom,
which,  as  we  are  told  in  2S.  814,  was  incorporated  by
David  into  his  kingdom.  We  are  left  entirely  ignorant
as  to  the  cause  of  the  war,*  and  know  next  to  nothing
of  the  details,  though  the  conquest  of  such  a  difficult
region  would  have  been  well  worth  describing. A  great

1  On  the  criticism,  see  Samuel,  ii.  SS  4,  6,  and  cp  Bu.  Ri.
Sa.  245/,  249./f.  ;  KIo.  Sam.  u.  K'Sn.  ;  Wi.  Gl  1  138^?:,  194^
For  another  estimate  of  the  evidence,  see  Israku,  §  lo.

2  RV'i't,'.  gives  the  more  favourable  view  (on  which  .see  Dr.
TBS  228)  that  David  put  the  Ammonitish  captives  to  forced
labour  at  public  works.

3  .SeeWi.  an  I -,8-144.

•*  KIo.,  on  the  other  hand,  wishes  to  correct  'Edom'  in  v.  14
into  'Aram.'  The  traditional  view  of  2  8.85/:  has  been  thought
to  be  confirmed  by  i  K.  1 1  24  ;  but  there  the  words  '  when  David
slew  them 'are  a  gloss,  not  found  in  ®"i-,  as  KIo.  himself  candidly
points  out.

8  Wi.  regards  the  war  as  the  resumption  of  hostilities  between
David  as  '  prince  of  Caleb '  and  his  Edomite  neighbours  at  an
earlier  period  (GI\  194).

1028


DAVID

victory  is  ascribed  to  David  in  the  Valley  of  Salt
(^.v. ),  to  the  S.  of  the  Dead  Sea  (aS.  813,  where  read
'  Etlom  '  for  '  Aram  '  with  6"*'- ;  I's.  60,  title).  There
is  also  an  incidental  reference  to  the  war  in  i  K.  11  15/,
which  tells  us  that  the  E<lomites  contested  every  inch  of
ground,  but  received  no  quarter  from  their  conqueror.
This  is  the  extent  of  our  information.

To  sum  up.  If  it  is  one  of  David's  titles  to  fame  that
he  for  a  time  united  '  all  the  tribes  of  Israel  froni  Dan

9  Lfttar  thaorv ^°  Heershclw  '  (aS.  24a),  it  is  another
■ . _ -jj ihixl.  he  secured  the  united  kingdom

0  a  avi  0  ^^^^  foreign  atuick.  From  Assyria
" ■  and Egypt indeed there was then

nothing  to  fear  ;  *  but  the  small  neighbouring  peoples
needed  the  lesson  which  he  gave  them.  That  his  suze-
rainty or  sphere  of  influence  e.vlended  to  the  Euphrates
is  not,  however,  supported,  in  the  opinion  of  the  present
writer,  by  a  thorough  criticism  of  the  documents.  The
editor  of  2S.  8,  who  perhaps  wrote  also  IOis-iq^,  con-
founded the  two  Zobahs^and  made  other  mistakes,  and
on  the  basis  of  this  mis-reading  of  the  e\  idence  he  and
his  school  erected  the  airy  fabric  of  a  Davidic  empire
large  enough  to  Ix;  named  respectfully  among  the
*  world-powers."  This  theory  (for  such  we  must  call  it)
fell  in  with  the  later  tendency  to  glorify  David,  and
with  the  idea  of  a  great  Messianic  kingdom  of  which  the
Davidic  was  a  type  (.\m.  9ii/,  post-exilic  ;  see  Amos,
§  10,  Chronic  I. Ks,  §  9).  It  cannot  be  resigned  without
regret,  and  should  archrKological  discoveries  disclose
some  grains  of  fact  which  may  have  assisted  the  growth
of  historical  error,  it  will  be  a  satisfaction  to  find  that
the  ancient  editors  were  not  entirely  arbitrary  in  their
procedure.  That  David's  power  was  respected  as  far
north  as  Hamath  (even  if  the  report  in  28.  810  be  not
altogether  accurate)  need  not  lie  denied.  The  question
is.  Can  it  Ixj  proved  that  friendship  had  given  place,  on
David's  side,  to  suzerainty  ?

David's  next  aim  was  to  provide  a  worthy  centre  for
the  united  people  of  Israel. In  this  he  showed  a  truly

10  The  new '"''*'*^'^'''y  statesmanship. The  kingship


capital.


of  Saul  was  not  altogether  different  from


the  authority  exercised  by  the  greater
'judges.'  It  never  entirely  divested  itself  of  a  tribal
character,  as  is  clear  from  the  striking  narrative,  i  S.
226-8.  At  the  risk  of  alienating  the  men  of  Judah,
who,  in  fact,  appear  as  the  chief  malcontents  in  subse-
quent civil  disturbances,  David  transferred  his  royal
residence  from  the  remote  southern  city,  Hebron,  to
Jerusalem.  The  new  capital  had  not  indeed  all  the
natural  advantages  which  could  l)e  wished  (see  Jeku-
sai.km)  ;  but  it  had  two  great  recommendations  :  (i)  it
was  neither  Israelite  nor  Judahite,  having  lieen  recently
won  by  David  and  his  men,  and  (2)  whilst  easily  access-
ible from  the  north,  it  lay  close  to  David's  own  trilx;  of
Judah.  The  king  not  only  strengthened  its  fortifications,
but  also  consecrated  it  by  solemnly  transferring  to  it  the
newly  recovered  national  sanctuary  (see  Ark,  §  6)  from
its  temporary  home  at  Baal  (see  Kikjath-JKARIM)  in
Judah.  This  must  not  be  disparaged  as  merely  a  proof
of  political  wisdom.  It  was  this,  no  doubt ;  but  it  also
sprang  from  deep  religious  feeling,  as  the  old  tradition
clearly  states  (2S.  621;  see  &^^^).  David  felt  that
the  true  principle  of  national  unity  and  strength  lay  in
fidelity  to  Yahw6,  and  it  is  to  him  therefore  that  the
world  is  ultimately  indebted  for  the  streams  of  spiritual
life  which  have  issued  from  Jerusalem.  That  he  built  a
palace  for  himself,  but  no  temple  for  the  ark,  seemed  a

1  It  is  quite  needless  to  suppose  that  David  made  a  nominal
recognition  of  the  suzerainty  of  KRvpt  (Wi.  6V  1  137).  This  is
no  doubt  a  necessarj-  corollary  to  W.  M.  Muller's  theory  of  the
Egyptian  conauest  of  Philistui ;  but  that  theory  is  not  here
accepted  (see  above,  |  7,  end).

2  The  cuneiform  evidence  for  two  Zobahs  will  Ije  found  in
Del.  Par.  280,  .Schr.  A'CF  12a.  The  historical  fist  of  places
given  in  ASurbAninal's  Annals,  7  108-114  (A"5 2  2 16/:)  proves  the
existence  of  a  Subiti  to  the  S.  of  Dam-iscus  and  near  Ammon,
and  .apparently  distinct  from  that  in  the  geogra6hical  lists  (on
which  cp  Tomkins,  PEFQ,  Apr.  1885,  p.  113). See  Zobah.

XO29


DAVID

strange  inconsistency  to  a  later  age.  'Whether  the
course  that  he  took  was  prcscrilx:d  by  an  oracle,  it  is
now  impossible  to  siiy  ;  the  narrative  in  2  S.  7,  with  the
acconjpanying  prophecy,  is  one  of  the  late  Dcuterono-
mistic  insertions  and  cannot  Ix;  siifely  followed.'

(a)  Army. — Hoth in military and in civil affairs

David  was  careful  to  combine  the  necessary  innovations

11 Adminia *''^ *  *^'"'  '"^8"'''^  ^"''  ''^'^  ^''^  habits


tration,  etc.


and  feelings  of  the  people, which  he


thoroughly  understood.  The  tendency
to  disintegration  inherent  in  the  old  clan-organisation
(see  Governmknt,  §  18)  he  sought  to  counteract  by
the  institution  of  a  l)odyguard.  which  was  a  natural
development  out  of  his  old  Ixind  of  freelKJOlers.  This
well-disciplined  and  absolutely  trustworthy  '  standing
army '  was  sufficient  to  exhibit  a  high  standard  to  the
old  national  militia,  but  not  so  large  as  to  excite  popular
suspicion.  .Specially  honoured  were  the  thirty-seven
heroes  of  whom  a  list  is  given  in  2  .S.  23  (see  below,  i. ).
It  is  uncertain  whether  they  were  called  'the  thirty'  or
'  the  knights '  ;  ^  but  most  are  in  favour  of  the  former
view.  They  were  conspicuous  for  their  fearless  courage,
of  which  some  anecdotes  are  preservc"d.  Foreigners
were  by  no  means  excluded  from  the  ranks  of  the
Cjibtx)rim  (AV  'mighty  men').  Shortly  Ijefore  the
rebellion  of  Absalom,  Ittai  the  Gittite  had  entered
David's  service  with  600  other  I'hilistines'  (2  .S.  15 18),
and  Uriah  the  Hittite  was  one  of  the  trusted  '  thirty.*
How  well  those  I'hilistine  mercenaries  repaid  David's
confidence,  is  proved  by  2  S.  15 18  2O7  i  K.  1  38.  (See
Chkrethitk.s,  and  on  later  OT  references  to  the  king's
foreign  guards  \_e.g.,  Zeph.  18  Ezek.  446^].  WRS
or  J  a-)  262  n.)

[(i.)  The  list  of  heroes  in  2  -S.  23  enumerates  'the  Three'
kot'  «fovi)i»: — IsHBAAL  (2),  Ki.KAZAR  (3),  and  Sha.mmah  (3);
then  follow  Abishai  and  Hen.-ii;rh,  who  occupy  an  intermedi.-uA'


position  ;  and  finally,  the  heroes  themselves,  thirty-sev


in  all


(see  Elika,  Eliphf.lkt,  2),  and  the  numerous  textual  corrup-
tions preclude  complete  certainty  as  to  their  names  and  origin
(besides  the  special  articles  cp  Marq.  Fund.  15^.).

The  heroes  .seem  to  have  been  originally  arranged  in  pairs
according  to  their  homes;  thus  Maharai  and  Heleb  from
Netophan  (aSi^,  29),  two  from  Jattir  (38),  one  each  from  the
neighbouring  pl.-iccs  of  Pirathon  and  (laash  (30),  etc.  It  is
noticeable  that  they  are  almost  wholly  of  Benjamite  and  lud^an
origin,  and  this  supports  the  conjecture  that  the  list  in  the  main
refers  to  the  early  part  of  David's  life  (cp,  e.g.,  1  S.  22 1/.),
before  his  supremacy  was  spread  over  the  rest  of  Israel.  Note
the  mention  of  Asahel  and  Uriah,  and  that  Benaiah  is  merely
the  he.id  of  David's  guard,  and  h.-vs  not  apparently  reached  the
position  he  holds  in  2S.  S18  (see  below  \c\  2).  The  omission  of
Joab  as  the  holder  of  any  official  position  is  remarkable,  and
suggests  that  he  had  not  yet  become  'captain  of  the  host,'
although  the  references  in  rt'.  18  (.■\bishai,  the  brother  of  Joab  ;
cp  V.  24),  37  .seem  to  show  that  he  was  not  unknown.  It  is
highly  proD.-ible  that  the  whole  chapter  owes  its  present  form  to
a  comparatively  l.-\te  editor  (cp  Kue.  F.inl.  i.  2,  $  22,  n.  13).

(ii.)  In  I  Ch.  11  the  s.-ime  list  is  substantially  repeated — in  a
few  cases  with  better  readings, — and  a  few  names  recur  in  i  Ch.
2"i-i4  (see  below,  \c\  i.).  Verses  41/^-47  .idd  sixteen  other
heroes,  who,  to  judge  from  the  gentilicia  (often  doubtful,  see
Mahavite,  Mesobaite,  Mith.s'ITe)  were  partly  of  east-
Jord.inic  origin.  The  authenticity  of  these  names  is  a  difficult
question.  They  may  have  proceeded  from  a  source  common  to
both  compilers  (see  Kue.  Eint.  1 2,  §  30,  n.  11);  but  the
mention  of  Reubenites,  and  the  preponderating  proportion  of
theophorous  names  as  well  as  the  relative  lateness  of  such  names
as  Jaasiel,  Jeiel,  Joshaviah  in  this  chapter,  render  their  genuin««
ness  open  to  question.

(iii.)  Further  lists  of  warriors  are  found  in  i  Ch.  12,  which
enumerates  those  who  came  to  David  (a)  at  Ziklag  (1-22),  and
(/3)  at  Hebron  (23  /?;).  O)  The  latter  is  purely  fabulous. It

represents  the  warriors  as  assembling  from  all  the  tribes  (not  ex-

1  The  modifications  introduced  into  thLs  narrative  both  by  the
author  of  the  gloss  in  v.  13  and  by  the  Chronicler  (1  Ch.  17)  are
interesting  evidence  of  the  constant  recasting  of  old  material
carried  on  by  the  editors.  See  Samuel,  ii.  §  5,  and  cp  We,
FroL,  ET,  177).

a  Wvhv  and  CpSb*  were  sometimes  confounded  (see  i  Ch.
11 II  15,  124  18,  Var.  Bib.).  Klo.  prefers  B'pW  (cp  DL  on  Ex-
14  7).  At  any  rate  such  a  term  .as  '  the  thirty '  would  soon  become
conventional  (see  2  S.  2839). Cp  Chahiot,  {  10.

S  Read  'and  all  the  men  of  Ittai  the  Gittite,  600  men,"  with
Klo.,  Ki.,  Bu.  It  seems  doubtful  whether  David  had  really  had
any  prolonged  or  bitter  strife  with  the  Philistines.


DAVID

eluding  the  two  halves  of  Manasseh  !),  and  gives  a  theocratic  air
to  the  whole  by  the  inclusion  of  Aaroiiiles.  (a)  In  the  first

half  (1-22)  we  have  probably  a/cw  traces  of  old  material,  and  very
possibly  a  confused  recollection  of  events  in  David's  early  life.
The  lists  comprise  men  of  Saul's  brethren  and  of  lienjamin  (3^),
Korahites(6)  and  men  of  ("ledor  (7).  In  the  case  of  the  Korahites
it  is  possible  that  the  Chronicler  is  thinking  of  the  later  priestly
class.  His  inclusion  of  such  warriors  among  David's  band  is  as
intelligible  as  his  ascription  to  David  of  the  division  of  priestly
courses  and  other  works  dealing  with  the  priests  and  Levites.
On  the  other  hand,  with  He.,  we  may  more  probably  think  of  the
Juda;an  Korah  (i  Ch.  243).  It  was  under  David  that  the  S.
Judajan  populations  attained  power,  and  it  is  perfectly  natural
to  suppose  that  individuals  from  among  them  jomed  him.  This,
of  course,  does  not  mean  that  the  names  are  necessarily  old  or
genuine.  Finally,  are  enumerated  (i)  certain  Gadites, '  captains
ol  the  host '  (xns.l  "c;xn),  who  put  to  flight  David's  enemies  on
either  side  of  the  Jordan  (8-15) ;  (2)  Amasai  ( =  Am  asa,  g.v.\  who,
at  the  head  of  men  of  Benjamin  and  Judah,  came  to  David  in
the  '  hold  ■  (16-18)  ;  and  (3)  certain  chiliarchs  of  Manasseh  (lo).
Underlying  the  account  of  .Amasai,  we  may  possibly  find  the
tmces  of  a  confused  and  mutilated  recollection  of  the  revolt  of
Absalom,  wherein  Amasa  plays  so  prominent  a  part  in  bringing
Judah  and  the  king  together  (2  S.  19  14).  S.  A.  C.  ]

(b)  Jus/ice. — To  the  chief  civil  duty  of  a  king — the
administration  of  justice — David  paid  the  utmost  atten-
tion (2  S.  815,  cpl44^),  for  Absalom's  complaint
that  the  king  was  inaccessible  (2  S.  15 3)  is  merely
factious.  He  does  not  appear  to  have  made  any  change
in  the  old  local  administration  of  justice  ;  but  he  intro-
duced— simply  by  acting  as  supreme  judge — an  element
which  profoundly  modified  the  traditional  system  (see

GOVEK.N.MK.NT, § I9).

(c)  Officers. — In  this  and  other  departments  David
was  aided  by  his  great  officers  of  state  (2  S.  816-18)  ;
see  Benaiah,  Husiiai,  Jkhoshaphat  2,  Joab,  and
below.  It  is  important  to  notice  that  in  all  probability
he  had  a  Babylonian  scribe  or  secretary  (see  Shavsha)
— a  late  trace  of  the  early  preponderance  of  Babylonian
civihsation  in  Palestine.

[It  will  be  convenient  here  to  note  briefly  the  lists  of  David's
officers,  treasurers,  etc.

i.  I  Ch.  27,  a  p.-issage  of  obviously  complex  character,  after
reproducing  (in'.  1-15)  the  first  part  of  the  list  of  David's  warriors
(see  above  a  i.)  in  the  form  of  a  list  of  twelve  captains  of
divisions  (njJ'^nD"':'!?  1-15),  enumerates  twelve /r/«c^.f  (C")r)  of
the  tribes  of  Israel  (16-24),  including  Levites,  Aaronites,  the
twofold  division  of  Manasseh  and  the  post-e.\ilic  priestly  names
Hoshe.i,  Iddo,  Jeroham  ('/),  Zichri ;  Jaasiel  (7'.  21)  is  probably
borrowed  from  i  Ch.  11 47.  This  is  followed  in  25-31  by  a  third
list  of  twelve — David's  cn>ersci>-s  or  treasurers  ;  the  names  seem
to  be  old  (Gray,  IIPN  230^),  and  so  far  as  this  goes,  the  list
might  be  trustworthy  (but  cp  Kue.  Kinl.  1  2,  §31,  n.  11.  Besides
Gray,  HPN  229 /fl,  see  Chronicles,  §  0,  and  cp  We.  Prol.i*)
i7i#-)-

ii.  David's  supreme  officers  of  state  are  variously  enumerated
in  2  S.  816-18  (cp2023-26  [where  they  are  obviously  out  of
place],  I  Ch.  18  14-17)  and  i  Ch.  2732-34  (cp  Solomon's  officers
I  K.  4,  and  the  list  given  by  ©i^L  at  the  end  of  i  K.  2).  In  the
case  of  the  list  in  2  S.  the  genuineness  of  the  passage  has  been
questioned  by  Bonk  {ZATll-'  12143)  and  probably  rightly.
Joab  b.  Zeruiah  is  said  to  be  'over  the  host'  (x3i'n),  but  with
the  exception  of  8  10  (David's  wars)  he  appears,  on  the  other
hand,  to  be  over  the  Cherethites  and  Pelethites  (2S.  20  7);  and
Benaiah,  who  in  the  list  is  credited  with  this  office  (i'.  18),
was  'head  of  the  nyDtJ'O.'  2  S.  2823*  (see  Council,  i.  2)  and
perhaps  also  '  chief  of  the  brick-kiln  '  (t  K.  246A  ©bl  ;  cp  [iSsn
aS.  1231).  Jehoshaphat  (f.7'.)  b.  Ahilud  was  recorder  (cp
GovKKNMENT,  $  2i)  and  Shisha  (see  Shavsha)  the  secretary.
The  priests  were  David's  sons  (but  see  Minister,  Chief);  but
at  the  head  stood  Zadok  b.  Ahitub  and  Abiathar  b.  Ahimelech.
Abiathar  is  a  descendant  of  the  famous  Eli,  Zadok  is  of  un-
known origin,  and  although  mentioned  first  (cp  similarly  2  S.  15
24  ^  36)  did  not  obtain  pre-eminence  until  the  time  of  Solomon.
The  Chronicler's  list  (2732-34)  mentions  a  Jonathan,
the  -m  of  David,  as  a  counsellor,  and  Jehiel  [g.v.],  who  was
'  with  the  king's  sons.'  Ahithophel,  ancf  Hushai  the  '  friend  '  of
David  (see  Hushai),  are  well-known  characters  in  the  revolt  of
Absalom ;  according  to  the  Chronicler  their  places  were  filled
by  Benaiah  and  Abiathar.  S.  A.  C.  ]

(d)  In  another  respect  too  David  followed  the  example
of  Oriental  kings  :  with  the  aid  of  his  ally,  Hiram,  king
of  Tyre,  he  built  himself  a  palace  of  stone  and  cedar
wood  which  rose  proudly  <at)ove  the  low  dwellings  of
Jerusalem.  There  he  combined  a  regal  generosity  with
a  not  less  regal  luxury.  Mephibosheth  (MERinu.VAi,)
and  Chimham  were  among  his  court-pensioners  (2  S.
1031


DAVID

97^  1928  33  38) ;  singing  men  and  singing  women  en-
livened his  repasts  (2  S.  19  35)-

Another  piece  of  genuine  Oriental  magnificence  was
the  harem  (2  S.  5  13,  etc.),  which,  though  it  does  not
seem  to  have  shocked  the  nation  (2  S.  I621),  was
fraught  with  moral  danger  to  the  king,  and  was  the
source  of  much  of  the  unhappiness  of  his  later  years.
It  is  clear  from  passages  like  2  S.  132i  I424  15 1  14  19
6  12  14  that  the  moral  weakness  of  his  last  days  had
begun  many  years  before,  under  the  influences  of  his
harem.

[Lists  of  David's  sons  are  found  in  (a)  2  S.  S 1-5  (=  i  Ch.  3 1-3)
and  O)  2S.  5i3-i6(^iCh.  3c-8=iCh.  I43-7).  It  is  probable
that  originally  these  stood  together,  and  Budde  (SB07)  accord-
ingly places  them  before  815.  (a)  The  former  list  gives  the
names  of  the  six  sons  born  at  Hebron  and  reflects  David's  policy
of  strengthening  his  power  by  alliances  with  neighbouring  clans
or  trilies.  Besides  the  two  wives  from  Jezreel  (in  Judah)  <-ind
and  Carmel  (Caleb),  we  have  one  from  the  S.  Palestinian
Geshur  ly.v.,  2]  and,  possibly,  one  from  Gath  (see  Hagcith).
The  two  remaining  names,  Shephatiah  (more  common  in  later
literature)  and  Ithrea.m,  are  unknown.  The  death  of  Ammon
left  Chileab  (if  the  name  be  correct — see  Chileab)  heir  to  the
throne,  and  it  is  therefore  the  more  remarkable  that  nothing  what-
ever is  told  us  of  his  fate  :  for  an  ingenious  conjecture,  cp  Marq.
Fund.  25  /.  O)  The  second  list  contains  eleven  names —
sons  born  at  Jerusalem.  Of  these  the  first  two,  Shammua  (or
Shimeah)and  Shobab,  may  probably  recur  (see  above  §  i,  n.  2).
These  and  the  two  following  (Nathan  and  Solomon)  are,  accord-
ing to  I  Ch.  35,  all  sons  of  Bathsheba.  The  statement  in  Ch.
has  probably  arisen  from  the  desire  to  render  Solomon's  birth  as
stainless  as  possible  (Solomon  is  mentioned  last),  since  from  2  S.
lly?  it  appears  that  Solomon  was  really  the  second  son.  These
names  are  increased  to  thirteen  in  i  Ch.  3  =  14  by  the  addition  of
Nogah  and  a  second  Eliphelet.  Perhaps  Nogah  is  original  and
should  be  inserted  in  2  S.  (  Th.  Be.),  thus  raising  the  number  to
twelve  ;  but  it  is  possible  that  it  has  arisen  from  the  following
Nepheg  and  should  (with  Eliphelet)  t)e  omitted.  It  is  note-
worthy that  in  2  S.  613-16,  ©«  (but  not  ©a)  has  a  double  list
the  second  of  which  (based  upon  Ch.)  agrees  with  ©'-  in  includ-
ing the  two  doubtful  names.  s.  A.  C.  ]

That  the  government  of  this  great  king  was  perfectly
successful  cannot,  of  course,  be  maintained.  His  people
was  far  from  homogeneous,  and  it  is  not  surprising  that
the  jealousies  of  Judah  and  Israel  reappeared.  Great
discontent  was  also  produced  by  his  attempt  to  number
the  people,  which  was  no  doubt  regarded  by  his  subjects
as  introductory  to  an  attempt  upon  their  liberties,  and
was  checked  only  by  the  rebukes  of  his  seer  Gad  and
the  breaking  out  of  a  pestilence^  (2  S.  24).

According  to  the  early  narrative,  the  conscience  of
the  king  accepted  the  rebuke  ;  but  most  probably  David
still  felt  as  a  statesman  that  the  position  of  Israel  was
precarious  without  that  improved  military  organisation
which  he  had  contemplated.  On  the  other  hand,  he
continued  to  tolerate  some  ancient  usages  inconsistent
with  the  interests  of  internal  harmony.  The  practice  of
blood-revenge  was  not  put  down,*  and,  by  allowing  the
Giteonites  to  enforce  it  against  the  house  of  Saul  (see
GiiiKON,  Rizpah),  the  king  involved  himself  in  a  feud  with
the  Benjamites  (cp  2  S.  21  with  168,  which  refers  to  a  later
date).  Yet  he  might  have  braved  all  these  dangers  but
for  the  disorders  of  his  own  family.  Need  we  tell  over
again  the  story  of  his  great  moral  disaster?  Nowhere
is  the  impossibility  of  upholding  the  saintliness  of  this
king  more  apparent  than  here.  And  yet  a  laudable
desire  to  believe  the  Ijest  of  David  has  perhaps  blunted
the  edge  of  the  scalpel  of  the  critic  (see  Bathsheba).

It  is  certain  that  the  narrative  in  2  S.  11 1-I225  is  not  without
later  insertions,  and  it  is  very  prob.-ible  th.^it  the  most  fascinating
part  of  the  story  was  imagined  by  an  editor  in  the  interests  of
reverence  and  edification, — in  fact,  that  the  process  of  converting
David  into  a  saint  had  already  begun.  "That  later  ages  were
profoundly  shocked  at  David's  action  is  a  proof  of  the  pro\-i-
dential  education  of  Israel  to  be  the  greatest  of  moral  teachers.
The  Chronicler  shows  his  own  feeling  very  clearly  by  omitting
the  narrative  altogether,  though,  h.-id  he  accepted  the  view
adopted in  the  late  heading  of  Ps.  51,  he  would  have  shown

1  The  event  must  have  been  subsequent  to  David's  foreign
war  :  the  king  has  no  longer  any  enemy  to  fear.  On  the  state-
ment of  the  boundaries  of  the  kingdom  in  2  S.  24  5-7  see
Tahtim-hodshi,  Dan-jaan,  and  on  the  literary  criticism  of
chap.  24.  see  Samuel,  ii.  f  6.

2  It  IS  clear,  however,  from  2  S.  828/:,  14  i-io,  that  his
sympathies  were  against  this  barbarous  usage.

1032


DAVID

David  to  he  more  nearly  a  saint  than  he  appears  to  us  in  almost
any  part  of  the  Chronicler's  biography.

The  effects  of  David's  sin  lasted  to  the  close  of  his
life,  for  the  undue  influence  of  Ikilhsheba  is  conspicuous
in  the  sad  story  of  the  competition  for  David's  crown.
Kvcn  apart  from  this,  however,  the  royal  princes  could
not  but  display  the  faults  due  to  their  birth  and  education.
The  narrative  is  impartially  exact.  We  shudder  at  the
brutal  passion  of  Amnon,  and  the  shameless  counsel  of
the  wily  Jonatlab.  If  a  brilliant  suggestion  of  Ewald
may  t)e  accepted,  we  see  the  '  inauspicious  expression,'
or  in  plain  Hnglish  the  black  scowl  that  for  two  long
years  rested  on  the  face  of  Absalom,'  and  the  panic
of  the  court  when  the  blow  was  struck,  and  Amnon
was  assassinated  in  the  midst  of  his  brethren.  Not  less
valuable  psychologically  is  the  graphic  description  of
Absalom's  unfilial  revolt  (see  Abs.\i.((M,  1).

On  the  tragic  death  of  the  popular  favourite,  better
thoughts  came  to  David's  people,  who  bethought
themselves  of  the  many  occasions  on  which  he  had
saved  them  from  their  enemies.  The  men  of  Judah,
however,  took  the  opportunity  of  putting  forward  that
claim  to  precedence  (2  S.  1941-43)  which  the  king's
policy  had  steadily  ignored,  and  a  rupture  ensued
between  north  and  south,  which,  but  for  Joab's  energy,
might  have  led  to  a  second  and  more  dangerous  reljellion
(see,  however,  SiiKH.\,ii.  i).  After  this  nothing  seems  to
have  occurred  to  trouble  the  peace  of  the  kingdom.
David  had  not  nuiny  more  years  to  live,  for  Absalom's
rebellion  must  have  occurred  near  the  last  decade
of  his  father's  life  (Kittel,  ///.f/.  2 175).  The  closing
scene  in  the  biography  (i  K.  li-'2ii)  represents  David
as  decrepit  and  tedridden,  and  an  easy  prey  to  the
partizans  of  Solomon.  The  unedifying  account  of  the
palace-intrigue  (see  Adonijaii,  1),  which  placed  Bath-
sheba's  son  upon  the  throne,  and  was  followed  by  the
execution  of  Adonijah  and  Joab,  shocked  the  Chronicler's
sense  of  reverence.  He  therefore  (as  also  perhaps  the
author  of  a  lost  Midrash  on  which  he  bases  his  work)
sul)stitutes  for  it  a  great  religious  function,  in  which
David  plays  the  leading  part,  and  Solomon  appears  as
the  meek  recipient  of  much  highly  spiritual  advice  and
of  minute  instructions  as  to  the  building  of  the  temple
(i  Ch.  2J-29).

We  have  now  to  estimate  the  character  of  David. ^

Wo  may  safely  assert  that,  if  the  narratives  can  in  the

12 n A' "^^'" '^ trusted, no ancient Israelite

,'  .  exercised such a jiersonal charm as

David,  and  that  he  owed  this  not  merely
to  his  physical  but  also  to  his  moral  qualities.  In  him
the  better  elements  of  the  Israelitish  character  start  at
once  into  a  new  life.  There  are  some  points  in  him
that  reix;l  us  ;  in  these  he  is  the  child  of  the  past.
There  is  more  in  him  that  attracts  us  ;  in  this  he  is  a
herald  of  the  future.  One  of  the  later  writers  who  have
contributed  to  the  story  of  Saul  and  David  descrilxjs  the
latter  as  'a  man  according  to  Gcxl's  mind'  (i  S.  1-3  14),
which  means,  as  the  context  interprets  it,  one  in  whom
Yahwe  God  of  Israel  has  found  the  c|ualities  of  a  leader
of his people (cp Jer.  315). Ihat David was an

1  On  3  S.  1332  see  F-w.  ///s/.  8172.  The  suRgestion  is
given  in  fuller  form  by  Dr.  '/'US  234,  whose  '  only  doubt  Ls
whether  a  word  (Jm'W")  meaning  in  itself  simply  "  unluckiness"
could  be  used  absolutely  to  signify  a  "token  of  unluckiness"
for  others."  WRS  (David,  £/U9>)  accepted  the  view  ;  We.  and
Ku.  are  also  attracted  by  it.  The  present  writer  prefers  Ew.'s
alternative  suggestion,  viz.,  to  read  nCtpC"  instead  of  rtO'V  (Kt.)
or  TO?C'(Kr.);  but  "S'^V  remains  unexplained.  Almost  certainly
Oratz  is  right.  Read,  with  him,  .TOei.~D  .  .  .  a'T'^V  '?»  'for
hostility  was  in  .•\bsaIom's  heart ';  cp  €Si-.

'-  The  most  helpful  characterisation  of  David  from  a  moderate
traditional  point  of  view  is  that  of  K6h.  Lehrb.  <ier  bihl.  Crsch.
ii.  1  184-188  373  ('84).  Owing  to  the  progress  of  criticism,
however,  all  trie  earlier  sketches  of  David's  character  need  a
thorough  revision.  A  bridge  between  the  old  and  the  new  is
offered  in  Cheyne's  Auls,  16-73,  where  the  results  of  recent
criticism  of  the  liooks  of  .Samuel  and  of  the  Psalter  are  pre-
supposed, and  all  that  is  .still  tenable  in  the  earlier  estimates  of
David  is  restated. See  also  Iskael,  |g  17-33.

1033


DAVID

honest  and  vigorous  ruler  both  in  peace  and  in  war,
the  evidence  given  alxjve  sulliciently  shows.  In  after-
times  his  name  lx.'came  the  syntlxjl  of  a  righteous  rule
(Jer.  285),  and  further  criticism  of  the  records  has  only
confirmed  the  eulogy  given  to  David  by  Koljertson  Smith
in  1877 — 'hat  his  adnunistration  of  justice  'was  never
stained  by  selfish  considerations  or  motives  of  personal
rancour. ' '  Nor  does  he  deserve  to  lie  blamed  for  his
cruelty  to  Israel's  foreign  enemies,  when  we  consider
the  imperfect  development  of  the  idci  t)f  ntorality  in  his
time,  and  the  fate  that  would  have  lx."en  in  store  for
himself  and  his  people,  had  the  conquerors  and  the
contiuered  changed  places.  He  doubtless  thought  it
absolutely  neces.sary  to  cripple  Israel's  cruel  and
malicious  neighbours  ;  to  the  Canaanites  at  his  own
door  he  was  gentle.*  Compare  him  with  .Sargon  or
Asur-bani-pal,  in  whom  cruelty  was  joined  to  the  lust  of
conquest,  and  how  great  is  his  moral  superiority  !  Nor
can  we  easily  admit  a  doubt  as  to  the  genuineness  of
his  religion.  He  lived  in  the  fear  of  God,  according  to
the  standard  of  his  times.

The  generous  elevation  of  David's  character  is  seen
most  clearly  in  those  parts  of  his  life  where  an  inferior
nature  would  have  been  most  at  fault — in  his  conduct
towards  Saul  (with  which  the  story  of  Rizi'.VH  is  in  no
way  inconsistent),  in  the  blameless  reputation  of  himself
and  his  band  of  outlaws  in  the  wilderness  of  Judah,  in
his  repentance  (which  we  so  greatly  desire  to  believe)
under  the  rebuke  of  Nathan,  and  in  his  noble  and  truly
religious  tearing  on  the  revolt  of  Absalom,  the  accuracy
of  the  account  of  which  is  guaranteed  by  the  antique
elements  which  it  contains.  His  unfailing  insight  into
character,  and  his  power  of  winning  men's  hearts  and
touching  their  lielter  impulses,  api)ear  in  inmimerable
traits  of  the  history  [e.g.,  2  S.  14:8-2o  331-39  2815-17).
His  knowledge  of  men  w.is  the  divination  of  a  poet
rather  than  the  acquired  genius  of  a  statesman,  and  his
capacity  for  rule  stood in harmonious  unity  with  his

„ Wa he b''''cal  genius. But was  David  reallv  a


a  poet  7


poet? Did  he, like  the  Arabian prince


Imra'  al-Kais,  fascinate  his  half-primitive
people  by  song?  The  old  tradition  knows  him  as  a
musician  (i  S.  16 14-32) ;  late  editors  of  the  psalms,  but
not  Amos  (as  most  have  suiJjxjsed  ^),  as  a  poet.  Several
poems,  too,  are  ascribed  to  his  authorship  in  the  Books
of  Samuel,  and  those  who  inserted  them  had  a  very
definite  belief  on  the  subject  (see  Samui-.I.,  ii.  §  7). One

1  It  would  be  a  strange  exception  to  this  rule  if  out  of  pure
vindictiveness  David  urged  his  .son  Solomon  to  put  certain
persons  who  h.id  injured  him  to  death  (1  K.  21-9).  Three
answers  may  be  given  to  this  charge,  (i)  If  I  >avid  spoke  in  sub-
stance these  words,  it  was  because  he  feared  to  leave  Joab's
bloodshedding  unexpiated  and  Shimei's  solemn  curse  unneutral-
ised  b>-  the  death  of  the  offenders  :  continued  clemency  would,
according  to  the  prevalent  belief,  have  been  dangerous.  (2)  The
words  ascribed  to  David  imply  a  vigour  of  mind  and  a  regard
for  the  interests  of  the  kingdom  which  the  narrative  docs  not
permit  us  to  assume  in  the  dying  king.  After  neglecting  to
communicate  with  the  elders  of  Israel  and  Jud.-»h  respecting  the
.successor  to  the  throne,  it  is  not  likely  that  David's  mental
powers  suddenly  rallied,  so  as  to  enable  him  to  make  this  forcible
and  even  eloquent  .speech.  (3)  This  is  precisely  one  of  the
occasions  on  which  a  narrator  was  likely  to  invent.  Solomon
needed  to  be  excused  to  unfriendly  readers  for  having  put  Joab
and  Shimei  to  death.  The  excuse  (which  in  the  narrator's  view
W.1S  perfectly  valid)  could  best  be  given  by  introducing  it  into
a  last  speech  of  David.

2  The  allusion  is  to  Araunah,  or  rather  Adonijah,  as  the  name
should  probably  be  read. See  Araunah.

3  Even  the  AIT  of  v.  $6  only  says,  '  Like  David,  they  devise
for  themseU-es  instruments  of  (i.e.  to  accompany)  song."  This
does  not  suit  the  context,  which  says,  '  who  chant  (read  C'TClcn  >
cp  5  2j  :  t  fell  out)  to  the  sound  of  the  harp,"  and  then  speaks  of
the  wine-bibbing  and  the  rich  unguents.  Some  detail  of  the
banquet  must  be  referred  to  in  t.  ^fi.  .\\\  but  the  last  word  tc
-seems  to  be  the  conjecture  of  an  ancient  editor  (before  ®  was
ni.-ide),  who  found  the  letters  of  his  text  almost  illegible.  On  ®
see  Vollers,  Z.-ITIW  326-7  ('8.:].  Probably  the  verse  should
read  thus,  Tr  SipS  incd  733^  IffSy  D~1CTCn  'who  play  on  the
timbrel  and  harp,  and  rejoice  at  the  sound  of  song."  "i-na  '  like
David  '  is  a  gloss,  as  I.  P.  Peters  and  Winckler  have  independ-
ently pointed  out.  Cp  Is.  612,  and  especially  Job  21 13  ;  als«
T^aj  msi  Am.  5  33.

1034


DAVID,  CITY  OP

of  them — the  deeply-felt  elegy  on  Saul  and  Jonathan —
was  taken  from  the  so-called  Hook  of  J  ashar  {q.v. ,  §  2),
and  another  —  the  short  elegy  on  Abner  —  may  have
been  copied  from  the  same  book.  These  occur  in
2  S.  1 19-27  and  833/  respectively.  They  have  an
antique  air  and  are  worthy  of  David.  Whether  any
religious  elements  formerly  present  have  been  removed,
we  cannot  say  ;  but  there  is  no  special  reason  to  think
so.  That  the  song  of  triumph  in  2  S.  22  (  =  Ps.  18)
and  the  'last  words  of  David'  in  23 1-7  (both  highly
religious  compositions)  are  Davidic,  is  not,  on  grounds
of  criticism,  tenable.  Nor  can  any  of  the  psalms  in  the
Psalter  Ije  ascribed  with  any  probability  to  David.
The  eager  search  for  possible  Davidic  psalms  seems  to
be  a  proof  that  the  seekers  have  taken  up  the  study  of
the  Psalter  at  the  wrong  end.  That  David  composed
religious  songs  is  of  course  probable  enough.  When
he  and  his  companions  '  played  before  Yahw6  with  all
their  might,  and  with  songs  and  with  (divers  musical
instruments),'  *  it  is  reasonable  to  conjecture  that  '  some
of  these  songs  had  been  made  for  the  purpose  by  the
poet-king. '  '^  But  how  much  resemblance  would  these
psalms  have  had  to  the  psalms  of  the  second  temple?
and  how  could  the  David  known  to  us  from  history
have  entered  into  the  ideas  of  Psalms  32  and  51,  which
are  assigned  by  Delitzsch  and  Orelli  to  the  sad  period
of  David's  great  sin  ?  Would  not  that  have  been  one
cf  the  greatest  of  miracles  ? See  PsALMS.

[In  the  above  sketch  sentences  have  been  here  and
there  borrowed  from  the  late  Robertson  Smith's  art.
'  David '  in  the  EH,  especially  where  David's  character
and  his  originality  as  a  ruler  are  referred  to.  The
advance  of  criticism  since  1877  required  a  fresh  survey
of  the  subject.  On  Renan's  view  of  David  in  his  Hist,
dlsrael,  see  WRS  Eng.  Hist.  Rev.,  1888,  p.  134/
Duncker  {Hist,  of  Ant.  vol.  ii. )  is  hardly  less  un-
sympathetic than  Renan,  and  his  narrative  needs
adjustment  to  the  results  of  critical  analysis.  St.  'sG  I'l
1  223-298,  and  We.'s  ProL,  ET,  261-272,  and  UG(^)
56-64,  are  of  the  highest  importance.  Wi.'s  GI  1  is
fresh  and  original,  but  often  rash.  Cheyne's  Aids
{'92),  part  I,  relates  to  the  David  -  narratives  ;  Ki.'s
analysis  in  Kau.  HS,  the  results  of  which  are  tabulated
in  chap.  1,  is  provisionally  adopted.  See  also  Dr.
TBS  ('90);  Kamph.,  Philister  und  Hehrder  zur
Zeit  Davids,  ZATW  ['86]  43-97;  Marquart's  Funda-
meiite  ('97)  ;  and  the  articles  in  this  Dictionary  on
Samuel  and  Chronicles  (with  the  books  there  referred
to).  Prof  W.  R.  Smith's  article  in  EBC^^  should  be
taken  with  the  corresponding  portion  of  Ewald's  History.
Chandler's  Life  of  David  (ist  ed.  1766)  gives  answers
to  the  very  real  difficulties  suggested  by  Pierre  Bayle
which  are  now  superseded.  Stiihelin's  Lehen  Davids
('66)  is  recommended  by  Rolx;rtson  Smith  for  the
numerous  parallels  adduced  from  Oriental  history.  The
late  H.  A.  White's  art.  in  Hastings'  DB  has  great
merit.  For  an  account  of  David  as  a  tactician,  see
Dieulafoy's  monograph.  ]  T.  K.  C.

DAVID,  CITY  OF  (IH  l^i;), 2  Sam.  57  i  K.2io,

.See  JKRUSALE.M.

DAY. Among  the  ancients  the  day  was  reckoned  in
a  great  variety  of  ways. '  The  Babylonians  reckoned
from  sunrise  to  sunrise,  the  Athenians  from


1.  Ancient
reckoning.


.sunset  to  sunset,  the  Umbrians  from  noon
to  noon,  the  common  people  everywhere
from  dawn  to  dark,  the  Roman  priests  and  those  by
whom  the  civil  day  has  been  defined,  as  also  the
Egyptians  and  Hipparchus,  from  midnight  to  midnight '
(Plin.  //.V  279,  §  188).  '  From  dawn  to  dark'  {a^ luce
ad  tenebras)  was  the  ancient  and  ordinary  meaning  of
a  day  (ci")  among  the  Israelites  ;  night,  as  being  the
time  'when  no  man  can  work'  (Jn.  94),  might,  it  was
considered,  be  left  out  of  account  altogether,  or,  at  all

1  a  S.fl5. We  emend,  with  Klost.,  after  i  Ch.  138.
2  Che.  OPs.  192.

I03S


DAY

events,  as  being  the  evident  complement  of  the  '  day
and  involved  in  it,  did  not  rccjuire  explicit  mention.
Thus  the  word  '  day '  came  to  have  a  twofold  meaning  :
at  one  time  signifying  the  period  from  sunrise  to  sunset ;
at  another  including  day's  inseparable  accompaniment,
the  night,  and  embracing  the  whole  period  from  one
sunrise  to  the  ne.\t.  Only  in  ca.ses  where  the  contrast
had  to  be  brought  out,  or  there  was  risk  of  ambiguity,
was  it  necessary  to  name  the  night  (.n'^'S)  expressly,
as,  for  example,  in  Gen.  7412  31 39.  Apart  from  dv
and  the  combination  of  or  and  Th\  the  Hebrews  pos-
sessed no  expression  for  the  civil  day  as  including  day
and  night ;  for  the  designation  n^^  anj;,  '  evening
morning,'  which  makes  its  first  appearance  in  the
second  century  B.C.  (Dan.  814),  equivalent  to  the  Greek
vvxOr)fxepoi>  (2  Cor.  11  25),  is  but  a  combination  precisely
similar  to  the  older  ov  and  r\h'^.

The  Israelites  regarded  the  morning  as  the  beginning
of  the  day  ;  in  the  evening  the  day  '  declined  '  or  '  went
down,'  and  until  the  new  day  (ina,  'morning')  broke
it  was  necessary  to  '  tarry  all  night '  (cp  Judg.  196-9  and
the  series  in  Nu.  II32,  'all  that  day  and  all  the  night
and  all  the  next  day ').  Not  till  post-exilic  times  do  we
find  traces  of  a  new  mode  of  reckoning  which  makes
day  begin  at  sunset  and  continue  till  the  sunset  follow-
ing. In  P,  it  is  true,  the  expression  'day  and  night'
{e.g. ,  Lev.  835  Nu.  9  21)  is  unhesitatingly  used,  not  '  night
and  day,'  and  the  evening  following  the  fourteenth
day  of  the  first  month  is  regarded  as  the  evening  of  that
day  (Ex.  12  i8)  ;  but  Lev.  2332  certainly  reckons  the  day
as  extending  from  evening  to  evening,  and  the  same
mode  of  reckoning  seems  to  have  been  in  the  mind  of  the
writer  (P)  when,  after  describing  the  work  of  each  day,
he  invariably  adds,  '  So  there  was  evening  and  there  was
morning,  a  first  [second,  third,  etc.]  day'  (Gen.  I58  13,
etc.,  ^v'^V,  ':».  nnx  c'v  "li^a-.Ti  a'lJT'n-i).  The  later  mode
of  reckoning  is  shown  also  in  the  above-mentioned
expression  in  Dan.  814  (ipia  y^rp),  in  the  order  of  the
words  '  evening,  morning,  noon'  in  Ps.  55 17  [18],  and  in
the  '  night  and  day,'  '  night  or  day,'  of  the  late  passages
Is.  273  34 10  Esth.  4i6.^  In  connection  with  this  later
Jewish  custom  one  has  to  remember  the  importance
which  the  new  moon  (visible  only  in  the  evening)  had
for  the  Israelites  in  the  determination  of  their  feasts,
and  it  nmst  not  be  forgotten  that  other  ancient  peoples
who  observed  lunar  divisions  of  time  (Athenians,  Gauls,
Germans)  also  began  their  day  with  evening.  All
the  same,  it  is  undeniably  a  somewhat  unnatural  mode
of  reckoning,  and  as  far  as  Israel  is  concerned  can  have
come  into  use  only  when  it  was  desired  to  fix  times  with
legal  and  uniform  precision  for  the  nation  at  large.

The  ancient  Israelites  had  no  precise  subdivision
of  the  day  for  accurate  measurement  of  time. They

2.  Its  sub-
division


designated the various periods of the

day by the natural changes which

"^**""" marked  its  successive  stages, or  by  the

a.m.OIig  ullB c,,rrp«<;ivf» nmin.ntions in ordinarv dailv


Israelites.


successive  occupations  in  ordinary  daily


routine.  Thus  it  was  in  the  nature  of
things  that  morning  (ij^i),  midday  (cnns),  and  evening
(a-iy)  should  be  distinguished,  and  equally  so  that
morning  should  be  spoken  of  as  the  rising  of  the  morning,
the  breaking  of  the  day  (Gen.  19 15  3224  [25]),  or  the
rising  of  the  sun  (Gen.  19 23  3231  [32]) ;  midday,  the  heat
of  the  day  (Gen.  18 1  i  S.  11  n)  or  the  height  of  the  day
[EV  the  perfect  day]  (Prov.  4 18) ;  afternoon,  the  time  of
the  day's  decline  (Judg.  198)  ;  and  evening,  the  time  of
the  goin;:^  down  of  the  sun  (Gen.  15 12  17)  or  of '  the  wind  of
the  day  '  or  evening  breeze  (Gen.  38  Cant.  2 17  [when  the
day  is  cool]  46).  Specially  noticeable  is  the  expression
D'aij;,"!  pa,  '  between  the  two  evenings, '  met  with  only  in

1  In  Dt.  2866  Jer.  14 17  the  original  text  had  'day  and  night '
(see  (S)  ;  a  late  transcriber  substituted  '  night  .-ind  day  '  in  accord-
ance with  the  mode  of  expression  current  in  his  own  time.

1036


DAY

P(Ex.l26  16ia  293941  308  I.ev.235  Nu.935"  2848),
which  can  mean  only  'towards  evening,'  'about  the
evoninR  time,"  since  it  is  used  to  indicate  the  same  period
tha(  is  called  in  Dt.  166  the  time  of  the  going  down  of
the  sun  (cp  Kx.  1'26  Nu.  93511).  Whether  the  form
ought  to  l)c  taken  as  a  dual,  and  '  the  two  evenings '
understood  as  meaning  '  the  evening  of  the  sun  and  the
evening  of  its  still  visible  light,'  may  be  left  an  open
ciuestion  ;  but  it  is  important  to  note  that  the  evening
sacrifice  prescribed  by  the  law  to  be  made  D'SiyJl  J"3 — «•'•  >
towards  evening  (Ex.293941  Nu.  2848) — was  offered  in
the  first  century  of  our  era  in  the  afternoon  between
half-past  two  and  half-past  three  (cp  Jos.  An/,  xiv.  43
and  .Mishna,  Pcujhimbi  ;  also  Acts 3 1  10 3  30,  where  the
prayer  associated  with  the  evening  sacrifice  also  is  made
at  the  ninth  hour),  and  that  only  the  Samaritans  and
Karaites  maintain  the  old  correct  interpretation.  The
change  possibly  may  not  have  taken  place  till  after  the
Maccabean  [)eri(xi  ;  for  in  Daniel  (9 21)  the  daily  offering
is  still  spoken  of  as  siy  nms.  'the  evening  oblation,'
and  no  place  in  the  OT  gives  any  hint  of  a  change  (cp
on  the  other  hand,  the  reminiscences  of  psalmody  by
night  in  the  temple  :  i  Ch.  933  2830  Ps.  9223  [34]  134  i;
cp  119  62).  Ry  reference  to  functions  of  daily  recurrence,
morning  is  called  'the  time  of  incense  '  (Lk.  1 10) ;  the
middle  of  the  afternoon,  the  time  of  the  offering  of  the
Minha  (i  K.  I82936)  ;  and  the  evening,  '  the  time  that
women  go  out  to  draw  water'  (Gen.  24ii),  or  '  the  time  of
the  evening  oblation  '  (Dan.  921 ;  cp  Kzra94/. ).  Cpalso
'  cock-crowing  '  as  denoting  early  morning  (Mk.  14  30  72).
The  or  affords  no  evidence  that  the  Israelites  divided
their  day  into  twelve  hours  as  the  Babylonians  did.
3  The  term  '^^'^  sundial  (?)  of  .Ahaz  (2  K.2O9-11  Is.
'hour  •  ^^^>'  ^^•^•'^^'^^'^''  '^  ^•''^  (see  Di.\i.),  did  not
lead  to  a  more  accurate  measurement  of
time  on  the  part  of  the  people,  and  even  at  so  late  a  date
as  that  of  Daniel  (4  16  65)  the  Aramaic  word  nyr  ( 'hour')
does  not  mean  any  e.xact  portion  of  time.  Reckoning  by
hours  is  met  with  first  in  the  NT,  where  the  day  consists
of  twelve  hours  (Jn.  11 9)  or  twelfths  simply  designated  as
first  [second,  etc.]  of  the  day,  reckoned  as  beginning  at
sunrise  (cp.\cts2  IS  Mt.  2O3  56  2745  46  etc. ).  The  hour
was  ilius  with  the  Jews  a  variable  quantity,  as  it  was
also  with  the  Babylonians,  the  twelfth  part  of  the  day
ranging  fiom  forty-nine  to  seventy-one  minutes  according
to  the  season  of  the  year.  The  division  of  the  day  into
twelve  parts  and  the  further  development  of  the  sexa-
gesimal system  as  a  whole  had  commended  itself  to  the
ftibylonians  from  their  observation  that,  at  the  vernal
equinox,  the  time  between  the  api>earance  of  the  first
direct  ray  of  the  sun  and  that  of  visibility  of  the  entire
disk  above  the  horizon  amounted  to  a  360th  of  the
whole  time  during  which  the  sun  was  visible  in  the
heavens,  or  the  720th  part  of  a  full  day  reckoned  from
one  sunrise  to  another.

Kqual  divisions  of  the  night  were  of  older  date  than

equal  divisions  of  the  day. Three  night-watches  were

recognised  : the  first (ni"C»K  B*kn ; Lam.

watches'  2 '9)'  ^^^  "^'^"^^^  (r^:\ym'n■pv^:^^,  Judg.
719;  within  which,  of  course,  midnight  fell,
Ex.  11 4)  and  the  last  (-ij^in  rrpvK  ;  Kx.  14 24  i  S.  11  n).
From  the  NT  we  learn  that,  in  the  first  century  of
our  era  at  le.ist,  the  Roman  division  into  four  watches
had  in  common  use  superseded  the  old  division  into
three  (Mk.  1835  6\f/i,  fuaovvKTiov,  dXfKTopo^w»'/o[i]
and  irpwi  ;  Mt.  I425  Mk.  648  Lk.  I238,  cp  Actsl24).
From  the  division  of  the  day  into  twelve  hours  the
step  to  a  similar  division  of  the  night  was  easy  (so,
certainly,  in  Acts 28  23  ;  cp  also  Acts  16  33  Lk.  12  39  and,
for  the  last-cited  passage,  see  the  parallel  in  Mt.  2443
which  speaks  of  '  watch,"  not  '  hour").

'  Day '  is  sometimes  used  in  a  half-metaphorical  sense.  Thus
in  Hos.  2157511  means  '  high  day '  ;  in  lob  3  t  '  birth-day ' ;  in
Jer.  5O27  Job  18  20  15  23  Ps.  37  13,  etc.,  'day  of  doom  ' ;  in  Is.
»  3  [4I '  day  of  battle.' On  the  expression  '  day  of  Yahwe '  (Joel

1037


DEACON  AND  DEACONESS

1  ij  F.zck.  135  Is.  212)  and  'day  of  Judgment'  (2  Pel.  87
rfiiifxi.  itpt<re<i*t)  see  KsciiA  loi.fx.v,  i.  Paul  u*c«  the  exprcksion
ai^pwiricij  i9fi«'pa  (i  Cor.  4  1)  in  coiurait  to  mi^pa  tou  jcv/mou  (Lk,
17  24  I  Cor.  1  H  (see  Var.  llib.  J ;  it)  nvpitunt  ruitpa,  Rev.  1  10 ;  see
I.okd's  Day)  to  mean  an  ordinary  'day  of  trial'  ((irimm(>)
compares  Landtag,  Keichtlag;).  See  an.  '  Tag '  in  Winer's
Miyii,  as  also  in  /'RK,  and  Richm's  HlVlf;  Itrn/inKcr,  HA
aoa/;  Nowack,  //-'M214/;  Hcrzfcld,  67 7 ('57) 2  184/ and
SchOrer,  Gy/'i-2T,i  3rd  cd.  2290.  k.  y^

DAY'S  JOURNEY  (DV  -SQ^  NU.II3,  ;  hm€PAC
oAoc.  Lk.  244)-  See  Weights  and  Mkasukes.
For  '  sabbath  day's  journey,'  see  Sabbath,  §  4,  n.

DAYSMAN  (n^SID),  Job 933  EV ;  EV""!:-  Umpire
(see  Murray  under  '  daysman '  ;  Davidson  quotes
Spenser,  FtrrieQuten,  ii.  8  28).  (S"**"*  renders  by  fuairijt
Kol  iX^yx^y- See  Law  anu  Justice,  §  10.

DAY  STAR.  I.  ("p!?*?!  ;  €coC(t)Opoc).  Is.  14  la  RV  ;
2. ((})60Cct)Opoc).  2  I'et.  1 19. See  Lucil-EK.

DEACON  and  DEACONESS  (Aiakonoc)-
1. yV;.'  Won/. We  may  consider first the use  of
the  word  and  of  its  cognates.

In  the  (lospels  the  word  iiaxovot  is  used  (i)  literally,  of  a

servant who  prepares  or serves  a  meal,  Mt.  2213 Jn.  259;

. (2)  metaphorically  (Mk.  935  10 43  |1  Mt.  23  11

1.  Usage  in 2026,  Jn.  1226). it  is  never  used  by  Lk.  who,
Gospels. in  wiiat  seems  a  parallel to  sayings in  Mk.,

prefers  the  participle  6  £i<uco><ui'  (22  2ty.) ;  in
one  place  (10  40),  however,  he  uses  Siaxofia  of  the  preparation
of  a  meal.  The  verb  {SiaKoveiy)  is  likewise  used  (i)  literally,  of
preparing  or  supplying  food  (Mk.  4  13  II  Mt.  4  1 1  of  the  angels) ;
1  31  (ij  Mt.  Lk.),  Lk.  10 40  1237  17  8  Jn.  12  2  Mt.  •2.-44  (rather
more  widely);  and  auain  somewhat  more  widely  (Mk.  IS  41  \,  Mt.
2755  Lk.  83)  of  the  women  who  ministered  to  Jesus  in  his
journeyings  in  Galilee;  (2)  metaphorically  (Lk.  '2236/.;  Jn.
12  26).

The  ordinary  word  for  a  servant  in  the  Clospels  is  Sov\oi,  a
bond -servant  or  slave;  but  a  5oOAo?  may  be  calKd  upaii  to
SiaKovtlf  (l.k.  177/.),  and  in  discliarj;c  of  this  function  may
be  termed  Siclkovoi;  (Mt.  22  8  10  12).  AoOAof  emphasises  relation
to  a  master  ;  itoKOfOV,  performance  of  service.  The  latter  word
is  free  from  the  .Lssoci.uiDns  of  slavery  which  belong  to  the
firmer.  It  wxs  thus  titled  for  adoption  as  the  description  of
any  form  of  Christian  service  rendered  to  Christ  or  to  his
Church.

Accordingly  in  Acts  we  find  &tajeovia  frequently  in  this  sense  :

Acts  1  17  25,  the  SioKot'Ca  of  ajx>stleship  ;  ti  i,  the  daily  jtaxofia

by  which  the  needs  of  the  poorer  brelliren  weie

2.  In  Acts, supplied  ;  and,  in  contrast  to  this,  the  Siajtovia

of  the  word  (t^).  In  11  29  and  12  25  itaxoi-ta
is  used  of  the  help  in  the  famine  rendered  by  .Antioch  to  the
brethren  in  J udaia  (a  sense  which  recurs  in  Paul's  epistles).  In
'20  24  Paul  sjjeaks  more  generally  of  fulliilinj;  the  Siaxofia.  which
he  liiLs  received  of  the  Lord  Jesus;  and  in  21  19  he  decl.ires
what  (lod  has  wrousht  among  the  (lentiles  through  his  jiojcoi'ta.
The  word  5taxoi'o«  does  not  occur  at  all  in  .\cts  (as  it  d<.«s  not
in  Lk.) ;  but  Sieucofetf  is  used  in  a  literal  sense  in  0  2  of  serving
the  tables ;  and  met.iphorically  of  Timothy  and  Erastus,  who
'  ministered  '  to  Paul  (li'  22).

In  the  first  of  the  four  chronological  groups  of  the  Pauline
epistles,  the  only  instance  of  the  word  or  its  cugnates  is  1  Thess.

3  2,  where  Timothy  is  called  'the  Siokovo^
3.  In  Epistles, (or  ervyfpyo^,  AV^* arm.]  of  God  in  the  gos|)ei

of  Christ.'  In  the  second  gri<iip  the  words
are  freely  used.  Paul  and  .\pollos  are  '  diaxovoi  ilirough  whom
ye  believed  '  (i  Cor.  3  5).  '  Differences  of  JiaxoWat '  are  spoken
of  in  12  5  ;  and  of  the  household  of  tStephanas  the  remarkable
phrase  is  used,  '  they  appointed  (or  set ')  themselves  unto
iioKovia  to  the  saints  '  (10  15).  This  passage  alone  wouM  show
that  the  words  were  not  yet  limited  to  an  official  use.  In  2  Cor.
the  most  noteworthy  passages  are  84  19  20  9  i  12  13,  where  the
words  are  applied  to  the  collection  in  the  Greek  cliurches  for
the  poor  saints  in  Jerusalem,  a  service  on  which  Paul  laid  the
greatest  stress  as  being  a  means  of  cementing  the  union  between
the  Jewish  and  the  Gentile  portions  of  the  Church.  The  Epistle
to  the  Romans  (162531)  shows  us  his  anxiety  on  this  matter,
and  his  fixed  resolve  to  carry  out  his  project  in  person  at  any
risk  to  liberty  or  life.  Here  again,  then,  Siojcovtlv  and  Siaxovia
are  used  of  the  mini.stration  to  temporal  needs.  In  the  same
epistle  (11  13)  occur  the  notable  words  '  I  glorify  my  {toxofia*
(as  apostle  of  the  Gentiles) ;  and  the  wide  range  with  which  he
uses  the  term  is  seen  when  he  speaks  of  the  temporal  ruler  as
'the  Sidxovoi  of  God'  (13 4).  1  he  application  of  the  word  to
PIiicIh;  of  Cenchreae  (16  i)  will  be  considered  presently  (i  4).

In  the  third  group  I'aul  himself  is  twice  styled  a  ' iidjcovot
of  the  gospel '  (Eph.  87  Col.  1  23),  and  once  'a  JiaxofOf  of  t('e
church  (Col.  1  24  yi).  Tychicus  is  twice  described  as  'the
beloved  brother  and  faithful  Jioxoiw  in  the  Lord '  (Eph.  6  21
CoL  47; in  the  latter  place  the  description  '  fellow-servant '

1038


DEACON  AND  DEACONESS

also  is  inserted);  similarly,  'Epaphras,  who  isa  faitliful  SiaKovoi,
on  our  behalf,  of  Christ'  (Col.  1  7).  "Ihe  work  of  6ta«oWa  is
referred  to  in  the  widest  sense  in  Eph.  4  12  ;  and  in  Col.  417
Archippus  receives  the  message  :  '  Look  to  the  SiaxovCa  which
thou  hast  received  in  the  Lord,  that  thou  mayest  fullil  it.'  In
Philemon  Paul  says  of  Onesimus  the  runaway  slave,  '  that  on
thy  behalf  he  may  minister  to  me  '  (Sianoirf,  v.  13).  In  Philip,
pians  the  only  instance  is  of  special  importance  ;  for  the  epistle

15  addressed  '  to  all  the  saints  ...  in  Philippi,  together  with
CTTiVieoTrot  and  hiaKOVoi  *  (1  i).

I'he  fourth  group  consists  of  the  Pastoral  Epistles  ;  and  here
the  general  sense  of  the  words  is  still  the  most  frequent.  The
apostle  thanks  (Jod  (i  Tim.  1  12)  for  having  appointed  him  unto
tioKovia..  Timothy  is  to  be  a  good  t».6.Kovo<i  of  Christ  Jesus
(4  6),  and  is  charged  to  fulfil  his  fiiaitoi'ia  (2  Tim.  4  5).  Of
Onesiphorus  the  apostle  recalls  how  he  '  ministered  '  in  Kphesus
(1  is);  and  of  ALirk  he  s.iys,  'he  is  useful  to  me  for  hiaKovia.'
(4  ii).  On  the  other  hand,  the  passage  of  most  importance  for
our  purpose  is  the  code  of  regulations  laid  down  in  i  Tim.  38-13
for  a  class  of  persons  who  are  definitely  designated  iioKOfoi.

Before  considering  these  regulations  we  may  return  to  Rom.

16  I, '  I  commend  to  you  Ph(jcbe  our  sister,  who  is  [also]  fiaxofot

_  f "'^ . church  which  is  in  Cenchrea;.' It  is

4.  Oase  01 possible  to  interpret  the  word  here  either  in  the

Phcebe. general  sense  in  which  Paul  uses  it  so  often,

or  in  the  official  sense  which  we  find  in  the

later  epistles to  the Philippians  and to  Timothy. It is  no

objection  to  the  official  sense  that  the  person  so  designated  is

a  woman  ;  for  we  shall  presently  see  that  at  Ephesus  the  Order

included  deacons  of  either  sex.

On  the  other  hand,  since  there  is  not  in  the  two  earlier  groups
of  Paul's  epistles  any  other  indication  that  inaKOvia.  is  a  special
office  in  the  Church,  this,  which  occurs  in  the  second  group,
would  be  a  solitary  and  somewhat  puzzling  exception.  More-
over, as  Cenchreae  was  the  E.  port  of  Corinth,  this  case  practi-
cally belongs  to  the  Ciirinthian  church.  In  that  church  special
mention  is  made  of  the  fiiaicoi'ia  of  .Stephanas  and  his  household,
the  word  hiaKovia.  being  used  in  its  broadest  sense.  There  also
Chloe  and  her  household  were  of  note.  It  may  be,  therefore,
that  Phcebe  was  another  woman  of  influence  who  held  a  corre-
sponding pre-eminence  of  service  in  the  neighbouring  port,  a
pre-eminence  that  earned  for  her  at  the  apostle's  hands  the
honourable  title  of  StotKoeof  of  the  church  ;  for  she  had  been
a  helper  (perhaps  we  should  render  it  'a  patroness,'  ■np6<nam^)
of  many  and  of  the  apostle  himself.  If  we  could  assume  that
the  diaconate  was  formally  established  in  the  Corinthian  church
at  this  time,  we  should  certainly  conclude  that  Phoebe  was  one
of  the  wonien  who  served  it  ;  but  this  assumption  is  in  sharp
contrast  with  the  silence  of  Paul's  epistles  as  to  any  kind  of
definite  ecclesiastical  organisation  at  Corinth.

Of  Phcebe,  then,  we  may  say  with  security  that  she  is  a
witness  to  the  important  services  rendered  by  women  in  the
primitive  Church  ;  but  in  tracing  the  history-  of  the  diaconate
It  will  not  be  wise  to  assume  that  the  word  &i6.Kovo<i  is  used  of
her  in  the  strictly  official  sense.  As  a  matter  of  historical
evidence  this  passage  miist  be  left  out  of  the  count  as  being,  at
any  rate,  uncertain  testimony.  For  a  technical  diaconate  in
Paul's  writings  we  are  thus  reduced  to  two  passages,  Phil.  1  i
and  I  Tim.  88-13.

n.  Origin  arid  functions  of  the  Diaconate. — The  first
recognition  of  any  need  of  organisation  in  the  Christian
6  Oriein  of  '^°'^'""n''y  occurs  in  connection  with  the
Diaconate.  ^'^''>;  "'^=},^  '"  Jerusalem  (see  Church.
§11).  1  he  word  deacon  is  not  applied
in  .Acts  to  the  seven  men  who  were  on  this  occasion
appointed  to  the  service  of  the  poor  ;  ^  we  have  already
noted  that  Siolkovo^  does  nor  occur  in  Lk.  or  Acts.
Nevertheless,  by  the  later  Church  tradition,  they  were
constantly  regarded  as  the  earliest  deacons  ;  and  so
strong  was  this  feeling  that  the  number  of  deacons  in
some  churches  was  limited  to  seven.  Names  apart,
they  truly  represented  the  essential  feature  of  the
diaconate,  as  the  Church's  organ  for  service  to  her
poorer  members.  In  other  communities,  especially  in
the  Greek  world,  this  service  was  destined  to  take  a
different  form  ;  but  the  deacons  of  the  Pauline  epistles
at  Philippi  and  Ephesus  had  a  similar  function,  though
the  circumstances  in  which  they  discharged  it  were  very
dissimilar.  The  definite  title  is  met  with  first  in  the  •
Greek  churches,  and  here  the  order  from  its  commence-
ment is  found  to  include  the  services  of  men  and  women
alike.  The  admission  of  women  to  the  diaconate
could  scarcely  have  arisen  in  the  Jewish  communities ;
but  it  was  probably  felt  to  be  natural  in  places  where
women  were  in  general  accorded  a  larger  liberty.
WTiilst  then  we  recognise  the  germ  of  the  institution
in  the  appointment  of  the  Seven  in  Jerusalem,  we  must

I  Cp  Hatch,  Early  Christian  Churches,  49.
1039


DEAD,  THE

look  to  the  Greek  churches  for  the  development  of  the
definite  and  permanent  order.

As  the  personal  ministry  of  Paul  drew  to  a  close,  and
as  it  became  evident  that  the  '  return '  of  Christ  was
indefinitely  postponed,  it  was  natural  that  ecclesiastical
organisation  should  assume  a  new  and  increasing  im-
portance. It  is  in  harmony  with  this  that  we  find  the
apostle  in  a  later  epistle  recognising  expressly  '  the
bishops  and  deacons '  at  F'hilippi,  very  much  as  he
had  recognised  the  '  episcopate '  of  the  presbyters  of
liphesus.  when  he  thought  that  he  should  see  them
again  no  more  (Acts  2O28).  'Those  who  ruled,'  and
'  those  who  served '  under  them,  were  coming  to  form
definite  classes,  to  which  the  natural  designations  of
overseers  (^ir/<TK07roi)  and  servants  (SidAcocot)  were  be-
ginning  to  be  formally  appropriated. Accordingly,  in

6  Functions  ^^'^  ^^^^  epistle  to  Timothy  the  apostle
lays  down  regulations  for  the  two
classes  under  these  titles.  The  differences  in  the
regulations  help  to  show  us  the  nature  of  the  functions
to  be  discharged  in  the  two  cases  (i  Tim.  81-13).  The
rules  which  should  govern  the  choice  of  deacons  must
be  cited  in  full  : —

'  De.-icons  in  like  manner  must  be  grave,  not  double-tongued,
not  given  to  much  wine,  not  eager  for  petty  gains,  holding
the  mystery  of  the  faith  in  a  pure  conscience.  And  they  too
are  first  to  be  tested,  and  then  to  minister,  if  they  be  irreproach-
able. Women  in  like  manner  must  be  grave,  not  slanderers,
sober,  faithful  in  all  things.  Deacons  are  to  be  husbands  of
one  wife,  ruling  well  their  children  and  their  own  houses  ;  for
they  that  have  ministered  well  acquire  a  good  standing  for
themselves  and  much  boldness  in  the  faith  which  is  in  Christ
Jesus.'

The  essence  of  these  regulations  is  that  deacons,
whether  men  or  women,  must  be  persons  of  character,
who  can  rule  their  tongues  and  are  temperate  in  the
use  of  wine.  Trustworthiness  is  demanded  of  the
woman,  as  strict  honesty  is  of  the  man  :  this  doubtless
points  to  the  fact  that  Church  moneys  would  pass
through  their  hands.  Deacons  are  to  know  what  they
believe,  and  to  live  in  accordance  with  it  ;  but  no
aptitude  for  teaching  is  demanded  of  them,  nor  any
qualifications  for  exercising  discipline.  The  service
of  the  deacons  is  the  house  to  house  service,  which
deals  primarily  with  temporal  wants.

In  the  AV  the  women  spoken  of  here  are  represented
as  the  wives  of  the  deacons.  This  interpretation  puts
a  serious  strain  on  the  original  Greek,  and  it  is  now
generally  abandoned.  It  finds  no  parallel  in  any
demand  for  special  qualifications  in  the  w  ives  of  bishops.
It  belongs  to  a  period  when  the  diaconate  of  women
had  been  wholly  lost  sight  of ;  and  it  cannot  be  main-
tained in  face  of  the  fact  that  women  were  undoubtedly
admitted  to  this  office  in  the  early  ages  of  the  Church's
history.

For  the  later  confusion  between  deaconesses  and  widows
see  Widow  ;  and  for  a  full  historical  account  of  the  female  dia-
conate see  The  Ministry  0/  Deaconesses  by  Deaconess  Cecilia
Kobinson  (98).  j.  a.  R.

DEAD,  THE,  and  DEATH.  The  preliminaries  may
first be  briefly  considered. To  kiss the  dead (Gen.

1  nisnoRal  of  ^^')  ^"'^  ^°  '^'°^'^  ^'^•^'''  ^^'^^  <^^"-
the  dead.  ^^''^  ''"'^  """"^^  (Mishna,  Shab.lZ^)
immediately  after  death  was  looked
upon  as  a  deed  of  natural  piety.  In  NT  times  the  body
was  washed  (Acts  937),  anointed  with  sweet -smelling
ointments  (Mk.  I61  Lk.  24i  Jn.  I27),  and  wrapped  in
linen  cloth  (Mt.  27s9  Mk.  1646  Lk.  2853),  or  the  hands
and  feet  were  bound  with  grave-clothes  and  the  head
covered  with  a  napkin  (Jn.  II44).  The  age  of  these
customs  must  remain  uncertain,  as  they  are  not  alluded
to  in  OT  ;  but  the  old  belief  that  in  SheOl  the  dead
would  lie  known  by  their  dress,  the  king  by  his  diadem,
the  soldier  by  his  sword,  the  prophet  by  his  mantle  ( i  S.
2814  Kzek.  3227),  leads  to  the  inference  that  the  dead
were  buried  dressed  as  in  life.  In  later  times,  delicate
foods,  ornaments,  gold  and  silver,  and  all  kinds  of
valuables  were  placed  with  the  body  in  the  graves  of


DEAD,  THE

princes  and  nobles '  (Jos.  Ant.  xv.  84).  If  what  we  read
(Jos.  Ant.  xiii.  84  xvi.  7 1)  as  to  the  plundering  of  Davids
grave  by  Hyrcanus  and  Herod  is  to  be  accepted,  this
custom  also  is  very  old.  Kmbalming  [</.i'.  ]  was  not  in
use. On  sacrifices  to  the  dead,  cp  KscjiATouxiV,  §  3.

The  usual  method  of  dis|X)sing  of  the  dead  was  by
burial  (Gen.  23 19  259  358  Judg.  -29  831  etc. ).  In  i  S.
31 8-13,  wiiere  we  n-ad  of  the  burning  of  the  Ixxly  of
Saul,  the  text  is  corrupt  (see  Klost.  ad  loc.),  as  is  also
the  case  with  Am.  610.^  Burning  was  looked  upt)n  as
something  abominable,  as  an  injury  to  the  dead  (Am.
2i) ;  it  was  used,  by  priestly  law  and  old  custom,  only
in  a  few  cases,  to  render  the  death  sentence  more  severe
(Josh.  725  l-ev.  2O14  219) ;  cp  Law  and  Ju.stick,  §  12.
The  aversion  to  the  burning  of  the  lx)dy  was  con-
nected with  the  belief  that  the  soul  even  after  death  was
bound  to  the  body.  Not  to  Ix;  buried  was  a  terrible
disgrace  which  one  could  hardly  wish  even  to  one's
greatest  enemy  (Am.  2i  i  K.  I322  14  n  I64  21  24  2  K.
9io  ls.33i2  Jer.732  82  922  [21]  14i6  I64  E/.ek.295).
The  spirits  of  the  unburied  dead  wander  restlessly  about,
and  in  ShCol  are  condemned  to  lie  in  the  corners  (lizek.
3223  Is.  14  15  etc.).  Burial  alone  so  bound  the  spirit
to  the  body  that  it  had  rest  and  could  harm  no  one.  It
was  therefore  the  sacred  duty  of  every  one  who  found  a
corpse  in  the  open  field  to  give  it  burial  (i  K.  14ii  I64
21  24  Jer.  7  33  2  S.  21 10,  and  especially  Tob.  1 18  28).  In
c;irsfs  of  death  by  stoning  the  pile  of  stones  took  the
place  of  a  regular  grave  (Josh.  726).  Cp  the  Greek  idea
as  given,  for  example,  in  the  Antigone  of  Sophocles.

Rapid  interment  wa.s  necessary  on  account  of  the  hot
climate,  and  even  without  express  biblical  authority  we
may  assume  that  then,  as  now,  in  the  East,  it  usually
took  place  on  the  day  of  death  (cp  Dt.  21 23).  The  body
was  carried  to  the  grave  on  a  bier  (2  S.  831  [nao] ;  Lk.
7  14  [aopos]).  Coffins  were  not  used  by  the  Israelites
(2  K.  1321);  Joseph's  bones  were  placed  in  a  cortin
(p-ix;  (jop6%)  in  conformity  with  the  custom  of  the
Egyptians  (Gen.  5O26).*  The  stone  coffin  (sarcophagus)''
was  adopted  by  the  Jews  (as  also  by  the  Phoenicians)  from
the  p:gyptians  long  after  the  e.xile,  but  only  by  the  wealthy.
The  procession  of  friends,  who  would  of  course  often  be
mourners,^  was  accompanied  by  hired  mourners  singing
lamentations  (2  S.  331  ;  cp  Mourni.ng  Customs).**  The
place  of  burial  was  determined  by  the  txjlief  that  the  unity
of  the  family  and  trilx;  continued  after  death.  The  Ixsdies
of  those  who  wished  to  be  reunited  with  their  parents  and
family  in  ShCol  had  to  be  buried  in  the  family  sepulchre
(see  To.MBS,  Esciiatoi.(k;v).

See  BenzinRer,  Arch.  ('94),  §  23;  Nowack,  If  A  ('94),  g  32;
and  Bender  in  JQK,  18947;  1.  B.

'Death'  (010. G&NATOc)  can  mean,  not  only  the

process  or  state  of  death,  but  also  the  realm  of  the  dead,

2 Biblical 'I^e'-ith-land.' See Is.  28.5 Hos.  I3.4

referenceB P^-^sM  9i3[.4]  22 ,5  [.6]  6820  [21]  89

reierences. ^g  ^^^^  jQ-_g  ^^^^  2.8  727  Job 28 22  38 .7

Rev.  I18  (58  20 13/ In Rev.  68  RV  prints  Death,  to

correspond  to  Hades. Both  are personifications  ; cp

the later Jewish representations of Ab.vudon ['/.f. ]

and  Maivcth  ( '  Death ' ) as two  of  God's  chief  angels

(cp Dkstkovkr). 'The dead' in AV corresponds

not  only  to  cnti.i  (often)  but  also  to  c"kbi.t  (Hs.  8810

'  On  Jobs  15,  where  some  pl.-iusibly  find  an  allusion  to  the
treasures  in  royal  tombs,  see  Tomhs.

2  See,  however,  the  ingenious  suggestions  of  WRS  Rel.
Sem.->  372.  Wellh.  is  fully  conscious  of  the  difficulty  of  Am.
610  (Die  AV.  Pn)ph.(i)  87);  also  Schwally,  Dm  Ltben  nach
dem  Tode,  48.

5  In  Job"Jl32  tropof  (bier,  coffin)  is  used  in  0a  to  render
Cfnji  'tomb'  or  'sepulchral  mound";  but  vioputv  [BC]  or  <rupu
[K]  is  the  better  reading. See  To.mbs.

*  Cp  Bed,  8  3.

3  Cp  Lk.7i2.  Whether  we  may  compare  Job2l33^  is  un-
certain. Di.  denies,  Duhm  affirms  this.  The  whole  passage  is
obscure  and  not  very  coherent.

6  On  the  mourning-women  in  primitive  Babylonia  see  Maspero,
DaivH  of  Civ.  684.  They  also  washed,  prepared,  and  arranged
the  dead  body.

XO4X


DEAD  SEA,  THE

[11]  Prov.  2i8  9i8  21 16  Is.  149  261419;  inconsistently
Job  26  5,  '  dead  things ' ).  R  V  sometimes  has  '  they  that
are  deceased'  (e.g..  Job  265);  in  mg.  always  'the
shades; Heb.  Rephaim.'

We  will  examine  the  alxjve  passages,  beginning  with  :
(a)  Job'JOs,  of  which  Schultens  remarks,  '  Subita  nox  diem
solemquc  adiniit.' KV,  and  virtually  Davidson,  render  thus —
They  that  are  dccea.sed  tremble
Beneath  the  waters  and  the  inhabitants  thereof.
Davidson  comments,  '  This  atxxle  of  deceased  persons  lies  deep
down  under  the  waters  of  the  sea  and  all  the  inhabitants  uf  these
waters,  for  the  sea  belongs  to  the  upper  world. Yet  the  power
of  Ood  is  felt  even  at  this  immeasurable  distance  from  his  abode
on  high.' To  us  this  may  appear  natur.-il  ;  but  to  those  who  l>c-
lievcd  that  the  '  shades '  were  '  forgotten  by  God  '  (Ps.  88  5  (6]),  it
would  .scarcely  appear  so. The  Hebrew  of '.'ti  5  is  also  not  worthy
of  the  context. Probably  we  should  read  (/i>/.  Timet,  10  383
tMay  '99]) :

He  makes  the  sea  and  its  billows  to  start  (in  alarm).
He  terrifies  the  waters  and  tlic  flo<xls  thereof*
(i^)  In  Ps.  88  10  [11]  the  shades  are  represented  as  incapable  of
'arising  and  praisin)^  (lod.'  In  'arise'  Kirkpatrick  sees  a  refer-
ence to  the  re^urrecttoIl,  an  idea  which  the  psalmist  finds  incon-
ceivable, (c)  Prov.  '2  m/.,  no  return  from  the  shades,  {d)  Prov.
9  18.  Those  who  frequent  the  house  of  .Madam  Folly  (v.  I3)are,
as  it  were,  shades  already  (anticipating  Dante).  (<■)  Prov.  "Jl  16.
Folly  leads  surely  to  the  shades.  (_/")Is.  I49.  When  the  over-
thrown king  of  Babylon  appears  in  .SheOl,  the  shades  themselves,
especially  the  royal  shades,  are  in  excitement.  Some  tidings  of
his  greatness  have  reached  them,  and  they  marvel  to  sec  one
who  had  claimed  to  sit  with  the  gods  reduced  to  their  own
miserable  state.  The  poet  takes  some  liberty  with  the  popular
belief,  or  else  revives  an  earlier  form  of  it.  In  the  legend  of
15tar,  /.  19,  we  read,  '  I  will  raise  up  the  dead  to  cat  the  living. '2
{g)  Is.  'Hy  1419.  '  The  shades  will  not  rise  ...  to  life  sh.ill  the
earth  bring  the  shades'  {SBOT). The  resurrection  hope. See

EsCHATOLtKJY,  §  28^

Bottcher  (De  inferis,  §  wi  ff.)  derives  the  word
.^^//!i:'/'/«(Q'KB-i)  from  ^Jritr^,  projicere. The  giants  are

3 Origin '  ^"'"''-''^ '  '°  ShCol,  and  then,  as  the  chief
",  . ° inhabitants  of  ShCol.  give  their  name  to
Renhi'Im '^e  whole  population. Duhm  (on  Is.  149
"  ■ and  Job2(>5)  holds  the  same  view  as  to

the  transference  of  the  title  Kiphd'im  from  the  giants  to
all  other  inhabitants  of  Deathland.  This  theory  mis-
takes the  meaning  of  the  Repha'lm  of  Gene-sis,  Numbers,
Deuteronomy,  and  gives  a  doubtful  meaning  to  y^'.-rc")-
It  also  assumes  as  correct  a  passage  (Job  265)  which  is
certainly  corrupt.  It  is  an  old  view  revived  (see  Schultens
on  Job,  1737,  p.  705).  Most  critics,  however,  hold  that
Rcphd'im—'\^c  flaccid,  weak,'  a  natural  development
of  y^nST  (cp  Jer.  624  etc.).  '  .\rt  thou  also  become
weak  [r\'Sn)  as  we?'  ask  the  shades  (Is.  14  10,  RV).  But
this  is  far  too  easy,  and  the  Hebrews  would  hardly  have
spoken  of  the  spirits  of  the  dead  as  'the  weak  ones.'
'  I  see  a  god  coming  up  out  of  the  earth,'  says  the  wise
woman  to  -Saul  (iS.  2813  R\').  The  word  ought  to
mean  'the  terrible,'  or  'the  wise,'  or  the  like.  In  the
later  OT  books  the  condition  of  those  in  .ShCol  is  por-
trayed in  very  gloomy  colours  ;  but  these  books  do  not
express  the  primitive  jxjpular  belief.  No  doubt  Re-
phii'im  is  a  mutilated  or  modified  form  of  some  primitive
religious  term.  A  sister-form  is  most  probably  Ter.\-
PHI.M  [q.v.]. Cp  Sayce,  Hibbert  l^cts.  450,  n.  5.

§ I I.  B.,  §  2/ T.  K.  C.

DEAD  SEA,  THE,  the  usual  designation  of  the  lake
in  which  the  course  of  the  Jordan  terminates,  occurs
1  Names  "°^^  '^'^'''-' '"  ^^  °^  ^  *  though  it  was  not  un-
■  connnon  in  antiquity  (0(iXa<r<ra»'6«fpd  ;  Paus.
v.  73;  Galen  420;  Justin  xxxvi.  36;  Eus.  C>.S'  261  32),
and  is  found  in  Vg.  of  Josh.  3  i6t  [mare  solitudinis  quod
nunc  vacatur  mortuum).

In  the  OT  this  lake  is  occa-sionally  called  simply  'the  sea'
(0^,  four  times,  and  in  the  e.vpression  'from  sea  to  sea'):  also
'  the  Salt  sea  '  (17^1  C^,  nine  times  ;  ^  SaAacro-a  tmi-  aAut>  [oAof ,
17  oAi/nj],  mare  satis,  m.  salsissimuni) \  'the  sea  of  the  plain,'
RV  'sea  of  the  Arahah'  ('"^^T^ri  C^  five  times;  \i\\  0dXauT<ra.
[r^]  'Xpafia;  mare  satitudinis,  m.  deserti ;  in  the  three  places

1  on'Sapi  c;o  nnnp  vVji  d;,t  pan.

>  Jastrow,  Rel.  o/Bab^andAss.  569.


DEAD  SEA,  THE


where  both  designations  are  employed  'Salt  sea'  is  used  to
explain  the  expression  'sea  of  the  Arabah ') ;  and,  in  three
places,  '  the  eastern  least,  former]  sea '  ('P"l|3ri  D'H  :  17  $dXa<T<Ta
ri  irpbs  afaroAo?  ♦oivKcivo?,  rj  6.  r]  irpu>TH  ',  mare  ortentaU).^  In
Diod.  Sic.  (•-'4'i  1998)  and  in  Josephus  (often;  see  especially
BJ'w.^Ai)  it  is  "ACTi^Tiri?  Ai>cr) ;  so  also  in  I'liny  {lacus  As-
phaltitfs;  /I.Vv.  IS  15).  josephus  also  has  17  SoSo/uLiTts  KifLin)
(Ant.  V.  1  22);  cp  the  Sodfonntish  sea'  (///arjr  Sodoiniticuni)  of
Esd.  5  7. This  name  occurs  also  in  Edrisi  (3  5,  transl.  Jaubert,


1  338),  who  calls  it  the  sea  of  Sodom  and  Gomorrah  and  the  sea
of  Za'rah  (Zoar).  lis  name  in  Arabic  (at  least  since  the  eleventh
century)  is  Bukriar  Buheirat)  Lut ;  but  this  does  not  prove
the  name  of  Lot  to  h.ive  remained  attached  to  the  sea  in  local
tradition  for  four  thousand  years.  It  arises  simply  from  the  fact
that  Lot  and  the  overthrow  of  Sodom  and  Gomorrah  are  men-
tioned in  the  Koran.

From  the  biblical  point  of  view  the  Dead  Sea  is  not
very  important.  The  references  to  it  in  the  OT  occur
generally  in  topographical  connections,  especially  in
deliniiions  of  the  eastern  frontier  of  the  land  of  Israel.
There  are  two  notable  exceptions  :  (a)  where  it  conies
into  the  story  of  the  Cities  of  the  Plain,  and  [b)  where  it
is  referred  to  in  the  prophetic  descriptions  of  Kzek.  47
and  Zech.  148. The  NT  does  not  refer  to  it  at  all.

From the geographical point of view it is other-
wise : the  interest  of  this  lake  is  quite  extraordinary.
_  ,  . The  Jordan  valley,  running  from  N.  to

2.  GeograpHi-  ^  _  j^^^j^^  ^^  ^j^^  ^^l^^^.  sea-level  as  far
cal  interest.  ^,  ^  ^ , j^^,^  ^^^^^^  Lake  H fileh  ;  the  Lake
of  Galilee  is  some  680  feet  lower,  and  thence  the  'Arabah
or  Ghor  continues  to  fall  till  the  surface  of  the  Dead  Sea
is  reached  at  a  distance  below  the  sea  of  some  i30o'-*
feet.  At  the  opposite  extremity  of  this  lake  ends
another  valley,  coming  from  the  S. ,  formerly  called  the
Ak.\1!.\ii  [/.r'.].  Thus  the  lake  constitutes  the  deepest
portion  of  what  is  the  most  strongly  marked  depres-
sion (unconnected  with  the  sea)  on  the  surface  of  the
globe.'  It  has  no  effluent.  Should  the  question  be
asked,  whether  in  former  times  the  Jordan,  after  passing
through  the  Dead  Sea,  may  not  have  flowed  on  south-
ward falling  at  last  into  the  Red  Sea  (Klanite  Gulf  or
Gulf  of  'Akabah),  it  may  suffice  to  point  out  how  much
below  sea-level  the  Dead  Sea  is,  and  further,  that  the
valley  to  the  S.  of  the  Dead  Sea  is  really  two  valleys,  j
One  runs  X. ,  the  other  S. ,  and  the  intersection  or  water-
shed is  at  a  height  of  650  feet  above  the  level  of  the
Red  Sea  and  of  the  Mediterranean  (according  to  the
PEF  survey).-*  Thus  the  two  basins  are  hydrographic-
ally  distinct,  which  is  confirmed  by  a  stratigraphical
study  of  the  sedimentary  deposits  on  the  valley  floor
(Lartet).

The  geological  investigation  of  Palestine  and  of  the
Dead  Sea,  carried  on  mainly  by  PVaiis,  Lartet,  Hull,
and  Blanckenhorn,  has  proved,  con-
3.  Geological  ^^^^^  ^^  previous  ideas,  that  the  Dead
investigation,  g^.^  ^.^^^o^  possibly  date  from  the
historical  epoch,  and  that  it  must  have  presented,  at
any  rate  from  the  beginning  of  the  quaternary  epoch,
practically  the  same  asfxict  and  configuration  as  at
present.  Traces  can  still  be  seen,  however,  of  a  past
time  when  the  water  stood  as  much  as  11 80  feet  above
its  present  level,  as  well  as  of  another  phase  in  which
the  difference  was  only  348  feet  ;  in  short,  the  waters
have  gradually  subsided  to  their  present  position.

The  actual  level  is  that  at  which  the  evaporation  exactly
counterbalances  the  daily  influx  of  water  from  the  Jordan  and
the  other  affluents. Of  these  List,  the  chief,  includint;  cert.im

1  Notwithstanding  the  continued  advocacy  of  the  wrong  view
in  PEFQ,  1898,  112-13,  ■'  is  certain  that  jiinN.T  D'H  in  Dt.  34  2
(AV  'the  utmost  sea';  RV  'the  hinder  .sea,'  mg.  'the  western
sea')  is  not  the  Dead  Sea  but  the  Mcditerr.inean  ;  cp  Dt.  11  24.

2  The  (not  very  wide)  variations  from  this  figure  can  for  the
most  part  be  explained  by  differences  between  one  se.-ison  and
another,  which  can  cause  the  level  of  the  lake  to  rise  or  fall  some
10  or  15' feet. It  is  at  its  highest  in  April  and  May.

3  The  discovery  of  the  great  depth  of  the  suriace  of  the  Dead
Sea  below  sea-level  belongs  to  modern  times ;  it  was  made  in-
dependently and  almost  simultaneously  by  Schubert  on  the  one
hand,  and  Moore  and  Heek  on  the  other,  in  1837  ;  and  afterwards
confirmed  by  Russegger  and  by  Symonds. , „ ^  „ . ,

*  Ihe  distance  from  the  watershed  to  the  Red  Sea  is  about
46  ra.,  and  to  the  Dead  Sea  over  73  m.

1043


winter  torrents,  are  :  (a)  on  the  eastern  side,  reckoning  from  N.
to  S.,  the  Wady  Ghuweir,  the  Wadys  Zerka-Ma'in  (Callirrhoe)-
MOjib  (Arnon),  Heni-Hamad,  ed-Deraa  (Kerak),  Numfireh,  el-
Ahsa  (or  es-§afiyeh)  ;  '(b)  on  the  S.,  the  Wadys  Tufileh,  el-Jeib,
el-Fikreh  (these  three  traverse  a  marshy  plain,  the  Sebkhah,
whicli  stretches  immediately  southwards  from  the  Dead  Sea  and
is  bordered  by  gigantic  thickets  of  reed.s) ;  (c)  on  the  western  side,
going  from  S.  to  N.,  the  Wady  el-.\luhauivat,  the  Wady  Seyal
(to  the  S.  of  which  lies  .Sebbeh,  the  ancient  fortress  of  Ma.sada),
the  spring  of  "Ain-Jedy  (Engedi),  the  Wady  cn-Nar  (Kedron),
and  the  -spring  of  'Ain  el-Feshkhah  (cp  Beth-Akabah),  to  the  S.
of  which  is  the  headland  known  as  Ras  el-Feshkhah.

Tlie  amount  of  daily  evaporation  ^  has  been  estimated
at  i3i  millimetres,  and  the  daily  contribution  of  the
Jordan  alone  at  6,000,000  tons  (the  volume  of  the
Rhone  at  its  infiux  into  the  Lake  of  Geneva  is  22,000,000
tons).  Another  feature  of  it  is  its  great  density,  which
arises  from  its  salinity  (the  mean  is  1. 166).  At  a  depth
of  1000  feet  the  solid  matters  contained  in  the  water
represent  27  per  cent  of  the  total  weight.  These  sub-
stances are  mainly  chlorides  of  sodium,  magnesium,  and
calcium,  also  certain  derivatives  of  bromium.  The
chloride  of  magnesium  gives  the  water  a  very  dis-
agreeable taste  ;  the  chloride  of  calcium  gives  it  its
slightly  oily  consistency.  The  eyes,  and  some  assert
also  the  skin,  are  powerfully  affected  by  contact  with  it.
Garments  receive  from  the  evaporating  water  a  saline
deposit,  with  indelible  spots  of  an  oily  appearance.
The  salt  encrusts  also  the  many  trees  and  pieces  of  wood
which  lie  stranded  on  the  shore  ;  so  much  so  that  they
form  a  characteristic  feature  of  the  landscape,  and  recall
the  striking  antithesis  in  Jer.  175-8.

A  bath  in  the  Dead  Sea  at  once  proves  its  difference
in  density  from  other  seas  or  from  fresh -water  lakes.
Eggs  float  on it. The  human body


4.  Character-


being  lighter  than  the  water,  swimmmg


istic  features.  ^^^^0,^^  difficult,  the  head  alone  of  the
swimmer  tending  to  sink.  The  boiling  point  of  the  water
is  221"  F.  It  is  remarkably  limpid,  and  has  a  beautiful
colour,  now  blue,  now  green.  To  think  of  this  lake  as
sombre  and  sad  is  quite  an  illusion  ;  its  intense  colouring,
its  varied  effects  of  light,  its  scarped  overhanging  slojx-'s
broken  by  deep  gorges,  produce  a  picture  of  wild  and
sublime  beauty.  '  The  scenery  round  the  sea  is  very
fine,'  says  Conder  ;  '  it  is  compared,  by  those  who  have
seen  both,  to  that  of  the  Lake  of  Geneva '  The  present
writer,  whose  home  is  in  Geneva,  agrees  with  this  com-
parison, it  being  understood  that  it  is  between  the
northern  portion  of  the  Dead  Sea  and  the  eastern  end
of  the  Lake  of  Geneva  towards  the  embouchure  of  the
Rhone.  Another  common  error  about  the  De.id  Sea  is
that  its  waters  have  no  motion  ;  on  the  contrary,  it  is
constantly  agitated  by  the  winds,  and  storms  sometimes
drive  huge  billows  to  the  shore.  It  does  not  owe  its
name  to  this  imagined  immobility,  but  rather  to  the  fact
that  no  sort  of  living  creature — fish,  crustacean,  mollusc,
etc. — can  subsist  in  its  waters,  the  only  exceptions  being
certain  inferior  organisms  and  microties,  as  shown  by
the  investigations  of  P^hrenbcrg  and  of  the  zoologist
Lortet  (not  to  be  confused  with  the  geologist  Lartet).
This  fact — which  is  conclusively  proved  by  the  death
not  only  of  the  fish  carried  down  into  it  by  the  Jordan
(their  bodies  serve  as  food  for  numerous  birds  which
frequent  the  neighbourhood),  but  also  of  salt-water
fishes — has  given  rise  to  various  incorrect  ideas.  Thus
it  has  been  said  that  birds  attempting  to  fly  over  it  drop
down  dead  ;  this  is  a  mere  imagination — a  fable  which,
like  a  host  of  earlier  witnesses,  the  present  writer  is  able
to  contradict  from  ocular  testimony — or  perhaps  it  may
be  the  result  of  a  confusion  with  some  other  lake  (see
Reland,  244/:).  It  is  equally  false  to  say  that  the
shores  of  the  Dead  Sea  derive  their  barrenness  from  the
pernicious  action  of  its  waters.  What  hinders  the
growth  of  plants  in  its  vicinity  is  not  the  presence  of  the
lake  itself,  but  the  absence  of  fresh  water  whether  from
affluents  or  by  precipitation.  Wherever  there  is  fresh
1  The  evaporation  produces  whitish  or  bluish  clouds  which
float  above  the  water. Hence  '  a  smoking  waste  '  (Wisd.  10  7).

Cp  NlBS«AN.


DEAD  SEA,  THE


running  water,  as  at  Engcdi,  where  there  is  a  thermal
spring  (79''  K. ),  vegetation  nourishes  (cp  Cant.  1 14)  and,
as  elsewhere  throughout  the  Ghor,  exhibits  a  com-
bination of  tropieal  plants  with  others  belonging  to  the
Mediterranean  region.  Finally,  the  scant  [wpulation
of  its  shores  is  to  be  accounted  for  more  by  llie  torrid
temperature  (above  icx>^  V.  in  the  shade)  than  by  any
infertility  or  positive  insalubrity.

Ill  fact,  the  lake  )ia.s  not  always  l>ccn  so  deserted  :  witness,  for
example,  tlic  town  of  Tamak  at  the  SW.  extremity.  Even  the
shores  of  the  Sea  uf  tialilec  have  gradually  conic  to  be  wholly
abandoned  except  in  three  or  four  localities.  The  shores  of  the
Dead  Sea  too  had  once  a  very  different  aspect.  Hoth  in
antiquity  (we  learn  this  from  Tac.  Hist.  56  and  also  from  the
Madeba  mosaic)  and  so  recently  as  the  time  of  the  Crusades
when  Kerak  and  other  fortresses  had  such  an  important  position,
the  waters  of  the  Dead  Sea  were  enlivened  with  passing  vessels.
Nor  were  the  curative  qualities  of  the  water  of  the  Dead  Sea
unknown  in  the  Koman  period.  Julius  Africanus  speaks  of
these  baths  as  wholesome  (Reland,  253  /."),  as  also  does  Galen
(iV'.  34iy.),  who(wrongly)  adds  that  an  artificial  substitute  could
be  obtained  by  the  simple  expedient  of  saturating  ordinary  sea
water  with  added  salt.  Mention  is  often  made  of  the  mcphitic
odour  exhaled  by  the  Dead  Soa  (see  Nibshan);  but  it  has  not
been  shown  that  the  lake  itself  is  the  cause  of  this.  It  may  be
occasioned  either  by  the  marshy  lagoons  by  which  the  lake  is
liorilcred,  or  by  the  mineral  springs  of  the  neighbourhood.  The
sulphurous  odour,  which  reminds  one  of  that  of  rotten  eggs,  is
particularly  noticeable  near  'Ain  cl-h'cshkhah.

The  lake,  as  we  have  seen,  lies  N.  and  S. ,  with  a
ma.xinmm  length  of  47^  m. ,  a  maximum  breadth  of  10

, _,.  .  m. (Josephus gives 66 and 17 m.

B.  DunensioiiB.  ,1 ,  ^ ,  c

rtsjx-ctively)  and  a  superficial  area  of

360  sq. m. (the  Lake  of  Geneva  being  224  sq. m. ).

It  is  divided  into  two  uiie(|ual  jxjrtions  by  a  peninsula,

11-12  m.  in  length  and  about  40-80  ft.  above  the  level

of  the  lake,  flat  for  the  most  part,  but  with  a  range  of

hills  rising  300 ft. This peninsula, formed of  white

calcareous marl, with deposits of  salt and gypsum,

projects  from  the  E.  shore  ; it  is  separated  from  the  W.

shore  by  a  channel  about  3  m.  in  breadth. The  name

of the fieninsula  is  el-Mczra'ah  or  el-Lisan  ; the last

designation, meaning 'the  tongue," has  been brought

into  connection  with  the  mention  of  the  prV  (EV 'the

bay  [mg.  : '  Heb.  tongue']  that  looketh  southward  ')  in

Josh.  1.^(25; but whilst the modern Arabic term is

applied  to  the  land  in  the  middle  of  the  lake,  the  two

biblical  pass;iges  refer  to  the  water  at  the  two  ends  of

the  lake  (cp  Is.  11  15  ; '  the  tongue  of  the  ICgyptian  sea  ').

The  N.  promontory  of  the  Lisan  has  been  named  Cape
Costigan  and  the  .S.  Cape  Molyneux  in  honour  of  two  bold
explorers  who  navigated  the  Dead  Sea  in  1835  and  1847  respec-
tively. We  ought  also  to  mention  the  expeditions  of  Moore  and
Ueek  in  1837  and  of  Symonds  in  1841,  and  especially  that  of
Lieut.  Lynch  of  the  U.S.  navy  in  1848  and  that  of  the  Due  de
Luynes  in  1864,  both  of  which  were  of  great  importance.!

The  portion  of  the  Dead  Sea  to  the  N.  of  the  Eisan
is  much  the  larger,  and  reaches  a  great  depth  ( 1278  ft. ).
The  S.  smaller  pt^rtion  is  quite  shallow  (10-18  ft.),  and
in  parts  even  fordable.  Possibly  this  portion  is  of  less
ancient  date  than  the  rest  of  the  lake,  and  may  have
arisen  within  historic  times  in  consetjuence  of  some  sub-
sidence of  the  land.  The  shores  immediately  bordering
on  this  section  are  the  most  saline  of  the  whole  country.
There  are  salt  marshes  in  the  neighbourhood,  and  it  is
there  that,  running  parallel  with  the  W.  shore,  the
curious  ridge  of  rock  salt,  a  veritable  hors  d'auvre  as
l^rtet  (p.  87)  picturesc)ucly  calls  it,  occurs.  It  is
called  Jebel  Usduni  or  I.iajar- Usdum  or  Khasm-
Usdum, — thus  echoing  the  name  of  Sodom, — and  rises
to  a  height  of  600  ft.,  with  a  length  of  3 J  m.  and  a
breadth  of  over  half  a  mile.  In  its  immediate  vicinity
can  lie  seen,  occasionally  at  least,  detiiched  pillars  of  salt,
suggesting  some  resemblance  to  a  rudimentary  colossal
statue.

Another  peculiarity  is  the  presence  of  asphalt  in  the
Dead  Sea  basin  (see  Bitltmen),  whence  the  Greek  name
of  Asphaltitis  (cp  Tac.  Hist.  56 ;  Sir.


6.  Its  asphalt.


I62  42  ;  Dioscor.  I99  ;  Died.  Sic.  19a8).


1  Since  1893  rowine  boats,  sailing  boats,  and,  more  recently,
even  steam  launches  have  occasionally  been  at  the  service  of
travellers.


Near  the  lake  are  found  beds  of  a  whitish  chalky  marl,
and  also  of  bituminous  marl.  It  is  not,  however,  from
these  deposits  on  its  shores  that  the  water  of  the  Dead
Sea  derives  its  bituminous  constituents,  but  rather,  no
doubt,  from  deep  subatjueous  beds ;  there  1  a  been
observed  a  marked  coincidence  between  the  appea  ance
of  considerable  bituminous  masses  floating  on  the  surface
and  the  occurrence  of  the  earth<iuakes  which  at  intervals
desolate  the  whole  of  that  region.  When  these  take
place  quantities  of  bitumen  are  broken  loose  and  con»e
to  the  surface  ;  the  natives  are  diligent  in  collecting
them,  but  hitherto  no  methodical  exploitation  of  these
mineral  resources  on  a  commercial  basis  has  Xtccn
atlempted.  The  existence  of  bituminous  constituents
in  small  (juantity  in  the  water  can  always  lie  shown.

Notwithstanding  the  presence  of  this  bitumen,  of
sulphur  springs,  and  of  m;ujses  of  sulphur  which  are
met  with  here  and  there,  as  also  of  certain  igneous
formations,  the  region  of  the  Dead  Sea  must  not  Ije
included  in  the  category  of  volcanic  territories  properly
so  called.  On  the  contrary,  in  opposition  to  the  asser-
tions of  certain  travellers  too  richly  endowed  with
imagination  [e.g.,  Russegger  and  van  de  Velde),  the
very  competent  geologists  already  named  agree  in
doubting  whether  any  large  part  in  the  formation  of
this  region  ought  to  be  attributed  to  igneous  forces.'

The  cretaceous  beds  rise  in  regular  stages  on  the  W.  bank
from  the  margin  of  the  lake.  On  the  other  shore  the  arr.inge-
ment  is  no  less  regular  ;  but  under  the  cretaceous  beds  there  arc
carboniferous  strata  and  beneath  there  are  other  formations  still
more  ancient.  At  the  must  it  may  Ije  admitted  that  certain
volcanic  agitations  have  made  themselves  felt  in  the  depths  of
the  lake.  Klanckcnhurn  (/.DI'V,  i8(,A,  p.  59)  recalls  and
attaches  importance  to  an  observation  made  by  >Iolyneux  and
quoted  by  Hitter  (706 yl)  relating  to  a  whitish  belt  of  foam
stretching  from  the  NW.  of  the  lake  towards  the  Lisan  and
following  on  the  whole  the  mcdi.in  line  of  the  lake,  above  which
a  whitish  vapour  lingered  in  the  air.  From  this  phenomenon,
supported  by  certain  other  indications,  he  concludes  the  existence
of  a  fault  in  the  fl  or  of  the  lake  which  is  prolonged  in  the
ch.-innel  skirting  the  Lisan  and  terminates  in  the  S.  portion  of
the  lake  near  the  embouchure  of  the  W.  Muliauwat.  On  lotli-
I2th  .^L-lrch  of  this  year  (1899)  the  author  of  this  article  witnessed
the  same  phenomenon  as  that  seen  by  Molyneux  in  1B47.

In  a  general  way  we  might  descrilie  the  geological
formation  of  the  Jortlan  valley  and  De.id  Sea  liasin  by
tiie technical expression effondretnent.


7.  The  story
in  Gen.  19.


'I  he  phenomenon  occurred  at  tlie  time  of
the  transition  from  the  tcrtiiiry  to  the
quaternary  epoch.  It  is  not  pxsssible,  therefore,  to  estab-
lish any  relation  between  the  formation  of  the  De-ad  Sea
as  a  whole  and  the  catastrophe  described  in  Gen.  19.
At  most  that  naixative  might  possibly  atlinit  of  being
connected  with  certain  exeiits  of  a  more  local  character
and  of  secondary  iniport.ince,  which  might  have  occurred
within  historic  times  (see  Lot,  SIUDIM,  Souom).

As  we  have  not  to  deal  with  the  historical  side  of  the  question,
but  with  the  geographical  only,  it  will  suffice  to  say  (a)  that  the
text  of  Genesis  s|}eaks  of  a  rain  of  fire  and  brimstone  and  a
pillar  of  smoke  rising  to  heaven,  but  neither  of  an  earthquake,
nor  of  an  igneous  eruption,  nor  of  an  inundation  ;  (h)  that  there
is  nothing  to  show  that  the  cities  of  the  Pcntapolis  were  in  the
plain  of  Siddim  ;  (<:)  th;a  the  remark  in  Gtn.  I43  'the  plain  of
Siddim  which  is  the  Salt  Sea'  may  be  a  conjecture  of  the
narrator  or  even  the  gloss  of  a  copyist  or  late  re.ider  ;  (</)  that
account  must  be  taken  of  the  mention  of  ihe  kikkar  of  Jordan
(Gen.  13  10-12  19  17  25  28  29)  ;  (<■)  that  jxis-ibly  a  distmction  must
be  made  between  the  actual  position  of  the  Pentapniis  and  the
position  assigned  to  it  by  later  writers,  inasmuch  as  these
entert.iined  perhaps  divergent  opinions  as  to  this  point;  (/")
that  the  position  of  Zoar  is  as  problematical  as  that  of  the  other
four  cities  ;  finally  {^g)  that  scholars  are  divided  into  two  camps
— those  who  place  I  lie  Pentapolis  in  the  N.  of  the  Dead  Sea,
and  those  who  place  it  in  the  S.

In  complete  contrast  with  its  sombre  narratives
regarding  these  doomed  cities,  the  OT,  in  two  propheti-
cal passages  of  Ezekiel  and  Zechariah  already  cited,
describes  the  transformation  of  the  waste  and  barren
regions  of  the  Dead  Sea  by  a  life-giving  stream  issuing
from  the  temple,  fertilising  all  that  it  touches  so  that
fish  and  fruit-bearing  trees  abound.

Hoffmann  has  adopted  this


1  The  well-known  geologist  '
view.


104s


1046


DEAL

Reland,  Paltrstina,  238-258  ;  Seetzen,  Reisen,  1 405-430
2217-274  293-385  37-16  4352-365  367-389401-403;  V. Schubert,

Keise  in  das  Morgcnlafui,  884-94 !  Kobin-
8.  Literature, son, Bihl. Res. 201-253 463-501 601-608  ;

Phys.  Geogr.  oj  the  Holy  Land,  187-216  {'65) ;
Ritter,  I'ergl.  Erdkunde  der  Sinai- Halbinsel,  von  Paliestina,
etc.  ii.  1553-780;  Der  Jordan  und  die  lieschiffung  des  Todten
Afeeres  ($0);  Tobler,  Topographie  van  Jerusalem,  2906-952;
de  Saulcy,  Voyage  autour  de  la  Mer  Morte  (^^-i);  Rey,  Voyage
dans  te  Haouran  et  aux  bords  de  la  Mer  Morte,  215-306;
Fraas,  Aus  dem  Orient :  Geologisclu  Betrachtungen  ('67),  62-67
73-78  ;  Das  Todte  Meer  ('67)  ;  Tuch,  Ueber  den  Ursprung  des
Todten  Meeres  nach  dem  A  T  ('63) ;  Lynch,  Narrative  0/  the
US  Expedition  to  .  .  .  the  Dead  Sea  ('49)  ;  Official  Report  0/
the  US  Expedition,  eic.  ('52) ;  Due  de  Luynes,  Voyage  d' Ex-
ploration a  la  Mer  Morte  ('75,  seq.),  see  especially  vol.  iii.,
Geologic,  par  M.  Loui-i  Lartet  ;  A.  Stoppani,  //  Mare  Morto
('75) ;  E.  Falcucci,  //  Mar  Morto  e  la  Pentapoli  del  Giordano
('81);  Hull,  Mount  Seir  ('89),  chap.  IS/;  Memoir  on  the
Geology  and  Geography  of  A  rabia  Petrcea,  Palestine,  etc.  ('89)  ;
Gu6rin,  Description  de  la  Palestine  ('74):  Samarie,  1 60-96;
Lortet,  La  Syrie  d'aujourd'hui  ('84),  389-442 ;  Tristram,  The
Land  0/  Israel  (^Zz),  255-360;  G.  A.  Sm.,  Hist.  Geog.  0/ the
Holy  Land  (^in),  497-516;  Blanckenhorn,  '  Entsteh.  u.  Gesch.
d.  Todten  Meeres,'  ZDPV,  li)  1-59  ('96);  '  Noch  einmal  Sodom
u.  Gomorrha,"  ib.  21  65-83  (98) ;  '  Das  Tote  Meer  u.  der  Unter-
gang  von  Sodom  u.  Gomorrha'  ('98);  Diener,  'Die  Katastrophe
von  Sodom  u.  Gomorrha  im  Lichte  geologischer  Forschung,'
Mitth.  derK.-K.  Geogr.  Ges.  in  IVein,  1897,  pp.  1-22). LU.  G.

DEAL,  TENTH  (pt/T),  Lev.  14 10.  See  Weights
AND  Mi;asukes.

DEATH  (Ganatoc),  see  Dead,  The.

DEBIR  (-l^n^  ;  AABeiN  [B*],  -p  [AL],  AABeiN  [B^]),
king  of  Eglon,  defeated  and  slain  by  Joshua  (Josh.  IO3
cp  23)-

DEBIR  (T2^  ;  AaBgip  [B.\L]).  (i)  A  place  in  the
S.  of  Judah  (Josh.  IO38/.  etc.)  ;  see  Kirjath-sepher.

2.  In  Josh.  107,  mnT  is  by  AV  taken  as  a  place-name
on  the  N.  boundary  of  Judah  ;  it  has  been  identified  by
some  with  the  present  Thoghret  ed  Debr  near  Tal'at
ed-Dam  (Adummim)  on  the  way  from  Jerusalem  to
Jericho.

The  text,  however,  is  uncertain  and  the  word  may  not  be  a  place-
name.  <B  renders  :  '  to  the  fourth  part  (n'^m)  of  the  vale  of
Achor.'  Di.  suggests  the  translation  'backwards' — i.e.,  'west-
wards'— |'3i  meaning  'behind'  ;  but  there  is  no  other  instance
of  its  geographical  application.!

3.  Josh.  1326;  RVnig.  LiUEBlR.  G.  A.  S.

DEBORA,  RV  Deborah  (AeBBcopA  [BN],  Ae/wBcopA
[A],  the  grandmother  of  Tobit  (Tob.  1  8).

DEBORAH  (nnU"!,  'a  bee,'  §68;  cp  WRS  in
Journ.  Phil.  14  ['85]  120/;  AeBBcORA  [BAL]).  i.  A
-.  .  heroine  who,  with  the  aid  of  Barak,  de-
1.  uccaaion  ijyg^gjj  ^^^^.  Israelites  from  their  Canaanite
,  ■,  .  .  oppressors.  The  victory  is  celebrated  in
leadership,  the  triumphal  ode,  Judg.  5.  The  Israelites,
particularly  the  tribes  which  had  settled  about  the  plain
of  Jezreel,  had  been  reduced  to  great  straits  by  the
Canaanites,  who,  holding  the  fortified  cities  along  the
plain  (Judg.  1 27),  blockaded  the  main  roads  and  cut
off  communication,  while  from  their  strongholds  they
harried  the  country  so  that  the  unwalled  villages  were
deserted  (56/.).  Incited  by  Deborah,  the  Israelites  at
last  took  up  arms  against  their  oppressors.  Under
Barak  as  their  leader,  Ephraim,  Benjamin,  and  Manasseh
united  with  Issachar,  Zebulun,  and  Naphtali,  and  gave
battle  to  Sisera  and  the  confederate  Canaanite  kings
in  the  plain  not  far  from  Taanach  and  Megiddo.
The  Canaanites,  notwithstanding  their  formidable  iron
chariots,  were  put  to  rout  ;  the  waters  of  the  Kishoii
completed  their  ruin.  Sisera,  seeking  refuge  in  flight
at  a  nomad's  tent,  was  killed  by  a  woman,  Jael.

The  history  of  the  struggle  is  related  somewhat
differently  in  chap.  4,'-'  according  to  which  Barak,  at  the
summons  of  Deborah,  raised  ten  thousand  men  of  the
tribes  of  Zebulun  and  Naphtali,  occupied  Mt.  Tabor,
and  from  that  position  attacked  Sisera  as  the  latter  was
advancmg  against  him. A  more  serious  difference  is  that

1  Read  m31D,  'to  the  wilderness' — i.e.,  of  Judah.  Beth-
arabah  (cp  156)  was  one  of  its  cities  (156i^).

2  On  the  relation  of  chaps.  4  and  5  in  general,  see  Judges,  §  7.

1047


DEBT

in  chap.  4  the  oppressor  of  Israel,  from  whom  it  is  delivered
by  Deborah,  is  Jabinkingof  Hazor,  acityin  UpperGalilee;
whilst  Sisera  is  only  Jabin's  general.  In  the  action,  how-
ever, Jabin  plays  no  part  ;  and  we  can  only  surmise  that
the  story  of  Sisera  has,  by  mistake,  been  connected
with  a  tradition  of  a  conflict  between  some  of  the
northern  tribes  and  the  king  of  Hazor  (cp  also  Josh.  II).

From  chap.  4  we  learn  that  Deborah  was  a  prophetess
— an  inspired  woman  ;  that  her  husband's  name  was
Lappidoth  ;  and  that  her  home  was  between  Bethel  and
Ramah,  whither  the  Israelites  resorted  to  her  for  judg-
ment. Chap.  5 15,  however,  seems  to  prove  that  she
was  of  the  tribe  of  Issachar  ;  and  other  considerations
would  incline  us  to  think  that  she  lived  in  or  near  the
plain  of  Jezreel.  (For  a  conjecture  on  this  subject  see
Daberath.  )  That  her  home  was  in  Mt.  Ephraim  may
have  been  inferred  by  the  author  of  45  (an  editorial
addition  to  the  narrative)  from  the  existence  of  a  tomb
of  Deborah  under  a  tree  below  Bethel,  where,  according
to  the  patriarchal  legend  (see  below,  no.  2),  the  nurse  of
Rebekah  was  buried  (Gen.  358).

Barak,  who  shares  with  Deborah  the  glory  of  the
victory,  was  from  Kedesh  in  Naphtali  (46).  This  city
„  t  ^^  somewhat  remote,  and  in  the  account  of
■  Sisera's  flight  seems  impossible.  It  has
been  conjectured  by  Wellhausen  (CH  221)  that  the  name
of  the  more  famous  Kedesh  in  Galilee  has  here  sup-
planted an  obscure  Kedesh  {q.v.,  2)  in  Issachar  (i  Ch.
672  [57] — mentioned  with  Daberath  not  far  from  Mt.
Tabor)  ;  a  suggestion  which  is  the  more  plausible  that
5  15,  if  the  text  be  sound,  connects  Barak  also  with
Issachar  (cp  Bezaanannim,  Kishio.v).  It  is  possible
that  Kedesh  in  Naphtali,  in  the  immediate  vicinity  of
Hazor,  comes  in  some  way  from  the  story  of  Jabin.

The  Song  of  Deborah  bears  in  itself  the  evidence  that
it  is  the  work  of  one  who  had  lived  through  the  great
„,  „  struggle  which  it  celebrates,  and  is  for
.°  that  reason  of  inestimable  value  as  an
■  historical  monument.  It  is  also  not  only
one  of  the  oldest  Hebrew  poems  which  have  come  down
to  us,  but  one  of  the  greatest.  On  its  date  cp  Sisera
and  Poetical  Literature,  §  4  (iv. ).  See  also  His-
torical Literature,  §  2.

Few  odes  in  the  world's  literature,  indeed,  can  be
compared  with  this  triumphal  Te  Deum.  Unfortunately,
the  text,  especially  in  z.'z^.  8-15,  has  suffered  grievously
from  the  injuries  of  time.

Until  very  recent  times,  Deborah  has  been  universally
believed  to  be  the  author.  It  is  ascribed  to  her  in  the
title  ;  and  this  testimony  was  thought  to  be  conclusively
confirmed  by  v.  7,  '  Until  I,  Deborah,  arose.'  The  form
of  the  Hebrew  verbs  in  this  verse,  however,  is  ambiguous,
and  the  clause  might  equally  well  be  interpreted,  '  Until
thou  didst  arise,  Deborah '  (cp  v.  12)  ;  whilst  ©  and  Vg.
render  in  the  third  person  (cp  v.  15).  On  the  other
hand,  the  natural  inference  from  v.  15,  and  especially
from  V.  12,  is  that  the  heroine  is  not  the  poet.

On  the  subjects  of  this  article  see,  further,  Moore,
Judges  ('95),  and  cp  Jael.  On  the  Song  of  Deborah,
cp  Hadrach,  Kadesh  (2),  Kishon,  Meroz,  and  see
A.  Miiller,  Das  Lied  der  Deborah  ('87)  ;  G.  A.  Cooke,
The  History  and  Song  of  Deborah  ('92)  ;  additional
literature  in  Moore,  op.  cii.,  127,  136.

More  recent  studies,  chiefly  in  the  text,  are  :  Grimme,  ZDMG,
'96,  sj^ffi;  Marquart,  Fundamentc  isr.  u.  jUd.  Gesch.  ('96)  ;
Budde,  Actes  d.  X""  Congrcs  d.  Orientalistes,  2  noff.  ('96) ;
Ruben, /O/^,  '98,  Si,^ff-:  Rie.ss,  Preuss.  Jahrb.  91295^;
D.  H.  Mailer,  Actes d.  f  Xlme  Congres d.  Orientalistes,  4  261^?:
('98).  G.  F.  M.

2.  Rebekah's  nurse  who,  according  to  J,  died  and  was  buried
below  Bethel  under  the  oak  known  as  Allon-bacuth  (Gen.  35  8,
pfPfiiopa  [E],  Sefioppa  [L]).  She  is  alluded  to,  but  unnamed,  in
24  59,  where  she  accompanies  Rebekah  on  her  departure  from
Bethuel  [J].  To  connect  these  two  traditions  would  make  her
about  150  years  old  at  the  time  of  her  death.  [For  a  radical
emendation  of  the  text  which  removes  this  difficulty,  see  Dinah.]

See,  further,  Dehokah  (t).

DEBT  (*L"3,  2  K.  47 ;  Aanion.  Mt.  I827).  DEBTOR
1048


DECALOGUE

(3in  ?  Kzck.  18  7 :  xpeo<t>i\eTHC.  l>k.  741). See  Law
ANu  Justice,  §  16,  and  Trade  anu  Commerce.

DECALOGUE  (h  AeKAAoroc,  sc.  BiBAoc  ;  deca-
/,>!;its,  sc.  lih-r),  a  term  adopted  from  Patristic  (ireek  and
I.atii).  and  meaning  what  we  conunonly  call  the  ten  com-
mandments. Ultimately,  the  name  comes  from  the  LXX
which  in  this  case  adheres  closely  to  the  orifiinal  Hebrew
1  MeaniniF  '""'  speaks,  not  of  ten  commandments.
Of  the  term  ''"*  °^  ^'^"  "'^'"''^  <*^*'*  ^'^'"  "■■  P'JMa^o,
■  Kx.  .3428  Ut.  4i3  10 4).  The  decalogue,
according  to  the  biblical  narrative,  was  uttered  by  God
from  lloreb  and  written  by  him  on  two  tables  of  stone
which  he  had  prepared.  Afterwards,  when  Moses  had
broken  the  tables  in  indignation  at  the  idolatry  of  the
people,  he  was  bidden  to  hew  other  tables  on  which  God
again  wrote  the  ten  words.  They  were  the  foutidation
of  a  covenant  {hi'ri/h)  lx;tween  Vahwe  and  his  people
(Dt.  413)  and  were  placed  in  the  ark  as  the  '  testimony'
('i\iuth)  or  revelation  of  Yahwe's  will  (E.\.  25i6);  see
a)VK.\A.NT,  §  6  (ii. ).

The  two  i)arallel  texts  of  the  decalogue,  one  in  E.x.  20
the  other  in  Dt.  5,  present  striking  points  of  difference.

2.  The  two ^" l'>:odus  the  sabbath  is  to  Ik;  kept,  Ix;-
texts '^■^"^^  Vahwe  made  all  things  in  six  days

and  rested  the  seventh  ;  in  Deuteronomy,
Ix-'cause  the  slave  as  well  as  his  master  needs  rest.  Here,
too,  as  in  the  command  to  honour  parents,  there  are
amplifications  of  language  peculiar  to  the  recension  in
Deuteronomy.  In  Exodus  the  Israelite  is  forbidden  to
covet  his  neighbour's  house,  and  then  wife,  slave,  and
cattle  are  specified  as  possessions  included  within  the
Hebrew  idea  of  house  or  household.  In  Deuteronomy
the  commandment  is  adapted  to  a  later  and  more  humane
view.  First,  the  Israelite  is  not  to  'covet'  his  neigh-
bour's wife.  Next,  he  is  not  to  '  desire '  his  neighbour's
house,  land,  slaves,  etc.  The  separation  of  the  wife  from
mere  property  is  very  significant  (see  Family,  §  6).

How  comes  it  that  the  parallel  texts  vary  so  seriously  ?
The  answer  now  generally  given  is  that' originally  the
decalogue  was  composed  of  concise  precepts,  which  were
expanded  in  different  ways  by  later  editors.  The  deca-
logue was  incorporated  in  his  work  by  the  Elohist  ;  it
was  repeated  by  the  Deuterononnst  and  lastly  by  the
Priestly  Writer.  Xo  wonder  then  that,  in  the  final
redaction  of  the  Pentateuch,  each  text  of  the  decalogue
offers  clear  marks  of  the  Deuteronomical  style,  whilst  in
Ex.  208-11  the  Deuteronomic  motive  of  humanity  has
Jjeen  supplanted  by  the  example  of  God's  rest  after  the
week  of  creation— evidence  of  a  super- redaction  in  the
spirit  of  P  (cp  Ex.  31 17/,  Gen.  22/-).  Commandments  6-9
preserve  their  primitive  form.  We  mav  therefore  on  that
analogy  restore  the  decalogue  to  its  original  form  thus  :—

Decalogue  of  Exodus  20
I.  "Thou  shalt  have  no  other  gods  Ije.side  me.
2 Thou  shalt  not  make  unto  thee  any  (graven)  image.

3.  Thou  shalt  not  take  the  name  of  Vahwe  thy  God  for  a  vain
end.i

4.  Remember  the  sabbath  day  to  hallow  it.

5.  Honour  thy  father  and  thy  mother.

6.  Thou  shalt  do  no  murder.

7.  Thou  shalt  not  commit  adultery.

8.  Thou  shalt  not  steal.

9.  Thou  shalt  not  hear  false  witness  against  thy  neighbour.
10.  Thou  shalt  not  covet  thy  neighbours  house.

(a)  In  their  arrangement  the  commandments  fall  into

two  pentads,  or  sets  of  five  each,  corresponding  to  the

3.  Arrange-  '^^° tables. The first table sets  forth

ment. *^*''  '^^^  ^^  P'^'^  '"  ^^^  ?"■■*=  worship  of

Yahw6  and  in  reverence  to  parents,  the

second  table  exhibits  the  law  of  probity  or  duty  to  fellow

Israelites,  conceived,  however,  in  an  exclusively  negative

form. This  is  the  scheme  known  to  Philo  (De  Decalogo,

12)  and  Josephus  (v4«/.  iii.  55).  adopted  by  the  Greek

and Anglican churches, as  also by  the  Scottish  and

other  churches  of  the  Calvinistic  type, and  approved,

among  recent  scholars,  by  Dillmann.

1  Perhaps  for  purposes  of  sorcery.
1049


DECALOGUE

Another  arrangement  (adopted  by  Knobel  and,  in
1869,  by  Kuencn)  is  to  count  the  opening  statement,  *  1
am  Yahw6  thy  God,'  etc..  iis  the  first  'word,'  and  bind
the  commandments  against  foreign  gods  and  image  wor-
ship into  one.  This  is  the  Talmudic  division,  which  is
still  in  force  among  the  Jews,  and  is  also  of  greater
antitjuity  in  the  (ireek  church  than  some  have  suppose*!.*
Augustine,  too  (and  he  is  followed  by  Roman  Catholics
and  Lutherans),  treats  the  prohibition  of  serving  other
gods  and  worshipping  images  as  one  commandment.
He  makes  this  the  first,  however,  not,  like  the  modern
Jews,  the  second  '  word. '  Hence  he  has  to  divide  the  pro-
hibition of  coveting  into  two  commandments,  viz.  :  one
against  covetinga  neighbours  wife,  theother  against  covet-
ing his  goods.  The  objection  to  the  Talmudic  scheme  is
the  awkwardness  of  a  law  which  makes  up  the  number  ten
from  one  statement  of  fact  and  nine  precepts.  The.Augus-
tinian  scheme  cannot  Ije  fitted  to  the  text  in  Exodus  and
can  scarcely  have  lx;en  intended  even  by  the  Deuteronomist.
The  order  given  by  the  Vatican  text  of  the  L.XX
in  Exodus  is  '  Thou  shalt  not  commit  adultery.  Thou
shalt  not  steal.  Thou  shalt  not  murder,'  and  in  Deutero-
nomy '  Th(iu  shalt  not  commit  adultery.  Thou  shalt  not
murder.  Thou  shalt  not  steal.'  Probably  the  variation
arose  from  the  feeling  that  the  prohibition  of  adultery,
as  the  destruction  of  family  life,  should  be  immediately
connected  with  the  injunction  to  honour  parents.

We  come  next  to  the  question  of  date.  The  Elohist
document  (perhaps  a  later  edition  of  it)  is  our  earliest
4.  Date  '-''"'^''"•'*'  witness,  and  that  does  not  carry  us
■  back  beyond  the  middle  of  the  eighth  century
B.C.  Nor  does  internal  evidence  point  to  a  much  earlier
time.  The  character  of  the  decalogue,  which  is  not
ritual  but  almost  purely  moral ;  the  prohibition  of  images,
apparently  unknown  to  Elijah  and  Elisha  ;  the  refine-
ment which  forbids  thoughts  of  covetousness  (the  Hebrew
cannot  fairly  be  taken  otherwise);  all  lend  support  to  the
view  that  the  decalogue  is  grounded  on  the  teaching  of
the  great  prophets  of  whose  discourses  we  have  written
records.  It  has  been  compared  with  the  loftier  teaching
in  Micah66-8,  and  may  belong  to  the  same  age,  i.e.,  at
earliest  that  of  Manasseh  (see,  further,  MosEs).

The reasons against a  date  very  much  earlier  are
clinched  by  the  modern  discovery  that  there  was  another
6.  Second •^'^^^'oS^e  older  in  character. True,  \se
and  older '^*'^""°'  ^'^y  ^^'^  certain  how  each  particular
Decalogue. P''*^'^'-'P'  °^  ^^is  older  decalogue  ran. We
do  know,  however,  that  reference  is  made
to  it  by  the  Yahwist  in Ex.  34  28,  and  further,  that  the
decalogue  itself  is  imbedded  in  10-26,  and  there  is,  there-
fore, no  doubt  about  its  general  character. Wellhausen's
reconstruction  is  as  follows:''^ —

Decalogue  of  Exodus  34

1.  "Thou  shalt  worship  no  other  god.

2.  Thou  shalt  make  thee  no  molten  gods.

3.  The  fe.ist  of  unleavened  bread  .shalt  thou  keep.

4.  Every  tirstling  is  mine.

5.  Thou  shalt  observe  the  feast  of  week.s.

6.  And  the  feast  of  ingathering  at  the  year's  end.

^'  .Tl°"  ^''^''  "°'  °^^^  '^^  blooti  of  my  sacrifice  with  leaven.

8.  The  fat  of  my  feast  shall  not  be  left  over  till  the  niorning.3

9.  The  best  of  the  firstfruits  of  thy  land  shall  thou  bring  to  the
house  of  Yahwe  thy  God.

10.  Thou  shalt  not  seethe  a  kid  in  its  mother's  milk.*
The  Yahwistic  legend  which  encloses  this  decalogue
is  simpler  and  more  natural,  for  here  it  is  Moses,  not

1  GefTken  (EinthtiluHg  (Ui  Pekalogs,  1838)  found  it  to  occur
firstmSyncellus(<r/>ra79oA.u.)and  Cedrenus  (1130)  ;  but  Nestle
has  shown  that  it  is  to  be  met  with  in  the  Codex  Vaticanus  and
the  Ambrosianus.  See  Nestle,  /.>/.  '//>««,  S 426/:  (J"'y  '^7)1
and  cp  Redpath,  'Codex  Zittaviensis,'  Exp.  Times,  8383
(May  97).

2  C//331/;  cp  Stade,  CF/lsio;  Staerk,  Deuteronomium,
3°/

»  Accordmg  to  the  more  original  text  in  Ex.  23  18.

*  The  number  ten  is  gained  by  omitting  the  command  of  the
seventh-day  rest  (which  is  out  of  place  in  the  cycle  of  annual
fe.ists),  and  the  command  that  all  males  should  appear  before
V  ahwe  thrice  in  the  year  (which  is  merely  a  recapitulation  of  the
three  preceding  laws).

1050


DECAPOLIS

Yahw6,  who  hews  the  tables  and  writes  the  words.  The  |
decalogue  represents  that  ritual  of  outward  worship
which  was  essential  to  the  early  stages  of  national
religion,  but  was  subordinated  to  ethical  monotheism
by  Amos  and  his  successors.  Yet  even  this  decalogue
must  be  put  long  after  the  time  of  Moses.  The  feasts
mentioned  imply  an  agricultural  life,  and  nmst  have  been
adopted  by  the  Israelites  after  their  settlement.

See  ( )ehler,  O/d  lestament  Theology,  1  267^  (gi  85,  86) ;  and,
for the  later  criticism,  Kuenen, iJex. 244  ;  Smend, A  TRel.


6.  Literature.


273/^.  2787^ ;  Rothstein, Das  Bundcshuch,
('8'8) ;  Hudde  in  ZA  ty  ('qI),  pp.  99/,
Bantsch, Das  Buniiesbuch  ('92) ; Meissner,


Der  Dekalog  ('93) ;  Montetiore,  JQR  3  286^  ;  Addis,  The
Docuiiunts  o/the  Hexatcuch,  1  136^  Robertson  Smith  (A^C)
art.  '  I )ec.-ilogue ')  in  1876  held  that  the  decalogue,  as  a  system
of  '  ten  words,  was  as  old  as  Moses,  though  the  original  fourth
commandment  must  have  had  a  much  simpler  form.  He  also  re-
jected the  hypothesis  of  a  second  decalogue.  How  largely  he  had
modified  his  views  in  later  years  on  both  pnjnts  may  he  gathered
from  OrjC(-)  22>^ff- See  also  Exouus,  li.  g  4. \v.  E.  K.

DECAPOLIS  (AeKAnoAic  [Ti.  WH])  is  the  name

given  in  the  gospels  (.Ml.  4  25  .Mk.  5  20)  to  a  territory  in

„ V -f Bashan  and  Gilead  covered,  or  affected,

o«^  !««r<.H«Jl!^  ^^y  t'le  Po^^t-T  of  ^  league  of  ten  or  more
and  contedera-  ^,,.^^.^  ^^^^^^  ^^,^„^j  ^^  ^j^  -^^  ^^  ^^^^

*^°"^-  AfKaTroXews. by Pliny HN v. 15.

Decapolitana  rei^o).  Josephus  calls  the  league  itself
both  AcKciTroXts  [BJ\\\.^^)  and  at  iv  rg  ^vpi<f  5^Ka
TToXeij  ( KiVrt,  65  74).  Other  early  instances  of  the
name  are  Ptolemy  v.  1522,  and  C/(J,  no.  450,  of
the  time  of  Hadrian.  Eusebius  describes  the  Deca-
polis  of  the  Gospels  as  a  region  (see  below,  §  2).

The  first  Greek  cities  in  Syria  were  founded  by  the
veterans  of  Alexander,  and  from  his  time  their  numbers
were  rapidly  increased  by  the  immigration  of  Greeks
under  the  patronage  of  the  Seleucids  and  Ptolemies.
On  the  west  the  Greeks  settled  in  ultimately  Hellenised
Phoenician  and  Philistine  towns  ;  but  beyond  Jordan
many  of  their  settlements  were  upon  fresh  sites.  Among
the  oldest  were  Pella,  Dion,  Philadelphia  (on  the
site  of  Rabbath-Ammon),  Gadara,  and  Abila — all  strong
fortresses  by  218  B.C.  (Polyb.  571;  10  39;  ]os.  Ant.
.\ii.  'i  3  ;  Stark,  Gaza,  381).  Bosra  had  become  largely
Greek  in  the  time  of  the  Maccabees  (i  Mace.  024^).
Gerasa  and  Hippus  are  not  mentioned  till  the  first
century  B.C.  (Jos.  Ant.  xiii.  15  3.4  ;  BJ  \.  4.  8).

As  the  Hellenic  world  came  under  Roman  sway,
various  confederacies  of  Cireek  cities  were  formed,  both
for  purposes  of  trade,  like  the  Hanseatic  League,  and
for  defence  against  alien  races  (Mommsen,  Prm>.  of  the
Rom.  E;np.,  Eng.  ed.  1  264/.).  Such  confederation
was  nowhere  more  necessary  than  in  .Syria,  where,  after
the  success  of  the  Maccabees,  and  especially  under  the
Jewish  king  Alexander  Jannasus  (104-78  B.C.),  the
Greek  cities  must  needs  have  combined  against  the
common  danger  of  overthrow  and  absorption  by  their
Semitic  neighbours.  Such  combinations,  however,  if
they  were  formed,  proved  a  failure  till  the  Roman  legions
led  by  Pompey  reached  Syria  in  65.  Then  the  Greek
cities  took  a  new  lease  of  life.  Several  called  themselves
after  Pomp)ey,  and  several  dated  their  eras  from  the
year  of  his  Sjrian  campaign,  64-63  B.C.  Among  these
were  Gadara,  Hippos,  Pella,  Dion,  Abila,  Kanata,
Kanatha,  and  Philadelphia.  Pompey  gave  them,  or
after  this  time  they  gradually  received,  municipal  free-
dom, the  rights  of  coinage,  asylum,  property  in  the
surrounding  districts,  and  association  with  one  anotlier.
They  were,  however,  put  under  the  Roman  Province  of
Syria  (Ant.  xiv.  4  4  BJ  i.  7  7).  and  taxed  for  imperial  pur-
poses ;  their  coins  bore  '  the  image  of  Caesar '  ;  and
they  were  liable  to  military  service  (B/  ii.  18 19).  Some
of  them,  certainly  with  the  reservation  of  their  rights,
were  afterwards  transferred  from  the  Governor  of  Syria
to  the  direct  authority  of  Herod.

From  Pompey's  time  to  Hadrian's  (106  A.D. ),  Rome's
grasp  of  Eastern  Palestine  was  neither  constant  nor
effective.  It  was  during  this  time,  and  in  this  region  of
1051


DECAPOLIS

unsettlement,  that  the  League  of  the  Decapolis  arose.
The  precise  year  we  are  unable  to  fix  ;  it  may  not  have
been  till  after  Herod's  death  in  4  B.C.,  but  probably
2  The  Deca  ^""^^  ^"""  ^'^'*^''  ''""^P'-'y's  campaign,
politan  leajrue.  ''^'  '^''^V  ""^  '^'^ "'''"'''  '"'P"*"^'  ^^'^  ^^*-'^Kue
*^  ° comprised  ten  cities. Only  one  lay  W.

of  Jordan — Scythopolis,  the  ancient  Bethshean.  Com-
manding the  approach  to  the  others,  by  Esdraelon,  from
the  Greek  cities  of  the  coast  and  the  Levant,  Scythopolis
remained  the  capital  of  the  league.  All  the  other  nine  lay
either  ujxjn  the  three  great  roads  which,  crossing  Jordan,
traversed  E.  Palestine,  or  on  the  trunk  road  which  these
ultimately  joined  :  Pella,  Gadara,  and  Hippos  on  the
E.  edge  of  the  Jordan  valley,  and  the  Lake  of  Galilee;
Dion,  Gerasa  (modern  Jerash),  and  Philadelphia  on  or
near  the  S.  road  ;  Raphana,  somewhere  near  the  central
road  ;  Kanatha  (now  Kanawat,  see  Kenath).  where
the  central  road  joins  the  great  trunk  road  from  N.  to
S.  at  the  foot  of  the  Jebel  Hauran  ;  and  Damascus,  at
the  junction  of  this  road  with  the  northernmost  of  the
three  roads.  All  the  sites  are  certain  except  those  of
Raphana  and  of  Dion.  These  form  the  earliest  list  that
we  have — Pliny's  in  //A'5i6[i8].  Other  cities  were
added.  Ptolemy  gives  eighteen,  omitting  Raphana,  and
adding  other  nine,  mostly  towards  Damascus,  —  Abila,  on
a  branch  of  the  Yarmuk  12  m.  E.  of  Gadara  ;  Kanata,
either  the  modern  Kerak  or  el-Kuneiyeh  in  en-Nukra  ;
Kapitolias,  probably  the  modern  Beit  er-Ras,  near
Irbid  ;  and  some  of  the  Semitic  towns  incorfxjrated  in
the  extension  of  the  Empire  in  106,  such  as  Edrei  and
Bosra.  Each  of  these  cities  held  sway  over  the  territory
in  its  neighbourhood.  Round  Hippos  was  Hippene
(B/  iii.  3 1 )  ;  round  Gadara  the  country  of  the  Gadarenes
(Mk.  5 1  according  to  one  reading),  which,  if  we  can
judge  from  the  trireme  on  some  Gadarene  coins,  extended
to  the  Lake  of  Galilee.  In  the  fourth  century  Jerome
calls  all  Gilead  the  '  region  of  Gerasa.'  These  suburban
properties  or  spheres  of  influence  nmst  have  touched
one  another,  and  the  remains  of  the  long  aqueduct  from
the  centre  of  Hauran  by  Edrei  to  (jadana  is  one  proof
of  how  far  they  extended.  The  '  Decapolitan  region  '
(coasts  of  Decapolis)  was,  therefore,  a  wide  and  solid,
if  loosely  defined,  territory  lying  on  the  E.  of  the  Lake
of  Galilee  and  stretching  across  a  large  part  of  Gilead.
Eusebius  (OS)  defines  the  Decapolis  of  the  Gospels
as  lying  in  Pera;a  round  Hippos,  Pella,  and  Gadara.
Pliny,  however,  describes  it  as  interpenetrated  by  the
Jewish  Tetrarchies  (/7A'5i6);  and  in  particular  the
territories  of  Herod  .Antipas  in  Galilee  and  Pera;a  were
probably  so  joined  across  Jordan  as  to  cut  off,  from  the
E.  Decapolis,  the  suburban  territory  of  Scythopolis.

■Within  this  region  of  Decapolis  Hellenism  was  pre-
dominant in  the  time  of  the  ministry  of  Jesus,  and  thence

3.  Civilization.  ''  ^°Z'''^°'''  "P°"  ^^'"^- '^^''/'
proved by a trace or two in the

Gospels  themselves  (e.jf. ,  the  presence  of  a  large  herd

of  swine  in  Gadara),  by  the  ample  ruins,  still  extant,  of

Greek  architecture  (the  most  glorious  period  of  which,

however,  was  not  till  the  time  of  the  Antonines),  and

especially  by  the  constant  communication  between  the

Decapolis  and the Mediterranean ports and Greece,

and  by  the  flourishing  state  of  Greek  literatiu-e  in  the

Ten  Cities. The  Decapolis  had,  in  each  city,  temples

to  purely  Hellenic  deities,  theatres,  amphitheatres,  and

various  athletic  institutions. Yearly  were  the  vayKpAria

celebrated — games in which every form of physical

strength was exhibited.  There was a vigorous

municipal  life  of  democratic  constitution. Gadara  w.as

the  birthplace  or  home  of  Philodemus  the  Epicurean  (a

contemporary  of  Cicero),  Meleager  the  epigrammatist,

Mdnippus the  satirist, Theodorus  the  rhetorician  (the

tutor  of  Tiberius),  and  others. The  Greek  writers  of

Damascus  are  still  better  known. Gerftsa  had  a  school

famous  for its teachers. Besides, the League, being

largely  a  commercial  union,  pushed  the  Greek  methods

of  trade  across  W.  Palestine  ;  the  result  is  seen  in  the


DECK

many  commercial  and  travellers'  terms  and  names  for
objects  of  trade  and  human  consumption  which,  in  the
centuries  immediately  before  and  after  Christ,  passed
from  Greek  into  Hebrew.  See  Th  ai>k  and  Commkrck.
Hc>iclcs  the  oiicicnt  aulhuritics  already  cited,  see  Kpiphaniti!i,
Utrrii. .1)7; Dt  Mens,  ft  I'otui. 15;  .Stcphaiius Kyzaiit. De


Vrbihus  (HaNil.,  1568,  ed.  Diiidorf,  Leps  1825)
Literature,  especially  the  art. Vt(m.aa.  \ Kcland,  raltrstina

108,  303,  506  ;  E.  dc  Saulcy,  Nmiiisniatique  lU  la
Terrr  Sainte,  Paris,  1874;  SchOr.  //m/.  894/1^.  ;  CJASm.  HG
chap.JH  ;  andvariousworksof  Iravclin  E.  Palestine. g.  A.  S.

DECK  (EH,-?).  Ezck.276  RV'k- ;  EV  Bknciies.
See  Ship.

DEDAN  (H'!'.  oftenest  AaiAan  [BNADEQ]).  a  son  of
Raamah  (see  Ge(x;raphv,  §  23).  son  of  (t.'SH.  Gen.
IO7  (F),  or  of  Jokshan,  son  of  Keturah,  Gen.  263  (J).
I  Ch.  1 3".

taU»  [ADF.QL],  «».  [KL],  U^tap.  [B/JQl,  Upiav  [L  i  Ch.
I33],  jatja.  [D],  lav  11],  xat  hav  K>-'],  M^^'o^  |EJ,  iovha.ha.v  [HJ.

As  the  name  of  a  peopli;  it  also  occurs  in  Is.  21 13
('caravans  of  Dkd.vm  ri;s  '  [so  KV  ;  AV  DkdanimJ,  in
connection  with  the  '  land  of  1  cina' ;  5at6a»'  [HNAC^)].  but
in  Aq.  and  Syin.  iwSan/i  ;  and  in  'Iheod.  ..nd  Orig.  ha.i.h.
[Q™k]),  Jer.  2523  (with  Tenia  and  Buz).  498  (where  it
is  thought  of  as  adjoining  Hdoni).  Ezek.  2;')i3  (where
©BAO  reads  huaKoiuvoi ;  cp  ©"a'l  for  mi  in  Eev.  2617  ;
Pesh.  yf>),  Ezek.  27  20  (with  Arabia,  Kedar,  Sheba,
and  Raamah,  as  trading  with  Tyre),  .3813  (with  Sheba),
but  not  27 15  (see  Rodanim).  These  passages  (to
which  add  Gen.  2f)3  i  Ch.  1  32)  all  point  to  Arabia,  but
some to  the  southern, some to the northern region.

OT  occurs  in  Min.  and  .Sab.  inscriptions  (see  es[)ecially
laser,  Skisze'ly)^).  Probably  Dedan  was  a  tribe  with
jx^rmancnt  seats  in  S.  or  central  Arabia  (Glaser,  I.e.,
locates  N.  of  Medina)  and  trading  settlements  in  the
NW.  F.  B.

DEDICATE,  DEDICATION.  For  t'-^p,  kiJdes  (lit.
'  to  separate,'  more  usually  rendered  '  to  consecrate,'
■hallow,'  or  'sanctify')  sec  Ci.kan  and  Unclean,
§  1/. For  Din,  hdram,  see  Ban.

^jn,  hdnak,  efKAiNizeiN,  nieans  prop.  '  to  initiate';
see  Catechise,  and  cp  HDH,  s.v.  Various  dedication
ceremonials  are  described,  mostly  in  late  documents.

There  is  the  dedication  of  the  temple  in  i  K.  8 1-63  (see  v.  63  :
ivtKa.iv\.<Ttv)  II  2  Ch.  52-7 5  (75  :  kv(Ka.i.vi.ijfv),  .1  'dedication  '  of
the  altar  l)ein>;  separately  referred  to  in  2  Ch.79  {ivKaivia^ov)  \
thatof  the  altar  of  the  tabernacle  is  descril)ed  in  Nu.  7  \off.
(P.j  «yicaii/i<r/noi);  that  of  the  walls  of  Jerusalem  as  rebuilt  by
Nehemiah  in  Neh.  VliTff.  (iv  iyKiuv\.oi%  ni\o\)%).  No  special
rite  is  prcscrilxd  for  the  dedication  of  a  new  house  referred  to  in
Dt.  20  5  (ivtKa.ivi<T<iy).—  On  the  dedication  of  temple  and  altar  in
the  Maccabean  period,  see  the  following  article.— The  dedication
or  ratification  of  a  covenant  with  blood,  and  the  dedication  or
inauguration  of  a  new  and  vital  wav  of  access  to  God  are
alluded  to  in  Heb.  ;•  18  (see  Covknant)  and  Heb.  10  20.

DEDICATION,  FEAST  OF  THE.  On  the  15th  of
Chislev  of  the  year  145  of  the  Seleucid  era  (  =  Dec.
168  B.C.),  during  the  religious  persecution  under
Antiochus  Epiphanes,  a  pagan  altar  was  set  up  on  the
altar  of  burnt  offering  at  Jerusalem,  and  on  the  25th
of  the  same  month  sacrirtce  was  for  the  first  time
offered  upon  it  (i  Mace.  1 41-64  2Macc.  61-11;  Jos.
Ant.  xii.  54).  Three  years  afterwards  (165  B.C.),
Judas  the  Maccabee  had  recovered  Jerusalem  and  the
temple.  The  temple  was  then  cleansed,  the  altar  of
burnt  offering  displaced  by  one  entirely  new,  new-
sacred  vessels  made,  and  the  temple  reconsecrated  with
great  festivities.  These  histcd  for  eight  d.iys,  beginning
on  2Sth  Chislev  148  of  the  Seleucid  era  (Dec.  165  B.C.),
— that  is,  on  the  very  day  on  which,  three  years  Ixjfore,
the  alur  had  been  desecrated  (i  Mace.  4  36-39).

In  commemoration  of  these  events,  the  feast  of  the
iledication  (n3:n  [Megilla,  iii.  46;  Bikkurim,  16;  Rosh
hashana,  I3,  etc.];  tA  ^Kolfia,  Jn.  IO22  ;  al  r}n4pai
iyKfuvKTixov  Tov  OvffiaffTifplov,  I  Mace.  4  59  :  KaOapiafibs
ToO  Upov  2  Mace.  1 18),  lasting  eight  days  from  the  asth
of  Chislev,  was  celebrated  '  with  mirth  and  joy '  (fier
einppoavvTjt  Kal  xa/>a»)  annually.  According  to  2  Mace.
IOS3


DEGREE

106  it  was  observed  after  the  manner  of  the  feast  of
Tabernacles,  and  in  another  passage  it  is  even  called
the  feast  of  tabernacles  of  the  month  Chislev  {ijfi^pai  rijt
aKrjDoiniyiai  tov  xafffXei-,  2  Mace.  1 9).  The  special  and
distinguishing  jieculiarity  in  its  celebration  was  the
illunnnation  of  synagogues  and  hou.ses.

.\t  the  do'ir  of  each  house  one  light,  at  least-  in  the  ca«e  of
those  who  could  afford  the  expense,  as  many  lights  ax  there  were
persons  in  the  house— had  to  l>e  displayed  ;  on  the  second  diiy  the
number  of  lights  must  lje  doubled,  on  theihiid  trebled,  and  soon.

Jewish  tradition  explains  the  eight-days'  duration  of  the  feast,
and  the  custom  of  displaying  lights,  by  the  a.sscrtion  that  ludas
found  only  one  small  cruse  of  consecrated  oil,  but  that  it  Luted
for  eight  days  instead  of  only  tor  one.

The  proljability  is  that  the  illumination,  like  the  dura-
tion and  other  features  of  the  feast,  was  taken  over  from
the  feast  of  tabernacles  and  referred  to  the  relighting  of  the
golden  candlestick  (i  Mace.  450). See  C'ANDi.tsricK.

No  mention  of  this  custom  of  illumination  is  made  in  the
books  of  M.iccaliees  or  by  Josephiis  ;  the  tiescription  of  the  feast
by  Josephus  a.s  'the  feast  of  lights  '  ((^Ta),  however,  doubtless
h.-is  reference  to  them  (Ant.  xii.  7  7),  ,-uid  his  explanation  of  the
name  as  coming  from  the  unexjwctedness  of  the  restoration  of
religious  freedom  10  the  nation  (f«  toO  Trap'  c'AntJof  olfiat  touttji'
rfixlv  ^vi]va.L  frtv  i^ovaiav  [sc.  ttv  9pi)(ricttav])  also  may  l)e  safely
taken  as  h.iving  the  same  reference.  In  both  of  the  letters  pre-
fixed to  2  Mace,  the  observance  of  this  least  is  urgently  pressed
on  the  Jews  in  Kgypt  (2  -Mace.  1  9  i8  2  16);  it  is  natural  to  pre-
sume that  when,  in  the  second  of  these  (on  the  text  of  "  hich  see
Hall  in  I  ar.  AfHKryfha),  the  story  of  Nehemiah 's  miraculous
discovery  of  the  sacred  fire  is  referred  to,  the  writer  saw  a  parallel
to  it  in  the  relighting  of  the  altar-fire  by  Judas,  and  desired  to
associate  the  commemoration  of  both  events  with  one  feast.
From  the  time  of  year  and  the  employment  of  lights  and  green
branches  in  the  celebration,  NS'ellhausen  (//C210  [  jrd  e<l.  256I)
conjectures  that  the  feast  originally  had  relerence  to  the  winter
.solstice,  and  onjy  afterwards  came  to  be  associated  with  the
events  recorded  in  Maccabees.

The  projjer  psalm  for  the  Feast  of  the  Dedication  is
Ps.  30  ;  hence  its  inscription,  r'2n  rzivrrv,  rl^aXfibi
i^drjs  TOV  (yKaivia/j.oO  too  oIkov,  '  Dedication-song  of
the  house  (temple).'

See  the  commentaries  on  i  Mace.  459  and  Jn.  10  22;  also
A.  (1.  Wahner,  t/e  n3Ijn  •f"'^  /fs/i'  Kncaenioy^m  judaico,
origine  nativitatis  Chnsti,  1715  ;  Oehler,  in  /'K Hf^)  A  $^1,/.
{3rd  ed.  7i5J;  Che.  OJ's.  17/,  32/,  247;  Nowack,  J/ A  (94)
■-'jooyT  ;  Schiirer,  CJ I'  1  162  n.,  with  its  references  to  literature
on  the  post-talmudic  fe.ists.  Cp  also  articles  by  Krauss  and
Levi  in  A'/.'/ 31  24-43,  204-219,  220-231  ('94).  I. B.

DEEP,  THE  (Dinn,  rhom;  always  without  art.  except
in  Is.  tiljijl's.  IO69  ;  .Ass.  tiainlu,  iamtu,  tdrnJu,  'the
sea';  afivaaos.  in  Jo1j383o  corruptly  dcffioOs  [gen.];
in  Prov.  8  27  iir'  aviixojv  [?]  ;  Prov.  8  28  t^j  i^ir'  ovpavdv.
Ecclus.  4;J23  ,n3T  [a^vaaov  ;  in  b  Heb.  gives  cmna.  ©
avTifv  ; but  the  clause  is  corrupt]).

Originally  t'hom  w.ts  feminine  :  note  the  phrase  HS'I  CiriB,
Gen.  7  II  ;  Is.  51 10  Am.  74  Ps.  3t>7  and  the  plur.  ending  fth.
See  al.so  Gen.  4925  (yrj?  <;(ou<n)s  itavra)  Dt.  33  13  Ezek.  31 4  15.
But,  at  first  apparently  with  the  plur.  form,  the  original  view
came  to  be  disregarded,  and  fhont  treated  as  a  sym)nym  of  D'
(plur.  :  Ex.  I.')5(>rdi/To«18[itufio]  Ps.  77  17  10726.  Sing.  ;  Ezek.
8I4  Jn.  26  H.ib.  3  10  Ps.  428  [not  1046,  but  cp  Ba.j,  Job  'i«i4.
On  Dt.  87  see  Kon.  Syn.  467).

See  ABY.SS.  Dragon,  end.

DEEE,  FALLOW  CWOn:),  Dt.  14s  1K.423  [513]
AV  ;  see  Roi:,  4.

DEFILE,  DEFILEMENT  (XOa).  Lev.  I824/.  See
Co.MMoN.  and  cp  Ci.i.an,  §  14.

DEGREE  occurs  in  a  passage  of  some  interest  with
reference  to  early  church  offices.  What  is  the  '  good
degree'  (AV)  or  rather,  '  good  standing  '  (RV)  which  is
assured  to  those  who  have  '  served  well  as  deacons '  ?
/3otf/xdj  KaKb%  is  the  phrase.  According  to  Hort  ( Chr.  Eccl.
202)  it  means  the  vantage-ground  of  influence  and  moral
authority  won  by  theexcellent  dischargeofdiaconal duties.
Theodoret,  de  W'ette,  etc.,  however,  find  a  reference
to  a  divine  reward  at  the  great  judgment ;  whilst  Jerome
anil  other  Fathers.  Baur.  Holtzmann,  and  von  Soden
think  it  is  promotion  to  the  episcopate  that  is  intended.
Observe  that  the  qualities  required  of  an  HrlaKorot  in
rt'.  a-7  are  analogous  to  those  required  of  a  deacon.

On  '.songs  of  degrees'  (a  purely  conventional  rendering)  see
PsALMS  ;  on  the  '  degrees  '  of  2  K.  2O9  (  =  Is.  3S  8),  see  Diai_

1054


DEHAVITES

DEHAVITES,  RV  Dehaites  (NIHl,  Kt.,  but  N^ni,
l>r. ;  Aay*^i<'I  I^'^^'  "^lOl  [I^].  l^ut  A  omits  '  Elamites'),
generally  regarded  as  one  of  the  peoples  represented  in
Samaria  among  the  colonists  of  Asnappek  (Ezra 49).
They  stand  apparently  between  the  Susanchites  (Susi-
anians)  and  the  Klamites.  No  plausible  identification
has  yet  been  offered  (see  Schr.  A. I  T'C-'  376,  616).

The  reason  is  plain,  as  soon  as  it  is  mentioned.  If  we  point,
with  G.  Hoffmann  (Z^  2  54),  Nirrn,  and  take  this  with  the  follow-
ing word  tt'D^y,  we  shall  get  the  phrase  '  that  is,  Elamites  '  (®B
already  has  o'i  elaiv  r)\atJialoi)  :  which  is  an  explanatory  gloss  on
the  preceding  word  '  Susanchites.'  So  Marti,  Gram,  der  bib.
.-irain.  S/>r.  40*.

DEKAR  (1i5"n.),  I  K.  49  AV  ;  RV  Ben-deker,  AV">e-
Ben-dkkar  ('/.J'.).

DELAIAH  (-in^^-n,  x^'hx  perhaps  'God  hath  drawn
out,'  §  30;  AaAaia  [NA],  -AC  [liQL].  some  compare
Ae\MACTApTOC  in  Jos.  c.  Ap.  1 18,  which  is  more
correctly  given  by  Niese  as  AeACTARTOc)-

1.  Son  of  Shemaiah,  a  prince  of  Jehoiakims  court;  Jer.  36
(©  43)  12,  ioAias  [N],  -Aeas  [A]);  25  (-Aat<ra  [Ncc  mg.  sup.]_
•yo6oAias  [HA?]).

2.  Head  of  one  of  the  priestly  courses;  iCh. '24i8  (SoAaia
[L],  afiaAAai  V.  17  [H]).

3.  (AV  Dalaiah),  a  descendant  of  Zerubbabel  (-Aaaia  [B],
-AfalLJ),  I  Ch.  324.

4.  The  15'ne  Delaiah  were  a  post-exilic  family  who  were  un-
able to  prove  their  pedigree;  Ezra 2 60  (\a.\ia.  [I?],  SaAaia  [L])
=  Neh.  7  62(-Afa[H])=DALAN,  i  Esd.  637  {a.<ra.v  [H],  ioAai/ [A]).

5.  Father  of  'shemaiah  (-Aea  [B],  -AAaias  [L]),  Neh.  (5 10.

DELILAH  {jhh\  'delicate?'  §  67;  AA\[e]iAA
[BAL]  ;  IL-!^?,  £>./A/i.^.'/),  Judg.  I64-20.  Whether  the
name  has,  like  S.VMSON  \_q.v.\  any  mythological  connec-
tion we  cannot  at  present  say.  Delilah  dwelt  in  the  vale
of  SOKEK  [q.v. ),  and  we  may  presume  that  the  tradition
regarded  her  as  a  Philistine.  Her  temporary  relation
to  the  Philistine  princes  hardly  warrants  us  in  calling
her  a  'political  agent'  (Smith's  Z)Z?C-'  s.v.).  See
Samson.

DELIVERER,  THE  (o  pyoMeNOC  [Ti.  WH])
Rom.  11  26  Ills.  5920  ('?Xi5);  see  Goel.

DELUGE.  Postponing  the  various  interesting  ques-
tions, as  well  of  comparative  folk-lore  (§§  18-20)  as  of
biblical  theology  (§§  10  ff.  17),  which  are  connected
with  the  title  of  this  article,  let  us  confine  ourselves  at

1  TJ  >,  1  ■  present  to  the  relation  betiueen  the
P,  y  ^°^^*^  Hebrew  Flood-story  and  that  of  Baby-
Irlooa-story.  ^^^.^^  Of  all  the  parallel  traditions  of
a  deluge  the  Babylonian  is  undeniably  the  most  import-
ant, because  the  points  of  contact  between  it  and  the
Hebrew  story  are  so  striking  that  the  view  of  the  de-
pendence of  one  of  the  two  on  the  other  is  directly
suggested  even  to  the  most  cautious  of  students.  The
account  in  the  Berossian  excerpts  will  be  referred  to  below
(see  §  16)  ;  but  we  may  state  here  that  the  genuine
Babylonian  character  of  the  Berossian  story  has,  since
1872,  been  raised  above  all  doubt  by  George  Smith's
discovery,  in  the  remains  of  the  library  of  Asur-bani-pal,
of  a  copy  of  a  very  ancient  cuneiform  Deluge -story
derived,  it  would  seem,  from  the  city  of  Surippak
in  Babylonia,  and  by  a  more  recent  discovery  by  Scheil
_ . .  (see  §  6). The  former  story  fills  the  first

p'..  P , four  columns  of  the  eleventh  tablet  of  the
*  ■  epic of  Gilgames,^ a  cycle  of  legends  to

which,  in  studying  the  early  narratives  of  Genesis,  we
have  so  freciuently  to  refer  (see,  e.g.,  Cainites,  §  6).

A  paraphrase  of  its  contents  is  all  that  we  can  give
here  :  translations  of  recent  date  and  critical  in  character
will  be  found  in  KA  T<-^  55^  (by  Paul  Haupt)  ;  Jensen's
Kosm.  367  ff.  ;  A.  Jeremias's  Izdubar-Nimrod,  32  ff. ;
Muss-Arnolt's essay  in Bibl. World, Zxogff. ('94);

1  [The  exploits  of  this  hero  are  celebrated  in  the  twelve  chants
or  lays  of  the  epic.  The  text  of  the  Deluge-story  was  published
in  4  R  (ist  ed.  ^o/.,  2nd  ed.  43^^)  and  most  recently  by  Haupt,
Das  Bab.  Nitnrodepos,  95-150  ('91)].

105s


DELUGE

and  Gunkel's  Schopf.  423^  (by  H.  Zimmern).!  The
gods,  more  especially  Bel,  wroth  at  the  sins  of  men,
determine  to  bring  upon  them  a  judgment  consisting  in
a  great  all-destroying  flood.  One  of  the  gods,  however,
namely  Ea,  selects  a  favoured  man,  named  Par(?)-
napisti,'-  of  the  city  of  Surippak,  for  deliverance.  This
is  the  Xisuthrus  of  Berossus,  and  be  it  observed  that  the
name  Xisuthrus  is  found,  in  all  probability,  by  transpos-
ing the  two  component  parts  of  Atra-hasis — i.e.,  'the
very  wise,'  or,  still  better  perhaps  (so  Haupt),  '  the  very
pious' — one  designation  of  the  hero  of  the  cuneiform
account.  Par(?)-napisti  is  in  a  dream  acquainted  by  Ea
with  the  purpose  of  the  gods,  and  commanded  to  build
a  ship  {elippu,  cp  Aram,  ns'jn),  the  form  of  which  is
prescribed,  as  a  means  of  saving  his  life,  and  to  take
with  him  into  it  'seeds  of  life  of  all  kinds'  (/.  25).
Accordingly,  the  ship  is  built ;  its  dimensions  ^  are
given  with  great  precision  by  the  poet,  who  mentions
that  it  was  coated  within  and  without  with  bitumen
(kiipru),  and  that  cells  were  made  in  it.  Into  this  vessel
Par(?)-napisti  brings  gold  and  silver  and  '  seeds  of  life  of
all  kinds,'  besides  his  family  and  servants,  beasts  of  the
field,  and  wild  beasts  of  the  field  (//.  84/.).  Shortly
before  the  Flood,  the  beginning  of  which  is  made  known
to  him  by  a  special  sign,  Par(?)-napisti  himself  enters  the
ship  and  bars  the  door,  while  his  steersman,  named
Puzur-Bel,  takes  over  the  direction  of  the  vessel  (/.  94).
Upon  this  the  deluge  begins  :  it  is  thought  of  as  an
unloosing  of  all  the  elemental  powers,  torrents  of  rain,
storm  and  tempest,  together  with  thick  darkness.  The
waters  rise  higher  and  higher,  till  the  whole  land  be-
comes a  sea  ;  all  men  and  animals,  except  those  in  the
ship,  perish.  Six  days  and  nights  the  flood  rages  ;  on
the  seventh  day  a  calm  sets  in.  Then  Par(?)-napisti  opens
the  air-hole  (/.  136;  nappasu  =  nanpasu,  cp  c'E3)i  and
sees  the  widespread  ruin.  At  the  same  time  land
emerges,  and  the  ship  grounds  on  the  mountain  of
Nisir  (/.  141).'*  After  seven  days  more  Par(?)-napisti
sends  out  successively  a  dove,  a  swallow,  and  a  raven.
The  dove  and  the  swallow,  finding  no  place  of  rest,
return  to  the  ship  ;  but  the  raven  is  seen  no  more.
Upon  this  Par(?)-napisti  clears  the  ship  and  offers  a
sacrifice  on  the  summit  of  the  mountain.  '  The  gods
smelt  the  savour,  the  gods  smelt  the  sweet  savour.  The
gods  gathered  like  flies  about  the  sacrificer '  (//.  160-
162).  As  for  Bel,  however,  he  is  at  first  displeased  at
the  deliverance  of  Par(?)-napisti  and  his  household  ;  but
on  the  representations  of  Ea,^  who  points  out  the  rash-
ness of  his  act  in  causing  a  universal  deluge,  and
recommends  the  sending  of  wild  animals,  famine,  and
pestilence,  as  a  more  fitting  mode  of  punishing  human
sins,  Bel  becomes  reconciled  to  the  escape  of  Par(?)-
napisti,  and  even  gives  him  and  his  wife  a  share  of  the
divine  nature,  and  causes  them  to  dwell  '  afar  off,  at  the
mouth  of  the  rivers  '  ••  (//.  199-205).

Before  attempting  to  explain  this  Deluge-story,  and
comparing  it  with  the  corresponding  Hebrew  account,
we  must  consider  the  position  which  it  occupies  in  Baby-
lonian literature.  It  stands  at  present,  as  we  have  seen,
in  close  connection  with  other  traditional  stories,  and
particularly  with  the  cycle  of  Gilgames-legends.  The
hero,  Gilgames,  who,  after  his  various  adventures,  is
visited  with  a  sore  disease,  sets  out  on  the  way  to  his

1  The  references  here  ^iven  to  lines  of  the  Deluge-story  accord
with  Zimmern's  numeration.

2  [Cp  §  15  (/.  The  reading  of  the  first  part  of  the  name
is  uncertain  ;  Par-napisti  ('  sprout,  or  offspring,  of  life '),  Sit-
napiSti  ('  the  escaped  one  '),  SamaS-napisti  ('  sun  of  life  '),  Cm-
napiSti  ('day  of  life'),  and  Nuh-napisti  (see  Noah)  have  found
their  respective  supporters.]

3  [See  Haupt,  Amer.  Joum.  of  Phil.^ i,\^ff.\

4  On  the  land  and  mountains  of  Nisir,  cp  Annals  of  Aiur-
ndsir-pal,  2  33-39  ( A" /"(^l  2  150/).  They  were  situated  between
the  Tigris  and  the  Lower  Zab,  between  35°  and  36°  N.  lat.  (Del.
Par.  105).

6  [Jastrow  sees  here  traces  of  a  collision  between  the  cultus  of
Bel  and  that  of  Ea.]
6  [See  below  §  15  (end),  and,  for  a  legendary  parallel  §  14.

1056


DELUGE

ancestor  Par(?)-napisti,  whose  dwelling  is  remote  from
that  of  all  other  men,  beyond  the  river  of  death  (cp
Caimtks,  §  6,  Enoch,  §  2).  From  this  fortunate
possessor  of  eternal  life,  Gilgames  hopes  to  learn  how  to
obtain,  not  only  the  cure  of  his  disease,  but  also  the  same
supreme  felicity.  Par(?)-napisii  answers  by  a  detailed
description  of  the  Deluge,  in  which  he  was  himself  so
prominent  a  figure,  and  at  the  end  of  which  he  was
admitted  to  the  life  of  the  gods.  Obviously,  the  present
connection  of  the  Deluge-story  with  the  Gilgames-tradi-
tion  is  secondary  in  character,  and  it  becomes  all  the
more  reasonable  to  maintain  that  the  Hebrew  Deluge-
story  too  has  only  an  artificial  connection  with  the  frame-
work in  which  it  now  stands.  Noah  may  originally
have  had  no  more  connection  with  Nimrod  than  Par(?)-
napisti  with  Gilgames  (see  NiMKon,  Noah).

The  secondary  character  of  the  present  connection  of
the  Babylonian  Deluge- story  being  granted,  can  we
.. TT- X  f  venture  to  indicate  a  more  original  connec-

3.  Hint  from  ^


Berdssus.


tion? According  to  BCrossus.i  Xisuthrus


(the  hero  of  tiie  Deluge)  was  the  last  of
the  ten  primitive  Bal)yloiiian  kings,  whose  innnensely
long  lives  so  forcibly  remind  us  of  those  ascribed  to  the
antediluvian  patriarchs  in  Genesis,  and,  as  has  l)een
repeatedly  pointed  out,-  are  closely  related  to  the  theory
of  an  artificially-calculated  cosmic  year.  The  Berossian
cosmic  year  had  the  enormous  duration  of  518,400
ordinary  years,  and  each  of  its  twelve  months  consisted
of  12  sari — i.e.,  (12x3600),  43,200  ordinary  years.
-According  to  this  system,  ten  cosmic  months  are  equiva-
lent to  432,000  years,  and  this  is  exactly  the  number  of
the  years  assigned  by  Berossus  to  the  ten  antediluvian
Babylonian  kings  (cp  Chro.\oi,(k:y,  §  4,  end).  The
theory  of  the  Babylonians  appears  to  have  been  that
these  ten  primitive  kings  reigned  during  the  first  ten
cosmic  months  of  the  great  cosmic  year  (each  king  for
a  cosmic  month),  and  that  the  Deluge  fell  at  the  end  of
the  tenth  month.  Now,  the  eleventh  month  was  for
the  Babylonians  (who  began  the  year  with  the  vernal
ecjuinox)  the  time  from  the  middle  of  January  to  the
middle  of  February — in  other  words,  the  middle  of  the
rainy  or  winter  season.

It  is  also  to  the  winter  season  that  the  position  of
the Deluge- narrative in the Giigame.s-epic points  —
4.  Confirmed more  particularly  to  the  eleventh  month
r' .  Sehat  (Jan.-I'eb. ). For,  as  Sir  Henry

Dy  epic.  Raxvlinion  saw,  the  twelve  tablets  of
the  adventures  of  Gilgames  stand  in  relation  to  the
passage  of  the  sun-god  through  the  twelve  months  of
the  year,  and  the  principal  event  on  every  tablet  has  its
analogue  in  the  corresponding  one  of  the  twelve  signs
of  the  zodiac,  which,  as  is  now  certainly  known,  had
their  origin  in  Babylonia.  Now,  it  is  the  eleventh  tablet
that  contains  the  Deluge  -  story,  and  the  eleventh
zodiacal  sign  is  Aquarius.  The  conclusion  is  obvious.
Lastly,  it  is  also  probable  that  the  Assyrian  name  of  the
eleventh  month,  Sabalu  (probably  'destruction'),  and
its  ideographic  designation  as  '  (month  of  the)  curse  of
rain,'  both  have  reference  to  the  Deluge.  Clearly  the
connection  of  the  Deluge-story  with  the  story  of  the  ten
primitive  kings  is  much  more  close  and  original  than  its
present  connection  w'ith  the  Gilgames -legends.  The
fixing  of  the  great  catastrophe  in  the  eleventh  month  is
a  fact  of  importance  with  reference  to  the  question,
which  will  shortly  (§  8)  claim  to  be  answered  :  Has  the
Deluge- story  a  historical  kernel,  or  is  it  simply  and
entirely  a  nature-myth  ?

The  elaborate  account  in  the  Gilgames -epic  is  not

the  only  cuneiform  record  of  the  B;ibylonian  Deluge-

_ „  J  «  , story. Peiser  has  published  [ZA  \T,(x)f.

document' ^^"^^^  ^  mythological  text,  with  a  map,

p  . V giving a primitive picture of Baby-

^  '■ Ionia  at  the time  of  the  Deluge  under

1  For  the  Berossian  story,  see  below,  $  16.

2  See especially Marcus  v. Niebuhr, Gesch. Assurs  und
Baheh  ('57),  237^


DELUGE

I^iir(?)-napisti.  The  text  is  very  fragmentary ;  but
as  far  as  it  can,  with  the  help  of  the  map,  be  under-
stood, this  is  the  notion  of  the  Flood  which  it  suggests.
— The  Persian  Cjulf  was  conceived  of  as  encompassing
Babylonia,  and  round  alxjut  this  ocean  lay  seven  islands.
The  mountain  of  the  Deluge  was  due  north  of  Babylon,
but  still  within  the  tract  enclosed  by  the  ocean.  It  is
noteworthy  that  the  time  of  the  Deluge  is  apparently
designated  in  this  text — 'the  year  of  the  great  serpent.'
[Further,  among  the  tablets  in  the  Constantinople
museum  Scheil  has  recently  discovered  a  mutilated  frag-
B *?  h  'I'b  '"*•'"' ^^  ^ "'^^ Deluge-story, containing


fragment.


part  of  colunms  if.  jf. In  the  twelfth  line


occurs  the  word  ^ibil  ('effaced'),  which,
according  to  Scheil,  suggests  that  our  tablet  is  but  a
copy  of  a  much  older  original  which  had  l^en  injured.
The  date  of  the  tablet  itself,  however,  is  sufficiently
ancient:  'month  of  .Sebat,  day  28,  the  year  in  which
Ammi-zaduga  built  the  fortress  of  Ammi-zaduga  at  the
mouth  of  the  Euphrates' — not  much  later  than  2140
B.C.  By  whom  the  story  is  told,  is  not  evident.  The
complaints  of  mankind  are  spoken  of  first  :  the  god
Ramman  appears  to  \)c  angry  with  them.  Thereupon
a  god  pronounces  sentence  upon  mankind  ;  reference
is  made  to  a  destroying  rain-storm.  In  the  seventh
column  the  god  Ea  speaks.  He  expostulates  with  the
other  god  for  wishing  to  destroy  men.  Some  men  at
least,  Ea  will  save  ;  'let  them  come  into  [the  vessel  .  .  .],
.  .  the  oar  (?)...  let  him  come  .  .  .  let  him  bring
.  .  .  let  him  .  .  .  .'  That  the  great  Deluge  is  re-
ferred to  is  now  clear  :  the  occurrence  of  the  word
ahubu  must  dispel  all  doubt.  In  the  eighth  colunm
only  two  lines  are  complete  ;  but  these  contain  a  refer-
ence to  Atra-hasis  (Xisuthrus),  who  is  introduced
speaking  '  to  his  lord ' — i.e. ,  to  the  god  who  has  proved
himself  a  friend  to  the  human  race.  The  name  of  the
scribe  suggests  to  Scheil  that  this  version  of  the  Deluge-
story  is  that  which  was  current  in  the  city  of  Sippar  ^
(see  §16).]

We  have  also  a  list  of  royal  names  which  bears  the  in-
scription, '  These  are  the  postdiluvian  kings  of  Babylon,"
thus  implicitly  confirming the  Berossian


7.  Other
references.


34


IOS7


distinction  between  kings  before  and
kings  after  the  Deluge  (cp  COT  I61).
The  word  here  used  for  Deluge  is  abubu  (cp  lx.-low,  §  13),
which  elsewhere  is  of  fre<iuent  occurrence,-  the  Deluge
being  referred  to  as  an  event  of  hoary  antiquity — e.g.,
when  it  is  said  of  old  inscriptions  that  they  go  back  to
the  time  before  the  Deluge  {abiibu). See  'I'kl-.VKIB.

We  have  now  to  take  up  the  question. What  was
probably the  true  origin of  this IBabylonian Deluge-
_ . . , story,  looking at  it by  itself, without
'. °  comparing  the  Hebrew  records? The

Ueluge-story.  ^^^^  ^^^^^^  ^j^^^  strikes  us  is  the  harmony
between  the  narrative  and  the  local  conditions  of  Baby-
lonia, which  justifies  us  in  regarding  that  country  as  the
native  place  of  the  story.  It  is  more  diflScult  to  deter-
mine whether  any  real  historical  event  lies  at  the  founda-
tion of  the  narrative,  or  w  hether  we  have  to  do  with  a
mere  myth.  In  itself  it  would,  of  course,  not  be  incon-
ceivable that  in  days  of  yore  an  unusually  extensive
flood  from  the  Persian  (julf,  combined  with  continuous
rain,  burst  upon  the  Babylonian  lowlands,  and  destroyed
countless  human  lives  ;  that  a  dim  tradition  of  this  event
was  preserved  ;  and  that  the  Babylonian  Deluge-story
was  a  last  deposit  produced  by  this  genuine  occurrence.
Judging,  however,  from  what  is  known  of  the  growth  of
myths  and  legends,  especially  among  the  Babylonians,

1  The  reason  is  that  one  element  in  the  name  of  the  scribe  is
Aya  (.-Va).  '  Now  it  was  chiefly  at  Sippar  that  the  goddess  Aya
was  honoured  in  conjunction  with  Sama^ (the sun-god);  her  name
was  borne  by  the  inhabitants.'  Scheil,  'Notes  d'ipigraphie  et
d'arche'ologie  assyriennes.  Tirage  a  part  du  Rccueil  de  travaux,'
etc.,  vol.  XX.  ('97).

2  [Abiilm,  '  Storm,'  is  also  used  as  a  title  for  the  god  Marduk's
weapon  in  the  Creation-story,  Tab.  iv.  49,  and  King  Hammu-rabi
calls  h\mx\( abiU)  tukumatiiu,  '  tempest  of  battles,"  KB  3a  115.]

1058


DELUGE

we  think  that  this  is  far  from  probable.  The  entire
character  of  the  narrative,  and  the  connection  with  other
myths  indicated  above,  are  much  more  favourable  to
the  view  that  we  have  to  do,  not  with  a  legend  b;ised
upon  facts,  but  with  a  myth  which  has  assumed  the  form
of  a  history  (cp  below,  col.  1063,  note  3).  The  colouring
may  have  been  partly  supplied  by  the  cyclones  which,
in  an  alluvial  country  like  Babylonia,  frequently  make
their  appearance  from  the  sea  ;  but  the  origin  of  this
myth  will  have  to  be  sought  in  cjuite  another  direction.
We  noticed  above  that  the  great  catastrophe  is  placed
by  the  Babylonians  in  the  middle  of  the  winter  season,
in  the  eleventh  month'  (Sebat  =  Jan. -Feb. ),  which  was
regarded  as  sp)ecially  the  time  of  storms,  and  had  for  its
patron  the  rain-god  and  storm-god  Ramman.  To  the
present  writer  it  seems  most  probable  that  the  Deluge-
story  was  originally  a  nature-myth,  representing  the
phenomena  of  winter,  which  in  Babylonia  especially  is
a  time  of  rain.  The  hero  rescued  in  the  ship  must
originally  have  Vjeen  the  sun-god. '-^  Thus,  the  Deluge
and  the  deliverance  of  lMr(?)-napisti  are  ultimately  but  a
variant  to  the  Babylonian  Creation-myth  (see  Creation,
§  2  y; ).  Now  we  can  understand  the  very  peculiar
designation  of  the  Deluge-period  mentioned  already.
The  '  great  serpent '  is  no  other  than  the  personified
ocean,  which  on  the  old  Babylonian  map  (see  above,  §
5)  encircles  Babylonia,  just  as  '  leviathan  the  wreathed
serjjent'  (Is.  27 1)  is  the  world-encircling  ocean  personified
as  a  serpent :  ^  it  is  the  same  monster  that  is  a  central
figure  in  the  Creation-story.

The  question  as  to  the  relation  of  the  Babylonian  to
the Hebrew Deluge-story can now be satisfactorily
answered. If, as we believe, the


9.  Of  Hebrew
story.


10.  P  depend-
ent on  Jo.


former  had  its  origin  in  Babylonia,
and  is  fundamentally  a  myth  of  winter
and  the  sun-god,  the  Hebrew  story  must  have  been
borrowed  from  the  Babylonian.  In  this  case,  Dillmann's
theory  of  a  common  Semitic  tradition,  which  developed
among  the  Hebrews  in  one  way,  and  among  the
Babylonians  in  another,  is  once  more  put  out  of  court
(see  Cre.\tion,  §  4).  h.  z.

The  Israelitish  story  of  the  submergence  of  the  earth
(i.e.,  of  the  part  known  to  the  narrators)  by  a  Deluge  is
found  in  the  Book  of  Genesis  (65-919)
in  two  forms,  belonging  respectively
to  J,,  and  to  P,  which  have  been  welded
together  (see  Genesis,  §  8).  There  are  also  allusions
to  the  story  (all  late)  in  Ezek.  14  14  20  Is.  549  Ps.  29  10
Is.  245  18  Job  22  is/.  (?).  It  remains  to  be  seen,  how-
ever, whether  the  two  forms  of  the  tradition  in  Genesis  are
really  independent ;  it  may  be  that,  as  in  the  case  of  the
Creation  -  story  (see  Creatio.v,  §  12),  P  has  only  given  a
somewhat  different  setting  to  data  which  he  has  derived
from  Jj.  It  is  no  objection  to  this  view  that  P's  account  is
longer  and  in  some  respects  less  fragmentary  than  that  of
J2.  The  editor  (or  editors)  naturally  preferred  the  former,
because  P's  work  was  systematically  adopted  as  the
framework  of  the  combined  historical  narrative.  The
three  principal  points  in  which  P  is  fuller  than  Jg  are
(i)  the  announcement  of  the  coming  deluge  to  Noah,
and  the  command  to  build  an  ark  (or  chest),  the
measurements  of  which  are  prescribed  ;  (2)  the  notice
of  the  place  where  the  ark  grounded  ;  and  (3)  the
appointment  of  the  rainbow  as  the  sign  of  the  covenant
between  God  and  man. On  all  these  points,  we  may

t  The  fragments  of  Berossus  mention  Daisiu.s  (May-June)
as  the  month  of  the  Deluge.  This  notice  is  suspicious  on
several  grounds.  The  writer  who  e.xcerpteU  BcrOssus  probably
identified  the  eighth  Babylonian  month  Arah-samna  =  Marhes wan
(  =  Oct.-Nov.)  with  the  eighth  Syro-Maced'onian  month  Daisius.
The  biblical  recension  alsomakes  the  Deluge  begin  in  Marheswan.
On  this  view,  both  Berossus  and  the  OT  placed  the  beginning
of  the  Deluge  early  in  the  winter,  instead  of  in  the  middle  of
that  season — an  easily  intelligible  \'ariant.

2  [The  .same  view  is  given  in  Che.'s  art.  'Deluge,'  £BW.
See  below.]

3  Gunkel,  Schef-f.  46.  See  Behemoth  and  Leviathan,  S
3  OCX  Serpent,  §3  (/).

1QS9


DELUGE

safely  presume,  information  was  given  in  the  original
Jy  To  suppose  that  the  latter  began  with  the  words,
'  And  Yahwc  said  to  Noah,  Go  thou  with  all  thy  house
into  the  ark,"  would  Ije  absurd,  and  Budde  seems  to  be
right  in  supposing  that  the  measurements  of  the  ark
in  Gen.  7 15  come  from  Jj,  who  on  his  side  may  have
derived  them  from  some  form  of  the  Babylonian  myth
(cp  GoPHEK-woou).  Budde  has  also  made  it  probable
that  J,^  gave  a  statement  as  to  the  resting-place  of  the
ark,  which  he  placed  among  the  mountains  E.  of  Ur-
Kasdim.  P  knew  that  there  were  higher  mountains
than  these  in  the  N. ,  and  transferred  the  locality  to
Ararat  {q.v.,  §  3)  ;  though  it  is  probable  that  he  had
the  support  of  the  later  Babylonian  tradition  (cp
Berossus).

Nor  need  we  doubt  that  the  episode  of  the  rainbow
also  was  told  by  Jj,  to  whose  delicate  imagination  it
11  Rainbow  ^^°"''^  ^^  '"  ^  ^'8^  degree  congenial.  It
is  true,  there  is  nothing  like  it  in  the
Deluge-story  given  in  the  Gilgames-epic  ;
but  we  do  not  know  all  the  variants  of  the  Babylonian
myth.  Most  probably,  however,  J.,  may  claim  the
honour  of  having  invented  this  e.xquisite  sign  of  the
covenant.  The  covenant  is  distinctly  Israelitish,  and
the  sign  should  be  Israelitish  too.  A  probable  point  of
contact  for  the  rainbow  episode  is  suggested  by  these
words  of  the  Babylonian  poet  (//.  92-102,  Jensen) :
'  A  dark  cloud  came  up  from  the  foundation  of  heaven  ;
Ramman  (the  storm-god)  thundered  therein.  .  .  .  The
noise  of  Ramman  penetrated  to  heaven  ;  it  turned  all
brightness  into  obscurity.'  The  flashes  of  lightning  are
the  storm -god's  arrows  (Ps.  763  [4]  7848  Hab.  3 11),
and  when  the  storm  ceases,  the  god  lays  aside  his  bow
(this  is  said,  e.g.,  of  the  god  Indra,  after  his  battle  with
the  demons).  If  the  Hebrew  story  in  its  original  form
referred  to  the  thundering  of  Yahwc,  we  can  well
believe  that  when  J,  appended  the  account  of  the
covenant  he  said  to  him.self  that  the  bow  which  Yahwe
had  laid  aside  could  be  no  other  than  the  rainbow.
There  is,  at  any  rate,  no  exact  mythic  parallel  elsewhere
to  the  use  made  of  the  rainbow  in  Gen.  912-17.

There  are  also  other  points  of  difference  between  Jj

and  P. (a)  The  latter  is  without  the  vivid  details  of

„ p, the  sending  out  of  the  birds  (Gen.  86-12,

Hpvifltinn« J2)  :  ^"^'^  ^  prosaic  writer  would  probably

aeviaiiions. ^j^j^j^ j,^^^^ superfluous. (b) A more

important  point  is  P's  non-recognition  of  the  distinction
between  clean  and  unclean  animals  (Gen.  728  Jg),  and
his  not  mentioning  the  sacrifice  which,  according  to  Jj
(Gen.  820),  Noah  offered  after  leaving  the  ark.  The
cause  of  these  deviations  of  P  is  obvious.  His  historical
theory  of  the  origin  of  the  cultus  imposed  on  him  the
necessity  of  harmonising  the  tradition  with  it.

(c)  Not  less  remarkable  is  the  difference  between  Jj
and  P  as  to  the  duration  of  the  Deluge.  According  to
Jo,  seven  days  elapsed  after  the  command  to  Noah  to
enter  the  ark  ;  then  the  rain-storm  ^  came,  and  it  lasted
forty  days  and  forty  nights  ;  then  in  three  times  seven
days  the  waters  disappeared.  The  computation  of  P
gives  more  occasion  to  debate.

It  is  stated  in  MT  (7  11)  that  the  deluge  began  on  the  seven-
teenth of  the  second  month,  and  that  on  the  twenty-seventh  of
the  second  month  in  the  following  year  the  earth  was  drj"  (8  14).
If  this  is  correct,  the  flood  lasted  i  year  11  days;  i.e.,  if  the
lunar  year  forms  the  basis  of  the  computation,  354 -f- 11  daj-s
which  make  a  solar  year.  This  looks  very  much  like  an  editorial
correction ;  the  flood  really  lasted  a  lunar  year.  ®,  however,
reads  in  7  11  '  twenty-seventh '(©adel)  instead  of 'seventeenth.'
In  this  case  the  solar  year  would  be  mcant,2  and  the  duration  of
the  deluge  (365  days)  would  be  the  same  as  that  of  the  life  of
Enoch  (365  years).  We  also  learn  that  '  the  waters  prevailed
on  the  earth  1 50  days  '  (7  24  cp  8  3). This  ought  to  be  equal  to

1  Cp  Ps.  29  10.  P  (7  11)  ascribes  the  deluge  partly  to  rain,
partly  to  the  breaking  up  of  the  '  fountains  of  the  great  deep '
{i.e.,  of  the  waters  under  the  earth,  cp  Gen.  41)25).  This
approaches  more  nearly  to  the  Babylonian  account,  which
speaks  of  the  sea  as  being  driven  on  the  land  by  a  hurricane.
Possibly  Ja,  in  its  original  form,  made  some  reference  to  the  sea
or  to  the  subterranean  waters.

2  On  P's  year  cp  also  'Vear.

1060


DELUGE

Ave  months  (7  ii  84X  But  150  day*  are  more  than  five  lunar
months ;  it  Is  clear  that  solar  months  must  be  meant  (see,
however,  I)i.  Cen.  \i<)y..  and  his  dLssertation  on  the  Calendar,

';  Bacon,  'Chron-

Utbraica,  8  (92)


Monatihtr.  <Ur  Hetl.  Akati.,  1881,  pp.  930 /I  ; Bacon,  'Chron-

oloRy of  the Account of  the KIockI  in P,"

79-88;  Nowack,  HA  2220).


We  are  thus  enabled  to  some  extent  to  reconstruct
the  Deluge-story  of  J,. No  doubt  some  archaic  incidents


13.  J,'b
narrative.


have  lxx;n  lost,  but  1'  has  preserved  three
of  the  most  important  details  which  were


found  in  the  earlier  narrative,  though  he
has  moved  the  Mountain  of  the  Ark  northwards.  He
has  also  retained  S^ao  (/ifaTa»cXi/<r/x6s),  J.^'s  term  for  the
Deluge:^  outside  of  Jj  and  P  in  the  Deluge-story,  the
term  occurs  only  in  I's.  29 10  (post-exilic),  and  in  (ien.
6 17  7  6  an  editor  has  glossed  it  by  the  word  c;a  '  waters' ;
also  •"'3n,  'chest '2  (/ct/3arr6j,  Vg.  area),  usetl  elsewhere
only  of  Moses'  ark  of  Nile-reeds  (l'",x.  235.  ^[e|t/!i«s
[B.\F]  0-t\i^y\  [I-]).  <ii"l  we  may  presume  that  the  words
-lEJ  (see  GoiMiKR-woou)  and  ibs'  'bitumen,'  both
occurring  in  6 14  and  nowhere  else,  were  retained  from
the  lost  narrative  of  ]^.

13ut  what  of  Jj? Did  his  narrative  of  the  origin  of
man contain  any  Deluge-story  ? No — at  any  rate, if


14.  Jj  had  no
Deluge-story.


the  theory  ably  propounded  by  Budde
be  accepted.  J,'s  narrative  contained
Gen. '24^-3  412^16^-24  61/4  920-27
(but  on  V.  27  sec  J.vpukth )  1 1 1-8 :  it  included  no  Deluge-
story.  In  this  record  Noah  appears  as  the  first  agri-
culturist, and  the  inventor  of  wine.  A  corruption  of
the  text,  and  fx;rhaps  editori.al  convenience,  led  to  his
identification  with  the  hero  of  the  Deluge,  who  (it  is
held)  had  originally  the  name  of  Enoch,  but  had  now  to
take  that  of  Noah  in  exchange  (see  Noah).  \\'e  need
not,  however,  suppose  that  the  Deluge-myth  was  un-
known to  the  Israelites  before  J2  wrote.  It  is  in  reality
a  pendant  to  the  Creation-story :  we  should  naturally
have  expected  both  stories  to  reach  the  Israelites  at  the
same  time.  We  have,  indeed,  no  direct  evidence  of
this  ;  but  the  expression  Sis^n  has  a  very  archaic  appear-
ance. At  one  time  ^20  must  have  had  a  meaning  in
Hebrew,  and  that  time  must  have  been  long  anterior
to  Jo.  But  the  Deluge-myth,  like  the  companion-story
which  underlies  Gen.  I,  did  not,  it  seems,  take  a  firm
hold  on  the  Israelitish  people  :  when  J,,  or  (more  prob-
ably) the  earlier  writer  from  whom  he  draws,  shaped
his  story,  the  Deluge-myth  had  passed  out  of  mind,  and
needwl  to  te  revived  by  the  hclj)  of  some  one  acquainted
with  cuneiform  documents  (cp  Crkation,  §  11/.). [a)


16.  Other
Semitic  Del.-
stories  lost.


Of  the  earliest  Israelitish  Deluge-myth
and  of  its  Canaanitish  original  we  know
nothing, [b)  Lucinn  (160  A.  D. ),  laugh-


ing in  his  sleeve,  gives  the  Syrian  Flood-
story  of  his  day  ;  *  but  it  h;is  been  partly  Helleni.sed,  and
prolxibly  Judaised  (a  'great  box  or  chest,'  \6.pva%,  is
spoken  of),  and  we  can  lay  no  stress  upon  it.  Its  origin
was  no  doubt  Babylonian.  '  Most  people,'  says  Lucian,
'  relate  that  the  founder  of  the  temple  (of  Hierapolis)
was  Deucalion-Sisythes. '  (f)  The  Phojnician  version  of
the  myth,  if  there  ever  was  one,  has  perished.''  (</)  The
1  Siac,  'destruction' :  hence  'deluge'  from  Uab.-ass.  nabdlu.


'  to  destroy ' ;  cp  C'^'BJ.  C'SeJi  a  softened  form  of  C'Saj.  Cien.  ft  4
Nu.i;{33.  "The  word  was  chosen  probably  as  a  synonym  for
Kab.-ass.  al'iibu  (deluge),  on  account  of  the  as.sonance,  when  the
Bab.  Oelune-nivth  first  became  naturalised  in  Canaan.  On  the
etym.  cp  Frd.  Del  Par.  156;  Haupt,  in  KATd^)  66;  Chcyne,
/'sa/msi'^i,  380,  He/>mica,  8175;  Jensen,  Ex/>.  Times,  9  (98)
284  (derives  from  S13,  'to  r.iin'  (.icainst  which  see  Del.  Genesis
\'iy]  172,  and  cp  K5nig,  Lehrgkiti-i).  On  the  form  of  the
Syri.ic  loan-word  mduiiil,  cp  KOnig,  1 495.  Such  a  notable
mythological  word  as  ahuhu  was  certain  to  be  naturalised  in
Canaan  m  some  form  (cp  Belial).

2  ,nan  may  be  of  Egj-ptian,  but  can  scarcely  be  of  Bab.
origin,  as  Jensrn  {ZA  4  273^^)  represents.  The  word  iehitim
in  the  phrase  ina  eli^i  tebititm  us  most  naturally  connected
with  \/j?3D.

3  Cp  kvpri  in  the  parallel  passage  in  the  GilgameS-epic.
*  De  Dea  Syra,  chap.  12/;  ;  cp  Jos.  Ant.  i.  3  6.

0  Gruppe's  opposite  view  {/.ATirV  135 JT.  [T " "
factor^-.


16.  BeroBsian
variant.


is  unsatis-


DELUQE

Arabs,  like  the  Egyptians,*  certainly  never  had  any,
though  the  legendary  el-Hidr  (see  col.  1064,  n.  1),  who
in  the  AlexandiT-legend  conducts  the  hero  to  the  waters
of  life,  and  in  the  Koran,  .acc<jrding  to  the  commentators
(Sur.  18 59),  is  found  by  Moses  'at  the  conHucnce  of
two  seas  (rivers  ?),'  may  be  a  reflection  of  PSr-napiiti,  or
rather  Hasis-atra  (from  a  shortened  form  of  which  el-
Hidr  may  be  derived).

Outside  of  Babylonia,  therefore,  the  only  extant
Semitic  tradition  is  that  of  Jj  and  P.  This  is  obviously
based  on  the  B;\bylonian  niyth,  for  the  suljstitution  of  a
'  chest '  for  a  '  ship '  is  due  either  to  reflection  or  to  a
confusion  between  two  Babylonian  words,  and  in  any
case  not  to  independent  tradition.  Jj's  account  is  the
typical  one  ;  P's  statements  as  to  the  length  of  Enoch's
life  and  the  duration  of  the  Deluge  seem  to  rest  on
Jewish  Aggada.

The  typical  Babylonian  myth  is  that  in  the  Gilgames-
epic  (see  above),  which  appears  to  be  the  local  tradition
of  the  city  of  Surippak  (see  Frd.  Del.
Far.  224  ;  Jensen,  A'osmo/.  387) ;  but
the  v.iriant  discovered  by  Peiser'''  (§  5),
and  the  much  fuller  one  transmitted  by  lierOssus,"*  also
are  valuable.  The  Babylonian  king,  Xisuthrus,  is  the
hero  of  the  Berossian  Deluge-story  ;  in  this  way  Berossus
disguised  the  name  of  .Atra-hasis,  transposing  the  two
parts  of  the  name  or  title.'*  Xisuthrus,  he  says,  was
accompanied  on  board  the  ship  {ffKdipos,  irXotov.  pavi)  by
wife,  children,  friends,  and  steersman,  and  took  with
him  quadrupeds  and  birds.  He  w.as  ordered  to  turn
the  course  of  his  vessel  '  towards  the  gods."  How  long
the  flood  lasted  we  are  not  told.  When  it  went  down,
he  sent  out  birds  three  times  ;  the  third  time  the  birds
did  not  return.  Then  he  discovered  that  the  ship
had  grounded  'on  a  certain  mountain.'  With  wife,
daughter,  and  steersman,  he  disembarked,  erected  an
altar,  sacrificed,  and  then  passed  out  of  sight  with  his
companions.  Those  who  remained  heard  a  voice  which
announced  that  Xisuthrus  had  been  t.iken  to  be  with
the  gods  as  a  reward  for  his  piety  ;  also  that  the  land
in  which  they  were  w:is  Armenia  (cp  Gen.  84  P).  They
were,  further,  commanded  to  dig  up  the  s.acred  books
which  Xisuthrus,  before  embarking,  had  buried  at  Sis-
para  to  transmit  them  to  mankind.  This  form  of  the
story  was,  therefore,  the  local  tradition  of  the  ancient  city
of  Sippar,  on  the  left  bank  of  the  Euphrates  (the  Aiu
Hahba  of  to-day).  We  may  plausibly  assume  that  the
fragment  discovered  by  Scheil  (see  §  6)  also  belonged  to
the  story  current  at  Sippar.  Here,  however,  we  find,
only  Atra- basis  as  the  name  of  the  hero  of  the
Deluge.  This  name,  however,  is  perhaps  to  be  regarded
rather  as  a  title  than  as  a  jjersonal  name.

The  epic  narrative  fills  up  the  lacuna  in  the  Berossian

story. It  presupposes  a  division  of  the  period  of  the

_, „ . Deluge  into  an  (at  present)  uncertain

ine  tpic, f,yp,L^r  Qf  weeks. The  same  predilec-

J2,  ana  ^^^^^  ^^^  ^j^^  number  seven  is  visible  in

Gen.  023. ^^^ account (see Gen.  724  8  [6]  1012).

Similarly  the  epic  agrees  more  definitely  than  Berossus

with  J2  in  its  notice  respecting  the  birds. Seven  days

after  the  calming  of  the  waters, Par-napisti  sends  out

first a  dove, then a swallow, then a  r.aven. Jj  less

naturally  puts  the  raven  before  the  dove  : probably  he

did not draw directly  from  a Babylonian  source  (see

above, §11. end; § 14, end). The  other  details  of

the  Deluge  hiive  been  simplified by  J^  (or  his  prede-

1  There  is  no  Eg>TJtian  Flood-myth.  It  is  hardly  allowable
to  quote  the  myth  of  the  Destruction  of  Man  (see  Maspcro,
Daum  0/  Civ.  164-168)  as  a  '  dry  deluge-m>th,'  for  the  storj'  has
a  ritual  purpose.

2  Cp  Jeremias,  Is/ivhar-NitMrod,  yb/.

3  See'Miiller,  Frafpu.  Histor.  Grirc.  2  501  (Eu.s.  Ckron.,  ed.
Schone,  1  19/),  and  cp  Eus.  Pnr^.  Er>.  9  12  (.\bydenu.s^
where  the  hero's  name  is  Sisithrus.  Lucian  (see  above,  §  15  (^))
had  he.-ird  the  name  Sisythes.

*  Probably,  according  to  Haupt,  the  adverbial  accusative  atra
was  affixed  m  the  later  period  of  the  language  (Proc.  of  Amtr.
Or.  Soc.,  March  1894).

1062


DELUGE

cesser).  The  rather  grotesque  polytheistic  setting  has
disappeared  :  P,  who  retained  the  plural  form  ('  Let  us
make  man')  in  Gen.  1  26,  found  nothing  corresponding
to  this  in  the  old  Deluge-story.  In  Gen.  821  ('.And
Yahwe  snielled  the  sweet  savour ')  we  find  a  reminiscence
of  the  mythic  description  in  the  epic  (see  above,  §  2)  ;
but  the  most  startling  part  of  the  description  has
vanished.  The  cause  assigned  to  the  Deluge  is  nobler
in  J2  (P)  than  in  the  epic.  In  the  latter  (//.  168-175)
Ea  reproaches  Bel  with  having  punished  the  innocent
with  the  guilty  :  the  offence  consisted,  it  appears,  in  the
neglect  of  the  accustomed  sacrifices  to  the  gods.^  In
J2  (P),  on  the  other  hand,  no  special  stress  is  laid  on
sacrifices,  and  no  limitation  is  made  to  the  sweeping  de-
claration that  '  the  earth  is  filled  with  violence '  (Gen.
613),  whilst  the  injunction  laid  upon  the  survivors  after  the
Deluge  is  not  that  they  should  be  '  reverent '  in  a  ritual
sense,  but  that  they  should  not  deface  the  image  of  God
by  shedding  man's  blood  (Gen.  96).  The  close  of  the  epic
narrative,  however,  redeems  the  character  of  the  poet,
and  irresistibly  suggests  the  theory,  supported  elsewhere,
that  '  Noah  '  should  rather  l^e  '  Enoch.'  It  was  for  the
children  of  the  Hebrew  Xisuthrus  to  re-found  a  human
race  of  finer  quality  than  that  which  had  perished.
Xisuthrus  himself  was  too  great  and  good  a  man  to
encounter  once  more  the  ordinary  trials  of  humanity.
Atra-hasis  was  transported  to  the  earthly  Paradise,  '  afar
off  at  the  mouth  of  the  rivers'-^  (the  Euphrates  and  the
Tigris).'  The  Hebrew  Xisuthrus,  like  his  model  in  the
Berossian  account,  'was  not  (  =  disappeared),  for  God
had  taken  him  '  (Gen.  524).

Both  Berossus  and  the  priestly  writer  represent  a  period
later  than  Asur-bani-pal's  epic. The  earthly  Paradise

„  _  .  ...  was  no  doubt  the  original  home  of  the
18.  Pnmitive  *'


ether-myth.


translated  Xisuthrus,  though  we  cannot


suppose  that  it  was  always  placed  '  at
the  mouth  of  the  rivers '  :  mythic  geography  is  notori-
ously fluctuating.  The  earliest  location  of  Paradise  was
on  the  slopes  of  the  mysterious  mythic  mountain  which
reached  upward  to  the  sky  (cp  Chkrub,  i.  §  7).  When
the  idea  of  an  earthly  Paradise  had  worn  out,  men
thought  of  Xisuthrus  as  in  heaven,  and  this  is  really
more  in  accord  with  the  earliest  form  of  the  myth.
For,  though  the  theory  offered  above  by  Zimmern  (§  8)
probably  does  embody  the  interpretation  of  the  most
cultured  Babylonian  priests,  we  can  hardly  regard  it
as  a  complete  explanation.  It  is  more  like  the  after-
thought of  a  semi-philosophic  age  than  like  the  sponta-
neous imagination  of  primitive  men.  There  would  be
more  plausibility  in  the  notion  that  some  definite  his-
torical catastrophe  lies  at  the  root  of  the  story,  if  we
could  only  believe  that  tradition  could  preserve  so
remote  an  occurrence.  The  truth  is  that  a  definite
occurrence  does  lie  at  the  root  of  the  story  :  only,  it
is  an  im.aginary,  not  a  historical  occurrence.

The  Deluge-myth  in  Babylonia  and  elsewhere  seems
to  have  grown  out  of  an  archaic  ether-myth,  akin  to
that  prev.alent  in  Egypt.  Originally  the  sun  was  im-
agined as  a  man  voyaging  on  a  boat  in  the  heavenly
ocean.  When  this  story  had  been  told  and  retold  a
long  time,  rationalism  suggested  that  the  sea  was  not
in  heaven  but  on  earth,  and  observation  of  the  damage
wrought  in  winter  by  incessant  rains  and  the  inundations
of  great  rivers  suggested  the  introduction  of  correspond-
ing details  into  the  new  earthly  Deluge-myth.  This
theory  is  supported  by  the  Polynesian  Deluge-myths
collected  by  Gerland,'  the  origin  of  which  is  still  plainly
visible.  In  these,  the  sun  and  the  moon  were  imagined
sometimes  as  peaks  emerging  out  of  a  flood,  sometimes

1  Throughout  the  epic -story  the  .sacrificial  interest  is  pro-
minent. Berossus,  too,  relates  that  a  voice  from  heaven  bade
the  friends  whom  Xisuthrus  left  behind  be  reverent  towards  the
gods  (9(0(Tffiei<;) — i.e.,  punctual  in  sacrifices.

-  Probably  an  island  in  the  Persian  Gulf  is  meant  (Jensen,
/Cosmo/.  213).

3  Waitz-Gerland,  Anthropolo^ie  der  NaturvSlker,  6  296-373.
See  also  Schirren,  Wanderungen  der  Neuseeldnder  ('56),  p.
J93-

1063


DELUGE

as  canoes,  sometimes  as  a  man  and  his  wife  ;  the  stars,
sometimes  as  ships,  sometimes  as  human  beings — the
children  of  the  sun  and  moon  ;  the  clouds  too  were
descril)ed  as  ships  —  the  'ships  of  Tangaloa'  (the
heaven-  and  air-god).  The  flood  itself  was  called
sometimes  'flood  of  the  moon'  (so  at  Hawaii),  some-
times '  flood  of  day's  eye,' — i.e.,  the  sun  (so  at  Tahiti).
This  accounts  for  the  strongly  mythological  characters  of
Par-napisti  in  Babylonia  and  of  Maui  in  New  Zealand,
who  are,  in  fact,  solar  personages.  Enoch  too  must  be
classed  in  this  category  ;  his  perfect  righteousness  and
superhuman  wisdom  ^  now  first  become  intelligible.  More-
over, we  now  comprehend  how  the  goddess  Sabitu  (the
guardian  of  the  entrance  to  the  sea)  can  say  to  GilgameS
(himself  a  solar  personage)  '  Samas  the  niighty  {i.e.,
the  sun-god)  crossed  the  sea  ;  Ijesides  (?)  Sam;is,  who
can  cross  it  ? '  '^  For,  though  the  '  sea '  in  the  epic  is
no  doubt  the  earth -circling  ocean,  it  was  hardly  this
in  the  myth  from  which  the  words  were  taken.

The  transference  of  the  Deluge  from  heaven  to  earth

had  two  effects. First,  it  produced  a  virtual  duplication

- _.  of  the  Creation -myth.* This  points

.  -  ■ , . the  way  to  a  probable  explanation  of

tratLsformatioii. ,  r >  ■

uxaiioiuxiiiauiuu.  ^j^^ appearance of the raven, the

swallow,  and  the  dove  in  the  B.abylonian  account,  and
of  the  dove  and  the  raven  in  the  Hebrew  account.  An
authentic  and  striking  Polynesian  parallel  to  the  descrip-
tion in  Gen.  I2  ('.  .  .  brooding  over  the  face  of  the
waters')  has  been  given  already  (see  CREATION,  §  10).
N.  American  tribes,  too,  frequently  connect  the  emergence
of  the  earth  from  the  primordial  ocean  with  the  descent
of  a  raven,  and  their  flood-myths,  according  to  Brinton,
connect  the  rebuilding  of  the  earth  with  the  agency  of
birds.*  In  the  Algonkin  account,  however,  the  musk-
rat  succeeds,  when  the  raven  fails,  in  finding  a  portion
of  the  submerged  earth.  ^  In  the  primitive  Babylonian
myths  of  Creation  and  Deluge  a  bird  (whether  r.aven  or
dove),  or  birds,  probably  had  a  share  in  the  process  of
creation  and  re-creation.

The  second  effect  of  the  transference  spoken  of  was  a
new  speculative  theory.  It  occurred  to  the  early  men
that  the  idea  of  a  second  construction  of  the  world
lightened  the  problem  of  the  origin  of  things.  How  the
primeval  world  arose  might  be  difficult  to  explain  satis-
factorily :  various  mythic  stories  were  current ;  but  it
was  not  so  hard  to  conceive  of  a  world  once  destroyed
being  reconstructed.  Thus,  in  course  of  time,  sys-
tematisers  devised  schemes  bearing  some  resemblance  to
the  cycles  of  the  Stoics.  It  seemed  to  them  as  if  the
Creator  were  constantly  being  baffled  in  his  experiments
by  physical  or  moral  perversity  in  the  materials.  Thus
the  priests  of  the  Aztecs  spoke  of  four  antecedent  ages,
separated  by  universal  cataclysms,  the  present  being  the
fifth  and  last,*"  and  a  similar  belief,  in  rudimentary  forms,

1  Enoch,  like  Pfir-napisti,  might  be  called  Atra.Jiasls, '  the  very
wise.'  Omniscience  is  an  attribute  of  the  sun-god.  The  same
title  appears  to  be  given  to  the  young  eagle  in  the  myth  of  Etana
(see  Ethan)  —  a  supernatural  bird  (Beitr.  zur.  Ass.  2^4,).
Notice,  too,  that  the  old  eagle  in  the  Etana-myth  and  Par-
napiSti  are  both  mentioned  in  connection  with  magical  plants.
The  legendary  el-Hidr  of  the  Moslems,  whom  Guyard  and
Lenormant  (Les  on^i'nes,  2  12/.)  identify  with  Hasls-atra,  was
also  the  wisest  of  beings.  Cp  above,  §  15.  On  this  interesting
parallel,  cp  Lidzb.irski,  ZAtio^jf.,  H263  J^.,  and  DjtoA;
ZA  7  310^  ;  .also  Clermont  Ganneau,  Jtev.  Arckeol.  32  388^
See  also  Elijah,  g  5.

2  See  M.-ispero,  J)a7vn  0/ Cri'.  584;  Jercm'tasi,  /zd.-JVi'nrrod,
31.  Sabitu,  It  has  been  remarked,  has  some  slight  affinity  to
Circe.

3  Was  the  Akitu- festival  at  Babylon  a  commemoration  of  the
Deluge?  It  is  referred  to  in  the  epic  narrative,  /.  71.  From
an  inscription  of  Nebuchadrezzar  we  learn  that  it  was  '  in
Zakmuk  '  (Jensen,  Kosmol.  85).  Now  Zakmuk,  the  New  Year's
festival,  commemorated  Creation. See  col.  941,  n.  i.

*  Brinton,  Myths  0/  the  New  World,  204  ;  cp  Macdonell,
JRA.S,  1895,  p.  189.

6  Brinton  {o/>.  cit.  loqff.')  gives  the  'authentic  form'  on  the
authority  of  Father  Le  Jeune  (1634).  It  appears  that  the
Algonkins  supposed  all  mankind  to  have  perished  in  the  Deluge.
This  is  against  deriving  this  Deluge-myth  from  a  previous  ether-
myth. The  Algonkin  view,  however,  is  not  largely  represented.

6  Riville,  Religions  0/ Mexico  and  Pcni,  114.

1064


DELUGE

is  still  prevalent  throughout  the  American-Indian  tribes.
The  Zoroastrians  believed  in  six  ages  of  the  world,  with
a  final  catastrophe  issuing  in  a  renovation.  The  six
ages  are  of  late  origin  (see  Crkation,  §  9)  ;  but  the
renovation,  as  Darniestetcr  admits,  goes  back  to  the
Ach^nienian  period.  Not  without  stimulus  from  Zoro-
astrianism,  the  Jews  in  later  times  advanced  to  the  same
belief.'  They  were  assured  that  the  present  world
would  be  destroyed  and  that  a  new  heaven  and  earth
would  take  its  place  (Is.  24 ^18-20,  516-  6517  662a
Mt.  1928  2  Pet.  312/  Enoch  45^/.  Apoc.  Bar.  326)  ;
in  harmony  with  Gen.  9 15  fire  was  to  be  the  destroying
agency  (2  Pet.  I.e.).  These  beliefs  were  naturally
fostered  by  the  moral  idealism  of  the  best  men,  as  we
see,  not  only  from  the  biblical  writings  {f.g.,  Gen.  6 5 11
2  Pet.  25  Kofffxos  d<r€fiCi)i>,  87),  and  from  the  Babylonian
story,  but  also  from  an  .American  (Quiche?)  story,  which
says,  •  They  did  not  think  or  s[K;ak  of  the  Creator  who
had  created  them,-  and  who  had  caused  their  birth. '^
The  intense  moral  fervour  of  the  ancient  Zoroastrian
hope  of  world-renovation  is  well  known  (see  PiCKSi.v).

If  it  were  possible  to  believe  in  a  primitive  tradition
respecting  early  human  history,  and  to  accept  all
20  Other  "'y''^''-"  narratives  as  indejiendent  tradi-
Ttaiii<ra  mTrfh  tioHS,  we  should  have  a  weary  waste  of
uemge-myxns.  p^.j^ge. stories  still  to  plod  through.
There  are,  however,  only  three  more  such  accounts
which  have  any  sjiecial  interest  from  our  present  point
of  view.  (ii)  The  Indian  Deluge-story  is  the  first.*
This  can  hardly  be  a  genuine  Aryan  myth,  for  there  is
no  clear  reference  to  it  in  the  Rig  Veda.

The  Satal>atlia  Hrahniana,  where  it  first  occurs,  was  written
(\Vel)er)  not  long  before  the  Christian  era.  Another  version,  in
which  the  lacunx  of  the  earlier  one  are  filled  up,  is  given  in  the
MahiU'liArata  ;  but  this  poem,  though  it  existed  in  part  before
the  Chri-lian  era,  did  not  assume  its  present  form  till  long
afterwards.  A  third  version,  still  more  decidedly  Indian  in
character,  but  with  some  suspicious  resemblances  to  the  Semitic
accounts,  is  given  in  the  Bhagavnta.  Purana  ;  but  the  earliest
possilile  date  of  this  work  is  the  twelfth  century  a.d.,  which
deprives  its  account  of  the  deluge  of  all  claim  to  originality.

rhe  principal  characteristic  of  the  older  Flood-story  is
the  part  assigned  to  the  fish  which  warns  Manu  of  the
Deluge,  and  ultimately  saves  him  by  drawing  his  ship  to
a  northern  mountain.  This  is  surely  out  of  character
with  .Aryan  mythology.  The  horned  fish,  in  which
Brahma  ajipears,  reminds  us  strongly  of  the  Babylonian
fish-god  \•J^..  It  was  Ea  who  gave  notice  of  the
coming  Deluge  to  Par-napisti.  Zimmer  [AUindisches
Lt'ben,  loi),  Jensen  [Koimol.  497)  and  Oldenberg
(AV/.  des  I'eda,  276)  consider  the  Babylonian  origin
of  the  Indian  Flood-story  to  be  certain  ;  but  on  the
other  hand  cp  Usener, Untersttch.  8240-244.

{b)  The  second  account  is  a  Zoroiistrian  myth  in  the
Avesta  (  r<!'«i//(/rt(/,  1  ^d ff.).  In  its  present  form  (even
after  the  prosaic  additions  have  been  removed  ;  see
Geldner,  in  Usener,  8209/:)  it  seems  to  have  been
influenced  by  the  Hebrew  Deluge-story.

The  Var,  a  square  enclosure  constructed  by  Yima  (  =  Yama,
the  Vedic  god  of  the  dead),  had  a  door  and  perhaps  a  window,'
like  Noah's  Ark,  and  it  w.as  designed  to  preserve  men,  women,
and  animals.  Apart  from  this,  it  reminds  us  of  the  biblical
Kden,  and  the  calamity  which  was  to  be  averted  was,  not  a
flood,  but  a  terrible  winter's  frost,  connected,  however,  with
the  end  of  the  world. 8  The  myth  seems  to  be  a  recast  of
elements  from  more  than  one  source.

[c)  The  third  is  a  Phrygian  myth.  Possibly  there
was  a  primitive  native  Deluge-story  ;  but,  if  so,  it  was
vitalised  from  a  Jewish  source,  some  time  during  the
third  or  the  second  century,  B.C.,  when  (as  Ramsay  has

1  Che.  OPi.  \o4,ff.

2  Is.  51 16  is  a  late  mosaic  of  phrases,  and  irrelevant  (see  Du.
ad  loc.\

3  Brinton,  op.  cit.  207 y:  This  is  of  course  a  later  addition,
as  in  one  of  the  forms  of  the  Tahitian  myth  (Waitz-Gerland,
6  271).

••  .See  Muir,  Sanskrit  Texts,  1  196-201  ;  Burnouf,  Bhagivata
PurAna,  2  191  ;  Welwr,  Indisclte  StuJUn,  1  161-232.

*  The  Zend  word  rendered  'window,'  however,  is  said  to  be  as
obscure  as  the  Hebrew  ("ni".  Gen.  6  16  ;  see  Lattice).

8  Cp.  Kohut,  JQK,  1890,  pp.  225.227.
1065


DELUS

pointed  out)  many  thousands  of  Jews  from  Babylonia
were  settled  as  colonists  in  the  cities  which  the  .Seleucid
kings  had  built.  This  was  the  pcrifxl  of  the  inter-
mingling of  religions,  when  Judaism  too  madecotK)uests,
esfjecially  in  .Asia  Minor.  Even  those  who  were  not
otherwise  Judaized  were  influenced  by  Jewish  legends
(cp  SoDo.M  A.\i)  GoMtJRRAii).  Important  cities  ex-
hibited on  their  coins  biblical  .symbols,  and  harmonised
their  old  traditions  with  biblical  narratives.*

Thus  Apamea  (formerly  Kclainai)  adopted  the  Noab-lecend  ;
Iconium,  that  of  Enoch,  whose  name  was  connected  with  the
Phrygian  name  of  Savvaico^  or  Kwaxo^.  This  king  (for  such
tradition  made  him)  was  s;iid  to  have  lived  more  than  300  years,
to  have  announced  the  coming  Deluge,  and  to  have  prayed  for
his  people.  The  mountain  hard  by  Apamea  w.-is  siiid  to  be
that  on  which  Noah's  ark  grounded  ;  the  city  therefore  assumed
the  title  xi^uitos  (Ark).

The  references  already  given  are  almost  suflficient
(they  may  be  supplemented  from  Dillniann's  Genesis) ;

21  AntiendiT  '^'  \cnsi  a  brief  mention  is  due  to
«r.  T  oi!^.^»^t  Lenormant's  study  in  Les  origines
onLenormant.  ,/..•, ■, „ ir t-u  i •

de  Ihtstoire,  1382^ The  conclusion

arrived  at  is  that  of  Franz  Delitzsch  and  Dillmann,
that  the  Deluge  is  no  'myth,'  but  a  historical  fact.
Lenormant,  at  any  rate,  holds  that  the  three  great
civilised  races  of  the  ancient  world  preserved  a  dim
recollection  of  it.  This  implies  a  self-propagating
power  in  tradition  which  the  researches  of  exjx-rts  in
popular  traditions  do  not  justify.  Lenormant  died,  a
martyr  of  patriotism,  in  1884.  Would  he  have  changed
his  mind  had  he  lived?  At  any  rate,  he  would  have
respected  the  honesty  of  those  who  regard  the  Deluge-
story  as  a  precious  record  of  the  myth-forming  imagina-
tion which  has  Ixjen  made  subservient  to  a  high  moral
idealism. .See  An.VM  AM)  Evk.

Lastly,  the  writer  would  call  attention  to  Jastrow's
two  articles  on  Scheil's  Deluge-story  (§  6)  in  the  Xcw

22  And  on ^'"'"'^  ^«"'</'""'''"'. lotl^ ^"^ 'Jth  Feb.
JasW°^ '^98  (cp  his  AV/.  of  Bah.  and  Ass.  502

.,  506). It  is  here  maintained  that  a  local

^'  tradition  of  a  rain-storm  which  submerged
a  single  city  has  been  combined  in  the  Gilgames-epic
with  a  myth  of  the  destruction  of  mankind  ba.sed  upon
the  annual  phenomenon  of  the  overflow  of  the  Euphrates.
Pir-napisti  or  Par-napisti  (as  Haupt  in  KA  Tl-''  and
Jastrow  prefer  to  read  the  name)  is  the  hero  of  the
local  tradition,  while  Hasis-adra  (  =  c"Cn  p"^s.  Gen.  69,
according  to  Jastrow)  is  the  hero  of  the  larger  nature-
myth.  The  present  writer  admits  that  the  version  in
the  epic  is  of  composite  origin,  and  that  the  names
Pir-napisti  and  Hasis-adra  may  perhaps  come  from
different  sources  ;  but  he  holds  that  all  the  Babylonian
deluge-stories,  whether  simple  or  composite,  have  a
mythic  basis.  Moreover,  he  does  not  recognise  that  the
simplicity  of  the  oldest  Hebrew  version  of  the  Deluge-
story  heightens  the  probability  that  the  Hebrews  carried
that  story  with  them  when  they  left  their  Euphratean
settlements.  The  account  given  above  of  the  origin
and  development  of  the  Hebrew  story  has  surely  not
lost  any  of  its  probability  in  consequence  of  Scheil's
discovery.

[See,  in  addition  to  works  already  cited,  Noldeke,
'  Der  Mythus  von  der  Siindfluth,"  Im  neuen  Reich
['72],  pp.  247-259  ;  R.  Andree,  Die  Flutsagen  ;  ethno-
graphisch  betrachtel  ('91)  ;  H.  Usener,  Rel.-gesck.
Untersuchungen,  pt.  3  ('99),  especially  §  7,  '  Ergebnisse" ;
M.  Jastrow,  '  Adrahasis  and  Parnapistum,"  /.A  1899,
pp.  288-301.  On  the  chief  questions  arising  out  of
the  Babylonian  Deluge-story,  cp  Jastrow,  Kel.  of  Bab.
and  Ass.  ('98),  pp.  493-508,  which,  as  also  Usener's
work,  appeared  after  this  article  had  been  written.  ]
H.  Z.  §§  1-5,  7-9  ;  T.  K.  C.  §§  6,  10-22.

DELUS, RV Delos  (AhAoc [ANV], Delus),  the

1  See  Babelon,  '  La  Trad,  phrjg.  du  Diluge,'  Rev.  de  tkitt.
des  rel.  (91),  pp.  174^.;  Usener,  ot.  cit.,  48-50;  and,  on
Apamea-Kelainaj,  Ramsay,  Cities  and  Bishoprics  0/ Pkrygiat
chaps.  11,  12.

1066


DEMAS

smallest  of  the  Cyclades,  regarded  by  the  ancients
as  the  centre  of  the  group — a  confusion  of  the  geo-
graphical and  religious  points  of  view  (cp  Str.  485).
Uelos  was  both  a  shrine  and  a  commercial  centre,  and
'  her  whole  destiny  is  explained  by  her  religious  traditions
and  her  geographical  situation.*  Though  nominally
free,  the  island  was  really  subject  to  the  dominant
power  for  the  time  being  in  the  Aegean.  It  was  a  free
port  as  early  as  168  B.C.,  and  attracted  a  great  part  of
the  Rhotlian  trade  (Folyb.  31 7).  After  146  B.C.  it
entered  upon  the  heritage  of  Corinth  (Str.  486).  The
acquisition  of  the  province  of  Asia  by  the  Romans  in
133  B.C.  added  greatly  to  the  wealth  and  importance  of
Dclos.  Now  began  the  most  brilliant  epoch  of  its
history :  the  inscriptions  show  that  its  commercial
relations  were  with  the  Levant,  chiefly  Syria  and  Egypt.
So  Pausanias  calls  the  island  t6  KOLvbv  '¥XKr}vwv
i/xTTopiov  (viii.  SSz).  For  long  it  was  the  chief  emporium
of  merchandise  from  the  E.  to  the  W. ,  so  that  the  fine
bronze  or  copper  wares  of  Greece  were  called  indiffer-
ently Corinthian,  or  Delian,  from  the  place  of  export
(PI.  i¥A^  xxxiv.  29  ;  Cic.  />rr.  ii.  2S3).  The  island
became  especially  a  great  slave  mart,  where  the  Asiatic
slave  dealers  disposed  of  their  human  cargoes  to  Italian
Sfjeculators  ;  as  many  as  ten  thousand  were  landed  and
sold  in  a  day  (Str.  668).  Naturally  such  a  spot  attracted
large  numbers  of  Jews  (Jos.  Ant  xiv.  108  ;  Philo,  I.ej^.
ad  Cai.  36  ;  cp  i  Mace.  1023).  According  to  a  Greek
inscription,  a  company  of  Tyrian  merchants  was  settled
there  as  early  as  the  second  century  B.C.  {C/G  2271).
At  the  altar  of  Uelos  Antiochus  Epiphanes  set  up  statues
(Polyb.  26 1),  and  an  inscription  to  Herod  Antipas  has
been  discovered  in  the  island  (cp  Schur.  f;7Vl358).  In
88  B.C.  20,000  men,  mostly  Italians,  were  massacred  in
the  island  by  Archelaos,  admiral  of  the  Pontic  fleet  of
Mithridates,  a  blow  from  which  it  partially  recovered,
only  to  lie  finally  ruined  about  twenty  years  later  by  the
systematic  and  wholesale  destruction  wrought  by  the
pirate  Athenodorus.  The  resurrection  of  the  island
was  rendered  impossible  by  the  rapid  growth  of  Puteoli
and  the  revival  of  Corinth  (for  its  decay,  cp  Pans.  viii.
332  ix.  346).

See  the  articles  by  M.  Homolle  in  the  Bull,  de  Corr.  Hell.,
especially /.ci-A^iJWrt/Mi-  a  I >i-los,  op.  cit.  875/;  A  good  account
in  Diehl's  E.xcursions  in  Greece,  KT,  \iZf.  w.  J.  W.

DEMAS  (Ahmac  [Ti.  WH])  is  enumerated  by  the
apostle  Paul  as  among  his  '  fellow-workers '  at  the  time
of  his  (first)  Roman  captivity  (Philem.  24  ;  see  also
Col.  414).  In  2  Tim.  4 10  he  is  thus  alluded  to:
'  Demas  forsook  me,  having  loved  this  present  world,
and  went  to  Thessalonica.'  Nothing  is  known  of  him
beyond  what  may  be  inferred  or  conjectured  from  these
allusions.

He  is  enumerated  in  the  'list  of  the  seventy  disciples  of  our
Lord'  compiled  by  the  Pseudo-Dorotheus  of  Tyre(C/:r.  Pasch.,
Bonn  ed.,  2  121)  and  is  stated  to  have  become  a  priest  of  idols  in
Thessalonica.  Along  with  Herraogenes,  he  figures  prominently
in  the  apocryphal  Acts  0/  Paul  ami  T/iecla  as  a  hypocritical
companion  of  the  former,  and  to  Hermogenes  and  Demas  is
assigned  the  particular  heresy  about  the  resurrection  which  in
2  Tim.  2  17  is  attributed  to  Hymena^us  and  Philetus.

DEMETRIUS  (Ahmhtrioc  [.\NV]— z.^.,  of,  or
belonging  to,  Demeter,  a  proper  name  of  very  common
occurrence  among  the  Greeks).

I.  Demetrius  I.,  surnamed  Soter.^  king  of  Syria,
son  of  Seleucus  IV.  Philopator,  was  sent  in  his
early  youth  to  Rome  as  a  hostage,  the  throne  mean-
while being  occupied  by  his  uncle  Antiochus  Epi-
phanes (see  Antiochus,  2).  After  some  time  he
effected  his  escape  to  Tripolis  (chiefly  through  the  aid
of  the  historian  Polybius),  and  thence  proceeded  to
Antioch  where  he  proclaimed  himself  king,  securing
his  position  by  putting  to  death  his  cousin  Antiochus
Eupator  (.Antiochus,  3),  and  Lysias  (i  Mace.  7  ;  162
B.C.).  He  lost  no  time  in  pleasing  the  Hellenizing
party  by  sending  Bacchides  to  instal  Alcimus  as  high-

t  He  received  this  honorary  designation  on  account  of  his
delivering  the  Babylonians  from  the  satrap  Heraclides.

1067


DEMETRIUS

priest  (see  Bacchides,  Alcimus).  The  disturbances
caused  by  the  latter  need  not  here  be  descriljed  ;  the
Syrian  general  NiCANOR  [jj.v.'\  was  defeated  at
Capharsalama  (726/:),  and  at  Adasa  (739^).  A
warning  was  sent  from  Rome  to  Demetrius  not  to
interfere  with  the  Jews  ;  but  it  was  too  late.  Less
than  two  months  after  the  fall  of  Nicanor  a  fresh
invasion  under  Bacchides  took  place  ;  the  Judaean
power  was  seriously  crippled  (chap.  9,  160  B.C.  ;  see
further  Bacchides).  Seven  years  later  Demetrius,
disputing  the  sovereignty  with  Alexander  Balas,
endeavoured,  though  in  vain,  to  secure  the  support  of
the  Maccal)ean  party  (chap.  10),  and  after  some
hostilities  died  fighting  his  rival ^  (w.  49/.  ;  150  B.C.).
See  Maccahkes,  §  5.

2.  Demetrius  II.,  Nicator,  son  of  the  above,  who
had  been  living  in  exile  in  Crete,  came  over  to
Cilicia  to  avenge  his  father's  ill  success  in  147  B.C.,
and  secured  a  powerful  follower  in  the  jjerson  of
Apoei.onius  [q.v.,  2).  An  engagement  took  place  at
Ashdod,  and  Apollonius  was  decisively  beaten  (i  Mace.
1067^).  Shortly  afterwards,  however,  his  hands  were
unexpectedly  strengthened  by  the  secession  of  Ptolemy
VI.  Philomctor  (see  Ptolemy,  i),  who  transferred  to
him  his  daughter  Cleopatra,  the  wife  of  Alexander
Balas  (see  Alexander,  2).  Alexander  was  put  to
flight  and  Demetrius  became  king  in  145  B.C.  (11 19).
A  treaty  by  which  Jonathan  obtained  favourable
concessions  was  concluded  (Maccabees,  §  5),  and
Demetrius,  believing  his  position  secure,  took  the  un-
wise step  of  discharging  his  regular  troops,  who  at
once  went  over  to  Tryphon,  the  guardian  of  the  young
son  of  Alexander  Balas  (1138^;  see  Tryphon).
Profiting  by  the  approach  of  a  disturbance,  Jonathan
obtained  fresh  concessions  from  Demetrius  on  the
undersianding  that  Tryphon's  rebellion  in  Antioch
should  be  put  down.  This  was  successfully  accom-
plished ;  but  when  Jonathan  saw  that  Demetrius  showed
no  signs  of  carrying  out  his  promises  he  was  easily
persuaded  to  transfer  his  allegiance  to  Tryphon.
Demetrius'  princes  entered  Judaea  and  after  a  temporary
success  were  routed  in  the  neighbourhood  of  Hazor
(1163^).  Another  invasion  was  meditated  in  B.C.
144,  but  was  successfully  warded  off  by  Jonathan's
skilful  generalship  {Vl^^ff.).  The  scene  suddenly
changed  when  Tryphon  usurped  the  throne  of  Syria,
and  endeavoured,  with  some  success,  to  reduce  Judoea.
Jonathan  was  dead  and  Simon  busied  himself  in
strengthening  the  defences.  An  embassy  was  sent  to
Demetrius  II.,  who,  to  obtain  Simon's  support,  readily
granted  all  the  Jewish  demands  including  even  a
complete  immunity  from  taxation  ^  (133r_^).  Trusting
Simon  to  continue  the  struggle  against  Tryphon,
Demetrius  marched  to  Persia,  partly  for  conquest,
partly  to  acquire  auxiliaries  ;  but  he  was  captured
by  Mithridates  I.  (see  Persi.\)  and  imprisoned,  his
place  in  Syria  being  taken  by  his  younger  brother
Antiochus  Sidetes  ( I  Mace.  14 1^  ;  see  Antiochus,  5).
From  non-biblical  sources  we  know  that,  at  the  expira-
tion of  ten  years,  he  resumed  the  throne  (128  B.C.),
quarrelled  with  Ptolemy  Physkon  and  his  proUgi
Alexander  Zabinas,  and  was  finally  conquered  at
Damascus,  after  fleeing  from  which  place  he  was
murdered  at  Tyre  in  125  B.C.  (cp  Jos.  Ant.  xiii.93).

3.  A  silversmith  of  Ephesus,  who  was  the  chief  instigator  of
the  tumult  in  the  interests  of  his  craft  which  brought  Paul's
mission  in  that  city  to  a  close  (.\cts  X^^^ff.).  See  Diana,  §  2,
Ephesus.  The  conjecture  that  he  figures  again  in  3jn.  12
as  a  convert  to  Christianity,  precarious  at  Ijest,  becomes
singularly  so  when  the  commonness  of  the  name  is  considered.

4.  A  Christian  mentioned  with  commendation  in  3  Jn.  (r/.  12).
That  he  was  the  bearer  of  the  epistle  is  sometimes  inferred ;  but

1  If  we  follow  RV  (after  AN,  etc.)  and  read  'the  army  of
Alexander  fled,'  it  would  seem  that  v.  49  and  v.  50  must  belong
to  two  different  accounts.  See  more  fully  Jos.  Ant.  xiii.  24  and
cp  Cainbr.  Bible,  ad  loc.

2  This  independence  gained  by  the  Jews  was  marked  by  the
introduction  of  a  new  era;  cp  Chronologv,  §  i.

1068


DEMONS

the  inference  has  no  more  strinuency  than  that  mcnli(?n«i  in
no,  3.  S.  A.  C.

DEMONS.  Demons  are  a  survival  from  an  earlier
faith  ;  continued  belief  in  them  is  due  to  the  conserva-
live  instincts  of  the  ordin:u-y  rolij^ious
1.  General  ^^-^^^  ^^^  j^.  jj^^^  particularly  character-
survey,  jgjj^  Qj-  ji^g  popular  religion.  For  this
reason  references  to  denions  scarcely  occur  in  the  earlier
OT  literature,  which  is  so  largely  prophetic.  Such  refer-
ences increase  in  fretjuency,  however,  in  the  later  Jewish
writings,  and  are  numerous  in  NT;  this  is  due  p.artly  to
the  foreign  influences  (Babyloniiin,  Persian,  and  Greek)
under  which  the  Jews  can»e  in  exilic  and  post-exilic  times,
and  partly  to  the  fact  that  the  earlier  beliefs,  after  being
transformed,  lent  themselves  as  explanations  of  some  of
the  religious  problems  that  were  arising.

For  the  Gk. (Hellenistic)  term  Saifidviov  or  Salfiuv
(sec  below, §  6), whence  the linglish term 'demon'
_  is derived, Hebrew possesses no clear

4  rw^*  equivalent.  Aat/i6;'toi' occurs  in  the  LXX
"^"*-  only  in  Dt.  32.7  I's.  906  905  IO637  Is.
1321  34 14  66311  [BA]  and  in  Tobit  ;  yet  it  re-
presents no  fewer  than  five  Hebrev,  words,  viz.,
' nil,  gad,  Jd'lr,  siyyi.  and  K-d  (Dt.  32i7  Ps.  IO637,  cp
916,  where  ©  reads  nv]  for  -pv^).  Of  these  the  first  is
a  general  term  for  false  gods  ;  details  as  to  the  second
and  the  third  will  be  found  in  the  articles  Fortune  and
S.\TYK,  and  as  to  the  fourth  in  Wild  Beasts;  only  the
last  is  translated  '  demon  '  in  RV.

Similar  objects  of  popular  superstition  are  LiLiTH,
AZAZEL,  AsMODEL'S  (in  Tobit),  and  probably  the
'horse-leech'  of  Prov.  30 15  (see  Hokse-i.eech).  For
details  of  these  also  reference  must  be  made  to  the
separate  articles.  Closely  connected  with  the  present
subject  is  the  practice  of  consulting  the  dcad,^  to  which
we  have  reference  in  the  earliest  narrative  literature
(i  S.  28). See  DiViN.\TiON,  §  4.

Jewish  demonology,  then,  is  the  result  of  the  survival
of  primitive Hebrew (Semitic) beliefs, which, having
been  neither  suppressed  by,  nor  wholly


3.  Primitive
survivals.


assimilated  to,  the  prophetic  religion,
were  quickened  by  contact  with  Baby-
lonia, Pi^Tsia,  and  Greece  (cp  ©'s  use  of  dai/xdviov,  as
above,  §  2).  The  chief  primitive  survivals  in  the  Jewish
belief  are  the  quasi-divine  character  of  these  beings  as
shown  by  the  sacrifices  offered  to  them  (Dt.  32 17,  cp  Bar.
47  iCor.  IO20  Ps.  IO637  Lev.  177;  cp  further,  in  ©,
Is.  653  II,  and  the  sacrifice  to  Azazel  [^.i'.]  described
in  Lev.  16),  their  undefined  yet  local  character  shown  by
their  association  with  waste  places  ( Is.  13  21  34  14,  cp  Rev.
I82  Bar.  43s,  and  [\'g.]  Tob.  83),  and  their  connection
with  animals,  indicated  by  their  sharing  the  waste  places
with  wild  beasts  (foregoing  references,  and  Mk.  1 13),
and  the  meaning  of  such  a  term  as  Si''inm  (hairy  ones,
goats);  on  the  similar  character  of  the  Arabian yV««,
see  Robertson  Smith's  AV/.  S<m.<r)  120^.

The  term  that  is  most  generic  in  character  is  certainly
ledim. Unfortunately  the  etymology of  the  word is
i ,  doubtful, for the view that it  signifies

4.  Semm.  .Jq|.j,  (>,,uhiau  and  Volck's  Gesenius)
cannot  be  said  to  be  well  supported.  The  cognate
word  in  Assyrian  (sidu)  denotes  the  gods  or  genii
who,  in  the  form  of  huge  winged  bulls,  guard  the
entrances  of  the  temples  {COT  1 40).  In  both  passages
(exilic  or  post-exilic)  where  iidlm  occurs  in  OT  it  is  used
quite  generally  of  illegitimate  objects  of  worship  (Dt.
32 17  Ps.  106 37),  and  in  the  Pesh.  Sldd  is  the  equivalent
of  baiixbviov.  In  the  later  Jewish  writings  the  K-diin
are  frequently  referred  to  as  noxious  spirits  (see  Buxtorf,
Lex.,  s.v.) ;  this  they  have  not  definitely  become  in  the

1  [In  the  age  of  the  Gosjjels  and  of  Josephus  the  spirits  of  the
(wicked)  dead  were  certainly  described  as  Soufio^et  or  &axii.6vi.a
=  lfdlm.  While  the  worship  of  dead  ancestors  was  at  its  height,
however,  the  wicked  dead  were  disregarded,  and  the  spirits  of  the
good  were  honoured  as  eMiim  (1  .S.  2S  13  ;  cp.  Is.  10  3  (S).  It
IS  best  therefore  to  treat  necromancy  separately ;  see  Divina-
tion, i  4.1

1069


DEMONS

OT  (on  the  Kdim  sec  further  Dr.  and  Di.  on  Dt.  32 17  ;
Hi.,  Now.  on  Hos.  12i2  (read  D~!rS  for  cTttr) ;  Che.
Psitlms,  258  ;  O/'s.  334  ;  G.  Hoffmann,  Ueber  einige
phonikische  Inschriften,  55,  n.  1).  See  StlADDAI,  §  2,
and  cp  SiDDiM,  Vai.E  ok.

When  angels  came  to  be  difTerentiated  as  helpful  and
harmful,  and,  Later,  .as  g<xKl  and  bad  (see  Ancels,  §  5),

8.  Demons '^'^  ^^7"/"'  ""'  ^t  '''."^"■''  '^'T'^  '*"
J  J sembled  demons  ;  the  difference  between

^ ■ the  two  became,  in  consequence,  less  and

less. SjK'culations  on  the  difference  may  be  found  in

Enoch  ; the  same  uncertainty  prevails  in  Mohammedan

theology,  where,  e.g. ,  it  is  disputed  whether  Iblis  was  an

angel  or  a  demon.  G.  B.  G.

The  classical  inferiority  of  Salfiuv  (and  dai/jUtifioy)  to

OeSi  finds  its  lowest  depth  in  the  Old  and the  New

Testaments,  most  plainly  so  in  the  New.

Even  as  early  as  Homer  the  general  equivalence  of  the  two
words  (Od.  J.I  ig$  201)  was  varied by  the  frequent  distinction

between  0t6^  as  the  pfrsonality  (deus),  and
6.  NT  USa^e. haiy.u>v  as  the  more  abstract,  less  nanieable

injluence  (nuiiten),  and  by  the  sense  of  tuck-
lessness  in  the  adjective  6aifidi/to«  (t></.  18  406),  as  well  as  by
such  epithets  for  &a.i.t/.m>  as  KitK6<;  and  (TTvyf/xiv.  In  post-
Homeric  (jreek  the  inferiority  grew  in  distinctness  and  degree,
and  gathered  round  itself  more  and  more  a  sense  of  evil  ;  and,
while  iai'/xuf  (fla-)tioit)  never  altogether  ceased  in  profane  Greek
to  be  a  vox  media,  the  tendency  to  degradation  overwhelmingly
prevailed.  Thus  the  word  that  stood  to  Hcsiod  (('//.  121)  for
the  benignant  souls  of  heroes  of  the  golden  age,  served  Plato
(^Lys.  223)  for  an  evil  apparition,  .ind  the  lrat;c(lians(/Ksch.  Ag.
1569,  Soph.  O  r  1 194)  and  the  Attic  orators  (Lys.  1  7H)  for  gloomy
genii  of  misfortune,  often  att.^ched  to  families  or  to  individuals  ;
and  finally  I'lutarch  (probably  under  the  influence  of  K.xstern
and  Alexandrian  dualism)  included  in  its  category  the  £at/xot^c
(^.lOAot,  to  whom  he  attributed  all  that  wxs  barbarous  and  cruel
{De  di'/tctu  orac.  14).

The  sense  of  rAl  spirit  for  5aLfj.(jviov  is  in  the  NT
quite  unmistakable.

AatV.u"'  does  not  occur  in  the  LXX,  except  once  in  k>  and,
according  to  the  best  authorities,  appears  but  twice  in  the  NT,
viz.  in  Mt.  and  Mk.'s  accounts  of  the  C.erasene  demoni.ic  (Mt.
8  31  Ml<.  '>  ij  ;  1.  't  ill  Ti.  WH  in  the  second  passage).  Perhaps
Sai/oLOtioi-  IK  lu.  il  ,ulj.  5ai^o>'io9  (cp  to  6(lov)  —  supplanted
&aiit.uiv  as  r.  |)i  •:-..  niin-  even  more  frtly  the  abstract  and  unnanie-
able.  Cp  iia.i|l6^■^a.  Ko-ivd,  Plat.  Af-ot.  26 B  and  feVa  Sat^bfia,
Acts  17  18.

The  word  Sai/xouiov  (used  in  the  NT  about  sixty
times),  best  reproduced  as  'dasmon.'  is  almost  entirely
confined  to  genii  in  the  worst  form,  evil  spirits  possess-
ing human  beings,  though  it  is  used  occasionally  of  evil
spirits  in  general  (Ja.  219),  and  once  (as  above,  Acts
17  iS)  of  heathen  gods  of  an  inferior  order,  as  well  as
three  times  in  one  passage  (i  Cor.  10  20/  )  of  evil  spirits
working  in  the  background  of  idolatry.  (See  TAe
Thiiiktr,  May  1895.I)

The  identity  of  dtfiiion  and  n'il  spirit  is  obvious  froin  such
passages  as  Lk.  8  2  and  i  Tim.  4  i,  ami  from  the  comparison  of
such  passages  as  ilk.  1  26  and  Lk.  4  35,  Mk.  3  30  and  Jn.  10  20,
Rev.  It>i3  and  14.

The  accounts  of  evil  spirits  as  possessing  are  confined
to  the  Synoptists  and  .\cts,  though  the  idea  crops  up
also  in  Jn.,  only  however  in  720  848/".  52,  .and  1020/".
(daifiovli^o/iai  and  ^x^"*  Saifidviov,  said  of  Jesus  himself),
and  never  as  actually  posited  by  the  writer.

The  period  immediately  embracing  the  Christian  era

saw  a  vast  development  of  the  idea  of  daemons  or  genii,

_ _  which may  be  traced to  the  survival  of

7.  Con-  ,  .  -^ . .  i_  ■ L

early aninustic conceptions m a  higher

bS°T^  stage  of  culture  (see  Tylor,  Prim.  Cult..
chap.  14/. ).  For  our  present  purpose  it
is  most  important  to  refer  to  the  Persian,  the  Hellenistic-
Jewish,  and  the  Talmudic  beliefs.  We  shall,  however,
here  limit  ourselves  to  the  second  of  these  classes  of
evidence,  which  appeals  most  to  ordinary  educated
readers  (see  also  below,  §  11,  and  cp  Pkksi.\).

On  the  philosophic  basis  of  the  Platonic  Idfiti  or  Forms,  and
the  Stoic  Logoi  or  Reasons,  combined  with  the  Hebrew  con-
ception of  angels,  Philo  had  bridged  over  his  dualistic  gulf
between  God  and  the  world  with  intermediate  beings,  some
'  bles.sed  '  and  others  '  profane  ' ;  the  incorporeal  souls  being  pure


1  An  article  by  the  present
Greek  Gods.'


St.  Pauls  view  of  (


DEMONS

and  hovering  in  the  air,  which  was  full  of  them,  some  of  them,
however,  descending  into  bodies  and  so  becoming  impure.
These  'souls'  are  identilied  by  him  with  the  'anRels'  of  Moses
and  the  'diemons'  of' other  philosophers'  'yde  Con/.  Lint;.  35  ;
deCigant.  2-4).  A  kindred  lilief  in  da:mons  as  gooti  and  evil
media  of  divine  action  pervaded  the  cosmology  of  the  Pytha-
goreans and  Neo-Platoiiists  towards  the  close  of  the  first
century  a.d.  (Hatch,  Utbh.  Lect.  2:6 /f:  ;  Zeller,  Die  Pliil.  der
Grieck.  iii.  1(^)291);  and  Epictetus,  alxjut  the  same  date,  held
that  'all  things  were  full  of  pods  and  daemons'  {/.ellcr,
iii.  IO745).  Josephus  also  (sceknig,  like  Philo,  to  conciliate
Jewish  and  heathen  views)  testifies  to  the  prevalence  of  a  similar
belief  among  his  countrymen,  but  in  his  description  makes  the
demons  exclusively  Ttovi\aiiv  avOpuimov  irvtvuara^  {Ant.  viii.  2  5  ;
B/vn.iij).  On  the  Talmudic  evidence  for  the  contemporary
Jewish  acceptance  (doubtless  developed  under  Parsee  influence)
of  a  countless  number  of  spirits,  good  and  bad,  and  legions  of
daemons  lying  in  wait  for  men,  see  Kdersheim,  Li/e  0/ Jesus,
Ap.  xiii.,  and  cp  Weber,  Altsyn.  Thcol.  -2^2  ff.

The  number,  prominence,  and  activity,  therefore,  of
evil  spirits  in  tiie  NT  is  in  general  harmony  with  the
views  of  the  times.

Germinal  ideas  of  possession  are  to  be  found  even  in
Homer  (O^/.  6396,  where  a  8alfj.wtf  ffTxr/epbs  causes  a
wasting  sickness).  The  verb  Saifiovav
represents  insanity  in  A'.i,c\\y\\is(Choepk.
566),  Euripides  (Fhan.  888),  Aristophanes  (Thesin.
1054) and  Plutarch  ( I'il.  Marcell.  20)  ;  whilst  Herodotus
{479),  Euripides  [Bacch.  298^),  and  other  writers  attri-
bute to  divine  possession  the  frenzy  of  the  Bacchantes
and  Corybantes.  To  a  sense  of  the  same  mysterious
power  may  be  traced  Herodotus's  name  tprj  vo\)co%
for  epilepsy  (Hippocrates,  400  B.C.,  attributed  the
disease  to  natural  causes),  and  the  phrase  of  the
Greek  physician  .-Xretteus  (ist  century,  .v.u. ),  Saifiovos
ei's  t6v  dvOpwrrov  etaoSos.  That  the  nations  with  whom
the  Jews  in  later  times  were  brought  into  contact  held
similar  views  in  systematised  forms  has  often  been
shown  (see  below,  §  11),  and  we  cannot  doubt  that,
though  not  originating  in  any  one  of  these  forms,  the
popular  belief  of  the  Jews  was  largely  influenced  by  the
beliefs  of  their  neighbours.  That  belief,  as  reflected  in
the  NT,  regards  the  d.emons  (which  are  spirits  entirely
evil)  as  a  definite  class  of  beings,  injuriously  affecting,
mostly  internally  and  by  possession,  the  human,  and
(in  the  case  of  the  (ierasene  swine)  the  animal  person-
ality, the  subjects  being  usually  described  as  daifxovi-
^6/j.fvoi,  '  ditmonised '  (all  the  Gospels,  though  only
once  each  in  Lk.  and  Jn. ) — the  less  classical  form  of
dai/jLovdj/ievoi,  and  the  equivalent  of  Josephus's  ol  virb
tCov  dai/jiot>lwi>  Xafx^avofievoi,  by  which  phrase  is  justified
the  rendering  'possessed.'  The  moral  conne.vion  of
dremons  in  the  NT  is  subordinate.  Without  doubt
they  are  regarded  as  diametrically  (though  by  no  means
with  dualistic  equality)  opposed  to  the  work  of  Christ,
and  their  subjugation  is  looked  upon  (especially  by
Lk. )  as  his  primary  healing  function  and  as  the  sign
above  all  others  that  the  kingdom  of  God  had  come
(Lk.  1832  11  20).  Their  moral  and  spiritual  influence
is  recognised  in  Jesus"  parable  of  the  unclean  spirit
(Mt.  1243  Lk.  11 24)  ;  in  what  Paul  says  of  the  '  table  of
daemons '  ( i  Cor.  1 0  20/  ) ;  in  the  '  doctrines  of  dasmons  '
of  I  Tim.  4 1,  and  in  Rev.  920,  where  the  worshipping  of
dcemons  (cp  Dt.  32i7  65)  is  another  expression  for
idolatry.  This  moral  and  spiritual  evil  in  the  daemonic
world  is  also  certainly  kept  in  view  whenever  the  NT
writers  speak  of  the  opposition  of  God  and  the  devil
(Ja.47);  of  the  subjugation  thenceforth  by  Christ  of
the  kingdom  of  evil  (Lk.lOiS/.  ijn.38  Rom.  16 20)  ;
and  of  the  final  destruction  (Mk.  I24  Mt.  829)  of  the-
devil  and  his  angels  in  the  lake  of  fire  ([•iev.  20 10),  after
a  period  of  relative  independence  which  finds  its  counter-
part in  the  moral  and  spiritual  freedom  of  man.

The  effects  of  daemonic  possession  which  are  constantly

^  [On  this  second  theory  relative  to  the  demons,  viz.,  that  they
are  the  spirits  of  the  (wicked)  dead,  see  Schwally,  Das  Leben
nach  dem  Tode,  \^\/.,  where,  on  the  ground  of  their  residence
in  the  tombs  and  of  the  passage  from  Josephus  referred  to  above,
it  is  maintained  that  the  twodemoniacs  in  Mt.  8  28  were  (thought
themselves)  possessed  by  spirits  of  the  dead.]

IO71


DEMONS

prominent  in  the  Synoptisls,  however,  appearingoccasion-
9.  Common  ^">'  '"  >•  ^"'l J"  Acts  (87  16.6  19.6).
effects  ^'''^  physical  and  psychical,  and  must  be
distinguished  from  Satanic  influence  such
as  that  upon  David  in  i  Ch.  21 1,  or  upon  Judas  in  Jn.  13
227.  It  is  not  a  mere  influence  :  it  is  a  besetting  internal
malady.  This  form  of  possession,  which  presupposes
a  large  development  of  the  belief  in  dcemons,  is  dis-
tinctive of  late  Jewish  times,  as  we  see  not  only  from  the
Gospels,  but  also  from  the  references  of  Josephus  (especi-
ally Ant.  viii.  25),  and  from  the  quasi-professional  status
of  Jewish  ^  (as  previously  of  Egyptian  and  Persian)
e.vorcists  (Actsl9i3  [7re/)tfpx<'M^''w]  ^"*-  93^  Mt.  1227  ;
Justin.  Apol.  26  Tryplw,  311  ;  Pliny,  //A^302).  as  well
as  from  the  many  methods  of  expulsion  recorded  in  the
Talnmdic  writings  (Edersheim,  Life  of  Jesus,  Ap.  xvi.  ;
cp  Jos.  Ant.  viii.  2s  BJ  vii.  63  ;  Solomon's  ring  and  the
root  baaras)."^

One  point  to  be  carefully  noted  is  that,  whilst  at  times
disease  is  attributed  to  dasmons,  possession  is  not  a
comprehensive  word  for  disease  in  general.  The  practice
of  the  Synoptists  in  this  respect  is  not  quite  uniform.

They  all,  in  their  stimiiiary  records  of  healings,  agree  in
distinguishing  the  dsmonised  from  the  sick  (.Mt.  108  Alk.  1  32
Lk.  6  ij  y.),  while  Mt.  (424)  expressly  distinguishes  them
also  from  the  lunatic  (o-eAiji/iafd^iei'ot).  _  They  all  likewise,  in  the
mention  of  individual  cases,  agree  in  speaking  of  maladies
without  making  any  reference  to  possession  (.Sit.  927-3.  Ll^-
17.1-19  Mk."  32-37).  Out  of  twelve  individual  cases  which
Mk.  records,  eight  are  so  presented ;  and,  in  the  six  of  these
recorded  by  Mt.  and  Lk.,  as  well  as  in  cases  peculiar  to  them,
reference  to  possession  is  also  absent.  Mk.,  in  the  four  remain-
ing cases,  confines  possession  to  psychical  maladies,  such  as
insanity  and  epilepsy ;  Mt.  and  Lk.  add  cases  in  which  posses-
sion takes  the  form  of  purely  bodily  disease — dumbness,  Lk.
11  14  Mt.  9  32_/^  ;  dumbness  and  blindness,  Mt.  1:^22;  curvature
of  the  spine,  Lk.  13  .0-17.  The  comparison  of  these  agreements
and  diflerences  suggests  that  the  tendency  to  account  for  purely
bodily  disease  by  possession  was  a  tendency,  not  of  Mt.  and  Lk.
themselves,  but  of  a  source  or  sources  used  by  them  but  unknown
to  .Mk.  (see  Schur. //>/",  vol.  xviii.,  .892).

The  drift  of  the  evidence  seems  to  carry  us  to  the
conclusion  that  the  idea  of  possession  was  associated,  in
the  main,  with  psychical  disease  (cp  also  Mk.  5.5  Lk.
733  Jn.  720),  and  this  is  confirmed  by  the  hints  thrown
out  here  and  there  that  this  affliction  was  of  all  afflictions
the  direst  and  most  impracticable.  The  peculiar  em-
phasis laid  by  Jesus  upon  the  power  given  to  the
missionary  disciples  to  expel  demons  (Mt.  10.  and
parallels)  ;  the  special  exultation  of  the  Seventy  upon
their  return,  '  Even  the  dasmons  are  subject  unto  us '
(Lk.  IO17);  the  intense  amazement  at  the  ease  with
which  Jesus  cast  out  the  spirits  (e.g.,  Lk.  436),  dispens-
ing with  the  more  elaborate  incantations  and  manipula-
tions of  the  professional  exorcist  ;  ^  the  helplessness  of
will  in  the  possessed  ;  their  identification  of  themselves
with  the  djemon,  their  aversion  to  deliverance  (Lk.  939),
and  the  wrench  with  which  the  deliverance  was  some-
times effected  (Mk.  I24);  the  fact  that  Jesus  never  in
these  cases  called  for  faith,  but  seems  to  have  felt  that
only  some  external  force,  acting  in  spite  of  the  subjects
of  the  disease,  could  free  them  from  it  ;  all  these  con-
siderations point  to  psychical,  nervous  disorder,  which
could,  of  course,  manifest  itself  in  various  forms.

There  is  no  sign  on  the  part  of  Jesus  any  more  than

on  the  part  of  the  evangelists,  of  mere  accommodation

.•A  m-t-'i.  J  r  to  the  current  belief.  It  is  true  that
10.  Attitude  01 ,  c- .  1 . u ■ n • .1.

-  '  Satan is  used  metaphorically  in  the

jesus.  rebuke  of  Peter  (.Mt.  I623)  and that

'unclean spirit' {nvevna aKadaprov) is figurative in

Mt.  1243. Accommodation is  just  admissible in the

1  Gebhardt  and  Hamack,  Texte,  viii.,  last  part,  107.

2  The  plant  which  gave  rise  to  the  fable  of  Baaras  was  prob-
ably a  strange-looking  crucifer  described  by  Tristram,  Land  0/
Moab,  who  found  it  near  Callirrhoe.

3  In  one  instance,  that  of  the  Gerasene  demoniac,  Jesus
appears  to  have  found  it  advisable  to  follow  the  precedent  of
Jewish  exorcists  (Jos. -4»/.  viii.  25)  and  give  the  demoniac  a
visible  proof  of  his  deliverance,^  though  in  a  way  not  suggested
by  them.  It  may  be  observed,  in  passing,  that  the  word  exor-
cism is  never  applied  to  Jesus'  method  of  expulsion,  though  the
Jews  in  Acts  19  13  are  called  exorcists.

1072


DEMONS

commission  to  the  disciples  (Mt.  108).  in  jcsus'  exulta-
tion at  their  success  (Lk.  IO17/),  and  his  reproof  of
their  failure  (Mt.  17jo);  or  the  phraseology  may  pos-
sibly have  been  coloured  by  the  belief  of  the  writers  (as
also  in  Mk.  1  n,  where  the  knowle<lge  of  the  tl.i-mons  is
dcscrilx-tl  as  suix-'rlninian).  Acccjitance  of  the  current
belief  is  clearly  at  the  basis  of  Jesus'  argument  with  the
Pharisees  in  I.k.  11 16^,  however,  and  this  is  quoted  by
Keiin  as  irrefragable  evidence.  On  the  other  hand,  the
indefinite  nuilliplication  of  spirits,  and  the  grotescjue
functions  ascrilx-d  to  them  in  contemjxjrary  and  later
Jewish  literature,  and  the  wholesale  belief  in  possession
in  the  second  century  A.I).,  find  no  favour  with  Jesus  or
his  biographers  or  in  NT  literature  generally.  While
the  existence  of  Satan's  ministers  is  recognised,  the
tendency  is  rather  to  concentrate  the  inlluences  for  evil
in  .Satan  himself.  P'inally,  that  Jesus  believed  in  the
power  of  others  besides  himself  and  his  disciples  to
e-x-jx-l  d.xMuons  in  some  sense,  at  any  rate,  seems  clear
in  the  presence  of  such  passages  as  Mt.  12 27  Lk.  11 19.
where  he  attributes  the  |x>wer  to  the  disciples  of  tlie
Pharisees  ;  he  recognises  also  the  fact  tht.i  similar  suc-
cess was  attained  by  some  who  used  his  name  without
actually  following  him  (Mk.  938).  or  without  being  more
than  profcssctl  disciples  (Mt.  722).  J.  M.

The ciiief  foreign  influence  on  Jewish demonology
was  no  doubt  Babylonian. It  was  partly  direct,  partly
_., indirect. For  though  Iranian suiH-rstition
■  . .  had  an internal  principle  of  devclopint-iU.

na  ions.  ^^  ^^.^^  ^.^^j^,  fertilised  from  Babylonia.  For
instance,  the  seven  devas  or  arch-demons  of  Zoroastrian-
isiii  .are  a  reflection  of  the  seven  evil  or  destructive
S|)irits  who  play  such  a  part  in  Babylonian  mythoUsgy
(see  Maspero.  Dawn  of  Civ.  634.  776),  and  who  in  a
famous  incantation  are  called  '  the  Seven  '  (see  Zimmern's
translation  of  the  te.xt.  Witer,  Sohn  11.  l-'iirsprec/icr,  j  f.
['96]),  and  the  supjxjsed  capacity  of  the  formula  of  the
.\luma-vairya  to  drive  away  the  devas  is  but  a  sub-
limated form  of  the  Babylonian  belief  in  the  recitation
of  the  hymns  to  the  gods.  Hence,  even  when  a  Jewish
belief,  such  as  the  grouping  of  seven  demons,  char-
acteristic of  Jewish  popular  superstition  (Ml.  1245  I-k.
11  26  Mk.  I69  Lk.  82).  appears  to  Ix;  shai^cd  by  Persian
influences  (for  names  of  demons  of  Persian  origin
besides  A.smodkls  [q.v.'\  see  Hamburger.  A*/:'  ii.  1
281).  it  is  very  jjossible  that  Rabylonia  gave  the  first
impulse  to  Persia.  The  doctrine  of  '  disease-jKjssession '
among  the  Jews  may  very  well  have  been  taught  in  pre-
exilic  times  ;  ^  but  it  is  probable  that  it  was  when  the
Jews  were  conscious  of  the  displeasure  of  their  God,  and
when  they  Ixjcame  more  and  more  e.\[X)sed  to  foreign
influences,  tint  this  doctrine  attained  its  full  dimensions,
as  we  see  it  in  the  NT.  It  is  not  so  much  from  Persia
as  from  F.gvjit  and  Babylon  that  the  stimulus  for  its
development  was  derived.  The  Egyptian  view  descrilx;d
in  Orig.  c.  Cels.9,si  (Schurer).  that  the  human  body
was  divided  into  thirty-six  members,  and  that  with  each
of  these  was  connected  a  separate  demon,  by  rebuking
whom  a  member  could  Ije  curetl  of  disease,  is  but  a
more  specialised  form  of  the  doctrine  of  the  Book  of  the
Dead."^  The  doctrine  of  disease  among  the  ancient
Babylonians  was  that  the  swarming  demons  could  enter
a  man's  Ixxly  and  cause  sickness.  On  a  fragment  of
a  tablet  Budge  has  found  six  evil  spirits  mentioned  by
name.  The  first  attacked  the  head  ;  the  second,  the
lips  ;  the  third,  the  forehead  ;  the  fourth,  the  breast  ;
the  fifth,  the  viscera  ;  the  sixth,  the  hand.^  It  was  the
duty  of  the  exorcist  to  expel  these  demons  by  incanta-
tions,  and  the  Zoroastrians  believed  that  Zarathustra,

1  [The  sacrifices  to  the  ie'lrfin  [2K.  238,  as  emended  by
G.  HofTmann,  ZAT]^'2i-!$  ('82);  Lev.  17  7]  may  h.ive  Vwen  in
part  desicned  to  avert  diseases  (cp  the  .Arabi.in  Iwlief  in //«>»
described  by  We.  Ar.  HfU.  138,  2nd  ed.  154  ;  WR.S  Rel.  Sem.9)
120). Cp  also  the  rite  of  Azazki..]

2  For  the  ancient  Egyptian  belief,  cp  Maspero,  Daivn  o/Civ.

"i-

3  TSBA  0  422  ['78] ;  cp  Maspero,  Daum  o/Crv.  £83,  780.

1073


DEPOSIT

by  reciting  the  formula  calle<l  the  Ahuna-vairya,  '  caused
all  the  dev.as  to  vanish  in  the  ground  who  aforetime
flew  alx)ut  the  earth  in  human  shajx.'. '  *  The  Zoroastrian
religion,  therefore,  gave  its  adherents  some  rest  from  this
baleful  Ix-'lief.  Fidelity  to  its  law  could  avert  the  danger
which  arose  from  the  existence  of  the  devas  created  by
Angra-mainyu.  That  was  also  a  part  of  the  mission
of  the  I^aw  as  consolidated  by  Kzra.  and  alxjvo  all  of  a
greater  than  either  Moses  or  ICzra.  The  '  authority
and  [X)wi;r '  with  which  Jesus  Christ  '  conmianded  the
unclean  spirits  '  ( Lk.  4  36)  astonished  his  contemporaries,
and  contrasts  even  with  the  comparative  facility  ascriljcd
to  Zarathustra.  It  is  hardly  necess;iry  to  add  that
similar  phenomena  to  those  descrilx;d  in  the  Gospels
are  still  to  be  met  with,  not  only  in  savage  districts,  but
also  in  countries  of  an  ancient  civilisation  such  as  India
and  China.

On  this  subject  see  J.  L.  Nevins,  Demon  Possfssion  and
allieii  I'htiiics  ;  being  an  intiucth'e  Stuiiy  0/ I'lunonicna  0/ our
07vn  'J'lincs  (Chicago,  New  York,  and  'I'orjnto,  itc,5).  Of
Babylonian  demonology  we  still  lack  an  a(ic<iuatc  presentation.
Among  the  older  b<X)ks  Lenormaiit's  /,«  mat; it'  diez  Ifs  Cluttdi'dts
(ist  ed.,  1874)  Ixrars  most  directly  on  llie  subject.  For  evidence
of  the  long-continued  influence  of  I'.ibyh.nian  on  Jewi>h  super-
stition, see  .Stiibe,  Jii  lisch  ■Itahytonisihe  /.atthettixte  ('95).
On  Zoroastrian  beliefs,  see  the  translation  of  the  Zendavesta  in
SHE.  The  reduction  of  the  heathen  gixis  to  mere  hdifiavia,
which  we  find  accomplished  in  the  Liter  biblical  writings,  finds
its  parallel  in  the  conver>ii)n  of  the  '  bright '  Ixjings  of  the  old
Aryan  mythology  into  the  evil  demotis  of  the  Persian  (see
1'kksia);  see  further  the  articles  'ficister,'  '  Magie,'  '  Zau-
berei,'  '  .M>erglaubc '  in  Hamburger's  Kl-'..  also  F.  C.  Cony-
beare,  '  The  Demonology  of  the  NT'  in/^'A",  1894-1897;  W.  K.
Newbold,  '  Demiiii  I'ossession  and  .-Mlied  Iheme;.,' .^Vra/  U\rlJ,
Sept.  1897,  pp.  4997?:

G.  «.  G.  g§  1-5  ; J.  M. §§  6-10  ; T.  K.  C. §  II.

DEMOPHON  (AHMO(t)a)N  rA\l),  one  of  the  com-
mandants (aTi-'aTrjyoi)  of  a  district  in  Palestine  in  the
time  (if  Jutias  the  Maccabee  (2  .\Iacc.  Ui2).

DEPOSIT.  The  OT  law  of  deposit  is  laid  down  in
E  (I-2x.  227-13  [6-12];  cp  the  paraphrase  in  los.  ArU.
iv.  8  33).

With  the  exception  of  v.  9  [8]  the  law  is  clear.  Two
kinds  of  deposit  are  specified  :  (a)  money  (r-;i,  or  goods
(c'Sl  n^xScj.Ki^)  ass.  ox,  sheep,  or  any  beast.  {^)  To  take
the  second  group  of  cases  first :  if  the  deposit  be  stolen
the  depositary  must  make  restitution  (12  [11]).  Should
it  be  torn  by  wild  beasts  the  production  of  a  piece  is
sufficient  witness,  and  a  man  cannot  be  called  upon  to
make  good  that  which  was  torn  ( 13  [12].  cp  C.\tti.k,  g  9).
Where  culpability  cannot  be  made  out  the  dejxasitary
swears  that  he  is  innocent  and  the  depositor  is  bound
to  accept  his  word  (10/  [9/]).  (c)  In  cases  of  the
first  description,  should  the  deposit  be  stolen,  the  thief,
if  found,  must  restore  twofold  7  [6],  cp  v.  4  [3])  ;  if  the
culprit  be  not  found  the  depositary  nmst  come  before
the  IClOhim  and  swear  that  he  has  not  put  his  hand  to  his
neighlx)ur's  property  (8  [7]}.  The  result  must  have
been  as  alwve  in  v.  iib  that  the  depositor  was  bound  to
accept  his  word.  Verse  9  [8]  alone  remains  and  is  not
easily  reconciled  with  the  foregoing  ;  it  may  be  a  later
law  added  to  cover  general  cases  (both  a  and  b)  involv-
ing alleged  gross  carelessness,  false  accusations,  and
libel. '-^

The  later  law  of  Lev. O2-7  (.'iai-261  applies  the  law  of  thft
'guilt  offering  '  to  sin  and  trespass  in  'a  matter  of  deposit'  (so
RV ;  jilf^S ;  >rapaO»j<t>),  iie/>ositum).  The  only  case  here  con-
templated, however,  is  that  in  which  volimtary  confession  is
made  ;  the  penitent  depositary  is  to  make  restitution  in  full,  add
the  fifth  part  more  thereto,  and  ofTer  a  ram  to  Vahwi.  Cp  Law
AND  JUSTICK,  8  17.

The  use  of  the  words  Tropa^m),  iropartSffai,  iroiiaxaTatftjici),
and  jrapaitaTOTiSfVoi  in  0  (Lev.  (5 2  4  Tot).  10  13  [12]  ['I  commit  my
daughter  unto  thee  in  special  trust  ')  2 Mace.  3  10  15  825  Jer.  40/
41  to)  sufficiently  expl.iins  the  expressions  in  i  Tim.  6  20  2  Tim.
1 12  14  (RViuk.  '  deposit  '  in  all  three  cases).  At  Jerus.ilem  (as
at  Rome,  01>-mpia,  Delphi,  and  elsewhere)  a  large  amount  of

1  VasnaO  15,  in  Mills'  translation  {Zemiav.  3  235).

2  c'nSj«n  in  ''''•  89(7  8],  as  in  F,x.  21  6  i  S.  2  25,  means  the
divinity  as  represented  by  the  priestly  exponents  of  the  law  at
the  sanctuary.

1074


DEPUTY

wealth  ('  which  did  not  pertain  to  the  account  of  the  sacrifices,'
but  was  in  fact  private  propc-rty)  was  consigned  to  the  safe
custody  of  the  temple  (st;e  the  story  of  Heliodorus  in  2  Mace.  8,
where  in  t.  15  express  reference  is  made  to  the  '  law  concerning
deposits'). See  Kaknest,  Pledge, Cp  Diana,  §  3

DEPUTY.  I-  130.  sd^dn.  Ass.  laknu,^  lit.  'one
appointed,"  'set  over'  (CKacl  HreMCON.  etc.),  the
official  title  (a)  of  a  certain  officer  of  hi<^h  grade  under
the  Babylonian  empire  ( Jer.  51  23  28  57  ICzek.  23  6  12  23  ;
see  also  Is.  41 25!;  AV  usu:illy  'rult-r'  or  [Dan.  82  etc.
r::3,  n'JJs]  'governor,'  KV  or  RV'"*.'-  'deputy';  (5^7
virarovi),  frequently  mentioned  in  conjunction  with
'governors'  (pa/iJth).  (b)  Of  certain  administrative
officers  in  Jud;i;a  in  the  time  of  lizra  and  Nehemiah
{Ezra92  N'eh.  'J  16  4i4  19  [8  13].  5?  17  75  I240  13ii);
menti(}ned  sometimes  in  conjunction  with  '  princes
(idrim). See  tJoviCRNMENT,  §  26.

2.  nrS, /«•/(«/«  (Esth.  89  93  AV). See  GovERNOK,  I.

3.  :S3,  nisfab,  i  K. 2247  [48]  [li>2"c  (pm]  (eo-njAiojiei/ov  [A]
vaolflcVini'l). See Koom,  §  7.

4.  orJiin-aro?,  Acts  lU  7  etc.  RV  PuocONSUL  [j.v.].  Cp
CVI'KUS,  §  4.

DERBE  (AepBH  [Ti.  WII  ;  Str.],  AepB&i  [Hier.
Synec.  675]).  Paul  visited  Dcrbe  at  least  twice  (Acts
1420  I61).  and  probably  once  again,  in  his  third
journey  (Acts  IS 23  '  went  over  all  the  country  of
Galatia  and  Phrygia  in  order').  From  the  fact  that
the  name  docs  not  occur  in  the  list  of  places  in  which
he  had  suffered  persecution  (2  'lim.  3ii),  it  may  perhaps
be  inferred  that  the  work  of  evangelisation  encountered
no  obstacle  there.  That  success  attended  the  apostles
at  Derbe  we  learn  from  Acts  14  21.  (iaius,  one  of
Pauls  companions  from  Corinth  to  Asia,  was  a  native
of  the  town  (Acts'204).

I'^rom  Steph.  Byz.  we  learn  that  the  town  was  called
also  Ae\/3eia,  '  which  in  the  Lycaonian  tongue  signi-
_.,  fies  a  juniper-bush.'  The  site  was  appro.xi-
■  mately  discovered  by  Sterrett,  who  put  it
between  Bossola  and  Zosta  (or  Losta),  villages  two
miles  apart  (  IVol/e  Expcd.  23).  Ramsay,  however,
says  that  the  ruins  at  Bossola  are  merely  those  of  a
Seljuk  khan,  whilst  those  at  Zosta  have  all  been  trans-
ported thither  from  some  other  site.  The  great  site  of
the  district  is  the  mound  of  Gudelissin  in  the  plain
about  3  m.  NW.  of  Zosta,  and  45  m.  S.  of  Konia,
(Iconium)  at  the  foot  of  the  Masallah  Dagh.  The
mound  is  of  the  class  called  by  Strabo  (537)  '  mounds
of  Scmiramis,'  which  are  largely  artificial,  and  of
Oriental  origin.  It  contains  numerous  traces  of
Roman  occupation.  The  earliest  city  of  Derbe  must  be
sought  in  the  mountains  to  the  south.

This  situation  agrees  with  the  notices  in  Strabo.  After
describing  the  ten  Strategiai  of  Cappadocia,  he  adds  that  in  the
first  century  n.c.  there  was  an  eleventh  Strategia,  consisting
of  part  of  Lycaonia,  Cilicia,  and  Cappadocia  (53s,  ij  irepl
Kaora/SaAa  re  ical  Ku^io-rpa  (Oie'^pt  n^s  'Avriirarpou  ToO  At/o-toO
Aep/Sr)?).  He  refers  to  the  same  district  (537)  as  the  additional
(«7ri<Ti)Tos)  Strategia.  Derbe  is  furtlier  described  as  lying  on
the  frontier  of  lEauria  (Str.  569,  -n^sS'  lo-auptictj?  ecmi'ei' irAeupai?
Ti\  Sep^r)) ;  the  words  which  immediately  follow  (jLtoAio-Ta  Tfl
Kairn-aJoKi'ij  e7ri7re<^uKb?  toO  'Ai'TiTrarpou  Tvpavuelou)  refer  to  the
fact  that  it  was  also  on  the  frontier  of  the  eleventh  Strategia,
an  external  addition  to  Cappadocia  as  above  described.  It  is
clear  that  Strabo's  eleventh  Strategia  is  identical  with  Ptolemy's
'  Strategia  Antiochiane,'  in  which  he  enumerates  Derbe
(Ptol.  5  6).

Derive was the stronghold of the brigand chief

Antipater  (Cic. /^/>.  ad  Fam. 13 73;  Str. 535, 569, 6

„  Tj. .  Aep^rjT-qs). When,  however,  KingAmyntas

■ ^  ^^' slew  Antipater,  he  added  the  town  to  his"

own  Lycaonian  and  Galatian  dominions  (29-27  B.C.).

On  the  de.ath  of  Amyntas  himself  in  25  n.c.  the  larger  part  of
his  kingdom  was  made  by  the  Romans  into  the  province  Galatia  ;
but  apparently  Derbe,  along  with  Cilicia  Tracheia  (i.e.,  the
eleventh  Strategia),  was  given  to  Archelaos,  king  of  Cappa-
docia {circa  20  B.C.).  When  Archelaos  died  in  17  A.n.  the
Cappadocian  part  of  his  kingdom  was  t.aken  over  by  the  Komans ;
but  the  Lycaonian  part  was  left  to  his  son  Archelaos  II.,  who

1  Whence  Or.  fu»yan|s  (Ges.  Lex.O^)).  On  its  relation  to
)3b  see  Treasurer,  2.

i07S


DESERT

was  still  reigning  in  36  a.d.  (cpTac.  Ann.  242  641).  Two  years
later  the  region  described  by  Strabo  as  the  eleventh  Strategia,
and  by  Ptolemy  as  the  Strategia  Antiochiane,  was  assigned  by
Caligtda  to  Antiochus  IV.  and  lotape  Philadelphos.  Soon
afterwards  Antiochus  lost  favour,  and  was  deprived  of  his
kingdom.  In  41  a.d.  Claudius  restored  the  territory  to
Antiochus  and  lotape,  who  ruled  until  72  a.d.  It  appears,
however,  that  on  this  restoration  the  Lycaonian  section  of  the
realm  of  Antiochus  was  detached  and  permanently  assigned  to
Galatia.  Derlje  therefore  became  part  of  that  province.  The
transference  was  due  to  the  importance  of  the  town  as  a  frontier
post  in  the  SK.  of  the  Roman  province.  Claudius  remixielled
Its  constitution  and  honoured  the  place  with  the  title  Claudio-
Derlw  (see  Rains.  JlUt.  Geog.  0/  AM,  336,  y]i/.,  and  Church
in  Kom.  JCinfi.  54).

Thus  we  can  understand  how  at  the  time  of  Paul's
visit  (46  or  48  A.D. )  Derbe  could  t)e  correctly  described
as  a  city  of  Lycaonia  (Acts  146),  for  so  it  was  from  the
point  of  view  of  geography  or  ethnography.  Politically,
however,  Derl>c  lx:longed  to  the  province  of  Galatia,
and  it  is  argued  by  Ramsay  that  in  the  language  of
polite  address  its  inhabitants  must  have  been  dvdpa
VaXdrai  (Gal.  3i),  not  AvKaove^,  which  latter  term
signified  the  population  of  the  non- Roman  part  of
Lycaonia  (see,  however,  Galatia).  w.  j.  w.

DESERT.  The  English  word  '  desert '  ordinarily
means  a  sterile  sandy  plain  without  vegetation  ami  water
— a  'sea  of  sand,'  such  as,  e._if.,  parts  of


1.  General


the  Sahara. This  is  not  the  meaning  of


meaning.  ^^^  Hebrew  words.  No  desert  of  this
kind  was  known  to  Israel  either  before  or  after  the  oc-
cupation of  Canaan.  The  districts  to  which  the  term
'desert'  is  ajjplied  in  EV  are,  at  the  present  day,
frequently  covered  with  vegetation,  and  were  i)robably
even  more  pros]x;rous  in  the  past  (see  more  fully  the
articles  on  the  place-names  enumerated  in  §  3).
'  Wilderness,'  by  which  the  Hebrew  terms  are  some-
times translated,  is  a  somewhat  Ijetter  rendering  ;  but
it  is  not  always  adequate.  It  will  be  convenient  here
to  record  the  Hebrew  words,  and  to  indicate  other  terms
of  analogous  meaning.

(1)  ■12ir;,  horbdh  (from  3-)n  '  to  lay  waste,"  epijfio? ;  also  ipyt/jiia,
I>ck.3.'>4,ep^H(oo-is,  Jer.  734  [R.\Q1  225;  oiKOTrefof  Ps.  1026(7],

'desert,'  RV  'waste  places';  .so  KV  'waste,'
2.  Hebrew Lev.  20  31  Is.  (il  4  ;  or  '  desolation,'  Jer.  44  2  ;  cp
terms. Kzek.  38 12  AV  only),  used  of  cities  and  regions
formerly  inhabited  but  now  lying  waste  or  in
ruins  from  war  or  neglect ;  cp  Jer.  44  2,  '  the  cities  are  a  desola-
tion and  no  man  dwelleth  therein'  ;  hence  in  threats  {e.g.,  Lev.
/.c),  or  in  promises  (with  ri^S,  CCip) — once  with  reference  to
the  wilderness  of  wanderings  (Is.  48  21).

(2)  p3"'f'?,  y'hmdn  (\^cr".  '^^  desolate';  for  cognates  see
below,  7),  [yij]  avu&po^,  used  of  a  district  riverless  and  un-
inhabited (Is.  43  19,  EV 'desert,'  ||  laic),  of  the  wilderness  of
wanderings  (Dt.  32  10,  EV  'wilderness';  Ps.7840,  EV  'de.sert,'
II  13ia)  ;  otherwise,  a  geographical  designation ;  cp  §  3,  2,  3,  and
see  Be  I  H-jESHi.MOTH,  Jeshimon.

(3)  "lino,  viiJbdr  (Iprj/ios,  etc.;  once  [Is.  41  19]  awipoi  y^ ;
AV  '  desert,' RV  '  wilderness';  but  in  Gen.  14  6,  etc.,  EV  'wilder-
ness'; once,  Ps.  75  6  (7],  EV  'south'  [RViuK-  'wilderness  of
the  mountains '1]).  The  idea  of  'desert'  is  totally  foreign  to
this  word  (on  its  derivation  see  Cattle,  §  5).  Midbar  is  a
district  pos.sessing  pastures  (Joel  222,  Ps.  65  12  [13])  and  cities
(Is.  42  11),  but  occupied  by  nomads,  not  by  settled  tillers  of  the
soil  (cp  esp.  Nu.  1433).  It  is  commonly  employed  to  denote
the  wilderness  of  wanderings,  which  itself  is  a  mountainous
region,  not  without  pasture  grounds,  and  so  devoid  of  sand
that  the  one  tract  which  forms  an  exception  has  the  ch.aracter-
istic  name  Debbct  er-Ra»ikh,  '  plain  of  sand  ' ;  see  below,  §  3,  i.

(4)  n^nj?,  'ilrilbiih  (apa^a  [i)  Trpbs  Sva-iiali,  Josh.  11 16,  etc.]),
in  poetical  literature  often  occurs  in  parallelism  with  midbdr
(Is.  S.'ii  [eprj/iio?]  40 3  41  19,  EV  'desert').  In  Jer.  50  12  it
approximates  more  closely  to  the  modern  idea  of  '  desert  '  (cp
Is.  35  I  Jer.  61  4  3  ;  |1  n^)  ;.  but  in  historical  w  ritings  (early  and
late)  it  is  a  geographical  term  (see  §  3,  2,  Ijelow).

(5)  n;^'.  fhyi^  ('dry  land'  [so  Ps.  63  i  (2),  EV],  Job  30 3,
AV  RVnig.  '  wilderness,'  RV  '  dry  ground  ' ;  cp  J'VS,  '  dry  place,'
Is.  255  322),  used  of  the  wilderness  of  wanderings,  Ps.  7S  17
(.\V  'wilderness,'  RV  'desert,'  RVnig.  'dry  land  ').  For  C"S,
dwellers  of  the  'desert'  (Is.  13  21  34  14,  EV ;  also  23  13,  AV  ;
referring  to  wild  beasts)  or  '  wilderness '  (Ps.  72  9  "4 '4.  EV ;
referring  to  human  beings),  see  Cat,  Wild  Beasts.

1  The  pa.ssage  is  obscure(see  Ba. ,  Del.),  and,  according  to  Che ,
deeply  corrupt.

1076


DESIRE

A  still  more  forcible  term  is —

(6)  \r,h,  taha  (I's.  10740  Job  12 84;  EV  'wilderness*),  used
of  tlie  wilderness  of  wandering,  Dt.  32  10  (with  pOC'|  77|, '  howl-
inR  waste  ').  The  word  (cp  et-T}k)  sucRests  the  idea  of  waste-
nc"*s  and  confusion  (Jcr.  4  at  Job  2ll  7  Is.  24  10;  cp  l-.ccliis.  41  10
(Heb.)),  such  as  existed  before  the  creation  ((Icn.  1  i,  see
C'kkation,  I  7).  For  the  sake  of  completeness  mention  may
be  made  also  of : —

(7)  ncc*,  Ummdh  (Is.  59  Jer.  42  18),  TOCC'ds.  1  7  0  11),  rCCB'
(Krck.  357),  all  of  which  involve  the  idea  of  a  devastation,  not
a  natural  state  (v^cCt?  :  cp  no.  3).

(8)  a'lr',  hirdb.  Is.  357  (n  aw«po«),  RV  'glowing  sand,'
RViiiL'-  MlKAGE  (?.!'.).  AV  'parched  ground'  is  preferable;
cp  Aram,  'i^raf',  'to  be  burnt  or  dried  up,'  and  .see  Che.  Intr.
Is.  269. The  NT  terms  to  !«  mentioned  arc  :—

(9)  tprttLM  (e.g..  Heb.  11  38,  KV  'desert,'  Mt.  1^33,  'wilder-
ness,' RV  'desert  place')  and  ipyfino^  U-S-t  ^'t-  l^^'Ji  ^-V
'  desert ').

The  chief  districts  and  regions  to  which  the  above
terms  are  applietl  may  Ix;  here  enunifratcd.

1.  The  most  prominent  is  that  which  was  the  scene  of
tlie  wanderings  of  Israel.  It  is  commonly  called  ham-
_  „  ..  ,  tm't/fi.i  r  (l)t.  li.etc. );  but  other  ireo-
3.  Geographical  „i,^i  ,erms(.Shur.  Sinai,  etc. ;  sc-e

applications.  ^,.,,';,.„  ,,.,„.,  g  .)  ,,,^  ^,Mcd  to  indicate
more  |>articularly  the  region  intended.  On  the  char-
acter of  tiiis  tract,  which  stretches  from  the  S.  border
of  Palestine  to  lUath  and  forms  the  W.  bouiuLiry  of
Ildom,  see  SiNAl.  The  only  part  which  can  fairly  be
dfscril>ed  as  a  desert  is  the  bare  and  parched  district
of  ct-Tih,  and  it  is  here  that  U  and  (more  elaborately)
1'  place  the  forty  years'  wanderings  (see  Wandkki.ngs,
§§  10/".  n>),  and  with  this  agrees  the  circumstance  that
it  is  only  in  the  later  writings  that  the  horror  and  lone-
someness  of  the  'wilderness'  is  referred  to  (I'-i;.,  Dt.
8.5).

2.  The  great  crack  or  depression  which  includes  the
Jordan  valley,  and  extends  N.  to  Antioch  and  S.  to
the  gulf  of  Akiibah,  is  the  second  great  'desert.'  To
the  N.  lay  the  viidbar  A'iblah  (Ezek.  614),  midbar
Damiiscus{\  K.  I95);  cj)  i)erhaps  the  ^pTj/ii'a  of  Mt.  1533.
The  well-known  geographical  term  'Anlbah  (see  above,
§  '2,  4)  is  confined  chiefiy  to  the  lower  half  (cp  iniJbor
Moab,  Dt.  "JS  Nu. '21ii;  viidbar  Kedcmoth,  Dt.  226;
midbar  Beser,  Dt.  443),  sc-e  Ak.\B.\II.i  To  the  NE.
of  the  Dead  Sea  is  applied  also  the  term  'JCshimon'
(see  Jk.shimon).  Allusions  to  the  .Arabnh  on  the  W.  side
of  the  Jordan  are  found  in  2  S.  102328  17  16,  and  in  it  we
should  jx-'rhaps  include  the  midbar  lU-th-Aven  (Josh.
18  12),  midbar  Gibeon  (2  S.  224  ;  but  .see  CiiniiDN),  mid-
bar  Jericho  (Jos.  16 1),  and  the  references  in  Judg.
2042^^  I  S.  13i8.  Here,  too,  was  probably  the  ^/mj/uos
of  the  niurative  of  the  Temptation  ( Mt.  4  i ).  See  further
Dk.\u  Si: .\,  §  2.

3.  The  third  tract  is  the  midbar  Judah  (Josh,  l.'iai,
Judg.  1 1 6),  the  E.  part  of  which,  along  the  IX-ad  Sea,
is  called  Jt5shiini3n  (18.281924  2613);  special  limita-
tions are  the  midbar  Maon  ('in  the  Aralxih '  i  S.  23
24/),  midbar  Ziph  (ib.  23 14),  aiul  midbar  En-i^edi
(1  S.  24  2[i]).  To  the  N.  it  approached  the  .Arab.ih.
Here  are  found  the  midbar  Tfkoa  (2  Ch.  202o;  cp
viidbar  Jc-ruel,  ib.  16),  and  probably  the  midbar  of
1K.234  (Ikthlehem?  cp  2.S.  232,  and  see  Atroth-
kkth-jo.ak).  To  the  S.  lay  Tamar  'in  the  midbar'
(t  K.9i8,  jnN2  is  a  gloss),  probably  forming  part  of
the  great  midbar  in  no.  i  alxjve.  On  the  '  desert '
(fpTjfio^)  of  .Acts  826,  see  Gaza.  See,  further.  Dead
Ska,  Juuah,  Palestink,  §  11.

4.  For  the  desert -like  tracts  to  the  E.  of  Jordan
(stretching  to  the  Euphrates,  1  Ch.  69)  see  Bash.\n,
Pai.kstink,  §  12.  s.  A.  c.

DESIRE  (n:i»nN),  EccI.  125  AV,  RV"«-;  RV
Caper-Hkrky  (y.i'.j.

DESSAU,  RV  Lkssau  (Aeec&oy  [V  vid.],  AeccAoy

[.\]),  a  village  (in  Judasa)  where  NiCANOR  {^.v. )  appears

to  have  fought  with  Judas  (2  Mace.  14 16). Possibly

1  On  Am.  6 14  see  Arabah,  Brook  op.

1077


DESTRUCTION,  MOUNT  OF

Adasa  is  meant  (Ew.  //is/.  4  331) ;  but  the  Greek  text
is  here  not  free  from  corruption.

DESTINY  (*:»),  Is.  65  n  RV. See  Fortune  and

Dksti.nv.

DESTROYER,  THE  (H^nU^n.  Ex.1223,  ton  oAeO-
peyoNTA.  cp  Heb.  11 28;  o  oAoGrcyoon.  Wisd.  ISas ;
O  oAoGpeYTHC.  I  Cor.  10 10).

In  his  account  of  the  last  plague,  J  implies  that  the
death  of  the  first-born  was  the  work  of  the  Destroyer.
In  the  light  of  2  S.  24  16,  where  the  angel  of  Vahwe  is
descrilx;d  as  '  the  angel  that  destroyc-d  the  people '
(ci'3  nrtr-cn),  and  of  2  K.  193s=  Is.  37.16,  where  the  de-
struction of  the  As.syrian  army  is  attributed  to  the  '  angel
of  Yahw^, '  we  should  be  ready  to  infer  that  the  '  Destroyer*
of  the  firstborn  is  not  a  lx.ing  distinct  from  Yaliw6,
but  rather  '  the  angel  of  Vahwe'  himself;  i.e.,  the  term
denotes  a  self- manifestation  of  Vahw6  in  destructive
activity  (cp  Tiik(JI'IIANV,  §  4).  This  conclusion  is
confirmed  by  the  fact  that  the  narrative  speaks  of  '  The
Destroyer'  or  Vahwe  (v.  zg)  indifferently,  just  as  other
narratives  use  the  terms  '  angel  of  Vahwe  '  and  '  Y.Uiwe  '
interchangeably.  Cp  also  E.x.  I227  (Rd).  The  'de-
stroyer '  is  clearly  identified  with  Vahwe  by  the  author
of  the  Wisdom  of  Solomon,  who  attributes  the  death
of  the  firstborn  to  the  word  of  God  (W'isd.  18 14-16).
The  meaning  attributed  to  the  term  by  the  author  of
the  epistle  to  the  Hebrews  (11  28)  is  less  clear.

The  death  of  the  Israelites  in  the  plague  recorded  in
Nu.  I641-50  [I76-15]  is  attributed  directly  to  CJod.  In
Wisd.  1825  it  is  said  that  these  [icople  jKrished  by  the
'Destroyer'  ;  but  here,  again,  the  IXstroycr  seems  to
be  identified  by  the  writer  with  God  (cp  (jrimm  on  the
passage.  zi:  20-25)  ;  and  the  same  identification  is
possibly  intended  by  Paul  (i  Cor.  lOio).  On  the  other
hand,  in  4  Mace.  7  11  the  executor  of  death  a[)fx;ars  as  a
distinct  angel  ;  and  generally  ^  in  later  Jewish  literature
the  angel  of  death  (xniCT  KrKSc)  has  a  well-marked  and
distinct  individuality  (cp  \\'elx.'r,  Altsyn.  77/a»/.<-)
247^)  and  is  identified  with  Satan  or  the  Devil  (cp
in  N'T  Heb.  214/  i  Pet.  58).  All  this  is  quite  foreign
to  the  belief  underlying  I".x.  12 23.

It  is  f|uite  in  accordance  with  the  general  character
of  the  Priestly  Code,  which  avoids  reference  to  angels
or  to  the  theophanic  'angel  of  Valiwe'  (cp  .Angkl,
§  6),  that  n'ntrc,  which  is  used  in  the  [K-rsonal  sense
of  'destroyer'  by  J  .(Ex.1223),  is  used  as  an  abstract
term — destruction — by  P  (12 13  [R\'"'C-  '  a  destroyer']  ;
cp  Ezek.  5 16  2l36[3i]  25 15).  A  plurality  of  tx-ings
who  accomplish  the  death  of  men  is  referred  to  in
Job  3322  by  the  temi  cntD  ('slayers'),  which  is
rendereti  in  RV  'destroyers.'  According  to  some
commentators,  such  angelic  ministers  of  death  form
the  unnamed  subject  of  the  plural  verb  in  Lk.  12  20.

(..  B.  G.

DESTRUCTION  (aBaAAcon).  Rev.  On  ;  RV  Abad-
don ('/.f. ).

DESTRUCTION,  CITY  OF  (Dnnn  Tl'),  Is.l9i8;
see  Hi:ki.s,  Cirv  ok.

DESTRUCTION,  MOUNT  OF  (n'n;**?2n-nn  ;  TOY
opoyc  TOY  ArncoAO  [!'>]■  x.  o.  t.  mocoG  r-^*'"'-]'  t.
O.  AAACCCOiO  [I-].  2  ^s-  -3ij,  R\'"'».'  ),  a  name  so  read  by
the  later  Jews  on  account  of  the  idolatrous  '  high  places  '
spoken  of.  Tradition  identified  the  mountain  with  the
Mount  of  Olives  (so  Tg. .  followed  by  AV™e).  and  the
name  has  been  supposed  to  have  a  double  meaning —
'  mount  of  oil '  (cp  -\ram.  ntrc)  and  '  mount  of  destruc-
tion '  (so  Rashi,  Buxtorf ).  A  much  better  explanation
can  be  given.

Hoffmann  (Z.-f  7"/?' 2  175)  and  Perles  {AnaUkUn,  31)  prefer
to  read  "nc'^rtnii,  'mount  of  oil,"  with  some  MSS;  D'ncs  will
then  l>e  a  deliberate  alteration  of  the  text.  Considering,  how-
ever, that  we  have  no  evidence  for  a  Heb.  word  ,-ircD  'oil,'  it  b

1  In  Targ.  Jon.  to Hab.  3  5,  however,  where  |«ni2 ^K^;  »s  parallel
to  .TTO'O  ('•'•.  "  *T  KTD*c)  the  distinction  is  not  so  manifest
1078


DEUEL

better  to  suppose  that  the  'mount  which  is  on  the  east  of  Jeru-
salem' (i  K.  11  7)  was  anciently  called,  not  only  'the  ascent  of
the  olives'  (2  S.  I&30),  and  in  a  late  prophecy  'the  mount  of
olives '  (Zech.  14  4),  but  D'inne'3n~in  ('  mount  of  those  who
worship'),  of  which  flTiC'pn'ln  would  be  a  purely  accidental
corruption.  Cp  2  S.  15  32,  'And  when  David  had  come  to  the
summit,  where  men  are  wont  to  worship  the  deity'  (mmc"  '\CK
C'^'I^N'?  CC')-  which  comes  near  proving  that  this  view  is  correct.
Observe,  too,  that  the  Mt.  of  Olives  appears  to  be  once  referred
to  as  the  '  hill  of  God  '  (Is.  10  32  emended  text). See  Nou.

Brocardus  (1283  A.D. )  gives  the  name  A/ofis  Off'cn-
sionis  (cp  Vg. )  to  the  most  southern  eminence  of  the
Mt.  of  Olives,  because  Solomon  set  up  there  the  image
of  Moloch  ;  on  the  northern  summit,  afterwards  called
Mons  Scandali,  he  placed  the  idol  of  Chemosh.  Quares-
mius,  however  (^ciixa  1630  A.  D. ),  calls  the  southern  ridge
Alons  Offcn  ionis  et  Scandali.  Grittz,  after  a  full  dis-
cussion, pronounces  in  favour  of  the  northern  summit,
i.e.,  the  '  Viri  (ialihei '  {MGWJ,  '73,  p.  97  J^.)  ;  so
also  Stanley  {SP  188,  n.  2).  No  doubt  this  view  is
correct ;  Solomon  would  certainly  prefer  an  eminence
already  consecrated  by  tradition.

The  phrase  'mount  of  destruction'  is  found  also  in  Jer.  .'il  25
as  a  symbolic  term  for  Babylon  (EV  'destroj'ing  mountain').
,  T. K. C.

DEUEL  (PS-iyi),  Xu.  1 14  ;  see  Rklkl  (3).

DEUTERONOMY.  The  name  conies  ultimately
from the  Greek  translation of  Dt.  17i3, in which the

1  Mo^»  o„^  ^^'""^is  nx-TH minn nrj'o. •  the

1.  Name  and  ,  ,.  , .  -  ■•  ■  ^  ;  .•  ,•
contents.  'luphcate  {i.e. ,  a  copy)  of  this  law,  are
rendered  t6  SevTepovj/jLiof  tovto.  '  As  a
title  of  the  book,  SfVTepovo/niov  (without  the  article)
occurs  first  in  Philo.-  I'hilo  takes  the  word  to  mean
'second  or  supplementary  legislation,'  and  more  than
once  cites  the  bookas  'Eirivofjiis.^  Others,  withTheodoret,
explaiit  the  name,  '  repetition,  recapitulation  of  the  law.'
Criticism  has  shown  that  Deuteronomy  is  neither  a
supplement  to  the  legislation  in  E.xodus,  Leviticus,  and
Numbers,  nor  a  n'suiiit!  of  it  ;  but  to  modern  critics
also  it  is  the  Second  Legislation,  an  expansion  and
revision  of  older  collections  of  laws  such  as  are  preserved
in  Ex.  21-23  34.

Deuteronomy  contains  the  last  injunctions  and
admonitions  of  Moses,  delivered  to  Israel  in  the  land
of  Moab,  as  they  were  about  to  cross  the  Jordan  to  the
conquest  of  Canaan  ;  and,  with  the  exception  of  chaps.  27
31  34,  and  a  few  verses  elsewhere,  is  all  in  the  form  of
address.  It  is  not,  however,  one  continuous  discourse,
but  consists  of  at  least  three  distinct  speeches  (1-4  40,
5-26,  28,  29/.),  together  with  two  poems  recited  by
Moses  in  the  hearing  of  the  people  (32/.).  The
narrative  chapters  record  doings  and  sayings  of  Moses
in  the  last  days  of  his  life,  and  are  more  or  less  closely
connected  with  the  speeches.  Besides  this  unity  of  situa-
tion and  subject  there  is  a  certain  unity  of  texture  ;  the
sources  from  which  the  other  books  of  the  Hexateuch
are  chiefly  compiled  (JE,  P)  are  in  Deuteronomy  recog-
nisable only  in  the  narrative  chapters,  and  in  a  few
scattered  fragments  in  the  speeches  ;  a  strong  and
distinctive  individuality  of  thought,  diction,  and  style
pervades  the  entire  book.

It  was  observed  by  more  than  one  of  the  fathers  that
Deuteronomy  is  the  book  the  finding  of  which  in  the


2.  Book  found
in  Temple.^


temple  gave  the  impulse  to  the  reforms
of  the  eighteenth  year  of  Josiah  (622-
621  B.C.).'  In  conformity  with  the
prescriptions  of  the  newly  discovered  book,  the  king
not  only  extirpated  the  various  foreign  religions  which
had  been  introduced  in  ancient  or  recent  times,  together
with  the  rites  and  symbols  of  a  heathenish  worship  of

1  Cp  also  Josh.  8  32.

^  Ltx-  Alleg.  3,  g  61;  Quod  Deus  imtnut.  %  10.  See  Ryle,
Philo  and  Holy  Scripture,  xxili/  The  corresponding  Hebrew
title,  ,Tiin  rwi'a  "IBp.  is  found  occasionally  in  the  Talmud  and
Midr.ish  as  well  as  m  the  Massora.

3  Quis  reruvt  div.  heres,  %  33. See  Ryle,  as  above.

♦  Cp  Hbxatflch,  Law  LrrERATURE,  Israel,  g  37/

6  Athanas.,  Chrysost.,  Jerome.

1079


DEUTERONOMY

Yahwe,  but  also  destroyed  the  high  places  of  Yahwi,
desecrating  every  altar  in  the  land  except  that  in  the
temple  in  Jerusalem  (2  K.  22/  ).  In  Deuteronomy,  and
there  alone,  all  the  laws  thus  enforced  are  found  ;  the
inference  is  inevitable  that  Deuteronomy  furnished  the
reformers  with  their  new  model.  This  is  confirmed  by
the  references  to  the  book  found  in  the  temple  as  '  the
law-book  '  (2  K.  228  II  ;  cp  2324/  )  and  '  the  covenant
book'  (232/  21),

The  former  of  these  names  is  found  in  the  Pentateuch  only  in
the  secondary  parts  of  Dt.  (28  6i  2Si  20  30  10  31  24  26),  and,  like
the  phrase  this  law'  (48  2738  '29  29),  signilies  \)l.  or  the
deuteronomic  legisl.ation  exclusively;  'coven;int  book'  is  an
appropriate  designation  for  a  book  in  which  the  covenant  of
\ahwe  with  Israel  (see  Cove.nant,  §  6)  is  an  often  recurring
theme  (5  2/.  17  2  2'J  i  4  13  23  21*9  12  14  21  25,  etc.).'

That  the  book  read  by  Shaphan  before  Josiah  was
Deuteronomy  has  been  inferred  also  from  the  king's  con-
sternation (2  K.  22ii  _^),  which  seems  to  show  that  the
law  was  accompanied  by  such  denunciations  of  the  con-
sequences of  disobedience  as  are  found  especially  in  Dt.  28.

The  opinion,  once  very  generally  entertained,  that  the
book  found  by  Hilkiah  w,as  the  whole  Pentateuch,  is  no
longer  tenaVjle.  In  addition  to  arguments  of  more  or  less
weight  drawn  from  the  narrative  in  Kings, — that  the
whole  Pentateuch  would  hardly  be  described  as  a  law-
book ;  that  a  book  as  long  as  the  Pentateuch  could  not
be  read  through  twice  in  a  single  day  (2  K.  228  10);
that,  with  the  entire  legislation  before  him,  the  king
would  not  have  based  his  reforms  on  deuteronomic
laws  exclusively, — recent  investigation  has  proved  that
the  priestly  legislation  in  the  Pentateuch  was  not  united
with  Deuteronomy  till  long  after  the  time  of  Josiah. 2
Modern  critics  are,  therefore,  almost  unanimous  in  the
opinion  that  the  law-book,  the  discovery  and  the  intro-
duction of  which  are  related  in  2  K.  22/  (see  next  g),
is  to  be  sought  in  Deuteronomy  ;  and  they  are  very  gener-
ally agreed,  further,  that  the  book  was  written  either  in
the  earlier  years  of  Josiah,  or  at  least  under  one  of  his
next  predecessors,  Manasseh  or  Hezekiah  (see  §  16).

The soundness  of  these conclusions has recently  been im-
pugned by  several  French  and  German  scholars  (Seinecke,  Havet,
d'Kichthal,  Vernes,  Horst),^  on  the  ground,

3.  Account  in  partly of  sweeping doubts  concernuig the
2  K.  22 /". trustworthiness  of  2  K.  22/,  partly  of  peculiar

theories  of  the  composition  of  Dt.  These
theories  cannot  be  discussed  here  ;  but  the  great  importance
of  2  K.  22  /.,  in  the  modern  construction  of  the  history  of
Hebrew  literature  and  religion,  makes  it  necessary  to  examine
briefly  the  historical  character  of  those  chapters.  _  It  is  generally
agreed  that  the  account  of  Josiah 's  reforms,  as  it  lies  before  us,
is  the  work  of  an  author  of  the  deuteronomic  school,  who  wrote
after  the  destruction  of  Jerus.alem.  If  this  author  h.-xd  drawn
solely  upon  oral  tradition,  he  might  well  have  derived  his  informa-
tion from  eye-witnesses  of  the  events  of  621  ;  but  it  seems  to  be
demonstrable  that  in  223-2824  he  made  use  of  an  older  written
source,  a  contemporary  account  of  Josiah's  reign,  which  was
probably  included  in  the  pre-exilic  history  of  the  kings.  This
narrative  was  wrought  over  and  enlarged  by  the  exilic  writer  ;  in
particular,  the  origmal  response  of  Huldah,  which  was  not  con-
firmed by  the  event,  w.xs  superseded,  after  the  destruction
of  Jerusalem  in  586  B.C.,  by  a  wholly  diff"erent  one,  in  which
the  judgment  is  represented  as  inevitable  (22  15-20  ;  cp  23  26/)  ;
23  15-20,  also,  is  generally  recognised  as  a  legendarj-  addition  ;
but,  notwithstanding  these  changes,  the  outlines  of  the  origin.al
account  can  be  reconstructed  with  reasonable  confidence,  and  it
appears  to  be  in  all  respects  deserving  of  credence.4 See  Kings.

The  historical  evidence  proves  only  that  the  law-book
which  was  put  into  force  by  Josiah  contained  certain
4 T • h* nt deuteronomic  laws  concerning  religion,

4.  JOSians  m.  ^^^  ^.^^^  j^  comprised  the  whole  of  the
_  chaps.  &-_b  •_»  p^ggg,^j  3oo,^  ^f  Deuteronomy.  A  super-
ficial examination  of  the  book  shows  that  the  latter  can-
not have  been  the  case.

Chaps.  31-34  are  composite.  Besides  the  two  poems,  821-43
and 33, they  contain the links  which connect not  only  Dt.

1  Ex.  21-23,  often  called  by  modern  scholars  'The  Covenant
Book '(see  24  7),  cannot  be  meant;  for,  so  far  from  putting  the
high  pl.ices  under  the  ban,  these  laws  assume  the  existence  and
legitimacy  of  many  local  sanctuaries  (see  21 6  23  14  ^  ;  cp
26  24).

2  See  Canon,  §  23/,  and  the  articles  on  the  several  books  of
the  Pentateuch  ;  also  Hkxateuch,  Law  Literatcre.

8  For  the  titles,  see  below,  §  33  (2).

*  See  St.  GVI  1  649^  ;  Kue.  Ond.!^)  1  417/,  cp  407.

icBo


DEUTERONOMY

but  aUo  the  narralives  of  J  K  and  P  in  Nil.  with  Josh.  Chap.  27.
also  in  narrative  form,  may,  Iwth  on  external  and  on  internal
erounds,  with  equal  conlidcnce  be  set  aside.'  Wh.it  remains
(l-Ji!  is-aO)  is  all  in  the  form  of  address;  but  even  this  is  not
n  unit,  a-s  is  shown  by  the  fresh  superscriptions  in  &  i  1*2  i  20  a,
and  the  formal  closes  in  20i6-ip  and  21»i  I2869);  in  particular,
1  1-4  and  444-49  ^re  completely  parallel  introductions,  which
strictly  exclude  each  other.  Ckips.  &-'J0  contain  no  allusion  to
a  former  discourse  such  as  1-4  40  ;  nor  do  the  latter  chapters  form
a  natural  introduction  to  f>--'»l  or  TJ-l'li.  Chaps.  1-4  are  dls-
tinBuishcil  also  by  sliyht,  but  not  insiKnific.-int,  jKCuliarities  of
style,  and  more  decisive  dilTerences  of  historical  representation.
The  short  prophetic  discourse,  '^^/.,  l>ears  all  the  marks  of  a
later  addition  to  the  Inxik  ;  21»  i  [2S69)  is  a  formal  subscription  ;
the  following  chapters  have  their  own  brief  superscription  ;  the
tone  of  'ifif.  Is  noticeably  different  from  that  of  the  exhortations
and  warnings  in  the  body  of  the  lK>ok.

Most  recent  critics  conclude  that  the  original  Deuter-
ononiy  contained  only  the  one  long  speech  of  Moses,
5-2G  "JS,  to  which  445-49  is  the  introduction  and  ii9i
[2869]  the  conclusion.

Others,  urging  that  the  Ixxik  put  into  the  hands  of

Josiah  is  uniformly  ik-scnl>cd  as  a  law-book,  infer  that

. „  . . , it  is  to  Ix.'  soui'lil  in  L)t.  12-26  alone  ;

8.  Not  simply  ,^ as wdf  as 1-4. is an intro-

chaps.  12-J(). , .  ,  .,  .- 1 . .1.

'  duction sul)se(|iiontly preh.\ed to the

original  Dculerotuimy  by  another  hand. This  conclusion

is  confirmed  by  tlie  way  in  which  the  author  of  5-11

dilates  on  the  motives  for  keeping  the  laws,  as  though

the  laws  themselves  were  already  known  to  his  readers.'-^

Against  this  view,  which  would  limit  the  primitive
Dt.  to  12-26,  it  is  argued  that  the  law-book  itself  pre-
supposes some  siicli  introduction  as  is  found  in  5-11.

In  I'.'-'-'ii  thi-re  is  nothing;  to  show  when  or  by  whom  the  law
was  i)romul>;.itcd  ;  '.>  1  supplies  precisely  the  information  which
l-'i  presumes;  Ui-t-i  recites  the  covenant  at  Uorel>,  with  the
Decalogue,  its  fundamental  law;  biT,ff.  explains  tin-  relation  of
the  laws  now  alxiiit  to  lie  delivered  to  that  li  inner  law  and
covenant.  To  this  answers  29  i  [28  69],  which  is  tli'-  siilisLription,
not  to  28  alone,  but  to  the  whole  law-book  :  '  TIrsc  are  the
words  of  the  covenant  which  Yahwc  commanded  Moses  to  make
with  the  Israelites  in  tlie  land  of  Moab,  besides  the  covenant
which  he  made  witli  them  at  Horeb.'

The  situation  supposed  in  12-26  is  throughout  the
same  as  that  dcscrilx.-d  in  5-11.  The  language  and
style  of  the  two  portions  present  just  that  degree  of
resemblance  and  of  difference  which,  rcmemlx^ring  the
difference  of  subject  matter,  we  should  exjject  to  find  ill
the  writing  of  one  author  ;  nothing  indicates  diversity
of  origin.*

In  regard  to  chap.  28  also,  critics  are  divided.  Well-
hausen  finds  in  285861 — where,  as  in  30 10,  the  law  is
already  a  book — evidence  that  28,  as  well  as  29  f. ,  is
secondary  ;  these  three  chapters  formed  the  conclusion
of  an  enlarged  edition  of  the  law-lxjok,  to  which  5-11  was
the  introduction.*  On  indeix;ndcnt  grounds,  however,
2847-68  is  to  be  recognised  as  a  later  addition  to  the
chapter,  and  with  these  verses  the  only  reason  for  con-
necting 28  with  the  two  following  chapters  disappears.
Not  only  are  tiiey  separated  by  29 1  /.  (2869  and  29  1],  but
also  the  whole  attitude  and  outlook  of  29/.  are  different
from  those  of  281-46.  On  the  other  hand,  it  would  be
natural  for  the  atithor  of  12-26  to  conclude  his  book  by
urging  as  strongly  as  he  could  the  motives  to  obedience,
and  solemnly  warning  his  readers  of  the  consequences  of
disotedience.  Similar  exhortations  and  warnings  are
foimd  at  the  end  of  the  so-called  Covenant  Book  (F,x.
2820^),  and  at  the  end  of  the  Law  of  Holiness  (I^v.
26).  the  latter  passage  being  strikingly  parallel  to  Dt.  28;
and  such  a  peroration  was  the  more  appropriate  in  Dt. ,
because  its  laws  are  all  in  the  form  of  address.  The
profound  impression  made  upon  the  king  by  the  reading
of  the  l)ook  is  most  naturally  explainecl  if  it  expressly
and  emphatically  denounced  the  wrath  of  God  against
the  nation  which  had  so  long  ignored  his  law.

The  Deuteronomy  of  62  \  B.  c.  has  not  come  into  our

1  See  below,  f  21.

«  See  Wellh.  CH  191-195  ;  Valeton,  Stud.  6  157^ ;  St.  GVI
1  61/

See  Kue.  Hex.  |  7,  n.  5-1 1 ;  Di.  Comm.  263  yC;  Dr.  Dt.


'^fc


DEUTERONOMY

hands  unchangc<l. Not  only  have  the  exhortations  and
_  .  w.u-ningslxxin  amplified  aiul  heightened,

6.  Later  pieces  j^^^^  ^^^  j^  j^,j  prolxibility.  many  ad-
in chaps.  lJ-2t}.  ,,i,j„„s  have  Ixx-n  made  to  the  bws.
At  the  very  lx?ginning  of  the  ctxle  in  12,  and  in  con-
nection with  the  most  distinctive  of  the  Deuteronomic
ordinances — the  restriction  of  sacrifice  to  Jerusalem —
there  are  unmistakable  doublets;  cp  12 5-7  with  11/.,
and  esjKicially  15-19  with  20-28.  In  the  following
chapters  a  g<x)d  many  laws  are  suspected,  because  of  their
contents,  or  the  unsuitable  place  in  which  they  stand.

Thus,  the  detailed  prescriptions  of  143-ao  are  foreign  to  the
usual  manner  of  Dt.  (cp  24  */.),  and  appear  to  be  closely  related
to  Lev.  n  ;  the  law  of  the  kingdom,  IT  14-20,  represents  the  law
as  written  (thus  anticipating  31  9  -.-6),  is  in  conflict  with  the  legiti-
mate prerogatives  of  the  monarch,  and  is  clearly  dej>endent  on
I  S.  84^^.  IO25;  the  rules  for  the  conduct  of  war  in  20  are  not
reconcilable  with  the  necessities  of  national  defence,  and  can
hardly  have  been  dreamed  of  before  the  'exile.'  'I'o  others,  how-
ever, the  Utopian  character  of  these  laws  seems  not  a  sufficient
reason  for  excluding  them  from  the  primitive  Deuteronomy.'

While  many  of  the  instances  alleged  by  critics  are  in
themselves  suscejjtible  of  a  different  explanation,  there
scents  to  l)e  sufficient  evidence  that  the  Deuteronomic
code  received  many  additions  l)efore  the  book  reached  its
present  form.  Certain  supplementary  provisions  may
have  been  introduced  soon  after  the  law  was  subjected
to  the  test  of  practice  ;  others  in  the  l-;xilc  ;  while  still
others  probably  date  from  the  period  of  the  restoration  ;
cp  Hist.  Lit.  §6/.

In  5-11  also,  it  is  evident  that  the  original  contents
.^  of  the  chapters  have  lx;en  amplified,  and

r  n''vfi '^'^•'^ order  and  connection  disturlx'd by
"^-^^  ^^- later  hands.

The  story  of  the  sin  at  Horeb  in  ^/.  is  a  long  and  confused
digression.  Chap.  V  1625  y.  repeats  1-5;  1-5  is  separated  from
12-15  by  6-11,  which  h.xs  no  obvious  appositeness  in  this  place  ;
17-24  intrudes  in  the  s;inie  way  between  16  and  25./  ."similar
pnenomena  may  be  observed  in  the  following  chapters.2  Nor
nas  28  come  down  to  us  unaltered.  Verses  457;  plainly  mark
what  was,  at  one  stage  of  its  historj-,  the  end  of  the  chapter  of
comminations.  The  two  pieces  which  follow,  47-57  and  58-68,
are  shown  by  internal  evidence  to  be  additions,  presupposing  the
destniction  of  leritsalem  and  the  dispersion  of  the  miserable
remnant '"■'  ' •'  sequence  of  neglecting  '  the  words

of  this '  I in  this  book'  (58;  cp  also  61).

Verses  1  the  deportation  of  the  king  and

people  i  1  Jeremiali  (with  35,  which  repeats

27^,  are  pr^-bably  glusses.-i

In  the  Hebrew  legislation  three  strata  are  to  be  re-
cognised : the collections  of  laws  incorporated in  JE

„^.^, ,  (Ex.  21-23,  often  called  the  Book  of  the

8.  Ds  laws  :  ^

relation  to


P  and  JE.


CI!  192  195. Chaps.  1-4  and  27  were  the  introduction  and
conclusion,  respectively,  of  another  edition.

1081


Covenant  ;  Ex.  34)  ;  the  Law  of  Holiness,
contained  (in  a  priestly  recension)  in  Lev.
17-26  and  cognate  pa.ssages  (H);  and
the  rest  of  the  laws  in  I-'.xodus.  Leviticus,  and  Numbers,
predominantly  liturgical,  ceremonial,  and  s.acerdotaI,
which,  though  not  all  of  the  same  age  or  origin,  may
hi  re  lie  treated  as  forming  a  single  Ixxly  of  priestly
law  (P).  The  result  of  modern  criticism  has  iR'en  to
establish  more  and  more  conclusively  that  V ,  as  a  whole,
is  later  than  Deuteronomy. ■• On  the  other  hand,  it  is

1  For  a  list  of  passages  in  12-26  which  have  been  challenged
bv  critics,  see  Holz.  /;/«/.  263  ^  ;  cp  also  Horst,  Krt:  de
['nut.  dfs  Kfl.  '27  i35#.  ('93].  Analyses  of  the  legislation  have
recently  been  attempted  by  Staerk,  Dns  Dcut.,  1894,  and
Steuernagel,  Die  Kntstih.  d.  dfut.  (.'.tselzis,  1P96.  For  a  sketch
of  these  theories  see  Addis,  Documents  oj  the  Ilexateuch,  2 1 5-19
[98].  The  sul)stantial  unity  of  the  laws  is  maintained  by  Kue.
Ilex.  §  14,  nn.  1-7.  Against  Horst,  see  especially  Tiepenbring,
Re7:  de  CI  list,  des  Rel.  '2'.»  libff.  \\a\.

2  Valeton  (Stud.  C  1:7-174)  and  llorst  (Re7'.  de  tllist.  des
Rel.  It)  39  ff.  18  3?o^.,  cp  27  174)  have  gone  farthest  in
the  attempt  to  eliminate  the  secondarj- elements  in  .5-11.  .See
Kue.  Ilex.  §  7,  n.  6;  Piepenbring,  Rer:  de  rilist.  des  Rel.
2i'  165^  A  formal  analysis  has  recently  been  attempted  by
Staerk  (see  the  last  note),  and  Steuernagel,  Der  Rahmen  des
Diiit.,  1894.

*  For  attempts  to  restore  the  primitive  brief  form  of  the  bless-
ings and  curses,  see  Valeton,  .Stud.  7  ^^/.  (cp  Kue.  Hex.  (  7,
n.  21(2]);  Horst,  Re!>.  de  rilist.  des  Rel.  IS  327  i?".,  cp
1(159^^  ;  Staerk,  71  f. ;  Steucrn.'igel,  Rahmen,  4044-  ^ee  also
Steinthal,  Zeit./.  I'Slkerpsych.  11  \\/.  The  substantial  unity
of  the  chapter  is  maintained  by  Kue.  and  Dr.

■•  Cp._  Hexajeuch.  It  is  not  hereby  denied  that  many
of  the  institutions  and  customs  embodied  in  P  are  of  great


DEUTERONOMY

agreed  by  all  that  the  little  collections  of  laws  in  JE  are
older  than  Deuteronomy.  The  most  convincing  proof
of  this  is  given,  of  course,  by  the  LXniteronomie  laws
restricting  the  worship  of  Yahw6  to  the  one  temple  at
Jerusalem.  It  may  confidently  l>e  infcrre<l  also  from  the
prominence  given  throughout  Deuteronomy  to  motives
of  humanity,  and  the  way  in  which  old  religious  customs,
like  the  triennial  tithe,  are  transformed  into  sacred
charities,  as  well  as  from  the  constant  appeal  to  the
memory  of  God's  goodness  as  a  motive  for  goodness  to
fellow-men.  Where  the  provisions  of  Deuteronomy
differ  from  those  of  the  Book  of  the  Covenant,  they
sometimes  appear  to  be  adapted  to  a  tnore  advanced
stage  of  society  ;  as  when  the  old  agricultural  fallow-
year  is  replaced  by  an  experiment  in  the  septennial
remission  of  debts.  The  many  laws  dealing  with  con-
tracts of  one  kind  or  another  also  are  to  be  noted.

Most  recent  critics  are  of  the  opinion,  further,  that
the  author  of  the  Deuteronomic  law-book  was  not  only
o  T  F  ^^  91  acquainted  with  Ex.  21-23,  but  also
"  "  '  ■  made  this  code  the  basis  of  his  own
work  ;  Deuteronomy,  it  is  said,  is  a  revised  and  enlarged
Covenant  Book,  adapted  to  some  extent  to  new  con-
ditions, but  with  only  one  change  of  far-reaching  effect,
the  centralisation  of  worship  in  Jerusalem.  It  may  be
questioned,  however,  whether  the  evidence  will  sustain
so  strong  a  statement  of  the  dependence  of  Deuteronomy
on  the  Book  of  the  Covenant.

Verbally  identical  clauses  are  very  few,  and  in  some  instances,
at  least,  have  probably  arisen  from  sul)seqiient  conformation,
There  is  no  trace  of  the  influence  of  the  Covenant  Book  either
in  the  gencr.il  arrangement  of  Dt.  ]2-2i)  or  in  the  sequence  of
particular  laws.  To  fully  one  half  of  the  Covenant  IJook  (after
the  subtraction  of  the  religious  precepts),  viz.,  the  title  .Assaults
and  Injuries,  Ex. '21  iS-2--' 17,  there  is  no  parallel  in  I)t.  ;  while
the  subject  of  Authorities  in  Dt.  U)i8-18  has  no  counterpart  in
Ex.  21-23 ;  of  thirty -five  laws  in  Dt.  21  io-2.0  16  only  seven
have  parallels  in  the  older  code.  Finally,  in  the  corresponding
laws  1  the  coincidences  are  hardly  more  frequent  or  moie  nearly
exact  than  we  should  expect  in  two  collections  originating  at  no
great  distance  in  place  or  time,  and  based  upon  the  same  religious
customs  and  consuetudinary  law  ;  the  evidence  of  literary  de-
pendence is  much  less  abundant  and  convincing  than  it  must  be
if  Dt.  were  merely  a  revised  and  enl.-irged  Book  of  the  Covenant.'-^

Certain  laws  in  Deuteronomy  have  parallels  also  in
H  ;  but,  whilst  the  provisions  of  these  laws  are  often
closely  similar,  the  formulation  and  phrase-
ology are  throughout  entirely  different.*  In
some  points  H  seems  to  be  a  stage  beyond  Dt.  ;  but
the  differences  are  not  of  a  kind  to  imply  a  considerable
interval  of  time  so  much  as  a  diversity  of  dominant
interest,  such  as  distinguishes  Ezekiel  from  Jeremiah.

Dt.  14  3-21,  compared  with  I^v.  11,  h.is  been  thought  to  prove
that  Dt.  IS  dependent  upon  H  ;  but  the  truth  .seems  rather  to  be
that  both  are  based  on  a  common  original,  a  piece  of  priestly
Torah,  which  each  reproduces  and  modifies  in  its  own  way.-*

References  to  the  history  of  Israel  are  much  fewer  in

Dt.  12-26  than  in  1-34; they  are  of  a  more  incidental

Ti' h'  t ^^^^  allusive  character,  and  the  author

,  Jl, •'  exercises  some  freedom  in the  use  of

his  material  ;  but, as  far  as  they  can

be  certainly  traced,  they  appear  to  be  all  derived  from

JE,  or  from  the  cycle  of  tradition  represented  by  that

work. That the  author  did  not  have  before  him  JE

united  with  P  is  proved  by  his  reference  to  the  fate  of

Dathan  and  Abiram  (116)  ;  if  he  had  read  Nu.  16  in  its

present  form,  in  which  the  story  of  Dathan  and  Abiram

(JE)  is  almost  inextricably  entangled  with  that  of  Korah

(P),  he  could  hardly  have  failed  to  name  the  latter,  who

is  the  central  figure  of  the  composite  narrative  (cp,  Nu.

269/  2/3  Jude  II,  and  see  KoRAii  and  DATHAN  and

antiquity  ;  nor  that  in  particular  instances  they  may  be  more
primitive  than  the  corresponding  titles  of  Dt.  ;  nor  that  .some  of
them  may  have  attained  a  comparatively  fixed  form,  oral  or
written,  before  the  '  exile.'

1  They  may  be  conveniently  compared  in  the  synoptical  table
in  Dr.  Dfu/.  p.  iv^,  or  in  Staerk,  Veui.  t,^ff.,  where  they  are
printed  side  by  side.

2  See  also  Steuern.igel,  Enistchung,  %i  ff.

3  Dr.  Deut.  p.  iv_^  ;  Baentsch,  Dat  lleiligkeitsgcsetz,  76  _^
103. See  also  Leviticus.

*  Kue.  Hex.  §  14,  n.  5  ;  Paton,  JBL  14  48^  ['95].

1083


10.  To  H.


DEUTERONOMY

Akir.\m).  But  even  if  he  had  possessed  P  separately,
it  would  be  almost  inexplicable  that  he  so  uniformly
follows  the  representation  of  ]V.  where  it  differs  from
P  or  conflicts  with  it.  The  instances  which  have  been
adduced  to  prove  that  he  was  acquainted  with  P  are  too
few  and  uncertain  to  sustain  the  conclusion  ;  moreover,
they  are  all  found  in  the  long  digression,  99-IO11,  which
probably  was  no  part  of  the  primitive  Deuteronomy.'

The  traditional  opinion  among  Jews  and  Christians,

that  Deuteronomy  was  written  by  Moses  shortly  before

_ .  .his  death,  though  resting  on  the  testi-

T)re-mSnlrchic  "^""^  "^  ''^'^  lx,ok  itself  (3l9#  24/:),
pre  monarcmc.  j^  ^.^mradicted  by  both  the  internal  and
the  external  evidence  ;  the  contents  of  the  book  and  the
entire  religious  history  of  Israel  prove  that  Deuteronomy
is  the  product  of  a  much  later  time.  The  legislation  qf
Jli  (in  the  main,  doubtless,  merely  the  b<Joking  of  an
ancient  consuetudinary  law)  is  without  exception  the
law  of  a  settled  people,  engaged  in  husbandry.  Deuter-
onomy retlects  a  still  more  advanced  stage  of  culture,
and  must  be  ascribed  to  a  time  when  Israel  had  long
been  established  in  Palestine.  The  fundainental  law
for  the  Hebrew  monarchy,  Dt.  17 14-20,  presumes  not
only  the  existence  of  the  kingdom,  but  also  considerable
experience  of  its  evils.  Solomon  appears  to  have  sat
for  the  portrait  of  the  king  as  he  ought  not  to  lie.'^  In
the  prohibition  of  the  multiplication  of  horses  and
treasure  we  may  recognise  the  influence  of  the  prophets,
to  whom  the  political  and  military  ambition  of  the  kings
seemed  apostasy  (see,  e.g.,  Is.  2;).  The  constitution  of
the  high  court  in  Jerusalem  (Dt.  1 7  8-13,  cp  19 17)  is  thought
to  be  modelled  after  the  tribunal  which  Jehoshaphat
(middle  of  9th  century  B.C.)  established  (2  Ch.  198-ii)."^

More  convincing than the  arguments derived  from

these  special  laws  are  the  ruling  ideas  and  motives  of

.J.  ,  the  whole  book. The  thing  upon  which

Deuteronomy  insists  with urgent  and

^' unwearied  iteration  is  that  Yahwe  shall

be  worshipped  only  at  one  place,  which  he  himself  w  ill

choose,  where  alone  sacrifices  may  be  offered  and  the

annual  festivals  celebrated. Although  no  place  is  named,

there  can  be  no  doubt,  as  there  was  none  in  the  minds

of  Josiah  and  his  counsellors,  that  Jerusalem  is  meant.

Jerusalem  was  not  one  of  the  ancient  holy  places  of  Israel.  It
owed  its  religious  importance  to  the  fact  that  in  it  was  the  royal
temple  of  the  Juda;an  kings;  but  this  was  far  from  putting  it
upon  an  equality  with  the  venerable  sanctuaries  of  Bethel  and
Shechem,  Gilgal  and  Beersheba.  The  actual  pre-eminence  of
Jcrus;dein,  without  which  the  attempt  to  assert  for  it  an  ex-
clusive sanctity  is  inconceivable,  was  the  result  of  the  historical
events  of  the  eighth  century.

The  fall  of  the  kingdom  of  Israel  (721  B.C. )  left  Judah
the  only  '  people  of  Yahwe.'  The  holy  places  of  Israel
were  profaned  by  the  conc|uerors  —  proof  that  Yahw6
repudiated  the  worship  offered  to  him  there,  as  the
prophets  had  declared.  A  quarter  of  a  century  later
Sennacherib  invaded  Judah,  ravaged  the  land,  destroyed
its  cities,  and  carried  off  their  inhabitants  ;  the  capital
itself  was  at  the  last  extremity  (see  Hkzekiah,  i  ;
I.SR.XKI.,  §  33/. ).  The  deliverance  of  the  city  from  this
peril  seemed  to  be  a  direct  interposition  of  Yahwe,  and
Jerusalem  and  its  temple  must  have  gained  greatly  in
prestige  through  this  token  of  (iod's  signal  favour.

This  of  itself,  however,  would  not  give  rise  to  the  idea
that  Yahwe  was  to  be  worshipped  in  Jerusalem  alone.
The  genesis  of  this  idea  must  be  sought  in  the  mono-
theism of  the  prophets.  At  a  tiine  when  monotheism  had
not  yet  become  conscious  of  its  own  universalism,  men
could  hardly  fail  to  reason  that  if  there  was  but  one  true
(?od,  he  was  to  be  worshipjied  in  but  one  place.  And
that  place,  in  the  light  of  history  and  prophecy,  could  only
be  Jerusalem. The  way  in  which  Dt.  attempts  to  carry

1  See  Dt.  10  3  6  22;  and,  on  these  passages,  Kue.  Th.T.
^S^if-  ['75];  IJr-  £>eut.  p.  xvi.  On  99-IO11  cp  also  below,
§  i8  (small  type),
a  CpDt.  lVi6y:withTK.4  26l02«28/  11  1-8  928  10  Mi?:
3  A  critical  examination  of  the  history  of  the  reign  of  Jehosha-
phat in  aCh.  17^?:  does  not,  however,  inspire  us  with  much
confidence  in  the  account  of  bis  judicial  reforms.

1084


DEUTERONOMY

out  this  principle,  by  simply  transferring  to  Jerusalem
the  cultus  of  the  local  sanctuaries  with  their  priesthoods,
W.1S  only  practicablo  within  narrow  territorial  limits,  such
as  those  of  the  kingdom  of  Judah  in  the  seventh  century.
Wc  have  the  explicit  testimony  of  the  IV)oks  of  Kings
that  there  was  no  attempt  to  suppress  the  old  Ux;al  s;inctu-
aries  in  Judah  until  the  reign  of  Hezekiah  ;  the  most
godly  kings  left  the  high-places  unmolested  (i  K.  15i4
2243  2  K.  124  143  15435).  The  deuteronomist  author
of  Kings,  to  whom  the  temple  in  Jerusalem  was,  from
the  mom<'iit  when  Vahwt  tof>k  up  his  abode  in  it  ( I  K.
810/),  the  only  legitimate  place  of  sacrifice,  condemns
this  remissness  as  a  great  sin  ;  but  there  is  no  evidcncx;
that  the  religious  Ic-aders  of  Israel  down  to  the  end  of
the  eighth  century  so  regarded  it.  IClijah  is  in  despair
over  the  sacTilegc  which  threw  down  the  altars  of  Yahw6  ;
when  he  goes  to  mt^et  Go<l  face  to  faci;,  it  is  not  to
Jerusalem,  but  to  Iloreb,  the  old  holy  motnitain  in  the
distant  S.,  that  he  turns  his  steps.  Amos  and  Hosea
inveigh  against  the  worship  at  the  holy  places  of  the
Northern  Kingdom  lK'cau.se  it  is  morally  corrupt  and
religiously  Hilse,  not  Ixicause  its  seats  a-e  illegitimate  ;
nor  is  their  repudiation  of  the  worship  on  the  high-places
more  unqualified  than  Isaiahs  rejection  of  the  cultus  in
Jerusalem  (Is.  lio^).  The  older  law-books,  far  from
forbidding  sacrifice  at  altars  other  than  that  in  Jerusalem,
formally  sanction  the  erection  of  such  altars,  and  promi.se
that  at  every  recognised  place  of  worship  Yahw6  will
visit  his  worshippers  and  bless  them  (i:x.2024).

According  to  2  K.  I84  22  21  3,  Hezeki.ih  removed  the  high-
places,  demolished  the  standing  stones,  hewed  down  tlie  sacred
posts.l  The  false  tenses  prove,  however,  that  18  4  has  been  in-
terpol.ited  by  a  very  late  hand  ;  the  original  text  said  only  that
Hezekiah  removed  the  bronze  serpent  which  was  worshipped  in
the  temple  (see  Nkhushta.n);  nor  can  much  greater  reliance
l)e  put  upon  the  reference  in  the  sjKech  of  the  Rabshakeh(18  22).
It  may  well  be  that  Hezekiah,  after  the  retreat  of  .Sennacherib,
took  vigorous  measures  to  suppress  the  idolatry  against  which
Isai.ah  thundered  in  both  his  earlier  and  his  later  prophecies
(•_' 8  18  20  30  22  31  7),  perha])s  including  the  s.icred  trees  and
other  survivals  of  rucle  natural  religion  (Is.  1  2g).^  In  any  case,
the  reaction  of  the  following  reign  swept  away  all  traces  of  his
work. Cp  Hkzekiah,  i  ;  Isaiah,  i.,  g  15.

Another  very  distinct  indication  of  the  age  in  which
Dt.  was  written  is  found  in  the  foreign  religions  which
14 Forpitm it  combats. The  worship  of  '  the  whole

cults  et?^  '"'''  ."'"  ^'''''''"''  <^^'-^"3  '■'P  4«9).  an
'  ■  Assyrian  cult  freciuently  condemned  by
the  i)ri)phets  of  the  seventh  century  (Jer.  82  19  13  .'5229
Zeph.  1  5),^  but  not  mentioned  by  any  earlier  writer,
was  probably  intro<luced  by  Manas.seh,  during  whose
reign  Assyrian  influence  was  at  its  height  in  Jutlah.
The  sacrifice  of  children,  'sending  them  through  the
fire'  to  the  King-God  (I)t.  I810  I231),  also  l)elongs  to
the  seventh  century  (see  Mni.Kcn)  ;  neither  Isaiah  nor
any  of  the  other  prophets  of  the  eighth  century  alludes
to  these  rites.

A  relatively  late  date  has  been  inferred  also  from  the
laws  against  the  erection  of  steles  and  sacred  poles  {mas-
slholh  and  Ashirim)  by  the  altars  of  Yalnv6  (Dt.  16 21/.).

The  ohier  laws  only  enjoin  the  destruction  of  the  Canaanite
holy-places  with  all  their  appurtenances  (Kx.  34  13  23  24  ;  cp
Dt.  12  3).  The  prophets  of  the  eighth  century,  especially  Hosea
and  Isaiah,  assail  the  idols  of  Yahwi,  but  not'the  more  primitive
standing  stones  and  posts  ;  the  polemic  against  the  latter  begins
with  Jeremiah.

The  age  of  Dt.  may  be  determined  also  by  its  relation

to other works of  known date. Krom the  time  of

15 D  and Jeremiah, the  influence  of  Dt. is  un-

Other  write™.  "f\=^'^''»*''>'/" l)e recognised in the

whole  prophetic  and  historical  literature,

whilst  we  look  in  vain  for  any  trace  of  this  influence  in

1  Cp  the  much  more  extended  account  of  these  reforms  in
a  Ch.  29-31.

2  If  it  were  established  th.-it  Hezekiah  put  down  the  high-
places,  it  would  not  follow  that  Dt.  is  older  than  Hezeki.ah  ;  the
more  probable  hypothesis,  in  view  of  all  the  testimony  of  tbc
prophets  and  the  historical  books,  would  be  that  the  I  )eutero-
nomic  law  wa.s  in  the  line  of  the  measures  .adopted  by  the  king.

3  Cp  also  the  worship  of  the  Queen  of  Heaven,  Jer.  7 1  44  1 7.
See  Queen  of  Heaven.

1085


DEUTERONOMY

the  prophets  of  the  eighth  century  ;  neither  tiie  impressive
ideas  nor  the  haunting  phr.ases  of  Dt.  h;tve  left  their
mark  there.'  The  inference  that  Dt.  was  unknown  to
the  religious  leaders  of  Israel  before  the  seventh  century
is  hardly  to  l)e  avoided.

On  the  other  hand,  in  all  its  ruling  ideas,  Dt.  is
dependent  upon  the  prophecy  of  the  eighth  century.
We  have  alre.ady  seen  that  the  deliverance  of  Jerusalem
from  Sennacherib  pre|Kired  the  way  for  the  lx;lief  that
the  temple  on  Mt.  Zion  was  the  only  sanctuary  at  which
Yahw6  should  Ix:  worshii)[x;d,  and  that  the  mf)notheism
of  the  pro[)hets  was  the  theological  basis  of  the  same
belief.  The  lofty  theism  of  Dt. ,  which  exalts  Yahwe,
not  only  in  might  and  inajestT.  but  also  in  righteousness,
goodness,  and  truth  —  the  moral  transformation  of  the
old  conception  of  'holiness'  (see  Ci.KAN,  §  i) — is  of
the  same  origin,  whiLst  the  central  idea  of  the  book,
that  the  essence  and  end  of  true  religion  is  the  mutual
love  of  (jod  and  his  jK-oijle,  is  derived  from  Hosea.
In  general,  the  theology  of  Dt.  is  an  advance  ujjon
tliat  of  the  prophets  of  the  eighth  century,  whose
teaching  it  fuses  and  assimilates,  and  approximates  to
that  of  Jeremiah  and  Isaiah  40-;'»').

To  the  same  result  we  are  led  by  the  literary  character
of  Dt.  Its  style  is  more  cofdous  and  flowing  than  that
of  earlier  writers  ;  but  it  lacks  their  terse  vigour,  and  is
not  free  from  the  faults  of  looseness,  prolixity,  and
rcix'tition,  into  which  a  facile  pen  so  easily  glides.  In
these  resixicts  it  exhibits  the  tendencies  which  mark  the
literature  of  the  seventh  century  and  the  I^xile.  The
diction,  also,  is  distinctly  that  of  the  same  period,
closely  resembling  that  of  Jeremiah. ^

Evidence  of  every  kind  thus  concurs  to  prove  that  the
primitive Dt. was a product of the seventh  century.

16.  Result  as
to  date  of  D.


The  fact  that  it  combats  foreign  cults
which were introduced by  Manasseh


militates  against  the  opinion  entertained
by  some  scholars,  that  it  had  its  origin  in  the  last
years  of  Hezekiah,  jx^rhaps  in  connection  with  the
reforms  of  that  king.  A  hypothesis  which  commends
itself  to  many  critics  is  that  I)t.  was  composed  in  the
reign  of  Mana.s.seh  as  a  protest  against  the  evils  of  the
time  and  as  a  programme  of  reform.  Its  authors  died
without  Ixiing  able  to  accomplish  their  object,  and  the
book  was  lost,  until,  many  years  after,  it  was  accident-
ally discovered  in  the  temijle  by  Hilkiah.  To  others  it
seems  more  probable  that  Dt.  was  written  under  Josiah,
shortly  lx.'forc  it  was  brought  to  light,  by  men  who
thought  the  tiiue  rii>e  for  an  attempt  to  introduce  the
reforms  by  which  alone,  they  Ijelieved,  Judah  could  be
saved,  and  hatl  intelligently  planned  the  way  in  which
this  should  l)e  effected.  ^

I'.verything  points  to  Jeru.salem  as  the  place  where
Dt.  was  written  :  a  work  whose  aim  was  to  exalt  the
17  Place  ''^"'P''-"  to  the  position  of  the  sole  sanctuary
of  Yahwib  can  hardly  have  originated  any-
where else.  The  Torah  of  the  priests  is  throughout  so
intimately  united  with  the  religious  teachings  of  the
prophets  that  we  are  constrained  to  believe  that  both
priests  and  prophets  were  associated  in  its  prcxluction,
or  at  least  that  its  priestly  authors  were  thoroughly
imbued  with  the  spirit  of  the  prophets.  Who  these
authors  were  cannot  be  more  definitely  determined.*

That the  authors of  the primitive Dt. freely  used

older  collections  of  laws  h.as  Ix-cn  generally  recognised.

17a.  Sources  f'^'^''^ Kx-.^l-'2:5 (on which see  alK,ve.

of  D  ^ ^'' remains  of  another collection are

found  in  Dt.  22-2;"). Staerk  and  Steuer-

nagel have recently  undertaken to show by minute

1  This  is  equally  true  of  the  older  historians ;  but  their  works
have  been  preserved  only  in  deuteronomistic  rccension.s.

-  On  the  diction  of  Dt.,  see  the  commentaries  of  Kn.  and  Di.;
Kleinert,  Dcitt.  214^;  Kue.  Ilex,  f  7,  n.  4:  Holz.  Finl.
iH-iff.;  Dr.  /v.  p.  Ixxviii  ^  On  the  .style,  Di.  611;  Holz.
^95  J^-  ''  l'""-  P-  Ixxxvi^

8  .So  Dc  Wette,  Reuss,  Graf,  Kue.,  We.,  St.,  Che.,  and  others.

*  The  suggestion  that  Jeremi.ih  w.-is  the  author  of  Dt.  (von
Bohlen,  Colenso)  is  for  various  reasons  untenable.

1086


DEUTERONOMY

analysis that both the hortatory and the  legislative
parts  of  Dt.  are  in  a  stricter  sense  composite.

According  to  Steiiernagel,  the  book  discovered  in  the  temple
in  the  eighteenth  year  of  Josiah  (Dt.  5  26  28)  wa-s  the  work  of  a
redactor,  who  combined  with  considerable  skill  —but  meclianic-
ally,  and  without  substantial  additions — two  oliler  works  of
like  character,  each  consisting  of  a  hortatory  introduction  and  a
body  of  laws.  One  of  them  (.Sg.)  is  marked  by  the  direct
address  to  Israel  in  the  second  person  singular  ;  the  other  (PI.)
tises  the  plural.  The  older  of  these  works  (Sg.)  is  assigned  to
the  early  years  of  Manasseh's  reign  (shortly  after  700  n.c),  the
other  (PI.)  was  composed  about  670.  The  union  of  the  two  by
the  redactor  (Dr)  falls  in  the  middle  of  the  century,  twenty-five
vears  or  more  before  the  discovery  of  the  book  in  the  temple.
\ioth  .Sg.  and  PI.  made  use  of  older  .collections  of  laws,  and
these  sources  can  still  in  part  be  recogni->ed.  One  of  the  chief
sources  of  Sg.  (the  '  Grundsammlung  ')  was  put  out  in  support
of  Hezekiah's  reforms,  probably  not  long  after  722  B.C.

Chaps. 1-3,  in  the  form  of  an  address  of  Moses  to

Israel,  contain  a  review  of  the  principal  events  of  the

A^/i-+-  migration, from  the  departure  of  the

\h77s 1°T  *  ^^'■'^'^''''^s  '"'■o'"  ^^"'■'-"'^ '°  ^'^*^  moment  at

V^'h  t  V  ^^'^''^'^  ^^  '^  speaking  to  them.^  This
reiatea  to  .  ^gtrospect  throughout  follows  the  history
of  JE,  from  which  its  material  is  drawn  and  many
phrases  and  whole  clauses  are  borrowed. ^  Upon  closer
examination  it  appears  that  the  chief  source  of  the
chapters  is  E,  which  the  author  had  before  him
separately  ;  whether  he  made  use  of  J  is  doubtful  ;  of
dependence  on  P  there  is  no  trace.

The  retrospect  begins  .^bruptly  with  the  command  to  remove
from  Horeb  (1  6-s),  and  it  has  been  conjectured  that  99-IO11
(or  at  least  i>  25-IO  11),  which  recites  the  transgression  at  Horeb,
and  brings  the  narrative  to  the  precise  point  where  it  is  taken
up  in  1,  once  stood  before  1 7.  More  probably,  however,
99-IO11  is  not  a  misplaced  fragment  of  the  retrospect,  but  the
product  of  successive  editorial  amplifications. S  The  review  ends
as  abruptly  as  it  begins  ;  the  words,  '  And  we  abode  in  the
valley  in  front  of  Heth-peor'  (829),  must  originally  have  been
followed  by  an  account  of  the  sin  at  Baal-peor  (Nu.  2j  1-5  ;  cp
Dt.43/).

The  chapters  (1-3)  are  not  by  the  author  of  5-"26.
The  resemblance  in  language  and  style  is  un(|uestionably
very  close,  though  there  are  some  noticeable  differences  ;
but  the  diversity  of  historical  representation  is  decisive  ;  ■
cp  229  with  23  3-6  7/.,  I35/;  2 14-16  with  11  2/:  02/
The  opinion  of  some  critics,  that  1-4  was  prefixed  to
the  primitive  Dt.  to  connect  it  with  the  history  in  Ex.
and  Xu. ,  is  improbable  ;  for  such  a  purpose  a  recapitu-
lation of  the  history  was  more  than  su{>erriuous.  Others,
with  better  reason,  suppose  that  the  historical  risumi
was  intended  as  the  introduction  to  a  separate  edition
of  Dt.  The  way  in  which  it  t)egins  and  ends  (see  above,
small  type)  suggests  that  it  was  not  composed  for  the
purpose,  but  was  extracted  and  adapted  by  the  editor
from  some  older  source.  Conclusive  marks  of  the  age
of  the  chapters,  further  than  their  dependence  upon  E
and  the  general  affinity  to  the  deuteronomistic  school,
are  hardly  to  be  discovered.

Chap.  41-40  has  generally  been  taken  with  1-.3,  as  a
ion  a  'hortatory  close  to  the  historical  introduction.
19. Chap.  4  'pj^^.^g  jg  iiouever,  neither  a  formal  nor
X-40  exilic.  ^  material  connection  between  them.

The  historical  allusions  in  the  exhortation  are  to  events
related,  not  in  1-3,  but  in  l>ff.\  4  loyT  32-35  differ  from  the
retrospect  (1  39/  etc.)  and  agree  with  l>if.  W-iff.  '-'^^ff.,  in
making  the  speaker's  audience  witnesses  of  the  scenes  at  Horeb  ;
the  greater  part  of  4  is  only  a  homiletical  enlargement  on  5  i^ff.

In  Other  points  4  goes  beyond  5-11  ;  its  monotheism
takes  a  loftier  tone,  like  that  of  Is.  40-55  (see  43539
15-19).  In  425-31  deportation  and  dispersion  are  inevit-
able ;  the  prediction  that  in  the  far  country  Israel  will
return  to  Yahwe  and  find  forgiveness  takes  the  central
place  which  it  has  in  the  exilic  prophets.

The  language  resembles  5-11  more  closely  than  1-3,
but  has  peculiarities  of  its  own  :  417/  are  full  of  words
and  phrases  which  remind  us  of  Ezekiel,  H,  and  P  (cp

1  Chap.  1  1-5,  which  now  forms  the  introduction  to  the  speech,
is  not  homogeneous,  and  glosses  have  been  pointed  out  in  the
discourse  itself.

2  .See  particularly  Dr.  Dt.  on  these  chapters,  where  the  rela-
tion is  well  exhibited.

3  Cp  above,  §  11.

1087


DEUTERONOMY

also  32)  ;  28  seems  to  be  directly  dependent  upon
Jeremiah  (I613  ;  cp  ©).  Chap.  4  thus  appears  to  be  a
secondary  addition  to  Dt. ,  composed  in  the  Exile,  and
closely  akin  to  29,  if  not  by  the  same  hand.'

Chap.  441-43, the designation by Moses of three

asylum cities  east  of the  Jordan, has  no connection

„,  either  with  what precedes  or  with  what

'  "■ follows. In  phraseology  the  vers<


441-43  44-49-


ology  the  verses  agree
closely  with  Dt.  \^\ff.,  after  which  they
are  probably  modelled.  They  may  originally  have
stood  after  3 17  or  20,  or  perhaps  after  29.

Chap.  444-49,  the  title  and  superscription  to  5^.,  like
the  corresponding  superscription  li-s.  appears  to  be
the  product  of  successive  additions  and  redactions  by
scribes  or  editors  ;  the  oldest  form  of  the  title  may  have
been  simply,  '  This  is  the  law  which  Moses  laid  Ixjfore
the  Israelites  on  the  other  side  of  Jordan,  in  the  land
of  Moab'  (cp  1  5).

Chap.  27, in narrative form, stands entirely dis-
connected in the midst of the speeches of Moses,
„, „_  separating  28  from  26. Graf,  accordingly,

21.  i.ip.  regarded  it  as  an  interpolation,  introduced
lour  pieces.  ^^^^^^ ^^ ^^.^^ vim\.>i6. with the older

historical  book  (JE),  whilst  Wellhausen  sees  in  it  the
conclusion  of  a  separate  edition  of  the  Deutcronomic
law-book  (I-440  12-20  27).  The  chapter  (27)

consists  of  four  distinct  parts:  viz.,  1-89/  11-13  14-26.
Vv.  9  f.  may,  as  many  critics  think,  have  originally
connected  26  with  28.  In  1-8,  where  there  is  much
repetition,  5-7(2  has  long  been  recognised  as  a  fragment
of  the  ancient  source  to  which  Ex.  20  24 -26  [21-23]
belongs.  Vv.  12/  seem  to  Ije  the  sequel  of  11  29/,
the  whole  being  a  liturgical  embodiment  of  11 26-28,
and  plainly  secondary.  Vv.  14-26  cannot  be  by  the
author  of  11-13  '■  the  things  on  which  Dt.  lays  the
greatest  stress  are  lacking  in  this  decalogue,  which  is  a
cento  gathered  from  all  strata  of  the  legislation,  especially
from  Lev.  lS-20.

Chap.  29/  contain  a  new  address  of  exhortation  and

warning, introduced, like 5  ^, by  the words, 'And

,,, t,n  ,  Moses  convoked  all  Israel.' The  stand-

22.  L-hap.  -y/.  p^j^^  ^^  ^^g  writer  is  similar  to  that  of
41-40,  and  differs  in  the  same  way  from  that  of  5-26  28
1-46  ;  cp  in  particular  30i-io  with  425-31.  The  author
had  before  him  the  deuteronomic  law,  with  its  blessings
and  curses,  in  a  book  (29 20/  27  30 10,  cp  also  29  9
2858  61).  The  diction  differs  considerably  front  that  of
5-26,  and  approximates  more  closely  to  that  of  Jeremiah,
upon  whom  the  author  is  evidently  dependent.  Chaps.
29/  are,  therefore,  like  4,  an  exilic  addition  to  Dt.  The
movement  of  thought  in  these  chapters  is  far  from  Iseing
orderly  or  coherent:  29 16-28  [15-27]  docs  not  naturally
follow  10-15  [9-14].  and  the  latter  verses  have  no  obvious
connection  with  2-9  [1-8]  ;  30i-io  cannot  originally  have
stood  between  29  and  30 11-20.  The  position  of
these  chapters  is  difficult  to  explain.  Chap.  281-46
is  the  proper  conclusion  of  the  long  speech  of  Moses,
5-26  ;  29 1  [28  69]  is  a  formal  subscription,  marking  the
end  of  the  book.  The  only  natural  place  for  fresh
admonitions  to  observe  the  law  would  be  after  the  law
had  been  committed  to  writing  (31 9-13 ;  cp  24-27) ;  and  it
has  been  conjectured,  not  without  probability,  that  this
was  the  original  position  of  the  parting  charge.-

Chap.  31,  which  takes  up  the  narrative  again,  is
composite,  and  presents  to  criticism,  most  difficult
problems.

Verses  1-8  are  not  the  sequel  of  20/ or  of  28  ;  they  take  up

the  story  at  the  point  which  the  historical  introduction  reaches

in  823  /?!  ;  they  are  deuteronomistic  in  colour.

23.  Chap.  31. and  Dillmann  surmises  that  once  they  followed

828  immediately.  A  parallel  to  1-8  is  found  in
\^/.  23,  in  which  Yahwe  himself  gives  the  ch.arge  to  Joshua  at  the
sacred  tent ;  these  verses  are  probably  derived  from  K.  The
intervening  verses,  16-22,  are  an  introduction  to  the  '  Song  of
Moses,"  321-43,  to  which  32 44  is  the  corresponding  close. This

1  On  this  point  see  further  below,  f  23.
2  See  next  section  (23),  on  31  24-29.


DEUTERONOMY

introiiuctinn  is  not  deutcronomic,  as  the  lannunKc  proves  ;  it  is
equally  clear  that  it  is  not  by  the  author  of  14/.  a^.  1  he
ciuestion  of  the  source  of  the  verses  will  recur  in  connection  with
the  age  of  the  [Kiem  itself  (next  t,  second  par.)-  'f.  9-11,
relating  how  the  law  was  comniitleil  to  writinK  and  preserved,
form  an  appropriate  conclusion  to  the  account  of  the  KivmR  of
the  law,  and  are  by  many  critics  coiniccted  with  &-'J»!  'JS.  1  he
preservation  of  ihe  law  is  the  subject  of  24-27,  which  the
repetition  and  the  different  motive  prove  to  be  by  another  hand;
aS  A  seems  to  l<e  a  preparation  for  the  recitation  of  the  '  Song  '
( <o),  and  is  as  much  out  of  place  after  19-22  as  24-27  after  9-13  ;
the  whole  passage,  24-29(30),  is,  therefore,  ascribed  toa  rtdacior.
iJillmann  conjectures  that  28/  (in  substance)  oriKinally  consti-
tuted the  introiluction,  not  to  the  Soiij:  of  Moses,  but  10  a  speech
the  close  of  which  is  to  be  found  in  3'J45-47.  This  speech,
containing  the  last  exhortations  and  admonitions  of  Moses,  was
removed  from  its  place  after  :U  9-1 3  to  make  r<x)in  for  the  Song,
and  is  preserved,  though  worked  over  and  extensively  inter-
polated,  in  4  '.'it/  For  re;usons  which  have  already  been  indicated,
we  should  not,  however,  with  Dillmaiin,  attribute  this  s|>cech  to
the  author  of  &-'.itJ  -8,  but  to  a  later  dcuteronomistic  writer.

Chiip.  32 1-43  ; T/ie  Son_^  of  .l/<;j«.'— The  theme  of
the  Ode  is  the  goodness  of  Vahwe.  the  sin  of  Israel  in
rejecting him, and the  ruin  which this


24.  Song  of
Moses.


apostasy  entails.  The  |)oem  contains  no
definite  allusions  to  historical  events  by
which  its  age  may  l>e  exactly  determined.  The  coiujuest
of  Canaan  evidently  lies  for  the  writer  in  a  remote  past
(7/:);  and  he  has  h.id  ample  e.\ix?rience  of  the  pro-
jx;nsity  of  Israel  to  adopt  foreign  religions,  and  of  the
national  calamities  in  which  the  prophets  saw  the
judgments  of  Vahwe  upon  this  defection.  The  language
has  Ix-'eii  thought  to  indicate  that  the  author  was  a
native  of  the  North  ;  and  many  scholars  Ijclieve  that
the  situation  rertected  in  the  poem  is  that  of  the  kingdom
of  Israel  in  the  reign  of  Jehoash  (797-783  H.C.)  or  the
early  years  of  Jerolxiam  11.  (782-743),  when,  after  the
long  and  disastrous  Syrian  wars,  Israel  was  beginning
to  recover  its  former  power  and  pr()s|)crity.-  Others,
understanding  by  the  'no  people'  (cy  N*').  the  'foolish
nation'  (''::  'ij  21),  the  Assyrians,  to  whom  such  terms
would  Ix;  applied  more  naturally  than  they  could  be  to
the  Syrians  (cp  Is.  3:J  19,^  5  26  j^  ),  ascriln;  the  jxiem  to  the
latter  half  of  the  eighth  century.  The  words  may.  how-
ever, with  even  greater  probability,  Ik;  interpreted  of  the
Habylonians  (cp  Jer.  l>\iff.  622/,  esixjcially  Hab.  \tff.,
l)t.  2849 7f).  In  the  vocabulary  of  the  Song  there  are
several  words  which  are  not  found  in  writers  of  the  eighth
century,  but  are  common  in  the  literature  of  the  seventh
and  sixth  ;  the  Aramaisms  in  word  and  form  which
have  lieen  looked  upon  as  evidence  of  Kpliraimite  origin
may  equally  well  lie  marks  of  a  later  age.  The  poem
contains  many  reminiscences  of  the  older  projjhets,
especially  of  Hosea  and  Isaiah  ;  but  in  its  whole  spirit
and  tone,  as  well  as  in  particular  expressions,  it  is  much
more  closely  akin  to  Jeremiah,  Ezekiel,  and  Is.  ■lO-fi.'i.
It  has  a  strong  resemblance,  also,  to  the  exilic  additions
to  Dt.  (429/ )  ;  its  theology  is  that  of  these  chapters
and  of  Is.  40  [ff.  Its  affinities  to  the  Psalms  and  the
])roducts  of  Jewish  Wisdom  are  to  Ix;  noted.''  It  is,
in  fact,  a  didactic  p(x.-m,  emlxxlying  in  lofty  verse  the
prophetic  interpretation  of  Israel's  history  from  lx;ginning
to  end.  Kucnen  and  others  ascrilx;  the  Song  to  the
end  of  the  seventh  century  (say  630-600  H.C.)  ;  but  the
considerations  last  adduced,  and  others  which  might  be
mentioned,  point  rather  to  an  exilic  or  post-exilic  date.

It  has  commonly  bt^en  assumed  that  the  introduction
to  the  .Song  (.3116-22)  is  pre-deuteronomic  (J  or  K)  ;'^
not  so  much,  however,  upon  internal  evidence  as  in
consecjuence  of  general  theories  aVxDut  the  age  of  the
poem  and  the  composition  of  the  last  chapters  of  Dt.
It is intrinsically at least  equally probable that the

1  On  the  Song  of  Moses  see  Ew.  JEW  8  41-65  ("57];
Kamph.  Das  Liiul  Moses,  1861 ;  Klo.  'Das  I.ied  Mose's  u.
das  t)eut.;  St.  Kr.  44  249^  ['71],  45  230  if.  450 ^f.  ['72];
reprinted  in  Der  Pent.  223-367  ('93] ;  St.  /.A  TW  5  297-300
[■8i;l.  For  the  older  literature  see  Di.  Comm.  395;  Reuss,
GA  T,  S  226.

2  .See  2  K.  1823-25  1425-27.

3  This  verse  is,  however,  probably  not  from  the  Assyrian
period.

4  See  1/  3/  6  28^:,  etc.  8  Kue.  attributes  it  to  Rje.

3.1  1089


26.  Its  date.


DEUTERONOMY

intr(»iuclion  is  ix>st-deuloron<imic  ;  and  tins  ij\  p'^tn' ii.->
is  strongly  conmiended  by  tlie  fact  that  the  Song  itself
has  apparently  lK.-en  put  in  the  place  of  the  List  discourse
of  Moses  (29/  ).  which  is  itself  a  product  of  the  'exile'

Chap.  .'5244  is  the  closing  note  to  the  |KH:m,  cor-
resixJiuling  to  31 30  at  its  lieginning.  \'erses  45-47
are  the  close  of  the  six-ech,  answering  to  31 28/;*
they  contain  no  allusion  to  the  Song  ;  their  literary
affinities  are  to  31  28/,  not  to  31  16-^2  or  3244-  (-hap.
3248-52  Ix-longs  to  the  |)riestly  stratum  ;  the  same
command  is  given  somewhat  more  briefly  in  Nu.
27.2-14  (P).

Chap.  33  :  '  The  Rlessing  w  herewith  Mo.ses  the  man
of  God  blessed  the  Israelites  Ixfore  he  died.'  '  Ueyond
_  .  this  su]x:rscription,  no  attempt  is  made  to
28.  Blessing.  ^.„„„j.j.j  the  p,^.„,  ^^i,h  the  history  of
Moses'  last  tlays  ;  from  which  it  may  Ix-  inferred  that  it
was  not  iiitroiluced  by  a  dcuteronomistic  editor.  The
oix-'ning  verses  (1-5),  which  are  very  obscure,  in  part
through  corruption  of  the  text,  descrilie  the  coming  of
Yahwe  from  Sinai,  the  giving  of  the  I, aw,  the  acquisition
of  the  territory  t)f  Jacob  (?),  and  the  rise  of  the  kingdom
in  Israel.'-*  Thereujxjn  come,  without  any  transitifin,
lilessings  on  eleven  trilies.  following  a  geograi)hicaI
order  from  south  to  north,  and  differing  greatly'  in
length  and  in  character.

The  Blessing  of  Moses  is  a  comiwsition  of  the  same
kind  as  the  so-called  lilessing  of  Jacob  (Oen.  49  1-27),
though  not  a  mere  imitation  of  it.  The
historical  situation  rertected  in  thelllessings
of  the  sexcral  tribes  in  Dt.  is  that  of  a  time  considerably
later  than  that  in  (Jen.  ;  cp  particularly  Levi  (Cjen.
495-7  Dt.  338-ii)  and  Judah  ((Jen.  498-i2  Dt.  S^?).  On
the  other  hand,  the  situation  is  entirely  different  from  that
re])resented  in  the  Song  of  Moses,  Dt.  32.  While  in
the  latter,  apostasy  has  drawn  ujwn  Israel  the  consuming
anger  of  Yahwe,  and  the  very  existence  of  the  [Xiople  is
threatened,  the  Hlessing  breathes  from  end  to  end  a
national  spirit  exalted  by  jx)\\er  and  prosperity  and
unbroken  by  disaster.  The  author  was  a  memix;r  of
one  of  the  northern  trilx?s.  or  a  I.evite  at  one  of  the
northern  sanctuaries.  The  blessing  of  Joseph  (13-17)
was  written  at  a  time  when  the  kingdom  of  Israel,  in
the  pride  of  its  power,  and  jx;rhaps  tlushed  w  ith  victory,
was  thinking  of  foreign  concpiests  (17K  Recent  critics
have  generally  followed  Graf  in  ascribing  the  poem  to
the  time  of  Jerolxwm  II.  (782-743  RC. ),  when  for  a
brief  space  Israel  seemed  to  have  regained  all  its  ancient
power  and  glory  ;  20  is  then  referred  to  the  recovery
of  the  territories  of  which  (jad  had  Ix-^in  strip|x'd  by
the  Syrians  of  Damascus  in  the  disastrous  pericxl  which
preceded.

The  prayer  in  7,  '  Hear,  O  Yahwe,  the  vo!ce  of  Judah,  and
l)ring  him  to  his  people,'  h.is  been  understood  as  the  wish  of  the
Kphraimite  poet  that  Judah  mi^ht  be  reunited  to  Israel,  and  is
thought  by  many  to  point  to  a  time  soon  after  the  division  of  the
kingdom,  when  the  desire  for  the  restoration  of  the  national  unity-
was  still  strong.  This  obscure  verse,  however,  cannot  Iw  allowed
to  outweigh  the  clearer  testimony  of  other  p.irts  of  the  chapter.
The  Hlessing  of  Levi  (8-ii)  describes  the  privileges  and  omces
of  the  priesthood,  and  the  fidelity  of  Levi  to  its  sacred  trust.
There  is  nothing  to  indicate  th.it  the  author  was  a  priest  of  the
temple  in  Jerusalem  3 — the  priests  of  other  temples  also  were
Levites, — nor  any  cogent  reason  for  thinking  that  9  it  are
Jewish  interpolations.  Verse  11,  however,  is  hardly  a  blessing
for  the  priestnood,  and  would  unquestionably  be  more  appropri-
ate to  one  of  the  other  tribes  ;  but  that  it  was  the  original  sequel
of  ^f<,  as  has  l)een  conjectured,  is  not  evident.

On  the  whole,  the  age  of  Jeroboam  II.  seems  best  to
satisfy  the  implications  of  the  Blessings. Verses  2-5,

1  See  above,  $  23.

-  On  the  I^lessing  see  HoflTm.  in  Keil  and  Tzschirner's  Ana-
UK-ten  (1822),  iv.  i  j.92  continued  in  a  series  of  Jena  Pro-
grams, 1S23-1841;  Graf,  Der  .Set;en  Mose's,  1857;  Volck,  Der
Seren  Afose's,  1873;  A  van  der  Flier,  Deut.  S3,  1895:  Ball,
•The  Hlessing  of  Moses,'  P.'iliA  18  118-137  ('96].  See  also
St.  GVI  1  \'~/o  ff.  The  older  literature  in  Di.  Cotittn.  416,
Reuss,  f;.-/7-,»  216.

3  The  meaning  of  these  versos  is  much  disputed.

4  In  12  it  is  not  certain  that  Jerusalem  is  meant  (cp  Ben-
JAMl.N,  $  8).

1090


DEUTERONOMY

36-29,  have  no  connection  with  the  Blessings,  and  it  is
not  improbable  that  they  are  fragments  of  another  poem.
Whether  the  Hlessing  of  Moses  was  contained  in  J  or  K
is  a  question  which  we  have  no  means  of  answering  :
neither  the  short  introduction,  nor  the  titles  of  the
several  Hlessings  (which  alone  can  be  attributed  to  an
editorial  liand),  offer  anything  distinctive;  nor  do  the
reminiscences  of  the  earlier  history.

Chap.  31.  The  story  of  the  death  of  Moses  is  highly
composite,  elements  from  JE  and  P,  as  well  as  the
hand  of  more  than  one  etlitor,  being  recognisable  in  it.

Deuteronomy  is  the  prophetic  law-book,  an  attempt
to  embody  the  ideal  of  the  prophets  in  institutions  and
laws by which the whole religious.


27.  Religious

character

of  Dt.


social,  and  civil  life  of  the  people  should
be  governed.  We  recognise  this  aim
in  the  treatment  of  the  older  right  and
custom  of  Israel,  and  more  clearly  in  those  provisions
which  are  peculiar  to  Deuteronomy,  alxjve  all  in  the
fundamental  law,  chap.  5^  It  seeks,  not  to  regulate  con-
duct by  outward  rule,  but  to  form  morality  from
within  by  the  power  of  a  supreme  principle.

The  dominant  idea  of  Deuteronomy  is  monotheism.
The first  sentence  of the  older Decalogue, ^  repeated
56/.,  expresses, indeed, only  a  rela-


28.  Mono-
theism.


tive  monotheism  ;  but  the  fundamental
deuteronomic  law,  '  Yahwe  our  God  is
one  Yahw6  '  (64  /. ),  declares,  not  only  that  there  are  not
tnany  Yahwes,  as  there  are  many  Baals,  but  also  that
there  is  no  other  who  shares  with  him  the  attributes  of
supreme  godhead  which  are  connoted  by  his  name.
He  is  '  the  God  of  gods  and  the  Lord  of  lords,  the
great,  mighty,  and  awful  God'  (10i7),  to  whom  belong
'  the  heavens  aTid  the  heavens  of  heavens,  the  earth  and
all  that  therein  is'  (10 14),  'the  [only]  God  in  the
heavens  above  or  in  the  earth  beneath  ;  there  is  no
other'  (439,  cp  35).-  The  unapproachable  majesty  of
Yahwe  (5i#  22^  'igjf-).  his  constancy  to  his  purpose,
and  his  faithfulness  to  his  word  are  often  recurring
themes  (78-ioi2^  95,  etc.).  He  is  a  God  who  re-
quites his  enemies  to  the  full  (7  10)  ;  yet  a  compassionate
and  forgiving  God  to  those  who  under  his  judgments
turn  to  him  again  (429-31,  cp  30 1^).

Idolatry is strictly forbidden. The images and
emblems  of  the  Canaanite  gods  are  to  be  totally  de-
stro3-c(l  (122/  75  25)- The  Decalogue
prohibits the making of images of


29.  Objects  of


worship.


Yahwe  in  the  likeness  of  any  object  in


30.  Exclusive-


heaven,  or  on  the  earth,  or  in  the  sea;  and  in  4 15^
where  this  prohibition  is  emphatically  repeated,  Israel
is  reminded  that  at  Horeb,  when  Yahwe  spoke  to  them
out  of  the  midst  of  the  fire,  they  saw  no  form — a  lesson
to  them  not  to  image  him  in  any  form.  The  more
primitive  standing  stones  and  sacred  poles  are  included
in  the  prohibition  (I621/  I23/.).  All  kinds  of
divination,  sorcery,  and  necromancy  are  condcnuied  as
heathenish  (I89-14)  ;  Yahwe's  will  and  purpose  are  made
known,  not  by  such  signs  as  are  interpreted  by  the  mantic
art,  but  by  the  mouth  of  his  prophet  (ISisi^).

Yahwe  is  to  be  worshipped,  not  at  many  sanctuaries,
but  at  one  only,  in  the  place  which  he  chooses  to  fix
his  name  there  {12 />ass.,  14  23  LI  20  16
/>ass. ,  etc. ). The  unity  of  the  sanctu-
uoBB.  ^j.y  jg ^ consecjuence  of  the  unity  of

God.  The  suppression  of  the  high-places,  which  is  so
strenuously  insisted  on  in  Dt. ,  was  primarily  dictated,  not
by  practical  considerations,  but  V)y  the  instinctive  feel-
ing that  their  existence  was  incompatible  with  mono-
theism :  as  long  as  there  were  many  altars  there  were  as
many  local  Yahwes.  It  is  doubtless  true  that,  for  the
religious  consciousness  of  the  great  mass  of  worshippers,
the  Yahw6  of  Dan  was  not  just  the  same  as  the  Yahw6

1  On  the  various  forms  of  this  code  see  Decalot.uk.

2  See  also  3  24  4  7/.  32  Jf.  It  has  been  observed  above  that
the  theology  of  4 1-40  approximates  more  nearly  to  that  of
Is.  40#.

IO91


DEUTERONOMY

of  Bethel  or  of  Beersheba.  But  the  great  doctrine  of
Dt.  is,  'Yahw6  thy  God  is  o«<r  Yahw6. '  The  exclusive
principle,  'Thou  shalt  have  no  other  gods  beside  me,'
is  strongly  reaffirmed  (612-15  IO20-22  11 16/.  28,  etc.)  ;
the  worship  of  other  gods  is  punished  by  death  (17  2-7,
see  also  13),  the  aposta.sy  of  the  nation  by  national  ruin
(614/  74  819/  425-28  '3O17/,  etc.)  ;  for  Yahw^  is  a
jealous  Go<l  (615  424).  Not  only  in  Israel,  which  is
Yahwe's  people,  but  also  in  Canaan,  which  is  his  land,
there  shall  be  no  other  god  or  cult.  Lvery  trace  of  the  old
religi(}ns  of  Palestine  is  to  be  obliterated.  The  Canaan-
itcs  themselves  must  Ijc  exterminated,  lest,  in  intercourse
with  them,  Israel  be  infected  with  their  religion  (7i^
16  93,  cp  1229/  '20i6^).i  Alliance  and  intermarriage
with  the  heathen  are  stringently  prohibited  (73/ .  etc. )  ;
and  many  sjiecial  laws  are  directed  against  heathen
customs  and  rites  :  see,  e.j^. ,  225  23 17/  No  less  urgent
warnings  are  given  against  the  religions  of  remoter
peoples  (136/).

The essence of the religious relation between
Yahwe  and his people is love. He  has  loved  Israel
from  the  beginning  (10 15  77/  23  5),


31.  Principle
of  love.


and  if  they  keep  his  commandments
he  will  love  and  bless  them  in  all  the
future  (7  13,  cp  437/ ).  They  are  the  children  of  Yahwe
their  God  (14i)  ;  his  discipline  and  his  care  are  parental
(85131).  All  good  things  are  from  him;  but  the
signal  proofs  of  his  love  to  Israel  are  the  deliverance
from  Egypt  (fussim,  e.g.,  814^),  and  the  law  which  he
has  given  them  (45-832^).  The  love  of  Yahwe  to  his
people  demands,  as  it  should  inspire,  their  love  :  '  Thou
shalt  love  Yahwe  thy  God  with  all  thine  he.art,  and  with
all  thy  soul,  and  with  all  thy  might'  (65)  is  the  first
commandment  of  the  law,  the  first  principle  of  religion
(10x2/  111  1322  134  199  306  16  20).  Love  to  God  con-
strains to  do  his  will ;  to  love  God  and  to  keep  his
commandments  are  inseparable.  His  commandments
are  not  remote  or  incomprehensible  :  they  are  in  men's
hearts  and  on  their  lips  (30 11-14.  cp  Jer.  31 31-34)  ;  nor
are  they  difficult  and  burdensome  (10 12/,  cp  Mic.  68)  :
to  keep  them  is  for  man's  own  good  (C24  10 13).  It  is  a
religion  of  the  heart,  not  of  outward  observances  or
of  formal  legality.  Observances  are  not  rejected  ;  a
religion  without  worship  and  distinctive  ceremonial  is
not  contemplated  ;  but  festivals  and  sacrifices  are  only
the  expression  of  religious  feeling — atxjve  all,  of  loving
and  joyful  gratitude  for  God's  love  and  goodness.

The  relation  of  Yahwe  to  Israel  is  not  a  natural  and

indissoluble  relation,  such  as  subsists  between  a  tribal

. god  and  his  people  ;  it  is  a  moral  rela-

32.  Moral  jj^j^  which  has  its  origin  in  his  choice  of
oasis.  xsrael  to  be  his  people.  He  chose  it,  not
for  any  good  in  it  (7  7  94/- ).  but  because  he  loved  its
forefathers  (10 15)  ;  and  love  and  faithfulness  bind  him
to  their  descendants  (78  95).  The  election  by  which
Israel  alone  of  all  the  nations  of  the  earth  is  made  the
people  of  Yahwi  is  Israel's  glorious  distinction  ;  but  it
imposes  the  greatest  obligation.  Sin,  in  this  light,  is
more  heinous,  judgment  more  necessary  and  more
severe  ;  but  in  God's  constancy  to  his  purpose  and  his
promise  faith  finds  the  assurance  that  the  severest
judgment  will  not  be  utter  destruction.

The  bond  between  Yahwe  and  Israel  is  the  covenant
which  he  made  with  them  at  Horeb  {b^ff.)  and  renewed
on  the  plains  of  Moab  (29 1  [2869]).  The  deuteronomic
law  sets  forth  the  obligations  imposed  by  Yahwe  and
accepted  by  Israel  (I72)  ;  strict  observance  of  the  law  is
the  condition  of  the  fulfilment  of  the  promises  of  Y.^hwi.
the  obligations  which  he  voluntarily  took  upon  himself
in  the  pact  (79-13  1122^,  etc.).

Israel  is  to  be  a  holy  people  (76  14 221  2619)— that  is,
one  set  apart  to  Yahwe  in  all  its  life.  The  stringency
of  the  laws  which are  to  preserve the  purity  of  the

1  At  the  time  when  Dt.  was  written  this  sanguinary  proscrip-
tion of  the  native  population  can  hardly  have  had  much  practical
significance.

1093


DEUTERONOMY

people  nnd  the  land  from  false  religion  and  immorality
is  thus  explained  and  justilietl  :  '  'rtiiiu  shalt  exterminate
the  evil  from  the  community'  (l^s  and  pais.;  see  22
13-30  'Jl  i8-ai  ly  i6-ai  etc. ).

Notwithstanding  the  sanguinary  thoroughness  with
which  it  demands  the  extirpjition  of  heathenism,  and  the
severity  of  many  of  the  special  laws,  the  distinctive  note
of  the  deuteronomic  legislation  is  humanity,  philanthropy,
charity.  Regard  not  only  for  the  rigiits,  but  also  for
the  needs  of  the  widow,  the  orphan,  the  landless  Ixvitc,
the  foreign  denizen,  is  urged  at  every  turn.'  The  in-
terests of  debtors  (232o  24 10-13  15i-ii)'  slaves  (.114
15ii-i8),  and  hired  labourers  (2I4/. )  are  carefully
guarded.  Various  provisions  protect  the  rights  of  the
wife  or  the  female  slave  (24  1-4  2213-19  21 10-1415-17).
Nor  arc  the  animals  forgotten  (2r)4  226/ ).  The  spirit
of  the  legislation  is  seen  not  least  clearly  in  the  laws
which  appear  to  us  altogether  Utopian,  such  as  20  (cp
24  5  17 14-20  l.'ii-6).

In  conformity  with  its  prophetic  character,  Dt.  pre-
sents itself  not  merely  as  a  law-lxjok,  but  al.so  as  a  book
of  religious  instruction.  Its  lessons  are  to  be  diligently
rememtx;red,  and  not  forgotten  in  times  of  prosi>erity
(66-12  8ti-i8  etc. ).  Its  fundamental  precepts  are  to
be  repealed  daily,  to  Ix;  worn  as  amulets,  to  be  inscribed
in  public  places  (67-9  11  iS-ai).  They  are  to  be  taught
to  children,  that  each  succeeding  generation  may  be
brought  up  in  the  knowledge  of  Yahwe's  will  (6720-25
11 19  49)  ;  and  every  seven  years  the  whole  law  is  to  tx;
publicly  read  in  the  hearing  of  the  assembled  people
(3l9-'3).

Taken  all  in  all,  Dt.  will  ever  stand  as  one  of  the
noblest  monuments  of  the  religion  of  Israel,  and  as  one
of  the  most  noteworthy  attempts  in  history  to  regulate
the  whole  life  of  a  people  by  its  highest  religious
principles.

1.  C V/z/wrw/rtr/cj.— Of  the  older  works,  Drusius  (1617),  Ger-
hard  (1657),  and  Clericus  (1696)  may  often  be  consulted  with

profit.  The  principal  motlern  commentaries
33.  Literature, are  Vater,  Pent,  in.,  1805  ;  M.  Baumgarten,

1843,  1844;  K.  W.  Schultz,  1859  ;  Kn.,  1861  ;
Schroeder,  1866  (Lange's  liihekocrk),  KT  with  additions  by
Gosman,  1879;  Kcil,  1862,2nd  ed.  1870,  ET  1807;  Lspin,  1871
(Sf>eaktrsUom»t.).  Di.,  i8i6  ;  Montet,  Le  Diut.,  1891  ;  Oettli,
1893  ;  Dr.,  1895  ;  Steuernagcl  in  Nowack's  //A',  1898.

2.  Criticism.— \'MCT,Commeni.  ul-fr  din  Pent,  iiiit.  Ilinl.Z,
'Abhandhing  iiber  Moses  und  die  Vcrfasser  des  Pentateuchs,'
391^;  De  Wette,  Dissert,  crtt.  ■  exeget.  (1805);  Beitr.  z.
Einl.  in  d.  .4  T  1  (1805),  i63  ff.  265  ff.,  2  (1807),  385  ff.  ;
J.  F.  L.  George,  Die  alt.  jUd.  Juste  C^^);  W.  \  alke,  Die  Kel.
d.  AT  504  /jr  (35);  Einl.  384>^(>^);  E.  Kichm,  Die
Gesetzgeb.  .^fos.,  etc.  ("54) ;  St.  A  r.  165-200  ('73)  (review  of
Kleinert);  Colenso,  Pent,  and  Josh.,  Pt.  3(03),  cp  pt.  7  App.
85-110;  Graf.  Die  gesch.  BiUh.  d.  AT  i^tt);  Kosters,  Die
historiebesclwmuingvan  den  Deuteronomist  Ctb);  Klo.,  '  D.xs
Lied  .Moses  11.  d.  Deut.'  .S7.  A>.  ('71,  '72):  '  Beit  rage  zur
Entstehungsgesch.  des  Pent.'  Ante  kirchl.  kt.,  1890-92,  re-
printed in  Der  Pent.  ('93);  Kleinert,  Das  Deut.  u.  d.
Deuteronomiker  ('72)  ;  Reinke,  '  Ueber  das  unter  dem  KOnige
Josia  aufgefundene  Gcsetzbuch,'  Beitr.  zur  Erkl.  d.  A  T
8  ('72).  131-180;  Kayser,  Das  vorexil.  Buck  der  Vrgtsch.
Isr.  u.  seine  Krtveiterungen  ('74);  J.  Hollenberg,  'Die  deut.
Bestandtheile  d.  Huches  Josua,'  St.  A'r.,  1874,  pp.  462-506;
We.  C//,  y/^T,  1876,  1877;  reprinted  separately,  under  the
same  title,  1885,  and  with  Nachtriige,  Pie  Comf>.  des  Hex.  u.
d.  hist,  liadur  des  A  T  ('8.,) ;  Gl  ('78),  2nd  td.  called  Prol.
z.  Gl  ('83),  4th  ed.  1895,  liT,  Prolegomena  to  the  Hist.  0/
IsraelCZi);  S.  J.  Curtiss,  The  Lrriti^al  Priests  Cjj);  WRS,
Additional  .Anyn>er  to  the  Libel (^'fi),  Ans7oer  to  the  Amended
Libel  {-yi)):  OTJCi^Ai;  2nd  ed.  '02);  E.  Reuss,  L'hist.
sainte  et  la.  loi,  I  154^  ('79);  Die  lieil.  Geseh.  y.  d.  Geselz,
106  jf.  Cgj),  {Das  AT,  Bd.  8);  Steintbal,  '  Da.s  fiinfte  Buch
'i\o-x,'  Xt./ur  \'6tkerpsych.  u.  S/>rochuiissens,  1879,  pp.  1-28;
'Die  erzahlenden  .Stucke  im  fiinften  Biiche  Mose,'  ib.  1880,  pp.
253-289,  also  separately  (Berlin,  '80) ;  Valeton,  Theo.  Stud.  5
(■79),  pp.  165-206,291-113:  6('Eo),pp.  133-174,30^.720;  7('8i),  pp.
39-56,  205-228;  F.  Del.  '  Pentateuch-kritische  Studien,'^A"//X

1  ('80),  445^  503^  SS^j^-  ■  Castelli,  La  legge  del  f^polo  Lbreo
ntl  sua  sTolgimeptto  storico,  207-320  ('84) ;  Chcyne,  Jeremiah,
his  life  and  times  ('88),  chaps.  5-7  ;  Baudissin,  Gesch.  des
A  r  Priesterihums  ("89) ; .\.  Westphal,  Lts  sources  du  Pent.

2  32  ff.  ("92);  Staerk,  Das  Deut.  sein  Inhalt  u.  seine
literarische  Form  (94) ;  Steuernagel,  Per  Rahmen  des  Deut.
('94);  Entsteh.desdeut.Geselzesi:^);  Havct,  LeChristianisme

1  See  10 18/  18  i8-ao  IT  8-13  2417/ 2719  121218/  1427-29
16 11 14  24  19-23  26 11^

1093


DEW

*/  tti  tripnet,  8  3a  ff.  ("78) ;  d'Eichthal,  MfL  dt  cril.  hii.
('86),  and  Atude  sur  le  Deut.  81-350  ;  Verne*,  Vne  twuv.  hyfoth,
tur  la  comft.  et  Corigint  du  Deut.  ('87),  reprinted  in  Etsais
bibliques  ('91);  L.  Horkl,  'Etudes  sur  le  Dcul.'  Krtme  d«
niist.  des  Kelig.  16  28-65  C^l\  17  1-22  (88),  18  320-334  ('86),
23  1J4-200  Coi),  27  119-176  (''Ji);  cp  Kucnen,  '  Dc  jungttte
pliascn  drr Critiek van den Hex.' //i. /, 35^. ("Efe); C.


Piepenbring, A'rt'.  dt  CHist.  des  Reiig.  24  ab  ff 37  ff.  ('90,
'  La  rdformc  et  Le  code  de  Jo»i • ■ -■  - -  -  •  ••

Documents  0/ tite  Hex.  2  ('98).


ib.  -0 123-


^"^JU- 37
«8o('94);


Addis,


.See  also  Introductions  to  the  OT  : — Eichhorn,  4th  ed.  ('23);
De  Wette  (17,  7th  ed.  "52,  8th  ed.  by  E.  Sehradcr,  '69);  Itleeic

i'6o),  subst.intially  unaltered  in  later  edd.,  E'l'  by  Venables
'6,>);  S.  Davidson  ('62);  Kuencn,  Hist.  krit.  t^nd.{'fii;  2nd
ed.  entirely  rewritten,  '85);  ET  by  Wicksteed,  The  Hexatcuch,
('86);  Reuss,  (.Vir/j.  des  W7' ("81  ;  2nd  ed.  '90) ;  C'ornill  ('91  ;
anded.  '92);  l^river,  httrod.  ('91  ;  6lh  ed.  '9-),  cp  '  Deuteronomy '
in  Smiths  /)//(-')  (y  j)  ;  Kdnig  ('93)  ;  WildelxK:r,  De  Lettetkunde
desOuden  I'erboiids  (a-,);  Holzinger,  Einl.  in  den  Hex.('^p.
On  the  relation  of  Dt.  to  Jeremiah,  see  Kueper,  Jeretniat
lihrorum  sacrotum  i>iter/>res  et  vindex,  4-45  ('38);  Kdnig,
'Das  Deut.  und  der  Prophet  Jeremiah,"  W  7'  Studien.  2('^v);
Zunz,  ZDMG  28  669-676  (73) ;  Colenso,  pt.  7,  App.  pp.  85-110,

cp ;:  563.^  572 A . ,, .

In  defence  of  the  Mosaic  authorship:  Hengstenberg,
Authentie  des  Pent.  2  159^.  ('19),  ET  Genuineness  0/  the
Pentateuch,  2  130^  (47);  Hiivcrnic'K,  Einl.  in  das  AT
1  601  ff.  (^f),  ET  Jntrod.  to  the  J'cntateiuh,  410/  ('50);
Keil,  Einl.  in  das  AT,  1853,  3rd  ed.  1873,  ET  by  C.  C.  M.
Dougl.ns,  Introd.,  etc.  1869;  Bis<.cll,  'The  Pentateuch,  its
Origin  and  Structure  ('85);  G.  V'os,  The  Mosaic  Origin  0/
tlu  I'entateuchal  Codes  ('66);  Martin,  Introd.  ,i  la  crit.  gin.
de  TAnc.  lest.  1  295^  (■87);  A.  Zahn,  Das  Deut.  ('go)-

G.  V.  .M.

DEVIL.  For  Dt.  32i7elc.  (cnr).  Lk.433  etc.  (5at-
/idi/tof),  Mt.  8  31  etc.  (&aCnuiv),  see  Demons,  8  4  ;  for  Lev.  17  7  etc.
("I'i"^"),  see  Satyr  ;  and  for  Mt.  4  i  etc.  (6  fia/3«Ao?),  see  Sata^  ,

DEVOTED,  AV  sometimes,  RV  usually,  for  Din,
henni  (Lev.  272i  KV,  i  K.  2O42  RV,  etc.).  See  R.AN.
§2.

DEW  ("Pp  ;  Apococ)-  'Dew'  is  a  theme  which
kindles  the  enthusiasm  of  the  OT  writers;  but  what
does  'dew'  mean  in  the  OT?  and  are  the  common
explanations  of  the  biblical  references  altogether  correct  ?

During  the  spring  and  autumn  the  phenomenon  which
we  call  dew  is,  at  least  in  the  intervals  of  fine  weather,
1  Meanine  ^^  familiar  in  Palestine  as  in  western
of  the  term  '^o"""''*^^  •  '^*-'  moisture  hekl  in  suspen-
■  sion  in  the  atmosphere  during  the  day  is
deposited,  in  cloudless  nights,  owing  to  the  cooling  of
the  surface  of  the  ground,  in  the  form  of  '  dew.'  It  is
not,  however,  simply  this  phenomenon  of  spring  and
aiitimin  that  excites  the  enthusiasm  of  the  Hebrew
writers  ;  for  it  is  not  the  dew  but  the  former  and  the
latter  rains  that  are  in  these  seasons  of  vital  importance
to  the  agriculturist  (see  R.\IN).  During  the  summer
season,  however,  from  the  beginning  of  May  to  the
latter  part  of  OctoIx:r,  there  is  an  almost  unbroken
succession  of  cloudless  days,  when  vegetation  becomes
parched,  and  would  altogether  perish  but  for  another
phenomenon  which  has  a  prior  claim  to  the  descriptive
Hebrew  name /<;/  ('sprinkled  moisture')  uniformly  re-
presented in  the  EV  by  the  word  'dew.'  During  the
summer,  but  more  especially  (when  the  need  is  greatest)
in  the  latter  part  of  August  and  during  Septemlx.'r  and
Octot)er,  westerly  winds  bring  a  large  amount  of  mois-
ture from  the  Mediterranean  (see  Winds).  This  moisture
becomes  condensed  by  the  cool  night  air  on  the  land
into  something  not  unlike  a  Scotch  mist,  which,  though
specially  thick  on  the  mountains,  is  yet  abundant
enough  everywhere  to  sustain  with  its  moisture  the
summer  crops,  and  to  keep  some  life  in  the  pastures  of
the  wilderness.^

Coming  only  in  the  night,  and  being  so  much  finer  than
ordinary  rain,  this  beneficent  piovision  of  nature  received  a
special  name,  tal,  to  which  the  .Arabic  tall"n,  'fine  rain,"  corre-
sponds.  _  The  Greek  poetical  terms  jpoirot  iroiTio  and  BaXavaia,
tpovtpai  fci^f'Aai,  seem  more  adequate  than  the  simple  ipotro^,

1  The  true  meaning  of  tO  is  most  clearly  set  forth  by  Neil,
Palestine  Explortd  (,'83),  pp.  129-151,  to  whom  this  article  owe*
its  central  idea.


DEW

and,  but  for  the  shock  to  our  a'ssociations,  'night  mist'l  would
be  a  prefera!)le  rendering  to  'dew.'

This  explanation  clears  up  certain  otherwise  obscure
passages.  It  also  enables  us  to  identify  with  consider-
able probability  the  season  to  which  any  important
passage  nietitioning  fal  refers.  The  miracle  of  Gideon's
fleece,  e.g. ,  w;xs  presumably  placed  by  the  writer  in  the
summer.  At  the  same  time,  when  perfectly  general
language  is  used  respecting  /<:/('  dew'),  it  may  be  oix-n
to  us  to  suppose  that  a  confusion  exists  in  the  writer's
mind  between  the  genuine  '  dew  '  of  winter  (spring  and
uutumn)  and  the  '  night  mist'  of  summer,  which  is  not,
in  our  sense  of  the  word,  dew  at  all,  since  the  vapour  be-
comes contlonsed  in  the  air  before  it  reaches  the  ground.

In  illustration,  see  Lane's  Arahic  Lexicon,  s.v.  tafia.  One
example  given  is,  '  The  sky  rained-small-rain  (taltaf)  upon  the
earth.'  Tall""  is  defined  as  '  light  or  weak  {i.e.,  drizzling)  rain,
or  the  lightest  and  weakest  of  rain  ;  or  dew  that  descends  from
the  sky  in  cloudless  weather.'  Cp  also  Koran,  Sur.  2267,  'And
if  no  heavy  shower  (jvdbilu")  falls  on  it,  the  mist  {tall"")  does.'
{a)  ]Vliere  ike  '  deiv'  comes  from. — Job  38  28  is,  prob-
ably enough,  a  scribe's  insertion  (Bi. ,  Duhm)  ;  but,  if
so, the  scribe  gives  an invaluable  early


2.  Biblical
and  other
references.


summary  of  what precedes. He states
tliat  what  is  said  of  the  rain  in  vv.  25-27


refers  not  only  to  the  wuiter  rains  or  to  the
occasional  tliunilcrstorms  but  also  to  the  '  night  mist.'

Has  the  rain  a  father?

Or  who  has  begotten  the  streams 2  (not  'drops')  of  'dew'?
To  this  question  a  wise  man  replies  (Prov.  820),

By  his  (God's)  knowledge  the  depths  were  opened  {i.e.,  at
creation).

And  the  sky  drops  down  'dew.'
So  Gen.  2728  Dt.  332$  Hag.  1 10  Zech.  812;  cp  also
Judg.  54  ((5"  and  Theod.  ).■*  A  more  complete  answer
is  given  in  ]-'noch,  where  the  'treasuries'  of  snow  and
hail  (Job  38  22)  and  also  of  dew  and  rain  are  described.
If  Job  did  not  '  come  to  those  treasuries  '  Enoch  did,
according  to  the  current  legend.  The  statements  are
important :  '  The  spirit  of  the  dew  has  its  dwelling  at  the
ends  of  the  heaven,  and  is  connected  with  the  chambers
of  the  rain,  and  its  course  is  in  winter  and  summer  ;
and  its  clouds,  and  the  clouds  of  the  mist  are  connected,
and  the  one  passes  over  into  the  other'  (6O20,  Charles).
In  chap.  70  the  twelve  portals  of  the  winds  are  described.  From
eight  of  them  dew  and  rain  are  said  to  proceed  ;  the  winds  are
not,  however,  always  beneficial.  The  author  is  by  no  means  a
good  observer,  and  his  statement  is  of  value  only  as  confirming
the  statement  of  t)0  2o  that  'dew'  and  'rain'  are  connected.

{b)  Preciousness  of  '  dezu.' — The  land  of  Israel  is  called
■  a  land  of  corn  and  wine  ;  yea,  his  heavens  drop  down
dew'  (Dt.  33 28).  The  blessing  of  Jacob  says:  'God
give  thee  of  the  dew  of  heaven,  and  of  the  fatness  of
the  land'  (Gen.  2728;  contrast  7'.  39,  RV'»2).  Yahw6
himself  resembles  '  dew ' ;  'I  will  be  as  the  dew  for
Israel '  (parched  up,  desolate  Israel),  IIos.  I45  [6].  The
preciousness  of  the  '  dew '  is  shown  by  its  effects,  which
are  next  descril^ed.

Perha|)s,  however,  fal  here  includes  rain.  Dew  is  an
emlilem  of  resurrection  ;'  '  A  dew  of  liglits  is  tliy  dew,  and  to  life
shall  the  earth  liring  the  shades'  (Is.  2{i  ig,  S/IO  I").  From  the
world  of  i)erfect  light  where  Vahwe  dwells  a  supernatural  'dew'
will  descend  on  the  dead  Israelites.  'The  dew  of  resurrection'
(rrnn  Sc  '72)  's  a  Talmudic  phrase  based  on  this  prophecy.  In
the  Koran,  also  {e.er-,  Sur.  41  39),  rain  is  referred  lo  as  a  sign  of
the  resurrection.  Probably,  too,  Micah  5  7  [6]  also  should  he
mentioned  here.  The  traditional  text,  as  it  stands,  is  unin-
telligible. The  'remnant  of  Jacob '  among  the  nations  cannot
be  at  the  same  time  like  showers  of  night  mist  on  the  earth  and
like  a  lion.  The  upright  line  (Pasek)  placed  after  'And  shall
i>e '  (iTH'')  warns  us  (as  so  often)  that  there  is  something  doiibtfitl
in  the  text. Possibly  /V,  '  upon '  has  dropped  out. The  passage

1  This  is  the  first  rendering  of  7t?  in  P.DB.  It  had  been
adopted  by  Che.  in  his  Prof-hecies  0/  Isaiah  and  Book  of
J'salinsih,  who  followed  Xeil,  o/>.  cit..  14O.

2  MT  reads  '^J*«,  generally  rendered  'drops'  (©  /3<iAovs).
•Reservoirs'  would  be  more  defensible;  but  this  does  not  suit
'begotten.'  The  obvious  emendation  is  '^.'?2.  Rain  is  called
D'n^K  jVb  '"  Ps-  C5  10.  The  scribe  is  thinking  of  the  'channel '
tl^yn)  in  T.  25.

3  Heb.  text  has  only  '  dropped.

109s


DIAL  AND  SUN-DIAL

then  reads  thus,  '  And  there  shall  be  on  the  remnant  of  Jacob
.  .  .  as  it  were  "dew"  from  Yahwfe  .  .  .  which  tarries  not  for
man,' etc. — i.e.,  which  is  independent  of  human  effort.  Reluctant
as  one  may  be  to  deviate  from  an  unquestioned  tradition,  it
becomes  necessary  to  do  so,  when  even  the  acute  Wellhausen
admits  that  the  jwint  of  the  comparison  in  the  present  text  is
unintelligible  to  him.

(c)  Other  illustraiive passages. — The  dew  (night  mist),
like  the  rain,  comes  by  the  word  of  a  prophet  (i  K.  17  i).
It  falls  suddenly  (2  S.  17 12),  and  gently,  like  jjersuasive
eloc|uence  (Ut.  322);  it  lies  all  night  (Job '2919),  but
early  disappears  like  superficial  goodness  (Hos.  64).
Such  a  night  mist  is  to  be  exjxicted  in  the  early  summer,
in  the  settled  hot  weather  of  harvest  (Is.  18 4  ;  but,  on
text,  see  Vim:,  §  i).  It  has  a  healing  effect  on  vege-
tation (I'-cclus.  18  16  4322) ;  but  for  a  man  to  Ix;  exposed
to  it  is  a  trying  experience  (Cant.  62).  It  is  all-pervading;
hence  Gideon  asks,  as  a  sign  of  his  divine  mission,  first,
that  the  fleece  which  he  has  put  on  the  threshing-floor
may  be  wet  with  a  night  mist  [tal)  when  the  floor  it.self
is  dry,  and  next,  that  the  fleece  may  be  dry  when  the
floor  is  wet.  So  abundant  is  the  moisture  of  the  night
mist  that  in  the  morning  after  the  first  exi^erience
Gideon  is  able  to  wring  out  of  the  fleece  a  whole  bowlful
of  water  (Judg.  636-40).

{if)  Tivo  doubtful  passages.— \n  Ps.  110  3,  if  the  scribes  have
correctly  transmitted  the  text,  there  is  a  condensed  comparison
of  a  king's  youthful  army  to  the  countless  drops  of  dew  :  a
highly  poetic  figure,  adopted  by  Milton  in  speaking  of  the  angel-
hosts.  The  words,  however,  '  thou  hast  the  dew  of  thy  youth '
('dew'  is  not  attested  by  the  LXX,  though  the  other  Greek
translators  all  have  ipotros),  are  probably  corrupt  (see  Che.
Psal)ns(->).  The  other  passage  (I's.  133  3)  appears  to  state

that  it  is  the  dew  of  Hermon  that  comes  down  on  the  moun-
tains of  Zion.  Some  (so  Del.)  have  thought  that  a  plentiful
dew  in  Jerus.alem  might  be  the  result  of  the  abundance  of
vapours  on  Hermon  ;  others  (so  Baethi;.),  that  'dew  of  Hermon '
is  a  proverbial  expression  for  a  plentiful  dew.  Robertson  Smith
{O'/yO-)  2i2)suggests  that  the  expressions  may  be  hyperbolical ;
the  gathering  of  pious  pilgrims  from  all  parts  at  the  great  feasts
at  Jerusalem  w.as  '  as  if  the  fertilising  dews  of  great  Hermon
were  all  concentrated  on  the  little  hill  of  Zion  '  ;  but  the  p.assage,
as  it  stands,  is  incapable  of  a  natural  interpretation.  The  text
came  into  the  editor's  hand  in  an  imperfect  condition.  Hermon
and  Zion  can  by  no  possibility  be  brought  into  connection  either
here  or  in  the  equally  corrupt  passage,  Ps.  42  6  [7]. T.  K.  C.

DIADEM.  Strictly  SidSr]/iia  (SiaS^w,  to  bind  round)
is  no  more  than  a  rich  fillet  or  liead-band.  It  was
worn  around  the  Persian  royal  hat  (see  Mitre,  2),
and,  as  distinguished  from  ffTi(f>avoi  (see  Crovv.n"),  is  the
badge  of  royalty;  cp  i  Mace.  I9  615  814  etc..  Rev.
123  13i  19i2  (RV,  AV  'crown,'  and  so  YJV  in  i  Esd.
4  30).  It  is  probable  that  fillets  of  a  more  or  less  ornate
character  are  referred  to  in  the  Heb.  -itj,  rri^^'  (see
Crown)  and  ]"s  (see  Mitre).

1.  AiaSrjfitt  is  used  by  ©  to  render  nri3,  kether,  Esth.  1  11,
and  "113,  ni-zcr,  2  S.  1  10  [ L,  Sym.  Theod.]  (see  Ckown,  §  2),  ~'^:J?,
takrik,  Esth.  8  15  (see  Mantle),  and  «]>:s,  santph.  Is.  623  (cp
Ecclus.  47  6):  see  4  below.

Diadem,  in  EV.  represents  the  following  words  : —

2.  ii.irpa,  15.ar.  62  (EV,  in  Judith  10 3  10  8,  EV  'tire,'  AVmg.
'  mitre ').

3.  nsjsn,  viiinepheih,  Ezek.  21  26  [31]  .W  ;  see  Mitke,  i.

4.  ^^'Vi,  santph,  Is.  G23  EV,  Zech.  85  RVniff.  (EV  'mitre').
Job  29  14  EV  (RV'ig.  '  turban  ')  ;  .see  Turban,  2.

5.  nT£li,  siphirah  (properly  '  a  plait '  ;  \/to  weave),  Is.  28  5

(II  niay.  «  TrAexeis  or  jrAo/tcis,  etc.  [P.K.\Qr],  irA«'y/ma  (Aq.
Theod.J,  iciVp'«lSym.l).  InEzek.  T  7  10  (RV 'doom'),  according
to  Co.,  5,y»//;/vf/!  means 'crown'  (cp  RVmt.'-  ' crowning  time ') ;
text  perhaps  faulty,  see  Co.,  BertholeU

DIAL  and  SUN-DIAL  (ni"?l?p,  literally  'steps,'
ANABaBmoi  ;  Tg.  NTB'  pN*.  'hour-stone'  ;  Sym.  in
Is.  388  copoAoriON  ;  horologiinn).  2  K.  20ii  Is.  388.
The  term  occurs  in  the  account  of  Hezekiah's  illness.

In  point  of  fact,  however,  the  narrator  says  nothing  of  a  '  dial '
and  of  '  degrees '  but  only  of  '  steps ' ;  where  AV  says,  '  1  he  sun
returned  ten  degrees,'  RV  more  correctly  .says, '  The  sun  returned
ten  steps.'  though  immediately  afterwards  it  uses  the  incorrect
term  'dial'  (with  a  marginal  note,  'Heb.  steps').  Hence  both
in  AV  and  in  RV  the  accoimt  is  more  obscure  than  it  need  have
been.  It  is  true,  the  parallel  accounts  in  2  K.  20  and  Is.  38  differ,
which  produces  some  difficulty.

1096


DIAMOND

On  the  whole,  Is.  887/  is  probably  nearer  to  the
ori>;iiial  text  than  2  K.  '208-ii.  It  is  not,  hnwcvcr,  free
from  awkwardness.  Explanatory  words  have  evidently
btx-n  introtluceti,  after  removing  which  we  get  something
like  this  :  '  lichold,  I  will  cause  the  shadow  to  go  back
as  many  steps  as  the  sun  has  gone  down  on  tlie  steps
of  Ahaz.  So  the  sun  went  back  as  many  degrees  as  it
had  gone  down."  '  The  dale  of  this  part  of  the  narrative
is  long  after  the  age  of  Isaiah,  who  was  ordinarily  no
worker  of  miracles  (see  Isaiah,  ii.  §  15,  and  c|j  i  for.
I32) ;  and,  if  Duhm  is  correct,  the  phrase  '  on  the  steps
of  Ahaz  ■  is  the  awkward  insertion  of  an  editor.  The
reference  is,  therefore,  of  very  small  archa;alogical  value.
Still,  we  may  fairly  ask  what  the  late  writer  meant,  and
the  most  usual  answer  is  that  the  steps  were  those  which
led  u])  to  the  base  of  an  olx.-lisk,  the  shadow  of  which
fell  on  the  upjxir  steps  at  noon,  and  on  the  lower  in  the
morning  and  the  evening.  We  may  suppose  the
monument  to  have  Ix-en  near  ent)ugh  to  the  palace  for
Hczckiah  to  see  it  from  his  chamber.  This,  however,
is  ciuite  uncertain,  and,  nothing  being  said  of  such
heathenish  objects  elsewhere,'-  it  is  sca:cely  probable.
©  (see  Is.  388,  and  cp  Jos.  .////.  x.  2i)  thinks  that  the
stei)S  were  those  of  the  palace.  This  has  been  too
hastily  rejected.  It  is  perfectly  possible  that  n'3.  '  house
(of),'  fell  out  of  the  text  before  inK,  'Ahaz.'  We  must
at  any  rate  abandon  the  view  that  a  dial  with  concentric
circles  and  a  central  gnomon  is  meant.  Ahaz  might  no
<l(Hibt  have  borrowe<l  this  invention  from  Assyria  (cp
Herotl.  2109).  There  is  no  evidence,  however,  that  ni^'iO
can  mean  'degrees,'  and  it  must  be  rei)cated  that  the
narrative  appears  to  Ix;  a  glorification  of  Isaiah  (cp
Ecclus.  4823),  b,ased  on  no  ascertainable  tradition  of
fact,-'  either  as  regards  the  wonder  or  the  'ste|)s. '
'  Steps '  was  the  siniplest  word  to  use  in  such  a  context,
in  six;aking  of  a  comparatively  remote  age. T.  K.  c.

DIAMOND  ("1'pr,  D^n^  ;  see  IxjIow,  §  2).  The
name  diamond is  merely  a modification of  adamant,

. TT„i *» though,  unlike  the  latter  word,  it  has  a

1.  Unknown  to . ,  ,-  ,  ,

the  Hebrews, n"'  '^ /''^"■"t'-"  meaning,  designating  the
well-known  gem  composed  of  crystal-
lised  carlxjii,  with traces of  silica  anti earths. It is
usually  colourless, but  is  often  tinged  white, gray, or
brown  ;  more  rarely  yellow,  pink,  etc.

The  diamond  does  not  apjxMr  to  have  become  known
to  the  (jreeks  till  the  time  of  Alexander's  successors,
when  the  (jreek  kings  had  much  intercourse  with  India,
the  only  place  in  the  ancient  world  where  diamonds  are
known  to  have  been  obtained.  Delitzsch  has,  indeed,
ascrit)ed  to  the  Assyrians  an  acc|uaintance  with  the
diamond  (comparing  eliiit-su  with  Ar.  'a///tiis)  ;  but  this
is  precarious.  Xor  is  it  any  more  likely  that  the
diamond  was  known  to  the  Egyptians  ;  the  cutting
point  used  by  them  in  working  hard  stones  was  more
probably  corundum  (Pctrie,  Pmiif/ii/s  and  Tcmpks  of
Gizeh,  173).  We  need  have  little  hesitation,  therefore,
in  deciding  that  it  was  not  one  of  the  stones  known  to
the  Hebrews  of  the  sixth  century  B.C.  (l-"zck.  2813  EV).
Much  less  could  it  have  been  an  inscrilied  gem  in  the
high-priestly  '  breastplate  '  of  P  (Ex.  '28i8  =  39  11  EV) ;
for  neither  Greeks  nor  Romans  could  engrave  the
diamond.

It  was  not  until  the  sixteenth  centiirj-  a.d.  th.it  the  wonderful
skill  of  the  cinque-cento  engravers  succeeded  in  producing
intagli  upon  the  diamond.  No  doubt,  even  many  of  the  works
celebrated  under  this  name  may  have  lieen  in  reality  cut  in  the
white  topaz  or  the  colourless  sapphire ;  but  C'hisuis,  a  most
competent  iudge,  declares  not  only  that  Clement  Hir.iKO  h.-id
engraved  on  a  diamond  the  portrait  of  Don  Carlos  as  a  betrothal
present  to  Anna,  daughter  of  the  enii)eror  Maximilian  I!.,  but
also  that  he  had  himself  seen  it  during  his  stay  in  Spain  in
1564. Uirago  h.-id  enjjraved  thearms  of  .^pain  as  a  seal. Paolo

1  Cp  Duhm,  Cheyne.

2  Olx-lisks  were  characteristic  of  Eg>'ptian  sun-worship  (cp
Jer.  43:3).

3  Hos.-inquet  (T".?^,-!  3  37)  explained  the  allesed  phenomenon
as  the  disturbance  of  the  shadow  during  the  solar  eclipse  of  1 1  th
Jan.eSgB.c.  It  is  needless  to  discuss  this.  Cp  Chronology,  §17.

1097


1.  The

and  her
worship.


DIANA

Morigi.i,  too,  says  that  Torezzo  discovered  the  method  and
engraved  the  arms  of  Charles  V.  on  a  diamond,  whilst  Jacobus
Thrunus  is  said  to  have  engraved  on  a  dutmond  the  arms  of
England,  for  (jueen  Mary  of  England,  Philip's  consort.

Diamond  occurs  four  times  in  EV — once  (Jer.  17 1)
to  translate  the  Heb.  tcc  {sJi,imir),  which  was  almost
2  The  Hebrew ^^■'■'•'^'"'y  corundum (see  Adamant,
.  §  3).  the  only  substance  use<l  by  the

(jreeks  to  engrave  gems  down  to  the
end  of  the  fourth  century  B.C.,  an<l  thrice  (Ex.  28 13
39 1 1  Ezek.  2813)  to  translate  the  Heb.  c%l(yahiUCm).
See  Prkcious  Stones.  w.  r.

DIANA  (&pT€/wic  [Ti.  WH],  Acts  \9^^f.). The
characteristic  feature  of  the  early  religion  of  Asia  Minor
,  , was  the  worship  of  a  mother-goddess

J  , in  whom was  adored the mystery  of

Nature,  |>eriM->tually  dying  and  jierpetu-
ally  self-reprotlucing.  She  '  had  her
chosen  home  in  the  mountains,  amitl  the  undisturbed
life  of  Nature,  among  the  wild  animals  who  continue
free  from  the  artificial  and  unnatural  rules  constructed
by  men'  (Ramsay,  I/ist.  Phryir.  I89);  the  lakes  with
their  luxuriant  shores  also  were  her  favoured  abode  ;
and,  generally,  in  all  the  world  of  plants  and  animals
her  power  was  manifest.  It  was  easy  to  identify  such
a  goddess  with  the  Greek  Artemis,  for  the  latter  also
was  originally  the  queen  of  nature  and  the  nurse  of  all
life  ;  but  from  first  to  last  the  Ephesian  goddess  was  an
oriental  divinity.

Under  diflferent  names,  but  with  essential  identity  of
character,  the  great  goddess  was  worshipped  throughout  Asia
Minor,  and  the  various  modifications  of  the  fundamental  con-
ception often  came  into  contact  with,  and  influenced,  one
another,  as  though  they  were  originally  distinct.  In  northern
and  eastern  Phrygia  the  great  Nature-gixldess  was  worshipped
as  Cybele.  In  Lydia  Katakekaumcne  she  was  invoked  as
.\rtcmis,  and  also  by  the  Persian  name  Anaiiis,  introduced
perbaps  by  Asiatic  colonists  planted  in  the  Hermos  valley  by
Cyrus  (Rams.  Hist.  Ccogr.  0/  As.  Min.  131).  She  was  known
there  also  as  Leto,  which  is  her  title  at  Hierapolis  and
Dionysopolis.  As  Leto  she  is  traceable  through  Lycia  and
western  Pisidia  to  the  Pamphylian  Perga,  where  again  sbe  is
also  called  Artemis  (Str.  667).  The  name  Leto  is  the  Semitic
."M-lat  (pSKi  cp  '.\AiAaT,  Herod.  1  131),  and  points  to  Semitic
influence,  radiating  perhaps  from  Cyprus  (Rams.  Hist.  Phryg.
I90).

The  world-renowned  scat  of  this  worship  was  Ephesus
(Acts  1927  ^v  6\r]  rj  'Atrta  Kal  i]  o'lKovnivi)  a4,i(Tai  :  the
festival  in  her  honour  was  called  OiKovfifviKO.).  The  fame
of  the  ICphesian  shrine  was  primarily  due  to  the  fact
that '  the  Asian  mead  by  the  streamsof  the  Cayster'  ( I  lom.
//.  2461)  was  the  natural  meeting-point  of  the  religious
ideas  brought  westwards  by  the  expansion  of  the  pre-
Aryan  kingdom  of -Asia  .Minor  (Sayce,  Anr.  Emp.  430K
and  of  the  foreign,  Semitic,  intiuences  which  iK'netratcd
the  peninsula  at  various  points  on  the  coast  where
intercourse  with  the  I'hojnicians  was  active.  Thus
nuist  we  explain  the  peculiar  composite  features  of  the
hierarchy  which  early  grew  up  round  the  temple  on  the
bank  of  the  Cayster.  It  consisted  of  certain  vestals
[irapdivoi)^  under  the  presidency  of  a  eunuch-priest,
Ix-'aring  the  titular  name  Mcgabyzos  (Str.  641).  Some
have  understood  the  passage  in  .Stralx)  to  assert  the
existence  of  a  College  of  Megabyzoi  ;  but  probably
merely  a  succession  is  meant  (one  only  in  Xen.  Anah.
S3>  §  6/.  and  .App.  liCh^).  Persia  was  probably
the  source  of  supply.  There  were  three  grades  among
the  vestals,  who  seem  to  have  had,  besides,  a  female
superintendent  (Plut.  An  sent.  795  34  Reiske).  There
is  no  evidence  (Hicks,  Inscr.  Brit.  Mus.  82,  p.  85)
that  they  were  called  fdXiaaai,  though  the  statement  is
usually  made  (after  Guhl,  F.phesiaca,  108)  ;  certain
priestesses  of  the  Great  Mother  were  so  called,  however,
according  to  Lactantius  {Inst.  \i2),  and  the  bee  was
the  regular  tyjie  on  the  coins  (Head,  Coins  of  Fph. ).

There  was  also  a  college  of  priests  ('Eaff^vej).  The
popular derivation of the name was from iayJ)%=.

1  For  the  meaning  of  this  word  in  connection  with  the
Anatolian  system,  see  Ramsay,  Hist.  Phryg.  1 96.

1098


DIANA

•  swarm '  (so  Curtius,  Ephesos,  36) ;  but  it  is  perhaps  wrong
to  follow  Lightfoot  [Coloss.  Intro,  p.  94)  in  denying  all
connection  with  the  name  of  the  Jewish  sect  of  the
ICssenes.  These  priests  were  the  connecting  link  between
the  hierarchy  and  civic  life — e.g. ,  they  cast  the  lot  wiiich
determined  the  Thousand  and  Tribe  of  a  newly  created
citizen  (Hicks,  i.e.,  no.  447,  etc.).  Neither  their  numlier
nor  the  mode  of  their  appointment  is  known,  but  they
held  office  only  for  a  year  and  superintended  the  feasts  at
the  Artemisium  following  the  sacrifices  at  the  Artemisia,
or  annual  Festival  (Pans.  viii.  13 1).  Tor  minor  sacred
oflicials  see  Hicks,  I.e.  85/

The  analogous  establishments  of  the  goddess  Ma  in  the  remote
K.  of  Asia  Minor,  at  the  two  Komanas  (Cappadocia,  Str.  5^5  ;
Poitus,  /</.  557),  show  us  the  system  in  a  more  thorou^h-goiiig
form  ;  Straho's  words  (wvl  &i  ra  fiiv  tfivKdrreTai  xiav  vofj.inuiv  to.
6'  ^rroc)  imply  that  the  grosser  features  of  the  cult  had  been  got
rid  of  at  Kphesus.  In  the  eastern  shrines  we  have  a  presiding
priest  allied  in  blood  to  the  reigning  family,  and  second  only
to  him  in  honour,  ruling  the  temple  and  the  attendant  Up6Sov\oi
(6joo  in  number),  and  enjoying  the  vast  revenues  of  the  sacred


Thecultus-statue  was  thoroughly  oriental  in  form,  Ijeing
a  cone  surmounted  by  a  bust  covered  with  breasts  (Jer.
Prit-/. Eph.). Like  the  most  ancient


2.  The  image.


image of Athena at Athens (I'a


i.  2G6)  and  the  statue  of  Artemis  at  Tauris  (ICur.  Iph.  T.
<)Tj),  and  that  of  the  allied  Cyl>ele  of  I'essinus,  it  'fell
down  from  Jupiter'  (so  .W  and  RV  in  Acts  19  35  :  toO
SioTreroiis,  '  that  fell  from  heaven  ').  Such  was  her  form
wherever  she  was  worshipped  as  ICphesian  .Artemis  ;  but
on  the  coins  we  find  mostly  the  purely  Hellenic  type.
The  '  silver  shrines  '  (Acts  19 24  vaoi)  were  offered  by  the
rich  in  the  temple  :  poorer  worshippers  would  dedicate
shrines  of  marble  or  terra-cotta.

Numerous  e.xamples  in  marble,  and  some  in  terra-cotta,  are
extant  (.•!//«(•«.  Mittk.  249,  Arch.  Zcit.,  i83o)  ;  the  series  .shows
continuous  development  from  the  earliest  known  representation
oitlie  Mother-godde.ss  (the  so-called  '  Niobe'  at  Magnesia  near
Mt.  Sipylus)  to  such  as  that  figured  in  Harrison,  Myth,  and
Mon.  0/ Athens,  48 (cp  Rams.  in///.S",  1882,  p.  45).  Such  .shrines
w-re  perhaps  also  kept  in  private  houses  (Paus.  iv.  31  8  di'Spes
i5i<f  Bemv  liaXifrTa.  ayovariv  ey  Tt/nij).  Similar  shrines  were  carried
in  the  sacred  processions  which  constituted  an  important  part  of
ancient  ritual  (Ignat.  ai  Eph.  q  avvo&oi  Trai'Te?,  6(oi>6pOL  xal
vaofpopoL  ',  Metaphr.  I 'it.  Tintoth.  1  769 :  ctfiajAa  6ta  ;(cipbs
i\ovri<i  in  the  festival  called  Karayioyiof  ;  Inscr.  Brit.  Mus.  i
n  >.  481,  referring  to  the  thirty  gold  and  silver  awfiicowV^aTa
presented  by  C  Vibius  Salutaris  in  104  a.d).

In  the  manufactiu'e  of  these  shrines  many  hands  and
much  capital  were  employed  (.\cts  1924  Trapeixfo  foh
Texvirais  ouk  dXiyrju  ipyaaiav).

The  characteristic  formula  of  invocation  was  ixeya.\-q
"Apre/jLis  (whence  we  must  accept  the  reading  of  D  as
aijainst  the  fieydXr)  r;  'AprefJ-is  of  the  other  MSS).  The
epithet  is  applied  in  inscriptions  {C/(t  2963  C,  ttjs
yu -yiXT/s  Seas  'Apr^/utSoj  ;  ifi.  6797,  'Ei^ejoi/ "Avacrcra).
Its  use  in  invocation  has  been  detected  at  other  centres
of  the  allied  cults.

This  was  the  case,  for  example,  at  the  shrine  of  .\rtemis-Leto
and  .\pollo-Lairbenos  at  Dionysopolis  (Rams.  ///>.'.  Fhryg.
1  151,  n.  49,  fieya?  ' KtroKKia  Aepni^fos,  see  /.  Hell.  Stud.,  1889,
p.  2i6y|  ;  cp  Hist.  Phryg.  153,  n.  53,  fv^a-piarui  Mijrpt  AjjtoJ
on  «f  a.h\)va.ru>v  h\>va.-ta.  Troiei).  In  an  inscription  from  the
I.imnai  (mod.  I'.girdir  Geiil  and  Hoiran  G.),  where  Artemis  of
the  lakes  was  revered,  we  have  the  formula  MeyiXij  'Aprtfjii^
(kams.  i/ist.  Geoerr.  0/  AM,  410).  The  Artemis  of  Therma  in
Lesbos  is  invoked  by  the  phrase  'Great  Artemis  of  Therma'
which  appears  on  a  stone  .still  standing  by  the  road  between
Therma  an  i  Mitylene  {B  'II  de  Corr.  Hell..  1880,  p.  430).  The
Artemis  of  Perga  also  affords  a  parallel  (Rams.  Church  in  K.
Emp.  138  ;  cp  also  id.  His!.  Geog.  0/ AM,  292).

All  these  e.xamples  show  that  \}nG power  ol  the  goddess
was  a  prominent  idea  in  the  cult,  and  give  point  to  the'
reiteration  of  the  formula  by  the  mob  (Acts  I934).  Cp
Xen.  Eph.  In,  b^vixj  rk  ffoi  riiv  virpiov  rifiiv  6e6v,
Tr)y  fieyiXrjv  'Ecpecriwv  'Apre/uv.

One  of  the  secrets  of  the  popularity  of  the  temple  was
its  right  of  asylum. Whatever  the  fate  of  the  town,  the

3.  The  temple,  '^'"^'f,  ^"'^  ■''."  T^'^l  '\^,  P'"*^'"';'  TT
*^ safe  (Fans.  vn.  28  rots  5^  irepl  rb  lepbv

oiKou<n  belfia.  Jji/  ov54v. Cp  also  Herod.  1  26  ;  Cic.  Verr.

ii.  1  33  ;  Strabo, 641). The  peribolos-area  was  several

times  enlarged — by  Alexander  the  Great  who  extended

1099


DIBRI

it  to  a  radius  of  a  stade  from  the  temple,  and  again  by
Mithridates.  Antony  doubled  it,  taking  in  fiipoi  ri  rrjs
ir<iXews — i.e. ,  part  of  the  suburbs.  This  extension  worked
in  favour  of  the  criminal  classes  (Stralx),  /.c,  Tac.  Ann.
36o),  so  that  .Augustus  in  6  B.C.  narrowed  the  sanctuary
area,  and  surrounded  it  with  a  wall  (Hicks,  /.r.  no.
522  /. ).  There  was  a  further  revision  by  Tiberius  in
22  A.  I).  (Tac.  Ann.  36i).  Connected  with  this  security
was  the  use  of  the  place  as  a  national  and  private  bank
of  deposit  ( Dio  Chrys.  J^/wd.  Or.  595  ;  see  also  Ca;s.
Be//.  Civ. '633  105;  Strabo,  640).  I'Yom  the  deposits,
loans  were  issued  to  individuals  or  communities  ( Hicks,
Alanua/  Gr.  Hist.  Inscr.  no.  205).

It  is  noteworthy  that  the  opposition  to  Paul  did  not
originate  among  the  priests  (see  Ephesus).  The
energies  of  the  priests  of  the  great  shrines  must  have
been  largely  directed  to  the  absori)tion  of  kindred
elements  in  the  new  cults  with  which  they  came  in  con-
tact, or  at  any  rate  to  the  harmonising  of  the  various
rival  worships.  In  this  they  were  assisted  by  the
tendency  of  the  Greeks  to  see  in  foreign  deities  the
figures  of  their  own  pantheon.  That  very  definite  steps
were  taken  in  Ephesus  to  avoid  conflict  with  the  cult  of
Apollo  is  proved  by  the  localisation  there  of  the  birth-
place of  Apollo  and  Artemis  (.Str.  639,  Tac.  Ann.  36i  ;
cp  Pauly's  Realenc.  1373).  The  teaching  of  Paul  would
seem  but  another  importation  from  the  E. ,  likely  to
effect  a  revival  redounding  to  the  advantage  of  the
temple.  This  blindness  of  the  priesthood  to  the  real
tendencies  of  the  new  teaching  is  well  illustrated  at
Lystra,  where  the  priest  of  Zeus  Pr.opoleos  is  foremost
in  doing  honour  to  Paul  and  Barnabas  (Acts  14 13).
Not  until  a  later  period  was  this  attitude  exchanged  for
one  of  hostility  ;  the  earliest  pagan  opposition  was  based
on  lower  grounds  than  those  of  religion  (Rams.  Church
in  R.  Emp.  131,  200).  [See  especially  Zimmermann,
Ep/icsos  im  crstcn  christl.  Jahrhundert,  1874.]

,  VV.  J.  w.

DIBLAH  (nri75'=];  AeBAaGa  [HAQ]),  Ezek.  6.4
RV. See  Rim,.\H.

DIBLAIM  (Q'^^T),  Hos.  I3  :  see  Gomf.r  (2).

DIBLATH  (nn^ni  in  Ml";  the  statement  that  the
true  Palestinian  reading  is  '2"1  is  weakly  attested  [Ha.]  ;
AcBAaGa  [B.\Q]),  Ezek.  614  AV  (RV  Diblah),  where
the '  toward '  of  EV  demands  an  emended  te.xt. See

RlBLAH.

DIBLATHAIM  (HO^n^aT), Nu.  3346; see  Betii-

DIBLArilAlM.

DIBON  (fn-l  ;  so  thrice  [Bii.  ad  Is.  I52]  ;  else-
where in  OT  and  on  Moahite  stone  p"'T.  and  so
AaiBcon  [B.\FL] — whence  the  true  pronunciation  is
probably  Daibon,  Meyer,  ZAW  1 128,  n.  2— but  in
Josh.  13i7  AAiBcop  [A],  AeBcoN  [L]).

1.  A  citv  of  Moab  (Is.  1.^)2,  \r^^u>v  [BS<:<'"P'],
Aai^-nduif  [N*],  Af,^.  [nV],  Jer.  481822  St^wv  [X],
[a]5at/ia)v  [Q]),  the  modern  Diban,  about  3  m.  N.
from  .Aroer  and  4  from  the  Arnon.  -A  fragment  of  an
ancient  song  preserved  by  JE  in  Nu.  21  commemorates
the  conquests  of  the  Amoritc  king  Sihon  over  Moab
'from  Heshbon  to  Dibon '  [v.  30).  According  to  Nu.
3234  [E]  it  was  '  built '  by  the  Gadites,  and  it  is  alluded
to  as  Dibon-Gad  in  Nu.  3345/  [P]-  Josh.  13. 7  [P]
gives  it  to  the  Reubenites.  In  Is.  lag  the  name  is
written  Di.mon  \qv.\  It  was  at  Diban  that  the
famous  stone  of  King  Mesha  was  discovered  in  1868.

2.  In  list  of  Judahite  villages  (Ezra,  ii.  §  5  L*^]  §  ^5
[i]  a).  Neh.  11  25  (Ai/Swv  [S<=»  ■»£].  om.  BA)  ;  perhaps
the  UiMONAH  ['/.'••]  of  Josh.  1022.

DIBRI (n^T  ; AABp[e]i [BAF], zamBri [L]  ;

DABKi],  father  of  Shki.omith  [q.v.,  no.  i]  ; Lev.  24ii.t

P's  story  of  the  son  of  Shelomith  who  blasphemes  '  the

Name '  ^  bears  a  close  family  likeness  to  the  incident  in

1  So  MT. The  original  text  no  doubt  had  '  Vahwe.


DIDYMUS

Nu.  25 14/^  There  the  marriaKC  of  Zimri  (a  name
not  unlike  Uibri)'  with  a  Miilianiless  is  the  cause  of  sin,
and  here  the  offentlcr  is  the  son  of  a  mixed  union.
Zimri  l>elongs  to  the  tril>e  of  Sinieon  whicli,  according
to  Gen.  46 10,  had  Canaanitc  relations,  and  in  the  i)crson
of  Diliri  the  trilw  of  Dan  is  pilloried  (see  Dan,  §  8).
In  iKjth  stories  the  prevailing  principle  is  the  necessity
of  cutting  off  Israel  from  all  strangers  ;  cp  Neh  9  a  1830,
and  see  liertholot.  Slellutig  J.  Isntel.  147.

DIDYMUS  (AiAymoC  [Ti.  WH]),  Jn.  11.6  etc  ;
see  Thomas.

DIKLAH  (n7|5"n;  AckXa  [AEL],  in  Ch.  AckXam
[A];  om.  R;  decla),  son  of  Joktan  ((icn.  IO27  i  Ch.
I21).  The  name  is  obscure;  it  has  l»een  supposed  by
Rochart  and  others  to  designate  '  a  palm-l>earing
district '  (cp  Ar.  dukal"",  a  sort  of  palm  tree,  and  see
BDH).  Hommel  connects  it  with  the  name  of  the
Paradise  river  Hid-dckcl  (sec  I'akadisk).

DILEAN,  KV  Dilan  (iv'?^  :  AaAaA  [I^]  :  -A&A  [A] :
-AAan  [I'l.  !''•'''>•  ^=»'^?).  an  unidentifi<xi  city  in  the
ShephClnli  of  Juilah  (Josh.  1.138).  It  occurs  with
Mizjxih  (Tell  cs-.Sfifiyeh)  in  a  group  apparently  N.  of
the  group  comprising  Lachish  and  Eglon.

DILL  (to  anhBon).  Mt.  2823  KV">n- ;  KV  Anise
(,;.:•.  I.

DIMNAH  (HJPT  ;  Aamna  [ALT ;  C€A\A  [B]K  one
of  the  cities  of  Zebulun  theoretically  assigned  to  the
Levites  (Josh.  21  35!  I').  It  is  mentioned  together  with
Naiiai.AI,  (r/.f. ).  The  form,  however,  .seems  incorrect  ;
we  should  rather  read  Rimmonah,  with  Di. ,  IJerth. ,
Ik-nnett.  Cp  Rimmono  (i  Ch.  662  [77]).  and  see
RiMMON,  ii.  3.  T.  K.  C.

DIMON  (P!3*'l  ;  AeiMCON  [B  twice] ;  peMMCON
I^X'^  ■'•  "^ ''  twice,  .\r  once,  Q*  once] ;  ACMMCON  [once  m  i°
sup  ras  N»' ;  AepMCON  N*  fort] ;  AlMOON  [once  (J'"b]  ;
NeMMOJ  [once  N*]),  a  town  of  Moah  mentioned  only
in  Is.  159  (twice).  According  to  Che.  jic'i  is  a  corniji-
tion  of  c'"CJ  NiMKi.Nf  ['/.*'.];  it  is  no  olycction  to  this
view  that  Nimrim  has  already  been  meiuioned  in  t-.  6  ;
Mad.mkn'  in  Jer.  482  is  still  more  plainly  a  corruption
of  Nimrim.  Those  who  adhere  to  the  traditional  text
suppose  that  Diiuon  =  Dibon,  the  former  with  ;//  lieing
cho.sen  on  account  of  the  assonance  with  </<////,  '  bUxxl,"
or  else  that  some  unknown  place  is  referred  to  (accord-
ing to  Duhm,  on  the  border  of  Iklom  ;  cp  l(5i  and  see
2  k.  822).  The  former  view  is  the  more  prevalent  one.
If  Alxxna  =  Amana,  may  not  Dimon  be  equivalent  to
Dibon  ?  Jerome  in  his  conuncntary  says,  '  Usque
hodie  indifferenter  et  Dimon  et  Dibon  hoc  oppidulum
dicitur,"  and  in  the  O T  it.self  we  find  Dimonah  [-/.f.]
and  Dibon  (2)  used  for  the  same  place.  If  Dilx)n  lje
meant  in  Is.  15,  '  the  waters  of  Dimon'  may,  according
to  Hitzig  and  Dillmann,  be  a  reservoir  such  as  many
cities  probably  possessed  (cp  Cant.  74(5].  hut  see
HESmi(J.N).  The  Arnon  flowed  too  far  off  from  the
town  to  \y&  meant.  Still  the  text  may  Ix;  admitted  to
be  doubtful.  II.  \v.  H.

DIMONAH  (n3iD*"1  ;  pepMA  [B],  Aimcona  [AL]).
a  Jiid.iliite  city  on  the  Ixsrder  of  Edoni  (Josh.  l.')22).
I'eriiaps  the  DiKON  (2)  of  Nch.  11  25  (cpDilxm  and
Dimon  in  .\Ioab).  Knotxjl  and  others  suggest  the  modern
Kh.  edh-Dheib  or  et-Teiyibeh,  2  J  m.  Ni:.  of  Tell'Arad  ;
but  this  is  quite  uncertain.  Pesh.  |LfOJ0i«  presupposes
a  form  rz-ST  \  cp  the  variation  given  under  Dannah.

DINAH  (nj-^  ;  A[e]iNA  [AL]),  'daughter'  of  Leah
and  'sister'  of  Simeon  .tiuI  Levi.

Whilst  Ben-oni  left  Iwhind  it  some  memorials  (see
Ben-ONi),  the  disap]>earance  of  Dinah,  to  judge  from
the  absence  of  all  later  traces,  seems  to
have been absolute. In J's  story, how-

1  Note L'.s  rc-iding  .ilxjve. _  Zimri in okl  Ar.  (Sab.)  com-

rjunJs  is  liimri  (see  Zi.mki,  i.,  n.);  and for  interchange  of
and  m  cp  Zabdi,  n.

IIOX


2.  Motive.


1.  Gen.  34.


DINAH

ever,  when  Simeon  and  I-cvi  fell  upon  the  people  of
Shechcm,  as  the  Danites  fell  upon  Laish,  their  attempt
to  carry  Dinah  away  w.as  successful.  '1  wo  explanations
are  possible.  Dinah  may  have  disappeared  as  a  trilie
later  along  with  its  rescuers ' — there  is,  howe\er,  a
difference:  the  brother  tril^es  left  traces  (see  Levi,
Simko.n) — or  the  success  of  the  raid  m.ay  be  an  element
of  exaggeration  in  the  story:  Dinah  may  ha\e  been
absorl)ed  into  Shechem.  Indeetl  the  question  suggests
itself,  as  it  does  in  the  case  of  the  other  '  wives'  in  the
patriarch  stories  (see  Zii.pah,  HimiAM,  Raciiei.,
Leah),  Have  we  here  ri-ally  a  di.stinct  trilx:?  or  does
Dinah  simply  mean  Israelitish  families  (of  whatever
clan)  that  settled  in  .Shechem?

Unfortunately  J's  story  is  incomplete  :  we  are  not
told  what  the  dowry  demanded  of  Shechem  was,  or
why  the  city  was  attacked.  A  later  age  forgot  that  in
Canaan  only  the  Philistines  were  uncircumcised  (see
ClKCfMf  isioN,  §  3),  and  thought  that  Israel  could
never  h:!ve  consented  to  settle  in  Shechem  unless  that
town  adopted  the  circumcision  rite.  J  cannot  have
meant  this.

Unlike  the  raid  on  Laish,  that  on  Shct  hem  seems  to
have  l>een  condemned  by  public  sentiment.  'Cursed
Ix;  their  anger,'  says  the  *  Blessing  of  Jacob,'
'for  it  was  fierce,  and  their  wrath,  for  it
was  cruel '  ;  but  according  to  J  the  chief  reason  of  this
disfavour  was  that  the  safety  of  Israel  had  Iicen  im-
ixnilled.  The  judgment  that  overtook  the  perp<-tration
of  the  raid  is  clearly  indicated  in  the  Blessing  :  they
should  tx;  divided  and  .scattered.  One  instinctively
asks.  How  does  this  'judgment'  stand  related  to  the
name  dinahl  Does  one  explain  the  other?  and,  if  so,
which  ?

The  Dinah  story  may  Ix;  regarded  as  an  explanation
of  the  'judgment'  either  on  .Shei  hem  or  on  Siineon-
Levi.  It  is  al.so,  however,  fitted  to  serve  as  a  popular
explanation  of  the  name  Jacob,  which  it  assigns  to  the
immigrant  people  :  Jacob  was  a  wily  people  ;  and  he
])ai(l  back  an  injury  done  him.  Stories  are  easily
worked  up  so  as  to  explain  several  distinct  jwints.

It  was  a  common  Ix^lief  in  the  days  of  the  mon.archy
that  the  Leah  trilx's  had  Ixen  in  the  highlands  of
„ „ .  ICphraim  lH.-fore  they  settled  in  the  south

3.  Meaning.  ^^^  j^^^^,.., g  ^ j  ,,^.,_  ^lmkon,  Dan,

§  2).  The  point  that  concerns  us  here  is  whether  some
of  them  settled  in  Shechem.  Unfortunately  the  earliest
traditions  that  have  come  down  to  us  Ixloiig  to  an  age
w hen  there  was  no  distinct  memory  of  the  real  course  of
events.  Every  one  knew  that  there  was  a  time  when
Isr.aelites  had  planted  themselves  in  the  hill-country
but  had  not  yet  incorporated  .Sliechem — the  belief  of
a  later  age,  that  it  was  the  resting-place  of  the  remains
of  Joseph,  had  not  arisen— but  as  to  how  it  Ix-came
Israelite  there  were  already  various  theories.  One  story
told  of  deeds  of  sword  and  bow  ((Jcn.4S22  Judg.  945)  ;
another  made  more  of  a  treaty  or  coiuract  of  some  kind
(connubium?  circumcision?  a  sale  of  pro])erty?  an
alliance  [nn:]  ?  ;  831934).  It  might  jx-rhaps  be  sug-
gested that  the  f7<//'>t(/-alliance  with  the  Shechenutes
(Judg.  831)  points  to  a  third  story,  a  story  of  an  Abiez-

1  Prof.  Cheyne  thinks  that  the  disappearance  of  the  tribe  is
actuallv  reortlec!  in  .15  8:  that  what  K  wrote  w.-is  not  'and
there  died  Deborah,'  but  'and  there  died  Din.ih.'  Tliere  are
certainly,  as  he  urges,  difTiculties  in  the  text  .is  it  stands  :  the
connecting  of  a  famous  tree  with  a  nurse  ;  the  pre.scr>'ation  of
the  name  (contrast  Ccn.  2459,  where  moreover  ®  read  ."tjro
for  .irpjD  '•  T*  v-aa^xovra.  auTi7«  :  cp  31  18);  the  presence  of  the
nurse  in  the  train  of  Jacob;  the  whole  Jacob-clan  making  a
solemn  mourning  over  her ;  the  geographical  discrepancy
between Gen.  35  8  and Judg.  43. jle tlicrcfore proposes  to

emend  r\^z-\  ppj'D  m3T  into  nn'ra.i  a-j.':  na  nan  and  to

read  :  '  And  Din.ih,  Iacol)'s  eldest  daughter,  died,  and  was  buried
at  the  foot  of  (the  hill  of]  Bethel,  and  was  buried  under  the  Tree  ;
so  its  name  is  called  Ailon-fjakuth  '  (see  Ai.i.on-baccth).  The
de.struction  of  a  tribe  would  certainly  fully  account  for  the
mourning  (hikuth).  Both  J  (Gen.  S73O  and  P  (Gen.  467)  re-
present Jacob  as  having  more  than  one  daughter.


DINAITES

rite  settlement  in  Shechem.  The  idea  of  the  covenant,
however,  may  be  simply  a  popular  attempt  to  explain
tlie  name  Baal-hkritii  ('/-v.),  like  the  story  coimectcd
with  the  name  Jerubbaal  (see  Gideon).  The  warlike
story,  though  early,  may  have  to  be  classed  with  others
of  the  same  type.  The  jxiaceable  settlement  theory  is
historically  the  most  probable  ;  but  it  is  hardly  necessary
to  question  the  occurrence  of  a  Dinah  raid,  less  success-
ful than the Danite. See, further, Lkvi, .Simko'n,

JUUAH.  H.  \v.  !!.

DINAITES  (N^J*!),  mentioned  with  the  Aphak-
SATiicHiTK.s,  Taki'ELITES  ['/./.t'.],  and  others,  in  the
Aramaic  letter  from  Rehum  to  Artaxerxes  (Kzra  49).
It  is  improbal)le  that  the  word  is  an  ethnic  name  (so
<S"'^,  dlejivaioL,  dinaei  [Vg.  ]),  and  we  should  rather
point  N":n  '  judges  '  (so  ©■-  ol  Kpirai).  It  is  the  Aramaic
translation  of  the  Persian  title  ddtahhar.  Cp  Hoffmann,
Z.4,  1887,  p.  55;  Schrader,  J/U'B'-^;  Andreas  in
Marti,  Bifi/.  Aram.  Gram.  59*.

DINHABAH  (nnn^;  AeNN^B<\  [ADEL]),  the
city  of  the  lulomite  king  I^ei.a  ((/.2'.),  Oen.  8632.
Almost  beyond  a  doubt  nznzi  is  a  corruption  of  pz^nf
(cp  V.  37).  See  lii.LA,  and  cp  Che.  OLZ,  May  '99.
It  is  a  mere  accident  that  several  names  can  be
quoted  somewhat  resembling  Dinhabah.  Thus  in  the
Amarna  tablets  Tunip  or  Dunip  is  mentioned  as  in  the
land  of  Martu.  Tunipa  also  occurs  in  the  list  of  the
N.  Syrian  places  conquered  by  Thotmes  III.  (Tomkins,
/^/'('■^)  529).  There  was  a  Danaba  in  Palmyrene  Syria
(Ptol.  V.  1524;  Assemani,  Bid/.  Or.  82,  p.  595 /i  606,
quoted  by  Kn. ),  and  a  Danabe  in  Babylonia  (Zosim.
//is/.  827).  'I'here  was  also  a  Dannaba  in  N.  Moab
(05  11431).  A  Toneib(/'i5"/^  map)  or  Thenib  (Tristram)
is  to  be  found  NK.  of  Hesban  ;  the  F/iF  map  calls  it
Hodbat  el  Toneib,  but  the  Beni  Sakhr  '  knew  not  Hod-
bat '  (Gray  Hill,  /'/-/'Q.  1896,  p.  46).  With  this  place
Dinhabah  is  identified  by  v.  Riess,  Bibel-Atlas,  and
Tomkins,  PEFQ,  1891,  p.  322/  T.  K.  c.

DINNER  (apicton),  Mt.  224  etc.  See  Meals,
§  2,  n.

DIONYSIA  (AiONYCiA  [VA]),  2  Mace.  67  RV"'S- ;
ICV  P.acciius.

DIONYSIUS  THE  AREOPAGITE  (AiONycioc  [o]
ApeonArlellTHC  ['H-  ^VIIj),  one  of  Paul's  Athenian
con\crts  (.Acts  1734)- See  Dam.VKIS.

I'.usL-bius  (///•;  34  423)  tells  us  on  the  authority  of  Dionysius,
bishop  of  Corinth,  who  flourished  about  171  A.D.,  that  Dionysius
the  Arenpagite  became  first  bishop  of  Athens.  In  ecclesiastical
tradition  he  is  sometimes  confounded  with  St.  Denis,  the  first
apostle  of  France,  a  confusion  which  was  greatly  fostered  by
Abbot  Hilduin  of  St.  Denis  (834  A.n.)  in  his  Arcopai^itica,
which  made  large  use  of  spurious  documents.  The  important
writings  of  the  Pseudo-Dionysius  Areopagita,  first  mentioned  in
the  sixth  century,  do  not  fall  within  the  scope  of  a  Dictionary
of  the  liible.

DIONYSUS  (AiONYCOC  [VA]),  2  Mace.  67  RV>"g-;
EV  Bac(  iirs.

DIOSCORINTHIUS  (Aioc  korinGioy  FA],
*»;ji»lwkiJk,/.  [IV-sh.]; 2  Mace.  Il2it);  see  Month,  §4.

DIOSCURI  (AioCKOYPOl  [Ti.  WH]),  Acts  28ii
R\'"'^'- ;  AV  Casiok  and  Poli.ux.

DIOTREPHES  (AiOTpecl)HC  [Ti.  WH])  is  the  .subject
of  unfavourable  comment  in  3jn.  <)f.  Beyond  what  is
there  stated,  nothing  is  known  concerning  him.

DIPHATH  (nS^'l),  iCh.  I6t  AV^e-  and  RV;  Av'
and  R\''"*>'-  Rii'iiATH.

DISCIPLE.  One  who  learns  (cp  Gk.  maBhthc
from  manGano)).  fis  opposed  to  one  who  teaches
(AiAackaAoc);  see  Rabki,  Te.\ciier.

AV  and  RV  both  give  'disciples'  in  Is.  %  16  {d{sci/>uli[V%.y),
and  RVmj;.  in  5O4  and  54  13  (7ra<«[€]ta,  iiSaxTO?  [BNAQ]).  In
each  case  this  represents  C"1157,  '  those  who
taught  or  trained.'  A  synonj-mous  word
from  the  same  root  is  "I*?;  ?,  common  in  late  Jewish  writings

1 103


1.  OT  usage.


DISEASES

■(cp  esp.  D'C^n  'I'cSn,  '  disciples  of  the  wise '),  and  found  once
in  I  Ch.  258,  where  the  contrast  between  6  jaa^T>)S  and  6
fit5a(TicaAo5  (for  which  cp  also  Mt.  10 25)  is  expressed  by  |'22
TC^n'CJ?  'as  well  .  .  .  the  teacher  as  the  scholar'  (reAeicoi'
Kai  tiavda.v6vTij>v  [BAL],  [<rvi'iu»'  (xera  /iiai-fldi'Oi'Tos,  b],  doctus
pariter  et  indoctus  [Vg.]).  The  apparent  parallel  in  'master
and  scholar '  Mai.  2 12  AV  (MT  iuyi  IJ?  niagistruni  et  discipu-
lum)  is  untrustworthy  ;  the  passage  is  rendered  in  many  different
ways,  and  is  certainly  corrupt. 1  In  the  LXX/maftjT^s  occurs  only
in  A,  for  C'SlVx  'friends'  (as  if  from  •j'TN  'to  teach'),  viz.,  in
Jer.  1321,  and  in  Jer.  20  11  4t>9  where  B  (and  in  4i>9  Al^',  see
Hatch-Redpath,  Concordance)  correctly  reads  fxaxi7T^s.  On  the
subject  generally  see  EnuCATioN.

In the NT ixad-qTrjs (fem. fiadyjTpia, Acts 936),
though  limited  to  the  Gospels  and  Acts,  is  of  frequent
occurrence. Here  it  sometimes  agrees


2.  NT  usage.


with the  usage in Attic (cp  especially


Plato)  and  designates  merely  the  pupil,  one  who  is
taught  by  another  (Mt.  1024  =  Lk.  640).  It  is  then
applied  to  the  followers  of  a  particular  teacher,  or  sect :
as,  for  example,  of  Moses  as  opposed  to  Jesus  (Jn.
928),  of  the  Baptist  (Mt.  9 14  Mk.  2 18),  of  the"  Pharisees
(Mt.  22 16  Mk.  2 18);  it  is  also  used  of  Jesus  and
his  teaching  (Jn.  666  and  often).  As  referring  to  the
followers  of  Jesus  we  find  that  fiaO-rjT-^i  is  applied  {a),
widely,  to  all  his  adherents  and  followers  (Alt.  10 42,
and  esp.  in  Acts  627  etc. ,  only  once  followed  by  rou
Kvpiov,  9i),  including,  even,  those  who  had  been
baptized  only  'into  John's  baptism'  (Acts  I91-3) ;  and
(6),  in  a  more  restricted  manner,  to  denote  the  nucleus
out  of  which  the  Twelve  were  chosen,  who,  themselves,
are  also  called  fiaOajTai  in  addition  to  the  more  familiar
name  of  airlxrToKoL  (Lk.  613  compared  with  Mt.  10 1,
cp  also  Mk.  827  IO24  etc.) ;  see  Aposti.e.^

Finally,  in  ecclesiastical  language,  the  term  '  disciple '

is  applied  (jn  the  jjlur. )  more  particularly  to  the  Seventy

„ f , who  were  sent  out  by  Jesus  to  preach  the

ChrM; Kingdom  of Heaven (Lk. IO1-17). The

number varies between seventy  (so Text.

usage,  j^g^,  _  pg^,^  NACL)  and  seventy-two  (Vg.
(iir.  B,  D  etc.  ;  see  more  fully  I'arionim  Bible  and
( "omm. ).  Lists  of  the  names  are  extant  in  various
forms  and  are  ascribed  to  Dorotheos,  Epiphanius,
Hippolytus,^  and  Sophronius.  They  comprise  the
names  in  the  Acts  and  Pauline  Epistles  ;  but  variations
are  to  be  found  in  each  list.  See  Lipsius,  Die  Apokry-
phen  Apostelgescli.  ti.  Apostellegend.  1 193-206.

DISCUS  (AlCKOC  [VA]),  the  Greek  game  played  at
the  palKStra  introduced  by  Jason  among  the  Hellenistic
Jews  of  Jerusalem  (2  Mace.  4 14) ;  see  Hellenism.  §  4  ;
also  Cap.  It  is  mentioned  alone,  either  as  the  chief,  or
perhaps  only  as  an  example,  of  the  games  played.

On  the  discus  (a  circular  plate  of  stone  or  metal  [cp  'dish']);
see  Class.  Diet.  s.v.  'Discus,'  'Pentathlon.'  'The  indignation
which  the  writer  displays  towards  this  Hellenizing  innovation
is  paralleled  in  later  limes  by  the  abhorrence  the  Jews  felt  at
the  introduction  of  the  f Grecian  game  of  'dice'  (N'3ip,  icu/Seta) ;
see  Shahb.  232  and  cp  Schiir.  Gl'l  233,  n.  154.

DISEASES.  OT  terms  for  diseases  afe,  as  might
be  expected,  vague  (it  is  still  a  widespread  practice  in
the  East  to  refer  euphemistically  to  any  illness  of  a
severe  nature  rather  than  to  give  it  a  name),  and  the
nosological  explanations  ■*  which  will  presently  be  given
are  but  plausible  or  probable  conjectures.  Not  to
spend  time  on  general  terms  such  as  >Vn,  ^X^y^>  vbao^
(rendered  'sickness,  disease'),  or  on  terms  implying  a
theological  theory  of  disease,  such  as  j'lj,  ^jJ3,  ncjo,  .irp
(words  which  are  often  rendered  '  plague,'  but  properly
mean  '  stroke,'  cp  Is.  684),  we  pass  to  special  terms  for
pestilence.

Such  are  (a)  niO,  (3)  na^i,  (f)  3£:i5  and  3ep,  (</)  icn.  (a)
niD inaweth  (cp  Ass.  mtitanu),  e6.va.T0<!  (properly  'death'),  is

1  Torrey's  correction  is  plausible— to  read  i^jyi  enc  '  root  and
branch '  (cp  819  [4  1  ]).

2  For  the  same  usage  cp  Tertullian,  ad7'.  Marc.  4  24.

3  Cp  Ante-Nicene  Library,  i.\.  Hippolytiis,  2132^

•1  For  these  we  have  to  acknowledge  obligations  to  Dr.  C.
Creighton.


DISEASES

useJ  for  a  fatal  sickness,  such  as  the  plague,  in  Jcr.  l.'>2  I821
43ii  Jol)27i5.  Cp  theuscoftfai/oTotin  Rev.  68  188.  (*)  13^
dM'ker  (perhaps  originally  a  hoil  [Socin)),  O6.varo^,  is  the  mos'
distinctive  term  (see,  e.g.,  Ex.  i»3  Dt.  2S21).  Possibly,  too,  in
the  phrase  ^ySa  •^3^,  rendered  'an  evil  disease'  (I's.  41 8),  we
should  point  naT  (with  Lag.  Che.),  {c)  3Bp,  ketebk  and  Jjfflfebh,
'cutting  off'  (Dt.  3'.>24  Ps.  9l6  Hos.  13  14),  and  (</)  'j^y'i,  n/f/A
(properly  'flame,'  cp  Reshei-h  ;  Dt.  8224  Hab.  3  5lp3;i)  are
poetic.-il  words. See  Pestilenck.

The  follovk'ing  terms,  which  are  of  a  more  specific
character,  occur  chiefly  in  the  threalenings  of  Lev.  22
26  Ut.  28  :  —

:.  ^^n^,  harhUr  (ipeeiafio^),  Dt.  28  22t,  'extreme  burning,*
RV  '  fiery  heat,'  m.iy  refer  to  some  special  fever,  such  as  typhus
or  relapsing  fever.

2.  njjVn,  dalUketh  (fiiyo<;),  Dt.  28  22t  ;  probably  inflammation.

3.  Dnn,  /teres  (<c»t}<^i)),  Dt.  2827!,  the  itch,  probably  some
eruptive  disease,  such  as  the  lichen  tropicus.

4.  nS^l,  yalle/>/iet/i  ('accretion'?  kfixnv).  Lev.  21 20  222-?t,
EV  '  scab(l>ed),'  is,  according  to  Jewish  tradition,  nnsD  n'nn
the  Egyptian  herpes.

5.  rh^l,  yai>/>eleth  (ji.vpii.-i\Ki.u>VTa),  'one  suffeiing  fromw.irts'
(so  Jew.  trad.),  Lev.  22 22!;  AV  'having  a  wen';  RVmtr-
'having  sores'  (ulcers);  from  n/S^',  'to  flow,'  hence  'a  sup-
puration '  ;  see  translation  of  Lev.  in  SBO'f.

6.  rn'^i^,  Ifadiiahatli  (jruperds),  Lev.  20 16  Dt.  28  22t,  fever
(AV  in  Lev.  '  burning  ague  ').

Under  the  kist  of  these  [kaddahath)  may  t)e  included
malarial  or  intermittent  fevers,  which  are  met  with  in
the  Jordan  valley,  but  are  not  specially  a  disease  of
Syria  and  l^alestine,  owing  to  the  etiuable  climate  and
the  moderate  variation  of  temperature.  It  was  at
Cajjernaum  (a  place  liable  probably  to  malaria)  that
Simon's  wife's  mother  was  '  taken  with  a  great  fever '
(Lk.  438) — an  expression  which  is  thought  to  indicate
medical  knowledge.^  Certainly  C3alen  and  Hippocrates
use  the  phrase,  as  Wetstein  has  pointed  out.  There
are  parallel  cases  in  Acts  1228  288  (see  9  10).  Accord-
ing to  kamsay  (.S7.  Paul  the  Traveller ;  cp  Expositor,
July  1899,  pp.  20-23)  the  'thorn  (stake)  in  the  flesh'
spoken  of  in  2  Cor.  12;  means  the  severe  headache
("like  a  hot  bar')  which  follows  an  attack  of  the
malarial  fever  of  Asia  Minor.

7.  riBnc',  Iahe/>heth,  Lev.  20 16  Dt.  2822t,  'consumption,'
perhaps  to  be  understood  as  the  wasting  of  marasmus,  which
may  attend  various  sicknesses.  Pulmonary  consumption  is  not,
however,  frequent  in  Syria  (Pniner,  283).

8.  3T:,^,m?M,2  Lev.  21  20  22  22  Dt.  2827,  'scurvy'  (but  AV
in  Dt.  '  scab  ').  The  reference  seems  to  be  to  some  chronic  skin
disease  such  as  eczema  ;  a  sense  in  which  '  scurvy  '  and  '  scor-
butic '  were  once  used.

9.  hv(Tevr4pi.ov  (so  the  best  MSS),  Acts  288;  RV  'dysentery.'
The  last  of  these  terms,  'dysentery,'  occurs  in  Acts

2828t,  where  the  combination  of  relapsing  malarial
fever  (irvpeToh)  with  dysentery  is  carefully  noted.
According  to  Josephus  (Ant.  vi.  li)  the  disease  of  the
Philistines  in  i  S.  5  was  dysentery,  a  view  which,  if  the
traditional  Hebrew  readings  of  the  text  may  be  accepted,
has  some  plausibility.  The  more  usual  biblical  ex-
pression for  dysentery  is  the  falling  out  of  the  Ixiwels,
implying  either  painful  straining  as  if  the  bowels  would
fall  out,  or  some  shedding  of  the  mucous  membrane,  or
a  degree  of  prolapse,  such  as  occurs  normally  in  the
horse,  mule,  etc.

There  is  a  singular  combination  of  the  idea  of  bursting
asunder  with  that  of  falling  out  in  Acts  1 18  ;  but  the  second
part  of  this  pass.^ge  will  not  bear  the  stress  of  critical  treatment  :
It  is  the  conventional  fate  of  traitors  in  .ipocryphal  legends  that
is  assigned  to  Judas.  The  statement  must,  if  this  view  is
correct,  be  classed  with  the  less  historical  portions  of  Acts. Cp

ACELUAMA.

10.  <7K03\r)K6pp(t}Toi  ('eaten  of  worms')  gives  us  the
only  detail  as  to  the  disease  by  which  Herod  Agrippa  L
was  carried  off  (Acts  12 28).  It  reminds  us,  however,
of  the  disease  of  which, ace. to  Josephus  (Ant. xvii.

1  Wetstein  (1752)  remarks,  '  Lucxs  medicus  morbos  accuratius
describere  solet.'  Cp  Hobart,  'J'/te  Medical  Language  0/  St.
Luke,  Dublin,  1852.

2  Cp  Kx.jarab,  a  contagious  eruption  consisting  of  pustules.

"OS


DISPERSION

65),  Herod  the  Great  died,  one  feature  of  which  was
fl-^^ts  <!KtJ)\y)Ka.%  ifi-Koiovca,  and  of  that  which  2  Mace,
(ix.  59)  asserts  to  have  caused  the  death  of  Antiochus
Epiphancs.  One  is  almost  led  to  think  that,  in  the
deficiency  of  evidence,  narrators  imagined  such  a  fate
as  this  for  wicked  kings.  Sir  R.  liennett  conjectures,
partly  on  the  ground  of  Josephus'  statement  (Ant.  xix.
82),  that  the  cause  of  Herod  Agrippa's  death  was
perforation  of  the  bowels  by  intestinal  worms  (Diseases
of  the  liible,  103).

On  aflections  of  the  sight,  see  Eve  ;  on  other  diseases  see
Bon,,  Leikosv,  Li  natic,  Pestilence,  Thokn  in  the  Flesh,
etc. ;  cp  Medicine.

DISH.  See  Bowl  (sephel).  Charger  (k'\irdh),
Crusk  (sallahath),  and  Meals,  §  9.

DISHAN  (\&'^;  p[e]icu)N  [AUEL],  see  Dishon).
I.  A  Horite  clan,  reckoned  as  the  seventh  and  youngest
son  of  Seir.  The  name  occurs  in  Gen.  3t;2i  (om.  B,
AlCAN  [L])  and  I  Ch.  I38.  Gen.  8628  (pHCCON  [li]).
iCh.  I42  (MT  pe^T;  A&ICCON  [IL\]),  Gen.  8630.
The  name  is  practically  identical  with  DiSHON,  and
should  perhaps  be  emended  after  ©'-  to  pi:'n.

2.  Gen.  30 26,  RV">K-,  EV  Dishon  (g.v.).

DISHON  (\\&\  [i  Ch.  I41];  |b""n  [i  Ch.  I3B];
wrongly  pointed  j^""!  [Gen.  8626]  ;  jit'T  [Gen.  8621];
ibn  [z'7'.  2530];  §68;  ^HCCON  [HADEL]).  Twice
reckoned  as  the  fifth  son  of  .Seir  (Gen.  3<i2i  i  Ch.  I38),
but  once  (Gen.  8625  [Aaitrtoj'  (E)])  as  the  son  of  Anah
the  son  of  Seir.  His  sons  are  enumerated  in  Gen.  8626
(RV'i-'-  Dish  AN,  following  present  .MT),  i  Ch.  I41
(\ai(jwv  [BAL]). Cp  Dlkk,  i.

In  spite  of  his  genealogical  phraseology,  the  writer  is  fully
conscious  that  he  is  dealing  not  with  indiviihials  but  with  clans.
Dish.m,  likti  l.otan  and  the  other  names,  belongs  to  a  Horite
chill,  lis  111'  .ining  seems  to  be  some  sort  of  mountain-goat  (see
Pv(iA !.<,).  A^  Di.  and  WRS  agree,  the  Horite  genealogy  is  full
of  animal  iianiLS.

DISPERSION.  A I  AC  no  PA.  so  rendered  by  RV  of
2  Mace.  I27  Jn.  735  Ja.  1  i  i  Pet.  1  i,  is  used  partly  to
denote  the  process  itself,  the  gradual  distribution  of
Israelites  among  foreign  lands,  and  partly  as  a  collective
term  for  the  persons  so  dispersed  or  for  their  surround-
ings. In  the  present  article  it  is  proposed  to  treat
briefly  of  the  origin  of  the  Jewish  Dispersion  (§§  1-14).  its
legal  standing  (§  15),  and  its  inner  and  outer  life  (§§
16-22).

Siao-iropa  occurs  in  <B  of  Dt.  2S25  Jcr. .34  [41]  17  for  Heb.
niyi,  '  tossing  to  and  fro  '  (?).  In  Jer.  13 14  6.  [X*]  is  apparently
a  corruption  for  Siaij>8opa.  [so  B.\,  etc.  ].  It  renders  JTIJ  (a  collec-
tive) in  Dt.304  and  Neh.lg,  and  C"n^:  in  Ps.l472  ('outcasts'
— 'dispersed  ones'),  .and  in  Is.  496  Siainropa  tou  'l<Tpari\ — "llsj
(Ktb.  'Ti'j) '^.Xnr',  'the  preserved  of  Israel."  It  also  occurs  in
Jer.  157 Dan.  (cod.  87)  12  2.

I.  Permanent  settlements  of  Israelites  in  regions  out-
side Canaan  had  their  origin  in  one  or  other  of  two
_.  .  .  causes— the  exigencies  of  commerce  and  the
°^'  chances  of  war.  The  regular  commercial
relations  into  which  Solomon  and  his  successors  entered
with  Egypt,  Phajnicia,  and  the  countries  of  Middle  and
Northern  S}Tia  (i  K.  1028/)  must  of  necessity  have
led  to  the  formation  of  small  Israelite  colonies  outside
of  Palestine.  These  enjoyed  the  protection  of  the
foreign  prince  under  whom  they  lived,  and  had  in  the
city  of  their  choice  a  sei)arate  quarter  of  their  own,
where  they  could  follow  their  distinctive  customs  with-
out disturbance  or  offence  (cp  i  K.  20  34.  and  see
Damascus,  §7;  Israel,  §  23^).  Prisoners  of  war,  on
the  other  hand,  either  remained  under  the  power  of  their
captors  or  were  sold  as  slaves  all  over  the  world  (.\ni.
16).  Obviously  it  was  only  in  the  first  of  these  cases
that  the  prisoners  could  by  any  possibility  have  formed
the  nucleus  of  a  permanent  Israelite  community  living
abroad  ;  but  we  know  of  no  actual  instance  in  v.hich
this  happened.

The  forced  migrations  arising  out  of  the  conquests  of
1106


DISPERSION

the  Assyrian  and  the  Babylonian  kinjjs  were  of  a  quite


2.  Tiglath


different  character. The  first  was  brought


^ileafr  and  =''^"'  '"  734  by  Tiglath-pileser  III.  (2  K.
pueaerana  ^,.^^,  .  ^^  ^  ,,^,^,^  j_^,p  Sargon  deported


Nebuchad
rezzar,


)29)  ;  at  a  later  date  Sargon  deported
27,280  inhabitants  of  Samaria  to  Meso-
potamia and  Media  (2  K.  176).  These
large  colonies  seem  to  have  become  completely  absorbed  ;
history  furnishes  no  clear  trace  of  their  continued  separ-
ate existence.  Still,  there  is'no  improbability  in  the
supposition  that  many  of  the  banished  Israelites  sub-
sequently became  united  with  the  later  exiles  from  Judah.
These  later  exiles  were  transported  by  Nebuchadrezzar
II.  to  Babylon  in  597,  586,  and  582, — according  to
Jer.  5228-30  to  the  number  of  4600  souls.  They

did not reaelily  accommodate themselves to the  ar-
rangrinciits  made  by  the  king  in  their behalf, having
„ ..  Ixicn led  by  their  prophets to  ex[)ect  a

. ee  ings ..p^g^jy  return  to  Jerusalem  (Jer.  2i)  Ezck.
01  israeutes.  ^^^ .^^-^^  ^.■^^^. ^^  ^^^  j.^^^^^ ^^  ^^^

sharetl  by  Jeremiah  and  Ezekiel  ;  and  hence  it  is  that
the  first-named  prophet  has  left  us  a  clear  utterance
with  regard  to  that  (for  Israel)  perplexing  event — the
'exile.'  For  him  the  Babylonian  Exile  is  a  prolonged
punishment  from  God.  It  must  be  submitted  to  with
resignation  and  patience,  and  relief  will  come  only
to  those  in  whom  the  chastisement  has  fulfilled  its  pur-
pose. Hence  he  admonishes  the  exiles  to  settle  quietly
down  in  Babylonia,  to  think  of  the  welfare  of  their
families,  and  to  seek  their  own  good  in  that  of  the
foreigners  among  whom  their  lot  is  cast  (Jer.  294-7).
On  the  other  hand,  in  his  view  the  intention  of  those
men  of  Judah  who  were  proposing  of  their  own  proper
motion  to  forsake  the  land  of  Yahw6  and  remove  to
Egypt  was  against  the  will  of  God  :  it  was  the  road  to
ruin  (Jer. -12/).  This  view  of  the  prophet  did  not,
however,  turn  them  from  their  purpose  (see  Jere-
miah). Nor  did  the  distinction  made  by  the  prophet
between  involuntary  and  voluntary  exile,  however  ob-
vious in  itself,  affect  the  theorists  of  a  later  age,  whom
we  find  expecting  the  return  of  the  Israelites  indis-
criminately from  all  the  lands  of  the  dispersion  (Is.
1112  435/.)-

Let  us  now  seek  to  trace  the  subsequent  history  of

the  diaspora  in  the  various  lands  of its abode. The

.p..  . Judahites  deported to Babylonia  con-

■R  ^^^f  ^'^^  ^°^  stituted,  alike  in  numbers  and  in  worth,
uaoyioma. ^^^  ^^^^  ^^^^^^  ^j.  ^^^^-^  ^^^^^  ^^  j^

24 12-16  25 II  Jer.  52x5).  They  carried  with  them,
accordingly,  as  we  learn  from  the  Book  of  Ezekiel,  into
their  new  home  all  the  political  and  religious  tendencies
of  the  later  period.  In  particular,  there  was  in  Baby-
lonia no  want  of  persons  who  cherished  and  developed
the  ideas  of  the  prophets  of  the  eighth  and  the  seventh
centuries.  For  i)roof  we  have  only  to  look  at  the  great
zeal  which  was  shown  in  preserving  and  adapting  the
older  historical  and  legal  literature,  or  to  call  to
mind  the  many  prophetical  utterances  belonging  to
this  p>eriod.  Those  who  cherished  these  ideals  did  not
constitute  any  '  close  '  community  ;  they  mingled  freely
with  those  who  were  opposed  to  them,  and  the  pro-
phetic conception  always  had  much  to  contend  with.
Still,  there  were  certain  centres  for  Israelitic  piety  at
which  fidelity  to  the  Law  and  hope  in  the  return  of  the
exiles  were  sedulously  and  specially  cherished.  Tel-
ABIB  (Ezek.  815),  the  river  Chebar  (Ezek.  I3),  Ahava
(Ezra  8 15),  and  Casiphia  (Ezra  817)  are  the  only,
names  of  such  places  that  have  come  down  to  us ;
but  doubtless  there  were  others.  When  we  find  Ezra
fetching  Levites  from  Casiphia  we  have  evidence
enough  to  mark  the  place  as  a  centre  of  deutero-
nomislic  legalism.  The  Babylonian  Diaspora  was  by
_  no means  entirely  deprived of these

,  ■ ,  , devoted  religious  workers  in the  sixth
returned  to ,,-.-■• r„.

T , ,  and  fifth  centuries. The  return  under

Judan. ,.  ,  ,  ,

Cyrus  must  not  be  construed  exactly

as we find it represented in Ezra  1-3 (see Israel,


DISPERSION

§50^1?:;  Ezra,  ii.;  Cyrus).  The  command  of  C}tus  to
rebuild  the  temple  of  Yahw6  in  Jerusalem  and  the
mission  of  .Shcshbazzar  in  538  led  to  the  return  of  but
few  families  to  the  ancestral  home  ;  the  tidings  that
the  restoration  of  the  temple  had  been  accomplished
(5'9-5'5)  le^  only  to  the  sending  of  deputations  and
of  gifts  to  Jerusalem  (Zech.  6g^);  it  was  not  more
than  some  5000  or  6000  fiersons  that  Ezra  led  back
to  Judaia  alx)ut  430  «.  c.  All  this  abundantly  proves
that  the  inclination  to  return  was  not  very  strongly
felt  by  the  exiles.

For  this  there  were  various  causes.  Many  of  the
exiles  were  indifferent  in  religious  matters  ;  some  had
in  the  interval  adapted  themselves  too  closely  to  the
new  conditions  in  which  they  found  themselves  ;  others
held  the  return  to  lie  premature,  deeming  that  the
times  of  fulfilment  had  not  yet  come.  In  accordance
with  prophecy,  the  last-mentioned  were  expecting  some
special  divine  interposition  to  put  an  end  to  the  '  exile '
and  to  give  the  signal  for  the  beginning  of  the  glori-
fication of  Israel  (Jer.  3236/:  Ezek.  34  n/:  Is.  403^
9^  Mic.  52).  Just  as,  in  Jerusalem,  men  hesitated  as
to  whether  they  should  proceed  with  the  building  of
the  temple  and  not  rather  wait  for  Yahwes  manifesta-
tion of  himself  in  glory  (Hag.  12^),  so  in  Babylonia
they  hesitated  as  to  whether  they  ought  to  return  forth-
with and  not  rather  await  some  special  divine  inter-
position. It  is  possible  that  a  few  additional  families
may  have  migrated  to  Jerusalem  after  the  post-exilic
community  there  had  been  reconstituted  under  Nehemiah
and  Ezra  (430  B.C.)  ;  but  in  any  case  it  is  certain  that
a  very  considerable  body  of  Jews  who  still  adhered  to
the  law  remained  behind  in  Babylonia,  and  thus  that
the  same  tendencies  which  had  led  to  the  great  changes
in  Jerusalem  brought  about  through  the  help  of  the
Persian  kings  continued  to  be  influential  in  Bab3'lonia
also.  The  Babylonian  Diaspora  received  an  accession
under  the  reign  of  Artaxerxes  III.  Ochus  (358-338)  when
he  transported  Jews  to  Hyrcania  and  Babylonia  (Georg.
Syncell.  ed.  Dindorf,  I486).

The  Persian  overlordship  may  be  assumed  to  have
helped to  open the way  for the Jews of Babylonia

_  ,  .  .  towards  the  E.  and  the  N.  (The  case  of
d t°^*  Nehemiah  [.\eh.  1#]  is  a  clear  example

happened  ;  compare  also  Tobit  I9-22.
Wherever  a  Jew  had  established  himself  in  some
advantageous  position  there  were  never  wanting  others
to  press  forward  and  follow  this  up  for  themselves.)
From  Babylonia  (and  Hyrcania)  the  Jews  advanced  to
Elam  (Is.  11  11),  Persia,  Media,  Armenia,  Cappadocia,
and  the  Black  Sea.  The  relations  which  Herod  the  Great
had  established  with  the  princes  of  the  Upper  Euphrates
were  utilised,  we  may  be  sure,  by  the  Jewish  Diaspora.
Their  centre  of  radiation  for  the  whole  of  these  Eastern
countries,  however,  continued  always  to  be  in  Bnbylonia,
where  the  Euphrates  and  the  Tigris  begin  to  merge.
Here  was  situated  Nehardea  (xynnj,  NaapSa),  where
the  temple  tax  levied  in  these  parts  was  annually
collected  (see  below,  §  16).  In  the  same  neighbour-
hood two  Jews  named  Asinasus  and  Anilasus,  in  the
time  of  Caligula,  founded  a  sort  of  robber  state  which
held  its  own  for  sixteen  years  (Jos.  yini.  xviii.  9i).
Another  important  focus  of  Judaism  was  the  city  of
Nisibis  (pa's:),  in  the  upper  basin  of  the  Chaboras.
The  Jewish  community  in  Babylonia  could  boast  of  the
conversion  of  King  Izates  of  Adiabene  (3"nn),  on  the
upper  Tigris,  along  with  his  mother  and  the  rest  of  his
kindred,  in  the  reign  of  Claudius  (Jos.  An/,  xx.  2-4).

The  develoijment  of  the  Diaspora  in  Egypt  followed

a  quite  different  course  from  that  which  has  just  Ijeen

_.  sketched. Whilst  the  Judaism  of  Baby-

'. pi Ionia maintained its Oriental character

°^"  ■ with  considerable  strictness,  in  Egypt,  or

(to  speak  more  precisely)  in  Alexandria,  it  entered  upon

that remarkable alliance with Hellenism which was


DISPERSION

destined  to  have  such  iniiKjrlant  effects  on  the  history  of  j
religion.  WheUu-r  I'samclik  I.  (663-609  B.C.)  actually  |
had  Jewish  mercenaries  in  his  service  (letter  of  Aristeas)
may  be  left  an  open  question!  We  know,  however,
that  in  609  Necho  11.  condemned  King  Jehoahaz  to  exile
in  I'-gypt,  and  that  in  586  a  bo<ly  of  Jews,  including
Jeremiah  the  prophet,  under  the  leadership  of  Johanan
b.  Kareah,  migrated  to  Taiii-anhks  (  7V// /-»</<://«<•,•  cp
Jer.  ,4'2/).  According  to  Jer.  44 1^  (an  insertion
dating  from  alxjut  the  fifth  century)  Jews  settled  also  in
MIGIK)!..  NoPU  (Mcntphis),  and  I'ATHKus  (Upper
Kgypt).  Their  settlement  in  Alexandria  is  a.ssigned  by
the  Pseudo-Hecata-us,  by  Aristeas,  and  by  Josephus  to
the  period  of  Alexander  the  Great  or  Ptolemy  I.  It  has
been  shown  by  M.  VN'illrich,'  however,  that  the  state-
ments of  these  writers  must  be  taken  w  ith  great  caution.
In  his  own  view  there  was  no  considerable  Jewish
clement  in  Alexandria  until  the  second  century  B.C.
Against  this  theory  two  objections  can  be  urged.  First,
the  statement  of  Apion  that  the  Jews  settled  to  the  K.
of  the  harlxjur  of  Alexandria  (Jos.  c.  Af>.  24)  can  be
understood  only  with  reference  to  the  time  of  the  rise  of
the  city.  Secondly,  the  statement  of  Josephus  (ib. ;  cp
/y/ ii.  18 7)  that  the  Jews  in  Alexandria  received  the
honorific  name  of  Macedoni.in  can  hardly  be  doubted.
Josephus  indeed  exaggerates  ;  the  Jews  in  Alexandria
were  in  the  first  instance  under  the  protection  of  the
'  phyle '  of  the  Macetloninns,  and  the  Jewish  quarter
formed  a  part  of  this  '  phyle' ;  in  the  limited  sen.se  only
can>e  they  to  Xtc  called  Macedonians.  As  the  later
I'tolemies,  esixxially.  from  the  time  of  Ptolemy  \I.
Philometor  onwards,  favoured  the  Egyptian  more  than
the  (jrecian  element  in  Alexandria,  it  is  not  to  lie  sup-
posed that  the  Jews  reached  this  privileged  |x)silion  so
late  as  the  second  cei'tury.'^  This  being  so,  they  can
have  obtained  it  only  under  the  first  Ptolemies,  and  in
that  case  it  is  very  far  indeed  from  improbable  that
Jews  were  inc'uded  among  the  earliest  inhabitants  of
Alexandria  and  thus  acquired  special  privileges  there.
They  had  a  separate  c]uarter  of  their  own,  known  as
the  A  (Delta)  quarter  (Jos.  UJ  ii.  183).  The  repeated
struggles  between  Ptolemies  and  Seleucids,  and  the
preference  of  the  Jews  for  the  former  dynasty,  may  Ije
presumed  to  have  led  in  succeeding  generations  to
further  Jewish  migrations  into  Kgypt,  especially  to
Alexandria,  partly  even  as  prisoners  of  war  (cp  Jer.  in
Dan.  11  4).

We  are  told  of  Ptolemy  II.  Philadelphus  (Jos.  Ant.  xii.  2  i)
that,  as  a  fitting  prelude  to  the  Greek  translation  of  the
Hebrew  Scriptures,  he  redeemed  some  120,000  Jewish  prisoners
of  war.  The  story  is  doubtless  a  fiction  ;  but  it  throws  light  on
some  of  the  circumstances  which  had  to  do  with  tlie  increase  of
the  Jewish  population  in  Egypt.  Ptolemy  VI.  Philometor
(181-145)  also  is  mentioned  in  history  as  a  friend  to  the  Jews;
Ptolemy  VII.  (see  Ki'ERGEtes),  as  a  relentless  enemy.  For  the
former  see  Jos.  AnI.  xiii.  3  i/. ;  for  the  latter  Jos.  c.  A^.  2  s.  We
may  take  it  that  Euergetes  for  some  years  regarded  the  Jews  as
his  political  opponents,  siding  as  they  did  with  his  rival  Ptolemy
Philometor  ;  but  we  have  evidence  of  papyri  and  inscriptions
that  he  also  showed  them  various  marks  of  favour  (Willrich,  <>/.
cit.  U2^.).

In  I'hilo's  time  (40  A.  D. )  the  Jews  in  Alexandria  were
so  many  as  to  occupy  two  entire  quarters,  besides
furnishing  a  sprinkling  over  the  rest  of  the  city  {in
Flaccum,  8,  ed.  Mangey,  2525).

An  exceptional  position  was  taken  by  the  Onias
colony in the  nome  of Heliopolis. The  high priest

_ .  Onias  {q.v.),  son  of  Simon  the  Just,  had

tonolia  *^''^"  refuge  from  his  adversaries,  the
™  ■  children  of  Tobias,  and  from  Antiochus  IV.
Epiphanes,  in  173  or  170,  by  Hight  into  I'gypt.  He
was  accompanied  by  a  body  of  his  adherents — among
them  DosiTHEis  (4),  who  is  named  in  the  subscription
to  the  Greek  version  of  the  liook  of  Esther.  From
Ptolemy  VI. Philometor  he and his people received

1  Juden  u.  Griechtn  vor  d.  makkaiiischeH  Erhtbung,  1-43,

1267^. I'QSI.

*  Cp  Lumbroso,  L'Egitto  dei  Greet  €  del  Romani  ['95I ;
Mahaffy,  Th*  Empire  of  the  Ptolemies,  359^.  383^  ['95).


DISPERSION

permission  to  settle  on  the  eastern  Ijordcr  of  the  Nile
delta  in  the  nome  of  Heliopolis.  Here  Onias  built  a
fortress,  and  within  this  a  sanctuary  (on  the  pattern  of
the  temple  of  Jerusalem),  in  which  he  eslablishc-d  a  legal
worship  of  Yahwi-.  Philometor  endowed  the  temple
with  land  (cp  Jos.  ///  i.  1  i  ;  vii.  102^;  Ant.  xii.  f>i  ;
97  ;  xiii.3i^  ;  also  the  recent  discu.ssions  of  the  date
of  this  exodus  and  the  jxirsons  engaged  in  it  in  Willrich.
op.  cit.  64^  136  f.;  Wellh.  GGA.  1895,  p.  9A7  f.  ;
also  IsKAKi..  §  7).

The  temple  of  Onias.  however,  did  not  receive
universal  recognition  even  in  Egypt  (not  to  speak  of
Palestine).  It  had,  indeed,  the  legitimate  high  priest,
of  the  family  of  Aaron  ;  but  it  did  not  occupy  the
legitimate  site.  Thus  the  Diaspora  in  I'gypt  was  brought
to  a  state  of  schism,  which  is  alluded  to  in  a  veiled
manner  in  Ant.  xiii.  84  and  elsewhere,  as  Willrich  (op.
cit.  \2()  ff.)  has  conjectured,  no  doubt  correctly.  At
the  same  time,  the  antagonism  ljetwc<-n  Ix-ontopolis  (as
the  city  of  the  Oni.as-temple  was  called)  and  Jerusalem
does  not  seem  to  have  been  ver)'  intense  :  otherwise  the
allusion  to  the  temple  of  Onias  in  Is.  19 18/.  (but  cp
Hekk-S,  (  itv  of)  would  hardly  have  lieen  allowed  to
pass.  Moreover,  national  feeling  appears  on  repeated
occasions  to  have  overridden  religious  or  ecclesiastical
differences  (Jos.  Ant.  xii.  1^2;  xiv.  81;  lij  \.  94).
Peculiarly  noteworthy  is  the  readiness  for  war  and  the
ability  for  self-defence  to  which  Josephus  frecjuently  calls
attention  in  the  followers  of  Oni.as  [c.  Ap.  25  ;  Ant.  xiii.
IO4  ;  1:5 1/  ;  liJ  i.  94  ;  Ant.  xiv.  81).  The  temple  at
Leontopolis  was  destroyed  in  73  A. D.  by  Lupus  and
Paulinas  by  order  of  Vespasian  (Jos.  lij  vii.  102^  ).

Jews  penetrated also into Upper Eg}pt  and  Cush

(Is.  11 11), as we learn from lately  published pap}Ti.

_  They  were  strongly  representtd  in  Cyre-

9.  upper  ^^^^^  j^i^^  [c.  Ap.1^\  Jer.  on  Dan.
hgypt,  etc.  jj^^^  j^j^^j^  ^^|j  j^g  .,„/  xiv.  72).
writing  of  85  B.C.,  divides  the  inhabitants  of  the  city  of
CjTene  into  four  classes — citizens,  peasants,  settlers
(metceci),  and  Jews.  In  the  city  of  IJerenice  the  inscrip-
tions show  a  special  iroXfTfi'/xa  of  the  Jews  dating  from
13  B.C.  (cp  CIG  iii.  no.  5361).

The  Diaspora  in  Egypt  did  not  owe  its  origin  entirely
—  as,  in  the  first  instance,  did  that  of  Babylonia  —  to
external  compulsion.  It  owed  its  growth
and  its  reputable  standing  mainly  to  the
great  changes  producwl  throughout  the
i:ast  generally  by  the  conquests  of
Alexander.  The  greatly  enlarge<l  channels  of  com-
merce, especially  by  sea-routes,  attracted  many  from
the  interior  to  the  coasts.  The  newly-foundetl  (Jrecian
cities,  rendere<l  attractive  by  all  the  achievements  of
Greek  art  and  civilisation,  Ijecame  fiivourite  resorts.
Henceforth  trade  relations,  the  desire  to  see  the  world,
soon  also  political  considerations  and  (we  may  well
suppose)  a  certain  conscious  or  unconscious  craving  for
culture,  became  operative  in  promoting  the  dispersion
of  the  Jews  over  the  civilised  world.

Such  things  seenj  to  have  been  specially  influential

in  bringing  alxsut  the  settlement  of  Jews  in  Syria. It

is quite possible, indeed, that the old

■'  ^**P Israelite  colony  in  Damascus  (see  above,

"^  y^^  ■  §1)  may  have  maintaine<l  an  uninter-
rupted existence  and  gradually  developed  into  the  Jewish
community  to  the  largeness  of  which  Josephus  bears
witness  (Z//  ii.  2O2  ;  vii.  87).  In  some  of  the  Phoenician
cities  also,  as,  for  example,  in  Tyre  (cp  Ezek.  27)  and
Sidon,  Israelites  may  have  settled  from  a  very  early
period  ;  as  at  the  main  points  on  the  great  trade  route
between  Jerusalem  and  Mesopotamia,  such  as  Hamath
(Is.  1 1 11).  The  Syria  of  the  Seleucid;e,  however,  seems
first  to  have  become  thoroughly  accessible  to  Jews  only
after  the  reign  of  Antiochus  IV.  Epiphanes.  It  was  his
successors,  for  example,  who  first  conceded  to  them  the
right  of  free  settlement  in  Antioch  (Jos.  Ant.  vii.  83).
The  later  Seleucidae  had  abtindant  occasion  for  showing


10.  Attrac-
tions of
civilisatioiL


DISPERSION

consideration  to  the  resident  Jews :  in  the  frequent
struggles  for  the  crown,  the  support  of  the  Maccat)ees
became  important  (Jos.  Arif.  xiii.  53).  The  opposite
statement  of  Josephus  that  it  was  Seleucus  I.  (306-280
H.  c. )  who  granted  to  the  Jews  the  rights  of  citizenship
in  Antioch  (r.  A/>.  24),  or  even  equal  rights  with  Greeks
in  all  the  cities  founded  by  him  in  Asia  and  Lower
Syria  {An/,  xii.  3i),  is  probably  to  be  understood  only  as
meaning  that  tiie  Jews  ultimately  received  the  rights  of
citizenship  in  all  the  places  named.  It  is  easy  to  under-
stand how  the  astonishing  increase  in  numbers,  power,
and  influence,  which  the  Jewish  conmionwealth  gained
under  the  rule  of  the  Maccabees,  should  first  have  made
itself  felt  in  the  neighbouring  kingdom  of  the  Seleucidng.
The  Maccabees  had  subjugated  and  converted  the  Idu-
maeans  in  the  south  as  well  as  the  Iturneans  in  the  north  ;
Galilee  and  Pertva  also  became  Judaised  during  their
supremacy.  What  was  the  little  connnunity  founded
by  Ezra  and  Nehcmiah,  either  in  extent  or  in  numbers,
in  comparison  with  this  ?  Jerusalem  had  become  so
strong  that — reversing  the  prophetical  prediction — it
could  lend  to  the  Dispersion  from  the  abundance  of  its
own  forces.  From  this  time  forward  it  was,  we  may
plausibly  conjecture,  that  the  Diaspora  in  Syria  became
so  strong  as  to  exhibit  the  largest  admixture  of  the
Jewish  element  known  anywhere  (Jos.  B/  vii.  3  3).
Precise  details  regarding  the  individual  localities  are,
however,  lacking.

The immigration of  Jews to  Asia Minor and its

islands  was  partly  overland  by  way  of  Syria  and  Meso-

19 T A ■ potamia, and  partly  by  sea  from  Egypt


Minor  and
the  West.


and  Phoenicia,  but  for  the  most  part  not
before  the  Grecian  period.  It  is  possible,
however,  that  Jews  may  have  been  sold
as  slaves  into  these  regions  at  an  earlier  date  (cp  Ezek.
27 13  Joel  3 [4] 7).  It  is  interesting  that  Clearchus  of
Soli  {circa  320  B.  C. )  speaks  of  a  meeting  between  his
master  Aristotle  and  an  already  Hellenised  Jew  (Jos.
c.  Ap.  i.  22).  In  the  passage  in  question  the  Jews  are
represented  as  descendants  of  the  Indian  philosophers  ;
which  shows  that  at  that  time  and  place  the  Jew  was
looked  upon  with  wonder  as  a  new  phenomenon — the
educated  Jew,  at  least.  Josephus  {Ant.  xii.  84)  will
have  it  that  a  colony  of  2000  Jewish  families  was  trans-
ported by  Antiochus  III.  the  Great  (224-1S7)  from
Mesopotamia  and  Babylonia  into  Lydia  and  Phrygia.
The  form  and  the  substance  of  the  statement  alike
arouse  suspicion  (Willrich,  2)9  ff-)-  Here  again  we  are
in  ignorance  as  to  the  details  of  the  migration.  In  any
case,  it  was  to  the  advantage  of  the  Jewish  Diaspora
when  Greece  and  Asia  Minor  in  146  and  130  B.C.
became  Roman  provinces  and  the  kings  of  Eastern  Asia
Minor  accepted  the  supremacy  of  Rome.  From  the
days  of  Simon,  the  Maccabees  had  been  in  friendly
alliance  with  Rome,  and  the  Jews  very  soon  began  to
realise  that  under  the  Roman  rule  they  enjoyed  greater
freedom  in  the  exercise  of  their  religious  customs  than
they  had  found  in  the  Grecian  kingdoms  (cp  Jos.  Ant.
xvi.  24,  and  below).  Accordingly,  as  early  as  the  first
century  B.C.,  we  find  them  making  use  of  their  good
relations  with  the  Romans  to  secure  any  doubtful  or
disputed  rights  in  the  cities  of  Asia  Minor  and  Syria  by
decisions  of  the  supreme  authority  (cp  decrees  and  the
names  therein  mentioned  as  given  in  Jos.  Ant.  xiv.  10,
xiv.  123^,  xvi.  23_^,  'o-iff.  ;  for  Cyprus,  Ant.  xiii.  IO4,
Acts  134^  ;  for  Crete,  DJ  ii.  7 1  ;  also  Acts  13-21
passini).

Jews  arrived  in  Greece  and  Italy  in  the  second  century

B.C.  if  not  earlier. Between 170  and 156  we  find  an

_ _  emancipated  Jewish  slave  named  in  a

13.  in  lireece  jj^jp^j inscrip-ion (Willrich. 123/),


and  Italy.


and  Valerius  Miximus  (1  32)  mentions


that  in  139  B.C.  certain  proselytising  Jews  were  ex-
pelled from  Rome.  The  fabulous  assertion  of  kinship
Ijctween  the  Jews  and  the  Spartans  (i  Mace.  12  21)  pre-
supposes for  the  time  of  its  origin  (see  SPART.\)  a  mutual


DISPERSION

acquaintance.  Jewish  inscriptions,  moreover,  occur  in
Greece,  and  the  apostle  Paul  found  firmly  organised
communities  there  (Acts  17/.).  In  63  B.C.,  Jewish
captives  were  brought  to  Rome  by  Pompey  and  sold  as
slaves.  Soon  emancipated,  they  acquired  the  Roman
citizenship  and  founded  the  Jewish  colony  upon  the
right  bank  of  the  Titer  (Philo,  ed.  Mangey,  2568).
Caesar  conferred  upon  the  Jews  many  favours  :  compare
the  decree  of  the  senate  in  Jos.  Ant.  xiv.  85,  and  the
immediately  preceding  narrative.  Herod  the  Great,
who  always  interested  himself  in  the  welfare  of  the  Jewish
Diaspora  {Ant.  xvi.  22-s,  61-8),  cultivated  relations
with  Rome  assiduously,  and  greatly  promoted  the  Jewish
settlements  there.  Thus  in  the  course  of  the  first
Christian  century  the  Jews  had  already  been  able  to
establish  themselves  on  the  left  bank  of  the  Tiber  beside
the  Porta  Capena  (Juv.  Sat.  3  12-16),  and  at  a  some-
what later  date  on  the  Campus  Martius  and  even  in  the
Subura.  In  connection  with  events  in  the  year  4  B.C.
Josephus  {BJ  ii.  t)i)  speaks  of  a  Jewish  embassy  to
Rome  as  having  been  supported  by  more  than  8000
Jews  there.  Under  the  same  year  he  incidentally
mentions  {BJ  ii.  7  i)  the  existence  of  Jews  in  Dicasarchia
(Puteoli).  The  friendship  of  the  two  Agrippas  with  the
imperial  house,  the  relations  of  Josephus  with  the  Flavii,
the  love  of  Titus  for  Berenice,  all  testify  to  the  progress
which  Judaism  had  made  in  the  highest  Roman  circles  ;
and  no  one  will  imagine  the  Jews  of  that  day  to  have
been  so  self-forgetful  as  not  to  utilise  such  favouring
circumstances,  as  far  as  they  possibly  could,  for  their
own  advantage.

To  comjjlete  the  present  survey,  Arabia  also  ought  to
be  mentioned  as  one  of  the  fields  of  the  Jewish  Diaspora.
From  Acts  2  n  and  Gal.  1 17  the  inference  that  in  the  first
century  there  were  Jewish  connnunities  there  is  certain ;
but  as  to  their  origin  we  are  left  entirely  to  conjecture.

Philo  {in  Flacc.  6,  ed.  Mangey,  2523)  estimates  the
number  of  Jews  living  in  Egypt  alone  in  the  time  of
Caligula  at  a  million.  If  to  this  figure
we  add  the  total  of  the  other  groups
mentioned  above,  we  shall  not  be  far
wrong  in  putting  the  figure  at  three  or  four  millions.
The  violent  breaking-up  of  the  Jewish  population  in
F'alestine  in  consequence  of  the  war  of  66-70  A.  D.  (cp
Jos.  BJ  vi.  82,  93)  raised  this  number  still  further  ;  and
thus  the  expression  of  Dio  Cassius  (693)  in  speaking  of
the  Jewish  insurrection  under  Hadrian — thatall  theworld,
so  to  say  {y\  olKovfievrj),  was  stirred — is  intelligible  enough.
II.  The  legal  standing  of  the  communities  of  the  Dia-
spora at  first  varied  in  the  various  lands.  The  colonies
.J. -in the AssjtIo  -  Babylonian empire were

■  ,P  crown  possessions,  under  royal  protec-
scanmng.  ^.^^  ^^^^^  ^  ^^y .^^^  ^^^^^^  ^j^^^  ^-^^^^  ^^,^^^

grants  from  the  king,  on  which  they  were  free  to  live  in
accordance  with  their  own  laws  and  customs  (cp  the
counterpart  in  Israel  2  K.  1724^).  If  the  colonists
flourished  they  gradually  established  their  independence ;
if  otherwise,  they  ultimately  lapsed  into  a  state  of  serf-
dom (cp  Gen.  47i3#)-  In  this  respect  it  is  not  to  be
supposed  that  any  considerable  change  came  about
under  Persian  or  Greek  supremacy  as  long  as  the  aliens
continued  to  be  members  of  the  colony.  In  Egj'pt  the
same  course  was  followed  by  the  rulers  or  pharaohs,  as
Gen.  il  -iff.  shows  :  to  shepherds  a  pastoral  region  was
assigned,  and  the  pharaoh  was  their  master  {v.  (>b  ;  Ex.
III).  It  must  be  borne  in  mind,  however,  that  in  this
case  Israelites  came  into  Egypt  not  only  as  prisoners,
but  also  as  refugees.

Brighter  prospects  opened  up  before  Israelites  in
foreign  parts  as  Alexander  and  his  successors  founded
new  cities  in  the  east.  In  Alexandria  they  received
important  privileges  ;  they  came  into  a  fellowship  of
protection  with  the  Macedonians — the  'phyle'  which
probably  was  considered  the  foremost  of  all  and  was
therefore  named  after  Dionysus  (see  above,  §  7).  What
use  the  Jews  made  of  this  privilege  is  shown  by  Josephus,


14.  Approxi-
mate numbers.


DISPERSION

who  asserts  that  they  had  equal  rights  {Ifforifda,  Icrovo/xla,
iffoiro\iT(ia)  with  the  Macedonians  and  even  the  light
to  txiar  this  honorific  nanje  (f.  ,-//.  24  ;  Ji/  ii.  18  7).  As
Alexandria  never  attained  the  characteristic  constitu-
tion of  a  Greek  city  with  a  /SouXr).  but  continued  to  be
governed  directly  by  royal  oflicials,  it  is  probable  that
the  s(jecial  administration  and  special  jurisdiction  in  civil
matters  which  the  Jews  enjoyed  within  the  bounds  of
their  own  quarter  of  the  city  were  of  ancient  standing.
At  a  later  ijeriod,  as  the  Ptolemies  came  to  take  more
account  of  the  I*2gyptian  population,  it  is  possible  that
many  of  the  Jewish  privileges  may  have  been  curtailed
(cp  Mahaffy,  T/u-  Empire  of  the  Ptolemies,  76,  ZS9ff<
381  J/".;  Lumbroso,  L'Egitto  dei  Greci  e  dei  Romani,
1895,  140^).  In  Stralx)'s  time,  however,  they  still
had  an  administration  of  their  own  under  the  special
jurisdiction  of  an  ethnarch  (Jos.  Ant.  .\iv.  7  2).  In  any
case,  they  again  received  full  rights  of  citizenship  in
Alexandria  from  Caisar  (Jos.  Ant.  xiv.  10  i  ;  c.  A  p.  'la,).
In  Cyrenaica  also  they  enjoyed  special  privileges  (Jos.
Ant.  .xiv.  7  2),  The  Onias  colony  doubtless  enjoyed  the
special  protection  of  the  sovereign  (see  above,  §  8).

In  the  (ireck  cities  properly  so  called  the  Jews  were
not  so  favourably  situated.  In  these  a  group  of
foreigners  could  kfep  up  the  observance  of  its  ancestral
customs,  especially  its  religious  customs,  only  as  a
private  society  or  club  {B[a.ao%,  t(ta.vos  ;  cj)  E.  Ziebarth,
Das  i^riechische  Vereinswesen,  1896).  The  Jews  in  this
respect  followed  the  lead  of  the  Phcrnicians  in  Athens
and  Delos.  We  do  not  possess  definite  evidence  of  the
fact,  though  it  is  interesting  to  note  that  in  the  Roman
decree  preserved  in  Jos.  Ant.  xiv.  10  8  the  Jewish  com-
munities without  prejudice  to  their  privileges  are  placed
upon  a  level  with  dia<xoi.  In  particular  cities,  such  as
Ephesus  and  Sardis,  they  no  doubt  sooner  or  later
acquired  the  rights  of  citizenship  (Jos.  c.  A/>.  24  ;  Ant.
xiv.  10 24)  ;  but  whether  they  already  had  it  un<ler  the
Seleucidce,  as  Josephus  asserts,  or  whether  they  first
received  it  from  the  Romans,  is  not  (juite  clear  (see
above,  §  11).  It  frecjuently  happened  that  their  citizen-
ship became  in  turn  a  source  of  embarrassment.  In
the  Greek  cities,  by  ancient  custom,  community  of  place
was  held  to  imply  community  of  worship  ;  in  many
places  the  fact  of  citizenship  found  its  expression  in  some
special  cult,  svkIi  as  that  of  Dionysus.  Ilence  a  demand
that  the  Jews  slioiild  worship  the  local  god — a  demand
which  they  were  compelled  by  their  creed  to  resist  (Jos.
t".  Ap.  '26).  Even  in  Ctesarea  Palajstina  their  laoiroXiTeia
did  not  secure  them  full  protection  (Jos.  Ant.  xx.  879
Z;/ii.  13?  14  4-5  18  i).

It  was  not  till  the  time  of  Julius  Coesar  and  Augustus
that  the  Jews  of  the  Diaspora  received  a  general  recogni-
tion of  their  legal  standing  throughout  the  Roman  Emjiire.
Josephus  (Ant.  xiv.  85  10  12  3-6  xvi.  62-7)  quotes  a
series  of  enactments  from  47  B.C. -10  B.C.  by  which
the  Jews  had  secured  to  them  the  enjoyment  of  religious
freedom,  exemption  from  military  service,  special  rights
in  the  administration  of  property,  and  special  juris-
diction (in  civil  matters).  Nicolaus  Damascenus,  in  his
apology  for  the  Jews  before  M.  Vipsanius  Agrippa  in
Lesbos,  in  14  B.C.,  says:  "The  happiness  which  all
mankind  do  now  enjoy  by  your  means  we  estimate  by
this  very  thing,  that  on  all  hands  we  are  allowed  each
one  of  us  to  live  according  to  his  conviction  and  to
practi.se  his  religion"  (Jos.  Ant.  xvi.  24).  In  Roman
law  the  Jewish  communities  came  under  the  category
of  collegia  licita  (Tertullian,  religio  licita).  After  70
A.i).  this  held  only  for  the  Jewish  religion,  not  for  the
Jewish  nation.  From  cases  covered  by  these  general
regulations  we  must  distinguish  those  in  which  individual
Jews  had  obtainefl  for  themselves  the  Roman  citizenship
(.\cts  22  25-29  ;  Jos.  Ant.  xiv.  10  16  17/ ).  See  Govern-
ment, §  30/.

III.  The  great  difficulty  of  Jewish  social  life  in  the
Diaspora  lay  in  the  fact  that  community  of  place  and
community  of  worship  no  longer  coincided. The  case


DISPERSION

had  lx:en  quite  othcrwi.se  in  Palestine,  and  the  Jewish
laws  in  their  original  framing  had  contemplated  Pales-
tinian conditions  alone. Communities


16.  Inner  and
outer  life.


of  some  sort,  however,  had  to  be  formed
abroad,  if  Judaism  was  to  maintain
itself  there  at  all.  Thus  the  attempt  to  secure  local
separateness  was  abandoned.  Attention  w;is  concen-
tratetl  on  the  effort  to  maintain  the  Ixjnd  of  union  by
means  of  a  separate,  if  restricted,  jurisdiction,  and  ad-
ministration of  property  ;  the  sacrificial  worship  was
given  up  ;  and  the  means  for  a  new  spiritual  worship
were  sought  in  regularly  recurring  meetings  for  prayer,
reading  of  the  scriptures,  and  prejiching  (see  Svna-
gogi'k).  l"or  the  central  sacrificial  worship  there  re-
mained the  high  honour  of  being  the  expression  of  the
connection  still  subsisting  between  Jerusalem  and  the
outside  communities  ;  every  Jew  of  twenty  years  old  or
more  had  yearly  to  pay  a  half-shekel  or  didrachma  to
the  temple  for  the  maintenance  of  the  sacrificial  system
still  carried  on  there.  This  tax  was  collected  yearly  in
the  various  districts,  and  transmitted  to  Jerusalem  by
the  hands  of  jjersons  of  repute  (Philo,  de  Mon.  23)
under  carefully  fjfamed  regulations  (Jos.  Ant.  xyiii.  9i).
Further,  the  pilgrimages  to  the  three  princi[)al  feasts,
particularly  that  of  Tabernacles,  annually  brought  vast
crowds  of  Jews  of  the  Diaspora  to  the  religious  capital.
Jose[)hus  \BJ  vi.  9  3)  gives  the  number  of  persons —
natives  and  strangers  together — present  at  the  Passover,
according  to  a  census  taken  in  the  time  of  Cestius  Gallus
(63-66  A.D. ),  as  having  been  2,700,000.  After  the
sacrificial  system  had  been  brought  to  an  end  in  70  A.  D. ,
it  was  by  the  forms  of  religious  fellowship  which  had
been  developed  in  the  Diaspora  that  the  continued
existence  of  Judaism  was  rendered  possible.

The  individual  community  was  called  n3:3  (lit.  'con-
gregation' ;  (}vva.yijy^ri). In  towns  with  a  large  Jewish
_  population (.Alexandria, Antioch. Rome)

^  '  there  were  many  synagogues.  The  heads
°  °^  ■  of  the  communities  are  usually  spoken  of  as
dpXO''''«s-  In  Alexandria  an  e6fdpxv^  ^^'^s  at  the  head
of  the  entire  Jewish  community  (Jos.  .^«/.  xiv.  72):  it
may  be  added  that  he  had  nothing  to  do  with  the
ofTice  of  the  Alabarch  or  Arabarch  (cp  Ai-E.\anukia,
§  2).  Under  Augustus  the  direction  of  affairs  was
handed  over  to  a  yepovffia.  with  Apxcvrts  at  its  head.
In  Rome  each  of  the  many  synagogues  had  its  own
yepoiKTia  with  dpxovres  and  a  yepoi'aidpxv^  over  all.
The  building  in  which  the  meetings  were  held  —  on
sabbaths  and  feast  days  especially  —  was  called  [n'3]
n???:"",  in  Gr.  ffwayuyr]  or  Trpoaevxr),  less  fre(|uently
crvvaytlryiov,  irpocyfVKTrjpiov,  aafi'^aTfiov.  See,  further,
Synagogue.

The  contact brought about by  the Diaspora  com
munities  between  Judaism  and  the  Gnvco- Roman  culture
was  of  great  consequence  to  the  history


18.  Contact
with  Hellenic


world.


)f  civilisation.  Here  again  it  is  the
Western  Diaspora  that  principally
claims  our  attention  ;  the  Eastern,  in
Mesopotamia  and  Babylonia,  had  little  share  in  this  move-
ment, and  indeed  hardly  comes  under  observation  at
all.  It  was  not  until  comparatively  late  in  the  day,  it
would  seem,  that  the  Greeks  began  to  take  any  but  the
most  superficial  interest  in  Judaism  and  the  Jews.
Willrich  (43-63)  has  collected  all  that  Greek  writers
had  to  say  about  them  dow  n  to  the  time  of  .\ntiochus
Epiphanes,  and  remarks  (170):  'In  the  period  l^efore
Antiochus  Epiphanes  the  Greek  regardetl  the  Jew  with
feelings  of  mingled  curiosity  and  wonder,  astonishment
and  instinctive  antipathy.'  In  these  circumstances  it  is
not  surprising  that,  down  to  the  date  in  question,  the
intellectual  importance  of  the  Diaspora  was  slight.
Traders,  freedmen,  and  prisoners  of  war  constituted  the
majority  of  the  Diaspora  of  these  days  ;  that  such  jieople
should  excite  the  interest  and  attention  of  educated
Greeks  was  not  to  be  expected. An educated  Jew


DISPERSION

acquainted with Greek is spoken of  as  a  rarity by
Clearchus  of  Soli  (c.  Ap.  1  22).

The  question of the rapidity or tardiness of the
chantje  in  this  respect  that  ultimately  came  depends  on
whether  we  date  the  production  of  the


19.  The
Septuagint.


Greek translation of the Pentateuch
from  the  reign  of Philadelphus  (285-


246  n. c),  or,  as  has  recently  lx;en  done  by  Willrich
(«/  sup.  154  ff.),  from  that  of  I'hilometor  (181-145
B.C. ).  Whatever  its  date,  this  attempt  to  make  the  Law
speak  in  Greek  conclusively  shows  that  when  it  was
made  the  Jews  of  Alexandria  had  already  assimilated
so  nuich  of  what  was  Greek  that  they  could  no  longer
get  on  with  Hebrew  alone,  either  in  their  synagogues  or
in  their  courts.  Their  sojourn  abroad  made  it  impera-
tive on  Jews  everywhere  to  complete  their  rapproche-
ment with  Hellenism.  In  the  process  many  may  well
have  become  lost  to  Judaism  altogether.  The  Greek
version  of  the  Pentateuch,  however,  evinces  the  fi.xed
determination  of  the  majority  not  to  allow  themselves  to
be  robbed  of  the  old  faith  by  the  new  culture.  As  the
influence  of  the  Jews,  on  trade  and  public  life  gener-
ally, advanced — in  Egypt  and  S)Tia  in  die  first  instance
— it  became  increasingly  necessary  for  the  Greeks  to
decide  definitely  what  their  own  attitude  towards  them  was
to  be.  This  led  to  struggle,  but  also  to  friendly  dealings.
Antipathy  to  Judaism  manifested  itself  both  in  coarse
and  in  refined  ways.  The  uneducated  masses  scoffed
at  the  Jews  for  their  outlandish  customs,


20.  Foreign
antipathy.


plundered  them  at  all  hands,  and  occasion-
ally gave  expression  to  their  hatred  in
massacres.  Civic  authorities  tried  to  infringe  Jewish
privileges  or  to  hinder  the  transmission  of  the  temple
money  to  Jerusalem  (see  the  decree  in  Jos.  Ant.
.xiv.  10).  Roman  emperors  even  more  than  once
sanctioned  measures  that  pressed  hardly  on  the  Jews.
Tiberius  in  19  A.  D.  e.xpelled  them  from  Rome,  and
forced  4000  of  them  upon  military  service  to  Sardinia
(Jos.  Ant.  .xviii. 85;  similarly  Tac.  Ann.  285  Suet.
Tib.  36).  They  seem  soon  afterwards  to  have  been  re-
stored to  the  enjoyment  of  their  rights.  Caligula  gave
free  course  to  a  bloody  persecution  of  the  Jews  in
Alexandria  in  38  A.D.  I'etitions  and  embassies  (Philo,
Apion)  to  the  emperor  proved  of  no  avail.  It  was
not  until  Claudius  had  come  to  the  throne  that  the  old
privileges  were  again  restored  to  the  victims  of  persecu-
tion (Philo,  in  Flacc.  and  I^g.  ad  Caium ;  Jos.  Ant.
xviii.  8  I  xix.  52).  Later,  Claudius  intervened  in  Rome
in  a  hostile  sense  (Acts  18  2  Suet.  Claud.  25  Dio  Cassius
Ix.  6).  The  Jews  defended  themselves  as  best  they
could,  not  so  much  by  force  as  by  money  or  writings,
and  by  cultivating  friendly  relations  with  those  in  high
places.

The  controversy  carried  on  with  the  pen  is  worthy  of
remark. Gentile  writers  made  it  a  reproach  that  the
...  Jews  as  a  people  had  done  nothing  for

■  ,  ^^  civilisation  and  had produced no men

con  roversy.  ^^  distinction  (so  Posidonius,  Polybius,
Strabo,  Apion).  These  and  similar  charges  the  Jews
answered  in  innumerable  apologies — some  of  them  (such
as  those  of  Nicolaus  Damascenusand  Philo)  with  atlignity
and  earnestness  worthy  of  the  cause,  though  others  (such
as  that  of  Josephus  in  many  cases)  showed  a  disposition
to  confound  the  convenient  with  the  true,  and  others
did  not  hesitate  to  resort  to  misrepresentation  and
positive  falsoJiood  ( Pseudo  -  Hecataeus,  Eup)olemus, -
Artapanus,  Aristobulus,  Aristeas,  etc. ).  The  most
incredible  fables  were  gravely  set  forth.

Abraham  was  the  founder  of  astronomy  ;  Joseph  the  founder
of  geometry  and  the  inventor  of  agriculture  ;  Moses  the  author  of
the  division  of  Egypt  into  nomes,  ahd  even  of  the  Egyptian  animal
worship.  Jews  and  Spartans  exchanged  salutations  as  descend-
ants of  Abraham  (1  Mace.  12  2oy;  ;  cp  Ant.  xiv.  10  22).

Such  things  could  be  written  only  by  Jews  who  had
become  familiar  with  the  activities  and  intellectual  life
of  Hellenistic  circles,  by  men  for  whom  the  Groeco-
Roman  culture  had  become  an  indispensable  element  of


DISPERSION

everyday  life.  They  were  only  unconsciously  proving
the  respect  which  they  themselves  cherishetl  for  foreign
culture  when  they  tried- to  trace  the  origin  of  culture  to
their  own  forefathers.  Such  literary  phenomena  could
not  be  produced  in  Jerusalem,  the  home  of  Judaism  ;
they  prove  that  Judaism  abroad,  although  still  wearing
the  garment  of  the  Law,  carried  a  very  different  nature
under  that  old-fashioned  vestment.  It  had  now  found
a  large  range  of  activities  which  it  shared  with  con-
temporary humanity  at  large.

This struggle — itself  an evidence  of the  pwwer  to

which  the  Judaism  of  the  Diaspora  had  attained — does

22 Friendlv ""' exhaust the histor}-. There were

contact "^'^"y  points  of  friendly  contact  between

Judaism  and  the  outer  world.  For  the
more  educated  circles  of  the  Gentile  world  the  Judaism
of  the  Diaspora  had,  in  fact,  a  great  attraction.  In  it
men  felt  themselves  face  to  face  with  a  power  which  had
developed  new  forces — unHinching  self-sacrificing  fidelity
in  the  maintenance  of  religious  customs  which  seemed
to  the  outsider  meaningless — sabbath  observance,  cir-
cumcision, laws  of  purity.  Through  Judaism  they
became  acqtiainted  with  a  conception  of  God  which,
strange  in  its  severity,  enlightened  by  its  simplicity,
and  attracted  religious  natures  by  its  purity  and  its
sincerity.  The  popular  polytheism  of  Greece  and  Rome
had  been  shattered  by  philosophy ;  in  the  Oriental
religions,  which  at  that  time  were  advancing  in  triumph
westward,  the  idea  of  a  supreme  God  found  many
supporters  ;  Judaism  in  its  monotheism  presented  the
explicit  conception  for  which  so  many  were  looking.
Inseparably  connected  with  it  was  the  thought  of  a
divine  creation  of  the  world,  of  the  original  oneness  of
the  world  and  the  human  race,  as  well  as  that  of  the
providential  ordering  of  the  world — thoughts  which
promised  to  provide  fi.xed  formula;  for  the  cosmopolitan
tendencies  of  the  time,  and  were  welcome  on  that
account.  No  one  has  set  forth  the  contents  of  Judaism
from  this  point  of  view  more  nobly  than  Philo,  the
contemporary  of  Jesus  in  Alexandria.  The  confidence
with  which  he  handles  these  conceptions  makes  it
probable  not  only  that  he  had  literary  predecessors  in
this  style  but  also  that  an  appeal  to  practical  experience
gave  a  powerful  support  to  his  teaching  (cp  Strabo  ap.
Jos.  Ant.  xiv.  72  ;  also  Jos.  c.  Ap.  I22  2363941  BJ  iv.
52  Koa-fjuKY)  OprjaKela ;  also  Proselyte,  §  3).  The
Diaspora  of  the  Mediterranean,  and  especially  in  Alex-
andria, thus  not  only  led  the  way  to  the  breaking  of  the
narrow  bonds  of  the  Jewish  Law,  but  also  was  the  first
to  make  the  heathen  world  acquainted  with  a  spiritual
conception  of  God  and  a  spiritual  worship  presented  in
a  positive  religion,  and  thus  paved  the  way  for  the
coming  of  Christianity.

Schiirer,  GV/  '1 493-548 ; O. Holtzmann, Etuie des  jiid.
Staat^.vcsens u.  Entsicli.  d.  C/tr!stinthums('SZ)=  B.  Stade, CI '[

2  2-70jff'.\  O. Holtzmann,  NTliche  Zeitgesch.
Literature. (95): \\.\4\\\r\c\\,Judenu.Griechenvorder

makkabdischen  Erhebung,  1895  (.see  also  We.
in  GGA  1895,  p.  947^  and  Schurer  in  TLZ,  1896,  no.  2);  Th.
Mommsen,  Riim  Gesch,  5  4S9_^  ['85];  Th.  Reinach,  Texies
dauteurs  grecs  et  roinains  relatt/s  au  Judaisme,  reunis,
traduits,  ct  annates,  1895  ;  Cless,  lie  Coloniis  Juda-orum  in
Mg.  deductis,  i.  ('32);  Schiirer,  'Die  Alabarchen  in  Agj'pten '
in  ZWT,  1875,  p.  13  ff.  (cp  Alarquardt.  Rdm  Staatsveni'iil-
tungi^),  1  446  y:) ;  Pauly-Wissowa,  Real  Encycl.^  d.  class.
Alterthums'.viss.  (s.t.  '  Arabarch ')  ;  Lumbroso,  L'Egitio  del
Greet  e  dei  Romanil.-),  1895,  '  Ricerche  Alessandrine'  in  Mem.
d.  Accadem-a  d.  Scienza  di  Torino,  ser.  ii.  t.  27  ['73],  sc.  mor.
e  filol.  237-24S  :  J.  P.  Mahaffy,  Ttu  Empire  0/  tke  Ptolemies,
1895  ;  r'/u  Flinders  Petrie  Papyri,  ed.  by  /.  P.  Mahaffy,  i.
and  ii.,  1891,  1893;  Ulr.  Wilcken,  '  Alexandrinische  Gesandt-
schaften  vor  Kaiser  Claudius'  in  Hermes^  30481^  [95];  Th.
Reinach,  '  L'Empereur  Claude  et  les  anti-semites  Alexandrins
dapres  un  nouveau  Papyrus'  in  REJ  31  i6x^  ['05];  B.P.
Grenfell,  An  Alexandrian  Erotic  Fragment  and  other  Greek
papyri  chiejiy  Ptolemaic,  1896;  Revenue  Laws  0/  Pto.emy
Philadelphus,  ed.  B.  P.  Grenfell,  introd.  J.  P.  Mafiaffy,  1896:
Schurer,  Die  Gemeindet<erfassung  der  Jud  n  in  Rom  in  der
Kaiseri.eit  mich  den  Inschri/ten  dargestellt,  1879;  A.  Berliner,
Gesch.  {ierjuden  in  Rom  von  de*-  tiltesten  Zeit  bis  zur  Gegen-
wart  ("95):  Erich  Ziebarth,  Das  griechische  V'ereins^uesen
('96);  Alf.  Bertholet,  Die  Stellung  der  hraeliten  u.  derjuden
zu  den  Fremden,  1896 :  E.  Schurer,  '  Die  Judcn  ira  bospora-

in6


DISTAFF

nischen Reiili u. Uic Ci<:iiu^si:i>sclutrtcii dcr o-c/So^icoc 8*6v
v4ii<TTof  tlK.nii;i!iclb»l '  in  SJiA  U'  1897,  p.  tooff.  H.  G.

DISTAFF. See  Flax.

DISTBICT  I.  nV?!*  nepiXtopOC;  vicus  [once
pa_i;us  315J;  Neh.  39iai4-i8t  RV),  the  name  given
to  certain  administrative  divisions  of  Juda-a  in
Nehemiali's  time,  each  of  which  was  under  a  '  ruler  '
or  'chief  (ifc').  These  'districts'  comprise  Jerusalem
and  Keilah  (each  with  tw(j  rulers),  Bcth-haccerem,
Beth-zur,  and  Mizpah  (BN.\  om.  [L  /x^/m  ;  for  V'g.
see  above]).  It  is  not  impossible  th.it  the  list  was
originally  much  fuller.  From  the  character  of  the
names  of  the  '  rulers  '  Meyer  ( Entst.  ibd  ff.)  has  con-
cluded that  they  were  Calcbites  (see  Calicb,  §  4).
The  organisjtiion  of  the  Calebites  in  the  genealogies
I  Ch.  '2  4  suggests  further  that  the  pelek  was  a  tribal
subdivision,-  the  head  of  which  would  correspond  to
the  iOvdpxv^  ('»  <Jr.  inscr.  from  the  Hauran)  of  the
later  Nabata;an  kingdom  (cp  2  Cor.  11 32,  and  see
Ethnarcu).

2.  '  District'  in  Acts  16 12  RV  also  translates  fitpli,
which  here  represents,  apparently,  the  Latin  reifio.
See  Mac  IDOMA.  I'hii.ihi'I.  s.  a.  C.

DITCHES  {Ll*2i).  2  K.  3 16.  etc.  See  Co.NDurrs,  §
I  (3,  5),  and  I'lT.

DIVINATION.  Men  instinctively  wish  to  know  the
future, aiul  among  all [xjoples there  have  been  those


1.  Divination.


who  have,  from  certain  omens,  claimed


to  be  able  to  predict  it.  Such  know-
ledge could  only  come  from  supernatural  Ixjings.
When  beasts  or  birds,  by  their  movements,  or  other-
wise, gave  men  intelligible  signs,  it  was  because  they
were  '  indwelt '  by  beings  that  were  supernatural,  or
because  they  were  supernatural  themselves.  '  Omens
are  not  blind  tokens  ;  the  animals  know  what  they
tell  to  men  '  (WRS  /^e/.  SemS^)  443).

Necromancy  is  a  kind  of  divination,  not  a  thing
distinct  in  itself  (see  below,  §  3).  It  is  difficult,  if  not
impossible,  to  indicate  the  boundary  line  between
divination  and  prophecy.  In  both  the  same  general
principle  obtains — intercourse  of  man  with  the  spiritual
world  in  order  to  obtain  special  knowledge.  In  divi-
nation, this  knowledge  is  usually  got  by  observing
certain  omens  or  signs  ;  but  this  is  by  no  means  always
the  case,  since  sometimes  the  beings  consulted  [xissessed
the  soothsayer.  Divination,  as  practised  in  this  last
method,  does  not  differ  from  prophecy  of  the  lowest
kind — that  of  the  ecstatic  state — as  distinguished  from
that  higher  species  of  prophecy  which  in  Riehm's  happy
phrase  is  '  psychologically  mediated.  "^ See  PkoI'HECV.

The  ancient  Greeks,  Romans,  Arabs,  etc.,  had
modes  of  divining  that  apparently  were  unknown  to  the
2  Methods  ^*-'^'^'^^^'^  of  the  OT — e.g.,  by  observa-
tion of  the  flights  and  cries  of  birds,
ins[x?ction  of  the  entrails  of  animals,  etc.  (see  Freytag,
Einl.  159/:);  but  there  are  mentioned  in  the  OT
many  signs  or  omens  that  resemble  or  are  identical
with  those  in  use  among  other  nations.

i.  Rhabdomancy  (divination  by  rods)  appears  to  be
referred  to  in  Hos.  4 12,  '  My  jjeojile  ask  counsel  at
their  "  wood,  "  and  their  "staff"  declares  unto  them'  (cp
Herod.  46;).  The  higher  prophets  of  course  forbade
this  ;  but  we  may  perhaps  assume  that  it  was  uncon-
demned  in  earlier  times.

ii.  Belomuncy  (divination  by  arrows),  a  development
of  rhabdomancy,  is  mentioned  in  Ezek.  'l\*iff.  [19^].
where  the  Babylonian  king  is  said  to  have  stood  '  at  the

1  The  word  is  no  doubt  the  Ass.  pulug{g)u,  fiilku,  pulukku,
'border,'  'district';  cp  probably  Phocn.  ■px'?  jSSi  'district  of
Laodicea,'  CIS  1,  no.  7.  On  the  Heb.  '3,  see  also  Dr.  on
aS.  S39.


*  Cp n'lJ^S, Judg. 5 15-5 (if correct,
uSsO,  a  Ch.  86512.
'  JHetsianic  Prophecy,  45  tt  peusim.
III7


Moore),  r\\ir^


DIVINATION

parting  of  the  way,'  and  to  have  '  shaken  the  arrows  to
and  fro.'  The  doubtful  point  was  whether  he  was  to
march  from  Babylon  to  l^gypt  by  Jerus;ilem  or  by
RabUtth-Amnujn.  .As  I'ocock  (quoted  by  RoscnmUllcr)
long  ago  jxjinted  out,  Ijelomancy  was  much  in  use
among  the  Arabs  (see  also  \N'e.  //<■/</. '•'l  132).  For
the  Babylonian  practice,  see  I^normant.  l.a  Dninalion,
chap.  2  ;  as  this  able  though  sometimes  uncritical  writer
truly  j)oinls  out,  belomancy  had  Ijut  a  secondary  im-
portance. Nebuchadrezzar  had  certainly  consulteil  the
stars  and  the  regular  omens  in  order  to  ascertain
whether  the  right  time  had  come  for  the  campaign
against  ICgypt.  Arab  tradition  tells  how  Imra-al-Kais
practisetl  Ijelomancy  liefore  setting  out  against  Asad.
He  did  .so  '  by  shutlling  Ixjfore  the  image  of  the  god  a
set  of  arrows.  These  were  here  three  in  numlxrr,  called
respectively,  "  the  Commanding,"  "the  Forbidding,"
and  "  the  Waiting."  He  drew  the  second,  and  there-
upon broke  the  arrows,  and  flung  them  in  the  face  of
the  idol. '  Mohammed  forbade  the  use  of  arrows,  as  '  an
abomination  of  Satan's  work'  (Koran,  .Sur.  692).  The
arrows  were  sfiecial,  pointless  .arrows  (originally  rods).

iii.  The  Babylonian  king,  however,  did  more  than
shake  the  sacred  arrows  ;  the  passage  continues,  '  he
looked  in  the  liver'  {'  hepa/oscopy').  (We  omit  the  refer-
ence to  the  toraphim  Ijecause  no  new  point  is  indicated
by  it  ;  the  king  consulted  the  teraphim  [sin^^iar],  by
shaking  the  arrows  bejore  it,  as  was  always  done  also  by
the  heathen  .Arabs. )  The  liver,  which  was  regarded  as
the  chief  seat  of  !ife(I'rov.  723),  was  supposed  to  give
warning  of  the  future  by  its  convulsive  motions,  when
taken  from  the  sacrificed  victim  (see  Livkr).  That  an
application  for  oracles  was  accompanied  by  sacrifices
we  know  from  the  story  of  Balaam.  Lenormant  (op.
cit.  58/. )  refers  to  two  Babylonian  fragments  relative
to  the  inspection  of  the  entrails,  giving  some  of  the
features  which  had  to  Ije  watched  for.  The  Greeks,
too,  practised  yyno.ro(jKovia.

iv.  The  objects  used  for  lots  in  Arabia  were,  as
we  have  seen,  jxjintless  arrows.  Among  the  Israelites,
however,  the  principal  objects  employed  were  probably
stones  of  different  colours,  one  of  which  gave  the
affirmative,  the  other  the  negative  answer  to  the  question
put  (so  Wellh. ,  Bu. ,  H.  P.  Smith,  in  connection  with  the
classical  passage,  i  S.  1-1 41).  Other  passages  in  the
historical  books  in  which  the  phrase  3  ^xr  ('  to  intjuire
of)  occurs  should  probably  be  explained  on  the  analogy
of  this  passage.  Cp  Ephod,  Uki.m  a.nd  Thummim,
Tekaphim.

v.  Passing  over  such  omens  as  Gideon's  in  Judg.  636
and  Jonathan's  in  i  S.  14  8^,  and  reserving  astrology
for  subsecjuent  consideration  (see  Staks),  we  pause
next  at  the  most  imjxjrtant  of  all  the  modes  of  divina-
tion that  linked  the  Hebrews  with  other  peoples —

(vi. )  The  methoti  oi  dreams  (oneiromancy).  Jacob  may
have  sufficient  reason  for  making  good  his  escape  from
Laban  ;  but  he  will  not  take  the  decisive  step  without  a
direct  revelation  ((ien.  31  10-13).  In  other  cases  the  divine
communication  is  such  as  exceeds  the  power  of  human
reason  to  discover  ;  instances  are  the  dreams  of  Abime-
lech  (Gen.  2O3  tf. ),  and  especially  those  of  Joseph  (Gen.
375  cp  408  41 1/).  Other  noteworthy  instances  of
divinely  sent  dreams  are  (jen.  2812^  31  24  Judg.  7 13
I  K.  35/  Mt.  l2o  2 12^  2719.  Notice  E's  fondness
for  relating  dreams.  The  author  of  the  speeches  of
Elihu  also  attaches  great  importance  to  dreams  as  a
channel  of  divine  communications  (Job  33 14- 16).  It
would  almost  seem  as  if  the  belief  in  the  symbolic
character  of  dreams  should  be  reckoned  among  other
revivals  of  primitive  beliefs  in  the  jieriod  of  early
Judaism  (cp  the  dream-visions  in  Enoch  chaps.  83-90,  and
the  dreams  in  the  Book  of  Daniel ;  also  Jos.  lij  ii.  74
iii.  83).  Men  were  oppressed  by  constiint  anxiety  as  to
the  future,  and  there  \sas  no  prophet  in  the  great  old
style  to  assuage  this.  They  looked  about,  therefore,  for
artificial  means  of  satisfying  their  curiosity. Prophets


DIVINATION

like  Isaiah,  however,  never  refer  to  their  dreams,  and
it  is  even  a  question  how  far  the  visions  of  which  they
speak  are  to  be  taken  literally  (see  Prophkcy).

vii.  On  a  possible  divination  by  means  of  sacred
garments,  see  Dkess,  §  8.

We  must  now  consider  briefly  the  various  terms
applied  to  divination  and  diviners,  and  endeavour  to
define  their  application.

1.  CD?,  kcseiit,  a  general  term  for  divination  of  all  kinds
(cp the Ar.  kdhin, and see Priests),  on the derivation of

which  see  jSIagic,  §  3  (i).  Thus  EV  renders
3.  Terms,  j,-,^,^  <  jjvination  '  (once  '  witchcraft,'  i  S.  15  23  EV),
Cr'p,  'diviner'  (iS.  0  2Zech.  10  2),  also  'soothsayer'  (Josh.
VA  22  EV)  and  '  prudent '  (Is.  3  2  AV)  ;  and  ©  gives  the  more
general  terms  /xacTis,  /iaj'Tevo/uai,  (xafreia,  ixavTflov.  Ezek.
•-'1  z6  [21],  however,  shows  plainly  enough  that  the  word  had
the  distinct  sense  of  obtaining  an  oracle  by  casting  lots  by
means  of  arrows  (see  above,  §2(2]).'  The  one  selected  by
chance  was  supposed  to  represent  the  divine  decision  ;  on  the
other  liand,  in  i  S.  "288,  Saul  is  made  to  ask  the  witch  to
divine  for  him  by  means  of  the  'ob  (qin)  ;  see  below,  §  4  (ii.) ;
and  cp  iMa(.;ic.

2.  I^.U'P  O"''''""'")-  The  etymology  of  this  word  is  much
disputed  (cp  Del.  on  Is.  2  6).  Two  interpretations  deserve
mention  :  (a)  M^'onl'n  is  one  who  divines  by  observing  the
clouds  (denom.  from  jJ]^),  a  mode  of  divination  well  known
among  the  ancients  ;  or  perhaps,  one  who  brings  clouds,  or  causes
storms  (tafowinancy).  In  the  passages  in  which  the  word  occurs,
however,  there  is  nothing  to  suggest  that  the  vif'oncn  has  an>;-
thing  to  do  « ith  the  sky.  (b)  One  who  smites  with  the  '  evil
eye  '  (denom.  from  ['!') ;  but,  apart  from  other  considerations,  the
Targ.  rendering  JJi'  appears  to  be  decidedly  against  this  view.
In  the  absence  of  further  evidence  it  is  best  to  follow  Ewald
{Bib.  Theol.  1  234)  and  WRS  (,loc.  cit.  ;  cp  also  Dr.),  who  com-
pare  the  Arabic  g-anna,  'to  emit  a  hoarse,  nasal  sound.'  The
fact  that  so  many  of  the  words  connected  with  magic  and
divination  denote  low  subdued  mournful  speaking,  favours  this
last  surmise,  though  there  must  ever  remani  much  doubt  about
the  ex.act  origin  and  meaning.  ©  rejiders  by  a  word  which
means  primarily  to  take  an  omen  from  the  flight  of  birds,
examples  of  which  practice  may  be  found  in  Arabia  (cp  We.
Niic/A'^)  202/.).  The  word  is  usually  rendered  by  'observers
(once  Judg.  i>  37  AV»>g-  '  regarders ')  of  times'  (AV),  or
'augurs'  (RV)  (Dt.  18  10  14  Lev.  19  26  2  K.  21  6),  in  Is.  2  6
Mi. 7)  12  [1 1]  EV  '  soothsayers  '  (so  also  Jer.  27  9  RV,  where  AV
'enchanter');  once  (fern.)  'sorceress'  (Is.  573).  An  oak  near
Shechem,  famous  in  divination,  bears  the  name  'Oak  of  Meo.v-
enim'  (Judg.  t' 37).  For  other  examples  of  sacred  trees  cp
luoLATKV,  §  2,  and  see  Natiike-wokshii'.

3.  V~i  (m'/iCf),  'to  use  enchantment'  (2  K.  21  6  =  2  Ch.  336
Lev.  li»  26  ;  cp  cm,  '  enchantment '  Nu.  23  23  24  i),  or  '  to
divine'  (Gen.  445  15  EV  ;  and  Gen.  30  27  RV,  whereAV  'to
learn  by  experience  '  ;  cp  i  K.  20  3  j  '  diligently  observe,'  RVnitj-
'  take  as  an  omen  '),  is  probably  used  to  include  any  kind  of
divination  (WRS).  In  Gen.  445  15  the  same  word  is  used  for
divination  by  a  cup'-^ — i.e.,  probably  by  hydromancy ,  where  a
vessel  is  filled  with  water  and  the  rings  formed  by  the  liquid
are  observed.  Was  [••nj  originally  used  in  a  special  sense,  and
connected  with  C*™,  'a  serpent'?  So  at  least  Bochart,  Lenor-
mant,  and  I?audissin  {Siudicn  zur  sent.  Kel.-scsch.  1  2S7)  ;  see
Serpent,  §  1,  3,  Magic,  §  3,  3.

4.  I '113.,  gaz'rln,  is  found  only  in  Daniel  (227  4  4  [7]  T)  7  11,
EV  'soothsayers'),  and  may  be  rendered  '  prognosticators,'
properly  '  those  who  determine  [what  is  doubtful]'  ;  cp  Bev.  eui
lac.  The  root  means  '  to  cut ' ;  but  whether  the  '  cutting  of  the
heavens '  by  Babylonian  astrologers  is  meant,  is  uncertain  (see
Stars,  §  5).  Perhaps  (cp  Ar.  jazara,  'to  slaughter')  the
gaz'r'in  originally  offered  a  sacrifice  in  connection  with  the  art
(cp  \'g.  hanisfiicis). See  §  2,  iii.

5.  f-fi-H  {'assii/>/t)  and  fjC'K  ('dsa//i)  occur  in  the  Heb.  (1  20  2  2)
and  the  .\ram.  (2  1047  [4],  etc.)  parts  of  Daniel  respectively,  and
are  rendered  '.astrologer,'  RV  'enchanter.'  The  word  is  of
Assyrian  origin  (Stars,  §  5).  It  is  difficult  to  say  whether  ^TJ,
TX  ^"d  th^  other  terms  found  were  meant  to  represent  a
separate  class,  or  whether  the  writer  employed  these  terms'
indiscriminately  (Bev.  Dan.  63).

6.  D'N^i:'?  {kasdd'im)  in  Dan.  1 4  2  10  (5  7  1 1)  means  the  caste
of  wise  men.  This  usage  (well  known  from  classical  writers)
arose  after  the  fall  of  the  Babylonian  empire,  when  the  only
Chaldjeans  known  were  astrologers  and  soothsayers.

1  Possibly  the  Teraphim  were  similarly  employed ;  see
Teraphim.

2  The  so-called  (cvAiicofiavTet'o.  Cp  Toseph's  divining-cup
with  the  famous  goblet  of  Jemshld,  and  see  Lenormant,  La
Divination,  78-80. For a  parallel French superstition, see

B.  Thiers,  TraiU  des  superstition^),  Paris,  1697,  1 187^


DIVINATION

7.  For  13  (Gad)  and  '3D  (M'nf)  in  Is.  CSiif,  see  FORTUNE
AND  Destiny. See  also  other  terms  under  Magic.

Necromancy,  to  which  we  turn  next,  is,  as  the  etymo-

4  Necromancv  '"*>'>'  °^  ^'^'^  ''"'"'^  implies,  divination  by
•X.  X101.1UUUUXVJ.  rj-sort  to  the  spirits  of  deceased  persons.
Three  terms  or  expressions  fall  to  be  noticed,  all  of
them  met  with  in  Dt.  18  11.

i.  We  shall  begin  with  that  which  occurs  last  in  the
verse,  viz.  c'nan-VN  v-f\  (one  who  resorts  with  an  inquiry
to  the  dead),  rendered  by  EV  'necromancer.'  It  is
clear  from  Is.  819  that  this  is  a  general  description
embracing  the  kinds  of  necromancy  indicated  by  the
two  words  next  to  be  considered  and  other  kinds  (see
Dr.  on  Dt.  18 11):  the  conjunction  with  which  it  is
introduced  is  simply  the  explanatory  '  7uaw,'  answering
to  the  Gk.  epexegetic  (cat.

ii.  3iN  VKb  (sho'il  'ob),  one  who  consults  an  'od.  The
word  'ob  is  generally  found  w'Whyidd^'oni  (see  below,  iii. ),
like  which,  from  meaning  the  spirit  of  a  departed  one,
it  came  to  stand  for  the  person  who  possessed  such  a
spirit  and  divined  by  its  aid.  The  full  phrase  nSj,;3
3iK  (the  possessor  of  an  '6b)  is  found  in  i  .S.  287,  where
it  is  applied  to  the  '  witch  of  Endor. '

(S  explains  the  expression  by  eyyaffTpLfivOos,  'ventrilo-
quist'  (i.e.,  in  the  O'V  passages,  one  who,  '  by  throwing
his  voice  into  the  ground,  where  the  spirit  was  supposed
to  be,  made  people  believe  that  a  ghost  spoke  through
him'),  and  Lenormant  {Dtv.  \b\  ff.),  Kenan  {Hist.
ET,  I347),  and  others  so  explain  the  phenomenon  ;  but
the  writer  of  Samuel,  and  other  biblical  writers  who
sjjcak  of  this  species  of  divination,  evidently  regard  it
as  being  really  what  it  claimed  to  be.  Lev.  20  27  is  the
only  possible  exception.

The  etymology  of  the  word  is  very  uncertain.  Other  sug-
gestions may  be  passed  by,  for  the  field  seems  to  be  held  by
two  principal  views,  H.  P.  Smith's  viewl  (Sam.  239 yT)  being
not  very  probable,  (a)  Ob  has  been  connected  with  Arab,  aba
=  amaba,  and  explained  'a  soul  which  returns  (from  ,She5l)';
cp  French  rcvenant.  So  Hitz.  and  Kij.  (on  Is.  819),  St.  (GVI
1  504),  and  Schwally  (Das  Leben  nach  dem  Tode,  69).  Schwally
also  suggests  a  connection  with  3N  'father'  (note  plu.  of  both
in  otii).  Van  Hoonacker  (Exp.  T.  9  157^^)  objects  that  in  Dt.
18  II  the  'ob  is  distinguished  from  the  dead  (viethtui);  but  if
the  latter  clause  of  the  verse  is  simply  a  generalisation  of  the
two  foregoing  clauses,  this  objection  falls.

(b)  The  other  view  (Ges.,  Del.,  Di.)  connects  the  word  with  'ob,
'a  bottle,'  literally  'something  hollow.'  A  similar  word  in
Arabic  (wdba)  means  '  a  hole  in  a  rock,'  a  large  and  deep  pit —
i.e.,  something  hollow.-

On  the  assumption  that  the  fundamental  idea  of  the  word
is  hollowness,  many  explanations  have  been  suggested  (see
Van  Hoonacker,  as  above).  Of  these,  two  may  be  noted  as
probably  approximating  most  nearly  to  the  truth.

1.  Bottcher(Z'<-  in/eris,  loi),  Kau.  (Riehm,  MIVB^-),  'Todten-
beschworer  '),  and  Di.  (on  Lev.  19  31)  hold  that  the  spirit  is  called
'ob,  on  account  of  the  hollow  tone  of  the  voice — such  a  tone  as
might  be  expected  to  issue  from  any  empty  place.  Other  terrns
for  practising  magic  and  divination  lend  some  support  to  this
view.

2.  The  idea  of  hollowness  has  been  held  to  apply  in  the  first
place  to  the  cave  or  opening  in  the  ground  out  of  which  the
spirit  speaks.  Among  the  Greeks  and  the  Romans,  oracles  de-
pending on  necromancy  were  situated  among  large  deep  caverns
which  were  .supposed  to  communicate  with  the  spirit -world.
If  the  Hebrew  'ob  is  parallel  to  the  Greek  chthonic  deities  and
to  the  Arabian  ah!  al-ard  or  'earth-folk,'  with  whom  wizards
h.ave  intercourse,  it  is  conceivable  that,  by  a  metonymy — con-
tained for  container,  and  vice  versa— \\ie.  hollow  cavern  may
have  come  to  be  used  for  the  spirit  that  spoke  out  of  it.  See
WRS  Rd.  Satt.^'^)  i9'5-

iii-  'Jl'y  (yidde'O/ii).  The  English  word  'wizard,'
by  which  this  Hebrew  term  is  rendered,  means  'a  very
wise  one,'  and  agrees  with  <S  yvuXTTiji  (in  Dt.  18 n
TfparoffKdiros),  Syriac  yaddud,  Arabic  'arrdf,  and  with
Ewald's  rendering  '  viel-wisserisch."

Like  'ob,  yidd^'Cmi  is  used,  in  the  first  instance,  for  the
spirit  of  a  deceased  person  ;  then  it  came  to  mean  him

1  Namely,  that  the  'db  was  originally  a  skull  prepared  by
superstitious  rites  for  magical  purposes ;  H.  A.  Redpath,  on
the  other  hand,  suggests  that  the  'ob  was  one  who  spoke  out  of
a  hollow  mask  or  domino.

■-  In  Job  3219  niax  seems  to  mean  'bellows'  (<8  ia<nTtp
^uoTjrijp  [-T^'s  >**]  x"^««w5)-


DIVORCE

or  her  thai  divines  by  such  a  spirit.  Roljcrtson  Smith
(/.  Fhil.  14 127).  followed  by  Driver  (on  Dl.  18 11).
distinguishes  the  two  terms  thus  : —

Yiiid''dHi  is  a  familiar  spirit,  one  known  to  him  that  consults
it.  The  '6b  is  any  ghost  that  is  called  up  from  the  grave  to
answer  questions  put  to  it  (cp  i  S.  28).  The  yidd''flni  speaks
through  a  personal  medium  ;  that  is,  through  the  person  whom
it  possesses.  The  'flb  speaks  directly,  as  for  example  out  of
the  grave  (cp  i  S.  •.*«).  Kashi  (on  Dt.  18  11)  says  that  yiddt'fni
differs  from  aiK  ^ya  (Mai  'db)  in  that  he  held  in  his  mouth  a
l)one  which  uttered  the  oracle.  It  is  hard  to  establish  these
distinctions,  the  data  lor  forming  a  judgment  being  su  slight.

Is  it  quite  certain,  however,  that  the  words  arc  to  be
held  as  standing  for  distinct  things?  Why  may  we
not  have  in  them  dift'erent  as[x;cts  of  the  same  spirit  ?
So  regarded,  'ob  would  convey  the  notion  that  the  spirit
has  returned  from  the  other  world,  while  yidd''dni  would
suggest  that  the  spirit  so  returned  is  knowing,  and
therefore  able  to  answer  the  (juestions  of  the  inquirer.
The  fact  that  in  all  the  eleven  instances  of  its  occurrence
yidd''dni  is  invariably  preceded  by  'vb  is  in  favour  of
its  being  a  mere  interpretation  of  it.  'Oh,  on  the  other
hand,  is  often  found  by  itself  (i  S.  2878  i  Ch.  10 13
etc. ).  It  is  probable,  therefore,  that  these  two  characters
are  at  bottom  one,  tiie  'and'  in  Dt.  18 11  joining  'ob
and  yidW'dni  in  the  way  of  a  hendiadys  :  '  he  who
seeks  a  departed  spirit  that  is  knowing,"  just  as  the
remaining  part  of  the  verse  is,  as  we  have  seen  already
(§  3,  i. ),  simply  a  repetition  in  different  words  of  the
same  thought.  This  is  in  complete  harmony  with  the
usages  of  Hebrew  parallelism.  The  whole  compound
expression  might  be  rendered  as  follows  : — '  He  who
inquires  of  the  departed  spirit  that  is  knowing,  even
he  who  seeks  unto  the  dead. '

iv.  To  the  expressions  considered  already  may  be
added  c"t3K.  iUim,  Is.  19 3!,  EV  'charmers.'  R'\'"'k.'-
prefers  '  whisperers '  ;  cp  Ar.  attd,  '  to  emit  a  moaning
or  creaking  sound  '  ;  or  perhaps  rather  Ass.  eti'i,  '  tlark-
ness." (S  apparently  renders  by  to.  dydX/xaTa  avrdv.

Though  condemned  in  the  OT  (i  S.  1%i  ff.;  Is.  819  ;
cp  Lev.  1931  20  6  27  Dt.  18  n),  necromancy  among
the  Israelites  held  its  own  till  a  late  period.  The
leaders  of  religious  thought  were  opposed  to  both  witch-
craft and  necromancy  ;  but  the  influence  of  habit  and
of  intercourse  with  people  around  was  too  strong  to  be
wholly  overcome.  See  Schultz,  OT  Theology,  'l-^-i-2  (ET).
Winer!-*'  ( A'  U  li  s.  v.  '  Todtenbeschworer  '  ;  see  refer-
ences) shows  that  in  the  ancient  world  divination  by
calling  back  the  spirits  of  the  dead  w;is  very  widespread
among  the  Greeks,  the  Romans,  and  the  other  ancient
nations.  Cp  B.MiVi.uMA,  §  31^,  and  see  M.\gic.
For  the  literature  see  .Ma(;ic.  X.  W.  U.

DIVORCE,  DIVORCEMENT  (ninn?  ;  ^no-
CTACION  [HNAQ]),  Jer.  38  Is.  50 1. See  Makki.VGE,  §6.

DIZAHAB  (nnr^,  kataxPYCCA  BAFL),  ubi  auH.
est pluiHmum — i.e.,  QHT  *^  [Vg.]),  in  the  topographical
description  Dt.  1 1.  '  If  it  be  the  name  of  a  place  in
the  "stepixis  of  Moab "  the  situation  is  unknown'
(Dr.  in  Hastings'  DB,  s.v.)\  on  the  identifications,  cp
Dillmann.  The  explanation  '  place  of  gold  '  is  difficult
to  justify  (see  Dr.  Dcut,  ad  loc.).  The  name  corre-
sponds to  'Me-zahab'  in  Gen.  8639  (as  Sayce,  Acad.
(3ct.  22,  1892,  and  Marcj.  Fund.  10,  have  observed),  and
like  ME-/.AU.\B[r/.i'.  J  is  no  doubt  a  corruption  of  onso  ( n
came  from  c) — i.e.,  the  N.  .Arabian  land  of  Musri
or  Musur,  which  adjoined  Edom  (see  Mi/.k.MM,  §  ■zb,
and  cp  Che.  Or.  LZ,  May  15,  1899).  It  was  i)erhaps
premature  to  identify  '  Di-zahab,'  before  the  correctness
of  the  reading  had  been  investigated.  T.  K.  C.

DOCUS,  RV  Dok  (AcoK  [ANY]),  called  by  Josephus
Dagon  tA<\rt*>N  ;  Ant.  xiii.  81  ;  /'/  i.  23),  a  small  for-
tress near  Jericho,  in  which  Simon  the  .\Iaccabee  was
treacherously  murdered  by  Ptolemy  his  son-in-law
(i  Mace.  16 15).  The  name,  doubtless,  still  survives  in
the  mod.  ' Ain  ed-Duk,  2.^  m.  N.  of  Jericho,  where  there
are  traces  of  ancient  substructions  and  remains  of  a
36  nai


DODANIM

fine  ac|ue(luct  (Koh.  UK  '2i'^',  I'T.F  Mem.  3:73190;
Haed.'"  152  ; v. Kastcren,  Ncv.  liibl. 1897,  p.  93^).

DOD,  NAMES  WITH.  This  group  of  compound
names  comprises  with  certainty  only  Dodavah  and
Dodiel  (sc>e  Daniel,  i),  and  virtu;illy  David,  Dod.ai,
Dotlo.  To  these  Gray  {HFX  60-63)  would  add  -n^K
(Eldad),  TlVa  (Bild.-id).  In  all  these  names  he  in-
terprets Ti  as  meaning  '  uncle  on  the  fathers  side,'
which  is  no  doubt  a  perfectly  legitimate  setise  of  ■ni  or
n'n  (see  2  K.  24  17).  (</)  First,  as  to  Eldad  and  Hildad.

The  objection  to  admitting  that  these  names  are  com-
pounded with  the  divine  name  Dad  is  obviously  pro-
visional. The  god  Ramman  was  so  well-known  in
Canaan  that  we  may  expect  to  find  at  any  rate  isolated
names  compounded  with  Dad,  which  was  one  of  the
names  of  this  deity  (Wi.  AT  Untersuch.  69,  n.  i).
In  the  Amarna  letters,  it  is  true,  the  form  we  find  in
comixjund  proper  names  is  Addu  ;  but  the  etiuivalence
of  Addu and Daddu  is  admitted.  [b] Next, as

to  the  other  names.  That  Dod  is  not  the  nanie  of
some  one  special  deity,  is  admitted  ;  but  whether  it  is,
or  is  not,  a  term  designating  some  degree  of  kinship,
is  disputed.  It  is  undeniable  that  in  (  =  Ass.  dadu)
means  '  beloved,'  and  also,  by  a  natural  transition,
'divine  patron'  (cp  ni'i,  used  of  God,  Job  I621).  The
present  writer  contends  that  it  is  more  natural  to  give
this  second  sense  to  Dod  in  the  few  Hebrew  names
compounded  with  it  than  to  adopt  the  theory  (Gray,
HFN  60)  that  -n  as  well  as  cj?  i"  proper  names  has
the  sense  of  '  uncle '  or  '  kinsman. '

This  is  not  affected  by  the  discovery  that  there  are  some
S.  Arabian  names  compounded  with  Atiimi,  and  some  others
with  Khali,  both  meannig  '  uncle.'  Nor  need  we  enter  into  the
question  whether  the  S.  .-Xrabian  name  Dadi-kariba  (so  Homniel
gives  the  name)  really  means  '  My  cousin  hath  blessed '
(Honuuel,  Aim^). See  Douo,  Dodavah.  t.  K.  C.

DODAI  ("in,  nM,  §  52  ;  but  Ginsb.  in  2  S.  289
points  Kt.  "H/T),  another  form  of  Douo  [i'.f. ],  pre-
sumably shortened  from  a  form  n'l'n  :  see  under
Dodavah  ;  '  Yahw^  is  patron'  (Marquart,  Fund.  16),
2  S.  289  (RV  following  Kt.  ;  but  .W  Dodo  ;  coycei
[B*].  COOC.  [A],  AoyAei  [B''^'"-  L])  and  i  Ch.  274  (AV
and  RV;  AcoAeiA  [B*].  -XeiA  [B''].  -AiA  [A],  -Aa!
[L]),  where  the  words  '  Eleazar,  son  of,'  found  in  i  Ch.
11 12  are  wanting,  but  are  supplied  by  Kittel  (5.507")
from  I  Ch.  11 12  ;  see  Dodo  (2),  Eleazar.

DODANIM  ID'J"!'^).  or  Rodani.m  (n'jni"').

Sn,  Gen.  U)4,  \^.^ DOn.tXJ.M  (cp  Pesh.),  so  EV,  AV"ik'-
Roilanim'  after  po6ioi  [»pA"iii-],  and  Sam.;  St!,  i  Ch.  I7
AViiig.  RV  'Rodanim'  after  poSioi  l(pi'Al,  but  many  MSS
Tin,  cp  i<u5ai'«in  IL],  /'0P.7.\/.1/[V>;.],  whence  AV  *  Dodanim."
In  Is.  21  13  .Vq.  Sym.  fujactfi  for  D'H"!.

A  son  of  Javan  [q.v.],  son  of  Japheth,  Gen.  104  =
I  Ch.  I7.  The  same  name — i.e.,  either  Dodan  (|nq)  or
Rodan  (jii) — should  possibly  be  restored  for  '  Dedan '
{yn)  in  Ezek.  27 15  (poSujv  [\M>  ;  adnot.  podioi  opa<rii
Kpiaeiiii  Q"''-''],  apadidjv  [.\]  ;  so  Pesh.  but  .At].  Sj'm.
Theod.  5a5av).  The  merchants  there  referred  to
brought  to  Tyre  the  ivory  and  ebony  which  they  had
themselves  procured  from  Africa  or  India.  Two  views
are  held.

{a)  Stade,  Cornill,  Bertholet  are  strongly  for  '  Rodan,"
and  naturally  hold  a  similar  opinion  as  to  the  reading
in  Gen.  IO4.  It  is,  however,  by  no  means  certain  that
MT  is  not  right  in  reading  p-i  '32,  'sons  of  Dedan,"  in
Ezek. ,  I.e.  ;  Edom  (so  all  [e.xcept  Aq.]  read  for
'Aram')  follows  in  v.  16.  As  to  Gen.  IO4,  the  most
prevalent  opinion  certainly  is  that  Rodanim  is  the  better
reading,  and  that  this  term  designates  not  only  the
Rhodians  properly  so-called  (on  whom  cp.  Horn.
//. 2654//^),  but  also  ('many  islands'  being  also
mentioned)  the  people  of  other  .'Egean  islands.  (So
Di.,  Hal.,  K.tu.,  Holzinger,  Ball,  GASm.  HG  135.)
This  view  is  geographically  plausible,  but  the  short  o
in  'P65oj  must  not  be  overlooked.


DODAVAH

{6)  Another  view,  so  far  as  the  name  goes,  is  more
satisfactory.  The  Rothinim  of  the  text  of  Clironicles
(if  we  follow  most  MSS  and  0)  may  be  as  inaccurate
as  the  '  Diphath '  which  it  gives  for  ■  Kiphath '
(i  Ch.  16),  and  Dodanim  itself  may  be  incorrectly
given  for  Dardanim  (Tg.  Jon.,  Luzz;itlo,  Ges. ,  Knob.,
Franz  Del.).  The  name  Dardan,  as  inscriptions  of
Rameses  II.  show,  comes  down  from  early  times;  it
designates  properly  a  people  of  jVsia  Minor,  not  far
from  the  Lycians  (see  W.MM,  As.  u.  Eur.  354/.).
It  is  not  impossible  that  for  D'3^n  (Ch.  reads  i)  the
original  source  of  P's  information  read  D'jm  (t-'P
Tog.\rmah),  and  it  would  be  natural  for  writers  and
scholars  of  the  Greek  period  (®  and  perhaps  Ch. )
to  convert  Dardanim  into  Rodanim,  and  to  understand
the  Rhodians.  It  has  been  proposed  elsewhere  to  j
identify  another  son  of  Javan  (Tarshish,  or  rather  ]
Turus)  with  another  pixjple  mentioned  in  the  Egyptian
inscriptions  (see  Tiras).  The  author  of  the  list  used
by  P  may  have  known  Dardan  as  well  as  Turus.  If
pT  is  the  correct  reading  in  Ezek.  we  should  jjerhaps
pronounce  it  Redan,  not  Rodan.  Recent  critics  may,
however,  have  been  too  hasty  in  rejecting  MT's  reading
Dedan.  The  '  islands '  are  not  necessarily  those  in
which  the  merchants  spoken  of  resided  ;  they  may  very
well  be  the  coast-lands  with  which  Dedan  had  com-
mercial dealings.  Cp  Deda.n,  and,  on  Ezek.  27 15.
see  Ebony.  '  t.  k.  c.

DODAVAH,  as  AV,  or  rather  Dodavahu  as
RV  (inn'n,  perhaps  for  -"inn'n,  ■  Yahw6  is  friend  or
patron.'  §  47 — whence  come  the  abbreviated  forms
Dodo,  Dddai  [y^/.r.']— coA[e]iA  [l^A],  AoyAiOY  [L] ;
Dodoa :  Pesh.  implies  the  reading  'Dodo'),  the  father
of  a  prophet  called  Eliezer  (2  Ch.  20 37)-  T.  K.  C.

DODO  ('n'n,  §  52,  with  which  cp  HH,  Dodai,  and
*7n,  David).  The  fuller  form  is  probably  -innn
[cp  Dddavah],  which  means  '  Yahwe  is  friend  or
patron'  [so  Marq.  Fund.  16].  HT,  genius  loci,  is
rightly  restored  by  Wi.  in  Am.  8 14,  and  there  appears
to  be  an  allusion  to  the  '  divine  friend  '  in  Is.  5i  (where
note  that  nn  and  <in'  are  parallel).  The  Dodah  (nin)
of  .-Vtaroth  is  mentioned  in  the  Mesha  inscription  /.  12.
May  we  also  compare  Dudu,  the  name  of  a  high
Egyptian  official  in  the  Amarna  tablets  {Am.  Tab.
4445  52i5.  cp  Wi.  AF  194)?  T.  K.  C.

1.  .\  Bethlehemite,  father  of  the  renowned  hero  Ki.hanan
(y.7');  2  S.  2324  («ouS[«]i  [BL],  Aou.  [A]),  iCh.1126  (6(o6u)<:
[BN],  -ai  [Al,  -5€t  [I,]).

2.  (.\V  following  Kre  ;  but  see  Dodai.)  An  Ahohitr  (?.?'. ),
father  of  David's  warrior  Kleazar,  2  S.  23  9  (vibs  ■na.tpa.MX^ov
avToO  [BA],  see  Ahohitk,  iouSet  [L])  ;  i  Ch.  11  xi  (ScoSai  [BAL],
-S«  [**]  ■>  patntus  ejus).

3.  An  ancestor  of  Tola  of  Issachar,  one  of  the  Judges,
Judg.  10  I,  if  we  should  not  rather  follow  eight  cursive  MSS  of
€>  and  read,  for  '  son  of  Dodo,'  '  son  of  his  (Abimelech's)  uncle
K.-ireah.'  See  Hollenberg,  Z.4  T/f-',  1881,  p.  104/  ®ual  has
vib9  na.Tfta.hiKi\>ov  aiiTOv  (so  Pesh.  Vg.). See  Tola.

DOE  (H^;;:),  Pr.  5i9t.  RV. See  Goat.

D0EG(3X1,  I  S.  21 7  [8]  229,  but  m,  i  S.  221822
[Kt.],  :xn,  Ps.  522  ;  AcoHK  [BSARTL],  but  AcoHf.
i.S.  22  9[.\];  Jos.  An/.\i.  12  i,  AcoHrOc)-  An  Edomite
(for  the  reading  's-in,  'Syrian,'  presupposed  [except  in
Ps.  522]  by  <S^^  [but  not  L]  and  Jos.,  is  certainly
wrong)  who  filled  some  minor  post  among  the  servants
of  Saul  ;  most  probably  he  was  '  keeper  of  the  saddle
asses"  (cp  Judg.  IO4  i  S.  93  a  S.  I62  i  Ch.  273o),  i  S.
21  7  [8]  22  9.  He  had  been  detained  (so  one  tradition
tells  us)  '  before  Yahw6 ' — i.e. ,  in  the  sacred  precincts  at
Nob  (or  Gibeon  ;  see  Nob) — by  some  obscure  religious
prescription  (see  y?5W  456).  and  had  cunningly  watched
David  in  his  intercourse  with  the  priest  Ahimelech  (see
David,  §  3).  Soon  after,  he  denounced  the  latter  to
the  suspicious  Saul,  and  when  the  king  commanded  his
'  runners '  to  put  Ahimelech  and  the  other  priests  to
1  See  also  under  Daniel,  4.
1 123


DOG

death,  and  they  refused,  it  was  this  foreigner  who  lifted
up  his  hand  against  them  (i  S.  229-18).

The  two  passages  in  which  Doeg's  office  is  referred  to  are  no
longer  in  their  original  form  in  MI .  In  21  8  [AV  7]  he  is  called
'  the  mightiest  of  the  shepherds  '  (D'jh  TSK),  a  strange  descrip-
tion of  a  shepherd,  and  still  stranger  when  we  observe  that
T3N  occurs  nowhere  else  in  Hebrew  narratives.  The  conjecture
'the  mightiest  of  the  runners'  (C'sn,  Gratz,  Dr.,  Ki.,  Bu.)  gives
an  e.xsier  but  still  not  a  natural  phrase,  and  disregards  the
renderinjj  of  ®hai.  in  -Jl  7  |8),  ffiiaiv  ra^  r)ni6i>ovi  iaouA.  There
can  be  lutle  doubt  that  Lagarde  {iVlittheil.  3  350)  is  right  in
reading  Cn^V  ':"3iK,  which  he  renders  'driver  of  the  mules,' —
a  less  natural  rendering  than  that  given  above,  but  still  possible.
Words  like  n;y  and  V'aiK  are  flexible.  For  the  former  see
Lagarde  {I.e.)  ;  for  the  latter,  see  Abki„  Almost  as  certainly
we  should  also  re.id  "TV  for  ^-\2y  in  229  (see  (S).  We.'s  ob-
jection to  following  (S  here  (TBS  125)  falls  to  the  ground
as  soon  as  it  is  recognised  that  21  7  [8]  is  a  later  insertion  in  the
narrative.

The  reference  to  Doeg  in  the  title  of  Ps.  52  is  due
to  the  thirst  of  later  Jewish  readers  for  biblical  justifica-
tion of  their  idealising  view  of  David.  The  Psalm  was
written  for  use  in  the  temple  (see  v.  8).  T.  K.  c.

DOG  (3?3,  a  name,  of  unknown  origin,  common  to
all  Semitic  dialects; KycoN.  canis  [but  Mt.  1526/.=

1  References  ^^-  ''"^^  kynarion,  fa/<?//H)-  No
■  dogs  of  any  noble  type  are  mentioned
in  the  Bible.  The  Israelitish  kings  were  not,  like
the  Assyrian,'  great  hunters,  and  even  the  Hebrew
legend  of  Nimrod  the  hunter  (but  is  '  hunter '  meant
literally?  see  Nimrod)  in  Gen.  IO9  says  nothing  of  his
dogs.'-^  According  to  EV  the  greyhound  is  referred  to
in  Prov.  30  31  as  one  of  the  four  things  which  are
'  stately  in  going' ;  but  this  is  doubtful  (see  Cock,  Grey-
hound). The  shepherd's  dog  is  mentioned  in  Job  30 1,
and  dogs  which  guard  the  house  may  be  intended  in
Is.  56 10;  but  neither  passage  vouchsafes  the  dog  any
friendly  words.  The  OT  references  are  in  fact  almost
entirely  to  the  pariah  dog,  such  as  may  be  seen  in  any
of  the  '  Bible  lands '  to-day.  They  seem  to  have  gone
careering  in  packs  round  the  city  at  night  (Ps.  596
14/.)  ;  it  was  dangerous  to  stop  one  of  them  (Prov.
26 17).  Doubtless,  however,  they  were  useful  as
scavengers.  They  were  ready  to  devour  even  human
bodies  (i  K.  14ii  I64  21  23/  2  K.  9  10  36  and  similarly
Jer.  153  cp  I  K..  21 19  2238  Ps.  6823[24]),  and  to  them
flesh  that  men  might  not  eat  was  thrown  (Ex.  2231  ;
contrast  Mt.  76).  Prom  Mk.  728  (.Mt.  I527)  some
have  inferred  a  sympathy  between  men  and  dogs  in  the
time  of  Christ  ;  but  this  is  hazardous.  Paul  has  no
such  sympathy  (Phil.  82),  and  a  certain  Rabbi  dissuades
from  keejiing  fierce  dogs  in  the  house,  apparently
because  they  would  frighten  away  the  poor  (Shabb.
63  a).  Most  dogs,  then,  were  fierce.  Yet  Tobit,
according  to  the  Greek  text,  makes  a  companion  of  his
dog  on  his  journeys  (Tob.  5i6  II4)  ;  see  Tobit.

The  pariah  dog  referred  to  above  is  a  variety  of  the
cosmopolitan  dog  (Canis  familiaris),  though  the  breed
p  -  ■u  J  has  probably  been  intermixed  by  cross-
g.  j^g  ^jjj^  jackals  or  wolves.  The  dogs
live  in  companies,  each  dog  having  its  own  lair  (some-
times two),  to  which  it  returns  for  rest  during  the  day.
Those  that  frecjuent  the  towns  act  as  scavengers,  living
on  offal  ;  but  in  the  country  they  are  trained  by  the
shepherds  and  fiirmers  to  act  as  sheep-dogs  (cp  Job  30 1 1.
Not  much  good,  however,  can  be  said  of  the  latter  :
they  are  'a  mean,  sinister,  ill-conditioned  generation,'
whose  use  consists  in  barking  at  intruders  and  warning
the  shepherds  of  any  possible  danger.  ■•  In  appearance
they resemble  the  Scotch  collie, and are  said to be

1  On  the  breeds  of  hunting  dogs  known  in  Assj-ria,  see
Houghton,  rSB.A  652-62  ['77].

'•2  On  the  four  'dogs'  of  Marduk  (Mero<lach)  see  below.  So
in  some  legends  the  Tyri.-in  Heracles  (or  Melkart)  is  accompanied
by  a  dog  {R'l-  Sem.fi)  292).

3  Thomson,  Z,^  (ed.  '94),  202;  cp  Doughty,  Ar.  Des.  1  309
337/ 526-

II24


DOG

intelligent, and sagacious when trainctl. Rabies is
almost,  or  entirely,  unknown  ani<jng  them.  I

The  strcs-s  laiil  in  Judg.  7  5-7  on  the  way  in which
(iidcons thrix- hundred drank, lapping with ihe.r '
3 ExAntic&l '•^"K"*-'*' •'•^'-'  ''"gs-  pr^l^ibly  indicates |
rf  ♦ "1 ^^ *^'*' *'^^'y ^**^''*-'  ''<-'''ce uncivilised  men i
aeiaiiS. (Moore, ///(/^rj,  aoa). The  mention  of
'dogs'  in  company  with  'lions'  in  I's.  2'2  as  typical  of
the  licrce  enemies  of  pious  Israel,  is  surprising. I  here
is  no  OT  parallel for  the  use  of  the p;iriah  tiogs  of
Eastern  cities  as  symlwlic  of  die  enemies  of  Israel. In
later  tinies  the  Gentiles  were  callc-d "dogs' (XiMaA,
77  ti;  liiibii  Kama,  49</,  etc.)  ;  but  the Talnnidic  use
has no biblical authority; Mk. 7 27  surely  does not
express  what  may  be  called  biblical  doctrine. More-
over in I's.  'J'iai only  lions and wild oxin are re-
ferre<l  to. Aq..  Theotl.,  and  Jer.  evidently  read  C'2^5
'hunters'  ; this  is  a  clever  attempt  to  get  over  a  re.il
diflicully. In  v. 17  (lA' 16)  we  should  certainly  re.id
0^*33  D'l<3\  and  D-ON-1  nij;. The  sense  then  becomes,
tlrecdy  lions  in  their  strength  surround  me,
A  troop  of  wild  oxen  encircles  me.
Similarly  in  v. 21 (1--V  20)  we  should  read  'n^n  K'3^,
and  render  (reading  td:3  for  aire).

Snatch  my  soul  from  the  young  lion,
My  life  from  the  clutch  of  the  greedy  lion.
We  now  {xiss  on  to  a  group  of  five  p.assages  which
have  been  much  misuiKlerst(xxl.

1.  2  K.  81J  '  Wlut  is  thy  servant,  the  dog  (0  has  'the  dead
dog'l,  that  he  should  do  this  great  thing?'  RV,  par:i phrasing,
'  which  is  but  a  dog.'  .W  incorrectly,  '  Is  thy  servant  a  dog,'
etc.

2.  a  S.  Iflg  'Why  should  this  de.id  dog  [C-  'this  cursed
dog  ']  curse  mv  lord  the  king?'

■^.  2  S.  '.>8  '  What  is  thy  servant  that  thou  shouldest  look  uix)n
a  dead  dog  like  me  ?  '

4.  I  S.  ".'4  14  [15]  '  After  whom  dost  thou  pursue  ?  after  a  dead
dog?'

5.  3  S.  38  'Am  I  a  dog's  head  that  belongeth  to  Judah?'
(EV).

As  to  (i)  AV  is  quite  wrong.  Hazael  does  not  revolt  in  horror
from  the  description  of  Elisha,  but  only  affects  to  think  it  too  j;rLat
an  achievement  for  him.  'Dog'  is  here  an  expression  of  servile
humility  towards  Klisha,  as  in  Assyrian  ('we  are  the  king's
dogs,' /.^.  his  humble  servants).!  In  (i)  'dead  dog '  (TO  373)
cannot  be  right,  as  ©l-  indicates  by  the  substituted  epithet  (>ej
above).  The  text  must  be  incorrect.  We  want  some  word
which  will  be  eijually  suitable  in  (2)  (3)  and  (4) ;  and  if  possible
some  word  which  will  make  letter  sense  than  'dead '  (,-c)  even
in  (j)  and  (4),  where  it  has  hitherto  been  plausibly  tak.ii  as  an
Oriental  exaggeration.  The  word  which  we  seek  is  KCO
'unclean';  'dead  dog  should  be  'unclean,  despised,  pariah
dog."  To  explain  his  see  Doughty's  striking  description  of  the
treatment  of  their  hcKuids  by  the  Bedouin,  who  '  with  blows
cast  out  these  profane  creatures  from  the  beyt.'2  As  to  (5)  the
text  is  evidently  not  quite  correct  (see  Klo.) ;  there  seems  to
be  a  play  on  the  name  of  Caleb  the  dog-tribe  (s<-e  1025,  n.  i  ;
Nabal).  To  read  'Am  1  a  dog's  head'  (omitting  the  next
words),  with  Prof  H.  P.  Smith,  can  hardly  be  called  s;itisfactor)'.
This  idiom  may  ca.st  light  upon  Dt.  '23  18(19]  where  'dog'
appears  to  be  applied  to  the  class  of  persons  elsewhere  called
kfdHlm.  It  was  natural  to  cxplam  the  word  as  a  term  of  com-
tempt  (see  Idolatrv,  g  6).  If,  however,  '  unclean  do^  '  or  some
similar  phrase  was  a  common  circumlocution  indicative  of
humble  deference  used  in  addressing  superiors,  as  kalbu  is  in
Assyrian  (especially  in  the  Ainarna  letters),  kelrb  need  not,  as
applied  to  these  temple  servants,  h.ive  been  a  term  of  contempt  :
it  may  have  been  their  ordiriary  name  (so  RS^A  292).  The  word
appears  in  fact  in  Phoenician,  applied  to  a  class  of  servants
(03'73)  attached  to  a  temple  of  Ashtureth  in  Cyprus  (CIS  1  no.  86
B,  1.  10).

There  are  not  wanting  indic.itions  that  the  dog  was

held  in  religious  veneration. .\  river  running  into  the

__ , sea  a  few  miles  N.  of  BeirQt  is  called  the

4.  xne  aog j^^^  ^.^^.^^  (Xahr-fl-Kelb.  l.ycus  numen),

m  re  igion. ^^^^j al-\adim informs  us  that  the dog

was sacred among the Harranians. '  They offeretl

sacrificial  gifts  to  it,  and  in  certain  mysteries  dogs  were

solemnly  declared  to  be  the  brothers  of  the  niysta;. ''

This  seems  to  be  connected  with  primitive  H;ibylonian

mytholog)' ; *  my  lord  with  the  dogs '  (a  divine  title  at

1  The  explanation  of  RV,  therefore,  is  not  quite  correct.

«  /Jr.  Dts.  I337.

•  RS^  291,  referring  to  Fthrist,  326,  and  other  passages.

lias


DOR

Harran)  ix)ints  »o  Martluk  .mil  his  four  dogs.  It  is
jxjssible  th.it  the  dog  may  have  Ix-en  among  the  animals
worshipjHxl  by  the  earliest  Semites  as  a  totem  '  (as,  e.g.,
among  some  .\.  American  Indians  and  in  Java).
Robertson  ."^mith  refers  to  Jusiin  (I8110).  who  stites
that  Darius  forlxide  the Carth-aginians  to  sacrifice  human
victims  antl  to  eat  the  tlesh  of  dogs  (in  a  religious  meal,
it  is  implied).  There  sc-ems  also  to  Ijc  an  allusion  to
sometl.ing  of  this  kind  in  post-exilic  Palestine — to  a
custom,  chielly  prevalent  perhaps  among  the  mixed
Samaritan  pt)pulation,*  of  sacrificing  the  dog' on  certain
occasions  (Is.  ii'Si).  T.  K.  c.  §  3.

DOLEFTJL  CREATURES  (D*nK),  Is.  13  21;  see
Jackal.

DOMINIONS  (KYPiOTHTec).  or  rather  'lordships,*
Col.  1  16  ;  cp  i;ph.  1  21  jude  8  2  I'et.  2io. See  Angel,  §  i.

DOOR  (n'P'n,  eyPA.*  eYPt*JM&.  etc.  [BAFLJ.  per-
haps from  ,^"^1,  '  to  swing,'  or  cp  .Ass.  eclilu,  '  to
bolt,  bar').

The  Hebrew  deleth  is  used  of  the  doors  of  a  chamlwr  (Judg.
323_^),  or  of  a  gate  (1  S.  21  13  {14]),  and  even  of  the  gate  it.self
(Dt.  35,  KV  'gates').  The  difference  between  pttliah,  which
may  lie  any  ojieiiing  or  entrance  (e.g.,  of  the  ark.  Gen.  6  16  :
Lattick,  g  2  I7]),  and  deUth,  is  clearly  ilhistratetl  by  (.en.  l'.>6,
where  Lot  stands  in  \\\t  pctliah  to  keep  back  the  men  of  .Sodom
from  approaching  the  deUth  (cp  also  i  K.  C31).  For  'I'C'
('  door '  Ex.  33  17  Job  3S  17  AV)  see  Gatk.

However  neces.sarj-  for  ventilation  ili.orways  were  in
the  East  (see  LArriCK,  §  i),  the  doors  themselves  were
not  employed  so  much  as  in  less  trojjical  regions.
'  The  lock  was  doubtless  like  those  now  in  use  in
the  East,  so  constructed  that  the  l>olt  pij-jc  Cant.  65
Neh.  83  etc. .  RV  ;  'lock,'  AV)  was  shot  by  the  hand
or  by  a  thong;  the  key  (np&O.  'opener')  was  only
used  for  unlocking  the  door'  (Moore,  SBO /'  [Eng.],
Judges,  60).  For  descriptions  of  keys  and  locks,  see
Wilk.  .-/«^.\t;^.  I3S3;  Moore,  ytt<4'.  99  ;  Che.  Is.SBOT,
ET,  159/

The  Hebrew  terms  for  the  component  parts  of  the  doorw.-iy
are  (i)  «"j3,  saf'h,  the  thrchoKl  (n-poOupoi',  irvAuir,  etc.,  aiiAi)
[BN'Al,  Jer.  3.J4,  ot,6%  ,b.H^-^'(i,  oTatfMiK  Aq.  Sym.  Thcod.),  also
jPSO  18.547;;  ***  Thresholi),  and  cp  Tkmplr.  (2)  •^Tn^,
tti'zuzdh,  door  post,  Dt.  C9  11  20;  on  deriv.ition  cp  Schwally,
ZD.MGhi\T,t/.  ;  see  Frontlets.  (3)  ^^^crt,  maikopli,  lintel,
Ex.  127,  22^(<^Ai<i[RAL]);  cp  MH  r^-,xi.  (4)  Ts,  j/r,  hinge,
Prov.  'lis  14  <TTp6<t>'yi  ;  cp  also  pi.  nins  1  K.  "  50  (if  correct,  Ovput-
nara  lli.\L]). See  Ga  IE.

DOPHKAH (Hi^a-l; pa<1)&ka [BAFL], -an [A

after  eU  in  ; .  12]),  one  of  the  stages  in  the  wandering  in
the  wilderness  (N'u.  33i2/. ). Sec  Wanderi.ngs,  §  12.

DOR  (in,  Acop  [BAL]; Josh.  1223,  eAAcoM  [B],

aSSutp  l.\] ;  Judg.  1  27  and  1  Ch.  7  29  Swpa  [I,] ;  also  written  njn,
cp Ph. -iKi below, Josh.  17  11, &<up [B-ilJ  nik'-JX

1.  Name,  more  fully  Maphath-dor  (i  K.  4  n  RVrng. ;  n^j

1K1 ;  yt<f>a6S<op  [A],  represented  by  ai-a  ^xtdet  atojp
[U],  and  PaOavarj  o  ktuk^ti  ai-rfp  f  I.l ;  Josh.  12  23  RVrnj;  -,,-,  'j
Tov if)ei'y(&6iup  [I?, for variants  sec Sw.J t. ►xu^tSiwp [.\],  t.

lv]a,^u,p  [L]),  and  Naphoth  Dor  (Josh.  11  2  RVmtf.,  -in  nir:,
if>tvci,6So,p  [BJ,  va4,t&„,p  [A*],  -66.  (AiFL]),  the  modem
Taniurah,^  lay  on  the  Mediterranean  coast  about  mid-

1  There  is  still,  however,  some  obscurity.  Compare  also  such
proper  names  as  K^Sr.  cSk3'?3  (Phoen.),  U'Ss.  n3"'?3.  K3'?3»
13^3  (Nab.  and  Sin.  inscr.),  j-«->'^  t»  (Cur.  Akc.  .'^yr.  Doc.
156),  A'a/i.,  plur.  A'i/iib  Aklul>,  arnl  dim.  Kulaib  among  Ar.
tribal  names,  and  the  Heb.  373  (cp  Kin.  200,  Joum.  Phil.
989  ;  though  N'Old.  ZDMG,  1886,  164,  n.  i,  throws  doubt  on  the
identification  of  Caleb  and  3^3  ;  see  Names,  {  88).

a  See  Che.  Intr.  Is.  367,  and  cp  RS(^  357,  and  (on  breaking
the  neck)  Kin.  yx)/.

3  Note  that  both  the  Sam.  text  and  the  Sam.  Targum  of  Ex.
2231  omit  the  contemptuous  reference  to  the  dog,  and  speak.
simply  of  casting  away.

*  #upa  is  the  usual  word  in  NT  ;  cp  A«s  5  1923  etc.

•  On  the  origin  of  die  name  cp  Ges.  I  kts.  331.

II36


DOR

way  between  the  promontory  of  Carmel  and  CsEsarea,
at  a  distance  of  alxjut  eight  miles  from  the  latter.

The  fuller  form  of  the  name  is  explained  by  Sym.
as  the  irapaXia  of  Uor,  or  as  Awp  ij  irapaXla  (cp  O.S'*"^*
11522  2r»056,  (/or  nafeth,  5ihp  tov  va<paO,  14'2i3  2883,
nefeddor,  i>a<t>e05u)p} ;  it  probably  includes  the  undulating
plain  of  Sharon  lying  inland.  The  exact  meaning  of
n?:.  n'lBO  (KV  'height,'  AV  'region,  coast,  border,
country')  as  well  as  that  of  'Dor'  is  very  uncertain.^
Outside  the  OF  the  shorter  form  of  the  name  is  usual.
It  is  frequently  mentioned  by  (ireek  writers  and  appears
as  Si^poi,  SQpa  (Sujpd  in  i  Mace.  15  11  13  25  .W ,  Dora),
also  5ovpa  (I'olyb.  ),  Durum  (I'liny),  and  'J'Aora  {'l\\\).
Pent. ).  In  .\ss.  Iht-ru  (by  the  side  of  Megidilo)  occurs
only  once,  in  a  geographical  list  (2  R.  53,  no.  4,  /.  57).
The  nicaning  of  the  name  is  obscure  (see  E.\-uuR,  and
for  H.\M.M.\TH-ni)K  see  H.\m.m.\tii).

Dor  is  tirst  mentioned  in  tlie  Pap.  Golenischeff  (temp.
Hri-hor,  circa  1050  B.C.),  where  D-ira  belongs  to  the
2  OT  and  other  ■^'^^'^^"'  ^  '^^^^  which  entered  Palestine
references,  etc.  f /^"g  ^^''h  the  P.  rus<U  land  occupied
the  sea-coast  (cp  \VMM.-/j.  u.  hur.
383,  and  see  C.Vi'HTOK,  §§  2,  4  ;  Philistinks).^  Their
prince  bears  the  name  Ba-d-ira,  which  appears  to  repre-
sent a  theophorous  name  (.-\bd-il,  'servant  of  El'  or
Bod-el).  That  Dor  continued  to  remain  in  the  hands
of  a  non-Israelite  people  seems  highly  probable.

Later  writers,  with  Deuteronomic  sympathies,  supposed  that
Dor  joined  the  northern  coalition  against  Joshua  (Josh.  11  2),
and  they  include  its  king  among  those  who  fell  (//>.  12  23).  In
the  same  spirit  Dor  is  assigned  to  Manasseh  (Josh.  17  11  ;  cp
1  Ch.  729).'*  A  more  historical  view  is  presented  in  Judg.
1  27,  where  Beth-shean,  Ibleam,  Megiddo,  and  Dor  (in  MT  the
order  is  disturbed)  form  a  belt  of  Caiia;inite  towns  stretching
from  E.  to  W.,  whicH  must  have  separated  Ephraim  from  the
more  northerly  trii)es.  In  the  time  of  Solomon,  it  is  true,  the
'  heights  of  Dor '  was  under  one  of  his  commissaries  ;  but  it  is
hardly  probable  that  the  town  of  Dor  was  itself  included  (i  K.
4  II  ;  see  Uk.n-abinwdau).

For  the  next  few  centuries  Dor  drops  out  of  Jewish
history. It  was  well  known,  however, to  the  (ireeks,
the earliest authority in which the name


3.  Later
history.


occurs being Hecatteus of Miletus [cii


500  B.C.).  It  is  not  improbable  that  it
ought  to  be  identified  with  the  AcDpos  which,  in  the  fifth
century,  was  tributary  to  the  Athenians  (Steph.  Byz.
s.v.  Aui/)os),  and  this  agrees  with  the  view  that  the
Takara  (the  earliest  known  occupants  of  Dor)  were
from  Asia  Minor,  and,  therefore,  might  have  been  in
close  touch  with  Greece.  At  the  beginning  of  the  fourth
century  Esmunazar  relates  that  Dor  (hnt)  and  Joppa
('2"),  rich  corn-lands  (jn  riinx)  in  the  field  of  Sharon
(pc  ira).  were  handed  over  to  Sidon  by  the  king  of
Persia  (Artaxerxes  Mnemon  ?),  probably  (as  Schlottmann
conjectured)  in  return  for  their  help  in  the  battles  of
Cnidus  (394)  and  Citium  (386). ■*  Hence  perhaps
arose  the  belief  of  later  Greek  geographers  that  Dor
was  originally  a  Phoenician  colony.  It  successfully
resisted  two  sieges,  one  by  Antiochus  the  Great  (Anti-
ocuus,  i)  during  his  war  with  Ptolemy  Philopator  in
219  B.C.  (Polyb.  566),  and  the  second  by  Antiochus
Sidetes  (.Xntiochu.s,  5)  in  139-8  k.c.  ,  when  the  siege
was  raised  in  consec|uence  of  the  flight  of  Trypho
(i  Mace.  15  11^.).  It  was  afterwards  held  along  with
Strato's  tower  (C/Ksarka,  §  i)  by  a  tyrant  named
Zoilus,  on  whose  subjugation  by  Ptolemy  Lathyrus  it
became  part  of  the  Hasmonaean  dominions  (Jos.  Ant.

1  Wholly  obscure  is  nB3n  nxhv  Josh.  17 11  which  ®  (to
Tpirov  T17S  fiau^eTo.  [B],  .  .  .  vcufteOa  [A],  .  .  .  vcxfxO  [L])  treats
as  a  place-name  (note  that  ®i  gives  only  t/tree  names).  Sym.
here  again  has  at  rpeis  n-opoAiai.  Slav.  Ostrogothic  adds  the
gloss  Tpia  kXitt).

2  On  the  identification  of  the  Takara  town  Dor  with  the  Ass.
Zaklcalu  (4  R  34  no.  2,  /.  45);  see  Hommel,  PSBA  17 203 ('95);
A  II  r  236.

3  The  passage  in  Josh,  is  hardly  sound  ;  Addis  corrects  after
Jude.  1  27. See  also  Asher,  §  3.

♦  For  Elimunazar's  inscription,  cp  Schlottmann,  Die  Inschrift
Esehmunazars  ('68),  and  see  CIS  1,  no.  3.  Skylax  assigns  Dor
to  ^don  and  Ashkelun  to  Tyre  during  the  Persian  period.

1 127


DOTHAN

xiii.  1224).  Front  Pompey's  time  it  w.as  directly  under
Roman  rule.  Gabinius  restored  the  town  and  harlxjur
(56  B.C.),  and  it  enjoyed  autonomy  under  the  emperors
\ih.  xiv.  44  XV.  53).  It  possessed  a  synagogue  in  42  A.  D.
{Ant.  xix.  63).  At  a  comparatively  early  date  after
this  its  prosperity  declined,  and  in  the  time  of  Jerome
((^5<'-l  11522  14214)  it  was  alre;idy  deserted,  and  soon
scarcely  anything  was  left  but  its  ruins  —  which  were
still  an  object  of  admiration  —  and  the  memory  of  its
former  greatness  (cp  Plin.  517:  memoria  urbii).  Down
to  at  least  the  seventh  century  it  continued  to  give  its
name  to  an  episcopal  see.'  Its  prosperity  was  largely
due  to  the  abundance  of  the  purple-yielding  murex  on
its  rocky  coast,  and  to  its  favourable  jxjsition  (I)ut  see
Ant.  XV.  96).  The  modern  village  consists  merely  of
a  few  hovels.

The  ancient  remains  which  lie  to  the  N.  of  the
modern  village  are  inconsiderable  {/i<ied.<^>  271  /,
F/!/''  Mem.  2(>  ff.),  the  most  conspicuous  object,  to
former  travellers,  being  the  ruins  of  a  tower  (of  the
time  of  the  Crusaders)  which  crowns  a  rocky  eminence.
The  tower  (el- Burj  ;  cp  Pirgul  [  =  irvp^os]  in  Foulcher
de  Chartres)  has  since  collapsed  (/"£/•'(>,  1895,  P-  "S)-'*

S.  A.  C.

DORCAS  (AopKAC  [Ti.  WH],  i.e.,  'gazelle,'  §68),
the  Greek  name  of  the  Christian  disciple  (yiio^Tjrpia)  at
Joppa,  whom  Peter,  by  prayer,  raised  from  the  dead
(.Acts  936-42).  She  was  manifestly  a  Jewess,  her  Greek
name  being  simply  a  translation  of  that  by  which  she
was  known  in  Aramaic,  'labilha  (xri'Dp,  i.e.,  'gazelle,'
=  Heb.  -aii ;  see  Gazellk).  A  handmaid  of  R.
(jamaliel  was  called  Tabitha  ( IVayyikra  R. 19).

In  the  so-called  Acts  0/  I'rochorus,  dating  from  about  the
middle  of  the  fifth  centtiry,  Tabitha  figures  as  the  hostess  of
John  and  Prochorus  during  their  three  days'  stay  at  Joppa  on
their  way  to  Egypt.

DORYMENES  (AopYMeNHC  [ANV] ;  in  2  Mace.
AcopOYAAeNOC  L^']).  father  of  Ptolemy  Macron  [see
I'Toi.K.Mv]  ; I  Mace.  838 2  Mace.  445.

DOSITHEUS  (AaiCieeoc[B*.AV],  Aoc.  [B»bL^V]).

1.  A  caiJtain  under  Judas  the  Maccabee  ;  he  and  his  fellow-
officer  Sosipater  had  'limotheus  in  their  power  after  the  action
before  Camion,  but  allowed  themselves  to  be  persuaded  to  let
him  off  (2  Mace.  12  1924).

2.  A  mounted  soldier  who  distinguished  himself  in  battle  by  a
brave  though  unsuccessful  attempt  to  take  Gorgias  prisoner
(2  .Mace.  12  35).

3.  .\  lenegade  Jewin  the  camp  of  Ptolemy  Philopator  (3  Mace.
13)-.

4.  '  Said  to  be  a  priest  and  Levite,'  who,  with  his  son  Ptolemy,
carried  to  Egypt  the  (translated)  letter  of  Mordecai  respecting
the  feast  of  Purim  (Esth.  11  i,  ®  ;  Aoo-tdeof  [A],  Suxrti.  [N]).

DOTEA  (AC0T6A  [A]),  Judith  89  AV-e-  ;  AV  Judea,
RV  DoTyKA. See  Dotha.n.

DOTHAN  (jnM,  Gen.  37 17  2  K.  6.3,  and  pn*1.  Gen.
37  17  [Names,  §  107];  Di.  (/«  loc.)  thinks  the  latter  a  vocalic
modification  of  the  former.  This  is  doubtful  (cp  Ba.  NB,  §  194
f .)  ;  but  in  any  case  the  termination  ['-  is  very  ancient,  occurring
in  the  Palestine  lists  of  Thotmes  III.,  sixteenth  century  B.C.,
tu-ti-y-na  (WMM  As.  u.  Kiir.  88).  It  is  possible,  therefore,
that  jnil  i^  merely  a  defective  form  of  J'n  [Audaetfx  [BNADEL],
in  Judith  89,  Aturata  [BN] ;  Awrea  [A] ;  Eusebius  has  Atudaci/i,
Jerome  Dothai>ii\).

Eusebius  placed  it  12  R.  m.  N.  of  Sehast6  (Samaria).
The  site  was  identified  by  Van  de  Velde'  (1364^)  with
Tell  Dothdn  10  m.  N.  of  Sebastiyeh.  It  is  a  green
mound  lying  on  the  .S.  of  a  plain,  sometimes  called  after  it
(Judith  4  5  [6],  Tb  nt5iov  rb  ir\t)alov  Scodaeifi,  Dothaun),
and  sometimes  called  Sahl  '.Arrabeh,  which  lies  some
500  feet  above  sea-level,  and  drains  to  the  Mediterranean
by  the  W'ady  Selhab,  afterwards  W'ndy  '.\bu  Nar,  and  is
connected  with  Esdraelon  by  the  wide  descending  valley
of  Bel'ameh,  the  ancient  Ible.\m  [(/.v.]. Thus  it  carries

1  Bapuyiof  Aupuf  ^n-i<r»toJro«  is  mentioned  in  the  Acts  of  the
Council  ot  Constantinople  (381  A.D.).

2  See,  further,  for  coinage,  etc.,  Schiir.  G/l^',  §  2j,  i.  lo.

S  Also,  independently,  a  few  days  later,  by  Robinson  [/.BR
1  22].  Rabbi  Parohi  had  noted  it  in  the  fourteenth  century  ;
see  Asher  s  Benj.  c/Ttuie/a,  2  434).


DOUGH

the  great  caravan  mail  from  Damascus  and  Gilead  to
Egypt,  which  is  still  in  use,  as  it  was  when  the  story  of
Joseph  and  the  com[)any  of  Ishniaelite  traders  passing
Dothan  with  spices  from  Gilead  for  Kgypt  was  written
(GASni.  //(/'  151/  356).  Van  de  Velde  found  the  re-
mainsof  a  Jewish  road  crossing  from  Ksdraelon  to  Sharon.
At  the  S.  foot  of  the  Tell  is  a  fountain  called  Kl-Haf  ireh ;
there  is  a  sc*cond  fountain  and  two  large  cisterns  (cp  the
cistern  into  which  Joseph's  brethren  are  said  to  have
lowered  him).  There  is  very  fine  piisturage  on  the  sur-
rounding plain,  which  the  present  writer  found  covered
with  flocks,  some  of  them  belonging  to  a  camp  of  nomad
Arabs.  From  its  site  on  so  ancient  a  road  through  the
country,  and  near  the  mouth  of  the  main  pass  from  the
N.  into  the  hills  of  Samaria,  the  Tell  nmst  always  have
been  a  military  position  of  importance  ;  note  the  de-
scription in  2  K.  &\iff.,  and  the  frec|ucnt  mention  of  it
in  the  IJook  of  Judith  (advance  of  Holofernes).  Cp
FEFMein.  2169  215;  Thomson,  LB.,  ed.  1877,  p.
466/.; Huhl,  Fal.  24/..  102,  107.  G.  A.  S.

DOUGH. For  Nu.  152o/. Xeh.  IO37  [38]  (np'TT;
RVnitf. 'co;irse meal'),  see Food,  § 1,  aiA for  2  S.  is'a RV

(Pm  cp  liKHAO,  §  ..

DOVE.  The  word  dove  is  somewhat  loosely  applied
to  cfi  tain  members  of  the  suborder  Columbte  or  pigeons  ;
and,  as  no  sharp  distinction  can  be  drawn,
it  is  pro[x>sed  to  treat  the  do\  es  and  pigeons
together  in  this  article.
Three  Heb.  words  come  under  consideration  :  (i)  njV,^5«rt//,
probably  derived  from  its  mournful  note  (n-fpKrrepa  [iS])  ;  (2)
"lirii  TB,  tor  (prol>ably  onomalopcwtic,  cp  Lat.  turiur ;  -rpvyuav
[®1),  EV  '  turtle-dove  ' ;  and  (3)  Vjij,^(JcJ/,  EV  '  young  pigeon  '
(Gen.  159,  II  Tin.  ntpKTTtpa.  [.AOL]),  properly  any  young
bird  ;  cp  Dt.  32  iif  (with  reference  to  the  IPJ).

Apart  from  its  occurrence in P  and Gen.  159  (see
below),  -nn  is  found  only  in  Cant.  2 12  (where  allusion  is


1.  Hebrew

terms.


OT


made  to  its  '  voice  '),  in  Jer.  87  (a  migratory
EV in both


character.


references ^'"""^ '• "-^ §  "^ ^'-^ '^"'"'^

reierences. .turtle), and in Ps. 74 19  (not©). In

the  last-quoted  piissage  mn,  as  the  harmless,  timid  dove
(cp  Hos.  7"  11 II  .\It.  IO16),  is  usually  thought  to
be  symbolical  of  Israel.  The  te.xt-reading.  however,  is
doubtful.  1  l^lsewhere  it  is  to  the  n:r  ( '  dove  ' )  that  Israel
is  compared  (see  JON".\H,  ii.  §  3).  This  is  the  most
common  term,  which  appears  notably  in  the  Deluge-
story,  Gen.  88-12  (Dki.ugk,  §  17).  Allusion  is  made  in
I's.  5r)6  (7]  to  its  plumage,  in  Is.  3814  59 11  to  its
mournful  note.-  Its  gentle  nature  makes  the  dove  a
favourite  simile  or  term  of  endearment  in  love  poems
(Cant.  1 15  4  1  52  12  69).  That  doves  were  domesticated
among  the  Hebrews  may  be  inferred  from  Is.  608  (see
Fowls,  §  5),  and  it  is  of  interest  to  recall  that  carrier-
pigeons  were  well  known  in  F.gypt,  and  that  at  the
coronation  ceremotiy  four  were  let  fly  to  carry  the
tidings  of  the  newly-made  king  to  the  four  corners  of
the  earth  (Wilk.  Anc.  l-'.g.  8320).

.\rc there reasons for supposing that among the
Hebrews  the  dove  ever  enjoyed  a  reputation  for  sanctity  ?

, „ J Conclusive  evidence  in  supjjort  of  this  view
i.  oacrea • „, .  . , ... •. • i._i.i„  .i,_. .1


is  absent  ; but it is  remarkable  that the


dove,  although  a  '  clean "  bird,  is  never
mentioned  in  the  OT  as  an  article  of  diet.  It  was  a
favourite  food  of  the  I'.gyptians,  and  is  commonly  eaten
in  Palestine  at  the  present  day.  Moreover,  we  have  to
note  that  the  -lin  and  Siii  are  mentioned  in  an  old  cove-
nant ceremony  by  E  (Gen.  I59),  and  that  in  P's  legis-
lation 'turtle-doves'  (omn)  and  'young  pigeons'  (»j2
nav)  are  frequent  sacrificial  victims  in  ceremonies  which.

1  'Deliver  not  the  soul  of  thy  turtle-dove"  is  a  strange  ex-
pression. Sym.  Tg.  Jer.  find  an  allusion  to  the  Law  (Tg.  '  the
souls  of  the  teachers  of  thy  Law')  ;  but  ©  Pesh.  read  I'jif  ;  so
Gunkel,  Che.  :  '  Deliver  not  the  soul  which  praises  thee,'  be-
comes the  sense.

s  Cp  also  Nah.  2  7  [8] ;  on  the  text  of  Ezek.  7  16  see  Co.

1129


DOVE'S  DUNQ

however,  do  not  involve  a  sacrificial  meal  (Ixv.  5;  128
etc.  ;  in  NT  Lk.  224).'  This  exceptional  treatment  of
the  dove  suggests  that  originally  the  Hebrews  were  wont
to  ascribe  to  the  bird  a  sacrosanct  character,  snnilar  to
that  which  it  has  obtained  among  other  branches  of  the
Semites.  In  Palestine  '  the  dove  was  sacreti  with  the
Phoenicians  and  Philistines,  and  on  this  superstition
is  based  the  conmion  Jewish  accusations  against  the
Samaritans  that  they  were  worshippers  of  the  dove.'
There  were  holy  doves  at  Mecca  (the  custom  is  hardly
indigenous),  and  according  to  Lucian  \^Dea  Syria,  54,
cp  14)  doves  were  taboo  to  the  Syrians,  he  who
touched  them  remaining  unclean  a  whole  day.''*  On
the  symlxjlism  of  the  dove  in  .NT  (Mt.  3 16  etc.)  and  in
early  Christian  times,  sec  Smith's  Diet.  Christ.  Ant.,
s.v.

The  following  species  occur  in  Palestine  : —
(i.)  Cotuntba  fialumhus,  the  ring-dove  or  wood-pigeon,  common
in England and throughout most of Europe. I^rge flocks

of  these  assemble  in  the  winter  months  and  do
4.  Species,  much  damage  by  feeding  on  the  young  leaves  of

cultivated  plants  ;  some  migrate  in  the  autumn,
but  many  iiass  the  winter  in  I'alestine.  (ii.)  C.  arnas,  the  stock-
dove, smaller  and  darker  than  the  alx)ve  and  rarer  in  Palestine  ;
unlike  C".  paluiiihtis  it  docs  not  build  on  branches  of  trees,  but
lays  its  eggs  in  holes  or  in  burrows,  (iii.)  t".  Inua,  the  rock-
dove,  is  abundant  on  the  coast  and  uplands  ;  it  is  the  parent
stock  from  which  the  domesticatetl  varieties  have  lieen  derived,
(iv.)  C.  schinipcri,  closely  allied  to  the  preceding,  which  it  takes
the  place  of,  m  the  interior  and  along  the  Jordan  valley.  It  is
elsewhere  found  in  Egypt  and  in  .Vbyssinia.  It  nests  in  crevices
and  fissures  of  the  rock  (cp  Jer.  48  2K).  (v.)  Turtur  communis  or
auritus,  the  turtle-dove,  which  prol>ably  represents  ~fj^  (see  |  2),
is  a  migratory  species  whose  return  is  very  cunstant  (Jer.  87,
Cant.  2  12)  alxjut  the  beginning  of  .Vpril,  when  they  become  very
plentiful  and  are  to  be  found  in  everj*  tree  and  shrub.  This
species  is  the  most  abundant  of  all  the  Cotumhir  in  Palestine,
(vi.)  /'.  risorius,  the  Harbar>-  or  collared  dove,  which  extends
from  Constantinople  to  India.  Around  the  Dead  Sea  this  species
is  a  permanent  resident,  being  found  as  a  rule  in  small  flocks  of
eight  or  ten.  (vii.)  /'.  senegitUnsis,  the  palm  turtle-dove,  has
been  regarded  by  Tristram  as  the  turtle-dove  of  the  Hiblc.  h
lives  amongst  the  courtyards  of  houses  in  Jerusalem  and  seems
to  be  half  tame  ;  it  especially  frequents  palm  groves.

A.  i:.  S.— b.  A.  C.

DOVE'S  DUNG(D'3Vnn  or  D'JV  nn,  Kt.  [Ginsb.].
D^yrn'n.^'  Kr. ; Konpoc  nepicrepooN  [HAL]). In

a  graphic  account  of  the  siege  of  Samaria,  side  by  side
with  '  an  ass's  head  '  appears  '  the  fourth  part  of  a  kab
of  dove's  dimg '  {/fare  yon im)  as  a  food  only  to  Xm
bought  at  a  very  high  price  (2  K.  625).  Much  has  Xnxn
written  to  account  for  this  strange -sounding  detail  ;
Josephus  {Ant.  ix.  44)  even  suggested  that  the  dung  was
a  substitute  for  salt  !  The  reference  to  it,  however,  is
doubtless  due  to  an  error  of  an  ancient  scrilx;,  which
is  precisely  analogous  to  one  in  I's.  1'234  (MT).

In  that  passage  a  questionable  word  (rendered  in  EV  '  llie
proud  ')  is  represented  \n  the  mg.  as  Ix-ing  really  two  words,  one
of  which  is  c':v.  It  is  more  than  prolwble  that  '  an  ass's  head  '*
(lICrrCK-l)  should  be  C'c'ny  "C.^,  'a  homer  of  lentils,"  and  'doves'
dung '  (C':i'  "in)  should  be  C'3'~n,  '  jkxIs  of  the  carob  tree  '  (see
Husks).  That  the  ancients  agreed  with  MT  and  that  the  correct-
ness of  the  reading  can  be  defended  (see  Post  in  Hastings'  />'/>,
s.v.)  by  observation  of  the  habits  of  pigeons  is  no  reason  why
we  .should  acquiesce  in  it  ;  similarly  we  might  defend  the  painful
figure  of  the  'snail'  in  Ps.  588(9]  (*««  .Snail,  2).  For  the
attempts  of  modern  writers  to  mitigate  the  unpleasantness  of
the  expression  '  dove's  dung  '  by  finding  some  plant  which  might
have  been  so  called,  see  articles  in  Smiths  and  Hastings'
dictionaries.  Two  illustrative  pa.s.sages(2  K.  18  27  Is.  1  20)  have,
we  may  believe,  been  recovered  by  similar  corrections  of  the
text,  one  certain,  the  other  highly  probable. See  HcsKS.

T.  K.  C.

1  In  NT  times  doves  for  such  purposes  were  sold  in  the  temple
itself  (Mt.  21 12  Mk.  11 15  Jn.  2  14  16).

'  On  the  whole  subject  see  Bochart,  Hiero-.  ii.  1 1  and  WHS
Kin.  iqd/.  ;  RSfl)  2 19  n.  2,  294,  etc.  Cp  also,  for  '  dove "  oracles,
Frazer,  Paus.  4  ng/.  The  white  dove  was  especially  venerated  ;
Tibullus,  1  7  :  'alba  Palastino  sancta  columba  Syro.'

'  I'his  is  a  euphemistic  substitute. Some  authorities  recognise
C>3V> 'doves,'  as  an  element  in  the  phrase  (so  KOn.  Lektycb.
I 2  102) ;  others  take  ji  to  be  simply  a  termination  (Ginsb.  Introd.
j 346,  '  decayed  leaves '),

4  Such  '  unclean '  food  was  not  likely  to  be  exposed  for  sale
' even  during  a  siege. And  why  specially  the  head  ?


DOWRY

DOWRY.  For  Gen.  34 12  Ex.  22 17  [16]  i  S.  1825t
("no,  mdhar;  (f>fpin^  ;  dos  [in  S.  sfionsalia]),  see  Marriage,  §  i.
For  Gen.  30  sot  C^J.  zcl>c<i),  see  Zkiiulun.

DRACHM,  RV  Drachma  (Araxmh),  Tob.  Sm
2  Mace.  4 19  10 20  1243. See  Money.

DRAG  (nnrODp),  Hab.  1 15/ See  Fisu,  §  3.
DRAGON  (pan;  Arakcon)-

For  Dt.  3233  KV  P<.  01  13  (RV  'serpent')  see  Seri-ent,  S  i
II  ;  and  for  Ps.  US  7  (RV'iui.'.  '  se.-i-monsters '  or  'waterspouts').
Serpent,  §  3  (/)  n.  For  the  '  dragons '  (D'jn,  |'3ri,  nijn  [sing.
|n] :  in  Lam.  43  AV  '  sea-monsters,'  AVmg.  '  sea-calves  ')of  Mai.
1  3  etc.  see  Jackals  (so  RV).

In  addition  to  the  passages  in  which  the  term  tannin
is  used  of  a  natural  species  of  animals  (such  as  Gen.  1 21
1.  Mythological  ^^ '  sea -monsters,' AV Whale


allusions  in


[y.i'.]; Ex. 79/. EV Sekpent


OT  and  NT  t'/-^'])  there  are  various  longer  or
shorter  passages  in  which  a  mytho-
logical or  semi-mythological  e.xplanation  of  the  term
may  be  reasonably  sup|X)sed.  Some  of  these  have
been,  with  more  or  less  fulness,  treated  elsewhere,  and
may  therefore  be  here  considered  more  briefly.

The  passages  are  as  follows  (for  discussion,  see  §  3yC) — (a)
Is.  27  I  (see  Behemoth  ano  Leviatman,  §  3  [yT]) ;  ip)  Is.  61 9
(see  RAHAfi);  (c)  ler.  51  34  (see  Jonah,  ii.  §  4);  {if)  Ezek.
29  3-6,  '  I  will  attack  thee,  Pharaoh  king  of  Kgypt,  thou  great
dragon,!  which  liest  in  the  midst  of  thy  streams,  which  hast
said,  Mine  are  the  streanis,2  1  have  made  them.  I  will  put
hooks  in  thy  jaws,  and  cause  the  fish  of  thy  streams  to  stick  to
thy  scales.  I  will  bring  thee  up  out  of  thy  streams  ...  I  will
hurl  thee  into  the  desert,  thee  and  all  the  fish  of  thy  streams ;
upon  the  open  country  shall  thou  fall  ;  thou  shalt  not  be  taken
up  nor  gathered.  .  .  .'  (e)  Ezek.  32  2-8,  '.  .  .  as  for  thee,  thou
wast  like  the  dragon  3  in  the  sea,  thou  didst  break  forth  with
thy  streams,  didst  trouble  the  water  with  thy  feet,  and  didst
foul  its  streams.  Thus  saith  Vahwe,  I  will  spread  my  net
over  thee,  and  bring  thee  up  into  my  snare.  I  will  lay  thy  flesh
upon  the  mountains,  and  fill  the  vallejf  with  thy  corruption.'*  .  .  .
I  will  cover  the  heavens  at  thy  setting,  and  clothe  its  stars  in
mourning.  .  .  .'  (/")  Job  7  12,  '  Am  I  the  sea  or  the  dragon, 3
that  thou  settest  watchers  against  me?'  (^)  Neh.  2  13,  '  before
the  dragon-well.'  These  are  probably  all  the  passages  in  the
Hebrew  OT  ;  for  Ps.  4419(20],  ref^-Tred  to  by  Gunkel  in  this
connection,  is  certaiily  corrupt;  but  (/i)  Esth.  10  7  [4]  lie  [5],
(J)  Bel  and  the  Dragon,  and  (jc)  Ps.  Sol.  2  28-34  have  to  be
grouped  with  them  (see  §  3).

The  N  r  references  are  all  in  Revelation,  viz.,  in  (w)  12  3-17,
(«)  13  2  4  1 1,  (<;)  10  13,  (/)  20  2  ;  cp  12  9.

These  last  require  to  be  treated  separately,  but  with

due  cognisance  of that old  Babylonian  dragon-myth,

j__ uncomprehended fragments of which

T-afoVarK^os c'^culated  in  the  eschatological  tradition

reierences.  ^^  antichrist  {q.v.).  The  dragon
which  souglit  to  devour  the  child  of  the  woman  is  the
very  same  development  of  Babylonian  mythology  which
lies  at  the  base  of  Jer.  51 34.  From  a  Jewish  point  of
view  the  woman  (cp  Mic.  4 10)  is  either  the  earthly  or
the  heavenly  Zion,  and  the  dragon  (originally  Tiamat)
with  its  seven  heads*  is  Armilos,  or  Kyc'l  ('  the  wicked
one  '  ;  cp  2  Thess.  23  8),  i.e.,  Rome,  the  new  Babylon,
which  is  identified  with  '  the  ancient  serpent,"  en:
"Onp'T  (cp  Rev.  I29,  and  see  Weber,  Jiid.  Theol.  218).
The  storming  of  heaven  by  the  dragon  is  also  Baby-
lonian ;  it  is  the  primeval  rebellion  of  Tiamat  (see
Cke.\tion,  §  2)  transferred  to  the  latter  days^  (cp
Eph.  612,  the  spiritual  hosts  of  wickedness  iv  roh
iirovpavloii).  The  additions  of  the  apocalyptic  writer
do  not  concern  us  here.^  On  the  affinities  of  Rev.  12  4
to  a  Greek  myth  see  Hellenis.m,  §  8.

1  Reading  p3?  for  C'^n  of  MT.

2  Reading  Cnk;  (0  Gunkel).

«  pan  (.W  'whale,'  RV  'sea-monster').

♦  Reading  "H^'l  (Symm.,  Pesh.,  Rodiger,  Gunkel).

*  Cp  the  '  great  serpent  of  seven  heads  '  in  a  primitive  Sumerian
poem  (Sayce,  Hibb.  Led.  282).

6  Cp  Charles,  .Secrets  0/  Enoch,  9  (note  on  chap,  i)  ;  Brandt,
ManddUche  Schr'/ten,  137^  (the  latter  cited  by  Bousset).

7  Cp  Bousset,  Der  Antichrist,  T  173,  and  the  same  writer's
conmientary  on  the  Apocalypse  ;  see  also  Ai-OCALVI'SE,  §  41.


DRAGON

We  pass  on  to  (A)  Esth.  10  7  [4]  1 1  6. Two  dragons  come  forth

to  fight  against  tiie  'righteous  i)eoj)lc,'  i.e..  the  Jews  (cp  Jer.

T (W ^^  ^*^' ^  '"^''^  '"''^ interpreted in  the  story  as

3.  in  OT  Mardocheus  and  Aman,  and  the  justification
Apocryph.  of  this  is  that  tliey  fight  together  as  Mordecai
contended  with  Hamaii.  Tliis  is  evidently
a  late  modification  of  an  uncomprehended  traditional  story.
The  connection  of  the  dragons  with  water  is  eviUefitly  .in  echo
of  the  Tiamat  myth.  The  writer,  however,  did  not  uiKierstand
it,  and  explained  the  'much  water'  of  Esther,  {i)  Bel  and  the
Dragon  sirikes  us  at  once  by  its  Babylonian  colouring.  That
it  is  D.aniel,  not  a  god,  who  kills  the  Dragon,  is  an  alteration
natural  to  Haggadic  stories,  to  which,  as  Ball  has  shown,  tliis
story  belongs.  No  trace  remains  of  the  old  myth  beyond  what
is  found  in  Jer.  51  34.  {k)  Ps.  Sol.  228-34  is  a  picture  of  the
fate  of  Pompey,  the  profaner  of  the  temple,  which  would  be
liy|>:rbolical  if  it  were  not  obviously  coloured  by  a  semi-mythical
tradition.

Resuming  the  consitleration  of  {a) — i.e..  Is.  27 1 — we
notice  that  the  two  Leviathans  and  the  Dragon  in  the
4.  OT  allusions  ■'^'^  '^^  distinctly  mythical  forms  (the


I


considered.


two  former,  differentiations  of  Tiamat;


the  latter,  Kingu,  Tiamat's  husband)  ;
they  are  identified  by  the  apocalyptist  (see  Intr.  Is.  155)
with  the  three  great  jxiwers  hostile  to  the  Jews, —
Babylonia,  Persia,  and  I-gypt.  The  reference  to  the
sea  confirms  the  mythological  origin  of  the  e.xpression,
for  Tiamat  is  the  personification  of  the  primeval  ocean.  ^
On  Yahwe's  sword  see  Gen.  824,  and  cp  Marduk's
weapon,  called  in  Creation  tablet  iv.  /.  49,  abiibtc,
'  storm  '  (cp  //.  30  39).  As  to  {b),  note  again  the  two
conquered  monsters  (Rahab  and  the  Dragon),  and  the
connection  with  the  sea  in  v.  10.  The  old  myth  is  ap-
plied to  the  passage  of  the  Israelites  through  the  Red
Sea ;  but  the  api>lication  would  have  been  impossible  had
not  the  destruction  of  Rahab  and  the  Dragon  been
equivalent  to  the  subjugation  of  the  sea.  The  poet
does  not  say,  but  obviously  supposes,  that  Rahab  and
Pharaoh  are  in  some  sense  identical,  just  as  in  Rev.
12  the  impious  power  of  Rome  is  identified  with  the
Dragon.  The  '  shattering '  of  Rahab  is  repeated  from
the  Babylonian  myth.

Of  (t)  nothing  more  need  now  be  said  (see  Jonah)  ;
but  ((/)  and  (c)  require  to  be  clearly  interpreted.  It  is
not  to  an  ordinary  crocodile  that  Pharaoh  is  compared.
The  'hyperbolical'  language  would,  in  this  ca.se,  be
intolerable.  It  is  the  despotic  and  blasphemous  dragon
Tiamat.  The  blasphemy  is  at  once  explained  when  we
remember  that  Tiamat  was  originally  a  divine  beings
older  in  fact  than  the  gods.  The  denial  of  burial  to
Pharaoh  is  of  course  explicable  out  of  mere  vindictive-
ness  ;  but  it  is  a  worthier  sujiposition  that  we  have  here
a  somewhat  pale  reflection  of  the  outrages  infiicted  on
the  Ixjdy  of  Tiamat  by  the  young  sun-god  Marduk.  T  he
'  hook'  reminds  us  of  Job  41 1  [4025]  (Leviathan)  ;  the
net,  of  a  striking  detail  in  Creation- tablet  iv. ,  ii.  95,
112.-  The  'setting'  of  the  dragon  implies  that  there  was
a  constellation  identified  with  the  dragon  (cp  Lockyer,
Dazvn  of  Astronomy,  137,  146).  In  (/)  the  combina-
tion of  'sea'  and  'dragon,'  and  the  occurrence  of
references  elsewhere  in  Job  to  Rahab  and  Leviathan,
sufficiently  prove  the  mythological  affinities  of  the
passage.  The  Dragon  was,  according  to  one  current
version  of  the  old  myth,  not  destroyed,  but  placed  in
confinement  (cp  Job  38  41).  Cp  the  stress  laid  in  Job
388-11  Ps.  10j59  336  [7]  657/  on  the  long-past  subju-
gation of  the  sea  by  Yahwe.

One  passage  only  remains  {s;).  The  term  '  dragon-
well  '  suggests  a  different  class  of  myths — those  in
•which  the  sui-)ernatural  serpent  is  a  friendly  being.
Primitive  sanctuaries  were  often  at  wells  (En-ROGEI.),
and  serpents  love  moist  places.-* Serpents,  too,  are  the

1  Rashi,  on  Is.  27  1,  remarks  that  the  '  coiled  '  Leviathan
encompa.sses  the  earth  (c'?lj'n  '^3  TIN  fi'po).  Cp  Griinbaum,
ZD.MGZ\  275.  The  'coils'  of  the  Egyptian  Leviathan  (ApOpi)
were  in  heaven  (Book  of  Hade.s,  RP  12  13).  ApOpi  seems  ulti-
mately identical  with  Tiamat ;  but  the  details  of  the  myth  are
i:gyptian.

2  Cp  Lyon,/5/.  14 132.

3  Schick  and  Baldensperger  (PEFQ  ['98],  p.  23  ;  ['99),  p.  57)
state  that  long  worms  and  serpents  abound  in  and  n.ar  the


DRAGON

emblems  of  healing  (cp  Nu.  21  5-9).  and  sacred  wells  |
are  often  also  healing  wells.  The  intermittent  character
of  St.  Mary's  Wdl  (connectccl  with  the  lower  Pool  of
Siloah)  is  accounted  for  in  folklore  by  the  story  that  a
great  drajjon  who  lies  there  makes  the  water  gush  forth
in  his  sleep.  Cp  also  the  dragon-myth  connected  with
the  Oronles.  the  serix.-nt's  pool,  Jos.  lij  v.  82,  and  the
serpent  myths  of  the  ancient  Arabs  (WRS  Rel.  Sem<^\
131.  171).  and  see  Zohkleth.

Thus  we  have  two  views  of  the  dragon  represented, —
as  a  friendly  and  as  a  hostile  Ixjing.  Into  the  wider
_ _ . , .  subject suggested  by  this result we

e.Babyloman  .-amiot  enter  now  (cp  Skkpknt).  It
origin  of  myth,  j^  ^^^^^  important  to  consider  the
question.  How  came  these"  only  half-understood  myths,
represented  by  liehemoth,  I^evialhati,  kahab,  and  the
inclusive  appKjllation  Dragon,  to  Ix;  so  prominent  ?  We
have  already  seen  that  they  are  not  of  native  Palestinian
growth,  but  (apart  from  the  myth  of  the  Dragon's  Well)
of  Babylonian  origin.  Not  that  every  important
Dragon-myth  in  Asiatic  couiitries  must  necessarily  be
derived  ultimately  from  Babylon — this  would  be  an
unscientific  theory — but  that  for  the  myths  now  under
consideration  the  evidence  points  unmistakably  to  a
Babylonian  origin.  If  we  ask  how  these  myths
came  to  be  so  prominent,  the  answer  is  that  a  great
revival  of  mythology  took  place  among  the  Jews,  under
Rabylonian  influences,  in  e.xilic  and  post-exilic  times.
Jewish  folklore  became  more  assimilated  to  that  of  the
other  nations,  and  the  leaders  of  religion  permitted  what
they  could  not  prevent,  with  the  object  of  impressing
an  orthodox  stamp  on  {X)pular  beliefs.  This  has  long
since  been  notice<i,  especially  by  the  present  writer  in  a
series  of  works  (see  also  Ckkation,  §  23),  where  it  is
pwinted  out  that  the  Dragon-myth  comes  from  pre-
Semitic  (Babylonian)  times,  and  where  several  explana-
tions are  indicated  as  perhaps  equally  historical.  ^  Like
other  interpreters  who  used  the  mythological  clue,  how-
ever, he  was  not  clear  enough  as  to  the  nature  of  the
conflict  between  the  God  of  light  and  the  serpent,  referred
to  in  Job9i3  Is.  51 9  ctc.'^  Continued  study  of  the
new  cuneiform  material  has  done  much  to  clear  up  his
difficulties,  one  of  which  may  be  expressed  thus.  The
Babylonian  epic  spoke  of  Tiamat  as  having  been  de-
stroyed by  the  God  of  light,  whereas  certain  biblical
passages  appeared  to  descrilx;  the  dragon  as  still  existing
'  in  the  sea,'  as  capable  of  being  '  aroused'  by  magicians,
and  as  destined  to  be  slain  by  Yahw^'s  sword.  Hence
it  seemed  as  if  there  was  a  Hebrew  myth  (of  non-
Hebraic  origin)  which  re[)resented  the  war  between  the
God  of  light  and  the  serpent  of  darkness  as  still  going
on,  and  Kgyptian  parallels  seemed  to  teach  us  how  to
conceive  of  this.^  The  defeat  and  destruction  of  the
gigantic  serpent  Apopi  and  his  heli^ers,  when  chaos
gave  way  to  order  and  darkness  to  lit;ht,  was  not
absolute  and  final.  They  still  seemed  to  the  Egyptians
to  menace  the  order  of  nature,  and  in  his  daily  voyage
the  sun  is  threatened  by  the  serpent,  and  has  a  time  of
anguish.  When  they  see  this,  human  folk  seek  to
frighten  the  monster  by  a  loud  clamour,  and  so  to
help  the  sun.  The  sun's  boatmen,  too,  have  recourse
to  prayers  and  spear-thrusts.  At  last,  paralysed  and
wounded,  Apopi  sinks  back  into  the  abyss.  Gunkel,
however,  has  shown  "•  for  the  first  time  that  Babylonian

Birket  es-Sultiin  ;  the  latter  writer  suggests  that  this  may  have
helped  to  fix  the  n.ime  to  ihe  locality.

1  For  a  Phoenician  dragon-myth,  see  Daniasc.  De  print,  princ.
133,  and  !■  us.  Pnup.  Kv.\\o  (ap.  Lcnormant,  Les  Origines,
151.V535.  55>)-

2  Proph.  Is.  1  159  231  ;  Jofi  and  Solomon,  76-78:  cp  Crit.
Rr:\,  July  1S95,  p.  262.

3  Jo/>  ami  SoL'ition,  76  :  cp  Maspero,  op.  cit.  90  /.  159.
Book  0/  the  Dead,  15  39  ;  Book  0/  Hades,  transl.  by  Lefibure,
RP,  12  13.

*  Sclu'ip/ung  u.  Chaos,  41-69.  This  is  not  the  place  to  discuss
the  points  in  which  the  present  writer  differs  from  (junkel  (see
Crit.  Rev.,  189s,  p.  256^),  whose  general  view  of  the  earlier
period  of  Israelitish  belief  is  perhaps  too  much  in  advance  of  the
evidence.

"33


DRAM

mythology  will  account  for  all  the  details  of  the  biblical
descriptions  which  an  accurate  exegesis  will  admit.  We
need  not  suppose  a  reference  to  the  niyth  of  the  daily
struggle  between  the  Light-god  and  the  serpent.  The
Tiamat  story,  iis  known  to  the  Jews,  was  briefly  this.
At  the  commencement  of  cTeation,  Tiimat  was,  accord-
ing to  some,  destroyed,  according  to  others,  completely
sulxlued  and  confined  in  the  ocean  which  encompasses
the  earth.  Without  God's  permission  he  can  henceforth
do  nothing.  Only  Ihe  angelic  jxjwers,  commissioned
by  (jod  to  keep  watch  over  Leviathan,  can  'arouse'
him  and  even  they  'shudder'  as  they  do  so  (see  Be-
HK.MOTii  A.M)  Lkviatiia.v). This  form  of  the  story

- T_*^ became popular in later biblical times,

6.  Later ,  T .  .i.  r
biblical '^''^^"^^  "  "i"^'  *"^  requirements  of  apoca-

. .  lyptic  writing. It  was  a  necessity  of  biblical

idealism  to  anticip.Ue  a  return  of  the  '  first
things,'  of  Paradise  and  its  felicity.  Evil  seemed  to
have  been  intensified  ;  the  reign  of  Tiamat  was  renewed,
as  it  were,  upon  the  e;irth.  A  deliverance  as  great  as
that  wrought  by  Yahw6  (a  greater  Marduk)  of  old  must
therefore  be  anticipated,  and  the  struggle  which  would
precede  it  would  be  as  severe  as  that  which  took  place
at  the  creation.  Then  would  '  the  old  things  pass
away,  and  all  things  Ijecome  new.'  It  is  not
improbable,  as  Budge  long  ago  pointed  out  (PSIiA,
['83],  6),  that  Tiamat  in  course  of  time  acquired  a
symbolic  meaning  ;  certainly  the  serpent  of  Kg)'ptian,
and  not  less  of  Jewish,  belief  acquired  one.  The
moralisation  of  the  old  dragon-myth  is  recorded  in  the
mysterious  but  fascinating  story  of  Antichrist  [q.v.^
On  the  twofold  representation  of  Tiamat  (dragon  and
serpent),  see  SiCRrKNT,  §  3/.

Into  the  dragon-myth.<  of  non-Semitic  peoples  frequently
adduced  to  illustrate  Job  38,  it  is  not  necessary  to  enter.  The
Semitic  material  has  been  growing  to  such  a  considerable  mass
that  it  is  wise  to  restrict  ourselves  at  present  to  this.  Otherwise
we  might  discuss  a  striking  passage  in  T/u'  Times,  Jan.  24,  i898,
on  the  cry  for  alms  in  Hindu  quarters  for  the  recovery  of  the
sun  from  the  jaws  of  the  dragon  Rahu.  Jan.  22,  1898,  was  the
day  of  a  solar  eclipse. Cp  Kci.ihsk,  S  2-

'ihe  fullest  Knglish  investigation  of  the  different  forms  taken

by  the  mythic  dragon  is  to  be  found  in  \V. H. Ward's  article

'Bel and the Dragon"  {Am.  Journal 0/

7.  Literature.  ^</«.  Lang,  and  Lit.,  Jan.  1898,  p.  94^).

In  early  Babylonian  art  the  dragon  does  not
represent  Tiamat  the  chaos-dragon,  but  a  destructive  demon  of
pestilence  or  torn^ido.  '1  he  sex  ol  the  dragon  is  not  as  a  rule
indicated  in  the  primitive  representations,  even  when  the  dragon
is  given  together  with  a  god  (or  godtless) ;  an  exception  however
is  figured  by  Ward,  in  which  the  dragon  appears  to  be  male.
In  the  Assyrian  period,  to  which  the  representations  of  the
conflict  between  Alarduk  and  the  Dragon  belong,  the  dragon  is
of  the  male  .sex,  which  reminds  us  that  the  evil  serpent  .■\hriman
in  Persian  mythology  is  male.  It  is  very  possible  that  in  the
oldest  Babylonian  representations  the  dragon  was  female  (cp
Dkki',  Till-;).  With  regard  to  the  view  (implied  in  parts  of  the
OT)  th;it  the  chaos-dragon  was  not  slain,  but  only  sulxlued  by
the  Light -god,  we  may  compare  some  Babyloni.in  cylinders,
older  than  Hammurabi,  which  represent  the  dragon  as  h.irnessed
in  a  chariot  and  driven  by  Bel  while  a  goddess  stands  on  his
back  and  wields  the  thunderbolt  ;  or  else  the  god  stands  on  the
back  of  the  dragon.  The  Assyrian  representations  do  not,  it  is
true,  show  that  the  dragon  was  slain  ;  but  the  natural  supposition
is  that  the  conflict  ended  in  his  destruction.

See  also  Gunkel,  Schdp/.  u.  Chaos;  Toy,  Judaism  and
Christianity,  162,  195,  200  (n.),  375  ;  Maspero,  Struggle  0/  th*
Nations;  Brugsch,  Religion  u.  Mvthologie  der  alten  Agypter  ;
Wiedemann,  Kgyptian  Religion  ;  housset,  Der  Antichrist  {'^),
pp.  04,  97  ;  and,  for  a  popular  summary  of  facts  on  the  Dragon-
myth,  A.  Smylhe  Palmer,  Babylonian  Jnjiuence  on  ike  Bihlt
('■J7)-  T.  K.  C.

DRAGON  WELL  {\'l7\r\  pr  ;  nnrH  TtON  cykojn
[BX.\1.  n.  TOY  ArAKONTOC  [L]  ;  fons  draconis;
^A^^k  >r  *>-  )  N'eh.  2  lit-  For  topography  see
GiHoN,  Jkrusalem,  and  for  folklore  see  Dkagon,
§  4  (.^)-

DRAM,RVDaric.  The  rendering  of  two  late  Hebrew
words:  {a)  D*33"llS,  iCh.  29  7  Kzra  827t— /.f. ,  ap-
parently AarcIKOC  (^yr-  )jaJJ*>?.  MH  paOTl,  pi.
niyiS'l'il  [Dalman]),  or  cp  Ass.  dariku  (pi.  darikanu)
•  piece  of  money '  Muss-Amolt ; and  (i)  D^JlilD^'l^,

"34


DREAMS

dark'monim,  Ezra  269Neh.  77q^,tapparentlyApAXAAH-^
Possibly  a  loan-word  (Asiatic)  in  both  Heb.  and  Gr. ,
see  Ew.  GGA,  1855,  1392/:;  1856,  798;  and  cp
BDB,  S.V.

The  Vss.  give  SpaxinaC  [L],  d'riktlria  [Pesh.  except  iCh.],
soliiius  [Vg.,  ill  Neh.  drachma].  But  in  i  Ch.  xpv(iov'i[\i\\,
SpaxfiaC  [HP  '93),  jmT,  Targ.  (see  Lag.  //a^.  23),  Pesh.
apparently  connected  'K  with  TJON  'lead.'  In  Ezra  827  ei?  rriv
oSbi/  xaM""'«'M  ['^1  •  •  •  SpaxH^di  [AL]  agree  in  presupposing
D'3D3  +  3TlS  i-e-yi;  II  i  Esd.  857  [56]  BAL  cm.  Ezra  269  ixvii
[BA]  il  I  Esd.  545  [44]  /Ltrat  [BAL].  Neh.  "70-72  BNA  cm.,  but
vop.iap.a.TO';  [Sixt.]  v.  71,  and  vop.ia'ti.atj-i.v  [N  '_  ]  v.  72.

According  to  the  commonly  accepted  view  a  and  b  are
identical  and  mean  'darics.'  Against  this  two  objections  may
be  urged  :  (i)  the  ^in  b  is  left  unexplained,  and  (2)  the  form  a,
which  alone  supports  this  meaning,  is  untrustworthy.  In  i  Ch.
it  is  doubtful  (i3T  D'^DIINI  ^^V  '^^  ^  g'oss  :  the  amount  of  gold
has  been  already  mentioned),  and  in  Ezra  827  the  better
reading  is  Q-jlODin  (see  above).  The  form  pSDIl  {^po-XM)  '^
preferable,  not  for  this  reason  alone,  but  also  on  account  of  its
identity  with  the  Pha:n.  cja^-n  (pl.),^  which,  as  the  analogy
from  Gk.  inscriptions  shows,  must  represent  Bpaxt^a^i-  .  The
occurrence  of  this  Gk.  (or  Asiatic?)  word  in  Ezra- Neh.  is  due
perhaps  to  repeated  glosses:  cp  Ezra  827  with  i  Esd.  857  and
observe  that  in  some  of  the  passages  (above)  BA  omit.  See
further  Money,  Weights  and  Measures. 3  s.  A.  C.

DREAMS  (niO^H),  Zech.  IO2,  etc.  ;  see  Divina-
tion, §  2  (vi. ).

DRESS.  A  complete  discussion  of  the  subject  of
ancient  Israelitish  dress  (including  toilet  and  ornaments)
is  impossible  with  our  present  limited  knowledge.  It
is  true,  the  Assyrian  and  Egyptian  artists  had  keen  eyes
for  costume  ;  but  trustworthy  representations  of  Israelites
are  unfortunately  few.  It  might  be  tempting  to  fill  up
this  lacuna  by  noting  the  usages  of  dress  in  the
modern  East.  This,  however,  would  be  an  uncritical
procedure.  We  might  presume  on  obtaining  more
than  analogies  from  the  customs  of  the  present  ;  but
common  sense  shows  that  to  look  for  a  Hebrew  equiva-
lent to  every  modern  garment  would  be  unnatural.
Consequently,  in  spite  of  the  scantiness  of  detail  in  the
OT,  we  must  base  our  conceptions  upon  O T  evidence
(viewed  in  the  light  of  criticism)  treated  by  the  com-
parative method.

There are several general terms in Hebrew for
'dress,' 'garments,' 'attire.' It is needful to give
details,  as there are distinctions  of  some
importance which could  not be brought
out  otherwise.

1.  nj2,  begi'd  (cp  perh.  Ar.  bijad ;  we  cannot  assume
a  root  meaning  '  to  cover ' ;  the  verb  n:n  known  to  us
means  '  to  deal  treacherously  ' ;  it  is  perhaps  a  verb
denom.  ),*  may  be  used  for  a  garment  of  any  kind
'  from  the  filthy  clothing  of  the  leper  to  the  holy  robes
of  the  priest,'  for  '  the  simplest  covering  of  the  poor  as
well  as  the  costly  raiment  of  the  rich  and  noble'
[/>'/>/?];  for  women's  dress  (Dt.  24  17;  cp  Gen.  8814),
for  royal  robes  (i  K.  2^30),  and  apparently  once  for
the  outer  robe  or  Mantlk  (2  K.  913);  also  for  the
coverlet  of  a  bed  (i  S.  19 13  i  K.  li),  and  for  the
covering  of  the  tabernacle  furniture  (Nu.  46-13  P. ).

2.  uh^,  g'lo7n,  Ezek.  2724,  AV  'clothes,'  RV  'wrap-
pings,' mg.  '  bales.'  Prof  Cheyne  writes  :  '  The  exist-
ence of  an  old  Hebrew  root  d^i  ' '  to  roll  together  "  is  not
proved  by  2  K.  -JS  Ps.  139 16;  both  passages  are  very
doubtful,  and  can  be  emended  with  much  advantage.

1  Cp,  e.,^.,  Torrey,  Comp.  Ezr.  Neh.  18:  'the  one  obviously
corresponding  to  iapeiKos,  the  other  to  hpa.x^")•

2  A  Phoenician  inscription  of  the  first  century  B.C.  from  the
Piraeus :  see  Lidzbarski,  Handh.  d.  Nordsevi.  Epi^r.  160.

3  See  also  Meyer,  Entst.  196/,  Prince,  Daniel,  26s  ('99).
From  Ezra  269  (Neh.  770-72  [see  ®i-])  compared  with  i  Esd.
545  it  would  seem  that  6i  D'3DD"n='  '*""  ('^P  '^^  """y^'
maneh  of  60  shekels).  In  ©,  however,  the  Heb.  'ipe*  is  repre-
sented by  SiSpaxfiOu,  and  Spaxinrj  represents  the  ypa  or  half-
shekel  ;  cp  Gen.  24  22  Ex.  8826.

■1  So  Gerber,  //e6r.  Verb.  Denom.  2/.  The  verb  133  is  found
only  in  E,  and  later.  See,  e.g.,  Ex.  2I7  Judg.  923  ;  i  S.  1433  is
probably  no  exception.

"35


1.  General
terms.


DRESS

DiSa  plainly  =  p'?3  in  Is.  823,  which  Peiser  identifies  with
Bab.  gulinu,  a  kind  of  garment '  ( ZA  T IV  [' gy],  17  348).
Cp  Chest.

3.  '^3,  k'ii,  a  word  of  the  widest  signification,  is  (like
the  German  2^ug)  used  of  garments  in  Dt.  22s  ("15J  d)
Lev.  1849  ("liy'^).

4.  niD3,  k'sfith,  'covering,'  Ex.  21 10  2226  etc.,
restored  by  Gratz,  Ball,  and  Cheyne  in  Gen.  49  n  ^  (MT
n?D  II  B'U'7,  irepi^oXr],  pallium),  and  by  Cheyne  in  Ps.  I'Ad
Prov.  7 10  (MT  n-TSr  EV  'garment,'  'attire').  C])
.^D^p  Is.  23 18  (EV  '  clothing ') ;  see  Awning.

5.  v^zh,  I'bt'J  (the  root  ca"?  '  to  wear,  put  on '  is
found  in  all  the  Semitic  languages),  a  general  term  (not
so  frequent  as  i . )  ;  used  of  the  dress  of  women
(2  S.  I24  Prov.  31 22),  etc.  Cognates  are  c^oSa,  2  K.
IO22  (EV  'vestment')  etc.,  and  T\^lhn  Is.  59  i7t
'  clothing.'

We  turn  now  to  the  Hebrew  terms  denoting  particular

articles  of  dress. It is  one  of  the  defects  of  the  EV

„ . .  that  the  same  English  word  is  often  used

*  P  to  represent  several  distinct  Hebrew  terms,

and  that,  vice  versa,  the  same  Hebrew  term
is  rendered  by  different  English  words  (promiscuously).
This  is  due  partly  to  the  difficulty  of  finding  an  e.xact
equivalent  for  many  of  the  Hebrew  terms,  partly  to  our
ignorance  of  their  precise  meaning,  and  the  uncertainty
of  tradition  as  represented  by  the  versions.  Rabbinical
exegesis,-*  etc.

Of  the  numerous  Hebrew  terms  denoting  articles  of
dress,  those  referring  to  the  feet  are  discussed  under
Shoe.  For  the  various  head-dresses  {-\nz,  <"j'JS.  etc. )  see
Turban.  One  of  the  special  terms  for  garments  worn
about  the  body  is  niix,  'ezor,  '  kilt '  or  '  loin-cloth  '  (see
Girdle).'*  Out  of  this  an  evolutionary  process  has
brought  breeches  (cp  Ar.  mi'zdr),  which,  however,
among  the  Hebrews  appear  first  as  a  late  priestly
garment  (viz.  o'DJ^a)  ;  see  Breeches.  For  the  ordinary
under-garment  worn  next  the  skin  (njhs),  see  Tunic.
The  over-garment  (corresponding  roughly  to  the  Gr.
Ifxariov  and  Roman  toga)  varied  in  size,  in  shape,  and
in  richness,  and  had  several  distinct  names  [simlah,
etc. ),  for  which  see  Mantle.

Certain  classes  and  certain  occasions  required  special

dresses. The  clothing  of  ambassadors  is  called  cna

. . {meddwi7n?), 2  .S.  IO4  =  i Ch.  19 4, EV

3.  bpeciai .  gjjrnients. ' A  kindred  word  '  mad'  (fem.

garments.  „„-,/^^^;,_  jf  the  text  of  Ps.  1332  is  correct)  ^
is  used  of  the  priestly  garb  in  Lev.  610  [3],  Ps.  I.e.
(^vSvfxa)  ;  of  the  outer  garment  of  the  warrior  (plur.
only)"  in  Judg.  3 16  (EV  'raiment'),  i  S.  4 12  (EV
'clothes'),  1738  (AV  'armour,'  RV  'apparel'),  184
(AV  'garments,'  RV  'apparel'),  and  2  S.  208  (AV
'garment,'  RV  'apparel  of  war')'';  ©"-^l  in  all
passages  fiavdvas,  except  i  S.  4  12,  where  ifidrLa.  The
mud  of  the  warrior  was  perhaps  some  stiff  garment
which  was  a  (poor)  substitute  for  a  coat  of  mail.  In
Ps.  109  18  mad  is  used  of  the  dress  of  the  wicked  tyrant

1  Others  cp  Ph.  n^lD  and  Heb.  n\00  (Ex.  34  33  where  Che.
reads  HD^s).

2  Others  vocalise  n;^  {ZDMG  37  535  ;  properly  '  that  which
is  set '  upon  one).

*  So  for  the  obscure  Aram.  z'^S  (Dan.  3  21  Isre)  we  find  such
remarkable  variant  renderings  as  'hosen'(AV),  '  tunics  '  (RV),
and  'turbans' (RVmg.).

*  We  may  compare  the  sak  of  camel's  or  goat's  hair  which,
like  other  primitive  garments,  long  continued  to  form  a  garb  of
mourning.  The  sak  was  perhaps  identical  with  the  kilt  of  the
ancient  Egyptians,  for  which  see  Wilk.  Anc.  Eg.i"^)  2322.

5  Che.  (^^.(2))  reads  "laisn  'JS^'??/,  'on  the  surface  of  the
desert.'

«  On  2  S.  208  see  next  note.

7  In2S.208^lJ^should  probably  be  cancelled  ;  note  the  Pasek,

so  often  placed  in  doubtful  passages. Read  I'lO  &,y7. See

Lohr  and  cp  We.  ad  he. For  other  views  see  Klo.,  H.  P.  Sm.

I136


DRESS

who  is  cursed  (but  the  whole  passage  is  in  disorder ;
see  Che.  Ps.'-^).  In  the  Tahn.  kid  is  a  robe  distinctive
of  the  JVdsl'  or  prince.  On  the  priestly  head-dress,
see  MlTKE  ;  the  priests  in  later  tinies  indulged  in
sumptuous  apparel.'  In  Talinudic  times  Rabbis  wore
a  special  dress,  and  were  crowned  until  the  death  of
Eliezer  b.  Azarya  {'Fosifta,  Sotah,  15).  In  Habylonia
a  golden  ordination  robe  was  used  at  the  conferring
of  the  Rabbinical  dignity.  A  festive  garb  was  worn
at  the  creation  of  an  lilder  {zdken)\  the  Nasi'  had  a
speci.-il  mantle,  the  Exilarch  a  girdle.'-*  For  the  king's
regalia  see  CoRON.vnoN,  Ckown,  §  2.  On  the
warrior's  dress  we  can  add  very  little.  R\'"'»f-  finds
the  military  boot  (['ikd)  in  Is.  94  [3]  ;  and  a  reference  to
the  distinctive  outer  garment  [maddim)  of  the  warrior,
and  to  his  shoes,  has  been  conjectured  in  Nah.  24a
[3rt].'  See  also  Hki.MKT.  For  bridal  attire  (cp  Is.
49i8  61 10,  (v5v/M  ydfiov  Mt.  22ii)see  M.\rriaue,  §3,
and  for  the  garb  of  mourning  C^aK  .icjro  Is.  61 3,  'j<  nJ3
2  S.  142),  see  Mourning  Cistoms.

With  the  exce|)ti<)n  of  the  swaddling-clothes  of  the  new-
born b.dje  (/iiif/i//l/uk,  Job  889  ;  cp  verb  in  Ezek.  16  4  ;
awdpyavof ,  W'isd.  7 4  \  cp  Lk.  27  12),  children  seem  to
have  hail  no  distinctive  dress.  The  boy  Samuel  wore  a
a  small  ;«<''/7  (see  Mantlk),  and  if  the  lad  Joseph
possessed  a  special  kuttoneth  (see  TiNic),  it  was
regarded  by  the  narrator  in  Genesis  as  exceiJtional.  In
Talmudic  times  boys  wore  a  peculiar  shirt  (Kpi:'T  p-hn
Shabb.  i34<0--'

In  ancient  times,  dress  depended  to  a  large  e.xtent
on  climatic  considerations.  The  simplest  and  most
primitive  covering  was  the  loin-cloth  (see


4.  History.


Girdi.k),  a  valuable  safeguard  in  tropical


climates,  adopted  perhaps  for  this  reason  rather  than
from  the  feeling  of  shame  to  which  its  origin  was  after-
wards traced  ((jen.  87).  The  use  of  sandals  in  early
times  was  not  looked  upon  as  an  absolute  necessity  (see
Shoks),  and  although  the  Tukb.XN  in  some  form  or
other  may  be  old,  the  custom  of  wearing  the  hair  long
was  for  very  many  a  sufficient  protection  for  the  head.
It  is  iiiij)ossible  to  say  how  early  the  ordinary  Israelite
assumed  the  two  garments  (tunic  and  mantle)  which
became  the  common  attire  of  both  sexes.  The
garments  of  the  women  probably  differed  in  length  and
in  colour  from  those  of  the  men — Dt.  22  s  leaves  no
doubt  as  to  the  fact  that  there  was  some  distinction.
Several  terms  are  conmion  to  the  dress  of  both  sexes
{beged,  kuttCmeth,  simUih,  etc. )  ;  for  some  distinctive
terms  see  Vail,  and  cp  Tunic,  Mantle.  The  Jewish
prisoners  pictured  on  the  marble-reliefs  of  Sennacherib
are  bareheaded  and  wear  short-sleeved  tunics  reaching
to  the  ankles.  This  costume  differs  so  markedly  from
the  Assyrian,  that  the  artist  seems  to  have  been  drawing
from  life.  Jehu's  tribute-bearers  on  Shalmaneser's
obelisk  wear  Assyrian  dress  and  headgear,  due  probably
to  the  conventionality  of  the  artist.  The  Syrian  envoy
in  a  wall  painting  in  the  tomb  of  Hui  at  el-Kab  wears
a  dress  so  unlike  the  Egyptian  that  we  seem  once
more  in  presence  of  an  autlientic  record.  The  over-
garment of  this  envoy,  which  is  long  and  narrow,  and
is  folded  close  to  the  body,  is  of  blue  and  dark-red
material  richly  ornamented  ;  he  has  yellow  underclothes
with  narrow  sleeves  and  wears  tight  breeches.  In  the
OT,  however,  there  is  no  indication  that  such  a  costume

1  The  exact  meaning  of  "niJ'n  na3  Ex.  31  10  35 19  39  4it
(AV  'cloths  of  service,"  RV  'finely  wrought  garments')  is
very  uncertain  ;  see  I)i.-Ky.  ad  loc,  Ges.(13).  It  is  pussilile  that
the  words  are  a  gloss  to  enpn  nj2  (//•''.),  for  which  cp  Ex.
2S2-4  Xmv.  11)32,  aiitl  the  enumeration  in  Lev.  1(54.

2  Cp  Brull,  Trachten  der  Juden(V:\nW\X.wi\^.

S  Che.  JBL  17  106  ('98),  where  D"nO  or  VJD  is  detected
in the  obscure dhnO. and  D'Vj':nOi  'put  on their  shoes,' in

*  Possibly  the  Israelite  boys  shaved  their  h.iir  and  only  left
curls  hanging  over  the  ear.  This  was  done  in  ancient  Egj-pt,
and  the  custom  prevails  at  the  present  time  among  the  Jewish
boys  of  Yemen.

"37


DRESS

was  ever  prevalent  among  the  Israelites.  For  simplicity
of  attire  it  would  not  l>e  easy  to  surpass  the  dress  of  the
Sinaitic  IJedawin  (see  W.M.M  As.  u.  liur.  140),  and
this  simplicity  once  doubtless  marked  the  garb  of  the
Hebrew.'  Later,  life  in  cities  and  contact  with  foreign
influences  paved  the  way  to  luxury.  The  more  elabor-
ate dress  of  the  Canajinite  would  soon  be  imitated.
Sevend  signs  of  increasing  sumptuousncss  in  dress  are
met  with  in  the  later  writings.  The  dress  at  the  court
of  Solomon  is  aptly  rejjresented  as  an  object  of  ad-
miration to  an  Arabian  queen  (pizSo  1  K.  lOs).  One
notes  that  it  is  in  the  later  writings  that  several  of  the
names  for  articles  of  dross  apjx^ar  for  the  first  time.
ICxtra  garments  and  ornaments  were  added  and  finer
materials  used.  The  traditional  materials  of  garments
were  wool  and  flax  woven  by  the  women  ;  but  now
trade  brought  purple  from  Phoenicia,  byssus  from
I'gypt,  and  figured  embroideries  from  Babylon  (see
E.mhroiuery).  That  silk  was  known  in  the  time  of
Ezekiel  (Ezek.  16 10  13)  is  doubtful  (see  Cotton,
LiNKN,  Sii.K,  Wo(Ji,).  New  luxurious  costumes  (cp
V1V30  'tra'?,  Ezek.  23 12  884!  ;  C'SSpo.  ib.  '11 2^  f.)  are  a
frequent  subject  of  denunciation  in  the  later  pro[)hets,
partly  Ixicause  of  the  oppression  of  the  poor  involved
in  the  effort  to  extort  the  means  of  providing  them,  and
partly  Ijecause  of  the  introduction  of  alien  rites  and
customs  encouraged  by  contact  with  foreign  merchants.

In  later  times  intercourse  with  other  peoples  led  to  the
introduction  of  fresh  articles  of  apparel  and  new  terms.
Such  for  example  is  the  essentially  Grecian  veraffos  (if
correct)  of  2  Mace.  4 12  (see  C.-\p).  Three  obscure
words  denoting  articles  of  dress,  most  probably  of  foreign
origin,  are  mentioned  in  the  description  of  the  three
who  were  cast  into  the  fiery  furnace  (Dan.  821).''^  For
Talnmdic  times  Schiirer  ((f/r23g/.)  notes  the  mention
of  CUD  {sagian)  worn  by  lalxiurers  and  soldiers,  n'V::!;K
[stola),  ]miD  {aov5apiov  ;  see  Napkin),  p-Sji  (inXiov),
N'SsON  {ipLirlXia).  Among  under-garments  are  the
P'P'cd'jt  [dalmattca),  according  to  Epi])hanius  {hirr.  15)
worn  by  scribes  ;  and  the  -flyya  (paraguudion),  of  which
the  equivalent  paregot  is  used  in  the  .\rmen.  \'ers.  for
X^Tijiv.  To  these  may  be  added  picpo  {mactorcn)  an
outer  garment,  \-:hy'p  (ko\6^iov),  n'Sn  a  fringed  garment
of  fine  linen  (see  Frincjks).  Gloves  are  mentioned
(fp  .Top  Chelin,  16 16,  etc.);  but  they  were  worn  by
workmen  to  protect  their  hands  (cp  also  pn"u  Targ.  on
Ruth  47).=*

Increased  luxury  of  dress  among  the  Israelites  was
accompanied  by  an  excess  of  ornaments. Ornaments

6.  Ornaments,  °^  "'i^''^'  ^'"'i'  ''^''''' '''''''  ^>'  ^""^  ''^f
....  '  — prnnanly  for  protective  purposes  (as

A.MUi.ETs),  at  a  later  time  (when  their
original  purpose  was  forgotten)  to  beautify  and  adorn
the  person.  The  elaborate  enumeration  of  the  fine
lady's  attire  in  Is.  8,  though  not  from  the  hand  of
Isaiah  (see  Isaiah,  ii.  §  5),  is  archa-ologically  im-
portant. Here  the  Hebrew  women  (of  the  post-exilic
period?),  following  foreign  customs,  wear  arm-chains,
nose-rings,  step-chains,  etc.,  in  great  profusion.  P'or
these  cp  Ornamknts,  and  see  the  separate  articles.

On  the  manner  of  treating  the  hair,  see  Beard,
Cuttings  ok  the  Fi.ksh,  §  3  ;  Hair,  Mourning
Customs.  Women  cris|>ed  their  hair,  bound  it  with
veils  (see  Vail)  and  Garlands  {</.■;■. ),  etc.  Later,  the
Roman  habit  of  curling  was  introduced  (Jos.  B/  iv.  9 10).

Washing  the  body  with  water  was  usual  on  festal
occasions,  at  bridals  (Ezek.  I69),  at  meals  (Gen.  25a
19 10  Lk.  "44), before formal visits  (Ru.  83), before

1  In  the  Roman  period  simplicity  of  attire  (.ilmost  amounting
to  nakedness  ;  Talm.  Sank.  ^^/')  w.is  enforced  in  the  case  of
criminals,  whilst  persons  on  trial  were  expected  to  dress  very
soljerly  (Jos.  Anl.  xiv.  94).

a  For  a  discussion  of  the  terms  see  Cook,  /.  Phil.  2f,  y^ff.  Cpp).

8  On  these  points  see  BrQll,  of>.  ci\,  and  l-evy,  SHH  7>,  under
the  various  term.s.  For  later  Jewish  dress  see  .Xbrahams,
Je^visk  L'/e  in  the  Middle  Ages,  chap,  xv.y!,  and  einries  in
Index,  440.

I138


DRESS

officiating  in  the  temple,  in  ritual  purifications,  and  so
forth.  Rubbing  the  body  with  sand  or  sherds  was  also
practised.  Unguents  prepared  by  female  slaves  (i  S.
813)  or  by  male  professionals  (npn)  were  used  after
washing  ( Ru.  3 3  Amos  66  etc.)  i;  see  Anointing,  §  2,
CoNFECTioNARiES.  After  the  Hellenistic  period  such
festal  customs  became  more  and  more  elaborate.

The  eye-lids  of  women  were  painted  to  make  the  eyes
larger,  kohl  being  used  for  the  purpose  (see  Paint).
It  is  doubtful  whether  henna  dye  was  placed  on  nails
and  toes.

The  references  in  the  EV  to  dress  are  so  frequent  and
the  symbolical  usages  so  familiar  that  a  passing  glance
^m  at  them  may  suffice.  Food  and  clothing
allii  i  ii<?  '^'^  naturally  regixrded  as  the  two  great
necessaries  of  life  (e.g..  Gen.  2820  i  Tim.
68).  An  outfit  is  called  m:3  -nj;  (Judg.  17 10).  In
Talmudic  times  it  consisted  of  eighteen  pieces  (Jer.
Shabb.  15).  Clothes  were  made  by  the  women  (Prov.
31 22  Acts  939),  but  references  to  sewing  are  few  (nsn,
Gen.  37  Job  16 15  Eccles.  3?  Ezek.  13 18,  iirippaTrru
Mk.  221).

Clothes  were  presented  in  token  of  friendship  (i  S.
I84  ;  see  WRS  A**-/.  Sem.^-^  335).  as  a  proof  of  affection
(Gen.  4,') 22),  and  as  a  gift  of  honour  (i  K.  IO25  ;  cp
Am.  Tab.  270).  Garments  were  rent  (pip,  ms)  as  a
sign  of  grief,  of  despair,  of  indignation,  etc.  (see
Mourning  Cusro.vis).  Shaking  the  clothes  was  a  sign
of  renunciation  and  abhorrence  (Acts  186  ;  cp  Neh.
513).  Promotion  was  often  accompanied  by  the
assumption  of  robes  of  dignity  (cp  Is.  22 21).  So
Eleazar  takes  the  robes  of  Aaron  (Nu.  20  28),  and
Elisha  the  mantle  of  Elijah  (2  K.  2);  see  also  Corona-
tion. Conversely,  disrobing  might  be  equivalent  to
dismissal  (2  Mace.  438).  Rich  people  doubtless  had
large  wardrobes  ;  the  royal  wardrobe  (or  was  it  the
wardrobe  of  the  temple?)  had  a  special  '  keeper  '  (i  K.
2214).  The  danger  to  such  collections  from  moths  (see
Moth)  and  from  the  so-called  '  plague  of  leprosy'  (see
Leprosy)  was  no  doubt  an  urgent  one.  The  simile  of
a  worn-out  garment  [rhz,  cp  Dt.  84)  is  often  employed
(cp  Is.  5O9  516  Ps.  10226  [27]).  Rags  are  called
D'jnp  (Prov.  2321  EV)  ;  cp  also  cnSp  ""''^3'  n'nnpri  ".i'?3
'old  cast  clouts  and  old  rotten  rags  '  (Jer.  38ii/  RV),
all  apparently  containing  the  idea  of  something  rent
(cp  poLKos  Mt.  9 16  Mk.  22t).

To  cast  a  garment  over  a  woman  was  in  Arabia
equivalent  to  claiming  her.^  Robertson  Smith  [Kin.  87)
cites  a  case  from  Tabari  where  the  heir  by


7.  Legal


throwing  his  dress  over  the  widow  claimed


°  ■  the  right  to  marry  her  under  the  dowry  paid
by  her  husband,  or  to  give  her  in  marriage  and  take  the
dowry.  This  explains  Ruth's  words  (Ruth  89)  and  the
use  of  '  garment '  to  designate  a  woman  or  wife  in
Mai.  2 16  (Kin.  87,  269).  A  benevolent  law,  found
already  in  the  Book  of  the  Covenant,  enacts  that  every
garment  retained  by  a  creditor  in  pledge  shall  be
returned  before  sunset  (Ex.  2226) ;  the  necessity  of  this
law  appears  from  Am.  28  Ezek.  18  7  16  ;  see  Pledge.

D's  injunction  '  a  man  shall  not  put  on  the  sitnlah
of  a  woman,'  'a  woman  shall  not  wear  the  appurte-
nances ('S3)  of  a  man'  (Dt.  225)  may  have  been
designed  as  a  safeguard  against  impropriety  ;  but  more
probably  it  was  directed  against  the  simulated  changes
of  sex  which  were  so  prevalent  and  demoralising  in
Syrian  heathenism.'  Quite  obscure,  on  the  other  hand,
is  the  law  prohibiting  the  layman  from  wearing  garments
made  of  a  mixture  of  linen  and  wool  (vjo^a,  Dt.  22 11

t  Amos  (66,  see  Dr.  ad  loc.)  speaks  of '  the  chief  ointments  '
(EV),  or  rather  'the  best  of  oils.'

2  Hence  some  explain  n3  11033  >n  Ex.  21 8  to  mean  that  the
master  could  not  sell  his  female  slave  '  seeing  that  (he  had
placed)  his  garment  (Jiegtd)  over  her.' See  Slavery.

'  See  Dr.  ad  loc.,  Frazer,  Paus.  8197,  Ashtoreth,  §  2.  It
may  be  doubted  whether  in  ancient  times  dressing  boys  as  girls
was  due,  as  among  later  Orientals,  to  a  desire  to  avert  the  evil
eye.

"39


DRESS

Lev.  1919;  see  Linen,  7.  n.  i).  Such  garments  were
worn  by  the  priests  ; '  and  the  law,  which  may,  like
the  term  itself,  be  of  foreign  origin,  is  at  all  events
later  than  Ezek.  4-1 18.  Another  law,  which  ordered
laymen  to  wear  tassels  or  twisted  threads  upon  the
skirt  of  their  sitnlah,  seems  to  go  back  to  a  former
sacred  custom  (see  Fringes). See,  further,  Shoe,  §  4.

G;irments  had  to  be  changed  or  purified  U[xjn  the
occasion  of  a  religious  observance  (cp  Gen.  802  Ex.
19 10)  or  before  a  feast  (cp  nii3''?n,
Relieion.  'changes,'  nisVnn,  'festal  robes,'  and
see  Mantle).  Primarily,  however,
all  festive  occasions  are  sacred  occasions,  and  there
is  therefore  no  real  difference  between  best  clothes  and
holy  clothes.  When  a  garment  comes  in  contact  with
anything  partaking  of  a  sacred  nature  it  becomes  '  holy,'
and,  once  '  holy,'  it  must  never  be  worn  save  on  '  holy'
occasions.''^  This  is  why  in  early  Arabia  certain  rites
were  performed  naked  or  in  garments  borrowed  from
the  sanctuary  (We.  Heid.^^^  56,  no).  The  same  prin-
ciple illustrates  the  command  of  Jehu  to  '  bring  forth
vestments  for  all  the  worshippers  of  Baal ' ;  the  vestments
were  in  the  custody  of  the  keeper  of  the  meltdhdh  (2  K.
10  22;  text  perhaps  corrupt  :  see  Vestry).  That  certain
rites  among  the  Hebrews  were  performed  in  a  semi-
naked  condition  seems  not  improbable.  The  Ephod
itself  was  once  perhaps  nothing  more  than  a  loin-cloth
(cp  2  S.  614  16  20,  and  see  EPHOD,  §  i).^

Elijah's  kilt  {^ezor)  of  skin  and  the  prophet's  customary
'  hairy  mantle  '  (see  Mantle) — in  later  times  often
falsely  assumed  (Zech.  184) — remind  us  of  the  priests
of  the  Palmetum  who  were  dressed  in  skins  (Strabo  xvi.
4 18  ;  for  other  analogies  see  RS'(^^  437  f- )  '<  *  but  there  is
always  a  tendency  in  cults  to  return  to  ancient  custom
in  the  performance  of  sacred  rites,  and,  as  Robertson
Smith  has  shown,  later  priestly  ritual  is  only  a  develop-
ment of  what  was  originally  observed  by  all  worshippers
when  every  man  was  his  own  priest.  The  dressing  of
worshippers  in  skins  of  the  sacred  kind  (cp  Esau)
implies  that  they  have  come  to  worship  as  kinsmen  of
the  victim  and  of  the  god,  and  in  this  connection  it  is
suggestive  to  rememl>er  that  the  eponyms  of  the  Levites
and  Joseph  tril^es  are  the  'wild-cow'  (Leah)  and  the
'ewe'  (Rachel)  respectively. See  Leah,  Rachel.

Again,  we  note  that  clothing  may  be  looked  upon  as
forming  so  far  part  of  a  man  as  to  ser\-e  as  a  vehicle  of
personal  connection.  The  clothes  thus  tend  to  become
identified  with  the  owner,  as  in  the  custom  alluded  to  in
Ruth  39  above.  The  Arab  seizes  hold  of  the  garments
of  the  man  whose  protection  he  seeks,  and  '  pluck  away
my  garments  from  thine '  in  the  older  literature  means
'  put  an  end  to  our  attachment. '  So  a  man  will
deposit  with  a  god  a  garment  or  merely  a  shred  of  it,
and  even  to  the  present  day  rag-offerings  are  to  be
seen  upon  the  sacred  trees  of  Syria  and  on  the  tombs  of
Mohammedan  saints.  They  are  not  gifts  in  the  ordinary
sense,  but  pledges  of  the  connection  between  worshipper
and  object  or  person  worshipped  (^"5(2)  335/).  Thus
garments  are  offered  to  sacred  objects,  to  wells  (ib.
177),  but  more  particularly  to  trees  and  idols  (see
Nature  Worship).'  So  2  K.  287  speaks  of  the  women
who  wove  tunics  (so  Klo. )  for  the  asherah.  The  custom
is  not  confined  to  the  Semitic  world,  and  instances  of

'  This  is  distinctly  asserted  by  Jos.  Ant.  iv.  8  u- .  'To  pray
for  a  blessing  on  the  flax  and  sheep,'  says  Maimonides.  This
prohibition  in  the  case  of  laymen  was  re-enacted  under  the
Prankish  emperors  (Caf>itularium,  646).  It  is  just  possible  that
the  law  aimed  at  marking  more  distinctly  the  priest  from  the
layman.

2  Cp  Lev.  627  Hag.  2  12,  and,  on  the  contagion  of  hohness,
cp  Ezek.  44  19  and  see  Clean,  §  2.  On  Is.  (55  5  (where  point
thePi-el)see/?5(2)45i,  n.  1.

3  Verse  14^,  however,  may  be  an  addition.  For  Ex.  20  26  cp
Breeches,  3.

4  In  Zeph.  1 8  the  wearing  of  '  strange  garments '  (nDJ  »137P)
IS  associated  with  foreign  worship  (cp  v.  0).

*  Cp  Bertholet,  Israel.  Vorstcllungen  v.  Zustaml  nock  d.
Tode  ('99).


DRINK  OFFERING

draped  images  in  Circece  arc  collected  by  Frazer  {Pa us.
2574/).  ■ 'l"he  (ireek  images,'  he  observes,  'which
atv  hihiorically  known  to  have  worn  real  clothes  seem
generally  to  have  been  remarkable  for  their  great
antiquity. '  The  custom  does  not  seem  to  be  indigenous ;
it  was  probably  Ixjrrowed  from  the  East. '  The  counter-
part of  the  custom  of  offering  a  garment  to  the  sanctified
object  is  the  wearing  of  something  which  has  been  in
contact  with  it.  At  the  present  day  in  Palestine  the
man  who  hangs  a  rag  upon  a  sacred  tree  takes  away,
as  a  preservative  against  evil,  one  of  the  rags  that  have
iKJcn  sanctified  by  hanging  there  for  some  time  (see
FEFQ,  1893,  p.  204).  The  custom  of  wearing  sacred
relics  as  charms  is  clearly  parallel.  Now,  just  as  the
priests  had  their  special  garments,  so  particular  vestments
were  used  for  purposes  of  divination.  Thus  a  magician
wears  the  clothes  of  Kr-ti — i.e. ,  Eridu,  a  town  mentioned
often  in  Babylonian  incantations ( Del.  Ass.  //WO  371^).
Another  instance  of  the  wearing  of  special  dress  is  cited  by
Kriedrich  Uelitzsch  in  Haer's  Fsei'.  p.  xiii.  An  important
parallel  to  this  custom  ap[jcars  in  Ezekiel's  denunciation
of  the  false  projjhctesses  '^  and  the  divination  to  which
they  resorted  (i-^zek.  13  17-23).  Two  sp«'cial  articles  are
mentioned:  (a)  mnC3.  ICsathoth,  'bands'  or  fetters'^
worn  upon  the  arms  (cp  the  use  of  Fronti.kt.s  [17. ^'.]),
and  {h)  ninsos.  '  long  mantles '  (evi(i6\aia  [BA(^J,
irfpt)3.  [At-.  21],  Pesh.  taksitha,  mand,  EV  incorrectly
Ki:rchii:is),  which  were  placed  over  the  head  of  the
diviner.*  It  becomes  very  tempting  to  conjecture  that
these  garments  were  not  merely  special  garments,  but
the  garments  actually  worn  by  the  deity  or  sacred
object  itself,  since  it  is  plausible  to  infer  that  they  would
be  held  to  be  permeated  with  the  sanctity  of  the  deified
object  and  that  supernatural  power  might  be  thus  im-
parted to  the  wearer.*  It  is  true,  the  link  is  still
missing  to  connect  the  diviner's  garb  with  that  of  the
clothed  image  ;  but  such  a  conjecture  as  this  would  seem
to  explain  how  the  use  of  '  Ephod,'  as  an  article  of
divination,  in  its  twofold  sense  of  image  and  garment
(in  which  it  has  been  clothed),  might  have  arisen  (cp
Bertholet  on  Ezek.  13 18)  ;  see  Ephod.

See  Weiss,  Ki'stumkunde,  i.  ch.  5  ;  Nowack,  HA,  §  20 ;  Ben-
zinger,  H.\,  §  16;  and  the  special  articles  referred  to  in  the
course  of  this  summary  I.  a. — S.  A.  <, .

DRINK  OFFERING  ("^D:),  Gen.  35 14;  see  Sacri-
fice ;  cp  RniAL,  §  I.

DROMEDARY.  The  word  nn3"l3.  kirkdroth,  is
rendered  'dromedaries'  in  Is.  6620,  RV°«-  (so  Boch. ,
Ges.,Che.,Di.  ,Duhm. ;  ci)"13"l3  •  to  whirl  about' and  EV
'  swift  beasts  ' ).  The  rendering  '  panniers  '  (cp  /ierd  oki-
aSiuv  [BXAQ];  Sym.  ^1/  (popeioi^)  has  little  in  its  favour.

For  Jer.  223  (nnqS)  and  Is.  606  (/>/.  plur.)— EV  'dromedary,'
RVmg.  correctly  'young  camel'— see  Camel,  |  i,  n.  For
1  K.  4  28  (f.R]  (r21)  and  Esth.  8io(D'3S>T  '32) see  HoRSK,  §  i  [4].

DRUSILLA  (ApoyciAAa  [Ti.  WH]).  Acts  2424-
See  IIi:kouian  F.amily,  10.

DUKE  had  not  yet  become  a  title  when  the  AV  was
made,  but  was  still  employed  in  its  literal  sense  of  any
dux  or  chief:  cp  //c«.  /'.  iii.  223  :  'Be  merciful,  great
du/ee  (viz.,  Fluellen),  to  men  of  mould." With  but  two

J  The  brazen  statue  in  Elis  bears  the  title  of  Satrap  and  seems
to  be  of  E.istern  origin  (Frazer,  "J  575).

2  The  importance  of  women  in  divination  will_  not  be  over-
looked. One  notes  how  frequently  the  Grecian  images,  above
referred  to,  represent  goddesses.

'  Sec  Cuttings,  §  7,  n.  ;  but  '3  might  also  mean  garments,
cp  Ass.  kusUu.

*  It  is  surely  wrong  to  suppose  that  the  mantles  were  worn
by  the  enquirer.  We  have  to  read  the  fern,  suffix  in  'nSOO
(r.  i\a ;  cp  the  fern,  suffix  in  'ninCD  ^'  'o^)  I  there  is  a  similar
error  in  03315;  v.  19^.  ,nD1p"'?3  (J'-  18)  should  probably  be
emended  to  ncpp"73,  'every  diviner.'

•  Cp  A'.VPl  438  and  see  Sacrifice.  This  may  have  given
rise  to  the  ficurc  '  robe  of  righteousness'  and  other  well-known
u.sages,  cp  also  Job  29 14,  '  I  put  on  truth  and  it  clothed  me
('iraS'l) '—'■'•.  became,  as  it  were,  incarnate  in  me.

II41


DURA

exceptions  (.see  i,  below)  this  now  misleading  term  has
given  place  in  RV  to  a  more  mo<lern  equivalent.

I.  I'?!*'  (^(woi'  [UAL]),  a  title  applied  to  the  Kdomite
•chiefs '(so  RVniif.  only)  in  Clen.  8615^.  1  Ch.  151^.  (cp  Ex.
15  15  EV,  and  see  Euo.M,  |  j);  but  also  (rarely-)  to  the  'chief-
tains' (so  RV)  of  Judah  (Zcch.  97  12s6,a  O  xiA^yxo*.  AV
'governors').  The  tribal  subdivision  of  which  the  allUfh  is
the  head  is  called  I^K  'eleph.

a.  1'03,  in  pi.,  of  the  'dukes  (RV  'princes')  of  Sihon  (Josh.
1821).  Elsewhere  the  word  is  always  tr.tnslatcd  'princes'  or
'priiiciiKil  men'  (Fs.  S3  11  [12J  Ezek.  3230  Mic  64  [5]).

DULCIMER  (n':B01D),  Dan.  851015;  see  Music.

§4(4

DUMAH(n»-n).  I.  In  Gen.  2.''.  i4(t3oi/Ma[»'][ADE].
5ot'/ia  [L])  and  1  Ch.  1 30  (tSof/xa  [B.\L])  Dumah
appears  as  a  son  of  Ishmael.  The  form  t3oi//xa  =
rrinK  suggests  comparison  with  Adumu,  the  '  fortress  of
the  land  of  Aribi '  [KD1\},i),  which,  as  Esar-haddon
tells  us,  Sennacherib  had  conquered.

2.  If  the  Dumah  of  Gen.  is  the  same  as  Adumu,  it  may
be  tempting  to  suppose  with  Winckler  {A  T  L'nt.  37)
that  the  heading  '  oracle  of  Dumah  '  (Is.  21  11)  also  refers
to  this  '  fortress. '  'I"he  prophecy  itself,  however,  seems
to  forbid  this  ;  it  begins  '  One  calleth  to  me  out  of  Seir.'
More  probably  not  Adumu  but  Udumu,^  i.e.  Edom,
is  meant  (Che.  Proph.  Is.  1 130)  ;  in  other  words,
'Dumah'  is  a  corruption  of  'Edom'  (t^s  'ISoi'/tatoj
[BX.AQ  ;  see  Sw.  ]),  facilitated  perhaps  by  the  neighlxiur-
hood  of  Massa  [massa,  v.  11,  being  misunderstood)  and
Tema(f.  14);  see  Gen.  2014/  It  is  a  less  probable  view
that  '  Dumah  '  ('  silence  ' — i.e.,  desolation)  is  a  mystical
name  for  Edom  (©  t^j  'ISoi^/xatds).  See  also  ISHMAEL,
§  4  (4),  Edo.v^  (footnote  on  name  of  Edom).

3.  There  is  another  (apparently)  enigmatical  heading
in  Is.  21 1  ( '  Oracle  of  the  wilderness  of  the  sea  '),  which
should  probably  be  emended  into  '  Oracle  of  Clialda;a'
(o'nra  Ni;D  ;  see  SHOT).  Both  headings  are  un-
doubtedly late.

4.  In  Josh.  1552t  the  reading  followed  by  EV  is
found  in  some  MSS  and  edd.  (see  Ginsb. ),  and
being  supported  by  the  OS  (Soi'/ui  ;  see  below)  is  very
probably  more  correct  than  the  Rumah  of  MT  (nDn
fBii.  p.  86,Gi.];  so  Pesh.  and  ©,  peM''a  I'*] /><"'Ma  [-^J-])-
In  favour  of  this  is  the  fact  that  the  name  is  assigned  to
a  town  in  the  hill  country  of  Judah,  mentioned  in  the
same  group  w  ith  Hebron  and  Beth-tappuah.  For  there
is  still  a  place  called  ed-Domch,  2190  ft.  above  the  sea-
level,  10  m.  SW.  from  Hebron  and  12  SE.  from  Beit-
Jibrln,  a  position  which  coincides  nearly  with  the
definition  of  Jer.  and  Eus.  [OS  II64  25068),  'a  very
large  village  now  in  the-Daroma,'  17  m.  southward
from  F.lcuthcropolis.  T.  K.  C.

DUNGEON  ("lian),  Gen.  40 15  41 14 ;  Dungeon  House
C^ian  n'3),  Jer.  37i6  ;  see  Prison.

DUNG-GATE  (niSL"Nn  nyj'  [Ba.  Gi.];  Neh.  813
niSV'n  [Bii.]).  N'eh.  2 13  813/  12 31. See  Jerusale.m.

DURA  (N'l-n,  TOY  nepiBoAoY  \.^^\  nepiBoAoN

[Syr.  mg.],  AeeiRA  [Theod.]  =  N■^^),  the  name  of  a
plain  '  in  the  province  of  Babylon  '  where  Nebuchad-
rezzar's golden  image  was  set  up  (Dan.  81).  If  the
word  is  Aram.,  it  should  mean  'dwelling-place'  or
'village';  but  65's  rendering,  even  if  a  guess,  may
suggest  that  the  name  had  come  down  from  old  Baby-
lonian times  and  means  'wall.'  In  fact,  three  localities
are  mentioned  in  the  tablets  as  bearing  the  name  Duru,

1  In  all  the  pas-sages  quoted  there  may  have  been  a  confusion
between  ']'''«  and ']^K.

2  In  Zech.  written  defectively  »)Vk.  The  St.  Petersburg  MS,
however,  points  l^**-

3  Udumu,  as  Wi.  now  reads  (but  cp  CI  1  189),  was  the  name
of  a  city  in  the  land  of  G.ir,  which  may  be  identical  with  the
Adumu  of  Esar-h.-iddon,  and  from  this  city  the  land  of  Udumu
may  have  derived  its  name.  Still  the  remark  in  the  text
appears  to  be  sound.

1 142


DUST

•wall"  or  'walled  town'  (Del.  Par.  216),  and  several
Babylonian  cities  had  names  compounded  with  Uur.^
That  the  writer  of  the  narrative  knew  any  of  these
places,  api)ears  improbable.  Possibly  the  old  name
Duru  had  attached  itself  in  his  time  to  the  plain
adjacent  to  the  remains  of  the  walls  of  Babylon.  At
any  rate,  the  scene  of  the  dedication  of  the  image  must
in  the  writer's  mind  have  been  close  to  Babylon.


DUST  (1BV)'  ^*^"-  2?  18  27  etc. See  Ashes.
DWARF, mentioned among those who were for-
bidden access to the temple  (Lev.  21 20), is  the  EV

1  Oppert  finds  an  echo  of  Dura  in  the  Nahr  Dur  and  the
Tfilrd  Dfirai^Expid.  en  Mcsop.  ['62]  I238).


DYSENTERY

for  p^,  which  has  been  variously  rendered  'freckled'
(e<t)HAoc  L©"'^'"''-],  lippus,  'blear-eyed'  [\'g.]),  'short-
sighted, '  '  weak-eyed, '  '  affected  with  a  cataract '  ( Rabb. ,
cp  Targ.  Jen).  The  literal  meaning  of  t.ie  word,  viz.
'shrunk,'  'withered'  (Ges. ,  Kn.,  Ke. ),  seems  most
natural.

DYED  ATTIRE  (D^'?np),  Ezek.  23.5EV;  RV»g-
'dyed  turbans'  ; see  Tukh.\n.

DYED  GARMENTS.  For  Judg.  5  30  R Vn'e-  (D^rny)
see  Colours,  col. 86q,  n.  2; and  for  Is.  63i  AV  (^^-IDn)  see

//'., § ID.

DYES. See  Ojlouks,  §  13^

DYSENTERY  (AyceNTepiON),  Acts  288  RV ;  AV
'  bloody  tiux.' See  Diska.si:s,  9,  and  cp  Emerods.
1 144


\


END  OF VOL. I
