Mesmerism in India (James Esdaile, 1846)
========================================
James Esdaile — Hundreds of painless mesmeric surgeries in India — the clinical foundation of Victorian mesmerism. Public domain. Scan via Internet Archive (39002011123172.med.yale.edu) — 1846 first edition.

t' ■' 

Ba-HHi;aii;ii,itB8' 

■■, (1 .iMii •Ul'f ''111' -,.. 

rl'i;)' '';.':■; s'^'^l! .Ill; 

iiiy: 

illpil'^i^''^^' 

:ir.t<iiii'-ifl'itii>Himiii'iM!!iii!.'i"- 

EX LIBRIS 
JOHN FARQUHAR FULTON 

YALE 
MEDICAL LIBRARY 

HISTORICAL 
LIBRARY 

MESMERISM IN INDIA. 

London : 

Printed by A. Spottiswoode, 

New-Street- Square. 

MESMERISM m ODIA, 

PRACTICAL APPLICATION IN SURGERY 
AND MEDICINE. 

BY 

JAMES ESDAILE, M.D. 

CIVIL ASSISTANT SURGEON, H.C.S. BENGAL. 

" I rather choose to endure the wounds of those darts which envy 
casteth at novelty, than to go on safely and sleepily in the easy ways 
of ancient mistakings." — Raleigh. 

LONDON: 

PRINTED FOIl 

LONGMAN, BROWN, GREEN, AND LONGMANS, 

PATERNOSTER- ROW. 

1846. 

turn 

MEDICAL 
BXSTORTCAt 

TO THE 

REV. JAMES ESDAILE, D.D. 

My dear Father, 

However new and strange the sub- 
ject of this Work may be to you, I am sure 
that it will afford you pleasure to know 
that I have introduced, and I hope I may 
say established, a new and powerful means 
of alleviating human suffering among the 
natives of Bengal. 

I shall soon ascertain to what extent 
other varieties of mankind are capable of 
benefiting by this natural curative power, 
as I am ordered to join the army in the 
field, and depart to-morrow, by dak, a 
journey of eleven hundred miles ! 
I am 
Your affectionate Son, 

James Esdaile. 

Hooghly, 
Feb. 1st, 1846. 

PREFACE. 

If tills production sliould be fortunate enougli to 
attract attention at home, I hope that criticism 
will be chiefly expended upon a careful examina- 
tion of the alleged facts, and their practical 
application to the improvement of Surgery and 
Medicine. 

What I now offer to the public is the result of 
only eight months' mesmeric practice, in a country 
charity hospital ; but it has been sufficient to 
demonstrate the singular and most beneficial 
influence that Mesmerism exerts over the consti- 
tution of the people of Bengal, and that pahiless 
surgical operations, and other medical advantages, 
are their natural birthright ; of which I hope they 
will be no longer deprived. 

Duty calls me to another and more extensive 
field (the Civil Surgeons being ordered to join 

A 4 

Vlll PREFACE, 

the army of the Sutlej), where I hope to work 
out this curious and interesting subject in all its 
practical bearings, and to live to communicate my 
experience to the public. 

Hooghly, 
Feb. 1st, 1846. 

EDITOR'S PREFACE. 

Appearing before the public as the Editor of a 
work on Mesmerism, I trust I may be pardoned 
for alluding to the circumstances under which I 
have been called upon to undertake such a duty. 
Several months ago my brother, a medical officer 
in the service of the East India Company, sur- 
prised me by announcing that he had now found 
something to dispel the ennui of Indian life, and 
that his mission was to become " the Apostle of 
Mesmerism in India." More than twelve years 
ago, my attention had been arrested by reading 
M. Cloquet's account of his having removed a 
cancerous breast from a lady while in the mes- 
meric trance, and by his certifying her insensi- 
bility to pain. Knowing the eminence of M. 
Cloquet as- a surgeon, and his reputation as a man 
of veracity, I was constrained to believe in the 
reality of the mysterious agent denominated Mes- 
merism, or Animal Magnetism ; and my belief 

X EDITOR S PREFACE. 

was confirmed by the fact of the operator not 
being a believer in Mesmerism. From that hour I 
never doubted that many things, scouted by most 
people as frauds or delusions, were merely new 
manifestations of this incomprehensible power. 
The evidence was so strong, that incredulity 
seemed irrational. Professional avocations hin- 
dered me paying further attention to the subject ; 
and I had almost ceased to think of Mesmerism 
when it was again unexpectedly brought before 
me by my brother. Being thoroughly convinced 
of his honesty, as well as of his ability to detect 
imposture, I read his communications, transmitted 
from time to time, with the liveliest interest, and 
rejoiced to be at length informed that he was 
about to communicate his experience to the public ; 
and that he relied on my services In seeing his 
"Work through the press, and In making any neces- 
sary alterations In the MS. 

A determination to know the truth, and to 
afford to others the opportunity of Investigating 
it for themselves, has induced me to read my 
brother's Work with care, and to undertake the 
responsibility of preparing it for the press. lu 
justice to him I must add, that the only alter- 
ations I have made In the MS. have been merely 
verbal; so that whatever mentis due to the Work, 

EDITOK S PREFACE. XI 

either as a literary performance, or a philosophical 
treatise upon an imperfectly understood branch of 
science, none of it belongs to me. 

While he will be gratified to learn that his lite- 
rary offspring has assumed so little of the aspect 
of a changeling, by being transferred to my care, 
I fear that on another point he will be mortified, 
and that some of his readers will share in his re- 
gret. His MS. was accompanied by nine beau- 
tifully executed drawings, also intended for pub- 
lication. After consulting with friends interested 
in Mesmerism, it has been resolved that these 
drawings shall not be published, but remain in 
the hands of Messrs. Longman and Co. for the 
inspection of the scientific, and the curious. They 
are very striking; but, unfortunately, their very 
fidelity is a reason for their non-publication, for, 
assuredly, they are fitted to shock the delicate, 
who are unaccustomed to witness the fearful 
ravages of disease on the human frame. More- 
over, to publish them would add materially to the 
price of the Work — a result which would frustrate, 
to some extent at least, the object of the Authoi-, 
who obviously desires that the British public shall 
have every facility in procuring information re- 
garding the derided science of which, and with 
sucli good reason, he iS so decided an advocate. 

xu editor's preface. 

On the probable reception of the Work in this 
country, it may be imprudent to speculate ; but I 
cannot help hoping that the evident honesty of 
the writer, and his willingness to receive assist- 
ance, even from his opponents, in detecting the 
imposture of Mesmerism, if imposture it be, will 
conciliate the most incredulous, and induce them 
calmly to examine a multitude of facts accumu- 
lated by a man who has never been suspected to 
be either a knave or a fool. Every body is alike 
interested in fair play being afforded to the pro- 
pounders of the strange facts and theories con- 
nected with Mesmerism. It is to be borne in 
mind, that it may be used for evil as well as for 
good ; and that, if we obstinately refuse even to 
examine the subject, we expose ourselves, defence- 
less, to the abuse of a power capable of being 
perverted to the most nefarious ends. This, 
perhaps, will not be reckoned a fanciful danger 
by those who carefully peruse the Author's re- 
marks on the singular trial for the abduction of a 
boy. And if from this case, corroborated by the 
general impression in India of the frequency of 
far more detestable crimes, the public arrive at 
the conviction that Mesmerism is a terrible eno-ine 
in the hands of a villain, as we have good reason 
for believing it to be, surely our legislators, who 

editor's preface. xiii 

spend laborious nights in perfecting bills of pains 
and penalties against the felonious abductors of 
favourite poodles and the various members of the 
canine race, will see it to be their duty to make 
the practice of Mesmerism penal, save by regu- 
larly educated medical men. If my brother's 
book do nothing more than rouse the public to a 
sense of danger, it will not have been written in 
vain. Small as is my personal experience of Mes- 
merism, I have yet, with my own hands, done 
enough to impress me with a profound conviction 
that, manifold as are the blessings it confers, it 
must be used with care, and that it is a most for- 
midable source of mischief in the hands of the 
ignorant and the unprincipled. In a note, in the 
body of the work, will be found an account of 
the influence I exerted over a young gentleman in 
London. I can now relate a still more striking 
case. When lately inviting a lady to pay me a 
visit, I thus wrote to her : — " Unbeliever in Mes- 
merism as you are, I hope to convince you of its 
reality by setting you asleep." In her reply she 
observed : — " You will, indeed, find me hard to 
be convinced ; but if you can procure me refresh- 
ing sleep, it wiU be the greatest blessing, for I 
have not had a sound sleep for eighteen months." 
Knowing the anguish she had endured by family 

XIV EDITOR S PREFACE. 

bereavements, and that her health was much im- 
paired, a desire to relieve her sufferings made me 
resolve to try whether she could be brought under 
the influence of Mesmerism. An opportunity 
presented itself shortly after her ai-rival here. 
On the evening of the 9th of this month (June), 
the oppressive heat of the weather rendered her 
languid ; her voice was very rough, and she was 
evidently labouring under a slight attack of bron- 
chitis. Believing that the inflammation might 
be subdued by means of Mesmerism, I requested 
permission to try its efficacy. This having been 
kindly granted, I subjected her to the usual mani- 
pulation for half an hour. She became perfectly 
placid, but did not fall asleep; she was merely 
drowsy, and disinclined to rise. No marked 
symptoms having been exhibited, I concluded that 
the experiment had failed ; but, next morning, I 
was agreeably surprised to learn that she had 
passed a most comfortable night, and had slept 
for seven hours and a half without waking. Her 
voice also was clear, the expression of lano-uor 
had left her countenance, and she felt so well that 
she ventured to dine at the house of a friend 
distant three miles from the Manse. Whatever 
was the cause of the improvement, I was de- 
lighted to see my friend evidently better, and 

EDITORS PREFACE. XV 

resolved again to mesmerise her. On our return 
from a saunter in the garclen, on the eveninor of 
the 11th (June), she lay down on the sofa, wait- 
ing the entrance of the servants to prayers. As 
they happened to be longer in coming than we 
expected, I said, " Suppose I try to mesmerise 
you?" The reply being "Very well," I com- 
menced my manipulations at five minutes before 
ten. Before that hour struck, we had the follow- 
ing conversation. " Oh ! I am very sleepy." — 
" Do you really think I am exerting any influence 
over you ? " — " How can I doubt it ? I never 
felt this way before. I am in a state of the most 
delightful placidity." — " Why, then, I had better 
put off the prayers, and keep the house quiet for 
a little." — " No, no ; don't do that. I am very 
drowsy," — and with these words she relinquished 
the attempt to rise, and sank her head on the 
pillow. Having slipped out of the room, and 
ordered no noise to be made, I found her on my 
return still very somnolent, and, without saying 
another word, proceeded with my manipulations 
for twenty minutes. I then spoke, and, receiving 
no answer, proceeded to get a witness of my sub- 
sequent doings. Calling my housekeeper, I said 
— " Come and try if you can waken Mrs. C. : I 
have mesmerised her, I think." She tried eveiy 

XVI EDITOR S PKEFACE. 

means so to do, but in vain. Her respect for the 
lady would not allow her to obey my order to 
prick her with a pin ; I therefore took a sharp- 
pointed instrument, and pricked her hand till the 
marks were visible. No uneasiness being ma- 
nifested, I was now certain that the mesmeric 
sleep was established, and proceeded to test its 
intensity by loudly calling, and claj^ping my hands 
close to the face of the sleeper. Not a feature 
moved; and the exquisitely placid countenance of 
my entranced friend will long live in my memory. 
As she was laid on a sofa in the dining-room, I 
could not permit her to remain there without 
sitting up all night to watch her, or causing my 
servants to do so. Circumstances renderinij this 
inconvenient, I proceeded, at 11 o'clock, to de- 
mesmerise her. This proved a work of the greatest 
difficulty : for half an hour I used all the methods 
resorted to by the mesmerists, but with hardly 
any success. Being resolved, however, to break 
in upon her repose, I applied the strongest smell- 
ing salts to her nostrils, threw cold water on her 
face, and blew upon it with a pair of bellows. 
This rough usage roused her a little; but even 
after I got her to sit up, she fell helplessly into 
my arms, and, if let alone, would instantly have 
been as fast asleep as ever. 

EDITOR S PREFACE. Xvii 

On questioning her next morning, she could 
give no account of what had happened. She only- 
remembered that she lay down, and that I soon 
made her very drowsy. She acknowledged that 
I might have done with her whatever I chose, 
and expressed her conviction that had I ampu- 
tated a limb, she would have been unconscious of 
the operation. What a power, then, is this for 
evil as well as for good ! How foolish in people 
to expose themselves to the machinations of the 
wicked, by treating Mesmerism as a fraud or a 
deb'sion! It is a fact, proved by incontestable 
evidence ; and capable of being applied to the 
relief of suffering humanity, or perverted so as to 
accomplish the designs of villany. As a clergy- 
man, I shall be happy to apply it, gratuitously 
for the relief of the sick, until medical men be- 
come convinced of the therapeutic value of Mes- 
merism, and introduce it into their practice. And 
for the encouragement of non-professional persons, 
who, like myself, are anxious to investigate the 
truth, I am glad to be able to state that a bene- 
volent bishop in England, and his amiable family, 
are successfully employed in relieving the afflicted; 
and that my friend Mrs. C. expresses the warmest 
gratitude for the benefit she has derived from my 
mesmeric treatment. 

XVIU EDITOR S PREFACE. 

The above remarks are for the general reader. 
I would now respectfully invite the attention of 
tlie medical profession to the facts detailed by my 
brother. He is neither a quack nor an enthu- 
siast, but a regularly educated, truth-loving phy- 
sician, whose reputation for talent and honesty is 
unquestionable. The facts he adduces cannot be 
"controverted, and, as I was happy to learn from 
a medical man just arrived from Hooghly, are 
admitted both by Europeans and natives, on the 
spot where they occurred. If he, then, in eight 
months, has jDcrformed no less than seventy-six 
operations, besides relieving eighteen medical 
cases, how can medical men in this country justify 
their heartless apathy in regard to Mesmerism ? 
It is a fact, in the highest degree disgraceful to 
them, that our doctors will not be pei'suaded even 
to try whether their patients can be benefited by 
the mesmeric agency. They insist on goincp on 
inflicting tortures, without an attempt to ascer- 
tain whether they may not be obviated by Mes- 
merism. The Royal Medical and Chirurgical 
Society of London permitted Dr. Copland, with- 
out a word of disapprobation, to declare that 
" pain is a wise provision of nature ; and patients 
ought to suffer pain while their surgeon is operat- 
ing; they are all the better for it, and recover 

EDITOR S PREFACE. XIX 

better." A London dentist has announced that 
several of his fratei-nity have resolved not to ex- 
tract the teeth of persons in the mesmeric sleep ! 
By this combination of doctors and dentists, we 
are threatened with the infliction of pain, when- 
ever we are so unfortunate as to fall into their 
hands ; and our agonies are to be soothed by Dr. 
Copland's pious assurance that pain is a wise 
infliction intended for good ! Let others do as 
they please, for myself I shall only say, that, 
having twice suffered under the surgeon's knife, 
all the doctors in Europe shall not persuade me 
to permit them again to mangle my " pleasant 
flesh," until a persevering attempt has been made 
to reduce me to insensibility by means of Mes- 
merism. As the best persuasive to induce sufibrers 
to form a similar resolution, I request their at- 
tention to the subjoined resume of my brother's 
mesmeric practice, as published by him in a Cal- 
cutta newspaper, on the eve of his departure for 
the army of the Punjaub. 

It now only remains that I should publicly 
offer my warmest thanks to Dr. Gregory, Pro- 
fessor of Chemistry in the University of Edin- 
burgh, and to Mr. Colquhoun, author of " Isls 
Rcvclata," and many other well-known works, 
•a 2 

XX 

editor's preface. 

for the highly flattering commendations they have 
bestowed on my brother's labom-s, and for many 
friendly and generous communications addressed 

to myself. 

David Esdaile. 

Manse of Rescobie, Forfar, 
13th June, 1846. 

Postscript. 19th June. — To-day I have had a new 
proof of the value of Mesmerism in relieving the sick. I 

was visiting Isabel A , a young woman recovering from 

fever ; the fever had left her, but the second night before 
I saw her an attack of inflammation in the breast had ren- 
dered necessary the application of leeches. I found her in 
pain from the inflammation, and also from toothache, and 
complaining of inability to sleep. In ten minutes I threw 
her into the mesmeric trance ; this was at 9 p. m. : she 
awoke at 2 a. m., refreshed and hungry. 23rd. — The 
change of weather has injured my relative Mrs. C. This 
evening she had a dreadful cough, which banished sleep, 
and gave her much pain. I proceeded to mesmerise her in 
the usual way : the paroxysms of the cough rendered the 
process more laborious than formerly ; at last I succeeded 
in allaying the spasmodic motions of the thorax, by placing 
my fingers on her throat, and breathing continuously on 
the spot which appeared to be the seat of the irritation 
which annoyed her. In half an hour she was fast asleep ; 
she slept two hours, and awoke refreshed. The cough had 
left her, and has not returned at this date (25th June). 
These are facts ; and I record them for the benefit of the 
sufieriog. Let sceptics scoflf, and doctors talk of danger ; 
I have alleviated pain ; and any one who will honestly 
make the attempt may do the same. — D. E. 

XXI 

MESMERIC FACTS 

REPORTED BY JAMES ESDAILE, M.D. 

To the Editor of The Englishman. 

Sir, — Before proceeding to join the army, I have the 
pleasure to send you a " resume "of my mesmeric practice 
during the last eight months. 

My experience has demonstrated the singular and beneficial 
influence exerted by Mesmerism over the constitution of the 
Natives of Bengal, and that painless surgical operations, 
with other advantages, are their natural birthright, of which 
they will no longer be deprived, I hope. 

Duty calls me to another and more extensive field, where 
I hope to work out this curious and interesting subject in 
all its practical details, and to ascertain to what extent other 
varieties of mankind are capable of being benefited by this 
natural curative power. 

I am, your obedient servant, 

James Esdailb, M. D. 

Hooghly, 22d Jan., 1846. 

a 3 

REPORT OF 

A Return showing the Number of painless Surgical Operations 
performed at Hooghly, during the last eight months. 

Arm amputated . - - - 1 

Breast ditto _-.--- I 

Tumor extracted from the upper jaw - 1 

Scirrhus testium extirpated ... 2 

Penis amputated - - - 2 

Contracted knees straightened = - 3 

Ditto arms 3 

Operations for cataract - 3 

Large tumour in the groin cut off - 1 

Operations for Hydrocele ... 7 

Ditto Dropsy - - 2 

Actual Cautery applied to a sore .... 1 

Muriatic acid ditto - - - 2 

Unhealthy sores pared down - - 7 

Abscesses opened - - - 5 

Sinus, six inches long, laid open - - 1 
Heel flayed ..... .1 

End of thumb cut off - - - - 1 

Teeth extracted - = - - 3 

Gum cut away ... ... 1 

Prepuce cut off ... 3 
Piles ditto .......i 

Great toe nails cut out by the roots . 5 

Seton introduced from ankle to knee - - - 1 

Large tumour on leg removed . - 1 
Scrotal tumours, weighing from 8lb. to 80 lb., 

removed 17, painless - - . - 14 

Operations ..... 73 

MESMEKIC FACTS. XXlll 

A Return of Medical Cases cured hy Mesmerism, during the last 
eiglti months. 

Nervous Headaeh - 3 cured by one trance. 

Tic-doloureux 1 ditto. 

Nervousness, and Lameness "| 

from Rheumatism of 21 l 1 by chronic treatment.* 

years standing -J 

Spasmodic Colic - 1 by one trance. 

Acute inflammation of the 7 1 by repeated trances in 24 

eye - . . J hours. 

Chronic ditto - - 1 by chronic treatment. 

Acute inflammation of testes -f ^ ^l "'^''^^^^ '"""^ '" ^6 
[_ hours. 

Convulsions - 1 by one trance. 

Lameness from Rheumatism- 2 by chronic treatment. 

Lumbago . 5 ' ''J' S^""'^^ /""^ '°™' '^^^ 

I mensmg for a week. 

Sciatica - _ - 1 ditto. 

Pain in crural nerve - 1 ditto. 

Palsy of one arm - 1 ditto for a month. 

Ditto of half the body - 1 ditto for 6 weeks. 

Feeling of insects crawling 1 , , 

over the body - .} 1 by one trance. 

18 

It will be perceived that the above cases are chiefly dis- 
eases of the nervous system. But as sleep and the absence 
of pain is the best condition of the body for promoting the 
resolution of inflammation by the powers of Nature, I have 
extinguished local inflammations by keeping the patients 
entranced till this was effected. 

* By chronic treatment is meant daily mesmerising without 
the intention of entrancing the patient, which is not necessary. 
a 4 

xxiv KEPORT OF 

I beg to state, for the satisfaction of those who have not 
yet a practical knowledge of the subject, that I have seen no 
bad consequences whatever arise from persons being operated 
on when iti the mesmeric trance. Cases have occurred in 
which no pain has been felt subsequent to the operation 
even ,• the wounds healing in a few days by the first inten- 
tion ; and in the rest, I have seen no indications of any 
injury being done to the constitution. On the contrary, it 
appears to me to have been saved, and that less constitutional 
disturbance has followed than under ordinary circumstances. 

There has not been a death among the cases operated on. 
In my early operations, I availed myself of the first fit of 
insensibility, not knowing whether I could command it back 
again at pleasure. 

But if the trance is not profound the first time, the 
surgeon may safely calculate on its being deeper the next, 
and when operating in public, it will be prudent to take the 
security of one or two preliminary trances. Flexibility of 
the limbs till moved, and their remaining rigid in any posi- 
tion we put them in, are characteristic of the trance : but 
there are exceptions, and these are equally diagnostic, and 
to be depended upon. It sometimes happens, that the 
limbs become rigid as they lie, and on bending them they 
have always a disposition to return to a state of spasmodic 
extension. At other times, there is a complete relaxation of 
the whole muscular system, and the limbs can be tossed 
about like those of a person just dead. 

The eyes are usually closed, but the eyelids are sometimes 
seen a little separated, or half-open and tremulous, and the 
eye is even occasionally wide open, fixed, and insensible to 
the light. On one occasion, having ordered a man to be 
entranced, I returned after two hours, and was told by my 
assistant that the man was not affected. I went to see, and 
found him with half-open eyes, quivering eyelids, and 

MESMEKIC FACTS. XXV 

trembling hands. I immediately said that he was ready, 
and, without further testing his condition, performed a most 
severe operation upon him, without his knowing any thing 
about it. 

I also wish to 'remark that I have seen no symptom of 
congestion of blood on the brain ; the circulation in the 
trance being usually quite natural, like that of a sleeping 
person. My patients appear to escape the stimulating stage 
of the mesmeric influence altogether, and to pass at once 
from life to temporary death. This I am disposed to at- 
tribute to the concentrated uninterrupted manner in which 
the power is applied. As soon as it is felt, there is no time 
given to the system to rally from the first impression, and it 
succumbs without a struggle to the constraining power. 

Some patients, when suddenly awakened, say that their 
vision is hazy, and their heads light ; but I take this to arise 
from the imperfectly recovered sensibility of the brain and 
the organs of sense, which are not at once roused up into 
the full possession of their waking powers, just as is seen in 
persons suddenly aroused from profound natural sleep. 

That the mesmeric torpor of the brain and nerves does 
not arise from sanguine congestion, is often beautifully seen 
in the first actions of persons awaking from the trance. 

They open their eyes, and at the same moment recover 
all their faculties ; but it is seen that the pupU is insensible 
to the light : this they also become aware of; they know 
that their eyes are open, and that they ought to see, but do 
not. The thought fills them with horror, and with a fearful 
cry they bury their faces in their hands, like persons struck 
blind by lightning ;' but this soon passes off, and the retina 
recovers its sensibility by a little rubbing of the eye. The 
dreadful shock given to the mind under such circumstancest 
or when a somnambulist awakes and finds himself standing 
in some strange attitude naked, in the midst of strangers 

XXVI MESMERIC FACTS. 

(an experiment I have often made), is a trial of the nerves 
which it would be very imprudent, and even dangerous, to 
make with any but such singularly impassive subjects as 
my patients. 

This, and the inconveniences of inducing the mesmeric 
disease (spontaneous mesmeric action in the system) by 
doing more than is necessary for the cm-e of disease, appear 
to me to be the real dangers to be avoided in the use of 
Mesmerism as a remedy. 

I am now able to say from experience, that debility of 
the nervous system predisposes to the easy reception of the 
mesmeric influence, and I augur well of a patient's powers 
of submission, when I recognise in him the listless dejected 
air, "Tair abattu" that usually accompanies functional 
debility of the nerves. 

CONTENTS 

CHAP. I. 

Aversion of the old Schools and the Public to new Ideas. — 
Some old Notions must be suspended in fairly considering 
Mesmerism. — Irrational Incredulity. — Mesmerism to be 
tried by the usual Laws of Evidence. — Medical Men not 
entitled to decide the Matter for the Public. — The Public 
invited to judge of the Matter of Fact. — Medical Men in this 

Country favourably placed. — Personal Labour necessary 

All easy afterwards. — Qualifications of a Mesmeriser. — 
The Mesmeric Power very general. — The Sick the proper 
Subjects for Experiment. — The Natives of Bengal very 
susceptible of the Mesmeric Influence. — Nature the School 
of the true Physician. — Mesmerism a natural Power of 
Man. — Instincts of Animals. — Mesmerism known and 
practised in India. — Trial of Skill with an Eastern Magi- 
cian Dangers of Mesmerism no Reason for rejecting it. — 

No need to interfere with the Mind in Bodily Disease. — 
My Patients bad Subjects for the Mental Phenomena. — 
The Public invited to judge the Question practically and 
fairly - - . - . Page 1 

CHAP. IL 

The French Commission of 1779. — Both Right and Wrong. 
— The Mesmerists properly punished, — Condition required 

1 

XXviii CONTENTS. 

in the Patient. — State of my Mind before experimenting 
for myself. — Report of the Bishop of Lausanne to the Pope. 
— His Reply. — Accidental Nature of my First Experiment. 

— ^'Accidental Nature of ray Second Experiment First 

Mesmeric Surgical Operation. — Conclusion Page 30 

CHAP. III. 

Mesmerism the same in India and in Europe. — Examples of 
Mesmeric Sleep. — Sealing of the Eyes Altered Sensibility. 

— Temporary Paralysis. — Muscular Rigidity. — Insensibility 
to Pain. — Exaltation of particular Organs. — Convulsions. — 
Delirium. — Injustice done to the Memory of the first 
Mesmerists. — Every available Evidence here given. — Impos- 
ture morally and physically impossible. — Mode of Proceed- 
ing. — Mesmeric and Non-Mesmeric Operations contrasted. 

— Physiological Demonstration of the Impossibility of Im- 
posture - - - - - 60 

CHAP. IV. 

Somnambulism Definition Singular Introduction to it. — 

Suspected Child-Stealing by its Means. — First Experiment 
in making a Somnambulist. — Trial of Mesmeric Skill in a 
Court of Justice. — Men stolen out of Court. — Truth of 
Mesmerism publicly proved Natural Sleep, and its Varie- 
ties, can be imitated by Artificial Means. — Mesmeric Sleep. 
— Mesmeric Day-mare Mesmeric Sleep-walking Mes- 
meric Sleep-waking.— Mesmeric Dreaming. —How to make 
Somnambulists. — Imitative Stage of Somnambulism. — Com- 
municative Stage of Somnambulism Mesmeric Catalepsy 

Mesmeric Coma Natural Clairvoyance. Mesmeric Clair- 
voyance. — Nature of the Mesmeric Power Illustrative 

Examples - - . _ - 85 

CONTENTS. 

CHAP. V. 

The Mesmeric Processes. — Publicity the best Security to the 

Public. — Ignorance and Indifference the real Dangers 

Mesmeric Treatment of Disease a Field for the Philanthropist. 

— Puysegur and Deleuze, unprofessional Men. — Processes 
for producing Coma. — Tumour in Upper Jaw removed 
during Coma. — Hypertrophy of Scrotum, ditto. — Trance 
renewable at Pleasure. — Three consecutive Operations on 
one Person. — Mode of Mesmerising in Chronic Diseases. — 
Cure of Rheumatism and nervousness. — Local Mesmerising. 

— Mesmerised Water. — Process for preparing it. — First 

Experiments with it. — The last Means of awaking Persons 

Mesmerised Page 142 

CHAP. VI. 

Mesmerism as a remedy. • — Coma as a Medical Agent. — 
Journal of Practical Mesmerism, — Chronic Inflammation of 
Eye cured. — Nervous Headache ditto. — Acute Inflammation 

of Eye ditto Return of Nervous Headache prevented. — 

Rev. Mr. Fisher's Report. — How to make n Convert. — 

Tooth drawn in the Trance. — Convulsions cured by ditto 

Arms straightened in ditto. — Sense of Formication removed. 

— Lumbago, Sciatica, Pain in Crural Nerve, cured. — Palsy 
of an Arm ditto. — Hemiplegia greatly benefited. — Tic cured, 

— Rheumatism ditto. — Mesmerism as a Disease. — Resembles 
Hysteria — Ignorant Charges of Imposture, — The Public 

abused. — The Public disabused Folly and Unfairness of 

its would-be Guides. — Spontaneous Development of the 
Mesmeric Disease. — Mesmerising by doing nothing taught 
by the Mesmerists themselves. — A natural Consequence of 
frequent Mesmerising. — Examples of Mesmerising by doing 
nothing. — Hysteric Theory. — Hope to hear of Hysteria 
as a Remedy soon. — Rational Mode of studying Mes- 
merism - - 167 

XXX CONTENTS. 

CHAP. VII. 

Mesmerism in Surgery. — Journal of Practical Mesmerism 

Mesmeric Trance : A Leg straightened in ; Colic cured by ; 
Penis amputated in ; Arm straightened in ; Arm amputated 
in ; Breast cut off in ; Abscess opened in ; Heel flayed in ; 
Tooth extracted in ; End of Thumb cut off in ; Arm laid 
open in ; Three Abscesses opened in ; Sinus laid open in ; 
Gum cut away in. — Invasion of the waking by the sleeping 

State Mesmeric Trance ; hypertrophied Prepuce cut off 

in ; suppurating Pile in ; both great Toe Nails cut out in ; 
Knee straightened in ; Ulcer on Temple burned with Mu- 
riatic Acid in ; Seton introduced, &c. in ; Tumour in Groin 
removed in ; Fungoid Sores pared off in ; scirrhus Testes 
extirpated in ; Cataract operated on in ; Malignant Disease 
of Testes extirpated in ; unhealthy Sore pared in ; hyper- 
trophied Prepuce cut off in ; Pain extinguished by ; 
Return on Awaking; Amputation of Penis in; unhealthy 
Sores pared in ; Two Operations for Hydrocele in. — 
Mesmerism alike favourable to the Operator and the Pa- 
tient - Page 201 

CHAP. VIII. 

Hypertrophy of the Scrotum; different Causes of. — Elephan- 
tiasis endemic in Bengal and Lower Egypt ; probable Causes 
of — Example of Malarious Fever. — True Elephantiasis of 

the Scrotum Hypertrophy from Hydrocele ; from Syphilis ; 

Condition of the Organs involved; Mode of operating; 
Mismanagement by the Native Doctors ; Number of Opera- 
tions for Six Years previous to April, 1845; in the Mes- 
meric Trance, for Eight Months. —First Case. _ Some Cause 
for the late Increase of Cases.— Operations in the Mesmeric 
Trance . - _ 227 

CONTENTS. XXXI 

CHAP. IX. 

Curiosities of Mesmerism. — Unsatisfactory Nature of Public 

Exhibitions Apology for giving one Account of it by 

a Visitor. — The Modes in which the Mesmeric Fluid can 
be transmitted. — It acts at great Distances. — Is absorbed 
by Water. — Can pass through a Wall. — Final Experi- 
ments - - Page 250 

AtPENDix . . _ _ 273 

MESMERISM IN INDIA. 

CHAPTER I. 

Aversion of the old Schools mid the Public to new Ideas. — 
Some old Notions must be suspended in f airly considering 
Mesmerism. — Irrational Incredulity. — Mesmerism to be 
tried by the nsiud Laws of Evidence. — Medical Men not en- 
titled to decide the Matter for the Public. — The Ptdilic in- 
vited tojiulge of the Matter of Fact. — Medical Men in this 
Country favourably placed. — Persojial Labour necessary. — 
All easy afterwards. — Qucdificcdions of a Mesmeriser. — 
27ie Mesmeric Power very general. — TTie Sich the proper 
Subjects far Experiment. — The Natives of Bengal very 
swsceptihle of the Mesmeric Influence. — Nature the School 
of the true Physician. — Mesmerism a natural Power of 
Man. — Instincts of Animals. — Mesmerism hnown and 
practised in India. — Trial of Skill ivith an Eastern Magi- 
cian. — Dangers of Mesmerism no Beasoji for rejecting it. 
— No need to interfere with the Mind in Bodily Disease. 
My Patients bad Subjects for the Mental Phenomena. — 
The Public invited to judge the Question practiccdly and 
fairly. 

On the first broacliing of any new branch of 
knowledge, there is ever a great commotion and 
combination among the old-established schools, 

B 

2 GENEEAL AVERSION TO NEW IDEAS. 

which have thriven on the wisdom of their an- 
cestors, and desire nothing more than " stare super 
vias antiquas;' satisfied with things as they are, 
and content to " let well alone ; " and there is 
also a general dislike in society to have its mind 
unsettled, and to be called upon to think again 
about matters supposed to have been set at rest 
iono- ao-o. AVe have the same affection for old fa- 
miliar ideas that we entertain for old coats, shoes, 
and hats, because they humour the peculiarities 
of our constitutions. 

But I hope the time has at last come for the 
public, and the medical profession, to listen pa- 
tiently to a medical man, while he relates facts 
that have fallen under his observation regarding 
Mesmerism, and for the truth of which he pledges 
his private and professional character, as I hereby 
do. 

Under such circumstances, a writer has a right 
to expect that his statements shall be believed till 
they are disproved, or till dishonesty in any of 
the parties concerned shall be detected. 

In considering a subject so new and wonderful, 
it will be necessary to clear away many thorns 
and thistles which have grown up in the mental 
soil, exhausting its strength, and unfittino- it for 
receiving the seeds of truth, however freely and 

SOME OLD NOTIONS NOT TENABLE. 3 

carefully sown. At present it will be sufficient, 
if, as a preliminary, tlie reader will dismiss the 
respectable old notion, that the vital powers of 
our bodies are confined witliin their own limits, 
and cannot be transferred to and act upon others. 
On the contrary, there is good reason to believe 
that the vital fluid of one person can be poured 
into the system of another, upon which it has 
various effects, according to constitutional peculiari- 
ties, the demand for it as a remedy, and the man- 
ner and extent to which it is exhibited in order to 
answer different purposes. Man is not, as com- 
monly supposed, shut up in that pent-house, his 
body, isolated, and impotent to affect his fellow- 
creatures beneficially by a benevolent will, and 
his own innate resources. A merciful God has 
ingrafted a communicable, life-giving, curative 
power in the human body, in order that when two 
individuals are found together, deprived of the 
aids of art, the one in health may often be able to 
soothe and relieve his sick companion, by im- 
parting to him a portion of his vitality. To be- 
lieve that we possess such a power is, surely, a 
proud and exalting idea, which I hope the public 
wiU entertain with pleasure ; and I trust to be 
able to prove to the satisfaction of all dispassionate 
and reflecting minds, that this is no fond delusion of 

B 2 

4 lEEATIONAL INCREDULITY. 

an excited brain, but a substantial blessing, daily 
at work for good, extending immeasurably man's 
individual power of doing good by his unaided 
natural powers, and bringing healing and comfort 
to suffering humanity, all over the world. 

Such is the force of habit, and aversion to a 

/ new train of thought, that this proposed extension 
of man's power has been received with as much 
distaste, as if it had been intended to deprive 
him of a limb, or one of his senses, and has been 
subjected to an irrational incredulity which nothing 
can satisfy. Nothing is more common than to 
hear persons boast, " tliat they will not believe it 
till they see it ; " — some go a step farther in 
smothering their reason, and declare, that " they 
would not believe it, if they saw it;" — and I 
have known others, not only refuse the evidence 
of their senses, but deny their own deeds, because 
they had declared the thing to be "impossible!" 
It is a common and ludicrous error to see people 
mistaking obstinacy for strength of mind, and 
self-sufficiency for knowledge ; and aiding the 
delusion, by calling themselves " Sceptics," that 
name having bnce been respectable in philosophy ; 

, — whereas, they have never had any doubt about 
the matter, and will never condescend to hear the 
subject mentioned without emphatic expressions 

BULE OF FAITH. 5 

of contempt and disgust. Tliese are the " enfans 
perdus " of knowledge, and must be left to the free 
indulgence of their passions and prejudices ; for a 
man who never doubts, will never learn : he may 
grow older, but not wiser. 

Few, in the solution of their doubts, can be 
privileged to the extent of St. Thomas ; and the 
horizon of human knowledge would be miserably 
circumscribed, if we rejected all that we did not 
understand, and refused to believe facts, except 
on the evidence of our own senses. There is 
absolutely no merit in believing what we have 
seen and handled ; • this is no exercise of the 
judgment, and is level to the understanding of a 
savage: but it is the privilege of reason to be 
able to believe in the most sur^Drising statements 
of others, if properly supported by evidence, and 
to adopt their conclusions, although the facts may 
have been observed, and the deductions drawn, by 
our antipodes. One such rational conversion is 
worth a thousand produced by crediting the 
senses ; for its influence extends to reasoning 
minds all over the world. When a person says, 
" I would not have believed it, unless I had seen 
it," he must not be surprised at his neighbour 
requiring equal satisfaction. As a lover of truth 
for its own sake, I am very little gratified by 
B 3 

6 MESMERISM MUST BE TRIED 

being told by my friends, " I believe it, because 
you say so." This is a very barren belief, and 
reaches only a small circle; our faith and opinions 
should be built upon a broader basis than personal 
confidence in any one. There are recognised 
laws of evidence for testing the credibility of 
human testimony, upon whatever subject it may 
be given ; and however new or strange the pro- 
position may be, we shall, by a careful and dis- 
passionate examination of the proofs, be able to 
determine what we may safely believe, on what 
points we ought to suspend our judgments, and 
how much should be rejected. In spiritual mat- 
ters, we have been told, " Blessed are they that 
have not seen, and yet have believed." This 
blessing also follows the ready, but discriminating, 
reception of truth in philosophy, morals, and 
secular affairs. Mental satisfaction, honour, and 
profit, if cared for, reward the first discoverers of 
the secrets of nature ; riches await the men of 
clear sense, who know how to turn the new 
truths to practical purposes; and in medicine, 
the early application of new remedies removes 
much human suiferlng that would probably have 
been otherwise hopeless. ; It is a curious psy- 
chological phenomenon, that a hard disbelief in 
Mesmerism seems to be in proportion to the 

BY THE USUAL LAWS OF EVIDENCE. 7 

extraordinary facilities afforded to every one of 
satisfying himself by his own deeds, and the 
evidence of his own senses. No " hocus pocus,^'' 
no pretensions to exclusive powers, no attempts 
at concealment, are resorted to by many Mes- 
merisers, whose word has never been doubted, 
and who are well known to be neither fools nor 
knaves. They say to us, " Do thus, and you 
wiU probably become as wise as ourselves ; or if 
you cannot, or will not, be at the necessary 
trouble, — come and see." 

But people in general prefer to dictate laws 
to nature from their easy chairs, and amuse 
themselves at the expense of her followers, 
chasing the shapes of their own imaginations, as 
they are pleased to say. To those who really 
desire to know the truth, whatever favourite 
ideas it may upset, I would venture to recommend 
that they should examine the evidence in support 
of Mesmerism, just as they would any other 
matter worth inquiring about ; and I can con- 
fidently promise that they will be richly re- 
warded. I To encourage them, I would remind 
them in the words of Bacon, " that the inquiry 
of truth, which is the love-making or wooing of 
it ; the knowledge of truth, which is the presence 
of it ; and the belief of truth, which is the en- 

B 4 

8 MEDICAL, MEN NOT ENTITLED 

joying of it; is the sovereign good of human 
nature;" and that this highest gratification of 
humanity can only be attained by carefully 
trainino- and exercising our intellect, to which 
the senses are only handmaids. 

The public are too apt to consider the subject 
of INIesmerism as a professional one, and not to 
take the necessary means to become acquainted 
with it till the doctors shall have decided what 
is to be believed about it. This is an error on 
the part of the public, for, I am sorry to say, 
medical men in general as yet know nothing 
about it ; and there is nothing in their previous 
knowledge, however great and varied, that bears 
upon the subject, or can entitle them to decide, 
ex cathedra, on the truth or falsehood of the new 
discoveries. As the question at present stands, 
it is one of facts, and of evidence in support of 
them, of which a jury of sensible unprofessional 
men can judge as well as so many doctors, to 
whom the subject is equally new and perplex- 
ing. When the doctors shall have experimented 
for themselves, or taken the trouble to witness 
the practice of others, and carefully studied the 
subject, the public cannot do better than take 
them for their guides ; but this " consummation 
devoutly to be wished" is so remote, I fear, that 

TO DECIDE THE MATTEK FOE THE PUBLIC. 9 

not many of this generation will live to benefit 
by JNIesmerism, if tbey wait till it is admitted into 
the Pharmacopoeia. 

I would therefore recommend the public to 
exercise their common sense, and sober judgment, 
in determining for the doctors the matter of fact ; 
and if the community decides that it is really a 
remedy of great efficacy, that there is no resisting 
the proofs in support of it, that to know nothing 
about it is no recommendation to a medical man ; 
then Mesmerism will assume its proper rank as a 
remedial agent, and be lodged in the hands of 
those who should alone practise it ; for it is sub- 
ject to enormous abuses in the hands of the ig- 
norant and unprincipled. Instead of doubting 
and doojmatisino; about Mesmerism, I would ear- 

do ^ 

nestly entreat my medical brethren to put it to 
the test by personal experiment, for it is a thing 
to be done, and not talked of only : " I want/btcifs, 
and not ivords," will be the answer of every per- 
son of common sense to the most dogmatical and 

... ^ 

mgenious objectors. 

It is by medical men in this country taking ' 
up the subject experimentally, without previous 
knowledge of it, and having no theories to make 
good or defend, that the truth or falsehood of ^ 
Mesmerism may be very speedily decided. \ By 

10 PERSEVERING EFFORTS NECESSARY. 

following the instructions to be hereafter given, 
I doubt not that many will be as successful as 
myself, for they are the means of putting in 
motion a law of nature whose springs are hidden 
from us, but whose effects are most wonderful, and 
beneficial to humanity, when properly directed. ' 
But I beg leave to warn all who have not yet 
a jjractical knowledge of the subject, that to pro- 
duce the phenomena of Mesmerism is by no means 
a thing so light and easy as some imagine. In 
singularly sensitive persons the extreme degree of 
coma, so intense as to j)ermit the performance of 
surgical operations, without awaking the patient, 
may sometimes be obtained in a few minutes ; but, 
in general, it takes an hour or two, and the pro- 
cess often does not succeed till the second, or even 
fourteenth time. In this, as in every thing else, 
nature will not "unsought be won," and only 
yields her secret treasures to those who court 
her with earnestness, sincerity, and resolution. 
" Lahore et sudore" ought to be the Mesmerist's 
motto, until he has produced the desired results 
by his personal efforts, and thereby given confi- 
dence to himself and others. After this, all is 
easy, for any number of proper assistants may be 
taught to act under our superintendence ; and this 

QUALIFICATIONS OF A MESMEKISEE. 11 

is the only way in which a physician can practise 
Mesmerism to any extent. 

But I would venture to suggest, that it will 
not be enough to set people to mesmerise for us 
by the book. It is exacting too much of human 
nature to expect people to sweat for hours j^awing 
the air, &c. for our incomprehensible objects. But 
let them look on and see the wonderful eifects 
produced by the labours of their superiors ; and 
a host of willing and efficient Mesmerisers will 
spring up, to execute the will of the directing 
mind, and relieve it from the drudgery of the 
needful bodily exertions. Much has been written 
about the physical and moral qualities necessary 
in a Mesmeriser, and such a picture of a " perfect 
monster" has been drawn, that it is enough to 
deter one from making the attempt. If asked to 
select a natural Mesmeriser, I should be disposed 
to choose a person of a high organisation, in whom 
the nervous and circulating systems wei'c equally 
active, with a determined will, a resolution to 
do the thing if possible, and a love of truth and 
humanity, that would induce him to " do for love 
what gold could never buy." But, when the 
way has been shown, far less energy of mind and 
body is quite sufficient for all practical purposes. 
Healthy young persons, who are tractable and 

12 THE SICK THE PROPER SUBJECTS 

patient, and who will give the necessary degree 
of attention, can be made to work out our inten- 
tions in the most efficient manner ; and I hope to 
make it appear that the mesmeric power is a far 
more general gift of nature than has hitherto been 
supposed. Finding it impossible, after the first 
month, to prosecute the subject in my own per- 
son, owing to the great bodily and mental fatigue 
it caused, — for I spared neither, — I set to work 
my hospital attendants, young Hindoos and Ma- 
homedans ; and such has been my success, that 
every one I have taught has become a skilful 
Mesmeriser. Now I do not need to mesmerise 
at all, having a dozen assistants to execute my 
wishes, whether it be in the mesmeric treatment 
of medical cases, or for procuring coma in sur- 
gical operations. 

To those who, by their own powers, inay desire 
to test the truth for themselves, I would venture 
to suggest, that an earnest desire to know the 
truth, a fixed attention, and a resolution to over- 
come first difficulties, are essential conditions of 
mind for the operator, as the means of concen- 
trating and keeping up the continued action of 
the vital agent, whatever it may be. First 
ex)Deriments should be made on the sick, in the 
hope of benefiting them ; which hopes, if strono-ly 

I'Olt FIRST EXPERIMENTS. 13 

felt, will be a stimulus to exertion, and an element 
of success totally wanting in experimenting on 
healthy subjects, who are also more difficult to 
be affected. " The whole need not a physician, 
but they that are sick ; " and however bountiful 
nature may be to her creatures, she is never 
prodigal, and never wastes unnecessary power. 
Mesmerism is the " Medicine of Nature ; ", and 
she refuses, very wisely, to take it when it is not 
needed ; and if forced upon her in a state of 
health, it is very likely to do mischief; for any 
attempt to be better than " well " is pretty sure to 
make one ill. People say to me, " I would like 
to ascertain if I can be mesmerised ; do try." I 
reply, " You very probably cannot ; and I 
should as soon comply with your desire to feel 
the effects of opium, as mesmerise you without 
a cause ; when you need it, you will probably be 
benefited by it." Besides, a person in health 
resisting the influence is no proof that he will 
remain insensible to it in an altered state of the 
body, when there may be an actual craving of the 
nervous system for this sustenance from without. 
As yet, I am sorry to add, I cannot, with 
any degree of confidence, say who are the persons 
susceptible of the mesmeric influence, without 
first trying. But it is satisfactory to know, that 

14 NATIVES OF BENGAL VERY SUSCEPTIBLE 

by far the majority of persons acted upon by me, 
and my assistants, have been affected in different 
degrees, all of which are invaluable to their pos- 
sessors, for the relief and cure of their diseases ; 
and in most of the failures I have little doubt 
that we should have succeeded, if the process had 
been prosecuted. 

The people of this part of the world seem to be 
peculiarly sensitive to the mesmeric power ; and 
as it has been observed that a depressed state of 
the nervous system favours its reception, we can 
understand why they, as a body, should be more 
easily affected than Europeans. Taking the 
population of Bengal generally, they are a feeble, 
ill-nourished race, remarkably deficient in nervous 
energy ; and natural debility of constitution being 
still further lowered by disease, will probably 
account for their being so readily subdued by the 
Mesmerist. Their mental constitution also 
favours us : we have none of the morbid irrita- 
bility of nerves, and the mental impatience of 
the civilised man, to contend against; both of 
which resist and neutralise the efforts of nature. 
The success I have met with is mainly to be 
attributed, I believe, to my patients being the 
simple, unsophisticated children of nature ; neither 
thinking, questioning, nor remonstrating, but 

OF THE MESMERIC INFLUENCE. 15 

passively submitting to my pleasure, without in 
the smallest degree undei'standing my object or 
intentions. How far artificial man may have 
forfeited his birthright I have not yet had the 
means of knowing ; but out of the small num- 
ber of Europeans who have come under my ob- 
servation, the majority have also succumbed to 
the influence ; and if the proud sons of civilisation 
will condescend to return for a moment to the 
feet of their mother Nature, they also will pro- 
bably benefit by her bounties. We have so far 
deserted Nature, that, in return, she has renounced 
us as unnatural children, and left us to our self- 
sufficiency and artificial resources ; but these, in 
general, are mere make-shifts and palliatives, com- 
pared with the steady and enduring curative 
powers of nature, when properly understood and 
brought Into action. The whole art of the true 
physician is exerted to induce nature to interfere 
and take up the case of his patient ; and when he 
sees signs of her gracious presence, he only reve- 
rentially looks on, and confines himself to re- 
moving impediments in her way. But the routine 
practitioner will rarely condescend to divide with 
nature the merit of the cure. He and his pills, 
powders, and potions, must have all the credit ; 
and if any one pretends to be able sometimes 

16 NATURE THE TEUE PHYSICIAN. 

to cure disease by the unassisted powers of nature, 
he is called quack, impostor, or fool, and hunted 
down as a fera naturcB. But, in my estimation, 
the genuine medical quack is he who, professing 
to cure disease, yet allows his patients to suffer 
and perish, by ignorantly, or presumptuously, 
despising any promising or possible means of 
relief. The Father of jNIedicine thought very 
differently from his degenerate sons, for he says, — 
" Nothing should be omitted in an art which 
interests the whole world, which may be bene- 
ficial to suffering humanity, and which does not 
risk human life and comfort." But a time was, 
when apothecaries, chemists, and diploma'd 
physicians did not exist ; when man was an un- 
reasoning animal, devoid of all the resources of 
art, yet subject to all the ills that natural flesh is 
heir to ; and it is a subject of deep interest to the 
philosopher and the physician to ascertain what 
were his natural r en. e lies, in common with the 
other animals ; whether his instincts were as 
strong as theirs, and to what conservative powers 
he resorted when labouring under disease. That 
he possessed such appears to me to be extremely 
probable, from the analogies of the animal crea- 
tion, and the universal benevolence of the Deity 
to his creatures. It must be most important and 

ANTIQUITY OF MESMERISM. 17 

instructive to discover what ivere, or, if not yet 
known, what are, the natural remedies of man ; 
for by observing their effects we shall best under- 
stand the restorative processes of Nature, and be 
able to imitate them by art, with a certainty 
hitherto unattained by medicine. 

So far from Mesmerism being a new and un- 
natural art, there is every reason to believe that 
it is the oldest and most natural mode of curinor 

o 

many of the severe, uncomplicated diseases of the 
human race. Let us imagine, for a moment, the 
condition of savage men, before, by long expe- 
rience, they had learned to avail themselves of 
the medicinal virtues of the vegetable and mineral 
kingdoms, for the cure of their most jiressing 
diseases. Man, in this state, would be more 
helpless than the brute creation ; they have happy 
instincts, many of them known to us, by which 
they are directed not only to their natural food, 
but to their natural medicines. But man, so far 
as we yet know him, could in his sufferings only 
make vague experiments on the natural objects 
around him, in the desperate hope of stumbling 
upon some suitable remedy. This might occa- 
sionally happen, but he was more likely to be 
poisoned than cured by his first experiments. 
The very fish were more favoured than he. The 
c 

18 INSTINCT AMONGST ANIMALS. 

salmon, by an iufallible instinct, quit the sea at a 
certain season, and ascend the rivers, thereby- 
getting rid of their tormentors, the sea-lice (which 
the fresh water speedily kills), and at the same 
time reaching the spots destined for the propaga- 
tion of their kind. After depositing the spawn, 
the parent fish, black, lank, and sick, distasteful 
to themselves, and unwholesome to us, hasten to 
the sea to renovate their health ; whence, again, 
they issue in another year, increased in size, and 
brilliant as silver, to run the same course as Iodt 
as life continues. The joung fry, also, the 
moment they break the egg, turn their lieads sea- 
ward, and never stop till they reach the ocean, 
whose action is necessary for their growth and 
health. 

The dog eats grass, and licks his sores when 
sick ; the cow, and calf even, sham dead, to induce 
the crows to pick the vermin from about their 
eyes and ears ; the chick, as soon as it breaks the 
shell, pecks gravel, to aid digestion; the mon- 
goose, after being bitten by its enemy, the snake, 
retires to the fields, to seek its antidote against 
the poison; and this it finds, for it comes back 
quite well; and at certain seasons the wild 
animals resort, from the most distant parts of the 
country, to the "salt-licks," to renovate their 

THE SAVAGE THE FIRST MESMEEISER. 19 

constitutions. Numberless instances of the same 
kind will occur to tlie naturalist, and the humble 
observer of nature even; and is it imaginable 
that the ever-watchful, all-bountiful Providence 
of God should have left the " noble savage," alone 
of all His creatures, to run such cruel risks, and 
perish helplessly in his natural ignorance ? Rea- 
soning a priori, we should say not ; and our 
positive knowledge of the equal care bestowed by 
God on all his creatures, forbids the supposition. 
Man, then, had probably some instinct by wliich 
he was directed to a natural medicine of sovereisn 

o 

virtue, and by which the hunter and his family 
were saved from starvation, when disease, for a 
time, deprived his right hand of its cunning, 
unnerved his iron sinews, and bowed his gallant 
head. If this be a natural supposition, what 
eould be his resource if not Mesmerism — that 
inherent power, implanted, as I conceive, in the 
human being, for the solace of his suffering fellow 
creature ? This is the simplest and most speedy 
restorative of the powers of life, in cases adapted 
to it (for, like every natural agent, it has its 
conditions and limits) ; and men in pain have an 
instinctive tendency to perform the required pro- 
cesses. From its simplicity, how consonant with 
c 2 

20 MESMERISM THE UNIVERSAL CUKE 

all we know of the laws of nature would be such 
a power, and how admirably adapted to meet the 
exigencies of savage life ! 

The more observing among savage men, it is 
presumable, would soon detect the latent curative 
powers of their bodily system, and develope them 
into an art for the cure of disease, and the ad- 
vancement of their own interests. But when 
experience had given them skill, and it became 
a source of gain, they made, we may suppose, a 
mystery of their calling, and attempted to secure 
the lucrative secret for themselves and families. 
Hence, among the savage races of mankind, we 
see the healing art practised exclusively by con- 
jurors, either artfully concealing the secret of 
their power by incantations, and other mummery, 
or, possibly, themselves deceived into a belief of 
the efficacy of such accompaniments. If the 
Mumbo Jumbo men of Africa, the medicine men 
of America, and the charmers of this country, 
ever succeed in relieving their patients (and here 
they do), I am disposed to think that it is gene- 
rally in cases curable by Mesmerism. The fol- 
lowing extract from my "Mesmeric Journal" 
will show that this is not so fanciful a speculation 
as it may at first appear, and that Mesmerism is 
actually practised in this country, and has pro- 

AMONGST SAVAGE NATIONS. 21 

bably been so time immemorial, like every other 
custom in this immutable society. 

June 9th, 1845. — I had to-day the honour of 
being introduced to one of the most famous magi- 
cians in Bengal, who enjoys a high reputation for 
liis successful treatment of hysteria, and had been 
sent for to prescribe for my patient (whose case will 
be afterwards given), but came too late ; the success 
of my charm. Mesmerism, having left him nothing 
to do. Baboo Essanchunder Ghosaul, deputy ma- 
gistrate of Hooghly, at my request introduced 
me to him as a brother magician, who had studied- 
the art of magic in different parts of the world, 
but particularly in Egypt, where I liad learned 
the secrets of the great Sooleymann, from the 
mooUahs and fuqueers, and that I had a great 
desire to ascertain whether our charms were the 
same, as the hakeems of Europe held the wise 
men of the East in high estimation, knowing that 
all knowledge had come from that quarter. I 
proposed that we should show each other our 
res23ective charms, and, after much persuasion, 
he agreed to show me his process for assuaging 
pain. He sent for a brass pot, containing water, 
and a twig with two or three leaves upon it, and 
commenced muttering his charms, at arm's length 
from the patient. In a short time he dipped his 
c 3 

22 AN EASTERN MESMEEISEK. 

foi-e-finger into the water, and, with the help of 
his thumb, flirted it into the patient's face ; he 
then took the leaves, and commenced stroking the 
person from the crown of the head to the toes, 
with a slow drawing motion. The knuckles al- 
most touched the body, and he said that he would 
continue the process for an hour, or longer, if 
necessary ; and it convinced me that, if these 
charmers ever do good by such means, it is by the 
Mesmeric influence, probably unknown to them- 
selves. I said that I was convinced of the great 
eflScacy of his charm, and woidd now show him 
mine ; but that he would understand it better if 
performed on his own person. After some diffi.- 
culty, we got him to lie down, and, to give due 
solemnity to my proceedings, I chaunted, as an 
invocation, the chorus of the " King of the Can- 
nilial Islands ! " I desired him to shut his eyes, 
and he clenched his eyelids firmly, that I might 
find no entrance to the brain by that inlet. In 
a quarter of an hour he jumped up, and said he 
felt something disagreeable coming over him, and 
wished to make his escape. He was over-per- 
suaded to lie down again, however, and I soon 
saw the muscles around the eye begin to relax, 
and his face became perfectly smooth and calm 
I was sure that I had caught my brother-mafician 

MODE OF OPERATING. 23 

napping, but, in a few minutes, he bolted up sud- 
denly, clapped his hands to his head, cried he felt 
drunk, and nothing could induce him to lie down 
again ; " abiit, excessit, evasit, erupit ! " Next day 
I saw him, and said, " Well, you were too strong 
for my charm last night, I could not put you to 
sleep." " Oh ! yes. Sahib," he answered, " you 
did ; I allow it : it is allowed that you put me to 
sleep." 

A gentleman, whose case will be given here- 
after, immediately recognised the identity of the 
two processes, and told me that he had been 
Mesmerised, he now knew, in a different part of 
the country, and with much relief, in a painful 
affection of the leg. In addition to tlie traction 
with the leaves, his mesmeriser had breathed care- 
fully upon the pained part, just as my assistant 
had done when mesmerising him locally for rheu- 
matism. It thus appears that the beneficial effects 
of the Mesmeric processes are known in this 
country, and the secret has probably descended 
from remote antiquity, in certain families, or castes. 
Farther on, when speaking of Somnambulism, a 
curious history will be given, which leads me to 
suspect that they know the evil, as well as good, 
of jSIesmerism, and practise it for the most vil- 
lanous purposes. The possible evil resulting to 
c 4 

24 CONTRARY TENDENCIES Or MESMERISM. 

society from the practice of Mesmerism has been 
a favourite objection, even when the evidence 
of its existence and power could be no longer 
resisted. 

But the tendency of all power depends upon 
the direction given to it for good, or evil ; and to 
eject opium, mercury, and prussic acid from the 
pharmacopceia, because, when injudiciously ad- 
ministered, they poison, instead of curing our pa- 
tients ; or to reject the agency of steam for the 
purposes of life, because it sometimes takes us a 
longer journey than we intended ; would be as 
reasonable as to refuse to be cui'ed by Mesmerism, 
because it could also injure us, if ignorantly and 
injudiciously applied. That this agent may, and 
will, be turned to the most diabolical purposes, is 
most certain, if the public will not be at the trou- 
ble to think upon the subject, and defend itself 
by common sense precautions. But the power as 
it comes from the Creator is pure, and the perver- 
sion of it is the work of the creature. The ob- 
ject of man's life here clearly is — to separate the 
good from the evil ; " to prove all things, and 
hold fast that which is good ; " and this can be 
done in Mesmerism, as in anything else: the 
abuse, and not the use of any great power, is to 
be dreaded and guarded against. I have o-reat 

SIMPLICITY OF MESMERISM. 25 

hopes that my experiments will go far to separate 
the regions of mind and body, which, it seems to 
me, have been unnecessarily and perplexingly 
intermingled by former Mesmeric observers ; and 
this will not only simplify the Mesmeric treat- 
ment of disease, but remove the principal objection 
to it; namely — the necessity of acting on the 
mind, often injuriously, during the cui'e of a 
bodily infirmity. It will appear, that in the ex- 
ercise of the art, as a medical agent of the most 
benign as well as powerful nature, the mind has 
never been attempted to be influenced by me, 
nor has it ever been heard of in my practice. In 
subjecting my patients to the sanative influence 
of Mesmerism for bodily complaints, no mental 
rapport has ever been thought of; and if so 
much can be done without it, I am sanguine that 
it will soon be proved to be a tedious and un- 
necessary complication of the art, and " more ho- 
noured in the breach than the observance." In 
the management of mental disease, it will pro- 
bably be required, and be useful, as the mind de- 
pends much more upon organisation than is gene- 
rally supposed. But this is only an extension of 
the blessing, if the power is wielded in all honour 
and simplicity of purpose. In this, as in other 
matters, the danger lies in the company we keep. 

26 SIMPLICITY OF MESMERISM. 

The possessor of a well-filled purse does not seek 
the companionship of pick-pockets ; and the ho- 
nest man eschews the society of knaves ; and if 
Mesmerism is thought likely to benefit us, the 
same common-sense mode of proceeding should 
influence us in the disposal of our bodies and 
minds, when affected by disease. I am convinced 
that in the majority of bodily evils removable by 
this means, there will be no need to interfere 
with the mind at all. To do so is a mere travel- 
ling out of the record ; and where a mixed treat- 
ment is required it can be safely adopted, by using 
the simple precaution of seeking an honest man 
with the necessary knowledge of the subject ; and 
let us hope that such will soon abound. Many 
will be disappointed that I have no mental won- 
ders to relate ; but no inference against the exist- 
ence of such wonders can be fairly drawn from 
the silence of my patients. My reseai'ches have 
been purely physical, and preclude me from 
getting at the mind at all, for all activity of mind 
is the natural enemy of the purely physical im- 
pressions made upon the system: I therefore 
seclude the brain from all external impressions 
as rapidly as possible ; the object being to ex- 
tirguish bodily und mental sensibility together, 
and altogether ; and in proportion to our success 

SIMPLICITY OF MESMEraSM. 27 

in effecting tills, is the early inducement of Coma 
for surgical purposes. It is quite unreasonable to 
expect to extract music from a fiddle without 
strings : and I endeavour to break at a blow, as 
It were, all the strings of the mind — the five 
senses. It is true, that this treatment is only- 
required for acute diseases, or to induce insensi- 
bility to pain, and it might be expected that in 
the treatment of chronic diseases, I should be able 
to elicit the mental phenomena, if they exist in 
nature. But as my principal object is to ascertain 
how far this new agent is capable of alleviating 
bodily suffering, I have purposely kept myself 
from embarking on the troubled sea of metaphy- 
sics, till the more pressing bodily problem shall 
be solved, and a "terra firma" of indisputable facts 
created, from whence we may securely, and at 
leisure, examine, and attempt to understand, the 
high and mysterious objects above us. 

My patients, being the poorest and most ig- 
norant of the people, and convicted felons from 
the same degraded orders, are the most unfavour- 
able subjects for psychological experiments. As to 
physique, men are nearly the same all the world 
over: an universal vital law reduces all to the 
same level of animal, and the cooly, therefore, 
may be able to mesmerise the philosopher; but 

28 MESMERIC SOMNAMBULISM. 

the difference in morale is so great, not only 
among races, but individuals, as to preclude all 
sympathy, and to often amount to actual an- 
tipathy, and mutual repulsion. Although in 
producing the physical effects of Mesmerism, I 
have not seen any necessity for the sympathy and 
rapport we read so much about, I can readily 
understand, that in eliciting the higher mental 
phenomena, these fine mental sympathies may be 
developed, and be necessary for the success of 
the abnormal mental manifestations ; but my 
patients and I have probably too little in common 
to admit of mental sympathy between us. It 
will be seen, however, in the chapter on Somnam- 
bulism, that I have created a singular houle-. 
versement in the minds of coolies and j)ariahs 
even, when under the Mesmeric influence. 

The public, in examining a subject so deeply 
interesting to them, will, I hope, take an en- 
larged and liberal view of the matter, and look 
for fundamental and incontrovertible truths, 
which are practically important, and not allow 
themselves to be cheated out of their senses and 
judgment, by the doubtful, mysterious, and theo- 
retical parts of the subject being exclusively 
dwelt upon, by those who icish Mesmerism to be 
untrue, or by others who have neither tlie desire 

MESMERISM AND MEDICINE. 29 

nor capacity to acquire new knowledge. Errors 
of observation and of judgment must often occur in 
investigating a new and difficult subject, but I 
hope such unintentional mistakes will be excused ; 
and wherever they shall be pointed out in my 
observations, I shall be ready to acknowledge and 
correct them. Let all doubtful evidence be 
totally rejected, and a mass of substantial im- 
portant truth will remain, which, I am confident, 
the public " will not willingly let die ; " for human 
nature can ill aiford to lose any new and promising 
source of comfort to suffering humanity. 

Before concluding these prefatory remarks, 
I beg the reader not to do me the injustice to think 
, me a Mesmeric doctor, for it would be as true to 
call me a rhubarb, jalap, or castor-oil physician. 
Mesmerism often comes to the aid of my patients, 
when all the resources of medicine are exhausted, 
and all the drugs of Arabia useless; and therefore, 
I consider it to be my duty to benefit them by 
it, and to assist in making it known for the 
advantage of mankind. 

30 

CHAP. 11. 

The French Commission of 1779.— Both Right and Wrong. 

— The Mesmerish properly punished. — Condition required 
in the Patient. — State of my Mind before experimenting 

for myself. — Report of the Bishop of Lausanne to the 
Pope. — His Reply. — Accidental Nature of my First Ex- 
periment. — Accidental Nature of my Second Experimeid. 

— First Mesmeric Surgical Operation. — Conclusion. 

The most formidable, because the most reason- 
able argument against the existence of Mesmerism 
as a natural power, is, perhaps, the report of the 
French Commission in 1779, of which Franldin 
was president. The verdict of the Savans was 
fair enough, considering the nature of the evidence 
placed before them ; but yet, (such is human 
fallibility), in this case siimmum jus was also 
summa injuria ; truth was sacrificed to false- 
hood, as I think will clearly appear from a short 
analysis of their proceedings- This will pro- 
bably not be time wasted, as I have heard in- 
telligent gentlemen say, that the report of the 
French philosophers still decided their opinions. 
They had a series of axioms in Mesmerism pre- 
sented to them, whose truth they were to 

FRENCH COMMISSION OF 1779. 31 

examine, and the efficacy of certain processes was 
to be proved to their satisfaction by experiment. 

The Mesmerist's object seems to have been, to 
try to convince the commission that he had a 
secret worth knowing, and yet continue to keep 
it to himself, by hiding its extreme simplicity 
under a load of complicated machinery and 
various kinds of mummery. D'Eslon, the pupil 
of Mesmer, propounded his laws of animal mag- 
netism, after this fashion : — 

" I. Animal magnetism is an universal fluid, 
constituting an absolute plenum in nature, and 
the medium of all mutual influence between the 
celestial bodies, and betwixt the earth and animal 
bodies." 

This is only a gigantic assertion. 

" II. It is the most subtile fluid in nature, 
capable of flux, and of reflux, and of receiving, 
propagating, and continuing all kinds of motion." 

The first two clauses are probable enough ; the 
last is only rash dogmatism. 

" III. The animal body is subjected to the 
influences of this fluid by means of the nerves, 
which are immediately affected by it.'' 

We see no other way, at present. 

" IV. The human body has poles, and other 
properties, analogous to the magnet." 

32 mesmee's pkopositions. 

The first proposition has never been proved, 
and takes everything for granted ; there is only 
likelihood in the second. 

" V. The action and virtue of animal mag- 
netism may be communicated from one body to 
another, whether animate or inanimate." 

True, as regards the relations batween a imate 
bodies ; and these can also impregnate inanimate 
substances. 

" VI. It operates at a great distance, without 
the intervention of any body." 

True. 

" VII. It is increased and reflected by mirrors, 
communicated, propagated, and increased by 
sound, and may be accumulated, concentrated, 
and transported." 

Soothing sounds may possibly assist in lulling 
the brain, but quiet is far more essential ; the other 
assertions are borne out by modern experience. 

" VIII. Notwithstanding the universality of 
this fluid, all animal bodies are not affected by it; 
on the other hand there are some, though but 
few in number, the presence of which destroys all 
the effects of animal magnetism." 

The first part correct, the last not impro- 
bable. 

" IX. By means of this fluid, nervous diseases 

d'eslon, the pupil of mesmek. 33 

are cured immediately, and others mediately ; 
and its virtues, in fact, extend to the universal 
cure and preservation of mankind." 

True ; to so great a degree, that we do not yet 
know how far it may go. 

Is it surprising that the Commission dismissed 
contemptuously such a mass of sheer assertion 
and unsupported theory, seasoned with truth to 
be sure, but that so diluted and obscured as not to 
be recognisable? Like a Bengal witness, D'Eslon 
was not content to tell the truth simply, but added 
so many corroborating inventions of his own, that 
no one knew what to believe, and the case was 
dismissed as unworthy of farther investigation. 
He ruined himself, and his cause, also, (perhaps 
in ignorance, however,) by loading the truth with 
a parcel of trumpery machinery, through which 
he hoped the power of nature would nevertheless 
penetrate. But Nature, like an overloaded camel, 
turned upon her driver, and threw him and his 
paraphernalia of magnetic platforms, conducting- 
rods and ropes, pianos, magnetised trees and buck- 
ets, into the dirt ; and truth retired in disgust to 
the bottom of her well, there to dwell till more 
honest men should draw her forth again to sur- 
prise and benefit the world. 

As far as my observation goes, all that is ne- 

D 

34 BELIEF IN MESMERISM. 

cessary for success, if the parties are in the rela- 
tion of agent and subject, is passive obedience in 
the patient, and a sustained attention and patience 
on the part of the operator. The process being 
a natural one, the more the parties are in a state 
of nature the better : the bodies of my patients 
being naked, and their heads generally shaved, is 
probably of no small conseq^uence in the proceed- 
ings. 

Before presenting to the reader my first ex- 
periment in mesmerising, I may perhaps be ex- 
cused the egotism of giving a brief sketch of the 
history of my belief in Mesmerism, as it is a 
remarkable epoch in a man's life the day he dis- 
covers that he possesses the temporary power of 
life and death over his fellow-creatures. 

Ever since Dr. EUiotson declared, years ago, that 
he " should despise himself if he did not declare 
his conviction of the truth of Mesmerism," I ceased 
to regard it lightly, and paid attention to all well- 
attested reports upon the subject. At last the 
facts became so numerous, and were so well sup- 
ported by credible witnesses, and kept their ground 
so firmly, both against adverse reasoning and ridi- 
cule, that I felt compelled to surrender my belief 
in the existence of the Unknown Power, or cease 
to exercise my reason and judgment. Ten days 

BISHOP OF LAUSANNE'S REPORT. 35 

before making my first experiment, I thus wrote 
to a friend in England : • — " What think you of 
this new mystery. Mesmerism ? For my part, 
I am thinking seriously about it, and cannot help 
suspecting that we have hit upon one of Nature's 
great secrets. I keep myself perfectly neutral, 
and hear the pro and con. If it turns out to be 
a delusion, I shall be happy to assist in digging 
its grave." 

The uniformity of the phenomena described by 
different persons, and coming from various parts 
of the world, strongly arrested my attention, 
and impressed me with the conviction that some 
new general law of Nature had been discovered. 
England, France, Germany, and America, all 
combined to give the same evidence in support 
of the new doctrines, or, rather, new phenomena 
of Nature. About the time that Miss Martineau's 
disclosures appeared, I also read a curious and 
striking document written in May, 1841, by the 
Archbishop of Lausanne and Geneva, and ad- 
dressed to the Sacred Penitentiary, at Rome. 
As it may possibly make the impression upon 
others that it did on me, it is here transcribed. 

" Most Eminent Lord, 

Since that which has hitherto been 
answered respecting animal magnetism seems by 

D 2 

36 BISHOP OF Lausanne's kepoet. 

no means to suffice, and it is much to be wished 
that cases not unfrequently occurring may be 
solved more and more uniformly, the undersigned 
humbly lays before your Eminence that which 
follows : — 

" A magnetised person, who is generally of the 
female sex, enters into that state of sleep called 
Magnetic Somnambulism so deeply, that not even 
the greatest noise at her ears, nor any violence of 
iron or fire, is capable of raising her from it. She 
is brought into this kind of ecstacy by the mag- 
netiser alone, to whom she has given consent (for 
consent is necessary), either by various touches 
or gesticulations, when he is present, or by a 
simple command, and that, too, an internal one, 
when he is at a distance of even several leagues. 

" Then, being interrogated, aloud or mentally, 
concerning her own disease, or those of absent 
persons entirely unknown to her, this person, 
who is evidently one unlearned, at once exhibits 
great superiority in science to medical men ; an- 
nounces most accurately anatomical matters ; in- 
dicates the cause, seat, and nature of internal 
diseases in the human body, which, to the skilful, 
are most difficult of understanding, and unravels 
their progress, variation, and complications ; and 

BISHOP OF LAUSANNE'S REPORT. 37 

this in the terms proper to them, and prescribes 
the most simple and efficacious remedies. 

" If the person concerning whom the magnetised 
woman is consulted is present, the magnetiser 
establishes the relation between them by means 
of contact. If, however, he be absent, a lock of 
his hair supplies his place, and suffices ; for, when 
this lock of hair is brought into the proximity 
only of the hand of the magnetised person, he 
declares what it is (without casting his eyes on 
it), whose hair it is, where the person is actually 
sojourning, to whom the hair belongs, what he 
is doing, and affisrds the above-mentioned in- 
formation respecting his disease not otherwise 
than if, after the manner of medical men, he 
were inspecting the interior of his body. 

" Lastly, the magnetised person does not see 
with the eye. The eyes being covered, though 
not knowing how to read, he will read off what- 
ever is placed on his head or stomach, whether a 
book or manuscript, open or shut. His words, 
too, seem to issue from this region: but when 
brought out of this state, either at the order, even 
internal, of the magnetiser, or, as it were, spon- 
taneously at the moment previously announced 
by himself, he appears to be not at all conscious 
of the things gone through by him in the pa- 
D 3 

38 BISHOP OF LAUSANNE'S REPORT. 

roxysm, how long soever it may have lasted : what 
may have been demanded of him ; what he may 
have answered ; what he may have undergone ; 
all these things have left no idea in his under- 
standing, nor the least vestige in his memory. 

" Therefore, the undersigned petitioner, seeing 
valid reasons for doubting whether such effects, 
the occasional cause of which is shown to be so 
little proportioned to them, be simply natural, 
earnestly and most fervently prays that your 
Eminence in your wisdom, for the greater glory 
of the Omnipotent, as well as the greater good of 
souls, which have been redeemed by the Lord at 
so great a price, may be pleased to decide, 
whether, admitting the truth of the premises, a 
confessor or curate may safely permit to his peni- 
tents or parishioners : — 

" 1. That they j^ractise animal magnetism, en- 
dowed with such, or other like characteristics, as 
an art auxiliary and supplementary to medicine. 

" 2. That they consent to be thrown into such 
a state of magnetic somnambulism. 

" 3. That they consult persons magnetised in 
such a manner either concerning themselves or 
concerning others. 

" 4. Or that they undertake one of these last- 
mentioned three things, having first taken the 

REPLY OF THE PENITENTIAET. 39 

precaution of formally renouncing in their minds 
every diabolic compact, explicit or implicit, as 
well as all satanic interventions, since, notwith- 
standing such precautions, similar effects, or some 
such effects, have been obtained by some persons. 
" Most Eminent Lord, by command of the most 
Rev. the Archbishop of Lausanne and Geneva, 
your Eminence's most humble and most obedient 
servant, " James Xavier Fontana, 

"' Chancellor of the Episcopal Chancery. 

" Friburgh, in Switzerland, Episcopal Palace, 
the 19th of May, 1841." 

KESPONSE. 

" The Sacred Penitentiary, the premises having 
been maturely weighed, considers that these 
should be answered as it now answers: — the use 
of magnetism, as set forth in the case, is not per- 
missible. 

" Given at Rome, in the Sacred Penitentiary, 
the 1st day of July, 1841. 

" C.Cakd. Castracane, M. P. 

" Ph. Pomella, of the S. P. Secy. 

" Certified as a copy conformable to the original. 

—Friburgh, the 26th July, 1841. 

" By order, J. Perroulaz, Secretary of the 

Bishopric." 

D 4 

40 NATURE OF MY FIRST EXPERIMENT. 

It will be observed, that though the subject is 
held in dread by the reporter, as probably of dia- 
bolic origin, yet it is treated as a " great fact," 
known to, and believed in, by a large community, 
so that catholics and protestants are found alike 
professing a belief in Mesmerism. If the twen- 
tieth part of what was reported was true, it well 
deserved careful investigation ; and, as I had no 
dread of knowing anything that God has permitted 
to be known, I determined to try to find out the 
truth for myself, on the first favourable opportu- 
nity. In choosing a proper subject to experiment 
upon, I should probably have selected some highly 
sensitive female of a nervous temperament, and 
excitable imagination, who desired to submit to 
the supposed influence. But, I beg it to be par- 
ticularly remarked, my first essay was not guided 
by theory, and was not made on a subject sup- 
posed to be favourable. On the contrary, the 
very worst specimen of humanity, theoretically 
considered, was the person destined to be my first 
mesmeric victim ; he being none other than a 
Hindoo felon of the hangman cast, condenmed to 
labour on the roads, in irons. Accident alone 
determined my choice, and decided the matter for 
me, perhaps much better than theory would have 

NATURE OF MY FIEST EXPERIMENT. 41 

done ; for I should as soon have thought of com- 
mencing operations on the first dog or pig I met 
on the road, as of selecting this man for his good 
mesmeric "materiel." 

There are some interesting particulars in this 
first successful mesmeric experiment in India, 
to which I beg leave to direct the reader's atten- 
tion. 

I. The purely accidental and unpremeditated 
nature of the experiment. 

II. All want of consent between the parties. 

III. The operator's want of belief in his own 
power ; for I had never seen Mesmerism, and all 
I knew about it was from scraps in the news- 
papers. 

IV. The absolute ignorance of the patient ; it 
being impossible that he should ever have heard 
of Mesmerism. 

V. The impossibility, therefore, of imitating the 
mesmeric phenomena. 

Under all the circumstances of the case, collu- 
sion between the parties will not, I presume, be 
suspected : and every possible care was taken to 
exclude any source of fallacy in the experiment. 
European gentlemen, scejDtical and critical, or 
so strong in disbelief that they would have rea- 

42 FIRST SURGICAL OPERATION. 

soned themselves out of their senses, if they could: 
Ignorant Hindoos and Mussulmanns, who merely 
used their eyes and ears without an attempt at 
reflection, will all be found, by their separate and 
independent reports, bearing testimony to the 
same series of phenomena. As I might never 
succeed again, I endeavoured to make this case 
as perfect as possible in all its parts, by bringing 
the senses of different people to bear upon it, in 
all its stages ; and, I must say, that I cannot see 
any possible opening for mistake or deception. 
It has for many months been before the Indian 
public, who were invited to point out any source 
of error that may have escaped me, and no at- 
tempt has been made to disprove the facts, or 
explain them away, except by the easy and sweep- 
ing charge of imposition in the patient, and delu- 
sion in the observers ; of the probability of which 
I shall now give the reader the means of judg- 
ing. 

First Exj:ierimeni. 

Madhab Kaura, a hog-dealer, condemned to 
seven years' imprisonment, with labour- on the 
roads, in irons, for wounding a man so as to en- 
danger his life, has got a double Hydrocele. 

FIRST SURGICAL OPERATION. 43 

He was ordered to be taken from the jail to 
the charity hospital, to be operated upon. 

April 4th. — The water was drawn off one side 
of the scrotum, and two drachms of the usual cor, 
sub. injection were thrown in. On feeling the 
pain from the injection, he threw his head over 
the back of the chair, and pressed his hands along 
the course of the spermatic cords, closing his eye- 
lids firmly, and making the grimaces of a man in 
pain. Seeing him suffering in this way, I turned 
to the native sub-assistant surgeon, an eleve of the 
medical college, and asked him if he had ever seen 
Mesmerism ? He said, that he had seen it tried 
at the medical college, but without effect. Upon 
which I remarked, " I have a great mind to try it 
on this man, but as I never saw it practised, and 
know it only from reading, I shall probably not 
succeed." — The man continuing in the position 
described, I placed his knees between mine, and 
began to pass my hands slowly over his face, at 
the distance of an inch, and carried them down 
to the pit of his stomach. This was continued 
for half an hour before he was spoken to, and 
when questioned at the end of this time his 
answers were quite sensible and coherent. 

He was ordered to remain quiet, and the passes 
were continued for a quarter of an hour longer — 

44 FIRST SURGICAL OPERATION. 

Still no sensible effect. Being now tired (ther- 
mometer 85°), I gave it up in despair, and de- 
clared it to be a feilure. While I rested myself, 
the man remained quiet, and made fewer grimaces, 
and when ordered to open his eyes, he said there 
was a smoke in the room. This roused my atten- 
tion, and tempted me to persevere. I now 
breathed on his head, and carried my hands from 
the back of his head over his face and down to 
the Epigastrium, where I pressed them united. 
The first time this was done, he took his hands 
off his groins and pressed them both firmly down 
upon mine ; drew a long breath, and said, " I was 
his father and mother, and had given him life 
again." The same process was persevered in, 
and in about an hour he began to gape, said he 
must sleep, that his senses were gone ; and his 
replies became incoherent. He opened his eyes, 
when ordered, but said he only saw smoke, and 
could distinguish no one : his eyes were quite 
lustreless, and the lids were oiJened heavily. All 
appearance of pain now disappeared ; his hands 
were crossed on his breast, instead of being 
pressed on the groins, and his countenance showed 
the most perfect repose. He now took no notice 
of our questions, and I called loudly on him by 
name without attracting any notice. 

FIRST SURGICAL OPERATION. 45 

I now pinched him, without disturbing him, 
and then asking for a pin in English, I desired 
my assistant to watch him narrowly, and drove it 
into the small of his back ; it produced no effect 
whatever ; and my assistant repeated it at inter- 
vals in different places as uselessly. His back 
had continued to arch more backwards latterly, 
and he now was in a state of " opisthotonos ; " 
the nape of his neck resting on the sharp back of 
the chair, and his breech on the edge of it. Being 
now satisfied that we had got something extraor- 
dinary, I went over to the Kutcherry, and begged 
Mr. Russell, the judge, and Mr. Money, the 
collector, to come and see what had been done, 
as I wanted the f)resence of intelligent witnesses 
in what remained to do. We found him in the 
position I had left him in, and no hallooing in 
his ears could attract his attention. Fire was 
then applied to his knee, without his shrinking in 
the least ; and liquor ammonise, that brought 
tears into our eyes in a moment, was inhaled for 
some minutes without causing an eyelid to 
quiver. This seemed to have revived him a little, 
as he moved his head shortly afterwards, and I 
asked him if he wanted to drinli ; he only gaped 
in reply, and I took the opportunity to give, 
slowly, a mixture of ammonia so strong that I 

46 FIRST SURGICAL OPERATION. 

could not bear to taste it; this he drank like 
milk, and gaped for more. As the " experi- 
mentum crucis," I lifted his head, and placed his 
face, which was directed to the ceiling all this 
time, in front of a full light ; opened his eyes, one 
after the other, but without producing any effect 
upon the iris ; his eyes were exactly an amaurotic 
person's, and all noticed their lack-lustre appear- 
ance. "We were all now convinced that total insen- 
sibility of all the senses existed, and I ordered him 
to be placed on a mattrass on the floor, and not 
to be disturbed till I returned. It was now one 
o'clock, the process having commenced at 11a. m. 
I returned at three o'clock, and was vexed to 
find that he had awoke, and been carried back to 
the jail hospital. The native doctor of the jail 
had come in; and on hearing that the Sahibs 
could not awake the patient, he set about doing 
so, and succeeded by throwing water on his face, 
&c. I again went to Messrs. RusseU and Money, 
and requested them to accompany me to the jail, 
to be present when he was interrogated regarding 
his reminiscences ; and we put down a series of 
questions to be put to him, at once, and without 
explanation. We found him looking well, with a 
lively expression of face, and the following ques- 
tions were put to him ; his answers being taken 
down at the same time : — 

QUESTIONS I-UT TO PATIENT. 47 

" How do you feel ? " 

" Very well." 

" Any pain in the throat, or elsewhere ? " 

" A little uneasiness in the throat, no pain any 
where else." 

" What has happened to you to-day ? " 

" I went in the morning to the Imbarah Hos- 
pital, to get the water taken out of my scrotum." 

" Was the water drawn off? " 

"Yes." 

" What do you remember after the operation ? " 

" I went to sleep soon after, and remember 
nothing else." 

" Did you eat or drink after the operation ? " 

" I felt thirsty, but got nothing to drink till 
Kurreem Ali, the native doctor, awoke me." 

" Did any body prick, or burn you ? " 

" No, no." 

" Did you smell anything disagreeable ? " 

" No." 

" Were you happy when asleep ? " 

" Very." 

"Did you hear any thing when you were 
asleep ? " 

" I heard voices, but did not understand them." 

" Did you see any gentleman in the hospital 
but me ? " 

48 QUESTIONS PUT TO PATIENT. 

" No." 

" Did you feel any pain in the scrotum after 
going to sleep ? " 

" I felt none till I awoke." 

" Any pain in that part now ? " 

" A very little." 

" How many motions have you had to-day ? " 
(he was suffering from chronic diarrhoea.) 

"Four, before going to the hospital, none since; 
belly is much easier than it has been for some 
time." 

Having answered all these questions readily 
and frankly, he began to cry, thinking it was 
some kind of judicial investigation, I suppose. 

" The above is an exact relation of what took 
place in our presence, and we are thoroughly con- 
vinced that there was a complete suspension of 
sensibility to extei'nal imj)ressions of the most 
painful kind. 
r Signed) F. W. Eussell. 
D. J. Money. 

BUDDEN ChUNDER ChOWDAEEE, 

Sub-Assistant Surgeon^ 

AjH-il 5th. — There is less than the usual in- 
flammation, and he makes no complaint. I intend 
to operate on the other side in a few days, nies- 

SECOND EXPERIMENT. 49 

merising him first, if possible, and have invited 
many persons to be present. 

Second Experiment, 

April 6th. — 11 o'clock, a.m. The inflamma- 
tion has become high during last night ; the part 
is hot, and excessively tender ; the lightest touch 
causes great pain. Skin hot ; pulse quick. I 
could not resist the temptation to satisfy myself 
still further, and relieve him at the same time. 
So, turning to the native doctors, I said that I 
would again try the " Belatee Muntur " (the 
Europe charm), and began the process as before ; 
he lying in bed. In ten minutes the mesmeric 
haze (smoke he always calls it) was produced. 
After half an hour he still complained of the pain 
in the inflamed part, and could not bear its being 
touched ; in three-quarters of an hour the coma 
was established, and I squeezed the inflamed part 
with no more eflect than if it had been a bladder. 
Having business to attend to in Chandernagore, 
six miles off, I called, in passing, on the Rev. 
Mr. Fisher, and said that he might now satisfy 
himself by going to the hospital in my absence ; 
and that, except mesmeric means, he was at 
liberty to use every possible means to awake him, 
or make him feel. Here I have the pleasure to in- 
E 

50 CASE OF A MESMERIC TRANCE 

ti'oduce a report of the proceedings of Mr. Fisher 
and Mr. Money while I was at Chandernagore : — 

" To J. Esdaile, Esq. 

My dear Sir, — I beg to certify that I twice 
saw the native whom you had put into a mes- 
meric trance, or state of catalepsy, and from the 
successful application of different tests I have no 
hesitation in stating, should ray statement add 
any weight to your own testimony, or be of any 
service to the cause of the imperfectly known, 
and hitherto unfairly ti-eated, science of Mesme- 
rism, that the individual in question was in that 
state entirely insensible of pain, and that I 
believe, if you had cut his leg off, he would not 
have felt it. I saw, when I was in England, 
both publicly and in private, many cases of 
Mesmerism accompanied by unnatural and won- 
derful phenomena, without being convinced. But 
your case is one so free from all possibility of 
suspicion, that to have doubted it, one might as 
well have doubted his own existence. 

" Yours truly, 
" D. J. Money. 

"Hooghly, 9th April, 1845." 

" I have only to add to the above, that I was 
present upon the last occasion referred to by 

REPORT OF KURREEM ALI KHAN. 51 

Mr. Money, and fully concur with him in thinking 
that the patient, during the Mesmeric trance, 
was totally insensible to pain. Indeed, all the 
senses appeared to be unnaturally suspended from 
any manifestation of their ordinary operations, 
and every available test was tried in vain. Dr. 
Esdaile upon this occasion was absent at Chan- 
dernagore, having previously put the patient into 
the trance. 

" F. Fisher." 

Returned to the hospital at 3 o'clock, and 
found him lying just as I had left him. Awoke 
him in a few minutes, by rapid transverse j^asses, 
blowing in his face, and giving water to drink. 
Is free of pain, and still desires to sleep ; says his 
head turns. 

Translation of a Report from Kurreem AH Khan, 
native doctor, of ivhat he saio and heard in the 
Jail Hospital, on the 6th April, 1845. 

"At 11 o'clock, A. M., the patient, Madhab 
Kaurd, was in a fever, and there was an acute 
pain in the scrotum. The worthy Dr. Sahib 
(may he ever prosper) came to the hospital, and 
began to do something to him. When the ex- 
periment was going on, Madhab was asked, — 

E 2 

52 SECOND EXPERIMENT. 

" What do you see ? " 

" I cannot see clearly ; something like smoke 
is before my eyes." 

" Do you see the doors ? " 

" No, nothing but smoke." 

" Do you see Dr. Sahib ? " 

" No, I see nobody, but perceive some one is 
talking near me." 

" Is there any pain in your body ? " 

" Yes, breathing causes pain in the belly." 

" Is there pain in the scrotum ? " 

" Yes, as acute as ever." 

" How do you feel now ? " 

" I feel cold and sleepy." 

After the Doctor Sahib had tried for nearly 
three-quarters of an hour, he fell into a deep 
sleep, and there seemed to be no pain in the 
scrotum ; he slept so sound that even the pricking 
of his body with a pin did not restore his senses, 
or awake him. Before, a touch of the scrotum 
was painful, but after he was asleep, even pricking 
it caused no pain whatever. 

He continued in this state for three hours, 
when, the Dr. Sahib calling him aloud twice or 
thrice, he came to his senses, and opened his eyes. 
He asked for water, which he drank, and, feeling 
cold, covered himself." 

EKPOET OF NOBOO. 53 

Translation of a Report from Noboo, native doctor, 
of tohat he saw and heard in the Jail Hospital, 
on the 6th April, 1845. 

" On the morning of the 6th of April, I went to 
the hospital, and found the body of Madhab 
Kaura hot and feverish, and he felt a great pain 
in the scrotum. 

At 11 o'clock. Dr. Esdaile, the civil doctor, 
came and made some operations on the body : 
eomething I do not know. While the operation 
was going on, the patient was asked if he could 
see j)lainly, but said no. "When asked if he could 
see any one, he answered, that he could see no 
one, iDut knew by the sounds that some people 
were there. 

Again he was asked if he felt any pain ; he 
said, that he felt a severe pain in the belly, on 
breathing, and also in the scrotum, and felt very 
cokl. Soon afterwards he became senseless. 

At 2 o'clock p. M. the Rev. Mr. Fisher and 
Mr. Money came to the hospital, and tried to 
bring him to his senses by pricking him with a 
pin, putting fire on his hand, and beating a gong 
in liis ear, but all proved ineffectual." 

I forgot to note down Avhat these reports 
notice ; — his complaining of feeling cold soon after 
E 3 

54 THIRD EXPERIMENT. 

the process began ; and that when I left him the 
temperature of his body was natural. 

On these two occasions, the effects were wit- 
nessed by all the patients and hangers-on in and 
about both hos^jitals. 

Api-il 7 th. — Has had a good night, is a little 
feverish; pain in scrotum much less. He now 
complains, for the first time, of pain in the places 
where he was pricked and burned. 

This makes one ashamed of incredulity, and 
I will never put a patient to the " question" in this 
way again. It is only excusable for the first 
time, when we can hardly believe the evidence of 
our senses. 

Third Experiment. 

April 11th. — Took the sub-assistant surgeon 
with me to-day to the Jail Hospital, and desired 
him to watch the time taken to produce the dif- 
ferent effects. There is still considerable pain in 
the side operated upon. Pulse regular, 60 ; skin 
warm. At 1 1 o'clock a. m. I seated him on the 
floor with his back against the wall; placed 
myself before him on a stool, and proceeded pretty 
much as before. The process, in one particular, 
was varied ; I leaned my elbows upon my knees, 
placed my mouth over the back of my joined 

THIRD EXPERIMENT. 55 

hands, and breathed along their upper surface ; 
the points of my fingers being pointed steadily at 
his eyes, nose, and forehead, in succession. This 
seemed to be very effectual, and was done witli 
the idea of concentrating the mesmeric influence 
of the whole body into one conductor. It was 
curious to observe that he had begun to think on 
the subject, and was observing the effects for 
himself, and testing his senses as we proceeded. 
After manipulating for a few minutes, he opened 
his eyes, looked sharply and minutely about him, 
and being asked if he saw quite well, he said, 
" Oh, yes." In a minute or two he repeated his 
inspection, and answered again, that he saw quite 
distinctly ; in seven minutes he again looked 
about him, seemed surprised, and said he only 
saw "smoke." 

In fifteen minutes he was pinched ; and wlien 
asked if any one was pinching him, he replied 
that he could not tell, as I might now cut a piece 
out of his body without his feeling it. I now 
tried for an abnormal mental manifestation ; cer- 
tainly not expecting to be gratified. I asked, — 
" What will cure your complaint ? " 

" You know best." 

" Has the Baboo any complaint ? " 

" How should I know ? " 

E 4 

56 THIRD EXPERIMENT. 

I understood this as a hint to attend to the 
business in hand, the body, and therefore pro- 
ceeded to induce the mesmeric coma as quickly 
as possible; and succeeded in twenty minutes 
from the commencement. I then said to the sub- 
assistant surgeon that I would operate upon hira 
in this state, if I could find some of the European 
gentlemen to be witnesses. On going to Chin- 
sui'ah, two miles oif, I fortunately found a con- 
siderable party, consisting of the Baron Law de 
Clapernou, Governor of Chandernagore, Mr. Eus- 
sell, the judge, Mr. Wauchoi^e, the magistrate, 
J. St. Pour^ain, Esq., Mr. Clint, Principal of 
Hooghly College, and Mr. Clermont, head master 
of the Lower School, who all accompanied me 
back to the hospital. The man had fallen down, 
and was lying on his back. The large gong of 
the jail was brought, and struck violently within 
a few inches of his ear, with no effect. I then 
pierced the scrotum, and threw in the injection, 
without any one being sensible of the smallest 
movement in his face or body. His limbs were 
quite flexible ; but on holding one of his legs in 
ray hand for a few seconds, it gradually became 
quite rigid, and we could not bend it again ; the 
same occurred in the other leg. The arms were 
supple, and lay in any position into which they 

THIRD EXPERIMENT. 57 

were thrown ; and wlien the fore-arm was bent 
upon the humerus, and then let go, it fell up- 
wards, or downwards, instantly. But on placing 
my united fingers over the ends of his, the arm 
remained fixed at a rio-ht angle in the air, and 
swayed to and fro, according to my movements. 
The insensibility of the iris was also tested, and 
proved. 

6 o'clock, A. M. Still sleeps ; most complete 
relaxation of all the limbs now exists. The legs 
and arms can be tossed about in every direction, 
and whei'e they fall there they lie. Being curious 
to ascertain the effect of the artificial state on the 
natural process of inflammation, I did not awake 
him, but saw that the part was as flaccid as when 
the water was just withdrawn. 

April 12th. — He awoke at 12 o'clock last 
night, spontaneovisly. Eecollects nothing after 
going to sleep ; sees the water is gone, knows not 
how; supposes the Doctor Sahib did it. The 
testicle is considerably enlarged to-day ; there is 
little pain, and it did not swell till after he awoke. 
He has had chronic diarrhoea for some time ; four 
and five motions a day, but has had none since 
yesterday forenoon till this morning. Natural, 
artificial, and diseased actions have therefore been 
all equally arrested for the last thirteen hours ; a 

58 THIRD EXPERIMENT. 

practical fact of the utmost importance, which 
will not be lost sight of by myself, or others, I 
hope. What a blessed prospect this opens to 
sufferers who may be sensible to the Mesmeric 
influence ! In time we may hope to discover who 
they are, by detecting the laws which regulate 
this power of Nature, and thereby save ourselves 
much trouble and disappointment. In the mean 
time let us accumulate facts, as the seed for a 
correct theory hereafter. Although I should 
never succeed again, I will in future think, speak, 
and write of Mesmerism as being as much a 
reality as the principle of gravitation, or the 
properties of opium. For, under all the cir- 
cumstances, I cannot but consider these to be 
unexceptionable /arfs ; and if I sliould not again 
be able to elicit them, it would not shake my 
belief in the existence of Mesmerism ; I should 
only conclude that the failure arose from my 
ignorance of the conditions required by Nature, 
or from some personal disqualification. The 
rarity of the occurrence would not make it less a 
reality ; and to deny a fact because it has been 
seldom witnessed, would be as reasonable as to 
doubt the existence of comets because they are 
rare appearances. 

Great weight is very justly attached to first 

THIRD EXPERIMENT. 59 

experiments in any new subject of investigation, 
for these are often a voluntary and unexpected 
evolution of the powers of nature ; and when the 
results surprise the experimenter even, we feel 
confident that he only relates what he actually 
saw, and that he is not seduced, by previous 
theory and prepossession of mind, to interpret 
appearances in support of a foregone conclusion. 
In making these experiments, I was in the situa- 
tion of a chemist, who has heard that a new 
elementary substance had been discovered by a 
certain process, and who thereupon sets his 
apparatus to work in the way prescribed, and is 
rewarded by obtaining the same results as the 
first discoverer. 

Besides the genei-al results, I noted in this 
case the following particulars as facts, which 
determined the course of my future proceedings. 

I was sure that there could be no imagination 
at work in the matter. 

That there was no consent between the parties. 

No mental sympathy. 

That the patient's eyes need not be open. 

I therefore came to the conclusion, that in this 
instance, the influence must have been of a purely 
physical description, and on this supposition I 
conducted my subsequent experiments ; with what 
success will be shortly seen. 

60 

CHAP. III. 

Mesmerism the same in India and in Europe. — Examples 
of Mesmeric Sleep. — Sealing of the Eyes. — Altered Sen- 
sibility. — Temporary Paralysis. — Muscular Rigidity, — 
Insensibility to Pain. — Exaltation of particular Organs. — 
Convulsions. — Delirium. — Injustice done to the Memory 
of the first Mesmerists. — Every available Evidence here 
given. — Imposture morally and physically impossible. — 
Mode of Proceeding. ■ — • Mesmeric and Non- Mesmeric 
Operations contrasted. — Physiologiccd Demonstration of 
the Impossibility of Imposture. 

Having, by the experiments described in the last 
chapter, satisfied myself of the existence of the 
Mesmeric power, I lost no time in applying it to 
practical purposes. The effects produced were 
nearly as various as the different persons acted 
upon, and corresponded perfectly with the ap- 
pearances observed in Europe ; and when the 
public see the same effects following like causes 
on the banks of the Thames, and the Seine, the 
Rhine, and the Hooghly ; I presume it will con- 
clude, that the same agent is at work, provided 
the same evidence, in support of matters of fact, 
is received for hot and cold climates, and it is not 

MESMERISM IN BENGAL AND EUROPE. 61 

supposed that the truth is affected by degrees of 
latitude. In a late No. of the " British and 
Foreign Medical Review," the reviewer gives a 
summary of the Mesmeric symptoms as known to 
himself, and recorded by various writers on Mes- 
merism, and acknowledges a perfect accord in all 
the accounts of the bodily phenomena. Tlie 
following extract will place these appearances 
succinctly before my readers, and I beg them to 
compare my account of Mesmerism in Bengal 
with this statement of its effects in Europe, and 
then say whether the identity of the thing in the 
east and west is not established : — 

" Sometimes, however, there is said to su- 
pervene a state of coma; at others, exaltation, 
depression, or some anomalous modification of 
sensibility ; and occasionally, a state somewhat 
appi'oaching to that of reverie, wherein the 
individual, although conscious, feels incapable of 
independent exertion, and spell-bound, as it were, 
to a particular train of thought or feeling. The 
occurrence of convulsive action, and of muscular 
rigidity, is described as taking place in some 
cases to a greater or less extent. These results 
are said to constitute the simpler pheiiomena of 
Mesmerism. We shall illustrate them by some 
extracts from accredited writers upon the subject. 

62 MESMERISM DESCRIBED. 

" In this peculiar state of sleep, the surface of 
the body is sometimes acutely sensible, but more 
frequently the sense of feeling is absolutely 
annihilated. The jaws are firmly locked, and 
resist every eiFort to wrench them open: the 
joints are often rigid, and the limbs inflexible; 
and not only is the sense of feeling, but the 
senses of smell, hearing, and sight also, are so 
deadened to all external impressions, that no 
pungent odour, loud report, or glare of light, can 
excite them in the slightest degree. The body 
may be pricked, pinched, lacerated, or burnt; 
fumes of concentrated liquid ammonia may be 
passed up the nostrils ; the loudest reports sud- 
denly made close upon the ear ; dazzling and 
intense light may be thrown upon the pupU of 
the eye ; yet so profound is the physical state of 
lethargy, that the sleeper will remain undisturbed 
and insensible to tortures, which in the waking 
state, would be intolerable." — {Dupotet, p. 36.) 

The above concise sketch corresponds very 
closely with what is laid down in other works of 
Mesmeric repute. A few brief quotations, ex- 
hibiting this correspondence, we subjoin. The 
first we take from Deleuze's Practical Instructions, 
wherein he states that " the magnetised feels the 
necessity of closing the eyes; his eyes are so 

MESMERIC SLEEP. 63 

sealed that he canoot open them : he experiences 
a calm, a feeling of comfort ; he becomes drowsy ; 
he is put to sleep." Teste, another writer of 
distinction, speaking of the physical insensibility, 
says, " it exists, not only in the skin, but in the 
subcutaneous tissues, in the muscles, and even in 
the nervous ramifications." Dr. Passavant of 
Frankfort, an author often referred to, avers as 
follows : " As an especial effect of the power of 
animal magnetism, results the magnetic sleep. 
This is mostly deeper than ordinary sleej), the 
mediation of the senses is yet more decidedly 
suspended. The sensibility can so have vanished 
in a moment, that the loudest sound, the brightest 
light, even bodily injuries, are not perceived in 
this sleep." Indeed, all the authorities seem to 
coincide very much in their accounts, and, this 
we say, after referring to Chenevix, Elliotson, 
Townshend, Gauthler, Foissac, and others." 

I shall now present to the reader illustrations 
of all the singular states of the system described 
above, and drawn from my practice here.' 

Mesmeric sleep. — This simulates, perfectly, sound 
natural sleep, and is more refreshing, even if it 
has been resorted to for soothing pain, or disturb- 
ance of the system, and can be had recourse to 
when it would be improper or useless to adminis- 

64 MESMEEIC SLEEP. 

ter common narcotics; — over which it has the 
advantage of not inducing a disagreeable constitu- 
tional derangement, after the specific influence 
has ceased. The restorative powers of mesmeric 
sleep seem to depend upon an actual infusion of 
nervous vigour into the body, and, when induced 
as a remedial agent, this may account for its su- 
periority over common sleep. 

April 7 th. — Janokee-Sing, a hai'dy looking 
peon ; the whole of the scrotum is sloughing, 
from the application of some acrid leaves, and the 
pain is most intense. 

April 15th. — The whole scrotum has sloughed 
off; has not slept since coming to hosjoital. The 
compounder, a healthy, intelligent Hindoo, suc- 
ceeded in putting him to sleep to-day, in half an 
houi-. He awoke when pinched, or called upon 
by name, but instantly fell asleep again. 

April 16th. — Has slept, almost wlthoiit inter- 
ruption, from eleven o'clock a.m. yesterday, till 
seven o'clock this morning, the only sleep he has 
had since he was burned. 

April 19th. — He has been mesmerised daily, 
and sleeps the greater part of liis time; to mesme- 
rise him, becomes more easy every day ; — and a 
few minutes now suffice to overcome him. 

CASES OF MESMERISM. 65 

April 20th. — Kowsoalla ; aged forty, a peasant 
woman. I subdued her to-day, for the first time, 
in ten minutes; she awoke when called upon, hut, 
in a second, fell asleep again. The limbs are 
quite loose, but when I let them remain for a 
moment in any new position, they become rigid, 
and require to be dragged into a new attitude : 
the muscles yield precisely like lead, without a 
vestige of re-action, when the bending force is 
removed. 

April 25th. — She can now be mesmerised in a 
minute. 

May 3rd. — Bissumber Chowdry : has had re- 
tention of urine for three days ; the bladder is 
prominent at the navel, and no instrument can be 
introduced. Ordered to lie in the easiest posture, 
and to be put to sleep, if possible. 

May 4th. — He slept for two hours yesterday, 
and voided his urine freely, when he awoke. 

May 4th. — Deenoo, a prisoner ; convalescent 
from cholera, is tormented with incessant hic- 
cough for the last twenty-four hours. 
Opii Grs. ii. 
Confect. Arom. Grs. x. 

F 

66 CASES OF MESMERISM. 

If this does not check it, a blister to be applied 
over the diaphragm. 

May 5th. — No better — To be mesmerised. I 
returned after three hours, and found him asleep 
— awoke him : has no hiccough. 

May 11th. — No return of the hiccough. 

Sealinff of the eyes. — The quivering of the eye- 
lids, and their subsequent spasmodic closure, is one 
of the most specific mesmeric symptoms. 

June 27th. — The woman Alunga complains of 
Considerable pain from the extension of her arm 
yesterday, and the nerve at the elbow is very 
tender. I passed my fingers along the course of 
the nerve for a few minutes, which removed the 
pain ; I then held my fingers before her eyes, 
and in a few seconds she fell into my arms quite 
insensible. I soon after awoke her, and she sat 
up conversing with us as usual, but could not 
possibly open her eyes ; when ordered to do so, 
she was obliged to pull the eyelids asunder with 
her fingers ; but they would not remain open, 
and the diflSculty was only removed by my 
rubbing, and blowing in her eyes. I have shown 
this peculiarity, in numerous cases, to great num- 
bers of persons. 

ALTERED SENSIBILITY. 67 

Altered sensibiUti/. — Rajah -, an intelligent 

Hindoo gentleman, who has received an English 
education, and speaks our language perfectly well, 
wished to be operated on for hydrocele, while in 
the mesmeric trance. After half an hour's 
manipulating, I extended his arm, and it took a 
fix in any position I put it : it was put perpen- 
dicular into the air, and remained motionless for 
ten minutes ; on depressing it again, it bent like 
lead, in the true cataleptic fashion. Having re- 
placed his arm at his side, I began to open his 
dress, when he awoke with a violent start, and 
instantly said that he had no feeling in his arm ; 
that it was very cold, which we all felt, and on 
putting a thermometer into his hand, we found it 
to be two degrees colder than the other. He re- 
membered my raising his arm, and felt me let go 
my hold of his thumb, but what became of his 
arm after that, he could not tell — he imagined it 
was lost. Having lately felt the sensation of 
galvanism, he said, that he felt slight shocks in 
his skin during the process, exactly like what he 
had experienced from galvanism. I have observed 
this in other patients. 

Temporary paralysis of muscles. — Madub, a 
shop-keeper. This man was operated on for 

r 2 

68 CASES OF MESMEEISM. 

hydrocele, when in the trance, without feeling it, 
and ever since has been very easily affected ; I 
have, therefore, made him the subject of several 
experiments. In a minute or two, his eyelids 
begin to quiver, then slowly close, opening heavily 
at short intervals, tiU at last they remain closed 
altogether. If at this stage he is ordered to open 
his eyes, the eiFort to do so only strains the eye- 
lids, which appear to be glued together, and he 
says it is impossible to separate them. Being 
desired to help himself with his fingers, he rubs 
his eyes violently, and then forcibly separates the 
eye-lids, when nothing but the white of the eye 
is seen ; the cornea being turned up to the roof 
of the orbit. While rubbing his eyes, I some- 
times seize his hands and extend his arms hori- 
zontally on either side ; the arms become fixed 
in a moment, and when desired to apply his hands 
to his eyes now, he says that he cannot, that he 
does not know wliere his arms are. If I blow on 
one arm, or impel a current of air against it by 
fanning, the rigidity disappears, and he uses his 
arm as desired, but the other continues catalepsed 
and useless, till relieved in the same way. When 
I urge him to use both arms, he says he has only 
one, and on being desired to seek for the other, 
he passes the flexible arm across his body, and 

MUSCULAR RIGIDITY. QQ 

gropes at the other side for it, but soon gives up 
the search, saying, it is not there : being desired 
to look for it higher up, he carries his hand up 
the opposite side till he reaches tlie catalepsed 
arm, and tries in vain to depress it ; the arm re- 
mains horizontally extended, and resists all his 
efforts. 

Muscular rigidity — Is usually attendant on 
mesmeric coma, of which numerous instances will 
be given, when treating of the medical jiart of 
the subject. My first patient, by repeated expe- 
riments, became excessively sensitive, and af- 
fords a good specimen of mesmeric catalepsy. 

May 13th. — -Madub Kaura ; this man can be 
catalepsed in less than a minute ; and the effects 
are passing strange. If, when he is standing, I 
point my fingers at him for a few seconds, his 
eyelids immediately droop, his arms fall by their 
mere weight to his sides ; his whole body begins 
to tremble, owing to the incipient loss of command 
over the muscular system ; and, if not supported, 
he would fall down in a heap. But give him a 
moment's support, and he becomes as rigid as a 
statue, and if the centre of gravity is well poised 
he will remain in any posture he is put into, and 
that for a longer time than I have waited to see. 

F 3 

70 CASES OF MESMERISM. 

The muscles must be dragged out of the fixed 
position they have assumed, and allowed a moment 
to contract in a new attitude, out of the perpen- 
dicular ; for if suddenly pushed, he goes down, 
head foremost, like a statue from its pedestal, and 
his life is endangered. However inconvenient, or 
gi'otesque, the position may be, he is equally well 
satisfied, and continues to sleep, quite comfortably, 
with his heels behind his neck ; and if his fore- 
head is placed against the wall at an acute angle, 
he remains sticking out from it, like a buttress, 
longer than I have ascertained. 

Insensibility to jmin. — This will be copiously 
illustrated in my numerous surgical operations. 

Somnambulism — Will have a chapter to itself, 
and need not be now introduced. 

Exaltation of particular organs, — convulsions, — 
delirium. — Instances of all these will occur in the 
course of this work, and be found to correspond 
with the irregularities observed in Europe ; so 
that the general rule, and its exceptions, will be 
recognised to be the same in the eastern and the 
western hemispheres; thereby proving the univer- 
sality of the truths declared by many honest and 

CONVULSIONS. — DELIRIUM. 71 

independent men, during the last sixty years, and 
for propounding which they were laughed at, 
and scorned. 

Apart from the personal gratification of being 
admitted to see the secret processes of nature's 
workshop, and the advantages of being able to 
imitate her processes, for the alleviation and re- 
moval of human suffering ; it will be a great satis- 
faction to me, if my evidence and labours should 
assist in raising the dishonoured dead into the 
public consideration and respect, due to them as 
benefactors of mankind, and in exciting a regret 
that wisdom called so long in the streets, without 
any one regarding her. 

I now know (and I deplore my long ignorance) 
that the battle was fought, and won, before I was 
born, by the truthful and benevolent Puysegur, 
Deleuze, and their companions, and that I, under 
the tropics, am only again demonstrating what 
they, on the banks of the Seine, had long ago 
established. The people of the continent have 
been familiar with both the good and the evil of 
Mesmerism for the last thirty years, while we in 
England are only now giving an unwilling ear to 
the expounders of a law of nature, which is as 
much a part of the human constitution as the pro- 
cesses of thought and digestion. It is to be hoped 

72 IRREFRAGABLE EVIDENCE 

that, on this subject, our neighbours will no longer 
have reason to reproach our insular ignorance and 
presumption, and that if Mesmerism is rejected 
by the English public, it will be after study and 
experiment, and not from prejudice and passion. 

Knowing the new and wonderful nature of the 
subject, and that the public was ill prepared to 
receive the naked truth on individual testimony, 
I have called in all the available evidence on the 
spot ; and the facts related by me will be found 
to be vouched for by disinterested, honourable, 
and intelligent gentlemen, both residents and 
strangers ; and if there is not a cloud of European 
witnesses, it is simply because no more exist in 
this neighbourhood. I would have preferred the 
plain of Calcutta for my theatre, and all the 
inhabitants for spectators, if it had been possible. 
All I have done, or may hereafter do, has been 
done, and shall be done, in open day, and 
every case related has had from half a dozen to 
hundreds of witnesses. The patients are on the 
spot, or can easily be found, and a host of eye- 
witnesses are ready for any one who may take 
the trouble to investigate the matter on the 
spot. 

Taking these general circumstances into ac- 
count, I might leave the cases to be adduced to 

OF THE TRUTH OP MESMERISM. 73 

speak for themselves, but I hope to be excused 
for pointing out some particulars which will, I 
trust, demonstrate that imposture, in the gene- 
rality of my cases, is morally and physically 
impossible. 

It is morally impossible that I could have 
taught my patients what I did not know; for I 
knew not the existence of the diversified symp- 
toms they exhibited, till, day by day, I became a 
witness of their unexpected occurrence. I had 
never read a Mesmeric book, when I made my 
first experiment ; and having succeeded in getting 
nature to speak, I determined to listen only to 
her for some time, and for months purposely 
refrained from reading on the subject, in order 
that my senses might not be predisposed to see 
things in any particular light, and that my judg- 
ment might be left unbiassed by the opinions of 
others. My reason did not teach me to expect 
what was presented to my senses ; but was 
gradually instructed by what I saw and did : and 
all that I know about Mesmerism has been ac- 
quired by reading the book of nature, without 
guide or interpreter. If I was ignorant of the 
subject, the peasants and coolies of Bengal must 
have been equally so, I presume. No rumour 
had gone abroad regarding the existence of such 

74 IRREFRAGABLE EVIDENCE 

a power ; Mesmerism had not become the village- 
talk in Bengal, so as to enable some clever rogue 
to exhibit the phenomena of which he had heard : 
— there was no type to imitate, therefore imita- 
tion, in the fii-st instance, was impossible. Be it 
observed also, that the cases did not happen 
among people in hospitals at the same time, but 
arose, day by day, among patients newly arrived 
from different parts of the country. The routine 
followed is this. A person pi-esents himself before 
me for the first time, and I see he has a disease 
requiring an operation for its removal : he is 
desired to go into another room (which is dark), 
and repose himself after his journey, not a 
word being said about an operation, as this would 
cause a mental excitement, destructive to the 
mesmeric influence. One of my assistants follows 
him ; seats himself (if unperceived, so much the 
better,) at the head of the bed; and by using the 
process to be hereafter described, often reduces 
the patient to a state of coma by the end of my 
visit : I then do what is necessary, whether it be 
to take off, or straighten a limb, without his 
knowledge or consent. Now, supposing these 
poor ignorant people to be impostors, whence 
comes their intimate knowledge of the mesmeric 
phenomena, from the quivering of an eye-lid 

OF THE TRUTH OF MESMERISM. 75 

onwards to insensibility to tlie most cruel tortures ? 
If they are not what they seem to be, then are 
they heaven-born impostors, or have had super- 
natm-al instruction, — on earth they could not 
have learned it. 

It may be said, that it is the taste of the 
coolies of Bengal to have themselves cut to pieces, 
and to have corrosive acids, and red-hot pokers 
applied to their sores, without showing a sign of 
life ; or that, knowing my hobby, they come from 
all quarters to be silently tormented, in order to 
please my Honour. Or we may be told, that the 
passive endurance of pain is no sign of the 
absence of it, for the North American invites 
his enemy to tear him at the stake, and the 
Indian Fuqueer voluntarily torments himself. 

To do justice to this ingenious hypothesis, I 
shall present the reader with some examples of 
the way iu which pain is borne by my patients, in 
the mesmeric and non-mesmeric condition of 
the body. 

June 12th. — Lokee, a peasant woman, aged 60, 
has a tumour on the calf of the leg of nine years' 
standing : it is full of deep ulcerations and 
maggots. I tried to subdue her yesterday, but 
the pain did not allow her to get beyond common 
sleep. To-day, after much trouble, first by one 

76 ADDITIONAL FACTS. 

person, and then another, she was entranced, and 
I cut out the tumour in the presence of Captain 
Elder, without her feeling it, and we left her 
sleeping. 

June 13th. She awoke three hours after the 
operation ; felt no pain on waking, and asked me 
to-day, who cut off the tumour ? 

Oct. 24th. The woman Lokee has come hack 
to hospital, with a return of the tumour, cut out 
in June last, to be mesmerised. 

Oct. 27th. She has been mesmerised daily, for 
two hours, but without effect. I therefore ope- 
rated on her to-day, as we could spare no more 
time for her, others requiring equal attention. 
The poor old woman screamed miserably the 
whole time, crying, that I was murdering her; 
and she continued in the greatest pain for hours 
afterwards. 

If the old woman shammed insensibility on 
the first occasion, why did she not do so on the 
second ? She had had practice ; every facility 
and encouragement were given her, and she knew 
what was wanted of her, and yet would not 
pretend to be asleep ! 

This perverse and inconsistent conduct appears 
to me to be easily accounted for, from the very 

ADDITIONAL FACTS. 77 

fact of her being aware of what was wanted and 
intended to be done : her anxiety to go to sleep 
neutralised her good intentions ; — excitement of 
mind being destructive of the mesmeric influence 
for the production of coma. 

August 13th. — -Dr. Finch freely applied mu- 
riatic aid (such as is furnished by the Company's 
dispensary) to a sore, covering all the right 
temple of the woman Gendo (who was mes- 
merised, in his presence, by one of my assistants,) 
without her showing: the smallest degree of 
consciousness ; and it was with great difficulty 1 
awoke her, after he had failed to do so. During 
the burning with the acid, her pulse fell from 
88° to 80°, and her respiration, which was quite 
natural before she was mesmerised, became en- 
tirely diaphragmatic, and abdominal; the volun- 
tary and semi-voluntary muscles of the chest 
being completely paralysed. 

August 18th. — Dr. Bedford to-day asked per- 
mission to apply the acid to the woman Gendo's 
sore, when she was awake ; and though I thought 
this most irrational scepticism (he having wit- 
nessed Dr. Finch's experiment) I consented, in 
order that it might not be said I interfered to 
save my phenomena. He accordingly wetted 

78 INSENSIBILITY TO PAIN 

the end of the glass stopper with the acid, and 
touched the sore with it, and the woman, for a 
few seconds, did not show any signs of acute pain. 
There could be no doubt about it, she was found 
out ! The arch deceiver, having set a snare and 
delusion for me, was now laughing at my beard; 
and I was not relieved from my thick-coming 
fancies by Dr. B. kindly suggesting, " that she 
was probably a very insensible person naturally." 
I was soon roused from my trance of bewilder- 
ment, however, by hearing the woman cry out, 
that " we had j)ut pepper to her head ! " and she 
sat up, showing signs of great pain ; Immediately 
after, she declared " her head was on fire," and 
got out of bed, walking about distractedly in 
great agony. I ordered her head to be bathed, 
and, as the best anodyne, threw her into the 
trance: the sore being surrounded by tubercles, 
which retarded its healing, I took the opportunity 
to pare them off; and to this she was perfectly 
indifferent. In half an hour, I awoke her with 
much difficulty, in order that Dr. B. might hear 
her first words, which were, that she knew 
nothing about what we were talking of, having 
even forgotten the burning ; an invasion of the 
waking by the sleeping state, which will be seen 
in another patient, when Mrs. Clermont's case is 

WHILE IN MESMERIC TRANCE. 79 

given. So that if Mesmerism did not protect 
this old woman, we have the curious fact of 
muriatic acid, applied in large quantities to a raw 
surface by Dr. Finch, acting as a direct anodyne 
and narcotic, calming at the same time the cir- 
culation, and revolutionising the respiration, 
while a drop in the hands of Dr. Bedford causes 
the greatest suffering and general excitement ! — 
" Non nobis tantas componere lites." 

Oct. 10th. — BepiDO Dass, a prisoner, was en- 
tranced to-day ; in the presence of Dr. Roer, 
Mr. Bradbury, INIajor Riddell, Mr. Higgins, Mr. 
MuUer, Mr. Graves, Messrs. Savigny, Mr. Bart- 
lett; and I operated on him for hydrocele. The 
injection was thrown in without his showing a 
vestige of feeling, and his arm, which I had 
placed in the air, on purpose, at the commence- 
ment, never moved, and had to be taken down 
after the operation : this was the second operation 
performed on the man during the last fortnight ; 
and on both occasions he slept for two hours 
afterwards, knew nothing of what had happened 
on waking, and felt no pain till the artificial 
inflammation commenced at 9 o'clock at night ; the 
operation having been performed at noon. This 
has been called a painless operation. 

80 INSENSIBILITY TO PAIN. 

" They laugh at scars who never felt a wound," 

and I shall therefore transcribe a passage from a 
friend's letter, written shortly after the publication 
of my first case. 

" When I was operated on, some years ago, 
for hydrocele, and the injection was thrown up, 
the pain was like a coir rope, round my loins, 
being pulled at each end by some persons as hard 
as they could ; and the perspiration ran down 
from my head as if some one was sprinkling 
water on my hair ; so this is what you have laid 
dormant by your Mesmerism." 

But it is for the sequel of this case, that I here 
quote it, and in order to show the man's behaviour 
in his natural and artificial states. On the day 
after the operation, the inflammation is usually 
high, and from the sensitive nature of the parts, 
pressure is excessively painfid. Now, on both 
occasions, I have requested numerous gentlemen 
to press the part, and ascertain if it was really 
painful : " a question not to be asked," was always 
their reply. The man was then entranced, and 
the experiment repeated by the same persons, 
when he allowed the part to be pressed as if it 
was a bottle : — he was then awakened, and on 
being now pressed, showed all the signs of instant 
and acute pain. 

MESMERIC FACTS. 81 

The cases above cited, along with, if I may use 
the expression, very numerous painless severe sur- 
gical operations, might be safely adduced as 
demonstrations of the physical impossibility of 
imposture ; but I shall now submit to the physi- 
ologist a series of fiicts which, to him, will be 
more convincing than all the cutting, tearing, and 
lacerating we can invent. For although we may 
pretty certainly conclude, that men will not 
exhibit insensibility to torture, without some ade- 
quate object to be gained, yet the incentive may 
escape our observation, or be unintelligible to us. 
It is, tlierefore, desirable to discover somethincf 
which it is hnjMssible for man in a natural con- 
dition to do, under the influence of any passion, 
or under the temptation of the highest bribe. To 
perform the following feats, will, I imagine, be 
found above the power of the most accomplished 
impostor : to keep the pupils dilated, without the 
use of drugs, in passing from darkness into sun- 
shine, — to lower the pulse at pleasure, — to 
breathe only by the diaphragm, for hours, and 
diminish the temperature of the body, at will. 
The dilation and insensibility of the pupil are 
recorded in my first case, and have since been 
frequently seen. 

June 11th. — -Kaloo, a Fuqueer, has an excres- 

G 

82 MESMERIC FACTS. 

cence, larger than a man's fist, at the end of his 
penis, and the body of the organ is also much en- 
larfired. I entranced him in a few minutes, on the 
first trial, and in the pi-escnce of Major Riddell, 
Captain Anderson, Mr. Bennett, and Mr. Jackson, 
dissected out the organ, but was obliged to sacri- 
fice the glans, as it was a cartilaginous degeneration 
of all the structures of the part : — the man did not 
awake till I was amputating the organ, after a 
long dissection. Wonderful to say, he relapsed 
into the trance again in a few minutes, and re- 
mained for twenty minutes, quite rigid, and 
insensible, with his eyes wide open, and the 
pujiils dilated, in a full noonday light, to which 
they were wholly insensible. This is not the only 
instance in which the eyes have been wide open 
during the trance, and would not remain shut 
when I closed them, showing, I conceive, the 
absolute extinction of muscular power. In most 
cases, the muscles of the eyeball continue to act 
involuntarily, after the rest of the muscular sys- 
tem has gone to rest, and on opening the eyelids, 
the ball of the eye is seen rolling round the orbit, 
like an agitated magnetic needle. Under the 
most intense degree of the influence, the muscles 
of the eye, and iris, also lose their contractibility, 
and the eye becomes as motionless and insensible 

MESMERIC FACTS. 83 

to light as that of a dead man. That the second 
trance was not a faint, we all satisfied ourselves, 
not only from the general rigidity of the body, 
but from the regular natural pulse. 

Sept. 17th. — In the presence of the Reverend 
Mr. Fisher and Dr. Heathcote, I to-day ope- 
rated for cataract on a man while in the mes- 
meric trance. The pupil was so much dilated 
that Dr. H. asked if belladonna had been applied ? 
After depressing the lens, and withdrawing the 
needle, the lens rose again, and such was the con- 
tinued dilation of the pupil, that it passed into the 
anterior chamber, and came in contact with the 
cornea ; the man being insensible all the time. 

Sept. 18th. — To-day, in the presence of the 
Reverend Mr. Bradbury, I entranced a man for 
the first time, in the hope of subduing an inflam- 
mation of one eye, by removing all pain and irri- 
tation, and thereby allowing the restorative 
powers of nature to act imdisturbed : he was 
entranced sitting on a stool, in order to lessen the 
flow of blood to the head. We counted his pulse 
b3forehand; it was 100 in the minute ; respiration 
20 ; thoracic movement natural ; temperature 
higher than usual. After twenty minutes, his 

G 2 

•84 MESMEKIC FACTS. 

pulse had sunk to 70, his respiration to 18, 
and, by comparing his chest with that of a man 
lying alongside of him, we ascertained that there 
was not a vestige of thoracic movement. All 
above the diaphragm was as fixed as the trunk of 
a statue, and the temperature of his body bad 
become lower than natural. 

If these tests are not considered an " experi- 
meiitum crucis," I am at a loss to imagine what 
will be reckoned more satisfactory by the human 
-physiologist. It appears to me, that when we see 
the involuntary organs of the body revolutionised, 
it is absurd to attribute it to the effect of the xeill. 

85 

CHAP. IV. 

Somnambulism. — Definition. — Singular Introduction to it. — 
Suspected Child- Stealing by its Means. — First Experi- 
ment in making a Somnambulist. — Trial of Mesmeric Skill 
in a Court of Justice. — Men stolen out of Court. -— Truth 
of Mesmerism publicly proved. — Natural Sleep, and its 
Varieties, can be imitated by Artificial Means. — Mesmeric 
Sleep. — Mesmeric Day-mare. — Mesmeric Sleep-walking. 

— Mesmeric Sleep-waking. — Mesmeric Dreaming. — 
Howtomake Somnambulists.— Imitative Stage of Somnambu- 
lism. — Communicative Stage of Somnambulism. — Mesmeric 
Catalepsy. — Mesmeric Coma. — Natural Clairvoyance. — 
Mesmeric Clairvoyance. — Nature of the Mesmeric Power. 

— Illustrative Examples. 

Before submitting to the reader the results of 
my observations on somnambulism, I beg leave to 
prefix the following summary of the appearances 
recognised as distinctive of the somnambulistic 
state in Europe. It is given in the Brit, and For. 
Med. Review, already quoted: — "Somnambulism 
is a condition in which certain senses and faculties 
are suppressed, or rendered thoroughly impassive, 
whilst others prevail in most unwonted exaltation ; 
in which an individual, though asleep, feels and acts 
most energetically, holding an anomalous species 

G 3 

86 SOMNAMBULISM : 

of communication with the external world, awake 
to objects of attention, and most profoundly torpid 
to thino-s at the time indifferent ; a condition 
respecting which, most commonly, the patient on 
awaking retains no recollection ; but, on any re- 
lapse into which, a train of thought and feeling 
related to, and associated with, the antecedent 
jDaroxysm, will very often be developed." 

I intended to have reserved this branch of the 
subject till I liad examined it in all its purely 
medical bearings ; but I was forced, by most 
extraordinary circumstances, to enter prematurely 
into this difficult and obscure field of experiment, 
in order to enable me to give my evidence in a 
court of justice ; and in describing my experi- 
ments, I hope it will be borne in mind, that I 
had never seen a somnambulist, or thought of 
making one, up to this date. My first essay was 
as extemporaneous and accidental as the produc- 
tion of mesmeric coma, on the first occasion I 
tried to mesmerise: — the facts are simply these. 

June 17th. — About a fortnight ago, I was 
driving through Hooghly Bazaar, and saw a 
crowd collected before the police office. On 
asking what was the matter, I was told that a 
man had been apprehended in the act of stealing 
a boy, and that the parties were inside the guard- 

CHILD-STEALING BY ITS MEANS. 87 

house. Upon hearing this, I entered the house, 
and found a boy of ten or twelve years old, sitting 
on the lap of a man who was said to have rescued 
him. The boy was half stupid, and one of his 
eyes was swollen ; I tlierefore ordered him to be 
taken to the hospital. The culprit was then 
shown to me. He said he was a barber ; and a 
bundle, containing his implements of trade, was 
produced: this I carefully examined, but only 
found the usual barber's tools. The boy soon 
recovered his senses, and told me, readily and 
consistently, the following tale, which I again 
heard him repeat before the magistrate, in a diffe- 
i-ent sequence, but without a tittle of variation. 
He said, that early in the morning he went into 
a field close to his house, and that shortly after, a 
strange man left the road, and came up to him : 
as soon as he was near him, he began to mutter 
charms, and then took hold of his hand ; very 
soon after, he passed his hand across his eyes, and 
that thereupon he lost his senses, and only recol- 
lected that the man led him away, but without 
force, and that he felt compelled to follow him. 
When he came to his senses, it was at the gate 
of Chandernagore, two miles from where he had 
met the man ; and this was all he had to say. 
He had not eaten, drunk, or smoked, in company 

O 4 

88 SOMNAMBULISM : 

with tlie man ; and his master and friends all said 
he was a clever, well-behaved boy, and had never 
been known to have fits, or walk in his sleep. I 
then examined the man who was said to have 
rescued him : his evidence was to this effect ; 
that on the morning in question, he saw the boy, 
whom he knew very well, following a strange 
man ; that he stopped him, and asked what he 
was doing there ? The boy made no answer, and 
appeared to be idiotic : upon seeing this, he 
became alarmed, brought water to throw in his 
face, and used other means to revive him ; in 
which he at last succeeded. On again questioning 
him, he said that he did not know why he was 
there ; that he was obliged to follow that man, 
though he did not know him, and after saying 
this, he fell down, and bruised his eye on the 
ground. In the mean time, the man was making 
off, but was apprehended, and brought to Hooghly, 
I then called in the barber; and this was his 
story : he met the boy on the road crying and 
looking stupid, and on asking him what ailed him 
he said that he had lost his way. Upon hearing 
this, he desired the boy to accompany him to the 
police station, and that a policeman would take 
him home. The strange nature of the transaction, 
whichever side was true, strongly arrested my 

CHILD-STEALING BY ITS MEANS. 89 

attention, and the trade of the man roused my 
suspicions ; as I had heard that barbers in this 
country, while performing their tedious processes, 
could put people to sleep ; and reports are rife, all 
over the country, of people having been obliged 
to follow persons who had charmed them ; and 
the victims are said to be usually women. The 
barbers, all over the world, are a shrewd, observing 
race ; their occupation brings them into close 
contact with the surfaces most sensitive to the 
mesmeric influence ; and they are, therefore, very 
likely to have become possessed of the secret of 
Mesmerism at an early period, and perhaps it 
has descended to them as a mystery of their craft. 
I could only see two roads out of the dilemma : 
it was either a case of natural, or artificial som- 
nambulism ; and if the latter, how could it be 
brought about unless by Mesmerism ? As acci- 
dent had made me a witness in the case, I antici- 
pated that I should be called upon to speak as to 
the possibility of such a mode of abduction ; and 
as I was completely ignorant of the subject, I 
determined to make experiments, to satisfy inyself. 
I thought it probable, that if this could be done 
by Mesmerism, I should perhaps be able to imi- 
tate it, as the greater power includes the less ; 
and that I had only to stop short in the progress 

90 FIRST EXPERIMENT 

to insensibility, in order to produce like eifects, if 
obtainable by this means. • 

I therefore repaired to the Jail Hospital, and 
mesmerised a man ; in whom I had subdued in- 
flammation of the eye, by entrancing him several 
times ; but only went to the extent of inducing 
the cataleptic tendency, and leaving him the 
power of moving and hearing, but very imper- 
fectly. At this point, I led him away, and then 
letting him go, he stalked to the other end of the 
enclosure, till brought up hj the wall ; being 
turned, he walked in a straight line till some 
obstacle obstructed him, and then stood helplessly 
still. If allowed to stand motionless for some 
minutes, the trance deepened, and he became 
insensible to sounds; by blowing in his eyes, and 
addressing him all the time, he revived, and 
repeated after me, with great exactness, both 
English and Hindostanec : on awakening him, he 
had no recollection of any part of his proceedings, 
and said that he had never stirred from the spot, 
although he was at the opposite end of the 
enclosure fi-om where we commenced. Being 
summoned to the Magistrate's Court as a witness, 
I was asked, " if I thought it practicable to 
carry oflF a person in the way described in the 
evidence?" I replied, that " I thought it pos- 

IN MAKING A SOMNAMBULIST. 91 

slblc, because I had just done something very 
like it, by making a prisoner follow me round 
the hospital enclosure, without his knowing it." 
The magistrate committed the case; but when it 
came to be tried before the judge, it was found 
to be utterly impossible to convey even a glimpse 
of my meaning to the minds of the native law 
officers who had to try the case; and the judge 
therefoi-e asked me if I had any objection to show 
the Moulavies in court that it was possible for 
one person to make another follow him involun- 
tarily, as I said. I answered, that I was willing 
to make the experiment, but would engage to do 
nothing: if he would order three men, whom I 
named, to be sent for to Court, I would try what 
could be done, — the men to be kept in total 
ignorance of our intentions. 

In a day or two after, I was requested to 
attend the judge's court, which was crowded 
with Europeans and natives. Nazir Mahomed 
was brought in, and placed at the bar : I mes- 
merised him in a few minutes, and led him, with 
his arms catalepsed, out of the court, and set him 
walking down the road for some distance, making 
his arms rigid in any position, as long as I pleased. 
I then replaced him at the bar, where the judge 
and Moulavies all loudly addressed him, without 

92 TRIAL OF MESMERIC SKILL 

his paying any attention to them ; and they were 
obliged to ask me to awake him. This I did, 
and on being asked from the bench, if he had left 
the room since he first entered it, he confidently 
answered, " No." While they were speaking to 
him in front, I ajiproached, unperceived, behind, 
and entranced him on the spot, in the act of 
speaking. The words died on his lips, and he 
became insensible to all voices that addressed 
him : he was again awoke by blowing in his eyes. 
Madub was put in the dock, and he did not see 
me on entering. The judge and Moulavies en- 
gaged him in conversation, and while he was 
speaking with animation and intelligence, I cata- 
lepsed him from behind, while in the usual praying 
attitude of a prisoner at the bar, and, in a moment, 
he ceased to speak or hear : I was told by those 
in front, that his lips moved as if in the act of 
speaking, after he ceased to be heard. He was 
so deeply aflfected that all motive power was 
nearly extinguished, and I had to push him from 
behind with my finger, to make him walk: 
he walked a few yards with difficulty, and then 
becoming suddenly rigid from head to foot, a 
slight push sent him down headlong upon the 
floor, in a most alarming manner : the fit of 
rigidity was so instantaneous that 1 was not 

IN A COURT OF JUSTICE. 93 

aware of it. He was revived with some difEculty, 
and forlunately was not injured by his fall. 

Soorooji Chund was next brought in, and, as I 
had not seen him for a month, I began asking him 
about his health, &c., mesmerising him all the 
time. In a few minutes, he ceased to answer, 
and I took him out of the dock, turned him 
round like a teetotum, his arms rigidly fixed all 
the time, and then restored him to his former 
place in a state of complete insensibility : no one 
could make him hear, or show the slightest sign 
of life. When I blew in his eyes, he instantly 
recovered his senses, and declared he had never 
left the spot. 

Whether the barber stole the boy mesmerically 
or not, I will not pretend to decide, but it gave 
me an opportunity of proving, in the most public 
manner, that the thing could be done, and no one 
has ventured to deny publicly that I stole the 
men ; and, with the facilities of a native barber, 
I could almost engage to steal a man, woman, or 
child, daily. From the moment that I witnessed 
the extreme degrees of Mesmerism, I became 
deeply impressed with a conviction of its power 
for evil as well as good ; and I have driven it 
thus far, in the hope of rousing the public mind 
to a sense of the dangers, as well as benefits, that 

94 MESMERISM PROVED. 

may be expected from it ; and I ti-ust the day is 
not distant, when public opinion will strongly 
condemn all those who practise the art, except 
for philosophic and medical purjjoses. 

That the barber was in illegal possession of the 
boy's person, however obtained, was so clear, that 
he was sentenced to nine years' imprisonment, and 
labour in irons ; and the sentence was confirmed 
by the superior court. But the government 
called for the proceedings, and thinking, I sup- 
pose, that the mesmeric experiments had made 
too deep an impression on the mind of the court, 
graciously pardoned the barber. 

AVhen puzzled by the unexpected exhibition 
of new and wonderful bodily, or luental phe- 
nomena, instead of solving our difficulties by 
denying the existence of the phenomena, or dis- 
missing them contemptuously as the offspring of 
deception, or delusion, we shall do much better, 
and generally be nearer the truth, if we suspect 
that we have overlooked some power of the 
human constitution, and resolve diligently to 
betake ourselves to the study of the nature of the 
new agent. Like the careless knitter, we find, 
at the end of our work, that some stitches have 
been dropped, and that wc must recommence our 
work de novo. By a comparison of the effects of 

MESMERIC SLEEP. 95 

natural and mesmeric sleep on the human system, 
it will be seen, 1 think, that they only differ in 
degree, and in the greater command we have 
over the artificial than the natural state of sleep ; 
and I feel disposed to think that extreme con- 
ditions of the nervous system, its exhaustion or 
repletion, and the irregular distribution of the 
nervous secretions, produce the same effects on 
the bodily and mental organs in normal and ab- 
normal sleep. 

I shall attempt to exemplify this, by insti- 
tuting a comparison between natural sleep and its 
diseased varieties, and the mesmeric phenomena ; 
from which it will be apparent that most of the 
latter exist in the routine of life, and that the 
novelty consists in our being able to produce and 
vary them, at will, by a new direction of the 
nervous energy. 

Cotnmon Sleep. — In this condition of the system 
there is an absolute repose of body and mind ; at 
least, there is no consciousness of movement in 
either, on awaking. 

Mesmeric Sleep exactly resembles common sleep, 
with added restorative and curative power, of 
which the following cases are examples. 

July 8th. — Geereah, a Hindoo girl; aged 10: 
is suffering from suppression of urine for two 

96 MESMERIC SLEEP. 

days, in consequence of violence clone to the 
perineum, by which the recto-vaginal septum has 
been destroyed: the bladder extends up to the 
navel, and no instrument can be passed, owing to 
the painful condition of the parts. I mesmerised 
her for half an hour, after which she slept an 
hour, and on waking voided her urine freely ; all 
disagreeable symptoms immediately disappeared, 
and she was cured Avithout a dose of medicine. 

July 10th. — Oboychurn Roy, a Hindoo land- 
owner : had his left arm struck off, twelve days 
ago, in defending his house against a gang of 
dacoits. There are two white rings on his arm, 
made by ligatures applied to staunch the blood; 
and it is wonderful that mortification has not 
been produced. Several pieces of bone required 
to be removed, and this gave him great pain: he 
was mesmerised, locally, with great relief, and 
afterwards generally : he dropped asleep in half 
an hour, and slept the whole of that night; the 
only sleep he had had since the infliction of the 
injury. 

2. Nif/ht-mare. — If the brain is disagreeably 
affected by internal physical impressions, such 
as an unequal distribution of blood, or nervous 
energy, then a confused train of painful images 
takes possession of the mind, which is filled with 

MESMERIC DAY-MARE. 97 

causeless fears and shadowy horrors; and the 
sleeper struggles helplessly to shake off the 
incubus that oppresses him. 

Mesmeric Day-mare. — This very much resem- 
bles n{ght-mare,h\ityf\t\i a greater tendency to walk 
and talk, and appears to depend upon the irre- 
gular distribution of the nervous power, and the 
consequent derangement of the respiration and 
circvdation. This is so alarming an effect of 
Mesmerism, that I do not envy the amateur who 
may produce it. 

July 4th. — Bunnoo, a Hindoo girl; aged 15. 
She sprained her ankle, ten days ago, by a fall : 
the foot, ankle, and half the leg, are much swollen, 
infiltrated, and very painful. I mesmerised her 
for an hour, but she only slept for a few minutes, 
and little relief was given. 

July 5th. — She was again mesmerised to-day, 
and in ten minutes she became much agitated ; 
her chest was convulsed, and she showed all the 
signs of a violent attack of hysteria. The con- 
vulsions were soothed in a short time, by general- 
ising the mesmeric influence, and then she became 
delirious, crying out, that there was a man before 
her with great eyes, and desiring him to be taken 
away. Her eyes were wide open, but she said I 
was a Bengalee; thought she was in her own 
H 

98 SLEEP-WALKING. 

house, and did not know her own, or her mother's 
name, who was standing by her. I placed her 
mother before her, whom she took for a man, and 
ordered away, covering him with the choicest 
flowers of Bengalee abuse. She was sitting up, 
and carefully jjrotecting her leg all this time, 
answering all, my questions about it quite clearly. 
As it was not in a comfortable position, I desired 
her to place it to her liking, as she would not 
allow it to be touched : this she did, and said it 
was now right. I then asked, if she would go to 
sleep: she answered "yes;" upon which I pointed 
my fingers at her eyes, and she fell back as if 
shot, and went into the trance. 

The leg could now be freely jiresscd all over, 
without disturbing her, and I made my assistants 
apply their hands to it, to show them that the 
heat had also disappeared; the inflamed parts 
were now cooler than our hands. 

This was not a case in which the mesmeric 
trance could rapidly subdue inflammation ; it was 
of too long standing, and the ligaments had been 
too much injured, but local manipulations gave 
great relief, and induced sleep even. 

Sleep-walking. — Sometimes from irritaliihty of 
the muscular system, there is a craving for motion 
as the natural source of relief, and, volition sym- 

MESMEKIC SLEEP-WALKING. 99 

pathising to the required degree only, the person 
gets up, and walks till tired: having thus ex- 
hausted the muscular and nervous irritation by 
exercise in the cool night air, he returns to bed, 
sleeps soundly, and, next day, has no recollection 
of his nocturnal promenade. 

Mesmeric Sleep-walldng. — July 18th. — I en- 
tranced five men to-day, in the presence of the 
Rev. Mr. Fisher, and Mr. Clint, Principal of 
Hooghly college : two of them awoke, on being 
pulled up, and set on their feet ; the others slept 
standing. 

No. I. could not possibly open his eyes, though 
he understood my order to do so, and tried with 
all his might; nor could he walk when desired, 
but being set in motion, he poked helplessly 
forward, till he came in contact with the wall, 
against which he bowed his head, and then stood 
motionless. Being relieved from his dilemma, 
and set a-going again, he slouched about, a most 
forlorn-looking wretch, till he got embayed be- 
tween a window shutter and the wall, and there 
he would have remained till the fit went off, if I 
had not taken pity on him. 

No. 2. on being raised, and roused a little by 
rubbing, and blowing in his eyes, half opened 
them, and saw sufficiently to enable him to avoid 

H 2 

100 MESMERIC SLEEP-WALKING, 

obstacles. Being ordered to walk, he stalked out 
of the room like a walking corpse; descended 
four steps, very cautiously, and continued his 
course in a straight line : when ordered to stop, 
he did so, and would never have moved again, of 
his own accord, till the unnatural state disap- 
peared . 

No. 3. being roused, opened his eyes wider 
than natural, but saw no better than the others. 
I think he even saw less, as he had to be warned 
of the steps, to prevent his falling : his pupils were 
dilated, and he never winked. Having got 
upon the grass, his actions portrayed the most 
helpless timidity : he walked as if upon glass, and 
stared intently at every tuft of grass in his way ; 
sometimes turning aside to avoid what, to his 
disordered senses, probably appeared to be in- 
surmountable obstacles. He turned, when or- 
dered, and made towards the hospital again, 
picking his steps very cautiously, and never look- 
ing up till he came to the steps leading up to the 
verandah ; he then stopped, looked up, carefully 
studied the nature of the impediment, and, seeing 
the mass of building before him, gave up the idea 
of ascending the steps as hopeless, and turned 
along the road running round the hosijital, till 
he came to where we were standing. Here I 

MESMERIC SLEEP-WAKING. 101 

stopped him, and very distinctly told him the nature 
of the obstacle ; four steps, namely, and desired 
him to come to me. This he understood, under- 
took, and accomplished; being assisted by my 
warning him at each of the steps, and counting 
them. All the men, as usual, were unconscious 
of having left the spot where they went to sleep. 
Sleep-waking.— At other times, one or more 
senses remain active after the others have gone 
to rest; the wants of the waking organ are 
transmitted to the sensorium, and are followed by 
.in effort of the will to gratify them. The sleeper 
rises, and performs the actions necessary to satisfy 
his desires ; eye-sight, to a small extent, usually 
assists ; if not, hearing and touch come to his aid, 
and guide him with singular accuracy in known 
localities. I may here give an illustration, from 
my own experience, of the preternatural acuteness 
of hearing, developed to aid the somnambulist in 
getting out of his troubles. In my youth, I was 
an eager sportsman, by flood and field ; and one 
night, after a fatiguing day's sport, I found my- 
self in the middle of the room, and very cold, but 
could not possibly contrive to get back to bed 
again. My last waking impression was made by 
the ticking of my watch under the pillow, and 
this recollection came to rescue me from my diflS- 

H 3 ■ 

102 MESMERIC SLEEP-WAKING. 

culties. After the most mature reflection, it 
occurred to me, that if I could only detect my 
watch by its ticking, I should also find my bed. 
Acting upon this happy idea, I hunted my watch 
by ear, till I actually found it ; and got into bed 
again, as the reward of sound reasoning and per- 
severance. 

I may also here notice a similar instance which 
occurred to my brother, a clergyman in Scotland. 
I give it in his own words: — "Returning to Lon- 
don, after a tedious and dangerous voyage from 
tlie continent, I retired to bed shortly after reacli- 
ing my hotel I had taken possession of a spa- 
cious apartment, in which were two beds, of which 
only one was occupied. I soon fell asleep, as I 
thought, but in a short time left my bed, and 
wandered about in the greatest perplexity, under 
the idea that I was still on board the foreign 
steamer, which I had recently left. I went from 
berth to berth, as I conceived, beseeching all and 
sundry to show me my own berth. At last I 
came in contact with the empty bed, and creep- 
ing over it, got embayed between it and the wall. 
I was long of getting out of this new dilemma, 
and resuming my supplications to the numerous 
sleepers by whom I fancied myself surrounded. 
I remember well one part of the affair, which 

MESMERIC SLEEP-WAKING. 103 

filled me with the greatest trepidation. I came 
up to a small table, on which I distinctly heard a 
watch ticking. The idea came into my head that 
should the owner awake, and find me in such 
suspicious proximity to his watch, he would de- 
nounce me as a thief. I spoke long and elo- 
quently, rebutting the base suspicion, but the 
sleeper remaining unmoved ; I paced about in 
despair. I came to the door, but having locked 
it, it did not yield to my attempt at opening ; but 
on coming to the window I drew up the blind, and 
was still more bewildered on seeing the mighty 
mass of London spread out before me. The light 
of the moon, however, striking on the watch, was 
at last the means of restoring me to the full use 
of my senses. It suddenly occurred to me that 
the watch was my own. I instantly seized it, 
and forthwith was wide awake. I was in the 
middle of the room, and in a cold sweat. A con- 
siderable time must have elapsed, during the 
occurrences above described, and the curious thing 
is, that my eyes were wide open the whole time. 
I spoke only French, and that with the greatest 
volubility." 

Mesmeric Sleep-waldng. — The following is a 
beautiful example of the same condition of mind, 
produced by art. 

H 4 

104 MESMERIC SLEEP-AVAKING. 

Mrs. , an English lady, wished to be 

entranced, to have a tooth taken out by the dentist, 
who was shortly expected to arrive. I told her 
husband, that my labour would be in vain, if she 
thought advantage was going to be taken of her 
sleej) ; fear and anxiety being quite destructive 
to the production of coma ; and suggested that 
when the dentist arrived, I should then propose to 
make a preliminary experiment, telling her, that 
if it succeeded she could then suit her convenience, 
and be entranced at any time, to have the tooth 
taken out. 

The dentist came, and his arrival being care- 
fully concealed from the lady, I proposed to test 
her powers of submission. At the end of half-an 
hour, her arms appearing cataleptic, I desired lier 
husband to order the carriage, and go for the 
dentist. In a quarter of an hour they arrived, and 
I bent back the lady's head, and began to open her 
mouth without any attempt at resistance ; but, on 
the window being thrown open to give the dentist 
light, she awoke witli a sudden start, and said the 
dentist was present. She thus described her feel- 
ings : she very soon became unconscious, after 
feeling a general sense of warmth and oppression 
on the chestj she felt me raise her arms, and 
leave them in the air without the power to move 

MESMERIC DREAMING. 105 

them, but did not hear me desire her husband to 
get the carriage ready. She heard the carriage 
wheels, however, and then it flashed across her 
brain that her husband had gone to bring the 
dentist, (ahhough she firmly believed him to be in 
Calcutta,) and this conviction, from that minute, 
took complete possession of her mind. She 
greatly wished to call back her husband, or to get 
up and run, but she could not move tongue or 
foot, and showed all the time the most perfect 
repose of body and feature. She heard the car- 
riage return, and knew it brought the dreaded 
dentist ; was sure it was he who was speaking to 
her husband, and yet remained fixed to her seat, 
like a statue. In this instance, the sense of hearing 
was the only means of communication with the 
outward world, but it excited a former train of 
ideas ; and how accurately did fear and causality 
come to a right conclusion, from the ear having 
transmitted a suspicious sound ! 

This case opened out to me the nature of 
Somnambulism, and taught me how to make 
somnambulists. 

Dreaming of the Organs of Sentiment and In- 
tellect. ■ — Perhaps no demand is made on the organs 
of sense ; but the waking parts of the brain are 
those connected with the passions, feelings, hopes, 

106 MESMERIC DREAMING. 

and fears of the individual. The Imagination 
becomes inflamed by sympathy with the excited 
organ, and the most vivid sensations of pain or 
pleasure, ecstacy and agony, are excited, accord- 
ing to the oi'gan stimulated, and the control, 
more or less, of the reflecting power. The lover, 
the miser, the philanthropist, and the murderer; 
the man who hopes for coming good fortune, and 
he who lives in constant dread of coming evil ; all 
enjoy, or torment, themselves to a height of plea- 
sure, or horror, that cannot be felt when awake. 
If the reflecting organs are chiefly called into play, 
then the man of business does a stroke in trade, 
or conceives a capital speculation that might be of 
use to him, if he could recollect it when awake : 
the student easily conquers his difliculties; the 
mathematician solves a problem, and the historian 
removes a doubt ; the poet's thoughts and lines 
no longer leave his brain like bird-lime, but he 
pours forth his soul " in thoughts that breathe, 
and words that burn." All good dreamers, in fact, 
confess that they think, say, and do better things 
when asleep than when awake. Or, let us sup- 
pose that the reflecting organs have been intensely 
engaged during the day, in considering our proper 
course of action in certain circumstances, and the 
probable consequences, or that a craving to pene- 

MESMEEIC DKEAMING. 107 

trate the future has been the haunting idea ; then 
the judgment, undisturbed by external impressions, 
and undistracted by passion, self-interest, and 
routine habits of thought, and supplied by memory 
only with the past experience and knowledge 
that bear upon the question ; under these circum- 
stances it is imaginable that the mind may jump to 
just conclusions, and receive a clear and happy 
glimpse into futurity. These impressions, when 
remembered on waking, and verified by sulisequent 
events, are naturally converted into inspired 
dreams, and supernatural warnings, merely by the 
train of reasoning having been lost. The persons, 
in reality, have reasoned correctly, but by an un- 
usual mode, whose processes have been forgotten ; 
and have penetrated the future, only by comparing 
it with the past. In this way 

" Old experience may attain 
To something like prophetic strain." 

And such dreams being remembered, and the rea- 
soning analysed, may be of real use to us, in 
shaping the course of our present and future 
conduct, because our sleeping conclusions have 
been come to from just premises, and the natural 
process of connecting cause and effect : whether 

108 MESMERIC DKEAMING. 

this is done sleeping or \yaking, is of little con- 
Bequence, the results being equally correct. 

If the state of one's health has Intensely oc- 
cupied the thoughts, and the hope of being cured 
of some distressing complaint is the leading idea ; 
then the man of medical and physical knowledge 
may possibly hit on the precise nature of his 
disease in dreaming, and prescribe for its cure in 
sleep better than he could have done by waking 
reflection; and, perhaps, the animal instinct of self- 
preservation may be concentrated on the case, and 
suggest a course of proceeding, the rationale of 
■which we do not understand, but which yet may 
benefit the patient if acted upon ; just as morbid 
longings, as we call them, (though frequently they 
are jDromptings of nature, and ought never to be 
despised by the physician,) often do the system 
good, when yielded to and gratified : this is called 
dreaming of what will do one good. 

3Iesmeric Dreaming of Different Organs. — As 
in natural sleep the organs are often preternaturally 
excited, and their powers singularly increased, by 
the concentration of the nervous energy upon 
them ; so, in the mesmeric sleep, this may be 
effected, and of course to a greater and more 
wonderful extent, by the person being under the 
control of a reflecting and directing agent, instead 

MESMERIC DREAMING. 109 

of being left to the fitful lights of his own imagina- 
tion, and the short unsustained flights of his 
intellect, as in common dreaming. This power of 
acting on separate portions of the brain, and there- 
by Inducing such trains of thought as we may be 
pleased to excite, will perhaps be found of prac- 
tical utility in the treatment of mental diseases ; 
the diseased haunting idea might be banished, and 
a more healthy tone of feeling and reasoning sub- 
stituted and sustained, till a new and better habit 
of mind was produced. I see no reason to doubt 
that the mental organs can be isolated and exalted 
by the mesmeric influence under the direction of 
a skilfid leader and suggester, and can readily 
believe that the mind, by this artificial stimulus, 
may be excited into more vigorous activity than 
when acted upon by the usual conditions of life. 
If persons may derive benefit from night thoughts 
in dreams, their sleep-waking day thoughts should 
be more valuable ; but the one has no more pre- 
tensions to supernatural power than the other. 
The night -dream is woven out of past impressions 
lighted up by a flickering imagination and a waver- 
ing judgment ; and the somnambvilist has only 
the advantage of having his thoughts sustained 
and concentrated by his mental director. Nor, 
considering the excessive nervous delicacy deve- 

110 HOW TO MAKE SOMNAMBULISTS. 

loped in the course of mesmeric treatment, and 
the power of fixing the whole attention upon their 
bodily sensation?, do I think it impossible that 
somnambulists may acquire an instinctive percep- 
tion of the condition of their organs, and occa- 
sionally be able to prescribe something for their 
relief; just as persons dream, under nearly an 
analogous state, of what will do them good, and 
which sometimes really does so. My psychological 
experiments have been very limited, partly, 
because I feared to bewilder myself at the outset, 
and also from want of proper subjects to try them 
on. The mental range of my patients is so cir- 
cumscribed, that the topics of food, drink, and 
clothing, almost exhaust it, and with most of them 
I have no common language. But I have done 
enough to show me how the higher grades of 
somnambulism may be reached ; and with more 
highly organised and intellectual natures, I should 
have good hopes of doing so. 

If jjroperly set about, somnambulism may be 
produced at a very early stage of the mesmeric 
phasis, or can be developed as the first step in the 
return to life from the mesmeric trance ; but in 
the latter case, the sleeper is apt to wake up, at 
once, to perfect consciousness. To make the 
simple somnambulist, it is only necessary to operate 

Hmv TO MAKE SOMNAMBULISTS. Ill 

on the person till his arms become cataleptic ; all 
expression then vanishes, and even when the 
person answers on subjects of deeji interest to him- 
self, no sign of mental emotion ever disturbs bis 
countenance. This statue-like serenity of features 
may be singularly broken by concentrating his 
attention, and desiring him to do whatever you 
do : he then becomes an imitative automaton, 
mimicking most servilely, and exactly, the actions 
and words of the mesmerist, or any one substituted 
for him, and who attracts his attention. Even at 
this stage, I have not established any " rapport " 
between the jj^rties, but have only desired the 
person who took my place to call upon the somnam- 
bulist repeatedly by name, till he answered, and 
then to give clear and short orders, which were 
obeyed as readily as my own. There is much 
misapprehension prevalent, I am convinced, about 
the necessity of " rapport " in the physical and 
lower mental phenomena of Mesmerism : most of 
my experiments have been made on patients first 
entranced by my assistants, and my subsequent 
control over their movements was often acquired 
without touching them ; it being only necessary 
for me to attract their exclusive attention. 

July 29th. — I made a man senseless and cata- 
lejitic, at a great distance, in the presence of a 

112 CASE or MESMERIC SOMNAMBULISM. 

large number of gentlemen, who had come from 
Calcutta and elsewhere* ; among them were six 
doctors, in whose hands, and in those of the rest 
of the company, he was left as long as they pleased, 
without my approaching till I was requested to 
awake him, after they had all tried in vain. This 
I did, but only to the extent of enabling him to 
walk and follow me. I then said, that I would try to 
clear iip his perceptive organs sufficiently to per- 
mit him to understand my wishes, with which he 
would implicitly comply : I did not wish to leave 
him the power of speech even, at this stage. 
Having attracted his ear, I ordered him to do 
what I did, and this he very faithfully performed by 

* I take the liberty to give the names of such gentlemen 
as I know, or who were introduced to me ; not, however, 
as being all vouchers for the truth of Mesmerism, for I did 
not know many of them, and know not the effect produced 
on their minds by what they saw. There were upwards of 
60 persons present, and some will be found, I hope, to put 
me right, if I misrepresent, or incorrectly report, what every 
one saw. Jlessrs. Barlow, and Tucker, Judges of the Sudder 
Court ; Mr. Elliot, Law Commissioner ; Mr. Ilardinge, 
Capt. Hardinge, Mr. Melville, Mr. Larpent, Mr. Bayley, 
Mr. ^^''anchope, Mr. Jackson, Mr. Graves, Mr. Clermont, 
Mr. Betls, the Rev. II. Fisher, the Rev. F. Fisher, the Rev. 
Mr. Bradbury, Mr. Hunter, Mr. Bennett, Major Wood, 
Major Anderson, Major Riddell, Capt. Duncan, Capt. 
Cantley, Dr. MacPhersoii, Dr. Smith, Dr. Burt, Dr. Walker, 
Dr. Elton, Dr. Ross. 

CASE OF MESMERIC SOMNAMBULISM. 113 

throwing himself, on the instant, into every atti- 
tude I assumed; but I required to be careful, for 
if I threw him much out of balance, he was in 
danger of plunging head foremost against the 
floor. Those who did not see him, may imagine 
how little the poor fellow knew what he was about, 
when they are told, that he took the "longitude" 
of the judges of the Supreme Court with the cool 
impudence and precision of a cabman, and the 
gravity of an astronomer. I then proceeded to 
free his voice, but only to the extent of making 
him my echo : he was told to repeat whatever I 
said, and he showed his intelligence by repeating 
the order. He then gave us " Ye Mariners of 
England," and if the pronunciation was not very 
perfect, he seemed to me to reverberate exactly 
my tones, and my gesticulations were also faithfully 
copied. We passed suddenly from " grave to gay," 
and he did such justice to " Hey diddle diddle," that 
I lost my gravity and bui'st into a laugh ; he 
joined me in full chorus, and I heard it remarked 
" he can't help laughing himself ; " and some were 
now quite satisfied that he was found out ! upon 
this, I stopped laughing, and, on the instant, liis 
features relapsed into the most awful repose, and 
I pointed out that it was no joke to him, but 
purely imitative laughter, and this, I should think, 
I 

114 CASE OF MESMERIC SOMNAMBULISM. 

became evident to all. He also sang " God save 
the Queen," as well, or rather as badly as I, for 
he is capable of much better things, under a more 
skilful music master. I now awoke him up a 
little more, and made him capable of answering 
questions : he was asked if he could fence ; he 
said that he could ; and I bid him show me. He 
began to cut the preliminary capers of the native 
fencers, but, in the act of stooping, a fit of rigidity 
shot through him, and he would have fallen with 
dangerous violence against the floor, if his fall 
had not been fortunately broken. I am always 
alarmed, and on the look out, -when this man is 
experimented on, from this tendency to instanta- 
neous rigidity of the body. A profound trance, 
from which it is very difficult to awake hiin, suc- 
ceeds such exertions, and usually lasts for four or 
five hours. I showed another step in the mental 
phenomena, on other subjects ; enabling them to 
answer simple questions correctly, and extin- 
guishing and releasing the power at pleasure. 
All reflection being dormant, they feel a natural 
impulse to give a direct answer to a direct 
question, and in this way teU me frankly whatever 
I choose to ask. We are assured that common 
sleepers can also be played upon in the same way 

NATURAL CATALEPSY. 115 

by patient and skilful persons, and that this is 
well known to the secret police of France. 

Catalepsy. — The following is a medical descrip- 
tion of natural catalepsy, from the CyclojDajdia of 
Practical Medicine. "The attack is generally 
instantaneous, the sudden rigidity of tlie trunk 
and limbs, the suspension of the senses, and tem- 
porary interruption of the exercise of the intellec- 
tual faculties, having been preceded by no pre- 
monitory stage. The patient retains the posture 
of body and the expression of countenance which 
he chanced to have at the moment of seizure ; and 
by this combination of fixed attitude and unvary- 
ing expression, presents the air of a statue rather 
than of an animated being. The eyes continue 
either fixedly, or shut, as they happened to be 
at the commencement, whilst the pupil, though 
usually dilated, contracts on the approach of a 
strong light. The balance between the flexor and 
extensor muscles is so perfect, that any new posi- 
tion given to the head, trunk, or extremities, by 
an external force, is easily received, and steadily 
maintained. This passive energy of the muscular 
system, permitting the body to be moulded into 
almost as great a variety of attitudes as if it 
were a figure of wax or lead, is the distinguishing 
characteristic of the disease." 
I 2 

116 MESMERIC CATALEPSY. 

Mesmeric Catalepsy — Sept. 24tb. — Mr. Blyth, 
curator of the Asiatic Society's Museum, paid me 
a visit yesterday, and saw various mesmeric oper- 
ations in my hospitals. He begged so earnestly 
to be allowed to see a somnambulist that I was 
over-persuaded to gratify him, as I wished to 
confine myself to the purely medical relations of 
Mesmerism. I told him, that when the mesmeric 
influence, or rather disease, had been deeply felt 
by the constitution, any body could re-develop 
it very easily, and that if he would follow my 
directions, he might mesmerise a man for him- 
self, and convert him into a somnambulist after- 
wards. 

He accordingly rendered a man senseless, stand- 
ing erect, in a few minutes, and failing to awake 
him, requested me to do so, which was instan- 
taneously done. But, as often happens, when 
the system is deeply affected, he fell back into 
the trance, and Mr. B. begged to see the imitative 
stage of somnambulism. I said, he could do this 
also himself, by concentrating the patient's atten- 
tion. Mr. B. was sitting on a table a few yards 
in front of the man, and made all kinds of noises, 
which he echoed back. Wishing to examine him 
more closely, Mr. B. jumped off the table, and 
came running forward with his body bent, and 

CASE OF MESMERIC CATALEPSY, 117 

singing. The man did exactly the same, but a 
sudden fit of rigidity passed through him, and he 
plunged head foremost against the floor, to ISIr. B's 
great distress. I had him placed on a comfortable 
bed to sleep off" the effects, and we left him at 
1 o'clock p. M. 

I was painfully startled to find the man as 
stiiF as a log to-day, at 1 1 o'clock, and that he 
had shown no sign of life since we left him. 

This would not have alarmed me without the 
accident, but I feared the head might have been 
injured by his faU, and set about restoring him to 
his senses by the usual mesmeric processes, but 
all in vain. I then had recourse to volatile sti- 
mulants to the nose (I could not induce any 
attempt to swallow), and effusion of cold water on 
the body, and to water poured from a height into 
his open eyes ; but to no purpose. I returned in 
an hour, and renewed my efforts ; no fluid could 
be got to pass down his throat, it ran out of his 
mouth as from a dead man's ; while looking on 
attentively, I saw an instinctive effort made to 
clear the wind-pipe of mucus that obstructed it, 
and then an attempt to swallow ; I took advantage 
of this, and poured some water down his throat ; 
some, luckily for my purpose, passed into his 
I 3 

118 COMA. 

wind-pipe, and brought on a violent fit of spas- 
modic coughing. I continued to rouse the system 
at the same time, by every possible means, and 
succeeded in awaking him. But from the rigidity 
of the muscles of respiration continuing, his efforts 
to get rid of the water, and the accumulated 
mucus of twenty-four hours, nearly choked him. 
At length, the respiratory muscles resumed their 
natural action, and enabled him to eject the phlegm 
from his wind-pipe. 

After the trunk had become pliable, his legs 
remained as rigid as bars of iron, and could not be 
bent for half an hour afterwards. 

This will not only be a lesson to myself, but to 
others, I hope ; and, in future, I must resist all 
appUcation to do more than is necessary for the 
removal of disease, even at the expense of being 
thought uncourteous and disobliging. 

Coma ■ — ■ " Last stage of all in this strange, 
eventful history," is only separated from the 
chamber of death by a very fine partition. In 
this, mind and body are equally torpid, and in- 
sensible to all external impressions. It is seen in 
persons exhausted by long watching and fatigue, 
exposure to cold, or intense suffering of body and 
mind ; and in this condition of the nervous system 
surgical operations might often be performed with- 

MESMERIC COMA. 119 

out causing pain. Irregularity In the vital organs, 
anguish and misery of the countenance, charac- 
terise natural coma, and indicate that the icy 
hand of death is arresting the currents of life, and, 
in general, the last trump alone can rouse the 
sleeper from this torpor of exhaustion. 

Mesmeric Coma. — In this, the great organic 
functions are usually undisturbed; the counte- 
nance is calm and full, and the complexion that of 
health. The person is generally easily aroused, 
and how different is his waking ! In an instant, 
often, he returns to full life and consciousness, 
without knowing that he has been asleep, and his 
feelings are often those of pleasure and relief; if 
he has lain down in pain, he often awakes free 
from it, and renovated in strength and spirits. 
In the subsequent part of this work, abundant 
instances will be given of this, and I will only 
here introduce one. 

May 22nd. — I went to-day to see my patient 
Mr. Clermont, head master of Hooghly College ; 
but found that he had gone out to his duty. Mrs. 
Clermont mentioned, that she was suffering from 
one of her nervous headaches, which commence 
with a pain in the back of the neck, that spreads 
over the scalp, and around the eye-brows ; she 
has been weakly and nervous of late. She knew 
I 4 

12© CASE OF MESMERIC COMA. 

nothing about Mesmerism, and I had never men- 
tioned it to her, but now proposed to try the 
effect of it on her complaint. No objection being 
made, I requested her to turn her back to me, 
and sit erect in her chair, and describe any- 
thing uncommon she might feel during the 
process. 

After a few minutes, she said that she felt a 
warmth in the neck, and on extending my mani- 
pulations, it advanced to the scalp and eyes. In 
about eight minutes, she said the pain was much 
less, and that she felt very drowsy : upon which, 
I asked, " shall I put you to sleep ? " She only 
smiled in reply, raised her right arm, put her 
hand to the side of her head, and went to sleep. 
At this moment a lady (Mr. Clermont's sister), 
entered the room, and I begged her to remain by 
Mrs. Clermont till I returned with her husband. 
Having found him, I asked pardon for taking the 
liberty of mesmerising his wife without his consent, 
and requested him to return to see her awake. We 
found her as I had left her, with some members of 
the family looking on. I extended her arm at a 
right angle to her body, in which position, or any 
other, it remained fixed till moved again, and 
her sister-in-law pricked her hand unheeded. As 
I saw the party becoming uneasy, I awoke her, 

CASE OF MESMERIC COMA. 121 

but with considerable difficulty : she felt very 
much ashamed at having been found asleep by 
me, as she supposed, and it was only after long 
questioning and reflection that she recalled the 
circumstances attending her sleep. The headache 
was quite gone, and she felt, and looked, greatly 
refreshed. 

Letter from Mr. Clermont. 

" My dear Sir, 

" I have read your report to the parties 
who were in the next room at the time you 
mesmerised Mrs. Clermont. They are perfectly 
satisfied as to its correctness, and have not the 
slightest objection to your making use of their 
names, if necessary. It would be superfluous to 
detail here the circumstances which came under 
my observation on my return from Judge Rus- 
sell's, as they have ah-eady been described by you. 
But, in short, I fully corroborate your account of 
the case, and even bear the most positive tes- 
timony to all that transpired in my presence. 
You will be glad to learn, that Mrs. Clermont 
has been doing well ever since. 
" I am, 

« Your's faithfully, 
" Chinsui-ah, May 25. 1845. « T. M. CleemONT. 

122 NATURAL CLAIRVOYANCE. 

" P. S. I herein insert the names of the parties 
present : — 

" Miss Clermont. 

" Mr. Manly. 

" Mr. Philipsz. 1 Students of the Medical 

" Mr. Scott. J College." > . 

Nov. 23. — Mrs. Clermont has not suffered any 
return of the headache, and no longer feels the 
distressing languor and oppression she complained 
of till she was mesmerised. 

Natural Clairvoyance. — This is recorded to have 
been seen in cases of natural catalepsy, and a 
French physician, M. Petetin, has related several 
instances of it, which are as well attested as most 
facts in the history of medicine. M. Petetin 
had opposed Mesmerism, when alive, and the 
cases of catalepsy, in which he had observed a 
transference of the senses, were found among his 
posthumous papers, and published after his death. 
In his first case, the discovery was purely ac- 
cidental : a cataleptic patient was seized with an 
uncontrollable impulse to sing, which nothing 
could stop, as she was completely deaf and in- 
sensible to external impressions on the organs of 
sense. 

M. Petetin fell by accident across the bed, 

CASE OF NATURAL CLAIKVOYANCE. 123 

and when his mouth was near the patient's 
stomach, exclaimed in despair, " Good God ! 
what a pity that this woman can't be stopped 
singing ! " This exclamation the woman heard, 
and answered, to his great amazement, and they 
continued to converse through the pit of her 
stomach, and the functions of other senses were 
also performed by remote parts of the body. 
All this is supported by unexceptionable au- 
thority ; such as one cannot reject, and hope to 
be himself believed. 

It has also been seen and described by unpro- 
fessional persons of intelligence and veracity ; of 
which the following is a curious example : it is a 
communication from a clergyman to Sir George 
McKenzie, President of the Edinburgh Phreno- 
logical Society, and was written without any 
reference to Mesmerism, and before it had at- 
tracted any attention in England : — 

« Dear Sir, 

" It is perfectly true, that our poor friend, 
who has now been some months with us, presents 
one of those singular and almost incredible cases 
of hysterical or nervous affection, which are at 
distant intervals witnessed under the dispensation 
of the Almighty. The overthrow of the regular 

124 CASE OF NATURAL CLAIRVOYANCE. 

functions of the nervous system was occasioned 
by the almost sudden death of her father (to 
whom she was fondly attached), who was seized 
with illness, during her absence from him, and 
died in a few hours after she returned to her 
home. I cannot enter into any longer details of 
the case, which has been attended with all those 
varieties, which have long characterised the com- 
plaint among medical men as the Protean disorder. 
The extraordinary powers communicated to the 
other senses by the temporary suspension of one 
or two of them, are beyond credibility to all 
those who do not witness it : and I really seldom 
enter into any of the details, because it v,'Ould be 
but reasonable, that those M'ho have not seen 
should doubt the reality of them. 

" All colours she can distinguish with the greatest 
correctness by night or by day, whether presented 
to her on cloth, silk, muslin, wax, or even glass ; 
and this I may safely say, as easily on any part 
of the body as with the hands, although, of course, 
the ordinary routine of such an exhibition of 
power takes place with the hands, — the other 
being that of mere curiosity. Her delicacy of 
mind, and high tone of religious feeling, are such, 
that she has the greatest objection to make that 
which she regards in the light of a heavy affliction 

CASE OF NATURAL CLAIRVOTANCE. 125 

from God, a matter of show or curiosity to 
others, although to ourselves, of course, all these 
unusual extravagances of nervous sensibility are 
manifest, for at least twelve out of every twenty- 
four hours. She can not only read with the 
greatest rapidity any writing that is legible to 
us, music, &c., with the mere passing of her 
fingers over it, whether in a dark or light room, 
(for her sight is for the most part suspended, 
when under the influence of the attack, or 
paroxysm, although she is perfectly sensible, — 
nay, more acute and clever than in her natural 
state ;) but within this month past she has been 
able to collect the contents of any printing or 
MS., by merely laying her hand on the page, 
without tracing the lines or letters; and I saw 
her, last night only, declare the contents of a note 
just brought into the room, in this way, (when I 
could not decipher it myself, without a candle) 
and with a rapidity with which I could not have 
read it by daylight. I have seen her develop 
hand-writing by the application of a note to the 
back of her hand, neck, or foot ; and she can do 
it at any time. There is nothing unnatural in 
this, for, of course, the nervous susceptibility ex- 
tends all over the surface of the body, but use 
and habit cause us to limit its power more to the 

126 CASE OF NATURAL CLAIRVOYANCE. 

fingers. Many, even medical men, take upon 
themselves to declare, that we are all, her medical 
attendants as well, under a mere delusion. We 
ask none to believe any thing, if they jirefer not 
to do so, and only reply, — The case is equally 
marvellous either way ; either that this our poor 
patient should be thus afflicted, or that eighteen 
or nineteen persons of my family and friends, in 
the daily habit of seeing her, should fancy she is, 
for every twelve hours out of the twenty-four, 
doinsr at intervals tliat which she is not doins;. 
There are many exhibitions of extravagant powers 
which she possesses, that we talk of to no one ; 
for finding it difficult to acquire credit for lesser 
things, we do not venture on the greater. Her 
power ceases the moment the attack passes off. 
A considerable sweUing has at times been visible 
at the back of the head, which has yielded to the 
treatment. It is certainly a case which would be 
an instructive one, in the consideration of the 
physiology of the human frame: but she, poor 
thing ! is most averse to experiments being pur- 
posely made on her; but in her every day life 
among us, we have no lack of pi'oof for all we 
believe and know. 

" Between the attacks, she is as perfectly in a 
natural state as ever she was in her life. There 

CASE OF NATURAL CLAIRVOYANCE. 127 

is but one paradox in her state ; and tliat is, that 
she can, at such times, hear some sounds, and not 
others, though very much louder, and see some 
things, and not others, though placed before her. 
She could liear a tune whistled, when she could 
not hear a gun fired close to her. It is certainly 
the absorption or absence of mind that occasions 
this ; absent to some things, though present to 
others, like any absent man; and thus Dr. Y. 
accounts for it. In making this communication 
to you, in part to vindicate the testimony of my 
friend, Mr. M., I have really exceeded my usual 
custom and resolution ; for I do not think it fair 
to the poor sufferer herself, to make her too much 
the talk of others. Very few believe what we 
tell them, and therefore we are in no degree 
anxious to open our lips on the subject. All 
I know is, that I should not have believed it 
myself, had I been only told it. I must beg, 
that you will not make any undue use of this 
communication, by handing my letter about to 
any one. The friend for whom you ask the 
information is perfectly welcome to read it, or I 
should not have written it. If the case were my 
own, the world should be welcome to it ; but a 
young female of such sensibility might be much 
embarrassed by finding the world at large in 

128 MESMERIC CLAIRVOYANCE. 

possession of all particulars on her recovery, 
should God so please to permit. 

" I am, &c. &c. 

Mesmeric Clairvoyance. — If the above &ve facts 
(and it is no sign of credulity to believe them till 
they are refuted, which has never been done, I 
believe,) I think it extremely probable that art, 
having copied nature so far, can also imitate her in 
this ; and that clairvoyance has actually been pro- 
duced in the derangement of the nervous system 
caused by Mesmerism. It has not yet occurred 
in my experience, but I should not be at all sur- 
prised to encounter it. A gentleman who saw 
me amputate a tumour, 281bs. weight, the other 
day, and cut and rudely handle the most delicate 
parts of the human body for twenty minutes 
without the patient showing a sign of life, said 
at the conclusion, " Well ! I have learned one 
thing to day, and that is — never to be again positive 
about anything : I did not believe a word of it, 
and am now completely convinced of its truth;" 
and those who wish to know the truth about 
Mesmerism will do well to follow his example. 

It would be more prudent perhaps to continue 
my facts, and plead ignorance of the modus operandi 
of this mysterious agent ; but it is impossible not 

author's theory. 129 

to think, though perhaps little to the purpose. By 
turning it aU round we may chance to make a 
happy hit, perhaps ; but nothing can be gained by 
indulging only in thoughtless wonder : I shall, 
therefore, venture to put down what has occurred 
to me about it. 

The exhaustion of any particular organ, the eye 
for instance, and the consequent derangement of 
the nervous system ; the shock given to the nervous 
centres by sudden mental emotions, or the effect 
produced on the imagination by a powerful mind 
acting on a weaker ; have all been said, and truly, 
to simulate the mesmeric symptons, and therefore 
" imagination " has very generally got the credit 
of being the " primum mobile " in these singular 
affections of the system ; and I do not intend to 
dispute its power, or the reality of the effects pro- 
duced by this agency. But my profound impres- 
sion is, that the first effects jjroduced on my 
patients by my mode of practising Mesmerism, 
are of a purely physical nature; an influence exerted 
by one animal over another, under certain circum- 
stances and conditions of their respective systems. 
I should as soon adopt the " opium diabolical," or 
" all humbug theory," as a satisfactory solution of 
the problem, as attempt by the action of the ima- 
gination to account for what I have seen and done. 

K 

130 authok's theory. 

Would the most imaginative of my readers ever 
think of the following process as a likely means to 
make people insensible to fire and steel, by the 
effect produced on the imagination? A Bengal 
cooly, or pariah, comes before me for the first 
time, and I see he has a disease requiring a surgical 
operation ; I never say a word to him, but desire 
my assistants to take him to another room and 
mesmerise him. They desire him to lie down, 
shut his eyes, and try to sleep, and they pass 
their hands slowly over the most sensitive parts of 
the body ; exhaling their breath upon the patient, 
and loading him with their sweat, if he does not 
readily yield to the mesmeric influence. A few 
minutes of this will sometimes suffice, but more 
generally it takes hours, and relays of mesmerisers ; 
and a less imaginative process I cannot imagine. 
Calomel, rliiibarb, and castor oil, have all the 
same eflPects, and it seems to me, that it would be 
as reasonable to say they were therefore all the 
same thing, as to declare the effects of the above 
process to be " all imagination." " Well ! there is 
one thing certain, and that is, that imagination 
has nothing to do with this," is the common 
remark of gentlemen who have witnessed the 
cause and effect, and whose senses are not stuffed 
by prejudice. That it mingles inexplicably, and 

author's theoky. 131 

inextricably, with the true mesmeric influence, after 
the constitution has taken on the diseased action 
deeply, is well known, and will be abundantly 
shown afterwards ; but I now speak oi first effects, 
on which alone I desire to insist, in leading proof 
of the reality and nature of Mesmerism. One 
person induces mesmeric symptoms by derang- 
ing the nervous equilibrium, through a commotion 
of the mind, another by means of squinting, a 
third by monotony of sensation, &c. ; the same 
effects being produced by different processes, as 
we see on many other occasions. It is too common 
for persons engaged in the same pursuit to 
become exclusively addicted to their own way of 
gaining their object, and when a new path is open 
they attempt to obstruct it as an infringement of 
their exclusive right of way. " Your way is not 
my way, and therefore it is wrong," argues self- 
love ; and the public seeing so many travellers 
pretending to reach the same destination, each by 
his particular route, and every one proclaiming his 
to be the only true road ; the impatient public, 
with its usual slashing logic, sets them all down 
as wrong, and declares them to be chasing a de- 
lusion. Whereas, very often, they are all right, 
and only wrong by taking too limited a view of 
the subject : the combined observations of all will 

132 author's theory. 

probably bring us near the truth, and each plan 
will be found a useful resource, in different cir- 
cumstances. 

It seems to me that irregularity in the distribu- 
tion of the nervous energy is at the bottom of all 
the mesmeric symptoms, however produced, whe- 
ther naturally or artificially ; and I suspect that 
the same effects may follow a state of exhaustion 
or repletion of the nervous system. If I might 
venture on so material an illustration, I should 
say that the first effects produced in the system by 
Mesmerism may be likened to a river roUed back 
upon its source by a heavier body of water, stagna- 
ting in its channel, and unable to resume its usual 
course, till the opposing tide subsides. 

From all I have seen, I cannot but beheve, that 
there is an influence of some kind that passes from 
one person into another, when one of two persons 
is mesmerised in the way I have described ; that, 
in fact, there is a virtual transfusion of some vital 
agent from the one body into the other. The 
wonderful subtlety as well as the effects of this 
power, lead us to suspect that it is a nervous pro- 
duct ; and may it not be the nervous energy 
passing off by the organs of sense, and even for a 
sliort time going beyond the surface of the body ; 
the lungs, meanwhile, and periphery of the body, 

authok's theory. 133 

retaining their vital properties, and remaining 
under the direction of the will ? Every time we 
move a finger, it is by transmitting something under 
the control of the will to the ends of the fingers, 
and why should it not go farther ? Supposing 
this to be possible, and that this nervous emanation 
can be directed by one person upon another, then 
I would venture to conjecture, that, being a 
nervous product, it is accepted by the nerves of 
sense, on coming into contact with them in a con- 
tinuous well-sustained stream, and is transmitted 
by them to the brain, thereby adding to rather 
than subtracting from, the nervous secretions of 
the brain, which it is their duty to carry off as 
soon as formed. If the sensorial secretions are 
not conveyed away by the nerves of sense and 
volition, and the exercise of the perceptive and 
intellectual organs, the brain becomes torpid and 
oppressed. In like manner, the transmission of 
foreign nervous matter might overwhelm the 
bi'ain, or a mere stoppage of its own fluids might 
steep it in a sleepy di'ench, and the functions of 
the sensorium would not be restored until the 
usual outlet for its energies were re-established. 

The entireness of the organic functions would 
seem to countenance the idea, that the external 
influence is propagated to the brain by the nerves 
K 3 

134 author's theory. 

of sense: the general and capillary circulation, 
the respiration, and temperature, often remain 
tranquil, and natural, as in sleep ; which shows 
that organic life is little affected. The accumu- 
lation of nervous fluid that oppresses the brain, 
is also seen in the singular condition of the 
muscular system, and may perhaps explain the 
strange helplessness, and at the same time the 
wonderful passive power of resistance in the 
muscles, which enables cataleptics to stand asleep 
in the most painful and exhausting attitudes, 
longer than would wear out the strongest and 
most practised athletse, who enjoy aU the re- 
sources of art and training. The absorption of 
another's nervous emanations being thought pos- 
sible, and this abnormal susceptibility being once 
established, it is possible to conceive the extreme 
degree to which this required habit, of trans- 
mitting extraneous nervous fluids to the brain, 
may be developed ; and we can comprehend the 
delicate impressions that would be made by so 
subtile an agent on . such fine conductors as the 
nerves of sense ; nor, on such a supposition, should 
it surprise us to be told, that the subject receives 
at the same time some impressions of the indi- 
viduality of the agent, and manifests a certain 
degree of submission to his will even. The 

author's theory. 135 

shades of such an interchange of vitality would 
be infinite, and probably resemble the effects 
which we are told can actually be produced by 
the mere will of the mesmeriser on his patient. 
I suspect, however, that considerable error exists 
regai'ding the power of the will in producing the 
physical mesmeric phenomena. People are loilled 
to sleep, I believe, by directing our nervous in- 
fluence upon them, and simply making them the 
objects of our attention, which is suflScient to 
impel this influence against them, and, if they 
have become extremely sensitive to the impression, 
the usual specific effects will ensue, and they 
appear to go to sleep in obedience to our will 
that they should. I have tested this in a variety 
of ways, by desiring Hindoos, Mussulmans, and 
Europeans of all professions, merely to concentrate 
their attention upon certain highly sensitive pa- 
tients ; and the results were as striking and 
certain as if the most energetic wiU had been 
directed against them. On one memorable, and 
ludicrous occasion, I induced a learned brother 
(who came purposely to exjDose the " humbug") 
to give me the command of his person for a short 
time. The result was, I forced him, against his 
will, and " in spite of his teeth," to produce all 

K 4 

136 author's theory. 

the mesmeric symptoms, from the quivering of an 
eyelid, to the most intense coma, in subjects of 
morbid sensitiveness, in whom the tendency to 
mesmeric action had become a deep-rooted disease. 
The will is no doubt very influential in producing 
first effects by giving continuity and intensity to 
our influence, but the system having been once 
deeply affected, the simple act of attention, on the 
part of any one, seems to be quite sufficient to 
bring it within his nervous atmosphere and in- 
fluence. 

But I wish it to be understood, that I speak 
only of the physical and inferior mental phe- 
nomena, such as I have described ; of the higher 
mental manifestations I have no personal know- 
ledge, and to produce them, mental sympathy 
will no doubt be indispensable. That the nervous 
sensibility has retreated from the surface, and the 
organs of sense, is evident to all observers, by the 
universal insensibility ; and the condition of the 
brain, and muscular system, would seem to in- 
dicate that they labour under the effects of this 
revulsion. The means used to demesmerise par- 
ticular organs, and the brain itself, appear to act 
by determining the nervous currents back to the 
surface, thereby relieving the deeper organs from 
the load that oppressed them ; at least I cannot 

ILLUSTRATIVE CASE. 137 

account for the following singular exliibition in 
any other way. 

Nov. 16th. In the presence of Mr. S. Palmer, 
Major Smith, Mr. Stopford, and Dr. Scott, I 
showed the spontaneous development of the mes- 
meric disease (for such it becomes, if pushed far) 
in a man who became entranced to the most 
intense degree, by being merely brought into my 
presence : every one was left to test his condition, 
in his own way, and no one doubted the reality 
of his condition. I at last awoke him for them, 
and carrying him to the end of the room, placed 
him erect against the wall ; in a few minutes he 
relaj)sed into the trance, and I catalepsed him in 
the attitude of St. Andrew on the cross. I then 
mesmerised another man, only, however, to the 
extent of sealing his eyes, and inducing the cata- 
leptic tendency in the muscles : having set him 
walking, I extended his arms horizontally, and 
directed him against the man crucified on the 
wall. On coming into contact with him, he stopped, 
and I urged him on, asking " what stopped him ? " 
He tried in vain to separate his eyelids, in order 
that he might see the nature of the obstruction, 
and, having no use of his hands, he thought of 
helping himself by rubbing his forehead against 
the object before him : this I stopped by pulling 

138 MODES OF DE-MESMERISING. 

back his head, and it remained stiffened in the 
position I left it. He was now reduced to 
utter helplessness, as his feet struck nothing 
but the wall below : 1 then blew on his neck, 
thereby immediately releasing it, and on being 
again urged to tell what was in his way, he 
began rubbing his forehead against the man, as 
before. One arm was next freed in the same 
way; this he brought into play; then the other, 
and he used both in feeling and rubbing the man 
all over, with the greatest earnestness, but without 
a vestige of expression in his countenance. At 
length, he said there was a man before him. I 
also showed, that my breath had no specific effect 
by doing the same thing Avith a fan ; a current of 
air being all that was required to dissolve the 
rigidity of the muscles. 

Blowing in the eyes is also the most expeditious 
way of relieving the brain, and restoring its 
functions ; rubbing the eyes, and pouring water 
from a height are also efficacious, and sometimes 
are all needed to de-mesmerise the brain. Air, 
cold, and friction, are natural stimuli to the skin, 
and the most likely means to restore its sensibility, 
if diminished ; and I imagine that they relax 
the muscles by determining again to the surface 
the nervous currents, which had been thrown 

MODES OF DE-MESMEKISING. 139 

back upon the muscular system, and produced its 
cataleptic condition. I cannot otherwise account 
for the following singular effects of cold, which, 
from my patients being naked, I can apply in 
any way I please. On several occasions, I have 
entranced persons standing, stript them naked, 
and catalepsed them in the most painful postures 
imaginable ; and in these they would remain an 
incredible length of time ; but let a little cold 
water be squirted from a distance on any member, 
and it became instantly relaxed. If both arms 
were fixed perpendicularly in the air, one after 
the other was shot down instantly, by a slight 
stream of water; and if it was directed to the 
calf of the leg, the person fell, as if he had been 
hamstrung : or if the body was catalepsed, out of 
the perpendicular, squirting water on the loins 
would send the patient head foremost against the 
ground. Blowing on, or rubbing any part had 
the same eiFect, but the general torpor is often 
too deep to exhibit these sensibilities, and such 
persons are awoke with great difficulty, by the 
use of all the de^mesmerising agents. 

The respiratory nerves of the face are more 
particularly sensitive to the impressions of air, 
cold, and friction ; indeed the shock given to a 
somnambidist by blowing in his face simply. 

140 author's theory. 

often resembles the effects of an actual blow, and 
is sufficient to awake him : how, I cannot pos- 
sibly imagine, unless it be by acting as a 
relief to the brain, by restoring its secretions 
to their natural channels. 

Having followed, and imitated, nature so far, 
in producing different symptoms according to the 
extent of the nervous derangement we induce, I 
see nothing more wonderful in the mesmeric 
phenomena than in the disturbances that occur 
in the atmosphere, when the electric relations of 
the earth and air are changed, and the equilibrium 
for a time destroyed ; but we need not, I suspect, 
seek for this marvellous agent among the great 

O DO 

inorganic powers of nature ; for if they are em- 
ployed, they are so altered and endowed with new 
vital qualities, by being subjected to the principle 
of life, that they are no longer recognizable after 
being converted from their control of brute 
matter, to be the directing powers of animal life ; 
and I fear the secret lies too near the sources of 
life and death for man to be permitted to approach 
it very nearly. 

That an agent capable of affecting the physical 
condition of the brain to such a degree, should 
have no influence on it as the organ of thought, 
appears, at first sight, extremely improbable, and 

authoe's theory. 141 

we might reasonably expect the production of 
singular and abnormal mental phenomena, when 
the influence was directed so as to act principally 
upon the intellectual organs. Like wine and 
opium, the extreme degree of the mesmeric in- 
fluence torpifies the brain, but in smaller quan- 
tities, it is a bodily and mental stimulus, and if 
it be possible to transfuse our cerebral fluid into 
the brain of another, I see no absurdity in sup- 
posing that it may be stamped with our indi- 
viduality, and may, for a time, induce a synchrony 
of action between the brains of the giver and the 
recipient. 

But, beyond the simpler manifestations of 
somnambulism, all is so dark, that to stop short, 
and wait for farther evidence, is better than to 
advance and step in the dark. The ignorance 
and presumption of man ; his passion for the 
mysterious and marvellous, his powers of self- 
delusion, with the pranks of knaves and the 
simplicity of fools, have so mystified the subject, 
that the artificial difficulties cost us more trouble 
to remove than the natural ; and a mass of rubbish 
must be removed before we can reach the founda- 
tion stone of truth. 

142 

CHAP. V. 

The Mesmeric Processes. — Publicity the best Security to the 
Public. — Ignorance and Indifference the real Dangers. — 
Mesmeric Treatment of Disease a Field for the Philan- 
thropist. — Puysegur and Deleuze, unprofessional Men. — 
Processes for producing Coma. — Tumour in Upper Jaw 
removed durijig Coma. — Hypertrophy of Scrotum, ditto. 
— Trance reneieable at Pleasure. — Three consecutive 
Operations on one Person. — Mode of Mesmerising in 
Chronic Diseases. — Cure of Rheumatism aiid Nervous- 
ness. — Local Mesmerising. — Mesmerised Water. — Pro- 
cess for preparing it. — First Experiments with it. — Tlie 
last. — Means of awaking Persons Mesmerised. 

At the commencement of ray mesmeric ex- 
periments, I had resolved to communicate only 
to professional men the modes which I had found 
most effectual in educing the influences of Mes- 
merism. I was, at first, alarmed at the possible 
dangers to the public, were the most effectual 
means of producing the extreme degrees of Mes- 
merism generally known ; but I am now of 
opinion that the greatest danger to a community 
is a contemptuous disregai-d of an unseen and 
unknown enemy, and, therefore, all I know on 

PUBLICITY THE BEST SECUKITY. 143 

this important subject shall be revealed. The 
best means of avoiding danger is to know its full 
extent, and, sometimes, the best policy is to meet 
it half way, fully prepared to repel it. While 
the public remain in a listless indifferent humour 
about Mesmerism, the dangers from an abuse of 
it are very likely, — I may say are very certain — 
to occur. But when, by attending to the follow- 
ing directions, proofs of its truth shall pour in 
from every quarter, then Mesmerism will come 
home to men's miuds as a reality, and become an 
object of personal interest to all ; and the instinct 
of self-preservation will rouse people to take the 
necessary steps for deriving all the benefit, and 
avoiding all the danger attending its practice. 
If evil arises, let the blame rest on the culpable 
negligence of the public, and the punishment fall 
on those who pervert good to evil. 

The utmost publicity is most consonant to my 
taste, and, upon the whole, the best security to 
the public. 

Many benevolent and honourable unprofes- 
sional persons may also be induced to exercise 
their natural gifts, in the alleviation of human 
suffering, under the superintendence of the phy- 
sician, who cannot spare the time, and waste of 
body, which are required before his patients can 

144 FIRST MESMERISTS. 

be benefited by the processes of Mesmerism. 
The persons to whom Europe owes its knowledge 
of Mesmerism, uncontaminated by self-interest 
and the devices of quackery, were unprofessional 
men, the Baron Puysegur and M. Deleuze ; 
the one a wealthy French nobleman, who con- 
secrated his life to relieving the suiFerings of the 
poor, and who said it was his mission to lodge 
Mesmerism in the hands of the doctors (a trust they 
have been very neglectful of, unfortunately) ; and 
the other, a truthful and benevolent man of 
letters, long keeper of the " Jardin des Flantes," 
at Paris, who practised the art for thirty-five 
years, and whose works are most honest and true 
guides ; errors of judgment, to which aU are 
subject, being their only defects ; as I have tested 
by experience, before reading them. 

Coma — I usually procure in the following 
manner, and am inclined to think that its com- 
parative rarity in Europe is owing to the mes- 
meric influence not being at once sufiiciently 
concentrated on the patient, by transmitting it to 
his brain from all the organs of the operator, and 
through every channel by which it can be com- 
municated. With the necessary degree of pa- 
tience, and sustained attention, the following 
process is so effectual in producing coma, that in 

MODE OF OPERATION. 145 

a large enough field, and with properly instructed 
assistants, it may here be obtained daily, for the 
purpose of procuring Insensibility to surgical ope- 
rations. No trial under an hour should be reckoned 
a fair one : two hours are better ; and the most 
perfect success will often follow frequent failures, 
but insensibility is sometimes induced in a few 
minutes. 

Desire the patient to lie down, and comjwse 
himself to sleep, taking care, if you wish to operate, 
that he does not know your intention : this object 
may be gained by saying it is only a trial ; for 
fear and expectation are destructive to the phy- 
sical impression required. Bring the crown of 
the patient's head to the end of the bed, and seat 
yourself so as to be able to bring your face into 
contact with his, and extend your hands to the 
pit of the stomach, when it is wished ; make the 
room dark, enjoin quiet, and then shutting your 
.patient's eyes, begin to pass both your hands, in 
the shape of claws, slowly, within an inch of the 
surface, from the back of the head to the pit of 
the stomach ; dwelling for several minutes over 
the eyes, nose, and mouth, and then passing down 
each side of the neck, go downwards to the pit of 
the stomach, keeping your hands suspended there 
.for some time. Repeat this process steadily for 

146 MESMERIC COMA. 

a quartei" of an hour, breathing gently on the 
head and eyes all the time. The longitudinal 
passes may then be advantageously terminated, 
by placing both hands gently, but firmly, on the 
pit of the stomach and sides; — the perspiration 
and saliva seem also to aid the effect on the 
system. 

It is better not to test the patient's condition 
by speaking to him, but by gently trying if the 
cataleptic tendency exists in the arras. If the 
arms remain fixed in any position they are left in, 
and require some force to move them out of 
every new position, the process has been success- 
ful ; the patient may soon after be called upon by 
name, and pricked, and if he does not awake, the 
operation may be proceeded with. It is impos- 
sible to say to what precise extent the insen- 
sibility will befriend us : the trance is sometimes 
completely broken by the knife, but it can oc- 
casionally be reproduced by continuing the process, 
and then the sleeper remembers nothing; he has 
only been disturbed by a night-mare, of whicli 
on waking he retains no recollection. Here is 
an instance of this. 

July 29th. — In the presence of some sixty 
gentlemen, who came from Calcutta and the 
vicinity, I to-day cut off an enlarged and ulcerated 

ILLUSTRATIVE CASE, 147 

prepuce ; the man moved, and cried out, before I 
had finished, but was immediately thrown back 
into the trance, from which all the efforts of the 
spectators, six doctors included, could not arouse 
him, or excite a sign of vitality. He was ope- 
rated on, at twelve o'clock, and awoke at three : 
on being questioned, he said, that he had felt no 
pain, and had not seen an European that day. 
Next day, he complained of the pricks of pins, 
inflicted upon him by my visitors, who had 
actually made a pincushion of him. In future, I 
must request that pins be left at the door. 

The person can be raised into any position 
required for the operation ; but some peculiarity 
in the case may demand the sitting posture from 
the commencement, as in the following instance. 

June 3d. — Teencowrie Paulit, a peasant, aged 
forty. Two years ago, he began to suffer from a 
tumour in the antrum maxillare ; the tumour 
has pushed up the orbit of the eye, filled up the 
nose, passed into the throat, and caused an en- 
largement of the glands of the neck. 

I was very desirous to reduce him to a state of 
insensibility before operating on him, and for the 
last fortnight my assistants have all perseveringly 
tried it, but without inducing sleep even. Indeed, 
from the tumour obstructing his throat, he has 
I. 2 

148 MESMERIC COMA. 

hardly slept for five months. Having ascertained 
that he was easier when sitting, I took him in 
hand myself, to-day, and entranced him in a 
chair hy the following process. The room heing 
darkened, I suspended my spread hands over his 
head for some time, and then carried them slowly 
down, one in front, the other behind ; the former 
dwelling over the eyes, nose, mouth, and sides of 
the neck, and the latter being applied over the 
base of the brain : both were then carried down 
the centre of the body, claw-like, to the pit of 
the stomach, where they were spread and gently 
pressed, one opposite the other; and I kept 
breathing on the head and eyes all the time. In 
half an hour, the man was catalepsed, and in a 
quarter more, I performed one of the most severe 
and protracted operations in surgery; the man 
was totally unconscious. 

I put a long knife in at the comer of his mouth, 
and brought the point out over the cheek-bone, 
dividing the parts between ; from this, I pushed 
it through the skin at the inner corner of the eye, 
and dissected the cheek back to the nose. The 
pressure of the tumour had caused the absorption 
of the anterior wall of the antrum, and on pressing 
my fingers between it and the bones, it burst, and 
a shocking gush of blood, and brain-like matter, 

ILLUSTRATIVE CASE. 149 

followed. The tumour extended as far my fingers 
could reach under the orbit and cheek-bone, and 
passed into the gullet — having destroyed the 
bones and partition of the nose. No one touched 
the man, and I turned his head into any position 
I desired, without resistance, and there it remained 
till I wished to move it again : when the blood 
accumulated, I bent his head forward, and it ran 
from his mouth as if from a leaden spout. The 
man never moved, nor showed any signs of life, 
except an occasional indistinct moan ; but when I 
threw back his head, and passed my fingers into 
his throat to detach the mass in that dii'ection, the 
stream of blood was directed into his wind-pipe, 
and some instinctive effort became necessary for 
existence ; he therefore coughed, and leaned 
forward, to get rid of the blood ; and I supposed 
that he then awoke. The operation was by this 
time finished, and he was laid on the floor to have 
his face sewed up, and while this was doing, he 
for the first time opened his eyes. 

June 4th. — This is even a more wonderful 
affair than I supposed yesterday. The man de- 
clares by the most emphatic pantomime, that he 
felt no pain wliile in tlie chair, and that when he 
awoke, I was engaged in sewing up his face, on 
the floor ; — so that the coughing and forward 
L 3 

150 MESMERIC COMA. 

movement to get rid of the blood, were in- 
voluntary, instinctive efforts, to prevent suffoca- 
tion. 

June 6th. — The dressings were vmdone to-day, 
and the whole extent of the wounds in the face 
has united completely by the first intention. He 
is out of all danger, and can speak plainly : he 
declares most positively, that he knew nothing 
that had been done to him till he awoke on the 
floor, and found me sewing up his cheek ; — and I 
presume he knows best. Here is a translation of 
his own statement in Bengalee : — 

" For two years I laboured under this disease, 
and scarcely slept for five months. On the 19th 
May, I came to the Imambarah Hospital, and 
three or four persons tried to make me sleep, but 
all In vain. On the 3d June Dr. Esdaile having 
kindly undertaken my cure, ivith a great deal of 
labour, made me sleep, and took something out of 
my left cheek, which at that time I did not 
perceive. After the operation, I did not sleep 
for two nights, but after the third day, I have 
slept as usual. 

"Teencowrie Paulit, 
of Madra." 

ILLUSTRATIVE CASE. 161 

If patients are fortunate enough to sleep some 
time after the operation, they not only feel no 
pain on waking, but none subsequently even. 
The following is an extraordinary instance of the 
absence of pain, from first to last. 

Sept. 1st. — Teg Ali Khan, a tall strong-looking 
man ; has a hypertrophled scrotum, caused by 
repeated operations for hydrocele by native doc- 
tors ; who only withdraw the water as often as 
it accumulates, without attempting the radical 
cure. The tumour is perfectly round, and as big 
as a man's head. He was mesmerised in two 
hours, on the first trial, and, in the presence of 
Drs. Ross and Sissmore, I dissected out all the 
parts ; which was very tedious, from the testes 
having contracted adhesions all round them ; and 
it was about half an hour before the organs were 
covered up again by stitching flaps over them. 
Not a quiver of the flesh was visible all this time, 
and at the end, his body was at stiff as a log, 
from head to foot, and his separated legs could be 
with difficulty put together again. He awoke 
in half an hour after the operation, and felt no 
pain. 

Sept. 4th. — The stitches were taken out to-day : 
the wound has healed throughout, and he has had 
no ■pain whatever since the operation ; — so much 
I 4 

152 MESMERIC COMA. 

for the absence of the usual irritative shock to the 
system. 

We can renew the trance at pleasure, in order 
to render people insensible to repeated opera- 
tions. 

Sept. 18th. — Morally Dass, a peasant, aged fifty, 
has an unhealthy cartilaginous sore, half an inch 
high above the skin, and extending for six inches 
along the outer ham-string of the left leg, which 
it has contracted to nearly a right angle with the 
thigh, for a year past. 

He was entranced to-day, for the first time, 
and I deeply cauterised the whole sore with 
a red-hot plaister iron, without awaking him. 

Sept 1 9th. — The excrescence is so hard, and 
thick, that it must be dissected oflP the ham-string : 
he was again entranced, and the diseased part was 
pared down to a level with the surrounding skin, 
without his feeling it. 

Sept. 20th. — When he was in the trance to-day 
I straightened the leg completely, and bound it 
up in splints : he awoke not, and when he did, 
had no pain ; although it took all my strength 
and weight to break down the adhesions, which I 
felt and heard cracking under my hands. Tiie 
Key. Mr. Bradbury saw the first operation. The 
Rev. Mr. Fisher, and Mr. Graves, the second, 

ILLUSTRATIVE CASE. 155 

and Mr. Blyth the third. In the treatment of 
chronic diseases suited for Mesmerism, coma is 
not required : if it occurs, it is probably because 
nature needs it ; but we ought to be satisfied with 
the improvement of the patient, though it is un- 
accompanied with any striliing phenomena. Tlie 
system is not less effectually recruited, because it 
is done silently, — ^just as the best digestion is least 
felt. For refreshing the nervous system, and 
inducing natural sleep, mesmerising "a longs cou- 
rants" as the French call it, will be found sufficient. 
These are steady continuous tractions, with the 
points of the spread fingers, from head to foot ; 
the head may be occasionally breathed upon, and 
the hands allowed to rest for a few minutes on 
the pit of the stomach. An hour of this, on 
going to bed, will often soothe restlessness, bring 
back natural sleep, and invigorate the nervous 
system. 

Sept. 25th. — jVIr. Calder (I mention his name 
at his own request), who has been twenty years 
in India, came to me to~day, complaining of general 
rheumatism, nervousness, and debility. He walks 
with great difficulty, with the help of a stick, and 
cannot ascend a stair. His nerves are shattered, 
his eye- sight is weak, and his hands tremble when 
writing; when he walks on smooth ground, he 

154 MESMERIC COMA. 

fancies that It slips from below him, and the 
effort made to save himself nearly throws him 
down : of late he has not been able to drive hia 
buggy, from a feeling that it is impossible for 
him to prevent his horse from running into any 
carnage he meets. He has been in this state for 
two years and a half; during which he has gone 
a tour of doctors, and swallowed a dispensary of 
2)hysic, to no good purpose. I said that I could 
not in conscience physic him more, but recom- 
mended him to try what nature would do for 
him, as, upon the whole, I thought his case adapted 
for mesmeric treatment, but that it would require 
time and patience to do him any good. He was 
very glad of any untried chance of relief, and I 
desired one of my people to mesmerise him for an 
hour in bed, every night. 

Never having been present when Mr. Calder 
was mesmerised, I am indebted to him for the 
following notes of his case. 

" On the 25th of September last, your native 
assistants, as directed by you, made the first 
attempt to induce the mesmeric sleep, but without 
success : the trial lasted for an hour and a half. 

" 26th and 27th September, ditto. 

" 28th. — After a persevering trial for the same 
length of time, I was thrown into a trance, from 

. ILLUSTRATIVE CASE. 155 

which I awoke after upwards of five hours, — I 
found great difficulty in raising my eyelids, or 
keeping my eyes open. I left the couch and 
rctu-ed to bed, and had my natural sleep after- 
wards, till six o'clock next morning. For a week 
afterwards, the efforts to mesmerise me were 
repeated for an hour daily, but without farther 
eflfect than causing a sleep of a few minutes. I 
however continued to enjoy my natural rest at 
night, found my pains abating daily, and my 
nerves considerably braced up ; so much so, that 
I could walk up and down stairs without as- 
sistance, and with every confidence drive out in a 
buggy alone, which I could not have attempted 
for two years and a half previously. 

" Up to the 17th of Oct. I was thrown into a 
sleep, every third or fourth night, for about two 
hours ; the effect of which you may judge of, 
from my being able to walk yesterday morning 
more than four, and this morning, more than six 
miles. 

" (Signed) J. Caldee. 

" Oct. 28th, 1845." 

This is the gentleman who, I said, recognised 
the identity of the mesmeric processes with the 
Indian modes of charming away pain. 

156 MESMERISED WATER. 

Topical mesmerising, — by suspending the ends 
of the fingers over the pained part, breathing on 
it at the same time, and then drawing the fingers 
downwards, continued for a long enough time, 
say an hour or two, — is often very effectual in 
soothing local pain ; and I have seen it relieve 
the pain in gout, bruises, and rheumatism. 

The much ridiculed " mesmerised water " is 
another means of producing the mesmeric symp- 
toms, and as it is practically useful, the process 
for preparing it shall be described ; and let those 
who do not choose to avail themselves of it, let it 
alone. But before doing this, and illustrating 
its effects by facts, it will perhaps be advisable to 
clear the way for the reception of them, by 
showing that there is no prima facie absurdity 
or impossibility about the matter. In accordance 
with Lord Bacon's advice, I will " foment the part 
to make the unguent enter the better." To those 
who will condescend to think seriously on the 
subject, and apply their previous knowledge to 
the examination of it, I would suggest, that if 
there is a vital emanation from the body, called 
" Mesmerism," there is nothing improbable in 
the assertion that it can be communicated to 
water and other inorganic substances, like other 
Invisible and imponderable agents. Water absorbs 

MESMERISED WATER. 157 

air and different gases, and the odours of neigh- 
bouring objects with great facility ; a glass of 
water can be charged with electricity, or an 
empty glass filled with it. Mesmerism has been 
called " animal electricity,'' and if correctly 
named, we should expect it to resemble inorganic 
electricity in many particulars : but whether it is 
a modification of electricity or not, I can see no 
reason why water should not absorb an invisible 
animal fluid, as easily as a fluid which is imper- 
ceptible and organic. There is nothing in the 
known laws of physics to make it improbable that 
water can be mesmerised, as well as electrified. 
On the contrary, it seemed to me so probable from 
analogy, that I fully believed the statements of 
others regarding it, and made my first experiment 
with considerable confidence. 

Deleuze, a most honest and trustworthy man, 
and who had practised Mesmerism, for thirty-five 
years in France, with great success, gives the 
following directions for mesmerising water. " It 
is to be poured over the tips of the fingers, and 
the glass is then to be mesmerised by passing 
the hands down its sides, and the water may also 
be breathed upon." The following process, 
though less delicate, is a shorter, and, I believe, a 

158 MESMERISED WATEE. 

more effectual mode of charging water with tiie 
mesmeric fluid. 

As there is good reason to believe that the 
breath is impregnated with the vital fluid, I 
breathe through a tube into the bottom of a 
cupful of water, keeping the points of the fingers 
in contact with the surface: in five minutes the 
water is charged, and here are my first ex- 
periments with it. 

June 28th. — From her extreme sensibility to 
the influence, it seemed to me probable that the 
woman Alunga would exhibit in perfection the 
virtues of mesmerised water, if it had any. In the 
presence of my hospital attendants, I to-day took 
an ounce of water from the common reservoir, 
and mesmerised it, putting the like quantity of 
plain water into another glass. We then went 
into the women's ward, and I gave the plain 
water first very slowly, asking her if it had any 
taste ? It was only plain water, she said ; I then 
gave her the other ; after waiting some time, she 
said it was different from the first, — that it was 
sharp to the tongue, and created a warmth in the 
stomach. Almost immediately, her countenance 
began to change ; she insisted upon getting up to 
walk ; and I immediately saw that she was a 

ILLUSTRATIVE CASE. 159 

somnambulist : after taking a few staggering 
steps, she would have fallen, but was prevented, 
and taken back to bed, where she instantly sank 
into the mesmeric coma, and remained so for 
hours. 

June 29th. — I to day had the pleasure of 
meeting the Rev. Mr. Long, from Calcutta, a 
stranger to me and mesmerism, who asked me if 
I could show him any mesmeric cases in the hos- 
pital at present. I replied that I should be happy 
to verify, in his presence, an important experi- 
ment regarding the efficacy of mesmerised water, 
which I had made for the first time, yesterday. 
I was glad to learn that he had never heard of 
such a thing ; and he willingly agreed to accom- 
pany me to the hospital. 

I took the same quantity of water as yesterday, 
out of the common cistern, and charged it before 
him, and again put the same measure of plain 
w^ater in another glass, the woman being un- 
conscious of our presence. We then went to 
her, administered the common water first, and 
waited for. the effects ; none appearing, the mes- 
merised water was given, and in a few minutes 
her expression altered ; she rose, and walked in a 
wavering uncertain manner, and then set about 
washing the floor, which was dirty, she said. 

160 MESMERISED WATER. 

Soon after she complained of the room being full 
of kites, crows, and paddy birds, and desired them 
to be scared away. On being asked who I was, 
she said I was a Baboo, and that the sweeper 
was her brother Essan, who had come to take her 
home ; she was put to bed, and immediately fell 
into the mesmeric trance. We then retired to 
talk over the matter, and I asked Mr. Long if 
he had any doubts that could be resolved on the 
spot. He said, nothing could be more certain 
than the connection of cause and effect, and that 
he would gladly certify to it. After some time 
we returned to her, and I awoke her, all but her 
eyes ; these she could not open ; but this being 
done with my assistance, she was seen to be in 
complete possession of all her senses and facul- 
ties, as was evinced by her ready and consistent 
replies, and the total revolution in her counte- 
nance. 

June 30th. — I thought of varying the experi- 
ment on the woman Alunga, whom I had not 
seen to-day : I therefore went to the house of my 
assistant, and asked him to give me a phial and 
a little water, telling him my intentions, which 
were to call for Mr. Eretts, the deputy-collector 
(who had never seen Mesmerism, and to whom I 
Lad never spoken on the subject), and request 

ILLUSTKATIVE CASE. 161 

him to go to the hospital, give the water to the 
woman, and then send to inform me that it was 
done. Having mesmerised the water, I carried 
the phial to Mr. Betts, and begged him to be 
good enough to perform an experiment for me, 
and at the same time satisfy his curiosity, per- 
haps. I assured him, on my honour, that this was 
pure water, only mesmerised, and requested him 
to go and give it to the woman named Alunga, 
and then to let me know. He kindly consented, 
and in a short time a messenger came for me ; 
when I arrived, the woman was getting up to 
walk, in the same delirious state as on former 
occasions, her phantasms only being varied ; and 
again she could not open her eyes, even by pull- 
ing : when partially opened they instantly closed 
again, till I relieved her by blowing and rubbing. 
On awaking there was no vestige of derangement 
in her mind or perceptions. Mr. Betts was sure 
of the facts he had witnessed, but, I suspect, had 
some difficulty in believing that he had only given 
water. 

June 28th. — Si^issur Ghose, a prisoner, in a 
different hospital ; I saw him for the first time 
to-day, at eleven o'clock ; he has been suffering 
for three days from inflammation of the testes, 
which were extremely tender to the touch, and 

162 MESMERISED WATER. 

he was bent double in walking. I determined to 
subject him to the trance if possible, for the fol- 
lowin"- reasons. As a fire exjiires for want of fuel, 
it seemed to me very probable that inflammation 
would die out during many hours of absolute 
repose to the system, pain and irritation being 
the sustaining causes of inflammation. Remove 
all pain and sensibility for hours, and it is only 
natural to suppose that the circulation will retiurn 
to its usual channels, and the disease be removed 
by a natural curative effort. If the repose be too 
short to recruit the vital powers, the trance can 
be repeated at will when the system has been 
once affected. I succeeded in entrancing him in 
half an hour, and left him sleeping. I then went 
to the Charity Hospital, and made my first expe- 
riment, as above related, on the woman Alunga, 
with mesmerised water. Having completely suc- 
ceeded, I returned to the Jail Hospital, and found 
that the man Sidissur had just awoke. He bore 
pressure much better, and there was no heat in 
the part. I gave him three ounces of mesmerised 
water, and in five minutes he was aa'ain in the 
trance. 

June 29th. — Sidissur awoke at nine o'clock 
last night, but went to sleep again immediately, 
and slept all night; the swelling has decreased, 

ILLUSTKATIVE CASES. 163 

and I can squeeze the part all over without 
causing pain, and he walks erect, with ease. The 
disease is subdued, but for the sake of experiment 
I gave him another dose of mesmerised water, 
and in three minutes he was in the trance. 
■ June 30th. — Sidissur again slept till nine 
o'clock last night, and had a good night after- 
wards. Dismissed cured, at his own request. 

July 2d. — Nobee, an elderly, worn-out woman, 
has had rheumatism in her back for some months : 
she was put into the trance to-day, and on waking 
was free of pain. 

July 3rd. — • No pain. Gave her a dose of mes- 
merised water ; she soon said that she felt warm 
all over ; a general tremor followed ; and on 
being desired to walk she comjjlained of her head 
turning, and walked a little, with great difficulty. 
On returning to bed she fell asleep immediately, 
and slept for two hours. 

July 29th. — At the public Seance, already 
mentioned, eight men drank mesmerised water 
prepared by my assistants, and superintended by 
two doctors, and two clergymen ; and in spite of 
the incessant tormenting of their visitors, four of 
them, to my great surprise, became entranced and 
H 2 

164 MESMERISED WATER : CASE. 

cataleptic, and were converted into somnam- 
bulists. 

December 14th. — Jadoo, a prisoner, convales- 
cent from cholera, is plagued with continual 
hiccough — eight convulsions in a minute. To 
be mesmerised : he was subdued in fifteen mi- 
nutes, but there was little change in the hiccough 
for half an hour afterwards. He was raised upon 
his feet, and a bandage soaked in cold water 
wound around his chest, without awaking him, 
and he was allowed to sleep half an hour longer : 
still no change for the better. I now prepared 
some mesmerised water, and awoke him ; he no 
sooner drank it than he fell asleep again, and the 
hiccough immediately stopped, and never re- 
turned. He slept for three hours after drinking 
the water. 

To illustrate the subject farther, as I could do 
by scores of examples, would be intolerably 
tedious ; and I hope it will not be for a moment 
supposed that I mean to say that such will in 
general be the effects of mesmerised water, but 
only that in persons already under the mesmeric 
influence such results can be procured: it has 
been known to affect the uncontaminated system, 
but it is a rare occurrence. 

MODE OF DE-MESMEKISING. 165 

The means used for dissipating the mesmeric 
influence, are precisely those employed for dis- 
fengaging the brain in fainting, or natural insen- 
sibility, caused by a revulsion or stoppage of the 
nervous fluid by natural causes. They act, I 
presume, exactly in the same way, by re-deter- 
mining the nervous currents to the skin and 
the organs of sense ; thereby rousing the brain 
from its torpor of exhaustion in the case of 
fainting, or relieving it of the nervous plethora 
which I have suggested might be the cause of 
mesmeric coma. 

Blowing sharply in the eyes, rubbing the eye- 
lids, and eye-brows, and sprinkling cold water in 
the face, are the methods for de-mesmerising the 
brain, and when locally applied, are equally 
efficacious in de-catalepsing rigid limbs. Let an 
arm be catalepsed, short of the most intense 
degree of coma, and although it may require con- ' 
eiderable force to bend it, yet blowing on it, 
rubbing it gently, or letting a few drops of cold 
water fall on it, will generally relax the rigidity 
of the muscles, and cause the arm to fall down to 
the side, with its flexibility restored ; and it looks 
to me as if the muscles recovered their functions 
(just as the activity of the brain is renewed) by 
being relieved of the nervous secretions that have 

M 3 

166 MODK OF DE-MESMERISING. 

deserted the surface, and become concentrated on 
the sensorium and muscular system. 

The smallness of the cause, and the greatness 
of the result, when we restore a person to the 
complete possession of his senses, and intellect, 
by sprinkling water in his eyes when in the 
mesmeric coma, are quite as remarkable in natural 
fainting, in which the effects are often equally 
striking and instantaneous ; and I leave it to the 
reader to determine whether the exhaustion of 
the nervous system in natural coma, and its pre- 
sumed repletion in the mesmeric state, does not 
assist us in understanding the similarities and 
differences observed in natural, and mesmeric 
sleep. 

167 

CHAP VI. 

Mesmerism as a Remedy. — Coma as a Medical Agent. — 
Journal of Practical Mesmerism. — Chronic Inflammation 
of Eye cured. — Nervous Headache ditto. — Acute Inflam- 
mation of Eye ditto. — Return of Nervous Headache pre- 
vented. — Rev. Mr. Fishers Report. — Hoiv to make a 
Convert. — Tooth drawn in the Trance. — Convulsions 
cured hy ditto. — Arms straightened in ditto. — Sense of 
Formication removed. — Lumbago., Sciatica, Fain in Crural 
Nerve, cured. — Palsy of an Arm ditto. — Hemiplegia 
greatly beneflted. — Tic cured. — Rheumatism ditto. — Mes- 
merism as a Disease. — Resembles Hysteria. — Ignorant 
Charges of Imposture. — The PuMic abused. — The Public 
disabused. — Folly and Unfairness of its would-be Guides. 
— Spontaneous Development of the Mesmeric Disease. — 
Mesmerising by doing nothing taught by the Mesmerists 
themselves — A natural Consequence of frequent Mesmer- 
ising. — Examples of Mesmerising by doing nothing. — 
Hysteric Theory. — Hope to hear of Hysteria as a Re- 
medy soon. — Rational Mode of studying Mesmerism. 

Foe practical purposes, the pbysical effects of 
Mesmerism may be divided into simple somno- 
lence, semi-insensibility, and total insensibility, 
or coma : of the first nothing more need be said, 
and abundant examples of the others will be 
given in my " Journal of Practical Mesmerism." . 
Although accepting thankfully vphatever nature 
u 4 

168 MESMERISM AS A REMEDY. 

deigned to offer in answer to my inquiries, in 
the various cases in which I consulted her ; yet 
they were not presented to the vis medicatrix 
naturcE, at hap-hazard, and without selection. 
My first case was indeed a " pomegranate full 
of many kernels," and offered so many facts from 
which great practical deductions could be drawn, 
that I only followed out the indications of nature 
in all my subsequent proceedings; so that my 
operations have not been " A mighty maze, and 
all without a plan." 

I. I was certain (if life is not a phantasma- 
goria) that in the mesmeric trance, the muscles 
of the whole body had been as plastic, and 
obedient to my command, as clay in the hands of 
the potter ; and I felt satisfied that if the same 
state of things could be brought about, muscular 
spasms and contractions would disappear before 
this great solvent. The straightening of limbs, 
long contracted, very soon verified this inference. 

II. Having, in this case, witnessed the total 
extinction of nervous irritability, I was led to 
conclude, that in a like state of things, nervous 
pains would vanish before this supreme anodyne. 
The cure of nervous headaches immediately de- 
monstrated the truth of this idea. 

III. The insensibility to pain convinced me 

MESMERISM AS A REMEDY. 169 

that the most painful surgical operations might 
be performed without the knowledge of the 
patient, and this has been done to an extraor- 
dinary extent, so much so, as to be a daily matter 
of course. 

IV. I had seen high local inflammation, and 
sympathetic fever suspended during the trance in 
my first patient, and that the artificial inflam- 
mation (which it was my object to excite, for 
the cure of hydrocele,) did not develop itself, 
while the mesmeric influence was in activity, and 
that the pulse and temperature had become 
natural: thence I inferred, that inflammation 
was probably incompatible with such a state of 
the constitution, and I soon succeeded in curing 
acute inflammation of the eye and testis, by no 
other means than the mesmeric trance. 

As regards the certainty of my conclusions, it 
required no great sagacity to believe the evidence 
of my senses, and to go and do as nature bid me. 
A. fact in nature being once ascertained, and all 
its accessories carefully observed, we may be 
confident of re-producing it, at will, by fulfilling 
the necessary conditions, if the phenomenon is 
imder human control. I therefore tried to 
bring about the same condition of body, by the 
means required to be used by nature, before she 

170 MESMERISM AS A REMEDY. 

will condescend to interfere in our favour, feeling 
- convinced that if she did interfere, it would he 
with unerring wisdom, and unapproachable skill ; 
and that what had been feebly begun by her 
weak, but obedient creature, would be triumph- 
antly completed by her laws, when brought into 
action ; the way for them being merely prepared, 
in the manner pointed out by experience, 

" Nature is but a name for an effect, whose 
cause is God ; " and the Author of nature has 
ordained, that such effects should often follow 
such predisposing causes. 

Mesmeric coma will in the following pages 
chiefly figure in surgical operations, and is not so 
often required in the treatment of medical cases ; 
but when it can be induced, it is extremely im^ 
portant in instantly extinguishing nervous pains, 
arresting convulsions, and aiding the natural re- 
solution of inflammation, by its anodyne and 
restorative powers ; and if it could be induced in 
the commencement of some of the most fatal 
diseases ; it would jjrobably arrest their progress, 
for it revolutionises the whole system, and every 
other constitutional affection is for the time sus- 
pended. 

In chronic Inflammation it is a useful discutient, 
gently stimulating the nerves, and capillary 

COMA A REMEDIAL AGENT. 171 

vessels of the part, to more liealtliy action ; 
and for this purpose, local Mesmerism is only- 
required. 

The chronic exhibition of Mesmerism as a gene- 
ral tonic, in diseases of debility promises to be of 
great service, especially in functional derange- 
ment of the nervous system, and I am hopeful 
that we have at last got a direct nervous remedy, 
hitherto, a " desideratum " in medicine. 

In palsy from Ti^eakness of the nerves, it pro- 
mises to assist us greatly, and Dr. Elliotson has 
recorded many cures of cases he could not have 
managed before. All who venture to confess the 
truth to themselves, know how miserably im- 
potent for the cure of palsy, and nervous diseases 
generally, are the medical means hitherto em- 
ployed. If we succeed, we often cannot tell why, 
and the connection of cause and effect is very 
uncertain. But in the chronic treatment of 
palsy, by Mesmerism alone, the patient often 
feels and shows early and continued improvement 
under the action of this natural remedy ; and we 
cannot refuse to believe that it is the exciting- 
cause : we must believe that it is, or own that it 
is a spontaneous cure of a commonly incurable 
disease ! But both the practitioner and the pa- 
tient must rememberj that Mesmerism is no ex- 

172 EXTRACTS FROM JOURNAL 

ception to the general rule, that a chronic disease 
must have a chronic cure : much patience and 
labour will be required in the mesmeric treat- 
ment of paralytic affections, and the result will 
greatly depend upon whether the disease is one 
of debility or over excitement of the nervous 
system. In the latter case, I should think, that 
unless the sedative effects on the system could 
be induced, we should be disappointed; in the 
former, every degree of the influence would pro- 
bably be of service. 

We find in practice, that nervous persons, from 
over-excitement of the nerves, are with great 
difficulty subdued, and appear to be still farther 
irritated by subjecting them to the mesmeric 
process ; whereas those who suffer from irritabi- 
lity of the nerves from weakness, are easily affec- 
ted, and soon benefited by it. 

The medical cases adapted for the use of Mes- 
merism, do not occur in my practice among the 
poor so often as surgical cases, as the labouring 
poor do not usually resort to medical advice for 
nervous diseases, till they are past cure : I can 
however present the reader with some inte- 
resting cases, which I will extract, as they occurred 
from my 

OP PRACTICAL MESMERISM. 173 

JOURNAL OF PRACTICAL MESMERISM. 

" May 7th. — Nazir, a Mussulman; aged twenty : 
is suffering from the sequela of opthalmia of two 
months' standing ; the sight of the left eye is 
destroyed. The cornea of the right eye is muddy 
with superficial ulcerations, and a pterygium ia 
forming ; there is constant lacrymation, and he 
cannot distinguish a white man from a black. I 
placed him in a chair before me, and directed the 
operation to the eyes and head generally, desiring 
him to mention what he felt as we proceeded. 
He soon said, that he felt au agreeable warmth 
where my fingers passed without touching him ; 
shortly after, he said his eyes were easier, and on 
extending the process to the body, he felt a gene- 
ral warmth pervade it, and sweat stood in drops 
• on his face. He next said, that he felt a fear 
come over him that he could not account for, and 
desired greatly to sleep : having no desire to go far- 
ther, I here stopped : — the eyes to be mesmerised 
daUy for ten minutes, and then be put to sleep." 

" May 22d. — Has been mesmerised daily, and 
put to sleep twice : he always feels better after 
the process ; says that his body feels pleasant and 
light, and the expression of his countenance ia 

174 EXTRACTS TKOM JOURNAL 

much imj^rovecl. The lacrymation has ceased, 
and he read two words in Bengalee and Persian 
to-day ; tlie pterygium will be the only impedi- 
ment to his sight. 

" May 22d. — Keenoo, a prisoner ; saw him for 
the first time to-day, at eleven o'clock. He has 
had a severe pain extending from the left eye-brow 
to one half of his head for four days ; and there is 
pain on pressing at the supra-orbitor notch. I 
made him lie down, in a small room off the hospi- 
tal, and in twenty minutes left him asleep with 
one arm raised perjDendicularly in the air, and 
locking the door, I left him alone. 

" I returned at one o'clock, and on opening the 
door, found him lying exactly as I had left him 
with his arm still in the air : he awoke whilst I 
was looking at him, and said that he had not been 
asleep. On being asked why his arm was in the 
air, he could give no reason for it. So insensible 
is the approach of sleep under this grand narcotic, 
or so sudden its invasion, that in the minds of 
the sleepers often no trace remains of the circum- 
stances attending their sleep ! This was seen in 
the case of Mrs. Clermont. He awoke perfectly 
free fi"om headache. 

" May 24th. — No return of pain — discharged 
cured. 

OF PRACTICAL MESMERISM. 175 

"May 24tli. — Nazir Mahomed, a prisoner; saw 
him for the first time to-day, at 11 o'clock. For 
the last four days, he has laboured under acute 
inflammation of the conjunctiva : the conjuncti- 
val vessels form a raised zone around the cornea ; 
there is constant lacrymation, pain over half the 
head, and he cannot distinguish objects. 

" I made him lie down on the floor, and ren- 
dered him cataleptic in twenty minutes; then 
putting his hands, clasped, above his head, I 
locked the door, and took the key with me to 
Chinsurah, two miles ofi^, where I found the 
Rev. Mr. Fisher, and Mr. Money, the collector, 
who are much interested in my proceedings, and 
daily ask, ' What progress ? ' I answered, that 
a man entranced was waiting my return ; and 
they offered to go back with me. On opening 
the door we found that the man had just awoke ; 
and being asked in what attitude he found him- 
self on waking, he said that his hands were clasped 
over his head : he reports the pain to have quite 
left the side of his head; only a little remains 
about the eye ; the eyelids move much more 
freely, and the watering is less ; his general feel- 
ings are much improved : before the sleep he felt 
his body hot and heavy, and it is now cool and 
light. Cold water to the head and eyes ; a dose 

176 EXTRACTS PROM JOURNAL 

of physic. When we were leaving the hospital 
the native doctor reported that a man had just 
come in with a pain in one side of his head, like 
the man cured on the 23rd. I desired him to be 
brought before us, and he stated that for the last 
six days he had suffered from an acute intermit- 
tent headache, confined to one side of his head ; 
that it commences at four o'clock in the morning, 
and continues till 12 p.m. Turning to my friends, 
I observed that if they would wait I should hke 
to entrance this man, as a preventive. They con- 
eented to do so, and Mr. Fisher has been good 
enough to send me his notes of what followed : — 

" Mr. Fisher's Report. 

" On Saturday last, the 24th inst., I visited 
the Jail Hospital, in company with Dr. Esdaile, 
for the purpose of seeing a prisoner awakened 
out of the mesmeric trance, who had been suffer- 
ing for some time from an inflamed eye. Upon 
pur arrival the man was awake, and no further 
experiment could therefore be tried with this 
patient. Another, however, immediately pre- 
sented himself, who had never been subjected to 
the mesmeric influence before, and whom, I 

OF PRACTICAL MESMKEISM. 177 

believe, the doctor had never seen. He had 
been suffering much for some days from severe 
pains in the head and face ; though not at that 
moment in pain, it was thought advisable to try 
the effects of Mesmerism as a preventive. The 
manipulations were immediately commenced, and 
in seven minutes the man was in a cataleptic state. 
We tried various means to test the intensity of 
the trance : his limbs rigidly maintained them- 
selves in any posture in which Dr. Esdaile chose 
to place them ; and at last he was raised upon his 
feet ; his back being slightly bent, his arms 
stretched over head, which was drooping upon his 
shoulder, and he remained fixed in this constrained 
position for some time, without exhibiting any 
symptoms of consciousness, or uneasiness. After 
a few minutes he was left to his deep repose, 
reclined upon the ground ; and I understand that, 
since this first trial, he has never had the sliglitest 
return of the pains of which he previously com- 
plained : we were much astonished at the phe- 
nomena exhibited on this occasion; the limbs 
being so extraordinarily supple, and at the same 
time capable of being so rigidly fixed in any posi- 
tion, at the will of the operator. 

(Signed) F. Fisher. 
Chinsurah, May 29th, 1845. 

N 

178 EXTKACTS FROM JOUENAL 

May 25tli. — Nazir Mahomed, entranced yes- 
terday for conjunctivitis, has slept well all night. 
There is no pain in the head ; very slight un- 
easiness about the eye : no watering. The zone of 
blood-vessels around the cornea is gone, and the 
inflammation is reduced from the vivid redness of 
the acute stage to the dull, brick-red colour of 
the chronic state. He can now see very well 
with the inflamed eye. 

I put him on a high stool before me, and 
desired him to tell me when he became sleepy, 
but he had not time to do so, as I left him sitting 
entranced in five minutes : this was done with 
the idea of lessening the determination of blood 
to the head. I then proceeded to my usual 
business in Chinsurah, and was there introduced 
to Mr. M'Questen, the dentist, who was on a 
professional visit at the house of one of my 
patients. As he expressed a great desire to see 
some of my Mesmeric cases, I said that he had 
better take the present opportunity, as I had left 
a man entranced, and hoped to find him so on 
my return, and that others were undergoing the 
process at the Charity Hospital, but I knew not 
with what results. 

The lady and gentleman of the house, here- 
upon, suddenly resolved to go too ; and the ex- 

OF PRACTICAL MESMERISM. 179 

peclitlon gave rise to a little episode, which I 
have the pleasure of introducing here, by permis- 
sion. 

We returned to the Jail Hospital, after I had 
been absent an liour, and found the man sitting 
precisely as I had left him, and his body colder 
than natural. The influence was now nearly 
worn out (partly, no doubt, by the exhausting 
position), and he awoke soon after our arrival. 
He said that the eye was still farther improved, 
and it looked so. I consider the case terminated. 
It was evident, to the most unj)ractised eye, that 
inflammation was incompatible with such a state 
of the system. 

But a man sitting on a high stool for an hour 
without knowing it, was not enough to satisfy 
the curiosity and unbelief of my lady visitor. 
Her theory was, that I must be " Angelus aut 
Diabolus,^^ to be permitted to do such things ; 
and as both hypotheses had their difficulties, she 
took refuge in an unapproachable unbelief. This 
to me was a singular mental phenomenon, and I 
determined to exjDeriment upon her mind tlirough 
her own senses (as she would not believe her hus- 
band even), and to observe the effects. The 
man entranced for hemicrania yesterday was sent 
for, and put upon the stool. The gentlemen 
n 2 

180 EXTRACTS FROM JOURNAL 

pulled out their watches, and in three minutes he 
was as insensible to life as the stool on which 
he sat. He was now put through all the amazing 
postures already described, and his friends were 
called in to awake him, but all to no purpose, till 
I came to their aid, when he awoke with a violent 
start, and look of alarm ; and, on being questioned, 
said that he had gone to sleeji of his own accord. 

My honoured visitor had now evidently some 
difficulty in collecting her senses, and kept ex- 
claiming, — " It's impossible ! it can't be I I vwrCt 
believe it ; it's all a trick ! " I replied, " If you 
will be good enough to go to the other hospital, 
I shall, perhaps, be able to show you more tricks 
of the same kind." 

Having entered the " Blue Chamber," she was 
resolved to see its mysteries, and the party pro- 
ceeded. I had ordered a man to be mesmerised 
in the morning, to have a tooth taken out ; and, 
on reaching the Charity Hospital, had the satis- 
faction to find him entranced, and begged Mr. 
M'Questen to give him the benefit of his skiU. 
This he declined ; and I extracted the tooth 
before him, without awaking the man, and pre- 
sented it to the lady as a mesmeric " souvenir." 
Seeing a collection of matter near the ear, I also 
made an incision into the swelling before he 

OF PRACTICAL MESMEEISM. 181 

awoke. On coming to his senses he said that he 
felt as if an ant had bit him when he was asleep. 
I had now the gratificationj rarely granted to 
first believers, — of living to see the triumph of the 
truth. My fair infidel frankly gave up the 
" diabolic theory ; " and although she could not 
yet adopt the angelic one in my favour, yet she 
was convinced that, instead of being in league 
with the evil power, I was a highly favoured 
individual, and congratulated me on my new 
powers of doing good. At parting I took the 
liberty to hint, in the most respectful manner, 
that there was something still more wonderful to 
me than Mesmerism ; and that was, the extent of 
human incredulity on the subject. 

June 6th. — I was called at eight o'clock last 
night, to see the wife of Baboo Essanchunder 
Ghosaul, deputy-magistrate of Hooghly. I found 
her in dreadful convulsions ; she was speechless, 
and suffering from a constriction in the throat, 
that threatened to suffocate her every minute ; 
and she constantly beat, or pointed at the part. 
At one moment her body was perfectly rigid, and 
in another it was bent back like a bow, till she 
rested on the back of her head and heels only. I 
never saw such convulsions except in Tetanus 
» 3 

182 EXTRACTS FROM JOURNAL 

and HydropLobia, and all I knew of the resources 
of medicine was useless ; for how could she take 
physic when she could not take breath? I there- 
fore had recourse to my new solvent power, and, 
after nearly an hour's hard work, I left her asleep, 
and catalepsed. 

July 1st. — She has had no return of the fit. 
This is the lady for whose relief the conjuror was 
sent, but came too late. 

June 26th. — Alunga, aged 24: she has slight 
contractions of both elbow-joints, from rheu- 
matism, with acute pain on pressing the ulnar 
nerve at the elbow. At first, she did not bear 
much handling without awaking ; but, on being 
left alone, the trance deepened, and she permitted 
me to work her joints like door hinges, and 
extend them to the natural degree, without 
awaking. One arm was mucli freer after the first 
trance and extension, and there was no pain. 

June 27th. — Complains of considerable pain 
in her left arm to-day, and the nerve at the elbow 
is very tcuder. I passed my fingers along the 
course of the nerve for a few minutes, which re- 
moved the pain, and allowed her to extend the 
arm : I then held my fingers before her eyes for 

OF PRACTICAL MESMERISM. 183 

a few seconds, and she fell into my arms in- 
sensible. 

July 3rd. — This woman's pains fly about, but 
I can chase them away from any part by holding 
my fingers over it for a short time. She came 
limping up to me to-day, to have the pain taken 
out of her " tendo Achillis ; " and this I did by 
passing my fingers over the pained part. I then 
grasped it firmly : she felt no pain, and by words 
and looks expressed the utmost astonishment and 
delight. This woman's sensibility is such, that I, 
or any one, can now make her delirious by 
merely looking at her for five minutes : but more 
of this hereafter. 

Aug. 18th. — I requested Dr. Bedford to satisfy 
himself if the woman Alunga had pain in any 
part of her body. On being asked, she said there 
was acute pain in one heel ; and Dr. B. spent a 
long time in testing the reality of its existence. 
He at last said that he was convinced there was 
considerable pain in that spot. I then passed my 
fingers over the part for a minute, and grasped 
the heel as firmly as I could, and she declared the 
pain had vanished ; and Dr. B. allowed that it 
had. He then looked at her steadily, and in a 
few minutes developed the mesmeric delirium, 
and desire to sleep-walk, always produced in this 
N 4 

184 EXTRACTS FROM JOURNAL 

woman, if the Influence is not quickly concen- 
trated upon her : the other symptoms, tremor of 
the eyelids, inability to open them when closed, 
and the mesmeric trance, all followed in due 
course. 

July 4th. — Dookee, a shopkeeper. For several 
months has had a constant feehng of insects 
crawling about his face and scalp, and it often 
extends to the whole body ; his eyes wink and 
water constantly. He was mesmerised for an 
hour, and then got a dose of mesmerised water. 
He soon after complained of general agitation, 
and feeling of alarm at the heart, and then slept 
a little. On leaving the hosj^ital the sense of 
formication had entirely disappeared, and he did 
not wink more than was natural : he has not re- 
turned. 

July 13th. — Four men and one woman were 
entranced to-day. 

No. 1. for Lumbago. 

No. 2. for Sciatica. 

No. 3. for pain in the course of the crural 
nerve. 

No. 4. for Syphilitic rheumatism. 

No. 5. ditto. 

OF PRACTICAL MESMERISM. 185 

Tliey were all subdued by the usual manipula- 
tions, assisted by the breath. 

After the first day the trance was induced in 
them all, by giving mesmerised water daily, till 
the 17 th ; on which day the three with neuralgic 
pains were dismissed cured ; the syphilitic cases 
were not benefited, as might be expected, the 
constitutional specific disease being still in oper- 
ation : the local pains were eased, however, and 
sleep procured : no small matter in such cases. 

July 29th. — Sustee Ram, a bearer; aged 30. 
He became paralytic in his left arm, twelve days 
ago, during the night : he cannot raise it higher 
than his navel ; there is pain under the scapula ; 
and he has slept very little since the attack : — to 
be mesmerised daily, for half-an-hour. 

July 30th. — Slept all night, can raise his 
arm to his breast, head, .spine, shoulder, and arm : 
— to be mesmerised daily. 

July 31st. — Slept yesterday, immediately 
after being mesmerised, and all night : can touch 
the opposite shoulder and his forehead to-day. 

August 15th. — Has improved daily : usually 
sleeps after the process, and well at night. 

August 25th. — Can hold his arm perpen- 
dicular, and has considerable command over it. 

Sept. 8th. — Can clap his hands above his 

186 EXTRACTS FROM JOURNAL 

head, strikes out well with the left arm, and 
squeezes my hand with considerable force. Dis- 
charged at his own request, being fit for work. 

The next case I should never have taken in 
hand, if new hopes had not been infused into 
me by the evident effects of Mesmerism on the 
nervous system. 

August 9th. — Geeois, a husbandman ; aged 
22. A man of large frame, and in good condition. 
There is complete jxalsy of the whole of the left 
side ; the arm can only be separated from the 
side for a few inches. He has taken mercury 
six times, in four years, for rheumatism : the 
paralysis began four months ago, and he has been 
three months in his present state : — to be 
mesmerised for half an hour daily. 

August 18th. — He sometimes goes to sleep 
during the process, and generally sleeps for two 
hours after it : he can raise the arm more, and 
there is a little resistance in the left side, on 
walking between two persons. 

August 20th. — He began to walk a little with 
a stick to-day. 

Avigust 25th. — Improves daily ; there is more 
command over the diseased side ; the leg is 
stronger, and he raises the arm higher : he walked 

OF PKACTICAL MEDICINE. 187 

to the end of the room to-day, with the help of a 
stick only. 

Sept. 8th. — Much better ; walks across the 
compound, with the aid of a stick ; arm also im- 
proving. 

Sept. 20th. — He has discarded his stick, and 
crosses the compound unaided. 

Sept. 25 th. — Daily improving ; he can hold 
his arm nearly perpendicular : there is every 
prospect of his recovering, and he was allowed to 
go home, with orders to his friends to mesmerise 
him daily, in the way they had witnessed. 

December 10th. — Horo, a Hindoo woman: 
aged 28. She has suffered for three years from 
tic-doloureux in the right eyebrow and temple, 
especially in the cold weather : it is very intense 
now, and comes on at a.m., remaining till 2 P.M. 
— to be mesmerised. I returned after an hour, 
and found her asleeji : she awoke soon after, and 
said there was no pain whatever in the part now, 
and that " it was cold as water.'' 

January 8th. — She has had no return of pain. 

December 14th. — Podo, a Hindoo woman, 
a beggar ; aged 40. She has been a cripple for a 
year and a half, from rheumatism in her shoulders 
and knees : there is much tenderness about the 

188 REMARKS ON MESMERISM. 

joints, and her knees are so weak that she cannot 
sit with her hams bent, and is obhged to ease 
herself standing, and she cannot rise from the 
ground without pushing herself up with her 
hands : — to be mesmerised an hour daily. 

December 16 th. — Slept half an hour after 
the process to-day. 

December 17 th. — Feels much better. 

December 18th. — Slept an hour to-day; the 
pain about the joints is much less ; she can rise 
from the ground without aid, and walks much 
more freely. 

December 19th. — Says she has no pain, and 
is quite well : dismissed cured, at her own re- 
quest. 

Mesmerism, like other powerful natural agents, 
is not only a remedy, but becomes a formidable 
disease when pushed far, and deeply rooted in 
the constitution ; and a knowledge of this is the 
key to a variety of anomalous phenomena, — mes- 
meric in their origin, but not directly produced 
by it at the time, and which give rise to absurd 
charges of imposture, delusion, &c., from persons 
totally ignorant of the subject. These are, in 
fact, the secondary or constitutional symptoms 
of the primary disease — Mesmerism, — which has 

REMARKS ON MESMERISM. 189 

contaminated the nervous system, and predisposed 
it to take on the Mesmeric action whenever it is 
deranged, especially by any thing having reference 
to the processes by which it was first developed 
in the system. 

In this respect. Mesmerism very closely re- 
sembles Hysteria, which, however primarily in- 
duced, is apt to recur on any agitation of the 
body or mind, more particularly if it is in any 
way associated with the first disturbing cause; 
and they both correspond, in each being sometimes 
voluntarily producible. Every one knows how 
a genuine fit of liystei-ics can be willed on, and 
that often tliere can be no doubt of the reality of 
the exhibition ; and, in like manner, some persons 
can luill on somnambulism and the other Mesmeric 
symptoms, the reality of which are indisputable. 
To an experienced person, the springing up of 
true Mesmeric phenomena, without the usual 
exciting cause, is a moral demonstration that the 
system has been previously revolutioned by Mes- 
merism. The nervous centres having become 
morbidly sensitive by the action of this great 
nervous excitant, every shock of the nerves, espe- 
cially if connected with Mesmerism, is exhibited 
in the shape of abnormal mesmeric symptoms. 

The eye of the hunter can tell by the foot- 

190 KEMARKS ON MESMERISM. 

prints tlie kind of animal tliat has gone before : 
from tlie shadow we can guess the semblance of 
the substance ; and, in like manner, the qualified 
observer, when he sees pseudo-mesmeric appear- 
ances, at once says, the Mesmerist has been here 
before me — ex pede Herculem. 

It is high time that the public should be dis- 
abused of many erroneous impressions regarding 
the finer phenomena of Mesmerism, which have 
been sedulously propagated by medical men even, 
affectedly impartial, but, in reality, labouring 
under intense prejudice, and profound ignorance 
of the subject. 

It is of no consequence to the community 
whether it is misled by the ignorance or dis- 
honesty of those who set themselves up as leaders 
of public opinion ; the offence against truth, the 
injury done to the public, and the injustice to 
those who have practically studied the question, 
and declared what they know to be true, careless 
whom it may displease, are equally great. It is 
a common thing for Doctors, who have never seen 
or thought of Mesmerism, to step forward to 
enlighten the public, and expose the " humbug." 
They have heard of " Mesmeric coma," and that, 
under its influence, the most severe surgical oper- 
ations can be performed without pain ; and they 

REMAEKS ON MESMERISM. 191 

thereupon exact total insensihiliti/ into tlieir expe- 
rimentimi crucis of the truth of INIesmerism ; and 
if any unfortunate Mesmeric wight, having a a'uI- 
nerable point in his " tendo Achillis " even, should 
fall under their observation, he is denounced as a 
hardened and determined impostor, and his phy- 
sician exposed as a quack, or charitably allowed 
to be, perhaps, only a fool. 

Nothino; short of the extinction of life will 
satisfy these discriminating observers : physi- 
ological revolutions in the system — altered bear- 
ing — changed expression in features and voice 
— the approach and advance of sleep — the ex- 
tinction of some senses — and the preservation 
or exaltation of others, are all not only lost 
upon such philosophers, but are, one and all, 
" confirmations, strong as Holy Writ," of the 
existence of imposture ! Such is the pro- 
crustean bed to which the anti-mesmerists bind 
down Nature in this most varied and wonderful 
display of her powers. If the body of their 
venerable mother be longer than her unnatural 
children, the Doctors, wish it, they mercilessly 
amputate the ofi^ending members ; if shorter, she 
is pulled and stretched by pulleys, secundum 
artem, to the length prescribed. A dispassionate 
and candid judge of this description (the wolf 

192 EEMAr.KS ON MESMERISM. 

judging the lamb) is perhaps invited by a medical 
Mesmerist to satisfy himself by ocular demonstra- 
tion in his hospitals, since nothing short of this 
can affect his understanding ; and the Mesmeric 
guest commences liis course of practical experi- 
ment by tossing and goring the patients (fortu- 
nately generally insensible) like a mad bull ; his 
only thought being how to kill two at a blow ; 
and because he has been compelled to develop all 
the Mesmeric phenomena himself, he revenges 
himself by declaring it to be all a miserable 
imposture and delusion : passion is the same all 
over the world, and it is easier to instruct igno- 
rance than pride.* 

But I am anxious that the public should know 
what Mesmerism really is, in order that they may 
know it when it comes before them, and be no 
longer deluded by prejudiced, ignorant, or inte- 
rested quasi descriptions of it. Abundant exam- 
ples of its acute, and extreme effects on the sys- 
tem will be found in these pages, as well as many 
of the intermediate phases, and each, to the dis- 
criminating observer, is distinctive and character- 

* Those desirous of reading the details of such a truly 
scientific and dispassionate mode of enquiring after truth 
should peruse my brother's " INIesnieric Facts," published by 
Ostell and Lepage, Calcutta. — D. E. 

MESMERISM BY DOING NOTHING. 193 

istic of an unusual condition of the body. The 
involuntary quivering of the eyelids, and the 
spasmodic closing of the eye, in persons a minute 
before wide awake, and resisting, perhaps ; — the 
extinction of one or more of the organs of sense, 
which we saw in full activity but a moment ago ; 
— the eye turned up so that the white can only 
be seen, or staring wide open, fixed and insensi- 
ble to light ; — sleep walking, — delirium, — convul- 
sions, — catalepsy, in persons not subject to these 
affections till they were subjected to the mesmeric 
processes ; • — is not any one of these induced 
symptoms as clearly the effect of some constrain- 
ing influence as the production of insensibility ? 
They are all links of the same chain, and in some 
patients can all be beautifully exhibited in se- 
quence and connection, from the quivering of an 
eyelash to the most intense coma. 

Another anti-mesmerist, who to save appear- 
ances lias condescended to look at certain of the 
mesmeric phenomena, says, on seeing their reality: 
— " There is no use in denying the extraordinaiy 
condition these people are reduced to ; but tlie 
whole secret of the matter is that they are a set 
of poor hysterical wretches, and I will show you 
that I can mesmerise them as well as you, by 
doing nothing.'''' Tlie enterprising experimenta- 
o 

194 MESMERISM BY DOING NOTHING. 

list proceeds to redeem his pledge, and actually 
succeeds, to his great delight and the mystifica- 
tion of the public, in disproving the truth of the 
axiom, "ex niliilo nihil Jit ;^' — for he produces a 
serious disease, hysteria, by the compelling power 
of nothing ! Upon this, the obstructives congra- 
tulate each other, and call upon the public to 
put down the now nailed humbug. Would not 
the public suppose that this mesmerising by no- 
thing was an ingenious and original experiment of 
the anti-mesmeric school of j>hilosophy ? And 
yet the truth is, that they were taught their 
favourite trick by tlie Mesmerists ; who have not 
only declared, that this can be done, but that it 
is a natural consequence of their proceedings, if 
carried to a certain extent. It is often very diffi- 
cult, and laborious, to excite the mesmeric action 
in tlie constitution ; but being once excited, a very 
slight recurrence to the original processes will 
bring on the paroxysm in all its first intensity, 
and if the excitement of the nervous system is 
kept up by frequent mesmerising, it takes on an 
independent diseased action, obeying constitu- 
tional laws which we do not understand : we, 
in fact, have inoculated the system with a nervous 
disease which often acts spontaneously, esjjccially 
on any reference to the primary exciting cause ; 

CONSEQUENCE OF FKEQUENT MESMERISING. 195 

and at this stage the candid medical observer 
steps in, and demands the applause of an admiring 
and confounded world, for having done with 
*' nothing," what had cost his stupid mesmeric 
brother so much trouble to effect. 

It is hardly credible that Dr. Elliotson had 
expressly said, and that our candid philosophers 
knew it : — " At length there is sometimes such 
sensibility, that almost any thing will induce sleep ; 
indeed, no process at last may be requisite to 
jjroduce the effect. I have three patients, whom 
I was originally some weeks in sending to sleep, 
though I gave each half an hour daily of manipu- 
lations, and gazing ; but who now go to sleep on 
my merely raising my hand, or looking at them 
when tiicy are prepared to expect sleep. I told 
each of them that, if she sat still, I would mes- 
merise her in the next room througli the door. 
I retired, shut the door behind me, did nothing, 
but walked into a further room, turned back, and 
found her asleep : so with the other two in succes- 
sion. While I did this, I thought as little of 
them as possible, and busied myself with any thing 
to distract my attention." — Mesmerists in all 
parts of the world have stated the same fact, 
and I can bear the most ample testimony to its 
truth. 

O 3 

196 MESMERISING BY NOTHING. ' 

What candid mind, after considering this ex- 
planation, will regard " mesmerising by nothing," 
as a demonstration of the imposture of Mes- 
merism ? 

I was explaining the mesmeric disease (for such 
it has become, at this stage) to a party of gentle- 
men, the other day, and while speaking, a man 
anticipated my intention to mesmerise him " by 
nothing," by becoming intensely entranced on 
the spot, when I was not regarding him. The 
gentlemen, and Dr. Scott among them, used 
every means to ascertain his condition, and were 
as well convinced that he had lost his senses, as 
that they were in possession of theirs : — in fact, 
although the paroxysm was spontaneous, he would 
have borne a severe surgical oj^eration without 
feeling it. I went to the hospital to-day (Sth 
Dec. 1845) after writing the last line, and had 
there the pleasure of meeting Dr. Behn, Profes- 
sor of Anatomy and Physiology in the Univer- 
sity of Kiel, Mr. Kiellcrup, Naturalist, and JNIr. 
Blyth, Curator of the Asiatic Society's museum : 
the two former gentlemen are attached to the 
Danish frigate, now here on a political and scien- 
tific mission. As all three were observers of 
nature by j)rofessiou, I thought it a good oppor- 
tunity to correct my own impressions by theirs. 

MESMERIC INSENSIBILITT. 197 

if different from mine, and therefore submitted to 
their notice cases of direct and indirect Mesmer- 
ism. A man was brought before us with an en- 
larged and tender testis, and of the latter point 
Dr. Behn satisfied himself and friends, by press- 
ing the part — there could be no mistake about 
it. I then, by the hands and breath, mesmerised 
him, standing before me, till he could not open 
his eyes, and the sensibility of the skin had dis- 
appeared. Dr. Behn then used any degree of 
pressure he chose to apply to the tender part, and 
the man's face was as placid as a statue of 
Somnus ; every means was used to ascertain the 
state of the skin and the oi-gans of sense, and it 
was clear that the ear was the only organ that 
transmitted any sensation to the brain, and this 
only of sound ; when water was squirted suddenly 
into his ear, he said that he felt nothing, and on 
waking, he was surprised to find his face wet. I 
also converted him into a somnambulist, that the 
gentlemen might at once have before them as 
many as possible of the genuine mesmeric phe- 
nomena. Another man was then brought ; and on 
asking him about his health, he said that he was 
feverish and had a severe pain in the side. This 
■was evidently the case ; for Dr. Behn pressed 
between the ribs, and found the intercostal spaces 

o 3 

198 HYSTERIC THEOlir. 

exceedingly tender. I then put him in a comep 
of the room, and bid him sleep : in less than five 
minutes he was asleep, could not turn round, or 
open liis eyes, catalepsy was established, and all 
sensibility had disappeared j as Dr. Behn ascer- 
tained by now pressing between the ribs to any 
degree he pleased ; — and not only so, the whole 
chest was seen to be catalepsed and immovable. 
His eyelids were forced open, and the vi'hite of 
the eye could only be seen. The moment he awoke. 
Dr. Behn again made pressure on the intercostal 
spaces, and he showed immediate and acute suf- 
fering. — In a word, the spontaneous mesmeric 
condition differed in no particular from that in- 
duced by the direct application of the mesmeric 
influence, and my visiters seemed to be perfectly 
satisfied of the reality of the symptoms in both 
states. 

It would be tedious to dwell on this point far- 
ther, and I hope enough has been said to convince 
the public that, in general, when jieople are said 
to have been mesmerised "by nothing," it is a cer- 
tain proof that something has pre-disposed to this, 
and we know nothing that can do this but Mes- 
merism^ It is hardly worth while to dispute about 
names ; and if it is allowed that I can cure nervous 
headaches, and perform painless surgical operations 

MODE OF STUDYING MESMERISM. 199 

by hysteria, call the process hysteric or mesmeric — 
I care not. 

But after all, there is a satisfaction in calling 
things by their right names, and I cannot possibly 
see how hysteria has got into my hospitals, where 
I never saw it before — coolies and felons not 
being at all nervous subjects. I have, therefore, 
generated a new disease among my patients by no- 
thing, or l)y using the mesmeric processes. Which 
is the more likely, I leave my readers to decide. 
As natural hysteria may be supposed to be more 
powerful than the imitation, I shall look with im- 
patience for the announcement, in " The Morning 
Post," that Mrs. Freak has been cured of her ner- 
vous headaches by the skilful application of hj's- 
teria, and Lady Tantrum has had her arm cut 
off when in a fit of hysterics, without knowing it. 
These should be easy feats for our fashionable 
physicians and surgeons, as they have the disease 
and antidote ready made to their hands ; whereas, 
it costs me and my assistants great trouble to 
make the coolies and prisoners of Bengal hysteri- 
cal, to the degree necessary to render them insen- 
sible to the loss of their members. 

But seriously, if medical men wish to see and 
vmderstand the effects of Mesmerism on the body, 
the natural and rational mode of proceeding is to 
o 4 

200 MODE OF STUDYING MESMERISM." 

attempt to develope them in the persons of their 
own patients ; and if they will take a tithe of 
the trouble I have been at, I can promise them 
very general success. The finest, as well as the 
most striking phenomena will thenbe equally dia- 
gnostic to their practised eyes, and their under- 
standings will be left clear, and free to study 
:\nd imitate the curative processes of Nature, 
undisturbed by doubts and susj)icion8 regarding 
the powers of observation and the honesty of 
others. 

201 

CHAP. VII. 

Mesmerism in Surgorjj. — Journal of Practical Mesmerism. 
— Mesmeric Trance : A Leg straightened in ; Colic cured 
hij ; Penis amputated in ; Arm straightened in ; Arm 
amputated in ; Breast cut off in ; Abscess opened in ; Heel 
flaijed in ; Tooth extracted in ; End of Thumb cut off in ; 
Arm laid open in ; Three Abscesses opened in ; Simis laid 
open in ; Gum cut away in ; Invasion of the leaking by 
the sleeping State. — Mesmeric Trance : Htjpertrophied 
Prepuce cut off in ; Suppurating Pile in ; Both great 
Toe Nails cut out in ; Knee straightened in ; Ulcer on 
Temple burned with Muriatic Acid in ; Seton introduced, 
^•c. in ; Tumour in Groin removed in ; Fungoid Sores 
pared off in; Scirrhus Testes extirpated in; ~Cataract 
operated on in ; Malignant Disease of Testes extirpated 
in ; Unhealthy Sore pared in ; Hypertropkied Prepuce 
cut off in ; Pain extinguished by ; Return on awaking ; 
Amptitation of Penis in ; Unhealthy Sores pared in ; Two 
Operations for Hydrocele in. — Mesmerism alike favour- 
able to the Operator and the Patient. 

In Surgery, the benefits of Mesmerism are not 
confined to the extinction of pain during an oper- 
ation, but are of the greatest general and parti- 
cular advantage in the after-treatment of surgical 
diseases. The nerves and brain have not been 
shattered by bodily and mental anguish, which 
generally excites an irritative fever in the system, 

202 EXTRACTS FROM JOURNAL 

wasting the powers of life, and rousing local in- 
flammation in the injured part; thereby often 
destroying all the hopes and precautions of the 
surgeon. In the mesmeric sleep, only the 
necessary local injury has been Inflicted ; and on 
awaking, the patient sometimes feels no pain 
whatever, and generally only a slight smarting in 
tiie wound ; and the constitution sets about re- 
pairing the breach of substance quietly, and under 
the best possible circumstances: if local jjains 
follow, they can be easily removed by topical 
manipulations ; all which will be seen in the 
following 

Journal of Practical Mesmerism. 

April 20th. — Jeolal, my washerman, aged thir- 
ty-five, lias been eighteen months ill ; first with 
dysentery, afterwards with rheumatic fever, in 
consequence of which his left knee is bent upon 
the thigh at a right angle. 

I considered him to Ije a hopeless cripple. I 
mesmerised him to-day in a quarter of an hour. 
At first, he supported his knee with both hands ; 
but soon allowed me to remove them, and sus- 
pend them in the air. The leg was then gra- 

OF PKACTICAL MESMERISM. 203 

dually extended, and straightened to a consider- 
able extent, without awaking him. 

April 21st. — The process was repeated to-day, 
and more force used, which awoke him ; the leg 
was still farther improved. 

April 22d. — The pulley was used to-day, and 
very considerable power ajiplied before he awoke. 
The muscular contraction is now nearly overcome, 
and the remaining stiffness of the knee seems to 
be from the tendons and ligaments about the joint, 
and will probably yield to mechanical extension, by 
exercise. 

May 11th. — He can now walk without a stick, 
but the fibrous contractions give way slowly. I 
am convinced that direct force might have torn 
the muscles of the thigh, but could not have re- 
laxed them. 

June 22d. — His leg is now quite straight, 
and the knee flexible ; he has got a violent colic, 
and when speaking to me fell down in a fainting 
state. — Ordered to be mesmerised. 

June 23d. — He slept for an hour, and awoke 
much relieved yesterday; but a paroxysm re- 
turned last night, and still continues. — Repeat the 
Mesmerism. 

June 24th. — He remained three hours in the 
mesmeric sleep yesterday, and awoke quite well. 

204 EXTRACTS FROM JOURNAL 

and continues so. His leg is now quite strong, 
and he has returned to his work. 

May 12th. — Busoo, a Khitmatgan. There is 
a fistulous opening in the urethra under the glans 
penis, which is sloughing and requires to be am- 
putated. I desired him to be mesmerised, and 
returned in an hour. I found him asleep, and 
when looking at him, he suddenly opened his 
eyes, but immediately went to sleep again, and in 
five minutes after I cut off" the glans, without 
awaking him. He awoke soon after, and said it 
was from fear, not pain. 

April 20th, eleven o'clock, A. m. — Kangalee, 
a peasant ; aged twenty, weak, and ill nourished. 
He had a fever four years ago, after which sores 
broke out in different parts of his body, and have 
left large cicatrices like burns. There is one 
about the left elbow joint, which has been per- 
manently contracted to nearly a right angle, for 
seven months. He was catalepsed in twenty 
minutes ; a bottle was then put under his elbow 
for a fulcrum, and the arm was gradually extended 
by depressing the hand. He moved a little, and 
the muscles contracted occasionally, but soon 
melted as it were, under my hand, and I left him, 

OF rKACTlCAL MESMERISM. 205 

with his arm perfectly straight, extended in the 
air, and still asleep.- — Two o'clock p. M. He 
awoke half an hour ago. Sees his arm is straight, 
knows not how it was done, has no pain, and can 
move it freely. 

May 2d. — He pulls the punkah daily with 
his left arm, for exercise. 

June 14th. — Dismissed cured. 

May 5th. — Eantoonee Buttachangie, a Brah- 
min ; aged forty. There is a prodigious Fungus 
ha3matodes protruding from the left elbow-joint. 
A swelling took place at the joint when he was 
five years old, and has gone on increasing 
gradually, but the skin remained entire till an 
incision was made by a native doctor, twelve days 
ago, when the bloody mass started through the 
integuments. It exactly resembles the contents 
of an old aneurism ; the structure of the fungus 
having been broken up by the actual cautery 
applied to it all over, in order to stop the bleeding : 
it was a frightful mass. I desired him to be care- 
fully mesmerised, and went to Chinsurah, to con- 
sult with Dr. Elton, in charge of the troops there. 
"We returned to the hospital together, and found 
him in a profound sleep, and decided to take the 
arm off instantly. It was removed, without his 

206 EXTRACTS FKOM JOURNAL 

moving or complaining, and Dr. Elton assured me 
that liis countenance had never changed. He 
awoke immediately after the limb was off, and 
declared, again and again, that he was aware of 
nothing having been done to him till lie awoke 
and saw his arm was gone ; and he then saw Dr. 
Elton for the first time. 

May 13th. — Is doing well. 

May 16th. — He complains of pain in the 
stump to-day. — To be mesmerised. 

May 1 7th. — He was easily put to sleep 
yesterday, and slept for three hours ; was free 
from pain when he awoke, and continues so. 

May 11th. — Meeroolla, a policeman; aged 
twenty-eight, strong and healthy looking. He 
has got a fatty tumour of the right mamma, which 
he begged me to remove to-day. I desired him 
to lie down, and let me carefully examine it, and 
commenced mesmerising him. In ten minutes he 
was fast asleep ; in five minutes more I transfixed 
the tumour with a hook, drew it up off the muscles, 
and cut it out, without disturbing him in the least, 
and he did not awake till half iin hour afterwards. 
He declares that he felt no pain tdl he awoke, 
and remembers nothing after my hands were 
placed on his stomach, which was in about five 
minutes from the commencement. 

OF PRACTICAL MESMERISM. 207 

May 11th. — Podoo, a young Hindoo woman, 
has a swelling over the false ribs of the right side, 
requiring an incision to be made in it. I desired 
the compounder to mesmerise her, while I was 
engaged with the last patient, and she was ready 
before I was : a deep incision, an inch long, was 
made into the swelling, without awaking her, and 
I left her sleeping. 

May 14th. — Maduh, a healthy-looking Cooly ; 
aged thirty. I saw him for the first time to-day, 
at 11 o'clock. He has got a sore on the heel, of 
two years' standing ; the skin is half an inch thick, 
separated from the subjacent parts all round, and 
requires to be removed, — To be mesmerised. I 
went on to Chinsurah, where I had the pleasure to 
be introduced to the Reverend ]Mr. B anergic, who 
is there on a visit, and who begged me to show 
him a person under the mesmeric influence. I 
replied that I disapproved of experimenting with 
so fonnidable a power, to gratify mere curiosity ; 
but I had left a man under the process, and that 
if he would go to the hospital, on chance, he 
might possibly be gratified. I returned to the 
hospital after an hour, and there found the 
Reverend Mr. Fisher, Mr. Banergie, and Mr. 
Money, the collector. The patient was asleep. 

208 EXTRACTS FROM JOURNAL 

and I immediately commenced dissecting the 
thickened skin from tlie plantar fascia, which was 
very difficult, owing to its thickness and hardness. 
It almost resembled a horse's hoof, and removal 
must have been very painful vmder ordinary 
circumstances. He was completely insensible to 
the pain however, and remained asleeji a quarter 
of an hour after I had finished. 

Mr. Banergie then questioned him, in Bengalee, 
regarding his feelings, and he protested that he 
felt nothing till he awoke. Many of the patients, 
already mentioned being still in hospital, INIr. 
Banergie examined them in Bengalee, and in no 
instance did their accounts vary from what I 
had related. 

May 26th. — Ram Dass, a large robust man, 
has a supernumerary tooth between the eye-tooth, 
and the first grindei', growing horizontally into 
his mouth, and causing him great annoyance. I 
entranced him in a quai'ter of an hour, lying on 
a mattress on the table, and proceeded to open 
his jaws. It cost me some trouble to relax the 
temporal muscles, and I had to proceed cautiously, 
as he did not appear to be under the extreme 
influence of the mesmeric power. From its 
position, it was difficult to lay hold of the tooth, but 
it was at last grasped, and extracted. He moved. 

or PRACTICAL MESMERISM. 209 

and moaned a little, but I soon tranquillised him 
again, and lie did not awake till almost suffocated 
by the blood. He declared he awoke from this 
cause, and not from pain. 

May 29th. — Sibehurn Sing, a young robust 
man, had his thumb nearly cut through by a 
sword, fourteen days ago. An attempt was 
made to unite it, but failed ; and the point of the 
finger would be a nuisance if kept. In ten 
minutes I made him insensible, and cut oif the 
end of the thumb without awaking him. He 
soon after quietly opened his eyes, and I asked 
him : — " Have you been asleep ? " " Yes." " Have 
you any pain? " " No." "Has any thing hurt you 
to-day?" "No." "Do you wish your nail cut 
off? " " Yes." " Look at it." He did so, looked 
confounded, and exclaimed, " It's gone ! " " Who 
did it ?" " God knows." " How did it happen, 
has it fallen off itself?" "I can't tell — I know 
nothing about it." 

May .30th. — Modoomohun Ray, a fine boy, 
twelve years old, was brought to the hospital, 
fourteen days ago, with a compound fracture of both 
bones of the forearm, and my assistants had several 
times tried to mesmerise him, in the hope of 
P 

210 EXTRACTS FROM JOURNAL 

assuaging the pain, but witliout success. Matter 
has formed, and the wound must be enlarged, 
upwards and downwards. As he was appre- 
hensive, I put a piece of wet cloth over his eyes, 
and went on with my affairs, telling him that it 
would cool his brain. The people were all 
dismissed, and, approaching him unobserved, I 
succeeded in entrancing him in ten minutes, and 
laid open the arm without disturbing him. I 
returned after three hours, and found him still 
sleeping. On awaking, he said the pain was 
much less, and that no one had hurt him that day. 

June 2d. — Gungaram Dass, a prisoner, was 
injured, ten days ago, by some rubbish falling on 
him, and in consequence three large abscesses 
have formed at the elbow, wrist, and ankle, 
which require to be opened. I subdued him in a 
few minutes, opened the abscesses, and left him 
sleeping. On my return, after two hours, he had 
just awoke, and I fount! him sitting up looking at 
his wounds. I asked him how the pus had 
escaped, since I saw him in the morning? He 
could not tell. Of its own accord ? He supposed so. 
Had any one cut or hurt him to-day ? No one. 

June 1 6th. — Toorab, a peasant, aged thirty. 

OF PRACTICAL MESMEKISM. 211 

of a rickety constitution, has a sinus, six inclies 
in length, under the pectoral muscle, of seven 
months' standing. We have not been able to 
close it by any means, and it is necessary to lay 
it 023en. He was entranced by one of my assist- 
ants, and I laid the whole of the diseased tract open 
without his knowing it, and left him sleeping. 

June 15th. — He awoke soon after I left him ; 
and on awaking, asked where the blood had come 
from ? He lias hardly had any pain in the wound, 
and has no recollection of being disturbed in his 
sleep yesterday. 

July 9th. — Mrs. dormant is suffering from 
one of her wisdom teeth ; half of it has come 
through, but the rest is covered with tlie indurated 
and ulcerated gum. I explained that the source 
of the irritation must be removed, by cutting 
away the offending gum. 

July 10th. — I entranced her to-day, sitting on 
a couch, in the presence of her husband and his 
sister ; laid her back and cut away the gum 
without awaking her, and left her sleeping. 

July 11th. — This is a very interesting case, as it 

shows the invasion of the waking by the sleeping 

state. Mrs. C, on awaking yesterday, arose as 

if from common sleep, and went to adjust her 

p 2 

212 EXTRACTS FROM JOURNAL, 

hair in the glass, when she saw blood about her 
mouth, and this first attracted her attention to 
the tooth ; she thought the gum had burst, and 
was still expecting me to call. For, strange to 
Bay, she had no recollection of having seen me 
that day, nor of what happened for half an hour 
before I put her to sleep. The incidents, her 
husband informed me, that occurred during this 
time were these : — She received letters from the 
postman, and paid for them ; a lady came to visit 
her ; and then I arrived, and sat conversing with 
them a short time. After seeing the lady to her 
carriage, 1 returned and mesmerised her: — all these 
occurrences were blotted from her mind. She feels 
quite well, and awoke much refreshed. If such 
inroads are made into the regions of sense, at one 
sitting, the effect of frequent unnecessary ex- 
periments may be guessed at in such sensitive 
subjects as this lady ; and this is the power trifled 
with, and made a show of for money ! * 

* While in London, arranging for tlie publication ofthis'work, 
I had the pleasure of being introduced to Dr. Elliotson, under 
"whose guidance I mesmerised two females, althougli I had never 
before seen Mesmerism, or attempted to practise it. These 
women being accustomed to be mesmerised, I was not surprised 
at my success ; but an event which happened a few days after- 
wards, astonished both myself and the friends who witnessed the 

OF PRACTICAL MESMERISM. 213 

July ITtli. — To-day, in the presence of Mr. 
Davidson, commissioner of tlie district, and 
Mr. Alexander, Registrar to the Board of 
Revenue (who have requested me to name them 
as witnesses), I ojjerated on a man for hyper- 
trophy of the prepuce, without awaking him. 
After letting him sleep some time, I asked the 
gentlemen if I should awake him, and at their 
desire, did so in a moment, by blowing in his 
eyes. He ^vas restored at once to full conscious- 
ness, and Mr. Davidson remarked, " I wish 

Doctor was here, who says you do this by 

opium." My visiters, understanding Bengalee, 
asked him, if any one had hurt him to-daj'. He 

occurrence. At an evening party I met a young gentleman 
from Oxford, who requested me to mesmerise him. He had 
never seen Mesmerism ; and yet, in one minute, liis eyes closed 
under my manipulations, and in less than three minutes he was 
fast asleep. Being diffident in my own powers, I de-mesmerised 
him as speedily as possible. He thus described his sensations. 
" The moment you pointed your fingers at me, 1 felt uncom- 
fortable. I dared not meet your gaze ; a sensation of heat, 
resembling a stream of electricity, commenced at my forehead, 
and followed the course of your hands, down to the pit of my 
stomach. I could not open my eyes. I knew I was sitting on 
a chair before you, and the last idea in my mind, before falling 
fast asleep, was this — Shall I ever be allowed to rise again?'' 

This fact seems to prove that the power of mesmerising, and 
of being mesmerised, is more general in this country than is com- 
monly supposed. — D. E. 

p 3 

'214 EXTKACTS FEOM JOURNAL 

said, " No." If he would like his disease to be 
removed ? He answered, that he would thank 
God if any one would do so. He was then 
desired to sit up, and his cloth removed; when, 
■seeing his nuisance was gone, he fell back with 
an exclamation of wonder and gratitude. 

July 25th. — Buggabuttec, a Hindoo woman, 
aged forty, has been troubled with a suppurating 
pile, as big as the end of my thumb. She was 
mesmerised at eleven o'clock, and at twelve I 
cut off the tumour, and thougli she moved and 
moaned, on awaking half an hour after, did not 
know that any thing had been done to her. 

Aug. 4th. — Sona, a Hindoo woman; twenty- 
five years old. Both nails of the great toes are 
destroyed to the roots, by the combined effects of 
syphilis and mercury, and their place is filled 
with a fungoid nicer. She was mesmerised at 
twelve o'clock, and at half past one, i'. m., I dis- 
sected out the entire root of one nail, without 
awaking her: her left hand and arm trembled 
only, and this was subdued in a few minutes, by 
her hand being held in mine. — Left her sleep- 
ing. 

Aug. 5th. — Again entranced, and I cut out 

OF PRACTICAL MESMERISM. 215 

the other nail without annoying her. On neither 
occasion has she had any pain on awaking. 

Aug. 6th. — Golam Hassein. His knee has 
been contracted to a considerable extent for two 
months, from rheumatism. He was mesmerised 
for the first time at eleven o'clock, and I made 
his leg straight at one o'clock, the new ligamen- 
tous adhesions were felt, and heard, cracking 
under my hands. — He felt no pain on awaking. 

Aug. 8th. — Gendo, a Hindoo woman; aged 
fifty. There is a large sloughing ulcer, covering 
all her right temple. She was mesmerised at 
ten o'clock, a.m. ; and at half-past eleven, I freely 
applied muriatic acid to the whole sore, without 
her showing any sensibility. She awoke twenty 
minutes after, and knew nothing about it. 

Aug. 9th. — Parbuttie, an elderly Hindoo wo- 
man, has a sinus extending from the inner ankle, 
under the calf, to the outer side of the leg near 
the knee, which is contracted by a dense cicatrix 
running two thirds round the joint, and involving 
the hamstrings : the knee has been in this state 
for ten years. Being put to sleep, a counter 
opening was made in the leg, and a seton run 
r 4 

216 EXTRACTS FROM JOURNAL 

through the leg, without hei' feeling it. I then 
leant all my weight on the knee, and succeeded 
in extending it a little, but the diseased stiiictures 
would yield no farther. A heavier and stronger 
gentleman then applied all his power, and eifected 
a little more, but it was evident that no force 
short of breaking tlie limb could straighten it. 
But it was equally certain, that any common 
muscular or ligamentous contraction must have 
yielded on the spot. — The woman continued to 
sleep for hours after. 

Aug. 23d. — Napaul Bagdy, a husbandman, 
lias a singular fungoid mass in the right groin ; 
it is tlic size of a small cauliflower, and like 
it in aiipcarance, the surface being whitish 
from sloughing. It spreads from a peduncle 
in the abdominal ring, and bleeds much when 
handled. His father says tliat, at his birth, tlicre 
was only one testis in the scrotum, and no trace 
of the other was seen till he was six months old, 
when a swelling appeared in the groin. Thia 
gradually increased till his twelfth year, but was 
not painful or inconvenient. About this time, 
he was attacked with fever, attended with in- 
creased sensibility and increase of size in the 
tumour, and the paroxysms came on twice a 

OP PKACTICAL MESMERISM. 217 

month, up to June last, wlien he applied to a 
barber-surgeon who used means to ripen the 
swelling. In the course of a few days it was 
punctured, and blood only followed. The 
opening was plugged as well as possible with a 
candle covered with cloth smeared with some 
ointment, but in a few days this came out, and 
the following day, a fungus shot out of the wound, 
and daily increased to its present size. It is now 
a very foul mass, its surface mortified, and the 
crevices filled with maggots. 

Au"-. 26th. — He was mesmerised after two 
hours' trial, and the mass removed without his 
feeling it. 

Aug. 31st. — Discharged at his own request — 
wound looking well. 

Sept. 1st. — Raimgopal, a young Hindoo, 
has got a high syphilitic sore, about the size 
of half a lemon, on each side of his nates. He 
was entranced on the first trial; and in the 
presence of Dr. Ross and Dr. Sissmore, I 
turned liim round like a log, and cut oflP both the 
excrescences level with the skin, then turned him 
back again, and left him sleeping. It is needless 
to say he did not feel it. 

218 EXTRACTS FROM JOURNAL 

Oct. 8th. — Nazir, a peasant, aged sixty, has 
sutFered from enlarged and scirrhous testis for 
four years ; the parts are as large as a child's 
head, and extirpation is necessary. — He was en- 
tranced after two hours to-day. 

Oct. 10th. — He was mesmerised the second 
time, to-day, in the presence of ]Mr. Sutherland, 
Dr. Owen, the Eeverend Mr. Bradbury, Major 
Eiddell, Mr. Higgen, ]\Ir. Muller, Mr. Graves, 
Messrs. Savigny, Mr. Calder, and Mr. Bartlett. 

I removed the parts without his showing any 
sign of sensibility till the last artery was being 
tied : he then woke up, but went immediately to 
sleep again for half an hour, and on awaking, said 
that he was only conscious of a little pain when 
he awoke for a moment, and found me to be tying 
something. He was cheerful and talkative, and 
showed no signs of sulFerlng or exhaustion in his 
coimtcnance or manner, and said the pain in the 
wound was very trifling. 

Nov. 20th. — Mohun Dass, a jieasant ; aged 
fifty-five : has got a cataract in one eye. He was 
entranced on the first trial, and I broke down the 
lens in the presence of I»Iajor Smith of H. M.'s 
9th Regt., without awaking him. 

Nov. 21st. — There is much pain in the eye. 

OP PEACTICAL MESMERISM. 219 

— To be mesmerised, and leeches applied. He 
slept for two hours with the leeches on, and on 
awaking, the pain was nearly gone. 

Nov. 26th. — ■ Mahes Banergie, a Brahmin, 
aged forty, has got an enlarged testis, the size of 
a child's head ; it is red, glistening, and very 
painful, and there is a scrotal hernia above it. 
He was entranced on the first trial, and I re- 
turned the gut into the abdomen, handling the 
inflamed part very rudelj', without his showing 
the least sensibility. I then, in the presence of 
Captain D. L. Richardson, dissected out the dis- 
eased organ. The operation was tedious, as I had 
to carefully separate the mass from the hernial 
sack. He moved, as in an uneasy dream, but did 
not awake till we were tying the arteries, which 
were very numerous ; he then said, that he had 
felt nothing till that moment. The muscular 
movements, sometimes seen, looked more like the 
contractions induced by cutting a recently dead 
animal, than the common contortions from pain ; 
and I believe may be avoided by patience, as 
every trance seems to deepen the insensibility. 
I need not point out to the surgeon the 
advantage he would derive from the mesmeric 
trance, in reducing strangulated hernia, and spas- 
modic strictures of the urethra. 

220 EXTRACTS FROM JOURNAL 

Nov. 30th. — Mahes, a peasant, aged thirty-two, 
has got a deep ulcei* of a year's standing, at the 
root of the penis, that iDcnetrates under the pubes ; 
the edges are callous, and prevent it healing. He 
was subdued in two hours on the first day, and in 
the presence of Dr. Tritton and a party of officers 
of the 71st Regiment N. I., I pared off the margins 
of the sore without his awaking. He awoke a few 
minutes after, said he had been asleep, and 
dreamt that some one had pulled him off the 
roof of a house, and declared that he felt no pain 
whatever at the moment of sjjcaking. I there- 
upon proposed that he should allow me to cut 
him a very little, as it would facilitate the healing 
of the sore, but he would not hear of it. Dr. 
Tritton and the rest also joined their persuasions ; 
but he implored us for the love of God to let him 
alone — he would rather die than be cut, that the 
proposal had already killed him, &c. He was 
desired to sit up, aud his cloth removed ; on see- 
ing the altered state of things, he was greatly 
alarmed and puzzled, and on being shown the 
pieces of flesh, said they had certainly belonged 
to him before he went to sleeji, aud how I got 
hold of them he had no idea. As I found myself 
in the company of candid and dispassionate ob- 
servers, I showed them INIesmerism in all its 

OF PRACTICAL MESMERISM. 221 

physical symptoms, whether directly or indirectly 
produced, and Dr. Tritton very kindly said at 
parting, that he was quite convinced of the reality 
of the symptoms from first to last, whether pro- 
duced by sometldng, or nothing, and that he now 
quite understood the " mesmeric disease," and 
said I was at liberty to say so, if I pleased. 

Dec. 1st. — I had the pleasure of receiving a 
visit from the gentlemen engaged in the railway 
survey, consisting of Mr. Simms, Captain Western, 
Captain Boileau, Mr. Fraser, and Dr. Macauley. 
They found a man entranced, from whom I was 
about to remove a hypertrophied prej)uce. As he 
appeared to be ready, I commenced at once ; but 
seeing that he shrunk from the knife, without 
awaking however, I desisted, and proposed to 
adjourn to the other hosjntal, saying that this 
man would probably be ready on our return. 
We accordingly went, and I requested Dr. Mac- 
auley to ascertain if a man brought before us 
had pain in his scrotum. He said there was no 
doubt ; and the rest were satisfied that there was no 
mistake about it. I ordered him to be entranced 
before them, which was easily done, as he had 
been twice operated on for hydrocele, in the 
trance. I pulled him up, and set him on his feet 

222 EXTRACTS FKOM JOURNAL 

sleejiing, befoi-e the gentlemen, and begged them 
to deal with them as they pleased. He was cata- 
lepsed l)y them in the most painful attitudes, to 
which he was as indifferent as a man of clay ; and 
Dr. INIacaulcy now squeezed the painful part with 
as much effect as if the man had been a mummy. 
I stripped him naked ; and when he awoke and 
found himself standing in the presence of gentle- 
men in this condition, his look of wonder and 
shame, if not natural, was most beautiful acting, 
and he certainly escaped being found out. As 
soon as he awoke, Dr. Macanley pressed the dis- 
eased part, and there could be no doubt about his 
feelings on the subject; — the pain was evidently 
instantaneous and acute. On returning to the 
charity hospital, I removed the enlarged cellular 
substance from the whole penis ; the man now 
did not shrink in the least from the knife, and 
slept a good while after the operation. On ques- 
tioning him, he said tliat he had been put to 
sleep to be operated on ; but as he was now awake, 
he would wish it to be put off till to-morrow. 
We then showed him the liberties that had been 
taken with him, and he recognised his property ; 
but how it had changed owners he had no con- 
ception. 

OF PRACTICAL MESMERISM. 223 

Dec. 21st. — Samoo, a weaver, has got a bad 
sloughing sore of the prepuce and glans, of a 
year's standing. — To be mesmerised. 

Dec. 22d. — He was mesmerised for two hours 
yesterday, and slept an hour afterwards, apparently 
naturally. To-day I saw him after half an hour's 
mesmerising, when tlie trance was fully established, 
his whole body being rigid. As I had not time 
then, I left him, and returned in an hour, and found 
his body still stiff. I cut open and took off the 
prepuce ; and finding the glans half eroded, I cut 
it off too. The man showed no sign of life ; the 
body continued stiff, and tlic pulse natural. lie 
awoke in half an hour afterwards, and did not 
discover that any thing had been done to him till 
he went to make water. 

Dec. 29th. — Malies, operated on last month. 
The sore is callous, and it will greatly advance his 
cure to have it pared. — To be mesmerised in my 
absence. I went on to Chinsurah, and there 
met the Rev. Mr. Cahusac, and the Eev. ]Mr. JIul- 
lins, wlio requested to see any mesmeric cases in 
hand. They returned with me to the hospital, 
and wc found Mahes entranced. I pared the 
sore, and he did not awake till a quarter of an 

224 EXTRACTS FROM JOURNAL 

hour afterwards. Mr. Mullins, who speaks Ben- 
galee, asked him if he had been disturbed in his 
sleep. He said " No ; " and that the pain was 
not greater than before he went to sleep. 

We found another man entranced, whose elbow 
had been dislocated for twenty days. I tried to 
reduce it, using all my force, but did not succeed ; 
he moved uneasily, but did not awake till ten 
minutes after I had desisted, and then said that 
nothing liad disturbed him. 

Dec. 26th. — -Goluck Seit, a prisoner, has got 
a hydrocele on each side. A young Hindoo sub- 
dued him to-day in ten minutes, on the first trial. 
When about to operate, I saw that he possessed 
a consecrated nail, on one of his little fingers ; 
and knowing the value attached to this, I resolved 
to get possession of it, if possible, as a moral test 
of his being insensible, for he would as soon have 
cut a cow's throat and eaten a beefsteak as al- 
lowed me to cut off his nail, while in possession 
of his senses. It is a common practice with the 
Hindoos to vow their hair, beards, or nails to 
Shiva, the Destroyer, in the liopc of averting his 
anger ; and this man had consecrated his little 
finger-nail to Shiva Forakissore, — Forakissore, 

OF PRACTICAL MESMERISM. 225 

in this district, being a famous shrine of the 
God. I transferred the sacred excrescence to my 
pocket, without any remonstrance being made, 
and then performed the less formidable operation 
of withdrawing the water, and throwing in the 
injection, of which he knew nothing, on awaking 
two hours after. His only distress was the loss 
of his nail, and he spent hours in hunting for it, 
supposing that it had been broken off by 
accident. 

Dec, 29th. — I entranced Goluck Seit to-day 
in five minutes ; and in tlie presence of Mr. Cahu- 
sac and Mr. Mullins, operated on the other hydro- 
cele, to which he was as indifferent as on tlie first 
occasion. But before putting him to sleep, I 
showed the gentlemen how painful was the side 
operated on three days ago ; and yet, in five 
minutes after, he allowed me to squeeze his tes- 
ticle to any extent, without exhibiting a vestio-e 
of uneasiness. I awoke him in half an hour, that 
Mr. Mullins might question him ; and he said 
that he saw the water was gone, but how it had 
escaped he had no idea. 

Dec. 30th. — Bungsee, operated on last month 
for a scrotal tumour. The wound, from his de- 
bilitr.ted condition, is glazed and callous, and is 
Q 

226 ADVANTAGES OF MESMERISM. 

wasting him with a useless discharge. It would 
greatly shorten his cure to f)are the sore, and 
bring it together with deep sutures ; but I could 
hardly bring myself to propose it to a person in 
his senses, as it would be as painful as the capital 
operation. INIesmerism, however, makes surgery 
pleasant to both parties; and having easily en- 
tranced him, I pared and shaped the sore very 
leisurely (it was six inches long, by two deep), 
inserted the deep sutures, and left him sleeping. 
He awoke after four hours. 

Jan. 2d. — The sutures were taken out to-day, 
and the sore is adherent throughout. 

This power of remedying any defect in the 
operation afterwards, without inflicting pain, is 
not one of the least advantages of Mesmerism. 

227 

CHAP. VIII. 

Hypertrophy of the Scrotum ; different Causes of. — Ele- 
phantiasis endemic in Bengal and Loicer Egypt; pro- 
bable Causes of. — Example of Malarious Fever. — True 
Eleplmntiasis of the Scrotum. — Hypertrophy from Hy- 
drocele ; from Syphilis ; Condition of the Organs in- 
volved; Mode of operating; Mismanagement by the 
Native Doctors ; Number of Operations for Six Years 
previous to April, 1845; in the Mesmeric Trance, for 
Eight Months. — Fir.nt Case. — Some Catise for the late 
Increase of Cases. — Operations in the Mesmeric Trance. 

This disease is so common in Bengal, and attains 
such a magnitude, that it deserves a chapter to 
itself, in which it will be seen that if Mesmerism 
cannot prevent it, it is very effectual in assisting 
its removal. These singular, and often prodigious 
tumours are generally called " elephantiasis of the 
scrotum ;" but, correctly speaking, this is a mis- 
nomer, many of them not having their origin in 
the constitutional aiiection called elephantiasis, 
but arising from local irritation and debility of 
the parts, caused by syphilitic sores, or simple 
hydrocele ; and the appearance of the tumours and 
aspect of the patients are often characteristic of 
their respective exciting causes. 

42 

228 DIFFERENT CAUSES OF 

la Fig. VI.* will be seen an excellent specimen 
of the true constitutional elejjliantiasis, in which 
the disease is accompanied with periodic fever, 
and general cachexy to such a degree as to make 
it unsafe to remove the local excrescence, as in the 
individual, whose portrait this is. The disease, in 
tliis shape, is endemic in Bengal almost ex- 
clusively, it being rarely seen in U2jper India, 
and appears to have its origin in a hot, moist, 
malarious, relaxing climate, in which the poor are 
ill-fed and ill-clothed. In EgyjDt it is also 
principally confined to the delta of the Nile, 
which considerably resembles Bengal in climate 
and the condition of its people. Endemic sources 
of disease abound here to a dreadful extent, but 
chiefly originate in the ignorance, inditference, 
and poverty of the people; and an enlightened and 
benevolent government should interfere to prevent 
its subjects perishing in their ignorance, by en- 
forcing stringent police regulations for the im- 
provement of the public health, esiiecially by 
attention to drainage and filling up all unnecessary 
pools of water. Ragged old tanks, and offensive 

* For the reasons .issigncd in the Editor's preface, the 
plates transmitted from India, as portions of this work, are 
not published ; but remain with the publishers for the in- 
spection of the scientific reader — D. E. 

ENDEMIC ELEPHANTIASIS. 229 

pools and holes of water, form a cliain along the 
roadside, in and near all towns and villages, and 
spread like a network over the country; their 
insulation rendering them only the more pesti- 
ferous, by making each an independent hotbed of 
malarious exhalations. The thing is so general, 
that every cottage may be said to be built over a 
green putrefying pool, out of which the mud to 
build the house had been taken, and which is 
reckoned a domestic convenience. Into this all 
the animal and vegetable debris of the houses is 
thrown : the pigs wallow in it, the people wash 
their fish and rice, and bathe in it ; and it is then 
used for cooking and drinking, as it is conveniently 
near, and saves the trouble of going to the nearest 
larse tank, or the river. This accumulation of 
animal and vegetable matter, festering under a 
tropical sun, renders every hole a pest pit, and 
the whole population eat, drink, and breathe per- 
petual infection. The effects are as dreadful as 
might be anticipated in a debilitating climate, and 
among an ill-fed people, and are deeply written 
in the personal appearance of the natives of the 
country. 

Ague, remittent fever, spleen, rheumatism, diar- 
rhoea, dysentery, and cholera are inherited by the 
poor people along with their homes ; and the 
Q 3 

230 DIFFERENT CAUSES OF 

general constitutional debility is evidenced by the 
incredible frequency of elephantiasis, diseases of 
the skin, and parasitic growths on the body. 
Ague and spleen were endemic diseases in Scot- 
land, fifty years ago, when every cottage had its 
"midden" before the door; and if northern 
nations suffer so much from miasmatic influences, 
we can readily imagine their ten'ible energy in 
Bengal, where every aid and aijpliance is afforded 
them. 

I shall give an illustration of the extreme 
gravity of these causes of disease, from a case 
that lately occurred in my private practice, and 
which I am disposed to regard as an acute form 
of tlie disease which, in its chronic shape, gives 
rise to constitutional elephantiasis. On the 16th 
May, 1845, I was requested to visit one of the 
richest Hindoo families here; and on going, found 
eight persons, men, women, and children, labour- 
ing luider different degrees of the same disease, 
and of which two men of the same party had 
died, shortly before. In the worst cases the feet 
were swollen, and hard as in elephantiasis, and a 
brick-red inflammation extended half way up the 
leg, and was still advancing. The others were 
worn out with fe%'er, and their bodies were 
generally or partially dropsical. The party con- 

ENDEMIC ELEPHANTIASIS. 231 

sistecl of one family and its attendants : no other 
persons living in the same house were affected. 
This led me to suspect some local cause of con- 
tamination, and I requested to be allowed to view 
the suite of apartments occupied by this part of 
the family. The house is a large two-storied pile, 
in which, as usual, all the family connections 
live. I could see nothing objectionable about the 
rooms inhabited by my patients ; but, on looking 
out of the back windows, I saw that the house 
rose right over a large, ragged, neglected tank, 
covered with green filth, and smelling vilely, and 
that this was the only part of the house so situated. 
I then examined below, and perceived that the 
water was led upon a brick platform to a passage 
in the lower story, to save the people from going 
out : numerous narrow lanes, the sides as high as 
the house, led from the tank to the different parts 
of the house, and all opened into the court around 
which this family exclusively lived in small ill- 
ventilated rooms. In short, it was a most in- 
genious labyrinth, contrived for receiving and 
retaining all the mejjhitic vapom-s from the tank, 
into which were thrown all the " exuviae" of this 
large family, or rather clan. This year, it so 
happened, was peculiarly adapted for the develop- 
ment of malaria; all the tanks in the district 
Q 4 

232 DESCRIPTION OF 

being dried up to the dregs ; so that, for months, 
this large putrid area had been exhaling death 
among this unfortunate family. The disease, I 
therefore concluded, was only an aggravated form 
of the malarious fever that usually ends In ele- 
phantiasis and dropsy ; the stage of elephantiasis 
being only more acute than usual, from consti- 
tutional peculiarity, or the severity of the disease. 
Being questioned as to their probability of re- 
covery, I said, that there was little hop)e, except 
for one of them, and at this moment (1st Dec), 
one only is alive, but not recovered. 

The true " elephantiasis " scrotal tumours are 
excessively dense in the rind, the cells of the 
cellular membrane being filled with dense fibrinous 
deposit, that makes it look and cut like half- 
tanned hide ; the skin is black, and the mass is 
usually studded with tubercles. 

Fig. VII. shows ^yell the difference between 
constitutional and local disease : this tumour, 
weighing sixty pounds, commenced with hydro- 
cele, and has gone on increasing regularly for the 
last twelve years, without any disturbance of the 
system ; indeed the man is one of the most robust 
Bengalees I ever saw, as his portrait shows ; and 
his nervous system was so unbroken, that all our 
efforts were vain to mesmerise him. I therefore 

SCEOTAL ELEPHANTIASIS. 233 

took it oft' in the iisual way, saving the penis, and 
on the fourth day the wound had united through- 
out. In the tumours arising from hydrocele the 
surface is generally smooth, the skin not dis- 
coloured, and the cellular substance is filled with 
a gelatinous substance, among which the remains 
of the cells, which have been enormously dis- 
tended, are perceived. 

Fig. VIII. is a tumour thirty pounds weight, of 
syphilitic origin. 1. is the enlarged prepuce; 
2. the opening of the urethra ; 3. sloughing sores 
filled with worms, and it will be seen that the 
small excrescences are warts, rather than tubercles ; 
the parietes were a compromise between the two 
other kinds. The patient reported that he had 
syphilis with buboes, twelve years ago, which 
was followed, two years after, by hydrocele of 
both sides of the scrotum, and ever since the en- 
largement had been going on. He was operated 
on before I had made the acquaintance of Mes- 
merism. 

This disease sometimes only attacks the skin of 
the penis ; and this organ, in one instance, was as 
long and thick as a man's arm, and ended in a 
wart bigger than a fist. An incision was made 
down upon the penis from the symphysis pubis ; 
and having freed it, the diseased tube was struck 

234 MODE OF OPERATING ON 

off where it joined the scrotum. I believe that 
the body of the penis will always be found un- 
changed and in situ, in this disease ; the testes 
frequently unaltered, but very variously situated, 
and with common expedition, the bleeding allows 
time enough to save all the organs, if it is thought 
expedient to do so, in tumours of moderate di- 
mensions. Even when the testes are enlarged, 
and castration is performed, the spermatic vessels 
have not their calibre or activity increased (in 
proof of this, I did not secure them at all in one 
case) ; and in general the arterial bleeding is 
moderate, as might be expected in a disease of a 
low organisation. 

The mode of operating I adopt is as follows : 
— The penis being always in situ, as has been said, 
it is immediately found by running a bistoury 
from the opening in the prepuce, wherever it may 
be, up to the symphysis pubis, and a long listouri 
cache is a very convenient instrument for this 
purpose ; it is pushed up till it reaches the pubes, 
and the penis is exposed, at once, by one ovitward 
cut. The penis is then easily freed, and a semi- 
lunar incision carried from its root across each of 
the spermatic cords ; these are easily found ; and 
if the testes prove to lie worth preserving, they 
are reflected back, the incision is extended down 

SCROTAL ELEPHANTIASIS. 235 

to the perineum on both sides, and the mass 
i-apidly removed; if the testes are diseased, the 
whole is removed togetlier. This plan is simple 
and expeditious ; one continued wound suffices 
for finding the testes, and removing the tumour ; 
and the wound has the advantage of being a 
gaping one, discharging the blood and water 
freely, and permitting one to see clearly. By 
this mode I always secure flaps, which often 
adhere in four days by the first intention ; and 
even if they jiartially slough, enough is left to 
support and defend the testes, as they adhere to 
some part of the covering. The testes often 
adhere to the fundus of the tumour, which vex- 
atious complication is generally caused by the 
natives making deep escars with the actual cau- 
tery, in the hojje of discussing the swelling by 
suppuration ; but the irritation only accelerates 
the disease. In these cases the spermatic cords 
are greatly elongated, perhaps a foot long ; and 
they, as well as the testes, must run great risk of 
sloughing without any covering and natural sup- 
port. In my experience, even when the flaps 
partially fail (I have never seen them do so en- 
tirely ), they are a great comfort to the patient by 
the adhesions which the cords and testes form in 
two or three davs. 

236 FIRST USE OF MESMERISM 

During the six years previous to April, 1845, 1 
had operated on eleven cases ; and in the last 
eight months, since I began to operate in the 
mesmeric trance, I have removed seventeen tu- 
mours, making in all twenty-eight, varying from 
a few pounds to eighty pounds ; and there has 
not been a ftxtal case ainonii them. 

o 

The results are — 

All the parts saved in - - - 13 

One testis sacrificed - - - 6 

Both - - . . 8 

All removed - - - - 1 

28 

Of the seventeen operations in the mesmeric 
trance three only were imperfect, the persons 
awaking before the operation was finished; this 
imperfect sensibility was a great comfort to the 
patient, and gave great facilities to the operator. 
Here is my first case, and an example of^this: — 

April 23d. — Bachoo. Saw him for the first 
time to-day, at 11 o'clock, A. M. : he has got 
hypertrophy of the scrotum ; the tumour is twice 
the size of a man's head. I put him to sleep, 
and made his arms cataleptic in three quarters of 
an hour. 

IN SCROTAL ELEPHANTIASIS. 237 

Prickina; and inhaling ammonia disturbed, but 
did not awake him ; I therefore proceeded to 
operate, but he a\voke after I had slit up the pre- 
puce. Upon this I desisted, and will try to edu- 
cate him into insensibility. To be mesmerised 
daily. 

April 27th. — He has been easily mesmerised 
daily, since the 23d ; is not insensible to prick- 
ing, but it does not awake him, and I could afford 
no more time to him. I pulled him by the legs 
to the end of the table ; allowed the tumour to 
hang down unsupported, and bent his knees, 
putting his feet on the edge of the table ; and in 
this jiainful attitude he remained for half an hour, 
without moving. His legs and arms were then 
properly disposed of, in case he should awake, 
and the tumour quickly removed ; the first in- 
cisions did not awake him, but before I was done 
he was completely roused. 

Since then I have had every month more oper- 
ations of this kind than take place in the native 
hospital in Calcutta in a year, and more than I 
had for the six years previous. There must be 
some reason for this, and I only see two ways 
of accounting for it : my patients, on return- 
ing home, either say to their friends similarly 

238 MESMERIC OPERATIONS ON 

afflicted, " Wah ! brother, what a soft man the 
doctor Sahib is ! He cut me to pieces for twenty 
minutes, and I made him believe that I did not 
feel it. Isn't it a capital joke ? Do go and play him 
the same trick ; you have only to laugh in your 
elbow, and you will not feel the pain." Or they 
say to their brother sufferers, — " Look at me ; 
I have got rid of my burthen, (of 20, 30, 40, 50, 
60, or 80 lbs., as it may be,) am restored to the use 
of my body, and can again work for my bread : 
this, I assure you, the doctor Sahib did when I 
was asleep, and I knew nothing about it ; — you 
will be equally lucky, I dare say ; and I advise 
you to go and try ; you need not be cut if you 
feel it." AVliich of these hypotheses best explains 
the fact my readers will decide for themselves. 
It ought to be added, that most of these persons 
were not paupers, but people in comfortable cir- 
cumstances, whom no inducement short of painless 
operations could tempt to enter a charity, or any 
other hospital ; and all who know the natives are 
aware of this. 

I have said that only three out of the seventeen 
awoke before the operation was finished ; I will 
not inflict the whole fourteen completely success- 
ful cases on the reader, but only present some of 
the last. 

SCROTAL ELEPHANTIASIS. 239 

Sept. 2d. — I was stopped ou the road to-day, 
and requested to go into a temple to see a sick 
Fuqueer ; on entering I found a healthy-looking 
man of sixty, but he was nearly blind from cata- 
racts, and had a scrotal tumour of about thirty 
pounds' weight, which he begged me to remove. 
I examined it, but gave no opinion, and said I 
would consider of it ; I then went on to Chin- 
surah, to see Dr. Ross (in charge of the troops 
there), to whom I said, that if he chose to return 
with me, I would try to show him a mesmeric 
operation. He consented, and in passing the 
Fuqueer's house we carried him with us to the 
hospital. The cook of the hospital, one of my best 
mesmerisers, was set upon him, and in half an hour 
made him insensible. Considering the man's age 
and the size of the tumour, we did not think it 
worth while to attempt to save the testes, and the 
operation was therefore speedily done. The man 
never moved, and did not awake till after the last 
artery was tied. Seeing him about to awake, he 
was covered up, and asked if he had been in any 
way disturbed; he said, "No." He was then 
desired to sit up, and show me the tumour, as I 
wished to examine it ; he did so, and actually put 
his hands under it, to raise the mass as usual ; 
his look of amazement, on missing it, was some- 

240 MESMERIC OPERATIONS ON 

thing not to be easily forgotten. Dr. Ross pub- 
lished an account of this and other operations in 
which he assisted me. 

Oct. 22d. — Muffur Dass, a peasant, aged 
forty. He was made insensible on the third day 
of mesmerising ; and in the presence of Mr. Reid, 
the collector, Mr. Wauchope, the magistrate, and 
Mr. Bennett, superintendent of Excise, I removed 
a tumour weighing eight pounds, without the 
man being disturbed ; although the operation was 
tedious, from the testes having contracted adhe- 
sions. I succeeded in saving all the organs ; he 
awoke soon after it was all over, said he felt no 
pain, and was quite ready to be operated on noiv. 

Oct. 25th. — Gooroochuan Shah, a shopkeeper, 
aged forty. He has got a " monster tumour," which 
prevents him from moving ; its great weight, and 
his having used it for a writing-desk for many 
years, has pressed it into its present shape. His 
pulse is weak, and his feet oedematous, which will 
make it very hazardous to attempt its removal ; 
but with such an appendage life is literally a 
burthen. He became insensible on the fourth 
day of mesmerising, and was drawn with the 
mattress to the end of the bed (my usual mode of 

SCROTAL ELEPHANTIASIS. 241 

proceeding) : two men then held up the tumour 
in a sheet, pulling it forward at the same time, 
and, in the presence of Mr. Bennett, I removed it 
by a circular incision, expedition being his only- 
safety. The rush of venous blood was great, but 
fortunately soon arrested ; and, after tying the last 
vessel, the mattress was again pulled back upon 
the bed with him upon it, and at this moment he 
awoke. The loss of blood had been so great that 
he immediately fell into a fainting state, and it 
took a good while to remove him. On recovering 
he said that he awoke while the mattress was 
being pulled back, and that nothing had disturbed 
him. The tumour weighed eighty pounds, and is 
probably the largest ever removed from the 
human body. I think it extremely likely that if 
the circulation had been hurried by pain and 
struggling, or if the shock to the system had 
been increased by bodily and mental anguish, the 
man would have bled to death, or never have 
rallied from the effects of the operation. But the 
sudden loss of blood was all he had to contend 
against ; and, though in so weak a condition, he 
has surmounted this, and gone on very well. 

Dec. 1st. — Has been allowed to go home at 
his own request : the wound is filling up slowly, 
for want of integument. 

242 MESMERIC OPERATIONS ON 

Oct. 27th. — Rammohun Sunokur, a jeweller, 
aged forty-four, has got a large tumour. He 
became insensible on the fifth day, and I removed 
the tumour in the presence of Mr. Wauchope 
and Mr. Bennett. The bleeding was violent, 
and the testes adherent to cicatrices from burnings : 
I was therefore obliged to sacrifice them. About 
the middle of the operation he gave a cry, but 
did not awake till twenty minutes after it was 
over, and then said, that he wanted something to 
eat, as he felt empty. He said that he had 
slept well, and was n it disturbed in any way ; 
that he was now ready to be cut, but begged to 
be allowed to get his dinner first. The mass of 
flesh was now shown to him, which he recognized 
with amazement ; thanked the gods, and said it 
would weigh twenty-four pounds, probably, — it 
weighed thirty pounds. 

Nov. 2d. — Gobinchunder Lane, aged thirty- 
two, a shopkeeper, and a very fine handsome 
man, is afflicted with the same disease. 

At three o'clock yesterday, when passing the 
hospital, I was told that another man had come 
with a tumour, since my morning visit, and had 
been entranced. I went to see him, and found 
him still in a fit state to be operated on, although 

SCROTAL ELEPHANTIASIS. 243 

he had been asleep for four hours — to be mes- 
merised again to-morrow, at ten o'clock. 

Nov. 3d. — -The operation was performed to- 
day, at twelve o'clock, in the presence of the 
Eev. Mr. Bradbury, and Mr. Bennett. As the 
bleeding was moderate, and the man perfectly 
passive, I tried to save all the parts, although 
the testes adhered to the sides of the tumour, 
which were very thick. It was twenty minutes 
before all was over: not a sign of life appeared, 
and the oi'gans were all saved. 

Before commencing, I put his arm erect in the 
air as an " oudanometer : " it never even trembled, 
was quite stiff at the end of the operation, and 
had to be taken down. He awoke just as the 
mattress was re-adjusted, and said, " It is done ! " 
Being asked how he knew, he said, by seeing me 
bloody, and the people all standing round, but 
that he had felt nothing, and had little pain now. 
The excrescence weighed twenty-five pounds. 

Nov. 16th. — Ameer Mullick, a coolly, ao-ed 
fifty, has a large tumour of twenty years' growth. 
He was mesmerised for the second time to-day, 
and, in the presence of Mr. S. Palmei-, and Dr. 
Scott, I dissected out, and saved all the organs. 
The operation was tedious, on account of old 
K 2 

244 OPEEATIONS DUEING 

adhesions ; but he did not awake till some time 
after it was finished, and then said, that nothing 
had disturbed him — the mass weighed thirty 
pounds. 

Nov. 18th. — Bungsee, a peasant, aged fifty- 
five, has a tumour ^which weighed twenty-eight 
pounds, when cut off", and has existed for nine 
years. He was entranced on the second day, 
and I removed it in the presence of Mr. Russell, 
Judge of Hooghly, Major Smith, H. M.'s 9th 
Regiment, Dr. Scott, and Capt. Smythe, of 
the Engineers. I found all the organs, and 
showed that the testes were atrophied and useless : 
they were therefore sacrificed, and the man never 
moved, or showed a sign of life, till ten minutes 
after the operation, and he then said, that he 
was quite ready to be operated upon. 

In concluding this practical part of the subject, 
I beg to state, that I have seen no bad con- 
sequences whatever ensue from persons being 
operated on in the Mesmeric trance. Cases 
have occurred in which no pain was felt, even 
subsequent to the operation, and the wounds 
healed by the first intention; and in the rest 
I have seen no indication of any injurious con- 

THE MESMEKIC TKANCE. 245 

sequences to the constitution. On the contrary, 
it appears to me to have been saved, and that less 
constitutional disturbance has followed than under 
ordinary circumstances. 

In my early operations, I availed myself of 
the first fit of insensibility, not knowing whether 
I could command it back at pleasure ; and when 
the Coma is deep enough on the first occasion, 
it is probably best for the patient that it should 
be taken advantage of, as the fewer liberties we 
take with Nature the better, the rule being never 
to do more than enough. But if the trance is 
not profound the first time, the surgeon may 
safely calculate on its being so the next, and, 
when operating in public, it is prudent to take 
the precaution of a preliminary trance or two. 
I have already said, that flexibility of the limbs, 
till moved, and their remaining rigid in any 
position we leave them in, is characteristic of the 
trance : but there are exceptions, and these are 
equally diagnostic and to be depended upon. It 
sometimes happens that the limbs become rigid 
as they lie, and, on bending them, they are not 
passive and plastic, as in the first kind of cata- 
lepsy, but the muscles always tend towards a 
spasmodic extension of the limbs : at other times, 
there is a complete relaxation of the whole mus- 

R 3 

246 OPEKATIOXS DURING 

cular system, and the arms and legs can be 
tossed about without resistance, like those of a 
person just dead. The eyes are usually closed, 
but the eyelids are sometimes seen a little se- 
parated, or half open and tremulous ; and the eye 
is even seen wide open, fixed, and the pupil 
dilated. On one occasion, having ordered a 
man to be entranced, I returned in two hours, 
and was told by my assistant that he was not 
affected : I went to see, and found him with half 
open eyes, quivering eye-lids, and trembling 
hands. I immediately said the man was ready, 
and, without testing his condition farther, per- 
formed on him a tedious, but painless, operation. 

I also wish to remark, that I have seen no in- 
dication of congestion of blood on the brain ; the 
circulation, while my patients were in the trance, 
being natural, like that of a sleeping person. 
Those I operate upon appear to escape the stimu- 
lating stage of the mesmeric influence altogether, 
and to pass at once from life to temporary death ; 
and this I am disposed to attribute to the concen- 
trated uninterrupted manner in which the power 
is applied ; as soon as it is felt, there is no time 
given to the system to rally round the first im- 
pression, and it succumbs, without a struggle, to 
the constraining influence. Some patients, when 

THE MESMERIC TKANCE. 247 

suddenly awoke, say that their vision is hazy, 
and their heads light, but I take this to arise 
from the imperfectly recovered sensibility of the 
brain and organs of sense, which are not at once 
roused up to the full possession of their waking 
powers; just as is seen in persons suddenly 
aroused from profound natural sleep. That the 
mesmeric torpor of the nerves and brain does not 
arise from sanguine congestion, is often strikingly 
and beautifully illustrated by the first actions of 
persons suddenly awoke from the trance. They 
open their eyes wide, and at the same moment 
their faculties are restored, but it is seen that the 
pupil is dilated, and insensible to light : this 
they also immediately become aware of; they 
know that their eyes are open, and that they 
ought to see, but do not. The thought fills them 
with horror, and, with a fearful cry, they bury 
their faces in their hands, like persons struck 
blind by lightning ; but this soon passes off, and 
the retina recovers its sensibility, by a little rub- 
bing of the eyes. 

For any person to see this, or even hear of it 
from a credible quarter, and still talk of imposture, 
is to convict himself of an incurable moral blind- 
ness, which it would be folly to attempt to dissi- 

B 4 

248 OPERATIONS DURING 

pate by experiment and reasoning : — " none are 
so blind as those who icorit see." 

The dreadful shock given to the mind under 
such circumstances, or when a somnambulist 
awakens and finds himself perhaps standing naked 
among strangers (an experiment 1 have often 
made), is a trial of the nerves, to which it would 
be very imprudent, and unsafe, to subject any 
but such singularly impassive beings as my pa- 
tients : — sometimes, however, it is too much for 
the nerves of a coolly even. In highly nervous 
and irritable constitutions the effects might be 
most disastrous both to mind and body ; and I 
would not dare to take such liberties with Euro- 
pean temperaments. This, and the dangers and 
inconveniences of inducing the " Mesmeric Dis- 
ease," by practising on the system more than is 
necessary for the cure of disease, appear to me to 
be the real dangers to be avoided in the use of 
Mesmerism as a remedy. 

I am now able to say from experience, that 
debility of the nervous system predisjioses to the 
easy reception of the mesmeric influence ; and I 
argue favourably of the patient's pbwers of sub- 
mission, when I recognise in him the languid 
listless air that characterises functional debility of 
the nerves. 

THE MESMERIC TRANCE. 249 

As I never have attempted, and never will 
attempt, to mesmerise people in health, I cannot 
speak from my own experience as to their mes- 
meric sensibility ; but we are assured by the best 
authorities that many persons in health can be 
subdued, and my experiments go to support this. 

My patient Mrs. had not a toothache even 

when she was mesmerised, in order to prepare 
her for the dentist ; and many others suffered 
only from some local complaint, that did not 
apparently impair the powers of life. The fact is 
sufficiently established ; and experimenting on 
the healthy ought to be discouraged, as it is only 
undermining healthy constitutions for no possible 
advantage. The artificial disease is not so tran- 
sitory or light a matter as it seems to be reckoned 
by many Mesmerisers, who go about upsetting 
the nerves of every one they can lay hands on. 
In proof of this I may mention, that after pri- 
soners have been working on the roads for two 
or three months, I have found them still as much 
under my command as ever. 

It is proper that ladies and gentlemen who beg 
to be mesmerised for fun should know this ; and 
then they will probably choose some other kind 
of amusement. 

250 

CHAP. IX. 

Curiosities of Mesmerism. — Unsatisfactory Nature of Public 
Exhibitions. — Apology for giving one. — ■ Account of it by 
a Visitor. — The Modes in which the Mesmeric Fluid can 
be transmitted. — It acts at great Distances. — Is absorbed 
by Water. — Can pass through a Wall. — Final Experi- 
ments. 

Mt original intention was to confine myself 
strictly to an examination of the medical preten- 
sions of Mesmerism, and to eschew all but the 
practical part at present, and thus open the minds 
of men to a reception of new truths, by the key 
of self-interest. Not that I was, by any means, 
indifferent to the philosophic and extra-profes- 
sional bearings of the subject, but because I saw 
that the gross and palpable bodily phenomena, 
even, were more than the public stomach could 
bear, and I did not intend to serve up all my mes- 
meric stores, till the public had digested my first 
course of facts that cannot be denied. 

But accident, if it does not determine, gene- 
rally shapes our actions ; and (as in my accidental 
rencontre with somnambulism) I have been 
driven, by the force of circumstances, out of the 

CURIOSITIES OF MESMERISM. 251 

prudent mesmeric course, which I had resolved 
to follow. 

But as the " utile " has not been sacrificed to 
the " dulce" I hope to be pardoned by the stern 
utiUtarian reader for devoting a chapter to the 
" Curiosities of Mesmerism." 

Knowing the worthlessness of public exhibi- 
tions for effecting a general conversion to the 
truth of Mesmerism, I was very averse to subject it 
to this unsatisfactory ordeal, and determined not to 
be made a showman of. All performers in public 
are not unnaturally suspected to take insurances 
from Art, in the event of Nature failing them ; 
success on such occasions being; thought to be 
more indispensable than truth. Besides this na- 
tural distrust of public displays, the really careful 
and intelligent observer has not the necessary 
means of close inspection, required to convince him 
beyond a doubt, and the mere sight-seer is only 
bewildered, and declares it to be " all humbug," 
because all beyond his comprehension. But in 
our present state of ignorance it is as absurd to 
pretend to set limits to the possible in any unex- 
plored region of Nature, as it would be for the 
inhabitants of an ant-hill in the plains of Bengal 
to decide authoritatively against the possible 
existence of the Himalayahs. I had acted with 

252 CURIOSITIES OF MESMERISM. 

considerable consistency for some months, in con- 
fining my public mesmeric experiments to purely 
professional subjects ; but a very general curiosity 
was excited, and I was at length requested, from 
a high quarter, to gratify some of the inhabitants 
of Grovernment-House with an especial mesmeric 
" Seance." This I could hardly have refused 
without appearing churlish ; and it would have 
been said that I shunned the light, because my 
proceedings would not bear inspection. I there- 
fore thought it best to submit to a necessary evil, 
and make the most of it, by converting an exclu- 
sive party into as general and jiromiscuous a 
meeting as possible. It was therefore pretty 
generally made known, that all the curious might 
be gratified for the first and last time on the 29th 
of July. Accordingly on that day I had the 
honour of meeting a large assemblage of Euro- 
peans and natives at my hospitals ; and as a letter 
appeared in the newspapers the day after, giving 
an account of aU that was done and seen, I here 
insert it, as it was generally allowed to give a 
correct account of all that happened, and men- 
tions the points I wish to make some observations 
on. Six medical men were of the party, and one 
of them publicly acknowledged the faithfulness of 
the report sent to the newspapers. 

CURIOSITIES OF MESMERISM. 253 

PUBLIC DISPLAY OF MESMERISM AT HOOGHLY. 

To the Editor of the Englishman. 

" Sir, — I esteem myself fortunate in having 
been present at an exhibition of the powers of 
Mesmerism, given by Dr. Esdaile, yesterday, to 
satisfy public curiosity, as it is the last oppor- 
tunity of the kind likely to occur, Dr. 'E. having, 
for this once only, consented to mesmerise for 
non-professional purposes. 

" The party was very numerous, two steamers 
having brought the curious from Barrackpore 
and Calcutta; and there was a large assemblage 
of the European and Native residents of Hooghly 
and Chinsurah. 

" The hospital we first went to was unfortu- 
nately small, and the room too much crowded for 
one to see all that was done ; but what escaped 
me will be supphed by others, I hope, as it is 
desirable that all the proceedings of the day 
should be clearly laid before the pubHc. 

" On entering the hospital, we saw two men 
extended on beds, with their native mesmerisers 
hanging over them ; but I had no time to ex- 
amine their process, as Dr. Esdaile proceeded to 
business. He said that these two men were 

254i CURIOSITIES OF MESMERISM. 

now under the mesmeric influence, to what extent 
he did not know ; that they required to be operated 
on, and that he would do so, if they were found 
to be insensible. 

" The first man awoke on being puUed, and 
called upon by name ; so he would not do. The 
other, an elderly man, the Doctor thought was in 
a favourable state, and he immediately did what 
was needfill ; it is needless to say what, but every 
one was sure that it was very painful. The first 
cuts did not seem to annoy the man, but he 
awoke, and cried out before the operation was 
finished, which was in a couple of minutes I sup- 
pose. The mesmeriser was desired to continue 
his efforts, and I saw him breathe on the head, 
and place both his hands at the same time 
on the pit of the stomach ; Dr. E. explaining 
that he often succeeded in restoring the trance, 
although broken to this degree. And sure 
enough, in a few minutes, the man became per- 
fectly senseless, to all appearance, and every body 
was allowed to examine and experiment upon 
him for the whole time we remained here ; and as 
I believe there were several medical men present, 
making active observations, I hope that they will 
favour us with the results of their investio-ation. 
We were now agreeably surprised by the appari- 

CURIOSITIES OF MESMERISM. 255 

tion of two lady philosophers, and the Doctor had 
to give them his attention, and certainly made 
them an offer they will not receive every day, for 
he begged them to choose whether they would 
prefer to see a woman made senseless by mesme- 
rised water, or through the wall. The wall was 
declared for, and the woman's face turned to it 
sitting upon her bed. 

" The Doctor disappeared, and what he did, I 
know it, but some went to see : whatever it was, 
the woman soon began to nod, and then fell down 
on her bed, her eyelids twinkling in a strange 
way, and she paid no attention to what was said 
to her. Dr. E. now returned from his ambuscade, 
having been absent for about five minutes, and 
pointing to the quivering eyelids, said, that this 
was very characteristic of the mesmeric state, and 
that it would be seen that this woman could not 
open her eyes without his assistance. After 
blowing in her eyes to restore her senses, she was 
desired, and then ordered, to open her eyes, and 
strained violently to do so ; but the eyelids looked 
as if gummed together, and she could not separate 
them. She then, on being urged still farther, 
puUed the lids asunder, but they instantly closed 
again. Dr. E. now rubbed her eyes, and blew 
into them, and she immediately awoke, but in a 

256 CURIOSITIES OF MESMERISM. 

delirious state, and arose to walk, muttering and 
staffserino; about in a singular manner ; and on 
being taken back to bed, she fell into a deep 
sleep, which usually lasted four or five hours, we 
were told. 

" We were next addressed by Dr. E., who said 
that he would now show us that the mesmeric 
power was not so rare and singular a gift as was 
imagined, but a general law of Nature, which 
might be evolved by most people who took the 
necessary degree of trouble ; and to prove this, he 
would desire one of his hospital assistants to mes- 
merise a woman across the room, a distance of 
thirty feet, I should think. The woman was placed 
with her back to the wall, and a young man placed 
himself before her, at the other end of the room. 
In a very short time she acted exactly like the 
first woman ; her eyes began to twinkle ; she 
swayed from side to side, and then fell down in a 
trance, from which no one could awake her — not 
even the doctors, who again examined the man 
who had been operated upon before leaving, and 
no one succeeded, I believe, in extracting a sign 
of sensibility. 

" We were now requested to go to another 
hospital, where there was more space for the 
company. We found it to be the Jail Hospital, 

CURIOSITIES OF MESMERISM. 257 

where there was ample accommodation for all, 
— the party having tailed off considerably. 

" Dr. E. said that he would attempt to show, 
in a more striking manner, the great distance at 
which the mesmeric influence could be felt. A 
man was brought in, and made to sit on the floor 
with his back to the wall, and the Doctor 
sat down opposite him at the other end of the 
room, which I afterwards measured, and found to 
be eighty feet long. 

"We all congregated at the other end to 
watch the effects of this 'Long Range,' and I 
heard some good jokes cut, about keeping out of 
the line of fire, and the danger of the gun 
bursting, &c. 

"The Doctor had proved his gun however, 
I suppose, as he very coolly and steadily took 
aim at his man, keeping his hands extended, 
and moving them across his face, and from head 
to foot. I could distinguish no sensible effects 
for ten minutes, and I imagine he became 
impatient, as he took a look at his opponent 
through an opera glass, and then desired him to 
to rise, to judge of the effects I presume. The 
man obeyed with great diflficulty, and his tor- 
menter, taking another look through his glass, 
appeared to be satisfied with his work, as he cried 
s 

258 CURIOSITIES OF MESMERISM. 

out to US to prevent him from falling, and not 
unnecessarily; for the patient trembled violently, 
and had to be supported. The operator now bid 
us move his arms, and seeing them remain in any 
position they were left in, declared him entranced, 
and being asked if we might now touch him, he 
called out — ' Oh yes ! do what you please.' He 
now fell into the Doctors' hands principally, 
and I hope they will report the results of their 
criticism. I saw, however, that the man was quite 
insensible, and his limbs cataleptic ; and that 
no one could excite his attention. Dr. Esdaile 
sat all this time alone, at the other end of 
the room, apparently enjoying, through his glass, 
the mischief and perplexity he had created. 
After we had extracted all we could out of this 
mesmeric condition of the body. Dr. E. joined us, 
and set about restoring him to some degree 
of sensibility by rubbing and blowing in his 
eyes. He now half opened his eyes, and fol- 
lowed the Doctor when led, into the middle of 
the room ; but like a drunken man, and care 
had to be taken, lest he should fall. Dr. E. 
said that he would now convert him into an imi- 
tating machine, with only sense enough left to 
hear and obey his orders, without the power of 
answering questions ; reflection being quite 

CURIOSITIES OF MESMERISM. 259 

dormant. Having cleared up his brain a little 
more, and attracted his attention by repeating 
the key note several times, the performance 
proceeded. He was ordered to do what the 
Doctor did, and certainly obeyed his orders 
most exactly, throwing himself, on the instant, 
into every attitude of the mesmerist, and the 
very scientific manner in which he took a 
landsman's 'sight' did great credit to his astro- 
nomical powers ; no omnibus cad could take 
the longitude of an obnoxious passenger in a 
more artist-like manner. His mode of cocking 
his eye and of applying his first digit to the 
side of his nose, was also much admired, and 
proved that he was 'wide awake,' as some 
thought, all the time. 

" His instructor next ordered him to repeat 
whatever he said, which the pupil obeyed by 
repeating the order. 

" He now showed himself to be a patriotic 
and loyal British subject, by the animated and 
hearty manner in which he repeated, ' Ye 
Mariners of England,' and sang, ' God save the 
King.' This was followed by ' Hey diddle 
diddle,' in capital style. And here a curious 
incident occurred; the spectators could not 
restrain their laughter, in which the singer joined 
s 2 

260 CTJEIOSITIES OF MESMERISM. 

in full chorus, and some said, ' He can't help 
laughing himself.' Upon which Dr. Esdaile 
stopped his performance, and pointed out that 
they were labouring under a mistake who 
supposed that he was laughing; the fact being 
that he was only imitating them, or rather Dr. E., 
who was laughing " Gorge deploi/e ;" and this, I 
think, must have been evident to all. But the 
farce was nearly converted into a tragedy; for 
on being ordered to show how the natives fight 
with sticks, he began very skilfully ; but on 
bending forward to make a blow, he j)itched 
head foremost into Dr. E.'s breast, and both 
rolled upon the floor. This actor's powers were 
clearly exhaiisted, and he was left in an intense 
trance on the floor. 

" It was intimated that the next scene would 
be ' A Mesmeric interview ; or the dangerous 
effect of getting on the wrong side of the wall ; ' 
and two men were brought in, and placed one in 
each corner of the room. Two lads were then 
despatched to work the will of the magician, 
who remained with us. This time, I was 
resolved to see both sides of the wall, and goins: 
into the adjacent room, I saw the two youths 
standing with their foreheads against the wall, 
opposite the men, and holding their hands 

CUBIOSITIES OF MESMERISM. 261 

extended under their mouths. In five minutes, 
the lads were desired to desist, and on returning 
to the large room, I saw the men had been 
turned round, and were standing perfectly rigid 
in their corners with their arms crucified against 
the wall, and in this transaction Dr. E. was no 
more concerned than I was. The Doctors again 
took possession of the victims, and I had after- 
wards an opportunity of taking a pull, and giving 
a pinch, but took nothing by my motion any 
more than the rest. 

" Our entertainer then proclaimed that the 
concluding piece would be the sleeping water, or 
the ' veritable eau merveilleuse.'' He said that 
when we saw its effects, he hoped that he would 
be justified for not showing in public how it was 
made, as it was not fit for the public to know, 
but that he would be happy to explain the 
process for the purposes of medicine and phi- 
losophy. To guard against all imposition, two 
Clergymen, and two Doctors, were deputed to see 
the water charmed, and in a few minutes half-a- 
dozen lads entered, each carrying a gallipot in 
his hands, the contents of which (certainly, to all 
appearance, water) he administered to eight men 
who were brought from the hospital. 

" This was a bold undertaking, for the people 
s 3 

262 CURIOSITIES or mesmerism. 

were scarcely pei'mitted to lie down befoi'e they 
were cuffed and kicked unmercifully, many of 
the company making a vigorous use of their 
understanding in this way. 

" A few minutes comparative quiet having 
been procured to some of the sleeping candidates, 
the result was, that four out of eight were found 
to be cataleptic, and several were converted into 
somnambulists. 

" I have thus endeavoured to give an account 
of what was done and seen by all; but in so 
large a field of observation, much must have 
escaped me, and each person will have something 
distinctive and characteristic to narrate. The 
medical men seemed to be wide awake, and 
availed themselves of the opportunity ; and if 
they have not made up their minds, it is for no 
want of subjects. Trusting that they will give 
the professional details, which I cannot supply, 
" I am your obedient servant, 

" A Mesmeric Visitor. 

" Calcutta, .30th July, 1845." 

It is not merely a matter of curiosity to ascer- 
tain whether the mesmeric fluid can traverse air, 
and denser substances, to what distance it can be 
transmitted, and what circumstances assist or 

CURIOSITIES OF MESMERISM. 263 

retard its operation. These are all questions of 
great interest to the Natural Philosopher, as, 
by ascertaining them, he will probably detect 
analogies and affinities between the mesmeric 
fluid and other better known natural powers, 
and perhaps prove that it is only a modifica- 
tion of an inorganic agent, or a combination of 
several, to meet the wants of animal life ; and 
the philosopher will naturally look to the physician 
for his facts, in a matter with which the latter is 
most conversant. 

If there is a transmission of some vital product 
from one person to another, it must pass undete- 
riorated through the air, for the bodies are not in 
contact, and the effect, in the first instance, can 
be produced at a distance of an inch or several 
feet, and the interval can be increased to a 
wonderful degree in proportion to the sensibility 
developed by frequent trials. An intervening 
inch of air between the two bodies being proved 
to be no obstacle, it is in vain to dogmatise about 
the possible extent of the mesmeric sphere of 
action ; if we wish to ascertain this, it must be 
by actual experiment. In acting upon persons, 
through the air, without any gesticulations, and 
by the agency of water, we can make an experi- 
ment without exciting the smallest suspicion, and 
s 4 

264 CURIOSITIES OF MESMERISM. 

when these are frequently successful \a first trials, 
I should think that it must be considered conclu- 
sive proof of the transmissibility of the mesmeric 
fluid by these media. The j^ossibility of affecting 
persons in this way had never been dreamt of by 
my assistants ; and it is needless to insist on the 
impossibility of my patients knowing any thing 
about it : — in a word, no human being could 
divine my intentions when I made my first 
attempt to mesmerise at a distance : I had not 
determined when or how to try it, and this was 
decided by an accidental favourable opportunity. 
In the women's ward, there is a row of pillars 
in the centre of the room, and it happened one 
day that, while leaning against the centre pillar 
giving some orders, I saw that the beds of the 
women Nobee and Alunga were on either side of 
me, in front, at the distance of four or five yards. 
The women were both sitting up in bed with their 
faces towards, but not looking at, me ; and I 
seized the lucky moment to open my masked 
battery upon them. I first turned my looks on 
Alunga, and simply made her the object of my 
exclusive attention; her eyelids soon began to 
quiver, and in a few minutes she acted precisely 
in the manner described by my "Mesmeric 
Visitor." I then turned to Nobee, and she 

CURIOSITIES OF MESMEEISM. 265 

succeeded equally soon in her way, which never 
partakes of excitement ; she only becomes lethar- 
gic, and passes, at once, into mesmeric sleep ; and 
this has been done subsequently to these and 
other patients, by all kinds of persons, often in 
my absence, and as readily as by myself. The 
experiments have been so numerous and unex- 
ceptionable, that I must consider the transmission 
of the mesmeric fluid through a large body of air 
to be incontestably proved. This being the case, 
the permeability of denser materials by it might 
be pretty confidently expected ; and he must be a 
person of a cold imagination, who, admitting the 
passage of the vital fluid through the impassive air, 
yet stops short at a wall as the "ultima Thule " of 
his mesmeric belief, and declares all transmural 
agency to be impossible ! Mineral magnetism finds 
no obstacle to its progress in the grossest textures, 
and traverses the earth from pole to pole ; electricity 
finds its way as easily through the walls of a house 
as through the ambient air ; and why subtile animal 
fluids should not be endowed, in a modified degree, 
with such qualities, I do not understand : it seems 
they must be condemned to lose their very 
essence probably, to gratify our notions of the 
fitness of things ! But it is in vain that we pre- 
sume to prescribe a course to Nature, and hedge 

266 CURIOSITIES OF MESMEEISM. 

hei- round with dogmas, in order to maintain our 
infallibility : the " Sacred College" was rapidly 
revolving through sjiaee, while its learned mem- 
bers were constraining the earth to remain a fix- 
ture by a " Senatus consultum," as had been de- 
termined by the wisdom of the schools ; and the 
mesmeric fluid will, " like a chartered libertine, " 
not only permeate the air, but also probably pass 
through walls, let its opponents oppose its pro- 
gress by what arguments they please. In coming 
to this conclusion, I only rely on Jirst trials also, 
and their results have been as positive and strik- 
ing as any I have recorded. I have shown that 
a person whose system has been deeply imbued 
with the mesmeric action, will sometimes become 
entranced by merely turning his face to the wall, 
and leaving him quiet for a few minutes : all the 
account that such a mesmeric victim can give of 
himself is, that he feels a coldness and numbness 
in the limbs, a sense of weight in the back of the 
head, and an unconquerable heaviness of the eye- 
lids before he goes to sleep. But I can hardly 
imagine that this spontaneous mesmeric paroxysm 
took place in all the numerous first trials we have 
made with new subjects, who had never been 
placed against a wall before, and to whom this 
position could not therefore be a source of excite- 

CURIOSITIES OF MESMERISM. 267 

ment. I acknowledge the possibility of some of 
these being cases of independent Mesmerism, as 
the constitution, to be affected in this manner, 
must be deeply tainted ; and something unusual 
was certainly done to them. To solve this doubt 
effectually, I have of late been looking out for a 
blind man, and one has luckily presented himself 
within the last few days. I have experimented 
on him solely for the purpose of determining the 
points in question, more particularly by the wall 
problem : and if this supplemental evidence should 
be stiU in any part open to objection, I shall be 
happy to repeat the examination on other blind 
men, till the evidence shall be considered perfect. 
In the mean time, I must declare myself almost 
satisfied, but hope that I shall be the first to 
change this, or any other opinion here advanced, 
whenever contradicted by new facts. 

Dec. 14th. — Janoo, a blind prisoner; he has 
got cataracts in both eyes, and can only dis- 
tinguish light from darkness. I placed him on a 
stool before me to-day, and entranced him in ten 
minutes ; I then roused him up a little, and made 
him a somnambulist ; he walked with great diffi- 
culty, and while doing so said he was fast asleep 
in his bed. He very soon became unable to 

268 CURIOSITIES OF MESMERISM. 

support himself, and fell into the trance, in which 
he remained for two hours. 

Dec. 15ih. — When sitting in the middle of 
the room to-day, I went and looked steadily at 
him from outside the window ; in less than ten 
minutes I knocked him on the head and toes with 
a long bamboo, and he was quite insensible. On 
trying to make him walk to-day, I found there 
was a total dissolution of the muscular system ; 
when placed on his feet he immediately sunk 
down all in a heap, and on trying to awake him it 
brought on an alarming fit of convulsive sobbing ; 
on being put to bed it ceased, but again returned 
on my renewing attempts to awake him ; he slept 
for more than two hours. 

Dec. 16th. — I sent the Sub- Assistant Surgeon 
to the Jail Hospital, desiring him to get the man 
placed with his face towards the wall, but not 
touching it ; to take care not to excite his atten- 
tion, and to keep him engaged in conversation, I 
followed, and placed myself opposite him on the 
other side of the wall, leaning my forehead against 
it, and extending my hands under my mouth. In 
ten minutes I went to see what was done, and 
found him conversing in a lively manner with my 
Assistant : returned, and gave him five minutes 
more ; went to see again : found them still talk- 

CURIOSITIES OF MESMEKISM. 269 

ing, but in about two minutes he ceased to 
answer, and burst into a fit of convulsive crying : 
I now pulled him by the hair, and he fell back 
like a person just dead : slept for three hours. 

Dec. 19th. — Mr. Samuells, the collector of 
Burdwan, being with me to-day, I took advantage 
of his presence to give this man his first dose of 
mesmerised water. This was prepared in a dif- 
ferent room, and sent to him by a prisoner who 
usually administers the medicine, and he was 
ordered to give it as such ; in two or three mi- 
nutes he was completely insensible. 

Dec. 20th. — To-day I saw him sitting in front 
of the cook-room, eating his dinner, and thought 
it a good opportunity to observe, unperceived, the 
extent of his blindness. The cook-rooms are about 
a hundred yards long, and there is a low wall in 
front, over which one can look kneeling : he was 
near one end, and I entered at the othei', pro- 
ceeding till I came opposite to him, when I care- 
fully observed him over the wall. He had nearly 
finished his dinner ; and all his looks and actions 
convinced me that he only knew the difference of 
night and day. After he had washed his hands 
and mouth he sat chirping in the sun, as it was 
very cold, and seemed to feel quite comfortable ; 
he occasionally called on some one by name, and. 

270 CUKIOSITIES OF MESMERISM. 

if answered, cracked a joke with him. I now 
left my ambush, and seated myself opposite to 
him in the open air at the distance of twenty 
yards ; in about a quarter of an hour he raised 
one arm, rested his elbow on his knee, and leant 
his head on the hand ; immediately after he sup- 
ported his head on both hands on his knees, and 
swayed a little to one side ; the inclination gra- 
dually increased (he never making an effort to 
rectify it) till he lost his balance, and fell head 
foremost into the puddle of water he had made in 
washing himself; his attitude was not in the 
smallest degree changed, and he looked like a 
sitting statue reversed. He was carried to bed ; 
awoke after three hours, and asked how he had 
got there. 

Dec. 26th. — I saw him sunning himself in 
front of the hospital to-day, and seated myself on 
the ground opposite him at the distance of thirty 
yards ; in less than five minutes he leaned to one 
side, and then fell as if shot : slept for two hours. 

From the foregoing facts it is allowable to 
conclude, I hope, that Mesmerism is a natural 
power of the human body. 

CURIOSITIES OF MESMERISM. 271 

That It affects dii-ectly the nervous and mus- 
cular systems. 

That in the mesmeric trance the most severe 
and protracted surgical operations can be per- 
formed, without the patients being sensible of 
pain. 

That spasms and nervous pains often disappear 
before the mesmeric trance. 

That it gives us a complete command of the 
muscular system, and is therefore of great service 
in restoring contracted limbs. 

That the chronic administration of Mesmerism 
often acts as a useful stimulant in functional de- 
bility of the nerves. 

That as sleep, and the absence of all pain, is the 
best condition of the system for subduing inflam- 
mation, the mesmeric trance will probably be 
found to be a powerful remedy in local inflamma- 
tions. 

That the imagination has nothing to do with 
the first physical impression made on the system 
by Mesmerism, as practised by me. 

That it is not necessary for the eyes to be 
open : I always shut them as a source of distrac- 
tion; and blind men are as readily mesmerised as 
others. 

That water can be charged with the mesmeric 

272 CURIOSITIES OF MESMERISM. 

fluid, and has a powerful effect on the system 
when it has been previously affected. 

That the mesmeric influence can be transmitted 
through the air to considerable distances, and even 
pass through dense materials. 

273 

APPENDIX. 

When speaking of Somnambulism, I ventured to 
express my belief that " Clairvoyance," or the trans- 
ference of sense, had been witnessed in diseased states 
of tbe body, and that, as we] can imitate Nature step 
by step, by artificially producing Somnambulism, 
Catalepsy, and a state of the system resembling 
Hysteria, in which " Clairvoyance " has been witnessed 
as a symptom in disease ; so we might expect to see 
this phenomenon in the analogous derangements of 
the nervous system brought about by Mesmerism. It 
ouTht to be'remembered that this is one of the wonders 
of Nature, and also, a great rarity in art, and must 
not be looked for, as a matter of course, in persons 
under the influence of Mesmerism. It has not yet 
fallen under my observation, and from want of books, 
I could not present the reader with as many well- 
attested proofs of its existence in Nature as was de- 
sirable. 

After the foregoing work was finished, I fortu- 
nately met Professor Wienholt's " Lectures on Som- 
nambulism," and, as I there found all the facts required 
to establish the existence of natural Clairvoyance, 
and, in the notes of the learned translator, Mr. Col- 
quhoun, a parallel array of these " stubborn things " 
T 

274 APPENDIX. 

in proof of the truth of Mesmeric Clairvoyance, I 
hope the reader will be glad to have this additional 
aid to his judgment in coming to a decision. Professor 
Wienholt, in describing natural Somnambulism, says : 
" The sleep-walker, when otherwise healthy, falls, 
at a particular period, into a common sleep, which 
cannot be distinguished from the natural state of 
repose. After a longer or shorter time he rises from 
his couch, and walks about the room — sometimes 
about the house. He frequently goes out into the 
open air, walks upon known or unknown paths as 
quickly, and with as much activity and confidence, as 
in his waking state, avoids all obstacles which may 
stand, or have been designedly placed in his route, 
and makes his way along rugged paths, and climbs 
dangerous heights, which he would never have thought 
of attempting when awake. He reads printed and 
written papers, writes as well and correctly as in his 
waking state, and performs many other operations 
requiring light and the natural use of the eyes. All 
these actions, however, are performed by the Som- 
nambulist in complete darkness as well as when 
awake, and, generally, with his eyes firmly closed. I 
shall afterwards speak of the exceptions, in which 
these persons have their eyes open. When the period 
of his somnambuhsm has elapsed, he returns to his 
bed, faUs back again into his natural sleep, awakes at 
his usual hour, and, in most instances, knows nothing 
of what he had done in his sleep-walking state. At 
the same time, there are very few persons who exhibit 
all of these phenomena, or even the greater number 
of them. For the most part, they only wander about 

APPEXDIX. 275 

without any other peculiar manifestation ; and the 
instances in which several of the phenomena in question 
are exhibited are rare. This state, whicli is found 
in persons otherwise healthy, frequently occurs in 
diseases, especially in diseases of the nervous system. 
In the latter case, the affection usually commences 
with a paroxysm of convulsive motions, catalepsy, 
apparent syncope, and then passes over with a state 
precisely similar, so far as regards the principal 
symptoms, to Somnambulism ; only that in this latter 
case, the patients not only act, but speak, which rarely 
happens in the former. Before these patients are 
completely restored to their ordinary waking state, 
their sleep is changed into a similar convulsive state, 
combined with want of consciousness. 

" Of this species of Somnambulism occurring in 
nervous diseases, we are in possession of many curious 
instances, of which the Aulic Councillor Meinei-s, a 
celebrated professor at Goettingen, has inserted several 
very remarkable examples in his instructive collection. 
In respect to its chief characteristics, this species of 
Somnambulism, occurring in nervous diseases, com- 
pletely resembles the natural crisis ; it is recognised 
by all competent judges as of the same kind, and is 
comprehended under the same class of diseases ; and 
in this view I also consider it. I begin with the case in 
Moritz's Magazine, which was first translated by 
Mr. Spalding, and afterwards inserted by Meiners in 
his collection. This is a case of what has been called 
' louping ague,' which, unquestionably, is just one 
instance of that species of Somnambulism which I 
have referred to as occasionally accompaning nervous 
T 2 

276 APPENDIX. 

diseases. The patient was a female of sixteen years 
of age. The paroxysm attacked her in the morning, 
and consisted of a profound sleep. In this state, she 
would jump with astonishing activity upon tables and 
chairs, run, when permitted, and with great rapidity, 
out of the house, — generally to a particular place in 
the neighbourhood ; and when she did not awake, she 
would return immediately, but sometimes by a dif- 
ferent road, and in a different direction. She not 
unfrequently left the highroad, and ran straight through 
the fields. She never fell nor injured herself, how- 
ever rough her path, might be, or however fast she 
might run ; and her speed was sometimes so great, 
that her much stronger and more active brother could 
not keep pace with her. She frequently mounted 
upon the garden wall, upon the uneven top of which 
she continued to run ; nay, she even went upon the 
edge of the house roof without once stumbling, much 
less falling. During all these hazardous operations, 
her eyes ivere fast closed, and she appeared to be 
deprived of all her other senses." 

The second volume of Moritz's Magazine contains 
the history of a boy of nine years of age, who fre- 
quently fell into a species of Somnolency, during 
which he was capable of carrying on a conversation. 
His eyes were fast closed, hut, notioithstanding of this 
circumstance, he saw and named all objects that loere 
presented to him. 

A very remarkable case was related to me by a most 
trustworthy observer, the late Hamburgh Physician 
Dr. Schulz, from whom the Aulic Counsellor Meiners, 
of Goettingen, also received it, and inserted it in his 

APPENDIX. 277 

well-known collection. It was that of a girl between 
twelve and thirteen years of age, belonging to a 
family of some distinction, who was afflicted with a 
violent nervous complaint, in which strong convulsive 
motions alternated with catalepsy and syncope. Besides, 
she frequently had paroxysms, during which she con- 
versed with much liveliness and ingenuity. In this 
state, she distinguished without difficulty all colours 
that were presented to her, recognised the numbers of 
the cards, and the stripes upon those which were 
variegated. She described the binding of books 
when shown to her. She wrote in the same manner 
as usual, and cut figures on paper, as she ivas 
accustomed to do for pastime in her waking state. 
Her eyes, at this time, were firmly closed ; but in 
order to be assured that she made no use of them, a 
bandage was placed over them on the approach of the 
paroxysm. 

Another very remarkable case will be found in the 
" Breslau Medical Collections." It relates to a rope- 
maker, who was frequently overtaken by sleep, even 
in the daytime, and in the midst of his usual occupa- 
tions. While in this state, he sometimes recom- 
menced doing all that he had been engaged in during 
the previous part of the day ; at other times he would 
continue the work in which he happened to be en- 
gaged at the commencement of the paroxysm, and 
finished his business with as great ease and success as 
when awake. When the fit overtook him in travelling, 
he proceeded on his journey with the same facility, 
and almost faster than when awake, without missing 
the road or stumbling over any thing. In this 
T 3 

278 APPENDIX. 

manner he repeatedly went from Nuremburg to 
Weimar. Upon one of these occasions he came into 
a narrow lane where there lay some timber. He 
passed over it regularly without injury; and with 
equal dexterity he avoided the horses and carriages 
that came in his way. At another time, he was over- 
taken by slegp just as he was about to set out for 
Weimar on horseback. He rode through the river 
Eme, allowed his horse to drink, and drew up his legs 
to prevent them getting wet ; then passed through 
several streets, crossed the market-place, which was, 
at that time, full of people, carts, and booths, and 
arrived in safety at the house of an acquaintance, 
where he awoke. These and many similar acts, 
requiring the use of the eyes, he performed in dark- 
ness, as well as by daylight, ffis eyes, however, were 
firmhj closed, and he coidd not see when they were 
forced open, and stimulated by light brought near 
them. His other senses appeared to be equally dor- 
mant as were his eyes. He could not smell the most 
volatile spirit. He felt nothing when pinched, pricked, 
or struck. He heard nothing when called by his 
name, or even when a pistol was discharged close 
beside him. 

There is another case, somewhat older, observed and 
circumstantially reported by a trustworthy physician, 
Dr. Knoll, which equally deserves our attention. The 
subject of his observation was a young man, a gardener, 
who became somnambulous, and while in that state 
performed many extraordinary operations. He gene- 
rally fell asleep about eight o'clock in the evening, 
and then began to utter devotional sentences and 

APPENDIX. 27a 

prayers. Afterwards he went out of the house, 
clambered over a high wooden partition, and a still 
higher wall, uninjured, passed through several streets, 
and returned. At another time he climbed up to the 
roof of the house, and rode astride upon the gutter, 
as if upon horseback, clambered about for some time 
upon the roof, and, at length, descended in safety. 
With a view to prevent accidents, he was locked up 
in a room, and watched. When he became somnam- 
bulous, at the usual time, he began to perform all 
sorts of operations on his clothes and the furniture of 
the room. He climbed up to the window sill, and from 
thence to a stone which was much higher, and at some 
distance, and rode upon the latter, as if upon a horse. 
The height of the stone, its distance from the window, 
and its small breadth, were such, that a person awake 
would scarcely have ventured to attempt these opera- 
tions. After descending from the stone, he knocked 
a large table about hither and thither, and finding it 
was likely to fall on him, he very dexterously contrived 
to evade it. He gathered together all the clothes he 
could find in the room, mixed them together, then 
separated them carefully, and hung them up, each article 
in its proper place. The old stockings and shoes he 
endeavoured to arrange in pairs, according to their 
shape and colour, as if he actually saw them. He 
then laid hold of a needle, which he had stuck into 
the wall some weeks before, and sewed his small- 
clothes. Besides these, he performed a variety of 
other operations, all requiring light and the use of 
the eyes, with which, it would appear, he ivas enabled 
to dispense. 

1 4 

280 APPENDIX. 

In addition to the foregoing instances, I must here 
notice two remarkable cases, which were both observed 
with great accuracy by individuals who are elevated 
far above all suspicion of credulity, deceit, and impos- 
ture. The one is reported by the Professor, and Aulic 
Counsellor, Feder. The subject of his observations 
was a student, who, during a severe nervous complaint, 
experienced several attacks of Somnambulism. Upon 
these occasions he would go from his bed-room to his 
parlour and back, open and shut the doors, as well as 
his closet, and take out of the latter whatever he 
wanted — pieces of music, pen, ink, and paper, and 
all this with his eyes shut! From among his music he 
selected a march from the opera of Medea, laid the 
sheet in a proper situation before him, and having 
found the appropriate key, he played the whole piece 
with his usual skill upon the harpsichord. In the same 
manner he also played one of Bach's sonatas, and 
gave the most expressive passages with surprising 
effect. One of the persons present turned the notes 
upside down . this he immediately perceived, and 
when he recommenced playing, he replaced the sheet 
in its proper position. When playing, he remarked 
a string out of tune, upon which he stopped, put it in 
order, and again proceeded. He wrote a letter to his 
brother, and what he wrote was not only perfectly 
rational, but straight and legible. While Professor 
Feder was on a visit to him one afternoon, he (the 
somnambulist) observed that it was snowing, which was 
actually the case. On the same occasion, notwith- 
standing his eyes ivere still completely closed, he re- 
marked that the landlord of the opposite house was 

APPENDIX. 281 

Standing at the window, which was true, and that 
hats were hanging at the window of another room, 
which was also the fact. He opened Professor Feder's 
Compendium of logic and metaphysics, and pointed 
out to him several passages which he thought interest- 
ing, as also some of his own written notes of the 
Professor's lectures in a volume which had been 
recently bound. We must observe, however, the 
remarkable circumstance — common to him, indeed, 
with several other somnambulists — that there were 
many things he did not perceive. Thus, while writing 
to his brother, he did not observe that there was no 
more ink in the pen, and continued to write on. At 
one time he struck fire, and held the tinder to his 
ear, as if to hear the crackling, and then ascertain if 
it was burning. He lighted a match, came to the 
candle, and held it in the middle of the flame. 

In conclusion, I may refer to the case observed by 
the Archbishop of Bourdeaux, and reported in the 
great French ^Encyclopedia. It is the case of a young 
ecclesiastic, in the same seminary with the Archbishop, 
who was in the habit of getting up during the night 
in a state of Somnambulism, of going to his room, 
taking pen, ink, and paper, and composing and writing 
sermons. When he had finished one page of the 
paper on which he was writing, he would read over 
what he had written and correct it. Upon one oc- 
casion, he had made use of the expression ce divin 
enfant. In reading over the passage, he changed the 
adjective divin into adorable. Perceiving, however, 
that the pronoun ce could not stand before the word 
adorable, he added to the former the letter t. In 

282. APPENDIX. 

order to ascertain whether the somnambulist made really 
any use of his eyes, the Archbishop held a piece of 
pasteboard under his chin, to prevent him from seeing 
the paper on which he was writing ; but he continued 
to write on without appearing to be incommoded in 
the slightest degree. 

The paper on which he was writing was taken 
away ; but the somnambulist immediately perceived 
the cliange. He wrote pieces of music while in this 
state, and in the same manner ivith his eyes closed. 
The words were placed under the musical notes. It 
happened, upon one occasion, that the words were 
written in too large a character, and did not stand 
precisely under the corresponding notes. He soon 
perceived the error, blotted out the part, and wrote 
it over again with great exactness. 

I hope that these examples, to which I might add a 
great many others, will be sufficient to show that the 
somnambulist, during this extraordinary state, is 
enabled, apparently without the use of his eyes, to 
receive impressions equally well, or, at least, with the 
same consequences to his perceptive faculty, as when 
awake. 

Mr. Colquhoun, the translator of Wienholt, supplies 
us from his extensive reading, with a number of the 
best authenticated cases descriptive of the same con- 
dition of things in Somnambulism, and derangement 
of the nervous system induced by Mesmerism ; and as 
this is the only physical symptom of any consequence, 
described by European Mesmerists, which I have not 
yet seen in India, I hope that Mr. Colquhoun will 

APPENDIX. 283 

excuse my making such free use of his facts, in order 
to complete this subject. 

The reporters of the^ facts in question are, for 
the most part, men whose intellectual attainments, in 
general, are known to have been of a superior order, 
and whose moral character is elevated far above sus- 
picion ; men, in short, far more honourable and trust- 
worthy than their wretched, chiefly anonymous, ca- 
lumniators. They will be found to be, principally, 
eminent physicians, such as Hufeland, physician to 
the king of Prussia ; Steiglitz, physician to the king 
of Hanover ; Brandis, physician to the king of Den- 
mark ; Klein, physician to the king of Wirtemberg ; 
Wienholt ; Olbers, the astronomer ; Gmelin ; Heine- 
cken ; Bockman; Baehrens; Ennemmoser; Sprengel, 
author of a history of medicine, and other learned 
%vorks ; Haindorf; Nolte ; Spindler; Nasse; Nees von 
Esenbeck ; Passavant ; Ziermann ; Heinroth ; Leupoldt 
&c. — Physiologists, such as Reil ; Treviranus ; Au- 
tenrieth ; Humboldt ; Burdach ; Eschenmayer ; Kieser, 
&c. — Naturalists, such as La Place, Cuvier, Oken, 
&c. — Philosophers, such as Fichte, Schelling, Steffens, 
Baader, Hegel, &c. — Theologians, such as Schleier- 
macher, Mayer, &c. To these might be added a vast 
number of men of general science, and celebrated lite- 
rary characters. The French magnetists — Puysegur, 
Deleuze, Bertrand, Georget, Cuvier, Despine, Rostan, 
. Husson, Filassier, Foissac, Gauthier, Teste, &c. — 
constitute a perfect host. 

But it has been alleged that the evidence of these 
enlightened individuals is liable to discredit, because, 
forsooth, they were engaged in investigating the 

284 APPENDIX. 

phenomena of animal magnetism. Assuredly, this is 
a strange, and we must take the liberty of saying, a 
most preposterous objection. Pray, how are the facts 
of nature to be discovered and appreciated, unless by 
those who take an interest in investigating them? 
Are the facts of chemistry to be discredited, because 
they have been discovered by chemists ? And is the 
same ultra sceptical test to be applied to electricity, 
galvanism, astronomy, and general physics? Are no 
facts to be relied upon as genuine, but such as may 
happen to be adduced by ignorant and unskilful per- 
sons, who have neither the requisite talent, nor the 
disposition for investigation, and who are, moreover, 
careless and indiiferent to the results ? 

The Author, then, feels no hesitation in appealing 
to the experience of the most eminent magnetists, in 
confirmation of the fact which, as we have seen, has 
been manifested in many instances, of the natural 
Somnambulism ; but in order to deprive the most 
obdurate sceptics of every pretence for denying the 
reality of the fact in question, we shall proceed to the 
brief enumeration of cases, in which the controverted 
phenomenon was distinctly and unequivocally mani- 
fested. 

Dr. Tritschler's somnambulist — a boy of thirteen 
years of age — saw and recognised the numbers and 
pictures on cards, when introduced under the bed- 
cover, and placed upon his stomach, in complete dark- 
ness, and covered, moreover, by the hand of the mag- 
netiser. The same recognition took place in the case 
of written notes. 

Madame Millet, magnetised by Van Ghert, saw her 

APPENDIX. 285 

physician's liand and finger by means of the epigas- 
trium. At a later period she recognised, in a similar 
manner, some portraits. At last she became so clair- 
voyante as to be able to read, by means of the epigas- 
trium, at the distance of a foot and a half. 

Miss St., under the care of Dr. Lehmann, accu- 
rately distinguished the colours of cards by means of 
the epigastrium. Kieser's epileptic boy read fluently 
by means of the pit of the stomach. Maria Riibel, in 
Langenberg, read sealed letters by means of the epi- 
gastrium ; nay, even written characters enveloped in 
a covering of double linen. De Valenti's patient 
described the ornamental devices on his watch ; she 
also recognised the picture of a soldier placed on her 
stomach. In many other patients the functions of 
other organs were also manifested at the epigastrium. 
Dr. Joseph Frank's patient, Louisa Baerkmann, re-r 
cognised and felt the taste of sugared water at the 
epigastric region, and heard at the same place. A ser- 
vant girl, magnetised by De Valenti, also heard at the 
epigastrium. Dr. Klein's patient said, " This is very 
comical — I hear by means of my stomach;" and she 
laughed aloud at the singularity of the phenomenon. 
Her ears having been stopt, she said, " That is of no 
use ; I hear with this," pointing to her stomach. 

In the case of other somnambulists, the common 
sense seemed to be transferred to the points of the 
fingers, as in the case of Miss M'Evoy, of Liverpool. 
Professor Kieser's patient, Anthony Arst, read with 
his forefinger, and distinguished cards in the same 
manner. Nay, when he held his elbow out of the 
window, he saw every thing in the street to the dis- 

286 APPENDIX. 

tance of 150 paces. Van Ghert's somnambulist saw 
by the means of the fingers ; as also Madame Millet 
and Maria Riibel, formerly noticed, and Dr. Durr's 
patient. An idio-somnambulic boy at Halmstadt, in 
Holland, read fluently by means of his breast and 
fingers. Dr. Meyer's patient, at Dulken in Rhe- 
nish Prussia, heard with the points of his fingers. 
One of Dr. Kerner's somnambulists heard some- 
times with her fingers, sometimes with every part 
of her body. Articles of food she tasted witli 
her fingers, as with her mouth. The second somnam- 
bulist, mentioned in the work referred to, saw only 
when she placed her finger on the pit of the stomach, 
or on the crown of the head. She sometimes heard, 
smelt, and saw with the point of the middle finger. 

Other cases are recorded in which the patients saw 
and heard with the nose, the cliin, the elbows, the 
knees, the toes, and aU the prominent parts of the 
body. Augusta Miller of Carlsruhe saw with her 
forehead, her eyelids, and her eye-brows. Dr. "Werner 
mentions, as a singular peculiarity, that his som- 
nambulist possessed the power of changing the focus 
of vision at pleasure. In some cases, it would appear, 
the whole body becomes as it were clairvoyant. 
This was the case with Dr. Heinecken's patient at 
Bremen, who saw without the assistance of the eyes, 
or of any other special organ ; and she expressly 
declared that such somnambulists were much more 
clairvoyant than those whose perceptive faculties 
were localised. Hence the somnambulists are fre- 
quently unable to give any adequate description of 
these metastases of the perceptive faculties, and the 

APPENDIX. 287 

species of perception, in these cases, might, perhaps, 
be more properly denominated feeling, than actual 
sight, hearing, &c. It is worthy of remark, too, that 
the perceptions of these somnambulists, in general, 
are much more vivid, acute, and delicate, than in 
the waking state. 

The foregoing observations, it is presumed, must be 
sufficient to convince every candid and unprejudiced 
mind of the existence in certain states of the or- 
ganism, of the phenomenon of sensible perception, 
without the use of the appropriate organs. 

Here, then, we have a body of evidence in support 
of the existence of natural and artificial " clair- 
voyance," given by the same description of persons ; 
physicians of eminence and unimpeached honour, a 
body of men who, perhaps more than the members 
of any other profession, are dependent on their cha- 
racter as the means of winning daily bread. It 
appears to me, that there is no ground for pre- 
ferring the evidence of one set of witnesses to the 
other, and that both are by their character and know- 
ledge eminently entitled to our belief, unless we 
reject all human testimony, declare clairvoyance to be 
a subject on which it is useless to accumulate facts 
and evidence, and " taboo ' its consideration by the 
human mind. 

THE END.- 1 

London: 

Printed by A. Spottiswoode, 
New- Street- Square. 

acay, 1846. 

A CATALOGUE OF 

NEW WORKS AND NEW EDITIONS 

PRINTED FOR 

MESSRS. LONGMAN, BROWN, GREEN, AND LONGMANS, 
LONDON. 

CLASSIFIED INDEX. 

AGRICULTURE & RURAL AFFAIRS. 

Pa, 

Bnyldoa on Valuing Tlents, etc. 

Crocker's Land Surveying . . . » 

Diivy's Agricultural Ciiemislry - - 9 

Greiiiwood's (Col.) Tree-Lifter - 12 

JohnBon's Farmer's En cyclopedia - - 15 

Loudon's EncytlopEBdia of Agriculture - 18 
,, Self-Instruction for Farmers, etc. 17 

,, (Mrs.) Lady's Country Companion 17 
Low's Breedsofihe Domesticated Animals 

of Great Britain ... - 19 

,, Elements of Agriculture - - 19 

,, Oil Landed Property ... 18 

., On the Domesticated Animals . 18 

Wliitley's Agriculturnl Gcoloi,^ - - 'd2 

ARTS, MANUFACTURES, AND 
ARCHITECTURE. 

Brnntie's Dictionary of Science, Litera- 
ture, and Art " 

Icd^c of Pictures 9 

Eiistlake's History of Oil Painting - - 10 
Gruner's Decorations of the Queen's 

Pavilion ____-- 12 

Gwih's Encyclopxdiaof Architecture - 12 

Havdon's Lectures on Painting & Design 13 
Holland's Manufactures in Metal - -13 

Lerebours On Photography - - - 17 
Loudon's Encyclopa;dia of Cottage, Farm, 

and Villa Architecture and Furniture - 18 

Maitland's Church in the Catacombs - 20 

Porter's Manufacture of Silk - • - 24 

,, Porcelain & Glass 24 

Rcid (Dr.) on Warming and Ventilating 2.=> 

Steam EiiRine (The) , by ihc Artisan Club 5 
Urc's Dictionary of Arts, Manufactures, 

and Mines - - - - 31 

BIOGRAPHY. 

Aikin'8 Life of Addison - - .5 

Bell's Livi-s of the British Poets - - 6 

Dover's Life of the King of Prussia - Id 

Dunham's Early Writers of Britain - 10 

,, Lives of the British Dramatists 10 
Forster's Statesmen of the Commonwealth 

of England -.-.-- 11 
Glei(,'',s I^ives of the most Eminent British 

Military Commanders - - - - 11 

Grant (Mrs.) Memoir and Correspondence 11 

James's Life of the Black Prince - 15 

,, Eminent Foreign Statesmen • 15 

Lil's (M.) Life of Dost Mahomed - • 21 

Leslie's Life of Conslnble - - - 17 

Life of a Travelling Physician - - 17 

Mackintosh's Life of Sir T. More - . 19 

Maunder's Biographical Treasury - 21 

Mignet's Antonio Pere/, and Philip II. - 21 

Roberts's Life of the Duke of Monmouth 25 

Roscoe'B Lives of Eminent British Lawyers 1:5 

Russell's Bedford Correspondence - 26 
Shelley's Eminent Literary Men of Italy, 

etc. 

Eminent French Writers - 

Pages 

Southcy's Lives of the British Admirals - 28 

Life of Wesley - . - - 28 

Townsend'a Lives of Twelve eminent 

Judges -------30 

Waterlon's Autobiography and Essays 31 

BOOKS OF GENERAL UTILITY. 

Acton's (Eliza) Cookery Book - 5 

Black's Treatise on Brewing . - - C 

,, Supplement on Bavarian Beer - 6 

Collegian's Guide . - . - - 8 

I) ivan's Doiiustic Economy - - 10 

H,i. id-Book ofT.iste - - . - 12 

Hints on Etiquette - - ■ - . 13 

Hudson's Parent's Hand-Book - - 14 

,, Executor's Guide • • • 1-1 

On Making Wills ... 14 

London's Self Instruction - - - 17 

Maunder's Treasury of Knowledge - - 2fl 

,, ScientificandLiteraiy Treasury 21 

,, Treasury of History - - 21 

, , Biograpliical Treasury . .21 

,, Universal Class-Book' - - 21 

Parkcs'a Domestic Duties • - - 23 

Pyeroft's Course of English lleading 24 

Riddle's Eng.-Lat. and Lat.-Eii^'. Diet. 25 

Robinson's Art of Curing, Pickling, etc. 25 

Short Whfpt ------ 27 

Thomson's Management of Sick Room - 30 

,. Interest Tables - - - 30 

Tomlins' Law Dictionary - - - . 30 

Wcbatcr'fiEncycl. of Domestic Economy 31 

BOTANY AND GARDENING. 

Abercrombie's Practical Gardener - • 5 
,, and Main's Gardener's 

Companion - - - 5 

Crtllcott's Scripture Herbal ... 7 

Conversations on Botany . - . g 

Drummond's First Steps to Botany - - lu 

Glendinning On the Pine Apple - - II 

Greenwood's (Col.) Tree-Lilter - - 12 

Grimhlofs William HI. and Louis XIV. 12 

Henslow's Botany ----- 13 

Hoarc On the Grape Vine on Open Walls 13 

,, On the Roots of Vines . . - J3 

Hooker's British Flora - . . - 13 

Lindlcy's Theorv of Horticulture 

,, Orchard and Kitchen Garden - 
,, Introduction to Botany - 
,, Flora Medica . - . . 
I, Synopsis of British Flora . 

Loudon's Hortus Britunnicus - - . 
,, Hortus Lignosus Londinensis - 
,, EncyclopajdiaofTrcesai Shrubs 
,, ,, Gardening 

,1 ,1 Plants 

,, Suburban Gardener - . . 
,, Self-Instruction for Gardeners, 

Repton's Landscape Gardeu 
scape Architecture 

CLASSU-'IED INDEX 

Rivera's Rose Amateur's Guide 
lloijers's Vegetable Cultivator - 
Sthleieleii's Scientific Botany - 
Smith's IntroiluLtioii to Botony 

„ En^rlisli Flora 

,, Compendium of English Flora 

27 
27 

CHRONOLOGY. 

Blair'i, Chronolount-alTables - - 6 

Calendar (llluiiiitialed) and Diary - - 15 

Nicuhiij's ChruM.logV of History - - S'i 

Riddh'"s ELxlosii-stiualClironologT - - 25 

Tute's Horaiius Rcstitutus - - - 29 

COMMERCE AND MERCANTILE 
AFFAIRS. 

Gilbart On Banking - - - - 11 

Lorimer's Letters to n Master Mariner - 1? 

M'Culloch's Dictionary of Commerce - 19 

Steel's Shipmaster's Assistant - - - 28 

Thomson s Tables ot Ij.tereEt - - - 30 

Walford's Customs' La>vs - - - 31 

GEOGRAPHY AND ATLASES. 

Butler's Sl^etth of Ancient and Modern 

Gcographv - ... 7 

,, Atlas of Modern Geography - 7 

,, ,, .-Ancient Geography - 7 

Cooley's World Surveyed - - - 8 

De Strzeleuki's New South Wales - - g 

Forster's Historical Geography of Arabia 11 

Hall's New General Atlas . - - 12 

M'Culloeh's Geographical Dictionary - 19 

Miirray's Encyclopiedia of Geofjrnphy - 22 
Ordnance Maps, and Publications of the 

Geological Society - - - - 23 

Parrot's Ascent of Mount Ararat - _ S 

HISTORY AND CRITICISM. 

Adair's (Sir R.} Mission to Vienna - - 5 
,, Neg^otiatious for the Peace of the 

Dardanelles .... 5 

Addison's Historv of the KnightsTemplars 5 

Bell s History of Russia - - - - 6 

Blair's Chron. and Historical Tables - 6 

Bloomfield's Translation of Thucydidea - 6 

Edition of Thucydides - - 6 

Bunsen's Egypt 7 

Cooley's Maritime and Inland Discovery 8 

Crowe's Hislorv of France - - - 9 

Dablmann's English Revolution - . 9 

De Sismoudi's Fall of tlie Roman Empire 9 

,, Italian Repniilics - - 9 

Dunham's History of Spain and Portugal 10 

,, Europe in the Middle Ages - 10 

,, History of the German Empire 10 

,, Denmark, Sweden, and Norway 10 

, , H istory of Poland - - - 10 

Dunlop's History of Fiction - lU 

EcLleston's English Antiquities - - 10 

Fergus's History of United States of 

Ameriea ----.-.]0 

f^rant (Mrs ) Memoir and Corespondence 11 

Grattan's History of Netherlands . - ]1 

Guieciardini's Hist. Maxims - - - 12 

Halsted's Life of Richard III. - - 12 

Havdon's Lectures on Paintinpand Design 13 

His'torieul Pictures of the Middle Ages - 13 

Horsley's (Bp.) Biblical Criticism - - 14 
Jeffrey's (Lord) Contributions to the 

E'dinburgh Review - - - - 15 
Keightley's Outlines of History - - 15 
Laing's Kings of Norway - - 16 
I.empri6re'B Classical Dictionary - - 17 
Macauliiy's Essays - . - - 19 
Maukinnon's History of Civilisation - 19 
Mackintosh'fiHistory of England - - 19 
„ Miscellaneous Works - 19 
JM'Culloch's Dictionary, Historical, Geo- 
graphical, and Statistical - - - 19 
IMaunder's Treasury of History - 21 

Pages 

Mignct's Antonio Perez and Philip H. - 21 

MiFner's Church History - - - - 21 

Moore's History of Ireland - - - 21 

Mosheim's Ecclesiastical History - - 23 

Mijller's Mythology ----- 22 

Nicolas's Chronology of History - - 26 

Rauke'G History of the Reformation - 24 
Roberts's Rebellion, etc. of the Duke of 

Monmouth 25 

Rome, History of - - - - - 25 
Russell's Correspondence of the Duke of 

Bedford -.-.-- 6 

Scott's Historyof Scotland - - - 26 
Stebbing's Hisinrj- of the Christian Church 28 

,, History of the Reformation - 28 

,, Church Histo/y - - - 28 

Switzerland, History of - - - - 29 

Sydney Smith's Works - - - - 27 

ThirhialFs History of Greece - - - 29 

Tooke's History o'l Prices - - - 30 

Turner's History of Kngland - - - 30 

Tyller's Elements of General History - 31 

Zurapt's Latin Grammar - - - - 32 

JUVENILE BOOKS, 

Tucludine- Mrs. Murcefs Works. 

Boy's (the) Own Book . . - - 6 

Conscience's Flemish Sketches - - 8 

Hawes's Tales of the N. American Indians 13 

Howitfs Boy's Country Book - - - 11 

Mackinto.sh's Life ..f Sir T. More - - 19 
Marcet's Conyersitions — 

On the History of England - - 20 

On Cbemistry ----- 20 

On Natural Philosophy - - - 20 

On Political Eeonomy - - - 20 

On Vegetable Phssiology - - - 20 

On Land and Water . - - 20 

On Language . - - - 20 

Marcet's Game ofGrammar - - 20 

,, Willv's Grammar - - - 20 

,, Lessons on Animals, etc. - - 20 

Marryat's Masterman Hendy - - - 20 

„ Settlers in Canada - - - 20 

„ Mission; or, Scenes in Africa 20 

Maunder's Universal Class Book - - 21 

Pycroft's (the Rev. 3 .) , English Reading 2-t 

MEDICINE. 

Bull's Hints to Mothers - - 7 

,, Management of Children - . 7 

Coplsnd's Dictionary of Medicine - - 8 

ElliotsoD's Human Physiology - - 10 

Holland's Medical Notes - - - - 13 

Lefevre (Sir Geo.) on the Nerves - 1? 

PereiraOn Foo'1 and Diet - - - 23 

Recce's Medical Guide ... 24 

Sandby On Mesmerism - - . _ 26 

VVigan (Dr.) On Insanity . . - 32 

MISCELLANEOUS 

Adshead on Prisons and Prisoners - - 5 

Bray's Philosophy of Necessity - - 7 

niavers's Forest i.ife ... - 8 

Coclis's Bordeaux, etc. - 8 

Collegian's Guide - - _ _ 8 

Colton's Lacon 8 

De Burtin On the Knowledge of Pictures 9 

De Morgan On Probabilities - - - 9 

De Strzelecki's New South Wales - - 9 

Dunlop's History of Fiction . - . 10 

Good's Book of Nature . - - - 11 

Graham's English - .... U 

Grant's Letters from the Mountains - H 

Guest's Mabinoifion - - - - . 12 

Hand-Book of Taste - - - . 12 

Hobbes's (Thos.) complete Works - 13 

Howitt's Rural Life of Eiivland - - 14 

„ Visits to Remarkable Places 1-1 

,, Student-Life of Germany - IJ 

TO MESSRS. LONGMAN AND CO.'b CATALOGUE. 

Pages 

Howitt's RurM and Social Life of Germany 14 

., Coloiiisation mid CLnstiauitv - 14 

Huuiphreja' llluniiiiftli-d Books - - 15 

lUiimiiuitcd Ciile(id:ir and Diary for 1845 15 
.ItlTrey's (Lord) Coiitributiona to the 

K.iinbur^li Review - - - - 15 

Lome's Lift; nt the Water Care - - 16 

Ltlcvre (SirGeo.) On the Nerves - 17 

Life of a Travelling I'hysicinn - - - 17 

l,iiudon'B(Mra.) Lady's Country Compfini on 17 

BlrtCHulay's Critical and Historical Essiivs 19 

Mrtckinlosh's 'HirJ.l Miscellaneous Works 19 
BlitUelel's Priests, Women, and Families 

,, The People - - - - 21 

Miiller's IMvtIiology ----- 22 

Nccker Deyaiissure's Progressive Educa- 
tion -------22 

Perry On German University Education - 23 

Peter Plymley"s Letters - - - - 21 

Pvcroft'a English Reading - - - 24 

U'owton's DcOatcr - - - - 26 

Snndby On Mesmerism - - - - 2G 

Saiidford'a Paioeliialia - - - - 26 

Seaward'E Nanativeof iiis Sliipwreck - 26 

Smith's (Rev. Sydiiev) Works - - 27 

Southey's Commonplace Book • - 23 

Taylor's Stntcsma.i 29 

Walker's Chess Studies - - - - 31 

Welsford On Language - - - - 32 

Wigan (Dr.) On Insanity - - - 32 
Willoughby's (Lady) IHary - 

tnpi'a 

32 

- 7 

NATURAL HISTORY IN GENERAL. 

Callow's Popular Coucholoify . 
Iloubledav's Butterflies and ilotbs 
Drummorid's Letters to -i Naturalis 
Gray's Figures of Molluscous Ani»: 

als 

Mai 

laha 

an<l Mitclieirs Ornilhology - - 12 

Kirby and Spence's Entomology - - lf> 

Lee's Taxidermy - - I? 

,, Elements of Natural History - 17 

Mnrcet's Conversations on Animals, etc. 20 

Newell's Zoology of the English Poets - 22 

Stephens' British Coleoplcra - - - 28 

Swainsonon the Study of Natural History 29 

,, Animals - - - - 29 

„ Quadrupeds - - - - 29 

Birds - - - 29 

,, Animals in Menageries - 29 

,, Fish, Amphibians, & Reptiles 29 

,, Insects - - - - 29 

, , M alaeology - * - - 29 

the Habits and Instincts of 

Animals 

,, Taxidei 

Turton'a Shellsof the Uritishlslands - 31 

Walerton's Essays on Natural History - 31 

Wustflood's Classification of Insects - 32 

Zoologj- of H.M. S.s' Erebus and Terror 32 

NOVELS AND WORKS OF FICTION. 

Bray's (Mrs,) Novels - ... 7 

Conscience's Flemish Sketches - - 8 

Doctor (The; 9 

Dunlop's History of Fiction - - 10 

Margaret Russell - - - - 20 

Marryat's Mastennan Ready - - 20 

„ Settlers in Canada - - - 20 

,. Mission; or. Scenes in Africa 2U 

Pericles, A Tale of Athens - - - 23 

Willis s (M. P.) Das-hci. at Life - 32 

ONE VOLUME ENCYCLOP>EDIAS 
AND DICTIONARIES. 

Copland's, of Medicine 

Pages 

Cres)-'s, of Civil Rngiueering - 9 

Gwilt's, of ArchiteeUire • 12 

Johnson's Furmer - - - - 15 

Loudnu's, of Trees and Shrubs - IS 

,, of Gardening - - IS 

,, of Agriculture - - - 18 

„ of Plants - - - - 18 

„ of Rural Architecture - IS 

M'Culloch'&Geot;raphical, Statistical, and 

Historical Dictionary - 19 

,, Coninicrec - - - - 19 

Murraj-'s Eneyelopfcdia of Geography - 22 

Ure's Arts, Manufactures, and Mines - 31 

Webster's Domestic Economy - - 31 

POETRY AND THE DRAMA. 

Aikin's (Dr.) British Poets - - - 26 

Bowdlcr^ Family Shakspeare - - - 26 

Chalenor's Walter Gray - - - 8 

,, Poetical Remains • - - 8 

Collier's Roxburghe Ballads - . . 8 

Costello's Persian Rose Garden - - 8 

Dante, translated by Wright - - - 9 

Goldsmith's Poems ----- II 

Gray's Elec)', illuminated - - - 1 1 

Heron's Palestrina - _ . . 13 

Horace, by Tate • - - - - 29 

L.E. L.'s Poetical Works - - - 16 

Linwood's Anthologia Oxonicnsis • - 17 

Maeaulay's Lays of Ancient Rome - - 19 

Mackay's Enijlish Lakes - - . - 19 

Montgomery's Poetical Works - - 21 

Moore's Poeiieal Works - - - 21 

„ Lalla Rookh - - - - 22 

,, Irish Melodies . - - - 22 

Moral of Flowers 22 

Poet's Pleasaunee ----- 24 
Pope's Works ... - -24 

Reynard the Fox ----- 25 

Sheldon's Minstrelsy - - - - 27 

Sophocles, by Linwood - - - - 27 
Southey's Poetical Works 

Olii 

r Ne 

,, 3rilish Poets 

Spirit of the Woods 

Thomson's Seasons . - - 

Turner's Richard 111. - - - 

Watta'a (A. A.) Lyrics of the Heart 

POLITICAL ECONOMY AND 
STATISTICS. 
Gilhart on Banking ----- 
M'Culloch's Geographical, Statistical, and 

Histo 

cal Di 

M'Culloch's Literature of Polit. Kconomy 
„ On Taxation and l-ui.ding 
,, Statistics of the British Empire 

Strong's Greece as a Kingdom 

Tooke's History of Prices - - - 

Twiss's Oregon Question Examined 

RELIGIOUS AND MORAL 
WORKS, ETC. 

Amy Herbert, edited by Rev W. Sewell 

Bailey's Essays on the Pursuit of Truth - 

DIoomfield's Greek Testament 

,, College and School ditto - 

,, LexiLon to Greek Testament 

Bunseii's Church of tlie Future 

Burns's Christian Pliilosopliy 

,, Christian Fragments - - - 

Callcott's Scripture Herbal 

Cooper's Sermons - . _ 

Dale's Domestic Liturgy 

Uibdin's Sunday Library - 

Doddridge's Family F.xpositor 

Englishman's Hebrew and Chaldee Con- 
cordance of the Bible - 
,, Greek Concordance of the 

New Testament - 

Cou- 

CLASSIFIED INDEX. 

Panes 

Fitzroy's (Lady) Scripture Conversations 11 

Forster's Historical Geography of Arabia H 

„ Lif.?of Biahop Jefab - - ^ 

Gertrude, edited by the Rev, \V. Sewcll - H 

Hook's (Dr.) Lectures on Pussion Week 13 
Home's IntroduL-tion to the Study of the 

Scriptures - - - " T 

„ Compendium of ditto - - I-* 

Horsley's (Bp.) Biblicfil Criticism - - 14 

I'salms ----- 14 

Jebb'a Protestant Kempis - - - 10 

„ PastornI Instructions - 15 

,, Correspondence with Knox 15 

lox's (Alexander) Hcmains - - - 16 
ing's Notes on the German Catholic 

scnisiB --""■■" j'i 

Lfineton Parsonnge ----- I'J 

fiitlnnd's Church in the Catacombs - 20 

Marriage Gift ------ -0 

"'"L-helct's Priests, Women, and Families 21 

,, and Quinet's Jesuits - - 21 

Milncr's Church History - - - 22 

Mosheim'a Ecclesiastical History - - 21 

Parablca (The) ----- 23 

Parkes's Domestic Duties - - 23 

Peter Plymlry's Letters - - - - 24 

Pitman's Sermons on the Psalms - - 24 

Kiddle's Letters from a Godfather - - 25 
Robinson's Greek and Kngllsh Lcxicoti 

to the NewTcstament - - - - 25 

Saiidford On Female Improvement - 2G 

„ On Woman - - - 21 

,, 's Parochialia - - "2(1 

Sermon on the Mount (The) - - 2fi 

Shepherd's Horie Apostolico: - - 27 

Smith's Female Disciple - - - - 27 

„ (G.) PerilousTimcs - - - 27 

,, Ucligion of Ancient Britain ^ 

„ (S.) Sermons - - - - 27 

Southcy's Life of Wesley - 28 

Stebbin^'H Church History - - - 28 

Tate's Hihtory of St. Paul - - - 09 

Taylcr's(Uev.C.B.}Mary;arct; or, the Pearl 29 

,, ,, Sermons - - 29 

,, ,, Dora Mclder - - 29 

,, 1, Lady Mary - - 29 

Taylor's (Jeremy) Works - - - 29 

Tomline's Christian Theolojfy • - - :^0 

,, Introduction to the Bible - ;iO 

Trollope',1 AnalcctaThcologica - 30 

Turner'sSacred History - - 30 

Wardlaw On Socinlan Controversy - 31 

Weil's Bible, Koran, and Talmud - - 31 

Whiiley's Life Everlasting - - - 32 

Wilbcrforcc's View of Christianity - 32 

Willoughby's (Lady) Diary - - -32 

RURAL SPORTS. 

Blaine's Dictionary of Sports - 6 

Hansard's Fishing in Wales - 12 

Hawker's [nstructions to Sportsmen - i:^ 

Loudon's (Mrs.) Lady's Country Companion 17 
Stable Talk and Table Talk - - . 2S 

THE SCIENCES IN GENERAL, 
AND MATHEMATICS. 

BakcwelPs Introduction to lleology - 5 
Balmain's Lessons on CliemiHtry - - 6 
Brandc'fi Dictionary of Science, Litera- 
ture, and Art - - - - 6 
Brewster's Optics - - • - 7 
Conversations nn Mineralogy - - - S 
DelaBechcon theGeologjofCornwalI.etc. 9 
Donovan's Chemistry - - - - 10 
Elliot's Geometry ----- 10 
Farey on the Steam Hnpinc - - - 10 
Fosliroke on the Arts of the Ancients 11 
Greener on the Gun -. - _ J2 
Herschel's Natural Philoso|.hy - - 13 
,, Astronomy - - - - 13 

ufactures in Metal 

Holland's Mai 
Humboldt's Kosmos - - - - 

Hunt's Researches on Light - - ' 
Kane's Elements of Chemistry 
Kater and Lardncr's McchanicB 
La Place's System of the World 
Lardner's Cabinet CyclopiEdia - - 

Hydrostatics and Pneumatics - 

,, and Walker's Eleetiici'.y 

Lardner's Arithmetic - - - - 

„ Geometry - - - - 

,, Treatise on Heat - - - 

Lerebours On Photovrrapby 
Lloyd On Light and Vision 
Mackenzie's Physiology of Vision - 
Marcet's Conversations on Sciences, etc. 
Moseley's Practical Mechanics 

,, F.ngineering and Architecture 

Narrien's Elements of Geometry 

, Astronomy and Geodesy - 
Nesbit's Mensuration . - - - 
Owen's Lectures On Comparative Anatomy 

Parnell On Roads 

Pearson's Practical Astronomy 
Pcsehel's Physics - - - - - 
Phillips's PalajozoicFossilsof Cornwall, etc. 

,, Guide to Gcologv _ - - 

,, Treatise on Geology - 

,, Introduction to Mineralogy 
Poisaon'a Mechanics _ - - - 
Portlock'8 Report on the Geology o£ 
Londonderry _ _ - - - 

Powell'B Natural Philosophy - - - 
QiiartcrlyJournal of theGeological Society 
Ritchie (Robert) on Railways 
Roberts's Dictionary ofGeology 
Sandhurst Mathcmalicnl Coarse 
Scott's Arithmetic and Algebra 

, , Tri ijon ome try - - - - 
Thomson's Afgebra - - - _ - 

Wilkinson's Eugiues of War - 

TRAVELS. 

Allan's Mediterranean 

Beale's Vale of the Towey 

Coolcy's World Surveyed 

Costello's (Miss) North Wales 

De Custine's Russia _ - - - 

D;; Str/elecki'B New South Wales • 

Erman's Travels through Siberia - 

Harris's Highlands of ^Ethiopia 

Howitt's (R.) Australia Felix 

Lai ng'a Notes of a Traveller - - - 
,, Residence in Norway - 
,, Tourin Sweden _ - - - 

Life of a Travelling Physician 

Mackay's English Lakes 

Monlauban's Wanderings - - . 

Parrot's Ascent of Mount Ararat 

Paton's (A. A.) Servia - - - - 
,, Modern Syrians 

Peilestrian Reminiscences - - - 

Seaward's Narrative of his Shipwreck 

Strong's Greece as n Kingdom 

Von Orlieh's Travels in India - - - 

VETERINARY MEDICINE 

Centaur's Two Books on the Horse 
Field's Veterinary Records - - . 
Morton's Veterinary Toxicological Chart 

>i i> Medicine 

Miles On the Horse's Foot . - _ 
Percivall's Hippopathology - - _ 

,, Anatomyof the Horse - 

Spooner on the Foot and Leg of the Horse 
Stable Talk and Tahlc Talk - 
Turner On the Foot of the Horse 
Winter On the Horse 

NEW WORKS AND NEW EDITIONS. 

ABERCROMBIR.— ABERCROMBIE'S PRACTICAL GARDENER, AND 

IMl'ROVED SYSTEM OF MODERN HORTICULTURE, Hlphftliettcully iLnangcii. 4lU 
Edition, with an liilroductory Treiitise on Vegetnblc I'hysioloyy, and Plults by W. biiliBbury. 
12ino. Gs. hoarda. 

ABERCROMBIE AND MAIN.— THE PRACTICAL GARDENER'S COM- 
PANION; Or, Horticnhural Cilendiir: to whicli in added, the (iarden-Sced and I'lant 
Estimate. Edited from a MS. of J.AbL-rurombie.by J. Miiin. 8th Edition. 3Jinu. 3s.6d. sewed. 

ACTON (MISS).— MODERN COOKERY, 

In all its Branches, reduced to a System of Easy Practice. For the use of Private Ftimilics. 
In a Series of Practical Receipis, all of which have been strictly testeil, and are given with 
the most minute exactness. Dedicated to tlic Young Housekcepera of Er.yrland. By Eliiia 
Aetnn. New Edition, improved. Foolscap Svo, with Woodcuts, r». Od. cloth. 

ADAIR (SIR ROBERT) —AN HISTORICAL MEMOIR OF A MISSION 

TO THECOORT OF VIENNA IN ISOfi. By the Right Honorable Sir Rnbert Adair, U C.U. 
With a Selection from his Despatches, published by perniia&iou of tlie pruper Authorities. 
Svo. 18s. cloth. 

ADAIR (SIR ROBERT) —THE NEGOTIATIONS FOR THE PEACE OF 

THE DARDANELLES, in 1808-9; with Despateljes and Official Documents. I(y the 
Right Honorable Sir Robert Adnir, G C.B. Being a Sequel to the fliemoir of his Missiun 
to Vienna in ISOG. 2 vols. 8vo. 28tf. i-loth. 

ADDISON.— THE KNIGHTS TEMPLARS. 

BcC.G. Addison, of the Inner TeDiple. 2d Edition, enlarged. Square crown Svo. with 
Illustrations, ISs. cloth. 

ADDISON.— THE TEMPLE CHURCH IN LONDON: 

Its History and Antiquities. By C. G. Addison, Esq., of the Inner Temple, author of "The 
History of the Knights Tcmplura." Square crow ti Svo. with G Plates, 5s. e loth. 
Also, 
A FULL AND COMPLETE GUIDE, HISTORICAL AND DESCRIPTIVE, TO THE 
TEMPLE CHURCH. [From Mr. Addison's " History of the Temple Church."} Square 
crown Svo. la, dewed, 

ADSIIEAD (JOSEPH).— PRISONS AND PRISONERS. 

By Joseph Adshead. Svo. with I llustralious, /». {id. cloth. 

AIKIN.-THE LIFE OF JOSEPH ADDISON. 

Illustrated by many of his Letters and Private PapLTS r 
Aikin. 2 vols, post 8vu. with Portrait from SirGodlrey Kj 

ALLAN (J. H.)— A PICTORIAL TOUR IN THE MEDITERRANEAN; 

Comprising Malta, Dalmatia, Turkey, Asia Minor, Grecian Arehipeltigo, Egypt, Nubia, 
Greece, Sicily, Italy, and Spain. By J. H, Allan, Member of the Athenian Arclia>ologieal 
Society, and of the Egyptian Society of Cairo. 2d Erlition. Imperial 4to. with up^yn^ds of 
40 lithographed Dra\\iugs, and /U VVood Engravings, Hi. 3s. cloth, 

AMY HERBERT. 

Bv a Lady. Eilited by the Rev. William Sewell, D.D. of Exeter College, Oxford. 3d 

Edition. 2 vols, foolscap Svo. Uff, cloth. 

ARTISAN CLUB (THE) —A TREATISE ON THE STEAM ENGINE, 

Bv the Artisan Club. 4to. with 30 Steel IMatea, etc., and about aSU Wood Engravings, 
'27$. eloth. [Eurly in Jtuie. 

',' Not. 1 to 23, Is. each; A'w. 24 on Jitnr \it<, 2.i. »eved. Back ytimbera to complete Sett 
may tlill be had. 

BAILEY.-ESSAYS ON THE PURSUIT OF TRUTH, 

Ami on the Pi ogress of Kuowlcdgt-. By Samuel Bailey, author of "Essays on the Formation 
and Publication of Opinions," " Berkeley's Theory of Vision," etc. 2d Edition, revised 
and enlarged, Svo. Os. 6d. cloth. 

BAKEWELL,— AN INTRODUCTION TO GEOLOGY. 

Intended to convey Practical Knowledge of the Science, and comprising the most important 
recent Discoveries; with Explanations of the Facts and Phenomeua whicli serve to conlirm or 
invalidate various Geological Theories. By Robert Bakewell. Fifth Edition, considerably 
enlarged. Svo, with numerous Plates and VVoodcuts, 21s, cloth. 

NEW WORKS AND NEW EDITIONS 

BALMAIN.- LESSONS ON CHEMISTRY, ,„ ^ ^ ,,. 

For the Use of Pupilwii Schools, Junior Students in Universities, and Headers who wish to 
learn the fu.iHamcnlal Principles and U-ud.iig Facta: witii Questiona for Examination, 
Glossaries of CliemicfilTcrriis and Chcmici.l Symbols, and an Index. By William H. Ba mam. 
With numerous Woodcuts, illustrative of the DctompoBilions. Foolscap 8vo. 6s. Cloth. 

BAYLDON.-THE ART OF VALUING RENTS AND TILLAGES, 

And the Tenant's IliL-lit of Enterinij ^"d Quitting' Farms, explained by several Specimens of 
Valuations; and Rcmaiks on the Cultlvuiion pursued on Soils in different Situations. 
Adapted to the Use of Landlords, Laiid-AgentM, Appraisers, Farmers, and Tenants. by 
J. S. Bayldon. 6th Kdition, corrected and revised by Jolm Donaldson, 8vo. 10«, 6d. tloth. 

BEALE (ANNE).— THE VALE OF THE TOWEY; 

Or, Sketches in South AA'ales. By Anoe Bealc. Pof>l Sv.i . Ids. 6//. cloth. 
" The ffrrrit merit of Miss Jicale's book isita truth, whirh leaves a strung Imprestion on the 
reader's iniV/d."— Spectiitor. 

BEDFORD CORRESrONDENCE.— CORRESPONDENCE OF JOHN, 

FOURTH DUKE OF BEHFORD, -.eleeted from the Orieiiials at Woburn Abbey: with 
Introductions by LorrtJolm Russell. 8vo. vol. 1 (1742-4S1, 18s. cloth; vol. 2 (1749-60), 15». cl. 
•, ■ rol. III. to complete the wirh, is nearly ready. ^ 

BELL— LIVES OF THE MOST EMINENT ENGLISH POETS. 

By Hobcrl ISl-II, Ks([. 2 vols, foolsciip Svu. with Vignette Titles, Vis. cloth. 

BELL.— THE HISTORY OF RUSSIA, 

From the Earliest Period to the Treaty ol Tilsit. By II Bell, Estj. 3 vols, foolscap 8vo. 18s. 

BLACK — A PRACTICAL TREATISE ON BREWING. 

Based on Chemical and Kconomieal Principles: wiih FormuUe for Public Brewers, and 
Instruetions for Private Families. By Willnini Black. Third Edition, rcvistd and eor- 
rected, with considerable Additions. The Additions revised by Professor Graham, of the 
London University. Svo. lOg. 6d. cloth. 
SUPPLEMENT, of REMARKS on B WARIAN BEER. London Porter, the Influence of Elec- 
tricity on Fermentation, and other Subjects. By William Blaek. Svo. 2s. M. sewed. 

BLAINE.-AN ENCYCLOP/EDIA OF RURAL SPORTS; 

Or, a complete Account, Historical, Practieal, and Descriptive, of Hunting, Shooting, Fishing, 
RaeinK, and other Field Sports and Athletic Amusements of the present day. By Dclabere 
P. Blaine, Esq., author of "Outlines of the Veterinary Art," " Canine Pathology," etc. etc. 
With nearly CUO Eii|rraviiigs ou Wood, by R. Branston, from Drawings by Alkeu, T, Land- 
.seer, Diekes, etc. Svo. 2f lOs. cloth, 

BLAIR'S CHRONOLOGICAL AND HISTORICAL TABLES, 

From the Creation to the present Time: with .\dditions and Corrections from the moat authen- 
tic Writers ; inuludiiig the Computation of St. Paul, as uonnecting the Period from the 
Exode to the Temple. Under the revision of Sir Henry Ellis, K.H., I'nncipal Librarian of 
the British Museum. Imperial Svu. 31s. Crf. half-bound morocco. 

BLOOMFIELD— THE HISTORY OF THE PELOPONNESIAN WAR. 

By Thueydnles. Nen-Iy Translated into English, and acconii''inied wiih verv copious 
Notes, Philological and Explanatory, Historical and Geographical. Bv the Rev. S. T. 
Bloomfield, D.U. F.S.A. 3 vols, 8vo. with Maps and Plates. 11. 5s. boards. 

BLOOMFIELD.— THE HISTORY OF THE PELOPONNESIAN WAR. 

ByThucydides. A New Recension of the Test, with a carefully amended Punctuation; and 
copious Notes, Critical, Philological, and Explanatoiy, almost entirely original, but partly 
selected and arranged from the best Expositors : accompanied ivith full Indexes, both of 
Greek Words and Phrases explained, and matters discussed in the Notes, Illustrated by 
Maps and Plans, mostly taken from actual Survey. By the Rev. S.T. Bloomfield, D.D.^.S.A. 
2 vols. Svo. 38j. cloth. 

BLOOMFIELD.— THE GREEK TESTAMENT : 

With copious English Notes, Critical, Philological, and Explaiintorv. Bv the Rev. S. T. 
Bloomfield, D.D. F.S.A. 0th Edit, improved. 2 vols. Svo. with a Map of Palc'Stine, 40s. cloth. 

BLOOMFIELD. —THE GREEK TESTAMENT FOR COLLEGES AND 

SCHOOLS; with English Notes. By the Rev. S.T. Bloomfiold, D D. Fourth Edition, 
cnlarfied and improved, aecompanied with a New JVIap of Syria and P.ilcstine, adapted to 
the New Testament and Josephus, and an Index of Greek Words and Phrases explained in 
the Notes. 12rao. 10s. 6d. cloth. 

BLOOMFIELD.— GREEK AND ENGLISH LEXICON TO THE NEW 

TESTAMENT: especially adapted to the use of College-., and the Hi. -her Classes in Public 
Schools; but also intended as a convenient Manual for Biblii^al Studtnts in general By 
Dr. Bloomfield. 2d Edition, enlarged, and improved. l2mo. on wider paper, lUs, 6rf. cloth. 
BOY'S OWN BOOK (THE): 

A Complete Eneyclonredia of all the Diversions, Athletic, Scientific, and Recreative, of Boy- 
hood and Youth. 2Uth Edition. Siiuarc I2mo., with many Engravings on Wood, 6*. boards 

BRANDE.— A DICTIONARY OF SCIENCE, LITERATURE, AND ART* 

Comprising the History, Description, and Scientific Principles of every Branch of llunian 
Knowledge ; with the Deriv.atioii and Definition of all the Terms in gcni-ral use Edited bv 

VV. T. Brande.F.R.S.L.and E.- assisted by J.Cauvin. The various dejjartmeuts h^- Gen ie^ 
of eminence 111 each. Svo. with V\'ood-cngravings, 3/. cloth. 

BRAY (MRS.)— MRS. BRAY'S NOVELS AND ROMANCES, 

Revised nnd corrected bv Mrs. Briiy. In 10 vols, fcap 8vo., uniformly with the " Stflndard 
Novels." with Frontispieces and Vignettes from Dtsigus ;iiul Sketihes by the late Thomas 
Stottiiird, R.A. i C. A. Stotlmrd, F.a.A. ; Henry Warren, Esq.; etc. 3/. cloth: or the Works 
septiratcly On. each, as follows; 

Vol. I. •' The ir/tite Hoods," tciCh portrait 
oj the Antkar, a view of her rrxideiice, 
inid General Prr-fnce to the Series; — 
Vol.11. "De l">i.r :" -Vol. III. '* The 
Proteslfint ;•• —Vol. IV. " Fitz of Fit::- 

Ford;"— Val.V. "The Tana;" -Vol. VI. 
" IVarlrigh;"— Vol. VII. " Trelawny ;" 
Vol. VIII. " Trialx of the Heart}" — 
Vol. IX. " Henry de PumeTi>f/;"—Vul.'^, 
" Cuurlenay of IValreddim.'" 

BRAY.-THE PHILOSOPHY OF NECESSITY; 

Or, the Ljiw of Consc<iueiice3 jis npplicablc to Mental, MornI, and Social Science . By Charles 
Bray. 2 vols. 8vo. 15s. cloth. 

BREWSTER.— A TREATISE ON OPTICS. 

By Hir David Brewster, LL.I). t'.R.S. etc. New Edition. Foolscap Svo. with viguette title, 

and I7t) Woodcuts, (is. cloth. ' 

BUDGE (J.)~THE PRACTICAL MINER'S GUIDE: 

CompriMii^r a Set of Trij^oriometrical Tables adapted to all the purposes of Oblique or 
DmKOiial, Vertical, Horizontal, and Traverse Dialling; with their appli-ation to the Dial. 
Exeriisc of Drifts, Lodes, Slides, Levelling, Inaccessible DistanceN, Heights, etc. By 
J. Budge. NewE.lition, considerably enlarged, Svo.with Portrait of the Author. 12j. (.loth. 

BULL.-THE MATERNAL MANAGEMENT OF CHILDREN, 

In HRALTH and DISEASE. By Thomas Bull, M.D. Physici m .A.ccoucheurto the Finsbury 
Midwifery Institution, etc, 2d Edition, revihed and enlarged. Foolscap 8vo. 73. cloth. 

BULL -^HINTS TO MOTHERS, 

lor the Miin^igcincnt of Health during the Period of Pregnancy and in the Lying-in Koom ; 
with an Kxposureof Popular Errors in eoiinexiou with those subjects. BvThonins Bull, M.D. 
Phy.sician Accoucheur to the Finsbury Midwifery Institution, etc. 4th Edition, revised and 
considerably enlarged. Foolscap 8vo. 7j. cloth. 

BUNSEN (C. C. J.)— THE CHURCH OF THE FUTURE: 

Or, an Inquiry into its Prospects, Constitution, and Import, with especial reference to the 
Church ot Prussia. To which is appended, a Correspondence with the Right Hon. William 
Ghidatoiie. By the Chevalier C. C. J Bnnsen. Transl ited, under the superintendence of 
the Chevalier Bnnsen, by the Rev. Leopold J. Bernays, Fellow of St. John's College, Oxford. 

Pwst Svo. [/„ the press. 

BUNSEN— AN INQUIRY INTO THE HISTORY, ARTS AND SCIENCES, 

LANGUAGE, WRITING, MVTHOLOGY, and CHRONOLOGY of ANCIENT EGYPT: 
with the peculiar PositioJi of that Nation in reference to the Universal Hi.tory of Iklankind. 
By the Chevalier C. 0. J. Bunsen. Translated from the Gerin.in, under the Author's super- 
intendeace, by C, H. Cottrell, Esq.; with additional matter, furnished by the Author. 2 vols 
8vo. with numerous Plates. [/n the press. 

BURNS.— THE PRINCIPLES OF CHRISTIAN PHILOSOPHY; 

Containing the Doctrines, Duties, Admonitions, and Consolations of the Christian Religion. 
By John Burns, M.D. F.R.S. 5th Edition. 12mo. /s. boards. 

BURNS— CHRISTIAN FRAGMENTS; 

Or, Remarks on the Nature, Precepts, and Comforts of Religion. By John Burns. M.D. 
F.R.S. Professor of Surgery in the University of Glasgow, author of "The Principles of 
Christian Philosophy," Foolscap 8vo. 5s. cloth. 

BUTLER. -A SKETCH OF MODERN AND ANCIENT GEOGRAPHY. 

By Samuel Butler, D.D.. late Lord Bishop of Lichfield and Coventry; and formerly Head 
master of Shrewsbury School. New Edition, revised by his Son. 8vo. 9s. boards. 

BUTLER.— AN ATLAS OF MODERN GEOGRAPHY. 

Consistinir of Twenty-three coloured Maps, from a New Set of Plates; with an Index of 
all the Names of Places, referring to the Latitudes and Lonuitudes. Bv the late Dr Butler 
Bishop Ot Lichfield. New Edition, corrected. 8vo. 12,1. half-bound. " 

BUTLER. -AN ATLAS OF ANCIENT GEOGRAPHY. 

Consisting of Twenty-three coloured Maps: with an Index of all the Names of Places, 
referrinir to the Latitudes and Longitudes. By the late Dr. butler, Bishop of Lichfield. 
New Edition, corrected. 8vo. 12s. half-bound. 

BUTLER —A GENERAL ATLAS OF MODERN AND ANCIENT GEOGRAPHY. 

Consisting of Forty-live coloured Maps, and copious Indices referring to the Latitudes and 
Longitudes. By tlic late Dr. Butler , Bishop of Lichfield. New Edition, corrected. 4to 
24s. half-bound. 

CALLCOTT.-A SCRIPTURE HERBAL: 

With upwards of l^U Wood Engravijigs. By Lidy Callcott. Squnre crown 8vo. 1/. 5/. cloth. 

CATLOW. -POPULAR CONCHOLOGY; 

Or, thcShcUCabinetArranL'ed: being an Introduction to the modern System of Concholoey; 
« ith ft sketch of the Natural History of the Animals, an account of the Formation of the 
Shells, and a complete Descriptive List of the Families nnd Genera. By Agnes Catlow. 
Foolscap.Svo. with 312 Woodcuts, lOa. &d. cloth. 

Ni;\V WURKS AND NEW EDITIONS 

CENTAUR.— THE HORSE: AND HOW TO CHOOSE HIM, 

ByCciitfiiir. r.p.Svo. [/" thr prcti. 

CENTAUR— THE HORSE: AND HOW TO USE HIM, 

By Centaur. Eop.Svo. lln the prean. 

CHALENOR. -WALTER CRAY, 

A Bfilljtd, and other Poems ; including the Poetical Remains of Mary Clialenor. 2d Edition, 
with Additions. Fcp.8vo.Gj cloth. 

CHALENOR. -POETICAL REMAINS OF MARY CHALENOR. 

Fli>.8vo.4». tloth. 

CLAVERS.— FOREST LIFE. 

By M^ryClHvcrs, an Actual Settler; author of " A New Home, Who 'll Follow?" 2 v.il 
fcap.Svo. 12,1. cloth. 

COCKS (C.)— BORDEAUX, ITS WINES, AND THE CLARET COUNTRY. 

Bv. C Cocks, IVL., Professor of the Living- Liinu'iiiU'es in the RoyJil Coljcires .if Frnnre i 
Traiisliitor of the Works of Michelet, Mit'nct, and Quiuct. [hi the yr-'»s. 

COLLEGIAN'S GUIDE (THE); 

Or, Recollections of College Diiys; setting; forth the Advnntages and Temptations of ft 
University Kducntion. By ***• ••**»•, n.A., Coll Oxon. PostSvo. lOj. C//. cloth. 

COLLIER CJ- PAYNE )- A BOOK OF ROXBURCHE BALLADS 

Edited by John Payne Collier, Esq. Post ■Ito, [In the pmf- 

COLTON— LACON; OR, MANY THINGS IN FEW WORDS. 

By the Rev.C.C. Colton. New Edition, 8vo. T^s. cloth . 

CONSCIENCE (HENDRIK).-SKETCHES FROM FLEMISH LIFE. 

In Three T.ilos Tr^.nslaled from the Flemish of Hcndrik Conscience. SiHiare 8vo, wiih 
130 Engravings on Wood, from designs by FlemiNli artiiitG, 6j. cloth. 

CONVERSATIONS ON BOTANY. 

9th Edition, im|iroved. Foolscap Svo. with 22 Plates, 'a. 6d. cloth ; with coloured Plates, ]2». 

CONVERSATIONS ON MINERALOGY. 

With Plates, engraved liy Mr. and Mrs. Lowry, from Original Drawings. 3d Edition, eiilargeil. 
2 ^■ols. ]2mo. 14.T. cloth. 

COOLEY.-THE WORLD SURVEYED IN THE NINETEENTH CENTURY ; 

Or, Recent Narratii'es of Scientific and Exploring Expeditions (chiefly uiidertaUen hv com- 
mand of Foreign Governments). Collected, translated, and, where necessary, abridged, 
hy W. D. CooTev, V.sr\., author of "Tlie History of Maritime and Inland Discovery^' in 
the Cabinet Cyefopicdia, etc. 
Th" First Volume contains "The Aseent of Mount Ararat " By Dr. Friedrich Parrot, Pro 
feasor of Natural Philosophy iu the University of Dorpat, Russian Imperial Councillor of 
Stitc, etc. Hvo with a Map hy Arrowsmith, and Woodcuts, I4«. cloth. 
*** E//ch vohime tcitl form, for thr maul }iarl, n Ifork complete in ittelf, and the frhnlr 
Series teill present an accurate and lumhioiia pietnre of all the knoirti viirtiiitis of the 
earth. The Second Work o/ the Series, '* Erinan s Travels through Silteria, is in the press, 
in 2 tioIs.Svo. 

COOLEY.-THE HISTORY OF MARITIME AND INLAND DISCOVERY. 

By W. D. Cooley, Esq. 3 vols, foolscap Svo. with Vignette Titles, 1S». cloth, 

COOPER (REV. E.) -SERMONS, 

Chieflydcsigncd to elucidate some ofthc leading Doctrinesof the Gospel. Towliich Is added, 
an Appendix, rontaining Bermous preached on several Public Occasions, and printed by 
desire. Bv the Rev. E<lward Cooper, Rector of Hamstall-Ridware, iuul of Yoxall. 7lh 
Edition. 2 vols. I2nio. 10s. boards. 

COOPER (r.EV. E.)-PRACT1CAL AND FAMILIAR SERMONS, 

Designed for Parochial and Domeslie liistrimion. Bv tin- Ilev. Edn-ard Cooper, Tlector of 
Hamstall-Ridware. and of Yoxall, iu tin- eounty of Stalforil ; and late Fellow of All-bouls 
College, Ojtford, New Edilions. 7 vols. 12mo. If. 1S«. boards. 

•,* roll. 1 lo 4, S». encfi ; Vvts. 5 to 7, 6*. each. 

COPLAND.— A DICTIONARY OF PRACTICAL MEDICINE - 

Comprising General PathcloKy, the Nature and Treatment of Diseases, Morhid <^tn,etnrpB 
and the Disorders espeeially incidental to Climates, lo Sex, and to the difrercnt Bnoclia of 
Life, with iiumerons approved Kormulin of the Medicines recommended. B ' Jan^Lsd.nd 
M.D.,etc.etc. l„3vols. Vols. 1 and 2, Svo. 3(. cloth ; and Part 10, 1,. CJ .™ld. ' " 
COSTELLO (MISS).— THE ROSE GARDEN OF PERSIA. 

A Scries of Translations from the Persian Poets. By f,nuisa Stuart Pn.t^ii^ .u 

of ■•Specimens of the Early Poetry of Prance," etc. Long 8vo w ih lo Yii ' ""'J"; 
Titles, and Borders printed in Gold aid Colonrs, ISj. boards ; 0r3). M „„ ,j !""""'""'"' 
(«ri,n(o/,lvl,-) byflayday. ■"">"■ I""- "ouiid ,m morocco 

PKINTi'.D FOIl MrSSUS. LONUMAN , AN D CU. 

COSTELLO (MISS)— FALLS, LAKES, AND MOUNTAINS OF NORTH 

WALKS; bL'iTi^ a Pirtorijil Tourlhrouph the most intercstiiiij pnrts of the Country. Bv 
Louisa Stunrt Costello, author of "Tlic Hose Garden of Pcrsin,'* " Beam and the PyreiieeB,'' 
etc. Profusely illuslraled with Views, from Oriuinnl Sketches bvD, H. M'Kewan, engraved 
on wood, and lithographed, by T. autl E. Gilks. Square Svo.'with Map, Us. elolh. 

CRESY (E )-AN ENCYCLOPPEDIA OF CIVIL ENGINEERING, HISTORICAL, 

THF':onF.TlCAL, and PRACTICAL. By Kdward Crcsy, F.S.A. C .E- Illustrated by many 
hundred En^aviiigs on Wood, eX|ilanatory of the PrineiplcH, Mjichinery, and Constructions 
which eoine under the Direction of the Civil Kiieinecr. In 1 large volume, 8vo. uniform 
with Messrs. Longman aud Co.'s Series of One-Volume Encyclopjedias and DiclioTiaries. 

[/h the presi. 

CROfKER'S ELEMENTS OF LAND SURVEYING. 

Fifth Edition, corrected throughout, and considerably improved and modernised, by 
T. G. Runt. Land Surveyor, Bri.^lol. To which are added, TABLES OF SlX-FIGUnE 
LOGARITHMS, etc.. superintended by Richard Farley.of the Nautical Almanac EatablisU- 
mcnt. PoatSvo. I'Jb. cloth. 

CROWE.-THE HISTORY OF FRANCE, 

From the Earliest Perii.d to tlie Abdication of Napoleon. By E. E. Crowe, Esq. 3vols. 

foolscap 8vo. with Vi^^nette Titles, I8j. cloth. 

DAHLMANN -HISTORY OF THE ENGLISH REVOLUTION. 

\\y F. C. Uahlmann. laic Professor of History at the University of Goltiiigen. Translated 
from the German, by H. Evans Lloyd, Esq. 8vo. IO5. bd. cloth. 

DALE (THE REV. THOMAS). — THE DOMESTIC LITURGY AND 
FAMILY CHAPLAIN, in Two Parts: the First Purl being Church Services adapted for 
Domestic Use, with Prayers for every Day of the Week, selected exclusively from the Book 
of Common Prayer. Part II. comprising an iippropnate Sermon for every Sunday in the 
Year. Bv the Uev. Thomas Dale, M. A. Canon Residentiary of St. Paul's, and Vicar of St. 
Bride's, London. Post Jto. handsomely printed, 21a.clotD: or, bound by Hayday, 31«. 6rf. 
calf lettered ; 5(J«. morocco, with gotTered edges. 

DANTE, TRANSLATED BYWRIGHT.— DANTE. 

Translated by Uh.ihod Charles Wright. M.A. late Fellow of Magdalen College, Oxford. 
A New Edition, revi'ied and corrected, 3 vols, foolscap 8vo. with Portrait, "Js. Gd. sewed. 
•,* rol. I.cantains the Inferno ; Vol. II. the Piirsatorio ; lot. HI. the faradiio. 

DAVY (SIR HUIvrPHRY;.-ELEMENTS OF AGRICULTURAL CHEMISTRY 

in a Course of Lectures. By Sir Humphry Davy. With Notes by Dr. John Davy. 
6th Edition. 8vo. with 10 Plates, 1.5». cloth. 

DE liURTIN.— A TREATISE ON THE KNOWLEDGE NECESSARY TO 

AMATEURS OF PICTURKS. Translated and abridged from ihe French of M. Francis 
Xavier De Biirtiii, First Slipeiidiary Member of the Royal .Academy of Brusacla in the Class 
of Scieuccs, etc. By Robert White, Esq. 8vo. with Illustrations, 12j. cloth. 

DE CUSTINE.— RUSSIA. 

By the Mariiuis De Cubtine. Translated from the French. 2d Edition. 3 vols, post Svo, 
3LY.6rf. cloth. 

DE LA BECHE.— REPORT ON THE GEOLOGY OF CORNWALL, DEVON, 

AND WEST SOMERSICT. By Henry T. Dcia Beche. F.R S. etc , Director of the cirdnance 
Geological Survev. Published by Older of the Lords Commissioners of H. M. Treasury. 
Svo. with Maps, Woodcuts, and 1:; large Plates, !-!». cloth. 

DE MORGAN.— AN ESSAY ON PROBABILITIES, 

And on their Application lo Life Contiii'.'cncics and Insurance Ofiiees. By Aug. De Morgan, 
Esq., of Trinity College, Cambridge. Foolscap Svo. with Vignette Title, Cj. cloth. 

DE RISMONDI.— THE HISTORY OF THE ITALIAN REPUBLICS; 

Or, of the Origin. ProRrc'ss, and Fall of Freedom in Italy, trom.A.D. 47G to IhU.i. By J. C.L. 
Sibinondi. Fcp. 8vn, with Vignette Title, Gs. cloth. 

DE SISMONDL— THE HISTORY OF THE FALL OF THE ROMAN EM- 
PIRE. Comprising a View of the Invasion and Settlement of the Barbarians. By J. C, L. 
De Sismondi. 2 vGls. Fcp. Svo. with Vignette Titles, V2s. clulli. 

DE STRZELECKI (P. E.)— PHYSICAL DESCRIPTION OF NEW SOUTH 

WALES AND VAN DIEMAN'S LAND. Accompanied by a Geological Map, Sections, 
and Diagrams, and Figures of the Oigaiiic Remains. By P. E. De Strzeleeki. Svo, with 
coloured Map and numerous Plates, 24*. cloth. 

DOCTOR (THE), ETC. 

5 vols, post Svo. -J/. 12*. 6rf. cloth. 
« Souther iirhiiuwled^cd the anthorahip nf TAe Doctor' shortly before hh Intt illiiem to 
hin ui'.tt lo-'jidintint J rtrnd. an M.H. of hifh character, ^„d in a prirnte l-tler from Mrs. 
Soulhev, dal,d ;Vir«ur(/ i??. 1^3. Jt'"- riot onli/ >tatesthe fui:t, but add, thiit the grcit'ir part 
of (I *ia'tU viluuir hud k'"'" through the prenf, ami thiil Southey loolied forward to the 
olemnre of drawinif her into it an n contributor; [•ivirrg her full imthoTity tn njfirm thnt her 
hnnb'nid it thr author.'-— Hobcrt Bell, Es-i, im The ^tory Teller. 

10 NEW WORKS AND NEW EDITIONS 

DODDRIDGE.— THE FAMrLY EXPOSITOR; 

Or, a Parnpbrasc and VL-rsion of the New TcstiiJiient; with Critical Notes, and a Practical 
Improvement of each Section. By P. Doddritl^c, U.D. To which is prefixed, a Life of the 
Author, by A.Kippis, D.D. F.R.S. and S.A. NewEditioH. 4vols.8vo. 1/. 16s. cloth. 

DONOVAN.— TREATISE ON CHEMISTRY. 

By Michael Donovan, Esq. M.B.I. A. Jih Edition. Fcap. SvO.with Vignette Title, 6s. cloth. 

DONOVAN.— A TREATISE ON DOMESTIC ECONOMY. 

B7 M. Donovan, Eso. M.R.I. A., Professor of Chemiitry to the Company of Apothecaries in 
Ireland. 2 vols, foolaeap Svo. wiJh Vignette Titles, 12j. cloth. 

DOUBLEDAY'S BUTTERFLIES.— THE GENERA OF DIURNAL LEPI- 

DOPTERA ; comprising their Generic Characters— a Notice of the Habits and Transform- 
ations—and a Catalogue of the Species of each Genus. By Edward Doul.leday, Esq. F.L.S. 
etc., Assistant in the Zoological Department of the British Museum. Imperial •Jto. uniform 
with Gray and Mitchell's Ornithology ; illustrated with 75 Coloured Plates. 
*,* To be published in Movthly ParCt. Ss, each; each Part to consist 0/ tieo coloured Platen, 

tptth accompanying Lctier-preas. Publication vill commence when 150 Subscribers' Names 

have been received. 

DOVER. -LIFE OF FREDERICK II. KING OF PRUSSIA. 

By Lord Dover. 2d Edition. 2 vols. 8vo. with Portrait, 28s. boards. 

DRUMMOND(DR. J. L.)-LETTERS TO A YOUNG NATURALIST, ON 

THK STUDY OF NATURE AND NATURAL THEOLOLJY. By Jame-; L. Drummond, 
M.D. Author of "First Steps to Botany," etc. Second Edition. Post Svo. with Wood 

Engravings, 7s. 6rf. boards. 

DRUTVIMOND.- FIRST STEPS TO BOTANY, 

Intended as popular Illustrations of the Science, leading- to its stndy as a branch of Feiieral 
education. By J. L. Drummond, M.D. 4th Edit. 12nio.with numerous Woodcuts, 9s.D0ards. 

DUNHAM.-THE HISTORY OF THE GERMANIC EMPIRE. 

By Dr. Dunham. 3 vols, foolscap Svo. with Vignette Titles, ISs. cloth. 
By the same Author. 
THE IirSTORV OF EUROPE DURING 
THE MIDDLE AGES. 4vols. 1/. 4j. 

THE HISTORY OF POLAND. Gs. 
THF. LIVES OF THE EARLY WRITERS 
OF GREAT BRITAIN. Foolscap Svo. 6ff. 

THE LIVES OF BRITISH DRAMATISTS. 

2 vols, foolscap Svo, 12y. 

THE HISTORY OF SPAIN AND PORTU- 
GAL. ^ vols, foolscap Svo. \l. Iflj. 

THE HISTORY OF SWEDEN. DENMARK. 
AND NORWAY. 3 vols, foolscap Svo. 18s. 

DUNLOP (.IOHN).-THE HISTORY OF FICTION: 

Beinga Cniical Account of the most celebrated Prose Works of Fiction, from the CEtrlicKt 
Greek Romances to the Novels of the Present Age. By John Dunlop. 3d Edition, com- 
plete in One Volume. Medium Svo. I5s. cloth. 

EASTLAKE (C. L.)-MATER|ALS FOR A HISTORY OF OIL PAINTING 

By Charles Lock Eastlake, R.A.Svo. [/„ the press- 

ECCLESTON (JAMES).— A MANUAL OF ENGLISH ANTIQUITIES. 

By James Eccleston, B.A. Head Master of Suttuu Coldfield Grammar School. Svo. witli 
numerous Illustrations on Wood. (/■„ the press. 

ELLIOT (J.)- A COMPLETE TREATISE ON PRACTICAL GEOMETRY AND 

MENSURATION. With luimerons Exercises. By James Elliot, (ormerly Teacher of 
Mathematics in the Mechanics' Institution of Liverpool. Svo hs. cloth. 

*** Keijt containing full Demovstrations and Solutions, 8do. fys. cloth. 

ELLIOTSON.— HUMAN PHYSIOLOGY: 

With which is incorporated much of the F.lemcntaryPart of the "lostitutiones Physiologic-^" 
of J. F. Blumenbaeh, Professor m the University of Gottingcn. Bv John Ellidtson, M.D. 

Cantab. F.R.S. Fifth Edition, Svo. with numerous Woodcuts, 2? ."2s. cloth. 

THE ENGLISHMAN'S GREEK CONCORDANCE OF THE NEW TESTA- 
MENT; being an attempt at a Verbal Connexion between the Greek and the English Texts ■ 
including a Coiicordnnee tn the Proper Names, with Indexes, Greek-English and English- 
Greek. 2d Edition, carefully revised, with a new Index, Greek and English. Royal Svo 42s 

THE ENGLISHMAN'S HEBREW AND CHALDEE CONCORDANCE OF 

THE OLD TESTAMENT; being an attempt at a Verbal Conne.xion between the Ori,rinal 
and the English Translations: witTi Indexes, a List of the Proper Names a-,d their occur- 
rences, etc. etc. 2 vols, royal Svo. ,3/. Us.Gd. cloth; large paper, 4i. Us, fid. 

FAREY.-A TREATISE ON THE STEAM-ENGINE, 

Historical, Practical, and Descriptive. By John Farev, Engineer 4tn ill.,ct,.= .^.i 1, 
numerous Woodcuts, and 25 Copper-plates, 5/. 5s. in boards. ^'"''"- ^"'- 'lli^tratcd by 

FERGUS. -THE HISTORY OF THE UNITED STATES OF AMFRIca 

From the Discovery of America to the Election of General Jackson to the Prrsiri^n^ w' n 
Rev. H. Fergus. 2 vols, foolscap Svo. with Vignette Titles, 12... cloth '^'^^'^'^"■^J'- ^y the 

PRINTED FOR MESSRS, LONGMAN, AND CO, 11 

FIELD. — POSTHUMOUS EXTRACTS FROM THE VETERINARY 

RECORDS UF THE LATE JOHN FIELD. Edited by Ilia Brother, Williani field, Vete- 
rinary Surj^eou, Loudou. Svo. Ss. boards, 

FITZROY (LADY). -SCRIPTURAL CONVERSATIONS BETWEEN 

CHARLES AND HIS MOTHER. By Lady Charles Fitzroy. Foolscai) Svo. 4a. 6rf. doth. 
FORSTER.-STATESMEN OF THE COMMONWEALTH OF ENGLAND. 

With an Introductory Treatise on the Popular Progress in English History- By John Torster, 

Esq. 5 vols, foolseap yvo. with Original Portraits of Pym, Eliot, Hampden, Cromwell, iirid an 

Hiatoricul iSeene after a Picture by Cattcriuole, 1/. KIs, cloth. 
TIm; introductory Treatise, intended as an LUtoduction to the Study of the Great Civil War in 

the Seventeenth Century, separately, price '2t. Gd. sewed. 
The above 5 vols, form Mr. Forster's Portion of the Lives of Eminent British Statesmen, by Sir 

Jumes Mackintosh, the Right Hon. T. P. Courtenay, and John Forster, Esq. 7 vols, foolscap 

8vo. with Vignette Titles, 2J. '2a. cloth, 

FORSTER (REV. O-THE HISTORICAL CEOCRAPHY OF ARABIA; 

Or, the Patriarchal Evidences of Revealed Religion. A Rlemoir, with illustrative Maps and 
an Appendix, containing Translations, with an Alphabet and Olossiiry of the Hamyarilic 
Inscriptions recently discovered in Hadramaut. liy the Rov. Charles Forsler, B,D., Rector ot 
Stisted, Essex, auttior of "Mahomelanism Uuvtiled." 2 vols. Svo. aOj. cloth. 

FORSTER (REV. C.)— THE LIFE OF JOHN JEBB. D.D. F.R.S. 

Late Biahopof Limerick. With a Selection from his Letters. By the Rev. Charles Forster,B.D., 
Rector of StisU'd, Essex, and one of the Six Preachers in theOalhcdral of Chrifil, Caaterbury, 
foriaerly Domestic Chaplain to the Bishop. 2d Edition. Svo. with Portrait, etc. IGs. cloth. 

FOSBROKE.— A TREATISE ON THE ARTS, MANNERS, MANUFAC- 
TURES, and INSTITUTIONS of the GREEKS and ROMANS. By the Rev. T. D.Fosbrokc, 

etc, 2 vols. foolbcBji Svo. with Vi;{uette Titles, V2s. cloth. 

GERTRUDE. 

A Talc. By the author of *' Amy H-erbcrt." Edited by the Rev. William Sewcll, B.D., of 
Exeter College, Oxford. Second Edition. 2 vols, foolscap Svo. 9s. cloth, 

GILBART (J. W.)-THE HISTORY'AND PRINCIPLES OF BANKING. 

By James William Gilbart, General Manager of the London and Westminster Bank. 
Third Edition. Svo. 9j. boards. 

GLEIG.— LIVES OF THE MOST EMINENT BRITISH MILITARY COM- 
MANDERS. By the Itcv. G. R. Gleig. 3 vols, foolscap Svo. with Vignette Titles, IBs. cloth. 

GLENDINNING.— PRACTICAL HINTS ON THE CULTURE OF THE 

PINEAPPLE. BvR.GIendinning, Gardener to the Right Hon. Lord Rolle, Bicton. 12nio. 
with Plan of Pinery, 5s. cloth. 

G0LDS:\I1TH-THE POETICAL WORKS OF OLIVER GOLDSMITH. 

Illustrated bv Wood Engravings, from the Designs of G. W. Cope. A.R.A,, Thomas 
Creswick, A.R.A., J.C. Horslcy, R. Redgrave, A. K. A. , and Frederick Taylor, Members of 
the Etching Club, With a Biographical Memoir, and Notes on the Poems. Edited by 
Bolton Corney, Esq. Square crown Svo., uniform with •' Thoaition's Seasons," 21*. cloth ; 
or 363. hound'in morocco, by Hayday. 

*»• One Hundred Copiei, 2f. -». each, printed on prepared paper o/ great beaaty, 
GOOD.— THE BOOK OF NATURE. 

A Popular Illustration of the General Laws a 
Good, M.D.F.RS.etc. 3d Edition, corrected 

GRAHAM.-ENGLISH; OR, THE ART OF COMPOSITION 

explained in a Series of Instructions and Examples. By G. F. Graham. 2d Edition, revised 
and improved. Foolscap Svo. 7s. cloth. 

GRANT (MRS.)— LETTERS FROM THE MOUNTAINS. 

Being the Correspondence with her J'rienda, between the yjears 17/3 "nd 1803, By Mrs. 
Grant, of Laggnn. 6th Edition. Edited, with Notes and Additions, by her Son, J, P. Grant, 
Esq. 2 vols, post 6vo. 2t«. cloth. 

GRANT (MRS., OF LAGGAN}. — MEMOIR AND CORRESPONDENCE 

of the late Mrc. Grant, of Laggan. author o€ "Letters from the Mountains," etc. Edited 
by her Son, J . P. Grant, Esq. 2d Edition. 3 vols, post Svo. Portrait, U. Ui. W. cloth. 

GRATTAN.— THE HISTORY OF THE NETHERLANDS, 

From the Invasion by the Romans to the Belgian Revolution in 1830, By T. C. Grattan, Esq, 
Foolscap Svo. with Vignette Titles, di. cloth. 

GRAY (JOHN). -CRAY'S ELEGY, 

Written in a Country Churchyard. Illuminated in the Missal style. By Owen Jones, 
Architect. Imp. Svo. 3I». 6d, elegantly bound in patent relievo leather. 

GRAY.— FIGURES OF MOLLUSCOUS ANIMALS, 

Selected from various ,\uthors. Etched for the Use of Students. By Maria Emma Gray, 
Vol. I. Svo, with 78 plates of Figures, 12j. cloth. 

GRAY AND MITCHELL'S ORNITHOLOGY.-THE GENERA OF BIROS; 

Compriniitg their Generic Charntters, n Notice of the Habits of euth Genus, and an eiten- 
sive List of SSpeeifcs, referred to their bevcral Genera. Dy George Robert Gray, Acad. Imp. 
Georif. Florciit. Soc. Corresp. Senior Assistant of the Zooloyieal Uepartmeut, British 
Museum ; and author of the "List of the Geiicrn of Uirda," etc. etc. Imperial 4tO. illus- 
trated with aSU Plates, by Uavid William Mitchell, D.A. 
•,* III course of pnbUcation in Monthli/ I'uTd, 10*. Gi/. each; each Part contistiug of Four 
cohiUTi-d Plates aiid Three phihi, uit/i Letter prat, givitii,' the Generic Charact>'Tg, short 
Hetiiarlit on the Habits, and it Lint vf Sprcies uf each Getiiix as complete as possible. The 
tiuc'.lonrrd Plates cut/tahi the Characters of all the Genera tij the various Snb-famiV\e», Co»~ 
tisiirif,' of iinmeroitj. details of Heads, fl'i>if,'s, and Fret, as the vase may lefnire, far pointing 
out thrir distiaffuishi]//,' tharaclers. The Wor/i will not exceed 50 Monthly Parti. No. 1:5 
U'os pal/liehed on \st uf May. 

GRAY (J. E )— THE GENERA OF MAMIVIALIA ; 

Comprising their Generic Charnctr^rs -w Notice of the Habits of each Genus— and a short 
Churaclerof each of the wcll-cstablishcd Species, referred to the several Genera. B^Joha 
Edward Gray, Ksq., Keeper of the Zoological Collection of the British Museum, imperial 4to. 
uniforoi with Gray and Mitchell's Ornithology ; illustraicd with 175 flates- 
*,* To he published in Munthli/ Parts, I2s. each; each Part to ruuHist of Four caloared and 

Three plain fhttes, with uccampaui/iug- Letter-press. The H'ojA will not exceed 25 Parts. 

Publication tcill touuucnce when IJU Subscribers' I\'umcs have been received. 

GREENER.— THE GUN; 

Or, a Treatise on the various Descriptions of Small Tire Arms. By \V, Greener, Inventor of 
an Improved Method of Firing Cannon by Percussion, etc. Svu.witb Illustrations, 15a. boards. 

GREENWOOD (COL.)— THE TREE-LIFTER; 

Or a New Method of TransplaatiiiL' Trees. By Col. Geo. Greenwood. Svo.withau Illus- 
trative Plate,/*, cloth. 

GRniBLOT (i^)— LETTERS OF WILLIAM 111. AND LOUIS XIV. AND OF 

THEIR MINISTERS. Illuatruting the Domestic and l-oreiRn Policy of England during 
Ihc |,(.-rioiI \^■hicll followed the Revolution of KiSS. Extracted from the Archives of Friince 
and Enyliiiid, and fron\ Foreign papt-rs. Edited by P. Grimblol. 8io. [/« the press. 

GRUNER (L.)-THE DECORATIONS OF THE GARDEN PAVILION IN THE 

GROUNDS OF BUCKINGHAM PALACE. Fifteen I'lattB, by L. Grnner. With Descrip- 
tions by Mrs. J.ime'^on. PaiiUslicd by Cjiumand of Her Mujesiy. Small folio, illj. Gd. plain ; 
coloured, 5/. 5tf. cloth. 

GUEST.— THE MABINOCION, 

From the Llyfr Cocli o Hergcst, or Red Book of Hcrgest, and other ancient Welsh MSS. 
witli an English Translation and Notes. By Lady Charlotte Guest. Parts 1 to 6. RovalSvo. 
Ss. each sewed. 

GUICCIARDINI{F.)— THE MAXIMS OF FRANCIS CUICCIARDINI, THE 

HISTORIAN. Translated by Kmma Martin With Ni.tes, and P.irallel Passages from 
the Works of Maehiavelli, Lord Bacon. Pascal, Rochefoucault. M.nitcsquicu. Burke, Prince 
Talleyrand, GuJzot, and otiicrs ; and a Sketch of the Lile of Gnicci irdini. Square foolscap 
8vo. M-ith Portrait, 7*. ornamental boards ; or Us. bound in morocco (old style) by Hayday. 

GWILT.— AN ENCYCLOP/EDIA OF ARCHITECTURE; 

Historical, Theoretical, and Pri.ctical. Bv Josejih Gwilt.Esn., F.S.A. Illustrated with 
upwards of lUOU Engravings on Wood, from Designs by J. S. G« ill. 8vo. 2i Ills. 6d. cloth. 

HALL— NEW GENERAL LARGE LIBRARY ATLAS OF FIFTY-THREE 

MAPS, oiiColombier Paper ; with the Divisions and boundaries carcfuUv coloured. Con- 
structed entirely from New Drawings, and engraved by Sidney Hall. New Edition, thoroughlv 
revised and corrected ; including all the Alterations rendered necessary by the reeentOlhiial 
Surveys, the New Roads on the Continent, and a careful Cuinpanson witt the authenticated 
Discoveries published in the latest Voyages and Travils. Folded in half. Nine Guineas, bulf- 
bnund in ruBsia ; full si/,e of the Maps, Ten Pounds, halt-bound in russia. 

HALSTED— LIFE AND TIMES OF RICHARD THE THIRD, 

as Duhe of Gloucester and King ol Engliiiid : in whicli ;ill tlic Charges against him are care- 
fully investigated and compared with llie Siatemcnis oi the Cotemporary Authorities. By 
Caroline A. Halsted, author of "The Life of Marnarel Beaufort." a vols. Svo.nitii Portrait 
from an Original Picture in the possession of the Right Hunoiable Lord Stafford, uever 
' before engraved, and other Illustrations, 1/. lUi. cloth. 

HAND-BOOK OF TASTE (THE); 

Or, How to Observe Worhs of Art, e-pccially Cartoons, Pictures, and Statues By Fahius 
Pictor. bd Edition. Foolscap 8vo. 'As. boards. ' -" 

HANSARD.— TROUT AND SALMON FISHING IN WALES 

By G. A. Hansard, l:::mo. 6s. 6(/. cloth. 

HARRIS—THE HIGHLANDS OF /ETHIOPIA; 

Being the Account of Eighteen Months' Residence of u British Embassy to the Christian 
Couftof Shoa. By Major Sir W.C.Harris, aulhorof " Wild Spoils iu Southern Africa '' 
etc. 2d Edition. 3 vols. 8vo. with Map and llhisirutions, 2/. '-'s.Uoth. ""^"^"i Airicu, 

PlliiSlED I'UH, MESSRS. LONGMAN, AND CO. 13 

HAWES {BARBAIIA).-TALES OF THE NORTH AMERICAN INDIANS, 

and Adventures of tlif Kiulv Seltleia in America; from the Liindiiiuof the Pilgrim F«llierB 
in 162U, to the Time of the I) eel nr a lion of liidLpeiideoLe. By Barhara Hit\vt;s. Fcp, 8vo,6s, 

HAWKER.— INSTRUCTIONS TO YOUNG SPORTSMEN 

In all that relates lulVmjs unci Slur'.tinif. By Lieut. Col. P. Hitwker. 'Jih edition, corrected, 
enlnrited, iiuJ improved, wuli Er^hty-five Philes «nd Woodcrits, by Adliird and Brauslon, 
from Drawings by C, Vurlcy, Uicks, etc. Svo. 21j, cloth, 

HAYDON (B. R.}— LECTURES ON PAINTING AND DESIGN, 

lielivered at the London liistitutinn, the lluyal Institution, Albc-nimrle Street, to the 
University of Oxford, etc. By B. R. iliiydon, Hi.storieal P.iinter, With Designs clrawn on 
Wood hy the nuthor, and En^^rHved by Edward Eviuis. Svo. 12». cloth. 
*,* The Second I'otume is prepiiriug for publication . 

HENSLOW. — THE PRINCIPLES OF DESCRIPTIVE AND PHYSIOLO- 
GICAL BOr.lNV. By J. S. Hcnslow, M.A. F.L.S. ete. Foolscap Svo. wiHi Viguette Title, 
and nciirly/U Woodmls, (is. cloth. 

HERON (E. M.)-PALESTRINA : 

A Metrical Romance. By Robert M, Heron, Esq. 8vo. 8*. 6rf. 

HERSCHEL.— A TREATISE ON ASTRONOMY. 

By Sir John Herachel. Ntw Kditiou. Fcap. 8vu. with Vignette Title, 6s. cloth. 

HERSCHEL. — A PRELIMINARY DISCOURSE ON THE STUDY OF 

NATURAL PHILOSOPHY. By Sir John Hcrachel. New Edition. FooUcap Svo. 6s. 

HINTS ON ETIQUETTE AMD THE USAGES OF SOCIETY: 

With a Glance at Bad Habits. By Ayojyoi;. " M.inners make the Man." 24thEditiou, 
revised (with additions) hy a Lady of Rank. Foolscap Svo. 2».6d. cloth, gilt edges. 

HISTORICAL PICTURES OF THE MIDDLE ACES, 

I n Blaek and White. Made on the spot, from Records in the Archives of Switzerland. By a 
Wandering Artist. 2 vols post 8vo. IS*, cloth. 
Contents.— Thi- Nuns' War; the War of T«'o AhhotH (Reichenaii and St. Gall) ; the Passage 

of the Great St. Deruiird ; tind Bertha, Queen of Transjurane Burgundy. 

HOARE.— A DESCRIPTIVE ACCOUNT OF A NEW METHOD OF 

PLANTING ANI> MANAGING THE ROOTS OF GRAPK VINES. By Ckmc-nt Hoare, 
uulhorof " ATreatibCOu the Cullivaliou of the Grape Vine on Open Walls." 12nio. 5s. cl. 

HOARE— A PRACTICAL TREATISE ON THE CULTIVATION OF THE 

GRAPEVINE ON OPEN WALLS. By Clement Hoare. 3d Edition, Svo. 7s. 6d. cloth. 

HOBBES— THE COMPLETE WORKS OF THOMAS HOBBES, 

Ol IMali.iesibury; now lirst collected and edited by Sir WiUium Molcsworth, Bart. 16 vols. 
Svo S'.tlolli. 

•,• Separately, the English lyurks, in 11 vols. 5M0).; the Latin /forhj^in 5 volj. 21. 10s. 

HOLLAND.— A TREATISE ON THE MANUFACTURES IN METAL- 

By John Holland, Esii- 3 vols, foolscap Svo. with about 3UU Woodcuts, 18s. eloth. 

HOLLAND.— MEDICAL NOTES AND REFLECTIONS. 

By Henry Holland, M.D.F.R.S. ete. Fellow of the Royal College of Physicians, Physician 
Extraordinary to the Queen, and Physician in Ordinary to His Royal Highness Prince Albert. 
2d Edition. 8vo. ISs. cloth, 

HOOK (DR. W. F.}-THE LAST DAYS OF OUR LORD'S MINISTRY; 

A Pourse of Lectures on the principal Events of Passion Week, By Walter Farfjuhar Hood, 
D.l)., Vicar of Leeds, Prebendary of Liacoln, and Chaplain lu Ordinary to the Queen. 4ih 
Edition. Foolscap Svo. 6s. cloth. 

HOOKER.— THE BRITISH FLORA. 

In 2 vols. Vol. I. ; conipnsint; the Ph;eno^amou8 or Flowering Plants, And the Ferns. By Sir 
William Jackson Hooker, K.H. LL.D. F.R.A. aud L.S. etc. ete. etc. 5th Edition, with 
Additions and Corrections ; and 173 Figoires, illustrative of the Umbelliferous Plants, the 
Composite Plants, the Grasses, aud the Ferns. Vol. I. Svo., with 12 Plates, l-li. plain ; with 
the platescoloured,24». cloth. 
Vol. 11. in Two Parts, comprising the Crvptogainia and the Fungi, completing the British 
Flora, aud forming Vol. V., Parts 1 and 2.of Smilli's English Flora, 24s. boards. 

HOOKER AND TAYLOR.— MUSCOLOGIA BRITANNICA. 

Containing the Mosses of Great Britain and Iiel.ind, systematically arranged and deacribed ; 
with Plates, illuslr.Htive of the character of the Genera and Species. By Sir W.J. Hooker 
aud T.Taylor, M.D. F.L.S.etc. 2d Edition, enlarged, Svo. 31s. Crf. plain ; 3/. as. coloured. 

14 NEW WORKS AND NEW EDITIONS 

HORNE (THE REV. T. H.)— AN INTRODUCTION TO THE CRITICAL 

STUDY AND KNOWLEDGE OF THE HOLY SCRIPTURES. By the Rev Thomas 
Hftrtwcll Home, B.D. of St. Johii'N College, Cambridge ; Rector of the united Panshes of St. 
Edmund the King nnd MartjT, and St. Nicholas Aeons, Lombard Street ; Prebendary of M. 
Paul'a. 9th Edition, revised and corrected. 5 vols. 8vo. with Maps and tac-iHiililes, W». 
cloth; or 5/. bound in caif half-extra, by Hayday. 
SUPPLEMENTARy PACKS, for purehasers of the 7th and 8lh Editions, 1j. 6rf. 
HORNE (THE REV. T. H.)-A COMPENDIOUS INTRODUCTION TO THE 

STUDV OF THE BIBLE, By the Rev. Thomas Hiirlwell Home, B.D. of St. John's College, 
Cambridge. Being an Analysis of hia *' Introduction to the Critical Study and Knowledge of 
the Holy Seriptures." 7th Edition, corrected and enlarged. 12mo. with Maps and other 

Engravings, 93. boards. 

HORSLEV (BISHOP).— BIBLICAL CRITICISM ON THE FIRST FOUR- 
TEEN HISTORICAL BOOKS OF THE OLD TESTAMENT; AND ON THE URST 
NINE PROPHETICAL BOOKS. By Samuel Horsley, LL.D. F.R.S. F,AS. Lord Bishop of 
St. Asaph. Second Edition, containing Translations by the Author, never before published, 
together with copious Indexes. 2 vols. Svo. 3Us. cloth. 
By the same Author, 
THE BOOK OF PSALMS; tran!>lu;ed from the Hebrew: with Notes, explanatory and critical. 
4th Edition. Sio. ll'a. cloth. 

HOWITT— THE RURAL LIFE OF ENGLAND. 

Bv William Howitt, Third Edition, corrected and revised. JlediuniSvo. with Engravingson 
Wood by Bewick and Williams, uniform with '■ Visits to Remarkable Places," 2l5. cloth. 

HOWITT.— VISITS TO REMARKABLE PLACES; 

Old Halls, Battle-Fields, and Scenes illustrative of Striking Passages in English History and 
Poetry. By William Howitt. New Edition. Medium 8vo. with -lUllTuslrations, il». cloth. 

SECOND SERIES, chiefly in the Counties of DURHAM and NORTHUMBERLAND, with a 

Stroll along the BORDER. Medium Svo. with upwards of 40 highly-finished Woodcuts, from 
Drawings made on the spot, 21a. cloth. 

HOWITT.— THE RURAL AND DOMESTIC LIFE OF GERMANY: 

With Characteristic Sketches of its chief Cities and Scenery. Collected in a General Tour, 
and during a Residence in that Country in the Years 1840-12. By William Howitt, author 
of "The Rural Life of England," etc. Medium Svo., with above 30 Illustrations, 21j, cloth. 

HOWITT— THE STUDENT-LIFE OF GERMANY. 

From Che Unpublished MS. of Dr. Cornelius. By William Howitt. Svo. with 24 Wood- 
Engravings, and 7 Steel Plates, 21s. cloth. 

HOWITT.— COLONISATION AND CHRISTIANITY: 

A Popular History of the Treatment of the Natives, in uU their Colonies, by the Europeaiifi. 

By William Howitt. Post Svo. Wa.dd. cloth. 

HOWITT.— THE BOY'S COUNTRY BOOK: 

Being tlie real Life of a Country Boy, written by Himself; exhibiting all the Amusements, 
Pleasures, and Pursuits of Children in the Country. Edited by William Howitt, author of 
" The Rural Life of England," etc. 2d Edition, leap, Svo. with 40 Woodcuts, 3». cloth. 

HOWITT fRICHARD;.— IMPRESSIONS OF AUSTRALIA FELIX, 

During a Four Years' Residence in that Colony: with particular reference to the Prospects 
of Emigrants. With Notes of a Voyage round the World, Aujtralian Poems, etc. By 
Richard Howitt. Foolscap Svo, 7a- cloth. 

HUDSON.— THE PARENT'S HAND-BOOK; 

Or, Guide to the Choice of Professions, Employments, and Situations , containing useful 
and practical information on the subject of placing out Young Men, and of obluiiiing their 
Education with a view to iiartieulitr occupations. By J. C. Hudson, Esq., author of " Plain 
Directions for Making Wills." Fcap. Svo. bs. cloth. 

HUDSON.— PLAIN DIRECTIONS FOR MAKING WILLS 

In conformity with the Law, ami particularly with reference to the Act 7 Win. IV. and 1 Vict, 
c. 26. To which is added, a clear Exposition of the Law reUling to the Distribution of Per- 
sonal Estate in the case of Intestacy . with two Forms of Wills, and much useful Information, 
etc. By J. C. Hudson, Esq. l^th Edition, corrected, with Notes of Cases judiciallv decided 
since tuc above Act came into operation. Fcap. Svo. 23. 6rf. 

HUDSON.— THE EXECUTOR'S GUIDE. 

By J. C. Hudson, Esq., of the Legacy Duty Office, London; author of *' Plain Directions 
lor Making Wills," and "The Parent's Hand-Book." 4th Edition. Foolscap Svo. oi.clolh, 
•«• The abutie two worki may be had in One volume, price'jB. cloth. 

HUMBOLDT (BARON).-KOSMOS : 

A Physical Description of the Universe. Translated, with the Author's Sanction and Co- 
operation, under the superintendence of Lieutenant-Colonel Edward Sabinn F n n r>r»v..> 
Royl AttiUcry. VoK. 1 acd 2. post Svo. [/i.'lLjr". 

*," Thil translation ha] lt£cn made at the requett of Baron Von UuuibotHt ■ ..fcn ,ni."; .... 
the sheets before pulilicalion, ' ""»""'"" 

PRINTED FOR MESSRS, LONGMAN, AND CO. 15 

HUMPHREYS.—THE ILLUMINATED BOOKS OF THE MIDDLE ACES. 

A History of Ulumin^ited Backs, from the IVlh to the XVlItli Centurv. By Henry Nncl 
Humphrcyi. Hlustratcd by a Series of Fac-Kimile Specimens, ojieli consistinjf of an entire 
Pa^e, of the cxHet kizc of the OriRinnl, from the most et'lehrated and splendiil MSS. In tlie 
Imperial and Royal I/ibrnries of Vienna, Moaeow, Paris, NHples, Copenhagen, and Madrid ; 
— from the Vatican, Escnrial, Ambrosian, and other prenl Libraries of the Continent!— and 
from the rich Public Collegiate, and Private Libraries of Gieat Britain. 

In course of puhliculion, in Parts- Parts 1 and 2, imperinl 4to. each containinpTlicec Plates, 
splendidly printed, in gold, silver, and colours, in imitation of ibe ongincUs, as accurate as 
can be produced by mechanical means, with Descriptions, price 12s. 

Large Paper, on Half Imperial (SLJ in. by 15), to prevciit folding the large Plates, 21s. 
•»• Six Parts to form a Volume, Four Volumes completing the work. 

HUNT.-RESEARCHES ON LIGHT: 

An Examination of all the Phenomena roiinectcd with the Chemical and Molecular Changes 
produced by the Jnlluencc of the Solar Rays ; cinbrnciiiL' alt the known Photographic Pro- 
ccsbCH, and new Discoveries in the Art. Rv Robert Ilutit, Keeper of Mining Hecords, 
Mu-scura of Economic Geology. 8vo. with Plate and Woodcuts, 10s. 6d. cloth. 

ILLUMINATED CALENDAR (THE)- — THE ILLUMINATED calendar and HOME 
DIARY for 18-lfi; containing 12 pages of fac-sitntte from the Calendar of the rich MSS. 
" Hours" of the Duke of Aniou, styled King of Sicily and Jerusalem ; also 24 pages of Diary, 
each illumiinted with an elaborate Border taken from the same MS.; and an Illuminated 
Title. Imperial 8vo, 42* in a binding composed from the miniature pictures ofthesame MS. 
',' The JUitminnted Cnli-udnr and Ifomr Diart/,for 1845; opted from the Manufrript of 

the " Hours of Anne of Brittany.*' Imp. Svo. 42b. in emblaconed printing and binding, 

JACKSON— THE PICTORIAL FLORA; 

Or, British Botany Delineated, in 1500 Lithographic Drawings ofall the Species of I'lowering 
Plants indigenous to Great Britain ; illustrating the descriptive works on English Botany of 
Hooker, Lindley, Smith, etc. By Miss Jackson. Svo. 15*. cloth. 

JAMES.-A HISTORY OF THE LIFE OF EDWARD THE BLACK PRINCE, 

and of various Events connected therewith, which occurred durinijihe Reign of Edward IIL 
King of England. By G. P. R. James. Esri. 2d Kdition. 2vols. fooficap Svo.with Map, 15g. 

JAMES.-LIVES OF THE MOST EMINENT FOREIGN STATESMEN. 

ByG.P. R. James, Esi]., and E. E. Croive, Est]. 5 vols, foolscap Svo. 30*. cloth. 

JEBB (BISHOP).— PASTORAL INSTRUCTIONS ON THE CHARACTER 

AND PRINCIPLES OF THE CHURCH OF ENGLANU, selected from tils former 
Publications. By John Jcbb, D.D. F.R.S., late Bishop ol Limerick, Atdfert, and Aghadoe. 
A New Edition. Foolscap Svo. 6s. cloth. 

By the same Author, 
PIETY WITHOUT ASCETICISM ; or, the Protestant Kcmpis: n Manual of Christian Faith 
and Practice, selected from the Writings of Scongal. Charles Howe, and Cudworth , with 
corrections and occasional Notes. Second Edition. Foolscap Svo. 6j. cloth. 

JEBB (BISHOP) AND KNOX (ALEXANDER). -THIRTY YEARS' COR- 
RESPONDENCE between John Jebb, D.D.F.R.S., Bishop of Limerick, Ardfcrt, Aghadoe, 
and Alexander Knox, Est). M.R.I.A. Edited by the Rev, Charles Forsfer, B D. Rector of 
Stisted, Essex, and one of the Six Preachers in the Cathedral of Christ, Canterbury, formerly 
Domestic Chaplain to Bishop Jebb. 2d Edition. 2 vols. Svo. 28«, cloth. 

LORD JEFFREY.— CONTRIBUTIONS TO THE EDINBURGH REVIEW. 

Bv Francis JcfTrey, now one of the Judges in the Court of Session in Scotland . 4vols.8vo. 
435. cloth. 

JOHNSON. -THE FARMER'S ENCYCLOP/EDIA, 

And DICTIONARY of RURAL AFFAIRS: embracing all the recent Discoveries in Agri- 
cultural Chemistry; adapted to the comprehension of unscientific Readers. Bv Cuthbcrt 
W, Johnson, Esq., F.R.S, Barristcr-at-Law, Corresponding Member of the Agricultural 
Society of KOnigsberg, and of the Maryland Horticultural Society , author of sevLral of the 
Prize Essays of the Royal Agricultural Society of England, and other Agricultural Works ; 
Editor of the " Farmer's Almanack," etc. Svo. with Wood Engravings ol the best and most 
improved Agricultural Implements, 2/. 10*. cloth. 

KANE— ELEMENTS OF CHEMISTRY; 

Including the most Recent Discoveries and Applications of the Science to Medicine and 
Pharmacy, and to the Arts. By Robert Kane, M.D. M.R.I .A. Professor of Natural Philosophy 
to the Royal Dublin Society. Svo. with 236 Woodcuts, 24». cloth. 

KATER AND LARDNER.— A TREATISE ON MECHANICS. 

By Captain Kater and Dr. Lardner. New Edition. Foolscap Svo. with Vignette Title, and 
19 Plates, comprising 224 distinct figures, 6». cloth, 

KEIGHTLEY.— OUTLINES OF HISTORY, 

From the Earliest Period. By Thomas Keightley, Enq. New Edition, corrected and con- 
siderably improved. Foolscap 8vo.,6fl. cloth ; or 6». (id. bound. 

16 NEW WORKS AND N KW F.DITIONS 

KIRBY AND SPENCE.— AIM INTRODUCTION TO ENTOMOLOGY; 

Or, Elements of the Natural History of li.seuts: c..mpris.ii|f an account of noxious and 
usefuUnsects, of their Mctamorphnscs, Fi-od, Stratagems. Habitations, SocielicB, Motions, 
Noises, Hybi-rnation, lnf.tinct, etc. Bv W. Kirhy, M.A. F.R.S. &L.S. Rector of Bnrham ; 
ond \V. Spencc, Esti., F.R.S. SiL.S. 6th Edition, corrected and considerably enlarged. 
2 vols. 8vo. 1/ Hi. Grf. cloth. 
•,* The first ttpo vohtnirsof the '* Iiitrodiirtioii to JiritomoJoir,/" are pnblhhed at a separate 
tpork, d,iiti„ct from the third and fourth rohuiirs, and, though much enlarged, iit u consider- 
able reduction of price, in order that the numerous clans of readers who confine their study of 
insectn to that of^their manners and cconoti.y, need not be burlhtned with the coat of the 
technical portion of the work, relatixg to their anatomy, physiology, etc. 

KNOX fALEXANDER). — REMAINS OF ALEXANDER KNOX, ESQ. 

Of Dublin, M.R.I. A.; containing Easaya, chiefly cxpUnatory, of Christian Uoctrine ; ;ind 
Confidential Letters, with Private Papers, illustrative of the Writer's Character, beiitiincDts, 
and Life. 3d Edition. 4 vols. Svo. 2/. 8». cloth. 

LAING.— NOTES ON THE SCHISM FROM THE CHURCH OF ROME, 

culled the GERMAN CATHOLIC CHURCH, instituted by .1. Rong^e and 1. C/erzki, in 
October 1844, on occasion of tlie Filnrinia|,fe to the Holy Coat at Treves. By S. Laiiig, Esq., 
author of "Notes of a Traveller," etc. :Jd Edition. Foolscap 8vo. oj. cloth. 

LAING.— THE CHRONICLE OF THE KINGS OF NORWAY, 

From the F.arliest Period of the History of the Northern SeaKinijs to the Middle of the 
Twelfth Century, cominouly called the HeimGkriii(;la. Translated from the Icelandic of 
Snnrro Sturleson, with Notes, and a Preliminary Discourse, by Samuel Laing, author of 
*' Notes of aTraveller,"etc. 3 vols. 8vo. 3G». cloth. 

LAING.— A TOUR IN SWEDEN 

111 IsaS; uoinprisiiig Observations on the Moral, Political, and Economical State of the Swedish 
Nation, By yninuci Laing, Esq. Svo. 12s. cloth. 

LAING.— NOTES OF A TRAVELLER 

On the Social and Political State of France, Prussia, Switzerland, Italy, and Other parts of 
Europe, during the present Century. By Samuel Laing, Esq. 2d Editiou. 8vo. 16s. cloth, 

LAING.— JOURNAL OF A RESIDENCE IN NORWAY 

During the years 1S34, 1835, and ISDG; made with aviewtn inijuircinto the Rural and Political 
Economy of that Countn', and the Condition of its luhabitants. By Samuel Laing, Esq. 

2d Edition. 8vo. 14^. cloth. 

LANE (R. J )-LlFE AT THE WATER CURE: 

Or, a Monlh at Mnlvcru. A Diarj- of Facts and Fancies. To which is added the Sequel. 
By Richard J. Lane, AR.A. Lithographer in Ordinary to Her Majesty and His Royal High- 
ness Prince Albert, Svo. with many Illustrations. [/h the press. 

LANETON PARSONAGE: 

A 7We for Children, on the jiraetlcal use of the Church Catechism. Bv the (\nihor of 
" Amy Herbert," and "Gertrude.^' Fcp. Svo. {In the press, 

LAPLACE (THE MARQUIS DE).— THE SYSTEM OF THE WORLD, 

By M. Le Marquis Ue Laplace. Translated from the French, and elucidated with Kxplniia- 
tory Notes. By the Rev. Henry H. Hartc, F.T.C.D. M.ll.I.A. 2 vols. 8vo. 24b. boards. 

LARDNER'S CABINET CYCLOP/EDIA; 

Comprising a Series of Original Worlds on History, Biography, Literature, the Sciences, Arts, 
and Manutactures, Conducted and edited bv Dr. Lardner, 
The Scries complete in One Hundred and Thirty-three Volumes, 39/. ISl. The Works 
separately, 6s. per volume. 

LARDNER.— A TREATISE ON ARITHMETIC. 

By Dr. Lardner. LL.U. F.R.S. Foolsmp Svo. with Vignette Title, 6». cloth. 

LARDNER.— A TREATISE ON GEOMETRY, 

And its Appliufitioi. to the Arts. By Ur. Lardner. Foolscap Svo., 6s. cloth. 

LARDNER.— A TREATISE ON HEAT. 

By Dr. L.^rduer. LL.D.etc. Fcap. Svo. «iih Vignette Title and Woodcuts, 6». cloth. 

LARDNER.— A TREATISE ON HYDROSTATICS AND PNEUMATICS. 

By Dr. Lardner. New Edition. Foolscap Svo. with Vignette Title, Gs. cloth. 

LARDNER AND WALKER.— A MANUAL ON ELECTRICITY, MAG- 
NETISM, :ind METICOROLOGV. By Hr. Lardner, LLD. F.R.S., and C. V Walker 
Secretary of the Eleelricul Society. 2 vols, foolscap Svo., with Vignette Titles, 12a. cloth, ' 

L. E. L.— THE POETICAL WORKS OF LETITIA ELIZABETH LANDON. 

New Edition, 4 vols, foolscap Svo. with lUu^trations by Howard, eic -J^j. doth ; or hound 
in morocco, with gilt edges, i;/. 4s. 

The following Works separately:— 
The IMPROVIS.\TRlCE - - 10s. Crf. ) The GULDfcN VIOLET - . m, firf 
The VENETIAN BRACELET lUs. 6rf. 1 The TROUBADOUR . . ]Uj firf 

PRINTED FOR MESSRS. LONGMAN. AND CO. 

• 17 

LEE— TAXIDERMY; 

Or, the Art of Collecting. Prcpanng;, nni MounlinpObjecta ofNntural History. For the use 
of Museums iiiid Trnvellers. UvMrs.U.],ee (formerly Mrs. T. E. Buwdich) , author of 
"Memoir;, of Cuvicr." etc. fitli 'Editir,n. impfoved, with an Hccount of a Visit to ^Vllltoll 
HnH.nnd Mr. Watertuii's method of Prebervint; Aiiirattls. Fcap. 8vo. with WooticuiB, 7». 

LEE -ELEMENTS OF NATURAL HISTORY, 

For the Use of Schools and Youiit; Persons: comprising the Principles of Ciassificatioii, 
interspersed with amusini; and instructive oriu;i>ial Accounts of the niostrcmarkable Ariir ''- 
By Mrs. R Lee (formerly Mra. T. E. Bowdieh), author of "Taxidermy," "p"-- -■■ 
Cuvier," elc. 12mo. with 55 Woodcuts, 7»-0rf. bound. 

'Memoirs of 

LEFEVRE (SIH GEORGE).— AN APOLOGY FOR THE NERVES; 

Or, their Importance and Inlluence in Health and Disease. By Sir (ieorge Lefevre, M.D. 
author of " The Life of a Travelling Physician," "Tliermal Comfort," etc. I'ost 8vo. 9». 

LEMPRIERE.— A CLASSICAL DICTIONARY; 

Contiiining a copious Account of all the Proper Names mentioned in Ancient Authors ; with 
the Value of Coins, \Veij,'hls, and Measures, used amongst the Greeks and Itomans; and a 
Chronological Table. By T. Lcmprifire, D U. 2(lth Edition, corrected. Svo. Us. cloth. 

LEREBOURS (N.P.)-A TREATISE ON PHOTOGRAPHY; 

Contaiiiinif the latest Discoveries appertaining to the Uaguerrcotvpe. Compiled from Com- 
munieatioiis by M.M. Daguerre and Arago, and other eminent Men of Science. By N. P. 
Lerebours, Optician to the Observatory, Paris, etc. Translated by J. Eiierton. Post 8vo, 
with Plate, 7s. Cd. cloth. 

LESLIE(C.R.)— MEMOIRS OF THE LIFE OF JOHN CONSTABLE, ESQ. 

R.A. Composed chielly of his Letters. By C. 11. Leslie, R. A. Second Edition, with further 
Extracts from his Correspondence. Small 4to. vHh two Portraits foiie from a new Sketch, 
by Mr. Leslie,) and a plate of" Spring," engraved by Lucas, 21 j. cloth. 

LIFE OF A TRAVELLING PHYSICIAN, 

From his first Introiiuction to Practice; including Twenty Years' Wanderings tbrougbout 
the greater part of Europe. By the late Sir Georgt Lefevre, M.D. 3 vols, post 8vo. with 
coloured Frontispieces, 'dl3. Gd. clutb, 

LINDLEY.— INTRODUCTION TO BOTANY, 

By Prof.J.Lindley, Ph.D. I'.R S.L.S. etc. 3d Edition, with Corrections and considerable 
Additions. Svo. willi Six Plates and numerous Woodcuts, 18*. cloth. 

LINDLEV.— FLORA MEDIC A ; 

A Botanical Account of all the most important Plants used in Medicine in difTercnt Parts of 
the World. By John Lindlcy, Pli.D. F.R.S. etc. 8vo. 18s. cloth. 

LINDLEY.— A SYNOPSIS OF THE BRITISH FLORA, 

Arranged according ro the Natural Orders. By Professor John Lindley, Ph. D., F.R.S-.etC. 
Third Edition, with numerous Additions and Improvements. 12mo."l0s. Cd.clolh. 

LINDLEY.— THE THEORY OF HORTICULTURE; 

Or. an Attempt to Explain the Principal Operations of Gardening' upon Physioloijieal Prin- 
ciples. By John Lindley, Ph.D. F.R.S. 8vo. with illustrations ou Wood, !2«. cloth. 

LINDLEY.— GUIDE TO THE ORCHARD AND KITCHEN GARDEN; 

Or, an Account of the moat valuable Fruits and Vegetables rultivatcd in Great Britain : with 
Kalendars of the Work reouired in the Orchard and Kitchen Garden during every month in 
the Year. By George Lindley, C.M.H.S. Edited by Professor Liudley. 8vo. IGi. boards. 

LINWOOD (W.)— ANTHOLOCIA OXONIENSIS; 

Sive, Florilcgium e lusibus poelicis diversorum Oxoiiicnsium Grwcis et Latinis dcccrptum' 
Curante Guliclmo Linwood, M.A. ^dis Christi Atummo. 8vo. [/« the preit. 

LLOYD.— A TREATISE ON LIGHT AND VISION. 

By the Rev. H. Lloyd. M.A, .Fellow of Trin. CoH Dublin. 8vo. 5« boards. 

LO RIMER.- LETTERS TO A YOUNG MASTER MARINER, 

On some Subjects connected with his Calling. By Charles Lorimer, 3d edition. 12mo. 
with an Appendix, 5s. Cd. cloth. 

LOUDON (MRS.)-THE LADY'S COUNTRY COMPANION; 

Or, How to Enjoy a Country Life Rationally. By Mrs. Loudon, author of "Gardening for 
Ladies,'' etc. New Edition. Foolscap 8\ o., with an Engraving on Steel, nnd Illustrations on 
Wood,7s.6d.clotb. 

LOUDON {J. C.)-SELF INSTRUCTION 

For Young Gardeners, Foresters, Bailitrs, Land Stewards, and Farmers; in Arithmetic 
Book-keeping, Geometry, Mensuration, Practical Trigonometry, Mechanics, Lnnd-Survey- 
ing. Leveling, Planning and Mapping, Architectural Drawing, and Isometrleal Projection 
and Perspective ; M'ith Examples sheaing their applii ations to Horticultural and Agricul- 
tural Purposes. Rv the late J. C. London. F.L.P. U.S. etc. With a Portrait ofMr.Lmidon, 
and a Memoir bv ^Ua. Loudon. 8v<i. with Wooil Engravings, /a. Cd. cloth. 

LOUDON.— AN ENCYCLOP/tDIA OF TREES AND SHRUBS; 

Being the " Arboretum et Fruticclum liritannicum" abridged: coiitauung^ the Hardy Treea 
and Shruba of Great Britni.,, N^.tive a.id Foreign, acientifieally and popularly described : 
with their Prnpa.'atiun. Culture, and LTnesin the Arts ; and with En^rravinKS of nearly all the 
Species. For the use of Nurserymen, Gardeners, and Foresters. ByJ.C. Loudon, t .L.S. etc. 
8vo. with upwards of 2000 Eut{'^^'"tf^ *"' Wood,2Mil.t. clmli. 
The Original Work j a New Edition, in 8 vols. 8vo. with above 400 8vo. Plates of Trees, and 
upwards of 2300 Woudtuts, 10/. cloth. 

LOUDON.— AN ENCYCLOP/EDIA OF GARDENING; 

Presentinc in one syoteiuatii; view, the History and Present StHte of Gardening- in all Coun- 
tries, and its Theory and Practice in Great Britain: with the Management of the Kitchen 
Garden, the Flower Garden, Laying^-outGrouiids, etc. By J. C. Loudon, F.L.S. etc. A new 
Edition, enlarged and much improved, gvo.with nearly lOOU Kngravings on Woodj 2/. 10«. 
cloth. 

LOUDON.— AN ENCYCLOP>CDlA OF AGRICULTURE; 

Comprisinfr the Theory and Fractice of the Valuation, Transfer, Laying-out, Improvement, 
and Management of Landed Property, and of the cultivation and economy of the Animal and 
Vegetable productions of Agriculture, including all the latest improvements; a general 
History of Agriculture in all countries; a Statistical view of its present state, with 
suggestions for its future progrtss in the British Islea ; and a Supplement, bringing do«-n 
the work to the year 1S44. By J. C. Loudon, F-L.G.Z. and H.S. etc. Fifth Edition. 8vo. with 
upwards of 1100 Engravings on Wood, by Branston, 2/. lOj. cloth. 
The Supplement, with 65 Engravings, Ss- sewed. 

LOUDON.— AN ENCYCLOP>tDIA OF PLANTS; 

including all the Plants which are now found in, or have been introduced into, Great Britain ; 
giving their Natural History, accompanied by such Descriptions, Engraved Figures, and 
Elementary Details, a.i may enable a oeginner, who is a mere English reader, to discover the 
name of every Plant which he may find in flower, and acquire all the information respecting 
it which is useful and interesting. The Specific Characters by an Eminent Botanist; the 
Drawings by J. D. C. Sowcrby, F.L.S. A new Edition (1841), with a new Supplement, com- 
prising every desirable particular respecting all the Plants originated in, or introduced into, 
Britain between the first publication of the work, in 1829, and January 184(1: with a new 
General Index to the whole work. Edited by J. C. Loudon, prepared by w. H. Baxter, Jun,, 
and revised by George Don, F.L.S.; and 800 new Figures of Plants, on Wood, from Drawings 
by J.D. C. Sowerby, F.L.S. Svo. with nearly lO.UUO Wood Engravings, 73s. 6rf. cloth. 
", * The last Supplement, sfparatety, Sfo. los. cloth, 

LOUDON.— AN ENCYCLOP>!EDlA OF COTTAGE, FARM, AND VILLA 

ARCHITECTURE and FURNITURE. Containing Designs for Cottages, Villas, Farm 
Houses, Farmeries, Country Inns, Public Houses, Parochial Schools, etc. ; with the requisite 
F'ittinu'B-up, Fixtures, and Furniture, and appropriate Offices, Gardens, and Garden Scenery : 
each Design accompanied by Analytical and Critical Remarks illustrative of the Principles 
of Architectural Science and Taste on which it is composed, and General Estimates of the 
Expense. By J. C. Loudon, F.L.S. etc. New Edition, corrected, with a Supplement contain- 
ing 160 additional pages of letter- press, and nearly 300 new engravingd. Svo. with more than 
20U0 Engravings on \Vood, 63a. cloth. 

■,* The Supplement, »e;jaraie^^, 8vo. 7»- 6d. sewed. 

LOUDON.— HORTUS BRITANNICUS : 

A CataIoi;ue of all the Plants indigenous to or introduced into Britain. The 3d Edition, 
with a New Supplement, prepared, under the direction of J. C. Loudon, by W. H. Baxter, 
and revised by George Don, F.L.S. 8vo. 'A\a.&d. cloth. 

The Supplement at'para/f^y, Svo. 2s. 6d. sewed. 

The later Supplement aeparately, Svo. 8s. sewed. 

LOUDON.— THE SUBURBAN GARDENER AND VILLA COMPANION: 

Comprising the Choice of a Villa or Suburban Residence, or of a situation on which to form 
one; the Arrangement and Furnishing of the House; and the Laying-out, Planting, and 
general Management of the Garden and Grounds ; the whole adapted for (irounds from one 
perch to fifty acres and upwards in extent ; intended for the instruction of those who know 
little of Gardening or Rural Affairs, and more particularly for the use of Ladies. ByJ.C. 
Loudon, F.L.S., etc. Svo. with above 300 Woi)d Engravings, 20s. cloth. 

LOUDON.-HORTUS LIGNOSUS LONDINENSIS ; 

Or. a Catalogue of all the Ligneous Plants cultivated in the neighbourhood of London. To 
which are ad~ded their usual Prices in Nurseries, By J. C. Loudon, F.L.S. etc. Svo. 7a. Gd. 

LOW.-ON LANDED PROPERTY, AND THE MANAGEMENT OF ESTATES; 

Comprehending the Relations between Landlord and Tenant, and the Principles and Forms 
of Leases ; of Farm buildings. Enclosures, Drains, Embankments, Roads and other Rural 
Works, Minerals, and Woods. By David Low, Esq. F R.S.E. etc., author of "Elements 
of Practical Agriculture," etc. Svo. with numerous Wood Engravings, 21g. cloth. 

LOW .--ON THE DOMESTICATED ANIMALS OF GREAT BRITAIN, 

comprehending the Natural and Economical History of the Species and Breeds- Illustrationi^ 
of the Properties of External Form; and Observations on the Principles and Pmcticp nf 
Breeding. By David Low, Esn., F.R.S E. Professor of Agriculture in the Universitv of 
Edinburgh, etc; author of " Elements of Practical Agriculture," etc. Svo with Enin-avincs 
on Wood, 25s. cloth. ^ S 

PRINTED FOR MESSRS, LONGMAN, AND CO- 19 

LOW.— THE BREEDS OF THE DOMESTICATED ANIMALS OF GREAT 

BRITAIN described. By David Low, Kaq. F.Il.S.K., Professornf Auriculturein the Univer- 
sity of Edinburgh, etc-, etc. Tlie Plates from drawings by W. Nicliolson, R.S.A., reduced 
from a Series of Oil PnintinKS, executed for tbe Agricultural Uluscum of the University of 
Edinburgh, by W.tihiel.s, R.S.A. 2 vols, ntlns quarto, with 56 plates of ADimals, beautifully 
colourcil after Nature, 16/. Km. half-bound in morocco. 

Or in four HCparatc portions, as follow: — 
The OX. 1 Vol. attas quarto, with 22 Plates, I The HORSE. 1 Vol. atUs quarto, with 8 

price 6/ Ifn. 6rf, half-bound morocco. Plates, price 3/. hiilf-bound morocco. 

The SHEEP. 1 Vol. atlas quarto, with 21 The HOG. 1 Vol. atlas quarto, with 5 Plates, 

Plates, price 6/. 16(.Grf. half-bound morocco. ] price 2/. 2s. half-bound morocco. 

LOW.— ELEMENTS OF PRACTICAL AGRICULTURE; 

Compreheiidiii(ithe Cultivation of Plants, the Husbandry of tbc Domestic Animals, and the 
F-coiiomyof the I-;irm. Bv David I^ow, Esq. K.R.S.K., Professor of Agriculture in the Uni- 
versity of Edinliurpfh. 4lb' Edition, with Alterations and Additions. 8vo. with above 20C1 
Woodcuts, 21j cloth. 

MACAULAY. -CRITICAL AND HISTORICAL ESSAYS CONTRIBUTED TO 

The EDINBUR<;H REVIEW. By the Ri^'ht Hon. Thomas Babington Macaulay, M.P. 
3d Edition. 3 vols. 8vo. 36». cloth. 

MACAULAY. -LAYS OF ANCIENT ROME. 

By the Right Honorable Thomas Babington Macaulay, M.P. 7th Edition. Crown 8vo. 
lOi.Gd. cloth. 

MACKAY (CHARLES).— THE SCENERY AND POETRY OF THE ENGLISH 

LAKES; .i Summer Ramble. Bv Charles Ulackay, Esq. author of " Legends of the isles," 
"The Salamandrinc," "TheThiimesand Its Tributaries," etc. 8vo. with beautiful Wood 
Engravings from Original Sketches. [Just ready, 

MACKENZIE.— THE PHYSIOLOGY OF VISION. 

By W. Mackenzie, M.D,, Lecturer on tbe Eye in the University of Glasgow. 8vo. with 
Woodcuts, 10a. 6rf. boards. 

MACKINNON.— THE HISTORY OF CIVILISATION. 

By Wm. Alexander Mackiiinon, F.R.S. M.P. for Lymington. 2 vols Svo. 24». cloth. 

MACKINTOSH (SIR JAJIES).— THE LIFE OF SIR THOMAS MORE. 

Fy the Right Hon. Sir James Mackinto-ib. Reprinted from tbc Cabinet CyclopBedia; nud 
intended for a Present-Book or School Prize. Foolscap Svo. with Portrait, 6s. cloth j or 
bound in vellum gilt {old style) ,S3. 

MACKINTOSH'S (SIR JAMES) MISCELLANEOUS WORKS; 

Inclnding his Contributions to The EDINBURGH REVIEW. Edited by Robert James 
Mackintosh, Esq. 3 vols. 8vo. 42(t. cloih. 

MACKINTOSH, ETC.— THE HISTORY OF ENGLAND. 

Bv Sir James Mackintosh ; W. Wallace, Esq.; and Robert Bell. Esq. 10 vols. foolscap Svo. 
with Vignette Titles, 3/. cloth. 

M'CULLOCH.— THE LITERATURE OF POLITICAL ECONOMY; 

Being a Classified Catalogue of tbe principal Works in the dilTereiit departments of Political 
Economy, interspersed with Historical, Critical, and Biographical Notices, By J. K. 
M'Cullo'ch, Esq. 3vo, 145. cloth. 

M'CULLOCH (J. R.)-AN ACCOUNT, DESCRIPTIVE, AND STATISTICAL, 

of the BRITISH EMPIRE; exhibiting its Extent, Physical Caparitics, Popularion, Industry, 
and Civil and Religious Iiislitutinns. By J. R. M'Culloch, Esq. 3d Edition, corrected, 
enlarged, and greatly improved. 2 thick vols. Svo. [In the press. 

M'CULLOCH.— A TREATISE ON THE PRINCIPLES AND PRACTICAL 

INFLUENCE OF TAXATION AND THE FUNDING SYSTEM. By J. R. M'Culloch, 
Esq. Svo 1.55- cloth. 

M'CULLOCH.— A DICTIONARY, GEOGRAPHICAL, STATISTICAL, AND 

HISTORICAL, of the various Countries, Places, and Principal Natural ( )bjects in the World. 
By J. R. M'Culloch, F.sq. A newEdiliou. 2 vols. Svo. with Six large Maps, 4/. cloth. 
*,• T/irncw Articles fire printed geporatety as a Supplement to the former Edition. They 
comprise a full nccontit of the present state of the United Kingdom, the Oregon Terri- 
tory, etc. Svo. 5s. sewed. 

M'CULLOCH.— A DICTIONARY, PRACTICAL, THEORETICAL. AND 

HISTORICAL, OF COMMERCE, AND COMMERCML NAVIGATION. By J. R. 
M'Culloch, Esq. A New Edition, corrected, enlarged, and improved. Svo. with Maps 
and Plans, 50s, cloth; or S0». strongly half-bound in rtissia, with flexible back. 
• ,• This Edition, vhich has been carefully corrected, comprises, besides the New Tariff, 
the new Arts relnlim; to Banbtr'ff, the Sugar Trade, N'tvigntion and Customs, thf hiring of 
Seamen, etc.; and is further enriched with valuable injitrtnntion from all parts of the tvurld. 
A SUPPLEMENT, for the use of the purchasers of the last Edition, Svo. price 3». 6c/, sewed. 

20 NEW WORKS AND K EW EDITIONS 

MAITLAND (DR. CHARLES).-THE CHURCH IN THE CATACOMBS : 

A Description of the primitive Church in Rome, Illustrated by its Scpukliral Ucmains, 
By Cbiirles Maitland, M.D. Svo. with very immcrouB Eng:ravings on ^^""'J'^;^^.^^,^ ^^^^^, 

MAUCET CMRS.)-CONVERSATIONS ON THE HISTORY OF ENGLAND. 

l-orlhe Use of Children. Bv Mrs Mr^rc^t. author of " Coi.versatlODS on CheiiiiBlry, etc 
2d Edition, with Additions. 18mo. 5*. cloth. 

MARCET.— CONVERSATIONS ON CHEMISTRY; . , ,^, ^ 

111 wliifh tlLe ElciiieiitN of thnt SLieticf arc liinuliiirly Explained and Illuslrated by Experi- 
ments. 13th Edition, enlarged and corrected. 2 vols, foolscap Svo. 1-ls. doth. 

MARCET.— CONVERSATIONS ON NATURAL PHILOSOPHY; 

III wliicli the Klcmcnls of that Science are familiarly explained, and adapted to the compre- 
hension of Young I'tTsons. lUtb Edition, enlar^'cd and corrected. Fcap. Svo. with 23 Plalea, 
10j..0J.clotli. 

MARCET.— CONVERSATIONS ON POLITICAL ECONOMY? 

Inwhichtlic Kleiuciils of that !?cicricc arc Imnili.-irly explained, /th Edition, revised and 
eulurijed. FoolscapBvo. 73. Orf. clotb. 

MARCET— CONVERSATIONS ON VEGETABLE PHYSIOLOGY; 

Coniprehcndinij the Klements of Botany, with their application to Agriculture. 3d Edition. 

Foolscap 8vo. with Four Plates, Oa. cloth. 

MARCET— CONVERSATIONS FOR CHILDREN; 

On Land and Water. 3d Edition revised and corrected. Foolscap Svo., with coloured Map, 
all c wing the comparative Altitude of Mountains, 5 j. 6rf. cloth. 

MARCET.— CONVERSATIONS ON LANGUAGE, 

For Children. By Mrs. Marect, author of " Willy's Grammar, "etc. ISmo. 4». Crf. cloth. 

MARCET- THE GAME OF GRAMMAR, 

With a Book of Conversations, shewing the Uulcs of the Game, nnd affording Examples of 
the manner of playing at it. In a varnished box, or done up as a post 8vo. volume, 8j. 

MARCET. -WILLY'S GRAMMAR; 

Interspersed with Stories, and intended for the Use of Boys. By Mrs. Marcet, anthor of 
•'Mary's Grammar," etc. New edition. 18mo.2». Gd. cloth. 

^'A sound etndniwple work /or the eiirlirtt ng-es."— Quarterly Review. 

MARCET.— LESSONS ON ANIMALS, VEGETABLES, AND MINERALS, 

Bv Mr.s. Marcet, author of "Conversations ou Chemistry," ctt. New Edition. ISmo. 2j. 
cloth. 

MARGARET RUSSELL: 

All Autobiography. In one volume. [ht the press. 

MARRIAGE GIFT, 

By a Mother. A Legacy to her Children. Post Svo. 5». cloth, with gilt edges. 

MARRYAT (CAPT).— THE MISSION; 

Or, Scenes in Africa. Written for Young People. By Captain Marryat. C.B., author of 
"Peter Simple," " Masterman Ready," "The Settlers in Canada,^* etc. 2 vols. fcap. 
Svo. 12s. cloth. 

MARRYAT (CAPT.)— THE SETTLERS IN CANADA, 

Written for Young People. By Captain Marryat, C.B. author of "Peter Simple," 
*' Masterman Ready," etc. 2 vols, fcap, Svo. 12a. cloth. 

MARRYAT (CAPT.)-MASTERMAN READY; 

Or, the Wreck of tlie Pacific. Written for Young People. By Captain Marryat, C.B. author 

of "Peter Simple," etc. 3 vols. fcap. Svo. with numerous Engravings on Wood, 22*. 6d. cloth. 

•,* The yolMmQUygepnr'iteltf, 7*-Grf. each, eloth. 

** The bp»t of Robinson Crusoe's numeroug descendnntSt and one tif the most captivatinr of 

modern children's books. The only danger ijt, lest parents should dispute v>\lh tneir thildren 

the possession o/ir."— Quarterly Review. 

MAUNDER.— THE TREASURY OF KNOWLEDGE, 

And LIBRARY of REKERENCR. By Samuel Maunder. Ifith Edition, revised throughout 

and enlarged. Fool.suup Svo., with two Frontispieces, lOi. cloth; bound in roan with tilt 

edges, 12». '' 

*,• The prinripat contents of the present neiB and thoroughly revised editiim of '■'The Trra- 

Murvof Ktioxoledge," me— a new and enlarged English Dictionary, with a Grammar, Verbal 

Distltictirms, and Ej'i'rrises; anew Universal Gazetteer ; n compendious Classical Dictionaru- 

nr, Analysis of Histor,/ and Chronology S n Dictjonarf/ of Law Term, t a neu, Synopsis of the 

Britiih Peerage; and various useful tabular Addenda. ^ r j 

PRINTED FOR MESSRS, LONGMAN, AND CO. 21 

MAUNDER.- THE BIOGRAPHICAL TREASURY: 

Consisting of Memoirs, Skctclies, mid brief Notices of above 12,000 Eminent Peraons of all 
A<e(> and Nations, from the Enrliest Period of History; formintf a uew nnd complete Dic- 
tionary of Universal Bii>i;riiphr. By ynmufl Maunder. 5tli Edition, revised througliout, 
and eontainin^' a copious ^np|)]ement, bruiiy:ht down to 1345. Foolscap Svo, witli Frontis- 
pieee, lOa. eloth; bound in roan, with gill edges, V2t. 

MAUNDER.— THE SCIENTIFIC AND LITERARY TREASURY: 

A New and Popular Fnevclopcedin of Sticuce and the Belles Lettres; in eluding all Branches 
of Seienee, and every Subiett connected with Literature Find Art. The whole written in a 
fiiniiliar style, adapted to the comprehension of ull persons desirous of acquiring in for mat ion 
on the subjects comprised in the work, nnd also adjiptcri for a Manual of convenient Refer- 
ence to the mure instructed. livSimiiel Mnuiider. 4thEdition. Feap. Svo. with Frontispiece, 
IOj. clothi bound in roan, with gilt edges, l^s. 

MAUNDER.— THE TREASURY OF HISTORY; 

Comprising a General Introductory Outline of Universal History, Ancient and Modern, and 
a Series ot separate Hisiories of eVerv principal Nation that exists ; developing their Rise, 
Progress, and Present Condition, the Moral and Social Character of their respective 
Inhabitants, their Religion, Manners, and Cnstoms, etc. etc. Dv bamuel Maunder. 2d Kdit. 
Fcap. Svu. with Frontispiece, 10*. cloth; bound in roan, with gilt edges, 12j. 

MAUNDER.— THE UNIVERSAL CLASS-BOOK: 

A new Series of Reading Lessons (oriuinal and selected) for Every Day in the Year. With 
Questions for Kxamination. By Samuel Maunder, author of " The Treasury of Knowledge," 
etc. 2d Edition, revised, P2mo, 5s. bound. 

MICHELET fJ).— PRIESTS, WOMEN, AND FAMILIES, 

By J. Michclet. Translated from the French (third edition) , with the Author's permission, 
by C. Cocks, B.L. Professor of the Living Langiiages iu the Royal Colleges of France. New 
Editions. Post 8vo. 9j. cloth. 16mo. Is. 4d. sewed. 

MICHELET (J.)— THE PEOPLE, 

By M. Michclet, Member of the Institute of France, etc. Translated, with the approbation 
ot the Author, liy C, Cocks, B.L, Profcs'sor of the Living Languages in the Royal Colleges 
of France. NewEdition. Post 8vo. 9j. cloth. ICmo. Is. 6d. sewed. 
•«• Mr.Cocki'ii authorised trnvalation.^ of Michelefa " Prirsls, Women, and Families," 

and "The Penpte," in one vol. IGma. 3s. 6d. cloth. 

MICHELET AND QUINET.-THE JESUITS 

By J. Michelet, Member of the Institute of France; and R. Qninet, of the College of 
France. Translated, with the Authors' approbation, by C. Cocks, B.L. Professor of the 
Living Languages in the Royal Colleges of France. 16mo. uniform with the authorised editions 
of Michelel's '* Priests, Women, and Families," and "The People." [Nearli/ ready. 

MIGNET(M.)- ANTONIO PEREZ AND PHILIP II. OF SPAIN. 

Bv M. Mignet, Member of the Institute of France, Perpetual Secretary of the Academy of 
Moral and Political Sciences, etc. Translated by C. Cocks, B. L. Professor of the Living 
Langnages in the Royal Colleges of France. Post Svo. 9«. cloth. 

MILES fW.j— THE HORSE'S FOOT, 

And How to Keep it Sound. By William Miles, Esq. Royal Svo. with Engravings, 7a. cloth. 

MILNER (REVS. J. AND I.)— THE HISTORY OF THE CHURCH OF 

CHRIST. Bv the Rev. Joseph Milncr, A.I\I. With Aiiditions and Corrections by the late 
Rev. Isaac Milner, D.D. F.R.S. A New Edition. 4 vols. Svo. 2/. 8s. boards. 

MOHUN LAL.-THE LIFE OF THE AMIR DOST MAHOMED KHAN OF 

CABOUL. By Mohun Lul, Kniglit of the Persian Order of the Sun ; lately attached to the 
Mission at Cahoul; author of " Travels in the Punjab, AlTgbanistan," etc, Svo. with nume- 
rous Portraits. [- vnl$. in the press. 

MONTAUBAN (MRS. E )-A YEAR AND A DAY IN THE EAST; 

Or, Wanderings over Land and Sea, By Mrs. Eliot Montauban. Post Svo. 7s. cloth. 

MONTGOMERY'S (JAMES) POETICAL WORKS. 

New and only complete Edition. With some additional Poems and Autobiographical 
Prefaces. Collected and edited by Mr. Montgomery. 4vols. foolscap Svo, nilh Portrait, and 
seven other Plates, 20s. cloth ; bound in morocco, l/.lfi». 

MOORE.— THE HISTORY OF IRELAND. 

From the earlic-it Kings of tliat Realm, down to its latest Chief. By Thomas Moore, Esq. 
4 vols, foolscap 3vo , with Vignette Titles, 24s. cloth. 

MOORE'S POETICAL WORKS; 

Containing the Author's recent Introduction and Notes. Complete in one volume, uniform 
with Lord Byron's Poems. With a New Portrait, by George Richmond, engraved in the line 
manner, and a View of Sloperton Cottage, the Residence of the Poet, bv Thomas Creswiek, 
A. II. A. Medium Svo \l. Is. cloth; or 42s. bound iu morocco, by Hay day. 
•,• Also', an Edition in 10 vols, foolscap Svo. with Portrait, and 10 Plates, 2/. lOs. cloth; 
morocco, 4/. lOs. 

22 NEW WORKS AND N F.W EDITIONS 

MOORE'S LALLA ROOKH, AN ORIENTAL ROMANCE. 

New Fditioti. Medium 8vo. illustrated with )3 fine En^ravinga,21». cloth ; morocro, d5<.; 
with India Proof Plates, 35«, cloth. 
MOORE'S LALLA ROOKH. AN ORIENTAL ROMANCE. 

Nc«- EditioQ. FoolsLap 8to. with 4 Plates, by Weatall, 10a. (id. cloth; or 14». bound in 

morocco. 

MOORE'S IRISH MELODIES, , ,, 

niiisirated bv U. Maclisp, R.A. Imp. S-o. with ICl Desigrns, enpravcd on Steel, 3/. 3#. 
bonrds; or 4/ 14i. firf. bound in morrocco, by Hayday. Proof Impiession.s (only 200 copies 
printed, of which a few remain), 6/. ds. boirds. 
•.* Itidia Proof' brfnrr letters of the 161 Di-xisTi», on Quarter Cofotnbier, In Portfolio 
fonhf 25 copiet/iririCrd, of irkich n jpic remain ., 31/. 10*. 

Indhi Pronffi before leltem "f the 51 Lnrse Desicns, on Quarter Colombier, tn Portfolio 
Con It/ -2!) copies printed, of which a few remain/, 18/. 18j. 

MOORE'S IRISH MELODIES. 

New Edition. Fcap. Svo. with Vignette Title, I0». cloth; bound in morocco, 13», &d. 

MORAL OF FLOWERS (THE). 

3d Edition. Royal Svo. with 24 beautifully coloured Enifravings, 1/. 10a. half-boand . 

MORTON.— A VETERINARY TOXICOLOCICAL CHART, 

ContiilniniTthoHcAgeiUs known lofause Death in the Horse ; with the Symptoms, Antidotes, 
Actioi: on the Tissues, and Tests. By VV, J. T. Morton. 12mo. 6».in ease ; 8j, 6d. on rollers. 

MORTON.— A MANUAL OF PHARMACY, 

For the Student in Veterinary Medicine ; contHininp the Substances employed at the noynl 
Veterinary Colleirc, with an Attempt at their Classification, and the Pharmacopixin of that 
Institution. By W. J. T. Morton. 3d Edition, 12mo. 10*. cloth. 

MOSELEY.— ILLUSTRATIONS OF PRACTICAL MECHANICS. 

liy the Rev. H. Moieley, M.A., ProfcRSor of NalurftI Philosophy and Ahtronomy in Kinsr's 
College, London ; bcine; the I'irst Volume of the Illustrations of Science by the Professors 
of Kind's College. F^.ap.Svo. with numerous Woodcuts. 8j. cloth, 

MOSELEY.— THE MECHANICAL PRINCIPLES OF ENGINEERING AND 

ARCHITECTUUK. By the Rev. H. Mose ley, M. A. FR.S., Professor. it Natural Phiio^iophy 
and Astronomy in Kint;'s Colleire. London; and author of " Illustrations of Practical 
Mechanics,"ete. Svo. with Woodcuts and Diairrams, l/.4». cloth. 

MOSIIEIM'S ECCLESIASTICAL HISTORY, 

Ancient and Modern. Tran-ilated, with topious Notes, by James Murdock, D.D, Edited, 
with Additions, by Henry t-oames. M A. Rectorof Stnplefofd-Tawney, Essex. New Edition, 
revised, and eontinncd to the present time. 4 vols. Svo. 43s. cloth. 

MULLER.— INTRODUCTION TO A SCIENTIFIC SYSTEM OF MYTHOLOGY. 

By C. O. Miiller, author of "The History and Antjrjuitii's of (lie Doric Race," etc. Trans- 
lated from the German by John Leitch. Svo. uniform with " MJillcr's Dorians," 12*. cloth. 

MURRAY.— AN ENCYCLOPAEDIA OF GEOGRAPHY; 

Comprising a complete Description of the Earth: exhibiting its Relation to the Heavenly 
Bodies, its Physical Structure, the Natural History of each Countrr, and the Industry, Com- 
merce. Politiial Institutions, and Civil and Social State of all Nations. By Hui;h fllorray, 
F.TI.S.E-: assisted in Astronomy, etc. by Professor Wallace; Geology, etc. by Professor 
Jameson; Botany, etc. by Sir W. J. Hooker; Zooloer>', etc. by W. Swaitison, Esq. New 
Edition, with Supplement, bringing down the Statistical Information contained in the Work, 
to December 1H43: with 32 Maps, drawn by Sidney Hall, and upwards of 1,000 other 
Engravings on Wood. Svo. 3/. cloth. 

NECKER DE SAUSSURE— PROGRESSIVE EDUCATION; > 

Or. Considerations on the Course of Lif-'. Translated and Abridged from the French of 
Madame Necker De Saussure, by Miss Holland, a vi.ls. foolscap Svo. 19*. 6rf. cloth. 

-,* Separnlely, vols. I. and II. 12j. ; vol. HI. 7». C>d. 

NESBIT fA.)-A TREATISE ON PRACTICAL MENSURATION; 

Containing the most approved Methods of drawing Geometrical Figures-; Mensuration of 
Superficies; Land Surveying; Mensuration of Solids; the Use o f "the Carpenter's Rule; 
Timber Measure, etc. By A. Nesbit. TJth Edition. 12mo. with nearly 300 Woodcuts, Gs. 
bound. 

KEY. 7th Edition. 12mo. 5*. bound. 

NEWELL fREV.R.H.5— THE ZOOLOGY OF THE ENGLISH POETS, 

Corrected by the Wntinirs of Modern Naturalists. By the Rev.R.H. Newell Rector of 
Little Hormcad. Fcap. Svo. with Engravings on Wood, .5.1. Grf., cloth. ^'"-" ''"' 'sector 01 
" Thin interesting Utile volume has for its object the pointi„i^ out name of the moreprnmi- 
nrnt pasiagen in fchich our English poets h'lve erred irith renpect to the ttrnctare and habits 
ofanvnoh. Birds, rrpfttes, and mfitnwalii, are surre»iii,-ely spoken of h„ the author and 
pritcttctil errors irith regard to them are held up to the light of tnod'rti rci^nce As a note 
bonk for correcting false impressions, and the imparting sound ones, Mr. Keue'Ws work u-il'l 
be found useful tn the education of young pcop/e."— Athcnrcum. 

PRINTED FOR MESSRS. LONGMAN, AND CO. 23 

NICOLAS-THE CHRONOLOGY OF HISTORY, 

Coutaining Tables, Ciikulations, uud Statements indispensable for aacerlaiuini; the Dates of 
Historical Evtnts, tiiirl of Public and Private Docuiiicnta, from the Earliest Period to the 
Present Time. By Sir Harris Nicolas, K.C. M.G. Seeood Edition, corrected throughout. 
Foolscap Svo. with Vignette Title, 61. cloth. 

ORDNANCE MAPS (THE), AND PUBLICATIONS OF THE GEOLO- 
GICAL SURVEY OF THE UNITED KINGUOM.-Messrs. Longman and Co. have been 
appointed by the Board of Ordnance Aj^enta for the sale of the Maps of the Ordnance Sur- 
vey of Great Britain. Also, sole Agents for tlie sale of the Maps, Sections, and Sooks of 
the Geological Survey of the United Kingdom, and of the Museum of Eeouomic Geology, 
under the Chief CommisBioucr of Her Majesty's Woods, Works, and Land Revenues. 
•,• Complete detailed Cataloffuea v/ both Series may be had on application. 

OWEN. — LECTURES ON THE COMPARATIVE ANATOMY AND PHYSI- 
OLOGY of the INVERTEBRATE ANIMALS, delivered at the Royal College of SurKeous 
in 134a By Richard Owen, F.R.S. Hunterian Professor to the College. From Notes taken 
by Williiim White Cooper, M.R.C.S. and revised by Professor Owen. With Glossary aud 
Index. Svo. with nearly 14(1 Illustrations on Wood, 14> cloth. 
•»* A Second nnd coucluding Volume, being the Lectures ,ou Vertebrata) delivered by 
Prof etaor Owen during the last ietiiO'i, is preparing fut publication, 

PARABLES (THE). 

The Parables of Our Lord, richly Illuminated with appropriate Borders, printed in Colours, 
and iti Black and Gold ; with a Design from one of the early German engravers. Square 
foolscap 8vo., uniform in size with the " Sermon on the Mountj" 21»., in massive carved 

binding ; or 'Ms. bound in morocco, by Hayday. {^Juat ready. 

PARKES.— DOMESTIC DUTIES: 

Or, Instructions to Younj; Married Ladies on the Management of their Households and the 
Regulation of their Conduct in the various Relntions and Duties of Married Life. By Kirs. 
W. Parkes. 5th Edition. Foolscap Svo. 9a. cloth. 

PARNELL.— A TREATISE ON ROADS; 

Wherein the Principles on which Roads should be made are explained and illustrated bvthe 
Plans, Speeiiieatioiis, and Contracts made use of by Thomas Telford, Esq. on the Holynead 
Road. By the Right Hon. Sir Henry Parnell, Bart., Hon. Memb. Inst. Civ. Enjj. London. 
Second Edition, greatly enlarged. Svo. with 9 large Plates, 1/. 1*. cloth. 

PATON (A. A.)-SERV|A, THE YOUNGEST MEMBER OF THE EUROPEAN 

FAMILY; or, a Residence in Belgrade, and Travels through the Highlands and Wood- 
lands of the Interior, during the years 1S43 aud 1844. By Andrew Archibald Palon, Esq. 
Post Svo. with portrait and plate, l_s. cloth. 

Bv the same Author. 
THE MODERN SYRIANS; or. Native Society in Damascus, Aleppo, and the Mountains of 
the Druses. Post Svo. 10». Grf. cloth. 

PEARSON.— AN INTRODUCTION TO PRACTICAL ASTRONOMY: 

By the Rev. W. Pearson, LL.D. F.R.S. etc. Rector of South Kilworth, Leieestcrshire, aud 
Treasurer to the Astronomical Society of London. 2 vols. 4to. nith Plates, 7/. /s. boards, 

PEDESTRIAN AND OTHER REMINISCENCES AT HOME AND ABROAD, 

WITH SKETCHES OF COUNTRY LIFE. By Sylvanus. Post Svo. , with Froulisijiete and 
Vignette Title, IOj. 6d cloth. 

PERCIVALL.-THE ANATOMY OF THE HORSE; 

Embracing the Structure of ihe Foot. By \V. Percivall, M.R.C.S. Svo. H. cloth. 

PERCIVALL.-HIPPOPATHOLOGY: 

A Systematic Treatise on the Disorders and Lameness of the Horse ; with their Modern and 
most approved Methods of Cure ; embracing the Doctrines of the Eniflish and French Veteri- 
nary Schools. By W . Percivall, M.U.C S., Veterinary Surgeon in the First Life Guards, 
3 vols. Svo. Vol. 1, Ids. 6d.i vols. 2 and 3, 14». each, boards. 

PEREIRA.— A TREATISE ON FOOD AND DIET: 

With Observations on the Dictetiial Regimen suited for Disordered States of the Digestive 
Organs; and an .Account of the Dietaries of some of the prin. ipal Metropolitan and other 
EstablishmeHts for Piiupcrs, Lunatics, Criminals, Children, tlie Sick, etc. By Jon. Pcreira, 
M.D. F.R.S., author of "Elements of Materia Medica." Svo. 16». cloth. 

PERICLES: 

A Tale of Athens in the 83d Olympiad. By the author of " A Brief Sketch of Greek Philo- 
sophy." 2 vols, post Svo. ISt. cloth. 
>^ All these claa*iLal Acenes are vi^orousli/ drairn ; and* PericlcA' must be pronounced one 

of the happiest examples ever yet produced of a t^racefuljictiun, based on a profound liviuff 

knowledge of ancient Greek history and wianncrj."— Britannia . 

PERRY (DR. W.C.)— GERMAN UNIVERSITY EDUCATION: 

Or, the Professors and Students of Germany. By Walter C, Perry, Phil. D. of the University 
of Gattingcn. Post Svo. 4». 6rf. cloth. 

24 NEW WORKS AND NEW EDITIONS 

PESCHEL {C. F.)-ELEMENTS OF PHYSICS, , „■,-,.„ r„ns« 

Pnn I. Ponderable Bodies. By C. F. Pcsclicl, Princip.l of the Royal "''''"J,,,:°' So' 
Dresden, etc. etc. Translated fi ,. .11 llic Cerraan. >Tilh Notes, by K. West. FoolstapBto. 
with Diagrams and Woodeuts. /s. T.rf elotti. 

Part 2.— The riiysii s of IniionikTahlc Bodies, is nearly ready. 

PHILLIPS.-AN ELEMENTARY INTRODUCTION TO MINERALOGY: 

Comprising: a Noliee of the Cljataeters and Elements of Minerals i '"ti;'J'^""'i'r-"i .^e Sfh 
and Cireumslanees in wbich tliey are found. By William Phillips, P-'-S/'p-'',- „f''.;„,t"' 
Edition, considerably anpnented by II. Allan, F.B.S.E. 8yo. with woodcuts, lil.clotn. 

PHILLIPS.-FICURES & DESCRIPTIONS OF THE PAL/EOZOIC FOSSILS OF 

CORNWALL, DKVON, and WKST st)MKUj;KT; observed in the course of the Ordnance 
Geoloirical Survev of that District. By .lidm Phillips, F.R S. F.G.S. etc. Published by 
Order of the Lnfds Commissioners of 11. M. Treasury. 8vo. with 60 Plates, compnsint.' 
yery numerous Figures, 9s. cloth. 

PHILLIPS.— A GUIDE TO GEOLOGY. 

By John Phillips, F.R.S.G.S. etc. Foolscap .Svo. with Plates, 5i. eloth. 

PHILLIPS— A TREATISE ON GEOLOGY. 

By John Phillip.s, F.R.S. G.S. etc. 2 vols, foolscap Svo. with Woodcuts. 123, cloth. 

PITMAN (REV. J. R.)— SERMONS 

On the principal Subjects comprised in the Book of Psalms, abridged from Eminent Divines. 
By the Rev. J. B. Pitman, A.M. Minister of St. Barnabas Church, Kensington. Svo. 

PLYMLEY (PETER).— LETTERS ON THE SUBJECT OF THE CATHOLICS 

TO MV BROTHER ABRAHAM, WHO LIVES IN THE COUNTRY. By Peter Phmlev. 
21st Edition. Post Svo. Js.clotli. 

POET'S PLEASAUNCE (THE); 

Or, Garden lull of all Sorts of Pleasant Flowers, which our Pleaaant Poets have in Past 
Time (for Pastime) Planted; with the right ordering of them. By Eden Warwick. In 

1 vol. with Border Illustrations. [/n the prra^. 

POISSON (S. D.;-A TREATISE ON MECHANICS. 

By a D.Poisson. Second Edition. Trruislatcd from the French, and illustrated with 
Explanatory Notes, by the Rev. Henry II. Hartc, late Fellow of Trinity College, Dublin. 

2 volumes, Svo. W.S.t, eloth. 

POPE (ALEXANDER).— THE WORKS OF ALEXANDER POPE. 

Edited by Thomas Roscoe, Esq. \\'ith the Author's Lite. A New Edition. S vols. Svo. 

[/» the preti. 

PORTER.- A TREATISE ON THE MANUFACTURE OF SILK. 

By G. R. Porter, Esq. F.R.S., author of " The Pro^.Tess of the Nation, ■•etc. Fcap. Svo. with 
Vignette Title, and 39 Engravings on Wood, fis. cloth. 

PORTER.— A TREATISE ON THE MANUFACTURES OF PORCELAIN AND 

GLASS. ByG. R. Porter, Esq. F.U.S. Foolscap Svo. with oil Woodcuts, f.s. cloth. 

PORTLOCK. -REPORT ON THE GEOLOGY OF THE COUNTY OF 

LONDONIIERRY, and of Parts of Tyrone and Fermanagh, examined and described under 
the Authority of the IMaater-General and board of Ordnance. By J. E. Portlock, F.R. S. etc 
Svo. with 4S Plates, 24s. cloth. 

POWELL.— THE HISTORY OF NATURAL PHILOSOPHY. 

From the Earliest Periods to the Present Time. By Baden Powell, M.A., Savilian Professor 
of Mathematics in the University of Oxford. Fcap. Svo. with Vignette Title, 6j. eloth. 

PYCROFT.— A COURSE OF ENGLISH READING; 

Adapted to every Taste and Capacity. With Anecdotes of Men of Genius RvtheTtev 
James Pvcroft, B.A., Trinity College, Oxford, author of "Greek Gramiinr fraetiee ■•' 
"Latin Grammar Practice," etc. Foolscap Svo. 6».6rf. cloth. i-rnciice, 

QUARTERLY JOURNAL OF THE GEOLOGICAL SOCIETY OF LONDON 

Edited by David Thomas Ansted. M. A F.R. S., Fellow of .leso. College, Cambridge • Pro" 
fessor of Geology in King's College, London; Vice-beeretary of the Genlo.'ieal Socictv 
Svo. 4.. each niiinlier, sewed. V«''>Uh,d'ij„„rt„lf ' 

RANKE (PROFESSOR).-RANKE-S HISTORY OF THE REFORMATION 

Translated bv Sarah Austin, translator of Ranke's •■ History of the P„pes •■ Vol" 1 'V r'" 
Svo. 3U.. cloth. [Vol. II. ,•„ thep're,,." 

REECE.-THE MEDICAL GUIDE: 

For the use of the Clergy. Heads of Familica, Seminaries, and JunitirPractitione- l„ in i- 
cine- comprising a complete Modern DispPnaatory, and a Practical Treatise "^".'l"",?'''.'''" 
guishing Symptoms, Causes, Prevention, Cure, and Palliation of the DiseaspsiT.Vl- 1 . ,"" 

fluman Frame By R. Rceee, M.D., late Fellow of the RoyalCollcgeoisrrge^i'.'ir," "!,""" 
etc. IGthKdition. Svo. 12j. hoards. 'kfonsof London, 

PRTNTEU FOR MESSRS. LONGMAN, AND CO. 25 

REID (DR.)-ILLUSTRATIONS OF THE THEORY AND PRACTICE OF 

VKNTILATION : wUh Ruimrks on Wiirrain^, Exclunivc Lic'itiiif;, and llic Cnmnimikalioil 
of Sound. By D. B. Rcid, M.D. F.R.S.B. etc. 8vo. with Diiiynims, iiniJ 3::u Eiiirraviiiirs on 
Wood, IGs. cloth. b • Kb 

REPTON.— THE LANDSCAPE GARDENING & LANDSCAPE ARCHITECTURE 

of tlic lute Humphrey Heptoii. Esij.; hcins^ his entire WotUs on tlicsc subjects. A New 
Edition, with an Historical and Scientific Introduction, u systematic Analysis, a bioeraphicRl 
Notice, Notes, iind a copious AIphabetii'Hl Index. By J. C. Loudon, E.L.S., etc. 8vo. with 
u I'ortrait and upwards of f25U Engraving;^, 30j. cloth ; with coloured Plates, 3/. 6s. cloth. 

REYNARD THE FOX ', 

A renowned Apologue of the Middle Age. Reproduced in Rhyme. Embellished throughout 
with Scroll Capituls, in Colours, from Wood-block Letters raiide expressly for this worli, nfter 
Designs of the V2lh and 13tli Centuries. With an Introductiou. by Samuel Naylor, late of 
Queen's College, Oxford. Lurge (.quMre Svo. 18j. cloth. 

RIDDLE-A COMPLETE ENGLISH-LATIN AND LATIN-ENGLISH DIC- 
TIONARY, tiom the best sources, chiedy German. Bj the Rev. J. E. Riddle, M A. 4th 
Edition. Svo. 31*. 6d. cloth. 
•,• Separately— The English-Latin Dictionary, 10». 6d. ; the Latin-English Dictionary, 21(. 

RIDDLE.— A DIAMOND LATIN-ENGLISH DICTIONARY. 

A Guide to the Menuinir, Qu^ilitv, and right Accentuuliou of Latin Classical Words. By 
the Rev. J. E. Riddle, M.A. Royal 32mo.4i. bound. 

RIDDLE. -LETTERS FROM AN ABSENT GODFATHER; 

Or, a CompendiuiD of ReligiouB Instruction for Young Pcrsous. By the Rev. J. E. Riddle, 
M.A. Foolscap Svo. 6». cloth, 

RIDDLE.— ECCLESIASTICAL CHRONOLOGY; 

Or, Annals of the Cliristian Church, from its Foundation to the present Time. Containing a 
View of General Church History, and the Course of SecuUr Events ; the Limits of the Church 
mid its Relations to the Stale; Controversies; Sects and Parties i Rites, Institutions, and 
Discipline ; Ecclesiastical Writers. The whole arranged according to the order of DateK, and 
divided into Seven Periods. To which arc added. Lists of Councils and Popes, Patriarchs, 
and Archbishops of Canterbury. By the Rev. J. E. Riddle, M.A. Svo. 15*. cloth. 

RITCHIE fROBKRT.)— RAILWAYS: THEIR RISE AND PROGRESS, AND 

CONSTnUCTION, with Remarks on Railway Accidents, and Proposals for their prose- 
cution. By Robert Ritchie, E,sq.,F. U.S., S. A., Civil Engineer, Associate of the Institution 
of Civil Engineers, etc, Fcnp. 8vo. with Woodcuts and Uiagrnms, Oa. cloth. 

RIVERS.— THE ROSE AMATEUR'S GUIDE: 

Containing ample Descriptions of »ll the fine leading varieties of Roses, regularly classed in 
their respective Families; their History and mode of Culture. Bv T.Rivera, Jun. Third 
Edition, corrected and improved. Foolscap 8vo. Cs. cloth, 

ROBERTS (GEORGE).— THE LIFE, PROGRESSES, AND REBELLION OF 

JAMES DUKE OF MONMOUTH, to hia Capture and Execution : with a full Account of 
the Bloody Assi/.es, and copious Bioeraphical Notices. By George Roberts, 2 vols, post 
Svo. with Portrait, Maps, and other Illustrations, 2-lj, cloth, 

ROBERTS.— AN ETYMOLOGICAL AND EXPLANATORY DICTIONARY OF 

the TERMS and LANGUAGE of GEOLOGY ; designed for the early Student, and those 
who have not made great progress in the Science. By G. Roberts. Foolscap Svo. 6». cloth. 

ROBINSOM (.TAMES}.-THE WHOLE ART OF CURING, PICKLING, 

and SMOKINU EVERY DESCRIPTION of MEAT and FISH, according to both the 
British and Foreign Modes. To which is appended, a Description of the reciuisite Apparatus 
By James Robinson, Eighteen Years a Practical Curer, Fcp. Svo. [Jugl ready. 

ROBINSON-CREEK AND ENGLISH LEXICON TO THE NEW TESTAMENT. 

By E. Robinson, D 1>., author of " Biblical Researches." Edited, with careful revision 
corrections, etc., by llie Rev. Dr. Bloonificld. Svo, ISs. cloth. ' 

ROGERS.— THE VEGETABLE CULTIVATOR: 

Containing a plain and accurate Description of all the ditferent Species of Culinary Vegetables, 
with the most approved Method of Cultivating them by Natural and Artificial Means, and the 
best Modes of Cooking them; alphabetically arranged. Together with a Description of the 
Physical Herbs in General Use. Also, some Recollections of the Life of Philip Miller, F A.S,, 
Girdener to the Worshipful Coiniian^ of Apothecaries at Chelsea. By John Rogers, author 
of "The Fruit Cultivator.-" 2d Edition. Foolscap Svo. 7s. clolh, 

ROME. -THE HISTORY OF ROME (IN THE CABINET CYCLOP/EDIA). 

2 vols, foolscap Svo. witli Vignette Titles, 1:;». cloth. 

ROSCOE.-LIVES OF EMINENT BRITISH LAWYERS. 

By Henry Roscoc, Esq, Foolscap Svo, with Vignette Title, Ha. cloth. 

26 NEW WOUKS AND NEW LDITIONS 

ROWTON (F.)-THE DEBATER; „ . , 

A Nl-w Theory of the Art of Spenkjii.' Bein? ft Scries of complete Debates, Qaefitions for 
Discussion, ;md Rules ofDc-li.ite. \Vith ample rcfereiu-es to the best sources of intoniui- 
tion upon each particular topic. Fur the use of Schools aiir] Uisuussion Societies, By Irc- 
dericlt Rowloii, Lecturer on Gencriil LUcratutc. [^" ''"^ preii. 

SANDBY (REV. G.)- MESMERISM AND ITS OPPONENTS: 

With a Narrative of Cases. By the- Rev. George Saudby, Jun., Virar of Hixton, antJ Rector 
of Alt Saints with St. Nicholas, South Elmhaui, Suffolk ; Domestic Chaplain to the Rit'ht 
Hon. the Earl of Abergavenny. Foolscap 8yo. 6jt. cloth. 

SANDFORD (REV. J0HN).-PAROCHIAUA, 

or Church, School, and Parish. By the Rev. John Sandford, M.A. Vicar of Duuchurch, 
Chaplain to tlic Lord Bishop of Worcester, Hod. Canon of Worcester, and Rural Dean. 
8vo. with numerous Woodcuts, IGj. cloth. 

SANDFORD.— WOMAN IN HER SOCIAL AND DOMESTIC CHARACTER. 

By Mrs. John Sandford. 6th Edition. Foulsc-ip 8vo. 6». cloth. 

SANDFUflD.— FEMALE IMPROVEMENT. 

By Mrs. John Sandford. 2(1 Edition. Foolscap 8vo. 7». 6rf. cloth. 

SANDHURST COLLEGE MATHEMATICAL COURSE. 

1. ELEMENTS of ARITHMETIC and ALGEBRA. By W. Scott, Esq., A.M. andF.R.A.S. 
Second Mathenialical Professor at the Royal Military College, Sandhurst. 8vo. 16«. bound. 

n. ELEMENTS of GEOMETRY ; consisting of the first Four and Sixth Books of Euclid, cliiefly 
from the Text of Dr. Robert Simson ; with the principal Theorems in Proportion, and a 
Course of Practical Geometry on the Ground ; also. Four Tracts relating to Circles, Planes, 
and Solids, with one on Spherical Geometry. By John Narrien. Professor of Mathematics in 
the Royal Military College, Sandhurst. 8vo, with many Diagrams, lOi. fid. bound. 

3. PLAIN TRIGONOMETRY AND MENSURATION; for the use of the Roval Military 
College, Sandhurst. By W. Scott, Esq. A.M. and F.R.A.S., Second Mathematical Master in 
Institution. Svo. 9a. 6d. bound. 

a. PRACTICAL ASTRONOMY and GEODESY; Including the Projections of the Sphere, 
and Spherical Trigonometry. By John Narrien, F.R.S. and R. A. S. Professor of Mathe- 
matics in the Royiil Military College, Sandhurst, Svo. 145. bound. 

SCHLKIDEN (PROF.)— PRINCIPLES OF SCIENTIFIC BOTANY, 

By M. J. Schlciden, Professor of Botany at Jena. Translated by E. Lankester, M.D. F.L S. 
Svo. with numerous wood engravings. [/« the preat. 

SCOTT.— THE HISTORY OF SCOTLAND. 

By Sir Walter Scott, Bart. New Edition. 2 vols. fcap. Svo. with Vignette Titles, 12». cloth. 

SEAWARD.— SIR EDWARD SEAWARD'S NARRATIVE OF HIS SHIPWRECK, 

and consequent Diseovcrj' of certain Islands in the Caribbean Sea: with a Detail of many 
extraordinary and highly interesting Events in his Life, from 17M to 1/49, as written in his 
own Diarj^. Edited by Miss Jane Porter. 3d Edition, with a New Nautical and Geographical 
Introduction, containing Extracts from a Paper by Mr. C. F. Collett, of the Rojal Navy, 
identifying the Islands described by Sir Edward Seaward. 2 vols, post Svo. 21s. cloth. 

SELECT WORKS OF THE BRITISH POETS: 

From Chaucer to Withers. With Biographical Sketches, by R Southey, LL.D. Medium 
Svo. 3('s. cloth ; or with gilt edges, 31.i. tirf. 

SELECT WORKS OF THE BRITISH POETS: 

With Biographical and Critical Prcf.vcs by Dr. Aikin. A New Edition, with Supplement 
by Lucy Aikin, consisting of Sckctioiis "from the Works of Crabbc, Scott, Coleridge, 
Priiigle, Charlotte Smith, and Mr.i. Barbauld. Medium Svo. 18j. cloth. 
•,• The ppcnVutT feature of these two wor/;» ij, that the Poems included are printed entire, 
■without mutilution or abridsmcnt. 

SERMON ON THE MOUNT (THE), 

I St. Matthew v.vi. vil.] Intended for a Birthday-Present, or Gift-Book for all Seasons. 
PriJited in Gold and Colours, m the Missal Stjle, with Oinamental Borders by Owen Jones, 
Architect, and an Illuminated Frontispiece by \V. Boxall, Esq. A new edition. Foolscap 4to. 
in a rich brocaded silk cover, manufactured expressly, 21s.; or bound in morocco in the 
Missal style, by Hayday, 25». * 

SHAKSPEARE, BY BOWDLER. 

THE FAMILY SHAKSPEARE , in wtiichnothingis added to the Original Text ■ butlhosc 
Words and Expressions arc omitted which cannot with propriety be read nlmi',1 Rv 'i' 
Bowdler, Esq. F.R.S. Seventh Edition, Svo. with30 lUustraliona after Smirke et' MiV 
cloth J with gilt edges, 31.'. (id. ' - • ■ 

*,• A LIBRARY EDITION, without Illustrations, 8 vols. Svo. AI. \-\s. fid. boards 

PRINTED FOR MF.ySRS. LONGMAN, AND CO. 27 

SHELDON (F.)— THE MINSTRELSY OF THE ENGLISH BORDER: 

Beluga CollucttoD of IJiillrids, Amiciit, Rc-modellcd. atui Orih'iiial. foiuidod on well-known 
Border Lc^'cnds. Witb llluutralive Notes. By l-'rederitk Sliuldoii. hqujirc fonlscap 8vo. 

[In the prexi. 

SHELLEY, ETC.— LIVES OF THE MOST EMINENT LITERARY MEN OF 

ITALY, SPAIN and I'ORTUGAL. By Mrs. Sl.elley, Sir D. 13l■c^¥stc^, J. Montgomery, tie- 
3 vols, foolscap Svo. witli Vignette Titles, ISs. elotli. 

SHELLEY.- LIVES OF THE MOST EMINENT FRENCH WRITERS. 

By Mrs. Shelley and others. 2 vols.foolseap Svo. with Vignette Titlet., lis. cloth. 

SHEPHERD {REV. W.)-HOR/E APOSTOLIC/E; 

Or, a Digested Narrative of the Acts, Lives, mid Writings of the Aposlles. By the TLev. 
William Shepherd, li.D. Hector of Maigiret Roding, Essex, and Rural Dean. Ft'p. 8v6. 

[/?* the preit. 
SHORT V/HIST: 

Its Rise, Progress, and Laws; with Observations to make anyone a Whist Player; containing 
also the Laws of Piquet, Cassino. Kcarte, Cribbage, Backgammon. By ftlajor A ■ • ' • •, 
9th Edition. To which are addedj Precepts for Tyros. ByMrs.B** •** Foolscap Svo. 
3s. cloth, gilt edges. 

SMITH (GEORGE). -THE RELIGION OF ANCIENT BRITAIN: 

Or, a SuLciiict Account nf the several Religinua Systems which hiive obtained in this 
Island from the Earliest Times to the Norman Connuest: including an Investigation into 
the Early Progress of Error in the Christian Chmeh, the Introduction of the Gospel into 
Britain, and the Stale of Religion in England till Popery had gained the Asci-ndency. By 
George Smith, F.A.S. Member of the lloyal Asiatic Society, and of the Royal Society 
of Literature, Foolscap, 8vo. 7*. tloth, 

SMITH (GEORGE).— PERILOUS TIMES: 

Or, the Agicssions of Anti-Cliristian Error on Scriptural Christianity: considered in refer- 
eiiee to the Dangers and Duties of Protestants. Bv George Smith, F.A.S. Member of the 
Royal Asiatic Society, and of tlie Royal Society, of Literature. Foolscap Svo. 6j. cloth. 

SMITH (MRS. H.)-THE FEMALE DISCIPLE OF THE FIRST THREE 

CENTURIES OF THE CHRISTIAN ERA: Her Trials and Her Mission. By Mrs, Henrv 
Smith, Foolscap Svo. 6i. cloth. ' 

SMITH.— AN INTRODUCTION TO THE STUDY OF BOTANY. 

By SirJ.E. Smith, late President of the Linnaean Society. 7th Edition, corrected ; in which 
the object of Smith's " Grammar of Botany" is combined with that of the " Introduction " 
By Sir William Jackson Hooker, K.H. LL.D. etc. 8vo. with 36 Steel Plates, 16b. cloth - 
with coloured Plates, 2/.l2s.6d. cloth. 

SMITH -COMPENDIUM OF THE ENGLISH FLORA. 

By Sir J. E. Smith. 2d Edition, with Additions and Corrections. By Sit W J Hooker 
l-Jmo.7J.6rf. cloth. THE SAME IN LATIN. 5th Edition, 12mo. 7a. 6d. " 

SMITH.— THE ENGLISH FLORA, 

By Sir James Edward Smith, M.D. F.R.S.,late President of the Linna;an Society etc 
6 vols. Svo. 3/.12». boards. ' 

CONTENTS : 
Vols. I, to IV. the Flowering Plants and the Ferns, 2/. 85. 
Vol. V. Parti, 12*.— Cryptogamia;comprising | Vol. V, Part 2, 12j.— The Funfiri— completino 
the Mosses, Hepalicae, Lichens, Chara- the work, bv Sir VV. J. Hooker, and the 

ceio, and Algie. Hy Sir VV, J. Hooker, I Rev. M.J, Berkeley, F.L.S. etc, 

SMITH (SYDNEY).- SERMONS PREACHED AT ST. PAUL'S CATHE- 
DRAL, The Foundling Hospital, and several Churches in Loudon; together with others 
addressed to a Country Ccngrcgation, By the late Rev. Sydney Smith, Canon Residentiary 
Of St. Paul's Cathedral. Svo. VJ.t. cloth. 

SMITH.— THE WORKS OF THE REV. SYDNEY SMITH. 

3d Edition. 3 vols.Svo. with Portrait, 36». cloth. 
•,• Thii coUection congistt of the jluthur*! contributioni to the " Edinburgh Review," 
Peter Ptamlnt/'s ^^ Letters an the Catholics," and other iiiisi-ellaneoui trurha; to which are 
now first added— **^ Three Letters on Uai/wa^t;" '' Lftler to Mr. Horner;" " Two Letters on 
American Debts;" " A Prayer;'* '* Changes" (never before published) j «'^ Fragment on 
the Irish Rumnn-CathoHc Church." 

SOPHOCLES, BY LiNWOOD. 

SOPHOCLIS JRAGCKDI*: SUPERSTITES. Rccensuit, et brevi adnotatione instruxit 
Guliclinus Linwood, A.M. .^dis CLristi apud Oxunienses Alumnus. Svo. I6f, cloth. 

28 NEW wouks and new editions 

SOUTHRY (ROBERT).— THE LATE MR. SOUTHEY'S COMMON- 
PLACE BOOK; comprising lits RcidingH a.itl Colleclious in History, Bio^rd|.liy, Mam. crs 
niid Literature, Voynijes and Travels, L'tc-cte.; syaiemiiticully arranged. 

' ^ " • [/)/ the iiress. 

SOUTHEY fROBERT),— SOUTHEY'S LIFE OF WESLEY. 

A New Edition. Edited by his Son, the Rev. Cullibert C. t>outhey. 8vo. [^« i'le prcfs. 

SOUTHEY, ETC.— LIVES OF THE BRITISH ADMIRALS; 

With an Introductory View of li.e N.ival lii.story of Hni,'lan(l. by R. Southcy, Esq. and 
R. Ilell,Es<i. 5 vols, foolscap 8vo., with Vignette Titles, 1/. 10*. cloth. 

SOUTHEY (ROBERT).— OLIVER NEWMAN; 

A Ntw Enifland Tiile (unfinished); with other Poetical Remains. By the late Robert 
Southey. Koolscnp 8vo. uniform with the Ten Vohime Kdition of Mr. bouthey's Poetical 
Works, 55. cloth. 

SOUTHEY'S (ROBERT) COMPLETE POETICAL WORKS: 

Containiuir alltlie Author's last Introductions iind Notes. Complete in one volume, medium 
8vo. with Portrait and View of tlie I'oet's Residence at Keswick, uniform with Byron's Poems 
and Thomas Moore's Poetical Works, 21s.; or 42s. bound in morocco, by Huydny. 
Also, an Edition in 10 vols, foolscap 8vo. with Portrait and 19 Plates, 2/. 10a. j morocco, 4/. 10s. 

The following Works separately: — 
JOAN OF ARC - - Fcap.Svo. 5s. cloth. 1 THALABA - - - Feap.Svo. 5». elotli. 

M\DOC „ 5s. ,, BALLADS, etc. 2 vols. ,, 10s. ,, 

CURSE OF KKHAMA ,, 5s. ,, | KODERICK - - - - ,, 5j. ,, 

SPIRIT OF THE WOODS (THE). 

By the author of "The Moral of l-lowers." 2d Edition. Royal 8vo. with 23 beautifully 
coloured Engravings of the Forest Trees of Great Britain, 1/. lis. 6d. cloth. 

SFOONER.— A TREATISE ON THE STRUCTURE, FUNCTIONS, AND 

DISEASES of the FOOT and LEG of the HORSE; lomprehcuding the drnparative Anatomy 
of these Parts in other Animals; emhracing the subject of Shoeini,' and the proper Treatment 
of the Font; with the Rationale and Effects of various Important Operations, aud the best 
Methods of perlormin^ tlieni. By W.C. Spooncr, M.U.V.C. lij.io. 7^- Urf. cloth. 

STABLE TALK AND TABLE TALK: OR, SPECTACLES FOR YOUNG 

SPORTSMEN. By Harry Hieovcr. 8vo. 12s. cloth. 
*,• A Sccot/d folume, with Portruit of the Author and complete Judex to both vi/nmes, 
is tie/iTli/ Tca-iy, 

STEBBING (REV. H.)— THE HISTORY OF THE CHURCH OF CHRIST, 

From the l>iet of AngHburg, 1530, to the Kigliteenth CenUirv: origiuiUv designed as a Con- 
tiiiiiation of Milner'b " History of the Church of Christ." By the llcv. Henry Siebbuig, 
D.D. 3 vols. 8vo. 36s. cloth. 

STEBBING.— THE HISTORY OF THE CHRISTIAN CHURCH, 

From Its Foundation to A.D. l-ly2. By the Rtv H. Steliljing, M..\., etc. 2 vols, fools tap Svo. 
with Vignette Titles. 12s. cloth. 

STEBBING.— THE HISTORY OF THE REFORMATION. 

By the Rev. H. Slebbing. 2 vols, foolscap Svo. with Vignette Titles, 12s. clot li. 

STEEL'S SHIPMASTER'S ASSISTANT. 

Compiled for the use of Merchants, Owners and Masters of Ships, Officers of Customs, and 
all Persons connected with Shippinu; or (Commerce ; cnritaininff ihc Law and Local Regula- 
tions aiTecting the Ownerhhip, Charge, and Management of Ships and their Carg-ocs; 
together with Notices of other Matters, and all necessary Information for Alarlners. New 
Edition, rewritten throuy;hout. Edited by Grahim Willniore, Esq. M.A Rarrisiei--«t-Law ; 
the Cuiloms and Shipping Department l)y Gcorj;e Clements, of the Cuslnms, London! 
tiirapilcr of "The Customs Guide;" The Exchanges, etc. and Naval Bnok-keepinL'. bv 
William Tate, author of "The Modern Cambist." Svo. 28s. cloth; 20s. bound. 

STEPlHiNS.-A MANUAL OF BRITISH COLEOPTERA : 

Or, BKETLKS : containing a Description of all the Species of Beetles hitherto ascertained to 
inhabit Great Britain and Ireland, etc. With a complete Index of the Genera By J. F 
Stephens, P.L.S., author of " Illustrations of Entomology." Post Svo. 14t. cloth. 

STRONG— GREECE AS A KINGDOM: 

A Statistical Description of that Country- Its Laws, Commerce, Resources, Public Tiistitutions 
Armv, Navy, etc, -from the Arrival of King Otho, in 1833, down to the nrtseiit Ihhp Frnm' 
Oftnn.lDu.'aments and Authentic Sources, "v Frederick Strong, Esq., Cons I uhnL for 
the Kingdoms of Bavaria and Hanover. Svo. 15s. cloth. ' ' ""^"' " -^^'ncns lor 

SUNDAY LIBRARY: 

Containing nearly one hundred Sermons liy eminent Divines. With Notes PfP I.v »1.p 
Rev. T.F. Dihdin.D.D. fi vols, foolscap 8vo. with 6 Portraits, 30s. cloth : nciitfv halV ho.ln,! 
in morocco, with gilt edes, 2/. 12s. 6rf. ' naii-uounn 

SWAINSON.-A PRELIMINARY DISCOURSE ON THE STUDY OF NATURAL 
HlbTORY. By \V. dwHiHaon, lisq. fooUiiip 8vo. Gs. clotli. 

By the same Author, 

A TREATISE ON THE NATURAL HIS- 
TORY & CLA&SII-TCaTION of ANIMALS. 
Ftap. Sv'o. 6s. 

NATUltAL HISTORY AND CLASSIFICA- 
TION OV QUAURUPEDS. Fcap. 8vo. 6*. 

NATURAL HISTORY AND CLASSIFICA- 
TION OF BIRDS. 2 vi.ls. ftap. 8vo. 123. 

HAIMTS AND IN&TINCT OF ANIMALS. 
Fctip. 8vo. Gs. 

ANIMALS IN MENAGERIES. Fcnp.Svo. Gs. 

NATURAL HISTORY ETC. OF FISH, 
AMPHIBIA, & REPTILES. 2 voU. fcap. 
8vo. 12». 

A TREATISE ON MALACOLOGY j Or, the 
Natural Classification uf Shells and bhell- 
Fish. Fcap. Svn. Gn, 

HISTORY AND NATURAL ARRANGE- 
MENT OK INSECTS. F<.,ip. Svo. (i». 

A TREATISE ON TAXIDEliMY; with the 
Eiogrfipliy of Zoologists, and Noticea of 
their Works. Feap. 8¥0. tis. 

SWITZERLAND.— THE HISTORY OF SWITZERLAND, 

Foolscap Svo. with Viguette Title, Gs. cloth. 

TATE.-HORATIUS RESTITUTUS; 

Or, the Books of Horace arraiiy;cd in Chronological Order, according to the Scheme of Dr. 
Bentley, from the Text of Uesner, corrected and improved. With a Preliminary Disfiertatii'n, 
very much enlarged, on the Chronology of the Works, on the Localities, and on the Life 
and Chnracter of that Poet. By James Tate, M.A. Second edition^ to whiehie novr added, 
an original Treatise on the Metres of Horace. Svo. 12s. cloth. 

TATE —THE CONTINUOUS HISTORY OF THE LIFE AND WRITINGS OF 

ST. P.\UL, on the basis of the Acts ; with Intercalary Matter of Sacred Narrative, yupplied 
from the Epistles, and elucidated in occasional Dissertutinns : with the HorLP Paulinte of 
Dr. Paley, in a more correct edition, subjoined, iiy James Tate, M.A., Canon Residentiary 
of St. Paul's. Svo. Willi Map, 13s. cloth. 

TAYLER (REV. CHARLES B.>-MARCARET; 

Or, the Pe^rl. By the Rev. Charles B.Tayler, M.A. Rector of St. Peter's, Chester, author 
of " Lady Mary; or. Not of the World;" etc. 2d Edition. Foolscap Svo. 65. cloth. 

TAYLER (REV, CHARLES B.)- LADY MARY; OR, NOT OF THE WORLD. 

By the Rev. Charles B. Taylcr, Rector of St. Peter'y, Chester ; amhorof *' Margaret, or tlie 
Pearl,'' etc. Foolscap Svo, 6s. 6d. cloth. 

TAYLER (REV. CHARLES B.)— TRACTARIANISiVl NOT OF COD. 

Sermons. By the Rev C B. T.iyler. Rcctoi of St Peter's, and Eveinng Lecturer at St. 
Mary's, Cheater; author of ♦' LadyMary ; or, Not of the World," etc. Fcap. Svo. 6s. cloth. 

TAYLER (REV. CHARLES B.)-DORA WELDER : 

A Story of Alsace. By Meta S.inder. A Translation. Edited by the Rev. C. B. Tayler, 
author of "Margaret; or, the Pearl," etc. Fcap. Svo,, with two Illustrations, Js. cloth. 

TAYLOR (JEREMY) 
With the References vi 

-BISHOP JEREMY TAYLOR'S WORKS, 
tied. A New and thoroughly revised Edition. 
*,* ThU {fork is in thtr hand» oj a competent Editor at Oxford, and will be piiblimlied in 
volumes^ price lOs. 6rf. each ; to be completed in 12 viilnwea, ctich o/GOU closeh/ printed pa^fs, 
publijfhed at intervnh of two months. The first volume will probably be publiihed in Jatm- 
ary 184/. Subscribers' names receined by the I'ropiietors, and all Booksellers. 

TAYLOR.— THE STATESMAN. 

By HenryTaylor, Esq., author of "Philip Van Artevelde." 

12mo. 6). 6(f . boards . 

THTRLWALL.~THE HISTORY OF GREECE. 

By the Right Rev. the Lord Bishop of St. David's. A new Edition, revised ; with Notes. 
Vols, I. and II. demy Svo. with Maps, 12s. each cloth. To be completed in S volumes. 

[Vol. HI. is in the press. 
•»• Also, an Edition in 8 vols. fcap. Svo. with Vignette Tales, V. Ss. cloth. 

THOMSON'S SEASONS. 

Edited by Bolton Corney, Esq, Illustrated with Seventy-seven Designs drawn on Wood by 
the Members of the Etching Club. Engraved by Thompson and other eminent Engravers. 
Square crown Svo. uniform with "Goldsmith's Poems,'' 21s, cloih ; in morocco, Dy Hay- 
day, 36s. 

THOMSON.— AN ELEMENTARY TREATISE ON ALGEBRA, 

Theoretical and Practical. By James Thomson, LL.D. Professor of Malheniaticb in the 
University of Glasgow. 2d Edition. 12mu. os. cloth. 

30 NRW WORKS AND NEW EDITI-ONS 

THOMSON JOnN).-TABLES OF INTEREST, ^ ^ ,, ^ -r^^.. „ „ 

At Three, Four. Four-an.l-a-luUf, mui Five j.cr Cent , from One Pound to Ten Thousai. I, 
nod from One to Tl.rcL' Hundred and Sixty-live Diivs. in a regular progrcsMum ot »"'?i'c 
D.tvs; with Interest at all the ..l.nve Rates, from One to Twelve Months. "'"^JfO"' "'"^ '" 
Ten Years. Also. Tables sliLWing the Kx. Iiajiye on Bills, ete. etc. elt. By John rhoinson, 
Aeeountantin Edinburgh, l^mo^Ss. bound. 

THOMSON. -THE DOMESTIC MANAGEMENT OF THE SICK ROOM, 

Necessary, in Aid of Medical Treatment, for the Cure of Diseases. By Anthony Todd 
Thomson, M.D. F.L.B. etc. '2d Edition. Post 8vo. 10s. Gd. cloth. 

TOMLINE (BISHOP).— AN INTRODUCTION TO THE STUDY OF THE BI3LE: 

Being the First Volume of the Elements ot Ciiriatiun Theology- ; containinn Proofs of the 
Autljciitieity and Ins|)iration of the Huly Scri[)lurL'S ; a bumm.iry of the History of the Jews; 
Hn Aceount..f the Jewish Setts ; and a brief Sialeme..t ot the Contents of the several IJooks 
of the Old Testament. By the late George Toinlin, D.U.F.R.S.Lord Bishop of Winchester. 
2tlth Edition. Foolscap 8vo. 5s. 6d, eloth. 

TOMLINE (BISHOP).— ELEMENTS OF CHRISTIAN THEOLOGY; 

Cuntaining Proofs of the Authenticity and Inspiration of the Holy Scriptures ; a Summary of 
the History of the Jews; a Brief Slatemeiit of the Contents of tne several Books of the Old 
and New Testaments ; a Short Account T)f the English Translations of the Bjblc, and of the 
Liturgv of the Church of England ; and a Scriptnrtil Exposition of the Thirty-Nnic Articles 
of Religion. By George Toinline, D.U. F.R.S.. Lord Bishop of Winchester. 1-ith Edition. 
With Auditional Notes, and a Summarv of Ecclesiastical Hislorv. By Henry Stebbing, D.D., 
author of " A History of the Church of Christ, from the Confession of Augsburg," etc. etc. 
2 vols.Svo. 21*. cloth. 

TOMLINS — A POPULAR LAW DICTIONARY; 

Familiarly explaining the Terms and Nature of English Law; adapted to the comprehension of 
Persons tiot edueatedfor the Legal Profession, ajid alTording Information peculiarly useful to 
Magistrates.aierchants.ParochialOrticers, and others. By Thomab EdlyueTomlins, Attorney 
ana Solicitor. Post Svo. ISs. cloth. 

The ichole work has been revised by a Barrister, 

TOOKE.— A HISTORY OF PRICES: 

With reference to the Causes of their principal Variations, from 1792 to the Present Time. 
Preceded by a Sketch of the History of the Corn Trade in the last Two Centuries. By 
Thomas Tooke, Esq. F.R.S. 3 vols. Svo. 2/. 8j. cloth, 

%• Separately, Vols. I. and II. 36s.; Vol. III. 12*. 
TOWNSEND (CHARLES).— THE LIVES OF TWELVE EMINENT JUDGES. 

OF THE PUESENT CENTURV. Bv W. Charles TownscTid. Esq A M. Ucconler uf M;.c- 
cleshcld , author of " Memoirs of the House ot Commons." 2 vulh. Svo. [/« the press. 

THOLLOPE {REV. "W.)— ANALECTA THEOLOCICA: 

A Critical, Pliilological, i.nd Exegeliial Comnienlury on !he New Testament, adapted to 
the GrcekText ; compiled and digested from the most approved sources, British and Foreign, 
and so arranged as to exhibit the comparative weight of the different Opinions on Disputed 
Texts. By the Rev. William Trollope, M.A. of Pembroke College, Cambridge, and formerly 
one of the Masters of Christ's Hospital. New Edition. 2 vols.Svo. If. 12s. cloth. 

TURNER.— THE SACRED HISTORY OF THE WORLD, 

Philosophically considered. By S.Turner, F.S.A. R.A.S.L. New Edit. 3 vols. 8vo. 42a. bds. 

TURNER (SHARON).— RICHARD III.: 

A Poem. Bv Sharon Turner, Esq., F.S A. and R.A.S.L., author of "The Historv of the 
Anglo-Saxons," "The Sacred llistury of the World," etc. Foolscap 8vo. 7i.firf. cloth. 

TURNER.— THE HISTORY OF ENGLAND, 

From the Earliest Period to the Death of Elizabeth. By SharonTuniPr, Esq. F. A. S. R.A.S.L. 
New Edilion. 12 vols. 8vo. 8/. 3«. cloth. 

•»• Or in Jour separate portions, as follows: — 
THE HISTORY of the ANCLO-SAXONS ; Gth Edilion. 3 vols. Svo. £/. 5». 
THE HISTORY of ENGLAND during the MIDDLE AGES; 3d Edition. 5 vols. Svo 3^ 
THE HISTORY of the REIGN of HENRY VIII.; 3d Edition. 2 vols. Svo. 2Gs. 
THE REIGNS of EDWARD VI., MARY, and ELIZABETH; 3d Edition 2 vuls. Svo. 32«. 

TURNER— A TREATISE ON THE FOOT OF THE HORSE, 

And a New Svfitem of Shoeing, by One-sided Nailing; and on tlie Nature, Oricin, and 
Svmptoms of the Navienlftr Joint Lameness, with Preventive and Curative Treatment Bj 
James Turner, M.R.V.C. Royal Svo. 7s. 6rf. boards. 

PRTNTED lOR MESSRS. LONGMAN, AND CO. 31 

TUUTON'S CDR.) MANUAL OF THE LAND AND FRESHWATER SHELLS OF 

THK BRITISH ISLANDS. A new E.lilion, (horoughlv rcviso.l, and with loiisideral.le 
•Additions. By John PMwjiriJ Hrny, Kt-L-pcr of the ZooloLncarColIcLlioii in the British Museuui . 
Post Sva. with Woodcuts, and U coloured Plates, 15a. cloth. 

TVVISS {DR. T.)-THE OREGON QUESTION EXAMINED, 

III respect to Facts and the Lnw of Nntioiis. Bv Travtrs Twiss, D.C L. F.Tl.S. Professor 
of Political Econoiuyin the University of Oxford, and A<ivocalc at Doctors' Commons. 8vo. 
with Msjis of North AmericH and the Oregon Territory (with the Columbian River on an 
enlarged scale, reduced from an American Government Survey) , 12s. cloth. 

TYTLER (PROFESSOR). — PROFESSOR TYTLER'S ELEMENTS OF 

GENERAL HISTORY, Ancient and Modern, with Dr. Nnrcs' Continuation. A new Edition, 

revised and continued to the Uciith of William IV. Svo. with 7 Mnps. Un. cloth. 

URE.— DICTIONARY OF ARTS, MANUFACTURES, AND MINES; 

Contninintr a clear Exposition of their Principles and Practice. By Andrew Ure, M.D. 
F.R.S. MXi.S.M.A.S. Lond.; M.Acad. N.S. Philad. ; S. Ph.Soc.N. Germ. Hanov. ; Mullli. 
etc. etc. Third Edition, corrected. Svo. with 12-H> Woodcuts, 50s. clotb. 
By the same Author, 
SUPPLEMENTOF RECENT IMPROVEMENTS. 2dEdUion. Svo. 143. cloth. 
VON ORLICH (CAPT.)-TRAVELS IN INDIA, - 

And the adjacent Countries, in 1842 and 1843. By C-ipt. Leopold Von Orlicb. Translated 
from the German by H. Evans Lloyd, Esq, 2 vols. 8vo. with coloured Frontispieces, and 
numerous illustrations on Wood, 25». cloth. 

WALFORD (J. E.)— THE LAWS OF THE CUSTOMS, 

Compiled by Direction of the Lords Commissioners of Her Majesty's Treasury, and pub- 
lished under the Sanction of the Commissionera of Her Majesty's Customs ; with Notes and 
a General Index. Edited hy J.G. Walford, Esq. Solicitor for the Customs. Printed for Her 
Majesty's Stationery Oftice, and published by Authority. 8vo. lOj. Grf. cloth. 

WALKER (GEO.)-CHESS STUDIES: 

Comprising' 1000 Games actually Played during the last Half Century ; presenting a unique 
Collection of Classical and Brilliant Specimens of Chess Skill in every stage oftlie Game, 
and forming an Encyclopaedia of Reference. By George Walker. Medium Svo. 10a. 6d. sewed. 

WATERTON'.— ESSAYS ON NATURAL HISTORY, 

Chiefly Ornitholog-y. By Charles Watcrton, Esq., autlior of "Wandering-s in South 
America." With an Autobiography of the Author, and a View of Walton Hall. New Edition, 
foolscap Svo. Ss. cloth. 

SECOND SERIES. With Continuation of Mr Waterton's Autobioirraphy. New Edition, fcnp. 
Svo. with Viijnette by T. Creswick, A.R.A. Gs.Od. cloth. 

WATTS fA.A.)~LYRICS OF THE HEART, 

With other Poems. By Alaric A. Watts. Illustrated by 40 highly-finished Line Engravings, 
from the Ucsiijns of many of the eminent modern Painters, by the best Enifravers of the age. 
S<[uare crown Svo. printed and embellished uniformly with Rogers's " llaly" and *' Poems," 
31». Crf. boards ; or proof impressions, G'da. boards ; proofs before letters, on 4to. colombicr, 
India paper (only 50 copies printed), price 5/. 5*. lAt Eaiter. 

WEBSTER.— AN ENCYCLOPytDIA OF DOMESTIC ECONOMY ; 

Comprising such subjects as are most immediately connected with Housekeeping; as, 
The Construction of Domestic Edifices, with the modes of WarmiuL'. VentilatinLS and 
Lighting them— A description of the various articles of Furniture, with the nature of their 
Materials- Duties of Servants— A general account of the Animal and Vegetable Snlistances 
used as Food, and the methods of preserving and preparing them by Cooking— Making 
Bread— The Chemical Nature and the Preparation of all kinds of Fermented Liipmrs used 
as Beverage — Materials employed in Dress and the Toilet— Business of the Laundry - 
Description of the various Wheel Carnaees— Preservation of Health-Domestic Medicire, 
etc. etc. etc. By Thomas Webster, F.G.S., etc.; assisted by the late Mrs. Parkes, author 
of "Domestic Duties." Svo. with nearly lUOU Woodcuts, 50j- cloth. 

WARDLA W.-DISCOUR5ES ON THE PRINCIPAL POINTS OF THE SOCINIAN 

CONTROVERSY— the Unity of God, and the Trinity of Persons in the Godhead— the Supreme 
Diviruly of Jesus Christ— the Doctrine of the Atonement - the Christian Character, etc. 
By Ralph Wjrdlaw, D.D. 5th Edition. Svo. 15». clotli. 

WEIL (DR.)— THE BIBLE, THE KORAN, AND THE TALMUD; 

Or, Biblical Legends of the Mussulmans, compiled from Ar.ibic Souri'es. and compared 

with Jewish TrnditiouN. By Dr. G. Weil. Libr-.nan of the University of Heidelberg, etc. 

Translated from the German, with occasional Notes. Post 8vo. la. Gd. cloth. 

'*// has been ihc nhn of th" lenTrii'd (tiiihor of this curious huok to collect the mott estenncd 

of AJfi/ioini-d'ui l''ffends,rts given in the Koran or Arabic HISS., that we may ascertain to what 

ej'trnt our Scripture nnrrativet have been corrupted by hitman invcnttovs, and knoie on what 

foandatiou the faith of Mahomediinism is built up. For giving «» authentic notion of 

Mahoini'dnn bchvf. Dr. iVeil'a volume, from its ciinwctedatid simple form, may be made more 

useful tlinn n/it/ "thcr, not ea-ceptlng even the A'fir«//."— Britannia. 

32 NEW WOHKS, ETC. PRINTED FOR LONGMAN AND CO. 

WELSFORD (HENRY).— ON THE ORIGIN AND RAMIFICATIONS OF THE 

?;NGL[SirLANGU/\GE; pretcrfed liy an rn.,uirv into the Primitive Seats. Eiirly Migrations, 
ttuti Filial SL'EllemciitB, of the principal Europeaii Nations. By Henry UV-lsford. 8vo. 10s, 6rf. 

WESTWOOD (J. O).— AN INTRODUCTION TO THE MODERN CLASSIFI- 
CATION OK INSKCTS ; foiiiidi-d on the Natural Habits and compoundini; Oriranisalioii of 
fht different Families. By J. U. Westwood, F. L. S. etc. etc. etc. 3 vols. 8vo. with numerous 
Illustrations, -21. 7b. cloth. 

WHITLEY (DR. JOHN).— THE LIFE EVERLASTING: 

In whieh are considered tl.c Intermediate Life, the NewJJody and the New World, tlie Man 
in Heaven, Angels, the Final Consummate Life. By John Whitley, D.D. Rector of Baliy- 
mnekey, and Chancellor of Killaloe, 8vo. 9j. cloth. 

WHITLEY (NICHOLAS).— THE APPLICATION OF CEOLOCY TO AGRICUL- 
TURE, and to the Improvement and Valufitioii of L:ind ; with the Nature and Properties of 
Soils, and the Principles of Cultivation. By Nicholas Whitley, Laiid-Siirvcyor. 8vo. /n, Gd. 

WIGAN (DR. A. L;— THE DUALITY OF THE MIND, 

Proved by the Structure, Functions, and Disenses of the Brain, and by the Phenomena 
of Mental Deranifemcnt ; and shewn to be essential to Moral Respousibility. By A. L, 
Wigan. M.D. Svo. 12j. cloth. 

WILBERFORCE fW.) — A PRACTICAL VIEW OF THE PREVAILING 

RELIGIOUS SYSTEMS OF PROFESSED CHRISTIANS, in the Hijrher and Middle 
Classes in this Country, contrasted with Real Christianity By William Wilberforce, Esq. 
M.P. for the County of York, New Editions. Svo. S*. hoards. 12mo. As. 6d. cloth. 

WILKINSON.— THE ENGINES OF WAR, ETC. 

Being; a History of Ancient and Modern Projectile Instruments and Engines of Warfare and 
Sporting-; including tlie Manufacture of Fire Arms, the History and Manufacture of Gun- 
powder, of Swords, and of the cause of the Damascus Figure in S«Ord Blades, with some 
Obsci-vations on Bronze : to whiih are added, Remarks on sonic Peculiarities of Iron, and on 
the extraordinary Effect produced by the Action of Sea Water on Cast Iron ; with Details of 
the various miscellaneous Experimcnta. By II. Wilkinson, M.R.A.S. Svo. 9*. cloth. 

WILLIS (NP.>-DASKES AT LIFE WITH A FREE PENCIL, 

ByN.P, Willis, Esq., author of '■ PenciUiu^s by the Way," " Inklings of Adventure," etc. 
Svols. post Svo. 31s. GeT. boards, 

WILLOUGHBY (LADY)-A DIARY. 

Purporting to be by the LADY WILLOUGHBY of the Reign of Charles I., embracing some 
Passages of her Doniesiic History from 1635 to 1648. 3d edition. Square foolscap Svo. 
S^. boards , or 18s. bound in morocco {old style.) 

*,* Thh vijlmne is printed and bound in the style of the period to uhich The Diary rejers. 

WINTER (J. W.)— THE HORSE IN HEALTH AND DISEASE: 

Or, Suggestions on his Natural and General History, Varieties, Conformation, Paces, Age, 

Soundness, Stabling, Condition, Training, and Shoeini^. With a Digest of Veterinary 

Practice. By James W. Winter, M.R.C.V.S.L. Svo. lOa. Crf. cloth. 

" Mr. Winter is tntn^trr of hta sithject, and hence tDritrs leilh force and distinctness. He is 

thoroughly coi^nisant of all the varieties of the horse,— of the best tnode» of breeding, of all 

forms of disease, and of the most jttdici'nis modes of treatment. Oi< these topics and various 

hiiidred ones he diseoursps in this elaborite treatise leith srent ttbility^ ff'i'ing the results of 

his erilayg-ed knoiclcdge nvd ejperience in a pleasing and intelligible nianurr ]'r-tn th' 

popular style of the book, and the great amount of information it contains, it'vian be read 

with pi oj! I by et-erif one who is mCereated xn the judicious treatment of the horse in ^health 

and rfia--«ire."'— Briliinnia. 

ZOOLOGY OF THE VOYAGE OF H M.SS- EREBUS AND TERROR, 

Under tlie Command of Capt. Sir James Clark Rosa, R.N. F.R.S. riuring the -vcarslSSI 
40,41,42,-13. Puhlished by Authority of ihn Lords Commissioners of the Adiniraltv EditeJ 
by John Richardson, M.D. F.R.S. etc.; and John Edward Gray, Esq, F.R.S. Parts'l to XI 
Royal 4to. with numerous coloured and plain Plates, lOir. each, sewed. 

*,* To be completed in about ^5 parts. 

ZUMPT (PROF.)— A GRAMMAR OF THE LATIN LANGUAGE. 

By C. G. Zumpt, Ph. D. Piofessor in th^ University, and Member of the Royal Academy of 
Berlin. Traiialalcd from the 'Jth Edition of the ong.nal.^nd adapted to the use of Enelish 
Students, Wr*1.<^onhard Schmitz. Ph. D, Rector o. the High School of Edinburgh Vith 
numerous AHWtions and Corrections by the Author. Svo. Us. cloth. ^ ' 

I. i6. 

EsDAiLE ON Mesmerism London 

Tide: Mesmerism in India, | and its | practical applicai 
surgery | and medicine. | By | James Esdaile, M.D. | C 
sistant surgeon, H.C.S. Bengal. | [ . . . ] | London: ] P 
for I Lonoman, Brown, Green, and Longmans, ! Pater 
Row. I 1846. 

Collatiun: 12°. A*, a*, B-TS; xxxii, 287 [288] pp., 32 pp. 

Contenh: Am half-title; Aib printer's note; hza title; A26 blank; K^a 
Rev. James Esdaile, D.D.' dated Hooghly, Feb. 1st, 1846; h%b blank; A4 
X^ri-anh laa. ix xxl Editors Preface, signed David Esdaile; asaasft (pp. : 
'Mesmeric Vacts'; a(ifi-8(j (pp. xxvii-xxxi) Conlcnts; aS^ blank; Bia-S8l 
272) text; Tia-8a (pp. 273-287) appendix; T8i; printer's note; pp. 1-32 2 

Note: Although Esdaile had issued reports in the Indian Journal of Meo 
Physical Sciences, this is his first formal leport. It was published in Ji 
and thus coincided closely with the appearance of Elliotson's Harveian 
Esdaile does not heie use the term 'aniesthesia.' The book was several I 
printed. An American edition with text unchanged was brought out 
ford. Conn. (Silas Anthus and Son, xxvi,[27l-2rjg pp.) in 1847 and again 
Much rarer is a volume whicli be Inul primed at Perth in 1852 imder I 
The Inlrodiiclion of nic\nuriun, as an ana-slliclic and cnralive agent, 
h<)\liiliih <ij India (Osier catalogue No. 1388). 

■ar.ll 

Accession no. 
Author 

Esdaile, J, 

Mesmerism in 
India, 

Call no. 

j:'!i 

■■ill* 

S'"l
