Essays in Idleness (Tsurezuregusa) (Yoshida Kenko (trans. G. B. Sansom), 1911)
Public domain. Sourced from Internet Archive: scan of the 1911 Transactions of the Asiatic Society of Japan (https://archive.org/details/in.ernet.dli.2015.69047). The first English translation of Kenko's 14th-century meditations.
Hosted by the Tower of Babel library, antarctic-labs.com.

==============================================================================

THE


TSUREDZURE GUSA

OF

YOSHIDA NO KANEYOSHI.


BEING THE

MEDITATIONS OF A RECLUSE IN THE
14th CENTURY.

Translated, with Notes,

by

G B. SANSOM.

(of H. B. M Consular Service in Japan.)

with an Appendix by PROFESSOR M. ANEZAKI on Religious Conditions
in Japan in the XIV Century.


1911 .


OFFICERS OF THE SOCIETY,

1911 .


, Vice Presidents.-


President . —

H. E. Sir Claude MacDonald, G.C.M.G., G.C.V.O., K.C.B.

{ Rev. Clay MacCauley.

R. J. Kirby, Esq.

Corresponding Secretary . — Montgomery Schuyler, Esq.

(Rev. Charles F. Sweet.

Recording Secretaries . — { „ w

6 \W. B. Mason, Esq.

Treasurer. — Prof. J. T. Swift.

Librarian. — Rev. Prof. Arthur Lloyd.


MEMBERS OF COUNCIL.


Prof. M. Anesaki.

Rev. J. Dahlmann, S.J.
Galen M. Fisher, Esq.

J. McD. Gardiner, Esq.
Rev. D. C. Greene, D.D.


J. C. Hall, Esq., I.S.O.
Ven. A. F. King.

Rev. E. R. Miller.

Prof. F. P. Purvis.

Rev. H. St. G. Tucker


CORRIGENDA,


Page 23, line 8 For higher read hither,

„ 26, Notes, 1 . 7 „ purification read purification

„ 49, L I „ hawks read hawk .

„ 68, Notes, 1 . I and 2 „ refer to No. 104, on preceding page.

„ 78, No. 126, 1 . 1 For once read one,

„ 79,1. 15 heart read hear.

„ „ I.19 „ absented read observe.

„ „ Notes, 1.2 „ king read bring.

„ 97, 1. 3 from bottom „ therefore read therefor.

„ 1 13, 1 . 3 Bel., and read, “ to throw away That is the

way to lose lhat and not to gain this?

„ 1 16, No. I93, 1 . 1 For pidge read judge.

„ 124, 1. 6 „ in read is.

„ 129, Notes, 1 . 6 „ God read Go.

„ 13 1, 1 . 6 After thought insert they .

„ 133, 1 . 2 from bottom For Grert read Great.

„ 139, Notes, 1 . I „ allutions read allusions.

„ 140, 1. 2 from bottom „ becomes read became.

on page 78, insert the following passage : —

124. A fox will bite people. In the Ilorikawa Dono an attendant
lying asleep had his leg bitten by a fox. Once at the Ninnaji
three foxes flew at and bit a priest who was passing^ at night in
front of the main temple. He drew his sword ana in warding
them off stabbed two of the foxes. One he stabbed to death,
and two escaped. The priest was bitten in several places, but
was not dangerously hurt.


INTRODUCTORY.


The miscellany here translated, which goes by the name of
the Tsuredzure Gusa — the nearest equivalent is perhaps * Idle
Jottings/ — is the work of one Kaneyoshi, a court official irt
the service of vaiious Imperial masters at the beginning of the
14th century.

Materials* for his biography are scanty, and not very
reliable, but the following brief sketch of his career is no doubt
substantially correct.

Born in 1283, he came of the ancient family of Urabe
(the Diviners) and, in the genealogical tables which are the
delight of the old commentators, his descent is traced back
through the Regent Kamatari to the deity Kogane-no-Mikoto.
His father, Kaneaki, was at the time of Kaneyoshi’s birth
guaidian of an Imperial shrine at Yoshida, a suburb of Kioto;
so that he is known as Yoshida no Kaneyoshi. He became
a court official as a young man, and is mentioned, with his two
brothers, as having been promoted to the lower grade of the
sixth rank for services in compiling an anthology of verse for
the Emperor GoUda. He was at this time made Samano
Snke> / gj, “ Vice Master of the Horse, of the Left/*
The cloistered Emperor Go Uda appears to have regarded him
with special favour, and he was soon nrde Sa/i)de no Sukcf[
Second-in-Conimand of the Left Guaids, a nominally military
post. IJis powers with bow and arrow are mentioned in the

* He is mentioned in the Dai Nihon Shi, the Yentai-reki, and other
records, and there is a pretence at a biography, called Kenko Hoshi Denki
Kosho (f»SE#tg).

f More probably Sahyoe no Jo, not so high a rank, but more likely to
have been attained by him.


%


INTRODUCTORY.


Yentaireki, which tells us how he shot two strange birds, one
of which turned into a fox. *

On the death of Go Uda in 1324 he took the tonsure, —
out of grief, it is said— changed his name to Kenko (the
sinicized reading of Kaneyoshi), and entered a monastery called
the Shugakuin, where he devoted himself to pious studies for
a time. He then went into retirement in the province of Kiso,
building himself a hermit’s cell, or cottage, among the hills*
Here he lived as a recluse until one day his solitude was
disturbed by a fashionable hunting party. Disgusted to find
that worldliness intiuded on him even in these remote parts, he
appears to have returned to Kioto, — to Yoshida, where he
devoted himself to poetry and study. His company was much
sought after by the nobles about the Court. His reputation
as a poet was high, he and three others (Ton-a, Jo-ben and
Kei-un) being styled the “ Four Heavenly Kings of Verse.”

It is during this period that he is supposed to have
composed and written for K 5 no Moronao the famous love-
letter to the wife of Yenya Hang wan, which (with, of course,
the necessary changes of time and scene) is introduced into the
dramatized versions of the tale of the “ Forty-seven Rdnin.”
The only authority for this story is a passage in |he Taiheiki
which runs, “ So he (Moronao) desired to send her a letter,
and he summoned a certain hermit named Kenko, a skilful
writer, etc. etc.” The Taiheiki is not always truthful, and
there were possibly other hermits, less well known, of the same
name. Moreover, according to the Yentaireki , he was not in
JCioto at the time this letter was written.

In 1338, on the invitation of the Governor of the then
province of Iga, he removed thither and again established
himself at a peaceful spot in the hills, called Kunimi no-oka.
Authorities vary as to his movements from this time onwards.

I^One account says that he stayed in Iga three years, and formed
a liaison with the Governor’s daughter, in order to mask various
intrigues and schemes which he had undertaken on behalf of the


INTRODUCTORY.


*3


Emperor Go Daigo, — among them a secret journey to Mutsuto
confer wito Kitabatake Akiiye. No reliance can be placed on
these chronicles, which are mendacious to a degree. It seems
probable that he travelled in Shikoku and visited Kamakura—
this from the ‘ prefaces 1 to his poems — and again spent some
time in Kioto. We are told of him lecturing in Yoshida on the
Kokinshiu ; assembling a large crowd and after praying with
them, feeding them on rice- gruel ; exchanging poems with Toma ;
living at Yogawa, and finally returning to his hermitage in Iga.

The date of his death is disputed. The Yentai-reki gives it
as 1350, and adds that the Emperor Suko and all the Court,
much distressed to hear of his sickness, sent messengers with
a gift of rice to enquire after his health, and a doctor with
medicine. The medicine he refused, shaking his head and
saying that a true Buddhist rejoiced at the quick coming of
death. The rice he gave to the poor people of neighbouring
villages.

His memorial tablet was placed in one of the Kdya-safl
temples.

The manuscript of the Tsuredzure-Gusa was not discovered
until after Kenko’s death. There were found in his cell at
Kunimi-no oka “ an old copy of the Hokke-kyo, some writings
of Laotzu in his hand, the Suma and Akashi volumes of the
Genji Monogatari, a copy of the Maboroshi volume in the hand'
writing of Ton-a, twelve bundles of scrap paper, two suits of
black vestments, his bedding and some pots and dishes/' It
happened that a former page of Kettko’s,' named Myomatsu
M^ru, was then in the service of one Imagawa R^oshun, who"
asked Myomatsu whether Kenko did not leave behind any
poems or sketches. Learning that Mydmatsu had kept some
as a souvenir of his master and that there were various writings
pasted on the walls of Kenko’s retreats, Imagawa despatched
messengers thither, who brought back from the hut in Iga some
fifty sheets covered with poems, and from Yoshida the original
manuscripts of the Tsuredzure Gusa, in the shape of scribbling!


INTRODUCTORY,


on the backs of old scrolls of prayers, pasted, as Myomatsu had
said,, on the walls of the I-shinin, the hermitage occupied by
Kenko at Yoshida. Such at least is one account, from which it
further appears that Imagawa and Myomatsu arranged these
papers, added what could be found in the possession of Myo-
matsu and people to whom Kenko had addressed poems, and
made of them two volumes of verses, and two oi piose. It is
the latter collection which, from the opening words of the first
passage, is now known as the “ Tsuredzure Gusa.”

, The place which it occupies in Japanese literature is high.
It is post* classical in date, and is, characteristic of the Kamakura
period in so far as it is didactic rather than romantic ; but it
belongs to the company of the great works of the Hei an era.
It is in particular reminiscent of the Makura-no Soshi, with its
catalogues of Things Agreeable and Detestable and its senti-
mental vignettes. It is written in a style which has a distinct
charm, — easy, harmonious and relieved from the flatness of pure
Japanese by the sparing, but effective, use of Chinese compounds.
The beauty of his prose is, indeed, his chief claim to admiration,
and his work has remained a model for stylists until the present
day. At the same time probably no Japanese writer has
attracted the attention of so many commentators. He has
supplied them with one of those problems, as unimportant as
they are insoluble, which seem to be the delight of litexary
students. Pages, volumes, have been filled with discussion^ of
his moral character, the most innocent phrases found charged
with terrific meaning, the most matter-of-fact views twisted into
lofty sentiments. All that can, and need, be said about the
writer himself is that he was plainly a man of artistic sensibilities,
jpf considerable culture for his period, a student of religion and
philosophy (the prevailing note is Buddhist of the Tendai Sect ;
but he is eclectic, and Confucianism and Taoism find a place in
his reflections) and able to make skilful use of the instrument
which WM^fordcd at that lime by the Japanese language. It
BP&y be remarked, of this instrument, that one is often struck by


INtRODUCtORY.


5


the poverty of its vocabulary, particularly in the way of epithets.
It results in the use of such words as omosMroki, okasfiiki,
imji&i, kokoronikuki, etc. with a disconcertingly wide range ol
meaning. Mono, too, “ a thing,” is elusive and ubiquitous,
and as sore a trial to the translator as res to the school-
boy struggling with the Gallic War. How much develop-
ment ^the Japanese language was capable of alone it is hard
to say, but certainly the Chinese factor supplied a much-
needed element of variety and force. Another feature, not so
desirable, which accompanied the Chinese element in Japanese
prose, is what may be called parallelism— the use of balanced
pairs of sentences in a sort of bilateral symmetry quite foreign to
the spirit of Japanese art.

Apart from its literary charm, which unfortunately vanishes
in translation, the Tsuredzure-Gusa is not without interest in its
subject-matter. It gives some insight into Kioto life and
manners in the 14th century, — not, it is true, such a com-
plete picture as is presented by the Genji Monogatari and
the Makura no Soshi ; it shows glimpses of a curious per-
sonality; and it reflects a high degree of contemporary
culture about the Court, — a culture already verging on
decadence. Some understanding of the peculiar conditions pre-
vailing at the Capital at the time makes for its better appreciation.
For this the reader cannot do better than refer to Vol. I of Mr.
Murdoch’s History of Japan. Here he need only be reminded
that while in Kamakura the Hojo Regents Were busy with
politics and law-giving, in Kioto Emperors and cloistered ex-
Emjferors held their courts, and needy nobles wasted their
energies on endless rites and ceremonies, or intrigued for empty
titles, in an atmosphere ostensibly religious and scholarly, but
in reality lax and dil T is was obviously not the milieu

fo* ure, and, to tell the truth, this

Kioto did produce. No one
jady shows signs of
mcefon


INTRODUCTORY.


Japanese writers. All the promise of the Makura no-Soshi, the
Genji Monogatari and the body of classical verse is unfulfilled,
ft is true that, seeing the circumstances in which it was written,
it would not be fair to judge the Tsuredzure Gusa by severe
standards ; but' it is interesting to note that it is already, if one
may say so, second-hand, derivative. Its striking sentiments
and wHl-turned phrases, though invested with a charm by the
writer's personality, are, if you come to look closely, as a rule
mere borrowings or adaptations from earlier literature. This
perhapsis what strikes one most in reading it — that it does not
mark any advance on its predecessois ; and impresses one with
the fact that Japanese literature has, for some reason or bther,
not made the progress that its beginnings might lead one to
expect. It is a strange phenomenon, but I believe it to be true,
that (leaving out of consideration the debateable ground covered
by the XIX century) almost every form in the literature of this
country has evolved to a certain point, and there remained in a
state of arrested development. The two classical works men-
tioned above, really quite remat kable efforts in their way,
are followed by the Tsuredzure Gusa, which is indebted to them,
but does not progress beyond them.- The next landmark is the
lyric drama, which was at its best in the XV century. Heie
again was an art form capable of progressive development ; but,
not only did it not progress, it actually ceased to exist, and has
been preserved tb this day in a fossil condition. Its successor,
the popular drama, owes it nothing of importance. Again, the
output of verse since the Kokinshiu must be of appalling dimen-
sions ; but, with the possible exception of a few epigrams by
Basho and his school, the level may have been maintained, but
has not been raised.

In varying degrees a ar arrested growth might be
traced in other branches of lettc T ' ^ "ke

too much of this feature. It
%v ^n be found in medir
* alasticisi


INTRODUCTORY.


7


the causes of this peculiar static character. It is only mentioned
because fee Tsuredzure Gusa is the first striking example there-
of, and apt to start a train of thought similar tp that outlined
above — to make the reader ask, not " Why ts it so good ? ” but
“ Why is it not better ? ” The translation* here given is as
nearly literal as circumstances would permit The text is
obscure, and no doubt corrupt, in places, while there is ground
for suspecting that in its present form it owes something to
the interpolations of editors and commentators in the century
after it was written.

So far as I am aware no other English translation of the
Tsuredzure Gusa exists, with the exception of an incomplete one,
more in the nature of a paraphrase than an accurate rendering,
by the Rev. C. S. Eby, in a now defunct magazine, the “ Chry-
santhemum/ * ,

The text used for the following translation was that of the
Tsuredzure Gusa Shosho Taisei a ver y pl eas * n g old

block printed edition of 1688, which is based on some dozen of
previous commentaries. It is in ten large volumes, each of 150
closely printed pages, and gives an average of a page of notes
to a line of text ! Of printed editions one of those intended for
the use of Middle Schools such as that published by the Scishido
MJ&Sb called the Tsuredzure Gusa Kogi, will be found

convenient. »

The illustrations of incidents in this volume are taken from
the “ Ekon Tsuredzure Gusa]' which is the work of Nishigawa
Sukenobu, the Ukiyo-ye artist, published at Kioto in 1740.
They are full of anachronisms as regards costume, etc., but
afe otherwise interesting, and it is worth while noting, as evidence
of the place the Tsuredzure Gusa took in popular estimation,

* 1 he use of capitals iu Buddhist terms and such words as Death, Wisdom,
etc. is au attempt to reproduce the effect of single Chinese words in a Japanese
setting. It does not, of course, represent personification. The meagre aid which
typography affords tcannot be despised in translating from a language which
relies on its appeal to the eye by its script as well as on that id the ear by its
"Sound. ^


s'


INTRODUCTORY.


that of a large series of illustrated works issued by the same
publisher, this is the only classic. From it I could not resist re*
producing the illustration to the ‘passage (No. 120) against the
importation of foreign goods — the picture of a Dutch vessel
making gaily for a lee shore !

The illustration of part of the procession at the Kamo
Festival is taken from a copy in the Imperial Library at Uyeno
of a coloured scroll said to date from 1274.

The illustrations of costumes, etc. are reproduced from
manuscript volumes in my possession.

* * * *

I am indebted for considerable assistance, in the interpreta-
tion of Buddhist terminology and other ways, to Professor
Anezaki, who has been kind enough to supply material for
various notes, and to write an essay bearing on religions condi-
tions in Japan during the 14th century, which is printed as an
Appendix to this volume. Some understanding of these condi-
tions is necessary in order to ^appreciate the milieu of Kenko’s
work, and the leader cannot do better than read Professor
Anezakfs illuminating remaiks in conjunction with the text of
the following translation.


THE

TSUREDZURE GUSA

OF

YOSH1DA NO KANEYOSHI.


j

To Whiie Away the idle hours, seated the livelong day
befoiethe inkslab, by jotting down without order or purpose
whatever trifling thoughts pass through my mind, verily this
is a queer artd crazy thing to do !

I, — Lo ! To those that are born into this world many
indeed are the Desirable Things.

Exceedingly worshipful is the majesty of the Mikado.
The youngest leaves of the Bamboo Garden are not of the seed
of men, and such as they are out of reach of all human desites.
Lofty the estate of the Prime Minister beyond all dispute, and
those of such station as to haVe a retinue from the Court are
of great splendour, while their children and their grandchildren,
though their fortunes be decayed, still preserve some of the
grandeur of their forbears.

But in all ranks of life beneath these, though a man may
rise and prosper and shew a boastful front, nevertheless, fine
as he may think himself, it is forsooth but a sorry thing he has
achfeved.

To while away etc. 4 'lbured/uic naru mama m ’ is the opening sentence,
and hence the name by which the work is known.

Leaves of the Bamboo Gauhn. Members of the Imperial family of divine
ancestry.

Retinue. The Engishiki gives their numbers as follows: ‘The Regent

IO, Ministers and Generals 8, Privy Councillors 6 / down to 2 for a

chamberlain. The retinue referred to was a bodyguard of men detached from
the Household troops [Konoe).


10 THE TSURED7URE GUSA OF YOSHIDA NO KANEYOSHT.


No lot is so little envied as a Priest’s. Sex Shonaoon
wrote, H They are looked upon as so many bits of stick,” and
truly this is so. Nor is a priest admired who is forceful and
turbulent, for men feel, in the words of the sage Zoga, that
thirst for fame means disregard of Shaka’s law. <

There is indeed none but the complete hermit who leads
a desirable life.

What men chiefly covet is outward excellence, of figure
and of bearing. They seek and are not wearied by the
company of one who has a pleasing manner of speech, talking
with charm but not garrulity. Yet how, it pains one to see
revealed in a man a base nature that belies a fair exterior.
Beauty and rank, indeed, are such as we are bprn with : but,
for the mind — if a man strive to copy the sages, shall he not
succeed and grow from wisdom unto greater wisdom ? And
if he lacks wisdom, then, though his form be fair and his heart
good, he feels Outshone and ill at ease in the company of others,
even of low degree and unpleasing aspect.

It is desirable to have a knowledge of true literature, of
composition and versifying, of wind and string instruments ;

Sei ShonAgon. The quotation is Trom the Maknrct-no sosht. “ /to tano-
moshiki waza wo tada l? no hashi no yd m omoctu loso 7 to oshthgre” which
appears to mean that a priest must look on the agreeable things of this world
as if they were bits of stick ; but doubtless Kenko knew best.

ZoGA. A priest of some reputation, incumbent of Tonomine.

The complete hermit. His is the only desirable position, for he is removed
from desire ; while all other men, whatever be their rank, continually thirst for
better things. Here at the outset Kenko strikes the note which recurs continually
throughout his work.

True Literature. Such as the four great philosophical works of (jhma (the
analects pf Confucius, the works of Mencius etc.) and the Sutras, — serious
works, as opposed to romances and the like.

Composition . Including the compositon of verse in Chinese, while
‘ versifying ’ refers to Japanese poems.

Precedents . Scholarship consisted then in an uncritical knowledge of the
d6ing8 and sayings of the ancients. This unquestioning reverence for antiquity
had already in Kenko’s time begun to sterilize Japanese literature and
philosoj&iy.


THE TSUREDZURE GUSA OP YOSHIDA NO KANEYOSHI. H

and it is Velt, moreover, to be learned in precedent and Court
cfremonieis, so as to be a model for otfiers. One should write
not unskilfully in the running hand, be able taking in a pleasing
voice and keep good time to music ; and, lastly, a man should
not refuse a little wine when pressed upon him.

2. — Wanton and heedless must one hold those Who, for-
getting the benevolent rule of the great ones of old, reckless of
the people's sorrow and the country’s harm, delight to exhaust ail
forms of luxury, and live withal cramped by their own magni-
ficence. In Kujo Dono’s Admonitions to his descendants it is
written, u From your headdress and your garments to your
horse and your carriage, be content with what you have, and
do not seek for elegance and splendour.” So, in his august
writings on palace affairs, the Mikado Juntoku says, “ In all
things for the Emperor's use plainness is desirable.”

3. — However gifted and accomplished a youngman may be,
if he has no fondness for women, one has a feeling of something
lacking, as of a precious winecup Without a bottom. Admire
the condition of a lover ! Drenched with dews and frosts and
aimlessly wandering ; ever concerned to shun the world's
reproof and escape his parents’ reproaches ; hither and thither

Wine, This passage is much disputed, but it appears to mean that 0151
certain occasions, such as flower parties, court banquets and so on, it is boorish
to refuse wine. The hygienics of the matter probably did not concern him.

Kujo Dono. A Fuji war a noble (Morosuke), 908-960, who served as
Udaijtrr under the Emperors Shujaku and Murakami, lie had five sons, all of
whdm duly succeeded to similar posts. r

Juntoku. 1197-124?. The work, written after his abdication in I22X te
still extant, and known as the The sentence quoted refers to tke

Emperor's robes.

Fotuincss for zoo men. The original has '£&, iro, which is susceptible of a
wide range of interpretation. KenkS appears to counsel a moderate degree of
gallantry, without making oneself cheap. 1 lie rendering of the whole passage is 1
rather conjectural, and for “ and spending his nights withal ” might perhaps he
substituted “ and all because he spends his nights.’'


1$ THE TSUREDZUHE GllSJi OF YOSHIDA NO KANEYOSIfl^

pursued by doubt and distress and spending his nigbts
wf$M sleepless upon a solitary couch.

But it is well that a man do not become addicted to le\yd-
ne$s, a constant and familiar companion of women.

4. — Happy is the man who, mindful of the after life, is dili-
gent in the way of Buddha.

' 5. — Not he who, plunged in grief at his misfortunes, takes

the tonsure because he holds the world harsh and evil, but
rather he who shuts himself off completely and lives day in, day
out, expecting nothing, demanding nothing, — this" is the true
hermit.

Well may one feel, as the Chunagon Akimoto said, “ O !
to look on the moon guiltless in exile.”

6. — Even for the great, to say nothing of the lowly, it is
well to be childless. The Prince Imperial First Minister of the
Middle Kane akira, the Prime Minister Kujo and the Minister
of the Left Hanazono all held it . a good thing to be without

The true hermit is one who realizes, as the preceding text has shewn, the
vanity of mundane affairs, and therefore cuts himself off from his fellows. A
man who retires in a fit of pique is not genuine. This is interesting in view of
the suggestion that Kenko’s own retreat followed the death of Go Uda no In, and
his consequent loss of employment.

Akimoto. A noble in the service of Ichijo (980-1011), who became a
hermit on his master’s death, living in a small hut at Ohara. A solitary life
was congenial to him, so that he would welcome even exile, but for the feeling of
guilt which it implies.

KaneakirA. Eleventh son of the Emp. Daigo, described as of high
literary attainments. He was Jbust Minister of the Middle because another
Imperial Prince later held the same post.

Kujo. pajudaijin in 1160. IIan\/oino, uuc Minamoto no Arihito, a
Minister under Toba, Sutoku and Komi

Kaneakira’s son appears to have been stupid ; Korcmichi lost all his child-
ren, says the Zpku Yotsugi Monogatari ; and Hanazono, says^the same authority,
never had any, but consoled himself by saying, * Rather no children at all than
uuyrorthy ones.*


WE tSUP.EBZURE GUSA OF YOSHIDA' NO KANEYOSHI. 13

posterity. * Vfell was it too that the Minister of SomeDqno
ijfras Without offspring ; and it is written in the * Yqtsugi no otena
no mmogatari* that it is an evil thing when a man’s descendants
fall behind him,/ Indeed, it is related that Shgtojcu Taishi,
when he caused his own tomb to be built, cut off and stopped
up the paths thereto, because he meant to leave no offspring, *

7. — Were we to live on for ever — weie the dews of Ad&-
shino nevei to vanish, the smoke on Toribcyama never to fade
away- then indeed would men not feel the Pity of Things.

Truly the bCauty of life is its uncertainty. Of all Uvifig
things, none lives so long as man. Consider how the ephemera
awaits the fall of evening, and the summer cicada knows neither
spring nor autumn. Even a year of life lived peacefully seems
long and happy beyond compare ; but for such as never weary
of this world and are loth to die, a thousand years would pass
away like the dieam of a single night.

What shall it avail a man to diag out till he becomes
decrepit and unsightly a life which some day needs must end.

feOMEDONu. 804-872. Hid no sons, but adopted his nephew Mototsune,
who, being the first Kwampaku, and a powerful ruler, lent more lustre to Some-
dono’s name t}ian a true "son might have done

Meant to leave no offsp mg so that no descendants would come to pay homage
at his tomb.

Dews of Adashmo etc. A conventional phrase for Death. Adashmo is a
pillow word for * tsuyu,’ and Tonbeyama for ‘ kemuri,’ both being names of burial
places of uncertain whereabouts. Cf. the verse

Tare totemo We none of us

tomaru beki ka wa ? can tarry long , for we

Adashmo no are but the dew

kusa no liagoto ni that clings to every blade

sugaru slmatsuyu. of grass upon Adashmo.

7 he Pity of Things. An insufficient rendering of the phrase ( mono no
aware.* It has been much discussed, and refers to the emotions in general,
particularly to such as arc evoked by the great manifestations of Nature— Birth and
Death, Growth and* Decay. Most often the tendency of the contemporary
Japanese mind was to dwell on the melancholy side, so that * Fjty of '1 lungs J is
reasonably accurate.


14 THE TSUKEDZUHE GUSA OF YOSHIDA NO KANEYOSHI,


ttiBg life brings many shames. At most before his fortieth year
Is foil it is seemly for a man to die.

After that age it is pitiful to see how, unashamed of his
looks, he loves to thrust himself into the society of others, and,
cherishing his offspring in the evening of his days, craves to live
oil and on that he may watch them grow and prosper. So he
coritinues, his heart set on naught but worldliness, and harden-
ing to the pity of things.

8. — Of all things that lead astray the heart of man there is
naught like fleshly lust. What a weakly thing is this heait of
ours. Though a perfume, for example, is but a transient thing,
and though he knows full well that incense is burned to give an
otjour to garments, yet a man’s heart will always be stirred
by a vague perfume.

The Magician of Kume, the legend runs, lost his magic
power through looking at the white shins of a maiden washing
clothes. This may well have been, for here was no charm
from without, but the real beauty of plump and glistening limbs.

9 . — What strikes men most in a woman is the beauty of her
hair, and from her manner of speech you may tell her quality
and her disposition, though she be hidden from view.

Even to look on her as she goes about hei business will
sometimes lead the heart astray — for she will sleep in uneasy
postures, spare no bodily pain and bear with patience unbearable
discomforts, all because her mind is set on love.

Verily the roots of passion aie deep and remote its sources.


Long Lift bungs many shames . A quotation from Chwmg Tzu, who says,
* ftfany sons, many troubles Much wealth, much business Long life, many
shames, These three prevent the nourishment of virtue *

no Sennin u A man of the province of Yamato, who went lip into

' the mountain fastnesses, and practise <1 the laws of magic One day, while

flying over his native village, he was attracted by the extreme whiteness of the shin
of 0 woman trampling on the clothes she was washing, and forthwith fell to earth ”
Charm from without. Artificial charms— pamt, powder and perfume.


THE TSUFEDZURE GUSA OF YOSHIDA NO KANEYOSHI. fj

V Xi,

Though the lusts and appetites of the Six Defilers are many, yet
nSay lfaey-.aH be banished save this one alone. It can hardly be

uprooted, and young and old, wise and foolish are alike its

, # *

slaves.

Therefore it is said that with a rope in which are twisted
strands of a woman’s hair the mighty elephant may be bound,
and that the deer in autumn will not fail to gather to the call of
a pipe carved from the clogs a woman wears.

It is this madness which we must chastise in ourselves,
which we must dread and which we must guard against

io. — There is a charm about a neat and proper dwelling
house, although this world, ’tis true, is but a temporary abode.
Even the moonshine seems to gain in fiiendly brilliancy, striking
into the house where a good man lives in peaceful case.

The man is to be envied who lives in a house, not of the
modern, garish kind, but set among venerable trees, with a
garden where plants grow wild and yet seem to have been dis-
posed with care, verandas and fences tastefully arranged, and
all its furnishings simple but antique.

A house which multitudes of workmen have devoted all
their ingenuity to decorate, where rare and strange things from
home and abroad are set out in array, and where even the trees
and shrubs are trained unnaturally — such is ^an ^unpleasant sight,

Sleep in uneasy postuies A much disputed passage. Another interpretation
is that a man will pass sleepless nights and undergo hardship for a woman’s sake.
Otherwise it appears to mean that women take great pains with their personal
appearance at all times, and, rather than be discovered in neglige, will sleep in
uncomfortable dress and position. Either rendering strains the text, which is
somewhat corrupt, perhaps.

Six Defilers . the Six Dusts, meaning the eyes, ears, nose, tongue, the

flesh and the mind, which are the instruments of defilement through the desires
to see, hear, smell, t^gte and touch, and through evil thoughts. JSuddhist termi-
nology, of course.

The minify elephant Quoting from the Y am antaka-dharani.
io, Although this world etc . He feels obliged to throw this in, as an appro-
priate sentiment for a hermit, who lives m a hut.


THE TSUREDZURE GUSA OF YOSHIDA NO KANEYOSHI.


depressing to look at, to say nothing of spending one's days
therein. Nor, gazing on it, can one but reflect how easily it
might vanish in a moment of time.

The appearance of a house is in some sort an index to the
character of its occupant.

There is a story that Saigio, when he saw that the*. Minister
Go-Tokudaiji had stretched ropes across the roof of his
residence in order to keep the kites from settling ther$, exclaim-
ed, “And if the kites do settle there, what harm can they do?
This then i^ the sort of man his Lordship is ! ”, and ever after
refused to visit him.

So, when I once saw ropes stretched on the palace roof of
His Highness Prince Aya-^o-Koji, I remembered this story,
but then I heard people say that the truth was, His Highness
could not bear to see the frogs in his pond caught by crows
that settled there in flocks, and I thought This is a very praise-
worthy action, and, after all, we cannot tell but what Go-Toku-
daiji had some good reason for what he did.

ii. — Once in the month of , September I passed over the
plain of Kurusu and sought out a certain village among the hills
beyond, when, threading my way far down a narrow moss-
grown path, I came upon a lonely hut. There was never a
sound to greet me, save the dripping of water from a pipe buried
in fallen leaves, but I knew that someone lived there, for sprays
of chrysanthemum and maple leaves bestrewed the shelf before
the shrine, and “ Ah ! ”, thought I, “ In such a place a man can
spend his days.” But as I stood and gazed in wonder, I
perceived in the garden beyond a great orange tree, its branches

Saigio, An interesting character, a Fujiwara noble in the service of the
abdicated Emperor Toba. He is the hero of many stories, a poet and a travelling
priest of distinction, Tokudajji was ^adaijin under the sa^e Emperor. Ayano-
Koji was one of the numerous sons of Kameyama.

Kites, It is not quite clear why Sanesada (Tokudaiji) disliked these birds
so much. Perhaps merely because they are eaters of offal. They are still un-
popular.


THE TSUREDZURE GUSA OF TOSHIBA HO KANEVOSHI.

weighed dovm with fruit It was strongly closed in on all sides
by a fence* This broke the spell, and I thought to myself* 1
44 If only yorider tree had not been there ! ”

12. — It would be a joyful thing indeed to hold intimate con*

verse with a man after one's own heart, chatting without reserve
about things of interest or the fleeting topics of the world ; but
such* alas, are few and far between. Not that one desires a com-
panion who will sit opposite and never utter a word in contradic-
tion— -One mignt as well be alone. Far better in hours of loneli-
ness the company of one who, while he will listen with respect
to your views will disagree a little, and argue, saying “ Yes,
that is so, but .... ”, or 14 For this reason such and

such is the case.”

And yet, with those who are not of the same way of think-
ing or are contentious, a man can only discuss things of passing
interest, for, the truth is, there must not be any wide gulf be-*
tween real bosom friends. '

13. — To sit alone in the lamplight with a book spread out
before you, and hold intimate converse with men of unseen gene-
rations — such is a pleasure beyond compare.

Of such books there are the wonderful volumes of the
Monzen, the works of Hakurakuten, thb # Sayings of
Roshi and the Book of Nankwa; while there are many

Monzen jjfcgt. One of the anthologies of Hsiao T'ung (501-531 A.D;), of
which the commentary by Li Shan is best known in China. In Japan the
favourite edition was that of Sugawara Michbane.

Hakttrafatien 6141 ^ (772-846 A.D.) the great poet Po-chii-i. The work re-
ferred to is the a still extant collection of his works. An acquaintance

with both of these authors was an essential to literary equipment in Kenko’s day,
— and at present for Chinese scholars, and students of the Heian era.

Roshi is Lao tzu. *He left no written work (the Tao Canon ascribed to him
being a forgery, much, ridiculed by Po-chii-i).") Perhaps for this reason Konko
says the “ words ” of Laotzu, referring to his otal doctrines as expounded by
ChUang to. It is, however, more likely that he refers to the Canon, whkli was
spoken of as the M Five Thousand Words,” 2 t r F , f!'.


I? THE TSUKBBZURK GUSA OF YQSHJDA NO KANEYOSHI.


admirable things written in olden times by scholars of^our own
land*


14.— Then, too, there is a charm in our native poetry. Des-
cribed in verse the rude toil of the lowly peasant of the hills
becomes pleasing, and even the dreadful wild boar, in such
phrases as fusui no toko, sounds gentle.

As for the verses of to-day, though there is an occasional
line which seems apt and graceful, there are none which conjure
up a moving picture, beyond the mere words, as in the old
poems.

Tsurayuki’s poem beginning 4 Ito ni yoru mono naranaku
ni 9 was looked upon, tradition says, as the rubbish of the
Kokinshiu, and yet there is not a man living who can write
such verse nowadays. Why this one poem was picked out
for blame it is hard to tell, seeing that there are numbers of
poems from that period similar in form and expression. In the
Genji Monogatari the line is written ‘ mono to wa nashi ni?


Book of Nankwa . The Nanhua Canon the great work of Chuang

Tz\i named from a hill, Nanhuaj where he lived in retirement. We see
from these references that Taoism, with its doctrine of Inaction, was well known


to Kenko.

The rude toil. Even such vulgar and unpoetical tasks as chwcoal-b»#s|fejty
timber-felling etc., sound romantic in verse, though strictly speakjj^tMr*&^
ject for poetry, which must describe the doings of the Court.

Fusui no toko (lit. * lair of the couchant boar’, but, by a not uncommon
process, becoming the poetical term for the animal itself). This fierce animal
loses all its terrors if only mentioned by such an elegant name.

Verses of to~day, Since the Shin Kokinshiu.

Beyond the mere words. The touchstone of Japanese verse is here indicated.
It mast suggest, rather than describe.

Tsmayukfs poem. In the Book of Journeys in the Kokinshiu ; —


Our ways are not like threads, that
can be twisted into a single strand,
but are separate, wherefore we feel
* thin-hearted,’ (kokaro-fawt, the reference
to thread being merely prefatory to tiin,)

The fact (hat the G.M, W a different version suggests that the altered line
wee objectionable.


Ito ni yoru
mono naranaku ni
wakareji no
kokorobosoku mo
Ofuohoyuru ka na.


tm TSGREHZURE GUSA OF V0S8IDA NO KANEVOSHI. 19

The same is said of the poem * Nokoru matsu sae mine ni
sabhhiki ' occuring in the Shin-Koktnshlu, and it certainly does
seem & little clumsy. Yet, in Iyenaga’s ijiury, it is stated
that the Committee of ' Judges reported favourably on this
poent, and that His Majesty afterwards was greatly pleased
with it.

Although it is generally said that the art of Poetry is the
one thing that has never changed since olden times, yet, with
the same themes and words as are in use to-day, lode how
different are the verses composed by the ancients. What they
wrote was Simple and artless, pure in form and full of feeling.

Many indeed are the beautiful passages in songs and poems
from the anthology called Riojin. Somehow there is always
a charm about even the most impromptu and careless sayings
of the men of bygone days.

15. — It wakes one up to go away from home for a time, no
matter whither. Rambling and exploring about the country-
side you come upon a host of unwonted sights in rustic spots
and mountain hamlets. You get a messenger to take letters to
the capital, and you write and say Do not forget to send me
so and so by the next opportunity. All this is in its way
amusing. Of course you have a thousand things to think of
in such a place.

Nokoru viatsu etc. The verse is : —

Fuyu no kite (End-stopping in the third line is

yama mo arawa ni considered a blemish by some critics,

ko no ha nari. —what is known as sankugiri. The

Nokoru matsu sae perfect stanza, they say, should run on

mine ni sabishiki. in one connected sentence. This is no

(Shin Kokinshiu.) doubt the clumsiness referred to.)

Committee of Judges. who sat and debated upon the merltsof

poems. IyenAGA was, with Kamo Chomei and others, an official In the Dept,
of Poetry (Wakadokoro) about 1190.

Themes . « Uta-m$kura,’ here meaning not only epithets but the

stock themes of verse— blossoms, the seasons, famous places etc.

, *&*• a collection of the chanted words accompanying the

Kagura, Saibara and other dances, still extant.


$0 THE TSUREDZOKE GUSA OF YOSHIDA NO KANEYOSHI,

v Pleasant also to slip away and go into retreat in some
mountain temple.

1 6. — Shut up in seclusion in a mountain temple, devoting
oneself to the service of Buddha, one is never lonely, and feels
one’s heart cleansed of its impurity.

>

1 7. — It is well for a man to be frugal, to abstain from luxury,
to possess no treasure nor to covet this world’s goods. Since
olden times there has rarely been a sage who was wealthy.

In China there was once a man called Ki<5~yu. He had
not a single possession in the world, and even scooped up water
with his hands, until a friend gave him a gourd. But one day,
when he had hung it from a branch, it rattled in the wind ;
whefeupon, disturbed by the noise, he threw it away and once
more took to drinking from out of his clasped hands. How
pure and free the heart of sugh a man.

18. — Sonshin spent the winter months without bedclothes.
He had one bundle of straw, which he slept on at night and
put away in the daytime.

The Chinese, admiring these things exceedingly, have set
them down in their writings so that they might be handed on
to future generations. Our people do not even pass (such
stories) on by word of mouth.

19. — The changes of the seasons are powerful to make men
feel all around them the Wonder of Things, and, people say, the

15. A thousand things. ]n the Capital your unspoken wish is fulfilled by
friends and servants. In the country you must fend for yourself.

18. Sonshin is 3Ufc> Kioya

The Wonder of Things, What Dr. Aston calls the i( Ah*ness of Things ”,
nmw no aware. It represents man’s attitude of wonder at the mysteries of Nature.
In Japse. literature it is a wonder greatly tinged with melancholy, so that the
“Pity of Things,” while not strictly accurate, covers most of the meaning of the
phrase. Vide note to 7 supra.


THE TSUBEDZURE GUSA OP YOSHIDA MO KANEYOSHI, 21

Autumn'tnlpt of all. Not without truth, indeed, but even more
meseems does the look of Spring make, a man’s bosom swell*
The song of the birds is full of a springlike sound, and under
the warm sunshine the grasses of the hedgerows burst into bud*
So the Spring deepens and the hazes spread abroad, and then
the flowers at last begin to blossom — when lo ! the wind blows
and the rain falls incessantly, and they are scattered in dismay.
So everything is grief until at length the green leaves come.

More even than the orange blossom, famed though it be,
does the scent of the plum make one recall the past with longing.
So the bright kerria and the soft-hued wisteria arouse a crowd
of feelings that cannot be dismissed.

About the time of the Washing of Buddha and the Great
Festival, when the young leaves grow thickly oirthe tree-tops,
—then too, someone has said with truth, the sadness of life and
the longing for lost friends are at their height. In the fifth month,
when iris leaves are scattered on the roofs and the young rice
planted out, the cry of the waterfowl is full of melancholy.

Then in the sixth month the \yhite evening-glory and the
smoke of the kayaribi> rising from some lowly cottage, make a

Autumn most of all. Debates as to the relative charms of the seasons have
always attracted the Chinese and Japanese dilettante. Cf the verse.

Haru wa tada In the Spring-time

hana no hitoe ni J tis but the wealth

saku bakari : — of blossoming flowers,

Mono no Aware wa but for the Pity of Things

aki zo masareru. the Autumn is supreme.

Famed as it be. The hanalachbana is often mentioned in verse as having a
sweeb perfume, which calls up tender memories. Kenko maintains that, the
Spring blossoms are equally affecting.

Washing of Buddha. a ceremony at k the anniversary of the birth of

Gautama, the infant Buddha, 8th of 4th month, O.S., when water or amacha is
poured over the sacred image, as a symbol of the washing of a new born child.

Great Festival. A Shinto festival at the Kamo Shrine. Matsun , the Festi-
val par excellence of the year, on the 12th of the 4 th month. V. No. 41.

Iris leaves. On the 5th of the 5th month leaves of the ha-skbbu, were, and in
some parts still are, spread upon the eaves, to dispel evil influences, in some way
which is not clear.


22 THE TSUREDZURE GUSA OF VOSHIDA NO KANEYOSHI.


touching sight An imposing ceremony, too, is the Purification
of the sixth month.

The feast of Tanabata is bright and gay. Now, as the
nights grow cooler, the wild geese come crying, the leaves of
the lespedeza start to redden, the rice of the first crop is reaped
and dried. No season is so crowded with events as Autumn.

Fine, too, the scene after an Autumn gale has blown.

Here as I string these thoughts together I must perforce
repeat the old familiar sayings of the Genji Monogatari, the
Makura no Soshi and suchlike works ; nor am I indeed loth to
say the same things over again. I have let my pen run on
aimlessly, because a man is ill at ease if he does not say the
things he feels, and, after all, this is only to be thrown away and
not to be seen by others.

Now come the scenes of Winter decay, little inferior to
those of Autumn. The reddened leaves fall and settle among
the grasses by the waters edge, and on a morning white with
frost the vapour rises from the water pipes. There is no time like
that when the year is drawing to a close, and everyone rushes
busily to and fro. After the twentieth day the aspect of the sky
is melancholy — dreary with the clear cold moon that none will
gaze upon. Solemn and grand the celebration of the Go butsu*
mid , and the departure of the Envoys to the Tombs. The


Kayanbi — herbs burned to drive off mosquitos.

Purification , In the 6th and 12th months (30th) prayers are offered to avert
evil influences.

Tanabata* The constellation of the weaver, 7th of 7th month Ink mixed
with early morning dews is used for writing verses, which are attached to branches,
and the stars reflected in a brass bowl are worshipped * Bright and gay 9 com-
pared with the Funfication ceremony

None will gaze upon It has not the brilliance of the harvest moon, — and they
axe busy

Go-bids# mio On the 19th.— 21st of thhe 12th month, 0 .&, a

Buddh. ritual, where the names of all the Buddhas are invoked.

Envoys to the Tombs Sent with offerings to the tombs of the Imperial

Ancestors.


am fwwmvm gusa of yoshida no kaneyoshi. 23

Falitce is busy with ceremonies and perparations for the coming
Spring. *

Then comes the Expulsion of Demons, followed close by
the Adoration of the Four Quarters in an interesting way.

In the thick darkness of the last night of the year the people
run about with pine-wood flares, knocking at folks* doors till
past the middle of the night, shouting (I do n*t know why)
noisily, and flying higher and thither. But as the day dawns
even they become quiet, and sadly we take our leave of the
departing year.

It is a pity that the custom of worshipping the spirits of the
dead, who were said to return on that night, is no longer
observed in the Capital, though in the East it is still practised.

So with the dawn of the New Year, though the sky wears
the same look as yesterday, by contrast one feels as if some
change had taken place. Pine tifees set out along the broad
streets give a bright and cheerful aspect — another moving sight.

20, — A Certain recluse, I know not who, once said that
no bonds attached him to this life, and the only thing he would
regret to leave behind was the sky. Truly one feels this to be
so.


21. — At all times it is a soothing thing to gaze upon the
moon. That was a pretty dispute where, one saying that there
was nothing so delightful as the moon, another replied that fie

Expulsion of Demons Tsuina or 0 my aim. On the last night of the

year * Thb ceremony took various forms, such a shooting at imaginary demons
with an arrow, glaring at them through a four eyed mask, and brandishing spear
and shield.

Adoration of the dour Quarters Shihohai 0 ^ 5 ?. “ At the hour of the
Tiger (4 a m.) on the first day of the year the Emperor bows to the four quarters
of heaven and earth (1 e the Shinto Pantheon), praying for deliverance from
disaster and the bestowal of prosperity,” so that hardly is one ceremony com-
pleted when the other begins

Spirits of the Dead, There were two such festivals — 14th of 7th month#
the Don, and last of 12th month, of which the former survives.


24 3*HE TSUREDZURE GUSA OF YOSHIDA NO KANEY05HI.


considered the dew a mqre moving sight. But indeed, in its due
season, what is there that does not arouse the emotions. The
moon and blossoms go without saying ; but even the wind alone
is noticed. A clear stream breaking upon rocks makes a
delightful picture, whatever the season.

Is it not a touching verse of the Chinese poet which says,

“ The stream called Gensho
flows Eastward day and night,
and never ceases — heedless of the grief of man.

Hii-ko said that it was his heart's delight to sport among
the hills and streams and gaze at birds and fishes. There is no
such quiet bliss as to wander Jn secluded spots where grass is
green and water clear.


* 22. — In all things one looks back with regret to the past*
Modern fashions appear to be growing from bad to worse. It
is the ancient shapes that are most pleasing in the beautiful
utensils made by workers in wood. As for the style of letters,
even a scrap of waste paper from olden times is admirable.

The every-day speech, loo, is growing regrettably bad.
Whereas they used to say Kurumd motageyo and Hi kakageyo
the modem people say mote-ageyo and kakiageyo. Old people
say that it is a great pity that for the Ninmidate of the liouse*


Even the wind etc . The most matter of-fact person knows when the wind
blows, and is reminded, by its quality, of the changing seasons. Wind has
always come in for a good deal of attention from the poets. Cf. Saigid’s
stanza : —


Even a man who gives
no thought to most things
notices the first Breeze
of Autumn.


Ohokata no
mono wo omowanu
hito ni dani,
kokoro wo tsukuru
, Aki no Hatsu-kaze.

Moteageyo etc v The moderns seem to have been more correct, but their
usage was different from the ancients’ — quite sufficient to condemn it, apparently 1
Nimudate . Assembly of the House idd servants, to light the lamps iivthe
Palace, Instead of using the old-fashioned words of command, they had now
dome to say plainly Get up and light the lamps,”


TttB T$URF.DZURE OUSA OF YOSHIDA NO KANEYOSHI. 2$

hold Department they now say ‘ Tachi akaski shiroku seyo, and
foe the Lecture Hall at the Salshoko service, instead of saying
Go Kb no i Ro they say Koro.

23. — Birr despite the degeneracy of these latter days, happily
the Nine-times-encircled still remains aloof from the world, serene
and venerable as of yore. Fine sounding names are used, such
as the Platform of the Dews, the Dry Rice of the Morning and
the divers styles of Gates and Halls. Even the names of such
things as are in the houses of the common people, blinds,
verandas and doors, are pleasing to the ear.

I like to hear the command * Make ready for the night * in
the nobles’ quarters, and the cry ‘ Hasten to light the lamps in
His Majesty’s Bedchamber,’ or to see the great ministers per-
forming their offices. It is amusing to watch the important air
of the high officials’ underlings, or to see them on a coldish
night dozing as they sit here and there the whole night through.

The Prime Minister Tokudaiji said, “ I love to hear the
beautiful sound of the bell in the Naishidokoro.”

24. — I know of nothing more touching and interesting than
the departure of the Vestal Princess for the Shrine on the Moor*

Goko no Ro, J§f. The moderns omitted the honorific.

The Saishoko service was instituted as a palace function by IchijS. An
auspicious day in the 5th month having been chosen, piiests from the great
temples assembled, and expounded the for five days in the Seirydden,

before the Emperor and his Court. Dr. Anezaki says : w The Saisho
o-gyo. is the SuvcmiafirabJici, Nan jo’s catalogue No. 126. It was the scripture
most revered during the Nara period, and the Heian too, and its recitation wa~s
meant to secure the guardianship of the various deities mentioned in the text
The text was distributed in the provinces, one for each Kokubunji (05H3P) "

Nine-times- encircted. The Imperial Palace, which is entered through nine
gates. There exists a separate and complete terminology for everything con-
nected with the Court and its doings. Dry Rice of the Morning, for
instance, is the Imperial Breakfast, or the Imperial Breakfast Chamber by
extended application.

Make ready for the night . The Chamberlains’ command to the Lords-in-
Waiting.


Jfc5 THE TSUREDZURE GUSA OF YOSHIDA NO KANEYOSHI.

Another interesting thing is the way in which the words
“ Prayer ” and u Buddha ” are considered impropitious, and in
their stead ^re used " Coloured Paper ” and " Child of th$
Centre/'

Splendid and unforgettable are the shrines of the Gods,
How fine they look in their groves of ancient trees that wear an
unworldly air, set round with the jewel-fence and on the sakaki
the white cloth symbols hung.

First among them are the shrines of Ise, K&mo, Kasuga,
Hirano, Sumiyoshi, Miwa, Kibune, Yoshida, Ohatano, Matsuo
and Amenomiya.

25. — The pools and shallows of the river Asuka ! This
is an inconstant life. Time passes, Things vanish. Joy and
Grief go and come. What once was a gay and crowded spot
becomes a deserted moor : or, if the dwelling rests unchanged,
yet those within are not the same. “ The peach and the pear
tree cannot speak. With whom then shall I talk of bygone
days ? " How much more fleeting, then, the traces of the great
that lived in ages we have never seen.

Naishidokoro — There was enshrined the. Mirror, one of the Sacred Treasures.
The Emperor made obeisance before it every morning, and the striking of the
bell was part of the music of the service. It is one of the three shrines in the
Palace for the worship of Imperial Ancestors, also called Kashikodokoro, the
“ Place of Awe.”

Vestal Princess . A virgin Princess was always dedicated to the Ise Shrine,
and before going thither she spent a ) ear of putification at rhe * Shrine on thp
Moor * (No no miya). .

Coloured paper (somegami), because prayers were written on red and yellow
paper. Child of the Centre vs, frequently used — ?takago 1 The curious will

find several of these tabus and their substitutes in the Engishiki (V). They
originated in Ise, where the intrusion of Buddhism was guarded against.

Asuka-gawa, A river in Yamato, with a shifting bed, which is a frequent
theme of verse. Cf. Kokinshiu

Yo no naka wa This world of ours,

nani ka tsune naru inconstant like

Asuka-gawa the Asuka-gawa,

Kino no fuchi wa where Yestereven's pool becomes

Kio no se to naru. the shaUow of To-day.


tm TSUREDZURE GUSA OF YOSHIDA NO KANEY05HI. 2j

looking on the Kiogoku-den or the Hojoji, one stands
amazed to see how a man's ambition can come to nought, and
to note the changes wrought by time.

When Mido Dono built and decorated his palace and
greatly added to his lands, hoping to make his descendants
guardians of the throne and protectors of the people, little can
he have thought that in any times such desolation would over-
take them. The Great Gate and the Golden Pavilion remained
until a little while ago, but the South Gate was burned in Showa
(1312-16) while the Golden Pavilion collapsed soon afterwards,
and, left untbuched, has never been set up again. Orjly the
Hall of Everlasting Life remains in its former shape. The nine
great Buddhas stand in a stately row, and one can still see
plainly a tablet written by GiSzei Dainagon and doors painted
by Kaneyuki — a moving sight.

The Hokkedo still remains, but for how long ? Others there
arc, less well-remembered spots, where but the stone foundations
now are left, though no one knows for certain what building once
stood there.

Therefore it is vain in all things for a man to set his
thoughts on a time he will not live to see.

26 . — Though the breeze blow not, the flower of the heart of
man will change its hue. Now looking back 6n months and
years of intimacy, to feel your friend, while you still remember

Mido Dono . The Regent Fujiwara Michinaga (966-1027). The Kiogoku-
den and the Hojoji were the homes he built before and after his retirement.

Lands, $£ JH, Shoen , which usually has the meaning of lands held in fief
from the crown, here no doubt refers to the holdings assigned to the temple
Hojoji).

Showa is 1312-16.

Though the breeze , etc . Cf. Tsurayuhi, Kokinshiu. —

Sakurabana The blossoms fade when scattered by

toku chirinu tomo, the wind to earth, but the heart of

omohoezu ' man varies without any apparent

hito no kokorozo cause,

kaze mo fukiaenu.


28 THE TSUREDZURE GUSA OF YOSHIDA NO KANEYOSHI*

the moving words you exchanged, yet growing distant and
living in a world apart — all this is sadder far than partings
brought by death.

It is the old lament — that the white thread must be dyed,
and the ways part at the crossroads.

In the Hundred Poems of the Emperor Horikawa there is
one which reads.

Below the fence which erstzvhile stood
around my loved one's bower
Nozv only grow the violet ,
the wild tsubana' flower.

Ti uly a melancholy scerie.

27. — At the ceremony of Abdication the handing over of the
Sword, the Jewel and the Naishidokoro is an occasion beyond
measure melancholy.

When the late Emperor descended from the throne he is
said to have composed this verse : —

Deserted by the Palace serving-men
my unswept garden's thick ivith fallen flower s,
meaning to say that, busy with the affairs of the new sovereign,
they Wt him neglected in his retirement. «

Such occasions reveal the true character of tho v se about

one.


28. — The year of mourning for the death of an Emperor is
surely a time of unequalled sadness.

The House of Mourning is a melancholy sight, with low
planked floor, hung with blinds woven from reeds and bordered

White thread, etc. Regrets expressed by Chinese worthies. Thread Cannot
always remain white, a road cannot go on for ever in one direction. Change is
inevitable.

Abdication (Mikunhyudzuri). When an Emperor retired, as frequently
happened under the Fujiwara regime, the three Sacred Treasures were solemnly
handed to his successor. The Naishidokoio refers to the Mirror, (v. note to 23),
and the M late Emperor ” was Ilanazono.


THE TSUKE3URE GUSA OF YGSHIDA NO KANBYOSH1. 29

with coarse linen, and supplied with the roughest of furnishings ;
while all about wear unwonted garments, even to their swords^,
and the loops of their girdles,

2q.«~In hours of quiet thought one cannot but be overcome
by longing for the past.

When, to while away the long nights after folk have gone
to rest, we go through our odd belongings, sometimes, as we
throw away such sciaps of paper as we do not want to keep,
the handwriting of one who is no more, or an idle sketch,
may be, will catch the eye and vividly recall the moment it was
made.

It is affecting, too, after the lapse of many years, to come
across the letters even of one who is still living, and to call to
mind the year and the occasion when they were written.

The things they were wont to use— they have no heart, but
they remain unchanged throughout the long, long years. A
melancholy reflection.

30. — There is no such mournful time as follows on a death.
For the days of Retirement a crowd of people go up together
to some mountain village, into a cramped and incommodious
house, and there they busily perform the offices for the dead.
So the appointed time passes with unwonted quickness. The
last day is pitiless indeed ; for in silence they gather together
their possessions, each for himself, and go their several ways.
Only when they have returned to their own homes will they
begin to feel exceeding sad.

Months and years pass by, and still they do not forget,

House of Mourning. The custom was to retire to a specially erected
mourning house or hut, of which the rough construction and furniture were to
symbolise the mourner’s indifference to comfort in the midst of grief

Loop ( hit ad ) v Conder, Japse Costume, T vm , 3, p 69.

1 he blmds had coarse grey linen edging, with a black pattern called mokko .

Days of Retirement For 49 days after death the relatives had to go

into retirement m some solitary temple


30 THE TSUREDZURB GUSA OF YOSHIDA NO KANELOSHI.

though, as the saying goes, the departed grows more distant
every day. However that may be, they seem not to fed so
deeply as at the time of death, for now they chatter and laugh
together. The body laid to rest upon some lonely mountain
side, whither the mourners come on rare appointed days, soon
the tablet Is over-grown with moss, buried in fallen leaves, and
looks in time as if none came to visit there save even storms and
the nocturnal moon.

i There may be some who will recall the dead, and think of
him with grief. But soon they themselves must pass away.
Then how can later generations grieve, who only know him by
repute? After a time they go no longer to his tomb, and
people do not even know his name or who he was. True, some
feeling folk may gaze with pity on what is now but the growth
of grasses of succeeding Springs ; but at last there comes a day
when evetl the pine trees that groaned in the storms, not lasting
out their thousand years of life, are spjit for fuel, and the
ancient grave, dug up and turned to ricefield, leaves never a
trace behind.

31. — One morning, after a fine fall of snow, I had to write
to a friend, but in my letter I said not a word about the snow.
Whereupon the answer came, " How can I do what its asked
of me by a man of such poor taste as not to write ‘ What do
you think of this snowfall ?’, or a line of that sort? Really I
am ashamed of you.” I thought this an amusing reply. The
writer is now dead, so that I do not readily forget even such £
trifle as this.

32. — Once, about the twentieth day of the ninth month, a
friend invited me to stroll about with him till daybreak looking
at the moon. As we walked, he bethought himself of a
friend's house, where he called arid was conducted within.
There was something impressive in the sequestered air of this
desolate garden, wet with dew, where breathed a faint natural


THE TSUKEDZURE G0SA OF YOSHIDA NO KANEYOSHI. $1

perfume. Betiirtes my friend came out, but I, still feeling the
strange beauty of the scene, stood for a while hidden in the
shade, and so perceived his host, instead of forthwith hastening
to retire, open the shutters a little wider, as if to gaze upon the
moon; and, as he could not have known that he was being
watched, it must have been because he was at all times fond of
such things, I heard that he soon after passed away.

33. — When the present palace was completed, it was in-
spected by those versed in ancient customs and they had no fault
to find. The day for His Majesty's removal to the new Palace
was drawing near, when Her Highness Gen-ki-mon-in very
admirably pointed out that the comb-shaped openings in the
wall of the old Kanin-den were round, and without edging
The fact being that it was a mistake to have made them foliated
and edged with wood, they were therefore altered. 1

35. — Even if your handwriting is bad, it is well to write
your own letters unashamed. To have them written by others
because your own hand is unsightly is a nuisance.

36. — It is a great relief and very pleasant, when you have
neglected to write for a long time, and, thinking ' How angry
she must be with me ! you feel conscious of ypur guilt and
do not know how to approach her, to get a message from a
woman, saying, ‘ I want a manservant. Can you spare me

Natural perfume * waza to naranu ,’ — not artificial, as pf incense burned fqr
an expected guest, but characteristic of the house.

Genkimonin the mother of the Emperor Fushimi.

Openings , — what are known as kwatoguchi Q, where a lamp placed on
the ledge will throw a light into two rooms. The original “ comb-shape ” was

, and they afterwards became more ornate, as below


A nuisance, to the amanuensis ?


3® THE TSUREDZURE GU5A OF YOSHfDA KO KANEYGSHI.

one? Such a disposition (i.e. free from malice) is very admir-
able, so people say, — and with reason.

37. — Although some will say, * After all this time, why stand
cm ceremony ?’, I myself feel that it is a sign of genuine and
proper feeling when even the most inseparable friends treat one
another, if the occasion demands, with due reserve and
decorum. On the other hand, it is sometimes well for people
who are not intimate to speak freely.

38. — Enslaved by desire for name and profit to live a life
tortured by care, with never a moment’s peace, is foolish indeed.
Such as are rich in treasure are poor in virtue. By its means
men purchase evil and invite disaster. When they are dead,
though they have piled their gold up to the Constellation of the
Bear, they do but bring distress on others. It is a poor thing
to take delight in gladdening the eyes of fools. Great carriages,
sleek horses, ornaments of gold and jewels, — all these a man of
understanding looks upon as folly. Throw your gold away
among the mountains. Cast into the stream your jewels*
Exceedingly foolish are men whom greed for profit leads astray.

It seems a desirable thing to leave for long years behind
one an unburied name. But a man is not perforce superior
because he is of noble family or high degree. Foolish and un-
skilful people, thanks to birth or opportunity, sometimes rise to
high rank and liye in great state, while saints and sages, lacking
opportunity, have lived and died in humble stations.

Only less foolish therefore is the desire for rank and office.

If we reflect on the desire to leave behind a name for ex-
cellence of heart and head, we see that the love of fame is a de-
light in the approval of others. But neither those who praise

Piled their gold, etc. An adapted quotation from Po-chii-i. The original is
hardly so didactic, for it reads, * A pile of gold reaching to the Great Bear when
you are dead is not so good as a barrel of wine when you are alive/

Throw your gold etc. From Chwang Tzu,


rm TSUREDZURE GUSA OF YOSHIDA NO KANEYOSHf* 33

nor those who blame remain long of tliis world, and those to
whom they tell the tale must presently depait Whose piatee
do you covet ? Whose blame do you dreacl ? Praise is the
fountain of blame. Though your fame live on, it profits nothing,
and this desire comes next in foolishness.

Speaking of such as persist in the mere search for skill and
wisdom, it must be said that with the growth of Knowledge
comes Falsehood, increasing Talent biings increasing Care.

True Knowledge is not gained by precept or by study*
What then is Knowledge? Right and Wrong are one. What
is good and whal evil ? The True Man has neither Knowledge
nor Virtue. He is without Deeds, without Name. Who then
shall know him, who shall speak his fame ? Not that he con-
ceals his viitue, nor cherishes his unwisdom, but because he is
beyond the confines of Wisdom and of Ignorance, of Gain and
of Loss.

So much for those that set their deluded hearts on Fame
and Profit. All things are Nothing — unworthy of speech, un-
worthy of desire.

39. — The reverend priest Honen when asked by a man, who
said he was overcome with drowsiness while at his prayers and
so neglected his religious duties, what he ought to do to rid
himself of this hindiance, replied, “ Pray earnestly enough to
keep awake.”

Another admirable saying of his was “ If you think your
salvation assured, it is assuied. If you think it is not assured,

Punse is tin fountain of btanu , because it arouses envy.

TIHs desire — 1 e. for good reputation It rinks in wickedness with, but alti r,
grceed and abmition.

hut Kncnvhd^t The underlying idea is not foreign to us The True (14.
the Perfect) man, 4^/ Ib °f such nature that he is as a little child, or Adam
before the hall, —ignorant of both good and evil. It is with the knowledge of good
and evil that trouble begins.

The whole of this passage is pure Taoism. *

Ilbntn IIis descendants are now* In mg in Mimasaha, and have become
Christians. He founded the Jddo sect.


34 THE tsuredzure gusa of yoshida no kaneyoshi.

it is not assured,” and another, 44 If, while you doubt, you
notwithstanding pray, even then you will be saved.”

40. — In the province of Inaba there was a girl, the daughter
of a certain lay priest of noble family, whose hand was asked in
marriage by many that heard of her beauty. However this
girl ate nothing but chestnuts, never touching rice or other
grain, and her parents therefore refused saying that such an un-
usual thing ought not to be seen by others.

41. — Once at the horse-races during the Kamo festival on

the fifth of the fifth month, unable to see for the crowd between
us and our carriage, we all got down and made towards the
railings, but the press of people standing was too great, and
we could not push our way through. , Just at this time we saw
a priest who had climbed up a tree over against' us, and was
seated in a fork to get a view. As he clung to his perch, time
after time he dozed Qff, and only awoke when on the point of
falling. The spectators jeered and reviled him, saying, 4 What
a fool,the fellow is calmly to fall asleep up there in such a risky
place ! ” 4 '

When I heard this, I was struck with a thought, and
exclaimed, 4 And what of us, who spend die da}% in sight-
seeing, forgetting that Death may come at any moment ? We
are greater fools than he I Whereupon those in front turned
round, remarking, 4 That is indeed so. It is exceedingly
foolish/ and, making way for us, they invited us to pass"
forward, saying, 1 Come this way, Sirs.’

Though this remark of mine might have occurred to any-
body, I suppose it was because it came as a surprise to them
at the moment that they were^so impressed. Men are not
sticks and stones, and a word in season will sometimes affect
them.


42.— There was once a priest, son of one Karahashi Chiujo,


THE TSUREbztfRE GUSA OF VOS HI DA NO KANEYOSHI. 35

who wsts called the Bishop Gioga, and was an instructor of
novices studying the doctrines of his sect He suffered from
a rising of vapours to the head, which grew worse year by
year until his nostrils were stopped up and he had difficulty in
breathing. They tried all sorts of remedies but his sufferings
only increased, and his $yes, eyebrows and forehead became
one swollen mass, overhanging so that he could not see. He
was a horrible sight, and looked like the mask of the ni-no-mai.
So his face grew like a demon’s, his eyes high up on his head,
his nose spread all his face, until at last he shut himself up, and
even the people belonging to the temple could not see him.

So he continued for many years, still growing worse and
worse, until at last he died. To think that there are such sick-
nesses in the world !

43. — One day towards the close of Spring in calm and lovely
weather, I came upon a seemly house, in a garden stretching
far back, grown with venerable trees and strewn with faded
blossoms. I could not pass without a look, and, peeping in,
I saw that all the shutters on the Southern side were down,
giving the place a deserted air ; but facing East the doors were
thrown open, and through a rent in the blind I saw a handsome
young man of about twenty, who, though quite at his ease,
was sitting there dignified and calm, reading a volume spread
out before him on the desk.

I felt a great desire to find out who and what manner of
man he was.

44. — Once I saw emerging from within a coarse, bamboo-
plaited gate a very young man, of important mien, wearing
a rich silken hunting-robe, whose hue the moon obscured, but
which was embroidered in deep colours. Attended by one

Ni-no-mai mash. They are large, red and repulsive. There are several
examples in the Tokio Imperial Museum.

Hunting rQbe<—Kariginu t but the name outlived the use of the garment.


30 THE TSUREDZURE GUSA OF YOSHIDA*NO KANEYOSHI.

small boy, he took the path stretching far away among the
rice fields, brushing through the young plants wet with dew,
and playing to himself the while with unspeakable sweetness on
a flute. As he went on, little thinking that there was one who
listened with admiration, curious to see where he was going I
followed him with my eyes until he ceased to play, and went
in at a temple gate by the foot of the hill.

A carriage propped up on its shafts attracts more attention
licye in the country than in the Capital. I enquire of my
servants and they reply, " Such and such a prince is now here.
It is no doubt some Buddhist rile they are performing.”
Priests and others are assembled in the Hall, and on the cool
evening breeze comes a pervading odour of incense. The way
in which the maids of honour take care their garments shall
not flutter in the breeze they make as they pass along the
gallery to the royal apartments shews that they are careful to
preserve decorum even here in this hillside village where none
can see them.

Here the Autumn moor, in wanton luxuriant growth, is
flooded frith' the heavy fall of dew; insects sing noisily ; and
file water in the pipes flows with a soothing sound. The clouds
seem to gather and disperse more rapidly than in the sky of
the Capital, the moon to wear a more variable complexion.

45. — -The eider brother of Prince Kinyo was the Bishop
Riogaku, a mighty choleric man. Near his house in the
temple grounds there was a large celtis-tree [cnokt ) , so that he
was known as the Celtis Tree Bishop. Disliking this, he had
the tree cut down, but, as the roots remained, people now
called him the Tree Stump Bishop. At last, highly incensed,
he had the stump dug up and thrown away, leaving a large hole
behind. Whereat they now named * him The Hole in-the-
Ground Bishop.

46. — Near Yanagiwara there was a priest known as His


THE TSURtDZUKE GUSA OF YOgHIDA NO KANEYOSHI, 37

Reverence Rpbbery-by-Violence. This name was given to
him because he had several times been the victim of robbers.

47 , *— A certain man, on a pilgrimage to Kiyonndzu, joined
on the way an old nun. As they went on their journey, she kept
on saying Kushamc , kushamc , and he asked her, “ Pray, what
is that you are saying ?”, but she made no answer, and con-
tinued to repeat those words. At last, when he had asked her
several times, her patience gave out, and she said, “'They say
that when you sneeze you will die unless this spell is repeated,
and I am repeating it now, because my young master, who is
at lliyei-zan, may be sneezing at this moment/ * Indeed a
faithful heart !

48. — When Lord Mitsuchika was performing the duties of
Officer of the Saishoko to the retired Emperor, I lis Majesty
summoned him to the presence and caused food to be served
to him. When he had eaten he took the trays with the
leavings, pushed them under the screen and departed. The
waiting- women cried out “Ah! how nasty! Whom does he
expect to take this? ” but llis Majesty was much impressed, and
said that this conduct of one versed 111 ancient customs was
admirable.

Robbery 7 >y violence . The explanation is given because the name would
leave one to gather that the hoy man himself was addicted to robbery.

Kushamc , kuahame is onomatopoclic for a sneeze. In . omc dialects, it is
akitsen , which is nearer. Even now nurses repeat various formulae to ward off
the supposed ill effects of sneezes.

Young master is Yashinai-^imi. The nun was apparently a foster-mother,
and the* boy had gone to one of the lliyei-zan monasteries as an acolyte.

Milsuchika. A Fuji wara who took the tonsure in 1222, and was assassinated
by followers of I Idjo Voshitoki at Suruga. The Emperor is Go Toba. For the
Saishoko , see note to 22.

Admirable conduct. Instead of taking the nest of laetjuer trays away with
him, he poked it under the misu, at the other side of which were the female
-attendants. It appears that this was praiseworthy, as indicating that he was
devoting all his attention to his duties in connection with the Saishoko, and had
no time for the refinements of etiquette.


38 THE TSUREDZURE GUSA OF YOSHIDA NO KANEYOSHI.

49. — Beware of putting off the practice of religion until
your old age. The ancient tombs are mostly those of such as
died in their youth.

Only when suddenly striken down by illness, and on the
point of death, do men first recognize the errors of their past
life. And what are these errors ? — Nought but delaying those
thirigs which should be done quickly, and hastening those
things which should be delayed ; whereby is caused great
regret for the past. When his time comes, what shall it avail a
man then to repent ?

Our hearts should be firmly fixed on the imminence of
Death, which we ought never for a moment to forget. So
shall we be little soiled by the contamination of this world, and
our hearts earnest in the observance of the Way of Buddha.

One of the saints of old, according to the Scnrin no Jilin ,
when folk came to talk on business, used to say to them, “ I
have a pressing task before me. My time is close at hand/*
and shutting his ears, would continue his prayers. So he went
on until he one day passed away.

Anqfher sage named Shinkai was so impressed by the
feeting nature of this life that he never even sat at his ease, but
always remained squatting.

50. — In the period of Ocho a story got about that there had
been brought up to the capital from Ise a woman who had
turned into a demon. At that time the people of the city and
suburbs used to go out in crowds every day, “to see the
demon.” “ Yesterday she was at Saionjis,” the rumour would
be, “ To-day she is going to be taken to the Emperor,” or
“ Now she is at such and such a place,” but nobody could say

Shinkai . In a work called tlie Icliigonhodan — ’ this is recorded.
The saint always maintained a squatting position, on crossed legs, as seen in
Buddhist images, because, he explained, “ in the Three Worlds and the Six
Roads there is no place where a man can sit in comfort/’ meaning that in passing
through the various stages to Nirvana there is no time for anything but devotion
to tlie Law.


THE TSUREDZURE GUSA OF YOSHIDA NO KANEVOSHI. 39

he had really seen her. All ranks and conditions talked of
nothing but this demon. One day, at this time, when I was

going from Higashiyama towards Agui, I met a great crowd
of people from Shijo and above, all rushing northwards and
shouting, “The demon is at Muromachi, in Ichij 5 .” Looking
from the Imadegawa side I saw that they were packed about
the Emperor's staging so close that there was no chance of
passing through, and thinking that there could hardly be such
a to-do without some reason I sent to enquire, but no one could
be found that had met her. They stood there, a shouting mob,
until dusk, when they began to brawl and quarrel.

It happened at this time that many people were taken with
sickness for two or three days ; and some said, of the false
rumour of the demon, that it was an omen thereof!

51. — When the Emperor desired to bring water from the
Oigawa to his residence at Kameyama he had a waterwheel
made by the villagers of Di. At great expense and after
several days they at last managed to finish it, but it would
hardly go round at all. They tried to put it right i§ all sorts
of ways, but without success — it would not revolve, and the§r
had set it up in vain.

Finally they called the villagers of Uji, and had them
make a wheel. This they built with case. It went round
properly and took up the water in a most satisfactory way.

In all things there is nothing like one who knows his
business thoroughly.

5 2 . — In the Ninnaji there was a priest who, to his great
regret, had reached old age without ever making a pilgrimage to
Iwashimidzu. So one day he made up his mind, and set off*
alone on foot. He worshipped at the Gokurakuji and at the

Kameyama . The residence he built after hts abdication. The water wheel
is that used for irrigation, not for grinding grain. The waterwheels of Uji are
frequently mentioned in Japanese literature.


40 THE TSUREJDZURE GUSA OF YOSHIDA NO KANEYOSHI. ,

r

Kora shrines and then, thinking this was all, returned home.
There he related how he had accomplished the desire of many
years, and found the shrines even more sublime than he had
heard. “ But ”, he said, “I wonder why everybody who
came to worship went up the hill? Though it was very
beautiful, my purpose was to worship the Gods, so I did not go
to see the hill.”

A guide is desirable, even in small matters.

■5 3 .* — This is another story, of the priests of the Ninnaji. They
had a feast to celebrate the farewell to the world of a young
acolyte about to enter the priesthood. In their revels they
became drunken, and the acolyte, beginning to feel merry, took
a three-legged iron pot that lay near by, and put it on his head.
Then, though it fitted very tight, he flattened out his nose,
pulled the pot over his face and began to dance. The whole
company grew merry beyond measure, until after performing
awhile, lie at length tried to pull it off — but in vain ! This
sobered the feast, and they were thrown into confusion and
doubt, wondering what they should do. While they were
debating it cut into his head, and blood began to flow and his
face swelled up so that he could hardly breathe. They tried to
break it, but it was not easily broken, and, as the fo,rce of the
blow went to his head, he could not bear it, and they were
obliged to stop. They did not know what to , do next, so,
throwing over the three legs, which looked like horns, a black
gauze cloak, they led him, supported by a staff, to the house of
a physician in Kidto. People looked at them with amazement
as they went along. It must have been a queer scene when
they brought him face to face with the physician on entering his
house. When he spoke, his voice was muffled, and resounded

Rvashhnizu . In Yamashiro. A famous shrine devoted to Haclmnan, at the
summit of a hill with clear running water, whipli gives it the name (Rock-spring).
The Kora shrines and the Gokuraku temple are both at the foot of the hill, and
the worthy pilgrim thought that these were the object of his journey !


THE TSUREDZURE GUSA OF YOSHIDA NO KANEYOSHI. 4 1

so that they could not hear what he said. The physician said
that he had never seen such a case in the books, nor had he
ever had any oral instruction on the point, so they we r e obliged
to return to the temple. There, Ills friends and relatives, with
bis old mother, gathered at his bedside and wept and grieved —
not that they thought he could hear ! At last someone said,
u Suppose he does lose his ears and nose, so far as living goes
there is no reason why he should not survive. Let us then
pull the thing off by main force.” So they thrust rice straw all
round between his head and the metal, and pulled as if to drag
off his head. His ears and nose were torn away, and he
escaped with his bare life, suffering afterwards for many a long
day.


54. — In the same temple there was a beautiful young acolyte
whom certain of the priest? planned to invite with them on^n
excursion. Some of the performing priests put their heads
together, and carefully prepared a packet of refreshments,
which they placed in a sort of box and carried to a suitable
spot on Narabi- no-oka, where they buried it, covering the place
with fallen leaves, so as to hide any unusual appearance ; and
then, returning to the temple, asked him to accompany them.

In joyful mood they roamed around, disporting themselves,
until at last, thoroughly exhausted, they sat down in a ring on
the soft carpet of moss that lay at their feet.

Here they all cried “ If someone would but burn the red-
dened leaves ! Let those priests whose prayers are efficacious
see what they can do.” Thereupon they turned to the tree at
the fool: of which the things were buried, rattled their heads,
made tremendous invocations, and altogether a great to-do.
Then, they scraped away the leaves, and lo! — there was

“ If someone would but burn” etc. A well-known line of the £j
It runs. “ In among the woods, to warm our wine we burn the leaves, to write
a verse on the stones we scrape away the green moss,” so that the sentence means
« If we only had some sake — ” knowing well, the sly dogs, that some had been
interred there.


42 THE TSUREDZURE GUSA OF YOSHIDA NO KANRYOSHf.

nothing, not a thing, to be seen. Thinking they might have
mistaken the place, they ranged all over the hill side, digging
everywhere, but without success. Someone must have seen
them burying something, and stolen it while they were gone to
the temple. Crestfallen and ashamed, the priests began to
wrangle in an unseemly manner, and returned home in great
wrath.

Things which we look forward to enjoying with great zest
are certain to end in disappointment.

55. — A house should be built with the summer in view. In
winter one can live anywhere, but a poor dwelling in summer is
unbearable. Deep water does not give a cool sensation. Far
cooler is a shallow running stream. Coming to details, a room
with sliding doors is lighter than one with those on hinges.
When the ceiling is high the room is cold in winter and difficult
to light. In construction people agree in admiring a place with
plenty of spare room, as being pleasing to the eye and at the
same time useful for all sorts of purposes.

56 . — How lacking in taste is it for people who meet you at
rare intervals to talk on and on, relating all that has happened to
themselves in the meantime. Why, even one's close attd inti-
mate friends are diffident at the first meeting after a lengthy
separation !

People of the lower orders, even among strangers, de-
light in breathlessly recounting something which they consider
interesting ; while the well-bred man, though in a large gathering,
will address his conversation to one person only, and others will
listen of their own accord.

Common people entering a large company address them*
selves to no one in particular, relating incidents as if they had

Sliding doois. The whole doorway can be thrown open, whereas, with
hinged [doors (shitomi) which are hinged horizontally, and therefore open by
being pulled upwards, some light is .always excluded.


THE TSUREDZURE GUSA OF YOSHIDA NO KANRYOSHI. 43


just seen them, and every one bursts into noisy laughter— very
loud and vulgar.

One can judge of a man's breeding by seeing whether he
refrains from excessive mirth on hearing a funny remark, or, on
the other hand laughs loudly at something which is not amusing.

It is an unpleasant thing to hear a man, when the appearance
of others is being discussed, or when someone says “ Intelligent
people do so and so ", put himself forward as a standard of
comparison.

57. — People make a great mistake when in talking of poetry
they quote with approval bad verses. If they had a little know-
ledge of the art they would not praise them. In all things it is
ludicrous and annoying to hear a man discourse upon a subject
with which he is not in the least acquainted.

58. — Those who say “If a man be religious at hea^t, it
matters not where he dwells. There is nothing to prevent hirn
from looking forward to the Future Life, even though he remain
at home, and mix with his fellows ” — such people do not at all
understand what Future Life means.

How can any one, forsooth, who feels the vanity of this
world, and desires to pass beyond the confines of Life and
Death, earnestly devote himself day and night to the service of
his Lord and the care of his House ?

Since a man’s heart is moved and changed by worldly ties,
he cannot follow the Way unless he be at Peace.

And even then his capacity is beneath that of men of
ancierlt times. Entering into the woods, ascending the moun-
tains, he must have wherewithal to satisfy his hunger and to
ward off the tempest. And so, by force of circumstance, he


Laugh loudly . The Commentator says “ Persons of weak intellect, women,
etc., are easily moved to laughter.”

Remain at home . As oppdsed to leaving home and entering a religious

life.


44 tHE T5UREDZURE GUSA OF YOSHIDA NO KANEYOSHI.


Cafcnot escape what appear to be worldly desires. There is no
help for this. It must be accepted. But it is nevertheless ah
unfair thing to say “ If such is the case, why retire from the
world at all ? ” For a man who has entered on the Way, and
is weary of the world, though it is true he is not free frohi
desire, must not resemble those who retain their worldly power
in the number of things he covets. What is the cost of a paper
quilt, a hempen robe, a dish of food, a pottage made from
herbs ? His needs are simple, his desires readily appeased*

True there are some who are ashamed of their garb, but,
however that may be, there is in most cases a withdrawal from
evil and an approach to good.

Born as men, by that same token should we wish by all
means to escape from the World, for otherwise in what do we
differ from the Beasts, if we labour only to satisfy our appetites,
and do not progress towards Salvation ?-

59. — He who projects to devote himself to the Great Matters,
however hard the wrench, must throw up, his purpose unachieved,
those undertakings on which his hearts is set.

If you start to think “ First I fnust finish off this, then I

must get rid of that people will laugh at me

about so and so. I must assure my future, make proper pro-
vision — there is plenty of time before me. I have gone all these
years, I can wait a little longer. There is no need for haste ”,
and so on, then you will find that you are involved in a growing
number of tasks you cannot quit, that there is no end to your
affairs, and the day for making the change will never come.

Looking round, one sees that nearly all such as have a
little feeling go through life more or less in this way.

Do men that are fleeing from a fire near at hand cry “ Wait


A little feeling (‘sukos/ti kokoro am kiiva ’). * Feeling ’ is here consciousness

of the claims of the spiritual life. The average man realizes his need of salvation,
but doesn’t get much further.


fflSiMf s* r-,\ ,


THE T 5 UREDZURE GUSA OF YOSHIDA NO KAN^YOSHI. 45

a while ” ? Wishful to save their lives, they are careless of
shame, thej' cast away their treasure and escape.

Does Existence wait on Man ? Nay ! When the Change
comes, its onslaught is swifter even than that of Fire or Flood ?
It cannot be averted. At its approach, regret it though they
may, the aged parent and the tender child alike must leave be-
hind the grace of sovereigns and the love of fellow men.

60. — In the monastery called Shinjoin there was a priest — an
Abbot — -named Joshin, who was a man of great wisdom. He
was very load of potatoes, of which he was wont to eat a great
quantity. Even at his sermons he would keep at his knees a
large bowl piled high with them, which he would eat as he ex-
pounded the scriptures. Whenever he suffered in body his
treatment was to retire to his cell, taking of the finest potatoes
what quantity he chose, and to eat of them more than ever. In
this way he cured every sickness.

He never gave his potatoes to others to eat, but always ate
them alone. Though he was very poor, when his Superior died
and left him 200 kwan in money and his hermitage, he sold the
hermitage for 100 kwan, and the total sum of 300 kwan he put
aside for the purchase of potatoes. He entrusted the amount to
a friend in the Capital, and, drawing from it 10 kwan at a time,
bought for himself no stint of potatoes. When the money was
exhausted it had been spent t)n potatoes and nothing else.

People said what a splendid example it was of true religion
that such a poor man, on obtaining a sum of 300 kwan, should
dispose of it in this manner.

It was this Abbot who, on seeing a certain priest, gave him
the name Shiroruri, and when people asked what that might

7'he change. i.e. the in-constant, here meaning simply Death, the change

from the condition of Existence. The phrase is of Buddhist origin, of course,
and strictly speaking refers to the Impermanence of mundane things, — evanescence
of life, the constant flow and change in form, as opposed to a permanent, un-
changing reality.

Potatoes . More correctly the taro root, hnogashira.


THE TSUREX)ZURE GUSA OF YOSH1DA HO KANEYOSHI.

be* said# " I do not know what it is myself. But if there
is such a thing, then it must be like this priest's face." «

He was a man of handsome appearance and great strength ;
of enormous appetite ; excelling in calligraphy and scholarship ;
and of eloquent speech. A leading light of his sect, he was much
thought of in the temple, but, being an eccentric, who despised
the world, he did always as he pleased and rarely as others
wished. When attending to his offices at the temple, he would
never at meals wait until others were served, but, as soon as his
portion was placed before him, would finish it alone and leave
the room.

He ate neither at the ordinary mealtimes nor at other fixed
times, but when he was hungry, be it at midnight or daybreak.
When drowsy he would retire even at noon, and would brook
no disturbance, however important business might be afoot.
Once awake, he would not sleep for several nights, but cheer-
fully walk round humming to himself.

Though of such an unusual nature he was disliked by no
one, and everything was forgiven to him, doubtless by reason of
his great virtue.

61. — The dropping of koshiki when one of the Imperial ladies
is delivered of a child is not a fixed custom, but a charm used
when the afterbirth is stubborn. It is not done if the birth is
easy. The custom came from the common people, and there is
no authority for it.

The koshiki used are brought from the village of Ohara.
In pictures that have been preserved since ancient times one sees
drawings of the dropping of these boxes when a child has been
born in the house of a common person.

Koshiki are square boxes with bamboo bottoms, formerly used for steaming
rice. Still used in making manju etc.

The custom rests on the likeness of sound between this and koshi-ki t pain at
the loins. Dropping the box was symbolic ofgctting rid of the pain. The name
of the village of dhara is equally appropriate under the circumstances. The
Ohara women were used as wetnurses in the Imperial family.


THE TSUREDZURE GUSA OF YOSHIDA NO KANEYOSHI. 4/

62. — When Enseuvionin was a child she sent these lines
as a message to the Emperor.

The letter fcr Two
The letter like a bull's horns
A straight letter
A berit letter

And that's how I think of you !
meaning that she thought of him lovingly.

63. — The assembly of men at arms by the Ajari during the
Second Seven Days is a precaution taken^because once upon a
time robbers broke in, and that is why all this business of palace-
watchmen came about. As all appearances during the time of
these observances Are omens of events throughout the year, the
employment of soldiers is inauspicious.

64. — To ride in a carriage with five straps is not at all a
personal privilege. Anybody can use them on obtaining high
rank or office in his particular estate.

65. — The headdress of to-day has grown far higher than it,

Enseimonin JilE&FliES; a daughter of the Einp. Saga II by a concubine.

The poem is explained as follows. •

The letter for two ^

The bull’s horns ^ '

The straight letter
The bent letter ^

making the word koishiku, lovingly.

The young lady was a little out in her spelling. The c* shd be ty,

Ajari. The ajari performed the various rites in the palace during this period,
i.e;j the 5th to the 15th of the 1st month. The presence of armed men in the
palace would be ominous of war and disturbance in the ensuing year. The ajari
(Sanskr. dcharyci) is a priest of high rank who has passed through the Shingon
sect and presides over the initiation of novices into its mysteries.

Hat- boxes. Kamuri-oke , where oke is used of a wooden receptacle of bent
wood as opposed to hako t made of dovetailed or nailed sections. Tall hats were'
in fashion, so that the boxes had to be increased in depth by adding a piece at the
top.

5 straps. More correctly silken cords (chikaradzuna) suspended from the
carriage roof, to which the passenger clung to alleviate jolting. The term goshq^
guruma may be a corruption of gochoguruma.


48 THE TSURKDZURE GUSA OF YOSHIDA NO KANEYOSHI.

Used to be, I have heard it said that people who own old hat-
boxes use them nowadays with a new rim added.

66. — The Prince Regent Okamoto once ordering the Keeper
of the Hawks, Shimotsuke no Takekatsu, to take, as a gift to
a distinguished person, a brace of birds which he had attached
to a branch of full-blown red plum blossom, the latter said, 41 1
know no way of fixing birds to blossoms, nor have I ever heard
of fixing two birds to one branch.” The Prince made enquiries
in his -kitchen, and asked a number of people, and finally said to
Takekatsu “ Very well, go and present them attached as you
think proper, 0 whereupon he attached a single bird to a plum
branch bearing no blossom, and so presented it.

Takekatsu said, u A branch of brushwood or plumtree
should be used, either in bud or from which the blossom has
fallen. The Goyo pine may also be used. The branches should
be seven (or six will do) feet long, and cut to a point with two
equal cuts, and the bird tied in the middle. There are two
branches, one for the feet to rest on, and the other to attach the
bird. This should be done in two places, with unsplit tendrils
of the creeper tsuzura ; the end being cut short, so as to reach
as far as the long tail feathers, and bent into the shape of a bull’s
horns. Then, on the First Morning of Snow [in the year], the
branch borne on the shoulder, the bird should be ceremoniously
taken in at the middle gate. Following the stone pavement
under the eaves, so as to leave no track in the snow, the bearer
should pluck and twist into disorder the feathers just above the
tail, and then lean the branch up against the balustrade of the
mansion. If a gift [of clothes] is bestowed upon him, he should
throw them over his shoulder make a deep obeisance and with-
draw, The bird must not be taken thus if the First Snow is
deep enough to hide the toe of the boot.

The ‘bird * is of course a pheasant, This pleasing custom is mentioned in
the ‘ Tosa Niki,’ where, however, the branch was in flower. The boot is that
known as Fukagiitsu —vide illustration,


THE TfcUREDZCJRE GUSA OF YOSHIDA NO KANEYOSHI. 4Q

The reason for plucking the feathers is, — since the hawks
always attack^ at this spot, above where the tail joins the body, —
probably to make it appear as if it has been caught by a hawk.

What can be the reason for not attaching birds to flowers ?
In the “ Ise Monogatar? ” we find it said, where in .'the long
month [t.e. the ninth, O.S.) a pheasant was attached to an artifi-
cial plum branch,

“ it matters not what season of the year.

For these are flowers plucked for thee, my lord.”

From this it appears there is no objection to artificial flowers.

67. — The two shrines at Kamo of Iwamoto and Hashimoto
are those of Narihira and Sanekata. People as a rule confuse them,
so one year when on a pilgrimage there, I stopped an old priest
who was passing, and enquired. He said “ They say that
Sanekata’s is the one which Is reflected in the Mitarashi, and as
Hashimoto is nearer to the river that must be the one. There
is a poem ‘by the priest Yoshimidzu, “ Here lies the gentle Ari-
wara, who of old did love the moon and gaze upon the flowers/'
which I have heard refers to the Iwamoto shrine. But you,
Sir, I am sure, know far more about these things than I do,”
and I was much impressed by his courteous reply.

The Lady-in-Waiting to the Empress Imadegawa no in,
Konoe no Tsubone, herself a poetess,, used in her youth to
compose a hundred stanzas, write them out in [ink mixed with
thej water from before these two shrines, and then make offer'
ing thereof. She had a truly high reputation, many of her
poems being often on people’s lips ; and she was a skilful writer
of Chinese verses and introductions.

68. — There was a certain man, a sort of Local Resident, in

Iwamoto . Two small shrines devoted to the poets Narihira and Sanekata.
It is an interesting fact that in Japan poets and authors have been apotheosized,
but never painters. Ariwarn is of course, Narihira, the writer of the Isemono-
gatari. The MitarashigaiJva , or * River of Lustration’ runs before the Shimogamo
shrines. It is actually a walled canal.


SO THE TSUREDZURK GUSA OF YOSHIDA NO KANEYOSHI.

Tsukushi, who held that the radish was a cure for all evils, and
every morning for years he ate two of them cooked.

One day, taking advantage of the absence of people from
the Residence, the enemy fell upon him, attacking from all
sides, when suddenly two warriors appeared in the house, and
fighting without any regard for their lives, drove them all back.
Greatly mystified, he asked who they were that had been so
good as to fight on his behalf, seeing that they did not belong
to his household. Whereupon they said, 41 We are the
Radishes which you have trusted and eaten every morning for
so many years,” and vanished.

, Such virtue was there in his great faith.

69. — The sage of Shosha was a man who, by dint of con-
tinued reading of the Hokkekyo had arrived at purity of the
Six Senses.

Once, taking lodging while on a journey, he heard the
bubbling noise of beans being cooked over a fire of their own
husks, and the bubble-bubble said “ How can you who are
related to us treat us so cruelly? ”, and the husks which were
being burnt said crackle-crackle .and replied, “ Are we doing
this of our own accord ? It is hard enough for us to be burned,
but how can we help it ? You must not be angry with us.”

70. — At the Seishodo Festival in the Geno period, about the
time that the lute Kensho was lost, the Minister Kikutei played
on Bokuba. Having taken his place he felt for the bridges,

Local Resident , an official delegated by the Court to keep order within

a certain district, to administer justice and put down brigandage. He was
generally a member of some local military family, and must be distinguished
from the Governor of a Province, sent down from Kioto for a term of years.

Tsukushi is Kiushiu, and the “ enemy ” probably refers to disaffected native
tribes.

The “ radish ” is the tsuchi-one t or daikon ..

Sage of Shosha. A hill in Karima, where he lived in retirement. He was
one Slioku Shonin flULhA. (1202-1280). Such a pitch had his faculties of
perception reached that he could interpret the speech of inanimate things.


THE TSUREDZURE GUSA OF YOSHIDA NO KANEYOSHI. Jl


but one of them fell off*, so he fixed it on with some rice glue
which he carried in the bosom of his robe. This dried up well
while the offerings were being made, and thus an untoward
incident was avoided. It was said that certain palace women,
having some grudge or other against him, had got together and
loosened the bridge, and then replaced it as before. ,

71.— As soon as we hear a person’s name we form in our
minds a picture of his appearance ; but when we come to see
him, he is never the man whose face we had imagined.

I suppose we all feel, when we hear stories of ancient times,
that the houses were more or less the same as people's houses
nowadays, and think of the people as like people we see about
us? And am I alone in having sometimes within me a feeling
that words I have just heard, or things I have just seen, have
happened once before — when , I cannot recollect, but none the
less certainly have happened.

72-r.DiSAGRKEAi3LE things are

Too much furniture in a living room.

Too many pens on an inkstand.


The Festival which was held once in an Emperor’s reign, in the Pavilion
known as the SeishodO consisted of a religious ceremony, followed by

sacred music, dancing and other performances. It would have been a terrible
contretemps if Kikutei had been obliged to confess to the assembled court that
the lute was out of order, and lie could not play.

Gen-o is Kenko’s own period. -

KensiiG tfwt/BoKUBA are the names by which two famous instruments were
known.

The bridges of a biwa are 4 in number, and, being rather high, they are
attached to the body of the instrument, instead of being moveable, as ip other
cases.

The point of the story is that Kikutei was wise enough to be prepared
against accidents ojF this sort. He was blind — hence ‘ felt * for the bridges.

J2. This is an imitation of the various catalogues of Things Delightful,
Detestable, etc. in the Makura-no-Soshi.

Private Shrine. Jibuti udd A private chapel or room in a temple

reserved for the use of a priest for his private devotions.


52 THE TSUKEDZURE GUS A OF YOSHIDA NO KANEYQSHI,

Too many images in a private shrine.

Too many rocks, herbs, and trees in a garden

Too many children in a house.

Too many words when men meet.

Too many vows in a prayer.

Things of which it is good to see plenty.

Books in a book-case ; dust in a dust heap.

73. — As a rule the tales which get abroad. in the world are
false— perhaps because the truth is not interesting enough?

People, always exaggerate' things, more so when months
and years have passed and the place is distant do they relate
any story they please, or even it put down in writing, so that
at last it becomes established fact.

Stupid people, who are ignorant of a particular subject,
talk wildly of a persons skill in some accomplishment, and of
his achievements therein, as if he were a God ; bub those who
are acquainted with the subject do not put the least faith in
them. Always what one sees turns out to be different from
what one has heard.

When people speak at random, letting their tongues run
on heedless of exposure, what they say is soon felt to be mere
empty talk ; and when a man, though he feels a story r is untrue,
repeats it as it was told to him, with a twitching about the nose,
he does not actually tell a lie. The lie to be feared is one that
a man tells with an air of truth, hesitating here and there as if
not quite sure, and yet making all his details agree.

Too many children. Reverting to Chwang-tzu, |, many sons

bring many troubles. Vide No. 6.

7'oomany vows. lit. “ too many good works inscribed in a written petition.”
The devout write out long prayers for Peace in the Two Worlds, promising in
return to copy out the Scriptures, to supply images to the shrine, etc. KenkO
suggests that it is better not to protest too much.

Book-case . fumigurunm. They were on wheels.

'Twitching? etc. The expression of his face shewing that he does not
believe what he is recounting. Where is his conscience that he can write these
lines so soon after the tale of the lighting Radishes ?


THE TSTJREDZURE GUSA OF YOSHIDA NO KANEYOSHI. J3

When flattering falsehoods are told about people, they do
not take great pains to contradict them.

When a man listens to a falsehood which the Whole com-
pany is enjoying, because he thinks it is no use for him alone to
contradict, he is even made witness to its truth, and so at last
the tale becomes quite established.

Anyhow, it is a world that is full of lies, and we shall
make no mistake if we make up our mirids that what we hear
is really not at all strange and unusual but merely exaggerated
in the telling, (

The tales that people of the lower orders tell are all of the
sort that astound the hearer. Well-bred people do not talk*
of marvellous matters.

Nevertheless, it does not follow that one should entirely
disbelieve the miracles of Gods and I 3 uddhas and the lives of
the Incarnations.

The fact is, to believe seriously in popular tales would be
silly, to contradict them would be idle ; and one had better on
the whole appear to think them true, while entirely disbelieving
and yet not casting doubt or ridicule upon them.

74. — Gathered together like ants, hastening East and West,
hurrying North and South ; some lofty, some base ; some young,
some old ; some going abroad, some returning home ; lying down
to sleep at night, rising in the morning ;-r~what is the business
they are about ? They never cease in their greed for life, in'.their
pursuit of gain. What do they expect from this nourishment
of the body? Only Old Age and Death are certain. They
come apace and are on us quicker than thought What plea-
sure can there be while awaiting them? Those who have

‘ Made witness to its truth As when A appeals to 13, saying “ Wasn’t it
so ?”, and B hesitates to bowl A out before an audience.

Incarnations, are deities appearing in the shape of men— or, more
correctly, extraordinary men who are imagined to be incarnations of celestial
beings, not necessarily specified.


54 THE tsuredzure gusa of yoshida no kaneyoshi.

wandered from the Way do not fear them, because, sunk in
greed for name and profit, they reck not of the journey they so
soon must make. Fools think of them with sorrow, because
they reflect on their own Impermanence, and do not know the
Reason of Change.

75. — What do people mean when they complain of solitude ?
It is a good thing to be alone and undisturbed.

If you follow the world, then your heart is captured by
Defilements from without, and you are easily led astray. If
you mix with men, your speech is agreeable to the ears of
others, but it comes not from your own heart. You jest with
them, you quarrel with them, now hating, now rejoicing, and
there is no end thereto. A thousand decisions must be made,
and Loss and Gain are ever present. Upon delusion follows
drunkenness, and in drunkenness you dream. Such is the way
of all men — hurrying, hastening, infatuate and blind.

Though not yet knowing the True Way, we may be said
to find joy for a time in breaking loose from our ties, taking
no part in affairs and giving the heart repose ; and it is written
in the Maka-Shikwan " Put an end to all ties of Livelihood, of
Society, of Arts and of Learning.”

76. — When, at times of grief and rejoicing in the houses of
the great and flourishing, folk go in numbers to pay their respects,
one does not like to see priests and hermits mingling with them

The Reason of Change , i.e., they do not see that Death is a reasonable
sequence of Life. “ Since Nothing becomes Something, it is reasonable to expect
that Something will again become Nothing.”

Maka Shikwan . This is a work by consisting ol speculations founded
upon the Hokkckyo. Its title might be translated “ The Great Meditation,”
Shi meaning fixation of thought.

Times of grief ami rejoicing. Funerals, wedding, etc. Even when he has
some connection, a priest should abstain from mixing with the world on such
occasions. Much less should he join a crowd attending on a great man, for the
mere purpose of being present at a big function.


THE TSttREDZURE GUSA OF YOSHIDA NO KANEYOSHI. 5 $

and asking for admission. Even though they have good reason
for so doing, priests ought to keep aloof from the world.

77. — I cannot tolerate one who ha$ no concern therewith dis-
cussing familial ly matters which are the common talk of the
day or telling others, or enquiring in a familiar way, about things
which do not concern him. Country hermits and priests in
particular gossip and ask about people in the world, as if of
their private affairs, until one wonders how they come to know
so much.

. Nor can I tolerate his spreading abroad the latest strange
and fashionable sayings. The man is enviable who does not
learn these until they have become commonplace.

78. — When in the presence of a new acquaintance, to carry
on a conversation in fragments, laughing and exchanging meaning
looks with a companion who knows the phrases, and names of
things, you commonly use, makes the stranger feel as if he
understood nothing — this is ignorant behaviour, and a sure sign
of ill-breeding.

79. — One should never make a show of having a deep know-
ledge of any subject. Well-bred people, do not talk in a superior
way even about things that they have a good knowledge of. It
is people who come from the country who offer opinions un-
asked, as though versed in all manner of accomplishments. Of
course there are some among them who have a i really enviable
knowledge, but it is their air of self conceit which is so stupid.

It is a fine thing when a man, who thoroughly understands
a subject, is unwilling to open his month, and only speaks when
he is questioned.

80. — Every man likes doing those things which are foreign to
his calling. A priest learns the Art of War, while soldiers on
our frontiers do not know the way to draw a bow. They pre-


56 the TSUREDZURE GUSA OF YOSI1IDA NO KANEYOSHI.

tend to know the Law, they indulge in linking verses and play-
ing music, although they are more despised for these accomplish-
ments than for stupidity in their own profession.

And it is not only priests. Generally, among nobles and
courtiers up to the very highest, there are numbers who are fond
of arms. u You may fight a hundred battles, and win a hundred
battles, but it is still hard to establish warlike fame.” For this
reason : Any man is soldier enough to crush the foe when
fortune favours him, but War is a profession where he cannot
make his name until, his forces exhausted, his weapons at an
end, he seeks death at the hands of the foe rather than surrender.
So long as he is living, he cannot boast of warlike fame.

What then does it profit, unless one is of a military family,
to devote oneself to conduct removed from human principles
and approaching that of the beasts ?

81. — Paintings and inscriptions on doors and screens drawn
with a clumsy brush impress one rather with the poor taste of
the master of the house than with their own ugliness ; and,
generally, a man’s belongings will betray the inferiority of their
owner’s character.

Not, indeed, that one need have such very good things.
What I refer to is the fondness for making things ugly and
vulgar so that they shall be durable, or the addition of useless
ornament so that they shall be curious.

What one wants are things with an air of age, not showy
and expensive, but of good quality.

8^.—' “ It is a pity that thin cloth covers soon wear out,” said

_Jl

Doors . ■r*. the modern fusuma.

What he is getting at is the equivalent of antimacassars, glass lustres,
artificial fruit and holland suits for furniture.

Cloth covers are those of MS rolls.


THE TSTREZURE GUSA OK YOSHIDA NO KANE OSHI. ££

some one to Ton-a, who replied, “ It is only when the covers
are torn top and bottom and the niQther-of-pearl has fallen out
o£ the ends of the roller that a volume looks well.” Whereby
one perceives him to be a man of excellent taste.

£>ome people dislike to see a complete set of writings—
sketches and so on — of which all the volumes are not alike*
But the Bishop K6yu said (it seems to me very admirably),
“ It is only a person of poor understanding who wishes to
arrange things in complete sets. It is incompleteness that is
desirable.” In everything regularity is bad. To leave a thing
unfinished gives interest, and makes for lengthened life. They
say that even in building the palace an unfinished place is
always left. In the writings of the ancients, inn6r and outer,
there arc many missing chapters and parts.

83. — The Minister of the Left Chikurln no Nyudo might
without any difficulty have become Prime Minister, but he saw
nothing extraordinary in that, and therefore, stopping at the
post of Minister of the Left, he entered the priesthood.

Ton-A was a contemporary of Kenko’s, and, with him, one of the * Four
Heavenly Kings ’ of Japanese poetry.

Incompleteness . Any student of Japanese art will undcirtand the idea under-
lying this. It is the principle that accounts for the deliberate introduction o
a withered or broken leaf into a flower arrangement, or the purposeful omission
of some part of a carving. It is akin to the aversion to bilateral symmetry that
characterizes Japanese design. The liongwanji, in Kioto, though regularly
repaired, is said to be never completed, and there is one pillar at Nikko where
the carving is upside-down, though here there appears to be some idea of a
concession to celestial jealousy (ma-yoke no hashira.) Cf. Heaven is not
complete.; Therefore in building our house we leave out three tiles.”

Inner and outer Classics are respectively Buddhist sutras and Confuciao
canons. “The Shikwan is three chapters short; Moslii (a commentary on the
Odes) lacks six of its 30 sections,” and so on.

Lengthened life. Why this is so I cannot explain. Perhaps because otie
has to worry less, — or because there remains something to live for ?

Nyuddy a term applied to nobles who retired from affairs and devoted
themselves to religion.

Extraordinary. He saw no merit in automatic promotion.


5 ? THE TSUREDZURE GUSA OF YOSHIDA NO KANEYOSHI.

- The Minister of the Left Doin much admired this, and
himself was without desire to become Premier.

There is a phrase, “ The regret of the mounting dragon.”
The moon waxes and then wanes. When the prime is reached
then domes decline. In all things, where there is no room for
advance decay is at hand.

84. — When Hokken Sanzo went over to India he is said to
have wept at the sight of a fan from his native land, and to
have desired Chinese food when he lay sick, and someone
hearing this said, “ How could such a man disgrace himself by
displaying such weakness in a foreign country ! ” whereupon
K5yu cried ” Nay ! an excellent, feeling man ! ” which seems
to me an admirable remark, and unlike a priest.

85. — The hearts of men not being pure, they are not ’without
falsehood, but there is no reason why there should not be some
who are by nature honest. It is the way of the world that
those who are not themselves upright look with envy on the
wisdom of others. At times, some of the very ignorant will
look on a wise man with hatred, and revile him, saying, u Aiming
at great profit he refuses small profit, because he hopes to make
a name by dressirig in false colours,” but this very abuse shews
that th^ir heart is different from his. Theirs is the nature of the
Lowest Ignorance, which is unchangeable, and they would not
refuse to lie, even for small profit.

Mounting Dragon. A phrase from the Book of Changes (I-Cbing).

One of the hexagrams appears to represent a dragon mounting to heav,en.
Having got so far he can go no higher, and is obliged to return. Hence the
regret. Similarly, says Kenko, with all things. Evolution to the highest
point is only the precursor of Involution.

This passage seems to have been suggested by the previous one on Incom-
pleteness.

Unlike a priest ■ — His asceticism had not rendered him insensible to the
feelings of others.

Hokken is Fa-hien, a monk of the Tsiang Dynasty, who made a pilgrimage
to India in 399-414. His memoirs were translated by Legge*


THE TSUREDZURE GUSA OF YOSHIDA NO KANEYOSHX. 59

Even for a short space you should not imitate folly. If
you run down the road in imitation of a madman, you are a
madman. If you kill a man in imitation of an evildoer, you are
an evildoer. To follow the example of the thousand league
steed is to be of its kind, to copy Shun is to be of his company.
Even a false imitation of Wisdom must be reckoned as Wisdom.

86. — Koretsugu no Chun agon was a man richly endowed
with poetical talent. He was a life-long devotee, and lodged
with a temple priest the Bishop Ykn-I, constantly reading the
scriptures. In the period Bumpo, when Miidcra was burnt, he
came upon him and said *' Your Reverence was a tera-hoshi,
but now there is no tera we must call you boshi.” A very witty
remark.


Ignorance and Wisdom connote, of course, Vice and Virtue.

This very abuse betrays tlicir own meanness because it is tantamount to an
admission that no reason is too petty for them to toil a lie. They are therefore
low down in the category of fools, beyond all hope of improvement, for, in the
words of Confucius, “ The wise of the highest and the fools of the lowest class do
not change’' meaning respectively the man who is born

wise, and the man who is born dull and does not attempt to learn. Kcnko
writes the ‘nature of the lowest ignorance’ (T* kut the^cLual doctrine refers
to conduct, not to character.

If a horse attempts to run a. thousand leagues, (though unsuccessfully) he
approaches in kind to the steed which can. If you imitate the virtuous SHUN,
^though unsuccessfully), you are by so much a virtuous man.

The error of this curious syllogism will be easily detected. It is a typical
example of proof by parallelism of words, not representing parallelism of ideas.

liumpd. 1317-19.

Yen-I was the chief priest of Miidera. :

A witty remark. It was really witty ; but it requires explanation. A
‘ temple \ priest (tera-hoshi) is so-called to distinguish him from a * mountain *-
priest (yama-hoshi). The word ‘tera’ alone stands for Miidcra, ‘yama* for
Hiyeizan, they being the respectively the mediaeval tern and yatna par excellency.
A priest of Miidera would, therefore, pride himself on being known as a ( temple*
priest ’, — Miidera understood— and it was this habit which Koretsugu was deli-
cately satirizing. If you take the tera from a tera-hoshi , it leaves plain hdshi,
which is either a priest J-JjjJjjj hdshi or “ regretting the fire ho-ushi.”


60 THE TSUREDZURE GUSA OF YOSHIDA NO KANEYOSHI.

87. — One should be careful how one gives drink to one’s
inferiors.

A man who lived in Uji was on intimate terms with a very
accomplished priest, a hermit called Gugaku bo, whose
brother-in-law he was. One day lie sent his horse to fetch him,
and the priest set wine before the groom, saying “ We have a
long way to go. Take a drink.' ” He gulped down cup after
cup, and then, girding on his sword, set out escorting the priest
in high feather.

As they went along, they encountered near Kobata some
Nara priests' with a large train of soldiers. The groom con-
fronted them, saying, “ This looks suspicious — here at night-
fall among the hills. Slop ! ” He drew his sword, whereupon
the others all drew theirs or fixed arrows to their bows.
Gugaku, rubbing his palms together, cried, " Sirs, he is drunk,
and out of his real mind. Pray forgive him, though he does
not deserve it.” So they all derided him and passed on.

Then the man, turning to Gugaku, said, “ Now, Sir, see
what you have done. I wished to perform a feat of valour, and
you have made me draw my sword in vain ”, and, in a passion,
lie cruelly slashed .and cut hinl down. Then as he cried
“ Robbers, robbers ”, a crowd of villagers turned out and came
towards him, and he, saying, “ / am the Robber ” rushed at
them, cutting all round him till a number of them together
wounded him and bound him as he lay prostrate.

The horse, splashed with blood, ran to its home on the Uji
highroad. Its master, dismayed at the sight, sent men running
out, who found Gugaku-eo lying insensible on Kuchinashi-
liara, and carried him back. He just escaped with his life, but
was so hurt by cuts about the loins that he became a cripple.

88. — A certain person had a copy of the Wakan Royei Shiii
said to be in the handwriting of Ono no Tofu , of which someone

Ono no 1 ofh (896-966). One of the famous calligraphists of Japan. As the
Shij6 Dainagon was born in 966 it was impossible that Ono should have copied
the anthology he compiled.


THE TSUREDZURE GUSA OF YOSHIDA NO KANEYOSHI. 01

said, “ As it is a family heirloom of yours, % there can hardly be
any mistake ; but it is very curious that Tofu should have written
out what the Shij5 Dainagon selected. Surely the periods
are different/* The owner, hearing this, said “ in that case it
must be very rare indeed,** and treasured it more than ever!

89, — They say that in the heart of the mountains there lives a
beast which eats men, known as the nckomata, A priest named
something Amida Butsu, a maker of linked verses, who lived
near the Kiogwanji, hearing someone remark “ Though this is
not a mountain district, even hereabouts cats have been known
to grow after a lime into nckomata and carry people away/*
thought to himself “ A man who walks about alone ought to
take care.** Just at this time, returning home alone after having
been at veise-making until late at night, what should suddenly
approach his feet near the edge of a small stream, but one of
these same nckomata of which he had heard. It leapt on to
him, and made to bite him about the throat. Frightened out
of his wits, he had no strength to resist, his legs gave way, and
he tumbled into the stream, shrieking “ Help ! Help ! A neko -
mata, a nekomata ! * ’ People ran out from their houses with
torches to see what had happened, and there found the priest,
who was well known by sight in those parts. Wondering what
had happened they picked him up out of the stream. Pie had
won a prize at the verse-making, and his fan, his box, and other
things, which he carried in his bosom, had fallen into the writer.
He crept into his house, as if he had had a wonderful escape.
It was his own dog, which had recognized its master in the dark,
and jumped up at him !

The Dainagon is Fujiwara Kinto (966-1041).

- The owner of the MS did not realize that this meant his book was not written
by Tofu ; on the contrary he felt its value was enhanced by the difficulty.

The ncko-mala. Evidently a wild cat, with legendary attributes, such as
forked (mata) tail. Bogey -stories of demonaic or ghostly cats are frequent. Cf*
Nabesliimas, and one of the tales of the Irolia Bunko.

Linked veises are 5^^ renga.


63 THE TSUREDZURE GUSA OF YOSHIDA NO KANEYOSHI.

90. — Thl' RE was in the service of a priest who was a Dainagon
a boy named Ototsuru Maru who knew, and frequently visited,
one Yasura Dono. One day, on his return (his master) said
“ Where have you been ? ” and he replied “ I have been to Ya-
sura <Dono’s.” On being asked “ Is this Yasura Dono a (lay)
man or a priest ? ” he replied, hiding his face with his sleeves,
#< I do not know. I did not see his head.’*

How could he have not seen his head ?

92. — A person learning archery takes in his hand both
arrows. The teacher says : Beginners ought not to hold two
arrows. They rely on their second arrow and are careless about
the first. You ought each time to think, without' any idea of
missing and hitting, “ This is the shot which counts.”

One may think. “ Surely, with two arrows only, a man
will not be careless in the teacher’s presence.” But, though a
man does not know when his own care relaxes, the teacher does
know, and this counsel extends to all tilings.

People who are studying think at night, “ There is To-
morrow.” To-morrow they think “ There is To-night,” and so
they go on, always meaning to work diligently. Nay, more, —
does not the attention relax even in a moment of time ? Why
is it so hard to do a thing Now, at the moment when one, thinks
of it.


93. — Someone said “ A man has an ox to sell. A buyer
comes and says “ To-morrow I will give you the money and
take the ox.” In the night the ox dies. He who was to buy
has gained ; he who was to sell has lost.”

A bystander, hearing this, remarked “ It is true that the
owner of the ox suffered loss. But again he gained a great
deal. For this reason, that all living things are ignorant of the.

* « Dainagon Horn ’ H c n)n > ^ iave been a priest who was former-

ly an official, but it was not unusual to give Court titles to priests.

His head, if a priest it would have been shaven.


THE TSUREDZURE GUSA OF Y0SHID3 NO KANEYOSHI. 63

nearness of death. It was so with this ox, and men are the
same. It happened that the ox died. It happened that its
owner lived.* One day of life is weightier than ten thousand
pieces of gold. The yrice of an ox is lighter than a feather.
A man who gains ten thousand pieces of gold and loses a
farthing cannot be said to have suffered loss.”

Whereupon everyone scoffed at him, saying “ That argu-
ment cannot be confined to the owner of the ox.”

Further lie said that since men hate Death they ought to
love Life. Why then do they not daily take pleasure iii the
joy of existence ? The foolish, forgetting this pleasure, labori-
ously seek other pleasures. They forget this treasure, and
rashly covet other treasures. Tut their desires are never ful-
filled. While they live, they take no pleasure in Life, when
they come near dying they fear Death — which is contrary to
this Reasoning. It is not because they do not fear Death, but
because they forget the nearness of Death that men do not
rejoice in Life. One might say that he has grasped the True
Principle who is unconcerned with the manifestations of Life
and Death.

When he said this people scoffed at him more than ever.

94. — A court officer bearing an Imperial Letter once dis-
mounted on meeting the Prime Minister TokiwAi, who was on his
way to attend at the Palace. The Prime Minister afterwards said
“ Such-and-such an officer dismounted from his horse while
bearing an Imperial Letter. How can such a man serve Ilis
Majesty !” and dismissed him.

This Reasoning — that a man who fears Death ought therefore to love Life.

True Principle — The Buddhist Life and Death l^eing merely

phases #0 of continuous being. ' *

Court Officer. Hokumen the name of a class of court officials, strictly
speaking confined to the bodyguard of the abdicated Emperor, corresponding to
the Konoe , Sahyde , etc., attached to the reigning Emperor. Here used in a
general way.

- Prime Minister. Shokoku ^00. Tokiwai is Fuji warn Saneuji,


<64 THE TSUREDZURE GUSA OF YOSHIDA NO KANEYOSHI.

An Imperial Letter should be presented (even) to a superior
while on horseback. The bearer should not dismount.

95. — I once asked a learned man where, in turning (the
lid of a) box, the attachment of the cords should be and he
replied. “There are two opinions. One is to attach them to
the mount, one to the roller. There is no objection to either.
In book-boxes it is, as a rule on the right, in hand-boxes it is
usual to attach to the roller.

96. — There is a plant called mcnamomi. If a man who has
been bitten h y a viper rubs this plant in his hands and applies
it, he will be cured forth with. One should learn to re-
cognize it.

, 97. — There is no end to the number of cases where a thing
wastes and damages the thing to which it belongs. The body
has lice, the house has rats, the nation has robbers. The
common man has goods, the sage has Righteousness, the priest
has the I^iw.

98. — The following are things which I remember as having
pleased me when I read a book, in which were written down
the Sayings of venerable sages, called the Ichigon Iiodan.

I. Things of which you think “Shall 1 do it, or shall I
not ? ” are for the most part better left undone.


Imperial Letter. While bearing a message in the Emperor’s hand, he
directly rq>resents the Emperor, and therefore owes obeisance to none.

The Jtthu is the left, hyoshi is the right — positions corresponding to the
roller and the mounting, not, of course, to the actual ju/cu and hyoshi.

Mcnamomi. Probly from momu , to rub between the palms of the hands.

Another curious example of verbal parallelism not corresponding to any
parallelism of fact. “ Every host has a parasite which preys upon it. The
ordinary man has wealth, which brings him trouble, the sage has uprightness
which causes the jealously of others, the priest suffers from his holiness.” TJiis
in justification of a hermit’s life.

Ichi£on Ilpilmu —


, THE 1SUREDZURE GUSA OF YOSHIDA NO KANEYOSHI. 6$

II. A man who thinks of the life to come should not possess
one miso tub, and it is wrong for him to have even a
good prayer-book and image for his own use.

III. The hermit lives so that he wants for nothing by having
nbtliing. Of such is the very highest excellence.

IV. The man of high rank should become as one of low
degree, the wise man ignorant, the rich poor, the capable
incapable.

V. This and none other is to desire to enter in the Way of
Buddha — to give over one’s business ; to take no thought
of the things of this world. Such is the foremost way.

There were other things, but I do not remember them.

99. — The Prime Minister Horikawa was a handsome man,
in very enviable circumstances, and much given to extravagance
in all things. His son, Lord Mototoshi, he made Dairi , and
in the course of his duties, he noticed archive chests in his
office, which he said were unsightly, and ordered them to be
remade in a more elegant way.

The officers who understood ancient matters pointed out,
‘‘ These chests date from the earliest ages, and nobody knows
their beginnings. Such government property, after successive
generations, being old and dilapidated, becomes a pattern for us
and can hardly be renewed.” — and so he gave his up intention.

100. — The Prime Minister Kuga, when on duty in the
Palace, wished to drink some water, and the palace-servants
offered him an earthenware vessel, but he said “ Bring me a
wooden ladle,” and drank from the ladle.


Dairi, The Chinese name for Kebiishicho.

Chests, Karabitsu — 6 legged boxes.

Ladle , ‘ magari ’ — the usual dipper of bent wood.

The point of the incident is doubtful. It is suggested that Kuga wished
to shew that all vessels in the palace were equally sacred and pure — though
outside it was felt that only earthenware vessels were not contaminating.


66 IHE TSUREDZURE GUSA OF YOSHIDA NO KANEYOSHI.

101. — A certain man, who was performing the functions
of Master of the Ceremonies at the Investiture of Ministers,
attended at Court without taking the Imperial Edicts from the
Palace Writers. It was beyond measure a breach of etiquette,
but he could not go back and fetch them, and he was much
concerned what to do, when Yasutsuna, Palace Writer of the
Sixth Grade, spoke to one of the court-ladies, and got her to
pass them to him unobserved. This was very admirable.

102. — When In no Dainagon, Mitsutada no Nyudo was
Master of the Ceremonies at the Expulsion of Evil, and was
being told by Doin, Lord Minister of the Left, what the
procedure would be, he said “ The wisest way is to get instruc-
tion from Matagoro.” This Matagoro was an old soldier of
the palace guard, well versed in public ceremonies. Once
when Konoe Dono taking his place at Audience, had forgotten
his kneeling-mat, and summoned a secretary to his side, Matagoro,
who was lighting fires at the time, whispered unobserved (to
the Secretary) ‘ I expect his Lordship wants a kneeling-mat/ —
which was very well done.

103. — Once when His Highness Daigakuji and his courtiers
were playing at riddles, there came to them the physician Ta-
DAMOri ; whereon the Chamberlain, Dainagon Kjn-Akira,
made this riddle , — “ Why is Tadamori not a native of this
country? ” and the answer was, “ Because he is a Kara-heishi.”
At this they all joined in laughter, and he withdrew in anger.

104. — A certain person, going to visit a woman at a time
when she had to sequester herself, and was living in solitude, shut
up in a house, away from the sight of men, went secfetly thither

Court Lady. They were called kinukadzuki, from their silk veils.

Admirable. The presence of mind was admirable.

Expulsion of Evil. Tsuina v. ante. Note to 19.

Daigakuji. The Emperor UnA IT., after abdication. As frequently, the
name is that of the temple where he resided

Tadamori. JjgAJ ? ). The Tamba house were said to have emigrated
from China.


THE TSUREDZURK GUSA OF YOSHIDA NO KANEYOSHI. 6 /

by the dim light of an early moon. A dog challenged him noisily
and there came out a serving woman who said, Whence comest
thou? and he was soon asked within and entered. There was
something gloomy about the place, which made him anxious,
wondering how she passed her time. He stood for a time on
the crazy planked floor (outside the room), until someone with
a youthful voice said In a quiet tone Come this way, and he
entered through a narrow sliding door-way that stood open.

Within, it had a far from cheerless air. There was a
pleasantly dim light in the distance, enough to shew the orna-
ments in the room : and a perfume which somehow seemed to
belong to the place. She lived then in very enviable wise.

“Make the gate fast v — “It's going to rain” — “The
gentleman’s carriage in the gateway, and his people in such and
such a place.” — she says to the servants, and they whisper
“ To-night, forsooth, we shall sleep peacefully,” and though 'tis
said in secret, they, being not far off, are just overheard.

Now he asks her in detail all that has happened of late, and
behold, the cock crows deep in the night ! So they pass on, to
earnest discourse, ranging from the past into the future ; until
now the cook crows long and loud with a brave note, that
sounds as if the day were breaking, but, as it is not the sort of
place where there is need for haste here late in the night, he
delays awhile. At length the chinks in the shutters lighten, and
then, saying not-to-be-forgotten things lie rises and departs.

Even now, when passing that way he recalls that bright
and lovely dawn in May, the tree tops and the gardens every-
where, ( ?ili wonderful and green, and looks back until the great
oak is out of sight. .

Kara- heishi. It is quite a good joke, but requires analysis: —

The physician’s famous namesake Taira no Tadamori was a founder

of the fortunes of the Ise branch of the Taira house, the lse Heislii A

Heishi ^jSTisa bottle, and kara-heishi is a bottle of Chinese kara) drugs,
Tadamori being an exponent of the Chinese school of medicine^ JCara-heishi
might also mean an empty bottle. In the Iieike Monogatari a similar jest is re-
lated. Some one said of Tadamori, who squinted, “ lse Heishi wa sugame nark”
Here Heishi is -2pj£ aud and sugame is both |j£ squinteyed, and an
unglazed earthenware pot or bottle.


68 THE 'TSUREDZURE GUSA OF YQSHIDA NO KANEYOSHI.

105. — Against the north side of the house, where the still un-
melted snow had frozen hard, a carriage was drawn up, and the
hoar frost glistened on its shafts. The daybreak moon shone clear,
though there were dark corners ; and yonder on the gallery of
the unfrequented Great Hall one who did not look a common
man was seated with a woman on the rail. They were engaged
in talk, which, whatever it may have been about, seemed as if it
would never end. She appeared to be of excellent carriage and
figure, and the way in which there came a sudden waft of vague
perfume was very pleasing. Delightful, too, to watch their
gestures and to catch now and again fragments of their talk.

106. — The priest Koya no Shoku Shonin once when on his
way up to Kidto was met on a narrow path by a woman riding
on a horse, whose groom, through clumsy leading, caused the
sage's horse to fall into the ditch. The sage scolded him most
angrily, saying “ What extraordinary rudeness is this? See
here ! The four grades of disciples — a bikuni is lower than a
biku, an ubasoku is lower than a bikuni , an ubai is lower than
an tibasoku. This is monstrous conduct, for a mere ubai to
drive a biku into the ditch !” The groom said “ I cannot make
out what you are saying, Sir,” and at this his Reverence
fuming still more, shouted “ What sayest thou, fellow without
Doctrine or Practice ?”, and then, looking as if he felt he had
used words beyond measure insulting, turned his horse round
and fled !

Surely a very noble dispute !


The -whole of this passage is very reminiscent of the Genji Monogatari (Ila-
shi-llime no Maki). The rendering of the last paragraph is conjectural.

IvoYA no Siioku Siionin jfS if S Jl A • Hi* identity is uncertain,

hut he appears to have been a disciple of Kobo Daislii.

Disciples. Followers of Buddha.

Biku (Sanskrit, Bhikshu) a priest.

Bikuni (S. Bliikshaui) a priestess 01 nun.

Ubasoku (S. Upasaka) a lay believer, man.

Ubai (S. Upasika) a lay believer, woman.


THE TSUftEDZERE GUSA OF YOSHIDA NO KANKYOSHI. 6 <J

: . 107* — 1° the time of Kameyama no In some frolicsome Court
ladies, holding that there are very few men who can at once
give a fair answer to a question put by a woman, used, when-
ever young men came to see them, to ask as a test, “ Have you
heard the nightingale ?”

A certain Dainagon replied, “ Such an insignificant person
as myself cannot hear it!’* The Home Minister Horikawa
said, “ I believe I heard it at Iwakura.” “There is nothing
wrong with that,” they criticised, “ but ‘ insignificant person f and
so on will never do.”

It was said of the former Regent Jooojr that it was
because he had been well instructed in his youth by the
Princess Akimon-in, on the principle that a man should
always be brought up so as not to be laughed at by women,
that his manner of speech was so good.

Yamashina, Minister of the Left, used to say he felt most
bashful and ill at ease when even a common serving woman
looked at him.

If there were no women in the world, no one would ever
be careful of his dress or his headgear.

One would think that the character of these Woman, before
whom people are so ashamed, was a very fine thing indeed, yet
a woman’s disposition is always crooked.

Practising Buddhists being dividedinto those who leave home (&§}£) to enter a
religious life, or those who remain at home (;££§£) and are secular believers. —
ana gam and sdgdra .

Learning and Religion— the doctrine and the practise of Buddhism respective-
ly. The groom, not understanding these technical terms, hardly realized he was
being insulted in the strongest language Sh6ku could find.

Noble. Because he felUie had lost his temper, and fled.

Fair answer. They argued that most men wd. turn a flattering speech, or make,
some self-depreciatory remark, but very few would give a straightforward answer.

Frolicsome * zarelaru.’ A var. lec, is 1 shiretaru ,’ which would mean
“ artfully inquisitive.”

Instructed. Both teacher and pupil being persons of high rank, the
honorific used is but feebly represented by one English verb, — oshienu\irasase~
tamaikem /


70 THE TSUREDZURE GUSA OF VOSHIDA NO KANEVOSHI.

The trait of Selfishness is strong. Greed is powerful.
They do not know the Reason of Things, and their hearts are
quickly inclined to error. Their speech is clever. They will
not reply even to a harmless question. Out of discretion, one
might think, but No! — for, on the other hand, they will,
unasked, utter the most silly things in their talk.

Deep in deceit and lies, one would think them superior to
men in cunning. Yet they do not see that they are found out
in the end.

Dishonest and yet unskilful— this is Woman. One must
be infatuated indeed to wish to please her, and to gain her
approval. Why therefore be ashamed before Women. If there
were a Wise Woman she would be cold and forbidding. It is
only when, mastered by infatuation, men are attached to women
that they find them tender and pleasing.

108. — No man is careful of small moments of time. Is this
through fullness of knowledge or through foolishness ? Speak-
ing for those whose neglect is due to foolishness, one may say
that a tenth of a penny is but a trifling sum, and, nevertheless,
it is by the accumulation of these that a poor man will become a
rich man. A merchant's care for his pennies is keen. So, though
we may not perceive the passing of the moments, yet,.. as they
progress unceasingly, of a sudden we reach the term of life.

Therefore the Wise Man will not be careful of far-off days
and months, but rather careful lest the Present Moment pass
unprofitably.

Should there come one to you and announce that To-
morrow you would without fail lose your life, until the close of
To day on what would you set your hope, what task would
you undertake ? *

What is the difference between this To-day that we are
living and such a season ?

Out of a single day much time is lost in Eating, Drinking,
Sleeping, Talking and Walking, that cannot be done without.


THE TSUREDZURE GUSA OF YOSHIDA NO KANEYOSHI. 7^

Foolish indeed it is, in the little space there is to spare from
these, jn doing unprofitable things, saying unprofitable things
and thinking unprofitable things, not only to pass the hours, but
to spend the days, to consume the months, and so to live a
whole life.

Though Shareiun was a transcriber of the sutras, his
mind was always fixed on thoughts of Clouds and Wind, and
therefore I£-On would not admit him to the Society of the
White Lotus.

Even for a time to be without this (conviction) is to be as
a dead man. And if one enquires why one should be so
grudging of time, the answer is, Let him who will withdraw,
withdraw, let him who will practise, practise, having no care
within, no business without.

109. — A man who was famous as a tree climber made a
person he was teaching climb a tall tree to cut the topmost
branches, but never said a word when he appeared to be in great
danger. When he was getting down, and had reached the height
of the eaves above the ground, he would call out, " Don’t make
a false step. Come down carefully.’

Someone said, u Why do you say that now he has got so
far? He might even jump down 1 now.” To this he replied,
u That is so. When a man feels dizzy, on a perilous branch,
he is in fear himself, and I say nothing. Mistakes always
happen when an easy place is reached.”

Though he was but a man of humble station, what he said
was in accordance with the teaching of the sages.

It is the same with a football. It is when a difficult kick
has been made, and the next appears easy, that one is sure to
miss, they say. *


' Clouds and Wind. i.e. Poetry.

Withdraw. The spiritual withdrawal from the mundane, while practise
means concrete devotion to religion.


7? THE TSUREDZURE GUSA OF YOSUIDA NO KANEYOSHI. ,

%

I io.— A man who was known for his skill at backgammon,
on being asked what his method of play was, replied, “ You
should never play to win, but so as not to lose. Think what
moves will be quickest beaten, avoid making them, and make
whatever move will take most time to beat, even by a square / 1

In learning any accomplishment, in controlling one’s own
conduct, and in governing a nation, the same rule applies.

111. — This saying of a certain sage struck me as very fine,

and remained in my cars : “ I think it is a greater wickedness

than even the four crimes and the five offences for a man to
delight in spending day and night at games of checkers and
backgammon.”

1 12. — What single worldly observance is there which cannot
be avoided ? If you comply with the demands of society and
persist in regarding them as inevitable, then your desires
increase, your person suffers, and your mind is never free from
care. You spend your whole life hindered by a succession of
trifling duties, and anon it comes to an unprofitable close.

The night falls, the way is long, and our life already
tottering. It is time to^ast loose all our ties. We must not
keep faith. We must not consider ceremony. People who are
not of this mind may call us mad, but there is no truth In them.
They may think us heartless, but we are not troubled that they
revile us, nor will we listen to their praise.

1 13. — When a man over forty who has leanings to lewdness
does Jiis best to conceal them, there is nothing more to be said ;
but when it shews in his speech and he jests about men and

Four crimes . Breaches of four of llie five Buddhist commandments
against Murder, Theft, Adultery and Lying. The fifth, and excluded, Crime is
Drunkenness.

The Five Offences are (3 lj2i) Patricide, Matricide, Murder of an Arkhan,
Brewing mischief between priests, and letting blood from a Buddha.

The night falls etc. (Quoted frem Pc-chil-i, QMM Biography.


* THE TSUREDZURE GUS& OF YOSHIDA NO KANEYOSHI. 73

women (in general) and the affairs of (particular) persons— it is '
indeed unpleasant "and unseemly.

Things which are unpleasant to see and disagreeable to hear
are; An oldman mixing with young people and trying to be
funny, A person of no importance talking as if he were very
intimate with people of reputation, and A man of poor circum-
stances fond of feasting, making a great shine to entertain guests.

114. — Once when Oidono of Jmadcgawa was proceeding
to Saga, Saio-Maku whipped up his Lordship’s bulls in a place
where there was running water near Arisugawa, so that they
splashed up a deal of water on to the front boards of the
carriage. Tamenori who was in attendance at the rear of the
carriage, said, “ You young rascal ! What do you mean by
whipping up His Lordship’s bulls in such a place ? ” At this
Oidono grew angry, and, exclaiming, " Thou, canst thou drive
a carriage better than Saio Maru ? Kascal thyself ! ” knocked
Tamenori’s head up against the carriage.

This well-known Saio Maru was a ^servant of Uzumasa
and Keeper of the Oxen in his household. The women em-
ployed by Uzumasa Dono were called, one IIizazachi, one
Kotodzuchi, one IIooaka and another Otoushj.

1 1 5. — At a place called Shukugahara a large number of
Boro boro were assembled, reciting the Prayer to Amida, when
there entered from without a boro boro who said , i( Is there among

Making a shine. Literally,- — ‘ Kirameku

Oidono. vide No. 70.

Uzumasa. A Fuji war a Noble (Nobukiyo), Naidaijin at the lime. It seems
he was such a bull-fancier that he even named his servants after various types of
oxen. Ilizazachi is ( strong- kneed/ kolodzuchi means ‘round and flit like a
mallet,’ Ilobara is ‘ big-bellied,* a good ‘ point ’ in a bull, and Otonshi is the
latest born calf of a cow, considered the best.

Said. The villagers of Yaseohara were employed as drivers of the ox-carts
used by the Court. They let their hair grow long in front, and gathered it up
into a queue at the back. Perhaps the youthful appearance this gave them
accounts for their all being named ( Maru.’


74 the tsuredzure gusa of yoshida no kaneyoshi. *

you a priest named Irooshi, Sirs ? v The reply came forth
'from (their midst, 41 Irooshi is here. VVho is it that speaks ? ”
44 1 am called Shirabonji. My master so and so was, I have
heard, killed in the Eastern provinces by a boro named Irooshi.
I wish to have the honor of meeting that gentleman, and aveng-
ing my master’s death. That is why I ask.” Irooshi replied,
44 Nobly asked, Sir ! I did do such a thing. But an encounter
here would pollute this place of devotion. Let, us meet in the
river-bed in front, therefore.” 44 1 am humbly grateful.”
44 Pray' let not the company present assist either party. If too
many Ihould get into trouble, it would hinder the performance
of the service of Buddha.”

Having thus arranged matters, the two went out to the
river bed, where they pierced one* another to their hearts’
content, and died together.

They say that formerly there were no boroboro , but they
began in recent times, with men who were named 4 Boronji,*

4 Bonji,* 4 Kanji 9 and so on.

Wilful and determined, they appear to be devoted to the
Way of Buddha, but they make strife and quarrel their business.
Though dissolute and cruel in appearance, they think lightly of
Death, and cling not at all to Life. The bravery of such men
having impressed me, I set this down as it was related to me.

1 1 6. — The people of ancient times never went out of their
way to give names to shrines and temples, or to things in general,
for that matter. They just simply named them accordingly to
the facts.

Nowadays names sound as if people had' racked their
brains to show their cleverness, which , is altogether wrong. In
personal names, too, it is a useless thing to use characters which
one rarely sees. A' desire for curious things, a fondness for

Boroboro. Another term for komuso , wandering, swashbuckling priests.
They adopted as names such words as Bonji etc. (Sanskrit), and this fact

gave rise to their appellation.


THE TSUREDZURE GUSA OF YOSHIDA NO KANEYOSHl. 75

uncommon opinions, is a sure characteristic of people of shallow
understanding. . /

1 17 — There are seven sorts of people whom it is bad to
have as friends.

First, Men of high rank and power.

Second, Young people.

Third, Strong people who are never ill.

Fourth, People fond of wine.

Fifth, Fierce and bold military men.

Sixth, People whose speech is false.

Seventh, Greedy people.

Good friends are three. Friends who make gifts, Doctors,
and friends who are wise.

/

1 19. — A fish called katmo, in the sea near Kamakura, is un-
equalled in that pait of the country, and has been much prized
of late. The old men of Kamakura say, “ Up till our young
days, this fish was never set before people of standing. Even
the servants did not eat the head, but cut it off and threw it
away/’

In these latter times, even such things as these have pene-
trated as far as the very highest.

120. — We could do without anything from China, except
drugs. As for books, they are spread all over this country, and
we could copy them. It is a foolish thing for ships from China
to make the perilous journey over here, crammed with cargoes
of useless things.

Is it not written, moreover, ‘‘Neither treasuring things
from afar, nor prizing jewels that are rare 99 ?

Neither Treasuring, etc. From Confucius. (#?»

A recent commentary points out that already a 1 ,000 (sic) years ago ’JCenko
was teaching that it is wrong to use foreign goods, and says that this shews
remarkable insight. ‘ China ’ is i Kara / even nowadays sometimes synonymous
with “ foreign parts.”


y6 THE TSUREDZURE GUSA OF YOSHIDA NO KANEYOSHt.


1 21. — Of domestic animals, horscs'and oxen, though it is a
pity to have to keep them in irksome bondage, cannot be done
without, so there is no help for it ; dogs, too, are superior to
rnen in the task of watching and defending, and are therefore
necessary ; though, as every house has one, it is well not
purchase one specially.

All other birds and beasts are useless. When beasts that
run are shut in houses and tied with chains ; or birds that fly
are thrust in cages and their wings clipped, then they long for
the clouds and think of the hills and fields. They never cease
from grief; and who that has a heart can take pleasure in
feelings which, if he himself were to suffer them, would be
unbearable ? lie whose eyes are delighted by torture of living
tilings has a heart like Kktsii and Chiu.

The Prince Yu was a lover of birds. He watched them
sporting among the trees, and made them the companions of
his walks abroad, lie did not capture and torture them. It is
written that “ in a state neither should strange birds nor curious
beasts be kept.”

122. — Of a man’s abilities first comes a knowledge of the
teachings of the Sages, by a clear understanding of Literature.
Next is handwriting, which should be studied, even though not as
an object in itself, as an aid to Learning.

> Next should be learned the art of Medicine. Without
Medicine, a man cannot care for his own body, nor help others,
nor perform his duties to parents and his lord.

Next come Archery and the Riding of a Horse, from
among the Six Accomplishments, and they certainly must be
given attention.

K K'J'SU as king of in China, a, monarch whose name, with that of Clllu
jfd' king of Jjj£, is a byword for cruel and tyrannical behaviour. Roth of them
took pleasure in watching strange forms of torture.

Literature : 4 Fumi/ meaning the philosophical classics and the sulras.

Six Aceomflishments. These are (l) Etiquette, (2) Medicine (3) Archery
(4) Horsemanship (5) Writing (6) Counting.


THE TSUREDZURE GUSA OF YOSHIDA NO KANEYOSHI.

A knowledge of Letters, Arms and Medicine cannot in
truth be done without ; and a man who will learn these cannot
be said to be an idle person.

Food is man’s Heaven,” and it must be accounted a
great virtue in a man to know how to prepare well-tasting food.

Next is Handicraft, which has a thousand uses.

Beyond these, too many accomplishments are a source of
shame t^ high and low. Skill in poetry, talent for music are
fine and admirable qualities ; but though Sovereign and subject
may prize them, nowadays a condition of things has been
reached where it would .seem foolish to (expect to) govern a
state by their means. Though gold is superior, it cannot equal
iron in the multitude of its uses.

- 123. — A man who spends his time doing unprofitable things
must be called both foolish and wicked. There are many things
to be done, which may not be neglected, for Country and for
King. The leisure that is left from these is little enough. It
must be cherished.

Of these things which a m m must perforce attend to for
his own person, first comes his Food, second, his Clothing, and
third, his Dwelling.

The chief business of man is none other than these three.
To live peacefully, without being hungry, without being cold,
without being harmed by wind and rain — this is Happiness.

Nevertheless, to all men there comes Sickness, and the
sorrow brought by the attacks of Sickness is hard to bear.
The art of Healing should not be forgotten.

Food is man's Heaven. Quoting iron; Heaven is that in which

Life depends. Similarly “ People arc the i leaven of the Sovereign. Food is the
Heaven of the People.”

Handicraft is $p| L, Mine work,’ and probably means such manual Recoin-
plishments as carving wood, etc., which would serve a variety of practical
purposes.

Music and Poetry. While ornamental, serve no practical purpose; tor
though in olden times they sufficed to influence men’s hearts to good, in these
degenerate days a ruler must adopt more forcible methods of persuasion.


78 THE TSUREDZURE GUSA OF Y 0 SHIDA NO KANEYOSHl.

Not to have got these four things, together with Music, is
to be poor. Not to be lacking in them is to be rich. To seek
to obtain more than these four is Luxury. These four things,
for one who is frugal, who can say that they do not suffice ?

125. — Once:, those left behind (by one who died) invited a
certain holy man to perform the ceremonies of the 49 days. So
beautiful was his exposition of the Law that everyone shed
tears. After he had left, those who had heard him were talking
together ; remarking that to-day they had been more than
usually impressed ; whereupon someone replied, “ Why, of
course — since he’s so like a Chinese dog.” Meaning that the
priest was so like a Chinese dog that he must have all the
Chinese learning.

Whereupon their feeling of wonder vanished, and they were
all amused.

What a way of praising a priest !

Again, so said someone, for one who wishes to persuade
another to take wine, first to drink himself and then to offer it
to the other is as if one were about to cut another with a sword.
In each case we have an edged weapon. Taking it up, and
first cutting our own head off, we cannot wound another. Get-
ting drunk first oneself, and lying down, others will hardly
take any.

This was very funny. Had he made a trial with a sword,
I wonder.

126. — Someone once said, ‘‘When once party has lost
“ heavily at gambling, and proposes to stake his all, the other
“ party should not play. He should recognize that the moment
" has come when the luck will turn and his opponent win time


126. Not much instruction can be derived from this paragraph, for an alterna-
tive reading makes it appear that the loser, recognizing that his opponent is in the
vein, should risk no more, but he content with what is left. The first interpreta-
tion is better, however; otherwise, good gambler’ loses its point.


THE TSUKEDZURE GUSA OF YOSHXDA NO KANEYOSHI.


“ after time. A good gambler is one who knows when this
“ moiikcnt has come/'

127. — If there is no advantage in changing a thing, it is
better noi; to change it.

1 28. — The Dainagon Masafusa was a good man, of fine under-
standing, His Majesty the retired Emperor had the intention,
indeed, of making him a general, but, about this time, someone
attached to His Majesty’s person said, “ I saw a very evil thing
just now.” “ What was that? ” enquired His Majesty, and the
reply was, ‘* 1 saw, through a hole in the fence, Masafusa cut off
the legs of a live dog, in order to feed his hawks.” His Majesty
was disgusted, and he did not promote Masafusa.

Though it was strange of such a personage to possess
hawks, the story of the dog’s legs was without foundation. The
slander was a great pity, but His Majesty’s displeasure on heart
ing of such a thing was noble.

Those who find it a pleasant sport to kill living things, or
to hint them or make them fight, are akin to beasts of prey.

If we carefully observed the condition of all beasts and
birds, 'down even to the small Insects, we see that they love
their children and are fond of their parents ; that male and
female consort together ; that they feel iea lousy and anger ; that
their desires are manifold ; that they cherish their bodies and
grudge their lives — all much more so than men, and this entire-
ly because they have no Reason. Is it not pitiful indeed to give
pain to such as these or to deprive them of their lives.

A, man without the sentiment of mercy towards every single
thing that has Feeling acts contrary to the principle of Humanity.

J27. Meaning, e.g. that old customs, which are not in themselves harmful,
and the abolition of which would king no benefit, may as wcil be left unchanged.

128. The retired Emperor. J^, meaning Go-Uda.

General. A Taisho, commander of the Household Troops, — a high
appointment..

Strange. If he had been a thoughtful Buddhist, he would have realized
that hawks, being takers of life, should not have been in’ his possession at all.


80 TllE TSUREDZURE GUSA OF YOSI1IDA NO KANEYOSJHI.

129. — Though the joys, the angers, the griefs and the
pleasures of older people are all empty and unreal, yet who is
there that docs not firmly believe them to be something real and
actual ?

More harm is done to a man by afflicting his mind than by
hurting his body.

Sickness, too, is chiefly come by through the mind*
Sickness from without is rare. Though there is often no effect
when a man takes drugs to make him sweat, let him once have
some' cause for shame or fear, and he will nftst surely drip with
sweat — and this, it must be marked, is the work of the mind
VVe arc not without the example of him who inscribed the
tablet of Ryoun and became a white-haired man !

130. — There is nothing better than to refrain from Con-
tention ; to yield oneself, and to follow others, to put oneself
last and others first.

Those who like games where the players compete for
victory do so because of the pleasure they get from winning.
But if a man rejoices because his skill excels another’s, it follows
that he will find it unpleasant to lose. Still less will he take
pleasure in playing a game to rejoice another by losing himself.

To get amusement oneself making others feel dissatisfied is
contrary to Morality.

Even when jesting among friends, one man will hoodwink
and deceive another, taking pleasure in his superior knowledge.
This, again, is against Propriety. Many a long contipued
hatred, of every sort, is thus first formed, arising out of some
convivial gathering. All these are the fault of a love of
contention.

If you have a mind to excel others, then let your only
desire be for Learning, that you may excel them in Wisdom.

Ryoun “ Cloud-topping.” The name of a lofty pavilion. The

writer of the tablet was hauled up to :he top in a basket, and when he came
down his hair had turned while. The story occurs in the

Learning . Of course meaning the study ot Religion and the philosophers.


THE TSUREDZURE GUSA OF YOSHIDA NO KANEYOSHJ. 8 1

For, if you study the Way, then you will learn not to be piuud
of your Virtues, and not to contend with your fellows.

It is the power of Learning alone that makes men give up
high Office and throw away Great Profit.

1 3 1. — With the poor Propriety is Money, with the old
Propriety is Strength.

To know your own condition, and to refrain immediately
from what is beyond you reach is Wisdom. If you arc not
allowed to do so that is the fault of others ; but if you presis-
tently strive, not knowing your condition, that is your own
fault. If a poor man does not know his condition, he steals.
If a man of impaired strength does not know his condition, he
falls sick.

132. — The name Toba noTsukurimichi was not given after
the Toba Pavilion was built, but is an old name. In the Ribo-
b-ki, h is written that the voice of Ilis 1 lighness Motoyoshi was
of such excellence, when he was making the Address to the
Throne on the First ] )ay, that he was heard from Taikiokuden
to Toba m Tsukunmichi.

133. — In the Imperial Bedchamber the pillow is to the Fast.
The pillow is placed to the Fast in order to receive the influence
of Light. Confucius too lay with his head to the least.

Propriety fig. As mentioned above, this ^stands for social italics as opposed
to abstract Morality or Virtue, jg. r l lie gist of tlie passage is that men will not
realize their limitations, either of position or ability. A poor man thinks the
demands of Propriety can only be fulfilled by spending on others money which
lie cannot -'pare ; a weak man by using for others strength, of which lie has but
little. One should lie content with one’s station in life and one’s natural gifts.

Toba no Tsuhmmichi The palace of the retired Kmpcror

Shirakawa. Toba was a southern suburb of the ancient Capital. As proof that
the name is not new, Kenko quotes chronicles of the reign of Daigo, long before
the Tobaden was built.

Ribb-o-ki. Ribu is the Chinese equivalent of Department of

Ceremonies. The Ribo-0 was an Imperial Prince (££), Shigeakira. The
chronicles are still extant and consulted by students.


82 THE TSUREDZURE GUSA OF YOSHIDA NO KANEYOSHI.


In the arrangement of bedchambers in some mansions,
however, a Southward pillow is common.

The Emperor Shirakawa used to sleep towards the North.
The North is inauspicious. Moreover Ise is to the South, and
people asked how it was 1 lis Majesty put the direction of the
Great Shrine behind him. But in worshipping the Great
Shrine from afar the Emperor faces to the South East, not the
South.

134. — A certain sammaiso of the Ilokke temple of Taka-
kura-In, a Risshi, once took a mirror and looked carefully at his
face. So grieved was he at the ugliness and meanness of his
own appearance that even a mirror was hateful to him, and after-
wards for a long time he was afraid of a mirror, and never took
one in his hand. He did not mix at all with others, but kept in
seclusion, only performing his duties in the temple. Such is a
tale I was told, and thought it a very rare story.

Even those who have an air of being wise judge of others
only, and do not know themselves. It cannot be in reason to
know others and not to know oneself. Therefore one who
knows himself may be said to be a man who has knowledge.

Though our looks be unpleasing, we do not know it. We
do not know that our hearts are foolish. We dc not know
that our skill is poor. We do not know that our station
is lowly. We do not know that we grow old in years.
We do not know that sickness attacks us. We do not
know that death is near. We do not know that we have not

Shirakawa was a devout Buddhist and being prepared for death at any
moment, slept in the posture of Sliaka entering Nirvana— reclining on the right
side, the head to the North, the face to the West.

he being the shrine of the Sun-Goddess, it would be wrong to sleep with
the feet towards it, but, as Kenko points out, the Emperor, when worshipping
from his palace in Kioto, faces South East for Ise.

Sammaiso. A priest, here of the ffokke sect, whose duty it is to perform
Sammai (Sanskr, Samadhe), an intense absorption in self, which excludes all
sensation of external things. This priest was a risshi one of the higher

grade, next below sodzu, •


THE TStJRHDZURE GUSA OF YOSftlDA NO KANRYOSfU. 83

attained the Way we follow. We do not know what evil is in
our own persons, still less what calumny comes from without.

But, you may say, our looks can be seen in a mirror, years
may be known by counting, and we are not unawaie of our char-
acter, though, because it cannot be helped, it appears as if we were
unaware thereof. Nevertheless you are not told to change voui
looks, nor to make young your years. If you know your un-
skilfulness, why do you not withdraw? if you know you have
grown old, why do you not live in tranquil ease ? If you know
your behaviour is foolish, why should your thought be not
your deed ?

It is ever a shame for a man to mix in company where he
is not liked and welcomed. Ugly in looks and base in feeling,
to take service ; lacking knowledge, to mix with great minds ;
having meagre accomplishments, to sit beside men of parts ; with
snow-white head, to go among those in their prime ; nay, more !
to desire what cannot be attained, to grieve at what cannot be
compassed, to await what will not come, to be dreaded by others,
to flatter] others — this is not a shame put on a man by others,
but it is he who shames himself, drawn on by his own greedy
heart.

And why greed never ceases is because men never surely
know tiiat Now and Here has come the great occasion, the end
of life.

135. — One Sukesok Dainagon Nyudd, meeting the Prime
Minister the Chiujb Tomoujt, said to him “ Whatever question
you ask me I will answer. No matter what.”

“I wonder,” said Tomouji. “Well,” was the reply,
“pray dispute with me!” “Of serious matters I have not
even a scrap of learning, so it is useless to question you concern -

Yoitr thought, your deed. A quotation. " Korc wo ornou koto, kore ni ari.”
meaning that what is earnestly felt to be is; so that he who has a
sense of his own foolishness ought to fed that he should do better, and con-
sequently to do better.


84 the tsuredzure gusa of yoshida no kaneyoshi.

ing such. I will do myself the honour of asking about some
trifle, some piece of nonsense, which I do not understand.”

“ The more so if it is some small matter of our own
country, whatever it be I will make it clear to you.”

The retinue and the women in waiting thought this a divert-
ing dispute, the more so if the discussion should take place
before His Majesty. So they arranged that he who was
defeated should provide a feast, and they were summoned
together to the Presence. Then Tomouji said, “There is
something which I have been used to hear from my youth up,
but have never understood. What is the meaning of the words
UMANOKITSURYOKITSUNINOWOKANAKAKUnOREIRIKUKENnO? I pray
you tell me.

The Dainagon was at a loss. “ This is nonsense,” he said,
“ and there is no need to answer.”

“ Yes,” replied Tomouji, “ but did I not arrange with
you that, since of course I have no deep learning, I should ask
you some piece of nonsense ? ”

So the Dainagon lost, and, they say, had to pay his forfeit
most handsomely.

136. — The Physician Atsushige, when in attendance on the
late Ivmpcror-in- Retirement, was once asked by Ilis Majesty,
when His meal was served, what was the efficacy, and how to write
the names, of the various dishes. He replied from memory, and
said, “ I pray Your Majesty will deign to compare this with
the book Homo. I think there will not be a single mistake.”
At that moment th e Home Minister Rokujo en tered. “Here

Our own country. Tomouji, having no classical, Chinese knowledge, will
ask some question relating to Japan, which, says Sukesue, will be the easier to
answer, since it does not need classical, i.e. Chinese scholarship.

Umanokitsmyd etc. Neither Sukesue nor anyone else has ever been able to
find the meaning of these syllables. It is suggested that they are a charm to be
uttered when a horse is sick.

Homo. a common title for herbals.

RoKUjtj. The Dainagon Arifusa, a calligraphist and poet of repute, and
Minister under Ilanazono.


THE TSUREDZURE GUSA OF VOSHIDA NO KANEVOSHI. 8$

is a chance to learn something,” said Arifusa— “ Now what is
the radical in the character for salt ? ”

' It is the radical Earth 9 said Atsusl »ige.

“ Ah ! Now the extent of your talent is already clear !
That will do. There is nothing to admire.” At which words
there was a burst of laughter, and Arifusa withdrew.

iy/. — Are we only to look at flowers in full bloom, at the
moon when clear?

Nay, to look out on the rain and long for the moon, to
draw the blinds and not to know the passing of the Spring — these
arouse even deeper feelings*. There is much to be seen in young
boughs about to flower, in gardens strewn with withered blossom.
Where, in the titles of verses, it is written “ On going to see the
blossoms, but they had too quickly fallen and passed away ” or
“ On being prevented from going to see the blossoms,” arc the
verses inferior to those written “ On seeing the blossoms ” ?

Men are wont to regret that the moon has waned or that
the blossoms have fallen, and this must be so ; but they must be
perverse indeed who will say, This branch, that bough is
withered, now there is nought to see.

In all things, it is the Beginning and End that are interest-
ing. The love of men and women, — is it only when they meet
face to face ? To fed sorrow at an unaccomplished meeting,
to grieve over empty vows, to spend the long night sleepless
and alone, to yearn for distant skies, in a neglected home to
think fondly of the past — this is what Love is.

Rather than to sec the moon shining over a thousand
leagues, it sinks deeper into the heart to w|tch it when at last it
appears towards the dawn. It never moves one so much as
when seen, pale green over the tops of the cedars on distant
hills, in gaps between the trees, or behind the clustering clouds

The radical for salt. The correct character is §jg, where the radical (the
question was actually about the hm jjjf) is doubtful. 'There is no hen, and the
form *s is incorrect.


86 THE TStJREDZURE GUSA OF YOSHIDA NO KANEYOSHt.


after showers of rain. When it shines bright on the leaves of
oak and evergreen, and they look wet, the sight sinks deep into
one’s being, and one feels ‘ Oh ! for a friend with a heart,’ and
longs for the capital.”

And must we always look on the moon and the blossoms
with the eye alone ? Nay, in the very thought thereof, in the
Spring though we do not go abroad, on moonlit nights though
we keep our chamber, there is great comfort and delight.

A well-bred man does not show strong likings. His
enjoyment appears careless. It is rustic boors who take all
pleasures grossly. They squirm and struggle to get under the
blossoms, they stare intently, they drink wine, they link verses,
and at last they heartlessly break off great branches. They
dip their hands and feet in springs ; they get down and step on
the snow, leaving footmarks ; there is nothing they do not
regard as their own.

It was a most strange way in which some people of this
sort behaved who went to see the Festival. The sights, said
they, were very late in coming, and meanwhile it was useless to
be on the staging. So they went into an inner room, where
they drank wine, ate food, and played checkers, backgammon
and other games. They left someone on the staging, and
when he cried 1 It’s coming ’ they all rushed up pell-
mell, fit to burst their livers, and pushing forward the
blinds leaned out till on the point of falling. They stared as if
they did not mean to miss a single sight, making remarks on
everything, and then, when it had gone by, they went down
again, saying, “ Until the next comes.” It seems that all they
wanted was to see thqjsights. The better sort of people in the
Capital doze, and see nothing at all. Young people, and those
of the lower orders, those serving the shrines, or those in
attendance on others, do not stretch forward and look over


A friend with a heart. A friend with a fine appreciation of the beauties of
nature, who could enter into one’s feelings.


THE TSUKEDZURE GUSA OF YOSHIDA NO KANEYOSHI. 8/

people s shoulders, in an unsightly way, and there is no one
who is intent on seeing at all costs.

With the soft beauty of hollyhocks that are Just hung
everywhere about, the charm of stealthily approacning carriages
before the break of day, when you guess That is so-and-so and
That is so-and-so, and there are coachmen and servants you
know by sight — it is not wearisome to watch all sorts of folk,
some queerly, some gaily dressed, going to and fro.

When night falls, whither have gone the carriages that
stood in rows, and the close ranks of people ? They soon
become scarce, the noise of carriages dies down, blinds and
mats are taken away. The scene grows to loneliness before
one’s eyes, saddening indeed as one feels that this is the way
of the world.

To see the streets is to see the Festival. You know from
the many people you recognize, of the crowd who pass to and
fro before the staging, that the number of people in the world
is not so very large — so small, indeed, that even were you
appointed to die only when all these had passed away, you
would have but a little time to wait.

If you pour water into a large vessel, and make a tiny hole
in it, though it drips but a little, yet if it goes on steadily
leaking, soon there is none left.

Of all the many people in the Capital, there cannot be
a day when some one does not die. Kven if it is only one or two
in a day, though there will be days when many will be taken
to Toribeno, to Funaoka, and other moorland places, there is
no day on which none are taken.

Therefore the dealers in coffins can never make enough
to keep a stock.

Hollyhocks . The streets were decorated with these flowers (aoi) and they
are frequently mentioned in contemporary literature. In a catalogue of “ Things
which excite regret for the past ” in the jVIakura no Sdshi, we find “ withered
hollyhocks,” — which served to remind one of the bright dftys of the Festival.
The following section (138) deals with this custom.


88 THE TSUREDZURE GUSA OF YOSHIDA NO KANEYOSHI.


Young or strong, it matters not, the unforeseen is Death.
That you have escaped it until to-day is a miracle, for which
to be thankful. Can you even for a little space think tranquilly
of Life.

It is like making with backgammon counters the pattern
called mam ago date. When they are arranged you cannot tell
which will be taken ; but when you count, and take one, the
others seem to have escaped, and yet, when you count again,
and light on one after another, not a single one remains.

When soldiers go forth to war, knowing they are neaf to
death, they forget their homes, they forget their own selves.
In a thatched hut, withdrawn from the world, peacefully
enjoying the rocks and streams, vain it is to hear of these things
and feel that they concern you not. Into the still recesses of
the mountains shall not the enemy Change come warring ? To
face that death is the same as to march to the field of battle.

138. — Once a certain person had all the hollyhocks taken
down from his blinds when the Festival was over, saying they
were no longer of any use. I thought this was unfeeling, but as
it was done by a great man, supposed it was the proper thing.
But there is a poem by Suwo no Naishi :

Mamagodatc. An arrangement of black and while checkers in the
following order.

B-0 OM##OIOOO

• o

o o

o' a •

ooott#o#ioi

If you count clockwise starling from A, and remove the 10th checker, and
continue from the next, then remove the 10th checker therefrom, and so on, all
the white checkers but B will be removed. Continuing then from B in the same
way, all the black checkers nre taken, leaving only B, which, strictly speaking,
should also be removed.


THE TSUREDZURE GUSA OF YOSllIDA NO KANEYOSHI. 89

“ in vain they hang on the blinds,

the withered leaves of holly-
hocks that we cannot see
together,”

which she is said in her Collected Poems to have composed
about the withered leaves of hollyhocks stuck on the blinds of
the main building (of the Palace). In the descriptions of old
poems, too, we find “ A poem sent attached to withered
hollyhocks.” In the Makura no Soshi also it is written,
“ Things that excite regret for the past — withered hollyhocks,”
which strikes me as very fine and touching. In the Tales of the
Four Seasons Kamo Chornci writes, “ The hollyhocks after the
the Festival remained on the beaded blinds.”

IIow is it possible to throw away without regret what
anyhow of itself anon must wither? Again, since it is said
that the scent-balls hung on the curtains in the doorways of the
Pal ace are changed for chrysanthemums on the 9U1 day of the
9 f h Month, the irises must remain until the chrysanthemum
time. After the Dowager Empress Biwa had passed away,

Ben no Menoto composed a stanza on seeing that

withered iris scent-bails still hung on the inside of the old
curtains.

139. — Trees that is desirable to have about the house are
the pine and the cherry. Of pines the goyd is good. Single
blossoms are best. There used to be double cherries only at
the Capital at Nara ; it is of late they have become common.
The blossoms at Yoshino and the Sakon cherry are all single.

Scent-balls . These are kmudama halls made of (lowers (in this case

iris) containing a bag of some scented drug, and having suspended from them a
number of silken cords of five colours. At the festival on the 5th of the 51I1
month these were presented to his courtiers by the Emperor, who tied them to
their elbows, or hung them on blinds and pillars. They were supposed to ward
off disease.

A stanza. It is not given here being meaningless in translation.

Goyoniatsu. Finus parvifolia.


QO THE TSUKKDZURK GUSA OF YDS HI DA NO KANEYOSIII.


The double cherry is exaggerated and specious. It is an
oddity. It is better not to plant it. The late cherry too is
disagreeable, and those which insects have got at arc nasty.
Of plums the white and the pink, blooming early, and the
double red with its lovely scent are all charming. The late
plum flowers together with the cherry, so that it is less
favoured, and sad it is to see its blossoms, overwhelmed by the
cherry, clinging withered to their branch.

Kiogoku Nyudo Ciiunagon said that the single ones,
bjooming first and falling, gladdened the heart sooner, and so
he planted single plum-trees- near his eaves. Two of these are
left to this day at the Kiogoku- den, on the side of the house
facing South.

Willows again are pleasing. More lovely than all the
flowers and red autumn leaves is the young maple of the 4th
month. Both orange and vine should be old and big.

Flowering plants are kerria, wisteria, iris and pink. For
ponds the lotus. Autumn plants are ogi 9 susuki> kic hik'd, luigi,
aminac $hi , fujikakama, shiotii , waremoko , karukaya , riiido , kiku.


Double cherries are said to have been planted at Kara by Shbmu
while the Yoshino cherries sprang from the staves of the gods.

Sakon Cherry. The Sakon no Sakttra and the Vkou no Taehibana are famous
trees, in the courtyard of the Shishind n, which were given Gourt rank Their
sites are still pointed out to visitors to the Palace.

Clinging withered, 'flic pi uni blossoms wither before they fill.

Iv Yoc.oku NyuJh> OhOnauon. The poet Sadaiyc.

vgi the reed.

susuki eularia.

kiehiko the kikyo.

hagi lespedeza.

ominaeshi patrinia.

fujibakama Kupatorium.

s/tioni (shion) aster.

waremoko burnet.

karukaya patrinia (also called ot 'T*», dii, to dist : from ominaeshi).

; indo gentian

kiku chrysanthemum.

kigiku „ (yellow).


THE TStJKEDZUHE GIJSA OF VOSHIDA NO KANEYOSHI.


9 *

kigikit , and tsvta, hidzu and asagao are good, on a small, low
bank, not in too great profusion.

Apart from these, all uncommon things, with nan.es that
sound hard and foreign and unfamiliar flowers, are not at all
desirable. Strange and rare things are mostly what amuse
|>eople of bad breeding. It is better to be without such.

140. — ‘The body dies, the treasure lett behind/ Such
i.j not the conduct of a wise man.

It is stupid to store up bad things. It is vain to set your
heart on good tilings — and still more regie ttable if they are
many and extravagant.

It is an unseemly thing when people quarrel over what is
left behind, saying "/must get it.” If there is someone for
whom you intend it afterwards, belter surrender it to him
while you are alive. Have those tilings which cannot be dis-
pensed with for your daily use. All other things arc better
done without.

141. — Ills Kminence (iyoken of the Hidcn-in, whose lay

name was Miura , was a warrior beyond compare.

A man from his old home came to talk to li’m, and said :
“ What the people of Adzuma say can be trusted. The people
of the Capital give fair answers, but they are false.”

The sage answered " No doubt you think so ; but I have
lived long in the Capital, and, now that I have grown used to
them, my view is that these people are not worse at heart. It
is because in general they arc soft-hearted and feeling, that, being
unable to refuse plainly what others ask, they cannot speak out
fully. They do not answer weakly thinking to deceive, but, as
they are all poor people who cannot do as they would, it must
often happen that, against their will, they are unable to carry


tsuta ivy

XWs/rpueraria (a creeper).
asagao convolvulus.


THE TStJREDZURE GUSA OF YDS HI DA NO KANEYOSHt.


out their intentions. The Adzuma people, though I am one
of them, have in truth no warmth of heart, and are deficient in
kindness. Being altogether strong — minded, and outspoken,
they say No at the outset and there is an end of it. Being
prosperous and rich, people trust them/’

Such was his explanation. This good man’s speech was
inelegant and harsh ; so that I wondered how he could have
any thorough understanding of the Sacred Teachings ; but
after this saying, I came to admire him, and felt that it was a
good thing that, he, out of the many, with such a such kindly
side, should have charge of the temple.

142. — Even men who seem heartless sometimes say a good
thing.

A certain wild barbarian of fearful appearance, meeting a
neighbour, said, “Have you any children?” “Not one,” he
replied. “ Then you cannot know the Pity of Things, and all
your doings must be with an unfeeling heart.” This was a
terrible saying, but it must be so, as he said, that by children
men come to feel the Pity of Things. Without the natural
affections, how could there be tiny love and compassion in the
heart of such a man. Even those who are without filial
affection, when they themselves have a child, realize their
parents’ love,

One who has forsaken the world is entirely alone and
destitute ; but it is wrong to despise utterly the common
flattery and strong desires^of those whose ties are many. If you
put yourself in their place you will in truth feel grief. For the
sake of their parents, for the sake of wife and child, they will
forget shame, and they will steal.

Therefore is it better, rather than only to put bonds on
thieves and punish wrong doing, so to rule the world that the
people of the world do not suffer from hunger and cold. When
a man has not a common livelihood he has not common
Common flattery. They must be obsequious.


±HE TSUREDZHRE GUSA OF YOSHIDA NO KYNEYOSHT.

feelings. When a man is in extremities he steals. When the
world is ill governed then the pains of cold and hunger are
present, and crime will not cease.

Having caused a people to suffer and break the law, then
to punish them, is a cruel business.

And further, if you ask how to do good to men, the
answer is, if those above give up their wasteful luxury, soothe
and foster the people, and encourage agriculture, there can be
no doubt that those below will profit.

It is he w ho, having the common share of food and eloth-
ing, yet will do evil, that must be called the true Thief.

143. — When you hear folk talking of the splendid way in
which a man has met his end, you would think that they would
feel admiration if only it were said that it was peaceful and undis-
turbed ; but foolish people add talk of strange and doubtful
appearances, and praise his words and behaviour according to
their own likings, — which, one feels, is contrary to what he him
self would have wished in life.

This great occasion is one which even incarnated saints
cannot determine, and scholars of wide learning cannot calculate.
If one’s own heart is not at fault, it matters not what others see
and hear.

145. — The body-guard I lata no Shigemi said to the Hoku-
men Shimotsuke no Nyudo Shingwan, “ You are destined to fall
from your horse. You should take great care.” Shingwan
did not believe it, but one day he fell from his horse and died.

People thought this saying of one so skilled in the art was
miraculous. They asked what the sign was. He said “ He
had a very loose seat, and was fond of spirited horses. That is
why I made the prediction. When have I been mistaken ?

146. — Myoun Zasu meeting a diviner asked “ Am I in
danger by the weapons of war ? ” The diviner replied, “ Indeed
the sign is there.” “ What is the sign ? ” he asked. " Your


94 THE TStJREDZURF. GUSA OF YOSHIDA NO KANEYOSHl.


lordship being one who is not likely to be in danger of a violent
death, the mere fact that you should think of it and ask the
question is already an omen of that danger? ”

And he did actually die, struck by an arrow.

147. — People have started to say of late that if the tnoxa
is applied in too many places a man becomes unclean for the
sacred offices. No such thing can be seen in the Precedents or
the Rites.

I4g.— P eople over 40, in applying the moxa, have a rising
of vapours unless the sanri is burned. It must be applied here.

149. — Rokusiio should not be put to the nose and smelled.
It is said to contain a small insect which enters by the nose and
feeds on the brain.

1 50. — It is often said that a man who would acquire any
Accomplishment should take care not to let others know while
he is yet unskilful, for it is by coming forward after having
thoroughly studied and learned that he will gain admiration.

Such people, however, cannot acquire a single Accomplish-
ment. A man who, from the time he is awkward and untrained,
will mix with those who are skilful and not be ashamed of
laughter and ridicule, and who stubbornly continues in his


JVIyoun FJJJHI Zasu ^ lc title the chief priests of the Knryakuji— first

held by a disciple of Pcnkyo Paishi in

Being a holy man he was not likely to meet his death in lighting. As a
matter of fact, he was shot, and then despatched, by one of Yoshinaka’s men at
the time of the assault (11S4), on Go-Shirakawa’s palace (llbjiiji), where he and
others from Ilieizan had come to help the Emperor. The whole story is told in
the Gempci-Seisuiki.

Precedents. Such works as the Enghhiki % I'.ngikakn i etc.

Works on the moxa state that (he application at the satin (a spot just
below head of tibula) cures dizziness, a common complaint, in those over 40.

Rokushb A powder, used in Medicine, compounded of the horns

(some authors say the gut) of a deer.


THE TSUREDZURE GUSA OF YOS1IIDA NO KANEYOSHI. 95

attachment, even though without the natural gift, will as the
years go on, by dint of persistence and care, at last reach a
degree of skill greater than those who, being gifted, are indif-
ferent. His high virtue recognized, he will gain an unequalled
name.

Some of the most skilful men in the world have at first been
said to be incapable, great shame has been put on others.

But if a man strictly observe the rules of his Way, and
keep a rein on himself, then, no matter what Way it be, he will
be a Scholar of renown and the Teacher of multitudes.


151. — A certain person has said, that Accomplishments in
which skill is not attained by the age of fifty should be abandoned.
Their zealous study will bring them to no goal. People cannot
laugh at an old man, and for him to mix with the multitude is
a pitiful and unpleasant sight.

It is better altogether, and more seemly, to give up all
tasks and be at leisure. lie is of low understanding who
spends a whole life irked by common worldly matteis. Ifthcie
is a thing you feel is desirable, then, though you may have it
taught you, it is well to withdraw when once, knowing the
substance thereof, you are no longer in darkness. But to
withdraw without having had any desire from the first that
is best of all.

l $ 2 . The sage Jonkn of the temple called Saidaiji was bent

^at the loins, his eyebrows were white, — he had in truth a look of
high virtue. When once he came to the Imperial Precincts,
the Home Minister Saionji crying “ Ho 1 how venerable,”
appeared to feel great faith in him. Lord Suketomo seeing
this, said “ It is because he is an old man,’' and so me time after

^firing them to no goal, because they must presently die. They will, more-
over, never be corrected, because people d<> not like to cast ridicule on their
seniors ^|nd it looks incongruous for an old man to mix an equal terms with his
juniors.

Suketomo. One of Godaigo’s great advisers.


g6 THE TSUKEDZUKE GUSA OF YOSllJDA NO KANEYOSHI.

he came, the tale goes, to the Minister, leading a shaggy dog,
wondrous old and lean, whose hair had fallen out, and said, “ Is
not this a venerable sight ! ”

153. — When Taniekane Dainagon Nyudo had been cap-
tured and was being led to the Rokuhara surrounded by
soldiers Lord Suketomo near Ichijo saw this and said, “ This is
noble. This ought to be a man’s object in living !

154. — It was he who taking shelter from the rain in the
gateway of the Toji where a number of cripples were assembled,
and seeing that they were all deformed in various ways, some
with arms and legs bent, some twisted, some turned backward,
thought to himself. “ They are, every one, singular freaks. By
all means, they must be chetished.” But, as he gazed at them,
soon the feeling of interest wore off, and he began to find them
ugly and loathsome, and thought “ There is nothing like that
which is simple and ordinary.” When he returned home,
though hitherto he had been fond of dwarf trees in pots, and
used to seek those out that were strangely bent and twisted to
rejoice his eyes, he now felt the\t their charm was gone, that it
was like being fond of yonder cripples, so he pulled up and
threw away all his trees that were planted in pots. This must
have been the case.

155. — A man who would follow the world must first of all
be a judge of moods, for untimely speeches will offend the ears
and hurt the feelings of others, and so fail in their purpose. He
has to beware of such occasions.

But falling sick, and bearing children, and dying, — these
things alone take no account of moods. They do not cease
because they are untimely. The shifting change of Birth, Life,
Sickness and Death, the real great matters, is like the surging


Tamckane was captured by the Hojos.
Object in living to die for Emperor.


THE TSUREDZURE CUSA OK VOSHIDA NO KANEYOSHr. 97

flow of a fierce torrent. It delays not for an instant, but
straightway pursues its course.

And so, for both priest and layman, there must be ho talk
of moods in things ;they must needs accomplish. They must

be free from this care and that, they must not let their feet
linger.

It does not turn to Summer after Spring has closed, nor
does the Fall come when the Summer ends. The Spring
betimes puts on a summer air, already in the'. Summer is the
hall abroad, and anon the hall grows cold. In the tenth
month comes a brief space of Spring weather. Grass grows
green, plum blossoms bud. So with the falling of leaves from
the trees. It is not that the trees bud once the leaves have
fallen, but, because they are budding from beneath, the leaves
unable to withstand the strain perforce must fall. An onward-
urging influence is at work within, so that stage presses on stage
with exceeding haste.

This again is exceeded by the changes of Birth, Age,
Sickness and Death. The four seasons have still an appointed
order. The Hour of Death waits for no order. Death docs
not even come from the front. It is ever pressing on from
behind. All men know of Death, but they do not expect it
of a sudden, and it comes upon them unawares. So, though
the dry flats extend far out, anon the tide comes and floods, the
strand.

1 56. — The Banquet when a Minister takes office is usually
held in a suitable place lent for the purpose. Uji no Sadaijin’s was
held in the Tosanjo Palace. Though it was at the time occupied
by the Emperor, His Majesty was pleased to move elsewhere
as it had been asked for.

Though there is no particular reason therefore, it was an
ancient practice to borrow the palace of the Dowager Empress.

157. — If we take up a pen, it suggests writing, if we take up


98 THE TSUREI 3 ZUKE GUSA OF YOSHIDA NO KANE^OSHI.

a musical instrument we think of making music. If we take up a
wine cup, we think of wine ; if we take up dice, it suggests
gambling. Ideas always come from association with acts, and
we should never even for a moment indulge in wrongful amuse'
ments.

, If we just glance at a verse of Holy Writ, without effort we
are aware of the text that follows and precedes. So of a sudden
the evil of many years may be reformed. If we had never
chanced to open the Book at that moment, how should we have
known this ? Such is the virtue of association.

If, without any impulse of the heart whatever, we kneel
before the Buddha, take up the bell, take up the book, then even
while we are carelessly performing pious tasks, a good work is
of itself being done. If even with wandering minds we sit on
the prayer mat unawares we become absorbed in contemplation.

Action and principle are fundamentally the same. If the
outward appearance do not offend, the inward reality is certain
to mature. We should not insist on our unbelief, but honour
and respect these things, (i.e. Religion).

158. — A certain person asked, “ What do you understand
to be the reason for throwing away what is left at the
bottom of a wine cup ? ” I replied “ One talks, of Gioto

(bottom congealing) so I suppose it means » throwing
away what congeals at the bottom.*’ “ No,” he said, “ That is
not so. It is Gioto (fish path). It is to leave something
to pour out and rinse the place which the mouth has touched.”

1 59. — The minctrinusubi is a series of knots tied in a cord, so
called because it resembles the shell called mina. This is what
a certain person of high degree said. It is a mistake to say
iiina,

JHsh path. Because a fish, though swimming in the great waters, is said to
keep to one path. So the wine which is left in the cup, when finally thrown
away, must Bow over the same path as that which was drunk, and thus cleanse
the place the lips have touched ! !


tEE TSUREDZURE GUSA OF YOSHIDA NO KANEYOSHI. 99

160. — Is if: wrong to say utsu instead of kakitru , of a tablet
over a gateway ?

Kade no Koji no Nihon Zemmon said kakn.

It is also wrong to say utsu of a staging for sight-seeing ?
It is usual to say utsu of planking laid on the ground. Of
stagings one should say kamau .

Similarly it is wrong to say goma taku. One says gain a
sum or s/iu sum.

In Gyoho it is wrong to read Ho with the pure

sound. It should be read with the impure sound, Gyoho , said
the Chief Priest of the Seiganji.

There are many similar cases in words we commonly use.


^.—The blossoms are said to be in their prime 150 days
after the winter solstice, or 7 days after the equinox ; but it is on
the whole correct to say 75 days from the first of Spring.

1(32. — Tiie rector (shoji) of the Henjoji for a long time made
a habit of feeding the birds in the pond. lie spread food about
up to just inside the temple, leaving one door open ; and then,
when a countless number of them had got inside, entered him-
self, shut the place up, and caught and killed them.

Some children cutting grass heard what seemed to be fear-
ful things going on. They told people about it, and the men
from the village rose and entered the temple, where they
saw the priest, mixed up with a mass of frightened, fluttering
geese, knocking them over and wringing their necks.

They seized him and brought him to the Commissioner’s

C — " ■ ■■ n- ■ n —

The correct usages are gaku kakuru. In rabari utsu , , sajiki kamau. Note the
omission of the particle wo.

Coma fffgg is Sanskrit, meaning to light a holy fire, therefore taku is tautolo-
gical. ' .

The blossoms, etc. i 5 o days from solstice is in May, 7 from equinox is

March 28, while 75 days from the first of Spring (i.e. New Year s day of Lunar
Calendar) is the middle of the 3rd lunar month,— somewhere near April *5*
which is about correct for Kioto.


100 THE TStfREDZtrfcE GUSA OE YOSHIDA NO KANEYOSHt.


Court. He was sent to gaol, with the birds he had killed hung
round his neck.

This happened in the time when Mototoshi Dainagon was
Commissioner.

163. — The people of the Bureau of Astrology had an argu-
ment as to whether there should be a dot in the character of

Morichika Nyudo said : The Konoe Regent has a writing
on astrology, with notes on the back in the hand of Yoshihira.
There it is written with the dot.

164. — When people meet they are never for a moment
silent. They always speak. Listen to what they say, and it is for
the most part unprofitable talk, — popular rumours, gossip about
people, doing little good and great harm to themselves and
others. When conversing of such things, they do not know
that it is without profit for either of them.

165. — It is unpleasant to see how people from the East mix
with people of the Capital, and people of the Capital go to the
East to set themselves up in the world, and priests of every sect
leave their monasteries and temples — all mixing in * a society
with customs not their own.

166. — When we look at the tasks with which men busy
themselves, it is as if, having made a snow Buddha on a spring
day, they would fashion 'ornaments of gold and silver and jewels
and erect a shrine and a tower for it. Is it likely that they will be
able to get the building ready and install the image safely in its
place ? So long as men’s lives, also, appear to last, and ail the
while are melting from beneath like snow, many are the tasks
they look forward to complete.


Commissioner The Kebiishi no Betto, the chief executive judicial officer.


the tsuredzure gusa op yosiiida no kanEyoshi. tot

167. — It is the usual thing for those who are devoted to a
particular Art, to say, and to feel in their hearts, when they are
watching a performance of some other Art, “ Ah ! If this were
only my Art, I should not thus look on without interest.” But
this is quite a wiong feeling. Rather if they be envious of the
knowledge they do not possess, should they say “ Alas ! How
enviable! Why did I never learn this?” To parade one’s
own wisdom and strive with others is of the same sort as a horned
animal lowering his horns, a tusked animal baring his tusks.
For man not to boast of Goodness, not to strive with others, is
Virtue.

It is a great error to be superior to others. Those who,
being of high estate, or exceeding talent, or famous lineage, feel
themselves superior to others, even though they do not say so in
words, offend somewhat in their hearts. They must take care
to forget these things. It is such Pride as this that makes a man
appear a fool, makes him abused by others, and invites Disaster.

A man who is truly versed in any Art will of his own
accord be clearly aware of his own deficiency, and therefore,
his ambition being never satisfied, he ends by never being
proud.

168. — When an old man excels in knowledge and skill in
one particular thing, so that it is said, “When he is gone of whom
shall we enquire ? ”, then it is not in vain that he still lives, to
uphold the cause of the aged. But though this is so, his very
devotion to this one thing means that he has lived his whole life
for it alone — which seems stupid.

Let him say, “ I have forgotten now.” Even though he
knows thoroughly, if he speaks carelessly and at random,
people will ask “Is he really so talented after all?” and
besides, mistakes cannot help occurring. To say “ I cannot tell
for certain ” is to be thought all the more a true Master of his
Art. More painful still is it to listen, thinking all the time " It
is not true,” to what is being told about a subject he does not


102 THE TSUREDZURE GUSA OF YOSIIIDA NO fcANEYOSHt

know, with a boasting air, by one who really ought not even to
discuss, however diffidently.

169. — It has been said that the term such-and-such a shiki
(ceremony) was not used until the reign of His Majesty Go
Saga, and is a word which has recently come into use ; but the
Ukyo no Daibu (Lady in waiting) of Ken-rei-mon-In, who was
again at court after Go Toba’s accession, has written that “ there
were no changes in the shiki from former days/'

170. — To go without any special object to a person’s house
is a bad thing. Even if we go on business, as soon as it is over,
we should immediately leave. It is very wrong to stay a long
time. Sitting there face to face, words are wasted, the body
fatigued, the mind disturbed, time is spent to the hindrance of
other things, all without profit to either party.

But it is bad, too, to talk as if it were tiresome to us.
When the subject is disagreeable to us, we should, on the con-
trary, say so.

It is a different matter when one after our own heart, who
desires our company, is at leisure ‘and says Stay a little longer !
To-day let us have a quiet talk. Every one has, at times, the
“ green eyes of Genseki.”

It is a pleasant thing when a person comes without business
and leaves after a quiet talk. Joyful, too, to get a letter just
asking how you are, after a long silence.


Kenrei-mon-In is the mother of Antoku Tennb. Her lady-in-waiting
remained at court after the defeat of the Taira family, — now in the service of
Go Toba. All this goes to prove that shiki ^ was used in that period, about 100
years before Go Saga.

Genseki One of the ‘ Seven Sages of the Bamboo Grove,’ who looked

on those he disliked with, * white eyes/ and those he favoured with ( green eyes.’
We all have bosom friends, whom we arc glad to see.

Say so. Don’t merely appear bored, but say plainly that you have other
things to do.


THE TSUKEDZURE GUSA OF YOSHIDA NO KANEYOSHI. ioj

171. — People playing at shell-matching, if they leave alone
those in front of them, and look all around elsewhere, behind
others’ sleeves or under their knees, will find the shells in front
of diem covered by others while they are searching.

Skilful players do not appear to take theirs from any where
at random ; they only match those close at hand, and yet it is
they who match most

When placing checkers at the edge of a checker-board and
flipping them, you do not keep your eye on the checker opposite
in order to strike it. It is by looking well at your own end,
and by flipping straight along the squares near you that your
checker is sure to hit its mark.

In all things, we must not look for favour from Without.
We must make Ourselves right. The Prince Seiken’s words
were : ‘ Do good, and ask not what lies ahead.’

It must be so, too, in the art of preserving the State. If no
care is given within, and the country, lightly and selfishly ruled,
is disturbed, then not until distant provinces rebel, as they surely
will, is some plan sought to subdue them. It is like what is
written in books on Medicine, that a man is a fool who, after
exposing himself to the wind and lying in the damp, complains
to the gods of his sickness. The fact is, people do not know
that, if they keep straight in the Way, doing kind deeds and
relieving the Sorrows of others under their eyes, their influence
will be far-reaching. U marched to subdue Sant>yo, but he
did better by withdrawing his army and spreading virtue in the
land.

When a man is young the blood runs too hot within

him. His heart is moved by Things, his passions and desires are
many. He will risk his life so that it is as easily destroyed as a

A~game in which 360 clam shells are taken, the top halves spread out before
the players, and the bottom halves placed in a separate heap. Shells are taken
from this heap one at a time, and the object of the players is to find among those
spread out before them the corresponding half. The player who, at the end, has
matched the greatest number, is the winner.


104 THE TSUREDZURE GUSA OF YOSIIIDA NO KANEYOSHI.

ball is made to roll. He delights in splendour, and he wastes
treasure. Anon, abandoning these, he grows worn and ragged ;
and, as his fiery temper reaches its height, he struggles with
circumstance, feels envy and shame, and from day to day his
desires are unsettled. Deep in venery, ardent with passion, he
admires only the example of those who have endangered their
bodies that should last a hundred years and lost their lives in
going fearless on their way. He cares not to live out a long
life ; but dragged whither his desires lead him he becomes the
talk of long generations. It is the work of Youth to spoil Life.
The spirit of an old man declines. I le grows simple and calm,
and is not moved by the senses. • His heart is perforce at peace,
and he therefore does no useless actions. He takes care of his
own person, and is without grief, while anxious that others shall
not suffer. The wisdom of the old is as much superior to that
of Youth as the beauty of the young is superior to that of
Age.


173. — The history of Ono no Komachi is very uncertain.
Her decline is described in a book called 1 Tamadzukuri. 1
There is an opinion that this book .was written by Kiyotsura,
but it is entered in the list of the works of Koya no Daishi.
The Daishi passed away at the beginning of Showa. Whether
Ono was in her prime after that is also doubtful.

174. — A dog which is good with a small hawk becomes,
they say, bad for a small hawk once it is used with a large one.
True it is indeed that to follow great things is to abandon
small things.

In all the manifold affairs of men, there is no deeper feeling
than delight in the Way. This is the true Great Thing. Once

TamaikukurL A book exists called ‘ Tamadzukuri Komaclii Sosui ()|£ 33)
sho,’ which is assumed to refer to Ono no Komachi.

Koya no Daishi is Kobo Daishi, and he died 90 years or so before Kiyotsura,
Kenko appears to think Ivomachi’s period doubtful, but it should be easy to
ascertain from her poems addressed to various officials. .


THE TSUREDZURE GUSA OF VOSHIDA NO KANKYOSHI. 105

a man has heard the Way, and inclined his heart towards if,
what task will he not abandon, what business will he undertake ?
Is even a man who is a fool inferior in heart to a clever dog ?

175. — There are many things in this world that are hard to
understand. It is hard to understand why people take pleasure
in pressing wine on others the first thing on every occasion, and
forcing them to drink against their will. The drinker’s face
shows great distress ; he knits his brows, and seeks a chance to
throw away the wine, or to escape, unobserved. But they
catch him and hold him back, and recklessly make him drink ;
so that an elegant person suddenly becomes a madman, behav-
ing foolishly, and a healthy person before our very eyes turns into
a man with a grave illness, falls and lies unconscious. A stupid way
to spend days of rejoicing ! Until the morrow, with aching head,
and eating nothing, a man lies groaning. As if cut off from life, he
does not know what happened yesterday, he neglects important
affairs, public and private, and the result is calamity. To treat
people like this is to be lacking in kindness as well as to offend
against courtesy, while he who meets with such treatment cannot
but feel hatred and regret. If such things did not happen
among ourselves, aud we were told that this was the custom in
some foreign country, we should think it strange and incredible.

It is sad, too, in its affect upon others. A person whose
thoughtful manner has been looked upon with admiration will
lose all reserve, talk a great deal, his cap awry, the cords of his
garments loose, his skirts tucked up high, his whole abandoned
appearance such that he cannot be recognized as his usual self.
Women will openly comb up the hair over their foreheads,
without any shame lift up their faces and laugh aloud, grasp the
hand of another holding a wine cup, and the worst of them will
take food and put it to the mouth of others, or themselves eat
in an unseemly way. Men shout at the top of their voices, each
singing and dancing for himself. Old priests are summoned,
who bare their black and dirty shoulders and go through con-


106 THE TSUREDZURE;GUSA OF YOSHlDA NO KANEYOSHI.


tortlons so unsightly that even those who look on with enjoy-
ment are hateful and disgusting. Others, again, ludicrously tell
fine tales about themselves, others weep drunken tears, while
the lower sort of people, reviling one another and quarreling,
are foolish and terrifying at the same time. The whole thing is
disreputable and miserable. They end by seizing forbidden
things ; they fall off verandahs or from carriages and horses and
do themselves hurt. The class that do not ride or drive reel
along the streets and scatter unspeakable things up against walls
or under gateways. Old priests, wearing their scarves, lean on
the shoulders pf little children and stagger along, talking,
nonsense — a pitiful sight.

How is this the sort of behaviour to bring profit in this
world or the next ?

In this world it brings many calamities. Wealth is lost
and sickness gained. Though it is called the Chief of a Hun-
dred Medicines, yet it is from wine indeed that all sicknesses
arise. Though it is said that by drinking we forget our sorrows,
it is in truth drunken men who call to mind past griefs and
weep.

As for the next world, a man loses his understanding, his
virtue is consumed as with fire. “ He who takes wine and gives
it to another to drink is born for five hundred births without
hands/* is the teaching of the Buddha.

And yet, although it thus seems that wine is a thing to be
shunned, there are occasions when it cannot be dispensed with.
On a moonlight night, and a snowy morning, or underneath the
blossoms, when we are talking with light hearts, all pleasures
are increased if the wine cup is brought forth. When an
unexpected friend comes in on an idle day, it is cheering to
entertain him with wine. It is exceedingly good to have fruits
and wine bestowed on you from within the curtain, in unaccus-
tomed precincts.

Very pleasant in some small place in winter to cook your
own meal and sit with a close friend and drink deep. Pleasant


THE TSUREDZURE GUSA OF YC&ITIDA NO KATEYOSHI. I Of

again, when stopping somewhere on a journey, on hijls or
moors, to cast around for food, and sit drinking on the grass.
It is very good for one who is much averse to wine to drink a
little when pressed* Joyful, also, when a person of high rank
is pleased to say “ Take another, that is not enough.” Joyful,
too, to become [over the wine] fast friends with a drinker whose
company you desire.

Whatever has been said (above) a drinker is amusing, and
his faults are forgiven.

A man exhausted with drinking sleeps till late in the
morning, and then, when the master of the house opens the
shutters, he is confused and, with sleepy looks, his queue in
disorder, not stopping to put on his clothes, he gathers them up
in his arms, drags them along and flees. Then it is an amusing
and proper sight, the back view of him in his shirt tails, shewing
his lean and hairy shanks !

176. — The Black Door is in the room where the Mikado
Komatsu, still remembering after his ascent to the Throne the old
days when as a private person he performed menial tasks himself,
used to cook his own food. It is called the Black Door because
it was blackened by smoke from the kindling-wood.

177. — Once when His Highness Kamakura no Chusho 0
was giving a game of foot ball, he was in doubt whatTo do, as the
garden had not dried after a fall of rain. Whereupon Sasaki
Oki no Nyudo presented His Highness with a large quantity of
sawdust in a cart, which being spread all over the garden there

Komatsu no Mikado. Kwok 5 885-887. He became Emperor un-

expectedly owing to the deposition of Yozei Tenno.

Menial tasks. The word used is masanagoto , which means not-proper-things,
i.e. things unbecoming to one’s age or station.

Kamakura no Chusko- 0 ~ Munetaka, one the series of Shoguns set up at
Kamakura by the Hojo. He was an Imperial Prince, and Naka tsukasa (Chu-
sho); and was obliged to return to Kioto, upon showing signs of impatience of
Hojo control, at the age of 24. (1266).


tO& THE TStJREDZtJRE GUSA OF VOSHIDA NO KANEYOSHl.

w?ts no trouble about a muddy ground. People were much
impressed by this, thinking it fine that he should have kept it
ready in case of need. When someone mentioned this fact, and
Yoshida no Chunagon said, " Why was there no sand ready ? ”
he felt ashamed. The sawdust which they had thought so fine
was vulgar and out of place. It has been the correct thing from
olden times for the person who has charge of garden affairs to
be provided with dry gravel.

178.- — When some samurai who had seen the sacred dance
in the Naishidokoro were describing it, and said that such-and-such
a person held the Treasure Sword, and so on, one of the women
of the party said quietly, " When His Majesty proceeds to the
Detached Pavilion it is the sword of the Day Palace.*'

This was admirable. She was it appears an old attendant
in the Shrine.

179- — Nisso no Shamon Dogan Shonin brought back
(from China) the Complete Sutras, and enshrined them at a
place called Yakeno near Rokuhara.

In particular he expounded the Shuryogon Sutra ; and
called the place the Naranda-ji.

This saint said : f

There is a tradition that De Masufusa held that the main
gate of the Naranda-ji faced North ; but in the lives of Saiiki or

The Naishidokoro , — an inner apartment in the palace or pavilion (presum.
ably separated from the outer chambers by a gallery-hence ‘ detached’) where
rites connected with the Sacred Treasure were performed. The woman pointed
out that the sword used in the Ceremony, the samurai were describing was not
the actual Treasure-Sword belonging to the Naishidokoro but a similar sword,
which was kept by the Emperor’s side during the day, part of his Imperial in-
signia. The Day Palace (Hi no Omashi Seiryoden.

The Shurydgon (Surangama) is a text used by the Zen believers. It con-
tains a magic formula beginning * Namu barn tanvo trayaya , which occurs in all
their rituals, and is to be heard in funeral services.

The original Naranda-ji is of course that in India,


tHE TSUREDZURE GUSA OF YOSHIDA NO KANEYOSHI. *09

Hokken this dops ribt appear ; nor can it be found anywhere.
It Is not clear what was Oe’s intention in saying this.

The Saimyoji in China, he said, of course faces North.

1 80. — The “ Sagicho 99 is the ceremony of taking the mallets
and balls which were used at New Year from the Shin-gon-In to
the Shinsen Garden and there burning them. The words “ the
pond of the law fulfilled ” which they chant refer to the pond in
the Shinsen Garden.

1 8 1 . — A learned person said : In the words “fare fare,
koyuki, Tamba no koyuki the koyuki (Hour-snow) comes from
the likeness of snow to rice flour which is being sifted. Tamba no
koyuki is a mistake for “ tarn arc, koyuki" (i.e. pile up, snow !) and
at the end should be sung “ kaki ya ki no mata ni 99 (on fences
and the forks of trees). 1 las this been said since olden times ?
In the Diary of Sanuki no Suke it is stated that the Emperor
Toba said it when he was a child.

182. — The Shijodainagon Takachika hearing someone say,

when a dish called Kara-zakc had been provided for the Imperial
table, that such strange things ought not to be supplied, said
“ That might be so if it were wrong to serve Ilis Majesty with
fresh salmon ; but as that is not so what objection can there be
to dried raw salmon ? Is not His Majesty served with dried
brook-trout?”

Sagicho a$fr, “ three mallets.” A ball-game played at New

Year, to which a symbolic meaning was attached. The implements were taken
on the 15th to the water's edge in the garden and burned.

This pond was Apparently the site of a successful prayer for rain by Kobo
Daishi, and subsequently by the Emperors, — hence the “ Law fulfilled ” — i.e.
answer to prayer.

181. This refers to a sort of nursery rhyme sung by children when snow
was falling :

Fare fare ko-yuki
Tamba no ko-yuki
Kaki ya ki no mata ni.

Kara-zakc is dried salmon. As Ilis Imperial Majesty might eat dried trout,
a fortiori might he eat dried salmon.


1 10 THE TSUREDZURE GUSA OF YOSHIDA NO KANEYOSHI.


183. — We cut off the horns of a bull that gores people, and
clip the ears of a horse that bites, as a sign thereof. To let people
get hurt though not attaching some sign is a crime in the owner.
A dog that bites should not be kept. All these are offences,
forbidden by the law.

184. — The mother of Tokiyori, Sagami no Kami, was called
Matsushita Zenni. Once, when Tokiyori had been asked to her
house, she herself set about cutting round with a small knife and
repairing some torn and blackened paper windows (shoji). Her
elder brother, Jo-no-suke Yoshikage, who was engaged in pre-
parations for the day, said “ Ixt me have it. I will give it to
such and such a man. He understands these things/* But she
replied “ His work will not be any better than mine,” and went
on pasting square after square. Yoshikage said “ It would be
far easier to repaper the whole window, and, besides, the patches
look ugly.” But the dame said “ I mean to do the whole thing
altogether later on ; but to-day I am purposely doing it like this.
I wish to set an example to young people, so that they may
learn that things should be mended only where broken, and so
used.’*

These were very fine words. The foundation of govern-
ment is economy. Though she was a woman, what she said
was in accordance with the teaching of the sages. Indeed, she
was no ordinary person, inasmuch as she had as her son one
who preserved the State !

185. — Jo Mutsu no Kami Yasumori was unequalled as a
horseman. When a horse was being led out for him, and he saw
that it jumped quickly over the door-sill (of the stable) with its
legs together, he would say “ This is a spirited horse,** and have
his saddle changed to another. Again, when a horse in stepping
forward kicked up against the sill, he would say u This horse is

Tokiyori . The Hojo regent.

Asked to her house. He was now a great man, and had to be treated with
ceremony, even by his mother.


vTHE TSUREDZURE GUSA OF YOSHIDA NO KANEYOSHr. 1 1 1


dull, and therefore ah accident might happen/' and would not
mount it.

People who knew nothing about the art of riding would
not think there was so much to fear.

1 86. — A horseman named Yoshida said : “ Every horse is

to be feared. One must know that a man cannot compete with
a horse in strength. When about to ride first of all one should
look at the horse carefully, and mark its strong and weak
points. Then one should see whether there is anything wrong
with bit, saddle and trappings, and if there is anything one does
not feel safe about that horse should not be taken. It is not
forgetting to take these precautions which makes a true horse-
man/' This is the secret of riding, he said.

187. — Those who make a business of any art or trade, even
if they are unskilful, are always superior when compared with
skilful persons who are amateurs. The reason of the this is the
difference between never relaxing one's care and being always
earnest in the one case, and being entirely ones own master in
the other. Nor is this confined to arts and accomplishments
alone. In all our deeds and thoughts, to be unskiful but earnest
is the source of Success, to be clever but wilful is the source of
Failure.

188. — A certain man decided to make his son a priest , and
said to him “ You must study, and learn the Principles of the
Faith, and by preaching and so on make this your means of liveli-
hood/' The son did as he was told. First of all, in order to
become a preacher, he learned to ride a horse. This was because
he thought that it would be regrettable for a priest, who owned
neither palanquin nor carriage, when he should be invited to
take a service, and a horse sent to fetch him, to fall off because

Jo Matsu no Kami Yasumori. He was Akita Jo (Jjg) no Suke i.e, the com-
mandant of the castle of Akita. This was an hereditary rank.


It3 THE TSUREDZURE GUSA OF YOSHIDA NO KANEYOSHL

he had a loose seat. Then, because he might be pressed to take
wine and food after some sacred rites, and his host would think
him dull if he were utterly without accomplishments, he learned
to sing (the popular ditties called) Haya-uta. Having at length
begun to be proficient in these two arts, he felt anxious to do
better still, and while he was devoting himself thereto, he grew
to old age without having had time to learn to expound the
Scriptures.

Nor is this priest the only one. This thing happens to all
people. While they are young they look many years ahead,
and are always meaning to study, to exhaust all forms of ac-
complishments', to carry out great undertakings, and in every
way to rise in the world. But all the while they take life easily,
they continue in idleness, and pass their days and months troubl-
ing to do only the pressing tasks beneath their eyes ; and so they
grow old having accomplished nothing. They end by never
growing skilful in anything, without having gained the position
they had thought. Since the years cannot be brought back
again, they go on declining, as a wheel runs downhill.

Therefore, we should weigh in oyr minds which is the most
important of all the things which we' would desire to make our
aim in life, and having decided which is the First Thing, we
should abandon all others and devote ourselves to that one thing.

When in the space of a day, nay, even of an hour, a number
of tasks present themselves, we should perform that one of
them which is even by a little the most profitable, and neglect
all others in order to hasten on the important matter.

If we are loth to abandon any, and take up all, then riot
even one thing is accomplished.

It is like, for example, a .man playing checkers who,
without wasting a single move, outstrips his opponent, by throw-
ing away little to gain much. For it is an easy matter to leave
alone three checkers and attack ten, but hard to leave ten and
attack eleven. Though he ought to attack the number which is
largest even by one, when the others mount up to as many as


THE TSURED2URE GUSA OF YOSHIDA NO KANEYOSIH, 1 1 3


ten he feels reluctant, and it is hard to change to checkers that
are very little more numerous. The desire to take This and not
to throw away. That is the to lose That and not to gain
This. -

A man living in Kioto has urgent business at the East Hill,
and, though he has already arrived there, it occurs to him that
it would be of greater profit to go to the West Hill. Then he
should turn back at the gate, and go to the West Hill. He
thinks : I have come so far, I might as well do this business. As
I did not fix a day, I will go to the West Hill some other time
after I get back.”

Thus a moment’s laziness becomes the laziness of a whole
life — a thing to be dreaded.

If you are determined to do a certain thing, you must not
grieve at the failure of other things, nor be ashamed at the
scorn of other people. Without giving up every thing for it,
the one Great Thing cannot.be accomplished.

Among a large number of people, one said, “ They say
masuho no susuki , masoho no susuki , and so on. The Sage of
Watanabe has had the explanation of this handed down to him.”
The priest Toren, who was present, heard this. It was raining
at the time, and he said, “ Have you a rain coat and an um-
brella ? Lend me them. I am going to call at the Sage’s house
to learn about these susuki .” They said “ Do not be so hasty.
Wait till the rain stops,” to which he replied “ What a wrong
thing to say ! Does a man’s life wait till the rain clears ? If
I should die, or the Sage pass] away, could I ask him? Then
he ran out and, going thither, learned. This is the tradition, a
rare and admirable tale, it seems to me.

In the book called the Analects it is written * To do things


Susuki. This being a plant frequently mentioned in verse, Toren, as a poet
of repute, was anxious to learn about the nomenclature of the various species.
The * Mumyosho ’ of Kamo Chomei contains this anecdote, and an explanation of
the names masuho , masoho etc., for any one who wishes to trouble with what
appear to have been imaginary differences.


114 THE TSURED2URE GUSA OF YOSHIDA NO KANEYOSIlI.

^eedily brings success.’ Even as he felt in doubt about the
susuki so should we feel about the {ruths of the great Matter.

189. — To day you mean to do a certain thing, but some
urgent affair you had not foreseen arises, and you spend the whole
day thereon. Or again, the person you await is hindered, and
someone comes whom you did not expect. You fail to do what
you had hoped, and succeed only in something you had not in-
tended. The thing that was troublesome passes off without diffi-
culty, the thing that should have been easy causes great anxiety.
The daily happenings are quite other than you had thought, so
with the passing of a year, and so, likewise, with the course of a
whole life. You may think that everything will go contrary to
your hopes, and yet sometimes all of its own accord fails out as
you desire. Nothing in fact is certain. That all is Uncertainty,
— this, being truth, is the only thing in which we cannot be
mistaken.

190. — A wife is a thing a man ought not to have. I liktf to
hear a man say * I am still living alone/ and so on. To hear it
said, “ So-and-so is getting married,” or “ He has taken such-and-
such a wife, and they are now living together ” lowers him ex-
tremely in my estimation. For one thinks poorly of a man who
marries a quite ordinary person because, forsooth, he has made
up his mind she is a fine woman ; while, if she is a handsome
woman, and he cares for and cherishes her as if she were his
own Image of Buddha, then one wonders how he can go so far.
More regrettable still is it in the case of a woman who manages
the work of the household ; and grievous when children come,
and she nurses and loves them. When she becomes a nun after


Analects , etc. The 1 Kongo,’ or Confucian Analects. One should not delay
in making oneself acquainted with the essential truths of Buddhism, in the same
way as Toren hastened to learn about matters on which he was uninformed.

Uncertainly. Again refering to the Buddhist doctrine. The only certain
thing in life is Death.


TftE T^UftEDZURE GUSA OF VOSHIDA NO KANEYOSHI. i|£

h^r husband’s death, and grows old, her condition is mean
though he is no longer alive.

IJvfrig day in, day out with a woman, of whatever sort she
ma if be, sfie must lose her attraction and beconie disliked.
The woman, too, must grow indifferent. It is bf keeping apart,
and going to stay with her from time to time, that an intimacy'
is reached that even the passing of months and years will not
destroy.

It is a pleasant change then to go and stay from time to

time.


191. — I think it a pity to hear a man say that things do not
look their best at night. Indeed it is only at night that brilliance
and colour are pleasing. By day let your appearance be simple
and sober, but at night it is well to wear bright and gay garments.
Good-looking people look even better at night by lamplight ;
and it is pleasant to hear the voices of people talking guardedly
in the dark. Perfumes and music, too, are most pleasing at
night-time.

It is good to see someone coming late to the Palace, on a
night when there is nothing much afoot, carefully attired. Young
folk make no distinctions, but are always observant of one
another, so that it is desirable, in particular just at those times


190. This passage is fully in keeping with Kenko’s character as a practising
Buddhist.

It sh ws, moreover, in what light women were regarded by his contempora-
ries. The gist of the argument is this “ If possible don’t marry at all. A man
who marries an ordinary woman is a fool ; one who marries a beautiful woman
generally Worships her ; one who marries a domesticated woman has nothing but
a servant, and has not even the excuse of infatuation or beauty. You are bound
to grow tired of a woman if you live with her permanently, therefore keep her in
a separate house, and you will remain in good terms with her.”

One has to remember that the Japanese conception of marrMge wds not as
two-sided social contract — but rather nearer Nature.

For the undesirability of children v. 7 ante. “ Many children, many
Sorrows.”


tl6 THE TSUREDZURE GUSA OF YOSHIDA NO KANEYOSHI.

when ceremony is dispensed with, to dress carefully, without re-
ference to the occasion.

It is pleasant to see a handsome man who has been to the
bath, or a woman who, when night comes, has withdrawn (from
her mistress’ presence) and taken her mirror and made up her
face and so on.

tg2 » — To shrines and temples too, on days when there
is no festival, it is better to go and worship by night.

1 93. — When an ignorant man thinks to pidge another, and
know the measure of his wisdom, he is quite sure to be wrong.

It is a great mistake for a foolish man, who is quick and
skilful only at the game of checkers, and sees that a wise man
is poor at that game, to come to the conclusion that the other’s
wisdom does not equal his own; or for any expei„ in one of
the various accomplishments, seeing that others are ignorant
thereof, to, think himself their superior. If priests who read
the scriptures and priests who practise meditation each, in their
mutual judgments, think the others not equal to themselves,
then they are both wrong.

A wise man sees others with unerring eyes.

194. — Suppose, for example, that a man makes up a false
tale in order to test others. Some are simple, and will take it to
be true; and may be judged according to what they say.
Some will be too credulous, and imagine an even worse false-
hood, which they will add thereto. Some, again, will think
nothing of it and pay it no heed. Some, again, will think it a
trifle doubtful, and will turn it over in their minds, while
neither believing nor disbeliving. Some, though they do not

Priests who ready etc. The original has viotiji no hvshi (mean-

ing those who rely on study of written works for enlightenment) and ansho no
zenshi QHS (meaning those who profess to obtain enlightenment from

within, and only know the scriptures orally— -such as those who practise
zazen, etc.


TUE TSUREDZURE GUSA OF YOSHIDA NO RANEYOSHI, II?

think it likely to be true, confine themselves to saying “ Quite
so ! ”, because it is what another has told them. Others, again,
make all sorts of guesses, and pretend to understand, and nod
and smile with a wise air, though all the while they know
nothing whatever. Some will surmise (that they are being
tried) and think “ Ah ! that’s it,” but will still be suspicious, for
fear of mistakes. Some will clap their hands * and laugh,
thinking there is nothing unusual. Others, again, though they
understand, do not say that they know, but without comment-
ing on its unlikelihood, let the falsehood pass in tire same way
as one who does not know the truth.

Some at once understand the purpose of the falsehood,
and without the least deceit, will fall in with the intention of its
maker, and lend him their aid.

Even when stupid people are jesting among themselves,
before one who knows , these various characteristics are plain to
him, without any chance of concealment, from their speech and
their faces. The better then can an enlightened man see us
deluded ones, even as one looking at a thing in the palm of his
hand !

But one must not liken to tests of this sort the doctrines of
Buddhism.

195, — As a certain person passed along the Kuga Nawate,
someone wearing kosodc and dguchi was carefully washing a
wooden image of Jizo which he had placed in the water in a
rice-field.

Doctrines of Buddhism. Rather ‘ the modes of teaching Buddhism,’ that
is, the hoUhiy the pious frauds or devices by which truths are adapted to the
understanding of the hearer, lvenko warns one against hastily concluding that
these /when, and their ‘efficacy, are of the same category as the falsehoods, and
their receptions, treated of above.

Ninbatc. A path between rice fields.

Kosodc and dguchi. The silken upper and lower garments worn beneath
court robes. The man was therefore a person of rank, and at the same time
half dressed, so that the onlooker was naturally puzzled to see him thus engaged.


. tr$ THE TSUREDZURE GUSA OF VOS HI DA NO KANEVOSHI.

While he watched, unable to understand, two or three men
in kariginu appeared, and, saying “Ah! here he is, M accom-
panied the man away.

It was the Naidaijin of Kuga, — who, at ordinary times,
was a man of great parts and lofty character.

196. — When the Sacred Car of the Tddaiji was being taken
back from the Lesser Shrine of the Toji to be reinstalled, some
nobles of the Minamoto clan went with it. His Lordship, who
was then a General, was clearing the way ahead, when the Frime
Minister of Tsuchi Mikado asked, “ How about clearing the way
around the Shrine ? Ought this to* be done ?” He answered only
“It is, the business of military families to know how an escort
should act.”

Later he explained thus. “ The Prime Minister has read
the Hokuzansho, but did not know the opinion of Saikyu. The
fact is, it is in particular at shrines that the way should be cleared,
for fear of all the familiar evil spirits and deities.”

197. — Jogaku is not only applied to priests in the various
temples. The fogahi women servants, at Court also are men-
tioned in the ‘ Engishiki.’ It is the general term for any fixed
number of public servants.

Kariginu. Lit. ‘ hunting-rolx;,’ but often, as here, used to denote a sort of
undress uniform worn by Court Officials. These were evidently the Naidai jin’s
servants. It seems he was mad, and had escaped from their custody.

Sacred Car of the God ITachiman. He was the patron deity of the Mina
moto. The priests of the Todaiji, who played a part in contemporary politics,
had probably come up to Kioto to make a demonstration to the Court, bringing
their god with them. The car would, during their stay in Kioto, he installed at
, the Ilachiman Shrine belonging to the Toji, and taken haqk to Nara with great
pomp.

His Lordship . This is a tale of Kuga. (y. 195).

Familiar evil spirits . An ancient authority gravely states that a certain god
has an army of evil spirits under his command numbering 84,000 ; while the-
familiars of another are calculated at 84,654 — no more, no less !!

Jogafot. % fj(, a fixed amount, a complement.


THE TSDKEDZUKE GUSA OF YOSHIDA NO KANEYOSHI. 1 19

198. — The term Ydmei is not confined to Ydmei no side.
There is also a Ydmei no Sakivan. This is written in the Seiji
Yoryaku .

199. — Yogawa no Giosen Hoin said: China is a country
of no ; they have not the sound ritsu. Japan, being a country
of ritsu only, has not the sound ritsu.

200. — The bamboo called Kuretake has narrow leaves ; the
Kaivatake , broad leaves. That near the gutter in the Palace is
Kaivatake , and that near the Jijti Pavilion is Kuretake .

201. — Of the taibon no sotoba and the gcjb no sotoba , the
gejo is at the bottom and the taibon up the hillside.

202. — There is no book or written authority for saying
that the tenth month is the month-without-gods, and should be


Ydmei means ‘ nominal.’ The four ranks of provincial authojrilies

were kami tj, the governor ; and beneath him suki jo (Jfc, and sakivan @ .
The Court, however, sometimes granted the title st/kS of some province to a noble
who was never expected to proceed thither ; and the same absentee appointments
were made, it is here pointed out, in the case of the lower grade of sakivan .

Seiji yoryaku. is a work on a administration, giving titles, duties, etc. of
officials, v. Note to 203.

199. It is hard to say what this means exactly. Sounds are divided into
g rio and rilsu. The distinction appears to be one of pitch. The common
phrase wreisu is a combination of these two, and roictsu ga nuHvaranu means
to be unable to make any intelligible sound at all.

200. Clumps of bamboo so named are marked in these positions in old plans
of the Palace in the innermost courtyard.

201. These sotoba are tablets which, arc said to have Jieen set up on a
hill in Ma^adha, the country of the Raja Bimbisara, whither Gautama frequently
repaired to preach during his ministry.

The gejo f at the foot of the hill, indicated the place where even those
of the most exalted rank must dismount, the taibon jg where the ordinary,
i.e. the unelightened, must turn back.

The former sotoba (a sotoba is a stuja, a memorial mound) is said to have been
erected at the spot where Bimbisara alighted frem his wagon when he was on his
way up the hill to hear the sermon known to the Japanese as the Hokkityo.


120 THE TSUHEDZUKE GUSA OF YOSIIIDA NO KANEYOSlU.


avoided for the sacred rites. Perhaps it is only because there
happen to be no festivals at the various shrines during this month
that it has the name.

Some hold that in this month all the gods assemble at the
Great Shrine, but there is no authority for this. If such were
the case, it in particular would be made a Festival Month at
Ise ; but there is no instance of this. There are many instances
of ait Imperial Progress to the various shrines in the tenth
month. For the most part, however, they have been
unlucky.

203. — There is nobody left nowadays who knows the pro-
cedure of hanging up a quiver at the house of one who has
been degraded by the Emperor.

When the Sovereign suffers from sickness, and in general
in times of trouble among the people, a quiver is hung up at the
Tenjin Shrine at Gojo. The God called Yuki-no-Mydjin at
Kurama also had a quiver hung up for him.

When the quiver borne by the Kado-no-osa was hung up
outside a house, people could not enter or leave it. Since this
custom died out, it has become the practice nowadays to place
a seal (on the gate). ”

204. — When criminals arc flogged with rods, they have
to be placed on a frame, and bound thereto. It is said that
nowadays there is nobody who understands the shape of this
instrument, or the proper method of attachment.


Month-without-gods. Kami-na-dzuki The superstitious still believe

that the gods assemble in Idzumo (not Ise) in the tenth month.

Quiver. The idea underlying the use of the quiver is not clear. It was
presumably a badge of authority, and hence a symbol of punishment.

Tenjin . Sukima-hikona-no tnikoio, the God of Medicine. If the Emperor
was ill, it followed that the god had been remiss in his functions, and the quiver
was hung before his shrine as a token thereof.

Kado^no-osa. -g, Subordinate police officials, under the Kebiishi*no*

bett5.


THE TSUKEDZURE GUSA OF YQSHIDA NO KANEYOSHI. 12!

205. — What is called the Dedication Oath of the High
Priest at Hiyei-zan was first written by the Abbot Jiei.

The term “ written oath ” is not known to students of the
Law. In the holy reigns of the past government was never
carried on by means of written oaths, which have become
common in recent times. Nor do the laws hold that there is
defilement in fire and water, but ohly in the vessels that contain
them.

206. — Once while His Lordship the Minister of the Right
Tokudaiji, at the time he was Chief Magistrate, was holding a
Council of the Magistracy at the Middle Gate, the ox of the
official Akikane got loose, and climbed up on to the dais, where
it lay down and chewed the cud. Everybody said that this was
a grave portent, and the ox should be sent to the Diviners. His
father, the Prime Minister, however, said : “ ‘An ox cannot make
distinctions. Since he has legs, he will climb anywhere. A


205. A dedication oath would be a document setting forth the objects of
worship, and embodying a vow to devote the temple or shrine to the service of
a certain deity or deities.

A * written oath’ is a document of a sort still heard of in Japan,

generally written or sealed wjtli blood, containing a vow, or an assertion of
innocence of some offence ; the writer guaranteeing to submit to some penalty if
proved false.

The underlying idea of the passage is presumably one of regret that such
methods should have become necessary, since in the u holy reigns of the past ” a
man’s spoken word was enough. “ Defilement ” etc. appears to refer tp, trials by
fire or water.

206. Magistrate . Kcbiishi-no-belto. The Chief Magistrate, with executive
police fusions.

Middle Gate, lie was hearing, or discussing cases in one of the chambers
over the Middle Gate, presumably ; and the ox wandered into the thus vacant
court-room.

The ‘ dais ’ ( hama-yukd ) is the raised and canopied part of the room, where
the judges sat — the ‘ bench,’ in fact.

The JQivincts. Ommyoshi fig Jiff. They derived information from various
signs, and among them were the shape of a bull’s horns and the condition of his
mouth.


1 22 THE TSURED2URE C,V SA OF YQSHIDA NO KANEYOSHI.

wretched official, coming once in a way to duty at the palace,
could not catch his miserable ox ! ” He returned the ox to its
master, and changed the mats where it had lain ; and nothing evil
happened.

When we see some Wonder, he said, and do not wonder
at it, then the wonder is distroyed.

\

207. — When they were levelling* the ground for building the
Kameyama Palace, there was a great mound where innumerable
large snakes were clustered together. They made a report to
the Emperor saying these were the gods of this place. His
Majesty asked what ought to be done, and they all said that as
the snakes had occupied the ground since olden times, it was
out of the question to dig them up and throw them away.

This Minister alone said : “ What Evil can be worked by

insects in Imperial Ground, when an Imperial Palace is to be
built ! The gods are not malevolent They will not be offend-
ed. All we have to do is to dig them up and throw them all
away.”

So they broke up the mound, and threw them into the Oi
river, and there was no‘ evil consequence whatever.

208. — In tying up the strings of a scroll of prayers, the
usual thing is to cross them, and then make a loop Which is
thrust sideways under and between the two crossed parts. The
Chief Priest K5shun, of the Kegon-In, untied one done in this
way, and did it over again, saying : — “ This is a new fashion, and *
very ugly. The neatest way is to roll the strings round and
round, and then pass a loop under them from top to bottonh.”

He was an old man, and so knew about this sort of thing.

209. — A man who had a dispute about a rice-field, and lost
his case, out of spite sent people to reap that field and bring in
the crop. First they reaped and, carried off the crop irom the


Insects. The Japanese class snakes and worms as / tnnshi.'


fHE T5UREDZURE GUSA OF YOSHiDA NO KANEYOSH*. 12 $

fields on the way, and when someone said, “ What is the mean-
ing of this ? These fields were not in dispute.”, the reapers re-
plied “ There is no reason for reaping these fields, but as we
have come out to do a wrong thing anyhow, it doesn’t matter
where we reap l ” This was a most curious argument !

210 — The yobukodori is merely known as a spring bird,
and it is nowhere written ekactly what sort of a bird it is.

In certain writings of the Shingon sect there is given the
procedure for performing the Invocation of Spirits, at the time
when the yobukodori sings. This is the nue . In one of the Man-
yoshu long poems it is mentioned in connection with the rising
mists and the long days of Spring. The descriptions of the
yobukodori and the nue seem to agree.

2 i i. — I n nothing at all should we put our trust. It is
because foolish people are deeply trustful that they know hatred
and anger.

Though you have power, do not trust in it. The ^strong
perish anon. Though your treasures are many, do not trust in
them. They are easily lost in a moment of time. Though you
have talent, do not trust in it. Confucius himself was unsuited
to his times. Though you have virtue, do not trust in it. Even
Gankwai was unfortunate. Do not either trust in the favour of
Princes. The death penalty comes quickly. Because you have
servants in your train, do not trust in them. They may rebel
and run away. Do not trust either in the feelings of others.
They will surely change. Do not trust in promises. Truth is
rare.

If you put trust neither in yourself nor others, you will re-
joice when Good comes, and when Evil comes you will not
grieve.


This is the nue. The evidence is hardly sufficient. He thinks the nue and
\\\Q.ychukoilori are the same bird because they are both mentioned as singing in
the Spring time.


r &4 THE TSUREDZDRE GUSA OF VOSHIOA NO KANEYOSHI.

If there is width to right and left, there is no obstruction.
If there is distance before and behind there is no confinement.
In narrow spaces things are crushed and shattered.

When the mind is narrow and severe, we come into colli-
sion with things, and are broken in the conflict. When the
mind in broad and gentle, not a hair is harmed.

Man is of the Spirit of the Universe. The Universe is
without limits. How shall the nature of Man differ therefrom?
When it is great and open and infinite, Joy and Anger do not
touch it, nor does it suffer at the hand of Circumstance.

212. — :The autumn moon is of loveliness without end.
Nobody is more pitiable than a man who cannot see the differ-
ence, and thinks the moon is the same at all times.

213. — When putting fire in the brazier before His Majesty,
tongs are not used. It has to be transferred straight from an
earthen-ware vessel, so that in piling up the charcoal care must
be taken lest any fall out.

At the Imperial Progress to Yahata one of those in atten-
dance, wearing white vestments, put on charcoal with his hands ;
whereupon a certain learned person said : There is no objection
to using tongs on days when white clothes are worn.

214. — The music called Sbfuren feeling love for a

man) is not so called from a woman's love of a man. It was ori-
ginally (The Premier’s Lotus), and the characters have

been changed. It is music in praise of the lotuses, of which he
was very fond, that the Minister Oken (EE$t) °f Kingdom
of Shin -jff planted in his garden. From that time he was called
the Lotus Stateman jH$f.

Similarly kivaikotsu should be This is be-

cause there was a country of terrible savages called the country
of Kwaikotsu, jfljtflg. These savages were subdued by the
people of Han, and when they afterwards came to Han they
performed the music of their own country.


The TSURED2URE GUSA OF YOSHlDA NO KANEYOSItl. I2g

215. — The court noble Taira no Nobutoki, telling tales of
the past in his old age used to relate how Saimyoji no Nyudo
once spnt for him in the evening, and he said he would go at
once« His ceremonial dress was missing, and while he was doing
one thing and another, a second message came, raying u Is it
that you have no dress of ceremony? If so, being night-time,
it does not matter what you wear, but come quickly.” So he
put on a crumpled robe, and went in his indoor clothes. When
he arrived his host brought out a wine-vessel and earthenware
wine-cups, saying “ I asked for you because it would be lonely
drinking this wine alone. There is no food to eat with it. All
the people in house will have gone to bed, but please go and
see if you can find something suitable anywhere you like.” So
he took a taper, and searched in every corner till, on a shelf in
the kitchen, he found a small earthenware bowl with a little bean
sauce at the bottom. He went back and said “ I have found
this.” The Nyiidd said “ That will do,” and in good humour
drank several cups of wine and grew merry.

“ In those days,” said Nobutoki, “ it was like that.”

216. — Saimyoji no Nyudo, when on a pilgrimage toTsuru*
gaoka, took the opportunity of visiting Ashikaga Sama no
Nyiidd, after first sending a messenger to announce himself.

The feast prepared was this : The first dish, dried awabi ,
the second, prawns, and the third, kaiinochi , and that was ail.
There were present the master of the house and his wife, and
the Abbot Ryuben sitting on the side of the host.

When Tokiyori said, “ I fear you will not have any of
those dyed cloths of Ashikaga which you present to me every
year ? lie replied, “ I have some ready.” And they brought

Saimyoji . This is Hojo Tokiyori, alter his abdiction frdm the Regency, and
retirement into religious, and ostensibly private life.

i It was like that . 1 The Ilojo rule at tins period encouraged thrift and
simplicity.

Ceremonial robe. The hitatare jgfjf. It refers strictly speaking ohly to the
upper garment.


J 2 & THE TSUREDZURE GUSA OF YOSHIDA NO KANEYOSHI.

out various dyed cloths which (Saimyoji) had made up into
garments ( kosode ) by women in his presence, and afterwards
gave to Sama no Nyudo.

This story was told by people who saw it at the time, and
were living until recently.

217. — A certain rich and prosperous inan said : “ A man

should give up everything and devote himself to Gain. If he is
poor, it is not worth while living. If he is not rich he is not a
Man. If you would acquire Wealth, whaf you must do is this :
First you must cultivate the proper frame of mind, and that is
none other than to dwell in the conviction that life is everlasting,
and never for a moment to regard its Impermanence. This must
be your first care. Next, you must satisfy not a single one of your
wants. In this world, the desires of men, for themselves and
others, are without end. If you give way to your lusts, and
think to satisfy your desires, then even a million pieces of money
will not last for a little while. Desire never ceases, but there
comes a time when Treasure is exhausted.

With Treasure, that has a limit, you cannot satisfy Desires,
that are without end.

If desires begin to grow in your heart, beware, be firmly
on your guard, thinking an evil thought has come to destroy
you, and do not fulfil your smallest want.

Next, if you treat Money as a slave, and look on it as a
thing for your use and service, then you will never escape from
Poverty. Do not subdue it to your uses, but fear it, and
reverence it, like a Master, like a God.

Next, you must feel neither Anger nor Hatred even in the
face of Shame. Next, you must be honest, and firmly keep
your covenants.

216. Another story to illustrate the frugal nature of Tokiyori. He went to
call on Sama unattended, they had a simple meal, and he returned Sanaa’s annual
present, thus discharging their mutual obligations without trouble and expense 1
The Kosode is a short-sleeved under-garment.


THif TSUREDZURE GUSA OF YOSHIDA NO KANEYOSHt. 1 2 }

To a man who seeks Profit by keeping these rules, Riches
will come just as Fire attacks that which is dry, as Water flows
downwards.

When money accumulates unceasingly, then . the heart is
happy and peaceful, though you take no thought of Feasting
and Drinking and Women yid Song, thougti your home is
unadorned and your desires unfulfilled.”

This was what he said. Now, in order to fulfil their
desires, men seek Wealth. The reason they regard Money as
Wealth is, that by its means they can satisfy their wants. If a
man has desires but cannot satisfy them, or has money but
does not use it, he is exactly the same as a poor man. Where
can he find Happiness ? I understand these rules to mean that
we should cast away our mortal hopes, and not be grieved by
Poverty. Rather than to seek happiness by satisfying our
desires, it is far better to be without Wealth. For a man who
suffers from boils, rather than to find pleasure in washing them*
it would be better not to suffer from them at all. When it
comes to this point, there is no difference between Poverty and
Wealth. The Ideal is the same as the Actual, and Avarice is
like Unselfishness.

221 — Even now old officials in the magistracy still relate
how it was the usual thing at the Festival, in the periods of Kenji
and Koan, to see, as the emblems carried by the bearers, a horse,
made of 4 or 5 rolls of curious blue cloth, with rushes for tail
and mane. This they wore attached to their clothes, which
were of a spider-web pattern and went along singing the burden

The Ideal is the same *s the Actual. A makeshift rendering of kukyd %
and risoku a bp.' Dr. Anezaki gives me the following not ey.— Kukyd means
, ultimate * in any respect, but especially in reference to the attainment of Bud-
dhist ideals. Ri soku is an abbreviation of ri sokuji BP literally “ reason is
the same as fact.” The doctrine of the Tendai school may ’be expressed in the
terms of the mediaeval Scholastics, universalia sive res. Another rendering would
be : The ideal is given in or manifested by tjie actual.

I'he Festival The Kamo Festival was u the festival ” par excellence.


128 THE TSUREDZUKK GUSA OF YOSHIDA NO KANEYOSHI.

of Some song, and people felt that it was done to amuse them,
and were satisfied.

But of late the emblems have become more unusually
extravagant year by year. All sorts of heavy things are worn
in great numbers, both their sleeves are held up by others, and
they are not even able to hold tlje spear themselves. It is an
unpleasant sight to see them, distressed and panting for breath.


[Nos. 222, 223, and 224 are omitted, being unintelligible in

translation].


225. — O no Hisasukk says that Michinori no Nyudo
selected certain dances that were amusing, and taught a woman
named Ise no Zenji to dance them. She wore a white robe, with
a sword, and an eboshi , and thus they were called otoko mai ,
men’s dances. '

Zenji’s daughter, who was called Shidzuka, followed her
in this profession. This is the origin of slmabyoshi .

Bearers . The original has $£, which appears to mean ‘ released prisoners’,
i.c. Offenders who were given menial employment instead of imprisonment.
The word as here used seems simply to mean bearers, and such like servants of
the lowest ranks, who would perfrom such tasks as carrying various objects in a
procession. One may be pardoned for not giving a definite explanation of this
passage, for it is hotly discussed by the commentaries.

The Emblems refer to the various images, weapons, devices, etc. borne in jthe
procession. The bearers wore quaint costumes, and carried various ornaments
about their persons, which increased in size so that they were finally unable to
discharge their functions as bearers !

O no Hisasuke. O, is the name of a family of hereditary Court
musicians.

Michinori , the adviser of Go Shirakawa, He came into conflict with Nobu-
yori, and wa3 slain, or killed himself, after Nobuy or i’s coup d’etat in 1160.


the tsukedzup.e gcsa of yoshida NO KANEYOSIM, 1 20

They sang the stories of Gods and Buddhas. Later
Minaraoto no Mitsuyuki composed^ a great number of others,
and there are also some that are the work of the Emperor Go
Toba, v$\ich His Majesty was pleased to teach to Kamegiku.

2 26 — Y ukinaga, ex-Governor of Shinano, who was famed as
a scholar in the time of His Majesty Go Toba, once, when called
upon to take part in the debate in the Bureau of Music, 'forgot
two of the “ Dances of the Seven Virtues/ and so was nick_
named the “Youth of Five Virtues/* He took this so much
to heart that he threw up study, and fled the world. The
priest Jichin, who had compassion for anyone able to do some-
thing, even down to the lowest, and took them into his service*
assisted this Shinano no Nyudo.

This Yukinaga wrote the Heike Monogatan and taught a
blind priest named Seibutsu to recite it.

His writing about the Hiyei temples is particularly good,
and he wrote with an intimate knowledge about Kuro Hangwan.
He leaves out a great deal concerning Kaba no Kwanja, per-
haps because he did not know much about him. With regard
to soldiers and fighting, Seibutsu, being an Easterner, asked
questions of soldiers, and Yukinaga wrote down what he told
him.

Shidzuka was the mistress of Yoshitsune.

The shircibydshi were the mediaeval Geisha. The origin of the name is not
clear, but they appear to have been so called because they danced*without musical
accompaniment, the word being interpreted as « keeping time without music!
Perhaps because they wore white robes ?

Kamegiku was one of God Toba’s favourites. On one occasion he went so
far as to ask the Bakufu to remove their stewards from certain fiefs, which he
wished to pr&fcnt to her ; and met with a curt refusal. It was this incident, it is
said, which led him to challenge the Bakufu’s authority, and ultimately brought
about his downfall and banishment.

The Seven Virtues. Referring to a poem by Po-chU i. This was, the
subject of the debate. He forgot the names of two of the seven virtues.

Kuto Hangwan is Yoshitsune, and Kaba no Kwanja in his elder brother
Noriyori.


I JO ME TSUREDZURE GUSA OF YOSHIDA NO KANEYOSHI.

The present biwci priests have imitated the natural voice of
this Seibutsu.

227 — The Rokuji Raisan is a collection of prayers made
by a disciple of the Saint Honen named Anraku, which he used
to recite. Later a priest called Zenkwambo of Udumasa fixed
the notes and the pitch, and put it in the form of a chant.
This was the beginning of the Ichinen no nembutsu . It com-
menced in the time of the Emperor Saga.

The Hbji san was likewise originated by Zenkwambo.

The Shaka Nembutsu of Sembon was begun by the Saint
Nyorin about Jhe period Bunyei.

229 — They say that a good carver always uses a slightly
blunt knife. The knife of Myokwan did not cut at all easily.

230 — In the Gojo Palace there was a ghost. His Lordship
Dainagon relates that while some of the courtiers were playing
checkers* in the room with the Black Door some one lifted
the blind and looked in. They looked round to see who it
was, and there was a fox, in the shape of a man, peering into

Rokuji Raisan A litany, divided into six sections, each intoned

at a certain hour, from sunset to sunrise. It and the Hoji san , which is a similar
litany, are used to-day by the Judo sect.

A nembutsu is a formula repeating a Buddha’s name. Iihi-ncu mean’s 4 one
thought.’ When a man fixes his thoughts on [the Buddha Amita, since the
mind of the Bu 3 dha includes and is identical with the minds of men, his thought
is at once in response with the Buddha’s. The JOdo sect held that * one thought ’
about the Buddha would therefore suffice to secure his saving grace. The object
of a nembutsu , a repetition of the Buddha’s name, is of course to fix the thoughts
on the Buddha, and such a nembutsu was called an * ichinen no nembutsu.’ The
two litanies mentioned above consist principally of repetitions of the Buddha’s
name, and epithets of praise or gratitude.

Shaka Nembutsu. At mentioned in the note to No. 227 above, the nembutsu
is, strictly speaking, confined to the Buddha Amita, but it was of later extended
to other Buddhas. This is a case of its application to Shaka (Sakya), to whom
the Sembon temple was dedicated.

Myokwan a carver of images, assigned to the 8th century.


tHE T5URED7JJRE GUSA OF YOSHIDA NO KANEVOSHI. 1 3 1

the room, <r It f s a fox l’ 1 , they shouted, whereat it fled,
bewildered by the noise.

A very inexperienced fox, and a failure as a ghost !

531 — Sono no Betto no Nyudo was without equal as acook.
Once at a certain person’s house a splendid carp was produced,
and every body there thought would like to see the
Nyudo prepare it, but hesitated to ask him, because they felt it
might be wrong lightly to make such a proposal. The Nyudo,
however, — being that sort of person — said “Just now I am
preparing a carp every day for a hundred days, and I must not
miss to day, so that I am very anxious to undertake this one,”
He then cut up the carp.

Every one was much interested, thinking it very fine and
proper, said somebody who told the story to Kitayama Dajd
Nyudo Dono , whereupon he replied, “ This sort of thing dis-
gusts me. It would have been better if he had said * I should
be like to be allowed to prep. ire this, if there is nf> one else to
do it. How could he possibly be preparing carp for a
hundred days ! ”

The person who told me this said he found it admirable.
It was indeed very admirable.

It is always better to be simple and uninteresting than to
be interesting but affected.

In entertaining strangers, though it is well enough to try
to make things interesting, it is better still just to produce them
in an ordinary way.

When making gifts, too, it is true kindness to say u I should
like to qffer you this,” and to add no embellishment.

232 — All men should be without Wisdom and without
Talent.

A certain person’s son, who was in appearance and other-

J 'ref a ring a carp would mean cleaning and cutting only, as the fish is eaten
uncooked. The original has * cutting.’


TllE TS0REDZURE GUSA OF YOSHrDA NO KANEYC&W.

wise not unpleasing, in his father’s presence wished to join the
talk, and so he made quotations from the classics. It sounded
clever enough, but one wished he had not done so in the pre-
sence of people who deserved respect.

Again, at a certain person’s house, they wanted to hear a
blind minstrel sing, and a lute was sent for. One of the bridged
was prissing, so he ordered one to be made and fixed. A guest,
— a well-looking man — asked if they had the handle of an old
wooden dipper, and, looking at him, I saw that his nails had
been let grow. He played the lute himself! Now there is no
need to go to such trouble for a blind priest’s lute, and it
disgusted nie to think that he was making himself out an
expert in the art.

Someone said that the handle of a dipper, being what is
called “ bent- wood,” was unsuitable.

The smallest things about young people are noticed, good
or bad as tie case may be.

233 — If you wish to be free from all blame there is no
better course than to be always sincere, to make no distinc-
tions of person, but treat everyone with respect, and to be
sparing of words.

Though men and women, young and old, should all be
like this, it is particularly true of young and good-looking people
that those of pleasant address are always remembered.

All blame from others is due to pretending experience,
making oneself out to be skilful, putting on superior airs and
looking down on people.


A blind- min sti'd. Blind and shaven minstrels, known as biwa-lioshi, lute-
playing priests, used to wander round the towns and country, and chant such
romances as the He ike Monogatari to an accompaniment on this instrument.
Their methods would be rough and ready, and it was therefore was an obvious
piece of conceit to suggest the use of a special sort of wood, which only musical
experts would appreciate.

Unsuitable. The wood used for dippers would be suitable, but not after it
had been bent and manipulated.


fm?, TSUREDZURE GUSA 6F VOSHIDA NO KANEYOSHI. 1^3

* 2 34 — I T * s a great mistake, when someone asks you a ques-
tion, to give a perplexing answer because you think he surely must
know, and it seems foolish to state the facts just as they are.
He may know, and yet have asked in order to make sure, and,
besides, why should there not be some person who really not
4 cnow ? It would be more sensible, and sound better, to tell
him plainly what he asks.

It is a careless thing, when writing a letter to someone,
about something you know yourself but he has not yet heard,
merely to say that so-and-so has done a foolish thing, for you
will get a letter back asking what happened.

Since it occurs that some people miss hearing the most
wide-spread tales, what is there wrong in writing and telling
him so as not to leave him in doubt.

It is inexperienced peopie who do this sort of thing.

235 — An evil-doer never walks just as he please into a
house that is occupied. But into an empty house wayfarers enter
at will, and foxes, owls and suchlike things there take up their
abode as if the place belonged to them, because there is no
human presence to withhold them ; and even such strange shapes
as goblins and so on appear.

In Mirrors, too, because they have neither colour nor
form, all sorts of reflections come and show themselves. If a
mirror had colour and form there would be nothing reflected.
It is Emptiness that best contains things.

So when momentary thoughts wilfully enter our hearts, it
must because we really have no heart. If the heart has a
master, the heart will not be invaded by innumerable things.

236 — In Tamba there is a place called Idzumo. They
brought thither the worship of the Grert Shrine, and set up a
beautiful building. A man by the name of Shida, who was in

The Great Shrine is the Taisha of Idzumo, in the province of that name.
The people of the Tamba Idzumo built a shrine for the worship of the deity of
the Taisha. (Okuninushi no Mikoto),


. '*®£ tSUR'EDZ^RE Gt&A OF YOSHIDA NO jUtiEYO&itt.

charge of the district, invited one day in the autumn the Venerable
Shokai and many others. “ Come/’ he said, u and let n>e offer
you some rice cake in honour of Idzumo,” and then led them
thither. They all worshipped, and were filled with great faith.
The stone dogs before the shrine stood, contrary to custom,
facing backwards. Shokai was much impressed by this, crying^
“ O, how fine ! Now there must be some very deep reason for
this.’\ He wept with admiration, and said, “ Sirs, did you not
notice this excellent thing? That was bad of you.” They
were all surprised, for in truth there was nothing of the sort
elsewhere, and they said they would carry home the tale to the
Capital. The holy man, growing more and more enthusiastic,
called an elderly priest, with an intelligent face, and said,
“ There must surely be some reason for the position of the dogs
before your shrine. I wonder, Sir, if you could tell me what
it is.”

“ Yes,” he replied, " it is a trick some mischievous children
have played,” and, approaching the dogs, he put them straight
and went on his way.

The holy man’s tears of admiration were all for nothing.

237— Should things be placed on a Yanagi-bako length-
wise or crosswise, according to what they are ?

Stone dogs. The curious animals (homainu) which stand in pairs outside
most shrines. In this case they faced the shrine itself, instead of facing in the
same direction as the shrine — towards approaching worshippers. Some face one
another, with heads turned away from the shrine.


A Yanagi bako.


THE TSUREDZIjRE GUSA OF YOSHIDA NO KANEYOSHI. 1 35

Things like scrolls should be placed lengthwise, and tied
With twisted paper passed through the space between the wood.

Lord Sanjo, Minister of the Left, said it is a good thing to
place ink-stones lengthwise, as the pens do not roll off. '

The cailligraphists of the family of Kade no Koji never for
§ moment put them lengthwise, but always made a point of
placing them crosswise.

238 — Chikatomo, of the Body Guard, set down in writing
Seven Articles which he called “ Self-Praise.* * They are all
trifling things, about horsemanship.

Following this example, I have these seven causes for Self
Praise.

( I ) Once I was walking in company with a number of
people looking at the blossoms. Near the Saishbkwo-in I saw
a man galloping a horse, and I said, “ If he gallops that horse
again, the horse will fall and he will tumble off. Watch a
moment ! ” We stood and looked, and he galloped the horse
again. When he came to a stop, the rider pulled the horse
down, and rolled into the mud.

They were all much impressed by the truth of my words.

(II) When the present Emperor was ^till Crown Prince,
and his palace was the Madenokoji-Dono, I happened once to
go on business to the apartment of the Dainagon of Horikawa,
who was in attendance on His Highness. lie had spread out
before him the fourth, fifth and sixth volumes of the Analects,
and said, “ Just now the Prince wished to see the passage about
Purple and Vermilion, and he looked in his book but could not
find it. He told ;me to look more carefully and I am now
searching for it.”

I said, “ It is at such and such a place in the Ninth
volume.”

“ Ah ! I am glad ! ”, said his lordship, and took the volume
with him.

Now such a thing as this is quite ordinary, even for a


136 THE TSUKEDZUKE GUSA OF YOSHIDA NO KANEYOSHI.

child ; but people in olden times used to praise themselves for
the smallest things. Once when the Emperor Go Toba no- In
asked Lord Sadaiye (Teika) whether it was wrong, in one of the
Imperial poems, to use the words tamoto and sode in the same
verse, he replied 41 Why should it matter ? There is the
poem : —

Aki no No no
kusa no 'tamoto ka
hana susuki —

I Io ni idete maneku
sode to miyuran,”

Even this has been set down in writing, and a great fuss
made, such things being said as, 4 It was divine grace, and great
good fortune for the Art of Poetry, that he should have had the
original poem in his mind at the right moment.’

The Kujo Prime Minister Koremichi, too, in his Petition to
the Throne, set down all manner of trivial Articles in praise of
himself.

• (III) The inscription on the bell of the Jozaikwo-In was
composed by Lord Arikane. Yukifusa Ason wrote it out in a
fair hand, and was going to get the bell founders to copy it, but
the lay-priest in charge brought out 'the draft and showed it to
me, and there was written the verse :« —

Hana no hoka ni
Yube wo okureba
Koe hyakuri ni kikoyu

(If you spend the evening far beyond where the flowers
bloom, its note will be heard a hundred leagues away).

As it appeared to be rhymed verse of Yo or To, I said
44 Is not hyakuri a mistake ? ”, whereupon he said 44 It was a
good thing that I showed it to you. This will bring me great

(II) Petition to the Throne.— -Setting forth his claims to promotion.

(HI) Being ignorant of the rules of Chinese prosoday, the translator cannot
elucidate this.


THE TSUREDZURE (SUSA. OF YOSHIDA NO KANEYOSHL 1 37

credit.” So he sent a message to the writer, and it turned out
that it was a mistake. The answer same, “ It should be su-ko
(a long way).

(IV) Once^I went with a large party on a pilgrimage to
the Three Pagodas. Inside the J6gy6d5 of Yogawa there was
m old tablet, with the inscription * Ryugei-In.*

One of the priests said very importantly “ Tradition Says
that it has never been settled whether this is the work of Shari
or Gyozei.”

“ If it is Gyozei,” I said, “ it should be signed on the back.
If Shari, there would be nothing written at the back.”

The back was thick with dust, and foul with insects* nests.
After it was dusted and wiped, we all looked carefully and
there saw quite plainly the names of Gyozei, his rank, and the
date,— whereat everyone was highly interested.

(V) In the Naranda-ji the holy DoGAN was preaching,
when he forgot which were the Eight Disasters, and* upon
his asking if anybody remembered, none of his disciples know
them ; when I, from the congregation, said, Are they not such-
and such?, and made a great impression.

(VI) I once went with the archbishop Kenjo to see (at the
Palace) the Incantation by Perfumes, and he left before the end.
He could not see his Bishop anywhere outside the room,
so he sent back some priests to look for him, who were
a long time because, they said, it was impossible to find him
in a great crowd of persons who all looked alike, “ How
tiresome ! ” he said, and asked me to find him. So I went back
into the room, and soon brought him out with me !

, (VII) On a bright night, of the 15 th day of the 2 nd moon,
I went to worship late at the temple of Sembon. I entered from
the back, and alone, with my face well hidden, was listening to


(VII) Inopportune. The words used are bin ashi fg]$ and it is not quite
clear whether Kenko means that he felt the lady’s advances were inertly ill
timed, or whether he objected to them on general principles.


1 38 THE TSURED 2 URE GOSA OF YOSHIDA NO KANEYOSHI.


the service. A beautiful woman, of figure and style beyond
the ordinary, pushed her way in and sat so close as to press on
my knee, and the perfume of her garments was all but communi-
cated to me. I felt this inopportune and moved away, when
she edged up and did the same again. I then left.

Afterwards, an old lady in the service of a high personagi,
said to me in the course of a gossip, “ I once despised you very
much, as a person cold beyond measure, and there is someone
who feels quite angry with you, for being unfeeling.” I said,
“ I do not understand you at all, 0 and the matter stopped there.

*Later I heard about this, and it appears that on the night
of that seryice someone had recognized me from her private
apartment (in the temple) and had had the idea to dress up one
of her waiting women and send her out, saying “ If he gets a
chance he will speak to you. Go, and tell me what happens. It
will be amusing. 0


239 — On the 15th day of the 8th month, and the 13th of the
9th mouth, the constellation is J|. This is a very bright and clear
constellation, so that these are good nights for enjoying the
Moon.


240 — Warm is the love of a man who will visit his
mistress undeterred by prying eyes and watchful guardians, and
many a thing happens, anon to be looked back to feelingly and
never forgotten.

It must make a man feel very small just to take to himself
a wife because she is approved by his parents and brothers.

And when some lonely woman says she will go “ whither
the stream takes her ”, and will marry anyone if he is prosperous,
even an ugly old priest or some strange man from the provinces ;
and the middleman makes out each party to be desirable ! —


$ is one of the 28 constellations of Chinese astronomy — corresponding to

Arigc,


THE TSUREDZURE GUSA OF VOSHIDA NO KANEYOSHI. 1 39

what an unlovely thing for a man thus to take a wife he knows
not and to whom he is unknown, and whatever can they talk
about (when they meet) .

If they could speak together of all their months and years
of suffering, and the hard road they have travelled, there would
be no end to their talk ; but when others have made arrange-
ments for them it must be very stupid and disagreeable.

Even if the woman is beautiful, a man of low birth, getting
on in years, and ill-favoured, will think, Alas ! that she should
waste herself on such a wretched person as me ; she will go
down in his estimation ; and he will feel ashamed to face her.
This is a very unhappy state of things.

A man who does not like to picture himself standing
beneath the clouded moon on a night when the plum blossom
smells sweet, or brushing at daybreak through the dewy moor, —
such a man had better have nothing to do with women at all.

t

241 — The full moon does not keep its roundness even for a
while. It quickly wanes. To those who give no heed .it may
seem that in a single night there is no great change. So with
the growth of sickness. It stops not for a space, and the
moment of Death is already near. While sickness is not yet
severe, and he is not approaching Death, a nun feels that life
will always go on in the same way, and thinks first to complete

240. This passage contains several allutions to classical Japanese verse, and
the English rendering is therefore necessarily imperfect. The argument appears
to be that the only desirable marriage is one which follows a romantic courtship,
and, indeed, that the only justification of a love affair is its romance, —the sighs, the
secjrecy, the midnight meetings. If a man is not attracted by the idea of waiting
to meet his mistress on a moonlight night, or visiting her on a dewy morning, he
has no business to go love-making at all.

Kenko evidently had in mind the gallant exploits related in the Monogatari,

“ Whither the stream takes her .” Refers to Ono no Komachi’s verse in reply
to Bunya no Yasuhide, when he asked her to go with him to his province*— she
was like grass, uprooted, and floating on the water, and would go whither the
stream took her.


140 THE TStfREDZURE CUSA OF YOSHlDA NO RANEYOSHt.

a number of worldly tasks and then to devote himself to religion.
Meanwhile sickness comes, and he is at the gates of Death,
without having accomplished one of his desires. Vainly he
regrets the wasted months and years, and vows that, if this time
he gets better and his life is saved, he will not cease to labour
night and day to complete this task and that. But anon he
sinks, and deranged, beside himself, he passes away.

Such is what always happens. Let people, then, quickly
take this thing to heart.

If a man thinks to turn to the Way in the leisure left after
he has fulfilled his desires, his desires will never come to an end.
What cati a man do, in this- life that is like a dream ? All desires
are wicked thoughts. If desires enter your heart, you should
recognize that wrongful impulses are leading you astray, and
should not do a single thing. If you forthwith abandon all, and
turn to the Way, then you are free from hindrance and trouble,
and the mind and body are at lasting peace.

242 — That we are for ever the servants of our likes and
dislikes is entirely for the sake of Pleasure and Pain.

Pleasure is liking and loving. We never for a moment
cease to seek it. Of the causes* of our pleasure and our desires,
first of all comes Fame. Fame is of two sorts — praise of Conduct,
and of Talent. Second is Fleshly Lust and Third Is Appetite.
Of all our desires, none can match these three.

This is a perverted view of life, and from it arise innumer-
able Disasters. It is better far to seek none of these.

243 — When I waseight years old I asked my father, “ What
is a Buddha ? ” My father said, “ A Buddha is what a man grows
into.” I asked again, How does a man become a Buddha ? ”
My father again answered, “ He becomes one by the teaching
of a Buddha.” Again I asked, “ Who taught the Buddha who
teaches him ? ” He answered again, “ He also becames a
Buddha by the teaching of a Buddha before him.” Once more


THE TSUREDZDRE GUSA OF YOSHIDA NO KANEYOSHJ. 14*

I asked. And what sort of a Buddha was that very first
Buddha who began to teach ? ” When I said this my father
laughed and said, “ I suppose he fell from the sky or sprang up
from the earth ! ” He was so hard pressed with questions that
he could not answer ; but he used to tell the story to everyone
with great delight.


Thf. End.


APPENDIX,


Religious Conditions of Japan in the
Fourteenth Century.

(By Professor M. Anezaki).

The 14th century of the Christian era marks a significant age
of confusion and transition in the religious and moral history
of the Japanese. The union and harmony between religion
and state ( Buppo IVobo no myogo ‘/£;E / &) had

been the aspiration of both statesmen and religious leaders,
ever since the establishment of Buddhism in Japan. The foun-
dation of Hiei by Saicho, or Dengyd Daishi, in the beginning of
the 9th century, was meant to establish a sole centre of
Japanese Buddhism, parallel with the advancement of national
unity.- This ambition and aspiration were based upon the doc-
tripe of the Hokke-kyo (}£$£$&) which emphasised the unique
supremacy of the eternal person of Buddha Sakya-Muni, the
eternal father and master of all beings. But this Buddhist
ideal was more and more overshadowed by the occultism
of the Shingon Buddhism, in the course of the four cen-
turies following the gtn. The Buddhism of these ages, the
Heian (*P 3 c) period, consisted of nothing but the mysteries
of Shingon, and its prosperity was supported by the court
nobles, the Fujiwaras. The nobles and hierarchies assisted one
another in manifestations of pomp and splendor, under which
degeneration and corruption crept in, finally culminating in the
fall of the court nobles and their authority.

The rise of military clans in the place of the Fujiwaras was
concomitant with the rise of various new forms of reformed
Buddhism. The end of the i?th century and the first half of
the 13th witnessed the appearance of pious reformers and vigor-


APPENDIX.


*43


ous revivalists, in the persons of Honen, Shinran, Nichiren and
Others. Iti addition to these inner growths, the newly imported
Zen Buddhism got its hold on the minds of military men, and suc-
ceeded in training them in its intuitive method of 'meditation and
self-discipline. " The peaceful Hojo regime thiough the whole of
the 13th century gave opportunities for the propagation of these
new forms of Buddhism. Moreover,- the repeated invasions of
the Mongols and their final repulsion (in 1281) aroused the self-
consciousness and self-confidence of the nation. A vigorous
spirit ruled the people and active works were carried on, both in
political administration and religious propanganda.

In spite of these bright aspects of social life, there were
gloomy sides of discontent and uneasiness. The decline of the
Imperial authority, together with the degeneration of the ortho-
dox Buddhism, signified the fall of the long cherished aspiration
for the complete union of religion and state. The nation was
ruled by usurpers and religion became individualistic. The
strong aspiration failed and the bright hope was lost, both in
politics and religion. The strong rule of the powerful Hojos
achieved its aim in keeping peace, but it had nothing to stir the
nation to fresh vigour and to inspire the people with new hopes.

Giving expressions to these discontents, the Prophet
Nichiren raised indefatigable protests against the existing regime
as well as the prevailing religions. His aim was the restoration
of the orthodoxy of Dengyo, namely thei^eal of the union between
the Throne and Buddhism, together with other sides of his teach-
ings emphasizing the unique authority oftheHokke-kyo. Though
the Prophet did not sncceed in convincing the Hojos, his protest
against them remained not in vain. About fifty years after the
Prophet’s death, the Hojos fell under a blow from the Imperial
party, and the nation was again ruled by the Throne. But the
Imperial rule lasted only three years and another military clan,
the Ashikaga, became the real rulers. The dynasty was divided
into two, the southern standing for the direct rule by the Im-
perial house and the northern being supported by the Ashikagas.,


APPENDIX.


*44

This division lasted about sixty years, from 1336 to 1392.
Social and political disintegration followed the division up to the
end of the 1 6th century.

This confusion and disintegration had complicated causes
and circumstances, but one of them was the confusion of faith
due to the failure of the hierarchy of Hiei to achieve the ideal of
Dengyo. Though Nichiren cried so eagerly for the recovery of
Dengyo’s orthodoxy, the currents of the time ran always against
it and the individualistic traits of religious faith were accelerated
by the rise of the Zen. People gave no heed to the warnings and
admonitions of Chikafusa, the loyal noble of the southern
dynasty, on the duty of the nation to restore the Imperial au-
thority founded upon the divine origin of the Throne. The
currents of thought were too utilitarian to permit the acceptance
of these ideal propositions, and the social conditions too far away
from the old unity under the Throne. Military men knew only
how to train themselves in the Zen or to believe in Amita-
Buddha, for their own sakes. Their religious training was
nothing but the means for their egoistic ends. Rivalries for
supremacy, feuds, plots of retainers against their lords or com-
rades, became the order of the day. The most ignoble instances
of these were given by the Ashikagas and their retainers. The
most prominent among them were the brothers Ko, one of whom
Kenko served as an instrument of his immorality. Tl)£ narra-
tions in the Taiheiki (“ History of Great Peace,” indeed an
ironical title) show the conditions of moral degeneration and
social disintegration in the 14th century.

In spite of his hopeless gloom, there lingered still an aspira-
tion for the restoration of the old glory, in state and religion ;
and the pomps and splendours of the court life of the Heiari
period influenced the minds of the aristocrats, in sad reminis-
cence and sorrowful reflection. Most of the nobles and literati,
monks and priests, cultivated their learning in the Buddhist
philosophy of Dengyo’s school, accomplished their refinement
in the culture of Japanese poetry and Chinese classics, as had


APPENDIX.


HS

t>eeii done by the court nobles of the Heian. The mysteries of
the ShingOnattracted many believers, and the works of Buddhist
arts were highly esteemed. Kenko was a man highly cultivated in
these refinements and we see in many passages of his notes yearn-
ing for, arid reminiscence of, the old regime of the Fujiwaras.
He knew also the profound and complicated philosophical tenets
of the Tendai (Dengyo’s) Buddhism, but with little of serious
belief, and without any zeal for its recovery. In this respect he
was a Rip van Winkle of the Heian culture. On the other
side, however, the new Zen, with its Taoistic associations,
exercised a real influence upon the mentality of the age. This
intuitionism was adopted by the military men in a pragmatic
way, in preparing for a life of struggles. But the same was
taken up in its quietistic traits by the mind of a man like
Kenko, half hermit and half man of the world. Another feature
of the age was the revival of Shinto ideas, aroused both by the
clan spirit of the military men and the loyalist aspiration of men
like Chikafijsa. These ideas inspired the people by keeping their
attachment to old traditions, though not without some inspira-
tions for the future prospect, on the part of a minority. Kenko ,
an ex-priest of Shinto, represented the former aspect of the Shinto
influence.

We need not here enter into full characterization of Kenko.
He speaks for himself better than anyone else could. But we
must see the back-ground of his life and thoughts, which we have
now delineated in a short outline. To resume, the melancholy
spirit of his time was a product of the conflict between, and at the
same time a combination of, sentimentalism and indifferentism,
the moods resulting from the degeneration of the Heian culture
ana caused by the conjoint force of the Zen and Taoism, respec-
tively. The sentimentalism was associated with the depressing
circumstances of the time. The indifferentism of the Zen was
accentuated by its association with Taoistic ideas and literature.
Human life has lost its light and hope, yet a full resignation tyas
not possible. The air produced by these moods was something


APfgfctHX.


146

akin to the mentality in the last phase of Greek thought,
fipicureanism was comfofned with Stoicism and men drank Wine
together with tears. Thus, Kenko, a representative of the age,
seems to hold himself aloof from the world and pretends to be
emancipated from its troubles and commotions ; yet he is stilt* a
man of the world, even in his hermitage, and ft* sighs over or
latlghs at human events. He speaks of the evanescence of life ;
get Still being attached to it, he cannot restrain himself from
looking at life with bitter irony and Cynic sarcasm. He has
feeling, but buried under stones ; he has fire, but surrounds it
with ice.

After him, in the 15th century, social disintegration and
religious confusion proceeded apace, shaking off nearly all
reminiscence of the past and the attachment to the old refinement
of court life. The whole country became a stage of wars and
strifes ; the non-moralism of the Zen was abused, to become the
instrument of immoralities. It was just at the transition from the
refinement of the Heian period to the ages of wars that Kenko
stood.
