The Truth of Religion
Rudolf Eucken (W. Tudor Jones, trans.) (1911)
========================================================================

PROVENANCE NOTE (Tower of Babel staging): Eucken's Der Wahrheitsgehalt der Religion (1901) — the philosophy of religion of the 1908 Nobel laureate. W. Tudor Jones's translation (1913 second-edition text).

========================================================================

eet


fens
4


elepeiet ete”.


INITIAL LIBRARY OF


Emmanuel school of RELIGION


PRESENTED BY


GRACE PHILLIPS JOHNSON


IN MEMORY OF


WHOSE CONTRIBUTION
TO THE CHURCH OF CHRIST
1S REFLECTED IN THIS SCHOOL


gen00i
\\BR ary


OS PO


Digitized by the Internet Archive
in 2023 with funding from
Kahle/Austin Foundation


https://archive.org/details/truthofreligionsOO00rudo


i > oy i \)
Tt? ae


2
”


THEOLOGICAL TRANSLATION LIBRARY


EMMANUEL
scHO0l OF RELIGION
LIBRARY


VOL, XXX
EUCKEN’S THE TRUTH OF RELIGION


Theological Translation Library


NEW SERIES


Vol. XXX.—THE TRUTH OF RELIGION. By Dr Rupo.tr
EuckeEN, Senior Professor of Philosophy in the University of
Jena. ras. 6d. net.

Vols. XXVIII. and XXIX.—THE OLD TESTAMENT IN
THE LIGHT OF THE ANCIENT EAST. By ALFRED
JeremiAs, Pastor of the Lutherkirche, and Lecturer at the
University of Leipzig. Two vols., with numerous illustrations
and maps, 25s. net. Vols. not sold separately.

Vols. XXVII., XXVI. and XXII.— PRIMITIVE CHRIS-
TIANITY: Its Writings and Teachings in their Historical
Connections. By Orro PrLEIDERER, Professor of Practical
Theology in the University of Berlin. Vols. 1, 2 and 3.
ros. 6d. each net.

Vol. XXV.—ETHICS OF THE CHRISTIAN LIFE. By
Dr THEopoR von HaeErinG, Professor of New Testament
Dogmatics and Ethics at Tiibingen. xos. 6d. net.

Vol. XXIV.—HISTORY OF THE CHURCH. By Hans
von ScuuBert, Professor of Church History at Kiel.
tos. 6d. net.

Vol. XXIII.—THE INTRODUCTION TO THECANONICAL
BOOKS OF THE OLD TESTAMENT. By Cart Cornitt,
Professor of Old Testament Theology at the University of
Breslau. os. 6d. net.

Vol. XXI.—ST PAUL: The Man and His Work. By Prof. H.
WEINEL, of the University of Jena. tos. 6d.

Vols. XIX. and XX.—THE MISSION AND EXPANSION
OF CHRISTIANITY IN THE FIRST THREE CEN-
TURIES. By Avotr Harnack, Berlin. Second, revised
and much enlarged edition, 25s. net. Vols. not sold separately.

Vol. XVIIL—CHRISTIAN LIFE IN THE PRIMITIVE
CHURCH. By Ernst von Dosscutitz, D.D., Professor of
New Bievarsen Theology in the University of Strassburg.
tos. 6d.

Vol. XVI.—THE RELIGIONS OF AUTHORITY AND THE
RELIGION OF THE SPIRIT. By the late AucustEe
SABATIER. 10S. 6d.

Vols. XV. and XVII—THE BEGINNINGS OF CHRIS.
TIANITY. By Pau_ WERNLE, Professor Extraordinary of
Modern Church History at the University of Basel. Vol. I.
The Rise of the Religion. Vol. Il. The Development of the
Church. os. 6d. per volume.

Vol. XIJI.—AN INTRODUCTION TO THE TEXTUAL
CRITICISM OF THE GREEK NEW TESTAMENT.
By Professor EBeRHARD Neste, of Maulbronn. Cloth,
ros. 6d. 3; half-leather, ras. 6d.

Vols. II., VII., VIII., [X., X., XI., XII.—A HISTORY OF
DOGMA. By Avotr Harnack, Berlin. Translated from the
Third German Edition. Edited by the late Rev. Prof. A. B.
Bruce, D.D. 7 vols. tos. 6d. each.

Vol. 1V.—THE COMMUNION OF THE CHRISTIAN WITH
GOD: A Discussion in Agreement with the View of Luther.
By W. Herrmann, Dr. Theol., Professor of Dogmatic Theology
in the University of Marburg. tos. 6d.

Vols. III. and VI.—A HISTORY OF THE HEBREWS. By
R. Kirret, Ordinary Professor of Theology in the University
of Breslau. tos. 6d. per volume.

Vols. I. and V.—THE APOSTOLIC AGE. By Prof. Cart von
WEIZSACKER. Translated by James Mitvar, B.D. 2 vols.
tos. 6d. each.


Descriptive Prospectus on Application.


iat PReEH OF
RELIGION


BY


RUDOLF EUCKEN


TRANSLATED BY


W. TUDOR JONES, Pu.D. (Jena)


EMMANUEL >>...
SCHOOL OF RELIGION
LIBRARY


WILLIAMS AND NORGATE
14 HENRIETTA STREET, COVENT GARDEN, LONDON
NEW YORK: G. P. PUTNAM’S SONS


IQIl


BL
51
. E82
aid


Now first translated into English from the
Second and Revised Edition, with a special
Preface for this Edition by the Author


(25 Beeoe


TRANSLATOR’S PREFACE


Ir is with mixed feelings that I allow this translation
to pass out of my hands. It would not have been
undertaken had it not been for the affection which I
possess for my old teacher and friend, and for the
influence which he exerted over my life when I had
the privilege of spending nearly three years with him
in the ancient University of Jena. And such an ex-
perience as mine is only a specimen of what is true of
thousands of other students who have passed through
his classes in Jena since 1874. These students are
found all over the world, and are all imbued with some-
thing of the spirit of their great teacher in connection
with the problems and contents of religion.

The book presents peculiar difficulties which will
be immediately acknowledged by all students of the
author’s writings. Much is lost at the best in a
translation, and especially is this so when the work is
that of a prophet of religion who cannot be tied down
either in thought or mode of expression to the level
of the writer on exact subjects. I have been painfully
conscious of the inadequacy of language to express
many of the ideas presented in the book—ideas which
seem inseparable from the religious experience of the
living personality. The terminology in many portions
of the book moves midway between Philosophy and


vi


S231


vi THE TRUTH OF RELIGION


Theology, and I have endeavoured constantly to take
this important fact into consideration. But it is a
fact of great difficulty in the midst of the present-day
flux of philosophical terminology. Whatever the
faults may be, I hope no one will detect a lack of fair-
ness in dealing with various theological conceptions.

I have to thank my wife for valuable help in con-
nection with the whole of the translation.

In the course of a few years, two large editions of
the book have appeared in Germany and the work
has been the subject of a large number of books,
dissertations, and essays, by many eminent German
philosophers and religious teachers. I hope it will
meet with a similar reception in the English-speaking
countries of the world, and help all who have at
heart the furtherance of the things of the spirit to
differentiate between the transient and the Eternal
in Christianity, and to labour for the growth of the
Spiritual Life in the deepest consciousness of men.


W. TUDOR JONES.
Hicusury, Lonpon,
lst November 1911.


AUTHOR’S PREFACE FOR THE
ENGLISH EDITION


THE author of this book has found so much good-
will in England in connection with his efforts that it
is a great pleasure for him to see his main work on
religion appearing in English. The work does not
pretend to present a system of religious philosophy ;
but, in the midst of the present-day controversy over
religion, the most important task seems to be to
present with the utmost possible clearness the solid
nucleus of religion, and, along with this, to show its
main rights. In the conviction of the author, religion
is able to attain a secure position and an effective
influence only when it is founded upon the whole of
life and not upon a particular so-called faculty of the
soul, be it intellect, feeling, or will. It behoves us,
therefore, to possess a plan of human life as a whole,
and to inquire whether life as a whole turns out to
indicate the operation of a Higher Power, and, hence,
to lead to religion. The primary condition of this
is the consideration that human life is not a mere
piece of nature, but that a new stage of reality reveals
itself in it. Such a revelation is actually present
in the Spiritual Life; and we are not able to grasp
sufficiently this fact or to understand its effects with-
out recognising that the Spiritual Life is a Whole,


vil


viii THE TRUTH OF RELIGION


and that it is present with elevating energy as a
Whole in man.

In pursuing this path it becomes evident that a
universal life—a cosmic depth—is imbedded in the
Spiritual Life. It is only as a revelation of such a
nature of life that spiritual creativeness, art and
science, morality and right, can develop themselves
and transform man. _ If, therefore, all genuine Spirit-
ual Life is the effect of a Higher Power, religion is
imbedded in it. The great spiritual leaders of the
race were clearly conscious of such a fact. But a
religion of such spiritual activity is still of a very
indefinite nature, and receives a distinctive character,
first of all, from the fact that, throughout a grave
upheaval, in a conquest over suffering and wrong, a
further stage of life—itself a kingdom of Divine
Love—is unlocked. Herewith religion becomes for
the first time an autonomous province of life; here-
with it brings forth a new and unique life.

But Characteristic and Universal Religion—in the
sense the terms are used in this work—must remain
in living relationship and mutually further one
another, for thus alone can the whole of religion
shape itself into greatness, and thus fortify and raise
not only individuals but the whole of humanity.
This fundamental conception tests and measures the
historical religions especially according to the manner
in which they shape the life of humanity, and accord-
ing to what they are able to achieve for the moral
elevation of human nature. Here the conception
decides resolutely for Christianity as the summit of
all religions ; but simultaneously it demands, in view
of the situation of the present day, that Christianity


AUTHOR’S PREFACE FOR ENGLISH EDITION ix


be more forcibly referred back to its essential vital
content and be given a simpler and more intelligible
form, and be freed from whatever is no more alive in
it but is a mere heritage of past times.

The Eternal and Divine in Christianity is the
depth of life which is unlocked in it. It has become
necessary to differentiate more clearly the Eternal and
Divine from the transient and the human which have
so intimately mixed up with it in divers forms. It
is only a conception of religion which binds freedom
and depth with one another, and which heightens
freedom through depth and depth through freedom,
that will be able to overcome the storms of the
present.

RUDOLF EUCKEN.

Jena, 1st November 1911.


CONTENTS


PART I.—THE UNIVERSAL CRISIS IN RELIGION


CHAP. PAGE


I. a. The problem of religion. ; : : 1

II. 6. The characteristic features of Chrasanine: ‘ 10
III. c. The movement of modern times against Chris-

tianity . : 24

1. The changes in ‘he woud of thought ; 24

(a) Natural science and religion : 24

(8) History and religion . : , 2 28

(y) The spiritual life and religion . ; 35

2. The variation of the direction of life . . 39

IV. d. The reconsolidation of religion . : : 48

V. e. The explanation of the developing tendency . 63


PART IJ.—THE FUNDAMENTAL BASIS OF
UNIVERSAL RELIGION


Introduction . : : ; : ; 72
VI. a. The complexity of hugreen life ; : : : 86
1. The dualism in human life : ‘ ; 86
2. The contradiction in human life ; . 04.
(a) The weakness of the spiritual motive-
powers . ; : 95
(() The spiritual iGipotence of man. ' 99
(y) The insufficiency of an alleged remedy 108
VII. 6. The progressive autonomy of the spiritual life . 119
1, The several stages. 122


(a) The emancipation BE life fom Ete

small self and the merely human

order . ; : : : 122
(B) The inward praibests overcome : 131
(y) The winning of a universal self . : 142


xi


xli THE TRUTH OF RELIGION


CHAP.
2, Epitome and survey .


(a) The meaning of the epminal life
(B) The view of the universe .
(y) The situation of man.
(8) Conclusions for the method dnd the
task of life
VIII. c. The fact of universal religion
1, The turn to religion . :
(a) The problem of religion in ienenl
(8) Nearer view of the problem
(y) The reality above the world
(aa) The peril to the spiritual life
from its surrounding world .
(6b) The assertion of the spiritual
life over against the world .
(cc) The revelation of an absolute
spiritual life in our world .
2. The content of religion
(a) The idea of God
(8) Godhead and the world
(y) Godhead and man :
(8) The psychic connections of religion
(c) The characteristic features of the
religion of the spiritual life .
3. The proof and confirmation of religion
(a) Religion and science .
(8B) General considerations
(y) Special pathways
(aa) The aspiration Mens ae -
(6b) The aspiration after freedom
and equality ‘
(cc) The aspiration after eternity .
(dd) The aspiration after fellow-
ship and after a soul.
(ee) The aspiration after greatness
Conclusion


PART III.—THE OPPOSITION TO RELIGION
Introduction .
IX. a. The explanation of the apposition
1. The opposition of nature


PAGE


156
156
163
169


rar
187
187
187
188
195


196
198


203
208
208
214
221
226


231
243
243
256
260
261


263
270


273
278
282


284
290
290


CONTENTS
CHAP.
2. The opposition of culture .
3. The opposition within the particular pro-
vince of the spiritual life
(a) The disruption of the spiritual life
(8) The disintegration within the spiritual
life
(y) The impotence of ooricy
4, The darkness of the human situation .
X. 6. The opposition considered 4
1. The inadequacy of proposed remedies
2. The impossibility of a negation .
3. The necessity of further manifestations


PART IV.—CHARACTERISTIC RELIGION


Introduction . :

XI. a. The historical religions

1. The fact of religions .

2. The opposition to religions

3. Impossibility of a simple denial of relisieny
XII. 6. Signs of a new depth of life

1. The idea of love of enemy .

2. The deepening of love :

3. Self-maintenance in the midst of ninatsance

and suffering .

4, The progressive development of iawaniness

5. The further development of morality .
XIII. c. The unfolding of a religion of a distinctive kind

1. Introductory ‘ : :

2, The new life-process .

(a) The main thesis

(B) The idea of God and the elationdlip

to God. ;

(y) The verification of relision iivodeh
the progressive develop-
ment of life :

(aa) Elucidation and integration
of life

(bb) The further Aevelonment of
the movements of life


xlll
PAGE


296


306
307


313
320
3295
349
349
351
362


364
366
366
374
386
391
392
395


4.00
403
4.05
410
410
419
419


429


437
437


444A


Xiv THE TRUTH OF RELIGION


CHAP.
(cc) Peculiar effects of character-


istic religion
(dd) Retrospect
3. Religion in its relation to society and history
(a) The problem of the Church
(aa) The necessity of a religious
organisation
(6b) The dangers of a selisions
organisation ; ;
(cc), The reconstruction of a re-
ligious organisation
(8) The relationship to history
XIV. d. The general aspect of religion and life
(1) The persistence of evil
(2) The overcoming of evil
(3) The religious interpretation of life saa
the world
(4) Faith and doubt: the aoa of relipion


PART V.—CHRISTIANITY AND THE PRESENT


Introductory remarks concerning historical and
absolute religion :
XV. a. The eternal in Christianity
1. The nucleus beyond all loss :
2. The maintenance of this nucleus soaiiey
the changes of time : :
(a) The further development over against
nature
(8) The further davclonmente over aaaine:
history and culture : :
(y) The further development over against
the changes of the spiritual life in
man” — : ; . : ;
XVI. 6. The transient in Christianity and the necessity
of a renewal of Christianity
1, The removal from past forms
2. The necessity of a new mode of Chrisuante
XVII. c. The situation and demands of the present.


INDEX


PAGE


448
453
457
458


458
459
467
AT5
4.90
490
493


4.98
518


534
539
5389


5AT
547


556


563


576
576
591
605


617


THE TRUTH OF RELIGION


Part I—The Universal Crisis


in Religion


CHAPTER I
a. THE PROBLEM OF RELIGION


He who wishes to ascertain the intrinsic truth of
religion need neither trace its blurred beginnings in
time nor pursue its slow ascent, but may take his
stand upon the summit of its development. For it
is here first of all that the problem of truth obtains a
clearness and, at the same time, an urgency. We
need not trouble ourselves about the magic-shapes
which accompany and govern the initial stages of
religion; and we need not occupy ourselves with
religion as a mere aspect of early civilisation or as
a mythology of nature. Our problem begins only
where religion engenders a world of its own, and
holds forth such a world over against the remainder
of existence, thus transforming the remaining world
through and through. Thus, religion holds before
man, in the midst of his province, an invisible order


of things, an eternal existence, a supernatural life,
1 1


2 THE UNIVERSAL CRISIS IN RELIGION


and claims his soul for all this. Such a stated
revelation appears not merely in one but in several
points in history, and, further, the contents of the
“historical” and the positive religions vary. But the
same problem presents itself in all the manifold
phenomena of religion, and a sharp Nay as well as a
joyous Yea are common to all religions.

Nowhere is religion able to gain man for its new
world unless it frees him from the old world, and
unless it enables him to dislike and even to hate what
hitherto had swayed and enchanted him. There is
no possibility of a genuine and effective turn of his
life without a breach with the nearest-at-hand world—
without the clear discovery of the misery and vanity
of such a world. ‘This world must displease man
not only at certain points but in its entirety. All
within it contains not only much pain and sorrow,
but all within it is inadequate for man’s highest
happiness. Man is not only menaced and oppressed
from without; he is troubled from within by anguish
and alarm. It is only an entire revolution of the
nearest-at-hand life that can engender a genuine and
overwhelming aspiration after religion, and it is only
through such an aspiration that religion can come to
birth in the soul of man.

Indeed, the harder and sharper the Nay is, the
more energetic and joyous becomes the Yea which
religion holds out to man. Religion as a communica-
tion of God—of the highest power and _ perfection—
not only alleviates in some kind of way the pain of
man, and not only heightens somehow his happiness,
but it promises an entire freedom from evil and a
translation into entire blessedness. The new world


THE PROBLEM OF RELIGION 3


announced by religion signifies the highest conceiv-
able world—the summit of all perfection. The
evanescent and diminutive nature of man shall gain
a portion in the eternity and infinity of this new
world, and, indeed, man shall ascend to the Divine,
and religion will finally bind the Divine and the
human in one.

Religion sets our life in a stormy conflict and
movement through the revelation of such immense
prospects, through the transportation of a super-
human aim within the needs and exigencies of
human existence. Our existence raises itself to
incomparable greatness and intrinsic value, and into
our being the essence of the cosmos enters and longs
for our decision. Our circle of life dissects itself into
a For or Against; the customary valuation of the
excellencies of life is not only altered but inverted,
so that now that alone holds valid which leads us to
the Divine, whilst all that holds us fast to the ordinary
world, in spite of all its captivating brilliancy, sinks
to the level of an evil. “If any man cometh unto
me and hateth not his own father, and mother, and
wife, and children, and brethren, and sisters, yea, and
his own life also, he cannot be my disciple.”

But, besides being such a denial of the world,
religion was at the same time the strongest power
within the world. Nothing has so much united men
inwardly, but also nothing has so much divided them
as religion ; nothing has so much deepened the nature
of individuals, nothing has so obligatorily driven
forward the characteristic tendencies of nations as
convictions of Divine things. Whatever appears in
life as heroism roots itself ultimately in religion ;


4 THE UNIVERSAL CRISIS IN RELIGION


nothing can inspire man in the depth of his soul,
nothing can win his entire self-surrender unless it
has linked itself to his religion, or has become a
kind of religion in itself. Indeed, all the belief of
humanity and of the individual seems inseparable
from a belief in the indwelling of a Divine in human
nature—of the living presence of an eternal and
spiritual energy in the deeds of man. He who has
experienced the religious problem in the depth of his
soul is never again able to free himself entirely from
such an experience ; he may cast it off and banish it
to a distance, but when he does this he cannot but
choose to lay his strongest affection in the realm
of negation; he cannot but choose to handle the
question of religion as the main question of his life,
so that unbelief itself becomes only another kind of
versatile belief in his inmost conviction. Thus the
strongest power within the world constitutes in reality
the conviction of an over-world.

But, at the same time, religion has been an object
which has been constantly spoken against in a harsh
and callous manner. This happens not only from
the outside, but also from the deep earnestness of
wrestling souls. Ever anew the question raises itself
whether an opening to the Divine—whether a raising
of man in some kind of way to a Divine life—is
possible, or whether all assertion concerning this
turns out finally to be no more than a delusion.
Must not all that affects man assume a mere human
form? And must not all which recommended them-
selves to his aims enter into mere human notions ?
And is not all drawn into the narrowness and the
gloom of the earthly circle—is not all confined within


THE PROBLEM OF RELIGION 5


the barriers of our nature? Often enough what
served petty-human interests was considered Divine ;
the forces of the world tore such a Divine meaning
and reduced it to a means for their own ends.
Religion promises man a new life and new heart.
But has it not often knitted itself faster to the
mechanism of the world and heightened in a most
repulsive manner hate and jealousy, vanity and
hypocrisy ? And, further, the external world does
not correspond to the conceptions of religion. How
could the external world hinder so callously the
upward tendency of the life of man, how could it
concede to unreason and injustice so much scope, if
it stood under the secure guardianship of an all-
powerful Reason and of an Infinite Love ?

Thus, doubt burns like a devouring fire and leaps
up into the external province of religion, and also
finds its way into the most holy place and engenders
a tormenting uncertainty. Deep by the side of their
yearning, ardent souls have discovered with pain the
contradiction of the appearance of things, and have
found no consolation in the customary modes of
appeasement. Indeed, with the leading religious
spirits, much that had originated from a joyous
creativeness is hurled back into the abyss of doubt.
The stubbornness of doubt changes with one stroke
the total-outlook of things: the joyous high flight
is retarded; the upward energy is paralysed; what
hitherto appeared evident, now appears impossible ;
the over-world which is to the faithful the secure and
self-evident standard of life, recedes into an inacces-
sible distance and, indeed, threatens to resolve itself
into an empty illusion. Religion then appears as a


6 THE UNIVERSAL CRISIS IN RELIGION


grand error of the human spirit—as an image of
man’s own existence projected into the All, and as a
dream of a more beautiful life to which a reality does
not correspond, and on which he hangs his life. He
who sees through the dream as a mere dream ought
to undertake an inexorable struggle against such a
falsification of life ; he ought not to tolerate patiently
religion but struggle with it with the whole of his
energy as a deadly error. Here all possibility of a
third course falls to the ground. If religion is not
the highest and most fruitful truth, it is the worst
and deadliest of errors; if it is not the work of God,
it is a diabolical testimony of falsehood and darkness.
How can we decide concerning this critical point on
which the course of the whole of our life depends ?
How can we flee from the intolerable barriers which
lie between affirmation and negation ?

The historical religions have answered these ques-
tions in their own way; they have not answered
them through philosophical doctrines but through
the real facts of the work accomplished ; they have
not reflected and disputed merely how the Divine
glory can enter into the world of man, but have
undertaken to corroborate the possibility of the
impossible through the fruzts of its reality. In the
personalities of the founders as well as in the religious
communities the wonder seemed to reach an intuitive
presence, the idea seemed to incarnate itself in flesh
and blood. Religions felt themselves in the posses-
sion of an obvious reality—a reality which Jiberated
them from all insecurity and armed them against all
doubt. But, unfortunately, the fact of all this was
not so simple as the believers supposed, for even that


THE PROBLEM OF RELIGION a


which was to overcome doubt raised a new and greater
doubt.

It is fact of an héstorical kind which is expected to
consolidate belief. Such a fact must stand out from
the remainder of life and develop a distinctive char-
acteristic feature; indeed, the more individual does
such a fact become, the more energetically will it
work. But, as an expression of Divine truth, the
same fact must hold valid for all times; it must
govern and permeate the whole compass of life. Is
not an intolerable contradiction imbedded in such a
belief? Does not the binding of life to one special
form of life confine life in too narrow a groove?
Will it not cut away all further development, and
must it not become a coercive burden which incites
human nature to cast it off?

The most casual view of the history of religions
places this entanglement clearly before us. Every
historical religion borrows peculiar convictions of the
world and peculiar valuations of life from its envir-
onment. The environment states the question, and
religion undertakes the answer. Thus, every Indian
religion has as its presupposition a strong feeling of
the transitoriness and unreality of existence. Can
the imposed solution satisfy any one who rejects such
a presupposition ? And does the matter stand other-
wise with Christianity ? Can it speak to all men,
races, and times if it maintains any definite character,
and does it not dissolve itself into vague generalities ?

The personalities of the founders constitute the
centre of the historical religions. Nothing gives
the presence of an over-world within the human
circle more convincing energy than the unswerving


8 THE UNIVERSAL CRISIS IN RELIGION


constancy with which such personalities are rooted in
the Divine; than the manner in which they are com-
pletely filled by the thought of this one relation; and
than the simplicity and nearness which the great
mystery has acquired for them. Hearts have never
been won and minds have never been swayed without
the presence of a regal imagination which understands
how to win visible forms from an unseen world, and
to penetrate through all the multiplicity of things
into a kingdom of a fuller life. Nothing so elevated
above the ordinary every-day existence is to be found
as this, and nothing has governed in so compelling a
manner the hearts of men as such a secure growth
and such a presence of a new world.

But all this is individual and distinct precisely
where it is great; so that the religious life which
issues from such a source bears a thoroughly indi-
vidual character. Jesus, the Buddha, Mahomet, have
affected humanity in fundamentally different ways.
If one fundamental form is offered to all peoples and
times, does it not exclude much which humanity can
not and dare not relinquish ?

Also, the attempt to mould one religion into a
world-power on the ground of history is dependent
upon the particularity of the transitory historical situa-
tion. Such a formation of religion requires a highly-
explicitated realm of thought, and the means to obtain
this can be no other than the environing culture and
civilisation ; yet though these latter seem to be no more
than hand-maids to religion, they work powerfully
upon religion itself. ‘That culture and civilisation were
the products of particular peoples and epochs; sooner
or later the whole of humanity will outgrow them,


THE PROBLEM OF RELIGION 9


and if religion is indissolubly bound up with them,
the breach with a past culture and civilisation yields
at the same time a disunion with the tradition of
religion.

Thus doubt upon doubt rises. The Eternal seems
to fall under the ban of time as soon as it touches the
ground of time. But, again, if it stands entirely on
an immutability, it becomes a hindrance to all move-
ment and a denial of all history. But history is ever
present, and its current incessantly carries forth some-
thing new, and an indestructible need of the life of
humanity rejects any imposed stagnation. In connec-
tion with this difficulty it may seem as if in the alleged
Kternal it is not so much the Divine and Eternal which
reveal themselves, but only a particular kind of human
and temporal notions is founded and sanctioned. Why
should we at this period of day bow before such
particularity, and why should we renounce the inde-
pendence of our own life ?

The historical element which should have supported
religion becomes thus a new burden; doubts seem
now strengthened all along concerning an over-world
and its province. Then the uncertainty concerning
the whole matter bars an entrance into religion;
indeed, the more we puzzle our brains and worry
ourselves, the further religion seems to recede from
us. ‘God is the easiest and hardest object to know ;
the first and easiest to know on the path of light ;
the most difficult and last to know on the path of
darkness ” (Leibniz).


PART I.—THE UNIVERSAL CRISIS IN RELIGION


(ContINUED)


CHAPTER II


b. Tur CHARACTERISTIC FEATURES
oF CHRISTIANITY


Tue general problem of religion increases with the
turn to Christianity. The investigator as well as the
believer willingly acknowledge a surpassing greatness
to Christianity among the religions of the world. In
the first place, Christianity belongs to the higher of
the two groups into which the historical religions
may be divided. These are either the Religions of
Law or the Religions of Redemption. 'To the first,
the kernel of religion is the announcement and
advocacy of a moral order which governs the world
from on high. A fixed decree issuing out of a holy
will is announced to man for his acts, words, and
thoughts; a glorious reward awaits the fulfilment
of this law, and a painful punishment awaits its
transgression, if not in this world yet in the world to
come. Life thus in the whole of its extent is linked
to a super-sensuous world, is drawn to the daily task
and to the decision for or against God. Such a call
to man would be impossible without the conviction
that he is able to select the alternative out of his own


energy, and that his will suffices for the adoption
10


CHARACTERISTIC FEATURES OF CHRISTIANITY 11


of the good. On the other hand, the religions of
redemption declare such a conviction as false and
superficial. The capacity of man which seems so
self-evident to such a conviction becomes to the
religions of redemption the most difficult of problems
—becomes the most weighty question and concern.
Through this growth of the problem, man appears
to the religions of redemption as entirely unable in
his natural state to reach God, and as a being who falls
continually into evil and semblance ; and consequently
such religions long for an entire transformation and
renewal—for a sinking of the old and a raising of the
new, and for a great miracle of redemption. How
such a miracle is to happen may appear in the begin-
ning entirely puzzling, because man views himself here
in the midst of the most difficult entanglements. But
the possibility of a deepening of life corresponds to the
entanglements ; life is conceived more and more as a
Whole, and is stirred, convulsed, transformed incom-
parably more than hitherto. The very opening of
such a question relegates the religions of law, despite
all the merits of their greater simplicity, transparency,
and rationality, to a lower level—to a level which has
been reached and passed by the most important inward
movement of the world.

Two types—the Indian and the Christian—are to
be differentiated in the religions of redemption. As
both types understand evil differently, they seek there-
fore the “cure of souls” in different ways. ‘To the
Indian religions, the existence of the world is prim-
arily an evil; the world, with the whole of its natural
constitution in space and time, appears as a kingdom
of empty semblance. All in it is transient and unreal ;


12 THE UNIVERSAL CRISIS IN RELIGION


nothing in it has duration; happiness and love are
merely momentary; and men are as two pieces of
wood on the face of an infinite ocean which pass by
one another never to meet again. Fruitless agitation
and painful deception have fallen upon him who
mistakes such a transient semblance for a reality and
who hangs his heart upon it. Therefore it behoves
man to free himself from such an unholy arena. This
emancipation will take place when the semblance is
seen through as semblance, and when the soul has
gained an insight right into the foundation of things.
Then the world loses its power over man; the whole
kingdom of deception with its evanescent values goes
to the bottom, all the excited affections caused by
the world are extinguished, and life becomes a still
and holy calm; it reaches the summit of a dreamless
sleep, and enters, through its immersion into an eternal
essence, beyond the shadows; it passes through its
dissolution, into a state of entire unconsciousness
according to definite Buddhism. In all this, no new
life with new values opens out in front of us; the
emancipation is supposed to consist in a right insight,
and each individual has to decide for himself; the
leader can only point out the road; the energy to
travel over such a road is a matter for the individual
himself. A wisdom of world-denial, a calm composure
of the nature, an entire serenity in the midst of the
changing scenes of life, constitute the summit of life.
‘* When I know that my own body is not mine, and
that, further, the whole earth is mine, and, again, that
both are mine and thine, then no pain can happen.”
What a different kind of spirit breathes in Chris-
tianity ! Christianity, too, finds the world full of


CHARACTERISTIC FEATURES OF CHRISTIANITY 13


misery and suffering. Its beginnings and its summit
are not to be glided over so easily as is done by the
ordinary Christianity of our day. But even all the
experience of suffering will not allow the world to be
simply rejected, but far more, the fundamental con-
struction of the world appears as a perfect work of
Divine wisdom and goodness. The root of evil is not
in the nature of the world but in moral wrong—in a
desertion from God ; and itis this moral wrong which
first of all brings pain and death into the world. Such
a trespass enters so deeply and paralyses so completely
the energy of man’s nature that the world out of
its own potency can never again harbour the Good.
Therefore, God Himself must come to man’s rescue ;
He does this through setting forth a redemption
over against the fall of man; He does it through
the inauguration of a kingdom of love and grace
which bestows a new nature on man, and puts its
law within his soul. ‘Through such a conversion man
is securely raised beyond all suffering and trespass to
Divine holiness and perfection ; indeed, the deeper the
discovery of the previous misery has been, the greater
the joyousness which emanates from such aredemption.
Thus, there grows a pure impetus of life from the
convulsion and the misery themselves ; the union with
God gives man a secure foothold ; the domain of his
life does not sink into the abyss of nothingness as in
the Indian conception, but he gains a great task—
a task to build a kingdom of God upon the earth,
and to gain every individual soul for the kingdom.
There originates thus here out of effects and counter-
effects a world-encompassing drama full of difficult
entanglements and mysterious puzzles, but still of


14 THE UNIVERSAL CRISIS IN RELIGION


an unfathomable depth and of an immeasurable
hope.

Whilst thus the Christian life binds together a
world-denial and a world-renewal, whilst it ascends
through deepest pain to highest perfection, and whilst,
at the same time, the consciousness of trespass and
suffering endures in the soul alongside of the con-
sciousness of redemption, it develops a breadth and
depth of discernment unknown to other religions,
and it gains a perennial inner movement. Nothing
lies further from Christianity than an attempt at
weakening and excusing suffering. For what purpose
then does it need a deliverance if suffering does not
oppress man with intolerable gravity? But all
suffering cannot stifle man and drive him to despair,
because Eternal Love raises him to a new world—a
Love which all the power of the enemy cannot harm.
But this new world has to be wrested ever anew
from the kingdom of darkness, and even an echo of
pain is heard within the realm of blessedness. Thus
life remains throughout guarded from inactive repose
and luxurious enjoyment, and after the conquest
itself the struggle does not cease to exist. Man
obtains here within the kingdom of belief and hope
a secure treasure which appeared at the outset as a
distant goal. Thus his existence becomes simul-
taneously a possession and task, rest and effort, joy
and pain, certainty and doubt, and along with all
this there yields itself that flow of inner life by
means of which Christianity far surpasses all other
religions.

Further, the Christian life is especially rich in that
it includes in itself two stages—the belief of Jesus


CHARACTERISTIC FEATURES OF CHRISTIANITY 15


himself and the belief of the Christian community
in Jesus Christ. In the former we find the pro-
clamation of the kingdom of God upon the earth—
the kingdom of love and peace, the inauguration
of anew world in the pure inwardness of the spirit
of man, a joyous trust in the nature of man as grounded
in God, an invitation to all to a share in the great
enterprise and feast. Fresh youthful feeling, readiness
to serve, world-pervading love, become here the
carriers of a characteristic Christian morality. By
the side of the belief in Christ as fixed by the Church
a darker picture of human life and a lesser estimation
of human capacity prevailed. The idea of evil has
now increased to mean a delight in destruction and
a diabolical rebellion; so that the counter-effect to
evil must now grow. The kernel of this counter-
effect is brought about through atoning and redeeming
sufferings—through the appearance of the God-man
for the redemption of a humanity that could not
redeem itself. Suffering is thus taken up into the
Godhead ; man is wholly dependent upon a miracle
of undeserved grace ; the Divine Life descends deeper
into the soil of humanity, and religion is raised far
above all ordinary life and existence. ‘This new
stage brings forth difficult entanglements ; the danger
of a darkening of life and of falling into a blind
devotion and into a mythological mode of thinking
takes place. But in all the entanglements and
dangers mysterious depths appear throughout, and
a new life develops not only through a relationship
with God, but also through its collision with an
envious world is conducted into deep inferences and
is carried into a more triumphant verification. Chris-


16 THE UNIVERSAL CRISIS IN RELIGION


tianity through the union of these two stages carried
once more the opposites of life into wider connections
and elaborated more energetically than any other
religion its experiences; for in the contradictions
themselves a greater richness of life and a more
powerful exertion of man make their appearance.

The fact that the opposites, however, did not lead
to an entire discord but that the effort far more led
back to some kind of union of these discords in a
higher unity is due by Christianity to the supreme
personality of Jesus. It is true that tradition has
weaved around the personality of the Founder many
lineaments which belong to the veneration and inter-
pretation of the earliest Christian community, but
through all the disguised mist there is perceptible to
every unbiassed mind a unique mode of life and
character of incomparable unity of an individual and
intrinsic kind. Religion has here transformed itself
into a human purity with wonderful energy and in-
wardness ; an overtowering height has joined itself
to a simple innocence; manly energy of action has
united with gentle feelings, and a youthful joy of
disposition with a deep discovery of suffering. The
characteristic world of spirit has here acquired for
Christianity a personal embodiment and, at the same
time, an overwhelming clearness; for life and death
a proof founded upon facts has been gathered for the
asserted truth to which Christianity could ever return
from all the entanglements of the course of the world
and from all the strife of parties in order to call back
to memory its own true task, in order to create fresh
energy of life, and to gain clean beginnings for life.
The personality of the Founder has thus become in-


CHARACTERISTIC FEATURES OF CHRISTIANITY 17


comparably more to Christianity than the founders of
all the other religions have become to their adherents.
Christianity in this has a possession which cannot get
lost—a possession that binds souls to the Founder,
but a possession that protests against the caricature
of the Church. And finally the excellencies of
Christianity itself must not be forgotten—excellencies
which its history and its development into a world-
power testify. Originating on Jewish soil, Christian-
ity found its education especially with the Greeks and
soon afterwards with the Romans. Without such a
contact it might have easily remained a mere Jewish
sect, but through these two connections it quickly
forged its way through a national narrowness and
opened out its effects upon wider areas. The con-
nection of Christianity with Greece and Rome was
advantageous in two ways. On the one hand, the
new aspirant met a universal and thoroughly-matured
culture, and its effects for the ethical and spiritual
renewal of humanity found their most precious supple-
ment in the desire for knowledge and the sense of
beauty of the Greeks, and in the energy of will and
organising power of the Romans. At the same time,
notwithstanding all the wealthy possessions of culture,
Christianity found in the humanity of the time an
opposite frame of mind. For the glory of antique
life had now exhausted itself, and dark shadows
announced the coming of the night. In the begin-
ning of the third century especially a deep feeling of
fatigue lay over the whole of life and effort, and even
in less-resigned natures this turned into a strong
longing for supernatural aid and redemption. As
Christianity went out to meet this longing, eee


18 THE UNIVERSAL CRISIS IN RELIGION


of the nearest-at-hand world and its erection of a
new world could gain the entire surrender of souls.
Christianity thus shaped itself into a world-encom-
passing organisation—into a Church—which collated
the belief in a present Kingdom of God with a visible
object. There originated an encompassing and
governing system of life and culture as religion, which
confidently took over the spiritual guidance of
humanity. In reality, the Christian Church became
the mainstay of waning antiquity and the educator
of new aspiring peoples.

In the midst of all the transformations of the times
and in the midst of trials from without and worse
ravages from within, the Church proved itself the
most powerful ally of the life universal which we have
witnessed in all the centuries of the Christian era.

Thus, Christianity appears in the whole of its
effects and existence as the religion of religions. But,
at the same time, it contains far more problems,
meets with far more entanglements, and possesses a
more intricate content than any of the other religions.
All the fundamental points of Christianity clearly
show all this.

Christianity develops from the connection of
personality to personality a new world, and explains
this as the kernel of all reality. But does not such
a world, notwithstanding all its depth and soul,
become too narrow for the extent and wealth of
existence, and is it alone able to encompass all sides
of the ethical life? Indeed, does not a danger lie
here close at hand, that the inaugurated kingdom
of love, gentleness, and peaceableness, through their
severance from the remaining world, should become


CHARACTERISTIC FEATURES OF CHRISTIANITY 19


merely subjective facts and weak inactive tendencies ;
that the hard opposition of the world-powers is
less gripped than ran away from; that the exacting
humility towards God becomes a slavery towards
man, and that a willing endurance should acquiesce
to all the unreason of politico-social relations ?
Christianity uplifts man particularly high through
the union of his nature with God—higher than any
other religion. But does not the deification of man
produce a humanisation of the Divine, and has not
anthropomorphism taken root in Christianity far
more than in the other great religions? No religion
has more definitely flown parallel with history than
Christianity, but no religion has occupied itself so
much with the problem how historical events, not-
withstanding their particularity, can possess and
discover eternal truths. No other religion spans so
many different sides and stages, and consequently
none has to fight so hard for its own unity ; none
has been exposed so much to the danger of a severance
from one another of these sides and stages, and of
their falling out of the domain of truth. First of all,
this appeared in that the breach with the ordinary
world was not made decisive enough, and did not
establish itself firmly enough; and later, in that the
transformation of man’s nature did not penetrate
deeply enough into the great deep, and thus religion
degenerates into a mere revolving around the natural
life and its tendencies; soon after, a stubborn denial
of the possibility of bettering the world turns towards
the mere cultivation of one’s own environment and
threatens the soul with freezing hollowness. Also,
the two sides of a more general and a more positive


20 THE UNIVERSAL CRISIS IN RELIGION


Christianity came easily into envious combat, and
the unity of the whole remained an ideal beyond
which the actual situation lagged far behind.

But it is the religious conception of the personality
of Jesus which has caused most trouble and strife.
It did not suffice the Christianity of the Church to
believe with Jesus, but it desired also a belief 2m Jesus
Christ as mediator and redeemer. In its doctrines
and principles the Church fought with its whole
energy for the belief that God was present in the
redeemer not only in isolated aspects and energies,
but in the fulness of His nature, and that in the
person of Jesus the Divine and the human were
bound together in an indissoluble unity. Herein is
imbedded something which Christianity can never
abandon. Christianity must in some kind of way
be certain of an inauguration of the Divine Nature
within human life if it is to possess absolute truth and
to exert an abiding influence. But how is this union
to be made conceivable? And has not the doctrine
of the Church concerning the Deity of Christ as the
second person in the Trinity been a mistake, because
it has mixed up a fundamental truth of religion with
philosophical speculations which hardly any Christian
can understand, and because at the same time it has
tacked on to Christianity the mode of ideas of a par-
ticular generation—ideas which threatened to become
mythological to later generations or, indeed, which
have already become so.

Also, in the history of Christianity great dangers
and entanglements met the stated gains. The antique
mode of life, whose ideas Christianity willed to in-
corporate, became more alien and hostile to the


CHARACTERISTIC FEATURES OF CHRISTIANITY 2]


Christians when they saw through its real nature.
Christianity had previously viewed antique culture
and civilisation through the medium of a religious
disposition, but now it saw that such a mode of life
had no meaning for historical epochs in any character-
istic sense. Antique culture and civilisation were
borne along by a joyous belief in a reason immanent
in the world, and it was for the working out of such
a reason that all the energy of man was called forth.
Does not Hellenism with its equating of spirit and
thought tend to entangle Christianity in an intellect-
ualism which its inmost nature combats? And do
not the Greek love of form and its longing after
artistic delineation and plastic forms tend to entangle
that pure disposition whose sovereignty Christianity
proclaims? Also, the Roman mode of thought, with
its existence upon a solid organisation and with its
forensic treatment of all relationships, harmonises
but little with the Divine Kingdom of love and
peace. The soul of Christianity through all this was
driven back and enfeebled; the same danger has
taken place through ecclesiastical forms, and the
Church has largely succumbed to this danger. It
would have succumbed more had it not been that
ever anew particular personalities had opened out
once more the original fountains of life. Christianity
on account of so much defacement remains yet but a
high ideal.

Further, the lassitude of the civilised world at the
time of its initial contact with Christianity was a
great disadvantage. Christianity had, as its main
purpose, to work against such a fatigue with its
“glad tidings,” and it has in reality planted a new


22 THE UNIVERSAL CRISIS IN RELIGION


life-motive of a higher kind in the heart of humanity.
But through the enormous influx of merely external
elements, Christianity itself fell under the strong
influence of that stagnant tendency of the age, and
relapsed into a disposition and form far too passive.
Saturated through and through by the feeling of
corruption and weakness of human nature, man
yearned for redemption and peace beyond all else;
he desired to unburden himself as much as possible
of his own responsibility and to be protected by
some fixed authority; he established himself against
tormenting doubt through belief in certain data, and
brought forth the miraculous, the magical, and the
unintelligible as proofs. ‘Io such a mode of thought,
the spiritual seemed to lack a completeness of reality
without a sensuous embodiment, and thus both the
spiritual and the sensuous flowed inseparably to-
gether. ‘The Divine seemed thus to be more highly
honoured the less man and his capacity were valued.
A secure rest, beyond all the life of the world, was
found here in God, but no path returned from this
rest to the reality around man in the world and to
an energetic possession and joyous uplifting of the
world. All that is of a spiritual and religious nature
in such a position was experienced by the mighty
spirit of Augustine. But, at the same time, he
stamped for future generations a type of thought of
his own age, and brought about a severance of the
Divine and the human; he bound the spiritual with
the sensuous, the invisible with the visible Church,
and the effects of all this have continued ever since.
It is out of the work of Augustine especially that
the religious system of the life of the Church grew,


CHARACTERISTIC FEATURES OF CHRISTIANITY 23


and it was through his energetic concentration that
a sheltered ark was offered in the deluge of that
epoch of humanity, but which, with all its spiritual
narrowness and constraint, its rigid determinism
became intolerable to ages of more courage and
independence.

The first shaping of Christianity consequently could
not remain incontestable. The first great counter-
movement originated upon the ground of religion
itself. This was the Reformation. Portions of the
Roman and Greek influences were eliminated, and
the inmost kernel and unique character of Christianity
were once more energetically grasped; through the
turn from the Church to personality a more original
life, greater energy of character, and a greater dis-
covery of difficult opposites were gained. But in
spite of all the greatness of the Reformation, the
whole matter stands in an unfinished state through
the fluctuating tendencies between old and new
modes of thought, and through the failure to come
into terms with modern culture. There is thus
nothing to prevent the appearance of a movement
in our modern times which will not only call into
question the ecclesiastical form of Christianity but
Christianity itself, and, indeed, call into question all
religion, and so involve us in a struggle for life or
death. ?


PART IL—THE UNIVERSAL CRISIS IN RELIGION


(ConTINUED)


CHAPTER III


c. Tue MovemMent oF MopEern TIMES
AGAINST CHRISTIANITY


Mopern thought has entered into conflict with
Christianity not only in certain directions but in the
whole of its tendencies and efforts ; and it is not the
beliefs and whims of individuals but the very nature
of the work itself which has led to a stern collision.
Although individual responsibility is not entirely
absent in such a collision, yet this responsibility is
not of the kind that can be accredited and attributed
to individuals. It is thus necessary to distinguish
the movement against Christianity from the work of
individuals and parties, and to analyse it according
to its own inner structure. It is then necessary in
the first place to consider the changes in the world
of ideas, and afterwards turn to the changes in the
domain of life.


1. The Changes in the World of Thought


(2) Natural Science and Religion.—The collision
between modern thought and religion is most visible
in the realm of nature. Traditional religion has


interlaced itself with a naive view of nature which
24


MODERN TIMES AGAINST CHRISTIANITY 25


considered the earth as the static centre of an en-
circling universe. Such a religion understands the
creation of the world as the work of a reason superior
to the world—a reason which holds and links nature
together, and makes it a means for its own ends.
And, further, such a religion gives man a matchless
position in which all the conditions are connected
with his weal and woe, and in which the destiny of
the All is linked with his deeds—with his fall and
misery, his elevation and bliss.

Modern science has attacked and destroyed such
a view of nature at three main points. Since the
time of Copernicus it has extended enormously its
field of operation; it has discovered world beyond
world, and has reduced the earth to a mere speck in
the universe; it has removed that distinction between
heaven and earth—a distinction which signified so
much to religious conceptions and feelings. Can
then that which is only a satellite amongst an
innumerable number of fixed stars decide concern-
ing the destiny of the All? And what becomes of
an “ascension to heaven ” when there is no heaven in
the old-fashioned sense—no above or below in this
boundless space ?

Next comes the inward change of nature depicted by
Galileo and Descartes. All psychic energies, all aims
and ends, are removed from nature, for they resolve
themselves into a co-existence of the most minute
elements which work upon one another only through
gravity and impact, and whose whole mechanism is
entirely evident. ‘Thus every phenomenon is reduced
to the same level and nature, and it follows simple
and inviolable laws; nothing individual or unique


26 THE UNIVERSAL CRISIS IN RELIGION


can break this circle, and no psychic energy can turn
any phenomenon out of its course.

Such a mode of thought which invests nature with
entire independence and inner completion collides
severely with the religious view of nature, especially
in the problem of miracle; for miracle is as intoler-
able in the realm of this mode of thought as it is
indispensable in the realm of religion. Miracle is
“the dearest child of belief”; to refer each and every
phenomenon back to natural causality seems to
destroy religion to its very foundation. No religion
has so strenuously defended miracle—even sensuous
miracle—as the Christianity of the Church; “and if
Christ hath not been raised, your faith is vain.”
Modern natural science, on the contrary, has un-
mercifully driven miracle out of its domain; miracle
signifies to it what it signified to Spinoza — not
something above nature but something contrary to
nature; every particular break in the order of nature
appears to modern science as a destruction of its
fundamental structure, and as a denial of its validity.

Miracle is but one point of the acute collision of
opposites, for in reality the line of battle extends
much farther. The transformation of all into a
soulless mechanism renders nature through and
through equally indifferent to all spiritual values
as well as to all religious and moral aims. Nature
follows its course with brazen laws and has no regard
whatever for what is termed good or evil by man.


“Devoid of all feeling
Does Nature proceed,
The sun shines the same


Whatever the deed ;


MODERN TIMES AGAINST CHRISTIANITY 27


The moon and the stars
Shine equally too,

On misdeed and darkness,
The good and the true.”


Thus, the human circle becomes isolated in the All
of things, whilst formerly it felt itself the ruling
centre.

Finally, the doctrine of evolution in the nineteenth
century appears and sets the coping-stone on the
whole of the previous work. Hitherto, the scientific
conception of nature found an insuperable barrier in
the organic kingdom, and consequently the religious in-
terpretation could always return to this one impreg-
nable citadel. Lamarck appeared, and later Darwin.
However much remains disputable in the theories of
both, the general meaning of the evolutionary theory
has passed from the realm of discussion to the realm
of fact. Scientists are agreed that the forms of life
did not stand side by side as completed things in the
beginning, but are causally linked with one another,
and the higher have proceeded out of the lower
through natural changes. And it is also agreed that
man is related to nature, and that characteristics of
nature extend, too, into his life. There developed
itself thus a biological interpretation of human
and mental greatness which contradicts directly the
ethico-religious interpretation. The ethico-religious
interpretation measured the values of all activities and
experiences according to their relationship with God
and with the Kingdom of God which was above the
world ; the biological explanation estimates qualities
according to their use and their preservation in
the struggle for existence. In the former mode of


28 THE UNIVERSAL CRISIS IN RELIGION


thought, eternal values are aspired after in spite of
all the changes of time; in the latter mode, the
valuation of things must perpetually alter according
to the changes in the external situations, for what is
of use to-day may become injurious to-morrow, and
inversely. In the religious mode of thought, a pure
inwardness should construct itself, and the gaining
of the whole world could not compensate for the loss
of the soul; in the scientific mode all tendencies and
efforts are directed towards the external, and the
“soul” has become an empty word. In all this, the
irreconcilable opposition to religion is evident, and
both modes cannot possibly exist together. But
natural science is here in our midst, and has, step by
step, further developed with a constrained kind of
necessity. It has brought forth not only an immense
fulness of results, but has even opened out a new
course of thought—a more precise insight, a clearer
line of demarcation, and a stronger affinity with
causal connections and real facts; it has, through
this work, turned against the thought-course of
religion, and has declared religion as scientifically
untenable. Is religion able to withstand such a
mighty current ?

(8) History and Religion.—History, to the op-
ponents of religion, associates itself with nature.
Traditional religion in its combat with the meaning
of history has experienced a blow which has affected
its inmost nature. According to the religious view,
human history and even our earth have had but a
short span of existence, and all that appeared on these
domains received its aim and its driving energy from
the Godhead who reigned above the world. The


MODERN ‘TIMES AGAINST CHRISTIANITY 29


Godhead had preordained the plan of the whole;
destiny had linked itself to each individual ;
prophets and heroes were sent “when the time was
fulfilled.” The main task of history was the educa-
tion of human nature—of each individual—for an
over-historical eternal life whose kernel constituted
the struggle between good and evil, and which con-
nects itself as a great drama from creation morn
to the day of judgment. Everything outside this
remained a mere environment, and had a significance
only through its relation to the soul of the whole. It
is from such a conviction that all results and experi-
ences were interpreted, and one grew so accustomed
to such an interpretation that one believed oneself
able to verify everywhere and at a glance such a
guidance of affairs, and to discover everywhere “the
finger of God.”

How much all this has been altered! And the
change has happened less through any sharp catas-
trophe than through a gradual crumbling away and
a rebuilding. The extension of time, just as the
extension of space, has grown into infinity; science
reckons the age of the earth by millions of years ; and
short as human history appears in comparison with
such a vast period of time, it, too, has continually
extended its duration; the epochs of civilisation
shrivel into insignificance when compared with the
immeasurable extent of “prehistoric” times. And,
further, as the presence of organic and also of mental
life seems dependent upon certain indispensable con-
ditions of existence, modern thought conceives the
existence of man as a mere episode of the world-
process—an episode, compared with infinite duration,


30 THE UNIVERSAL CRISIS IN RELIGION


is no more than that of a meteor in an infinite sky
which illumines and suddenly vanishes.

But the inward transformations have been still
deeper. History as well as nature has developed an
independence. As the supernatural was subjugated
to nature, so the over-historical now falls under the
ban of history. Certain motive-powers were acknow-
ledged within the human domain ; certain aims were
exhibited ; these phenomena linked themselves directly
with one another, and thus united themselves into a
great web. Each individual example is now under-
stood through these connections ; the highest instance
is now no more valued as an isolated miracle, but
as the climax of a movement, and such an instance
grows out of the conditions and environment. When
history is understood thus as something that has
grown out of a prior history “immanent ” in it, all con-
ceptions of supernatural powers become an intolerable
disturbance, and it is this which renders history such
an irreconcilable opponent of traditional religion.

The same aspect appears in the knowledge that
any movement proceeds and progresses from point to
point—a fact which conceives history as a continuous
process of evolution. Thus history as a whole gains
a task and a meaning by itself; the perspective of
a better and even an endless ascent of a capacious
future invests present existence with an expansion
and task within its own province, and raises it above
all the evils of the present. The religious hope of a
culminated bliss in the next world fades away before
such a belief in the future of this world.

Where there is so much to do and to alter within the
sphere of time— and, indeed here alone such a work


MODERN TIMES AGAINST CHRISTIANITY 31


is able to transform reality into a kingdom of reason
—such a work cannot be viewed as something futile
and transitory, and consequently aspiration and
hope do not depend entirely upon eternity. Simul-
taneously the feeling of the impatience of man dis-
appears. He seems now, under the new conditions,
posited before all else upon his own energies; he
reaches his majority; he does not so much receive
his destiny from a superior power as that he shapes
it through manly deeds. And thus it is not towards
a supernatural kingdom of God but towards the
_ welfare of man and humanity that the focus of
attention is directed.

The conflict into which the historical and the
religious convictions enter becomes specially bitter
in connection with the problem of truth. Religion
understands truth as simply eternal and unchange-
able; although the Divine revelation discloses itself
within time, it is in no manner a product of time,
and it does not follow the current of time; and it
views all change as a degradation. The historical
development, on the contrary, with the incessant
shifting of its situation and its restless progress,
transforms truth into a child of the times (veritas
temporis filia) ; the tendencies as well as the convic-
tions have to correspond to the exigencies of the
situation of things. On account of this, all spiritual
values become fluid, all truth becomes relative, all
unfolding into absolute validity of the intrinsic
content of thought and belief is energetically fought
against. If, however, religion can never renounce
an absolute and eternal truth, all decision in favour
of history will be a decision against religion.


32 THE UNIVERSAL CRISIS IN RELIGION


Further, the detailed formation of historical in-
vestigation becomes highly dangerous to a religion
such as Christianity, which rests first and foremost
upon historical events. The naive mode of thought
which accepted indiscriminately the transmitted
picture of earlier ages, and simultaneously combined
the manifold lore into a homogeneous whole, cannot
stand before an awakened conduct of life and a keen
critical consciousness. We cannot disguise the fact
that what hitherto has been accepted as unalloyed
truth and as a genuine expression of reality contains
ever so much subjectivity of conception and adjust-
ment, that we see the things far less than the veil
which human opinion and imagination have weaved
around them. How slowly and guardedly do we climb
even to-day towards the facts as towards an unattain-
able ideal which, to earlier times, seemed so safe and
certain. Growing historical criticism will not allow
itself to be removed from dealing with religious
tradition, for hardly anywhere else has it shown so
conspicuously its achievements, purged so funda-
mentally the transmitted pictorial ideas, and trans-
formed the transmitted picture. What appeared in
earlier times as a totality or whole now discloses deep
differences and pointed contradictions not only in
subsidiary aspects, but in fundamental and essential
characteristics. We find this, for instance, in the
New Testament—in the widely divergent pictures
of Jesus~and in the fundamentally different repre-
sentations of Christianity; so that much which
became main facts to believers in later times was not
so to the original witnesses, or if it were it was only
in a hardly perceptible form; and no unbiassed mind


MODERN TIMES AGAINST CHRISTIANITY 33


ean fail to detect a great chasm between the dogmas
of the Church and their historical foundation in the
Bible. All this gives rise to problems concerning
the authenticity of the sources with all their agitated
and minute discussions. Whether the results of
criticism are positive or negative is of far less im-
portance than that the trustworthiness of the records
depends upon scientific proof, and that the Divine
is not poured directly upon us, butis to be found
by man through the toilsome work of thought. ‘The
criticism and conclusions reached by this mode of
thought have irreparably destroyed the halo which
once surrounded the tradition; the dazzling light of
science has dispelled unmercifully that dreamlike
semi-darkness of the religious imagination in which
heaven and earth seemed to blend into one another.
Thus the gains of history become a loss to religion.
As a religion founded upon history experiences a loss
in so far as the more precise insight and the more
essential conception of the past become clear through
the necessary results of a critical mode of inquiry
which fixes the boundaries more distinctly between
one age and another, and along with this utilises the
results of the past, an easy inundation of the effects of
such criticism is forbidden by such a religion. Sacred
history was pictorially present to earlier generations,
and they saw the particular time and surroundings
in the light of this history. Whilst historical criticism
has rendered this impossible, it has at the same time
destroyed the predominant position of sacred history.

But the doubt and discord reach still deeper. The
inner content of the tradition becomes a problem to
modern thought, but such a mode of thought fee it


SED DD |


DF tho (>


34 THE UNIVERSAL CRISIS IN RELIGION


impossible to establish basal convictions upon historical
events. What influences the spiritual self-preservation
- of man must be experienced in the form of immediacy,
and must be verified by man himself, and all this can-
not be imposed from without. Whilst the dufhlirung
for the first time brought this truth to expression over
against all bare tradition, it differentiated too sharply
reason and history, the individual life and tradition,
and overestimated the power of any present moment
of consciousness. But even we who view history in
a more friendly manner are not able to give up the
self-reliance which life has gained through such a
turn; and yet history for us to-day can never take
the first but the second place, because only so much
in it can be valid for our life as allows itself to enter
into self-consciousness. In this respect the words of
Lessing hold valid for us: ‘ Accidental—z.e. actually
empirical—truths of history can never become proofs
of the necessary truths of reason.” And if life thus
disengages itself from the bond of history, it becomes
an intolerable coercion to bind the salvation of man
to an easy acknowledgment of historical events.
“To state that a historical belief is a duty and that it
belongs to salvation is superstition” (Kant). “Let
no one assert that it does no harm to cling to such
historical beliefs. It is injurious in that subsidiary
facts are given equal validity with essential ones, or,
indeed, are presented as the essential facts, and con-
sequently the main facts are suppressed and the
conscience is tormented ” (Fichte).

The meaning of history has thus brought forth all
along the line a mode of thought other than is appre-
hended by religion. And no religion has received


MODERN TIMES AGAINST CHRISTIANITY 35


greater shocks in this respect than Christianity, on
account of the fact that it is more closely bound up
with historical points of view as well as with historical
events than any other religion.

(y) The Spiritual Life and Religion.—Religion is
_so injuriously affected by nature and history that the
most important point has not yet been touched by us.
This point lies in the inner nature of life itself—a
point which is the source of all practical proof and
mode of thinking. Between that, on the one hand,
which religions in general teach, and that, on the other
hand, which modern culture in the whole of its de-
velopment maintains, a deep cleft has been created, so
that what hitherto had held valid as the kernel of all
reality now threatens to vanish into a hollow semblance.

The life of the human soul, from the standpoint of
an old mode of thought, was most intimately woven
with the environment of the world; mutual energies
swayed within and without in the particular and in
the general, and all things seemed to find their true
rest in the mind and soul of man. No kind of doubt
could be raised as to the legitimacy of depicting the
all-ruling Power in terms of human analogy, or to
understand the intercourse with such a Power as a
relationship of soul to soul in the manner of relation-
ship of man with man. All the values of religion
thus shaped themselves by means of the immediate
life of the soul of man; from such a point of im-
mediacy alone could such conceptions as love, grace,
and trust obtain a meaning. No religion, however,
places the inwardness of the soul higher than Chris-
tianity with its message of an Infinite Love and of
the immediate presence of the Kingdom of God.


36 THE UNIVERSAL CRISIS IN RELIGION|


Now, the work of modern times, as we have already
seen, has altered in an important manner the position
and the valuation of the life of the soul. The soul
has been banished out of nature, and, along with this,
out of the world; thus it had to shape itself into a
particular kingdom of its own—into a totality of life
and thought within its own circle. The barriers of such
an isolated life become more and more perceptible ;
as a mere solipsism; as a relationship of all phenomena
to each other in a point outside itself, and as a
subjective neutrality the soul becomes too narrow for
a spiritual work which more and more decisively
develops a cosmic character. Thus, the larger and
wider outlook disengages itself from the immediate
consciousness, turns against the soul, and sets it in
a position of a mere epiphenomenon. Thus, the
particular forms of life, such as art and science, politics
and technics, separate themselves and form provinces
of their own, and such happens finally with the whole
results of culture. Everywhere independent provinces
originate and engender their own tasks, laws, and
motive-powers ; they carry their own aims and ends
in themselves, reject all relationship with the self-
existence of the soul, and look upon all standards
which value the deeper welfare of the individual as
disfigurements. United indissolubly with modern
culture are its impersonal character, its continuous
positing on itself and continuous movement outside
itself, and its alleged superiority over all human plans
and “ends.” Indeed, the true greatness of man now
appears in that he lays on one side all mere self-
existence, and transforms himself into a willing tool of
the processes of civilisation and culture. No one has


MODERN TIMES AGAINST CHRISTIANITY 37


presented such a penetrating and fundamental view
of the whole processes of modern civilisation and
culture as Hegel, and his ideas have operated with
remarkable effect through the nineteenth century right
up to the present day.

But such a work and creativeness, brought about
through actual necessities, are not able to draw the
life into themselves without an entire transformation
of its ideals. ‘The subjective disposition and, along
with it, all the ethical relationships of man retire
when face to face with the proclamation of an
external spiritual energy and with the co-operation
in that process of civilisation. Consequently the old
inwardness of the soul with all its greatness and
goodness is ordered out of the centre of life to the
periphery ; indeed, the soul is now driven not only
out of nature but out of its own inward life as well.

We cannot conceive of a more deadly assault on
religion than all this. For if the soul sinks so low to
the level of a subsidiary thing, it cannot furnish the
standard for man’s view of reality, and, consequently,
the whole ideal world of religion appears as a mere
anthropomorphism and as an unbearable falsification
of reality. Positivism, following such a train of
thought, has considered religion as a mere stage of
development upon which man, through a childish
illusion, sees magnified human powers in the universe,
and believes himself capable of conversing with such
powers. Positivism has not the least place for
religion in the old sense. If it continues to hold
some kind of conception of God, this cannot signify
anything more than a basal world-substance or a
pervading world-energy. Here no personal relation-


38 THE UNIVERSAL CRISIS IN RELIGION


ship to such a substance is gained, and conceptions
such as love and grace, belief and _ trust, lose their
meaning. It is not only this or that point in religion
which now becomes a mythology, but the whole of
religion itself; it becomes now a stage of life which
has been passed by mental development. And along
with the downfall of religion, the downfall of morality
takes place, for how can qualities such as character
and conviction signify a value if all independent inner
life is suppressed ? Such an ejection of religion and
morality by an impersonal process of culture must
affect Christianity in a most severe manner, as it has
maintained the independence of the inner life more
confidently and has developed itself more powerfully —
than any other religion. Indeed, according to this
positivistic mode of thinking, the higher Christianity
sets its aim, the deeper must its fall now be.

Thus, it is not only on account of the new concep-
tion of nature and of historico-social work but also
on account of the fundamental woof of life itself
that religion—indeed, all possibility of a religion—is
driven out. All the counter-effects mutually protect
and heighten one another. This work, in particular
points, is far from creating a negation, and it is often
asserted with an honourable conviction that the special
changes in our views of nature and history leave un-
touched the entire stability of religion. But, indeed,
when it happens in other points—and in all other
points—that all the particular corner-stones crumble
into pieces, what becomes of the construction of the
whole building? The greatness and pre-eminence
of this mode of thought is that men proceeded at the
start not to destroy in any way, but were far more


MODERN TIMES AGAINST CHRISTIANITY 39


desirous to bind and to fit into one another the old and
the new; but the truths discovered cast off all the
adornment and, indifferent to human views and
plans, went their way towards their own goal. And
this road leads towards the destruction of religion.


2. The Variation of the Direction of Life


It needs but few words in order to show that a
change in the drift of life corresponds to the trans-
formation of the world of ideas. Hand in hand with
natural science proceeds the development of modern
technics, and with the rise of this, man has ceased to
be powerless against nature, and has become far more
its lord and ruler. He can now with good courage
take up the struggle against all limits and hindrances ;
he can extend his life beyond all bounds through the
appropriation of natural energies; he can accelerate
the richness of life, and shape it into greater enjoy-
ment. Through the progressive inauguration of new
perspectives and tasks he gains a remarkable con-
sciousness of human capacity and human superiority.
This disposition of joyous energy and courageous
faith develops over against the historico-social life.
Constraint and unreason cease to be conceived as
necessities laid upon him by destiny whose effects
he may alleviate but whose root he cannot destroy.
Modern man, in the use of all the means of culture
and the severe clash of energies, feels himself strong
enough to shape his existence into a kingdom of
reason, and to make the real rational and the rational
real. However many the oppositions which stand
against him, they produce a feeling of life which is


40 THE UNIVERSAL CRISIS IN RELIGION


far more a stimulus than a deterrent to activity. In
any case, man does not expect this result to proceed
from any supernatural agencies, but achieves it
through his own inmost exertions. In addition to
this, that new ideal of life appears with its superiority
to all human inactivity and its inauguration of an
immeasurably richer Spiritual Life of an objective
kind filled with independent contents and moved by
inner necessities. Infinitely more clearness, breadth,
and reality seem to enter into our life through all
this, as well as a truth which does not proceed from
a supernatural communication but from our own
activity.

Indeed, our environing world furnishes an abun-
dance of work and expansion; it is able to occupy
man with itself so as to hold him fast in the inward-
ness of his being, so that not the least desire arises
for another mode of life. ‘The more such a tendency
in the direction of the world takes possession of
the whole soul of man, the more religion loses its
foundation, the clearer becomes the opposition to
the ages in which Christianity gained its most
important achievements, and the greater appears
the whole history of modern times as a progressive
transference of life from a world of belief and fancy
into the world of immediate existence.

Christianity in its beginnings could never have
undertaken its work for humanity without setting
up a world of belief and hope over against the exist-
ing world, and to announce such a new world as the
true home of man. When Christianity, however,
reached its conquest it laid the world “beyond” in
front of a tired world devoid of any special hope;


MODERN TIMES AGAINST CHRISTIANITY 41


and now the hoped-for life did not seem able to
proceed from the present world, but proceeded only
out of a new order of things. The character of the
present world is depicted so clearly by Augustine
through the ardour of his conviction and the energy
of his writings. The new world is to him no distant
realm but the most intimate world, which furnishes
first and foremost in the toils and tangles of existence
a spiritual self-reliance, and which alone justifies the
will to live. But the new world drives the sensuous
world to the periphery of existence, and draws to
itself the work and affection of man. All the
ramifications of culture and civilisation, according to
Augustine, had but one aim—to raise man to a higher
world, to indicate to the manifold the necessity of
reaching a world-swaying unity, and to direct all
activity to the point where its toil and anxiety
suddenly change into an intuitive vision of Eternal
Truth and into the worship of Infinite Love. An
inmost kernel of the life of the soul is here raised
above all the entanglement of the work of the world,
and anchors securely in the Divine Life. From such
a level above the world, the soul is not driven back
again to the world; man feels himself most secure
in the midst of the continuance of opposites and in
the midst of all the knocks of all toil and anxiety.
«Thou hast created us for Thyself, and our heart
is not at rest until it rests in Thee.” ‘This religion
of a thorough transcendental kind experiences in the
Church-system of the Middle Ages a certain humani-
sation and mellowing, but the world of belief remained
still the main world, but it had now become the
nearest inmost world of the soul, and was designated


42 THE UNIVERSAL CRISIS IN RELIGION


at the height of Scholasticism as Fatherland (patria).
All this meant that religion formed the kernel of
life, and that the Church became the carrier of all
the ideal interests of humanity. But a new path
of most important significance was soon opened by
new nations with their fresh courage of life. The
prior life with its belief and hope, with its weaving
of a feeling alien to the world, lost gradually its power
of attraction; it was discovered as being too passive,
too soft and dreamy ; the desire arose stronger and
stronger after dealings and connections with the
world around us—after an exercise of human energy
in the struggle with the hardness of the things of
the world, and after a more awakened and more
genuine life. Man and the world were more sharply
severed ; subject and object were more clearly differ-
entiated. A new morning seemed to dawn and an
immeasurable day’s work lay before humanity. Thus
meaning and thought entered more and more into
the world instead of severing themselves from it ;
the natural impulse of life is changed throughout,
and this change was not favourable to religion.

But this great change culminated very gradually,
and appeared in three main stages. The new life
appears first of all in the Renaissance; the minds of
men here moved freer, and the narrowness of the
ideas with which man had depicted human life and
the world fell away. Man now not only discovers
distant lands, but before all else he discovers himself,
gains a vivid consciousness of his own energy, and
takes a joyous possession of the unlimited opulence
of the world. What draws and holds man is, on the
one hand, mainly the fulness of life which everywhere


MODERN TIMES AGAINST CHRISTIANITY 43


wells up, and, on the other hand, the beauty which
shines through all the forms of life. From such con-
victions and experiences there grows an ideal of a
harmonious development of the whole man; and in
the modern civilised state, the effort to adorn the
“here and now” obtains a fast root, for the natural
sphere of life drives ever forward new tasks, and
gains ever new energies. But notwithstanding all
its independence, the new mode of life does not as
yet enter into a struggle with the old mode: at the
height of the Renaissance both modes seem to seek
one another more than to flee from one another.
The natural world is conceived as beautiful and in-
exhaustible because it constitutes the impress and
reflection of the Divine Life; religion, however,
receives its most valuable development through in-
dependent art which invests the lofty contour of
belief with an intuitive nearness and enchanted
loveliness. Thus, religion and artistic culture walk
together hand in hand, and the contradictions im-
bedded in such a relationship were not yet discovered.

Soon, however, the movement passes beyond such
a union, and stands at last upon a closer unity of life.
This step took place at the height of creativeness in
the time of Spinoza. Its aim was to bind together
God and the world into a unique indissoluble reality.
Since the Divine permeates the whole world and
gives it a depth, the world becomes more than its
immediate appearance reveals, and transforms itself
into a kingdom of reason without any lacune. The
Godhead, thus drawn into the world, must, however,
lay aside all that is narrow and merely human, and
must be conceived as beyond all the limits of human


44, THE UNIVERSAL CRISIS IN RELIGION


conceptions, and must be raised to an all-encom-
passing eternity and infinity. Thus, religion can no
more be a particular province which governs existence
from a height “beyond,” but it seems to fulfil its
task far better the more it lays on one side any parti-
cular and isolated formations, and permeates all its
work with invisible effects. The aspects which united
man with the great All constituted here the kernel
of existence and raised him to a cosmic life; these
aspects are science and art in the sense of an ideal
culture. These create, through their world-encom-
passing thought and free-play of imagination, a new
kind of spiritual reality over against the ordinary
daily life; and, further, they ennoble all human
relations, and bestow the infinite and eternal upon
man in the midst of his daily life. Indeed, the more
the reality transforms itself thus into a kingdom of
reason, the more raises itself a cosmos out of the
chaos of an initial cosmogony, and the more the need
for any special religion disappears. Religion becomes
now a kind of finger-post to those to whom the
mental creativeness of science and art is denied.
‘‘Hfe who possesses science and art possesses also
religion. He who does not possess them, he, too,
has religion.”

But, notwithstanding its great achievements, this
pantheistic ideal of culture has not had a permanent
hold on humanity. On the one hand, its spiritualisa-
tion of reality signifies a stepping beyond experience,
so that experience could justify itself less and less
with the fading away of an over-world. On the other
hand, there grows a stronger feeling of the mystery
and suffering of the world, which destroys the calm of


MODERN TIMES AGAINST CHRISTIANITY 45


the pantheistic view—a view which, in its contempla-
tion of the whole of things, left almost entirely on one
side the unreason of particular phenomena. But if
our world is not a realm of reason, it demands us to
seek an explanation beyond the domains of pantheism.
And thus the movement proceeds towards a powerful
contraction of life upon immediate existence, upon a
development of a natural culture, which forbids all
progress, interpretation, and elevation beyond the
realm of ordinary life. The kernel of such a life is
built by the empirical investigation of nature, together
with technics and the practical politics of human
society. ‘There originates then a newer and more
secular type of life with such energy and self-con-
sciousness as have never been hitherto witnessed.
Such a type of life has verified itself through un-
dreamed-of achievements ; it has opened out a large
field of new tasks which have drawn man ever more
exclusively into their vortex, and which have busied
him almost breathlessly. Thus, life seems in the
position to value all the definite energy of man and
to fulfil all his entitled hopes. But the more the
spiritual activity binds itself to such a reality, the
more shadowy and untenable becomes each and every
religion. True, such a secular culture can well pro-
claim that the circle of human life constitutes but a
small segment of the unbounded reality, and that,
indeed, with all its extension, it belongs to a mere
superficiality, yet behind all this there lies and remains
inaccessible a dark depth. But as such a culture fails
to obtain any inward connection with such a depth, all
its gains are of no avail to religion.

Thus, the movement of modern times has moved


46 THE UNIVERSAL CRISIS IN RELIGION


farther and farther from religion, and has tied man
ever more securely to the visible world. The union
of religion and natural culture was followed by a
culture which turned itself into a kind of religion,
and this was followed finally by a culture devoid of
any kind of religion. So that the tendency towards
the world grew ever stronger, and more and more
such a tendency divested itself of all super-sensuous
connections, but, at.the same time, it has given man
far more to do in the realms of knowledge and action ;
and in certain departments it has become so rich in
content that it seems to be able to satisfy the whole
of life and effort.

Religion, without a doubt, roots itself too firmly in
the convictions of individuals and in. the organisations
of society to allow such consequences of material
culture to come into full and immediate effect,
although nowhere is the centre of gravity of duration
more visible than in these realms. For the individual
in particular, the inwardness of his soul and the in-
finite aspiration of his mind constitute a sanctuary
to which he flees out of all the struggles, and from
which he can hold forth his inner experience as a
shield against all attacks. But this refuge of the
individual signifies no stronghold for all men. Not-
withstanding the spiritual content of his life, man
remains bound to the ordinary situation of humanity ;
it is not given to him to set forth victoriously the
ideals which fill the depth of his soul against culture
and civilisation, so that religion becomes more and
more a mere private concern—a mere ebb and flow
of a subjective kind—which degenerates into the level
of sectarianism and the miraculous. And, finally, all


MODERN TIMES AGAINST CHRISTIANITY 47


cautious restrictions are not able to prevent an entire
expiration.

Can we then wonder that the opponents of religion
consider that the matter has been investigated and
decided? To such minds religion is upheld by idle-
ness and dulness or even at the best by selfish interest.
Such a total extinction of religion was anticipated
with certainty and in the immediate future by the
main trend of thought in the eighteenth century.
Winckelmann in 1768 could write from Rome that
in fifty years there would not be in Rome either a
pope or a priest. Such an extinction of religion
which was thought would take place as a gradual
dying ember, is, in our day, aimed at through a violent
attempt at scattering doubts and denials amongst
the masses.


PART I.—THE UNIVERSAL CRISIS IN RELIGION


(ConTINvUED)


CHAPTER IV
d. THE RECONSOLIDATION OF RELIGION


THe priesthood has outlasted its supposed appointed
span of time, and seems far from vanishing; and re-
ligion, too, does not exhibit the situation which its
opponents expected. Though its deficiencies are seized
by ever wider circles, and though the ordinary disposi-
tion of man does not correspond to the atmosphere of
spiritual activity, yet on its heights, religion proves
itself again the possessor of so much energy of life—
an energy which seems on a deeper view of it to show
that the condemnation of religion is more of an echo of
the past than of a promise of the future. The Churches
show such a renewal of religion in the most tangible
manner. How much has their power grown, how
much more definitely have they stamped the various
contrasts and values of things, and how ardently do
their struggles rouse the soul! ‘True, such energy
has not been limited to causes of an inward character.
The democratic atmosphere of the nineteenth century
increased the power of the Church since it heightened
the power of the masses who were least affected by
culture and its doubts. Further, the severe concen-
tration of life and the growing potency of great
48


THE RECONSOLIDATION OF RELIGION 49


organisations have worked in a similar direction.
But although such and other changes explain much,
they do not explain everything—they do not explain
the inner activity, the spiritual creativeness, and the
aspiring power of the Churches. And this growth
of religion limits itself in no way to the Churches:
it appears, too, outside them and, indeed, in direct
opposition to them ; it forms a trait in the life of the
present which grows stronger and stronger. Philo-
sophy—the old enemy of religion—applies itself most
ardently to create a free place for religion; literary
art treats with great earnestness the Yea and the
Nay of religious questions; the fine arts seek to
approach religious forms through new explanatory
forms of modern discovery ; and finally the religious
problem, beyond all these particular provinces,
proceeds again mightily in the soul itself. Many
phenomena point to a close affinity of our day
with that antiquity which for the first time raised
religion into a world-power, for in the midst of all the
negation and condemnation a new wave of religion
seems to rise and to carry humanity along on its
breast.

How is this notable change to be understood? If
the movement against religion has continued, and,
indeed, has swelled out further and further, the cause
of this lies in the fact that the counter-effect to this
has grown, and that religion has exhibited a stronger
potency and a deeper root in human life than its
opponents had attributed to it. First of all, it has,
upon anew ground, brought forth new achievements ;
it has, in the midst of modern life, developed a lofty


benevolence over against the inflated moral and social
4


50 THE UNIVERSAL CRISIS IN RELIGION


ravages ; it has commanded a longed-for halt to many
individuals over against the growing destruction of
life. On account of such achievements, the extin-
guishing of religion can never be regarded as a pure
gain. But however highly may be regarded what
religion has brought forth in the form of love and
service, the main cause of its vitality is not contained
in such achievements; this main cause is far more of
an indirect kind: it consists in the most difficult
inner entanglements of the very spiritual force itself
—entanglements which threatened the progress of
religion; it consists in the upheaval of the belief in
the all-sufficiency of modern self-satisfied and self-
conscious culture and civilisation. All wavering of
this belief works in the direction of the lessening
of the opposition to religion; indeed, the more the
doubt in culture and civilisation advances, the more is
the total position of man changed ; new dispositions
are awakened and new avenues of life open out;
religion has once more the ear of humanity who had
temporarily turned away from it, and once more it is
able to prove what is imbedded in it that is of price-
less value.

Modern culture has had to learn that all life within
the human domain is at the same time self-energising,
and that self-development is simultaneously self-crea-
tiveness. The advancement of life’s own movement
placed it against barriers undreamed of, and drove it
into consequences unwilled by the individual. Life
* erosses beyond the point which hitherto had been
its haven of refuge, and at each farther remove man
appears unable to govern the current of life and to
make it a tributary of reason, What thus might be


THE RECONSOLIDATION OF RELIGION 51


a Whole of life, but which through such exclusiveness
is bound to prove a deadly enemy of religion, must
be a mere piece of a further life unless reason and
culture are to fall to the ground.

The scientific, historical, philosophical and social
modes of thought have developed into systems, and
have made demands upon the whole of life. But
the more their achievements, the more does their
completion cease and the more does the denial
overtop all; the more is the ground destroyed
upon which they have grown and the more insuffi-
cient and even unbearable does the whole situation
become. It is especially in its relation to man and
in connection with the problem how to found and
how to construct all activity and work from the
depth of the soul that modern culture has miscarried
in spite of all its value. We must now look closer
at this fact.

In these systems there has originated a mighty
movement to consider nature as the sole reality, and
man as a mere product of nature. So far as such an
attempt gains any success, man becomes a piece of
a meaningless mechanism, which moves, it is true,
according to definite laws; he becomes altogether
a creature of his environment; he is able to maintain
in no manner a self-reliance over against the process
of nature, and the life of his soul must reconcile itself
entirely to the standards of nature, and is able to
bring forth nothing essentially new. Often has man
desired and desires to-day to retain some old values
of the more human kind in the process of the de-
struction of the old world of thought ; and with such
a radical denial a kind of practical idealism seems


52 THE UNIVERSAL CRISIS IN RELIGION


quite easily tenable: love and humaneness may appear
strengthened although they have been founded upon
nature alone without the aid of any metaphysic.
Whilst this is an unbearable halfness and even
thoughtlessness, it further destroys conceptions such
as character, deed, inwardness, to their final root, and
it has absolutely no place for moral valuation and
noble idealism. This appears specially clear in
the biological mode of thought, which transforms our
whole life into a struggle for natural existence, and
subordinates and sacrifices the good to the useful.
At the same time, all questions concerning the
meaning of life vanish more and more, and the bare
actuality of physical existence exclusively holds the
field. It may be that the senselessness and soulless-
ness of human existence is hardly noticed on account
of the haste and press of modern life, and the loss is
hardly discovered because science itself has not been
drawn into the same vicicus circle. And the reason
is clear: a consistent naturalism is not able to permit
science of any kind. Science is constructed through
the activity of the human mind alone; but how could
the mind construct it if its intellectual achievements
spent themselves in a mere raising up and accumu-
lating of isolated impressions, and if such achieve-
ments never succeed in reaching a commanding view
of the isolated impressions, and still less succeed in
welding such impressions into a Whole? In reality,
even modern natural science, with its conquest over the
naive world-view, has become possible only through
an energetic analysis and clearing away of the first
impressions of things, through an advance towards
simple phenomena and the discovery of their laws,


THE RECONSOLIDATION OF RELIGION 53


through the establishing of new connections by the
aid of prior ideas. All this takes place through the
observation of the different behaviour of things on
the one hand, and their natural relationship and
systematic union on the other hand. Thus, through
the work of the mind, the path leads to a scientific
conception of nature. This scientific conception
could not verify itself from the things themselves,
but the verification had to be traced within the
mind ; and, in the subjugation of the external world,
science before all else remains an inner result. Now,
if all inner result breaks away from its inward source
—from independent inwardness—and if life is laid
entirely upon its connection with external things,
the result is that science, and along with it natural
science, must collapse, or, on the other hand, natural-
ism with its equalisation of sensuous nature and
reality must be given up. Whenever effective
mental work found recognition in natural science,
especially where it led to an illumination of things,
so that the total mirroring of nature was not some-
thing given entirely from the outside but something
brought forth from the mind, it develops itself into
a critical mode of thought. Such a mode of thought
succeeds more and more to win recognition upon
the summits of modern life, and exercises a decisive
resistance to the turning of the reality into a mere
natural thing. And, at the same time, the path is
left open for the formation of new configurations of
life; and great problems, which forbid any ready-
made solution, awaken.

Further, the historical treatment of things has
contributed towards the superiority and sovereignty


54 THE UNIVERSAL CRISIS IN RELIGION


of thought and life. By bringing an existence other-
wise numb into motion, the historical treatment has
given life more freedom, movement, and richness ;
the present has been freed from the tyranny of the
past and raised to an entire self-reliance. The cul-
minated transformation has entered so deeply into
life that a simple retreat to the old situation is now
absolutely forbidden. But wherever the new mode
of thought holds exclusively the field, there issues
out of it a destructive energy. If all stability in face
of the flux of semblance gives way, all that is solid
and durable melts away; truth becomes not merely
the child of the age, as of the passing moment, and
through stepping outside its own nature becomes an
unreality ; even the present itself, which before all
else should have been strengthened, fades away,
whilst the course of events resolve themselves into
purely fleeting moments. But a life that resigns all
solid aims and permanent norms, and becomes the
mere play of wind and wave, must more and more
fall into shallowness and relinquish all content. But
man does not seem willing to be merged in the fleeting
lapse of the moment: he holds himself inwardly fast ;
he compares and questions different aims for his life ;
he has no choice but to differentiate, select, and reject
things. Therefore his life cannot entirely flow on
the current of appearances.


“ Within the hope of man alone
The highest goal draws nigh,
He chooses, raises up his soul
To that which is on high ;
He can duration to the moment give,
He can in Time the Eternal live.”


THE RECONSOLIDATION OF RELIGION 55


The fact that man experiences all changes—that
each change is known by consciousness—proves
that he does not belong entirely to the domain of flux.
In so far as he in his deeper nature is more than a
flux of isolated occurrences, the incessant changes and
alternations cannot possibly satisfy him. The nobility
and lightheartedness which seemed to him at first to
be a pure gain proceed from an unbearable empti-
ness and mar the deepest life. For how could
any kind of joyous expansion of life be possible if
moment devours moment without ceasing, if what is
honoured at one moment is thrown on one side the
next moment? ‘The nineteenth century has dis-
covered how unbearable such a view of things is,
for ideal succeeded ideal with amazing rapidity,
disposition succeeded disposition with the reversal of
fortune, and the duration of alleged truths became
shorter and shorter. But in the midst of all this
the aspiration after a consolidation of life and after
a durable truth became ever stronger, and the
opposition became more decisive against the immer-
sion of the whole of human existence in the stream
of historical life. Such a turn leaves no doubt in
regard to the fact that history itself is more than a
mere result of the succession of events. History is
far more an elevation above the changes of occur-
rences—a commanding view of things, connections of
things, a judgment of the manifold material, a raising
of pre-eminent aims. So that it is discovered that
history, viewed from the point of view of mind and
spirit, is a portion of a further total-life, and, conse-
quently, there is no such thing possible as “mere”
history, for history, in so far as it is recognised in


56 THE UNIVERSAL CRISIS IN RELIGION


its deeper meaning, includes a confession of such a
further total-life. ‘The exclusiveness of history with
its alleged relativity destroys the meaning of history
itself. And if we are not to give up the meaning
of history, it is necessary to rise above it, and to
take up once more, in some kind of way, eternal
truths. Such a course does not lead directly to
religion, but, at the same time, it shows the toil
for eternal truth in.a very different light from the
ordinary mode of looking at things.

An entire change has taken place in another main
point. The “immanent” method of considering history,
with its expulsion of superhuman aids, has brought
forth a powerful heightening of human existence and
human potency. Man himself has accordingly to pre-
pare his domain of life, and to find his highest aim
in the adornment of this domain; now he has to
stimulate all that is included within human energy
into the greatest achievements ; and now for the first
time he seems to stand fast within his own world.
It cannot be measured how much such a conviction
has brought forth. The awakening of individual
lives was followed by the awakening of the masses.
Whilst all formations of relationships were drawn and
measured directly from the actual situation of man,
more joy and freedom, more care for others and more
humaneness entered into life ; and, further, the pro-
vince of thought gained in clearness because it was
developed psychologically from the immediate ex-
perience of consciousness. But here again the affirma-
tion soon passes into a negation, and a shrinkage soon
appears in the emancipation. To abolish all invisible
ties and connections may appear as a pure gain so long


THE RECONSOLIDATION OF RELIGION 57


as man continued to idealise unconsciously, and so long
as the consciousness contained something of its earlier
greatness and values. But such idealisation was
more and more extinguished before the impressions of
experience. Humanity does not find the ideal of
brotherhood so easily realised as it had expected, but
finds more and more divisions of individuals, parties,
and nations; the impulses, emotions, and passions of
human nature develop deeper and wider ; the tyranny
of the petty common life becomes more and more
brutal; and more and more we are threatened with
the death of the Spiritual Life. Have not men,
viewed from within, become smaller and smaller,
because they value nothing other than themselves ?
And, at the same time, when it is discovered that
the whole man even in his spiritual efforts is tied to
human impulses with all their pettiness and assertions,
and that all possibility of a counter-effect—of a voca-
tion in the highest and final court of appeal—vanishes,
and when judgment over the true and the false, over
good and evil, is surrendered to the opinions and
inclinations of individuals and masses, it becomes
evident why wrath and even hatred burn against the
pretence of mere modern culture; and in order to
preserve a genuine spiritual culture nothing seems
more necessary than an unrelenting struggle against
such petty and presumptuous culture which reduces
life to a lamentable level, and which destroys all
genuine values. In order to possess such values man
has to work his way up to something—something
which he has to acknowledge beyond and above him-
self, and yet though beyond and above him is yet not
alien to him. This leads once more to the problem


58 THE UNIVERSAL CRISIS IN RELIGION


which religion has taken up from of yore, and he who
places on one side the solution which religion offers
will think otherwise when he comes to realise the true
nature of the problem.

And, further, the expulsion of all the inwardness
of the Spiritual Life—the transformation of our entire
nature into an impersonal process of culture and
civilisation—turns a pure gain into a serious loss.
The immediate neutrality of man became too small
for the content of the work of culture, and through
such labours our existence has grown immeasurably
in width and truth. And it is from a kind of
necessity that the attention of the subject upon him-
self was abandoned, and life was laid entirely in the
relationship to external things. But this complexity
of work which had now become the main fact—
indeed, of the Spiritual Life itself—needs an inner
connection and an animated unity, for otherwise it
cannot possibly construct a Whole and work as a
Whole. But the more the inward and _ personal
element is pushed aside without some kind of com-
pensation in its place, the more all characteristic and
inspiring energy slips away, the more each totality
loses its inner unity and animation, and becomes a
mere piece of mechanism which may be of value in
subduing the external world and in calling forth
certain exertions. But all this fails to unite man
with a Whole and to raise him as a Whole, and
also it inevitably decays and fails to engender a new
world of intrinsic value. Thus, the impersonal work
of culture and civilisation threatens to become
mechanical from its very centre outwards. No
growth of inner potency corresponds to the increase


THE RECONSOLIDATION OF RELIGION 59


of work, and expansion by far outweighs concentra-
tion; man becomes more and more the slave of his
work and a bundle of isolated accomplishments.
But the work itself, through its severance from the
centre of life, loses all its soul. Can we deny that
the last decade has placed such dangers under our
very eyes? At the same time, a kind of compulsion
raises the questions whether ultimately the soul of
life has to be abandoned, whether the emergence of
conceptions of inwardness above the old forms and
beyond mere subjectivity is possible, whether a
coherent and superior unity may through a great
struggle be obtained within the Spiritual Life itself.
If the latter happened, it would effect an entire
transformation of life, and that would lead back,
certainly not to the old situation of religion, but
still to the problems of religion.

We are thus experiencing to-day a remarkable
entanglement. The older forms of life, which had
hitherto governed history and its meaning, became
too narrow, petty, and subjective for human nature.
Through emancipation from an easy-going subject-
ivity and through the positing of life upon external
things and, indeed, upon the whole of the great
universe, life, it was believed, would gain more
breadth and truth ; and in a noteworthy manner man
undertook a struggle against the pettiness of his own
nature and for the driving out of all that was petty-
human. A great deal has been gained through such
a change and new tendency of life. In fact we have
discovered far more than we had hoped for. But, at
the same time, we have lost something, a loss which
at the outset brings forth no anxiety, but which,


60 THE UNIVERSAL CRISIS IN RELIGION


however, through painful experience, proves itself to
have been “the one thing needful.” Through its
own development the work has destroyed its own
carriers; it has undermined the very ground upon
which it stood; it has failed, notwithstanding its
infinite expansion, through its loss of a fundamental
and unifying Life-process ; and in the entire immer-
sion of man into activity his deepest being has been
lost. Indeed, the more exclusively life transforms
itself into mere external work, the more it ceases to
be an inner personal existence, and the more alien we
become to ourselves. And yet the fact that we are
able to be conscious of such an alienation—an aliena-
tion that we cannot accept indifferently but is ex-
perienced as an irreparable loss—is a proof that more
is firmly implanted in us than the modern direction
of life is able to develop and satisfy. We acknow-
ledge simultaneously that we have gained much but
that the loss is a painful one. We have gained the
world but we have lost the soul, and, along with this,
the world threatens to bring us into nought, and to
take away our only secure foothold in the midst of
the stormy roaring torrent of material work.

This danger was not realised so long as modern
ideas failed in precision of expression, and so long as
life without any hesitation supplied itself from the
old sources of thought and experience. Indeed,
the more an immanent and impersonal culture and
civilisation were posited upon their own energy, the
more that universal dialectic which the experience of
humanity has often witnessed reveals itself. Systems
of thought and, indeed, ideal worlds either destroy
one another or rail in their gained domains ; evolution


THE RECONSOLIDATION OF RELIGION 61


itself shows limits; but the discovery of the limits
leads to new tendencies—to tendencies in the main
thesis. In the meantime, however, there arises a
painful situation, as modern man with growing
consciousness has discovered. Men have drifted from
the old moorings, and the new ones which promised
the highest happiness do not satisfy. They are
conscious of a poverty in an overflowing kingdom,
conscious of an absence of a real substance in the
midst of incessant activity, and have discovered in
the midst of incessant joy and pleasure the absence
of genuine happiness. Is it to be wondered that
desire and anxiety should turn again home towards
the whole of life, and that the question concerning
the inner clarification of life should place on one side
all other questions and reduce them to subsidiary
facts ; and that the possibility of an inner elevation
of human nature—of a self-maintenance in the midst
of a threatening destruction of life—should become
the most weighty of all concerns? And through
such a revolution in the tendency and character of
life, the ancient puzzles of human existence, hushed
up in earlier times, raise themselves once more with
lively and crude energy—problems concerning the
deep darkness which veils our Whence and Whither,
our dependence upon strange powers, the painful anti-
thesis within our own soul, the stubborn barriers to
our spiritual potencies, the flaws in love and righteous-
ness in nature and in human nature; in a word, the
apparent total loss of what we dare not renounce—
our best and most real treasures. But we are now
experiencing what mankind has so often experienced,
i.e. that at the very point where the negation had


62 THE UNIVERSAL CRISIS IN RELIGION


reached its climax and the danger had reached the
very brink of a precipice, the conviction dawns with
axiomatic certainty that there lives and stirs within
us something which all obstacles and enmity can
never destroy, and which signifies against all opposi-
tion a kernel of our nature that can never get lost.
And if the call to us is heard in no domain more
powerfully than in the domain of religion to return
home to the unassailable foundation of our being, and
to make that which we dare not renounce our
conscious possession, then the message of religion
acquires a totally different meaning. ‘Then religion
appears no more as a creation of childish fancy or a
flight into some far and alien world, but as an indis-
pensable heiper of man in the difficult and seemingly
impossible struggle for a spiritual self—for a soul
and meaning of life. Consequently there rises once
more, after a long brow-beaten period, an aspiration
after fundamental depths and inner connections,
after eternal truth and infinite love; and in the
midst of all the welter of our day a new wave of life
universal appears which carries man into entirely
other bearings, and which is a flowing tide that
heralds the inauguration of a better day.


PART I.—THE UNIVERSAL CRISIS IN RELIGION


(ConrINUED)


CHAPTER V


(e) THe EXPLANATION OF THE DEVELOPING
TENDENCY


He who understands the religious problem in the
sense already referred to is, in his treatment of the
problem, pressed into a definite course of decision
between Nay and Yea. ‘That decadent mode of
thought which, from grounds of utility, reeommends
a return to the old form of religion will appeal least
of all to him. Modern culture, we hear so often
to-day, has become entirely bankrupt ; human society
needs for its subsistence and development moral
consolidation and energetic cohesion, and nothing
other than a religion of authority is able to furnish
this ; then there is nothing remaining but to return to
such a religion, to bend willingly before its authority
—perchance to Rome—and to accept the traditional
confession as the best doctrine concerning things which
are under lock and key to the human intellect.

The way in which the awakening of religion is to
take place, in our view of the matter, contradicts such
a mode of thought in the most definite manner. To
religion belongs an aspiration which urges man to a


great depth and resoluteness of life, to a self-reliance
63


64 THE UNIVERSAL CRISIS IN RELIGION


over against the imbroglio of the world and to an
elevation above the petty-human bustle of life. Man
is able to experience and live a Higher and Nobler
within his own nature, and to overcome an alien and
even an envious world. And here again a utilitarian
mode of thought draws him into his petty-human
bustle and turns religion into a mere tool for his
material welfare, and consequently what enters into
man’s nature is perceived as a half-truth, whilst human
nature at its deepest thirsts for genuine truth. How
high does even the honourable atheist stand above
such a mode of thinking!

It could not happen otherwise than that the know-
ledge of the limits of the New should occasion the
return of many minds to the Old and to hold fast
to it. But the present crisis of religion has in reality
altered our standpoint to the Old. But still the Old
comes nearer to us when we recognise in it necessary
problems whose meanings have not as yet been shown
in the New. But this does not warrant a justification
for a simple return to the Old. The newer culture
has cut too deep a chasm between the past and
ourselves to make a return possible. And we have
to be on the guard against underestimating the
value of the New for the whole of life, because as yet
it does not mean all to us, and because it does not
immediately suffice for the inmost source of life.
For the penetrating and transforming effects of the
New are found in full currency, and in no manner
has the New brought forth no more than a number
of particular results which sagacity and dexterity
dovetailed into the empty spaces of traditional ideas,
but it has changed the fundamental process of life


EXPLANATION OF DEVELOPING TENDENCY 65


itself. The gain in clearness and breadth through
natural science, in earnestness through history, in
other essentials through philosophy and criticism, will
never be rescinded ; and on account of such changes
we are obliged to view the New in a different light,
and are no longer able to adopt the simpleminded-
ness of our forefathers. Re-fitting and patching are
always anachronisms, and nowhere more so than in
this province.

Further, it is not to be forgotten that the present-
day expansion and struggles affect not only the con-
tent of religion, but also its position in the whole
of life. It is on the ground of Christianity that
religion constructs, for the first time, a Whole or,
termed otherwise, the one worthful kernel of the
Spiritual Life, and all the other provinces of life had
no other problem than to lead into this kernel. In
the Middle Ages the various provinces gained more
ground, but they still remained under the guardian-
ship of religion. Protestantism, however, brings to
a consummation a cleavage between culture and
religion. Neither of these possibilities satisfies us to-
day: a mere religious life has become too narrow for
us, and a mere parallelism of religion and culture can
at the best be no more than a transitory phase, and
cannot mean a final conclusion. ‘Thus, there originates
here a difficult problem, which no return to an old
extinct mode of thought can solve.

Though the newer culture appears as an enemy,
or at least as an uncomfortable critic, of religion, its
effects in no way turn out to be a danger and a detri-
ment, but far more are able to further the clarification,
emancipation, and extension of life, as such ieee place


66 THE UNIVERSAL CRISIS IN RELIGION


new problems in front of themselves, and forge a
new energy for the solution of such problems. ‘The
earlier configuration of religion—formed in a weary
and evanescent age—entered into danger, for in its
anxiety for the suffering of mankind the fostering of
its own active conduct was weakened, and its own
actions were forgotten in the midst of its perpetual
submissive mood. It is a justifiable aspiration of
modern times that religion should develop more and
more in the direction of the ennobling of work, of
the awakening of a new courage of life, of an inner
elevation of all the provinces of activity ; it is an aspira-
tion that religion should not only teach man to think
little of himself, but also reveal to him the great-
ness of his nature. The old mode of viewing things,
through its sole dwelling on the salvation of the indi-
vidual, has pushed largely the question of the vindi-
cation of the Spiritual Life into the background; it
looked too much upon the life of man as something
ready-made and not as something that is ever a
“becoming”; and all this has happened because this
old mode of thought could not return from its abode
of seclusion and calm to the present actual world in
order to impregnate it with a new spirit.

In the midst of such great changes, religion can
only come to grief if the new ascending movement is
fastened entirely to the old form, and if the old form
is represented as being immutable in all its essentials.
The representatives of religion carry such a procedure
easily into a mistrust of the least scientific exactness
and even of veracity, whilst, at the same time, they
gloss over obvious difficulties. By removing contra-
dictions out of sight, uncertain probabilities are made


EXPLANATION OF DEVELOPING TENDENCY 67


to appear as certain realities; this most shallow mode
of thinking receives through this a kind of relief in
that it is championing the casting out of incontestable
truths. Religion will never gain the indispensable
simplicity for far-reaching effects, never the inward
immediacy and the victorious energy of conviction
if it binds the present rigidly to the past, if it does
not speak to us in the feelings, conceptions, and even
words of our own day. If so much that belongs
to the older configuration of religion has become
anthropomorphic and even mythological and magical,
are we to ignore such a state of things, and dare we
ignore it when the real true interest of religion
itself is at stake ?

Many who have relinquished a rigid clinging to the
Old seek to escape from the difficulty by conceiving
of religion, separated as it is to them from culture, as
a pure inwardness of the individual feeling, and con-
sequently they strive to transform religion entirely
into a personal conviction and sentiment. In this
manner they believe themselves able to verify and
develop energetically the distinctive characteristic
features of religion. Through such a notion, all the
contradictions of the work of the world do not touch
religion because it rules securely and calmly within its
own domain. Without a doubt, much freshness of
life, enthusiasm, and joyous labour have issued from
such a mode of religion, and it pulsates with great
power in the character of our age. We shall have to
occupy ourselves with this movement in the whole of
this book, so that for the moment we can place its
discussion on one side. At present we only indicate
briefly wherein the religious crisis, notwithstanding its


68 THE UNIVERSAL CRISIS IN RELIGION


recognition of the turn towards the purely human
mode of formation, compels us to conceive it as an
anomaly. The pure subjectivity to which the
tendency turns from the embroilment of culture as
to an indestructible and even unassailable citadel is
not so secure and certain as it is supposed to be.
Our consideration of the matter has already shown us
that modern culture values subjective inwardness not
as a main but as a secondary phenomenon—as an
accompanying phenomenon—and, further, that it con-
siders all life developed on such lines not as the entire
truth, but only as a circle of subjective stimulation and
imagination. Such an inwardness can corroborate its
rights, free itself from a vacillating sentimentalism,
and prove itself the kernel of reality, only through its
energetic union with the work of the modern world,
only through the gain of an immanent and impersonal
culture. In order to obtain this, such inwardness
strikes more and more into the deep, and gains more
extensive connections. This it is able to do only
through the turn to a Metaphysic—a Metaphysic not
of the Schools but of life. ‘Through this the inward-
ness will experience a clarifying and a winnowing ; all
mere sentimental pathos must be stripped off, and a
firmer substance must be won. The immediacy of the
first impressions of things is not the genuine immediacy
of spiritual creativeness and original depth, for all
the latter has to be worked out.

And, simultaneously with this, culture becomes
for us something quite other than such a subjectiv-
ism. And now, with all our energy, we fight against
the splitting of life into subjective religion on the one
hand, and into soulless culture on the other hand.


EXPLANATION OF DEVELOPING TENDENCY 69


Culture as a work in the world is by no means a mere
external side of life; it belongs to our nature, and has
even in modern times affected deeply the configura-
tion of total-life, whilst it has given life more clearness
and has penetrated beyond mere subjectivity. So
that a renewal of life is of benefit to culture in the
whole of its ramifications, and thus the problem reaches
beyond mere religion into the whole of our being.
The advocates of subjectivism as well as those of the
old mode of thought, in spite of all their differences,
agree in their undervaluation of the present-day crisis
in religion. This crisis deals not only with the position
of religion in life, but also with the fundamental process
of life itself. Hardly at any period in human history
has the upheaval gone so deep; and such a struggle
which calls mankind to a revaluation of its positions
and possessions has rarely been witnessed as is wit-
nessed to-day. An old form of life has proved itself,
on account of the work of the centuries, as being too
petty, narrow and subjective, and yet such a form
seems to contain an imperishable nucleus which we
dare not renounce without encountering the severest
of losses. The new mode of thought which arose over
against the old one has, through its breadth, earnest-
ness, and energy so completely mastered us as to
render a retreat to the old mode simply impossible.
But the new mode brings ever clearer to the surface
flaws perceived in the solid nucleus and in the secure
foundation ; thus it is full of inner problems, and we
cannot possibly enter into agreement unceremoniously
with it. Now one mode hems in the other, and yet is
not able to dislodge this other, still less are we to
expect both to flow amicably together on the current


70 THE UNIVERSAL CRISIS IN RELIGION


of compromise. Consequently, we witness the one
tearing the other through the collision; we observe
the disaster reaching ever deeper into the most
original qualities ; and the possession which is common
to all breaking up in pieces. At an earlier time we
had wrestled with the truths of morality, of religion,
of a world-view, in order to draw nearer to such
realities, but now the truths themselves have become
matters of dispute, and consequently we find ourselves
contradicting ourselves and carried to the most pointed
opposites. When we reflect, however, on the whole
of life, we are able to discover a painful uncertainty :
our spiritual existence floats in mid-air without any
means of support, and our fundamental relationship
to reality has fallen into entire uncertainty. ‘There-
fore, a struggle for the whole of life and for a new
man has become necessary. This struggle has to
be led not only by religion, but also by the other
provinces of life—by art, philosophy, etc. True, each
province has, as in the case of religion, its special
problem and its special way of attacking its problem,
but it is a condition of success in connection with each
province that the Whole should be recognised as in-
wardly present in the particular, and that this Whole
withstands every kind of dissolution, contraction, and
torpor. ‘The problem of religion is only a segment—
probably the most important segment—of a more
general problem—of the problem concerning the
struggle for a spiritual existence, for the duration,
content, and meaning of life; and the problem of
religion dare not sever itself from all this.

It must produce discomfort to the adherents of
religion and, indeed, it may produce deep depression


EXPLANATION OF DEVELOPING TENDENCY 71


of spirit to see that which forms, for the personal
conviction, the most steadfast security and the
highest good of life treated by science as an open
problem. But this is once more our destiny that in
connection with the fundamental questions of life
what appears as our most secure possession, and what
in reality carries along incessantly our spiritual exist-
ence, should have to be won ever anew for our
own conviction, and should have to be strengthened
through spontaneous decision. Though the indi-
vidual may withdraw from this task, human nature
is not able to do so. Religion in particular may
protest against all such distressing fears: religion is
either merely a sanctioned product of human wishes
and of pictorial ideas brought about by tradition and
the historical ordinance—and, if so, no art, power
or cunning can prevent the destruction of such a
bungling work by the advancement of the mental
and the spiritual movement of the world; or religion
is founded upon a superhuman fact—and, if so, the
hardest assault cannot shatter it, but far more, it must
finally prove of service in all the troubles and toils of
man, it must reach the point of its true strength and
develop purer and purer its eternal truth.


Part I]..-The Fundamental Basis of
Universal Religion


INTRODUCTION


WE have already seen that the problem of religion
arises out of a vast crisis in the total existence of
life. The old form of life, which hitherto had marked
all aspiration, became too narrow and subjective for a
general expansion of our existence and of activity in
the various provinces of knowledge. On the one
hand, the new life which issued out of the transforma-
tion of activity had no fixed centre and consequently
threatened to vanish into emptiness. That we are
able to discover the contradiction and reflect on both
sides of the antithesis may undoubtedly be held as a
sign that our inmost nature in some kind of way is
able to rise above the cleavage; but evidently the
upheaval is much too deep for us to conceive and
vivify without a great transformation and even a
revolution of our nature. We therefore find our-
selves in the midst of a great conflict for the whole
of life, and are necessarily pressed to the problem
whether religion can and must come to our aid in
order to reconsolidate our spiritual existence, and
whether it is possible to become the possessors of a


reality superior to the world, enclosed within the
72


INTRODUCTION 73


living present to consciousness, and which, if found,
renders possible such a striving after a content and
meaning of life. If, therefore, the problem of
religion arises out of the Whole of life, it will
mean that such a religion alone as flows again
into the Whole is able to bring satisfaction. Thus,
when we turn to the particular province, we must
constantly bear in mind the reality of the Whole.
But such a conviction involves particular methodic
requirements, and, in particular, it carries us at the
outset over the antithesis, which runs through the
ages, of a derivation of religion from the intellect
and the world on the one hand, and from the
particular experiences of man in feeling or will on
the other hand. What here first of all appears as
a bare diversity of method is in reality a struggle
for the content of religion itself; for the differ-
ences in the proofs correspond to differences in
the religions, and the proofs only carry out, in
each case, what was at bottom already decided
by the choice of this or that kind of proof.
Thus, in these considerations it is not merely
the path to religion but religion itself that stands
in question.

In earlier times, indeed already since the time
of the Greeks, the evolution of religion proceeded
by placing the emphasis on the side of thought.
At the height of this development the endeavour
signified no mere reflection on the world—an attempt
to conclude to a supra-mundane intelligence from
the seeming purpose and fitness of things — but
rather the hope of man triumphantly to penetrate
to the kernel of reality, from this point of vantage


74 FUNDAMENTAL BASIS OF UNIVERSAL RELIGION


above the pettily human circle, and thus opening
out to him a wider, purer, richer life. Reality,
apprehended thus in its very kernel, appeared as
sustained by a living unity, indeed, as the unfolding
of such an over-world unity. In this work of
apprehension thought gained a religious character
and transformed itself at last wholly into religion.
At the end of this path lies mysticism, with its
complete immersion of all the varied characteristics
of things into the All-One, and its devotion of the
whole soul to that one end.

We shall find that this course of thought contains
a truth which religion cannot renounce without
becoming narrow and rigid. But this does not
signify that such a course of thought is able of itself
to found religion, and, along with religion, to open
out a new kind of life. In reality this course never
attains to religion through the energy of thought
alone, but always, though unobserved, through an
inflow and an appropriation of feeling, into and by
the thought which warms its cold form. In a word,
a thinking left simply to its own resources would
never be able to get beyond empty forms and highly
abstract conceptions. Indeed, even when thus com-
pleted by feeling the religion that arises here is
still in a high degree shapeless and lacks the power
for proceeding, from the one great intuition with
which it starts, to the formation of a complex of
life. In addition, there springs up a painful doubt
which no merely intellectual form of religion is
ever able to overcome. Is thought able to reach the
kernel of things through its own energy, and can its
highest exertions break through the bounds of the


INTRODUCTION 75


merely human circle and raise us to the divine?
Are our conceptions in reality more than mere
human conceptions? Is it not a mere world of
phantoms which arises in them? Must not thought
itself be recognised as a member of a wider con-
nection of life, if it is to be valid as an expression
of truth, and is to assure man of the reality of a new
world? Precisely the convulsions of modern life,
which we have already pursued, make this doubt
acute, and consequently forbid us to base religion
on mere speculation.

Less still, according to the experience of the
centuries, can the reflective procedure suffice which
derives an over-world intelligence from the special
construction of the external world. In the pheno-
menal world there appeared, to such a procedure
of thought, far more order, design, and beauty
than was possible for the nature of things to accom-
plish of itself; consequently, every behaviour of
physical things was considered as a testimony of
the power, wisdom, and goodness of an over-world
spirit. This train of thought won many minds
in late antiquity ; it won them in early Christianity ;
it won them in the period of the Aufklirung ;
and, because of its perspicuity and comprehensive-
ness, it will not lose its influence lightly. But
whatever truth may be imbedded behind its anthro-
pomorphic form, it has not a convincing power
against the doubts of the present age. For one
thing, our scientific age has discovered the drawback
in this mode of thinking, that it puts science and
religion into irreconcilable antagonism. For whilst
science passionately endeavours to bring all particular


*


76 FUNDAMENTAL BASIS OF UNIVERSAL RELIGION


events into relationship with each other, and to
understand them from out of this relationship, that
mode of thought must consider religion to be the
more securely grounded, the more immediate is the
impression of design presented by the look of the
world, and the more tangibly single startling pheno-
mena contrast with the remaining happenings. If
thus each gain in the scientific and inherent inter-
pretation of things becomes a loss to religion, then
religion must withdraw more and more into an
unexplored region with the naive presumption that
such a region is also unexplorable, and without any
certainty that the supposed mystery will not, some
day, reveal its secret to the illuminating light of the
activity of thought. We discover, too, to-day, much
more clearly than of yore, the anthropomorphism of
the method which carries carelessly human modes of
thought into the All, and explains the condition of
this All as though a human being had produced it.
Again, for our present-day outlook on to the universe,
there is, alongside of the purposive that may be
discovered in it, so much that seems purposeless, so
much struggle and suffering, so much rigid indiffer-
ence to human welfare and spiritual good, so much
limitation and precariousness even in the purposive,
that for us the starting-point of that teleological
doctrine is riddled with insecurities. And, finally,
if we overcome all such scruples and recognise the
superior energy perceptible in the physical universe,
could we derive from such a consideration a new
life, and could the discord of our inward nature
be overcome? The older mode of thought could be-
lieve such results to be possible since it was under the


INTRODUCTION 77


influence of a securely operative religion—a religion
which heightened the intelligence which by that mode
had, with considerable artifice, been inferred as pre-
sent in the world to a living personality, and which
gave to this intelligence an efficacious presence in the
human soul. That mode asserted far more than it
had proved. But that influence has by now been
shaken to its very foundation, and the whole of
religion has become problematic; and therewith falls
all that had lifted that mode of thought above its
intrinsic capacity. However much, then, in the
world may remain an enigma for us, and however
willing we may be to acknowledge dark depths in
existence, such a method can never furnish a secure
position for a foundation and living development of
religion. ‘The amazement of the sage in viewing
the depth of creation and his search in the abyss
for the Creator do not furnish an education of human-
ity in the corresponding belief. In the abyss of
creation the investigator can readily lose himself,
and in this whirlpool he can drift about and miss
his way far from the source of the fathomless sea”
(Pestalozzi).

It was as a reaction against such an overstrain of
the intellect, against the transformation of religion
into speculation, and against the resolution of man
into the Infinite, that there followed a turning to
the experiences special to man himself. In these,
religion seemed to be able to win a stable form, a
living energy, and a full certainty. But here again
the attempt, though above reproach in its basis, has,
in its execution, led to problematical positions; and
this chiefly because human life has been swerved


78 FUNDAMENTAL BASIS OF UNIVERSAL RELIGION


from the All and been treated as a separate province.
For then not only are we confronted by the difficult,
and even insoluble, problem, how anything that lies
within such an entirely separate province can possibly
reach beyond it—and such a reaching beyond is a
necessary part of religion; but there also arises the
danger that such a basis for religion will keep man
too much tied to himself and will simply excite his
simply natural self. Thus, there would here be a lack
of the necessary opposition to the merely human. A
closer consideration of the two currents into which
this non-intellectual endeavour divides, will show this
more clearly.

It is either in the softer mode of feeling or in
the stronger mode of will that this way seeks access
to the Divine. Man is able to withdraw himself
into his own feeling, to rid himself of all connection
with his environment, and, in a condition of pure
apartness and of soaring detachment, to know
himself to be both far above his merely physical
environment, and a part of an unseen whole. The
mere fact that he is thus able to free himself from
all the entanglements of things, and to place himself
upon his own separate inwardness, seems to prove
a greater depth of reality than is to be found ex-
ternally, and seems, too, to reveal a kingdom of the
soul in spite of the hardness and senselessness of
the immediate world. And in such a self-contained
feeling, a touch-stone seemed to be won for securely
deciding concerning the truth or falsehood of every
religious experience. Here alone human life seemed
to win full immediacy, here alone to become auto-
nomous. Let, then, all that claims to be religion be


INTRODUCTION 79


brought to this point in order to prove its authen-
ticity and, in a characteristic manner, to decide
between the kernel and the shell. Indeed, the claims
of feeling proceed even further: they prove them-
selves not only an unfailing touch-stone, but become
the creative source of religion itself. In these claims
are contained demands of life, and further develop-
ments take place, and in these are included a new and
divine world which had dawned on the consciousness.
Through this winning independence of the inward
there arises a longing to break through natural ex-
istence, and a desire to prove that this characteristic
and novel truth which now dawns is a real longing
after infinity and eternity and freedom; and the
desire seems to culminate in peace and _ holiness
through the feeling in a form of immediacy of a
reality of such greatness and goodness. ‘Thus a king-
dom of ideals arises and declares its content as a
definite truth over against all mere subjective ex-
perience. In the province of religion the conscious-
ness fastens itself to a Whole and grips the whole
man. The culmination of a real existence for one-
self is reached in such a manner, and the full bliss
is obtained by a free floating in the ether of
infinity.

This, doubtless, contains a good deal of truth, but
this truth is mingled with much that is problematic,
and needs a fundamental clarification of conceptions
in order to separate the certain from the problematic.
In the first place, mere feeling is in no manner an
independent inward life—a still deep, certain through
itself of its truth. Feeling testifies only to the
rousing of the subject—to the degree of the subjective


80 FUNDAMENTAL BASIS OF UNIVERSAL RELIGION


appropriation of the processes of life. The truth-
content of these processes remains questionable and
doubtful, and, also, the rousing has varied degrees
because feeling can be shallow and feeble in spite of
considerable amount of excitement, and can dissipate
and consume itself in hasty agitation without its being
able to affect the remainder of life. If feeling is,
therefore, in its simple and natural state less full of
value and content than when it displays its connection
with real existing life, it cannot construct for itself a
decisive touch-stone ; and consequently a criticism of
the feelings is as necessary as a criticism of concep-
tions. One can adopt fully the words of Hegel:
«Phe true nerve is the truthful thought; and only
when the thought is true can the feeling be of a
truthful kind.”

In the province of religion the movement towards
feeling takes place usually within the circle of crystal-
lised tradition and the common order of things;
although the subjective experience crystallises itself in
this established order, it wins through it a support and
a content, and in all his advance the subject would
in no way shake off an objective world. Thus it hap-
pened with Pascal and also Schleiermacher, especially
after the esthetic enthusiasm of early youth had
adopted a strong religious element into itself. In
both cases the close relationship of the soul of the
individual to religion brought forth a pure gain in
warmth and inwardness. Quite otherwise is it,
however, when the feeling, rejecting all wider con-
nections, attempts to generate religion purely out of
its own nature. Then it contracts itself through such
a one-sided striving upon its own particular ability,


INTRODUCTION 81


and consequently its product proves lean and poor.
This bare feeling is so fickle and soft, so devoid of
stability and content, that finally it discharges itself
into an entirely vague disposition. And when such
a disposition attempts to weave a content out of itself
in order to lead man beyond the mere human pro-
vince to a relationship with the Divine, it degenerates
of necessity to the level of eccentricity and fancy.

The proclamation of the predominance or even
of the autocracy of feeling was thus usually on his-
torical grounds a part of the inner process of the
dissolution of religion. The receptive form estranges
itself inwardly from the traditional form and yet fears
to break away completely, so that one sought to hold
fast to a portion of the subjective meaning whilst the
substance was given up. One has the tendency to
greet such a state of things because it seems to be a
gain in width and freedom, but the fact is overlooked
that when the real truth falls away sooner or later
its reflex in the minds of men must disappear. Such
a religion of mere feeling had the tendency to become
more and more shadowy, until finally it vanishes
completely from the mind. The turn to bare feeling
is accordingly a path on which religions not so much
originate as disappear.

The basing of religion upon will seems to place it
on securer grounds and under stronger motives. But
here also a dilemma will soon become visible, because
the will, strictly confined within its own limits,
falls inevitably into emptiness; while with the de-
velopment of some kind of content, it enters into
wider connections and becomes dependent on these
connections. The will, doubtless, as a cher leusee


82 FUNDAMENTAL BASIS OF UNIVERSAL RELIGION


decision and as a carrier from the domain of faculty
to that of activity, constitutes a phenomenon of the
greatest significance. It affirms not only freedom
from all mere mechanism of nature, but also promises
to become the starting-point of a new kind of world.
But as soon as we begin to develop such a world, and
as soon as we lay hold of a law of activity present
in the will which points to morality, we step beyond
the mere individual will and venture to make asser-
tions concerning the highest ends and final grounds.
When this happens there happens, too, that we are
compelled to recognise a kingdom of self-activity
beyond all mere psychological functions. Herewith
new demands arise concerning the reconstruction of
life from its very foundation, and the will must now
prove its particular truth out of the larger truth of
this new reconstruction.

Common to feeling and will are two different
reasons which make it impossible for both to give
religion a secure basis. Both appear as original and
immediate events; such originality and immediacy
seem to confer on both the right of sovereign value
and the ability of independent creative power. But
this immediacy is first of all a mere phenomenon of
consciousness, and as such, through the further work
of thought, is liable to the possibility of error ; much
can be of significance in the phenomenon which
seems to the immediate impression to point to the
contrary. So it is in no way certain that because
the feeling interprets itself as a pure existence-for-
self that such an existence-for-self actually exists.
Is there not much concealed and indirect dependence
here, and could not the assertion rest upon error ?


INTRODUCTION 83


It is similar with the will and its presumptive free-
dom. Is not the will probably a non-knowledge
and an oversight of the truth of its previous ties ?
Does not man aim at something more than merely
to feel himself free, although he is unable to penetrate
to the causes of his activity? If feeling and will,
however, in their present fundamental significance
admit of so much doubt, how can they ever create
a new world in the sense of religion, and through this
fortify human life ?

There corresponds to this insufficiency of the basis
an insufficiency of presented content. Religion finds
it difficult to disentangle us from the contradictions
of life unless it culminates in an inversion of existence,
and unless it exercises through such inversion a sharp
sifting of the near-at-hand materials which present
themselves. There is no possibility of a workable
Yea without the presence of a powerful Nay; for
thus alone can the transformation strike into the
deep. In feeling or will, in the manner already
described, such a radical Nay is wanting, and
consequently human life in its particular circle may
aim at and further a given religion without being able
to become the possessor of the inward elevation and
the essential renewal—two characteristics of the chief
end of religion.

When the whole matter is surveyed, there appears
no possibility for any single aspect of life to arrive at
religion. Each one of these aspects is not only too
feeble for such work, but is also unable to present
religion with a sufficient content. The experiments
made in such direction are in sharp conflict with one
another: on the one side, the attention is directed


84 FUNDAMENTAL BASIS OF UNIVERSAL RELIGION


to the outward character of religion and to the
building up of a scientific province of thought, whilst
on the other side the standpoint is that of immanence
and of the immediate energy of movement which
arises out of this. The one is as necessary as the
other, but on this path the two aspects refuse to
coalesce: the general character of religion, mirrored in
the intellect alone, endangers the inward immediacy
and spiritual warmth, whilst through the individual
results of feeling and will alone the immediacy
endangers the spiritual width and validity which
extend beyond the individual. So that a new path
must be sought which will unite the discordant
elements. It is certainly clear that through such
discord between the two opposites, an immediate
united push and a joyous co-operation are impossible.
The experience of history testifies to the particular
naiveté of basing religion on thought, feeling, or will.
It remains here to seek a new path which is not, from
the very outset, under the power of the opposites.
We need not, however, allow man and the world,
subject and object, activity and presentation, to fall
outside one another. We do not proceed on this
new path from any ready-made imaginative existence,
but from the Life-process itself; and from this Life-
process we seek to develop conceptions of existence
and strive to carry the particular sides of our con-
sciousness far enough to meet within an essentially
unique Whole. That such a Whole exists—it has all
probability on its side—appears in the fact that the
contradictions of our existence could not be ex-
perienced collectively unless there existed a living
unity which spans the separate aspects of existence.


INTRODUCTION 85


But where is such a unity to be found? And when
found, is it able to be of effect without causing a
reversal of our naive view of things? These are
other questions. And it may be held as certain that
no proof of religion is possible in the manner a fact
of the connection of external things is proved. The
path to religion leads through the contradictions of
life, and allows itself to be discovered long before a
clear conception of the overcoming of these contra-
dictions is ripe. It is the great characteristic of
religious problems that a great contradiction shall
become visible, and also that it shall be overcome by
the entrance of something within the human circle
that will lift man beyond that circle. This demands
energetic analysis and essential gradations. ‘The first
representation (of the contradictions) must be re-
cognised and must become more effective in us than
has hitherto been the case. Thus when we are
battling with the question of religion, we are at the
same time battling for a more complete picture of
reality and of our own real existence. And it may
be, indeed, that we shall find much that is provisional
and full of contradictions. But who has given us the
certainty that the universe in us and we in it are
complete? Is it not far more probable that the main
value of life lies in the fact that we are allowed to
combat with alien elements ?


PART I].—THE FUNDAMENTAL BASIS OF
UNIVERSAL RELIGION


_ (Continurp)


CHAPTER VI


a. THE COMPLEXITY OF HumMAN LIrE


1. The Dualism in Human Life


THE movement of the Life-process in the direction
of the religious problem has before all else to ask if it
fashions a characteristic and continuous Whole, or if
it produces essential differences, and especially if it
exhibits a thorough-going dualism. Such a dualism
might probably offer a thread which might guide us
further. Now, an unbiassed view, undisturbed by
particular one-sided tendencies, holds that our life
in reality contains two different aspects: that it in-
cludes the two qualities and stages of Nature and
Spirit within itself. ‘This hypothesis will be eluci-
dated as we proceed. Such an antithesis is quite
other than the ones between body and mind, object
and subject, extension of space and conscious activity,
as these were brought to the foreground in the
period of the Aufklérung. Our antithesis lies wholly
within consciousness itself. The particular psychic life
shows a twofold characteristic: on the one hand, it
merely carries forth its sensuous surrounding nature


and adapts itself within the bounds of nature, while
86


THE COMPLEXITY OF HUMAN LIFE 87


on the other hand, and contemporaneously, new
energies, ends, and forms are produced whose connec-
tions lead to a new kind of reality over against all
mere nature. This difference is so fundamental for
the whole of our investigation as to render a clear
illumination and a sufficient basis for it impossible
without an investigation into its very nature.
Modern Science itself has proved visible nature,
out of which we have sprung, to be a fugitive web
of purely particular elements or forces lying in im-
mensity. Speculation may, accepting some supposed
ground of the multiplicity and the inward connec-
tions, resolve the universal reciprocal actions as well
as the course of the whole universe into simple
fundamental forms. Natural Science can push back
such connections and provide all explanation from the
simple elements themselves. For all phenomena
grow out of relationships, from step to step, on the
ground of experience; one phenomenon against the
other receives interchanges in the reciprocity of the
effects. Nowhere does the guidance of the move-
ment seem to proceed from a Whole, and nowhere
does life itself seem to rest upon an elevated and
collective end of self-maintenance. What finds itself
in amalgamation is nothing other than a construction
of things side by side in space. The external con-
tiguity, in the main, does no more than bring the
elements together; an inward participation collect-
ively is throughout impossible and, indeed, unthink-
able. Speculation may anew complete this picture by
stating that the elements cannot possibly pass wholly
into the mutual relations, and that they must possess
some individual existence. But such individual


88 FUNDAMENTAL BASIS OF UNIVERSAL RELIGION


existence lies inaccessible beyond the phenomena |
and remains unexplored for all times. Along with
this, each question concerning final “grounds” un-
folds another question, and there is here, therefore,
no discovery of the Why and Wherefore; the
scientific investigation of the processes of nature
shows them as no more than mere occurrences.
As such an existence from without, with its myriad
forms, surrounds us, it extends itself also deeply into
the province of the soul. Also, human activities are
above all driven by the needs of individual self-
preservation and self-elevation, and it is the execution
of this alone which gives value to man and things;
here activities are not meant for alien aims—they are
not meant for any existing Whole beyond the realm
of the life of humanity. Our life, primarily, creates
its content out of the external relations and connec-
tions; it is nothing other than an intercourse with
the environment. What is called “inward” is only
echo and ashes of what originated through the
friction of the connections. Our ideas or conceptions,
for instance, are mere sensuous presentations ; that
alone can be termed good which our position utilises
in the sensuous existence; all happiness, in the last
resort, is rooted in sensuous stimulation; what is
termed non-sensuous or spiritual is in truth only a
sensuous of a finer make. Also, the connection of
the psychological movements corresponds entirely
with the order of nature. Isolated elements unite and
link themselves simultaneously or in turns, stir and
displace themselves ; and it is the association of their
mechanism which largely governs our life and makes
out of it a complicated machine which far more moves


THE COMPLEXITY OF HUMAN LIFE 89


independently of us than helps to shape our own
particular product. No superior unity spans and
stirs the manifold, so that there is no room here
for either ends or activities.

As, however, our position remains bound in this
network, we infer that we cannot be carried beyond
that position. What in themselves these things may
be, we can know nothing, and there is no need for us
to know; in such a beyond we could neither interest
ourselves nor attain our ends. We see, too, that the
psychic life in its initial stages remains within the
domain of nature, and through and through exhibits
the character of a mere existing thing: it comes and
goes, it mounts and sinks, it is tied to sensual appetite
and mechanism—a life without ends or aims, without
meaning or reason, entirely sinking to the level of
bare and barren existence. If we survey this psychic
life in its extension over the expanse of nature right
up to man himself, we find it nowhere resting in itself,
but it appears with all its performances as mere means
to the mere natural conservation of its own existence.
What purpose does the richest equipment in the
animal world serve but to put on war-footing the
individual and the species in the struggle for ex-
istence? And hardly more does the mere psychic
life perform for man, for it remains in his life, too, a
mere piece of the natural Life-process.

But though this kind of life has governed humanity
almost exclusively in its initial stages, and though
it has carried the natural and commonplace to the
throne, yet such a kind of life does not remain isolated,
for along with it there develops a new and higher
kind with other configuration and direction. Step by


90 FUNDAMENTAL BASIS OF UNIVERSAL RELIGION


step transformations appear and form an essentially
higher standard. Thus human activity is not wholly
held fast by self-assertion, but also reaches out in the
direction of the welfare of others. Consequently,
inward connections of the community arise and win
the individual up to the point even of sacrifice of self
for the aims of the community ; in other departments
of life the spiritual activity draws the man unto him-
self and places his striving under an actual compulsion ;
in art, science, law, technics, etc., great connections
grow up and urge man into their service.

Such work could never be linked together into a
Whole had it not been that a transformation had pro-
ceeded out of a Whole in the inward web of the soul.
An inward representation of these connections must
be possible ; the thought of a Whole must span the
manifold, and the entire mass must be transmuted
into a system. Indeed, this shows in reality the
erection of a connected world of thought—a general
organisation of culture.

Of more importance still is the fact that the Life-
process disengages itself from its mere connections
with things: the process deepens the life of the
soul in itself, and strives to pass beyond the mere
appearance of things to their nature. This Life-pro-
cess is carried further and cast into a new mould by
receiving into itself from the external world; through
this new forms and energies appear, and the inward-
ness attains the capacity for production, as, for instance,
we find on the heights of science that the conceptions
are not a mere thesis of sensuous presentations but
characteristic creations of thought. More and more
the inward world links itself together into a unity ; it


THE COMPLEXITY OF HUMAN LIFE 91


seeks and finds original tracks, and exercises a counter-
activity to all the mere environment. An activity
arising out of characteristic energy and decision now
places itself over against all mere hap and hazard.
To such an independence of the individual soul
corresponds the greater self-activity of humanity.
The latter prepares a particular kingdom—a kingdom
of civilisation—over against the realm of nature, and a
corporate Spiritual Life, founded in itself, bridges all
the branch provinces and calls men to a new existence
far beyond the reach of nature.

At the same time, a new relationship is won towards
all natural things. It suffices us no longer to know
whatthe mere connections of things are ; we must forge
our way in the direction of the connections of things
and transpose ourselves in the midst of their character-
istic existence, and participate in their characteristic
life. This is accomplished not only through mental dis-
cernment and its longing after truth, but also through
the whole of the life of the spirit. What differentiates
definite love from sensuous excitement but the re-
ception of the “other” into one’s own soul? How
could a fact with its compulsion move us, were it not
that it was born in our characteristic striving? This
signifies a breaking through the narrowness of natural
existence as well as the most fundamental transforma-
tion of all greatness and goodness. It is only when the
Life-process draws this seeming “ beyond ” into itself
that there arises a problem of truth, and that a good
(one of the most riddlesome of all terms) grows over
against the useful and the pleasurable. What satis-
fied us previously as happiness—the maintenance and
enhancement of the individual—becomes through the


92 FUNDAMENTAL BASIS OF UNIVERSAL RELIGION


inward expansion of life small and lean, and, indeed,
a hindrance to definite welfare.

This new direction of life develops into an
objectivity and exhibits an activity of the soul of a
very different nature from the activity known on
earlier levels. ‘This new object never gains an inde-
pendence and an inward present moment from sen-
suous impressions, but only through its deliverance
from these; this deliverance is, however, a work of
the activity of thought, for thought transplants us
into the very centre of things, and it is through the
conception of the things as great thoughts that the
things can produce in us a living movement. ‘Thus
every further expansion of life means, at the same
time, a remove into the province of a world of thought,
of the non-sensuous, and of ideals. Indeed, there
follows an inversion of life in which the work of
thought operates in the interpretation of the earlier
stages of things and of the foundation of all; and
through this process the sensuous aspect of things
withdraws to a secondary place and sinks to the
periphery of life. This basing of life upon thought
is, at the same time, a gain in transparency and
freedom. True, the object which we ourselves
appropriate exercises a strong constraint against our
previous condition—an inward necessity of our nature
dispels all arbitrary choice. But this constraint of
the outward fact does not work through physical
pressure, but all along through the intervention of a
characteristic activity—an activity which pulls out
arbitrary choice and thus establishes freedom. All
investigation comes under the necessities of the case,
but the strongest external sway of things cannot force


THE COMPLEXITY OF HUMAN LIFE 93


open a turn to investigation: esthetic creativeness
could not discover and obey the necessities of its
handling-object had not the imagination previously
linked that object to itself. The thought of obliga-
tion is an absurdity without an acceptation of the
fact of a moral organising power in the will.

Thus a new life unfolds itself in manifold traits ;
a bi-lateral life and a parting of the ways towards
wider and more decisive directions now become
needful in order to obtain a complete view of things.
In the one, our acts are more and more flung back
upon ourselves and thus strike a depth in the soil of
independent inwardness; in the other, it becomes
possible to plant ourselves on new objects and be
filled and moved by them. The collective flow of
things found on the natural level is now entirely dis-
carded; subject and object, man and the world,
activity and its object of treatment, have all separated
themselves and work upon one another as independent
energies. But the cleft which frees our life from
numb subjection cannot signify as yet the final con-
clusion ; indeed, the sharper and clearer that cleft
becomes, the more do we discover it as an intolerable
situation, and are driven with all our available energy
to seek to re-establish again some kind of unity
which had succumbed during the initial stages of the
inward movement. ‘The road to a Yea lies through
a Nay; we must separate in order again to unite,
and must depart from our ordinary state in order
again to return to it. There enters thus a negative
element into the work of life; all definite departure
on the new road follows through toil and struggle,
doubt and pain, but in all this aggravation of existence


94 FUNDAMENTAL BASIS OF UNIVERSAL RELIGION


the man is raised to a higher level, and is ennobled
through the inward compulsion which drives him
forward. Intertwining movements and revolutions
break the ban of the fixed actuality which lay upon
natural existence. Much still remains dark and
mysterious, and, indeed, becomes more and more so,
but already the clear discovery of the darkness heralds
the beginning of a coming enlightenment. We are
not allowed now to accept the phenomena as they
merely fall upon us; we cannot now leave on one
side a standard and a judgment, a sanction and a
disapproval; over all the particular questions there
arises the question concerning the aim of all action
and the meaning of all life. The whole manifold
must fasten itself together and obtain a characteristic
view of things.

There is, thus, no doubt that our conscious life is
not a mere furtherance of the movement of the
natural order, but that within it a new art of life is to
be recognised ; our life constitutes not merely a simple
superficies, but it includes two qualities fundamentally
different in kind. That such a view of life is less
simple, and that scientific investigation demands a
greater labour out of it, must not prevent us from
recognising such a fact. Or, shall we bend, enfeeble,
and trim such a life in order that we may join
together merely those conceptions alone which will
produce our mere individual comfort ?


2. The Contradiction in Human Life


The point of contact of two different stages of a
life signifies in itself no contradiction; such con-


THE COMPLEXITY OF HUMAN LIFE 95


tradiction would arise only if a conflict between the
two stages originates, and if the relationship of both
became something other than what corresponded to
their separate inner significance. And it is this which
actually happens. The Spiritual Life presents itself as
pre-eminent and as being called to wield the sceptre ;
it has often to content itself with a humbler position;
it will thus, true to its own nature, rest in itself and
construct its own particular province, but through
such a treatment of it the man remains still tied to
the natural order, and the pre-eminent life seems to
accompany that order as a mere addendum. Such a
contraction confines the effect not only from the ex-
ternal side, but also brings the internal formation to a
standstill: the Spiritual Life, through that dependence
upon an alien power, seems not able to accomplish
the purpose of its own nature, and consequently must
be wrecked in its search for a More, which lies on a
coast beyond the natural province. Thus it becomes
in itself a contradiction, and what promised to illumine
our existence proves itself now a difficult riddle.

(a) .The Weakness of the Spiritual Motive-Powers.
—A loosening of the activity from the natural instinct
of self-preservation and its liberation for aims of a
conjoint and actual kind are essential to the Spiritual
Life. This shows itself especially in the province of
morality. In however devious ways morality may be
conceived and founded, that it is a contraction of the
instincts and signifies a direction upon common aims
cannot be doubted. How do things stand in reality
with the evolution of such a conviction? Over the
whole field of civilisation there extends an appearance
of morality, self-forgetfulness, and willingness for


96 FUNDAMENTAL BASIS OF UNIVERSAL RELIGION


sacrifice; the corporate organisations hold before
themselves great aims, and mutual co-operation, love,
and esteem find their way by the sheer force of their
own inherent assurance into organic society. But he
who accepts this appearance for the whole truth is
soon disillusioned, and finds pretty quickly that the
gold pieces prove themselves to be copper coins, and
that that which constitutes the real experience of life
is in its foundation nothing other and nothing less
than an insight into, and a loosening from, the mere
appearance of things. So that from of old the renown
of an insight into human nature belongs to the
pessimists and not to the optimists. The organisa-
tion of co-operative life, however, treats entirely the
particular interests of individuals as the driving-
power of all effort; such an organisation wins such a
power not through the presentation of elevated aims
beyond the circle of immediate life, but through the
benefits which it is called to further, and through
the drawbacks which it is called to obviate. Indeed,
the closer these individual movements link themselves
to the system of society, the securer becomes their
actual strength; how poorly would the movement
proceed in its love for the good if it left on one side
its abhorrence of evil! Religions, in spite of all their
differences, are united in the fact that they change in
some degree the moral achievements of man. The
optimistic character of even the religions of law does
not confine itself to the natural good of human nature,
but expects an obedience to the voice of Divine
command which promises, on the one hand, great
rewards, and threatens, on the other hand, heavy
punishments. Philosophy, too, handles incessantly


THE COMPLEXITY OF HUMAN LIFE ire


the wide gap between the moral potency and the
actual conduct of man; indeed, the deeper the great
thinkers have penetrated into the depth of human
existence, as, for example, Plato and Kant, the more
they have discovered that contradiction; but the
thinkers who, as Aristotle and Leibniz, presented
the facts in a more friendly manner, yet became, in
the further development of their thoughts, living
witnesses against their earlier outlook, and in favour
of another view of things. For as soon as they turned
towards the expanse of life and trod on the impressions
of experience, the favourable picture was inverted
into its opposite. Thinkers are far more united con-
cerning their judgment of man than could be expected
from the strife of their different conceptions; for
example, they present the same truth in different
forms. Art also tends to the same convictions as
philosophy and religion when it does not falsify the
reality in shallow embellishments, but endeavours
to illumine it and learns to see it in a truthful way.
How many entanglements has such Art brought
to the surface, and under what strong contrasts has
it exhibited human existence !

In great moments, however, individuals and nations
have exhibited a character free from self and capable
of heroic sacrifice. This is true of particular moments
when human nature was under strong stimuli, and is
a phenomenon witnessed but seldom. But does not
the circumstance prove, when it is considered more
closely, that such achievements—prized as something
miraculous and conceived as something superhuman
—-condemned root and branch the ordinary natural


ways of man ¢ F


98 FUNDAMENTAL BASIS OF UNIVERSAL RELIGION


The problem does not limit itself, however, to the
moral province in any definite sense; it is not only
when man is required to sacrifice his own self, but also
when he shall bring forth some earnest participation
in the affairs which lie beyond his self, that the ability
is denied him for such an accomplishment. It may
be an activity concerning the state and society, or
art and science; everywhere the ordinary mode
of life shows a lamentable callousness and apathy,
everywhere the effort proceeds not so much upon
the thing itself as upon the advantages which promise
to accrue to the individual. In order to win any
energy for the actual thing itself, it becomes obligatory
to take solitary circuitous paths and perilous enter-
prises, and then the situation seems to need a severe
intimidation, and soon, too, a daring assertion of one’s
own self; but, soon, on the contrary, the particular
interest has somehow found its vantage-point, and
transforms the immovable apathy into the closest
attention and the most strenuous interest. If it is
now felt that the situation at the height of this
creativeness is a better one, this in its turn is clearly
discovered as an exception, and serves more for the
corroboration than for the refutation of the assertion.

There remains, therefore, no doubt as to the weak-
ness of the spiritual and moral motive-powers. But
noteworthy enough man stands up in strong opposi-
tion to the acknowledgment of this fact. Throughout
the whole of life and of corporate organisations there
proceeds a striving to represent things in a better
light, to show them to be nobler and greater than
they actually are; an open conviction and calm
acknowledgment of the real facts of the case have


THE COMPLEXITY OF HUMAN LIFE 99


fled, and men practise hypocrisy not only towards
one another but more towards themselves; and even
in front of his own consciousness the man speaks
and imagines himself on the heights. This inces-
sant drama has raised, from of old, the bitter jests
of the satirists, the fiery indignation of the friends
of truth, and the deep pain of all moral natures.
There is imbedded here a problem: Why do we
shun recognising that mysterious Something whose
actuality is undeniable? Why do we not acquiesce
in the ordinary state of things which surrounds us
on all sides? There must be some kind of concealed
counter-effect extant; whence that concealment—
that darkness—came and whither it goes nobody
knows. And thus’our existence continues largely
under the power of opposites, and we are unable
to see how the spiritual can prevail, although the
necessity of our nature even against our will holds
us to it.

(8) The Spiritual Impotence of Man.—Hitherto the
subject has on the whole handled the strength of
the spiritual motive-powers in man; the will as yet
has not corresponded to the demands of the new
standard. But the question arises, whether the
will in particular is responsible for the fault, or
whether, rather, the entanglement does not extend
to the very foundation of our nature. Is man
able, primarily, to pursue something beyond his
present situation? Can Spiritual Life, in the distinct
way it expresses itself within the confines and sub-
jectivity of his own nature, come to actual realisation ¢
Will not all things—not only mere appearances but
even truth—be drawn down to the level of the


EMMANUEL
SCHOOL OF RELIGION
LIBRARY


100 FUNDAMENTAL BASIS OF UNIVERSAL RELIGION


ordinary nature and thus destroyed? Such things
could transform all into an over-natural kingdom of
life constructed out of the largeness and truth of
things.

The aspiration after knowledge becomes truth—the
particular truth of things beyond the bare impressions
which surround the mind in sensations and which
are deposited into percepts and ideas. ‘The sensuous
presentation of the idea disengages itself from the
idea itself in order to present before the mind the
existence of things in space. But how do we step
beyond the province of the presentation? Does not
the idea the more it withdraws itself from its object
and stands upon its own particular potency become
more empty and shadowy? And, too, in the most
sublime ideas sensuous presentations adhere. With
what ardour and toil has religion, from of old, striven
to obtain pure conceptions of the Divine; and always
in this procedure how greatly has it discovered anew
the limits of our powers! Must it not then acknow-
ledge even in its highest flight that all human know-
ledge attains to no more than a metaphor? But even
so much signifies that the human notion holds man
with inexorable power.

What is true of the idea is true on the whole of
knowledge. Knowledge ought to subsist upon the
“in-itself” of reality, and yet it is held in trammels
by the subjectivity of the soul. The subject remains
always with himself, and can extend and extend this
particular circle, but is never able to break through
the situation and transpose himself into the object ;
what we occupy ourselves with are never things but
only our presentations and images of things. The


THE COMPLEXITY OF HUMAN LIFE 101


idea itself of any thing is not given from the external
but originates in our own characteristic thought.
Thus there stands continually between us and reality
the ghost of our own particular thought and reflection,
which threatens to reduce the world to a shadow;
instead of seeing the things we see only a haze with
which they are surrounded, and we only substitute
one haze for another when we believe we have
uncovered them.

Hence to all great thinkers the conception of
truth has been the most difficult of all problems as
well as a riddle full of mysteries. To such thinkers
the work of knowledge presented itself not as a
wandering on a paved, secure path, but as an inces-
sant wrestling to find the main goal and the main
direction of a new track. Philosophy, therefore, must
take up anew the question of the possibility of truth,
and must consider that the question is not altogether
settled by previous work upon it. In spite of all
toil the goal seemed to recede into an ever-wider
distance. The Greeks considered the problem simply
as the unbroken connection of man and the world,
and the truth was conceived as a harmony between
subject and object (adequatio rei et intellectus of the
Middle Ages), and found such harmony quite attain-
able through the accepted kinship of nature on both
sides. The growing inwardness of human life slackens
and parts asunder such a connection with the environ-
ment ; it corresponds to the most important situation
of Descartes when he tore off the subject from its
entanglement with the physical universe and under-
took to construct reality out of consciousness. But
even he, at the same time, held fast to the existence


102 FUNDAMENTAL BASIS OF UNIVERSAL RELIGION


of an independent actual world of man in conscious-
ness; and therefore it became necessary for him to find
2 connection between subject and object in a new
kind of way. That happened with his successors
in the doctrine of parallelism between thought and
existence. Each of the two unfolds independently
of the other; a pre-eminent power—of an immanent
or of a transcendent nature—causes at least here and
there a harmony of results. But to conceive of the
truth of the problem in this manner is not to solve
it so much as to push it backward; it must soon
reappear as an intolerable contradiction alternately
over against the world and upon the world. Such a
criticism culminated with decisive acuteness in Kant ;
a truth seemed possible to him only in the degree
it is conceived apart from all its relationships with
things, and thus the problem is laid entirely in the
particular thought-province of the subject. But
when it is not recognised that a world of things
persists by the side of this thought-process and that
the subject is nothing without such a world, our
world transforms itself into a kingdom of appearances
and then it becomes questionable whether a truth
in any definite sense remains, and whether we are
not standing on a province between knowledge and
non-knowledge. A way out of this dilemma as well
as a conclusion of the most important movements
were sought by the German speculative movement,
in which the leaders allowed the things to remain
on one side, and endeavoured to bring forth reality
out of their own thought. That such an investigation
signifies an overstrain of human ability, and that,
at the same time, it robs the reality of all content


THE COMPLEXITY OF HUMAN LIFE 103


there is no doubt, as this is clear enough from the
consequent disillusion which followed the speculation.
What has this most important speculative movement
arrived at? It seems to teach nothing other than
the inaccessibleness of truth for man, and the insight
that the sum of all knowledge forms the confession
—unknowable. But out of all the changes and trans-
formations of time arises clearly the one dilemma:
Hither the striving after truth points to some kind
of existence beyond the human circle, and then our
inability to attain a direct intercourse with the things
will prove itself ever anew and ever clearer ; 07 we
create the whole reality out of our thoughts, and
then such a titanic plunge soon breaks into pieces,
and the overstrain of the human powers will take
vengeance through the increasing emptiness of our
existence.

The existence of a science can tolerate such doubts
well enough because it is situated in the ordinary life,
and, through untiring toil, it ranges itself into con-
clusions. Science can extend and codify incessantly
results only in so far as it stands upon an average
height and shuns the highest summit and the deepest
abyss, and in so far it pushes further off or places on
one side the problem of a final and definite truth.
Such is a kind of indispensable compromise and no
more, which has to take place in the co-operation of
the work of science and in the continuance of life ;
and to see the solution of the main problem within
such a province can only mean a self-satisfied super-
ficiality. As soon as we demand to pass beyond mere .
awareness to a truthful knowledge, we discover our
deplorable poverty, and must confess that that which


104 FUNDAMENTAL BASIS OF UNIVERSAL RELIGION


is termed certain seems on clearer investigation to
rest upon a totally insecure foundation.

When we turn to the realm of action, the matter
appears worse than in the realm of thought. The
moral inadequacy of man has been, as we saw, an
object of complaint from of old, but the complaint
seems often to have forgotten the question, whether
the “ given” and benumbed nature of man is able in
some kind of way to handle things otherwise. We
cannot act without motives, and these adjust them-
selves to the good striven for, but a good for us can
only be that which furthers our particular will;
therefore we can strive only for ourselves and never
for some external existence. In particular, it is our
subjective existence—our particular neutrality—which
seeks the one thing and flees from the other ; to speak
of effects upon this condition of things is, to our
activity, as insoluble as our knowledge of sense-
presentations. Pleasure and pain drive and control
our life; they may be refined far beyond their raw,
sensuous forms; and our subjectivity, too, binds us
to great refinement, so that in the last resort we
seem to act for nothing other than our own par-
ticular condition. Also, this condition may inter-
lace and link itself to the world and man around us,
in the most varied manner; we may imagine that we
are striving not so much for our own welfare as for
the welfare of another; we may conclude, in order
to strengthen such an opinion, that we do this for
another because it promises pleasure and has already
proved itself of value to ourselves, so that when dealing
with the seeming external we are really always dealing
with ourselves; we thus find the self, in the furthest


THE COMPLEXITY OF HUMAN LIFE 105


remove from its starting-point, bound in its own
subjective happiness, and linked again with it un-
observed. All transformation and seeming excellence
never seem to yield an exit from that embarrass-
ment—never bring forth a transplanting of the life
into the realm of over-individual and over-subjective
actions. This impossibility, however, is the strict
demand of morality, and with it morality stands or
falls. This demand renders impossible the enclosure
of man within the web of his own small self; the
demand not only places his acts under definite aims
but also calls him to mount to a region of definite
self-denying love; it holds its message before him not
merely as an agreeable play of phantasy, but as an
imperative problem upon whose solution the content
and value of life are decided. -Thus there appears
something as indispensable which is not yet discovered :
it does not reveal itself, and the problem is: How
may we discover it ?

All along the ages thinkers have laboured in order
to try to solve the problem, but the liberation of
man from himself would not yield to any proposed
solution ; all ardent labours have alternately entangled
and disentangled the skein, and the goal has always
receded further away. On the summit of Greek life
the good attracted man on account of its inherent
beauty as an object of disinterested welfare, and not
on account of its utility or its enjoyment ; on account
of its powerful influence on the imagination man
seemed to win the good and the beautiful. Happiness
(cidamovia) welded compactly together sensation and
act, subject and object. But this supposition pos-
sessed presuppositions of a problematic character ; it


106 FUNDAMENTAL BASIS OF UNIVERSAL RELIGION


reckoned with nature conceived as great and noble ;
it interweaved minutely the psychic nature of the
observer with the objective world, and placed the
increased inwardness of life as something inherent in
the external world. But the question was not raised,
whether this refinement of nature works in the
direction of the liberation of man from nature itself
and from egotistic narrowness, or whether, finally, all
such attempts do not end in the mere inclinations of
man. However hard and unfair the opinion may be
that “the virtues of the ancients were splendid sins”
(virtutes veterum splendida vitia), inconceivable it is not.

Christianity has, as one of its great accomplish-
ments, freed morality from mere nature, and with
incomparably greater clearness than before placed the
moral problem in front of the soul of man. But the
solution was not, on account of this, rendered easier
but more difficult. Holding all human ability as
useless, there remained only the flight to a miracle
of Divine grace: such alone could create a new
disinterested life. But is not the centre of gravity
through this shifted outside us? And do we not
sink to the level of lifeless instruments and mere
indecisive receptacles of Divine decree? Also, it
remains in darkness how such a regenerated man
could escape from the toils and tangles of his own
nature, and how his life and actions could free them-
selves from subjective conditions. Christian love is
much praised, but it is often forgotten in the midst
of this praise to ask if such love is possible, and if it
really exists. Thus the knot is not so much untied
as cut asunder ; and the violence of the solution has,
as its consequence, the oscillation, on the one side,


THE COMPLEXITY OF HUMAN LIFE 107_


between a supernatural view brought forth through a
powerful achievement which will destroy all personal
action and morality, and on the other side, an ac-
commodation in the egotism of his own nature which
falls into the danger of relapsing into the rear of the
antiquated solution of the problem. Is it no relapse
to a lower level when, within the Christian world,
questions concerning rewards and punishments occupy
such a prominent place ?

Also, our age in its own way has taken up the
struggle against the pettiness of the natural forms of
life. ‘Through the transformation of the whole man
into thought—into an objective world-embracing
thought—our age believes itself able to transform
him into a cosmic nature and to wrest him from all
his embarrassments. Here, too, such liberative process
pushes against insurmountable barriers. A thought
and life born of external things desires an entry into
the deepest essence, and fancies it receives it in all the
entanglements of the problem of truth; on the other
hand, the doubt is raised if thought by itself in the
overcoming of the opposition can include the whole
nature of man, or if the kingdom of thought, in all
its breadth and fulness, does not leave unbroken the
egotistic impulsive life. This seems to be the case
on the ordinary level of our modern life of culture.

All in all this characteristic movement of modern
times unveils here a rough dilemma. If the aim of
the good is clearly grasped, it sprouts through the
whole soil of human energy; and on the other hand,
a mere adjustment of things to our own nature is
nothing less than an inward subversion of that nature.
Thus each alleged conclusion rapidly transforms itself


108 FUNDAMENTAL BASIS OF UNIVERSAL RELIGION


into a problem, and increases incessantly the distance
between us and the goal of the good.

Human society has not prevented such sorrow and
toil from bringing forth a certain civic honourable-
ness and righteousness. The question is, how much
good of a definite nature is imbedded in the attempt
to fold together the interests of the individual into a
well-authorised system, and place such interests for
reciprocal movements on the chess-board, in order
to make possible an endurable co-operative life. As
much as this is certain, that where conventional
righteousness exhibits itself as the one true and
culminating virtue, deeper natures in all times have
handled it as a miserable delusion and have branded
it as a pernicious pharisaism. Only such human
performances satisfied such deeper natures as took
possession of the aim of life right down to the inward
abandonment of all that is base; and, meanwhile,
with a strong ardour for love and righteousness,
thirsting spirits found the ordinary level of life as a
hollow caricature. What is true, however, of the
true and the good is also true of the whole of the
Spiritual Life. Such a life holds before us a new kind
of existence, but the energy to reach such an exist-
ence it verifies not, and this seems in no way verifi-
able. But if such a conviction of our inability to
verify such an existence takes root, it transforms
our previously possessed aims to bare illusions, and
consequently all confederate work falls into pieces.
Is the situation thus, or is there some kind of help,
some kind of passable exit ?

(y) The Insufficiency of an Alleged Remedy.—
Modern life is convinced that it has a ready exit out


THE COMPLEXITY OF HUMAN LIFE 109


of the exposed entanglements upon the particular
ground of experience without any kind of trans-
formation of reality, and it hopes to become
equipped to deal with the problem by holding and
overcoming the particular energies which are mis-
placed in the problem. The solution is to take place
through a belief in the power of the progressive
evolution of humanity aided by society and history—
two factors which the modern man holds out against
all doubt, and which enable him to take up life with
a joyous courage. That such a course of thought, as
it presents itself in the foreground, is peculiar and
problematic, will appear clearer as we proceed.

Such a course of thought understands the band
of society and history as the convincing energy of
the Spiritual Life. Bred in the chaos of individual
opinions, it affirms society as a connecting world of
thought, and, at the same time, develops common
aims and goods over against the bare self-preservation
of the individual. But, as it was with the simul-
taneity of events, so is it, too, with succession—it
engenders a combination and summing-up of energy ;
a later time takes over the achievements of an earlier
time ; the stones of the building fit into each other
and rise into a pyramid of civilisation ; the succession
of generations eliminates the transient and subsidiary,
and couples and fastens the essentials, and thus
augments the fundamental inheritance of our domain.
Thus humanity is able to build up a kingdom of
reason far beyond the capability of the mere in-
dividual and the mere moment; although the ideal
is certainly not reached at one stroke, yet, little by
little, it is brought nearer home,


110 FUNDAMENTAL BASIS OF UNIVERSAL RELIGION


This unbounded ability of the ascent of the world
of experience seems to render superfluous the need of
splitting of reality into two different provinces. For
what purpose, then, does man need religion when
his wishes and hopes, little by little, come to realisa-
tion entirely on such a ground? Thus evolutionary
thought becomes a rugged, and, indeed, a most
dangerous enemy of religion.

It would have been difficult for such a thought to
have won the mind of modern man with such con-
vincing power had it not been that there stood behind
it a significant new tendency of the life of civilisa-
tion itself. The nineteenth century has developed
with characteristic energy an historical point of view ;
over against the eighteenth century it might be
designated as the century of history. Not only do
we occupy ourselves as investigators far more with
the past, but also we interlace it more closely with
our own present work; we seek to introduce the
inheritance of the ages into our work, and in this
manner to establish a richer, clearer, and more con-
crete work. ‘Thus it is in law and religion, in science
and art. At the same time, in consequence of the
easier and more rapid intercourse, more reciprocal
relationships and co-operative work originate ; we feel
ourselves more closely bound and connected together ;
we experience in such results a powerful ascent of
our abilities over against all earlier times. Such an
energetic development and such a clear consciousness
of historico-social modes of life make it conceivable
how, from such a development, the results of the
main problem may be expected.

A deeper and more penetrating reflection is, how-


THE COMPLEXITY OF HUMAN LIFE ful


ever, necessary in order to read more correctly that
opinion of our day, and in order to perceive that
history and society in all their accomplishments on
the periphery of life heighten rather than lessen the
problem at the centre. With compelling force the
following dilemma raises its head: History and
Society are either, as evidences of the mere great-
ness of experience, testimonies of a confused and con-
flicting situation which has appeared clearly before
our eyes; and if so, history and society participate
in the entanglements of the situation, and cannot
raise themselves beyond the situation or inwardly
free themselves from it. Or there results in history
and society such actual effects of elevation and
freedom ; and if this happens, they do not work out
of their own energy, but there is imbedded in them
a superior power which prepares them as means and
ways. ‘Then it is not history and society but some-
thing that in the meantime remains completely un-
known that consummates the transformation.

What gain could issue out of the recognition that
man, as he suffers and lives, merely links himself to
his equals? The energies gather themselves together
without much toil in their action upon things: whilst
activities perform their work and reciprocally supple-
ment and fold themselves, differentiate and _par-
ticularise themselves, a powerful increase of behaviour
and a thorough consolidation and refinement of the
work are accomplished. ‘This work, through such
inflation, has transformed the contour of our existence
and drawn our life more and more into its own vortex.
But does such an advance of the work itself signify
the gain of an inward harmony, and are men in


112 FUNDAMENTAL BASIS OF UNIVERSAL RELIGION


conviction and character—in the whole of their
being—brought nearer to one another, so that the
true and the good for which they strive become easier
and gain a conquest of reason over all the dangers
and resistance? Experience on this point reveals
the very opposite. A growing disunion of mind is
rendered necessary in order to support the amalga-
mation of work ; we.observe more and morxye contrasts
opening out amongst men, which swell to ever greater
passion and hatred, thus causing individual to stand
against individual, vocation against vocation, race
against race, nation against nation, empire against
empire. When, indeed, was humanity so full of
dissensions as to-day, and this in the midst of all
the coherence of united practical work? Also, the
admission and the belief themselves do not verify the
statement that a real union of individuals is possible
without a further addition of reason, or that through
such a contact with one another a fixed truth easily
and quickly springs forth. If we view, however, our
parliaments and the great gatherings of the people,
it seems clear how very little so-called public opinion
is able to differentiate between the definite and the
indefinite, and how defenceless it falls often before
robust force, and, indeed, even before audacity and a
daring to plunder. When we become aware of this,
we shall think less confidently of the alleged summa-
tion of truth. ‘There is, indeed, no joyous activity for
humanity without a trust in some kind of conquest of
reason in its own sphere, but this conquest must be
something other than the gain of the ordinary and
the commonplace; and when such a conquest comes
to its own, a different kind of truth-energy must sway


THE COMPLEXITY OF HUMAN LIFE 113


humanity than that which lies in the opinions and
interests of individuals and masses. Also, the evident
strengthening of the convictions and tendencies of
human society gives not the slightest security for their
actual truth. And, too, stubborn errors can strike
here their fast roots, and with a kind of sacred
authority grow from generation to generation. Later
times revere then calmly the undisputed truth which
the tradition of the centuries had sanctioned. But
this sanction is of a purely human kind; and if there
stands not something more than human behind it,
sooner or later the day must dawn when the usurpa-
tion is seen through and the alleged truth is stripped
of its deception. And then a powerful upheaval
results, and each and every truth falls lightly into
doubt.

These considerations lead into the province and
problem of history. Here, also, a_ significant
achievement is unmistakable ; but the question is, if
such achievement, through what it receives from the
doctrine of evolution, is able to create a definite
cleavage between reason and unreason and to possess
the security of a growing mastery of reason. In
certain respects there results evidently an increase of
material as well as a progressive adjustment of work ;
this is to be witnessed in the exact and positive
sciences and in technics. What the particular move-
ment here achieves is a gain in the duration of its
material, and in the linking together of epochs into
an unbroken chain of activity and production. But
will this bond of union be reached if the inner exist-
ence and convictions of man are laid on one side, if


the question of absolute truth remains in the back-
8


114 FUNDAMENTAL BASIS OF UNIVERSAL RELIGION


ground, if the activity revolves around the circumfer-
ence and not around the centre of life? Was the
historical movement a progressive gain in spiritual
substance? Has it incessantly clarified our funda-
mental relationship to reality, and overcome the
previously explained contradictions of our nature ?
Have we become greater, nobler, happier men, and
has the daily life transmuted itself into a kingdom of
reason? Our particular consideration of the struggle
for the true and the good has already given us a
decisive answer ; the seeming near-at-hand solutions
proved themselves insufficient, and when we dive
ever deeper into the entangled abyss, we discover an
ever greater cleft between wish and capacity. More
and more our life tears itself away from a naive
standpoint and seeks new paths. But the energy of
the denial corresponds not to that of the affirmation :
energies and movements are found in abundance,
but no definite aim which governs, fastens, and raises
them.

The strenuous efforts with the past and the develop-
ment of a historical consciousness must heighten the
impression of this situation; what these efforts gain
in knowledge threatens to overbalance in the loss to
life. When a keen outlook on history presents before
us the multi-coloured abundant material of human
striving, and when it shows alternately slow and rapid
changes and transformations of ideals and their ever
fragile nature—material which the man had achieved
with toil and which had filled his soul—then the
question raises itself imperatively, whether all human
toil for truth and reason is a labour in vain. With
what right may we hold and defend truths as being


THE COMPLEXITY OF HUMAN LIFE 115


definite and settled simply because they were so in
earlier times, but which are now seen through as errors ?
The Indian words, “ We were what you are, you shall
become what we are,” should recall us to the realisation
of the penumbra of such relative truths.

Let us consider impartially the situation of the
present. Historical inquiry stands in magnificent
blossom, it extends its kingdom ever onward, and ever
more accurately it explores its ramifications. More
accurate, indeed, than we realise is the validity of
truth to the great investigator. But do we gain, with
all our insight, a more secure support for that which is
valid to us as truth? And are we not inwardly poor
in the midst of this overflowing kingdom? Or, one
indicates to us a particular positive truth—a funda-
mental truth for life and existence—which is carried
to us on the current of history. The insight that all
is to be conceived as in a process of flux, and that all
the later comes under the influence of the former, is
not likely to make valid the belief in a particular truth
in the sense referred to.

This joyous belief in history has an hypothesis
which it cannot verify and which soon suffers a shock.
This belief accepts as true that the movement of
humanity from of yore has transmuted itself into the
elements of reason, and that through this the move-
ment possesses an unassailable foundation, and con-
sequently is able to erect its structure step by step.
But reason is not a ready-made thing given to us, but
presents itself to us as a task; doubts and strife ever
anew draw us back, and the reasonable character of the
whole turns again and again into doubt. And on
account of this, our belief in such an evolution falls


116 FUNDAMENTAL BASIS OF UNIVERSAL RELIGION


to the ground. Such a denial signifies in no manner
a complete transmission of history into unreason.
But if any kind of reason works in history, it must
originate out of an over-empirical and over-historical
source ; and such a source will hardly find its highest
aim in a superstructure of the kingdom of history.
History can never, out of its own capacity, create pure
reason, but remains a turbid mixture of little reason
and much unreason.

The untenableness of the evolution theory also
is corroborated through its own history. This
history shows it as a testimony of various kinds of
thought-procedure and afflicted with an inward con-
tradiction. Modern thought believed itself to have
grasped directly, through the ascending scale of life,
an absolute truth, and to be able to carry this truth
fully into the human province. Such a course of
thought took up, first of all, a tendency against history,
and placed the explanations of its discovery before a
powerful tribunal of reason ; there resulted, however,
in a calmer mood, the view that history should be
conceived as a revelation of reason—indeed, it was
conceived as a gradual evolution of the whole of
reason. History appeared to such a mental procedure
not so much as that which is able to engender reason
out of itself, but as that which is encircled and carried
along its course by a timeless reason, thus placing
the main standard of life not within but above Time.
Then followed the change to immediate existence
through the realism of the nineteenth century ; and
to that change the over-historical life became a mere
illusion and bare impossibility ; history was placed
entirely upon the ground of natural immediate ex-


THE COMPLEXITY OF HUMAN LIFE 117


perience. But through this happened what signifies
the modern view of life: the old view is fundamentally
rejected, but the claim is to be rightly maintained that
the new view is able to perform less than was thought
possible. The historical movement should be under-
stood more on its empirical side, but, at the same
time, 1t appears as a witness of reason which held
unswervingly to a belief in the strong reign of law, in
an incessant ascent, and in a progressive conquest of
the good. Such a mixture of different kinds of mental
procedure tends necessarily to a blunting of the
problem, and obscures the sharp Hither—Or which
doubtless lies here ; and the mixture becomes a serious
danger to the energy and truth of life. This danger
is rapidly growing on all sides, and the doctrine of
evolution on its empirical side, with its confidence in
the culture of society and in history, has now reached
the masses. But on the height of spiritual activity
such a doctrine has been broken and overcome. The
untenableness and even the destructive energy of the
limiting of life within the merely human area appear
constantly before us. Where man sinks wholly into
the relationship of the human environment, where his
anxiety for his position in the mere simultaneity and
succession of things allows him to forget all else, then
he loses in inward independence, in depth of soul, and
becomes inevitably a shallow and babbling nature in
which finally all characteristic life and all truthful
present consciousness disappear. We witness with
painful clearness to-day a strong decline of inward
culture ; more and more, leading minds fail in creative
power; ever less does man find definite satisfaction
in all the bustle of our modern mechanism; ever


118 FUNDAMENTAL BASIS OF UNIVERSAL RELIGION


more is the inward life lowered in its pitch to the
commonplace; and ever clearer it becomes apparent
that all the gain on the periphery of life cannot
counterbalance the loss which occurs at the centre.
In the last resort, it is true that we live our existence
from out the centre, and although this fact may be
forgotten in our relationship to the environment, it
can never be permanently lost. If, therefore, the
proffered solution of the evolutionary theory fails, the
main question faces us again with a harsh distinct-
ness: Hither the complete surrender of reason and,
along with this, an inward subversion of life, ov an
ascent beyond the ordinary level and a new tendency
which not only grapples strongly with the contra-
dictions, but also lifts the inward lite out of them and
sets that life to work against all obstacles. It is a
great gain in the midst of all the chaos of the present
time to realise that all attempts to run away from this
dilemma are more and more seen through as a delusive
hybridisation of life.


PART IZ—THE FUNDAMENTAL BASIS OF
UNIVERSAL RELIGION


(ContINuED)


CHAPTER VII


b. THe PrRoGREssIVE AUTONOMY OF THE
SPIRITUAL LIFE


HirHerro the movement in the direction of the
Spiritual Life appeared as a particularly difficult
contradiction. ‘The Spiritual Life presented great
problems, and we find in ourselves no energy for
their solution ; it demanded a cosmic character and
yet the narrowness of the self coerced it ; it promised
a clarification of existence and yet it was the first
to bring the darkness of existence prominently
before us. A contradiction which comes suddenly
upon the inmost kernel of life allows itself not to be
placed calmly on one side—at least not for a strong
nature with its corresponding strong thought. If
the aims of life are simply unreachable, every attempt
to reach them must be excluded, and they must
vanish out of our existence as deceitful illusions.
But we, at the same time, dare not allow so much to
perish, for all this exhibited what gives eminence to
man above all else, and what constitutes the good
and the noble in his life—in fact, what constitutes


all the inner onward movement of humanity and all
119


120 FUNDAMENTAL BASIS OF UNIVERSAL RELIGION


the meaning and content of life. Is such a complete
collapse inevitable, and does no path offer itself to
meet the catastrophe ¢

There is one and only one possibility. The final
cause of the contradiction consisted in affirming
that the Spiritual Life appeared as an activity of the
mere individual self, and that it was bound up in the
situation and custom of this self. Man forms out of
his surrounding conditions a special province over
against the great All; reality stands over against
him as something alien, and his life appears as a
pendulum swinging between his own particular pro-
vince and this great All of things. Things being
thus, if the Spiritual Life is called to bridge inwardly
the gulf, to unfold the infinite on a definite point,
the impossibility of such an achievement becomes
evident, and all attempts will be wrecked on the rocks
of the contradiction. ‘This intolerable situation is to
be escaped only if the Spiritual Life were not railed
simply within the human. province ; if it contributed
in some kind of way to the winning of an independence
and of a power to draw reality into itself; and if
it were able from within to expand and become a
universe of its own. ‘Through this the Spiritual Life
would be raised above the opposites ; man would win,
through his participation in the new life, freedom from
the narrowness of his subjective existence; and in
that which at first seemed to oppress him—as an
unfulfilled demand from without—he seeks and finds
the immost nature of his true self. For the in-
sufficiency and even the contradiction of life within
the mere-human circle reveal themselves ever clearer.
Then an activity of a spiritual order is no longer


PROGRESSIVE AUTONOMY OF SPIRITUAL LIFE 121


satisfied to accept languidly a rigid and_ indifferent
kind of existence which accrues from the mere
motive-powers, but is able to penetrate to the depth
of one’s own nature and to attain to the might and
ardour of self-affirmation. Thus the opposition of
subject and object, of one’s own individual standpoint
and one’s external material, can be taken up into the
Life-process itself and here overcome. If this hap-
pens, there results a hope of such an illumination over
the whole meaning of the Spiritual Life which was
not possible so long as that Life signified only a
particular speck of a universe of chaff and dust. In
brief, an avenue opens in a new and opposite direction,
provided that the possibility of such a Life is more
than a mere possibility, and provided that it reveals
a corresponding reality.

All continuation of life’s movement and all success
depend on the existence of such a reality. The
many problems and entanglements connected with
the existence of such a reality constitute a further
question: in the first place, it is necessary that our
anxiety concerning that question should not blind us
to the real fact itself. The attention must be set on
this fact alone, and set against any incidental reflec-
tion which prevents us from storming this new path,
for this is not a pert merriment in knight-errantry but
that which Goethe named as the best of counsellors—
Necessity.

That a new actuality, however, of an independent
kind rises in us becomes more and more evident ;
through this we seek to effect an emancipation of
the life from the small self and from the petty-human
level, in order that we may overcome the inward


122 FUNDAMENTAL BASIS OF UNIVERSAL RELIGION


opposition and gain a new self. Our object in this
work will be to survey the whole of this new life,
to estimate its significance, and to examine its trans-
formation in its view of the world and of life.


1. The Several Stages


(2) The Emancipation of Life from the small self
and the merely human order.—All spiritual manifes-
tation appears first of all so vague in the isolated
individual, and we need only view such manifestation
from its content in order to verify the fact that it
forms new connections which produce transformations
upon the individual. We observe the Spiritual Life
always linking the elements into a Whole; the
separate elements come together not only from with-
out, but bind and complete themselves, too, from
within ; within this embracing Whole each special
act has to seek its location and to prove its significance.
It is most distinctly so in science, and it is so
wherever movement of thought extends—we find
everywhere a change from mere bare aggregate to a
system, everywhere general movement and dependence
of the individual upon the Whole. Life, through such
an extension, alters itself as well in its single states.
Life thus appears, in so far as it is of a spiritual
kind, not as a matter of the mere individual, or as
something pivoted on its own special point; but
what the individual obtains through great effort
carries in itself the assertion to all others of its validity
and power to bring something of value to all, and
attempts to demand from all a recognition of its
claims. Truth is ever a matter for the whole of


PROGRESSIVE AUTONOMY OF SPIRITUAL LIFE 123


humanity and never a private possession; in the
assertion of truth the individual may feel himself
as a representative, indeed, as a tool of the Whole,
and through this inward presence of the Whole he
is lifted out of the chances and changes of his
individual position. Springing from his work an
inward necessity issues its call, that what he with
labour achieved can become the possession of all; and
that such a possession particularly gives activity its
tenacity and success its joy.

The Life-process, however, could barely grow above
the severance of individual from individual did there
not lie in it, on the whole, a superiority above the
mere human and above the web of external presenta-
tions and interests. Thought with its truth could not
possess the certainty of its validity for all men if
it did not hold valid over against all men; it could
win no inward present moment with man without
the initiation if not the culmination of a transforma-
tion in himself. The independence of truth from
all human opinions and “may-bes” has constituted
since the time of Plato the basal confession of
science ; however riddlesome the matter may be
the conviction will not allow itself to give up the
belief that truths originate in a sphere which lies
beyond the mechanical work of ideas in the brain ;
man does not engender such truths, but discovers
them ; and they are not measured by him, but he
is measured by them. It is from such a source
alone that the joyous belief in the power of truth,
which inspires all striving, interprets itself; and it
is out of such a belief that the energy is available
to stand, if necessary, against the whole environment,


124 FUNDAMENTAL BASIS OF UNIVERSAL RELIGION


and to feel one’s self on the side of the right against
all others, and also to take up courageously the
struggle against deep-rooted errors in all their forms.
Indeed, man becomes a problem to himself; he can
examine and sift, and with longing and energy strive
after a transformation of life. Thus, there results
through the living power of the truth-content a
rearrangement in man’s whole view of things. On
the one hand, truth shall be held valid not as
one’s own individual opinion but as a thing in itself;
and on the other hand, truth is accessible within
one’s own individual life alone. Thus there exists
and works in man something more than human, and
consequently he does not become a mere bottled-
up kind of vessel.

Similarly as shows itself the movement from mere
opinion to truth, shows itself the movement from
utility to the good. The useful corresponds to the
material of the natural or social self-preservation, and
is able within a given province to maintain and to
improve its particular situation ; evidently here the
effort governs the broad ordinary level of human
existence. But the effort is not able to accomplish
this without opposition. Man can have no choice
but to feel the useful, with its natural and social
self-preservation, as indispensable; and he has no
choice either but to see that all proffered happiness is
too narrow and petty, and to long for wider and
nobler aims. It is something of this nature that
comes to expression in the idea of the good; in such
an idea something is aspired after which raises man
beyond his easy smugness ; what appears to him now
of value is to be found through struggle and pain,


PROGRESSIVE AUTONOMY OF SPIRITUAL LIFE 125


and stands in direct opposition to the aims of his
mere natural welfare. If such an idea of the good
operates as a gravitating force on man, if it wins his
particular energy and conviction, therefore it must be
something grounded in his very nature, something
which proves this nature to be more than a mere
increase of an intelligence which issued out of the
endowed animal world. What is gained here through
emancipation from the ordinary effortless situation and
from the small human mode of life finds its richest
expression in the fact of morality. It is true that we
are aware to-day of manifold opinions concerning the
content of morality, yet its slow “ becoming” on the
field of humanity appears to us clearer than to former
times, but the primal phenomenon of morality asserts
itself victoriously against the one time as against the
other. Though the realisation of the good may be
a difficult problem and may rend asunder peoples and
epochs, yet the fact remains that in all places and at
all times of the historical consciousness something
appears as binding and as a law above mere arbitrary
action, something which abandons the mere standard
of utility. What one, however, accentuates and
reveres as a good is not some one thing lying by the
side of other things, but something considered as a
sovereign swaying thing which demands universal
recognition. If, further, the good in man has climbed
slowly from faint beginnings to a persistent clearness,
what has altered its nature? True, the good is in
that movement often drawn closer to the useful, and
seems, indeed, to issue entirely out of the useful.
But all this confusion of the two currents of the good
and the useful in man lessens in no wise the distance


126 FUNDAMENTAL BASIS OF UNIVERSAL RELIGION


between their different natures; for however much
the useful may receive by an appearance of good, to
become the good itself is impossible for it. It is true
that in regard to the good the movement seems to
proceed from outward inward; much of the good
which seems to ascend directly from within has been
imported from the social environment, education,
custom, and other sources. But even here the in-
ward assimilation and the acceptation into one’s will
remain as a special act—as an independent achieve-
ment; all the effects from without would glide in
vain as over a hard rock, or could not pass beyond a
clever parrot’s prattle, had not such effects awakened
an inherent consciousness in human nature. ‘The
initial custom can become a moral activism, but so
long as it remains a mere custom and nothing more,
it is not yet moral. What, however, may be desig-
nated as moral suffers in value the moment it is
considered as a testimony of bare custom.

Morality thus remains an unconquerable primal
phenomenon of the Spiritual Life. In the Spiritual
Life, however, there lies an entire transformation
of human nature as well as the most fundamental
emancipation from the smallness of the mere natural
order. When it turns away from the “ends” of
natural self-preservation, and turns towards the ab-
soluteness of its demands, morality appears first of
all as an overlaying imperative and brings into birth
such characteristic greatness as “ the ought,” duty, and
law. It appears usually, in consequence, to the re-
ligious conviction as a revelation of a world “ beyond ”
and as a Divine injunction to man. But such a
meaning includes one side only of the fact and needs


PROGRESSIVE AUTONOMY OF SPIRITUAL LIFE 127


necessarily a completion ; if that “beyond” does not
in some kind of way transplant itself into a “here
and now,” the purity of morality is cast into the
greatest peril. What works upon us from the external
only could not move the soul in any other way than
through the holding out of consequences—through
the promise of reward and the threat of punishment.
Through this, however, man would be thrown back
upon the position from which morality should free
itself, and the narrow circle within him would not be
broken through. Man can unfold his own activities
only in so far as they appertain to his own particular
nature; the law, in which these activities appear,
must be an inward self-willed, self-given law. Such
an assimilation of morality in our own existence is,
however, impossible unless a growth in the inward
parts beyond the small self takes place, and unless
morality casts asunder the notion of a coercion. An
“ ought ” which we ourselves help to found must carry
in itself a will—perhaps a will lying far behind the
passing moment; and such an “ought” must, too,
labour for the emancipation and the expression of life.
As every energetic Nay hid in itself a Yea, so is
morality in the denial of the old at the same time an
affirmation of the new; in its onward march on this
positive path morality grows to a self-affirmation, and
wins a portion in all of an inward and abiding affection
of a strong and joyous kind.

The testimony of experience corroborates this with
a clear voice. It refutes from its very foundation that
which perceives only an abandonment and denial, a
diminution and depression of existence, in moral
activity ; and denies as well that which bewails the


128 FUNDAMENTAL BASIS OF UNIVERSAL RELIGION


creative evil of human activity. The denial was not
at all of a definite moral kind when it proceeded
out of an unwilling and coercive frame of mind ; for
love and joy failed it, and consequently it had in an
inward manner no value. Humanity, indeed, in its
energetic moral movement stands in no way dependent
on the perception of limits and pressure, and it does
not feel itself timid and humble, but experiences and
perceives a raising of its own nature in all its struggles
and sorrows. Thrown back, as it were, upon the
primal source of its own energy, it could feel itself
secure in the midst of monstrous doubt, rich in the
midst of external poverty, a free lord of things though
surrounded by powerful oppression ; and in its seem-
ing setting and even collapse it is able to herald the
dawn of a new spirit, a new life, and a new world.

How, in the memory of humanity, stand the men
whom we most have to thank for the development of
the ideal world of morals, and in what did they find
the kernel of their work—men such as Plato, the
Stoics, Luther, Kant, and Fichte? Were they small,
nervous, depressed natures, or were they rather free
and energetic natures—heroes of the spirit? Brutal
men of power they were certainly not, for their
freedom carried in itself a shrinkage of the mere self,
and it was clear to them beyond any doubt that there
was no affirmation of a spiritual kind without a denial
of their bare natural existence.

Morality could become a power and reality in
the common life only through such an energy of
affirmation. And it has become that in spite of all
the contradictions of daily life and in spite of all
the scorn of opponents. However much morality


PROGRESSIVE AUTONOMY OF SPIRITUAL LIFE 129


remains usually in the background, it needs only
greater stimulus, compulsion, and emotion, to break
forth with rapturous energy as an independent force,
and consequently to unlock through its own energy a
new nature to man, and to offer him a fixed support
and a reliable succour. All such blossoming epochs
invariably blew over humanity a renewal of the
religious life; and then the nothingness of all mere
natural and social existence was perceived with
painful perspicuity as the deep abyss in which all
human life and effort became fully visible. But even
in the denial of all customary help, and, indeed, in
the submersion of the whole existing world, the
conviction of the indestructibility of our inmost
nature unfolds itself with overwhelming energy,
and out of the collapse of all the customary hunt
after happiness there dawns the hope and even the
certainty of a newer, more definite, and purer bliss.
Particular nations have shown themselves capable
of a deepening and transforming power in kindred
directions when their very independence was in
danger, and when they had to fight for their exist-
ence or non-existence. Also, the movement and the
renewal reached into the smaller circle of private
life; here, indeed, where all external lustre and
renown of historical acts fail, where all the fortified
energy of society fails, the greatest heroism may yet
develop, full of ardent love and joyous self-denial.
Thus are the pessimists and sceptics wrong through-
out when they assert that the matter is done with
and ended in the downfall of the sham appearances
in which daily life and the common impulses had
wrapped themselves, For behind the Sian gee


130 FUNDAMENTAL BASIS OF UNIVERSAL RELIGION


rules that thought lies a further standard; behind
that mechanism of life lies a depth which holds its
own against all the stir and strife of the small and
common on the highways of human life. Without
this activity of its present moment of consciousness,
human existence must fall to pieces. All energetic
activity for humanity relies upon this depth, and
comprehends a belief in the possibility of an inward
renewal. The same may be said of all great practical,
political, social, and educational manifestations.
These alone give man an inexhaustible possession
which he seizes in all his dire need. All culture which
flings away this depth through deprecation of mor-
ality robs itself of indispensable motive-powers, and
becomes in the whole of its existence, in spite of its
otherwise brilliant performances, shallow and hollow ;
it threatens to fall into decay unless it possesses that
which gives salt to life and which turns the will from
mere natural impulse.

Morality is thus in its seeming weakness a mighty
power, and is in its seeming strangeness the most
original energy of our life. When, however, that
which otherwise stands outside us is taken into the
will, when a new order of things—an infinity—drives
the man from within so that nevermore does he seem
to stand alone, but seems as if carried by a majestic
flood of life, then clearly results a deliverance from
the small self, and a cosmic life, a superhuman life,
reveals itself actively in the form of immediacy.

Morality is in all this not a particular province of a
man’s own but the testimony of a new life out of the
Whole, out of Infinity. As clear as daylight the
fact stands in front of us that the spiritual activity


PROGRESSIVE AUTONOMY OF SPIRITUAL LIFE 131


knows no bounds, that it tolerates no external
hindrance, and that it perceives all which it as yet
has not made its own as a resistance and a reproach.
An all-inclusive life, in this manner, dawns in man,
and at the same time morality shows that nowhere
is he more himself than within his moral province.
Must not this kind of thing then alter fundamentally
all the prior views of man ?

(8) The Inward Antithesis overcome.—We have
already observed the dawning of an infinite life in
man as well as his striving liberating him from the
small self and the mere ordinary level of humanity.
But a doubt can arise, whether this change is energetic
enough to reach the root of life; whether the cleft
previously referred to between subject and object,
between the individual standpoint and its opposite,
does not confine man within the mere surface-level
of things, and does not hold him fast to a mere
subjective mood and stimulation. Our next concern
and question will be to see whether this cleavage can
somehow be bridged, and whether the life can dis-
engage itself from the destructive antithesis.

The treatment of this question can easily fall into
a false path when it misconstrues that such an anti-
thesis is not endowed by nature, but has originated
in the course of history. The sensuous beginnings
of life allow the consciousness and its object to flow
in perfect unison, the psychical impressions swim on
the current of the environment, and the human
sphere has not yet opposed individual and society to
one another. But the movement of thought grows
and works everywhere towards differentiation and
perspicuity ; in such work the subject begins to


132 FUNDAMENTAL BASIS OF UNIVERSAL RELIGION


realise itself, and at the same time acquires greater
rigour and independence ; and, consequently, the life
finds itself more and more posited between an anti-
thesis, and through this is driven further out of its
previous unity. But the liberation of the object from
the immediacy of sensation is in no way its complete
banishment out of life ; indeed, it remains present in
-a freer kind of way, for we saw a counter-movement
originate in which the very same thing that is pressed
back on the one side is again appropriated on the
other side. How could thought itself without such
an adherence and a reapproach of the object mark its
own frontier over against the mere presentations ?
How could the idea raise itself above the impressions
of sensation, the judgment above mere association of
ideas, and the causal nexus above the mechanism of
presentations, if they were not able to transplant
themselves in the very midst of the facts, to develop
their duration, and to maintain their necessity in a
region beyond the mere impressions of sensation ?
The Spiritual Life thus never falls entirely on the
external side, so that another side presents itself
and occupies our attention because it belongs to our
existence and is encompassed by our life.

Now, however, this life develops a further move-
ment which brings both sides together into closer
contact, which leads the two to some kind of union,
and thus enables the one to grow by means of the
other. It is the gravitation of the object from the
region of work or mere external activity which
translates the outward into an inward. Such inward-
ness alone—such acceptation of the external into the
particular life—makes it conceivable how work can


PROGRESSIVE AUTONOMY OF SPIRITUAL LIFE 133


become one’s own aim, how we can love it and bring
to it sacrifice, and how we are able to drown all our
sorrows and needs in the joy which lies beyond them.
The task is laid upon us mainly through an external
necessity, and often in the initial stages it is dis-
covered as a painful burden. But when the task
enables us to fasten it to an inward staple, when
it is able to become a thing of value for us, and
when out of the obligation freedom and joy burst
forth, then the seeming stranger proves itself clearly
enough to be a piece of our very life: we affirm
and uplift ourselves whilst we serve the necessity
of the facts.

The most varied provinces of life point this out
with equal clearness ; each province, however, shows
it in its own special way. That there is no definite
knowledge without a relationship with the nature and
necessity of the object has been already often noticed
and needs no further explanation; but in Art it is
shown even clearer how a Life-process of a spiritual
kind encircles both inward and outward sides, and
enables them to sail together; and how, out of the
contact, an inner development issues. On its highest
summits, as in the life-work of a Goethe, Art is
neither a mere reception and copy of an external
world surrounding us nor is it a mere setting
of a ready-made inner life, but both inward and
outward are raised into a corporate region of life and
here in one another and through one another are
carried further. The inwardness gains a solid con-
figuration and a distinctive individuality in this
recasting mould; the object, however, could not
mean much to the Life-process had it not itself


134 FUNDAMENTAL BASIS OF UNIVERSAL RELIGION


received an inspiration from within, and had it not been
able to communicate with this. All this is removed
as far as possible from a vague parallel flow of both
sides, for only where the initial chaos is overcome and
a clear division has resulted can Art begin its work,
for it finds itself first of all facing an opposite, and has
to labour to penetrate beneath the surface-content of
both sides. But this labour overcomes the opposite
and holds it fast ; and while it does this, if on the
lower level the one might suppress the other, yet on
the heights a reciprocal relationship is reached ; the
opposing forces of a subjective and an objective, of
an idealistic and a realistic division, yield to a treat-
ment which may be designated as the sovereign
treatment in so far as here the Life-process is freed
from all dependence on the “hither and thither”
of things, and is raised to the level of a full
self-reliance.

The creations of Goethe are admired on account of
their objective quality, but this objectivity signifies in
no way a slavish adherence to an external existing
material, but in this very material the spirit of man
proves its superiority, for he posited the material within
the ground of the inner life and filled it with life
anew. ‘Through such a course alone can the material
reveal its own nature and provide for the whole of life.
This is the wondrous and further development: the
object, even in its assimilation by the subject, does not
lose its own independence and characteristic features,
but through this assimilation develops those features.
Thus the consciousness itself grows by means of the
object, and the whole of life wins, in being raised
above the opposite of mere empty sentimentalism


PROGRESSIVE AUTONOMY OF SPIRITUAL LIFE 135


and dead matter, an objective and even an essential
character. We can now say:
*‘ Nothing is within alone,
Nothing is without alone,
For what’s inward is, too, outward,
And what’s outward is, too, inward.”

The double-sidedness and inward reciprocity of life
appear in another colour through the relationship
of man with man and through the superstructure of
political and social connections. Out of the surface-
content there could never issue an inward communion
and interchange of life without the ability of man to
transpose himself into the soul of another, to think
and feel with that other, for through this there is
granted him an independence and a power to move
within suitable bounds. Without such an inward
pressure of another upon the individual, there is no
good-will, no sympathy, no definite compassion and
no reciprocal judgment concerning right and obliga-
tion. The idea of right shows with special clearness
our ability to distinguish that “ other” from ourselves,
to transpose ourselves upon his standard, and to think
and measure out of his standard ; thus the “ beyond”
is simultaneously a “ here and now,” and the separation
is not done away with, but the life is raised above it.
Only by such an exit from one’s ordinary sphere
can a conjoint order of human relationships become
possible—an order which strives after a kingdom of
righteousness.

Encompassing all these individual provinces, activity
accomplishes an inner scale of values for the individual
as well as for the whole of humanity. If all which
we take up in our work draws incomparably nearer


136 FUNDAMENTAL BASIS OF UNIVERSAL RELIGION


to us and becomes a piece of our life, then the whole
of such activity itself may form a self-reliant province
and become what we designate as our “calling”; a
piece of reality is thus appropriated inwardly by us;
this grants a stability to life in itself and against itself
as well as a superiority over whim and caprice. In
fact, it is a consciousness of unassailable worth which
is secure within its inward citadel in spite of the
immensity of the alien and inconceivable without.
In a similar manner, humanity itself prepares a pro-
vince and a world of action progressively out of an
alien world. What appertains to this world of action
may include, indeed, many problems, but it signifies
undoubtedly an actuality; it constructs a starting-
point for all further labour; it holds men and things
fast together, and binds single periods of time into
a continuous chain; it resists a dissolution into the
small and egotistic, and resists, too, the constant
change of that current which flows on the surface of
time ; it stands against all arbitrary action concerning
the contour of things ; and it feels bound to come to
an understanding with what is able to produce effects
in the depth and duration of things. In all such
expansion the man discovers his real self through his
own soul, and finds that he is incomparably more in
himself than he could possibly be through the cultiva-
tion of his mere natural self; he becomes far more his
own true self than he had become when under the
dominion of natural impulses. Indeed, the man is
now more, and comprehends his life as more than is
revealed by the first glance of things ; consequently,
effective transformations of this glance become urgent.

Activity alone gives man a secure feeling of


PROGRESSIVE AUTONOMY OF SPIRITUAL LIFE 137


reality ; without activity life threatens to vanish as
a shadow and a dream. Activity grants life such a
consolidation through the progress of work as a
superior and upholding force. Such a progress binds
activity and work. The “becoming” of such a work
is a highly characteristic transaction; even in the
hurried design of it there originates a kernel, an idea,
a governing centre, just as has happened in the
growth of the physical universe and in the formation
of organic life. The kernel shoots up more and more
around the centre, the rough outline grows and shapes
itself, it stands before our thought as a self-reliant
essence which strives to pass from the region of
quasi-existence to that of a complete reality; and
through such movement it becomes a driving and
judging force within the life. The initial insecurity
is then overcome, the multiplicity of energies find
their way back towards the centre, mutually form
their boundaries and determine themselves in turns;
the different possibilities which, at first, treat one
another peaceably are now urged to a decision, and
life as a whole is driven into a definite arena. The
work develops an experience by itself, and it is only
when the two sides of work and conscious activity
are related to one another in an encompassing
and fruitful manner that a definite experience
originates over against a bare empiricism. Also, the
work does not require that .the truth should be
corroborated through external proofs; the corrobora-
tion is in the man’s own triumphant effort, in his own
deduction, and in the active ascent of his life. In
all this there is present a withdrawal from self and
a return to self, and, at the same time, there is an


138 FUNDAMENTAL BASIS OF UNIVERSAL RELIGION


inward crystallisation of a reality which is durable
within one’s own province. Such concentration and
crystallisation of life raise the man above all the
groping and lingering of mere mental reflection, and
make him yield to a power which may be termed
the necessity of the fact, and which without question
brings forth a further development of life.

But action cannot accomplish so much as all this
so long as it lies sundered and isolated merely by the
side of other actions. But the more it reaches a
spiritual character, the more it outgrows that isola-
tion until it becomes the expression of a universal
characteristic, and a piece of an all-embracing aggre-
gate action. Or, is not every work of art and of
thought in its individuality a confession at the same
time of the Whole, and is there not in it, in spite of
external limits, a conception of the Infinite? And
is there not in the struggle for the right of this
Infinite an essential truth and a universal Weltan-
schauung contended for? Thus in definite spiritual
activity all individual actions are spanned by an
aggregate living activity, and it is through reaching
such, and in no other way that life can gain an inner
unity and a solidity—gain the character of a definite
reality. Such a reality can never fall on us from
without ; it is obtained through a great struggle in
the welding-heat of subject and object which results
through a turn towards activism. This welding-
process, however, takes place not somewhere between
the inner and the outer world, but purely in an inner
world which has taken up into itself the antithesis.
It is out of the Spiritual Life alone that there issues
a reality for man.


PROGRESSIVE AUTONOMY OF SPIRITUAL LIFE 139


Through such inwardness of the activity—especially
of the encompassing life-activity—there is also present
a formation of the spiritual nature of man. When
labouring along with this, he labours on the heights of
his own nature and obtains in the struggle a spiritual
individuality. It is this, which appears from one
point of view as the construction of a new world,
appears at the same time as a construction of his own
nature—a lawful work against his own lower self.
The mere expansion of activity is not of a true
nature unless the man struggles with his own self
and thereby wins the energy and the fulcrum of self-
maintenance. But, on the other hand, the inward-
ness of his characteristic nature does not reach this
through brooding and sorrowing, but only through a
stepping out of his own subjectivity, through a virile
wrestling with things, and through a clarification and
a further development of all things on the path of
their greatest resistance. Thus we seek ourselves,
but we find ourselves only in the plasticity of things
and in the construction of a new world. So that,
after all, we are within ourselves although we seemed
to have stepped outside ourselves ; and in the struggle
we have won a true and larger province of life. All
this shows clearly enough that a bridging of the cleft
reaches down to the deepest ground of life; and
through a recognition of this we find ourselves
undoubtedly engaged in the constructive creation of
our own spiritual individuality.

When we base our individual work upon such
a foundation of aggregate work and of a spiritual
individuality, it appears evident that the work of
great souls retains a worth when all the surface-


140 FUNDAMENTAL BASIS OF UNIVERSAL RELIGION


appearances and the incessant leakage of time pass
away. It is clear, too, that those souls handled the
transitory nature of the appearance of things with
great indifference. Goethe made such a confession
of himself: “I have ever viewed all my work and
accomplishments as no more than mere symbols ; and
in my deepest experience it seemed to me pretty
much the same whether I made pots or pans.”

How spiritual individuality develops into a life-
work, and how it steps forth and grows alongside
such life-work, has been shown by the leading minds
with illuminating perspicuity. Such a work as
that of Kant did not possess its most characteristic
features and its greatness from the beginning as a
mere natural product. Such a work acquired its
originality only after a long and toilsome quest
through which finally the striving burst out into
blossom and fruit. In all movement he held before
himself a fixed goal, and in all multiplicity a govern-
ing unity. Such a method led the energies to their
highest tension, dispersed all that was alien and
irresolute, and gave to the individual for the first
time his distinctive stamp. Thus the characteristics
of the Whole can participate in the smallest elements
and fashion each and all according to the pattern of
this Whole..:

If this work of the spiritual “becoming” of man
signifies so much, the decision concerning the success
or the ill-success of the enterprise lies above all else
in this: whether the ascent to such a levél is accom-
plished or not. The inner course of life as well as
the nature of the final convictions are determined
throughout by nothing more than by the manner


“PROGRESSIVE AUTONOMY OF SPIRITUAL LIFE 141


in which this ascent takes place— whether such
ascent is easy or difficult, whether it takes place
through the restful development of natural construc-
tion or through powerful feeling and renewal. In-
deed, if the decision failed here, life will appear soon
as an offering of fate, later as a work of free activity,
later still as filled with the harmony of existence, and
finally as moved by its own contradictions.

What is true of the work of the individual is not
less true of the work of the race. ‘To a participation
in work many are called; to the furtherance of
definite culture few are chosen. It is only spiritual
individuality bent on its work of life which gives
culture an inward connection, a full self-reliance, and
a living soul; and such spiritual individuality alone
is able to span all the various provinces and to work
with a rousing and durable energy upon the whole
of life.

What differentiates people differentiates also
epochs. Great are only those times which fasten
their strivings to an undivided task in which man is
able to take part with his whole nature; where this
does not happen, all fulness of work, all exertion and
movement of the individual and of the masses, pro-
duce neither stability of character nor joyousness of
disposition ; and, too, the advance of petty-human
interests is not kept sufficiently at bay, so that the
life will fluctuate aimlessly between a soulless per-
formance and an empty frame of mind. It is only
with a life-encompassing work that the otherwise
fleeting and unreal time obtains the consciousness of
an immanent eternity and of unassailable worth.

Finally, there proceeds through the whole striving


142 FUNDAMENTAL BASIS OF UNIVERSAL RELIGION


of humanity the desire to grasp the whole infinity of
existence in one characteristic reality, and to trans-
form existence into a totality of production, and, at the
same time, to gain for the self a characteristic spiritual
mode of life. All definite culture is also intrinsically
a striving of humanity after an inner unity of its own
life and nature; for if the striving remains less than
this, culture remains something, in spite of its
feverish industry, which merely hangs on us exter-
nally, and which finally becomes quite indifferent
to the main spiritual problems of life. But if the
relation of culture is found in close contact with
the characteristic mode and self-maintenance of life,
the life is raised securely above all natural and civic
existence, for it has won a new world within itself.

There arises, therefore, in activity and production
a rich reality; it arises, too, in problems and
struggles. The Life-process reaches within itself an
altitude above its prior hindrances, and bestows upon
man, so far as he participates in it, an existence on
the heights, out of which, as out of a solid kernel,
there issues a counter-effect to the natural disinte-
gration of things. This power has shown itself to
belong to an upward level of life, but it signifies not
as yet the final issue of life.

(y) The Winning of a Universal Self-—Work
forms, as a consummation of activity, the summit of
life as well as the goal of effort; it remains the axis
on which all further development has to turn. But
with all its accomplishments it is not yet the final
aim. ‘That which renders work great signifies at the
same time its limits, and the greatness itself seems
unreachable without the aid of energies which the


PROGRESSIVE AUTONOMY OF SPIRITUAL LIFE 143


work far more presupposes than produces. In par-
ticular, the Spiritual Life demands more unity, more
freedom, more soul than the work is able of itself to
produce.

(1) In work the inward energy and the external
object reach a point of contact and a reciprocal
impregnation. But such a bond of union within the
consciousness is at the same time a switching off of
the external ; nowhere more than here holds valid the
word that all close determination is also a nega-
tion (omnis determinatio negatio). Also, work, as
an embodiment of a general conviction and as a
Weltanschauung, retains a specific and abstract char-
acter ; the transference of life into work and effort is
thence a differentiation which, if made final, becomes
dangerous. The complete immersion of man in the
sea of work resigns him inevitably to a narrowness
and easily to an egoism; also the spiritual individu-
ality contains a lofty self-existence which quickly and
pointedly rejects and excludes the claims of the mere
external. That the work that binds at the same time
disunites is clearly shown in the union of men as
labour-groups; here originates a jealousy of vocation,
and a passion of class-struggle which in a spirit of the
wildest hatred against its opponents believes itself
justified in the advocacy of common interests. And
is the situation otherwise when nations fight for the
increase of their products and for world-dominion ?

Such disunion and split reach beyond the individual
mind into the whole mode of thought. The speciality
of work prevents us from seeing both aspects of
its characteristics ; it cannot develop certain energies
without coercing others; work thus prepares for in-


144 FUNDAMENTAL BASIS OF UNIVERSAL RELIGION


dividuals, nations, and times, in their own life-circle, a
special province and a special kind of existence, and
yet we can not and may not renounce the truth that
we need co-operation in a sphere of life common to
all, need exchange in our work, and need to think of
and to live for one another. Indeed, humanity as a
whole is not able to consider the need of winning
a spiritual individuality for the highest aspiration
necessary unless it resigns itself to the claims of a
universal truth.

(2) The strengthening and the calm of life are a
further product of work. But without the counter-
effect of liberating energies this very quality resigns
itself into a numb fixture and an intolerable bondage ;
the fluctuation which inheres in work threatens to
overwhelm and to suppress man. Does not work
hold such fluctuation? Work needs for its success
not only external conditions and favourable surround-
ings, but far more an inward ability which does not
place our will under its heel, and which makes work
devolve upon us as a good and a gift. These guests,
however, decide concerning the result of our efforts
and the happiness and worth of life in so far as they
rise into work and activity. So much hardness, so
much injury and even cruelty, are not discovered in
connection with work so long as the happy results
and the victorious achievements are kept before our
eyes. But a pure result is seldom enough to be
found, and amongst the favoured minds scarcely one
was truly great who did not discover a wide cleft
between wish and will, and who had not far more to
say than was permitted him. Now, is this surplus
presented to such minds to be treated as an indifferent


PROGRESSIVE AUTONOMY OF SPIRITUAL LIFE 145


and worthless thing? And are all those wide and
predominant provinces of life, which are lost by
peoples and times, to be denied of their rich and far-
reaching effects? We resist such an assumption and
greet joyously that parable of Jesus of the talents,
that there rises, beyond all the distinctions of the men
and beyond the whole field of their several activities,
that which is located in the decision and character of
each individual. But does not this itself desire a new
life? And how is such a life grounded? How does
it rationally justify itself ?

(3) In the main, the entanglements originate out
of the relationship of work with the soul. The
work to us was no external performance; it proved
its presence and its greatness within the soul through
the fact which culminated in freeing the man from
all bare neutrality and subjectivity; it was found
to be something resting in its own essence, something
moved to further development by its characteristic
energies. Work could accomplish such a feat only
in so far as it drew into itself the very life of the
soul, and in so far as this life set forth characteristically
a reflected light from itself. But this emancipation
of work has also a reverse side. The emancipation
can become numb and exclusive; the connection
relaxes and parts asunder from the whole of the
soul; the work tears the self-sovereignty within itself,
and through this the life does not only move in a track
too narrow for itself, but also sacrifices its freedom
to a mechanism of its own acts; and finally its specific
spiritual character is turned into an impervious
mechanism. Whilst work itself tears away so much


from man and turns round as master upon the
10


146 FUNDAMENTAL BASIS OF UNIVERSAL RELIGION


originator, life transforms itself into a soulless
mechanism in spite of all the straining of energy ;
the character retreats before the activity of work ;
the work overpowers the man and finally makes him
its slave. So it happened where the whole Spiritual
Life was transformed through a logical process into
a particular movement of thought-process; so it
happens in a more evident and painful manner still
where technical work with its incessant headway
captivates all thought and judgment; and so it
happens everywhere where man is held as a mere
tool for the progress of culture, and where the waves
of the most extensive movements carry and drive
him along without the participation of any power of
his own.

Work, without a doubt, though it withdraws itself
from the life of the soul, is again drawn back to the
whole of the soul, is proved, valued, and enlivened ;
it is only through a constant return-movement to
its own origin and through a continuous overcoming
by the force of a spirituality superior to itself that
it can unify the spiritual character and serve as the
inward growth of life. If the words are true that
man is more than his work, then the whole of
humanity is more than the production of work;
it must be no less than the creation of a culture and
spiritual individuality.

Thus through a kind of necessity there arises a
desire after a further development of life beyond the
level of work—after a life which returns from its
immersion in work to itself, which abides in itself,
which holds fast the work and also allows a self
superior to it to unfold. Does such a desire corre-


PROGRESSIVE AUTONOMY OF SPIRITUAL LIFE 147


spond with any kind of reality within our experience ?
We answer in the affirmative; for above the levels
of work, Justice, culture, and mental individuality,
the movement mounts upward to a level of creative-
ness and of love, of a spiritual personality and a pure
immanent existence. Religion and Art especially
appropriate the conception of this creativeness as a
confession ; the former, in order to exclude all union
of the Divine effect with an alien material and dark
fate; the latter, in order to explain its own work
as a donum of free imagination and as a proof of
the originality of the artist. Both could not appro-
priate the conception were it not rooted in the whole
of life, and were there not mainly a deepening possible
in the fact that work previously had ruled and bound
life, and now is overcome by life itself. This happens,
however, through a transformation into the free
development and reflection of the Spiritual Life.
Herewith life outgrows the heaviness and numbness
which its prior development adhered to; now all
dark residuum vanishes—the alien becomes a gover-
nor and the outward becomes an inward. On such
elevation above the sphere of work and through a
liberation from all the coercion of the numb “ given,”
life becomes a complete immanent existence, a definite
self-life, and a transformation to the heights; and
it is in this that all lies which carries an uplifting
energy and good cheer in itself. ‘This creativeness
strikes its roots into the soil of all the particular
fields which contribute to the growth of the Spiritual
Life as well as into those of science—a science which
aimed previously to relate itself inflexibly in an
opposite direction. Science must abandon its highest


148 FUNDAMENTAL BASIS OF UNIVERSAL RELIGION


aim — Knowing — if it renounces this creativeness.
For without such a creativeness the ascent from mere
awareness to a true discernment is impossible. Definite
discernment is never found through that which is
alien to us, but always through that which is original
in us; definite discernment is always a discovery of
our own life, a finding of ourselves in that which at
first was alien. How could this be possible except
on the explanation that an advance of life has taken
place, and has reached the level where our limita-
tion becomes a personal testimony, and an activity
of the self is discovered? How far and under what
conditions man is able to accomplish this, is a question
by itself, but he could never strive towards such a
height were he entirely chained to a lower level.

The higher levels of life attain a greater clearness
in the region of character; for to the forward-move-
ment from work to creativeness there corresponds
here the movement from justice to love. ‘Though
this conception of love has divergent levels, and
though grievously the daily life weaves it in the most
heterogeneous ways, yet in the midst of all the tangle
definite love asserts itself as a turn of life which is
both indisputable and a great mystery. Love in
this sense brings not only the particular elements into
secure relationship and directs life from point to point
in its progress, but it also raises the relationship out
of its isolation and kindles a new corporate life in
which the singularity does not vanish but is raised and
transformed beyond its initial position. That which
does not create something new and better out of man
is not definite love. With love the existence of
another obtains a full inward present moment in the


PROGRESSIVE AUTONOMY OF SPIRITUAL LIFE 149


soul, and becomes immanently a piece of the very
life. All elevation, however, results through a willing
self-denial and sacrifice. ‘‘ The first motive in love is
that I shall be no individual person for myself, and
that if I were such, I should feel myself defective and
incomplete. The second motive is that I win myself
in another person, that I value in her what she in
turn finds in me. Love is consequently a most pain-
ful contradiction which the understanding cannot
untie, and in it there is nothing harder than that this
exactness of consciousness is negated and which still
has to be affirmed. Love is both the affirmation and
the solution of the contradiction: as solution it is
moral harmony ” (Hegel).

This occurs in the first place in the realm of
relationship of individual with individual, but in such
a construction a cosmic phenomenon reveals itself, for
through the development of the inner connections
over against the numb co-existence of bare nature, a
new grade of life appears. In addition to this, love
disengages itself from the shrinkage upon an_indi-
vidual, and welds together whole nations—the whole
of humanity ; everywhere it becomes a product of the
whole life, a product that not only brings existing
elements to a level of reciprocity, but which also re-
news the whole existence of man with creative energy
and with a transforming flow of life. It is trust in
such creative energy of love that makes it possible
to penetrate clearly through the existing situation of
humanity, and yet enables us to hold fast to cheerful
work for humanity. There can be nothing held out
for man in the painful entanglements of his own soul
and his seeming abiding helplessness when face to


150 FUNDAMENTAL BASIS OF UNIVERSAL RELIGION


face with the problem of his own being but what
religion offers as a hope upon an Infinite Love, which
unreservedly awakens a new life in him and lifts him
beyond the range of conflict.

What, however, drives forward such rich develop-
ments in special directions must embrace itself into
a Whole of a new form of life; the longing after
such appears in the ardour and tenacity wherewith
the nineteenth century as well as the present revolve
around the conception of personality.

Since Leibniz each of the great thinkers has given
us something original, but they all sought for a new
and all-comprehensive summit of life. The meaning
of our view, however, needs a further development,
because first of all we have not shown that man has
ascended to the level of spiritual individuality. In
the midst of all his most brilliant performances such
a level does not surround him altogether; he can
cast a glimpse at it from below; he can posit it in
the life of other individuals and through this view it
in greater completeness. ‘This he is compelled to do
in order to become superior to the accidental and
problematic in his own life, and in order to be able to
eliminate the indefinite from his nature and to energise
the definite. ‘Through this the life desires a standard
where it can survey the different levels and transform
all the content into his own possession, and where
it can focus Infinity and possess an immanent self.
Life here remains occupied in itself although it
appears as turning to the external; here is the level
of mere achievement overcome, and the characteristic
elevation of life forms the governing aim of all toil.
This corresponds to the Christian conviction of the


PROGRESSIVE AUTONOMY OF SPIRITUAL LIFE 151


infinite value of man in his pure inwardness—a
conviction “that for the riches of the whole world
not one individual soul can be purchased ” (Luther).
How could such an estimate be justified did there not
arise in the depth of the soul a new manner of life,
and did there not here become visible that which forms
the inmost kernel of entire reality ? Since the matter
is usually conceived as a recommendation of a mere
subjective and inactive sentimentality withdrawn from
the great world into a private nook, it has no suf-
ficient basis, and indeed, threatens to end in empty
words and phrases. The above estimate of Luther is
justified only if a new stage of reality manifests itself
in the depth of the soul; and this can never happen
out of the energy of any one individual point in life,
but can only happen through the impact of Infinite
Life with Infinite Life, and through the formation at
this spot of a point of intersection and concentration
of such life. Goethe seems to refer to the matter
from a similar point of view in those noteworthy
words of his: “God meets always Himself; God
in man meets again God in man. Hence there is
no cause to esteem ourselves lightly in comparison
with the Greatest.”

The matter, then, does not resolve itself into a re-
ference of life to one special point and a subjection
of it to that point’s particularity, but consists in the
immense task of bringing life to its own depth and
giving it a support within itself. Reality can become
our own life only if our activity transforms itself into
a self-activity, if it brings to expression a living self;
and this can happen only when the encompassing unity
remains no mere point of relation, but when, through


152 FUNDAMENTAL BASIS OF UNIVERSAL RELIGION


the strenuous elaboration of a thorough-going and
durable life within it, it wins a substance and a nature
which affects all the remaining life. Within such a
course life finds its own; without it, it misses its own.
Only out of such alternate separation and reunion,
out of such a scale of values and reference to the Whole,
arises the question concerning a content for the life ;
it is only when the encompassing Whole overcomes
the scattered manifold and appropriates it by a gradual
and thorough reconstruction that there arises a reality
resting within its own essence.

Whether such a life may be called a personal life
may be disputed. In any case, the ruling unity lies
not by the side of but within the life, and through the
unfolding of such a unity life deepens and expands ;
such deepest life can be in single points only because it
was previously and is now in the Whole. In all this
the situation is what it is, not through severance but
through something entirely the contrary. It has come
about through the formation of the most inward
connections with things—indeed, through a connec-
tion with Infinity—although not without an energetic
penetration and far-reaching transformation of them.
The language used by great thinkers points in the
same direction. Ordinary parlance, on the contrary,
connects too much with this conception of a deepest
unity and life the notions of seclusion and of opposi-
tion, and degrades too often this conception to a
designation of a mere natural force, for us to be able
to advance in our investigation without continuous
reservations against these several popular views.
Hence it may be better for us to speak of auto-
nomous life and of autonomies. Both expressions


PROGRESSIVE AUTONOMY OF SPIRITUAL LIFE 153


become pretty indifferent when the facts of life stare
us in the face with sufficient clearness. ‘To us there
lies before all else the fact that in the Spiritual Life
itself a movement towards the growth of a nucleus
and towards a transformation into a self-life is wide-
awake and on its course; and through such a turn of
the Life-process a world of inwardness dawns, which
signifies something quite other than the shadowy
inwardness of the mere subject himself.
Corresponding to such gradations of autonomous
life, we find in the most important work the passing
out of the spiritual movement beyond the realm of
culture. Necessary as culture is, the main standard
for the final convictions of life is not in it but above
it. If culture were the highest aim of man, he him-
self would be a mere tool of this achievement; the
culture, however, which is not clasped and vivified by
a life superior to its own could not contain any meaning
and must, without such a completion, sink more and
more into a lifeless mechanism. Culture is a contest
of the Spiritual Life with an opposite and seeming
hostile world and not an accumulation of accomplish-
ments ; it comes to its own truth only when it flows
into the current of a Spiritual Life of the self.
Laborious enough it is on the ground of human
history to wring such a superiority out of mere culture.
It is wrung first and foremost in the centuries when
antiquity clashed with Christianity—in a time when
an old culture sank and a new one had not yet arisen.
In such a situation life would have fallen into empti-
ness had it not found a world of its own as well as a
full security in the concern with itself, in the diving
into itself. This becomes clearly evident upon the


154 FUNDAMENTAL BASIS OF UNIVERSAL RELIGION


Grecian side in Plotinus, and upon the Christian side
in Augustine. Both are agreed in the need of carry-
ing the work of culture beyond itself, and of placing
it on a point where it revolves around the apprehension
of eternal truth and the development of the configura-
tion of an all-inclusive superior life within itself alone.
In these connections the thought dawns that the
nature of reason is not a mere piece of the universe,
but encases within itself the whole of the universe—
is a microcosmus. ‘ We are each and all a spiritual
universe ” (Plotinus). Doubtless those times remained
too much in a superior world of withdrawal and
solitude; they would not return to the work of the
world and employ the life that had been won. So
that a sudden reaction was bound to come. But the
gain of a pure immanent existence of the Spiritual
Life as a cosmic life, and its inward superiority to all
mere culture remained intact. There struck, too,
along with such a gain, an aim and a standard to which
all that shall henceforth satisfy the spiritual nature of
man shall have to correspond. This appears valid
enough to-day and forbids the finality of the con-
clusions of culture.

This adjusted standard and this comprehensive
coming-to-itself of life are the armour for us in the
quest after aims more than possessions, problems
more than achievements; but this conclusion is at
the same time the carrier and the indispensable pre-
supposition of the earlier standards. We saw effort
itself loosened from the natural self, and through
such a liberation developing new energies and tracing
out new aims. Whence should these energies come,
how should the new aims justify themselves if a


PROGRESSIVE AUTONOMY OF SPIRITUAL LIFE 155


characteristic existence did not arise in the Spiritual
Life, if a new self did not come into birth which
develops and asserts itself in the movements of life ?
The upward march of life to a true and real level
overcame the cleavage between subject and object.
Is such a conquest conceivable unless the life returns
from the province of work to itself, and unless it
transforms its achievements into a raising of the self ?
That we in spiritual work develop our own inmost
nature and struggle for our true self is testified at
a glance. Why do we, for example, allow the cur-
rent of experience to mount into our presentations ?
Why not allow these presentations to pass over us
calmly? Why do we practise self-defence and
seek to overpower these external impressions and
transform them into our own conceptions? Why
suffices it us not to float on the perpetual flux of
things? And why are we driven by an inward
necessity to follow the infinitude of the All into its
uttermost concealment? Such transformation and
expansion must belong, indeed, to the culmination of
our own particular nature, and its furtherance must
carry a movement of this very nature within itself.
Also, Art could never have become the mighty
power of life it is, and its form could not have been
transformed into an elevated power, had it not driven
man to his work—not merely to his subjectivity but
to the foundation of his being. That scientific and
artistic labours won such a height in the struggle for
the spiritual self only on certain points of the
summits does not alter the facts. What is reached
wholly in the long-run would not have been reached
at all without the conquest of points on the summits,


156 FUNDAMENTAL BASIS OF UNIVERSAL RELIGION


and had it not been that the great personalities had
taken the facts in that great sense, and had found the
salvation of their life in scaling the heights of truth.
Such an installation of the whole life alone has
founded the conquest of such heights and has tilled
the soil of daily work and the results of its ac-
complishments for the reception of this seed. The
work sinks rapidly into a lifeless mechanism when
it severs its connection with such creativeness and
barters its originality for bare diligence on the surface
of things.

All these movements, viewed from the ordinary
surface-existence of man, may appear as mere
possibilities. But they are possibilities not in the
sense of vague imaginations but of urgent tasks and
driving energies. ‘They could not work so powerfully
in us and make that existence which satisfied us
previously now insufficient for us, were they not
realities; were they not realities out of the deep
we should not have struggled with them for the
winning of a spiritual self, and at the same time, for
the meaning and content of our life.


2. Hpitome and Survey


(a) The Meaning of the Spiritual Life.—We have
already viewed the Spiritual Life developing its
characteristics in three grades. It grew out of its
isolation and dissipation, and simultaneously dis-
entangled itself from mere-human mechanism; in
the overcoming of the cleft between subject and
object it forged for itself a self-reliant and sovereign
character; in the comprehension of infinity for its


PROGRESSIVE AUTONOMY OF SPIRITUAL LIFE 157


own self, it gained in itself a fixed foundation, and at
the same time a superiority to the world around it,
and it became an autonomous life. All these aspects
work towards one another, side by side they support
and clarify one another, and bind themselves into a
connected totality. This picture is, however, far re-
moved from the ordinary conception of the Spiritual
Life. According to the ordinary conception the
Spiritual Life is conceived from its very beginning
as strewn piecemeal on solitary and separable points,
and it is only much later that any kind of connection
is brought about ; it appears, too, as an attribute and
activity of an existence lying entirely beyond itself,
and consequently finds itself hemmed within a given,
ready-made world, and busies itself in various ways
with such a world. Our consideration of the matter
has presented the subject in quite other light. Before
all else it appeared clear that the Spiritual Life
is only possible as an inward connection, and as a
life out of the Whole; it is a participation in this
Whole which invests the isolated points with a
spiritual character; never can its own world, to
which the Spiritual Life extends itself, originate
through mere external combinations. However, this
total-life did not originate from any dark existence,
but it engendered by itself centre-points and con-
centration-points; for all the conceptions of the
existence of its material arose within the life, and
through it received a full illumination. The Life-
process has not, therefore, to execute an achievement
from the outside: it found its problem in itself, in
the bringing forth of the culmination of its own
nature. This signifies an overcoming and an assimi-


158 FUNDAMENTAL BASIS OF UNIVERSAL RELIGION


lation of all that lay outside, and that seemed at first
alien and seemingly hostile. In such a movement
this or that thing within the province of a given
reality is not merely altered and bettered, but it is
obligatory to bring to clearness a Whole of reality.
This reality does not feel itself as one thing by the
side of another, but—with its direction towards the
self as the carrier of life—as the compact and com-
prehensive reality, as that which deserves the name
of reality in the truest sense, and which cannot
tolerate anything outside itself.

This Spiritual Life with its reality surrounds man
not as a mere environment of his; it attains in
him as a Whole an immediate present moment, and
becomes with its infinity his own life and nature.
Only such an inward abiding of the spiritual world
makes it conceivable that the spiritual tasks work
directly on man, not through the ravaging agents of
his particular interests, but through the fact that
individuals, in spite of all their differences, are able
to find an inner co-operation of activity, and to raise
themselves out of bare subjectivity to an independent
inner life and to a kingdom of inwardness. Through
the presence of such an immanence of the Whole the
rigid cleft which hitherto separated man from the
world is overcome; now in the individual points the
energy of the Whole can work and can build for
itself experiences of the Whole. Thus man gains in
himself different gradations of life. The Spiritual
Life is thus seen to be no mere contrivance of a purely
human kind, but the taking up of a difficult struggle
against such a human mode—an emancipation from
such a mode as an intolerable narrowness. This new


PROGRESSIVE AUTONOMY OF SPIRITUAL LIFE 159


world, however, should not rest satisfied with a
merely human raiment wrapped around itself, but
should contain its own truth, and through its trans-
portation into the Spiritual Life reach its own
characteristic nature. The Whole would have been
a great falsification had not infinity with its transla-
tion into spirituality obtained its original depth. It
appears similarly in the direction of spiritual activism.
A truth which shrinks and is valid only for the
individual is no definite truth at all, but a hybrid of
many colours. If all the investigation does not draw
the main motives along with it, how can the narrow-
ness of the circle of mere-human notions be broken
through, and a new world of thought valid for all be
opened out? For the value and the grandeur of the
Good, it is essential that all human interests should
be repelled, and man enabled by himself to rise above
himself.

It is urgent to come to this characteristic depth
through the Spiritual Life. In such a province the
individual’s own nature is not isolated, but is inter-
weaved inseparably with the whole of the All, and
turns to this source for its own life-content. Thus
there is no depth in the individual portions if they do
not exist in the Whole, if they are not able here to
unfold themselves; in each point a struggle for the
Whole takes place, and this brings the Whole into
activity.

Finally, it is to be borne in mind that the Spiritual
Life in man could never arise against the power of
nature if it were no more than a purely human thing.
Nature surrounds us as a boundless kingdom of
energies and laws; it surrounds us not merely from


160 FUNDAMENTAL BASIS OF UNIVERSAL RELIGION


without, but strikes deep into our own soul with a
thousand-fold incessant effects. How could the
Spiritual Life, which finds itself first in our aspiration,
in any manner enforce its way against all this did we
not stand upon inward connections, and had there
not worked in us over against that which is given in
the surrounding world the energy of a new kind of
world? Transformations in the Whole could only.
arise out of a Whole.

It is now evident that the movement to spirituality
cannot be considered as a work of any separate
individual faculties of the mere man, but that it is
a movement of the All, which certainly in our position
needs our co-operation, but which, at the same time,
takes us into itself and makes of us something quite
other than we were on the first view of things. The
universe itself now finds its own depth through such
a movement to spirituality ; from being a kingdom of
relations it becomes the kingdom of a definite reality.
The inward life, which is otherwise a mere appearance
of things, now gains a self-reliance, and develops
its own particular kingdom—an inner world. The
nearer qualities of this inner world do not allow
themselves to be known through general conceptions
such as existence-for-self, self-activity, etc.: these
give only the frame within which alone the mounting
experience of life is able to set forth its qualities.
For example, the Good and the Beautiful are
characteristic developments and revelations of life,
which possess an incomparable individuality and
actuality which are later discovered in them. So in
connection with the Spiritual Life, it constructs a
new ground upon which boundless avenues open out


PROGRESSIVE AUTONOMY OF SPIRITUAL LIFE 161


and a whole kingdom of new actualities becomes
accessible. Through this we become discoverers and
conquerors, but it is not into a strange but into our -
own world that we climb more and more.

Leibniz was of opinion that no nature could arise
in man without some kind of existence-for-self, and
consequently he sought to base all reality upon
living monads. Whether his theory, through such a
turn to the bare individual nature, is in itself correct,
may be doubted; but it cannot be doubted that
there is no definite reality unless the united total-life
forces its way through, and holds together, all the
manifold. Without a foundation-stone all the uni-
verse becomes a mere occurrence, and thus receives
the character of a mere addendum, a subsidiary and
shadowy thing, and one which must finally pass away
in a senseless flight that cannot be stopped. Only a
total-life can hold fast and bind, can construct a self-
activity over against bare mechanical activity, can
along with this reach an existence which does not
belong to an inaccessible “beyond” constructed
through analogy from the scientific picture of the
natural world; but such a total-life finds its own
more and more in the furtherance of itself, and
through this gains an ever-richer content. Only this
depth of existence of the Life-process itself may be
termed “substance”; such a substance lies not be-
hind us but in front of us; and it is towards it as an
all-inclusive goal that the movement now reaches.

This movement of such a substance produces in
the particular province of man’s nature a separation
of activity into that which is empty and that which


is substantial, as well as a separation between the de-
11


162 FUNDAMENTAL BASIS OF UNIVERSAL RELIGION


velopment of physical energy and of self-activity.
Evidently there arises much activity which is not
gripped by the whole of the self—an activity which
sets mere energies in movement; such an activity
governs the initial acts and impulses of man. But
there is also an activity which lies within the whole
of life, and through which life is able to grow. It is
only such an activity as the latter that gives life a
support and a meaning in itself, and only out of such
an activity are conceptions such as character, con-
viction, etc., possible—conceptions which sprout in
spite of the presence of subjectivity and passivity,
and which, as proofs of the Whole, carry along with
them an elevation of the level of life. In the strict
injunction of such a self-preservation, all other
kinds of activity must appear empty and untenable.
Through such a self-preservation in the things a
new conception of truth originates far above the
ordinary intellectual notion, for now that alone
becomes true to life which includes, expresses, and
furthers the Whole as a present moment in con-
sciousness, whilst the separate isolated activities
which have loosened themselves from this and which
believe themselves all-efficient, sink into untruth.
The main movement of life—encompassing all the
separate points and shaping itself characteristically in
each, and especially overcoming the opposition be-
tween theoretical and practical reason—becomes a
striving which longs to pass from this region of the
untruth, which at the start surrounds us, to the region
of truth; the longing after truth and real existence
becomes now the main motive-energy of the Spiritual
Life ; as in the province of nature, so it now becomes


PROGRESSIVE AUTONOMY OF SPIRITUAL LIFE 163


here a longing after the self-preservation which rules
all movement ; but the longing is after a self-preser-
vation quite other than that found in nature.

In all these transformations our initial problem
has stepped into a new and richer position. The
movement which aimed at a level above the natural
and which wrecked itself when conceived as a mere-
human fact, has now succeeded in showing itself
more than human, and yet has fastened man to itself.
It works now with characteristic greatness and energy,
but all depends upon man being a participator in that
elevated life. In all this there are dangers enough,
but such dangers can be faced, and must not frighten
the man at the outset. Let us see somewhat closer
how, through this transformation, the view of the
world and the problems of life are altered ; and in the
meantime we shall not view directly the religious
problem, and yet shall not lose sight of it.

(8) The View of the Universe.—Our main thought
of a “becoming” independence, of a coming to itself
of all reality in the Spiritual Life, clashes most
strongly with the prevailing view of the universe, and
must demand against such a view a powerful trans-
formation. With the prevailing view, the visible
universe is held as the main world, and what rises
up in the inner life is thought of as a subsidiary
phenomenon, which is hardly able to bring forth any-
thing that is original. According to our course of
thought, however, there is imbedded in this inner
world a kernel of reality, and all else becomes a mere
environment or preparation, and thus we obtain an
inverted order of the consideration and valuation of
things. Will such a view be able to hold its own


164 FUNDAMENTAL BASIS OF UNIVERSAL RELIGION


over against the overwhelming impressions of the
external world? It can do so only through a standard
of thought, and if the inner life has become conscious
of its autonomy, and if from this source it undertakes
its work. If this happens, the demand will certainly
not be denied ; but the fact is to be seen and explained
not from without within but from within without.
Thus there culminates for the whole expansion of
thought an inversion from a Ptolemaic to a Copernican
standard.

An independent life is to be found thus within,
but it is highly improbable that it is not to be found
anywhere else in all the wide universe but in man.
But even if this could not be proved, yet the
Spiritual Life remains a cosmic fact, for it encloses
a depth of reality over against the surface-appear-
ance of nature.

Viewed in this manner, nature cannot possibly
signify by itself a complete and finished kingdom.
Its whole incessant mechanism of movements and
relations reveal nowhere a self-life; in the last resort
these are viewed as empty and meaningless, but
yet, however, the world-process itself reveals in the
Spiritual Life an imperative longing after a meaning.
There originates in nature in its wending towards the
animal level numerous and clear evidences of psychic
life, but this animal psychic life heightens rather than
lessens the conflict of opinions regarding nature.
This psychic life, which also belongs in the greatest
part to human existence, remains throughout bound
in the mechanism of nature, and develops over
against it no kind of independent thought. So far
as we are able to see, all psychic performance on this


PROGRESSIVE AUTONOMY OF SPIRITUAL LIFE 165


stage of life means simply the self-preservation of the
individual, and with it of the species, in the struggle
for existence. So that here a physical equivalent
is well able to take the place of a psychical perform-
ance: what a higher intelligence or a closer banding
together furnishes to one creature is furnished to
others by strength of bodily organisation, swiftness of
movement, etc. Nowhere here does the inner life
reach an independence, and nowhere is it able to
found a kingdom of its own; nowhere is it able to
pass beyond the environment in order to view and
handle that environment as a Whole. But the inner
life remains scattered and bound, a mere piece of
an alien world, empty in the midst of all the
passion of the animal impulse. If now—not in
man himself, but yet within the range of humanity
—a clarification and a liberation arise, if here the
inner life becomes independent and a depth of ex-
istence opens—that such a fact has happened from
simple beginnings and by a very slow ascent does
not alter the main fact in the least,—then nature
cannot any more signify the whole of reality, but
can only signify a special stage of it—a stage beyond
which the world-process proceeds to an existence-
for-self.

This new fact is far too original and signifies far
too much an inverted order of things to be under-
stood as a mere furtherance of the mechanical move-
ment of nature itself; rather must it be a cosmic
life superior to nature which breaks forth thus—a
cosmic life which works also in nature but which
proceeds beyond it to a stage of self-completion.
In such a connection the Spiritual Life cannot


166 FUNDAMENTAL BASIS OF UNIVERSAL RELIGION


at all be viewed as only a result; it must also be
valid as a principle; it can be the aim and the
culmination of the world-process only if it also
forms its foundation and presupposition, and if that
which at first appears as a result works in and
through the whole movement. An energy of the
Whole must be active from the outset if the mani-
fold is to be united into a Whole, and through such
a union is to rise to a higher plane. How could an
All bring forth an independent inner life if it were
soulless in itself? Nature and the unfolded spirit
become herewith stages of the world-process which,
beyond the juxtaposition of nature with its bare
relations, progress to a total-life which overcomes
the cleft between obscure substance and unsubstantial
happening, by making the Life-process independent
and developing all substance from it. At the same
time, the All-life can no more be a stream flowing
nobody knows whither and which nobody experi-
ences. But, in a union of beginning and of end,
a superiority 1s won above all mere movement,
and an Eternal appears as a foundation of all the
march of Time. This alone gives a standpoint
whence truth, and, indeed, any striving after truth,
first become possible; at the same time we attain
to the conception of a cosmic inner life, as a
presupposition of all striving after an interior
world. But he who contracts the kingdom of
thought of humanity to presentations of the ex-
ternal world renounces at the same time knowledge
and truth.

The recognition of such a cosmic inner life signifies
in no way an introduction of interior energies and


PROGRESSIVE AUTONOMY OF SPIRITUAL LIFE 167


movements into the province of the science of nature,
for this science of nature must reject such a procedure
as a disagreeable and dangerous disturbance of its
work. But that recognition announces that this
science, with all its means, does not create the whole
deep of reality. The higher stages can now throw
backwards light upon the lower stages ; they do that,
for example, in the Theory of Knowledge, where the
fundamental construction of nature is turned into a
problem, and the contact between this and the
mental organism is set forth; for thus we obtain
universal truths which are distinguished from the
merely human forms of life and its presentations.
Also, the higher stages accomplish this through
artistic reflection ; here the inner life of things seems
to be experienced. Fundamental facts of the life of
nature, which otherwise had been considered as self-
evident, become now a problem, and carry us to a
deepening of the total-view of things, as, for example,
in the thorough-going subjection of all to law, effects
of change, constitution of forms, the ascent of the
world-movement. We must never contract the
exact and speculative consideration of things, but
we must not misconstrue the conclusions which
issue from such a consideration.

In such a connection there exists between Nature and
Spirit a characteristic relation—a relation of opposites
as well as of union. First of all, let us consider the
opposites. Where Nature and Spirit stand in opposi-
tion to one another, as has already been shown in
the present work, where a hemmed-in life and an
independent life rise sharply one from the other,
there the greatness of the spirit cannot possibly


168 FUNDAMENTAL BASIS OF UNIVERSAL RELIGION


mean the same as the simple ascent of nature; for
thus the ascent of spirit can signify no more than
what the classical epoch of literature in Germany
stated concerning it, viz., that upon the higher stages
the development and the formation had arrived at
only a greater consciousness and freedom than were
visible on the lower unconscious and hemmed-in
levels. To such a view the phenomena seem
different only here and there through the heightening
of the functions of the intellect. In our view, on
the contrary, the difference reaches back beyond the
intellect into the Whole; the kingdoms of relations
and of the total- and self-life widen themselves
further and further. Therefore the two sides which
ordinary notion and also language allow to flow
together, must before all else be clearly separated,
and the boundaries between them fixed; a constant
struggle is needed against their admixture with all
its accompanying sleepiness. Herewith the passage
from the one to the other will not appear as a
peaceful and secure growth, as we are led to suppose
through the doctrine of evolution, but the higher
must first of all loosen itself in a new direction and
find a fastening in itself; and then this higher can
turn back to the lower and discover its kinship in it.
For a fact can certainly not remain in a state of
full and pointed opposition if the All is not to fall
asunder. Also, nature must somehow serve the aims
which come forth in the Spiritual Life; the powerful
stirring of energies which culminate in nature must
somehow assist in the development of a self-life, and
the ascent to this life brings forth a further develop-
ment and intimacy. Therefore points of contact and


PROGRESSIVE AUTONOMY OF SPIRITUAL LIFE 169


points of exit originate where the lower suddenly
seems to pass into the higher. But with the recogni-
tion of such a chain of life the independence of the
higher must always be guarded, for the lower stage
may bring forth something to the contrary of what
the higher brings forth.

The total-view shows us in the relationship of both
provinces more opposition and more insecurity than
the pantheistic view which runs through modern
culture presents, but it shows as well more expansion
and more progressive acts. And also along with
the movement depth is gained.

(y) The Situation of Man.—The attitude of man
is essentially changed when the greatness and the
success of life depend on a participation in a super-
human Spiritual Life. In the first place, he appears
placed most strongly against the customary notions
of things. We are accustomed to view man as the
meeting-point of divergence of worlds, and _ to
attribute to him on account of his characteristic
nature an incomparable worth: this cannot any
longer be asserted of him. For the New and the
Higher lie in the Spiritual Life as openings of an
independent inner world, and not in man as mere
man. For a long, long time he hardly left the
bounds of nature, and when at last the Spiritual Life
dawned within him, that life was not so much his
own work as the communication of a superior
standard. When the Spiritual Life developed
further in the human province, that province was in
no way won. Far more does the lower mode of life
remain, shows the most stubborn resistance, and
draws the Spiritual Life down to the lower level ;


170 FUNDAMENTAL BASIS OF UNIVERSAL RELIGION


thus the ordinary situation becomes one of a semi-
spirituality in which the greatness and originality
of the Spiritual Life is lost. Such a sharp diver-
gence of man from the Spiritual Life places the
problems in a new light and heightens everywhere
the extension of the activity. Thus, for example,
morality may never be held as a natural quality
or product of man; what even the ordinary life
produces does not raise itself far above the animal
instincts and impulses; definite morality with its
shifting of the centre of gravity of life is funda-
mentally different from such instincts and impulses,
but such morality becomes possible first of all from
the Spiritual Life, and the ascent to this life remains a
continuous problem, and, as well, succeeds but in the
smallest measure. Thus the decisive turning-point
appears first of all in the life of a man; it does not
appear with his entrance into this world as mere
man.

All this doubtless involves a strong humiliation of
man as mere man. But there corresponds to the
degradation an elevation, as to man there opens the
possibility of a participation in a new grade of
reality which lies beyond the entanglements of the
human province. All that characterises the Spiritual
Life—its universality, its sovereignty, its autonomy
—can become the possession of the man who
mounts; now the spiritual contents can rise above
the purely human forms of life; now the anthropo-
morphism which had turned the whole of reality
into a mere reflex of human thoughts, feelings, and
strivings, can be partially if not entirely cast off, and
can be gripped by a superior standard; now the


PROGRESSIVE AUTONOMY OF SPIRITUAL LIFE 171


struggle of man against the mere-human becomes
possible, and world-experiences enter into his narrow
province, and through such effects his whole
attitude is changed. Out of the Spiritual Life and
not out of the mere-human are all the problems to be
seized and all the provinces to be formed. Right and
morality, art and science, are spiritual in the sense
that they are not developments of the bare man, but
developments of the Spiritual Life in man. Also,
the religious problem must transform itself in an
essential manner, in which it will deal not concerning
the preservation of the petty-human but concerning
the Spiritual Life in man.

Further, life as a whole receives throughout a
special character in the fact that its main connection,
its fundamental relationship, becomes evermore the
Spiritual Life. This characteristic becomes clear
through comparison with the historical and_tra-
ditional types of life. The religious type of life
which men have most welcomed gave to the life
the main connection with God, and allowed all the
tributaries of life to flow into the current of religion ;
there came a time, however, when such a conception
proved too narrow, and when the fundamental con-
nection passed into a region of grave uncertainty.
And as the life through this effect turned from the
“beyond” to a “here and now,” it split into two
main portions—the cosmic and the social. In the
cosmic portion, the strength of the intellect mainly
opens the door of the universe, and through the
winning of such an insight the whole of existence
was raised; here now issues the construction of
relations to the human environment, definite con-


172 FUNDAMENTAL BASIS OF UNIVERSAL RELIGION


clusions are arrived at, and strong co-operations of
humanity take place. All this ought to bring greater
warmth of feeling as well as stronger reason into
human relationships. This tendency has produced
great and energetic results, but none of these results
individually has satisfied the whole nature of man,
and even collectively they have failed to do so. The
cosmic guidance of life threatens, in spite of all its
expansion, to become cold and empty ; and the social
guidance, with all its nearness and warmth, threatens
to become narrow and confined. These guides of
life, however, have the common disadvantage in that
the fundamental relationship does not lie within the
individual life, but appears as something without.
It is only in the drift of the Spiritual Life that
the Life-process becomes itself, for here it deals with
nothing other than the inmost nature of man. Thus
it is here alone that the life proves itself, and it is
here, too, that an encompassing foundation is won,
upon which the relationships to God, the world, and
human society have to be grounded and constructed,
and a counter-effect to all one-sided forms of life
has to be brought forth.

If that in which we recognise the inmost nature of
man is to be found here, then the man’s view passes
from his immediate existence to a far-off goal. In
man there are different degrees of reality, different
meeting-points of worlds, and thus the man’s own
decision must not fail. But such a decision lies not
in individual resolutions and acts, but it goes through
the whole of life. And it is not to be understood
that the individual portions of his nature would offer
him for selection different worlds merely from the


PROGRESSIVE AUTONOMY OF SPIRITUAL LIFE 173


outside, and that he could have merely an option
which to accept or reject. Man is always carried by
the total-life of the All; this total-life must be
effective in the particular portions if it is ever to
win the new stages of life. But however mysterious
this may appear, the Whole issues not into a Whole
without the vivification and characteristic decision of
the individual portions; here the movement of the
All culminates through our own appropriation alone ;
the movement issues only through a joyous affirma-
tion of that which belongs to us, and which, without
recognition, cannot become ours. Through this we
become co-workers, and, indeed, are called to become
co-carriers of the All; thus our life gains an ethical
character from its very foundation—an ethical which
shows the meaning of our adoption of the Spiritual
Life as our true nature, as the ascent to our own
heights and to infinity. This work is no longer that
of a special province, but it penetrates the whole
circumference of life, and places activity at all times
before an Lither—Or. At the same time, rigid
determinism is broken, without our having to admit
that decision depends on the chance of the moment.
For it is the fundamental presupposition of deter-
minism that it fits man well with a particular world-
order, and allows him to be bound entirely by such
an order. ‘Thus all man’s acts from their very
beginning are fixed, and life divests itself of all
expectation. But, on the other hand, the meeting-
point of two unique worlds places the fact in a totally
different light; the life now is enabled to transform
its main tendency into a free act, and through this to
gain a genuine present-moment of consciousness.


174 FUNDAMENTAL BASIS OF UNIVERSAL RELIGION


According to our method of treatment the
Spiritual Life transforms itself from being an alleged
possession to being a difficult problem, and this places
the main tendency of life not in any one particular
act, but makes the Spiritual Life a fact of unutterable
toil which grants humanity as well as the individual
a real history. The Spiritual Life was not on our
view a mere form of life which could be assimilated
in a hurried resolution ; but through an inverted order
of the first impression of things, a new and definite
kind of reality is wrung from it which draws the
whole periphery of life into itself. The life has now
to discover an all-encompassing unity from which
each particular province is shaped in a characteristic
manner. ‘This, however, is an enormous problem,
and forms the soul of all historical work. We do
not find ourselves from the beginning in spiritual
connections, and do not find our way securely, but
the main direction can be found and before all else
it must be sought—sought through toilsome experi-
ences and on perilous paths. But primarily some
kind of life-connection, some kind of governing aim,
must rise out of the initial chaos, for such connections
and aims are the salient parts—the hypotheses—of life,
full of risks and dangers, but yet indispensable, be-
cause thus alone can life as a Whole become a current,
thus alone can questions concerning the Whole become
possible, thus alone can experiences of the Whole
originate which in their turn become a standard in
the total-existence of life. Now opposition grows,
hinders the movement, and drives it out of its course.
But new points of concentration may grow and under-
take the erection of reality. In this connection the


PROGRESSIVE AUTONOMY OF SPIRITUAL LIFE 175


growth does not take place—be it through a peaceful
movement or through a spiral of opposites—through
mere associations furthered by a kind of. surface-
necessity ; things do not fit into one another as in the
growth of a pyramid, but ever anew, doubt and violent
emotion strike down to the foundation of life; ever
anew one has to struggle for the Whole. What issues,
however, as connections—so far as it is of a spiritual
kind—issues not in a ready-made manner from any
part in our nature, but has to be brought forth
through our own exertions. In this manner, history
cannot become a struggle for the content of the
Spiritual Life unless the main standard of life is laid
beyond the bare results of the times in a timeless
order. ‘The furtherance of the sub specie ceternitatis
holds not only and mainly for knowledge, but in the
first place for the Whole of life. The Spiritual Life
could not seek in history itself the unfolding of its
own nature unless history possessed in its kernel an
over-historical nature. Time is something of a
phantom, and all life in it something of an appear-
ance and a shadow if the foundation of an eternity
fails in it, and if, out of its changes and transforma-
tions, nothing rises up to save man for an eternal
existence. And if all depends on the slender thread
of the fleeting moment of the present which illumines
and endures merely for a twinkling of an eye but to
sink into the abyss of nothingness, then all life would
mean a mere exit into death. Thus without eternity
there is no spirituality, and without connection there
is no content of life. But what is enthroned in itself
above time becomes for the man who wins such a
spirituality, first of all, an immense problem which


176 FUNDAMENTAL BASIS OF UNIVERSAL RELIGION


allows itself to be grasped on the field of time alone ;
and, also, the Eternal which works within us and
which hovers before us on the horizon of eternity can
become our full possession only through the move-
ment of time. ‘To wish to check this movement and
to arrest the course of time, this means not to serve
eternity but to ascribe to time what belongs to eternity.

We see accordingly how our conception of the
Spiritual Life heightened powerfully the significance
and the span of history, but always only under the
hypothesis of an Eternal Order of things out of
which history is experienced. <A full abandonment
to history, which is often witnessed on the ordinary
level of life, becomes an inward subversion; with all
its significance, history can only be the arena of the
struggle for the Spiritual Life; it is always only a
second and never a first. But even as a second,
history grows powerfully, so that it signifies not the
mere extension of a given thread but an ascent of a
new life, and through this life it handles not the web
of a bare outline but the growth of a full reality.
What, however, holds valid for humanity holds valid
also for the individual: the individual’s life contains
a great problem and an original decision; values such
as personality and spiritual individuality do not fall
on him as a shower, but have to be wrung man-
fully in the inward ascent of life. Also, the individual
will give all these movements a spiritual character,
and will be able to verify them only if he wins a
character above the flux of time; and from this
standard, through all the multi-coloured manifold
of the external tasks, seeks before all else his own
self—his own essence.


PROGRESSIVE AUTONOMY OF SPIRITUAL LIFE 177


(0) Conclusions for the Method and the Task of Life.
—Spiritual Life can unfold itself in man only when
significant transformations take place in the inward
web of his being, and new paths of reflection become
necessary. We shall follow these changes here only
in so far as they bear on the religious problems to
which this work is dedicated.

What precedes the Spiritual Life in man cannot
be grasped by science until science constructs a new
method and marks out such a method from all
others. There is, however, a double aspect of the
original manner in which spirituality develops within
the human province. It develops itself, for example,
under the conditions of empirical psychic life, and,
indeed, with energies which have to wrestle with
such a life. But spirituality is never a mere product
of the empirical psychic life. This psychic life is
bound up with the bodily organism, is scattered in
the individual, is conceived as an incessant flux ; there-
fore it never longs, through its own potency, to reach
a connected world or a durable truth; and without
such there is neither Spiritual Life nor Spiritual
content. To turn the Spiritual Life into a mere
procedure of psychic existence is to destroy it in its
very foundation. The Spiritual Life must possess
from the beginning not only an independence and
self-value, but it must also maintain these; when it
develops under the conditions of empirical psychic
life, it must, with an unswerving nature, shine
through all the strangeness and transientness of
human psychic life. At the same time, spirituality,
first of all, works as an indefinite and weak potency.
It has to find its own nature which, on the one side,


178 FUNDAMENTAL BASIS OF UNIVERSAL RELIGION


builds a foundation, but which, on the other side, has
to come to an understanding with the psychical
existence and gain its own energies for higher ends.
To leave such a psychic existence calmly on one side
is to set back the energy of the Life-process and to
rest satisfied with a pallid and rigid spirituality.
Both sides are to be distinguished clearly, and at the
same time brought into a living connection.

To this double-sidedness of life there corresponds a
twofold method. These methods are the Noological
and the Psychological Methods. ‘To explain noo-
logically means to arrange the whole of the Spiritual
Life as a special spiritual activity, to ascertain its
position and problem, and through such an adapta-
tion to illumine the whole and raise its potencies.
To explain psychologically, on the contrary, means
to investigate how man arrives at the comprehension
and appropriation of a spiritual content and especially
of a Spiritual Life, with what psychic aids is the
spiritual content worked out, how the interest of
man for all this is to be raised, and how his energy
for the enterprise is to be won. Here one has to
proceed from an initial point hardly discernible, and,
step by step, discover the way of ascent; thus the
psychological method becomes at the same time a
psychogenetic method. The main condition of the
successful handling of this question is that both
methods are to be held sufficiently apart in order
that the conclusions of both may not flow together
and yet may form a fruitful completion.

Such separation and union of both methods and
their corresponding realities make it possible to under-
stand how to overcome inwardly the old antithesis


PROGRESSIVE AUTONOMY OF SPIRITUAL LIFE 179


between Idealism and Realism. The fundamental
truth of Idealism is that the spiritual contents
establish an independence and a self-value over
against the individual, that they train him with
superior energy, and that they are not material for
his purely human welfare. In the noological method
this truth obtains a full recognition. Realism, how-
ever, has its rights in the forward sweep of the
particular human side of life with all its diversions,
its constraints, and its predominant natural character.
Viewed from this standpoint, the main fact is,
that life is raised out of the idle calm of the
rigid indifference of its initial stages, and is brought
into a current; in order to bring this about, much
is urgently needful by man, which cannot originate,
prior to the appearance of the spiritual estimation
of values, but these needful things become his when
he is set in a strong current; then, on the one hand,
anxiety for external existence, division into parties,
ambition, etc., and on the other hand, the mechanism
of the psychic life with its association, reproduction,
etc., are all seen in a new light. ‘These motive-
powers would certainly never produce a spiritual
content out of man’s own ability; such a content is
only reachable if the movement of life raises man
out of and above the initial performances and the
initial motives. No mechanism, either of soul or of
society, is able to accomplish this; it can be accom-
plished alone by an inward spirituality in man.
Through such a conception, Realism and Idealism
are no further irreconcilable opponents, but two sides
of one encompassing life; one may grow alongside
the other but not at the expense of the other. In-


180 FUNDAMENTAL BASIS OF UNIVERSAL RELIGION


deed, the more the content of the Spiritual Life
grows, the more becomes necessary on the side of
psychic existence; the more we submerge ourselves
in this psychic experience, the greater appears the
superiority of the Spiritual Life.

The noological method is new in name only, and
in the following connection : it actually extends every-
where where logical, ethical, and esthetic conceptions
are differentiated from the empirico-psychological
conceptions. In Kant, and since his time, such a
differentiation has been made with great clearness.
This differentiation is, however, indispensable, be-
cause there is no possibility of an independence of
the particular provinces without an independence of
the Spiritual Life as a Whole. Such a conclusion
comes to expression in the noological method. It
is different throughout from the old method of an
ontological metaphysic. This latter sought especially
to make phenomena intelligible through world-con-
ceptions which had been gained through strong
subjective theories — theories, in the main, which
were shadows of the living content and concreteness
of reality. On the contrary, the noological method
understands the particular out of an encompassing
and basal Whole of life. The principle of explana-
tion is not brought in from without, but is inwardly
present, or at least allows itself to be brought to a
present moment in consciousness: it is in the last
resort, with all its arrangements through freedom,
a fact and an experience. Herewith is not only a
higher degree of security won, but the linking of
each element with the Whole must lead to an inward
renewal and deepening as well as to a clearer impress


PROGRESSIVE AUTONOMY OF SPIRITUAL LIFE 181


of the characteristic features. Therefore, the founda-
tion of religion must be of a noological and not of a
speculative kind: the psychological method accord-
ingly stands in a secondary place.

It is, however, necessary to raise up the Spiritual
Life not only from the empirical psychic life, but
even within itself it needs a further separation. In
the Spiritual Life we recognised a total-life—a world ;
but our ordinary immediate life flows in homogeneous
individual acts as a succession of events and activities,
and this seems to exclude all definite spirituality.
This contradiction is to be overcome through an
inner gradation of life alone: in individual acts a
Whole must be able to be present, but the life
acquires an entirely different character as to whether
it discovers such a Whole present or not. Were the
life to shift back beyond the surface of the individual
events, then what appears tangible to the individual
must in some kind of way become conscious, work-
able, and accessible. That possibility is really dis-
covered and appears in clear results. It is only the
presence of a Whole that enables the individual
thoughts to become an expression of a Weltan-
schauung, and enables the individual acts to become
the expression of a moral character ; for it is only a
continuous construction of an elevated thought that
can mould the material and weld a systematic order
of the whole particular provinces. ‘This presence of
the Whole in the particular can have very different
grades. For example, great are those thinkers alone
whose total method reaches into each particular, even
into the smallest achievement; great is that moral
character alone which sets its stamp on each par-


182 FUNDAMENTAL BASIS OF UNIVERSAL RELIGION


ticular act: thus Substance and Haistence differentiate
themselves in life. Substance is to be conceived not
as an inaccessible entity, but as the kernel of the
Life-process itself; not as a species fixed for all
times, but as something conceivable only through
the process of its construction, and as something
gifted with power through the process of its trans-
formation. The development in which the Spiritual
Life unfolds itself*in man strikes itself into the
substance as well, and it is in this that the main
extension of life lies, because in the movement a
struggle for the substance itself is taking place. The
first achievements are mere attempts which have to
stand the test of experience, and which, through such
a test, can be driven forward to a further development
and even transformation. Such tests and experiences
need a development towards particular activities ;
this is the substance itself now assigned to the
existence-side of life. But in order to make some
contribution to the solution of the problem, the
existence-side must found a certain independence
over against the substance, for if the substance meant
nothing more than its immediate momentary ex-
pression, the life would remain tied to a situation
reached once for all. And thus life could never
become a problem and never desire a movement;
and without both there is not possible for man, in the
midst of all his unreadiness, any further development.

Thus, once more, we find a double-sided aspect of
life, which carries an incessant problem in itself, and
at the same time carries a germ of entanglements of
opposing kinds. What is imbedded in life from the
substance has continually to be transformed into a


PROGRESSIVE AUTONOMY OF SPIRITUAL LIFE 18%


free activity, and is to be explained through such
an activity. The free activity, however, needs a
return-movement to the substance in order not to
fall into vague indecision. he individual as well as
the community show an opposite tendency. Men
and times can transform their lives simply into a
movement—into a play of free-energies—without
grasping the radical foundation, or without even
striving after such a foundation. Then shallow men
arise who, in all their agility and industry, possess no
souls, but merely exist—bare creatures of the environ-
ment, and barren times, though full of excitement
and business which possess no spiritual base; men
and times that seek to fill the needs of life through
endless variations and combinations of a free and
disconnected activity.

But the contrary is also possible: a substance ready-
made does not enter into the region of explanation,
and consequently never becomes the full possession of
man. It is so with individuals and so with times.
Not seldom do we find a spiritual foundation ready
and at hand, but it is not worked out; although in
one’s own possession, it remains as something alien
and inaccessible. These are the dull and _ helpless
men and times who cannot find their own depth, but
follow in the direction of the shallows of life and not
in the direction of what the deep contains. Also,
in spiritual provinces and especially in religion,
the explanation of the substance fails often to
correspond with, and, indeed, often contradicts, its
validity ; what is willed and estimated at the base
can often lie beneath a growing crust of thought.
Throughout the whole history of Christianity this


184 FUNDAMENTAL BASIS OF UNIVERSAL RELIGION


cleft between substance and its explanation appears ;
ever arises the need to prove the latter, and to seek
the former.

Where the analysis into substance and existence is
recognised, the kernel of life is then never sought in
the so-called faculties of thought, feeling, and will—
neither in either nor in their sum. These different
phases of the one consciousness belong to the substance
just referred to, and-never out of their own power can
they produce a spiritual content; far more do they
develop in a connection with some kind of Life-
substance. Such a deepening of reality alone is able
to free us from the intellectualism which we discover
to-day as so insufficient, but into which, notwithstand-
ing all our troubles and toils, we tend to sink back
ever anew. We remain without overcoming so long
as the existing activities signify to us the whole of life.
In the provinces of such existent activities the intelli-
gence stands in the foreground ; that which struggles
to reach up to the level of a spiritual content has to
explain itself at the bar of intelligence and work
from that judgment into the remaining provinces.
When the fact is recognised that thought itself, in
so far as it is of a productive and not merely of a
reflective kind, possesses behind itself a basal and
directive activity of the Whole and brings forth its
creativeness from this basal region, a secure conquest
over intellectualism is gained. Then it becomes
clear that in the movement of life the handling is
not dealing with an assimilation of a “ given” reality,
but with an ascent to a definite reality; the struggle
is not concerning interpretations but concerning
contents.


PROGRESSIVE AUTONOMY OF SPIRITUAL LIFE 185


Thus the problem of life is raised above the
antithesis of intellectualism and voluntarism — for
voluntarism is a mere reversal of intellectualism,
and remains bound on the mere level of bare
experience. The powers of intellect and will thus
cannot form the kernel of man’s nature, far less can
they be carried into the universe and be raised to the
substance of the All. It is not from the forms of
phenomena but from the substance of life that any
hope arises of illumining the deep night which
wraps our life and our fundamental relation to reality.
All pictorial conceptions of these forms of phenomena
are mere human projections, intellectual plays of a
flying imagination.

When, however, the recognition of that depth
heightens powerfully the task of life, it heightens at
the same time the inward movement of life, and the
attention extends over the whole expanse of life.
For now the truth of the Whole becomes anew in
each individual position a problem ; each point has to
prove, to strengthen, and to adjust its truth. This
yields also a characteristic organisation of the work
of culture. Here the total-view of life is not now
included in one particular province, as, for example,
in religion or metaphysics, which is supposed to be
able to include and to further all the other provinces ;
the main problem lies on the other side of all the
branches and runs through them all; each particular
province can take the whole question into itself,
prove it in its own experience, and answer it in its
own way. All great achievements of the particular
provinces possess a grasp of the Whole and at the
same time a furthering of the Whole. This signifies


186 FUNDAMENTAL BASIS OF UNIVERSAL RELIGION


an equality of rights of the different branches; it
forbids all hierarchic gradation and subordination of
the middle-ages type. The differentiation of sub-
stance and existence works in that it renders life
more eventful, freer, richer.

Accordingly, we see life all along taking a charac-
teristic shape, and we find this characteristic extend
from an external outline into the innermost web.
What always yielded itself to the individual drew its
strength and found its connection in a particular
governing and thorough-going thought— the thought
of an opening of a new grade of reality, of a kingdom
of independent inwardness within the province of man.
And this thought will lead us further into the province
of religion. Our discussion hitherto has been necessary
in order to obtain a fixed foundation ; now we are to
handle the matter direct.


PART II—THE FUNDAMENTAL BASIS OF
UNIVERSAL RELIGION :


(ConrINuED)


CHAPTER VIII
c. THe Fact or UNIVERSAL RELIGION


(1) The Turn to Religion


(a) The Problem of Religion in General.— In con-
nection with the turn towards religion, it is necessary
before all else to establish what is essential and indis-
pensable to religion—to religion in each and every
sense. Before all else the main point is this: religion
holds up before us, over against the surrounding world,
a new kind of existence, a new order of things, and
divides reality into different provinces and worlds.
That religion may be obtained without a belief in
God is proved by ancient and definite Buddhism; but
without a dualism of worlds, without an outlook on a
new existence, religion becomes a mere empty sound.
The mere acknowledgment of a higher order, however,
gives us in no way a religion. That higher order
must not merely exist in itself: it must also be
effective for us, it must place our existence on a new
foundation, and must be conceived by us as a main
fact; otherwise it remains, in spite of an external
acknowledgment, inwardly strange and _ indifferent.


The mere existence of deities was conceived readily
187


188 FUNDAMENTAL BASIS OF UNIVERSAL RELIGION


enough by the Epicureans. How barren for religion
were all the diggings for the final “grounds” of
things and all the so-called proofs for the existence
of God! There is not, therefore, any definite religion
without the living presence of a higher world within
our own domain, without the clash of two worlds
with all their entanglement and irrationality. But
even in this irrational there appears especially clear
the original character, the transforming and renewing
energy of religion.

Such a projection of a new world into our life is a
question of an actual kind; and thus appearing as a
fundamental fact, the question is not to be placed on
one side but to be proved. But with all its actuality,
the question does not deal with something that is
individual and obvious. Eckuarr ridicules such an
attempt as this: “‘ Many people hope to see God as
one sees an ox.” ‘The question deals with something
that is a Whole and an invisible. Such an object
cannot come to man from the outside and overwhelm
him with sensuous impressions; it is only an inward
movement that can bring man to the point where
truths, otherwise concealed, reveal themselves; and
data, otherwise loose, can bind themselves into a
Whole of Reality. True, such movements desire as
well the work of thought, but such a help remains in
the service of the main actual question.

(8) Nearer View of the Problem.—'The whole
course of our investigation has shown the character-
istics and greatness of man to consist in the working
within him of a total reality; along with this the
Spiritual Life became the centre of all the investiga-
tion. This must verify itself also in connection with


THE FACT OF UNIVERSAL RELIGION — 189


the turn to religion. It is not the entanglements of
the mere-human but those of the Spiritual Life which
urge us to religion ; it is not the deliverance of man to
human happiness but the self-reliance of the Spiritual
Life which stands now in question. All this an-
nounces such mighty transformations against the
customary mode of life—transformations which aim
to present before man the fact that something more
is indispensable than a smug arrangement of things.

Such a method does not only place religion on
securer foundations, but, in the formation of its
content, meets with evil entanglements. So long as
man as an isolated existence stands over against the
All, he is never able to go forth out of his own move-
ments and needs to a certainty of a new world.
What he possesses and develops on his subjective
plane can never mean anything more than that which
holds valid for his own circle of presentations; if
things were only so, the danger becomes evident that
all things will soon be explained as a mere brain-
spinning of the subject himself. If, before all else,
the presence of a world within man is not recognised as
well as the fact that he can be raised to a world-life,
he can never win a secure conviction of a Whole of
Reality, and never be certain of the opening of a new
world.

This first question of truth requires a noo-centric
and not an anthropomorphic standard ; the thought-
world of religion will remain under the ban of anthro-
pomorphism so long as Spiritual Life and the human
form of existence are not differentiated. The old
thinker was correct in stating that men constructed
the gods in their own image; but when such con-


190 FUNDAMENTAL BASIS OF UNIVERSAL RELIGION


ceptions were refined, they were more and more
transformed into objects of thought. But the re-
fining of the conceptions easily makes the error even
more dangerous, and entangles the objects of thought
still deeper in the anthropomorphic process. This
anthropomorphism, however, meets with a strong
opposition the more the progress of knowledge
explains to man his position in the All of things.
Indeed, the more his dependence on nature and, at
the same time, the speciality of his species are
illumined, the more appears the failure to raise man
to the All-Life and to fill up the ground of reality
with products from the quarry of human analogy.
More weighty still are the dangers into which such
an anthropomorphic conception of religion brings its
inner motive-powers. A religion of the merely human
kind makes inevitably the quest of man’s happiness
the centre of all activity; it rivets him to the in-
activity to which he seems to subordinate and even
to sacrifice himself. Of what avail are all obedience
and all sacrifice if man only renounces in order to
gain more of the very stuff which binds him? In
the customary order of religion the hope of a great
reward threatens to adjust the character in a prevail-
ing manner to the results of action, and to link that
character with the particular external worth of things
and thus to injure greatly the pure joy in the good
and true, and to endanger the inner independence.
It appears then as if the whole world-order is here in
order to satisfy our “ dear self” with all its pettiness
and meanness, and to bring it to full indulgence ; it
appears as if. “God had forgotten all His creatures
with the exception of us alone” (Kcknarr). True,


THE FACT OF UNIVERSAL RELIGION 191


the deeper atmosphere of all religions withstands all
such shrinkage upon the small self, and leads against
such a notion an ardent battle for the purification and
refinement of the soul. But in this struggle the full
energy does not enter so long as a fundamental libera-
tion of life from the mere-human and the anxiety for
its small happiness have not taken place. And in
order to obtain this liberation, radical transformations
are necessary, as we have already seen in the acknow-
ledgment of the Spiritual Life and the changes it
brought along with itself; there is no ejection of the
small human assertions out of our inner world without
a new view of ourself, and there is no unselfishness
of character without a nature superior to that of the
bare self. Man does not remain a mere man-—a kind
of well-equipped animal —a kind of special and
vanishing point in infinity; he is called to acknow-
ledge the inner presence of a world, and to reach
such a world in spite of his mere singularity. Only
the effort for a deliverance can free him from the
anxiety for his bare happiness, and only the laying of
the centre of gravity in this makes it possible to place
the mere inactivity in the background and to create
actions and energy; otherwise his particular nature
brings forth no fruit and, indeed, his further existence
is endangered.

The content and aim of the world of religion are
universally not ascertained by the natural man, but
by the Spiritual Life in him. Difficult as all this
may seem, and sure as it may appear that the natural
ways of man accompany all his work and strive to
enter into this, yet through the energetic separation of
the mere-human and the more-than-human from one


192 FUNDAMENTAL BASIS OF UNIVERSAL RELIGION


another a struggle for the maintenance and purity of
the spiritual substance is taken up, so that we do not
fall defenceless to the lower plane. As in culture on
the whole, so, too, in religion, the progress of the
developing thought appears not anywhere as a mere
disentanglement of an initial childish kind —as a
destruction of an anthropomorphism—but as a re-
building proceeded with through the discovery of a
new life and nature in man. Were there no road
from the denial to the affirmation, the work of thought
would more and more destroy the living content of
reality ; indeed, the more energetic that work of
thought would proceed, the more certain it would
reach a complete agnosticism with ail its hollowness.

But when, however, a religion of the Spiritual
Life leaves behind itself the mere-human, it must
be by itself of a universal nature. For here it is
not the aim of religion to further, through the
introduction of a new world, this or that side of the
Spiritual Life, but, before all else, it is the energetic
longing to maintain the Spiritual Life as a Whole,
and to carry it through in the midst of seemingly
insuperable obstacles. A religion which performs
this must not consider itself as a special province
of the remaining life, but must encompass and _per-
meate the whole life. That the Universal mode of
religion does not form its culmination, for, indeed,
it never leads to an independent religion, but that
it far more leads to a Characteristic religion—all
this will be shown later; but it will be shown, too,
that this characteristic mode presupposes the uni-
versal mode, proceeds out of its experiences, and has
to unite itself with it.


THE FACT OF UNIVERSAL RELIGION 193


Spiritual Life was not in our view a quality of
another existence; it proved itself as a life exist-
ing by itself, which had to develop all its existence
within the life. The problem of the truth of religion
receives, therefore, its existence from out of the
fact that an absolute life, superior to the world, is
recognised as effective in our sphere. Through such
a recognition the conception of the Godhead receives
the meaning of an Absolute Spiritual Life; out of
this all the remainder of life is to be moulded. This
yields a decisive break with the old methods of
proof—methods that sought before all else to prove
an existence on the other side of the human circle,
and to set oneself in relationship with such an
existence. Through this the intellect gained in-
evitably a leading position, for by what other means
could we perceive an external existing reality? On
the contrary, the revelation and the appropriation of
a turn towards the Life-process call upon the whole
man, and desire a forward act of the whole soul; all
this certainly enters into ideas and has to be set in
doctrine, but even these have to relate themselves
and be adjusted to the Life-process, for they cannot
proceed as rigid dogmas which would govern the
very powers themselves. From this point of view
there results for religion a characteristic relationship
of the eternal and the temporal, of substance and its
forms ; now only such are valid as fundamental truths
as are necessary in the vindication of the representa-
tive Life-process. The nature of that which presents
itself in the existing situation as an incontestable
truth, and which is measured as indispensable by a
standard of the act, has to be proved ever anew over


194 FUNDAMENTAL BASIS OF UNIVERSAL RELIGION


against the changes of time, and ever anew does it
become a problem. ‘This is so because the historical
course of the religious life of the Church has the
tendency to extend further and further the importance
of doctrines, and, along with this, to relax the connec-
tion with the living foundation, or to construct a
particular side of the nature at the expense of the
whole. Therefore, the return to the ground-process
and the elimination of all the superfluous as a burden
and a hindrance become an ever necessary problem ;
the great renewals of religion thus appear as a simpli-
fication of life, as a return out of the darkness and
distraction of time to an old and eternal truth.
Finally, the position of our question contains also
a raising of religion above the ramifications of the
psychic life—above the so-called faculties of the soul ;
the question concerns itself with a particular develop-
ment of a Spiritual Reality which certainly unfolds
itself in thought, feeling, and will, but which proceeds
not from one or from a combination of them. All
the strict fulfilment of religion in the provinces of
the so-called faculties of the soul yield a formation
of the periphery, behind which remains unexperienced
and undeveloped a centre of life—the workshop of
original moulding and creativeness. Let us consider
the religion of the Church system of the Middle Ages,
which even to-day presents itself with such an
obtrusive air as the one true religion. A system
of doctrines is transmitted to the individual, a
complex of deeds is laid upon him; also the entire
resignation of the subjective feeling—a mysticism
with its feeling organ—can be brought about through
doctrines and precepts presented in such a manner as


THE FACT OF UNIVERSAL RELIGION 195


not to appear as a burden and a constraint. Thus
the whole man seems to have been won, and religion
seems to have become the possession of his soul.
But is it so in reality? Or remains there not un-
conceived behind all the expansion that which is
really the fundamental fact — man as a superior
Whole, as a participator in infinity, as a warrior for
a spiritual self? This depth of his nature has now
come to a full consciousness, and, along with this,
it has become clear that such a fact alone grants him
secure stability against unutterable dangers, tribula-
tions, and doubts; so that he will found his religion
upon this rock, weary throughout of the strife whether
intellect, or will, or feeling, plays the main part in the
concern. Here as everywhere in such a fact we do
not find anything new, for wherever religion was the
moving energy of life, there stood behind it man with
the whole of his soul. But this ancient truth was
woefully darkened, and prevented from coming to
full effect in the common life of humanity through
human conceptions and especially through the
- Christian Church. So that it is still something new
when it is recognised fully in principle, and when it
is able to defend itself more energetically against its
own disfigurement.

(y) The Reality above the World.—What brings
about the problem of religion out of the Spiritual
Life? ‘The Spiritual Life in itself does not produce
religion in an immediate manner. It is certain that
it signifies a higher degree of reality than nature ;
this degree can develop itself fully and live out its
potencies in our world, and can prepare all it needs
for its aims; as things stand thus, we have in the


196 FUNDAMENTAL BASIS OF UNIVERSAL RELIGION


Spiritual Life a new stage within the world, but we
have not as yet a new world—we have won no over-
world as yet; in all this we have reached an idealism
—the employment of this worn-out expression is used
here for the purpose of brevity—but we have not as
yet acknowledged religion. The question concerning
an over-world leads us first to ask whether the New
which carries such a fundamental transformation with
itself knocks itself in pieces upon the hard obstacles
of our world, and thus is not able to win any secure
position against such obstacles. If things are really
so, either the whole has to be dropped as a treacherous
illusion and all activity to reach and to maintain it
has to be suspended, or we are to seek a deeper
ground in what occurs within our circle and to pro-
tect the gain throughout. But when such a matter
of fact allows itself to be proved, and when it leads
to the recognition of an over-world absolute life, even
yet religion is not won. That comes about when the
life comes in contact not only with its own results,
but when we seize life and appropriate it as a Whole,
when we pass from the effects and set ourselves upon
the causes, and participate, in a form of immediacy, in
the absoluteness of the Divine Life. But in order to
reach such a decisive point we must first of all run
through the earlier stages of life and seek to show
that the Spiritual Life has no secure ground in the
ordinary near-at-hand world, but meets the hardest
contradictions in such a world, and yet in spite of
these contradictions it maintains itself and exercises
energy in order to take up first of all the decisive
question.

(aa) The Peril to the Spiritual Life from its Sur-


THE FACT OF UNIVERSAL RELIGION 197


rounding World.—How little the Spiritual Life
governs ordinary immediate existence has been seen
from the beginning of our investigation; it was this
fact-that made us raise it so fundamentally above that
existence. But the inner energy presents yet in no
way a triumphant advance over against the world.
The clash has become sharper rather than milder, and
the contradiction reaches deeper into the foundations.
In the meantime the Spiritual Life brings forth from
within a new kind of existence, and desires for it new
forms ; it remains throughout committed to a funda-
mental construction of the same reality and yet it
longs to advance and possess more of this reality,
and is thus affected with a contradiction right through
its course ; its energy and its truth are endangered by
the greatest difficulties. It signifies from within a
total-life, and yet this total-life is strewn over the
conformable individual nature ; it signifies a timeless
truth and underlies wholly the power of time, and yet
it is carried along powerless by the ever-restless
current of history ; it must hold itself as the main fact
——as the kernel of reality and a full self-aim—and
yet it is handled throughout as a subsidiary fact, as
a means to-other aims. At the same time, a char-
acteristic nervousness restrains the man from confess-
ing openly his inner apathy towards the Spiritual
Life; rather he will and can allow this appearance
of a “better” to have its place, so that there originates
a general unveracity with all the powerlessness which
is inherent in such unveracity, with all the hollow
pomp which makes the man himself vexatious. This
hard conflict between the nature and the existence-
form of the Spiritual Life is the deepest ground of


198 FUNDAMENTAL BASIS OF UNIVERSAL RELIGION


that hypocrisy which runs through and poisons human
life not only in the union of the life of culture, but
also in the deepest recesses of the soul. Such a mere
semblance of character—such unveracity—is bound
to strike its roots into all the individual activities and
situations: knowledge, love, happiness—all receive a
multi-coloured hybrid form; all these might be and
could be more than. this; everything through such a
disunion has not the courage either of a decisive
Yea or of a decisive Nay. With such halfness how
could a new world arise or be built up over against
nature? We have already convinced ourselves that
the examination of the historico-social life offers not
the least hope for such a new world or the possibility
of altering essentially our position in respect to the
Spiritual Life. Therefore, the whole movement
towards the Spiritual Life is either a great and an
inexplicable error, or there is more behind it than
appears clear at a glance.

(6b) The Assertion of the Spiritual Life over
against the World.—That in reality more is imbedded
behind the appearances is shown by the fact of the
conflict itself; for this fact is of a twofold kind: it
shows the hindrance, but it also shows that something
1s hindered which asserts itself in spite of all hindrance.
If the surrounding world with its unspiritual nature
were the Whole, how could the Spiritual Life arise
universally ? How could it, if it isno more than a mere
appearance, exercise so much more power now it has
recognised the fact than it exercised previously ?
Whence even the striving after appearance, after
hypocrisy, if all resolves itself into a phantom? There
must be thus something superior in the very truth


THE FACT OF UNIVERSAL RELIGION 199


which works in our potency and in the whole of its
province. That this is so is illumined yet clearer
by the fact that the Spiritual Life, with all its hin-
drances and restraints in the environing world, does
not simply conform to this world, but asserts itself
over against it and holds fast its own aims. It does
this in the directions we shall now point out.

1. In the midst of all distractions, one thing issues
out of the kingdom of distractions—an inconceivable
movement towards unity. Individuals, peoples, and
epochs believe in the possibility of mutual under-
standing in the midst of all disintegrations; all
assertion of a spiritual kind is valid not only for the
individual or for a special circle, but for all; also the
particular branches of the work of reason can well
diverge for a while but not for any length of time,
and finally all the manifold of effort must flow into
an encompassing truth, for all particularity becomes
rigid and lifeless when severed from such a unity.
The striving towards unity in the midst of all
distractions is that which particularly rouses human
life, which sets it in motion, which entangles it in
unutterable strife, but which proves itself a mighty
power in the midst of all. Whence else comes the
struggle than from thence—that each shall become
the Whole, the governing, the universally valid, and
that each tends to lose its value if it tolerates another
to lie untouched by its side? Such strenuous and
even passionate striving is an irrefragable testimony
of a power superior to the dispersion of the parts
and also to the whole environing order of things.

2. However the content and the value of the
Spiritual Life may be made by man to fit in with his


200 FUNDAMENTAL BASIS OF UNIVERSAL RELIGION


aims, yet they withstand a complete adjustment into
the mere-human situation, and exercise from their
side a counter-effect to that situation. No less an
authority than Kant explained it as “highly ob-
jectionable that the laws concerning what I ought
to do can be drawn from or confined to what is
merely done.” How does such a superiority of the
norm of all action justify itself above the position of
man if there dwells not in his whole nature such a
superior arrangement? This arrangement in man’s
nature appears in the total-movement of history, first
of all, as a power of a directive and unravelling kind.
Men and times draw the Spiritual Life into them-
selves and lower it as a means for their aims; they
give it a moulding which corresponds to their fleeting
wishes. ‘Thus they may carve and bend it, and
appear themselves as seeming lords of things. But
such a method has always a measuring rod brought
to bear on it; sooner or later a counter-effect makes
its presence felt and then the merely human fashion
lives itself out, its emptiness and meanness come to
light, and the final decomposition is not far away.
Thus we find an incessant return to the Spiritual
Life from the human perversion of it—a return to
man’s own nature; and consequently an energetic
return to the demands and dependence of man.

This is an effect of a more negative kind, but
the Spiritual Life declares its ability also positively
within the human province through an incessant
exertion to move outside the “given” situation,
through a tracing out and a holding forth of ideals,
through a longing after a more complete happiness
and a more complete truth. Why is not man satisfied


THE FACT OF UNIVERSAL RELIGION 201


with the relativity which clings so fast to his
existence? Why has he a longing for the Absolute
in opposition to such relativity, and through this
plunges himself into the most difficult sorrows and
restlessness? This has happened not only in special
situations of individuals, but in the total ascent of
culture ; indeed, the upward march of culture would
have been impossible without a striving of man from
a level above his “given” position and even above
himself. Was not subjective satisfaction more
easily reached by him in the semi-animal stages of
his existence than in culture with all its toils and
tangles, and does the progress of culture with all its
tools make him happier in the mere human sense?
What else can compel him to step into this perilous
track of culture but the necessity of his own nature
which, at the same time, reveals to him the presence
of a new order of things ?

3. Then Spiritual Life asserts itself not only
within the human circle, but it exhibits in the midst
of all obstacles a capacity to draw the lower to
itself, it exhibits the energy to overcome the lower
and the power to ennoble it through a higher. There
proceeds through our life a movement from the
outward to the inward, from the natural to the
spiritual. Any spiritual stimulation which comes to
us may seem in the first instance to proceed and to
work on us from without, and may thus appear as a
mere constraint which can only be uncoupled by
counter-effects. But what first of all seems to work
on man more than zm him begins soon to strike its
roots within him, allows itself to be gripped as one’s
own fact and to be transformed into free activity.


202 FUNDAMENTAL BASIS OF UNIVERSAL RELIGION


Without such a growth of one’s own life, without
such an inverted order of the direction of the move-
ment, all education of humanity remains a dead
training, and all moral instruction remains a mere
appearance ; the spark of the inner life would never
be awakened were such a life not imbedded in man’s
very nature, and did it not enable him to carry
further his very life,in the direction of his goal. So
that it is not through the mere working of psychical
mechanism, which could never awaken man and
which could never originate an inner unity and an
active disposition, that the progress from custom to
morality, from external relationship to inner harmony,
from a collection of self-interests to a union of
character, explains itself and reveals itself as a
phenomenon of the inwardness of human life and
existence. Through this the effort is raised beyond
its original motive, and the man is led out to a
region beyond himself. What appeared to him pre-
viously as mere means for his egotistic aims, begins
now, through his own character, to draw him and set
him in motion; this is more and more taken into
his own life and raises his life. The necessities of
existence aim at carrying man to his work; and how
many inward movements and how many blessings
proceed from such aims! But all this is to be
understood only under an hypothesis of an active
presence of an elevated Spiritual Life within the
human circle.

What we have already considered in connection
with these three points and directions is a develop-
ment of the one and same ground-fact which testifies
in a corporate manner that a Spiritual Life works


THE FACT OF UNIVERSAL RELIGION 203


in us, and which does not explain itself out of
the relations, but which points to a higher order of
existence than the world-order which surrounds us.
With all this is won only an hypothesis of religion,
and not religion itself. Though the consciousness
of the effect of a higher order of things in the
midst of our circle of experience is able to give a
true assurance, and to strengthen the faith in some
kind of conquest of the good, still the power remains
a dark secret, and an inner relationship to it is not
yet given. It is only with this latter inward re-
lationship that religion originates. Let us therefore
see if the experience of life shows an entrance hither.

(cc) The Revelation of an Absolute Spiritual Life
wn our World.—We need not open any laborious and
lengthy investigation in order to prove that a
Spiritual Life superior to the world not only touches
us with its effects, but that it is also present in us
as cause with all the fulness of its energy. It is
revealed to us as a great fact that a Spiritual Life can
rise up as our own life: and this actually happens.
The significance of this fact can be judged fully after
we have recognised that a total-life presents itself in
the Spiritual Life, and that in this total-life a new
degree of reality arises, and an inverted order of the
world-process takes place; such a turn could not
proceed out of the potency of the individual elements
of life, but has to proceed out of the energy of the
Whole. Therefore, this Whole must be, in a form
of immediacy, present in us, and, also, the great change
shall ensue as a gain of our own life. Now, the life
of the spirit does not develop itself in us merely in
isolated achievements or from the external ; we have


204 FUNDAMENTAL BASIS OF UNIVERSAL RELIGION


already seen how it returned to itself from each
performance and constructed for itself a nucleus
which became the carrier of all activity, for thus alone
could the autonomous life develop itself. Whatever
the personality and the spiritual individuality may
receive on the mere-human and natural planes could
not arise and bring forth any kind of movement unless
there worked on such planes some kind of autonomous
and original life.

The great change of life from a web of relations to
the founding of a total-life in itself, and the turn of
reality to its own depth—all this is a fact which does
not march forward in front of us, and it could not arise
in us at all had it not gone forth out of us and had we
not become along with it active co-carriers of reality.
The dawning of a new world in the midst of our
province, our entering into an inward revolution of
human existence—this is the great miracle in which
the presence of a new world manifests itself with
great clearness. He who does not find the miracle
here is not likely to find it anywhere else, and will
seek in vain for it in the “far, far away,” for the
words of Paracetsus hold valid in this respect:
“* You are long-sighted, you see in the distance, but
you do not see close at hand.”

That the fact of an autonomous life in our own
circle holds valid as the decisive proof of the presence
of a Divine existence is contradicted only by the
external clothing of the idea. “ Autonomous,” one
may say, and so says one with the Middle Ages mode
of thought, is the denial of all dependence, of all
tying to another will; religion, however, desires
unconditional dependence, obedience, submission ;


THE FACT OF UNIVERSAL RELIGION — 205


thus the two are complete opposites. But they re-
main opposites only so long as God and man, in a
childish anthropomorphic manner, are set against one
another as two isolated natures that are set in relation
from the outside, and thus the one side seems to take
what is given by the other side. We could think
but little of man if we allowed everything to come in
to him from the outside, if we denied him all inner
movement towards the summits of religion. And,
too, the new world would be cut off entirely from
our world and, through the inaccessibleness, the
“beyond ” would vanish.

But it is quite otherwise when the autonomy, now
possessing more inward and less anthropomorphic
modes of thought, appears not as something contra-
dictory to the Whole but as an independent “ becom-
ing” out of the energy and presence of the Whole,
and, at the same time, as an essentially new grade of
life; then this independent life must separate itself
most pointedly from all self-willed selfishness and
from all stubborn self-assertion. It is certainly a
mystery how the highest self-activity signifies the
immediate extinction of all mere egoism and signifies,
too, a life out of Infinity. But he who places this
mystery on one side must either cast away all
religion or shape it in a purely external form of the
understanding.

Through the inward presentation of the total
problem the thought of an over-world signifies much
more than a flight to a bare “beyond.” ‘True, there
results a separation—a division of reality—for with-
out this religion is not possible. But this does not
imply that a “beyond” is to be thought of as a kind


206 FUNDAMENTAL BASIS OF UNIVERSAL RELIGION


of fixed and inviolable foundation of our existence
entirely over against the present world—a “ beyond ”
that has to be adjusted through special helps; but
it does imply a “beyond” in the sense that the
existing Spiritual Life relegates the present world
to a secondary place. Such a Spiritual Life becomes
the fixed norm for all life, and in its renewal it
becomes not some kind of a More of an already
existing life, but in it, first and foremost, a really
existing and truthful life is won.

Thus, religion was everywhere found where it
possessed this thorough originality, and its own
truth was the most certain of all things—a truth
in which all else found its fixed duration. Thus
an Augustine took flight out of the hardest shocks
of human life to the immanent Divine presence in
his own soul—to that which first of all disengaged
itself from the threatening overthrow of life, to that
which won him for himself. So that the Middle
Ages conceived this Divine Order as the Fatherland
(patria), and ventured to say that we know God
better than the creature (Deus notior creatura),.

After all this there can be no doubt as to the
nature of religion. Religion rests on the presence
of a Divine Life in man; it unfolds itself through
the seizure of this Life as one’s own nature. Religion,
too, subsists in the fact that man in the inmost
foundation of his own being is raised into the Divine
Life, and participates in the Divine Nature.
Christianity was right when it found the kernel
of religion in the union of the natures of the human
and the Divine, and even the unfortunate dogmatic
representation of the two natures in Christ could


THE FACT OF UNIVERSAL RELIGION 207


not destroy the transforming and elevating energy
of this truth.

But the full vivification of the Divine in man and
the gaining of a new plane of life can never happen
without a recognition and an assimilation on the
side of man. Religion can never originate unless the
Divine enters into the conviction of man, unless the
whole of his soul turns towards the new world. In
this sphere there is no place for any mechanical
instillation, and there is no growth possible without
our own accommodating spirit. Hence religions
constantly long so ardently for the consent and
repentance of man; the nobility of the soul and
its membership with God must be acknowledged
in order to be able to experience His Divine Energy.
For “ what would it availa man if he were king and
knew it not” (Ecxuarr). It will appear later in
our treatment in a fuller manner that religions could
not consider human capacity as the measurement
of the activity of the Divine, but that to all religions,
in their best conclusions, human achievement was
considered as the highest proof of grace.

It is not possible that so much should lie imbedded
in such a recognition did it not signify more than
a passive approval or a setting of act and work.
If things did not mean more for our life, there is not
much more won than a beautiful sonorous etiquette.
In order to bring forth a genuine renewal, the
recognition of the Divine must transpose itself into
an energetic selection and rejection of the elements
which present themselves in this world. The great-
ness of this turn of man consists in that the Spiritual
Life is led through its freedom from the entanglement


208 FUNDAMENTAL BASIS OF UNIVERSAL RELIGION


and anxiety of the world-situation to a pure distinct-
ness of its own nature and to a full self-reliance.
Thus, an energetic distinction between essential and
non-essential becomes possible, and through such
an analysis the life is powerfully roused and set in
motion. Religion throughout is not mere contem-
plation with its corresponding characteristics, but,
after the nature of its nucleus, is the highest activity,
the separation of the existing chaos, the concentration
of the Spiritual Life by itself, and the setting forth
of such a Spiritual Life against all the alien elements
which threaten to overwhelm it.


2. The Content of Religion


(a) The Idea of God.—The discussion of the idea
of God belongs to the summit of our investigation.
But the discussion of the subject is to be considered
not as if the idea of God had already been discovered
in advance at a certain stage in the evolution of
religion, and had driven forward all further develop-
ment out of itself; but on the contrary, our in-
vestigation considers the idea of God as that which
brings to expression above all else the characteristic
properties of religion, and which makes the main
direction of the striving of religion palpable. There-
fore, one fought in reality for the content of religion
when one fought for the conception of God, and it
is in the recognition of this fact that every conception
of religion has to prove itself.

The pathway which leads to the conception of God
leads us at the same time to the content which the
conception can have for us. It signifies to us nothing
other than an Absolute Spiritual Life in its grandeur


THE FACT OF UNIVERSAL RELIGION 209


above all the limitations of man and the world of
experience—a Spiritual Life that has attained to a
complete subsistence in itself, and, at the same time,
to an encompassing of all reality.

Before we view what such a foundation and develop-
ment of the idea of God, in and by the Spiritual Life,
yields as to content, we must discuss how this way
of taking the idea contrasts with other ways, and
especially how it is qualified to overcome an antithesis,
which, beyond mere conceptions, disunites and en-
dangers the religious life itself. This antithesis is
that of anthropomorphism and of ontological specula-
tion. The former has endeavoured to keep the idea
of God as near as possible to man; the latter has
endeavoured to lift the idea as high and far above
man as possible. Anthropomorphism controls the
ordinary conception of religion from remote anti-
quity. Or can we deny that man is here wont to
project into the universe a somewhat magnified
and ennobled replica of himself, and to deal with
the Deity as with a man-like being? The insuffi-
ciency of this was not only brought up against, but
it was also fully felt within, religion’s own circle.
Hence the effort to drive out such a human notion,
and this elimination seemed to be most thoroughly
effected by ontological speculation which excluded
each and all closer determination of the Godhead as
illegitimate, and retained as valid for the nature of
the Godhead only Being without any qualities and
above all concepts. This worked with special attrac-
tive energy on philosophic minds, who then evolved


a mode of esoteric religion which seemed to lie
14


210 FUNDAMENTAL BASIS OF UNIVERSAL RELIGION


heaven-wide from all the smallness and selfishness
of man. But with such a loosening of its bonds
with man, religion threatened to forfeit not only all
clear qualities of the Godhead but also all animated
energy ; it passed more and more into a passive con-
templation, and, by this, into a direct counterpart
of the anthropomorphic religion which accomplishes
too little in the inward transformation of man, and
which serves too directly his desire for mere
happiness.

With such a divergence the two ways cannot
possibly be directly united and conjoined, as the
esoteric and exoteric forms of religion, as has
happened in the main in the historical religions and
especially in Christianity. In reality the Christianity
of the Church has not one but two conceptions of
God—one anthropomorphic and the other ontologic-
speculative ; they contain different forms of religion,
so that any juxtaposition of the two forms cannot
possibly be a solution of the problem, but can only
represent a tolerable compromise which insistently
proclaims the two requirements of every concept
of God and of all religion. |Anthropomorphism
contends rightly that religion, in order to be a
power of life and not a mere view of the universe,
must remain close to man and must strengthen
him in himself. How little ontology is able out
of its own power to do this, and how little in its
speculations it leads to religion—all this would be
quite evident if it were not wont, unnoticed, to
complete itself from a more positive kind of re-
ligion, and to substitute mere empty conceptions


THE FACT OF UNIVERSAL RELIGION 11


for true forms, as mysticism evidently shows. On
the other hand, ontology possesses a right in the
undertaking because it lifts religion out of the circle
of presentations, and especially out of the circle of
the interests of the mere individual; for through this,
ontology really forms something new out of man,
and not merely strengthens him further in his small-
ness and narrowness.

Now, the two claims—the psychic nearness of
religion and its liberation from the mere-human—
become united with the promulgation of the Spiritual
Life. For this deals not only with the preservation
of the merely human but with its spiritual substance,
and it prohibits all anchorage in any merely human
province and all binding of the conception of God
in merely human conceptions. But when, at the
same time, the truth stands firm that the Spiritual
Life has to win our true self—the depth of our own
nature—then religion, with all its elevation beyond
the merely human, preserves a nearness of soul; and,
too, the conception of God can gain a positive con-
tent without falling into anthropomorphism. All
this will happen through the fundamental conception
that man himself signifies no bare isolated existence,
but is moored upon Infinity, and only in the realisa-
tion of this fact is he able to discover his own definite
nature. Also, the highest human conception of de-
signating the Absolute Nature will not suffice, for a
human colouring always clings to the conception of
spiritual greatness. But these conceptions, through
the annulment of the sharp opposites, can well serve
as pathways and symbols, and, in spite of all their
insufficiency, can present us with true contents of life.


212 FUNDAMENTAL BASIS OF UNIVERSAL RELIGION


From such a reflection on these things the effort
concerning the personality of God is to be judged—a
fact which reaches back to antiquity. Much is here
a strife over words. In the expression “ personality ”
differences with the most striking resemblances lie
imbedded: one side thinks, in connection with the
expression, of the individual human nature with its
opposition to other natures and with its natural
limits; another thinks of the “becoming” inde-
pendence and self-comprehension of the Spiritual
Life in man. But the whole of the difference is
not a strife over words. The direct denial of a
personality of God aims at the denial of a superiority
against the world-process, aims at bringing about a
pantheistic melting of the Absolute Life in the world.
An unconditional affirmation, on the other hand,
works in the direction of humanising and pulling
down. It becomes necessary, then, for a further de-
velopment of the Spiritual Life to secure sufficiently
its ground against the flow of all into merely human
qualities and relations ; and it is not easy to overcome
this danger on account of the rooted usage of terms.
Therefore, it may be recommended as a scientific ex-
pression of the fact, not to transplant the expression
“personality” to the Absolute Life, or, at the most,
not to employ it as more than a symbol. Indeed,
one may ask, in order to avoid the dangers of the
conception of personality, whether religion of a
universal kind has not to turn from the expression
“God” to that of “ Godhead.” Whether the passage
from the Universal mode of religion to the Charac-
teristic mode constitutes such a turning, and at the
same time gives a better right to the conception of


THE FACT OF UNIVERSAL RELIGION 213


personality, can be shown only by further develop-
ments and experiences.

These investigations include also the decision con-
cerning the position of mysticism. If the Spiritual
Life is, first of all, a total-life, then no true departure
to the religious province can take place without a
liberation from narrow accuracy, without a counter-
effect to the merely human, and without the setting of
the life in a total-life. That mysticism sets this
forth, is its great service ; indeed, all the moulding of
religion fails unless it takes an element of mysticism
—the living soul—into itself. But mysticism fails
because it turns this necessary portion of religion into
the sole content. To it religion is nothing other than
an absorption into the infinite and eternal Being—an
extinguishing of all particularity, and the gaining of
a complete calm through the suspension of all the
wear and tear of life. Thus even here the Nay
and not the Yea remains in the ascendant; and
this will far more lower the natural difficulties of life
than wring from them a new power superior to
them; and consequently the life fails to find an exit
out of the sphere of irritation and of its ordinary pitch
to a region of active work and to a fundamental
transformation of reality. Mysticism, however, holds
valid as a weighty and indispensable motive of religion,
but it does not constitute the whole of religion.
We cannot dispense with it, but dare not terminate
with it.

If we now turn towards the demarcations and
securities, it is clear that such can never result out of
vague reflection but out of the experiences of the
Spiritual Life. All speculative gnosticism fades


214 FUNDAMENTAL BASIS OF UNIVERSAL RELIGION


where the Life-process constitutes the point of depar-
ture and also the boundary of all reflection. The
idea of God signifies to us nothing other than an
Absolute Spiritual Life—a Life freed from the limits
and entanglements of our experience, a Life in
possession of a complete existence for itself, and
constituting the substance of reality. It is thus
alone that the idea of God can possess a content,
that the characteristics of the Spiritual Life can long
for a purer formation, and that these characteristics,
uniting among one another what appeared previously
as merely external qualities, can now set these very
qualities in the nature itself. Through such a turn
from effects to causes, from surface to foundation, the
unity of the total-life raises itself to a more complete
clearness; the timelessness of all spiritual content
leads to the idea of a Divine Order; the truthful and
the worthful now desire a full union, and the good
becomes the governing power of all life. Thus the
Spiritual Life, through such an elevation to the
Absolute, reaches a full development of its own
nature, and obtains, at the same time, an incompar-
ably greater power and superiority over against the
merely human powers.

(8) Godhead and the World.—In connection with
the problem of the Godhead and the world, two
directions have struggled for prominence, each of
which is able to show a good reason for itself. On
the one side, it appears necessary before all else to
distinguish clearly the Godhead from the world, and
to raise such far above the world; for it is only thus
we are able to preserve the purity of the conception,
and only thus does an elevating effect seem to pro-


THE FACT OF UNIVERSAL RELIGION — 215


ceed from such a conception. On the other side, the
Godhead is drawn as far as possible deep into the
world, and as far as possible the particular nature of
the Divine is bound with the particular nature of
things, for it is only thus we seem able to reach a
living present consciousness and lasting influences
from the world.
“What kind of nature would God have, had He no other call
Than from outside to move the world and merely circling


all!
Far more is He the inner life of all that seems and is,
In Him is Nature born and bred, and He in Nature lives.”


Thus we obtain the opposition of transcendence
and immanence, of dualism and monism, of super-
naturalism and pantheism. The terms announce but
little, and the mutual charges of heresy are weari-
some. That the matter is not so simple as _ the
partisans imagine on the one side or the other,
appears clear from the fact that whole epochs have
stood under the influence, now of one, now of the
other: waning antiquity could not, on account of a
feeling of weariness, separate wide enough the Divine
and the world; the rising modern times, with its
fresh strain of life, could not sufficiently unite both.
Indeed, soon the impression of limits and entangle-
ments predominated ; later the impression of energy
and beauty won the upper hand. Alternate aspects
of inability and ability drew the character hither and
thither. We have to see if the development of
religion through the Spiritual Life is able to raise
man above the vacillations of times and of dis-


positions. | |
The starting-point of the Spiritual Life evidently


216 FUNDAMENTAL BASIS OF UNIVERSAL RELIGION


prohibits such a crass dualism as governs the ordinary
mind. For the Spiritual Life was no separate
domain which forced open an entrance to alien things,
but it proved itself to us as the characteristic depth
of reality, and as the turn of life to its own nature.
- Therefore, if the conception of the Godhead develops
out of the conception of the Spiritual Life, the God-
head must be most intimately connected with the
nature of things ; and this nature of things must be
grounded and founded in the Godhead, and, finally,
the Godhead must be all in all. The positive
religions could not withhold such a conviction, and
religion dare not deprive itself of the experience of
the great apostle who felt that “in Him we live,
and move, and have our being,” and that “we are
also His offspring.”

When dualism misconstrues this, it isolates the
Godhead to the uttermost, and thus loses all power
to give the Godhead a content ; inevitably a partially
transfigured mirror-image of the reality nearest at
hand is set up fora new world. The projection of this
“here and now” to a “beyond”—this reduplication
of the world—must, however, create a contradiction
especially in the province of religion, for with such
a method there results too little inward trans-
formation; the natural impulses are not sufficiently
broken ; the bitter Nay fails in religion, and without
such a Nay the Yea gains no energy and depth.
The same thing happens in connection with the
customary hopes of immortality, which conceive of
man as being immortal even in his body and all its
natural limitations, and which are carried with all
their worldly qualities into infinity. Indeed, is there


THE FACT OF UNIVERSAL RELIGION 217


not a religious disposition conceivable which has as
its motive some kind of conservation of the “dear
self,” and which finds the hindrances against such a
conservation unbearable ?

Thus, not only all philosophic thought, but also
definite religion itself, withstand such a dualism ; but,
again, a renunciation of it glides easily into pantheism.
But an exclusive and complete pantheism, however,
is securely obviated through a development of religion
out of the Life-process. ‘To such a pantheism our
world in the whole of its existence becomes a
phenomenon, a development, an emanation, or, as the
usual wording has it, an absolute essence. All
differentiation of things appears to such a line of
thought as a weakness and an error of the human
mode of thinking ; there is, to such a view, only one
particular reality, only one particular life. The
government of God according to this theory falls
fully in unison with the characteristic effects of the
things, and the unity spreads itself over the whole
multiplicity. Such a course of thought has the
tendency to win man to its side, especially when the
consciousness of his energy stirs within him, and
when his eyes are opened to the fulness of life and
the beauty of the world. It is the self-consciousness
of the work of culture—a consciousness of a truth
beyond the individuals themselves—which, through
a strengthening of itself, raises pantheism to a
religion. Its atmosphere of greatness, its effort to
reach beyond the antithesis of life, and its giving
reality a depth, are the chief recommendations of
pantheism.

Such things are no small merits. But, in spite of


218 FUNDAMENTAL BASIS OF UNIVERSAL RELIGION


all its lustre, pantheism discovers no contradiction in
the inmost nature of man, and such a failure makes
it untenable, and transmutes its development into a
subversion of the self. It remains an indisputable
fact that all turn to religion originates out of an
opposition to the surrounding world; the thought
of an over-world arises and gains a power only
because the near-at-hand world does not penetrate
into a problem whose solution dare not be abandoned.
Herewith, it is characteristic of and essential to
religion that it develops its power from within with-
out in opposition to the surrounding world; and
where the opposition fades or fails, its energy
immediately relaxes. The idea of God becomes
unstable where no inner contradiction carries man
beyond the world and furthers a life above the world.
All movements within the world and all the deepen-
ing of the things existing in it can, of course, further
their own particular conceptions, but they cannot
justify a breach with external things, and it is through
such a breach that the idea of God results. Such an
idea of God holds within itself a great turn of life and
a transformation of reality; it issues also a call of
the whole of reason to the struggle against unreason
and for the renewal of life. All this lies far away
from pantheism.

The contradiction referred to checks the develop-
ment of pantheism and drives it out to great diver-
gences. If the ideas draw God and the world in
opposite directions, both could not possibly flow
together side by side; the one tends to overcome
the other, and seeks to absorb the other into itself.
Where the movement to the Godhead stands in the


THE FACT OF UNIVERSAL RELIGION 219


foreground, the world takes its flight more and more
to the realm of night as is shown in mysticism ;
where the movement proceeds mainly in the direction
of the world, the idea of God evidently fades away
until finally it becomes an empty word which trans-
forms itself from pantheism to atheism. The develop-
ment of modern life down to the brand-new monism
of the present day points out this fact. Pantheism
often dresses things with an indefinite glamour of the
Divine, and deceives us as to the sharpness of the
opposites of things. Often pantheism is no more
than an echo of a real and energetic religion which
has been transformed into a sickly sentimentalism—
into the process of the dissolution of real religion.
But in human existence the hardest inner contra-
diction hinders in no way a true realisation and
development of power, so that this remains an
historical fact in spite of the poverty of pantheism.
But pantheism has rendered the service of working
against the humanising of the religious conceptions,
and has cast its glance on the particular connections
of things and on the presence of reason within the
world, and especially it has opposed the egoism not
only of the individual but of mankind, and also has
held that reality is to be possessed not through
words and doctrines but through the opening of a
new life out of the Whole and Infinity. But its
mistake consists in that it recognises the highest aim
as already attained, and declares all divergence from
such an aim as a mere appearance. ‘This ready-made
kind of reality has precarious results in varied
directions. If there is to be recognised as valid
only such a ready-made reality, and if it is not


220 FUNDAMENTAL BASIS OF UNIVERSAL RELIGION


shown that the reason of things can only be attained
through labour and struggle, then life transforms
itself into a mere contemplation, and the reconciliation
with reality lies then merely in a bare contemplation
of an artistic or scientific kind. This point is, how-
ever, reached at the cost of freedom and ethical
handling, for both of which there is no place in
such a position. At the same time, there arises an
inclination which was made partially clear even at
the start, that evil is to be considered trivial and to
be glossed over; hence the danger of a quietistic
optimism arises. Here, the whole of the Spiritual
Life receives too much of a merely natural character ;
it may be conceived as a restful substance and as a
continuous process, but it does not appear so much
as the freedom and the destiny of man. Thus such
a course falls in its flight to the level of the mere-
human, and becomes under the ban of purely natural
conceptions—a position extremely difficult for the
Spiritual Life to express its definiteness and depth.
In reality, all this gliding of the Divine into the
world tends in the direction of concealing the op-
posites and of weakening the energy of movement.
True, religion must also seek for the Divine in the
world, but it can find it only when it has developed
and stamped its impress over against the world; for
such is the only possible way to distinguish between
reason and unreason, to drive out the enemy and to
uplift the kinsman. It is characteristic of religion
that the Divine world has another world by its side
which somehow strikes its roots into the Divine, and
which also presents the aim of its worship as an
impetus out of its own energy, but which impetus,


THE FACT OF UNIVERSAL RELIGION 221


attains to this aim not by its own energy, but only
through being lifted up to it by the Divine world.

In the primal phenomenon of religion a two-fold
aspect is imbedded: the Absolute Life must be
effective above and within the world; the movement
must proceed beyond the world and return to the
world. It is this fact especially which gives religion
its driving force, its incessant life from ever fresh
sources. ‘The two things are not separated one from
the other, but are present the one thing with the
other. Religion thus needs a continuous overcom-
ing of the opposition of dualism and pantheism,
each of which pursues only one of these opposites,
and thus soon reaches a disastrous point of rigid
repose.

(vy) Godhead and Man.—In connection with the
problem of the relationship between the Godhead and
man, there exists especially the danger of making
them to move, within the realm of religion, outside
of each other and to labour against each other. For
if Divine and human action are brought into such an
opposition to each other that the gain of the one
signifies the loss of the other, all the freedom of man
and all human activity become prejudicial to the all-
power of the Divine, as well as to an unconditioned
surrender of man; and both of these are absolutely
necessary for all religion. If such a one-sided course
is adopted, religion will restrict freedom as much as
possible up to complete annihilation ; indeed, this line
of thought made all explicitly religious characters
determinists in their consciousness. If consideration
for the practice of life enforced a mitigation in these
matters, and imposed the admission of a co-operation


222 FUNDAMENTAL BASIS OF UNIVERSAL RELIGION


on the part of man also, such behaviour was evidence
rather of a practical cleverness than of a religious
depth and logical conclusions. If, however, the con-
sequences are thought out without any consideration
for human opinion and individual feelings, determinism
produces an apathy of each and all of our activities,
it brings about a blight on all moral endeavour and
introduces the most deadly enmity between morality
and religion. Then, all redemption is supposed to
lie in a fixed miracle; a materialism threatens the
substance of the religious life, since good is simply
infused into us without being transformed into our
own act. All this leads easily to an overstrain and
an untruth; when this track of thought is followed,
it depicts man as impotent, depraved, and bad, in
order to allow the Divine grace to shine all the
clearer against such a dark background of human
existence. We have thus obtained the unfortunate
doctrine of original sin which drew Christianity into
Manicheism; and thus we find that opinion of
Luther that man does not so much acquire righteous-
ness as that righteousness is imputed to him by faith.
Such an opinion, if thought out, resolves the great
struggle of the world into an appearance and
a play.

Such consequences—unavoidable and unbearable
at the same time—reveal clearly a mistake in
the fundamental direction of this line of thought.
In the last resort, it is a mistaken, anthropomorphic,
and inadequate course of thought for religion
also, to attempt to heighten the conceptions of the
greatness of the Godhead and of the Divine action
through the debasement of man and his capacities.


THE FACT OF UNIVERSAL RELIGION = 223


This is in the end nothing other than the measurement
of the Divine by the standard of man at his worst.
In reality there is only one solution to the problem:
the opposition of the Divine and the human has, in
the main, to be abandoned, and the development of
the one and the strengthening of the other at the
same time has to take its place. The freedom and
the self-activity of man are not a withdrawal of the
Divine power and the lessening of Divine grace, but
they are the verification of these—the highest verifica-
tion of all. Morality and religion do not strive for
some other province, but, rightly understood, morality
itself is the main proof of the fundamental fact of
religion—of the presence of an Absolute Life. The
fact that man is raised to a level of a definite Spiritual
Life over against his own weaknesses and the contra-
dictions of a boundless world, is the greatest of all
miracles, for it carries within itself the power of a
world above the world.

How all this is possible, how freedom arises out of
grace, and self-activity arises out of dependence—this
primal phenomenon overflows all explanation. It
has, as the fundamental condition of all Spiritual Life,
a universal axiomatic character. This shows itself
as no isolated problem, but is a higher stage of a
more general problem, viz., how out of the connections
of the world an individual nature of a psychic kind—
a feeling and willing nature—has arisen, and has led
its own life in opposition to all the environment? If
we were fortunate enough to solve this problem, we
could then be ready to handle every other.

But what remains a great riddle to speculation has
been transformed into a religion by life through its


224 FUNDAMENTAL BASIS OF UNIVERSAL RELIGION


achievements. Also, even with the great determinists
who possessed great natures, this truth has been
verified. They were not inactive natures dependent
merely on hope and tarrying, but even in the
proclamation of their highest conceptions and in the
shaping of their own inmost nature they were carried
as if by a superior power, and became tools for the
fulfilment of their most characteristic aims. The
highest achievement of freedom carries within itself
the strongest consciousness of dependence. Paul
more than anyone has brought a determinism into
Christianity, but at the same time he worked more
than all his contemporaries. One needs only follow
Augustine in his life-work in order to acknowledge
him as one of the most active of personalities ; and
Luther’s energy needs no proclamation on the house-
top. Further, in wider circles of activity, freedom
and dependence can run together as is proved by that
Calvinism, to which the entire conviction was present
that all has been determined solely and directly by
God ; and yet such a conviction became the strongest
motive for the assertion of independence, and for
the sprouting forth of the most fervent work. Thus
a problem insoluble by the mind was solved by
religion.

The solution, however, must not remain confined
to those personalities and epochs to whom the original
welling-up life was strong enough to drive back and
to render harmless all the errors of the psychical
impulses and of conscious contentment. The solution
must be recognised clearly, and must govern the
universal configuration of religion. In all this the
activity does not revolve around a struggle of bare


THE FACT OF UNIVERSAL RELIGION 225


opinions, but around the content of life. Wherever
antagonism between the Godhead and mankind
remains in power, the life enters into a dilemma—
into a vacillation to and fro between irreconcilable
opposites. Hither the dependence alone fills the
conviction, and then all our activity appears as
useless, and, indeed, as a blasphemy; thus religion
becomes almost entirely passive and receives a gloomy,
doleful, and unmanly character ; it becomes a danger
to the freedom and the energy of life; it easily
engenders, in its turn towards pietism, a dejected
and cowed character—a character of painful unver-
acity wherein the man imagines that he is great in
his nothingness, and so superior to another who seems
to be conscious of his own powers. All this happens
the more the man builds and confesses his feeling
of detestableness of all he has. When, however, in
the reaction against such a disposition of mind a fresh
and frank courage of life arises—when the man
holds fast the opposites, the previous danger is escaped,
and the man feels, unfolds, and enjoys his own energy ;
such a feeling heightens to a defiant self-consciousness
and to the placing on one side of the Divine. The
consequence is that culture thus takes a turn against
religion, and treats it as a mere expression of weakness
and as a refuge for sick souls. But all this leads
rapidly to a reaction. The more such a development
of culture wipes out from the contents of life every-
thing absolute and all the problems of the Absolute,
the more it extinguishes the gleam of the over-world
which surrounds our existence. Then life, in spite
of all its activities, becomes inwardly shallower and


emptier, until at last it turns again pomicr nhs in


226 FUNDAMENTAL BASIS OF UNIVERSAL RELIGION


search of a content, in search of a spiritual self-
preservation within the domain of religion.

If such a change for the worse in the realm of
culture is to be viewed in our day, the more necessary
it behoves us to raise religion by means of the nature
of its substance above this situation, in order that it
may construct its superiority above the mere mentality
of the day, and in order that eternal truth may be
rightly held up against all the fluctuations and errors
of human existence.

(0) The Psychic Connections of Religion.—It is a
main point in our method of investigation to differ-
entiate clearly between the foundation of the spiritual
contents in the characteristic connections of the
spiritual world, and their stimulations in psychic
existence; or, in other words, to hold separate a
noological and a psychological treatment. Thus the
previous investigation of the religious problem needs
a completion through the presence of the psychic
motives which prepare and incline man for religion.

The discovery of a pointed contradiction in our
life—the strong contradiction between need and
reality — constitutes the starting-point of all the
turn towards religion; for how could we in any
other way come to strive so eagerly to reach beyond
the province of that experience which threatens to
break the connection of the world and the unity of
our own existence? ‘This contrast is in the first place
a fact of feeling. Feeling constructs the psychic
starting-point of religion, but it remains certainly
fundamentally different from the spiritual root of
religion. But the observation of a contrast—the
painful discovery of a contradiction—has an _indis-


THE FACT OF UNIVERSAL RELIGION 227


pensable hypothesis in spiritual things. Such a con-
tradiction could not have entered into the life had
not some kind of movement been already awakened
in us—some kind of impetus after a higher kind of
happiness been kindled; for purely external misfor-
tunes produce no shock in the deepest recesses of the
soul and engender no feeling of the real nature of the
hindrance. We see often, however, on the political
and social sides, the most stubborn evils and grievances
enduring for a great length of time without engen-
dering a feeling of pain, and without calling forth a
strong indignation. ‘The callousness is even so great
that the external events pass over the soul without
any reaction on its part; and the immediate impres-
sions do not link themselves together to form a
Whole. But there is imbedded in the discovery of the
contradiction some kind of longing after happiness:
a positive need of life is the first thing found in the
foundation, which drives life upon the track of religion.

If such a need of lite met with no hindrance, no
kind of entanglement would arise; if the opposition
could be conquered, though not at once yet in the
course of time through external circumstances, life
and striving would be held fast by such external
circumstances more than they would be raised above
them. A breach can only take place when the
opposition appears as insurmountable—insurmount-
able for present and future, for achievement and for
hope. Through such a situation the striving is either
to discontinue as being quite hopeless, or it must
open out new avenues of a complete transforming
view of the world and of life. A closer investigation
of that wherein the hindrance and the problem are


228 FUNDAMENTAL BASIS OF UNIVERSAL RELIGION


discovered shows how deep this inward revolution
goes, and in what directions it carries the man. We
see in the course of history itself more and more
elements moving from the outward into the inward
and thus deepening the inward itself. Although in
the beginning all this might have been the external
entanglement which our own energy could not
remove and which called for supernatural aid, yet
soon the inward condition steps into the foreground
and insists on a spiritual redemption. Also, it makes
an important difference whether the entanglement is
discovered in what a man thinks or in what he does ;
whether the contradiction roots itself in an existence
laid upon the man by a destiny which does not
correspond with and even contradicts his immost
nature, or whether the hindrances belong to the soul
itself and whether man can sanction his own striving
and being in the attempts to remove them. In all
this the pain becomes violent, and the awakened soul
is hurried along if the impressions and feelings remain
unscattered but unite into a Whole of experience
and judgment and work with the energy of a Whole ;
and through this revelation of the nature of our life
the whole level of our ordinary existence becomes
insufficient and even intolerable.

This judgment in its turn will reach its greatest
resoluteness, and the situation of the soul will reach
its greatest tension when the main ground of our
malady is seen to consist not in that we can never
reach worthy aims, and must always remain in a state
of imperfection, but in that the very aims them-
selves are now in doubt, in that they promise no
definite happiness, and in that incessant courage and


THE FACT OF UNIVERSAL RELIGION 229


work appear worthless. If, then, such aims do not
suffice, what shall we hope for, and where shall we
turn ?

The crisis now comes to a full outburst; the
previous situation is seen through as untenable, and
it now becomes necessary to go backward or forward.
Either every striving after happiness and after the
noblest things has to be viewed as a tragic error,
and has to surrender itself to a total dissolution, or
a great turn results, a new point of departure is won
for the life, and a new world is discovered. All
attempts to weaken this Hther-Or lead to sickly
compromises, to the deadness of the feelings, and to
the one-sidedness of life itself.

But through such a turn to his inmost nature,
there originates in man a decisive struggle concerning
Being and non-being. Often enough has the negation
conquered with innumerable individuals, with whole
times and epochs, and has gained the overhand in
the particular province of religion as is shown so
evidently in Buddhism. But it has not always
conquered, for the affirmation, too, has become a
world-power, and it is this affirmation which preserves
rightly human life and effort. The point where
such a decision falls on the individual—and it is this
fact which occupies us here—lies largely on the other
side of the province of “grounds” and aims, and
there appears in its existence something axiomatic,
original, and elevated. The decision occupies itself
with the question as to whether an impetus of life is
to awaken—an impetus that no upheaval can destroy,
and which shows that, with all the surrender of the
natural self and all the overthrow of prior happiness,


230 FUNDAMENTAL BASIS OF UNIVERSAL RELIGION


something remains in man—something he cannot
destroy. It cannot be destroyed because man ac-
knowledges it not as a special possession of his own
but as the inward presence of a new world which
makes itself felt and efficacious in the greatest catas-
trophes of life, and indeed, is able to grow on account
of these. Through such a turn the presence and
mystery of the suffering itself become the beginning
of an elevation beyond it.

Thus we discover the co-operation of two factors
in what leads man to religion, and in what exercises
a power over his soul, viz., a deeper discovery of the
hindrances of the world, and an iron energy over
against the hindrances right up to the achievement
of a new world. We saw how the discovery of the
actual situation could not have been made without
some kind of a stirrimg existence of the inward
energy. And it is this stirring existence which drives
the energy beyond its natural initial stage, stimulates
it to a progressive depth, and furthers the physical
tension of life into a metaphysical tension. The
whole of this is a movement of life all along the line
through difficult hindrances ; it is the assertion, and,
at the same time, the transformation of a Yea
in the midst of the strongest negation. Indeed, it
is the holding fast of a Yea in the Nay; it is
an ascent of the nature whose freshness and truth
can only be asserted when both sides are held forth
and ever anew are experienced. Thus there is set
forth a dialectic not of ideas but of life—a focusing
of deep experience and manly energy and a puri-
fication of one through the other, an ever-freer
elevation above the antithesis of bare natural energy


THE FACT OF UNIVERSAL RELIGION 231


and effeminate weakness, and finally the dawning of
a heroism of the most inward kind. All this sets a
world against a world, and out of the catastrophe
itself a new life is born. |

(¢) Lhe Characteristic Features of the Religion of
the Spiritual Life.— Religion does not deal with the
conservation of man as mere man, but with the con-
servation of the Spiritual Life in man; for in con-
nection with religion there stands in question the
winning of a definite Spiritual Life; and religion
must set forth in a characteristic manner the parti-
cular features of such a life as well as its total-view.
In connection with these particular features we must
present at least some of them.

1. Where religion is directed upon the winning of
a new and elevated life superior to all human impulses,
its sublimity must contend with special energy for a
province beyond all human interests and_ parties.
Religion is never mixed in a Yea or a Nay
with political or social problems. Religion has
nothing whatever to do as to whether monarchy
or republic, individualistic or socialistic presentation
of economic relation, is the better condition of things ;
and he who draws religion into these spheres, even if
he is of the opinion that one of them is useful for
humanity, will find an opponent who thinks quite as
strongly in a contrary direction. No less injurious it
is to handle religion in the interests of a political or
social radicalism, or to defame it in the interests of
the privileged classes. How deplorably would one
think of the nature of man if religion meant no more
than this, and how little would man think of himself
if the abandonment of spirituality and, along with


232 FUNDAMENTAL BASIS OF UNIVERSAL RELIGION


this, the abandonment of the content and meaning of
his own life come about so easily !

2. We have already shown how the Spiritual Life
with its construction of a discovered reality within
itself goes behind the psychic form of life with all its
ramifications, and how it has transformed the whole
province, in so far as such a province had connections
with such a life, into a mere appearance. Wherever
the eclipse of this truth happens, there is called forth
difficult entanglements and passionate discords which
affect deeply the configuration of religion.

Thus, the old-rooted intellectualism turns the great-
ness of religion into a hybrid of many colours.
Religion should be a fact of the whole man and of
his own decision, but may, however, fail to possess
more than a purely intellectual character. Through
this, the main fact of religion is stunted in its growth,
and conscience and conviction are oppressed. This
appears most of all in the conception of belief. ‘The
welfare of the soul can never link itself to belief unless
that belief means more than an authoritatively trans-
mitted doctrine, and unless the man in the inmost
substance of his soul stretches forth towards the
belief. The ecclesiastical form of religion has suc-
ceeded but little in working out this connection of
belief, and is unable to succeed on account of its ad-
mixture of the substance and the ewistence-form of the
Spiritual Life. The Divine Life in its possession by
man transforms itself unfortunately into a doctrine—
a doctrine of the redemption of the soul and of “ last
things,” but still a doctrine ; the more such a doctrine
surmounts reason and even contradicts reason, the
greater seems the sacrifice of the power of affirma-


THE FACT OF UNIVERSAL RELIGION 233


tion and of the heroism of the character. Now,
heroism certainly belongs to religion—more heroism,
indeed, than belongs to any other fact in the world—
but this heroism must set itself in the right position,
for otherwise the valour becomes a caprice and the
consolidation becomes a torpor. The heroism is not
brought about through any kind of doctrine which
constructs the object of life, but through the presence
of an Absolute Life in our own nature; then, belief
is no mere agreement with any doctrine, but there is
imbedded in it an ascent of the whole existence of
our nature, a longing for the heights, and a pro-
gressive certainty of such heights out of the energy
of the Divine Life. Thus, belief in its foundation
rests upon one thing alone, but that one thing is the
kernel of a new world. At the same time, belief is
naturally a source of new convictions, but these con-
victions will not be developed without arranging
themselves with the general position of the Spiritual
Life and without utilising the experiences of life.
Such a character of belief alone makes it clear how
its counterpart—doubt—can play such a great part
in religion as in reality it does. So long as belief
rests upon bare doctrine, it remains undiscoverable
how doubt agitates so strongly the soul, and how it
can shatter so deeply the life. We have seen, how-
ever, how in ancient times that, when the religious
problem stood in the background of the Spiritual
Life, doubt and scepticism were recommended by
clever men as the best remedies for the comfort of
the soul. On that account Christianity has become
something quite other, because, through the relation-
ship to God, the gain of a new nature—the salvation


234 FUNDAMENTAL BASIS OF UNIVERSAL RELIGION


of the threatened soul—became the great quest.
But if the matter deals with the question concerning
spiritual existence or its non-existence, the strength of
doubt leads quickly to despair. The shrinkage be-
comes so painful and the coercion so intolerable when
orthodoxy places doctrine between us and life, and
decides as to the place of church dogmas in connec-
tion with the welfare and salvation of man.

A fundamental driving out of intellectualism in
this and in other religious conceptions, as, for example,
in the ordinary conception of revelation, is necessary
in the urgent need of religion. But such a conquest
will only take place through the recognition of the
truth-elements of intellectualism, especially in its
desire after a world of thought; it will not take place
through placing ourselves in an entirely contrary
position to the world of thought, or through attempt-
ing to found religion upon bare feeling or will. For
if the conquest has the conjecture, that it is only
reachable simply through the setting-up of a contrary
valid doctrine, it is easy to see, on the other hand,
that bare feeling or will yields a spiritual substance
quite as little as bare knowledge. Strong subjective
feelings and strong subjective acts of will may con-
tain but very little spiritual substance. The appear-
ance of a success only is reached in such a manner,
for, often unobserved, something becomes a spurious
image of something deeper, more essential, and more
substantial, and which makes its appearance as feel-
ing or will, but which does not reach the higher
stage of a feeling or willing entity. What brings the
opposition of intellectualism and voluntarism to ruins
are the problems within the Spiritual Life; these


THE FACT OF UNIVERSAL RELIGION — 235


problems handle the different sides and tasks of life
which on the surface are at variance with one another
and play against one another, whilst in reality they
depend on one another and belong to an encompass-
ing Whole. If something did lie beneath and pro-
ceed out of all the “isms,” we could say that Noet?-
cesm | alone is able to found securely religion, and it is
out of this noetic synthesis that the struggle against
the discord begins.

3. We have seen that religion has to do with the
whole of life, and that it pledges to uplift this whole ;
therefore it does more than construct a special
province over against the remaining portions of life ;
it must strike its effects in all directions, and it works
less directly upon the particular provinces than upon
the transformation of the total-life. All the direct
effects of religion, as, for example, upon science, art,
the state, have grave dangers and lead easily to
coercion and contraction, and are rightly rejected.
But it is a fundamental mistake, when such direct
actions are rejected, to reject the indirect actions as
well. Since religion transforms the whole man, it
will also change, through its ramifications into the
whole nature, problems into energies, and aims into
points of attack. But such changes do not occur
through any arbitrary command from the outside, but
through a tranquil—and, certainly, a mighty—effect
from within without. Conceived of in its univer-


1 The Substantive “Noeticism” is not found in English
Philosophy. The terms “noetic synthesis” and “noetic conscious-
ness” are found, but in a somewhat different sense. Cf. Stout’s
Analytic Psychology, vol. ii. ch. v.; Martineau’s Types of Ethical
Theory, vol, ii, pp. 443-445, where he deals with Cudworth’s
“intelligible ideas” (vonpara).— TRANSLATOR.


236 FUNDAMENTAL BASIS OF UNIVERSAL RELIGION


sality (although this universality does not form the
final conclusions of religion) religion needs no special
organisation, but is able through an invisible sway to
penetrate through the whole work of life. Indeed,
the deeper it works, the less it steps into publicity,
and the more it signifies nothing other than the
tranquil and yet powerful soul of the whole. ‘Thus
in the great souls whose convictions were filled with
such a universal nature of religion, the incomprehen-
siveness and the inscrutableness of the Highest
Essence do not discourage and lower the pressure of
such souls, but work in a gravitating and elevating
direction. Thus, we find the deep-religious Plato
stating that it is difficult to know God, and impos-
sible to communicate in an entire manner with Him ;
and also Goethe states that a man hardly confesses his
belief ina Divine Nature without at the same time
confessing the inscrutableness of the Divine Nature.
But still in conformity with this, all the conceptions
of religion must carry the character of universality ;
they must extend themselves over the whole life and,
through this, fasten together and strengthen what
does not proceed to a full development in the isola-
tion of the various elements of life. Human life,
right down to the abyss of pain and sin, is full of
testimonies of a superhuman Divine life which in
manifold ways appears as an elevation above all
smallness, as an illumination of the darkness, and as
a dawning of love and mercy in the midst of all
egotistic instincts and impulses. Religion must
gather together, through the energy of its universal
nature, such external and scattered effects, and
understand and revere them as parts of a more general


THE FACT OF UNIVERSAL RELIGION 237


life. Such wniversal religion does not exclude a
turning to characteristic religion; but if religion is
to extend its power over the whole of life, its
values must possess an all-comprehensiveness and an
omnipresence.

This is shown, for example, in the idea of sacrifice.
Sacrifice is a supremely important conception in
religion, since only by its acceptance does religion
attain to full seriousness. For without a funda-
mental renunciation, and indeed, without a seeming
collapse, there is no secure ascent to a new summit—
no attainment of a real life. But let not sacrifice
be limited by religion to specific religious perform-
ances, but let religion reveal it as present through-
out life, and let it weld together and inwardly raise
all this sacrifice. As the energy of love is measured
in human circles by the greatness of the sacrifice it
is capable of bringing forth, so there is no genuine
movement towards truth without denial and renun-
ciation—without an indwelling sacrifice. But in
the survey of the whole it becomes clear that
sacrifice does not restrict itself to the surrender of
this or that good, but demands nothing less than
the whole natural impulses of life. When religion
works in such a manner that we are made to see
and to experience the Whole in the parts, the
great in the small, it works therewith for the puri-
fication and sanctification of life right down to its
most insignificant details.

It is similar with the conception of faith. Faith
which the customary mode of religion confines
far too much within an isolated province, and which
it conceives in far too intellectualistic a manner,


238 FUNDAMENTAL BASIS OF UNIVERSAL RELIGION


extends, in reality, its strengthening and elevating
energy to the whole range of life. Faith, accord-
ing to the customary teaching of religion, has for
its object something invisible and seemingly im-
possible. Where, however, was there a progressive
striving in spiritual things which did not, at the
first glance, appear impossible, and which did not
trust in the inner ability of being lifted up and
in the possibility of creating a new man? How,
without this, would any kind of scientific or
esthetic creativeness of an elevated kind be con-
ceivable? How any confiding love? How any
joyous action for man’s purification in spite of all
the appearances and all the meanness of shallow
experience? And, again, all faith has the character-
istic that we cannot become its possessors through
the might and main of our own labours, but that
it rather devolves upon us as a favour, and must
be offered to us as a free gift. This is so, not
only with faith in another, but also with faith in our-
selves, in our tasks, and in our life-work. Nowhere
do we enter into genuine work and creativeness
without a conviction of an axiomatic character,
which refuses to be analysed into reasons and which,
indeed, precedes all such reasons. What, however,
is desired at the single points, and is there affirmed,
though often unconsciously and unwillingly, gains a
clear light only in its integration into a Whole,
and through the recognition of the inner presence
of an infinite energy from which an indestructible
trust and an unbounded ability of ascent can pro-
ceed. Again, it is religion which has to raise to
the power and clearness of a principle what indeed


THE FACT OF UNIVERSAL RELIGION 239


now penetrates the whole of life, but which there,
in the breadth of life, remains manifoldly scattered
and obscured. Thus, while religion integrates and
brings into activity as a whole whatever of noble
and elevating force lies hidden in our lives, it effects
a transfiguration of life without denying its dark
side; it shows the Divine in the things nearest at
hand without idealising falsely the ordinary situation
of life. |

4. This integrating energy would prepare many
a danger for religion did there not stand by its
side an energy of discrimination; and such a dis-
criminating energy is developed by religion even
of the general kind which occupies us here. For
as certainly as religion aims at the whole of the
Spiritual Life, does it desire such a life in its full
purity, but it is able to do this only through an
energetic discrimination in the human situation be-
tween genuine spirituality and its mere semblance.
Because religion dives into a substantial Spiritual
Life and constructs its nature from the Life-process,
it will exclude much as being adulterated, but will
find more depth in what it approves as genuine;
and it will raise the genuine out of its isolation to
a union, out of its chaos to a cosmos, and out
of its merely parasitical quality to a characteristic
act and full possession of the spirit. But a hard
struggle has to take place in order to carry through
a true Spiritual Life against that semi-spirituality
which satisfies the ordinary situation of human
life, and which treacherously makes man feel com-
fortable. This is nothing less than a struggle for
reality against appearance, a struggle for a true


240 FUNDAMENTAL BASIS OF UNIVERSAL RELIGION


spiritual culture over against a merely human cul-
ture. ‘True, the amount of life, now restricted to its
genuine constituents, is thus greatly reduced ; but in
what remains incomparably more is seen. ‘There
arises now a hard conflict with the customary mode
of thought, especially because this mode of thought
attributes spirituality, and with it greatness and
dignity, to its forms of life, as though they were the
latter’s natural properties, whereas religion already
clearly shows that only a certain kernel of spirituality,
or a movement towards spirituality, is present from
the first, and that these have to attain to more by
a hard struggle. But, at the same time, a new
order of things and the presence of a new world
appear in the Spiritual Life. Man, indeed, is not,
with the whole of his existence, straight-away a per-
sonality ; there only les implanted in him a power to
become a personality—a power over against a nature
of a very different kind, and which has to win its
way through such a nature. But this becoming a
personality is now recognised as an emancipation from
all existential tiedness to an external point and an
elevation to a self-life of a universal kind. Morality
signifies now not a quality pertaining to man as a
natural being, since what the ordinary life manifests
in the way of social instincts and of occasional sym-
pathy forms, at the most, no more than a step
preliminary to morality and can be ranked without
hesitation as a mere continuation of the animal level.
Genuine morality arises not earlier than at the stage
of the Spiritual Life, and it is a matter of dispute how
much or how little of this we meet in human life by
itself; but, much or little, morality appears in our


THE FACT OF UNIVERSAL RELIGION 241


domain, and along with it there appears a kingdom of
a superior kind. So that the man in the transforma-
tion may lose some of the experiences of the natural
level, but certainly man’s nature has gained in depth
and breadth through such a transformation.

Man has been well termed an “historical nature,”
but most of what is termed his history differentiates
itself too little from what is found in the changes
and deposits of nature. History, in the distinctive
human and mental sense it is taken, never originates
through the bare succession of time, but throughout
in the sense that something is held fast, experienced,
and its nature brought into an inner connection.
However, such a feat can happen only through the
presence of a standard superior to time, which creates
the effect of an order of things above time. But
with such elevation history transforms itself from
being a mere fact to being a difficult task. And the
matter does not stand otherwise in connection with
the problem of society. Society, too, in the dis-
tinctive human and mental sense, is not any ready-
made thing, but has to be evolved, and to it belongs
an inner unity of life—a total-life. Little enough
of this finds its way to our experience, but the little
that does find its way refers back to an order of
things superior to nature and its scattered elements.

There is thus imbedded universally in human life
something deeper, although it may appear first of all
only in the faintest manner, and it is religion which
raises up, binds, and energises this deeper quality.
Thus, religion performs universally a dissection of
human life, sets the life, through the working out of


its deep, in an enormous movement, and calls it
16


242 FUNDAMENTAL BASIS OF UNIVERSAL RELIGION


to an immense struggle. Religion, in all this, is very
far from explaining life as being on its natural plane
something superior or even tolerable; far more through
its elevation religion casts a gloom over the provinces
of life with all their hindrance and shallowness ; but in
all this natural opposition to religion, religion cannot
be destroyed, for the presence of an Absolute Life
verifies a fixed nucleus and the certainty of a conquest.

Thus religion stands beyond the opposites of opti-
mism and pessimism, for it is able to acknowledge the
total fulness of wrong without forfeiting the joy of
belief or even without diminishing it. Indeed, religion
has, especially in tattered and dejected times, won
the hearts of men. The clear call of an Absolute
Life must bring the wide differences of our exist-
ence to consciousness and, along with this, work for
the heightening of the suffering. The contradictions
of our existence appear, when the situation is seen as
it really is, far too pointed, and the unreason far too
powerful to be veiled by an optimistic mood. But
the strongest discovery of the contradictions and
their agony cannot create a hopeless pessimism, but
it is first and foremost the appearance of a new world
—the presence of an Infinite Life—which makes our
ordinary existence inadequate.

This twofold aspect gives the total effect of religion
a twofold character. On the one side, it means a
loosening, a freeing, a redemption from the old world ;
and on the other side, an elevation into a new one.
A uniform development and an incessant reciprocal
action of both sides do not take place if the life is
coerced and is morose, or if it considers the main fact
in a superficial manner.


THE FACT OF UNIVERSAL RELIGION 243


Also, inasmuch as religion appears as a kingdom
of continuous development—as that which constructs
the fundamental facts on their Divine side, and as
that which is present in the inmost depth of the
human soul—it has to be won ever anew in human
life, and ever anew it has to be sought, struggled for,
and perfected. Thus the fact becomes a task; the
possession becomes a problem; and with the varied
differences of the points of departure, the one and
same life can include certainty and doubt, calm and
tempest, bliss and sorrow.

Thus, through and through, religion proves itself a
kingdom of opposites. When it steps out of such
opposites, it destroys without a doubt the turbid
evanescence of ordinary commonplace life, and separ-
ates clearly the lights and shadows from one another.
It sets our life between the sharpest contrasts, and
engenders the most powerful feelings and the most
mighty movements ; it shows the dark abyss in our
nature, but also shows illumined peaks; it opens out
infinite tasks, and brings to an awakening ever a new
life in its movement against the ordinary self. It
does not render our existence lighter, but it makes it
richer, more eventful, and greater; it enables man to
experience cosmic problems within his own soul in
order to struggle for a new world, and, indeed, in
order to gain such a genuine world as his own


existence.


3. The Proof and Confirmation of Religion


(a) Religion and Science.—We have hitherto
followed the main lines of our investigation without
viewing the side-paths, and without discovering the


244 FUNDAMENTAL BASIS OF UNIVERSAL RELIGION


relationship of our material to the remaining world
of thought as that world is represented by science.
It is impossible for us to withdraw entirely from this
task and to pass silently by the facts which, at all
times, have come to the surface in connection with
religion, and which have discovered a concealed con-
tradiction. And this they have done often in no
spirit of light-hearted jest, but in deep seriousness ;
for the facts of science have struggled against religion
because science considered that religion was a fal-
sification of reality and a disfigurement of life.
Science and religion often appear as sworn enemies ;
each develops a truth out of its own province, and
each can present only its own truth ; each traces out
an image of reality, and these images seem to ex-
clude one another. ‘The one seizes special experiences
of humanity, and indicates from this point as its ruling
centre all the spaciousness of the All. The other
holds itself fast to a Whole, and interprets out of
this all the content of human life. Religion is
inclined to reduce science to a soulless sphere;
whilst science easily interprets religion as anthropo-
morphism—as an illegitimate inner mirroring of the
reality through human presentations and _ interests.
The attained objectivity of science appears to religion
as cold and unfeeling; whilst the particular inward-
ness of life appears to science as subjective exaggera-
tion and fancy. Religion does not believe itself able
to guard its independence without the creation of a
knowing-organ in belief, and even with this it meets
with the hardest contradiction, and falls often within
its own province to the boundary between knowledge
and belief where all kinds of entanglements prevail.


THE FACT OF UNIVERSAL RELIGION 245


The adherents of religion are at variance themselves ;
some draw the ideal word of religion quite close to
knowledge, whilst others separate most pointedly
knowledge and belief. Thus the struggle surges
hither and thither through the centuries and the
millenniums, but each situation is not well understood
without the historical connections. The defence of
religion to-day stands under the power of the rebound
from the intellectualism which had checked the ideal
world of religion for a long time. From the beginning,
the doctrine of the Christian Church was interweaved
strongly with intellectualism ; in the Middle Ages the
intellect served less as a foundation than as a check,
and, in the period of the Aufkldrung, science disen-
gaged itself from all external authority and believed
itself able to develop the Spiritual Life as well as
religion out of itself, and speculation heightened and
ennobled such an undertaking. Now, at least in the
opinion of our day, speculation has collapsed, and the
insufficiency of intellectualism has appeared with
piercing clearness; we not only mistrust the ability
of the applied intellect, but it seems to us to rob us
as well of a religion of true immediacy and inspiration.
Therefore we posit ourselves entirely on the other
side, and in the founding of religion put the intellect
in a secondary place, and even partially disconnect it.
Thus we obtain the turn to feeling-—to the explana-
tion of religion as merely an affair of “personal” life,
and to the attempt to derive the religious content
from judgments of values, etc. Such a course appears
natural enough, and has some amount of truth in its
favour ; but it is afflicted with a strong one-sidedness,
and aims to accommodate itself to such a retrogression.


246 FUNDAMENTAL BASIS OF UNIVERSAL RELIGION


Religion in reality dare not isolate itself from the
universal world of ideas. It dare not do this for
its own sake. Its vocation throughout is essentially
and indispensably to bring forth the final and all-
encompassing truth; and it cannot possibly be one
thing by the side of other things, for it must be the
soul of the Whole. But how could religion verify
itself as such without occupying itself in a funda-
mental manner with the total-world of ideas?
Unless it does this, not only does its truth remain
set in painful doubt, but through such an isolation
the danger menaces its content; and thus the con-
tent is unable to free itself sufficiently from the petty-
human mode and from selfishness; for in the midst
of all the waves and bubblings of feeling, and in the
midst of all the agitation of the individual, the con-
tent wins too little of a spiritual substance, and, con-
sequently, exercises too little transforming energy on
the whole human situation. Such a substance is
attainable only in the wrestling from a Whole to a
Whole. Religion, however, undertakes this feat,
and, consequently, comes to some kind of agreement
with science concerning the Yea and the Nay of
things.

Whether such an agreement is possible depends
before all on a more correct wording of the meaning
of science and religion. Such a meaning alone can
decide whether what appeared at the first glance an
irreconcilable conflict can be brought to a happy
settlement. Let us see first of all what the religion
of the Spiritual Life for which we contend signifies
concerning the whole of reality, in order that we
may try to discover the method of proof. Here, an


THE FACT OF UNIVERSAL RELIGION 247


independent Spiritual Life superior to the world is
asserted as the ground and kernel of all reality.
The Spiritual Life can be autonomous only as a total-
life—as an inner connection; but the superiority to
the world reaches the level of self-reliance not after
the event of becoming superior to the world, but,
according to the whole of our investigation, this
self-reliance carries such a superiority in itself, and
proves it through its own development over against
a very different kind of world. This Absolute
Spiritual Life signifies not an isolated province, but
wills to be the foundation and the apex of all reality.
But this cannot be asserted without relegating nature,
and, most of all, the near ordinary existence, to a
subsidiary world—to a lower level. There is no
religion without an analysis of the reality and with-
out stepping beyond bare nature, for an immanent
religion can announce and command only a painful
weakness and a halfness of thought. But through such
a turn as we have already seen the whole reality
gains an inner connection and a depth. Even the
movement of our world appears, at least in its decisive
phases, not as a simple development of the higher out
of the lower, but as a further driving-power out of
the Whole of the All. Through such a turn to the
world, religion unavoidably meets science, and the
meeting of the two becomes quite early a collision.
Religion not only holds certain assertions over against
those of science, but works for their promulgation,
furthers the treatment of the world-problem, and thus
gets itself saturated with the efforts and objections of
science. Religion is an irreconcilable enemy of the
naturalism which sets up nature as the whole of


248 FUNDAMENTAL BASIS OF UNIVERSAL RELIGION


reality, and which treats the spiritual world as a bare
epiphenomenon ; it is, too, an enemy of the history
which is unable to overcome the mere flux of time,
and consequently unable to climb above the relativity
of the scientific view to an eternal and absolute truth ;
and it is finally an enemy of the psychology which
resolves the life of the soul into elements of the
lowest common denominator, and which thus is not
able to bring forth an independent Spiritual Life.
In its connection with all these, religion develops a
thorough-going affirmation, and, indeed, an aggressive
character; it prescribes, with a strong decision, a
definite track for thought and life ; and he who seeks
with special zeal to weaken the fact that religion itself
is able to sustain a joyous and friendly disposition
towards the most varied expressions of thought,
shows a dimness of his own mind and a weakness of
his own character. No energetic Yea without a
decisive Nay must hold valid, especially for religion
with its assertion of the final kernel and meaning of
reality. Religion is intolerant, and must be intoler-
ant, not against men—for every man is an infinity, and
thus far supersedes all forms and confessions—but
against a shallow course of thought and the hollow-
ness of its egotistical nature.

Upon what, then, does religion—meeting with so
many high demands—* ground” its own rights, and
by what means does it verify its own truth? It deals
with a unique fundamental truth, viz. with the
reality of an Absolute Spiritual Life within our own
circle. Evidently such a Life does not allow itself to
be born out of individual data, whether of nature or
of history; it does not allow itself to be evolved out


THE FACT OF UNIVERSAL RELIGION 249


of the natural world. It is only within the Life-
process itself, as its own foundation and further
development, that it may be brought forth. Con-
sequently, it deals not so much with the seeking for
new things as with the discovering of the new in the
things we already know; it deals not so much with
ready-made results, but with the plunging into the
existing movement of a current; it aims not at dis-
covering a world already existing merely by the side
of our present world, but at securing for itself the
depth of the reality which will compel our present
world to sink to a secondary level.

The decisive thing in connection with all this is
the advance of life itself. The act must precede the
proof; the reality of the representative act transmits
the main proof of religion. Individual propositions
or performances are not alone here in question, but
the possession of the Spiritual Life as a Whole, as in-
dependent, as superior to the world, and as our
adopted situation in such a life. What is it now
that drives the man hither? Nothing other than an
acknowledgment of the Spiritual Life as his own
nature, and the placing of the centre of gravity of his
life and existence in this. As soon as this happens,
and as soon as we possess an inward relationship to
. the world and to ourselves, the man can do no other
than bind together the Spiritual Life as a Whole and
as a self-reliant life; and thus he is bound to reach
an inwardness which will make clear the contrasts of
life as well as his own superiority over against the
environing world. ‘The decisive main proof is and
remains in the fact that an autonomous Spiritual
Life arises in man and humanity, and that we are


250 FUNDAMENTAL BASIS OF UNIVERSAL RELIGION


able to discover our deepest being and construct our
new world through a process of selection and rejec-
tion as participators in such a Life. This proof,
however, needs no minute adjustment, for it enters
into every soul in the form of immediacy whenever
such a soul struggles to step out of the bondage of
the world, struggles to create its own laws of ascent,
and to enter into its true personal life. Through this
the life gains an absolute certainty. Next to this in
importance stands the fact that the corroboration
results through the demonstration that the Spiritual
Life is barren in its ramifications unless it roots itself
as a Whole in an Absolute Life; for there is neither
art nor science, neither right nor morality, possible
without the fundamental truth which comes to
expression in religion. The Spiritual Life is not a
Whole in its ordinary existence, but is a Whole only
as an elevated arrangement of the things which
present themselves within and without. But when
it is not a Whole, it inevitably breaks in pieces in
the isolated positions of life. Such a state of affairs
concerning the Spiritual Life is a testimony to the
truth of religion. We are able to give up religion,
but we must give up at the same time our Spiritual
Life, the spiritual character of our existence, and our
spiritual individuality. But is anybody able to
abandon religion so completely as all this ?

Such a condition of things makes it impossible to
win anyone through the mere intellect to religion,
for the problem lies deeper, and the mode of in-
tellectual activity—right down to the heart of the
problem—depends on the total Life-process. He
who places himself in the position of a mere spectator


THE FACT OF UNIVERSAL RELIGION = 251


of the great world and accepts his life as an assigned
kind of fate, he who undertakes no struggle concerning
a “becoming” independence and concerning an in-
ward relationship to things, cannot take into himself
the Whole with all its problems, cannot possess a
participation in a cosmic life, and is not able to carry
forward the energetic movement of religion. But he
who has discovered an inner relationship with the
world and with his own self, he who is held fast by
the inner movement of life and is led to an inner
union with reality, obtains a new insight of reality
and becomes fully certain of the truth of this reality
—far more certain than of the axioms of the sciences.
For with such axioms the matter deals with detached
portions of life and of the work of thought; but in
religion the dealing is concerning the vindication of
life as a Whole. Nowhere more than here does the
movement itself prove the reality of the hypothesis
from which it issues.

Through such a consolidation in the deepest
“sround” of life, religion can confidently look
forward to an understanding with science. ‘This is
certainly not so simple as it seems, for we witness
often to-day a pointed dualistic mode of thought.
This mode of thought believes itself able to solve the
problem after a fashion, but rather far more shuns it,
and it presents us with a notion that science concerns
itself solely with the world of experience, and, along
with this, that it has to contract itself into a mere
relative knowledge. From this point of view religion
is supposed to deal with final “ grounds” and “ ends ”
alone; thus both spheres of science and religion fall
entirely outside one another, and only an entangle-


252 FUNDAMENTAL BASIS OF UNIVERSAL RELIGION


ment can issue in any attempt to bring both nearer
to one another. Either science transforms its empirical
constructions into metaphysical constructions, as has
actually happened with our speculative scientific
investigations, or, on the other hand, religion touches
the province of science. All this contains much that
is true, but it does not exhaust the facts. Science is
not a summation of rules, but it develops a
characteristic course of thought, and this course of
thought can very well come into conflict with religion.
or rather, with religion of a special historical kind.
Religion, however, cannot explain the standard
which it accepts and to which it brings its proofs
without coming to a settlement with the whole of
science.

This problem receives a driving-power especially
through history. The traditional kind of religion
and also of Christianity has grown in intimate
connection with a view of the world which has been
destroyed by modern investigation. Indeed, as was
shown in the introductory part of this book, it is not
only destroyed in individual places but in its whole
mode of thought. ‘The older mode of thought appears
to modern investigation as a thorough anthropomor-
phism—as a transmission of human greatness into
the environing world. Modern science, through its
discovery of inflexible laws and through the causal
restriction of all phenomena, has rendered the old
view impossible ; it has driven the soul out of such
a view of the world and threatens to do the same
in the province of religion. Thus positivism especially,
with its three stages of religious, metaphysical, and
positive thought, formulates such a plan, and attempts


THE FACT OF UNIVERSAL RELIGION 253


to place religion on one side as a childish stage of
human development which has no right whatever in
our day. Can we deny that such a view reaches, too,
far beyond the special circle of positivism, and that
a great deal of the mental atmosphere of our day
views religion as a stage on the road to be passed
over by the general movement of humanity and its
new view of the world? Now, the protest has to be
made that religion, in its inmost nature, is not a view
of the world but the evolution of a new life—an
ascent to a new stage of reality. But such a new
life carries convictions in itself of the whole of reality,
and these convictions, together with the whole of the
standard, must somehow be scientifically vindicated
against such a positivistic course of thought. Such
a vindication is really to be found, and it is a vindi-
cation which makes clear that it itself marches in
front against the pettiness in human nature; it is a
vindication that the development of the physical
and mental sciences, viewed from within, signifies
the conclusions of mental constructions ; and, finally,
it vindicates that if something is lost on the one side,
something of incomparably greater value is won on
the other side.

Philosophy shows us that reality does not exist
merely at hand for us; it exists only in so far as
it becomes our own experience. Philosophy also
shows that a scientific and mental configuration is
not reached unless a new outline of reality is traced
out in the Whole ; and shows that a new foundation
is won only when there has resulted a new conclusion
of the manifold in accordance with the laws of the
mind. Thus nature becomes a mental occurrence


254 FUNDAMENTAL BASIS OF UNIVERSAL RELIGION


and a subject of scientific work only in so far as it
touches us with individual impressions not merely
from the outside, and only when these impressions
are fastened together into a total-view ; and such can
happen only from within through our mental organ-
isation. History in the human and mental sense, as
has so often been shown, originates in no way through
a mere succession .of events and an accumulation of
effects, but only when a superior standard experiences,
comprehends, and values the phenomena through a
separation of the essential from the non-essential.
Our own life of the soul could not be surveyed and
brought to a unity did we not in the kernel of our
nature stand above the bare co-existence of acts, and
had not this co-existence a background for itself.
In all this an inwardness of a mental and spiritual
kind develops itself, which is all along the line
different from the merely subjective nature. The
subjective nature remains under the power of the
opposites of subject and object, but the mental and
spiritual nature seeks to overcome this opposition
through a supreme formation of reality. The former
adapts itself to the mere-human; the latter adapts
itself to the Spiritual Life, and through it alone can
man possess an elevated self-life. Evidently such
a turn from the naive situation of life is no mere
natural growth but an inverted order of things, and
this naive situation of life appears now a kind of
Ptolemaic conduct of life; for, instead of viewing life
from without within, it is now viewed from within
without.

In all this there is a vindication of a standard of an
independent Spiritual Life, as is represented and


THE FACT OF UNIVERSAL RELIGION 255


made a main fact by religion; and again, religious
history appears in a new light. True, the early
anthropomorphic forms get more and more dissolved,
but in their place a spiritual form is gained and the
movement to the spiritualising of religion is not
imposed from without, but arises mainly from religion’s
own inward longing after truth. Thus, religion
proceeds from external observances to inner religious-
ness, from the self-conservation of the natural man
to a salvation of spiritual values and a redemption
of the soul, from a duty towards isolated aspects of
the Spiritual Life to the raising of such a Life as
a Whole. The positivistic mode of thought sees
in this the loss and not the gain; it fails to see
the rise of a spiritual inwardness over against a
subjective one, because such a mode of thought
directs its attention to external results and not to
inward experiences, and because, over its dealings
with the results of the Spiritual Life, it forgets
the Spiritual Life itself. The logical conclusion of
such a mode of thought is to resolve man into a
mere machine—a complicated reckoning-machine—
and such machines can be constructed. Only the
mystery would remain, how such a machine could
produce the great revolution from a naive to a
scientific, and from a natural to a spiritual, condition
of life.

So far, however, as science works out the central
phenomenon of the Spiritual Life, and illumines the
world from such a standpoint, it becomes speculation.
Thus, religion cannot lack such speculation for its
own scientific development. But speculation needs
‘religion still more substantially. For the aim of specu-


256 FUNDAMENTAL BASIS OF UNIVERSAL RELIGION


lation is futile from its very foundation, and becomes
a vain assumption, unless there exists a hope of
finding, in contrast with merely human presentations,
a universally-valid thought. But how could such
a thought be possible without the immanence of an
Absolute Life in our circle? So that from of old
religion and speculation have been in close contact ;
in all speculation a religious element is easily to be
discovered ; and religion lost in breadth and depth
whenever it placed all speculation on one side. ‘True,
with the divergence in their starting-points, quarrels
were not wanting, but they were quarrels between
friends who, in all their differences, strove for a final
mutual understanding, and who could not do without
each other. Speculation and religion presuppose
an inner movement of life; this movement cannot
be forced upon anyone, but it can be shown that,
without it, no Spiritual Life in the Whole and no
genuine spirituality are possible. The words of
Plotinus are valid in connection with all this: “The
hoctrine reaches as far as the road and its course;
but the intuition is the possession of him alone who
chooses to see.”

(8) General Considerations.—If religion first and
foremost deals with the inward ascent of life toa Whole
—with our apprehension of the Spiritual Life as our
real self—then the inward inertness of man consti-
tutes the strongest resistance and the most stubborn
hindrance experienced by religion. Such inertness is
satisfied with scattered fragments of life ; it remains in
a mere external relationship to reality, and undertakes
no struggle for its appropriation. Accordingly, in a
time of predominant expansion as is the present, it


THE FACT OF UNIVERSAL RELIGION 257


is easy to understand how religion may often appear
as a tissue of illusions; with the absence of a move-
ment to a Whole, the opposite opinion would be
surprising. But this inner inertness of life would
never have stepped forth with such self-com-
placency and made a virtue out of the calamity
unless there went hand in hand with it a great con-
fusion of thought, which believed in the possibility
of solving the essential spiritual problems without a
movement to the Whole, and hence without religion.
It is remarkable how often men here turn against
religion that which, without the independence and
superiority of the Spiritual Life, as championed by
religion, becomes simply untenable. ‘Thus, morality
is often supposed to serve as a substitute for religion,
although a morality without a new world would be
more inconceivable than religion itself; thus, one
flutters to and fro towards an “enthusiasm for
humanity” without giving the term “humanity”
any kind of spiritual content; thus, one appeals to
the immediacy of personality and of personal life as
if personality could have a meaning and value without
the awakening of a new world at this particular
spot. Personality is either an empty and mislead-
ing term or a confession of a world of independent
spirituality.

The Either-Or truly present here—independent
spirituality or no spirituality—may veil itself from us
for a long time, because we live in a spiritual atmo-
sphere which has developed under the mighty influence
of religion. For by means of this atmosphere the
contention hostile to religion gets unperceivedly sup-


plemented, and thus those formations existing in our
IY


258 FUNDAMENTAL BASIS OF UNIVERSAL RELIGION


midst are credited as such with what only the original
energy of the Whole is able to accomplish. There
arises thus the appearance as though it were possible
to retain in the subject and the consequence what has
been given up in the substance and the foundation,
and as though the mere man were able to accomplish
what man can achieve only within spiritual connec-
tions. Such a mode of life may even appear, in the
beginning, as a gain in freedom, freshness, and
immediacy. But this can proceed only for a time,
for life itself will engender a reaction. For the
more those survivals from the older formations of
life are driven out, the more all inward connections
slip away, until the man finally stands on nothing
broader than his own subjectivity ; thus the move-
ment breaks up more and more, and the life becomes
emptier inwardly and as a whole, and more and
more individuals set themselves at variance with each
other, and the scene becomes a Babylonian confusion
of tongues. Evidences of all this are sufficiently at
hand, but in the meantime the struggle against
religion and substantial spirituality may appear still
as a pleasant occupation and, indeed, as a struggle
for freedom. After this comes the reaction, and
brings new dispositions and strivings into the life of
humanity—perhaps it happens through painful up-
heavals—and then our problem enters into a new
phase of universal history. For the history of the
world is mostly wont to prove things in such an
indirect..manner as this.

In the, meantime, however, the direct proof which
religion transmits through its effective stirring and
elevation of life is not to be misjudged. Religion


THE FACT OF UNIVERSAL RELIGION 259


does not so much add something particular to life as
that it effects an integration, a clear discrimination,
and a liberation of what already lies in the total-
life, but which, without such concentration, is unable
to find its own self. It is through this concentra-
tion that the Spiritual Life first gains a durable
kernel, and emancipates itself from the admixture
of the existential state in order to construct a char-
acteristic world, and to become a new starting-point
of life.

This integration into a Whole, and this eleva-
tion to action of the whole man, may appear less
important and urgent so long as human existence
is conceived to be free from acute conflicts and
in process of secure advance. However, as soon
as difficult entanglements set in, the ascent of the
Spiritual Life has to overcome enormous obstacles,
and is, through these, threatened with paralysis, a
return to the Whole and an actuation of the
energy of the Whole become indispensable. Such
obstacles appear clearly enough, so that there can
be no apology and no doubt for the necessity of
religion.

Religion finds a main proof of its truth in the fact
that it forms the indispensable culmination of the
total Spiritual Life; and although man can be
spiritually active here and there, he can never take
up the Spiritual Life as a Whole, and transform it
into his own act, without religion. We have shown
sufficiently the general outlines of this fact, and it
remains for us now to show how all the main
separate movements which endow our life with
a spiritual character attain to no completion and


260 FUNDAMENTAL BASIS OF UNIVERSAL RELIGION


indeed, lose their anchor and foundation if the
turn to religion does not lead them to a Whole, to
Principles, and to the Absolute; so that finally the
truth and the right of our Spiritual Life hang on
such a turning-point. Since, on the one hand, the
specifically religious conceptions permeate the whole
of life, and, on the other hand, the movements which
issue from that ,whole ever-increasingly demand
an elevation to a principle, and hence a turn to
religion, a firm interweaving of religion with the
whole of the spiritual effort is accomplished. Thus,
the whole of this effort speaks and works for
religion; the more energetically the Spiritual Life
develops itself, the more it becomes conscious of
the opposition of its substantiality to a world of
appearance; and the mightier the impetus to religion
becomes, the more certain becomes the truth of
religion itself.

(y) Special Pathways.—If we now pursue the pro-
blem through the ramifications of life, and seek to
demonstrate that the main movements of life point
toward a religion of a universal kind, and that
without religion all movements must collapse, re-
ligion is taken by us throughout not merely as
the end of a movement existing prior to itself,
but also as this movement’s fundamental presupposi-
tion; since that spiritual effort could not originate
without the presence of the Absolute Life which
manifests itself in religion. But since religion
clearly reveals that presupposition and the inter-
connection of life, and bids us incorporate them more
energetically in our activities, it will work for the
illumination, consolidation, and elevation of all the


THE FACT OF UNIVERSAL RELIGION 261


remaining life. This fact will appear clearer in
connection with the following special points.

(aa) The Aspiration after Infinity——The man of
experience finds himself enclosed firmly on all
sides; he is, as a mere portion of a causal order,
conditioned and bounded in his aims and energies ;
the duration of his life has but a brief span to run,
and he must acknowledge himself usually as a finite
existence. And yet as a tremendous resistance to
all this, his Spiritual Life is filled with a longing for
Infinity. ‘The idea of Infinity signifies not merely
that an immeasurable expanse ever lies by the side
of the circle which we traverse. For such an
* outside” need trouble us but little, because it does
not explain the stirring and forward-driving energy
which lives within the thoughts of Infinity. Such
thoughts evidently bear witness on the whole that
Infinity does not emerge beyond the bounds of life,
but that it belongs to man from the beginning; it is
the clash within us between the finite and the
Infinite which brings forth such effects, and it is only
out of this point that the idea and the feeling of the
sublime explain themselves, for they do not originate
from without, but are an original testimony of the
soul. |

The movement towards the Infinite proceeds not
only into the quantitative, but far more into the
qualitative. It is not the surface of reality which
suffices us, but far more do we appropriate its whole
depth. All the effort after final ends and _all-
inclusive aims, all investigation concerning the Why
of Whys, all the longing for perfection and the
highest blessedness over against the mere satisfaction


262 FUNDAMENTAL BASIS OF UNIVERSAL RELIGION


of the given situation—what is all this but an
evidence of the depth of reality. Everywhere in
connection with the idea of the Infinite we find
ourselves in danger of losing ourselves in the
pathless expanse and the danger of an over-strain of
human ability, but we also find a mighty ascent of
our nature, a tracing of tracks and a progress upon
them, and a challenge to battle against all the narrow
and petty-human modes of life which have now
become an intolerable barrier. Such a longing—
partly revealed and partly concealed—was somehow
present in the works which resulted in the great
transformations of life and in the inner progressive
development of man, so that the impossible itself
appeared possible if what ought to be reached is
now in reality reached ; for out of self-sufficiency and
timidity nothing great has ever been born.

What then is the basis of such a movement? If
it is a work of a merely human kind, it can mean no
more than a mere bolstering up of the self in one’s
own fancy, a futile presumption of the self, a deceit-
ful illusion. At the same time, all the inner fruits of
culture and all that appears always as the spiritual
uplifting of man prove themselves as a tawdry polish
on old goods and chattels. Or, on the other hand,
the movement has a deeper foundation in the inner
presence of an Absolute Life. If things are so, then
it is religion which embraces and expresses the whole
of life. Through such exertions religion at the same
time attaches and rouses itself to a striving after
Infinity, and, in order to accomplish this, it calls the
whole soul to its aid, and wins a strong conviction
and character. ‘Thus, in connection with this special


THE FACT OF UNIVERSAL RELIGION 263


point, it is religion which brings life to its full depth ;
and what is imbedded in the aspiration after Infinity
becomes the evidence of religion.

This is corroborated, too, by the experience of
history. The antique method of viewing the
Spiritual Life—a method which allowed largely the
meaning of religion in our sense to remain in the
background—gave full sovereignty to the ideas of
extremes and limits; the All is here limited, and the
life of man moves between fixed aims and given
energies ; there is now no need to cross the frontier
into the Infinite, but far more there is present
a timidity to cross beyond the natural defined
boundary. When did the idea of Infinity gain
acknowledgment and power, and when did it step
into the very centre of life itself? It accomplished
this through the turn to religion, a turn which
culminated especially in the philosophic sense through
Plotinus. Since his time the idea has often enough
been obscured, but it has never been extinguished.
And what appears to us new and great in modern life
is indissolubly bound with the reception of Infinity
into our own character and nature. For whence
otherwise the fixed superiority over the world—the
fast rooting of the personality—after which we at
least strive for? Shall we retreat once more into the
old limits in order to avoid entering the pathway of
religion ?

(bb) The Aspiration after Freedom and Equality.
—The experience of life shows man bound on all
sides and in constant relationships of dependence,
shows him bound to other men, bound to the environ-
ment, bound to his own nature. ‘This subordination


264 FUNDAMENTAL BASIS OF UNIVERSAL RELIGION


often veils the consciousness and continues to exist.
But, at the same time, there runs through humanity
a glowing aspiration after freedom. ‘This is to be
found, first of all, in the relation of man to man as
the demand of independence of each individual over
against the human environment, or of the independ-
ence of a class over against another class. ‘Through
such a freedom man seemed to gain an otherwise
unknown dignity and an incomparably greater
energy; his life seemed to experience an essential
elevation, and for the first time to possess an original
worth. Thus, the struggle for freedom was able to
kindle the strongest affections and to make light of
the most difficult sacrifices.

How does all this explain itself, and how can
something essentially higher issue forth from life if
there is not more present than a mere rearrangement
of energies within an enclosed system? It explains
itself only through the fact that a new order of things
has created a new breach of life, and that life through
such a turn has gained an originality of an inward
kind as well asa new content. But how can life gain
all this if it possesses no depth, and if there is not an
existence of a reality for itself? If the Spiritual
Life fails in this, what is there besides contained in
the representation of religion? History shows,
without a doubt, the longing for freedom usually
coupled with eschatological convictions ; ancient
Christianity with its advocacy of the freedom of the
religious conviction (libertas religionis) took up a
great universal struggle for freedom ; out of the age
of the Reformation has the freedom of our modern
times gone forth; indeed, it seemed as if no effort


THE FACT OF UNIVERSAL RELIGION 265


for freedom could stir the whole soul unless it became
a kind of religion to man and raised him above mere
ordinary experience. This contention is valid, too,
concerning the radical movements of the present day ;
they could not have taken such a strong turn against
religion had it not been that they had moulded them-
selves into some kind of religion. Whenever the
struggle for freedom is not carried by new ideals of
the whole life, it tends quickly to relax and to enter
under the dominion of egoism, be it egoism of
individuals or of classes.

But the aspiration after freedom extends deeper than
the relationship to other men; it reaches the funda-
mental relationship to the world and to reality. Man
seeks in spiritual activity another standpoint to things,
and, indeed, to himself, than is verified by the nearest-
at-hand experience. In such a surface-experience all
is given and tied, all is opaque and alien ; and, further,
the nature of all this appears to man as something
external so long as it does not allow itself to be set in
his own act and there transfigured. And, therefore,
however zealous in work man may be, so long as he
remains a mere link of a natural chain, so long will
his decision fail to handle the material which he takes
up, and his will fail to decide concerning the nature
of such material; but all the particular is determined
through the connection of the Whole, and what on the
surface may appear as no more than a link of a chain,
on a deeper view is perceived to reach forth into
immensity.

Why does man himself struggle against the accept-
ance of such a state of things which surround him
with irresistible intrusiveness, and which incessantly


266 FUNDAMENTAL BASIS OF UNIVERSAL RELIGION


explains determinism with its old and new grounds
as the only possibility? Why, indeed, but because
through the tying of man to such a situation unutter-
ably more is lost than willingly allows itself to be
destroyed. There is lost all inner relation to reality
through resignation to the dark night of fate; there
is lost all inner obligation and, indeed, all ethical
character of action, through the shifting of action to
an imposed necessity, and, consequently, when we
reflect on it, what determinism leaves over is nothing
more than an empty word; there is lost all present
living consciousness, and the present is viewed only as
a mere result issuing out of given premises and which
contain nothing in the least original; there is lost all
hope of sunnier and nobler days ; and all the possibility
of inward renewal for peoples and times, as well as for
the whole of humanity, fails, and thus life in its march
becomes more and more numb and senile; and finally,
there is lost the striving to construct our existence,
through our own original activity, out of the deep
and out of a permanent foundation, and all is simply
turned into a piling of a mechanism upon a surface-
foundation. Accordingly, life, through its complete
resignation to an external necessity, loses all inner
movement, all soul, all value; it is now a mere
appearance and not an original life to us.

It is no wonder that man strives against all this,
that he strains every nerve to resist such a destiny.
But it is impossible for him to resist it without a
transformation of the whole view of reality and of
his own nature. For all attempts to escape to some
refuge within the given world of necessity must fail,
and such attempts issue from turbid thoughts as de-


THE FACT OF UNIVERSAL RELIGION 267


terminism itself has shown with convincing power. It
is the elevation into a new world alone that can help
us ; and such a world is not a mere system, but is ever
a new and inner governing Whole proceeding out of
activity, and which can become our own characteristic
life of all activity. The Spiritual Life becomes such
a world in so far as it gains a full independence and
engenders out of itself a characteristic reality. The
cosmic ‘‘ becoming” of the Spiritual Life, however,
surmounts all the capacity of the mere-human, and
appears to man as the dawning of an Absolute Life.
This has been a leading thought of the whole of our
investigation. How freedom and necessity in man
clash and yet stand apart is a question which does not
concern us at this point. Here the main point is that
without the presence of a new world, all possibility of
freedom—all the transformation of existence into one’s
own life—breaks in pieces, and, at the same time, all
genuine living present vanishes. ‘The origin of the
longing itself remains a mystery. And yet such a long-
ing moves in mighty waves over humanity and has
brought forth such greatness and nobleness. ‘Thus,
once more, all this is religion, and in it a general
movement of life fastens itself together, and with it
something remains which in the final resort nobody
can destroy. If, however, that deepest origin of the
effort of freedom is taken up into our own conviction
and direction of life, then all activity in this direction
can be purified and ennobled, then the individual move-
ments unite themselves more compactly together so
that in each individual position the whole man is now
able to step into activity. A long period of time loved
to conceive of religion and freedom as set up pointedly


268 FUNDAMENTAL BASIS OF UNIVERSAL RELIGION


against one another and as irreconcilable opponents.
A deeper meaning, however, shows here, as often
elsewhere, the truth to be quite contrary to the
opinion of particular epochs. Without religion—
religion in the universal sense—freedom is a hollow
term; no definite freedom can originate without
religion, and certainly no religion can originate with-
out freedom.

The movement towards freedom annexes itself to
the movement towards equality, and often they walk
hand in hand. Experience shows universally an in-
equality of man; even nature endows individuals
unequally ; culture brings forth difference after differ-
ence the more it develops itself; and this is true, too,
of the newer culture with its heightened differentiation
of individuals and its technical shaping of activity.
The course of history itself drops many differences as
having become spurious, but it brings forth newer and
greater differences, and, on the whole, the inequality
is in a state of constant growth.

But over against the whole of this current of what
actually happens, there arises and asserts itself in a
notable manner a longing after equality. Is there
imbedded in all this merely the ordinary disposition
on a small scale, does nothing commanding endure,
and is all drawn down to the ordinary surface-level ?
This cannot be admitted, for an inequality without
the presence of counter-effects to it would endanger
most seriously the inner convictions of man, and,
indeed, destroy them ; it would become an intolerable
hardship for that which commands the vicissitudes of
life to a lower plane; and it would lead astray to a
wayward vanity the very things which ought to have


THE FACT OF UNIVERSAL RELIGION 269


stood on the summit of life. But how are we to
meet such dangers, and how powerless are all abstract
conceptions over against them! The equality of all
“who carry a human face” will not allow itself to be
established through a mere decree. It can only come
to a reality and power over against the painful
differences of the standpoint of experience if, on the
one hand, all the differences of men finally vanish and
strictly turn into an infinite greatness; and, on the
other hand, if a common problem ignites itself and
overflows all else which otherwise compromises effort
and achievement. Nothing other than religion can
verify this. For the conscious hold upon an Absolute
Life prevents the man from reaching final conclusions
in the differences of the standpoint of experience ;
and the opening out of a new task concerning the
whole inner man together with the demands of this
turn of man press down all remaining activity, press
the whole province of achievement to a lower level.
This fact appears in that emancipating parable of
Jesus, of the Talents, and from this source flows
through the whole broad current of humanity ; it has
often run underground, but ever anew runs out into
the light. Also, out of the consciousness of the
equality of all before God has, upon the ground of
human history, dawned a longing for equality over
against the different situations of men, a longing for
an acknowledgment of the rights of man. In the
army of Cromwell there originated first of all a
longing after universal and equal political rights ; and
it was out of a religious foundation that the proclama-
tion of the rights of man went forth in America.
Thus religion has called forth great movements—


270 FUNDAMENTAL BASIS OF UNIVERSAL RELIGION


movements which often, through the fault of their
representatives, have turned against their own origin,
but not without having to pay the penalty by falling
into shallowness and sinking into a subjective passion
of their inner unveracity. Wherever religion has
stood with the fresh energy of youth, it has always
brought men nearer together, it has always been the
protector of the weak, and always a help to the
aspiring soul; it is only where it has become withered
and senile that religion is used for the maintenance
of private interests and privileges.

(cc) The Aspiration after EKternity.— At a first
glance, man appears throughout as a creation of time ;
he lives and works in time; the actual affairs of time
seem to determine his whole life and being. But in
spite of all this, it is false to assert that man belongs
entirely to time; the situation, if it were so, would
become intolerable to him and would mean an inner
devastation. And, on account of this, he undertakes
an energetic struggle against the seeming situation,
and this struggle forms not a mere episode of his life,
but penetrates all culture and spiritual work, for
without a trust upon eternal truth, and, indeed, with-
out some kind of eternal life, there is no energy in the
effort, no greatness in the character, and no depth in
the love. ‘Love—sincere love and not a merely
passing desire—never clings to the perishable, and
awakens and kindles itself in the Eternal alone.
Never is man able to love himself except when he
conceives of himself as an eternal being, and outside
this he is unable either to respect or to sanction him-
self. Still less is he able to love something outside
himself unless he raises that something into the


THE FACT OF UNIVERSAL RELIGION 271


eternity of his belief and of his soul, and links it to
these” (Fichte).

Thus, there proceeds through the life of humanity
an energetic struggle against the dissemination of
things on the mere flux of time. We have seen
repeatedly that all that is termed “history” in a
special human sense carries in itself such a struggle,
and that man, in such a struggle, holds or might hold
with his utmost exertion something inward which
otherwise would be lost on the river of time. The
historical configuration of life and conduct signifies
the building in the midst of time of an order of things
superior to time; this is purely the aspiration after
eternal truth and an all-comprehensive present, which
confers on history an inner movement as well as an
inner connection. And does not the individual strive
in a similar manner in connection with his own self?
Is there a true life without a stepping beyond the
mere flight of the moment, without a crystallisation
in one’s own self as happens in the formation of
character and of spiritual individuality ?

Such a superiority to time, and such a power over
against time, can never be brought forth by the
Spiritual Life through merely human means ; what is
found in us must stand in connection with an inde-
pendent world of spirit. Without such a world and its
conscious presence all attempts to rescue ourselves from
the river of time are hopeless, and the man becomes a
mere creature of the day. The inauguration of an
Absolute Life in our domain is, as we have seen, the
kernel of religion; and such a Life in this respect
forms the conclusion of a great movement, whose
reality may be judged as a corroboration of its own


272 FUNDAMENTAL BASIS OF UNIVERSAL RELIGION


truth. Religion not only forms a foundation, but
also heightens the aspiration after eternity, and finds
this goal more and more through its turn to man’s
own nature, and in this, too, discovers an altitude
above mere time. All the great thinkers were united
in proclaiming that all spiritual work of the deeper
kind participates in an eternal world; but when a
formation of man’s nature appears beyond the province
of all mere activities, and when an independent start-
ing-point of a true Spiritual Life is recognised in man,
then this characteristic spiritual existence must be
raised above the transient. The current opinion and,
generally, also religion give an insufficient and even
incongruous expression to this necessary truth, because
they consider as the main fact the duration in time
of the natural individuality with all its egoism and
limitations. This mode of conceiving things must
call forth a progressive contradiction in the particular
interest of a religion which has been laid in the forms
of the finite and of human nature. But it is one thing
to doubt an anthropomorphic immortality ; it is quite
another thing to deny the spiritual nature of man as
a participator in eternity. For such a customary
notion means not so much the projecting out of
earthly views of the future, as of surrendering all
Spiritual Life to bare Time, and along with this to
press it down, fritter it away, and inwardly destroy it.
Also, the life of man in Time thus becomes a mere
appearance and shadow unless there dwells within him
a striving towards eternity; and consequently, through
a complete binding to Time, all human experience and
all human reality which endeavoured to illumine the
mere moment sink back into the abyss of nothingness.


THE FACT OF UNIVERSAL RELIGION 273


Whilst, however, religion clearly encloses an eternal
order and allows not merely the acts of men but also
their existence to participate in such an order, the
thought of eternity gains a great power for life and
character. Now, all active progress in Time finds its
counterpart in a life resting in itself; the movement
of life is not an entrance into Time but a stepping out
of Time. And thus we are able to understand the
proclamation of a thinker of the Middle Ages, that
man shall become younger every day.

(dd) The Aspiration after Fellowship and after a
Soul.—The world of experience shows a co-existence
of elements in nature and in human society, which
move amongst each other in the most varied ways,
which link themselves ever faster, interlace themselves
ever more definitely, and construct an ever-completer
web. But all relation and intricacy remain linked to
the external performances and effects ; what precedes
what is in the elements themselves, or if anything on
the whole precedes them—this is not the question.
Viewed from this point, then, human connections as
well as the whole of the world become more and more
a well-regulated mechanism into which the individual
life must enter in order to accomplish its own work,
and in order to uncouple any special movement of the
world-machine. An inner fellowship, an over-in-
dividual experience of men and things from within,
must now appear as an absurd and illicit thought.
And yet such a thought gains a power over man and
engenders an endless movement. All friendship and
love might now participate in the inner life of another ;
and that these possess a soul behind all external
activity is undoubted ; our own experience pe NUES


274 FUNDAMENTAL BASIS OF UNIVERSAL RELIGION


unlocks the door of art and leads to the realm of science.
Everywhere we find demands and movements beyond
the external contiguity, everywhere one’s own life
with its entrance into the life of another seems to
experience an immeasurable elevation, and to gain
first and foremost a content and a value. Does not
the whole of culture place itself under the view that
over against the world of effects and counter-effects
a province of existence-for-self arises and opens out
into an ever-greater kingdom #

Thus, the fact of a movement towards inwardness
cannot be doubted, but a mighty problem arises along
with it, and, too, intertwining transformations of the
view of the world become necessary. ‘The whole
movement is an error and a falsehood if it possesses
no depth of the things, and it exhausts its own life in
this system of relations. But what is to be under-
stood by ‘‘ depth,” and how is it reachable? MReach-
able it is in no way through the mere agitation of
subjectivity, as the main current of the present day
would make us believe. When this main current of
the present states that depth of soul is reachable
through an emancipation from the environment as
well as through the transformation of life into a free
and somewhat artistic character, all unbiassed opinion
easily recognises this as an error. Man, in the mere
disposition of his nature as well as in his mere
achievements, is still sufficiently empty and shallow ;
he has only changed one superficiality for another,
but in no way has he gained in depth. Have then,
to-day, all the broad developments of external
harmony, all luxury and self-importance, strengthened
the substance of life, and have they in any kind


THE FACT OF UNIVERSAL RELIGION 275


of way made man fuller of content and deeper
of experience? In reality subjectivity is not yet
by any means inwardness, and disposition is not by
any means a soul. There is no inwardness of life
possible for us without an inward life of reality ;
there is in the individual positions of life no inner life
without the presence of an inner world. Man could
never strive after an inwardness had he not been able
to disengage himself in some kind of way from niceties
of forms, and to gain a portion in Eternal Life. And
the facts are such that a genuine inwardness only
develops where great tasks and a great strain
originate, where a struggle for a new being burns
within, and along with it a spiritual self ascends, an
essential formation of the nature results, and in the
throe a personality and spiritual individuality is born.
He who carries not such problems in his own soul
and who seeks not, in all the expansion of work,
before all else to find his own self, can never gain a
depth and soul for himself. But is all this possible
unless our life stands within a total-life, and unless
we are carried by such? It is religion, however,
which pleads for the presence of this total-life, and
which brings us to an appropriation of it. When
religion conceives of the facts as a Whole, the move-
ment towards inwardness will considerably heighten,
and the insufficiency of the ordinary situation enters
for the first time into consciousness. Now it is
clearly discovered how alien man usually appears in
the midst of all external relationships, how coercive
the narrowness of natural existence holds him fast,
and how shallow and soulless the life shapes itself
through all this. Clear, too, it will ever more be how


976 FUNDAMENTAL BASIS OF UNIVERSAL RELIGION


the movement of culture itself heightens the danger
in that it differentiates men from each other more
than ever, increases more and more the distance
between them, and casts away more and more the
individuality. ‘Through all this there arises an inner
alienation of man, and a loneliness of soul in the
midst of all the fellowship of work. How otherwise
can the walls of separation be broken down, and how
can the inner experience of one individual draw
nearer to that of another save through the opening
out of a life on the other side of all natural individual-
ity, through a participation in a world which includes
even our own natural world, and, indeed, can include
all worlds? It is only when a fellowship of life and
a mutual understanding have been gained that the
various individualities can further one another in a
positive manner, and, out of the contact, a mutual
restoration can take place.

Thus, in the relationship of man with man, all lies
in the gaining of a corporate life which encompasses
and binds all. ‘The problem, however, reaches beyond
this to the relationship of man with his own soul.
In this natural state his deeper being is no less strange
to man than is the deeper being of another; his own
soul is to him closed and inaccessible, and, before all
discovery of spiritual qualities outside himself becomes
possible, he must first of all discover and assimilate
his own deeper being. And he can do this only
through the vivification of a spiritual world which he
makes objective for himself, which gains for him his
own special nature, and which raises him beyond
his natural state. ‘The customary opinion can only
darken such a limitation of the characteristic life


THE FACT OF UNIVERSAL RELIGION 277


through the environing and changeable world, because
such an opinion has no eye for problems of such a
nature, and looks upon the most difficult as self-
evident, and conceives of the fruit brought forth
through the universal toil of the ages as being nothing
more than a result of the mere moment. Wherever
the problem is discovered, history is seen to furnish
an incontestable proof for the definite connection of
religion and inwardness. Let us confine ourselves to
the beginnings of Christianity. What changes have
these sources brought forth in this respect compared
with rich and beautiful antiquity! How much nearer
they have brought man to man through the opening
of a corporate world out of belief and hope as well as
a corporate activity of life; how they have created
the basis for a spiritual art and a spiritual intercourse
with nature; and how they have unlocked man’s
nature and brought him nearer to his own soul!
Could Jesus have seen so much in the little child,
could he have explained nature as a symbol of the
Divine without the presence of a kingdom of in-
wardness within himself? And such holds valid for
the whole course of the ages: wherever religion—
religion understood in the widest sense, and as a
religion of the spirit—has stepped into the background,
there the inner life has become stunted, if not at once,
yet after a while. Also, it holds valid for the present
day that wherever religion has been awakened out of
the social custom into our own life, it has in the
simplest relationships of life aimed at developing
more depth than is often to be found imbedded in
the highest achievements of culture. Thus, all gain
of a true inwardness becomes a testimony for religion,


278 FUNDAMENTAL BASIS OF UNIVERSAL RELIGION


and thus we see the struggle for religion forming a
portion of the struggle for the soul of life. To-day,
when the external world forces itself so mightily upon
us, and draws us to itself so overwhelmingly, there is
needful, indeed, more than a subjective fortification
in ourselves—there is needful the development of an
energetic inner life. Shall we give up lightly the
indispensable associate in the struggle—religion—as
happens too often to-day ?

(ce) The Aspiration after Greatness.—The view of
human things shows the individual so small by the
side of the whole of humanity, and the view of the
world shows humanity so small by the side of a
boundless universe. What has been held valid from
time immemorial in connection with this matter has
been brought fully to consciousness only in modern
times. Viewing things from the ancient childish
level, humanity considered itself as the centre of all;
and even with the toning down of such a claim there
appeared still a greatness of a human kind, which
man saw within the All, and with which he believed
himself to have definite intercourse. We _ have
already observed how nature gained a complete
independence over against man, how it has drawn
him more and more to itself, and how step by step it
has honoured him. ‘Through all this his condition
and actions seem to lose all significance for the All,
so finally man had to seek his happiness and greatness
within his own circle. But if he depends on the light
which shines from such a corner and not on the light
which shines from the inward connections, if he is
posited wholly upon his nearest-at-hand existence and
develops all out of this, there originates a picture that


THE FACT OF UNIVERSAL RELIGION 279


has no place for inward greatness and original worth.
Far too intrusive stands before our eyes the struggle
for existence, the stormy hurry of this life, the
unkempt wild growth of greed and passion, the
organised and coercive power of general effects, for
us to remain with and delineate. In a word, we
witness an immeasurable expenditure of life and a vast
amount of work, and yet through it all no correspond-
ing gain and no meaning of human life either for the
individual or for the Whole. Such contradiction and
senselessness, and, indeed, the nothingness of the
whole, cannot be avoided by man so long as he
remains simply within the clamour of this mechanism,
and so long as he attempts to develop his life merely
from point to point, and allows his whole efforts to be
concentrated upon isolated aspects. But as soon as
thought and reflection are freed from such a tie and
are set upon a Whole, then there can be no doubt
as to the intolerable hollowness and nothingness of
such an existence, for such an emancipation and
reflection of the Whole cannot possibly be hindered.
Thus, man will reflect on ways and means of escape
from this abasement; and to-day an effort in this
direction is visible enough. But as the effort reveals
itself in the realm of a superficial situation, it is
consequently of a kind too little inclined to set the
highest goal in front of itself. One hopes to push
aside the small and commonplace and to obtain once
more greatness and joy for the nature of man—a state
in which man raises himself into a free sentiment
above the whole mechanism ; and thus the differences
of individual and individual are brought forth, and
the differences of the individual over against other


280 FUNDAMENTAL BASIS OF UNIVERSAL RELIGION


individuals and over against the whole of the environ-
ment are strengthened. In such a course of thought
the uncontracted sovereignty of the individual is often
proclaimed, and greatness is sought in the discarding
of all external restraints. In this manner the man
seems to enjoy what is ordinarily termed personality,
but what in reality is only a kind of natural individu-
ality. Such a course of thought has its own right—
or, rather, its own semblance of right—only through
a strong and hardly conceivable optimism in the midst
of all the experiences and entanglements of modern
life. It has to presuppose man endowed with highly-
gifted spiritual potencies and set upon high aims,
otherwise it becomes a confirmation of an egotistic
greed of life and of all the raw impulses of life;
indeed, it will work more towards the sinking than
towards the elevation of life. The fundamental
mistake consists in this: to affirm in the parts what
is denied in the Whole; to wish to retain within the
human province of the relationship of man to man a
greatness which had been lost in the deeper life
and nature of man as a Whole. Such a greatness
has been lost wherever man has become a mere piece
of an impervious world, and wherever he has forfeited
all inner relations to the whole of reality. Man
can retain such a greatness only when there dawns
within him a new stage of reality, only when he
participates in the Whole of this new world, when he
does not contract himself upon isolated activities, when
there breaks forth from the new life a new being and
new self. Then the world and its enterprises can
become man’s own experience, and then he is able to
carry the Whole along with him and to participate in


THE FACT OF UNIVERSAL RELIGION — 281


the struggle of worlds, then he has to represent the
Whole in the individual parts, and thus becomes
through what he does a necessary portion of the
cosmic movement; and it is all this which constitutes
in reality his aspiration after greatness of life. Indeed,
the more certain the life possesses such greatness, the
less man aims to speak of it. Understood thus, the
aspiration after greatness is not conceived mainly as
one difference against another, not as a superior pomp
against the environment, but brings along with it the
deepening of the soul itself and the infinite evolution
of one’s own soul.

All this is not possible, as we have already seen,
without the opening of an independent Spiritual Life
in the particular domain of man; and with the truth
of this stands or falls all greatness of life. It is
religion which connects together life as a Whole,
and which as a Whole opens out to man; and thus
religion is simply indispensable to the foundation
and evolution of the greatness of life. Religion raises
out of the otherwise destructive and scattered elements
a simple outline; it gives life the comprehensiveness
of a powerful drama, opens out a great antithesis in
the main direction of life, and at the same time calls
man to a characteristic decision of his own; it makes
the problem of the All become the personal experience
of man and gives him, through the inward presence
of the Absolute Life, a superiority to the world. The
life is here securely raised above the anxieties of
natural and social existence through the inner task
of moving from a Whole toa Whole. This certainly
happens only through the formation of a religion of
the Spiritual Life and under the summons for a


282 FUNDAMENTAL BASIS OF UNIVERSAL RELIGION


complete self-sovereignty. A religion of obedient
subjection and blind devotion must certainly coerce
man—coerce him deeper than any human power of
command, and such a state of things brings about a
stagnation of life in its inmost source. But why
should we as free men bind our conceptions of religion
to the presentations of another, and why should
human disfigurements darken the picture of religion
for us—a picture that arises out of the necessity
of the Spiritual Life, and which has verified itself
sufficiently in universal effects ?

Conclusion.—In_ all individual points a definite
connection of religion with the total-development of
the Spiritual Life was observed. ‘This fact need only
be conceived more clearly in its main lines in order to
become a testimony of religion. Step by step, move-
ments appeared which burst through the world of ex-
perience and which, indeed, could not proceed without
coming into sharp contrast with ordinary experience.
But we cannot draw fully such a conclusion as this
without acknowledging that an inversion has taken
place in our conception of reality, and that a new world
has been gained ; and this actually happens in religion.

Religion appears as something that is not a mere
epiphenomenon of life, but as a necessity that grows
out of man’s deeper nature, and which at the start
may not appear more than a clarification of a matter
of fact without whose rule no aspiration after spiritu-
ality could arise. The wonder originates not only
in any one special situation of life, but penetrates far
more into all Spiritual Life. To him who does not
perceive the wonder in this, to him who does not see
a secret verified and acknowledged in what moves us


THE FACT OF UNIVERSAL RELIGION — 283


daily and hourly, religion appears simply as a super-
fluous and noxious weed of life. But to him to whom
the secret has unveiled itself, that all movements
of a spiritual kind work towards us, religion is no
more an alien thing, and he sees in it the conclusion
of what the Spiritual Life all along carried within
itself. Further, to him will the conclusion and the
emergence out of the deep be worthful because what
otherwise would remain veiled has come to great
clearness, and what otherwise would remain scattered
has led to unity. However, through such an elevation
to the level of a principle an inverted order of life has
resulted, which works for the elevation of all the
earlier existence. In this, religion before all else
guarantees the possibility of a spiritual existence, and
becomes the most certain thing within our whole
domain of life ; and also, it becomes the hypothesis of
all scientific knowledge. And as religion, through
such a source of the Spiritual Life, results in a constant
elevation above the interests and even above the
whole existence of the mere-human kind, and under-
takes such an incessant struggle against the small
human modes of life, it is completely protected from
the reproach of the anthropomorphism which a shallow
mode of thought has saddled upon the nature of
religion simply because such a mode of thought has
grown for a great length of time. In a far more
fundamental manner than all negative criticism will
the delineation of the religion of the Spiritual Life
drive out anthropomorphism. Indeed, understood
in the right way, religion is the only possible way
to encounter the anthropomorphism which otherwise


clings inexorably to us.


Part III.—The Opposition to Religion


INTRODUCTION


Our investigation has already reached a certain
result. It has been shown that we are more than
the mere being of nature; it has been shown that an
original kingdom of spirit unfolds in culture; we
have seen how religion is able to stand on the side
of the individual, and how it has been subjectively
appropriated by him. The truth of the other pro-
vinces of life does not depend upon how far the
individual takes possession of them; science remains
science although the individual may discover but
little intellectual movement in himself; art remains
art although many relate themselves to it in a crude
kind of way. But in spite of the superiority of
religion to the condition and even the caprice of the
individual, we cannot possibly consider the previous
conclusions we have reached as final. On the con-
trary, it must have already surprised us that what we
as yet have discovered as religion has nowhere out
of its own energy brought forth an historical religion,
and has never become the conviction of a great
community. Religion must always be able to
become something more than produce such results


as we have investigated, for unless it becomes this,
284


INTRODUCTION 285


it is evidently unable to arrive at an entire reality.
The object of our particular investigation is to search
for this More. We have gained from the conception
of the Spiritual Life a certainty of the fundamental
fact of religion, but here the object in view was
directed upon the positive achievements, upon the
triumphant advance of religion. ‘The opposition
which religion had to overcome was left largely in
the background. But this opposition cannot always
remain there; it must come to more than a partial
articulation ; it will have to be considered and esti-
mated asa Whole. And in this investigation difficult
oppositions and hindrances may appear which will
perhaps carry our whole consideration of the subject
into a new track and therewith lead to a more original
formation of religion than has hitherto met us. Let
us, therefore, see how matters stand.

That something sub-spiritual and non-divine exists
does not become a stumbling-block and a shock to
religion, for all this is unavoidable on account of the
imperfect stage of the reality we find in the existing
world. Religion cannot explain evil—all attempts
at explanation within the province of religion are
lamentable sophisms—but religion can overcome evil,
overcome it through the elevation and triumphant
achievement by it of a representative Divine world.
But religion must adhere unconditionally to such a
progress. Indeed, the less religion presupposes a
reason in the nearest-at-hand world, the more
vigorous must it further a “‘ becoming” of reason—a
progressive spiritualisation of existence through the
energy of the efficacious Divine within itself. Such
a meaning can be extracted in varied ways according


286 THE OPPOSITION TO RELIGION


to the different stages of the reality with which we
are dealing, but always the higher stages must raise
up the lower to themselves ; the Spiritual Life must
raise nature, the substance of the spirit must raise the
human form of existence ; all that represents within
the Spiritual Life the unity and the Whole must raise
the ramifications and particularity of life.

The picture, however, that we subsequently expect
and must expect is not corroborated by experience.
In our domain especially, the new life meets not only
individual hindrances, but it thrusts itself in the whole
of its effects upon an opposition which seems insur-
mountable. It attains no independent existence, but
remains directed by the energies of the lower level of
things ; the Divine here is not able to raise to itself the
non-divine, but is drawn down to it, and is degraded
to a mere means for the aims of the non-divine. Such
defencelessness over against a world man has entered
into to rule, and such a perversion of his activities
shake of necessity the belief in the truth of things.
How are such weaknesses compatible with the con-
ception of the Divine, and how can a hemmed-in and
powerless life be of a Divine kind? But, also, when
the reality of the Divine remains unapproachable as
a power superior to the world, its communication to
us becomes a matter of ever greater doubt, Of what
use is a definite Spiritual Life to us if it is only a
knowledge out of the distance, if it is unable to
permeate through the hindrances of our existence,
but is far more drawn into the very same discord from
which it ought to free us ?

Thus, the turn of life undertaken through religion
seems to be drawn right into the entanglement


INTRODUCTION 287


instead of being drawn out of it. There results in
connection with religion undeniably a removal from
the prior situation, a new starting-point is gained,
some kind of movement is brought into a current.
But when this movement is unable to rise after it has
opened out vistas and raised desires without being
able to fulfil them, it has made the situation rather
worse than better. The idea of an independent
Spiritual Life has brought forth a new standard
which makes much inadequate and intolerable which
previously had raised no kind of obstacle; especially
the shallow relationships and the ordinary everyday
life which otherwise might have remained neutral
now step upon the opposite side and strengthen the
opposition ; the hindrance turns from the external to
the internal: out of the weakness of the Spiritual
Life there issues an inner entanglement, and within
our own domain there issues a discord. Such a
confused situation turns reflection and conviction into
the most painful dilemma. ‘loo much exists in the
mind to pronounce a simple Nay because an actual
turn of life has already resulted, and the conflict itself
with its bitter pang is engendering the existence of a
movement. ‘loo much exists to pronounce a Yea.
Thus, neither the one nor the other is able to win us.
And yet the necessity of life drives constrainedly to a
decision. Will this knot allow itself in any kind of
way to be disentangled? Will it at least notify the
direction in which we have to search and to work /
Only further actual conclusions and not imaginative
suppositions can definitely decide concerning this;
and the attention must be directed especially upon


this.


288 THE OPPOSITION 'TO RELIGION


First of all, however, the province of the hindrances
has to be traversed, and its impressions have to
be brought to an open judgment; all disguise and
extenuation against the truth would be a wrong as
well as a danger to all further progress. Evidently
our investigation has entered upon a new stadium.
In the first place, the sun of a Divine Life rose out of
the thick cloud of the initial stages, and enabled us
to witness a kingdom of reason in the midst of all
hindrances; reflection can follow joyously the exten-
sion of this kingdom, and see all the fulness of life
and effort drawn to itself. Now, however, thick
clouds arise anew and veil that light so much that it
becomes dark and dull—-more inelined to allow us to
discover the cessation of truth than to lead us nearer
to it.

Further, our life may be compared to a drama
whose handling has come to movement in a toilsome
kind of way. But a reason had unfolded, and the
world seemed to have opened to its victorious
advance. Now, however, the counter-play begins
and grips so mightily that all the gain is endangered,
and, indeed, it threatens to transform everything into
a loss. Whether the matter remains ultimately in
such an entanglement, whether reason is not able
to carry forth further energies, and through this to
remain master of the field—all this must remain open
as a possibility, and may present itself as a hope. In
the meantime, however, the advocatus diaboli has the
solution, and it may express it bluntly. For all
enfeeblement and excuse come from evil. In con-
nection with the particulars of explanation one alone
has to be remembered, viz. that in connection with


INTRODUCTION 289


the whole question the matter deals not concern-
ing human happiness but concerning the reality of a
definite Spiritual Life, concerning the presence of a
higher world within our domain. All this gives the
fact a more earnest outlook and the question an in-
comparably greater vigour than the mere problem of
happiness is able to bring forth.


19


PART II].—THE OPPOSITION TO RELIGION
(ConTINUED)


CHAPTER IX
a. Tue EXPLANATION OF THE OPposiITION


1. The Opposition of Nature


THe Spiritual Life is unable to desire an independ-
ence without placing characteristic demands upon
nature. The entire binding of the life of the soul to
the natural process shown by experience raised no
obstacle prior to the turn towards spirituality. For
hitherto the life was a mere means and tool to the
self-preservation of the individual; it would not and
could not be a kingdom of its own; it developed no
original content, and opened out no new world.
The spiritual stage, however, has brought forth all
this. Therefore the turn to spirituality produces
necessarily the longing that there should correspond
to this independence in the nature of man an
independence of existence over against nature ; the
new aims and the immediate participation in the
whole of an infinite and eternal world, existing by
itself, demand appropriate forms of life. Indeed, a
superiority and sovereignty over nature become here
an urgent demand. For if the turn to spirituality


signifies truly a penetration of reality to its own
290


THE EXPLANATION OF THE OPPOSITION 291


essence, the independent progressive Spiritual Life
must out of itself illumine the whole domain and
draw all to itself; it must handle this domain as
means to its own ends, and as stepping-stones to its
own height; and it will at least desire in all con-
nections to take the lead. Such a demand proceeds
not only externally but far more internally. As
nature itself with its succession and mechanism enters
into the very soul of man, the awakened Spiritual
Life must verify its independence and superiority
over against this; it must rule our actions more and
more, and must link all effort to its own career.
How could it otherwise execute a revolution of the
total reality @

Do the facts of experience show such a “ becoming”
superiority of the Spiritual Life? They show quite
the reverse. The spiritual development of man as
well as the natural life of the soul remain tied to the
body, and, at the same time, they remain attached to
the order of nature; they become and grow with
the body. The Spiritual Life, too, thrives and wanes
within us. That the body is more to man than a
mere tool is proved evidently by so-called mental
pathology—which is really brain pathology—which
contracts most powerfully the psychic activity and
drives man to perverted paths. Death, again, with
its extinguishing of the whole existence, appears as a
great evil proceeding from the province of nature.
For the Spiritual Life sets aims within the individual
being which far surpass the short span of existence ;
activities are initiated and relationships of man to
man are framed which contain a longing after a
permanent duration; the man works with incessant


292 THE OPPOSITION TO RELIGION


toil for his own cultivation, and achieves by his
labours a personal existence and a spiritual individu-
ality in order to witness all his results destroyed so
cruelly. Over against this, there awakens a glowing
longing to burst such limits asunder, and to participate
in some kind of way in eternity ; thus religion became
in the main especially the promise of individual
immortality. But-not only does experience fail to
give the least clue to this, it also refuses to affirm
that what appears on one side as indispensable appears
on the other side as superfluous. How often does
all spiritual emotion fade in the soul; the spiritu-
ality becomes numb and dull, and it gradually dies
almost entirely in the life-time of man. What has
immortality to do with such a spent-out life? If,
however, death forms the natural conclusion, can
things stand otherwise in connection with that which
persists as a spiritual fire for the whole of life, and,
indeed, that which in its course burns with love ever
more energetic and ever clearer? Question after
question, and riddle after riddle! This, however, is
certain, that in our view of the matter the natural
process, unconcerned with spiritual values, follows
simply its own course; the most glorious spiritual
greatness offers no protection against an early death
or against collapse brought about by ill-health ; but,
on the other side, we often witness spiritual no-
bodies unhappy and dragging idly along an arrested
existence.

The experiences of peoples and of humanity corres-
pond to the experiences of individuals. The aims
and values of the Spiritual Life do not seem to exist
for the blind mechanism of the natural process ; these


THE EXPLANATION OF THE OPPOSITION 293


natural powers know of no difference between good
and evil, righteousness and unrighteousness, inward
greatness and smallness. Earthquakes and floods as
in a play destroy the blossoming Spiritual Life ;
pestilence and hunger hold forth their harvest without
any grief concerning human welfare and spiritual
values. Nowhere does nature rise to a higher order
as the symbolism of the Middle Ages imagined to
have been the case with plants and animals ; it merely
constructs an enclosed kingdom concerned with itself
alone. A mysterious sphinx stands in front of us,
incessantly bringing to birth and bringing to death,
patiently preparing and rashly destroying, benevolent
and pitiless at the same time, its objects quickly
befriending one another and quite as rapidly pursuing
one another in a relentless struggle; all this verifies
the saying that nature is less of a mother than of a
wicked mother to her children. We find then in
nature an incessant impetus towards life, but in all
the agitation and movement we find no existence-for-
itself, no life-for-self, and thus no genuine fruits, no
meaning, no reason of the whole, but all seems a
passionate play without reason and for nothing. But,
however, it is not without any reason at all, for all the
works of nature result in simple, unswerving funda-
mental forms and in a fast chain of occurrences ; they
result in law and causality. All this is certainly
reason, but as yet only a formal reason which is
throughout indifferent to the content of the occur-
rences. Also, the most painful destruction of life,
the origin of awful malformations, the inheritance of
painful diseases, follow throughout in accordance with
these laws and with the causal order. Of what help,


294 THE OPPOSITION TO RELIGION


however, to reason is that which places so much
power in the hands of unreason ?

Such indifference of nature to all spiritual aims
becomes intolerable in religion, and religion sought,
as out of a constrained necessity, a help in the
miraculous which appeared as an evident proof of the
sovereignty of spiritual and divine energies above
nature. But, in spite of all toil, a secure founda-
tion for such an assertion cannot be found. The
scientific conception of nature as well as historical
criticism have undermined the belief in miracle, until
that belief has become, right down to its main prop,
a burden for true belief. How can we now hold up
a consolidated inner life over against the insecurity of
the external situation! And, further, the mechanism
of nature seizes the soul and places all action in an
iron band. ‘This mechanism cannot hold us entirely,
for how could a Spiritual Life rise up on the whole
within us? And also, after such a turn towards the
Spiritual Life the immediate consciousness places the
mechanism underneath itself; the spiritual activity
must thus have won some kind of place for itself; it
is soon pushed out of it, but quickly and strongly it
returns to its abode. The Spiritual Life has to be
formed out of the Whole, and has to convince us of
infinity as well as of eternity. But in the nature of
man it disperses itself into the sheer, incessant,
changing and counter-stirring flux of consciousness.
True, the Spiritual Life struggles against such a
hindrance but does not forge its way through it; it
remains banished in the background and sees itself
shut out of the obvious reality as an alien.

Also, the emancipation of spirituality from nature


THE EXPLANATION OF THE OPPOSITION 295


cannot be brought about through the motive-powers
of life. However much the sensuous impulses may
be relegated to a lower level, they reassert themselves
with such strength that spiritual activity does not
seem able to dispense with their help. How dull
would such an activity remain, how uninteresting
would all work become, how insipid would all love be,
if they were not linked to a natural impulse, and if
they did not draw the potency of such an impulse
to themselves! Further, the characteristic configura-
tion of the Spiritual Life in different civilisations
seems determined before all else by the standard and
custom of the natural energy of life. But does not
the fact concerning the differences of the historical
religions resolve itself to this: whether a people holds
tenaciously to an affirmation of life and sets forth this
affirmation in spite of all hindrances as the Semites
have done, or whether a people tends to deny and
to destroy such an affirmation as the Indians have
done ?

The natural life stands on a lower level than the
impulse of self-preservation ; and, on the other hand,
in the domain of the spirit this impulse is censured
and repudiated as selfishness. But shall we become
free of it, and can we, in the main, be deprived of it ?
While we have to wrest incessantly our existence out
of an alien and indifferent world, can we and dare we
put in place of such a world the anxiety for self-
preservation? This anxiety grows and refines itself
over whole nations and over the whole of human
society. How much depends on material welfare
and how much it signifies even for the Spiritual Life,
is shown with special clearness by the economic


296 THE OPPOSITION TO RELIGION


movements of the present. But when material
things become so much to us, and hold us in so
obligatory a manner, what becomes of the elevation
to the new world which the Spiritual Life and also
religion with all its might long for ?

The total impression on this level can be no other
than this: that the Spiritual Life, too, with its
awakening to a clear consciousness remains a mere
accompanying phenomenon of the natural process.
In all its lofty flight the effort cannot disengage it-
self from a dependence from without ; it remains tied
to the energies of nature; it is drawn down to the
service of nature. This barrier becomes an intolerable
contradiction when the presence of the Divine is
experienced within the Spiritual Life. Ifthe Divine
is really in the transaction, the Spiritual Life must
be able to bring its efforts to fruition. If it is not
able to do this, how could we revere such a Life
as Divine ?


2. The Opposition of Culture


Certain as the weakness of the spirit over against
nature remains a mystery, it would have been in-
tolerable if the man were not able within his own
province to construct a kingdom of reason and to
fortify himself against all attacks and doubts. In
reality a unique human province originates over
against nature: this province is culture, through
which man prepares a new kind of world. This new
world is culture as it develops itself, through the
conclusions of individuals, into an historical life and,
through history, into a stratum of activity. We
have previously shown that this human culture is not


THE EXPLANATION OF THE OPPOSITION 297


able to bring forth spirituality out of itself, but far
more presupposes it. But in spite of such a limita-
tion, it must be in the position to construct its basal
development out of deep connections, and to co-
operate in the construction of a kingdom of reason.
This is to be expected and desired of culture. Culture
is called to break the contradiction and untruth of
the ordinary commonplace life, and to seek for a new
order of things. Now, as such a new order is known
and acknowledged, culture must victoriously out of
its own energy make headway against the old situa-
tion ; it must free and weld the inner-abiding reason
of our existence, and triumphantly drive out all
unreason. In the midst of all the unreadiness of our
situation the dawning of a Divine Power ought to
seal fast the superiority of reason and transform the
movement of history into a progressive conquest of
the spirit.

It is thus we ought to find things, but in reality
we find them otherwise; instead of human culture
placing itself in the service of definite spirituality, it
raises itself as an independent master, treats its own
existence and development as the highest of all ends,
and consequently cannot very well but reduce the
Spiritual Life to a mere means, and set it fast on a
level where its services seem advantageous to culture.
A strong inversion is evident in this procedure. It
belongs to the very nature of the Spiritual Life to be
independent and self-valued, and this claim it can in
no way renounce. Culture, however, need only be
viewed a little closer in its qualifications, in order
that its inability to discover the Spiritual Life may
become evident. In culture there result conclusions


298 THE OPPOSITION TO RELIGION


of the human mind, a reciprocal contraction of
certain individual elements becomes clear, a visible
union takes place, which at the same time undertakes
spiritual tasks. In this union the individuals step
forth with their given opinions, z.e. with their pre-
vailing natural impulses and with but little spiritual
qualities, with much delight in themselves and with
but little love for others. Thus, there results in the
union of individuals some kind of binding of spiritual
elements, a certain summation of potencies. But
such a binding results only in external achievements
and without a just differentiation of the definite and
the indefinite. Consequently there easily arises a
manifold and complicated web of relations, but not,
however, an inner Whole; the current of life thus
flows not from the internal to the external but from
the external to the internal; and whatever awakens
in the form of spirituality remains tightly tied to the
purely human formation.

All this may be relatively valuable, and throughout
indispensable for man, but inner barriers are perceptible
enough; and if, in spite of the acknowledgment
of these barriers, social culture makes of itself an
all-governing end, and directs itself against the
independence of an awakened spirituality, difficult
entanglements and, indeed, perversions are unavoid-
able. That social culture in reality is not more than
it is, is no detriment or reproach to it; while, how-
ever, it can be more than is possible for it to be
through the actual natural state of affairs. It cannot
become more so long as it presents its mixture of
reason and unreason as pure reason, so long as it
attributes the rights of absolute spirituality to its


THE EXPLANATION OF THE OPPOSITION 299


conditioned human spirituality. When it acts from
such a disposition it seeks to mould all spiritual great-
ness out of itself, it seeks to command all effort out
of its own achievement, and to satisfy all demands
out of its own means ; and finally to tie the movement
to the point where it can reach its own ends. Hence,
an opposition necessarily originates, and, indeed, a
struggle between a mere-human and a genuine spiritu-
ality arises—a struggle which must work with all
tenacity because the struggle on the mere-human side
is also led in the name of the spirit. Such a dissension
lies evidently before our eyes if the all-powerful State
or the Church with its monopoly of all means of grace
drags with its utmost all Spiritual Life to itself. But
the struggle spreads itself, however, beyond all this
to the whole domain of human connections. Every-
where the mere inclination tends not to raise, free,
and transform human existence out of its level, but
to leave it tied to itself and satisfied with itself, and
thus, in spite of all the seeming expansion, to narrow
it inwardly. Utilitarianism and_ relativism— two
diminutives of the Spiritual Life—become unavoid-
able if spiritual greatness and connections as well as
religion itself are considered first and foremost as
social organisations. Then, that alone is termed
“good” which is useful to society; that is termed
“true” which finds its acknowledgment in society ;
and both are an inner subversion of the definite
meaning of the two concepts without the discovery
of such a subversion. The subversion is so varied
and disfigures life so much that it will prove of
little avail in the main tendencies of life.

Human alliances always develop the Spiritual Life


300 THE OPPOSITION TO RELIGION


in a particular kind of way, but on this path the
Spiritual Life is not able to stamp itself energetically
without a strong one-sidedness. But this particular
kind of way tends towards the greatest stubbornness
in its attempt to become. a Whole, and it coerces
with passionate intolerance all remaining activity.
Such contradiction engenders necessarily in course
of time a reaction; other ideals arise, progress, and
discover their rights, but only to fall quickly into the
same narrowness. Thus we witness an_ incessant
change of ideals, a zigzag movement, without the
superior unity of the whole, without the necessary
demand of definite spirituality to step forth from the
background to take the lead. We observe such a
change of ideals clearly enough; the experience of
history shows it openly with impressive clearness,
and, in spite of this, social culture treats ever anew
the occasional drift of activity as the only right,
the only possible, and the conclusive truth. In the
abstract, we have the clearest consciousness of the
relativity of all human and historical achievements ;
in the concrete, any suitable time adapts us to be-
come carriers of absolute truth. And must not this
happen, and is not the error avoidable in order to
gain character and energy for the problems of time ?

Social culture can do no other than present the
achievements in front of us and partially conform to
such achievements. That would be no detriment if
such a limitation were acknowledged, and if the
inwardness and rights of the life of the soul were
preserved. But such does not happen, because the
achievements together with all their residuum as well
as the character itself are enclosed within the circle of


THE EXPLANATION OF THE OPPOSITION 301


social culture. Thus, all life and action are driven from
the character to the performances, and this works to-
wards a stunted growth of all independent inward-
ness. ‘The direction of all striving upon achievements
—the acknowledgment of external results alone in the
life of others—becomes a great danger to the independ-
ence of character; man now finds his centre of gravity
not in himself, but in the social environment, and
thus the life loses the energy and veracity of original
creativeness. He who in the first place works not
for himself but for others, not for the facts but for
the social environment, must, in spite of all his activity,
exclude himself from the depth of things. The
greatest defect here, however, is the inevitable rapid
growth of pretence. Where all the value lies in the
effect an action has on another and on the mere
acknowledgment of another, then the semblance of
truth does the same and often better service than
truth itself. And this semblance will entangle the
whole of life, and poison the real soul of man. This
semblance-character of social culture becomes an
intolerable peril when the inmost soul of the Spiritual
Life is in question, as e.g. in religion and morality,
so that all penetrating creativeness within these
provinces was a burning protest against the pretence
not only of the special social situation but also of the
social mode of handling such problems. But all
protests have transformed the social situation but
little.

As the inwardness in this manner is stunted in its
growth, therefore the individuality is pressed back
and suppressed. Since society values and nurtures
in man especially what enters into its ordinary ar-


302 THE OPPOSITION TO RELIGION


rangement, characteristic features, discernment, and
eminence are thought lightly of, curtailed, and ejected.
Indeed, the more exclusively the social leadership of
life takes the field, the individual situation suffers
more hindrance; the more monotonous and mechani-
cal existence becomes, the more must activity itself
grow inwardly coarser. Also, society will give an
ordinary shallow character to its organisations—a
character which often harmonises but little with the
inexhaustibleness of the individual cases which origin-
ate, and which collides sharply with the individual
nature of the particular cases. Thus, for example,
we find in law an incessant conflict between the
general norms and some feature of the individual
fact. But shall we throw such norms away on
account of this? Or, are we called to abandon life
to a complete subversion and an insecure arbitrary
choice 4

To base life on the level of ordinary everyday
experience is extremely precarious, because the level
of human relationships has no altitude, because such
ordinary existence must depend on exhausted move-
ment and waning energy, and these will consequently
organise the life. When the ordinary existence
presents itself as a totality and standard of all
spirituality, it enters into a great conflict with the
development of true spirituality. The elevated out-
look, greatness, and originality appear to the ordinary
existence as useless, excessive, and indolent. Thus
all independent spirituality becomes a disturbance of
social equilibrium, becomes a reproof against social
conclusions. This opposition of ordinary existence
engenders severe conflicts with tragic issues not only


THE EXPLANATION OF THE OPPOSITION 303


in particular cases, but permeates the whole of
historical life, and persists even in the external
acknowledgment of greatness, since existence drags
-such greatness down to its own level. And in
the central questions, the acknowledgment was
wont to follow only when the greatness was removed
far back enough not to disturb the circles thus
acknowledging it, indeed far enough to be able, as
‘classical,’ to become a weapon against the Spiritual
Life struggling upwards in their own time.

Again, in the field of culture there appears the
same defect of which already nature makes us
painfully aware, the cleavage between formal and
intrinsic reason. Society places all life and action
under conjoint forms, and insists, before all else,
upon the observation of these forms; and social
culture has a decidedly formal character. As
against the natural level the entanglement gets
even increased here, since the formal reason steps
forth and is acknowledged by society as the carrier
of intrinsic truth; the decisions of this formal reason
claim absolute validity. Now, the most correct
observation of all forms of existence offers no
guarantee of an intrinsic truth, since fallible and
easily moved men have to apply those forms.
Socrates and Jesus were sentenced in accordance
with all the forms of law, and the Inquisition and
the trials for witchcraft were most correct. All
social modes of life stand in danger of injuring
intrinsic truth whilst holding fast to the formal
truth. Hence all true friends of morality praise
so little the virtue and righteousness of civic life ;
and deep religious natures are so often found in


304 THE OPPOSITION TO RELIGION


sharp opposition to the basing of religion on forms,
dogmas, and rites, towards which the social formation
of religion moves.

The more clearly the effort in the Spiritual Life
after a genuine being—an aspiration towards the
essential development of life—is acknowledged, the
greater must that disfigurement and damage appear.
But does a knowledge of this fact make formal
reason superfluous, and is not the life without it
abandoned to an entire dissolution ?

Thus, there appear a multitude of abuses, and
common to them all an inner unveracity, a desire to
appear more than one can be, the raising of a highly
problematic half-reason to absolute reason, an idolatry
of the social circle! Such a situation of life must
anew cause a counter-movement, and this must rise
in opposition not only to individual sides and regula-
tions but to the whole of this social mode of life.
If great spiritual renewals work in such a counter-
movement, they can set an elevation of life going.
If such counter-movements, on the other hand, be,
as is usually the case, mere reactions, all their
passionate protestations can be of but little use
essentially. What shapes itself here against a binding
of things within the domain of freedom remains so
many formless waves of feeling; the individual can
indeed appeal to the immediacy of his life and can
revel in ever new moods, but the substance of life
profits thus but little. If, in kindred directions, the
present seeks to cast off all the burden of history, and
seeks to defray the cost of life by its own means
alone, no complete freedom is attained. For the aspira-
tion of the movement is, viewed empirically, a testi-


THE EXPLANATION OF THE OPPOSITION 305


mony of history even when it places itself pointedly
over against the immediate past. Such an opposi-
tion may well show the defects of social culture,
but it is not able to overcome such defects from
their foundation. Such opposition with its exaggera-
tion of the individual and his contingencies passes
easily into one-sidedness and error, so that the scales
of right must turn again to the level of social culture.
Thus the pendulum of the movement swings inces-
santly from one side to the other ; ever anew one side
succeeds through exaggeration against the other side,
and in the passions of the struggle the best energies
devour themselves without having gained anything
essential for the main fact. But it is always the con-
clusion of absolute truth that makes the struggle
passionate and overthrows all error.

Thus, social culture is far removed from being the
realisation of a kingdom of reason or even from
becoming so by degrees. The greater will be the
subversion—not only in expressed words but in
acts—when social culture stands for such a kingdom
of reason. There lies in such a worship of humanity
a delusion which must issue, in the particular as well
as in the general, into clamorous hindrance and
misrepresentation. But even such a mode of life
received its characteristic feature from the Spiritual
Life, and can never wholly deny its origin. But how
does this Spiritual Life explain itself now that the
lower mode of life draws it into its own web and
offers the most tenacious opposition to all progressive
effort ?. And even when the Spiritual Life is con-
ceived as a world-power and returns to the Divine,


even this conception is drawn into the sphere of
20


306 THE OPPOSITION TO RELIGION


doubt. Is not the Spiritual Life able to complete
the work begun? But why then was the work
begun? Out of what do these hindrances explain
themselves — hindrances which, however, do not
originate out of the mere individual, but which carry
a necessity in themselves? Here again we find riddle
after riddle! All the obscurity, however, concerning
these questions is stimulated on the path of denial.


3. The Opposition within the particular Province of
the Spiritual Life

Difficult as the previous entanglements were, they
do not reach to the deepest root of the Spiritual Life.
However much such a life may be confined within
the human circle, it signifies even here, through inner
movements and necessities, a real kind of existence
and a real efficacy. For how otherwise does the
struggle against bare nature as well as against bare
society explain itself, and how could the injunctions
of both be discovered as insufficient ? Also, such an
elevated Spiritual Life encompasses and permeates
our existence not merely as an invisible total atmo-
sphere, but it unites itself as a great Whole in art,
science, morality, etc., and develops a propelling force
within its own province, and works beyond the
individual province in the whole realm of life. Thus
there originates here without a doubt an original
sphere of life. Has this sphere overcome the en-
tanglements, and has it resulted in an emancipation
from the hindrance and error which otherwise saddle
human existence ?

Such were in fact the opinions and hopes of ancient
and modern times. All disorder was pressed into the


THE EXPLANATION OF THE OPPOSITION 307


relationship with the environment; the particular
circle of the Spiritual Life was imagined through
this to avoid any deformity ; spirituality and reason
seemed to have an equally valid greatness. Accord-
ing to this, man need only set himself in spiritual
activity in order to place his life in pure reason. It
is in this direction that the convictions of all the
enthusiasm of culture and all the confessions of
enlightenment considered that the development of
mental energies carry directly within themselves the
security of a righi habit and usage of things, and
that when errors arise they will unloose themselves
easily and smoothly.

In connection with the whole course of our investi-
gation quite a contrary picture presented itself. The
entanglements vanish in no manner within the
province of the Spiritual Life, but reach within it
their highest power; the most difficult hindrances
and disturbances are not of an unspiritual but of a
spiritual kind. That an Absolute Spiritual Life was
visible in the domain of man brings, instead of a
smooth solution, far more a sharpening of the op-
posites, a heightening of the conflict. Indeed, when
the disturbance threatens to grip the fundamental ex-
istence itself, when the Spiritual Life is confined within
itself, doubt penetrates now into the final depths.
How does it stand now in connection with the Divine
that suffers such an inner disorder to prevail? Or
shall we flee to the course of thought which comes to
expression in the noteworthy words: Nemo contra
Deum nisi Deus ipse ?

(a2) The Disruption of the Spiritual Life.—The
Spiritual Life begins in us at individual points and


308 THE OPPOSITION TO RELIGION


first of all constructs further Wholes; it shows the
nearest-at-hand view of things as scattered into a
great number of isolated elements. The presence of
the Spiritual Life promises an entire revolution of
all this. For in it the unity longs for sovereignty ;
little as the fragmentary elements may be abolished
with one stroke, yet the Spiritual Life will undertake
an energetic struggle against them, and out of a
Divine power within the soul it will penetrate into
them victoriously ; more and more the Spiritual Life
must connect all into a Whole and permeate each
special province with the spirit of the Whole. We
must expect and aspire after all this. But again, the
expectation is deceived, again a still greater entangle-
ment grows out of the alleged solution.

True, in all this the idea of a total-life arises, works,
and extends itself into the individual provinces. But
the elements do not bend before this idea, but seek
with all their existing rights to draw it down to
themselves, and with the help of such an idea of a
total-life to raise themselves to the level of all
sovereignty. Now it is science, now art, now moral-
ity, now historical religion, now practical activity,
which make themselves in turn a centre of life, and
seek to link all effort to their own special arena.
Consequently there originates varied types of life
with their antagonistic movements and their dis-
agreement and division of fragmentary portions of
spirituality amongst themselves. And, indeed, such
a procedure seems to issue out of an inner necessity.
Thus the Spiritual Life within us seems to belong to
no special and clear province beyond the social circle,
and does not seem able to gain the necessary energy


THE EXPLANATION OF THE OPPOSITION 309


for high aims without concentrating itself on one
aspect of life alone, and expecting all safety through
reaching that aspect. Therefore, there is with us no
prominent achievement without a strong one-sided-
ness and also unfairness; all greatness thus works
tyrannically and coercively; all effort, in the glow
and passion of its activities, after a just balancing and
a reciprocal reservation, appears as an intolerable
dulness. But as all this conflict experiences through
the idea of an Absolute Life the most important
enhancement, the entanglements are still found
beyond the existing situation.

The next result is a sharp division of the various
movements, a hard conflict on the whole, the trans-
formation of our Spiritual Life into a relentless
struggle. And all hope of an atoning conclusion
fails. As each party represents a right which must
never be lost, none of the elements of the movement
must be destroyed, and thus the conquest of each
element carries in its over-exertion a turn to a lower
level, and further, the prospect opens itself upon an
ebb and flow, upon a fluctuation hither and thither.
When, however, the one displaces the other ever anew,
ever anew the ideals and the convictions change
suddenly into full opposites. Does not the whole
thing then become a mere play and caprice? ‘True,
the thought of an all-encompassing and all-governing
truth is there, but it does not seem able to mould itself
without being under the power of the merely indi-
vidual formations, without serving the ambition of
these isolated formations for an absolute monarchy,
and without working for the sharpening of the dis-
ruption whose overcoming was set forth as a goal.


310 THE OPPOSITION TO RELIGION


This presumption, however, to be a Whole in the
particular is believed to be atoned for by the individual
movements; they will make some amends through
the shaping of the meaning of the true and the false,
the spiritual and the human, freedom and necessity,
which in their natural state are entangled in one
another, and which nowhere long to reach pure reason.
Therefore, it is only out of the Whole that the
necessary division of things results; it is only in the
connections of life framed in an inner unity that there
results a transposition into full freedom and original
activism—into an illumination and spiritualisation of
the total existence; it is only out of this that each
province receives definite boundaries within which it
has, in its own way, to represent the Whole and
work for its further development. If, on the other
hand, the individual formations in their exclusiveness
allow the good and the indispensable to flow along-
side of the perverse and the problematic, life degener-
ates into the most painful dilemma. What life dare
not miss as a truth cannot possibly be extracted out
of the region of the affixed error; but, however, if
life ignores the error, the truth quickly fades and
vanishes. Therefore life must at the same time
affirm and deny, accept and reject ; everywhere truth
disperses into error because the particular rules the
Whole, and forces its own nature on the Whole.

The total-life needs Art for its emancipation
and thorough cultivation, for Art makes Truth
significant and joyous at the same time; Art
baptizes Truth in the element of Beauty, but as
soon as truth rules the Whole through the develop-
ment of an esthetic view of life, it submits to a


THE EXPLANATION OF THE OPPOSITION 311


pleasurable, playful, and hyper-sensitive direction of
life. Science brings forth an energetic clarification
and consolidation, an ascent of man to a world-
consciousness and to a life which proceeds from the
expansion and truth of things; but science is not
able to become the sole mistress without engendering
through its merely intellectual culture an excessive
self-consciousness of the work of thought, and turning
the tasks of life into problems of knowledge, and
finally injuring the development of an independent
inwardness as well as of the fresh apprehension of
the immediate movement. A manly strength and a
consolidation of character which the whole being -
needs originate out of morality, but a specific moral
conduct of life is wont to become hard, stubborn,
and self-conscious. Over against this, religion de-
velops more gentleness and fervour, but to fill the
life exclusively with these leads easily into the danger
of turning aside from the work of the world and
of revolving simply in one’s own inactivity, and,
finally, of transferring to the Divine the claims which
humanity makes upon us—the very qualities by
which we are able to know the Divine at all. A
counter-effect is brought about by the practico-social
life with its development of the contact with the
environment and with its participation in the energies
of the ordinary everyday experience ; and this works
in the direction of greater security and skill, of fresh
courage to face life, and of a joyous self-existence.
But as soon as such a mode of life conquers the
whole man, it drives him into a shallow activity and
into a soulless alienation. Thus each isolated method
leads into error as soon as it becomes a Whole to


312 THE OPPOSITION TO RELIGION


itself, and yet each individual method will not give
up its claim to become a Whole, and puts every nerve
forth to become such a Whole.

Through such a dispersal the conduct of life
engenders a characteristic obscurity which arrogantly
tends to despise all the provinces except its own,
whilst it rejects such a treatment from any other side
as an unbearable monstrosity. The esthetic mode
of thought feels itself superior in the fineness of its
sensations and the distinction of its taste; the
scientific mode feels its superiority in the expansive-
ness of its view and the clearness of its insight; the
moral mode feels its superiority in the strength of its
virtues ; the religious mode feels its superiority in the
inwardness of its soul-life and its being well-pleasing
unto God; the practico-social mode feels its superi-
ority in the secure rule of immediate existence.
Each misses the ideals of the rest, and no wonder
that each easily defeats the others. Thus, through a
variegated colouring we obtain usually a pharisaic
self-consciousness, and, along with it, a disfiguration
of the Spiritual Life into a factious life which is as
unavoidable as it is intolerable.

But how shall the substance of the Spiritual Life
conquer if each element strives against the others,
and all contend against all, and in the strife destroy
their best energy? On account of this, such strife,
in the course of history, will increase rather than
decrease. For in spite of all the vacillations of
individuals, divergences increase on the whole, and
the characteristic development of each particular
province takes place as well. Modern times
especially constitutes a significant period through its


THE EXPLANATION OF THE OPPOSITION 313


dissolution of the Middle Ages mode of culture, but
the danger became ever greater through the develop-
ment of one-sided formations, through a disintegration
of the Spiritual Life and the transformation of our
existence into an irreconcilable struggle. Also, it
becomes ever clearer that the entanglement lies far
above all will and capacity of mere individuals; the
individual appears here all along as a child of his
age; the waves of his age play with him and carry
him far out until he becomes without a will of his
own, and merely floats on the current of the external
circumstances.

The idea of a Spiritual Life is not able to prevail
against such a discord, but is considered a specially
evil defect, and it is driven into stubborn doubt at
the moment a Divine power is recognised in the idea
of such a spiritual total-life. Then the Divine seems
too weak to become the ruler of the human forma-
tion of the Spiritual Life; indeed, what is present as
a stimulation of the Spiritual Life seems to fall under
the power of a lower order, and to heighten the fancy
and confusion of that order. How can a Divine
work thus against His own aims ?

(8) The Disintegration within the Spiritual Life.—
The opposition to the unity of the Spiritual Life
reaches even deeper: disintegrations unite themselves
together in the very foundation, and produce a
dispersal of elements and conflicting formations.
Three such disintegrations have already been noticed
in our investigation. First of all, our investigation
considered the cleft between subject and object—
between the individual consciousness and its external
world. From the beginning this cleft checks progress


314 THE OPPOSI'TION TO RELIGION


towards truth, but it seemed to draw a conclusion
concerning the opening of a definite spiritual and
essential life within the particular domain of man.
For along with the cleft there appears within the
domain of activity the dawning of a reality; there
originates a world which is contiguous with the self
from within and not from without, but such a world
becomes our true self through the binding of its
elements into a unity. That this new world, first of
all, found itself in opposition to the old world, and
only gradually subjects it, cannot astonish and terrify
us. This is certainly to be expected in connection
with a movement which arises towards a new direction,
and which slowly yet securely advances over against
the cleft. But when this expectation of overcoming
the cleft is unfulfilled, even the presence of a higher
order of things far more heightens than lessens the
problem. Not only is the idea of unity unable to
draw the being to itself, and mould it out of itself,
but it works in the direction of giving an edge to the
situation, as each of the two sides—subject and object
—is driven, through its indifference to the unity, to
an attempt to tear the total-life into pieces and to
bring the opposite side entirely under itself. In the
one direction, the particular works of man emancipate
themselves, they step forward as independent powers,
they transform the life of the soul into mere means
for their own necessities, they coerce ever stronger
all inwardness and mechanise more and more all
existence. But the progressive absorption of the
subject contributes finally towards the overthrow of
man’s powers. For the more the activities loosen
themselves from a soul-foundation, the less can they


THE EXPLANATION OF THE OPPOSITION 315


signify a connection by themselves, and the more
must their own energy and greatness sink until their
inability to inspire the whole of life appears quite
clearly. Then comes the rotation to the other side:
there results now an inversion of the prior course of
work. ‘The subject now raises itself in a gigantic
manner and disconnects itself to the utmost from the
_ object in order to construct all reality by itself. Its
own individual situation becomes its world; the
enjoyment of its sensations and the refinement of its
dispositions become its life. But if the subject
follows exclusively on this path, the reality more
and more internally and externally flies away. For
the subject is not able to preserve its own unity on
account of its growing resignation to a mere senti-
ment ; it degenerates into purely isolated and inces-
santly changing positions, and its existence falls more
and more into the transient and the shadowy. On
the other hand, a great longing will again awaken for
the object as an indispensable support for our life,
and thus once more the power reaches the other side.
This dialectic, in which each side through its isolation
and overstrain destroys itself and returns to the other
side, shows clearly the necessity of both sides to
instruct one another. But with the acknowledg-
ment of a homogeneousness we do not gain a living
unity ; all merely individual effort for a Whole does
not free us from the power of a lifeless disunion,
as our own times with their vacillation to and fro
between a soulless technics and a fanciful senti-
ment show with painful clearness. The presence
of an Absolute Life which shall be above the
opposites has as yet only heightened the longing


316 THE OPPOSITION TO RELIGION


for unity without conferring the energy to satisfy
the longing.

Another evil cleft from which the Absolute Life
should be freed is that between energy and character.
Experience from of old has shown how the energy
has often mangled the character and the character the
energy, and how life has entered into a blind natural
impulse on the one hand and into a powerless spiritu-
ality on the other hand. Such a situation ought to
alter itself through the presence of an essential and
cultivated spirituality. For within the province of
such a spirituality there is no definite energy which
does not carry within itself an independent appropria-
tion of that spiritual world, and, along with this,
acquires a moral character; at the same time, the
character raises itself from a merely passive condition
to an energetic act—an act in which the whole soul
connects itself together. Thus, through the ennoble-
ment of energy and the strengthening of character an
inner unity is reached, and a new type of life is gained
in which the strong is good and the good is strong.
It is a matter of regret that such a type of life signifies
for us more of a distant ideal than of a present reality.
For not only does the antithesis contain undiminished
energy in the direction mentioned over the whole
breadth of existence, but the attempt at emancipation
seems to it to lie back still deeper in the spiritual.
Also, from an earlier simple-mindedness the idea has
more and more heightened, so that one of the sides
raises itself above the other as alone of value, and
handles its opposite side as superfluous and even evil.
Thus, on one side, we find the exclusiveness of
spiritual energy—great diabolical formations which


THE EXPLANATION OF THE OPPOSITION 317


are completely absorbed in the victorious progress
of their own doings and creations, and treat all else
with supreme indifference; which are served by the
events of life, and to which fate itself appears to
pay homage, although their course lies on the other
side of good and evil; thus all moral judgment
appears as a subsidiary consideration and even as
an unbecoming intrusion. In all this there lies a
wantonness which not only leads sooner or later
to external ruin, but which also from the outset
damages the spiritual character of the achievement.
And, over against this cult of mere energy, we find
a cult of mere disposition, the self-conceit and self-
righteousness of a disposition separated from action,
and resting exclusively in itself. Now, what happens
within pure inwardness may, in its ultimate valuation,
surpass in lustre the most brilliant performance in
the moulding of the world. But when a frame of
mind has no contact with the entanglements and
temptations of the world, when the disposition is
not turned into action, when there is no struggle
with external things, when man revolves, from the
outset, within an alleged superiority of his own mind,
then life threatens to sink into inactivity, the weak-
ness of the soul is reckoned as a merit, and in such
a numbness and smallness of nature a_pharisaic
self-complacency arises. And the self-complacency
of weakness is even more painful than that of strength.
But how will the disposition become the soul of a
great life, and how will the cleft between wishing
and achieving be spanned? Once again, we have
not amongst men found those things together, which,
in themselves, require each other.


318 THE OPPOSITION TO RELIGION


In corporate life that conflict appears in the discord
between culture and morality (especially as repre-
sented in religion). Culture, with its development
of energy, is wont to treat morality as a subsidiary
thing, and to sacrifice it to its own ends ; morality
develops, over against this, a consciousness of inner
superiority without being able, however, to develop
a corresponding ‘power. Morality, nevertheless,
shows itself energetic enough to reveal the limits
of culture, and to check men from finding full satis-
faction in it. Thus each tendency is able to break
the exclusiveness of the other, but neither is able to
reach an exclusive rule. What, however, does the
whole of the Spiritual Life gain through such a
mutual hindrance ?

The third antithesis is that of spiritual sub-
stance and psychic existence—an antithesis expressed
by the noological and the psychological methods.
This antithesis is, first of all, brought to the surface
through the idea of the essentzal development of our
nature, and only therewith does it become clear that,
without the attainment by the Spiritual Life of an
independence over against the purely psychic pro-
cedure, there is no content of life and no connected
spiritual world. But at the same time, there becomes
apparent the fact that such an elevated Life realises
itself only in the form of psychic existence, and that
its development proceeds only through the move-
ments and experiences of such a form. ‘Thus, as
necessary as a clear separation cf both series becomes
the constant reciprocity of both. Here, also, the
experience of life shows, in the main, a pointed and
severe enmity. On the one side, we find misjudg-


THE EXPLANATION OF THE OPPOSITION 319


ing of the incomplete state and limitation of human
Spiritual Life, a rash seizure of the substance and the
fixing of one’s self on it, and through this, however,
a cutting off any further movement, thus causing a
coercion of all initiative and a premature conclusion
of the meaning of life. On the other side, we find
the attempt to gather up fragments of a content and
of a spiritual world out of the movements of the
immediate psychic life; and thus we obtain a good
deal of freshness, movement, and .variation, but on
account of the inward contradiction of the facts we
find a constant wish for more than can ever possibly
be, we find a fraudulent acquisition of the unprovable
and a great danger of shallowness. Thus the opposi-
tion between substance and existence-form shapes
itself into a disorder of the depth and freedom of the
nature ; the depth threatens to become rigid, and the
freedom superficial. This strife permeates the whole
ramifications of life: no other opposition drives men
into such contending camps, and none engenders so
many parties. It is thus to-day in the particular
province of Philosophy. For what other are the
deepest ground and the strongest energy of the
divisions of thinkers but that one section takes its
stand on the necessity of the Spiritual Life, and
that the other takes its stand on the circumstances
and experiences of man? The struggle between
idealism and realism, the a prio7? and empiricism,
metaphysics and psychology—they all originate in the
last resort out of the same root. How can the presence
of an Absolute Life be sustained when the movement
towards truth itself is retarded by the strife of parties,
and remains fettered by such a situation ?


320 THE OPPOSITION TO RELIGION


(vy) The Impotence of Morality.— After all the
upheaval we have already observed, there remains
the very last means of escape, ¢.e. morality in its
existence-for-self as a kingdom of pure character, as
the decision concerning the total-direction of effort.
However few results such a decision may possess
from an external point of view, however many
hindrances and limits it meets within the soul itself,
there originates with it an original province of life, a
full existence-for-itself of the inwardness of life which
all the power of the enemy cannot possess. Here
the soul longs for a secure superiority to the world,
and gains also the indestructible certainty of a new
order of things. Thus, many epochs became the
possessors of all this, and later antiquity especially
made morality a fast bulwark against all the doubts
and toils of life.

All this heightens itself powerfully when the turn
to religion posits the decision upon the whole of the
universe, and when the decision allows itself to be
carried by an Absolute Life. True, the problem
becomes far greater, but also the certainty of man
becomes far more joyous. Indeed, that turn origin-
ates from difficult entanglements of a moral kind,
and an immediate conquest is not to be expected,
but an inward strengthening and a victorious ascent
are certainly longed for by us.

Do things stand thus in the reality of our experi-
ence? First of all, this is certain: religion shows
far more the inadequacy than the sufficiency of our
actions; concerning the judgment of the moral situa-
tion of man the Standard, for example, decides before
all else the nature of what we construct, and shows


THE EXPLANATION OF THE OPPOSITION 321


what we ought to construct. Now, religion with its
relationship to the Divine reveals such an Absolute
Standard ; the Divine valuation displaces all merely
human convictions of things. While the latter state
of things coerces the man within the man, its
judgment with all its relativity loses its edge. The
ordinary situation of human actions constructs its
standard, but what remains behind such a situation
condemns the situation; what steps perceptibly be-
yond the ordinary situation is praised as being some-
how great, and is honoured as a service which is not
unconditionally required from man. Over against
all this, the Divine valuation of things raises itself
and transforms the ordinary valuation, because its
claims rest upon absolute perfection. Measured out
of the infinite, all the differences of the finite vanish,
and there remains only the common boundless expanse
of space; and it is through the recognition of some-
thing of this kind that all moral greatness and all
moral service of man develop. ‘Thus it has happened
everywhere where the religious idea dawned with full
originality, as in the beginnings of Christianity and
in the rise of Protestantism. It is only in the
weakening of that idea that human valuations gain
so much ground as they have gained in Catholicism.
The problem intensifies itself, however, in the
degree the spiritual and essential mode of religion
longs for a recognition, and in the degree the con-
viction is found that there stands in question not
merely some kind of development in certain direc-
tions, but the essential development of the whole
of our nature. After this, the revealed inadequacy


meets the whole of our existence; then all which is
21


322 THE OPPOSITION TO RELIGION


termed customary morality appears as a thing which
belongs far too much to the mere shallowness and
far too little to the substance of the soul. And when
the inadequacy presents itself as the all-sufficient and
the all-encompassing, an inexorable struggle of de-
finite morality as against a mere semblance of it is
inevitable.

Thus, all development of morality under the
influence of religion gave a continuous lower valua-
tion to customary moral values. That which in
worthy achievements fastens itself to bare natural
energy must finally crystallise into a non-moral ; that
which works within the particular circle of human
society towards the curtailment of selfishness and
towards mutual advancement is much too external
and is afflicted with far too much pretence to enter
into the balance as an absolute valuation. But
placed in a “beyond” to the social formation of
things, all human morality appears insipid, vacillating,
and hollow. It is a virtue out of a defect caused
by temptations or by the equilibrium of errors; a
legality which was never placed on trial; a love
which remained true out of mere custom and because
it knew no other; a belief and trust which never had
doubts, and which had no need to prove anything;
a sacrifice which at the same time brought forth much
profit. Over against such weaknesses we find the
evil power of the passions, and man torn through
them from his better insight, and, indeed, against
his better will, and all the remaining fully-recognised
excellences blown out of his consciousness as a dream
and a shadow. And over all the particular passions
we find, however, the egoism with its loosening of


THE EXPLANATION OF THE OPPOSITION 323


the individual from world-connections, and from its
relationship to the infinity of the universe, brought
to a state of poverty. This egoism, through its
inversion of the world and so fundamentally different
from natural self-preservation, seems to grow not
weaker but stronger with the advance of culture;
the historical movement may vary its form but such
a movement leaves the substance untouched. Such
a banishment of effort into the small self becomes
intolerable when the turn to his essential nature and
its cultivation holds definitely before man a new self
in the Spiritual Life; now the hold upon the small
and shallow produces a self-alienation of man and a
destruction of his own nature. And yet it persists
and draws ever the new movement back to itself.
Thus the inadequacy of all human morality lies
clearly on the surface. But what harm can this in-
adequacy produce if over against it a Divine energy
dawns and a superhuman life kindles itself? Such a
turn to a “better” would then stand more visibly and
more convincingly before our eyes! But in the mean-
time such obviousness and energy of conviction fail
to appear. Not only does religion seem to alter but
little the total situation of life, but the entrance of
the “higher” works in the first place principally in
driving out the contradictions and in the awakening
of otherwise slumbering oppositions; thus the in-
version reaches its most external height, whilst the
“good,” with the acknowledgment of its highest
worth, is dismissed, injured, and destroyed. When
many thinkers of a rationalistic turn of mind declare
it as impossible that such an activity, which works
against one’s own conclusions and which disapproves


324 THE OPPOSITION TO RELIGION


of a Divine, can be itself Divine, they misconstrue the
abyss of human nature and contradict the experiences
of humanity. For in the “great” and the “small”
there is an evil beyond mere egoism—there is envy
and malicious joy over the calamities of others, hate
and jealousy; and where one’s own welfare is not
touched at all, there is an antipathy towards the
Great and the Divine, and a pleasure in the deface-
ment and destruction of the Good. Through this
the bad things mount to positive evil—to the dia-
bolical. The burlesque figure of a devil has vanished
from our figurative ideas, but it has not vanished out
of human nature. Further, the mysterious fact of
evil as a positive opposition to the “Good” has not
ceased to occupy the minds of the deepest thinkers,
and in spite of all attempted reconciliation the pro-
blem has ever anew broken out; it stands clearly
before us at the present day not only through the
teachings of Kant and Schopenhauer, but far more
through the particular experience of modern life
itself.

Kvil is thus in the highest degree to be understood
as a testimony of freedom, and the conception of
moral wrong will never allow itself to be expelled in
spite of all attempts. But although moral wrong
endows evil with its edge, it does not engender all
evil. But what makes the situation of man so
especially painful is the fact that the total arrange-
ment of life—which at least leads man if it does not
force him—becomes a failure even with man’s own
activities. Out of the hand of nature man receives
the obligation of an incessant self-preservation which
often drives men against one another, and allows


THE EXPLANATION OF THE OPPOSITION 325


them to welcome the injury of one another on ac-
count of their own advantage. _Civilised life heightens
these entanglements through its multiplication and
refinement of wants and needs, through its manifold
complications and the narrow concentration of men,
through its strong blaze of ambition and impulse for
gain—all these are deemed necessary for our self-
preservation. Thus the release of energy and the
restless extension of effort appear self-evident and
unassailable; the common atmosphere, the social
organisations, etc., shape themselves in accordance
with such a notion. And if we proceed only a step
further we find the admission of merely instinctive
attitudes into entire self-activity ; we find that which
occurs in daily life elevated into a principle; and
thus the real thing which matters appears as a pain-
ful inversion and degenerates into adverse criticism.
But this criticism grows out of relationships which
carry our whole life, and, along with it, our spiritual
development !

How shall we disengage ourselves from such an
entanglement? And what becomes of the presence
of the Divine through such an upheaval of morality ?
In so far as the actual situation has been acknow-
ledged, it has to all appearance strengthened less the
reason of our existence than brought the unreason to
a clear consciousness.


4. The Darkness of the Human Situation


Our attention hitherto was specially directed to-
wards the entanglements in the actions of man, but
we have also to estimate his condition and the forma-
tion of his abilities. In connection with these latter


326 THE OPPOSITION TO RELIGION


the matter does not deal merely with man’s subjective
happiness but with the Spiritual Life; it deals with
the question—whether such a Life through its founda-
tion in an Absolute Being gains the energy to enforce
its way to the external world and to subject the
universe to its own ends? What brings about the
formation of the value of values should certainly be
able to reign and rule also in our circle.

Before all else the desire of man appears in his
effort to reach spirituality through the aid of a power
superior to the world, to reach it especially in a hard
struggle against an alien, dark, and powerful world.
Indeed, the more the threads of the phenomena of
the universe run tangled through one another, the
more indispensable it is to link all human aims
to a power superior to the world; the harder the
oppositions of the world-environment are, the more
urgent is the hope placed upon an over-world help.
Such a power is to raise our own potency out
of its insufficiency; it is to prepare a secure path
for our activity through a deep darkness; and it is
to transform the hindrance and opposition into a
conclusive advancement. It must raise man im-
measurably in the inmost of his being and strengthen
him in his courage to face life, so that he may be able
to consider himself an object of the care of an over-
world power and wisdom, and also of eternal love.
Upon the lower levels much may mix together as
self-love and even vanity, but on the higher level all
this vanishes before the unique end of the spiritual
maintenance and elevation of man.

In reality this idea is so indispensable to religion
that an entire renunciation of it has been conceived


THE EXPLANATION OF THE OPPOSITION 327


as the destruction of religion itself. In any case,
every conception of religion must feel anxious for the
realisation of such an idea. If and how such a
realisation can happen does not concern us at this
point of the inquiry; here the question is not how
the gain of such a realisation reaches the idea of a
Providence, but whether the idea seems sufficiently
clear over against the condition of the world so as to
win the seeker for itself. It is a bad mistake to mix
together the matter-of-fact of experience and the
claims of religious belief; for he who carries carelessly
into his nearest view of things what seemed to him
from such a view to be self-evident, but what in
reality becomes possible only after a great conquest,
diminishes not only the expansion of life but also
endangers the truth of life.

We must ask, therefore, without any prejudice,
whether the surrounding objects allow us to infer of a
movement of the universe in the direction of spirit-
uality, and whether a superior furtherance of a spiritual
striving of man clearly appears. Doubtless there are
numerous examples and modes of life which create
the impression of a well-marked directivity ; number-
less threads are discovered which bind themselves
together and produce a favourable final result ;
dangers are averted, and aids, beyond all expectation,
are gained. But, too, the impression of the system-
atic arrangement of things can occasionally produce
a result of the blindest gamble of things; and in
order to estimate with any certainty whether any
evidence of a higher guidance and love is to be found
in the accommodating behaviour of things, more is
under consideration than a purely solitary event ; we


328 THE OPPOSITION TO RELIGION


must be able to know the relationship of actual
instances to possible ones; we must estimate the
ratio of the gains to the blanks; and all this we are
not able to do.

The impression of many opposite kinds of ex-
periences associates itself with such a darkness as we
find in things around us. For we observe that there
remains in man himself not only much goodwill and
many busy activities without the needed aids from
above, but which break in pieces before they reach
their highest ends; there remains not only much
spiritual energy and warm love unrealised—and in
other cases much of all this is painfully lacking—but
we also discover enchainments of phenomena which
seem to aim at the creation of great misery, and
which drive man with unmerciful callousness over
the brink of an abyss. The faintest hint would have
sufficed to hold him back from such a catastrophe,
but this does not appear, and consequently destruction
takes its course. Petty accidents destroy life and
happiness ; a moment annihilates the most toilsome
work. Often, also, we discover a chaotic medley, a
sudden overthrow of all potency, a seeming in-
difference towards all human weal and woe, a blind
groping in the dark; we discover deep-veiled_ possi-
bilities constantly sweeping as dark clouds over man
and occasionally descending as a crashing lightning.
But, also, man’s own destiny, as it were, plays with
him, raising hopes soon to destroy them and _ pre-
paring energies soon to annihilate them. And in all
this we are to view an order of reason and a kingdom
of love!

The method in which the customary development


THE EXPLANATION OF THE OPPOSITION 329


of religion arranges itself in connection with these
problems is lamentable, and is unworthy of the
seriousness of the whole question. The matter is
handled as a law trial in a thoroughly attorney-
like fashion. The cases which seem to present an
affirmative answer are recognised gladly as “the
finger of God,” especially where He seems to
strengthen one’s own party ; but what shows life as
suffering and unreason, as stubborn opposition and
fruitless toil, is ignored or placed out of the way in a
manner we should be ashamed of in connection with
human things. Soon one flees to mere possibilities,
and holds to the comfortable thought that things
will soon outweigh in an opposite direction, and that
what began in pain and sorrow will end in pleasure
and bliss. Soon the thought grants the consolation
that, in spite of all the misery, it might have been
worse; that a tormented suffering leads, after the
exhaustion of all the energies, finally into death, and
that a devastating calamity has not reached the depth
it might have reached—all this is praised as a grace of
God. These assumed claims easily satisfy, but does
the world constitute a kingdom of reason because it
is not the worst of all possible worlds ?

If, however, the unreason is far too evident to
accept the above conclusion, there remains to the
official defenders of the Godhead one other exit:
suffering is not only apologised for but welcomed as an
indispensable means for inner purification and moral
cultivation. Now, one must be very undiscerning
not to be aware that an order of things whose highest
end is reachable only through severe suffering can
never be a kingdom of reason. How does it stand


330 THE OPPOSITION TO RELIGION


with the real fact of the assertion? Can we say with
certainty that suffering reforms man—reforms him
in a decisive manner? Or does it not perhaps give
another direction to his errors? As the experience
of life lifts itself up to an unbiased reflection, suffering
is a shield against evil and pride; man is able through
great tribulation to rouse himself out of the numbness
of daily routine, and is able, too, to pitch his courage
to a gentle key, as well as to render sincere services
to his fellow-men. But, on the other side, suffering
often works in the direction of deadening and dis-
couraging the powers, especially when it does not
come to us in the form of a volcanic catastrophe, but
accompanies the whole course of life as a continuous
grief and as a cramped pressure. The mean and
common found in the chain of relations, from which
the man is not able to withdraw, although he longs
to do so with the whole of his soul, confine all aspira-
tion and lower the level of life; and close to such
a level lies a turn to a petty and narrow-minded
disposition, to bitterness of heart and jealousy ; in-
deed, through the most external conditions, suffering
and sorrow can suffocate all spiritual effort. Thus
testifies the immediate impression of experience for
the Greeks, to whom happiness and success were held
as aids of advancement for the moral education of
man. And the fact that Christianity took up suffer-
ing into the inmost soul of man, and made it a point
of departure to an entirely new direction of life—a
fact which will occupy our attention later—can only
indicate a mistaken shallowness and a dangerous
inversion, as though suffering, without further ado,
through a kind of necessary effect, engendered a


THE EXPLANATION OF THE OPPOSITION 331


spiritual advance and a moral purification. Then,
indeed, the fact would be most simple, so simple that
religion itself would become superfluous. Certainly
to all religious conviction the thought is indispensable
that somehow at least a reason shall issue out of
unreason is to be hoped for. As it is presented
in the book of Job: “And now men see not the
light which is bright in the skies, but the wind
passeth and cleanseth them”; but it makes a great
difference whether, first of all, doubt is fully tasted,
and whether an inner turn of life, through the
deepest conviction, is prepared, or whether, through
those supposed reasonable counsels of the Godhead,
all shall soon be turned into the pure and the clear,
and, along with this, the head of all sting shall be
plucked out. As this beautiful colouring tends to-
wards the blunting of the problem, it enters into a
constant conflict with the plain meaning of truth.
For the meaning of truth can only acknowledge the
impression that certainly much in our potencies seems
to point beyond ourselves, but which, however, allows
itself to be understood on the whole as a strong
enchainment and chaotic disarrangement of occur-
rences, as an indifferent treading upon weal and woe,
as no order of reason for the hopes and fears of man,
and as no kingdom of love. And with what other
eyes are we able to see things but with our own ?
Much certainly remains mysterious, and especially
mysterious is the fact that the life of man is not able
to follow a directed course. It seems occasionally
as if his life and actions were driven by an unexplain-
able power into a course unwilled by the individual
himself; in many instances a strong wave seems to


332 THE OPPOSITION TO RELIGION


raise the potencies of man and to carry him far past
his own capacities ; in other instances such a power,
with equal energy, seems to work against him, and
to allow his choicest undertakings to be cruelly
wrecked. Thus, there has originated from of old
the belief in destiny which, with brazen will,
prescribes his course for man, doles out his luck, and
to resist which is to will wantonly. Spiritual control
is withheld all the more from such a belief because
human self-love plays strongly in the idea: if the
belief once flatters the vanity that destiny, through
a supernatural power, raises the individual beyond
others, pettiness and weakness find: their most
comfortable trust in their attempts to impute their
own defects to an irresistible destiny. It constantly
remains a noteworthy experience that especially
renowned men of action, whose actions operated so
efficaciously in a dark world and who brought forth
incalculable results, often lived in the conviction that
they were tools in the hand of an all-powerful destiny.
This belief, invulnerable against all dangers and
certain to lead to the appointed goal, was indispens-
able to them in order to possess a joyous courage for
creativeness and for the entire certainty of their
enterprises. But all the power of such a subjective
conviction furnishes no objective proof. Could it
not be that the self-feeling alone was expressed in
such a belief? Were, however, the reality of a
higher power acknowledged here, the mystery of the
whole world would increase rather than lessen. For
why does that solicitude contract itself upon indi-
vidual cases, and how does it agree with an infinite
good when it handles man as a mere tool, and


THE EXPLANATION OF THE OPPOSITION 332


throws him indifferently out of the way just as he
is about to reach his longed-for goal? Also, in the
lives of great men, their energy seems to weaken
after the culmination of their work. And does there
not remain here an unexplainable incongruity between
the seeming power of reason on its summits and its
weakness on the whole? Heroes appear, work, and
create; they overcome, as in a play, all opposition ;
they link their results to their further pursuits; thus
their achievement enters into the whole and seems to
control the destiny of humanity. But has much of
reason, on the whole, issued out of all toil and work,
and does history exhibit itself as a victorious ascent
and a secure advance of definite spirituality? And
if this is not the case, what avails all help of the
Divine in individual situations? Once more, a half-
reason seems to lie in front of us, and the riddlesome
appears as an entire unreason. ‘Thus, it happens with
us in our search for a guiding thread as with those
who search for a track in a deep thicket. We seem
to have found such a track ; it seems to show a way
through the labyrinth ; it becomes clearer and seems
to lead securely to a goal. But soon the track grows
narrower, fainter, and vanishes, to reappear ; again the
imprints become fainter and fainter, until finally the
whole disappears, and all toil has yielded only a
delusive hope.

Perhaps, however, the blame of the previous dis-
content lies on the observer; perhaps we have sought
in an inverted direction. Ifa benevolent providence
which links all for the best is not recognisable, yet
there appears perhaps with clearer eyes a moral order,
an equilibrium of all action and condition, a kingdom


334 THE OPPOSITION TO RELIGION


of strong righteousness. The longing after a requited
righteousness is in no way an outflow from a petty
disposition which desires a reward for the good and
a punishment for the evil, or of an envied calculation
which grows anxious lest too little should come to us
and too much should goto another. But the thought
allows itself to be lifted up beyond the small human
mode, and places-before itself for its advancement
the fact that the spiritual governs and rules the world
as a moral order. A Plato and a Kant longed for
this.

Thinkers thus shaped into the Whole and the
Spiritual only what inspires peoples and epochs, and
the former were rather called to transform the entire
concept of reality beyond all experience than to be-
queath anything for the intensifying of the demand.
In the first place, one hoped to find the entire adjust-
ment ready in the life-course of each individual;
as experience contradicted this, the vicissitudes of
life were drawn into a concept, and consequently
righteousness was hoped for in the future results of
the race as a whole. But such vicissitudes of life
engendered new problems without having solved the
old ones; and now the thought soars beyond the
realm of fear and hope, and passes beyond the limits
of this life to seek the atoning righteousness in a
future existence. Most peoples satisfy themselves
with such a solitary consummation of things, and
find in the thought of a judgment day a satisfying
conclusion. Others, however, who did not merely
think forward but also backward, and who, with
an unbounded imagination, flew beyond the world,
went much further and made of the present life an


THE EXPLANATION OF THE OPPOSITION 335


individual link of an immeasurable chain—as, for
example, the Indian doctrine has done in its teaching
of the transmigration of souls. The teaching of an
unescapable destiny of the actions constitutes nowhere
more the centre of religious conviction than with
the Indians ; what is truly man’s own seems here to
him to be nothing more than his deeds; through life
and death, through rebirth and transformation, the
consequences of his deeds return to man from the
good and the evil; nowhere is there an evasion or an
aversion, nowhere a forgetfulness or a loss. The
imagination has never worked more powerfully than
in the keen tracings of such views of the universe;
and the sway of such a teaching has not failed to
exercise a strong effect upon the soul of man. But
such delineations have convincing power only for
believers, to whom the doctrines make possible what
is necessary for their souls. But he who does not
feel himself in the position of a believer, but of a
seeker, can have no choice but to look within his own
experience for the essential facts.

Such essential facts do not fail us. A certain
moral order, as it is termed, appears already in the
natural concatenation of things as well as in the
external results of action and in the judgment of the
mind on such action. In reality, certain kinds of
action exhibit characteristic connections which pro-
duce agreeable results, but there are other kinds
which produce disagreeable ones; dissipation is less
conducive to well-being than a well-regulated life ;
and an action corresponding to the legal and social
ordinances is more favourable to decent living than
a contrary kind of action. But how little, after all,


336 THE OPPOSITION TO RELIGION


is gained from such trivial truths! They are valid
only for isolated fragments of life, and this kind of
adjustment touches merely the visible action, whilst
the character remains untouched. Indeed, the more
the life intensifies itself, and the more the moral tasks
extend over the whole circumference of life, the more
inadequate will all such adjustments become by
means of natural results.

But perhaps there grows with such a development
of life as the action engenders in the inwardness of
the soul a power of self-judgment, of conscience.
Whenever life took a turn from external effects to an
inwardness of soul, it believed itself able to find here
an uncorrupted judge of good and evil; the approval
of this judge seemed to produce joy and power against
which all the suffering of life vanishes; its condem-
nation, on the contrary, produces a torment which
reduces the value of the most brilliant external
achievements.

Without a doubt we obtain here a primal spiritual
phenomenon which only a shallow external course
of thought can lay on one side. But the question
arises, as to how far this primal phenomenon reaches,
and whether it helps to the production of a righteous
order of things for the whole of our existence. But
the most manifold reflections arise against such
a view. First of all, the fact loses its supposed
inviolable sublimity because the nearer kind of self-
judgment is seen to be under the influence of a strong
social environment: many actions were valued by
different peoples and epochs in quite contrary ways ;
a conscience which, however, as a kind of soft wax,
shapes and alters itself with the customs, opinions,


THE EXPLANATION OF THE OPPOSITION 337


and tendencies of men, cannot very well be a true
standard for good and evil or an entire righteousness
for human existence.

Further, conscience is dependent in a high degree
on the individual nature of the soul. The reflex
which the action throws on the consciousness is of
varied strength and accuracy: with one man the
reflex may be highly dull, and may work as an
impulsive decision ; in another, on the contrary, the
reflex fastens the man with great energy and will not
let him free. ‘Thus, the first man does not trouble
over the most grievous wrongs, whilst the second
excites and grieves himself over mistakes hardly
perceptible. Physical differences of a coarser or of a
finer sensibility play strongly in connection with all
this, but it is the height of the moral development,
however, which decides concerning the energy of such
a self-judgment. Thus most comes to him who
needs it least. In the words of Pascal, “the righteous
are accustomed to consider themselves sinners and
the sinners righteous.”

Finally, who can deny that conscience forms the
foundation for the influence of great perverters of
moral values and of the aims of life. The words of
Goethe, “the end invests things with a renown,”
holds valid also in the particular domain of character.
For the evil which we choose arouses us but little
when its injury is not perceptible, or when it is
trimmed into a supposed good through the enchain-
ment of circumstances; and thus the most upright
effort towards ourselves, and more still towards others,
seems to remain trifling and worthless if all success is


denied it. Where, however, success in good or evil
22


338 THE OPPOSITION TO RELIGION


was of importance, the disposition seems to grow
greater and more energetic on the one side or the
other. A judge so dependent and corruptible can
never bring forth righteousness for the whole of life.
All in all, the matter here stands in a similar state to
what it stood in connection with previous points we
have considered. It may well be, that a phenomenon
appears within the human province whose deepest
root reaches back into the super-human. But in all
the nearer development, the facts come under the
influence of human means and imperfection ; we thus
seem to sink back into the same uncertainty out of
which we strove to escape.

If, however, human existence through its own
means is not able to satisfy the longing after righteous-
ness, the moral order cannot be other than of an over-
natural kind: an over-world Will must re-establish
the equilibrium of action and condition which our
life fails to do. The fact of such an adjustment
must become clearly discernible towards our human
view of things, and, indeed, it must become clearly
evident even over against such an adjustment in
order to be able to protect our conviction and to
govern our life. Does it in reality do this? Who
could confidently answer in the affirmative? For
the nearest-at-hand impression confirms in no way
within our experience the doctrine of a righteous
course of the achievements of life; but it shows far
more a great disproportion of things. Soon the
action has the most serious consequences, and all
these consequences return to the man _ himself;
causality holds him unmercifully in its grip, and a
long-buried past may rise out of its grave and terrify


THE EXPLANATION OF THE OPPOSITION 339


him asa ghost. But, inversely, painful wrong courses
remain for a long time without any consequences ;
these courses degenerate the man not only externally
but also internally ; they fall upon him as something
alien, and disperse and destroy all just as a storm
ravages. Thus particular kinds of foundations come
to such a lawless medley when they oppose the right-
eous allotments of destiny. The individual is not
an island, but stands in manifold and often entangled
relations; he is conditioned by the nature of the
environment, by his commissions and omissions in
wide and narrow circles, by family, nation, times, ete.
Such a solid complication rules here that the action
has its consequences often less on the doer than on
others; one individual has often to atone for the
wrongs of others, and one generation for the foolish-
ness of another ; the offence of one drags others into
unhappiness and misery; ‘the fathers have eaten
sour grapes, and the children’s teeth are set on edge.”

Herewith the threads run into the individual
scenes of life, entangled in one another without
binding themselves into a connected web and with-
out exhibiting a common character. He who seeks
to draw a conclusion concerning the destinies of life
can hardly avoid the conclusion of a blind confusion,
and this confusion becomes a strong injustice when
so many differences of an inward kind and character
originate, as they in reality do originate. Such an
impression might call forth passionate complaints
and accusations from one direction; from another
direction they may acquire a form of a disquieting
doubt; but in both cases the indifference of the
world transposes itself against the moral relationships


340 THE OPPOSITION TO RELIGION


and being of man, and in direct antagonism to the
strongest activity of most earnest minds. That evil
often not only hinders and rejects, but also advances
and rewards, and that the good seems continuously
to abandon the hoped-for energy for the suppres-
sion and overthrow of wrong—all this has become
in the particular province of religion a matter of
incessant searching of heart and of sorrow. ‘Behold,
I cry out of wrong, but 1 am not heard: I cry for help,
but there is no judgment” (Job). “The righteous
perisheth, and no man layeth it to heart ; and godly
men are taken away, none considering that the
righteous is taken away through wickedness ” (Isaiah).

The general custodians of belief and the official
representatives of religion have, of course, here as
well as elsewhere a comfortable answer at hand.
Man, they say, dare not reckon with God, whose
decrees far overreach all human knowledge; also,
according to the Divine Standard, no one is free
from blame, and, therefore, suffering met even him
not unjustly who was righteous among men. How
clear all this mystery seems to self-righteous men,
who yet make a confession of their impotence!
What do they know of the decrees of God? And
how could they expect from man a suspension of
his judgment and a denial of the imperative and
urgent impressions which he forms? Certainly, all
the moral differences of men vanish in the light of
the conception of absolute perfection, but man is
not able to consider his actions in relationship to
the Divine as solely his own, but also through the con-
nections of these actions with his fellow-men; he is
not able to adjust the vicissitudes and values of life ;


THE EXPLANATION OF THE OPPOSITION 341


and when therefore he can find no righteousness any-
where, religion with its basing of the good in the Divine
must heighten the pain and the unrest. And is not
the history of religion itself full of the most painful per-
secution and oppression of the Noble and the Divine ?
Religion is never able to think lightly of such problems.

Also, injustice limits itself in no way to the rela-
tionship of inner and outer, of blame and condi-
tions, but it strikes its roots into the inward nature
itself, it turns into blame what is in no way so in its
whole extent, and what is often hardly a blame at
all. The causation of things and the growing relation-
ship of the individual with the environment through
which much unmerited wrong has fallen on the in-
dividual, as we have seen, enters into his particular
actions; what he designates as his own act is dis-
covered inwardly to be only an inevitable final link
of a long chain which reaches far back; indeed,
reaches intoimmensity. All this may not lie entirely
outside the fault of the individual himself, but such
an external fault is nothing compared with what
appears in the individual consciousness as the indi-
vidual’s own fault. ‘The seeming inevitableness of
that which, however, works as our own act—the
growth of faults through the impervious web of
destiny—has from of old occupied the attention of
the deeper minds. The problem permeates ancient
tragedy, and has ever since accompanied artistic
creativeness to its heights; and that thinkers have
not shut out the problem is shown by the words of
Schelling: “The highest conceivable misfortune is
to become blameable through destiny without being
conscious of any blame of our own.”


342 THE OPPOSITION TO RELIGION


It is of great importance to bear in mind that
things are not sharply marked off from one another
in the web of life, and that good and evil do not
stand here pure and clear over against one another,
as has been pointed out in books on morality and in
edifying discourses. But in the confused state of the
human situation, one element flows almost imper-
ceptibly into another ; our actions seem often entirely
indifferent to morality, and no danger whatever is
perceived as being present in the sphere of history.
And yet the road can lead, if we follow it farther, to
the brink of an abyss; a catastrophe breaks forth
suddenly; the past illumines itself clearly and
plercingly, and shows a blame in what previously
seemed to require no consideration. ‘The blame here
often seems to lie more in the omissions than in the
commissions of life. The unholy thing is avoided
through the calling up of opportune energy and
through the skilful installation of our activity. We
have not called up the consciousness of the wrong,
but it comes upon us. But did we know what stood
in question, and could we measure the consequences
of a hesitation to decide? ‘Thus it was upon our
ignorance and inability that the fact returns. But
did not our action in some kind of way participate
in such an ignorance, and does not the fact, along
with this, again become our own blame? Therefore,
blame rests not so much upon the individual act as
upon the whole of our being. But have we ourselves
brought forth this being of ours? Has it not de-
volved upon us through the destiny of nature, of the
situation of life, of education, of our times, of our
environment, etc.# Is not the fact of our aspiration


THE EXPLANATION OF THE OPPOSITION 343


after the heights of spiritual development, in order
that we may feel ourselves free, in order that we may
strive after self-activity—is not all this more than the
result of that dowry of a particular existence and
destiny? But if we are a mere piece of the world
and its causality even when we feel ourselves free,
whence comes the feeling of obligation and the
consciousness of wrong which burden us often so
unbearably? Is there not here imbedded the greatest
injustice, that man should have to carry in his breast
the pains and sorrows of freedom without being
able to possess freedom? If things are otherwise,
freedom is, in spite of all hindrance, able to maintain
itself, and the whole world is rather to be dashed in
pieces than to abandon freedom! But who confers
on us the indispensable energy—the energy for the
construction of a new kind of world? In the mean-
time, we remain in the custody of the old world, and
experience here perpetually shows the most painful
disagreement between the “ought” and the “is.”
We must act: the necessity of physical and social
self-preservation compels us with unrelenting con-
straint to this. But we act in the region of darkness
with a chance of success even there; without being
able to fathom the connections and to measure the
results, our actions alter the course of things and
create anew situation. And yet in this we have fallen
under the power of destiny. or the linkage of things
may bring forth effects which we had not dreamed
of, which contradict directly our own plans, and for
which we are not responsible. Through such an in-
version of plan and result we may injure where we
ought to help, and destroy where we ought to build.


344 THE OPPOSITION TO RELIGION


When the winds and waves of destiny drive us to
entirely other bearings than were present in our minds,
what in all of this is man’s own work, what of his
own being is in it? Does he steer his own course,
or is he a mere tool in the hands of dark powers ?
Thus could the old poet call out:


“ What then is man, and what not, too, is he ?
The dream of a spirit that ceases to be” (PinDaR),


and with a turn towards the moral problem, a more
recent great poet thus conceives of doubt:


“ Thou leadest man to life’s domain,
Thou countest to him many a blame,
And then thou leavest him in pain” (Gorrue).


All doubt and sorrow, however, which call forth
such a view of the world and such a situation of man,
must fall with their whole energy on the soul of the
individual after the inauguration of an Absolute Life
within man’s domain has immeasurably raised him.
For now he is no longer able to cast off from himself
the problems of the world; now he has immediate
participation in Infinity; now he must discover as
his very own the destiny which the Spiritual Life
experiences within the human province. Indeed, he
sees all his work and being placed under a pointed
contradiction which limits his actions, which renders
his feelings uncertain, and which makes his whole
existence problematic.

So far as the Spiritual Life develops itself, the indi-
vidual gains the unique. place where an originality
is able to break forth and to give an incomparable
worth and a secure superiority against all the re-
mainder of his existence. Here alone—if anywhere


THE EXPLANATION OF THE OPPOSITION 345


in human things—can there be a self-aim and self-
worth. That which pertains to the development of
man’s soul—to the working out of his spiritual nature
—must act on the individual and must precede all
remaining tasks; it must all the more set the
individual’s main energy in the direction of this goal
because the path to such a goal is full of toil and
obstacles; and the individual dare not consider
anything which belongs to such a tendency as small
and insignificant. For in all this the individual
struggles for something which brings forth with itself
a world—an essential world, behind which all the
“goods” of natural things take a secondary place ;
here the matter deals concerning the salvation of his
own soul, the loss of which is incapable of being
counterbalanced by the gain of the whole world.
Thus, his inmost consciousness enables man to dis-
cover such a fact as a holy duty, and the human
environment does not fail to support him in this.
Religion and morality strengthen him powerfully
‘in this task, and all deeper cultivation concerns itself
with the effort of reaching such a goal.

That such an upward movement proceeding from
such an inward obligation clashes with the most
pointed contradictions of the world-mechanism, has
already been shown in our investigation; such a
mechanism treats all actions, and, indeed, all the
being of the individual with indifference, so that from
the mechanical standpoint they appear as futile and
unreal, According to the meaning of the external
world, all the inwardness of man appears as an
insignificant point of an immensity whose original
elements become ever more inaccessible the more


346 THE OPPOSITION TO RELIGION


science binds its effects into laws, and which shows
ever clearer its extreme callousness towards our
strivings. Human connections give the individual a
higher value, but here, again, the more the complexities
grow, the more exclusively do the achievements of
man turn towards merely external aims and, therefore,
these achievements become more and more one-sided ;
what is inwardly going on in man, what issues out of
this inwardness, and what has become the standpoint
of his soul, become largely subsidiary facts. Also,
where all value depends on the achievements, no one
is indispensable and no one but can be substituted
by someone else, for all this mode of thought there
is provision elsewhere for anything and everything ;
thus the stream of social life flows quickly over the
individual with all his sorrows, hopes, and burning
aspiration after a self of value. Consequently, on
such a level, there remains but the relationship of indi-
vidual to individual ; if there is anything here which
man may hope for, it is to be found as a self-aim and
self-value in reciprocal love in the whole of his being,
in his drawing nearer to the spirituality of his nature,
and in his directing himself towards sympathy, com-
prehension, and love. But through such a relation-
ship of individual and individual, we meet not only
in the province of the accidental but also within
the inner situation of the soul, difficulties and
infirmities which cling with great energy. What is
usually praised as love rests so little upon the whole,
the inward, and the essential ; it is so entangled with
bare natural impulses, and so dependent on external
things, and especially so fugitive and transient, that
it mirrors the deeper aspiration of the soul as an


THE EXPLANATION OF THE OPPOSITION 347


illusion far more than it helps that aspiration to obtain
its fulfilment. Thus the individual sees his impulses
appropriated—impulses worthy in themselves: they
become acknowledged, valued, furthered, but are of
no help to him in his hard struggle; he cannot, with
all his aims, prevent himself from being dealt with
by the whole of experience, because he himself must
deal with all things from an inward necessity.

What consequences, however, shall man draw from
the fact that the world-mechanism is so indifferent
towards him, and also seems so superfluous? From
of old—-with special energy in Stoicism—the method
has sought to loosen itself wholly from the world,
and to withdraw solely to one’s own inwardness, and
here to construct an independence against all the
environment. In reality, the power to accomplish
this lies in the ability of man to place himself upon
his own thoughts alone, and to reject all connections
with the world; he can then create a characteristic
happiness and a stolid feeling of superiority out of the
liberation from all oppression and out of an elevation
above the things of the world. But does such a self-
affirmation of the individual suffice, and is it able to
inspire the whole of life? Is there not, first of all,
in all true effort towards spirituality a reciprocal
communication, an exchange of life, indispensable ?
Does not the separation of man from things turn
quickly into an inner impoverishment? And when
man casts a glance at himself, does he not. meet
difficult entanglements within his own nature, and
does he not need for their solution the Other—the
Whole? The fundamental mistake of such an
abstraction is to see the problem only in the relation


348 THE OPPOSITION TO RELIGION


of man to the environment ; and if the soul discovers
itself as full of entanglements, the insufficiency of
such a view is clear.

But what shall man do when the world treats him
indifferently, and when he finds no refuge in himself ¢
Shall he, on his own side, acknowledge the negation
which the world exercises on him? Shall he simply
renounce himself to that which coerces all effort,
which suspends the Life-process, and which expects
all safety through death and annihilation? He could
do this if the movement of life were his own concern
—his own private fact. But he could not do this if
within him a Life-process superior to all mere exact-
ness—the opening out of a higher order of things—
is acknowledged. Thus, there is something implanted
in him which he dare not rob himself of; he now
deals with a problem which he himself has not set,
but which, as from a sublime energy, rises within
him and refuses to be abandoned. However much
of all this concerns itself with the renunciation of
his own happiness, man is not able to disown his
spiritual nature and its tasks. _ In his nature and its
tasks a fact seems committed to him which is of
value not only for himself but for the whole; for
the vindication of a higher order of things does not
seem possible without his activity. Therefore, beyond
all the physical oppression of life something meta-
physical seems to govern, and which forbids a simple
abandonment. If the fact stands thus, why does not
that superior power help man? And why is man placed
in a situation where neither success can be expected nor
abandonment be allowed? Must not such a contra-
diction destroy all courage for effort and creativeness 2


PART Il.—THE OPPOSITION TO RELIGION
(ContTINUED)


CHAPTER X
6. THe Opposition CONSIDERED


1. The Inadequacy of Proposed Remedies


WE have followed the main directions in which the
development of an independent spirituality met with
oppositions ; evidently the hindrances do not flow
separately side by side, but they mutually strengthen
one another and raise one another into united action,
so that they become an invincible power. The world
outside seems indifferent and rigid ; human society is
considered inadequate, and resting less upon truth
than upon semblance ; the spiritual movement within
our own province is weak and full of contradictions ;
and in destiny there is to be recognised no govern-
ment either of love or of righteousness ; all, with the
whole of its energy, extends into the life of the in-
dividual. Thus, how can man adhere to his effort
after independent spirituality and to a belief in the
presence of the Divine ?

All attempts which human need has devised for
its justification have been shattered on the rocks of
these hindrances. First of all, all systems of optimism


have been shattered. These may point out the
349


350 THE OPPOSITION TO RELIGION


evident unreason of our situation and seek another
standard of consideration, as an insertion of things
into wider connections. Why could not the contra-
dictions of the world disentangle themselves through
such a standard into a pure harmony, or why could
not what seems as a stubborn hindrance prove itself
a means to the awakening and elevation of life? A
beautiful prospect, but only a prospect! As we are
not able to place ourselves upon that higher standard,
such a solution at the best remains no more than a
mere possibility; and compared with the very real
reality of unreason, this possibility is hardly more
than a shadow compared with a living body. The
main error of this attempt consists in that the fact
is conceived as a problem of mere observation. If we
were related to the world merely as observers, and if
all suffering were nothing other than a displeasure of
the observer from what occurs externally, a variation
of the standard might effect in all cases a complete
change of judgment. But we stand in no manner as
mere observers of the world, but through actions and
sufferings are drawn into the depth of the world;
what we herewith experience is itself a piece of
actuality, and this actuality will never allow itself
to be placed on one side, or, through any dexterity,
allow itself to vanish.

Also, the delusion of hope of being able to bring
forth more pure reason from the movement of culture
has been demonstrated in the whole course of our in-
vestigation. Indeed, the main point of the entangle-
ment consisted in the fact that difficulties of an
essential spirituality in connection with the highest
questions made all progress insecure and all results


THE OPPOSITION CONSIDERED 351


double-edged; the alleged gain transformed itself
lightly into a loss, and what has long seemed certain
fell ever anew into doubt and struggle. He who
hopes for an essential betterment of the position of
facts from the historical movement has to weave to-
gether independent and mere-human, central and
peripheric spirituality into one.

Thus the proposed remedies leave the fact un-
furthered and the problem unsolved ; in the last resort
we see ourselves ever thrown back upon the point
from which we set out, and the attempt to switch off
the entanglement makes it reappear all the greater.


2. The Impossibility of a Negation

If the facts stand thus, the oppositions grow
from stage to stage and frustrate all attempts for
the welfare of the soul. What then remains but
an entire negation? If the intolerable entanglements
do not untie themselves in some kind of way, the
whole movement towards an independent spirituality
is withdrawn, and the conviction of the presence of
a Divine within the human province is relinquished.
In whatever manner the conviction originated, it
seems to prove itself an error in the impotence of
its achievement. If the facts really stand thus,
nothing must prevent us from drawing courageously
and pronouncing honestly the legitimate conclusions.
Thus, all that belongs to the turn towards spirituality
or which results from it would be rejected as a mere
illusion, and would be removed wholly from our
life. Although this could not happen at one
stroke, the duty of veracity at least would command
an energetic striving towards such an end if after


352 THE OPPOSITION TO RELIGION


such a breach there would be any place for veracity
and duty.

The consequences, difficult as they are, should not,
therefore, hold us back from such a task. But we
are not quite so sure whether absolute negation really
brings the situation to a correct expression. We
have already seen that a painful contradiction per-
meates the whole of our existence, that neither the
world nor our own capacity corresponds to the tasks
laid on us and which gain our conviction. Could
the contradiction long for the violent and_ stirring
energy which we have already discussed, if such tasks
hang on us only externally, and if such an energy
deceived us as a merely transient play of fancy ?
If there grows within the whole of life an earnest,
penetrating conflict, therefore a two-sidedness of life
has taken place; there originates now not only
something that hinders, but also something that is
being hindered—something whose development fails
to succeed, something that is everywhere denied its
request, but that never allows itself to be explained
as pure nothingness, or to be blotted out of life as
mere fancy. Pascal was right when he stated:
“Qui se trouve malheureux de wétre pas roi, si non
wn ro. dépossédé”; and were there not imbedded
in human nature an elevated movement superior to
all arbitrary action, the state of our world could
never engender so much agitation, indignation, and
pain. Through what other means do the strangeness
and indifference of soulless nature become objects
of complaint, but through the fact that we are able
to reflect on a Whole and relate ourselves to higher
aims? How could the evanescence of our existence,


THE OPPOSITION CONSIDERED 3538


for example, create a pain unless something Eternal
worked in us and withstood the dissolution of things
into a mere flux of time? Why do the inadequacy
and the perversion of the social configuration of
Spiritual Life grieve us unless another configuration
of life aspires over against the social form, and which
now relegates all actions and impulses to a lower level?
Could such difficult entanglements be discovered in
the inwardness of the Spiritual Life unless in some
kind of way a superior kind of energy brought about
the opposition, and unless we were, in some kind of
way, inwardly raised beyond the sphere of conflict ?
Why do the flaws in love and righteousness within
our circle agitate us so powerfully unless some
precious good suffers injury? Finally, how could
the individual experience the entanglements of the
whole as his own particular life unless he had some-
how raised up a new order of things to the level of
cosmic significance ?

All this has run as a leading thought through the
whole of our explanation; the hindrances have ap-
peared so great because new and greater demands
have been made; so that here we only gather together
what, as a matter of fact, manifested itself step by step
in the actual condition of things, viz. that the strength
of the suffering and the hardness of the contradictions
prove themselves to be the best testimony for the depth
of our existence, and for the efficacy of a higher energy.
A Nay which calls forth so much stir and movement
is impossible without a Yea, although such a Yea may
be imbedded far in the background of life.

The inward contradiction of absolute pessimism


lies in that it sees but one side of the facts, in that it
23


354 THE OPPOSITION TO RELIGION


ends with what falls within the realm of perception,
and in that it does not concede that the impressions,
the stirring, and the suffering, however deep and
ardent they may be, could occur unless somehow a
positive life and striving were being hindered. If all
is futile, there originates no kind of disparity ; pain is
an illusion which easily allows itself to be shaken off.
It is an absurdity to bewail the privation or the loss
of that the possession of which granted no happiness.
Such a contradiction permeates the Indian conviction
and feeling of life. Here pain originates primarily out
of the experience and perception of the instability,
transitoriness, and incessant flux of things. But how
can the transient be an evil if we, root and branch,
belong to the kingdom of flux, and, therefore, lead
but the life of a day? If in reality the evanescent
can be felt as pain only by a nature intended for the
Kternal and thirsting after Eternity, then the strength
of pain bears immediate witness to that longing for
Eternity. This is the truth-element in the Hellenic
thoughts concerning the privative nature of evil—in
the conception of evil as a mere hindrance and a
robbing of the good—so that, in fact, without some
kind of pre-existing good, suffering would have no
energy and pain no depth. But such an optimistic
conception made a mistake in conceiving that through
the presence of a ready-made kind of good it was
able to substantiate the predominant power and
authority of the good. But a mistake quite as great
is to be found in pessimism, in that, in the main, it
wipes out all the good because its development in
human existence clashes with difficult entanglements.

Also, the experience of life speaks clearly enough


THE OPPOSITION CONSIDERED 355


in the same strain. In no manner is the sense of
hard suffering wont to drive man to an entire
negation. But even when the calamities hurl them-
selves against him, when he is threatened not only
from without in all that he loves, but also when he is
convulsed to the very depth of his existence, such a
situation is able to awaken a certain axiomatic con-
sciousness of his relationship to an order of things
on the other side of all the conflict, and to the
certainty of the indestructibility of his inner nature,
as well as to a strength which will enable him to
reach his goal. Such a province of hindrance appears
then as a stage of reality, as a stage which cannot
possibly signify the whole of man’s existence.
Nothing protects life so powerfully from abandoning
the whole of existence and from a docile resignation
to the thought of annihilation than deep suffering,
especially suffering and pain in spiritual things—in
such things as are here in question. It is not epochs
of troubled experiences and difficult entanglements
which make humanity err in connection with its
higher tasks, but far more epochs of idle pleasures and
seeming plenty. Further, over against religion, a
strong experience of the unreason of our existence
has worked not so much in the weakening as in the
strengthening of belief, and such an experience,
beyond all capacity of a direct demonstration of the
truth, heralds the necessity, the certainty, and the
presence of a new world. In the midst of the most
conclusive doubt—a doubt that cannot from its very
root be refuted—the impossibility of an entire
negation has dawned with victorious clearness.
Through such a train of thought, all the difficult


356 THE OPPOSITION TO RELIGION


hindrances which human existence reveals cannot lead
towards an entire renunciation; that which always
stamps human existence as something petty and in-
adequate—that which brings to the mind our long
distance from the goals of life—transforms itself into
a testimony for the reality and the altitude of these
goals; thus the greatness of the Spiritual and Divine
appears clearly in the pettiness of the human.

Thus, a depth of things is unmistakable in all
hindrance, and such a depth makes clear the impossi-
bility of a simple negation. Also, all the darkness
leaves no doubt that the Divine emerges, first of all,
not from the outermost boundary of our life, but
through a creativeness and activity in the inmost life
itself. In the form in which this work of the Divine
appears first of all, it certainly negates more than it
affirms: there does not result the construction of a
kingdom of pure reason, but there is prevented all satis-
faction for man in merely human things ; all attempts
of a self-revolving and of an anchorage in the merely
human province are opposed, and an inflexible tribunal
is exercised towards all self-sufficiency and towards
all self-adulation of human nature.

This appears clearly in a twofold direction. On
the one hand, it is seen in the power of logical
thought, in which something superior to all human
opinion and inclination appears which shows fear-
lessly the weal and woe of mere man. ‘The movement
of thought marches forward, is driven and linked solely
through its own necessities; all the attempts of man
to draw such necessities into his own track and to
adjust them to his aims are lamentably stranded.
Certain ideas have appeared, they have won _ us,


THE OPPOSITION CONSIDERED 357


they were welcomed by us so far as they performed
for us some service and did not lay too great a
sacrifice upon us. In such a situation we might,
as individuals and classes, have retained such ideas
and placed on one side certain uncongenial circum-
stances; we might have shaped them so that they
might fit comfortably into our plans. But how-
ever much we might labour and trouble, however
much we might attempt to turn the current with all
zeal and perseverance, it helps us nothing, because
logical ideas will not allow themselves to be bent and
turned ; a secure superiority over all the contents of
time is presented to weakness and awkwardness when
they possess the conclusions of thought and bring
these to a clear expression. ‘Thus, we find a secure
superiority of thought over all the undertakings of
mere man.

A similar conclusion presents itself in the appear-
ance of contradictions in human life. Pointed con-
tradictions may lie within the bounds of an epoch,
and may cause no unrest or disturbance so long as
they do not pass into consciousness. But a moment
arrives when this happens, and when it happens, all
the possibilities of repression, enfeeblement, and cheer-
ful accommodation disappear; then the higher asser-
tions develop their full strength, and the opposition to
them is unceremoniously ended ; happiness, rest, and
the earthly welfare of man become secondary things.
It has happened thus in political and social move-
ments.

The encounter between such a progressiveness of
logical conclusions and such an irreconcilability of the
opposites creates a universal dialectic, which does not


358 THE OPPOSITION TO RELIGION


move in the precise forms presented by Hegel, but
whose mighty power is unmistakable in human life.
The Spiritual Life always steps on a special path with-
in the human ground, and the following of this path
leads necessarily to a strong one-sidedness, where the
success itself engenders more and more error. Now,
a rejection of this error does not result through a
toning down of the assertions that are made, or
through the breaking off of points and angles, but
through a sudden change into an entirely real—not
logical—opposite ; after such a change, a new power
is conferred on man, and yet he follows his track with
the same exclusiveness until it threatens to pre-
dominate over the truth, and one sudden change after
another enables the man probably to enter into a
new direction. Such movements fill the history of
the world with their smailer and greater waves ;
whether a positive progress towards reason is to be
found in them, can in no manner be discovered.
Viewed externally, the waves seem to run in an
aimless ebb and flow. However, it is certain that
all ascent and descent, all “becoming” and passing
away, lie on the other side of the interests of the
individual, and are confused in no way through his
wishes and strivings. Such movements never allow
man any kind of rest; they never reach a secure
foundation; they hold their existence always in
jeopardy ; they destroy ever anew all self-satisfaction
through the effects and creations which they produce.
Thus spiritual forces rule in man—forces which
humiliate him profoundly, and which adjudicate him
a worth only in so far as he decides to become the
tool of such forces, which, in spite of all his brilliant


THE OPPOSITION CONSIDERED 359


characteristics, destroy him whenever he attempts to
stem their course.

In addition to this superhuman sovereignty of a
formal kind, there associates itself a sovereignty of an
intrinsic kind. It results in its characteristic features
in morality, in its superiority and, indeed, in its oppo-
sition to all purely human aims. So morality must
consider the natural mode of man as something
distant, alien, and even hostile; it has a kind of
natural instinct against itself; it is quickly repressed
through the ordinary everyday experience of the
human situation, and is easily transformed into a
mere semblance. It gains no strong positive power
in such a situation. On the other hand, however, an
influential negative authority is unmistakable. But
such an authority renders man uneasy and brings
clearly before his mind the inadequacy of all his
undertakings ; it exercises, in the form of conscience,
a judgment concerning his actions from which he is
not able to withdraw himself permanently ; it destroys
also satisfaction in the most brilliant achievements of
a culture which believes itself able to dispense with
such a sovereignty ; it avenges itself all along for ail
neglect in considering that without such a sovereignty
all the gains of life, with their tendency towards
selfishness and pride, threaten to capsize into peril
and loss.

Matters do not stand otherwise with religion. Re-
ligion, also, in so far as it outgrew superstition, had
the natural inclination of mere man more against than
in favour of it; nature does not transmit a venera-
tion for a “higher” than itself; and even where
religion has stood in high external honour, there have


360 THE OPPOSITION TO RELIGION


been many complaints of the unbelief of mankind.
In the average of human conditions, religion has
always been more of a semblance than of a reality,
and what religion has performed on such a plane has
been full of contradiction. But in spite of all this,
religion remains a mighty power of human life and
of the universal movements of mankind. For it has
brought forth a new.standard which makes inadequate
all that previously sufficed; it has shown the evil
doings of man and the limits of his valuation of things,
and, along with this, it is called to create a cleft in
the inmost soul itself. That great turn of religion is
the raising up of new demands to the level of the
Spiritual Life and a blotting out of what had hitherto
satisfied man. Thus we find it most of all in the
personality and life-work of Jesus. Here we find a
human existence of the most homely and simple
kind, passing in a remote corner of the world, little
heeded by his contemporaries, and, after a short-
blossoming life, cruelly put to death. And yet, this
life had an energy of spirit which filled it to the brim ;
it had a standard which has transformed human
existence to its very root; it has made inadequate
what hitherto seemed to bring entire happiness; it
has set limits to all petty natural culture; it has
stamped as frivolity not only all resignation into the
mere pleasures of life, but has also reduced the whole
prior circle of man to the mere world of sense. Such
a valuation holds us fast and refuses to be weakened
by us even when all the dogmas and usages of the
Church are seen through as human organisations.
That life of Jesus exercises evermore a tribunal over
the world ; and the majesty of such an effective bar


THE OPPOSITION CONSIDERED 361


of judgment supersedes all the development of
external power.

Hence, in spite of all the confused state of human
things, an elevated Spiritual Life is not merely an
object of aspiration and hope, but also works in
us in the form of immediacy ; first of all, certainly,
as a law and a bar of judgment—as a power which
forbids in an obligatory manner the conclusion that
human effort is no more than the work of mere man,
and which sets forth with unmerciful clearness the
impotence of all merely human undertakings. Not
only in certain directions but in all Spiritual Life
such meek and energetic effects appear with mighty
power.

Man is incessantly endeavouring to attribute to
himself what comes only from the Spiritual Life; he
interprets himself as a standard, as public opinion,
etc. ; he makes himself judge over good and evil, the
true and the false. But when he presents the
semblance of truth, he does not present with this
judgment the energy of truth; sooner or later the
definite standards of the Spiritual Life make their
appearance and demolish the semblance. The
Spiritual Life allows itself provisionally to be drawn
into the service of human aims, but soon it disengages
itself from the obscurity and humanisation, and de-
monstrates its independence and superiority.

All this remains full of problems and mysteries, but
in spite of the darkness so much as this is certain,
that a superhuman Spiritual Life signifies no illusion.
If it rules over us as a power of sublimity, as law and
tribunal, it is and it remains a reality founded on a
rock—safe against all the waves of negation.


362 THE OPPOSITION TO RELIGION


3. The Necessity of Further Manifestateons


Impossible, however, as an entire abandonment of
religion is, the entanglement receives through religion
more of another configuration than of a satisfactory
solution. For a greater depth of life may be recog-
nised on the other side of the province of the hin-
drances, and a direttive power of a spiritual kind may
work within our existence. We are not able, how-
ever, to know whence such a power comes, but it is
a positive participation in the Spiritual Life and a
full vivification of imbedded depths planned within us.
It is this alone which invests our action with value,
and which is able to free our conviction from doubt.
Without such a turn we remain permanently in a
vacillating, intermediate position: a higher world is
perceptible, but in our province it does not seem able
so far to overcome the immense oppositions so as to
reach a positive development ; it has certainly driven
out all hope of deriving satisfaction from merely human
things, but it has not granted us the compensation
of a new life. Thus, we do not see what the goal of
our action is, or the Why and the Wherefore of the
action. Has the Divine only opened our eyes in
order that we may discover the immeasurable distance
from us and our own vanishing smallness at the same
time? But is then all that we may undertake of
no avail, and must not, under such impressions, all
human effort break in pieces ?

Thus, even with the recognition of that depth of
things, and of that sovereignty of the Divine, all still
remains in question; and the most painful dilemma
ever surrounds us, viz. that there is too much reason to


THE OPPOSITION CONSIDERED 363


pronounce a negation and too little to pronounce an
affirmation. §% deus, unde malum ; st non deus, unde
bonum? How can we hope to escape from this
dilemma? All the previous facts and reflections do
not help us to answer the question; the one hope
lies in the fact that the Divine, through some kind
of positive effects, appears in our circle. It is only
a further reality that can lead the Yea to a final
conquest, and, along with this, rescue our life from a
menacing destruction. ‘Therefore, it behoves us to
look for this. That man, in the upheaval of his life,
cried for outward signs and wonders, we can under-
stand without having to do it ourselves ; but we, too,
remain dependent on a-wonder, on an ampler and
more pervading Divine, since this alone is able to raise
us out of our hitherto-prevailing contradictions, and
to guide our life to a secure path.


Part I1V.—Characteristic Religion


INTRODUCTION


Our previous discussion has resulted in a strong aspira-
tion after new realities—after a further manifestation
of the Godhead. The counterpart of this had de-
veloped so powerfully within the domain of man that
the life had entered into an entire deadlock ; there
could be no doubt as to the inadequacy of mere
man; the Divine, however, revealed itself as law
and tribunal, and brought new aims and standards
to our life, but it granted not the energy to coincide
with such aims and standards; it allowed the un-
reason of existence to be unveiled to its very depth,
but it did not lead reason to a victory against un-
reason. Thus, the entanglement seems heightened
within us; what grows thence into doubt may not
extend to the Divine itself, but man is saturated with
it, and, indeed, it robs life of all its significance. Of
what avail are all toil and activity if they are not
able to raise themselves against such powerful op-
position, and if we divine a new world but find the
path to such a world closed ?

We have already seen that there is only one hope
of escaping from such an intolerable situation: the


Divine Life and Being must reveal itself still further
364


INTRODUCTION 365


in the midst of the needs and struggles of our ex-
istence; such a new reality alone can prevent an
inner collapse of life, and turn doubt and depression
into fixity of purpose and joyousness. Does there
indeed result such a turn ?

A belief in this runs through humanity ; it speaks
out of all religions, and has attained an independence
over against culture, and has brought forth from the
so-called historical and positive religions a charac-
teristic world of thought. For to all religions be-
longed the desire not so much to assist in obtaining
the whole of the Spiritual Life through man’s own
achievement, as to bring forth something new, and
to gain the whole soul for this. Over against the
chaotic darkness of human existence they created
their own kingdom and rescued in this, as in a
sheltering ark, the ideals of humanity ; this kingdom,
however, seemed especially strong through what it
possessed in discernment and uniqueness. The his-
torical religions, through such a configuration, appear
as an answer to the question which presented itself
in our prior investigation—an answer not through
ideas and doctrines but through life and act, an
answer not of the mere individual but of the cor-
porate experience of humanity. A pity only, that
where we long for an unerring certainty soon a
strife breaks out, and that where we desire one answer
the historical religions offer many and conflicting
answers. How is this? Do the various claims
destroy one another, and does hope of help disappear
at the same time? Or does all the ramification allow
a universal truth to break forth — a truth which
promises to guard us and to lead us farther ?


PART IV.—CHARACTERISTIC RELIGION
(ConTINUED)


CHAPTER XI
a. Tuer HistrortcaL RELIGIONS


1. The Fact of Religions


Our introduction dealt briefly with the historical
religions, but it is our aim now in a more precise
manner to conceive of their significance and great-
ness, and to consider what is problematic in them.
That such religions present a unique mode of life
over against the ordinary world and reason, is shown
by the mode of their origin. For they do not grow
in a calm kind of way from the ordinary work of
thought, but appear as an entirely new beginning in
great personalities, who, as mediators between the
Godhead and the world, announce the will of God
to humanity, and establish a closer communion
between the Godhead and humanity. The precise
content of the message and the mode of communion
decide the characteristic nature of the particular
religions ; for religion may be understood as a con-
joint struggle for goodness, light, and purity as means
of protection from evil spirits as in Parseeism; it
may be a bond formed between God and his chosen


people, which leads to a stricter fulfilment of the law
366


THE HISTORICAL RELIGIONS 367


and to a corresponding retribution as in Judaism;
it may finally be a Kingdom of God which binds all
men to their Heavenly Father in mutual love, and
which, indeed, leads to a union of the Divine and
the human natures as in Christianity. Religion
ever founds a unique communion of life with God;
it ever allows such a communion to engender a new
reality which will signify not a mere addendum to
the remaining life, but the kernel of the whole. The
conceptions of God, the tasks of life, spiritual great-
ness and values, shape themselves characteristically
and incomparably in accordance with the quality of
the new life. Thus, each religion has its own view
of the universe and its own morality. And it is from
this individual and underivable characteristic that
religion feels itself mighty and hopes for redemption.

Such an independence and individuality were at-
tained by religions especially through the greatness
and energy of their founders. To these founders the
new kingdom was no vague outline and no feeble
hope, but all stood clear in front of them; the
kingdom was so real to their souls and filled them so
exclusively that the whole sensuous world was re-
duced by them to a semblance and a shadow if they
could not otherwise gain a new value from a superior
power. The new world could attain to such im-
mediacy and impressiveness only because a regal
imagination wrestled for a unique picture in the
tangled heap of life, and held it up over against all
the confusion, and because it invested this picture with
the clearest outlines and the most vivid colours.
Thus, the new world dawns on humanity with
fascinating power, rousing it out of the sluggishness


368 CHARACTERISTIC RELIGION


of daily routine, binding it through a corporate aim,
raising inspiring ardour through radiant promises and
terrible threats, and creating achievements other-
wise impossible. This prepared road into the king-
dom.of the invisible, this creation of a new reality
which is no merely serene kind of play but a deep
seriousness, this inversion of worlds which pushes
sensuous existence down into a distance and which
prepares a home for man within the kingdom of
faith—all this is the greatest achievement that has
ever been undertaken and that has ever worked upon
human soil. In order to accomplish all this, the
founders must be great thinkers, and far more than
being thinkers they must be great artists, and far
more than being artists they must be heroes of action.
And, at the same time, they must be raised above
all action to a secure repose in an Eternal Order, and
be possessed of homely simplicity and a deeply child-
like nature in the midst of all the complications
and excitement of world-transforming power. Conse-
quently it becomes easily conceivable how the estima-
tion of their adherents raised the founders beyond
all human measurements to a likeness to God, and,
indeed, to an equality with God. Their works
seemed to carry within them Divine energies;
wonders surrounded their paths; their life and being
bridged securely the gulf between heaven and earth.
Thus, it became of the greatest importance to
acknowledge these personalities in order to bring life
into a secure track. But the reality founded in God
became at the same time an enormous task for man.
The new life had to be assimilated, to be developed, and
to enforce its way against a hostile world; thus man


THE HISTORICAL RELIGIONS 369


became a co-worker with God, and his life through
this gained immeasurably in value. Out of such a
blending-work a corporate circle grew up; high
aims and great hopes united men together and
drove their energies to the utmost tension; in
united convictions and their fundamental experi-
ences men found the help of God entirely certain,
and were fully armed against all doubts and
temptations.

The rights of what had been discovered as truth in
such a new world could not be set aside by general
reason. For it was precisely in that which brought
something new over against such reason that the
energy and strength were to be found; therefore, the
New must stand upon its own particular kind of
proof, and thus it comes to possess an actuality
against all reason, and demands for such an actuality
a willing acknowledgment of the confiding faith of
man. The conception of faith received through this
a more definite meaning than is presented in the
universal delineation of religion. It is not mainly
a revelation of God that stands here in question
but this special revelation existing in the midst of
history ; the Yea bound itself more definitely with a
Nay, and the acknowledgment bound itself with an
exclusion. Here, the thought of the underivableness
of the truth easily became excessive, so that the con-
tradiction of reason was welcomed as an evidence of
the incomparable and superhuman character of the
new truth, and a credo guia absurdum inspired joy.
In any case, one felt certz.in and joyful in the possession
of a truth on the other side of all the complications and
unnecessary formalities of brooding reason ; ie truth


370 CHARACTERISTIC RELIGION


alone seemed accessible to man independently of the
position of intellectual development ; deep-penetrating
spirits, however, could point to the justification of
what they held in the fact that all mediate knowledge
in the last resort rests upon something that is evident
only in the form of immediacy, and that the final root
of reality is to be conceived as an act of freedom which
is simply non-derivable.

To such a positiveness of the foundation there
corresponds in historical religions a positiveness of
content. We have already seen religion, in general,
dividing life into a For or Against, and creat-
ing an enormous movement, and all this in the
historical religions experiences a general enhance-
ment. As the affirmation here is more precise and is
traced out in an enclosed circle of life, much is pushed
out to the opposite side—even much that belongs to
the Spiritual Life itself—and thus the tension and
struggle must become incomparably harder. But
this may signify from the standpoint of historical
religion simply a gain, because it will more than
anything else lift life out of the idle indifference which
forms the worst enemy of all spiritual movement ;
it will, too, exercise an’ energetic counter-effect to all
that is small and mean, which otherwise chokes human
life; it will, through such a concentration, consolidate
life securely in itself and place it on a foundation
which seems simply indestructible.

We have noticed the opposition to religion turning
into a doubt whether man, in spite of all his efforts,
penetrated in any kind of way to truth; whether the
union of the Divine and the human, which con-
stitutes the kernel of religion, : reaches any measure


THE HISTORICAL RELIGIONS 371


of success. Historical religion overcomes this doubt
from its very root and in the whole of its extent.
For historical religion causes the Divine to enter into
the province of man, and makes the effective com-
munion the soul of all life. Through such a definite
union of the Divine and the human, the image
and the conception of the Godhead transform them-
selves at the same time. How could the Godhead be
moved by human need, and, on the other side, how
accept the help of man? How could the Godhead
bind itself to an inner communion with us unless it
left its superhuman abode and dwelt among men ?
If, thus, the human appears as essentially related to
the Divine, or if the human is raised beyond all
narrowness and particularity through the descent of
the Divine into its nature, the human may assign the
highest conceptions of its own circle to the Divine,
and thus it penetrates beyond the colourless concep-
tion of the Godhead to the conception of a living and
personal God who is present in the form of immediacy,
and with whom the soul can converse as an I with a
Thou. If man owes his greatness to the fact of
a communion with the Divine alone, then it is not
an anthropomorphism which the man holds; but a
return from the image to a prototype takes place
when man, from the best in his own nature, traces
out an image of the Godhead.

Through such an approximation of God to man, the
union between both could develop far more inward-
ness—an inwardness which is able to dispense with
all relationship to the world, and which is even
able to exercise its entire energy in opposition to
the world. It is here therefore that the individual


372 CHARACTERISTIC RELIGION


acquires a value, because it is here that the Highest
Nature concerns itself with him; here man may
have intercourse with the Divine as with his best
friend ; here originates a religious emotional life—a
piety in conscious opposition to all external forms
and productions. In such a religious emotional life
there develops a pure life within itself of the Spirit ;
here a sanctuary unassailable from all strife and alarm
is found; here a pure stream flows from which
life is able to refresh itself ever anew with energy.
Through their achievements within their own province
the historical religions have worked mightily upon
the whole of life and have implanted into it an
energetic motive for the deepening of the self; wide
circles of the human race have gained an energetic
emotional life through such religions. As soon as
religion relaxes, the inwardness turns into insecurity
and succumbs to the power of the intrusive external
world.

A union so intimate and so fervent with God
would have repelled all relationship with the world,
and would have made all work for the world so
indifferent if the historical religions had not created
by the side of the formation of such inwardness
a visible sphere of life, and had not united men most
intimately with each other. And how could these
religions abstain from such a creation, since they were
concerned fully to develop the fellowship of life mani-
fested by them and to maintain such in the midst of a
hostile world? ‘Thus, there arose communities and
churches governed by religion which presented them-
selves as the soul and kernel of the whole of life.
In these religion gained a visible presence; here


THE HISTORICAL RELIGIONS 378


the Divine seemed to flow intimately into the human.
On account of this, such institutions became in the
course of their development the main evidences for
the power and truth of religion as well as a solid
bulwark against doubt. Life was here brought into
a secure path; here a pointed distinction between
friend and foe was accomplished; here individuals
united themselves in a co-operation not only of
character but also of work. Man, in the inmost depth
of his being, was here united with the fellowship,
because nothing other than this fellowship could
grant and guarantee a Divine revelation superior to
all subjective reflection. Thus, a withdrawal from
the fellowship appeared as a falling from truth.

True, difficult entanglements are imbedded in all
this, and perhaps, also, contradictions ; and these will
shortly occupy our attention. But, without a doubt, a
great fact and a mighty enrichment of human life are
to be recognised in the historical religions. ‘Through
the concentration which they accomplish and represent,
they have bestowed upon history incomparably greater
intrinsic value, contrast, and movement what other-
wise threatens to dissolve into sheer unintelligible-
ness; they have incarnated in flesh and blood ; they
have gained wide spheres of the human race for
spiritual things; and they have raised, in the midst
of our world, an over-world of the most mighty
power. If, then, every unbiassed view is compelled
to acknowledge here a great and, indeed, a unique
phenomenon, it means that a decisive and final turn has
resulted for men through their entrance into historical
religion. Life can no more come to a deadlock, and
doubt can no more harm where God, over against


374 CHARACTERISTIC RELIGION


the world, has revealed Himself to man and never
ceases to reveal Himself.


2. The Opposition to Religions


History bears testimony to the mighty effect of
religions, but none the less does it show an incessant
counter-effect; in spite of their development of
power, religions are always objects which are spoken
against. Such an opposition formed an undercurrent
wherever religion stood externally in an_ entirely
secure sovereignty. The constant complaints as to
the indifference and the unbelief of its adherents show
this. Whenever the relaxation of the social pressure
permitted a free articulation, doubt grew quickly into
a dangerous power, and threatened religion in the
whole of its existence. If Augustine was right in
stating that religion, as an historico-social institution,
cannot subsist without a strong authority (sine
guodam gravi autoritatis imperio), he indicated, at
the same time, how slightly religion roots itself in the
inwardness of man. But it is not mere individuals or
even mankind at large, who, from an insipid disposi-
tion, raise ever new doubts; there are also entangle-
ments of an actual kind—hesitations and doubts
within the Spiritual Life itself, and which work
for a painful upheaval of the whole.

First of all, it is the plurality of historical religions
which produces alienation and uncertainty. Religions
themselves aimed at placing the facts on one side;
indeed, they engendered a flame of passion against
the facts. Through such an opposition to other
modes of thought and religion—modes which ap-
peared to the advocates of the “chosen” religion as


THE HISTORICAL RELIGIONS 315


a web of human folly, and, indeed, as a deception of
the devil—the greatest energy was awakened and the
most frantic passions were not only tolerated but
commended. Religions, in their struggle against one
another, have fettered the soul of man to themselves ;
also, within the individual religions such a schism
has heightened work and zeal, and when peace was
brought about, it brought inevitably along with itself
an enervation. Struggle is the life-element of his-
torical religions, for it alone seems able to set the
truth in full light, and to carry the energy to its
greatest tension.

But the problems are not solved by the mere
declaration of their solution by religion. Questions
and doubts do not allow themselves to be banished
out of the world by interdicts and threats. So long
aS man remains within an enclosed social sphere
and brands all that exists outside that sphere as
a monstrous folly, so long is he able unhesitatingly
to consider his own religion as the only true one.
Modern man, however, has outgrown such narrow-
ness; he surveys the different provinces of culture
and also of the various religions ; an historical mode
of observation compels him to estimate religions in
their connections, to enter deeply into these con-
nections, and to seek their validity. ‘The more he
does this, the more uncertain becomes the exclusive
validity of his own religion. ‘The sincerity of convic-
tion and the passion of belief of the remaining religions
are not less strong and genuine than those of our
own religion ; they, too, rest upon great personalities ;
they have their signs and wonders, and, what signifies
more, they have their heroes and martyrs; and they


376 CHARACTERISTIC RELIGION


have moved individuals from the depth of their souls
as well as surged through the history of the world
with mighty power. What right have we to interpret
these phenomena outside our own sphere as fancy and
deception whilst our own phenomena are of the same
nature, and these are considered by us as solid facts
and as safe citadels of truth? Could the ideal world
and the life-constructions of many millions and whole
millenniums originate through bare illusion? What
secures us, against all this, that it is not similar with
us and that our belief, too, has not been revealed
from on high but has issued from purely human
ruminating ? Or shall we value ourselves and others
by different weights and measures as the fanaticism
of all times has done but which has by no means
been sanctioned by justice ?

But perhaps religions will deal with a proof
obtained through a comparison of their most im-
portant achievements, and thus seek to demonstrate
the characteristic superiority of such achievements
over all else. But does that demonstrate their truth,
their absolute truth, their Divine truth? The
achievements lead into the province of relativities ;
one achievement may largely overtop all the others, —
but it remains still an open question whether such
an achievement is the final, the highest, and the all-
inclusive. Further, the human and historical situation
is not a product of religion alone, but varied move-
ments run crossways through the situation, so that
it is hardly possible to decide whether that which
happened within the life-circle of religion happened
from religion’s own energy, or whether it has not
proceeded, in a far greater measure, from the more


THE HISTORICAL RELIGIONS 377


or less gifted nature of peoples, from the characteristic
greatness of special personalities, from the favour of
external circumstances, ete.

For example, is Christianity indebted to its most
important origins and its religious contents alone ?
Is it not also indebted to its union with highly-gifted
peoples, to its coalescence with the rich and beautiful
culture of antiquity, and to modern culture for the
revival and restoration of its youth ?

The questions, however, which most religions set
us, lead back to the fundamental problem, as to how
far, in the main, an historical religion can manifest
absolute truth ; and, also, as to the doubt whether such
a religion’s concentration of life does not inevitably
involve a contraction whose detriment counterbalances
all gain, and which may transform all gain into a loss.
The proof offered by a positive religion is in its nature
an historical kind: certain events are exhibited; a
certain spiritual content is announced as a revelation.
Even if we admit that there is not the least doubt
concerning the events, yet an historical existence can
never prove of itself that a certain fact is of Divine
origin and its content is an ultimate truth, for such
a claim can be proved only through the ideas and
convictions into which it is brought; and such a
conclusion never comes to man from without, but
is founded in his own inwardness by the whole of
his life. In the historical data it is impossible to
recognise the Divine as Divine without antecedent
conceptions as to the nature of the Divine, and
without the standard imbedded in such conceptions ;
for otherwise, religion and magic, faith and super-
stition, could not be separated from one another.


378 CHARACTERISTIC RELIGION


This train of thought leads necessarily to the point
that all the argument of history must rest upon the
immediate life itself, and that the intrinsic nature of
the truth of all historical facts can be measured by
the Spiritual Life alone. Here Lessing’s well-known
words meet us: ‘“ Accidental truths of history can
never become the proof of the necessary truths of
reason.” Though this may carry in its form the past
mark of the Aufkldirung, its kernel contains a truth
which it is not so easy to get over as was supposed by
the historical positivism of the nineteenth century.
True, history at the present day has come to mean
incomparably more to us than it used to, and it may
deem such a course of thought as antiquated, and
for which it has no place; but he who is not to fall
into a destructive relativism must conceive of history
as being encompassed and borne along by an intimate
and timeless Spiritual Life which relegates history with
all its accumulation to a secondary place. But, also.
historical religion is through this withdrawn to a
secondary place, and it can by no means become the
final basis of our religious conviction, and by no
means can its greatest achievements in the realm of
time prove its eternal truth. And if religion is to
secure a basis at all, it must secure it in eternal truth.

Doubt, however, does not merely remain in the
mode of the foundation, it also attacks the content of
historical religion, and even combats that wherein it
seeks its strength—the distinctive, the unique, the
super-rational ; and, further, the definite union of the
Divine and the human—the kernel of all religion—
turns into doubt, and fashions itself into an inner
prejudice towards the Divine. The historical religions


THE HISTORICAL RELIGIONS 379


cannot claim for themselves a definite relationship
to the Godhead without having to leave out of account
portions of human nature. And yet we hear occasion-
ally to-day people speak of a “God of the Christian,”
and who seek therein a special strength of belief.
Does not this lead to the path of a particularism which
lies not very far from the belief of a primitive stage of
culture in special national gods? And as to each
historical religion every other religion seems false, so
here, all religious mode of thought of a more universal
kind will appear to such a particularism as unreal
and worthless. At the height of Hellenism, in men
such as Auschylus, Pindar, and Plato, particularism can
recognise no genuine religion ; and it will exclude the
leaders of modern culture—men such as Leibniz and
Kant, Schiller and Goethe. How close lies such a
narrowness of belief to a pharisaic self-righteousness
of small souls who have never laboured and grieved
for the truth! But how is this danger to be avoided
if the affirmation of historical religion is considered as
the sole source of truth? And who can find fault
with anyone who would rather side with the men in
all of whom there was something great—for there is no
greatness without independence—with the unbelievers,
than be included in the army of believers ?

Further, it is not easy to accept the statement, viz.
that historical religion draws inevitably the Godhead
into the arena of time and thus into variableness.
Such could happen if the Godhead did not pervade
the whole of time with eternal truth, but had opened,
only at a special moment, its inmost essence, and
had in this manner communicated that essence to
human nature. ‘To place a variableness in God means


380 CHARACTERISTIC RELIGION


nothing less than to surrender the absoluteness of
truth; it means no less than to leave the field to
a blind positiveness and a destructive relativism.
Augustine, a man wont to think out any thought
he had laid hold of, has in the main tendency
of his conviction—in another direction he is more
rational—maintained that prior to the advent of
Christianity, not only were beliefs concerning
morality different, but morality itself was something
different from what it subsequently became; prior to
Christianity things were allowed which were forbidden
after its advent. This is consistent thinking from
the standpoint of a merely positive religion. But it
shows, at the same time, that such a mode of thinking
even transforms morality into a fluctuating precept,
and, at the same time, inwardly destroys it.

Also, the closer union of man with the Godhead
and the clearer representation of this union which
the historical religions have striven to present are
of a double-sided kind, and produce a colossal
complexity. Indeed, if in that intimacy the human
arises too easily and perpetually to the Deity, not
seldom has the Divine been drawn down into the
narrowness and passions of the human situation!
But in the very conception of God there are diffi-
culties which are very perceptible. The idea of
personality is to render comprehensible the incom-
prehensible, and to bring the representation of
the Godhead nearer to a man; but how power-
fully does an anthropomorphism pervade such an
idea and render it extremely dangerous, as it so
easily resolves itself into a mere replica of man’s
own nature! And does the religious relationship


THE HISTORICAL RELIGIONS 381


which develops on this ground bring with itself,
always and with certainty, a spiritual elevation—an
inner transformation of man? How often do we ex-
perience immeasurable waves of subjective feeling !
How often do an egotistic desire after success and
a passionate excitation believe themselves justified
and even consecrated by religion itself! Or, again,
positive religion is, through its aspiration after a
reality superior to all brooding reflection—after a
tangible and incontestable reality—tempted to estab-
lish a sensuous and even a materialistic mode of
pictorial ideas, and, indeed, to announce with special
zeal what has been left behind by the movement of
the Spiritual Life. Thus, definite religion is measured
by the doctrine of the sacraments which easily de-
generate into mere magical charm; thus, many even
to-day believe that Christianity is threatened at its
root if the belief in a reconciliation through the
blood of Christ does not form the core of its nature.
Wherever men insist primarily upon positiveness in
religion, the danger of a relapse into an under-spiritual
stage lies perilously near. Plotinus had good reason
for giving the warning that man should not sink back
below reason whilst striving to rise above it. The
historical religions certainly represent a justifiable
and even a necessary aspiration when they recon-
solidate the tattered life through the inauguration of
a new kingdom which is able to save the harassed
soul. But in that which they offer there seems
a higher and a lower, a right and a wrong inter-
weaved, and they do succeed in finding the line of
demarcation.

It fares similarly with the effect of religions upon


382 CHARACTERISTIC RELIGION


the life and actions of man; these bring him clearer
aims and more energetic motives, but they also
readily bring contractions and coarseness. Life,
under the influence of positive religion, gains a strong
consolidation ; a province of truths is traced out and
dismisses all doubt; men, through this, are brought
into greater concord and are called to mutual assist-
ance; the direct relation to the Godhead gives a
powerful vigour to all demands and an increas-
ing earnestness to life. But the consolidation turns
readily into a rigid fixation, and the reflection turns
into a narrow exclusiveness. How often have re-
ligions imagined something great in such elements
as these, and how often have they rejected every-
thing that lay beyond their own province as some-
thing inferior, indifferent, and even dangerous! This
attitude does not limit itself to particular points, but
enters into the whole. The direct relationship of man
to man aims at placing in the foreground, as factors
in the formation of life, the rendering of help and love
in mutual intercourse and the well-being of the
human province. But the relationship to the universe
and to the inward expansion of one’s own nature
which science, art, and culture strive to set forth, is
but little thought of. Thus, the governing life easily
becomes subjective and merely human, and this soon
turns the man to revolve around himself.

But, also, within man’s own province, that which
seems first of all a pure gain may readily turn into
a loss. Historical religion binds men closer together
on the Godward side; it creates more inward fellow-
ship, more mutual understanding, more uniformity
of the soul. But such can hardly happen otherwise


THE HISTORICAL RELIGIONS 383


than at the cost of free movement and of individu-
ality. ach religion has its own type of life, and
forces this upon its adherents from youth upwards
with mild or strong constraint. Does not the life
through this become bound and mechanised? Does
it not become to many individuals, who bring no inner
movement against it, a mere clinging to the external,
and does it not threaten to become a gross untruth-
fulness—a mere conventional participation in an
imposed order? There is an hypocrisy which reaches
beyond the conscious idea into the recesses of the
soul, and which unites itself with the subjective notion
of veracity; there is an hypocrisy of the nature to
which nothing more easily enters than religion. This
is the pharisaism which true religious natures have to
fight against with the whole ardour of their convic-
tion; and the sadness is that such hypocrisy is no
transient appearance of certain times, but seems to
connect itself indissolubly with religion.

Historical religion is the strongest mainstay of
morality, but, at the same time, nowhere else do such
dangers grow. Historical religion consolidates mor-
ality through a linkage of it to a Divine Will, and it
strengthens the energy of morality through the
awakening of an indestructible belief in the moral
order of the universe. But, at the same time, the
founding of morality upon an historical religion draws
morality into great insecurity, and it clings to this
insecurity ; the moral motives are threatened with
defacement, for the winning of Divine favour becomes
now the main motive-power of action. Thus, a
religious morality, through its orientation of thought
towards a “ beyond,” readily injures a joyous labour and


384 CHARACTERISTIC RELIGION


creativeness in the “here and now’—since with its
pictorial ideas of future expectations and confidence
in these, it may support a passive conduct ; it may
repress a courageous entrance into reality and ex-
change it for a mere logical and judicious kind of
reality ; it disunites and estranges human nature ; it
produces unutterable bitterness, to which it binds all
the qualities of the moral disposition as an aid to
its own propaganda, and explains everything existing
outside its own circle as unreal and worthless. Do
all these questions allow themselves to be placed on
one side as an outflow of mere ‘ unbelief,” or as a
shallow mode of thinking ?

All these problems, however, culminate in the turn
of religion to the Church. The Church presented
itself as indispensable to historical religion, for only
through the incorporation of religion with the Church
did religion gain a full actuality for man; only in
connection with the Church did religion attain a
distinct stamp of its characteristic features; only in
connection with the Church did religion work for the
whole of humanity, and not merely for specially
selected minds. But, at the same time, the danger
of humanising the Divine increases most powerfully
through the conception of its entrance into the
province of man. The Church is not able to exist
without a human and temporal element ; indeed, the
more it develops to a full independence, the more will
it bring forth the claims of the human and temporal
elements and transfer them to the Divine and
Eternal; it will then busy itself mechanically with
the Divine, and probably consider quite worldly
men as being religious and in communion with


THE HISTORICAL RELIGIONS 385


the Divine. An inversion of the most deadly kind
threatens the Church; it becomes liable, instead of
labouring for the presence of the Divine, to clothe a
certain kind of the human with a semblance of the
Divine, and to confer upon this humanity the
qualities of Divine truth and glory; indeed, the
Church is able, when it carries such a procedure to its
uttermost, to elevate the priesthood above the Divine,
and to attribute to it alleged power beyond that of
the Godhead. Then the Church occupies itself with
a veneration of itself and not of the Divine, and this
becomes a mere means to the heightening of its own
glory. However, through such a turn, through such
a wanton exaggeration of the human to the level of
the Divine, the Church becomes the greatest danger
to, as well as the greatest enemy of, religion; for, in
fact, nothing has injured religion so much as the
Church. But, at the same time, religion did not seem
able to obtain for itself a secure foundation and its
legitimate effect upon men without a development
into a Church. How, then, can we disengage our-
selves from the contradiction, and how can we find the
line of demarcation between good and evil, between
a genuine elevation of man through the Divine and
through the lowering of the Divine to the human? If
such a line of demarcation cannot be found, then a grave
doubt is bound to arise in the whole of historical
religions, and that doubt appears strongest in that re-
ligion which bears most clearly the marks of historicity,
i.e.in Christianity. Does not historical religion appear
as something which of necessity must destroy itself
through its own development and excess, and


thus reveals itself as an untenable contradiction ?
25


386 CHARACTERISTIC RELIGION


3. Impossibility of a simple Denial of
Historical Religion

What we have already discussed makes it con-
ceivable that historical religions became a target for
the hardest assaults, and, indeed, this did not happen
only from the pettiness of a subjective mode of
thought, but also from the numerous interests of the ~
whole provinces of life. No struggle has kindled
more passions and anger than this, and none so
strongly has so pointedly divided men from one an-
other. In earlier times, the attack was wont promptly
to issue in a complete denial of religion; religion, to
such times, was explained as a mere web of illusions or
even as a product of conscious fraud. To-day, the
hazardous character of such a sweeping condemnation
is clearly perceived. In any case, the capacities,
achievements, and sense of truth of mankind fall into
entire mistrust if the most powerful energy of the
historical development and the most secure anchorage
of peoples and times were to sink into an empty
illusion. ‘There is not a more deplorable contradic-
tion to be witnessed than, at one time, to praise in the
highest terms the greatness of human reason, and, at
the same time, to surrender as entire error all] that is
inmost and holiest in human nature. Only to an
absolute pessimism can such a turn give no shock.

Therefore, one seeks to avoid this conclusion, and,
in order to do this, devises a mid-path between truth
and error. It is now declared that the historical
religions were not merely pictorial illusions, but pro-
ducts of the momentary situations of peoples and
epochs; such peoples and epochs have, in their re-


THE HISTORICAL RELIGIONS 387


ligions, freed themselves from such situations, and
raised themselves beyond them through the aims and
ideals which were imbedded in their efforts. Thus,
religions, in the form of union of ideals, have a certain
kind of reality, and have undeniably contributed
towards a progressive development of humanity.
But all this has happened, it is said, only within the
human circle and for human ideas; life itself won
nothing which it had not previously carried within
itself and from which it was able to develop. ‘Thus,
the great problem seems smoothly and_ simply
settled: religion receives a right to be approved of,
and, at the same time, shows that what are exhibited
as differences and even as opposites are but an ex-
pression of the characteristics of peoples and times.
The consequence will be that we shall have to do
with purely relative truths which do not exclude one
another but subsist friendly side by side.

But, in spite of such alleged superiority, this solu-
tion isno more than one of those multi-coloured com-
promises through whose presence the edge of the
opposites is blunted and the energy of life is depreci-
ated. The deeper conviction of religions has been all
along to introduce man to something superhuman and
to shield him from inner destruction. Ifsuch a super-
human did not at all originate, man intoxicated him-
self with his own creations, and climbed to the height
of his own subjective notions; thus the whole of
religion appeared to him as a self-deception of human
nature, and although the representatives of religion
were not considered to be conscious deceivers, yet
they were considered to be “deceived deceivers.”
In fact, such a view alters the situation but little,


388 CHARACTERISTIC RELIGION


so that the same answer which withstood the old
sweeping denial must meet the new one. Without
a doubt, the historical religions have strongly affected
the life of the spirit of man; they have carried it
into original paths and have brought to it an inward
elevation. They have, on the whole, done this less
directly than indirectly through a transformation of
the entire life. We need only trace back a little the
threads of creativeness in art and in the mental con-
structions regarding the universe, in morality and the
formation of communities, in order to recognise
everywhere the connection of all this with the effects
and sway of religion. ‘Therefore, the alleged illusory
character of religion extends itself over the whole
of the Spiritual Life; and if we follow this path, it
will lead us to the same conclusion as previously—to
an entire bankruptcy of human capacity and to the
extinction of any hope of help from truth. Out of the
attempted obscuring of the problem the unmerciful
Either-Or steps ever forward. Hither man is nothing
more than mere man—a ready-made kind of nature by
the side of innumerable other similar natures ; and
then certainly religion falls to the ground, but at the
same time there falls each and. every truth—even
scientific truth, for totruth belongs necessarily a validity
beyond human opinion and vacillation, Or there is
implanted in man more than an isolated, completed
nature, and he is able to take up astruggle against the
petty-human self; and then religion refuses from the
very outset to be considered as a mere phantom, and
it compels us to seek in it the element of truth.

If an unequivocal condemnation of the historical re-
ligions is thus prohibited, and if, at the same time, we


THE HISTORICAL RELIGIONS 389


can neither recognise different truths existing
side by side nor consider any one of the _his-
torical religions as absolute truth and all the
others as entire error, one possibility remains open:
there must result in all historical religions a
common further inference of the Spiritual Life; a
common fundamental fact must precede all the rami-
fications and strife. This fundamental fact has to
be set forth with the utmost clearness, and from it
alone we must undertake a critical valuation of the
particular religions, and seek to differentiate the more-
than-human from the mere-human. That much of
the petty-human flows into religion and filters into a
seeming inseparableness with the Divine is only too
evident ; indeed, it is this that constitutes the kernel
of the problem and the main knot of the matter, that
historical religions contain too much that is merely
human to be valued as a pure work of God, and
yet too much that is Spiritual and Divine to be con-
sidered as a mere product of man.

Thus, in connection with the historical religions,
we come back to the same question with which we
opened this section of our investigation—the question
whether, within our life-province, some kind of a
further development of Spiritual Reality culminates
beyond the hitherto-explained situation, and whether
the manifestation of a further cosmic depth results.
The course of our investigation does not allow such
a possibility to be rejected as a matter of course.
For we have already seen a spirituality superior to
the world dawning within our existence, but such
a spirituality developed itself entirely through our
work in the world, and remained united with the


390 CHARACTERISTIC RELIGION


advancement of this work. And on account of this
we have witnessed the growth of inexpressible en-
tanglements. Now, could not a spirituality superior
to the world make its appearance in relation to man
without the intervention of the world? If this were
possible, we might expect a new kind of life, new
spiritual contents .and values, an entire turn of our
position, and, through all this, some kind of conquest
over hitherto all-powerful oppositions.

In the meantime, this is no more than a possibility ;
whether a reality corresponds to such a possibility,
only further experiences can decide, and to these we
now turn. But it is important to know that the
investigation even at our present stage is not mean-
ingless, and is in some degree able to show the drift of
the path we have to pursue.


oe a


PART IV.—CHARACTERISTIC RELIGION
(ConvINUED)


CHAPTER XII
b. Stans or A New Depry or Lire


WE cannot, according to the whole course of our
investigation, offer or expect a further depth of reality
from any external existence; we can search for such
a depth nowhere else than in the Life-process itself;
we have to work out this depth, and from this point
to secure a connection with a new order of things.
It is nowhere more necessary than at this point to
avoid the mistake of a deep-rooted intellectualism
which first of all constructs a world beyond man and
from thence supplies his life with a content, instead
of taking possession of such a world and grasping
it nto a Whole in order then to hazard convictions
of the All.

However, the new sought-for depth of life will not
probably appear in front of us immediately as a
Whole, but, in the first place, it appears in particular
manifestations. But these manifestations are able,
however, to lead further if they reveal themselves on
closer inspection as portions of a larger connection,
and if, in such an investigation, further avenues open


out until at last a new world dawns in front of us.
391


392 CHARACTERISTIC RELIGION


Therefore, we seek before all else to win some kind
of tangible point of departure whose original nature
announces a new order of things; we seek then to
gain, through a gradual ascent, more and more com-
prehensive values and at last a total-life.


1. The Idea of Love of Enemy


As a point of departure, we are helped by the fact
that upon a certain height of historical life, the
thought and demand of love of enemy appear not
only in Christianity but also in other religions, and,
beyond all religions, the fact has appeared as a general
atmosphere of life. Love of enemy seems here as
the summit of ethical conduct and as the most certain
sign of its completion. Whilst, however, love of
enemy was ardently praised, and the infinite aim
seemed to raise man beyond himself, the question
usually remained unasked whether the exalted virtue
was possible within the given situation of man,
whether the effort for the virtue aspired after inter-
twining transformations in the whole of our life
and being. ‘This question may be lightly put aside
if the two dispositions of the soul which we meet
in love of enemy is taken up in a faint and slurring
kind of way so that no earnest conflict originates.
At the point, however, where the claims of love of
enemy break forth, things relate themselves other-
wise: here an entire turn—a transformation of the
prior situation—is discovered. Enmity is no fleeting
ill-humour, but an antagonism of the deepest character
and of the whole mode of thinking ; it is an encounter
from an objective necessity, since our highly valued
goods are seized, reviled, and injured by another.


SIGNS OF A NEW DEPTH OF LIFE 393


And love, however, is not that faint-hearted disposi-
tion which begrudges to another his existence and
which allows all blessings to fall on itself, but is an
active and positive demeanour, a strong joy in the
being of another, a furthering and a raising of its own
life through the communion established with the other.
If things are so, is there not an irreconcilable opposi-
tion between love and enmity, and is it not an
absurdity to will at the same time to hate truly and
to love truly ?

Indeed, the question lies here so near—whether
an enfeeblement and slackening of the strife is de-
sirable for man. It behoves us, first of all, to bring
forth and to carry forward a Spiritual Reality over
against a hostile or indifferent world. In order to
accomplish this, the greatest tension of energy and
an untiring struggle are needful; as this struggle
labours for the possession of the highest good, it
demands the whole soul of man—the entire strength
of his affections, the full glow of his feelings. Plato
had good reason for desiring a ‘noble passion”
for the success of the work of life. Now, does not
the command to love our enemies threaten to weaken
the earnestness of the matter, to handle good and evil
as equally valid, and to concede willingly the right
of the field of conflict to unreason? ‘Thus, unmanly
cowardly compliance and a sentimental weakness are
elevated as highest virtues, or the character remains
a mere semblance and under the mantle of love such
a passion and hate grow luxuriantly, as witnessed so
often in religious strife. A depression of the energy
indispensable in the struggle against evil has, from
the beginning, been made a matter of reproach against


394 CHARACTERISTIC RELIGION


Christianity. Thus, we find Plotinus with this re-
flection concerning the matter: “If we do not
struggle, evil men will triumph.” . Should such
weakening of man, so often witnessed in the
history of Christianity, be the final word of Chris-
tianity? In any case, it was not the final word of
_ Jesus when He delivered the mighty discourse
against the Pharisees, and when He drove the
money-changers out of the Temple.

But how does it stand, then, with love for enemy ?
Is it really no more than a deceitful semblance—a
phantom of an overstrained disposition—and must we
conclude in connection with it that a friend is a friend
and an enemy is an enemy, and that we are indebted
to justice for telling us the latter, and that we should
preserve our love for friends alone? It was thought
thus at the zenith of Hellenic thought, and so,
too, Confucius taught consciously and emphatically.
‘* Someone asked, what shall one think of him who re-
pays injury with kindness? The philosopher replied :
If one so acts, with what can kindness be repaid ?
One must repay hate and injury through justice, and
kindnessthrough kindness.” ‘That is a clear andhonest
mode of thinking which corresponds to the natural
feelings of man. But it imposes limits on human life
which the revolutionary experiences of the inmost
soul have to burst asunder. Such a_ conclusion
suffices only if, and upon the whole, a ready-made
world surrounds us, if we develop ourselves in its
railed-in province, and if there is nothing essential
to be transformed or renewed. But such a con-
culsion becomes an intolerable narrowness when
the prior situation contains difficult entanglements,


SIGNS OF A NEW DEPTH OF LIFE 395


and when only a fundamental renewal can give
a value to our life and action. If such a new
order of things makes its appearance, everything
which divides and estranges us is able to pass away ;
and out of a new foundation a new fellowship of life
can be built which now binds the minds that other-
wise strove against one another, so that we are raised
above all strife, although many opposite points of
view cannot be relinquished. That which otherwise
is impossible now becomes possible through a funda-
mental renewal of life—through the appearance of a
depth which relegates the whole prior life, with all its
struggles, to a mere superficiality. If, herewith, the
demands of love for enemy emerge from and rest upon
genuine love and not upon mere pity, the hope of
a new order of things lies close to this foundation,
and a yearning of human nature for an emancipation
from the bounds and barriers of the “ given” world
takes place. Does not then the joy itself build such
a hope, and does not the strength of the yearning
itself constitute a testimony that here the matter
does not deal with a mere phantom but with a new
life within the domain of man ?


2. The Deepening of Love


The problem of love for enemy is only a section of
a more general problem—of the problem whether the
direction of our life, in the last resort, belongs to justice
or to love. There was good reason for the old Greek
thinkers for siding with justice—with justice in the
broad sense of an arrangement of all relationships ac-
cording to merit. Each receives what falls to his share,
no less, but also no more; even love has thus to be


396 CHARACTERISTIC RELIGION


measured according to the degree of presented love,
and all unmerit and all non-limits are excluded. Such
an ideal calls for the utmost exertion, for the trans-
position of all capacity into efficient activity, and for
the construction of an organised kingdom of reason.
Such a system of justice had also place for mercy in
so far as the hardness of a literal measurement was
toned down, and in so far as the over-tension of right
was held to become an injury (swmmum jus summa
injuria). The idea of justice has, first and foremost,
brought forth and developed a connected spiritual
order, and it is and remains indispensable for the
vindication of such an order.

How does it happen, then, that in spite of such
a great achievement justice has not satisfied man ?
How is it that the movement of universal history has
left that ideal of justice behind itself? The answer
is: that such an ideal of justice has been left behind
through the painful experience and feeling of the
inadequacy of man as mere man, and through a
knowledge of a deep disorder in his own nature.
Such experience and knowledge, however, became an
urgent need as soon as man did not continue within
a “ given” world, but raised himself beyond all earthly
connections to infinity; and as soon as he measured
himself not with his equals but with the ideal of an
absolute perfection. ‘The growing depth of life, with
. Its discovery of infinity in man’s own nature, demands
him to measure himself in this manner. His life does
not exhaust itself with the solution of this or that
problem, and does not content itself with the attain-
ment of some kind of elevation, but it drives him from
within towards the domain of the Whole; he is now


SIGNS OF A NEW DEPTH OF LIFE 397


after absolute perfection, and, before all else, after a
perfection of a comprehensive life and conduct in the
Whole. The presence of such a goal brings to clear-
ness the entire inadequacy and even the hopelessness
of his actual performances and situation. Along with
this, the standard of justice becomes an intolerable
hardness, and the valuation of the ordinary perform-
ances threatens the man with entire rejection and
ruin. On account of this, man defends himself
through energies which have in no way originated out
of his egotistic desires of life, but rather he feels
himself convinced of a greater depth and, along with
this, of a priceless value; but he cannot call into life
such depth and value from his own energy, and,
therefore, he depends on redemption and love for the
realisation of his own nature. ‘Thus, there grows a
burning desire after Infinite Love on the other side of
all questions of merit, and after a new order of things
beyond all calculation and measurement.

Is such a longing a superfluous fancy, and could
it arise and gain such power if some kind of reality
did not stand behind it? Also, the relationship of
man to man would become cold and soulless if all
unmerited and unmeasured love were removed from
his soul. But how mysterious is such love! How
could it ever have originated out of the selfishness
and impurity of the ordinary impulses of man ?
Man has to be raised out of such a situation and set,
from within, in other connections; an energy out of
the Whole must become his-—an energy which lifts
him beyond the initial stage and, indeed, beyond his
natural capacity, and which, issuing out of a new life,
brings the seemingly impossible to fruition. This is


398 CHARACTERISTIC RELIGION


especially clear in connection with the great person-
alities whom human life has to thank for an inner
elevation, and especially in connection with the heroes
of religion. The external situation of life left them
forsaken, and the circumstances of life carried them
but little love, yet these men were too clear of vision
to disguise the true position of things through mere
phrases about the greatness and progressive develop-
ment of mankind. ‘Thus, they have often within
human circles felt themselves so lonely, as the yearning
and fervour with which they fled to the Godhead
reveals. Mahomet did not belong to the deepest
spirits, but even he brought that feeling to a tender
expression. “In the glare of noonday and in the
stillness of the night the Lord casts him not away,
and the future will be better than the past. Did
He not find him an orphan and has given him a
place in His home? Did He not find him astray
and has led him to the right road? Did He not
find him so poor and has made him so rich ?”
But has such a loneliness of these leading spirits
amongst men destroyed their love to man? Has
not a mighty power of love kindled itself in the
midst of all opposition—a fire that enveloped also
drowsy souls and became the illuminating energy
for the welfare of mankind? ‘Thus, these men were
able to see more in man than lies on the sur-
face; they were able to penetrate through all mean-
ness and failure to.a depth of the nature which
unites the seemingly severed and which invests the
seemingly worthless with a value. But could such a
depth be possible without a new order of things—
without the presence of an All-Life in the human


SIGNS OF A NEW DEPTH OF LIFE 399


soul? As these men were obliged to view humanity
in the light of the new order of things in order
to work as they did, it would have been diffi-
cult for them to find, without the energy of that
All-Life and without an ascent beyond themselves,
the stability, the joy, and the inexhaustibleness
which their work aspired after and to which their
success testified.

It has happened thus on the summits of historical
life, but it did not remain confined to these summits.
Our life would lose its deepest soul were it a mere
system of effects and counter-effects ; we should have
to measure all actions according to what should issue
in the form of a result which corresponds to the
thought of justice. Our life, as Goethe has often
expressed it in a wonderful manner, would soon
slacken and stagnate unless it contained much ac-
tivity which expected no gratitude and much love
which claimed no reciprocal love. Such a love—
selfless and strong at the same time—may show itself
in unpretentious achievements and may raise the
inner worth of life beyond all the exploits of uni-
versal history. In such daily occurrences—seemingly
trivial—a mystery is imbedded and a marvel happens ;
what happens contradicts not only the order of nature
but also the order of the natural life: in so far as
what happens follows justice, it hangs in the air and
cannot find a foundation until a new order of things
—a kingdom of creative love—carries and animates
it. To acknowledge such a superiority of love does
not mean that justice is to be attacked and banished
out of the world, for justice is ever needed in human
relationships for the growth of reason over the whole


400 CHARACTERISTIC RELIGION


expanse of life, and for the consolidation of mental
and moral things over against bare nature. But a
mere acknowledgment of a kingdom of love does
not establish its order in the whole of our inner
world; for it is not only through hope but also
through its own effective presence that love is able
to strike its roots into our life and alter the whole
mode of life, and, at the same time, further the ac-
knowledgment of a new depth of reality.


3. Self-Maintenance in the Midst of Hindrance
and Suffering

Our earlier consideration of this subject has shown
us that in the acknowledgment of an independent
spirituality, life presents itself not as a calm ascent
but as a hard struggle. With the appearance of
spirituality there appeared something essentially new,
which has to forge its way over against an existing
world ; collisions are bound to take place, and hind-
rances and deadlocks are to be expected. But at
first hope and conviction in all this endured and
believed that the Spiritual Life, carried as it is by an
Absolute Life, would emerge victoriously from the
struggle, and that the hindrance, through the stimu-
lated energy of such hope and conviction, would
finally work towards an advancement. Now, we
have witnessed the opposition gaining such strength
and extension within our circle that the whole life
is endangered, and the hope of a conquest within
our domain breaks in pieces. Our effort everywhere
clashes with stubborn barriers which it dare not
conform to without becoming aimless and meaning-
less. What does the experience of mankind point


SIGNS OF A NEW DEPTH OF LIFE 401


out here? It shows us that, amidst such painful
hindrances and amidst an eclipse of hope of any
success, the Spiritual Life can be maintained and has
been maintained by individuals as well as by mankind
at large. Our scientific investigations collide with
insurmountable obstacles ; we discover with pain our
inability to wrestle with the dark mysteries of existence.
In the wrestling for a genuine Art we find ourselves far
too weak to give adequate form to what occurs in the
deepest recesses of our soul, to what thirsts after an
embodiment, and we fail to aid it towards its longed-
for reality. Thus, we remain incomplete, and, in-
deed, remain tattered and torn in our existence—in-
sufficient for, and locked-out from, ourselves. Must
we not become convinced of the impossibility of an
essential betterment of the human situation, when
we view the effects of experience of millenniums, and
do we not see the goal recede ever in front of us ?
And must not the individual, the more he stands
upon an inner connection of his life, recognise life as
a mere torso? It is easily conceivable that human
nature, under such a hard and harsh Nay, should lose
all the courage of life and should relinquish all ac-
tivity. In reality human nature has not done this.
True, certain views of the universe and of religion
seek an entire negation, but this negation, even if it
did not carry within itself a prior affirmation, soon
again turns to affirmation. Buddhism has toned
down the entire negation of its initial stages, and has
transformed itself into some kind of affirmation.
Was this due to a mere stubbornness of the natural
impulse, to an ineradicable quality of the common


greed of life? Hardly, for the affirmation itself has,
26


402 CHARACTERISTIC RELIGION


in the form of spiritual self-preservation, brought
forth so much labour and sorrow upon humanity
that it would recommend, rather than a satisfaction
in the bare natural desire for happiness, a calm
submersion and dissolution of its own existence.
Further, the affirmation has brought forth far
too much spiritual movement and newness of life
to allow itself to be swept on one side as a mere
illusion. Therefore, there must be present in such
a need of the life of man something deeper; for man,
through some kind of energy, will hold fast to his
life and fill it with a confident hope and trust, although
these cannot be justified by any nearest-at-hand view
of things.

No great thinker has more truly experienced these
problems and brought them more powerfully to ex-
pression than Augustine. Before his eyes the old
world sank before a new one had yet emerged; he
found himself haunted by the phantom of an entire
void, and felt all the havoc and barriers of human
existence with the most painful intensity. And yet
he held fast to life and withstood the total destruction
of his soul. But why? Because the hindrance itself
brought him to the consciousness that something
greater than it is imbedded in it; because all menace
and intimidation made him absolutely certain of some-
thing in his nature which can never be lost. This
something is something axiomatic—something, first
of all, mysterious, but out of the mystery a powerful
energy originates and gives birth to a new and higher
need of life which, over against the energy of nature,
may be termed metaphysical. Whence all this if
life had exhausted itself with the hitherto-prevailing


SIGNS OF A NEW DEPTH OF LIFE 403


situation, and was not able to bring forth a further
depth for the strengthening and renewal of man?
The experience of Augustine is not singular, but is
an experience of mankind, an experience of all indi-
viduals to whom these problems come to signify their
own destiny. It was not the most troubled times
and experiences that allowed doubt to penetrate into
the whole of life, but such a catastrophe has happened
far more in times of idle super-abundant plenty and
of an absence of great tasks. The former hard times
have rather worked in the direction of strengthening
and energising human nature. But how could they
do this without the hope and even the certainty of a
new order of things—an order in direct contradiction
to all that life had hitherto brought to them ?


4. The Progressive Development of Inwardness

According to our explanation, it was essentially
necessary for the Spiritual Life to raise the inner life
to an independence, to extend it to a world which
does not merely stand by the side of other things, but
which takes the things, in the whole of their exist-
ence, up to itself, and which reveals to things their
own nature. The development of the Spiritual Life
becomes through this a progressive inwardness of
existence. But we have already observed how this
inwardness in all its toil clashes with most painful
oppositions, so that a danger is here evident, viz. that


_what we attain as inwardness may be looked upon as


|


an enclosed circle by the side of the great world, and
that it may finally resolve itself into bare subjectivity.
But mankind has in no manner surrendered it-


self to such a disintegration; it has ever sought to


404 CHARACTERISTIC RELIGION


shape the inwardness anew; it has sought to lay such
inwardness deeper in the nature and to give it a new
foundation and a new content. And to it such effort
seemed to be more than a mere aberration of judg-
ment. At least, we often witness new movements
issuing forth from the hindrances themselves. We
get roughly thrown back by the objects around us
upon ourselves, and we discover with pain stubborn
obstacles. But what we witness and experience in all
this becomes the point of departure of a new kind of
life; the hindrance engenders not only a sentimental
echo and a timid reflection, but it gets taken up
into a wider, deeper, and more basal life; it serves
towards a further development of the soul in regard
to all the work of the world. Thus, an inwardness
seems to constitute itself here, which rests purely
within itself—an inwardness which transforms into
a gain what was previously a sheer detriment for
work.

The acknowledgment of such unalloyed inwardness
must change in an essential manner the aspect of life:
what seemed hitherto to be the whole of our world
becomes now a mere segment of it and appears in
comparison with the inwardness as something external ;
what hitherto appeared as the total range of our
soul now acknowledges a depth beyond itself. Man
will be the readier to acknowledge this depth be-
cause he sees through the prior hemmed-in life as
inadequate, and because he feels his own previous
mode of viewing things as a stubborn destiny
from which he wants somehow to free himself.
But how is such pure inwardness, which brings such
great changes and awakens such great hopes, itself to


SIGNS OF A NEW DEPTH OF LIFE 405


be explained? How can such inwardness be possible
unless our life had won further connections than before,
and through this had drawn a new content? All
this can hardly happen without a further manifesta-
tion of the Whole of Reality.


5. The Further Development of Morality


The further inner development of life which
occupies here our attention is nowhere more visible
than in the problem of morality. Wherever we have
had to deal with the problem in the course of our
investigation, morality, in our view, had not separated
itself from the whole of life and had not condensed
itself into a province of its own. Morality has not
merely a special task of its own, but it extends over all
Spiritual Life, since all along it does not surround
man as a natural inheritance but governs him through
his own decision and appropriation. We must un-
conditionally cling to such a universality of morality ;
in particular the practical social domain—the domain
of human intercourse—has no right to claim the
moral disposition for itself alone, and to exclude from
it, say, art and science. The antithesis extends over
the whole of life, whether the action is governed by
the necessities of the Spiritual Life itself, or by the
interests of the individual; whether the disposition
is that of the individual who follows after truth and
is affected by no kind of motive such as pleasure,
gain, and renown, or is that of the artist who
reflects in his soul how to bring an unborn form
to expression—a form as morally valuable as the
practical conduct which stands in the service of
humanity. Understood thus, morality develops itself


406 CHARACTERISTIC RELIGION


all the happier the less it becomes an isolated province
separated from all other tasks.

But morality experiences oppositions and entangle-
ments similar to those found in religion. That full
devotion to the Spiritual Life is not entirely wanting
in morality, yet it acquires but little strength, and
the entanglements often cripple spiritual work as
well as the character; and, also, the most brilliant
results of work do not guarantee a corresponding
disposition, for natural impulses penetrate deeply
into the very province which intended to lead
man beyond nature, and the petty-human holds the
soul in its powerful grip. Thus, in the ordinary
surface-life, morality has but little power, and it is
considered as a quite subsidiary matter. Indeed,
it is often considered an irksome and obtrusive dis-
order—an attempt at an unwarranted limitation.
But human nature as a whole has not rested on such
a denial; it has ever returned to an appreciation of
morality, and well it might, because in its abandon-
ment of morality it had followed a track which led
to an unbearable loss in depth and energy of life. In
such upheavals of life, morality has carried itself above
the initial formation of things, and has even attained
a special province over against the former life.
Morality, through the cultivation of pure inwardness
over against the work of the world, gains a new
task—-the task of preserving unconditionally such
inwardness and, along with it, the kernel of the life
of the soul, and heroically and faithfully to preserve,
a “soul of the soul” over against immense opposition.
Life, through this, seems for the first time to reach
its deepest root, and what occurs here is immeasur-


SIGNS OF A NEW DEPTH OF LIFE 407


ably superior to all other work. Christianity espe-
cially upheld such a conviction ; we find this in such
appropriate words as that “the gain of the whole
world can not counterbalance the loss of the soul,
and that with the price of the whole world not one
soul can be purchased” (Luther). So that in the case
of collision with other aims there cannot be the
slightest doubt that the autonomous moral task pre-
cedes unconditionally all other tasks; “the eye is to
be plucked out and the hand is to be cut off” if they
endanger the salvation of the soul. Hand in hand
with such a high estimation goes a greater rigour of the
demands of life. The preservation of that depth of
the nature applies not to practice alone, but it grips
the whole province of the Spiritual Life and there
starts a struggle with “the life at ease.” Thus, that
which had a right in the particular situation must
now rest in the Whole, and it is on account of
this that a counter-effect is bound to arise. It
is in this connection that conceptions such as
responsibility, guilt, conscience, arise—conceptions
of a most mysterious character—but in spite of
all their darkness they are powers which defy dis-
paragement and rejection and ever resurrect them-
selves; they are powers, once they dawn with their
full energy, which bring the whole of life under
their sway ; they obviously withstand being driven
out of the world of man because the maintenance of a
spiritual self-reliance and the possibility of a spiritual
self-preservation are indissolubly linked with them.
It is easily possible to show that human life, despite
its most brilliant achievements—as, for instance, in
the period of the Renaissance—rapidly fell into inner


408 CHARACTERISTIC RELIGION


decay. Thus, that mysterious, uncomfortable, stir-
ring force, is ever indispensable ; indeed, life seems
to obtain through it alone an enduring consoli-
dation, and, indeed, an incomparable worth. How
does all this explain itself save that more must be
present in the whole of our life, and that further
energies must rule in us if morality is to attain the
content and the position claimed for it here.

When we view the several points which have
hitherto occupied our attention, we discover in all the
multiplicity one fact running through all—a further
movement of life beyond the point of hindrance.
And this fact is a pure inwardness from whose growth
a further consolidation and a turn of life were expected.
But, in the meantime, this inwardness floats entirely
in the air, and we have not yet seen how it can gain
a characteristic content, and how it can grow into a
self-reliant kingdom. And yet there lies here far too
much actuality for us to consider the whole as a mere
play of fancy. What appears as not easily compre-
hensible in the life of the individual is found in the
history of mankind as a great characteristic trait.
Here the new mode of life appears especially in the
raising of life beyond all mere culture. At all times
there is present in life more than civilisation and
culture, but in special epochs this More comes into
bold relief and to full self-consciousness. There are
times when special circumstances bring civilisation and
culture to a standstill and even toa retrogression, and
yet, in spite of this, such circumstances do not invest
the times with mental and moral emptiness but
develop a noble and worthy life in another direction.

The epoch of the dissolution of antiquity was,


SIGNS OF A NEW DEPTH OF LIFE 409


measured by its achievements in culture, highly barren
and, indeed, unedifying; but it was this epoch which
brought for the first time the life of the soul to a full
self-reliance within the human province, and which
penetrated beyond all purely subjective inwardness to
an inner world—to one of the greatest turnings in
the whole history of human life. Thus, we are ever
able to draw much from such men as Plotinus
and Augustine, and they are valued by us as
heroes of the spirit although they damaged more
than they aided culture. The fact that they made
accessible to man a new world of pure inwardness
signifies more than the most brilliant performances in
the mere work of culture.

Hitherto we have had more questions than answers,
more puzzles than solutions, so that a conclusion at
this stage of our inquiry is impossible. But within
the province of the inner life an earnest effort is ttself
a fact, and it must, especially when an essential re-
newal stands in question, be present in that which
hovers as a far-away gleam but which also was the
possession of the soul from the very start of its enter-
prise. If it were not present, how could such a far-
away aim move us? Pascal’s words are valid not only
for religion: “Thou wouldest not seek me had it not
been that thou hadst already found me.” But it be-
hoves us to work out the hidden possession in order
to press on from mere ideas and suggestions to a full
and joyous life.


PART IV.—CHARACTERISTIC RELIGION
(ConTINUED)


CHAPTER XIII


c. THe UNFOLDING OF A RELIGION OF A
DIsTINcTIVE KIND


1. Introductory


Various indications of a new depth have already
become visible ; they all point to the fact that a further
inner life, lying far beneath the surface, reveals itself,
and that a reality previously hindered by the entangle-
ments has now been gained. Such a movement
could never originate from mere man, but must have
originated from the All; it can only originate,
according to the whole course of our investigation,
because the All-Life is present not only in its un-
folding to become a world, but also within us as a
Whole in the form of immediacy. That this actually
happens is the vindication of religion as it shapes itself
into the Characteristic mode; but such a religion
allows itself to be proved only by the discovery
of a new life—only by an original connection of
life in which an actuality manifests itself, and
reveals to us our own being as well as the whole of
reality.


This New cannot be of a sudden and unprepared
410


A RELIGION OF A DISTINCTIVE KIND 411


kind, but must somehow be imbedded in us, or how
otherwise could it become our inmost being? But
on the first view of it, it appears as something scattered,
subsidiary, a mere addendum. But religion accom-
plishes a transformation of this; it gathers, binds, and
brings the scattered elements into a Whole; it turns
this Whole into man’s own act; it places for the first
time the significance of the New in a clear light and
recognises in it the presence of a new kind of world.
Thus, religion is not able to obtain the final depth
and the inmost unity for the life without differentiating
itself from the remaining spiritual life, and construct-
ing for itself a province of its own. ‘Through such a
turn to the Characteristic mode religion comes into
definite contact with the contention of the historical
religions, and gains a nearer relationship to these than
was possible through the Universal mode of religion.
Along with the historical religions, religion of a
Characteristic kind participates in the conviction that
man, through a further manifestation of the Divine, has
been raised beyond the province of entanglements
into a new life; and, further, Characteristic Religion
recognises a gradation of reality through the further
development of the Spiritual Life within one’s own
province ; it invests, at the same time, the inner ex-
periences as well as the historical movement with
more significance. But in spite of such a nearness
between these two modes of religion there remains an
essential difference. The new life, according to the
Characteristic mode, appears, in so far as we under-
stand it, not as the exclusive possession of a particular
historical religion, but as the common aim and the
common fundamental energy of all religion. ‘These


412 CHARACTERISTIC RELIGION


historical religions are considered by us not as irre-
concilable opponents, but as co-workers in the great
enterprise of the spiritual redemption of humanity.
This does not mean the placing of all religions
on the same level and effacing their differences ;
indeed, the measuring of them all by one common
aim may bring out such differences still more.
But the differences now lie within something
deeper and common to them all—they lie within a
common striving, and thus cannot lead to a stubborn
enmity. That which any one particular religion
develops at all times into a spiritual content does not
signify a subtraction from the truth of all other re-
ligions, but is seen, when it is brought to the light of
the substance common to all religions, as that which is
able to protect and strengthen reciprocally all the
others. In dealing with the several religions, the
attention must direct. itself especially upon what each
religion contributes towards the formation of a re-
ligion of the Characteristic kind ; we have to see how
the one truth works in spite of the inadequacy of,
and often in opposition to, the scaffolding of doctrines
and organisations. ‘Thus there has to be raised up
in all religions what in reality is religious in them
—what is substance and not a merely intellectual
expression.

On account of this, religion as well as its treatment
are able thus to gain a broader basis only through the
energetic concentration upon the inner life. The truth
of religion rests upon facts, or, rather, upon a connected
actuality of an inward kind. These facts are to be
discovered nowhere outside the human soul, and, in-
deed, the facts are beyond all particular achievements


A RELIGION OF A DISTINCTIVE KIND 413


and formations of life which have hitherto occupied our
attention. In a far greater degree than we as yet
have observed does man become the starting-point
of a new world. Through this turn the motives
of mere subjectivism and humanism will strengthen
—motives which are only too liable to make their
presence felt in Characteristic Religion from the out-
set, and which were able to be guarded against more
easily in the Universal mode. Further, he who
recognises in the total-development of the Spiritual
Life an inner unity and an invisible depth may oppose
the turn to Characteristic Religion because it seems
to be a relapse into a mere humanism which places
itself over against the meaning of the remaining world,
and which seems to exchange the driving energy of
movements outside the individual for a foundation of
life upon mere self-preservation. Does the alleged
new kind of world construct no more than a mere
web of human ideas and interests, and does it not
merely spin around itself at a loss of all connection
with definite reality? Is not the vigorous and
assertive freedom of Universal Religion from mere
humanisation lost again through the turn to Charac-
teristic Religion ? Doubtless, much subjectivism and
much that is merely human are imbedded in the
historical religions, and threaten also the Characteristic
Religion. Yet, however luxuriously such a subjectiv-
ism may grow on the soil of ordinary life, it does not ex-
haust the matter—indeed, it does not touch the kernel
of the matter. In the turn to a Characteristic kind of
religion, as in religion in general, the moving-energy
is not the self-preservation of man as mere man, but
the maintenance of a Spiritual Life superior to his


414 CHARACTERISTIC RELIGION


interests and notions—the impossibility of a renuncia-
tion of spiritual contents and values. Thus, there
works here a metaphysical and not a physical impetus
of life. And what is hoped for as new is not a fostering
and furthering of the mere-human—not a purely epi-
curean well-being of a more refined nature—-but a new
stage of spirituality which creates something other than
hitherto out of man,:which reduces the value of what
had hitherto sufficed as happiness, and which leads to
a goodness which was hitherto alien to his life. The
historical religions show this quite clearly. They are
not mere mirror-images of human doings and dealings,
but through them man has scaled spiritual heights ;
he has learned to see and to understand himself; he
has gained courage and energy in the struggle against
a petty-human mode of conduct and a petty-human
world. It has happened thus, too, within the intel-
lectual province. Nothing has more clearly set forth
the limitation of the range of human conceptions
than the idea of an Absolute Reality and Life. The
demands imbedded within the intellectual province
have reduced in value, from their very foundation,
the forms of space and time, and have relegated them
to a particular—not equally valid—mode of existence.
And not less have religions taught us to think of the
moral capacities of man, for, in the standards which
they have brought forth, the most splendid human
achievements fell far short of the needs of the human
soul. It is impossible to state that religions, through
their representations to man of the problems of life,
have made existence lighter and more agreeable, or
that they have flattered his natural impulse for
happiness. Although there has been much taught in


A RELIGION OF A DISTINCTIVE KIND 415


religions concerning the next world—far too much
which belonged to the merely pictorial ideas of man
—yet there has worked herein a demand for an
entire transformation of life—a demand which gave
an immeasurable earnestness to the actions of man.

This detaching of a spiritual world—a world of inde-
pendent inwardness—from human doings and dealings
operates in all religions, and is able to express itself in
so far as religion is conceived by the entire conscious-
ness to be a fact of the Spiritual Life and not of mere
man, and in so far as the Spiritual Life itself'is conceived
as an encompassing and an overcoming of the antithesis
between subject and object, and as a development
and not a mere copy of reality. On such a ground
as this, the movement to Characteristic Religion is
secure against the danger of solipsism ; and so far as
a further development of the Spiritual Life virtually
appears, a new kind of an entirely active reality is
gained. Everything depends then upon whether such
a turn of life happens; the turn can happen, as life
shows, through its own development and through the
construction of a new reality.

Nevertheless, the danger of a humanising of religion
is considerably increased at this new stage. And
further, the more life is pushed back into an invisible
region, the less are we able to bring the spiritual
content to an adjusted expression; and if man fails
here, he becomes satisfied with mere symbols which
incessantly have to be referred back to their basal
truth in order not to relapse into purely illusory
images. In order to be armed against such a danger,
it is necessary never to allow Characteristic Religion to
fall outside the whole of religion, but to consider it


416 CHARACTERISTIC RELIGION


constantly as one side of that whole. The Universal
mode of religion must remain at hand if the
Characteristic mode is fully to preserve its spiritual
character, and is to be protected also from dangers of
all kinds. Thus, we come to the relation between
these two modes of religion. How precisely this
relationship is to be conceived, and what rights it
has, are matters for further investigation, for misunder-
standing is only too apt to enter here—misunderstand-
ing which our prior consideration has not sufficiently
dealt with.

Certainly, there are not two religions but simply
one religion, but this one could well have different
stages, and such might be indispensable to an
entire vivification of the whole. Indeed, if we
take our stand decisively upon a religion of the
Spiritual Life in opposition to a religion of the
mere-human kind, the more necessary it is to relate
our religion to the whole of the Spiritual Life, or,
rather, to bind this Spiritual Life into a Whole,
and to acknowledge it in its independence. But
now we discover the hindrances upon which the
development of the Spiritual Life clashed. These
hindrances made us seek for a new stage of life and,
through this, religion receives a definite meaning, and
must now approve itself through definite achievements
as a Characteristic Religion. All this connects itself
again with the Universal mode, and obtains a secure
footing against all embarrassments. Upon the ground
of history there has never been presented a Universal
religion of a self-reliant kind, but a Universal religious
mode of thought has rapidly fallen into decay as soon
as it gave up all connection with the Characteristic


A RELIGION OF A DISTINCTIVE KIND 417


mode of religion. But, at the same time, the
Universal mode maintains an independent importance
in so far as in it the elevation of man to spirituality
attains to great energy and clearness, an elevation which
also underlies the Characteristic mode. The Universal
mode has to bring movements and experiences into a
current out of which the turn to the Characteristic
mode takes place; for without the undertaking of a
struggle against the whole of the world, the longing
after a new order of things acquires no personal truth.
How unsympathetic, for instance, is the officious
confession of the inability of human reason presented
by people who have never undertaken any struggle
in order to possess genuine knowledge, and who are
unaware of the pain and renunciation involved in such
a struggle. How unsympathetic are those who depict
the nature of man as totally depraved, and declare
him as corrupt from the beginning because he is
by no means equal to his spiritual tasks, and,
indeed, has often stood in direct opposition to such
tasks.

But the Characteristic mode requires an incessant
relation to Universal Religion also as a counter-
weight against a threatening narrowness. Through
every turn into the particular, Characteristic Religion
must maintain an influence upon the whole of life, and
the total-task must remain present in each particular
point, and must be furthered by it. Otherwise
Characteristic Religion becomes in itself a mere refuge
from the exigencies of existence, and for the remainder
of life it becomes a numb and gloomy narrowness.
Indeed, such apartness may endanger the spiritual


character of religion, since by it religion may lose
a7


418 CHARACTERISTIC RELIGION


evermore all definite content, and may sink finally
to a mere agitation of empty emotion.

Our affirmation of the growth of Characteristic
Religion from the Universal pretends in no way to be
an account of the historical course of religion with
peoples and individuals. In connection with such a
development, positive religion aims at constructing
the starting-point, and it is only later that a general
mode of thinking develops itself and exercises a criti-
cism on the traditional material—a criticism which
appears first of all as mainly negative but which
finally leads back to a positive valuation of things
Then only we reach the ground of philosophic dis-
cussion, and now the double-sidedness of religion
becomes recognisable within its one totality.

Understood thus, both modes must remain per-
manently side by side, and refer reciprocally to one
another. Through this, the whole of religion gains
an incessant movement, and this movement is of
great advantage as a weapon of defence against the
finality of dogmatism. At the same time, however,
such a movement gives free room for the characteristics
of individuals and times. In the whole of religion,
indeed, the Universal and the Characteristic modes
work together, but their relationship can shape itself
in varied ways, and here the one, and there the other,
stands in the foreground; thus, either the greatness
and energy of the Spiritual Life absorb the con-
viction, or, first and foremost, the hindrances are felt,
and a further manifestation of the Divine is desired
as the only possible means of salvation. The leading
religious personalities present us with very different
combinations, How great, for instance, is the distance


A RELIGION OF A DISTINCTIVE KIND 419


between Luther and Zwingli in spite of all the affinity
of their ideas! Probably none of these personalities
developed both sides of religion more energetically
than Augustine, and even he was able to adjust both
sides only in an imperfect degree.

Thus, a view opens out upon much movement
and a rich manifold, and also upon oppositions and
struggles; but nowhere more than in religion does
the struggle itself demonstrate, through its stirring
of all the energies, the power of the Whole and the
necessity of striving.

We have now attempted to find a secure place
for Characteristic Religion, and our next object is
to reach nearer to its content.


2. The New Life-Process


(a) The Main Thesis.—The assertion of Character-
istic religion consists in the fact that a pure self-
subsistence of the Spiritual Life within the human
soul, as a communication of an Absolute Inner Life,
includes a claim which man acknowledges as his true
nature and shapes his life accordingly, and includes
the hope that he gains an entire superiority to all
conflicts and hindrances. As a self-subsistence of
the Spiritual Life, the inwardness here in question
cannot signify a special province by the side of
reality: it must signify the most essential nature—
the inmost depth—of reality. And, at the same time,
this inwardness may not be mere subjectivity, but
has to unlock a new content; and in such an achieve-
ment it can in no way be the work of any indi-
vidual point of the nature, but must originate from
the whole of the Spiritual Life. This precisely is the


420 CHARACTERISTIC RELIGION


conviction of Characteristic religion that such an
inwardness becomes a pure self-existence not merely
through its development by means of the world but
also in opposition to the world, and that it brings
help to man in his troubles—troubles which otherwise
threaten to make him succumb under his burden ;
through the creation not merely of individual processes
of life but of a néw unity of life in man, life is freed
from its imposed deadlock and is brought again into
a fresh current. How all this happens with man is
now to be considered more closely.

The point of departure is to be found in the fact
that the problem originates beyond all particular
achievements of man, and also beyond the whole
explanation of achievements; it is a problem con-
cerning what man is in the whole of his soul—in the
whole of his character. In all this, Life appears
solely concerned with itself—with its own situation—
and in no way appears to reach beyond itself, and
yet in what life does or leaves undone in such a
seclusion seems to lie the decision concerning its work,
concerning its success or failure. Expressions to re-
present such a fact do not fail us here altogether:
we speak of moral character, moral personality, etc.,
but we do so in danger of narrowing and coarsening
what stands here in question from the very outset.
What happens here is mysterious enough. Life forges
its way here, beyond the work of the world, to a
persistency and duration in itself, to a new kind
of being, but in all this it is at the outset split
up into so many isolated appearances, and it falls
easily into mere subjectivity. But some kind of
unity seems present in the foundation, but it is not


A RELIGION OF A DISTINCTIVE KIND 421


able to overcome the hindrance, and succeeds in
bringing forth no more than poor results. The whole
is as though nebulous or veiled, and how it is possible
from such vague motives to gain a foothold over
against the entire world-order or even to set up a new
world over against the old is absolutely incomprehen-
sible. And here Characteristic religion steps in with
its fundamental assertion that a “becoming” inde-
pendence of pure inwardness and the unfolding of a
new unity of life result, but this is shown to happen
not through the energy of these qualities themselves
but through the communication of the inmost nature
of things—from the pure self-subsistence of reality.
Certainly that communication is no mechanical in-
stillation, but must awaken the energy of the soul
itself; but such an energy does not appear as a
natural possession but as a gift and grace. What
is always fundamental in religion seems in _ this
special position to be certainly so: that the vivifica-
tion of the Whole at this particular position is not
able to succeed without man’s own decision and
appropriation, and this in its turn includes in itself
an act of the Whole.

That a new life of pure inwardness is not found
in advance and does not rest upon particular effects,
but still that man himself brings it forth and, in the
inmost of his life, makes it the bearer and the cause
of all, and that through this he gains a new kind
of reality—all this is conceived by Characteristic
religion as a fact and a wonder for the defence of
which it is ready to take up with confidence a
struggle against the whole of the remaining world.
For this new centre alone is able to invest the


422 CHARACTERISTIC RELIGION


remaining fluctuating life with a stability, for no-
where is life more entirely itself than at this centre,
and nothing is able to destroy what appears to it
here as a certainty. But this holds valid only in so
far as the movement belongs to the Spiritual Life
itself, and does not fall from this into subjectivity ;
and the main business of religion is to see its being
the former. When man is convinced of all this, the
cosmic character of the Spiritual Life reaches a new
stage, so that the new unity of life has to be viewed
as the achievement of the one essential development
which decides the decisive character of the Spiritual
Life.

Such a turn invests religion with a sovereignty
over the whole of life. Henceforth man gains out of
the relationship to God not only some kind of ascent of
his life, but he gains also a self-reliant life and nature
over against the world and in the midst of the most
serious upheavals and a threatening destruction. In
this new life the self-subsistence of infinity becomes his
own, and opens out to him the final depth of reality.
Thus the relationship to the Absolute Life as the
exclusive ground of spiritual self-preservation must
far precede all remaining tasks, and these tasks may
not withhold man, for the relationship now demands
recognition unconditionally and exclusively as self-
sufficient. And thuswe find on thesummits of religion
the claim raised that all things are to be loved not for
their own sake, but for the sake of God from whose
energy they proceed, and consequently they are
always relegated to a secondary place through such a
mediation ; all things thus had value only in so far
as they were founded in God and were filled with


A RELIGION OF A DISTINCTIVE KIND 423


His Life. All devotion to anything but God
appeared as a robbing of God; all belief in one’s
own capacity to perform anything appeared as
culpable pride (superbia). If thus God effects all
in all and yet remains in Himself, no aim can
lie outside Himself, and consequently the conviction
develops that all happens for the glory of God
(propter majorem dei gloriam). It was by no means
a gloomy fanaticism that thought thus, as is often
imagined by shallow opinion, for even a Kant in
the expression of his moral mode of thinking did not
think so. ‘They who place the aim of creation in
the glory of God (setting it forth in no anthropo-
morphic way) have probably hit upon the best expres-
sion.” It was in fact the anthropomorphic expression
which made such a thought appear hard and crass ;
and such a thought becomes indispensable with the
recognition of that pure subsistence-in-itself of reality
and of the redemption of life solely through the
communication of such a reality.

This demand, however, is not able to develop its
entire potencies unless it perceives with scrupulous
clearness the wide difference between, and even the
entire opposition of, the ordinary human situation and
the deeper task in hand, and unless the problem of
life is immeasurably heightened. The new standard
causes all which proceeds from natural impulse and
from a satisfaction in one’s own powers to appear as
insufficient, and, indeed, all now appears as a contra-
diction in the light of the higher order of things. It
is not only this or that particular act or tendency,
but the whole clinging to natural existence—the
existence of a mere creature—which stamps this


424 CHARACTERISTIC RELIGION


mode of thought as an insurrection against God and
as an apostasy from God. Amongst thinkers on this
subject Augustine appears prominent. Through him
the elevation and emancipation of the ethical task
resulted from this raising of the problem into the
Whole, and a new being from the very foundation
upwards was longed for, but none the less he also
recognised great dangers that lie on this path. Here-
with the demand heightens not only its content but
also its urgency. For the contradiction extends not
against something that is apart from us but against
the nearest thinkable thing—against the Absolute
Life that is the basis of our inmost being, and conse-
quently against our own being itself. ‘The contradic-
tion runs against not only an impersonal law, but
against the world-power immediately present as a
whole. Thus evil appears as a personal outrage—a
grieving wrong and a contempt of the highest good ;
it shapes itself into sin and guilt, and it weighs upon
the soul of man with incomparably greater heaviness ;
it sets the soul in agitation and fills it with alarm.
Religions have often expressed all this in too
anthropomorphic a manner and have distorted it
almost to morbidness, but despite the imperfection of
the formulation the fundamental fact of an inner rift
in life and of an imperative responsibility glimmer
through it all clearly enough. This fact may slumber
for a long time in the consciousness of the individual
and of humanity ; it may be placed out of sight by a
mode of thinking shallow and devoid of much toil, but
it breaks forth ever anew against the opinions and
inclinations of men, and as soon as this happens it
becomes quickly the ruling energy of the entire life.


A RELIGION OF A DISTINCTIVE KIND = 425


It is evident that man’s own energy. is not able
to save him from such a disunion. If a rescue is
possible, Divine power and grace must do the work.
That such power and grace really accomplish this,
is the fundamental conviction of religion. Religion
doubtless cannot appeal, in proof, to any completed
work, for usually just those personalities who felt
themselves entirely certain of a new life have felt
with painful intensity an opposition to such a new
life within their own nature. But the experience
of the conflict was at the same time an elevation
above the conflict, and in this elevation they
grasped the immediate presence of a Higher Power.
The new life was further strengthened within them
through this convulsion; its origin in God had now
become more clearly visible; suffering and guilt not
only demonstrated their deepest root in our being
but they led to the point where a lofty “becoming”
—indeed a new “becoming” —through a Higher
Power shone forth in the seeming collapse of man.
In all the unreadiness and darkness of the human
circle the firm belief and the certain confidence asserted
that what was begun by such a Power can never get
lost; so that it was a trust in God which gave man
once more a belief in himself.

The effort to connect these movements and ex-
periences of the soul, with all their clash and their
dialectic, in the inmost nature—this resurrection of
the nature out of its destruction, this progressive
certainty of conviction in the midst of the most
stubborn doubt—succeeds but imperfectly ; the facts
tend to become more obscure and, indeed, the more
complicated becomes the apparatus of thought which


426 CHARACTERISTIC RELIGION


was called up for the elucidation of the facts. It is
sufficient for religion that in man an independent
point of departure, though in direct contradiction
to the whole of his psychic life, has taken place and
is maintained. Herewith there results not only a
rearrangement but also an inversion of life, and it is
this which becomes the fundamental fact which soon
transforms itself into an immeasurable task. Fact
and task together testify to the presence of a new
order of things in the soul, and there originates, too,
a new centre of life. But the man must not, as is
often the case, mistake particular aspects and_pro-
ceedings for the whole of life, and especially must he
not extol agitated feelings which disappear as rapidly
as they originate. Whenever religion is developed
out of the Spiritual Life, a new stage of the
Spiritual Life on the other side of the branching of
psychic activities is required; the reflex of such a
new stage may be observed in the immediate psychic
life, but never allows itself to be founded on the
psychic life. Severely, but not without justice,
Kant termed “the will to feel such an immediate in-
fluence of the Divine a self-contradictory presump-
tion.” ‘There grows easily a luxury in alleged religious
feelings which falls entirely outside the realm of
truth, and which contains a good deal which helps
to reduce religion to the level of a merely subjective
fancy.

Religion is best able to lay aside such a reproach
when it brings with itself a new kind of being, and
along with this a secure consolidation of the whole
life. The spiritual concentration found in religion
with its development of a pure self-subsistence of


A RELIGION OF A DISTINCTIVE KIND 497


the Spiritual Life and not of the mere subject—this
gaining of a new stage of life—is lost to him who
holds fast to the naive, one might say, Ptolemaic
mode of thought—a mode of thought which believes
that certainty can proceed from the external alone,
and which seeks to prove the inward by the out-
ward. ‘The historical development of humanity, and
especially the inner movement of modern times, have
resulted in an inversion of the old conviction in solid
material existence, and have shown more and more
that all reality is known only to our inner experience,
and that there is no kind of stability possible for us
unless there is a more stable unassailable point in our
own life. If this is not true, then absolute Pheno-
menalism is right in resolving the inner and outer
world into a mere stream of appearances. Now, the
main concern and the main achievement of religion
are to offer a foothold above the vacillation of things,
and to lead life to its most original sources. ‘This
conviction is the most certain thing of all to the
Standard of the Spiritual Life, and it is that alone
which gives certainty to everything else. That much
strife occurs concerning this does not alter the fact
itself but our relationship to the fact. Such a central
life is not perceptible right in front of us, but we
have to climb through our own movements and ex-
perience to the point where it becomes accessible and
convincing. And in connection with this fact there
are various stages visible. To him who busies him-
self entirely with the external world and who does
not reach some kind of unfolding of an inner life, the
whole question of religion appears as useless, and
consequently he will only possess an anthropomorphic


428 CHARACTERISTIC RELIGION


interpretation of the external world, and will en-
deavour to lay even that on one side. But he who
recognises a complex of the inner life and yet sees in
it only a succession of individual activities outweighing
all else or a background of life, and takes his stand
towards life from such a level, religion may be held
valid as one province by the side of other provinces,
but such a conception of religion will not attain an
imperative energy and will not become the governing
principle of his life. It is only to him who fastens
the inward aspects into a Whole, and, along with
this, measures the whole of his potencies by the
whole of the demand, that a penetrating change of
life will carry him to the point where the presence
of an Infinite Life breaks forth and where the appro-
priation of such an Infinite Life for the first time
affords an indestructible foundation which all
the contradictions of the remaining world can only
strengthen. ‘Thus there lies in the relationship of
religion to man a more than subjective—a more than
personal—element. Religion can produce this element
only by recognising it as something that enters into
the life and not by conceiving of it as something in
the distance alone. But if life relates itself in a
fundamentally different manner to morality, art, and
even science in so far as these unite into a Whole,
is it not then characteristic of religion that it fastens
the personal judgment into a Whole ?

In any case, the questions of the acknowledgment
of religion by the individual and of its truth within
the Spiritual Life should not be confused with one
another. The judgment concerning the latter
question, which constitutes the main fact, depends


A RELIGION OF A DISTINCTIVE KIND 429


upon the fact whether Characteristic religion truly
brings a further development of the life of the spirit,
whether it leads to contents and values which lie far
above all the subjective reflections and arbitrary
actions of men. This question will be dealt with
more fully, and its ramifications will be followed.
But before we turn to it, we have to notice the idea
of God which issues from Characteristic religion, and
to determine its essential characteristic formation.

(C8) The Idea of God and the Relationship to God.—
Characteristic religion draws its idea of God from the
Life-process ; it cannot expect the idea to come from
an external revelation as the older and more child-like
mode of thought imagined; it cannot gain the idea
from free speculative conceptions whose shadowy crea-
tions are not able to move or take a warm interest in
anything. But in the Life-process itself such a pene-
trating culmination is not able to take place unless the
idea of God discloses further characteristics for man.
But there appears here the paradoxical character which
belongs to religion everywhere, and more particularly
to Characteristic religion. In the apprehension of man-
kind the intimacy which the idea of God gains through

its further inclusion in life is the most prominent thing.
“The Highest Power has not only harboured human
needs, but such a Power has had communication with
man, is present within his soul, has become his own
life and nature, as well as his self-subsistence over
against the order of the world. Here love is. raised
up into an image of the Godhead—love as a self-com-
munication and as essential elevation of the nature,
and as an expression of inmost fellowship. Since the
whole of the Divine Life is here most intimately


430 CHARACTERISTIC RELIGION


present, the relationship of Whole to Whole creates
a new unity of life and, through the constant relation-
ship, preserves and develops itself; there originates a
mutual intercourse of the soul and God as between
an I and a Thou; and the thought concerning the
Godhead is not able to attain genuine power unless it
endeavours to be a living and operative unity. Con-
sequently, there culminates here a turn from the
colourless conception of the Godhead to that of a
living and personal God. ‘The idea of a personality
of God, whose inadequacy shows itself as soon as
it severs itself from the Life-process of religion
and appears in a doctrinal form, is, when found within
the Life-process, entirely obvious and indispensable.
Man can be clearly conscious of the symbolism of the
idea, and yet, at the same time, grasp in it an incon-
testable intrinsic truth which he knows to be far
above all mere anthropomorphism. For it is not a
merely human greatness that has been transferred to
the Divine, but it is a return to the source of a Divine
Life and its mutual communication with man ; all this
is not an argument of man concerning God, because
the Divine must be apprehended through the Divine
within us. All attacks on the personal character
of God root themselves finally in the fact that an
energetic religious Life-process is wanting—a Life-
process which considers the question not so much
from without as from within. Whenever such a
Life-process is found, there is simultaneously found,
often in direct opposition to the conscious wording,
an element of such a personal character of God.

But this intimacy is only one aspect of the idea of
God; and the danger of falling into a mere-human


A RELIGION OF A DISTINCTIVE KIND 431


mode of conception is avoided if the further removal
of God from immediate existence is simultaneously
acknowledged. Characteristic religion brings forth a
new content only in so far as it penetrates beyond the
Divine effects in the universe to a self-subsistence,
and recognises in this a new depth of reality superior
to all other formative action. This can only happen
through a loosening from the bonds of the world and
an elevation above all the conceptions of the world ;
thus there appears here something simply not found
in the world—an elevated summit, a mysterious
sublimity. If this sublimity superior to the world
acquires an abode in the soul, and, indeed, becomes the
inmost and most intimate of our being, and enables
us to participate in the self-subsistence of infinity,
it implants within us a fathomless depth which pushes
away the external nearest-at-hand existence, and
it makes us a problem to ourselves—a problem which
transforms the whole of life—whilst it learns to under-
stand and to handle that which at the outset appeared
to be its whole life as a mere phase and appearance.
Thus it is the same religion which opens out from
God to man and simultaneously opens itself out in
man himself and becomes a great mystery to him.
Therefore, in the idea of God the intimate and the
ultimate must be present if religion is to reach its
full development and to avoid the dangers which
everywhere threaten it. Thus the Godhead appears,
on the one side, at an infinite height and distance
above man, so that man discovers his pettiness with
great bitterness ; and, on the other side, the Divine
appears as most intimate and as the dearest possession,
so that man is raised through this to immeasurable


432 CHARACTERISTIC RELIGION


greatness. The fact that both interlace in one Life-
process, that they do not follow one another but work
together, that the unity is present in the manifold
and the ultimate present in the intimate, implants an
inexhaustible movement within the life, and enables
it ever to renew its youth; life is thus carried beyond
all final formations and forbids all self-sufficient con-
clusions. The contrast of the finite and the infinite,
of the unreal and the perfect, which was already
developed by religion of a Universal kind, and which
was recognised as the source of all sublimity, becomes
for the first time an immediate personal experience
of the whole man.

A closer relationship to the vicissitudes of life
corresponds to the richer content of the idea of
God. The fact that the new life discloses itself to
man not as something at hand but as a counter-action
to, and as the overcoming of, an unreason otherwise
insuperable within its own domain, shows the idea
of God in a quite different relationship to suffering
and unreason than had hitherto been the case. The
manifestation of the Divine in Universal religion also
occurred within an incessant struggle with a resisting
environment. -But there the opposition seemed to lie
mainly in the external situation, and a decisive ascent
beyond it was confidently expected. But later the
view of reality appeared still more gloomy, and our
Spiritual Life shows itself involved in the entangle-
ment to its very root, so that help was expected only
through the communication of an entirely new life
by means of an over-world Power. Now that Power
has turned towards us and has had a care of our
misery by raising us to itself. Can this happen


A RELIGION OF A DISTINCTIVE KIND 433


unless such a Power is itself affected by that suffer-
ing, and unless it enters into the very sphere of
suffering? Is there a genuine help obtained where
an inward participation—a conjoint experience—is
wanting? The doctrine of a suffering God arose
from such a train of thought—a God who took our
misery upon Himself in order to free us entirely from
it. This doctrine is an irrefragable testimony of a
deep feeling, but, through its turn to a doctrinal
form, it strikes a decisively wrong note. It is true
that religion must insist on the intimacy—the closest
intimacy—of the Divine presence precisely in suffering,
but to place the very suffering in God Himself, and
especially to press such a great mystery into formu-
lated ideas, leads to anthropomorphic and even
mythological ideas of an intolerable kind. Since such
a train of thought does not set suffering in the final
cause, it devises gradations in God; it develops the
idea of a reconciliation and substitution, and it feels
itself justified in striving to express the impotence of
man and his entire dependence on love and grace.
This is a fundamental subversion of and a direct injury
to religion in so far as it does not carry the efficacy
to its final root—to God Himself, and in so far as it
will not allow that any success can be brought forth
through man’s efforts. Further, in the religious pro-
vince a reciprocal action of the Divine and the human
takes place; the intimate relationship to God suffers
injury when redemption is expected through media-
tion; indeed, the notion that God does not help us
through His own will and power, but requires first of
all His own feeling of pity to be roused, is an outrage


on God and a darkening of the foundation of religion
28


434 CHARACTERISTIC RELIGION


—of the intimate presence of infinite love and grace.
Also, in spite of his guilt and in the midst of
his guilt God must be near to man. Dare we for
this reason ascribe guilt to God? All dogmatic
formulation of such fundamental truths of religion
becomes inevitably a rationalism and a treatment of
the problem by means of human relationships and
according to human standards. Such a rationalism
would have injured religion far more than it has
already done were not life itself raised beyond all the
disputation of ideas through the inner abiding energy
of the Divine. It is sufficient for the religious con-
viction to experience the nearness of God in human
suffering and His help in the raising of life out of
suffering into a new life beyond all the insufficiency
of reason. Indeed, the more intuitively this neces-
sary truth is grasped, the less does it combine
into a dogmatic speculation, and the purer and more
energetically is it able to work.

The facts are similar-in connection with the
relation of the Absolute Life to history as they are
in connection with suffering. History also gains
a far greater significance in the Life-process of
Characteristic religion. For it is only through ex-
periences, shocks, and transformations of the soul
that the over-world life unlocks itself to us; such
a life appears as a higher stage which postulates a
higher still beyond itself, and gains its energy from
such a source. In reality there originates a “ history
of the soul” only in connection with Characteristic
religion, and a place in the literature of the world
was first gained for such a history by the Confessions
of Augustine. But because the movement presents


A RELIGION OF A DISTINCTIVE KIND § 435


itself to man as a succession, and because grades of
revelation contrast with each other, yet, to place an
historical process or even an inward change in God is
again to judge from human analogy, and to measure
God by human standards. But this happens if we con-
ceive love in God as having only begun at a certain
point of time, if under an appeasement of an alleged
wrath, or if that love reached its consummation only
through the efficacy of certain conditions. It is a mis-
take to attempt to reach a greater intimacy of God
through projecting forth human notions of His image.

Kven in its simple final root religion, as a union of
the new nature of man with God and as a participa-
tion of his being in an Absolute Life, places the
whole of life under a new aspect, and causes an entire
revolution of the being. Also, the union with the
Divine brings an entire calm under the vicissitudes
of life; nowhere else than in the relationship with
God can this be gained. The Infinite Power and
Love that has grounded a new spontaneous nature
in man over against a dark and hostile world, will
conserve such a new nature and its spiritual nucleus,
and shelter it against all perils and assaults, so that
life as the bearer of Life Eternal can never be wholly
lost in the stream of time. Thus we obtain in this
connection an essential portion of religion with its
belief in immortality—the conviction of the indestruc-
tibility of that spiritual unity of life in man, which is
the work of God. And it is from such a conception
that the conviction of the eternity of the Divine Life
proceeds—a conviction which gives man a trust in the
preservation in some kind of way of the spiritual
nucleus of his nature and not of his natural indivi-


436 CHARACTERISTIC RELIGION


duality ; and upon which the certainty is grounded in
him “that what can not pass away for God can not
pass away for itself either. But God is Lord of the
living and the dead” (Augustine). The train of
thought of religion here is: that where the greater is
certain there can be no doubt about the less. Re-
ligion holds as certain and conclusive that this new
inner foundation is the greatest thing of all and the
wonder of wonders, because it carries within itself the
power and certainty of the overcoming of the old
world and the creation of a new one; it is on account
of this that religion longs for the conviction of the
whole man, and brands the denial of this as pettiness
and unbelief. The world may therefore remain to
the external glance as it appeared before—a kingdom
of opposition and darkness ; its hindrances within and
without may drive everything before themselves ;
they may contract and even seemingly destroy man
and his spiritual potencies; all his acts may seem
fruitless and lost, and his whole existence may seem
to sink into nothingness and worthlessness. Yet
through the entrance of the new life and a new world
everything is transformed from within, and the clear-
ness of the light appears all the more by the side of
all the depth of the darkness. Indeed, in the midst
of all the mysteries of existence, hope and conviction
and certainty will consolidate our experience, so that
ultimately evil itself must serve the development of the
good. “This is the spiritual power which reigns and
rules in the midst of enemies, and is powerful in the
midst of all oppression. And this is nothing other
than that strength is perfected in weakness, and that
in all things I can gain life eternal, so that cross and


A RELIGION OF A DISTINCTIVE KIND 437


death are compelled to serve and to contribute
towards my salvation” (Luther).

(vy) The Verification of Religion through the Pro-
gressive Development of Life.—Religion, as all things
original and axiomatic, can establish its truth not
through a reduction to general conceptions, but only
through its development and effects. And in order
to do this, its effects take place in the conditions
and content of life and not merely in the reflec-
tion and frame of mind of the subject; it brings
forth not merely isolated stimulations but a thorough-
going further development. That such is the case
in Characteristic religion, we shall seek to show;
but we have to show first of all how the indications
of a new depth—a matter which has previously
occupied us—now grow clear and integrate them-
selves ; secondly, how the movements of life, begun
in Universal religion, are now carried further; and
thirdly, how from such a further development new
characteristic traits enter into the entire life.

(aa) Elucidation and Integration of Life.—A
yearning aspiration after a self-reliant inwardness
grows over against all the work of the world and all
culture and in the midst of all the confusion of life.
But such an inwardness needs a new fundamental
relation of life—it needs an inner world superior to
all subjective reflection. Religion, and religion alone,
is able to grant this through the manifestation of an
absolute self-subsistence, and it is here alone that the
reality integrates itself into a Whole and works as a
Whole towards each individual ; here man is delivered
from the psychic isolation into which he must other-
wise fall, in proportion as the movement of culture


438 CHARACTERISTIC RELIGION


dissolves the sensuous connections of life and separates
individuals ever farther from each other. Religion, in
the experience of universal history, proved itself indis-
pensable for the gaining of an inner connection of life,
for the deepening life in itself, for overcoming all the
alienation in one’s own nature, for drawing to one’s
self and vivifying what hitherto had appeared as a
mere environment. It has unlocked man to himself,
and has revealed to him, through the presence of an
absolute self-subsistence, a kingdom of pure inward-
ness, and it is in religion that man found first of all
his own inwardness and an inward relationship to the
world. This comes to expression in innumerable
examples. How, for instance, did the religious
movement, prior to and after the Christian era, turn
the ideal world of classical culture into a thing of soul
and inwardness! How definitely connected in the
writings of Plotinus is the foundation of character with
the turn to religion, and how much did Augustine
enhance the soul’s moods and the musical strains of
the Latin tongue! Also, an intimate relationship to
environing nature and an emotional mutual intercourse
with it desire a development only through the con-
viction of an inner presence of an Absolute Life.
German people pride themselves since Fichte on the
possession of a Gemiit, as a faculty specially developed
amongst them, and who else has given the expression
such a characteristic sense except the mystics who
created such a “ turn ” from the intimate relationship to
the Eternal Being? The inwardness of the soul, which
is the inheritance of our language, was gained and
has unfolded itself in close connection with religion.
And it is not only at its advent alone that the


A RELIGION OF A DISTINCTIVE KIND 439


inwardness needs religion; if there exists no cosmic
inwardness and if we acquire no participation in it,
the inner life visibly loses its root, its energy, and
its truth. Thus we often find to-day an empty
subjectivity usurping the rights of inwardness; men
clutch eagerly at the letter and semblance of
things whilst the reality is threatening to vanish
entirely.

Hand in hand with the progressive autonomy
of inwardness goes a dominant position of morality,
and the one is inseparable from the other. True
inwardness grows only where life connects itself into
a Whole, and in order to do this, it needs the subject’s
own elevating deed. Such a deed is not ready-made ;
it has to be wrestled for and formed, and here is
the point where an energetic, manly and healthy
inwardness differentiates itself from the weak, effemi-
nate and morbid disposition of romanticism. Contrari-
wise, there is no genuine morality which does not aim
at a whole of the inwardness and does not strive for
a new being. But religion alone ensures such a mode
because it opens out a new life from cosmic connec-
tions, and makes the question of the redemption of
the soul the kernel of all effort. True, morality has
often attributed to itself an absolute value outside
religion and often in opposition to religion: the Stoic
mode of thought has proceeded through the centuries
as a permanent type of this mind. But such a
morality loosened from religion is deficient, as in
connections, so also in a living content and a secure
foundation ; man here will easily overestimate his own
capacity, isolate himself, and thus fall into hollow-
ness. ‘The single point is not able of itself to lead any


440 CHARACTERISTIC RELIGION


life from the Whole, if such a life is not communicated
to it from the All. As soon as the moral problem has
set itself upon the whole of life, and as soon as herewith
not only the greatness but also the pettiness of man
become evident, the union with religion becomes
inevitable; it is in such a union alone that the
moral life integrates itself into a Whole and is able
to justify its claims to the leading position, which
otherwise would appear as dictatorial and arbitrary ;
it is in this way alone that the pride and hardness of
moralism can be held at bay—qualities which have
invited many assaults on morality. True, an act
—an encompassing act of the whole nature—has to
carry our Spiritual Life, but this act is itself more
than a subjective flight: it is the appropriation of a
new life, and appears, in the midst of all its activity,
as being carried and even engendered by the Spiritual
Life.

Life persists in the midst of painful hindrances
and ever finds new courage for its ascent. In all
this we have already recognised a difficult problem—
even a mystery. For a merely instinctive clinging to
life would not discover the energy for a new develop-
ment, and all subjective agitation would quickly grow
weary in face of the hardness of the opposition. That
positive impetus of life is able to obtain an illumina-
tion and a justification from religion—an illumination,
because here a new life superior to the entangle-
ments of human existence is really mediated; a
justification, because this new life is freed from all
that, in the self-preservation, was lower instinct or
narrow selfishness. For it is not mere man but the
preservation of the Divine Life which now governs


A RELIGION OF A DISTINCTIVE KIND 44)


all the effort ; and the struggle is not for a finite being
but for the presence of an Infinite Life. We hear
over and again religion reproached of lessening the
energy of life and even of breaking the courage of
life. But such a statement holds valid only for
special times of degeneration of religion, or for an
external view of the matter, to which the inner life
remains a sealed book. Nothing in reality so much
as religion has sustained man in painful tribulations
from within and without, and filled him with a joyous
courage of life. For man was now transplanted
from the effect to the cause, from the periphery
to the centre, and here Infinite Life with its per-
fection became his own life. No doubt, as we
have long realised, the entire energy of affirmation
deepened here upon the thoroughness of the nega-
tion. But how can men with any kind of alert-
ness overlook the Yea which stands behind the
Nay ?

We saw the claims of love and a shaping of life
from out of love persisting in the midst of all the
hardness of human relations; but love itself found
no secure “ground,” and the movement towards
it, restricted to itself, threatened to end in empty
sentimentality or mere pompous talk; and often
enough such talk has to hide a want of substance
and truth. New contents of life are absolutely
necessary in which man shall acquire a value and shall
grow beyond his former self; if such is to happen
over against the whole condition of the world, there
is need for new beginnings, a new world, an infinite
power and love, which communicate of their fulness
to man, which free him from oppression, and which


442 CHARACTERISTIC RELIGION


make him capable of genuine love. In this connec-
tion the exercise of such a love is able to become
a testimony of its Divine origin: “that we forgive
our neighbour makes us certain that God has forgiven
us” (Luther). Only that a real transformation of life
has to take place herewith, and not simply a higher
estimation of what has remained unchanged, else we
sink back into the. subjective and anthropomorphic
which will prevent us, until we overcome them, from
taking a single step forward in religion. The expres-
sion ‘Infinite Love” contains something pictorial
and human which can easily lead into error. But
the mere approximateness, indeed, the inadequacy of
the expression does not matter so long as the fact is
held fast energetically that, beyond all nature and
culture, a new being is bestowed on man from the
relationship and in the relationship to the Absolute
Life—a being whose most adequate expression is that
genuine love.

Such a founding of love in the Absolute
Life will shield it from the effeminacy and light-
ness which it so easily assumes amongst human
relations; it will sever humanity from the external
appearances to which it tends to cling, and will
unite it with the kernel of man’s being and, at
the same time, will avoid all the false idealisations
which inevitably lead to grave disappointments.
Thus, secure against defacement and certain of a
new spiritual content, love will work as a power-
ful motive towards the shaping of human relation-
ships from the foundation according to the valuation
which is the due of man as a member of that new life.
Love will undertake a manly struggle not only against


A RELIGION OF A DISTINCTIVE KIND 443


what oppresses and defaces it from the outside, but still
more against what threatens to destroy it inwardly.
Thus, love of enemy can now mean more than a
mere demand or a mere phase, because the new life
is able to found an inner fellowship which certainly
does not simply abolish the opposition and struggle,
indeed, it may not abolish them, but which, however,
raises man beyond them and enables him to work
against them.

Thus religion binds together into a Whole move-
ments otherwise isolated ; it gives a firm foothold to
things otherwise insecure; it illumines the darkness
which otherwise enwraps such movements. Now
for the first time what previously appeared more
beside us than in us becomes our own act—our own
being; an inversion results and along with it an
immense elevation of life, because we step out of
the effect into the cause, and along with this, gain
as our own an infinite life and creativeness of pure
inwardness, and, indeed, find our true self in it.
But all this comes about only in so far as religion in
reality opens out a new content—a new stage of the
Spiritual Life—not from a mere tendency of life
based upon some indeterminate over-world and
“beyond.” It is essential to the religion of the
Spiritual Life that it forges its way ever and ever
into a content which raises man beyond his initial
situation and not merely stirs him to bare move-
ments within his unaltered condition. ‘True, even the
religion of the Spiritual Life cannot loosen itself from
the human form of life, but it makes an immense
difference whether it accepts such a form as valid
without any more ado, or whether it deals with


444 CHARACTERISTIC RELIGION


such a form as a mere receptacle—an entirely
insufficient receptacle—of a dawning Spiritual Life
within us.

(bb) The Further Development of the Movements
of Life.— We have seen religion, even in its
Universal mode, initiating the most fertile movements
of life. But these movements experience the most
varied hindrances within the human domain; they
threatened to come to an entire deadlock if the potency
of religion does not strengthen itself, if it is not able,
at least, to carry through that which aspires after a
Whole. But how this becomes really possible
through the manifestation of an absolute inner life
will now be briefly explained.

An effort after Infinity belongs to the very root of
religion, but the world of man withstood such an
effort in aharsh and hard manner. Striving man finds
himself not only hemmed in from without; but from
within also he is tied by the particularity of his own
nature, and its own psychic potency is doled out to it
generally parsimoniously enough by destiny. How
can he escape from such a barrier, and how can
he make the whole of life his own real life?
He is able to accomplish this only at a new level
where the pure self-subsistence of reality communi-
cates itself to him, and awakens within him a new
life. In this life of pure inwardness, he grasps the
whole of Infinity as his own possession, and his life
is raised above all the hitherto-prevailing barriers.
This is done first in an inwardness of the soul, but yet
it does not arise out of a purely subjective imagination,
but out of the energy of a new cosmic order—out of an
All-life subsisting in itself. If, thus, our life anchors


A RELIGION OF A DISTINCTIVE KIND 445


itself in the inmost point of Infinity, it will be able
to hold fast to such an Infinity in the midst of all
hindrances.

The problem of freedom is closely connected
with the problem of infinity. Life had to insist
upon some kind of freedom, for without freedom,
as already noticed, there is no originality, no personal
life, and no genuine present moment. Religion,
however, became the best advocate of freedom
because it manifested an original life out of the
Whole over against the concatenations of nature and
destiny. But such a life of the whole of our existence
does not forge its way right through the hindrances,
but it falls right in its mner woof under the power
of the concatenations; and, thus, without a new
start, freedom must succumb to destiny. Life
gains such a new start from the new stage of
life which Characteristic religion inaugurates. For
here new beginnings are gained over against one’s
own psychic potency; and in this domain of pure
inwardness even that is not lost which does not
succeed in transposing itself into visible work and
achievement. ‘This does not mean that a faint dis-
position, in the form of a merely subjective emotion,
suffices—little enough is gained through that—but
the presence of an Absolute Life establishes an
activity springing from pure inwardness, and creates
herewith a new province of life removed from the
hindrances of the world. Through the consolidation
of this province of life the domain of natural causality
does not simply cease, but still exercises a power over
the very soulofman. But it has lost its old monopoly ;
man is now able to withstand its exhausted binding and


446 CHARACTERISTIC RELIGION


hemming in; he is able to set his life in its inmost
depth upon his own act and upon an original creative-
ness, and, along with this, to drive out the old strange
elements, and thus to bridge the chasm which other-
wise lies between himself and his own soul.

All Spiritual Life is here a struggle against the
flux of time—an ascent to eternal and immortal truth.
Because religion uplifts things into a Whole and a
Principle, it executes an inversion of man’s first view
of things. But we have already seen how man’s
effort after truth fell under the power of time and
change, and how this called forth the most difficult
entanglements and a painful anxiety, so that ever
anew the transient presents itself in the garb and with
the claims of eternal truth. There is no secure over-
coming of time and no consolidating of the eternal
through the ordinary every-day existence, or even
through the surface-aspect of spiritual things. This
achievement is possible only through a new order
which reduces our whole world to a particular kind
or aspect of reality. In this new order life may gain
a timeless character, and may transform itself in its
inmost depth into a pure self-subsistence and into
a persistence within its own essence. Characteristic
religion inaugurates from the side of an absolute self-
subsistence an emancipation from time ; it brings calm
and consolidation into life; hence it works beyond
one’s own circle for the maintenance and strengthening
of the whole effort after timeless truth. , Wherever
religion acquired full energy and independence, it has
scorned being driven away on the current of time or
being curbed by the fluctuating situations of man-
kind; rather has it held up a standard against the


A RELIGION OF A DISTINCTIVE KIND § 447


movements of time, and such movements had to
Justify themselves before such a standard; it has
worked for the differentiation of the transient from
the permanent, and of pretentious culture from
spirituality. But if religion itself falls into the
entanglement, it finds no help in the wavering products
of time, but in an energetic consciousness of the
eternal within its own being—in a revivification of
its indestructible foundation; and it is this power
alone, which supports religion in the midst of the
movements of time, that can be considered by it as
possessing value. Thus, religion has held up the
idea of eternity present in human life; it has estab-
lished an abode for life in itself in the midst of all the
hurry of work, and has founded a secure rest in the
midst of all movement ; along with this it has given
existence a depth, and has upheld a constancy of life
against the vacillations of time.

The aspiration after greatness is, as we have already
seen, no mere outflow of vain, overweening pride and
self-mirrormg. Man has to think greatly of himself
and of his potency when he pursues his own task
over against his apparent lostness in an _ endless
world, and is to forge his way through enormous
oppositions. Religion gave such an aspiration a solid
ground and a secure support, and since it revealed
the presence of an Absolute Life in man it calls him
to pursue this life and to transform its entire infinity
into his own possession. But man could not succeed
in drawing his whole domain into this infinite life ;
the oppositions threaten to overpower him, and
crippling doubt presses him down into littleness.
In order to get beyond this, religion must establish a


448 CHARACTERISTIC RELIGION


new depth of life, and it accomplishes this through
the turn to Absolute self-subsistence, and, further,
through the ensuing union of human and Divine life.
Man is here removed into the centre of reality ; here
he has to reach decisions concerning the Whole;
here the success of the Whole is tied to his decision in
so far as the vivification cannot occur at this particular
spot without his own deed, and this deed has to carry
farther the movement of the world. Thus the deed
has gained a cosmic character and cannot possibly
be deemed trivial. Rather does, as against the inner
forming and building of reality proceeding here,
all that the external view of things exhibits, all
that the history of the world shows in sensuous
results, in catastrophes and colossal effects, become
merely secondary. Everything has now a true value
only in so far as it furthers that development ;
and for the best minds the more or less equally
valid environment is a coming and going, a rising and
falling, a collecting and scattering, of human things.
Thus, we have here also the inversion of life and of
values which is characteristic of religion.

Characteristic religion, in all this, brings the stag-
nant life into a current. It does this not so much
in that it breaks down the opposition, as in that it
raises the life throughout above the domain of the
opposition ; it does it through the production of a
new characteristic domain; but, as the longing for
this ideal proceeded from out the Whole of life, so
also will its satisfaction re-act upon the Whole and
strengthen the Whole.

(cc) Peculiar Effects of Characteristic Religion.—
Our previous exposition noticed the fact that


A RELIGION OF A DISTINCTIVE KIND 449


Characteristic religion not merely carries on, but also
brings forth something new, and we have now to lay
hold of some of the peculiar developments of this
New. And here again there is nothing astonishing
to be expected—nothing that was hitherto alien
to us; but it is to be expected that phenomena
which hitherto were dispersed, and through the dis-
persion remained without any effect within the
Whole, now connect themselves together, and, along
with this, gain a new significance and reveal a further
development of the Whole. Religion thus appears
as the power which teaches man, through a discovery
of the connections and a transposition into the creative
“grounds,” to see the facts as a Whole and to grasp
them as his own. Its action, viewed externally, may
seem to emerge only on the horizon of life and to
evade all precise description. Viewed inwardly, it
accomplishes an inversion of life which pushes all
that surrounds man with manifold abundance and
limited form to a secondary place, and causes
the ascent of a new kind of life, which appears
over against the prior life as the fundamental
depth, and which transforms the entire aspect of
reality.

Religion generally comprehends reality as a
development or expression of a total-life; but it
makes a great difference whether such a total-life
appears as effective in the concatenation of the Whole
and as mediated through this to the individual parts,
or whether it appears as immediately present in the
part, and as directly related to the part. ‘The former
view predominates in Universal religion, and the


latter predominates in Characteristic religion. The
29


450 CHARACTERISTIC RELIGION


development of the immediate presence of the Whole
places the individual in possession of a new light,
by teaching us to understand such light as an ex-
pression of infinity—as the point where an original
and self-subsisting life bursts forth. Through this a
mode of reflection arises which is the direct opposite
of the exact scientific mode with its all-pervading
connection and its deduction of each element from out
of the series to which it belongs ; the new mode cannot
hope to eject or replace this scientific mode, but it is
able to maintain over against it its independence and
its own rights. For there results through this a more
intuitive and esthetic insight which cannot possibly be
abandoned in our consideration of the whole meaning
of the universe. ‘The individual receives here an
immense enhancement because the fact is grasped as
an intimate verification of an inner life of the All—
as an expression of Divine glory ; man in his indi-
viduality gains along with this a self-subsistence, a
self value, an inner infinity, and all this becomes an
object of pure insight and of a disinterested de-
votedness. Here Art has its pre-eminent task and
develops, through its solution, a new and more inward
relationship to the world ; “‘it does not raise nature
and it does not make it more majestic than it really
is, but it raises human nature to see its own glory
and the glory of the world—it helps to see right
through the confusion of the external” (Runeberg).
Art will thus see and honour the Divine not merely
in what is charming and harmonious, but also in
what is mighty and awful. Would not such an inner
vivification of nature—such an inner reflected light
of the spiritual from out of nature—be an unreality,


A RELIGION OF A DISTINCTIVE KIND 451


and could it therewith unlock such an immeasurable
fulness of individuality, if the reality had no self-
subsistence and no inner depth? All art becomes
a testimony to such a depth. But such an insight
into the infinite—such an intimate apprehension of
the infinite in the particular point—reaches beyond
all art into the whole of life; for without this, life
could never become a pure self-life and never attain to
a full present.

Just as with that turn, reflection is raised above
mere causality, so also is action raised above
merely serviceable activity and above the whole
mechanism of ordinary life. It is only through
the gain of an inner infinity that action has no
need to be ever on the look-out for new tasks beyond
the position attained at the moment, but it can rest
in itself, return from all movements to itself with-
out falling into an idle inaction. Herewith there opens
out a sphere of inner peace—the calm of a Sabbath
rest in the midst of all the tumult and struggle of
the ordinary surface-world. Such an experience is
either an empty delusion and, if so, we are the entire
slaves of a restless and senseless world-work, or there
is such a thing as a self-subsistence of reality which
becomes man’s own possession.

The manifestation of such self-subsistence as is re-
presented by religion works in another direction: it
invests life with a greater simplicity and child-likeness
than is possible through social relations. For where
infinity is placed over against the individual, the
individual’s dependence upon infinity, his relationship
to infinity, and his security therein are now perceived.
And there can be no more suitable symbol to express


452 CHARACTERISTIC RELIGION


this than the life of a little child with the simplicity
of its feelings, its full dependence on others, its
unconditioned trust, its certain expectation of help
as a matter of course. Life appears here as a return
from a painful entanglement, and yet there results
something more than a mere return—there results
an inner renewal, the dawning of an otherwise locked-
up depth. Religions first and foremost have brought
forth such a spirit to development, and no one more
than Jesus has done this. ‘The reformers of education,
too, were convinced that nowhere is man more him-
self and nearer to the source of life than during
the tender age of childhood, and hence that from
such a source a rejuvenation of the whole life can
proceed. Such a conviction penetrates the life-work
of Froebel; and Pestalozzi chose the dispositions
that permeate child-life as the most secure point
of departure for the cultivation of religion. We
quote once more his words: “The amazement of
the sage in viewing the depth of creation and his
search in the abyss for the Creator are not the
education of humanity for the production of this
belief. In the abyss of creation the investigator
loses himself, and in its waters he can only drift
about aimlessly far away from the source of a
fathomless sea.” ‘ Innocence and purity; an un-
alloyed human feeling of gratitude and love, are the
source of faith. In the pure child-like disposition of
mankind, the hope of eternal life wells up, and the
pure faith of mankind in God is not experienced in
its energy without such a hope.”

These various traits are evidently developments
of one single life. Such a life resists being


A RELIGION OF A DISTINCTIVE KIND 453


fastened to adjusted conceptions, and can reach some
representation only through metaphors and parables.
_ Yet notwithstanding this, it does not lose its power
and reality, and in it alone is man able to gain a
secure foothold and a pure self-subsistence without
which his whole life must break in pieces. ‘I'hus,
there culminates here something indispensable and
urgent, but, at the same time, human life seems
most unready—posited between different orders
of the world, and moved within itself by sharp
opposites. But the movement itself is the most
valid testimony that the whole is no mere fancy,
and religion will increase this assurance because it
turns the matter entirely into an individual concern,
and lets the world-problems be experienced directly
by man. But religion must reflect with the greatest
possible energy as to how to differentiate clearly
between the new life-content and all the mere sub-
jectivity which seems to accompany the new life as
a shadow, but is utterly unable to produce it out
of its own capacity.

(dd) Retrospect.—TYo derive the proof of religion
from the experience of the Life-process is a doctrine
in no way new. For from of old the raising up of a
new life was the main achievement of religion and the
most convincing proof of its truth. The new life won
the soul and inclined it towards the imparted in-
struction and not vice versa. But, however, the more
religion turned into Church organisations, the more
have they developed their doctrines into an enclosed
system, and the more have they considered an
acknowledgment of this system as the main end, and
have readily treated life as a secondary, and doctrine


454 CHARACTERISTIC RELIGION


as the primary, thing. It is difficult to avoid such a
course amongst human conditions, but it contains so
many dangers and engenders so many abuses that a
counter-action is ever necessary and ever important—a
counter-effect that will raise life out of any and every
opportune manifestation to the level of a principle.
Such a turning of religion into doctrinal conceptions
brings it easily into a condition of inertness and
cripples man’s own activity, because religion is
thus conceived as something ready-made which
stands with unconditional authority in front of
man; whereas if religion is referred to life, it
appears far more as a progressive co-operative work,
and set as a task from without. But life has to
struggle gradually for its content, and work out such
a content with increasing clearness; it must ever
ascend, ever draw reality more and more into itself
and grow along with it. And, further, the setting of
religion in doctrinal ideas can result only in definite con-
nection with the momentary situation of culture ; thus
there is found in religion a temporal and problematic
element which easily treats itself as the main fact ;
and the violence which the main fact experiences
through the advancement of culture turns easily into
an assault upon religion, and causes it to appear far
more insecure than it really is; religion steps thus
into immense entanglements because it is not able to
carry on the struggle from the point where it is truly
strong.

Such and other abuses have for centuries pressed
men to put life, which in reality has ever decided,
first also in the consciousness and activity of
mankind, and to work out its implications


A RELIGION OF A DISTINCTIVE KIND = 455


with all possible clearness. The Reformation and
Pietism acted thus; Pascal and Schleiermacher
did the same; and the present day demands such
an achievement with special insistence. But at
the same time, history shows the great danger and
entanglement connected with such an effort. The
turn to life which shall energise the whole sinks easily
into mere subjectivity, and this is certainly unable to
give religion either a secure foundation or an original
content, and consequently an evaporation and a
dissolution of religion become unavoidable. It is,
then, necessary to raise life beyond its usual vagueness,
to discover within it inner connections, and indeed, the
source of a reality ; and, further, to loosen hfe from
merely isolated aspects and to invest it with a self-
reliance as well as with a cosmic character. We have
already sought to show this through the turn to the
Spiritual Life and its clear differentiation from the
empirical psychic life with its “ given” existence; and
our whole investigation stands or falls with the
acknowledgment of the Spiritual Life. We in
modern times have long given up the attempt to
found religion upon an investigation of the world,
because the world itself has become far too much of a
problem for us, and consequently we flee to man as
our starting-point in the development of life. But
man in his empirical existence is far too petty and |
confined to be able through his own potencies to set up
against the boundless world a new and elevated world ;
and thus religion threatens to become a mere radiation
of subjective human craving and fancy, and its entire
world threatens to sink down to a dream-world. No
amount of shrewdness or acumen can prevent this


456 CHARACTERISTIC RELIGION


issue if man is no more than the first impressions show
him to be, if there is not present within him a really-
subsisting All-Life which enables him more and more
to bring about an inversion of his natural existence.
But this, however, is a question of fact and not of
argument; therefore our main investigation directed
itself to the tracing of such facts. Because we con-
vinced ourselves that things were so, we gained the
standpoint of spiritual experience over against a merely
psychological standpomt. For the latter standpoint
occupies itself with purely psychic processes, and in
the province of religion especially it occupies itself
with the conditions of the stimulations of will and
feeling, which are not able to prove anything beyond
themselves. ‘The spiritual experience, on the con-
trary, has to do with life’s contents and with the con-
struction of reality ; it need not trouble itself concern-
ing the connections of the world only in a subsidiary
manner, because it stands in the midst of such
connections, and without these it cannot possibly
exist. Man never succeeds in reaching the Divine
unless the Divine works and is acknowledged in his
own life; what is omitted here in the first step is
never again covered, and becomes more and more
impossible as life proceeds on its merely natural
course. If, however, the standpoint of spiritual ex-
perience is gained, then religion succeeds in attaining
entire certainty and immediacy ; then the struggles in
which it was involved turn into a similar result, and
its own inner movements become a testimony for
the reality of the new world which it represents.


A RELIGION OF A DISTINCTIVE KIND 457


3. Religion in its Relation to Society and History


Religion hitherto has been noticed as governing in
the domain of the invisible—it was a life of pure
inwardness. But it is not able to affect energetically
the immediate existence of man and humanity unless
it succeeds in coming into visibleness and in adopting
a solid organisation, and these in their turn will
appeal to, and will support themselves by means of
special historical events. But immense entangle-
ments result through religion entering into definite
relationship with society and history, and also on
account of the fact that religion had to substantiate
its truth and reality within the domain of the visible.

The invisible and eternal, upon which all the claims
of religion in its foundation rest, steps into strange
conditions within the domain of the visible; and
easily enough in these human conditions, those things
which should serve as mere representation and orienta-
tion compete eagerly amongst themselves for independ-
ence; they raise themselves up as main facts, and
through such a subversion they work directly against
the final aims of religion. As everywhere, the main
danger here does not come from enemies but from
friends—from erring friends. Simultaneously, the
configuration within the visible world leads easily
through such a turn into a contraction of, and a menace
to, the other provinces of life, and the contradiction
which these call forth easily impels to a rejection of
religion itself; and thus religion has to suffer for the
presumption and usurpation of the Church. Nothing
has carried into religion so much confusion from
within and so much contradiction from without as its


458 CHARACTERISTIC RELIGION


own visible incorporation—as that which intended to
serve it, and which religion seems unable to abandon.


(a) The Problem of the Church.

(aa) The Necessity of a Religious Organisation.—
Religion in its Universal mode works for an inner
fellowship of mankind, but it does not press
for a hard and fast organisation. ‘The desire for
organisation arises only when the opposition of
our world to the Spiritual Life has been deeply
felt, and when, over against this opposition, a
new stage of life has succeeded in obtaining
recognition. For not only is the new stage of the
religion of a pure self-subsistence much more difficult
to apprehend and to retain, but in its presence the
inability of man becomes far more evident. How
can individuals be roused out of the indifference of
the mechanism of daily life, and how can they be
brought, out of the chaos of opinions, into common
convictions unless some solid organisation raises
and stimulates and unites them? He who denies
the need for such a turning must either think very
little of religion or very highly of man. If religion
is no more than an artistic and delicate worldly
disposition—a mere embrace of infinity in the exulting
feeling of happiness and success—or, on the other
hand, if man is held as from the outset filled with
spiritual interests and in his intimate consciousness
securely turned to high aims, then religion needs no
kind of strengthening through fellowship. But where
the greatness of the task and the littleness of man
are present to the mind, some kind of incorporation
of religion is not so easily rejected.


A RELIGION OF A DISTINCTIVE KIND 459


The fact that Characteristic religion first awakens
such an aspiration for fellowship does not signify that it
alone is able to satisfy it. Religion is not well able
to develop an independent circle of life without falling
back upon its Universal mode and calling up also the
whole energy of this. Sucha circle of life dare not
contract into a mere refuge from the exigencies of life,
but it has to consolidate the whole of life, and to shield
it from dangers of an inner dissolution. Characteristic
religion is able, as we have already noticed, to develop
genuinely its spiritual nature and defend itself against
the intrusion of mere-human elements, only if it
occupies that broader foundation. Since religion is to
open out to man’s nature the entire depth of reality
over against empirical existence, the Church seems
indispensable in order to introduce and to hold at
hand the new world and the new life to man in the
midst of his ordinary existence; it is indispensable
in order to fortify the conviction and to strengthen
the energy in the midst of all the opposite collisions ;
it is indispensable in order to uphold an eternal truth
and a universal problem in the midst of the changes
of time and the fleetingness of the moment. In fact,
the development of independent religious societies
causes in human relationships divergences which un-
doubtedly have many dangers and abuses, but there
has gone forth from such societies a great enrichment
and emancipation of life whose withdrawal would
mean a loss hardly bearable.

(6b) The Dangers of a Religious Organisation.—
Our consideration of the historical religions has already
placed before us clearly the dangers of a religious
organisation. It is now only necessary to raise to


460 CHARACTERISTIC RELIGION


the level of a principle that which was visible in those
religions, and to set it in a closer relation to the
religion of the Spiritual Life.

The religion of the Spiritual Life maintains with
special energy that religion is in no way that which
simply adorns mere-human existence, but that within
it an elevated life is opened out—that it not merely
annexes some kind of embroidery to a “ given” world.
Now the attempt to make such a new worldto attain re-
presentation within the old one contains a fundamental
contradiction which can never be smoothly solved.
The temporal and the human, beyond which religion
will rise, unavoidably aspire after power; even these
exercise a counter-effect to the work of the ordinary
and commonplace; the Church must speak not only
to spiritually distinguished souls, but must speak to
all; and it must speak every day and not merely in
moments of elevated feeling ; it must reckon through-
out with human nature and human weakness. ‘Thus,
the Church, measured by the standard of religion,
will appear very inadequate. But what is dis-
covered within the Church as limits and defects has
been long fought against, and at present causes no
real danger because the organisation is incessantly
drawn back upon an inspiring life, and because the
Church feels and conducts itself as a mere servant of
religion. But in human and historical conditions
there is a constant temptation to make the Church
the main fact, and to degrade religion to a mere means
for its power and glory; through this the human,
the temporal, and the finite gain power within religion,
and, indeed, above religion ; immense abuses originate,
and then a struggle against the Church may become


A RELIGION OF A DISTINCTIVE KIND 461


an imminent concern of religion—it may become a
struggle for the self-preservation of religion. What
perversion this positing of the human into the place
of the Divine brings along with itself shall here be
shown in at least some points.

Religion is unable to attain to a visible form
without the work of special personalities in its
service, and consequently the sublimity of religion
will confer upon these personalities a certain splen-
dour. But, however, this fact easily takes a turn:
the man who busies himself with the Divine claims
for himself the honour due to the Divine alone:
the servant becomes a priest, and places himself as
mediator between man and God, and therewith injures
the kernel of all religion— injures the intimate partici-
pation in the Divine Life. In the extreme develop-
ment of this, the priesthood can claim power above that
of the Godhead: thus the Brahmanic priest, through
his sacrifices and incantations, seemed to subdue the
very gods themselves; and in perilous nearness to
this lies the mass in the Roman doctrine. It is but
natural that the power of the priest should be con-
sidered as having been conferred upon him by the
Godhead, but the usage of the Church places the
priest in the very foreground ; it is the priest who
possesses the truth and has the safety of man in his
hands, and who finally aspires after Divine honour
and imagines himself able to rule over the grace of
God.

Religion is able to create an organisation only with
the consolidation of a world of ideas, and this results
unavoidably in a narrowing of religion. ‘The struc-
ture of the Church was achieved at a particular


462 CHARACTERISTIC RELIGION


juncture ; this juncture had particular spiritual needs
whose satisfaction preceded and drove back all other
claims. Therefore particular central truths stand out
fromsuch aworldof ideasand group themselves together
and all others around themselves ; they succeed in the
course of centuries in enforcing themselves with ten-
acious energy, and more and more aim at governing
the total intellectual world of the Church. This has
happened for instance in connection with the ancient
Christian doctrine of the Godhead of Christ and with that
of the Sacraments in the Middle Ages. Such a taper-
ing and a locking-up of the world of ideas is less serious
so long as an invisible world of religion counteracts
it, and puts the assertion of the Church within a more
encompassing truth. But such a counteraction fails
within the Church especially in times of greater lassi-
tudeand narrowness, for then thenarrow thought-world
of the Church becomes the thought-world of religion,
and then the perils and injuries of such a narrowing
come to full effect. On the one side, we find an iron
logic which develops the governing main truths into
such conclusions as the adherents hold easily to be a
testimony of the Holy Spirit. On the other side, we
find much non-logic, because the conclusions of the
iron-logic tend to break down when they are face to
face with unquestionable religious needs ; and, further,
such a logic proceeds only in a special direction
and not slant-wise—and hence it tolerates all kinds
_of contradictions in the juxtaposition of ideas and
tasks—contradictions which, once they are dis-
covered, become intolerable. But the Churches
offer this circle of ideas with all their one-sided-
ness as the absolute and final truth, and aim at


A RELIGION OF A DISTINCTIVE KIND 463


imposing it upon individuals with coercive authority.
Can we wonder that an opposition arises against
all this? Can we wonder if the various ideas
of the Church, with all their peculiarities, clash
severely with each other, and cannot possibly come
to terms? For each of these ideas views the
world from its own individual standpoint, and
declares such a view as the only possible one;
each at the outset places itself in such a position
that it sees clearly only in certain directions, whilst
in other directions even the clearest things become
dark to it.

Now, as the main proof of religion lies in its
own actuality—in the creation of a new reality
of independent Spiritual Life—so also the Church
proves the right of its existence through the greatness
of its achievement in the midst of an alien and hostile
world. The Church is no mere system of doctrines
which has been produced by scientific reasons, and
which can be convulsed and dissolved; but as
an organisation of life the Church has brought
the supersensuous world to some kind of con-
crete expression; it has, through its training of
souls and the formation of relationships, gained
an actuality, and acts, from out of this actuality,
with a power above all argument. But this actu-
ality claims, as religious, to be not merely some
sort of actuality; it must represent the final depth
of reality; it must contain absolute truth. And
here again a danger threatens all this: that what
has its rights only in reference back to the In-
visible presents itself as sovereign, and_ believes
its truth to be established by the bare weight of


464 CHARACTERISTIC RELIGION


its existence and the empirical actuality of its achieve-
ments. True, the Church appeals in this to the lead-
ing of the Holy Spirit, but it makes bold to determine
where and how the Holy Spirit governs, and, along
with this, it takes upon itself to judge concerning
truth and error, and again raises the human above
the Divine. Thus it is the authority of the Church
which is to assure man of the truth ; where the Church
unites in a common conviction, there an absolute
truth is supposed to have been won; where the
Church constructs a tradition, an eternal duration
seems secured. Now, in the long run, it cannot be
denied that much that is human has worked in all this,
and that with the fixation of alleged divine truths this
became so earthly that the serene halo vanishes with
the insight that the sanction of such truths was far more
of human than of Divine origin. ‘Thus, the doubt
concerning the Church passes easily into a doubt
concerning religion itself, and the domain of religion
will easily appear as a mere web of human illusions.
A thousandfold experience shows that where the
religious conviction of man rested mainly upon the
authority of the Church and did not proceed from
his own life, any injury to this basis led easily to
a renunciation of the whole—to an entire negation
and indifference. If once the Church had taken over
entirely the solicitude for truth, and if man’s entire
convictions and conscience depended on a union with
the Church, the relaxation of such a union could
not but take away from him all fixed principles, and
could not but surrender his soul to entire emptiness.

The champions of ecclesiastic authority are ac-
customed to insist that human nature will fall into


A RELIGION OF A DISTINCTIVE KIND § 465


an entangled chaos without a strong authoritative
binding, and that it needs for its own welfare a strong
control. Against this view let us take the following
course. The Spiritual Life itself causes a union of
mankind from within, and holds men also in visible
connections in the general situation of culture, in
art and science, in society and the state. Without
such a union from within all the external union
would become a mere constraint; and, further, if
all agreement were a work of authority, every deviation
would mean the upheaval of the whole, and that
could in no manner be tolerated, but would have
to be repressed with the severest disciplinary punish-
ment; so that courts of inquisition and persecution
of heretics were not only just but an unavoidable
duty. However, that mode of thinking which took
upon itself to decide that man had an alleged need
beyond what religion itself testifies, fell finally into
a crass and unworthy utilitarianism. Utilitarian
considerations may possess a right in other situations,
but in connection with the question of absolute truth,
they signify a lowering of the matter and an entire
subversion. The atheist in his denial of religion
thinks more religiously than the utilitarian who
turns the Divine into a mere means of human
welfare.

Finally, the prominence of the Church causes inevit-
ably an externalising of the religious life. The
organisation has to stand upon visible proofs of life
and to come to expression through such proofs; it
will develop and hold forth certain doctrines ; it will
value and desire certain activities; and through all


this connection it will develop a characteristic web of
30


466 CHARACTERISTIC RELIGION


life. So long as the organisation is drawn back ener-
getically upon the fundamental life of religion and
is vivified and held together through religion, all
dangers to it can be fought against and overcome ;
but if the Church drives back religion, and ensnares
the whole life in the web of its system of ordinances,
the life is in danger of being transformed entirely
into a comparative number of deeds, and transferred
into the shallows of a most industrious mechanism.
Then the fatal conception of “ religious obligations ”
arises, which places the religious task on a level
with social, political and other obligations, without
discovering at all how deeply such a turn degrades
religion, and how soulless it moulds the life. There
is here no possibility of a compromise of this kind
—that a subordination of religion to ecclesiastical
authority and the possession of an inwardness of
disposition can be simultaneously preserved—but the
fact stands here upon an inexorable Hither—Or.
Where the truth is presented from the external,
the inner life is unable to gain entire self-reliance ;
where the inner life has gained such self-reliance,
it will survey the external by its own necessities
and shape it to its own demands; and it must reject
any constraining leadership as an inadmissible bond-
age. Freedom and inwardness are ever inseparable ;
and he who will not accept the perils of freedom,
must for good or evil renounce an independent
inwardness and a genuine personality. Life can
possess but one centre of gravity, and this lies
either within the invisible inner world, and, if so,
within the soul; or within the visible and, thus,
outside the soul; and it is only a confused mode of


A RELIGION OF A DISTINCTIVE KIND 467


thinking that attempts to find a mid-path between
this Exther—Or. It may be that a certain inward-
ness develops from the external binding, but it
remains a dejected, weak and sentimental inwardness,
and does not become the sanctuary of a new life and
the carrier of a new world.

The dangers of such an alleged superiority of the
Church over religion vary in different times; they
adjust themselves essentially according to the position
which religion itself occupies in the whole of Spiritual
Life. If religion stands in close connection with
Spiritual Life, and, if new energy and animation flow
constantly into it, then it is able to hold a counter-
balance to the expansion of the power of the Church ;
but if such a connection has been loosened and the
whole situation has become insecure, religion has
to seek support in the Church, and thus the
prominence of the Church and the rank growth of
the merely human are hardly to be avoided. But
the Church will then fail in greatness of creativeness,
and it need not wonder if the age sees in it more of
the human than of the Divine.

(cc) The Reconstruction of a Religious Organisa-
tion.—In connection with the Church, the dangers
and defects have hitherto largely occupied our
attention. But the fact should by no means be
overlooked, how much greatness the Church has
brought forth in the midst of all its mistakes, how
it has strengthened the soul, and how it has given
some kind of drift towards supersensuous values.
What the historical view within this domain shows
in the way of tangible events is usually unedifying
enough, and seems fully to justify the severe judgment


468 CHARACTERISTIC RELIGION


of Goethe concerning Church history. But it does not
show what entered into the souls of men, what led
them to noble incentives, what brought them peace
and happiness, and what upheld them in temptation
and tribulation. He who takes this into consideration
will be secure against a sweeping condemnation of
the Church, and he will not, with its mistakes, com-
bat the real achievements of the Church itself.

Such a course will not be taken especially because the
character of the religious organisation is not allotted
to us as a rigid destiny, but was changed in the past
and can be further changed. So that we should
not simply abandon the Church because the present
character of the Church displeases us, but strive
according to the best of our ability to bring about
a transformation. ‘The following points would seem
to be necessary in such a transformation.

1. In the first place, all coercion with regard to
men’s attitude towards the Church should disappear,
and entire freedom should obtain of joining this or
that Church or no Church at all. Earlier times felt
the unworthiness of a compulsion in this respect less
than it is felt to-day ; at the present time the con-
sciousness of this has awakened to full clearness; hence,
in such a situation, it must directly injure religion,
and turn the Church from being a fellowship of “holy
people” to being an apathetic community if men are
held fast to it through a stronger or softer pressure.
At this point again we see how religion is threatened
with greater injury from unwise friends than from
open enemies.

2. Further, more freedom, more movement and
individuality are necessary within the Church. We


A RELIGION OF A DISTINCTIVE KIND 469


refer herewith especially to the difference between a
more universal and a more characteristic disposition
in religion. The latter first drove men to a Church
organisation and, in such an organisation, naturally
maintains the foreground. But what it discerns and de-
fends as the final result of the experience of life should
not be imposed uniformly upon all individuals, and
should not be expected from them as their confession.
And especially should it not dominate the teaching of
the young save to beckon them to it as to a Holy of
Holies in the distance, and to assist them by way of
suggestion to become conscious of a veiled mystery,
but on no account should aspiring minds in their joyous
fulness of life be distressed and grieved. How can
every man and every child feel what such a mightily
contrasted nature as Luther’s with all its convulsive
experiences felt? Such an obtrusion injures re-
ligion because it incites a strong ill-will against
religion; it injures life because life becomes thus
accustomed to an unreality of feeling, as though to
something self-evident.

3. In order to obtain a true reconstruction of the
religious organisation, it is, before all else, needful to
discern rightly the characteristic content of religion.
Religion brings to man not some kind of trimmings
of life but the depth of life itself—the positing of man
within the nucleus of things, within a self-subsisting
reality. Religion in the first place is life, but life
not in the customary sense of a mere relationship
of things to a sentient subject ; but it is a Spiritual
Life in the fullest sense of the term—life of an en-
tirely active kind which develops a reality out of
itself, and which is present as a Whole in each situa-


470 CHARACTERISTIC RELIGION


tion. But such a life is entirely of an invisible kind
and lies beyond all the differences of psychic activity.
The religious organisation is not able to place itself in
the service of such a life unless it is constantly re-
ferred back to religion as the source of this life. The
Church has therefore the task, not so much to
propagate this or that doctrine, and not to set forth
this or that particular mode of activity, but, in the
midst of all the ramifications of activities, to point to
the Spiritual Life, to set forth the conditions of its
development, and to represent it amidst another kind
of world to the best of its ability. It has through
its convictions to penetrate into an acknowledgment
of this Spiritual Life and its new and all-essential
reality, and regard it as conclusive. ‘True, there. lie
in all this assertions concerning the whole of the
world—indeed, a Weltanschauung—but it makes a
great difference whether such a view is developed
from what has been assimilated by a genuine life and
is carried continuously by one’s own act, or whether
the view is offered us independently of our own
act and spiritual experiences, and whether life is
to develop from out of itself. It is not doctrines
in the main, but mere dogmas severed from life and
through the severance spinning further doctrines
—it is this that constitutes an evil in religion.
How much of all this is included in the traditional
organisation of Christianity! What significance, for
instance, has the doctrine of the Trinity to the re-
ligious life—a doctrine which only a philosophically
educated fraction of believers cansomewhat understand
and estimate its motives? And if Christian dogmas
on one side bring far too much, on another side they


A RELIGION OF A DISTINCTIVE KIND  47i


bring far too little. For instance, they have not a
single word of appreciation for the developing and
original Spiritual Life with its new configuration and
fundamental relationship to God, found in the life
and being of Jesus. So that often the subsidiary
facts become the main facts, and the main facts the
subsidiary ones. The age of the Reformation dis-
covered this fact very clearly, but it did not bring
things to a victorious issue; but religion will never
succeed in engendering a new life until such a change
and issue have come about.

Such a presentation of the Spiritual Life will by
no means efface all differences ; 1t will rather enhance
than contract the fundamental differences of minds.
Also, according to our investigation, religion is in no
manner a collection of all kinds of facts; it cannot
present its new world without culminating in a
differentiation in regard to the qualities within the
mind and spirit of man; it is able to serve the char-
acteristic power and genuineness of the entire Spiritual
Life only when such a differentiation within the soul
results, and it attempts to do this in the midst of the
spiritual torpor and inertia of our day. The differen-
tiation touches a point where minds part company,
where essential truths stand in question; the inmost
nature of man and the main direction of his effort
express themselves in the decision of appropriating or
‘rejecting ; and it is through such a decision that the
energy and depth of religion become evident. All
this, however, has no relationship to the elaborate con-
fessions of past generations ; such confessions can be
accepted with great readiness, and be united with a
great shallowness of religious life; and the opposi-


472 CHARACTERISTIC RELIGION


tion to all this may arise out of a genuine zeal for
religion.

How the recognition of the religion of the Spiritual
Life with its inner gradations carries in itself definite
decisions which have met us at each point of our
inquiry, it is not necessary here to do more than to
refer briefly to the fact. The main point to be borne
in mind is, that the world of nearest-at-hand experience
—outer and inner~does not signify the whole of
reality, that such a world rests upon a deeper world,
and it is only through this depth that it becomes intel-
ligible; in this depth the reality integrates itself
into a Whole and is able to be present as a Whole
in each individual place. But such a Whole is not
able to develop without a pointed collision with the
ordinary life and without demanding an energetic
division of the prior elements of life. As the Spiritual
Life becomes the true standard of all work, a spiritual
culture stands out in bold relief to all mere-human
culture, and produces a superiority over all the
agitations of mere time. Religion places human life
and all its efforts under the vista of eternity. True,
the movement of history is not without value to
religion; but the immediate results of history are
not of themselves standards and norms, but have
to justify themselves first of all before a higher
tribunal. Hence religion is well able to acknowledge
and to utilize for itself a position attained to by
spiritual evolution and belonging to universal history,
but it will discriminate such a position clearly from
the surface of time and the shifting opinions of men.
Religion will demand in a most decisive manner that
time with all its change and caprice shall not pass judg-


A RELIGION OF A DISTINCTIVE KIND 473


ment on the Spiritual Life, but that the latter shall
Judge concerning the valuable and the valueless of
the things of time. If religion holds forth in all this
a spiritual substance to life and calls all to battle for
this substance, will it not also drive the minds which
it has won for such a struggle to some kind of conjoint
work and of visible coherence? And will not religion
do this all the more, the more clearly the wide dis-
tance becomes visible between its own claims and the
ordinary situation of life ?

The growth of the task makes the opposition
appear all the greater, and a further experience shows
that the opposition does not succumb with the ac-
ceptation of the Spiritual Life. Religion itself steps
into evil entanglement and hindrance, and the dark-
ness and unreason of our world heighten. This
full acknowledgment is an essential portion of the
religious conviction; and it is in this that religion
parts company with all abstract idealism which is
satisfied with the mere fact of the Spiritual Life, but
which pays no heed to the more intimate experiences
of religion. Religious conviction further differentiates
itself from all the enthusiasm of the culture and
progress which believe themselves able to tone down
irreconcilable contradictions; it differentiates itself,
too, from all purely esthetic culture which shows only
the light side of things in the foreground, and which
threatens to transform the whole of life into a grace-
ful but merely empty play. But the religious con-
viction proclaims with all emphasis that life is no mere
play, but that from its foundation it carries within
itself a mighty strenuousness, and it is through this
conviction that religion can bind together its adherents


474 CHARACTERISTIC RELIGION


But the dismissal of a weak optimism in all its
forms does not drive religious conviction into the
path of a melancholy pessimism. For the religious
conviction ascends through all the complications and
hindrances to a new stage which lies beyond the
entanglements of human existence; here it is able
to found securely a reality, and here discover energy
and courage to combat all opposition. That life
finally reaches joyousness after painful toil, and
that at last out of the Nay a Yea dawns—this is
again a confession that can only proceed out of an
original movement of life—a movement in which
an energy for the union of souls dwells.

When the religious fellowship realises this fact
as well as other similar facts, it discovers for itself
a mighty task within and without. True, the fact
must ever be present that religion intends to raise
man to a cosmic life which claims to be the deepest
ground of all reality; and therefore the religious
fellowship dare not ever sever itself from the whole
of life, but it will maintain its place in this whole,
and take up the struggle against all perversion
with joyous courage and certain trust. Hegel was
justified in his warning against the petty retail-
traders of belief. Nothing is more essential for
religion—and nothing ought to be more essential
for the religious community—than to raise life into
Greatness, the finite into the Infinite, and the temporal
into the Eternal. Here it is necessary to struggle
against all that is sub-spiritual as well as against
all admixture of the spiritual with the merely human,
to struggle against defacements and malformations
of the Spiritual Life, to struggle against a torpor on


A RELIGION OF A DISTINCTIVE KIND 475


one side and against shallowness on the other side.
The spiritual is to be raised to its own heights, whilst
its ethical basal character, its superiority to all merely
natural process, its roots in freedom and action, its
formation of a relationship from a Whole to a Whole
with great clearness, are worked out and are vindi-
cated in the face of all contradiction. The decision
for all this results not so much in_ particular
propositions and doctrines as in convictions and
modes of thinking; it produces not so much
finished results as solid tendencies and broad lines
of battle; it furnishes a touch-stone for the separa-
tion of the genuine and the spurious in time, and
enables our effort to gain an over-individual stand-
point. ‘The deepest minds of men can and must meet
together in such a standpoint; then a concentration
opposes a destruction; a substance of life is main-
tained over against all mere manifestation of energies ;
and human existence, amidst the full estimation of
conflicting experiences, signifies a meaning which
never can fall upon us from without but which has to
be struggled for ever anew. Such are the demands
of all times; such are especially the urgent demands
of the present.

(8) The Relationship to History.—The inquiry into
religion has led us often into the problem of history.
We have already observed that there is no such thing
as history—history as an inner experience—without
a return-movement to an eternal order of things.
We have also observed how religion, through its
discovery of various stages in life, increased in a most
important manner the significance of history and the
historical character of our existence. In this place we


476 CHARACTERISTIC RELIGION


are not so much concerned with a question of principle
as with the question how far is religion a matter of
history, what promises does history make, and what
dangers does it prepare.

Religion of the Characteristic kind will urge history
to assist in the development of life. For this religion
is founded upon great experiences of life, and is unable
to deny that these experiences do not clearly meet
everyone at every moment, but that those deeper
experiences of religion can become strongly obscured
through the passing experiences of the moment.
And since, at the same time, the conviction, with-
in the province of religion, obtains that the course
of time is not able to bring forth new truths
but only an unfolding of a timeless truth, it is
in no way impossible to gain stimulations and
indications from past times, such as our own time
does not offer. Should not the past thus bring the
present to a completion, and does it not contain
conspicuous epochs when the religious movement—the
religious creativeness—scaled a height otherwise un-
attainable ? Such summits might be found—summits
where pressing problems of the general situation
and great personalities came into contact with each
other, and through the contact the otherwise stag-
nant existence was brought into a current. Through
this the historical religions originated, which in-
corporate a type of spiritual life—a type which
exhibits its power through the centuries and mil-
lenniums, and brings and offers to man what has
been gained in the form of achievements and experi-
ences. Should we not set our own life in union
with this ?


A RELIGION OF A DISTINCTIVE KIND = 477


Certainly we must do this, but we must not pass
over the limits and dangers of such a union with
history precisely in the domain of religion. Religion
lays hold of an Absolute Life which in its very nature
istimeless. If a particular epoch advances particularly
far, yet it apprehends the Eternal far better as the source
of its achievements ; and its genuine effect lies in the
fact that it illumines the path to the Eternal, and not
that it holds mankind fast in itself. In a word, it is
only in so far as the epoch places itself in the service
of an immediate and intimate life, only in so far as it
leads out beyond itself, and only in so far as it frees
man from the accidental nature of the moment
and raises him into a genuine present, that history
can further religion. Hence, that alone can be
religiously valuable which transforms itself into an
immediacy of life, and it is always necessary to test
how far the historical quality of anything corresponds
to such a demand. The soul’s own life thus stands
always above all mere communication of the past ;
thus it adjusts the past from the standpoint of the
height of its own experience ; thus religion develops
itself not so much from out of history as wethin history ;
and thus all genuine use of history becomes at the
same time an annulment of bare history.

This treatment of history differs from the tradi-
tional and still prevalent church organisation of the
present day more than is usually discovered; and
friends of the newer mode of thought often under-
rate the greatness of such a turn. ‘The old mode of
thought conceived of the Divine as being enclosed
in a particular point of time, and that the work of
later generations was simply to appropriate and to


478 CHARACTERISTIC RELIGION


hold fast to what had there and then appeared ; they
must copy truly the model presented there. Thus
we obtain that ideal of the imitation of Christ—an
ideal which has governed the life of Christendom from
a height far above all other individual summits. This
conception of religion possesses as its broad foundation
a conviction of truth and of life’s content which in its
scientific aspect reaches back to Plato. ‘Truth appears
hereas harmony with a pre-existing immutable Essence,
and Spiritual Life appears as a copy, an imitation,
and an explanation of this perfect Essence. According
to this, there is nothing new to be reached; there is
no essential progress and no universal process; all
that is necessary is to guide reason and effort ever
back to the summit which, according to Plato, did
not lie within but above time, and which for the first
time is planted by the Christian conviction wethin
time. The new mode of thought has broken away
from this ideal of truth not so much through theor-
etical reflection as through the heightening of the
needs of life, and through a deeper longing for in-
dependence and originality. Truth appears now no
more as a copy of an absolute essence but as an
elevation to an Absolute Life, and as an intimate
participation in such a Life. It does not belong to
this particular part of our discussion to examine here
how all this transforms the tasks and conditions of the
individual provinces as well as especially the problem
of knowledge; but evidently there grows through
all this a characteristic relationship of history to life,
because now we have not to seek within life a ready-
made truth which we have to hold fast and to
imitate, but all that was great in history is to be


A RELIGION OF A DISTINCTIVE KIND 479


transformed back into the immediate timeless life
from which it arose, in order that from out of the
community of this life it may be able to profit us.
The contact is able to become far more intimate
than all merely historical communication is able to
engender; but at the same time the relationship
becomes free, because life has ever to wrestle with
greatness in order to win greatness.

What is demanded by such a turn is not already
fulfilled through any stronger relationship of history
with the subject—not through an inner subjective
appropriation. For as certainly as personal life, that
forms worlds and elevates being, is something other
than a subjective life, quite as certainly life con-
tains the demand of a superiority to history, and
quite as certainly must that life relate itself not so
much in a passive as in an active way to history;
certainly, too, must that life incessantly free the
eternal content from the transient of the mere form
of time, and thus see another meaning in it and
make something other out of it than the older mode
of viewing it had done.

Let us consider further, in the light of such a
discussion, in what special manner history can aid
religion. If it is necessary to obtain a new reality
superior to the world, history becomes of use through
its great personalities as well as its great organisations.
Both are indispensable for the furtherance of the higher
life. In personality alone does life reach the height
of original creativeness, but without organisation the
new creation gained could not unfold itself into a
thoroughly complete reality, and could not encompass
the individual with its spiritual atmosphere.


480 CHARACTERISTIC RELIGION


Indeed, the stronger religion develops its character-
istic mode, the more will it seek a close relationship
to great personalities, for these alone present the life
superior to the world in an intuitive form and as
secure actuality ; and without such personalities such
an elevated life would appear only in indefinite out-
lines. The Divine within the depths of human nature
is now awakened to a vivid life, and is brought to full
effect for other lives also. That the new life is not
in the main a product of mere man but is a com-
munication of God, is the fundamental conviction of
all religion. But the average of mankind fails to
work out and to place in clear bold relief the Divine ;
the Divine here loses itself in the merely human path,
and does not disengage life from pettiness and doubt.
To those rare ones only has power been given to
sever the Divine from the merely human and to hold
it forth in a clear form as a characteristic, immense,
and elevated world to man, and to allow such Divine
effects with all their energy to work upon the soul.
When such happened, it produced a raising of the
life into greatness and certainty; it freed man from
merely subjective particularity, and brought him a
progressive certainty of the presence of a Divine
within his own nature. Thus the customary and
conventional life with all its petty aims sank to a
lower level, and all its power faded away before the
glory of a new world. But all this happens not
through any new doctrines, but pre-eminently through
the raising up of a new life, through the development
of a characteristic spiritual type, which grips the man
with irresistible power, and which brings him to a
realisation of that which has been prepared in the


A RELIGION OF A DISTINCTIVE KIND 481


depth of his own nature, but which is not able to
ascend from the realm of shadows to that of a clear
reality without such a help. The main and essential
effect of such great personalities is the fact that they,
through the powerful energy with which they present
before us a type of life incarnated within themselves,
constrain us to a decision and lift us out of the stag-
nation of the trivial occurrences of daily routine.

In order to obtain such a power, it is essential that
the content should succeed in reaching an intuitive
form—that the sublime thought should gain flesh
and blood. We have already recognised in this the
work of an imagination which holds sway over entire
worlds, and which makes the inconceivable easy and,
indeed, self-evident, whilst it places the best that
appears in this present world into the service of the
new world. The representation of this sublime reality
retains here also its aspiring and symbolical character.
Is it not a symbol, for instance, when in the teaching of
Jesus, the relationships of parents and children typify
the union of God and humanity? But notwith-
standing the symbol, no cleft is felt here because what
actually belongs to our world is seen in the light of the
new world, and is through it ennobled, raised, and
transfigured. Because thus the higher draws to itself
the lower, and because the higher can even shine out
of the lower, the full presence of the Divine appears
reached. Such a union of the Divine and the human
is not confined to individual summits in the history
of the world, but extends itself over the whole of
humanity ; it results in an inner elevation and in a
spiritualisation of the whole of existence ; it constructs,


through the dawning of its content, an essentially
31


482 CHARACTERISTIC RELIGION


original life with its secure superiority to the confusion
and unreliableness of the social sphere, and also with
its energetic conviction of a life of the spirit founded
upon the incontestable fact of the living presence of
a new world within the human circle. Nowhere is it
more true than here that it is not history that makes
man, but that it is man who makes history.

Thus, our estimation of the great personalities
of the Church is able to follow a good portion of
the path which they travelled over. But a point of
divergence certainly occurs. Where the realisation
of a new and intimate life founded in God appears
as the main fact, and where, as greatest of all achieve-
ments, the experience of this Divine Life is recog-
nised, the Highest dare not sever itself from human
nature, but must remain with it in genuine com-
munion of life, for otherwise the elevation would
mean no elevation of the whole nature of man.
It is only when such great ones belong wholly to
us, only when they participate in our struggles and
sorrows, our temptations and doubts, that their experi-
ence is able to become ow7 experience, their overcoming
our overcoming, and that the miracle which occurred
in them can ever renew itself. Further, the passive
character of religion here falls away. The man
moved greatness as far as possible into the distance
in order to gaze upon it with a blind devotion instead
of binding it most definitely with his own life and
effort. But such a binding is impossible through
mere imitation and blind submission. That which
can work best towards greatness is the training for
an ever fuller freedom. The free person, however,
must set and even prove all—-even the Highest and


A RELIGION OF A DISTINCTIVE KIND 483


especially the Highest—upon the foundation of
his own life, and see what all this can mean
for life. All this prevents in no way a deep and
sincere veneration of greatness; but this greatness
must never in itself become an object of religious
faith, and all worship of man should be kept at
a distance as an injury to God.

In a way other than that of great religious person-
alities, history works through the religious community.
All pre-eminent greatness of such personalities does
no injury to the significance of the religious com-
munity. For mankind is in need not only of
creativeness, but also of the preservation of this
creativeness ; it is in need not only of a fundamental
foundation for action, but also of continuous pro-
gressive actions. He who bears in mind the fact that
in religion it is not so much the question of the salva-
tion of the mere individual that stands in the fore-
ground, but the formation of a spiritual nature and
of a cosmic life in the soul of man, will in no way
wish to see the cosmic character of religion stunted ;
he will perceive that his own consolidation and
realisation are obtained through the community,
which is indispensable on account of its spiritual
atmosphere and its historical continuity. But this
continuity does not lie in external things but
in a unity of spirit, and this spirit cannot flow
in, upon the later generations, from without, but
must ever originate anew, in order that it may seek
a strengthening in what is transmitted and in order
to differentiate the eternal from the temporal.

Consequently the position of man to the historical
religions can never be that which the ecclesiastical


484 CHARACTERISTIC RELIGION


forms aim strongly to make it. These religions are
receptacles of truth or pathways to truth, but are
never the truth itself. They offer in our human
situation and exigencies the eternal not in its pure
form but mixed with the temporal and the fluctuat-
ing. In such a connection adherence to an histori-
cal religion does not mean the recognition of simply
everything in its total condition as so much pure
truth, but the welcoming and reverencing in it the
formation most readily capable of developing within
itself the absolute religion, which can never exist
without an historical religion.

How much, however, history can mean in this re-
spect is not decided in the last resort by general
reflection, but by the witness of human experience.
But it is decided before all else by this: whether,
among the historical religions, one religion is extant
that has seized with full consciousness, and has de-
veloped through the whole of its being that which
has presented itself to us as the kernel of religion—
especially of Characteristic religion. If this is the
case, then it is not necessary to find the path-
way of truth beforehand, but only to proceed farther
on the path already found. This point, however, is
a later conclusion of our investigation.

In the event of an affirmation, however, religion is
no ready-made possession of man; it remains a
matter for incessant seeking and wrestling, and
must ever issue anew from man’s own work and
experience. But what man loses in rest and alleged
security, he gains in the greatness and truth of
the new facts. For is there not far too large a
picture of religion presented when we view it as


A RELIGION OF A DISTINCTIVE KIND 485


ever anew arising from the foundation of a timeless
order of things and proceeding as a continuous work,
and when the growth of the new reality encom-
passes all ages and civilisations? Would it not
be better to present a smaller picture which shows
religion as having been essentially completed at a
special point of time, and that all succeeding ages
have but to hold fast to what had been fixed
there? It is not in the fixation of its content
to any one particular point of time that religion
verifies its genuine eternity, but in a living and
elevating present in the midst of all the fluctua-
tions of time and over against the changes of time.
But do not such a presentation of the inner life
and such a critical relationship to history and society
bring us perilously near to the rationalism which
we do not fear so much as does the historicism of
the nineteenth century, but whose limits, however,
have been laid bare by the experience of the times in
a way that cannot be contradicted? We answer, No.
For the bearer of life is not for us the individual
with his supposed ready-made intelligence, but the
personality only in its process of becoming, through its
encompassing of the world and its upbuilding of a new
reality. The intimate and timeless life which such a
cosmic nature desires cannot be acquired by it either in
a day or in isolation, for in order to climb to its own
heights the life must draw the traditional religious
world into itself and remain in constant intercourse
with such a world. The content of this religious
world can mean so much more to us than to rational-
ism, because religion does not merely signify to us a
view of the universe or theoretical notions for the


486 CHARACTERISTIC RELIGION


definition and explanation of phenomena. Religion
means to us a mighty concentration of the Spiritual
Life; in it we observe and revere great spiritual
energies in which hidden experiences of our nature
are revealed, and which have made life itself quite
other than it was—made it richer and deeper. ‘Thus
Christianity has not so much brought forth new con-
ceptions of God and the universe as that it has trans-
formed the fundamental process of life, and along
with this our fundamental relationship to reality ;
since it became strong enough, through the most
intimate union of God and man, to take up the
whole depth of suffering into the Life-process, and
at the same time to raise the Life-process beyond
sufferng. Through this, Christianity changed not
merely the view of reality but reality itself, and thus
introduced man to a more essential life. This further
development of life does not depend on the mere
environment or on mere time; for unless such a
development is laid in the very foundation of man’s
nature, unless it is constantly able to verify and to
renew itself, it can never become our own truth,
faith, and hope. But the penetration into this founda-
tion of our being is made immeasurably easier through
its linkage with history, and especially through the
positing of the nature upon the formative process of
the great religions where mighty convulsions and
renewals have raised them out of all the insecurity of
reflection, and out of all the pettiness of daily routine.
It remains always a main fact that history is not able
to deliver us from the decisive experiences and
further developments of life, but it is able to make
them easier.


A RELIGION OF A DISTINCTIVE KIND 487


The fact that the historical religions thus render
the abiding truth far more intuitive and even _per-
sonified, through its close relations to special person
alities, epochs, and environment, signifies a great
gain so long as this embodiment does not enter into
conflict with the spiritual substance. For it is only
through this turn to intuition, to the entire individu-
ality of an historical formation, that the religious life
is able to free itself from the other-worldliness and
shadowy character which otherwise cling to it. The
individual instances in the historical religions are thus
no mere examples, but a living factual proof—an in-
contestable realisation. History is able through such
a contact with intimate life to place on one side all
alienation, and to become more confiding to us than
all the visible things of the present moment, and than
all sensuous nearness. ‘Thus the distant land where
the Saviour lived and worked and suffered has become
to Christendom a spiritual home, and the personalities
who surrounded him have become types that have
permanently accompanied the work of life, and that
have raised the centuries ever anew to either love
or enmity.

But such an interweaving of history and life
depends on fixed conditions. It can succeed only in
so far as life finds the pathway to history easy, only
in so far as life furthers its own efforts through the
aid of history, and only in so far as the interval
between past and present is not perceived. But
when this interval is perceived, most important
transformations create a barrier between the intimate
contact of the Now and the Then. ‘Thus we are not
able, in connection with the affairs of history, to


488 CHARACTERISTIC RELIGION


affirm anything without also denying something ; we
are not able to acknowledge anything without also
limiting it. Thus the naive fusion of past and
present fails, and the historical tie can readily
become a hindrance. History then recedes into the
distance, and remains inwardly alien to us even in
the midst of all the incessant scholarly disquisitions
concerning it.

Such days are critical days, and even painful days
for man. But they are necessary phases of a
universal movement; they are indispensable for the
purifying and deepening, for the purer working out
of eternal truth, and for a fundamental preparation
of a new configuration of the things of religion.
What gets shaken in such days is in reality not
the fundamental fact of religion itself—not the mani-
festation of an intimate reality founded in God—
but the human conception of this reality. Indeed,
the upheaval itself is in the last resort a testimony of
the presence of Superior Powers. Mere movements
and transformations within its own province alone
have always proved dangerous to traditional religion ;
all changes in the conceptions of the universe, all
adoption of new aims of activity do not, in spite of
the strong agitation of souls, remain long outside the
substance of religion, but enter into the ground and
plant themselves in the soil of religion, and thus
act as a real portion of religion itself. It is only then
that a conflict of the new with the other views becomes
irreconcilable. So that finally nothing other than
religion itself produced the upheaval and the renewal ;
or rather, the Divine in religion has anew proved its
sublimity above all human configurations, whilst it


A RELIGION OF A DISTINCTIVE KIND = 489


proved, rejected, and transformed such configurations.
Viewed thus, the most painful crisis, with all the
anxieties and unrest which it prepares for man, is an
expression of the sway of a Superior Power which
does not create without destroying and which does
not destroy without creating.


PART IV.—CHARACTERISTIC RELIGION


(ConrINUED)


CHAPTER XIV
(d) Tue GeneraL Aspect oF RELIGION AND LIFE


Ir is now necessary to examine in conclusion how,
after the appearance of Characteristic religion, the
general aspect of life presents itself, how far a
solution of the problems which led to religion has been
achieved, and whether the solution has resulted in
the sense we strove to see at the commencement of
our investigation. For it could very well be that
the development of religion had made out of man
something quite other than he seemed to be prior to
this development, and that he in his aspiration after
happiness found more than happiness in the sense of
human well-being. Perhaps the experience of Saul,
that Goethe was so fond of citing, applies to us all—
of Saul who went out to seek his father’s asses and
found a kingdom.


1. The Persistence of Evil


What drove man mainly to religion was the long-
ing for a deliverance from evil—evil without and
within—a longing after a fuller and purer happiness.


Has religion, as it manifested itself to us, satisfied
490


GENERAL ASPECT OF RELIGION AND LIFE 491


this longing, and has it driven evil out of life? We
do not find this to be the case. Even after the
manifestation of the Divine Life things proceed
externally on their old course; the rigid indifference
of the course of the world remained unaltered
towards the whole Spiritual Life of man. This
Spiritual Life continues suddenly to disappear under
the forms and aims of human frailty ; it remains an
inner impotence, tattered and torn, and perverted ;
the inscrutableness of destiny remains, which exhibits
neither an order of righteousness nor a reign of love.
Indeed, the pressure of evil and the gravity of unreason
seem to be but further increased within man. It is,
first of all, increased in itself. For now it is in direct
contradiction to the new manifestation of Divine Life ;
it sets itself against the domain of love, and love is
hemmed in by it; now evil integrates itself more
into a totality and seems to set forth an energy of its
own against the Divine. Nowhere is this heighten-
ing more to be witnessed than in the problem of
morality, because first of all Characteristic religion
stamps any deviation from its path as a rebellion
against a Holy Will and consequently as a guilt.
Further, the elevation of the standard through the new
life renders much problematic which was otherwise
without any doubt. The standard now shows clearly
the two-edged character of all human efforts and of
mere culture and civilisation with all theirramifications.
On the one hand, science and art appear now as the
highest aims for obtaining a reality superior to the
world, and for bringing about the redemption of the
soul. On the other hand, practical and technical work
appears not as Divine but as a potentially diabolical


492 CHARACTERISTIC RELIGION


power which can also turn into evil and demoralises
man. Thus, it becomes clear that the most serious
hindrance to the spiritual lies within the spiritual itself.

But along with the thing, the consciousness of it also
grows. Religion, in its progress towards a Character-
istic mode, has filled man with a new need of life, and
-without such aid man’s energy and courage grow
weary amidst insurmountable obstacles of a hostile
world. Religion further has ennobled this need from
its very root, so that man in the inmost depth of his
being succeeds in coming to a union with the Divine ;
he cannot, and dare not if he could, consider himself
and his actions as indifferent, and he dare not wholly
despair. After his hopes have been strengthened,
and a greater inwardness and a greater longing
after love are awakened, he must experience, with
all its poignancy, the insufficiency of all that
human existence offers in the way of soul and of
love. The lack of affection within the visible order
of things, the fleetingness and the semblance of
all human love, the inner forlorn condition of the
Spiritual Life in a dark world, meet man now in a
far more painful manner than hitherto. And the
leading spirits of religion were unanimous in pro-
claiming that religion, with its heightening of the
standard and the deepening of feeling, rendered
suffering not easier but more difficult: “the more of
a Christian a man is, the more is he subject to
evil, suffering, and death” (Luther).

In addition to this, religion not only appears
powerless against the remaining world, but the very
enemy whom it is supposed to overcome penetrates
into its own province. ‘The superhuman is not able to


GENERAL ASPECT OF RELIGION AND LIFE 493


communicate itself effectively to man without some
kind of incarnation within man’s own domain; the
inner fellowship must adopt external forms in order
to become a power within the historical domain.
But simultaneously with this, human frailty begins to
draw to itself the Divine; it begins to weld that
which was to raise man beyond himself; but man
welds this power far too much in accordance with his
own frailty, and moulds it so disastrously by means
of so much arrogance and pretence and of so much
craving for power and intolerance that the whole
may well seem to be rather a loss than a gain. In-
deed, the more highly religion thinks of its own task,
and the more seriously it undertakes such a task, the
less is it able to conceive of the possibility of toning
down and of glossing over the actual situation, or of
leaving human nature in the condition it is in. If
there is no toning down of the Nay, it can only
be in the strengthening of the Yea that religion
comes to the aid of man.


2. The Overcoming of Evil


Such a strengthening of the Yea in reality estab-
lishes itself. The manifestation of a new life—of a
new reality—raises man with entire certainty above
the spheres of wrong and unreason. It is a funda-
mental conviction of religion that the new life in its
inmost nucleus withstands all hindrance, and that all
defacement of the Divine within the human circle is
not able to destroy it or to annul its effects. Also,
the human point of departure of life is set by God,
and the whole of life is maintained simply through
His energy, and is simultaneously withdrawn from all


494 CHARACTERISTIC RELIGION


human insecurity. In this inmost original depth, no
failure or guilt of man is able to destroy entirely his
spiritual substance ; he cannot, in the words of a re-
ligious mode of expression, again fall from grace if
once he has been gripped by grace. Even in the
midst of the most painful suffering, and in the over-
throw of all that was termed happiness, the blessed-
ness of a refuge in Infinite Love and of a peace
superior to the world in the union with the Final
Ground of things permanently remain. The fact
that God Himself preserves the Divine alive within
us and protects man also from himself has been the
stand upon which all hope of an ultimate conquest of
the Yea over the Nay within the soul of man rests.
The new life appears first of all in opposition to the
world, and only through loosening itself from the
world is it able to succeed in gaining full self-reliance.
But life does not on account of this become a merely
isolated province which is enclosed within itself, and
which allows the situation of the world to remain
unaltered. For such a course could mean no more
than a painful flight of individuals from the iniquity
of the world, and could help in bringing forth no more
than a devout disposition. Butin all this the sub-
stance of life would gain but little. The true meaning
of religion is rather the fact that such a higher life
signifies a higher stage of the total-life of man him-
self, that it develops further the very substance of
reality, and that it must strike its effects everywhere,
and must come to a fundamental understanding with
the environing world. The total aim of the Spiritual
Life, its turn from the world to its own depth, the
construction of an activity of the sustained and


GENERAL ASPECT OF RELIGION AND LIFE 495


transformed nature—all this is reached through an
intimate inclusion of the final unity ; it is only through
this that the movement of life entered once more into
a current, whilst otherwise life would have become
weary and worn on account of the oppositions.
Through such a turn, it is not only this or that isolated
good that is gained, but the whole of the Spiritual
Life is redeemed ; through the positing of man from
the fringe of things to their centre an inner relation-
ship to the whole of reality is gained; through the
comprehension of a continuous Divine act in the
formation and preservation of life, an indestructible
consolidation is acquired. The union from a Whole
to a Whole gave a depth of life to the Spiritual Life
of humanity as well as to the souls of individuals,
and it is from such a union that there originated what
is known as our experience of an intimate relationship
with things, of an inner expansion of human nature
and of a creativeness; and from such a union, too, all
spirit to labour and all soul to act have issued.

It is true that this life which originates in the
deepest ground is not conveyed immediately into the
domain of work and configuration. But it works
upon the whole of one’s being, and through this
works indirectly upon all else it comes in contact
with. But certainly this life is perverted and contains
a germ of the most intricate confusion when, for
instance, a Christian doctrine or a Christian State is
desired through the carrying over bodily the mere
formulas of religion, instead of realising that religion
consists in the possession of developing convictions
and doctrines. It is only a shallow mode of thinking
that can ignore the fact that Christianity is able


496 CHARACTERISTIC RELIGION


to work and has worked by transforming the whole
man, and that it culminates in bringing about an
alteration in his fundamental relationship to reality,
through the power which issued out of itself. He
who denies this connection with the fundamental
questions of our spiritual existence thinks of Science
and of the State not highly but meanly.

The conquest of the Yea is determined all along
the line by the turn to religion; we gain a portion in
an Absolute Life and, at the same time, an untold
activity; and we become fellow-citizens of a new
world. But in this final conquest of the Yea there
are two different kinds of things which must not be
forgotten: the negation and self-denial which the Yea
desires, and also the whereabouts of the oppositions
in the environing world and in the soul itself. Man
is not emancipated while he lives and thinks in his
natural state; he is set free only through an entire
inversion of his first impressions of the world-—through
the germ of an Infinite and Eternal Life. What is
usually deemed happiness—the full satisfaction of
natural impulse—ties below this sphere of the higher
life, and will also be overcome by the new emanci-
pation ; it is only in opposition to the small self that
there originates a spiritual self in man. So that re-
ligion on its summits does not speak of prosperity or
of supreme happiness, but of blessedness; and when
the popular idea falsely conceived of this as some-
thing lying on the other side of the grave, even
the mistake points to the truth that something must
pass away if ever a genuine life and being are to
be won. Religion rightly understood, is, in its direct
affirmation of life, very far removed from all eudaemon-


GENERAL ASPECT OF RELIGION AND LIFE 497


ism, and, indeed, frees itself fundamentally from the
narrownessof such aneasy-going affirmation. Insepar-
able from religion is the idea of sacrifice—the idea not
of a sacrifice happening but once, but of a continu-
ous sacrifice. Consequently there remains perma-
nently a loud lament even in the conquest of the Yea,
which is very different from the pleasurable Lubberland
of which common theological eudemonism dreams.

Further, over against the turn to religion, the
hostile world of darkness and unreason permanently
remains ; these draw man to themselves ; they clutch
him with the energy of sense impressions and with
the eloquence of the mere expansion of things, and
they gain power over his soul. This opposition is not
overcome once for all, but is to be overcome ever
anew ; pain does not entirely vanish, but remains and
echoes within the blessedness of the new life, and never
allows the conquest to enter into an inactive rest or
to become an indulgent enjoyment. If, however, the
energy is now a match to the oppositions, or rather
if man now becomes superior to them through the
presence of the Divine Life, this constant struggle
becomes an incessant conquest ; the whole life shapes
itself into a heroic deed ; suffering with its persistence
can indeed disturb and destroy, but cannot check a final
affirmation. In the great works of music we often
observe the fundamental theme develop and maintain
itself through a seeming chaos of tones and conflicting
discords, and also, in the very conquest the conflict does
not altogether vanish, but sounds on and on, yet now as
something overcome, until at last the harmony finally
triumphs.


32


498 CHARACTERISTIC RELIGION


3. The Religious Interpretation of Life and
the World


The religious solution of the problem of life, with
its strengthening of the good and its raising above
evil, contains in no manner an explanation and justi-
fication of evil. In order to do this it would be
necessary to demonstrate that evil passes entirely
into the good, and that in spite of all hostile appear-
ances it finally shows itself as a means of the good—
as a means by which we reach the depth of the good.
A proof of this is not, however, found. Also within
Christianity men have often troubled themselves over
this problem. Suffering and guilt were supposed to
be the only means of moving the Highest to unlock
His love and grace ; and upon the human side, only
grave guilt seemed to invest the feeling of need
with an inwardness and a longing after deliverance
through overpowering energy, as is explained in the
parable of the prodigal son. Thus guilt itself could
be extolled as fruit-bearing (felia) because it had
brought forth such a redeemer. A more philosophical
and far-reaching mode of thought, however, could
wish for a contrast of evil over against the full develop-
ment of the good, just as a dark background is con-
trasted with a clear light. “Who can speak of joy
who has felt no pain, or of peace who has not seen or
experienced strife 4” (Jacob Boehme).

Certainly such a mode of thinking is able to call
upon many experiences within the human circle in
favour of its claim. An ascent of life may often result
more easily from a precipitous fall with its scars than
from the stagnation of daily routine. Evil may


GENERAL ASPECT OF RELIGION AND LIFE 499


exercise a stirring power, and along with this, point
out the path of goodness; suffering and guilt may
occasionally be conducive to the inner advance of
life and to the formation of a new nature. But
that they are always this, or that they are pre-
eminently this, is demonstrated in no manner. How
often evil with its acute growth increases its grip
upon man and fetters him for ever! And how
dangerous would such a teaching concerning evil as
a necessary gate to the domain of the good become
if it were raised to a doctrine and precept! Also, in
the totality of the world’s order, we dare not consider
evil as an indispensable means for the furtherance
of the good. An Almighty Love, according to the
conviction of religion, governs the world. And this
Almighty Love could not unlock its depth otherwise
than through the admission of guilt and suffering,
in order then to oppose them utterly. Would not
the Divine, through this, bend under the power
of a destiny which had prescribed its path? Do
we not step here into a web of anthropomorphic
ideas? And would not such an explanation place
in the very constitution of the universe the deadly
proposition that the good “end” justified the evil
means? Such an explanation sets a greater puzzle
than it attempts to solve.

In reality, such an explanation of evil corre-
sponds far more to the desire of speculation than
to that of religion. The inner elevation above evil
suffices. religion; religion must refuse everything
that weakens the edge of the opposites and the
tension of the struggle. And the reduction of
evil to a means for realising the good is such


500 CHARACTERISTIC RELIGION


a weakening—a weakening which threatens to trans-
form the mighty world-struggle into an artistic
arrangement of things and into an effeminate play,
and which takes away that bitterness from evil with-
out which there is no strenuousness in the struggle
and no virility in the life. Thus it remains perma-
nently true that religion does not so much explain
as presuppose evil. As religion sees the acme of
suffering in guilt, therefore it is inclined to seek the
deepest root of evil in guilt. But this is only a mere
pushing back of the problem, and is no explanation ;
indeed, every attempt at a didactic fashioning of the
problem leads to impossibilities. If man, by his fall,
is considered to have brought the whole world to
deterioration, religion is in danger of sinking into a
mythology.

If religion heightens rather than lessens the view
of the unreason of our existence, yet it brings a certain
relief through the enlargement of the conception of
reality—through the opening out of a new world-per-
spective. ‘Io those epochs whose thoughts and
tendencies were turned tenaciously towards another
world, hope and conviction could hold that all suffering
in the present world will find overflowing compensa-
tion in a future glory. Why of course this suffering
exists, remains dark. Help was sought in the
thought that through all suffering, and even all
guilt, our training is more and more completed,
that what appears at the outset as hardness may
finally serve the aims of love, that much which
astonishes us as being a Divine command proves
itself finally as a means for the elevation of our life.
But this is no more than a possibility. And why


GENERAL ASPECT OF RELIGION AND LIFE _ 50!


should this supposed education need such a circuitous
route if an absolute reason directs our life? Thus
we roam in the midst of explanatory attempts in
the region of mere possibilities; and these _possi-
bilities lead towards dangerous reefs the more we
follow them. The matter ever comes to this, that
religion places evil in quite another light, but that it
explains and interprets it in no way.

Further, religion does not solve the riddle of the
universe. The unfinished state of the whole—the
gradual and toilsome “becoming”—turns into a
difficult problem. And the “becoming” itself is
full of entanglements: stage raises itself above stage,
but the lower becomes no pure ascent to the higher
but maintains an independence over against it and
holds the movement rigid in itself, and, indeed,
threatens to draw back to itself all further effort.
The kingdom of nature constructs the foundation of
an immeasurable extension and strikes its roots into
the psychic life, and in this the sway of mechanism
is found; what points to the lawfulness of pheno-
mena, to the universal causal connection, and to
the construction of durable forms from a greater
depth, remains permanently in an inaccessible back-
ground. With the appearance of the Spiritual Life
a great turn results, but this Life remains tied to
the inadequate human form and succeeds but in a
toilsome way towards a mediocre self-reliance. And
it is able to maintain this self-reliance only in so far
as man within his own domain progresses from a
universal mode to a concentrated mode of viewing
things, and only in so far as he withdraws from
contact with the world of semblance to a pure


502 CHARACTERISTIC RELIGION


self-subsistence. This, however, seems to be not so
much to take possession of the world as to be carried
out of it.

In this gradation the more developed stages, on
account of their richer content, will deem themselves
more highly valued, and will claim to govern the lower
stages. ‘Thus especially the Spiritual Life would like
to handle nature as a mere means for its own aims.
But nature maintains its independence over against
the Spiritual Life and follows, as we have already
observed, its own course heedless of all spiritual values.
Similarly, within the Spiritual Life, the universal kind
of spirituality maintains itself over against the con-
centrated or characteristic mode, and such a general
mode refuses to become a means and a preparatory
stage for the concentrated mode. Whence, save on
account of this, is the pointed opposition to religion
found even within the Spiritual Life? Thus the
world-process itself seems to become narrowed and
entangled in itself: what strives upwards within the
world-process is not able to carry the whole domain
of reality along with itself, and it consequently steps
into a situation of the most insecure nature.

Such an entanglement strikes also into the method
of investigation, and places it under conflicting
motives. At one time, the higher is explained out of
the lower; at another time, the lower is explained
out of the higher. The former view has the im-
mediate impression of experience on its side; the
latter view calls to its own superiority for its better
right as an explanation, but as soon as it carries its
conceptions within the domain of the lower, it dis-
turbs the particular mode of operation of the lower


GENERAL ASPECT OF RELIGION AND LIFE 503


and seems to drag human qualities into the domain
of the lower. Thus the various views of the universe
enter into an irreconcilable contradiction ; each view
can injure the other views, but no single view is able
to conquer completely.

Within our human reality the entanglement grows
further, because here the higher stage remains depen-
dent on the lower for its own preservation, and is
not able within our world with all its superiority to
create an existence from out of its own energies. The
spiritual nature must ever anew achieve the means
for the maintenance of its life, and is thus drawn back
and pinned down to that which it feels inwardly it
has passed long ago. Even concentrated spirituality
whose stable support is constructed by religion needs
universal spirituality, beyond which, nevertheless, it
intends to lead us; for without this basis and the in-
dispensable help which it offers, concentrated spirit-
uality is in danger of fading and, indeed, of forfeiting
its spiritual character.

The entanglement reaches its climax, however,
when the lower penetrates into the heart of the
higher and gains strength for itself—when the
Spiritual Life sets unspiritual aims before itself.
Then the natural is refined, and _ self-preservation
heightens into selfishness; and then evil is no mere
departure from the good, but grows into an entire
perversion.

If all this were only a matter of esthetic reflection,
the sublimity of the spectacle could be willingly
acknowledged. ‘The scene would then appear as the
broad ground of nature developing unerringly into
simple iron laws, drawing all effort back to itself,


504 CHARACTERISTIC RELIGION


and appearing entirely indifferent towards all which
man calls good or evil. But on the contrary, a
Spiritual Life grows beyond the world-process, en-
genders an inwardness out of itself and turns towards
it, shapes a new reality but in the shaping narrows
and even destroys much of it, withdraws from its
ascent, denies it affirmations, resigns its toilsome
work, and allows itself to be overthrown. All this
appears as an ebb and flow—a colossal picture in life
and death. But is it all a mere picture—a mere
play¢ It is an awful self-contradiction, a tragic
deception, an empty phantasmagoria, if it claims to
be taken seriously and if it encloses in itself the whole
of our life and being, and if it signifies the ultimate
and the whole of all things. We are not able, how-
ever, to view it other than with seriousness.

If all this, with all its darkness, is not able to brow-
beat religion, religion must be considered in its inward
nature superior to that whole province, and it must
prove its superiority through the construction of a
new reality. We need only touch here on the point
which our investigation attempted to show, viz., that
religion not merely gathers together certain elements
at hand, but that, through the inauguration of an
independent spirituality, it brings forth something
essentially new ; life and the world are transformed
from their very foundations. As the whole of the
Spiritual Life gathers itself together in religion and
brings itself to expression, a new standard and a new:
content are gained by life. What was imbedded in
existence prior to the advent of the Spiritual Life
but was isolated and scattered, narrowed and dis-
figured, insecure and dependent, is through its union


GENERAL ASPECT OF RELIGION AND LIFE 505


with the Divine raised to a fuller self-reliance, to a
purer formation, and to a more consolidated position,
so that it is now able to work as an energy for con-
solidating and elevating, for selecting and rejecting.
The dawning of new possibilities which result here is -
itself a fundamental fact, and renders insufficient
what hitherto satisfied; it reduces in value what
hitherto stood in secure estimation. The ascending
aspiration found in religion after an appropriation of
the whole of infinity—after a life from out of the
soul of reality—breaks away step by step from what
hitherto captivated man. ‘The working rights of civic
life sink to the level of a merely preparatory stage
or to a caricature of the genuine culmination of life
with its essential and world-encompassing love; the
truth in which the ordinary routine of science finds
satisfaction becomes a mere semblance and shadow
when face to face with the genuine truth which opens
out the inner nature of things, and which transforms
these things into the soul. And also, genuine Art
becomes an inner community of life with things— it
becomes a new “becoming” which lies on the other
side of all mere gratification and ease. There results
thus a thorough and new fundamental relationship to
reality—an essentially new life. This New, however,
draws to itself from the situation of experience all that
it can appropriate; it drives asunder the opposites
and it places the confusion of things before an Hither-
Or; and it manifests its energy in stimulation and
movement. Simultaneously we discover a raising of
characteristic features out of the depth, an insight
into values and essentials, a simplification of reality,
and a penetrating concentration of life. All this is an


506 CHARACTERISTIC RELIGION


actual current which can never issue from the mere
reflection or mood of man but is a fact which gives
man, in the midst of all his unreadiness, the con-
scious certainty of his relationship to a higher order.
How the view of the world and the task of life,
through such a turn, alter their content in accordance
with the main tendency revealed is to be further
explained.

Religion as the inauguration of an over-world life
is no Weltanschauung. As it is unable to prove
fully its own higher Divine order from the con-
dition of the universe, it presents no explanation
of this condition. But it is not able to make the
over-world life the kernel of reality (not the kernel of
an isolated province) unless it transforms its total view
of reality, unless it brings the whole into a new light,
and rearranges the relationships of the various sides
of life to each other. Religion places a Whole in front
of all the manifold, and understands this manifold as
an expression of such a Whole; it will emphasise and
bring to effect all that reveals itself in the relationships
and connections of the elements of the world. The
laws of phenomena and their causal nexus become now
testimonies to a unity of the Whole; and so may be
said of the possibility of a reciprocal understanding
within the domain of the spirit, and the possibility of
an inner conjoint work: they point towards a unity
which carries and brings together all the manifold.
But before all else, as we have already seen, each indi-
vidual appears now not merely as a link in a chain but
also as being in intimate relationship to the Whole,
and, consequently, as being in himself of intrinsic
value and precious ; along with this, the individual is


GENERAL ASPECT OF RELIGION AND LIFE 507


able to form his own ends, and an esthetic insight of
things with its apprehension of infinity is founded in
the individual situation. Finally, this Whole within
the Spiritual Life is able to become, in the form of
immediacy, a characteristic personal experience and a
self-reliant deed; it is able to work against placing
all the inferences of life within the narrowness of any
particular or isolated circle. Without the presence
of the Infinite there would be no striving after truth,
no energy for the good or for love over against
egotistic utility.

Similar transformations occur in the relationship of
rest and movement. ‘The world appears to modern
reflection as a process existing in incessant change.
Religion, on the contrary, proclaims an eternal order,
and understands movement as an expression of this
eternal order. Again, there comes here prominently
forward for the first time into a persistent form what
the world-configuration contains as substance and law,
so that the movement itself cannot become a personal
experience without a standpoint superior to it. And
there is no genuine experience of history, and con-
sequently no history of a spiritual kind, without an
order of things which learns to survey, connect, and
deepen the conditions of things. Along with this,
the total view of occurrences transforms itself. ‘The
higher, which appears to an empirical considera-
tion of the world as a mere evidence of a process,
gains through religion an independence and superi-
ority. Because religion develops a self-subsistence of
reality and stands out in bold relief from all mere
nature and from all that is unspiritual, it acknow-
ledges in movement qualitative transformations—


508 CHARACTERISTIC RELIGION


essential enhancements—and it brings men, at the same
time, to the discernment that what happened within the
spiritual domain happens also in connection with the
whole of reality, viz., that the result is somehow a
principle—a principle that must be the presupposition
and driving energy of the movement whenever any-
thing shall issue out of the movement, as in reality
something does issue out of it. Because such a con-
viction, arising out of religion, wends its way towards
the world, it will everywhere carry forth the Character-
istic and the New which the progress of the process
brings with itself; it will understand the development
not as a result of the lower but as an ascent to a
higher stage—as a breaking forth of such a stage; it
will not bind the situation of experience to the mere
level on which experience now stands, but will guide
it beyond its present situation. Culture appears as
such a course of thought: it is not a mere bettering
of a mere-human existence but an ascending tendency
towards a new world; the spiritual greatness which
occurs in history appears now not asa mere More of the
commonplaces of the environment but as the inaugu-
ration of a self-reliant spiritual world over against
such commonplaces. Thus, all that life contains for
its inner ascent clarifies and connects itself together
through religion. And as religion, through such a
mode of thinking within its own domain, trans-
forms the movement, from a drifting along towards
vagueness, from a meaningless hurry to a return to
itself, and along with this brings life to an inner
rest, so will religion work against the abandonment
of things to the mere movement, and it will be-
come the focussing point of all that gives stability


GENERAL ASPECT OF RELIGION AND LIFE 509


to life, and invests all effort after a consolidation
with more meaning and reason.

Religion has opened out an intimate relationship
with an Infinite and Absolute Life, and has given
our life an originality over against all the attempts
to classify it within the causal nexus. As religion
thus places man between two worlds, it calls him to
a self-decision and makes freedom for the first time
possible, for freedom remains an empty delusion so
long as we are only pieces of a merely “ given ” world.
And, for the first time, religion furnishes the possibility
of an inner renewal and of a new beginning through
a contact with an inexhaustible depth. As thus
worlds come to a focus within the deepest inwardness
of the soul, and as freedom becomes a portion of our
spiritual self-preservation, then this ennobles every
effort after freedom and strengthens the confidence
in the possibility of an inner renewal throughout the
whole breadth of life. How much we are in need
of such a confidence, since even the most brilliant
civilisation finally outlives itself, and since mankind
even amidst the greatest richness of results be-
comes inwardly sterile! And, further, the whole of
life gains immensely in stimulation and tension, In
meaning and value; it passes out of merely ex-
ternal occurrences to a genuine life of its own where
it transforms itself in the struggle between an
old and a new world, between originality and im-
posed conditions, between its own deed and the
process of nature. For “without the contradiction
of necessity and freedom, not only philosophy but
every higher will of the spirit would sink into death ”
(Schelling).


510 CHARACTERISTIC RELIGION


Religion founds the whole of reality upon a cosmic
inner life. The fact that religion preserves such a
depth within us must be discovered through the
presence also of more inwardness in the rest of
life, and everything must be strengthened which
aspires after such a depth. Certainly, religion does
not carry every outer into an inner, every visible
thing into the invisible; but in the midst of the
visible an invisible.kingdom can be present, which
sees more and more in the visible, and which enables
the visible to produce new effects. We have already
observed how Art especially wrested a soul from the
external, and simultaneously opened out a new king-
dom of life. And in this connection, too, does the
progressive deepening which is visible in life every-
where find its true interpretation and its full acknow-
ledgment. Thus the facts themselves illumine them-
selves and gain an energy for our efforts, so that in
the advance of the movement the Inner ceases more
and more to be a mere addendum of the sensuous
world, and becomes the main standard of life, and
through this culminates in an effective re-valuation
of all value and excellences.

Such a progress would not have been possible
without the differentiation of a substantial and
intrinsic inwardness from a subjective and empty
inwardness. The foundation of such a genuine in-
wardness is secured only through the acknowledgment
of an independent inner world as is represented by
religion. In order to bring this truth to clearness,
it has to be borne in mind that the inwardness not
only engenders new contents and values, but in the
main it makes in the first place these contents and


GENERAL ASPECT OF RELIGION AND LIFE 511


values possible. These values could never happen
from without, and could never originate out of
man’s mere contact with external things, but they
require an inwardness grounded in the soul itself.
But this truth is not able to find a secure basis in
religion unless its effects and sway illumine clearly
the remainder of life, and connect themselves
energetically together. Thus, to all striving belongs
an actual necessity over against a merely subjective
opinion and inclination as presented in science and
art, law and morality. Where otherwise lies and
works that actual necessity save in the characteristic
inwardness of the spirit of man? It is out of this
source alone that conceptions such as personality and
spiritual individuality gain an independence and a
characteristic content over against mere nature, and
are able to obtain a value in what takes place within
themselves. And it is from the same source that
the standpoint and the inner scope of life, which all
genuine spiritual work presupposes, are explained. For
these dare not make either the external result or the
merely subjective welfare their own final end without
becoming inwardly degraded and, indeed, inwardly
destroyed. If they are ever to maintain a self-reliance
against carnal appetites without and within, and if
they are to preserve the results of their labour from
falling into emptiness, they must stand within an
inner world, and find their entire satisfaction in the
further development of such a world and in the
incorporation of it within the human circle. Thus,
the whole of life exhibits a struggle between a sub-
jective and a substantial inwardness. The latter,
however, appears the greater, and gains in energy


512 CHARACTERISTIC RELIGION


when it finds through religion a firm centre and, at
the same time, a closer bond of union.

The movement against the mere humanising of our
existence—a movement which penetrates all spiritual
effort—stands in close relationship with what we
have just discussed. For we could not speak at all
of truth over against mere opinion, or of good over
against mere utility, unless there is some point of
departure from the limits of mere humanity, and unless
there is an acknowledgment of a truth beyond man
himself. But what is maintained in this statement is
impossible of realisation without raising the Spiritual
Life from the narrowness and subjection of its human
mode ; and this religion does through the acknow-
ledgment of a superhuman origin of the Spiritual
Life. As, then, the wonderful seems now possible to
religion, religion must now strengthen the power as
well as the positive assurance of all effort to reach it.
Now for the first time it can be fully realised that all
genuine spiritual culture undertakes a struggle against
the petty-human, and that the progress into the
spiritual presents itself as an ever-further repression of
thepetty-human, and that especially moderntimes form
atthis point a sharp dividing-line. Its great thinkers—
a Spinoza, a Kant, and a Hegel—set their best energy
upon the attempt to bring life to such a point where
all the isolation and limitation of man fall away, and
where a spiritual content of a universal kind and of
an absolute validity opens itself out.

Thus religion, all along the line, throws a new
light upon life ; new aspects of life become prominent
in this light, and bind together elements otherwise
isolated ; more aspiring reason comes into existence,


GENERAL ASPECT OF RELIGION AND LIFE 513


and more simplicity and greatness are discovered.
The concentration which grows through religion
works beyond itself into the whole of life, and binds
all the manifold more energetically into a total activity.
Life as a whole thus gains a new total view, and
appears now more than a mere movement within a
given circle—more than a maintenance, an enjoyment,
or an ornamentation of natural existence ; it appears
as an apprehension of a new and essentially different
world, and, indeed, as an entire inversion of all prior
existence. This does not mean that all existing
things enter into such an ascent, as an optimistic
evolutionary doctrine asserts, but it does mean that
a connected movement to a new height arises, and
carries with itself an immense current of actuality—a
current which could never be produced by the re-
flection of mere man.

The fact that religion thus appears as the height
and the animating soul of a wider life and that it
illumines, collects, and strengthens so much, may
be greeted as a corroboration of its own truth. But
it dare not base its truth upon that wider life,
as has often been attempted and has called forth
inevitable opposition. For in our view the world
receives its interpretation only after the develop-
ment and consolidation of the absolute life by
religion; unless this fact is observed, the proof is
searched for in the empirical situation, which may
suggest the greater depth represented by religion ;
but, prior to the appearance of religion, this More
of religion remains an obscure background, and
it is thus a leap of thought alone that can give it
an intimate relationship to religion. ets e leap


514 CHARACTERISTIC RELIGION


takes place, for instance, when, through the observa-
tion of the interaction of the elements in nature, it
is sought to prove the existence of God as the
connecting medium; or when, within the organic
world, the existence of teleological tendencies and
formations are made to prove the guidance and
activity of God. But we must not forget that no
province can prove anything outside its own reach,
and that an attempt to do this leads into anthropo-
morphism. It is similar with human and historical
life. ‘fo him who sees life in the light of religion,
life itself becomes a verification, and he will find
everywhere indications of the presence of an Infinite
Life, but he dare not reverse this method and attempt
to make of an external derivative a foundation of
religion. ‘To allow the religious interpretation and
the scientific explanation of the universe to blend
into one injures not only science but also religion.

We have already witnessed the religious interpreta-
tion work in the direction of consolidating and gather-
ing together, and through this raising the courage
of life. But an explanation or even a diminution
of evil is not brought forth. But rather the increase
of the action on the good side makes the opposite side
appear all the greater, and stronger than ever the
power of destruction and of unreason comes promin-
ently forward. But all this is a gain—and it is no
small gain—because the matter is now abstracted from
man’s subjectivity, and a cosmic movement and a
cosmic struggle have become evident. Mysterious
as the whole may appear, there cannot be a doubt
concerning one’s own situation and task. Different
grades of reality meet within our domain, and an


GENERAL ASPECT OF RELIGION AND LIFE 515


advance does not result through a restful further
development, but painful entanglements and_per-
versions retard the advance, and any kind of success
is hoped for only through a retreat to the Final
Cause. But we have already noticed how such
a dependence of man did not take away his own
self-activity, and how in the particular situation
the vindication and progress of the whole was set
upon man’s own act. Thus man’s action gains a
mighty expansion; he works in the works of the
All; indeed, he becomes through the Divine Life
a co-carrier of Infinity.

The movement seems hardly to make head-way
under such powerful hindrances, and it need not
frighten or dishearten us that it does not compass the
whole of our existence and that it carries only a por-
tion of it along with itself. We are still able to
hope, because religion carries within itself a secure
eminence beyond the whole line of battle, and because
its characteristic truth is not linked in the last resort
even upon success in this battle. And further, our
human world signifies to religion no more than a par-
ticular kind of existence, but the unfinished condition
of this world signifies in no way an utter absurdity,
but is able to gain some kind of meaning through the
presence of a higher standpoint, and is thus turned to
something other than a tangled chaos. Certainly, our
world is no simple evolution of reason, but a certain
moving tendency in that direction is not to be denied
it. More and more connections and more and more
inwardness appear in bold relief. The Spiritual Life
does not, indeed, gain the whole breadth of things,
but it unlocks an ever richer content, and affords a


516 CHARACTERISTIC RELIGION


glimpse into ever greater depths. But simultaneously
the oppositions grow too; the problems become more
and more difficult; and what previously seemed so
near and easily within our reach recedes more and
more on the horizon. Is there a greater difference
than this between antiquity and modern times: that
the weightiest questions seemed near solution to the
former, whilst with us the goals recede ever farther ?
Thus, the main gain of the movement is a heightening
of the problem ; and more incomplete our life appears.
But who has given us the certainty that our world
constitutes a completed Whole, and that it carries
its complete interpretation in itself? How is it, if
our world is such, that the problems are to be vigor-
ously worked out, that the energies prepare themselves
and set themselves against one another, and that the
opposites gain so much in clearness? Then, indeed,
the whole of this world would be but a beginning, and
might be compared to the development of the plot of
a draina: the further development is lost for us in
darkness, but religion has no doubt as to the final
consummation. Thus we do not deal of course with
the consummation; it is sufficient for us to know
that what we do is not lost. The words of Luther
are valid for the whole of life: “We are not it yet,
but we shall be it; it is not yet done and has not yet
happened, but it is, however, on the move and in full
swing; it is not the goal but the road; all is not
aglow and sparkling, but all is being cleansed.”
Religion may discover with pain the fact that we
are not able to fathom the whole; yet on account
of its basal conviction of the intimate presence of an
Absolute Life, religion will not allow itself to be


GENERAL ASPECT OF RELIGION AND LIFE 517


overthrown, but rather it will derive the confidence
from such a conviction ; an elevated reason enforces its
way through all the unreason and will manifest itself in
the vicissitudes of single souls. The darknessmayeven
be of value, in view of the actual condition of man, in
so far as it pushes back the idea of reward and directs
the effort upon the content of life itself. Thus a
Kant, in a surveyed reflection, could greet this lack
of insight into the wider connections of things as
a gain for the purification of character, and could give
expression to the conviction “that the inscrutable
wisdom through which we exist is not less vener-
able in what it denies us than in what it allows
us.”

The religious interpretation of life, through such
a course, will not work towards the lessening but
towards the heightening of its energy, its self-reliance,
and its virility. Where our life carries within itself so
many oppositions and decisions, where so much within
it has to be awakened and strengthened, where cosmic
movements penetrate into our existence, and where a
higher mode of existence has to gain a place over
against the ordinary shallow routine, the task cannot
consist in prudent evasion of the entanglements, in
bringing things to the same centre of gravity, or in
hunting after a smug happiness. But it is necessary
to enter courageously into the great struggle, and to
work without ceasing for the possession and the
progression of the new world of an essential life ;
and in the midst of confusion and obstruction, in
unreadiness and darkness, in suffering and death,
to be fully certain of the presence of an Eternal


Life.


518 CHARACTERISTIC RELIGION


4. Haith and Doubt: The Denial of Religion


Religion has to prove its rights not only against
certain propositions but against a deep-rooted mode of
thinking. By this we mean, first of all, that naive
fixed mode of thinking with its intellectual outlook
on the world—a mode of thinking which conceives
that the truth can be determined independently of life,
and that life can ‘afterwards be led to it. Such
happens only in connection with the relationship to a
world existing outside ourselves ; but, if it is necessary
to conceive of the whole of reality only as something
external to ourselves, then religion stands con-
demned. But it is not only religion but also the
whole of the ascending Spiritual Life which insists
upon an inner relationship to things; and herewith
the whole of life comes to the foreground, and
determines also the particular mode of thinking—its
direction and formation—in accordance with its own
qualities. If religion thus leads into a characteristic
conception of faith, such a life in the first place rests
upon a characteristic life—upon a life in the special
spiritual sense—which carries within itself a reality,
and which develops it out of itself. Religion is not a
communication of over-world secrets, but the in-
auguration of an over-world life; and it is with the
acknowledgment and assimilation of such a life that
faith has to do; it has to do with an appropriation
which carries a synthesis and an ascent of man’s own
nature as well as an advancement and a lofty eleva-
tion within itself. The new life brings forth with
itself a new conception of reality, but faith all along
proceeds to such a reality through life alone; and it


GENERAL ASPECT OF RELIGION AND LIFE 519


is only in the obscuring of this connection and finally
in its dissolution that faith becomes a mere assertion
concerning things on the other side of this world,
and consequently succumbs inevitably to the criticism
of knowledge, whilst faith as a power of life precedes
knowledge, and it is only out of faith that knowledge
becomes possible. Such a faith is not only of a
stirring and progressive, but also of a welding and
defensive, nature. Then an unbroken decision for a
new life and its appropriation in a Whole becomes
a matter of significance, and life maintains itself
against a hostile or indifferent world; it holds itself
fast to invisible facts against the hard opposition of
visible existence, and to general ideas over against
all the failures of the nearest-at-hand achievements.
If faith carries within itself so much movement
and struggle, it is not surprising if the matter does not
run smoothly, if hindrances and deadlocks obtrude,
if faith and doubt set themselves against one another,
and if the soul is set in a painful dilemma. Doubt,
in these connections, does not appear as something
monstrous and atrocious, though it would appear so
if a perfect circle of ideas presented itself to man
and demanded his assent as a bounden duty. For
where it is necessary to lay hold on a new life and
to bring to consummation an inward transformation,
then a personal experience and testing are needed.
But no proof is definite which clings from the be-
ginning to the final result, and places on one side
all possibility of an antithesis. The opposite possi-
bility must be thought out and lived through if the
Yea is to possess full energy and genuineness.
Thus doubt becomes a necessary, if also an un-


520 CHARACTERISTIC RELIGION


comfortable, companion of religion ; it is indispensable
for the conservation of the full freshness and original-
ity of religion—for the freeing of religion from con-
ventional forms and phrases which would lead the
mighty current into well-ordered channels but which
easily cause it to be lost in the sands.

The history of religion presents us with a corrobora-
tion of this estimate. For it shows only a mediocre
kind of the religious life as being unassailable by
any doubt—a life inclined to a pharisaic superiority ;
and to such a life the stern suppression of all doubt
or even of any problem seemed necessary for the con-
solidation of its own belief. But on the contrary, many
creative spirits—for instance, Augustine and Luther
—had much trouble with doubt. This was so, not
because their impetus towards religion was less
strong, but because, by means of the greater strength
of such an impetus, they saw through the inadequacy
of all the props which give the feeling of certainty
to the average man, and because they longed for
something essentially secure, intimately present,
and free from every human error, in order to
posit their life upon it and in order to defy even
death itself. It was only through the possession of
such a goal that these leaders could become other
than they were; but the realisation of such a goal
claimed the greatest toil and a fearless analysis of
doubt. And even with all this, no complete rest
was gained. What was as steadfast as the rock in
the depth of the soul, experienced temptations ever
anew from a surrounding world which never allowed
the soul a rest. So that the certainty constitutes no
inert possession, but has ever anew to be struggled


GENERAL ASPECT OF RELIGION AND LIFE 521


for and ever anew has to wrestle with doubt. “I
believe, Lord ; help Thou mine unbelief”: this is the
best expression of the situation of the soul which finds
itself in such struggles.

To bring forth tangible signs and wonders to. the
aid of threatened belief was a very natural and con-
genial thought to a naive frame of mind. But with
closer reflection, the observation renders this situation
precarious because now external wonders have with-
drawn entirely from the heights of spiritual creative-
ness—from the inner wonder of the Spiritual Life
and from the intimate presence of a Divine World.
The founders of religion have themselves protested
against a craving after such sensuous signs. ‘Go
thither and hush up about your good works, and
make a clean breast before the people of the sins you
have committed, for that is the true wonder.” These
were the words of the Buddha; and Mahomet would
perform no wonders, but looked upon the great works
of God in nature and in the human soul as the true
signs and wonders which man is called to believe in.
How did Jesus blame those who craved for wonders
and who had mixed up his life’s work with signs and
wonders? ‘An _ evil and adulterous generation
seeketh after a sign; and there shall no sign be given
to it but the sign of Jonah the prophet.” This
is no other than the sign of spiritual power and of a
Divine message and greatness.

Again, there is a mid-level of religion to which
miracle seems indispensable in order to give faith
the certainty from without which it is not able
to obtain from within; thus one will see and feel
with Thomas before one believes. Great crises and


522 CHARACTERISTIC RELIGION


upheavals, however, have ever returned to the inner
wonder of the spirit of man. The Reformation was
attested by no external signs and wonders, and yet it
found the energy to forge its way against an old and
great existing world and its possessions, to renew life,
and to fortify religious certainty. And so it was in
connection with Savonarola in the dark days prior to
his violent end—days which chronicle a touching
insight into certainty and joyousness. Where did he
finally find these? He found them not in external
signs and wonders which lay near to him in the
environment or through tradition ; he found them in
the inward presence of a life-elevating Divine Spirit
that makes something better out of man, and whose
communication can thus be no mere illusion.

Doubt is far more an uncomfortable companion than
an enemy of religion. Doubt always bears. witness
to a strong interest, anxiety, and labour in the cause;
it acknowledges the problem, it discovers the difficulty
and even the impossibility of an easy solution. It is
quite otherwise with the entire denial of religion—
with the attempt to drive religion entirely out of life.
But even this can appear monstrous to no one to whom
the entanglements of the question have become evi-
dent and who fully measures the wide distance between
our world and the picture which religion demands.
But the question arises, whether these entanglements
can be overcome, and whether new realities—original
facts—stand over against them. We sought to show
that this is the case through the discovery of an
autonomous depth of life—through the tracing of
an intimate relationship of man to a cosmic and
absolute life; we ventured to assert the need of a


GENERAL ASPECT OF RELIGION AND LIFE 523


struggle with all things which, after the inauguration
of the new life, become externals and a mere environ-
ment, and also to assert the need of carrying forth such
a struggle to a victorious issue. Herewith we are fully
conscious of the fact that the new life carries within
itself assertions which are in no way self-evident, and
concerning which much uncertainty and discord can
arise. But then the struggle is pushed back farther
into life; it does not concern an interpretation of a
“given” world but the production and content of
reality itself; it is not a concern of the mere intellect
but of the whole man; it is a struggle of life against
life. Let us inquire what possibilities are here in
question, and what aspects of life oppose religion.
There are three assertions, or rather, the conjoint
action of three, which the characteristic life of
religion carries within itself. The first is, that a self-
reliant and inter-connected Spiritual Life develops
over against bare nature as well as over against the
particular individual with all his distractions. The
second is, that this Spiritual Life collides in our
world with the hardest oppositions within and with-
out—oppositions not only in individual points but
in the whole of our being, so that our existence
presents itself as an inner contradiction. The third is,
that the manifestation of a new life raises man above
these oppositions and re-instates life in the position
of positive action and creativeness. Thus, there bind
themselves together the basis, the struggle, and the
conquest of spirituality. Life is through this posited
upon a new summit; it undergoes here sore trials
under which it threatens to fade away, but finally
reaches, through a strengthening from within, the


524 CHARACTERISTIC RELIGION


victory ofa Yea. When these three grades bind them- ,
selves through an adjustment of their conflicting ex-
periences, and through a reciprocal relationship into a
corporate life, then religion has secured a pre-eminent
place in life.

At the same time there becomes evident whence
the rejection of religion arises—from what directions
of life it is considered an error and an absurdity. Re-
jected must religion be by all who make war upon its
foundation and indispensable presupposition—-upon the
existence of an independent spirituality. Naturalism
does this through its conceiving of all Spiritual Life
as a mere product or a secondary accompanying
phenomenon of the sensuous world. Phenomenalism
or subjectivism acts similarly through the dissemina-
tion and dissolution of the Spiritual Life into isolated
and disconnected phenomena. Both do not bring
forth either the need for, or the understanding of,
religion. And even quite as little will a mode of
thinking help life which does not perceive the
difficulties and the manifold contradictions down to
their very root, and which resolves all the discords of
the first view of things into an encompassing world-
harmony: these are the optimists of all kinds.
Optimism is able to assume many different forms sae
is able to perceive reason in the very structure of
the universe or in the evolution of life; it is able to
determine the progress of human civilisation from a
practico-social point of view; it is able, on the
romantic-speculative side, to take the greatness and
beauty of nature as its basis. The enthusiasm of
culture and the romanticism of nature find the
solution of things within the given world, and do


GENERAL ASPECT OF RELIGION AND LIFE 525


not feel the need of religion, and they often con-
ceive of the turn to religion as an expression of
weakness. But, however, the full acknowledgment
of the hindrance leads in no way to religion. It
can include far more a paralysing and a deadlock
of life which turn either into a weak resignation or
into a passionate pessimism. As soon, however, as
pessimism becomes rigid and absolute it withstands
religion, since it holds life fast to doubt—life which
otherwise through the possession of a new stage
would have turned to religion.

From these assaults, the greater outer diffusion
happens in the beginning of the series, and the greater
inner dangers happen in the conclusion. Naturalism
corresponds to the character of the great external
accumulations found in all situations, and has but a
slight contact with spiritual tasks. Pessimism fetters
more the elevated things which carry within them-
selves the movements and experiences of life. Special
modes of thought and conceptions of the universe
originate from these standpoints—modes of thought
with which religion has to come to an understanding.
But what arises into ideas and doctrines draws its
energy from the formation of life out of which it
proceeds and which brings it to expression. Religion,
however, asserts its right and superiority in that it
alone is able to estimate the different sides of things
justly and to connect them together into a Whole;
and in that it is able to give its rights to each indi-
vidual main experience without doing a wrong to any
experience. Religion alone institutes a thorough-
going movement and maintains this movement even
at the end; it alone is able simultaneously to


526 CHARACTERISTIC RELIGION


recognise fully the hindrances and inwardly to over-
come them.

If thus the source of the power of religion lies in
such a universal and elevated character of its life, the
defence of its truth depends especially in holding life
fully to its summits, in developing the particular sides
equably, and in gathering them together strongly
into a Whole, thus avoiding a resignation into lower
levels and courageously steering clear of dangerous
courses, ,

It is necessary before all else for the truth of
religion that the elevation to the stage of the Spiritual
Life should be consummated and conserved with al]
energy. Such a truth enters always into insecurity
when religion is based upon mere feeling ; and, along
with this, all spiritual contents disappear when re-
ligion rests in the main upon isolated activities and
does not lead into a new mode of being, and de-
velops no new reality out of itself. If there results
no elevation beyond the ordinary surface-tendency of
life, if religion works only within a “given” world
instead of manifesting a new world, it abandons its
truth from the very beginning and becomes power-
less against doubt. The second point is the need
of the full acknowledgment of the Opposition,
and the rejection of all superficial optimism. Cer-
tainly it is necessary to conquer finally the enemy
somehow, but the conquest itself loses its energy
when the problem is blunted from the very beginning.
The opposition, however, will be estimated in a
fuller measure only when the fact is laid hold of asa
Whole and is made to depend upon one’s own act, i.e.
when the encounter takes on an ethical character, It


GENERAL ASPECT OF RELIGION AND LIFE 527


is thus alone that the problem steps into the centre
of life, and thus alone does the matter shape itself
into a struggle for a spiritual existence. This does
not mean, in spite of great failures and the breaking
off at the outset of many convictions, that all evil is
an effect of guilt. That would present a far too
narrow and rigid formation of life—a formation
largely devoid of the ethical. Yet the whole of life
must interpret every tendency ; for it is only when
man himself participates in the great world-struggle,
experiences and grasps the tasks as his own, that the
opposition gains such a violent and stirring energy
as to render a reconciliation with the given situation
now simply impossible, and to have the choice only
between an overthrow or a renewal of life.

The third and final point we wish to emphasise is,
that this renewal is actually realised, and is not a
mere delusion ; it means that life is essentially raised
from within—indeed, raised in its totality—and that it
depends in no manner on purely particular excitations
or mere injunctions from a “beyond,” for such would
keep life tied to a mere hope and tarrying, and would
easily give it an oppressed and doleful character.
The aspiring New must reach a living present, and
dare not reconcile itself to a mere More of the prior
situation; it must not trace out in imagination a
similar (but painless) world to ours, but it must bring
forth an entire transformation and along with this
consummate an essential elevation; otherwise there
is no genuine conquest and no convincing meaning of
the whole. For why all this toil and sorrow if nothing
new issues forth ¢

First of all, it is necessary to raise life to a height


528 CHARACTERISTIC RELIGION


of an essential self-subsisting spirituality, and
to gain a new domain—a new place for spiritual
experience; it is here necessary to experience the
Nay and the Yea and to bring them to a right
relationship, and finally raise all to an undivided
and encompassing life. The main proof of religion
lies always in the Whole of the life developed out
of religion. This Whole must draw to itself the
whole circumference of existence; it must sift and
winnow, connect and raise; it must conduct things
to their own truth; it must kindle a powerful
movement which, through its own content and its
progressive victorious superiority, demonstrates its
own truth. Here it is not a doctrine which man
has merely to accept and follow that leads him to
religion, but a life held in front of him and brought
near to him; it is for this he is called, for it is this
alone which grants him the right relationship to
reality, and enables him to dive into the depth of
his own nature. Through this the idea of reality
is transformed, extended, and deepened. The ele-
vation of the level of reality, the inner ascent of life
in a manner superior to all capacity of the mere
individual, the growth and creativeness—all these
are the main proof which religion is able to bring
forth. The fact that religion, with its willing and
creating, stands in no isolation but finds itself in the
centre of life, that it furthers the whole and not
merely isolated sides, and that it leads it to
its own truth—all this belongs essentially to this
main proof. As with all things original and axiomatic,
this new life is positively demonstrated through its
own development and not through a deduction from


GENERAL ASPECT OF RELIGION AND LIFE 529


some other points: it carries its most effective energy
of conviction in the strength and clearness of its own
development ; it never allows itself to be forced from
without, but only to be stimulated from within,
and it cannot possibly convince and gain us where
such a stimulation finds no kind of accommodating
spirit.

An indirect proof, however, can be found in the fact
that without the connection and elevation of life re-
presented by religion, all that life possesses as any kind
of content becomes insecure and unstable. We need
only follow backwards the stages of ascent in order
to become aware that with the surrender of religion
a decay of life sets in, eats more and more into its
essentials, and finally destroys its deepest foundation.
When religion thus decays, a conquest of unreason
takes its place, and pessimism becomes the uncon-
tested lord of the field. As a final conclusion, how-
ever, such a pessimism must become rigid, embittered,
and barren; the whole life sees itself threatened by
it with stagnation—indeed, with destruction. An
urgent natural impulse withstands this pessimism,
and a tenacious clinging to existence softens it to some
extent. One wishes in some kind of way to retain
life, but is not able to do this without emphasis-
ing the brighter sides of existence and placing the
darker sides in the background; thus we find an
approach to optimism without a crossing over to
optimism. Thus we witness in our own day an
affirmation of life gaining ground over against an
intolerable growing pessimism ; the ground is gained
not so much through an inner elevation of life


as through men’s resistance to an entire denial.
3 34


530 CHARACTERISTIC RELIGION


But a solid support is granted in no way through
such a resistance. Such a resistance either con-
tains but little basal affirmation of life in face of
the conflicting impressions of experience, and conse-
quently sinks into superficiality and unveracity, or
these contradictory impressions gain the overhand and
destroy then all synthesis of life and annihilate all
self-reliant spirituality. Thus, life loses all spiritual
character, and renounces all ideality when it turns
aside the inner advance of the movement and its
conclusion from the realm of religion. It appears
clear in connection with all this, that the matter does
not deal with a special province, but with the pre-
servation of the whole of life, and that the denial of
religion leads inevitably to an inner dissolution of the
whole of life.

One may seek to evade such a conclusion of life
as this through the belief that a certain kind of Spir-
itual Life is possible and actual without penetrating
to final questions—that it surrounds us with its multi-
coloured fulness through the expansion of the work of
culture. Why should we not accept the Spiritual Life
as it offers itself to us in culture, dismiss all further
questions, and cling to the actual whilst refusing
to be involved in any problems of a subtle inward
nature? We are able to do this, and had it not
been that we were able to do it, life would offer quite
a different aspect, and its opposites would stand far
more pointedly and clearly against each other. But
such an explanation of the whole matter is obtained
at a high price! It is possible only where the Spiritual
Life is conceived as something “ given” and presented
from the outside and not as something inward and


GENERAL ASPECT OF RELIGION AND LIFE 531


originally engendered. Thus it appears more as an
alien than as our own concern—more as an appended
trimming than as our inmost nature—and also it
resolves itself into so many isolated appearances and
does not connect itself together into a Whole. Who-
soever tolerates such a degradation, alienation, and dis-
integration, and through this can renounce all inward
independence, and place aside the question of truth even
at the source of life itself, may find such a compromise
sufficient for him. But he who takes up the struggle
for truth and is determined to live his life as his very
own, must lay on one side such compromise, for he is
not able to escape from the fact that the problem pro-
ceeds from a Whole to a Whole, and that the nature
of the movement is decided in the final conclusion of
religion ; and further that what has been given upin the
Whole and in the Substance cannot be retained in any
one isolated point or in the subject, and that no indi-
vidual stage can offer us a foothold if the Whole ends
in unreason. If one believes therefore that a denial of
religion is a legitimate procedure, one must at the same
time throw away as semblance and delusion what life
has developed in the form of ideal greatness and good-
ness, and such a procedure leads inevitably to the con-
ception of the spiritual evolution of humanity as an
unparalleled great aberration. When this happens,
man becomes from out of a cosmic nature a mere
piece of a soulless and meaningless mechanism of
culture, and all greatness and all emancipation from
the mere-human to an inner independence disappear
with the loss of the struggle from a Whole to a Whole.
And with the resignation of all inner connections of
reality, all unity of personality is given up. Now that


532 CHARACTERISTIC RELIGION


there is no intimate relationship to the whole of reality,
all originality, all freedom, and all genuine present
moment of the soul fall away ; and now where a mere
point holds life fast and rigid to itself, all love which
has risen above a mere, natural impulse becomes an
empty phrase.

The so-called immanent idealism with its deceptive,
intermediate formations has become a special danger to
man and to religion. Such a system dazzles man be-
cause it contends that the reason of reality and the
meaning of life descend upon him without much labour,
ina form ofimmediacy. Such an intermediate product
springs from a flaw in the energy of life, and is bound to
increase such a flaw; but notwithstanding its clang-
ing phrases it is never able to discover this flaw, and
it injures the truth of life. It is not only in the
realm of science but also in religion that the words of
Bacon hold valid, that truth proceeds out of mistakes
rather than out of chaos. The atheist is not the
most dangerous enemy of religion.

The Spiritual Life which attains full clearness in
religion constantly remains in difficult opposition to
the environing world, and an overcoming of this
opposition is not to be found in the ordinary capacity
of man. This opposition must and will move and
stir ever anew head and heart, and will ever drive
forth new doubts. The decision lies finally in the
question whether for man the external world or a
spring of life within himself is the main fact, whether
the centre of gravity of reality is found without or
within. It 7s a struggle for the governing centre of
life. If the inner life attains to no independence and
is not led as a Whole, the contradictions of the envir-


GENERAL ASPECT OF RELIGION AND LIFE 533


oning world appear insurmountable, and man must
decline religion as an impossibility. But if the
inner life reaches such an independence, and if man
finds within the Spiritual Life simultaneously a new
world and his own genuine self, the gravest mis-
givings will not be able to overthrow the certainty
of this fundamental fact. Thus, this fundamental
fact remains as the first and foremost, and uplifts
itself far from the contradictions of the whole external
world, so that the aspect of world has to accommodate
itself to this fact and not this fact to that aspect.
Certainly, even after such a decision the contradic-
tion does not simply vanish, but as holiness retains the
background of suffering, so certainty will preserve its
‘‘one thing needful” as the background of doubt.
But the contradiction is now removed from the
centre to the periphery of life; it can therefore only
touch us from without, and is not able to overthrow
what is within; it will now not so much weaken
as strengthen the certainty, because it calls life to a
perpetual renewal and brings to fruition the greatness
of the conquest.


Part V.—Christianity and the Present


INTRODUCTORY REMARKS CONCERNING HIS-
TORICAL AND ABSOLUTE RELIGION


Iv we now open the question concerning the relation
of Christianity to our present day, the question gives
another kind of character to our investigation, and
presents new difficulties. Hitherto we have striven
to come to an understanding with all who ac-
knowledge fully the significance of the religious
problem, but now we enter into a domain where
divergent opinions are hardly to be avoided. For
scientific reflections alone are not able to decide con-
cerning the material within this domain, because char-
acteristics of the work of life, individual impressions
and experiences, fall into the balance. Thus, much
which appeared to us as a main tendency is separated
from us through this further problem. But in spite of
this we dare not place our further investigation on
one side. Closely connected with the investigation
concerning the intrinsic truth of religion lies an open
pronouncement concerning the situation of our day,
for it is such a pronouncement which is able to set
forth the essential character of our general conviction.
That which rejects being immersed in mere Time has


yet to verify itself in Time. May we as friends, in
534


HISTORICAL AND ABSOLUTE RELIGION 535


the midst of all the differences, hold fast to what
binds us together in the totality of our convictions.

How we understand the relation of the historical
religions, and amongst them of Christianity, to
absolute religion, has been shown in the whole course
of our investigation. As certainly as there is only one
sole truth, there can only be one absolute religion,
and this religion coincides entirely in no way with
any one of the historical religions. For they all
conceive of the Divine under the conditions of the
human situation; originating and growing in parti-
cular epochs, they have all to pay their tribute to
the characteristics and culture of such epochs. But
what is problematic and transient in such particularity
need not prevent the action of a truth superior to
time. If we acknowledge as the one essential of
religions that they manifest and represent a Divine
Life, such a Life in its inmost foundation is superior
to its external configuration and activity, and thus
it is able to withstand all the changes of time, and
to maintain in the midst of all its curtailment through
the human situation an eternal truth. It is then
necessary to differentiate such a Substance of religion
from its Hwistential-form ; it is necessary to examine
how far religion harbours and represents such a
fundamental life which runs through all ages and
nations, and which raises them beyond the merely
human situation. That a religion confesses itself to
be an historical religion does not mean that it is to be
considered as the final and completed truth, but that
it is accepted as a standpoint where there exists the
closest possible contact with truth, and where we are
able to take possession of it.


536 CHRISTIANITY AND THE PRESENT


The historical religions are not the truth itself, but
appearances of the truth and pathways to the truth;
and it is only where the Divine and the human get
mixed up that men can fail to perceive this limit of
the historical religions.

If from the standpoint of religion a critical investi-
gation of historical religions becomes needful, critical
investigation is nowhere more difficult than within this
domain. Conflicting considerations work here especi-
ally against each other. Now the historical religions
may partially desire and deserve a great veneration
because of their actual achievements. They are not
mere systems of doctrine, but a concentration and
development of life; they have traced out ideals not
through some bold flight of thought, but have rooted
such ideals even in the stony ground of the life of
humanity ; they have worked not merely for a period
and upon select minds, but have operated along the
whole vista of the ages for the welfare of humanity ;
they carry within themselves, through their close con-
tact with human reality, great experiences, and have
gained an actuality which maintains itself through its
own centre of gravity, because religion from the outset
deals not so much with theoretical considerations of
the world, but with a content of life which will secure
for us a spiritual existence. Thus Hegel’s words con-
cerning a preponderatingly critical relationship to the
State hold even more valid in the domain of religion.
“The State is no work of art; it stands within the
world, and thus within the spheres of arbitrary action,
of accidents, and of errors; and evil conduct is able
to disfigure it on many sides. But even the ugliest
person, the criminal, the invalid, and the cripple, are


HISTORICAL AND ABSOLUTE RELIGION 537


yet living beings: and this affirmation—Life—exists
in spite of all the flaws, and it is with this affirma-
tion that we have to do.” Where the treatment of
religion does not succeed in reaching this affirmative
character, where religion is simply cavilled at, and
no attempt is made to enter into its totality and
its inwardness, such a carping criticism may attain a
cheap popularity, but it has absolutely no value for
the subject-matter.

This is one side of the matter. But there remains
another side, and it, too, has its rights. The historical
religions may not be satisfied with their actual facts
alone; they raise the claim of being the truth—the final
truth, which is superior to all else. Now, nothing—
not even the most colossal achievement of an historical
kind—is able to furnish the proof of such a truth, for
such a proof is only to be found from a standpoint
above Time and from the very nature of the Spirit-
ual Life and its fundamental relationship to reality.
Thus an intimate and immediate life has to stand
over against every historical achievement, measure
it, and test it. In fact there exists in all times,
and especially in such times when historical religion
was in a state of indisputable sovereignty, an interior
tension between tradition and immediate life, and the
assimilation of the presented material is ever a re-
modelling and an adjustment. But as long as this
adjustment was not too difficult to accomplish, no
cleft was felt, and consequently the historical religion
could appear to be in entire possession of the truth.
When, however, important transformations of uni-
versal life heighten the tension, a point is finally reached
where men feel especially its distance from their own


538 CHRISTIANITY AND THE PRESENT


ideas and efforts, and where, consequently, the relation-
ship to such an historical religion becomes pre-
dominantly critical and negative. The differences
which thus originate may be twofold. Either life
outgrows the content of the historical religion,
and therefore great revolutions of an inward char-
acter become inevitable; or all the transformations
in the existential-form leave so much of the Sub-
stance untouched, .so that still the changes in the
external form can be connected with the inward
nucleus, and thus in the midst of all the dis-
arrangement the continuity of the historical religion
can be preserved. Indeed, the transformation in
the existential-form may even help towards a purer
and more energetic effect of the Substance, and thus
the seeming upheaval and destruction may prove
itself finally to be a development and deepening of
the Substance.
All this has now to be applied in connection with
Christianity. It is necessary to ask the question, how
deeply Christianity is affected by the undeniable trans-
formations of culture and human life, whether it is
able to assert and maintain itself victoriously over
against such culture and life, and what such an
assertion demands in the way of new activities,


PART V.—CHRISTIANITY AND THE PRESENT
(ContINUED)


CHAPTER XV
a. THe EvrERNAL IN CHRISTIANITY


1. The Nucleus beyond all Loss.


Tue whole of our investigation leaves no doubt as
to our position in regard to Christianity. A double
aspect has been already fully noticed. On the one
hand, Christianity in the nature of its Substance
appears as the highest embodiment of absolute re-
ligion ; and, on the other hand, a fundamental revision
of its traditional existential-form has become absolutely
necessary. It has already appeared to us that we are
not able to develop what proves itself as absolute
religion without a constant reference to Christianity.
Christianity has already appeared to us from its
inmost foundation as the religion of religions, and,
simultaneously, as being certain of a permanent dura-
tion. But the Eternal in Christianity finds itself not
only railed in and interlaced, but also welded with
seemingly inseparable elements which bear the im-
print of a special age, and which we dare not bind to
ourselves—an age which is so distant from us and
which in so many ways has been outrun. It is now


necessary to present a connected view of the twofold
539


540 CHRISTIANITY AND THE PRESENT


aspects, to mark clearly the boundaries between them,
and to show the necessity of not allowing the religious
problem to remain in a state of stagnation. If we
bring together the results of our main discussion and
the historical conditions of Christianity, we shall see
how they illumine one another reciprocally, how they
strengthen one another, and, also, how they diverge
from one another. This will enable us to understand
where the boundary between the temporal and the
Kternal lies, and this in its turn will carry to clearer
expression the manner in which Christianity has to be
shaped in the future.

Christianity is a religion of redemption and not a
religion of law. Herein lies the acknowledgment of
a pointed contrast between an actual and an urgent
situation ; herein lies the assertion of the inability,
out of one’s own energy, to reach the longed-for
summit through a general kind of improvement of
the prior situation; and herein lies the demand of a
transformation and elevation through an intimate
entrance of the Divine. Does the general experience
of the Spiritual Life corroborate this assertion? It
does. For we have already seen how the Spiritual
Life is unable to find its necessary self-reliance in the
world of ordinary experience ; we have seen a breach
between genuine spirituality and the world taking
place; and we have seen how the effects of all this
carry a new world within themselves. In spiritual
things every pathway of man leads to a Yea through
a Nay, and all toil is in vain without an inner eleva-
tion through the energy of an Absolute Life. This
happens in connection with the whole of the Spiritual
Life as soon as it aspires to climb from merely decora-


THE ETERNAL IN CHRISTIANITY 541


tive culture to genuine truth, and this Spiritual Life
strengthens itself even through the very effort itself ;
it is only the inauguration of a new stage of reality
that is able here to prevent a shipwreck of all toilsome
work. This new stage places the threatened over-
throw of human life, the impotence of mere man, and
the presence of an elevated world, far more intuitively
and urgently before man’s eyes. Thus, the religion
of redemption only brings to a fuller expression and
more tangible configuration what is present as a
demand and a fact throughout the whole of life.

The religions of redemption which are found along-
side of Christianity are esoteric Brahmanism and
Buddhism. But the difference between the latter
and Christianity occupied our attention at the com-
mencement of our investigation, and has appeared
all the greater in the course of the investigation.
Now it becomes quite clear how wide an interval lies
between a predominantly intellectual religion of re-
demption and a predominantly ethical one, and how
differently life shapes itself in each. In the former
mode an emancipation from semblance becomes
necessary ; in the latter mode an overcoming of evil
is the one thing needful. In the former, the very
basis of the world seems evil ; in the latter, it is the
perversion of this basis which seems evil. In the
former, the impulses of life are to be entirely eradi-
cated ; in the latter, on the contrary, they are to be
ennobled or rather to be transformed. In the former,
no higher world of a positive kind dawns on man,
so that life finally reaches a seemingly valid point of
rest, whilst upon Christian ground life ever anew
ascends beyond itself.


542 CHRISTIANITY AND THE PRESENT


In Christianity suffering has its bitterness chiefly
as a perversion of an original good, so that a Yea
is able to work in the midst of all unreason, and
a hope of a final conquest is able to become the
possession of the soul in the midst of the seeming
collapse of the world. But an elevation into a new
world is even here not an entire casting off of the old
world. For that elevation does not succeed at the
outset in reaching the inmost depth—the centre of
life. The old world with its darkness and suffering,
its alarm and its error, persists in the whole breadth
of existence. here arises thus a noteworthy dialectic
of life. What man possesses in this existence has
to be won and even abandoned. Thus, an overflow-
ing joy and a deep pain, a serene security of the
inner being and a drifting of existence before all
the storms of life; a steadfast conviction and a
brooding doubt, a participation in the perfection of
Absolute Life and a persistence of human pettiness
meet as opposites in the one and same life. If life
is ever to rise, it has to take upon itself, in a genuine
manner, its own acts, and not be satisfied with a
merely sentimental disposition ; it has to enter into
an incessant tension and movement; it has to be
driven to ever further self-deepening ; and it has to
take up its experiences in all their extent, to live
through them, and to taste all their sweets and bitter-
ness. Thus there arises energy without defiance,
gentleness without weakness; indeed, the deepest
feeling and the most joyous activity sustain and inter-
lace one another. Such an inner tension and move-
ment, as we have already observed, are indispensable
for the ascent of the Spiritual Life under human con-


THE ETERNAL IN CHRISTIANITY 543


ditions, and Christianity only develops here in a special
direction what is struggling upwards from the whole
of life and which is pressing towards a configuration.
All religions proclaim and require morality. But
this of itself signifies in no manner that freedom and
deed constitute the source of their ideal world, or
that the nucleus of the Spiritual Life is of an ethical
nature. What constitutes the decisive characteristic
of Christianity is the fact that it roots the whole
world in freedom, and that it refuses altogether the
reducing of the Spiritual Life to a natural or
mental process. But, at the same time, Christianity
steps into painful entanglements without and within.
Without, a rigid kingdom of mechanism which enters
into the soul and overpowers spiritual activity with-
stands the attempts of a transformation into freedom,
into a soul, and into love. The impression of a blind
indifferent actuality is here so powerful against all
inner greatness and goodness that an external glance
of things deems it hopeless to overcome the opposition.
At the same time, entanglements of an inward kind
threaten to bring the movement towards freedom and
personality under the ban of the petty-human, and
to rob these qualities of their cosmic character; and
the threat goes so far as to coerce all inward aspira-
tion under an all-powerful destiny. Therefore, there
arises a painful hazardous enterprise when the struggle
is taken up against such oppositions within and with-
out; but Christianity has found the courage and the
faith for this colossal struggle, for it has become
convinced that this is the only means for the spiritual
preservation of human life and for the gaining of a
meaning and value. At the same time, the inmost


544 CHRISTIANITY AND THE PRESENT


nucleus of life must withdraw itself from all rational-
istic deductions, and yet it has to remain in the midst
of opposites. Christianity is the most ultra-rational
of all religions, because it is the richest and deepest
of them all.

It was a main point in our investigation to show
that the Spiritual Life is not a manifestation of mere
man but of an independent reality, and that it, through
a communication of this reality, gains a new and
cosmic nature for man. What religion more fully
meets such demands as that which makes the Kingdom
of God its central idea, and which promises to help
the individual not only in a “given” world, but to
guide him to a new world? And this new world is
contiguous with man not only from the external; it
also becomes one’s own world from within and as a
Whole; and as each particular point in life has now
to be decided by reference to the Whole, and, indeed,
has to carry the Whole within itself, life gains a task
which cannot be measured and a greatness superior to
that of the world.

The union of the human and the Divine constitutes
the nucleus of all genuine religion, and it is the
manner in which this union is conceived that con-
stitutes the main characteristics of the particular
religions. Christianity has pursued this problem to
its final depths, since it not only effects partic-
ular relations of the Divine and the human, but
presents a full union of the two natures, and has
courageously maintained the indestructibility of the
Divine in the midst of all the perversions of the
human situation. Not all the crippling of this idea
through unhappy dogmatic formulations can hide


THE ETERNAL IN CHRISTIANITY 545


the fact that the religious form presents here a truth
which is the indispensable presupposition of every
effort after truth, and without which our life loses
all possibility of a durable support.

A warm love towards all humanity runs through
Christianity ; it longs to redeem every individual ; it
gives man a value beyond all special achievements
and on the other side of all mental and moral deeds;
it has been the first to bring the pure inwardness of the
soul to a clearer expression. But it has also, through
the linking of the human to a Divine and Eternal
Order, raised life beyond all the petty-human with its
civic ordinances and social interests. He who, with the
best intention, views Christianity as a mere means for
the betterment of the social situation, draws it from
the heights of its nature, and deprives it of the main
constituent of its greatness—the emancipation from
the petty-human within the depths of the human
itself. It is essentially the nature of Christianity
that it transplants man into a new world over
against the nearest-at-hand world; it has planted the
fundamental conviction of Platonism of the exis-
tence of an Eternal Order over against the world of
time amongst a great portion of the human race, and
has given a mighty impetus to all effort. But it has,
though it separated the Eternal from Time, brought it
back again into Time, and through this presence of the
Eternal it has, for the first time, proposed to mankind
and to each individual a fundamental inner renewal,
and through this has inaugurated a genuine history.

In order to render the Life-process of Christianity
characteristic and significant two different elements


have to be taken into account—a conception of the
35


546 CHRISTIANITY AND 'THE PRESENT


Spiritual Life and a valuation of the actual world-
situation. A hard contradiction and an immense
movement issue from the contact of the two elements:
that which from within is real and necessary, 1s
set back and rejected by the surface-reality nearest-
at-hand. Thus, life finds itself within a power-
ful coil, and a great decision becomes urgent. Shall
the new world which arises from within and which,
viewed inwardly, appears the most certain thing
of all, gain our energy and disposition in spite
of the contradiction of the whole remaining world ?
Or shall we merely accept the fulness of the external
world and allow the overthrow of our inwardness to
take place? There is here no middle course. Chris-
tianity has decided for the first alternative ; but it is
important to bear in mind that Christianity presents
no ready-made conclusion, but that it brings forth an
inexhaustible movement. Christianity before all else
is great in that it takes up the experiences and the
opposites of life in their widest extent, and fastens
them together into a Whole; it is great in stirrings,
struggles, and transformations ; it appears before all
else as a powerful current of life which indeed does
not flow into vagueness ; but over against all attempts
to make it deviate from its course it adheres to its
main tendency. ‘The whole of the Spiritual Life and
the total trend of human things point in the same
direction. Thus, Christianity is not a special pheno-
menon by the side of other similar phenomena, but
is the main struggle for the soul of man. It has
within the domain of religion, and, along with this,
in the deepest configuration of life, brought forth
to an historical realisation what genuine spirituality


THE ETERNAL IN CHRISTIANITY 547


according to its total nature must demand as
indispensable.

Thus, there is no need of a breach with Christianity ;
it can be to us what an historical religion pre-eminently
is meant to be—a sure pathway to truth, an awakener
of immediate and intimate life, a vivid representation
and realisation of an Eternal Order which all the
changes of Time cannot possess or destroy.


2. The Maintenance of this Nucleus against
the Changes of Time

Let us now consider somewhat more closely how
this Christian cardinal type of life retains its truth
over against. civilisation and culture. We limit our-
selves to the consideration of the chief changes effected
in the world of ideas. Our assertion proceeds from
the fact that these changes undoubtedly enter into a
sharp conflict with the traditional existential-form of
Christianity, but the Substance of Christianity is not
able to free itself from antiquated forms and gain a
purer and more energetic development without much
trouble and toil. The mighty expansion which the
whole of modern times has brought forth need not
become hostile to Christianity. Such an expan-
sion can be assimilated by Christianity, and through
the contact Christianity can even be strengthened,
provided it turns to the depth of its own nature,
fortifies itself with this Substance of Christianity,
and simultaneously finds the courage for new creative-
ness.

(a) The Further Development over against Nature.
—The most tangible result of modern investigation
has been the immense extension of the natural world


548 CHRISTIANITY AND THE PRESENT


and the shrinkage of the earthly circle toa minute
littleness. The sharp point of modern investigation
has undoubtedly turned against the Church-form of
Christianity in so far as the latter considers the earth
as the centre of the universe, and in so far as
‘+ makes our actions decide the destiny of the All.
To give the earth such a significance, in spite of all
the transformations of modern thought, has been
attempted by an .apologetic at any price; but all
manipulations of possibilities and subterfuges are of
no avail against the natural impression of the altered
position of our earthly circle. All such manipulations
belong to a geocentric and anthropocentric mode of
thought of the past. But when the new mode of
thought enters deeply into the realm of traditional
ideas and feelings, does it destroy the spiritual sub-
stance of Christianity, and does it refute the convic-
tion of the superiority of the soul of man? It does
this in no manner. For why should the expansion of
things limit itself to nature? Why should not the
spiritual as well penetrate and encompass the world ?
Indeed, the spiritual must do this if the web of
relations of particular energies observed in nature
does not constitute the final depth of reality, but
that this depth is to be sought in subsistence-by-
themselves of things, as the Spiritual Life alone
offers. It may be that we, upon this earth, are
able to apprehend but a small segment of this life,
but in such a segment the cosmic character of the
Spiritual Life is unmistakable. The fact is not to be
overlooked that, in any comparison with the outward
extension of nature, the inward transformations more
than hold the balance. For a progressive intensify-


THE ETERNAL IN CHRISTIANITY 549


ing of the Life-process has made ever more clear the fact
that nature is not the final reality it was conceived to
be by an older mode of scientific thought, but that
it signifies only a human vista of reality. The Theory
of Knowledge which has brought to a clear conscious-
ness the limitations of this vista on account of our
bodily organisation is only an expression of the inner
growth of the Life-process beyond mere nature.
Nature, which at the outset entirely surrounded and
captivated man, has become more and more a mere
environment to him. If man in such an inwardness
of the Life-process has gained an Archimedean point,
all the palpableness of sensuous impressions is not
able to endanger the priority of spirit. ‘The earthly
circle, however, notwithstanding all its contraction,
does not lose its significance when it appears as an
abode where cosmic problems are struggled for, and
where a segment of reality is raised to a higher stage.
Over against Infinity man appears petty, but he
becomes great through the cosmic life and its turn to
spirit, which develops also within him.

Nature has not only extended externally; it has
also altered inwardly. It has revealed itself as a
connected causal web under simple laws; it has thus
obtained an independence through which it dismisses
every alien influence as an unjust intruder. Along
with this, all dependence of nature upon the Spiritual
Life seems for the moment to cease, and especially
all sensuous miracle is placed on one side as a break
in the order of nature.

Such a rejection of miracle is directed against all
religions, for in all religions miracle is “the dearest
child of faith.” But nowhere is the rejection of


550 CHRISTIANITY AND THE PRESENT


miracle more pointedly directed than towards Chris-
tianity which, with its doctrine of the bodily resurrec-
tion of Jesus, has planted miracle in the very nucleus
of religious belief. This doctrine constituted not
only the basis of the convictions of the apostles, but it
has remained a main portion of the teaching of the
Church up to the present day. ‘To touch this subject
may appear serious even to men who otherwise will-
ingly follow the néwer mode of thinking. For must
it not alienate and even wound our feelings to resolve
into a mere semblance an event which was at the
foundation of the belief of millenniums, and which
has been of help to an innumerable number of souls ?
Also, all the insufficiency and contradictions of the
historical records leave the fact untouched that the
apostles were entirely convinced of that bodily
resurrection, and that this conviction alone explains
the sudden change from entire despair to the joyous
certainty which culminated within their souls in those
dark and critical days.

On the other side, the opposite reasons retain a
mighty force, once the exact conception of nature has
been adopted and once an historical criticism has de-
veloped. To place a miracle in that one situation
would now not merely mean an occasional exception ;
it would mean an overthrow of the total order of nature,
as this has been set forth through the fundamental
work of modern investigation and through an incalcu-
lable fulness of experiences. What would justify such
a breach with the total mode of reality must appear to
us with overwhelming, indisputable clearness. Has
the traditional fact this degree of certainty, and can-
not it be explained in any other way? Who is able


THE ETERNAL IN CHRISTIANITY 55]


to assert this with entire certainty? If the superiority
of the Divine was, on this particular occasion, to be
proclaimed in a tangible manner, why did all this
happen for the small circle of believers alone, and why
did it not happen to others? There seems, however,
to have been necessary a certain state of the souls of
the disciples to make them see what they thought they
saw; but in all this there is found a psychic and
subjective factor in operation—a factor whose potency
is very difficult to define and to mark its boundaries.
It would have been a fact of a wonderful nature if
the souls of the disciples, from within, became
suddenly and without intermediary convinced of
the continuation of the life and the presence of the
Master : all this would have been no sensuous miracle
—no break in the course of nature. But we have to
bear in mind how times of strong religious agitation
and convulsion are so little qualified to judge con-
cerning external phenomena, and how easily a psychic
state solidifies into a supposed percept! Within and
without Christianity there are numerous examples
of the sensuous appearance of a dead person being con-
sidered to be fully authenticated by the narrower circle
of friends. Savonarola appeared more than a hundred
times after his death, but always to those whose hearts
clung to him; and to fifteen nuns of the convent of
St Lucia he gave the consecrated wafer through the
opening in their grille. (Cf. Hase, Savonarola, 2nd
ed., pp. 99 and foll.)

We can, indeed, lay on one side such analogies, and
still assert the uniqueness and inexplicableness of the .
events at the death of Jesus. In the midst of all the
obscurity of the facts, no interpretation is pressed by


552 CHRISTIANITY AND THE PRESENT


us as being universally valid. But on one point perfect
clearness ought to reign—as to what such supposed
events can and may be for our own life and faith.
The bodily resurrection is an historical, or asserted
as an historical fact. Such a fact is either capable of
proof or incapable of it. If it is capable, it can be
proved to everyone—even to the greatest unbeliever,
and its acknowledgment needs no personal disposition.
If it is not capable of proof or at least of sufficient
proof, religion can never make it a duty. Even in con-
nection with any point less critical and less difficult
than is here in question, religion does not compel us
to accept as proved what in reality has not been proved.
Otherwise expressed: the acknowledgment of an his-
torical fact is a matter of knowledge and not of
faith. Faith has as its object what is of a timeless
nature—what is able to be immediately present to
each individual and able to manifest its own elevating
energy; faith, in fact, carries within itself an inner
movement and a courageous ascent of the spirit of
man. If an historical fact is put in the place of
this object of faith, faith is externalised, and reduces
religion to a level which has been passed by the most
important movements of the world; and thus religion
becomes entangled in an insoluble contradiction with
the whole of the rest of life. If, then, the belief in
the bodily resurrection of Jesus threatens to break
up the whole of Christianity, wherein does faith in
the truth of Christianity obtain its final root? Are
the new contents of life, which affirm an emancipa-
tion from all petty-human capacities, and which pro-
claim a new world of love and grace, to be explained
as mere illusions if they are not guaranteed to you


THE ETERNAL IN CHRISTIANITY 553


by a tangible proof of a bodily resurrection? If, in
the manner of the Middle Ages, we make the reality of
the spiritual dependent upon a sensuous embodiment,
we shall obtain the pertinacity of what is termed
historical belief, but through this, we confess our
unbelief in the all-presence of the Spiritual and Divine
Life; and consequently we have parted from the
religion of the spirit and of personality and have sunk
back into a religion of signs and wonders. Men
certainly do not intend to do this, and yet they allow
the confusion which originates through the mixing
up of history and faith to remain, and which has
brought so many entanglements upon humanity.
We have already quoted the words of Fichte where
he pointed out that the emphasis on the historical
has resulted in considering subsidiary facts as of equal
validity with the main facts, and even at the expense
of the main facts, thus coercing the main facts and
tormenting the conscience.

Religion, which has already shown so much
energy, will finally find the energy to subsist with-
out sensuous signs and wonders. It discovers the
true wonder in the Spiritual Life itself, which,
with its cosmic creativeness and its deepening of
itself, demands as well as manifests the presence
of the Absolute Life. Nature, through its abandon-
ment of sensuous miracle, is in no way surrendered
to mere mechanism, and the denial of a break in its
order does not mean a breaking off of all relationship
with spirit. Mechanism itself has presuppositions
which it is not able to explain and which point
beyend it, as for instance, the laws of nature, reciprocal
effects, the ascent of types and of animate life out of a


554 CHRISTIANITY AND THE PRESENT


seemingly scattered and soulless agitation. And with-
out giving straight-away a religious significance to all
this, yet a depth of reality is here unmistakable; and
that the whole of nature finally serves the whole of
spirit is held fast by religion in spite of the impossi-
bility of a detailed application. But the main fact for
religion remains in the wonder of the Spirit and the
wonder in the Spirit ; and in the most decisive manner
religion must reject whatsoever threatens to weaken
the significance of this wonder and its consolidating
and elevating energy.

Not less severely does modern natural science collide
with traditional Christianity in the theory of evolu-
tion. The fact that the world has at the present day
entered into the current of scientific investigation,
that its elements participate in this movement, that
out of the supposed co-existence of types a succession
of types has been shown, and that especially the
organic kingdom has climbed from simple beginnings,
through a long ascent to its present height — all
this certainly contradicts not less irreconcilably the
traditional doctrine of creation and the whole notion
of the bringing of things into existence through
a will “beyond,” as the newer astronomy contra-
dicts the old geocentric mode of thinking. It is
only certain forms of the evolutionary theory, and
in no way all its forms, which signify a danger to the
substance of religion. If the interpretation of the
universe from the evolutionary point of view signifies
that the whole content of the universe has proceeded
without the operation of any effective law from within,
but solely through chance collisions of elements, so
that all the higher is simply a product of the lower,


THE ETERNAL IN CHRISTIANITY 555


and so that all independence loses its value, then
certainly a victory of mechanism and materialism
has captured each and every religion. If evolution,
however, signifies rather this—if it signifies that the
attainment of the higher stages became possible only
after having passed through the lower stages ; that in
each stage the Whole brings forth a new beginning,
and consequently all movement has the foundation
of a timeless order, and its advancement happens
within Time but not from Time, then evolution can in
no manner injure the substance of religion. If things
are thus, there is a growth in the depth of reality as
well as in the living presence of a higher order.

Indeed, we observe in natural science itself an
inner law of a timeless kind restraining more and
more the mere mechanism of a “‘ becoming” brought
forth through external adaptation to environment, re-
straining the lawless flux of forms and the predomin-
ance of a blind chaos of natural selection. But
religion is not able, however, to base its convictions
upon the currents of natural investigation, and there
is no need for it to do so because the dawning of the
Spiritual Life itself is a proof to it of a new stage
over against all nature, and of the growth of a further
new stage within the Spiritual Life itself. Thus the
Higher is not a mere More and a mechanical result
of the lower, but within this Higher an immediate
proof of Absolute Life is imbedded. Evolution is
then a testimony not against but for religion.

No unbiassed mind is able to deny a “ becom-
ing” within nature and spirit. Reason is for us no
ready-made thing; within our own circle it has
to be wrestled for, and the wrestling needs both


556 CHRISTIANITY AND THE PRESENT


the movement of external things and an activity
on our own part. But the question which separates
minds is: whether reason is a mere effect of a
“becoming,” or whether it can be an effect without
at the same time being a principle—whether the
universe must not be grounded upon reason in order
to engender reason at all. He who occupies the
former standpoint draws reality down to its lowest
stages and is able to see no more in all the rest than
a construction of that lower. But wherever character-
istic features and independence are accorded to the
Higher, wherever it stands clearly before us in all
its fulness and depth, there reason is recognised as a
principle in the midst of.all its “ becoming,” and there
the evolutionary theory and religion can and must
walk together hand in hand.

(8) The Further Development over against History
and Culture.—Changes in human life and actions
threaten Christianity still more directly than the
changes in our view of nature. Here, again, our in-
vestigation leads to the result that an irreconcilable
collision originates not so much in connection with the
real facts of the movements of life and actions as in
connection with certain problematic tendencies which
cling to these facts, and which grow in seeming in-
separableness along with them. All that is true and
genuine in these movements of life and actions can be
accepted by Christianity, but Christianity can accept
anything only in so far as it differentiates clearly
between the Eternal Substance and the temporal
existential-form, and only so far as it strives after a new
existential-form which corresponds to the demands of
the situation reached by the labours of the ages.


THE ETERNAL IN CHRISTIANITY 557


First of all, an opposition to religion originates on
account of the rise of an historical view and treatment
of existence. This view and treatment bring all things
into a flux and unveil an incessant change. To draw
religion—the work of God—into the current of time
and to adjust its stability to the changes of the human
situation, means to destroy it at its very foundation.
A religion based upon mere time—accepted with the
possibility of a notice to quit—is no religion. Chris-
tianity, however, has welded together with special
energy not only a fundamental body of doctrines and
organisations, but also a characteristic content of life
—a content which is to defy all the changes of time.

This is the first glimpse of the opposition, but we
shall see that it does not remain in possession of all this
harshness. First of all, human life refuses to surrender
itself entirelyinto this flux. Modern times, intheir first
fresh impression of the movement of things, saw only
the bright side of the change—they saw only the greater
freedom, the rich manifold of things, ete. But we are
just beginning to discover difficult drawbacks in con-
nection with the facts—the instability of all results, the
speedy toppling over of all standards and values, the
dissolution of life into mere moments which drive and
dislodge each other. More and more we lose an inward
connection of life; we become the puppets of an ever-
changing kaleidoscopic situation, and are in danger of
becoming engulfed into nothingness. In the presence
of such a catastrophe we are no longer able to speak of
a history, and least of all of a history of a spiritual kind.
For some kind of a persisting factor is present in all
history ; and in history of a spiritual kind there is pre-
sent an inner representation of the past, a view of the


558 CHRISTIANITY AND THE PRESENT


whole course, a stepping out of the stream of time, and
a transference to a timeless contemplation sub specie
ceternt. If life ascends towards such an eternity,
it ascends of necessity towards religion, which calls
for a return to final depths, calls for the illumina-
tion of the fundamental relationship of man to the
All, calls for the setting forth of the abiding
tasks and experiences of life, calls for the union of
our life with the Absolute Life, and above all else
to become the custodian of Eternity. If religion is
anything at all, it is that which gives man a secure
foundation, and which measures his undertakings
by means of elevated norms. If thus a longing
after Eternity arises through the fresh experience
and deep feeling of the vanity of all the mere life
of time, the turn to religion will gain full energy
and veracity.

But is religion able to satisfy the aspiration after
Kternity without having to suppress all movement and
without having to prohibit the full flow of the current
of life? The aspiration is not satisfied if the tradi-
tional existential-form signifies its final essence. The
mode of thinking which conceived eternal truth only
as it presented itself in time (of course this is an
indispensable element of religion), and also which
believed in the possibility of man reaching it at one
stroke, has become untenable. This mode of thinking
corresponded to the old view of truth which has been
replaced by another view. According to the old view,
the truth appeared so intimately related to man that a
courageous tension of energy seemed able immediately
to reach it at one stroke, and then an alleged durable
truth was set forth and which had only to be guarded


THE ETERNAL IN CHRISTIANITY 559


in a true and heroic manner. Thus, it was believed
at the height of Greek development that scientific
knowledge could accomplish this for once and for all ;
and men believed themselves able to trace out a
political constitution valid for all times. Correspond-
ing to this, it was believed that religion could be
brought into an inviolable and durable situation in
the same manner. But it is characteristic of modern
times, on the contrary, that a wider division between
the truth of the Spiritual Life and the immediate
situation of man has taken place, so that now, if an
Eternal is not to be lost, man has to labour in the
depth of his being, and it is only after a toilsome
struggle that the Eternal can be gained and can
become the true possession of man. The Eternal, in
itself certain and firm, is to us an incessant task.
Christianity is able to take over this latter view only
when it differentiates between an existential-form
characteristic of, and appropriate to, a certain age
from the timeless Substance which is effective in all
ages ; only when it works out the characteristic Life-
process and its new reality founded in God, and only
when it uplifts clearly this Life-process through
thought and feeling from all mere-human formations
of doctrines and works. Then Christianity will give
its full rights to the Eternal as well as to the temporal,
and the necessary contact between the two will lead
to no injurious narrowness.

The turn towards history and culture brought
forth not only more mobility, it also raised man to
greater self-activity and to the awakening of slum-
bering energies within him. Life, through such
experiences, is immeasurably raised, and man gains


560 CHRISTIANITY AND THE PRESENT


power not only over nature but also over his own
particular relationships and over his own soul: he
has now undertaken the construction of a kingdom
of reason on a great scale. Such a life, through its
possession of reality, has made all things far richer in
content than could ever have happened in the times
when man stood impotent over against the darkness
of the world, and expected, through tarrying and
hoping, his entire welfare from a power beyond. Now,
does not such a self-consciousness of human potency
contain a strong protest against all religions, and
especially against a mode of Christianity which pro-
claims the vanity of mere man with such special
emphasis? A clash is here quite evident, and the
question is, whether the necessities of life itself tend
to level down this distinction, and whether, indeed,
religion goes out half way to meet the desire for
levelling it down.

It is undoubtedly true that through the develop-
ment of modern culture far more has resulted from
man’s capacities than had hitherto been the case, but
it is doubtful whether it is the energy of the mere
individual which has brought forth all this; it is
doubtful whether, in the very process of this develop-
ment, nothing besides the merely human was at
work. We have already noticed that Spiritual Life
does not proceed from historico-social connections.
In so far as civilisation and culture are no more
than products of such connections they are, not-
withstanding all their claims at being able to form
a higher stage of things, afflicted with the curse
of semblance and untruth. Indeed, the further
they progress, the more do they get away from


THE ETERNAL IN CHRISTIANITY 561


their true basis, and thus become artificial and empty,
and fall into the petty and the common.

Whatsoever is genuine in civilisation and culture
rests upon the fact that a superhuman Spiritual Life
with its cosmic creativeness is operative within them.
Through such a connection with the Spiritual Life all
that is great in man is not given by nature but origi-
nates from a deeper basis, and must rest permanently
upon this basis. When it does this, the very sense of
power will contain a consciousness of entire depen-
dence on this basis and, at the same time, will contain
a denial of all merely natural individuality. Civilisa-
tion and culture will not then think lightly of religion,
and will not attempt to push it back, but they will
invoke it for their own preservation and purification,
and for the elevation of man beyond the region of
the petty-human. All merely secular culture will
now be seen through as a mere farce, since man
has realised that genuine culture has not merely to
develop extant powers but has to form a new being
—helps to develop an ascent from mere time to a
timeless order, and from mere man to a _ world-
embracing spirituality.

Religion, however, is able to correspond to such a
“call” of culture only if it grasps its own task in a great
and free sense. Religion must not consider that the
Divine in some external kind of way does the work,
and thus reducing life to a merely passive level, but
far more it has to posit itself into the centre of the
highest activity, and yet must never forget that such
a creative activity is fundamentally different from
merely natural development of energy. And, over


against culture, religion must at all times assert its
36


562 CHRISTIANITY AND THE PRESENT


rights to prove and to winnow, for it is religion-—the
power which draws upon the deepest source of life
—which takes to itself the whole of man and offers
a fixed standard for all his undertakings. Religion,
instead of being carried on the face of the changing
currents of civilisation and culture, must provide
through its timeless truth a secure foothold for the
remainder of life. It must cavil less at the transient
and particular in the domains of knowledge and life,
and rather undertake to test their whole meaning ;
it has to hold fast to the fact that all civilisation and
culture are only phenomena of the Spiritual Life and
not the Spiritual Life itself, and that consequently
these exhibit only a few of the many possibilities and
phases of things which have changed in the past and
will continue to change in the future. Religion is
thus unable to measure and to pass judgment on
things without holding up definite aims before
civilisation and culture, but it will accomplish this
task less directly than indirectly: it will accomplish
it through the working out of the further development
of the total-life which connects and encompasses all
the provinces of knowledge and life with itself. It
is through this reciprocal relationship that civilisation
and culture can assert their independence and free-
dom of movement.

In this reciprocity then religion has not only to give
but also to take. For the fundamental condition on
which religion finds its secure superiority comes to a full
effect in man when it finds an appropriate existential-
form ; and man is not able to find this form without the
aid of civilisation and culture. ‘Thus, we may hope that
such change which to-day urges culture to oppose


THE ETERNAL IN CHRISTIANITY 563


religion may finally serve the main aims of religion, so
that a common spiritual world may span the provinces
of both religion and culture.

This homogeneousness of both has to be worked
out over against the traditional forms not only of
culture but also of religion. Religion must not
bring forth simply that which lies by the side of the
rest of life—simply handling its one-sided content
alongside of other contents which it deems as not
belonging to itself and which it treats indifferently.
Religion must never consider itself as an isolated
province but as the characteristic depth of the totality
of life; and it must consider that its full energy and
intimate knowledge are to be reached on this pathway
alone. Through such an insight, religion will neither
be anxious to win the individual to some kind of a
mere assent to truth nor to lead individuals to some
ready-made spiritual world, but it will far more
constantly attempt to build up and hold forth a Whole
of the Spiritual Life within the human domain over
against the immense hindrances and perversions of an
indifferent and hostile world. We need a religion of
the total Spiritual Life and not one of the mere
individual or a one of the sum-total of any number
of individuals; we need as our own that religion
which has set forth more expressively than any other
religion the central conception of the Kingdom of
God. But here, however, it is necessary to purify
further the traditional form if that which from of old
has worked as an ideal and a demand is to find its
energetic achievement and to become the entire
possession of man.

(y) The Further Development over against the


564 CHRISTIANITY AND THE PRESENT


Changes of the Spiritual Life im Man.—-The most
important movements of the day have brought about
great changes within the province of the Spiritual
Life. But the fact is nowhere more perceptible than
in the changes which have taken place in connection
with the traditional existential-form of Christianity,
but, rightly understood and carried further, these
changes promise to develop the inmost essence of
Christianity, and to extend it as the religion of
universal life. This matter deals especially with the
three points of analysis and emancipation of the
Spiritual Life: its progressive superiority to sensuous
nature, to mere history, and to the petty-human
form of life. This emancipation and expansion of
the Spiritual Life are no ready-made results which
fall upon each individual in his smug situation, but are
movements and invitations of a spiritual kind and from
which no individual, who is to maintain human power
and creativeness on the heights of the most important
movements of life, dare withdraw himself; for these
movements of the Spiritual Life present a standard
beyond all the arbitrary actions of individuals and
beyond all the vacillations of the moment.

1. The Spiritual Life has, upon the ground of
modern times, succeeded in obtaining an independ-
ence over against sensuous existence in all its
forms. It has succeeded in obtaining this through
a more energetic excitation and exertion of self-
activity—an activity which does not tolerate a pas-
sive immersion of man into the environment, but
which precedes and measures the material that is
presented to it from without, and even weaves
the meaning of the fundamental construction of


THE ETERNAL IN CHRISTIANITY 565


the world from within. On account of this, the sen-
suous is no longer able to remain an essentially integral
part of the mental construction, but signifies now only
a valuable helper and even an essential means of repre-
senting the meaning of the mental construction.
Sensuous nature extends to the domain of religion:
we find this first. in the senile disposition of waning
antiquity as well as in the simple-minded way in
which the middle ages made the sensuous an essential
part of religion. But to the greater activity of
awakened modern times, such a mixing of external
signs with the inner life has become something magi-
cal and an intolerable hindrance to freedom. This
mingling of the sensuous and the spiritual is repre-
sented in the main by Roman Catholicism, and it is
largely owing to this that the strength of Catholicism
was due in former times, but since the advent of
the movement towards greater self-activity and purer
spirituality of humanity, the situation suitable to
former times has given way to an inward and higher
stage of life. But Protestantism also, which has pro-
tested against the magic of Catholicism, has by no
means excluded it; it holds sensuous miracle in high
estimation ; it preserves a sacramental mode in all its
tendencies, and this shows itself in its doctrine of
salvation through the “ blood” of Christ. ‘The sacra-
ments are a child of an age of deep weariness and
spiritual twilight: Divine energies were to proceed
towards man, but it was imagined that these energies
needed sensuous signs which, however, conceived as
necessary pledges of the truth of Divine energies, be-
came more than sensuous. In order to hide the con-
tradiction imbedded in this, a dim twilight time


566 CHRISTIANITY AND THE PRESENT


and a dreamy disposition of life are necessary, and these
are needed further in order to obtain a foothold and
conviction in the midst of the darkness of the situation.
The fresher life of modern times has scattered this
twilight and has reduced an alleged piety to magic.
The residue of such magic which has remained
in Protestantism works all the more vaguely, the
more it fails to understand the life of our day.

Many have found and do find to-day a sub-
jective support in such magic, and its removal
may appear to such minds a disaster. But it is
necessary for modern man to bear in mind—and this
truth is of the very essence of Christianity—that when
Christianity entered into the arena of time as a
religion of pure spirituality, magic served as help
to it and was not inseparably connected with it.
Certainly such magic ought not to disappear before
some equivalent appears. ‘The equivalent is at hand:
it is the further development of the Spiritual Life
itself; and this development can take place through
a turn of life to a level beyond all externals—a turn
towards itself and towards a_ total-activity—and
through the winning of an unassailable reality by
means of a development of a basal and durable life
and being. If the sensuous is not in this manner
replaced by the self-consolidation of the Spiritual Life,
every kind of spiritualisation tends to wither away, so
that the Middle Ages was right in insisting that some-
thing besides the sensuous was needful. But the
sensuous through its removal from the centre of life
becomes in no way superfluous and subordinate for
the stimulation of man. Indeed, the more religion
deepens itself by means of the whole of the Spiritual


THE ETERNAL IN CHRISTIANITY 567


Life, the more it makes the external recede into
a distance; the less religion is able to grasp
the idea, the more necessary becomes the pictorial,
and the more religion needs the help of imagination
and art. But this indispensable means does not
signify the reality itself and will not coalesce with
it.

2. The progressive superiority of the Spiritual Life
to bare history has occupied our attention so much
that it is not necessary here to do more than remind
ourselvesof our previousconclusions. The fact thatwe
as children of modern times posit all the offerings of
history upon our own day and adjust them from such
a situation comes into conflict with the traditional
form of Christianity. Catholicism is not, on the
whole, troubled with this entanglement because to it
past and present join themselves intimately in the
manner of the Middle Ages, and also because the
differences of the generations are obliterated. ‘To
Protestantism, on the contrary, the distinction
between past and present was made and an alleged
yet conscientious return to the former became
essential: it attempted to carry life back to a special
epoch—the beginnings of Christianity—and to shape
it in accordance with this epoch. But Protestantism
discovered that it was still more essential to base
religion within one’s own life and personal experience ;
but the attempt to carry both elements—the ex-
perience of the personal life and its binding to an
historical factor-—has miscarried ; and this fact is dis-
covered to-day, and it must soon become intolerable.
Catholicism has here decidedly the logic on its side
when it makes the Church and its past the guarantor


568 CHRISTIANITY AND THE PRESENT


of its truth; whilst Protestantism, through allowing
matters of learned investigation and of an historical
nature to decide concerning the meaning of life and
the salvation of the soul, has entered into grave
danger. If Protestantism is to remain true to its
main idea, it must subjugate history to personal life,
and this means a radical transformation of the tradi-
tional material.

The present day. often shows an uncertain oscilla-
tion of the religious life between history and the
present, between authority and personal conviction ;
one hopes to help the personal conviction through a
retreat to the past, and thus the rich content of
history is supposed to procure an intuitive content
for life as well as for religion. We resign ourselves,
through such a turn, to the impressions of unique
epochs and personalities ; we transpose and submerge
ourselves in these so far as to forget ourselves; we
seek to understand such epochs and personalities as
they really were, and the intuitive presentation of
such pictures seems to us a great gain in truth.
But this historical and relative truth is not the
eternal and absolute truth upon which religion must
ever insist. The interweaving of these two things is
not far removed from the German mode of conceiving
life, and contains the danger of substituting merely
imitative feeling for genuine feeling, many truths for
the one truth, mere knowledge for life. Let us give
the highest honour to history in its right place, but let
us energetically oppose an enervating “ historism.”

We are in entire unison with the spirit of Christi-
anity when we place history and its results in a
secondary place. It is true that the assertion of the


THE ETERNAL IN CHRISTIANITY 569


entrance of the Divine into Time made by Christianity
has heightened mightily the significance of history, and,
indeed, has for the first time made history in a spirit-
ual sense possible. But Christianity has never made
the temporal life the main fact, and has never turned
the nature of man into a predominantly historical
nature. For all that happens within time has here a
worth only in so far as it develops what is eternal and
in what it executes for the eternal. Thus it views and
values not eternity by means of time, but time bymeans
of eternity ; and thus it finds present within history a
greatness: it is a greatness because it is an emanci-
pation from history—a realisation of an eternal order.
Herein is imbeddedthe demand that the contemplation
of infinity must ever remain superior to all, so that
Christianity forms an irreconcilable opposition to any
form of evolution or of “historism.” The more ener-
getic working out of its eternal character—the aspira-
tion after a present superior to time—is therefore
no defection from Christianity. We have in our
previous investigation become convinced of the fact
that such a movement is not a relapse into the
Enlightenment, and that history as a_ subsidiary
element retains great value. We have already seen
that a “here and now” superior to time must some-
how through religion become the main standard of
life, and that history will further us in our efforts only
in so far as we encompass and govern it with an in-
dependent life.

3. The third aspect of the emancipation of the
Spiritual Life is the one of emancipating it from a
merely human existential-form. We have already
observed how the modern work of civilisation and


570 CHRISTIANITY AND THE PRESENT


culture with its expansive tendency has broken
through the merely human existential-form, and we
have noticed how it took up an energetic struggle
for the driving out of the mere-human. ‘Throughout
the whole development of modern times, the Spiritual
Life has severed itself from a merely subjective
inactivity and from resting upon a merely human
opinion; it has engendered characteristic contents
and necessities, laws and methods; it has connected
itself into an independent world and has made man
a mere tool and means for its development. Modern
development finds its most tangible expression in
the linking of the Spiritual Life with a unique and
seemingly free-moving thought-process. We have
observed how this thought-process pointedly opposed
not only Religion and Christianity but also how it
lowered morality to a merely subjective and sub-
sidiary phenomenon, and how it undertook to disin-
tegrate all personal life, all independent self-sub-
sistence, and all ideals favourable to the creation of
spiritual energy.

Now, through such a critical situation composed
of an irreconcilable entanglement, the emancipation
of the Spiritual Life becomes a great problem. But
the reason for this opposition is highly problematic,
but we dare say that it is a mistake—a colossal
mistake. We have already seen in this book, and
the same idea has been more fully developed in other
works of the author, that the transformation of the
Spiritual Life into an impersonal thought-process
destroys it to its very foundation. This method of
treating the Spiritual Life becomes its self-distortion,
whilst at the same time, its content evaporates more


THE ETERNAL IN CHRISTIANITY 571


and more and the whole life is transformed into a
kingdom of abstract values which slip through our
hands as soon as they are grasped and subjected
to a closer examination. If, however, the idea of an
emancipation of the Spiritual Life frees itself from
such an abstract process, and when it possesses the
further insight that the Spiritual Life, in order to
become a full reality, must become a self-subsist-
ence and must, through a persistent self-develop-
ment, encompass all activity, then this movement of
thought need not go against Christianity, but can
quite well serve for the furtherance of Christianity,
whilst simultaneously it brings the Spiritual Life and
man into a secure relationship. It is true that in
Christianity a high estimation of man and a strong
love for man are found. But these do not issue out
of man as a merely natural being; they do not
fortify him in his merely human self-assertion, but
they see him in the light of a new world and inaugur-
ate for him a new life founded in God, so that his
estimation and love rest, if not upon the reality itself,
yet upon the possibility of an essential transformation
of the nature of man. Throughout genuine Christi-
anity everywhere there is operative a yearning after a
new man and after a new kingdom of peace and love.
The detailed elaboration, however, which this aspira-
tion found in earlier ages is not able to satisfy entirely
our age. Life in those ages, notwithstanding its en-
nobled efforts, remained too much within the domain of
human frailty and did not sufficiently distinguish the
new spiritual contents developed by the relationship to
God, from the subjective form of their appropriation
by the soul. Such an idea of God to the modern


572 CHRISTIANITY AND THE PRESENT


mode of thinking appears too much as a mere idealisa-
tion of man, and the religious life too much as an inter-
course of person with person, and consequently as
too emotional and anthropomorphic. Pantheism, on
the contrary, has insisted upon conceptions of the
universe and has opposed energetically the religious
tendency of dwelling on the sickness of the soul, and
on account of this has gained a good deal of sympathy
in modern times, but we can no more go back to it,
notwithstanding the warmth of its definite ideas, than
to the Ptolemaic conception of the universe.

But we hear it asked, does not a danger arise to
religion through such a conception of Pantheism ?
Is there not a certain affirmation and strengthening of
man essential for religion, and does not there belong to
religion a certain anthropomorphism ? In any case, the
view of God as well as of religion has become more
shadow-like, the more it has attempted to drive every-
thing human out of religion. We step thus into the
dilemma: that the human is too small for us, and that
with the renunciation of the human, religion threatens
to break in pieces.

Such a dilemma is to be escaped from only through
an inner analysis of the human—through a sharp
differentiation of the spiritual contents from the sub-
jective inclinations. The whole of our investigation
has been directed towards demonstrating that such an
analysis is not only possible but even necessary, and
that without it there is neither religion nor, speaking
generally, truth. Our investigation sought also to
show that not only did particular contents develop
side by side, but also that they connected themselves
together into a Whole of an entity and produced an


THE ETERNAL IN CHRISTIANITY 573


essentially new being, which we aspired after by
means of our “ever-becoming” personality. Here-
with the man gains a cosmic nature within his own
province, so that he is now able in religion and every-
where else to take up a struggle against the petty-
human; he is now able to bring about, if not with
ease, yet with great effort, a fundamental analysis of
his own nature. The problem remains no longer for
him in the relationship of himself with the external
world, but lies within the domain of his own soul.
Difficult tasks arise along with all this. As modern
investigation transforms the immediate picture of
nature into a mere phenomenon which appeared to an
older mode of thought as the reality itself, and as it
passes from the phenomenon to the meaning of this
phenomenon in consciousness, we, too, have to pass
’ from the surface-possession of human existence and
have to work out the spiritual substance which lies be-
neath this. The supposed facts then transform them-
selves into tasks,but within the tasks themselves facts
are imbedded which promise to bring us nearer to
truth. It is from such a source as this that religion
can hold man fast to his spiritual nature, and struggle
vigorously against anthropomorphism. Thus all
objects and qualities have to be changed within con-
sciousness ; conceptions such as personality, morality,
etc., have to be carried beyond their nearest-at-hand
human meaning, and ail merely subjective inward-
ness has to give way to an essential inwardness ; in
fact, there is now everywhere a remodelling of all into
the great, the fully active, and the cosmic. Con-
sequently, much that appeared previously as the
reality itself is now reduced to a mere finger-post ;


574 CHRISTIANITY AND THE PRESENT


but what we thus lose as a surface-possession is more
than compensated for in the gain of a depth in
our nature. Indeed, the more we fortify ourselves
through such a spiritual substance and feel that the
kernel of our life lies beyond the petty-human, the
more truly are we able to employ and value such
metaphors and symbols of the Divine. For then we
know that they are indispensable means for the
furtherance of the soul, and at the same time we find
in them not the reality itself, but a parable of reality.

If we consider how much is involved in such a
change in the position of the Spiritual Life, and if
we as well present before ourselves what transforma-
tions, culture, history, and natural science carry
within themselves, we see clearly the critical situation
in which religion is placed, because these surface-
changes are not of the essence of religion. Through
the mighty expansion and fissures which these
changes bring about, the old immediacy and intimacy
of the soul have become lost, and religion has now
receded into the distance, and is in danger of vanish-
ing more and more. The disarrangement of things
which such changes cause occurs not only in con-
nection with their own facts and material and against
their old forms, but the effect proceeds into the very
character and feelings of man and into his religion.
And yet, when we examine the matter closer, we
find that such changes cause not so much a breach
with Christianity as with its traditional form, and
that they aspire to bring about a fundamental renewal
of Christianity. For when we penetrate beyond the
motives and dispositions of men to their spiritual
basis, all the changes cannot contradict what is


THE ETERNAL IN CHRISTIANITY 575


essential to Christianity, but they even promise to
assist this essential element in its new, freer, and
more energetic development. But we have to bear
in mind that all this will not descend upon us like
a shower of rain, but will have to be brought forth
through immense labour and toil. It becomes neces-
sary to replace that which must pass away, and to
reconsolidate the essentials which are threatened.
All this cannot come about save through an energetic
concentration and deepening of the Spiritual Life,
save through a struggle against the superficiality of
time regardless of all consequences, and save through
a vivification and integration of all that points in the
right direction. We now turn to the elucidation of
this.


PART V.—CHRISTIANITY AND THE PRESENT
(ContTINUED)


CHAPTER XVI


b. Tue TRANSIENT IN CHRISTIANITY AND THE
NEcESSITY OF A RENEWAL OF CHRISTIANITY


1. The Removal from Past Forms


WE were not able to plead for the substance of
Christianity, without, at the same time, emphasising
strongly the temporal character of the traditional
existential-form. This existential-form took shape
under the influence of a highly characteristic epoch,
and since that epoch fundamental transformations have
taken place in human life and .activity. The fourth
and the fifth centuries, in which the conclusions of
the existential-form of Christianity were formulated,
were in the whole of their nature times of spiritual
stagnation; they could further Christianity only
through the aid of the very antiquity with which
primitive Christianity had had to wrestle. Thus, the
doctrines and worship of Christianity during the
earlier centuries developed under the strongest in-
fluence of Greek thought, and its organisation was
largely influenced by the Roman spirit. At a later
period came the transmission of Christianity amongst


a people imbued for the first time with aspirations ;
576


THE TRANSIENT IN CHRISTIANITY 577


then followed the mistakes and finally the decay of
the ideals of these peoples; and later the rise of a
new civilisation and culture brought forth a new
standpoint of viewing the world as well as a new
kind of life, and all this could not proceed on its
course without bringing about changes in the whole
situation of man as well as in the whole of Chris-
tianity-—without revaluing old values and engender-
ing new demands out of new situations. We have
already protested sufficiently against subjugating
religion to the ordinary changes of history as well
as abandoning it to the limits of the elements of
time. But where transformations in the world of
thought reach back into the whole of life, and where
these transformations find the soul something other
than it was supposed to be, and where they are
called to bring forth a different view of man and the
world, then religion is not able to withdraw from
such transformations without injury and without
even the danger of being supplanted at the very
core of life. Such transformations in reality resulted
against the conclusions of the fourth and the fifth
centuries. Thus, religion had to speak in a new way
to a new man, for it dare not ever deal with this New
in a concealed manner and offer portions of it as a
mere embroidery of life, but it has always to pro-
nounce openly concerning this New and take its
stand independently upon it, if the religious life in its
totality is not to suffer in energy and veracity.

The greatness of the change, and the necessity of a
remodelling become most obvious if we compare the
configuration of the religious world of thought at


the spiritual height of ancient Christianity—as for
37


578 CHRISTIANITY AND THE PRESENT


example in Augustine—with the configuration which
is demanded after the experiences of the millenniums.
By these experiences we do not mean the fleeting
fancies of many of our contemporaries, which have
little enough to recommend them, but we mean the
experiences which have issued through the most
important and universal results of the Spiritual Life
through the centuries; and this inheritance no one,
in the long run, can deny. Augustine in three main
points holds out before us a characteristic configura-
tion of religion. The manifestation of the Divine in
his writings stands in direct opposition to the develop-
ment of human energy, and this doctrine conceived of
and revered the Divine all the more, the deeper it
lowered human nature and the more it divested man
of all independence. And further, according to this
view, religion seemed to be real and true only in so
far as it gained a visible embodiment; thus the
kingdom of God had its embodiment in the Church ;
all activity of a religious nature had its embodiment
in tangible achievements which were in no way a
mere semblance but were essential parts of the
reality. Finally, the whole of culture was placed in
the immediate service of religion and its doctrines ;
all scientific, artistic, and political activities were
admissible and of value only in so far as they dis-
charged themselves into religion and corroborated
its truth. And thus was obtained a thoroughly
religious, but not a universal, system of life.

The relation of the spiritual to the sensuous is
investigated from these three points of view, and
this relation shows how deeply the claims of the
heightened self-activity of the Spiritual Life affects


THE TRANSIENT IN CHRISTIANITY 579


the configuration of religion. But we have to bear
in mind that the sharp conflict between an older
and a newer mode of thinking allows no com-
promise, but imperatively demands a_ decision.
These two tendencies of thought contradict one
another; the inseparable blending of the sensuous
with the spiritual signifies to the old tendency an
unconditional necessity in order to reach the entire
reality of the spiritual; but the newer tendency
considers this as a drawing of the spiritual down to
a lower level. The newer tendency must desire to
drive the sensuous out of the centre of life, whilst
the older tendency feels itself obliged here to assert
and to consolidate the sensuous. What is to one a
rock of offence is to the other a necessary demand.
Further, in connection with the relationship of the
Divine and the human, we are prohibited from hold-
ing fast to the old mode. To Augustine belongs the
merit of having formulated with full clearness the
fundamental Christian thought of the nothingness of
mere man, and also of having severed morality from
all mere nature ; for with him all greatness in man
was a work of Divine grace. But in dealing with
one side of the question he allowed the other side, in
accordance with the disposition of an enfeebled and
despondent time, to become stunted—that is, the
side of the restrengthening of man through his union
with God and the transformation of his life into
self-activity through the new connections. Grace
and freedom, corresponding to that conception of the
relationship of the Divine and the human, appeared
to Augustine as irreconcilable opponents ; a welling-
up of freedom out of grace remained alien to his


580 CHRISTIANITY AND THE PRESENT


dualistic mode of thinking. That Augustine, on the
other hand, does assign an activity of his own to man
and that this activity often seems even to contain
the main decision of life we are well aware of; but
we are also aware that all this is in direct contra-
diction to his fundamental tendency, and that it
is rather a superficial compromise to the claims of
practice than a deepened conception of Christianity.

This conception of Augustine was bound to result
in giving religion a character of passivity, of drowsy
devotion, and of blind obedience; it engendered a
pleasure and even a passion to worship its object on
account of the security it promises; it threatened to
take away all backbone out of life and to transform
it into mere sentimentality, weakness, and dejection.
Also the senile character of Augustine’s time has here
penetrated deep into religion itself. At later periods
in the history of the western world protests did not
fail to arise. Especially do we find in the inaugura-
tion of the Reformation a glowing aspiration after
a manly, joyous, and world-renewing Christianity.
But even these new beginnings did not succeed in
coming to a full development, and infinitely much
remains to be done in the future if world-denial and
world-renewal effects are to find an entire equilibrium
within Christianity, and if freedom and grace are to
settle the dispute that exists between them, and are
to bind themselves together for the construction of
a new reality.

Also, the relation of religion to culture needs a re-
modelling. Because all the provinces of life, in the
view of Augustine, had simply to serve religion, all
that existed and worked from its own energy lost its


THE TRANSIENT IN CHRISTIANITY 581


value, and the renunciation of all objective interests
to a subjective state of the soul threatened to destroy
all culture. And, further, religion through its aspired
isolation lost all living content; and when religion
degenerated into a highly abstract conception, it had
as an alternative only the return to an anthropomor-
phism. The Middle Ages through their Scholasticism
gave a higher value to the work of culture, because it
looked upon culture as possessing a certain independ-
ence, and assigned to religion only the work of
guiding the totality of things. But Scholasticism
did not carry things to a true settlement—culture
was narrowed and religion was still largely under
the influence of an alien mass of thought. The
Reformation accomplished a severer severance in
favour of the independence of religion, but even here
the danger of making religion too much of an isolated
province became quite evident; religion thus tended
to lose its cosmic character, so that the results of
knowledge had but little influence on life and were
considered to be of a secular character. Although
religion and knowledge have different starting points
and took on opposite poles of the total-life, yet their
entire severance would mean the rending of life in
an intolerable manner.

Thus, we stand face to face with new tasks ; we are
obliged to do something more than merely carry
further the past: we are to seek for new and in-
dependent beginnings. A merely pietistic view of
life has become too narrow for us; but, on the other
hand, the superficiality of a culture devoid of religion
becomes more and more evident. Consequently, an
understanding within the domain of a wider synthesis


582 CHRISTIANITY AND THE PRESENT


has become necessary. We have already seen how
the Spiritual Life, in the sense we conceived it, offers
a basis for such an explanation. But this Spiritual
Life is not a restful bond of union, which man has
merely to accept; it is not the setting forth of an
equilibrium of life for once and for all. ‘The point of
departure and the drift of the movement of the
Spiritual Life are fundamentally different from this
old conception, and all attempts to weaken this
difference threaten to lower the energy as well as
the truth of life. The Spiritual Life, if it would
remain healthy and fresh, must, founded though our
being is in the Absolute Life and Eternal Truth,
remain in constant movement. ‘That the truth is to
us simultaneously a fact and a task signifies an
essential divergence from the older mode of thinking.

Thus, there appears all along a great opposition
between the traditionally old and the sought-for new
types of life. And it is of no avail to veil this
difference between the old and the new Christianity,
or to endeavour to make the old and the new flow
together in what can be no more than a seeming
coalescence. And further, it is not sufficient merely
to allow the New to assert itself, and merely to inter-
pret the Old. He who attempts to give equal rights
to both is in danger of doing injustice to both; he is
in danger of raising the claims of the Old to become
crystallised through the centuries without any change
although it has no longer the same meaning for the
convictions of an increasing number of minds; he is
in danger, through the attempt to amalgamate both,
to do injustice to the New, whose development is
retarded through placing a millstone around its


THE TRANSIENT IN CHRISTIANITY 583


neck, whilst it needs all its energy in order to re-set
its truth, in order to overcome the present-day
situation of painful unreadiness, and in order to
help in the bringing forth of a new phase of eternal
truth.

How great and irreconcilable the opposites are,
appears most clearly in the different positions which
the Founder of historical Christianity occupies in the
Old and in the New. This question we are dis-
cussing is in so far the kernel of the whole matter,
since we here decide concerning the manner of the
relationship of the human and the Divine, which re-
lationship forms the fundamental truth of the whole
of Christianity. For nothing differentiates Chris-
tianity so much from other religions as the fact that
in Christianity the union of mankind and God is not
determined in an external manner through commands
and achievements, but that it results from within
through the growth of an entirely new and essential
life founded in God and through the call of man, in
the midst of an antagonistic world, to a participation
in the perfection and blessedness, in the infinity and
eternity of Absolute Being. The old conception
presents this union of the natures of the Divine and
the human in a supernatural, ontologic-metaphysical
manner. The Founder of Christianity is thus simul-
taneously truly God and truly man; only at this one
life does the miracle of the entrance of the Divine
into the human appear accomplished ; only through
the mediation of the Divine in this one situation and
the relationship of man to the situation, that a union
with God is inaugurated for the rest of mankind.
Thus the whole truth and certainty of this union is


584 CHRISTIANITY AND THE PRESENT


stated to lie in the fact that in the personality of
the Founder it was not merely the energy of the
Godhead which was efficacious, but that the Founder
himself was of a Divine Nature—was himself God in
the fullest meaning of the term. In this connection,
every attempt to weaken the Godhead of Christ
meant a lessening of the substance of religion, and
all similarity between Christ and God had to give
way to the strict’ identity of the two. Thus the
more metaphysical and also the more identical with
God Christ became, the greater seemed his religion
to be and the securer seemed the foundation of its
Divine truth. But, however, the entire union of the
Godhead and humanity in one person has become in
no way through its dogmatic proclamation a living
reality for the religious life, but the history of
Christianity shows here a strong dualism. People
have not so much revered Christ at the same time
as God and as man, but rather they have revered
him alternately now as God, now as man, according
to the manner in which the dogmatic conception
brought forth the one side, and the practico-ethical
conception brought forth the other side. And the
contradiction is in reality irreconcilable. The dog-
matic conception views the Founder as a man who
is at the same time God; who as God possesses
absolute truth and who from such a height leads a
human existence; who lays on one side only for a
time his sovereign rank; who participates in the
cares and quests, the struggles and doubts which
constitute not only the most difficult but also the
greatest conceivable sufferings in human life. Even
to the suffering that was preordained by a Divine


THE TRANSIENT IN CHRISTIANITY 585


decree to bring forth the most beneficial results and,
indeed, to bring a change in the destiny of the
world—in all this the sting which makes suffering
genuine is wanting: the seeming senselessness of his
death, the doubts, whether all the hard struggles,
the bitter pain are not in vain—all these disappear
if the dogmatic conception is correct. He who had
no need to overcome also such a doubt, had not
more but less laid upon him than is laid upon us
other men, and such an one’s conquest cannot bring
consolation to others. And when traditional Chris-
tianity fails to discover any contradiction in that,
on the one hand, it grieves from the depth of its
soul over the human sufferings of this Personality,
and, on the other hand, reveres this Personality as a
God superior to all human anxieties and needs, we
are reminded, although they are separated by an
infinite interval, of the words of Xenophanes so
specially concerned for the unity and eternity of
the Divine Nature. When the Eleatics questioned
him whether they should sacrifice to MLeucothea
and bewail her, he replied, “ Bewail her not if you
consider her a goddess, sacrifice not to her if you
consider her human.”

But the new conception dare not renounce the
union of the human and the Divine. The renuncia-
tion would be an abandonment not only of religion,
but of any and every truth. But the new mode
dare not fasten the union to any one individual
event in history, and place everything else in a state
of dependency upon that one event ; but it has much
more to permeate, connect, and elevate all events
of a spiritual kind; it has to bring forth a world-


586 CHRISTIANITY AND THE PRESENT


encompassing and continuous deed which can become
the intimate experience of every individual.

This involves also a severe clash of the new
view with the traditional idea of mediation, which
Christianity connects with the main idea of redemp-
tion. According to the traditional view, redemp-
tion does not proceed directly from the Absolute
Life and Being that lies on the other side of man’s
own energy, but a mid-link is forged between the
Divine and the human, and half of it belongs to each
side; both sides are brought into a definite connection
which could be found in no other way. The power
which this idea has exercised over the soul is
shown through its origin and whole history. It
was late Greek antiquity that fled towards it and
clung to it. The presuppositions of the idea are
quite evident. Deeply conscious of the opposites
of our existence, especially of spirit and matter,
man sought to elevate the Divine above the sordid
mechanism of the world, and to conceive of it as
much as possible on the other side of this world;
and consequently the Divine appears incapable of
coming into direct contact with man. But if, at
the same time, there energises in man a glow-
ing aspiration after an emancipation from the hard
exigencies and unreason of the world as well as
after some kind of participation in the Godhead,
and if simultaneously the consciousness of his own
impotence is developed, what remains except the
hope of intermediate powers that finally integrate
themselves into one personality? We are able to
understand how such a conception offered a means
of support to human frailty, how it seemed to


THE TRANSIENT IN CHRISTIANITY 587


make the access to the Divine easier, and how it
gave an intimacy to the idea of redemption. And
yet there is imbedded in the doctrine of mediation
a crass anthropomorphism which religion cannot
possibly endure for ever, and the presuppositions of
which must fall to the ground as soon as an
energetic feeling of life and a firmer faith have
bridged the deep cleft between the Divine and the
human which ruled there. Then it is bound to
become clear that the doctrine is not able to bring
forth a gain on one side without bringing forth a
great loss on the other side. For it injures the
direct relationship with the Divine; as it removes
this relationship farther away from man, it lowers
the Divine love and grace upon which in the last
resort all depends; as it places the entire inclusion
of such love and grace in one particular point, it
falls into anthropomorphism; as it contracts the
union of the human and the Divine to one special
situation, it thus inevitably draws down the Divine
into the existence-form of man. The main fact,
however, is that, like to all other life and being, so
also that of religion cannot have more than one
centre; either God or Christ stands in the centre,
and the one consequently represses the other. Con-
cerning the decision, there cannot be the least doubt:
the fact is clear in the soul-struggles of the great
religious personalities, that in a decisive act of the
soul the doctrinal idea of mediation recedes into
the background, and a direct relationship with God
becomes a fact of immediacy and intimacy. And
the idea of mediation glides easily into a further
mediation. Has not the figure of Christ receded


588 CHRISTIANITY AND THE PRESENT


in Catholicism, and does not the figure of Mary
constitute the centre of the religious emotional
life ?

Such a conviction does not exclude the fact that a
man is able to be a great help to men in their upward
path towards God; and does not exclude the fact
that the human personality who first and foremost
brought eternal truth to the plane of time and
through this inaugurated a new epoch remains per-
manently present in the picture of the spiritual world,
and is able permanently to exercise a mighty power
upon the soul. Such a personality as Jesus is not the
mere bearer of doctrines or of a special frame of mind,
but is a convincing fact and proof of the Divine Life,
a proof at which new life can be kindled ever anew.
The fact is at the same time the source of a move-
ment which cannot be estimated; it is from this
source that a great yearning has been implanted
within the human breast—a longing for a new life
of love and peace, of purity and simplicity. Such a
life with its incomparable nature and its mysterious
depths does not exhaust itself through historical
effects, but humanity can from hence ever return
afresh to its inmost essence, and can strengthen
itself ever anew through the certainty of a new, pure
and spiritual world over against the meaningless
aspects of nature and over against the vulgar mechan-
ism of a culture merely human.

But all this is far removed from any idea of media-
tion, and far removed from the setting of a human
personality in Divine power and worship. And if we
have thus to protest against the position accorded
to Jesus by the traditional form of Christianity, so


THE TRANSIENT IN CHRISTIANITY 589


that we have to part company with a Christo-centric
configuration on account of the breach with the old
mode of thinking, yet we cling to an essential con-
tent and a metaphysical depth in the human image
of Jesus, and seek in this the sole standard of the
religious life. One had good ground for doing this
so long as Jesus Christ was considered in his humanity
as true God, as the second person in the Trinity.
But where this belief has been abandoned, the ex-
clusive linking of life to Jesus becomes an inadmis-
sible contraction and diminution of religion. Also,
the pathway to the facts dare not become the facts
themselves, and dare not bring the metaphysical and
eternal in religion into obscurity. The Christianity
which occupies itself solely with Jesus and which to
many to-day seems an exit from all entanglements,
is not yet a match for the mighty problems, and
does not carry within itself the energy to overcome
the world.

Thus, we witness the most pointed antagonism
between the traditional and a new aspiring Christi-
anity. All along the line, the two conceptions do
not appear as a More or a Less between which some
kind of a Mean can be found, but they appear as
opposites in their main tendencies. The breadth
which the one desires is held by the other to be
an evaporation; the consolidation upon which the
one insists is held by the other to be no more than
a semblance and a humanisation; the doctrine of
mediation which signifies to the one an indispens-
able entrance to the Godhead, appears to the other
as a diminution of the Divine and as a weakening of
the fundamental process of religion.


590 CHRISTIANITY AND THE PRESENT


In the midst of such antagonism and such an actual
cleft, what can now signify a clinging to an appear-
ance of unity? The old mode is right when it com-
plains that the traditional values are buried under
new and strange phenomena and meanings; the old
view fears an injury to the substance of Christianity
from such a new interpretation, and calls up and
stands upon a tradition from century to century in
order to hold fast the pure and true configuration
of Christianity gained for once and for all. The new
mode desires clear divisions of the material whenever
it feels itself the representative of truth, and when it
feels it its duty to set forth truth with the whole of
its energy. It feels that it is only through an entire
independence it can overcome all the prior hesitation
of halting in front of a problem; it feels that it is
able to progress from a more negative to a more
positive construction ; it feels that it is able to test
the experience of human nature, and that through
a struggle with the opposites it is able inwardly to
grow. Thus, as things now stand, the opponents
consume their best energy in reciprocal disputes ;
through the one questioning the rights and wrongs of
the other, the subject-matter itself is not furthered,
and, more than all, the confused state of things
hinders veracity, and without such veracity the pre-
sent crisis in religion cannot be overcome.

This new disunion will not be able for any great
length of time to keep religion in the background.
Indeed, this fact is even now becoming visible.
Religious questions occupy and govern more and
more the minds of men; they kindle the passions
and call to battle. They do this at present, it is true,


THE TRANSIENT IN CHRISTIANITY 591


more from without and not always in a desirable
manner, but an inward change is visible and wide-
awake. Old and seemingly-settled questions arise
anew and show that all the transformations of life
have not entirely broken their power. Such a light
in the direction of religion drives out with mighty
power that gloomy twilight which is the abode of
halfness and obscurity, and such a light brings the
concealed contradiction to a clear consciousness and
makes it intolerable. It is out of an honourable
adjustment of the Old and the New, however, that
the effort after a reconstruction of Christian truth
must issue—a reconstruction of the universal validity
of the Spiritual Life, which already wells up as a
mighty aspiration in the hearts of many who hunger
and thirst after truth and eternity, but whose deep
craving is no longer satisfied by the old forms. How
long shall religion be considered a mere stepchild
of that which suppresses conscience and conviction ?
How long are we to search for eternal truth upon an
obsolete road? That things are not easy and comfort-
able on the new road is easily seen, and it is to this
fact we now pass.


2. The Necessity of a New Mode of Christianity

When we aspire after a new form of Christianity
and simultaneously deem necessary a breach with
tradition, we are not blind in any way to the danger
and difficulty of the problem. ‘The traditional form
has for centuries held together a large portion of
humanity; it has given life and conviction a fixed
direction, as well as a foothold and confidence to an
innumerable number of souls, and it has been the


592 CHRISTIANITY AND THE PRESENT


means of interesting the widest circles in spiritual
tasks. All this is already evident as something great
beyond measure when we compare it with the small
spiritual activity brought forth by the ordinary life
of men and with the instability of the Spiritual Life
within the mere-human circle. In reflecting on all
this, the breach with the traditional form of religion
may appear as an upheaval of morality as well as of
intellectual connections. In a word, this may appear
as an endangering of all that lifted man beyond his
small self and beyond mere nature. In reality, there
exist here grave dangers, and a great risk is un-
mistakable. Such a breach is justified only if it is
aspired after on account of a spiritual necessity of
man’s nature, superior to all human considerations and
reflections. And this will be the case in the province
of religion when it is perceived that the old form of
religion is unable to solve our own religious problems,
and when simultaneously our own interest in religion
has turned into an aspiration and effort after an inner
renewal. ‘That this is actually the case to-day has
been the leading thought of the whole of our in-
vestigation, and we need here do no more than bring
this thought to its final connection and conclusion.
Religion has its nucleus in eternal truths—in truths
which, once they are grasped, cannot be overthrown
by any transformation of the work of the world. But
such truths want to produce effects upon man, and,
in order to do this, they must enter into his sphere,
and their existential-form must correspond to the
universal situation of spiritual evolution. Within
this universal situation, as we have already observed,
not only slight re-arrangements but deep and pene-


THE TRANSIENT IN CHRISTIANITY 593


trating transformations have already occurred against
the old mode of Christianity, and these transforma-
tions are not merely in contact with the periphery
but reach into the very centre of life itself. A
mere change of views concerning the external would
stir only slightly, but something infinitely more
happens when simultaneously the Life-process and
the whole mode of thinking transform themselves,
when man becomes something other than he was
before, when his fundamental relationship to reality
is transformed, and when the whole domain of his
life is reshaped. For as certainly as religion does
not stand merely by the side but wethin life, quite as
certain is it that it relates itself to such transforma-
tions. The thought-world of the old form has
become far too narrow and anthropomorphic ; its
opposition to reason—an opposition which was for-
merly considered to be the doing of man alone—has
spread by to-day over the whole religious world, and
such a conception has increased immeasurably the
obscurity of reality and has given rise to an in-
creased difficulty in discovering what religion really
means. In its earlier stages, this old thought-world
presented a picture of the greatness and goodness
of the All, and thus religion appeared as the rela-
tionship of man to a nature incomparably higher
than himself, but still a nature in analogy with his
own nature. But now the world of nature has
drawn man to itself; he becomes now a mere drop
in the sea unless he recognises the dawning of a
new and essential reality within his spiritual nature.
Thus, what appeared as his secure possession turns


now into a difficult problem; he now undertakes a
38


594 CHRISTIANITY AND THE PRESENT


task—the task how to penetrate from his ordinary
surface-situation to the spiritual depth of life. Con-
sequently a religion of the Spiritual Life must stand
in bold relief from that of mere man, for the latter
aspect of religion threatens more and more to become
a mere mythology. Therewith all conceptions of
Divine things become inadequate; much that was
held hitherto valid as entire truth has now become a
mere symbol from which it is necessary to move
further and further. But, at the same time, the
spiritual contents gain an independence, and exercise
a transforming energy on man; life raises itself now
through religion from the subjective to the substantial,
and subsists more and more upon a real transforma-
tion of its own being. All along we stand here face
to face with new tasks, and we can never hope to
come nearer their solution unless the altered situation
is fully acknowledged and unless a struggle is under-
taken from such an altered situation.

The old mode of religion withdraws itself from
such an acknowledgment of the altered situation; it
allows only some isolated elements to fall upon itself
—results which have now become incontestable. It
accepts now, for instance, the Copernican view of
the universe, but it had to be dragged to accept it ;
it does not posit itself willingly even now within
the whole meaning of the conception, but stands
mistrustful and on the defensive over against it, so
that it cannot loyally adjust itself on the side of the
Yea or the Nay of that and other movements. Con-
sequently it cannot seize the fruit offered by such
movements to religion.

The consequence of this leads to a constant and


THE TRANSIENT IN CHRISTIANITY 595


unbearable frittering away of life. Culture more
and more pushes back the old mode of religion, and
through this enters into an ever-greater secular and
soulless mode. Religion thus becomes more and
more of an isolated province, and the channel between
it and knowledge widens; thus its distance from
men becomes ever greater until the mental efforts
and ascents of humanity become indifferent to it.
This indifference is the greatest enemy to religion,
and is in reality more dangerous than all the assaults
of doubt. And yet this indifference cannot be
avoided if religion is severed from the whole of life.
The indifference, indeed, will strike its roots ever
deeper until religion once more gains a fixed connec-
tion with the whole of life.

The older mode of religion, in the midst of all these
hindrances, exercises still a powerful effect, and in
so far as positive achievements are concerned, it is
still far ahead of the new mode. But these effects
confine themselves to particular provinces: the
totality of spiritual work and the main current of
life are no longer dominated by the older mode; it is
not so much a universal as a particular mode as “all
who call themselves Christians” are only too apt to
let us know. The fact that great masses of the
people cling to the older mode does not at all prove
that they have come to any kind of conscious decision
concerning the differences of the Old and the New,
but only proves that they have not as yet come into
contact with the problems and doubts of the age—
that these problems have not as yet entered into
their consciousness. But these problems and doubts
are the very things which render the position of


596 CHRISTIANITY AND THE PRESENT


religion insecure. For sooner or later a contact
with them is bound to take place. The question
is, will people then be true to the old customs and
practices @

In fact, religion is able to reveal its entitled position
when it holds the full heights of the Spiritual Life,
and through this proves itself necessary and fruit-
bearing ; and also when, in connection with the move-
ments of life, it draws the “kinsman” within these
movements and drives out the “old enemy.” But as
the old form cannot lend itself in any great degree to
such a task, it needs a new existential-form ; it needs
before all else—in the very interest of religion itself—
to free the Eternal within itself from its temporal
forms, and the spiritual substance from human notions.
We discover in the old mode too much that is languid
and alien. Men have become tired of its form and
also of its language, and it does not any longer issue
forth from a rapturous energy and youthful freshness
of the whole of our own life, as it always does when
the entire truth and effects of religion are at work.
Now, as we have to live our own life and carry our
own destiny, shall we reject the aid of our indis-
pensable helper on the road of life—religion? There
are no such things as restorations, in religion as else-
where, and the Spiritual Life will never return ‘to the
old forms. It thus behoves us to take heed of what
is ahead of us and to strive to reach it.

But, indispensable as the effort aftera new existential-
form is, yet there can be no doubt as to the immense
difficulty of the task if we do not conceive it in a
wrong or petty manner. ‘The first demand is, that in
the transformation of the ewstential-form nothing of


THE TRANSIENT IN CHRISTIANITY 597


the genuine substance should be lost, but that the new
existential-form should succeed in giving this sub-
stance purer, more energetic, and more universal
effects. This is, however, possible only if the problem
of the adjustment of religion and culture is not under-
stood as in any way desirous of a relaxation of religion
with knowledge, and, on the other hand, is not desirous
of an absolute adjustment of both. The solution will
come when religion enters into the relationship as an
independent power and with all its independent
content—when it is not only measured by culture,
but when it, in its turn, measures, judges, rejects,
and selects. All this is necessary for religion when
face to face with modern culture, because modern
culture is not of a simple and obvious nature. It
comprises movements, experiences, and unfoldings of
the Spiritual Life from which it cannot for ever
withdraw itself; but such a culture also carries within
itself temporal and human tendencies of a highly pro-
blematic character—tendencies which contradict most
pointedly the dominant trend of religion and even of
Christianity. Modern culture as it expresses itself in
human formulations—with its material joy in, and its
ready affirmations of, life, with its repression and even
displacement of ethical greatness, with its abandon-
ment of eternity to the doctrine of evolution—is not
only at variance with this or that existential-form of
religion but with each and all religion. He who makes,
therefore, such a culture a standard for measuring
religion has there and then decided against religion.
But for him to whom religion has become a serious
concern a struggle against such tendencies of culture
has become inevitable, and he must forge his way


598 CHRISTIANITY AND THE PRESENT


with all the energy at his command to the funda-
mental differentiation of the elements of spiritual
truth and of the human errors found within the whole
situation of culture.

Hence all definite movements for a renewal of
religion must be differentiated clearly from the move-
ments which are found within the domain of culture.
Unless this is done, we may hold fast to a kind of
religion which inevitably falls into great shallowness.
In an age of religious crisis, as we witness to-day, the
superficial is always the nearest-at-hand remedy and
the loudest in its claims; it is able to hide its own
poverty of life under the colours of freedom ; it has on
its side the half-educated and, even more, the over-
educated to whom negations are so pleasing and
smugness is so welcome. This is also true of those
movements that attempt to shape religion in harmony
with what is termed “the spirit of the age ”—shape
it in harmony with all that bubbles from the playful
fountains of time—and that avoid every genuine Nay
and look upon every sharp collision as a disturbance
of their “life at ease.” Even to-day any movement
be it ever so perverted and hostile to genuine religion
will find so-called “liberal-minded” people who feel
themselves the true messengers of the times when
they declare that their message can be made to fit
excellently with religion and even with Christianity,
and that it is here alone the meaning of both can be
found. It is necessary over against such an unworthy
adjustment of the times to hold forth the superiority
and the trenchancy of the timeless truth; it is
necessary to uphold the independence of religion
over against a superficiality of knowledge and to


THE TRANSIENT IN CHRISTIANITY 599


exercise an energetic criticism on the claims of
culture from the standpoint of religion. Those who
are unable any longer to cling to the Old constitute
two main classes. The one class feels the need for
no more than a minimum of religion, whilst the other
class strives to obtain a maximum. The former
places itself under the contents of time, whilst the
latter attempts to raise itself above time; the former
feels itself already in possession of all essentials,
whilst the latter sees itself as only just entering on
an infinite quest. The sincerity of life and the
progress of the religious movement can only be
furthered when the two classes are differentiated
more clearly from one another than has hitherto
been the case.

He who conceives the religious problem in its
varied difficulties is unable to deny that religion has
lost unspeakably much through the upheaval of the
old form, and, further, he sees the need of making
good such a loss. But such an urgent result can come
about only through a strengthening of the substance
of religion—through the energetic working out of
its fundamental characteristics, and through the un-
daunted assertion of all that raises religion above the
mere level of time. Religion is thus raised to the
metaphysical and transcendental which frighten so
much the ordinary man of the present. The con-
tradictions of human life must be fully acknowledged
if ever a true effort for overcoming them is to be
set in motion. The Lther-Or which runs through
the whole of life must stand clearly in front of
us, and we must take a decisive stand within the
situation. A thorough-going clarification of the


600 CHRISTIANITY AND THE PRESENT


entangled situation and a severance of spirits accord-
ing to their fundamental convictions are the first
requisites for the turn towards a better state of
things. And then comes the need of building up
and creating, of collecting and penetrating, of select-
ing and possessing, a new reality. But all this is not
possible without a deepening of the total Life-pro-
cess—without an energetic self-recollection of the
Spiritual Life and a stepping beyond the situation of
the times. Our whole investigation rests upon the
conviction that the religious problem is not to be
handled isolated from, but within, the totality of
life ; it rests upon the fact of the phenomenon of the
Spiritual Life and the characteristic way in which it
is to be conceived; it rests upon the fact that this
Spiritual Life binds itself into a Whole, and upon
the acknowledgment of an essential and independent
reality within it which became the fixed standard and
great task of religion. The necessary conditions for
a renewal of religion are solely the elevation and the
energetic development of the Spiritual Life. It is
in this alone that a sufficient compensation for the
loss of the Old can be found, and it is here alone
that the new mode can overcome the opposition
directed against it from the side of the old mode.

The old mode often misses a sufficiency of actuality
in the New; the New seems to the Old to lack
the certainty that man in religion is raised above
himself by means of a superior power, and is also led
to a new life. This complaint is valid in connection
with all attempts to found religion upon mere
psychology, for when this happens, it is either the
intellectual or the affective side of the nature—either


THE TRANSIENT IN CHRISTIANITY 601


ideas and concepts, or judgments of value and feelings
—which take the lead. Through any of these, man
may be able to revolve within his own circle, but he
is never able to come out of his subjectivity, and the
energy of truth can never invest his psychic state or
his partial and one-sided qualities with an absolute
value. But it is quite otherwise when the Spiritual
Life in its independence is acknowledged, and when
it is understood as the presence of a new kind of
world. Through this the total outlook of life changes
itself, so that it is not now necessary that man should
be guided to this new world by means of some iso-
lated portion of his nature. The man now possesses
energy of a spiritual nature to be a participator in
such a new world; his need now is to develop such
a cosmic life within his own consciousness and all
that it includes. Thus, the fundamental fact and
proof of all lies in the totality of the Spiritual Life
itself, and all remaining facts and proofs have to be
connected with this one fundamental fact. The
result then is that religion is raised above all mere
subjectivity.

Further, the new mode complains of the “ abstract-
ness” found in the indeterminate concepts of the old
mode, and states that such an “ abstractness ” does not
help towards bringing about an energetic effect of
religion. Much is to be said in favour of this com-
plaint of the new mode, but it is not in its favour
that it often does not attempt to discover the nature
of religion within the characteristic formation of
Spiritual Life. It is in doing this that the concrete-
ness of religion lies and not in copious and learned
disquisitions concerning doctrines and organisations


602 CHRISTIANITY AND THE PRESENT


—disquisitions which may concede that some kind of
needed nucleus lies beneath all this but is imbedded
in great obscurity. How is it, if no more than
this were needed, that Catholicism with its colossal
machinery often fails to manifest with sufficient clear-
ness and energy what is new and world-renovating
in Christianity ? The characteristic and the concrete
in religion can be brought forth, however, by the
New through an-exclusive concentration upon the
spiritual content; and once this Yea has become
the conviction of the new mode, it can pronounce
judgment on any Nay it likes. It is characteristic of
religion before all else that it constitutes the ethical
formation of the Spiritual Life, its foundation in
freedom and deed, its demand for a new kind of
existence, and tts creation of a world subsisting
within wtself. This signifies incomparably more than
a mere fulfilment of moral rules within a given
earthly organisation ; it contains the most unique and
decisive assertions and denials; it withstands the
alleged sovereign claims of all intellectual and
esthetic formations of life; it withstands the im-
mersion of our life into an environing world and
into a blind destiny. But notwithstanding all such
characteristics, ethical idealism is only the presup-
position of religion and not religion itself. A turn to
religion results only through the problems and con-
flicts which originate from this foundation through
a deep convulsion of the nature of man; and when
this has happened, the elevation and transformation
become religion. It is obvious that all this, through
its reciprocal relations, exhibits an entirely new and
characteristic type of life, and it is this type with its


THE TRANSIENT IN CHRISTIANITY 603


facts and tasks, its developments and conquests—as
our whole investigation has attempted to prove—
which constitutes the genuine concreteness of the
Spiritual Life upon which we take our stand.

{t may appear at the first glance as though the new
mode does not place the problem of moral wrong so
exclusively in the foreground as the old mode places
it, and this assertion appears to the old mode as a
sign of a laxer mode of thinking. This may be
true concerning a number of the forms of the
New, but it is not true of all. The New is able
to acknowledge in the fullest possible manner that
nothing reveals the depth of life so much as the
discovery of an ethical conflict within human nature.
And it is this fact which gives the religious problem
a compelling power. But the acknowledgment of
this inner conflict has to pass beneath the level of
conscious mental reflection and shallow delineation,
because such a procedure blunts the real facts and
glides easily into unveracity. Thus, the conceptions
of freedom and moral guilt must be viewed in a
wider sense than the old mode has yet done. We
cannot agree with the old mode that all evil is to be
traced back to the deeds of man or that sin brought
death for the first time into our world. We must
hold fast to freedom, but at the same time we must
not deny the fact of the mighty power of a dark
destiny. ‘This problem has to be placed in the very
front of the old mode, and it has to be shown that
the problem has mysterious depths. The problem
will thus be handled in a more circumspect, more
tender, and less anthropomorphic manner than has
been the case with the past Protestantism of the


604. CHRISTIANITY AND THE PRESENT


Church ; and notwithstanding the change, the earnest-
ness concerning the facts will preserve everything
essential from being lost.

The New then may live convinced that nothing of
the energy and depth of religion need be lost upon
its path. And it will certainly realise that it is only
at the beginning of the road and still far removed
from any kind of terminus. How the course of
things will shape themselves in the distant future lies
for us enwrapped in deep darkness. For manifold
factors are operating at the present day which are
creating some of the elements of that distant future.
These factors are the fortunes and experiences of
humanity, of great personalities, and of the character-
istic and most important universal elements of the
times. But we need not trouble our hearts concern-
ing the contour of that distant future. There is in
the present enough and to spare for us todo. The
activism of the present, taken in its deepest sense,
has work enough under its very eyes to trace the
outlines of a new ideal world in the midst of a per-
verse generation and the midst of immense con-
fusions. The great task to-day is to carve out deeply
and clearly the main bearings of life—bearings where
all efforts can co-operate and where the deepest spirit
of man can find its greatest energy. Even if all this
be only of a preparatory kind, preparation itself is
part of the total-work, and no one, at bottom, can
know where the preliminaries go over into the work
itself.


PART V.—CHRISTIANITY AND THE PRESENT
(ContTINUED)


CHAPTER XVII


c. THe SITUATION AND DEMANDS OF THE
PRESENT


GRreEaT as the difficulties of a new configuration of
religion are, they must not discourage us from entering
upon the task, for behind this task an urgent need of
the times calls us to the work—a need which wells up
ever tothe surface. We live in an age of richness and
movement—an age which no one dare brand as paltry,
and which, with ali its activities, capacity for work,
and its over-flowing life, should never be assimilated
too closely with the stagnation of waning antiquity.
But it is an age afflicted with an immense contra-
diction. It is wonderfully great in its mastery of,
and achievements within, the environing world, but,
on the other hand, it is deplorably poor and insecure
in regard to the problems of the inner life and the
inner world. Such a contradiction cannot be toler-
ated forever. As certain as it is that it will be
overcome, quite as certain is the fact that religion
will once more step forth as the fact of facts, and
prepare for itself an appropriate configuration of the


essential and universal elements of life and existence.
605


606 CHRISTIANITY AND THE PRESENT


There is no need for us here to delineate the power
of man over the world: it is evident to all. Most
evident are the gains over nature through science and
technics ; and also the conditions of human relations
have become incomparably clearer and more tract-
able. We understand how to unravel the skein of
the past and how to weave a meaning out of its
isolated threads, and how to differentiate the sub-
jective clothing of*things from their essential aspects.
Further, we observe in the corporate life of men the
immense growth of the power of administration and
organisation, and through all this we are able to
obtain our wants and needs in an incomparably
securer and easier way than at any other period in
the history of our world. In al! this, man has be-
come more and more the master of things. But all
this potency has a measured and limited boundary.
This potency is confined to what the capacities of
man are able to extract from the external world, but
the potency does not reach to that which exists with-
in his own soul, and does not lead to the growth and
the blossoming of an inner world. And consequently
life in the midst of all its achievements remains resting
upon the external, and man has to consider himself
ever as something of an alien in the midst of it all
if he is ever to exercise real power and to exhibit his
genuine superiority over the world.

Whilst the effort and the energy are so strongly
drawn towards the external, the inner life—the
heritage of long millenniums—has become afflicted
with a grave anxiety and insecurity. But this inner
life is too. deeply implanted and rooted in human
nature through the work of the millenniums to be ever


THE DEMANDS OF THE PRESENT 607


shaken off as an alien thing or to be considered in
any light-hearted manner. It holds us fast and raises
its claims; it forbids us to find satisfaction in all
the things of sense and time. But in the midst of
all the contradictions the inner life is unable to reach
by itself a clear and energetic content, and it will
never reach it by looking externally. We remain
therefore on the inward side as poor in the midst of
all the external plenty which surrounds us as if we
were not the possessors of it at all.

We discover this poverty “in the inward parts”
in a stronger and more painful manner if we do
not wrap our inward exigency with historical tra-
dition, if we do not call upon antiquity or upon
the beginnings of modern times to come to our
immediate assistance, and if we cease to look to
the traditional form of religion for the deepening of
life and for consolidation. In fact, the situation of
mankind has altered so much through the work and
experience of modern times that the older mode of
thinking cannot possibly satisfy our life in its entirety.
We may feel great interest in much that is contained
in the old mode and allow ourselves to be carried
along with it, but a point arrives where a parting of
the ways takes place for ever. In reality, we cannot
approach certain aspects of the Old without simul-
taneously moving away from other aspects; we
cannot affirm certain aspects of history without at
the same time having to deny other aspects. There-
fore, if we take the whole of any historical occurrence
as our guide, there cannot be at work more than half
of our energy and character; we shall thus turn
hither and thither in the most unsteady manner; and


608 CHRISTIANITY AND THE PRESENT


amongst all the chaos of the contradictory impressions
we shall fall at last into dulness and weariness.

What remains? The immediate present moment
remains. And if this present moment possesses not
as yet a connected inner world, still it possesses the
free spontaneous feeling and the natural individuality
of the individual. But can these become the standard
of a new life? It is certain that from this source
much can become alive and move, raise and turn
itself, affirm and deny, devote itself energetically in
divers ways to vista beyond vista and task beyond
task. But notwithstanding such a possession life still
remains under the ban of the accidental and the
superficial; it has not yet possessed the genuine
substance and the durable truth. Indeed, the farther
life travels on this road without these essentials on
its journey, the more it falls amongst strange situa-
tions, mistakes, and eccentricities. And thus there
arises that shallow situation of which we are all
aware, and which we need only briefly refer to here.

The basing of life upon subjectivity and natural
individuality causes inner divisions of the human race ;
it causes a frittering away of the life of the soul
of the whole and the soul of each individual. It was
the main service of traditional religion that it raised
up and presented a total-task and total-aim for
humanity ; the individual was introduced to the life
of the fellowship ; he received from this source light
and guidance ; each individual experienced intimately
the fate of the whole, and so could always with-
draw from the fleetingness of his own individual
conclusions to this; it is in this total-life of the
fellowship that the individual finds support and


THE DEMANDS OF THE PRESENT 609


consolation, motive and enhancement, norm and
standard. And, further, men were thus held closely
together ; the common task and the daily burden of
each and all was understood by each and all; they
laboured and suffered together, and they loved and
hated together. Here was a source of spiritual
energy and ethical character which no proclamation
of mere doctrine and no appeal of mere emotion
could ever replace.

It is a loss which cannot be estimated when such
an inner fellowship and, along with it, a life out of
the Whole decay. It is a loss when each individual
plants himself upon the particularity of his natural
individuality, and when an exaggerated individualism
is developed without any reservation and counter-
poise. If this calamity happens, all the energies
which worked together in the fellowship now work
against one another. ‘The result is an intellectual
and moral disintegration ; men understand one another
less and less, live less and less for one another, and
more and more rarely are they to be found shoulder
to shoulder. Can we deny that mankind divides
itself more and more into opposites and_ parties,
and that the colossal associations in the domains
of material work oppose the independence of the
inner life ?

It is a strange life which issues out of such an
unbounded development of subjectivity and natural
individuality. Man in all this is most busy with
himself, observes himself, mirrors and reflects his
own states; he ruminates and broods more and
more over himself, seeks to refine his small artistic


soul and to free himself from all the deeper concerns
39


610 CHRISTIANITY AND THE PRESENT


of life and existence. Thus, life is posited more
and more upon mere reflection and is turned towards
whims.and delusions; it loses all its naiveté—all
simple innocence and inner necessities. But here-
with it enters into a track where mind and soul are
neither well nor sick, and where artificiality and
eccentricity keep company with prejudice and
jealousy.

The elevation of natural individuality to the level
of a guide of life has as its result the shaping of life
in a puny, piecemeal, irregular, and curious fashion.
Paradoxes and commonplaces now present themselves
as excellences, but they never lead to even a medi-
ocre independence although the man is in urgent
need of greatness and independence in order to
compare his life with such trivial things and in order
to be raised above them. ‘he individual has here no
inner world beyond himself, so that he cannot measure
himself and cannot obtain fulfilment for his life.
What remains for him but to return towards the
external world and seek there a flimsy greatness
by means of a “brilliant career” and often of an
overstrain ?

Through the convergence of these individual cur-
rents of life, no life of greatness can ever issue forth.
A chaos of conflicting movements, contrary hin-
drances and weaknesses, sudden rising and abrupt
falling, no governing main drift which differentiates
between good and evil and between the real and the
apparent, no energetic counter-effect to the petty and
the common on the highways of human life, and,
instead of an energetic spirituality, a refining of the
sensuous right up to a senile sensuality—all this


THE DEMANDS OF THE PRESENT 611


takes place. All culture which possesses no sub-
stance, notwithstanding all its aspiration after reality
and notwithstanding all the excitement of its sub-
jectivity, possesses no soul, and in the whirl of
fleeting appearances obscures the great WHither-Or.
The words of Pestalozzi are even more needful for
our day than for his own: “Light and darkness
have always been in our world, but most of the
light and darkness stood out in greater bold relief
in days of yore—in the dark days themselves—
and were clearer and more real to the eyes of men.
Darkness was then recognised by the seer fully as
darkness. But to-day the darkness has become light
and the light darkness.”

In such a critical time as ours, which meets the
life of humanity everywhere, this truth of Pestalozzi
becomes particularly plain if we compare the universal
weakness of the inner life with the colossal capacity
of a scientific, technical, and practical kind. We are
occupying ourselves very diligently in a scientific,
historical, and reflective way with Philosophy,
but we possess no Philosophy of our own—no
philosophical creativeness of an independent kind.
We occupy ourselves incessantly with history, and
have carried the results of technics to a marvellous
height, but we lack all along the meaning of history
as a totality, and are not able to cross the bridge
from the past to the present. Our literature sets
in motion individual sides of the soul, but it does
not seize and bind together man in the totality
of his being—it does not strike its root into the
depth of man’s nature. Our art works diligently
and aspires zealously after truth, but it does not


612 CHRISTIANITY AND THE PRESENT


succeed in bringing the chaos of the times to its own
track. We deal more than ever to-day with educa-
tion, but we possess no united and simple ideal.
We trouble incessantly for the betterment of political
and social relations, but we come to a painful halt
wherever the final aims and the highest happiness
of man are at stake. Everywhere we witness the
absence of a self-reliant Spiritual Life which would
be superior to the wealth of the conflicting im-
pressions, and which would carry the universal
situation of the present into a connected and simple
expression. Our day is also full of inner problems,
and we have not grown strong enough to attack
them; we sink back ever anew into the petty-
human level and fail to reach a genuine content
of life—fail to reach consolidation and greatness.

All this will not be seen so long as man allows
himself to remain entirely in such a state of impulse
and mechanism and only hurries breathlessly along
from one small point to another. But once he steps
out of such a situation and strikes out for a new path
of the Whole, he will certainly discover the nature of
the painful situation. He will discover the situation
to be that of incessant toil and work without many
pure gains, of fascinating achievements in isolated
things but of a trivial value for the totality of life,
of a highly complicated apparatus of civilisation and
culture but of no living soul in the Whole, of burning
impulses of the fleeting moment but of no creative-
ness, eternal values, or eternal hopes. Why all this
labour and toil if the whole thing has no meaning
but relapses at last into nothingness 4

But one needs but grasp clearly the crisis of


THE DEMANDS OF THE PRESENT 613


such a culture in order to raise himself above all
anxiety for the future. The boundaries of such
negations and shallowness have been set: there comes
a point where man within his own being and life
discovers their destructive energy, and when this
happens the counter-effect is not far away. Man
now takes up the struggle on behalf of his threatened
spiritual existence; he grips the inner connections
of his being once again—connections in which his
deepest being has its foundation—and new energies
will flow from such a source and strengthen him
towards producing a culture which signifies once
more an independent inner world, and which is able
to grant their true valuation to all the relationships
of his life. We really stand to-day on the verge of
an aspiration after an essential culture—a culture
of the whole man—after an inwardness which corre-
sponds to the most important meanings of the
Spiritual Life. In the midst of the tangle and the
loud lament of the initial stages, the aspiration will
become stronger and stronger; it needs but an
energetic concentration of effort as well as a definite
focussing of energies in order that the movement
may proceed on its upward course— beyond the
realm of the petty circle and into a realm beyond
all earthly bounds. ‘The possibilities of life are not
yet exhausted: mew avenues and tasks open out
whenever we discover the courage of creativeness
and the right point of attack, but it is imperative
that we should possess the conviction and that the
conviction should possess us that reality has a depth
beyond the natural man, and that we are able to
gain admission to such a depth.


614 CHRISTIANITY AND THE PRESENT


But a movement towards a more essential and
soul-stirring culture—to a progressive superiority of
a total-life beyond all individual activities—cannot
arise without bringing the problem of religion once
more to the foreground. Our life is not able to find
its bearings within this deep or to gather its treasures
into a Whole unless it realises how many acute
opposites it carries within itself. Life will either be
torn in pieces by these opposites or it must somehow
be raised above them all. It is the latter alone that
can bring about a fundamental transformation of our
first and shallow view of the universe as well as the
inauguration of a new reality. It is this which
religion announces to man and promises to bring to
his soul in its dire need. Man has emerged out of
the darkness of nature and remains afflicted with the
afflictions of nature, yet at the same time, with his
appearance upon the earth the darkness begins to
illumine, and “nature kindles within him a light”
(Schopenhauer); he who is a mere speck on the
face of a boundless expanse can yet aspire to a
participation in the whole of Infinity; he who
stands in the midst of the flux of time yet pos-
sesses an aspiration after infinite truth; he who
forms but a mere piece of nature constructs at the
same time a new world within the Spiritual Life
over against it all; he who finds himself confined
by contradictions of all kinds, and which immediate
existence in no way can solve, yet struggles after a
further depth of reality and after the “narrow gate”
which opens into religion. Through and beyond all
the individual problems of life and the world, it
behoves us to raise the Spiritual Life to a level of


THE DEMANDS OF THE PRESENT 615


full independence, to make it simultaneously supe-
rior to man as an individual and to bring it back
into his soul. When this happens, there happens
at the same time a transformation of his inmost
being, and for the first time he becomes capable of
genuine greatness.

The aspiration after a new culture carries thus
within itself in an immediate and intimate manner
the aspiration after a rejuvenation of religion. Re-
ligion and culture will thus instruct one another.
Without religion the inwardness cannot become a
self-reliant province and cannot rise above the ex-
ternal world; without a connection with the whole
of life and also with culture, religion loses its char-
acteristic spiritual content and threatens to sink into
a merely subjective disposition. Consequently the
deficiency or the curtailment of one is also an injury
to the other.

These final conclusions strengthen the aspiration
after a religion of the Spiritual Life, which has run
through the whole of our investigation. Such a
religion is in no way new, and Christianity has
proclaimed it and clung to it from the very begin-
ning. But it has been so interweaved with traditional
forms which are now seen through by so many as
pictorial ideas of epochs and times. LEarlier times
could allow the essence and the form to flow in-
separably together without discovering any incon-
gruity in this. But the time for doing this has
irrevocably passed away. ‘The human which once
seemed to bring the Spiritual and Divine so near
to man has now become a burden and a _ hind-
rance to him. A keener analysis, a more independent


616 CHRISTIANITY AND THE PRESENT


development of the Spiritual and Divine, and along
with this, the truth of religion, do not succeed in
reaching their full effects if religion is looked upon as
merely something to protect individuals, instead of
looking upon it as that which furthers the whole of
humanity—as that which is not merely a succour in
times of trouble and sorrow but also as that which
guarantees an enhancement in work and creativeness.
The situation is difficult and full of dangers, and
small in the meantime are the number of those who
grasp it in a deep and free sense, and who yet are
determined to penetrate victoriously into it, so that
the inner necessities of the Spiritual Life may dawn
within the soul of man. Whatever new tasks and
difficulties lie in the lap of the future, to-day it
behoves us before all else to proceed a step upward
in that direction of the summits and to draw new
energies and depths of the Spiritual Life into the
domain of man, for this kind of work will prevent
the coming of an “old age” upon humanity and will
breathe into its soul the gift of Eternal Youth.


INDEX


OF NAMES AND OF SUBJECT MATTERS


Absolute and Historical Re-
ligion, 534 ff.
life: its conception, 193, 208.
Activity demanded in religion,
483, 562, 580 ff,
Antithetic character of the
Spiritual, especially of the
Religious Life, 242 ff., 542 ff.
as an overcoming of an
interior opposition and in
connection with religion,
133 ff, 450 ff, 505,
Autonomous Life and Auto-
nomies, 152, 153, 204, 205.


Art:


Bacon, 532,

Being, and the formation of
Being, 161, 162, 422.

Biological conception of life: its
peculiarity and its danger,
27, 51, 52.

Bodily resurrection of Jesus: no
object of faith, 550, 551.

Bohme, J., 498.

Buddha, 521.


Catholicism (Roman), 565, 567,
602.

Changes and crises in historical
movements, 357, 358.

Characteristic Religion: its con-
ception, 410 ff.

its detailed development,

419 ff,


617


Characteristic Religion : its place
in education, 468 ff.
its relation to the historical
religions, 411 ff.
its relation to Universal Re-
ligion, 411 ff.
Christian religion, the: as over
against history and culture,
556 ff.
as over against the changes
within the Spiritual Life
itself, 563 ff.
effect of its beginnings, 227.
its eternal substance, 539 ff.
its maintenance, as over against
the changes in the outlook
on to Nature, 547 ff.
its peculiarity, 7, 539 ff., 546,
547.
its temporal form, 576 ff.
its union of the Divine and
the human, 206, 544.
of its medieval form, 41, 42,
194.
peculiarity of its older form,
20 ff, 40, 41, 65, 559, 576 ff.
Christian State, Christian Sci-
ence: the right and the
wrong in these conceptions,
495 ff. ;
Childlikeness: its connection
with religion, 451, 452.
Church, the: demands concern-
ing its formation, 467 ff.


618


Church, the: its necessity and |


its dangers, 458 ff.

Cognition : its complications,

100 ff.
its conditions, 148.

Concreteness in religion; how
to be understood, 601 ff.

Confucius, 394.

Conscience: its significance and
its limits, 336 ff.

Cosmic Interior Life: as pre-
supposition of all, striving
after interiority, 165 ff.

Creativeness (spiritual) : its char-
acter and its conditions,
146 ff.

Culture and Civilisation: their
character and their relation
to religion, 58, 68 ff, 142,
560 ff.

in contrast to morals, 318.
in contrast to religion, 296 ff.


Dead, judgment of the: motive
of this conception, 334,
Determinism: its presupposi-

tions and its insufficiency,
172 ff, 223 ff, 265 ff.
Development, doctrine of, and
idea of Evolution: their
limits, 109, 116 ff.
their relation to religion, 27,
29, 554 ff., 569.
Diabolical, the, in human nature,
324,
Dialectic, the, of religion, 425 ff,
436, 542.
of universal religion, 357,
Disposition and power: their
alienation, 316 ff.


Divine, the, and the human: |


their inter-relation, 222 ff.,
579 ff.

complication of this inter-
relation within the histori-
cal religions, 380 ff.


INDEX


Doubt: its power, its right and
its wrong, 9, 233, 519 ff.
Drama, the, as an image of

human life, 288, 516.


Eckhart, Meister, 188, 190, 207.

Emancipation of the Spiritual
Life from man, 36, 569 ff.

Enemies, love of our (as indica-
tion of a new world-order),
392 ff.

Eternal, the, and the temporal :
their mutual relations with-

_ in religion, 193.

Eternity, the longing for, 270,

446.
as presupposition of history,
176.

Ethical Idealism: its character
and its superiority, 173,
602.

Evil: its reality recognised by
religion, 14, 499.

its treatment in religion, 502 ff.

Existence, Existential Form (in
contradistinction to  sub-
stance), 182 ff., 514 ff.

Existences (in contradistinction
to Natures), 184.

Experience (distinguished from
merely empirical know-
ledge), 137.


Faith and doubt, 518 ff.
its necessary conception, 232,
237 ff, 518 ff.
Fatalism, 324,
Fate and guilt, 324, 340 ff.
of the work, 144.

Feeling : its significance for the
psychic starting-point of
religion, 226.

its insufficiency as a basis of
religion, 67, 78.
Fichte, 34, 271.


| Following of Christ, 553.


INDEX


Formal reason: its quarrel with
material reason, 212, 293.
Freedom and depth, 319.
and Equality: their connec-
tion with religion, 263 ff,
444. fF, j
and grace, 205 ff., 223 ff.


God, the idea of, 181, 208 ff,

371 ff., 429 ff.

its twofold interpretation in
ecclesiastical Christianity,
210 ff.

Godhead and God, 429 ff.

Goethe, 54, 133, 140, 151, 215,
337, 344.

Good, the, and the useful, 124 ff.

Greatness, the longing for: its
connection with religion,
278, 290 ff., 447.

Greek manner of thinking and
view of life, 101, 105, 233,
263, 559.

Guilt, 500, 527, 603.


Habit: limits of its efficiency,
125-ff.
Hegel, 80, 149, 474, 536.
Higher, the, and the lower:
opposite direction of the ex-
planation of them, 502 ff,
507, 556.
History : conditions for a history
of a spiritual kind, 55 ff.
its relation to religion, 28 ff.,
A434 fF.
its significance within religion,
475 ff.
limits of its efficacy in the
domain of the Spiritual
Life, 113 ff, 176.
of the soul: introduced by
religion, 434.
Historical criticism: its origin
and effect, 32 ff.
religions, 6 ff., 366 ff.
Historism: refusal of, 567 ff.


619


Historico-social culture and civil-
isation: its incapacity to
produce the Spiritual Life,
50, 68 ff., 142, 560 ff.

is interpretable in two differ-
ent ways, 318,
its opposition to religion, 296 ff.


Idealism and Realism: they can
be conjoined, 178 ff.
Idealist Culture and Realistic
Culture and Civilisation in
modern times, 43 ff.
Ideals: their peculiar action,
200 ff.
their constant change, 300 ff.
Imagination : its operation with-


in religion, 8, 367, 368,
481, 567.

Immanent Idealism: refusal of,
532.


Immortality, 216, 272,291 ff.,435.
Impersonal character of the pro-
cess of civilisation and cul-
ture in modern times, 36.
Indian religions, 11 ff, 541.
Indirect proof furnished by uni-
versal history, 258.
Individual, the: as interlaced
with the environment, 338 ff.
in relation to society, 300 ff.
treated by fate as though in-
different, 347 ff.
Infinite Love, 441 ff.
Infinity: the longing
261 ff, 445.
Interiority : discrimination be-
tween subjective and sub-
stantial interiority, 67 ff,
150 ff, 274, 426, 439, 510,


after,


Os.
strengthened by _ religion,
437 ff.
Intellectualism: conditions for


overcoming it, 181 ff.
its insufficiency, 74, 232.
Intolerance, the : of religion, 248.


620


Jesus: His personality, 16 ff.
360, 521, 588.
His position within the Christ-
ian faith, 16 ff., 583 ff.
Judaism, 367.
Justice and love, 395 ff.


Kant, 34, 200, 275, 423, 426,
517.


Leibniz, 161, 275.

Lessing, 378.

Life, types of: their ieee
and their onesidedness, 171
ff., 307 ff.

Life-work, 138 ff.

Love and justice, 395 ff.

its nature and its presup-
positions, 148 ff, 395 ff,
505.

Luther, 151, 222, 407, 437, 442,

492, 516,


Magical, the, in religion com-
bated, 565 ff.
Man: his smallness

greatness, 169 ff.


and his


Matter of fact, in religion: how


to be understood, 600 ff.
Mediation, the idea of: its pre-
suppositions, 583 ff.
its dangers, 585.
Metaphysic indispensable for re-


ligion, 68.
Metaphysical life: the thirst
after (distinguished from


the thirst after physical
life), 402.

Miracles (in the false and in the
right sense), 25 ff., 205, 223,
282, 521 ff, 549 ff.

Modern culture and civilisation :
discrimination between its
spiritual substance and _ its
merely human _ tendency,
593 ff.


INDEX


Mohammed, 398, 521.

Morality and civic worthiness,
108.

and religion, 223.

is no diminution of energy,
128 ff.

its interior growth and de-
velopment, 405 ff.

its nature and action, 128 ff.

its power, 130.

its seeming
103 ff.

its weakness in human life, 95,
320 ff.

no natural quality of man,
170 ff. 240 ff.

Movement and rest: influence
of religion upon the con-
stitution of their  inter-
relations, 507 ff.

Mysticism: its right and _ its
wrong, 74, 213 ff.


impossibility,


its relation-
religion, 24 ff.,


Natural Science:
ship to
547 ff.
Nature and spirit as grades of
reality, 86, 164, 167.
opposed to religion, 290 ff.
Negative element of all the
work of life, 93, 94.
Noeticism opposed to _ intel-
lectualism and voluntarism,
239.
Noological method differentiated
from the psychological, 178
ff, 455, 456.
differentiated from  specula-
tive metaphysic, 180.


Object and objectivity :
true meaning, 90 ff.

Objectivist and — subjectivist
modes of life: their con-
flict, 313 ff.

Optimism : _ its
349 ff.


their


insufficiency,


INDEX


Optimism: its contrast with
religion, 524, 526, 529.
Organisation of the work of
culture : demands concern-
ing it, 185 ff.

Original sin, a mistaken con-
ception, 222.


Pantheism: its development in
modern times, 43 ff.
its mistaken interpretation of
the process of life, 168.
the right and the wrong of,
217 ff.
Paracelsus, 204.
Parseeism, 366.
Pascal, 337, 352, 409.
Passive kind, the, of religion
combated, 482, 484, 561,


579.
Paul, 216, 224.
Personal: distinguished from


subjective, 151, 152.
Personality, 150 ff.
of God, 212, 429 ff.
of the founders of the re-
ligions, 7, 367 ff., 480 ff.
Pessimism: as opponent of re-
ligion, 526 ff., 529 ff.
interior contradiction,
353 ff.
Pestalozzi, 77, 452, 611.
Pietism, refusal of, 225.
Pindar, 344.
Plato, 236, 393, 478.
Plotinus, 154, 256, 277, 393.
Positivism: rejection of its attack
upon religion, 255.
Presence, characteristics of spiri-
tual, 256 ff.
Priesthood, its dangers for re-
ligion, 461 ff.
Privative conception of Evil; its
right and its wrong, 355.
Proof, the kind of, possible for
religion considered, 72 ff.
Providence, belief in, 325 ff.


its


621


Rationalism: position taken up
towards it, 485 ff.
Reformation, the, 23, 581.
Religion: and cosmic contempla-
tion, 448 ff., 506 ff., 513 ff.
and culture and _ civilisation,
597 ff.
and speculation, 255, 256.
its affirmative character, 249,


250.

its discriminating and integ-
rating action, 235, 236,
471 ff.


its kernel, 187 ff., 249 ff.
its method of proof, 193 ff,


453 ff, 526 ff.
its psychic — starting-point,
226 ff.
reasons for men’s different
attitudes towards it, 228,
243 ff, 426 ff, 523 ff,
530 ff.
Renaissance, the: its ideal of
life, 43,


Right, the idea of: its spiritual
conditions, 135.
Runeberg, 450.


Sacraments, 553, 565 ff.
Sacrifice: how far necessary,
237, 497.
Savonarola, 522, 551.
Schelling, 341, 509.
Schopenhauer, 614.
Science and Truth, 103.
Self-actuation : distinguished
from mere activity, 151,
LOZ:
Self-life of the Spirit, the, ex-
plained, 147 ff.
Soul, depth of, 262.
powers of the, 273 ff.
Souls, transmigration of, 335.
Sovereign treatment of life (as
against the subjectivist and
the objectivist treatments),
133 ff.


622


Spiritual, the, and the sensible:
form taken by their inter-
relation in modern times,
564 ff., 578.

Spiritual culture: its contradis-
tinction to merely human
culture, 239 ff., 472.

Life, the: difference between
our conception of it, and
that which obtained in
the classical period of
German literature, 168.

its gradual independence
over against man, 35 ff.,
563, 569.

its position in the universe,
156 ff.

its scatteredness in human
existence, 307 ff.

Stoicism, 347, 439.

Substance: in contradistinction
to Existence and Exist-
ential form, 182 ff.

Suffering: its effect upon man,
328 ff., 355.

God: objections to this con-

ception, 432 ff.

Thinking (logical): its power in
history, 356.


INDEX


Truth: its apparent self-contra-
diction, 101 ff.
its new formulation, 161 ff.,
4°78, 505.
chief directions in the
movement of religious re-
form, 599.


Two


Universal Religion: its concep-
tion, 192.
its relation to Characteristic
Religion, 412 ff.
Utilitarianism (in religion) re-
jected, 64, 465.


Voluntarism (see Willing): a
mere reaction against In-
tellectualism, 80 ff., 185.


Willing, not suitable as a founda-
tion for religion, 81 ff.
Winckelmann, 47.
Work : its greatness, 136 ff.
its limits, 144.
world of, the: its conception,
135 ff.


Xenophanes, 585.


———— ee
PRINTED BY NEILL AND co., LTD., EDINBURGH.


A Catalogue


of


Williams & Norgate’s


VI.


GENERAL INDEX OF TITLES AND AUTHORS


Publications


Divisions of the Catalogue


. THEOLOGY

. PHILOSOPHY, PSYCHOLOGY .

. ORIENTAL LANGUAGES, LITERATURE, AND HISTORY
. PHILOLOGY, MODERN LANGUAGES


. SCIENCE, MEDICINE, CHEMISTRY, ETC.


BIOGRAPHY, ARCHAOLOGY, LITERATURE, MIS-
CELLANEOUS


London


Williams & Norgate


14 Henrietta Street, Covent Garden, W.C.


5%)
61


I. Theology and Religion.


THEOLOGICAL TRANSLATION LIBRARY.
Rew Series,
A Series of Translations by which the best results of recent Theo-
logical Investigations on the Continent, conducted wtthout reference
to doctrinal considerations, and with the sole purpose of arriving
at the truth, are placed within reach of English readers.


Vols. I.-XII. were edited by the Rev. T. K. Cheyne, M.A,,
D.D., Oriel Professor of Interpretation in the University of Oxford,
Canon of Rochester ; and the late Rev. A. B. Bruce, D.D., Professor
of Apologetics, Free Church College, Glasgow.

Vol. XIII. was edited by Rev. Allan Menzies, D.D., Professor of
Divinity and Biblical Criticism in the University, St Andrews.

Vols. XV., XVII, XVIII., and XXI.-XXVI. are edited by Rev.
W. D. Morrison, M.A., LL.D.


Vols. XIX. and XX. are edited by Rev. James Moffatt, B.D.,
D.D., St Andrews.
The Price of Vols. I1-XXT, ts tos. 6a. ;
Vol. XXII, and after, 10s. 6d. net,
Subscribers to the Series obtain three volumes for 22s. 6d.
carriage free, payable before publication, which only applies to the
current year’s volumes, viz., XX V.-XXVII., which are as follows :—


Vol. XXV. Almost Ready. tos. 6d. net.
ETHICS OF THE CHRISTIAN LIFE. By Theodor


Haering, Professor of New Testament Dogmatics and Ethics at
Tiibingen.
Vol. XXVI.

PRIMITIVE CHRISTIANITY: Its Writings and
Teachings in their Historical Connections. By Otto
Pfleiderer, of Berlin. Vol. II. The Historical Books.

The third volume completing this subscription has not yet been decided

upon.


The following Volumes are published at ros. 6d. net.
Vol. XXII. Ready. ros. 6d. net.
PRIMITIVE CHRISTIANITY, Vol. 1: Its Writings and
Teachings in their Historical Connections. By Otto


Pfleiderer, Professor of Practical Theology in the University of
Berlin.


Vol. XXIII. Ready. 10s. 6d. net.
THE INTRODUCTION TO THE CANONICAL
BOOKS OF THE OLD TESTAMENT. By Carl


Cornill, Professor of Old Testament Theology at the
University of Breslau.


14 Henrietta Street, Covent Garden, London, W.C.


CATALOGUE OF PUBLICATIONS. 3


THEOLOGICAL TRANSLATION LIBRARY—Continued.


Vol. XXIV. Ready. ros. 6d. net.


HISTORY OF THE CHURCH. By Hans von Schubert,
Professor of Church History at Kiel. Translated from the
Second German Edition. By arrangement with the author, an
Additional Chapter has been added on “ Religious Movements
in England in the Nineteenth Century,” by Miss Alice Gardner,
Lecturer and Associate of Newnham College, Cambridge.


The following Volumes are published at ros. 6d. per Volume, excepting
Vols. XIX. and XX.


Vol. XXI. ‘


ST PAUL: THE MAN AND HIS WORK. By Prof. H.
Weinel of the University of Jena. Translated by Rev. G. A.
Bienemann, M.A. Edited by Rev. W. D. Morrison, M.A., LL.D.


‘* Prof. Weinel may be described as the Dean Farrar of Germany; the
work is quite equal to Dean Farrar’s work on the same subject. In some
respects it is better,” —Dazly News.


Vols. XIX. and XX.


THE MISSION AND EXPANSION OF CHRIST-
IANITY IN THE FIRST THREE CENTURIES.
By Adolf Harnack, Ordinary Professor of Church History in
the University, and Fellow of the Royal Academy of the
Sciences, Berlin. Second, revised and much enlarged edition,


255. net.
Vol. XVIII.


CHRISTIAN LIFE IN THE PRIMITIVE CHURCH.
By Ernst von Dobschutz, D.D., Professor of New Testament
Theology in the University of Strassburg. Translated by Rev.
G. Bremner, and edited by the Rev. W. D. Morrison, LL.D.

‘*Tt is only in the very best English work that we meet with the scientific
thoroughness and all-round competency of which this volume is a good
specimen ; while such splendid historical veracity and outspokenness would
hardly be possible in the present or would-be holder of an English theo-
logical chair,””—Dr RASHDALL in The Speaker.


Vol. XVI.


THE RELIGIONS OF AUTHORITY AND THE
RELIGION OF THE SPIRIT. By the late Auguste
Sabatier, Professor of the University of Paris, Dean of the
Protestant Theological Faculty. With a Memoir of the Author
by Jean Réville, Professor in the Protestant Theological Faculty
of the University of Paris, and a Note by Madame Sabatier.

“Without any exaggeration, this is to be described as a great book, the

finest legacy of the author to the Protestant Church of France and to the theo-

* logical thought of the age. Written in the logical and lucid style which is

characteristic of the best French theology, and excellently translated, it is a

work which any thoughtful person, whether a professional student or not,
might read without difficulty.”— Glasgow Herald.


14 Henrietta Street, Covent Garden, London, W.C.


: r :
4 WILLIAMS & NORGATE’S


THEOLOGICAL TRANSLATION LIBRARY—Continued.


Vols, XV. and XVII.


THE BEGINNINGS OF CHRISTIANITY. By Paul
Wernle, Professor Extraordinary of Modern Church History at
the University of Basel. Revised by the Author, and translated
by the Rev. G. A. Bienemann, M.A., and edited, with an Intro-
duction, by the Rev. W. D. Morrison, LL.D.


Vol. I. The Rise of the Religion.
Vol. II. The Development of the Church.


Dr Marcus Dods in the British Weekly—‘‘ We cannot recall any work by
a foreign theologian which is likely to have a more powerful influence on the
thought of this country than Wernle’s Begennings of Christianity, It is well
written and well translated ; it is earnest, clear, and persuasive, and above all
it is well adapted to catch the large class of thinking men who are at present
seeking some non-miraculous explanation of Christianity.”


The Earlier Works included in the Library are :—


HISTORY OF DOGMA. By Adolf Harnack, Berlin. Trans-
lated from the Third German Edition. Edited by the Rev.
Prof. A. B. Bruce, D.D. 7 vols. (New Series, Vols. II., VIL,
VT Tiguid Xvi Nrgn Niky LL.) 5 sao, cloth, each ios 16d. calls
leather, suitable for presentation, 12s. 6d.


ABBREVIATED LIST OF CONTENTS:—Vol. I.: INTRo-
puctory Division:—I. Prolegomena to the Study of the History
of Dogma. II. The Presuppositions of the History of Dogma.
Division I.—The Genesis of Ecclesiastical Dogma, or the
Genesis of the Catholic Apostolic Dogmatic Theology, and the
first Scientific Ecclesiastical System of Doctrine. Book I. :—
The Preparation. Vol. I1.: Division I. Boox II.:—TZzhe
Laying of the Foundation.—\. Historical Survey.—/. Fixing
and gradual Secularising of Christianity as a Church.—J],
Fixing and gradual Hellenising of Christianity as a System of
Doctrine. Vol. III.: Division I. Boox II.:—TZhe Laying of
the Foundation—continued. Division Il.—The Development
of Ecclesiastical Dogma. Boox I.:—TZvhe History of the
Development of Dogma as the Doctrine of the God-man on the
basis of Natural Theology. A.—Presuppositions of Doctrine of
Redemption or Natural Theology. B.—The Doctrine of Redemp-
tion in the Person of the God-man in tts historical development.
Vol. 1V.: Division II. Boox I.—TZhe History of the Develop-
ment of Dogma as the Doctrine of the God-man on the basis of
Natural Theology—continued. Vol. V.: Division II. Book
Il.—Lxpansion and Remodelling of Dogma into a Doctrine of
Sin, Grace, and Means of Grace on the basis of the Church.
Vol. VI.: Division II Boox I].—L£xpansion and Re-


14 Henrietta Street, Covent Garden, London, W.C.


CATALOGUE OF PUBLICATIONS. 5


THEOLOGICAL TRANSLATION LIBRARY—Continued.


modelling of Dogma into a Doctrine of Sin, Grace, and Means
of Grace on the. basis of the Church—continued. Vol. VIL:
Division II. Boox II].—TZhe Threefold Issue of the History
of Dogma.—Full Index.


*“ No work on Church history in recent times has had the influence of
Prof, Harnack’s Azstory of Dogma.”— Times.


‘* A book which is admitted to be one of the most important theological
works of the time.” —Dazly News.


WHAT IS CHRISTIANITY? Sixteen Lectures delivered
in the University of Berlin during the Winter Term, 1899-1900.
By Adolf Harnack. ‘Translated by Thomas Bailey Saunders.
(New Series, Vol. XIV.) Demy 8vo, cloth, 10s. 6¢.; can only
be supplied when complete set of the New Series is ordered.

Prof. W. Sanday of Oxford, in the examination of the work, says :—‘‘ I
may assume that Harnack’s book, which has attracted a good deal of attention
in this country as in Germany, is by this time well known, and that its merits
are recognised—its fresh and vivid descriptions, its breadth of view and skilful
selection of points, its frankness, its genuine enthusiasm, its persistent effort
to get at the living realities of religion.”


**Seldom has a treatise of the sort been at once so suggestive and so
stimulating. Seldom have the results of so much learning been brought
to bear on the religious problems which address themselves to the modern
mind.”’—P7/ot.

‘‘In many respects this is the most notable work of Prof, Harnack.
These lectures are most remarkable, both for the historical insight they
display and for their elevation of tone and purpose.” — Literature.


THE COMMUNION OF THE CHRISTIAN WITH
GOD: A Discussion in Agreement with the View of
Luther. By W. Herrmann, Dr. Theol., Professor of Dogmatic
Theology in the University of Marburg. ‘Translated from the
Second thoroughly revised Edition, with Special Annotations by
the Author, by J. Sandys Stanyon, M.A. (New Series, Vol. IV.)
8vo, cloth. tos. 6d.

“Tt will be seen from what has been said that this book is a very im-
portant one. . . . The translation is also exceedingly well done.”—Cretical
Review.

‘© We trust the book will be widely read, and should advise those who
read it to do so twice.” —Premztive Methodist Quarterly.


‘Instinct with genuine religious feeling; .. . exceedingly interesting
and suggestive.” —G/asgow Herald.


A HISTORY OF THE HEBREWS. By R. Kittel, Or-
dinary Professor of Theology in the University of Breslau. In
2 vols. (New Series, Vols. III. and VI.) 8vo, cloth. Each
volume, ros. 6d.
Vol. I. Sources of Information and History of the Period up to
the Death of Joshua. Translated by John Taylor, D.Lit., M


14 Henrietta Street, Covent Garden, London, W.C.


6 WILLIAMS & NORGATE'’S


THEOLOGICAL TRANSLATION LIBRARY—Continued.


Vol. II. Sources of Information and History of the Period down
to the Babylonian Exile. Translated by Hope W. Hogg, B.D., and
E. B. Speirs, D.D.


“Tt is a sober and earnest reconstruction, for which every earnest student
of the Old Testament should be grateful.” —Chrestiax World.


‘Tt will be a happy day for pulpit and pew when a well-thumbed copy of
the History of the Hebrews is to be found in every manse and parsonage.” —
Literary World.


‘Tt is a work which cannot fail to attract the atiention of thoughtful
people in this country.”—Pall Mall Gazette.


.


AN INTRODUCTION TO THE TEXTUAL CRITI-
CISM OF THE GREEK NEW TESTAMENT.
By Professor Eberhard Nestle, of Maulbronn. ‘Translated from
the Second Edition, with Corrections and Additions by the
Author, by William Edie, B.D., and edited, with a Preface, by
Allan Menzies, D.D., Professor of Divinity and Biblical Criticism
in the University of St. Andrews. (New Series, Vol. XIII.)
With eleven reproductions of Texts. Demy 8vo, ros. 6d. ; half-
leather, 125. 6d.


‘© We have no living scholar more capable of accomplishing the fascin-
ating task of preparing a complete introduction on the new and acknowledged
principles than Prof. Nestle. This book will stand the most rigorous
scrutiny ; it will surpass the highest expectation.” —2xposztory Times.


‘‘Nothing could be better than Dr Nestle’s account of the materials
which New Testament textual criticism has to deal with,’’—Sfectator.


‘*We know of no book of its size which can be recommended more cor-
dially to the student, alike for general interest and for the clearness of its
arrangement. . . . In smoothness of rendering, the translation is one of the
best we have come across for a considerable time.’”—anchesler Guardian,


THE APOSTOLIC AGE. By Prof. Carl von Weizsicker.
Translated by James Millar, B.D. 2 vols. (New Series, Vols.
I. and V.) Demy 8vo, cloth. Each ros. 6d.


‘* Weizsicker is an authority of the very first rank. The present work
marks an epoch in New Testament criticism. The English reader is fortunate
in having a masterpiece of this kind rendered accessible to him.” —Z-xfosztory
Times.

**, , . No student of theology or of the early history of Christianity can
afford to leave Weizsicker’s great book unread.” —M/anchester Guardian.


_ “In every direction in this work we find the mark of the independent
thinker and investigator ... this remarkable volume... this able and
learned work. . . .”—Christtan World,


‘The book itself . . . is of great interest, and the work of the translation
has been done in a most satisfactory way.’—Cretecal Review.


14 Henrietta Street, Covent Garden, London, W.C.


CATALOGUE OF PUBLICATIONS. 7


THEOLOGICAL TRANSLATION FUND LIBRARY.
Old Series.


Uniform Price per Volume, 6s.


BAUR (F. C.). CHURCH HISTORY OF THE FIRST
THREE CENTURIES. Translated from the Third
peer Edition, Edited by Rev. Allan Menzies. 2 vols. 8vo,
ClOCD 2S.


= Ue, AOS) LE. OF, JEoUS CHRIST,
HIS LIFE AND WORK, HIS EPISTLES AND
DOCTRINE. A Contribution to a Critical History of
Primitive Christianity. Edited by Rev. Allan Menzies. 2nd
Edition. 2 vols. 8vo, cloth. 12s.


BLEEK (F.). LECTURES ON THE APOCALYPSE.
Translated. Edited by the Rev. Dr. S. Davidson. 8vo, cloth.
65.


EWALD’S (Dr. H.) COMMENTARY ON THE
PROPHETS OF »THE OLD: TESTAMENT.
Translated by the Rev. J. F. Smith. [Vol. I. General Intro-
duction, Yoel, Amos, Hosea, and Zakharya 9-11. Vol. II.
Yesaya, Obadya, and Mikah. Vol. III. Nahm, Ssephanya,
Habaqqtq, Zakharya, Yéremya. Vol. IV. Hezekiel, Yesaya
xl.-lxvi. Vol. V. Haggai, Zakharya, Malaki, Jona, Baruc,
Daniel, Appendix and Index.] 5 vols. 8vo, cloth. 30s.


— COMMENTARY ON THE PSALMS. | Translated
by the Rev. E. Johnson, M.A. 2 vols. 8vo, cloth. 12s.


— COMMENTARY ON THE BOOK OF JOB, with
Translation. Translated from the German by the Rev. J.
Frederick Smith. 8vo, cloth. 6s.


HAUSRATH (Prof. A.) HISTORY OF THE NEW
TESTAMENT TIMES. The Timeof Jesus. Translated
by the Revs. C. T. Poynting and P. Quenzer. 2 vols. 8vo,
cloths), 12's.


The second portion of this work, ‘‘The Times of the Apostles,” was
issued apart from the Library, but in uniform volumes; see p. 18.


KEIM’S HISTORY OF JESUS OF NAZARA: Con-
sidered in its connection with the National Life of
Israel, and related in detail. Translated from the
German by Arthur Ransom and the Rev. E. M. Geldart.
[Vol. I. Second Edition. Introduction, Survey of Sources,
Sacred and Political Groundwork, Religious Groundwork.
Vol. II. The Sacred Youth, Self-recognition, Decision. Vol. III.


14 Henrietta Street, Covent Garden, London, W.C.


8 WILLIAMS & NORGATE’S


THEOLOGICAL TRANSLATION FUND LIBRARY—Continued.


The First Preaching, the Works of Jesus, the Disciples, and
Apostolic Mission. Vol. IV. Conflicts and Disillusions,
Strengthened Self-confidence, Last Efforts in Galilee, Signs of
the Approaching Fall, Recognition of the Messiah. Vol. V.
The Messianic Progress to Jerusalem, the Entry into Jerusalem,
the Decisive Struggle, the Farewell, the Last Supper. Vol. VI.
The Messianic Death at Jerusalem. Arrest and Pseudo-Trial,
the Death on the Cross, Burial and Resurrection, the Messiah’s
Place in History, Indices.] Complete in 6 vols. 8vo. 36s.
(Vol. I. only to be had when a complete set of the work is ordered.)


KUENEN (Dr. A:)) THE RELIGION OF ISRAEL
TO THE FALL OF THE JEWISH STATE. By
Dr. A. Kuenen, Professor of Theology at the University, Leiden.
Translated from the Dutch by A. H. May. 3 vols. 8vo, cloth.
185.


PFLEIDERER (O.). PAULINISM: A Contribution
to the History of Primitive Christian Theology.
Translated by E. Peters. 2nd Edition. 2 vols. 8vo, cloth. 12s,


—— PHILOSOPHY OF RELIGION ON THE BASIS
OF ITS HISTORY. (Vols. I. Il. History of the Philo-
sophy of Religion from Spinoza to the Present Day; Vols.
III. IV. Genetic-Speculative Philosophy of Religion.) Trans-
lated by Prof. Allan Menzies and the Rev. Alex. Stewart.
4 vols. 8vo, cloth. 24s.


REVILLE (Dr. A). PROLEGOMENA OF THE
HISTORY OF RELIGIONS. With an Introduction by
Prof. F. Max Miller. 8vo, cloth. 6s.


PROTESTANT COMMENTARY ON THE NEW
TESTAMENT. With General and Special Introductions.
Edited by Profs. P. W. Schmidt and F. von Holzendorff.
Translated from the Third German Edition by the Rev. F. H.
Jones, B.A. 3 vols. 8vo, cloth. 18s.


SCHRADER (Prof. E.). THE CUNEIFORM IN-
SCRIPTIONS AND THE OLD TESTAMENT.
Translated from the Second Enlarged Edition, with Additions
by the Author, and an Introduction by the Rev. Owen C.
Whitehouse, M.A. 2 vols. (Vol. I. not sold separately.) With
a Map. 8vo, cloth, 12s.


ZELLER (Dr. E.). THE CONTENTS AND ORIGIN
OF THE ACTS OF THE APOSTLES CRITI-
CALLY INVESTIGATED. Preceded by Dr. Fr. Over-
beck’s Introduction to the Acts of the Apostles from De Wette’s
Handbook, Translated by Joseph Dare. 2 vols. 8vo, cloth. 12s.


14 Henrietta Street, Covent Garden, London, W.C.


CATALOGUE OF PUBLICATIONS. 9


THE CROWN THEOLOGICAL LIBRARY.


The volumes are uniform tn size (crown octavo) and binding, but the
price varies according to the size and importance of the work.


A Few Opinions of the Series.


Professor Marcus Dods: ‘‘ By introducing to the English-speaking public
specimens of the work of such outstanding critics and theologians, your
“Crown Theological Library’ has done a valuable service to theological
learning in this country.”


Dr John Watson: ‘“‘The Library is rendering valuable service to lay
theologians in this country, as well as to ministers.”


Rey. Principal P. T. Forsyth: ‘‘ As a whole it is an admirable series, and
opens to the English reacler at a low price some books which are of prime
importance for religious thought.”


Rev. Principal D. L. Ritchie: ‘‘I have read many of the volumes in the
©Crown Library,’ and I think it an admirable and useful series,”


Sir Edward Russell: ‘‘I have formed the highest opinion of this series.
Each of the books is animated by a fine intelligent and at the same time
devout spirit.”


Rev. Professor A. E. Garvie: ‘‘I am very grateful for the publication of these
volumes, as they bring within the reach of the English student, in a correct
translation and at cheap price, important theological works, which other-
wise would be accessible only to those familiar with French or German.”


Rev. R. J. Campbell: ‘‘ Your ‘Crown Theological Library’ is invalu-
able, and is doing excellent service for liberal Christianity.”


Professor G. Currie Martin: ‘‘I think you are rendering a most valuable
service to all serious students of theology by your publication of the
‘Crown Theological Library.’”


Vol. I. BABEL AND BIBLE. By Dr. Friedrich Delitzsch,


Vol.


Vol.


Vol.


Professor of Assyriology in the University of Berlin. Authorised
Translation. Edited, with an Introduction, by Rev. C. H.
W. Johns. Crown 8vo, with 77 illustrations, cloth. 55.


Il. THE VIRGIN BIRTH OF CHRIST: An
Historical and Critical Essay. By Paul Lobstein, Pro-
fessor of Dogmatics in the University of Strassburg. Translated
by Victor Leuliette, A.K.C., B.-és-L., Paris. Edited, with an
Introduction, by Rev. W. D. Morrison, LL.D. Crown 8vo. 35.


Ill. MY STRUGGLE FOR LIGHT: Confessions
of a Preacher. By R. Wimmer, Pastor of Weisweil-am-
Rhein in Baden. Crown 8vo, cloth. 35. 6d.

IV. LIBERAL CHRISTIANITY: Its Origin, Nature,
and Mission. By Jean Réville, Professeur adjoint a la
Faculté de Théologie Protestante de l’Université de Paris.
Translated and edited by Victor Leuliette, A.K.C., B.-és-L.
Crown 8vo, cloth. 45.


14 Henrietta Street, Covent Garden, London, W.C.


10


WILLIAMS & NORGATE’S


THE CROWN THEOLOGICAL LIBRARY—Continued.


Vol. V. WHAT IS CHRISTIANITY? By Adolf Harnack,


Vol.


=—


Vol.


—


Vol.


—


Vol.


Vol.


Vol.


Professor of Church History in the University, Berlin. Trans-
lated by Thomas Bailey Saunders. Crown 8vo. 5s.


VI. FAITH AND MORALS. By W. Herrmann, Pro-
fessor of Systematic Theology at the University of Marburg ;
Author of “The Communion of the Christian with God.”
Crown 8vo, cloth. 55.


VII. EARLY HEBREW STORY. A Study of the
Origin, the Value, and the Historical Background of the
Legends of Israel. By John P. Peters, D.D., Rector of
St Michael’s Church, New York; author of ‘‘Nippur, or
Explorations and Adventures on the Euphrates.” Crown 8vo,
cloth. 55.


VIII. BIBLE PROBLEMS AND THE NEW
MATERIAL FOR THEIR SOLUTION. A Plea
for Thoroughness of Investigation addressed to
Churchmen and Scholars. By the Rev. T. K. Cheyne,
D.Litt., D.D., Fellow of the British Academy; Oriel Professor
of Interpretation in the University of Oxford, and Canon of
Rochester. Crown 8vo. 5s.


IX. THE DOCTRINE OF THE ATONEMENT
AND ITS HISTORICAL EVOLUTION ; and RE-
RELIGION AND MODERN CULTURE. By the late
Auguste Sabatier, Professor in the University of Paris. Trans-
lated by Victor Leuliette, A.K.C., B.-és-L. Crown 8vo. 4s. 6d.


X. THE EARLY CHRISTIAN CONCEPTION OF
CHRIST: Its Value and Significance in the History
of Religion. By Otto Pfleiderer, D.D., Professor of Practical
Theology in the University, Berlin. Crown 8vo. 35. 6d.


XI. THE CHILD AND RELIGION: Eleven
Essays. By Prof. Henry Jones, M.A., LL.D., University of
Glasgow; C. F. G. Masterman, M.A.; Prof. George T. Ladd,
D.D., LL.D., University of Yale; Rev. F. R. Tennant, M.A.,
B.Sc., Hulsean Lecturer; Rev. J. Cynddylan Jones, D.D.; Rev.
Canon Hensley Henson, M.A.; Rev. Robert F. Horton, M.A.,
D.D.5 Rey. -G:"Hill, MIA, DID."Rev, Je¥e"Chorntonss Rey.
Rabbi A. A. Green ; Prof. Joseph Agar Beet, D.D. Edited by
Thomas Stephens, B.A. Crown 8vo. 6s.


‘*No fresher and more instructive book on this question has been issued
for years, and the study of its pages will often prove a godsend to many
perplexed minds in the church and in the Christian home.” —Brztish Weekly.


14 Henrietta Street, Covent Garden, London, W.C.


CATALOGUE OF PUBLICATIONS. II


Vol


—


Vol.


Vol.


—


Vol.


Vol.


—


Vol.


Vol.


—


—


Vol.


THE CROWN THEOLOGICAL LIBRARY—Continued.


.XIl. THE EVOLUTION OF RELIGION: an An-
thropological Study. By L. R. Farell, D.Litt., Fellow and
Tutor of Exeter College, Oxford; University Lecturer in Clas-
sical Archzeology, etc., etc. Crown 8vo, cloth. 55.


XIII. THE BOOKS OF THE NEW TESTA-
MENT. By H. Von Soden, D.D., Professor of Theology
in the University of Berlin. Translated by the Rev. J. R.
Wilkinson, and edited by Rev. W. D. Morrison, LL.D. Crown
8vo, cloth. 5s.


XIV. JESUS. By Wilhelm Bousset, Professor of Theology in
Gottingen. Translated by Janet Penrose Trevelyan, and edited
by Rev. W. D. Morrison, LL.D. Crown 8vo. 4s.

‘Tt is true the writers, Von Soden and Bousset, have, in the course of
their papers, said things that I regard as nothing less thanadmirable, I very
much doubt whether we have anything so admirable in English,”—Rev. Dr.
Sanday in the Guardian.


XV. THE COMMUNION OF THE CHRISTIAN
WITH GOD. By Prof. Wilhelm Herrmann. Translated
from the new German Edition by Rev. J. S. Stanyon, M.A.,
and Rev. R. W. Stewart, B.D., B.Sc. Crown 8vo, cloth. 5s.


XVI. HEBREW RELIGION TO THE ESTAB-
LISHMENT OF JUDAISM UNDER EZRA. By
W. E. Addis, M.A. Crown 8vo. Cloth, 5s.


XVII. NATURALISM AND RELIGION. By Rudolf
Otto, Professor of Theology in the University of G6ttingen.
Translated by J. Arthur Thomson, Professor of Natural History
in the University of Aberdeen, and Margaret R. Thomson.
Edited with an Introduction by Rev. W. D. Morrison, LL.D.
Crown 8vo. 6s.

‘« |. , A valuable survey, and a critical estimate o1 scientific theory and
kindred ideas as they concern the religious view of the world... . It is well
written, clear, and even eloquent.”—Lxfosztory Times.


XVIII. ESSAYS ON THE SOCIAL GOSPEL. By
Professor Adolf Harnack, of Berlin, and Professor W. Herrmann,
of Marburg. Crown 8vo, cloth. 4s. 6d.


XIX. THE RELIGION OF THE OLD TESTA-
MENT: Its Place among the Religions of the
Nearer East. By Karl Marti, Professor of Old Testament
Exegesis, Bern. Crown 8vo, cloth. 45. 6d.


In a leading review Zhe Spectator says :—‘‘It is a valuable contribution
to a great theme by one who has devoted his life to its study. Not only the
general reader, for whom it is specially intended, but the theologian will
learn not a little from its pages.”


14 Henrietta Street, Covent Garden, London, W.C.


12 WILLIAMS & NORGATE’S


THE CROWN THEOLOGICAL LIBRARY—Continued.


Vol. XX. LUKE, THE PHYSICIAN. By Adolf Harnack,
D.D. Translated by the Rev. J. R. Wilkinson, M.A. Crown
8vo, cloth. 6s.

‘‘What is new and interesting and valuable is the ratiocination, the
theorising, and the personal point of view in the book under review. We
study it to understand Professor Harnack, not to understand Luke ; and the
study is well worth the time and work. Personally, I feel specially interested
in the question of Luke’s nationality. On this the author has some admir-
able and suggestive pages,” —Prof. Sir W. M. Ramsay in Zhe Exfosttor.


Vol. XXI. THE HISTORICAL EVIDENCE FOR THE
RESURRECTION OF JESUS CHRIST. By
Kirsopp Lake, Professor of New Testament Exegesis in the
University of Leiden, Holland. Crown 8vo, cloth. 55.


Vol XXII" THE’ APOLOGETIC OF” THE NEW
TESTAMENT. By E. F. Scott, M.A., author of ‘‘The
Fourth Gospel: Its Purpose and Theology.” Crown 8vo,
cloth. 5s.


XXIII. THE SAYINGS OF JESUS. By Adolf
Harnack, D.D. Being Vol. II. of Dr Harnack’s New Testa-
ment Studies. Crown 8vo, cloth. 6s.


.XXIV. ANGLICAN LIBERALISM. By Twelve Church-
men. Rev. Hubert Handley, Prof. F. C. Burkitt, M.A., D.D.,
Rey. J. R. Wilkinson, M.A., Rev. C. R. Shaw Stewart, M.A.,
Dr Hastings Rashdall, D.Litt., D.C.L., Prof. Percy Gardner,
D.Litt., LL.D., Sir C. T. Dyke Ackland, Rev. A. J. Carlyle,
M°A., Rev. H:''G. Woods,!-D.D:, “Rev. “A: A. Caldécott,
D.Litt., D.D., Rev. W. D. Morrison, LL.D., Rev. A. L. Lilley,
M.A. Crown 8vo, cloth. 55.

‘‘ This is a stimulating volume, and we are glad to see an able body of


writers uniting to claim the free atmosphere as the condition of spiritual
progress.” Westminster Gazette.


Vol.


—


Vo


—


Vo


nae


.XXV. THE FUNDAMENTAL TRUTHS OF THE
CHRISTIAN RELIGION. By R. Seeberg, Professor of
Systematic Theology in Berlin. Sixteen Lectures delivered
before the Students of all Faculties in the University of Berlin.
Crown 8vo. 350 pp. 5s.


THE ACTS OF THE APOSTLES. By Adolf Harnack, D.D.
Being Vol. III. of Dr Harnack’s New Testament Studies.
Crown 8vo, cloth. 6s.


Ln the Press. Almost Ready.


THE LIFE OF THE SPIRIT. By Rudolf Eucken, Professor
of Philosophy in Jena.


14 Henrietta Street, Covent Garden, London, W.C.


CATALOGUE OF PUBLICATIONS. 13


THE HIBBERT LECTURES.


Library Edition, demy 8vo, ros. 6d. per volume. Cheap Popular
Edition, 3s. 6d. per volume.


ALVIELLA (Count GOBLET D’). EVOLUTION OF
THE IDEA OF GOD, ACCORDING TO AN-
THROPOLOGY AND HISTORY. Translated by the
Rev. P. H. Wicksteed. (Hibbert Lectures, 1891.)° Cloth.
tos. 6d. Cheap Edition, 35. 6d.


BEARD (Rev. Dr. C.). LECTURES ON THE REFOR-
MATION OF THE SIXTEENTH CENTURY IN
ITS RELATION TO MODERN THOUGHT AND
KNOWLEDGE. (Hibbert Lectures, 1883.) 8vo, cloth.
tos. 6¢. Cheap Edition, 3rd Edition, 35. 6d.


DAVIDS (T. W. RHYS) LECTURES ON SOME
POINTS IN THE HISTORY OF INDIAN
BUDDHISM. (Hibbert Lectures, 1881.) 2nd Edition.
8vo, cloth. tos. 6d. Cheap Edition, 35. 6d.


DRUMMOND (Dr.). VIA, VERITAS, VITA. Lectures
on Christianity in its most Simple and Intelligible Form. (The
Hibbert Lectures, 1894.) 10s. 6d. Cheap Edition, 3s. 6d.


HATCH (Rev. Dr.) LECTURES ON THE INFLU-
ENCE OF GREEK IDEAS AND USAGES UPON
THE CHRISTIAN CHURCH. Edited by Dr. Fair-
bairn. (Hibbert Lectures, 1888.) 3rd Edition. 8vo, cloth.
tos. 6d. Cheap Edition, 3s. 6d.


KUENEN (Dr. A.). LECTURES ON NATIONAL
RELIGIONS AND UNIVERSAL RELIGION.
(The Hibbert Lectures, 1882.) 8vo, cloth. ros. 6¢ Cheap
Edition, 35. 6d.

MONTEFIORE (C. G.). ORIGIN AND GROWTH
OF RELIGION AS ILLUSTRATED BY THE
RELIGION OF THE ANCIENT HEBREWS.
(The Hibbert Lectures, 1892.) 2nd Edition. 8vo, cloth.
tos. 6d. Cheap Edition, 35. 6d.


PFLEIDERER (Dr. O.) LECTURES ON THE IN-
FLUENCE OF THE APOSTLE PAUL ON THE
DEVELOPMENT OF CHRISTIANITY. Translated
by the Rev. J. Frederick Smith. (Hibbert Lectures, 1885.)
2nd Edition. 8vo, cloth. tos. 6¢. Cheap Edition, 3s. 6d.


RENAN (E.). ON THE INFLUENCE OF THE IN-
STITUTIONS, THOUGHT, AND CULTURE OF
ROME ON CHRISTIANITY, AND THE DE-
VELOPMENT OF THE CATHOLIC CHURCH.
Translated by the Rev. Charles Beard. (Hibbert Lectures, 1880.)
8vo, cloth. tos. 6d. Cheap Edition, 3rd Edition, 35. 6d.


14 Henrietta Street, Covent Garden, London, W.C.


14 WILLIAMS & NORGATE’S


THE HIBBERT LECTURES—Continued.


RENOUF (P. LE PAGE). ON THE RELIGION OF
ANCIENT EGYPT. (Hibbert Lectures, 1879.) 3rd
Edition. 8vo, cloth. t1os. 6d. Cheap Edition, 35. 6d.

RHYS (Prof. J... ON THE ORIGIN AND GROWTH
OF RELIGION AS ILLUSTRATED BY CELTIC
HEATHENDOM. (Hibbert Lectures, 1886.) 8vo, cloth.

_ tos. 6d. Cheap Edition, 3s. 6d.

REVILLE (Dr. A.) ON THE NATIVE RELIGIONS
OF MEXICO AND PERU. Translated by the Rev.
P. H. Wicksteed. (Hibbert Lectures, 1884.) 8vo, cloth.
tos. 6d. Cheap Edition, 3s. 6a.

SAYCE (Prof. A. H.). ON THE RELIGION OF
ANCIENT ASSYRIA AND BABYLONIA. 4th Ed.
(Hibbert Lectures, 1887.) 8vo,cloth. 1os.6¢. Cheap Ed., 35. 6d.

UPTON (Rev. C. B.. ON THE BASES OF RE-
LIGIOUS BELIEF. (Hibbert Lectures, 1893.) Demy
8vo, cloth. ros. 6d. Cheap Edition, 35. 6d.


ALPHABETICAL LIST.
ADDIS (W. E.). HEBREW RELIGION. 5s. See Crown


Theological Library, p. 12.

ALLIN (Rev. THOS.). UNIVERSALISM ASSERTED
AS THE HOPE OF THE GOSPEL ON THE
AUTHORITY OF REASON, THE FATHERS,
AND HOLY SCRIPTURE. With a Preface by Edna
Lyall, and a Letter from Canon Wilberforce. Crown 8vo, cloth.
2s. 6d. net.


ALVIELLA (Count GOBLET OD’. .»THE,)iCON-
TEMPORARY EVOLUTION OF RELIGIOUS
THOUGHT IN ENGLAND, AMERICA, AND
INDIA. Translated from the French by the Rey. if Moden.
8vo, cloth. tos. 6d.

— EVOLUTION OF THE IDEA OF GOD. ‘See The
Hibbert Lectures, p. 13.

ANGLICAN LIBERALISM. By Twelve Churchmen. 5s.
See Crown Theological Library, p. 12.

ANNOTATED CATECHISM. A Manual of Natural Religion
and Morality, with many practical details. 2nd Edition. Crown
8vo, cloth. 15.

BAUR (F.C.). CHURCH HISTORY OF THE FIRST
THREE CENTURIES. 2 vols., 125. See Theological
Translation Library, Old Series, p. 7.

— PAUL, THE APOSTLE OF JESUS CHRIST.
2 vols., 12s. See Theological Translation Library, Old Series, p. 7.


14 Henrietta Street, Covent Garden, London, W.C.


CATALOGUE OF PUBLICATIONS. 15


ALPHABETICAL LIST—Continued.


BEARD (Rev. Dr. C.). THE UNIVERSAL CHRIST,
AND OTHER SERMONS. Crown 8vo, cloth. 7s. 6d.


— LECTURES ON THE REFORMATION OF
THE SIXTEENTH CENTURY IN ITS RELA-
TION TO MODERN THOUGHT AND KNOW-
LEDGE. See The Hibbert Lectures, p. 13.


BEEBY (Rev. C. E., B.D., Author of “Creed and Life”).
DOCTRINE AND PRINCIPLES. Popular Lectures
on Primary Questions. Demy 8vo, cloth. 4s. 6d.


BIBLE. Translated by Samuel Sharpe, being a Revision of the
Authorised English Version. 6th Edition of the Old, roth
Edition of the New Testament. 8vo, roan. 55. See also
Testament.


BLEEK (F.). LECTURES ON THE APOCALYPSE.
See Theological Translation Library, Old Series, p. 7.


BREMOND (HENRI). THE MYSTERY OF NEW-
MAN. With an Introduction by Rey. George Tyrrell, M.A.
Medium 8vo, cloth. tos. 6d. net.

‘From France comes a remarkable volume, excellently translated, which
endeavours to probe the mystery ; to realise, as it were, the soul of Newman,
to describe to us justly and truthfully the personality of the man.”— Dazly
Chronicle.

‘* No subsequent work can deprive M. Bremond’s book of its great psycho-
logical interest; it is a work that, unlike many books on Newman and the
Tractanians, no student of modern Christianity can afford to miss,”-—PalZ
Mall Gazette.


BROADBENT (The late Rev. T. P., B.A.). THIR-
TEEN SERMONS, AN ESSAY, "AND A FRAG-
MENT. With a Prefatory Note by Rev. Prof. J. Estlin
Carpenter, M.A. Crown 8vo, cloth. 4s. net.

CAMPBELL (Rev. Canon COLIN). FIRST THREE
GOSPELS IN GREEK. 35s. 6d. net. See Testament,
New, p. 26.

CHANNING’S COMPLETE WORKS. Including “The
Perfect Life,” with a Memoir. Centennial Edition.  4to
Edition. Cloth. 7s. 6d.

CHEYNE (Prof. T. K.).. BIBLE PROBLEMS AND
THE NEW MATERIAL FOR THEIR SOLU-
TION. 5s. See Crown Theological Library, p. 10.


CHILD AND RELIGION. Edited by Thomas Stephens, B.A.
6s. See Crown Theological Library, p. 1o.


CHRISTIAN CREED (OUR). 2nd and greatly Revised
Edition. Crown 8vo, cloth. 35. 6d.


14 Henrietta Street, Covent Garden, London, W.C.


16 WILLIAMS & NORGATE’S


ALPHABETICAL LIST—Continued.


COIT (STANTON, Ph.D.). NATIONAL IDEALISM
AND A STATE CHURCH.


‘“No one reading this book could miss its interest and ability... .
Criticises existing Christianity along lines almost literally opposite to those
of Herbert Spencer and the majority of the critics. . . . Great clearness and
eloquence.”—G. K. CHESTERTON in Zhe Natzon.


— NATIONAL IDEALISM AND THE BOOK OF
COMMON PRAYER. An Essay in Re-Interpretation and


Revision. Demy 8vo, cloth. tos. 6d. net.


COMMON PRAYER FOR CHRISTIAN WORSHIP:
in Ten Services for Morning and Evening. 32mo,
cloth. 1s. 6d. Also in 8vo, cloth. 35.


CONWAY (MONCURE D.). CENTENARY HISTORY
OF THE SOUTH PLACE ETHICAL SOCIETY.
With numerous Portraits, a facsimile of the original MS. of the
hymn, ‘Nearer, my God, to Thee,” and Appendices. Crown
8vo, half-vellum, paper sides. 55.


CORNILL (Prof. CARL). INTRODUCTION TO THE
CANONICAL BOOKS OF THE OLD TESTA-
MENT. Demy 8vo, cloth. 10s. 6d. net. See Theological
Translation Library, New Series, p. 2.


DAVIDS (T. W. RHYS). LECTURES ON SOME
POINTS IN. THE. HISTORY OF INDIAN
BUDDHISM. See The Hibbert Lectures, p. 13.


DELITZSCH (F.). BABEL AND BIBLE. Two Lectures
delivered before e Deutsche Orient-Gesellschaft in the presence
of the German Emperor. 55. See Crown Theological Library,
p. 9. See also Harnack, A., ‘‘ Letter to Preuss. Jahrbiicher,”
p. 18.


DOBSCHUTZ (E. VON). CHRISTIAN LIFE IN
THE PRIMITIVE CHURCH. Demy 8vo. tos. 62.
See Theological Translation Library, New Series, p. 3


DRIVER (S. R.). See Mosheh ben Shesheth, p. 22.


DRUMMOND (JAMES, M.A., LL.D., Hon. Litt.D.,
late Principal of Manchester College, Oxford). AN
INQUIRY INTO THE CHARACTER AND
AUTHORSHIP OF THE FOURTH GOSPEL.
Demy 8vo, cloth. tos. 6d.


“The book is not only learned, but also reverent and spiritual in tone, and
ought to find its way into the libraries of students of all shades of belief, as a
very notable attempt to solve one of the most important of New Testament
problems.”—Chr¢stzan World,


— VIA, VERITAS, VITA. See The Hibbert Lectures, p, 13.
— PHILO JUDAUS. See p. 28.


14 Henrietta Street, Covent Garden, London, W.C.


CATALOGUE OF PUBLICATIONS. 17


ALPHABETICAL LIST—Continued.


ECHOES OF HOLY THOUGHTS: Arranged as
Private Meditations before a First Communion. 2nd
Edition, with a Preface by Rev. J. Hamilton Thom. Printed
with red lines. Fcap. 8vo, cloth. rs.


EUCKEN (Prof. RUDOLF). THE LIFE OF
SPIRIT... See prize. reels ts


EWALD (H.). COMMENTARY ON THE PROPHETS
OF THE OLD TESTAMENT. | See Theological Trans-
lation Library, Old Series, p. 7.


— COMMENTARY ON THE PSALMS. See Theo-
logical Translation Library, Old Series, p. 7-


—— COMMENTARY ON THE BOOK OF JOB. See
Theological Translation Library, Old Series, p. 7.


FARNELL (L. R.). THE EVOLUTION OF RE-
LIGION. An Anthropological Study. By L. R.
Farnell, D.Litt., Fellow and Tutor of Exeter College, Oxford.
55. See Crown Theological Library, p. 11.


FIGG (E. G.).. ANALYSIS OF THEOLOGY,
NATURAL AND REVEALED. Crown 8vo, cloth, 6s.


FORMBY (Rev. C. W.). RE-CREATION: A New
Aspect of Evolution. Large Crown 8vo, cloth. 5s.


FOUR GOSPELS (THE) AS HISTORICAL RE-
CORDS. §8vo, cloth. 15s.


GILL (C.). THE EVOLUTION OF CHRISTIANITY.
By Charles Gill. 2nd Edition. With Dissertations in answer
to Criticism. 8vo, cloth. 12s.


— THE BOOK OF ENOCH THE PROPHET.
Translated from an Ethiopic MS. in the Bodleian Library, by
the late Richard Laurence, LL.D., Archbishop of Cashel. The
Text corrected from his latest Notes by Charles Gill. Re-issue.
8vo, cloth. 55.


HARNACK (ADOLF). ACTS OF THE APOSTLES.
6s. See Crown Theological Library, p. 2.


— MONASTICISM: Its Ideals and History; and
THE CONFESSIONS OF ST. AUGUSTINE.
Two Lectures by Adolf Harnack. Translated into English by
E. E. Kellett, M.A., and F. H. Marseille, Ph.D., M.A. Crown
8vo, cloth. 4s.

‘‘ The lectures impart to these old subjects a new and vivid interest which
cannot but win this faithful version many admiring readers.” —Scotsman.

“One might read all the ponderous volumes of Montalembert without
obtaining so clear a view or so rare a judgment of this immense subject as are
offered in these luminous pages. . . . The translation is excellent, and gives
us Harnack in pure and vigorous English.” —Christian World.


14 Henrietta Street, Covent Garden, London, W.C.
2


8 WILLIAMS & NORGATE’S


ALPHABETICAL LIST—Continued.


HARNACK (ADOLF). LETTER to the “ Preussische
Jahrbiicher” on the German Emperor’s Criticism of
Prof. Delitzsch’s Lectures on ‘Babel and Bible.”
Translated into English by Thomas Bailey Saunders. 6d. net.


— LUKE, THE PHYSICIAN. See Crown Theological
Library.


— HISTORY OF DOGMA. 7 vols., 10s. 6d. each. See
Theological Translation Library, New Series, p. 4.


— THE SAYINGS OF JESUS. 6s. ‘See Crown Theo-
logical Library, p. 12.


— WHAT IS CHRISTIANITY? 55. See Theological
Translation Library, New Series, p. 5. 4/so Crown Theological
Library, p. 11. See Saunders (T. B.), “ Professor Harnack
and his Oxford Critics,” p. 24.


— MISSION AND EXPANSION OF CHRISTI-
ANITY IN THE FIRST THREE CENTURIES.
By Adolf Harnack, D.D., Berlin. Entirely new edition, re-
written, with numerous editions and maps. 2 vols. demy 8vo,
255. net.


-— and HERRMANN (Dr. WILHELM). ESSAYS
ON THE SOCIAL GOSPEL. 4s. 6d Translation
edited by Maurice A. Canney, M.A. See Crown Theological
Library, p. 11.


HATCH (Rev. Dr.) LECTURES ON THE _ IN-
FLUENCE OF GREEK IDEAS AND USAGES
UPON THE CHRISTIAN CHURCH. See The
Hibbert Lectures, p. 13.


HAUSRATH (Prof. A... HISTORY OF THE NEW
TESTAMENT TIMES. The Time of the Apostles.
Translated by Leonard Huxley. With a Preface by Mrs.
Humphry Ward. 4 vols. 8vo, cloth. 42s. (Uniform with the
Theological Translation Library, Old Series.)


— NEW TESTAMENT TIMES. The Times of Jesus.
2 vols. 12s. See Theological Translation Library, Old Series,
Dag

HEBREW TEXTS, in large type for Classes:


Genesis. 2nd Edition, 16mo, cloth. Is. 6d.
Psalms. 16mo, cloth. Is.

Isaiah. 16mo, cloth. Is.

Job. 16mo, cloth. 1s.


HENSLOW (Rev. G.). THE ARGUMENT OF
ADAPTATION ; or, Natural Theology reconsidered.


8vo, cloth. 1s.


14 Henrietta Street, Covent Garden, London, W.C,


CATALOGUE OF PUBLICATIONS. 19


ALPHABETICAL LIST—Continued.


HENSLOW (Rev. G.). SPIRITUAL TEACHINGS
OF BIBLE PLANTS; or, The Garden of God.
8vo, cloth. 1s.

— THE AT-ONE-MENT;; or, The Gospel of Recon-
Ciliation. 8vo, cloth. 1s.


— THE SPIRITUAL TEACHING OF CHRIST’S
LIFE. 8vo, cloth. 5s. net.


ao eee NO PRODUCT OF EVOLUTION.  8vo,
cloths:

—— VULGATE, THE; The Source of False Doctrine.
A work specially applicable to the Clergy, Bible Teachers, and
other exponents of the Gospel of Christ. Crown 8vo, cloth.
2s. 6d. net.

HERFORD (R. TRAVERS, B.A.). CHRISTIANITY IN
TALMUD AND MIDRASH. Demy 8vo, cloth. 18s. net.

CONTENTS :—Introduction. Division I. Passages from
the Rabbinical Literature: A. Passages relating to Jesus.
B. Passages relating to Minim, Minuth. Division II. General
Results. Appendix containing the Original Texts of the
Passages translated. Indices.

“Tt is no exaggeration to say that it will prove indispensable not only to
scholars interested in Talmudic literature, but to all who study the subject of


the evangelical tradition. It will introduce the reader into a new world—
that of Jewish thought in the centuries after Christ.” —Camébridge Review.


HERRMANN (W.). THE COMMUNION OF THE
CHRISTIAN WITH GOD. 5s. See Theological Trans-
lation Library, New Series, p. 5.

—— FAITH AND MORALS. 5s. See Crown Theological
Library, p- 10.

— and HARNACK (ADOLF.). ESSAYS ON THE
SOCIAL GOSPEL. 4s. 6¢ See Crown Theological
Library, p. 1.

HIBBERT JOURNAL: A Quarterly Review of Re-
ligion, Theology, and Philosophy. Edited by L. P.
Jacks and G. Dawes Hicks. Vol. I. Royal 8vo, 856 pp.
Vol. II., 864 pp. Vol. III., 869 pp. Vols. IV., V., and VI.,
960 pp. Cloth, Each 12s. 6d. net. Annual Subscription,
Ios. post free.

HOERNING (Dr. _R.). THE KARAITE MSS.,
BRITISH MUSEUM. The Karaite Exodus (i. to viii. 5)
in Forty-two Autotype Facsimiles, with a Transcription in
ordinary Arabic type. Together with Descriptions and Colla-
tion of that and five other MSS. of portions of the Hebrew
Bible in Arabic characters in the same Collection. Royal 4to,


cloth, gilt top. 205.


14 Henrietta Street, Covent Garden, London, W.C.


20 WILLIAMS & NORGATE’S


ALPHABETICAL LIST—Continued.


HUNTER (Rev. J., D.D.). DE PROFUNDIS CLAM-
AVI, and Other Sermons. Large Crown 8vo, cloth. 55. net.


— THE COMING CHURCH. A Plea for a Church
simply Christian. Cloth, 15. 6d. net.


JOHNSON (EDWIN, M.A). THE RISE OF
CHRISTENDOM. Demy 8vo, cloth. 7s. 6d.


—— ANTIQUA MATER: A Study of Christian Origins.


Crown 8vo, cloth. 2s. 6d.


— THE RISE OF ENGLISH CULTURE. Demy


8vo, cloth. 155. net.


JONES (Rev. R. CROMPTON). HYMNS OF DUTY
AND FAITH. Selected and Arranged. 247 pp. Fcap. 8vo,
cloth. znd Edition. 35. 6d.


CHANTS, PSALMS, AND CANTICLES. Selected


and Pointed for Chanting. 18mo, cloth. 15. 6d.


— ANTHEMS. With Indexes and References to the Music.
18mo, cloth. 1s. 3d.


— THE CHANTS AND ANTHEMS. Together in


1 vol., cloth. 2s.


— A BOOK OF PRAYER. In Thirty Orders of Worship,
with Additional Prayers and Thanksgivings. 18mo, cloth,


2s. 6d. With Chants, in 1 vol. 18mo, cloth. 35.


KAUTZSCH (E.). AN OUTLINE OF THE HISTORY
OF THE LITERATURE OF THE’ OLD TESTA-
MENT. With Chronological Tables for the History of the
Israelites, and other Aids to the Explanation of the Old Testa-
ment. Reprinted from the ‘‘ Supplement to the Translation of
the Old Testament.” By E. Kautzsch, Professor of Theology
at the University of Halle. Edited by the Author. ‘Translated
by John Taylor, D.Litt., M.A., etc. Demy 8vo, cloth. 6s. 6d.

‘‘This English translation... is likely to prove very acceptable to
all those students who desire to see for themselves the view taken by the
‘higher critics’ of the growth of the Old Testament.”—7he Guardian,

_ “Dr, Taylor has rendered a great service to the English readers by
his excellent translation of this important work.”—Brztish Weekly.

KEIM’S HISTORY OF JESUS OF NAZARA. 6 vols.
6s. each. See Theological Translation Library, Old Series, p. 7.


HERDED S (Rev. JAS.). BIBLICAL HEBREW. 1zs.
e€€ P. 34.
KITTEL. (R.).. HISTORY OF THE HEBREWS.


2 vols. tos. 6d. each. See Theological Translation Library,
New Series, p. 5.


14 Henrietta Street, Covent Garden,',London, W.C.


CATALOGUE OF PUBLICATIONS. 21


ALPHABETICAL LIST—Continued.


KUENEN (Dr. A). LECTURES ON NATIONAL
AND UNIVERSAL RELIGIONS. ‘See The Hibbert
Lectures, p. 13.

— THE RELIGION OF ISRAEL TO THE FALL
OF THE JEWISH STATE. 3 vols. 185. See Theo-
logical Translation Library, Old Series, p. 8.

LAKE (Professor KIRSOPP). THE HISTORICAL
EVIDENCE FOR THE RESURRECTION OF
JESUS CHRIST. 55. See Crown Theological Library, p. 12.

LEA (HENRY CHARLES, LL.D.). HISTORY OF
SACERDOTAL CELIBACY IN THE CHRISTIAN
CHURCH. Third Edition. Thoroughly Revised and
Reset. 2 vols. Medium 8vo, cloth. 21s. net.

LOBSTEIN (P.). THE DOGMA OF THE VIRGIN
BIRTH OF CHRIST. 3s. See Crown Theological Library,


D390:

LODGE (Sir O.). LIFE AND MATTER: A Criticism
of Professor Haeckel’s “ Riddie of the Universe.”
Fourth impression. Crown 8vo, cloth. 2s. 6d. net.

MACAN (R. W.). THE RESURRECTION OF
JESUS CHRIST. An Essay in Three Chapters. 8vo,
cloth. 5s.

MACKAY. (R. W.). SKETCH OF. THE. RISE
AND PROGRESS OF CHRISTIANITY. — 8vo,
cloth. 6s.

MARCHANT (JAMES). THEORIES OF THE RE-
SURRECIJION OF JESUS CHRIST... Crown’ 8vo,
stiff covers, 25. net ; superior cloth binding, 3s.

MARTI (KARL). RELIGION OF THE OLD TES-
TAMENT. 4s. 6d. See Crown Theological Library, p. 11.

MARTINEAU (Rev. Dr. JAMES). THE RELATION
BETWEEN ETHICS AND RELIGION. An
Address. 8vo, sewed. Is.

—— MODERN MATERIALISM: Its Attitude towards
Theology. A Critique and Defence. 8vo, sewed. 25. 6d.

MENEGOZ(E.). RELIGION AND THEOLOGY. By
E. Ménégoz, Professor of the Faculty of Protestant Theology,
Paris. Stiff boards. 1s. net.

MERCER (Rt. Rev. J. EDWARD, D.D.). THE SOUL
OF PROGRESS. Being the Moorhouse Lectures for 1907,


Crown 8vo, cloth. 6s.

‘To be congrarulated on an effective and freshly thought out exposure of
the familiar failure of materialism to account for evolution, humanity, or
progress in any intelligible sense.” — Zhe Christian World.


14 Henrietta Street, Covent Garden, London, W.C.


22 WILLIAMS & NORGATE’S


ALPHABETICAL LIST—Continued.


MITCHELL (Rev. A. F.).) HOW TO TEACH THE
BIBLE. nd Edition, thoroughly revised and reset. Crown
8vo, cloth. 2s. 6d.


‘The lectures are marked by much insight and moderation, The book
is notable also for its gracious and cultured note, and for the quiet persuasive-
ness with which a revolutionary reform is advocated.”—Sunday School
Chronicle,


MONTEFIORE (C. G.). ORIGIN AND GROWTH
OF RELIGION AS ILLUSTRATED BY THE
RELIGION OF THE ANCIENT HEBREWS.
See The Hibbert Lectures, p. 13.


MOSHEH BEN SHESHETH’S COMMENTARY ON
JEREMIAH AND EZEKIEL. Edited from a Bodleian
MS., with a Translation and Notes, by S. R. Driver. 8vo,
sewed. 35.

MUNSTERBERG (Prof. HUGO). THE AMER-
ICANS. 12s. 6d. net. See p. 29.

NESTLE (E.). INTRODUCTION TO THE TEX-
TUAL CRITICISM OF THE GREEK NEW
TESTAMENT. See Theological Translation Library, New
Series, p. 6.

OTTO (R.) NATURALISM AND RELIGION. 6s.
See Crown Theological Library, p. 11.

PERCIVAL (G. H.). THE INCARNATE PURPOSE.
Essays on the Spiritual Unity of Life. Crown 8vo, cloth.
25. 6d. net.

PERRIN (R. S... THE EVOLUTION OF KNOW-
LEDGE: A Review of Philosophy. Crown 8vo,cloth. 6s.

PERSONAL AND FAMILY PRAYERS. 8vo, buckram.


TSG.


PETERS (JOHN P.).. EARLY HEBREW STORY.
A Study of the Origin, the Value, and the Historical Background
of the Legends of Israel. 55, . See Crown Theological Library,
p. To.


PFLEIDERER (Dr. 0.) LECTURES ON THE IN-
FLUENCE OF THE APOSTLE PAUL ON THE
DEVELOPMENT OF CHRISTIANITY. See The
Hibbert Lectures, p. 13.


— PAULINISM: A Contribution to the History of


Primitive Christianity. 2 vols. 12s. See Theological
Translation Library, Old Series, p. 8.


— PHILOSOPHY OF RELIGION ON THE BASIS
OF ITS HISTORY. 4 vols. 24s. See Theological Trans-
lation Library, Old Series, p. 8.


14 Henrietta Street, Covent Garden, London, W.C.


CATALOGUE OF PUBLICATIONS. 23


ALPHABETICAL LIST—Continued.


PFLEIDERER (Dr. O.). THE EARLY CHRISTIAN
CONCEPTION OF CHRIST: Its Significance and
Value in the History of Religion. 35. 6d. See Crown
Theological Library, p. 10.

— PRIMITIVE CHRISTIANITY. Vols. I. and II.
Demy 8vo, cloth. ros. 6d net. See Theological Translation
Library, New Series, p. 2.


POOLE (REG. LANE). ILLUSTRATIONS OF THE
HISTORY OF MEDIAZVAL THOUGHT IN
THE DEPARTMENTS OF THEOLOGY AND
ECCLESIASTICAL POLITICS. 8vo, cloth. ros. 6d.

PROTESTANT COMMENTARY ON THE NEW
TESTAMENT, 3 vols. 18s. See Theological Translation
Library, Old Series, p. 8.

RENAN (E.). ON THE INFLUENCE OF THE IN-
STITUTIONS, THOUGHT, AND CULTURE OF
ROME ON CHRISTIANITY AND THE DE-
VELOPMENT OF THE CATHOLIC CHURCH.
See Hibbert Lectures, p. 13.

RENOUF (P. LE PAGE) ON THE RELIGION
; OF ANCIENT EGYPT. See Hibbert Lectures, p. 14.
REVILLE (A.). THE SONG OF SONGS, commonly
called the Song of Solomon, or the Canticle. Trans-

lated from the French. Crown 8vo, cloth. ts. 6d.

— ON NATIVE RELIGIONS OF MEXICO AND
PERU. See Hibbert Lectures, p. 14.

— PROLEGOMENA OF THE HISTORY OF RE-
LIGIONS. 6s. See Theological Translation Library, Old
Series, p. 8.

REVILLE (JEAN). LIBERAL CHRISTIANITY. 4s.
See Crown Theological Library, p. 9.

—- See also Sabatier’s ‘‘ Religions of Authority and Religion of the
Spirit,” p. 3:

RIX (HERBERT). TENT AND TESTAMENT. A
Camping Tour in Palestine, with some Notes on Scripture Sites.
With 61 Illustrations, Frontispiece,and Maps. Demy 8vo, cloth.
8s. 6d. net.

‘His narrative of travel is that of an intelligent and well-informed
traveller who went without prepossessions and was both able and willing to
weigh evidence. . . . Mr. Rix’s contribution is one that must be taken into
account.”— Spectator, 4

‘*The result is a thoughtful, well-written, even learned work, far from
the vain outpourings of the tourist. The narrative, though heavily charged
with information, is wonderfully unembarrassed, and the word-pictures which
abound are true to life.” —Atheneum.


— A DAWNING FAITH. Crown 8vo, cloth. 5s.


14 Henrietta Street, Covent Garden, London, W.C.


24 WILLIAMS & NORGATE’S


ALPHABETICAL LIST—Continued.


ROBINSON (ALEX., M.A.,, B.D.). A STUDY OF
THE SAVIOUR IN THE NEWER LIGHT. 2nd
Edition. Revised and partly rewritten. Demy 8vo, cloth.
5s. net.


— OLD AND NEW CERTAINTY OF THE GOS-
PEL. A Sketch. Crown 8vo, cloth. 2s. 6d.


SABATIER (AUGUSTE). THE RELIGIONS OF
AUTHORITY AND THE RELIGION OF THE
SPIRIT. With a Memoir by Professor J. Réville. 10s. 6d.
See Theological Translation Library, New Series, p. 3.


— THE DOCTRINE OF THE ATONEMENT AND
ITS HISTORICAL EVOLUTION; and RELI-
GION AND MODERN CULTURE. 4s. 6d. See
Crown Theological Library, p. ro.


SADLER (Rev. Dr.) PRAYERS FOR CHRISTIAN
WORSHIP. Crown 8vo, cloth. 35. 6d.


SADLER (Rev. Dr.) CLOSET PRAYERS, Original
and Compiled. 18mo, cloth. 1s. 6d.


SAUNDERS (T. BAILEY). PROFESSOR HARNACK
AND HIS OXFORD CRITICS. Crown 8vo, cloth.
Is. 6d. net.

““Tt gives thoughtful and acutely reasoned support to the great historical
student of Christianity who represents Berlin in theology against the pig-
tailed opposition which Oxford has offered to his learning. A spirited piece
of controversial writing, it cannot but prove stimulating to readers interested
in modern divinity, no matter to which side of the debate their private pre-
possessions incline them.’’— Scotsman.


‘“‘ Mr, Saunders writes with sobriety and with a knowledge of the points
at issue. Readers of ‘Harnack and his Critics’ will do well to read his
comments.” —Shefield Daily Telegraph.


SAVAGE (M. J... BELIEFS ABOUT THE BIBLE.
8vo, cloth. 75. 6d.


SAYCE (A. H.). ON THE RELIGION OF ANCIENT
ASSYRIA AND BABYLONIA. See Hibbert Lectures,
p- 14.

SCHRADER (E.). CUNEIFORM INSCRIPTIONS


AND THE OLD TESTAMENT. 2 vols. 125. Sve
Theological Translation Library, Old Series, p. 8.


SCHUBERT(HANS VON). OUTLINES OF CHURCH
HISTORY. See Theological Translation Library, New Series,
Dn 28

SCOTT (Rev. E. F.. M.A.). THE APOLOGETIC OF


THE NEW TESTAMENT. ss. See Crown Theological
Library, p. 12.


14 Henrietta Street, Covent Garden, London, W.C.


CATALOGUE OF PUBLICATIONS. 25


ALPHABETICAL LIST—Continued.


SCULLARD (Rev. Prof. H. H., M.A., D.D.). EARLY
CHRISTIAN ETHICS IN THE WEST, FROM
CLEMENT TO AMBROSE. Crown 8vo, cloth. 6s.


SEEBERG (R.). THE FUNDAMENTAL TRUTHS
OF THE CHRISTIAN RELIGION. By R. Seeberg,
Professor of Systematic Theology in Berlin. 55. See Crown
Theological Library, p. 12.


SEVERUS (Patriarch of Antioch). THE SIXTH
BOOK OF THE SELECT LETTERS OF
SEVERUS, PATRIARCH OF ANTIOCH, in the
Syriac Version of Athanasius of Nisibis. Edited and
translated by E. W. Brooks. Vol. I. (Text), Part 1, and Vol. II.
(Translation), Part 1. 2 vols. 8vo, cloth. 42s. net. Vol. I.
(Text), Part 2, and Vol. II. (Translation), Part 2. 2 vols. 8vo,
cloth. 42s. net. See Text and Translation Society, p. 37.


SHARP (SAMUEL). CRITICAL NOTES ON THE
AUTHORISED ENGLISH VERSION OF THE
NEW TESTAMENT. 2nd Edition. s12mo, cloth.
Ts, Od:

SMITH (MARTIN R.). WHAT I HAVE TAUGHT
MY CHILDREN. nd Edition, Revised. Crown 8vo,
cloth. 3,5. 6d.

SODEN (H. von, D.D.). THE BOOKS OF THE NEW
TESTAMENT. 5s. See Crown Theological Library, p. 11.

STEPHEN (Rev. Canon REGINALD, M.A.). DEMOC-
RACY AND CHARACTER. Being the Moorhouse
Lectures for 1908. Crown 8vo, cloth. 55.

THE STATUTES OF THE APOSTLES. The hitherto
unedited Ethiopic and Arabic Texts. Edited, with an Introduc-
tion and Translations of the Ethiopic, Arabic, and Coptic Texts,
by Rev. G. Horner, M.A. With an Appendix—a recently dis-
covered variant of the Coptic Text. 18s. net.

TAYLER (Rev. JOHN JAMES). AN ATTEMPT TO
ASCERTAIN THE CHARACTER OF THE
FOURTH GOSPEL, especially in its Relation to
the First Three. 2nd Edition. 8vo, cloth. 55.

TAYLOR (Rev. C.). THE DIRGE OF COHELETH
IN ECCLES. XII. DISCUSSED AND LITER-
ALLY INTERPRETED. 8vo, cloth. 3s.

TAYLOR (Rev. Dr J... THE MASSORETIC TEXT
AND THE ANCIENT VERSIONS OF THE
BOOK OF MICAH. Crown 8vo, cloth. 55.


See also Kautzsch, “ Outline,” p. 20.


14 Henrietta Street, Covent Garden, London, W.C.


26 WILLIAMS & NORGATE’S


ALPHABETICAL LIST—Continued.


TEN SERVICES OF PUBLIC PRAYER, with Special
Collects. 8vo, cloth, 3s.; or 32mo, cloth, 1s. 6d.


—— PSALMS AND CANTICLES. 8vo, cloth. 1s. 64.
— PSALMS AND CANTICLES, with Anthems.


8vo, cloth. 2s.


— SERVICES OF PUBLIC PRAYER, taken in
Substance from the Common Prayer for Christian
Worship, with a few Additional Prayers for Particular
Days. 8vo, cloth, 2s. 6d. ; or 32mo, cloth, rs.


TESTAMENT, THE NEW. TISCHENDORF (C.).
NOVUM TESTAMENTUM GRAKCE. 3 vols. 8vo.


70S, net.


— CAMPBELL (Rev. Canon COLIN, M.A, D.D.).
THE FIRST THREE GOSPELS IN GREEK.
Arranged in parallel columns. 2nd Edition, Revised. Crown
8vo, cloth. 35. 6@. net.


THOMAS (Rev. J. M. LLOYD). A FREE CATHOLIC
CHURCH. Crown 8vo, cloth. ts. 6d. net.


UPTON (C. B.).. ON THE BASES OF RELIGIOUS
BELIEF. See Hibbert Lectures, p. 14.


VICKERS (J. THE REAL JESUS: A Review of His
Life, Character, and Death, from a Jewish Stand-
point. Crown 8vo. 6s.


— THE CRUCIFIXION MYSTERY. Crown 8vo,
cloth. 35. 6d.


WETR GI: H, BD). pAssHORT.HISTORY OF Lae
HEBREW TEXT OF THE OLD TESTAMENT.
By Thomas H. Weir, Assistant to the Professor of Oriental
Languages in the University of Glasgow. 2nd Edition, with
Additions. Crown 8vo, cloth. 6s.


WEIZSACKER (C. VON). THE APOSTOLIC AGE.
2 vols. demy 8vo. 215. See Theological Translation Library,
New Series, p. 6.


WERNLE (PAUL). THE BEGINNINGS OF CHRIS-
TIANITY. 2 vols. 8vo. 215. See Theological Translation
Library, New Series, p. 4.


14 Henrietta Street, Covent Garden, London, W.C.


CATALOGUE OF PUBLICATIONS. 27


ALPHABETICAL LIST—Continued.


WICKSTEED (Rev. P. H.). THE ECCLESIASTICAL
INSTITUTIONS OF HOLLAND, treated with
Special Reference to the Position and Pros-
pects of the Modern School of Theology. A Report
presented to the Hibbert Trustees, and published by their
direction. 8vo, sewed. 1s.


WIMMER (R.). MY STRUGGLE FOR LIGHT:
Confessions ofa Preacher. 35.6¢. See Crown Theological
Library, p. 9.


WRIGHT (Rev. C. H. H.). BOOK OF GENESIS IN
HEBREW TEXT. With a critically revised Text, various
Readings, and Grammatical and Critical Notes. Demy 8vo.
3s. 6d.


— BOOK OF RUTH IN HEBREW TEXT. With a
critically revised Text, various Readings, including a new
Collation of Twenty-eight Hebrew MSS., and a Grammatical
and Critical Commentary ; to which is appended the Chaldee
Targum. Demy 8vo. 7s. 6d.


—— DANIEL AND HIS PROPHECIES. Demy 8vo,
cloth. 7s. 6d,


— DANIEL AND ITS CRITICS: A Critical and Gram-
matical Commentary with Appendix. Demy 8vo, cloth. 7s. 6d.


— LIGHT FROM EGYPTIAN PAPYRI ON JEW-
ISH HISTORY BEFORE CHRIST. Crown 8vo,


Clothes se let.


WRIGHT (G. H. BATESON). THE BOOK OF JOB.
A new critically revised Translation, with Essays on Scansion,
Date, etc. 8vo, cloth. 6s.


— WAS ISRAEL EVER IN EGYPT? or, A Lost
Tradition. By G. H. Bateson Wright, D.D., Queen’s College,
Oxford; Headmaster Queen’s College, Hong-Kong; Author of
“A Critical Revised Translation of the Book of Job.” 8vo, art
linen. 75. 6d.


WRIGHT (W. ALDIS), Edited by, and Dr. S. A.
HIRSCH. A COMMENTARY ON THE BOOK
OF JOB. From a Hebrew MS. in the University Library,
Cambridge. Med. 8vo, cloth. 21s. net.


ZELLER (E.). CONTENTS AND ORIGIN OF THE
ACTS OF THE APOSTLES. See Theological Transla-
tion Library, Old Series, p. 8.


14 Henrietta Street, Covent Garden, London, W.C.


28 WILLIAMS & NORGATE’S


II. Philosophy, Psychology.


BACON (ROGER), THE “OPUS MAJUS” OF.
Edited, with Introduction and Analytical Table, by John Henry
Bridges, Fellow of Royal College of Physicians, sometime Fellow
of Oriel College. Complete in 3 vols., 31s. 6¢.; Vol. III. sold
separately, 75. 6d.


BREWSTER (H. B.). THE THEORIES OF AN-
ARCHY AND.OF LAW. A Midnight Debate. Crown


8vo, parchment. 5s.
— THE PRISON. A Dialogue. Crown 8vo, parchment. 5s.
— THE STATUETTE AND THE BACKGROUND.


Crown 8vo, parchment. 4s.


COLLINS (F. H.). AN EPITOME OF THE SYN-
THETIC PHILOSOPHY. By F. Howard Collins.
With a Preface by Herbert Spencer. 5th Edition. The Syn-
thetic Philosophy Completed. 8vo, cloth. 21s.


DRUMMOND (Dr.). PHILO JUDAUS; or, The Jewish
Alexandrian Philosophy in its Development and Com-
pletion. By James Drummond, LL.D., Principal of Man-
chester New College, Oxford. 2 vols. 8vo, cloth. 21s.


HODGSON (S. H.). PHILOSOPHY AND EXPERI-
ENCE. An Address delivered before the Aristotelian Society.
8vo, sewed. 25.


— THE REORGANISATION OF PHILOSOPHY.


Address. 8vo, sewed. Is.


LAURIE (Professor SIMON). ETHICA: or, The Ethics
of Reason. By Scotus Novanticus. 2nd Edition.  8vo,
cloth. 6s.


—— METAPHYSICA NOVA ET VETUSTA: A Return
to Dualism. 2nd Edition. Crown 8vo, cloth. 6s.


LODGE (Sir 0.) LIFE AND MATTER. 2s. 6d. net.
See Religion, p. 21.


MACKENZIE (MALCOLM). SOCIAL AND POLITI-
CAL DYNAMICS. An Exposition of the Function of
Money as the measure of Contract, Trade, and Government,
viewed from the Principles of Natural Philosophy and Juris-
prudence, in refutation of Economic Dogmas. Demy 8vo,
cloth. tos. 6d.


14 Henrietta Street, Covent Garden, London, W.C.


CATALOGUE OF PUBLICATIONS. 29


MUNSTERBERG (HUGO, Professor of Psychology at
Harvard University.) THE AMERICANS.  Trans-
lated by Edwin B. Holt, Ph.D., Instructor at Harvard Uni-
versity. Royal 8vo, cloth. 12s. 6d. net.


PERRIN (R. S.).) EVOLUTION OF KNOWLEDGE
(THE): A Review of Philosophy. 6s. See Religion,


Dir 2e.


PIKLER (JUL.). THE PSYCHOLOGY OF THE
BELIEF IN OBJECTIVE EXISTENCE. Part I.
8vo, cloth. 4s. 6d.


PROCEEDINGS OF THE ARISTOTELIAN SOCIETY
FOR THE SYSTEMATIC STUDY OF PHILO-
SOPHY. Proceedings. Vol. 1, 4 Nos., 1890-91. 8vo.
12s-°° Discontinued” after’ Vol 1IkPart* 2: Or'“each” Part
separately. Vol. I: No. 1, 25. 6a; No. 2,25. 06a.;" No, 3,
Parte nsmOdes Parte 2s INO. A, Partytjats. 6¢.- Part: 2,
2S O ae ie NOs ies Cath she lo Ods sbarters. asa) INO,
Par taiiveiss Ove mbariy 2, e254) NOves, bart i. e2s.e9 unartn2,.2s,
Wid lepine rartsinu2 S00. 7b alte moc sIN/ Views HR TES iVols:
I.-VIII. Demy 8vo, buckram, each tos. 6d, net.


SALEEBY (C. W., M.D., F.R.S.). INDIVIDUALISM
AND COLLECTIVISM. Crown 8vo, cloth. 2s.


SCHURMAN (J. GOULD). KANTIAN ETHICS AND
DHE ETHICS OF EVOLUTION... 8vo,cloth. 5s.


— THE ETHICAL IMPORT OF DARWINISM.


Crown 8vo, cloth. 55.


SCRIPTURE (EDWARD W., Pi.D.). STUDIES
FROM THE YALE PSYCHOLOGICAL LABORA-
TORY. Vols. I.-VI., each 4s. 2d. net.


SCULLARD (Rev. Prof. H. H., M.A., D.D.). EARLY
CHRISTIAN ETHICS IN THE WEST, FROM
CLEMENT TO AMBROSE. Large crown §8vo,
cloth. 6s.


SHEARMAN (A. T., M.A.). THE DEVELOPMENT
OF SYMBOLIC LOGIC. A Critical Historical Study
of the Logical Calculus. Crown 8yo, cloth. 55. net.

Lirom the Contents.

Symbols as representing Terms and as representing Pro-
positions—Symbols of Operation—The Process of Solution—
Concerning a Calculus Based on Intension—The Doctrines of
Jevons and of Mr MacColl—Later Logical Doctrines—The
Utility of Symbolic Logic.


‘<Tts style is smooth, pleasant, and lucid.” —Atheneum.


14 Henrietta Street, Covent Garden, London, W.C.


_ 30 WILLIAMS & NORGATE’S


SPENCER (HERBERT). AN AUTOBIOGRAPHY.
2 vols. Demy 8vo. With Portraits. Popular Edition, 12s. 6d,
net. Library Edition, 28s. net.


‘«Tt is not too much to say that we close this book, the most interesting,
and certainly one of the most important we have ever opened, feeling better,
wiser, and humbler for having thus hastily read it.”—Academy,


‘Tt is a book for all men and for all time. In its pages the thinker may
trace, step by step, the synthesis of synthetic philosophy. Here the poet
will find not only a worthy inspiration, but a possibly surprising vein of
sympathy. The statesman, the inventor, the litterateur, the man of theory,
and the man of practice will find alike, within the covers of these two
massive volumes, an almost inexhaustible treasury of interest and constructive
thought. There is suggestion and instruction for all the world, and an
almost indefinable fascination—whether it be due to the mere intrinsic
beauty of the picture itself, or to the dignity of its execution, or to the sense
of its almost laborious faithfulness, or to the combined attraction of all
three.” — Sz. James’s Gazette.


— A SYSTEM OF SYNTHETIC PHILOSOPHY—


Vol. I. FIRST PRINCIPLES. With an Appendix and a Portrait.
Finally revised. New Edition, large crown 8vo, cloth. 75. 6d.


Vols. II. and III. THE PRINCIPLES OF BIOLOGY. 6th
Thousand. $vo, cloth, Revised and greatly enlarged. Vols, I. and II,
18s, each,


Vols. IV. and V. THE PRINCIPLES OF PSYCHOLOGY.
5th Thousand. 2 vols. 8vo, cloth. 36s.


Vol. VI. THE PRINCIPLES OF SOCIOLOGY. Vol. I.
Part 1, The Data of Sociology ; Part 2, The Inductions of Sociology ;
Part 3, Domestic Institutions. 4th Thousand, revised and enlarged. 8vo,
cloth, 21s,


Vol. VII. THE PRINCIPLES OF SOCIOLOGY. Vol. II.
Part 4, Ceremonial Institutions; Part 5, Political Institutions, 3rd
Thousand, $8vo, cloth. 18s,


Vol. VIII. THE PRINCIPLES OF SOCIOLOGY. Vol. III.
Part 6, Ecclesiastical Institutions ; Part 7, Professional Institutions ; Part 8,
Industrial Institutions. 2nd Thousand. 8vo, cloth. 16s.


Vol. IX.. THE PRINCIPLES OF ETHICS,» Vol. Part 1
The Data of Ethics; Part 2, The Inductions of Ethics; Part 3, The Ethics
of Individual Life. 2nd Thousand. 8vo, cloth. 15s.


Vol. X THE PRINCIPLES OF ETHICS. Vol. II. Part 4,
Justice; Part 5, Negative Beneficence; Part 6, Positive Beneficence ;
Appendices. Demy 8vo, cloth. 12s, 6d.


14 Henrietta Street, Covent Garden, London, W.C.


CATALOGUE OF PUBLICATIONS


SPENCER (HERBERT).


uniform with popular edition of “First Principles.”


Also to be had separately :


25. 6d. net.; cloth, 3s. net.


= Le Ges,


znd Thousand. §8vo, cloth. 6s,


—— THE STUDY OF SOCIOLOGY.


Other Works.


DATA OF ETHICS. | Reset


Sewed,


(21st thousand), with a Postscript. 8vo, cloth. ros. 6d.


—— EDUCATION :


Being Part 4 of the Principles of Ethics.


Library Edition


Intellectual, Moral, and Physical.


Cheap Edition. Entirely reset. 46th Thousand. Crown 8vo,
cloth. 2s. 6d.


— ESSAYS: Scientific, Political, and Speculative.


new Edition, rearranged, with additional Essays.


cloth. (Each 10s.) 30s.


— SOCIAL STATICS. Abridged and revised, together with
“The Man v. The State.” 8vo, cloth. tos.


— VARIOUS FRAGMENTS. Uniform in library binding.
Demy 8vo, cloth. Enlarged Edition. 6s.


— FACTS AND COMMENTS. Demy 8vo, cloth.


6s.


A


3 vols. 8vo,


— THE MAN versus THE STATE. 14th Thousand.


Sewed.


IS.


—— A REJOINDER TO PROFESSOR WEISMANN.


Sewed. 6d.


—— REASONS FOR DISSENTING FROM THE


PHILOSOPHY OF M. COMTE. Sewed.


6d.


—— DESCRIPTIVE SOCIOLOGY; or, Groups of Soci-


ologicai Facts.


Compiled and abstracted by Professor D.


Duncan of Madras, Dr. Richard Scheppig, and James Collier.
Folio, boards.


. English, 18s.

. 2. Ancient American Races. 16s.

. Lowest Races, Negritto Races, Polynesians.
. African Races. 16s.


I
2
3
4
WS.
6
7
8


Asiatic Races. 18s.


. American Races. 18s.
. Hebrews and Pheenicians. 2is.
. The French Civilisation. 30s.


New volumes in preparation.


18s,


14 Henrietta Street, Covent Garden, London, W.C,


32 WILLIAMS & NORGATE’S


SPENCER (HERBERT). COLLINS (F. H.). AN
EPITOME OF THE SYNTHETIC PHILOSOPHY.
By F. Howard Collins. Being a Digest of Mr. Herbert
Spencer’s Works. 5th Edition, the Synthetic Philosophy
Completed. With a Preface by Herbert Spencer. $vo, cloth.


21S.


— DREY (S.).. HERBERT SPENCER’S THEORY
OF RELIGION AND MORALITY. By Sylvan Drey.


8vo, sewed. IS.


— — A THEORY OF LIFE DEDUCED FROM
THE EVOLUTION PHILOSOPHY. Demy 8vo,


sewed. IS.


SPINOZA: Four Essays. By Professors Land, Van Vloten,
and Kuno Fischer, and by E. Renan. Edited by Professor
Knight, of St Andrews. Crown 8vo, cloth. 5s.


STUDIES FROM THE YALE PSYCHOLOGICAL
LABORATORY. Edited by Professor E. W. Scripture.
With many Illustrations. 8vo, sewed. 4s. 2d. each net. Vol.
I. 1892-93, 100 pages. Vol. II. 1894, 124 pages. Vol. III.
1895, 110 pages. Vol. IV. 1896, 141 pages. Vol. V. 1897,
105 pages. Vol. VI. 1898, 105 pages.


WUNDT (WILHELM). OUTLINES OF PSYCHO-
LOGY. Translated, with the co-operation of the Author, by
Charles Hubbard Judd, Ph.D., Instructor in the Wesleyan
University. 3rd Enlarged Edition. Demy 8vo, cloth. 8s. net.


14 Henrietta Street, Covent Garden, London, W.C.


CATALOGUE OF PUBLICATIONS. 33


III. Oriental Languages, Literature, and
History.


ABHIDHANARATNAMALA (THE) OF HALA-
YUDHA,. A Sanskrit Vocabulary (120 pp.). Edited, with a
Sanskrit-English Glossary (180 pp.), by Dr. T. Aufrecht. 8vo,
cloth. (Published at 18s.) ros.


AVESTI, PAHLAVI, and ANCIENT PERSIAN
STUDIES in Honour of the late SHAMS-UL-
ULAMA DASTUR PESHOTANJI BEHRAMJI
SANJANA, M.A., Ph.D. Paper cover, 125. 6d. net ; cloth,
135. 6d. net.


BERNSTEIN and KIRSCH. SYRIAC CHRESTO-
MATHY AND LEXICON (Chrestomathia Syriaca
cum ‘Lexico). 2 vols in 1. 8vo, cloth boards. 7s. 6d.
I. Chrestomathia, separately. Sewed. 35.


DAVIDS (T. W. RHYS). LECTURES ON SOME
POINTS IN THE HISTORY OF INDIAN
BUDDHISM. See The Hibbert Lectures, p. 13.


DELITZSCH- (Prof. F.).. ‘ASSYRIAN. GRAMMAR.
With Paradigms, Exercises, Glossary, and Bibliography. Trans-
lated by the Rev. Prof. A. R. S. Kennedy. Crown 8vo,
cloth. 165s.


— THE HEBREW LANGUAGE VIEWED IN THE
LIGHT OF ASSYRIAN RESEARCH. Demy 8vo,
cloth. 4s.


— BABEL AND BIBLE. 5s. See Crown Theological
Library, p. 9.

DILLMANN (A.). ETHIOPIC GRAMMAR. Translated
from: C. Bezold’s Second German Edition. By Rev. J. A.
Crichton, D.D., with Index of Passages, Philological Tables, etc.
I vol., Royal 8vo. 255. net.

DIPAVAMSA (THE): A Buddhist Historical Record in
the Pali Language. Edited, with an English Translation,
by Dr. H. Oldenberg. 8vo, cloth. 21s.


The ‘‘ Dipavamsa” is the most ancient historical work of the Ceylonese ;
it contains an account of the ecclesiastical history of the Buddhist Church,
of the conversion of the Ceylonese to the Buddhist faith, and of the ancient


history of Ceylon.

ERMAN’S EGYPTIAN GRAMMAR. | Translated, under
Professor Erman’s supervision, by J. H. Breasted, Professor
of Egyptology in the University of Chicago. Crown 8vo,
cloth. 18s.


14 Henrietta Street, Covent Garden, London, W.C.
3


Vel WILLIAMS & NORGATE’S


EVANS (GEORGE). AN ESSAY ON ASSYRIOLOGY.
With 4to Tables of Assyrian Inscriptions. 8vo, cloth. 55.


FAIZULLAH-BHAI (Shaikh, B.D.) A MOSLEM
PRESENT. Part I., containing the famous poem of
Al-Busaree. With an English Version and Notes. 8vo, cloth. 45.


— AN ESSAY ON THE PRE-ISLAMITIC ARABIC
POETRY, with special reference to the Seven
Suspended Poems. 8vo, sewed. 4d.


FLINDERS PETRIE PAPYRI. See Cunningham Memoirs,
volsi,8,:9, and hijspy 45405 *


FRANKFURTER (Dr. O.). HANDBOOK OF PALI:


Being an Elementary Grammar, a Chrestomathy, and
a Glossary. 8vo, cloth. 16s.


FUERST (Dr. JUL... HEBREW AND CHALDEE
LEXICON TO THE OLD TESTAMENT. | sth
Edition, improved and enlarged. Translated by Rev. Dr.
Samuel Davidson. Royal 8vo, cloth. aus.


HARDY (R. SPENCE). MANUAL OF BUDDHISM
IN ITS MODERN DEVELOPMENT. | Translated
from Singhalese MSS. 2nd Edition, with a complete Index
and Glossary. 8vo, cloth. ars.


HEBREW TEXTS. Large type. 16mo, cloth.


Genesis. (2nd Edition. Baer and Delitzsch’s Text.) 15. 6a.
Psalms. 1s.

J ODaeats:

Isaiah. Is.


KENNEDY (Rev. JAS.). INTRODUCTION TO
BIBLICAL HEBREW, presenting Graduated In-
struction in the Language of the Old Testament.
By James Kennedy, B.D., Acting Librarian in the New College,
and one of the additional Examiners in Divinity at the Univer-
sity, Edinburgh. 8vo, cloth. ras.


— al UDIES IN HEBREW SYNONYMS. Demy 8vo,
cloth. 55.


LYALL (C. J., M.A., K.C.LE.). ANCIENT ARABIAN
POETRY, CHIEFLY PRAE-ISLAMIC. Translations,


with an Introduction and Notes. Feap. 4to, cloth. tos. 6d.


14 Henrietta Street, Covent Garden, London, W.C.


CATALOGUE OF PUBLICATIONS. 35


MACHBEROTH ITHIEL. By Yehuda ben Shelomoh
Alcharizi. Edited from the MS. in the Bodleian Library, by
Thomas Chenery, M.A. 8vo, cloth. 35.


MILANDA PANHO, THE: Being Dialogues between
King Milanda and the Buddhist Sage Nagasena.
The Pali Text, edited by V. Trenckner. 440 pp. 8vo, sewed.
21s. See also ‘‘ Pali Miscellany.”


MOSHEH BEN SHESHETH’S COMMENTARY ON
JEREMIAH AND EZEKIEL. See p. 22.


MUSS-ARNOLT (W.). A CONCISE DICTIONARY
OF THE ASSYRIAN LANGUAGE (Assyrian—
English—German). By W. Muss-Arnolt. Completed in
19 parts. Each 5s. net.; or bound in 2 vols., 45 net.


NEW HEBREW SCHOOL OF POETS OF THE
SPANISH-ARABIAN EPOCH. Selected Texts, with
Introduction, Notes, and Dictionary. Edited by H. Brody,
Ph.D., Rabbi in Nachod (Bohemia), and K. Albrecht, Ph.D.,
Professor in Oldenburg (Grand Duchy). English Translation
of the Introduction, etc., by Mrs. Karl Albrecht. Cloth. 7s. 6d.
net.


NOLDEKE (THEODOR, Professor of Oriental Lan-
guages in the University of Strassburg). COM-
PENDIOUS SYRIAC GRAMMAR. With a Table of
Characters by Julius Euting. Translated (with the sanction of
the author) from the second and improved German Edition by
Rey. James A. Crichton, D.D. Royal 8vo. 18s, net.


— DELECTUS VETERUM CARMINUM ARABI-
CORUM GLOSSARIUM CONFECIT A. MULLER.
Crown 8vo, cloth. 7s. 6d.


NORRIS (E.). ASSYRIAN DICTIONARY. Intended to
further the Study of the Cuneiform Inscriptions of Assyria and
Babylonia. Vols. I.to III. 4to, cloth. Each 28s.


OLDENBERG (Prof. H.). BUDDHA: His Life, his
Doctrine, his Order. By Dr. Hermann Oldenberg, Pro-
fessor at the University of Berlin. Translated by W. Hoey,
M.A. 8vo, cloth gilt. 18s.


PALI MISCELLANY. By V. Trenckner. Part I. The
Introductory Part of the Milanda Panho, with an English


Translation and Notes. 8vo, sewed. 4s.


14 Henrietta Street, Covent Garden, London, W.C.


36 WILLIAMS & NORGATE’S


PLATTS (J. T.).. A GRAMMAR OF THE PERSIAN
LANGUAGE. By John T. Platts, Hon. M.A. (Oxon.),
Teacher of Persian in the University of Oxford; late Inspector
of Schools in the Central Provinces of India. Part I. Accidence.
Broad crown 8yvo. tos. 6d.


RENOUF (P. LE PAGE) LECTURES ON THE
RELIGION OF ANCIENT EGYPT. See Hibbert


Lectures, p. 14.


SADI. THE GULISTAN (ROSE GARDEN) OF
SHAIK SADI OF SHIRAZ. A new Edition of the
Persian Text, with a Vocabulary, by F. Johnson. Square royal
8vo, cloth. 155.


SAYCE..(Prof-A,,.H;).m, A ECTURESZON. Liters
LIGIONS OF ANCIENT BABYLONIA AND
SYRIA. See the Hibbert Lectures, p. 14.


SCHRADER (E.). THE CUNEIFORM INSCRiP-
TIONS AND THE OLD TESTAMENT. 2 vols.
12s. See Theological Translation Library, Old Series, p. 9.


SHIHAB AL DIN. FUTUH AL-HABASHAH; or,
The Conquest of Abyssinia. By Shinab al Din Ahmad
B. ’Abd al Kadir B. Salim B. ’Uthman. Edited, from an
Arabic MS., by S. Arthur Strong. Part I. 8vo, sewed.
3s. net.


SOCIN (Dr. A.) ARABIC GRAMMAR. Paradigms,
Literature, Exercises, and Glossary. 2nd Edition. ‘Translated
from the 3rd German Edition by the Rev. Prof. A. R. S.
Kennedy, D.D. Crown 8vo, cloth. New edition in pre-
paration.


— KEY FOR TRANSLATING THE GERMAN
EXERCISES IN ABOVE GRAMMAR. Sewed.
1s. 6d,


SORENSEN (S., Ph.D.), Compiled by. AN INDEX
TO THE NAMES IN THE MAHABHARATA.
With short explanations. Royal 4to, in twelve parts, which are
not sold separately, at 7s. 6d. per part net. Parts I. and 1V. now
ready.


STATUTES, THE, OF THE APOSTLES. The hitherto
unedited Ethiopic and Arabic Texts, with translations of
Ethiopic, Arabic, and Coptic Texts, by G. Horner, M.A.
Seetp: 25:


14 Henrietta Street, Covent Garden, London, W.C.


iets OF PUBLICATIONS. 37


TEXT AND TRANSLATION SOCIETY. Zstablished
Jor the purpose of editing and translating Oriental Texts chiefly
preserved in the British Museum.


Volumes already tssued—


THE SIXTH BOOK OF THE SELECT LETTERS
OF SEVERUS, PATRIARCH OF ANTIOCH,
in the Syriac Version of Athanasius of Nisibis.
Edited and translated by E. W. Brooks, M.A. Vol. I.
Text, Parts J. and II. Vol. II. Translation, Parts I. and
LIS Sas.net.


THE CANONS OF ATHANASIUS OF ALEX-
ANDRIA, in Arabic, Ethiopic, and Coptic. Edited
and Translated by Prof. W. Riedel (Griefswald) and W. E.
Crum, 21s, net.


A RABBINIC COMMENTARY ON THE BOOK
OF JOB, contained in a unique MS. at Cambridge.
Edited, with Translation and Commentary, by W. Aldis
Wright, LL.D. 21s. net.


BURPIES (Dr... Deo McC). MANUAL OF THE
CHALDEE LANGUAGE. Containing Grammar of the
Biblical Chaldee and of the Targums, and a Chrestomathy,
with a Vocabulary. Square 8vo, cloth. 7s.


VINAYA PITAKAM: One of the principal Buddhist
Holy Scriptures. Edited in Pali by Dr. H. Oldenberg. 5
vols. 8vo, cloth. Each ats.


WALLIS (H. W.). THE COSMOLOGY OF THE
RIGVEDA: An Essay. 8vo, cloth. 55.


14 Henrietta Street, Covent Garden, London, W.C.


38


WILLIAMS & NORGATE’S


IV. Modern Languages and Literature.


A complete list of Messrs. Williams & Norgate’s Educational Publi-


cations on Modern Languages may be had on application.


ARMY SERIES OF FRENCH AND GERMAN


NOVELS. Edited, with short Notes, by J. T. W.
Perowne, M.A.


This series is equally well adapted for general reading, and for those
preparing for the Army, Oxford and Cambridge Certificates, and other
Examinations—in fact, for all who wish to keep up or improve their
French and German. The notes are as concise as possible, with an
occasional etymology or illustration to assist the memory. The books
selected being by recent or living authors, are adapted for the study of
most modern French and German.


LE COUP DE PISTOLET, etc. Prosper Merimée.
2s. 6d.


‘‘A book more admirably suited to its purpose could not be desired.
The Editors deserve to be congratulated.” —azonal Observer.


VAILLANTE. Jacques Vincent. 2s. 6d.


‘*The books are well got up, and in Vazl/ante an excellent choice has
been made.” — Guardian.


AUF VERLORNEM POSTEN AND NAZZAR-
ENA DANTI. Johannes v. Dewall. 3s.


‘Well printed, well bound, and annotated just sufficiently to make the
reading of them sure as well as easy.” Educational Times.


CONTES MILITAIRES. A. Daudet. 25. 6d.


‘‘ These stories are mainly culled from a series called Contes du Lunde,
originally contributed by their author to the #zgavo, Written at fever heat
immediately after the great 1870 war, they show Daudet’s power in many
ways at its highest. . . . We therefore do more than recommend—we
urge all readers of French to get the stories in some form, and the present
one is both good and cheap.” — The Schoolmaster.


ERZAHLUNGEN. E. Hofer. 35.


‘The series has brought fascinating examples of fiction under the eyes of
English readers in a neat and handy form. Besides having the military
flavour, they are models of style.” —Scotsman.


BAYLDON (Rev. G.). ICELANDIC GRAMMAR. An


Elementary Grammar of the Old Norse or Icelandic Language.
8vo, cloth. 7s. 6d.


14 Henrietta Street, Covent Garden, London, W.C.


CATALOGUE OF PUBLICATIONS. 39


BOIELLE (JAS.). FRENCH COMPOSITION
THROUGH LORD MACAULAY’S ENGLISH.
Edited, with Notes, Hints, and Introduction, by the late James
Boielle, B.A. (Univ. Gall.), Officier d’Académie, Senior French
Master, Dulwich College, etc. etc. Crown 8vo, cloth. Vol. I.
Frederick the Great. 3s. Vol. II. Warren Hastings. 35.
Vol. III. Lord Clive. 35.


See Victor Hugo, “‘ Les Misérables” and “ Notre Dame.”


DELBOS (L.). NAUTICAL TERMS IN ENGLISH
AND FRENCH AND FRENCH AND ENGLISH.
With Notes and Tables. For the use of Naval Officers and
Naval Cadets. By Leon Delbos, M.A., of H.M.S. Britannia,
Dartmouth. 4th Edition, thoroughly revised and considerably
enlarged, with additional Plates. Crown 8vo,cloth. 75. 6d. net.


EUGENE’S STUDENT’S COMPARATIVE GRAM-
MAR OF THE FRENCH LANGUAGE, with an
Historical Sketch of the Formation of French. For
the use of Public Schools. With Exercises. By G. Eugene-
Fasnacht, late French Master, Westminster School. 23rd
Edition, thoroughly revised. Square crown 8vo, cloth, 5s. ; or
separately, Grammar, 3s.; Exercises, 25. 6d.


GOETHE (W. v.). ANNOTATED TEXTS. See Educa-


tional Catalogue.


HAGMANN (J. G., Ph.D.) REFORM IN PRIMARY
EDUCATION. Translated from Second German Edition
by R. H. Hoar, Ph.D., and Richmond Barker, M.A. Crown
8vo, cloth. 25. 6d. net.


HOGAN (E.). CATH RUIS NA RIG FOR BOINN.
With Preface, Translation, and Indices; also a Treatise on
Irish Neuter Substantives, and a Supplement to the Index
Vocabulorum of Zeuss’s “‘ Grammatica Celtica.” Todd Lecture
Series, Vol. IV. 8vo, sewed. 35. 6d.


— THE LATIN LIVES OF THE SAINTS AS
AIDS TOWARDS THE TRANSLATION OF
IRISH TEXTS AND THE PRODUCTION OF
AN IRISH DICTIONARY. By Edmund Hogan, S.]J.,
F.R.U.1, M.R.I.A., Royal Irish Academy’s Todd Professor of
Celtic Languages. Todd Lecture Series, Vol. V. 25. 6d.


— THE IRISH NENNIUS FROM L. NA HUIDRE,
AND HOMILIES AND LEGENDS FROM L.
BREAC. Alphabetical Index of Irish Neuter Substantives.
Todd Lecture Series, Vol. VI. 2s. 6d.


HUGO (VICTOR). LES MISERABLES: Les Prin-
cipaux Episodes. Edited, with Life and Notes, by the late J.
Boielle. 2 vols. 6th Edition. Crown 8vo, cloth. Each 3s. 62.


14 Henrietta Street, Covent Garden, London, W.C.


40 , WILLIAMS & NORGATE’S


HUGO (VICTOR) NOTRE DAME DE PARIS.
Adapted for the use of Schools and Colleges. By the late
J. Boielle. 2 vols. 2nd Edition. Crown 8vo, cloth. Each 3s.


LEABHAR BREAC. The “Speckled Book,” otherwise styled
“The Great Book of Dun Doighre”: a Collection of Pieces in
Irish and Latin, transcribed towards the close of the Fourteenth
Century. “The oldest and best Irish MS. relating to Church
History now preserved” (G. Petrie). Now first published,
from the original MS. in the Royal Irish Academy’s Library.
In imperial folio, on toned paper. In one vol., half-calf, Ga, 45.
(200 copies only printed.)


LEABHAR NA H-UIDHRI. A Collection of Pieces in Prose
and Verse, in the Irish Language, transcribed about a.D. 1100;
the oldest volume now known entirely in the Irish language,
and one of the chief surviving native literary monuments—not
ecclesiastical—of ancient Ireland ; now for the first time pub-
lished, from the original in the Library of the Royal Irish
Academy, with account of the Manuscript, description of its
contents. index, and facsimiles in colours. In folio, on toned
paper, half-calf. £3, 3s. (200 copies only printed.)


LILJA (The Lily). An Icelandic Religious Poem. By Eystein
Asgrimson. Edited, with Translation, Notes, and Glossary, by
E. Magnusson. Crown 8vo, cloth extra. tos. 6d.


LODGE Stow pie: SCHOOL TEACHING AND
SCHOOL REFORM. A Course of Four Lectures on
School Curricula and Methods, delivered to Secondary
Teachers and Teachers in Training at Birmingham during
February 1905. 35.

“The work of a sensible iconoclast, who does not pull down for the


sake of mere destruction, but is anxious to set up something more worthy in
place of the medizevalism he attacks,”’— Ozlook,


“Let me commend this wise volume not only to teachers but to all con-
cerned in national education, And especially to the politician. Halfan hour
with Sir Oliver Lodge would make him realise that there are problems on the
inner side of the school door not dreamt of in his philosophy—would make
him feel that the more he knows of these the better will he be able wisely to
handle those others about which he is glibly talking every day.”—Dr,
MACNAMARA in the Dazly Chronicle.


MAORI. NEW AND COMPLETE MANUAL OF
MAORI CONVERSATIONS. Containing Phrases and
Dialogues on a variety of Topics, together with a few general
rules of Grammar, and a comprehensive Vocabulary. 4s. net.
See also Williams.


MARKHAM (Sir CLEMENTS, K.C.B.). VOCABU-
LARIES OF THE GENERAL LANGUAGE OF
THE INCAS OF PERU. Crown 8vo, cloth. 75. 6d. net.


14 Henrietta Street, Covent Garden, London, W.C.


CATALOGUE OF PUBLICATIONS. 4i


NIBELUNGENLIED. “The Fall of the Nibelungens,” other-
wise “The Book of Kriemhild.” An English Translation by
W.N. Lettsom. 5th Edition. 8vo, cloth. 55.


O’GRADY (STANDISH H.). SILVA GADELICA (L-
XXXI.). A Collection of Tales in Irish, with Extracts illus-
trating Persons and Places. Edited from MSS. and translated.
2 vols. Royal 8vo, cloth. 425. Or separately, Vol. I., Irish
Text; and Vol. II., Translation and Notes. Each vol. 21s.


OORDT (J. F. VAN, B.A... CAPE DUTCH. Phrases
and Dialogues, with ‘l'ranslations, preceded by short Grammatical
Notes. Crown 8vo, cloth. 2s. 6d. net.


Beer ay Bf eaiee OLLORE (SKE )CH, OF
GERMAN LITERATURE, for Schools. By Vivian
Phillipps, B.A., Assistant Master at Fettes College, Edinburgh.
2nd Edition, revised. Pott 8vo, cloth. 1s.


ROGGE) (Ff -F.). TAN] INTRODUCTION TO OLD
FRENCH. History, Grammar, Chrestomathy, and Glossary.
2nd Edition. Crown 8vo, cloth. 6s.


——we Lito boo. bor tN, PRENCH HISTORY,
Pipe RALURE, AND” PHILCOLOGY. 4,.For, Gandi-
dates for the Scotch Leaving Certificate Examinations,
the various Universities Local Examinations, and the Army
Examinations. 4th Edition. Crown 8vo, cloth. 5s.


See also Voltaire.


ROSING (S.). ENGLISH-DANISH DICTIONARY.


New Edition. Large 8vo, sirongly bound, half-roan. 115, 6d.


SCHILEER  (F.. VON). ™ THE’ “BAELADS “AND
SHORTER POEMS. Translated into English Verse
by Gilbert Clark. Fcap. 8vo. cloth. 55.


— ANNOTATED TEXTS.  Sce Educational Catalogue.


SULLIVAN (W. K.). CELTIC STUDIES FROM
THE GERMAN OF EBEL. With an Introduction on
the Roots, Stems, and Derivatives, and on Case-endings of
Nouns in the Indo-European Languages. $vo, cloth. tos,


TODD LECTURE SERIES (Royal Irish Academy)—

Vol. I, Part 1. MESCA ULAD;; or, The Intoxications of the
Ultonians. Irish Text, with Translation and Notes, by W. M. Hennesy.
8vo, sewed. Is. 6d.

Vol. Il. LEABHAR BREAC, PASSIONS AND HOMILIES
FROM. Irish Text, Translation, and Glossary, with Lecture on Irish
Lexicography, by Dr. R. Atkinson. $8vo, cloth. Part 1, pages 1-34, out
of print, Part 2, pages 35-958, 6s.


14 Henrietta Street, Covent Garden, London, W.C.


42 WILLIAMS & NORGATE’S


TODD LECTURE SERIES—Continued.


Vol. II. THE CODEX PALATINO-VATICANUS. No. 830.


Texts, Translations, and Indices, by B. MacCarthy, D.D. 8vo, sewed.
2s. 6d.


Vol. IV. CATH RUIS NA RIG FOR BOINN. With Preface,
Translation, Indices, a Treatise on Irish Neuter Substantives, and a Supple-
ment to the Index Vocabulorum of Zeuss’s ‘‘Grammatica Celtica.” By E.
Hogan. 8vo, sewed. 35. 6d.


Vol. V. THE LATIN LIVES OF THE SAINTS AS AIDS
TOWARDS THE TRANSLATION OF IRISH TEXTS AND
THE PRODUCTION OF AN IRISH DICTIONARY. By
Edmund Hogan, S.J., F.R.U.I., M.R.I.A., Royal Irish Academy’s Todd
Professor of the Celtic Languages. 2s. 6d.


Vol. VI. THE IRISH NENNIUS FROM L. NA HUIDRE,
AND HOMILIES AND LEGENDS FROM L. BREAC. Alpha-
betical Index of Irish Neuter Substantives. By Edmund Hogan, S.J.,
F.R.U.L, M.R.LA., Royal Irish Academy’s Todd Professor of the Celtic


Languages. 25, 6d.

VELASQUEZ. LARGER SPANISH DICTIONARY.
Composed from the Dictionaries of the Spanish Academy,
Terreros and Salva. Spanish-English and English-Spanish.
1279 pp., triple columns. 2 vols, in 1. Imp. 8vo, cloth. 245.


VIGA GLUMS SAGA. Translated from the Icelandic, with


Notes and an Introduction, by Sir Edmund Head, Bart. [ cap.
8vo, cloth. 55.


WEISSE (T. H.). ELEMENTS OF GERMAN. Witha
Course of Exercises instructing in Simpler Composition. Crown
8vo, cloth. 35.


—- SYSTEMATIC CONVERSATIONAL EXER-
CISES FOR TRANSLATING INTO GERMAN,
adapted to his Grammar. New Edition. Crown 8vo,
cloths ri(Keyx gsanctrgas Gd.


— ASHORT GUIDE TO GERMAN IDIOMS: being
a Collection of the Idioms most in use. With Examina-
tion Papers. 3rd Edition. Cloth. 2s.


WERNER’S ELEMENTARY LESSONS IN CAPE
DUTCH (AFRIKANDER TAAL). By A. Werner and
G. Hunt. 16mo, cloth. ts. 6d.


““ We most cordially recommend this book to anyone going out to settle


in South Africa. . . . The dialogues and exercises are admirably planned.”
—keformer.

‘* To those outward bound such a book is sure to be useful.” —Practical
Teacher.


WILLIAMS (The. Right Rev. W.al.; DCljg A
DICTIONARY OF THE NEW ZEALAND
LANGUAGE. 4th Edition. Edited by the Right Rev.


Bishop W. L. Williams, with numerous additions and corrections.
Demy $vo, cloth. tr2s. 6d.


14 Henrietta Street, Covent Garden, London, W.C.


CATALOGUE OF PUBLICATIONS. 43


WILLIAMS (The Right Rev. W.L., D.C.L.). LESSONS
IN MAORI. 3rd Edition. Fcap. 8vo, cloth. 35.


YELLOW BOOK OF LECAN. A Collection of Pieces
(Prose and Verse) in the Irish Language, in part compiled at
the end of the Fourteenth Century; now for the first time
published from the original Manuscript in the Library of Trinity
College, Dublin, by the Royal Irish Academy. With Introduc-
tion, Analysis of Contents, and Index, by Robert Atkinson.
30 and 468 pp. (Royal Irish Academy’s Irish facsimiles.)
Large post folio, 1896, half-roan, Roxburghe, cloth sides.
Bt 45:

ZOEGA (G. T.). ENGLISH-ICELANDIC DICTION-
ARY. 8vo, cloth. 6s. net.


ZOMPOLIDES (Dr. D.). A COURSE OF MODERN
GREEK; or, The Greek Language of the Present
Day. I. The Elementary Method. Crown 8vo, cloth. 5s.


14 Henrietta Street, Covent Garden, London, W.C.


44 WILLIAMS & NORGATE’S


V. Science.


MEDICINE—CHEMISTRY—BOTANY—ZOOLOGY—
MATHEMATICS.


ANNETT(H.E.,M.D.,D.P.H.), J. EVERETT DUTTON,
M.B., B.Ch., and ‘J. H.VELLIOT TENDS Toronto.
REPORT OF THE MALARIA EXPEDITION TO
NIGERIA (1900). Part I. Malarial Fever, ete. (Liverpool
School of Tropical Medicine, Memoir III.). 10s. 6d. Part II.
Filariasis (Liverpool School of Tropical Medicine, Memoir IV.).
Out of print separately, but ts contained in the Thompson- Yates
Laboratory Reports, Vol. LV., Part I. Price 20s.


BASTIAN (H. CHARLTON, M.A, M.D., F.R.S.).
STUDIES IN HETEROGENESIS. With 825 Illus-
trations from Photomicrographs. Royal 8vo, cloth. 315. 6d.


BENEDICT (F.E., Ph.D.). ELEMENTARY ORGANIC
ANALYSIS. Small 8vo. Pages vi+8z2. 15 Illustrations.
4s. 6d. net.


BERGEY (D. G.).) HANDBOOK OF PRACTICAL
HYGIENE. Small 8vo. Pagesv+164. 6s. 6d. net.


BILTZ (HENRY). THE PRACTICAL METHODS
OF DETERMINING MOLECULAR WEIGHTS.
Translated by Jones. Small 8vo. Pages vili+245. 44 Illus-
trations. 85. 6d. net.


BOLTON. HISTORY OF THE THERMOMETER.


12mo. 96 pages. 6 Illustrations. 45. 6d. net.


BOYCE .(RUBERT. MBs ER Sap ed ee le
MALARIA MEASURES AT ISMAILIA. (Liverpool
School of Tropical Medicine, Memoir XII.) Price 1s.


— YELLOW FEVER PROPHYLAXIS IN NEW
ORLEANS, 1905. (Liverpool School of Tropical Medicine,
Memoir XIX.) 55. net.


BOYCE (RUBERT), A. EVANS, M.R.C.S., and H. H.
CLARKE M,A./@B:G: REPORTS" ON® THE
SANITATION AND ANTI-MALARIAL MEAS-
URES IN “PRACTICE "AT: BATHURST, CON-
AKRY, AND FREETOWN (1905). (Liverpool School
of Tropical Medicine, Memoir XIV.) With 8 plates. 55.


BRUCE (ALEX, M.A., M.D., F.R.C.P.E.; F.R,S.E.),
A TOPOGRAPHICAL ATLAS OF THE SPINAL
CORD. Fcap. folio, half-leather. £2, 25. net.


14 Henrietta Street, Covent Garden, London, W.C.


CATALOGUE OF PUBLICATIONS. 45


CREIGHTON (CHAS., M.D.) CANCER AND OTHER
TUMOURS OF THE BREAST. Researches showing
their true form and cause. With 24 Lithographic Plates con-
taining 138 figures from the Author’s drawings. Royal 8vo,
cloth, 125. 6d. net.


—- CONTRIBUTIONS TO THE PHYSIOLOGICAL
THEORY OF TUBERCULOSIS. By Charles
Creighton, M.D., sometime Demonstrator of Anatomy, Cam-
bridge Medical School, author of “Bovine Tuberculosis in
Man,” etc. Royal 8vo, cloth. 12s. 6d. net.


CUNNINGHAM MEMOIRS—


1. CUBIC TRANSFORMATIONS. By John Casey, LL.D.
4to, sewed. 25. 6d.


2, ON THE LUMBAR CURVE IN MAN AND THE
Cre By D. J. Cunningham, M.D. 13 Plates. 4to, sewed. 55.


NEW RESEARCHES ON SUN-HEAT, TERRES-
TRIAL RADIATION, Etc. By Rev. Samuel Haughton, M.A., M.D.
9 Plates. 4to. sewed. Is. 6d.


4. DYNAMICS AND MODERN GEOMETRY. A New Chapter
in the Theory of Screws. By Sir Robert S. Ball, LL.D. 4to, sewed. 2s.


5. THE RED STARS. Observations and Catalogue. New
Edition. Edited by Rev. T Espin, M.A. 4to, sewed. 35. 6d.


6. ON THE MORPHOLOGY OF THE DUCK TRIBE
AND THE AUK TRIBE. By W. K. Parker, F.R.S. 9 Plates. 4to,
sewed. 35. 6d.


7. CONTRIBUTION TO THE SURFACE ANATOMY OF
THE CEREBRAL HEMISPHERES. By D. J. Cunningham,
M.D. With a Chapter upon Cranio-Cerebral Topography by Victor Horsley,
M.B., F.R.S. 4to, sewed. 8s. 6a.

8 ON THE FLINDERS PETRIE PAPYRI. Part I. Out
of print.

9. ON THE FLINDERS PETRIE PAPYRI. Part II. With
18 Autotypes. 4to, sewed. 425. net. Appendix to8andg. 5s. net.


10. THE DECORATIVE ART OF BRITISH NEW
GUINEA. A Study in Papuan Ethnography. By Alfred C. Haddon, M.A.
With 12 Plates, and numerous cther Illustrations. q4to, sewed. 14s. net.


11. ON THE FLINDERS PETRIE PAPYRI. With Tran-
scriptions, Commentaries, and Index. By John P. Mahaffy, D.D., and
Prof, J. Gilbert Smyly. With 7 Autotypes 4to, sewed. 42s. net.


DURHAM (H. E., M.A., M.B., F.R.C.S.), and the late
WALTER MYERS, M.B. REPORT OF THE
YELLOW FEVER EXPEDITION TO PARA
(1900). (Liverpool School of Tropical Medicine, Memoir VII.)
Ato. 7s. 6d.


DU dCONG (ack) NVLB.,. ChB) AeREPORT OF THE
MALARIA EXPEDITION TO THE GAMBIA.
(Liverpool School of Tropical Medicine, Memoir X.)  4to.
10s, 6d. net.


14 Henrietta Street, Covent Garden, London, W.C.


46 WILLIAMS & NORGATE’S


DUTTON, J. E., M.B., Ch.B., and JOHN L. TODD,
B.A., M.D., C.M., M‘Gill. FIRST REPORT OF
THE TRYPANOSOMIASIS EXPEDITION TO
SENEGAMBIA (1902). (Liverpool School of Tropical
Medicine, Memoir XI.) 4to. ros. 6d. net.


—_ _— RAPPORT SUR L’EXPEDITION AU CONGO
(1903-5.) Price 5s.


———— THE NATURE OF HUMAN TICK-FEVER
IN THE EASTERN PART OF THE CONGO
FREE STATE. (Liverpoo! School of Tropical Medicine,
Memoir XVII.) .4to. With Map, 4 Plates, and 9 Tem-
perature Charts. Price 7s. 6d. net.


ENGELHARDT (V.).... THE .ELECTROLYSIS OF
WATER. 8vo. Pages.x+140. 90 Illustrations. 5s. net.


GILES (Lieut.-Col.).) GENERAL SANITATION AND
ANTI-MALARIAL MEASURES IN SEKONDI,
THE GOLDFIELDS, AND KUMASSI, AND A
COMPARISON BETWEEN THE CONDITIONS
OF EUROPEAN RESIDENCE IN INDIA.  (Liver-
pool School of Tropical Medicine, Memoir XV.) 4to. 75. 6d.
net.


HANTZSCH (A.). ELEMENTS OF STEREOCHEM-
ISTRY. Translated by Wolf. 12mo. Pages viii+206. 26
Figures. 6s. 6d. net.


HARDY. ELEMENTS OF ANALYTICAL GEO-
METRY. 8vo. Pages iv+365. 163 Figures. 85. 6d. net.


— INFINITESIMALS AND LIMITS. Sm. 12mo, paper.


22 pp. 6 Figures. 15. net.


HARNACK (AXEL). INTRODUCTION TO THE
ELEMENTS OF THE DIFFERENTIAL AND
INTEGRAL CALCULUS. From the German. Royal
8vo, cloth. tos. 6d.


HART (EDWARD, Ph.D.). CHEMISTRY FOR BE-
GINNERS. Small 12mo.
Vol. I. Inorganic. Pages viii.+188. 55 Illustrations
and 2 Plates. Fourth Edition. 4s. 6d. net.
Vol. Il. Organic. Pages iv+g98. 11 Illustrations,
2s;met.
Vol. III. Experiments. Separately. 60 pages. rs. net.


— SECOND YEAR CHEMISTRY. Small 12mo. 165


pages. 31 Illustrations. 5s. net.


14 Henrietta Street, Covent Garden, London, W.C.


CATALOGUE OF PUBLICATIONS. 47


Demonstrator of Chemistry in the Yorkshire College, Leeds.
Royal 8vo, cloth. tos. 6d.


HOWE (j. L.). INORGANIC CHEMISTRY FOR
SCHOOLS AND COLLEGES. By Jas. Lewis Howe,
Washington and Lee University. Being a Second Edition of
‘Inorganic Chemistry according to the Periodic Law.” By
F. P. Venable and J. L. Howe. Demy 8vo, cloth. 12s. 6d. net.


JOHNSTONE (J.). BRITISH FISHERIES: Their
Administration and their Problems. A Short Account
of the Origin and Growth of British Sea Fishery Authorities and
Regulations. ros. 6d. net.


JONES (J. T. SHARE-). SURGICAL ANATOMY OF
THE HORSE. To be completed in 4 Parts. With
above roo Illustrations, a number being in colour. Part I.
Head and Neck; Part II. Fore Limb; Part III. Hind Limb.
Price per part, 15s. net, sewed ; cloth, 16s. 6d. net.


—— LIFE-SIZE MODELS, Illustrating the Superficial
Anatomy of the Limbs of the Horse. Price per set of four
models, £21; or separately—Fore Limb, Inner and Outer
Aspects, £6, 16s. 6d. each; Hind Limb, Inner and Outer
Aspects, £6, 6s. each.


JONES. THE FREEZING POINT, BOILING POINT,
AND CONDUCTIVITY METHODS. t2mo. Pages
viit+64. 14 Illustrations. 35. net.


JOURNAL OF THE LINNEAN SOCIETY. Botany.
At various prices. Index to Journal (Botany), 20s. Zoology.
At various prices. General Index to the first 20 vols. of the Journal
(Zoology) and the Zoological portion of the Proceedings, 20s.


JOURNAL OF THE ROYAL MICROSCOPICAL
SOCIETY, containing its Transactions and Proceedings,
with other Microscopical Information. Bi-monthly. Previous to
1893 at various prices ; after that date bi-monthly, each 6s. net.


JOURNAL OF THE QUEKETT MICROSCOPICAL
CLUB. Nos. 1-26, 1s. net.; Nos. 27-31, 2s. 6d. net. 1893,
No. 32, and following Nos., half-yearly, 35. 6d. net.


LANDOLT (Dr. HANS). THE OPTICAL ROTATING
POWER OF ORGANIC SUBSTANCES AND ITS
PRACTICAL APPLICATIONS. 8vo. Pp. xxi+751.
83 Illustrations. 315. 6d. net.


14 Henrietta Street, Covent Garden, London, W.C.


48 WILLIAMS & NORGATE’S


LANGENBECK. THE CHEMISTRY OF POTTERY.
Small 12mo. Pages viiit+197. Illustrated. Out of print.


8s. 6d. net.


LEAVENWORTH (Prof. W. S., M.Sc.). INORGANIC
QUALITATIVE CHEMICAL ANALYSIS FOR
ADVANCED SCHOOLS AND COLLEGES.  8vo.
Pages vit154. 65. 6d. net.


LEBLANC (Dr. MAX). THE PRODUCTION OF
CHROMIUM AND ITS COMPOUNDS BY THE
AID OF THE ELECTRIC CURRENT. §8vo. 122


pages. 55. net.


LIVERPOOL MARINE BIOLOGY COMMITTEE.
MEMOIRS ON TYPICAL BRITISH MARINE
PLANTS AND ANIMALS. Edited by W. A. Herdman,
D.Sc., F.R.S. All demy 8vo, stiff boards.

1. ASCIDIA. By W. A. Herdman. With 5 Plates. Price 2s. net.

2, CARDIUM. By J. Johnstone, Fisheries Assistant, University
College, Liverpool. With 7 Plates. Price 25, 6d. net.

3. ECHINUS. By Herbert Clifton Chadwick, Curator of the Pert
Erin Biological Station. With 5 Plates. Price 2s. net.

4. CODIUM. ByR. J. Harvey Gibson, M.A., F.L.S., Professor of
Botany in University College, Liverpool, and Helen P. Auld, B.Sc. With
3 Plates. Price 15. 6. net.

5. ALCYONIUM. By Sydney J. Hickson, M.A., D.Sc., F.R.S.,
Beyer Professor of Zoology in Owens College, Manchester. With 3 Plates.
Price Is. 6d. net.

6. LEPEOPHTHEIRUS AND LERNEA. By Andrew Scott,
Resident Fisheries Assistant at the Peel Hatchery. With 5 Plates. 2s. net.

7, LINEUS. ByR.C. Punnett, B.A. With 4 Plates. 25. net.

8 PLEURONECTES. By Frank J. Cole, Jesus C: llege, Oxford,
Lecturer in the Victoria University, Demonstrator of Zoology, University,
Liverpool, and James Johnstone, B.Sc, Lond., Fisheries Assistant, University,
Liverpool. With 11 Plates. 7s, net.

9. CHONDRUS. By Otto V. Darbishize, Owens College, Manchester.
With 7 Plates. 25. 6d. net.

10. PATELLA (the Common Limpet). By J. R. Ainsworth
Davis, M.A., Professor of Zoology in the University College of Wales,
Aberystwyth, and H. J. Fleure, 8.Sc., Fellow of the University of Wales.
With 4 Plates. 25. 6d net.

11. ARENICOLA (the Lug-Worm). By J. H. Ashworth, D.Sc.,
Lecturer in Invertebrate Zovlogy in the University of Edinburgh. With
8 Plates. 4s. 62. net.

12, GAMMARUS. _ By Margaret Cussans, B.Sc., Zoological De-
partment, University of Liverpool. With 4 plates. 2s. net.

13. ANURIDA. By A. D. Imms, B.Sc. (lond.) With 7 Plates. 4s, net.


14. LIGIA. By C. Gordon Hewitt, B.Sc., Demonstrator in Zoology
University of Manchester. With 4 Plates. 2s, net. ‘


15. ANTEDON. By Herbert Clifton Chadwick. With 7 Plates,
2s. 6d. net.


16. CANCER. By Joseph Pearson, M.Sc.. Demonstrator in Zoology
University of Liverpool. With 13 Plates. 65, 6a. net.


14 Henrietta Street, Covent Garden, London, W.C.


CATALOGUE OF PUBLICATIONS. 49


LONG (J.H.). ATEXT-BOOK OF URINE ANALYSIS.
Small 8vo, Pages v+249. 31 Illustrations. 6s. 6d. net.


MASON (W. P., Prof. of Chem.). NOTES ON QUALITA-
TIVE ANALYSIS. Sm. 12mo. 56 pp. 35. 6d. net.


MEADE (RICHARD K., B.Sc.). CHEMIST’S POCKET
MANUAL. 16mo. Leather. Pocket Edition. Pages
vu+204. Out of print. 85. 6d. net.


— PORTLAND CEMENT: ITS COMPOSITION,
RAW MATERIALS, MANUFACTURE, TEST-
ING, AND ANALYSIS. Second Edition. With 100


Illustrations. 145. 6d. net.


MEMOIRS OF THE LIVERPOOL SCHOOL OF
TROPICAL MEDICINE—


I. ROSS (R.). Malarial Fever: Its Cause, Prevention, and
Treatment. 8vo. 2s. 6d,

IR ROSS?(R) 2H: ESSANNEDT, Sand- Ese BE VAUSTEN.
Report of the Malaria Expedition to Sierra Leone (1899). 4to.
PIG)

TANNED in (HE.))|oE. DUTTON, and J. H: EELIOT F.
Report of the Malaria Expedition to Nigeria (1900). I. Malarial
Fever. 4to. 10s. 6d.

V. ROSS (R.) and M. L. TAYLOR. Progress Reports of
the Campaign against Mosquitoes in Sierra Leone. Part I. 1901.
With a Letter from Dr. Daniels regarding the results arrived at to date.
SvOwme Isa peart DL V1902;e98vo. uits:


VI. [Wot tssued yet. ]


VII. DURHAM (H. £.) and W. MYERS. Report of the
Yellow Fever Expedition to Para (1900). 4to. 7s. 6d.

VIII TAYLOR (M. L.). Report on the Sanitary Conditions
of Cape Coast Town. 8vo. Is.
x IX. ROSS (R.). Report on Malaria at Ismailia and Suez.
vo. ES:

X. DUTTON (J. E.). Report of the Malaria Expedition to the
Gambia. 4to. 10s. 6d. net.

XI. DUTTON (J. E.) and J. L. TODD. First Report of the
Trypanosomiasis Expedition to Senegambia (1902). 4to. 10s. 6d.
net. [Also contained in Thompson-Yates Laboratories Reports, V. 2.]


XII. BOYCE (R.). The Anti-Malaria Measures at Ismailia.
8vo. IS.

XIII. DUTTON (J. E.) and J. L. TODD. Reports of the
Trypanosomiasis Expedition to the Congo (1903-1904). With a
Comparison of the Trypanosomes of Uganda and the Congo Free State by
H. W. Thomas, M.D. M‘Gill, and Stanley F. Linton, B.Sc., M.B.,
Liverpool, and a Note on Tsetse Flies by E, E. Austen, Zoological Depart-
ment, British Museum. Paper covers. 155. net.


XIV. BOYCE (RUBERT, M.B., F.R.S.) ARTHUR EVANS,
M.R.C.S., H. HERBERT CLARKE, M.A., B.C., Cantab.
Report on the Sanitation and Anti-Malarial Measures in practice
in Bathurst, Conakry, and Freetown (1905). 4to. 8 Plates. Price 5s.


14 Henrietta Street, Covent Garden, London, W.C.
4


50 WILLIAMS & NORGATE’S


LIVERPOOL SCHOOL OF TROPICAL MEDICINE—Continued.


XV. GILES (Lieut.-Colonel). General Sanitation and Anti-
Malarial Measures in Sekondi, the Goldfields, and Kumassi, and
a Comparison between the Conditions of European Residence in
India. 4to. Price 7s. 6d. net.


XVI. THOMAS (H. WOLFERSTAN, M.D., M‘Gill) and
ANTON BREINL, M.U.Dr., Prag. Trypanosomes, Trypano-
somiasis, and Sleeping Sickness: Pathology and Treatment. 4to.
6 Plates (5 coloured) and 7 Charts. Price 125, 6d. net.

XVII. DUTTON (J. EVERETT, M.B.) and JOHN L. TODD,
B.A., M.D., M‘Gill. The Nature of Human Tick-Fever in the
Eastern Part of the Congo Free State. 4to. With Map, 4 Plates, and
9 Temperature Charts. Price 7s, 6d, net.

XVIII. 1. DUTTON (J. EVERETT, M.B.) and JOHN L.
TODD, B.A., M.D., C.M., M‘Gill. Gland Palpation in Human
Trypanosomiasis ; and 2. The Distribution and Spread of ‘‘ Sleeping
Sickness” in the Congo Free State. With 4 Maps (2 colours) and
4 Plates. 3. NEWSTEAD (R., A.L.S., F.E.S.) and JOHN L.
TODD, B.A., M.D., C.M., M‘Gill. A New Dermanyssid Acarid.
With 1 Plate. 4. NEWSTEAD (R., A.L.S., F.E.S.). Another New
Dermanyssid Acarid. With 1 Plate. 5. STEPHENS (J. W. W.,
M.D., Cantab.) and R. NEWSTEAD, A.L.S., F.E.S. Anatomy
of the Proboscis of Biting Flies. With 6 Plates. Imp. 8vo. Price
7s. Od, net.


XIX. BOYCE (RUBERT, M.B., F.R.S.). Yellow Fever Pro-
phylaxis in New Orleans in 1905. Imp. 8vo. Maps and 6 Plates.
Price75s.,net.


XX. 1. DUTTON (J. EVERETT, M.B.),and JOHN L. TODD,
B.A., M.D. , La Prophylaxie de la Malaria dans les Principaux
Postes de |’/Etat Indépendant du Congo. With 4 Maps and 4 Lllus-
trations. Imp. 8vo. 2. BREINL (ANTON, M.D.) and A.
KINGHORN, M.B. The Animal Reactions of the Spirocheta of
African ‘‘ Tick-Fever.” Imp. 8vo. 3. BREINL (ANTON, M.D.).
The Specific Nature of the Spirochzta of African ‘‘ Tick-Fever.”
Imp. 8vo. Price 5s.


XXI. RUNCORN RESEARCH LABORATORIES. An Ex-
perimental Study of the Parasite of the African ‘‘ Tick-Fever.”
Note on a New Spirocheta found in a Mouse. Comparison between the
Trypanosomes, and other Articles. qto. 75. 6d. net.


MOISSON (HENRI). THE ELECTRIC FURNACE.


8vo. Pages x+305. 41 Illustrations. ros. 6d. net.


NISSENSON. THE ARRANGEMENTS OF ELEC-
TROLYTIC LABORATORIES. 8vo. 81 pages. 52


Illustrations. 5s. net.


NOTES ON SANITARY CONDITIONS OBTAINING
IN PARA. By the Members of the Yellow Fever Expedi-
tion, (Published by the Liverpool School of Tropical
Medicine.) rs.


NOYES (ARTHUR A, Ph.D.). ORGANIC CHEM-
ISTRY FOR THE LABORATORY. Small 12mo.
Pages xil+257. 22 Illustrations. 6s. 6d. net.


14 Henrietta Street, Covent Garden, London, W.C.


CATALOGUE OF PU seis anata 51


NOVES and MULLIKEN (SAMUEL P., Ph.D.). LA-
BORATORY EXPERIMENTS ON CLASS REAC-
TIONS AND IDENTIFICATION OF ORGANIC
SUBSTANCES. 8vo. 81 pp. 2s. net.


OTTO (RUDOLF). NATURALISM AND RELIGION.
See Crown Theological Library, p. 11.


PALLIN (Capt. W. A., F.R.C.V.S.). A TREATISE ON
EPIZOOTIC LYMPHANGITIS. Second Edition.
Demy 8vo, cloth. 3s. 6d. net. Nearly too pages, 17 full-page
Plates.


PATERSON (ANDREW MELVILLE, M.D., Derby
Professor of Anatomy in the University of Liverpool,
Hunterian Professor at the Royal College of Surgeons
of England) THE HUMAN STERNUM. Three
Lectures delivered at the Royal College of Surgeons, England,
November 1903. With 10 Plates. Crown 4to. tos. net.


PFANHAUSER (Dr. W.). PRODUCTION OF ME-
TALlLiC OBJECTS: ERECTEROEYTICALLY.. 5..°


Net:


PHILLIPS (FRANCIS C.). METHODS FOR THE
ANALYSIS OF ORES, PIG IRON AND STEEL.
Second Edition. 8vo. Pages vilit170. 3 Illustrations.
4s. 6d. net.


PIDDINGTON (HENRY). THE SAILORS’ HORN-
BOOK FOR THE LAW OF STORMS. Being a
Practical Exposition of the Theory of the Law of Storms, and
its uses to Mariners of all Classes in all Parts of the World.
Shown by transparent Storm Cards and useful Lessons. 7th
Edition. Demy 8vo, cloth. tos. 6d,


PRAY (Dr.). ASTIGMATIC LETTERS. Printed on


Miliboard, size 22 by 14 inches. Is.


PROCEEDINGS OF THE OPTICAL CONVENTION,
No. 1, 1905. Crown 4to, cloth. 10s, net.


RANSOM (W. H., M.D., F.R.S., F.R.C.P.). THE
INFLAMMATION IDEA IN GENERAL PATH-
OLOGY. Demy 8vo, cloth. 7s. 6d.


RAY (Prof. P. C.). A HISTORY OF HINDU CHEM-
ISTRY FROM THE EARLIEST TIMES TO THE
MIDDLE OF THE SIXTEENTH CENTURY
A.D. With Sanskrit Texts, Variants, Translation, and Illustra-
tions. Vol. I. Second Edition, Revised and Enlarged.
Crown 8vo. tos. 6d. net.


14 WeieArieecs Street, eovene Gatton Leiden, W. Cc.


52 WILLIAMS & NORGATE’S


REPORTS OF THE THOMPSON-YATES AND
JOHNSTON LABORATORIES. Demy 4to, with
Illustrations. Vol. I. 1898-9. 10s. 6d Vol. II. 1898-9.
acs. Vol. III. Part 1. 1900. 75. 6d. Vol. III. Part 2. 1gor.
125. 6¢,. Volo JV, Part 1.) 1001." ” 20s. NV Ol LY arte
1902. 21s. New Series. Vol. V. Part 1. 1903. Limp, 20s. ;
cloth, 215. Vol. V.: Part 2.'°"roozsealimp,* 12s. 6d.;7 cloth,
13s. 6d. Vol. VI. Part 1. 1905. Limp, 12s. 6d.; cloth,
13s. 6d. Vol. VI., Part 2, 15s. Vol. VII., Part 1, 105. 6d.


ROSS (RONALD, C.B., F.R.S., etc., Major I.M.S.
(retired)). MALARIAL FEVER: Its Cause, Pre-
vention, and Treatment. (Liverpool School of Tropical
Medicine, Memoir I.) 8vo, cloth. 2s. 6d.


OSS CB OANNET TE MDs D-Pittfvand ESECAUSPEN,
REPORT OF THE MALARIA EXPEDITION
TO SIERRA LEONE (1899). (Liverpool School of
Tropical Medicine, Memoir II.) 4to. aus.


— FIRST PROGRESS REPORT OF THE CAM-
PAIGN AGAINST MOSQUITOES IN SIERRA
LEONE (1901). With a letter from Dr. Daniels regarding
the results arrived at to date. (Liverpool School of Tropical
Medicine, Memoir V., 1.) 15.


— SECOND PROGRESS REPORT OF THE CAM-
PAIGN AGAINST MOSQUITOES IN SIERRA
LEONE (1902). By M. Logan Taylor, M.B. (Liverpool
School of Tropical Medicine, Memoir V., 2.) 1s.


— REPORT ON MALARIA AT ISMAILIA AND
SUEZ. (Liverpool School of Tropical Medicine, Memoir
IX:;)reaas.


SANG’S LOGARITHMS. A new Table of Seven-place


Logarithms of all Numbers continuously up to 200,000.
2nd Edition. Royal 8vo, cloth. ats.


SCHREBER (D. G. M.). MEDICAL INDOOR GYM-
NASTICS, or a System of Hygienic Exercises for Home
Use, to be practised anywhere, without apparatus or assistance,
by young and old of either sex, for the preservation of health
and general activity. Revised and Supplemented by Rudolf
Graefe, M.D. With a large plate and 45 illustrations in the
text. Royal 8vo, cloth. 35. net.

‘“‘The exercises described, when efficiently used, will undoubtedly be of
value in strengthening and developing the muscular system. The descrip-


tions of the exercises and the figures in the text are excellent.”——Physician
and Surgeon.


_‘‘ Well worthy of the attention of those who go in for regular physical
training as a means for the preservation of health.”——Scotsman.
‘* A very sensible little treatise.”"—Glasgow Herald.


14 Henrietta Street, Covent Garden, London, W.C.


CATALOGUE OF PUBLICATIONS. 53


SCHROEN (L.). SEVEN-FIGURE LOGARITHMS
OF NUMBERS from 1 to 108,000, and of Sines,
Cosines, Tangents, Cotangents to every 10 Seconds
of the Quadrant. With a Table of Proportional Parts.
By Dr. Ludwig Schroen, Director of the Observatory of
Jena, etc., etc. 5th Edition, corrected and _ stereotyped.
With a description of the Tables by A. De Morgan, Professor
of Mathematics in University College, London. Imp. 8vo,
cloth, printed on light green paper. gs.


SEGER. COLLECTED WRITINGS OF HERRMANN
AUGUST SEGER. (Papers on Manufacture of Pottery.) 2
vols. Large 8vo. £3, 3s. net per set; per volume, 315. 6d. net.


SNELLEN’S OPHTHALMIC TEST TYPES. Best Types
for the Determination of the Acuteness of Vision. 14th Edition,
considerably augmented and improved. 8vo, sewed. 4s.
Single Sheets: ETB, MOV, BDE, WwW, and Large
Clock Sheet. 8d. each. Small Clock Sheet and RT VZ.
4d. each,


SNYDER (HARRY, B.Sc.) SOILS AND FERTIL-
ISERS. Second Edition. 8vo. Pages x+294. 1 Plate,
40 Illustrations. 6s. 6d. net.


SONNTAG (C. O.). A POCKET FLORA OF EDIN-
BURGH AND THE SURROUNDING DISTRICT.
A Collection and full Description of all Phanerogamic and the
principal Cryptogamic Plants, classified after the Natural
System, with an artificial Key and a Glossary of Botanical
Terms. By the late C. O. Sonntag, the Royal High School,
Edinburgh ; formerly Secretary of the Microscopical Society of
Glasgow, etc. Fcap. 8vo, limp cloth, round corners, with
Map of the Environs of Edinburgh. 35. 6d. net.


STEPHENS (J. W. W., M.D. Cantab., D.P.H.) and
Sek CHRIS TOrrle ro, M.b.. Vict,’ 1:M.S.
PRACTICAL STUDY OF MALARIA AND
OTHER BLOOD PARASITES. (Published for the
Liverpool School of Tropical Medicine). 8vo, cloth. Third
Edition. 125. 6d. net.

STILEMAN (THOS. B.,.,M.Sc,,...Ph.D.). ..RNGIN-
EERING CHEMISTRY. Third Edition. 8vo. Pages
x+597. 139 Illustrations. 19s. net.


TAYLOR (M. LOGAN, M.B., Ch.B.). REPORT ON
THE SANITARY CONDITIONS OF CAPE
COAST TOWN. (Liverpool School of Tropical Medicine,
Memoir VIII.) 8vo. 1s.


— REPORT OF THE CAMPAIGN AGAINST THE
MOSQUITOES IN SIERRA LEONE. See Ross
and Taylor.


14 Henrietta Street, Covent Garden, London, W.C.


54 WILLIAMS & NORGATE’S


THOMAS (H. WOLFERSTAN, M.D., M/‘Gill) saa
ANTON BREINL, M.U. Dr., Prag. TRYPANO-
SOMES, TRYPANOSOMIASIS, AND SLEEPING
SICKNESS: PATHOLOGY AND TREATMENT.
Quarto. (Liverpool School of ‘| ropical Medicine, Memoir XVI.)
6 Plates (5 coloured) and 7 Charts. Price 7s. 6d. net.


TOWER (O. F., Ph.D.). THE CONDUCTIVITY OF
LIQUIDS. 8vo. Pagesiv+i1go. 20 Illustrations. 65. 6d. net.


TRANSACTIONS OF THE ROYAL SOCIETY OF
EDINBURGH. Vol. XXXVIIL Part 1, 40s. Part 2, 255.
Part; 3,..30sloPart 4jrzsncOdem Nok XXX Xoone Rartaiy 206:
Parti2,: LOShbeb Akt BAS Sen lal td, OSeemmeOl eh ie SA Ee wlan Bee
Complete parts only—we do not supply separate papers.
General Index to First Thirty-four Volumes (1783-1888), with
History of the Institution. 4to, cloth. ars.


TRANSACTIONS. OBcel Hey ROYAL sbRISH
ACADEMY, DUBLIN. Vols. I.-XX. 4to. £22, 5s. 6d.
Vols. XXI.-XXXI._ Various prices.


TRANSACTIONS OF THE ROYAL DUBLIN
SOCIETY. Various volumes at various prices.


VEGA. LOGARITHMIC TABLES OF NUMBERS
AND TRIGONOMETRICAL FUNCTIONS. Trans-
lated from the goth, or Dr. Bremikers Edition, thoroughly
revised and enlarged, by W. L. F. Fischer, M.A., ERS, Fellow
of Clare College, Cambridge ; Professor of Natural Philosophy
in the University of St. Andrews. 75th Stereotyped Edition.
Royal 8vo, cloth. 7s.


VENABLE (T. C., Ph.D.) THE DEVELOPMENT
OF THE PERIODIC LAW. Small 12mo. Pages
vilit+ 321. Illustrated. 10s. 6d. net.


— THE STUDY OF THE ATOM.’ izmo. Pages
vit290. 8s. 6d. net.


— and HOWE. INORGANIC CHEMISTRY AC-
CORDING TO THE PERIODIC LAW. Second
Edition. See under Howe, p. 47.


WILEY (HARVEY W., A.M., Ph.D.). PRINCIPLES
AND PRACTICE OF AGRICULTURAL CHEMI-
CAL ANALYSIS. 3 vols. 8vo. New Edition in prepara-
tion. Vol. I. Soils; Ready. 185.net. Vol. II. Fertilizers.


WYSOR (HENRY, B.S., Assistant Professor of Ana-
lytical Chemistry, Lafayette College). METAL-
LURGY. A Condensed Treatise. Demy 8vo, cloth,
12s, 6d. net.


14 Henrietta Street, Covent Garden, London, W.C.


CATALOGUE OF PUBLICATIONS. 55


VI. Miscellaneous.


ANTHROPOLOGY—SOCIOLOGY—M YTHOLOGY—
BIBLIOGRAPHY, BIOGRAPHY, ETC.


PAVERS Ye) Mord! DiC hess <e)" (Sir? John
Lubbock). PREHISTORIC TIMES, as Illustrated
by Ancient Remains and the Manners and Customs
of Modern Savages. 6th Edition, revised, with 239 Illus-
trations, a large number of which are specially prepared for this
Edition. Demy 8vo, cloth, gilt tops. 18s.

““To anyone who wishes to obtain a succinct conspectus of the present


state of knowledge on the subject of early man, we recommend the perusal
of this comprehensive volume.” —/our, Brit. Archaolog. ASSOC.


‘*The fact that this well-known standard work has reached a sixth
edition is evidence of its value to ethnologists and archzologists. The many
and beautiful illustrations are most helpful in better understanding the plain
but accurate letterpress. Lord Avebury is to be congratulated on the new
edition, which is sure to further popularise a fascinating subject for investiga-
tion by cultured people.” —Sczence Gosszp.


‘It is necessary to compare the present volume with the fifth edition in
order to see how much it has been improved. The illustrations to this sixth
edition are immeasurably superior to the fifth.”—Anowledge.


BLACKBURN (HELEN). WOMEN’S SUFFRAGE.
A Record of the Women’s Suffrage Movement in the British
Isles, with a Biographical Sketch of Miss Becker. Portraits.
Crown 8vo, cloth. 6s.


—— See also Vynne, Nora, and Blackburn, ‘‘ Women under the
Factory Acts.”


BROWN (ROBERT, Jun., F.S.A.). SEMITIC INFLU-
ENCE | IN’ HEELCENIC” MYTHOLOGY.” With
special reference to the recent mythological works of the Right
Hon. Prof. Max Muller and he Andrew Lang. Demy 8vo,
cloth. 7s. 6d.


—. RESEARCHES INTO THE ORIGIN OF THE
PRIMITIVE CONSTELLATIONS OF THE
GREEKS, PHGENICIANS, AND BABYLONIANS.
With a large map of the Northern Hemisphere as viewed
at Phoenicia 1200 B.c., and other maps. 2 vols. Demy 8vo,
cloth. ros. 6d. each.


— MR. GLADSTONE AS I KNEW HIM, and other
Essays. Demy 8vo, cloth. 7s. 6d.


14 Henrietta Street, Covent Garden, London, W.C.


56 WILLIAMS & NORGATE’S


CATALOGUE OF THE LONDON LIBRARY, St James’s
Square. By C. T. Hagberg Wright, LL.D., etc. xiv +1626 pp.
4to, cloth. 42s. net. Supplement I., 1902-3. Buckram,
1 vol., 196 pp. 55.net. Supplement II. 198 pp. 1903-4.
Buckram. 5s.net. Supplement IV., 1905-6. 55. net.


“‘ The present catalogue is essentially a working catalogue. . . . The
general level of accuracy in the printing and editing of the work appears to
us to be an unusually high one. . . . We heartily applaud the work,
both as a landmark in library land, and as a monument standing upon a firm
foundation of its own.”— Zhe Tames.


DIETRICHSON (L.). MONUMENTA ORCADICA.
The Norsemen in the Orkneys, and the Monuments they have
left, With a Survey of the Celtic (Pre-Norwegian) and Scottish
(Post-Norwegian) Monuments on the Islands. With original
Drawings, and some Chapters on St. Magnus’ Cathedral, Kirk-
wall, by Johan Meyer, Architect. Demy ato, cloth. 43 net.


ENGELHARDT (C.). DENMARK IN THE EARLY
IRON AGE. Illustrated by recent Discoveries in the Peat-
Mosses of Slesvig. 33 Plates (giving representations of upwards
of a thousand objects), Maps, and numerous other Illustrations
on wood. 1866, 4to, cloth. 315. 6d.


GOLDAMMER (H.). THE KINDERGARTEN. A
Guide to Frébel’s Method of Education. 2 vols.in 1. 120 pp.
of Illustrations. 8vo, cloth. tos. 6d.


HARRISON (A., D.Sc.) WOMEN’S INDUSTRIES
IN LIVERPOOL. An Inquiry into the Economic Effects
of Legislation regulating the Labour of Women. 8vo. es:


HENRY (JAMES). ZZ2NEIDEA; or, Critical, Exegetical,
and A®sthetical Remarks on the AEneis. With a per-
sonal collation of all the first-class MSS., and upwards of 100
second-class MSS., and all the principal editions. Vol. I.
(3 Parts), Vol. II. (3 Parts), Vol. III. (3 Parts), Vol. IV.
(1 Part). Royal 8vo, sewed. £2, 25. net,


HERBERT (Hon. A.). THE SACRIFICE OF EDUCA-
TION TO EXAMINATION. Letters from “All Sorts
and Conditions of Men.” Edited by Auberon Herbert. Half-
cloth boards. 2s.


— and WAGER (HAROLD). BAD AIR AND BAD
HEALTH. Dedicated to Professor Clifford Allbutt. Re-


printed from the ‘‘ Contemporary Review.” 8vo, cloth, 1s. 6d. ;
sewed, Is.


14 Henrietta Street, Covent Garden, London, W.C.


CATALOGUE OF PUBLICATIONS. 57


JOHNSON (E.). THE RISE OF ENGLISH CUL-
TURE. Witha brief account of the Author’s life and writings.
Demy 8vo, cloth. 155. net.


KIEPERT’S NEW ATLAS ANTIQUUS. Twelve Maps
of the Ancient World, for Schools and Colleges. Third hundred
thousand. 12th Edition, with a complete Geographical Index.
Folio, boards. 6s. Strongly bound in cloth. 7s. 6d.


— WALL-MAPS OF THE ANCIENT WORLD—


WALL-MAP OF ANCIENT ITALY. Italia antiqua. For the
study of Livy, Sallust, Cicero, Dionysius, etc. Scale 1 : 800,000, Mounted
on rollers, varnished. 20s.


GENERAL WALL-MAP OF THE OLD WORLD. Tabula
orbis terrarum antiqui ad illustrandam potissimum antiquissimi zevi usque ad
Alexandrum M, historiam. For the study of ancient history, especially the
history of the Oriental peoples: the Indians, Medes, Persians, Babylonians,
Assyrians, Egyptians, Phoenicians, etc. Scale 1: 5,400,000. Mounted on
rollers, varnished. 20s,


GENERAL WALL-MAP OF THE ROMAN EMPIRE.
Imperii Romani tabula geographica, For the study of the development of
the Roman Empire. Scale 1 : 300,000. Mounted on rollers, varnished.
245.

WALL-MAP OF ANCIENT LATIUM. Latii Veteris et finiti-
marum regionum tabula. For the study of Livy, Dionysius, etc. Scale


I: 125,000, With supplement: Environs of Rome. Scale 1 : 25,000,
Mounted on rollers, varnished. 18s,


WALL-MAP OF ANCIENT GREECE. Grecie Antique
tabula. For the study of Herodotus, Thucydides, Xenophon, Strabo,
Cornelius Nepos, etc. Scale 1: 500,000. Mounted on rollers, varnished.
245.

WALL-MAP OF THE EMPIRES OF THE PERSIANS
AND OF ALEXANDER THE GREAT. Imperia Persarum et
Macedonum. For the study of Herodotus, Xenophon, Justinian, Arian,
Curtius. Scale 1 : 300,000, Mounted on rollers and varnished. 20s.


WALL-MAP OF GAUL, WITH PORTIONS OF ANCIENT
BRITAIN AND ANCIENT GERMANY. Galliz Cisalpinz et
Transalpinze cum partibus Britanniz et Germaniz tabula. For the study of
Cesar, Justinian, Livy, Tacitus, etc. Scale 1: 1,000,000, Mounted on
rollers and varnished. 245.

WALL-MAP OF ANCIENT ASIA MINOR. Asiz Minoris
Antique tabula. For the study of Herodotus, Xenophon, Justinian, Arian,
Curtius, etc. Scale 1 : 800,000, Mounted on rollers and varnished. 20s.


MARCKS (ERICH, Professor of Modern History at the
University of Leipzig) ENGLAND AND GER-
MANY: Their Relations in the Great Crises of
European History, 1500-1900. Demy 8vo, stiff wrapper. rs.


MUIR (Prof. Ramsay). A HISTORY OF LIVERPOOL.


With Maps, Illustrations. Crown 8vo, art linen. 6s. net.


14 Henrietta Street, Covent Garden, London, W.C.


58 WILLIAMS & NORGATE’S


MUIR (RAMSAY) and EDITH M. PLATT. A HIS-
TORY OF MUNICIPAL GOVERNMENT IN
LIVERPOOL. From the Earliest Times to the Municipal
Reform Act of 1835. 4to, cloth. 215. net.


OTIA MERSEIANA. The Publication of the Arts Faculty of
the University of Liverpool, Vols. I-III. 8vo. 1899-1903.
Each tos. 6d.


PEDDIE (R. A). PRINTING AT BRESCIA IN
THE FIFTEENTH CENTURY. A List of the


Issues. 55. net.


SCHLOSS (DAVID F.). METHODS OF INDUS-
TRIAL REMUNERATION. 3rd Edition, revised and
enlarged. Crown 8vo, cloth. 7s. 6d. Popular Edition, 35. 6d.


“Tn its new as in its old form the book is well-nigh indispensable to the
student who desires to get some insight into the actual facts about the various
methods of industrial remuneration, and the degree of success with which
they have been applied in the various trades.” —Manchester Guardian.


“More useful than ever to the students of the labour problem.”—
Political Science Quarterly.


Sse thine (HERBERT). AN AUTOBIOGRAPHY.
c€ Pp. 30.


— PRINCIPLES OF SOCIOLOGY. | See p. 30.
— STUDY OF SOCIOLOGY. See p. 31.
——_+ DESCRIPTIVE SOCIOLOGY, * Sze pi ar.


STEPHENS (GEORGE) PROFESSOR BUGGE’S
STUDIES ON NORTHERN MYTHOLOGY EX-
AMINED. Illustrations. 8vo, cloth. 8s,


— THE RUNES, WHENCE CAME THEY? to,


sewed. 6s.


— OLD NORTHERN RUNIC MONUMENTS. Vol.


IV. Folio. 20s. net.


VEILED FIGURE (THE), and Other Poems. Large
post 8vo, buckram, gilt, cover designed by Mr. T. Blake
Wirgman. 2s. 6d.


VYNNE (NORA) and HELEN BLACKBURN, and
with the Assistance of H.W. ALLASON. WOMEN
UNDER THE FACTORY ACTS. Part 1. Position
of the Employer. Part 2. Position of the Employed. Crown
8vo, cloth. 1s. net.


14 Henrietta Street, Covent Garden, London, W.C.


CATALOGUE OF PUBLICATIONS. 59


WELD (A. G.). GLIMPSES OF TENNYSON AND
OF SOME OF HIS FRIENDS. With an Appendix
by the late Bertram Tennyson. Illustrated with Portraits in
photogravure and colour, and with a facsimile of a MS. poem.
Fcap. 8vo, art linen. 45. 6d. net.


‘*This is a delightful little book, written by one who has all the qualifications
for the task—the opportunities of observation, the interest of relationship,


and the sympathetic and appreciative temper. . . . We do not attempt to
criticise, but only to give such a description as will send our readers to it.”—
Spectator,


‘* Everyone who reads the book will understand Tennyson a little better,
and many will view him in a new aspect for the first time.” —Dazly Chronicle.


‘*It is quite worthy of a place side by side with the larger ‘ Life.””—
Glasgow Herald.


14 Henrietta Street, Covent Garden, London, W.C.


60 CATALOGUE OF PUBLICATIONS.


LIST OF PERIODICALS, REVIEWS, AND
TRANSACTIONS AND PROCEEDINGS
OF LEARNED SOCIETIES


PUBLISHED BY WILLIAMS & NORGATE.


THE HIBBERT JOURNAL: A Quarterly Review of
Religion, Theology, and Philosophy. Single numbers,


2s. 6d. net. Subscription, ros. per annum, post free.


JOURNAL OF THE FEDERATED MALAY STATES
MUSEUMS. Issued quarterly. Single numbers, 15. 6d,
net. Subscription, 5s. per annum.


JOURNAL OF THE ROYAL MICROSCOPICAL
SOCIETY, containing its Transactions and Proceedings,
with other Microscopical Information. Bi-monthly. 6s. net.
Yearly subscriptions, 375. 6d., post free.


JOURNAL OF THE QUEKETT MICROSCOPICAL
CLUB. Issued half-yearly, April and November. Price
3s. 6d. net. 75. 6d. per annum, post free.


LINNEAN SOCIETY OF LONDON. Journal of Botany


and Journal of Zoology. Published irregularly at various prices.


ROYAL SOCIETY OF EDINBURGH. | Transactions.


Issued irregularly at various prices,


LIVERPOOL MARINE BIOLOGY COMMITTEE.
Memoirs. I.—-XVI. already published at various prices. Fauna
of Liverpool Bay. Fifth Report, written by Members of the
Committee and other Naturalists. Cloth. 85. 6d. net. See p. 48.


ROYAL ASTRONOMICAL SOCIETY. Memoirs and


Monthly Notices. Yearly volumes at various prices.


ROYAL IRISH ACADEMY. Transactions and Proceedings
issued irregularly ; prices vary. Cunningham Memoirs. Vols.
I.—X. already issued at various prices.


ROYAL DUBLIN SOCIETY. Transactions and Proceed-


ings. Issued irregularly at various prices.


14 Henrietta Street, Covent Garden, London, W.C.


INDEX UNDER AUTHORS & TITLES.


Abhidhanaratnamala. Aufrecht, 33.

Acland, Sir C. T. D. Anglican Liberalism, 12.

Acts of the Apostles. Adolf Harnack, 12.

Addis, W. E. Hebrew Religion, 11.

fEneidea. James Henry, 56.

African Tick Fever, so.

Agricultural Chemical Analysis. Wiley, 54.

Alcyonium. Vide L.M.B.C. Memoirs, 48.

Allin, Rev. Thos. Universalism Asserted, 14.

Alviella, Count Goblet D’. Contemporary Evolu-
tion of Religious Thought, 14; Idea of God, 13.

Americans, The. Hugo Miinsterberg, 22.

Analysis of Ores. F.C. Phillips, 5x.

Analysis of Theology. E. G. Figg, 17.

Ancient Arabian Poetry. C. J. Lyall, 34.

Ancient Assyria, Religion of. Sayce, 14.

Ancient World, Wall Maps of the, 57.

Anglican Liberalism, 12.

Annett. H. E. Malarial Expedition, Nigeria, 49.

Annotated Catechism, 14.

Annotated Texts. Goethe, 39.

Antedon, Vizde L.M.B.C. Memoirs, 48.

Anthems. Rey. R. Crompton Jones, 20.

Anti-Malaria Measures. Rubert Boyce, 44.

Antiqua Mater. Edwin Johnson, 20.

Anurida. Vide L.M.B.C. Memoirs, 48.

Apocalypse. Bleek, 7.

Apologetic of the New Test. E. F. Scott, r2.

Apostle Paul, the, Lectures on. Pfleiderer, 13.

Apostolic Age, The. Carl von Weizsacker, 6.

Arabian Poetry, Ancient, 35.

Arenicola. Vide L.M.B.C. Memoirs, 48.

Argument of Adaptation. Rev. G. Henslow, 18.

Aristotelian Society, Proceedings of, 29.

Army Series of French and German Novels, 38.

Ascidia. Johnston, L.M.B.C. Memoirs, 47.

Ashworth, J. H. Arenicola, 48.

Assyrian Dictionary. Norris, 35.

Assyrian Language, A Concise Dictionary of. W.
Muss-Arnolt, 35.

Assyriology, Essay on. George Evans, 34.

Astigmatic Letters. Dr. Pray, 51.

Athanasius of Alexandria, Canons of, 37.

Atlas Antiquus, Kiepert’s, 57.

At-one-ment, The. Rev. G. Henslow, 19.

Atonement, Doctrine of the. Sabatier, 10.

Aufrecht, Dr. T. Abhidhanaratnamala, 33.

Auf Verlornem Postem. Dewall, 38.

Autobiography. Herbert Spencer, 30.

Avebury, Lord. Prehistoric Times, 55.

Avesti, Pahlavi. Persian Studies, 33.


Babel and Bible. Friedrich Delitzsch, 9.

Bacon, Roger, The ‘‘ Opus Majus” of, 28.

Bad Air and Bad Health. Hebert and Wager, 56.

Ball, Sir Robert S. Cunningham Memotr, 45.

Ballads. F. von Schiller, 41.

Bases of Religious Belief. C. B. Upton, 14, 26.

Bastian, H.C. Studies in Heterogenesis, 44.

Baur. Church History. 7; Paul, 7.

Bayldon, Rev. G. Icelandic Grammar, 38.

Beard, Rev. Dr. C. Universal Christ, 15;
Reformation of the Sixteenth Century, 13.

Beeby, Rev. C. E. Doctrine and Principles, 15.

Beet, Prof. J. A. Child and Religion, 10.

Beginnings of Christianity. Paul Wernle, 4.


Beliefs about the Bible. M. J. Savage, 24.

Benedict, F. E. Organic Analysis, 44.

Bergey, E.G. Practical Hygiene, 44.

Bernstein and Kirsch. Syriac Chrestomathy, 33.

Bible. Translated by Samuai Sharpe, 15.

Bible, Beliefs about, Savage, 24; Bible Plants,
Henslow, 19; Bible Problems, Prof. T. K.
Cheyne, 10; How to Teach the, Rev. A. F.
Mitchell, 22.

Biblical Hebrew,
Kennedy, 20, 34.

Biltz, Henry. Methods of Determining Molecular
Weights, 44.

Biology, Principles of. Herbert Spencer, 30

Blackburn, Helen. Women’s Suffrage, 55.

Bleek. Apocalypse, 7.

Boielle, Jas. French Composition, 40; Hugo, Les
Misérables, 39 ; Notre Dame, 4o.

Bolton. History of the Thermometer, 44.

Book of Prayer. Crompton Jones, 20.

Books of the New Testament. Von Soden, n.

Bousset, Wilhelm. Jesus, 11.

Boyce, Rubert. Anti-Malarial Measures, 49;
Yellow Fever Prophylaxis, 44, 50; Sanitation at
Bathurst, Conakry and Freetown, 49.

Breinl, A. Animal Reactions of the Spirocheta of
Tick Fever, 50; Specific Nature of the Spiro-
cheeta of Tick Fever, 50.

Bremond, Henri. Mystery of Newman, 1s.

Brewster, H. B. The Prison, 28; The Statuette
and the Background, 28; Anarchy and Law, 28.

British Fisheries. J. Johnstone, 47.

Broadbent, Rev. T. B. Sermons, 15.

Brown, Robert. Semitic Influence, Origin of the
Primitive Constellations, 55; Gladstone as I knew


Introduction to, Rev. Jas.


him, 55.

Bruce, Alex. Topographical Atlas of the Spinal
Cord, 44.

Buddha. Prof. H. Oldenberg, 35.


Burkitt, Prof. F. C. Anglican Liberalism, 12.


Calculus, Differential and Integral. Harnack, 46

Caldecott, Dr. A. Anglican Liberalism, 12.

Campbell, Rev. Canon Colin. First Three Gos-
pels in Greek, 15.

Cancer. Vide L.M.B.C. Memoirs, 48.

Cancer and other Tumours. Chas. Creighton, 45.

Canonical Books of the Old Testament, 2.

Cape Dutch. J. F. Van Oordt, 41.

Cape Dutch, Werner’s Elementary Lessons in, 42.

Cardium, Vide L.M.B.C. Memoirs, 48.

Carlyle, Rev. A. J. Anglican Liberalism, 12.

Casey, John. Cunningham Memoirs, 45.

Catalogue of the London Library, 56.

Cath Ruis Na Rig For Boinn. E. Hogan, 39.

Celtic Heathendom. Prof. J. Rhys, 14.

Celtic Studies. Sullivan, 41.

Centenary History of South Place Society. Mon-
cure D. Conway, 16,

Chadwick, H. C. Antedon, 48; Echinus, 48.

Chaldee Language, Manual of. Turpie, 37.

Channing’s Complete Works, 15.

Chants and Anthems, 20; Chants, Psalms, and
Canticles. Crompton Jones, 20.

Character of the Fourth Gospel. Rev. John James
Tayler, 25.


62 INDEX—Continued.


Chemical Dynamics, Studies in.
47.

Chemistry for Beginners. Edward Hart, 46.

Chemistry of Pottery. Langenbeck, 48.

Cheyne, Prof. T. K. Bible Problems, ro.

Child and Religion, The, ro.

Chondrus. Vide L.M.B.C. Memoirs, 48.

Christ no Product of Evolution. Rev. G. Henslow,
19.

Christian Creed, Our, 15.

Christian Life, Ethics of the, 2.

Christian Life in the Primitive Church.
schiitz, 3.

Christian Religion, Fundamental Truths of the.
R. Seeberg, 12.

Christianity, Beginnings of. Wernle, 4.

Christianity in Talmud and Midrash. R. Travers
Herford, 19.

Christianity? Whatis. Adolf Harnack, 5.

Chromium, Production of. Max Leblanc, 48.

Church History. Baur, 7; Schubert, 3.

Clark, H. H. Anti-Malaria Measures at Bathurst,
44e

Closet Prayers. Dr. Sadler, 24.

Codium. Vide L.M.B.C. Memoirs, 48.

Coit, Dr. Stanton. Idealism and State Church, 16 ;
Book of Common Prayer, 16.

Cole, Frank J. Pleuronectes, 48.

Collins, F. H. Epitome of Synthetic Philosophy,
28.

Coming Church. Dr. John Hunter, 20.

Commentary on the Book of Job. Ewald, 7;
Wright and Hirsch, 27; Commentary on the Old
Testament. Ewald, 7; Commentary on the
Psalms. Ewald, 7; Protestant, 8, 24.

Common Prayer for Christian Worship, 16.

Communion with God. Herrmann, 5s, 11.

Conductivity of Liquids, 54.

Confessions of St. Augustine. Harnack, 17.

Contemporary Evolution of Religious Thought.
Count Goblet D’Alviella, 14.

Contes Militaires. Daudet, 38.

Conway, Moncure D. Centenary History, 16.

Cornill, Carl. Introduction tothe Old Testament, 2.

Cosmology of the Rigveda. H.W. Wallis, 37.

Creighton, Chas. Cancer and other Tumours, 45;
Tuberculosis, 45.

Crucifixion Mystery. J. Vickers, 26.

Cuneiform Inscriptions, The. Schrader, 8.

Cunningham, J.,M.D. Lumbar Curvein Man and
the Apes, 45; Surface Anatomy of the Cerebral
Hemispheres. Cunningham Memoir, 45.

Cunningham Memoirs, 45.

Cussans, Margaret. Gammarus, 48.


J. H. Van’t Hoff,


Dob-


Daniel and its Critics; Daniel and his Prophecies.
Rey. C. H. H. Wright, 27.

Darbishire, Otto V. Chondrus, 48.

Daudet, A. Contes Militaires, 38.

Davids, T. W. Rhys. Indian Buddhism, 13.

Davis, J. R. Ainsworth. Patella, 48.

Dawning Faith. H. Rix, 23.

Delbos, L. Nautical Terms, 39.

Delectus Veterum. Theodor Néldeke, 35.

Delitzsch, Friedrich. Bable and Bible, 9; Hebrew
Language, 33.


Democracy and Character. Canon Stephen, 2s.


Denmark in the Early Iron Age. C. Engelhardt,
56.

De Profundis Clamavi. Dr. John Hunter, 20.

Descriptive Sociology. Herbert Spencer, 31.

Development of the Periodic Law. Venable, 54.

Dewall, Johannes v., Auf Verlornem Posten and
Nazzarena Danti, 38.

Dietrichson, L. Monumenta Orcadica, 56.

Differential and Integral Calculus, The.
Harnack, 46.

Dillmann, A. Ethiopic Grammar, 33.

Dipavamsa, The. Edited by Oldenberg, 33.

Dirge of Coheleth. Rev. C. Taylor, 25.

Dobschiitz, Ernst von. Christian Life in the
Primitive Church, 3, 16.

Doctrine and Principles. Rev. C. E. Beeby. rs.

Dogma, History of. Harnack. 18.

Drey, S. A Theory of Life, 32.

Driver, S. R. Mosheh ben Shesheth, 16.

Drummond, Dr. Jas. Character and Authorship
of the Fourth Gospel, 16; Philo Judzeus, 28; Via,
Veritas, Vita, 13.

Durham, H. E. Yellow Fever Expedition to
Para, 49.

Durham, J. E.,and Myers, Walter. Report of the
Yellow Fever Expedition to Para, 45.

Dutton, J. E. Vide Memoirs of Liverpool School
of Tropical Medicine, 49, 50.

Dutton, J.,and Todd. Vide Memoirs of Liverpool
School of Tropical Medicine, 46, 49, 50.


Axel


Early Christian Conception. Pfleiderer, ro.

Early Hebrew Story. John P. Peters, ro.

Ecclesiastical Institutions of Holland. Rey. P. H.
Wicksteed, 27.

Echinus. Vide L.M.B.C. Memoirs, 48.

Echoes of Holy Thoughts, 17.

Education. Spencer, 31; Lodge, School Reform,
40.

Egyptian Grammar, Erman’s. 33.

Electric Furnace. H. Moisson, 50.

Electrolysis of Water. V. Engelhardt, 46.

Electrolytic Laboratories. Nissenson, so.

Elementary Organic Analysis. F. E. Benedict, 44.

Englehardt, C. Denmark in Iron Age 56.

Engelhardt, V. Electrolysis of Water, 46.

Engineering Chemistry. T. B. Stillman, 53.

England and Germany. Erich Marcks, 57.

English Culture, Rise of. E. Johnson, 57.

English-Danish Dictionary. S. Rosing, 41.

English-Icelandic Dictionary. Zoega, 43.

Enoch, Book of. C Gill, 17.

Epitome of Synthetic Philosophy. Collins, 28.

Epizootic Lmyphangitis. Capt. Pallin, 57.

Erman’s Egyptian Grammar. 33.

Erzahlungen. Hofer, 38.

Espin, Rev. T.,M.A. The Red Stars, 45.

Essays on the Social Gospel. Harnack and Herr-
mann. 11.

Essays. Herbert Spencer, 31.

Ethical Import of Darwinism. Schurman, 29.

Ethics. Prof. Simon Laurie, 28.

Ethics, Data of. Herbert Spencer, 3r.

Ethics, Early Christian. Prof. Scullard, 25.

Ethics, Principles of. Herbert Spencer, 30.

Ethiopic Grammar. A. Dillmann, 33.

Eucken, Prof. Life of the Spirit, r2.


INDEX—Continued. C 63


Eugéne’s Grammar of French Language, 39.

Evans, A. Anti-Malarial Measures at Bathurst,
etc., 44.

Evans, George. Essay on Assyriology, 34.

Evolution, A New Aspect of. Formby, 17.

Evolution, Christ no Product of, 19.

Evolution of Christianity. C. Gill, 17.

Evolution of Knowledge. R. S. Perrin, 22.

Evolution of Religion, The. L.R. Farnell, rr.

Ewald. Commentary on Job, 7; Commentary on
the Old Testament, 7; Commentary on the
Psalms, 7.


Facts and Comments. Herbert Spencer, 31.

Faith and Morals. W. Herrmann, ro.

Faizullah-Bhai, Shaikh, B.D. A Moslem Present,
34; Pre-Islamitic Arabic Poetry, 34.

Farnell, L. R. The Evolution of Religion, rz.

Fertilizers. Vzde Wiley’s Agricultural Analysis, 54.

Figg, E.G. Analysis of Theology, 17.

First Principles. Herbert Spencer, 30.

First Three Gospels in Greek. Rev. Canon Colin
Campbell, r5.

Flinders Petri Papyri. Cunn. Memoirs, 34.

Formby, Rev. C. W. Re-Creation, 17.

Four Gospels as Historical Records, 17.

Fourth Gospel, Character and Authorship of, 16.

Frankfirter, Dr O. Handbook of Pali, 34.

Free Catholic Church. Rev. J. M. Thomas, 26.

Freezing Point, The. Jones, 47.

French Composition. Jas. Boielle, 39.

French History, First Stepsin. F. F. Roget, 41.

French Language, Grammar of. Eugéne, 39.

Fuerst, Dr Jul. Hebrew and Chaldee Lexicon, 34.


Gammarus. Vide L.M.B.C. Memoirs, 48.

Gardner, Prof. Percy. Anglican Liberalism, 12.

General Language of the Incas of Peru, 4o.

Genesis, Book of, in Hebrew Text. Rev. C. H. H.
Wright, 27.

Genesis, Hebrew Text, 34.

Geometry, Analytical, Elements of. Hardy, 46.

German Idioms, Short Guide to. Weiss, 42.

German Literature, A Short Sketch of. V. Phil-
lipps, B.A., 41.

German, Systematic Conversational Exercises in.
T. H. Weiss, 42.

Gibson, R. J. Harvey. Codium, 48.

Giles, Lt.-Col. Anti-Malarial Measures in Sekondi,
ete., 50.

Gill, C. Book of Enoch, 17; Evolution of Chris-
tianity, 17.

Gladstone as I Knew Him. Robert Brown, 55.

Glimpses of Tennyson. A. G. Weld, so.

Goethe, W. v. Annotated Texts, 39.

Goldammer, H. The Kindergarten, 56.

Gospels in Greek, First Three, 15.

Greek Ideas, Lectures on. Rev. Dr. Hatch, 13.

Greek, Modern, A Course of. Zompolides, 43.

Greek New Testament, 6.

Green, Rev. A. A. Child and Religion, 10.

Gulistan, The (Rose Garden) of Shaik Sadi of
Shiraz, 36.

Gymnastics, Medical Indoor. Dr. Schreber, 52.

Haddon, A.C. Decorative Art of British Guinea,
Cunningham Memoir, 45.


Hagmann, J. G., Ph.D. Reform in Primary
Education, 39.

Handley, Rev. H. Anglican Liberalism, 12.

Hantzsch, A. Elements of Stereochemistry, 46.

Hardy. Elements of Analytical Geometry, 46;
Infinitesimals and Limits, 46.

Harnack, Adolf. Acts of the Apostles, 12 ; History
of Dogma, 4; Letter to the ‘* Preussische Jahr-
bucher,” 18; Luke the Physician, 12; Mission
and Expansion of Christianity, 3; Monasticism,
17; The Sayings of Jesus, 12; What is Christi-
anity ? 5, ro.

Harnack, Adolf, and Herrmann, W. Essays on the
Social Gospel, 11.

Harnack and his Oxford Critics. Saunders, 24.

Harnack, Axel. Differential and Integral Calculus,
46,

Harrison, A. Women’s Industries, 56.

Hart, Edward, Ph.D. Chemistry for Beginners,
46 ; Second Year Chemistry, 46.

Hatch, Rev. Dr. Lectures on Greek Ideas, 13.

Haughton, Rev. Samuel, M.A., M.D. New Re-
searches on Sun-Heat, 45.

Hausrath. History of the New Test. Times, 7.

Head, Sir Edmund, translated by. Viga Glums
Saga, 42.

Hebrew and Chaldee Lexicon Dr. Fuerst, 34.

Hebrew Language, The. F. Delitzsch, 33.

Hebrew, New School of Poets, 35.

Hebrew Religion. W. E. Addis, 11.

Hebrew Story. Peters, ro.

Hebrew Texts, 18.

Henry, Jas. Aneidea, 56.

Henslow, Rev. G. The Argument of Adaptation,
18; The At-one-ment, 19; Christ no Product of
Evolution, 19; Spiritual Teachings of Bible
Plants, 19; Spiritual Teaching of Christ’s Life,
19; The Vulgate, 19.

Henson, Rev. Canon Hensley.
ligion, 10.

Herbert, Hon. A. Sacrifice of Education, 56.

Herbert, Hon. A., and Wager, H. Bad Air and
Bad Health, 56.

Herdman, Prof. W. A. Ascidia, 47.

Herford, R. Travers, B.A. Christianity in Taimud
and Midrash, 19.

Herrmann, W. Communion, 5, 11; Faith and
Morals, to.

Herrmann and Harnack.
Gospel, 11.

Heterogenesis, Studies in. H. Bastian, 44.

Hewitt, C. Gordon. Ligia, 48.

Hibbert Journal, The, 19.

Hibbert Lectures, The, 13, 14.

Hickson, Sydney J. Alcyonium, 48.

Hill, Rev. Dr. G. Child and Religion, 10.

Hindu Chemistry. Prof. P. C, Ray, 51.

Hirsch, Dr. S. A., and W. Aldis Wright, edited
by. Commentary on Job, 27.

History of the Church. Hans von Schubert, 3.

History of Dogma, Adolf Harnack, 4.

History of Jesus of Nazara. Keim, 7.

History of the Hebrews. R. Kittel, 5.

History of the Literature of the O.T. Kautzsch, 20.

History of the New Test. Times. Hausrath, 7.

Hodgson, S. H. Philosophy and Experience, 28 ;
Reorganisation of Philosophy, 28.


Child and Re-


Essay on the Social


64


Hoerning, Dr. R. The Karaite MSS., 19.

Héfer, E. Erzahlungen, 38.

Hoff, J. H. Van’t. Chemical Dynamics, 47.

Hogan, E. Cath Ruis Na Rig For Boinn, 39;
Latin Lives, 39 ; Irish Nennius, 39

Horner, G. Statutes, The, of the Apostles, 36.

Horse, Life-Size Models of, 47; Surgical Anatomy
of. J.T. Share-Jones, 47.

Horton, Dr. R. Child and Religion, 10.

How to Teach the Bible. Mitchell, 22.

Howe, J. L. Inorganic Chemistry, 47.

Hugo, Victor. Les Misérables, 39; Notre Dame,
40.

Human Sternum, The. A. M. Paterson, s1.

Human Tick Fever, Nature of. J. E. Dutton, and
J. L. Todd, 46.

Hunter, Dr. John. De Profoundis Clamavi, 20 ;
The Coming Church, 20.

Hygiene, Handbook of. Bergey, 44.

Hymns of Duty and Faith. Jones, 20.


Icelandic Grammar. Rey. G. Bayldon, 38.

Idea of God. Alviella, Count Goblet D’, 13.

Imms, A. D. Anurida, 48.

Incarnate Purpose, The. Percival, 22.

Indian Buddhism. Rhys Davids, 13.

Individualism and Collectivism. Dr. C. W. Saleeby,
29.

Indoor Gymnastics, Medical, 52.

Industrial Remuneration Methods of.
Schloss, 58.

Infinitesimals and Limits. Hardy, 46.

Inflammation Idea. W.H. Ransom, 51.

Influence of Rome on Christianity. Renan, 13.

Inorganic Chemistry. J. L. Howe, 46.

Inorganic Qualitative Chemical Analysis. Leaven-
worth, 48.

Introduction to the Greek New Test.

Introduction to the Old Test. Cornill, 2.

Irish Nennius, The. E. Hogan, 39.

Isaiah, Hebrew Text, 34.

Ismailia, Malarial Measures at.


Dok.


Nestle, 6.


Boyce, 49.


Jesus. Wilhelm Bousset, 11.
Jesus of Nazara. Keim, 7.
Jesus, Sayings of. Harnack, 18,
Jesus, The Real. Vickers, 26.


Job, Book of. G. H. Bateson Wright, 27.

Job, Book of. Rabbinic Commentary on, 37.

Job. Hebrew Text, 24.

Johnson, Edwin, M.A. Antiqua Mater, 20; English
Culture, 20; Rise of Christendom, 20.

Johnstone, J. British Fisheries, 47 ; Cardium, 48.

Jones. The Freezing Point, 47.

Jones, Prof. Henry. Child and Religion, ro.

Jones, Rev. J. C. Child and Religion, ro.

Jones, J.T. Share. Life-Size Models of the Horse,
47; Surgical Anatomy of the Horse, 47.

Jones, Rev. R. Crompton. Hymns of Duty and
Faith, 20; Chants, Psalms and Canticles, 20;
Anthems, 20; The Chants and Anthems, 20; A
Book of Prayer, 20.

Journal of the Federated Malay States, 60.

Journal of the Linnean Society. Botany and
Zoology, 47, 60.

Journal of the Quekett Microscopical Club, 47, 60.

Journal of the Royal Microscopical Society, 47, 60.

Justice. Herbert Spencer, 31.


INDEX—Continued.


Kantian Ethics. J. G. Schurman. 29.

Karaite MSS. Dr. R. Hoerning, 19.

Kautzsch, E. History of the Literature of the Old
Testament, 20

Keim. History of Jesus of Nazara, 7.

Kennedy, Rev. Jas. Introduction to Biblical
Hebrew, 34; Hebrew Synonyms, 34.

Kiepert’s New Atlas Antiquus, 57.

Kiepert’s Wall-Maps of the Ancient World, 57.

Kindergarten, The. H. Goldammer, 56.

Kittel, R. History of the Hebrews, 5.

Knight, edited by. Essays on Spinoza, 32.

Knowledge, Evolution of. Perrin, 22.

Kuenen, Dr. A. National Religions and Universal
Religion, 13; Religion of Israel, 8.


Laboratory Experiments. Noyes and Mulliken,
Bip

Ladd, Prof.G.T. Child and Religion, ro.

Lake, Kirsopp. Resurrection, 12.

Landolt, Hans. Optical Rotating Power, 47.

Langenbeck. The Chemistry of Pottery, 48.

Latin Lives of the Saints. E. Hogan, 39

Laurie, Prof. Simon, Ethica, 28; Metaphysica
Nova et Vetusta, 28.

Lea, Henry Chas. Sacerdotal Celibacy, 21.

Leabhar Breac, 4o

Leabhar Na H-Uidhri, 4o.

Leavenworth, Prof. W. S.
Chemical Analysis, 48.

Leblanc, Dr. Max. The Production of Chromium,
48.

Le Coup de Pistolet.

Lepeophtheirus and Lernea.
Memoirs, 48.

Letter to the ‘‘Preussische Jahrbucher.”
Harnack, 18.

Lettsom, W. N., trans. by. Nibelungenlied, 41.

Liberal Christianity. Jean Réville, 9.

Life and Matter. Sir O. Lodge, ar.

Life of the Spirit, The. Eucken, 12.

Lilja. Edited by E. Magnusson, 40.

Lilley, Rev. A. L. Anglican Liberalism, 12.

Lineus. Vide L.M.B.C. Memoirs, 48.

Linnean Society of London, Journals of, 60.

Liverpool, a History of. Muir, 57.

Liverpool Marine Biology Committee Memoirs,
i=l HEE


Inorganic Qualitative


Merimée, 38.


Vide L.M.B.C.


Adolt


Liverpool, Municipal Government in. Muir and
Platt, 58

Liverpool School of Tropical Medicine Memoirs,
49.

Lobstein, Paul. Virgin Birth of Christ, 9.

Lodge, Sir O. Life and Matter, 21; School


Teaching and School Reform, 40.
Logarithmic Tables. Sang, 52; Schroen, 53.
London Library, Catalogue of, 56.
Long, J. H. A Text-book of Urine Analysis, 49.
Luke the Physician. Adolf Harnack, r2.
Lyall, C. J., M.A. Ancient Arabian Poetry, 34.


Macan, R. W. The Resurrection of Jesus Christ,
2I.

Machberoth, Ithiel. Thomas Chenery, 35.

Mackay, R. W. Rise and Progress of Christian-
ity, 21.

Mackenzie, Malcolm. Social and Political Dyna-
mics, 28,


INDEX—Continued. 65


Magnusson, edited by.

Mahabharata, Index to. S. Sorensen, 36.

Mahaffy, J. P., D.D. Flinders Petrie Papyri.
Cunningham Memoirs, 45.

Malaria Expedition to Nigeria, Report of. Annett,
Dutton, and Elliott, 44.

Man versus the State. Herbert Spencer, 31.

Maori, Lessons in. Right Rev. W. L. Williams,
43-

Maori, New and Complete Manual of. 40.

Marchant, James. Theories of the Resurrection,
21.

Marcks, Erich. England and Germany, 57.

Markham, Sir Clements, K.C.B. Vocabularies of
the Incas of Peru, 4o. »

Martineau, Rey. Dr. James. Modern Material-
ism, 21: Relation between Ethics and Religion,
21.

Mason, Prof, W. P. Notes on Qualitative Analy-
sis, 49.

Massoretic Text. Rev. Dr. J. Taylor, 25.

Masterman, C. F. G. Child and Religion, 10.

Meade, R. K. Portland Cement, ag.

Medizval Thought, History of. R. Lane Poole,

23.

Memoirs of the Liverpool School of Tropical
Medicine, 49, so.

Ménégoz, E. Religion and Theology, 21.

Mercer, Right Rev. J. Edward, D.D.
Progress, 21.

Merimée, Prosper.

Metallic Objects, Production of.
hauser, 51.

Metallurgy. Wysor, 54.

Metaphysica Nova et Vetusta.
rie, 28.

Midrash, Christianity in. Herford, 19.

Milando Panho, The. Edited by V. Trenckner,
35.

Mission and Expansion of Christianity.
Harnack, 3.

Mitchell, Rev. A. F. How to Teach the Bible, 22.

Modern Materialism. Rev. Dr. James Martineau,
21.

Moisson, Henri.
Molecular Weights,
Henry Biltz, 44.

Monasticism. Adolf Harnack, 17.

Montefiore, C. G. Religion of the Ancient
Hebrews, 13.

Monumenta Orcadica. LL. Dietrichson, 56.

Moorhouse Lectures. de Mercer’s Soul of Pro-
gress, 21; Stephen, Democracy and Character
25.

Morrison, Dr. W. D. Anglican Liberalism, 12.

Mosheh ben Shesheth. S. R. Driver, edited by,
16.

Moslem Present.
34.

Maus Prof. Ramsay. History of Liverpool, 57.

Muir and Platt. History of Municipal Government
in Liverpool, 58.

Miinsterberg, Hugo. The Americans, 22.

Muss-Arnolt, W. A Concise Dictionary of the
Assyrian Language, 35.

My Struggle for Light. R. Wimmer, 9.

Mystery of Newman. Henri Bremond, 15.


5


Lilja, 40.


Soul of


Le Coup de Pistolet, 38.
Dr. W. Pfan-


Prof. Simon Lau-


Adolf


Electric Furnace, 50.
Methods of Determining.


Faizullah-Bhai, Shaikh, B.D.,


National Idealism and State Church, 16; and the
Book of Common Prayer, 16,

National Religions and Universal Religion. Dr.
A. Kuenen, 13.

Native Religions of Mexico and Peru.
Réville, 14.

Naturalism and Religion. Dr. Rudolf Otto, 22.

Nautical Terms. L. Delbos, 39.

Nestle. Introduction to the Greek New Test., 6.

New Hebrew School of Poets. Edited by H.
Brody and K. Albrecht, 35.

Newstead, R. Another New Dermanyssid Acarid,


Dr. A.


50; Newstead, R., and J. L Todd. A New
Dermanyssid Acarid, 50.
New Zealand Language, Dictionary of. Rt. Rev.


W.L. Williams, 42.
Nibelungenlied. Trans. W. L. Lettsom, 41.
Nissenson. Arrangements of Electrolytic Labora-
tories, 50.
Néldeke, Theodor.
Grammar, 35.
Norris, E. Assyrian Dictionary, 35.
Norseman in the Orkneys. Dietrichson, 56.
Noyes, A. A. Organic Chemistry, 50.
Noyes, A. A., and Milliken, Samuel.
Experiments, 51.


Delectus Veterum, 35}; Syriac


Laboratory


O'Grady, Standish H. Silva Gadelica, qr.

Old and New Certainty of the Gospel.
Robinson, 24.

Oldenberg, Dr. H., edited by.
33; Vinaya Pitakam, 37.

Old French, Introduction to. F. F. Roget, 41.

Oordt, J. F. Van, B.A. Cape Dutch, qr.

Ophthalmic Test Types. Snellen’s, 53.

Optical Rotating Power. Hans Landolt, 47.

“Opus Majus” of Roger Bacon, 28.

Organic Chemistry. A. A. Noyes, 5x.

Otia Merseiana, 58.

Otto, Rudolf. Naturalism and Religion, rz.

Outlines of Church History. Von Schubert, 3.

Outlines of Psychology. Wilhelm Wundt, 32.


Alex.


Dipavamsa, The,


Pali, Handbook of. Dr. O, Frankfiirter, 34.

Pali Miscellany. V. Trenckner, 35.

Pallin, Capt. W. A. A Treatise on Epizootic
Lymphangitis, 51.

Parker, W. K., F.R.S. Morphology of the Duck
Tribe and the Auk Tribe, 45.

Patella. Vide L.M.B.C. Memoirs, 48.

Paterson, A.M. The Human Sternum, 51.

Paul. Baur, 7; Pfleiderer, 13; Weinel, 3.

Paulinism. Pfleiderer, 8.

Pearson, Joseph. Cancer, 48.

Peddie, R. A.. Printing at Brescia, 58.

Percival, G. H. The Incarnate Purpose, 22.

Perrin, R.S. Evolution of Knowledge, 22.

Persian Language, A Grammar of. J. T. Platts, 36.

Peters, Dr. John P. Early Hebrew Story, 10.

Pfanhauser, Dr. W. Production of Metallic Ob-
jects, 51.

Pfleiderer, Otto. Early Christian Conception, 10;
Lectures on Apostle Paul, 13; Paulinism, 8; Phil-
osophy of Religion, 8; Primitive Christianity, 2.

Phillips, F. C. Analysis of Ores, 5x.

Phillipps, V., B.A. Short Sketch of German
Literature, 41.


66 INDEX—Continued.


Philo Judeus. Dr. Drummond, 16.

Philosophy and Experience. Hodgson, 28.

Philosophy of Religion. Pfleiderer, 8.

Piddington, H. Sailor's Horn Book, sr.

Pikler, Jul. Psychology of the Belief in Objec-
tive Existence, 29.

Platts, J.T. A Grammar of the Persian Language,
36.

Pleuronectes. Vide L.M.B.C. Memoirs, 48.

Pecket Flora of Edinburgh. C. O. Sonntag, 53.

Poole, Reg. Lane. History of Medieval Thought,


23.
Portland Cement, Meade, 49.
Pray, Dr. Astigmatic Letters, 51.


Prayers for Christian Worship. Sadler, 24.

Prehistoric Times. Lord Avebury, 55.

Pre-Islamitic Arabic Poetry. Shaikh Faizullah-
Bhai, B.D., 34.

Primitive Christianity. Otto Pfleiderer, 2.


Primitive Constellations, Origin of. Robt. Brown,
55

Printing at Brescia. R. A. Peddie, 58.

Prison, The. H. B. Brewster, 28.


Proceedings of the Aristotelian Society, 29.
Proceedings of the Optical Convention, 51.


Prolegomena. Reéville, 8.
Protestant Commentary on the New Testament,
8, 23.


Psalms, Hebrew Text, 34.

Psychology of the Belief in Objective Existence.
Jul. Pikler, 29.

Psychology, Principles of, Spencer, 30; Outlines
of, Wundt, 32.

Punnett, R. C.  Lineus, 48.

Qualitative Analysis, Notes on. Prot. W. P.

Mason, 49.


Ransom, W. H. The Inflammation Idea, sr.

Rapport sur l'Expédition au Congo. Dutton and
Todd, 46.

Rashdall, Dr. Hastings. Anglican Liberalism, 12.

Ray, Prof. P.C. Hindu Chemistry, 51.

Real Jesus, The. J, Vickers, 26.

Reasons for Dissenting from the Philosophy of M.
Comte. Herbert Spencer, 31.

Re-Creation. Rev. C, W. Formby, 17.

Reform in Primary Education. J. G. Hagmann,
39-

Reformation of the Sixteenth Century. Rey. Dr.
C. Beard, 15.

Rejoinder to Prof. Weismann, 31.

Relation between Ethics and Religion. Rey. Dr.
James Martineau, 21.

Religion and Modern Culture. Sabatier, ro.

Religion and Theology. E. Ménégoz, 21.

Religion of Ancient Egypt. Renouf, 14.

Religion of Israel. Kuenen, 8.

Religion of the Ancient Hebrews.
fiore, 13.

Religions of Ancient
Prof. A. H. Sayce, 36.

Religions of Authority and the Spirit.
Sabatier, 3.

Renan, E. Influence of Rome on Christianity, 13.

Renouf, P. L. Religion of Ancient Egypt, 14.

Reorganisation of Philosophy. Hodgson, 28.


C. G. Monte-
Babylonia and Assyria.


Auguste


Report of Malarial Expedition to Nigeria, 44.

Report of the Yellow Fever Expedition to Para,
1900. Durham and Myers, 49.

Reports on the Sanitation and Anti-Malarial Meas-
ures at Bathurst, 44.

Reports of Thompson-Yates Laboratories, 52.

Resurrection of Jesus Christ. Lake, 21; R. W.
Macan, 21; Marchant, 2x.

Réville, Dr. A. Native Religions of Mexico and
Peru, 14; Prolegomena, 8.

Réville, Jean. Liberal Christianity, 9.

Rhys, Prof. J. Celtic Heathendom, 14,

Rise and Progress of Christianity. R. W. Mac-
kay, 21.

Rise of Christendom. Edwin Johnson, 20.

Rise of English Culture. Edwin Johnson, 20.

Rix, Herbert. Dawning Faith, 22; Tent and
Testament, 22.

Robinson, Alex. Old and New Certainty of the
Gospel, 24; Study of the Saviour, 24.

Roget, F. F. First Steps in French History, 41 ;
Introduction to Old French, 4r.

Rosing, S.. English-Danish Dictionary, 41.

Ross, R. Campaign against Mosquitoes in Sierra
Leone, 49; Malaria at Ismalia and Suez, 49;
Malaria] Expedition to Sierra Leone, 49; Mal-
arial Fever, 49.

Royal Astronomical Society. Memoirsand Month-
ly Notices, 60.

Royal Dublin Society. Transactions and Pro-
ceedings, 60.

Royal Irish Academy.
ceeding, 60.

Royal Society of Edinburgh.


60.
Runcorn Research Laboratories.


Fever, 50.
Runes, The.


Transactions and Pro-


Transactions of,


Parasite of Tick


Geo. Stephens, 58.


Runic Monuments, Old Northern. Geo, Stephens,
58.

Ruth, Book of, in Hebrew Text. Rev. C. H. H.
Wright, 27.


Sabatier, Auguste. Doctrine of the Atonement, 10;
Religions of Authority and the Spirit, 3.

Sacerdotal Celibacy. Henry Chas. Lea, or.

Sacrifice of Education. Hon. A. Herbert, 56.

Sadi. The Gulistan (Rose Garden) of Shaik Sadi
of Shiraz, 36.

Sadler, Rev. Dr. Closet Prayers, 24; Prayers for
Christian Worship, 24.

Sailors’ Horn Book. H. Piddington, 51,

Saleeby, C. W. Individualism and Collectivism, 29.

Sang’s Logarithms, 52.

Sanitary Conditions of Cape Coast Town. Taylor,
M. L., 49.

Sanitation and Anti-Malarial Measures.
Giles, 46.

Saunders, T. B. Harnack and his Critics, 24.

Savage, M. J. Beliefs about the Bible, 24.

Sayce, Prof. A. H. Religion of Ancient Assyria, 14.

Sayings of Jesus, The. Adolf Harnack, 12.

Schiller. Ballads, 41.

Schloss, D. F. Methods of Industrial Remunera-
tion, 58.

School Teaching and School Reform.
Lodge, 40.


Lt.-Col.


Sir O.


INDEX—Continued. 67


Schrader. The Cuneiform Inscriptions, 8.

Schreber, D. G. M. Medical Indoor Gymnastics,
52. :

Schroen, L. Seven-Figure Logarithms, 53.

Schubert, Hans von. History of the Church, 3.

Schurman, J.Gould. Ethical Import of Darwinism,
29; Kantian Ethics, 29.

Scott, Andrew. Lepeophtheirus and Lernea, 48.

Scott, E. F. Apologetic of the New Test., 12.


Scripture, Edward W., Ph.D. Studies from the


Yale Psychological Laboratory, 29.
Second Year Chemistry. Edward Hart, 46.
Seeberg, R. Fundamental Truths of the Christian
Religion, re.
Seger. Collected Writings, 53.
Semitic Influence. Robt. Brown, 55.
Seven-Figure Logarithms. L. Schroen, 53.
Severus, Patriarch of Antioch. Letters of, 25.
Sharpe, Samuel. Bible, translated, by, 15.
Shearman, A. T. Symbolic Logic, 29.
Shihab Al Din. Futuh Al-Habashah. Ed. by S.
Strong, 36.
Short History ofthe Hebrew Text. ‘[. H. Weir, 16.
Sierra Leone, Campaign against Mosquitoes in.
Ross and Taylor, 49.


Sierra Leone, The Malarial Expedition to, 1899. |


Ross, Annett, and Austen, 49.

Silva Gadelica. Standish H. O’Grady, 41.

Sleeping Sickness, Distribution and Spread of, 50.

Smith, Martin R. What I Have Taught My Child-
ren, 25.

Snellen’s Ophthalmic Test Types, 53.

Snyder, Harry. Soils and Fertilisers, 53.

Social and Political Dynamics. Malcolm Mac-
kenzie, 28.

Social Gospel, Essays on the, r1.

Social Statics. Herbert Spencer, 31.

Sociology, Principles of. Herbert Spencer, 30.

Sociology, Study of. Herbert Spencer, 31.

Soden, H. von, D.D. Books of the New Testa-
ment, 11.

Soils. Vide Wiley's Agricultural Analysis, 54.

Soils and Fertilisers. Snyder, 53.

Sonntag, C.O. A Pocket Flora of Edinburgh, 53.

Sorensen, S. Index to the Mahabharata, 36.

Soul of Progress. Bishop Mercer, 2r.

Spanish Dictionary, Larger. Velasquez, 42.

Spencer, Herbert. Drey on Herbert Spencer's
Theory of Religion and Morality, 32.

Spencer, Herbert. An Autobiography, 30; A
System of Synthetic Philosophy, 30; Descriptive
Sociology, Nos. 1-8, 31; Theory of Religion and
Morality, 32; Works by, 30-32.

Spinal Cord, Topographical Atlas of. Alex. Bruce,
M.A., etc., 44.

Spinoza. Edited by Prof. Knight, 32.

Spiritual Teaching of Christ’s Life. Henslow, ro.

Statuette, The, and the Background. H. B. Brew-
ster, 28.

Statutes, The, of the Apostles. G. Horner, 25, 36.

Stephen, Canon. Democracy and Character, 25.

Stephens, Geo. Bugge’s Studies on Northern
Mythology Examined, 58; Old Northern Runic
Monuments, 58; The Runes, 58.

Stephens, J. W. W. Study of Malaria, 53.

Stephens, Thos., B.A., Editor ‘‘The Child and
Religion,” to.


Stephens and R. Newstead. Anatomy of the Pro-
boscis of Biting Flies, 50. é

Stereochemistry, Elements of. Hantzsch, 46.

Stewart, Rev. C. R.S. Anglican Liberalism, 12.

Stillman, T. B. Engineering Chemistry, 53.

Storms. Piddington, 51.

Strong, S. Arthur, ed. by. Shihab Al Din, 36.

Study of the Saviour. Alex. Robinson, 24.

Studies from the Yale Psychological Laboratory.
Edward W. Scripture, Ph.D. , 29.

Studies on Northern Mythology. Geo. Stephens, 58.

Sullivan, W. K. Celtic Studies, 4x.

Surgical Anatomy of the Horse.
Jones, 47. ,

Symbolic Logic. A. T. Shearman, 29.

Synthetic Philosophy, Epitome of. F. H. Collins,
32.

Syriac Chrestomathy. Bernstein and Kirsch, 33.

Syriac Grammar. Theodor Néldeke, 35.

System of Synthetic Philosophy. Herbert Spencer,


30.


J.) 2. eshare


Tayler, Rev. John James. Character of the Fourth
Gospel, 25.

Taylor, Rev. C. Dirge of Coheleth, The, 25.

Taylor, Rev. Dr. J. Massoretic Text, 25.

Taylor. Sanitary Conditions of Cape Coast 'Town,
49.

Ten Services and Psalms and Canticles, 26.

Ten Services of Public Prayer, 26.

Tennant, Rev. F. R. Child and Religion, 10.

Tent and Testament, Herbert Rix, 23.

Testament, Old. Canonical Books of, 2; Religions
of, 11; Cuneiform Inscriptions, 24; Hebrew
Text, Weir, 26; Literature, 20.

Testament, The New, Critical Notes on. C.
Tischendorf, 26, 27.

Testament Times, New. Acts of the Apostles, 12;
Apologetic of, 12 ; Books of the, 11; Commentary,
Protestant, 8 ; History of, 7 ; Luke the Physician,
12; Textual Criticism, 6.

Test Types. Pray, 51; Snellen, 53.

Text and Translation Society, Works by, 37.

Theories of Anarchy and of Law. H. B. Brewster.
28.

Theories of the Resurrection of Jesus Christ.
James Marchant, 2.

Thermometer, History of the. Bolton, 44.

Thomas, Rev. J. M. L. A Free Catholic Church,
26.

Thomas and Breinl.
ing Sickness, 50.

Thornton, Rey. J. J. Child and Religion, 10.

Tischendorf, C. The New Testament, 26.

Todd Lectures Series, 41-42.

Tower, O. F. Conductivity of Liquids, 54.

Transactions of the Royal Dublin Society, 54.

Transactions of the Royal Irish Academy, 54.

Transactions of the Royal Society of Edinburgh,
54-

Trenckner, V. Pali Miscellany, 35.

Trypanosomiasis Expedition to Senegambia.
Dutton and J. L. Todd, 46, 49.

Turpie, Dr. D. M‘C. Manual of the Chaldee
Language, 37.


Trypanosomiasis and Sleep-


ae


Universal Christ. Rev. Dr. C. Beard, 15.


68


Universalism Asserted. Rev. Thos. Allin, 14.
Upton, Rev. C. B. Basis of Religious Belief, 14.
Urine Analysis, A Text-Book of. Long, 49.


Vaillante, Vincent, 38.

Various Fragments. Herbert Spencer, 31.

Vega. Logarithmic Tables, 54.

Veiled Figure, The, 58.

Velasquez, Larger Spanish Dictionary, 42.

Venable, T.C. Development of the Periodic Law,
543 Study of Atom, 54.

Via, Veritas, Vita. Dr. Drummond, 13.

Vickers, J. The Real Jesus, 26; The Crucifixion
Mystery, 26.

Viga Glums Saga. Sir E. Head, 42.

Vinaya Pitakam. Dr. Oldenberg, 37,

Vincent, Jacques. Vaillante, 38.

Virgin Birth of Christ. Paul Lobstein, 9.

Vulgate, The. Henslow, 19.

Vynne and Blackburn. Women under the Factory
Acts, 58.


Wallis, H. W. Cosmology of the Rigveda, 37.

Was Israel ever in Egypt? G. H. B. Wright, 27.

Weir, T. H. Short History of the Hebrew Text,
26.

Weisse, T. H. Elements of German, 42; Short
Guide to German Idioms, 42; Systematic Con-
versational Exercises in German, 42.

Weizsacker, Carl von. The Apostolic Age, 6.

Weld, A. G. Glimpses of Tennyson, 59.

Werner's Elementary Lessons in Cape Dutch, 42.

Wernle, Paul. Beginnings of Christianity, 4.

What I Have Taught my Children. Martin R.
Smith, 25.

What is Christianity? Adolf Harnack, s, ro.


INDEX—Continued.


Wicksteed, Rev. P. H. Ecclesiastical Institutions
of Holland, 27.

Wiley, Harvey W. Agricultural Chemical Analysis,
54:

Wilkinson, Rev. J. R. Anglican Liberalism, 12.


Williams, Right. Rev. W. L., D.C.L. Dictionary |


of the New Zealand Language, 42; Lessons in
Maori, 42.

Wimmer, R. My Struggle for Light, 9.

Women’s Industries. A. Harrison, 56.

Women’s Suffrage. Helen Blackburn, 55.

Women under the Factory Acts. Vynne and
Blackburn, 58.

Woods, Dr. H. G. Anglican Liberalism, 12,

Wright, Rev. C. H. H. Book of Genesis in
Hebrew Text, 27; Book of Ruthin Hebrew Text,
273; Daniel and its Critics, 27; Daniel and his
Prophecies, 27; Light from Egyptian Papyri,
27.

Wright, G. H. Bateson.
Israel ever in Egypt? 27.

Wright, W., and Dr. Hirsch, edited by.
mentary on the Book of Job, 27.

Wundt, Wilhelm. Outlines of Psychology, 32.

Wysor. Metallurgy, 54.


Book of Job, 27; Was


Com-


Yale Psychological Laboratory, Studies from, 32.

Yellow Book of Lecan, 43.

Yellow Fever Expedition, Report of.
and Myers, 4s.

Yellow Fever Prophylaxis.


Durham


Rubert Boyce, 44. 9 ”


Zoega, G. T. English-Icelandic Dictionary, 43.
Zompolides, Dr. D. A Course of Modern Greek,
43-


NEILL AND CO., LTD., PRINTERS, EDINBURGH.


ei /


ra aa


ite


‘BL 51 .R82 BOT 5294


Eucken, Rudolf, 1846-1926.
The truth of re]


igion


BL 51 .E82 1941 5234


Eucken, Rudolf, 1846-1926.
The truth Of religion


BRARY :
EMMANUEL SCHOOL OF RE
ONE W Al Aaa wea ul
JOHNSON Cit ¥


EM MANUE EL SCH HOOL O OF RELI LIGION LI LIBRA ARY


“Hi (LN
