The Life of the Spirit: An Introduction to Philosophy
Rudolf Eucken (F. L. Pogson, trans.) (1909)
========================================================================

PROVENANCE NOTE (Tower of Babel staging): Eucken's Einführung in eine Philosophie des Geisteslebens — his introduction to the philosophy of the spiritual life. F. L. Pogson's 1909 translation.

========================================================================

CROWN THEOLOGICAL LIBRARY


vl J®
*^*9


VOL. XXVI.
EUCKEN'S THE LIFE OF  THE SPIRIT


Crown  Ubeoloaical  Xibrarp

WORKS  ALREADY  PUBLISHED


Vol.  I.— BABEL  AND  BIBLE. By  Dr  FRIEDRICH  DELITZSCH. 45.  6d.  net.
Vol.  II.— THE  VIRGIN BIRTH OF CHRIST. An Historical  and  Critical

Essay. By  PAUL  LOBSTEIN. as.  6d.  net.
Vol.  III.— MY STRUGGLE FOR LIGHT. Confessions  of  a  Preacher. By

R.  WIMMKR. 35.  net.
Vol.  IV.— LIBERAL  CHRISTIANITY. Its  Origin,  Nature,  and  Mission. By

JEAN  REVILLE. 35.  6d.  net.

Vol.  V.-WHAT  IS  CHRISTIANITY? By  ADOLF  HARNACK. 4s.  6d.  net.
Vol.  VI.— FAITH  AND  MORALS. By  W.  HERRMANN. 45.  6d.  net.
Vol.  VII.— EARLY HEBREW STORY. A  Study  of  the Origin, the Value,

and  the  Historical  Background  of  the  Legends  of  Israel. By  JOHN  P.  PETERS,

D.D. 45.  6d.  net.
Vol.  VIII. —BIBLE  PROBLEMS  AND  THE  NEW  MATERIAL  FOR  THEIR

SOLUTION. By  Prof.  T.  K.  CHEYNE,  D.Litt.,  D.D. 45.  6d.  net.
Vol. IX.— THE DOCTRINE OF THE ATONEMENT AND ITS HIS
TORICAL  EVOLUTION,  AND  RELIGION  AND  MODERN  CULTURE.

By  the  late  AUGUSTS  SABATIER. 45.  net.

Vol.  X.— THE  EARLY  CHRISTIAN  CONCEPTION  OF  CHRIST  : Its  Sig
nificance  and  Value  in  the  History  of  Religion. By  OTTO  PFLKIDERER. 35.  net.
Vol.  XL— THE CHILD AND RELIGION. Eleven Essays by Various

Writers. 55.  net.
Vol.  XII.— THE EVOLUTION OF  RELIGION: An Anthropological Study.

By  L.  R.  FARNELL,  M.A.,  D.Litt. 45.  6d.  net.
Vol.  XIII.— THE BOOKS OF THE NEW TESTAMENT. By  BARON

HERMANN  VON  SODEN,  D.D. 45.  6d.  net.
Vol.  XIV.— JESUS. By  W.  BOUSSKT. 3s.  6d.  net.
Vol.  XV.— THE  COMMUNION OF THE CHRISTIAN  WITH  GOD. By

W.  HERRMANN. Revised  and  much  enlarged  Edition. 45.  6d.  net.
Vol.  XVI. -HEBREW RELIGION. To  the  Establishment  of  Judaism  under
-• Ezra. By  W.  E.  ADDIS,  M.A. 45.  6d.  net.

Vol.  XVII.— NATURALISM AND  RELIGION. By  RUDOLF  OTTO. 5s.  net.
Vol.  XVIII.-ESSAYS  ON  THE  SOCIAL  GOSPEL. By  Dr  ADOLF  HARNACK

and  Dr  HERRMANN. 45.  net.
Vol.  XIX.— THE RELIGION OF THE OLD TESTAMENT. By KARL

MARTI. 45.  net.
Vol. XX.— LUKE THE PHYSICIAN. Being Volume One of Dr Adolf

Harnack's  New  Testament  Studies. 55.  net.
Vol.  XXL— THE  HISTORICAL  EVIDENCE  FOR  THE  RESURRECTION

OF  JESUS  CHRIST. By  Prof.  KIRSOPP  LAKE. 4s.  6d.  net.
Vol.  XXII.— THE APOLOGETIC OF THE NEW TESTAMENT. By

E.  F.  SCOTT. 45.  6d.  net.
Vol.  XXIII.— THE  SAYINGS  OF  JESUS. Being  Volume Two  of  Dr  Adolf

Harnack's  New  Testament  Studies. 5*.  net.

Vol.  XXIV.— ANGLICAN  LIBERALISM.  By  TWELVE  CHURCHMEN. 4S.6d.net.
Vol.  XXV.— THE FUNDAMENTAL TRUTHS OF THE CHRISTIAN-
RELIGION. By  Dr  R.  SEEBF.RG. 45.  6d.  net.

Vol.  XXVI.— THE  LIFE  OF  THE  SPIRIT.  By  Dr  RUDOLF  EUCKEN.  4S.6d.net.
Vol.  XXVII.— THE ACTS OF THE APOSTLES. Being  Volume  Three  of

Dr  Adolf  Harnack's  New  Testament  Studies. 55.  net.
Vol.  XXVIII.— MONASTICISM AND THE CONFESSIONS OF ST

AUGUSTINE. By  Dr  ADOLF  HARNACK. 3s.6d.net.
Vol.  XXIX.— MODERNITY  AND  THE CHURCHES. By  Professor  PERCY

GARDNER. 45.  6d.  net.
Vol.  XXX.— THE  OLD  EGYPTIAN  FAITH. By  Professor  EDOUARD  NAVILLK.

Illustrated. 45.  6d.  net.
Vol.  XXXI.— THE  CONSTITUTION  AND  LAW  OF  THE  CHURCH IN

THE  FIRST  TWO  CENTURIES. By  Dr  ADOLF  HARNACK. 5s.  net.
Descriptive  Prospectus  on  Af>flicaiiot'..


THE

LIFE  OF  THE SPIRIT

AN INTRODUCTION  TO PHILOSOPHY


BY

RUDOLF EUCKEN

PROFESSOR OF PHILOSOPHY  IN JENA


TRANSLATED BY

F.  L.  POGSON,  M.A.


SECOND EDITION
WITH  INTRODUCTORY  NOTE  BY  THE  AUTHOR

(SECOND  IMPRESSION)


WILLIAMS & NORGATE

14  HENRIETTA STREET, COVENT  GARDEN, LONDON

NEW YORK: G. P. PUTNAM'S SONS

1909


First  printed  December  1908

Second  Edition  first  printed  February  1909

,i  Second  Impression,  December  1909


PREFACE

IN  the  present  volume  philosophy  is  not  re
garded  as  a  known  quantity,  and  no  attempt
is  made  to  impart  it  to  the  individual  by  a
comparative  survey  of  its  different  depart
ments  ;  but  it  is  treated  as  a  problem — the  pro
blem  that  it  in  reality  continually  becomes  in
the  course  of  the  centuries.  The  book  re
presents  a  particular  view  of  the  nature  of
philosophy,  and  undertakes  to  show  that  it
must  be  conceived  in  this  way  if  it  is  to  be
equal  to  the  demands  which  are  made  upon  it
by  the  life  of  mankind,  and  particularly  by  the
present  situation.  By  tracing  out  as  simply
and  clearly  as  possible  a  few  of  the  leading
lines  on  which  the  age-long  work  of  the  human
spirit  has  proceeded,  it  is  shown  that  our  spiri
tual  life  is  not  built  up  in  peace  and  security
on  a  given  foundation,  but  that  doubt  and


vi  PREFACE

conflict  extend  right  down  to  the  foundation,
and  that  no  progress  of  our  inner  life  is  possible
without  a  reversal  of  our  first  impressions.
If  philosophy  thus  appears  intimately  bound
up  with  all  the  striving  of  humanity  and
the  necessity  for  spiritual  self-preservation,
then  the  re-emergence  of  a  philosophy  of  life
and  existence  becomes  an  urgent  requirement
in  the  complication  and  confusion  of  the  present
situation,  and  in  the  struggle  which  we  have
to  wage  to-day  for  a  spiritual  centre  for  our
civilisation  and  a  perception  of  the  meaning
and  value  of  life.  It  is  because  this  struggle
concerns  not  merely  the  learned,  but  every
man  who  does  not  despair  of  attaining  to  inner
independence  and  true  fulness  of  life,  that  it
is  hoped  this  book  will  appeal  to  a  wider  circle
of  readers,  especially  those  who  share  the
author's  strong  and  painful  conviction  of  the
inadequacy  and  indeed  the  emptiness  of
modern  civilisation,  in  spite  of  all  its  outer
ostentation.  RUDOLF  EUCKEN.

JENA,  May  1908.


INTRODUCTORY  NOTE  BY  THE
AUTHOR

IT  may  render  the  present  volume  easier  to
understand  if  the  author  endeavours  to  sketch
in  a  few  words  what  he  aims  at  accomplishing.
My  efforts  have  been  inspired  by  the  strong
feeling  that  the  present  spiritual  situation  is
highly  unsatisfactory,  and  in  particular  that
there  is  a  sharp  opposition  which  divides
mankind  and  depresses  the  level  of  life.  The
greatness  of  our  age  lies  in  work,  in  the  sub
jection  and  shaping  of  the  world  of  objects
to  human  ends :  this  work  has  gained  more
and  more  brilliant  triumphs,  and  has  altered
the  whole  of  our  existence.  But  these  triumphs
have  not  been  accompanied  by  a  correspond
ing  growth  in  the  content  of  life  and  the  soul
of  man.  Work  directs  our  efforts  towards


viii  INTRODUCTORY  NOTE  BY  THE  AUTHOR

external  ends,  and  thus  brings  into  play
only  a  part,  and  indeed  a  more  and  more
insignificant  part,  of  our  faculties.  Hence  all
technical  achievements  do  not  preserve  us
from  inner  emptiness :  work  overwhelms  our
soul  and  makes  us  to  a  continually  increasing
extent  a  mere  means  and  instrument  of  its
restless  activity.  In  opposition  to  this  a
counter  -  movement  has  lately  arisen  ;  man
tears  himself  away  from  work,  and  opposes
to  it  his  own  subjective  condition ;  he  seeks
happiness  more  especially  by  treating  life  as
an  art,  by  cultivating  refined  and  pleasurable
emotions,  by  shaking  off  the  burden  of  matter
and  the  objective  world.  But  the  aestheticism
which  aims  at  transforming  the  whole  of  ex
istence  into  pleasure  and  enjoyment  provides
it  with  no  high  aims  and  no  real  content :
it  makes  life  a  mere  play  on  the  surface  of
things,  which  may  be  attractive  and  delightful
for  a  certain  time,  but  which  in  the  end  is
bound  to  produce  weariness  and  repulsion.
Hence  it  becomes  a  matter  of  importance


INTRODUCTORY  NOTE  BY  THE  AUTHOR ix

to  rise  above  the  opposition  between  soulless
work  and  empty  subjectivism ;  this,  however,
cannot  possibly  be  accomplished  from  the  out
side,  but  requires  the  strenuous  exertion  and
deepening  of  life  itself.  To  help  towards  this
end  is  the  special  task  of  philosophy,  which  is
thus  seen  to  be  indispensable  to  humanity,
for  it  is  philosophy  which  can  best  co-ordinate
life  into  a  whole,  investigate  the  specific
character  of  the  whole  so  formed,  press  for
ward  from  the  outer  appearance  to  the  inner
depths,  weigh  the  significance  of  each  element
in  the  universe,  and  try  to  ascertain  the  mean
ing  of  the  whole.  But  any  such  thorough
investigation  of  life  must  make  it  evident  that
human  life — in  a  large  measure,  at  any  rate
— falls  within  a  wider  concept  of  Nature,
and  displays  a  close  kinship  with  the  animal
world.  It  is  equally  evident,  however,  that  the
possibilities  of  human  life  are  by  no  means
entirely  exhausted  in  the  life  of  Nature,  but
that  with  it  a  new  stage  of  reality  arises,
which  we  call  spiritual.  This  stage  does  not


x INTRODUCTORY  NOTE  BY  THE  AUTHOR

merely  exhibit  particular  new  qualities,  but
also  involves  an  entirely  new  kind  of  exist
ence  :  psychical  life,  which,  in  the  stages  below
the  human,  forms  a  mere  appendage  and
serves  only  to  promote  physical  self-pre
servation,  here  first  reaches  independence,
gives  rise  to  entirely  new  realities  and  values,
and  forms  a  realm  which  is  co-ordinated
into  a  whole  by  internal  connections.  This
whole  cannot  possibly  be  set  down  as
a  merely  human  product ;  it  must  spring
from  the  universe  and  thence  be  communi
cated  to  man.  In  appropriating  it  he  appears
as  a  being  who  has  a  share  in  a  cosmic
movement  and  is  called  upon  to  further  it.
But  the  spiritual  life  is  no  mere  possession  to
be  enjoyed  by  man.  His  average  existence
usually  forms  a  turbid  medley  in  which  nature
is  strong  and  spirituality  weak.  Hence  the
object  to  be  aimed  at  is  first  to  build  up  in
opposition  to  this  average  life  a  realm  of
genuine  spirituality  by  means  of  united  work,
and  then  to  raise  humanity  up  to  it.  This


INTRODUCTORY  NOTE  BY  THE  AUTHOR xi

transforms  the  whole  of  our  existence  into
a  problem  and  a  task ;  at  every  point  life
must  be  raised  to  an  essentially  higher  level,
a  reversal  of  its  previous  course  must  be
accomplished ;  our  view  of  the  world  and
the  kind  of  life  we  lead  must  be  given  a
specific  shape ;  humanity  as  a  whole  has  here
a  common  work  to  carry  out.  From  this
starting-point  a  new  idealism  is  developed,
a  philosophy  which  may  be  termed  activism.
This  activism  differs  both  from  the  older
speculation  and  from  modern  Pragmatism.
From  the  former  it  is  distinguished  by  its
repudiation  of  intellectualism,  by  its  ground
ing  of  knowledge  on  life,  and  by  its  constant
return  to  the  content  of  life  as  the  funda
mental  and  controlling  fact.  From  Pragma
tism  it  is  differentiated  by  the  fact  that  it
does  not  make  the  welfare  of  the  mere  man,
whether  as  an  individual  or  in  society,  its
leading  aim,  but  sees  in  man  the  emergence
of  something  superhuman,  divine,  and  eternal,
and  makes  this  the  sure  guiding  star  of  its


xii  INTRODUCTORY  NOTE  BY  THE  AUTHOR

efforts ;  by  this  means  it  raises  them  above
the  contingency  of  the  individual  and  the
vicissitudes  of  time,  and  gives  to  man's  life
a  worthy  content.

But  where  endeavour  is  thus  concentrated
chiefly  on  the  content  and  connections  of  life,
the  consideration  of  the  general  movement  of
history  will  acquire  great  significance.  For
the  spiritual  life  does  not  lie  ready  to  hand
in  the  consciousness  of  individuals  ;  it  reveals
to  us  its  depths  and  its  goals  only  through
manifold  experiences  and  hard  struggles ;
these  experiences  and  struggles,  with  the
development  of  spiritual  life  which  they  have
brought  about,  form  the  heart  and  core  of
the  movement  of  history.  Hence  history,
when  regarded  from  the  philosophical  point
of  view,  leads  us  to  consider  the  height  of
spiritual  life  which  has  been  already  attained  ;
not  only  so,  but  with  regard  to  the  different
leading  problems  of  philosophy,  the  process
of  tracing  out  the  fate  they  have  met  with
in  the  course  of  the  centuries  is  an  excellent


INTRODUCTORY  NOTE  BY  THE  AUTHOR  xiii

means  of  taking  bearings  and  of  seeing  both
what  in  them  is  permanently  necessary,  and
what  in  this  connection  the  present  requires
from  the  thinker.  This  attention  to  history
is  not  meant  to  alienate  us  from  the  present,
but,  by  increasing  our  philosophical  insight,
it  should  reveal  to  us  a  wider  and  richer
present  than  that  of  the  mere  moment.  This
is  the  justification  for  the  attempt  made  in
this  volume  to  fix  our  position  with  regard
to  the  present  tasks  of  philosophy  by  means
of  an  historical  survey.

RUDOLF  EUCREN.
JENA.


TRANSLATOR'S NOTE

IT  is  my  pleasant  duty  to  thank  the  friends
who  have  helped  me  in  various  ways.  The
translation  owes  much  to  my  discussions  with
Mr  G.  G.  Berry,  whose  keen  insight  has
cleared  up  many  a  difficulty.  I  am  also  much
indebted  to  Mr  W.  R.  Boyce  Gibson  for
generously  allowing  me  to  see  in  manuscript
the  concluding  portion  of  his  forthcoming
translation  of  Prof.  Eucken's  Lebensansckau-
ungen,  and  for  giving  me  the  benefit  in  other
ways  of  his  intimate  knowledge  of  Prof.
Eucken's  philosophy.  To  Prof.  L.  P.  Jacks
I  owe  the  correct  interpretation  of  the  passage
from  Hegel  quoted  on  p.  54.  The  translation
in  the  "English  and  Foreign  Philosophical
Library"  does  not  seem  to  bring  out  the  real
meaning,  but  it  was  unfortunately  too  late  to


xvi  TRANSLATORS NOTE

alter  it.  Finally,  I  am  greatly  indebted  to
Prof.  Eucken  himself  for  courteously  giving
me  information  on  a  considerable  number  of
doubtful  points.  For  any  errors  that  there
may  be,  I,  of  course,  am  solely  responsible.

F.  L.  POGSON.

OXFORD, December  1908.


CONTENTS


INTRODUCTION


PAGES
1-29


Philosophy  the  queen  of  sciences,  I ;  ancient  philosophy,
2 ;  religion  and  philosophy,  2  ;  philosophy  and  its  oppon
ents,  3 ;  internal  conflicts  of  philosophy,  4 ;  the  aim  of
philosophy,  5-7 ;  the  influence  of  philosophy,  8 ;  philo
sophy  as  the  representative  of  necessities  of  thought,  9-11;
philosophy  and  life,  11-14  >  spiritual  life,  15-20  ;  history,
philosophy,  and  the  spiritual  life,  21-29.


CHAPTER  I


UNITY  AND  MULTIPLICITY


30-103


The  systemalisation  of  life,  30 ;  demand  for  unification,
30 ;  Greek  philosophy  and  unity,  32-34  ;  Plato's  doctrine
of  ideas,  35  ;  Aristotle's  scheme  of  life,  37-40  ;  the  creative
activity  of  art,  40  ;  philosophy  and  universal  reason,  42  ;
the  function  of  religion,  43  ;  Plotinus  and  the  search  for
unity,  44  ;  unity  and  the  spiritual  life,  46  ;  mysticism,  47  ;
Christianity  and  unity,  49  ;  the  ethical  conception  of  God,
49  ;  the  Christian  conception  of  God,  50  ;  the  Greek
conception  of  the  Deity,  51  ;  exaltation  of  the  individual,
53  ;  the  Church  and  individual  freedom,  55  ;  contradictions
of  Christianity,  55  ;  the  absorption  of  Christianity  by  the
Church,  57-59 ;  Scholasticism,  61  ;  freedom,  63-68 ;
modern  science  and  its  aims,  68-72  ;  new  forms  and  aims
of  philosophy,  72  et  seq.  ;  individualism  and  society,  83  ;
personality  and  the  world,  84 ;  civilisation  and  the
spiritual  life,  87  ;  German  philosophy,  88  ;  the  medieval
ecclesiastical  system,  92  ;  history  and  the  spiritual  life,
94 ;  philosophy  and  the  spiritual  life,  100-103.
xvii


xviii  CONTENTS

CHAPTER  II

PAGES

CHANGE  AND  PERSISTENCE — TIME  AND  ETERNITY 104-181

The  endlessness  of  time  and  the  longing  for  eternity,  105  ;
religion  and  its  influences,  106  ;  Greek  philosophy  and  its
influence,  107-112  ;  the  search  for  the  persistent,  112-113  ;
the  Greek  ideal  of  life,  115  ;  eternal  rest  the  supreme  goal
of  religion,  117  ;  the  Christian  scheme  of  life,  119-123  ;
the  Church  the  guardian  of  unchangeable  truth,  124  ;
classical  antiquity  and  the  beginnings  of  Christianity,  126  ;
Scholasticism,  126;  mysticism,  127;  persistence  and  medi
evalism,  128  ;  the  Renaissance  and  the 'Reformation,  132  ;
"middle  ages":  derivation  of  the  term,  133;  the
doctrine  of  evolution,  135  et  seq.  ;  the  conception  of
evolution  in  Faust,  139  ;  time  and  eternity,  139  et  seq,  ;
three  phases  of  evolution,  140-141  ;  natural  science  and
Positivism,  141  ;  co  ordination  needed  in  spiritual  work,
145  ;  modern  philosophy,  146  ;  historical  modes  of  thought,
151  ;  natural  law,  153  ;  the  futility  of  a  restless  life,  157  ;
the  rejuvenescence  of  the  old  Mysticism,  159  ;  rationalism
and  optimism,  161  ;  historical  evolution  an  absurdity,
163  ;  the  medieval  system  of  the  Roman  Catholic  Church,
164-167  ;  the  illusory  recourse  to  history,  167-168  ;  in
dependent  work,  168  ;  the  movement  of  history,  169  ;
faith  in  the  ultimate  rationality  of  reality  the  basis  of
spiritual  life,  176  ;  the  co-operation  of  philosophy  and  the
reconciliation  of  time  and  eternity,  178-181.

CHAPTER  III
THE  OUTER  WORLD  AND  THE  INNER  WORLD . 182-274

The  need  and  use  of  philosophy,  182-184;  the  two
worlds,  \%$et  set],  ;  dualism,  185-186;  materialism,  187;
spiritualism,  188  ;  monism,  188-190  ;  the  relation  between
idealism  and  naturalism,  193-199;  Greek  idealism  and  its
complications,  199-208  ;  the  later  ages  of  antiquity  and
the  two  worlds,  208-210;  Christianity  and  the  two
worlds,  211-218;  Christianity  the  subject  of  constant
strife,  218  ;  the  fundamental  conception  of  Christianity,
219  ;  the  Christian  conception  of  the  sacrament,  225  ;  the
trend  of  modern  life  and  the  relation  of  the  two  worlds,
227-232  ;  the  scientific  conception  of  the  soul,  232  ;  in
tellectual  culture  and  the  question,  234-238 ;  modern


CONTENTS  xix

PAGES


natural  science,  238-241  ;  defects  of  naturalism,  246-249;
spiritual  life  a  new  life,  256 ;  religion  and  the  spiritual
life,  262-264 ;  the  creative  activity  of  art,  264-266 ;
science  and  the  question,  266  ;  the  close  connection  of  the
spiritual  with  the  natural,  270-273.


CHAPTER  IV

THE  PROBLEM  OF  TRUTH .  .  . 275-333

Truth  and  happiness :  opposing  conditions,  275 !
Augustine  and  Spinoza,  277-278  ;  the  conception  of
truth,  280-283  ;  the  classical  idea  of  truth,  284-293 ;
Scepticism  and  truth,  291  ;  Christianity  and  the  question,
294~3°2  ;  faith  the  way  to  truth,  294-296  ;  difficulties  re
garding  faith,  296  ;  the  Roman  Catholic  Church  and  faith,
297-298  ;  faith,  the  remover  of  doubt,  itself  an  object  of
doubt,  302;  the  Enlightenment,  307-313  ;  critical  philo
sophy,  313-319 ;  constructive  speculation,  319-321  ;
Positivism,  322  ;  Pragmatism,  322-326  ;  truth  and  meta
physics,  322  326  ;  modern  philosophy  and  truth,  327-333.

CHAPTER  V
THE  PROBLEM  OF  HAPPINESS .... 334-394

Work  and  happiness,  334  ;  the  craving  after  happiness,
335-337  ;  a  survey  of  world  history  in  connection  with
happiness,  337  et  seq.  ;  the  Greek  idea  of  happiness,  338-
339  ;  Plato's  conception  of  happiness,  340-342  ;  Aristotle
and  happiness,  343-345  ;  an  examination  of  the  ideal  of
happiness  of  the  great  classical  thinkers,  345-357;  Plotinus'
ideal  of  happiness,  350-355 ;  the  Christian  pursuit  of
happiness,  357  ;  the  Christian  conception  of  pain,  360-
363  ;  modern  idea  of  happiness,  366-373  ;  limitations  of
knowledge  and  complications  arising  therefrom,  373  et
seq-  ;  aesthetic  culture,  383-384 ;  happiness  and  the
question  of  personality,  384-386 ;  philosophy  and  happi
ness,  391-394.

CONCLUSION ....  , 395-403


THE

LIFE  OF  THE  SPIRIT

INTRODUCTION

THAT  philosophy  is  not  only  full  of  problems,
but  that  philosophy  itself  as  a  whole  is  and
remains  a  problem  is  shown  by  the  varied
estimation  in  which  it  has  been  held  and  the
disputed  place  which  it  occupies  in  the  life  of
mankind.  On  the  one  hand  it  is  called  the
queen  of  the  sciences,  and  a  life  dedicated  to
it  seems  the  acme  of  human  existence ;  minds
of  the  highest  rank  have  laboured  to  serve  it,
and  it  has  often  intervened  with  great  effect
to  modify  the  whole  condition  of  humanity.
This  modifying  influence,  moreover,  has
appeared  in  a  great  variety  of  ramifications.


2  THE LIFE OF  THE SPIRIT

/  At  one  time,  as  in  the  case  of  Plato,  philosophy
has  wrested  pure  ideals  from  the  dark  tangle
of  everyday  life  and  has  held  them  up  as  sure
guiding  stars  to  action.  At  another  time,  as

//'  in  the  case  of  Aristotle,  it  has  sought  to  grasp

the  fulness  of  reality  in  a  unified  whole  and  to
penetrate  the  whole  of  life  as  an  organizing
influence.  At  still  another  time,  as  in  the

ai  later  ages  of  antiquity,  it  has  been  a  support

and  finally  a  consolation  amid  the  cares  and
troubles  of  life.  In  modern  times  again  it
has  acted  as  an  influence  in  liberating  men's
minds  and  as  a  torch  of  advancing  culture.
Moreover,  it  has  in  addition  carried  out  a
vigorous  examination  of  the  traditional  condi
tion  of  life  and  has  sought  to  enlighten  men  in
the  most  thoroughgoing  way  as  to  the  limits
of  their  powers.  No  great  spiritual  achieve
ment  has  seemed  possible  without  the  help
and  co-operation  of  philosophy ;  whenever  it
has  been  wanting  life  has  lost  in  spontaneity,
in  freedom  of  movement,  in  depth.  Religion
especially  has  often  enough  experienced  this


INTRODUCTION  3

to  its  grave  injury.  When  we  follow  this  line
of  thought  philosophy  appears  as  an  indispens
able  and  most  important  part  of  the  spiritual
possessions  of  humanity.

But  on  the  other  hand  every  survey  of
human  experience  shows  that  at  all  times
philosophy  has  had  its  zealous  opponents,  who
have  declared  that  it  was  superfluous  and
indeed  have  rejected  it  as  harmful.  This  is
the  case  with  the  specialist,  who  believes  that
the  work  of  knowledge  is  completely  defined
when  the  world  has  been  divided  up  among
the  different  scientific  disciplines ;  with  the
practical  man  who  regards  brooding  and  reflec
tion  as  a  hindrance  to  keenness  of  action  ;  and,
finally,  with  the  believer  in  positive  religion,
who  thinks  that  philosophy  undermines  the
security  of  faith  and  fills  men  with  proud  self-
confidence.  But  more  dangerous  than  any
attack  from  without  is  the  fact  that  philosophy
is  uncertain  of  itself,  that  its  work  is  dislocated,
that  it  is  divided  into  different  schools,  each
one  of  which,  in  order  to  maintain  itself,  thinks


4  THE LIFE OF  THE SPIRIT

it  necessary  to  refute  all  the  others.  This  con
flict  threatens  to  remain  unsettled  and  without
result ;  it  seems  in  the  course  of  the  centuries
to  grow  rather  than  to  diminish.  For  whether
the  Sophists  were  in  the  right  with  their
subjectivism,  or  Socrates  with  his  doctrine  of
concepts,  whether  happiness  in  life  is  to  be
sought  by  the  way  of  the  Stoa  or  by  that  of
Epicurus,  is  still  an  open  question.  Of  course
the  individual  actors  have  withdrawn  from  the
stage,  but  their  ideas  have  remained  and
passionately  continue  the  fight,  like  the  spirits
on  the  Catalaunian  Fields.  From  this  stand
point  it  remains  incomprehensible  how  philo
sophy  can  have  gained  a  deep  influence  over
thought  and  life  ;  but  if  this  influence  must  be
accepted  as  an  indisputable  fact,  we  are  con
fronted  by  a  riddle  which  necessarily  impels
us  to  take  our  bearings  both  as  to  the  task  and
the  position  of  philosophy.

It  is  true  that  an  attempt  has  been  made  to
get  rid  of  the  above  contradiction  by  means  of
a  conception  of  philosophy  which  would  make


INTRODUCTION  5

it  acceptable  to  all :  the  only  question  is
whether,  in  such  a  case,  everything  is  not  lost
which  lends  it  independence  and  value.  In
earlier  times  as  well  as  at  the  present  day
it  has  often  been  held  up  as  the  sole  aim  of
philosophy  to  co-ordinate  the  work  of  the
different  sciences  and  to  blend  their  results
into  a  unified  picture:  the  more  investiga
tion  becomes  specialized,  it  is  said,  the  more
necessary  is  a  special  discipline  which  should
concern  itself  with  any  unity  that  may
be  left;  in  surveying  and  discussing  the  pre
suppositions,  the  methods,  and  the  results  of
the  individual  sciences,  philosophy  has  an
important  task  to  which  no  objection  can  be
raised.  No  doubt  there  is  a  task  for  philo
sophy  here,  but  every  attempt  to  gain  a  more
exact  conception  of  it  gives  rise  to  com
plications  and  difference  of  opinion.  How  are
we  to  conceive  of  this  surveying  and  co
ordinating  activity  ?  If  it  is  bound  to  take
the  sciences  as  they  come,  if  it  has  no  right
of  revision,  if  it  can  venture  on  no  further


6  THE LIFE OF  THE SPIRIT

development,  then  to  be  sure  it  has  escaped
all  danger,  but  at  the  same  time  it  has  lost  all
significance.  For  if  it  is  thus  limited  it
becomes  merely  a  registering  of  the  results  of
the  particular  sciences,  an  encyclopaedia  which
is  not  a  genuine  science,  though  a  generous
use  of  language  might  give  it  the  name.  In
particular  it  is  hard  to  see  how  a  mere  encyclo
paedia  could  have  exerted  upon  thought  and
life  those  deeply  disturbing  and  fruitfully
elevating  influences  which  the  examples  of
Plato  and  Kant  are  enough  to  show  have
actually  proceeded  from  it.  And  what  if  the
individual  sciences  do  not  harmonize  without
demur,  if  bitter  conflicts  arise,  if,  for  example,
one  department  of  science  contends  for  the
exclusive  operation  of  mechanical  causality,
but  another  craves  at  least  some  shred  of
freedom  therefrom  ?  Shall  philosophy  quietly
suffer  such  a  contradiction  to  remain  and  be
ready  to  submit  to  it  ?  According  to  the
above  conception  it  would  not  have  the
slightest  remedy.


INTRODUCTION  7

On  the  other  hand  one  who  desiderates  for
philosophy  a  separate  domain  of  activity  may
perhaps  be  inclined  to  think  that  it  carries  out
a  synthesis  of  the  manifold  in  accordance  with
the  particular  nature  of  the  contemplating
subject ;  that  it  is  not  so  much  a  science
governed  by  strict  rules  as  an  unfettered  art,
and  that  it  therefore  remains  inseparably  bound
up  with  the  nature  of  the  individual.  Ac
cording  to  this  conception,  philosophy  would
offer  an  incalculable  variety  of  pictures  of  the
world,  some  of  which  would  quickly  fade,
while  to  others  their  inherent  spiritual  power
would  give  the  capacity  to  subjugate  men's
minds  and  to  last  for  thousands  of  years.
This  view  seems  to  be  favoured  by  the  fact
that  the  history  of  philosophy  shows  us  a  great
abundance  of  figures.  There  is  no  doubt  that
this  conception  contains  a  certain  amount  of
truth  ;  the  subjective  element  is  particularly
important  in  philosophy,  for  a  man's  philosophy
can  least  of  all  be  separated  from  the  whole
of  his  personality.  But  on  the  other  hand


8  THE LIFE OF  THE SPIRIT

the  influence  which  philosophy  has  exercised
throughout  history  remains  unexplained.  For
how  could  subjective  pictures  of  that  kind
cause  such  passionate  excitement  and  stir,  or
give  rise  to  so  much  love  and  hate  ?  Besides
this,  philosophy  does  not  merely  offer  an
unlimited  number  of  individual  pictures,  but
it  also  shows  persistent  types  which  seem  to
embody  the  fundamental  tendencies  of  human
existence  and  effort.  Hellenism  especially  has
given  rise  to  an  abundance  of  types  to  which
humanity  has  remained  faithful  as  it  has  gone
on  its  way,  and  which  are  continually  producing
new  effects.  In  spite  of  all  the  progress  of
knowledge,  Platonism  and  Aristotelianism,
Stoicism  and  Epicureanism  still  maintain  their
position.  Besides,  it  would  be  incompre
hensible  how  philosophy  as  a  purely  individual
and  subjective  reflection  of  reality  could  affect
the  contents  of  thought  and  alter  the  conditions
of  life,  or  how  it  could  be  for  humanity  a  source
of  freedom,  of  security,  and  of  rejuvenation.
Philosophy  has  been  often  enough  a  com-


INTRODUCTION  9

pelling  force  which  has  transformed  the  whole
of  the  work  of  the  spirit.  Whence  this  com
pulsion  if  it  rests  purely  on  the  caprice  of  the
individual  ?

It  is  true  that  an  attempt  has  been  made  to
avoid  the  danger  of  such  a  relapse  into  pure
subjectivity  by  regarding  philosophy  as  the
representative  of  necessities  of  thought  which
have  not  been  sufficiently  emphasized  in  every
day  life  and  in  the  other  sciences.  By  un
folding  and  fully  developing  these  necessities
philosophy  has  the  right  and  the  duty  of
transcending  its  starting-point  and  reorganiz
ing  its  representation  of  reality.  It  thus
acquires  compelling  force  and  is  bound,  in
particular,  to  set  itself  the  task  of  radically
removing  all  the  contradictions  which  appear
in  our  world  of  thought.  This  seems  to  lift
its  task  above  the  risk  of  pure  subjectivity  and
to  make  it  a  matter  which  concerns  the  whole
of  humanity.  But  this  conception,  too,  con
tains  more  complications  than  are  apparent  at
first  sight.  The  experience  of  history  shows


10  THE LIFE OF  THE SPIRIT

that  there  is  no  unanimity  as  to  the  exact
nature  of  that  which  is  to  count  as  a  necessity
of  thought.  Great  thinkers  have  absolutely
contradicted  one  another  on  this  subject:
Hegel,  for  example,  saw  in  contradictions  a
power  favourable  to  the  production  and  pro
motion  of  spiritual  life,  while  to  Herbart,  on
the  contrary,  they  seemed  absolutely  intoler
able.  Does  not,  then,  the  search  for  necessities
of  thought  bring  us  back  to  the  very  subject
ivity  beyond  which  it  was  to  carry  us  ?  And
we  may  be  doubtful  of  the  right  of  a  thinking
which  rests  purely  upon  itself  to  impose  its
demands  on  the  totality  of  things.  Thinking,
in  its  immediateness,  is  something  which  goes
on  in  man  :  if  things  are  to  conform  to  thought,
does  there  not  arise  a  merely  human  interpreta
tion  of  reality  which  may  be  quite  foreign  to
reality  itself?  But  the  strongest  motive  in
the  pursuit  of  truth  is  the  desire  to  get  beyond
the  small  and  narrow  circle  of  the  merely
human  and  to  gain  full  participation  in  the
life  of  things  themselves,  in  the  breadth  and


INTRODUCTION  11

truth  of  the  universe.  It  is,  above  all,  this
inner  expansion  and  liberation,  this  carrying
of  man  beyond  himself,  which  makes  the  work
of  great  thinkers  valuable  and  helpful  to  us ;
a  merely  human  truth  is  a  contradiction  in
terms,  is  no  truth  at  all.  If  we  cannot  thus
be  sure  of  some  sort  of  inner  connection  with
the  universe  in  our  thinking,  if  we  cannot
found  our  thinking  on  a  wider  and  deeper
life,  then  philosophy  does  not  exist  in  the
sense  in  which  it  was  understood  at  the  height
of  its  activity,  and  in  which  it  has,  as  a  matter
of  fact,  influenced  mankind.

We  are  thus  thrown  back  from  thought  on
to  life — life  as  it  co-ordinates  itself  from  within
to  some  sort  of  unified  whole,  directs  its  powers
to  particular  ends,  and  adjusts  itself  to  the
totality  of  its  environment.  We  need  only
examine  the  individual  thinkers  more  exactly
as  regards  the  inner  texture  of  their  work  and
the  aims  which  have  actuated  them,  to  become
aware  that,  behind  what  stands  before  us  as
fully  accomplished,  there  lies  a  particular


12  THE LIFE OF  THE SPIRIT

shaping  of  life,  and  that  here  is  the  point  of
division  which  separates  thinkers  and  drives
them  to  do  battle  with  one  another.  Only
because  it  was  founded  in  such  a  life  has
thought  attained  a  finished  form  as  well  as  a
constraining  necessity  ;  only  from  this  starting-
point  has  it  gained  the  power  of  taking  reality
up  into  itself  and  striving  after  inner  illumina
tion.  The  products  of  thinking  have  varied
very  largely  for  the  reason  that,  corresponding
to  the  connection  with  life  which  is  the  founda
tion  of  thought,  the  work  of  knowledge  has
been  from  the  first  conceived  differently.  The
failure  to  recognize  this  connection  between
thought  and  life  is  mostly  to  blame  for  the
fact  that  the  strife  of  the  philosophers  with
one  another  has  turned  out  to  be  so  unedifying
and  so  fruitless.  The  contest  always  ran  the
risk  of  moving  in  a  circle,  because  it  never  got
back  to  the  point  where  in  reality  the  division
lies,  and  because  it  treated  as  the  main  thing
what  was  the  effect  of  deeper  causes.  This
connection  of  thought  with  life  enables  us  also


INTRODUCTION  13

to  understand  that  in  the  case  of  philosophy
the  work  of  knowledge  is  so  closely  connected
with  the  nature  of  the  personality.

But  this  connection  of  thought  with  life
does  not  seem  to  lead  us  out  of  our  complica
tions  to  a  secure  standpoint.  The  danger
again  arises  of  a  wide  separation  and  division
of  mankind  into  separate  circles.  For,  after
all,  different  types  of  life  do  develop  and  range
themselves  side  by  side  and  put  forth  equal
claims.  Who  is  to  decide  to  which  of  them
belongs  the  higher  right  and  leadership,  and
which,  therefore,  may  produce  a  general  picture
of  reality  that  should  be  reckoned  as  definitive  ?
Besides,  this  gives  no  explanation  how  a  move
ment  which  arises  in  man  could  go  beyond
him,  bring  him  into  connection  with  the  great
world,  and  put  him  in  possession  of  its  meaning.
And  without  this  there  is  no  knowledge  of
truth  in  the  sense  in  which  philosophy  strives
to  attain  it.

All  these  discussions  come  in  the  end  to
this,  that  the  existence  of  philosophy  is  bound


14  THE LIFE OF  THE SPIRIT

up  with  definite  conditions  which  are  by  no
means  perfectly  obvious,  and  which  no  mere
acuteness  or  reflection  can  bring  to  light,  but
as  to  whose  existence  or  non-existence  only
experience  can  decide.  If  thought  is  to  have
a  root  and  a  basis  in  life,  and  if  at  the  same
time  it  is  to  have  a  constraining  power  and  a
character  of  universality,  there  is  only  one
possibility.  There  must  appear  within  reach
of  man  a  life  which  can  rise  above  divisions
and  can  counteract  them,  a  life,  further,  which
can  develop  out  of  its  own  movement  compre
hensive  connections  and,  indeed,  can  show
itself  active  in  moulding  the  world.  Finally,
it  must  be  a  life  which  not  only  touches  and
interprets  what  it  lays  hold  of  from  the  outside,
but  shapes  it  from  within  and  admits  it  to  its
own  depths.  Only  if  man  is  able  in  this  way
to  share  in  a  universal  life  and  thereby  outgrow
the  limits  of  his  particular  nature,  can  his
thinking  advance  from  a  mere  cognition  of
things  to  a  true  knowledge.  Thus  there
results  the  possibility  and,  indeed,  the  neces-


INTRODUCTION  15

sity  of  a  new  way  of  looking  at  the  world  in
contrast  to  that  practised  by  the  individual
sciences.

The  question  then  is  whether  we  have  evi
dence  of  a  life  of  this  kind,  which  shapes  our
world  and  places  us  in  a  different  fundamental
relationship  to  reality.  We  believe  that  we
can  confidently  answer  this  question  in  the
affirmative.  For  we  only  need  to  gain  a
keener  apprehension  of  what  is  called  spiritual
life,  and  to  set  it  in  sharper  relief  against  the
environment  in  which  human  existence  in
volves  it,  to  become  aware  that  it  offers  the
very  thing  which  we  desire  and  seek.  Spiritual
life  is,  above  all,  the  formation  of  a  coherent
system  in  life.  In  it  not  merely  the  poten
tialities  of  the  subject  are  aroused  and  height
ened,  but  confronting  the  subject  there  arises
a  field,  and  indeed  a  whole  kingdom,  of  an  ob
jective  nature.  Subject  and  object  are  compre
hended  in  a  self-contained  activity  and  assist
each  other's  further  development.  Nothing
short  of  such  a  comprehension  of  the  two  sides


16  THE LIFE OF  THE SPIRIT

can  supply  life  with  contents  and  values  which,
with  all  their  inwardness,  possess  an  indubitable
superiority  over  all  merely  human  powers  and
opinions.  It  is  in  this  way  that  whole  pro
vinces  such  as  science  and  art,  jurisprudence
and  morality,  grow  up  and  develop  their  own
contents,  their  own  motives,  their  own  laws.
These  provinces,  however,  strive  towards  unity
and  finally  coalesce  in  a  unified  world.  In
fact,  they  belong  on  the  subjective  side  from
the  very  beginning  to  such  a  unified  whole,
and  only  in  connection  with  it  can  they
solve  their  own  problem.  Thus  we  find  that
within  man  there  is  something  which  goes
beyond  him ;  he  himself  must  become  some
thing  different,  and  his  whole  life  assumes
the  form  of  a  problem  when  a  unified
world  thus  makes  its  appearance  in  his  life
and  distinguishes  itself  from  that  which  is
merely  human.

But  what  is  the  significance  of  this  new  life
in  relation  to  the  whole  of  reality  ?  This  can
only  be  estimated  by  comparing  it  with  that


INTRODUCTION  17

from  which  it  distinguishes  itself  and  which  it
strives  to  transcend.  In  the  first  place,  the
realm  of  nature  surrounds  us  all  and  penetrates
deep  into  the  human  soul.  Here  we  see  reality
dissected  into  purely  individual  elements.  Life
is  resolved  into  the  relations  of  these  elements  ;
it  passes  in  purely  individual  processes,  and
does  not  get  beyond  mere  matter-of-fact.  For
there  exists  here  no  life  of  the  whole,  which
should  comprehend  the  diversity,  take  it  up
into  itself  and  thence  draw  profit.  But  the
amount  of  psychical  life  which  exists  here  has
not  yet  reached  the  stage  at  which  it  might  be
called  an  individual  life.  For  in  the  realm  of
nature  psychical  life  does  not  attain  any  in
dependence  ;  it  remains  a  mere  concomitant
phenomenon.  It  does  not  stand  out  as  an  end
in  itself,  but  forms  a  mere  means  and  instru
ment  for  the  preservation  of  living  beings  in
the  hard  struggle  for  existence.  But  the  great
change  that  ensues  when  spiritual  life  comes
upon  the  scene  is  that  now  the  inner  life

becomes independent and  begins  to  prepare

2


18  THE LIFE OF  THE SPIRIT

for  itself  a  world  of  its  own.  This  change,
with  its  introduction  of  an  essentially  new
kind  of  life,  and  its  construction  of  a  world
from  within,  with  its  own  particular  contents,
values,  and  order,  can  never  be  the  work  of
man  by  himself.  It  is  only  to  be  understood
as  a  movement  of  the  whole  of  reality  itself,
which  surrounds  man,  takes  hold  of  him,
and  drives  him  on.  Thus  the  movement
towards  spiritual  life  appears  as  a  movement
of  reality  towards  an  independent  conscious
existence.  A  depth  of  the  world  is  revealed
which  before  was  hidden,  and  this  gives  rise  to
a  complete  transformation  which  must  produce
an  essentially  new  view  of  reality.  But  this
new  life,  by  the  mere  fact  of  its  having  con
structed  a  state  of  civilization  which  exists
side  by  side  with  what  is  purely  natural,  has
proved  its  power  to  make  its  way  in  opposition
to  pre-existing  forces.  The  achievement  of
civilization,  when  at  its  height,  in  producing
essentially  new  objects  and  essentially  new
human  characters,  can  have  been  made  possible


INTRODUCTION  19

only  by  the  force  of  an  independent  spiritual
life,  seeking  to  unfold  itself.

With  the  recognition  of  this  movement
there  is  a  change  in  the  whole  representation
of  our  spiritual  work.  It  is  no  longer  accessory
to  the  main  body  of  reality,  and  it  is  not  a
private  concern  of  man  by  himself,  but  in  it
we  recognize  a  portion  of  a  world-movement,
of  which  mankind  is  the  servant.  From  this
standpoint,  that  work  can  claim  superiority
both  over  isolated  individuals  and  over  all
mere  subjectivism.

But  what  is  true  of  spiritual  work  generally
applies  also  to  philosophy.  Man  does  not,
out  of  his  own  inner  consciousness  and  possibly
quite  at  random,  put  a  particular  complexion
on  the  world,  but  his  philosophy  can  only
possess  truth  and  power  so  far  as  the  life  of
the  world  comes  to  clear  consciousness  in  it
and  reveals  its  own  depth.  The  co-ordination
of  the  manifold,  which  philosophy  undertakes,
cannot  be  imposed  upon  reality  from  the  out
side,  but  must  come  from  within  it  and  conduce


20  THE LIFE OF  THE SPIRIT

to  its  unfolding.  The  task  of  philosophy  now
is  to  enhance  and  thus  to  foster  that  co-ordina
tion  in  the  work  of  thought.  In  opposition
to  the  circumstances  of  humanity  it  will  have
to  be  the  champion  and  enforcer  of  the  neces
sities  of  the  spiritual  life,  and  bring  home  clearly
to  man  the  connections  of  that  life.  From
this  point  of  view  it  is  quite  comprehensible
how,  throughout  the  course  of  history,  phil
osophy  was  bound  to  accompany  the  life  and
the  struggles  of  humanity,  and  how  it  could
lift  them  to  a  higher  level.  It  was  able  to  do
this  because  it  was  not  an  opinion  of  man  by
himself,  but  because  it  was  a  work  and  a  demand
of  the  spiritual  life.  It  is  only  as  a  philosophy
of  spiritual  life  in  this  sense  that  philosophy
can  attain  to  independence  and  maintain  the
position  assigned  to  it  by  its  friends.  And
from  this  point  of  view  its  work  can  be  seen
to  be  a  connected  task  which  is  common  to
the  whole  of  humanity.

But  at  the  same  time,  this  conception  ex
plains  why  philosophy  is  exposed  to  so  much


INTRODUCTION  21

uncertainty  and  strife.  For  spiritual  life  is
not  something  that  is  ready-made  for  us,  but  is
a  difficult  problem — in  fact,  the  problem  of
problems.  Certainly  our  being  must  be  some
how  grounded  in  it  if  we  are  to  make  an
effort  after  it,  but  as  far  as  our  consciousness
and  activity  are  concerned,  we  must  first  win
it  and  make  it  our  own :  only  thus  can  it  gain
a  clear  shape  and  a  definite  content.  But  this
further  opening  up  takes  place  in  the  indi
vidual  not  so  much  through  reflection  or
imagination  as  through  the  labour  of  the
whole  and  as  the  work  of  history.  What  first
makes  history  in  the  distinctively  human  sense
possible,  is  the  fact  that  here  a  revelation
of  spiritual  life  gets  started  and  gains  ground
as  the  development  of  a  new  stage  of  reality.
But  the  testimony  of  experience  shows  that
the  course  of  this  historical  movement  is  by
no  means  sure  and  simple.  In  the  first  place,
spiritual  life  has  no  domain  of  its  own  in  the
human  sphere  and  no  independent  starting-
point,  but  it  develops  out  of  our  life  in


22  THE LIFE OF  THE SPIRIT

nature  and  society  and  cannot  dispense  with
it.  In  doing  so  it  does  not  appear  from  the
beginning  as  a  whole,  but  starts  from  separate
points  and  gradually  extends  to  larger  con
nections,  which  again  may  diverge  from  one
another.  And  its  progress  through  history
is  not  orderly  and  sure,  but  resembles  rather  a
groping  and  seeking.  It  makes  a  step  forward,
but  encounters  insurmountable  obstacles  and
is  often  driven  back  a  long  way ;  new  starting
points  are  tried,  but  they  lead  to  a  similar
result.  The  life  is  often  split  into  opposites,
and  then  again  the  impulse  towards  reconcilia
tion  gains  the  upper  hand  :  much  drops  out  of
sight,  only  to  come  up  again  later  and  exercise
new  influence,  and  so  the  whole  becomes  more
and  more  complicated  and  involved.  In  par
ticular  a  permanent  complication  proceeds
from  the  relation  of  the  spiritual  life  to  man.
Spiritual  life  stands  in  need  of  the  feelings  and
faculties  of  man,  and  so  far  as  it  gains  these  it
raises  him  above  that  which  is  merely  human.
But  at  the  same  time  this  merely  human


INTRODUCTION  23

element  persists  and  is  always  ready  to  drag
down  the  spiritual  life  to  its  own  level.  It
does  this  especially  when  no  great  spiritual
tension  and  no  powerful  spiritual  creative
effort  exercises  a  counteracting  influence.  At
such  times  it  almost  appears  as  if  this  merely
human  element  looked  upon  the  spiritual  life
as  an  enemy,  and  would  like  to  take  vengeance
on  it  for  its  troublesome  interference.  Noth
ing  contributes  more  to  impress  a  particular
character  on  human  history  than  the  fact  that
spiritual  life  has  to  develop  in  the  unsuitable
and  indeed  hostile  medium  of  human  existence.
But  if  spiritual  life  has  often  been  dragged
down  to  the  level  of  the  merely  human,  it  has
not  submitted  for  any  length  of  time  to  this
degradation.  It  has  always  escaped  again,
and,  however  much  it  might  be  disintegrated,
it  has  always  made  a  fresh  effort  to  regain
its  unity ;  in  fact,  throughout  all  the  mistakes
and  passions  of  men  it  has  made  substantial
progress  in  self-realization.  It  has  been  able
to  liberate  life  and  thought  from  the  tyranny


24  THE LIFE OF  THE SPIRIT

of  the  mere  passing  moment,  and  by  separat
ing  the  temporal  from  the  eternal,  the  human
from  the  spiritual,  to  gather  up  the  results  of
thousands  of  years,  so  as  to  be  taken  in  at  one
view.  It  has  been  able  to  reawaken  what  to
all  external  appearance  had  perished,  and  to
hold  fast  everything  that  it  recognized  as
valuable  in  a  present  which  is  above  time  and
includes  time.  Philosophy  in  particular,  just
as  spiritual  life  generally,  takes  its  stand  on
this  time-including  present.  History,  however,
appears  on  this  view  not  as  a  kingdom  of  pure
reason,  but  as  a  scene  where  a  certain  amount
of  reason  wins  through  in  the  teeth  of  enormous
resistance.

From  this  point  of  view  the  movement  of
history,  with  its  elevation  of  spiritual  life  above
the  position  and  caprice  of  mere  man,  gains  a
special  significance  for  philosophy,  and  in  fact
becomes  an  introduction  to  a  philosophy  of
the  spiritual  life.  For,  in  revealing  all  that  has
been  unfolded  of  independent  spiritual  life,  it
shows  what  possibilities  our  life  contains  of


INTRODUCTION  25

being  raised  to  a  higher  inward  level,  and  also
what  oppositions  arise  in  this  connection  and
have  to  be  overcome  in  some  way  or  other.
It  goes  on  to  exhibit  the  conditions  and  the
demands  of  spiritual  creative  effort,  and  the
presuppositions  and  environment  from  which
special  kinds  of  spiritual  life  have  sprung.  It
shows  the  dominating  facts  both  within  and
as  opposed  to  the  spiritual  life,  and  also  the
directions  in  which  the  movement  progresses.
It  can  further  operate  to  free  our  work  from
all  that  is  casual  and  temporary,  and  to  bring
it  into  line  with  the  necessary  course  of  spiritual
life  so  far  as  it  has  been  revealed  in  the  history
of  the  world.  Our  efforts  will  not  only  acquire
thereby  more  breadth  and  freedom,  but  may
also  gain  a  stronger  and  securer  position
through  the  recognition  of  the  great  guiding
lines  of  the  general  movement  of  history.
Naturally  all  this  can  only  take  place  according
to  the  capacity  of  the  individual  life  on  which
the  task  is  laid  of  gaining  an  inner  mastery
over  the  materials  provided  by  history.  For


26  THE LIFE OF  THE SPIRIT

without  such  individual  exertion  history  cannot
impart  or  teach  anything :  the  contents  of
history  must  first  be  awakened  and  revivified
by  our  own  work  before  they  can  be  of  any
significance  or  use  to  our  own  life.  If  we
thus  address  ourselves  to  the  spiritual  content,
the  revivifying  of  the  general  movement  of
history  takes  the  form  of  a  comparative  survey
of  the  spiritual  possessions  which  we  have
hitherto  acquired,  and  a  summons  to  develop
and  secure  these  possessions  against  the  in
fluences  and  accidents  of  the  moment.  We
need  not  waste  any  time  in  proving  that  the
present,  with  its  sharp  oppositions,  its  violent
cleavage,  and  ominous  levelling  down  of  life,
and  its  want  of  any  ruling  aim,  stands  in
particularly  urgent  need  of  being  supplemented
and  developed  in  the  way  we  have  sketched.
Historical  study  must  press  on  with  particular
insistence  to  fresh  philosophical  work,  to  a
creative  activity  which  will  transform  phil
osophy  by  clearly  proving  the  untenability
of  the  present  spiritual  state  and  the  necessity


INTRODUCTION  27

of  a  new  type  of  culture.  But  in  this  respect
the  spiritual  requirements  which  are  involved,
not  so  much  in  the  time  as  in  the  general
position  in  world  history,  are  bound  to  set
philosophy  definite  tasks  and  point  it  in
definite  directions.

A  treatment  of  history  like  this,  which  com
bines  the  tracing  out  of  the  rise  and  growth  of
spiritual  life  within  the  sphere  of  humanity  with
the  search  for  a  standpoint  for  philosophical
work,  can  be  undertaken  in  different  ways.
We  desire  to  undertake  it  in  such  a  way  as
to  emphasize  some  of  the  leading  lines  of
development,  to  exhibit  the  problems  which
there  await  us,  and  to  show  the  movements,
experiences,  and  revelations  of  life  which  have
resulted  from  them.  It  may  seem  that  out
wardly  we  are  giving  ourselves  up  entirely  to
history,  but  our  aim  is  always  directed  towards
philosophy.  What  history  has  brought  us  is
not  reckoned  as  merely  past,  but  we  try  to
make  it  present  to  us  as  living,  and  at  the
same  time  to  gain  from  it  points  of  support


28  THE LIFE OF  THE SPIRIT

both  for  the  guidance  of  spiritual  life  and  for
philosophy.  In  these  leading  lines  we  shall
find  common  features,  in  fact  an  inner  con
nection  will  be  evident  through  all  the  diver
sity  ;  but  a  more  exact  estimation  of  this  is  to
be  made  at  the  end.  We  thus  arrange  our
sections  so  that  we  progress  gradually  from
general  sketches  to  a  more  definite  content,
and  so  allow  the  character  and  the  demands
of  the  whole  to  become  continually  more
apparent.  Let  us  then  treat  in  succession  the
problems  of  unity  and  multiplicity,  of  rest  and
movement,  of  the  outer  and  the  inner  worlds,
and  finally  the  problem  of  truth  and  the  pro
blem  of  happiness.  As  far  as  material  is  con
cerned,  let  us  limit  our  investigation  to  tracing
out  the  movement  from  the  rise  of  Greek
civilization  to  the  present  day.  This  is  not
merely  because  it  lies  nearest  to  us  externally,
but  also  because  no  other  historical  complex
contains  so  much  spiritual  movement  or  has
produced  such  an  abundance  of  life  and,  amid
violent  metamorphoses,  has  passed  through  so


INTRODUCTION  29

many  experiences.  But  this  is  the  point,  above
all,  for  philosophical  contemplation.  If  we  go
through  history  in  this  way  we  do  not  lose
ourselves  in  an  incalculable  vastness,  but,  with
all  the  abundance  of  material,  we  are  all  the
time  at  home.  It  is  a  kind  of  introspection,
not  so  much  of  the  individual  as  of  the  whole,
which  we  are  here  striving  after,  and  intro
spection  is  to-day,  as  at  all  times,  the  best
approach  to  philosophy.


CHAPTER  1
UNITY  AND  MULTIPLICITY

NATURE,  as  it  lies  open  to  our  view,  displays
a  mere  juxtaposition  of  elements,  with  no  inner
connection.  On  the  natural  level  life  does  not
get  beyond  the  stage  of  mere  correlations.
But  on  the  other  hand,  wherever  spiritual  life
makes  itself  felt  we  find  the  desire  to  sur
mount  the  stage  of  mere  juxtaposition,  to
establish  an  inner  connection,  and,  in  fact,  to
systematize  the  whole  of  life.  All  the  main
directions  in  which  our  spiritual  work  finds
its  outlet  involve  the  effort  to  overcome  an
opposition  and  the  demand  for  some  sort  of
unification.  Thus  the  struggle  for  truth  seeks
to  overcome  the  separation  between  men  and
things,  between  subject  and  object,  between

30


UNITY AND MULTIPLICITY  31

thought  and  existence.  With  the  good,  in
the  narrower  sense  of  the  word,  it  is  a  case
of  getting  free  from  the  pettiness  of  the  ego,
breaking  through  the  original  narrowness,  and
attaining  inner  solidarity.  Beauty  too  seeks
to  overcome  an  opposition  in  endeavouring  to
make  the  external  conform  completely  to  its
own  internal  standards.  But  just  as  spiritual
life  exercises  a  unifying  influence  in  an  ex
ternal  environment,  so  too,  in  itself,  it  strives
to  assume  the  form  of  a  coherent  whole  and
gives  rise  to  an  inner  solidarity  of  work.  It
is  a  matter  not  for  the  individual  man,  but
for  the  whole  race ;  it  strives  to  attain  not
merely  individual  truths  but  a  realm  of
truth,  which  envelops  and  holds  together
the  individuals,  and  which,  indeed,  lays  claim
to  a  validity  of  its  own,  independent  of  man
kind.  It  is  very  much  the  same  with  the
good  and  the  beautiful ;  however  much  con
troversy  and  dissension  may  prevail  in  this
connection,  even  the  controversy  would  be
incomprehensible  without  the  belief  in  a


32  THE LIFE OF  THE SPIRIT

common  truth  and  without  the  impelling
power  of  this  truth.

But  though  the  striving  for  unity  is  an
incontestable  and  fundamental  impulse  of  all
spiritual  life,  it  yet  involves  a  difficult  pro
blem,  which  cannot  be  attacked  by  the  indivi
dual  but  only  by  the  age-long  toil  of  humanity.
For  the  question  is,  how  the  unification  can
be  attained,  and  what  form  the  whole  must
assume  in  order  to  take  up  the  diversity  into
itself  and  overcome  the  oppositions.  Many
different  attempts  and  much  unrest  will  meet
the  eyes  of  him  who  makes  a  spiritual  pilgrim
age  through  the  centuries.  In  accordance
with  our  plan  we  begin  with  the  life  of  the
Greeks.

From  the  very  beginning  the  philosophy  of
the  Greeks  shows  the  impulse  towards  unity.
Their  first  thinkers,  the  sages  of  Ionia,  turn  at
once  to  the  search  for  a  single  fundamental
substance,  and  the  Pythagoreans  co-ordinate
the  wealth  of  phenomena  into  a  coherent
universe,  a  cosmos.  Even  the  exclusiveness


UNITY  AND MULTIPLICITY  33

of  a  unitary  being  finds  early  defenders  in  the
Eleatics,  and  they  do  not  shrink  from  reduc
ing  multiplicity  to  mere  appearance.  But
Greek  life  clings  too  closely  to  the  rich
diversity  of  reality  to  be  able  to  give  it  up
completely :  hence  the  problem  assumes  the
form  of  discovering  a  definite  relation  between
unity  and  multiplicity,  a  firm  co-ordination  of
the  diversity  of  things.  Its  solution  is  reached
in  close  connection  with  movements  that  take
place  in  the  general  life  of  the  time,  in  contact
of  the  work  of  thought  with  the  state  of
political  and  social  development.  As  usually
happens,  the  beginnings  of  this  development
show  us  individuals  in  strict  subjection,  in
complete  dependence  on  the  order  and  custom
of  the  community,  under  the  yoke  of  autho
rity  and  tradition,  which  is  not  yet  felt  as
oppressive.  But  gradually  the  individual  gains
in  power,  in  freedom  of  movement,  in  inde
pendence  ;  he  begins  to  inquire  into  the  right
and  reason  of  the  systems  in  which  he  finds

himself; he  holds himself continually more

3


84  THE LIFE OF  THE SPIRIT

aloof  from  them,  and  feels  that  he  is  personally
responsible  for  his  own  life.  But  then  the
danger  at  once  arises  that  the  subject  may
break  up  all  systems,  make  himself  the
measure  of  all  things,  and,  as  a  logical  con
sequence,  recognize  the  validity  of  no  ends
except  those  that  further  his  own  well-being.
This  gives  rise  to  the  most  dangerous  crisis,
and  life  appears  likely  to  suffer  a  complete
dissolution.  The  Sophists  with  their  subjec
tivism  make  this  very  evident.  In  such  a
convulsion  nothing  can  be  of  any  assistance
except  man's  own  spiritual  work :  it  is  this
alone  which  can  attempt  to  build  up  from
within  the  coherent  system  which  the  visible
world  no  longer  affords,  and  what  it  here
undertook  for  the  first  time  is  in  reality  a
problem  of  a  lasting  nature  which  our  own
day  too  must  face.  With  the  Greeks  it  was
pre-eminently  philosophy  which  took  upon
itself  this  problem.  A  solution  was  sought
by  affirming  the  existence  of  a  world  of
thought  raised  above  all  human  circumstances


UNITY AND MULTIPLICITY  85

and  opinions  and  firmly  established  over  against
them.  Plato's  doctrine  of  Ideas  brings  the
power  of  genius  to  the  execution  of  this  task,
and  for  him  the  constituents  of  that  world
more  nearly  acquire  the  character  of  forms
endowed  with  fulness  of  life.  These  forms
with  all  their  diversity  unite  to  form  a  whole  ;
the  work  of  this  whole,  moreover,  is  to  give
movement  and  elevation  to  human  existence ;
it  supplies  it  with  a  deeper  foundation  and  the
power  of  counteracting  the  distraction  from
which  it  previously  suffered.  On  the  basis
of  scientific  work  there  thus  arises  an  artistic
ordering  of  life  which  brings  about  a  peculiar
combination  of  unity  and  multiplicity.  The
thought  of  the  One  takes  precedence,  but  the
Many  are  not  in  the  least  sacrificed,  though
each  part  must  seek  its  place  and  its  task  within
the  whole  in  order  to  carry  out  its  special  work
in  this  position.  But  it  cannot  do  this  without
recognizing  limits  and  overcoming  the  crude
impulses  of  nature,  and  thus  it  is  ennobled  and,
in  fact,  spiritualized  by  the  whole.  Thus  life


36  THE LIFE OF  THE SPIRIT

is  organized  from  top  to  bottom,  marked  off
into  stages,  made  symmetrical  and  harmonious,
and  everything  which  is  merely  natural  is
brought  under  the  dominion  of  the  spirit.

A  movement  of  this  kind  affects  human
endeavour  in  all  directions  and  gives  it  a
peculiar  character.  On  this  view  thought  is
not  a  critical  sifting  and  analysing,  a  pressing
forward  to  the  most  minute  elements,  but  it  is
rather  a  comprehensive  survey  of  the  diversity
of  things,  and  a  disentangling  of  the  funda
mental  structure  of  the  universe  from  the
chaos  which  it  presents  at  first  sight.  Its
main  movement  is  from  the  whole  to  the
parts,  and  it  is  especially  the  task  of  philoso
phical  knowledge  to  put  everything  that  exists
and  everything  that  happens  in  its  proper
place,  and  to  understand  it  from  what  it  does
for  the  whole.  And  the  psychic  life  of  man
has  also  a  general  work  to  perform,  which
includes  its  individual  parts  and  stages.  It  is
of  special  importance  in  the  human  com
munity  to  counteract  the  isolation  of  in-


UNITY AND MULTIPLICITY  37

dividuals,  with  their  caprice  and  selfishness.
The  thought  arises  of  a  state  whose  structure
is  based  on  knowledge  and  seeks  to  enforce
its  own  realization.  An  essentially  elevating
effect  is  expected  from  the  direction  of  the
whole  towards  spiritual  goods  and  from  the
division  and  organization  of  work  by  a  grada
tion  of  classes.  Even  the  severest  conse
quences,  such  as  the  extraordinary  communism
of  the  higher  classes,  are  not  shirked  if  they
seem  to  be  necessary  in  order  to  strike  at  the
root  of  egoism.  But  all  this  surrender  to  the
whole  does  not  mean  any  complete  sacrifice  of
the  individuals,  for  in  this  arrangement  they
satisfy  their  own  nature  as  well,  and  thereby
attain  to  complete  happiness.

Aristotle's  scheme  of  life  is  closely  related
to  Plato's,  but  still  the  modifications  which  he
introduced  are  significant.  Less  importance
is  attached  to  the  part  played  by  art,  and  the
power  of  co-ordination  which  results  from
taking  the  point  of  view  of  art  is  less  em
phasized,  though  it  is  not  entirely  neglected.


38  THE LIFE OF  THE SPIRIT

But,  on  the  other  hand,  the  classifying  and
organizing  power  of  thought  is  given  the
widest  scope,  and  it  is  especially  the  conception
of  the  unfolding  of  life,  of  existence  becoming
fully  active,  that  provides  the  guiding  lines
for  thought.  It  is  here  in  particular  that
human  activity  displays  a  systematic  char
acter  :  the  world,  both  in  general  and  in  detail,
is  regarded  under  the  governing  conception  of
an  articulated  whole,  an  organic  unity  of  life.
Aristotle  is  particularly  successful  in  enforcing
the  idea  that  in  the  case  of  an  organic  living
being  a  large  number  of  organs  and  functions
is  subordinated  to  a  comprehensive  unity  of
life,  and  that  it  is  only  from  this  point  of
view,  by  help  of  the  idea  of  an  end,  that
they  can  be  understood.  This  conception
of  an  organism  is  finally  transferred  to  the
whole  universe ;  this  too  forms  a  complete
and  rounded  unity  which  tolerates  nothing
"episodic."1  Still  more  than  in  the  case  of

*  Cf. Aristotle, Met. 1090b 19, owe eoi/ce 8' f}
Ss  ov<ra  IK  T(JJV


UNITY AND  MULTIPLICITY  39

Plato  we  thus  find  one  fundamental  conviction
extending  over  all  departments.  Thinking
becomes  the  logical  organization  of  the  whole
of  reality,  and,  while  prepared  to  recognize  all
particularity,  it  never  allows  the  individual
to  become  separated  from  the  whole.  Simple
and  fundamental  thoughts  govern  all  depart
ments,  and  though  they  may  appear  to  be
disparate  they  are  still  kept  together  by  the
bond  of  analogy.  Psychic  life,  too,  is  re
quired  to  develop  every  faculty,  but  there
must  be  an  activity  of  the  whole  which  in
cludes  all  particular  activities  and  measures
them  by  its  own  standards.  The  superiority
of  the  whole  acquires  particular  force  and
vividness  when  we  come  to  the  idea  of  the
state.  Just  as  each  member  can  only  live
and  work  in  connection  with  the  whole
organism,  man  can  only  be  fully  man  in  the
community.  And  thus  it  can  be  maintained
that  the  state  is  prior  to  the  individual.
But  at  the  same  time  the  utmost  differentia
tion  is  desired  within  the  state,  and  the


40  THE LIFE OF  THE SPIRIT

heart  and  soul  of  every  man  is  called  upon
to  co-operate.

The  combined  work  of  both  thinkers  has
held  up  to  life  a  stable  and  coherent  system,
and  satisfied  in  a  characteristic  way  the  desire
for  unity.  Unification  is  attained  by  the
alliance  of  clear  thought  with  the  creative
activity  of  art.  The  main  achievement  of
this  philosophy  is  its  vigorous  and  thorough
organization  of  the  whole  range  of  existence ;
it  leaves  nothing  outside  but  takes  up  every
thing  from  the  greatest  to  the  least,  gives  it
definite  shape,  and  quickens  and  ennobles  it.
Man  here  displays  his  capacity  of  forming  a
whole  in  thought,  retaining  within  this  whole
a  rich  diversity  of  elements,  and  making  it  a
centre  from  which  to  bring  the  whole  range
of  reality  into  an  inwardly  coherent  system.
The  endeavour  to  attain  unity  in  this  manner
has  persisted  throughout  the  whole  course  of
history ;  it  has  often  entered  upon  new  spheres
of  activity  with  rejuvenated  powers,  and  seems
to  be  indispensable  for  the  spiritual  appro-


UNITY AND  MULTIPLICITY  41

priation  of  the  breadth  and  fulness  of  existence.
But  as  a  leading  synthesis  of  life,  this  philo
sophy  had  presuppositions  which  met  with  a
continually  increasing  opposition.  Such  a
synthesis  not  only  needs  pre-eminent  spiritual
power  to  carry  it  out,  but  it  also  presupposes
as  objectively  existing  a  tendency  on  the  part
of  things  towards  union,  an  inner  harmony  of
reality,  which  the  further  movement  of  life
made  continually  more  uncertain.  In  the
first  place,  this  synthesis  of  life  did  not  retain
its  leading  position  in  the  following  centuries.
When  the  separation  between  philosophy  and
the  particular  sciences  becomes  wider,  and  the
former  comes  to  be  regarded  predominantly  as
wisdom  in  the  conduct  of  life,  we  no  longer
find  simple  fundamental  thoughts  exercising
control  over  the  whole  range  of  reality.  In
dividuals  are  still  less  inclined  to  submit  to
the  constraint  which  is  commended  by  Plato
and  Aristotle.  As  the  break-up  of  the  old
systematizations  of  life  becomes  increasingly
apparent,  men  are  more  and  more  concerned


42  THE LIFE OF  THE SPIRIT

to  ensure  that  the  individual  shall  stand  firm
on  his  own  basis  and  be  independent  of  all
environment.  Philosophy  is  particularly  suc
cessful  in  this  aim  when  it  occupies  man  with
the  thought  of  the  Universe,  and  promises  him
victory  over  every  obstacle  if  he  realizes
strongly  the  presence  of  the  Universal  Reason.
The  complete  emancipation  of  the  individual
finds  its  classical  expression  particularly  in  the
doctrine  of  the  Stoics :  it  is  here  that  there
arises  the  conception  of  a  personality  superior
to  the  world,  and  participation  in  the  universal
thought  lends  dignity  and  value  to  human
existence.  Another  result  is  that  all  men
enter  into  an  invisible  connection,  they  become
conscious  of  an  inner  relationship,  a  solidarity
embracing  all  that  is  human.

But  if  men  are  thrown  on  their  own
resources  to  grasp  and  reali/e  the  universal
thought,  it  is  only  heroic  individuals  of
original  force  who  will  succeed.  But  such
men  are  scarce  at  all  times,  and  this  solution
became  especially  unsatisfactory  in  proper-


UNITY AND MULTIPLICITY  43

tion  as  the  approaching  break-up  of  the
ancient  world  increased  the  feeling  of  in
security,  of  weakness,  and  of  need.  The  per
plexities  of  life  finally  appear  too  great  for
man  to  meet  out  of  his  own  resources.  This
gives  rise  to  a  continually  increasing  craving
after  religion,  and  finally  to  a  movement  in
the  direction  of  religion.  Hence  the  endeavour
after  unity  now  takes  on  a  religious  rather
than  an  artistic  character.  Unity  is  now
sought  not  so  much  by  producing  an  all-
embracing  co-ordination  of  the  diversity  of
things,  as  by  recourse  to  an  existence  which
is  raised  above  all  multiplicity  and  forms  its
ground.  But  although  with  the  Greeks
multiplicity  was  never  degraded  to  mere
appearance,  as  it  was  with  the  Indians,  and
though  for  this  reason  the  Greeks  never
embraced  an  exclusive  monotheism,  yet  they
came  more  and  more  to  attach  significance
to  that  which  is  individual  only  so  far  as  it
gives  expression  to  the  unity  of  the  universe.
This  gives  to  life  a  powerful  stimulus  and


44  THE LIFE OF THE SPIRIT

impetus,  but  it  involves  the  loss  of  the
organizing  influence  which  was  exercised  by
the  older  creative  activity.  It  was  Plotinus
in  particular  who  gave  a  philosophical  shape
to  the  new  tendency,  and  in  this  connection
philosophy  takes  a  quite  new  direction.  It
was  formerly  the  function  of  religion  to
minister  to  the  happiness  and  especially  the
tranquillity  of  man  ;  it  was  a  mere  means  to
his  well-being ;  but  now  the  centre  of  gravity
is  transferred  from  individuals  to  the  universe,
and  it  is  only  from  the  universe  that  the
individual  receives  life  and  being.  We  find
here  a  single  life  which  sustains  and  pervades
the  whole  range  of  reality  and  exhibits  it  as
its  own  development.  All  the  diversity  of
things  is  dependent  on  this  unitary  life,  and
everything  tends  to  return  to  it.  Many
metaphors  are  employed  in  the  attempt  to
show  how  the  One  can  give  rise  to  the  rich
diversity  of  the  world  without  losing  itself
anywhere  or  striving  to  transcend  itself.  It
resembles  a  light  which  sends  forth  its  rays


UNITY  AND MULTIPLICITY  45

far  and  wide  without  diminishing  its  own
brightness  ;  it  is  like  the  fountain  from  which
all  things  proceed  but  which  itself  continues
to  flow  inexhaustibly  ;  or  it  resembles  the  root
of  a  tree  which  shoots  up  above  the  ground,
but  which  is  not  merged  into  its  own  un
folding.  In  these  modes  of  connection  the
core  of  spiritual  life  and  also  of  philosophy
consists  entirely  in  the  search  for  unity  and
the  apprehension  of  it.  All  the  different
domains  of  life  and  philosophy  are  only
particular  ways  of  reaching  unity.  But  since
the  final  unity  lies  beyond  all  special  forms
and  all  concepts,  it  follows  that  thought,  even
when  its  powers  are  strained  to  the  utmost,
is  no  longer  equal  to  the  claim  which  is  made
upon  it.  It  is  only  immediate  apprehension
which  can  put  us  in  possession  of  this  unity.
Thought  passes  into  a  formless  feeling,  a  sub
jective  mood  which  cannot  be  expressed  in
words,  in  which  it  desires  nothing  but  unity.
By  this  process  thought  brings  about  its  own
destruction  as  pure  thought,  but  this  violent


46  THE LIFE OF  THE SPIRIT

convulsion  results  in  feeling  becoming  inde
pendent,  and  there  arises  a  new  type  of
psychical  experience  which  is  both  self-con
tained  and  self-sufficing.

In  the  detailed  carrying  out  of  this  tendency
life  is  either  shaped  on  the  model  of  a  hierarchy
or  it  receives  a  mystical  turn.  The  former
scheme  leaves  the  diversity  of  things,  but
introduces  a  fixed  order  into  it  by  recognizing
throughout  a  continuous  chain  of  life.  For
Spiritual  Life  proceeds  from  the  original  unity
as  the  first  stage,  and  on  this  there  depend
the  further  stages  of  Soul  and  of  Nature.
Each  in  its  place  receives  life  from  the  order
of  being  immediately  above  it,  and  conveys  it
from  itself  to  that  which  is  below  it.  Through
a  connection  of  this  kind,  even  that  which
might  seem  to  be  imperfect  as  far  as  itself  is
concerned  gains  a  certain  value.  It  is  only
through  a  misapprehension  of  this  connection
that  anyone  can  imagine  that  he  has  discovered
evil  in  the  world,  since  what  seems  to  be  evil
is  in  reality  only  a  lesser  good.  This  concep-


UNITY AND MULTIPLICITY  47

tion  of  gradation  and  the  downward  com
munication  of  life  was  destined  to  attain  to
great  influence  in  the  domain  of  Christianity.

Mysticism,  on  the  contrary,  puts  the
individual  into  immediate  relationship  with
the  infinite  life,  and  aspires  to  steep  him  in
this  life  to  such  an  extent  that  it  becomes
his  own.  By  getting  rid  of  everything  that
makes  for  separation  and  distinction,  by  casting
off  the  chains  of  what  men  call  happiness,  and
by  freeing  himself  from  all  the  narrowness
and  insufficiency  of  the  mere  unit,  the  mystic
believes  that  in  extinction  itself  he  gains  an
incomparably  higher  life  and  genuine  blessed
ness.  It  is  here  that  we  first  recognize  clearly
the  power  which  the  thought  of  a  total
surrender  of  the  ego  and  of  absorption  into
an  infinite  life  can  exercise  over  the  human
soul.  The  fact  that  man  can  completely
renounce  the  merely  human  and  can  give  up
the  whole  wealth  of  reality  without  thereby
falling  into  the  void,  seems  to  assure  him  of
his  capacity  for  rising  superior  to  the  world,


48  THE LIFE OF  THE SPIRIT

and  to  bring  him  into  close  connection  with
the  ultimate  depths  of  the  universe.  Hence
he  seems  to  himself  to  be  nowhere  greater
than  in  such  complete  surrender  of  his  separate-
ness.  But  the  danger  of  this  movement,  as
well  as  its  greatness,  consists  just  in  this  con
centration  of  life  on  one  point.  It  is,  of  course,
this  concentration  which  has  given  rise  to  the
thought  of  a  purely  internal  world,  and  the
recognition  of  the  immediate  presence  of
infinite  life  in  the  individual  soul  has  revealed
a  refuge  which  is  open  at  all  times.  But  at
the  same  time  the  stripping  off  of  all  particu
larity  forces  life  to  give  up  all  detailed  content
and  all  penetration  and  organization  of  reality.
But  even  when  this  loss  is  recognized,  this
mode  of  thought  remains  an  indispensable
element  in  all  development  of  independent
spirituality.  It  not  only  persists  throughout
the  middle  ages,  but  comes  into  prominence
in  modern  times  in  new  shapes,  and  shows
that  it  is  still  powerful  even  at  the  present
day.  If  we  give  up  the  immediate  presence


49

of  infinite  being  in  the  soul,  the  life  of  the
soul  must  inevitably  and  immediately  lose  in
depth  and  spontaneity.

The  relation  of  Christianity  to  the  problem
of  unity  and  multiplicity  is  by  no  means  simple.
Different,  and  in  fact  opposite,  tendencies  are
engaged  in  conflict  against  one  another,  and
though  this  may  give  rise  to  much  confusion
and  error,  it  also  produces  much  movement
and  progress  in  life.  The  mere  fact  that
Christianity  is  distinctively  and  characteristic
ally  an  ethical  religion,  has  diverse  tendencies.
Morality  has  its  end  in  action,  and  therefore
demands  both  self-activity  and  self-sufficiency
on  the  part  of  the  individual ;  but  religion  gains
power  only  where  man  is  conscious  of  his
weakness  and  seeks  help  from  higher  powers.
The  ethical  element  prevails  chiefly  in  the
conception  of  God,  which  is  essentially  differ
ent  from  that  of  the  Greek  world.  For  Greek
thought  the  divine  is  closely  bound  up  and

intimately united with the totality of the

4


50  THE LIFE OF  THE SPIRIT

world ;  and  though,  later  on,  it  was  regarded
as  raised  above  all  sensible  existence,  it  never
detaches  itself  from  the  world  as  an  inde
pendent  power,  and  does  not  take  up  an  inde
pendent  stand  over  against  it.  Hence  its
activity  seems  to  be  not  so  much  a  free  action
as  a  process  of  nature,  which  is  only  raised  to
the  spiritual  level.  It  is  represented  as  a
flowing  out,  a  shining  forth,  a  going  forth,  etc. :
in  every  case  as  something  which  happens
from  necessity.

Christianity,  on  the  contrary,  in  close  con
nection  with  later  Judaism,  regards  God  as
a  Spirituality  who  transcends  the  world  and
is  self- existing  and  self-sufficing.  He  is
thought  of  as  free  in  His  action,  and  His
self-manifestation  is  regarded  as  spirit  coming
into  touch  with  spirit.  There  is  no  doubt  that,
especially  in  popular  thought,  this  may  give
rise  to  the  danger  of  degrading  God  to  the
level  of  human  ideas  and  interests,  the  danger
of  anthropomorphism.  But  however  far  this
may  have  spread,  it  is  not  the  whole  of  the


UNITY AND MULTIPLICITY  51

matter.  All  the  mistakes  that  have  been  made
ought  not  to  prevent  us  from  recognizing  that
it  was  in  Christianity  that  the  movement
towards  a  self-existent  and  active  Spirituality
was  first  carried  out  on  any  large  scale,
and  that  it  was  religion,  in  the  ethical  form
which  it  assumes  in  Christianity,  that  first  led
to  the  recognition  of  such  a  Being.  To  the
change  in  the  conception  of  the  divine  Being
there  corresponds  a  new  relation  of  man  to
Him.  The  Greek  sought  to  draw  near  to  the
Deity  on  the  heights  of  philosophy,  by  pushing
knowledge  to  its  utmost  limits.  He  sought
complete  union  with  the  Divine ;  but  when  this
is  attained,  life  does  not  return  to  its  starting-
point  to  make  something  newer  and  higher
out  of  it.  But  this  is  what  takes  place  in
Christianity,  because  the  relation  to  the  Deity
opens  up  new  depths  of  life  in  the  individual,
and  makes  him,  even  in  his  particularity,  an
object  of  the  divine  love  and  care.  The  indi
vidual,  who  is  accustomed  to  be  treated  with
such  indifference  by  nature  and  society,  gains


52  THE LIFE OF  THE SPIRIT

an  infinite  worth  from  such  a  relationship,  and
ventures  to  regard  himself  as  an  end  in  him
self,  but  at  the  same  time  he  finds  that  he  has
a  task  which  takes  precedence  of  any  general
extension  of  his  activity.  This  holds  good  for
all  men  without  distinction  :  it  is  not  measured
and  limited  by  any  outward  results  that  have
been  achieved,  but  depends  on  the  general
nature  and  bent  of  the  soul,  on  the  active
moral  force  which  it  shows.  This  forms  a
great  contrast  to  Greek  thought,  which  could
not  make  union  with  the  transcendental
unity  a  matter  of  philosophical  knowledge
without  encountering  great  differences  between
one  man  and  another,  and  finding  that  only  a
few  were  called  to  the  full  knowledge  of  God.
The  problem  of  recruiting  all  men  for  the
spiritual  task  is  one  which,  in  the  province  of
civilization  to  which  we  belong,  first  gained
recognition  by  the  agency  of  Christianity,  and,
though  the  task  contains  enormous  complexities,
in  particular,  the  danger  lest  spiritual  work
should  be  subordinated  to  the  power  of  the


UNITY  AND MULTIPLICITY  53

merely  human,  once  having  been  recognized
and  acknowledged  it  can  never  again  be  put
into  the  background.  The  fact,  too,  that  in
Christian  thought,  which  is  determined  by
ethical  considerations,  the  Greek  ideal  of  justice
gives  way  to  the  ideal  of  love,  tends  also  to
the  exaltation  of  the  individual  in  general  and
of  each  separate  individual  in  particular.  If,
on  the  one  hand,  outward  achievements  decided
the  place  of  the  individual  in  the  whole,  that
which  was  mean  and  feeble  could  never  receive
any  sort  of  recognition.  But  on  the  other
hand  it  does  gain  a  certain  value  if  every  man
finds  that  the  task  he  has  to  face  is  inde
pendent  of  external  conditions,  and  if  infinite
love  embraces  all,  the  least  as  well  as  the
greatest,  in  an  equal  degree.

This  all  le^is  to  a  considerable  increase
in  the  significance  of  the  individual  and  his
decisions.  At  the  same  time  the  coherence  of
things  and  the  connection  of  the  individual
with  it  is  not  surrendered,  but  rather  there
is  a  general  tendency  to  increase  this  also.


54  THE LIFE OF  THE SPIRIT

Christianity  does  not  exhaust  the  relationship
to  the  Deity  in  single  points  of  connection
and  isolated  achievements,  but  desires  that  this
relationship  should  lead  to  an  entire  change  of
soul ;  and  it  is  for  this  very  reason  that*  the
individual  cannot  force  himself  to  take  the
decisive  step,  but  must  await  the  coming  of  a
new  life  from  a  source  of  power  and  grace
which  is  above  him.  A  kingdom  of  God
must  reveal  itself  to  him,  and  must  even
inspire  the  desire  to  enter  it.  Great  world
events  must  happen  in  order  that  a  change
may  take  place  at  one  point,  or,  as  Hegel
expresses  it  in  his  own  language,  "the  very
fact  that  the  opposition  is  implicitly  done
away  with  constitutes  the  condition,  the
presupposition,  the  possibility  of  the  sub
ject's  ability  to  do  away  with  it  actually."1
Withal,  it  is  an  important  fact  that  the
coherent  system  with  which  the  individual

1  Hegel,  Werfce,  2e  Aufl.  xii.  277.  Hegel,  Lectures  on  the
Philosophy  of  Religion,  translated  by  E.  B.  Spiers  and
J.  B.  Sanderson,  iii.  67.


UNITY AND MULTIPLICITY  55

comes  into  connection  does  not  remain
purely  of  an  invisible  kind  but  strives  to
embody  itself  in  a  visible  form,  not  only  in
its  later  stages  but  from  the  very  beginning ;
and  that  there  is  an  early  and  persistent
tendency  to  form  a  church.  This  brought  in
its  train  an  inevitable  dependency  not  merely
on  divine  truth  but  also  on  human  conditions.
The  more  firmly  the  visible  order  was  estab
lished,  and  the  closer  it  linked  the  invisible
order  to  itself,  the  greater  was  the  loss  which
the  freedom  of  the  individual  was  bound  to
undergo ;  every  diminution  of  freedom,  how
ever,  endangered  the  ethical  character  of
Christianity.

Thus  Christianity  contained  difficult  contra
dictions,  just  like  every  other  spiritual  move
ment  which  has  had  a  great  part  to  play  on
the  stage  of  humanity.  These  contradictions
needed  imperatively  to  be  reconciled  in  some
way  or  other,  but  the  manner  of  reconciliation
was  principally  determined  by  the  nature  of
the  period  within  which  it  had  to  be  accom-


56  THE LIFE OF  THE SPIRIT

plished.  It  was  the  time  at  which  the
definitive  consolidation  of  Christianity  was
established,  the  last  epoch  of  antiquity,  a
period  when  the  will  to  live  was  greatly
weakened,  when  men  were  becoming  uncertain
of  themselves,  and  all  the  old  connections  were
broken  up.  The  old  epoch  was  at  an  end,
and  a  new  one  had  not  yet  dawned.  Hence
men's  first  desire  was  to  reach  a  safe  harbour
of  refuge :  they  wished  to  be  thoroughly
assured  of  deliverance,  and  to  be  relieved  as
far  as  possible  from  all  private  responsibility.
The  wish  was  all  the  stronger  owing  to  the
fact  that  men's  minds  had  been  so  overawed
by  gloomy  experiences  that  the  thought  of
eternal  life  became  for  them,  above  all  else,  a
dread  of  eternal  punishment.  This  drove  them
to  submit  willingly  to  a  superior  authority,
and  also  led  to  truth  being  put  in  as  popular
a  form  as  possible.  In  this  difficult  situation
Christianity  did  indeed  become  a  refuge  for
mankind  ;  but  it  could  not  become  so  without
suffering  the  consequences  of  this  position  and


UNITY AND MULTIPLICITY  57

being  driven  in  a  very  problematical  direction.
The  religious  aspect  now  pushed  the  ethical
into  the  background,  and  immediately  devel
oped  a  strong  tendency  towards  the  visible
and  sensuous.  Hence  it  came  about  that  the
Church  as  a  visible  order  absorbed  Christianity
more  and  more  into  itself,  that  it  was  thought
to  have  at  its  disposal  the  treasure  of  divine
grace,  and  was  raised  to  a  position  of  incon
testable  authority  over  the  individual.  At
the  same  time  the  idea  of  organization — and
of  an  organization  which  is  both  stable  and
palpable — becomes  the  centre  of  spiritual  life
and  spiritual  work.  However  much  com
plexity  and  difficulty  this  tendency  has  brought
with  it,  we  must  not  fail  to  recognize  its
grandeur.  Nowhere  else  in  the  whole  course
of  history  has  the  attempt  been  made  to  bring
the  whole  of  mankind  into  close  connection
with  one  another  on  the  ground  of  common
convictions,  and  thus  to  bind  them  together
not  by  external  constraint  but  by  inner  com
munion.  Nothing  in  the  human  shape  is  left


58  THE LIFE OF  THE SPIRIT

outside  the  spiritual  order,  or  excluded  from  its
influence.  But  at  the  same  time  the  spiritual
order  is  drawn  down  deep  into  that  which  is
human,  and  thereby  strongly  influenced ;  its
special  shape  is  essentially  determined  by  the
needs  of  man,  or  by  the  stimulus  which  seems
necessary  in  order  to  set  him  in  motion.  The
final  result  is  that  a  unique  compromise  is
concluded  between  the  spiritual  and  the  merely
human,  which  leaves  to  the  former  its  essential
superiority,  though  in  detail  the  spiritual  is
largely  overborne  by  the  human.  No  one
contributed  more  to  establish  this  compromise
than  Augustine,  a  man  who  united  a  fervent
desire  for  a  world-enveloping  spiritual  life  with
the  deepest  feeling  for  the  needs  and  weak
nesses  of  men.

The  idea  of  organization  was  first  carried
into  effect  in  a  complete  form  in  the  middle
ages.  It  determined  not  only  the  relationship
of  the  individual  to  society,  but  also  the  rela
tions  between  the  different  departments  of  life.
The  community  in  its  religious  aspect  appears


UNITY  AND MULTIPLICITY  59

as  the  Church,  and  by  it  the  individual  is
provided  with  a  firm  support,  direction  for
conduct,  gentler  or  sterner  constraint  to  definite
tasks.  Thus  a  certain  level  of  life  is  attained,
a  certain  amount  of  spiritual  activity  is  widely
distributed,  and  to  some  extent  the  masses  are
brought  under  discipline.  But  at  the  same
time  the  limits  of  achievement  are  unmistak
able.  Such  a  system  of  subordination  and
solidarity  inevitably  involves  a  serious  loss  of
independence,  and  if  independence  is  lost  the
inward  life  is  bound  to  suffer  injury.  We
cannot  place  the  chief  end  of  man  in  the  per
formance  of  certain  exercises  and  tasks,  in  the
fulfilment  of  his  religious,  i.e.  his  ecclesiastical
"  duties,"  without  reducing  the  experiences  of
his  soul  to  a  position  of  secondary  importance,
and  letting  outward  acts  repress  inward  dis
position.  The  centre  of  gravity  of  life  is
removed  more  and  more  from  the  soul  of  the
individual,  and  the  latter  is  treated  as  a  mere
appendage  of  the  gigantic  ecclesiastical  system.
It  is  a  natural  development  of  this  position


60  THE LIFE OF  THE SPIRIT

that  the  Church  becomes  not  only  the  exclusive
custodian  of  truth,  but  also  the  keeper  of  the
moral  conscience  of  humanity.  Her  ministers
decide  what  each  man  has  to  hold  for  truth,
and  what  is  the  good  he  has  to  strive  after.
She  believes  that  she  has  the  power  of  con
ferring  eternal  salvation  on  them,  or  of  con
demning  them  to  eternal  misery.  The  more
this  conviction  prevails  and  becomes  a  part  of
life,  though  the  spontaneity  of  life  in  its  par
ticular  manifestations  is  dried  up,  the  more
must  the  greatness  of  man  consist  in  willing
submission,  and  the  more  must  his  piety  acquire
the  character  of  a  blind  devotion.  But  all  the
smaller  is  the  place  left  for  independent  convic
tion  and  disposition,  for  erect  and  self-active
personalities.  Thus  the  latest  papal  Syllabus
actually  required  men  not  only  to  receive  the
decisions  of  the  Church  obediently,  but  to  hold
these  decisions  as  their  own  beliefs.  If  the
independence  of  the  personality  is  violated  in
this  way,  acts  as  well  as  belief  will  acquire  a
predominantly  passive  character.  Hence  it  is


UNITY AND MULTIPLICITY  61

again  consistent  with  these  medieval  modes
of  thought  when  the  latest  Encyclical  re
proaches  the  Modernists  for  thinking  too
highly  of  the  active  virtues.  The  result  is
that  the  individual  is  degraded,  and  obedience
and  endurance  become  the  highest  virtues
in  his  life.

The  medieval  tendency  towards  organiza
tion  affected  also  the  life  of  culture,  and  it
was  Scholasticism  in  particular  which  gave
philosophical  expression  to  this  tendency.
The  rigour  of  the  older  thought,  which  in
volves  the  exclusive  concentration  of  life  on
religion  and  allows  all  diversity  to  be  absorbed
in  unity,  is  here  moderated.  The  other  de
partments  of  life  are  accorded  some  rights ;
they  are  taken  up  into  a  general  scheme  in  a
way  that  resembles  the  Greek  synthesis  of
life,  especially  as  carried  out  by  Aristotle.
The  artistic  and  the  religious  struggle  for
unity  are  to  be  fused  into  a  comprehensive
totality  of  life  within  which  their  differences
are  reconciled.  The  idea  of  gradation  seems


62  TIT?] LIFE OF  THE SPIRIT

to  render  this  possible  by  handing  over  the
direction  of  the  whole  to  religion,  but  guaran
teeing  a  certain  independence  to  the  other
departments  which  fall  within  the  sphere  of
the  universal  reason  and  the  secular  life.
This  inclusion  of  all  interests  certainly  sets
men  a  great  and  imperative  problem,  but  the
solution  here  offered  is  much  too  external  to
be  felt  as  satisfactory  beyond  the  middle
ages.  This  scheme  of  subordination  leaves
the  other  departments  of  life  no  real  inde
pendence  and  no  spontaneity  of  creative  effort.
But  this  is  not  the  only  unsatisfactory  feature,
for  it  is  also  found  that  the  spiritual  life  is
wanting  in  inner  unity,  since  religion,  on  the
one  hand,  with  its  elevation  above  the  world,
and  an  essentially  earthly  culture  on  the  other,
with  its  joyous  reconstitution  of  the  world,
pull  in  precisely  opposite  directions,  so  that
only  an  extremely  external  conception  of  the
problem  and  extreme  superficiality  in  the
mode  of  attacking  it  could  bring  them  into
immediate  union.


UNITY AND MULTIPLICITY  63

This  attempt  to  solve  the  problem  of  unity
is,  as  a  whole,  magnificent  and  in  its  way
unique.  But  the  influence  which  it  exercised
on  mankind  was  considerably  modified  through
Mysticism,  and  it  involves  a  presupposition
which  is  open  to  dispute.  It  demands  men
who  are  either  senile  or  else  spiritually  im
mature  :  it  cannot  satisfy  men  who  are  grown
up  and  conscious  of  their  powers.  But  ever
since  the  close  of  the  middle  ages  humanity
has  been  striving  to  attain  its  majority,  and
it  is  just  this  endeavour  which  ushers  in  a  new
epoch  and  gives  it  a  distinctive  character.  A
growing  feeling  of  power  requires  a  life  that
is  independent  and  spontaneous,  and  it  cannot
have  it  unless  individuals  are  called  upon  to
exercise  their  powers  in  the  freest  way.  This
caused  authority  to  be  felt  as  an  oppressive
burden,  and  the  medieval  synthesis  was  proved
to  be  too  narrow  for  the  wealth  of  life  that
was  struggling  upwards.  Hence  a  breach
with  the  old  order  became  inevitable,  and  life
took  a  course  which  was  directly  opposed  to


64  THE LIFE OF  THE SPIRIT

that  which  it  had  previously  followed.  The
leading  tendency  had  hitherto  been  from
multiplicity  towards  unity,  from  an  un
organized  to  an  organized  life,  but  now  the
movement  is  directed  towards  multiplicity,
towards  the  apprehension  and  elaboration  of
all  that  is  specific  and  individual.  Freedom
from  every  tie,  complete  emancipation,  now
becomes  the  main  aim,  and  a  demand  to  which
everything  must  give  way.  At  the  beginning
there  was  no  intention  of  shaking  off  all  the
traditional  connections  and  making  the  in
dividual  rely  entirely  on  his  own  powers :  the
intention  was  rather  that,  at  such  and  such  a
particular  point,  the  whole  should  be  more
immediately  apprehended,  made  to  live  more
intensely,  and  wrought  out  into  a  distinctive
form.  But  gradually  these  connections  sank
in  importance,  and  the  individual  freed  him
self  more  and  more  from  all  ties.  Hence  any
co-ordination  of  life  could  only  come  from  the
individual  himself,  and  must  never  be  incon
sistent  with  his  freedom.  The  complications


UNITY AND MULTIPLICITY  65

which  arise  from  this position  we  shall  have
to  deal  with  immediately.

The  old  philosophy,  which  was  deeply
rooted,  and  occupied  a  hallowed  place  in  the
beliefs  of  mankind,  might  regard  this  striving
for  freedom  as  a  mere  movement  of  opposi
tion,  as  a  bold  revolt  and  a  piece  of  defiant
presumption.  Such  reproaches  have  not  yet
been  finally  silenced.  But  that  this  striving
after  freedom  was  in  reality  something  more,
that  it  was  the  result  of  a  spiritual  necessity,
is  proved  by  the  enormous  enrichment  and
development  of  life  to  which  it  has  given  rise,
and  the  enormous  range  of  actuality  which
it  has  opened  up.  If  the  unfolding  of  the
powers  of  the  individual  were  nothing  more
than  a  movement  of  negation  and  contradic
tion,  this  victory  of  individuality  could  never
have  been  the  source  of  the  amount  of  life
and  creative  effort  to  which,  as  a  matter  of
fact,  it  has  given  rise.  That  the  change
extends  beyond  all  merely  human  ideas  into

the  fundamental  texture  of  life  itself,  is  proved,

5


66  THE LIFE OF  THE SPIRIT

among  other  things,  by  the  transformation  of
the  inner  life  as  compared  with  the  middle
ages.  The  middle  ages  were  by  no  means
wanting  in  inner  life,  but  it  was  an  inner  life
of  a  rather  weak  and  passive  kind ;  man  felt
himself  untrammelled  by  the  world  in  the
silent  ebb  and  flow  of  immediate  personal
experience.  The  modern  period,  on  the
contrary,  develops  an  inner  life  of  an  active
kind  which  insists  on  making  its  power  felt,
subjecting  the  world  and  making  it  conform
to  its  own  demands.  Whatever  may  be  the
problems  involved,  it  cannot  hide  the  truth
which  this  movement  brought  into  pro
minence,  viz.,  that  complete  spontaneity  is
essential  to  genuine  spiritual  life,  and  that
this  spontaneity  requires  both  freedom  and
self- activity.  But  we  cannot  have  these  latter
without  the  recognition  of  the  special  character
of  each  particular  part,  the  recognition  of
individuality.  Where  such  movements  arise
and  make  themselves  felt,  life  is  bound  to  be
essentially  changed.


UNITY AND MULTIPLICITY  67

In  justification  of  the  new  movement  this
also  may  be  alleged,  viz.,  that  the  great  civilized
nations  have  imported  into  it  each  its  own
specific  character  and  have  accentuated  this
character  by  its  further  progress.  Nothing
distinguishes  one  from  another  more  than  the
special  direction  in  which  they  seek  and  de
mand  deliverance  for  humanity.  In  art  and
in  the  general  tone  of  life,  the  Italians,  the
first  modern  men,  occupy  the  earliest  place.
The  French  continue  the  same  tendency  and
carry  it  further  into  the  ramifications  of
existence,  and  their  leading  spirits  set  an
example  to  the  individual  of  defiant  inde
pendence  of  the  world  and  also  of  society.
The  English  build  up  political  and  economic
life  from  the  individual  as  the  starting-point,
and  cherish  the  hope  that  it  will  thus  be
raised  to  an  infinitely  higher  level.  The
Germans  represent  the  movement  towards
freedom  in  the  domain  of  religion,  and  they
carry  it  down  into  the  furthest  depths  of  the
soul.  When  their  classical  literature  reaches


68  THE LIFE OF  THE SPIRIT

its  highest  point  they  finally  develop  the  idea
of  a  world-enveloping  Personality,  which  is
grounded  in  itself  and  controlled  by  its  own
laws.  This  is  an  idea  which  must  form  the
rallying  point  for  every  attempt  to  overcome
the  opposition  between  unity  and  multiplicity,
between  order  and  freedom.

The  new  movement  shows  that  it  is  superior
to  all  individual  caprice,  and  is  spiritually  pro
ductive  by  its  characteristic  shaping  of  all  the
departments  and  relations  of  life,  and  the
essential  changes  which  it  makes  in  the  re
presentation  of  the  world  and  the  existence
of  man.  The  older  science  consisted  chiefly
in  a  general  survey  of  the  multiplicity  of  things,
in  which  they  were  regarded  as  forming  parts
of  a  great  structure.  Modern  science,  how
ever,  breaks  up  the  initial  impression  which  we
experience  of  a  totality,  and  seeks  to  get  down
to  the  ultimate  elements  and  the  smallest
forces,  to  ascertain  their  laws,  and  by  their
help  to  reconstruct  the  world.  This  tracing
of  particular  lines  of  connection  gives  us  not


UNITY AND MULTIPLICITY  69

only  a  clearer  insight  into  reality,  but  also
an  incomparably  greater  control  over  things.
Without  the  analytical  methods  practised  by
modern  science,  the  modern  technical  applica
tions  of  it  would  never  have  arisen.  But  just
as  modern  science  introduces  more  detail  and
exactitude  into  its  representation  of  reality,
and  places  the  motive  power  of  things  in  the
elements,  so,  too,  its  own  position  is  strikingly
differentiated  from  that  of  medieval  science.
The  Scholastic  system,  which  made  metaphysics
supreme  over  the  whole  range  of  reality,  is
shattered.  The  individual  sciences  take  up
their  task  independently,  and  furnish  us  with
characteristic  views  of  the  world,  while  at  the
same  time  they  get  closer  and  closer  to  things
and  keep  near  their  real  nature.  Not  only  the
individual  sciences,  however,  but  also  whole
departments  of  life  diverge  further  and  further
from  one  another,  and  at  the  same  time
break  away  from  the  control  of  religion  and
the  Church.  Law  and  Morality,  Art  and
Science,  become  independent  spheres  of  life


70  THE LIFE OF  THE SPIRIT

which  encompass  man  on  all  sides  with  par
ticular  truths  and  set  him  particular  problems.
This  makes  life  incomparably  broader,  richer,
and  more  varied,  but  is  likely  at  the  same
time  to  expose  it  to  varying  and,  indeed,
intersecting  movements.  It  takes  from  life,
without  hope  of  return,  its  old  restful  and
self-contained  character.

It  has  been  so  often  depicted  before  that  we
do  not  feel  it  incumbent  on  us  to  show  how
human  society  takes  on  an  entirely  different
form  when  work  falls  predominantly  on  the
shoulders  of  the  individual,  how  political  and
economic  life  is  driven  into  new  channels,  and
how  the  individualizing  of  existence  penetrates
even  into  social  intercourse  and  everyday
customs.  That  which  now  gives  charm  and
attractiveness  to  work  is,  in  general,  the  fact
that  its  product  embodies  and  illustrates  indi
vidual  character,  which  is  only  thereby  fully
realized.

The  position  of  man  within  reality  is  also
affected  by  the  movement  of  modern  life,  and


UNITY AND MULTIPLICITY  71

a  fresh  foundation  must  be  sought  for  his
greatness.  Aristotle  declared  that  the  differ
ence  between  man  and  the  animals  was  that
the  latter  cannot  go  beyond  individual  impres
sions  and  individual  stimulations,  while  man,
in  virtue  of  his  power  of  thought,  can  form
universals  and  let  his  action  be  determined  by
them.  Later  thought  differentiates  the  lower
from  the  higher  stage  by  the  distinction  that
the  former  is  bound  hand  and  foot  to  the
order  of  nature,  while  life  at  the  latter  stage
rises  to  independent  thought  and  self- decision.
Reason,  which  raises  us  above  the  purely
natural  order,  does  not  take  its  direction  from
any  external  source,  but  is  able  to  choose  its
own  path.  Thus  freedom  becomes  the  dis
tinguishing  mark  of  man ;  he  is  "  the  first
freedman  of  Creation"  (Herder).  Of  course,
the  conception  of  freedom  is  by  no  means
uniform,  and  often  covers  both  a  higher  and
a  lower  kind,  e.g.  the  freedom  of  Locke  is
different  from  the  freedom  of  Kant.  But
everywhere  that  freedom  forms  the  leading


72  THE LIFE OF  THE SPIRIT

conception  of  value  it  is  taken  as  proof  of  a
Reason  indwelling  in  man.  Freedom,  too,
need  not  reduce  the  demands  on  conduct,  but
may  increase  them  if  an  invisible  world  is
present  in  the  soul  as  an  awakening  and  con
straining  force.  Thus  the  Reformation  has
greatly  increased  the  task  of  morality  by
laying  the  chief  problem  of  religion  immedi
ately  on  the  soul  of  the  individual  and  demand
ing  its  transformation.  And  Kant,  by  deepen
ing  the  idea  of  duty,  has  brought  the  whole  of
life  under  an  inner  subjection,  and  has  thus
made  it  not  more  easy  but  more  difficult.
In  connection  with  men  like  these,  who
approached  the  subject  with  all  the  deep
earnestness  of  souls  anxiously  concerned  for
the  truth  of  life  and  spiritual  self-preservation,
who  dare  speak  of  libertinism  ?

This  movement  as  a  whole  gave  to  phil
osophy  a  new  form  and  new  aims,  and,  as  far
as  philosophy  is  in  line  with  the  new  move
ment,  it  exhibits  a  common  character  through
out  all  the  differences  between  individual


UNITY AND MULTIPLICITY  73

philosophers.  Descartes  is  the  first  in  whose
philosophy  this  common  character  is  clearly
discerned.  A  strong  craving  after  truth
makes  him  feel  the  existing  condition  of
knowledge  to  be  absolutely  unsatisfactory,  and,
in  particular,  to  be  involved  in  unbearable
confusion.  The  first  result  is  a  radical  doubt,
but  within  this  doubt  there  persists  unchanged
the  endeavour  to  attain  some  fixed  point,  such
as  the  fulcrum  which  Archimedes  desired.
Such  a  point  is  finally  found  in  the  thinking
subject,  in  the  conscious  ego,  and  this  leads  to
a  complete  change  of  direction  in  the  work  of
philosophy.  Hitherto  it  had  proceeded  from
the  world  to  man,  from  the  whole  to  the
element,  from  the  macrocosm  to  the  micro
cosm  :  after  a  truth  had  been  apprehended  in
the  macrocosm  it  was  applied  to  the  micro
cosm.  But  now  the  microcosm  steps  into  the
first  place,  the  movement  advances  from  man
to  the  world,  which  becomes  a  difficult  problem
instead  of  a  ready-made  datum.  The  truth
about  the  world  is  ascertained  only  after  it


74  THE LIFE OF THE SPIRIT

has  first  been  taken  to  pieces  by  scientific
analysis  and  then  reconstructed  in  accordance
with  the  laws  of  our  thinking.  Only  that  can
be  admitted  to  be  true  which  presents  itself  to
our  thought  as  clear  and  distinct.  It  is  owing
to  this  tendency  to  start  with  the  subject  that
the  English  thinkers  make  psychology  the
foundation  of  all  knowledge.  To  follow  up
the  growth  of  the  individual  life,  and  to  ascer
tain  the  laws  and  tendencies  which  govern  it,
becomes  the  central  task  of  knowledge  and
determines  all  its  contents  and  range.  All
the  spiritual  achievements,  all  the  morality
and  law,  the  religion  and  art,  which  form  an
integral  part  of  human  existence,  are  to  be
developed  from  the  soul  of  the  individual,  and
owe  to  this  source  their  characteristic  forms.
What  was  formerly  looked  upon  as  a  cosmic
process,  for  example,  the  causal  connection
between  events,  now  becomes  something  ex
perienced  by  man,  and,  indeed,  produced  by
him,  and  thus  acquires  quite  a  different  signi
ficance.  About  the  same  time  Leibniz  draws


UNITY AND MULTIPLICITY  75

up  a  magnificent  scheme  of  the  world  in  which
each  individual  existence  is  regarded  as  a
monad,  as  a  metaphysical  point.  As  such,  it
gains  an  endless  life,  and  develops  this  life
purely  out  of  its  own  resources  without  having
any  relations,  or  being  bound  up,  with  anything
external  to  itself.  While  the  monad  thus
assumes  the  form  of  a  world,  reality  itself  is
transformed  into  a  world  of  worlds.  But  at
the  same  time  Leibniz'  hearty  recognition  of
individuality  enables  him  to  assign  to  each  of
these  sub-worlds  a  unique  significance.

Kant,  too,  continues  this  movement  of
modern  life,  and  the  whole  of  his  philosophy
is  pervaded  by  the  attempt  to  transfer  the
centre  of  gravity  from  the  object  to  the
subject.  The  theoretical  reason  frees  man
from  the  oppression  of  an  alien  world,  for  it
shows  that  the  subject  itself  constitutes  its
own  world  in  accordance  with  laws  that  are
indwelling  in  itself.  "  The  understanding
does  not  derive  its  laws  from  nature,  but  pre
scribes  them  to  nature."  Hence  the  theory  of


76  THE LIFE OF THE SPIRIT

knowledge  takes  precedence  of  metaphysics,
and  destroys  the  latter  in  the  old  sense  in
which  metaphysics  believed  that  it  could
apprehend  a  transcendental  existence.  The
practical  reason  frees  the  acting  personality
from  all  external  constraint  and  leaves  it
to  impose  its  laws  on  itself,  but,  at  the
same  time,  in  the  building  up  of  a  new
moral  order  enables  it  to  penetrate  to  the
ultimate  depths  of  reality.  Personality  here
becomes  the  channel  through  which  a  higher
world  is  revealed,  and  nowhere  else  is  it  more
clearly  seen  that  freedom,  while  it  destroys  old
ties,  introduces  new  ones  in  their  place,  and
claims  to  be  essentially  the  setting  free  of  a
more  real  and  spontaneous  life.  Hence  the
new  philosophy  exhibits  a  large  number  of
results  which  often  contradict  one  another  if
taken  as  they  stand.  But  we  need  only  in
stitute  a  general  comparison  with  the  older
method  to  become  aware  that  the  diversity
rests  on  a  common  foundation,  and  that  it  is
not  a  confused  divergence,  but  a  struggle  to


UNITY AND MULTIPLICITY  77

carry  out  a  common  fundamental  tendency.
We  thus  discern  here  with  absolute  clearness
the  close  connection  between  the  form  which
philosophy  assumes  and  the  general  movement
of  human  life.

Anyone  who  is  ready  to  deny  that  there  is
any  truth  in  such  a  movement  as  this,  with  its
thorough-going  transformation  of  reality,  must
have  a  very  low  opinion  of  the  forces  which
have  been,  and  are,  at  work  in  the  world.
The  man  who  undertook  to  prove  that  this
movement  was  nothing  more  than  a  product
of  human  self-will  would  find  that  the  logical
development  of  his  principles  made  it  very
difficult  for  him  to  escape  absolute  scepticism.
But  to  acknowledge  some  truth  in  a  movement
which  forms  part  of  the  world's  history  does
not  mean  that  we  regard  it  as  raised  above  all
dangers  and  aberrations.  In  particular,  we
may  expect  that  here,  as  usual,  the  relation  of
man  to  the  spiritual  life  may  give  rise  to  the
most  perplexing  difficulties.  That  which,  on
the  high  level  of  the  spiritual  life,  has  an  in-


78  THE LIFE OF  THE SPIRIT

contestable  right,  and  is  capable  of  producing
the  most  fruitful  results,  may  be  dragged
down  by  man  in  his  natural  state  to  the  level
of  his  general  mental  outlook  and  interests,
and  thus  be  most  mischievously  distorted.
Such  a  man  may  claim  for  himself,  just  as
he  is,  what  belongs  to  him  only  as  a  member
of  a  spiritual  order ;  he  may  believe  that
he  can  accomplish  from  his  own  resources
what  is  possible  for  him  only  in  connection
with  a  visible  or  invisible  system,  and  this
is  bound  to  give  rise  to  a  great  deal  of
error  and  obstruction.  For  the  tragedy
of  the  human  situation  is  just  this,  its
greatest  danger  is  the  perversion  of  its
best  (corruptio  optimi  pessima).  Hence  in
modern  life  also  doubt  may  finally  become
so  strong  that  it  reaches  right  down  to  the
foundations,  and  drives  life  and  thought  into
new  directions.

The  modern  scheme  of  life  arose  in  opposition
to  the  medieval,  and  is  in  direct  contradiction
to  the  latter  both  as  regards  its  estimate  of


UNITY AND MULTIPLICITY  79

man  and  the  general  feeling  for  life  which
pervades  it.  The  medieval  system,  as  we  saw,
presupposes  the  spiritual  minority  of  man,  the
modern  system  his  majority.  In  the  former
man  appears  as  possessed  of  no  great  spiritual
enterprise,  and  as  partaking  to  a  certain  extent
in  spiritual  life  only  through  superior  power ;
but  the  modern  system  presupposes  men  of
spiritual  power,  bent  on  high  aims,  for  otherwise
individuals  could  never  become  pillars  of  the
spiritual  life.  But  now  the  question  arises,
whether  this  picture  is  verified  by  experience,
whether  real  life  does  not  lag  far  behind,  and
whether  all  the  complications  which  we  have
just  indicated  are  not  thereby  reintroduced.
Such  complications  may  be  allowed  to  rest  so
long  as  the  old  coherent  systematizations  of
life,  the  world  of  religion,  or  the  world  of
a  universal  reason,  in  the  sense  of  the  En
lightenment,  are  still  vividly  present  to  men,
and  point  them  in  a  common  direction.  But
the  more  these  fade  into  insignificance,  and  the
more  man  is  thrown  upon  himself,  the  greater


80  THE LIFE OF  THE SPIRIT

is  the  danger  that  spiritual  life  may  dwindle
and  finally  disappear  entirely.

The  problem  is  most  easily  grasped  when
we  consider  the  question  as  to  how  any
systematic  coherence  can  be  introduced  into
life  on  the  new  basis.  The  more  we  surrender
all  control  of  the  manifold  by  a  superior  Whole,
the  more  are  we  thrown  back  upon  the  capacity
of  the  individual  elements  to  accomplish  the
same  result  by  means  of  free  association.
Experience  shows  that  this  is  not  such  an  easy
matter,  that  on  the  one  hand  we  may  have
mere  colourless  co-existence,  or  on  the  other
a  condition  of  mutual  hostility.  And  the
surrender  of  an  inner  connection  may  easily
lead  to  a  diminution  of  spiritual  achievement.
This  is  seen  in  all  the  ramifications  of  the
spiritual  life,  and  first  of  all  in  the  case  of
science  itself.  We  saw  how  the  break-up  of
the  medieval  structure  raised  the  individual
branches  of  science  to  a  position  of  independ
ence,  made  them  specific  starting-points  for
investigation,  and  revealed  the  treasures  of


UNITY AND MULTIPLICITY  81

the  universe  with  incomparably  greater  fulness
and  exactitude.  At  first  a  reaction  towards
unity  persisted  as  a  relic  of  earlier  religious
and  philosophical  systematizations.  After  its
disappearance  the  individual  sciences  had  only
their  own  necessities  to  consider,  and  went
their  own  ways,  which  soon  diverged.  The
next  step  is  a  specialization  which  has  eyes  for
nothing  except  what  lies  in  the  direction  of  its
own  goal,  and  which,  though  it  accumulates  a
wealth  of  information,  never  really  succeeds  in
penetrating  and  mastering  its  material.  Or
again,  where  more  general  tendencies  come
into  prominence,  they  easily  succumb  to  the
influence  of  special  departments  of  science,
and  this  brings  them  into  a  position  of  sharp
opposition  to  one  another.  Hence  the  various
branches  of  science  which  deal  with  nature  and
spirit  develop  fundamentally  different  methods
and  standards  of  value,  and,  even  within  any
one  of  the  great  departments,  the  various
movements  and  tendencies  are  often  widely

divergent. Still more dangerous is the

6


82  THE LIFE OF  THE SPIRIT

cleavage  which  takes  place  in  life  itself,  the
attitude  of  hostility  which  whole  departments
of  life  assume  towards  one  another.  We  have
already  become  so  accustomed  to  look  upon
religion  and  culture  as  opponents  that  we
hardly  feel  any  longer  how  abnormal  this
strained  relationship  is,  and  how  foreign  to
other  epochs.  Further,  there  exists  at  the
present  day  among  men  of  average  culture  an
opposition  between  their  beliefs  about  the
world  and  their  beliefs  about  the  moral  values
of  life,  which  is  often  concealed,  but  in  reality
is  very  sharp.  In  the  world  they  recognize  an
exclusively  mechanical  causality ;  in  human
life  they  defend  moral  values  and  the  idea  of
freedom.  The  same  individuals  and  parties
who,  in  their  view  of  the  world,  greet  every
negation  with  shouts  of  joy  and  put  as  low  an
estimate  upon  man  as  possible,  in  the  political
and  social  domain  glorify  the  greatness  and
dignity  of  man,  as  if  this  did  not  depend  upon
inner  connections  and  require  that  reality
should  have  deeper  foundations  than  those


UNITY AND MULTIPLICITY  83

offered  by  the  mere  co-existences  of  experience.
Thus  we  live  to-day  not  only  alongside  one
another  in  separate  worlds,  whose  wide  diver
gence  is  concealed  only  by  language,  but  one
and  the  same  man  lives  in  different  worlds.
In  view  of  such  a  state  of  spiritual  anarchy,
how  could  common  ideals  arise  and  by  their
superior  power  win  the  minds  of  men  ?

The  problems  which  arise  from  the  relation
ship  between  the  individual  and  society  are  no
less  difficult.  When  the  modern  movement
towards  freedom  laid  the  burden  of  life  mainly
on  the  shoulders  of  individuals,  it  presupposed
that  they  were  thoroughly  efficient  and  willing
to  do  their  best.  It  also  relied  upon  the  free
association  of  individuals,  and  the  mutual
contact  and  intermingling  between  different
circles  in  the  life  of  society,  to  produce  a
sufficient  degree  of  solidarity  among  humanity.
Much  has  certainly  been  attained  which  earlier
epochs  did  not  possess,  but  the  modern  libera
tion  of  energies  has  given  rise  to  strong  opposi
tions  and  passions,  and  has  conferred  enormous


84  THE LIFE OF THE SPIRIT

power  on  the  party  system.  It  has  often
tended  to  promote  the  unbridled  letting  loose
of  frenzied  selfishness,  and  has  placed  at  the
service  of  the  latter  all  the  means  which  a
highly  developed  civilization  has  at  its  disposal.
But  this  leads  us  to  the  decisive  point  as  to
how  the  individual  presents  himself  to  us  on
the  new  basis  when  we  consider  him  in  his
own  private  nature.  In  the  higher  strata  of
modern  culture,  wherever  conceptions  such  as
personality  and  individuality  have  been  fully
recognized,  it  has  only  been  by  those  who  have
held  fast  to  and  reinforced  invisible  connections,
and  have  resolutely  maintained  the  reality  of
an  inner  world.  For  we  are  only  justified  in
setting  a  high  value  upon  personality  if  we
believe  that  it  reveals  to  us  a  new  kind  of
process — in  fact,  a  new  world.  The  develop
ment  of  individuality  can  only  be  made  the
chief  object  of  human  endeavour  if  existence
as  human  beings  means  that  men  have  great
tasks  to  carry  out,  and  contradictions  to  over
come,  as  the  condition  of  realizing  the  highest


85

capacities  of  their  own  nature.  Life  only
acquired  greatness  and  spiritual  independence
because  man  had  to  seek  to  enter  into  relations
with  the  whole  universe,  to  come  to  terms
with  it,  and  to  maintain  his  own  position  in
face  of  it.  The  main  body  of  mankind  has
become  less  and  less  conscious  of  these  inner
connections,  and,  at  the  same  time,  man  has
become  a  mere  item  in  a  world  which  comes
before  him  as  something  given  and  incapable
of  development  from  the  spiritual  point  of
view,  and  which  surrounds  and  hems  him  in
on  all  sides.  Hardly  any  room  is  left  for  the
conception  of  personality,  and  we  do  not  see
how  individuality  can  maintain  its  value  if  it
is  nothing  more  than  a  particular  fragment  of
nature.  But  if  the  conceptions  maintain
themselves,  claim  to  be  valued  as  highly  as
before,  and  make  good  their  claim,  it  is  impos
sible  to  guard  against  a  luxurious  upgrowth  of
hollow  talk  and  a  deep-reaching  insincerity  in
life.  In  the  absence  of  any  counteracting  in
fluence,  there  is  an  increasing  danger  that  our


86  THE LIFE OF  THE SPIRIT

life  may  lose  its  sure  foundation  and  finally
find  itself  adrift  in  the  void,  leaving  us  to
affirm  conclusions  while  denying  their  premises.
In  fact,  when  this  tendency  prevails,  the
human  soul  can  no  longer  remain  a  unity  in
itself,  but  is  bound  to  be  transformed  into  a
medley  of  co-existing  and  interpenetrating
psychical  processes.  If  these  are  not  worked
over  and  transformed  by  a  superior  unity,  they
will  come  to  have  a  merely  sensational  connec
tion  with  one  another,  and  man  will  finally
become  a  mere  bundle  of  sensations,  feelings,
and  impulses.  But,  all  the  same,  the  superior
rights  of  personality  and  the  dignity  and  great
ness  of  humanity  are  proclaimed  and  trumpeted
forth.

Thus  experience  shows  that  the  mere
striving  after  freedom  cannot  ensure  that  life
shall  retain  a  spiritual  character.  The  break
up  of  all  inner  connections  has  led  to  super
ficiality  and  the  dissipation  of  energy.  In
addition,  the  course  of  the  movement  in
modern  life  has  revealed  that  the  complications


UNITY AND MULTIPLICITY  87

are  much  greater,  and  the  resistance  much
more  strenuous  than  was  anticipated  at  the
beginning,  when  men  were  filled  with  joyful
confidence.  And  a  further  fact  has  become
evident,  viz.,  that  it  is  not  only  at  particular
points  that  civilization  does  not  correspond  to
the  demands  of  the  spiritual  life,  but  that
civilization  as  a  whole  is  in  many  ways  in
conflict  with  these  demands.  We  feel  with
increasing  distress  the  wide  interval  between
the  varied  and  important  work  to  be  done  at
the  circumference  of  life  and  the  complete
emptiness  at  the  centre.  When  we  take  an
inside  view  of  life,  we  find  that  a  life  of  mere
bustling  routine  preponderates,  that  men
struggle  and  boast  and  strive  to  outdo  one
another,  that  unlimited  ambition  and  vanity
are  characteristic  of  individuals,  that  they  are
always  running  to  and  fro  and  pressing  forward,
or  feverishly  exerting  all  their  powers.  But
throughout  it  all  we  come  upon  nothing
that  gives  any  real  value  to  life,  and  nothing
spiritually  elevating.  Hence  we  do  not  find


88  THE LIFE OF  THE SPIRIT

any  meaning  or  value  in  life,  but  in  the  end  a
single  huge  show  in  which  culture  is  reduced
to  a  burlesque.  Anyone  who  thinks  it  all  over
and  reflects  upon  the  difference  between  the
enormous  labour  that  has  been  expended  and
the  accompanying  gain  to  the  essentials  of  life,
must  either  be  driven  to  complete  negation
and  despair,  or  must  seek  new  ways  of
guaranteeing  a  value  to  life  and  liberating
man  from  the  sway  of  the  pettily  human.
But  this  will  force  men  to  resume  the  quest
for  inner  connections.

But  the  objection  will  be  raised  that  the
endeavour  to  attain  to  such  connections  is
no  novelty,  for  the  whole  of  the  nineteenth
century  was  taken  up  with  it.  This  is  certainly
the  case ;  but  should  we  find  ourselves  at  the
present  day  in  such  a  state  of  unrest  and  in
security,  as  actually  exists,  if  the  co-ordina
tions  which  have  been  attempted  had  been
satisfactory  ?  In  German  speculation  philo
sophy  itself,  with  buoyant  courage,  undertook
to  understand  the  whole  of  reality  as  the


UNITY AND MULTIPLICITY  89

unfolding  of  a  single  all-embracing  spiritual
process.  Hegel,  in  particular,  makes  all
philosophy  to  be  the  search  for  unity,  and
at  the  same  time  gives  a  symmetrical  form
to  the  whole  of  existence.  But  however
powerful  have  been  the  influences  which  this
attempt  has  exercised,  and  still  exercises,  it
has  not  met  with  universal  recognition,  not
only  because  in  the  meantime  there  took  place
the  well-known  movement  of  life  towards  the
visible  world,  but  also  because  man  was
treated  in  the  Hegelian  system  too  much  as  a
purely  intellectual  being,  and  the  spiritual  life
was  not  given  any  sufficient  content.  On  a
broader  basis  a  counteracting  influence  to  pre
vent  the  threatened  dissipation  of  the  energies
of  life  was  exercised  by  the  thought  of  social
evolution,  the  carrying  out  of  which  was
especially  distinctive  of  the  nineteenth  century.
It  makes  full  use  of  the  connection  of  the
individual  with  the  sequence  and  co-existence
of  things,  and  shows  what  is  the  value  of  this
connection,  how  the  work  of  men  through


90  THE LIFE OF  THE SPIRIT

long  generations  still  continues  to  influence
present  conditions,  and,  further,  how  the
existence  of  men  in  society  produces  a
spiritual  atmosphere,  a  jnilicu,  which  leaves
every  individual  enveloped  and  moulded  by
superior  power.  But  if,  from  this  point  of
view,  he  appears  as  a  mere  member  of  an
extensive  system,  the  question  arises  as  to
whether  he  can  come  into  intimate  relation
ship  with  this  system,  and  take  it  up  as  a
whole  into  his  character  and  disposition,  or
whether  he  feels  himself  at  the  mercy  of  mere
blind  fact.  In  the  first  case,  the  problem
arises  how  history  and  society  are  to  attain
to  an  inner  connection  which  can  win  the
allegiance  of  the  soul  of  the  individual,  if  no
sort  of  inner  world  is  presupposed.  In  the
second  case,  where  the  mere  fact  of  depend
ence  is  the  final  conclusion  that  is  reached,
we  cannot  see  why  man  should  welcome  as  a
good  this  dependence,  which  is  often  very
burdensome  and  oppressive ;  why  he  should
make  it  part  of  his  character,  and  sacrifice  his


UNITY AND MULTIPLICITY  91

own  well-being  to  that  of  a  world  which  con
sists  of  merely  co-existing  parts.  Hence  the
matter  remains  in  some  obscurity,  and  only
the  constant  interpenetration  of  the  two  con
ceptions,  as,  for  example,  in  the  case  of  Comte,
the  founder  of  Positivism,  can  in  any  degree
conceal  the  fact  that,  by  this  path,  the  goal
is  unattainable.  In  reality,  what  has  kept
modern  men  together  to  the  greatest  extent
is  work,  work  in  the  modern  sense.  This
has  as  its  characteristic  feature,  in  comparison
with  earlier  periods,  a  greater  detachment  from
the  subjective  basis  and  a  greater  independence
of  the  individual,  the  formation  of  great  com
plexes  which  develop  their  own  laws  and
motive  forces,  and  which  combine  and  unite
with  one  another  the  achievements  of  indi
viduals.  The  efforts  of  the  individual  can
only  succeed  on  condition  that  he  gains  an
entrance  into  these  systems,  and  does  his  work
in  the  particular  position  which  is  assigned  to
him.  This  exercises  an  extraordinary  power
in  overcoming  the  self-will  of  individuals  and


92  THE LIFE OF  THE SPIRIT

directing  their  actions  towards  a  common
end.  But,  whatever  has  been  accomplished
in  this  respect  by  such  a  co-ordination,  it
unites  men  only  with  regard  to  their  outward
actions,  and  does  not  produce  a  spiritual  unity.
Wherever  it  is  a  question  of  character  and
convictions,  all  combination  and  co-operation
in  work  cannot  prevent  a  wide  divergence,  a
rampant  selfishness,  an  inward  isolation  of  the
individual.  In  fact,  if  work  is  raised  to  a
position  of  exclusive  control,  it  finally  brings
with  it  the  danger  that  life  may  become
merely  mechanical.  The  craving  after  more
soul  and  more  love  in  human  existence  has
to  remain  unsatisfied.  Hence,  as  a  general
rule,  the  modern  movement  after  some  sort
of  connection  is  too  external,  and  does  not
go  back  to  the  spiritual  foundations ;  we  are
conscious  of  a  great  gap  with  nothing  to
fill  it.

Such  a  situation  naturally  enables  us  to
understand  how  the  older  method,  and,  in
particular,  the  medieval  ecclesiastical  system,


UNITY AND MULTIPLICITY  93

can  again  make  itself  more  powerfully  felt,
how  it  can  make  use  of  the  perplexities  of
modern  life  to  recommend  its  own  system  of
truth,  and  how  it  can  win  the  allegiance  of
many  vacillating  souls.  As  a  matter  of  fact,
it  acquires  a  certain  power  because,  in  the
midst  of  a  progressive  disintegration,  it  pre
sents  a  stable  and  coherent  system,  and  offers
a  support  to  which  one  can  cling.  If  that  dis
integration  is  not  in  the  end  checked  from
within,  then  a  serious  danger  of  a  relapse
might  arise ;  the  imperative  need  of  some
support  or  other  might  for  a  time  thrust  out
of  sight  all  other  considerations.  But  what
men  are  able  to  win  temporarily  does  not
necessarily  become  a  power  that  is  spiritually
productive ;  and  even  if  the  old  system  is
taken  up  again,  it  could  never  regain  its  old
power  of  conviction.  For  this  rested  for  the
most  part  on  the  fact  that  the  spiritual  life
which  was  offered  by  this  system  was  on  a
level  with  the  general  world-movement.  But,
meanwhile,  changes  of  the  most  far-reaching


94  THE LIFE OF THE SPIRIT

character  have  taken  place.  Of  course,  men
may  make  artificial  attempts  to  reverse  the
course  of  progress,  or  to  explain  it  away,  but
these  attempts  can  never  have  the  immediacy
and  inner  necessity  which  were  characteristic
of  the  medieval  systematization  in  its  own  age,
and  which  belong  to  a  great  achievement  in
the  history  of  the  world.  Hence  no  help  can
be  expected  from  this  quarter.

If  men  were  mere  products  of  history,  as
this  view  makes  them,  if,  as  such,  they  were
bound  to  the  pre-existing  situation,  and  both
their  life  and  their  work  were  essentially  con
trolled  by  what  has  previously  been  accom
plished,  it  is  impossible  to  see  how  to  avoid
the  perplexities  which  we  have  set  forth,  or
how  we  should  overcome  the  opposition
between  a  unity  which  crushes  out  all  freedom
and  a  multiplicity  which  breaks  up  all  co
herence.  But  we  are  not  mere  products  of
history ;  in  virtue  of  our  spiritual  nature  we
are  able  to  transcend  our  past,  and  this  power
we  are  able  to  make  use  of  and  cultivate.


UNITY  AND MULTIPLICITY  95

Fortified  by  this,  we  are  not  left  defenceless,
and  need  not  accept  whatever  history  offers  us
as  an  undifferentiated  whole ;  we  possess  a
spontaneity  which  we  can  oppose  to  every
thing  that  is  merely  given  ;  we  can  separate
in  what  is  offered  to  us  that  which  is  spiritually
necessary  from  that  which  has  been  shaped  by
human  agency  ;  we  can  emphasize  the  require
ments  for  the  maintenance  of  spiritual  life
which  have  been  revealed  by  the  experience  of
history,  and  we  can  inquire  what  direction  is
pointed  out  for  our  own  work  by  these
requirements.

In  our  brief  survey  of  history  it  was  clearly
seen  that,  in  the  case  of  the  problem  of  unity
and  multiplicity,  the  movement  of  life  has  not
followed  a  single  line,  but  that  the  tendency
towards  multiplicity,  which  is  characteristic  of
modern  times,  is  in  opposition  to  the  tendency
towards  unity,  which  was  predominant  in
antiquity.  A  critical  estimate  of  the  whole
shows  us  that  it  is  not  a  question  of  a  mere
sequence  of  tendencies,  but  that  two  poles  are


96  THE LIFE OF  THE SPIRIT

indicated,  between  which  the  spiritual  life  is
necessarily  compelled  to  move.  If  spiritual
life  is  to  be  possible,  we  must  have  on  the  one
hand  an  inner  connection,  a  creative  activity
proceeding  from  the  whole :  such  life  can
never  be  produced  by  a  mere  juxtaposition  ;
it  must  be  acquired  and  maintained  by  some
power  above  the  separate  elements.  On  the
other  hand,  as  we  saw,  the  spiritual  life  must
have  spontaneity,  independence,  and  pure
inwardness,  if  it  is  to  exist  at  all ;  it  must  be
lived  for  its  own  sake  and  cannot  be  imparted
or  transferred  from  without.  It  does  not
persist  in  the  condition  which  it  has  once
reached,  but  begins  to  ebb  if  it  is  not  con
tinually  renewed.  If,  then,  it  is  incontestable
that  such  immediacy  and  spontaneity  can
arise  only  in  the  soul  of  the  individual,  and
from  this  source  must  animate  all  the  con
nections  which  are  subsequently  formed,  then
a  contradiction  arises  which  at  first  sight  is
insoluble.  Life  arises  for  us  only  at  an  in
dividual  point,  and  yet,  as  spiritual  life,  it


UNITY AND MULTIPLICITY  97

must  at  the  same  time  be  a  creative  activity
proceeding  from  the  whole.  If  this  contra
diction  is  to  be  resolved,  we  must  make  an
essential  change  in  the  view  which  we  took
at  first  sight,  and  deepen  our  conception  of
reality  so  as  to  see  at  the  individual  point
more  than  an  isolated  event.  We  must
recognize  the  presence  there  of  a  universal
process,  and  a  totality  of  spiritual  life  must  be
the  basis  of  our  own  existence.  To  be  sure,
this  world-process  is  not  immediately  our  own
possession  :  we  have  first  to  grasp  it  and  work
it  out ;  but  it  never  could  have  come  into  our
field  of  vision  at  all  and  become  an  object  of
our  efforts  if  our  nature  did  not  originally
participate  in  it.  If  our  inner  existence  is  not
somehow  grounded  in  the  infinity  of  the
whole,  all  co-ordination  of  life  must  be  im
pressed  upon  us  from  without,  and  this  will
inevitably  crush  all  independence.  But  this
again  will  necessarily  cause,  sooner  or  later,
a  reaction  in  favour  of  setting  free  the  indi
vidual  elements,  and  will  engender  a  desire

7


98  THE LIFE OF  THE SPIRIT

to  break  up  the  connection.  On  this  view,
mankind  would  be  driven  to  and  fro,  without
hope  of  rescue,  between  blind  subjection  to
authority  and  a  spiritual  anarchy  of  individual
elements,  and  would  be  worn  out  by  the
contest,  were  it  not  that  there  is  a  point  of
vantage  from  which  it  is  possible  to  make
some  headway  against  the  antithesis  in  ques
tion,  though  it  does  not  here  simply  disappear,
and  at  which  we  are  able  to  protect  ourselves
from  the  unhappy  condition  just  described.

The  average  man,  whose  spirituality  is
sluggish,  will  always  have  great  difficulty  in
getting  beyond  the  stage  of  wavering  between
these  two  opposite  positions.  According  as
the  feeling  of  weakness  and  isolation,  or  the
feeling  of  power  and  independence,  gains  the
upper  hand,  he  will  incline  first  in  the  one
direction  and  then  in  the  other.  But  this
makes  it  all  the  more  an  indispensable  task
for  the  work  of  the  spirit  to  develop  a  life
which  rises  above  that  opposition  and  all
the  spiritual  poverty  of  the  average  man,  and


UNITY AND MULTIPLICITY  99

thereby  to  bring  into  as  sharp  relief  as  possible
a  genuine  spiritual  culture  as  compared  with
the  superficiality  and  pretence  of  a  culture
which  is  merely  human.  This  cannot  well
take  place  unless  we  seek  also  to  establish  a
particular  organization,  a  co-ordination  of
mankind  with  this  object  in  view.  The
medieval  Church  became  too  narrow  for  this
purpose,  not  only  because  it  bound  up  the
spiritual  world  much  too  firmly  with  a  visible
order,  but  also  because  it  made  religion  the
sole  representative  of  that  independent  spiritual
life.  It  thus  gave  life  a  character  that  was
too  one-sidedly  religious,  and  transformed  to
too  great  an  extent  the  spiritual  into  the
ecclesiastical.  But  when  once  the  funda
mental  thought  of  a  combination  of  forces,
under  the  idea  of  a  spiritual  life  superior  to
the  average,  has  won  a  footing  in  history,  it
cannot  again  disappear  ;  it  will  stir  up  and
move  humanity  until  it  is  revived  in  some
form  or  other.  Only  then  can  we  attack  the
problem  of  bringing  into  relief  from  the  dull


100  THE LIFE OF THE SPIRIT

average  of  attainment  a  heart  and  core  of
genuine  spirituality  throughout  the  whole
range  of  existence,  and  of  working  from  this
starting-point  to  strengthen  and  elevate  life.
The  constant  presupposition  is,  that  a  spiritual
life  which  is  a  unified  whole  is  at  work  in  the
depths  of  our  soul ;  it  is  only  when  it  does
this  that  main  lines  of  effort  can  be  developed
out  of  it,  that  truths  of  the  soul  can  be  ela
borated,  and  that  the  way  can  be  prepared  tor
an  inner  solidarity  of  the  soul.

If  this  is  impossible  without  the  constant
co-operation  of  philosophy,  then  philosophy
itself  must  receive  a  new  form  from  the  new
connections,  and  must  develop  new  methods.
Its  first  task  is  to  provide  a  new  starting-point
for  its  own  work.  It  can  no  longer  take  its
stand  on  the  external  world,  as  the  ancients
did,  since  the  general  movement  of  life  and
thought  has  tended  more  and  more  to  make
that  world  itself  a  problem,  and  to  refer  men
back  to  life  as  the  only  thing  which  is  immedi
ately  present  to  them.  But  if  this  life  is


UNITY AND MULTIPLICITY 101

understood  as  the  mere  activity  of  a  unit
which  is  cut  off  from  the  world,  it  can  never
get  beyond  its  limited  and  separated  sphere,
and  never  attain  to  a  truth  that  is  universally
valid.  It  will  thus  inevitably  lapse  into  a  state
of  complete  isolation.  Hence  it  is  important
to  show  that  there  is  a  world  which  lies  within
life  itself,  and  to  advance  from  the  psychologi
cal  treatment  of  it  to  the  noological.  The  latter
does  not  deal  with  the  states  and  experiences
of  the  individual  unit,  but  with  the  upgrowth  of
the  spiritual  life,  and  looks  at  it  in  a  way  that
rises  above  the  separation  of  individual  and
society,  but  at  the  same  time  affords  us  a
characteristic  view  of  the  whole  of  reality.

If  we  thus  start  from  the  spiritual  life  as
a  unified  whole,  and  strive  to  reach  some
systematization  of  life  in  work,  we  need  not
be  afraid  that  humanity  will  sink  to  a  condition
of  rigid  uniformity :  ample  provision  has  here
been  made  for  movement  and  variety.  For,
in  the  first  place,  spiritual  life  as  a  whole  will
always  need  to  be  recognized  and  appropriated


102  THE LIFE OF  THE SPIRIT

by  men,  and  in  doing  so  different  minds  will
inevitably  take  different  paths.  It  will  only
be  with  great  difficulty  that  this  divergence
will  ever  cease  in  the  course  of  history,  or  even
diminish.  But  we  have  to  struggle  incessantly,
not  only  to  realize  the  spiritual  life  as  a  whole,
but  also  to  give  form  to  its  details.  For,  as
we  shall  have  to  show  later  with  more  detail,
the  spiritual  life  does  not  reveal  its  depths  to
man  all  at  once,  but  he  can  only  advance
gradually  into  it  by  coming  to  terms  with  the
existing  condition  of  the  world  and  his  own
soul.  Various  stages  may  have  to  be  tra
versed  and  important  decisions  will  have  to
be  taken.  In  this  matter  one  and  the  same
answer  cannot  be  expected  from  all.  For  the
individual  may  take  up  his  position  here  or
there  according  to  his  nature  and  experience ;
in  fact  whole  periods  may  adopt  different
positions  according  to  the  impressions  they
have  received  and  the  tasks  they  have  to
perform.  In  particular,  one  epoch  may  be
filled  with  the  consciousness  of  the  inner


UNITY AND MULTIPLICITY  103

greatness  of  the  spiritual  life,  another  may  feel
deeply  how  human  existence  fails  to  reach
this  height  of  attainment ;  the  one  may  there
fore  be  a  period  of  affirmation,  the  other  a
period  of  negation.  Great  tension  may  be  the
consequence,  and  much  strife  among  men,  but
if  we  once  make  sure  only  of  the  idea  of  an
independent  spiritual  life,  we  shall  have  made
it  possible  to  bring  counteracting  influences  to
bear  against  the  disintegration,  and  in  fact  to
understand  the  different  movements  as  all
co-operating  in  a  common  work.  The  only
essential  is  that  the  matter  should  never  be
regarded  as  settled  and  done  with.  Let  it
never  be  forgotten  that  to  us  men  there  is  not
offered  any  ready-made  relationship  between
unity  and  multiplicity,  but  that  we  have  to
co-operate  with  the  forces  at  work  in  the
world,  and  laboriously  strive  to  reach  some
sort  of  reconciliation  of  the  antithesis.


CHAPTER  II

CHANGE  AND  PERSISTENCE
TIME  AND  ETERNITY

THE  relation  between  change  and  persistence,
between  time  and  eternity,  is  exceedingly
complicated  and  confused  in  human  life.  No
phase  of  this  relationship  is  satisfying ;  we  are
driven  from  one  to  another ;  a  reconciliation
seems  to  be  indispensable,  but  we  do  not  see
how  to  attain  it.

In  the  first  place,  man  stands  completely
immersed  in  the  stream  of  time ;  his  whole
existence  is  in  a  state  of  constant  change,
and  in  the  external  world  he  finds  everywhere
the  more  change  the  more  closely  he  scrutinizes
things.  Meanwhile,  the  current  of  his  own  life
flows  on  without  resting ;  in  comparison  with

104


CHANGE AND PERSISTENCE 105

the  endlessness  of  time,  the  existence  of  the
individual  appears  as  a  fleeting  moment.  But
this  transience  and  insignificance  of  his  life
is  felt  by  man  both  as  a  grief  and  a  grievance,
and  hence  it  comes  to  be  one  of  the  leading
motives  of  his  work  to  escape  somehow  from
the  destroying  power  of  time.  He  experiences
that  longing  for  eternity  which  Plato  depicted
in  glowing  colours.  The  individual  feels  that
he  must  soon  retire  from  the  scene,  and  hence
he  seeks  to  leave  behind  him  some  signs  that
he  has  lived.  Great  kings  set  up  memorials
of  their  deeds  and  inscribe  their  names  on
walls  of  rock.  But  if  we  go  beyond  the
individual,  we  find  that  the  building  up  of  a
civilization  requires,  as  it  were,  the  accumula
tion  and  storing  up  of  achievements.  The
present  must  maintain  its  hold  on  the  past
in  order  to  be  able  to  continue  the  building-up
process ;  our  task  is  to  establish  a  foundation
for  life  in  face  of  all  change  of  circumstances
and  all  caprice  of  individuals.  Institutions
and  customs,  which  are  declared  to  be  un-


106  THE LIFE OF THE SPIRIT

changeable  and  which  are  revered  as  inviolable,
are  particularly  dominant  at  the  beginnings  of
civilization.  Religion  especially,  by  connecting
life  with  a  sacred  order,  exercises  an  influence
in  favour  of  persistence  and  keeps  change  at
arm's  length  as  an  outrage  against  God.

But  if  we  take  our  stand  within  time  we
cannot  well  overcome  the  power  of  time.
The  stream  of  time  undermines  and  destroys
the  mightiest  and  most  skilfully  constructed
works  ;  from  the  largest  whole  to  the  smallest
parts  it  brings  everything  into  flux.  Not  only
individuals,  but  whole  nations  and  civilizations
decay ;  the  various  religions  themselves,  the
guardians  of  eternal  truth,  succumb  to  time
and  survive  only  as  memories.  The  craving
for  eternity  would  have  to  be  torn  from  our
soul  if  our  life  belonged  entirely  to  the
immediate  present,  if  it  could  not  transcend
it  and  press  forward  to  a  new  reality,  which
stands  in  a  different  relation  to  the  question
of  time  and  eternity.  But  such  a  reality  can
reveal  itself,  if  at  all,  only  as  the  result  of


CHANGE AND PERSISTENCE 107

spiritual  work,  and  this  work  necessarily  in
volves  both  thought  and  philosophy.  Now
it  would  appear  that  nothing  is  more  char
acteristic  of  thought  than  the  power  to  look
at  things  out  of  relation  to  time  under  the
form  of  eternity.

Greek  philosophy  devoted  special  attention
to  this  problem.  It  waged  vigorous  war
against  the  flux  of  phenomena,  and  hence
produced  a  characteristic  type  of  life.  Change
in  things  is  recognized  throughout  a  wide
range,  but  is  degraded  by  the  main  tendency
of  thought  to  a  lower  level,  and  kept  at  a
distance  from  the  heart  and  core  of  spiritual
work.  This  was  not  done  purely  in  the
interests  of  philosophical  knowledge,  which
bade  men  seek  beneath  all  change  a  persistent
fundamental  substance  or  unchangeable  ele
ments.  Life,  too,  demanded  some  sure  and
certain  support,  which  should  be  a  spiritual
rallying-point  from  which  it  could  go  forth
to  enrich  itself.  It  was  thought  that  life
could  not  gain  this  support  except  by  turning


108  THE LIFE OF  THE SPIRIT

from  the  restless  activity  of  man  to  the
universe,  which,  in  its  ultimate  nature,  was
considered  to  be  unchangeable.  In  grasping
and  contemplating  the  order  of  the  universe
and  its  eternal  grace,  man  seemed  to  find
something  worth  living  for  and  to  be  raised
above  the  cares  and  troubles  of  everyday  life.
On  this  view,  knowledge  seems  to  be  the  only
path  by  which  man's  life  can  be  raised  to  the
level  of  that  which  is  eternal ;  the  superiority
of  knowledge  over  action  was  thus  fully
guaranteed.  But  the  next  thing  was  to
ascertain  more  accurately  what  it  was  in  the
universe  which  could  be  reckoned  as  persistent.
The  answer  given  by  Plato  gained  the  widest
acceptance  and  has  exercised  the  deepest
influence  on  mankind.  Plato  sees  in  the
conceptions  which  thought  uses  a  certain
amount  of  fixity  in  contrast  with  an  opinion
which  continually  varies.  On  a  closer  view,
this  fixed  element  is  determined  as  the  form
or  shape.  The  co-ordination  of  these  forms
into  a  great  synthetic  structure  gives  rise  to


CHANGE AND PERSISTENCE  109

a  realm  of  unchangeable  truth  and  reality.
This  realm  must  be  raised  above  the  world
which  envelops  us,  in  order  to  preserve  its
independence  and  purity,  but  it  exercises  a
formative  influence  over  the  world  and  gives
its  efforts  a  fixed  goal  and  an  impulse  towards
higher  things.  Knowledge  is  here  raised  to
a  position  of  control  over  the  whole  of  life,
for  it  is  knowledge  alone  which  is  able  to
reveal  to  us  this  transcendental  world  and
keep  it  abidingly  present.

Aristotle  brings  form  back  into  the  world
of  experience,  but  leaves  it  its  immutability,
and  by  his  vigorous  development  of  the  anti
thesis  of  matter  the  total  picture  of  the  world
and  life  is  rounded  off  with  still  greater  com
pleteness.  This  reconciliation  between  change
and  persistence,  between  time  and  eternity,
which  was  reached  when  Greek  thought  was
at  its  highest  level,  has  moulded  the  whole  of
life  in  a  specific  way,  and  still  retains  the
influence  which  it  has  exercised  for  thousands
of  years.  Form  has  received  the  fullest  recog-


110  THE LIFE OF  THE SPIRIT

nition  as  a  phenomenon  which  pervades  the
whole  world,  and  it  becomes  the  central  point
of  spiritual  work.  The  world  appears  on  this
view  as  dominated  by  the  opposition  of  matter
and  form.  The  latter  is  the  absolutely  un
changeable  element,  so  that  to  seek  something
which  is  persistent  simply  means  to  throw  the
forms  into  clear  relief.  Matter,  on  the  other
hand,  exists  in  a  state  of  flux,  not  subject  to
rule.  In  the  process  of  life  form  takes  hold
of  matter  and  shapes  it  to  its  own  ends,  but
matter  always  tends  to  escape  from  these  ties
and  always  has  to  be  conquered  anew.  Hence
the  world  is  in  a  state  of  constant  movement,
but  in  its  ultimate  nature  it  remains  unaltered  :
rest  retains  an  unassailable  superiority  over
change.  And  even  where  change  extends
beyond  the  individual,  as  with  the  fates  of
nations  or  the  motions  of  the  heavenly  bodies,
Aristotle  does  not  by  any  means  believe  that
there  is  no  persistence.  The  conception  of  fixed
rhythms  in  movement  is  developed,  perhaps,
in  connection  with  the  Babylonian  astronomy.


CHANGE AND PERSISTENCE  111

Just  as  day  and  night,  summer  and  winter,
follow  one  another  in  eternal  recurrence,  so
also  there  are  rhythmical  periods  in  the  world
as  a  whole  and  in  the  fates  of  men.  Move
ment  does  not  go  on  endlessly,  but  only  up
to  a  certain  point,  whose  position  is  fixed,  then
it  turns  back  to  the  beginning  and  starts  a
new  series.  Hence  everything  is  both  old
and  new  at  the  same  time ;  in  the  incessant
ebb  and  flow  of  phenomena,  in  the  endless
succession  of  periods,  the  world  as  a  whole
remains  the  same.  The  work  of  knowledge
corresponds  to  this  conception  of  reality.  Its
task  is  not  so  much  to  follow  the  changes  in
the  coherent  systems  which  have  been  formed
within  life  as  to  construct  a  general  picture
out  of  the  confused  mass  of  first  impressions,
to  bring  the  flux  of  things  to  a  stand.  Its
procedure  is  not  genetic,  but  descriptive  and
classificatory.  The  strong  point  of  this  philo
sophy  lies  in  discovering  fixed  types  or  forming
them,  to  a  certain  extent  after  the  manner  of
plastic  art.  It  is  certainly  in  connection  with


112  THE LIFE OF  THE SPIRIT

this  that  we  are  especially  indebted  to  the
work  of  the  Greeks  for  the  fixation  of  sharply
outlined  types  of  thought  and  life,  which  seem
likely  to  remain  a  permanent  heritage  of
humanity.

The  search  for  something  which  is  persistent
is  not  confined  to  the  universe  generally,  but
extends  to  the  details  of  human  existence.
The  kind  of  political  life  which  prevails  seems
to  be  determined  above  all  by  the  nature  of
the  political  constitution.  The  form  of  the
state  seems  to  be  that  which  preserves  the
systematic  coherence  of  the  whole  in  opposition
to  the  constantly  changing  series  of  individuals,
and  it  is  this  in  particular  which  has  led  to  the
high  estimation,  and  frequent  over-estimation,
in  which  constitutional  forms  are  held.  Thus
a  tendency  arises  to  construct  an  ideal  and  to
hold  this  up  as  the  permanent  standard  by
which  any  change  in  political  relations  is  to
be  judged.

But  the  impulse  to  find  something  that  is
persistent  is  seen  with  particular  clearness  in


CHANGE AND PERSISTENCE  113

the  way  in  which  the  life  of  the  soul  is  shaped.
The  ultimate  basis  of  life  is  here  always  taken
for  granted  ;  in  the  full  development  of  this
human  activity  has  an  important  task  assigned
it,  but  at  the  same  time  an  impassable  goal.
When  this  goal  is  reached,  activity  ceases  to
be  a  mere  striving,  and  is  transformed  into  a
state  of  rest  in  itself,  into  an  activity  fully
satisfied  by  its  own  exertion  and  self-expression.
The  best  example  of  this  is  artistic  contempla
tion,  which  is  full  of  exalted  pleasure  without
striving  to  attain  to  anything  beyond  itself.
It  seems  that  here  the  opposition  is  entirely
overcome,  since  the  activity  itself  acquires  a
sort  of  persistence.  If,  in  accordance  with
this,  happiness  is  sought  not  in  effort  but  in
possession,  this  possession  is  no  state  of
slothful  rest,  but  an  incessant  activity.  Hence
the  chief  problem  of  life  is  life  itself,  as  the
complete  unfolding  and  effective  co-ordination
of  its  own  nature :  as  the  poet  says,  the
important  thing  is  to  become  what  one  is.

The conception of  form has a far-reaching

8


114  THE LIFE OF THE SPIRIT

power  in  this  connection  also,  for  everywhere
that  there  is  any  diversity  manifest  in  the
domain  of  life,  it  is  to  be  brought  into  a  fixed
relation  either  of  gradation  or  of  equilibrium.
The  general  result  is  a  life  which  is  self-
existent  and  established  on  its  own  founda
tions,  and  which  is  exempt  from  restlessness
and  haste  only  because  it  is  incessantly  active.
No  one  would  wish  to  maintain  at  the
present  day  that  this  scheme,  which  was
drawn  up  by  the  philosophers,  really  controlled
the  life  of  the  average  Greek.  Very  possibly
it  was  by  way  of  contrast  to  this  average  that
its  features  were  outlined  with  so  much
sharpness.  But  in  the  spiritual  life  and  in
the  work  of  that  unique  nation  philosophy
does  not  occupy  a  position  of  isolation.  And
the  creative  activity  which  found  expression
in  art  shows  more  persistence  than  in  modern
times ;  certain  types  endure  for  centuries
without  crushing  the  individuality  of  their
creators.  The  technical  wrork  of  the  Greeks,
too,  has  more  stability  ;  there  is  less  alteration


CHANGE AND PERSISTENCE 115

in  its  methods  and  instruments  than  has
become  the  rule  in  the  latest  period.  Hence
their  life  has  throughout  a  more  restful
character  than  modern  life ;  it  is  laden  with
fewer  unsolved  problems  and  sharp  contra
dictions.  It  is  not  so  much  a  restless  striving
after  an  ever-receding  goal,  a  hoping  and
waiting  for  a  better  future,  as  a  co-ordination
and  strengthening  of  its  own  powers ;  it
draws  its  satisfaction  from  the  complete
mastery  of  its  own  existence  in  the  present.
This  ideal  of  life,  with  its  reconciliation  of
rest  and  activity,  has  always  possessed  an
attraction  for  later  periods,  but  all  its  nobility
and  greatness  cannot  conceal  the  presupposi
tions  on  which  it  rests,  and  which  became
untenable  in  the  following  ages.  It  demands
a  vigorous  nature ;  it  demands  a  considerable
activity  which  takes  pleasure  in  its  own
exercise :  it  demands,  in  fact,  faith  in  the
rationality  of  the  human  soul  and  the  whole
of  reality  in  their  fundamental  nature.  Form,
too,  can  only  maintain  its  position  of  leader-


116  THE LIFE OF  THE SPIRIT

ship  where  it  possesses  an  inner  life—  we  might
say,  a  soul.  And  the  whole  scheme  under
went  considerable  modifications  towards  the
close  of  antiquity.  After  the  loss  of  political
freedom  and  the  cessation  of  spiritual  creation,
activity  loses  its  old  value,  and  what  is  offered
in  its  stead  cannot  fully  make  up  for  the  loss.
Difficult  problems  and  contradictions  arise
within  human  existence  and  in  the  condition
of  the  world  ;  in  particular,  the  old  harmony
between  the  spiritual  and  the  sensible  threatens
to  turn  into  a  sharp  opposition.  Among  men
the  pettiness  and  meaninglessness  of  everyday
routine  is  ever  more  keenly  felt.  The  thought
that  a  similar  round  of  tasks  may  go  on  for
ever,  may  easily  make  it  appear  that  all  our
trouble  and  work  is  fruitless,  and  may  become
terribly  oppressive.  Finally,  when  creative
power  is  at  a  low  ebb,  form  no  longer  preserves
the  soul  and  the  content  which  are  necessary
to  the  furtherance  of  life.

Hence  old  ideals  decayed,  and  yet  no  new
ones  arose  out  of  the  chaos  of  the  times. Was


CHANGE AND PERSISTENCE  117

it  to  be  wondered  at  that,  in  such  a  situation,
wherever  all  faith  in  life  had  not  disappeared,
there  arose  a  strong  desire  for  some  truth  or
other  which  should  be  untouched  by  the
changes  of  time,  and  for  complete  peace  in  the
possession  of  such  a  truth  ?  The  important
point  is  to  find  something  eternal,  which  leaves
behind  it  the  whole  domain  of  becoming,  and
reveals  to  men  a  new  life.  Such  an  eternal
element,  however,  is  not  to  be  found  in  the
world,  but  only  above  it,  and  hence  the
endeavour  to  attain  to  it  acquires  a  religious
character.  The  endeavour  to  reach  persistence,
as  we  saw  it  in  art,  in  which  the  fixed  element
is  sought  within  the  activity,  gives  way  to  a
religious  endeavour  which  is  inclined  to  bring
the  two  into  opposition.  Rest  in  the  eternal,
free  from  all  the  haste  and  toil  of  life,  now
becomes  the  supreme  goal.  When  spiritual
life  is  at  its  highest  level,  as  in  the  case  of
Plotinus,  this  rest  is  certainly  not  represented
as  a  cessation  of  all  action,  but  action  here  lies
entirely  within  the  soul ;  it  comes  to  be  a


118  THE LIFE OF  THE SPIRIT

constant  and  persistent  contemplation  of  the
one  eternal  existence.  On  this  view  there  is
no  room  for  any  change  or  any  diversity.
Finally  there  remains  as  the  ultimate  fact  of
life,  only  a  single  and  fundamental  emotional
tone,  a  quiet  resting  and  free  moving  in  eternal
existence.  But  this  leads  to  the  threshold  of  a
new  epoch.

Christianity  could  not  summon  mankind  to
a  complete  change  of  heart,  and  could  not
preach  the  necessity  of  a  new  condition  of
things,  without  making  a  breach  with  the
finality  of  the  old  Greek  view.  It  was  just
the  rise  of  Christianity  which  made  clear  the
fundamental  presupposition  on  which  the  old
system  rested,  and  which  was  now  seen  to  be
untenable.  The  Greek  solution  of  the  problem
stands  and  falls  with  the  conviction  that  this
world  of  ours  is  everything  which  it  can
possibly  be,  that  it  is  in  a  normal  condition
which  does  not  need  any  alteration  and  does
not  demand  our  interference.  Only  on  such
a  view  could  the  contemplation  of  the  universe


CHANGE AND  PERSISTENCE  119

furnish  the  chief  content  of  life,  and  a  content
which  is  not  only  completely  satisfactory  but
also  productive  of  happiness.  Christianity,  on
the  contrary,  holds  the  opposite  belief,  that
the  world  is  full  of  grave  disorders,  that  it  has
fallen  away  from  a  standard  which  it  ought  to
maintain,  and  which  it  really  did  maintain  at
the  beginning,  and  that  it  is  important  to
regain  the  lost  height  of  attainment  by  an
entirely  new  departure,  for  which  a  fresh
bestowal  of  divine  love  and  power  on  humanity
is  necessary.  At  the  same  time,  the  world  as
a  whole  acquires  an  essentially  new  aspect :
great  deeds  now  become  the  essence  of  all  that
happens,  they  make  an  ethical  drama  out  of
the  whole.  In  this  the  salvation  of  mankind
and,  indeed,  of  the  whole  universe,  is  the
question  at  issue  and  is  the  subject  of  the
greatest  vicissitudes.  The  seriousness  of  this
drama  forbids  all  repetition  :  the  thought  of  a
rhythm  of  events,  and  of  an  ebb  and  flow  in  the
history  of  the  world,  can  in  such  a  connection
be  regarded  only  as  a  frivolity.  At  the  same


120  THE LIFE OF  THE SPIRIT

time  the  most  significant  modification  occurs
in  the  relation  between  time  and  eternity.
Greek  speculation  at  its  highest  level  admitted,
of  course,  that  all  that  happens  in  time  rests  on
an  eternal  order,  but  the  temporal  and  the
eternal  remain  clearly  separated  from  one
another ;  eternity  does  not  intervene  in  the
changes  of  time.  But  this  is  just  what
happens  according  to  the  beliefs  of  Christi
anity  ;  it  is  this  conviction  more  than  any
thing  else  that  gives  this  religion  its  distinctive
character.  But  the  entry  of  the  eternal  into
time  must  very  considerably  increase  the
importance  of  all  that  happens  in  time ;
temporal  happenings  thus  gain  a  value  for  the
deepest  ground  and  the  ultimate  fate  of  reality.
The  building-up  of  a  kingdom  of  God  within
human  life  is  closely  connected  with  this  fact.
When  the  old  and  the  new  worlds  come  into
collision,  nothing  produces  a  wider  separation
between  the  leading  thinkers  on  both  sides,
such  as  Plotinus  and  Augustine,  than  the  fact
that  the  former  reduces  time  to  a  mere  simili-


CHANGE AND PERSISTENCE  121

tude  of  eternity  and  does  not  call  for  any  sort
of  historical  progress  in  human  life,  while  with
Augustine  the  building-up  of  a  religious  com
munity,  an  ecclesiastical  order,  is  the  central
point  which  controls  all  his  thought.  It  is
when  the  formation  and  development  of  this
religious  order  lays  a  great  task  upon  men  and
calls  for  decision  on  their  part  that  they  first
acquire  a  history  in  any  true  sense  of  the
word.  But  the  task  which  is  laid  upon  them
is  a  permanent  one.  For  although,  after  the
victory  of  Christianity,  the  movement  pro
ceeds  on  more  peaceful  lines,  there  is  always
the  demand  for  the  further  expansion  and
development  of  the  Christian  life.  In  this
connection  Christianity  has  from  the  beginning
set  up  a  high  goal  in  its  representation  of  the
kingdom  of  God,  when  men  shall  be  perfect  in
love  and  purity.  This  goal  is  far  in  advance
of  anything  which  experience  shows  to  have
ever  been  attained,  and  it  has  consequently
implanted  a  deep  longing  in  the  human  soul,
and  has  continually  lifted  the  thoughts  of  men


122  THE LIFE OF  THE SPIRIT

beyond  the  present  and  the  present  order  to  a
future  anticipated  in  faith  and  hope.

But  the  soul  of  the  individual  takes  its  full
share  in  the  inner  movement  of  life  and  in  the
shaping  which  it  receives  in  the  course  of
history  ;  in  fact,  it  is  in  the  individual  soul  that
the  most  immediate  and  deepest  changes  take
place.  For,  henceforth,  the  main  task  of  life
can  no  longer  be  to  make  completely  intelli
gible  and  hold  fast  a  nature  which  after  all  is
already  present  to  us.  For  the  intensifying
of  the  ethical  demand,  which  insists  that  men
must  be  renewed  and  purified,  makes  every
thing  which  is  achieved  by  merely  natural
powers  seem  inadequate,  and  requires  a  radical
renewal.  It  is  thus  that  a  history  of  the  soul
first  arises  and  becomes  the  heart  and  core  of
all  life.  The  great  oppositions  of  existence
here  come  into  immediate  collision,  and  keep
the  life  of  man,  which  oscillates  from  one  to
the  other,  in  a  state  of  constant  tension.

Hence  there  is  much  more  movement  and
change  in  Christianity  than  in  the  world  of


CHANGE AND  PERSISTENCE 123

ancient  thought.  But,  on  the  other  hand,
there  are  many  influences  which  co-operate  to
preserve  and  strengthen  the  effort  after  per
sistence.  When  God  is  conceived  of  as
entirely  above  the  world  and  as  a  personal
Being,  and  especially  after  victory  has  been
won  in  the  outer  world,  the  rest  in  God  which
is  longed  for  when  life  is  at  its  highest  level
has  a  more  fervent  and  intimate  character,
and  the  desire  to  be  completely  free  from  the
restless  and  ignoble  routine  of  the  world  be
comes  still  more  pressing.  The  appearance  of
the  eternal  in  time  could  then  be  easily  under
stood  as  allowing  men,  even  in  this  life,  to  give
an  eternal  setting  to  their  thoughts  and  feel
ings,  and  to  free  them  from  every  element  of
time.  This  line  of  thought  has  established
itself  and  maintains  a  permanent  position  in
particular  in  the  Greek  Church,  and,  more  than
anywhere  else,  in  Greek  monasticism.

But,  as  a  general  rule,  what  contributed
most  to  the  attainment  of  persistence  was  the
conviction  that  the  truth  which  decides  the


124  THE LIFE OF THE SPIRIT

salvation  of  the  soul  was  not  obtained  by  merely
human  power,  and  could  not  be  so  obtained
in  the  future,  but  that  it  came  to  us  as  a  com
munication  from  God,  as  a  supernatural  revela
tion,  and,  as  such,  tolerates  no  change.  The
course  of  history  makes  the  Church  the  guar
dian  of  this  unchangeable  truth.  The  more  the
Church  detaches  itself  from  its  secular  environ
ment,  and  the  greater  the  separation  between
divine  and  human,  supernatural  and  natural,
the  higher  is  the  inviolable  divine  truth  raised
above  the  changes  of  human  life  and  above  the
whole  sphere  of  human  work.

A  further  support  was  given  to  the  tendency
towards  persistence  by  the  conditions  of  the
closing  period  of  antiquity,  with  its  disinclina
tion  for  any  independent  action  and  any  private
responsibility,  along  with  the  dangers  attaching
to  both.  When  it  made  any  effort,  it  experi
enced  not  so  much  a  pleasurable  exercise  of
power  as  a  paralysing  uncertainty  as  to  the
success  of  its  endeavours.  Hence  it  was  bound
to  seek  for  happiness  not  so  much  in  endeavour


CHANGE AND PERSISTENCE 125

as  in  possession,  and  it  wanted  its  possession
to  be  absolutely  certain  and  unassailable.  A
possession  of  this  kind,  however,  seemed  to
be  nowhere  offered  except  by  religion  in  its
ecclesiastical  form.

Just  as  this  tendency  towards  persistence
made  itself  more  widely  felt  in  the  middle
ages  in  the  sphere  of  religion,  so  now  it
conquered  all  the  ramifications  of  life.  In
spite  of  their  increasing  power,  the  new
nations  were  not  yet  in  a  position  to  pro
duce  a  culture  of  their  own,  and  were
compelled  to  depend  on  that  which  was
handed  down  to  them.  It  was  not  to  be
wondered  at  that  this  culture  was  thought
to  be  final  perfection  and  met  with  uncon
ditional  veneration.  Hence  Aristotle  came
to  be  regarded  as  the  supreme  example
of  human  knowledge,  with  whom  men
would  not  dare  to  break,  and  the  attain
able  was  everywhere  supposed  to  have  been
already  attained  in  the  past.  There  was
only  one  task  left  for  men  to  carry  out,


126  THE LIFE OF  THE SPIRIT

to  guard  faithfully  that  which  had  been  won,
and  to  transmit  it  conscientiously  to  later
generations.

This  mode  of  thought  usually  looked  at  the
life  of  its  own  age  and  the  state  of  its  environ
ment  in  the  light  of  the  past,  and  this  past
might  be  either  classical  antiquity  or  the
beginnings  of  Christianity.  The  past,  with  its
culminations  of  attainment,  was  that  which
lay  next  to  man's  soul,  and  it  hung  like  a  veil
between  the  man  and  his  own  period.  There
was  something  fresh  to  do  only  in  so  far  as  the
various  authorities  on  which  men  relied  had  to
be  reconciled  with  one  another.  This  was  the
problem  which  Scholasticism  took  up  and
solved  in  a  very  capable  manner  within  the
limits  of  possibility.  Thus  life  here,  with  all
its  externally  directed  industry — and  this  is  by
no  means  lacking — yet  possesses  in  its  inmost
heart  a  deep  tranquillity  and  security.  It  is
usually  exempt  from  agitating  soul-conflicts
and  corroding  doubts.  In  the  exceptions
where  these  do  occur  they  are  usually  thought


CHANGE AND PERSISTENCE  127

of  as  something  monstrous  and  are  condemned
with  the  utmost  severity.

This  restful  tone  attains  its  maximum  in
mysticism.  The  latter  develops  a  wonderful
tenderness  and  intimacy,  in  direct  contrast
with  the  hardness  and  roughness  of  its  environ
ment.  It  strives  to  free  human  life  more  and
more  from  every  element  of  time,  to  make
man  younger  every  day,  and  to  transport  him
entirely  into  a  "permanent  present."  The
man  for  whom  time  becomes  as  eternity  and
eternity  as  time,  seems  to  escape  all  pain  and
to  be  brought  into  a  state  of  pure  bliss.  In
order  to  prepare  a  secure  lodging  for  such
peace  within  the  soul,  the  inner  consciousness
is  here  first  separated  from  all  external  activity,
as  a  pure  internality  of  the  soul,  and  while
this  immersion  of  life  in  itself  does  not  prevent
a  joyous  activity  toward  the  world,  this  latter
has  no  value  except  as  an  expression  of  char
acter.  The  close  connection  between  God
and  the  world  which  mysticism  stands  for,
may  reduce  both  the  visible  world  and  time  to


128  THE LIFE OF  THE SPIRIT

an  illusion  and  a  dream,  a  morning-glow  which
disappears  at  the  rising  of  the  sun.  But  this
may  easily  lead  to  the  thought  that  the  world
and  time,  as  expressions  of  eternal  being,  gain
a  closer  connection  and  a  greater  significance.
These  are  valuable  seed-thoughts  which  may
lead  to  a  more  inward  comprehension  of  the
world  and  also  to  a  doctrine  of  development.
We  cannot  fail  to  recognize  that  this  is  a
doctrine  which  has  arisen  from  religious
speculation.

This  predominance  of  the  idea  of  persistence
sets  definite  limits  to  the  action  as  well  as  the
thought  of  the  middle  ages.  Where  the  con
dition  of  things,  with  all  its  incompleteness
and  all  its  misery,  was  thought  to  be  the  dis
pensation  of  a  higher  will,  it  could  not  be  the
task  of  man  to  strive  to  make  essential  altera
tions  in  it,  or  to  transform  reality  as  far  as
possible  into  a  kingdom  of  reason.  And  the
misery  was  the  more  easily  endured  because
all  earthly  life  was  thought  to  be  only  a  tran
sitory  passage  to  a  better  state  of  existence,


CHANGE AND PERSISTENCE 129

to  man's  true  "home."  Hence  any  effort  to
improve  things  was  limited  to  mitigating  to
the  best  of  men's  ability  the  need  which
existed  in  individual  cases :  no  attempt  was
made  to  trace  back  the  misery  to  its  source
and  to  abolish  it  totally  by  a  general  trans
formation  of  existing  circumstances.  We  find
no  effort  and  no  movement  from  whole  to
whole.  But  just  as  the  condition  of  mankind
was  accepted  as  essentially  unchangeable,  so
the  great  external  world  was  thought  of  as
being  once  for  all  established  and  fixed  by
superior  creative  power.  In  particular,  we
never  meet  with  the  thought  that  organic
forms  may  be  subject  to  change ;  nature  is
conceived  of  as  the  faithful  tenant  of  the  form
which  the  Creator  has  stamped  upon  things.

Hence  the  thought  of  persistence  had  a
secure  predominance  and  determined  the  kind
of  life  that  was  lived.  To  emphasize  the  per
sistent  element  in  things,  and  to  connect
human  action  with  it,  seemed  to  be  in  the

main  the  chief  aim of  spiritual  work. The

9


130  THE LIFE OF  THE SPIRIT

artistic  and  the  religious  solutions  agreed
together  on  this  point  and  reinforced  each
other.

The  older  kind  of  life  certainly  had  great
advantages.  To  life  it  gave  an  inner  equili
brium  and  to  man  the  consciousness  of  being
encompassed  by  assured  truth.  It  thus  guar
anteed  a  restfulness  incomparably  greater  than
was  given  to  later  periods.  But  it  rested  on
a  presupposition  with  the  overthrow  of  which
the  whole  became  untenable,  the  presupposi
tion  that  in  those  achievements  of  the  past,
on  which  it  relied,  the  highest  conceivable
limit  had  been  reached  and  absolute  truth
attained.  If  essentially  new  tasks  arose  and
essentially  new  powers  were  developed,  if  far-
reaching  changes  took  place  in  the  funda
mentals  of  life  and  in  the  general  view  of
reality,  there  was  bound  to  be  opposition  to
the  finality  of  earlier  views.  This  opposition
could  not  be  smoothed  over  by  a  friendly
agreement,  but  led  to  a  complete  breach  with
the  old  way  of  life.  For  as  soon  as  the  con-


CHANGE AND PERSISTENCE  131

viction  gained  ground  that  tradition  did  not
exhaust  the  fulness  of  life,  that  it  left  many
problems  untouched,  the  solution  of  which
was  possible  and,  in  fact,  absolutely  necessary,
as  soon  as,  in  a  word,  the  incompleteness  and
the  inadequacy  of  the  old  way  was  put  beyond
doubt,  its  claim  to  be  final  and  complete  was
bound  to  seem  an  intolerable  presumption,
which  must  be  contested  with  the  greatest
vigour  in  the  interests  of  truth.  It  seemed
wrong  that  the  achievements  of  a  particular
age  should  be  stereotyped  and  made  the
standard  for  all  ages.  Such  an  attempt  might
lead  to  the  reproach  that  the  temporal  usurps
the  rights  of  the  eternal,  and  the  human  the
rights  of  the  divine,  in  a  way  which  can  no
longer  be  tolerated.  But  the  decision  of  the
resulting  conflict  depends  on  the  question
whether  the  modern  period  has,  or  has  not,
really  given  rise  to  a  new  life  of  an  inde
pendent  spiritual  character.  If  it  has  done
so,  if  it  has  unfolded  new  forces  in  the  region
that  lies  beyond  all  human  opinion,  and  made


132  THE LIFE OF THE SPIRIT

something  essentially  new  out  of  life  and
reality,  if  there  is  a  culture  which  is  speci
fically  modern,  and  if  there  is  a  specifically
spiritual  type  of  the  modern  man,  then  the
foundation  is  overthrown  on  which  the
medieval  doctrine  of  persistence  rested,  and
the  maintenance  of  life  on  medieval  lines
becomes  impossible.

But  when  the  new  life  first  arose,  it  was
not  by  any  means  the  intention  of  those  who
introduced  it  to  bring  in  something  new  and
different.  They  believed  rather  that  what
they  introduced  would  only  free  the  old  life
from  the  disfigurement  to  which  it  had  been
subjected,  and  would  restore  it  to  its  original
condition.  Thus  the  Renaissance  and  the
Reformation  were  not  consciously,  as  they
were  actually,  the  originators  of  a  new  life,
but  the  restorers  of  an  old  one.  They  did
not  want  something  new,  they  wanted  the
old  and  nothing  but  the  old.  It  was  in  the
seventeenth  century,  with  the  advance  of  the
Enlightenment,  that  the  new  became  fully  con-


CHANGE AND PERSISTENCE 133

scious  of  its  own  nature :  old  and  new  became
clearly  separated,  and  it  was  inevitable  that  a
middle  period  (medium  cevum)  should  be
interpolated  between  the  two,  and  hence  the
name  "  middle  ages."  Thus  was  invented  the
usual  division  of  history,  subject  to  all  the
defects  which  are  inseparable  from  divisions
of  this  kind,  but  nevertheless  an  unavoid
able  necessity.  But  at  the  same  time  it  was
recognized  that  human  existence  is  in  motion.
The  modern  period  could  not  enforce  its
own  right  to  exist  without  breaking  with  the
traditional  doctrine  of  persistence.

It  is  not  for  us  to  consider  now  how  the  idea
of  movement  has  made  its  way  more  and  more
into  the  different  departments  of  life,  and  how
everything  which  stood  in  opposition  to  it,  and
finally  even  organic  forms,  have  been  brought
under  its  category.  At  present  we  are  con
cerned  only  with  the  general  nature  of  life  and
work.  And  here  the  most  significant  feature
is  the  change  in  the  fundamental  presupposi
tion,  as  compared  with  earlier  schemes  of  life,


134  THE LIFE OF THE SPIRIT

a  change  which  becomes  continually  more
evident.  To  the  Greeks  the  world  presented
itself,  in  spite  of  all  the  movement  that  goes
on,  as  a  ready-made  and  rounded-off  whole,
and  on  their  view  there  was  no  necessity
for  any  essential  alteration.  Christianity,  on
the  other  hand,  which  estimated  things
from  the  moral  point  of  view,  found  the
world  full  of  error  and  guilt,  and  indeed
burdened  with  a  pervading  contradiction,  a
contradiction  so  grave  that  its  solution  could
not  be  expected  from  any  movement  on
the  part  of  the  world  itself,  but  only  from
some  supra-mundane  power.  The  main  stream
of  modern  thought  does  not  acknowledge  any
such  dualism :  it  is  inclined  to  connect  the
divine  with  the  world  and  to  merge  the  one
completely  in  the  other  in  a  monistic  system
of  thought.  But  if  in  this  it  approached  the
ancient  view,  there  is  the  essential  difference
that  now  the  world  is  not  thought  of  as  a
finished  product  but  as  in  a  state  of  becoming,
and  that  it  calls  upon  man  to  act  on  his  own


CHANGE AND PERSISTENCE  135

account  to  a  far  greater  extent  than  did  the
earlier  schemes  of  life.  Philosophical  thought
thus  understands  the  world  as  the  whole  of
being,  which  strives  to  attain  its  highest  level
by  its  own  movement.  The  double  conviction
that  the  world,  as  we  have  it,  is  extremely  im
perfect,  and  that  it  is  making  sure  and  certain
progress  towards  perfection,  changes  the  whole
tone  of  life  and  the  nature  of  work  in  im
portant  particulars,  as  compared  with  earlier
periods.  If  it  was  formerly  the  task  of  science
to  distinguish  and  emphasize  permanent  forms
in  the  transitory  series  of  sensible  phenomena,
and  to  show  that  the  perfect  form  is  the
directing  power  and  final  goal  of  movement,
we  now  find  that  the  significance  of  time  for
the  production  of  reality  meets  with  full  recog
nition.  The  important  point  is  to  make  the
existing  state  of  things  completely  intelligible
by  following  its  evolution  from  the  very  be
ginning,  and  thus  win  for  man  more  power  over
things.  For  the  man  who  begins  by  under
standing  the  evolution  of  things  is  able  to


136  THE LIFE OF THE SPIRIT

intervene  in  their  formation,  and  can  direct
them  to  human  ends.  When  knowledge
therefore  ceases  to  be  a  contemplation  of
reality,  and  becomes  a  re-creation,  it  comes
into  closer  connection  with  life  and  increases
its  activity.  Science  is  the  leader  in  the
movement  towards  subjecting  the  world  to
the  human  spirit.

The  new  life  does  not  accept  any  part  of
the  existing  condition  of  things  as  absolutely
unchangeable.  Even  in  the  case  of  the  most
difficult  problems  it  holds  out  the  hope  of  a
better  future.  One  task  is  no  sooner  finished
than  another  comes  into  sight ;  everywhere  we
see  the  capacity  for  increase,  unlimited  possi
bilities  are  disclosed.  In  the  first  place,  man
in  his  own  nature  appears  capable  of  progress,
and  not  bound  down  to  a  fixed  endowment  of
nature.  For  nothing  appears  more  character
istic  of  a  reasonable  being  than  an  indwelling
of  infinite  life  and  effort.  Hence  no  definite
limit  is  set  to  its  powers,  but  they  seem  to  be
able  to  grow  and  to  keep  on  growing.  And


CHANGE AND PERSISTENCE  137

further,  both  political  and  economic  life  seem
to  be  capable  of  progress  to  an  unlimited
extent.  This  progress  seems  to  take  two
directions :  firstly,  the  getting  rid  of  all  irration
ality  from  human  affairs,  as  far  as  possible,
and  the  progressive  transformation  of  our
existence  into  a  kingdom  of  reason,  and,
secondly,  the  effort  to  ensure  as  far  as  possible
to  all  individual  members  of  the  community  a
share  in  material  as  well  as  in  spiritual  goods.
And  since  spiritual  work  in  all  its  ramifications
is  in  a  state  of  movement,  the  idea  of  progress
determines  to  a  continually  increasing  extent
the  general  character  of  life.  Since  movement
continually  breaks  down  more  and  more  all
the  goals  which  lie  ahead  of  it,  and  fashions
them  afresh  according  to  its  changing  needs,
movement  itself,  gathering  force  as  it  goes,
comes  more  and  more  to  be  the  chief  content
of  life.  Finally  it  will  have  nothing  beyond
itself;  the  increase  of  power  becomes  the
supreme  ideal,  which  is  bound  to  come  into
violent  collision  with  the  old  ideal  of  giving


138  THE LIFE OF  THE SPIRIT

form  to  things. As  Hegel  says,  "  becoming  is
the  truth  of  being."

Movement  cannot  win  control  over  life  in
this  way,  or  even  claim  to  control  it,  without
overcoming  the  irregularity  which  had  hitherto
clung  to  it  and  subjected  it  to  severe  reproach.
It  must  show  that  it  possesses  in  itself  stability
and  coherence,  and  is  moving  in  a  fixed  direc
tion.  Movement  fulfils  these  conditions  when
it  becomes  evolution.  For  the  conception  of
evolution  makes  all  the  different  phases  into
steps  in  one  progressive  movement,  in  which
one  part  is  connected  with  another,  and  all
contribute  to  one  general  result.  But  this
conception  of  evolution  can  extend  over  the
whole  of  reality  and  shape  it  in  a  single  mould.
It  is  precisely  the  thinkers  generally  regarded
as  the  leading  representatives  of  modern
thought  who  have  given  a  particularly  im
pressive  exposition  of  the  idea  of  evolution
conceived  cosmically.  It  is  thus  with  Leibniz
and  his  innumerable  monads,  all  of  them
moving  with  slowly  but  surely  increasing


TIME AND ETERNITY  139

rapidity,  the  summation  of  whose  progress
amounts  to  an  unceasing  advance  of  reason.
It  is  so  with  Hegel,  according  to  whom  the
movement  of  the  universe  progresses  by  means
of  a  constant  succession  of  contradictions,
which  arise  and  are  overcome.  Every  indi
vidual  thing,  according  to  its  particular  nature,
must  plunge  into  the  stream  of  becoming,  but
it  is  permanently  preserved  in  that  stream  as  an
element  in  the  universal.  But  the  whole  con
ception  of  movement  in  the  modern  sense  has
been  most  powerfully  expressed  by  the  poet :

"  In  the  currents  of  Life,  in  Action's  storm,

I  wander  and  I  wave,

Everywhere  I  be  !

Birth  and  the  grave,

An  infinite  sea,

A  web  ever  growing,

A  life  ever  glowing,
Thus  at  Time's  whizzing  loom  I  spin,
And  weave  the  living  vesture  that  God  is  mantled  in." *

Such  changes  give  rise  to  a  new  relation
between  time  and  eternity,  and  at  the  same

1  Faust,  Sc.  I. Sir  T.  Martin's  translation.


140  THE LIFE OF  THE SPIRIT

time  alter  the  value  assigned  to  the  present.
But  a  closer  view  soon  shows  that  the  modern
period  does  not  speak  with  one  voice  on  the
subject,  that  the  idea  of  evolution  is  itself
evolved,  and  has  passed  through  three  chief
phases.  The  first  phase  owes  its  origin  to
religion,  and  especially  to  religious  speculation,
as  it  begins  with  Augustine  and  is  continued
by  philosophical  mysticism.  Just  as  the  world
in  its  diversity  is  conceived  of  as  a  representa
tion,  an  unfolding  of  the  divine  unity,  so  the
course  of  time  is  an  unfolding  of  eternal  being.
Time  cannot  thus  become  an  expression  of
eternity  without  itself  gaining  in  significance,
and  being  co-ordinated  to  a  greater  degree
into  a  continuous  whole.  Here  everything
that  happens  in  time  gains  its  content  and
value  from  eternity,  and  hence  remains  directed
beyond  its  immediate  existence  towards  eter
nity.  In  mysticism,  too,  the  soul  of  man,
though  it  participates  in  the  work  of  the
world,  retains  a  profound  peace  untouched  by
the  confusion  of  the  world.  The  next  phase


TIME AND ETERNITY  141

has  both  an  artistic  and  a  speculative  aspect.
It  brings  the  eternal  more  and  more  into  the
world  as  we  know  it,  and  there  finally  merges
it  completely.  The  movement  of  reality  is
conceived  of  as  the  unfolding  of  an  all-embrac
ing  being,  which  thereby  first  attains  to  com
plete  realization.  Goethe  has  given  the  most
impressive  exposition  of  the  artistic  aspect,  and
Hegel  of  the  philosophical.  On  this  view  life
is  not  referred  beyond  itself  to  a  transcendental
being,  but  every  individual  manifestation  stands
within  the  life  of  a  whole  and  is  controlled  by
it.  In  this  way  life  can  gain  depth  in  itself,
and  in  the  stream  of  time  can  grasp  that  which
is  above  time.  As  Goethe  said,  the  moment
can  become  a  representative  of  eternity.  The
final  phase  of  the  doctrine  of  evolution  is  when
it  reaches  the  level  of  natural  science  and
Positivism.  In  this  phase  everything  which
makes  any  claim  to  eternity  is  placed  entirely
behind  the  process  of  life,  and  this  vital  process
is  regarded  as  consisting  almost  entirely  of  the
movement  and  displacement  of  the  elements.


THE LIFE OF  THE SPIRIT

Then  everything  that  takes  place  happens  in  a
single  plane,  and  is  entirely  exhausted  in  being
what  it  is  ;  it  has  in  no  way  to  represent  or  to
serve  anything  that  exists  behind  itself.  Hence
there  can  be  no  question  as  to  its  having  any
sort  of  meaning.  In  this  view  life  falls  asunder
completely  into  a  mere  juxtaposition  of  indi
vidual  processes  and  a  succession  of  moments,
which  may  to  a  certain  extent  be  summed
up  but  do  not  form  an  inwardly  connected
system.

These  phases  do  not  merely  follow  one
another.  The  second  in  particular  maintains
its  position  alongside  the  third,  but  the  main
tendency  of  the  movement  is  to  concentrate
itself  more  and  more  upon  the  sphere  of  im
mediate  existence  and  to  reject  all  persistence
with  ever  greater  vigour.  At  the  same  time
there  is  outlined  with  increasing  sharpness  a
particular  type  of  life  which  fully  develops  the
opposition  between  the  old  and  the  new  way
of  life.  On  the  earlier  view,  the  highest  aim
was  to  live  one's  life  from  the  side  of  eternity,


TIME AND ETERNITY  143

and  to  retain  in  life  the  presence  of  something
eternal.  But  now  the  aim  is  to  bind  up  life
as  closely  as  possible  with  the  stream  of  time
and  the  changing  moment.  Formerly,  un
changeable  ideals  were  held  up  for  the  guidance
of  action.  Every  enterprise  had  to  be  measured
by  these  ideals  and  to  conform  to  them,  but
now  they  are  felt  as  intolerably  narrow  and
oppressive  ;  equal  rights  and  the  fullest  freedom
are  demanded  for  everything  which  aspires
and  struggles  upwards.  Thus  life  is  subject
to  incessant  change ;  but  the  more  it  changes
and  the  less  it  marks  time  and  stagnates,  the
higher  it  seems  to  stand.  Such  mobility  gives
it  immeasurably  more  freedom  and  fulness,
freshness,  and  intimacy.  And  the  individual
departments  of  life  are  subject  to  similar
changes.  Education  undergoes  an  essential
change  in  that  man  is  not  now  required  to  be
educated  for  an  ideal  which  transcends  time,  but
for  the  needs  of  his  own  period.  Legislation
has  no  longer  to  enforce  uniform  demands,
but  must  correspond  to  the  existing  situation


144  THE LIFE OF THE SPIRIT

and  unreservedly  follow  its  changes.  Tn  such
a  connection  the  conception  of  modernity
gains  a  peculiar  significance  and  power  of
attraction.  If  life  is  to  be  a  success,  the  chief
requisite  seems  to  be,  not  to  cling  tenaciously
to  the  old  but  to  seize  the  fleeting  and  transi
tory  moment,  to  make  the  most  out  of  it,  and
to  adapt  one's  life  continually  to  it.  It  is  only
if  we  do  so  that  it  seems  to  become  entirely
our  own  life  and  to  attain  to  what  in  this
connection  can  be  called  truth.  Thus  we  get
rid  of  all  rigidity  ;  values  become  fluid,  and
the  stream  of  things  carries  off  everything  in
its  course.

But  what  we  thus  desire  for  ourselves  we
must  also  grant  to  other  periods ;  we  cannot
understand  them  from  our  point  of  view,  we
must  try  to  understand  them  from  their  own ;
we  cannot  measure  them  by  an  absolute
standard,  but  by  that  which  they  set  them
selves  to  attain.  Hence  our  historical  judg
ments  are  only  relative,  and  man  develops
the  faculty  of  placing  himself  completely  at


TIME AND ETERNITY  145

the  point  of  view  of  all  past  systems,  of  re
constructing  them  and  re-living  them.  Life
thus  gains  an  inmeasurable  breadth  and  un
limited  elasticity  ;  whatsoever  moves  mankind
seems  also  to  belong  to  us.

But  all  the  advantages  which  result  from
such  mobility  of  life,  such  flexibility  and
adaptability  on  the  part  of  the  human  spirit,
have  a  reverse  side,  which  may  not  necessarily
affect  the  individual  but  spiritual  work  as  a
whole.  All  spiritual  work  needs  co-ordination
of  the  diversity  of  things,  and  control  of  our
first  impressions.  It  is  impossible  if  the  stream
of  phenomena  carries  man  hither  and  thither
like  a  plaything ;  it  needs  a  fixed  standpoint,
and  can  only  find  it  in  opposition  to  the  dis
integration  which  we  have  described.  Hence,
in  spite  of  the  mobility  of  life,  the  creative
efforts  of  the  modern  period  have  been  eagerly
directed  from  the  beginning  towards  finding
some  sort  of  fixed  point,  from  which  the  realm
of  movement  might  be  understood  and  con
trolled.  The  only  question  is  whether  the

10


146  THE LIFE OF THE SPIRIT

modern  period  has  found  such  a  fixed  point
and  turned  it  to  account,  whether  it  could  find
it  at  all  in  the  circle  of  life  which  it  marked
off.

There  are  two  ways  in  particular  in  which
the  modern  period  has  sought  to  meet  the
advance  of  movement  by  something  that  is
fixed :  firstly,  from  the  standpoint  of  philosophy,
and,  secondly,  from  the  standpoint  of  natural
science.  Thought  in  the  one  case  and  natural
law  in  the  other,  both  of  which  are  themselves
exempt  from  all  change,  seemed  to  promise  a
sure  support  for  the  whole  of  life.

Modern  philosophy  begins  when  Descartes
turns  from  the  overthrow  of  all  tradition  and
the  uncertainty  of  the  existence  of  the  external
world,  to  the  thinking  ego  as  the  Archimedean
point,  the  existence  of  which  no  one  can  doubt.
But  when  Descartes  carries  out  his  method  in
detail,  it  appears  that  it  is  not  so  much  the
individual  point  as  thought  itself  which  is  to
lead  the  investigator  to  certainty.  What  is
clear  and  distinct  for  thought  may  be  regarded


TIME AND  ETERNITY  147

by  us  as  truth.  But  thought  could  not
recognize  anything  as  clear  and  distinct  if  it
were  merely  an  empty  vessel  or  a  mass  that
yielded  to  every  stimulus.  For  this  purpose
it  must  possess  a  fixed  original  endowment,
and  this  endowment  was  thought  to  consist  of
indwelling  truths,  the  so-called  innate  ideas
(idece  innatce}.  Only  with  such  an  endow
ment  could  it  oppose  the  stream  of  phenomena,
and  undertake  to  reshape  the  previous  condi
tion  of  things  according  to  its  own  require
ments.  It  was  not  only  thinkers  like  Spinoza
and  Leibniz  who  defended  such  eternal  truths
with  complete  confidence.  Kant  was  really
defending  them  in  another  form  when  he
maintained  that  all  experience  and  all  change
necessarily  presuppose  a  persistent  intellectual
structure  of  the  mind.  The  whole  of  the
Enlightenment  also  presupposes  them  when  it
endeavours  to  test  everything  that  is  handed
down  to  it  as  to  its  reasonableness,  and,  if  it
cannot  stand  this  test,  to  reject  it  or  transform
it.  Through  such  a  challenge  to  prove  its


148  THE LIFE OF  THE SPIRIT

rights  before  a  timeless  reason,  the  whole  of
life  is  vigorously  shaken  up,  sifted,  and  renewed ;
a  culture  which  rests  on  a  basis  of  reason
advances  in  cheerful  confidence  to  oppose  the
culture  resting  on  history  which  had  till  then
held  the  field.  Thought  thus  becomes  the
measure  of  all  things  and  the  fixed  point  in
the  transitory  series  of  phenomena.  The  con
ception  of  the  nature  and  function  of  thought
has  undergone  many  changes  in  the  course  of
the  centuries,  but  it  is  a  characteristic  of  the
whole  of  modern  culture  that  it  assigns  to
thought  that  stablishing  and  regulating  function
for  which  it  looked  first  to  the  universe  and
later  on  to  the  Deity.  The  struggle  of
thought  to  appropriate  the  whole  range  of
reality  and  to  bring  it  under  its  own  laws  is
the  chief  movement  of  modern  times.

But  although  much  has  been  accomplished
in  the  struggle,  the  result  has  not  been  an
absolute  victory.  The  carrying  out  of  the
undertaking  was  met  by  difficulties  both  from
within  and  from  without :  from  within,  because


TIME AND ETERNITY  149

the  foundation  of  thought  itself  gave  rise  to
grave  doubts  and  difference  of  opinion ;  from
without,  because  the  immeasurable  extent  of
the  field  of  history  offered  an  obstinate  resist
ance  to  being  enveloped  and  controlled  by
thought,  and  rejected  more  and  more  decisively
all  such  attempts.  Who  is  the  vehicle  of
thought,  where  does  it  arise,  and  where  is  its
centre  of  activity  ?  Descartes  and  the  En
lightenment  had  no  scruples  in  making  the
individual  the  vehicle  of  thought,  thus  pre
supposing  an  essential  equality  of  reason  in  all
individuals.  If  this  presupposition  is  contested,
and  it  soon  was,  then  the  universal  validity  of
truth,  and  truth  itself,  is  overthrown.  Kant
met  such  doubts  by  the  assumption  of  an
intellectual  structure  of  the  human  mind
anterior  to  all  difference  of  individuals,  which
comes  to  light  in  great  products — above  all,  in
the  construction  of  scientific  experience  and
the  development  of  the  moral  law.  But
doubts  may  easily  arise  as  to  whether  these
products  are  to  be  relied  on,  and  are  capable


150  THE LIFE OF  THE SPIRIT

of  only  one  interpretation,  and  these  doubts
will  then  extend  to  the  common  structure  of
the  mind.  When  Hegel  finally  raised  thought
to  the  position  of  an  all-embracing  and  all-
moving  cosmic  power,  he  thereby  surrendered
all  connection  with  the  immediate  life  of  the
soul,  and  attributed  to  the  mind  of  man  a
complete  absoluteness  which  was  bound  to
meet  with  the  strongest  opposition,  especially
in  the  nineteenth  century,  with  its  growing
knowledge  of  the  strict  and  narrow  limits
within  which  man  is  confined.  Hence  we  are
met  by  the  dilemma  that  thought  is  either
closely  bound  up  with  man  and  is  involved  in
all  the  uncertainty  and  fragmentariness  which
cling  to  human  existence,  or  else  that  it  casts
loose  from  the  connection  with  man,  overstrains
its  own  powers,  and,  emulating  the  bold  flight
of  Icarus,  finally  plunges  into  the  void.

Still  more  comprehensible  than  this  inner
perplexity  is  the  resistance  offered  by  historical
life  to  the  claim  to  control  it  made  by  a
thought  that  transcends  time.  This  opposi-


TIME AND ETERNITY  151

tion  is  met  with  at  an  early  period,  and  the
advance  of  historical  modes  of  thought
strengthens  it.  The  experience  of  history
shows  with  continually  increasing  clearness
that  the  differences  and  changes  of  the  periods
not  only  extend  to  the  inner  depths  of  the
soul  but  also  affect  the  shaping  of  thought,
that,  at  the  most,  certain  elementary  forms  are
of  universal  occurrence,  which  however  are  of
no  importance  for  the  content  of  life.  Hegel
made  a  magnificent  attempt  to  construct  a
world  out  of  the  forms  themselves,  and  to
bring  into  this  structure  the  whole  of  historical
reality.  But  not  only  do  the  living  contents
and  the  individuality  of  the  historical  structures
fade  away  in  Hegel's  philosophy  of  history,
but  there  also  arises  the  strongest  contradiction
between  history  and  the  necessary  demands  of
thought.  Thought  cannot  take  a  general  view
of  history  without  detaching  itself  from  it  and
treating  it  as  already  closed.  But  this  does
away  with  the  possibility  of  all  further  move
ment,  and  history  is  inwardly  destroyed.  But


152  THE LIFE OF  THE SPIRIT

if  history  preserves  the  right  of  unlimited
progress,  then  thought,  from  the  point  of  view
of  history,  will  be  seen  to  be  merely  the  ex
pression  of  a  particular  time,  "time  grasped
in  thought."  But  then  one  period  has  the
same  right  as  another,  and  this  does  away
with  the  possibility  of  thought  being  able  to
co-ordinate  and  illuminate  history.  If  the
first  alternative  leads  to  an  intolerable  fixity,
the  second  leads  to  a  no  less  intolerable
relativity.  For  the  great  majority  of  mankind
the  movement  of  history  has  broken  through
the  scheme  imposed  upon  it,  has  gained  a
victory  over  timeless  thought,  and  has  vindi
cated  the  rights  of  relativity.  Thought  has
thus  been  unable  to  make  good  its  claim  to
raise  life  of  itself  to  the  level  of  that  which  is
fixed  and  eternal.

But  still  less  successful  is  the  attempt  to
do  so  from  the  side  of  nature,  with  the  help
of  the  conception  of  law.  Modern  investiga
tion  has  transferred  the  persistent  quality  of
nature  from  composite  structures  to  the


TIME AND ETERNITY  153

elements  and  their  modes  of  action — natural
laws  are  nothing  else.  This  transference  is
no  doubt  a  fact  of  the  highest  importance,
but  it  does  not  mean  that  persistence  is
surrendered,  only  that  it  is  carried  further
back.  But  even  if  these  laws  of  nature  could
be  simply  transferred  to  the  spiritual  life,  they
would  not  solve  our  problem.  For  although
the  course  of  events  may  follow  simple  funda
mental  forms,  this  does  not  give  life  any  inner
coherence,  and  does  not  direct  the  diversity
of  things  to  common  ends.  The  reign  of  law
would  still  leave  us  defenceless  against  the
changing  currents  of  life.  We  may  all  think
in  accordance  with  the  same  logic,  and  yet,
under  the  influence  of  different  interests  and
apperception  -  masses,  reach  fundamentally
different  results.  Using  the  same  forms  of
thought  we  may  reach  more  and  more  widely
divergent  conclusions.

Hence  we  are  convinced  that  the  element
of  fixity,  which  the  modern  period  on  its  own
ground  opposes  to  movement,  is  either  itself


154  THE LIFE OF THE SPIRIT

involved  in  conflict  and  movement,  or  else,
so  far  as  it  is  incontestable,  does  not  satisfy
the  demands  of  the  spiritual  life  and  does  not
guarantee  us  the  necessary  support  for  our
struggles  and  aspirations.  The  general  result
then  is  that  the  movement  which  emerges  in
the  modern  period  does  not  find  in  it  any
sufficient  counterpoise,  that  it  is  therefore
bound  to  advance  further  and  further  with
elemental  force,  and  to  destroy  everything
that  still  offers  resistance.  The  same  result
is  further  promoted  by  the  rapid  acceleration
of  life  on  its  external  side — an  acceleration
which  the  latest  period  has  carried  out,  and
will  carry  out  to  a  continually  increasing
extent,  by  quickening  the  means  of  inter
course,  facilitating  the  communication  of  ideas,
massing  men  in  large  aggregates,  etc.  Hence
it  is  quite  conceivable  that  within  the  move
ment  itself  the  more  uncompromising  forms
are  more  and  more  displacing  the  milder ;  that
all  the  persistent  elements  offered  by  the  older
conceptions  tend  to  be  slurred  over  and  lost,


TIME AND ETERNITY  155

and,  in  particular,  that  persistent  basis  which
the  genuine  theory  of  evolution  supplied  by
its  conception  of  a  universal  life  gradually  un
folding  itself.  Life  becomes  more  and  more
an  incessant  change,  a  constant  letting  go
and  beginning  again,  a  following  of  every  fresh
attraction,  a  floating  away  with  the  stream  of
things.  If  it  is  thus  transferred  entirely  into
the  immediate  present,  as  we  saw,  if  it  is
freed  from  all  the  pressure  of  the  past,  and
gains  an  agility  and  capacity  for  change  which
were  formerly  unknown,  then  it  flatters  itself
that,  with  this  movement  towards  modernity,
it  has  attained  the  summit  of  the  ages.

But  here,  too,  the  rule  is  verified  that  the
external  victory,  the  complete  permeation  of
the  world  by  life-forces,  is  usually  the  beginning
of  a  counter-movement,  that  the  very  ex-
clusiveness  of  success  sets  limits,  and  that
what  is  outwardly  still  advancing  in  triumph,
may  thus  be  felt  inwardly  as  inadequate  and
even  intolerable.  The  turn  of  the  tide  first
becomes  noticeable  in  a  sudden  revulsion  of


156  THE LIFE OF  THE SPIRIT

vital  feeling,  which  completely  alters  the  value
ascribed  to  change.  At  first  it  seemed  that
the  setting  of  life  in  motion,  the  stimulus  to
the  powers,  the  continual  production  of  fresh
images,  the  opening  up  of  ever  fresh  aims,
the  unbounded  possibilities,  were  all  pure
gain ;  life  seemed  to  be  made  individual  in  a
higher  degree,  and  man  to  be  brought  in
comparably  nearer  to  himself.  The  individual
may  still  retain  this  estimate  so  far  as,  con
cerned  only  with  his  own  welfare,  he  throws
himself  into  the  stream  of  life  and  seeks  to
advance  on  his  way.  But,  as  a  thinking  being,
he  cannot  help  reflecting  on  the  whole,  and
asking  the  question,  in  all  this  excitement  and
strain,  in  all  this  toil  and  work,  what  is  gained
for  the  whole  ?  And  if  he  does  not  covertly
bring  in  other  bodies  of  thought  to  make  up
the  deficiency,  he  cannot  fail  to  recognize  the
inner  emptiness  and  meaninglessness  of  this
life,  the  break-up  of  all  connections.  Hitherto
men  had  seen  only  one  side  of  movement,
the  inexhaustible  wealth  of  novelties  to  which


TIME AND ETERNITY  157

it  gave  rise :  they  had  not  seen  the  other
side,  their  equally  rapid  disappearance,  and
the  unsubstantiality  of  the  inner  life  that
results  from  such  coming  and  going.  A  life
of  nothing  but  change  cannot  look  forward  to
the  future  with  any  joy  or  certainty,  for  where
there  are  no  persistent  aims,  the  future,  as
regards  its  spiritual  character,  is  hid  in  deep
obscurity,  and  we  cannot  tell  whether  to
morrow  may  not  bring  a  complete  revolution.
Such  a  life  has  no  fixed  past,  and  therefore
no  history,  for  the  constant  change  places
things  perpetually  in  a  different  light;  it  is
bound  to  make  our  past  character  and  actions
seem  as  if  they  did  not  belong  to  us,  our
own  selves  dissolve  into  a  kaleidoscopic  suc
cession  of  pictures.  And  least  of  all  has  such
a  life  any  genuine  present ;  a  present  which  is
spiritual  in  its  nature.  For  mere  time  is  not
sufficient  for  such  a  present ;  the  time  must
also  be  filled  with  a  content  such  as  only
persistent  and  co-ordinating  aims  can  give  it.
But  the  absolute  movement  which  we  have


158  THE LIFE OF THE SPIRIT

described  resolves  life  into  smaller  and  smaller
pieces,  indeed  into  separate  moments ;  every
attempt  to  grasp  the  present  results  in  nothing
better  than  mere  opinion,  the  shadow  of  a
present.  Hence,  as  a  general  rule,  if  this  life
does  not  experience  any  sort  of  counteracting
influence,  it  threatens  in  spite  of  all  its  activity
to  become  a  mere  hankering  after  life,  a  half-
life  or  phantom-life.  We  may  add  a  fact
which  has  been  too  often  described  to  detain
us  now,  viz.,  that  the  breaking-up  of  all  con
nections  inevitably  hinders  the  inner  elaboration
of  impressions  and  experiences,  drives  life  and
effort  more  and  more  to  the  surface,  and
makes  them  to  a  continually  increasing  extent
defenceless  and  dependent  on  externals.  There
is  the  further  fact  that  the  different  movements
in  the  different  departments  easily  come  into
conflict  and  find  themselves  at  cross  purposes,
not  only  as  between  different  men  but  also
within  the  individual  himself.  If  this  is  really
the  case,  it  can  be  easily  understood  how  men
grow  tired  and  weary  of  all  the  rush  and


TIME AND ETERNITY  159

bustle,  which  is  so  confused  and  yet  in  the
end  so  empty,  how  this  feeling  of  weariness
spreads  and  produces  a  longing  for  more  per
sistence,  more  peace  and  repose  in  life.  It  is
a  remarkable  feature  of  the  present  day  that
the  old  mysticism  is  regaining  its  power  of
attraction,  and  that  the  Indian  religions,
which  release  men  from  the  cares  and  troubles
of  time,  are  gaining  many  adherents  also  in
the  West.  Is  not  this  to  be  connected  with
the  change  in  vital  feeling  which  we  have
described  ?

Now,  such  a  change  does  not  prove  much
in  itself ;  it  may,  after  all,  be  merely  a  part  of
the  irregular  ebb  and  flow  to  which  mere
movement  reduces  life.  It  can  only  be  of
use  in  so  far  as  it  enables  us  to  take  a  more
unprejudiced  view  of  the  whole  problem,  and
free  ourselves  from  the  one-sidedness  of  our
previous  estimate.  And  this  is  in  fact  what
usually  happens  in  human  life.  Movements
emerge,  seize  upon  men's  minds,  and  carry
them  irresistibly  away.  Men  perceive  only


160  THE LIFE OF  THE  SPIRIT

the  results  of  these  movements,  their  progress,
their  general  direction ;  they  do  not  see  their
limitations,  their  presuppositions,  the  problems
and,  may  be,  the  contradictions  which  emerge
on  a  closer  view.  Hence  they  are  proof
against  all  attack,  and  no  demonstration  of
their  deficiencies  and  faults  can  affect  them.
No  amount  of  sober  reflection  is  of  avail
against  the  condition  of  intoxication  with
which  they  fill  mankind.  But  in  the  end
some  limitation  is  felt,  and  then  the  move
ment's  power  of  attraction  quickly  disappears.
All  the  problems  which  it  involved  now  stand
out  clearly,  and  the  next  step  is  to  under
estimate,  and  in  fact  to  treat  unfairly,  what
was  so  long  overestimated.  We  are  ex
periencing  to-day  just  such  a  reversal  of
opinion  with  regard  to  the  attempt  to  reduce
life  to  mere  movement.  It  is  a  change  which
is  first  felt  in  the  higher  strata  of  the  intel
lectual  atmosphere,  and  not  among  the  great
majority  of  people  who  lag  behind  any  move
ment  and  believe  that  something  has  come


TIME AND ETERNITY  161

into  existence  when  it  has  at  last  attracted
their  notice.  We  are  becoming  more  and
more  clearly  aware  of  the  presupposition  on
which  alone  this  belief  in  movement  could
take  upon  itself  the  guidance  of  the  whole  of
life.  The  presupposition  is  that  movement  is
a  sure  and  constant  ascent,  that  it  can,  out  of
its  own  resources,  overcome  all  the  obstacles
which  it  meets  with  or  produces  out  of  itself :
on  this  view  it  can  never  give  rise  to  com
plications  against  which  it  is  defenceless.  In
so  far  as  this  widens  out  to  a  general  view  of
the  world  and  history,  it  involves  the  demand
not  only  that  our  reality  shall  be  rational  in
its  ultimate  nature,  but  also  that  man  shall
be  able  to  make  himself  absolutely  certain  of
it.  Rationalism  and  optimism  are  here  in
dispensable.  But  optimism  has  not  only
aroused  many  misgivings  when  looked  at  from
without :  from  within,  also,  it  very  easily
appears  superficial  and  untrue.  We  see  clearly
before  our  eyes  the  hard  and  pitiless  struggle

for  existence  both  in  nature  and  among  men,

11


162  THE LIFE OF  THE SPIRIT

the  constraint  and  insecurity  of  spiritual  life
in  the  world  in  which  we  live,  but,  above  all,
the  insufficiency  of  man  for  the  spiritual  tasks
on  which  the  value  of  his  existence  depends,
the  wide  interval  between  genuine  spiritual
culture  and  what  men  like  to  call  culture.  If
we  take  a  general  view,  human  existence  seems
to  be  a  grave  contradiction.  And,  when  we
come  to  the  more  detailed  shaping  of  existence,
we  begin  to  doubt  the  presupposition  which
underlies  the  interpretation  of  history  as  an
evolution  that  becomes  more  and  more  rational,
viz.,  the  presupposition  that  movement  starts
from  a  fixed  point  and  makes  sure  progress
towards  its  goal,  that  any  doubt  which  may
arise  only  concerns  details  and  cannot  call  in
question  movement  as  a  whole.  For  the
present  state  of  opinion,  with  its  complete
uncertainty  as  to  the  final  aims  of  man  and
the  meaning  of  his  existence,  is  sufficient  proof
that  doubt  does  extend  to  the  whole,  and  that
the  whole,  if  it  is  to  have  any  influence  upon
us,  requires  on  our  part  a  continuous  act  of


TIME AND ETERNITY  163

recognition  and  appropriation.  But  if  this  is
the  case,  then  evolution  cannot  be  the  last
word :  action  and  decision  must  come  before
evolution.  And  at  the  same  time  we  clearly
see  what  difficulties  lie  in  the  relation  between
action  and  evolution,  and  how  easily  evolution
can  come  into  collision  with  the  fundamental
conception  of  history.  Where  evolution  pre
vails,  the  order  of  the  whole  prescribes  what  is
to  be  done  at  each  point,  and  the  direction  to
be  followed  :  there  is  no  choice  and  no  freedom
of  decision.  But  without  these  there  can  be
no  history  in  the  specifically  human  sense.
To  talk  of  historical  evolution  is,  properly
speaking,  an  absurdity.  Where  there  is
evolution  there  is  no  real  history,  and  where
there  is  history  there  is  no  evolution.  For  if
we  are  to  have  history,  the  individual  must
have  freedom  of  decision,  but  this  is  excluded
by  evolution.

But,  above  all,  the  very  attempt  to  deny  it
only  demonstrates  with  greater  clearness  and
cogency  the  old  truth  that  there  can  be  no


164  THE LIFE OF THE SPIRIT

real  spiritual  life  unless  it  is  raised  above  time,
that  otherwise  the  true  is  subordinated  and
sacrificed  to  mere  opinion,  the  good  to  mere
utility,  and,  generally,  all  independent  spiritu
ality  to  the  trivial  round  of  merely  human
activities.  Man,  too,  in  the  end  cannot
tolerate  such  distortion  of  the  spiritual  life,
for  it  deprives  everything  which  distinguishes
him  from  nature  of  its  end  and  meaning,  and
condemns  his  life  to  absolute  emptiness.
Emptiness,  however,  is  more  difficult  to  bear
than  pain.  Hence  the  craving  after  happiness
drives  us  continually  to  renew  our  demand
for  a  truth  which  transcends  time,  and  forces
spiritual  work,  and  philosophy  in  particular,
to  seek  ways  of  securing  it.

When  faith  in  the  power  of  modern  move
ment  thus  disappears,  and  a  craving  after
some  fixed  content  of  life  is  re-awakened,  the
medieval  system  of  the  Roman  Catholic
Church  may  seem  likely  to  solve  our  difficulties
and  may  summon  mankind  to  return  to  its
fold.  We  found  that  this  was  the  case  when


TIME AND  ETERNITY  165

we  were  considering  the  problem  of  finding
connections  in  life.  But  such  a  return  could
only  satisfy  a  few  tired  and  faltering  souls,
for  whom  the  visible  and  tangible  is  at  the
same  time  the  spiritually  certain :  it  is  not
capable  of  satisfying  the  demands  of  the
spiritual  life.  Medieval  thought  rested  on
the  presupposition  and  conviction  that  the
height  of  human  achievement  in  every  sphere
had  been  already  reached,  that  there  could  be
nothing  essentially  new.  But  this  presup
position  has  been  obviously  refuted  by  the
whole  course  of  the  modern  period,  with  its
fundamental  transformation  of  human  ex
istence.  The  man  who,  to  avoid  flatly  con
tradicting  the  evidence  of  his  senses,  would
perhaps  be  willing  to  recognize  movement
outside  of  religion,  and  only  wished  to  deny
its  existence  inside,  would  by  this  means
divide  human  life  into  two  contrary  species,
and  would  assign  our  efforts  to  fundamentally
different  motives  and  feelings.  He  would
produce  an  inner  discord  in  the  soul,  which  is


166  THE LIFE OF  THE SPIRIT

fatal  to  the  vigorous  conduct  of  life,  and
absolutely  foreign  to  the  middle  ages,  which
extended  the  tendency  to  persistence  over  the
whole  of  life.  Thus  at  that  time  religion
could  be  regarded  as  in  its  whole  extent
exempt  from  all  change  only  because  men
unhesitatingly  accepted  it,  just  as  it  was,  as
an  undivided  whole,  because  they  had  no
insight  into  its  gradual  growth  and  the  con
ditions  of  this  growth.  Only  thus  could  it
be  entirely  separated  from  the  human  sphere
and  regarded  as  a  pure  revelation  of  God.
But  now  the  scientific  study  of  history  has
brought  this  department  also  under  its  sway,
and  proved  how  it  was  shaped  in  detail,  very
gradually  at  first,  and  under  the  strong
influences  of  human  needs,  interests,  and  ideas.
It  is  to  confuse  the  human  and  the  divine,
and  to  do  the  divine  a  grave  injustice,  if  for
that  system,  which  has  in  great  part  been
recognized  as  human  and  temporal,  a  venera
tion  is  demanded  which  is  the  due  of  the
divine  and  the  eternal  alone.  Hence  we


TIME AND ETERNITY  167

cannot solve our  present perplexities by a
return  to  the  middle  ages.

But  what  is  true  of  the  middle  ages  applies
to  all  the  epochs  and  achievements  of  the  past.
They  may  help  us  on  our  way  if  we  have  an
independence  of  our  own  to  oppose  to  them,
and  if  we  can  thus  transmute  them  into
our  own  life,  but  they  are  quite  incapable
of  compensating  us  for  the  loss  of  inde
pendence.  We  are  very  fond  to-day  of
evading  the  urgent  problems  of  the  present
by  seizing  upon  some  culminating  point  of  the
past,  by  according  to  it  unconditional  venera
tion  and  absolute  devotion,  and  then  using  it
as  a  basis  from  which  to  supplement  and
consolidate  the  present.  In  doing  so  we
usually  emphasize  the  points  of  contact  and
minimize  the  differences,  but  we  forget  that
the  present  situation  sets  us  problems  which
are  far  too  specific  and  far  too  pressing  to
admit  of  being  solved  or  even  essentially
advanced  by  such  indirect  means.  This  re
course  to  history,  which  is  evident  to-day  in


168  THE LIFE OF  THE SPIRIT

all  departments  of  spiritual  work,  yields  at
the  best  only  a  substitute  for  a  real  life  of
our  own.  A  substitute  is  certainly  better
than  nothing,  but  it  produces  the  illusion
that  we  possess  the  real  thing  when  we  are
inwardly  poor,  and  it  threatens  to  limit  our
life  to  half  truths,  and  indeed  untruths.

There  is  only  one  way  left  to  overcome
our  present  perplexities :  humanity  must  go
on  with  its  independent  work,  it  must  use  its
own  powers  to  bring  about  a  new  situation.
The  demand  for  a  new  type  of  life  and  a  new
type  of  culture  becomes  more  and  more  in
sistent  ;  as  the  present  crisis  owes  its  origin
to  the  whole  of  life,  so  it  can  be  overcome
only  by  a  further  development  of  the  whole.
The  work  of  philosophy  can  only  be  helpful
in  this  connection  in  so  far  as  it  takes  its
place  in  such  a  general  movement,  receives  a
stimulus  from  it,  and  exercises  a  return  in
fluence  over  it.  But  within  the  whole,  its
first  task  is  to  get  rid  of  the  illusion  of  finality,
to  open  up  the  way  for  wider  possibilities,


TIME AND ETERNITY  169

and  to  restart  the  movement  which  intrinsic
causes  have  brought  to  a  standstill.  But  this
task  lent  a  particular  value  to  a  survey  of
universal  history,  as  in  general,  so  also  in
particular  in  connection  with  the  problem  of
persistence  and  change :  it  has  given  us  a
wider  view,  it  has  revealed  the  most  diverse
relations  and  demands  which  our  existence
involves,  it  can  use  the  experience  gained  in
the  general  movement  of  history  to  point  out
to  our  own  work  more  definite  lines  of  attack.
The  general  movement  of  history  has  not
steadily  followed  one  line  with  regard  to  our
problem,  but  has  swung  completely  round.
The  striving  after  persistence  was  predominant
at  first,  and  established  its  position  more  and
more  firmly  in  the  course  of  time,  until  its
own  activity  came  to  a  complete  standstill.
When  the  modern  period  began,  movement
gained  the  ascendancy  and  transformed  all
standards  and  values.  But  the  experience  of
mankind  left  no  doubt  that  the  exclusive,  or
even  the  partial  predominance  of  movement


170  THE LIFE OF  THE SPIRIT

gravely  endangers  the  spiritual  character  of
life :  thus  a  reconciliation  of  the  two  tendencies
becomes  an  urgent  requirement.  But  this
reconciliation  is  impossible,  as  is  sufficiently
shown  by  the  study  of  history,  if  both  meet
on  the  same  plane  and  are  brought  into  im
mediate  contact.  For  then  rest  relegates
movement  to  an  entirely  secondary  position,
and  condemns  life  to  stagnation,  or  else  move
ment  makes  itself  master  of  the  whole  sphere
and  tends  towards  the  break-up  of  all  fixity.
It  is  impossible  to  escape  this  dilemma  unless
a  division  and  inner  expansion  of  reality
takes  place,  which  brings  rest  and  movement
not  into  an  oppositional  but  into  a  comple
mentary  relationship.  This  is,  however,  hardly
attainable  otherwise  than  by  a  sharper  separa
tion  between  spiritual  life  and  human  existence.
Spiritual  life  needs  to  be  clearly  thrown  into
relief  against  human  conditions  in  order  to
preserve  its  independence  and  transcendence  of
time,  which  are  indispensable  to  its  substance.
In  such  a  separation,  to  be  sure,  this  substance


TIME AND ETERNITY  171

must  not  entirely  disappear  from  the  ken  of
man  :  it  must  somehow  be  a  part  of  his  own
nature,  and  it  must  gradually  work  itself  out
from  the  indeterminateness  of  its  beginning
and  allow  us  to  take  full  possession  of  it,  if
this  separation  is  to  give  rise  to  a  particular
kind  of  life.  It  would  not  be  of  much  help
to  us  if  we  could  only  open  up  the  depths  of
our  being  with  difficulty,  and  get  a  glimpse
of  them  as  in  a  dream ;  we  must  be  able  to
place  ourselves  immediately  in  them  and  share
in  their  contents  if  our  life  is  to  undergo
differentiation,  gain  thereby  an  inner  breadth,
and  at  the  same  time  overcome  the  opposition
between  persistence  and  movement.  But  here
movement  is  also  indispensable,  for  the  appro
priation  of  these  depths  needs  much  hard  work
and  toil,  which  is  subject  to  the  conditions  of
time,  and  can  only  advance  very  gradually.
But  a  movement  of  this  kind  has  a  fixed
goal  and  a  history.  It  is  directed  towards  a
spiritual  substance  and  serves  to  promote  the
unfolding  of  a  persistent  truth  :  it  cannot  be  a


172  THE LIFE OF  THE SPIRIT

mere  succession  of  periods  of  time  ;  it  becomes
a  gradual  movement  away  from  time,  and  a
progressive  construction  of  a  present  which
transcends  time.  When  history  is  of  this
kind,  our  study  of  it  need  not  helplessly  follow
the  succession  of  periods,  but  can  distinguish
in  the  contents  of  history  what  belongs  to  the
mere  temporal  situation  from  that  which  is
eternal  in  its  nature  and  can  exercise  a
permanent  influence.  Such  a  study  of  history
may  lead  to  a  deliverance  from  mere  history,
and  to  the  revelation  of  a  present  which
transcends  time.

But  such  a  treatment  of  history  cannot
arise  and  make  its  way  unless  we  grant  that
the  world  and  human  existence  contain  greater
depths  than  are  evident  at  first  sight.  The
contradiction,  that  a  truth  which  transcends
time  appears  and  plays  a  part  in  this  world,
which  is  in  a  state  of  becoming,  can  only  be
resolved  if  this  world  has  an  eternal  order
behind  it,  and,  along  with  everything  in  it
which  is  spiritual  in  its  nature,  serves  to  pro-


TIME AND  ETERNITY  173

mote  the  unfolding  of  this  order.  If  such
depths  are  present  in  our  world,  in  human
creative  efforts  also  we  can  distinguish  a
spiritual  substance  from  everything  which  is
merely  temporal,  and  the  apprehension  of
this  substance  enables  us  to  overcome  mere
time.  Then,  particularly  in  the  case  of  all
that  is  great,  we  can  recognize  through  the
veil  of  time  a  life  and  work  which  transcends
the  world  and  is  valuable  for  all  ages.  Hardly
anyone  at  the  present  day  will  profess  his
adherence  to  the  doctrines  which  such  a  per
sonality  as  Plato  formulated,  or  the  practical
proposals  which  he  made.  But  if,  in  spite  of
this,  we  hold  Plato  in  the  highest  honour,  and
treat  him  as  a  living  and  powerful  influence
among  us  at  present,  we  only  do  so  because
we  recognize  a  creative  power  and  a  particular
shaping  of  life,  which  may  be  called  Platonic,
and  which  was  embodied  in  time  in  Plato's
doctrines  and  proposals,  but  was  by  no  means
exhausted  in  them.  The  same  is  true  also  of
general  movements  of  historical  life.  In  many


174  THE LIFE OF  THE SPIRIT

ways  we  are  out  of  sympathy  not  only  with
the  ideas  and  dogmas  of  early  Christianity,
but  also  with  the  contemporary  feelings  and
tone,  but  this  does  not  in  the  least  degree
exclude  the  possibility  that  the  revelation  of
spiritual  life  accomplished  by  it  should  pre
serve  an  indestructible  freshness  of  youth  and
remain  an  ever-changing  problem  to  the  ages.
Only,  our  life  must  not  be  lived  on  one  plane
in  which  temporal  and  eternal,  merely  human
and  spiritual,  meet  indiscriminately,  but  rather
there  must  be  an  inner  gradation  in  it,  which
takes  place  in  virtue  of  the  independence  of
the  spiritual  life— a  gradation  which  distin
guishes  as  well  as  re-unites  spiritual  substance
and  the  human  appropriation  of  it.  As,  in
order  to  be  fully  possessed  by  man,  this  sub
stance  must  first  be  acquired,  a  movement  will
arise  here  which,  however,  will  not  appear  as
an  aimless  journey  to  an  infinite  distance,  but
as  a  striving  of  life  to  return  to  itself,  to  raise
and  consummate  its  existence.

This new way of treating history, this


TIME AND ETERNITY  175

esoteric  way,  as  it  might  be  called,  produces
a  radical  change  of  view,  which  is  also  seen  in
connection  with  the  problem  of  persistence
and  movement.  Here,  too,  the  earlier  periods
must  not  be  regarded  as  a  dead  past,  but  as
something  which  remains  bound  to  us  by  a
community  of  work,  and  co-operates  with  us
towards  the  up-building  of  a  present  which
transcends  time.  Ancient  thought  could  make
such  a  point  of  the  persistent  only  because  it
regarded  the  condition  of  the  world  as  normal
and  needing  no  essential  change,  and  because
it  believed  that  life  was  to  be  satisfied  solely
and  entirely  by  its  own  efforts  in  raising  itself
to  the  status  of  a  perfect  work  of  art.  Later
experience  has  shown  that  this  conclusion  was
premature,  and  that,  in  particular,  human  life
contains  far  too  many  complications  and  con
tradictions  to  form  at  once  a  harmonious
whole.  But,  however  much  these  facts
compel  us  to  go  beyond  anything  which  the
ancients  attained  or  attempted,  they  do  not
invalidate  the  main  motive  of  these  en-


176  THE LIFE OF  THE SPIRIT

deavours.  Faith  in  the  ultimate  rationality
of  reality  is  the  permanent  basis  of  all  spiritual
life  and  effort :  otherwise  it  immediately  loses
its  support  and  is  bound  to  collapse.  Equally
indestructible  is  the  thought  that  life  has  to
seek  satisfaction  not  in  the  attainment  of  any
external  good  but  in  its  own  unfolding  and
activity.  Although  the  exact  nature  of  the
activity  may  have  to  be  differently  conceived,
and  the  goal  may  recede  to  a  far  greater  dis
tance,  the  fundamental  thought  is  indispens
able  if  life  is  to  be  completely  independent  and
really  self-sufficient.

Christianity  destroyed  this  restful  optimism,
and  threw  mankind  into  a  state  of  great  agita
tion,  by  revealing  grave  disorders  in  the  state
of  the  world  and  life.  The  deepest  root  of
these  disorders  was  found  in  the  ethical  situa
tion,  and  the  struggle  against  such  perversions
was  made  the  cardinal  point  of  life.  It  has
often  laid  these  disorders  too  directly  to  the
charge  of  the  individual ;  it  has  applied  ethical
considerations  too  directly  to  the  whole


TIME AND ETERNITY  177

breadth  of  the  universe ;  it  has  not  developed
its  own  power  of  affirmation  to  its  utmost
capacity,  and,  under  the  influence  of  periods
of  exhaustion,  it  has  been  too  ready  to
dictate  its  own  permanent  form.  But  what
ever  changes  may  be  necessary  in  the  tradi
tional  order,  the  great  revolution  remains
irreversible  which  delivered  life  from  the  sway
of  all  merely  natural  processes,  made  a  real
history  possible,  and,  by  the  opposition  of
affirmation  and  negation,  stirred  life  to  its
foundations.  The  peaceful  and  even  course
of  human  existence  is  thus  destroyed  for  ever :
the  new  problems  which  are  raised  can  never
again  disappear.

We  saw  how  the  modern  period  began  by
giving  complete  recognition  to  movement,  but
we  also  saw  this  exaggerated  to  such  an  extent
that  movement  was  to  produce  all  the  contents
of  life.  This  attempt  was  bound  to  miscarry,
but  such  a  failure  must  not  make  us  forget  for
a  moment  that  it  was  this  feature  in  life  which

first brought into prominence not  only  the

12


178  THE LIFE OF  THE SPIRIT

incompleteness  of  human  existence  but  also
its  capacity  for  progress,  and  thus  gave  an
immense  impulse  to  our  efforts.  This  has
brought  about  a  new  situation :  we  may
perhaps  struggle  and  rise  above  it,  but  we
cannot  simply  treat  it  as  if  it  had  never
existed.

All  these  different  facts  call  for  recognition
at  the  present  day,  and  prevent  all  immediate
recurrence  to  one  particular  period.  If  they
are  to  be  reconciled  with  one  another,  not  by
a  superficial  compromise,  but  by  coming  to  an
understanding  with  one  another,  we  must  con
siderably  extend  the  frame-work  of  our  life
and  re-shape  the  vital  process.  It  is  obvious
that  this  is  impossible  without  the  vigorous
co-operation  of  philosophy,  without  the  help
which  it  can  give  by  opening  up  the  way  and
sketching  the  country  to  be  traversed.  The
perplexities  of  life  necessarily  drive  us  back  to
philosophy  and  set  it  new  problems.

But  philosophy  will  hardly  be  able  to  help
in  this  work  if,  in  dealing  with  these  questions,


TIME AND ETERNITY  179

it  does  not  make  use  of  the  experiences  of  the
general  movement  of  history  and  gain  there
from  definiteness  of  direction.  Above  all,  it
must  seek  for  itself  some  fixed  standpoint,
and  the  experience  of  history  has  shown  that
it  can  hope  to  find  this  standpoint  not  in  a
being  beyond  the  process  of  life  but  only
in  that  process  itself.  This  process  again  it
cannot  understand  as  the  evolution  of  a  unit
confronting  the  world :  it  must  lay  hold  of  the
life  of  the  world  in  the  very  process  itself.
Such  a  world-life,  however,  cannot  be  reached
by  a  freely  ranging  thought,  but  only  by  a
self-centred  spirituality,  which  partakes  of  the
essence  of  things  and  moulds  reality.  Such  a
spirituality  rises  above  the  activities  of  the
individual  faculties,  and  also  shows  in  great
detail  the  task  which  thought  has  to  accomplish
and  the  direction  it  has  to  take.  Hence  philo
sophy  cannot  turn  immediately  to  the  uni
verse  ;  it  must  first  strive  to  deepen  life  by
introspection,  and  then  try  to  discover  connec
tions  in  life,  and  root  itself  firmly  in  them.  It


180  THE LIFE OF THE SPIRIT

is  only  after  such  a  strengthening  process  that
it  is  equal  to  dealing  with  the  world  around  us.
Since,  however,  these  connections  in  life  are
not  immediately  apparent  to  us,  but  are  only
revealed  by  means  of  work  and  struggle  with
resisting  influences,  it  follows  that  we  are
involved  in  movement  of  all  kinds,  and  need
have  no  fear  of  relapsing  into  a  permanent
state  of  dull  inactivity.  But  if  in  our  search
we  are  encompassed  by  spiritual  connections
and  guided  by  spiritual  necessities,  if  the
spiritual  life  itself  affords  a  firm  foundation
which  is  at  the  same  time  the  highest  goal  of
human  endeavour,  and  if  in  this  way  what  is  a
certain  fact  becomes  at  the  same  time  a  difficult
task,  then  life,  with  all  its  movement,  will  not
lose  itself  in  uncertainty ;  however  much  it
may  appear  to  be  struggling  towards  an  un
certain  and  distant  goal,  it  remains  in  the  end
occupied  with  itself  and  anchored  in  its  own
being.  But  if  philosophy  sets  itself  the  task
of  giving  a  scientific  form  to  its  fundamental
vision,  and  deducing  a  corresponding  line  of


TIME AND  ETERNITY  181

conduct,  it  is  then  equal  to  dealing  with  the
opposition  between  rest  and  movement ;  it  can
then  reconcile  the  eternal  and  the  temporal,
and  can  use  them  both  to  raise  life  to  a  higher
level.


CHAPTER  III.

THE  OUTER  WORLD  AND  THE
INNER  WORLD.

NOTHING  drives  man  to  philosophy  with  more
urgency  than  a  contradiction  which  arises
within  himself  and  makes  him  uncertain  as
to  his  own  life  and  nature.  We  first  find
that  we  are  sentient  beings  and  form  part
of  a  visible  world,  from  which  we  receive  a
constant  series  of  impressions  and  which  makes
continual  demands  on  us.  But,  at  the  same
time,  introspection  teaches  us  that  we  have  no
direct  experience  of  external  things,  but  only
of  our  own  subjective  states,  and  that  there
fore  what  confronts  us  as  an  external  reality
must  be  evolved  from  within.  Hence  two

realms arise which cannot be directly co
rn


THE  OUTER  AND  THE  INNER  WORLD 183

ordinated,  and  each  strives  to  subordinate  the
other  to  itself,  and  indeed,  as  far  as  possible,  to
absorb  it.  The  sensible  world  treats  the  life
of  the  soul  as  a  by-product,  a  mere  reflection
and  shadow  ;  the  psychical  world,  on  the  other
hand,  is  inclined  to  degrade  the  sensible  to  a
mere  appearance  which  is  purely  subjective.
According  as  we  decide  in  favour  of  one  or
the  other,  our  whole  view  of  life  will  be  com
pletely  altered  :  different  goods  will  attract  us,
different  aims  will  control  us,  and  this  may
easily  be  exaggerated  to  the  antinomy  that
what  from  the  one  point  of  view  seems  valu
able  and  indispensable  is  from  the  other  per
verse  and  reprehensible.  The  one  regards  the
increase  of  material  happiness  as  the  supreme
good,  the  other  looks  upon  it  as  hindering  our
efforts  to  attain  the  right  goal :  to  the  one,
absorption  in  the  inner  world  is  the  acme  of
life ;  to  the  other,  it  is  a  lapse  into  the  vague
and  the  vacuous.  Where  are  we  now  to  find
out  what  we  are  and  what  we  are  not  ?  This
is  a  problem  which  can  never  be  postponed


184  THE LIFE OF  THE SPIRIT

and  handed  over  to  the  future.  The  urgency
with  which  it  calls  for  our  decision  is  no  less
than  our  certainty  that  we  are  alive  to-day,
and  wish  to-day  to  attain  satisfaction.  Now
our  immediate  impressions  bring  us  to  an  irre
concilable  opposition :  we  must  therefore  get
beyond  them,  and  what  can  be  of  any  assistance
to  us  except  philosophy  ?

In  reality  philosophy  has  taken  up  the
problem  from  the  beginning,  and  all  the  more
because  the  form  which  philosophy  assumes
depends  very  largely  on  the  solution  of  this
problem.  But  it  is  in  the  modern  period  that
philosophy  has  devoted  special  attention  to
the  subject.  For  the  Enlightenment,  with  its
violent  separation  between  inner  and  outer,
between  what  is  conscious  and  what  is  ex
tended,  cleared  the  situation  and  sharpened
the  contrast.  This  made  a  definite  solution  a
matter  of  urgency,  and  men  sought  to  find  it
by  making  the  problem  the  main  subject  of
investigation  and  comparing  the  different
solutions  that  were  possible.  It  was  easy  to


THE  OUTER  AND  THE  INNER  WORLD 185

take  in  these  possibilities  at  a  glance,  and  their
number  has  not  increased.  The  two  worlds
seem  to  be  fundamentally  different  as  regards
their  contents,  and  yet  in  real  life  inseparably
bound  up  with  one  another.  Which,  then,  is
to  take  precedence,  the  maintenance  of  the
specific  character  of  each  or  their  connection
with  one  another  ?  Where  the  first  alternative
is  chosen  the  result  is  dualism.  If,  on  the
other  hand,  we  emphasize  the  connection  of
the  two,  we  must  press  on  to  a  unity  which
transcends  the  opposition.  There  are  thus
three  different  ways  of  reaching  a  solution.
The  first  regards  the  material  world  as  the
only  reality,  and  attempts  to  derive  all
psychical  life  from  it.  On  the  second  view,
the  psychical  is  the  only  world  that  exists,  and
contains  the  material  world  in  it.  The  third
strives  to  attain  a  unity  embracing  both  sides,
which  are  regarded  as  the  unfolding,  the
expression,  the  manifestation  of  the  unity.
Hence,  beside  dualism  we  find  materialism,
spiritualism,  and  monism  in  the  narrower  sense


186  THE LIFE OF  THE SPIRIT

of  the  word.  By  removing  the  core  of  reality
from  one  centre  to  another,  each  of  these
attempts  places  many  things  in  a  clearer  light
and  co-ordinates  much  that  is  otherwise  left
incoherent.  But  each  also  meets  with  peculiar
obstacles  and  must,  in  some  way  or  other,  try
to  overcome  them.  An  enormous  amount  of
effort  is  expended  in  doing  so,  but  the  struggle
still  goes  on  with  varying  success,  and  the
adherents  of  each  view  show  a  continually
recurrent  capacity  for  believing  that  they  can
finally  refute  their  opponents.

Dualism,  with  its  separation  between  the
material  and  the  psychical  worlds,  is  particularly
calculated  to  display  the  specific  character  of
each.  It  may  boast  of  the  clearness  and
definiteness  of  its  conceptions,  but  it  is  flatly
contradicted  by  a  craving  after  unity,  the
existence  of  which  is  shown  by  our  immediate
perception  of  the  close  connection  between
body  and  soul ;  by  art,  which  joins  the
material  and  the  psychical  in  intimate  union,
and  uses  the  one  to  enhance  the  other,  and  by


THE  OUTER  AND  THE  INNER  WORLD 187

thought,  which  insists  on  the  ultimate  unity
of  the  universe.  In  favour  of  materialism
we  have  our  immediate  impressions  and  the
stubbornness  of  the  sensible  world  ;  its  apparent
simplicity  and  avoidance  of  all  metaphysics  :
and  the  incontestable  dependence  of  allpsychical
processes  on  physical  conditions.  But  what
has  especially  promoted  its  influence  among
men  is  the  fact  that,  in  the  conflict  of  opinion,
it  is  thought  to  furnish  the  sharpest  weapon
against  the  oppression  of  obsolete  systems,
against  tyranny,  illusion,  and  superstition.
Materialism,  however,  is  contradicted  by  the
incommensurability  of  what  proceeds  from  the
soul,  of  the  unity  and  inwardness  of  psychical
life,  with  what  takes  place  in  the  domain  of
matter  and  motion,  and  by  the  building  up
of  a  specifically  spiritual  life  in  the  sphere
of  history  and  society.  The  fact  that  the
external  world  recedes  into  the  background
and  that  its  existence  becomes  uncertain  as
the  result  of  epistemological  reflection,  is  also
opposed  to  materialism.  From  this  point  of


188  THE  LIFE OF THE SPIRIT

view  it  is  impossible  to  hide  from  ourselves
that  nature,  as  we  see  it,  does  not  come  to  us
from  the  outside  as  a  ready-made  fact,  but
that  it  starts  from  our  own  thinking,  and,
under  the  influence  of  our  intellectual  organiza
tion,  takes  on  the  shape  in  which  it  lies  before
us.  In  fact,  the  failure  to  recognize  that  we
do  not  find  the  world  but  mould  it  and  build
it  up  from  ourselves  as  centres,  threatens  to
reduce  materialism  to  a  pre-scientific  opinion.
Spiritualism  pursues  the  opposite  course.  It
asserts  the  primacy  of  psychical  experience
and  enforces  its  assertion,  and  it  shows  much
energy  in  the  logical  working  out  of  its  funda
mental  conception.  But  it  cannot  succeed
in  making  clear  the  specific  character  of  the
sensational  element  which  contrasts  with  the
purely  inward  experience  of  the  soul.  Even
if  the  division  is  transferred  to  the  soul  itself,
it  is  not  thereby  overcome,  but,  rather,  is
likely  to  become  still  more  intolerable.

Monism  seems  to  be  the  theory  most  con
sistent  with  our  knowledge  that  neither  series


THE  OUTER  AND  THE  INNER  WORLD 189

can  be  reduced  to  the  other,  but  that,  at  the
same  time,  they  require  some  sort  of  connec
tion  ;  for  monism  makes  them  different  but
parallel  sides  of  a  single  more  essential  process.
This  provides  for  the  unity  and  also  preserves
the  difference ;  perfect  equilibrium  seems  to
have  been  reached  of  valuation  and  attune-
ment.  The  only  pity  is  that  a  keener
examination  soon  shows  that  the  opposition
is  only  hidden  and  put  in  the  background  but
not  overcome.  The  parallelism  between  the
two  sides,  which  it  is  sought  to  reach,  can
never  be  attained.  As  soon  as  we  pursue  the
fundamental  conception  somewhat  further,  we
find  that  one  side  comes  into  prominence  and
relegates  the  other  to  a  secondary  position.
We  cannot  study  the  historical  forms  of
monism  without  becoming  aware  that  they
have  approached,  and  finally  passed  over  into,
materialism  or  spiritualism,  if  indeed  the  two
conceptions  have  not  clashed  and  crossed  in
the  same  thinker.  This  was  the  case  above
all  with  Spinoza,  whose  Ethics  starts  from  an


190  THE LIFE OF  THE SPIRIT

unmistakably  materialistic  basis  and  reaches
spiritualistic  conclusions.  Thus  monism  sinks
back  into  the  very  confusion  which  it  aimed  at
avoiding.

We  thus  see  that  a  twofold  opposition  per
vades  the  whole  problem :  we  dispute  as  to
whether  there  is  unity  or  multiplicity,  and  we
dispute  as  to  where  the  unity  is  to  be  found.
The  one  problem  involves  the  other,  and  the
dispute  separates  men  further  and  further
instead  of  bringing  them  together.  How
often  has  one  theory  "  refuted  "  the  other !
But  the  conquered  and  apparently  annihilated
theory  has  always  risen  up  again  with  re
newed  power.  Have  all  the  "  refutations  "  of
materialism  prevented  it  from  being  the  most
widely  prevalent  view  at  the  present  day,  and
in  fact  feeling  itself  master  of  the  situation  ?
Does  not  the  fruitlessness  of  these  learned
disputes  indicate  that  the  discussions  do  not
carry  back  the  matter  to  the  point  of  diver
gence—that  this,  rather,  lies  further  back  ?
Another  indication  pointing  to  the  same


THE  OUTER  AND  THE  INNER  WORLD 191

conclusion  is  the  fact  that  each  separate  school
has  claimed  a  triumph  over  its  special  obstacles
solely  because  it  has  had  special  views  on
what  was  of  primary  and  what  of  secondary
importance,  because  its  general  view  involved
a  definite  system  of  values.  Hence  its  thought
depended  on  the  position  it  took  up  towards
reality,  and  this,  again,  on  the  work,  impressions,
and  experiences  of  the  different  individuals,
and,  in  fact,  of  whole  nations  and  periods.  In
the  end  it  is  the  view  which  is  taken  of  the
whole  of  life  which  lays  down  the  lines  for
thought  and  determines  its  direction.

Thus  the  problem  is  transferred  from
thought  to  life  and  assumes  a  new  aspect.
For  if  we  ask  whether  life  is  to  take  up  its
position  outside  or  inside  and  conform  itself
accordingly,  it  does  not  behove  us  to  interpret
an  existing  process,  but  first  to  call  the  process
into  being.  For  our  life  is  not  given  us  as  a
whole  without  our  co-operation,  but  presents
itself  at  first  as  a  juxtaposition  and  succession
of  individual  processes :  the  binding  into  a


192  THE LIFE OF  THE SPIRIT

whole  is  the  work  of  the  thinking  and  active
spirit ;  it  is  an  attempt,  a  venture,  which  must
always  justify  itself.  But,  in  the  last  resort,
such  justification  is  possible,  not  by  any  out
ward  achievement,  but  only  if  the  attempted
solution  co-ordinates  all  diversity  and  binds  it
into  a  single  and  unified  life.  This  neces
sarily  raises  the  whole  of  life  to  a  higher  level,
and  enables  us  to  make  completely  our  own
the  life  which  otherwise  only  streams  past  us.
It  is  only  such  a  synthesis,  too,  which  can
overcome  the  indeterminateness  of  the  initial
situation  and  give  life  a  definite  character.

There  are  different  ways  of  carrying  out  this
synthesis  which  our  problem  demands.  In
the  first  place,  the  world  of  the  senses,  which
holds  us  so  firmly  in  its  embrace,  which  links
us  imperiously  to  itself  by  the  obligation  of
waging  a  perpetual  struggle  for  existence,
may  become  the  real  scene  of  life.  If  so,  all
the  peculiar  powers  of  the  human  soul  will
rank  merely  as  means  and  instruments  to
bring  ourselves  into  closer  relations  with


THE  OUTER  AND  THE  INNER  WORLD 193

the  sensible  world,  to  appropriate  it  more
fully,  to  gain  more  profit  from  it  than  is
possible  at  the  stage  of  merely  animal  exist
ence.  But,  on  the  other  hand,  the  life  of
humanity  in  history  and  society  has  risen
above  the  level  of  the  senses :  a  non-sensuous
life  has  appeared  and  continually  develops
richer  and  richer  ramifications.  Where  the
synthesis  of  the  whole  seeks  its  controlling
centre  in  the  new  life,  the  sensible  world  will
have  to  be  subordinated  and  can  only  gain  any
value  so  far  as  it  promotes  the  unfolding  of
this  other  life.  This  is  the  source  of  the  main
opposition — the  opposition  between  a  natural
istic  and  an  idealistic  basis  for  life  and  culture.
But  the  relation  between  idealism  and  natural
ism  can  assume  two  forms,  and  this  gives  rise
to  a  further  division.  The  new  life  which
idealism  stands  for  while  rising  superior  to
the  sensible  world  may  do  one  of  two  things.
It  may  yet  seek  to  preserve  friendly  relations
and  a  close  connection  with  the  sensible  world,

or  else  it  may  stand  out  in  sharp  relief  against

13


194  THE LIFE OF THE SPIRIT

it,  and  venture  on  absolutely  independent  paths
of  its  own.  The  former  species  of  idealism
may  be  called  immanent,  the  latter  super
natural.  Hence  the  struggle  centres  princi
pally  round  these  three  types,  naturalism,
immanent  idealism,  and  supernatural  idealism.
Dualism,  in  the  sense  that  there  are  two
developments  of  life  which  run  alongside
without  affecting  one  another,  and  only  come
into  external  contact,  is  excluded  by  the  crav
ing  of  life  after  unity ;  and  this  also  excludes
monism  in  the  sense  that  there  is  a  total  life
embracing  two  series  running  parallel  courses
in  complete  independence.  The  nearest
approach  to  monism  is  made  by  immanent
idealism,  with  its  endeavour  to  reconcile  the
two  worlds;  while  supernatural  idealism,  which
strives,  on  the  contrary,  to  hold  the  two  worlds
as  far  as  possible  apart,  is  most  closely  related
to  dualism.  History,  to  be  sure,  and  in  par
ticular  the  present  day,  shows  a  large  amount
of  dualism  in  so  far  as  men,  and  indeed  whole
periods,  often  distribute  their  efforts  along


THE  OUTER  AND  THE  INNER  WORLD 195

different  lines,  and  incline  here  to  a  natural
istic  and  there  to  an  idealistic  mode  of  thought.
But  this  is  an  error  which  men  commit ;  it
does  not  yield  a  new  type  of  life,  and  need
only  occupy  our  attention  incidentally.

Hence  the  spiritual  struggle  goes  on
between  the  leading  types  which  we  have
described.  But  the  course  of  the  struggle  is
not  what  we  might  expect :  it  does  not  start
from  universal  principles  and  from  them  go
on  to  details,  but  there  arise  concrete
syntheses  of  an  absolutely  individual  nature.
These  syntheses  have,  of  course,  universal
questions  and  answers  behind  them,  in  fact
they  radiate  a  world-philosophy  ;  but  above  all
they  are  characteristic  facts  in  the  life  of  the
world,  and  it  is  from  their  individuality  and
actuality  of  achievement  that  they  derive  their
power  and  significance.  For  it  is  only  because
they  do  not  merely  pore  and  brood  over  the
conception  of  reality  but  vigorously  set  them
selves  to  produce  something  real,  that  they  can
raise  the  level  of  our  existence,  open  up  depths


196  THE LIFE OF  THE SPIRIT

and  powers  in  the  spiritual  life  which  before
were  hid,  and  help  us  to  experiences  which  are
of  lasting  value.  It  is  also  to  be  expected
that,  so  far  as  there  is  any  systematic  connec
tion  in  historical  life,  the  later  forms  of  this
life  should  take  up  and  make  use  of  the  ex
periences  of  the  earlier,  and  that  thus  the
experience  of  the  world  should  be  welded  into
a  unified  whole  and  a  general  level  of  spiritual
evolution  attained.  Anyone  who  takes  a
general  view  of  the  whole  process  can  see
what  particular  form  the  different  syntheses
have  given  to  the  relation  between  the  inner
and  the  outer  worlds,  and  what  answer  to  the
main  problem  has  been  involved  in  the  con
struction  of  the  synthesis ;  he  can  see  what
obstacles  they  met  with  and  how  they  came
to  terms  with  them,  what  complications  they
fell  into,  and  what  further  steps  they  were  thus
compelled  to  take  ;  finally,  he  can  see  how  the
overthrow  of  one  synthesis  helped  the  rise  of
another,  and  how  the  whole  process  led  to  a
continual  enlargement  of  the  circle  of  life.  A


THE  OUTER  AND  THE  INNER  WORLD 197

study  of  this  kind  is  primarily  historical  in  its
nature,  but  it  need  not  consist  entirely  in  the
unrolling  of  a  succession  of  processes.  For  if
the  attempt  is  successful  to  decide,  in  what  has
been  accomplished,  between  that  which  has
grown  out  of  special  presuppositions  and
surroundings  and  that  which  reveals  a  per
manent  capacity,  and  perhaps  also  permanent
limitations,  of  the  spiritual  life,  then  co
existence  may  take  the  place  of  succession ;
a  present  which  transcends  time  may  stand
out  in  relief  from  the  course  of  the  ages,  and
seek  to  maintain  its  hold  on  all  the  real  life
which  the  different  epochs  have  contributed.

The  peculiar  position  which  the  modern
period  takes  up  towards  our  problem  makes  it
a  matter  of  urgency  to  survey  the  whole  of
history  in  the  way  we  have  described,  and
emphasize  what  is  of  permanent  value.  The
traditional  systematizations  of  life  gave
idealism  an  undoubted  ascendency;  for  them
it  ranked  as  an  incontestable  and  indeed  self-
evident  truth.  But  now,  in  opposition  to  this


198  THE LIFE OF  THE SPIRIT

devotion  to  an  invisible  world,  naturalism  has
more  and  more  emphasized  the  importance  of
the  visible  world,  and  is  thus  pressing  idealism
further  and  further  into  the  background.  In
addition,  the  onward  movement  of  culture  has
shown  the  existence  of  much  confusion  within
idealism  itself,  and  it  has  been  weakened  by
the  fact  that  the  new  methods  of  studying
history,  with  their  keener  criticism,  have
discovered  much  variation  and  inconsistency
in  the  traditional  idealistic  forms  of  life  which
were  formerly  accepted  without  hesitation  as
homogeneous.  But,  in  spite  of  everything,
there  are  many  obstacles  in  the  way  of  natural
ism.  For  idealism  has  cut  its  way  too  deeply
into  our  convictions,  efforts,  and  conceptions,
to  be  likely  to  succumb  at  once  to  a  bold
assault.  But,  all  the  same,  we  have  fallen  into
a  state  of  great  uncertainty ;  the  existence  of
the  invisible  world  has  become  doubtful  and
the  visible  world  does  not  satisfy  us.  Such  a
state  of  uncertainty  as  to  the  direction  which
life  ought  to  take  must  inevitably  cripple  its


THE  OUTER  AND  THE  INNER  WORLD 199

power  and  joyousness.  It  is  certain  that  the
crisis  can  only  be  overcome  by  an  actual
further  development  of  life  ;  and  it  is  equally
certain  that  this  development  cannot  come
down  from  heaven  to  us,  but  must  be  set  in
motion  by  ourselves.  For  this  purpose  we
cannot  dispense  with  the  active  help  of
philosophy  in  clearing  the  way,  taking  bear
ings,  and  acting  as  pioneer.  And  if  the
immediate  duty  of  philosophy  in  this  connec
tion  is  to  free  us  from  the  contingency  of  the
moment  and  to  bring  before  us  human  experi
ence  in  its  utmost  possible  range,  it  will  un
doubtedly  be  a  valuable  contribution  to  this
end  if  we  carry  out  a  critical  scrutiny  of  the
great  syntheses  of  historical  life,  with  their
revelations  and  experiences.

We  naturally  begin  our  journey  through
history  with  the  solution  which  our  problem
received  when  Greek  life  was  at  its  culmina
tion.  Let  us  not  forget  for  a  moment  that
the  average  life  of  the  time  did  not  attain  this
height,  but  was  in  many  ways  sharply  opposed


200  THE LIFE OF  THE SPIRIT

to  it.  This  culminating  period,  however,
welded  life  into  an  artistic  whole,  which  in
a  pre-eminent  degree  embodies  for  us  the
system  of  immanent  idealism.  Here  the
artistic  element  is,  above  all,  plastic  in  its
nature :  as  regards  its  spiritual  content,  life
is  a  transformation  of  reality  into  a  whole
endowed  with  soul,  and  therefore  well  ordered
and  clearly  graded.  This  process  of  trans
formation  has  two  opposite  sources — on  the  one
hand,  spiritual  activity,  and,  on  the  other,
nature  as  perceived  by  the  senses ;  but  the
two  streams  converge  and  unite  to  form  a
comprehensive  vital  process  which  finds  its
full  satisfaction  in  itself.  Here  the  spiritual
is  certainly  the  controlling  element :  it  is  the
source  of  all  movement,  it  revivifies  and
imposes  form  on  the  sensible.  The  latter,
with  its  formlessness,  may  seem  at  first  the
exact  antithesis  of  the  spiritual,  but  to  a
deeper  study  it  soon  reveals  itself  as  some
thing  which  expects  and  struggles  towards  the
ordering  and  quickening  influence  of  spirit.


THE  OUTER  AND  THE  INNER  WORLD 201

In  this  way  both  can  meet  as  elements  in  a
harmonious  life,  and  the  one  can  help  the
development  of  the  other.  For  even  the
higher  element,  which  imposes  form  on  the
lower,  is  not  perfect  and  complete  without  the
help  of  the  other :  it  is  only  by  the  subjuga
tion  of  matter  that  it  attains  the  full  measure
of  its  own  power,  development,  and  perfection.
This  type  of  life  gives  both  spiritual  life  and
nature,  to  use  these  abbreviated  expressions,
a  characteristic  form  and  task,  as  it  thus
establishes  a  friendly  co-operation  between
the  two.  The  spiritual,  however  much  it  is
raised  above  the  sensible,  does  not  sever  itself
from  the  one  reality  which  embraces  them
both :  it  does  not  form  for  itself  an  inner  life
which  neglects  the  world,  but  it  finds  its  task
in  uniting  and  revivifying  this  world  and
raising  it  to  a  higher  level.  Hence  in  its
inmost  nature  it  is  an  incessant  working  and
creating,  virile  power  and  joyous  activity ;  its
fundamental  impulse  thus  seems  to  be  towards
the  undeviating  pursuit  of  the  true  and  the


202  THE LIFE OF THE SPIRIT

good.  At  the  same  time,  however,  the
sensible,  because  of  its  close  connection  with
the  spiritual,  remains  indispensable  at  all  its
stages.  Whatever  stimulus  to  the  senses  life
offers  is  recognized  and  retained  ;  only  it  must
fit  in  and  subordinate  itself  to  the  whole ;  it
must  occupy  a  definite  place  and  be  bound  by
definite  limits ;  but  at  the  same  time  it  will
be  purified  and  ennobled.  Hence  the  charac
teristic  and  great  achievement  of  this  type  of
life  is,  above  all,  that  it  has  brought  together
into  the  closest  and  most  fruitful  connection
spirit  and  nature,  form  and  matter,  and  has
thus  made  the  spiritual  vividly  near  to  us  and
raised  the  sensible  to  a  higher  level.  Here  all
oppositions  seem  to  be  reconciled,  all  contra
dictions  overcome ;  life  is  co-ordinated  into  a
unified  whole  without  detracting  in  any  way
from  the  diversity  of  things.  Hence  it  can
feel  itself  firmly  established  on  its  own  basis
and  equal  to  dealing  with  all  the  complications
of  existence.

Such  a  type  of  life  is  seen  among  the  Greeks


THE  OUTER  AND  THE  INNER  WORLD 203

in  its  purest  development  in  the  sphere  of
plastic  art.  Nowhere  else  in  the  whole  range
of  history  is  a  world  of  spiritual  objects  and
values  brought  so  near  to  man  in  an  immediate
present ;  nowhere  else  are  the  visible  and
invisible  worlds  so  closely  interwoven.  But
philosophy  also  takes  part  in  this  movement,
and  does  so  in  the  first  place,  at  least  where  it
gives  expression  to  the  Greek  mode  of  life  in
its  purest  form,  by  uniting  the  inner  and  outer
world,  under  the  control  of  the  former,  into  a
life  which  rests  upon  itself.  It  is  Aristotle
who  gives  the  completest  scientific  expression
to  this  view.  But,  apart  from  the  particular
contents  of  Greek  philosophy,  we  find  merely
in  the  mode  of  its  operation  a  unique  recon
ciliation  between  the  inner  and  the  outer.
For  in  it  content  and  form  are  not  separated,
and  thought  is  not  left  painfully  struggling
with  a  refractory  matter,  but  the  work  of
philosophy  does  not  cease  until  it  has  over
come  all  contradiction  and  given  a  clear
and  exact  representation  of  thought.  Such


204  THE LIFE OF  THE SPIRIT

efforts  on  the  part  of  philosophy  have  pro
duced  at  all  stages  of  the  movement  of
history  well-marked  types  of  thought,  which
have  indelibly  impressed  themselves  on  the
consciousness  of  humanity.

A  similar  creative  activity  pervades  the
whole  of  Greek  life.  All  the  inner  life  that
strives  to  find  outward  expression  succeeds  in
gaining  complete  embodiment,  and  everything
that  is  external  has  soul  and  shape  put  into  it.
It  is  this  above  all  that  gives  rise  to  a  coherent
spiritual  reality  and  lends  the  life  which  is  here
unfolded  a  wonderful  power  of  attraction.
Much  that  is  temporal  and  particular  may  also
come  in,  but  the  heart  and  core  of  the  whole
lies  beyond  all  contingency  and  is  capable  of
exercising  a  permanent  influence.  For  here  the
primary  phenomenon  of  the  form  makes  itself
clearly  and  strongly  felt ;  the  fact  is  convincing
that,  on  a  spiritual  basis,  the  inner  can  mould
itself  on  the  outer  and  the  outer  can  become
an  expression  of  the  inner.  This  gives  clear
expression  to  a  general  experience  of  human


THE OUTER  AND  THE  INNER  WORLD 205

life,  the  experience  that,  in  life,  the  inner  is
imperfect  in  many  ways,  and  that  it  can  pass
from  indefinite  outline  to  definite  shape  only
if  it  can  find  outward  expression.  In  this
connection  the  outer,  far  as  it  may  fall  short
of  being  a  factor  with  equal  rights,  yet  seems
indispensable  in  order  to  drive  the  inner  to
definite  decision  and  complete  organization;
with  its  power  of  stimulation  and  reaction  it
is  an  important  element  in  the  process  of  life.
All  artistic  creation  proves  the  truth  of  this,
and  thereby  furnishes,  as  Goethe  said,  the
happiest  assurance  of  the  eternal  harmony  of
existence.  But  the  clearest  proof  of  it  is  the
indirect  one  from  the  experience  of  humanity.
For  wherever  form  has  been  despised  and
neglected,  life  has  soon  degenerated  and  finally
sunk  into  barbarism.  Form,  with  its  close
union  of  inner  and  outer,  is  indispensable  in
order  to  call  forth  spiritual  life,  bring  it  to  full
power,  and  make  it  penetrate  the  breadth  of
things.  Hence  it  can  be  easily  understood
how  it  was  possible  that  form  should  become


206  THE LIFE OF  THE SPIRIT

the  central  conception  of  a  cult  of  immanent
idealism.

But  just  as  the  creative  efforts  of  the  Greeks
show  us  this  at  its  highest,  so  their  experience
also  proves  the  existence  of  many  limitations
and  complications.  These  are  bound  to  be
come  objections  and  obstacles  if  the  artistic
order  described  above  is  taken  as  the  final
achievement  and  the  whole  of  our  life.  In  the
first  place,  this  solution  contains  presupposi
tions  which  are  by  no  means  self-evident.  It
can  only  form  the  highest  achievement  of  life
if  the  spiritual  impulse  is  strong,  and,  with  its
superior  powers,  can  subdue  and  shape  the
sensible  world ;  if,  in  addition,  the  life  of  the
senses  is  healthy,  if  its  natural  power  to  strive
upwards  is  unspoilt,  and  if  it  willingly  fits  into
the  frame  that  is  provided  for  it ;  and  if,  finally,
the  movements  from  the  one  to  the  other
unite  in  ready  and  friendly  fashion  to  form  a
common  life.  All  together  demand  that  life
should  attain  a  height  which  is  only  reached
under  special  circumstances,  and  which  deter-


THE  OUTER  AND  THE  INNER  WORLD 207

mines  the  general  character  of  existence  only
in  rare  periods,  and  then  only  for  a  spiritual
aristocracy.

We  also  find  complications  in  the  funda
mental  nature  of  this  artistic  idealism,  so  far
as  it  claims  the  direction  of  the  whole  of  life.
The  unification  of  form  and  matter  must  not
be  a  mere  combination  and  arrangement  of
them.  Their  efforts  to  come  together  can
only  yield  a  spiritual  content  if  form  has  a
soul  and  can  communicate  it  to  the  whole  of
its  product.  But  whence  is  form  thus  endowed
with  soul  ?  This  leads  to  the  further  question,
how  are  we  to  conceive  in  this  connection  of
the  position  of  spiritual  life  generally  ?  If  it
possesses  a  superiority  over  the  formative
process,  and  if,  in  order  to  preserve  the  purity
of  the  form,  this  superiority  is  vigorously
emphasized,  then  there  arise  two  worlds,  as
Plato  clearly  shows  us.  But  this  gives  rise  to
enormous  complications.  If  form,  however,
is  to  operate  only  within  the  process,  as  the
tendency  is,  especially  in  the  case  of  Aristotle,


208  THE LIFE OF  THE SPIRIT

then  it  threatens  to  lose  in  spiritual  content
and  has  difficulty  in  preserving  its  purity.
Here  we  recognize  the  Achilles'  heel  of  this
artistic  idealism.  On  one  alternative  it  pre
supposes  a  large  amount  of  inner  life,  which  is
self-contained  and  self-sufficing:  in  this  case
human  life  can  hardly  find  complete  satisfaction
in  mere  systematization,  mere  art  becomes  too
narrow  for  it.  The  second  alternative  is  that
the  moulding  and  shaping  are  treated  as  com
plete  ends  in  themselves  :  from  this  it  is  not
far  to  the  position  that  they  are  a  mere  embel
lishment  of  existence  as  it  is  given,  a  mere
refinement  of  life,  and  thus  they  easily  lose
their  significance.  Thus  the  artistic  solution
points  beyond  itself  to  a  further  totality  of
life.

The  later  ages  of  antiquity  place  this  problem
before  us  in  broad  outline.  The  sensible  and
the  spiritual,  which  were  so  closely  united
when  creative  effort  was  at  its  height,  dissolve
the  union  and  diverge  further  and  further.
The  spiritual  tries  more  and  more  to  acquire


THE  OUTER  AND  THE  INNER  WORLD 209

a  complete  inwardness.  The  result  of  this
tendency  is  that,  with  the  vigorous  co-opera
tion  of  philosophy,  first  of  all  morality  and
then  religion  becomes  independent.  But,
however  much  depth  of  soul  is  thereby  won,
and  to  however  large  an  extent  sense-existence
finally  sinks  to  a  mere  symbol,  the  spiritual  life
is  able  to  give  no  effective  content  to  the  con
dition  of  inward  isolation  and  self-sufficiency
which  it  reaches.  The  main  reason  for  this  is
that  thought  desires  to  produce  a  reality  from
itself,  while  as  a  matter  of  fact  it  only  comes
to  forms  and  relations  which  strive  to  detach
themselves  from  all  perception,  and  float  over
reality  like  ill-defined  shadows.  In  this  way,
to  be  sure,  the  spiritual  wins  a  realm  of  its
own,  but  its  emptiness  would  be  immediately
perceived  if  religious  feeling  did  not  in
cessantly  revivify  and  put  warmth  into  the
cold  products  of  thought.  But  as  culture
becomes  increasingly  polished  and  subjective,
the  sensible  element  loses  more  and  more  the

robustness  of  an  earlier  period  and  sinks  into

14


210  THE LIFE OF  THE SPIRIT

feeble  refinement,  and  indeed  inward  corrup
tion.  It  is  not  to  be  wondered  at  that  the
spiritual  life  became  hostile  to  the  sensible,
that  men  not  only  strove  to  repress  the  latter
as  far  as  possible,  but  that  asceticism  made
this  repression  the  main  content  of  life.  In
spite  of  this  change,  the  old  ideal  of  the
artistic  shaping  of  life  retains  its  influence  in
many  directions,  and  form  continues  to  rank
as  a  conception  of  high  value.  But  it  only
does  so  in  opposition  to  the  main  stream  of
life,  though  the  opposition  passed  unnoticed,
and  it  cannot  alter  the  fact  that  the  classical
harmony  of  the  two  worlds  is  transformed  in
the  end  into  a  sharp  division.  The  whole
course  of  Greek  history  presents  us  with  the
spectacle  of  the  gradual  retreat  of  the  sensible
world  before  the  spiritual.  In  the  beginning
the  sensible  world  took  complete  possession  of
man,  but  the  craving  after  spiritual  self-pre
servation  drives  him  to  the  elaboration  of  a
super-sensible  world.  It  was  not  Christianity,
and  certainly  not  the  modern  period,  which


THE  OUTER  AND  THE  INNER  WORLD 211

first  gave  rise  to  the  idea  of  a  purely  inward
life :  the  Greeks  won  it  for  the  general  system
of  culture  by  painful  work  and  experience,  and
thereby  prepared  the  ground  for  new  systema-
tizations  of  life.

Christianity  also  turns  away  from  the
sensible  world,  but  it  succeeds  in  giving  this
self-centred  and  self-sufficing  inner  life  a  great
work  to  do  and  a  rich  content.  It  ac
complishes  this  when,  in  unmistakable  con
nection  with  later  Judaism,  it  transfers  the
centre  of  gravity  of  life  from  the  intellectual
and  cosmic  to  what  is  ethical  and  personal.
The  result  is  a  complete  transformation,  since
the  fundamental  relation  of  human  life  is  no
longer  the  relation  to  a  visible  or  invisible
universe,  but  the  relation  to  a  perfect  Spirit
who  is  above  the  world.  In  this  way  new
aims  and  standards  are  revealed  which  bring
the  whole  of  life  face  to  face  with  tasks  of
great  importance.  The  object  to  be  aimed
at  is  union  with  this  perfect  Spirit,  a  demand
for  which  the  existing  condition  of  humanity


212  THE LIFE OF THE SPIRIT

is  not  only  inadequate,  but  with  which  it
even  appears  to  be  in  direct  contradiction.
To  end  this  conflict,  which  involves  the  whole
of  the  soul,  now  becomes  the  supreme
necessity.  This  is  impossible  if  we  start  from
the  existing  condition  of  the  soul ;  for  this
purpose  a  new  and  purer  nature  is  needed,
and  hence  the  task  is  raised  above  all  human
capacity.  Such  a  necessity  for  what  is  im
possible  must  bring  about  a  huge  convulsion.
But  if  the  conflict  grows  more  acute,
Christianity  shows  a  way  of  overcoming  it ;
it  confidently  preaches  a  redeeming  and
sanctifying  love,  which  frees  man  from  all
perplexity,  enables  him  to  share  in  the  per
fection  of  divine  life,  and  vouchsafes  him  full
blessedness.

On  this  scheme  the  inner  life  itself  contains
great  contrasts,  movements,  and  experiences.
The  utmost  extremes  of  absolute  despair  and
certain  assurance  are  at  work  and  intensify
one  another.  The  tension  of  the  whole  is
increased  by  the  conviction  that  the  trans-


THE  OUTER  AND  THE  INNER  WORLD 213

formation  of  human  life  is  not  a  mere  private
concern  of  man,  but  that  the  refusal  of  it
signifies  a  revolt  against  the  divine  will,  a
violation  of  a  sacred  world-order,  and  there
fore  involves  the  disintegration  of  man.
Hence  this  life  will  necessarily  feel  that  it  is
the  heart  and  core  of  the  whole  of  reality ;  it
will  regard  all  other  life  as  a  mere  setting,
and  will  grant  it  no  independent  significance.
At  the  same  time  it  must  uphold  its  complete
superiority  over  all  nature.  It  not  only
understands  nature  around  us  as  a  work  of
spirit:  it  is  more  important  that,  within
man,  it  puts  on  a  lower  level  all  activity
which  proceeds  from  merely  natural  powers,
and  stringently  prohibits  its  entry  into  the
sphere  of  moral  action.  Thus  a  thinker  like
Augustine,  who  throws  the  oppositions  into
sharp  relief,  could  regard  ancient  morality
not  only  as  insufficient  but  as  a  perversion
(virtutes  veterum  splendida  vitid).

Hence  the  life  which  arises  on  this  ethico-
religious basis is of a strictly supernatural


214  THE LIFE OF  THE SPIRIT

character.  Here  the  spiritual  life  has  abso
lutely  no  need  of  being  supplemented  by
nature,  but  it  contains  its  task  as  well  as  its
power  within  itself.  But  the  sensible  is  not
therefore  declared  to  be  bad  and  treated  as  an
enemy.  Where  this  has  taken  place  within
Christianity,  it  is  in  contradiction  to  its  funda
mental  tendency.  For  on  this  point  Christi
anity  is  clearly  and  consciously  at  variance  with
the  later  ages  of  antiquity :  to  it  the  decisive
opposition  is  not  that  between  the  sensible
and  the  supersensible,  but  that  between  good
and  evil.  The  root  of  evil  is  not  a  deficiency
in  spiritual  capacity,  but  moral  guilt.  But  the
sensible  remains  a  subordinate  sphere,  which
has  to  be  completely  subservient  to  the  ends
of  the  spirit :  it  possesses  value  not  in  itself
but  through  the  part  of  the  higher  order  to
which  it  gives  expression,  or  through  what  it
accomplishes  for  the  higher  order.  Hence  it
can  never  form  the  sole  domain  of  human
endeavours,  but  always  points  beyond  itself,
and,  with  all  its  palpability,  as  far  as  the  soul


THE  OUTER  AND  THE  INNER  WORLD 215

of  man  is  concerned it remains  an external
world.

We  shall  see  what  dangers  and  complications
are  produced  by  the  unfolding  of  this  system
of  life  in  the  sphere  of  humanity  and  under
special  historical  conditions.  At  the  same
time  we  shall  have  to  examine  whether,  from
the  very  beginning,  the  whole  is  not  burdened
with  difficult  problems.  But  before  we  discuss
these  questions  we  must  fully  recognize  the
primary  phenomenon  of  the  spiritual  life,  which
here  unfolds  itself.  The  spiritual  life  here
discovers  in  itself  immeasurable  depths,  sharp
contrasts,  mighty  tasks.  If  it  formerly  ranked
as  of  incontestable  worth  throughout  its  whole
existence,  there  now  arises  in  it  an  inner
division,  a  cleavage,  the  overcoming  of  which
becomes  the  task  of  tasks.  Man's  own  nature
thus  becomes  his  chief  problem,  and  this  means
that  his  life  is  withdrawn  from  external
activities  and  principally  occupied  with  itself.
The  purely  inward  life  thus  gains  independence
and  a  completely  satisfying  content.  At  the


216  THE LIFE OF  THE SPIRIT

same  time  a  change  takes  place  in  the  value
put  upon  action  in  that  it  does  not  need  any
external  results  to  make  it  complete,  but  finds
that  its  main  business  lies  in  the  purely  inward
life.  Then  only  does  the  internal  disposition
cease  to  be  a  dead  accompaniment  and  become
an  active  process ;  thus  men  are  freed  from
the  bondage  which  may  come  not  only  from
external  relations  but  from  the  unalterableness
of  the  nature  of  the  soul.  A  life  which  is  based
upon  freedom  of  action  rises  above  all  merely
natural  processes ;  a  struggle  commences
between  freedom  and  fate.  The  independence
which  is  thus  won  not  only  seeks  to  make  man
master  of  his  own  nature,  but  it  prevents  him
from  accepting  his  sense  -  existence  as  an
assigned  destiny  and  from  yielding  to  it  with
out  a  struggle.  It  calls  upon  him  to  master
the  life  of  the  senses,  and  insists  on  shaping  it
conformably  to  the  ends  of  the  spirit.  The
importance  of  this  is  shown  in  particular  by
the  beginnings  of  Christianity.  For  in  taking
up  with  courage  and  confidence  the  struggle


THE  OUTER  AND  THE  INNER  WORLD 217

against  a  weak  sensuousness  pervading  all  the
relations  of  life,  it  strengthened  and  consoli
dated  men  against  the  disintegration  which
threatened  to  carry  all  before  it,  and,  by  in
creasing  their  self-confidence,  prepared  the  way
for  a  movement  of  ascent.

In  the  actual  world  of  history  these  trans
formations,  these  deepening  and  liberating
movements,  have  always  produced  only  inade
quate  results :  in  the  consciousness  of  mankind
they  are  liable  to  be  temporarily  obscured  and
forgotten.  But  they  cannot  be  simply  can
celled  ;  they  have  produced  so  much  change
in  life  on  its  inner  side  that  any  further  move
ment  of  humanity  must  come  to  terms  with
them.  It  is  impossible  for  man  to  resume
without  question  the  earlier  naive  relations  in
which  he  stood  to  his  environment  and  his  own
nature,  and  to  find  full  satisfaction  in  their
development.  Where  the  working-out  in
detail  of  this  ethico-religious  system  of  life
provokes  to  contradiction,  it  often  happens
that  the  fundamental  thought  of  the  deepen-


218  THE LIFE OF  THE SPIRIT

ing  and  ethical  awakening  of  life  maintains  its
position  all  the  more  strongly.  Where  the
answers  no  longer  receive  assent  the  questions
remain.  They,  too,  are  forces  which  drive  life
in  a  definite  direction  and  give  it  a  specific
character.  Hence  the  new  systematization  of
life  which  we  owe  to  Christianity  not  only
cannot  be  erased  from  history  but  remains  one
of  its  leading  features :  in  fact,  as  revealing  a
depth  which  controls  all  the  rest  of  life,  it  is
above  all  the  changes  of  history.  It  continues
to  work  openly  or  in  secret  throughout  the
ages,  and  this  proves  that  it  belongs  to  that
timeless  present  which  is  the  subject  of  our
investigation.

But  all  the  truth  and  greatness  of  Chris
tianity  have  not  prevented  it  from  being  a
subject  of  constant  strife.  It  is  not  only  from
outside  that  it  has  continually  experienced  the
severest  attacks,  unless  these  have  been  sup
pressed  with  an  iron  hand,  but  it  has  been
torn  with  internal  dissensions  which  have
extended  beyond  the  domain  of  conceptions


THE  OUTER  AND  THE  INNER  WORLD 219

to  the  shaping  of  life.  Everything  indicates
that  the  main  tendency,  when  it  is  worked  out
in  detail,  contains  a  complication ;  we  shall
see  that  it  is  just  the  relation  between  the
inner  and  the  outer  worlds  which  is  here  in
question.  Christianity  stands  for  a  new  world,
as  opposed  to  that  which  immediately  surrounds
men,  and  it  cannot  give  up  either  of  these
worlds ;  a  "  monistic "  Christianity  is  an
absurdity  which  can  only  please  a  confused
thinker.  But  to  maintain  the  existence  of
two  worlds  still  leaves  it  an  open  question
how  they  are  related  in  detail  to  each  other :
the  particular  point  is,  how  the  world,  which
is  on  the  one  hand  transcendent  and  superior
to  man,  can  become  his  own,  and  come  into
close  touch  with  his  soul.  It  is  certainly  part
of  the  fundamental  conception  of  Christianity
to  make  the  supramundane  order  powerfully
operative  in  our  world  as  well,  but  the  relations
of  one  to  the  other  are  not  completely  adjusted.
The  supramundane  order  remains  in  the  first
place  a  Beyond,  which  exists  alongside  our


220  THE LIFE OF  THE SPIRIT

world  and  is  bound  to  lead  us  away  from  it
by  drawing  us  to  itself.  But,  at  the  same
time,  instead  of  creating  a  present  which
transcends  time,  it  remains  too  much  a  matter
of  mere  expectation,  a  hope  to  be  realized  in
the  future.  This  not  only  leads  to  the  greatest
confusion  in  particular  directions,  but  it  gives
the  whole  of  life  a  character  which  is  bound  to
arouse  doubt  and  opposition.  Since  the  trans
cendent  Spirituality  affects  us  here  chiefly  as
an  order  working  upon  us  from  the  Beyond,
our  whole  life  receives  a  specifically  religious
character,  and  is  thereby  driven  into  a  channel
which  may  satisfy  particular  periods  but  which
is  too  narrow  to  be  permanent.  Christianity
was  established  in  an  age  which  was  wanting
in  vigorous  vitality,  and  was  chiefly  intent  on
gaining  a  safe  harbour  of  refuge.  But  it
seemed  that  this  could  be  found  only  in
opposition  to  the  confused  activity  of  the
world,  in  a  supernatural  order.  The  sharper
the  division  became,  the  more  certain  men
felt  of  themselves  and  the  stronger  was  the


THE  OUTER  AND  THE  INNER  WORLD 221

position  of  the  divine  revelation,  which  came
to  us  only  by  a  miracle.  It  would  be  irrelevant
to  treat  of  the  objections  raised  by  later  ages,
when  vitality  was  at  a  higher  level,  but  it  is  of
course  important  to  consider  how  the  relation
between  the  inner  and  the  outer  worlds  had  to
suffer  through  this  tendency.

Above  all,  there  arises  a  sharp  opposition
which  runs  through  the  whole  history  of
Christianity,  and  finds  expression  particularly
in  the  shaping  of  creeds  :  we  allude  to  the
opposition  between  an  inwardness  which  with
draws  from  the  visible  world,  and  an  adapta
tion  to  this  world,  with  the  accompanying
danger  of  an  intrusion  of  the  sensible  into  the
spiritual.  Where  the  inner  life  springs  from
the  relationship  to  a  transcendent  Deity,  and
finds  its  chief  task  in  the  development  of  this
relationship,  it  is  easy  for  anyone  to  be  in
different  to  his  earthly  environment,  to  face
all  injustice  in  silence,  with  patience  and
resignation,  to  make  no  attempt  either  to
grapple  with  the  irrationality  in  the  world,


222  THE LIFE OF  THE SPIRIT

or  to  raise  it  to  an  essentially  higher  level.
Can  we  deny  that  the  modern  period  has
intervened  in  the  general  relations  of  life  much
more  powerfully  and  helpfully  than  Christi
anity,  though  the  latter  dominated  for  so  long
the  souls  of  men  ?  Who  abolished  slavery,
who  carried  through  a  universal  system  of
popular  education,  who  has  attacked  the  social
problem  on  a  grand  scale  ?  The  inwardness
which  we  have  described,  with  all  its  delicacy
of  feeling,  was  too  feeble  and  too  aloof  from
the  world  to  exercise  any  power  of  penetrating
and  organizing  it.  Where  spiritual  emotion
does  not  somehow  turn  into  activity  it  runs  a
great  risk  of  becoming  an  inert  brooding  over
things,  a  purely  subjective  feeling,  an  empty
mood.  It  does  so,  of  course,  only  where  the
seriousness  of  the  religious  life  has  faded  away,
a  pre-eminent  example  of  which  is  the  purely
intellectual  Christianity  of  modern  times.
And  even  where  men  are  willing,  they  are
often  very  helpless  in  dealing  with  the  world  :
nor  can  we  deny  the  further  fact  that,  in  the


THE  OUTER  AND  THE  INNER  WORLD 223

life  which  is  ruled  by  Christianity,  the  depth  of
soul  and  the  tenderness  of  the  fundamental
experience  have  often  been  unsuccessful  in
preventing  great  barbarity,  and  in  fact
brutality,  of  outward  action.  Or  were  not
the  Inquisition  and  trials  for  witchcraft  carried
on  in  the  name  of  Christianity  ?  There  is  thus
a  dualism  of  life,  which  cannot  be  permanently
endured.

But  in  Christianity  itself  there  was  vigorous
opposition  to  the  movement  towards  an  in
wardness  superior  to  the  world.  This  move
ment  would  probably  have  made  Christianity
a  religion  of  mere  individuals,  if  from  the
beginning  its  efforts  had  not  been  directed
towards  establishing  a  kingdom  of  the  new
life,  and  helping  the  whole  of  mankind.  Even
on  the  ground  of  history  nothing  distinguishes
it  more  from  other  religions  than  the  forma
tion  of  a  church  that  is  definitely  marked  off,
and  claims  to  embrace  the  whole  of  humanity.
But  this  enterprise  could  not  be  carried  out
without  taking  into  consideration  the  general


THE LIFE OF  THE SPIRIT

situation,  and  also  the  opinions  and  interests
of  men.  If  now  this  situation  was  accepted  as
essentially  unalterable,  it  was  naturally  im
possible  to  avoid  accommodation  to  it  in
many  ways,  and  the  consequent  intrusion  of
sensible  elements  into  the  world  of  religion.
It  is  thus  emphatically  the  case  not  so  much
that  a  new  world  is  formed  as  that  the  old
world  and  its  modes  of  thought  are  trans
ferred  to  the  domain  of  religion.  How  sen
suous  are  the  ideas  of  a  God  who  is  provoked
to  anger  by  sin,  and  must  be  appeased  by
some  sort  of  atonement  1  How  sensuous  are
the  ideas  of  reward  and  punishment,  of  pur
gatory,  of  heaven  and  hell,  and  the  whole  body
of  eschatological  doctrine !  In  addition,  the
spiritual  exhaustion  at  the  beginning  of  Chris
tianity,  which  has  been  often  alluded  to,  was
bound  to  strengthen  the  sensuous  element.
Men  wished  to  be  perfectly  sure,  at  any  cost
and  without  any  risk  to  themselves,  of  the  full
reality  of  the  spiritual,  and  so  they  insisted  on
a  sensuous  embodiment  in  order  to  be  absol-


THE  OUTER  AND  THE  INNER  WORLD 225

utely  certain  of  it.  Hence  they  demanded
facts  which  appealed  to  their  senses,  over
powering  impressions,  visible  pledges,  such  as
we  find  in  the  clearest  form  in  the  conception
of  the  sacrament.  For  the  sensible  is  here
much  more  than  a  mere  means  and  instru
ment  ;  it  belongs  to  the  essence  of  the  matter,
and  the  communication  of  divine  powers  is  so
closely  bound  up  with  it  that  a  man's  own
disposition  in  the  matter  may  easily  become
a  secondary  consideration  (sacramenta  non
solum  significant,  sed  causant  gratiam}.  There
is  the  closest  connection  between  this  and  the
fact  that,  the  more  the  consciousness  of  his
own  weakness  makes  man  look  for  deliver
ance  solely  to  supernatural  grace,  the  more
religious  it  may  appear  to  deny  him,  as  far  as
possible,  all  activity  of  his  own,  and  to  repre
sent  the  new  life  merely  as  "  streaming  into  "
him  as  into  a  passive  vessel.  Hence  the
inclination  spreads  to  make  sure  of  spiritual
processes  by  binding  them  to  sensible  forms,

to  give  to  outward  and  tangible  performances

15


226  THE LIFE OF  THE SPIRIT

a  value  which  is  in  direct  contradiction  to  the
efforts  of  Christianity  after  inwardness.  The
final  result  is  a  materialising  of  the  spiritual
life,  which  leads  at  the  same  time  to  a
suppression  of  all  free  movement.

A  similar  problem  also  appears  both  in  the
conception  of  the  Church  and  in  its  activity.
This  activity  is  in  the  interests  of  the  kingdom
of  God  ;  its  object  is  to  subordinate  all  external
processes  to  the  ends  of  the  inner  world.  But
it  cannot  meet  with  any  success  without  com
ing  to  terms  with  the  world  as  it  is,  and
making  use  of  the  means  which  it  provides.
The  result  is  that  it  falls  under  the  influence
of  this  world,  and  may  be  overborne  by  it  to
such  an  extent  that  the  main  aim  is  completely
obscured.

We  thus  see  the  opposition  in  its  fullest
development :  we  have  on  the  one  side  an
inwardness  withdrawn  from  the  world,  and,
on  the  other,  the  inner  overborne  by  the  outer.
Though  there  are  constant  endeavours  within
Christianity  to  effect  some  sort  of  reconcilia-


THE  OUTER  AND  THE  INNER  WORLD 227

tion,  the  confusion  lies  too  far  back  to  permit
of  anything  but  a  tolerable  compromise  being
attained.  Do  we  not  see  in  Christianity,  with
particular  clearness  at  the  present  day,  the  op
position  between  a  freely  ranging  subjectivity
and  a  sense-bound  organization  ?

The  main  trend  of  modern  life  puts  the
problem  of  the  outer  and  the  inner  worlds  in
a  very  different  light.  The  stream  of  life  is
once  more  directed  upon  the  world,  but  now
the  main  point  is  not  merely  to  contemplate  it
but  to  lay  hold  of  it  vigorously,  to  get  full
possession  and  enjoyment  of  it.  The  inward
ness  that  has  been  won  is  not  by  any  means
given  up  in  principle,  but  is  now  expected  to
communicate  itself  to  the  whole  of  reality,
and  in  this  communication  to  increase  its  own
power  and  joyousness.  We  saw  how  the  main
task  of  modern  times  lies  in  the  enhancement
of  life,  and  how  this  enhancement  does  not
serve  an  end  beyond  itself,  but  itself  becomes
more  and  more  its  own  completely  satisfying
goal.  But  as  the  carrying  out  of  this  process


228  THE LIFE OF  THE SPIRIT

makes  it  necessary  that  diversity  should  be
reduced  to  unity  and  the  oppositions  should
show  a  tendency  towards  reconciliation,  the
inner  and  the  outer  worlds  cannot  remain
separate ;  the  life  of  the  whole  continually
directs  them  towards  one  another ;  the  one  can
develop  its  power  and  reach  its  highest  level
only  in  contact  with  the  other.  Although  they
may  thus  form  different  starting-points,  they
approach  one  another  and  become  more  and
more  closely  interwoven,  and  the  advance  of
the  process  of  life  may  here  be  regarded  as
a  progressive  overcoming  of  the  opposition.
The  supersensible  strives  to  unite  with  the
sensible  in  order  to  win  its  full  power  in  the
movement  of  the  latter.  Thus  we  see  that  all
the  ideas  and  principles  which  have  emerged
in  modern  times  are  filled  with  a  fiercer  long
ing  to  master  the  sensible  world  and  penetrate
to  its  furthest  ramifications.  Only  by  doing
so  do  they  seem  to  step  from  the  realm  of
shadows  into  clear  and  full  reality,  and  at  the
same  time  demonstrate  their  truth.  Hence


THE  OUTER  AND  THE  INNER  WORLD 229

the  time  for  a  timid  severance  from  the
sensible  is  now  past,  nor  can  the  latter  any
longer  be  despised.  From  the  other  side,
modern  life  and  work  enable  the  sensible  to
appropriate  in  an  increasing  degree  the  features
of  the  spiritual,  and  they  bring  it  nearer  and
nearer  to  the  spiritual.  Nature  renounces  its
old  palpability ;  it  no  longer  lies  before  us  as
a  realm  of  impenetrable  matter,  but  is  trans
formed  into  a  web  of  forces  and  relations,
held  together  by  a  causal  order  accessible  to
thought.  In  this  system  of  life,  whose  funda
mental  principles  are  the  increase  of  power
and  constant  progress,  material  goods  also
appear  in  a  higher  light  than  at  earlier
periods,  when  their  pursuit  was  thought  to
be  the  outcome  of  a  lower  way  of  thinking.
For  now  they  become  indispensable  means  to
the  development  of  human  power  and  the
overcoming  of  obstacles :  it  is  not  so  much
sensuous  enjoyment  as  the  increase  of  power,
the  mastery  over  things — and  thus  something
supersensuous — which  makes  them  valuable.


230  THE LIFE OF  THE SPIRIT

If  one  thus  grows  by  means  of  the  other,  it
seems  that  there  is  only  a  single  world  and  a
single  life  encompassing  man,  and  the  tendency
towards  union  which  we  have  described  seems
completely  to  reconcile  idealism  and  natural
ism.  Thus  the  division  which  opened  in  front
of  Christianity  seems  to  be  happily  overcome.
The  systematization  of  activity  into  work,
in  which  the  modern  period  considerably  sur
passes  earlier  epochs,  was  of  great  significance
for  this  result.  For  the  modern  period  has
made  vigorous  attempts  to  free  human  action
from  all  subjectivity,  and  to  connect  it  closely
with  its  objects :  it  forms  great  complexes  of
work,  recognizes  in  them  their  peculiar  laws
and  motives,  and  lets  these  latter  control
human  action.  While  man  thus  identifies
himself  with  the  special  necessities  of  things,
the  latter  come  incomparably  nearer  to  him
and  grow  to  be  parts  of  his  own  nature.  In
the  world  of  human  work  the  inner  and  the
outer  unite,  in  the  same  way  as  force  and  its
object,  to  form  a  single  whole.  Thus  the


THE  OUTER  AND  THE  INNER  WORLD 231

progress  of  work  is  at  the  same  time  the
establishment  of  man  in  an  undivided  world:
it  means  that  the  idea  of  unity  has  made  a
further  advance.

This  consciousness  of  belonging  to  a  single
world  dominates  the  convictions  of  the  modern
man,  and  gives  him  an  assured  sense  of  life.
But  the  greater  the  pride  and  joy  which  are
manifested  in  the  striving  after  unity,  the
greater  must  be  the  resultant  confusion,  if,
in  the  details  of  the  systematization  within
modern  life  itself,  different,  and  indeed  con
trary,  life-currents  are  formed,  which  that  life
cannot  bring  together  with  the  means  at  its
disposal ;  if  work,  though  it  strains  its  powers
to  the  utmost,  cannot  fulfil  a  requirement
which  is  emotionally  of  the  utmost  urgency.
This  comes  about  as  follows.  The  chief  in
strument  for  carrying  out  this  effort  has  been
found  by  modern  life  in  science,  science  of  the
analytical  and  exact  character  which  has  been
developed  precisely  in  modern  times.  It  was
of  such  scientific  knowledge  that  it  could  first


THE LIFE OF  THE SPIRIT

be  truly  said,  knowledge  is  power.  But
science  could  not  clearly  and  distinctly  grasp
either  psychical  life  or  nature  without  giving
them  an  independence  of  one  another  and
recognizing  that  each  possessed  a  unique
nature  of  its  own.  This  meant  a  complete
breach  with  the  former  method,  which  found
no  difficulty  in  a  mingling  of  both  realms.
Though  from  the  ethical  and  religious  point
of  view  the  inner  was  raised  above  the  outer,
the  earlier  scientific  conception  of  the  soul  was
overladen  with  many  sensuous  images.  No
difficulty  was  felt  in  representing  sensuous
operations,  impressions,  influences  as  entering
immediately  into  the  soul,  nor,  on  the  other
hand,  in  representing  volitions  as  extending
into  the  outer  world  and  altering  its  condition.
In  addition,  the  soul  was  defined  not  so  much
by  any  positive  attribute  as  by  its  contrast
with  the  sensible,  and  hence  it  easily  came  to
be  popularly  conceived  as  something  sensible,
though  of  a  refined  and  gaseous  nature.  On
the  other  hand,  nature  seemed  to  be  controlled


THE  OUTER  AND  THE  INNER  WORLD 233

by  psychical  forces,  guided  by  ends,  moved
by  impulses  and  inclinations ;  it  might  be
regarded  as  forming  a  living  whole  and  exer
cising  creative  power  from  within.  A  con
fusion  like  this,  which  involved  the  constant
interpenetration  of  the  two  series,  hindered  all
precise  explanation,  and  hence  the  desire  for
such  explanation  drove  men  to  separate  com
pletely  one  realm  from  the  other,  and  at
the  same  time  to  demand  a  psychological
explanation  of  everything  psychical  and  a
physical  explanation  of  everything  natural.
This  separation  was  ably  and  vigorously
carried  out  by  the  leading  spirits  of  the
Enlightenment :  as  they  conceived  the  essen
tial  characteristic  of  the  soul  to  be  conscious
ness  and  thought,  and  that  of  the  material
world  to  be  extension  in  space,  the  two  were
regarded  as  irreconcilably  disparate.  Here  a
realm  of  souls  with  their  indivisibility,  there  a
realm  of  infinitely  divisible  masses  with  their
motions.  As  regards  their  relations,  the  two
realms  could  no  longer  be  understood  as


THE LIFE OF  THE SPIRIT

communicating  with  one  another.  According
to  the  new  conception,  a  stimulus  comes  from
one  side  and  releases  on  the  other  some  sort
of  activity :  in  its  working,  however,  each
realm  kept  to  itself  and  was  closed  against
every  interference  from  without.

But  these  movements  did  not  by  any  means
remain  confined  to  the  realm  of  mere  theory :
they  broke  forth  and  became  mighty  forces
striving  to  dominate  the  whole  of  life,  and
thus  inevitably  came  into  the  sharpest  col
lision  with  one  another.  In  thought  the
thinking  subject  begins  to  feel  himself  the
creator  of  a  world.  For  when  thought,  as  a
productive  faculty,  develops  an  inexhaustible
diversity  out  of  itself — mathematics  affords
the  clearest  example — it  does  not  thereby  lose
itself  in  things ;  it  preserves  an  unassailable
superiority ;  from  all  its  work  of  production
it  always  returns  again  to  itself,  and  thereby
proves  the  complete  independence  of  the
human  spirit.  Just  as  the  thinking  subject
seems  to  be  the  Archimedean  point  which


THE  OUTER  AND  THE  INNER  WORLD 235

affords  a  fixed  position  in  face  of  the  chaos  of
phenomena,  the  next  task  is  to  include  the
whole  of  reality  in  the  process  which  so  arises.
Thought  now  becomes  both  the  motive  force
and  the  measure  of  all  things  :  by  vigorous
self-concentration  it  discovers  in  itself  an
original  endowment  of  eternal  truths,  then
transforms  these  into  postulates,  and  applies
them  to  the  existing  condition  of  things.
What  contradicts  these  truths  cannot  stand  ;
what  corresponds  to  them  will  be  illuminated
and  raised  to  a  much  higher  level.  An
activity  of  this  kind  not  only  works  on  things
from  the  outside,  but  penetrates  into  them
and  seeks  to  make  out  of  them  something
quite  different  from  what  they  appear  to  our
immediate  impressions.  For  everything  sen
sible  here  becomes  a  mere  appearance,  an
expression  and  instrument  of  a  content  of
thought :  all  reality  seems  to  be  reduced  to
thought-elements,  and  we  seem  to  promote  its
ultimate  truth  when  we  raise  it  to  the  realm
of  thoughts  and  ideas.  On  this  view  the


236  THE LIFE OF  THE SPIRIT

sensible  can  only  be  regarded  as  a  residue  on
which  the  transforming  work  of  thought  has
not  yet  been  fully  successful,  but  it  is  not
granted  an  independent  existence  as  opposed
to  thought.

The  essential  attributes  of  the  work  of
thought  thus  become  the  ruling  characteristics
of  the  whole  of  civilized  life.  The  universal
and  timeless  truth  ascertained  by  this  work
possesses  an  unassailable  superiority  both  over
what  the  sensible  world  exhibits  and  over
what  has  been  made  of  man  by  particular
historical  experiences.  Man's  greatness  and
worth  do  not  lie  in  what  he  is  as  a  natural
being,  nor  in  what  he  is  as  belonging  to  a
particular  nation  or  a  particular  religion,  but
in  what  he  is  as  a  reasonable  being.  The
development  of  his  rational  nature  produces
a  culture  which  is  rational  and  universal
as  contrasted  with  a  culture  dependent  on
history ;  in  particular  it  rejects  all  sensation
alism  and  becomes  an  intellectual  culture ;
and  it  shows  vigour  and  tenacity  in  making


THE  OUTER  AND  THE  INNER  WORLD 237

its  way  in  all  directions.  Man  now  appears
as,  above  all,  a  being  whose  essence  is  pure
thought,  as  a  personality  and  an  individuality,
and  from  this  point  of  view  he  must  make
further  claims  on  himself  and  on  life.  Accord
ingly  an  attempt  is  made,  starting  from  the
reason  immanent  in  man,  to  shape  the  indi
vidual  departments  of  life,  such  as  religion  and
morality,  politics  and  education,  and  these
thus  undergo  a  complete  transformation.
Finally,  all  variety  tends  towards  an  all-
embracing  realm  of  thought,  and  an  inner  life
is  developed  which,  with  its  incessant  activity,
is  much  better  protected  against  an  irruption
of  sensible  elements  than  the  more  passive  and
emotional  inwardness  of  the  middle  ages.
The  guidance  of  this  intellectual  culture
belongs  incontestably  to  philosophy.  For
centuries  great  thinkers  have  emphatically
contested  the  existence  of  an  independent
sensible  world,  and  have  sought  to  transpose
the  whole  of  reality  into  a  web  of  thought.
This  intellectualistic  effort  found  its  culminat-


238  THE LIFE OF  THE SPIRIT

ing  point  in  the  system  of  Hegel,  which  not
only  makes  the  laws  of  thought  control  the
whole  of  reality,  but  makes  the  movement
of  thought,  which  advances  by  means  of
contradictions,  its  sole  content.

But  nature,  too,  exhibits  a  life  of  its  own,
which  is  no  less  intense,  and  which  struggles
for  the  possession  of  the  world.  Just  as
psychical  life,  after  the  removal  of  the  tradi
tional  intermingling  of  psychical  and  physical,
found  in  thought  a  world-forming  creative
activity,  so,  after  the  expulsion  of  the
psychical  elements,  nature  is  co-ordinated
into  a  stricter  unity,  and  shows  that,  when  it
is  understood  in  this  way,  it  is  capable  of
incomparably  greater  services.  Modern  in
vestigation,  using  the  exact  methods  of
mechanics,  probes  nature  to  the  smallest
elements  and  forces,  and  thus  reveals  to  us  a
new  depth  of  reality.  By  the  aid  of  these
elements  it  illuminates  the  existing  state  of
things  in  the  most  thorough-going  manner,
and  not  only  discovers  much  more  movement


THE  OUTER  AND  THE  INNER  WORLD 239

in  nature,  and,  by  following  it  up,  is  able  to
recreate  reality,  but  also  finds  a  way  to  enlist
the  forces  of  nature  in  the  service  of  man,  and
thereby  enormously  enhance  his  life.  Modern
natural  science  is  the  starting-point  of  modern
technical  processes,  which  have  not  only  led
to  an  enormous  advance  in  details,  but  have  in
general  put  man  in  a  different  relation  to
reality.  For  his  ability  henceforth  to  grapple
boldly  with  all  the  irrationality  of  existence,
and  to  treat  all  limitations  as  only  temporary,
must  give  him  a  proud  self-reliance  and  instil
an  inner  joyousness  into  his  life.  But  while
the  shaping  of  existence  by  the  technical
applications  of  science  shows  that  the  outer
is  everywhere  capable  of  a  strong  influence  on
the  inner,  and  while  it  is  easy  for  the  latter  to
appear  as  a  mere  appendage  of  the  former,  the
progress  of  science  produces  effects  tending  in
the  same  direction.  The  latter,  especially
when  it  assumes  the  form  of  a  doctrine  of
evolution  and  makes  even  organic  forms
subject  to  change  and  growth,  may  look


240  THE LIFE OF  THE SPIRIT

upon  all  psychical  life  as  a  mere  product  of
the  process  of  nature,  and  may  regard  its  task
as  consisting  only  in  what  it  does  for  the  ad
vancement  of  this  natural  process.  Psychical
life  loses  more  and  more  the  independence
which  was  formerly  assigned  to  it ;  even  in
details  its  activity  seems  to  be  determined
by  physical  processes.  Another  factor  which
increases  the  importance  of  the  visible  world
is  the  emergence  and  predominance  of
economic  problems  in  modern  society.  Not
only  much  that  was  formerly  in  a  state  of
disintegration  thus  gains  coherence  for  the
first  time  and  increases  its  influence,  but  also
the  particular  systematization  of  modern  work
produces  many  new  problems,  and  gives  them
a  leading  position  in  human  life.  From  this
point  of  view  the  management  of  life  on  its
material  side  seems  to  be  the  main  thing  in
human  existence,  and  the  struggle  connected
with  it  is  the  heart  of  the  work  that  has  been
done  throughout  history.  The  manner  in
which  this  problem  has  been  solved  seems


THE  OUTER  AND  THE  INNER  WORLD 241

to  give  the  different  epochs  their  peculiar
character.  If  intellectualism  regarded  ideas
as  the  motive  forces  of  social  and  historical
solidarity,  the  pendulum  has  now  swung  to
the  opposite  extreme,  and  the  place  of  ideas
has  been  taken  by  material  interests.

A  realistic  culture,  such  as  has  never  existed
before,  arises  out  of  the  combination  of  these
different  movements  and  their  annexation  of
the  whole  of  life.  For  although  the  idealistic
schemes  of  life  never  failed  to  meet  with  con
tradiction  and  the  counteracting  influence  of
realistic  modes  of  thought,  it  was  always
rather  a  matter  confined  to  individual  schemes,
and  did  not  extend  beyond  a  critical  and
defensive  attitude  to  a  positive  construction
dealing  with  life  as  a  whole.  The  occurrence
of  this  in  the  modern  period  alters  the  situa
tion  in  essential  particulars.  For  now  for  the
first  time  naturalism  may  hope  to  satisfy  the
spiritual  as  well  as  the  material  needs  of
humanity,  and  meet  idealism  on  equal  terms.

The  struggle  thus  enters  on  a  new  phase :  it

16


242  THE LIFE OF  THE SPIRIT

goes  more  than  ever  from  whole  to  whole,
and,  when  clearly  realized,  is  bound  to  throw
the  whole  of  life  into  frightful  unrest  and
confusion.  Philosophy  has  again  played  the
largest  part  in  raising  the  matter  to  the  level
at  which  it  can  deal  with  life  as  a  whole  and
fundamental  principles.  Only  philosophy  will
not  now  appear  as  untrammelled  thought,
prescribing  to  things  the  course  they  should
pursue,  but  will  mould  itself  upon  the  data
of  experience  with  the  greatest  possible
fidelity,  and  will  find  its  chief  work  in  co
ordinating,  or,  to  use  Comte's  expression,
"systematizing"  the  co-existences  of  ex
perience.  Comte,  with  his  Positivism,  may
in  general  be  regarded  as  the  realistic  counter
part  of  Hegel :  the  opposition,  and  at  the
same  time  the  close  relationship  between  the
two  tendencies,  comes  out  with  particular
clearness  in  the  life-work  of  these  two  men.

There  is  no  doubt  that  the  elaboration  and
the  collision  of  the  two  movements  takes
place  within  the  sphere  of  a  common  effort.


THE  OUTER  AND  THE  INNER  WORLD 243

Both  in  the  one  and  in  the  other  there  is  a
struggle  to  conquer  the  world,  a  thirst  for
reality,  an  increased  sense  of  power,  a  trans
lation  of  the  vital  impulse  into  objective
work,  a  denial  of  all  separation  between  the
two  worlds,  a  depreciation  of  the  ethical  and
religious  inner  life  of  the  soul,  which  had  been
developed  in  Christianity,  but  which  now
appears  too  insipid  and  feeble.  If,  now,  these
demands  are  satisfied  in  two  opposite  ways ;
if,  on  the  one  hand,  the  inner  world  does  not,
and  cannot,  tolerate  anything  outward,  nor
the  outer  world  anything  inward,  if  the  crav
ing  for  unity  drives  each  of  the  life-currents
to  insist  on  its  own  exclusiveness,  then  no
agreement  between  them  is  possible,  and
the  movement  of  modern  times  is  bound  to
be  transformed  into  an  incessant  struggle :
this  is  what  has  actually  occurred.

At  first  the  intellectual  culture  had  the
better  of  the  struggle,  not  only  because  of
the  greatness  of  its  cosmic  philosophy  and
the  penetrating  power  of  its  work,  but  also


244  THE LIFE OF  THE SPIRIT

because  it  seemed  more  capable  of  coming  to
an  understanding  with  the  traditional  forms
of  idealism,  and  of  making  use  of  their  forces.
But  while  idealism  thus  found  a  support  in
history,  naturalism  was  favoured  by  the
immediate  impressions  of  the  real  world.
These  impressions  have  constantly  increased
in  strength,  and  have  tended  more  and  more
to  produce  the  conviction  that  the  shaping
of  life  from  within  is  an  audacious  and  indeed
unsuccessful  venture.  But  what  has  been
most  in  favour  of  naturalism  is  the  progressive
spread  of  culture :  an  increasing  number  of
men  take  an  interest  in,  and  in  fact  help
to  decide,  ultimate  questions,  who  are  little
affected  by  history  and  know  hardly  anything
of  the  experiences  which  it  records,  and  who
therefore  decide  the  great  problems  well  or
ill  according  to  the  immediate  impressions
of  the  present.  And  who  can  deny  that
our  own  age  shows  no  powerful  and  strongly
marked  movement  of  an  idealistic  character  ?
In  the  older  forms  of  idealism  we  feel  that


THE  OUTER  AND  THE  INNER  WORLD 245

much  is  obsolete,  and  yet  we  are  unable  to
draw  the  boundary  line  between  what  is
obsolete  and  what  is  of  permanent  validity.
Our  age  is  by  no  means  wanting  in  idealistic
movements,  but  they  are  not  co-ordinated
into  a  whole,  and  therefore  cannot  inspire
mankind  to  enthusiasm  and  sacrifice.  On  the
other  side  stands  naturalism  with  its  rounded-
off  system,  its  appeal  to  the  senses,  its  easily
understood  aims :  is  it  to  be  wondered  at  if
the  main  tendency  of  the  age  regards  its
triumph  as  already  settled  ?  The  question
is  whether  the  judgment  of  the  age  has  come
to  a  decision  which  is  finally  valid,  and  whether
philosophy  can  be  content  to  acquiesce  in  it.

That  philosophy  cannot  be  content  to  do  so
is  sufficiently  proved  by  our  survey  of  history.
For  however  large  a  part  of  our  spiritual
achievements  history  showed  to  be  problem
atic  and  transitory,  yet  it  revealed  powers  and
depths  of  life  which  belong  to  its  essence  and
which  may,  of  course,  be  denied  by  human
opinion  and  inclination,  but  cannot  be  abol-


246  THE LIFE OF THE SPIRIT

ished.  The  essential  nature  which  life  thus
revealed  gives  us  something  to  take  hold  of,
and  contains  demands  which  must  be  satisfied
if  life  is  to  attain  anything  more  than  a  super
ficial  and  momentary  satisfaction.  Here,
however,  lies  the  rock  on  which  naturalism
makes  shipwreck,  here  is  the  basis  for  the
assertion  that  it  will  not  be  able  to  retain  a
permanent  hold  on  humanity.  That  naturalism
is  in  many  respects  incomplete,  that  it  sets
aside  many  problems  as  insoluble,  cannot  in
the  least  degree  be  reckoned  to  its  disadvantage
or  reproach,  for  this  is  a  defect  from  which  all
systematizations  of  life  have  to  suffer.  It  is
a  greater  drawback  that  its  development  in
volves  it  in  many  contradictions,  but  such
contradictions  may  be  quietly  ignored  or
simply  endured.  But  the  fatal  thing  is  that  it
does  not  meet  the  claims  which  life,  in  accord
ance  with  its  nature  as  unfolded  by  the  move
ment  of  history,  is  bound  to  make,  and  in
fact  puts  itself  in  direct  opposition  to  the
main  tendency  of  these  claims.  However


THE  OUTER  AND  THE  INNER  WORLD 247

much  fluctuation,  and  even  at  times  retro
gression,  the  movement  of  history  may  exhibit,
there  can  be  no  doubt  that  it  has  elaborated
inner  life  to  a  continually  increasing  extent  as
opposed  to  the  outer  world,  and  has  made  this
inner  life  continually  more  independent.  A
kind  of  reversal  has  been  continually  in  pro
gress  by  the  transference  to  an  ever  greater
extent  of  the  centre  of  gravity  from  the  outer
to  the  inner.  Naturalism  itself,  as  a  system  of
thought  and  a  totality  of  life,  bears  witness  to
this  superiority  of  the  inner,  for  without  this
superiority  the  diversity  of  things  could  never
have  been  co-ordinated,  worked  up,  and  ex
perienced  as  a  whole.  But  this  inwardness,
which  has  become  independent,  now  claims
full  employment  and  satisfaction  ;  if  this  claim
is  refused,  all  the  rich  diversity  of  inflowing
impressions  cannot  prevent  an  emptiness,  and
an  emptiness  which  in  the  end  is  bound  to  be
felt.  Naturalism,  however,  with  its  building
up  from  the  outside,  offers  no  shred  of  sub
stitute  for  this  inwardness,  but  transforms  the


248  THE LIFE OF  THE SPIRIT

whole  of  life  into  a  sum  of  outward  achieve
ments.  It  is  thus  inevitable  that  it  should  be
opposed  by  the  desire  of  man  for  happiness,  a
desire  which  does  not  proceed  from  petty
selfishness  but  from  the  inner  necessity  of  our
nature,  from  the  craving  after  some  meaning
in  our  life  and  efforts.

If  this  destructive  action  of  naturalism  is
not  fully  realized,  it  is  owing  to  the  fact  that
it  usually  supplements  its  deficiencies  secretly
by  means  of  a  stock  of  thoughts  which  belong
to  the  world  of  idealism.  Thus  it  is  accus
tomed  to  hold  fast  to  an  ethical  estimate  of
action ;  in  practical  life  it  usually  retains
without  hesitation  its  hold  on  such  things  as
duty  and  honour,  justice  and  humanity,  though
in  the  world  built  by  its  own  conceptions  there
is  not  the  smallest  place  for  them,  and  though
from  this  point  of  view  they  must  appear  no
less  incredible  than  the  crassest  legends  and
miracles.  But  the  more  the  consequences  of
naturalism  are  developed,  the  more  intolerable
must  it  find  this  dualism,  the  more  inclined


THE  OUTER  AND  THE  INNER  WORLD 249

will  it  be  to  reject  these  supplements  as  im
possible,  and  the  more  plainly  must  its  limits
be  seen  and  likewise  its  inability  to  guide  life.
Thus  its  own  outer  victory  must  destroy  it
inwardly :  it  is  wrecked  not  on  its  contradiction
of  any  traditions  and  institutions — no  system
of  thought  need  fear  such  contradiction — but
on  its  conflict  with  the  inmost  essence  of
human  life,  which  in  the  end  will  ever  prevail
in  spite  of  all  aberrations  of  individuals  and
epochs.

But  in  a  question  like  this  the  negation  of
one  possibility  does  not  alone  involve,  as  in
logic  or  mathematics,  the  victory  of  the  other,
but  life  may  quite  well  remain  in  suspense
between  the  two  possibilities.  Although  we
may  be  ever  so  certain  that  to  transform  life
into  mere  relations  and  achievements  directed
towards  the  outer  world  is  to  destroy  it  spiritu
ally,  although  the  inability  of  naturalism  to
give  a  meaning  and  value  to  our  existence
may  be  perfectly  clear,  yet  a  life  in  the  sense


250  THE LIFE OF  THE SPIRIT

of  idealism,  an  inner  world  which  should  co-or
dinate  our  efforts  and  direct  them  along  one
main  line,  is  not  yet  won.  We  feel,  rather,
that  our  position  is  insecure  and  unsteady  as
soon  as  we  seek  a  path  from  the  general  idea
to  the  precise  systematization.  The  work  of
the  past,  to  whose  strong  influence  we  are  all
wittingly  or  unwittingly  subject,  presents  us
with  three  different  ways  of  shaping  life  from
within :  the  artistic  method  of  antiquity,  the
ethico-religious  method  of  Christianity,  and
the  dynamic-intellectual  method  of  modern
times.  Each  of  these,  in  its  day,  offered  itself
as  the  only  one,  or  at  any  rate  the  supreme
one.  Now  we  find  them  all  pressing  upon  us
at  once,  while  our  vision  has  been  made  much
too  acute  by  historical  and  critical  modes  of
thought  for  us  to  be  blind  to  their  great  differ
ences  and  glaring  contrasts.  But  if  it  is
impossible  simply  to  combine  them,  each  one
of  them  displays  truths  that  must  not  be  lost,
and  thus  successfully  resists  its  own  absolute
negation.  Indeed,  in  the  midst  of  their  strife,


THE  OUTER  AND  THE  INNER  WORLD 251

they  seem  incapable  of  dispensing  with  each
other's  help :  each  contradicts  the  other  and  at
the  same  time  demands  it.

If  we  abandon  the  artistic  idealism  of  anti
quity,  with  its  power  of  shaping  and  ennobling
life,  it  will  be  easy  for  our  life  in  the  midst  of
all  its  zealous  activity  to  sink  into  a  state  of
formlessness,  uncouthness,  and  barbarism ;  so
we  obviously  must  preserve  here  a  funda
mental  phenomenon  of  life.  But,  at  the  same
time,  not  only  the  deep  obscurity  of  the  world
and  the  severe  conflicts  in  human  life  revealed
by  Christianity,  but  also  the  immeasurable
capacity  for  increase  which  the  modern  period
has  proved  to  belong  to  human  powers,  forbids
us  to  recognize  as  final  a  scheme  of  life  so  cir
cumscribed  and  so  instinct  with  the  harmony
of  existence  as  that  presented  by  the  highest
efforts  of  Greek  creative  activity.  The  depth
of  soul  and  the  inner  movement  of  life,  the
pervading  influence  of  a  world-embracing  love,
and  the  great  seriousness  attaching  to  moral
decisions,  which  are  characteristic  features  of


252  THE LIFE OF  THE SPIRIT

Christianity,  cannot  be  surrendered  or  even
minimized  without  impoverishing  and  lower
ing  the  level  of  life.  But  at  the  same  time  the
increased  psychical  activity  of  the  individual,
as  well  as  the  greater  breadth  and  freedom  of
life  which  we  owe  to  the  modern  period,  not
only  make  the  historical  form  of  Christianity
too  narrow  and  too  anthropomorphic  for  us,
but  also  give  rise  to  the  strongest  doubts  as  to
the  rights  of  a  specifically  religious  system  of
life,  which  directs  man's  thoughts  and  efforts
predominantly  to  an  existence  yet  to  come,
and  makes  him  live  more  for  a  better  future
than  for  the  present.  The  particular  character
of  the  modern  period,  with  its  breadth  and
universality,  its  rousing  work  of  thought,  its
increase  of  human  capacity,  its  liberation  of
men's  minds,  may  be  ever  so  highly  estimated,
but  we  must  not  overlook  the  fact  that  not
only  were  these  characteristics  bound  to
necessitate  a  constant  supplementing  of  the
older  schemes  of  life,  but  also  that  their  own
development,  with  its  call  upon  all  our  powers


THE  OUTER  AND  THE  INNER  WORLD 253

and  its  awakening  of  unlimited  claims,  has
conjured  up  enormous  complications.  In  par
ticular  its  intellectualism,  for  all  its  restless
external  activity,  remains  inwardly  confined
within  rigid  limits.  The  faith  in  reason  and
progress,  with  which  the  modern  period  began,
has  more  and  more  faded  away  under  the  influ
ence  of  these  experiences  :  it  no  longer  controls
men's  deepest  convictions  even  where  it  still
persists  as  an  outward  confession.

Hence  at  first  sight  everything  is  here  in  a
confused  whirl,  conflicting  movements  inter
sect,  and  fill  man  with  opposite  emotions.
Here  he  is  to  think  highly,  and  there  lowly,
of  himself ;  here  with  defiant  self-assurance  he
is  to  subject  the  world  to  himself,  there  he  is
humbly  to  subordinate  himself  to  it ;  here  his
activities  and  aspirations  are  restlessly  directed
towards  externals,  there  he  takes  refuge  in  the
still  depths  of  his  inner  consciousness.  How
can  a  life  that  is  full  of  so  many  contradictions
co-ordinate  its  activities  into  one  main  direc
tion,  how  can  it  make  its  assertion  of  the


254  THE LIFE OF  THE SPIRIT

existence  of  an  independent  inner  world  con
vincing,  and  bring  it  home  to  the  mind  ?  As
the  powers  of  life  wear  one  another  down,  the
inner  world  will  more  and  more  fade  into  a
realm  of  shadows,  and  there  will  remain  only
an  unstable  subjectivity  which  yields  to  every
stimulus.  Such  a  subjectivity  may  be  strong
enough  to  keep  naturalism  at  a  distance ;  but
it  is  far  too  weak  to  unfold  a  world  of  its  own,
to  bring  man  to  a  condition  of  inner  unity
and  mankind  to  a  condition  of  inner  solidarity,
to  combine  all  the  forces  of  life  into  one  great
stream  and  thus  give  them  security.  We  all
know  how  at  the  present  day  such  a  lawless
and  unreal  subjectivity  comes  forward  as  a
true  inwardness  and  usurps  its  rights.

But  how  can  we  escape  from  this  precarious
and,  in  the  end,  intolerable  position  ?  Perhaps
we  shall  be  led,  if  not  to  the  goal,  at  least
some  distance  along  the  road  we  are  seeking,
by  the  perception  that  all  the  older  kinds  of
idealism  rest  on  a  presupposition,  for  which  they
do  not  seek  any  further  foundation,  but  which


THE  OUTER  AND  THE  INNER  WORLD 255

is  not  so  self-evident  as  it  professes  to  be.
Everywhere,  that  is  to  say,  certain  develop
ments  and  activities  of  the  spiritual  life  are  in
question :  a  moulding  activity,  or  the  over
coming  of  an  inner  contradiction,  or  the
increase  of  power  without  limit.  That  spiritual
life  exists  is  everywhere  assumed,  and  no  one
troubles  any  more  about  it.  Must  not  this
presupposition  be  transformed  into  a  problem
by  all  the  confusions  and  doubts  which  we
feel  so  strongly  at  the  present  day  ?  and,  if  we
start  with  this  problem,  should  not  new  light
be  cast  upon  life  ?  Science  has  been  often
advanced  by  the  fact  that  what  earlier  times
regarded  as  settled  and  self-evident  has  later
become  transformed  into  a  difficult  problem.
Perhaps  it  is  the  same  in  life ;  perhaps  if  we
start  further  back  we  may  have  a  right  to  hope
for  a  more  fertile  development  in  the  later
stages.

We  have  dealt  at  length  with  the  problem
of  spiritual  life  in  various  publications,  and
especially  in  the  Grundlinien  einer  neuen


256  THE LIFE OF  THE SPIRIT

Lebensanschauung,  and  we  must  refer  to
these  works  for  all  details.  But  it  is  clear,
without  going  more  closely  into  the  question,
that  in  spiritual  life  we  have  to  do,  not  with
a  mere  addition  to  a  life  already  existent,  but
with  an  essentially  new  life.  Psychical  life,
which  otherwise  is  merely  subservient  to,  or
accompanies,  the  process  of  nature,  gains,
when  human  life  is  at  its  highest— not  when
it  only  reaches  the  average — an  independence
and  content  of  its  own.  It  is  something  so
new  and  so  peculiar  that  it  can  be  understood
only  as  a  new  stage  of  reality,  as  the  emer
gence  of  a  depth  of  the  world  which  was
formerly  hidden.  For  although  this  new  life
may  appear  only  in  the  human  sphere,  its
claim  to  form  a  new  domain  of  existence  as
opposed  to  nature,  and  to  introduce  new
realities  and  goods  and  assert  them  in  opposi
tion  to  those  which  reign  in  the  natural  order,
would  be  absurd  and  hopeless  from  the  start
if  it  were  a  life  which  belonged  to  mere  man
and  were  ultimately  bound  up  with  the  con-


THE  OUTER  AND  THE  INNER  WORLD 257

ditions  of  his  existence.  Its  cosmic  ambition
would  be  an  audacious  folly  were  it  not  that
it  had  a  cosmic  life  behind  it  by  whose  power
it  is  driven  forward.

That  with  the  upgrowth  of  spiritual  life
man  is  raised  into  a  new  world  and  participates
in  the  totality  of  its  life,  is  something  of  which
we  can  gain  no  assurance  by  any  flight  of
speculation :  conviction  can  come  only  from
the  fact  that  a  life  is  developed  which  accom
plishes  the  deliverance  of  man  from  the  merely
human,  and,  in  doing  so,  by  no  means  falls
into  the  void.  But  such  a  development  does
appear  in  point  of  fact ;  indeed,  it  exhibits  itself
as  the  height  of  spiritual  work  both  in  the
macrocosm  and  in  the  microcosm.  What  is
genuine  and  essential  in  religion  is  not  a
petting  and  pampering  of  the  mere  man  with
his  craving  for  happiness ;  it  is  a  removal  of
him  into  infinity,  eternity,  perfection ;  it  is  the
winning  of  a  new,  wider,  and  purer  existence
from  a  new  world.  Real  morality  does  not

consist  in  man's  obeying  commandments  im-

17


258  THE LIFE OF  THE SPIRIT

posed  upon  him  and  playing  the  part  of  the
honest  citizen,  but  it  demands  a  new  world,  a
kingdom  of  justice  and  love,  a  new  starting-
point  for  life.  Real  knowledge  is  not  an
adjustment  and  accumulation  of  impressions,
starting  from  man  and  directed  towards
human  ends,  but  it  is  a  penetration  into  the
real  nature  of  things  and  an  inner  expansion
through  participation  in  a  wider  life.  Nor  is
that  genuine  art  which  ministers  to  the
enjoyment  or  the  interests  of  mere  man,  but
only  that  which  brings  him  into  an  inner
relation  to  his  surroundings  and  at  the  same
time  makes  something  different  out  of  him.

Anyone  who  takes  a  general  survey  of  all
these  points  will  feel  no  doubt  that  in  the
human  sphere  a  new  kind  of  reality  emerges,
a  movement  of  the  universe  is  set  in  motion.
However  far  this  new  element  may  in  appear
ance  retreat  into  the  background,  in  it  alone
lies  all  the  meaning  and  value  of  human  life,
and  so  far  it  has  succeeded  in  making  its
influence  sufficiently  felt  to  render  impossible


THE  OUTER  AND  THE  INNER  WORLD 259

a  quiet  acquiescence  in  the  existing  condition
of  things.  From  the  standpoint  of  the  new
life  this  condition  must  appear  as  a  confused
medley  of  nature  and  spirit;  in  fact,  it  will
seem  to  be  a  difficult  and  intolerable  contra
diction  in  that  the  spiritual,  with  all  the
superiority  of  its  nature,  is  accustomed  in  our
sphere  to  play  the  part  of  a  mere  accessory  to
nature,  and,  so  far  as  it  is  developed  at  all,  is
drawn  into  the  service  of  the  merely  human.
In  reality,  the  average  culture  treats  the
spiritual  as  a  secondary  matter  and  a  mere
means  towards  human  well-being,  but  in  words
it  proclaims  that  the  spiritual  is  the  main
thing  and  a  complete  end  in  itself.  Hence
this  culture  acquires  a  character  of  incomplete
ness  and  falsity,  and  it  is  impossible  for  it
to  carry  the  spiritual  life  beyond  individual
phenomena  to  a  stable  and  coherent  system,
and  from  vague  outlines  to  a  strongly  marked
form.  Life  is  here  wanting  in  real  independ
ence,  and  thus  does  not  get  beyond  a  half-life
or  phantom  life.


260  THE LIFE OF  THE SPIRIT

But  if  a  desire  for  real  and  genuine  life  now
awakens — and  the  spirituality  indwelling  in
man  will  always  impel  him  in  spite  of  all
contradiction  to  seek  such  a  life — it  becomes
clear  that  a  movement  in  this  direction  cannot
come  from  the  chaos  we  have  described,  but
demands  an  elevation  above  this,  the  winning
of  an  independent  standpoint,  the  development
of  a  spirituality  superior  to  this  average  routine.
Only  after  the  movement  is  firmly  established
can  the  spirituality  which  is  latent  in  this
average  be  thrown  into  relief,  purified,  and
turned  to  account  for  the  further  development
of  the  whole.

Endeavours  of  this  kind  may  give  rise  to  an
idealism  which  is  universal  in  its  nature,  because
it  makes  it  its  task  to  appropriate  not  this  or
that  point  in  the  spiritual,  but  the  spiritual
itself.  But  at  the  same  time  this  idealism,  in
its  insistence  on  the  reality  of  the  spiritual
life  and  on  liberation  from  the  merely  human,
prescribes  a  specific  aim,  which  is  able  to
co-ordinate  all  the  diversity  of  these  endeavours


THE  OUTER  AND  THE  INNER  WORLD 261

and  set  them  in  due  proportions.  From  this
point  of  view  the  whole  condition  of  culture
will  have  to  be  submitted  to  an  examination
to  ascertain  how  much  of  it  is  essentially
spiritual  in  its  nature  and  what  belongs  to
the  bustle  of  merely  human  activities.  The
individual  systems  of  life  of  an  idealistic  nature
must  be  taken  up  into  this  movement,  into
this  struggle  for  independence  of  life  and  for
the  opening-up  of  a  basal  depth  of  reality.
This  universal  idealism  has  to  prove  its  right
above  all  by  showing  that  it  is  able  to  appreci
ate  all  these  developments  of  life,  to  separate
their  permanent  content,  with  its  primary
features,  from  their  historical  form,  to  confirm
them  in  their  own  truth  and  provide  against
their  lapse  into  the  pettily  human.

This  system  of  life,  which  rests  on  an
independent  and  essential  inwardness,  has
above  all  an  ethical  character.  And  this  is
principally  because,  with  this  conviction,  life
does  not  run  its  course  in  quiet  development,
but  contains  in  itself  the  necessity  of  a  con-


262  THE LIFE OF  THE SPIRIT

version  from  appearance  to  reality,  and  there
fore  of  a  complete  reversal ;  and  this  reversal,
with  its  demand  for  a  rise  to  independence,
cannot  possibly  be  a  mere  process  occurring  in
man  but  must  be  his  own  act  and  deliberate
choice.  But  at  the  same  time  this  system
leaves  no  doubt  that  the  act  we  have  described
does  not  depend  on  the  will  and  pleasure  of  the
mere  man,  but  that  the  action  of  each  unit
reaches  back  into  the  totality  of  the  world  and
thereby  involves  a  great  responsibility.  It  is
only  a  morality  on  such  a  basis  which  will  as
a  general  rule  introduce  life  to  its  own  height
and  truth ;  it  will  not  make  it  petty  and  con
strained,  but  greater,  freer,  and  more  stable,
for  it  is  incomparably  more  than  a  mere
regulation  of  social  life,  accompanied  as  this
latter  is  by  reciprocal  pressure  and  the  danger
of  a  self-complacent  Pharisaism.

Religion  also  belongs  essentially  to  the  life
which  it  is  here  sought  to  attain.  If  the
independent  spiritual  life  with  its  essential
inwardness  stands  in  sharp  contrast  to  the


THE  OUTER  AND  THE  INNER  WORLD 263

average  condition  of  humanity,  and  cannot
possibly  spring  from  this  condition,  then  it
must  be  understood  and  recognized  as  the
revelation  of  a  new  world.  Therefore,  all
work  for  the  inner  elevation  of  man,  all
genuine  spiritual  culture,  contains,  although
in  a  latent  form,  and  even  in  direct  opposition
to  the  consciousness  of  those  concerned,  an
acknowledgment  of  such  a  superior  world
and  of  its  living  presence  in  the  human  sphere.
But  the  religious  character  of  life  attains  a
clearly  elaborated  form  whenever  the  constraint
and  the  disfigurement,  to  which  spiritual  life
is  subject  in  the  human  sphere,  are  clearly
realized,  but  at  the  same  time  the  maintenance
and  further  deepening  of  spiritual  life  is  regarded
as  a  fresh  manifestation  of  this  superior  world.
A  religion  which  is  thus  grounded  in  the
whole  of  the  spiritual  life  cannot  strengthen
the  merely  human  element  in  man,  with  its
vulgar  greed  for  happiness  ;  it  cannot  drive
his  life  into  that  which  is  petty  and  narrow,
but,  rather,  with  the  revelation  of  infinite  life


264  THE LIFE OF  THE SPIRIT

it  will  free  him  from  all  paltry  punctiliousness,
and  by  giving  him  a  share  in  the  cosmic  battle
will  lend  him  dignity  and  superiority  to  the
world.  On  this  view,  too,  the  divine  need  not
come  to  man  from  without,  since  it  manifests
itself  sufficiently  in  the  very  process  of  life  by
the  opening  up  of  a  new  depth.  At  the  same
time  thought  and  feeling  will  be  directed  not
so  much  towards  the  Beyond  and  the  future
as  towards  a  present  which  transcends  time.
It  is  then  possible  to  bring  a  counteracting
influence  to  bear  with  good  results  upon  the
opposition  between,  on  the  one  hand,  an  in
wardness  that  is  withdrawn  from  the  world
and  is  indifferent  or  even  hostile  to  sensible
existence,  and,  on  the  other,  the  defeat  of  a
too  passively  conceived  spiritual  by  a  sensible
that  is  surreptitiously  introduced.

Further,  without  the  creative  activity  of  art
there  can  be  no  successful  construction  of  an
independent  spiritual  world  in  the  human
sphere,  for  this  construction  involves  the
severance  of  the  subject  from  the  confused


THE  OUTER  AND  THE  INNER  WORLD 265

initial  situation  and  a  creative  effort  in  contra
distinction  to  it.  Would  not  a  movement  of
this  kind  fall  into  the  void  unless  imagination
went  on  in  advance,  giving  form  to  the  invis
ible  and  keeping  it  constantly  present  with
insistent,  rousing,  and  stimulating  force  ?  The
importance  of  this  is  most  clearly  shown  by
the  historical  religions  with  their  impressive
pictures  of  new  worlds,  their  pictures  of  the
Kingdom  of  God  and  the  last  judgment,  of
the  future  heaven  and  earth,  or  else  of  the
endless  succession  of  worlds — pictures  which
sometimes  inspired  men  with  deep  longing
and  sometimes  filled  them  with  horror  and
dread.  But  in  all  the  departments  of  life  no
essential  progress  is  possible  unless  imagination
thus  opens  up  the  way ;  and  the  life  of  the
individual  needs  it  as  well,  for  it  is  only  when
an  ideal  picture  of  itself  is  constructed  and
kept  in  mind  that  this  life  can  enter  upon  an
inner  movement  of  ascent,  and  thereby  rise
superior  to  the  dull  routine  of  every  day.
An  activity  of  an  artistic  nature  is  also  in-


266  THE  LIFE OF  THE SPIRIT

dispensable  for  the  organization  of  what  this
inner  ascent  has  enabled  us  to  acquire.  Such
an  activity  alone  can  extend  what  has  been
seen  on  the  heights  to  the  whole  breadth  of
life,  and  make  what  was  at  the  beginning
distant  and  strange  in  the  end  near  and
familiar.  An  artistic  activity  of  this  kind,
which  is  grounded  in  the  connections  of
spiritual  reality,  cannot  be  isolated  in  spite
of  all  its  independence  of  other  departments
of  life,  and  cannot  lead  man  on  the  road  to
wards  a  feeble  and  unnerving  sestheticism.

Science  and  the  civilization  based  on  it
encompass  us  so  obviously  with  their  beneficial
influences  that  no  doubts  of  any  kind  can  be
admitted  as  to  their  significance.  But  that
science  is  indispensable  can  also  be  fully
recognized  in  connection  with  the  very  ques
tion  of  gaining  a  new  coherent  system  in  life,
a  self-centred  reality,  in  opposition  both  to
the  soullessness  of  a  mechanical  nature  and  to
the  dark  confusion  of  human  existence.  For
what  force  can  be  found  more  suitable  than


THE  OUTER  AND  THE  INNER  WORLD 267

this,  with  its  objective  necessities,  to  deliver
man  from  the  pettily  human  and  to  lead  the
struggle  against  it ;  what  force  more  suitable
to  raise  life  from  the  contingency  of  the
temporary  situation  to  that  which  is  universal
and  above  time ;  or  what  force  more  suitable
than  this,  with  its  constructive  use  of  leading
thoughts,  to  develop  inner  connections  of  a
systematic  character  ?  The  liberating,  ele
vating,  transforming  influence  of  science,  its
capacity  for  building  up  a  world  of  thought-
elements  in  opposition  to  that  of  sense  and
for  enforcing  objective  necessities  in  opposition
to  the  caprice  of  individuals,  has  been  exhibited
by  the  modern  period  with  particular  clearness
and  effectiveness.  We  cannot  dispense  with
these  services  where  it  is  a  question  of  rising
to  self-activity  and  independence.  But  at  the
same  time  we  shall  be  safe  from  over-estimating
the  value  of  science  if  we  regard  it  as  a
member  of  a  wider  system  within  life,  if  we
are  convinced  in  particular  that  it  has  to  gain
its  strongest  driving  force  as  also  its  special


268  THE LIFE OF  THE SPIRIT

differentiations  from  the  whole  of  life,  and
that,  on  the  other  hand,  if  it  is  severed  from
life,  its  fundamental  nature  renders  it  very
liable  to  be  transformed  into  a  tissue  of
abstract  formulae.  The  dangers  of  an  intel-
lectualistic  ordering  of  life  are  plainly  visible
to  us  at  the  present  day,  and  there  is  no  lack
of  vigorous  opposition.  But  this  opposition
will  hardly  attain  to  complete  victory  without
a  return  to  the  roots  of  science,  and  the
demonstration  of  its  close  connection  with  the
whole  of  life.  By  this  close  connection  it
may  appear  to  lose,  but  in  reality  it  gains.

The  different  sides  of  the  life  which  it  is
sought  to  attain,  and  the  different  lines  of
approach  to  it,  are  very  easily  brought  into
isolation,  and  indeed  into  conflict  with  each
other.  Owing  to  the  limitations  of  human
nature,  individuals  and  periods,  according  to
their  special  impressions  and  experiences,  may
give  the  first  place  to  one  or  other  of  these
aspects,  and  apply  all  their  powers  and
faculties  to  further  it :  thus  the  ways  divide


THE  OUTER  AND  THE  INNER  WORLD 269

and  the  violent  strife  which  rages  throughout
history  becomes  quite  comprehensible.  This
strife  will  hardly  come  to  an  end ;  the  task
of  men  can  only  be  in  some  way  or  other
to  rise  superior  to  it  and  to  counteract  the
threatened  disintegration  of  life.  But  this  is
impossible  until  the  different  movements  allow
themselves  to  be  encompassed  by  a  totality  of
life  and  take  the  form  of  endeavours  after  one
and  the  same  goal.  For  this  end,  however,
it  is  essential  that  our  existing  spiritual  assets
should  go  through  a  process  of  sorting  and
sifting,  of  clarifying  and  heightening :  at
every  point  it  is  necessary  to  look  from  the
standpoint  of  the  whole  and  to  separate  the
spiritual  content  from  its  human  trimmings.
But  however  much  toil  and  labour,  strife  and
uncertainty,  this  involves,  the  general  result
can  only  serve  to  convince  us  of  the  reality
of  an  inner  life  and  an  inner  world,  of  the
fact  that  man  does  grow  beyond  the  stage  of
merely  sensuous  life.  Just  as  the  individual
becomes  certain  of  an  inner  task  and  an


270  THE LIFE OF  THE SPIRIT

independent  psychical  life  principally  through
contradictions  in  his  own  nature,  which  he
cannot  well  tolerate,  so  too  for  humanity  the
strength  and  intensity  of  the  struggles  to  shape
the  content  of  life  are  the  surest  witness  that
it  is  here  in  reality  a  question  of  seeking  and
winning  something,  that  some  important  pro
cess  is  going  on  in  us,  that  it  is  not  a  case  of
mere  vain  pretensions  and  empty  fancies.
The  doubts  and  struggles  themselves  make  us
feel  with  compelling  power  that  we  cannot
give  up  an  inner  world,  and  that  it  is  with
the  shaping  of  this  world  that  our  spiritual
contest  is  principally  concerned.

This  transference  of  the  inner  realities  to
their  true  place  behind  the  superficialities  of
the  merely  human  is,  further,  the  surest  and
indeed  the  only  means  of  giving  full  recogni
tion  to  the  element  of  truth  in  naturalism
without  accepting  its  guidance.  Many  men,
no  doubt,  are  still  extremely  reluctant  to
recognize  fully  the  historical  development  of
man  from  animal  beginnings,  the  slow  emer-


THE  OUTER  AND  THE  INNER  WORLD 271

gence  of  the  spiritual  in  him,  the  strict  sub
jection  of  all  life  to  material  conditions.  Such
a  close  connection  of  the  spiritual  with  the
natural  is  repugnant  to  them,  because  they
believe  that  the  spontaneity  and  independence
of  the  spiritual  are  thereby  endangered.  But
this  danger  can  threaten  only  so  long  as  the
fate  of  the  whole  spiritual  life  is  held  to  be
bound  up  with  human  experience.  But  if
it  is  once  clearly  realized  that,  however  the
spiritual  may  have  arisen  in  man,  in  its  world-
character  it  cannot  possibly  have  been  in  the
last  resort  produced  by  him,  but  that,  rather,
we  must  recognize  in  the  spiritual  the  appear
ance  of  a  new  stage  of  the  world,  then  all  its
insignificance  and  subjection  in  the  human
sphere  can  in  no  way  imperil  its  independence.
On  the  contrary,  this  subjection  to  conditions,
and  indeed  this  weakness  of  the  spiritual  in
the  human  sphere,  can  but  strengthen  the
conviction  that  its  roots  strike  deeper  into
the  ground  of  reality.

At  the  same  time  our  action  will  not  be


272  THE LIFE OF  THE SPIRIT

able  to  treat  the  sensible  and  natural  side  of
our  existence  as  a  secondary  matter.  Where
nature  ranks  as  a  stage  of  reality,  which
remains  even  when  the  spiritual  is  developed,
the  power  which  this  stage  contains  must  be
enlisted  in  the  service  of  the  life-process,  in
order  that  it  may  not  become  too  weak.  Not
by  withdrawing  from  nature,  but  only  by
overcoming,  appropriating,  and  penetrating  it
can  the  spiritual  life  attain  its  full  height  and
strength ;  only  thus  can  life  be  brought  from
mere  outline  to  the  finished  product.  That
which  has  done  idealism,  with  its  defence
of  an  independent  inner  world,  more  harm
than  any  attack  from  outside  is  the  fact  that
it  has  often  been  intent  upon  offering  a
picture  of  reality  which  should  be  as  smooth
and  pleasant  as  possible,  and  upon  represent
ing  reason  as  in  immediate  control  of  reality.
In  doing  so  it  became  untrue,  and  lost  its
rousing  and  deepening  force.  But  if,  on  the
contrary,  we  are  certain  of  an  independent
spiritual  life,  we  can  fully  recognize  the  large


THE  OUTER  AND  THE  INNER  WORLD 273

amount  of  obstinate  matter-of-fact  and  blind
irrationality  in  our  world  without  necessarily
becoming  doubtful  in  any  way  as  to  our  goals,
or  relaxing  our  efforts  to  reach  them.  For
then  our  world  signifies  only  a  particular
kind  of  being,  with  which  the  ultimate  decision
does  not  lie.

Anyone  who  takes  all  this  into  consideration
will  feel  no  doubt  that  our  age  has  been  set
a  great  task  with  reference  to  this  cardinal
interest  of  human  life.  Some  inwardness  is
indispensable ;  life  is  in  danger  of  losing  its
equilibrium  unless  there  is  a  central  reality
and  a  lofty  goal  to  aid  us  in  our  resistance  to
the  overwhelming  pressure  of  the  external
world.  Tradition  with  all  its  fulness  does
not  supply  this  want ;  hence  it  is  important
to  gain  a  new  standpoint,  to  look  the  problems
straight  in  the  face,  and  to  venture  on  ways
of  our  own.  If  the  present  crisis  has  been
occasioned  less  by  the  increase  in  importance
of  the  outer  world  than  by  the  uncertainty

in  which  the  inner  world  has  become  involved,

18


274  THE LIFE OF  THE SPIRIT

we  are  impelled  to  go  deeper  into  ourselves
and  to  discover  new  inner  co-ordinations.
Only  in  this  way  can  we  become  equal  to
dealing  with  the  complications,  and  again
come  to  realize  the  meaning  and  value  of
our  life.  But  how  can  we  even  strive  after
such  goals  without  the  help  of  philosophy  ?
It  is  all  the  more  called  upon  to  exert  itself
here,  because  the  solution  of  this  problem  is
decisive  as  to  its  own  rights  and  its  own
development.  For  to  surrender  the  inde
pendence  of  an  inner  world  is  to  surrender
philosophy  as  well,  while  the  more  specific
nature  and  relations  of  the  inner  world  dictate
to  philosophy  also  the  path  which  it  is  to
pursue.


CHAPTER  IV

THE  PROBLEM  OF  TRUTH

UNDER  human  conditions  truth  and  happi
ness  often  seem  to  be  irreconcilably  at
variance.  In  his  striving  after  truth  man
finds  his  immediate  existence  too  narrow  and
too  petty :  he  desires  to  escape  from  this
narrowness,  and,  passing  from  the  subjective
to  the  objective,  to  participate  in  the  life  of
things  and  the  whole  of  infinity.  It  seems
that  here  the  greatest  of  all  deliverances  is
beckoning  to  him,  the  deliverance  from  all
the  troubled  passions  of  self-will  and  the
contingency  attaching  to  the  particular.  A
purer,  nobler,  infinite  life  here  emerges,  a  life
which  even  so  moderate  a  thinker  as  Aristotle
could  declare  to  be  more  divine  than  human.

275


276  THE LIFE OF  THE SPIRIT

When  he  is  inspired  by  such  high  endeavours
man  seems  obliged  to  put  his  own  subjective
condition  entirely  in  the  background,  and
indeed  to  sacrifice  it  willingly  where  the
service  of  truth  demands  such  a  sacrifice.  It
is  quite  otherwise  with  regard  to  the  desire
for  happiness.  Here  everything  which  con
cerns  and  affects  man,  which  moves  him  and
drives  him  to  action,  is  brought  into  relation
with  a  central  point  in  which  his  own  life  is
co-ordinated  into  a  whole.  All  his  experience
is  measured  and  valued  in  reference  to  this  ;
from  this  source  love  and  hate,  fire  and
passion,  stream  out  to  all  infinity.  That
which  can  accomplish  nothing  in  these  direc
tions  is  counted  as  useless  ballast  and  may
well  be  left  on  one  side  :  whatever,  on  the
contrary,  is  left,  must  be  strengthened  from
this  source.  Hence  in  the  case  of  happiness
the  subject  takes  the  first  place,  in  the  case  of
truth  the  object ;  there  we  have  a  vigorous
concentration,  here  an  unlimited  expansion,
there  an  expression,  here  a  repression  of  vital


THE PROBLEM OF  TRUTH  277

emotion.  From  the  point  of  view  of  the
desire  for  happiness  the  struggle  for  truth
may  easily  appear  cold  and  lifeless,  while  from
the  point  of  view  of  the  latter  the  former  may
appear  narrow  and  selfish.

It  must  not  be  thought  that  this  opposition
is  entirely  external  to  philosophy,  which,  how
ever  appealed  to,  decides  the  question  in
favour  of  truth  and  against  happiness,  but  it
extends  into  philosophy  and  produces  two
fundamentally  different  types  of  thought.
There  are  two  eminent  examples  which  bring
this  contrast  before  us  in  a  palpable  form,
those  of  Augustine  and  Spinoza.  A  fervent
desire  for  happiness  impels  and  animates  both
the  striving  and  the  thought  of  Augustine :
it  is  only  this  desire,  only  an  overpowering  "  I
will "  that  leads  him  through  all  doubts  and
makes  him  equal  to  dealing  with  all  obstacles.
That  which  he  apprehends  he  insists  on
mastering  and  transmuting  into  his  own  life,
and  even  in  what  is  apparently  most  distant
he  sees  only  the  relation  to  the  condition  of


278  THE  LIFE OF  THE SPIRIT

the  subject,  and  therefore  enfolds  it  with  his
emotions.  Hence  for  him  everything  falls
under  an  alternative,  good  or  evil,  day  or
night,  salvation  or  perdition  :  here  all  attempt
at  mediation  becomes  an  intolerable  weakness.
Spinoza,  on  the  contrary,  attacks  the  importa
tion  of  human  feelings  and  passions  into  the
universe  as  a  gross  misrepresentation,  indeed
a  complete  falsification.  He  regards  it  as
important  to  free  the  ordinary  representation
of  the  world  from  them,  and  to  fill  our  thought
and  life  entirely  with  the  content  of  things.
Contemplation  unmixed  with  volition  and
desire  here  becomes  the  acme  of  life  :  it  teaches
us  to  look  at  things  "  under  the  form  of
eternity,"  to  fit  every  unit  into  all-embracing
connections,  not  to  weep  or  laugh  at  events,
but  to  understand  them.  All  true  greatness
here  consists  not  in  wishing  to  be  anything
particular  for  oneself,  but  in  seeking  to  be
entirely  absorbed  in  the  infinite  :  "he  who
truly  loves  God  cannot  desire  that  God  should
love  him  in  return."


THE PROBLEM OF  TRUTH  279

Who  is  right,  and  whose  ideal  must  rank  as
the  higher  ?  For  both  cannot  well  be  co
ordinated  without  further  trouble,  considering
that  the  directions  in  which  they  point  are  so
sharply  divergent ;  hence  we  cannot  avoid
deciding  between  them.  But  at  the  same
time  it  seems  impossible  to  renounce  either  of
them  entirely ;  rather,  each  apparently  re
quires  to  be  supplemented  to  a  certain  extent
by  the  other  side,  the  sharp  divergence  must
admit  somehow  or  other  of  being  transformed
into  a  convergence.  For  the  truth  from
which  we  promise  ourselves  so  much,  and
which  requires  so  much  work  and  zeal,  must
surely  be  somehow  linked  with  our  own
nature,  and  must  in  some  way  or  other  be
auxiliary  to  our  self-preservation.  Otherwise,
how  could  it  move  and  affect  us  so  strongly  ?
On  the  other  hand  a  happiness  which  did  not
go  beyond  the  condition  of  the  mere  subject,
which  did  not  in  any  way  widen  our  sphere  of
life  and  make  more  out  of  us,  could  hardly
satisfy  a  reasonable  being ;  it  would  not  be


280  THE LIFE OF THE SPIRIT

worth  the  trouble  which  it  cost.  Thus  it
appears  that  in  the  struggle  for  truth  a  desire
for  happiness,  though  diminished  in  intensity,
is  at  work,  but  that  this  desire  itself  cannot
dispense  with  that  inner  purification  which  the
struggle  for  truth  promises.  Hence  we  are
impelled  to  inquire  how  far  an  approach  is
possible,  and  whether  the  two  aims  may  not
be  taken  as  opposite  poles  of  a  single  life.
But  for  this  purpose  every  movement  will
have  to  be  examined  for  itself.

The  conception  of  truth  is  among  those
which  at  first  sight  seem  simple  and  indeed
almost  self-evident,  but  which  become  com
plicated  in  proportion  as  it  is  sought  to  gain
a  more  exact  idea  of  them.  When  we  speak
of  truth  in  everyday  life  it  is  merely  a  ques
tion  of  comparing  an  image,  an  opinion,  an
assertion  of  ours  with  the  facts  of  the  case  to
which  they  relate.  So  far  as  these  facts  lie
within  the  realm  of  experience  such  a  com
parison  gives  hardly  any  trouble ;  truth  can


THE PROBLEM OF  TRUTH  281

here  be  regarded  without  hesitation  as  the
agreement  of  our  ideas  with  objects  (adcequatio
intellectus  et  rei).  But  man  is  driven  beyond
this  conception  of  truth  by  his  spiritual  nature,
which  implants  in  him  a  capacity  to  stand
outside  the  connected  series  of  phenomena,
to  reflect  on  the  world  and  his  relation  to  it.
He  develops  a  thought-world  of  his  own,
distinguishes  it  from  the  world  of  things,  and
cannot  help  asking  how  the  one  whole  is
related  to  the  other,  and  how  far,  in  what
his  thought  makes  out  of  things,  their  own
being  is  present.  In  this  connection  it  seems
as  if  man  were  set  a  great  task,  as  if  it  were
a  question  of  piercing  through  an  initial  mist
and  beholding  things  in  their  unclouded
reality.  At  the  same  time  life  seems  to  rise
superior  to  the  varying  opinions  of  individuals
and  to  attain  inner  stability.  But,  however
great  the  rewards  which  await  the  perform
ance  of  this  task,  is  it  not  in  itself  an
impossible  one  to  fulfil,  does  it  not  contain
a  contradiction  ?  We  cannot  well  keep  things


282  THE LIFE OF  THE SPIRIT

at  a  distance  from  us  and  at  the  same  time
draw  them  back  to  us,  and  the  conception  of
truth  as  a  copy  of  reality,  as  an  agreement  of
our  ideas  with  a  world  of  things  that  exists
alongside  them,  needs  only  to  be  more  exactly
thought  over  to  be  proved  to  be  untenable.
For,  assuming  that  man  stands  alongside
things,  and  things  make  themselves  known
to  him,  would  they  not  be  compelled  to
adapt  themselves  to  his  nature  and  thereby
become  something  different  from  what  they
are  in  themselves  ?  The  gap,  and  at  the  same
time  the  impossibility  of  immediately  bridging
it  over,  must  be  all  the  more  strongly  felt  the
more  independent  the  inner  life  is  made  by
the  progress  of  culture.  But  even  if  things
could  make  themselves  known  to  man  in  their
true  nature,  how  would  it  be  possible  to  gain
any  certainty  of  it,  since  we  cannot  transfer
ourselves  to  a  third  standpoint  and  from  there
compare  our  representation  of  things  with  the
things  themselves  ?  But  if,  in  spite  of  the
obvious  impossibility  of  this  solution,  a  desire


THE PROBLEM OF  TRUTH  283

for  truth  persists,  if  it  impels  man  with  over
powering  force  to  seek  a  thought  and  life
which  proceed  from  the  All,  then  an  essential
change  in  our  relation  to  reality  will  become
necessary ;  such  a  change  alone  can  give  us
any  hope  that  the  apparently  impossible  may
yet  in  some  way  or  other  become  possible.
Hence  the  work  of  philosophy  has  been  from
the  beginning  concerned  with  the  discovery
and  development  of  a  relation  which  should
overcome  the  contradiction :  each  of  the  main
epochs  has  dealt  with  this  question  in  its  own
characteristic  way,  there  has  been  no  great
thinker  who  has  not  attempted  ways  of  his
own  in  treating  of  the  problem  ;  in  fact,  it  has
been  at  this  point  more  than  anywhere  else
that  both  the  possibility  of  a  philosophy  and
its  fundamental  character  have  been  decided.
But  the  efforts  which  are  made  at  the  present
day  are  strongly  influenced  by  this  past  work  ;
hence  we  shall  be  compelled  to  exhibit  it  in
its  main  features  in  order  to  take  the  bearings
of  our  own  position.


284  THE LIFE OF  THE SPIRIT

In  connection  with  this  problem  Greek
antiquity  followed  its  usual  course  and  did
not  break  away  abruptly  from  the  naive  view,
but  developed  it  and  raised  it  to  the  spiritual
level.  That  a  universe  is  present  and  encom
passes  man  with  its  sure  operations  is  uni
versally  presupposed,  and,  however  much
opinion  may  change  in  other  respects,  this
presupposition  is  not  called  in  question.  Hence
spiritual  work  finds  its  main  task  in  developing
to  full  clearness  the  relation  of  man  to  the
world :  here  the  goal  of  the  struggle  for  truth
is  the  philosophical  knowledge,  the  spiritual
appropriation  of  the  world.  The  chief  epochs
have  endeavoured  to  effect  this  purpose  in
different  ways,  and  the  course  of  these
attempts  displays  a  typical  character,  so  that
it  tends  to  repeat  itself  in  later  times.  First
of  all,  the  predominant  thought  is  that  of  a
community  of  nature  between  the  universe  on
the  one  hand  and  man  and  his  thinking  on  the
other  ;  then  the  two  fall  apart  and  the  subject
must  concern  himself  with  finding  definite


THE PROBLEM OF  TRUTH  285

marks  of  truth  in  himself;  finally,  thought  is
assigned  the  capacity  of  shaping  itself  into  the
world  and  comprehending  the  opposition  of
subject  and  object.

In  the  classical  period  of  Plato  and  Aristotle
the  influence  is  still  felt  of  the  personification
of  the  environment  which  belongs  to  the  naive
way  of  thinking  and  which  pictures  man's
relation  to  the  world  as  an  intercourse  with
his  like.  For  in  spite  of  the  decay  of  that
anthropomorphism  which  treats  things  as  big
or  little  men,  they  retain  an  inner  life  and
capacity  for  effort,  and  the  same  forces  which
move  our  life  seem  also  to  govern  the  universe.
They  do  not  seem  to  be  imported  by  man  into
the  universe,  but  rather  to  be  communicated
to  him  from  the  universe  which  encompasses
him.  It  is  only  because  of  this  inner  affinity,
or  rather  relatedness,  that  man  can  hope  to
grasp  the  universe  in  his  thought.  The  pro
cess  of  knowledge  is  the  bringing  into  contact
of  two  correlatives  which  are  from  the  begin
ning  destined  for  each  other,  but  must  come


286  THE LIFE OF  THE SPIRIT

to  terms  before  they  can  attain  complete
union.  This  union  is  attained  in  intuition,
which  is  here  closely  related  to  love.  It  is  to
this  stage  above  all  that  the  words  of  the  poet
apply :-

"  Were  not  the  eye  itself  a  sun,
No  sun  for  it  could  ever  shine  :
By  nothing  godlike  could  the  heart  be  won,
Were  not  the  heart  itself  divine."  1

No  doubt  on  this  view  truth  is  still  an  agree
ment  of  the  subject  with  the  object,  of  thought
with  being ;  but  since  philosophical  knowledge
is  nothing  but  the  development  of  the  com
munity  of  nature  between  the  spirit  and  the
universe,  no  complication  arises  from  this
conception.  It  is  not  inconsistent  with  the
most  joyous  confidence  of  ability  to  grasp  the
complete  truth  of  things,  and  to  participate  in
the  true  life  of  the  universe.  Men  may  hope
to  appropriate  the  whole  depth  of  things  since
no  cleft  has  yet  opened  between  the  activity
and  the  being  of  things,  but,  rather,  their

1  Goethe,  Zahme  Xenien  :  cf.  Plotinus,  Enneads,  i.  6.


THE PROBLEM OF  TRUTH  287

whole  being  is  present  in  their  activity.  On
this  conception  thought  is  clearly  enough
separated  from  all  merely  sensuous  perception,
but  it  takes  up  into  itself  a  certain  objectivity,
a  plastic  form,  and  thus  acquires  a  certain
affinity  to  such  perception.  Scientific  work  is
itself  a  kind  of  artistic  moulding,  an  appropria
tion  and  inner  revivifying  of  things,  a  co
ordination  in  thought  of  the  manifold  into  a
unity,  a  transformation  of  the  chaos  of  sensuous
impressions  into  a  well-ordered  cosmos :  it  is
at  the  same  time  a  joyous  raising  of  the  whole
of  human  nature  to  a  higher  level.

Just  as  in  the  case  of  Plato  all  this  stands
in  immediate  connection  with  the  whole  of
the  personality,  so  here  the  artistic  and  plastic
character  of  thought  is  still  more  strongly
marked.  When  scientific  investigation  be
comes  independent  in  the  hands  of  Aristotle
this  artistic  character  tends  to  fade  out  of
sight,  but  it  by  no  means  entirely  disappears.
There  remains  a  close  connection  of  human
life  with  the  universe,  and  unwearying


288  THE LIFE OF  THE SPIRIT

efforts  are  directed  towards  transforming  the
world  into  a  web  of  inner  unities,  ends,  and
forces,  and  thereby  bringing  it  closer  to  the
spirit  of  man  and  making  it  transparent  to
his  intellect.  Innumerable  threads  are  spun
between  man  and  his  environment,  in  fact  a
vigorous  articulation,  a  systematic  organiza
tion  of  the  whole  of  reality  is  attained.  But  as
the  system  settled  down  into  greater  clearness
there  is  no  longer  any  possibility  of  concealing
that  anthropomorphism  which  the  whole,  with
all  its  greatness  of  achievement,  involved.  It
was  bound  to  seem  especially  dangerous  just
because  it  was  hidden,  and  men  could  not
permanently  fail  to  notice  that  a  great  deal
of  what  was  here  offered  as  explanation  was
nothing  more  than  an  image  and  similitude.
At  the  same  time  the  whole  was  bound  to
be  rejected  because  felt  as  an  intolerable
mingling  of  fact  and  image,  as  well  as
a  transference  to  objects  of  what  is  merely
subjective.  This  in  particular  was  the  case
at  the  beginning  of  the  modern  period  with


THE PROBLEM OF  TRUTH  289

Scholasticism,  and  all  the  more  because  the
latter  held  fast  to  the  forms  of  Aristotle  with
out  being  able  to  retain  his  spirit  and  the
inner  connections  of  his  thought.  But  already
in  antiquity  the  increasing  severance  of  man
from  the  world  drove  the  struggle  for  truth
beyond  the  classical  solution  and  compelled
it  to  seek  new  paths.

One  of  these  new  paths  was  attempted  by
the  Stoa.  Even  the  Stoics  do  not  doubt  that
the  world  exists  and  that  man  belongs  to  it,
but  for  them  the  close  connection  between
the  two  has  been  loosened.  They  make  the
subject  their  starting-point  and  thence  seek
to  gain  enlightenment  as  to  what  may  be
regarded  as  real  and  true.  Much  zeal  is  ex
pended  in  ascertaining  definite  marks  which
teach  men  to  distinguish  genuine  knowledge
of  things  from  mere  imagination.  Investiga
tion  does  not  here  so  much  enter  into  the
life  and  activity  of  things  as  sketch  certain
fundamental  features  of  the  whole  and  make

men  believe  in  them. At  the  same  time  the

19


290  THE LIFE OF  THE SPIRIT

close  alliance  between  philosophy  and  the  in
dividual  sciences,  which  distinguishes  the  work
of  Aristotle,  comes  to  an  end,  and  the  different
sciences  go  their  own  ways.  But  to  make  up
for  this,  life  in  the  human  sphere  is  investi
gated  more  closely  and  made  deeper ;  in
particular,  it  is  when  his  ethical  task  is  clearly
thrown  into  relief  that  man  believes  he  is
winning  an  inner  connection  with  reality  and
an  assured  truth.  The  truth  that  appears  in
this  ethical  sphere  is  confirmed  by  importing
the  whole  personality  into  it :  the  maintenance
of  knowledge  becomes  itself  a  valiant  action.
But  the  attempt  to  reconcile  this  knowledge
completely  with  the  whole  of  the  universe
does  not  succeed :  the  world  which  stands
alongside  man  is  predominantly  of  a  physical
and  logical  character ;  if  a  doubt  should  arise
the  sphere  of  ethical  life  may  easily  be  isolated
and  appear  uncertain :  but  this  also  shakes
man's  faith  in  truth.  The  problems  and  con
tradictions  which  are  involved  in  the  Stoic
doctrine  have  been  very  clearly  emphasized


THE PROBLEM OF  TRUTH  291

by  Scepticism,  whose  achievements  have  been
far  too  little  appreciated  by  the  moderns.
When  the  Sceptics  saw  that  there  was  a  rigid
division  between  subject  and  object,  doubt
was  bound  to  extend  further  and  further
until  every  avenue  to  truth  seemed  barred  to
man.

But  the  modern  period  was  not  the  first
to  oppose  this  division ;  the  Greek  world  had
already  done  so,  principally  in  the  cosmic
speculation  of  Plotinus.  It  is  here  held  as  a
truth  beyond  doubt  that  a  knowledge  of
things  existing  outside  thought  is  an  absolute
contradiction ;  and  thus,  if  all  knowledge
which  deserves  the  name  of  knowledge  is
not  to  disappear,  things  must  be  compelled  to
take  their  place  within  the  world  of  thought.
But  this  cannot  be  done  unless  thought  makes
itself  the  object  of  knowledge  and  thereby
overcomes  the  division,  in  the  sense  that  know
ledge  is  nothing  but  a  self-cognition  of  thought.
Then  investigation  had  only  to  bring  into
emphatic  prominence  this  activity  of  thought


292  THE LIFE OF  THE SPIRIT

and  to  express  in  terms  of  it  all  the  data  of
experience.  Plotinus  having  set  about  doing
this  with  vigorous  boldness  and  on  the  grand
scale,  discovered  in  thought  the  essential  inde
pendence  of  life  and  made  this  into  the  soul
of  all  reality.  There  is  here  unfolded  a  vision
of  things  from  within  outwards,  from  the
whole  to  the  part ;  all  reality  is  set  in  flux,  its
different  realms  become  stages  in  an  all-em
bracing  movement.  Since  it  is  an  essential
unity  which  underlies  all  diversity,  the  appre
hension  of  unity  is  the  principal  task  of  know
ledge,  unity  is  what  it  strives  to  see  before  all
else  at  every  step.  In  this  connection  the
thought  of  infinity  arises,  a  thought  which
embraces  all  oppositions  and  indeed  reduces
them  to  harmony.  Thus  the  world  is  co
ordinated  in  a  magnificent  way  and  filled  with
inner  life ;  the  dependence  of  one  thing  on
another,  the  permeating  stream  of  life,  the
necessity  and  importance  of  the  thought  of
unity,  are  enforced  with  peculiar  power.  But
this  is  accomplished  by  sacrificing  all  the  vivid-


THE PROBLEM OF  TRUTH  293

ness  of  the  concrete  and  the  particular,  by
transforming  reality  into  a  realm  of  logical
relations,  which  would  have  constituted  a
tissue  of  mere  forms  and  formulae  were  it  not
that  a  strong  impulse  of  an  emotional  nature
had  given  the  whole  a  deeply  religious  tone
and  thus  infused  life  into  it.  But  when  this
tendency  prevails,  knowledge,  just  when  it
reaches  its  greatest  height,  must  exchange  its
character  of  scientific  insight  for  that  of
obscure  feeling,  of  a  freely  ranging  emotional
mood.  Although  it  may  still  retain  some
truth,  this  species  of  knowledge  has  given  up
the  attempt  to  ascertain  the  detailed  content
of  the  world  and  has  renounced  the  form  of
science.

We  thus  find  a  wealth  of  movement  even
within  antiquity,  and  we  recognize  that  it  is  a
gross  error  to  extend  the  particular  character
istics  of  the  classical  period  to  the  whole  of
antiquity.  But  still  throughout  all  its  phases
it  did  retain  one  common  feature,  viz.,  that
belief  in  the  world's  existence  was  not  shaken,


294  THE LIFE OF  THE SPIRIT

and  the  relation  of  man  to  it  was  regarded  as
the  main  problem  ;  it  was  in  close  connection
with  this  that  thought  maintained  its  position
as  the  guide  of  life.  When  Christianity  made
the  heart  and  core  of  life  to  consist  in  the
relationship  to  God,  and  indeed  to  a  God  who
is  not  so  much  indwelling  in  the  world  as
superior  to  it,  this  was  bound  to  produce
essential  changes  both  in  the  aim  and  in  the
character  of  the  struggle  for  truth.  The
main  concern  of  knowledge  was  now  to  work
out  the  relations  between  God  and  man ;  but
this  was  a  question  on  which  the  work  of
science,  and  indeed  the  human  faculties  at
large,  were  unable  to  give  definite  informa
tion  :  for  this  purpose  it  needed  a  communi
cation  on  the  part  of  the  deity,  a  divine
revelation,  "  about  God  it  is  possible  to  learn
only  from  God  "  ( Athenagoras).  From  man,
however,  a  docile  acceptance  of  this  revelation,
an  unconditional  faith,  is  demanded :  hence
faith  and  not  knowledge  is  regarded  as  the
way  to  the  truth  that  decides  the  salvation


THE PROBLEM OF  TRUTH  295

of  man.  Faith  is  represented  as  having  the
advantage  over  knowledge  not  only  in  its
greater  certainty  but  also  in  its  greater
intelligibility;  even  the  simplest  working-man
may  have  his  share  in  faith  while  those  who
attain  to  knowledge  are  never  very  many.
The  truth,  however,  which  is  attained  by  this
path  has  for  its  content  great  world-events
of  a  moral  nature ;  in  particular,  everything
centres  round  the  problem  of  man's  revolt
and  deliverance,  everything  else  becomes  a
mere  setting;  according  to  Augustine  it  is
only  of  God  and  the  soul  that  it  is  necessary
to  know  anything.  While  the  sphere  of
human  thought  is  thus  confined  within  the
narrowest  limits,  there  arises  at  the  same  time
a  far-reaching  change  in  the  general  outlook
on  reality,  since  the  totality  of  the  world  is
now  regarded  as  resting  upon  a  free  personal
Being,  and  as  being  governed  by  ethical  tasks.
Hence  man  with  his  ethical  strivings  may
know  himself  to  be  bound  up  with  the  deepest
foundations  of  reality  ;  he  stands  at  the  centre


296  THE LIFE OF THE SPIRIT

of  the  world  and  may  be  absolutely  convinced
of  the  truth  of  the  content  of  faith.  Indeed,
for  the  participators  in  this  ethico-religious
movement  the  whole  world  is  opened  up.
Things  seem  to  express  their  deepest  being  in
what  they  accomplish  for  the  ethico-religious
task.  Where  they  cannot  work  directly  in  its
service,  they  do  so  in  image  and  similitude,
and  thus  even  the  figures  and  processes  of
nature  become  symbols  of  what  is  contained
in  sacred  history.

But  the  conception  of  faith,  which  is  here
the  foundation  of  all  certainty,  contains  diffi
culties  which  first  give  rise  to  many  com
plications  within  the  sphere  of  Christian
thought,  and  finally  even  threaten  to  convulse
it.  It  cannot  well  be  denied  that  there  is  a
department  of  knowledge  additional  to  that
of  faith ;  then  the  question  becomes,  how  are
the  two  related  to  one  another?  It  is  a
question  which  can  receive,  and  has  received,
different  answers.  In  particular  there  comes
into  view  a  pervading  opposition  between  a


THE PROBLEM OF  TRUTH  297

universalistic  and  a  positivistic  mode  of
thought :  the  one  seeks  to  bring  faith  and
knowledge  into  friendly  alliance,  the  other  to
keep  them  as  sharply  apart  as  possible.  Ac
cording  to  which  conception  is  adopted,  each
of  the  two  departments  will  take  on  a  different
form.  One  means  of  seeking  a  combination
of  the  two  is  to  maintain  that  knowledge  is
a  preparation  for,  and  a  lower  stage  in,  what
comes  to  its  highest  perfection  in  faith.  But,
in  spite  of  this  subordination,  owing  to  its
close  connection  with  divine  truth  know
ledge  is  directed  towards  essential  problems ;
it  acquires  a  speculative  character.  But  the
content  of  faith,  however  superior  it  may  be,
is  seized  upon,  worked  over,  and  illuminated
by  thought ;  faith  appears  as  another  and
higher  kind  of  knowledge,  which  is  only
possible  by  communication  from  God,  but  it
still  remains  a  kind  of  knowledge.  It  is  this
mode  of  thought  which  finally  gained  the
ascendancy  in  the  Roman  Catholic  Church,  in
which  at  the  present  day  it  retains  an  unas-


298  THE LIFE OF  THE SPIRIT

sailable  supremacy.  In  the  middle  ages,
however,  it  had  to  wage  a  hard  struggle  with
the  other  type,  which  has  predominantly
gained  the  adherence  of  ecclesiastical  Pro
testantism.  To  the  latter  type  the  above-
described  mode  of  reconciliation  seems  to
endanger  the  characteristic  nature  of  faith,
the  specific  character  of  the  facts,  and  the
immediateness  of  the  conviction.  For  the
preservation  of  these  it  seems  that  the  sharpest
possible  separation  is  necessary,  an  "  either
....  or  "  takes  the  place  of  the  "  both  ....
and."  Faith  thus  loses  its  intermixture  with
speculation :  but  the  less  it  is  regarded  as
capable  of  proof,  the  more  it  becomes  a  matter
of  free  decision ;  it  is  regarded  as  an  act  of
the  will  and  is  declared  to  be  a  "  practical
attitude "  (habitus  practicus}.  The  facts  on
which  it  is  based  present  themselves  as  pre
eminently  historical  in  character  and  insist
on  being  received  as  such.  Knowledge,  how
ever,  is  kept  at  a  distance  from  these  funda
mental  questions  so  far  as  possible,  and  is


THE PROBLEM OF  TRUTH  299

directed  towards  the  world  of  nature ;  it
becomes  thereby  much  more  closely  con
nected  and  concerned  with  experience.  This
opposition  between  a  universalistic  and  a
positivistic,  an  intellectualistic  and  a  volun-
taristic,  mode  of  thought,  divides  men  to  the
present  day,  and  we  do  not  see  how  it  can  be
resolved  within  this  range  of  ideas.  Its
deepest  root  lies  in  the  fact  that  Christianity
insists  at  the  same  time  on  being  an  historical
fact  and  on  having  a  universal  validity ;  and
according  as  one  or  other  of  these  claims
comes  into  prominence,  the  mode  of  thought
will  assume  this  or  that  form.

Still  more  difficult  than  this  problem  of  the
relation  between  faith  and  knowledge  is  the
complication  in  the  conception  of  faith  itself.
From  the  beginning  faith  strove  to  be  some
thing  more  than  knowledge — a  claim  which  it
could  justify  only  if  it  proved  that  it  sprang
from  a  greater  depth  of  the  soul ;  it  carried
out,  or  at  any  rate  attempted  to  carry  out,
this  justification  by  putting  itself  forward  as


800  THE LIFE OF  THE SPIRIT

a  manifestation  and  expression  of  the  whole
nature,  as  a  purely  inward  matter  entirely
dependent  on  free  decision.  But  the  willing
ness  to  receive  a  divinely  revealed  truth,  and
the  resolution  not  to  be  led  astray  from  alle
giance  to  it  by  any  misgivings  of  reason,  have
a  necessary  presupposition ;  the  divine  origin
of  the  doctrine  in  question  must  be  exempt
from  all  doubt,  infallible  testimony  must
assure  us  of  it.  But  only  science  can  examine
whether  such  testimony  is  really  available,  and
hence  it  seems  that  an  act  of  knowledge  must
precede  faith.  The  misgiving  which  results
from  this  would  be  more  easily  removed  if  it
were  a  question  of  something  which  arose  in
the  life  of  the  individual  and  could  prove  itself
immediately  by  its  elevating  influence :  but  it
is  here  a  question  of  facts  in  the  history  of  the
world,  which  lie  beyond  the  life  of  the  indi
vidual  and  have  first  to  be  imparted  to  him.
How  can  faith  in  such  facts  prove  that  it  has
an  unassailable  right  ?  Roman  Catholicism
has  supposed  this  difficulty  overcome  by  its


THE PROBLEM OF  TRUTH  301

assertion  that  the  Church  has  a  teaching  office
entrusted  to  it  by  God  ;  but  this  assertion  has
first  to  be  proved,  and  the  study  of  history
shows  that  there  are  very  weighty  objections
to  it.  In  any  case  the  decision  of  the  question
lies  with  science ;  and  this  shows  that  the
foundation  of  faith  is  dependent  on  the  very
thing  above  which  it  strove  to  raise  man.  At
the  average  level  of  life  faith  is  thus  nothing
more  than  a  docile  acceptance  of  what  the
Church  brings  forward  as  truth,  which  is  here
guaranteed  by  tradition  and  authority.  If,  in
opposition  to  this,  Protestantism  represented
faith  as  arising  immediately  in  the  individual,
the  presupposition  was  that  the  facts  which
form  its  basis  are  accessible  to  every  individual
and  must  be  immediately  self-evident  to  him.
We  cannot  doubt  to-day  that  the  matter  is  by
no  means  so  simple.  According  to  the  form
which  the  question  has  recently  taken,  it  is
sought  to  attain  certainty  of  faith  principally
by  a  combination  of  psychical  experiences  and
historical  facts ;  psychology  and  history  are  to


302  THE LIFE OF  THE SPIRIT

work  together  towards  the  same  goal.  But
each  of  these  has  had  its  credibility  seriously
shaken  by  modern  investigation ;  and  the
combination  of  two  uncertain  quantities  can
never  by  any  possibility  produce  a  certainty.
Thus  at  the  present  day  faith,  which  was  to
relieve  man  of  all  doubts,  has  itself  become  an
object  of  doubt ;  its  power  of  conviction  is
limited  to  a  sphere  within  which  man  feels
himself  encompassed  by  a  clearly  defined
religious  world,  certain  and  self-evident,  which
makes  both  the  existence  and  the  proximity  of
the  Deity  as  obvious  to  him  as  his  own  exist
ence.  If  this  world  falls  into  discredit,  indeed
if  it  loses  in  any  degree  the  naive  certainty
which  it  possessed  for  the  men  of  the  middle
ages,  faith  ceases  to  be  a  sure  foundation  for
truth  and  itself  becomes  a  difficult  problem.

The  more  the  modern  period  has  developed
an  independent  character  the  more  has  the
specifically  religious  conduct  of  life  retreated
into  the  background  and  had  its  presupposi
tions  shaken.  The  first  result  is  a  great


THE PROBLEM OF  TRUTH  303

uncertainty  as  regards  the  problem  of  truth.
Christianity  has  torn  man  away  from  the
coherences  of  the  world  which  encompassed
him  in  antiquity,  and  the  increased  independ
ence  of  the  soul  forbids  a  simple  return.  But
he  is  no  longer  certain  even  of  the  Deity ;  in
any  case  his  relation  to  the  Deity  no  longer
controls  the  whole  of  life.  In  this  situation
where  can  he  now  turn  to  find  truth,  and
what  meaning  can  this  conception  still  retain  ?
In  accordance  with  the  experiences  which  we
have  described  man  can  seek  truth  nowhere
else  but  in  himself;  his  own  life  must  possess
a  depth  which  even  for  himself  at  first  lies  in
a  dim  and  distant  background ;  with  the  full
appropriation  of  this  depth,  however,  he  may
hope  to  discover  a  world  in  himself,  or  rather
he  may  himself  grow  into  a  world.  The
object  then  to  be  aimed  at  is  a  transference  of
life,  not  into  something  which  exists  outside
us  or  above  us,  but  into  something  which
belongs  to  us,  but  which  can  become  com
pletely  our  own  life  only  by  a  vigorous  trans-


304  THE LIFE OF  THE SPIRIT

formation,  and  indeed  revolution.  Reality  is
not  here  found  already  existing,  but  it  has  to
be  built  up  from  within :  truth  is  thus  a
striving  of  life  towards  itself,  a  seeking  for
its  own  being.  Hence  it  cannot  be  the  agree
ment  with  a  given  reality :  it  becomes  an
agreement  with  itself,  a  self-co-ordination  of
a  life  which  becomes  independent  and  raises
itself  to  a  higher  level,  instead  of  remaining
disintegrated  and  constrained.  Its  verification
can  only  lie  in  the  fact  that,  by  embracing  it,
the  whole  of  existence  is  transformed  into
spontaneous  life,  raised  to  an  essentially  higher
level,  and  at  the  same  time  united  into  a  whole
of  creative  effort  which  moulds  reality.

Here  the  main  problem  is  to  find  the  point
where  a  spontaneous  and  creative  life  springs
up  in  man  as  the  deepest  thing  in  his  own
nature.  According  to  the  form  which  this
life  takes,  different  forms  will  be  assumed  by
reality  and  truth ,  but  that  such  a  life  is
attainable  in  some  way  or  other  is  the  common
presupposition  of  that  faith  in  reason  which


THE PROBLEM OF  TRUTH  305

pervades  the  creative  efforts  of  the  modern
period  and  is  enunciated  with  particular  clear
ness  in  the  works  of  its  leading  thinkers.  The
reason  which  is  immanent  in  the  human  race
must  now  take  the  place  of  the  universe  and
the  Deity.  This,  too,  is  common  to  all
attempts,  viz.,  that  the  movement  does  not
proceed  from  a  pre-existing  world  towards
man,  but  from  man  towards  a  world  which
has  first  to  be  constructed.  This  movement
draws  everything  into  itself  which  at  the
beginning  lies  outside  it ;  it  tolerates  nothing
which  does  not  conform  to  the  necessities
indwelling  in  it ;  everything  previously  existing
must  fit  in  with  and  accommodate  itself  to
these  necessities,  or  it  can  no  longer  maintain
its  position.  It  is  evident  how  great  a  change
comes  over  human  activity  as  compared  with
the  older  way,  how  much  it  gains  in  independ
ence,  how  much  more  active  and  productive
it  becomes,  but  at  the  same  time  how  much
more  restless  and  critical.  In  moulding  the

world  it  will  insist  on  developing  things  from

20


306  THE LIFE OF  THE SPIRIT

their  first  beginnings  and  at  the  same  time  on
gaining  control  over  them  :  this  it  is  which
principally  determines  the  character  of  modern
science,  and  it  is  also  the  impelling  force  to
wards  a  complete  renewal  of  human  existence.
The  question  as  to  where  such  a  life
emerges  in  man  is  now  closely  connected
with  the  attempt,  which  has  been  previously
discussed,  to  find  in  thought  the  persistent
power  that  is  able  to  hold  together  existence,
which  otherwise  strives  to  diverge,  and  to  gain
a  spiritual  mastery  over  it.  The  predominant
tendency  is  first  of  all  to  declare  that  thought
is  that  spontaneous  creative  effort  which  raises
man  by  himself  above  the  pettily  human  and
leads  him  to  truth  by  enabling  him  to  parti
cipate  in  the  life  of  the  world.  It  was  thought
in  particular  which,  throughout  the  centuries,
undertook  and  carried  through  the  working
out  of  objective  necessities  and  wide  com
plexes  in  opposition  to  the  narrowness  and
constraint  of  the  pettily  human.  In  this
movement  it  raised  itself  more  and  more


THE PROBLEM OF  TRUTH  307

freely  above  the  immediate  existence  of  man,
co-ordinated  itself  more  firmly  on  its  own
basis,  and  took  up  into  itself  to  a  continually
increasing  extent  whatever  confronted  it  as
an  independent  world.  In  this  advance  of
thought  three  chief  stages  can  be  dis
tinguished  ;  the  Enlightenment  (Descartes,
Spinoza,  and  Leibniz),  the  critical  philosophy
(Kant),  and  constructive  speculation  (Fichte,
Schelling,  and  Hegel).

When  the  Enlightenment  took  the  thinking
subject  as  the  starting-point  of  the  struggle
for  truth,  it  would  have  gained  very  little  by
doing  so  if  it  had  not  discovered  in  this
subject  a  definite  content  and  a  moving  force.
It  found  these  in  the  "  innate  ideas,"  the
"  eternal  truths,"  which  seemed  to  form  an
absolutely  certain  original  endowment  of  the
human  spirit.  When  these  truths  unfold
themselves,  seize  upon  the  surrounding  world
and  shape  it  conformably  to  their  own
demands,  a  realm  of  reason  arises  and  vouch
safes  man  an  apparently  universally  valid  and


308  THE LIFE OF  THE SPIRIT

unassailable  truth.  But  neither  the  repre
sentation  of  nature  nor  the  sphere  of  man
can  reach  the  state  of  truth  except  by  toil
some  labour  of  an  intellectual  nature.  The
object  to  be  aimed  at  is  a  thorough  purgation
and  sifting,  which  must  get  rid  of  everything
that  refuses  to  be  illuminated  by  thought,
while  everything  that  stands  the  test  is  more
effectively  revivified,  and  more  firmly  co
ordinated.  This  gives  rise  to  natural  science,
with  the  exactitude  of  its  mathematical
methods,  and  also  to  a  culture  based  on
reason,  which  makes  a  problem  out  of  every
thing  handed  down  by  historical  tradition,
and  lets  nothing  pass  which  cannot  clearly
and  distinctly  prove  its  rights  at  the  bar  of
reason.  This  attempt,  however,  derives  its
self-confidence  and  its  power  chiefly  from  the
conviction  that  reason  is  not  a  matter  of
mere  man,  but  controls  the  universe ;  hence
what  man  recognizes  as  truth  can  have  a
limitless  validity  beyond  him ;  he  himself,
however,  gains  a  high  life-task  and  a  com-


THE PROBLEM OF  TRUTH  309

pletely  satisfying  happiness  by  participating
in  this  universally  valid  truth  and  in  the
building  up  of  a  kingdom  of  reason.  Thus
Leibniz  is  of  opinion  that  the  whole  earth
"  cannot  serve  our  true  perfection  unless  it
gives  us  opportunity  of  finding  eternal  and
universal  truths,  which  must  be  valid  in  all
worlds,  indeed  in  all  periods,  and,  in  a  word,
with  God  Himself,  from  whom  they  continually
proceed."  Both  with  Leibniz  and  in  the
Enlightenment  generally,  faith  in  the  posses
sion  of  universally  valid  truth  rests  on  the
conviction  that  the  human  reason  is  grounded
in  a  divine  world-encompassing  reason.  It
was  sought  first  of  all  to  find  a  basis  for
this  conviction  in  close  connection  with  the
traditional  transcendent  conception  of  God ;
faith  in  the  veracity  of  God  may  then
enable  us  to  trust  our  own  reason  with
complete  confidence  if  it  conscientiously  ob
serves  the  rules  prescribed  to  it.  Spinoza,
however,  with  his  philosophy  of  immanence,
goes  so  far  as  to  conceive  that  a  cosmic


310  THE LIFE OF  THE SPIRIT

thought  is  immediately  present  in  us,  that  it
is  not  so  much  we  who  think  as  it  which
thinks  in  us  ;  the  only  important  point,  there
fore,  is  to  make  sure  of  such  a  cosmic  thought,
and  we  can  do  so,  according  to  Spinoza,  if  we
free  our  intellectual  work  from  the  influence
of  human  conditions  and  aims,  and  allow  it
to  be  determined  purely  by  the  inner  neces
sities  of  thought  itself.  For  what  makes  the
usual  representation  of  the  world  inadequate
and  erroneous  is  that  man  is  treated  as  the
centre  and  goal  of  all  reality,  that  in  par
ticular  the  oppositions  which  belong  merely
to  human  modes  of  feeling,  such  as  the  anti
thesis  of  good  and  bad,  beautiful  and  ugly,
etc.,  are  imported  into  the  universe,  and  have
grossly  distorted  its  image.  The  first  condi
tion  of  truth  is,  therefore,  a  modest  self-
repression  on  the  part  of  man,  a  willing
submission  to  the  necessities  of  things  as
thought  reveals  them ;  man  must  remove  the
centre  of  gravity  of  his  own  being  from  the
confused  whirl  of  the  passions  into  a  passion-


THE PROBLEM OF  TRUTH  311

less  thought,  into  a  contemplation  of  things
which  is  unmixed  with  volition  and  desire.
Pure  thought  of  this  nature  can  place  man
in  the  stream  of  a  cosmic  life,  deliver  him
from  everything  that  is  pettily  human,  and  by
the  opening  up  of  an  eternal  and  infinite  life,
vouchsafe  him  complete  rest  and  blessedness.

But,  however  high  may  be  the  position
which  Spinoza  thus  assigns  to  thought,  and
however  strongly  he  represents  it  as  self-
moving  and  progressing  in  accordance  with
its  own  necessities,  he  does  not  deprive  it  of
all  relation  to  objects  existing  outside  itself;
he  holds  fast  to  the  position  that,  while
thought  unfolds  its  own  nature  and  necessi
ties,  it  corresponds  at  the  same  time  to  a
being  which  exists  alongside  it ;  in  place  of
agreement  we  have  here  a  parallelism  of
thought  and  being,  and  it  seems  thus  to
become  possible  that  one  and  the  same  funda
mental  process  of  the  universe  should  embrace
both  series  and  come  to  expression  in  them.
But,  on  this  solution,  not  only  is  the  above


312  THE LIFE OF THE SPIRIT

presupposition  of  an  all- embracing  world-basis
open  to  attack,  but  also  the  relation  between
the  two  series  leads  to  the  gravest  complica
tion.  It  must  at  once  arouse  misgivings  that
Spinoza  nowhere  puts  the  two  series  on  the
same  level  but  always  subordinates  one  to  the
other  ;  either  thought  becomes  a  mere  mirror
ing  of  nature,  whose  laws  thus  widen  till  they
become  laws  of  the  universe,  or  thought  forms
the  core  of  reality  and  nature  is  nothing  more
than  its  manifestation  and  environment.  But
doubt  cannot  be  suppressed  on  the  further
question  as  to  whether,  if  the  two  sides  are
incommensurable,  the  idea  of  a  parallelism  is
not  an  absolutely  unthinkable  thought,  whether
it  is  not  essentially  self-contradictory.  But
whatever  doubts  of  this  description  may  arise,
they  cannot  obscure  the  greatness  and  inevit
ability  of  Spinoza's  endeavour  to  discover  a
cosmic  nature  in  man  himself,  to  distinguish
in  him  the  merely  human  from  the  cosmic ;
at  least  we  do  not  see  how  the  modern  man
could  find  his  way  to  truth  by  any  other  path.


THE PROBLEM OF  TRUTH  313

But  was  Spinoza  right  in  placing  this  cosmic
nature  solely  and  entirely  in  intellectual
activity,  and  in  imagining  that  every  other
kind  of  life  ought  necessarily  to  be  degraded
to  a  lower  stage  ?  In  this  way  he  reached
only  a  reality  of  logical  forms  and  formulae,
whose  emptiness  and  soullessness  must  have
been  immediately  evident,  were  it  not  that  a
mystic  and  religious  intuition,  entirely  different
in  its  nature,  had  infused  life  and  warmth  into
the  whole.  In  spite  of  the  vigorous  energy  of
his  thought  in  certain  directions,  there  is  no
other  philosopher  who,  in  the  fundamental
texture  of  his  system,  is  so  compound  of
contradictions  as  the  thinker  who  is  praised
by  many  as  the  supreme  example  of  the  quest
for  unity.

The  struggle  for  truth  reaches  a  new  stage
with  Kant.  He  is  the  first  to  recognize  clearly
that  truth,  in  the  sense  of  the  agreement  of
thought  with  an  existence  external  to  it,  is  an
absolute  absurdity.  But  since  at  the  same
time  the  existence  of  some  truth  or  other  is


314  THE LIFE OF THE SPIRIT

insisted  upon  with  the  utmost  vigour,  the
conception  of  truth  must  undergo  essential
modifications  ;  in  reality  a  complete  revolution
is  brought  about  in  the  relation  between
thought  and  being.  It  is  now  taught,  not  that
thought  has  to  conform  to  being  but  that
being  has  to  conform  to  thought,  that  is,  we  are
acquainted  with  reality  only  so  far  as  things
enter  into  the  forms  of  our  intellectual  organ
ization  ;  truth  thus  ceases  to  be  for  us  the
knowledge  of  things,  and  becomes  the  self-
knowledge  of  the  human  spirit,  which  prepares
for  itself  a  world  of  its  own — acting,  it  must
be  admitted,  on  an  impulse  independent  of
itself.  This  self-knowledge,  however,  surpasses
everything  which  earlier  epochs  possessed  of  a
like  kind,  and  gains  an  incomparably  richer
content  through  the  coming  to  light  of  an
inner  structure,  a  comprehensive  web  of  spirit
ual  life,  in  the  course  of  that  construction  of  a
wrorld.  In  the  gaining  of  this  knowledge
there  arises  a  new  kind  of  investigation,  the
transcendental,  which  is  concerned  with  the


THE PROBLEM OF TRUTH  315

inner  possibility  of  knowledge,  as  opposed  to
the  empirico-psychological  method,  which
treats  of  its  origin  and  growth  in  the  indi
vidual  man.  Our  view  of  reality  is  thereby
fundamentally  transformed,  for  henceforth  all
the  coherence  which  it  presents,  in  particular
all  the  assertions  which  it  includes  about
ultimate  grounds,  have  to  be  regarded  not  as
belonging  to  reality  itself  but  as  imported  into
it  by  man.  Thus  man  in  his  struggle  for
truth  does  not  transcend  himself,  he  does  not
reach  in  knowledge  a  point  where  a  universal
life  springs  up  in  him,  but  remains  always
confined  to  his  own  circle  of  thought,  the
contents  of  which  cannot  be  universally  valid,
since  they  have  arisen  under  special  conditions
and  have  not  proceeded  from  an  original
creation.  For  Kant  regards  it  as  beyond
question  that  human  thought  is  non-creative.

But  if  the  Kantian  movement  from  the
object  to  the  subject  thus  puts  human  know
ledge  on  a  much  lower  level  and  threatens  to
make  truth  merely  relative,  it  brings  us  into


316  THE LIFE OF  THE SPIRIT

an  incomparably  happier  position  in  the  domain
of  the  practical  reason,  in  morality.  For  here,
according  to  Kant,  the  subject  can  rise  to
creative  activity,  eliminate  everything  specifi
cally  human,  and  thereby  press  forward  to  an
absolute  truth.  Hence  the  thinker  has  no
doubt  that  the  ultimate  meaning  of  the  world
is  moral,  and  that  man,  by  participation  in  it,
attains  a  universally  valid  truth,  a  superhuman
life,  and  at  the  same  time  an  incomparable
greatness  and  dignity.  He  reaches  these
heights,  indeed,  only  in  this  special  direction,
and  not  so  much  by  scientific  knowledge  as
by  an  inner  appropriation  which  is  of  the  nature
of  faith,  and  which  cannot  be  forced  on  anyone,
but  requires  a  free  recognition,  an  inward
up-striving  of  life.  Hence  this  philosophy
does  not  by  any  means  fail  to  transform  pre
existing  reality  and  to  grasp  a  cosmic  nature
in  man,  and  thus  possesses  a  metaphysics,  but
of  a  kind  completely  different  from  all  earlier
systems.

The  Kantian  philosophy  forms  the  beginning


THE PROBLEM OF  TRUTH  317

of  a  new  epoch  in  the  struggle  for  truth  both
in  negation  and  in  affirmation.  The  impossi
bility  of  the  old  conception  of  truth  is  clearly
and  cogently  demonstrated,  and  at  the  same
time  the  philosophical  is  finally  distinguished
from  the  naive  treatment  of  the  problem.  All
immediate  connection  of  thought  with  things
disappears,  and  there  is  a  simultaneous  dis
appearance  of  the  capacity  of  thought  to  reveal
to  man  by  freely  ranging  speculation  a  realm
of  universally  valid  truth ;  at  the  same  time
the  view  of  the  world  is  freed  from  the  deeply
rooted  confusion  of  subjective  and  objective
which  had  hitherto  prevailed.  But  if  man
thus  loses  the  connection  with  a  surrounding
world,  he  gains  in  exchange  a  new  world  in
his  own  being,  and  the  very  limitation  of
knowledge  seems  to  make  it  possible,  this
ethical  turn  having  been  given  to  philosophy,
to  put  the  struggle  for  truth  on  a  new  basis,
which  is  simpler,  surer,  and  more  fruitful  than
any  of  its  earlier  forms.  The  struggle  for  truth
is  here  thoroughly  purged  from  all  mere  intel-


318  THE LIFE OF THE SPIRIT

lectualism,  and  indeed  the  conception  of  truth
is  itself  deepened.

But  the  obstinate  strife  over  the  interpreta
tion  of  Kant  soon  proved  that  these  changes
did  not  provide  any  final  solution  but  gave
rise  to  new  problems ;  this  is  also  proved  by
the  fact  that  the  movement  of  philosophy  so
quickly  went  beyond  Kant.  Can  the  subject
be  raised,  as  is  here  the  case,  so  as  to  become  a
texture  of  inner  life,  and  yet  at  the  same  time
be  bound  in  knowledge  to  an  unfathomable
world  ?  Is  it  possible  to  lift  the  special
domain  of  morality  above  the  rest  of  life  to
a  condition  of  complete  independence,  creative
activity,  and  absolute  truth  ?  Will  not  this
new  life  either  draw  the  other  up  to  itself  or
else  sink  down  to  the  level  of  the  rest,  with  its
subjection  and  its  merely  human  character  ?
Will  the  cleavage  between  the  theoretical  and
the  practical  reason,  with  the  conflicting  emo
tions  to  which  it  exposes  man,  be  permanently
endurable  ?  So  much  is  certain ;  from  the
standpoint  of  history  it  is  clear  that  Kant  did


THE PROBLEM OF  TRUTH  319

not  provide  a  final  solution,  which  brought
peace  and  union,  but  that  he  gave  rise  to  a
powerful  movement  and  an  enormous  amount
of  contention.

We  know  that  it  was  in  the  first  place  the
craving  for  a  more  effective  unity  in  the  world
of  thought  which  drove  effort  into  new
channels.  Thought,  which  with  Kant  was  so
sharply  separated  from  the  world,  now  be
comes  the  workshop  in  which  the  whole  of
reality  is  created  ;  it  is  vigorously  thrown  into
relief  against  merely  human  conditions,  and
thus  grows  to  be  a  world-process  which  drives
forward  all  being  by  its  own  movement,
fashions  all  that  is  apparently  alien  to  it  into
its  own  possession,  and  proves  its  rights  not
by  any  sort  of  external  verification  but  by  its
inner  mastery  of  the  whole.  This  movement
which  commences  in  Fichte  with  directive
force  and  fervid  zeal,  reaches  its  consumma
tion  and  its  ripest  development  in  Hegel.
Thought  is  here  raised  entirely  above  the
mere  subject,  it  has  for  its  vehicle  the  work


320  THE LIFE OF  THE SPIRIT

of  society  throughout  history,  which  work  is
itself  thereby  co-ordinated  and  spiritualized.
The  motive  power  of  the  process  is  contained
in  the  fact  that  thought  produces  contradic
tions  out  of  itself  and  overcomes  them,  and
that  it  is  thereby  driven  further  and  further
until  it  has  finally  assimilated  the  whole  range
of  existence  and  at  the  same  time  admitted  it
to  its  own  truth.  Since  man  can  identify
himself  completely  with  this  movement,  this
self-unfolding  of  spiritual  life,  if  he  vigorously
rejects  all  his  narrow  opinions  and  self-willed
striving,  he  seems  here  to  participate  in  the
full  and  complete  truth :  nowhere  else  in  the
whole  course  of  history  do  we  meet  with  so
joyous  and  proud  a  feeling  of  the  possession
of  truth.  Our  world  of  thought,  however,
undergoes  a  radical  change  of  condition  when
it  is  attempted  to  carry  out  this  undertaking,
in  such  wise  that  all  the  diversity  of  things  is
united  to  form  a  single  structure,  everything
which  is  apparently  isolated  is  brought  into
relation  with  everything  else,  everything  that


THE PROBLEM OF  TRUTH  321

is  at  rest  is  set  in  active  motion,  all  mere
matter-of-fact  is  illuminated  by  logic  and
rationalized.

This  achievement  as  a  whole  has  resulted
in  a  vast  increase  of  spiritual  capacity,  which
cannot  simply  disappear.  But  as  a  definitive
solution  of  the  problem  of  truth  it  was  bound
before  long  to  meet  with  opposition.  It  in
volved  the  assumption  that  the  spiritual  life
of  humanity  is  spiritual  life  pure  and  simple,
absolute  spiritual  life,  and  it  thus  exaggerated
human  capacity  in  a  way  that  became  intoler
able,  especially  to  the  nineteenth  century,
with  its  growing  recognition  of  the  subjection
of  man  to  wider  systems.  Further,  it  could
not  accomplish  this  transformation  of  reality
into  a  process  of  thought  without  either  trans
forming  it  into  a  realm  of  mere  shadows  and
categories,  or  else  essentially  supplementing
it  from  a  richer  world  of  thought  and  so
leaving  the  path  upon  which  it  had  entered.
We  know  how  suddenly  the  whole  structure
collapsed,  and  this  precisely  because  the  pro-


322  THE LIFE OF  THE SPIRIT

cess  of  thought  was  unable  to  maintain  its
superiority  over  the  subject,  because  the
subject  violently  appropriated  the  increased
mobility  of  thought,  and  consequently  gave
rise  to  an  unlimited  subjectivism,  which
contains  no  trace  of  any  higher  truth  common
to  all  men.

Thus  with  regard  to  the  problem  of  truth
we  now  find  ourselves  in  an  extremely  un
certain  and  confused  position.  The  movement
of  history  has  made  an  irreparable  breach
with  the  naive  conception  of  truth :  it  has
raised  claims  to  which  our  capacities  do  not
seem  equal,  but  which  we  cannot  renounce.
It  is  true  that  the  modern  period  shows  no
lack  of  attempts  to  minimize  these  claims  and
to  find  some  sort  of  truth  without  metaphysics.
Thus  Positivism  transforms  knowledge  into  a
mere  determination  and  description  of  the
relations  of  things,  which  in  their  own  nature
are  absolutely  inaccessible  to  us ;  thus
Pragmatism  transforms  knowledge  into  a
mere  means  and  instrument  of  human  well-


THE PROBLEM OF TRUTH

being.  But  we  are  impelled  beyond  such
limitations  not  merely  by  the  persistence  of
theory,  which  seeks  to  invent  some  "meta
physics  "  or  other  for  any  given  existence,
but  also  by  the  irresistible  power  of  man's
innate  spirituality.  That  we  are  not  a  mere
constituent  in  a  web  of  relations  of  things
is  sufficiently  proved  by  the  very  fact  that
we  are  able  to  consider  our  relationship  to
our  environment,  apprehend  it  as  a  whole,
and  recognize  the  relations  as  relations.  But
as  soon  as  we  convince  ourselves  that  behind
the  sphere  of  our  knowledge  there  still  lies
an  unattainable  world,  we  cannot  help  feeling
that  what  we  have  attained  is  unsatisfying  as
belonging  to  the  mere  surface  of  things.  And
what  would  be  fairly  tolerable  as  a  limitation
of  thought  becomes  absolutely  unendurable
as  an  ultimate  limitation  of  life.  For  here,
where  it  is  a  question  of  arousing  and  co
ordinating  all  our  powers,  it  is  impossible  to
renounce  ultimate  goals,  and  therefore  the
consciousness  that,  with  all  our  toil  and  labour,


324  THE LIFE OF  THE SPIRIT

we  can  never  penetrate  beyond  the  surface  of
things  to  their  fundamental  nature,  is  bound
to  produce  an  unspeakable  emptiness  in  which
no  nature  of  any  force  can  finally  acquiesce.
Was  it  by  chance  that  Comte  himself  in  the
end  set  to  work  with  heart  and  soul  to  create
new  ideals  ?  Was  it  by  chance  that  both
Mill  and  Spencer,  at  the  end  of  their  laborious
days,  felt  painfully  the  limitations  of  the  solu
tion  which  they  had  offered,  that  thus  all  the
leaders  of  Positivism  were  impelled  by  their
own  natures  to  transcend  their  own  philosophy  ?
Man  may  treat  nature  as  something  external,
although  this  too  has  its  limits,  but  he  cannot
permanently  maintain  this  attitude  towards
other  men,  and  especially  towards  himself.
But  this  does  away  with  Positivism,  which
knows  only  external  relations.

But  as  regards  Pragmatism,  which  ought
to  have  more  attention  paid  to  it  in  Germany,
let  us  accord  full  recognition  to  its  efforts  to
deliver  the  problem  of  truth  from  its  customary
isolation  and  to  bring  it  into  closer  connection


THE PROBLEM OF  TRUTH  325

with  the  whole  of  life.  It  is  only  such  a  con
nection  which  will  give  truth  a  firm  founda
tion  and  enable  it  to  assume  a  fruitful  form.
But  the  question  is,  what  is  understood  by
this  whole  of  life  ?  If  it  means  nothing  more
than  the  complex  of  actual  society,  as  it  dis
plays  itself  in  the  wide  field  of  experience,
the  struggle  for  truth  would  be  subject  to  all
the  dissipation  and  collision  of  forces,  the
selfish  striving  after  happiness  of  the  mere
man,  the  spiritual  sluggishness  of  mere  average
humanity,  and  thus  truth  would  be  sacrificed
to  utility,  de-spiritualized,  and  thereby  de
stroyed.  But  after  all  the  movements  and
experiences  of  world-history  we  cannot  help
feeling  keenly  so  unfortunate  a  result:  we
have  grown  beyond  both  mere  nature  and
merely  social  existence,  we  cannot  help
measuring  this  existence  by  the  necessities  of
our  spiritual  life,  we  cannot  turn  round  and
make  the  latter  depend  on  the  former.  The
average  condition  must  be  very  highly  idealized
if  it  is  to  be  accommodated  to  the  endeavour


326  THE LIFE OF  THE SPIRIT

after  truth  without  serious  harm.  Or  else  we
must  recognize  another  life  besides  that  of
the  social  sphere.  But  where  this  assumption
is  made  explicitly  and  worked  out  consistently,
a  fundamental  transformation  of  the  earlier
situation  becomes  necessary ;  men  resume  the
quest  for  a  metaphysical  system,  and  once
more  the  struggle  for  truth,  in  the  old  sense
of  the  deliverance  of  man  from  the  merely
human  and  the  winning  of  a  new  and  more
essential  life,  must  come  into  prominence.
Thus  we  find  ourselves  in  the  end  agreeing
with  Hegel  that  a  highly  educated  people
without  a  metaphysics  resembles  a  temple
without  a  holy  of  holies.  Only  let  us  not
understand  by  metaphysics  something  gratui
tously  added  by  thought  to  a  rounded-off
world,  but  something  which,  by  a  vigorous
reversal  of  existence,  forms  the  very  first  step
to  a  stable  and  essential  reality.

Hence  a  final  renunciation  of  metaphysics
is  impossible  without  producing  such  a  marked
degradation  of  life  as  to  be  intolerable ;  we


THE PROBLEM OF  TRUTH  327

shall  have  to  resume  the  struggle  for  truth  in
this  higher  sense  of  the  word.  However
certain  it  is  that  we  cannot  do  so  simply  by
returning  to  the  achievements  of  an  earlier
period,  yet  the  experience  of  history  shows  us
the  direction  in  which  we  have  to  seek  our
goal.  And  this  experience  leaves  us  in  no
doubt  that,  when  we  take  up  the  struggle,  we
cannot  start  from  the  world  nor  from  a  tran
scendent  Deity,  but  only  from  the  process  of
human  life.  And  it  is  just  as  certain  that  the
struggle  cannot  start  from  the  immediate  con
dition  of  psychical  life,  as  empirical  psychology
determines  it,  but  that  it  requires  a  reversal,
a  transference  to  a  spontaneous,  self-active,
creative  life.  It  is  only  thus  that  man  can
participate  in  a  cosmic  life  that  forms  the
essence  of  things,  and  so  gain  possession  of
truth.

Such  a  reversal  has  been  undertaken  with
great  energy  by  the  leaders  of  modern  phil
osophy  :  the  form  taken  by  the  attempt  was
that  a  special  kind  of  activity  was  exalted


THE LIFE OF THE SPIRIT

above  all  the  rest,  and  a  new  life  of  an  inde
pendent  character  developed  from  it.  Some
demanded  for  this  purpose  a  knowledge  rooted
in  itself,  others  a  creative  moral  activity.  But
we  have  seen  what  complications  resulted  from
this  limitation  to  a  special  faculty.  This  sub
ordination  not  only  drives  life  into  a  channel
that  is  too  narrow  for  it,  but  such  a  faculty
does  not  seem  to  be  in  a  position  to  produce  a
new  reality  from  itself,  and  at  the  same  time
to  effect  a  reversal  of  previous  existence.
Besides,  a  shaping  process  of  which  the  trans
forming  power  does  not  extend  over  the  whole
range  of  life  will  hardly  acquire  the  stability
and  certainty  which  are  necessary  for  this
movement ;  in  that  case  doubts  and  contradic
tions  will  continually  arise  from  other  sides  of
life.  Consequently  the  next  requirement  will
be  that  this  reversal  should  extend  over  the
whole  of  life,  that  in  particular  it  should  rise
superior  to  the  intolerable  cleavage  into  a
theoretical  and  a  practical  reason.  Life  must
get  behind  this  cleavage,  it  must  be  possible


THE PROBLEM OF  TRUTH  329

to  reach  beyond  the  individual  faculties  a  total
activity,  which  by  its  own  movement  develops
into  an  independent  reality  and  at  the  same
time  comprehends  the  opposition  of  subject
and  object,  subjectivity  and  objectivity.  But
this  is  much  what  we  have  in  mind  in  the  con
ception  of  spiritual  life.  It  is  not  that  a
primary  thought  or  even  a  creative  moral
activity  operates  in  us,  but  that  a  new  totality
of  life,  a  self-existent  and  self-sufficing  being,
a  primary  creative  power  which  fashions  the
world  and  expresses  itself  in  complete  acts,
makes  its  presence  felt  in  us  —  this  is  the
cardinal  principle  on  the  attainment  and  vivid
realization  of  which  all  truth  of  thought  and
life  depends  for  us.  Hence  it  is  not  a  question
of  the  appropriation  and  strengthening  of  par
ticular  sides,  but  of  making  independent  and
co-ordinating  all  the  inner  life  that  is  active  in
us,  and  thus  reaching  a  new  starting-point  for
the  whole  of  life.

This  new  life  has  to  confirm  its  truth  by  an
enhancement  of  the  whole  range  of  our  exist-


330  THE LIFE OF  THE SPIRIT

ence.  It  will  be  seen  that  it  is  only  from  this
standpoint  that  the  contents  and  values  un
folded  by  our  life  can  be  understood,  and,
further,  that  the  latter  is  raised  to  an  infinitely
higher  level  when  it  is  summoned  to  independ
ence  and  co-ordinated  into  a  self-existing  and
self-sufficing  world.  Just  as  the  new  life,  as
the  totality  of  a  new  being,  is  raised  still
further  above  the  mere  man  and  the  immediate
situation,  so  also  it  will  make  greater  demands
than  the  older  kinds  of  reform ;  in  face  of
the  given  condition  of  things  it  demands  at
each  separate  point  a  disturbance  and  trans
formation  of  old  conditions ;  everywhere  the
object  to  be  aimed  at  is  to  work  out  an
independent  spirituality,  to  oppose  it  in  the
first  place  to  the  average  life,  and  then  to
refer  it  back  to  this  life.  The  whole  of
existence  is  thereby  transformed  into  a  general
problem  which  can  be  solved  only  very
gradually.  For  this  independent  spirituality
cannot  be  suddenly  transformed  into  reality
by  a  bold  fiat,  but  the  work  and  experience  of


THE PROBLEM OF  TRUTH  331

world-history  are  necessary  for  this  purpose ;
it  is  only  by  convulsions  and  negations  that  it
is  possible  to  compel  life  to  open  up  its  depths.
But  since  in  the  end  the  truth  of  thought
depends  on  the  essential  content  of  life,
thought  must  get  rid  of  the  idea  that  at  a
given  moment  it  can  reach  conclusions  which
are  final  for  all  periods.  Though  it  must
necessarily  insist  on  a  truth  which  transcends
time  and  possesses  absolute  stability,  the
stability  of  this  truth  does  not  lie  in  man  but
in  the  spiritual  life,  and  if  man,  as  grounded
in  the  spiritual  life,  must  in  some  way  or  other
participate  in  this  truth,  to  work  it  out  to  a
self-active  possession  is  a  high  goal  to  which
we  can  only  slowly  approach.  If  truth,  if  a
life  which  fashions  the  world  and  partakes  of
the  essence  of  things,  are  not  in  the  first  place
incontestable  facts  for  us,  then  all  our  trouble
about  them  is  wasted ;  but  that  they  likewise
form  difficult  problems  which  are  continually
recurring,  is  shown  with  peculiar  force  by  the
struggles  and  confusions  of  the  present.  It


THE LIFE OF  THE SPIRIT

is  an  urgent  necessity  for  our  spiritual  self-
preservation  that  life  should  be  deepened  and
renewed ;  but  this  cannot  be  accomplished
without  a  bold  advance,  a  successful  search
for  new  connections,  a  further  development  of
our  world  of  thought.  Can  we  expect  to
advance  in  these  endeavours  without  the  help
of  philosophy  ?  Is  it  not  an  indispensable  ally
in  the  struggle  for  a  richer  content  of  life  and
more  truth  of  conviction  ?  And  does  not  the
idea  of  an  independent  spiritual  life  open  up
new  outlooks  and  tasks,  the  possibility  of  a
revolution  ?  Humanity  has  indeed  not  yet
exhausted  the  possibilities  of  life.

If  the  struggle  for  truth  thus  rests  on  the
craving  after  a  life  which  partakes  of  the
essence  of  things,  it  cannot  possibly  divest
itself  of  all  strong  emotions  and  become  an
affair  of  quiet  contemplation  and  selfless
resignation.  For  the  above  conception  shows
clearly  that  its  motive  force  lies  in  the  impulse
towards  spiritual  self-preservation :  without
the  elemental  force  of  this  impulse  it  would


THE PROBLEM OF  TRUTH  333

never  succeed  in  overcoming  the  pressure  of
the  actual  world  and  in  building  up  a  new
world  of  self-activity  in  opposition  to  it.  Re
signation  is  justified  only  so  far  as  this  spiritual
self-preservation  requires  much  negation  and
renunciation  just  because  it  is  fundamentally
different  from  self-preservation  on  the  natural
level.  This  negation,  however,  must  be  the
reverse  side  of  an  affirmation  if  it  is  not  to
remain  lifeless  and  unfruitful.  It  would  be
easy  to  show  that  even  in  Spinoza's  philosophy
there  is  no  lack  of  positive  and  joyous  vital
emotion  in  the  depths  of  existence.  But  if
this  is  so,  then  the  irreconcilable  hostility
between  truth  and  happiness  disappears,  the
struggle  for  truth  will  help  to  purify  and
ennoble  the  desire  for  happiness  and  will  not
tend  to  suppress  it ;  it  will  be  able  to  aid  the
latter  in  overcoming  the  complications  to
which  it  gives  rise.


CHAPTER  V

THE  PROBLEM  OF  HAPPINESS

OUR  age  has  particularly  urgent  cause  to
occupy  itself  with  the  problem  of  happiness,
for  we  are  confronted  by  a  remarkable  con
trast  between  the  greatness  of  the  outward
achievements  of  the  age  and  the  insecurity  of
its  sense  of  happiness.  In  successful  devotion
to  the  work  of  civilization  we  surpass  all  other
periods ;  how  far  are  we  in  advance  of  them  in
the  knowledge  of  nature,  in  the  mastery  and
utilization  of  its  forces,  in  the  humane  ordering
of  society  !  But  it  cannot  be  denied  that  all
these  achievements  do  not  help  us  to  attain
a  joyous  and  assured  sense  of  life,  that  a
pessimistic  tone  has  become  very  widespread
and  continually  extends  further.  How  is  it


334


THE PROBLEM OF HAPPINESS 335

that with  us  work  and happiness refuse  to
associate  ?

When  such  a  dislocation  compels  us  to  con
sider  the  nature  and  conditions  of  happiness,
we  immediately  encounter  a  grave  misgiving.
May  man  as  a  general  rule  make  happiness  the
goal  of  his  efforts,  is  it  not  a  sign  of  a  narrow
and  petty  character  that  in  every  effort  man
should  think  principally  of  what  gain  he  is  to
receive  in  happiness  ?  Experience,  too,  seems
to  show  plainly  that  not  only  individual  men
but  whole  nations  and  religions  have  been  able
to  renounce  happiness :  we  know,  further,  that
thinkers  of  the  very  first  rank  have  called  for
something  higher  than  the  struggle  for  happi
ness.  But  if  we  look  more  closely  we  find
that  their  opposition  has  been  directed  not  so
much  against  happiness  as  against  lower  con
ceptions  of  happiness  :  even  in  the  substitutes
which  have  been  offered  in  its  place  a  craving
after  happiness  can  always  finally  be  recognized.
Men  have  wanted  something  different  from
the  majority,  but  they  have  always  opposed  to


336  THE LIFE OF  THE SPIRIT

the  existing  condition  of  life  another  which
was  higher  and  better,  and  have  sought  to
enlist  human  feelings  and  faculties  in  the  task
of  attaining  it :  but  is  this  not  a  craving  after
happiness  ?  Thus  even  the  Indian  sage  strives
for  happiness  when  he  tries  as  far  as  possible
to  negate  life,  to  bring  it  into  a  condition  of
absolute  repose  and  indeed  indifference.  For
then  absorption  in  the  universe  or  even  com
plete  annihilation  appears  to  him  a  better  state
than  his  previous  life  with  its  labours  and  cares,
its  excitements  and  disappointments.  And
the  struggle  for  happiness  need  by  no  means
remain  bound  to  the  narrowness  and  poverty
of  the  natural  ego,  but  rather  the  very  aim  of
the  struggle  may  be  to  find  a  new,  purer,
nobler  being,  a  life  which  is  freed  from  this
ego  and  yet  remains  active  and  vigorous.
Thus  we  see  that  the  conception  of  happiness
is  itself  by  no  means  simple,  and  that  the
opposition  does  not  apply  to  happiness  so  much
as  to  lower  and  inadequate  conceptions  of
happiness.  Indeed,  it  is  a  thing  to  be  insisted


THE PROBLEM OF  HAPPINESS 337

upon  that  man  should  let  the  thought  of
happiness  control  his  efforts,  for  it  is  only  by
doing  so  that  he  can  put  all  the  vigour  of  his
life  and  the  strength  of  his  emotions  into  his
action :  he  cannot  devote  all  his  energy  to  the
struggle  after  anything  in  which  he  does  not
expect  to  find  satisfaction  for  his  own  nature.
Fundamentally  different  conceptions  are  in
cluded  in  the  term  happiness,  but  it  is  only
dulness  of  thought  which  can  agree  to  a  general
renunciation  of  happiness :  all  real  life  is
strictly  individual  life,  and  to  this  happiness  is
indispensable.

But  this  survey  has  already  shown  that
happiness  is  not  something  simple,  that  the
understanding  of  it  is  only  to  be  reached  by
labour  and  struggle.  This  lends  value  to  a
survey  of  world-history  in  the  present  con
nection.  Let  us  then  make  a  hasty  journey
through  the  ages  keeping  this  problem  in
view,  not  in  order  to  consider  the  whole
array  of  individual  solutions  but  only  to

show the leading types which human life

22


338  THE LIFE OF  THE SPIRIT

has elaborated, and which cannot cease to
occupy  us.

We  begin  once  more  with  the  highest
achievements  of  ancient  culture.  Here  the
answer  to  the  inquiry  after  happiness  rests  on
a  peculiar  attitude  towards  life  and  the  world
which  pervades  the  whole  course  of  Hellenism.
Effort  is  supported  by  the  conviction  that  the
joy  of  life  lies  principally  in  activity,  that  it  is
therefore  the  chief  object  of  endeavour  to  enter
upon  a  state  of  activity,  to  assume  an  active
and  not  a  passive  attitude  towards  things.  In
the  course  of  Greek  development,  activity,  on
the  high  level  of  the  spiritual  life,  has  continu
ally  retreated  further  and  further  from  contact
with  the  immediate  environment,  and  has
taken  refuge  in  the  inner  nature  of  man,  and
indeed  finally  in  the  relation  to  a  being  superior
to  the  world  ;  but  yet  faith  in  activity  and  joy
in  activity  have  always  remained.  In  the
struggle  which  Plotinus  finally  waged  against
Christianity  it  was  a  leading  consideration  that
this  religion  makes  man  hope  and  wait  too


THE PROBLEM OF HAPPINESS 339

much  for  help  from  an  outside  source,  while
the  good  cannot  gain  the  victory  unless  every
individual  himself  takes  up  arms  and  fights.
On  the  Greek  view,  activity  needs  no  reward
in  order  to  gain  the  allegiance  of  man  ;  it  is
its  own  joy  and  reward :  as  Aristotle  says,  all
life  possesses  a  "  natural  sweetness."

But  now  the  question  arises,  in  what,  then,
does  the  activity  consist  which  is  able  to
control  and  fill  life?  With  regard  to  this
question  thinkers  were  naturally  bound  to
go  their  own  ways.  They  seek  what  leads  to
the  highest  form  of  activity  in  that  which
distinguishes  man  from  other  beings,  and
exalts  him  above  them  :  this  is  reason,  which
is  here  defined  more  exactly  as  thought.  In
virtue  of  his  thought  man  can  overcome  the
distraction  of  sensible  impressions  and  the
transience  of  external  stimulations  ;  he  can
grasp  permanent  values  and  aims ;  in  fact,  he
can  leave  behind  him  the  whole  domain  of
civil  life  with  all  its  petty  interests,  and  in  the
contemplation  of  the  universe,  with  its  eternal


340  THE LIFE OF  THE SPIRIT

order  and  wonderful  beauty,  he  can  attain  a
true  and  lasting  happiness.  He  can  return
hence  to  man  and  his  soul,  and  here  also  strive
to  attain  a  condition  essentially  higher  than
the  average.

To  this  effort  Plato  was  the  first  to  give  an
individual  character  and  a  vigorous  elabora
tion.  His  conception  of  happiness  involves
an  energetic  negation  and  rejection  of  the
usual  human  existence :  all  the  happiness
which  is  there  offered  and  commended  seems
to  him  fleeting,  external,  and  illusory.  But
science  reveals  to  the  thinker  the  possi
bility  of  contemplating  an  eternal  order  of
things  which,  in  accordance  with  his  character
istic  tendency  towards  grandeur  and  vividness
of  conception,  becomes  co-ordinated  into  a
whole,  the  world  of  ideas.  This  ideal  world,
with  all  its  superiority,  is  not  intrinsically
alien  to  us,  but  he  who  strives  with  all  his
might  to  attain  it  can  gain  complete  possession
of  it  and  make  it  his  own  life  and  being.  In
this  appropriation  of  a  real  and  perfect  world


.. THE PROBLEM OF  HAPPINESS 341

the  thinker  finds  a  happiness  which  is  beyond
comparison  with  anything  else  that  life  offers.
But  even  the  individual  life  of  man  takes
another  course  when  a  higher  world  is  thus
revealed  to  him :  it  is  in  particular  the  com
bination  of  scientific  thought  with  the  forma
tive  activity  of  art  which  everywhere  reveals
great  tasks  and  leads  to  genuine  happiness.
The  work  of  science  is  to  destroy  all  mere
appearance  and  everywhere  to  throw  into  relief
something  essential :  it  also  frees  its  disciple
from  all  external  dependence  and  places  him
entirely  on  his  own  basis.  Art  as  formative
effort,  however,  finds  a  high  goal  set  before  it
by  the  fact  that  human  life  contains  a  wealth
of  potentialities  and  powers  which  must  some
how  be  reconciled  with  one  another.  No  one
of  all  these  different  potentialities  ought  to  be
rejected  or  stunted,  but  all  ought  to  be  associ
ated  in  carrying  out  their  common  task  in
such  a  way  that  higher  and  lower  are  clearly
separated,  the  former  gaining  a  secure  ascend
ancy  while  the  latter  willingly  subordinates


THE LIFE OF  THE SPIRIT

itself.  When  this  is  successfully  accomplished,
when  all  the  diversity  of  things  is  clearly
marked  off  and  graded,  human  life  in  itself  is
fashioned  into  a  perfect  work  of  art.  It  is  the
vigorous  realization  of  this  work  of  art,  the
self-contemplation  of  man,  from  which  true
happiness  proceeds.  In  the  possession  of  such
happiness,  which  is  grounded  in  his  own  nature,
man  may  feel  himself  superior  to  all  fate,  for
this  inner  harmony  cannot  be  destroyed  or
even  diminished  by  anything  that  comes
from  outside.  Thus  Plato  sketches  that
magnificent  picture  of  the  suffering  just  man,
who  is  misjudged  and  persecuted  even  unto
death,  but  who  through  all  the  attacks  upon
him  actually  gains  in  inward  happiness.  On
this  view,  further,  action  needs  no  external
reward,  for  this  contemplation  of  inner  harmony
contains  complete  happiness  in  itself.  The
only  presupposition  is  that  the  inner  condition,
while  differentiating  itself  into  harmony  and
disharmony,  should  enter  into  feeling  and  life
in  its  pure  and  undisguised  character,  that  the


THE PROBLEM OF HAPPINESS 343

reflection  in  our  consciousness  should  be
absolutely  faithful.  The  chief  distinction  of
this  doctrine  of  happiness  lies  in  the  fact  that
it  brings  the  internal  disposition  and  its  mani
festation,  the  good  and  the  beautiful,  into  the
closest  connection,  but  represents  the  whole  as
finding  its  joy  and  motive  force  immediately
in  itself.  Here  all  petty  calculation  of  private
advantage,  all  thoughts  of  reward  and  punish
ment,  have  sunk  out  of  sight.

Aristotle  shares  this  conviction  in  all  essential
particulars,  but  he  puts  a  peculiar  complexion
on  it  by  another  mode  of  marking  it  off  from
the  ordinary  conceptions  of  happiness.  The
usual  struggle  for  happiness  is,  according  to
him,  only  a  pursuit  of  external  goods ;  the
devotion  of  all  one's  life  and  efforts  to  this
pursuit  involves  an  inner  contradiction,  and
indeed  the  deep  degradation  of  man.  For
these  external  goods  are  after  all  only  means
to  life  ;  an  endeavour  which  is  directed  towards
them  never  reaches  rest  and  satisfaction  ;  it  is
driven  onwards  to  infinity  and  yet  always


344  THE LIFE OF  THE SPIRIT

remains  dependent  on  external  things ;  with
its  pursuit  of  outward  results  it  robs  man  of
all  inward  independence.  True  satisfaction
can  come  only  from  an  activity  which  finds
its  task  in  itself  and  does  not  strive  after  any
thing  beyond  itself.  Such  an  activity  is
reached  when  all  powers  unite  and  acquire  a
great  depth  of  purpose  under  the  guidance  of
reason,  when  a  strong  and  earnest  man  con
sciously  expresses  himself  and  his  character  in
his  actions.  But  as  the  feeling  of  happiness
generally  corresponds  to  the  content  of  life,
man  will  gain  all  the  greater  happiness  the
more  successful  he  is  in  filling  his  life  with
significance  :  there  is  no  full  happiness  without
greatness  of  soul.  Joy  in  activity,  however,
will  on  its  side  contribute  towards  raising
activity  to  a  higher  level,  and  thus  life  itself
will  be  enhanced  by  happiness.  In  this  con
nection  Aristotle  has  weighed  and  measured
with  circumspection  and  sureness  of  touch  the
relation  of  human  action  to  Fate.  The  activity
which  decides  our  happiness  undoubtedly


THE PROBLEM OF HAPPINESS 345

postulates  the  fulfilment  of  many  conditions
and  the  co-operation  of  many  auxiliaries ;  a
maimed  and  crippled  man  cannot  exercise  any
full  activity,  and,  generally,  we  must  to  a
certain  extent  be  favoured  by  circumstances
if  we  are  to  unfold  what  is  latent  in  us.  But
however  strongly  Aristotle  recognizes  this,
he  does  not  believe  that  man  becomes  on  this
account  a  plaything  of  Fate.  For  the  main
thing  in  all  activity  is  always  the  inner  power
and  capacity.  Though  for  its  consummation
it  may  need  to  be  brought  on  the  stage  of  life,
even  without  this  it  is  as  little  lost  as  the
dramatic  poet's  work  of  art  which  is  never
acted.  Spiritual  power  is  equal  to  dealing
with  the  average  amount  of  suffering  and  con
straint  which  life  presents.  Excessive  afflictions
may  of  course  destroy  the  happiness  of  life,
but  in  any  case  they  are  of  rare  occurrence,  and
even  they  are  unable  to  make  a  noble  man
really  miserable :  for  his  beauty  of  character
shines  through  all  unhappiness.

Thus the great classical thinkers have


346  THE LIFE OF  THE SPIRIT

sketched  an  ideal  of  happiness  which  has
always  claimed  the  attention  of  humanity  as
the  type  of  a  vigorous,  joyous,  and  noble
scheme  of  life.  But  the  further  movement  of
history  soon  made  it  evident  that  the  ideal
rests  upon  definite  presuppositions  and  does
not  overcome  certain  limitations.  It  demands
a  pre-eminent  power  of  spiritual  creation ;  it
assumes  not  only  that  the  soul  is  directed
towards  the  good  but  also  that  the  spiritual
faculty  is  a  match  for  every  obstacle  ;  it  needs,
further,  the  conviction  that  man  can  grasp  the
complete  truth  with  his  thought  and  make  it
the  setting  of  his  life.  But  the  beginning  of
Hellenism  involved  a  great  revolution  which
modified  the  relation  of  man  to  reality.  With
the  traditional  order  of  life  shaken  to  its
foundation,  it  became  the  supreme  necessity  to
win  for  him  an  inner  self-sufficiency,  a  com
plete  independence  of  and  superiority  over
everything  which  lies  without  him.  But  this
can  only  be  accomplished  if  his  interest  is
dissociated  from  externals,  if  his  relation  to


THE PROBLEM OF HAPPINESS 347

all  experiences  of  external  happiness  or  un-
happiness  ceases  to  be  that  of  feeling  or
suffering  and  becomes  one  of  complete  indiffer
ence,  so  that  he  takes  refuge  entirely  in  his
thought,  in  the  realization  of  a  cosmic  reason
and  the  consciousness  of  an  inner  greatness.
A  man  who  thus  gains  by  thought  a  living
realization  of  the  totality  of  the  universe  can
not  be  moved  or  agitated  by  anything  which
happens  in  the  world  of  experience ;  even  if
this  world  were  shattered  he  would  not  be
dismayed.  The  development  of  this  spiritual
superiority  has  greatly  strengthened  the  inner
life  and  has  led  man  deeper  into  his  own  soul :
it  has  supported  him  in  troubled  times  by
rousing  the  heroic  elements  in  his  character,
but  the  many  problems  which  as  a  whole  it
contains  cannot  well  remain  hidden.  The
fundamental  thought  which  here  forms  the
basis  of  life  is  more  of  a  negative  than  of  an
affirmative  nature ;  it  exalts  character  above
the  world,  but  it  does  not  lead  to  the  permea
tion  and  moulding  of  the  latter ;  hence,  how-


348  THE LIFE OF THE SPIRIT

ever  powerful  may  be  the  stimulus,  it  is  easy
for  a  feeling  of  emptiness  to  arise.  Further,
this  ideal  of  life  needs  great  and  powerful
souls,  it  requires  heroic  energy  to  maintain
the  fundamental  conviction  when  the  whole
environment  contradicts  it.  Hence,  as  soon
as  doubts  about  the  spiritual  power  of  man
arose  and  spread,  faith  in  this  ideal  was  bound
to  wane.

Doubts  of  this  kind,  moreover,  continually
gained  ground  as  the  ancient  world  ran  its
course :  man  continually  developed  a  deeper
sense  of  the  obscurity  of  the  world,  and  felt
himself  continually  less  equal  to  dealing  with
its  sharp  oppositions.  In  particular,  it  was
the  opposition  between  spirituality  and  sensu-
ousness  which  occupied  and  agitated  men's
minds  to  an  ever-increasing  extent.  The  old
harmony  between  the  spiritual  and  the  sensible
was  replaced  by  its  opposite  as  spiritual  power
became  deadened  and  the  life  of  the  senses
more  refined ;  in  the  end,  this  was  intensified
to  an  antipathy  against  all  sensuousness  and


THE PROBLEM OF  HAPPINESS 349

a  passionate  longing  somehow  to  gain  de
liverance  from  it  and  to  participate  in  a  purer
life.  But  man  felt  himself  much  too  weak  to
bring  about  this  change  from  his  own  re
sources  :  thus  a  longing  arose  for  supernatural
help,  and  the  Deity  was  invoked  to  raise  man
to  a  higher  life.  These  changes  destroy  the
old  rest  and  security ;  life  is  tossed  hither  and
thither  between  conflicting  moods  ;  longings,
hopes,  and  dreams  take  the  place  of  a  secure
possession ;  the  fixed  forms  are  dissolved  and
a  journey  begins  towards  the  distant,  the
formless,  the  unlimited.  The  whole  is  thrown
into  enormous  agitation  by  the  fact  that
human  existence  is  thought  to  be  encompassed
by  influences  proceeding  not  merely  from  good
but  also  from  evil  spirits,  destroying  demons,
and  that  thus  a  consciousness  of  responsi
bility,  indeed  a  torturing  fear  of  eternal  punish
ment,  makes  itself  felt.  In  such  a  situation
deliverance  and  happiness  can  be  hoped  for
only  from  the  assistance  of  a  supramundane
Deity  ;  such  a  Deity  must  come  to  the  rescue


THE LIFE OF  THE SPIRIT

in  a  miraculous  manner  and  give  man  a  share
in  his  perfection.  In  order  to  reach  this  it
is  necessary  for  man  to  come  out  of  himself,
and  a  condition  of  ecstasy  becomes  the  highest
level  of  life.  As  regards  the  sensuous,  however,
the  object  to  be  aimed  at  is  the  highest
possible  degree  of  renunciation,  a  strict
asceticism.  In  the  whole  scheme  the  position
of  humanity  is  wrapped  in  deep  gloom,  but
it  is  precisely  from  this  sense  of  darkness  that
there  proceeds  the  strongest  impulse  towards
liberation  from  all  misery,  towards  the  attain
ment  of  full  and  vigorous  happiness.  In  the
wide  field  of  existence  this  endeavour  gives
rise  to  a  remarkable  situation,  in  which  the
most  various  elements,  higher  and  lower,
superstition  and  the  scientific  impulse,  greed
for  happiness  and  willingness  for  self-sacrifice,
meet  in  a  confused  medley.  It  needs  a  great
personality  to  wrest  from  this  chaos  a  pure
ideal  of  life  and  happiness  :  such  a  personality
appeared  in  Plotinus.

In  the  change  of  direction  which  was  due


THE PROBLEM OF  HAPPINESS 351

to  Plotinus  the  essential  point  is  that  here
religion  is  no  longer,  as  it  had  been  to  the
average  man,  a  mere  means  to  subjective
happiness,  but  that  it  promises  to  make  some
thing  essentially  new  out  of  man  and  to  get
rid  of  all  the  pettiness  of  a  separate  existence.
What  is  new  is  that  the  whole  universe
appears  as  a  single  life,  which  always  remains
self-contained  even  when  it  unfolds  into  multi
plicity,  and  that  at  the  same  time  it  seems
possible  by  means  of  thought  to  transport
oneself  into  this  unity  of  the  All  and  thence
to  regulate  the  whole  of  one's  life.  The
winning  of  such  an  inner  unity  with  the  All
promises  an  incomparably  higher  life  and
incomparably  higher  happiness.  For  union
with  the  ultimate  basis  of  the  All  enables  man
to  gain  the  whole  of  infinity  and  eternity  for
his  own  possession,  and  to  comprehend  all
oppositions.  At  the  same  time  he  attains
thereby  a  purely  inward  life,  since  here  all  the
value  of  action  lies  in  its  relation  to  this
cosmic  unity ;  all  external  achievements,  on


352  THE LIFE OF  THE SPIRIT

the  other  hand,  become  completely  indifferent.
A  further  result  is  complete  independence  of
fate,  since  all  experiences  of  joy  and  suffering
fail  to  reach  this  height  of  life.  It  is  true
that  such  a  life  involves  a  constant  movement
in  virtue  of  its  relation  to  eternal  being,  but
in  contrast  to  the  rush  and  bustle  of  the  world
it  appears  as  perfect  rest,  as  profound  peace.
Participation  in  such  an  inner  life,  which  rises
superior  to  the  world,  must  further  the  es
sential  development  of  psychic  life.  As  this
primary  unity  lies  above  all  special  differentia
tion,  man  cannot  attain  to  it  unless  he  is
able  to  rise  above  all  diversity  of  psychical
activities  and  co-ordinate  himself  into  a  unity
superior  to  all  differentiation.  The  pursuit
of  this  path  leads  to  the  development  of  a  life
purely  of  the  soul  and  feeling,  a  freely  soaring
disposition,  untrammelled  by  material  ties.
Life  seems  here  lightened  of  all  weight  and  en
tirely  transported  into  the  pure  ether  of  infinity.
Hence  it  may  well  be  conceived  that  in  the
development  of  such  a  life  Plotinus  experi-


THE PROBLEM OF HAPPINESS 353

ences  a  rapturous  bliss,  and  that  this  bliss
carries  him  far  above  every  other  happiness
which  life  can  offer.  It  is  equally  intelligible
that  he  does  not  believe  in  the  possibility  of
winning  and  forcing  this  life  by  personal  toil
and  labour,  but  that  he  regards  any  beginning
on  the  part  of  man  as  necessarily  preceded  by
a  revelation  of  the  absolute  life,  which  has  to
be  quietly  waited  for.  "  Men  must  remain
in  quietude  until  it  appears,  and  must  look
for  it  as  the  eye  awaits  the  rising  of  the  sun."
Thus  Plotinus  by  this  appropriation  of  a
universal  life  carries  out  a  transference  both
of  being  and  of  happiness  into  the  purely
inward  life :  it  is  here  first  clearly  seen  what
power  the  thought  of  union  with  the  All  is
able  to  gain  over  the  human  soul.  But  it
cannot  be  denied  that  there  is  no  path  leading
from  this  inwardness  back  to  the  wide  field  of
life ;  the  spiritual  rapture  cannot  transform
itself  into  fruitful  work  and  permeate  the
whole  of  life.  Hence  in  the  end  there  remains

a cleavage  between  the  height of  the  inner

23


354  THE LIFE OF  THE SPIRIT

life  and  the  rest  of  existence ;  there  are  only
particular  moments  when  the  thought  of  the
All  takes  complete  possession  of  man,  fills
him  with  ecstatic  rapture,  and  enables  him
both  to  participate  in  a  bliss  beyond  descrip
tion  and  to  forget  everything  else.

The  further  limitations  in  the  work  of
Plotinus  we  can  best  estimate  if  we  keep  in
mind  his  connection  with  the  whole  ancient
world.  For  although  with  him  philosophy
takes  a  turn  towards  religion  and  pure  inward
ness,  he  does  not  forsake  the  connections  of
ancient  life.  This  life  regards  man  and  all
his  efforts  as  an  item  in  a  given  world  which
is  complete  in  itself  and  rounded  off:  the
cardinal  task  for  man  is  to  master  this  world
and  find  his  place  in  it.  Thought,  which
connects  him  with  the  All,  thus  becomes  the
guiding  force  in  spiritual  life  ;  but  just  as  this
thought  arises  in  the  soul  of  every  individual,
it  is  likewise  the  concern  of  every  individual  to
carve  his  own  way  to  happiness.  Man  is  not
dependent  on  others,  neither  does  he  work  for


THE PROBLEM OF HAPPINESS 365

others  ;  there  is  here  no  inner  solidarity  between
men,  no  assimilation  of  another  or  of  the
whole  into  one's  own  inner  being ;  the  destiny
of  mankind  is  not  lived  out  at  each  individual
point,  nor  is  any  activity  entered  upon  for  the
elevation  of  the  general  condition,  but  as  the
individual  here  stands  entirely  on  his  own
basis,  so  he  lives  only  for  himself  and  even  in
his  happiness  is  inwardly  lonely ;  there  is  here
no  inner  world  encompassing  men  and  form
ing  a  bond  of  union  between  them.  Hence  it  is
not  to  be  wondered  at  if  the  great  differences
between  individuals,  which  human  life  un
deniably  shows,  are  accepted  as  final  and  com
pletely  control  the  system  of  values.  An
aristocracy  of  the  spirit  is  sharply  distinguished
from  the  rest  of  humanity :  it  alone,  with  its
spiritual  power  and  greatness  of  character,  has
any  share  in  true  happiness  ;  such  happiness  is
refused  to  the  others,  and  this  refusal  causes
no  pain  to  those  on  the  higher  level.  The
rigidity  and  hardness  of  the  whole  also  be
comes  apparent  in  its  estimate  and  treatment


356  THE LIFE OF THE SPIRIT

of  pain.  Greek  thinkers  have  by  no  means
treated  pain  lightly,  as  seems  to  have  been
thought  in  former  times,  but  they  have  dis
played  the  greatest  reluctance  to  admit  it
among  the  fundamental  constituents  of  life.
As  thought  was  here  concerned  as  a  general
rule  to  prove  that  the  world,  in  spite  of  all
the  pain  obviously  existing  in  it,  is  a  kingdom
of  reason,  so  the  highest  task  in  life  seemed
to  be  to  prohibit  all  approach  of  pain  to  one
self,  to  put  on  against  it  armour  of  proof
through  which  it  cannot  possibly  pierce.
Thus  immense  complication  was  bound  to
arise  when,  after  all,  the  sense  of  pain  grew
continually  stronger  and  refused  to  be  treated
as  a  mere  appearance,  or  to  be  kept  at  a  wide
distance  from  the  inmost  part  of  life.  That
joyous  doctrine  was  then  in  some  risk  of  being
transformed  into  its  exact  opposite.  The
Greek  ideal  of  happiness,  with  all  its  serious
ness,  is  not  on  the  whole  free  from  an
audacious  optimism.  To  find  perfect  happi
ness  in  activity  is  something  not  to  be  hoped


THE PROBLEM OF HAPPINESS 357

for  apart  from  the  conviction  that  such  activity
has  been  from  the  first  exerted  within  the
sphere  of  truth,  and  that,  provided  all  powers
be  strained  to  the  utmost,  it  reaches  its  goal
with  absolute  certainty.  Thus,  as  a  matter  of
fact,  the  opinion  of  the  ancient  world  is  that
a  well-directed  and  vigorous  struggle  for  truth
must  undoubtedly  reach  truth,  and  that  all
spiritual  power  is  certainly  working  towards
the  good.  There  are  as  yet  no  shattering
doubts  and  inner  dissensions  in  the  spiritual
life  itself,  or,  where  they  appear,  they  are
thrust  into  the  background  and  attention  is
averted  from  them.  The  struggle  for  truth
of  the  old  thinkers  presupposes  the  rationality
of  the  universe :  they  neither  appreciate  the
irrationality  of  human  existence  at  its  full
value  nor  fight  against  it  with  all  their  powers.
It  is  this  irrationality  of  existence  which
affords  the  starting-point  for  the  Christian
pursuit  of  happiness ;  it  is  here  for  the  first
time  that  it  gains  full  recognition.  For  it  is
not  this  or  that  item  in  the  world  which  here


358  THE LIFE OF  THE SPIRIT

seems  wrong,  but  the  whole  condition  is  full
of  confusion  and  disorder ;  the  perversion,
however,  reaches  its  highest  point  in  the
ethical  alienation  of  man  from  God,  and  it  is
here  that  the  transformation  too  must  begin.
But  where  the  mischief  goes  right  down  to
the  root,  and  where  a  renewal  of  the  whole
of  existence  is  requisite,  the  new  departure
cannot  proceed  from  the  private  resources  of
man  but  only  from  divine  love  and  grace ;
it  is  the  fundamental  conviction  of  Christianity,
however,  that  such  a  love  has  really  been
made  manifest  and  that  it  promises  deliverance
to  every  individual.  As  all  evil  arose  out  of
the  separation  from  God,  so  the  highest  good
can  consist  in  nothing  else  but  re-union  with
God :  but  this  affords  a  bliss  incomparably
superior  to  every  other  form  of  happiness.
For  here  man  obtains  a  share  in  the  whole
wealth  of  divine  life  ;  here  he  is  entirely  trans
ported  into  a  kingdom  of  love,  of  childlike
trust,  of  saving  grace.  Moreover  his  soul
acquires  a  peculiar  state  of  tension,  since  the


THE PROBLEM OF HAPPINESS 359

initial  situation,  above  which  he  is  raised,  does
not  simply  disappear  but  persists  within  the
new  life,  which  thus  runs  its  course  amid  sharp
contrasts.  An  undertone  of  pain  accompanies
the  bliss,  and  may  even  seem  to  be  enhanced
by  the  presence  of  the  higher  elements ;  but,
on  the  other  hand,  happiness  gains  by  the
contrast  both  in  intimacy  and  stability.  Placed
amid  such  contrasts  the  soul  remains  in  con
stant  inner  movement :  happiness  cannot  here
be  thought  of  as  a  possession  acquired  once
for  all,  and  the  condition  of  man  as  a  state
of  perfection,  but  it  is  only  an  inner  superiority
to  the  whole  realm  of  conflict  which  is  offered,
and  it  is  in  the  inmost  ground  of  his  being
that  man  is  absorbed  into  divine  life.  The
point  of  superiority  of  this  new  life  and  the
corresponding  happiness  over  everything  which
could  be  attained  in  Hellenism,  even  by  the
path  of  religion,  is  that  here  a  true  inner
world  arises.  What  makes  this  possible  is
that  here  the  divine  is  not  conceived  in  the
first  place  as  the  unchangeable  unity,  the


360  THE LIFE OF  THE SPIRIT

essential  being,  but  as  the  ideal  of  personality,
as  moral  perfection,  as  almighty  love.  The
relation  to  such  a  Being  may  rise  to  the
highest  power  and  warmth,  the  inwardness
of  thought  may  be  heightened  to  the  intimacy
of  the  full  personality :  man  in  general,  and
each  man  in  particular,  may  know  that  he  is
supported  and  guarded  by  eternal  love.  In
this  realm  all  differences  of  spiritual  capacity
disappear  and  everything  depends  on  the  force
and  faithfulness  of  the  character,  on  the  ethical
direction  of  the  nature,  which  everyone  is  able
to  display.

The  particular  character  of  the  whole  is
especially  prominent  in  the  treatment  of  pain,
which  is  in  flat  contradiction  to  the  Greek
method.  Here,  where  man  cannot  find  his
way  to  the  heights  until  his  nature  has
undergone  a  mighty  convulsion,  and  where
the  most  difficult  problems  concern  the  soul
itself,  it  is  impossible  to  follow  the  Greek
thinkers  in  expelling  pain  and  keeping  it
wholly  at  a  distance  from  the  inner  life.


THE PROBLEM OF  HAPPINESS 361

On  the  contrary,  pain  here  becomes  indis
pensable  for  the  deepening  of  life  and  as  a
preparation  for  the  good  :  indeed,  the  assertion
is  actually  made  that  in  pain  itself  there  is  a
blessedness,  so  that  those  who  suffer  pain  are
praised  as  blessed.  In  this  connection  those
who  take  an  external  view  might  think  chiefly
of  the  joy  of  a  future  life,  to  which  pain
forms  a  mere  passage,  but  the  more  spiritually
minded  have  sought  to  show  that  the  trans
formation  of  soul  which  proceeds  from
suffering  contains  in  itself  a  deepening  and
strengthening  of  life.  According  to  Gregory
of  Nyssa  a  good  becomes  manifest  in  pain
itself;  the  absence  of  the  good  could  not
move  us  to  such  strong  and  passionate  grief
if  it  were  not  something  pertaining  to  our
being ;  hence  it  is  precisely  distress  of  such
a  kind  which  gives  us  assurance  of  a  depth
of  our  nature.  In  pursuance  of  this  line  of
thought  a  special  unhappiness  may  be  ascribed
to  the  man  who  now  feels  himself  happy,  for
it  is  just  this  which  circumscribes  his  life  and


362  THE LIFE OF  THE SPIRIT

prevents  it  from  reaching  further  depths.  In
the  same  way  the  strong  feeling  of  the  im
measurable  pain  of  existence  is  for  Augustine
a  sure  sign  that  the  present  is  not  the  final
and  complete  existence,  that,  rather,  we
belong  in  the  ultimate  basis  of  our  being  to
another  and  higher  world.  In  a  similar  way
from  the  agitating  and  shattering  power  of
doubt  he  infers  that  truth  does  subsist  and
has  a  close  connection  with  our  being ;  non-
possession  accompanied  by  a  painful  feeling
of  want  everywhere  attests  for  him  the  im
possibility  of  renunciation,  the  active  operation
of  a  higher  life.  Thus  Christianity  in  its
struggle  for  happiness  has  taken  up  negation
into  the  heart  of  life,  and  thereby  for  the  first
time  made  life  truly  superior  to  it.  If  there
is  a  consequent  danger  that  life  may  tend  too
much  towards  softness,  mildness,  and  gentle
ness,  this  one-sidedness  is  counteracted  by  a
strong  impulse  towards  activity  proceeding
from  the  innermost  being  of  Christianity:
did  it  not  come  to  renew  the  world,  to  put


THE PROBLEM OF HAPPINESS 363

humanity  on  its  feet  again,  to  build  up  a
kingdom  of  God  even  on  earth  ?  It  promises,
therefore,  not  merely  deliverance  from  pain
and  guilt  but  also  the  revelation  of  a  new
and  higher  life.  But  it  cannot  be  denied
that  historical  circumstances  have  permitted
this  affirmative  side  of  Christianity  to  develop
to  a  much  smaller  extent  than  the  negative :
once  more  it  was  the  influence,  so  often
described,  of  that  weary  and  languid  period
which  gave  the  one  side  an  unwarrantable
predominance.  Complete  deliverance  from
suffering  and  all  the  confused  bustle  of  the
world,  rest  and  peace  of  mind — these  became
the  highest  of  aims.

However  convinced  we  may  be  that  this
development  of  Christianity  which  holds  aloof
from  the  world  does  not  extend  to  its  inmost
essence,  and  that  it  leaves  open  the  possibility
of  other  developments,  it  at  first  gained  the
victory  over  them  and  ruled  for  long  ages.
The  difficulty  about  this  kind  of  Christianity,
which  has  met  us  under  many  different  forms,


364  THE LIFE OF  THE SPIRIT

can  be  clearly  seen  also  in  connection  with  the
problem  of  happiness.  For  it  seeks  happiness
too  much  in  separation  from  the  world ;  it  is
in  danger  of  sinking  into  weakness  by  not
grappling  with  things  courageously  but  only
rising  superior  to  them  in  the  mind.  Since
feeling  is  not  sufficiently  transformed  into
action,  it  is  impossible  for  happiness  to  inform
and  animate  the  whole  of  life.  Another
drawback  arises  from  the  fact  that  the
emphasis  on  suffering  easily  leads  to  a
lingering  over  mere  suffering,  indeed  to  a
sentimental  revelling  in  pain,  such  as  we
see  especially  in  religious  poetry  and  often  in
an  unedifying  form.  A  further  consideration
is  that  a  happiness  which  is  thus  divorced
from  the  rest  of  life  must  become  insecure
as  soon  as  the  whole  of  this  religious
systematization  of  life  begins  in  any  way  to
be  doubted :  but  we  all  know  that  such
doubts  did  arise  and  have  spread.  The
history  of  Christianity  shows,  it  is  true,  much
diversity  on  all  these  points  :  the  medieval


THE PROBLEM  OF HAPPINESS 365

system  of  Catholicism  appears  in  very  different
hues ;  still  there  is  no  mistaking  the  wide
divergence  between  the  predominantly  passive
character  of  the  middle  ages  and  the  greater
activity  which  proceeded  from  the  Reformation
and  which  has  reacted  even  on  Catholicism.
For  the  Reformation,  in  imposing  the  strong
contrasts  of  the  Christian  life  on  the  soul  of
every  individual,  in  rousing  in  it  a  greater
stir  of  emotion  and  summoning  it  to  more
vigorous  activity,  could  not  but  effect  an
inner  transformation  of  happiness  as  well.
But  in  spite  of  everything  here  also  happiness
remained  a  matter  of  the  inner  consciousness
superior  to  the  world ;  it  rested  too  much  on
a  hopeful  faith  in  a  new  order  for  it  to  ally
itself  with  any  valiant  and  vigorous  attempt
to  grapple  with  and  transform  the  surround
ing  world.  Hence  it  always  retained  a  certain
weakness  and  tenderness  ;  it  is  easy  to  under
stand  how  a  period  filled  with  a  more  vigorous
vitality  and  pleasure  in  activity  pressed  beyond
such  a  conception.


366  THE LIFE OF  THE SPIRIT

This  is  what  happened  to  a  large  extent  in
the  modern  period.  In  this  period  man  seeks
happiness  not  so  much  by  retreating  into  the
sanctuary  of  the  soul  as  by  coming  out  of
himself,  unfolding  and  utilizing  his  powers :  a
great  deal  here  depends  on  the  conviction  that
man  is  not  assigned  a  limited  capacity  by
nature  and  fate,  but  can  grow  without  limit,
continually  develop  new  powers,  and  set  him
self  higher  and  higher  aims.  Nothing  seems
to  give  a  clearer  proof  of  man's  greatness,  and
indeed  of  his  relationship  with  the  Deity,  than
this  capacity  for  progress  to  infinity.  On  the
very  threshold  of  the  modern  period  it  is
absolutely  clear  that  this  faith  in  progress
brings  with  it  an  essentially  different  sense  of
happiness,  a  more  vigorous  and  joyous  condi
tion  of  soul  than  was  known  to  the  middle
ages.  Thus  we  read  in  Nicolaus  of  Cusa,  the
first  modern  thinker :  "  To  be  able  to  know
ever  more  and  more  without  end,  this  is  our
likeness  to  the  eternal  wisdom.  Man  always
desires  to  know  better  what  he  knows  and  to


THE PROBLEM OF  HAPPINESS 367

love  more  what  he  loves,  and  the  whole  world
is  not  sufficient  for  him  because  it  does  not
satisfy  his  craving  for  knowledge."  With
such  a  growth  of  endeavour  the  spirit  also
must  grow  in  itself :  "  Like  a  fire  which  is
kindled  from  the  flint-stone,  the  spirit  can
grow  without  limit  through  the  light  which
streams  from  it."  This  feeling  is  also  expressed
in  the  succeeding  centuries  with  particular
clearness  in  the  thinkers  who  are  the  principal
representatives  of  the  modern  movement.
Thus  Leibniz  is  filled  with  a  vigorous  faith  in
progress  and  derives  from  it  a  sense  of  happi
ness  and  joy.  Thus  even  Hegel  is  carried
safely  over  all  the  oppositions  and  vexations
of  existence  by  the  consciousness  of  the
constant  progress  of  the  whole.

But  this  faith  in  progress  gains  in  weight
and  content  principally  because  the  movement
does  not  merely  increase  the  powers  of  the
individual  subject  but  develops  the  general
situation  and  makes  reality  more  and  more
rational.  A  central  position  is  here  obtained


368  THE LIFE OF  THE SPIRIT

by  work.  In  work  an  activity  is  recognized
which  brings  us  into  the  closest  connection
with  things,  since  it  can  take  up  their  nature
and  necessity  into  itself  and  conform  to  them.
While  man  thus  binds  himself  more  closely  to
his  cosmic  environment  by  means  of  work,  he
has  a  right  to  hope  that  by  his  efforts  the
condition  of  reality  may  be  raised  and  all  the
more  so  because  modern  work  has  tended  to
form  extensive  complexes,  has  united  the
powers  of  individuals  more  closely,  and  by
uniting  them  has  made  them  capable  of
achieving  incomparably  higher  results.  But
if  man  has  thus  gained  in  work  a  means  to
advance  the  condition  of  the  world,  it  has
given  him  at  the  same  time  stability  in  his
own  nature,  it  has  given  his  life  a  broader
foundation  and  a  secure  position  in  face  of  the
world.  Hence  for  the  modern  man  happiness
is  closely  bound  up  with  work ;  here  for  the
first  time  work,  which  was  put  in  the  back
ground  by  the  earlier  systems  of  life,  comes  to
be  fully  appreciated,  and  by  combination  with


THE PROBLEM OF  HAPPINESS 369

it  happiness  becomes  stronger,  calmer,  and
richer :  it  is  now  able  to  penetrate  the  whole
range  of  life.

This  modification  of  work  and  of  happiness
can  be  followed  out  in  different  directions.
We  see  it,  above  all,  in  the  building  up  of
civilization,  that  is,  a  condition  of  life  peculiar
to  man  as  opposed  to  mere  nature.  By  valiant
struggle  with  the  apparently  alien  world  man
extends  the  boundaries  of  his  domain  and  con
structs  for  himself  his  own  sphere  of  life.  It
is  science  especially  which  takes  the  lead  in
this  movement  and  thus  proves  its  power  over
things.  It  is  especially  clear  in  connection
with  science  how  the  individual  in  the  modern
period  has  to  fit  himself  into  a  whole  and  to
carry  out  his  work  in  the  ranks.  But  if
definite  limits  are  thus  assigned  to  every
individual,  he  may  cherish  the  consciousness
that  in  his  place  he  is  indispensable,  and  by
his  activity  is  furthering  the  construction  of  the
whole  :  "  Many  shall  run  to  and  fro  and  know
ledge  shall  be  increased"  (Bacon,  with  refer-

24


370  THE LIFE OF  THE SPIRIT

ence  to  a  passage  in  Daniel).1  In  a  still  bolder
flight  of  thought  Leibniz  declared  that  we
men,  like  little  gods,  in  virtue  of  our  reason,
are  able  to  imitate  the  architect  of  the  world
and  promote  the  welfare  of  the  whole.  Man
is  "  not  a  part  but  an  image  of  the  Deity,  a
representation  of  the  universe,  a  citizen  of  the
divine  city."  If  activity  here  seems  to  be
principally  directed  towards  serving  the  pro
gress  of  the  universe,  at  the  same  time  there
shows  itself  in  modern  society  an  eager  and
active  endeavour  to  raise  the  condition  of
humanity,  to  eliminate  as  far  as  possible  all
irrationality  from  human  relations,  and  to  give
more  and  more  strength  to  reason.  For  here
the  conviction  no  longer  prevails  that  the
condition  of  human  affairs  has  been  established
once  for  all  by  the  will  of  God  and  must  be
accepted  by  us  as  an  unchangeable  fate,  but
here  also  everything  appears  to  be  in  flux  and
capable  of  enhancement.  Thus  activity  here

1  Bacon,  De  Aug.  Sclent.,  II.,  x.  :  "  Plurimi  pertransibunt
et  augebitur  scientia." Cf.  Dan.  xii.  4.


THE  PROBLEM OF  HAPPINESS 371

finds  high  tasks  to  perform,  all  the  more  since
"everything  in  human  form"  becomes  an
object  of  sympathy,  indeed  a  growing  feeling
of  solidarity  makes  every  individual  seem
responsible  for  all  the  distress  and  injustice
around  him.  Much  darkness  and  suffering
is  now  really  felt  for  the  first  time,  but  it  is
unable  to  overwhelm  man  because  his  power
to  cope  with  the  misery  can  increase  indefinitely.
The  feeling  of  power  and  happiness  must  grow
to  an  immeasurable  extent  if  man  can  thus
take  up  the  battle  with  circumstances  and
bring  about  a  new  condition  of  the  world.

In  this  movement  as  a  whole  the  first  thing
which  attracts  our  notice  is  its  larger  and
broader  effects,  but  the  movement  is  no  less
significant  in  its  relation  to  what  is  small  and
individual.  For  it  is  an  essential  feature  of
modern  life  that  every  individual  is  recognized
as  furnishing  a  specific  problem :  at  every
point  his  dormant  power  must  be  awakened,
the  different  elements  whose  previous  state  is
a  confused  medley  must  be  adjusted  to  one


372  THE LIFE OF  THE SPIRIT

another  and  subordinated  to  a  unity  which  is
able  to  raise  everything  to  a  higher  level.  In
the  development  of  this  effort  the  individual
finds  an  exalted  happiness  in  spite  of  all  the
toil  and  labour.  For  he  here  becomes  a  world
of  his  own  which  possesses  a  value  for  the
whole  just  because  it  is  unique.  This  in
dividualizing  process  extends  to  all  human
relations,  a  uniform  development  is  every
where  avoided,  and  by  the  cultivation  of
individuality  a  specific  task  and  joy  is  revealed.
In  the  whole  there  is  apparent  a  powerful
vital  impulse  which  is  occasionally  heightened
to  fierce  passion.  To  be  sure,  an  objective
compulsion  and  law  is  also  at  work  and  pre
vents  a  lapse  into  merely  subjective  excite
ment  :  resignation,  too,  is  not  wanting,  since  at
a  given  moment  every  achievement  has  de
finite  limits,  and  since,  further,  the  individual
cannot  accomplish  anything  by  himself  but
only  together  with  the  others  and  in  sub
ordination  to  a  common  aim.  But  all  the
limitations  and  restrictions  at  the  individual


THE PROBLEM OF HAPPINESS 373

point  and  the  particular  moment  are  out
weighed  by  the  faith  in  a  better  future  and
in  the  infinitely  increasing  power  of  the
human  race.  This  faith  is  as  indispensable  to
the  modern  period  as  that  in  the  harmony  of
the  universe  was  to  antiquity  and  that  in  a
benevolent  Deity  to  the  middle  ages.  Such
faith  in  progress  enables  the  modern  man  to
bear  all  his  labours  cheerfully  and  to  preserve
a  vigorous  sense  of  happiness  in  the  midst  of
all  his  work  and  care.  It  seems  to  give  life
an  absolutely  positive  content  and  human
happiness  a  sure  foundation.

We  know  to  what  a  magnificent  develop
ment  of  life  this  movement  has  led,  but  we
also  know  what  complications  have  arisen
from  it  and  how  these  complications  are  placed
in  the  foreground  by  the  consciousness  of  the
present.  The  faith  in  progress  which  we  have
described  has  been  able  to  fill  the  whole  of
life  and  make  it  happy  only  in  virtue  of  the
conviction  that  human  activity  could  pene-


374  THE LIFE OF  THE SPIRIT

trate  things  to  their  foundations  and  enable
man  to  appropriate  them  completely ;  but
whether  this  really  takes  place  became  open  to
stronger  and  stronger  doubt.  Such  doubts
first  affect  science,  the  leading  force  in
modern  culture.  While  the  height  of  the
Enlightenment  was  absolutely  convinced  of  its
ability  to  fathom  things  to  the  very  bottom,
Kant  has  demonstrated  to  us  with  irresistible
force  the  limitations  of  our  knowledge.  Far
beyond  the  domain  of  philosophy,  however,
the  conviction  has  become  established  in  the
nineteenth  century  that  behind  the  work  of
our  thought  there  lies  a  world  of  things  which
remains  inaccessible,  and  that  the  mutual
relations  of  things  are  all  that  we  can  hope  to
ascertain.  We  cannot  explain  and  understand
but  only  determine  and  describe.  Hence  we
are  cut  off  from  truth  in  the  sense  in  which  it
admits  us  to  the  essence  of  things  and  frees
us  from  the  narrowness  of  a  merely  human
conceptual  world.  But  what  applies  to  truth
applies  also  to  the  whole  of  culture.  It  has


THE PROBLEM OF  HAPPINESS 375

been  brought  home  to  us  more  and  more  that,
however  much  we  are  able  to  alter  and  im
prove  in  the  external  relations  of  things,  we
do  not  thereby  attain  an  essentially  new  life
and  a  higher  kind  of  being :  all  the  progress
of  civilization  has  resulted  in  little  genuine
culture  and  little  development  of  the  condi
tion  of  the  soul.  We  cannot  avoid  asking  the
question  whether  such  an  activity  on  the  mere
surface  of  things  is  worth  the  enormous  toil
and  labour  which  it  costs.

Similar  misgivings  are  also  aroused  by  our
relation  to  man.  The  modern  movement
rested  on  a  firm  belief  in  man's  efficiency  and
natural  goodness :  it  seemed  that,  if  only
ample  room  were  provided  for  the  full  de
velopment  of  his  powers,  everything  would
shape  itself  for  the  best  and  a  kingdom  of
reason  would  be  established  in  the  sphere  of
humanity.  Now,  in  fact,  deliverance  from  all
kinds  of  constraint  has  been  secured  and
human  powers  have  been  unfolded  as  never
before  ;  but  can  we  shut  our  eyes  to  all  the


376  THE LIFE OF  THE  SPIRIT

complications,  struggles,  and  aberrations  which
have  proceeded  from  this  deliverance  ?  At  the
beginning  of  the  modern  period  the  conception
of  humanity  included  an  emphatic  judgment
of  value:  to  develop  the  human  element  in
man  still  seemed  to  be  at  our  classical  period
to  raise  life  to  a  proud  height,  but  now  we  are
more  conscious  of  what  is  petty  and  mean  in
man  ;  we  perceive  sharp  conflicts  in  his  being,
we  find  him  not  merely  inadequate  for  the
tasks  which  his  own  nature  sets  him,  but  we  see
his  liberated  spiritual  powers  to  a  large  extent
enlisted  in  the  service  of  selfishness  and,  in
general,  of  pettily  human  interests,  and
thereby  diverted  from  their  true  ends.  Hence
it  is  not  to  be  wondered  at  if  there  is  aroused
a  longing  for  deliverance  from  the  pettiness  of
man,  a  craving  for  greatness ;  but  it  must  be
confessed  that  as  a  rule  these  ambitions
quickly  succumb  again  to  the  influence  of
pettiness  and  vanity.  In  such  a  situation  how
could  it  fill  us  with  assured  confidence  and
pure  happiness  to  work  for  the  improvement


THE PROBLEM OF  HAPPINESS 377

of  the  human  situation  ?  The  contradictions
which  are  here  involved  fail  to  be  fully  realized
at  the  present  day  simply  because  estimates  of
man  which  belong  to  older  schemes  of  life  still
retain  their  influence  although  they  have  no
foundation  in  our  period.  The  religious  esti
mate  of  man  as  a  "seed-corn  of  eternity"  and  the
object  of  infinite  love  still  retains  its  influence ;
from  the  point  of  view  of  the  faith  in  reason
which  was  characteristic  of  the  Enlightenment,
man  appears  as  belonging  to  a  kingdom  of
reason,  and  in  virtue  of  his  freedom  incompar
ably  superior  to  all  mere  nature ;  but  religion
has  been  shaken  and  faith  in  reason  has  waned,
and  hence  in  the  end  this  estimate  cannot
possibly  be  maintained.  But  if  it  is  seriously
meant  to  transform  man  into  a  mere  item  in
a  rounded-off  natural  world,  this  does  away
with  all  possibility  of  bringing  any  counter
acting  influence  to  bear  on  this  state  of  im
mediate  existence,  all  possibility  of  inner  eleva
tion,  and  we  do  not  see  how  the  most  distant
future  can  produce  any  change  in  this  respect.


378  THE LIFE OF  THE SPIRIT

These  complications  extend  also  into  the
sphere  of  individual  existence,  the  full  re
cognition  of  which  was  a  leading  feature  in
the  modern  movement  of  culture.  Certainly
much  stimulus  and  pleasure  still  arise  from
the  activity  of  individuals,  but  the  foundation
has  been  overthrown  which  gave  these  en
deavours  a  significant  content  and  an  assured
direction.  Formerly  the  individual  seemed
to  be  valuable  and  the  work  expended  on  his
education  profitable  because  in  him  infinite
life  strove  to  express  itself  in  a  unique  way,
because,  therefore,  every  individual  might
hope  that  the  development  of  his  own  nature
advanced  the  condition  of  the  universe.  But
since  life  is  now  more  and  more  exclusively
concentrated  in  the  visible  sphere,  we  have
become  continually  more  uncertain  of  this
foundation ;  but,  if  the  individual  is  com
pletely  tied  to  the  sphere  of  immediate  ex
istence,  his  unlimited  development  must  lead
both  to  severe  collisions  with  other  individuals
and  mutual  hostility,  and  also  to  crude  sel-


THE PROBLEM OF HAPPINESS 379

fishness  or  even  complacent  vanity.  Once
thought  has  embraced  all  these  points  in  a
single  survey,  the  emptiness  and  unedifying
character  of  the  whole  cannot  possibly  escape
notice ;  and  then  the  solution  of  the  problem
of  happiness  can  no  longer  be  expected  from
the  fullest  possible  development  and  recogni
tion  of  all  individuals.

These  misgivings  are  further  increased  by
the  modern  development  of  work  and  the
urgency  with  which  its  problems  are  thrust
into  the  foreground.  At  the  beginning  work
still  stood  in  close  connection  with  the  soul
of  man :  the  individual  could  take  a  pride
and  joy  in  its  progress  because  he  saw  his
own  product  in  it ;  at  the  same  time  it  still
possessed  a  restful  character,  it  set  life  in
motion  but  the  motion  as  yet  was  not  feverish
or  violent ;  it  still  afforded  periods  of  leisure
which  permitted  men  to  review  the  whole
and  to  transform  it  into  a  joyous  possession.
And  now  what  a  change !  By  forming
gigantic  complexes  work  has  severed  itself


380  THE LIFE OF  THE SPIRIT

more  and  more  from  the  soul  of  the  individual
and  goes  its  way  unconcerned  for  his  weal  or
woe ;  owing  to  its  being  at  the  same  time
more  and  more  specialized  and  differentiated,
the  part  which  the  individual  has  in  his  field
of  vision  and  under  his  own  control  becomes
smaller  and  smaller.  Hence  his  psychical
power  also  is  developed  only  in  a  certain
direction  while  the  rest  remains  unemployed
and  undeveloped.  To  this  must  be  added
the  speeding-up  process  by  which  modern
work  has  been  more  and  more  invaded ;  it
forces  man  to  be  always  on  his  guard  and
to  hold  his  powers  in  constant  readiness  for
fresh  efforts ;  this  life  must  bind  man  hand
and  foot  to  the  temporary  situation,  keep
him  in  a  state  of  breathless  tension  and
transform  him  more  and  more  into  a  mere
struggler  for  existence.  It  cannot  be  denied
that  the  whole  has  led  to  prodigious  results,
but  it  becomes  clearer  and  clearer  that  the
man  as  a  whole  can  find  no  happiness  in  such
a  life.  But  if  this  work  thus  strains  him  to


THE PROBLEM OF HAPPINESS 381

the  utmost  without  leading  him  through  all
his  toil  and  agitation  to  any  genuine  happiness,
and  if  at  the  same  time  it  becomes  clearer
and  clearer  that,  in  spite  of  the  pre-eminent
cultivation  of  skill  in  particular  directions,
man  is  sinking  to  a  lower  level  in  the  whole
of  his  being,  is  becoming  insignificant  and  in
the  end  empty,  the  question  necessarily  arises
whether  all  this  work  of  civilization,  which
renders  man  neither  happy  nor  noble  nor
great,  is  not  a  self-deception  on  the  part  of
humanity ;  whether  it  is  not  a  huge  contradic
tion  to  set  all  one's  power  in  motion  with  such
passionate  earnestness,  and,  as  regards  the
whole  of  one's  being,  to  lose  rather  than  to
gain.  What  is  then  the  real  object  for  which
man  works  if  he  thus  becomes  a  mere  means
and  instrument  in  a  soulless  process  of  civiliza
tion  ?  We  have  just  seen  that  he  does  not
attain  happiness  for  himself  in  the  process.
For  whom,  then,  does  he  work  ?  For  a  future
which  is  wholly  veiled  from  him  and  which
will  perhaps  in  all  its  progress  only  be  involved


382  THE LIFE OF THE SPIRIT

in  increasing  confusion  ?  Or  for  the  whole  of
humanity,  which  yet  from  the  point  of  view
of  immediate  existence  is  a  pale  and  empty
abstraction,  and  which,  as  such,  will  never  be
able  to  overcome  the  interests  and  passions  of
the  individual  ?  Everything  contributes  to
raise  doubts  as  to  whether  the  path  pursued
by  the  modern  period,  especially  if  it  be
pursued  exclusively,  is  able  to  lead  man  to
happiness.  It  is  coming  more  and  more
to  be  believed  that,  as  every  individual  man
is  more  than  his  work,  so  also  the  whole  of
humanity  must  be  more  than  the  civilization
based  on  work.  It  is  the  craving  after  in
dependence  of  life  and  true  happiness  which
drives  us  beyond  the  civilization  based  on
mere  work  and  compels  us  to  seek  further
widths  and  depths  of  life.  But  where  are
they  to  be  found  ?

The  craving  after  a  more  spiritual  civiliza
tion  as  opposed  to  that  based  on  mere  work
has  become  stronger  and  stronger  and  brings
to  the  front  many  counteracting  influences.


THE PROBLEM OF HAPPINESS 383

Perhaps  the  most  significant  of  these  influ
ences  is  the  development  of  an  aesthetic
culture  which  runs  through  the  period  in
broad  waves.  We  cannot  deny  that  this
movement  of  culture  has  furnished  a  valuable
stimulus  and  indeed  has  led  to  an  advance :
it  has  again  laid  a  stronger  emphasis  on  the
independence  of  individuality,  it  has  given  life
more  immediacy  and  more  free  movement,
more  suppleness  and  more  joyousness,  and  it
may  in  consequence  seem  to  restore  genuine
happiness.  But  in  reality,  as  a  closer  ex
amination  is  bound  to  show,  when  confined
to  its  own  resources  it  does  not  afford  a
happiness  which  penetrates  to  the  inmost
heart  of  life  and  gives  it  warmth  and  eleva
tion,  but  only  a  rich  diversity  of  individual
agreeable  moments,  of  pleasant  stimulations
which  are  not  combined  into  a  whole.  What
is  here  offered  is  only  a  selfish  though  refined
enjoyment  on  the  part  of  the  educated,  and
often  over-educated  individual :  there  is  an
absence  as  well  of  a  high  goal  as  of  an


384  THE LIFE OF  THE SPIRIT

essential  content  of  life.  But  without  these,
what  has  happened  in  the  end  to  all  forms
of  Epicureanism  will  also  happen  here  in  the
midst  of  all  the  enjoyments,  however  refined
they  may  be — a  feeling  of  inner  emptiness
will  break  forth  irresistibly  and  reject  all  the
proffered  happiness  as  shallow  and  artificial.
Thus,  although  the  individual,  and  indeed
whole  circles  of  society,  may  seek  in  this
manner  to  escape  the  complications  and
troubles  of  the  period,  the  way  to  overcome
them  is  not  revealed  by  a  superficial  life  of
this  character.

In  another  direction  it  is  sought  to  win
true  happiness  by  demanding  more  person
ality  and  a  more  personal  shaping  of  exist
ence  :  the  ethical  task  is  here  given  precedence
over  artistic  activity.  This  view  certainly
contains  an  incontestable  truth,  only  we  must
recognize  that  a  high  and  distant  goal  is  here
in  question,  the  attainment  of  which  should
not  be  anticipated  so  lightly  and  easily  as  it
often  is.  We  do  not  by  any  means  become


THE PROBLEM OF  HAPPINESS 385

personalities  by  pronouncing  the  word  with
affection  and  emphasis,  for  subjective  emotion
is  not  enough  to  start  our  life  on  a  new  path.
The  thought  of  personality  possesses  value
only  so  far  as  the  word  is  backed  by  action,
and  indeed  action  which  involves  nothing  less
than  the  complete  transformation  of  the  old,
and  the  building  up  of  a  new  reality.  How
much  this  thought  demands  is  shown  with
particular  clearness  by  the  life-work  of  Kant.
He  saw  clearly  that  there  is  no  personality
unless  life  is  raised  to  freedom,  independence,
and  spontaneity,  but  he  saw  just  as  clearly
that  for  such  freedom  and  spontaneity  the
world  of  natural  existence  does  not  afford  the
smallest  room :  hence  a  complete  reversal  of
the  former  world-picture  became  necessary,
and  Kant  employed  all  his  mighty  powers  in
its  accomplishment.  But  to-day  it  often  looks
as  if  life  could  be  raised  to  an  essentially
higher  level  within  the  world  of  natural
existence  without  much  trouble  if  only  it

were brought  into  more  vigorous  and  direct

25


386  THE LIFE OF  THE SPIRIT

relation  with  the  individual  units.  This,
however,  is  a  dangerous  error.  If  we  do
not  bring  the  living  units  into  connection
with  a  new  kind  of  being  and  thereby  give
them  an  essentially  new  content,  this  move
ment,  by  awakening  their  self-consciousness
and  self-complacency,  may  easily  do  more
harm  than  good,  and,  with  all  its  subjective
stimulation,  provide  little  genuine  happiness ;
it  is  also  dangerous  in  so  far  as  it  veils  the
difficult  problem  with  which  we  are  here
concerned.  The  modern  period,  like  all
others,  is  especially  eloquent  and  enthusiastic
about  that  in  which  it  is  most  lacking :  we
are  in  painful  want  of  vigorous  and  strongly
marked  personalities  of  original  force,  and  we
talk  incessantly  about  personality,  its  value
and  greatness.

If,  then,  the  conclusion  of  the  matter  is  that
we  cannot  overcome  the  complications  and
gain  a  share  of  happiness  from  the  immediate
situation,  but  can  do  so  only  by  an  energetic
transformation  of  the  whole,  it  is  our  obvious


THE PROBLEM OF HAPPINESS 387

course  to  turn  our  gaze  upon  the  whole  of
history  in  order  to  gain  thereby  a  wider
perspective  and  perhaps  a  point  of  support.
Thus  viewed,  however,  the  problem  really
seems  to  be  greater  rather  than  smaller.
For  our  own  examination  showed  that
wherever  the  desire  for  happiness  found
satisfaction  on  the  high  level  of  the  spiritual
life  it  involved  definite  convictions,  but  that
these  convictions  in  the  changing  course  of
the  ages  came  to  lose  their  immediacy  and
their  force.  With  the  Greeks  the  struggle
for  happiness  rested  on  faith  in  the  ration
ality  and  beauty  of  the  universe,  the  vigorous
realization  of  which  would  raise  man  above
all  the  constraints  of  existence  ;  in  Christianity
it  was  the  steadfast  faith  in  the  loving  care  of
an  almighty  Deity  which  supported  man  in
all  the  trials  of  life  ;  the  modern  period  relied
on  the  reason  indwelling  in  the  human  race
and  on  the  unlimited  capacity  for  increase
possessed  by  human  faculties ;  here  it  was
faith  in  a  better  future  which  raised  man


388  THE LIFE OF  THE SPIRIT

above  all  the  limitations  of  the  moment.  For
us  moderns,  however,  the  thought  of  the
beauty  of  the  universe  has  faded  away  before
the  dark  actuality  and  the  severe  struggle  for
existence  which  modern  science  displays  to
us ;  and  we  all  know  how  religious  faith  has
been  most  severely  shaken  in  the  life  of
culture.  But  least  of  all  can  a  closer  ex
amination  fail  to  recognize  how  seriously
faith  in  man  and  his  spiritual  greatness  has
been  impaired ;  for  here  the  test  of  experi
ence  lay  nearest  to  hand,  and  experience,
wherever  it  has  given  a  candid  verdict,  has
decided  in  the  negative.

Hence  that  which  afforded  earlier  periods
a  firm  foundation  for  happiness  and  an  aid  to
its  development  offers  us  at  the  present  day
no  sufficient  point  of  support.  In  face  of  the
influences  of  the  world  which  press  so  strongly
upon  us  we  lack  a  rounded-ofF  world  of
thought  to  mitigate,  transform,  and  turn  to
account  the  doubts  and  difficulties  of  life:
in  particular  we  lack  a  single  supreme  truth,


THE PROBLEM OF HAPPINESS 889

and  hence  we  stand  defenceless  in  face  of  an
all-powerful  Fate.  Is  it  to  be  wondered  at
if  in  these  circumstances  pessimism  boldly
raises  its  head  and  ever  advances  further  ?
We  now  see  clearly  that  the  very  thing  which
exalts  man  above  nature  involves  him  in  vast
problems,  with  which  he  seems  unable  to
cope.  It  cannot  fail  to  be  recognized  that  a
new  kind  of  life  arises  in  him  and  separates
him  from  other  beings.  This  life,  however,
seems  to  find  no  support  and  help  in  the  great
world ;  it  sees  itself  bound  to  unintelligible
conditions  and  treated  by  the  process  of
nature  as  if  it  were  a  thing  of  no  importance.
Since  at  the  same  time  in  man  himself  it  is
generally  languid  and  burdened  with  sharp
contradictions,  it  seems  unable  to  prevail
against  all  that  alien  world  upon  which  it
supervenes.  But  with  all  its  weakness  and
constraint,  this  new  life  yet  maintains  its
standards  and  forces  man  to  apply  them  to
all  his  doings  and  dealings.  After  this  move
ment  the  mere  comfort  of  natural  existence


390  THE LIFE OF  THE SPIRIT

can  no  longer  be  felt  as  satisfying :  man's
awakened  power  demands  a  goal  and  an
intrinsic  value,  but  it  does  not  find  what  it
seeks  and  renunciation  is  impossible.  Man's
thought  carries  in  itself  the  idea  of  infinity
and  eternity,  and  thereby  destroys  all  the
satisfaction  which  can  be  found  in  the  tem
poral  and  the  finite.  Viewed  in  relation  to
infinity  man  and  all  his  doings  must  seem
unspeakably  small ;  the  individual,  too,  as  a
thinking  being  cannot  help  feeling  the  cramp
ing  limits,  the  nullity,  even,  of  his  particular
sphere  ;  the  thought  of  eternity  contracts  into
a  fleeting  span  the  whole  duration  of  our  life
and  threatens  to  take  from  it  all  its  zest  and
heart.  But  the  course  of  history  heightens
rather  than  diminishes  these  complications.
For  the  more  man  develops  his  specific
characteristics,  and  the  further  his  thought
carries  him  beyond  the  sphere  of  immediate
existence,  giving  him  at  the  same  time  a
feeling  of  freedom,  the  greater  appears  the
resistance  of  an  alien  world  which  does  not


THE PROBLEM OF HAPPINESS 391

partake  in  his  advance,  and  the  heavier  the
pressure  of  a  rigid  order  of  things.  Human
experience,  too,  teaches  us  plainly  the  moment
we  consult  it  that  the  progress  of  civilization
rather  leads  man  into  increasing  complications
than  bestows  upon  him  pure  and  complete
happiness.

Thus  the  problem  of  happiness  runs  through
the  whole  movement  of  history,  and  that
which  is  in  question  is  not  merely  the  paths
which  lead  to  the  goals  but  the  goals  them
selves.  It  follows  that  beyond  all  doubt
philosophy  has  here  a  great  task  to  perform,
and  indeed  that  it  is  here  indispensable  to
humanity.  For  if  a  natural  instinct  does  not
infallibly  show  us  the  way,  and  if  at  the  same
time  all  our  efforts  after  genuine  happiness
need  to  be  founded  on  definite  convictions
about  the  Whole,  humanity  cannot  dispense
with  a  vigorous  effort  of  introspection.  Here,
too,  we  encounter  the  problem  of  truth  ;  no
amount  of  subjective  wishing  and  willing  can
lead  us  on  the  path  to  happiness  unless  the


392  THE LIFE OF  THE SPIRIT

possibility  of  happiness  is  guaranteed  by  the
reality  of  things.  But  to  give  information
on  this  head  is  pre-eminently  the  task  of
philosophy.

But,  as  all  our  previous  discussion  shows,
it  will  make  no  progress  unless  a  successful
attempt  is  made  to  extract  from  the  ex
periences  of  human  life  an  all-embracing  fact
or  supreme  truth  which  shall  help  us  to  con
centrate  and  strengthen  our  powers  and  render
them  superior  to  obstacles.  The  experiences
and  changes  of  the  ages  show  that  we  have
to  seek  a  fact  of  this  nature  primarily  not
outside  but  within  ourselves,  that  is,  not  in
the  mere  circumstances  of  the  individual  but
in  a  vital  process  superior  to  him.  The
peculiarly  human  attributes  have  been  the
source  of  all  complications ;  these  complica
tions,  therefore,  will  in  all  probability  be
insoluble  unless  the  specifically  human  ele
ment  is  further  deepened,  brought  into  wider
connections,  and  thereby  made  a  match  for
the  indifferent  or  hostile  world.  With  this


THE PROBLEM OF HAPPINESS 393

we  return  to  the  problem  of  an  independent
spiritual  life  superior  to  the  mere  man.  If
the  spiritual  process  which  takes  place  in  us
is  a  mere  product  of  man,  this  involves  the
disappearance  of  all  hope  of  building  up  a
specific  world  from  it  as  a  centre,  and  of
winning  at  the  same  time  significance,  value,
and  happiness  for  human  existence :  on  this
conclusion  all  our  labour  and  toil  is  lost,  and
victory  rests  finally  with  negation.  Hence
only  one  way  is  left,  viz.,  to  understand  and
treat  the  spiritual  life  as  an  independent
world ;  only  thus  can  we  hope  to  win  a
content  for  our  life  and  to  save  it  from  the
nothingness  into  which  otherwise  it  irretriev
ably  sinks.  With  the  appropriation  of  these
connections  our  existence  is  by  no  means
transformed  into  vain  pleasure  and  harmony,
but  rather  the  contrasts  and  conflicts  of
existence  may  at  first  appear  only  greater  and
more  intolerable,  and  the  battle  may  become
fiercer  than  ever.  But  if  human  endeavour  is
provided  with  a  firm  point  of  support  in  the


394  THE LIFE OF  THE SPIRIT

movement  of  the  universe  and  allowed  to
draw  upon  its  resources,  it  can  confidently
begin  the  battle ;  it  is  then  at  least  certain
that  our  life  is  not  in  vain,  but  that  something
of  moment  is  accomplished  in  it,  however  far
we  may  be  from  having  a  clear  view  of  the
whole.  But  if  philosophy  has  in  general  been
found  indispensable  to  the  battle  for  happiness,
it  must  become  still  more  so  when  we  see
that  what  is  needed  is  a  radical  deepening
and  a  vigorous  unification  of  life.  For  what
is  there  more  qualified  than  philosophy  for
the  task  first  of  destroying  the  illusory  hopes
which  the  modern  world  holds  out  to  man,
and  secondly,  of  pushing  on  the  work  of
positive  construction  and  searching  out  new
paths  ?


CONCLUSION

A  VARIETY  of  pictures  has  passed  before  us,
a  variety  of  movements  has  come  within  our
view  in  connection  with  the  different  funda
mental  problems.  Nowhere,  however,  have
we  seen  the  movement  advancing  in  a  straight
line,  but  the  historical  aspect  is  complicated
by  a  series  of  reactions  and  revulsions.  But  at
the  same  time  it  has  become  clear  that  the
problems  of  the  past  reach  into  the  present  and
that  our  work  is  conditioned  by  the  strong
influences  of  history.  Now  the  goal  appears
as  the  overcoming  of  traditional  oppositions,
now  as  the  more  vigorous  following  up  of  a
course  successfully  begun,  but  in  almost  every
case  a  glance  backwards  will  make  our  own
task  clearer :  we  cannot  doubt  that  our  work,
to  be  successful,  must  meet  the  demands  of  a

395


396  THE LIFE OF  THE SPIRIT

situation  conditioned  by  its  antecedents.  But
it  has  become  just  as  apparent  that  we  cannot
simply  accept  a  particular  stimulus  and  allow
ourselves  to  be  carried  on  without  trouble  by
the  stream  of  history.  For  we  have  seen
everywhere  that  the  earlier  achievements  can
no  longer  satisfy  us  in  their  more  detailed
development,  that  the  movement  itself  has
produced  a  new  situation  with  peculiar
demands.  Not  only  an  abundance  of  problems
encompasses  us  on  all  sides  but  our  spiritual
condition  as  a  whole  has  become  insecure ;  we
feel  with  particular  distinctness  at  the  present
day  that  the  life  of  humanity  is  not  being  built
up  in  peace  and  security  on  a  fixed  foundation,
but  that  we  have  continually  to  renew  the
struggle  for  its  continuance  and  its  main
principles.  Everything  tends  to  show  that  our
period  is  full  of  tension  and  occupied  with  high
tasks ;  it  is  obvious  that  we  have  come  to  a
point  where  it  is  a  question  of  recurring  to  the
fundamental  problems,  to  the  elementary  con
ditions  of  our  spiritual  existence ;  we  are


CONCLUSION  397

urgently  called  to  the  search for  new  paths,
to  independent  creative  effort.

But  the  average  attainment  of  the  period  by
no  means  corresponds  to  the  demands  of  the
spiritual  situation  ;  we  feel,  perhaps  to  a  greater
extent  than  other  epochs,  how  far  human
conduct  can  diverge  from  the  inner  necessities
of  the  spiritual  life.  The  spiritual  situation  of
the  present  urgently  calls  for  a  synthesis  of
life,  for  an  overcoming  of  oppositions,  for  a
systematization  which  should  deal  with  the
whole,  and  also  for  a  concentration  of  men  on
the  search  for  common  paths.  In  place  of  this
we  find  a  high  degree  of  isolation,  a  complete
separation  into  different  parties  and  groups,  a
treatment  of  problems  from  the  standpoint  of
mere  party.  This  division  into  different  circles
and  sharp  oppositions  hinders  all  mutual
understanding ;  to  each  it  seems  to  admit  of
no  doubt  that  his  own  way  of  thinking  is  the
best  and  constitutes  the  certain  cure  for  all
ills ;  it  is  never  doubted  that  the  other  party
is  entirely  in  the  wrong.  Self-complacency


398  THE LIFE OF  THE SPIRIT

and  dogmatism  thus  flourish  luxuriantly,  the
constant  criticism  of  others  stifles  all  self-
criticism.  Thus  the  different  movements  are
bound  to  intersect  and  hinder  one  another,
and  in  the  end  a  confused  chaos  must  arise,
from  which  it  is  impossible  for  successful
creative  efforts  to  proceed.

In  addition,  the  spiritual  situation  demands
a  vigorous  deepening  of  thought  and  life,  for
otherwise  how  should  we  be  equal  to  dealing
with  the  difficult  problems  which  the  age  lays
upon  our  shoulders,  or  how  could  we  wrest
from  this  confused  medley  goals  and  paths  of
our  own  ?  In  place  of  this  the  average  man
clings  to  the  surface  of  things  and  is  content
to  do  so :  we  surrender  ourselves  to  the  first
impression  and  do  not  perceive  into  what
complexity  it  may  lead  us ;  hence  everything
seems  easy  and  smooth  and  all  difficulties
appear  to  exist  only  in  the  imagination  of  those
who  are  involved  in  old  prejudices.  This  mode
of  thought  further  leads  us  into  sharp  contra
dictions  in  our  own  being  by  bidding  us  follow


CONCLUSION  399

first  one  and  then  another  impression ;  and
hence  in  particular  we  often  seek  to  retain  as
an  effect  and  consequence  what  we  have
definitely  rejected  as  a  cause  and  ground.  In
this  way  alone  has  it  become  possible  for  the
thought  and  the  action  of  the  period  to  employ
as  a  general  rule  fundamentally  different
standards  of  value.  Our  thought  is  occupied
chiefly  with  the  visible  world  and  shuns  as
"metaphysics"  everything  which  transcends
its  limits ;  but  in  action  there  prevails  a  vague
idealism,  which  treats  conceptions  such  as
reason  and  personality,  humanity  and  human
greatness,  as  incontestable  values,  without
realizing  that  with  them  a  new  world  is  intro
duced.  But  in  the  end  our  spiritual  creative
efforts  are  oppressed  by  a  desire  for  negation,
an  inclination  to  expect  great  benefit  from  the
destruction  of  traditional  systems,  from  the
rejection  of  old  solutions.  Now  the  age
certainly  contains  much  that  is  obsolete  and
rotten,  which  urgently  needs  to  be  removed,
but  negation  cannot  produce  any  true  advance


400  THE LIFE OF  THE SPIRIT

unless  behind  it  there  lies  the  impelling  force
of  an  affirmation,  which  gives  effort  a  fixed
direction.  But  this  is  usually  lacking ;  it  is
the  negation  as  negation  which  satisfies  many
and  is  thought  to  be  something  great.  But
since  there  is  usually  nothing  narrower  and
more  impatient  than  negation,  it  produces  to
day  a  dogmatism,  and  indeed  a  despotism,
which  is  bound  to  impair  to  the  most  serious
extent  spiritual  creative  efforts  and  the  true
knowledge  of  the  present  situation.

But  if  the  surface  of  things  offers  the  most
obstinate  resistance  to  the  necessary  renewal
of  culture  and  strengthening  of  inner  life,  and
if  no  essential  progress  of  life  is  possible  from
this  starting-point,  but  only  in  opposition  to
it,  we  may  welcome  as  evidence  of  an  increas
ing  reaction  the  fact  that  this  obstacle  is
coming  to  be  more  and  more  felt,  and  that
the  necessity  of  deliverance  from  isolation,
shallowness,  and  negation  is  becoming  more
and  more  clearly  recognized.  The  more,  how
ever,  spiritual  work  strives  to  gain  indepen-


CONCLUSION  40J

dence  of  the  superficiality  of  the  period,  and
the  more  the  desire  emerges  for  greater  depths
and  more  essential  contents  of  life,  the  more
valuable  must  the  work  of  philosophy  appear,
and  the  less  doubt  can  there  be  felt  that  it  is
indispensable  for  overcoming  the  present  crisis
of  spiritual  life.

But  at  the  same  time  it  will  also  be  clearly
seen  that  philosophy  must  have  a  special
nature  in  order  to  be  able  to  discharge  these
tasks.  It  must  not  be  an  affair  of  mere
learning,  nor  can  it  remain  a  mere  blending
of  reflection  and  subjective  acuteness,  but  it
must  become  an  energetic  pressing  forward
and  a  spiritual  creation,  it  must  work  out
depths  of  our  life,  awaken  dormant  powers,
co-ordinate  isolated  efforts,  indeed  it  must
reveal  a  new  reality  if  it  is  to  help  humanity
to  deal  with  these  leading  questions  and  at
the  same  time  to  preserve  the  independence  of
its  own  position.  For  such  progressive  crea
tion  it  has  to  seek  a  new  and  peculiar  stand
point,  and  in  this  sense  it  must  assume  the

26


402  THE LIFE OF  THE SPIRIT

form  of  a  metaphysics.  But  it  cannot  avoid
the  errors  of  the  old  metaphysics  unless  it
starts  from  the  process  of  life,  as  we  see  it  not
in  the  isolated  individual  but  in  the  whole  of
humanity,  and  unless  it  succeeds  in  the
attempt  to  discover  and  develop  in  mankind
a  general  tendency  opposed  to  the  initial
situation.

This  is  much  what  we  had  in  mind  when
we  spoke  of  a  philosophy  of  spiritual  life  and
desired  the  elaboration  of  such  a  philosophy.
It  is  only  such  a  philosophy  which  can  co
ordinate  and  make  use  of  all  the  experience
accumulated  in  the  history  of  the  world
without  surrendering  the  rights  of  the  living
present ;  only  such  can  place  us  under  the
constraint  of  an  inner  necessity  and  at  the
same  time  summon  us  to  fresh  and  joyous
activity ;  it  alone  can  do  justice  to  the
diversity  of  the  relations  of  life  and  at  the
same  time  strive  after  a  straightforward  sim
plicity  ;  it  alone  can  in  the  end  serve  to
promote  the  advancement  of  life  without


CONCLUSION  403

sinking  to  a  matter  of  mere  utility.  A
philosophy  of  this  nature  is  especially  con
genial  to  the  peculiar  characteristics  of  the
German  people  and  the  traditions  of  German
life :  a  nation  which  has  produced  men  like
Eckhardt  and  Leibniz,  Kant  and  Hegel,  and
so  many  other  thinkers  spiritually  akin  to
these,  will  never  be  able  to  give  up  the  desire
for  a  philosophy  which  seeks  to  regard  reality
from  the  inside  and  from  the  point  of  view  of
the  whole,  and  which,  in  the  midst  of  earnest
and  laborious  investigation,  strives  to  raise  the
whole  of  human  life  to  a  higher  level.


INDEX  OF  NAMES


Antiquity  (Greek),  33  ff., 107  ff., 199  ff,  284  ff,  338  ff.,

356  ff.

Archimedes,  73,  146,  234.
Aristotle,  2,  8,  37  ff.,  61,  71,  109,  HO,  125,  203,  207,  275,

285,  287,  289,  290,  338,  343  ff.
Athenagoras,  294.
Augustine,  58,  120,  121,  140,  213,  277,  295.

Bacon,  369,  370.

Christianity,  49  ff,  118  ff,  134,  174,  176,  211 ff,  251,  252,

294  ff,  299,  303,  357  ff

Church,  57  ff,  69,  93,  99,  124,  223,  226,  301.
Comte,  91,  242,  324.

Descartes,  73,  146,  149,  307.

Eckhardt,  403.

Eleatics,  33.

Enlightenment,  79,  132, 147, 149, 184,  233,  307  ff,  374,

377.
Epicurus,  4,  8,  384.

Fichte,  307,  319.

Goethe,  139,  141,  205,  286.
Gregory  of  Nyssa,  36 1.

Hegel, 10,  54,  89,  138,  139,  141,  150,  151,  242,  307,  319,
326,  367,  403.

405


406  INDEX OF NAMES

Herbart,  10.
Herder,  71.

Kant,  6,  71,  72,  75,  147,  149,  307,  313,  315  ff.,  374,  385,
403.

Leibniz,  74,  75,  138,  147,  307,  309,  367,  370,  403.
Locke,  71.

Middle  Ages,  58  ff.,  66,  125,  128,  133,  167.

Mill,  324.

Modern  Period,  66  ff.,  131, 134,  145,  146,  169,  177,  222,

227,  252,  302,  305,  366  ff.
Mysticism,  47  ff,  63,  127,  140,  159.

Nicolaus  of  Cusa,  366.

Plato,  2,  6,  8,  35  ff,  105,  108,  173,  207,  285,  287,  340  ff.
Plotinus,  44  ff,  117,  120,  286,  291  ff,  338,  350  ff.
Positivism,  91,  141,  242,  322,  324.
Pragmatism,  322  ff.
Protestantism,  298,  301.
Pythagoreans,  32.

Reformation,  72,  132,  365.

Renaissance,  132.

Roman  Catholicism,  60,  164  ff,  225,  297  ff.,  301,  365.

Scepticism,  291.

Schelling,  307.

Scholasticism,  6l  ff,  69,  126,  289.

Socrates,  4.

Sophists,  4,  34.

Spencer,  324.

Spinoza,  147,  189,  277,  278,  307,  309  ff,  333.

Stoicism,  4,  8,  42,  289,  290.


PRINTED BY NEILL  AND CO., LTD., EDINBURGH.


A Catalogue

of

Williams  &  Norgate's

Publications

Divisions  of  the  Catalogue

PAGE

I. THEOLOGY  .  .  .  2

II. PHILOSOPHY, PSYCHOLOGY  .  .  .  .28

III.  ORIENTAL LANGUAGES, LITERATURE, AND

HISTORY ....  -33

IV.  PHILOLOGY, MODERN LANGUAGES  .  . 38
V. SCIENCE, MEDICINE, CHEMISTRY, ETC.  . 43

VI. BIOGRAPHY, ARCHEOLOGY, LITERATURE,

MISCELLANEOUS 51

GENERAL  INDEX  UNDER  AUTHORS  AND  TITLES 57


For  Full  List  and  Particulars  of  Educational
JVorks,  see  separate  Catalogue.


London
Williams  &  Norgate

14  Henrietta  Street,  Covent  Garden,  W.C.


I. Theology and Religion.

THEOLOGICAL  TRANSLATION LIBRARY.

1Re\v  Series.

A  Series  of  Translations  by  which  the  best  results  of  recent  Theological
Investigations  on  the  Continent,  conducted  without  reference  to  doctrinal
considerations,  and  -with  the  sole  purpose  of  arriving  at  the  truth,  are
placed  within  reach  of  English  readers.

Vols.  I. -XII.  were  edited  by  the  Rev.  T.  K.  Cheyne,  M.A.,  D.D.,
late  Oriel  Professor  of  Interpretation  in  the  University  of  Oxford,
and  the  late  Rev.  A.  B.  Bruce,  D.  D.,  late  Professor  of  Apologetics,
Free  Church  College,  Glasgow.

Vol.  XIII.  was  edited  by  Rev.  Allan  Menzies,  D.D.,  Professor  of
Divinity  and  Biblical  Criticism  in  the  University,  St  Andrews.

Vols.  XV.,  XVII.,  XVIII.,  and  XXI. -XXVI.  are  edited  by  Rev.
W.  D.  Morrison,  M.A.,  LL.D.

Vols.  XIX.  and  XX.  are  edited  by  Rev.  James  Moffatt,  B.D. ,
D.U.,  St  Andrews.

The  Price  of  Vols.  I.-XXI.  is  los.  6d.  ;
Vol.  XXII.  and  after,  los.  6d.  net.

Subscribers  to  the  Series  obtain  three  volumes  for  22s.  6d.  carriage
free,  payable  before  publication,  which  only  applies  to  the  current  year's
volumes,  viz.,  XXV.-XXVIL,  which  are  as  follows.

In  Active  Preparation.

THE  OLD  TESTAMENT  IN  THE  LIGHT  OF  THE
EAST.  By  Alfred  Jeremias,  Professor  of  Old  Testament  History
in  the  University  of  Leipzig.  The  translation  will  be  edited  by
Professor  C.  H.  W.  Johns  of  Cambridge.  The  work  will  be
profusely  illustrated.

Vol.  XXV. Ready. IDS.  6d.  net.

ETHICS  OF  THE  CHRISTIAN  LIFE.  By  Theodor  Haering,
Professor  of  New  Testament  Dogmatics  and  Ethics  at  Tubingen.

Vol.  XXVI.

PRIMITIVE  CHRISTIANITY:  Its  Writings  and  Teach
ing's  in  their  Historical  Connections.  By  Otto  Pfleiderer,  of
Berlin.  Vol.  II.  The  Historical  Books.


Vol.  XXII. Ready, zos.  6d.  net.

PRIMITIVE  CHRISTIANITY,  Vol.  I.  :  Its  Writings  and
Teachings  in  their  Historical  Connections.  By  Otto  Pfleiderer,
Professor  of  Practical  Theology  in  the  University  of  Berlin.

14  Henrietta  Street,  Covent  Garden,  London,  W.C.


CATALOGUE  OF  PUBLICATIONS.  3

THEOLOGICAL  TRANSLATION  LIBRARY-Continued.

Vol.  XXIII. Ready. los.  6d.  net.

THE  INTRODUCTION  TO  THE  CANONICAL  BOOKS
OF  THE  OLD  TESTAMENT.  By  Carl  Cornill,  Professor
of  Old  Testament  Theology  at  the  University  of  Breslau.

Vol.  XXIV. Ready. IDS.  6d.  net.

HISTORY  OF  THE  CHURCH.  By  Hans  von  Schubert,  Pro
fessor  of  Church  History  at  Kiel.  Translated  from  the  Second
German  Edition.  By  arrangement  with  the  author,  an  Additional
Chapter  has  been  added  on  "Religious  Movements  in  England  in
the  Nineteenth  Century,"  by  Miss  Alice  Gardner,  Lecturer  and
Associate  of  Newnham  College,  Cambridge.

The  following  Volumes  are  published  at  IDS.  6d.  per  Volume,
excepting  Vols.  XIX.  and  XX.

Vol.  XXI.

ST.  PAUL:  The  Man  and  his  Work.  By  Prof.  H.  Weinel  of
the  University  of  Jena.  Translated  by  Rev.  G.  A.  Bienemann,
M.A.  Edited  by  Rev.  W.  D.  Morrison,  M.A.,  LL.D.

"  Prof.  Weinel  may  be  described  as  the  Dean  Farrar  of  Germany  ;  the  work
is  quite  equal  to  Dean  Farrar's  work  on  the  same  subject.  In  some  respects  it
is  better." — Daily  News.

Vols.  XIX.  and  XX.

THE  MISSION  AND  EXPANSION  OF  CHRISTIANITY
IN  THE  FIRST  THREE  CENTURIES.  By  Adolf
Harnack,  Ordinary  Professor  of  Church  History  in  the  University,
and  Fellow  of  the  Royal  Academy  of  the  Sciences,  Berlin.
Second,  revised  and  much  enlarged  edition,  2$s.  net.

Vol.  XVIII.

CHRISTIAN  LIFE  IN  THE  PRIMITIVE  CHURCH. By

Ernst  von  Dobschiitz,  D.  D.,  Professor  of  New  Testament  Theology
in  the  University  of  Strassburg.  Translated  by  Rev.  G.  Bremner,
and  edited  by  the  Rev.  W.  D.  Morrison,  LL.  D.

"It  is  only  in  the  very  best  English  work  that  we  meet  with  the  scientific
thoroughness  and  all-round  competency  of  which  this  volume  is  a  good  speci
men  ;  while  such  splendid  historical  veracity  and  outspokenness  would  hardly
be  possible  in  the  present  or  would-be  holder  of  an  English  theological  chair."
— Dr  RASHDALL  in  The  Speaker.

Vol.  XVI.

THE  RELIGIONS  OF  AUTHORITY  AND  THE  RE-
LIGION  OF  THE  SPIRIT.  By  the  late  Auguste  Sabatier,
Professor  of  the  University  of  Paris,  Dean  of  the  Protestant  Theo
logical  Faculty.

"Without  any  exaggeration,  this  is  to  be  described  as  a  great  book,  the
finest  legacy  of  the  author  to  the  Protestant  Church  of  France  and  to  the  theo
logical  thought  of  the  age.  " — Glasgow  Herald.

14  Henrietta  Street,  Covent  Garden,  London,  W.C.


WILLIAMS  &  NORGATE'S


THEOLOGICAL  TRANSLATION  LIBRARY  -Continued.
Vols.  XV.  and  XVII.

THE  BEGINNINGS  OF  CHRISTIANITY.  By  Paul  Wernle,
Professor  Extraordinary  of  Modern  Church  History  at  the  Uni
versity  of  Basel.  Revised  by  the  Author,  and  translated  by  the
Rev.  G.  A.  Bienemann,  M.A. ,  and  edited,  with  an  Introduction,
by  the  Rev.  W.  D.  Morrison,  LL.D.

Vol.  I.  The  Rise  of  the  Religion.

Vol.  II.  The  Development  of  the  Church.

Dr.  Marcus  Dods  in  the  British  Weekly — "  We  cannot  recall  any  work  by
a  foreign  theologian  which  is  likely  to  have  a  more  powerful  influence  on  the
thought  of  this  country  than  Wernle's  Beginnings  of  Christianity.  It  is  well
written  and  well  translated  ;  it  is  earnest,  clear,  and  persuasive,  and  above  all
it  is  well  adapted  to  catch  the  large  class  of  thinking  men  who  are  at  present
seeking  some  non-miraculous  explanation  of  Christianity."


The  Earlier  Works  included  in  the  Library  are  : —

HISTORY  OF  DOGMA.  By  Adolf  Harnack,  Berlin.  Translated
from  the  Third  German  Edition.  Edited  by  the  Rev.  Prof.  A.
B.  Bruce,  D.D.  7  vols.  (New  Series,  Vols.  II.,  VII.,  VIII.,  IX.,
X.,  XL,  XII.)  8vo,  cloth,  each  los.  6J.  ;  half-leather,  suitable  for
presentation,  125.  6d.

ABBREVIATED  LIST  OF  CONTENTS  :— Vol.  I.:  INTRO
DUCTORY  DIVISION  : — I.  Prolegomena  to  the  Study  of  the  History
of  Dogma.  II.  The  Presuppositions  of  the  History  of  Dogma.
DIVISION  I. — The  Genesis  of  Ecclesiastical  Dogma,  or  the
Genesis  of  the  Catholic  Apostolic  Dogmatic  Theology,  and  the
first  Scientific  Ecclesiastical  System  of  Doctrine.  BOOK  I.  : —
The  Preparation.  Vol.  II.  :  DIVISION  I.  BOOK  II.  -.—  The
Laying  of  the.  Foundation. — I.  Historical  Survey. — /.  Fixing  and
gradual  Secularising  of  Christianity  as  a  Church.  — //.  Fixing  and
gradual  Hellenising  of  Christianity  as  a  System  of  Doctrine.  Vol.
III.  :  DIVISION  I.  BOOK  II.:  —  The  Laying  of  the  Foundation —
continued.  DIVISION  II. — The  Development  of  Ecclesiastical
Dogma.  BOOK  I.  :  —  The  History  of  the  Development  of  Dogtna  as
the  Doctrine  of  the  God-man  on  the  basis  of  Natural  Theology.

A.  Presuppositions  of  Doctrine  of  Redemption  or  Natural  Theology.

B.  The  Doctrine  of  Redemption  in  the  Person  of  the  God-man  in
its  historical  development. Vol. IV.: DIVISION  II. BOOK  I.  :—
The  History  of  the  Development  of  Dogma  as  the  Doctrine  of  the
God-man  on  the  basis  of  Natural  Theology — continued. Vol.  V. :
DIVISION  II. BOOK  II.  : — Expansion  and  Remodelling  of  Dogma
into  a  Doctrine  of  Sin,  Grace,  and  Means  of  Grace  on  the  basis  of
the  Church. Vol. VI.  : DIVISION  II. BOOK  II.  -.—  Expansion
and  Remodelling  of  Dogma  into  a  Doctrine  of  Sin, Grace,  ana


14  Henrietta  Street,  Covent  Garden,  London,  W.C.


CATALOGUE  OF  PUBLICATIONS.


THEOLOGICAL  TRANSLATION  LIBRARY— Continued.

Means  of  Grace  on  the  basis  of  the  Church — continued.  Vol.  VII.:
DIVISION  II.  BOOK  III.  : — The  Threefold  Issue  of  the  History  of
Dogma. — Full  Index.

"No  work  on  Church  history  in  recent  times  has  had  the  influence  of  Prof.
Harnack's  History  of  Dogma." — Times.

"  A  book  which  is  admitted  to  be  one  of  the  most  important  theological  works
of  the  time." — Daily  News.

WHAT  IS  CHRISTIANITY?  Sixteen  Lectures  delivered  in
the  University  of  Berlin  during  the  Winter  Term,  1899-1900.  By
Adolf  Harnack.  Translated  by  Thomas  Bailey  Saunders.  (New
Series,  Vol.  XIV.)  Demy  8vo,  cloth,  IO.T.  6d.  ;  can  only  be
supplied  when  complete  set  of  the  New  Series  is  ordered.

Prof.  W.  Sanday  of  Oxford,  in  the  examination  of  the  work,  says  : — "  I  may
assume  that  Harnack's  book,  which  has  attracted  a  good  deal  of  attention  in  this
country  as  in  Germany,  is  by  this  time  well  known,  and  that  its  merits  are
recognised — its  fresh  and  vivid  descriptions,  its  breadth  of  view  and  skilful
selection  of  points,  its  frankness,  its  genuine  enthusiasm,  its  persistent  effort  to
get  at  the  living  realities  of  religion."

"Seldom  has  a  treatise  of  the  sort  been  at  once  so  suggestive  and  so
stimulating.  Seldom  have  the  results  of  so  much  leaining  been  brought  to  bear
on  the  religious  problems  which  address  themselves  to  the  modern  mind." —
Pilot.

"In  many  respects  this  is  the  most  notable  work  of  Prof.  Harnack.  .  .  .
These  lectures  are  most  remarkable,  both  for  the  historical  insight  they  display
and  for  their  elevation  of  tone  and  purpose." — Literature.

THE  COMMUNION  OF  THE  CHRISTIAN  WITH  GOD  :
A  Discussion  in  Agreement  with  the  View  of  Luther.  By

W.  Herrmann,  Dr.  Theol.,  Professor  of  Dogmatic  Theology  in  the
University  of  Marburg.  Translated  from  the  Second  thoroughly
revised  Edition,  with  Special  Annotations  by  the  Author,  by  J.
Sandys  Stanyon,  M.A.  (New  Series,  Vol.  IV.)  8vo,  cloth.
10s.  6d.

"  It  will  be  seen  from  what  has  been  said  that  this  book  is  a  very  important
one.  .  .  .  The  translation  is  also  exceedingly  well  done." — Critical  Review.

"  We  trust  the  book  will  be  widely  read,  and  should  advise  those  who  read  it
to  do  so  twice." — Primitive  Methodist  Quarterly.

"Instinct  with  genuine  religious  feeling;  .  .  .  exceedingly  interesting  and
suggestive." — Glasgow  Herald.

A  HISTORY  OF  THE  HEBREWS.  By  R.  Kittel,  Ordinary
Professor  of  Theology  in  the  University  of  Breslau.  In  2  vols.
(New  Series,  Vols.  III.  and  VI.)  8vo,  cloth.  Each  volume,
ioj.  6d.

Vol.  I.  Sources  of  Information  and  History  of  the  Period
up  to  the  Death  of  Joshua.  Translated  by  John  Taylor,
D.Lit,  M.A.


14  Henrietta  Street,  Covent  Garden,  London,  W.C.


WILLIAMS & NORGATE'S


THEOLOGICAL  TRANSLATION  LIBRARY-Continued.

Vol.  II.  Sources  of  Information  and  History  of  the
Period  down  to  the  Babylonian  Exile.  Translated  by  Hope
W.  Hogg,  B.D.,  and  E.  B.  Speirs,  D.D.

"  It  is  a  sober  and  earnest  reconstruction,  for  which  every  earnest  student  of
the  Old  Testament  should  be  grateful." — Christian  World.

"  It  will  be  a  happy  day  for  pulpit  and  pew  when  a  well-thumbed  copy  of
the  History  of  the  Hebrews  is  to  be  found  in  every  manse  and  parsonage." —
Liternry  World.

"  It  is  a  work  which  cannot  fail  to  attract  the  attention  of  thoughtful  people
in  this  country." — Pall  Mall  Gazette.


AN  INTRODUCTION  TO  THE  TEXTUAL  CRITICISM
OF  THE  GREEK  NEW  TESTAMENT.  By  Professor
Eberhard  Nestle,  of  Maulbronn.  Translated  from  the  Second
Edition,  with  Corrections  and  Additions  by  the  Author,  by  William
Edie,  B.D.,  and  edited,  with  a  Preface,  by  Allan  Menzies,  D.D.,
Professor  of  Divinity  and  Biblical  Criticism  in  the  University  of  St.
Andrews.  (New  Series,  Vol.  XIII.)  With  eleven  reproductions
of  Texts.  Demy  Svo,  los.  6d.  ;  half-leather,  12s.  6d.

"We  have  no  living  scholar  more  capable  of  accomplishing  the  fascinating
task  of  preparing  a  complete  introduction  on  the  new  and  acknowledged  prin
ciples  than  Prof.  Nestle.  This  book  will  stand  the  most  rigorous  scrutiny  ;  it
will  surpass  the  highest  expectation." — Expository  Times.

"  Nothing  could  be  better  than  Dr.  Nestle's  account  of  the  materials  which
New  Testament  textual  criticism  has  to  deal  with." — Spectator.

•'  We  know  of  no  book  of  its  size  which  can  be  recommended  more  cordially
to  the  student,  alike  for  general  interest  and  for  the  clearness  of  its  arrangement.
.  .  .  In  smoothness  of  rendering,  the  translation  is  one  of  the  best  we  have
come  across  for  a  considerable  time." — Manchester  Guardian.


THE  APOSTOLIC  AGE.  By  Prof.  Carl  von  Weizsacker.  Trans
lated  by  James  Millar,  B. D.  2  vols.  (New  Series,  Vols.  I.  and
V.)  Demy  Svo,  cloth.  Each  IDS.  6d.

"  Weizsacker  is  an  authority  of  the  very  first  rank.  The  present  work  marks
an  epoch  in  New  Testament  criticism.  The  English  reader  is  fortunate  in
having  a  masterpiece  of  this  kind  rendered  accessible  to  him." — Expository
Times.

" .  .  .  No  student  of  theology  or  of  the  early  history  of  Christianity  can
afford  to  leave  Weizsacker' s  great  book  unread." — Manchester  Guardian.

"  In  every  direction  in  this  work  we  find  the  mark  of  the  independent
thinker  and  investigator  .  .  .  this  remarkable  volume  .  .  .  this  able  and
learned  work.  ,  .  ." — Christian  World.

"  The  book  itself  .  .  .  is  of  great  interest,  and  the  work  of  the  translation
has  been  done  in  a  most  satisfactory  way." — Critical  Review.


14  Henrietta  Street,  Covent  Garden,  London,  W.C.


CATALOGUE  OF PUBLICATIONS.  7

THEOLOGICAL  TRANSLATION FUND LIBRARY.

©ID  Series.

Uniform  Price  per  Volume,  ds.

BAUR  (F.  C.).  CHURCH  HISTORY  OF  THE  FIRST
THREE  CENTURIES.  Translated  from  the  Third  German
Edition.  Edited  by  Rev.  Allan  Menzies.  2  vols.  8vo,  cloth.  12s.

PAUL, THE  APOSTLE  OF  JESUS  CHRIST,  HIS

LIFE AND WORK, HIS EPISTLES AND DOC-
TRINE. A Contribution to a Critical History  of  Primitive
Christianity. Edited by Rev. Allan Menzies. 2nd Edition.
2  vols.  8vo,  cloth. I2s.

BLEEK (F.). LECTURES ON THE APOCALYPSE.

Translated. Edited  by  the  Rev. Dr.  S.  Davidson. 8vo,  cloth.
6s.

EWALD'S  (Dr.  H.)  COMMENTARY  ON  THE  PRO
PHETS  OF  THE  OLD  TESTAMENT.  Translated  by
the  Rev.  J.  F.  Smith.  [Vol.  I.  General  Introduction,  Yoel,  Amos,
Hosea,  and  Zakharya  9-11.  Vol.  II.  Yesaya,  Obadya,  and  Mikah.
Vol.  III.  Nahum,  Ssephanya,  Habaqquq,  Zakharya,  Yeremya.
Vol.  IV.  Hezekiel,  Yesaya  xl.-lxvi.  Vol.  V.  Haggai,  Zakharya,
Malaki,  Jona,  Baruc,  Daniel,  Appendix  and  Index.]  5  vols.  8vo,
cloth.  30^.

COMMENTARY ON THE PSALMS. Translated  by

the  Rev.  E.  Johnson,  M.A. 2  vols.  8vo,  cloth. 12s.

COMMENTARY ON THE BOOK OF JOB, with

Translation. Translated from the German by the Rev. J.
Frederick  Smith. 8vo,  cloth. 6s.

HAUSRATH  (Prof.  A.).  HISTORY  OF  THE  NEW
TESTAMENT  TIMES.  The  Time  of  Jesus.  Translated
by  the  Revs.  C.  T.  Poynting  and  P.  Quenzer.  2  vols.  8vo,  cloth.

I2S.

The  second  portion  of  this  work,  "The  Times  of  the  Apostles,''
was  issued  apart  from  the  Library,  but  in  uniform  volumes  ;  see
p.  1 8.

KEIM'S  HISTORY  OF  JESUS  OF  NAZARA  :  Considered
in  its  connection  -with  the  National  Life  of  Israel,  and
related  in  detail.  Translated  from  the  German  by  Arthur  Ransom
and  the  Rev.  E.  M.  Geldart.  [Vol.  I.  Second  Edition.  Intro
duction,  Survey  of  Sources,  Sacred  and  Political  Groundwork.
Religious  Groundwork.  Vol.  II.  The  Sacred  Youth,  Self-recog
nition,  Decision.  Vol.  III.  The  First  Preaching,  the  Works  of

14  Henrietta  Street,  Covent  Garden,  London,  W.C.


WILLIAMS  &  NORGATE'S


THEOLOGICAL  TRANSLATION  FUND  LIBRARY-Contiuued.

Jesus,  the  Disciples,  and  Apostolic  Mission.  Vol.  IV.  Conflicts
and  Disillusions,  Strengthened  Self-confidence,  Last  Efforts  in
Galilee,  Signs  of  the  Approaching  Fall,  Recognition  of  the  Messiah.
Vol.  V.  The  Messianic  Progress  to  Jerusalem,  the  Entry  into
Jerusalem,  the  Decisive  Struggle,  the  Farewell,  the  Last  Sapper.
Vol.  VI.  The  Messianic  Death  at  Jerusalem.  Arrest  and  Pseudo-
Trial,  the  Death  on  the  Cross,  Burial  and  Resurrection,  the
Messiah's  Place  in  History,  Indices.]  Complete  in  6  vols.
8vo.  36.5-.

(Vol. I.  only  to  be  had  when  a  complete  set  of  the  work  is
ordered.)

KUENEN  (Dr.  A.).  THE  RELIGION  OF  ISRAEL  TO
THE  FALL  OF  THE  JEWISH  STATE.  By  Dr.  A.

Kuenen,  Professor  of  Theology  at  the  University,  Leiden.  Trans
lated  from  the  Dutch  by  A.  H.  May.  3  vols.  8vo,  cloth.  i8.r.

PFLEIDERER  (O.).  PAULIN1SM  :  A  Contribution  to  the
History  of  Primitive  Christian  Theology.  Translated  by  E.
Peters.  2nd  Edition.  2  vols.  8vo,  cloth,  izs.

PHILOSOPHY  OF  RELIGION  ON  THE  BASIS  OF

ITS  HISTORY.  (Vols.  I.  II.  History  of  the  Philosophy  of
Religion  from  Spinoza  to  the  Present  Day  ;  Vols.  III.  IV.  Genetic-
Speculative  Philosophy  of  Religion.)  Translated  by  Prof.  Allan
Menzies  and  the  Rev.  Alex.  Stewart.  4  vols.  8vo,  cloth.  24?.

REVILLE  (Dr.  A.).  PROLEGOMENA  OF  THE  HIS
TORY  OF  RELIGIONS.  With  an  Introduction  by  Prof.
F.  Max  Miiller.  8vo,  cloth.  6s.

PROTESTANT  COMMENTARY  ON  THE  NEW  TES
TAMENT.  With  General  and  Special  Introductions.  Edited
by  Profs.  P.  W.  Schmidt  and  F.  von  Holzendorff.  Translated
from  the  Third  German  Edition  by  the  Rev.  F.  H.  Jones,  B.A.
3  vols.  8vo,  cloth.  185.

SCHRADER  (Prof.  E.).  THE  CUNEIFORM  INSCRIP
TIONS  AND  THE  OLD  TESTAMENT.  Translated
from  the  Second  Enlarged  Edition,  with  Additions  by  the  Author,
and  an  Introduction  by  the  Rev.  Owen  C.  Whitehouse,  M.A.
2  vols.  (Vol.  I.  not  sold  separately.)  With  a  Map.  8vo,  cloth.

I2S.

ZELLER  (Dr.  E.).  THE  CONTENTS  AND  ORIGIN  OF
THE  ACTS  OF  THE  APOSTLES  CRITICALLY
INVESTIGATED.  Preceded  by  Dr.  Fr.  Overbeck's  Intro
duction  to  the  Acts  of  the  Apostles  from  De  Wette's  Handbook.
Translated  by  Joseph  Dare.  2  vols.  8vo,  cloth.  12s.

14  Henrietta  Street,  Covent  Garden,  London,  W.C.


CATALOGUE  OF  PUBLICATIONS.


THE CROWN THEOLOGICAL LIBRARY.

The  volumes  are  uniform  in  size  (crown  octavo]  and  binding,  but  the
price  varies  according  to  the  size  and  importance  of  the  -work.

Vol.  I.  BABEL  AND  BIBLE.  By  Dr.  Friedrich  Delitzsch,  Pro
fessor  of  Assyriology  in  the  University  of  Berlin.  Authorised
Translation.  Edited,  with  an  Introduction,  by  Rev.  C.  H.  W.
Johns.  Crown  8vo,  with  77  illustrations,  cloth.  $s.

Vol.  II.  THE  VIRGIN  BIRTH  OF  CHRIST:  An  Historical
and  Critical  Essay.  By  Paul  Lobstein,  Professor  of  Dogmatics
in  the  University  of  Strassburg.  Translated  by  Victor  Leuliette,
A.K.C.,  B. -es-L.,  Paris.  Edited,  with  an  Introduction,  by  Rev.
W.  D.  Morrison,  LL.D.  Crown  8vo.  y.

Vol.  III.  MY  STRUGGLE  FOR  LIGHT :  Confessions  of  a
Preacher.  By  R.  Wimmer,  Pastor  of  Weisweil-am-Rhein  in
Baden.  Crown  8vo,  cloth.  y.  6d.

Vol.  IV.  LIBERAL  CHRISTIANITY:  Its  Origin,  Nature,  and
Mission.  By  Jean  Reville,  Professeur  adjoint  a  la  Faculle  de
Theologie  Protestante  de  1'Universite  de  Paris.  Translated  and
edited  by  Victor  Leuliette,  A.K.C. ,  B. -es-L.  Crown  8vo,
cloth.  45.

Vol.  V.  WHAT  IS  CHRISTIANITY?  By  Adolf  Harnack,
Professor  of  Church  History  in  the  University,  Berlin.  Translated
by  Thomas  Bailey  Saunders.  Third  and  Revised  Edition.  Crown
8vo.  S.T.

Vol.  VI.  FAITH  AND  MORALS.  By  W.  Herrmann,  Professor  of
Systematic  Theology  at  the  University  of  Marburg ;  Author  of ' '  The
Communion  of  the  Christian  with  God."  Crown  8vo,  cloth.  $s.

Vol.  VII.  EARLY  HEBREW  STORY.  A  Study  of  the  Origin,
the  Value,  and  the  Historical  Background  of  the  Legends  of  Israel.
By  John  P.  Peters,  D.D.,  Rector  of  St.  Michael's  Church,  New
York ;  author  of  "  Nippur,  or  Explorations  and  Adventures  on  the
Euphrates."  Crown  8vo,  cloth.  $s.

Vol.  VIII.  BIBLE  PROBLEMS  AND  THE  NEW
MATERIAL  FOR  THEIR  SOLUTION.  A  Plea  for
Thoroughness  of  Investigation,  addressed  to  Churchmen
and  Scholars.  By  the  Rev.  T.  K.  Cheyne,  D.Litt.,  D.D.,
Fellow  of  the  British  Academy ;  Oriel  Professor  of  Interpretation
in  the  University  of  Oxford,  and  Canon  of  Rochester.  Crown
8vo.  $s.


14  Henrietta  Street,  Covent  Garden,  London,  W.C.


WILLIAMS & NORGATE'S


THE  CROWN  THEOLOGICAL  LIBRARY  -Continued.

Vol.  IX.  THE  DOCTRINE  OF  THE  ATONEMENT  AND
ITS  HISTORICAL  EVOLUTION  ;  and  RELIGION
AND  MODERN  CULTURE.  By  the  Kite  Ai-.gusto  Sabatier,
Professor  in  the  University  of  Paris.  Translated  by  Victor  Leuliette,
A. K. C. ,  B.  -es-L.  Crown  8vo.  4^.  6:/.

Vol.  X.  THE  EARLY  CHRISTIAN  CONCEPTION  OF
CHRIST:  Its  Value  and  Significance  in  the  History  of
Religion.  By  Otto  Prleiderer,  D.D. ,  Professor  of  Practical
Theology  in  the  University,  Berlin.  Crown  Svo.  3.?.  6</.

Vol.  XI.  THE  CHILD  AND  RELIGION.  Eleven  Essays.  By
Prof.  Henry  Jones,  M.A.,  LL.D. ,  University  of  Glasgow  ;  C.  F.  G.
Masterman,  M.A.  ;  Prof.  George  T.  Ladd,  P.D.,  LL.D.,  Uni
versity  of  Yale;  Rev.  F.  R.  Tennant,  M.A.,  B.Sc.,  Hulsean
Lecturer  ;  Rev.  J.  Cynddylan  Jones.  D.D.  ;  Rev.  Canon  Hensley
Henson.  M.A.  ;  Rev.  Robert  F.  Morton,  M.A.,  D.D.  ;  Rev.  G.
Hill,  M.A.,  D.D.  ;  Rev.  J.  J.  Thornton;  Rev.  Rabbi  A.  A.
Green;  Prof.  Joseph  Agar  Beet,  D.D.  Edited  by  Thomas
Stephens,  B.A.  Crown  8vo.  65.

"  No  fresher  and  more  instructive  book  on  this  question  has  been  issued  for
years,  and  the  study  of  its  pages  will  often  prove  a  godsend  to  many  perplexed
minds  in  the  church  and  in  the  Christian  home." — British  Ik'eekly.

Vol.  XII.  THE  EVOLUTION  OF  RELIGION:  An  Anthro
pological  Study.  By  L.  R.  Farnell,  D.Litt.,  Fellow  and  Tutor

of  Exeter  College,  Oxford  ;  University  Lecturer  in  Classical
Archaeology,  etc.,  etc.  Crown  8vo,  cloth.  55.

Vol.  XIII.  THE BOOKS OF  THE NEW  TESTAMENT.

By  H.  von  Soden,  D. D.,  Professor  of  Theology  in  the  University
of  Berlin.  Translated  by  the  Rev.  J.  R.  Wilkinson,  and  edited  by
Rev.  W.  D.  Morrison,  LL.D.  Crown  Svo,  cloth.  55.

Vol.  XIV.  JESUS.  By  Wilhelm  Bousset,  Professor  of  Theology  in
Gottingen.  Translated  by  Janet  Penrose  Trevelyan,  and  edited  by
Rev.  W.  D.  Morrison,  LL.D.  Crown  Svo.  qs.

"  It  is  true  the  writers,  von  Soden  and  Bousset,  have  in  the  course  of  their
papers  said  things  that  I  regaid  as  as  nothing  less  than  admirable.  I  very
much  doubt  whether  we  have  anything  so  admirable  in  English." — Rev.  Dr.
Sanday  in  the  Guardian.

Vol.  XV.  THE  COMMUNION  OF  THE  CHRISTIAN
WITH  GOD.  By  Prof.  Wilhelm  Herrmann.  Translated  from
the  new  German  Edition  by  Rev.  J.  S.  Stanyon,  M.A.,  and  Rev.
R.  W.  Stewart,  B.D.,  B.Sc.  Crown  8vo,  cloth.  5*.


14  Henrietta  Street,  Covent  Garden,  London,  W.C.


CATALOGUE  OF PUBLICATIONS.


THE  CROWN  THEOLOGICAL  LIBRARY— Continued.

Vol.  XVI.  HEBREW  RELIGION  TO  THE  ESTABLISH
MENT  OF  JUDAISM  UNDER  EZRA.  By  W.  E.  Addis,
M.A.  Crown  8vo,  cloth.  $s.

Vol.  XVII.  NATURALISM  AND  RELIGION.  By  Rudolf
Otto,  Professor  of  Theology  in  the  University  of  Goltingen.  Trans
lated  by  J.  Arthur  Thomson,  Professor  of  Natural  History  in  the
University  of  Aberdeen,  and  Margaret  R.  Thomson.  Edited
with  an  Introduction  by  Rev.  W.  D.  Morrison,  LL.D.  Crown
8vo.  6.r.

"...  A  valuable  survey,  and  a  critical  estimate  of  scientific  theory  and
kindred  ideas  as  they  concern  the  religious  view  of  the  world.  ...  It  is  well
written,  clear,  and  even  eloquent."—  Expository  Times.

Vol.  XVIII.  ESSAYS  ON  THE  SOCIAL  GOSPEL.  By  Pro
fessor  Adolf  Harnack,  of  Berlin,  and  Professor  W.  Herrmann,  of
Marburg.  Crown  Svo,  cloth.  4^.  6d.

Vol.  XIX.  THE  RELIGION  OF  THE  OLD  TESTAMENT:
Its  Place  among  the  Religions  of  the  Nearer  East.  By
Karl  Marti,  Professor  of  Old  Testament  Exegesis,  Bern.  Crown
Svo,  cloth.  4.s.  6d.

In  a  leading  review  The  Spectator  says  : — "  It  is  a  valuable  contribution
to  a  great  theme  by  one  who  has  devoted  his  life  to  its  study.  Not  only  the
general  reader,  for  whom  it  is  specially  intended,  but  the  theologian  will  learn
not  a  little  from  its  pages."

Vol.  XX.  LUKE,  THE  PHYSICIAN.  By  Adolf  Harnack,  D.D.
Translated  by  the  Rev.  J.  R.  Wilkinson,  M.A.  Crown  8vo,
cloth.  6s.

"What  is  new  and  interesting  and  valuable  is  the  ratiocination,  the  theorising,
and  the  personal  point  of  view  in  the  book  under  review.  We  study  it  to  under
stand  Professor  Harnack,  not  to  understand  Luke  ;  and  the  study  is  well  worth
the  time  and  work.  Personally,  I  feel  specially  interested  in  the  question  of
Luke's  nationality.  On  this  the  author  has  some  admirable  and  suggestive
pages." — Prof.  Sir  W.  M.  Ramsay  in  The  Expositor.

Vol.  XXI.  THE  HISTORICAL  EVIDENCE  FOR  THE
RESURRECTION  OF  JESUS  CHRIST.  By  Kirsopp
Lake,  Professor  of  New  Testament  Exegesis  in  the  University  of
Leiden,  Holland.  Crown  Svo,  cloth.  51.

Vol.  XXII.  THE  APOLOGETIC  OF  THE  NEW  TESTA
MENT.  By  E.  F.  Scott,  M.A.,  author  of  "The  Fourth  Gospel :
Its  Purpose  and  Theology."  Crown  Svo,  cloth.  5.5-.

14  Henrietta  Street,  Covent  Garden,  London,  W.C.


WILLIAMS & NORGATE'S


THE  CROWN  THEOLOGICAL  LIBRARY-Continued.

Vol.  XXIII.  THE  SAYINGS  OF  JESUS.  By  Adolf  Harnack,
D.D.  Being  Vol.  II.  of  Dr  Harnack's  New  Testament  Studies.
Crown  8vo,  cloth.  6.r.

Vol.  XXIV.  ANGLICAN  LIBERALISM.  By  Twelve  Church
men.  Rev.  Hubert  Handley,  Prof.  F.  C.  Burkitt,  M.A.,  D.D.,
Rev.  J.  R.  Wilkinson,  M.A.,  Rev.  C.  R.  Shaw  Stewart,  M.A.,
Rev.  Hastings  Rashdall,  D.Litt.,  D.C.L.,  Prof.  Percy  Gardner,
Litt.D.,  LL.D.,  Sir  C.  T.  Dyke  Acland,  Rev.  A.  J.  Carlyle,  M.A.,
Rev.  H.  G.  Woods,  D.D.,  Rev.  A.  Caldecott,  D.Litt.,  D.D.,  Rev.
W.  D.  Morrison,  LL.D.,  Rev.  A.  L.  Lilley,  M.A.  Crown  Svo,
cloth.  55.

"This  is  a  stimulating  volume,  and  we  are  glad  to  see  an  able  body  of
writers  uniting  to  claim  the  free  atmosphere  as  the  condition  of  spiritual
progress.  "  —  Westminster  Gazette.

Vol.  XXV.  THE  FUNDAMENTAL  TRUTHS  OF  THE
CHRISTIAN  RELIGIpN.  By  R.  Seeberg,  Professor  of
Systematic  Theology  in  Berlin.  Sixteen  Lectures  delivered  before
the  Students  of  all  Faculties  in  the  University  of  Berlin.  Crown
Svo,  350  pp.  55.

Vol.  XXVI.  THE  ACTS  OF  THE  APOSTLES.  By  Adolf
Harnack,  D.D.  Being  Vol.  III.  of  Dr  Harnack's  New  Testament
Studies.  Crown  8vo,  cloth.  6s.

Vol.  XXVII.  THE  LIFE  OF  THE  SPIRIT.  By  Rudolf
Eucken,  Professor  of  Philosophy  in  Jena.  Second  Edition.  Svo,
cloth.  55.

Vol.  XXVIII.  MONASTICISM  :  Its  Ideals  and  History;  and
THE  CONFESSIONS  OF  ST.  AUGUSTINE.  Two

Lectures  by  Adolf  Harnack,  D.D.  Translated  into  English  by
E.  E.  Kellett,  M.A.,  and  F.  H.  Marseille,  Ph.D.  Crown  Svo,
cloth.  4-r.

"  One  might  read  all  the  ponderous  works  of  Montalembert  without  obtaining
so  clear  a  view  or  so  rare  a  judgment  of  this  immense  subject  as  are  offered  in
these  luminous  pages."  —  Christian  World.

Vol.  XXIX.  MODERNITY  AND  THE  CHURCHES.  By
Prof.  Percy  Gardner,  Litt.D.,  of  Oxford.  Crown  Svo,  cloth.


Vol.  XXX.  THE  OLD  EGYPTIAN  FAITH.  By  Edouard
Naville,  Hon.  LL.D.,  Ph.D.,  Litt.D.,  Fellow  of  King's  College,
London,  Professor  of  Egyptology  at  the  University  of  Geneva.
Translated  by  Colin  Campbell,  M.A.,  D.D.  Illustrated.


14  Henrietta  Street,  Covent  Garden,  London,  W.C.


CATALOGUE  OF  PUBLICATIONS.  13


THE  HIBBERT LECTURES.

Library Edition, demy 8vo, los. 6d. per  volume. Cheap Popular
Edition,  y.  6d.  per  volume.

ALVIELLA  (Count  GOBLET  D').  LECTURES  ON  THE
ORIGIN  AND  THE  GROWTH  OF  THE  CONCEP
TION  OF  GOD  AS  ILLUSTRATED  BY  ANTHRO
POLOGY  AND  HISTORY.  Translated  by  the  Rev.  P.  H.
Wicksteed.  (Hibbert  Lectures,  1891.)  Cloth,  los.  6d.  Cheap
Edition,  y.  6d.

BEARD  (Rev.  Dr.  C.).  LECTURES  ON  THE  REFORMA
TION  OF  THE  SIXTEENTH  CENTURY  IN  ITS
RELATION  TO  MODERN  THOUGHT  AND  KNOW
LEDGE.  (Hibbert  Lectures,  1883.)  8vo,  cloth.  los.  6d.
Cheap  Edition,  3rd  Edition,  3^.  6d.

DAVIDS  (T.  W.  RHYS).  LECTURES  ON  SOME  POINTS
IN  THE  HISTORY  OF  INDIAN  BUDDHISM.  (Hib.
Lee.,  1881.)  2nd  Ed.  8vo,  cloth.  los.  6d.  Cheap  Ed.,  3^.  6d.

DRUMMOND  (Dr.)  VIA,  VERITAS,  VITA.  Lectures  on
Christianity  in  its  most  Simple  and  Intelligible  Form.  (The
Hibbert  Lectures,  1894.)  los.  6d.  Cheap  Edition,  3_r.  6d.

HATCH  (Rev.  Dr.).  LECTURES  ON  THE  INFLUENCE
OF  GREEK  IDEAS  AND  USAGES  UPON  THE
CHRISTIAN  CHURCH.  Edited  by  Dr.  Fairbairn.  (Hibbert
Lectures,  1888.)  3rd  Edition.  8vo,  cloth.  los.  6d.  Cheap
Edition,  $s.  6d.

KUENEN  (Dr.  A.).  LECTURES  ON  NATIONAL
RELIGIONS  AND  UNIVERSAL  RELIGION.  (The
Hibbert  Lectures,  1882.)  8vo,  cloth,  los.  6d.  Cheap  Edition,
3^.  6d.

MONTEFIORE  (C.  G.).  ORIGIN  AND  GROWTH  OF
RELIGION  AS  ILLUSTRATED  BY  THE  RELIGION
OF  THE  ANCIENT  HEBREWS.  (The  Hibbert  Lectures,
1892.)  2nd  Edition.  8vo,  cloth.  105.  dd.  Cheap  Edition,  35-.  6d.

PFLEIDERER  (Dr.  O.).  LECTURES  ON  THE  IN
FLUENCE  OF  THE  APOSTLE  PAUL  ON  THE
DEVELOPMENT  OF  CHRISTIANITY.  Translated  by
the  Rev.  J.  Frederick  Smith.  (Hibbert  Lectures,  1885.)  2nd
Edition.  8vo,  cloth,  los.  6d.  Cheap  Edition,  3^.  6d.

RENAN  (E.).  ON  THE  INFLUENCE  OF  THE  INSTITU
TIONS,  THOUGHT,  AND  CULTURE  OF  ROME
ON  CHRISTIANITY  AND  THE  DEVELOPMENT
OF  THE  CATHOLIC  CHURCH.  Translated  by  the  Rev.
Charles  Beard.  (Hibbert  Lectures,  1880.)  8vo,  cloth,  los.  6d.
Cheap  Edition,  3rd  Edition,  y.  6d.


14  Henrietta  Street,  Covent  Garden,  London,  W.C.


i4  WILLIAMS & NORGATE'S

THE  HIBBERT  LECTURES-Continued.

RENOUF  (P.  LE  PAGE).  ON  THE  RELIGION  OF
ANCIENT  EGYPT.  (Hibbert  Lectures,  1879.)  3rd  Edition.
8vo,  cloth.  ICK.  6d.  Cheap  Edition,  y.  6d.

RHYS  (Prof.  J.).  ON  THE  ORIGIN  AND  GROWTH
OF  RELIGION  AS  ILLUSTRATED  BY  CELTIC
HEATHENDOM.  (Hibbert  Lectures,  1886.)  8vo,  cloth.
los.  6d.  Cheap  Edition,  3^.  (id.

REVILLE  (Dr.  A.).  ON  THE  NATIVE  RELIGIONS  OF
MEXICO  AND  PERU.  Translated  by  the  Rev.  P.  II.
Wicksteed.  (Hibbert  Lectures,  1884.)  8vo,  cloth.  ids.  6d.
Cheap  Edition,  $s.  6d.

SAYCE  (Prof.  A.  H.).  ON  THE  RELIGION  OF
ANCIENT  ASSYRIA  AND  BABYLONIA.  4th  Edition.
(Hibbert  Lectures,  1887.)  8vo,  cloth,  los.  6d.  Cheap  Ed. ,  $s.  6d.

UPTON  (Rev.  C.  B.).  ON  THE  BASES  OF  RE
LIGIOUS  BELIEF.  (Hibbert  Lectures,  1893.)  Demy  8vo,
cloth,  los.  6d.  Cheap  Edition,  3^.  6:t.


ALPHABETICAL LIST.

ADDIS  (W.  E.).  HEBREW  RELIGION.  5*.  See  Crown
Theological  Library,  p.  II.

ALLIN  (Rev.  THOS.).  UNIVERSALISM  ASSERTED
AS  THE  HOPE  OF  THE  GOSPEL  ON  THE
AUTHORITY  OF  REASON,  THE  FATHERS,  AND
HOLY  SCRIPTURE.  With  a  Preface  by  Edna  Lyall,  and  a
Letter  from  Canon  Wilberforce.  Crown  8vo,  cloth.  2s.  6d.  net.

ALVIELLA  (Count  GOBLET  D').  THE  CONTEMPOR
ARY  EVOLUTION  OF  RELIGIOUS  THOUGHT  IN
ENGLAND,  AMERICA,  AND  INDIA.  Translated  from
the  French  by  the  Rev.  J.  Moden.  8vo,  cloth.  IQJ.  6d.

EVOLUTION OF THE IDEA OF GOD. See  The

Hibbert  Lectures,  p.  13.

ANGLICAN  LIBERALISM.  By  Twelve  Churchmen.  5*.  Sec
Crown  Theological  Library,  p.  12.

BAUR  (F.  C.).  CHURCH  HISTORY  OF  THE  FIRST
THREE  CENTURIES.  2  vols.,  I2s.  See  Theological
Translation  Library,  Old  Series,  p.  7.

— PAUL, THE APOSTLE OF JESUS CHRIST.
2  vols.,  12s. See  Theological  Translation  Library,  Old  Series,  p.  7.

BEARD  (Rev.  Dr.  C.).  THE  UNIVERSAL  CHRIST.
AND  OTHER  SERMONS.  Crown  8vo,  cloth,  ^s.  6d.


14  Henrietta  Street,  Covent  Garden,  London,  W.C.


CATALOGUE  OF PUBLICATIONS.  15

ALPHABETICAL  LIST-Continued.

BEARD  (Rev.  Dr.  C.).  LECTURES  ON  THE  REFORMA
TION  OF  THE  SIXTEENTH  CENTURY  IN  ITS
RELATION  TO  MODERN  THOUGHT  AND  KNOW
LEDGE.  See  The  Hibbert  Lectures,  p.  13.

BEEBY  (Rev.  C.  E.,  B.D.,  Author  of  "Creed  and  Life").
DOCTRINE  AND  PRINCIPLES.  Popular  Lectures  on
Primary  Questions.  Demy  8vo,  cloth.  4^.  6d.

BEVAN  (Rev.  J.  O.,  M.A.,  F.G.S.,  F.S.A.,  etc.,  Rector  of
Chillenden,  Dover).  THE  GENESIS  AND  EVOLUTION
OF  THE  INDIVIDUAL  SOUL  SCIENTIFICALLY
TREATED.  Including  also  Problems  relating  to  Science
and  Immortality.  Crown  Svo,  cloth.  2s.  6d.  net.

"  Meets  the  much  debated  questions  which  are  raised  by  the  more  thought
ful,  and  perhaps  able,  opponents  of  belief  in  a  second  life,  and  is  a  work  of  great
value,  and  one  that  is  opportune  in  its  publication,  and  besides, per  se,  emphati
cally  interesting  reading." — Manchester  Courier.

BIBLE.  Translated  by  Samuel  Sharpe,  being  a  Revision  of  the
Authorised  English  Version.  6th  Edition  of  the  Old,  loth  Edition
of  the  New  Testament.  Svo,  roan.  $s.  See  also  Testament.

BLEEK(R). LECTURES  ON  THE  APOCALYPSE. See

Theological  Translation  Library,  Old  Series,  p.  7.
BREMOND  (HENRI). THE  MYSTERY  OF  NEWMAN.

With  an  Introduction  by  Rev.  George  Tyrrell,  M.A.  Medium  Svo,
cloth,  icxr.  6d.  net.

"From  France  comes  a  remarkable  volume,  excellently  translated,  which
endeavours  to  probe  the  mystery  ;  to  realise,  as  it  were,  the  soul  of  Newman,
to  describe  to  us  justly  and  truthfully  the  personality  of  the  man." — Daily
Chronicle.

"  No  subsequent  work  can  deprive  M.  Bremond's  book  of  its  great  psycho
logical  interest  ;  it  is  a  work  that,  unlike  many  books  on  Newman  and  the
Tractarians,  no  student  of  modern  Christianity  can  afford  to  miss." — Pall  Mall
Gazette.

CAMPBELL  (Rev.  Canon  COLIN,  M.A.,  D.D.,).  FIRST
THREE  GOSPELS  IN  GREEK.  3*.  6d.  net.  See  Testa
ment,  New,  p.  26.

CAMPBELL  (Rev.  R.  J.,  M.A.).  NEW  THEOLOGY
SERMONS.  Crown  Svo,  cloth.  6s.

CHANNING'S  COMPLETE  WORKS.  Including  "The
Perfect  Life,"  with  a  Memoir.  Centennial  Edition.  4to  Edition.
Cloth.  7  5.  6d.

CHEYNE  (Prof.  T.  K.).  3IBLE  PROBLEMS  AND  THE
NEW  MATERIAL  FOR  THEIR  SOLUTION.  5*.
See  Crown  Theological  Library,  p.  9.

CHILD  AND  RELIGION.  Edited  by  Thomas  Stephens,  B.A.
6s.  See  Crown  Theological  Library,  p.  10.

CHRISTIAN  CREED  (OUR).  2nd  and  greatly  Revised  Edition.
Crown  Svo.  cloth.  3^.  6d.

14  Henrietta  Street,  Covent  Garden,  London,  W.C.


16  WILLIAMS  &  NORGATE'S

ALPHABETICAL LIST— Continued.

COIT  (STANTON,  Ph.D.).  NATIONAL  IDEALISM  AND
A  STATE  CHURCH.

"  No  one  reading  this  book  could  miss  its  interest  and  ability.  .  .  .  Criticises
existing  Christianity  along  lines  almost  literally  opposite  to  those  of  Herbert
Spencer  and  the  majority  of  the  critics.  .  .  .  Great  clearness  and  eloquence." —
G.  K.  CHESTERTON  in  The  Nation.

NATIONAL IDEALISM AND THE BOOK OF

COMMON  PRAYER.  An  Essay  in  Re- Interpretation  and
Revision.  Demy  Svo,  cloth.  lew.  6.'/.  net.

COMMON  PRAYER  FOR  CHRISTIAN  WORSHIP:  in
Ten  Services  for  Morning  and  Evening.  32mo,  cloth,  is.  f>d.
Also  in  Svo,  cloth.  y.

CONWAY  (MONCURE  D.).  CENTENARY  HISTORY
OF  THE  SOUTH  PLACE  ETHICAL  SOCIETY.

With  numerous  Portraits,  a  facsimile  of  the  original  MS.  of  the
hymn,  "Nearer,  my  God,  to  Thee,"  and  Appendices.  Crown
Svo,  half  vellum,  paper  sides.  $s.

CORNILL  (Prof.  CARL).  INTRODUCTION  TO  THE
CANONICAL  BOOKS  OF  THE  OLD  TESTAMENT.

Demy  Svo,  cloth,  los.  6d.  net.  See  Theological  Translation
Library,  New  Series,  p.  3,

DAVIDS  (T.  W.  RHYS).  LECTURES  ON  SOME
POINTS  IN  THE  HISTORY  OF  INDIAN  BUDDH
ISM.  See  The  Hibbert  Lectures,  p.  13.

DELITZSCH  (F.).  BABEL  AND  BIBLE.  Two  Lectures
delivered  before  the  Deutsche  Orient-Gesellschaft  in  the  presence
of  the  German  Emperor.  55.  See  Crown  Theological  Library,
p.  9.  See  also  Harnack,  A.,  "Letter  to  Preuss.  fahrbiicher"  p.  18.

DOBSCHUTZ  (E.  VON).  CHRISTIAN  LIFE  IN  THE
PRIMITIVE  CHURCH.  Demy  Svo.  los.  6d.  5^  Theo
logical  Translation  Library,  New  Series,  p.  3.

DOLE  (CHARLES  F.).  THE  ETHICS  OF  PROGRESS,
or  the  Theory  and  the  Practice  by  which  Civilisation
proceeds.  Small  demy  Svo,  cloth.  6s.  net.

DRIVER  (S. R.). See  Mosheh  ben  Shesheth,  p.  22.

DRUMMOND  (JAMES,  M.A.,  LL.D.,  Hon.  LittD.,  late
Principal  of  Manchester  College,  Oxford).  AN  INQUIRY
INTO  THE  CHARACTER  AND  AUTHORSHIP  OF
THE  FOURTH  GOSPEL.  New  Edition  in  Preparation.

"  The  book  is  not  only  learned,  but  also  reverent  and  spiritual  in  tone,  and
ought  to  find  its  way  into  the  libraries  of  students  of  all  shades  of  belief,  as  a
very  notable  attempt  to  solve  one  of  the  most  important  of  New  Testament
problems. " — Christian  World.

VIA,  VERITAS,  VITA. See  The  Hibbert  Lectures,  p.  13.

-  PHILO  JUDJEUS. Seep.  28.

14  Henrietta  Street,  Covent  Garden,  London,  W.C.


CATALOGUE  OF  PUBLICATIONS.  17


ALPHABETICAL LIST— Continued.

ECHOES  OF  HOLY  THOUGHTS:  Arranged  as  Private
Meditations  before  a  First  Communion.  2nd  Edition,  with  a
Preface  by  Rev.  J.  Hamilton  Thorn.  Printed  with  red  lines.
Fcap.  8vo,  cloth,  is.

EUCKEN  (Prof.  RUDOLF). THE  LIFE  OF  THE  SPIRIT.

$s. See  page  12.

EWALD  (H.).  COMMENTARY  ON  THE  PROPHETS
OF  THE  OLD  TESTAMENT.  See  Theological  Transla
tion  Library,  Old  Series,  p.  7.

-  COMMENTARY  ON  THE  PSALMS. See  Theological

Translation  Library,  Old  Series,  p.  7.

EWALD  (H.).  COMMENTARY  ON  THE  BOOK  OF
JOB.  See  Theological  Translation  Library,  Old  Series,  p.  7.

FARNELL  (L.  R.).  THE  EVOLUTION  OF  RELIGION.
An  Anthropological  Study.  By  L.  R.  Farnell,  D.Litt.,  Fellow
and  Tutor  of  Exeter  College,  Oxford.  5-r.  See  Crown  Theo
logical  Library,  p.  10.

FIGG  (E.  G.).  ANALYSIS  OF  THEOLOGY,  NATURAL
AND  REVEALED.  Crown  8vo,  cloth.  6s.

FORM  BY  (Rev.  C.  W.).  RE-CREATION:  A  New  Aspect
of  Evolution.  Large  Crown  8vo,  cloth.  $s.

FOUR  GOSPELS  (THE)  AS HISTORICAL  RECORDS.

8vo,  cloth. 155-.

GILL (C.). THE EVOLUTION OF CHRISTIANITY.

By  Charles  Gill. 2nd  Edition. With  Dissertations  in  answer  to
Criticism. 8vo,  cloth. 12s.

THE BOOK OF ENOCH THE PROPHET. Trans
lated  from  an  Ethiopic  MS.  in  the  Bodleian  Library,  by  the  late
Richard Laurence, LL.D., Archbishop of  Cashel. The Text
corrected  from  his  latest  Notes  by  Charles  Gill. Re-issue,  8vo,
cloth. 55.

HARNACK  (ADOLF). ACTS  OF  THE  APOSTLES. 6s.

See  Crown  Theological  Library,  p.  12.

MONASTICISM  : Its Ideals  and History  ; and  THE

CONFESSIONS  OF  ST.  AUGUSTINE. Two  Lectures
by  Adolf  Harnack. Translated  into  English  by  E. E. Kellett,
M.A.,  and  F.  H.  Marseille,  Ph.D.,  M.A. Crown  8vo,  cloth. ^s.

"  The  lectures  impart  to  these  old  subjects  a  new  and  vivid  interest  which
cannot  but  win  this  faithful  version  many  admiring  readers." — Scotsman.

"  One  might  read  all  the  ponderous  volumes  of  Montalembert  without
obtaining  so  clear  a  view  or  so  rare  a  judgment  of  this  immense  subject  as  are
offered  in  these  luminous  pages.  .  .  .  The  translation  is  excellent,  and  gives  us
Harnack  in  pure  and  vigorous  English." — Christian  World.


14  Henrietta  Street,  Covent  Garden,  London,  W.C.
2


i8  WILLIAMS & NORGATE'S

ALPHABETICAL LIST- Continued.

HARNACK  (ADOLF).  LETTER  to  the  "  Preussische  Jahr-
biicher "  on  the  German  Emperor's  Criticism  of  Prof.
Delitzsch's  Lectures  on  "  Babel  and  Bible."  Tianslated  into
English  by  Thomas  Bailey  Saunders.  6d.  net.

-LUKE, THE PHYSICIAN. 6.-. See  Crown  Theological
Library,  p. 1 1.

-  HISTORY  OF  DOGMA. 7  vols.,  los.  6d.  each. See  Theo
logical  Translation  Library,  New  Series,  p.  4.

-  THE  SAYINGS  OF  JESUS. 6s. See  Crown  Theological
Library,  p.  12.

-WHAT  IS  CHRISTIANITY?  See  Theological  Trans-
lation  Library,  New  Series,  p.  5.  Also  Crown  Theological  Library,
p.  10.  5.?.  See  Saunders  (T.  B. ),  "Professor  llarnack  and  his
Oxford  Critics,"  p.  24.

—  MISSION  AND  EXPANSION  OF  CHRISTIANITY
IN  THE  FIRST  THREE  CENTURIES.  By  Adolf
Ihirnack,  D.  D.,  Berlin.  Kntitvly  new  edition,  re-written,  with
numerous  additions  and  maps.  2  vols.  demy  ovo,  cloth.  255.  net.

and HERRMANN (Dr. WILHELM). ESSAYS ON

THE SOCIAL GOSPEL. 45.  bd. Translation  edited  by
Maurice  A.  Canney,  M.A. Sec.  Crown  Theological  Library,  p.  n

HATCH  (Rev.  Dr.).  LECTURES  ON  THE  INFLUENCE
OF  GREEK  IDEAS  AND  USAGES  UPON  THE
CHRISTIAN  CHURCH.  See  The  Ilil.btrt  Lectures  p.  13.

HAUSRATH  (Prof.  A.).  HISTORY  OF  THE  NEW
TESTAMENT  TIMES.  The  Time  of  the  Apostles.  Trans
lated  by  Leonard  Huxley.  With  a  Preface  by  Mrs  Humphry
Ward.  4  vols.  8vo,  cloth.  42.1-.  (Uniform  with  the  Theological
Translation  Library,  Old  Series.)

-  NEW TESTAMENT TIMES. The Times of Jesus.
2  vols. I2s. Sec  Theological  Translation  Library,  Old  Series,  p.  7.

HEBREW  TEXTS,  in  large  type  for  Classes:

Genesis. 2nd  Edition. i6mo,  cloth, is.  6d.
Psalms. 161110,  cloth, is.
Isaiah. i6mo,  cloth, is.
Job. 161110,  cloth. is.

HENSLOW(Rev.  G.).  THE  ARGUMENT  OF  ADAPTA
TION  ;  or,  Natural  Theology  reconsidered.  8vo,  cloth,  is.

-SPIRITUAL  TEACHINGS  OF  BIBLE  PLANTS;
or,  The  Garden  of  God.  Svo,  cloth,  is.

-  THE  AT-ONE-MENT  ;  or,  The  Gospel  of  Reconciliation.
8vo,  cloth, is.


14  Henrietta  Street,  Covent  Garden,  London,  W.C.


CATALOGUE  OF PUBLICATIONS.  19

ALPHABETICAL LIST-Contiuued.
HENSLOW  (Rev. G.). THE  SPIRITUAL  TEACHING

OF  CHRIST'S  LIFE. 8vo,  cloth. $s.  net.
-  CHRIST NO PRODUCT OF EVOLUTION. 8vo,

cloth, is.

-VULGATE,  THE:  The  Source  of  False  Doctrines.
A  work  specially  applicable  to  the  Clergy,  Bible  Teachers,  and
other  exponents  of  the  Gospel  of  Christ.  Crown  8vo,  cloth.
2s.  Gd.  net.

HERFORD  (R.  TRAVERS,  B.A.).  CHRISTIANITY  IN
TALMUD  AND  MIDRASH.  Demy  8vo,  cloth.  iS^.net.

CONTENTS : — Introduction.  Division  I.  Passages  from  the
Rabbinical  Literature  :  A.  Passages  relating  to  Jesus.  B.  Passages
relating  to  Minim,  Minuth.  Division  II.  General  Results.  Appen
dix  containing  the  Original  Texts  of  the  Passages  translated.
Indices.

"It  is  no  exaggeration  to  say  that  it  will  prove  indispensable  not  only  to
scholars  interested  in  Talmudic  literature,  but  to  all  who  study  the  subject  of
the  evangelical  tradition.  It  will  introduce  the  reader  into  a  new  world — that
of  Jewish  thought  in  the  centuries  after  Christ." — Cambridge  Review.

HERRMANN  (W.).  THE  COMMUNION  OF  THE
CHRISTIAN  WITH  GOD.  $s.  See  Theological  Translation
Library,  New  Series,  p.  5-

FAITH AND MORALS. 5*. See Crown Theological

Library,  p.  9.

—  and  HARNACK  (ADOLF.). ESSAYS  ON  THE  SOCIAL
GOSPEL. 4-r.  6d. See  Crown  Theological  Library,  p.  n.

HIBBERT  JOURNAL  :  A  Quarterly  Review  of  Religion,
Theology,  and  Philosophy.  Edited  by  L.  P.  Jacks  and  G.
Dawes  Hicks.  Vol.  I.  Royal  8vo,  856  pp.  Vol.  II.,  864  pp.
Vol.  III.,  869  pp.  Vols.  IV.,  V.,  VI.,  and  VII.,  960  pp.  Cloth.
Each  I2s.  6d.  net.  Annual  Subscription,  los.  post  free.

HIBBERT  JOURNAL  SUPPLEMENT,  1909,  entitled
JESUS  OR  CHRIST?  Containing  Essays  by  the  following
writers  : — The  late  Rev.  George  Tyrrell,  The  Bishop  of  Southwark,
Professor  II.  Weinel,  Professor  Percy  Gardner,  Professor  P.
Schmiedel,  Professor  Henry  Jones,  The  Rev.  Richard  Morris,  B.  D.,
Sir  Oliver  Lodge,  Canon  H.  Scott  Holland,  The  Rev.  Father
Joseph  Rickaby,  S.J.,  Professor  Nathan  Soderblom  (Upsala). ,  Rev.
Principal  A.  E.  Garvie,  D.  1).,  The  Rev.  R.  J.  Campbell,  M.A.,
The  Rev.  James  Drummond,  D.  D. ,  Professor  B.  W.  Bacon,  D.  D, ,
Rev.  Principal  J.  E.  Carpenter,  D.D. ,  Mr  James  Collier,  The
Rev.  R.  Roberts.  Super-royal  8vo,  cloth.  $s.  net.

HOERNING  (Dr.  R.).  THE  KARAITE  MSS.,  BRITISH
MUSEUM.  The  Karaite  Exodus  (i.  to  viii.  5)  in  Forty-two
Autotype  Facsimiles,  with  a  Transcription  in  ordinary  Arabic  type.
Together  with  Descriptions  and  Collation  of  that  and  five  other
MSS.  of  portions  of  the  Hebrew  Bible  in  Arabic  characters  in  the
same  Collection.  Royal  4to,  cloth,  gilt  top.  2os.

14  Henrietta  Street,  Covent  Garden,  London,  W.C.


WILLIAMS & NORGATE'S


ALPHABETICAL LIST-Continued.

HUNTER  (Rev.  J.,  D.D.).  DE  PROFUNDIS  CLAMAVI,
and  Other  Sermons.  Large  Crown  Svo,  cloth.  55.  net.

—  THE  COMING  CHURCH. A  Plea  for  a  Church  simply
Christian. Cloth, is.  6d.  net.

JOHNSON  (EDWIN,  M.A.).  THE  RISE  OF  CHRISTEN
DOM.  Demy  Svo,  cloth.  Js.  6d.

JOHNSON  (EDWIN,  M.A.).  ANTIQUA  MATER  :  A  Study
of  Christian  Origins.  Crown  Svo,  cloth,  zs.  6d.

THE RISE OF ENGLISH CULTURE. Demy  8vo,

cloth. 155.  net.

JONES  (Rev.  R.  CROMPTON).  HYMNS  OF  DUTY  AND
FAITH.  Selected  and  Arranged.  247  pp.  Fcap.  Svo,  cloth.
2nd  Edition.  3^.  6d.

CHANTS, PSALMS, AND CANTICLES. Selected

and  Pointed  for  Chanting. iSmo,  cloth, is.  6d.

-  ANTHEMS. With Indexes  and References to  the Music.
iSmo,  cloth, is.  ^d.

—  THE  CHANTS  AND ANTHEMS. Together  in i vol.,
cloth, zs.

A  BOOK  OF  PRAYER. In  Thirty  Orders  of  Worship,  with

Additional Prayers and Thanksgivings. iSmo, cloth. zs. 6d.
With  Chants,  in  I  vol.  iSmo,  cloth. 3^.

KAUTZSCH  (E.).  AN  OUTLINE  OF  THE  HISTORY
OF  THE  LITERATURE  OF  THE  OLD  TESTA
MENT.  With  Chronological  Tables  for  the  History  of  the
Israelites,  and  other  Aids  to  the  Explanation  of  the  Old  Testament.
Reprinted  from  the  "Supplement  to  the  Translation  of  the  Old
Testament."  By  E.  Kautzsch,  Professor  of  Theology  at  the  Uni
versity  of  Halle.  Edited  by  the  Author.  Translated  by  John
Taylor,  D. Lit.,  M. A.,  etc.  Demy  Svo,  cloth.  6s.  6d.

"  This  English  translation  .  .  .  is  likely  to  prove  very  acceptable  to  all  those
students  who  desire  to  see  for  themselves  the  view  taken  by  the  'higher  critics'
of  the  growth  of  the  Old  Testament." — The  Guardian.

"Dr.  Taylor  has  rendered  a  great  service  to  the  English  readers  by  his
excellent  translation  of  this  important  work." — British  Weekly.

KEIM'S  HISTORY  OF  JESUS  OF  NAZARA.  6  vols.
6s.  each.  See  Theological  Translation  Library,  Old  Series,  p.  7.

KENNEDY (Rev. JAS.). BIBLICAL HEBREW. 125.

See  p.  34.

KITTEL  (R.).  HISTORY  OF  THE  HEBREWS.  2  vols.
los.  6d.  each.  See  Theological  Translation  Library,  New  Series,  p.  5.

KUENEN  (Dr.  A.).  LECTURES  ON  NATIONAL  AND
UNIVERSAL  RELIGIONS.  See  The  Hibbert  Lectures,
P-  13-


14  Henrietta  Street,  Covent  Garden,  London,  W.C.


CATALOGUE  OF  PUBLICATIONS.  21

ALPHABETICAL  LIST— Continued.

KUENEN  (Dr.  A.).  THE  RELIGION  OF  ISRAEL  TO
THE  FALL  OF  THE  JEWISH  STATE.  3  vols.  18*.
See  Theological  Translation  Library,  Old  Series,  p.  8.

LAKE  (Professor  KIRSOPP).  THE  HISTORICAL  EVI
DENCE  FOR  THE  RESURRECTION  OF  JESUS
CHRIST.  55.  See  Crown  Theological  Library,  p.  n.

LEA  (HENRY  CHARLES,  LL.D.).  HISTORY  OF  SAC
ERDOTAL  CELIBACY  IN  THE  CHRISTIAN
CHURCH.  Third  Edition.  Thoroughly  Revised  and  Reset.
2  vols.  Medium  8vo,  cloth.  2 is.  net.

LOBSTEIN(P.).  THE  DOGMA  OF  THE  VIRGIN  BIRTH
OF  CHRIST.  y,.  See  Crown  Theological  Library,  p.  9.

LODGE  (Sir  O.).  LIFE  AND  MATTER.  An  Exposition
of  Part  of  the  Philosophy  of  Science,  with  Special  References
to  the  Influence  of  Professor  Haeckel.  Second  Edition,  with
an  Appendix  of  Definitions  and  Explanations.  Crown  8vo,  cloth.
2s.  6d.  net.  Popular  Edition.  Paper  cover.  6d.  net.

MACAN  (R.  W.).  THE  RESURRECTION  OF  JESUS
CHRIST.  An  Essay  in  Three  Chapters.  8vo,  cloth.  55.

MACFIE,  (RONALD  C.,  M.A.,  M.B.).  SCIENCE,
MATTER,  AND  IMMORTALITY.  Crown  8vo,  cloth.
5-y.  net.

MACKAY  (R.  W.).  SKETCH  OF  THE  RISE  AND
PROGRESS  OF  CHRISTIANITY.  8vo,  cloth.  6s.

MARCHANT  (JAMES).  THEORIES  OF  THE  RESUR
RECTION  OF  JESUS  CHRIST.  Crown  8vo,  stiff  covers,
2s.  net  ;  superior  cloth  binding,  3^.

MARTI  (KARL).  RELIGION  OF  THE  OLD  TESTA
MENT,  qs.  6d.  See  Crown  Theological  Library,  p.  n.

MARTINEAU  (Rev.  Dr.  JAMES).  THE  RELATION
BETWEEN  ETHICS  AND  RELIGION.  An  Address.
8vo,  sewed,  u.

MODERN  MATERIALISM  :  ITS  ATTITUDE  TO
WARDS  THEOLOGY.  A  Critique  and  Defence.  8vo,
sewed.  2s.  6d.

MENEGOZ  (E.). RELIGION AND  THEOLOGY. By  E.

Menegoz,  Professor  of  the  Faculty  of  Protestant  Theology,  Paris.
Stiff  boards, is.  net.

MERCER  (Right  Rev.  J.  EDWARD,  D.D.).  THE  SOUL
OF  PROGRESS.  Being  the  Moorhouse  Lectures  for  1907.
Crown  8vo,  cloth.  6s.  For  Moorhouse  Lectures  vide  also  Stephen,
page  25.

"  To  be  congratulated  on  an  effective  and  freshly  thought  out  exposure  of
the  familiar  failure  of  materialism  to  account  for  evolution,  humanity  or
progress  in  any  intelligible  sense." — The  Christian  World.

14  Henrietta  Street,  Covent  Garden,  London,  W.C.


WILLIAMS  & NORGATE'S


ALPHABETICAL  LIST— Continued.

MITCHELL  (Rev.  A.  F.). HOW  TO  TEACH  THE  BIBLE.

2nd  Edition,  thoroughly  revised  and  reset.  Crown  8vo,  cloth.
2s.  6d.

"  The  lectures  are  marked  by  much  insight  and  moderation.  The  book  is
notable  also  for  its  gracious  and  cultured  note,  and  for  the  quiet  persuasiveness
with  which  a  revolutionary  reform  is  advocated.' — Sunday  School  Chronicle.

MONTEFIORE  (C.  G.).  ORIGIN  AND  GROWTH  OF
RELIGION  AS  ILLUSTRATED  BY  THE  RELIGION
OF  THE  ANCIENT  HEBREWS.  See  The  llihbert  Lec
tures,  p.  13.

MOSHEH  BEN  SHESHETH'S  COMMENTARY  ON
JEREMIAH  AND  EZEKIEL.  Edited  from  a  Bodleian
MS.,  with  a  Translation  and  Notes,  by  S.  R.  Driver.  8vo,
sewed.  35.

MUNSTERBERG (Prof. HUGO). THE AMERICANS.

I2s.  6d.  net. Sec  p.  29.

NESTLE  (E.).  INTRODUCTION  TO  THE  TEXTUAL
CRITICISM  OF  THE  GREEK  NEW  TESTAMENT.

See  Theological  Translation Library, New  Series,  p. 6.

OTTO  (R.).  NATURALISM  AND  RELIGION.  6s.  See
Crown  Theological  Library,  p.  11.

PERCIVAL (G. H.). THE INCARNATE PURPOSE.

Essays  on  the  Spiritual  Unity  of  Life.  Crown  8vo,  cloth.  2s.  6d.
net.

PERRIN  (R.  S.).  THE  EVOLUTION  OF  KNOWLEDGE.
A  Review  of  Philosophy.  Crown  8vo,  cloth.  6s.

PERSONAL  AND  FAMILY  PRAYERS.  Svo,  buckram
is.  net.

PETERS (JOHN P.). EARLY HEBREW  STORY. A

Study  of  the  Origin,  the  Value,  and  the  Historical  Background
of  the  Legends  of  Israel.  $s.  See  Crown  Theological  Library,
p.  10.

PFLEIDERER  (Dr.  O.).  LECTURES  ON  THE  IN
FLUENCE  OF  THE  APOSTLE  PAUL  ON  THE
DEVELOPMENT  OF  CHRISTIANITY.  See  The
Hibbert  Lectures,  p.  13.

PAULINISM  :  A  Contribution  to  the  History  of  Primitive

Christianity.  2  vols.  121.  See  Theological  Translation  Library,
Old  Series,  p.  8.

—  PHILOSOPHY  OF  RELIGION  ON  THE  BASIS  OF
ITS  HISTORY.  4  vols.  24$.  See  Theological  Translation
Library,  Old  Series,  p.  8.


14  Henrietta  Street,  Covent  Garden,  London,  W.C.


CATALOGUE  OF PUBLICATIONS.  23


ALPHABETICAL  LIST— Continued.

PFLEIDERER  (Dr.  O.).  THE  EARLY  CHRISTIAN
CONCEPTION  OF  CHRIST:  Its  Significance  and
Value  in  the  History  of  Religion.  y.6d.  See  Crown  Theo
logical  Library,  p.  10.

-  PRIMITIVE  CHRISTIANITY.  Vols.  I.  and  II.  Demy
8vo,  cloth.  IQS.  6d.  net  each.  See  Theological  Translation  Library,
New  Series,  p.  2.

PICTON,  (J.  ALLANSON,  M.A.,  Lond.).  MAN  AND  THE
BIBLE.  A  Review  of  the  Place  of  the  Bible  in  Human
History.  Demy  8vo,  cloth.  6s.  net.

POOLE  (REG.  LANE).  ILLUSTRATIONS  OF  THE
HISTORY  OF  MEDIEVAL  THOUGHT  IN  THE
DEPARTMENTS  OF  THEOLOGY  AND  ECCLESI
ASTICAL  POLITICS.  8vo,  cloth.  IDS.  6d.

PROTESTANT  COMMENTARY  ON  THE  NEW  TES
TAMENT.  3  vols.  iSs.  See  Theological  Translation  Library,
Old  Series,  p.  8.

RENAN  (E.).  ON  THE  INFLUENCE  OF  THE  INSTI
TUTIONS,  THOUGHT,  AND  CULTURE  OF  ROME
ON  CHRISTIANITY  AND  THE  DEVELOPMENT
OF  THE  CATHOLIC  CHURCH.  See  Hibbcrt  Lectures,
P-  13'

RENOUF  (P.  LE  PAGE).  ON  THE  RELIGION  OF
ANCIENT  EGYPT.  See  Hibbert  Lectures,  p.  14.

REVILLE  (A.).  THE  SONG  OF  SONGS,  Commonly  called
the  Song  of  Solomon,  or  the  Canticle.  Translated  from  the
French.  Crown  Svo,  cloth,  is.  6d.

ON  NATIVE  RELIGIONS  OF  MEXICO  AND  PERU.

See  Hibbert  Lectures,  p.  14.

PROLEGOMENA  OF  THE  HISTORY  OF  RE
LIGIONS.  6s.  See  Theological  Translation  Library,  Old
Series,  p.  8.

REVILLE  (JEAN). LIBERAL  CHRISTIANITY. 4* See

Crown  Theological  Library,  p.  10.

RIX  (HERBERT).  TENT  AND  TESTAMENT.  A  Camp
ing  Tour  in  Palestine,  with  some  Notes  on  Scripture  Sites.  With
61  Illustrations,  Frontispiece,  and  Maps.  Demy  Svo,  cloth.
&s.  6d.  net.

"  His  narrative  of  travel  is  that  of  an  intelligent  and  well-informed  traveller
who  went  without  prepossessions  and  was  both  able  and  willing  to  weigh
evidence.  .  .  .  Mr.  Kix's  contribution  is  one  that  must  be  taken  into  account."
— Spectator.

The  result  is  a  thoughtful,  well-written,  even  learned  work,  far  from  the
vain  outpourings  of  the  tourist.  The  narrative,  though  heavily  charged  with
information,  is  wonderfully  unembarrassed,  and  the  word-pictures  which  abound
are  true  to  life." — Athenceum.


14  Henrietta  Street,  Covent  Garden,  London,  W.C.


24  WILLIAMS & NORGATE'S

ALPHABETICAL  LIST— Continued.

RIX  (HERBERT).  A  DAWNING  FAITH.  Crown  8vo,
clolh.  5.5-.

ROBINSON  (ALEX.,  M.A.,  B.D.).  A  STUDY  OF
THE  SAVIOUR  IN  THE  NEWER  LIGHT.  2nd

Edition. Revised  and  partly  re-written. Demy  8vo,  cloth. $s.  net

OLD  AND  NEW  CERTAINTY  OF  THE  GOSPEL:

A  Sketch. Crown  8vo,  cloth, zs.  6d.

SABATIER  (AUGUSTE).  THE  RELIGIONS  OF  AU
THORITY  AND  THE  RELIGION  OF  THE  SPIRIT.

With  a Memoir  by  Professor  J.  Reville. los.  6d. See  Theologi
cal  Translation  Library,  New  Series,  p.  3.

THE  DOCTRINE  OF  THE  ATONEMENT  AND

ITS HISTORICAL EVOLUTION  ; and RELIGION
AND MODERN CULTURE. 45. 6d. Sec  Crown  Theo
logical  Library,  p.  10.

SADLER  (Rev.  Dr.).  PRAYERS  FOR  CHRISTIAN
WORSHIP.  Crown  8vo,  cloth.  T,S.  6d.

CLOSET PRAYERS, Original and Compiled. i8mo,

cloth, is.  6d.

SAUNDERS  (T.  BAILEY).  PROFESSOR  HARNACK
AND  HIS  OXFORD  CRITICS.  Crown  8vo,  cloth.
is.  6d.  net.

"It  gives  thoughtful  and  acutely  reasoned  support  to  the  great  historical
student  of  Christianity who  represents Berlin in theology  against the pig-


tailed  opposition  which  Oxfo
controversial  writing,  it  cam
modern  divinity,  no  matter  t
sions  incline  them." — Scotsni
"Mr.  Saunders  writes  \\
at  issue.  Readers  of  '  Ha


d  has  offered  to  his  learning. A  spirited  piece  of
ot  but  prove  stimulating  to  readers  interested  in

which  side  of  the  debate  their  private  preposses-

«.

th  sobriety  and  with  a  knowledge  of  the  points

nack  and  his Critics ' will do well to read his


comments." — Sheffield  Daily  Telegraph.

SAVAGE  (M.  J.).  BELIEFS  ABOUT  THE  BIBLE.  8vo,
cloth.  7s.  6d.

SAYCE  (A.  H.).  ON  THE  RELIGION  OF  ANCIENT
ASSYRIA  AND  BABYLONIA.  See  Ilibbert  Lectures,
p.  14.

SCHRADER  (E.).  CUNEIFORM  INSCRIPTIONS  AND
THE  OLD  TESTAMENT.  2  vols.  i2s.  See  Theological
Translation  Library,  Old  Series,  p.  8.

SCHUBERT  (HANS  VON).  OUTLINES  OF  CHURCH
HISTORY.  See  Theological  Translation  Library,  New  Series,
P-  3-


14  Henrietta  Street,  Covent  Garden,  London,  W.C.


CATALOGUE  OF  PUBLICATIONS.  25

ALPHABETICAL  LIST-Continued.

SCOTT  (Rev.  E.  F.,  M.A.).  THE  APOLOGETIC  OF  THE
NEW  TESTAMENT.  5*.  See  Crown  Theological  Library,
p.  II.

SCULLARD  (Rev.  Prof.  H.  H.,  M.A..  D.D.).  EARLY
CHRISTIAN  ETHICS  IN  THE  WEST,  FROM
CLEMENT  TO  AMBROSE.  Large  crown  8vo,  cloth.  65.

SEEBERG  (R.).  THE  FUNDAMENTAL  TRUTHS  OF
THE  CHRISTIAN  RELIGION.  By  R.  Seeberg,  Pro
fessor  of  Systematic  Theology  in  Berlin.  $s.  See  Crown  Theo
logical  Library,  p.  12.

SEVERUS  (Patriarch  of  Antioch).  THE  SIXTH  BOOK
OF  THE  SELECT  LETTERS  OF  SEVERUS,
PATRIARCH  OF  ANTIOCH,  in  the  Syriac  Version  of
Athanasius  of  Nisibis.  Edited  and  translated  by  E.  W.  Brooks.
Vol.  I.  (Text),  Part  I,  and  Vol.  II.  (Translation),  Part  I.  2  vols.
8vo,  cloth.  425.  net.  Vol.  I.  (Text),  Part  2,  and  Vol.  II.  (Trans
lation),  Part  2.  2  vols.  8vo,  cloth.  425-.  net.  See  Text  and
Translation  Society,  p.  37.

SHARPE  (SAMUEL).  CRITICAL  NOTES  ON  THE
AUTHORISED  ENGLISH  VERSION  OF  THE  NEW
TESTAMENT.  2nd  Edition.  121110,  cloth,  is.  6d.

SODEN  (H.  von,  D.D.).  THE  BOOKS  OF  THE  NEW
TESTAMENT.  55.  See  Crown  Theological  Library,  p.  10.

STEPHEN  (Rev.  Canon  REGINALD,  M.A.).  DEMOC
RACY  AND  CHARACTER.  Being  the  Moorhouse  Lectures
for  1908.  Crown  8vo,  cloth.  5*.

"  Canon  Stephen's  book  is  much  too  clear  and  thoughtful  to  be  neglected  in
this  country.  Within  the  narrow  limits  of  seven  lectures  he  has  discussed  some
important  issues  of  politics  in  a  democratic  country  with  strong  practical  common
sense  and  the  right  kind  of  theoretical  learning." — Athenceum.

THE  STATUTES  OF  THE  APOSTLES.  The  hitherto
unedited  Ethiopia  and  Arabic  Texts.  Edited,  with  an  Introduc
tion  and  Translations  of  the  Ethiopic,  Arabic,  and  Coptic  Texts,
by  Rev.  G.  Homer,  M.A.  With  an  Appendix — a  recently  dis
covered  variant  of  the  Coptic  Text.  185.  net.

TAYLER  (Rev.  JOHN  JAMES).  AN  ATTEMPT  TO
ASCERTAIN  THE  CHARACTER  OF  THE  FOURTH
GOSPEL,  especially  in  its  Relation  to  the  First  Three.

2nd  Edition. 8vo,  cloth. 55.

TAYLOR  (Rev.  C.).  THE  DIRGE  OF  COHELETH  IN
ECCLES.  XII.  DISCUSSED  AND  LITERALLY
INTERPRETED.  8vo,  cloth.  3*.

14  Henrietta  Street,  Covent  Garden,  London,  W.C.


26  WILLIAMS & NORGATE'S


ALPHABETICAL  LIST— Continued.

TAYLOR  (Rev.  Dr.  J.).  THE  MASSORETIC  TEXT  AND
THE  ANCIENT  VERSIONS  OF  THE  BOOK  OF
MICAH.  Crown  8vo,  cloth.  5j.

See  also  Kautzsch,  "  Outline,"  p.  20.

TEN SERVICES OF PUBLIC PRAYER, with Special
Collects. 8vo,  cloth,  3.5-.  ;  or  32010,  cloth,  is.  6d.

PSALMS  AND  CANTICLES. 8vo,  cloth, is.  6d.

PSALMS AND CANTICLES, with Anthems. 8vo,

cloth. 2s.

TEN  SERVICES  OF  PUBLIC  PRAYER,  taken  in  Sub
stance  from  the  Common  Prayer  for  Christian  Worship,
with  a  few  additional  Prayers  for  particular  Days.  Svo,
cloth,  2s.  6d.  •  or  32mo,  cloth,  is.

TESTAMENT,  THE  NEW.  TISCHENDORF  (C.).
NOVUM  TESTAMENTUM  GREECE.  3  vols.  Svo.
•jos.  net.

CAMPBELL  (Rev.  Canon  COLIN,  M.A.,  D.D.). THE

FIRST  THREE  GOSPELS  IN  GREEK.  Arranged  in
parallel  columns.  2nd  Edition,  Revised.  Crown  Svo,  cloth.
35.  6d.  net.

THOMAS  (Rev.  J.  M.  LLOYD).  A  FREE  CATHOLIC
CHURCH.  Crown  Svo,  cloth,  is.  6d.  net.

UPTON  (C.  B.).  ON  THE  BASES  OF  RELIGIOUS
BELIEF.  See  Hibbert  Lectures,  p.  14.

WEIR  (T.  H.,  B.D.).  A  SHORT  HISTORY  OF  THE
HEBREW  TEXT  OF  THE  OLD  TESTAMENT.  By
Thomas  H.  Weir,  Assistant  to  the  Professor  of  Oriental  Languages
in  the  University  of  Glasgow.  2nd  Edition,  with  Additions.
Crown  Svo,  cloth.  6s.

WEIZSACKER  (C.  von).  THE  APOSTOLIC  AGE.  2  vols.
Demy  JSvo.  21  s.  Sec  Theological  Translation  Library,  New
Series,  p.  6.

WERNLE  (PAUL).  THE  BEGINNINGS  OF  CHRIS
TIANITY.  2  vols.  Svo.  2is.  See  Theological  Translation
Library,  New  Series,  p.  4.

WICKSTEED  (Rev.  P.  H.).  THE  ECCLESIASTICAL
INSTITUTIONS  OF  HOLLAND,  treated  with  Special
Reference  to  the  Position  and  Prospects  of  the  Modern
School  of  Theology.  A  Report  presented  to  the  Hibbert
Trustees,  and  published  by  their  direction.  Svo,  sewed,  is.


14  Henrietta  Street,  Covent  Garden,  London,  W.C.


CATALOGUE  OF  PUBLICATIONS.  27


ALPHABETICAL  LIST— Continued.

WIMMER  (R.).  MY  STRUGGLE  FOR  LIGHT:  Con
fessions  of  a  Preacher.  $s.  6d.  See  Crown  Theological
Library,  p,  9.

WOODS (C.  E.) THE  GOSPEL  OF  RIGHTNESS. A

Study  in  Pauline  Philosophy. 300  pages,  cloth. 51.  net.

The  chief  purpose  in  the  author's  mind  has  been  to  present  a  book  to  a  class
of  thinkers  and  readers  who  are  not  so  widely  catered  for  as  might  be,  and  by
whom  the  writings  of  the  great  Apostle  have  been  shelved  as  no  longer  in
keeping  with  the  liberal  thought  of  to-day.  The  attempt  is  made  to  present  the
Apostle  in  a  somewhat  new  light  as  a  philosopher  who  develops  a  remarkable
scheme  of  spiritual  thought  from  one  or  two  very  simple  and  self-evident
principles.

WRIGHT  (Rev.  C.  H.  H.).  BOOK  OF  GENESIS  IN
HEBREW  TEXT.  With  a  critically  revised  Text,  various
Readings,  and  Grammatical  and  Critical  Notes.  Demy  8vo.
y.  6d.

BOOK  OF  RUTH  IN  HEBREW  TEXT. With  a  criti
cally  revised  Text,  various  Readings,  including  a  new  Collation  of
Twenty-eight Hebrew MSS.,  and a Grammatical and Critical
Commentary  ;  to  which  is  appended  the  Chaldee  Targum. Demy
8vo. "js.  6d.

• DANIEL AND HIS PROPHECIES. Demy 8vo,

cloth. 7J-.  6d.

-  DANIEL AND ITS CRITICS. A  Critical  and  Gram
matical  Commentary  with  Appendix. Demy  8vo,  cloth, "js.  6d.

LIGHT  FROM EGYPTIAN PAPYRI  ON  JEWISH

HISTORY  BEFORE  CHRIST. Crown  8vo,  cloth. 3*.  net.

WRIGHT  (G.  H.  BATESON). THE  BOOK  OF  JOB. A

new  critically  revised  Translation,  with  Essays  on  Scansion,  Date,
etc. 8vo,  cloth. 6s.

WAS ISRAEL EVER IN EGYPT  ? or, A Lost

Tradition. By  G.  H.  Bateson  Wright,  D.D.,  Queen's  College,
Oxford ; Headmaster  Queen's  College, Hong-Kong ; Author  of
"A  Critical  Revised  Translation  of  the  Book  of  Job." 8vo,  art
linen. Js.  6d.

WRIGHT  (W.  ALOIS),  Edited  by,  and  Dr  S.  A.  HIRSCH.
A  COMMENTARY  ON  THE  BOOK  OF  JOB.  From
a  Hebrew  MS.  in  the  University  Library,  Cambridge.  Med.  8vo,
cloth.  2is.  net.

ZELLER  (E.).  CONTENTS  AND  ORIGIN  OF  THE
ACTS  OF  THE  APOSTLES.  ^Theological  Translation
Library,  Old  Series,  p.  8.


14  Henrietta  Street,  Covent  Garden,  London,  W.C.


28  WILLIAMS &  NORGATE'S


II. Philosophy, Psychology.

BACON  (ROGER),  THE  "OPUS  MAJUS"  OF.  Edited,  with
Introduction  and  Analytical  Table,  by  John  Henry  Bridges,  Fellow
of  Royal  College  of  Physicians,  sometime  Fellow  of  Oriel  College.
Complete  in  3  vols. ,  31.1.  6d.  ;  Vol.  III.  sold  separately,  "js.  6d.

BREWSTER  (H.  B.).  THE  THEORIES  OF  ANARCHY
AND  OF  LAW.  A  Midnight  Debate.  Crown  8vo,  parch
ment.  55.

—  THE  PRISON. A  Dialogue. Crown  8vo,  parchment. $s.

THE  STATUETTE  AND  THE  BACKGROUND.

Crown  8vo,  parchment. 45.

COLLINS  (F.  H.).  AN  EPITOME  OF  THE  SYNTHETIC
PHILOSOPHY.  By  F.  Howard  Collins.  With  a  Preface  by
Herbert  Spencer.  $\.h  Edition.  The  Synthetic  Philosophy  Com
pleted.  8vo,  cloth.  2is.

DRUMMOND  (Dr.).  PHILO  JUD^US;  or,  The  Jewish
Alexandrian  Philosophy  in  its  Development  and  Completion.
By  James  Drummond,  LL.  D.,  late  Principal  of  Manchester  New
College,  Oxford.  2  vols.  Svo,  cloth.  2is.

HODGSON  (S.  H.). PHILOSOPHY  AND  EXPERIENCE.

An Address delivered before the Aristotelian Society. Svo,
sewed. 2s,

-THE REORGANISATION OF PHILOSOPHY.

Address. Svo,  sewed, is.

JORDAN  (HUMFREY  R.,  B.A.).  BLAISE  PASCAL.  A
Study  in  Religious  Psychology.  Crown  Svo,  cloth,  qs.  6d.  net.

JESUS  OR  CHRIST?  The  Hibbert  Journal  Supplement  for
1909.  Containing  Essays  by  the  following  writers  : — The  late  Rev.
George  Tyrrell,  the  Bishop  of  Southwark,  Professor  H.  Weinel,
Professor  Percy  Gardner,  Professor  P.  Schmiedel,  Professor  Henry
Jones,  The  Rev.  Richard  Morris,  B.D.,  Sir  Oliver  Lodge,  Canon  H.
Scott  Holland,  The  Rev.  Father  Joseph  Rickaby,  S.J.,  Professor
Nathan  Soderblom  (Upsala),  Rev.  Principal  A.  E.  Garvie,  D.D. ,
The  Rev.  R.  J.  Campbell,  M.A.,  The  Rev.  James  Drummond,
D.D.,  Professor  B.  W.  Bacon,  D.D.,  Rev.  Principal  J.  E.  Car
penter,  D.D.,  Mr.  James  Collier,  The  Rev.  R.  Roberts.  Super-
royal  Svo,  cloth.  5^.  net.

14  Henrietta  Street,  Covent  Garden,  London,  W.C.


CATALOGUE  OF  PUBLICATIONS.  29


LAURIE  (Professor  SIMON).  ETHICA:  or,  The  Ethics  of
Reason.  By  Scotus  Novanticus.  2nd  Edition.  8vo,  cloth.  6s.

METAPHYSICA  NOVA  ET  VETUSTA:  A  Return  to

Dualism. 2nd  Edition. Crown  8vo,  cloth. 6s.

LODGE (Sir  O.). LIFE  AND  MATTER, zs.  6d.  net. See

Religion,  p.  21.

MACCOLL  (HUGH).  MAN'S  ORIGIN,  DESTINY,  AND
DUTY.  Crown  8vo,  cloth.  4*.  6d.  net.

Professor  A.  E.  TAYLOR  in  Mind: — "On  the  main  issues  involved  the
writer  of  the  present  notice  must  avow  himself  entirely  on  the  author's  side,  and
would  unreservedly  express  his  admiration  for  the  skill  and  luminosity  with
which  the  chief  points  are  made,  and  the  happiness  of  the  illustrations.

"  Would  that  some  public-minded  society  would  provide  the  funds  for
circulating  a  book  like  the  present  in  a  sixpenny  edition  as  a  counterblast  to  the
sorry  stuff  which  the  secularist  press  is  providing  as  spiritual  pabulum  for  the
inquiring  artisan.

"The  tenth  essay,  on  the  'fallacies  of  Haeckel,'  in  particular,  is  a  most
admirable  piece  of  work,  at  once  clear,  untechnical,  and  unanswerable."

MUNSTERBERG  (HUGO,  Professor  of  Psychology  at
Harvard  University).  THE  AMERICANS.  Translated  by
Edwin  B.  Holt,  Ph.D.,  Instructor  at  Harvard  University.  Royal
8vo,  cloth.  i2s.  6d.  net.

PERRIN  (R.  S.).  EVOLUTION  OF  KNOWLEDGE,
THE.  A  Review  of  Philosophy.  6.r.  See  Religion,  p.  22.

PIKLER  (JUL.).  THE  PSYCHOLOGY  OF  THE
BELIEF  IN  OBJECTIVE  EXISTENCE.  Part  I.  8vo,
cloth.  4J.  6d.

PROCEEDINGS  OF  THE  ARISTOTELIAN  SOCIETY
FOR  THE  SYSTEMATIC  STUDY  OF  PHILOS
OPHY.  Proceedings.  Vol.  I.,  4  Nos.,  1890-91.  8vo,  izs.
Discontinued  after  Vol.  III.  Part  2.  Or  each  Part  separately.
Vol.  I.  No.  I,  zs.  6d.  ;  No.  2,  zs.  6d.  ;  No.  3,  Part  I,  is.  6d.  ;
Part  2,  zs.  ;  No.  4,  Part  I,  is.  6d.  ;  Part  2,  zs.  Vol.  II.  No.  I,
Part  I,  is.  6d.  ;  Part  2,  zs. ;  No.  2,  Part  I,  is.  6d.  ;  Part  2,  zs.  ;
No.  3,  Part  I,  zs.  ;  Part  2,  zs.  Vol.  III.  Part  I,  zs.  6d.  •
Part  2,  zs.  NEW  SERIES,  Vols.  I.-IX.  Demy  8vo,  buckram,
each  los.  6d.  net.

SALEEBY  (C.  W.,  M.D.,  F.R.S.).  INDIVIDUALISM
AND  COLLECTIVISM.  Crown  8vo,  cloth,  zs.

SCHURMAN  (J.  GOULD).  KANTIAN  ETHICS  AND
THE  ETHICS  OF  EVOLUTION.  8vo,  cloth.  5*.

THE  ETHICAL  IMPORT  OF  DARWINISM. Crown

8vo,  cloth. 5.?.


14  Henrietta  Street,  Covent  Garden,  London,  W.C.


30  WILLIAMS & NORGATE'S

SCRIPTURE  (EDWARD  W.,  Ph.D.).  STUDIES  FROM
THE  YALE  PSYCHOLOGICAL  LABORATORY.  Vols.
I. -VI.,  each  4?.  zd.  net.

SCULLARD  (Rev.  Prof.  H.H.,  M.A.,  D.D.).  EARLY
CHRISTIAN  ETHICS  IN  THE  WEST,  FROM
CLEMENT  TO  AMBROSE.  Large  ciown  Svo,  cloth.  6s.

SHEARMAN  (A.  T.,  M.A.).  THE  DEVELOPMENT  OF
SYMBOLIC  LOGIC.  A  Critical  Historical  Study  of  the
Logical  Calculus.  Crown  8vo,  cloth.  55.  net.

From  the  Contents.

Symbols  as  representing  Terms  and  as  representing  Propositions
— Symbols  of  Operation — The  Process  of  Solution — Concerning  a
Calculus  Based  on  Intension — The  Doctrines  of  Jevons  and  of  Mr.
MacColl — Later  Logical  Doctrines — The  Utility  of  Symbolic
Logic.

"  Its  style  is  smooth,  pleasant,  and  lucid." — Athcturum.

SPENCER (HERBERT). AN AUTOBIOGRAPHY.

2  vols.  demy  8vo. With  Portraits. Popular  Edition,  I2s.  6d.  net.
Library  Edition,  285.  net.

"  It  is  not  too  much  to  say  that  we  close  this  book,  the  most  interesting,  and
certainly  one  of  the  most  important  we  have  ever  opened,  feeling  better,  wiser,
and  humbler  for  having  thus  hastily  read  it." — Academy,

"  It  is  a  book  for  all  men  and  for  all  time.  In  its  pages  the  thinker  may
trace,  step  by  step,  the  synthesis  of  synthetic  philosophy.  Here  the  poet  will
find  not  only  a  worthy  inspiration,  but  a  possibly  surprising  vein  of  sympathy.
The  statesman,  the  inventor,  the  litterateur,  the  man  of  theory,  and  the  man  of
practice  will  find  alike,  within  the  covers  of  these  two  massive  volumes,  an
almost  inexhaustible  treasury  of  interest  and  constructive  thought.  There  is
suggestion  and  instruction  for  all  the  world,  and  an  almost  indefinable  fascina
tion — whether  ii  be  due  to  the  mere  intrinsic  beauty  of  the  picture  itself,  or  to
the  dignity  of  its  execution,  or  to  the  ssnse  of  its  almost  laborious  faithfulness,
or  to  the  combined  attraction  of  all  three." — St.  James's  Gazette.

—  A  SYSTEM  OF  SYNTHETIC  PHILOSOPHY—

Vol.  I.  First  Principles.  With  an  Appendix  and  a
Portrait.  Finally  revised.  New  Edition,  large  crown  8vo,  cloth.
7s.  (>d.

Vols.  II.  and  III.  The  Principles  of  Biology.  6th
Thousand.  Svo,  cloth.  Revised  and  greatly  enlarged.  Vols.  I.
and  II.  iSs.  each.

Vols.  IV.  and  V.  The  Principles  of  Psychology.  51(1
Thousand.  2  vols.  Svo,  cloth.  36^.

Vol.  VI.  The  Principles  of  Sociology.  Vol.  I.  Part  i,
The  Data  of  Sociology  ;  Part  2,  The  Inductions  of  Sociology  ;
Part  3,  Domestic  Institutions.  4th  Thousand,  revised  and
enlarged.  Svo,  cloth,  zis.


14  Henrietta  Street,  Covent  Garden,  London,  W.C.


CATALOGUE  OF PUBLICATIONS.  31

A  SYSTEM  OF  SYNTHETIC  PHILOSOPHY-Continued.

Vol.  VII.  The  Principles  of  Sociology.  Vol.  II.  Part  4,
Ceremonial  Institutions ;  Part  5,  Political  Institutions.  3rd
Thousand.  8vo,  cloth.  i8s.

Vol.  VIII.  The  Principles  of  Sociology.  Vol.  III.  Part  6,
Ecclesiastical  Institutions  ;  Part  7,  Professional  Institutions  ;  Part
8,  Industrial  Institutions.  2nd  Thousand.  8vo,  cloth.  i6s.

Vol.  IX.  The  Principles  of  Ethics.  Vol.  I.  Part  i,  The
Data  of  Ethics  ;  Part  2,  The  Inductions  of  Ethics  ;  Part  3,  The
Ethics  of  Individual  Life,  and  Thousand.  8vo,  cloth.  155.

Vol.  X.  The  Principles  of  Ethics.  Vol.  II.  Part  4,
Justice  ;  Part  5,  Negative  Beneficence  ;  Part  6,  Positive
Beneficence  ;  Appendices.  Demy  8vo,  cloth.  12s.  6d.

Also  to  be  had  separately  :

SPENCER (HERBERT). DATA OF ETHICS. Reset

uniform  with  popular  edition  of  "  First  Principles." Sewed,  2s.  6d.
net ;  cloth,  35.  net.

JUSTICE. Being Part 4 of  the Principles  of  Ethics. 2nd

Thousand. 8vo,  cloth. 6s.

Other  Works.

-  THE STUDY  OF  SOCIOLOGY. Library  Edition  (2ist
Thousand),  with  a  Postscript. 8vo,  cloth. IO.T.  6d,

EDUCATION  : Intellectual,  Moral,  and  Physical. Cheap

Edition. Entirely  reset 46th  Thousand. Crown 8vo,  cloth.
2s.  6d.

—  ESSAYS  : Scientific,  Political,  and  Speculative. A  new

Edition,  rearranged, with  additional  Essays. 3  vols.  8vo,  cloth.
(Each  los.) 305.

SOCIAL STATICS. Abridged and revised,  together with

"The  Man  v.  The  State." 8vo,  cloth. los.

-VARIOUS FRAGMENTS. Uniform in Library  binding.

Demy  8vo,  cloth. Enlarged  Edition. 6s.

FACTS  AND  COMMENTS. Demy  8vo,  cloth. 6s.

-THE MAN versus THE STATE. i4th Thousand.
Sewed, is.

A REJOINDER TO PROFESSOR WEISMANN.

Sewed. 6d.

14  Henrietta  Street,  Covent  Garden,  London,  W.C.


32  WILLIAMS & NORGATE'S


SPENCER  (HERBERT).  REASONS  FOR  DISSENTING
FROM  THE  PHILOSOPHY  OF  M.  COMTE.  Sewed.
6d

-DESCRIPTIVE  SOCIOLOGY;  or,  Groups  of  Socio
logical  Facts.  Compiled  and  abstracted  by  Professor  D.
Duncan  of  Madras,  Dr.  Richard  Scheppig,  and  James  Collier.
Folio,  boards.

No. i.  English. i8s.

No.  2.  Ancient  American  Races. i6s.

No.  3.  Lowest  Races,  Negritto  Races,  Polynesians. i8.r.

No.  4.  African  Races. i6.r.

No.  5.  Asiatic  Races. i8.r.

No.  6.  American  Races. iSs.

No.  7. Hebrews  and  Phoenicians. 2is.

No.  8.  The  French  Civilisation. 305.

In  Preparation.

Edited  by  Henry  R.  Tedder,  Secretary  and  Librarian  of  the
Athenrcum  Club.

Chinese.  Compiled  and  abstracted  by  E.  T.  C.  Werner,
H.M.'s  Consular  Service,  China.

Ancient  Egyptians.

Hellenic  Greeks.  By  Rev.  Dr  J.  P.  Mahaffy,  and  Pro
fessor  W.  A.  Goligher,  Trinity  College,  Dublin.

Hellenistic  Greeks. By  the  same.

Romans.  By  Mr  E.  H.  Alton,  F.T.C.D.,  and  Professor
W.  A.  Goligher.

COLLINS  (F.  H.).  AN  EPITOME  OF  THE  SYN
THETIC  PHILOSOPHY.  By  F.  Howard  Collins.  Being
a  Digest  of  Mr.  Herbert  Spencer's  Works.  5th  Edition,  the
Synthetic  Philosophy  Completed.  With  a  Preface  by  Herbert
Spencer.  8vo,  cloth.  2is.

SPINOZA  :  Four  Essays.  By  Professors  Land,  Van  Vloten,  and
Kuno  Fischer,  and  by  E.  Renan.  Edited  by  Professor  Knight,  of
St.  Andrews.  Crown  8vo,  cloth.  $s,

STUDIES  FROM  THE  YALE  PSYCHOLOGICAL
LABORATORY.  Edited  by  Professor  E.  W.  Scripture.
With  many  Illustrations.  8vo,  sewed.  4_r.  2d.  each  net.  Vol.  I.
1892-93,  I oo  pages.  Vol.  II.  1894,  124  pages.  Vol.  III.  1895,
no  pages.  Vol.  IV.  1896,  141  pages.  Vol.  V.  1897,  105  pages.
Vol.  VI.  1898,  105  pages.

WUNDT  (WILHELM).  OUTLINES  OF  PSYCHOL
OGY.  Translated,  with  the  co-operation  of  the  Author,  by
Charles  Hubbard  Judd,  Ph.D.,  Instructor  in  the  Wesleyan
University.  3rd  Enlarged  Edition  Demy  8vo,  cloth.  85-.  net.

14  Henrietta  Street,  Covent  Garden,  London,  W.C.


CATALOGUE  OF  PUBLICATIONS.  33


III. Oriental Languages, Literature,
and  History.

ABHIDHANARATNAMALA (THE) OF HALAYUDHA.

A  Sanskrit  Vocabulary  (120  pp.).  Edited,  with  a  Sanskrit-English
Glossary  (180  pp.),  by  Dr.  T.  Aufrecht.  8vo,  cloth.  (Published
at  iSs.)  los.

AVESTI,  PAHLAVI,  and  ANCIENT  PERSIAN  STUDIES
in  Honour  of  the  late  SHAMS-UL-ULAMA  DASTUR
PESHOTANJI  BEHRAMJI  SANJANA,  M.A.,  Ph.D.
Paper  cover,  12s.  6d.  net ;  cloth,  13*.  6d.  net.

BERNSTEIN  and  KIRSCH.  SYRIAC  CHRESTOMATHY
AND  LEXICON  (Chrestomathia  Syriaca  cum  Lexico).

2  vols.  in  I.  8vo,  cloth  boards.  Js.  6d.  I.  Chrestomathia,
separately.  Sewed.  35.

DAVIDS  (T.  W.  RHYS).  LECTURES  ON  SOME  POINTS
IN  THE  HISTORY  OF  INDIAN  BUDDHISM.  See

The  Hibbert  Lectures,  p.  13.

DELITZSCH  (Prof.  F.).  ASSYRIAN  GRAMMAR.  With
Paradigms,  Exercises,  Glossary,  and  Bibliography.  Translated  by
the  Rev.  Prof.  A.  R.  S.  Kennedy.  Crown  8vo,  cloth.  155.

THE HEBREW LANGUAGE VIEWED IN THE

LIGHT OF ASSYRIAN RESEARCH. Demy 8vo,
cloth. 4.?.

BABEL  AND  BIBLE. 5*. See  Crown  Theological  Library,

P-  9-

DILLMANN  (A.).  ETHIOPIC  GRAMMAR.  Translated
from  C.  Bezold's  Second  German  Edition.  By  Rev.  J.  A.
Crichton,  D.D.,  with  Index  of  Passages,  Philological  Tables,  etc.
I  vol.,  Royal  8vo.  2$s.  net.

DlPAVAMSA  (THE):  A  Buddhist  Historical  Record  in  the
Pali  Language.  Edited,  with  an  English  Translation,  by  Dr.
H.  Oldenberg.  8vo,  cloth.  2is.

The  "Dipavamsa"  is  the  most  ancient  historical  work  of  the  Ceylonese  ;  it
contains  an  account  of  the  ecclesiastical  history  of  the  Buddhist  Church,  of  the
conversion  of  the  Ceylonese  to  the  Buddhist  faith,  and  of  the  ancient  history  of
Ceylon.

14  Henrietta  Street,  Covent  Garden,  London,  W.C.
3


34  WILLIAMS  &  NORGATE'S

ERMAN'S  EGYPTIAN  GRAMMAR.  Translated,  under
Professor  Erman's  supervision,  by  J.  H.  Breasted,  Professor  of
Egyptology  in  the  University  of  Chicago.  Crown  8vo,  cloth,  l&s.

EVANS (GEORGE). AN ESSAY  ON  ASSYRIOLOGY.

With  410  Tables  of  Assyrian  Inscriptions. 8vo,  cloth. $s.

FAIZULLAH-BHAI  (Shaikh,  B.D.).  A  MOSLEM
PRESENT.  Part  I.,  containing  the  famous  poem  of  Al-Busaree.
With  an  English  Version  and  Notes.  8vo,  cloth.  4.?.

AN ESSAY ON THE PRE-ISLAMITIC ARABIC

POETRY,  with  special  reference  to  the  Seven  Suspended
Poems. 8vo,  sewed, ^d.

FLINDERS  PETRIE  PAPYRI.  See  Cunningham  Memoirs,
PP-  43.  44-

FRANKFURTER  (Dr.  O.).  HANDBOOK  OF  PALI  :  Being
an  Elementary  Grammar,  a  Chrestomathy,  and  a  Glossary.

8vo,  cloth. i6s.

FUERST  (Dr.  JUL.).  HEBREW  AND  CHALDEE
LEXICON  TO  THE  OLD  TESTAMENT.  5th  Edition,
improved  and  enlarged.  Translated  by  Rev.  Dr.  Samuel  Davidson.
Royal  8vo,  cloth.  21  s.

HEBREW  TEXTS. Large  type. i6mo,  cloth.

Genesis. (2nd  Edition. Baer  and  Delitzsch's  Text. ) is.  6d.
Psalms. is.
Job. is.
Isaiah, is.

KENNEDY  (Rev.  JAS.).  INTRODUCTION  TO  BIBLICAL
HEBREW,  presenting  Graduated  Instruction  in  the
Language  of  the  Old  Testament.  By  James  Kennedy,  B.D.,
Acting  Librarian  in  the  New  College,  and  one  of  the  additional
Examiners  in  Divinity  at  the  University,  Edinburgh.  8vo,  cloth.

I2S.

STUDIES IN HEBREW SYNONYMS. Demy  8vo,

cloth. $s.

LYALL  (C.  J.,  M.A.,  K.C.I.E.).  ANCIENT  ARABIAN
POETRY^  CHIEFLY  PRiE-ISLAMIC.  Translations, with
an  Introduction  and  Notes.  Fcap.  410,  cloth.  lOs.  6d.

14  Henrietta  Street,  Covent  Garden,  London,  W.C.


CATALOGUE  OF  PUBLICATIONS.  35


MACHBEROTH  ITHIEL.  By  Yehuda  ben  Shelomoh  Alcharizi.
Edited  from  the  MS.  in  the  Bodleian  Library,  by  Thomas
Chenery,  M.A.  8vo,  cloth.  35.

MI  LAN  DA  PAN  HO,  THE:  Being  Dialogues  between  King
Milanda  and  the  Buddhist  Sage  Nagasena.  The  Pali  Text,
edited  by  V.  Trenckner.  440  pp.  8vo,  sewed.  2is.  See  also
"  Pali  Miscellany."

MOSHEH  BEN  SHESHETH'S  COMMENTARY  ON
JEREMIAH  AND  EZEKIEL.  Seep.  22.

MUSS-ARNOLT  (W.).  A  CONCISE  DICTIONARY  OF
THE  ASSYRIAN  LANGUAGE  (Assyrian-English—
German).  By  W.  Muss-Arnolt.  Completed  in  19  parts.  Each
S.T.  net. ;  or  bound  in  2  vols.,  ^5  net.

NEW  HEBREW  SCHOOL  of  POETS  of  the  SPANISH-
ARABIAN  EPOCH.  Selected  Texts  with  Introduction,  Notes,
and  Dictionary.  Edited  by  H.  Brody,  Ph.D.,  Rabbi  in  Nachod
(Bohemia),  and  K.  Albrecht,  Ph.D.,  Professor  in  Oldenburg
(Grand  Duchy).  English  translation  of  the  Introduction,  etc.,  by
Mrs  Karl  Albrecht.  Cloth.  75.  6d.  net.

NOLDEKE  (THEODOR,  Professor  of  Oriental  Languages
in  the  University  of  Strassburg).  COMPENDIOUS
SYRIAC  GRAMMAR.  With  a  Table  of  Characters  by  Julius
Euting.  Translated  (with  the  sanction  of  the  author)  from  the
second  and  improved  German  Edition  by  Rev.  James  A.  Crichton,
D.  D.  Royal  8vo.  i8j.net.

DELECTUS VETERUM CARMINUM ARABI-

CORUM GLOSSARIUM CONFECIT  A. MULLER.

Crown  8vo,  cloth. Js.  6d.

NORRIS  (E.).  ASSYRIAN  DICTIONARY.  Intended  to
further  the  Study  of  the  Cuneiform  Inscriptions  of  Assyria  and
Babylonia.  Vols.  I.  to  III.  410,  cloth.  Each  2%s.

OLDENBERG  (Prof.  H.).  BUDDHA :  His  Life,  his  Doctrine,
his  Order.  By  Dr.  Hermann  Oldenberg,  Professor  at  the
University  of  Berlin.  Translated  by  W.  Hoey,  M.A.  8vo,  cloth
gilt.  18*.

PALI  MISCELLANY.  By  V.  Trenckner.  Part  I.  The  Intro
ductory  Part  of  the  Milanda  Panho,  with  an  English  Translation
and  Notes.  8vo,  sewed.  $s.

14  Henrietta  Street,  Covent  Garden,  London,  W.C.


36  WILLIAMS & NORGATE'S


PLATTS  (J.  T.).  A  GRAMMAR  OF  THE  PERSIAN
LANGUAGE.  By  John  T.  Plaits,  Hon.  M.A.  (Oxon.),  Teacher
of  Persian  in  the  University  of  Oxford  ;  late  Inspector  of  Schools  in
the  Central  Provinces  of  India.  Part  I.  Accidence.  Broad  crown
8vo.  los.  6d.

RENOUF  (P.  LE  PAGE).  LECTURES  ON  THE  RE
LIGION  OF  ANCIENT  EGYPT.  See  Hibbert  Lectures,
p.  14.

SADI.  THE  GULISTAN  (ROSE  GARDEN)  OF  SHAIK
SADI  OF  SHIRAZ.  A  new  Edition  of  the  Persian  Text,  with
a  Vocabulary,  by  F.  Johnson.  Square  royal  8vo,  cloth.  155.

SAYCE  (Prof.  A.  H.).  LECTURES  ON  THE  RELIGIONS
OF  ANCIENT  BABYLONIA  AND  SYRIA.  See  the

Hibbert  Lectures,  p.  14.

SCHRADER  (E.).  THE  CUNEIFORM  INSCRIPTIONS
AND  THE  OLD  TESTAMENT.  2  vols.  izs.  See
Theological  Translation  Library,  Old  Series,  p.  8.

SHIHAB  AL  DIN.  FUTUH  AL-HABASHAH  ;  or,  The
Conquest  of  Abyssinia.  By  Shinab  al  Din  Ahmad  B.  'Abd  al
Kadir  B.  Salim  B.  'Uthnian.  Edited,  from  an  Arabic  MS.,  by
S.  Arthur  Strong.  Part  I.  8vo,  sewed,  y.  net.

SORENSEN  (S.,  Ph.D.),  Compiled  by.  AN  INDEX  TO
THE  NAMES  IN  THE  MAHABHARATA.  With  short
explanations.  Royal  410,  in  twelve  parts,  which  are  not  sold
separately,  at  "js.  6d.  per  part  net.  Parts  I.  and  V.  now  ready.

STATUTES,  THE,  OF  THE  APOSTLES.  The  hitherto
unedited  Ethiopic  and  Arabic  Texts,  with  translations  of  Ethiopic,
Arabic,  and  Coptic  Texts,  by  G.  Homer,  M.A.  See  p.  25.

TEXT  AND  TRANSLATION  SOCIETY.  Established  for  the
purpose  of  editing  and  translating  Oriental  Texts  chiefly  preserved
in  the  British  Ahisenm.

THE  SIXTH  BOOK  OF  THE  SELECT  LETTERS
OF  SEVERUS,  PATRIARCH  OF  ANTIOCH,  in
the  Syriac  Version  of  Athanasius  of  Nisibis.  Edited
and  translated  by  E.  W.  Brooks,  M.A.  Vol.  I.  Text,  Parts  I.
and  II.  Vol.  II.  Translation,  Parts  I.  and  II.  84^.  net.

THE  CANONS  OF  ATHANASIUS  OF  ALEX
ANDRIA,  in  Arabic,  Ethiopic,  and  Coptic.  Edited
and  Translated  by  Prof.  W.  Riedel  (Griefswald)  and  W.  E.
Crum.  215.  net.


14  Henrietta  Street,  Covent  Garden,  London,  W.C.


CATALOGUE  OF PUBLICATIONS.  37


TEXT  AND  TRANSLATION  SOCIETY-continued.

Volumes  already  issued —

A  RABBINIC  COMMENTARY  ON  THE  BOOK  OF
JOB,  contained  in  a  unique  MS.  at  Cambridge.
Edited,  with  Translation  and  Commentary,  by  W.  Aldis
Wright,  LL.D.  2is.  net.

AN  ANCIENT  ARMENIAN  VERSION  OF  THE
APOCALYPSE  OF  ST  JOHN;  also  THE  ARME
NIAN  TEXTS  OF  CYRIL  OF  ALEXANDRIA,
SCHOLIA  DE  INCARNATIONE  and  EPISTLE
TO  THEODOSIUS  UPON  EASTER,  the  former  in
completely  preserved  in  Greek,  the  latter  unknown  in  Greek
or  Latin.  All  edited,  with  English  versions,  etc.,  by  F.  C.
Conybeare,  formerly  Fellow  of  University  College,  Oxford.

REMNANTS  OF  THE  LATER  SYRIAC  VERSIONS
OF  THE  BIBLE.  Part  I.  (Sixth  Century).  The  Four
Minor  Catholic  Epistles.  Reconstructed  Text,  with  Apparatus
Criticus.  Part  II.  (Seventh  Century).  Extracts,  hitherto  un
edited,  from  the  Syro-Hexaplar  Text  of  Chronicles,  Nehemiah,
etc.  All  edited,  with  Greek  versions,  etc.,  by  John  Gwynn,
D.  D.,  Regius  Professor  of  Divinity,  Dublin.

In  the  Press.

THE  REFUTATION  OF  MANI,  MARCION,  AND
BARDAISAN  OF  ST  EPHRAIM.  Edited  by  the
Rev.  C.  W.  Mitchell.


TURPIE  (Dr.  D.  McC.).  MANUAL  OF  THE  CHALDEE
LANGUAGE.  Containing  Grammar  of  the  Biblical  Chaldee
and  of  the  Targums,  and  a  Chrestomathy,  with  a  Vocabulary.
Square  8vo,  cloth.  Js.

VI  NAY  A  PITAKAM  :  One  of  the  Principal  Buddhist  Holy
Scriptures.  Edited  in  Pali  by  Dr.  H.  Oldenberg.  5  vols.  8vo,
cloth.  Each  2is.

WALLIS  (H.  W.).  THE  COSMOLOGY  OF  THE  RIG-
VEDA  :  An  Essay.  8vo,  cloth.  5*.


14  Henrietta  Street,  Covent  Garden,  London,  W.C.


38  WILLIAMS  &  NORGATE'S


IV. Modern  Languages  &  Literature.

A  complete  list  of  Messrs.  Williams  &  Norgate's  Educational  Publi
cations  on  Modern  Languages  may  be  had  on  application.


ARMY  SERIES  OF  FRENCH  AND  GERMAN  NOVELS.
Edited,  with  short  Notes,  by  J.  T.  W.  Perowne,  M.A.

This  series  is  equally  well  adapted  for  general  reading,  and  for  those
preparing  for  the  Army,  Oxford  and  Cambridge  Certificates,  and  other
Examinations — in  fact,  for  all  who  wish  to  keep  up  or  improve  their  French
and  German.  The  notes  are  as  concise  as  possible,  with  an  occasional
etymology  or  illustration  to  assist  the  memory.  The  books  selected  being
by  recent  or  living  authors,  are  adapted  for  the  study  of  most  modern  French
and  German.

LE  COUP  DE  PISTOLET,  etc. Prosper  Merimee. 2s.  (>d.

"A  book  more  admirably  suited  toils  purpose  could  not  be  desired.  The
Editors  deserve  to  be  congratulated." — National  Observer.

VAILLANTE. Jacques  Vincent. 2s.  6d.

"  The  books  are  well  got  up,  and  in  Vaillante  an  excellent  choice  has  been
made." — Guardian.

AUF VERLORNEM POSTEN AND NAZZARENA
DANTI. Johannes  v.  Dewall. 35.

"Well  piinted,  well  bound,  and  annotated  just  sufficiently  to  make  the
reading  of  them  sure  as  well  as  easy." — Educational  Times.

CONTES  MILITAIRES. A.  Daudet. 2s.  6d.

"  These  stories  are  mainly  culled  from  a  series  called  Contcs  du  Lundi,
originally  contributed  by  their  author  to  the  Figaro.  Written  at  fever  heat
immediately  after  the  great  1870  war,  they  show  iJaudet's  power  in  many  ways
at  its  highest.  .  .  .  We  therefore  do  more  than  recommend — we  urge  all
readers  of  French  to  get  the  stories  in  some  form,  and  the  present  one  is  both
good  and  cheap." — The  Schoolmaster.

ERZAHLUNGEN. E.  H6fer. 3*.

"  The  series  has  brought  fascinating  examples  of  fiction  under  the  eyes  of
English  readers  in  a  neat  and  handy  form.  Besides  having  the  military  flavour,
they  are  models  of  style." — Scotsman.


BAYLDON  (Rev.  G.).  ICELANDIC  GRAMMAR.  An
Elementary  Grammar  of  the  Old  Norse  or  Icelandic  Language.
8vo,  cloth.  7.?.  6d.

14  Henrietta  Street,  Covent  Garden,  London,  W.C.


CATALOGUE  OF  PUBLICATIONS.  39


BOIELLE  (JAS.).  FRENCH  COMPOSITION  THROUGH
LpRD  MACAULAY'S  ENGLISH.  Edited,  with  Notes,
Hints,  and  Introduction,  by  the  late  James  Boielle,  B.A.  (Univ.
Gall.),  Officier  d' Academic,  Senior  French  Master,  Dulwich
College,  etc.,  etc.  Crown  8vo,  cloth.  Vol.  I.  Frederick  the
Great.  35.  Vol.  II.  Warren  Hastings.  y.  Vol.  III.  Lord
Clive.  3^.

See  Victor  Hugo,  "Les  Miserables"  and  "Notre  Dame."

DELBOS  (L.).  NAUTICAL  TERMS  IN  ENGLISH
AND  FRENCH  AND  FRENCH  AND  ENGLISH.

With  Notes  and  Tables.  For  the  use  of  Naval  Officers  and  Naval
Cadets.  By  Leon  Delbos,  M. A.,  of  H.M.S.  Britannia,  Dart
mouth.  4th  Edition,  thoroughly  revised  and  considerably
enlarged,  with  additional  Plates.  Crown  8vo,  cloth.  7-r-  6<£  net.

THE STUDENT'S GRADUATED FRENCH

READER. Remodelled  and  rewritten. Edited,  with  Notes  and
a  Complete  Vocabulary. First  Year — Part  I.  Anecdotes,  Tales,
and  Exercises. Part  II.  Tales,  Historical  Pieces,  and  Exercises.
is.  6d.  each. Second  Year — Parts  I.  and  II.  in  the  Press.

EUGENE'S  STUDENT'S  COMPARATIVE  GRAMMAR
OF  THE  FRENCH  LANGUAGE,  with  an  Historical
Sketch  of  the  Formation  of  French.  For  the  use  of  Public
Schools.  With  Exercises.  By  G.  Eugene- Fasnacht,  late  French
Master,  Westminster  School.  23rd  Edition,  thoroughly  revised.
Square  crown  8vo,  cloth,  $s.  ;  or  separately,  Grammar,  31.  ;
Exercises,  2s.  6d.

GOETHE  (W.  v.).  ANNOTATED  TEXTS.  ^Educational
Catalogue.

HAGMANN  (J.  G.,  Ph.D.).  REFORM  IN  PRIMARY  EDU
CATION.  Translated  from  Second  German  Edition  by  R.  H.
Hoar,  Ph.D.,  and  Richmond  Barker,  M.A.  Cr.  8vo,  cl.,  2s.  6d,  net.

HUGO  (VICTOR).  LES  MISERABLES :  Les  Principaux
Episodes.  Edited,  with  Life  and  Notes,  by  the  late  J.  Boielle.
2  vols.  6th  Edition.  Crown  8vo,  cloth.  Each  %s.  6d.

NOTRE DAME DE  PARIS. Adapted for the  use  of

Schools  and  Colleges.  By  the  late  J.  Boielle.  2  vols.  2nd
Edition.  Crown  8vo,  cloth.  Each  3-r.

KYRIAKIDES  (A.).  MODERN  GREEK-ENGLISH  DIC
TIONARY.  With  a  Cypriote  Vocabulary.  2nd  Edition,
revised  throughout.  Medium  8vo.  920  pages.  Cloth.  1 5 s.  net.

14  Henrietta  Street,  Covent  Garden,  London,  W.C.


40  WILLIAMS & NORGATE'S


LEABHAR  BREAC.  The  "Speckled  Book,"  otherwise  styled.
"The  Great  Book  of  Dun  Doighre":  a  Collection  of  Pieces  in
Irish  and  Latin,  transcribed  towards  the  close  of  the  Fourteenth
Century.  "The  oldest  and  best  Irish  MS.  relating  to  Church
History  now  preserved"  (G.  Pttrie).  Now  first  published,  from
the  original  MS.  in  the  Royal  Irish  Academy's  Library.  In
imperial  folio,  on  toned  paper.  In  one  vol.,  half-calf,  ^4,  45.
(zoo  copies  only  printed.)

LEABHAR  NA  H-UIDHRI.  A  Collection  of  Pieces  in  Prose
and  Verse,  in  the  Irish  Language,  transcribed  about  A.D.  noo;
the  oldest  volume  now  known  entirely  in  the  Irish  language,
and  one  of  the  chief  surviving  native  literary  monuments — not
ecclesiastical — of  ancient  Ireland ;  now  for  the  first  time  pub
lished,  from  the  original  in  the  Library  of  the  Royal  Irish
Academy,  with  account  of  the  Manuscript,  description  of  its
contents,  index,  and  facsimiles  in  colours.  In  folio  on  toned
paper,  half-calf.  ^3,  3^.  (200  copies  only  printed.)

LILJA  (The  Lily).  An  Icelandic  Religious  Poem.  By  Eystein
Asgrimson.  Edited,  with  Translation,  Notes,  and  Glossary,  by
E.  Magnusson.  Crown  8vo,  cloth  extra,  icw.  6d.

LODGE  (Sir  O.).  SCHOOL  TEACHING  AND  SCHOOL
REFORM.  A  Course  of  Four  Lectures  on  School  Curricula
and  Methods,  delivered  to  Secondary  Teachers  and  Teachers  in
Training  at  Birmingham  during  February  1905.  35.

"The  work  of  a  sensible  iconoclast,  who  does  not  pull  down  for  the  sake  ol
mere  destruction,  but  is  anxious  to  set  up  something  more  worthy  in  place  of
the  mediaeval  ism  he  attacks. "  —Outlook.

"  Let  me  commend  this  wise  volume  not  only  to  teachers  but  to  all  concerned
in  national  education.  And  especially  to  the  politician.  Half  an  hour  with
Sir  Oliver  Lodge  would  make  him  realise  that  there  are  problems  on  the  inner
side  of  the  school  door  not  dreamt  of  in  his  philosophy — would  make  him  feel
that  the  more  he  knows  of  these  the  better  will  he  be  able  wisely  to  handle  those
others  about  which  he  is  glibly  talking  every  day." — Dr  MACNAMARA  in  the
Daily  Chronicle.

MAORI.  NEW  AND  COMPLETE  MANUAL  OF
MAORI  CONVERSATIONS.  Containing  Phrases  and
Dialogues  on  a  variety  of  Topics,  together  with  a  few  general
rules  of  Grammar,  and  a  comprehensive  Vocabulary.  4^.  net.
See  also  Williams.

MARKHAM  (Sir  CLEMENTS,  K.C.B.).  VOCABULARIES
OF  THE  GENERAL  LANGUAGE  OF  THE  INCAS
OF  PERU.  Crown  8vo,  cloth.  Js.  6d.  net.

NIBELUNGENLIED.  "The  Fall  of  the  Nibelungens,"  other
wise  "The  Book  of  Kriemhild."  An  English  Translation  by
W.  N.  Lettsom.  5th  Edition.  8vo,  cloth.  5*.


14  Henrietta  Street,  Covent  Garden,  London,  W.C.


CATALOGUE  OF  PUBLICATIONS.  41


O'GRADY (STANDISH H.). SILVA GADELICA (L-

XXXI.).  A  Collection  of  Tales  in  Irish,  with  Extracts  illus
trating  Persons  and  Places.  Edited  from  MSS.  and  translated.
2  vols.  royal  8vo,  cloth.  42^.  Or  separately,  Vol.  I.,  Irish
Text;  and  Vol.  II.,  Translation  and  Notes.  Each  vol.  2is.

OORDT  (J.  F.  VAN,  B.A.).  CAPE  DUTCH.  Phrases  and
Dialogues,  with  Translations,  preceded  by  short  Grammatical
Notes.  Crown  8vo,  cloth.  2s.  6d.  net.

PHILLIPPS  (V.,  B.A.).  A  SHORT  SKETCH  OF
GERMAN  LITERATURE,  for  Schools.  By  Vivian
Phillipps,  B.A.,  Assistant  Master  at  Fettes  College,  Edinburgh.
2nd  Edition,  revised.  Pott  8vo,  cloth.  is.

ROGET  (F.  F.).  AN  INTRODUCTION  TO  OLD
FRENCH.  History,  Grammar,  Chrestomathy,  and  Glossary.
2nd  Edition.  Crown  8vo,  cloth.  6s.

FIRST  STEPS  IN  FRENCH  HISTORY,  LITERA
TURE,  AND  PHILOLOGY.  For  Candidates  for  the  Scotch
Leaving  Certificate  Examinations,  the  various  Universities  Local
Examinations,  and  the  Army  Examinations.  4th  Edition.  Crown
Svo,  cloth.  5-^

ROSING  (S.). ENGLISH-DANISH DICTIONARY. New

Edition. Large  Svo,  strongly  bound,  half-roan, us.  6d.

SCHILLER  (F.  VON).  ANNOTATED  TEXTS.  See  Educa
tional  Catalogue.

SULLIVAN  (W.  K.).  CELTIC  STUDIES  FROM  THE
GERMAN  OF  EBEL.  With  an  Introduction  on  the  Roots,
Stems,  and  Derivatives,  and  on  Case-endings  of  Nouns  in  the
Indo-European  Languages.  Svo,  cloth.  10s.

VELASQUEZ. LARGER SPANISH DICTIONARY.

Composed  from  the  Dictionaries  of  the  Spanish  Academy,  Terreros
and  Salva.  Spanish-English  and  English-Spanish.  1279  pp.,
triple  columns.  2  vols.  in  I.  Imp.  Svo,  cloth.  24^.

VIGA  GLUMS  SAGA.  Translated  from  the  Icelandic,  with  Notes
and  an  Introduction,  by  Sir  Edmund  Head,  Bart.  Fcap.  Svo,
cloth.  5^.

WEISSE  (T.  H.).  ELEMENTS  OF  GERMAN.  With  a
Course  of  Exercises  instructing  in  Simpler  Composition.  Crown
Svo,  cloth.  y.

14  Henrietta  Street,  Covent  Garden,  London,  W.C.


42  WILLIAMS  &  NORGATE'S

WEISSE  (T.  H.).  SYSTEMATIC  CONVERSATIONAL
EXERCISES  FOR  TRANSLATING  INTO  GERMAN,
adapted  to  his  Grammar.  New  Edition.  Crown  8vo,  cloth.
(Key,  $s.  net.)  3*.  6d.

-A  SHORT  GUIDE  TO  GERMAN  IDIOMS:  being  a
Collection  of  the  Idioms  most  in  use.  With  Examination
Papers.  3rd  Edition.  Cloth.  2s.

WERNER'S  ELEMENTARY  LESSONS  IN  CAPE
DUTCH  (AFRIKANDER  TAAL).  By  A.  Werner  and
G.  Hunt.  i6mo,  cloth,  is.  6d.

"  We  most  cordially  recommend  this  book  to  anyone  going  out  to  settle  in
South  Africa.  .  .  .  The  dialogues  and  exercises  are  admirably  planned." —
Reformer.

"To  those  outward  bound  such  a  book  is  sure  to  be  useful." — Practical
Teacher.

WILLIAMS  (The  Right  Rev.  W.  L.,  D.C.L.).  A  DICTION
ARY  OF  THE  NEW  ZEALAND  LANGUAGE.  4th

Edition. Edited  by  the  Right  Rev.  Bishop  W.  L.  Williams,  with
numerous  additions  and  corrections. Demy  8vo,  cloth. 125.  6d.

LESSONS IN MAORI. 3rd Edition. Fcap. 8vo, cloth.

3*-

YELLOW  BOOK  OF  LECAN.  A  Collection  of  Pieces  (Prose
and  Verse)  in  the  Irish  Language,  in  part  compiled  at  the  end  of
the  Fourteenth  Century  ;  now  for  the  first  time  published  from  the
original  Manuscript  in  the  Library  of  Trinity  College,  Dublin,  by
the  Royal  Irish  Academy.  With  Introduction,  Analysis  of  Con
tents,  and  Index,  by  Robert  Atkinson.  30  and  468  pp.  (Royal
Irish  Academy's  Irish  facsimiles.)  Large  post  folio,  1896,  half-
roan,  Roxburghe,  cloth  sides.  £4,  qs.

ZOEGA  (G.  T.)  ENGLISH-ICELANDIC  DICTIONARY.
8vo,  cloth.  6s.  net.

ZOMPOLIDES  (Dr.  D.).  A  COURSE  OF  MODERN
GREEK  ;  or,  The  Greek  Language  of  the  Present  Day.
I.  The  Elementary  Method.  Crown  8vo,  cloth.  55.


14  Henrietta  Street,  Covent  Garden,  London,  W,C.


CATALOGUE  OF  PUBLICATIONS.  43

V. Science.

MEDICINE— CHEMISTRY— BOTANY— ZOOLOGY-
MATHEMATICS.

BASTIAN  (H.  CHARLTON,  M.A.,  M.D.,  F.R.S.).
STUDIES  IN  HETEROGENESIS.  With  825  Illustra
tions  from  Photomicrographs.  Royal  8vo,  cloth.  31  s.  6d.

BENEDICT  (F.  E.,  Ph.D.).  ELEMENTARY  ORGANIC
ANALYSIS.  Small  8vo.  Pages  vi  +  82.  15  Illustrations.
4s.  6d.  net.

BERGEY  (D.  G.).  HANDBOOK  OF  PRACTICAL  HY
GIENE.  Small  8vo.  Pages  v+ 164.  6s.  6d.  net.

BILTZ  (HENRY).  THE  PRACTICAL  METHODS  OF
DETERMINING  MOLECULAR  WEIGHTS.  Trans
lated  by  Jones.  Small  8vo.  Pages  viii  +  245.  44  Illustrations.
8s.  6d.  net.

BOLTON. HISTORY OF THE THERMOMETER.

I2mo. 96  pages. 6  Illustrations. 41.  6d.  net.

BRUCE  (ALEX.,  M.A.,  M.D.,  F.R.C.P.E.,  F.R.S.E.).  A
TOPOGRAPHICAL  ATLAS  OF  THE  SPINAL  CORD.

Fcap.  folio,  half-leather. £2,  2s.  net.

COLBY  (ALBERT  LADD).  REINFORCED  CONCRETE
IN  EUROPE.  Demy  8vo,  cloth.  14*.  6d.  net.

CREIGHTON  (CHAS.,  M.D.).  CANCER  AND  OTHER
TUMOURS  OF  THE  BREAST.  Researches  showing
their  true  seat  and  cause.  With  24  Lithographic  Plates  containing
138  figures  from  the  Author's  drawings.  Royal  8vo,  cloth.
12s.  6d.  net.

CONTRIBUTIONS TO THE PHYSIOLOGICAL

THEORY  OF  TUBERCULOSIS.  By  Charles  Creightpn,
M.D.,  sometime  Demonstrator  of  Anatomy,  Cambridge  Medical
School,  author  of  "  Bovine  Tuberculosis  in  Man,"  etc.  Royal  8vo,
cloth.  12s.  6d.  net.

CUNNINGHAM MEMOIRS—

1.  Cubic  Transformations. By  John Casey, LL.D. 410,
sewed. 2s.  6d.

2.  On the  Lumbar  Curve  in Man  and  the  Apes. By
D.  J.  Cunningham,  M.D. 13  Plates. 4to,  sewed. 5.?.

3.  New  Researches  on  Sun-heat,  Terrestrial  Radiation,
etc. By  Rev.  Samuel  Haughton,  M.A.,  M.D. 9  Plates. 410,
sewed, is.  6d.

4.  Dynamics  and  Modern  Geometry. A  New  Chapter  in
the  Theory  of  Screws. By  Sir  Robert S. Ball,  LL.D. 4to,
sewed. 2s.


14  Henrietta  Street,  Covent  Garden,  London,  W.C.


44  WILLIAMS & NORGATE'S


CUNNINGHAM  MEMOIRS-Continued.

5.  The Red Stars. Observations and Catalogue. New
Edition. Edited  by  Rev.  T.  Espin,  M.A. 4to,  sewed. $s.  6d.

6.  On  the Morphology  of  the Duck  Tribe  and  the  Auk
Tribe. By  W.  K.  Parker,  F.R.S. 9  Plates. 4to,  sewed, y.  6d.

7.  Contribution  to  the  Surface  Anatomy  of  the  Cerebral
Hemispheres. By  D.  J.  Cunningham, M.D. With  a  Chapter
upon Cranio-Cerebral Topography by Victor Horsley, M.B.,
F.R.S. 410,  sewed. Ss.  6d.

8.  On  the  Flinders  Petrie  Papyri. Part  I. Out  of  Print.

9.  On  the  Flinders  Petrie  Papyri. Part  II. With  18  Auto
types. 4to,  sewed. 421.  net. Appendix  to  8  and  9. $s.  net.

10.  The  Decorative  Art  of  British  New  Guinea. A  Study
in  Papuan  Ethnography. By  Alfred C. Haddon, M.A. With
12  Plates,  and  numerous  other  Illustrations. 4to,  sewed. 141.  net.

11.  On  the Flinders  Petrie Papyri. With  Transcriptions,
Commentaries,  and  Index. By  John  P.  Mahaffy,  D.D. ,  and  Prof.
J.  Gilbert  Smyly. With  7  Autotypes. 4to,  sewed. 42^.  net.

EMERY  (F.  B.,  M.A.). ELEMENTARY  CHEMISTRY.

With  numerous  Illustrations. Ss.  6d.  net.

ENGELHARDT  (V.).  THE  ELECTROLYSIS  OF
WATER.  8vo.  Pages  x+ 140.  90  Illustrations.  5J.net.

FISCHER  (Prof.  EMIL,  of  Berlin  University).  INTRO
DUCTION  TO  THE  PREPARATION  OF  ORGANIC
COMPOUNDS.  Translated  with  the  author's  sanction  from
the  new  German  edition  by  R.  V.  Stanford,  B. Sc.,  Ph.D.  With
figures  in  the  text.  Crown  8vo,  cloth,  4^.  net.

HANTZSCH  (A.).  ELEMENTS  OF  STEREOCHEM
ISTRY.  Translated  by  Wolf.  I2mo.  Pages  viii  +  2o6.  26
Figures.  6s.  6d.  net.

HARDY.  ELEMENTS  OF  ANALYTICAL  GEOMETRY.

8vo. Pages  iv  + 365. 163  Figures. 8s.  6d.  net.

-  INFINITESIMALS AND LIMITS. Sm. I2mo,  paper.
22  pp. 6  Figures, is.  net.

HARNACK  (AXEL).  INTRODUCTION  TO  THE  ELE
MENTS  OF  THE  DIFFERENTIAL  AND  INTEGRAL
CALCULUS.  From  the  German.  Royal  8vo,  cloth,  IQS.  6d.

HART  (EDWARD,  Ph.D.).  CHEMISTRY  FOR  BE
GINNERS.  Small  I2mo.

Vol.  I. Inorganic. Pages  viii+i88. 55  Illustrations  and  2

Plates. Fourth  Edition. 4.?.  6d.  net.

Vol.  II.  Organic. Pages  iv  +  98. n  Illustrations. 2s.  net.
Vol.  III.  Experiments. Separately. 60  pages, is.  net.

-  SECOND  YEAR  CHEMISTRY. Small  I2mo. 165  pages.
31  Illustrations. $s.  net.

14  Henrietta  Street,  Covent  Garden,  London,  W.C.


CATALOGUE  OF  PUBLICATIONS.  45

HOFF  (J.  H.  VAN'T).  STUDIES  IN  CHEMICAL
DYNAMICS.  Revised  and  enlarged  by  Dr.  Ernst  Cohen,
Assistant  in  the  Chemical  Laboratory  of  the  University  of  Amster
dam.  Translated  by  Thomas  Ewan,  M.Sc.,  Ph.D.,  Demonstrator
of  Chemistry  in  the  Yorkshire  College,  Leeds.  Royal  8vo,  cloth.
IQS.  6d.

HORNELL  (JAMES,  F.L.S.).  REPORT  TO  THE
GOVERNMENT  OF  BARODA  ON  THE  MARINE
ZOOLOGY  OF  OKHAMANDAL  IN  KATTIAWAR.
With  Supplementary  Reports  on  Special  Groups  by  other
Zoologists.  Demy  410,  cloth,  with  full-page  Plates.  Part  I.
15.?.  net.

HOWE  (J.  L.).  INORGANIC  CHEMISTRY  FOR
SCHOOLS  AND  COLLEGES.  By  Jas.  Lewis  Howe,
Washington  and  Lee  University.  Being  a  Second  Edition  of
"  Inorganic  Chemistry  according  to  the  Periodic  Law."  By
F.  P.  Venable  and  J.  L.  Howe.  Demy  8vo,  cloth.  12s.  6d.  net.

JOHNSTONE  (J.).  BRITISH  FISHERIES:  Their  Ad
ministration  and  their  Problems.  A  short  account  of  the
Origin  and  Growth  of  British  Sea  Fishery  Authorities  and  Regu
lations,  los.  6d.  net.

JONES  (J.  T.  SHARE-).  SURGICAL  ANATOMY  OF
THE  HORSE.  To  be  completed  in  4  Parts.  With  above  100
Illustrations,  a  number  being  in  colour.  Part  I.  Head  and  Neck.
Part  II.  Fore  Limb.  Part  III.  Hind  Limb.  Price  per  part,  155.
net,  sewed;  cloth,  i6.r.  6d.  net.

LIFE-SIZE MODELS, Illustrating the Superficial

Anatomy  of  the  Limbs  of  the  Horse.  Price  per  set  of  four
models,  £21  ;  or  separately — Fore  Limb,  Inner  and  Outer
Aspects,  £6,  \6s.  6d.  each ;  Hind  Limb,  Inner  and  Outer
Aspects,  £6,  6s.  each.

JONES.  THE  FREEZING  POINT,  BOILING  POINT,
AND  CONDUCTIVITY  METHODS.  i2mo.  Pages
vii  +  64.  14  Illustrations.  3^.  net.

JOURNAL  OF  THE  LINNEAN  SOCIETY. Botany. At

various  prices.  Index  to  Journal  (Botany),  2Os.  Zoology.  At
various  prices.  General  Index  to  the  first  20  vols.  of  the  Journal
(Zoology)  and  the  Zoological  portion  of  the  Proceedings,  2os.

JOURNAL  OF  THE  ROYAL  MICROSCpPICAL
SOCIETY,  containing  its  transactions  and  Proceedings,  with
other  Microscopical  information.  Bi-monthly.  Previous  to  1893
at  various  prices  ;  after  that  date  bi-monthly,  each  6.r.  net.

JOURNAL  OF  THE  QUEKETT  MICROSCOPICAL
CLUB.  Nos.  1-26,  is.  net;  Nos.  27-31,  2s.  6d.  net.  1893,
No.  32,  and  following  Nos. ,  half-yearly,  3.5-.  6d.  net.

14  Henrietta  Street,  Covent  Garden,  London,  W.C.


46  WILLIAMS  & NORGATE'S


LANDOLT  (Dr.  HANS).  THE  OPTICAL  ROTATING
POWER  OF  ORGANIC  SUBSTANCES  AND  ITS
PRACTICAL  APPLICATIONS.  8vo.  Pp.  xxi  +  75i.  83

Illustrations. %is.  6d.  net.

LEAVENWORTH  (Prof.  W.  S.,  M.Sc.).  INORGANIC
QUALITATIVE  CHEMICAL  ANALYSIS  FOR  AD
VANCED  SCHOOLS  AND  COLLEGES.  8vo.  Pages
vi  +  1 54.  6s.  6d.  net.

LEBLANC  (Dr.  MAX).  THE  PRODUCTION  OF
CHROMIUM  AND  ITS  COMPOUNDS  BY  THE  AID
OF  THE  ELECTRIC  CURRENT.  8vo.  122  pages.  55.  net.

LIVERPOOL  MARINE  BIOLOGY  COMMITTEE.
MEMOIRS  ON  TYPICAL  BRITISH  MARINE
PLANTS  AND  ANIMALS.  Edited  by  W.  A.  Herdman,
D.  Sc. ,  F.  R. S.  All  demy  8vo,  stiff  boards.

1.  Ascidia. By  W.  A.  Herdman. With  5  Plates. Price  2s.  net.

2.  Cardium. By  J.  Johnstone,  Fisheries  Assistant,  University
College,  Liverpool. With  7  Plates. Price  2s.  6d.  net.

3.  Echinus. By  Herbert  Clifton  Chadwick,  Curator  of  the  Port
Erin  Biological  Station. With  5  Plates. Price  2s.  net.

4.  Codium. By  R.  J.  Harvey  Gibson,  M.A.,  F.L.S.,  Professor  of
Botany  in  University  College,  Liverpool,  and  Helen  P.  Auld,  B.Sc.,
With  3  Plates. Price  15.  6d.  net.

5.  Alcyonium. By  Sydney  J.  Hickson,  M.A.,  D.Sc.,  F.R.S.,
Beyer  Professor  of  Zoology  in  Owens  College,  Manchester. With
3  Plates. Price  is.  6d.  net.

6.  Lepeophtheirus  and  Lernea. By  Andrew  Scott,  Resident
Fisheries  Assistant  at  the  Peel  Hatchery. With  5  Plates. 2s.  net.

7.  Lineus. By  R.  C.  Punnett,  B.A.,  with  4  Plates. 2s.  net.

8.  Pleuronectes. By  Frank  J.  Cole,  Jesus  College,  Oxford,
Lecturer  in  the  Victoria University, Demonstrator  of  Zoology,
University,  Liverpool,  and  James  Johnstone,  B.Sc.  Lond,,  Fisheries
Assistant,  University,  Liverpool. With  II  Plates. 7.?.  net.

9.  Chondrus. By  Otto  V.  Darbishire,  Owens  College,  Man
chester. With  7  Plates. 2s.  6d.  net.

10.  Patella (the Common Limpet). By  J.  R.  Ainsworth
Davis,  M.A.,  Professor  of  Zoology  in  the University  College  of
Wales, Aberystwyth, and H.  J. Fleure, B.Sc., Fellow of  the
University  of  Wales. With  4  Plates. 2s.  6d.  net.

11.  Arenicola  (the  Lug-Worm). ByJ.  H.  Ashworth,  D.Sc.,
Lecturer  in  Invertebrate  Zoology  in  the  University  of  Edinburgh.
With  8  Plates. Price  4^.  6d.  net.

12.  Gammarus. By Margaret Cussans, B.Sc., Zoological
Department,  University  of  Liverpool. With  4  Plates. 2s.  net.

13.  Anurida. By A. D. Imms, B.Sc. (Lond.). With 7
Plates. Price  4_r.  net.

14.  Ligia. By  C. Gordon Hewitt, B.Sc., Demonstrator  in
Zoology,  University  of  Manchester. With  4  Plates. 2s.  net.

14  Henrietta  Street,  Covent  Garden,  London,  W.C.


CATALOGUE  OF PUBLICATIONS.  47


LIVERPOOL  MARINE  BIOLOGY  COMMITTEE  MEMOIRS-Contd.

15.  Antedon. By  Herbert  Clifton  Chadwick. With  7  Plates.
2s.  6d.  net.

1 6.  Cancer. By  Joseph Pearson, M. Sc., Demonstrator in
Zoology,  University  of  Liverpool. With  13  Plates. 6s.  6d.  net.

17.  Pecton. By  W.  J.  Dakin,  M.Sc. With  9  plates. 4*.  6d.
net

1 8.  Eledone. By Annie Isgrove, M.Sc. With 10 plates.
4.r.  6d.  net.

19.  Polychael Larvae. By  F.  H.  Gravely,  M.Sc. With  4
plates. 2s.  6d.  net.

LONG  (J.  H.). A  TEXT-BOOK  OF  URINE  ANALYSIS.

Small  8vo. Pages  v  +  24g. 31  Illustrations. 6s.  6d.  net.

MACFIE  (RONALD  C.,  M.A.,  M.B.).  SCIENCE,  MAT
TER,  AND  IMMORTALITY.  Crown  8vo,  cloth.  5*.  net.

MARRINER  (GEORGE  R.,  F.R.M.S.).  THE  KEA :  A
New  Zealand  Problem.  With  Illustrations.  Demy  8vo,  cloth.
"js.  6d.  net.

MASON  (W.  P.,  Prof,  of  Chem.).  NOTES  ON  QUALITA
TIVE  ANALYSIS.  Sm.  I2mo.  56  pp.  3*.  6d.  net.

MEADE  (RICHARD  K.,  B.Sc.)  CHEMIST'S  POCKET
MANUAL.  i6mo.  Leather.  Pocket  Edition.  Pages  vii  +  204.
Out  of  Print.  8s.  6d.  net.

PORTLAND  CEMENT:  ITS  COMPOSITION,  RAW

MATERIALS,  MANUFACTURE,  TESTING,  AND
ANALYSIS.  Second  Edition.  With  100  Illustrations.  l^s.  6d.
net.

MOISSON  (HENRI).  THE  ELECTRIC  FURNACE.  8vo.
Pages  x  +  3O5.  41  Illustrations,  los.  6d.  net

NISSENSON.  THE  ARRANGEMENTS  OF  ELECTRO
LYTIC  LABORATORIES.  8vo.  81  pages.  52  Illustra
tions.  $s.  net.

NOYES  (ARTHUR  A.,  Ph.D.)  ORGANIC  CHEMISTRY
FOR  THE  LABORATORY.  Small  I2mo.  Pages  xii  +  257.
22  Illustrations.  6s.  6d.  net.

and  MULLIKEN  (SAMUEL  P.,  Ph.D.).  LABORA
TORY  EXPERIMENTS  ON  CLASS  REACTIONS
AND  IDENTIFICATION  OF  ORGANIC  SUB
STANCES.  8vo.  81  pp.  2s.  net.

OTTO (RUDOLF). NATURALISM AND RELIGION.

See  Crown  Theological  Library,  p.  1 1 .

PFANHAUSER  (Dr.  W.).  PRODUCTION  OF  METAL
LIC  OBJECTS  ELECTROLYTICALLY.  5*.  net.

14  Henrietta  Street,  Covent  Garden,  London,  W.C.


48  WILLIAMS & NORGATE'S


PHILLIPS(FRANCISC-).  METHODS  FORTHE  ANALY
SIS  OF  ORES,  PIG  IRON  AND  STEEL.  Second
Edition.  8vo.  Pages  viii+ 170.  3  Illustrations.  45.  dd.  net.

PIDDINGTON  (HENRY).  THE  SAILORS'  HORN-BOOK
FOR  THE  LAW  OF  STORMS.  Being  a  Practical  Exposi
tion  of  the  Theory  of  the  Law  of  Storms,  and  its  uses  to  Mariners  of
all  Classes  in  all  Parts  of  the  World.  Shown  by  transparent  Storm
Cards  and  useful  Lessons.  7th  Ed.  Demy  8vo,  cloth.  los.  6d.

PRAY  (Dr.).  ASTIGMATIC  LETTERS.  Printed  on  Mill
board,  size  22  by  14  inches,  is.

PROCEEDINGS  OF  THE  OPTICAL  CONVENTION,
No.  I,  1905.  Crown  4to,  cloth.  los.  net.

RANSOM  (W.  H.,  M.D.,  F.R.S.,  F.R.C.P.).  THE  IN
FLAMMATION  IDEA  IN  GENERAL  PATHOLOGY.
Demy  8vo,  cloth.  7.?.  6d.

RAY  (Prof.  P.  C.).  A  HISTORY  OF  HINDU  CHEMISTRY
FROM  THE  EARLIEST  TIMES  TO  THE  MIDDLE
OF  THE  SIXTEENTH  CENTURY  A.D.  With  Sanskrit
Texts,  Variants,  Translation,  and  Illustrations.  Vol.  I.  Second
Edition,  Revised  and  Enlarged.  Crown  8vo.  105.  6d.  net.
Vol.  II.  Cloth.  IO.T.  6cf.  net.

SANG'S  LOGARITHMS.  A  new  Table  of  Seven-place  Loga
rithms  of  all  Numbers  continuously  up  to  200,000.  2nd  Edition.
Royal  8vo,  cloth.  2is.

SCHREBER  (D.  G.  M.).  MEDICAL  INDOOR  GYMNAS
TICS,  or  a  System  of  Hygienic  Exercises  for  Home  Use,  to  be
practised  anywhere,  without  apparatus  or  assistance,  by  young  and
old  of  either  sex,  for  the  preservation  of  health  and  general  activity.
Revised  and  Supplemented  by  Rudolf  Graefe,  M.D.  With  a
large  plate  and  45  illustrations  in  the  text.  Royal  8vo,  cloth.
3.y.  net.

"The  exercises  described,  when  efficiently  used,  will  undoubtedly  be  of  value
in  strengthening  and  developing  the  muscular  system.  The  descriptions  of  the
exercises  and  the  figures  in  the  text  are  excellent." — Physician  and  Surgeon.

"Well  worthy  of  the  attention  of  those  who  go  in  for  regular  physical  train
ing  as  a  means  for  the  preservation  of  health." — Scotsman.

"A  very  sensible  little  treatise." — Glasgow  Herald.

SCHROEN  (L.).  SEVEN-FIGURE  LOGARITHMS  OF
NUMBERS  from  i  to  108,000,  and  of  Sines,  Cosines,
Tangents,  Cotangents  to  every  10  Seconds  of  the  Quad
rant.  With  a  Table  of  Proportional  Parts.  By  Dr.  Ludwig
Schroen,  Director  of  the  Observatory  of  Jena,  etc.,  etc.  5th
Edition,  corrected  and  stereotyped.  With  a  description  of  the
Tables  by  A.  De  Morgan,  Professor  of  Mathematics  in  University
College,  London.  Imp.  8vo,  cloth,  printed  on  light  green  paper.


14  Henrietta  Street,  Covent  Garden,  London,  W.C.


CATALOGUE  OF  PUBLICATIONS.  49


SEGER.  COLLECTED  WRITINGS  OF  HERMAN
AUGUST  SEGER.  (Papers  on  Manufacture  of  Pottery.)
2  vols.  Large  8vo.  £3,  3*.  net  per  set ;  per  volume,  31.?.  6d.
net.

SNELLEN'S  OPHTHALMIC  TEST  TYPES.  Best  Types
for  the  Determination  of  the  Acuteness  of  Vision.  I4th  Edition,
considerably  augmented  and  improved.  8vo,  sewed.  4^.  Single
Sheets  :  E  T  B,  MOV,  B  D  E,  UJ  UJ IU,  and  Large  Clock  Sheet.
Sd.  each.  Small  Clock  Sheet  and  R  T  V  Z.  yi.  each.

SNYDER  (HARRY,  B.Sc.).  SOILS  AND  FERTILISERS.
Second  Edition.  8vo.  Pages  x  +  294.  I  Plate.  40  Illustrations.
6s.  6d.  net.

SONNTAG  (C.  O.).  A  POCKET  FLORA  OF  EDIN
BURGH  AND  THE  SURROUNDING  DISTRICT.

A  Collection  and  full  Description  of  all  Phanerogamic  and  the
principal  Cryptogamic  Plants,  classified  after  the  Natural  System,
with  an  artificial  Key  and  a  Glossary  of  Botanical  Terms.  By  the
late  C.  O.  Sonntag,  the  Royal  High  School,  Edinburgh  ;  formerly
Secretary  of  the  Microscopical  Society  of  Glasgow,  etc.  Fcap.  8vo,
limp  cloth,  round  corners,  with  Map  of  the  Environs  of  Edinburgh.
3^.  6d.  net.

STILLMAN  (THOS.  B.,  M.Sc.,  Ph.D.).  ENGINEERING
CHEMISTRY.  Third  Edition.  8vo.  Pages  x  +  597.  139
Illustrations,  igs.  net.

TOWER  (O.  F.,  Ph.D.).  THE  CONDUCTIVITY  OF
LIQUIDS.  8vo.  Pages  iv+igo.  20  Illustrations.  6s.  6d.
net.

TRANSACTIONS  OF  THE  ROYAL  SOCIETY  OF
EDINBURGH.  Vol.  XXXVIII.  Part  i,  405.  Part  2,  25*.
Part  3,  30.r.  Part  4,  Js.  6d.  Vol.  XXXIX.  Part  I,  30^.  Part
2,  19-r.  Part  3,  43^.  Part  4,  9*.  Vol.  XL.  Part  i,  25^.  Part  2,
32.?.  dd.  Part  3,  26s.  Part  4,  2O.r.  Vol.  XLI.  Part  I,  2os.
Part  2,  29*.  6d.  Part  3,  45*.  Vol.  XLII.  42^.  Vol.  XLIII.  42.?.
Vol.  XLV.  Part  I,  29.5-.  Part  2,  27^.  Part  3,  33.?.  9^.  Part  4,
4*.  6d.  Vol.  XLVI.  Part  I,  2is.  lod.  Part  2,  2$s.  8d.  Part  3,
27 s.  3</.  General  Index  to  First  Thirty-four  Volumes  (1783-
1888),  with  History  of  the  Institution.  410,  cloth.  2is.

TRANSACTIONS  OF  THE  ROYAL  IRISH  ACADEMY,
DUBLIN.  Vols.  I.-XX.  410.  £22,  $j.  6d.  Vols.  XXI.-
XXXI.  Various  prices.

TRANSACTIONS  OF  THE  ROYAL  DUBLIN  SOCIETY.

Various  volumes  at  various  prices.

14  Henrietta  Street,  Covent  Garden,  London,  W.C.
4


So  WILLIAMS  &  NORGATE'S


VEGA.  LOGARITHMIC  TABLES  OF  NUMBERS  AND
TRIGONOMETRICAL  FUNCTIONS.  Translated  from
the  4Oth,  or  Dr.  Bremiker's  Edition,  thoroughly  revised  and  en
larged,  by  W.  L.  F.  Fischer,  M.A.,  F.R.S.,  Fellow  of  Clare
College,  Cambridge ;  Professor  of  Natural  Philosophy  in  the
University  of  St.  Andrews.  75th  Stereotyped  Edition.  Royal  8vo,
cloth.  TS.

VENABLE  (T.  C.,  Ph.D.).  THE  DEVELOPMENT  OF
THE  PERIODIC  LAW.  Small  I2mo.  Pages  viii  +  32i.
Illustrated,  los.  6</.  net.

—  THE  STUDY  OF  THE  ATOM. izmo. Pages  vi  +  ago.
8s.  6d.  net.

and  HOWE.  INORGANIC  CHEMISTRY  ACCORD
ING  TO  THE  PERIODIC  LAW.  Second  Edition.  See
under  Howe,  p.  45.

WILEY  (HARVEY  W.,  A.M.,  Ph.D.).  PRINCIPLES  AND
PRACTICE  OF  AGRICULTURAL  CHEMICAL
ANALYSIS.  3  vols.  8vo.  New  Edition  in  preparation.  Vol.1.
Soils.  Ready.  i8s.  net.  Vol.  II.  Fertilizers.

WYSOR  (HENRY,  B.S.,  Assistant  Professor  of  Analytical
Chemistry,  Lafayette  College).  METALLURGY.  A

Condensed  Treatise. Demy  8vo,  cloth. 125.  6d.  net.


14  Henrietta  Street,  Covent  Garden,  London,  W.C.


CATALOGUE  OF  PUBLICATIONS.


VI. Miscellaneous.

ANTHROPOLOGY— SOCIOLOGY— MYTHOLOGY-
BIBLIOGRAPHY— BIOGRAPHY, ETC.

AVEBURY  (Lord,  D.C.L.,  F.R.S.,  etc.)  (Sir  John  Lubbock).
PREHISTORIC  TIMES,  as  Illustrated  by  Ancient  Re
mains  and  the  Manners  and  Customs  of  Modern  Savages.

6th  Edition,  revised,  with  239  Illustrations,  a  large  number  of
which  are  specially  prepared  for  this  Edition.  Demy  8vo,  cloth,
gilt  tops.  iSs.

"  To  anyone  who  wishes  to  obtain  a  succinct  conspectus  of  the  present  state
of  knowledge  on  the  subject  of  early  man,  we  recommend  the  perusal  of  this
comprehensive  volume." — Jour.  Brit.  Arclutolog.  Assoc.

"  The  fact  that  this  well-known  standard  work  has  reached  a  sixth  edition  is
evidence  of  its  value  to  ethnologists  and  archseologists.  The  many  and  beautiful
illustrations  are  most  helpful  in  better  understanding  the  plain  but  accurate
letterpress.  Lord  Avebury  is  to  be  congratulated  on  the  new  edition,  which
is  sure  to  further  popularise  a  fascinating  subject  for  investigation  by  cultured
people. " — Science  Gossip.

"  It  is  necessary  to  compare  the  present  volume  with  the  fifth  edition  in
order  to  see  how  much  it  has  been  improved.  The  illustrations  to  this  sixth
edition  are  immeasurably  superior  to  the  fifth." — Knowledge.

BLACKBURN (HELEN). WOMEN'S SUFFRAGE. A

Record  of  the  Women's  Suffrage  Movement  in  the  British  Isles,
with  a  Biographical  Sketch  of  Miss  Becker.  Portraits.  Crown  8vo,
cloth.  6s.

See  also  Vynne,  Nora,  and  Blackburn,  "  Women  under  the  Factory

Acts."

CATALOGUE  OF  THE  LONDON  LIBRARY,  St  James's
Square.  By  C.  T.  Hagberg  Wright,  LL.D.,  etc.  xiv+i626  pp.
4to,  cloth.  425.  net.  Supplement  I.,  1902-3.  Buckram,  I  vol.,
1 96  pp.  5j.net.  Supplement  II.  198  pp.  1903-4.  Buckram.
5*.  net.  Supplement  IV.  1905-6.  5^.  net.

"  The  present  catalogue  is  essentially  a  working  catalogue.  .  .  .  The  general
level  of  accuracy  in  the  printing  and  editing  of  the  work  appears  to  us  to  be  an
unusually  high  one.  .  .  .  We  heartily  applaud  the  work,  both  as  a  landmark
in  library  land,  and  as  a  monument  standing  upon  a  firm  foundation  of  its  own."
—  The  Times.


14  Henrietta  Street,  Covent  Garden,  London,  W.C.


52  WILLIAMS  &  NORGATE'S


ENGELHARDT  (C.).  DENMARK  IN  THE  EARLY
IRON  AGE.  Illustrated  by  recent  Discoveries  in  the  Peat-
Mosses  of  Slesvig.  33  Plates  (giving  representations  of  upwards  of
a  thousand  objects),  Maps,  and  numerous  other  Illustrations  on
wood.  1866.  4to,  cloth.  3U.  6d.

GOLDAMMER  (H.).  THE  KINDERGARTEN.  A  Guide
to  Frobel's  Method  of  Education.  2  vols.  in  i.  120  pp.  of  Illus
trations.  8vo,  cloth.  lOs.  f>d.

GRIEBEN'S  ENGLISH  GUIDES.  Practical  and  handy  ;  size,
suitable  for  the  pocket,  6J  x  4^,  and  bound  in  cloth.

Switzerland. A practical guide with seven maps. Cloth.
35.  net. Ready.

Norway  and  Copenhagen. With  six  maps. Cloth. 3*.  net.
Ready.

Ostend  and  other  Belgium  Watering  Places. With  two
maps. Cloth, is.  6d.  net. Ready.

Lakes  of Northern Italy. With maps. Cloth. 35. net.
Ready.

The  Rhine. With  maps. Cloth. 35.  net. In  the  press.
North  Sea  Watering  Places. Cloth, y.  net. In  the  press.
Belgium. With  maps. Cloth, y.  net. In  the  press.

Brussels  and  the  Universal  Exhibition  1910. With  maps.
Cloth. 15.  6d.  net. In  the  press.

Holland. With  maps. Cloth. 3.?.  net. In  the  press.
The  Riviera. With  maps. Cloth. 31.  net. In  the  press.

Dresden and Environs. With maps. Cloth, is.  6d.  net.
In  the  press.

HENRY  (JAMES).  ^NEIDEA ;  or,  Critical,  Exegetical  and
yEsthetical  Remarks  on  the  ^Eneis.  With  a  personal  collation
of  all  the  first-class  MSS.,  and  upwards  of  100  second-class  MSS. ,
and  all  the  principal  editions.  Vol.  I.  (3  Parts),  Vol.  II.  (3  Parts),
Vol.  III.  (3  Parts),  Vol.  IV.  (r  Part).  Royal  8vo,  sewed.
£2,  2s.  net.

HERBERT  (Hon.  A.).  THE  SACRIFICE  OF  EDUCA
TION  TO  EXAMINATION.  Letters  from  "All  Sorts  and
Conditions  of  Men."  Edited  by  Auberon  Herbert.  Half-cloth
boards.  2s.

and WAGER (HAROLD). BAD AIR AND BAD

HEALTH. Dedicated  to  Professor  Clifford  Allbutt. Reprinted
from  the  "  Contemporary  Review." 8vo,  cloth,  is.  6d.  ;  sewed,  is.


14  Henrietta  Street,  Covent  Garden,  London,  W.C.


CATALOGUE  OF  PUBLICATIONS.  S3


JOHNSON  (E.). THE  RISE  OF  ENGLISH  CULTURE.

With  a  brief  account  of  the  Author's  Life  and  Writings. Demy
8vo,  cloth. 151.  net.

KIEPERT'S  NEW  ATLAS  ANTIQUUS.  Twelve  Maps  of
the  Ancient  World,  for  Schools  and  Colleges.  Third  hundred
thousand.  I2th  Edition,  with  a  complete  Geographical  Index.
Folio,  boards.  6s.  Strongly  bound  in  cloth,  fs.  6d.

-  WALL-MAPS  OF  THE  ANCIENT  WORLD—

Wall-map  of  Ancient  Italy.  Italia  antiqua.  For  the  study  of
Livy,  Sallust,  Cicero,  Dionysius,  etc.  Scale  i  :  800,000.  Mounted
on  rollers,  varnished.  2os.

General  Wall-map  of  the  Old  World.  Tabula  orbis  terrarum
antiqui  ad  illustrandam  potissimum  antiquissimi  aevi  usque  ad  Alex-
andrum  M.  historiam.  For  the  study  of  ancient  history,  espe
cially  the  history  of  the  Oriental  peoples  :  the  Indians,  Medes.
Persians,  Babylonians,  Assyrians,  Egyptians,  Phoenicians,  etc.
Scale  I  :  5,400,000.  Mounted  on  rollers,  varnished,  2os.

General  Wall-map  of  the  Roman  Empire.  Imperii  Romani
tabula  geographica.  For  the  study  of  the  development  of  the  Roman
Empire.  Scale  1 :  300,000.  Mounted  on  rollers,  varnished.  24^.

Wall-map  of  Ancient  Latium.  Latii  Veteris  et  finitimarum
regionum  tabula.  For  the  study  of  Livy,  Dionysius,  etc.  Scale
I  :  125,000.  With  supplement :  Environs  of  Rome.  Scale
I  :  25,000.  Mounted  on  rollers,  varnished.  185.

Wall-map  of  Ancient  Greece.  Graecise  Antiquse  tabula.  For
the  study  of  Herodotus,  Thucydides,  Xenophon,  Strabo,  Cornelius
Nepos,  etc.  Scale  I  :  500,000.  Mounted  on  rollers,  varnished.
346

Wall- Map  of  the  Empires  of  the  Persians  and  of
Alexander  the  Great.  Imperia  Persarum  et  Macedonum.  For
the  study  of  Herodotus,  Xenophon,  Justinian,  Arian,  Curtius.
Scale  I  :  300,000.  Mounted  on  rollers  and  varnished.  2OJ.

Wall-Map  of  Gaul,  with  portions  of  Ancient  Britain  and
Ancient  Germany.  Gallioe  Cisalpinse  et  Transalpine  cum  parti-
bus  Britannise  et  Germanise  tabula.  For  the  study  of  Caesar,
Justinian,  Livy,  Tacitus,  etc.  Scale  I  :  1,000,000.  Mounted  on
rollers  and  varnished.  24^.

Wall-Map  of  Ancient  Asia  Minor.  Asise  Minoris  Antiquse
Tabula.  For  the  study  of  Herodotus,  Xenophon,  Justinian,  Arian,
Curtius,  etc.  Scale  I  :  800,000.  Mounted  on  rollers  and  var
nished.  2O.T.


14  Henrietta  Street,  Covent  Garden,  London,  W.C.


54  WILLIAMS  &  NORGATE'S


LONDON  LIBRARY  SUBJECT  INDEX.  To  be  issued  about
the  end  of  November.  A  quarto  volume  of  about  1200  pages  in
three  columns,  bound  in  buckram.  $is.  6d.  net.

Opinions  of  some  of  those  who  have  read  through  the  proof-sheets  :

"...  My  admiration  for  the  Index  increases  daily.  .  .  ." — Professor  BURY,
Regius  Professor  of  Modern  History,  Cambridge.

"  .  .  .  I  feel  certain  that  this  Index  will  become  a  standard  book  of  reference,
and  will  be  a  vade  mecum  to  every  man  of  letters.  .  .  ." — FREDERIC
HARRISON.

"...  This  Index  will  have  a  signal  educational  value.  There  never  was  a
piece  of  work  better  worth  doing,  or,  I  think,  better  done.  .  .  ."— Dr  WARD,
Master  of  Peterhouse,  Cambridge.

"  .  .  .  As  far  ns  I  have  seen  the  proof-sheets  I  am  satisfied  that  the  new
Subject  Index  will  be  one  of  the  best  Catalogues  of  the  kind  ever  produced.
.  .  ."— H.  R.  TEDDER.

"...  The  specimen  page  is  exceedingly  neat.  A  good  Catalogue  is  one  of
the  few  human  works  that  can  do  no  harm.  .  .  ." — Sir  FREDERICK  POLLOCK,
Bart.

"...  I  am  more  than  surprised  at  its  accuracy  and  fulness.  .  .  ." — Sir
FRANK  MARZIALS,  C.B.

MARCKS  (ERICH,  Professor  of  Modern  History  at  the
University  of  Leipzig).  ENGLAND  AND  GERMANY:
Their  Relations  in  the  Great  Crises  of  European  History,
1500-1900.  Demy  8vo,  stiff  wrapper,  is.

PEDDIE  (R.  A.).  PRINTING  AT  BRESCIA  IN  THE
FIFTEENTH  CENTURY.  A  List  of  the  Issues.  55.  net.

RING  OF  POPE  XYSTUS,  THE.  A  Collection  of  Aphorisms
and  Short  Sayings  in  use  among  the  Christian  Communities  as
early  as  the  Second  Century  of  our  Era.  There  is  no  question  that
it  was  widely  read,  for  Latin,  Syriac,  and  Coptic  versions  are
known  besides  in  the  original  Greek.  The  original  Greek  was
discovered  at  the  end  of  last  century,  and  is  now  translated  into
English  for  the  first  time.  Beautifully  printed  on  hand-made  paper,
and  bound  suitable  for  presentation.

SCHLOSS  (DAVID  F.).  METHODS  OF  INDUSTRIAL
REMUNERATION.  3rd  Edition,  revised  and  enlarged.
Crown  8vo,  cloth.  75.  6d.  Popular  Edition,  $s.  6d.

"  In  its  new  as  in  its  old  form  the  book  is  well  nigh  indispensable  to  the
student  who  desires  to  get  some  insight  into  the  actual  facts  about  the  various
methods  of  industrial  remuneration,  and  the  degree  of  success  with  which  they
have  been  applied  in  the  various  trades." — Manchester  Guardian.

"  More  useful  than  ever  to  the  students  of  the  labour  problem." — Political
Science  Quarterly.

SPENCER  (HERBERT). AN  AUTOBIOGRAPHY. See

P-  3°

14  Henrietta  Street,  Covent  Garden,  London,  W.C.


CATALOGUE  OF  PUBLICATIONS.  55


SPENCER  (HERBERT). PRINCIPLES  OF  SOCIOLOGY.

See  p.  30.

STUDY  OF  SOCIOLOGY. See  p.  31.

DESCRIPTIVE  SOCIOLOGY. See  p.  31.

STEPHENS  (GEORGE).  PROFESSOR  BUGGE'S
STUDIES  ON  NORTHERN  MYTHOLOGY  EX
AMINED.  Illustrations.  8vo,  cloth.  Ss.

THE  RUNES,  WHENCE  CAME  THEY? 4to,  sewed.

6s.

-  OLD  NORTHERN  RUNIC  MONUMENTS. Vol.  IV.
Folio. 2OJ-.  net.

VEILED  FIGURE  (THE),  and  Other  Poems.  Large  post  8vo,
buckram,  gilt,  cover  designed  by  Mr.  T.  Blake  Wirgman.
2s.  6d.

VYNNE  (NORA)  and  HELEN  BLACKBURN,  and  with
the  Assistance  of  H.  W.  ALLASON.  WOMEN  UNDER
THE  FACTORY  ACTS.  Part  I.  Position  of  the  Employer.
Part  2.  Position  of  the  Employed.  Crown  8vo,  cloth,  is.  net.

WELD  (A.  G.).  GLIMPSES  OF  TENNYSON  AND  OF
SOME  OF  HIS  FRIENDS.  With  an  Appendix  by  the  late
Bertram  Tennyson.  Illustrated  with  Portraits  in  photogravure
and  colour,  and  with  a  facsimile  of  a  MS.  poem.  Fcap.  8vo,
art  linen.  45.  6d.  net.

"  This  is  a  delightful  little  book,  written  by  one  who  has  all  the  qualifications
for  the  task — the  opportunities  of  observation,  the  interest  of  relationship,  and  the
sympathetic  and  appreciative  temper.  .  .  .  We  do  not  attempt  to  criticise,
but  only  to  give  such  a  description  as  will  send  our  readers  to  it , "— Spectator.

"  Everyone  who  reads  the  book  will  understand  Tennyson  a  little  better,
and  many  will  view  him  in  a  new  aspect  for  the  first  time." — Daily  Chronicle.

"It  is  quite  worthy  of  a  place  side  by  side  with  the  larger  '  Life.'  " — Glasgow
Herald.


14  Henrietta  Street,  Covent  Garden,  London,  W.C.


56  WILLIAMS  AND NORGATE'S


LIST OF PERIODICALS, REVIEWS,  AND

TRANSACTIONS AND PROCEEDINGS

OF LEARNED SOCIETIES

PUBLISHED BY WILLIAMS & NORGATE.


THE  HIBBERT  JOURNAL:  A  Quarterly  Review  of
Religion,  Theology,  and  Philosophy.  Single  numbers,  2s.  6J.
net.  Subscription,  los.  per  annum,  post  free.

JOURNAL  OF  THE  FEDERATED  MALAY  STATES
MUSEUMS.  Issued  quarterly.  Single  numbers,  is.  6d.  net.
Subscription,  55.  per  annum.

JOURNAL  OF  THE  ROYAL  MICROSCOPICAL
SOCIETY,  containing  its  Transactions  and  Proceedings,  with
other  Microscopical  Information.  Bi-monthly.  6s.  net.  Yearly
subscriptions,  37^.  6d. ,  post  free.

JOURNAL OF THE QUEKETT MICROSCOPICAL

CLUB. Issued  half-yearly,  April  and  November. Price  $s.  6d.
net. 7-r.  6d.  per  annum,  post  free.

LINNEAN  SOCIETY  OF  LONDON.  Journal  of  Botany  and
Journal  of  Zoology.  Published  irregularly  at  various  prices.  Also
Transactions,  published  irregularly.

ROYAL  SOCIETY  OF  EDINBURGH.  Transactions.  Issued
irregularly  at  various  prices.

LIVERPOOL  MARINE  BIOLOGY  COMMITTEE.
Memoirs.  I. -XIX.  already  published  at  various  prices.  Fauna  of
Liverpool  Bay.  Fifth  Report  written  by  Members  of  the  Com
mittee  and  other  Naturalists.  Cloth.  8s.  6d.  net.  See  p.  47.

ROYAL  ASTRONOMICAL  SOCIETY.  Memoirs  and  Monthly
Notices.  Yearly  volumes  at  various  prices.

ROYAL  IRISH  ACADEMY.  Transactions  and  Proceedings
issued  irregularly  ;  prices  vary.  Cunningham  Memoirs.  Vols.
I. -XI.  already  issued  at  various  prices.  Vide  pp.  43-44.

ROYAL DUBLIN SOCIETY. Transactions  and  Proceedings.

Issued  irregularly  at  various  prices.

14  Henrietta  Street,  Covent  Garden,  London,  W.C.


INDEX  UNDER  AUTHORS  &  TITLES


Abhidhanaratnamala. Aufrecht,  33.
Acland,  Sir  C. T. D. Anglican  Liberalism,

12.

Acts  of  the  Apostles. Adolf  Harnack,  12.
Addis,  W.  K. Hebrew  Religion,  n.
./Eneidea. James  Henry,  52.
Agricultural  Chemical  Analysis. Wiley,  50.
Alcyonium. Vide  L.M.B.C.  Memoirs,  46.
Allin,  Rev.  Thos. Universalism  Asserted,  14.
Alton,  E.  H. Romans,  32.
Alviella, Count Goblet D'. Contemporary

Evolution  of  Religious  Thought,  14.
Alviella,  Count  Goblet  D'. Idea  of  God,  13.
Americans,  The. Hugo  Miinsterberg,  29.
Analysis  of  Ores. F.  C.  Phillips,  48.
Analysis  of  Theology. E.  G.  Figg 17.
Ancient  Assyria,  Religion  of. Sayce,  14.
Ancient  Egyptians,  32.
Ancient  World,  Wall  Maps  of  the,  53.
Anglican  Liberalism,  12.
Annotated  Texts. Goethe,  39.
Antedon. Vide  L.M.B.C.  Memoirs,  46.
Anthems. Rev.  R.  Crompton  Jones,  20.
Antigua  Mater. Edwin  Johnson,  20.
Anunda. Vide  L.M.B.C.  Memoirs,  46.
Apocalypse. Bleek,  7,
Apocalypse  of  St  John,  37.
Apologetic  of  the  New  Test. E.  F.  Scott,  12.
Apostle  Paul,  the,  Lectures  on. Pfleiderer,  13.
Apostolic  Age,  The. Carl  von  Weizsacker,  6.
Arabian  Poetry,  Ancient,  34.
Arenicola. Vide  L.M.B.C.  Memoirs,  46.
Argument  of  Adaptation.  Rev.  G.  Henslow,  18.
Aristotelian  Society,  Proceedings  of,  29.
Army  Series  of  French  and  German  Novels,  38.
Ascidia. Johnstone,  L.M.B.C.  Memoirs,  46.
Ashwprth,  J.  H. Arenicola,  46.
Assyrian  Dictionary. Norris,  35.
Assyrian  Language,  A  Concise  Dictionary  of.

W.  Muss-Arnolt,  35.

Assyriology,  Essay  on. George  Evans,  34.
Astigmatic  Letters. Dr.  Pray,  48.
Alhanasius  of  Alexandria,  Canons  of,  37.
Atlas  Antiquus,  Kiepert's,  53.
Atonement,  Doctrine  of  the. Sabatier,  10.
At-one-ment,  The. Rev.  G.  Henslow,  18.
Aufrecht,  Dr.  T. Abhidhanaratnamala,  33.
Auf  Verlornem  Posten. Dewall,  38.
Autobiography. Herbert  Spencer,  30.
Avebury,  Lord. Prehistoric  Times,  51.
Avesti,  Pahlavi. Persian  Studies,  33.

Babel  and  Bible. Friedrich  Delitzsch,  9.
Bacon,  Roger,  The  "Opus  Majus"of,  28.
Bad  Air  and  Bad  Health. Herbert  and  Wager,

56.

Ball,  Sir  Roberts. Cunningham  Memoir,  45.
Bases  of  Religious  Belief. C.  B.  Upton,  14,  26.
Bastian,  H.  C. Studies  in  Heterogenesis,  43.
Baur. Church  History,  7 ;  Paul,  7.
Bayldon,  Rev.  G. Icelandic  Grammar,  38.
Beard, Rev. Dr. C. Universal Christ, 15  ;

Reformation  of  the  Sixteenth  Century,  13.
Beeby,  Rev.  C.  E. Doctrine  and  Principles,  15.
Beet,  Prof.  J.  A. Child  and  Religion,  10.
Beginnings  of  Christianity. Paul  Wernle,  4.


Beliefs  about  the  Bible. M.  J.  Savage,  24.
Benedict,  F.  E. Organic  Analysis,  43.
Bergey,  D.  G. Practical  Hygiene,  43.
Bernstein  and  Kirsch. Syriac  Chrestomathy,

Bevan,  Rev.  J.  O.  Genesis  and  Evolution  of
the  Individual  Soul,  15.

Bible. Translated  by  Samuel  Sharpe,  15.

Bible,  Beliefs  about,  Savage,  24  ;  Bible  Plants,
Henslow,  18  ;  Bible  Problems,  Prof.  T.  K.
Cheyne,  9  ;  How  to  Teach  the,  Rev.  A.  F.
Mitchell,  22;  Remnants  of  Later  Syriac
Versions  of,  37.

Biblical  Hebrew,  Introduction  to.  Rev.  Jas.
Kennedy,  20,  34.

Biltz,  Henry.  Methods  of  Determining  Mole
cular  Weights,  43.

Biology,  Principles  of. Herbert  Spencer,  30.

Blackburn,  Helen. Women's  Suffrage,  51.

Bleek. Apocalypse,  7.

Boielle,  Jas.  French  Composition,  39  ;  Hugo,
Les  Miserables,  39;  Notre  Dame,  39.

Bolton. History  of  the  Thermometer,  43.

Book  of  Prayer. Crompton  Jones,  20.

Books  of  the  New  Testament. Von  Soden,  10.

Bousset,  Wilhelm. Jesus,  10.

Bremond,  Henri. Mystery  of  Newman,  15.

Brewster,  H.  B.  The  Prison,  28 ;  The  Statu
ette  and  the  Background,  28  ;  Anarchy  and
Law,  28.

British  Fisheries. J.  Johnstone,  45.

Bruce,  Alex.  Topographical  Atlas  of  the
Spinal  Cord,  43.

Buddha. Prof.  H.  Oldenberg,  35.

Burkitt,  Prof.  F.  C. Anglican  Liberalism,  12.

Calculus,  Differential  and  Integral. Harnack,

44-

Caldecott,  Dr.  A. Anglican  Liberalism,  12.
Campbell,  Rev. Canon Colin. First Three

Gospels  in  Greek,  15.

Campbell,  Rev.  R.  J.  New  Theology  Ser
mons,  15.

Cancer. Vide  L.M.B.C.  Memoirs,  46.
Cancer  and  other  Tumours.  Chas.  Creighton,43.
Canonical  Books  of  the  Old  Testament,  3.
Cape  Dutch. J.  F.  Van  Oordt,  41.
Cape  Dutch,  Werner's  Elementary  Lessons  in,

42.

Cardium. Vide  L.M.B.C.  Memoirs,  46.
Carlyle,  Rev.  A.  J. Anglican  Liberalism,  12.
Casey,  John. Cunningham  Memoirs,  43.
Catalogue  of  the  London  Library,  51.
Celtic  Heathendom. Prof.  J.  Rhys,  14.
Celtic  Studies. Sullivan,  41.
Centenary History  of  South Place Society.

Moncure  D.  Conway,  16.
Chadwick,  Antedon,  47  ;  Echinus,  46.
Chaldee  Language,  Manual  of. Turpie,  37.
Channing's  Complete  Works,  15.
Chants  and  Anthems,  20  ;  Chants,  Psalms  and

Canticles. Crompton  Jones,  20.
Character  of  the  Fourth  Gospel. Rev.  John

James  Tayler,  25.
Chemical  Dynamics,  Studies  in. J.  H.  Van't

Hoff,  45.


INDEX— Continued.


Chemistry  for  Beginners. Edward  Hart,  44.

Cheyne,  Prof.  T.  K. Bible  Problems,  9.

Child  and  Religion,  The,  10.

Chinese. Werner,  32.

Chondrus. Vide  L.M.B.C.  Memoirs,  46.

Christ  no  Product  of  Evolution.  Rev.  G.
Henslow,  19.

Christian  Creed,  Our,  15.

Christian  Life,  Ethics  of  the,  2.

Christian  Life  in  the  Primitive  Church.  Dob-
schiitz,  3.

Christian  Religion,  Fundamental  Truths  of
the.  R.  Seeberg,  12.

Christianity,  Beginnings  of. Wernle,  4.

Christianity  in  Talmud  and  Midrash.  R.
Travers  Herford,  19.

Christianity? What  is. Adolf  Harnack,  5.

Chromium,  Production  of Max  Leblanc,  46.

Church  History. Baur,  7. Schubert,  3.

Closet  Prayers. Dr.  Sadler,  24.

Codium. Vide  L.M.B.C.  Memoirs,  46.

Coit,  Dr.  Stanton.  Idealism  and  State  Church,
16  ;  Book  of  Common  Prayer,  16.

Colby,  A.  L.  Reinforced  Concrete  in
Europe,  43.

Cole,  Frank  J. Pleuronectes,  46.

Collins,  F.  H.  Epitome  of  Synthetic  Philo
sophy,  28.

Coming  Church. Dr.  John  Hunter,  20.

Commentary  on  the  Book  of  Job.  Ewald,  7  ;
Commentary  on  the  Book  of  Job.  Wright
and  Hirsch,  27  ;  Commentary  on  the  Old
Testament.  Ewald,  7  ;  Commentary  on  the
Psalms.  Ewald,  7  ;  Protestant,  8,  23.

Common  Prayer  for  Christian  Worship,  16.

Communion  with  God. Herrmann,  5,  10.

Conductivity  of  Liquids,  49.

Confessions  of  St.  Augustine. Harnack,  12.

Contemporary  Evolution  of  Religious  Thought.
Count  Goblet  D'Alviella,  14.

Contes  Militaires. Daudet,  38.

Conway,  Moncure  D. Centenary  History,  16.

Conybeare,  F.  C. Apocalypse  of  St  John,  37.

Cornill,  Carl.  Introduction  to  the  Old  Testa
ment,  3.

Cosmology  of  the Rigveda. H.  W.  Wallis,

Creighton,  Chas. Cancer  and  other  Tumours,

43  ;  Tuberculosis,  43.

Cuneiform  Inscriptions,  The. Schrader,  8.
Cunningham  Memoirs,  43,  44.
Cunningham,  D.  J.,  M.D. Lumbar  Curve  in

Man  and  the  Apes,  43 ; Surface  Anatomy

of  the  Cerebral  Hemispheres. Cunningham

Memoir,  43.
Cussans,  Margaret. Gammarus,  46.

Daniel  and  its  Critics ;  Daniel  and  his  Pro
phecies.  Rev.  C.  H.  H.  Wright,  27.

Darbishire,  Otto  V. Chondrus,  46.

Daudet,  A. Contes  Militaires,  38.

Davids,  T.  W.  Rhys. Indian  Buddhism,  13.

Davis,  J.  R.  Ainsworth. Patella,  46.

Dawning  Faith. H.  Rix,  24.

Delbos,  Leon.  Student's  Graduated  French
Reader,  39.

Delbos,  L. Nautical  Terms,  39.


Delectus  Veterum. Theodor  Noldeke,  35.
Delitzsch, Friedrich. Babel and Bible, 9;

Hebrew  Language,  33.

Democracy  and  Character.  Canon  Stephen,  25.
Denmark  in  the  Early  Iron  Age.  C.  Engel-

hardt,  52.

De  Profundis  Clamavi.  Dr.  John  Hunter,  20.
Descriptive  Sociology.  Herbert  Spencer,  32.
Development  of  the  Periodic  Law.  Venable,  50.
Dewall,  Johannes  v.,  Auf  Verlornem  Posten

and  Nazzarena  Danti,  38.
Differential  and  Integral  Calculus,  The. Axel

Harnack,  44.

Dillmann,  A. Ethiopic  Grammar,  33.
Dipavamsa,  The. Edited  by  Oldenberg,  33.
Dirge  of  Coheleth. Rev.  C.  Taylor,  25.
Dobschiitz,  Ernst  von. Christian  Life  in  the

Primitive  Church,  3,  16.

Doctrine  and  Principles. Rev.C.  E.  Beeby,  15.
Dogma,  History  of. Harnack,  18.
Dole,  Chas.  P  . The  Ethics  of  Progress,  16.
Driver,  S.  R. Mosheh  ben  Shesheth,  22.
Drinnmond,  Dr.  Jas. Character  and  Author
ship  of  the  Fourth  Gospel,  16;  Philo  Juda:us,

28  ;  Via,  Veritas,  Vita,  13.

Karly  Hebrew  Story. John  P.  Peters,  9.
Early  Christian  Conception. Pfleiderer,  10.
Ecclesiastical Institutions  of  Holland. Rev.

P.  H.  Wicksteed,  26.
Echinus. Vide  L.M.B.C.  Memoirs,  46.
Echoes  of  Holy  Thoughts,  17.
Education. Spencer, 31  ; Lodge, School

Reform,  40.

Egyptian  Faith,  The  Old. Naville,  12.
Egyptian  Grammar,  Erman's,  34.
Electric  Furnace. H.  Moisson,  47.
Electrolysis  of  Water. V.  Engelhardt,  44.
Electrolytic Laboratories. Nissenson,  47.
Eledone. Vide  L.M.B.C Memoirs, 47.
Elementary,  Chemistry. Emery,  44.
ElementaryOrganic Analysis.  F.E.Benedict, 43.
Emery,  F.  B.,  M.A. Elementary Chemistry,

44.

Kngelhardt,  C. Denmark  in  Iron  Age,  52.
Engelhardt,  V. Electrolysis  of  Water,  44.
Engineering  Chemistry. T.  B.  Stillman,  49.
England  and  Germany. Erich  Marcks,  54.
English  Culture,  Rise  of. E.  Johnson,  53.
English-Danish  Dictionary. S.  Rosing,  41.
English-Icelandic  Dictionary. Zoega,  42.
Enoch,  Book  of. C.  Gill,  17.
Epitome  of  Synthetic  Philosophy. Collins,  28.
Erman's  Egyptian  Grammar,  34.
Erzahlungen. Hofer,  38.
Espin,  Rev.  T.,  M.A. The  Red  Stars,  44.
Essays  on  the  Social  Gospel. Harnack  and

Herrmann,  IT.

Essays. Herbert  Spencer,  31.
Ethica. Prof.  Simon  Laurie,  29.
Ethical  Import  of  Darwinism. Schurman,  29.
Ethics,  Data  of. Herbert  Spencer,  31.
Ethics,  Early  Christian. Prof.  Scullard,  25.
Ethics,  Principles  of. Herbert  Spencer,  31.
Ethics  of  the  Christian  Life. Haering,  2.
Ethics  of  Progress,  The. Dole,  16.
Ethiopic  Grammar. A.  Dillmann,  33.


INDEX-Continued.


59


Eucken,  Prof. Life  of  the  Spirit,  12.
Eugene's  Grammar  of  French  Language,  39.
Evans,  George. Essay  on  Assyriology,  34.
Evolution,  A  New  Aspect  of. Formby,  17.
Evolution,  Christ  no  Product  of,  19.
Evolution  of  Christianity. C.  Gill,  17.
Evolution  of  Knowledge. R.  S.  Perrin,  22.
Evolution  of  Religion,  The. L.  R.  Farnell,  10.
Ewald. Commentary  on  Job,  7  ;  Commentary

on  the  Old  Testament,  7  ;  Commentary  on

the  Psalms,  7.

Facts  and  Comments. Herbert  Spencer,  31.

Faith  and  Morals. W.  Herrmann,  9.

Faizullah-Bhai,  Shaikh,  B.D.  A  Moslem
Present ;  Pre-Islamitic  Arabic  Poetry,  34.

Farnell,  L.  R. The  Evolution  of  Religion,  10.

Fertilizers.  Vide  Wiley's  Agricultural  Analysis,
50.

Figg,  E.  G. Analysis  of  Theology,  17.

First  Principles. Herbert  Spencer,  30.

First  Three  Gospels  in  Greek.  Rev.  Canon
Colin  Campbell,  15.

Fischer,  Prof.  Emil.  Introduction  to  the  Pre
paration  of  Organic  Compounds,  44.

Flinders  Petrie  Papyri. Cunn..  Memoirs,  44.

Formby,  Rev.  C.  W. Re-Creation,  17.

Four  Gospels  as  Historical  Records,  17.

Fourth  Gospel,  Character  and  Authorship  of,  16.

Frankfurter,  Dr.  O. Handbook  of  Pali,  34.

Free  Catholic  Church. Rev.  J.  M.  Thomas,  26.

Freezing  Point,  The, Jones,  45.

French  Composition. Jas.  Boielle,  39.

French  History,  First  Steps  in.  F.  F.  Roget,  41.

French  Language,  Grammar  of. Eugene,  39.

Fuerst,  Dr.  Jul.  Hebrew  and  Chaldee  Lexi
con,  34.

Gammarus. KzVfc  L.M.B.C.  Memoirs,  46.

Gardner,  Prof.  Percy.  Anglican  Liberalism,  12  ;
Modernity  and  the  Churches,

General  Language  of  the  Incas  of  Peru,  40.

Genesis,  Book  of,  in  Hebrew  Text.  Rev.  C.
H.  H.  Wright,  27.

Genesis,  Hebrew  Text,  34.

Geometry,  Analytical,  Elements  of. Hardy,  44.

German  Idioms,  Short  Guide  to. Weiss,  42.

German  Literature,  A  Short  Sketch  of.  V.
Phillipps,  B.A.,  41.

German,  Systematic  Conversational  Exercises
in.  T.  H.  Weiss,  42.

Gibson,  R.  J.  Harvey. Codium,  46.

Gill,  C.  Book  of  Enoch  ;  Evolution  of  Chris
tianity,  17.

Glimpses  of  Tennyson. A.  G.  Weld,  55.

Goethe,  W.  v. Annotated  Texts,  39.

Goldammer,  H. The  Kindergarten,  52.

Goligher,  Dr  W.  A.  Hellenic  Studies,  and
Hellenistic  Greeks,  Romans,  32.

Gospel  of  Rightness. C.  E.  Woods,  27.

Gospels  in  Greek,  First  Three,  15.

Greek  Ideas,  Lectures  on. Rey.  Dr.  Hatch,  13.

Greek,  Modern,  A  Course  of. Zompolides,  42.

Greek  New  Testament{  6.

Green,  Rev.  A.  A. Child  and  Religion,  10.

Grieben's  English  Guides,  52.


Gulistan,  The  (Rose  Garden)  of  Shaik  Sadi  ot

Shiraz,  36.
Gwynn,  John. Later  Syriac  Versions  of  the

Bible,  37.
Gymnastics,  Medical  Indoor. Dr.  Schreber,  48.

Haddon,  A.  C.  Decorative  Art  of  British
Guinea,  Cunningham  Memoir,  44.

Haering,  T. Ethics  of  the  Christian  Life,  2.

Hagmann,  J.  G.,  Ph.D.  Reform  in  Primary
Education,  39.

Handley,  Rev.  H. Anglican  Liberalism,  12.

Hantzsch,  A. Elements  of  Stereochemistry,  44.

Hardy.  Elements  of  Analytical  Geometry,  44  ;
Infinitesimals  and  Limits,  44.

Harnack,  Adolf.  Acts  of  the  Apostles,  12  ;
History  of  Dogma,  4  ;  Letter  to  the  "  Preus-
sische  Jahrbucher,"  18  ;  Luke  the  Physician,
ii ;  Mission  and  Expansion  of  Christianity,
3;  Monasticism,  12;  The  Sayings  of  Jesus,
12  ;  What  is  Christianity?  5,  9.

Harnack,  Adolf,  and  Herrmann,  W.  Essays
on  the  Social  Gospel,  n.

Harnack  and  his  Oxford  Critics. Saunders,  24.

Harnack,  Axel.  Differential  and  Integral
Calculus,  44.

Hart,  Edward,  Ph.D.  Chemistry  for  Begin
ners,  44  ;  Second  Year  Chemistry,  44.

Hatch,  Rev.  Dr. Lectures  on Greek  Ideas,

X3-
Haughton,  Rev.  Samuel,  M.A.,  M.D. New

Researches  on  Sun-Heat,  43.
Hausrath. History  of  the  New  Test.  Times,  7 .
Hebrew  and  Chaldee Lexicon. Dr. Fuerst,

Hebrew  Language,  The. F.  Delitzsch,  33.

Hebrew,  New  School  of  Poets,  35.

Hebrew  Religion. W.  E.  Addis,  n.

Hebrew  Story. Peters,  9.

Hebrew  Texts,  18.

Hellenic  Studies,  32.

Hellenistic  Greeks. Mahaffy  and  Goligher,  32.

Henry,  Jas. ./Eneidea,  52.

Henslow,  Rev.  G.  The  Argument  of  Adapta
tion,  18 ;  The  At-one-ment,  18  ;  Christ  no
Product  of  Evolution,  19  ;  Spiritual  Teach
ings  of  Bible  Plants,  18  ;  Spiritual  Teaching
of  Christ's  Life,  19;  The  Vulgate,  19.

Henson,  Rev.  Canon  Hensley.  Child  and
Religion,  10.

Herbert,  Hon.  A. Sacrifice  of  Education,  52.

Herbert,  Hon.  A.,  and  Wager,  H.  Bad  Air
and  Bad  Health,  52.

Herdman,  Prof.  W.  A. Ascidia,  46.

Herford,  R.  Travers,  B.A.  Christianity  in
Talmud  and  Midrash,  19.

Herrmann,  W.  Communion,  5,  10  ;  Faith  and
Morals,  9.

Herrmann  and  Harnack.  Essays  on  the  Social
Gospel,  n.

Heterogenesis,  Studies  in. H.  Bastian,  43.

Hewitt,  C.  Gordon. Ligia,  46.

Hibbert  Journal  Supplement  for  1909,  entitled  :
Jesus  or  Christ?  19.

Hibbert  Journal,  The,  19.

Hibbert,  Lectures,  The,  13,  14.
Hickson,  Sydney  J. Alcyonium,  46.


6o


INDEX— Continued.


Hill,  Rev.  Dr.  G. Child  and  Religion,  10.
Hindu  Chemistry. Prof.  P.  C.  Ray,  48.
Hirsch, Dr. S. A.,  and W. Aldis Wright,

edited  by.  Commentary  on  Job,  27.
History  of  the  Church.  Hans  von  Schubert,  3.
History  of  Dogma.  Adolf  Harnack,  4.
History  of  Jesus  of  Nazara.  Keim,  7.
History  of  the  Hebrews.  R.  Kittel,  5.
History  of  the  Literature  of  the  O.T.  Kautzsch,

20.

History  of  the  New  Test.  Times. Hausrath,  7.
Hodgson,  S.  H. Philosophy  and  Experience,

28  ;  Reorganisation  of  Philosophy,  28.
Hoerning,  Dr.  R. The  Karaite  MSS.,  19.
Hofer,  E. Erzahlungen,  j8.
Hoff,  J.  H.  Van't. Chemical  Dynamics,  45.
Hornell,  J. Marine  Zoology  of  Okhamandal,

45-
Horner, G. Statutes,  The,  of  the  Apostles,

3<5.
Horse, Life-Size  Models  of.  J.T. Share  Jones,  45;

the,  Surgical  Anatomy  of,  45.
Horton,  Dr.  R. Child  and  Religion,  10.
Howe,  J.  L. Inorganic  Chemistry,  45.
How  to  Teach  the  Bible. Mitchell,  22.
Hugo, Victor. Les  Miserables, 39; Notre

Dame,  39.
Hunter,  Dr.  John.  De  Profundis  Clamavi,  20;

The  Coming  Church,  20.
Hygiene,  Handbook  of. Bergey,  43.
Hymns  of  Duty  and  Faith. Jones,  20.

Icelandic  Grammar. Rev.  G.  Rayldon,  38.
Idea  of  God. Alviella,  Count  Goblet  D',  13.
mms,  A.  D. Anurida,  46.
ncarnate  Purpose,  The. Percival,  22.
ndian  Buddhism. Rhys  Davids,  13.
ndividual Soul, Genesis and Evolution of.

Bevan,  15.
ndividualism  and  Collectivism. Dr. C.  W.

Saleeby,  29.

ndoor  Gymnastics,  Medical,  48.
ndustrial  Remuneration,  Methods  of. D.  F.

Schloss,  54.

nfmitesimals  and  Limits. Hardy,  44.
nflammation  Idea. W.  H.  Ransom,  48.
nfluenceof  Rome  on  Christianity. Renan,  13.
norganic  Chemistry. J.  L.  Howe,  45.
norganic Qualitative Chemical Analysis.

Leavenworth,  46.

ntroduction  to  the  Greek  New  Test.  Nestle,  6.
ntroduction  to  the  Old  Test. Cornill,  3.
ntroduction to the Preparation of  Organic

Compounds. Fischer,  44.
Isaiah,  Hebrew  Text,  34.

Jeremias,  Prof.  A. Old  Testament  in  the  Light

of  the  East,  2.
Jesus  of  Nazara. Keim,  7.
Jesus  or  Christ? The  Hibbert  Journal  Supple
ment  for  1909,  19.
Jesus. Wilhelm  Bousset,  10.
esus,  Sayings  of. Harnack,  12.
ob,  Book  of. G.  H.  Bateson  Wright,  27.
ob,  Book  of. Rabbinic  Commentary  on,  37.
ob. Hebrew  Text,  34.


Johnson, Edwin,  M.A. Antiqua  Mater, 20;

English  Culture,  20 ;  Rise  of  Christendom,  20.
Johnstone,  J. British  Fisheries,  45.
Jones,  Prof.  Henry. Child  and  Religion,  10.
Jones,  Rev.  J.  C. Child  and  Religion,  10.
Jones,  Rev.  R.  Crompton. Hymns  of  Duty

and  Faith,  20;  Chants,  Psalms  and  Canticles,

20  ;  Anthems,  20  ;  The  Chants  and  Anthems,

20 ;  A  Book  ol  Prayer,  20.
Jones,  J.  T.  Share. Life-Size  Models  of  the

Horse,  45  ;  Surgical  Anatomy  of  the  Horse,

45-

Jones. The  Freezing  Point,  45.
Jordan,  H.  R. Blaise  Pascal,  28.
Journal  of  the  Federated  Malay  States,  56.
Journal  of  the  Linnean  Society. Botany  and

Zoology,  45,  56.
Journal of  the  Quekett Microscopical  Club,

45,  56.
Journal  of  the  Royal  Microscopical  Society,

45,  56.
Justice. Herbert  Spencer,  31.

Kantian  Ethics. J.  G.  Schurman,  29.

Karaite  MSS. Dr.  R.  Hoerning,  19.

Kautzsch,  E.  History  of  the  Literature  of  the
Old  Testament,  20.

Kea,  the. G.  R.  Marriner,  47.

Keim. History  of  Jesus  of  Nazara,  7.

Kennedy,  Rev.  Jas.  Introduction  to  Biblical
Hebrew,  34;  Hebrew  Synonyms,  34.

Kiepert's  New  Atlas  Antiquus,  53.

Kiepert's  Wall-Maps  of  the  Ancient  World,  53.

Kindergarten,  The. H.  Goldammer,  52.

Kittel,  R. History  of  the  Hebrews,  5.

Knight,  edited  by. Essays  on  Spinoza,  32.

Knowledge,  Evolution  of. Perrin,  22.

Kuenen,  Dr.  A.  National  Religions  and  Uni
versal  Religion,  13  ;  Religion  of  Israel,  8.

Kyriakides,  A.  Modern  Greek-English  Dic
tionary,  39.

Laboratory  Experiments. Noyes  and Mulli-

ken,  47.

Ladd,  Prof.  G.  T. Child  and  Religion,  10.
Lake,  Kirsopp. Resurrection,  n.
Landolt,  Hans. Optical  Rotating  Power,  46.
Laurie, Prof. Simon. Ethica, 29 ; Meta-

physica  Nova  et  Vetusta,  29.
Lea,  Henry  Chas. Sacerdotal  Celibacy,  21.
Leabhar  Breac,  40.
Leabhar  Na  H-Uidhri,  40.
Leavenworth, Prof.  W.  S. Inorganic  Quali
tative  Chemical  Analysis,  46.
Leblanc, Dr. Max. The Production of

Chromium,  46.

Le  Coup  de  Pistolet. Merimee,  38.
Lepeophtheirus  and  Lernea. I/ii/£  L.M.B.C.

Memoirs,  46.
Letter to the "  Preussische Jahrbucher."

Adolf  Harnack,  18.
Lettsom,  W.  N.,  trans,  by. Nibelungenlied,

40.

Liberal  Christianity. Jean  Reville,  9.
Life  and  Matter. Sir  O.  Lodge,  21.
Life  of  the  Spirit,  The. Eucken,  12.


INDEX— Continued.


61


Lilja. Edited  by  E.  Magnusson,  40.
Lilley,  Rev.  A.  L. Anglican  Liberalism,  12.
Lineus. Vide  L.M.B.C.  Memoirs,  46.
Linnean  Society  of  London,  Journals  of,  56.
Liverpool  Marine  Biology  Committee  Memoirs,

I.-XIX.,  46,  47.

Lobstein,  Paul. Virgin  Birth  of  Christ,  9.
Lodge,  Sir  O. Life  and  Matter,  21  ;  School

Teaching  and  School  Reform,  40.
Logarithmic  Tables. Sang,  48  ; Schroen,  48.
London  Library,  Catalogue  of,  51.
London  Library  Subject  Index,  54.
Long,  J.  H. A  Text-book  of  Urine  Analysis,

Luke  the  Physician. Adolf  Harnack,  n.
Lyall,  C.  J.,  M.A. Ancient  Arabian  Poetry,
34-

Macan, R. W. The Resurrection  of  Jesus

Christ,  21.
MacColl,  Hugh. Man's  Origin,  Destiny,  and

Duty,  29.

Macfie,  R.  C. Science, Matter,  and  Immor
tality,  21.

Machberoth  Ithiel. Thos.  Chenery,  35.
Mackay,  R.  W. Rise  and  Progress  of  Chris
tianity,  21.

Magnusson,  edited  by. Lilja,  40.
Mahabharata,  Index  to. S.  Sorensen,  36.
Mahaffy,  J.  P.,  D.D. Flinders  Petrie  Papyri.

Cunningham  Memoirs,  44  ;  Hellenic  Studies,

32-

Man  and  the  Bible. J.  A.  Picton,  23.
Man  s  Origin,  Destiny,  and  Duty. MacColl,

29.

Man  versus  the  State. Herbert  Spencer,  31.
Maori, Lessons in. Right Rev. W. L.

Williams,  42.

Maori,  New  and  Complete  Manual  of,  40.
Marchant,  James. Theories  of  the  Resurrec
tion,  21.

Marcks,  Erich. England  and  Germany,  54.
Marine  Zoology  of  Okhamandal,  45.
Markham,  Sir  Clements,  K.C.B. Vocabularies

of  the  Incas  of  Peru,  40.
Marriner,  G.  R. The  Kea,  47.
Martineau, Rev. Dr. James. Modern

Materialism,  21  ; Relation  between  Ethics

and  Religion,  21.
Mason, Prof. W. P. Notes on Qualitative

Analysis,  47.

Massoretic  Text. Rev.  Dr.  J.  Taylor,  26.
Masterman, C. F. G. Child  and Religion,

10.

Meade,  R.  K.,  Portland  Cement,  47.
Mediaeval Thought, History  of. R. Lane

Poole,  23.

Menegoz,  E. Religion  and  Theology,  21.
Mercer,  Right  Rev.  J.  Edward,  D.D. Soul

of  Progress,  21.
Merimee, Prosper. Le Coup de Pistolet,

38.
Metallic Objects, Production of. Dr. W.

Pfanhauser,  47.
Metallurgy. Wysor,  50.
Metaphysica  Nova  et Vetusta. Prof.  Simon

Laurie,  29.


Midrash,  Christianity  in. Herford,  19.
Milanda Panho, The. Edited by V.

Trenckner.  35.
Mission  and  Expansion  of  Christianity. Adolf

Harnack,  3.
Mitchell, Rev. A. F. How  to Teach the

Bible,  22.
Mitchell,  Rev. C. W. Refutation  of  Mani,

Marcion,  etc.,  37.
Modern  Greek  •  English  Dictionary. Kyria-

kides,  39.
Modernity  and  the  Churches. Percy  Gardner,

12.
Modern Materialism. Rev. Dr. James

Martineau,  21.

Moisson,  Henri. Electric  Furnace,  47.
Molecular  Weights,  Methods  of  Determining.

Henry  Biltz,  43.

Monasticism. Adolf  Harnack,  12.
Montefiore, C. G. Religion of  the  Ancient

Hebrews,  13.
Moorhouse  Lectures. Vide  Mercer's  Soul  of

Progress, 21 ; Stephen, Democracy and

Character,  25.

Morrison,  Dr.  W.  D. Anglican  Liberalism,  12.
Mosheh  ben  Shesheth. S.  R.  Driver. Edited

by,  22.
Moslem Present. Faizullah-Bhai, Shaikh,

B.D.,  34.

Miinsterberg,  Hugo. The  Americans,  22.
Muss-Arnolt, W. A Concise Dictionary of

the  Assyrian  Language,  35.
My  Struggle  for  Light. R.  Wimmer,  9.
Mystery  of  Newman. Henri  Bremond,  15.

National  Idealism  and  State  Church,  16 ;  and

the  Book  of  Common  Prayer,  16.
National Religions  and Universal Religion.

Dr.  A.  Kuenen,  13.
Native  Religions  of  Mexico  and  Peru. Dr.  A.

Reville,  14.
Naturalism  and  Religion. Dr.  Rudolf  Otto,

22.

Nautical  Terms. L.  Delbos,  39.

Naville,  Prof.  E. The  Old Egyptian Faith,

12.

Nestle. Introduction  to  the  Greek  New  Test.,  6.
New  Hebrew  School  of  Poets. Edited  by  H.

Brody  and  K.  Albrecht,  35.
New  Theology  Sermons. Rev.  R.  J.  Campbell,

'5-

New  Zealand  Language,  Dictionary  of.  Rt.
Rev.  W.  L.  Williams,  42.

Nibelungenlied. Trans.  W.  L.  Lettsom,  40.

Nissenson.  Arrangements  of  Electrolytic
Laboratories,  50.

Noldeke,  Theodor.  Delectus  Veterum,  35  ;
Syriac  Grammar,  35.

Norris,  E. Assyrian  Dictionary,  35.

Noyes,  A.  A. Organic  Chemistry,  47.

Noyes,  A.  A.,  and  Milliken,  Samuel.  Labora
tory  Experiments,  47.

O'Grady,  Standish,  H. Silva  Gadelica,  41.
Old  and  New  Certainty  of  the  Gospel. Alex.
Robinson,  24.


62


INDEX— Continued.


Oldenberg,  Dr. H.,  edited  by. Dipavamsa,

The,  33  ;  Vinaya  Pitakam,  37.
Old  French,  Introduction  to. F.  F.  Roget,  41.
Old Testament in the Light of the East.

Jeremias,  2.

Oordt,  J.  F.  Van,  B.A. Cape  Dutch,  4i.
Ophthalmic  Test  Types. Snellen's,  49.
Optical  Rotating  Power. Hans  Landolt,  46.
"  Opus  Majus  "  of  Roger  Bacon,  28.
Organic  Chemistry. A.  A.  Noyes,  47.
Otto,  Rudolf. Naturalism  and  Religion,  n.
Outlines  of  Church  History. Von  Schubert,  3.
Outlines  of  Psychology. Wilhelm  Wundt,  32.

Pali,  Handbook  of. Dr.  O.  Frankfurter,  34.

Pali  Miscellany. V.  Trenckner,  35.

Parker, W. K., F.R.S. Morphology  of  the

Duck  Tribe  and  the  Auk  Tribe,  44.
Pascal,  Blaise. H.  R.  Jordan,  28.
Patella. Vide  L.M.B.C.  Memoirs,  46.
Paul. Baur,  7;  Pfleiderer,  13;  Weinel,  3.
Paulinism. Pfleiderer,  8.
Pearson,  Joseph. Cancer,  47.
Pecton. Vide  L.M.B.C.  Memoirs,  47.
Peddie,  R.  A. Printing  at  Brescia,  54.
Percivnl,  G.  H. The  Incarnate  Purpose,  22.
Perrin,  R.  S. Kvolution  of  Knowledge,  22.
Persian Language, A Grammar  of. J. T.

Plaits,  36.

Peters,  Dr.  John  P. Early  Hebrew  Story,  9.
Pfanhauser,  Dr.  W. Production of  Metallic

Objects,  47.
Pfleiderer,  Otto. Early  Christian  Conception,

10;  Lectures  on  Apostle  Paul,  13  ;  Paulinism,

8 ; Philosophy of Religion, 8  ; Primitive

Christianity,  a.

Phillips,  F.  C. Analysis  of  Ores,  48.
Philjipps,  V.,  B.A. Short  Sketch  of  German

Literature,  41.

Philo  Judaeus. Dr.  Drummond,  16.
Philosophy  and  Experience. Hodgson,  28.
Philosophy  of  Religion. Pfleiderer,  8.
Picton,  J.  Allanson. Man  and  the  Bible,  23.
Piddington,  H. Sailors'  Horn  Book,  48.
Pikler, Jul. Psychology of the Belief in

Objective  Existence,  29.
Platts, J. T. A Grammar of the Persian

Language,  36.

Pleuronectes. Vide  L.M.B.C.  Memoirs,  46.
Pocket Flora  of  Edinburgh. C.  O.  Sonntag,

49-
Polychael  Larvae. Vide  L.M.B.C.  Memoirs,

47-
Poole, Reg. Lane. History of Mediaeval

Thought,  23.

Portland  Cement. Meade,  47.
Pray,  Dr. Astigmatic  Letters,  48.
Prayers  for  Christian  Worship. Sadler,  24.
Prehistoric  Times. Lord  Avebury,  51.
Pre-Islamitic  Arabic  Poetry. Shaikh Faizul-

lah-Bhai,  B.D.,  34.

Primitive  Christianity. Otto  Pfleiderer,  2.
Printing  at  Brescia. R.  A.  Peddie,  58.
Prison,  The. H.  B.  Brewster,  28.
Proceedings  of  the  Aristotelian  Society,  29.
Proceedings  of  the  Optical  Convention,  48.
Prolegomena. Reville,  8.


Protestant  Commentary  on  the  New  Testa
ment,  8,  23.

Psalms,  Hebrew  Text,  34.

Psychology  of  the  Belief  in  Objective  Exist
ence.  Jul.  Pikler,  29.

Psychology,  Principles  of,  Spencer,  30 ;  Out
lines  of,  Wundt,  32.

Punnett,  R.  C. Lineus,  46.

Qualitative  Analysis,  Notes  on.  Prof.  W.  P.
Mason,  47.

Ransom,  W.  H.  The  Inflammation  Idea,  48.
Rashdall,  Dr.  Hastings.  Anglican  Liberalism,

12.

Ray,  Prof.  P.  C. Hindu  Chemistry,  48.
Reasons  for  Dissenting  from  the  Philosophy  of

M.  Comte. Herbert  Spencer,  32.
Re-Creation. Rev.  C.  W.  Formby,  17.
Reform  in  Primary  Education. J.  G. Hag-

mann,  39.
Reformation  of  the  Sixteenth  Century. Rev.

Dr.  C.  Beard,  15.

Refutation  of  Mani,  Marcion,  etc.,  37.
Reinforced  Concrete  in  Europe. Colby,  43.
Rejoinder  to  Prof.  Weismann,  3r.
Relation  between  Ethics  and  Religion. Rev.

Dr.  James  Martineau,  21.
Religion  and  Modern  Culture. Sabatier,  10.
Religion  and  Theology. E.  Menegoz,  21.
Religion  of  Ancient  Egypt. Renouf,  14.
Religion of the Ancient Hebrews. C. G.

Montefiore,  13.

Religion  of  Israel. Kuenen,  8.
Religions  of  Ancient Babylonia  and  Assyria.

Prof.  A.  H.  Sayce,  14.
Religions  of  Authority  and  the  Spirit. Auguste

Sabatier,  3.
Renan,  E. Influence  of  Rome  on  Christianity,

13-

Renouf,  P.  L.  Religion  of  Ancient  Egypt,  14.
Reorganisation  of  Philosophy.  Hodgson,  28.
Resurrection  of  Jesus  Christ.  Lake,  21  ;

R.  W.  Macan,  21  ;  Marchant,  21.
Reville,  Dr.  A. Native  Religions  of  Mexico

and  Peru,  14.
R6ville. Prolegomena,  8.
R6ville,  Jean. Liberal  Christianity,  9.
Rhys,  Prof.  J. Celtic  Heathendom,  14.
Ring  of  Pope  Xystus,  54.
Rise and Progress of Christianity. R. W.

Mackay,  21.

Rise  of  Christendom. Edwin  Johnson,  20.
Rise  of  English  Culture. Edwin  Johnson,  20.
Rix,  Herbert. Dawning  Faith,  24  ;  Tent  and

Testament,  23.
Robinson,  Alex. Old  and  New  Certainty  of

the  Gospel,  24  ;  Study  of  the  Saviour,  24.
Roget,  F.  F. First  Steps  in  French  History,

41 ;  Introduction  to  Old  French,  41.
Romans. Alton  and  Goligher,  32.
Rosing,  S. English-Danish  Dictionary,  41.
Royal Astronomical Society. Memoirs  and

Monthly  Notices,  56.
Royal Dublin Society. Transactions and

Proceedings,  49.


INDEX— Continued.


Royal Irish Academy. Transactions and

Proceedings,  49.
Royal  Society  of  Edinburgh. Transactions

of,  49.

Runes,  The. Geo.  Stephens,  55.
Runic Monuments, Old Northern. Geo.

Stephens,  55.
Ruth,  Book  of,  in  Hebrew  Text. Rev.  C.  H.

H.  Wright,  27.

Sabatier,  Auguste.  Doctrine  of  the  Atone
ment,  10 ;  Religions  of  Authority  and  the
Spirit,  3.

Sacerdotal  Celibacy. Henry  Chas.  Lea,  21.

Sacrifice  of  Education. Hon.  A.  Herbert,  52.

Sadi.  The  Gulistan  (Rose  Garden)  of  Shaik
Sadi  of  Shiraz,  36.

Sadler,  Rev.  Dr.  Closet  Prayers,  24  ;  Prayers
for  Christian  Worship,  24.

Sailors'  Horn  Book. H.  Piddington,  48.

Saleeby,  C.  W.  Individualism  and  Collec
tivism,  29.

Sang's  Logarithms,  48.

Saunders,  T.  B. Harnack  and  his  Critics,  24.

Savage,  M.  J. Beliefs  about  the  Bible,  24.

Sayce,  Prof.  A.  H.  Religion  of  Ancient
Assyria,  14.

Sayings  of  Jesus,  The. Adolf  Harnack,  12.

Schloss,  D.  F.  Methods  of  Industrial  Re
muneration,  54.

School  Teaching  and  School  Reform.  Sir  O.
Lodge,  40.

Schrader. The  Cuneiform  Inscriptions,  8.

Schreber,  D.  G.  M.  Medical  Indoor  Gym
nastics,  48.

Schroen,  L. Seven-Figure  Logarithms,  48.

Schubert,  Hans  von. History  of  the  Church,  3.

Schurman,  J.  Gould.  Ethical  Import  of
Darwinism,  29  ;  Kantian  Ethics,  29.

Science,  Matter,  and  Immortality.  R.  C.
Macfie,  21.

Scott,  Andrew.  Lepeophtheirus  and  Lernea,
46.

Scott,  E.  F. Apologetic  of  the  New  Test.,  n.

Scripture,  Edward  W.,  Ph.D.  Studies  from
the  Yale  Psychological  Laboratory,  30.

Second  Year  Chemistry. Edward  Hart,  44.

Seeberg,  R.  Fundamental  Truths  of  the
Christian  Religion,  12.

Seger. Collected  Writings,  49.

Seven-Figure  Logarithms. L.  Schroen,  48.

Severus,  Patriarch  of  Antioch. Letters  of,  25.

Sharpe,  Samuel. Bible,  translated  by,  15.

Shearman,  A.  T. Symbolic  Logic,  30.

Shihab  Al  Din.  Futuh  Al-Habashah.  Ed.
by  S.  Strong,  36.

Short  History  of  the  Hebrew  Text.  T.  H.
Weir,  26.

Silva  Gadelica. Standish  H.  O'Grady,  4r.

Snellen's  Ophthalmic  Test  Types,  49.

Snyder,  Harry. Soils  and  Fertilisers,  49.

Social  Gospel,  Essays  on  the,  u.

Social  Statics. Herbert  Spencer,  31.

Sociology,  Principles  of. Herbert  Spencer,  30.

Sociology,  Study  of. Herbert  Spencer,  31,

Soden,  H.  von,  D  D.  Books  of  the  New
Testament,  10.


Soils  and  Fertilisers. Snyder,  49.

Soils. Vide  Wiley's  Agricultural  Analysis,  50.

Sonntag,  C.  O.  A  Pocket  Flora  of  Edin
burgh,  49.

Sorensen,  S. Index  to  the  Mahabharata,  36.

Soul  of  Progress. Bishop  Mercer,  21.

Spanish  Dictionary,  Larger. Velasquez,  41.

Spencer,  Herbert.  An  Autobiography,  30 ;
A  System  of  Synthetic  Philosophy,  30 ;  De
scriptive  Sociology,  Nos.  1-8,  31  ;  Works  by,
30-32.

Spinal  Cord,  Topographical  Atlas  of.  Alex.
Bruce,  M.A.,  etc.,  43.

Spinoza. Edited  by  Prof.  Knight,  32.

Spiritual  Teaching  of  Christ's  Life,  Henslow,  18.

Statuette,  The,  and  the  Background.  H.  B.
Brewster,  28.

Statutes,  The,  of  the  Apostles.  G.  Horner,
25.  36.

Stephen,  Canon.  Democracy  and  Character,  25.

Stephens,  Geo.  Bugge's  Studies  on  Northern
Mythology  Examined,  55 ;  Old  Northern
Runic  Monuments,  55  ;  The  Runes,  55.

Stephens,  Thos.,  B.A.,  Editor.  The  Child
and  Religion,  10.

Stereochemistry,  Elements  of. Hantzsch,  44.

Stewart,  Rev.  C.  R.  S.  Anglican  Liberalism,  12.

Stillman,  T.  B. Engineering  Chemistry,  49.

Storms. Piddington,  48.

Strong,  S.  Arthur,  ed.  by. Shihab  Al  Din,  36.

Study  of  the  Saviour. Alex.  Robinson,  24.

Studies  on  Northern  Mythology.  Geo.
Stephens,  55.

S  tud  ies  from  the  Yale  Psychological  Laboratory.
Edward  W.  Scripture,  Ph.D.,  29.

Sullivan,  W.  K. Celtic  Studies,  41.

Surgical  Anatomy  of  the  Horse.  J.  T.  Share
Jones,  45.

Symbolic  Logic. A.  T.  Shearman,  29.

Synthetic  Philosophy,  Epitome  of.  F.  H.
Collins,  32.

Syriac  Chrestomathy. Bernstein  and  Kirsch,

Syriac  Grammar. Theodor  Noldeke,  35.
System of Synthetic Philosophy. Herbert
Spencer,  30.


Tayler,  Rev.  John  James. Character  of  the

Fourth  Gospel,  25.

Taylor,  Rev.  C. Dirge  of  Coheleth,  The,  25.
Taylor,  Rev.  Dr.  J. Massoretic  Text,  26.
Ten  Services  and  Psalms  and  Canticles,  26.
Ten  Services  of  Public  Prayer,  26.
Tennant,  Rev.  F.  R. Child  and  Religion,  10.
Tent  and  Testament. Herbert  Rix,  23.
Testament,  Old. Canonical  Books  of,  3  ;  Re
ligions  of, ii  ; Cuneiform  Inscriptions,  24  ;

Hebrew  Text,  Weir,  26  ;  Literature,  20.
Testament,  The  New,  Critical  Notes  on. C.

Tischendorf,  26,  27.
Testament  Times,  New. Acts  of  the  Apostles,

12; Apologetic  of, u  ; Books  of  the, 10 ;

Commentary, Protestant,  8  ;  History  of,  7 ;

Luke  the  Physician,  1 1 ;  Textual  Criticism,  6  ;
Test  Types. Pray,  48  ;  Snellen,  49.
Text  and  Translation  Society,  Works  by,  37.


64


INDEX— Continued.


Theories  of Anarchy  and  of Law. H. B.

Brewster,  28.
Theories  of  the  Resurrection  of  Jesus  Christ.

James  Marchant,  21.

Thermometer,  History  of  the. Bolton,  43.
Thomas, Rev. J. M. L. A Free Catholic

Church,  26.

Thornton,  Rev.  J.  J. Child  and  Religion,  10.
Tischendorf,  C. The  New  Testament,  26.
Tower,  Q.  F. Conductivity  of  Liquids,  49.
Transactions  of  the  Royal  Dublin  Society,  56.
Transactions  of  the  Royal  Irish  Academy,  56.
Transactions  of  the  Royal  Societyof  Edinburgh,

56-

Trenckner,  V. Pali  Miscellany,  35.
Turpie,  Dr.  D.  M'C. Manual  of  the  Chaldee

Language,  37.

Universal  Christ. Rev.  Dr.  C.  Beard,  15.
Universalism  Asserted. Rev.  Thos.  Allin,  14.
Upton,  Rev.  C.  B. Bases  of  Religious  Belief,  14.
Urine  Analysis,  A  Text-Book  of. Long,  47.

Vaillante,  Vincent,  38.

Various  Fragments. Herbert  Spencer,  31.

Vega. Logarithmic  Tables,  50.

Veiled  Figure,  The,  55.

Velasquez. Larger  Spanish  Dictionary,  41.

Venable,  T.  C. Development  of  the  Periodic

Law,  50;  Study  of  Atom,  50.
Via,  Veritas,  Vita. Dr.  Drummond,  13.
Viga  Glums  Saga. Sir  E.  Head,  41.
Vinaya  Pitakam. Dr.  Oldenberg,  37.
Vincent,  Jacques. Vaillante,  38.
Virgin  Birth  of  Christ. Paul  Lobstein,  9.
Vulgate,  The. Henslow,  19.
Vynne  and Blackburn. Women under the

Factory  Acts,  55.

Wallis,  H.  W. Cosmology  of  theRigveda,  37.
Was  Israel  ever  in  Egypt? G.  H.  B.  Wright,

27.
Weir,  T.  H. Short  History  of  the Hebrew

Text,  26.
Weisse,  T.  H. Elements  of  German,  41 ;  Short


Guide  to  German  Idioms,  42  ;  Systematic
Conversational  Exercises  in  German,  42.

Weizsacker,  Carl  von. The  Apostolic  Age,  6.

Weld,  A.  G. Glimpses  of  Tennyson,  55.

Werner,  E.  T.  C. Chinese,  32.

Werner's  Elementary  Lessons  in  Cape  Dutch,
42.

Wernle,  Paul. Beginnings  of  Christianity,  4.

What  is  Christianity  ? Adolf  Harnack,  5,  9.

Wicksteed,  Rev.  P.  H.  Ecclesiastical  Institu
tions  of  Holland,  26.

Wiley,  Harvey  W.  Agricultural  Chemical
Analysis,  50.

Wilkinson,  Rev.  J.  R.  Anglican  Liberalism,
12.

Williams,  Right.  Rev.  W.  L.,  D.C.L.  Diction
ary  of  the  New  Zealand  Language,  42.

Williams,  Right  Rev.  W.  L.,  D.C.L.  Lessons
in  Maori,  42.

Wimmer,  R. My  Struggle  for  Light,  9.

Women  under  the  Factory  Acts.  Vynne  and
Blackburn.  55.

Women's  Suffrage. Helen  Blackburn,  51.

Woods,  C.  E. The  Gospel  of  Rightness,  27.

Woods,  Dr.  H.  G. Anglican  Liberalism,  12.

Wright,  Rev.  C.  H.  H.  Book  of  Genesis  in
Hebrew  Text,  27  ;  Book  of  Ruth  in  Hebrew
Text,  27  ;  Daniel  and  its  Critics,  27  ;  Daniel
and  his  Prophecies,  27  ;  Light  from  Egyptian
Papyri,  27.

Wright,  G.  H.  Bateson.  Book  of  Job,  27;
Was  Israel  ever  in  Egypt?  27.

Wright,  W.,  and  Dr.  Hirsch,  edited  by.  Com
mentary  on  the  Book  of  Job,  27.

Wundt,  Wilhelm. Outlines  of  Psychology,  32.

Wysor. Metallurgy,  50.

Yale  Psychological  Laboratory,  Studies  from,

32-
Yellow  Book  of  Lecan,  42.

Zoega,  G.  T.  English-Icelandic  Dictionary,  42.
Zompolides, Dr. D. A Course of Modern
Greek,  42.


PRINTED BY NEILL AND CO., LTD., EDINBURGH.


v\


EUCKEK,  RUDOLF  CHRISTOF B

Ski

,E8
The  life  of  the  spirit..
