The Meaning and Value of Life
Rudolf Eucken (W. J. Gibson, trans.) (1908)
========================================================================

PROVENANCE NOTE (Tower of Babel staging): Eucken's Der Sinn und Wert des Lebens (1908) — the 1908 Nobel laureate's philosophy of the spiritual life. W. J. Gibson's translation.

========================================================================

OT ll


0059658


sweanaeane ————— :
NOT TO BE ISSUED
OUT OF THE LIBRARY.


CUNY AU EAU TM
00059658


Digitized with financial assistance from
Government of Maharashtra
on 30 January, 2020


THE MEANING AND VALUE OF LIFE


THE MEANING AND
VALUE OF LIFE


BY


RUDOLF EUCKEN


PROFESSOR OF PHILOSOPHY IN THE UNIVERSITY UF JENA
(AWARDED THE NOBEL PRIZE FOR LITERATURE IN 1908)


98693


TRANSLATED BY
LUCY JUDGE GIBSON
(CLASSICAL AND ORIENTAL TRIPUSES, CAMBRIDGE)
AND


W. R. BOYCE GIBSON, M.A. (Oxon.)


EXAMINER IN PHILOSOPHY IN THE UNIVERSITY OF LONDON
(AUTHOR OF ‘RUDOLF EUCKEN’S PHILOSOPHY OF LIF#,’ ETC.)


LONDON
ADAM AND CHARLES BLACK
1909


PREFACE


In treating the question of life’s meaning and value,
our aim is to press home on the individual conscious-
ness the spiritual problems of the present day, and
enlist the individual’s co-operation in regard to them.
This conception of our task has imposed certain limita-
tions on our philosophical programme; but that
within these limits there is still room for enlightenment
should become apparent as the work proceeds. Tu
some the first and more critical portion of the dis-
cussion may seem too long drawn-out. But the main
thesis—the vindication of which brings with it as a
possibility the re-establishing of life and the rebirth of
culture—could not be convincingly developed until
shown to be the only road to the goal. And to this
end the critical treatment was indispensable. It is
not an accessory, but an essential.


RUDOLF EUCKEN,
Jena, Deve er, 1907.


TRANSLATORS’ PREFACE


THE original work of which the present volume is the
translation has already proved popular in its own
country. Published in 1908, a first edition of some
4,000 copies has been sold out, and a second edition
called fot. This special success is symptomatic of the
general esteem in which Professor Eucken’s works are
held in Germany. One of his larger works, now trans-
lated into English under the title of ‘The Problem
of Human Life,’ has already reached a sale of over
10,000 copies.

Eucken’s influence as a thinker has for long been
felt far beyond the borders of his native land. Trans-
lations of his books have appeared in many foreizn
languages, including French, Italian, Swedish, Finnish,
and Russian. In our own country such articles on
Eucken’s work as have appeared quite recently in the
Times, the Guardian, and the Inquirer are significantly
sympathetic and appreciative. ‘It seems likely,’
writes the reviewer in the Guardian, ‘ that for the next
decade Eucken will be the leading guide for the pilgrims
of thought who walk on the Idealist road.’

Eucken’s philosophy has been variously describtd
as ‘ The New Idealism,’ a ‘ Religious’ or ‘ Spiritual ’
Idealism, and as an ‘ Activism.’ Its central theme—
to quote the title of one of his own works, as yet un.

Vil


viii TRANSLATORS’ PREFACE


translated—is ‘ The Struggle for Spiritual Existence,’
and its central persuasion is this, that nothing short
of an Independent Spiritual Life in intimate communion
with our own can give to the struggle a meaning and
a value. The conceptions of ‘immanence’ and ‘ in-
dependence’ are not easy to define, but it should be
noted that, from Eucken’s standpoint, the immanence
of the Spiritual Life within us implies at once its trans-
cendence over us and its independence of us. By the
very intimacy of its indwelling, the Spiritual Life
awakens our reverence for its own distinctive standards,
values, and obligations ; and at the same time convinces
us that its authority, which is spiritual only in relation
to our freedom, is yet not of our own making, and exists
in its own right.

This essentially spiritual foundation demands for
its development a broad historical outlook. If we are
to rise above our finitude and grasp our true infinite
nature as persons, we must turn to the manifold witness
of history, and relive in sympathetic thought the
world’s heroic struggle for a spiritual existence. We
must study the great movements of the human spirit
till we learn to see in all their illuminating diversity
the connected and progressive expression of a single
spiritual need. We shall then find that in seeking to
solve tle problem of human life on the large, historical
scale, we are at the same time unravelling our own.

The Spiritual Life, so understood, is the key to
Eucken’s system. It explains low his philosophy can
be at one and the same time a Mysticism, an Activism,
and a Humanism. The ‘ New Idealism’ is mystical
in the stress it lays on the reality and immediacy of
the Spiritual Life, and on the intimacy of personal


TRANSLATORS’ PREFACE ix


union between the human and the divine ; it is activistic
in its insistence that all spiritual communion is a
challenge to our moral nature, and can be maintained
as an inspiration only through the earnestness with
which we adopt its values as authoritative over our
action ; it is profoundly humanistic in the breadth and
depth of its historical insight, and in its close identifica-
tion of the welfare of our race with the dominance of
these spiritual values.

Eucken’s philosophy of life, being at root a philosophy
of experience, is also a philosophy of reality. It is as
truly a Weltanschauung as a Lebensanschuuung,
though the former is determined by the latter and not
wce versa. The spiritual world is created and sustained
by our spiritual faithfulness : it is the outcome of man’s
respect for the values and ideals of the Spiritual Life.

In conclusion we would add a word of grateful
acknowledgment to the author for kindly consenting
to read through all the proof-sheets, and we would
point out that, in two instances, at the author’s own
suggestion, the translation deviates slightly frum the
original. The extent of the first of these changes
(vide p. 11) is indicated in a footnote. The second change
occurs on p. 143, towards the end of the page, where
the statement of the original version, ‘we reject the
tendency to turn to personality as a ready cure-all for
every evil of the times,’ is superseded by the statement
adopted in the text.

L, J. G.


W.R. B. G.


CONTENTS


INTRODUCTION) - - < 4 : <
THE PROBLEM AS IT STANDS TO-DAY 7 -
OLDER SOLUTIONS - = - - %
Religion : - - 7 - <
Immanental Idealism - é 5 .
MopERN CULTURE 7 a = 7
Work - 3 2 ‘ - : s
Realistic Schemes of Life - 2 i =


The Naturalistic and Intellectualistic Solutions of
the Life-Problem - ps .


The Inadequacy of Mere Humanism - -
RETROSPECT AND PROSPECT - - - -
RESULT OF THE FOREGOING INQUIRY - - -


PERPLEXITIES OF THE PRESENT SITUATION
FORECAST OF A POSITIVE SOLUTION” -
ATTEMPT AT RECONSTRUCTION
THE GROUNDWORK - -
The Main Thesis - - - -
Developments - - -
Attempt to Secure a Firm Basis for Life -
The Growth of Freedom and Initiative -
The Subdual of the Natural Man -
Discussion of Doubts and Difficulties
RECAPITULATION - : - - -
APPLICATIONS TO MODERN LIFE -


APPENDIX - -


xi


THE MEANING AND VALUE
OF LIFE


INTRODUCTION


Has human life any meaning and value? In asking
this question we are under no illusion. We know that
we cannot pose to-day as the possessors of a truth
which we have but to unfold. The question confronts
us as a problem that is still unsolved, whilst we may
not renounce the attempt to solve it. That our
modern era lacks all assurance in regard to its solution
is a point we shall have to establish more in detail.
But no subtlety of argument is needed to show that
such assurance is to us indispensable. We are subject
to manifold impressions, beset by endless problems,
and it is hard to discern amid the maze any unity of
meaning or purpose. Life, moreover, is no mere idle
game ; it requires toil and labour, renunciation and
sacrifice. Is it worth the toil, worth the labour ?
Can the good of the whole compensate for all partial
risks and losses? Can it justify us in affirming that
life is worth the living? The question has more than
a speculative interest ; for unless faith in some lofty
ideal infuse zest and gladness into every department
of our activity, we cannot realize the highest possi-
bilities of life.
I


2 THE MEANING AND VALUE OF LIFE


It is true that at certain epochs the-question may lie
dormant. Tradition and social requirement lay down
sure lines of guidance, and leave no room for doubting
the validity of the aims that are set before us. But
once let a doubt arise, let the assumptions underlying
the whole structure be called in question, and the
mischief spreads like a devouring fire. The problem
becomes more and more complicated the more we
brood on it. We seem to overstrain our faculty when
we think to prove that life, with all its apparent con-
fusions, has still a meaning and value, and can be con-
fidently declared to be worth the living. A paralyzing
doubt saps the vitality of our age. We see a clear
proof of this in the fact that, with all our astounding
achievements and unremitting progress, we are not
really happy. There is no pervading sense of confi-
dence and security, but rather a tendency to em-
phasize man’s insignificance, and to think meanly of
his position in the universe. A closer scrutiny reveals
the presence of a genuine endeavour to unify life, but,
even so, the processes adopted are so widely divergent
as to be directly antagonistic. Alternative systems,
alternative ideals, fundamentally different in kind,
solicit alike our adhesion. And since no one of them
is obviously and convincingly superior to the others,
conflicting tendencies and standards are still the order
of the day. What is supremely good to one is an un-
mitigated evil to another, and the first man cannot
condemn too strongly that which fills the second
with enthusiasm. Thus, over against a lavish out-
put of departmental work we have to set a woeful
incapacity to deal with life as a whole, and a growing
uncertainty as to the goal aimed at and the nature


INTRODUCTION 3


of the path to be followed. The situation forces upon
us the question whether, in the face of darkness,
doubt, and denial, we can still wring from life a mean-
ing and value, and whether the clashing elements
shall ever yield to the compulsion of some great
constructive idea.

The question cannot be answered unless we are
prepared to take life as a whole; only then are we in
a position to pass judgment on its worth. But how
are we to grasp it as a whole? We are, indeed, driven
to make the attempt; our longing for happiness
demands it—the yearning of rational beings who can-
not wholl¥ abandon themselves to the passing moment,
but are bound to seek some all-inclusive end. Yet,
however insistent the demand, however profound the
emotion and the passion that prompt it, we cannot
satisfy it without going beyond the distinctively human
domain. For the life of man is inextricably bound up
with the life of the universe: he must ascertain the
position he holds in it, regulate his activities with
reference to it, and forbear to insist on any happiness
which contradicts the truth of things and the truth
of his own nature. Is there, then, any way of recon-
ciling man’s desire for happiness ‘with the requirements
of truth? This reconciliation of truth and happiness
is undoubtedly the cherished dream of all who seek
to uphold the significance and the value of life, but
whether the dream admits of realization is another
question. However that may be, the problem is both
persistent and insistent. It has not been devised by
any single mind. It is the product of the innermost
consciousness of the age ; it is the inevitable outcome
of our present stage of development. That a problem

I—z


4 THE MEANING AND VALUE OF LIFE


of such pressing human interest must be also a problem
for philosophy will be admitted by all save those to
whom philosophy is a byword.

We begin, as is natural, by criticizing such solutions
of the problem as our own age has to offer. Though
the prevalent confusion of thought forbids our hoping
to find in them anything ultimately satisfying, yet
it is scarcely credible that they should be so elaborately
developed, and win such general approval, if they did
not contain some element of truth. They undoubtedly
record for us certain forms of human experience ;
they give us a broad view over the problem as it exists
for us to-day ; and they may, even by their’ very un-
satisfactoriness, lead our thought on to a decisive
parting of the ways, at the same time indicating the
direction which we ourselves must follow.


THE PROBLEM AS IT STANDS
TO-DAY


It can hardly be denied that the man of to-day has no
sure convictions, either about himself or the meaning
of his lif8. It is not only that he tends to reflect the
manifold differences of his environment; his whole
existence is rent in twain by one supreme opposition.
An older tradition handed down from the past contends
with newer ideals for his undivided allegiance. It is
not merely in points of detail that these traditions are
at variance; they ground our life on fundamentally
different bases. Hence, in all that concerns life’s
meaning and value, they are in direst opposition. The
older Order, represented by Religion and Immanental
Idealism, proclaims the authority of an invisible world
which can only be spiritually discerned, and allows to
the sense-life a merely derivative and subordinate
function, disregarding, or even denouncing, any claim
it may put forward to possess an independent value.
The newer thought, on the other hand, seeks to explain
life without drawing in any way upon the resources of
another world. If not within the sphere of our sense-
life, then nowhere at all can we know joy and sorrow.
Here, if anywhere, must life find its unity and yield
up its meaning. Any attempt to overstep these
3


6 THE MEANING AND VALUE OF LIFE


limits can only be the product of illusion, and lead us
hopelessly astray. Both the older and the newer
views influence us profoundly, and, in fact, divide
our allegiance. Our ideals and our standards of value
are determined mainly by the older line of thought,
our interests and occupations by the newer. Which
shall we decide for in the last resort ? Where shall we
find a programme that will make life worth the living ?


OLDER SOLUTIONS.


RELIGION.


The religious interpretation of the world, bequeathed
to us from a hoary past, has still a powerful hold upon
modern thought. It is, moreover, serenely confident
of its own power to give worth and dignity to life.
This confidence rests on certain definite assumptions.
The world, and man, its inhabitant, are conceived as
the creation of a transcendent spiritual Power which
can be apprehended only by faith. All the main
interests of man’s life centre round his relationship
to this spiritual Power, the more so since it is held
that he is no longer at one with it. The bond has been
broken ; he has fallen grievously from the high estate
he once occupied. His one supreme endeavour, there-
fore, is to recover the divine communion he has lost,
an end which can be attained by nothing less than a
complete transformation of the inner life. There must
be a moral rebirth, in which the necessary initial factor
is divine love and grace, making possible that which
else were impossible to man. This premised, the
further appeal is to man’s own effort. Not only must


THE PROBLEM AS IT STANDS TO-DAY 7


he yield his heart’s ready devotion, and faithfully
guard the grace he has received; he must also be a
co-worker with God for the establishment of His king-
dom upon earth.

With a belief such as this, man might well entertain
an exalted view of himself and his life-work. As the
express image of God, he stood in the very centre of
reality ; it was around him that the wheel of the
universe revolved. His conduct decided the fate of
the universe—decided it, moreover, to all eternity.
Again, each individual, however inexorably linked to
the facts of the Divine Order, constituted an inde-
pendent centre of activity, and was looked upon as an
end in himself; nay, more, his decision was necessary
to the completing of the whole, which might not
dispense with the service of even its humblest part.

Life, as religion conceived it, was full of care, trouble,
and pain. The universe was too terribly in earnest,
the contradictions of our human existence far too
glaring, to allow of any comfort or happiness in the
usual meaning of the terms. In fact, it would seem
at first that religion tended rather to increase than to
diminish the sum total of the world’s sorrow and guilt.
But just here the Divine Power intervened, lifting man
above the region of misery and need into newness of
life, allowing him to share in its own glory, perfection,
and everlastingness, and to attain a fulness of ua-
imaginable bliss. The final triumph of good over evil
was forthwith assured, and every detail of man’s life
made subservient to this great end. It was, indeed,
no easy life, but its purpose was lofty and its basis
sound. It was no vain show.

For thousands of years this life has sufficed for men.


8 THE MEANING AND VALUE OF LIFE


It has welded them firmly together; -to countless
multitudes it has afforded spiritual stimulus and con-
solation. But its effectiveness has been bound up with
the fact that its foundations have never been called
in question. Doubts that arise within the bosom of
religion may well give an added glow to its fervour—
witness Augustine and Luther ; but doubts bearing on
religion itself must weaken, even if they do not actually
destroy it. It is this more fundamental doubt which
has been working in the modern world, and proving
increasingly formidable to the interests of religion.
The criticism in which this doubt eventually found
expression was directed ostensibly against the doc-
trinal teaching of religion, and it derived its efficacy
mainly from the new insight man had won into the
meaning of nature and history. Such criticism, how-
ever, would not have been very serious if the old force
and fervour had still been burning brightly on the
altar. Faith, self-confident and defiant, might even
have gained an added strength from the dilemmas of
the reason (credo quia absurdum). If the effect was
otherwise, it was because the feeling of the age had
undergone a revulsion. There had been a time—a
time of upheaval and profound unrest—when religion
was the moving spiritual force, lord and dictator to
the whole of life. Such was the closing period of
antiquity. The world could offer no aims worth
striving after ; its spiritual existence seemed doomed,
its only resource to lean upon another and a higher
world. Faith, with heroic ardour, grappled with this
other world, brought it into closest touch with human
life, and constituted it the tribunal before which the
visible world should approve itself and justify its


THE PROBLEM AS IT STANDS TO-DAY 9


existence. Imagination also soared aloft, potent to
clothe the Unseen in concrete form, and make it over-
poweringly vivid and impressive. Here, where the
deeps of life were sounded, the opposition between
human and divine was transcended ; their essential
oneness—the consoling truth which lies at the base of
all religion—was made convincingly manifest. It was
the heroic age—an age that could change the whole
face of existence, look on the hardest task as easy,
treat the impossible as a commonplace, and hold the
Invisible as the most intimate of all realities.

Such ages as these exercise a lasting influence over
human lifesbut their specific quality inevitably perishes
with them. For it would be impossible to live con-
tinuously in this state of tension. The cord would
snap if the strain went on, if life did not sink back to
a more stable position. With the slackening of the
tension, however, Religion finds herself in a critical
state. She can no longer make good her claim as the
central authority in life; her appeal has lost its old
direct, convincing force. The human and divine
resume their antagonism ; religious facts and experi-
ences lose their vividness ; religion becomes more and
more the mere embroidery of a life abundoned to other
interests. Now this change dates mainly from the
beginning of our modern period—a period in which
the natural world, so long despised and disregarded,
wins a new power of attraction, speaks to man in a
new language, and bids him draw fresh courage from
fresh founts of inspiration. Man acquires the proud
consciousness of his own powers: the problems of the
world’s work crowd upon him, dazzle him, push far
into the background all thought for the salvation of


to THE MEANING AND VALUE OF LIFE


the soul. He can scarcely understand-a frame of mind
which could centre its thought and care on the spiritual
life. So momentous a change must inevitably throw
doubt on the religious solution of life’s problem ; and
the advance of doubt means a corresponding ebb in
the religious life, even where its outer forms subsist
unchanged. It loses its old strength and assurance,
and degenerates into a mere fluctuation of feeling
which never did and never can give to life real fulness
of content. Whatever casts a slur on religion, any
objection brought against it, now meets the readiest
hearing. In particular, men are keenly alive to the
fact that there is much in life which religion either
ignores or, at best, treats as quite subsidiary. This
line of thought naturally tends to the conclusion that
the religious reformation of life is really a grievous
_deformation. That our own world, which envelops
us with its wondrous wealth of vitality, should be made
to depend on an alien system the very existence of
which is problematic, may well seem the height of
absurdity. ‘Surely,’ we seem to hear the objector say,
‘thig is a method which proceeds from far to near, from
uncertain to certain.’ We may, of course, find argu-
ments to confute him, and we have certainly no right
to accept current opinions as true without further
investigation. It is, moreover, indisputable that
Religion, in spite of protest and denial, is still a mighty
power. Its stimulating, spiritualizing hold upon life,
the distinctions it has established, the aspirations
it has kindled after infinity, immortality, and per-
fection—these are things which cannot easily pass
away. They serve as a standard by which to test all
man’s efforts after truth and happiness. But, at the


THE PROBLEM AS IT STANDS TO-DAY 11


same time, the fact remains that the whole situation
has changed. Religion [in the traditional, ecclesias-
tical form],* despite all it has effected, is for the man
of to-day a question rather than an answer. It is
itself too much of a problem to interpret to us the
meaning of our life, and make us feel that it is worth
the living.


IMMANENTAL IDEALISM.


Immanental Idealism, with its systematic cult of
the Ideal, has for centuries past worked side by side
with Religion, now complementing, now opposing it,
and its claim is that it can escape the difficulties of the
religious position without sacrificing any of life’s
deeper meaning. Idealism, like Religion, gives life
an unseen basis; but the Invisible, for Idealism,
is not a world existing side by side with the visible
world, separated from it by a distinct line of demarca-
tion; it is rather that which lies at the root of the
visible world, and constitutes its true and deeper nature.
That the universe really possesses this deeper nature,
in which its varied outward aspects find unity and
coherence, is at once the firm conviction and the in-
dispensable presupposition of all Immanental Idealism.
From this idealistic point of view man is intimately
one with the universe. None the less, he holds therein
a unique position, and is assigned a distinctive task.
Outwardly he belongs to the visible world, but inwardly
he is already alive to the presence of a deeper reality.
For in him the life of the world first attains to a clear

* The words in the square brackets do not appear in the original.


They were, however, sugyested by the author himself on the ground
that they served to make his own meaning more plain,


12 THE MEANING AND VALUE OF LIFE


consciousness of its freedom, though apart from man’s
personal initiative and co-operation such revelation
would be impossible. He himself must put forth his
hand and take; he must work and strive. There is
a point at which everything depends on him, and he
may legitimately hope through the development of
his own powers to advance the welfare of the whole.
That which above all else gives to this idealistic cult
the convincing stamp of reality is that, through the
putting forth of spiritual activity against the natural
bent, there rises into view an essentially new life, a
realm of spiritual values, the world of the good, the
beautiful, the true. The man who concéntrates his
energies on these things, and is wholly absorbed by
them, seems to be caught up from the triviality of
everyday existence into an inner fellowship with a
larger world. His life needs, apparently, no goal
beyond itself. It finds its meaning in its own develop-
ment, its satisfaction in the bliss of fruition. Spon-
taneity is here opposed to compulsion, the heroic to
the commonplace, self-realization to mere utility. It
is a life which can only be won through contempt of
ease and enthusiasm for work. The supreme condition
of insight is to be spiritually fruitful, notably in the
spheres of science and art. Creative work brings every
faculty into play, and induces a sound and healthy
judgment. It is true that man is, in the first instance,
dependent upon himself and his own strength; but
since his effort furthers the progress of the world, he
becomes involved in the larger life he has fostered, and
his self-confidence is saved from degenerating into
self-conceit. He carries his ideal within him, and may
confidently hope to realize it.


THE PROBLEM AS IT STANDS TO-DAY 13


It was after this fashion that life was construed by
the old Greek thinkers, and their dominating idea has
come up again, time after time, under very various
forms. Its most modern expression is found’in the
life-work of Goethe. Its influence is felt wherever
there is an attempt to deal with human experience as
a whole. It has a lasting value for all true culture.

And yet, as regards its claim to be the sole guide
and interpreter of life, Immanental Idealism fares no
better than Religion. Its foundations have been
shaken, and the life based on them has lost the force
and the depth which are indispensable to its sovereignty,
and apart from which it has no glad gospel of enlighten-
ment for man. That reality possesses a spiritual
depth, and that, by a deeper insight into the world as
we find it, we may set foot in the realm of creative
causes, is to the average man of the present day quite
as doubtful and problematic as any of the fundamental
truths of Religion. The fact is that the beliefs of
Immanental Idealism are the product of special con-
ditions: they are the outcome of those rare red-letter
days of humanity when, by a happy chance, great
personalities have found the stimulus of an appropriate
environment. At such times, in the heat and glow of
artistic creation, the invisible world became an obvious,
uncontested fact, and the indisputable centre of man’s
life, claiming and obtaining his whole energy and
devotion. Spiritual creation was at the same time a
moral action, exalting man above himself. But those
creative epochs passed away : the best will in the world
could not prolong them nor revive them at pleasure.
The vista opened up by creative genius faded again
as other conflicting impressions poured in. The visible


14 THE MEANING AND VALUE OF LIFE


world was no longer a mere unfolding and manifesta-
tion of a world invisible. It was viewed as possessing
its own distinctive quality in entire independence of
all spiritual values. The outer world opposed to man’s
effort a stolid resistance, and even his inner life was
singularly irresponsive to spiritual aims. Viewed
critically, this life appeared to be rent and maimed by
abrupt oppositions, and to be incapable of realizing
the organization essential to a rational existence. It
may be that these difficulties are no more than the
spiritual resources of Idealism are perfectly adequate
to cope with, and it is always possible to look upon a
severe test as a challenge to one’s nobler* qualities.
But when the complications reach inward, when man
feels distracted and weak, when his lower nature holds
him back and fetters his upward striving, then the
world of his beliefs begins to totter, and he no longer
feels that he can reach the Ultimate Reality. Despite
all his progress, his deepest longing and desire still
remain unsatisfied. The whole idealistic persuasion
tends to become a mere adjunct and appendage to a
life whose main interests lie elsewhere. It can no longer
furnish any sure clue to the problem of human life.
Immanental Idealism has always had to face such
criticism, but the task of driving it home has been
reserved for our own era. It has been accomplished
in two ways. In the first place, more stress has been
laid on the blind inevitableness of the universe, the
irrationality of human existence, the indifference of
mankind in general to really lofty aims. Secondly,
we have had impressed upon us the limitations of
human faculty, limitations which would seem to shut
us out finally and completely from any immediate


THE PROBLEM AS IT STANDS TO-DAY 15


participation in the life of the world. Modern Sub-
jectivism tends to abstract man from the conditions
and circumstances of his development, and opposes
him to the world from which he has thus been alienated
as something different in kind. So placed, he may
indeed extend his sphere indefinitely, but he can never
leave it to take up a wholly new position. How could
creative spiritual energy manifest itself under limita-
tions such as these, open up the deeper sources of the
universe, and give a changed meaning to life ?

Serious as are these doubts and difficulties, they are
not in themselves fatal to the influence of Immanental
Idealism. Byt so soon as it ceases to be a fount of
inspiration, so soon as it no longer works with the
resistless might of a spiritual world, and, instead of
itself producing, merely appropriates, carries on and
enjoys what has already been produced, its creative
energy degenerates inevitably into mere culture, and
though this may fulfil a valuable function as part of a
wider life, yet it cannot of itself satisfy life’s needs and
requirements. It can gladden and illumine existence ;
it can clothe it in rich and varied hues; out of its
wealth of resource it can pleasantly beguile us into
forgetting the black spots of our human destiny ; but
.it cannot inspire action on a great, heroic scale; it
cannot bring us into sure and close touch with a
universal life; it does not lay upon us grave and
imperative duties, but rather leaves everything to our
own fancy and inclination. How, then, can it make
life worth the living? Do we not usually find some-
thing illusory and insincere in it? Man is bidden be

enthusiastic and strenuous in his devotion to a world
of spiritual values. He is told to ‘interest himself’


16 THE MEANING AND VALUE OF LIFE


in it, and he urges on himself no less insistently than
on others the duty of whole-hearted obedience to this
injunction. But, on the other hand, the culture we
are speaking of treats the whole domain of spiritual
values as of slight, or at least secondary, importance
compared with the great ends of natural and social
self-preservation and the varied interests and passions
of ordinary life. It takes all our social skill and
ingenuity to conceal this discrepancy and to keep up
appearances even passably. But we cannot rest our
whole life on mere appearance ; we cannot draw from
a merely subsidiary belief the power to overcome sorrow
and need, the means of deliverance from an intolerable
emptiness of soul. Never will culture such as this—
mere life at second hand—bring us any true satisfaction.

In one respect the experiences of Immanental
Idealism are the same as those of Religion. Both seem
to show that the effort to reach a new world only leads
us astray, and that the fair prospects it holds out to
us are bound to prove illusory. Moreover, where high
hopes have been entertained, the reaction is corre-
spondingly great; failure results in deep depression
and the gloomiest doubt. Could it be possible that
nature should have endowed man with hopes and
wishes which he is bound to cherish, but which no
amount of effort can enable him to realize? Is
he merely the victim of illusion when he scorns
the immediate sense-world as petty and inadequate,
and, through religious faith or creative insight,
seeks to enter a new and loftier sphere? Yet
surely no! No mere illusion could have proved so
inspiring or done so much to enrich and deepen life.

To religion we owe the revelation of an independent


THE PROBLEM AS IT STANDS TO-DAY 17


inner world, the insistence on the absolute value of
purity of motive for its own sake, the instilling of a
lofty seriousness into life, the dramatic tension and
interest of a passage through bitterness of denial to
the blessedness of belief. It was religion which,
breaking through the rigid, narrow limitations of the
naturalistic scheme of life, and awakening an over-
whelming longing for love and immortality, first gave
thasoul a true, spiritual history, and made this history
central in the history of the world. Immanental
Idealism, again, elicited all man’s powers and taxed
them to the utmost, at the same time inspiring them
tc act harmbniously together ; it lifted him above the
smallness and triviality of his private, particular self
into a relation of spiritual communion with the
universe, and, by intimately allying truth and beauty,
it produced a type of life of rare force and distinction.
And the result of it all is that we are left with a sense
of many grave claims haunting our life and imperatively
demanding recognition. But if the effects of a principle
still persist after the principle itself has given way, how
are we to deal with the claims which then beset us and
the complications they involve? Can the plant live
severed from its root and from all that held it organi-
cally together ? Will not the claims which thus survive
that which inspired them lose their substance and
vitality, their compelling, constraining force? They
can but hover over us like pale ghosts, strong enough
to mar our pleasure in the visible world, but utterly
unable of themselves to open up to us another world
or to supply a fitting goal to our activity and a meaning
to our life.

These are considerations to which man cannot always

2


18 THE MEANING AND VALUE OF LIFE


turn a deaf ear. But he may for the moment adopt
the expedient of thrusting them as far as possible into
the background and directing his attention elsewhere.
This is the policy of our whole modern era, and it is
strikingly exemplified in the nineteenth-century move-
ment from Idealism to Realism. There is a growing
tendency to weary of introspective problems: with
youthful freshness and enthusiasm we absorb ourselves
in the visible world, which is daily disclosing more of
its riches, and here, if anywhere, we expect to dis-
cover the meaning and value of life. With this change
in the orientation of our interest, life seems to lose its
shadowy, ghostlike character, and to take on a vital,
concrete form. It is true that our private preferences
must bow in self-effacement before the inviolable laws
of the universe. Much must be sacrificed, for, despite
all surface expansion, there is a contraction of man’s
inner life, and his limitations close ever more tightly
around him. But within these narrower limits he
leads a perfectly untrammelled and catholic exist-
ence. He is no longer obliged to dichotomize reality
into good and evil, or to arrest and starve any of his
faculties. He can follow out any and every impulse,
develop without scruple any and every power. Should
it not, then, be possible to organize life afresh? And,
whereas the older régime deluded us with promises
whose fulfilment it could never guarantee, might we
not find in this new synthesis some real justification
for optimism ? Humanity has, at any rate, done its
best to answer this question. The history of the
attempt shows that it has passed through many
different phases and assumed very diverse forms,
which we now proceed to consider.


THE PROBLEM AS IT STANDS TO-DAY 19


MODERN CULTURE.


WorK.


There is no disputing the fact that modern progress
has tended to shift the centre of life’s interest from the
invisible to the visible world. But in the case of the
problem we are treating, there have been two phases
in the transition—one milder, one more acute—and
we must be aware of confusing them. From the
first the visible world was the main object of interest,
but it was ‘hot for nothing that humanity had toiled
so long. There had emerged from its labours an
effective record of them—to wit, an independent
Subject with a self-contained life. Thus a distinction
arose between man and world—a distinction which, in
opposition to the traditional view, became increasingly
emphasized, till it was stated with such clearness and
distinctness that the main problem thereafter lay in
determining how man and world were mutually
related. Just as in the first instance it had been
necessary, in the interest of truth and clearness, to
set a gulf between us and the world, it now became
equally necessary to bridge the gulf and effect a new
rapprochement with a world no longer distorted by
human bias. It was naturally to be expected that
this reunion with the world would act as a powerful
stimulus—nay, more, that a veritably new life would
be opened up—a life in which the visible world should
play a vastly more important part than it had done at
an earlier epoch. And the expectation has been ful-
filled. Not only has the world revealed to us the

2—2


20 THE MEANING AND VALUE OF LIFE


secrets of its nature and history in a way we never
dreamt of; it has also allowed us to mould it more
and more to our own uses. More and more we have
abandoned our old passive attitude in favour of an
active relation to our environment. We find that we
can alter and improve that existing state of things
which once we accepted as an inevitable fate. Wher-
ever there is misery and need, error and illusion, the
modern spirit attacks it bravely and seeks a radical
remedy. And the struggle of reason against unreason,
waged at every disputable point, has opened up endless
problems and possibilities. Now, the central fact of
this new life is Work—+.e., the activity which grasps
an object and shapes it to man’s ends—a process which
is impossible, in the stringent modern sense, unless we
adjust ourselves more and more accurately to the
nature and laws of the object we are dealing with, and
assimilate these so completely that our work itself
takes on an objective character. Thus, not only in
our scientific and technical departments, but also in
the spheres of politics and practice, work becomes
indepsndent of the subjective opinions and inclinations
of the worker ; it builds up its own connections, and
evolves its own laws and machinery, thereby giving the
human worker a firm foothold and the sure prospect
of well-sustained progress. If, then, life, under these
altered circumstances, is to have any meaning, it can
only obtain it from one source—viz., work. And
work really seems to supply this meaning : its organiza-
tions render human action incomparably more effec-
tive, enriching the contributions of the individual
and the moment, and imbuing us with the con-
sciousness of our world-wide solidarity. Epochs,


THE PROBLEM AS IT STANDS TO-DAY a1


no less than individuals, are linked together as sharers
in a common task. We realize our importance and
at the same time our limitations. Where to-day
the path seems closed there is yet no need for
discouragement, since work opens before us an ever-
widening vista of possibilities, and the very fact of
grappling with destiny already serves to relieve the
pressure of its iron hand. ‘Thus we have a virile,
straightforward, purposeful existence, never seeking
to pierce beyond its finite horizon, steadily avoiding
religious and metaphysical complications. May not
human life, we ask, find, under some such scheme as
this, full meaning and satisfaction? Yes, we reply, it
might do so, could the soul but consent to occupy a
subordinate position, could we but cease from the
attempt to unify our spiritual experience, and stifle
even the desire for such unity. But since this is no
easy matter, we are at once faced with complica-
tions which make us question the value of work
and resist the suggested solution. At the outset
man threw his whole energy into work, and was
dazzled—wellnigh intoxicated—by the results achieved.
That his inner life was not being correspondingly en-
riched was a doubt which never occurred to him for a
moment. As the work, however, grew more and more
important, and asserted its claims more vigorously
against the worker, this doubt could not fail to make
itself felt, and the discrepancy between material results
and the claims of the soul became increasingly apparent.
The soul, for ever discontent with mere results, must
needs turn back upon itself and ask how its own
inward life has profited ; for it cannot but regard this
inward life as the end to which all else is subsidiary.


22 THE MEANING AND VALUE OF LIFE


Work, on the other hand, with its gigantic and elaborate
organizations, is perfectly indifferent to ‘the welfare
of the worker who is valued merely as a means, to be
used or tossed aside as best serves the purpose in hand.
He is only a tool—a tool endowed with the property
of consciousness. But will the soul patiently endure
such treatment ? Will not some elemental longing for
a happier, nobler life rise in protest against such
degradation? And there is still a further ground for
rebellion : the increasing subdivision and specialization
of labour means that an ever smaller fraction of man’s
total energy is called into play while the rest is allowed
to lie idle. Yet for the soul’s welfare it is essential
that all its powers should be employed, and the
arrested development of so many faculties must be felt
as an intolerable loss. The soul, again, requires time
for quiet, persistent growth, whereas work turns life into
a breathless rush and hurry, and knows neither rest
nor pause. Thus the soul may easily come to regard
work as a foe, and may take up arms, so to speak, in
self-defence. The social movements of our own day
show up in a vivid light the distraction and unsettle-
ment that ensue. But the problem is not confined to
the social sphere: it affects life in all its aspects.
Everywhere there is the same danger lest, through too
exclusive a devotion to work, we gain the world and
lose our soul, lest the victories of labour should mean
a lowered standard of vitality, a weakened sense of
responsibility, and, therefore, of necessity, an im-
poverished spiritual life.

With this rift running through our life, the problem
of its value becomes hopelessly difficult. For a time
we can stifle thought in work, but we cannot in-


THE PROBLEM AS IT STANDS TO-DAY 23


definitely work on for work’s sake only. Voltaire’s
recipe—to work, but ask no reasons—would, if put into
practice, degrade us to mere beasts of burden. How
can work advantage us if, in the end, its results fail
to compass the good of the whole man? Moreover,
the consideration of our position to-day shows very
clearly that the progress of our work does not even help
us to a personal appropriation ot reality : soul and world
do not draw together into a living unity. Nor does
the whole soul challenge the world as a whole and wrestle
with it, intent on subduing it wholly to itself. The
truth is, rather, that the world of objects remains
strange antl alien to the soul, despite all its feverish
activity. Our efforts fail to give life a content, and
the powers more particularly concerned with spiritual
creation—religion, art, philosophy—are most pitifully
thwarted and depressed.

Thus, in the conflict between work and soul, life is
torn asunder, and we find ourselves in a position which
we cannot possibly regard as final. Of the many con-
ceivable ways of escape, that suggested by the main
tendency of the modern movement claims our first
attention. We refer to the attempt to limit life still
more strictly than the exponents of the work-policy
had done to the sphere of immediate existence, giving
it within this sphere a perfectly consistent organization,
and placing it under the guidance of one dominant aim.
The leaders of this movement attribute our intoler-
able complications mainly to the fact that the older
systems still maintain a hold and influence on us which
run directly counter to the modern spirit, introducing
discord into life. They demand that all these vestiges
of the old régime shall be entirely cleared away, and


24 THE MEANING AND VALUE OF LIFE


that henceforth life’s content shall be supplied wholly
from the world of sense-experience.

Now, it is a demand of this kind that first brings
matters to a crisis, and forces us to decide definitely
one way or the other. Nowhere is modern life summed
up more forcibly and characteristically than in its
favourite contention that it is possible to find a meaning
and value for life without having recourse to another
world ; that we do not need to transcend the sphere
of immediate existence or postulate a realm of ideas
in the background, or, indeed, look anywhere beyond
this world for the good that we seek. The object of
this contention is to establish existence onea uniform
basis. In this work-a-day world, as nowhere else, we
find countless individuals bound together in like
interests and hopes ; here, then, is the supreme fount
of inspiration, whence our modern movements may draw
the strength they need for proceeding on their path
of progress and reform. We have here a determined
attempt to root life wholly in the world at our feet
without renouncing its meaning and value; whether the
attempt succeed, or whether it find in Reality itself its
reef of destruction, can be decided only by the inclusive
experience of life itself. On this fateful issue everything
depends. If the attempt in question prove unsuccess-
ful, then either we must abandon all hope of finding
any meaning in existence or must seek new paths
that shall lead us beyond the merely empirical sphere.
The question manifestly calls for careful and impartial
consideration, for it is no mere individual interest that
is at stake, but the interests of humanity as a whole.
We are here confronted not with any passing caprice
of human fashion, but with the resistless pressure of


THE PROBLEM AS IT STANDS TO-DAY 25


the tidal movement of history, urging its way without
reference to the opinions and inclinations of any
particular age or individual. That the older spiritual
solutions have lost their certainty and immediacy it
were folly to deny. It also becomes clearer every day
that we cannot win a meaning for life from the medley
of old and new—the chaos of conflicting tendencies—
which is all that present-day mediocrity can offer us.
Thus the attempt to reach the goal through the
adoption of a consistent, thoroughgoing Realism has
good historical justification. Whether it is destined
to succeed is indeed another question.


REALISTIC SCHEMES OF LIFE.


The problem, then, is to unify life from the stand-
point of our immediate experience : give it, if possible,
a meaning ; and, in particular, transcend the intolerable
dualism of subject and object. Modern thought has
approached this problem along two different lines.
Either it has set itself to find a life that shall be more
than merely subjective—a world-life which includes
man wholly and entirely within its own being, leaving
the subject no shred of independence—or it has made
the subject itself the central and controlling factor
while the world has been conceived of as merely furnish-
ing the environment and serving as a means for securing
man’s welfare. We shall presently see that each of
these alternatives may be further divided, thereby
presenting life under a variety of different aspects.
At the same time we shall see that no one of these
presentments is the mere outcome of theory and re-
flection, but rather that all alike are the living issue of
far-reaching historical movements.


26 THE MEANING AND VALUE OF LIFE


The Naturalistic and Intellectualistic Solutions of the
Life-problem.


As the solutions of Religion and Immanental
Idealism have gradually lost their force, nature has
come to mean more and more to man, eventually consti-
tuting his whole world and his whole being. We do not
mean Nature as she is in herself—for to modern thought
the thing in itself remains a dark and inscrutable
mystery—but Nature as she appears to man from a
certain point of view—.c., from the standpoint of
mechanical causation. Though natural science is very
far from actually maintaining the identity of the world
with nature—this being no scientific theory, but merely
the creed of a naturalistic philosophy—still the creed
has its roots in the discoveries of science, and there
is to-day a growing tendency to interpret science in a
naturalistic spirit. Our modern era began, at the
Enlightenment, with the sharp separation of nature
from soul. The more insistent the demand for a
soulless nature, the more urgent the claim that the
soul should exist in its own right. But from the very
outset there was something far more imposing in
nature’s illimitable vastness than in a number of dis-
persed individualities ; and, as nature’s realm continued
to expand, it was inevitable that the soul should tend
to be drawn within it. Not only has its empirical
existence been shown ever more and more clearly to
be dependent on natural conditions, but there has been
an attempt to appropriate its very essence, and eventu-
ally to fit it wholly into the framework of an enlarged
naturalistic scheme. There has been a continually
growing tendency to identify science with natural


THE PROBLEM AS IT STANDS TO-DAY 27


science, and reality with nature. If any difference
were still felt to persist, it seemed to vanish—together
with the doubts this solution naturally engendered—
before the steady advance of a mechanical doctrine
of development. This doctrine claimed to assimilate
man entirely to nature—a nature destitute of all inner
principle of cohesion, and possessing no spontaneity
of its own. Thus it was proper, end indeed inevitable,
that the attempt should be made to give a value to
human life when considered as a mere part of a natural
process, and to show that it was really worth the living.

In spite, however, of all historical justification, this
attempt inevitably runs counter to certain inbred
tendencies of our nature. Many considerations had
combined to recommend the drawing of a very sharp
distinction between nature and man. Not only was
there the extremely natural, even if not wholly justifi-
able, motive of man’s own self-feeling in the matter ;
there was also the wish, by thus exalting him, to stimu-
late his activity and direct it to high ends. Indeed,
the very fact of singling man out for special honour
seemed to attest his dignity and his grandeur. He
who, on the contrary, assimilates man entirely to nature,
and treats his life as a merely natural process, has to
face and vanquish the hostility due to this cherished
belief in his uniqueness; but to compass this end
effectively he must be persuaded that this hostility
is nothing more than the last, lingering protest of an
already effete system, and that the loss which its over-
throw seems to involve forecasts a real gain. Here,
once more, everything depends on the truth of the
contention. If true, it would certainly be strong
enough to bear down any amount of natural prejudice.


28 THE MEANING AND VALUE OF LIFE


But how stands it with the question of truth? Is
there room within this scheme for the varied powers
and manifold experiences of human nature? Will
they one and all fit into it? Naturalism, broadly
conceived, has unquestionably many advantages, and
appeals strongly to the modern mind. It appears to
avoid all the difficulties of dualism, and to make life
simple and straightforward. Man is absorbed into
great and complex organizations whose fortunes he
is privileged to share. Thus his own life is guaranteed
a certain security, and appears subject to an ineluct-
able necessity. The mists that have enveloped it
part asunder, and it emerges into the clear¢light of day.
Moreover, this new order makes great demands on
our energy and pugnacity. We are summoned to a
fierce campaign against the ingrained illusion and folly
of other-worldliness. Since this illusion has made
itself universally prevalent, we are called upon to expel
it root and branch from every sphere of life, and recon-
struct in accordance with the newer way of thinking.
We know well what attraction this gospel has for large
circles of our contemporaries, and how it appeals with
special force to the struggling masses of our population,
whose nature it is to let vague total impressions of this
kind determine the ultimate form of their conviction.

The difficulties of Naturalism begin when we proceed
to investigate it more closely. We then see very soon
that it represents life in a characteristically limited
way. It excludes much which, after all, may be more
than a mere echo of outworn beliefs, of mere illusion
and superstition. A life which complies entirely with
the mechanical requirements of a merely natural order
resolves itself into a mere series of isolated states which


THE PROBLEM AS IT STANDS TO-DAY 29


entirely lack organic connection. What connection
there is is purely external—mere addition and juxta-
position ; there is no inner principle of relationship.
The struggle for existence between competing in-
dividuals is the law of life’s evolution, and life itself is
but the system of interactions which this struggle calls
into play. No individual can step out of his place in
the series, and thus all life is strictly derivative and
dependent. There is no room whatsoever for any
originality, independence, and free decision. All that
we can say about anything is that it has happened.
There can be no such questions as Why ? and Wherefore?
Nor can there be any opposing values such as good and
evil, but only a greater or a less expenditure of force.
It can hardly be denied to-day that human life
corresponds very largely to this description, and that
even our psychical life is, to a far greater extent than
was formerly supposed, a mere prolongation of the
physical. But the question still remains whether this
is the complete truth and a just description of life as
a whole. If life have no inner coherency, if it move
only in response to stimulus from without and lack
all free initiative, if it resolve itself entirely into a tissue
of external relations, into mere adaptation to con-
stantly changing environments, then not only is re-
ligion doomed, but equally all morality and justice.
Art and science resolve themselves into mere trains of
detached feelings and ideas, and all such concepts as
personality, character, disposition, become mere empty
phrases, no less the creations of illusion and supersti-
tion than the very convictions of religion itself. Again,
what task is there within the naturalistic scheme to
challenge our activity? Are we even justified in


30 THE MEANING AND VALUE OF LIFE


using the terms ‘task’ and ‘activity’? Nature
within and without us pursues an unswerving course ;
resistless forces control her every movement. It is
not really man who acts ; something acts in him, some-
thing that is essentially alien to his nature. His
consciousness can only register and observe what is
done ; it can neither originate nor change anything.
Thus, for all his physical endowment, man would be
a mere observer, a mere shadow of the genuine reality,
were he not impelled to exert himself in order to rid his
existence of error and illusion. The only stimulus to
exertion that Naturalism can offer is a call to oppose
any attempt on man’s part to transcend the limits of
nature, a summons to engage in active warfare against
human prejudice and superstition. If once the victory
were won, if the enlightenment were complete and
man put back into his rightful place in nature, it is
hard to see what would be left for him to do. His
inward development would come to a standstill, and
all further achievement would rest with nature, and
not with the human will. Thus the real goal of our
highest effort would coincide with the complete ex-
tinction bf all spiritual life.

Now, is it possible for man, the product of a long
historical evolution, to revert to his natural, primitive
condition, and, divesting himself of all that makes him
distinctively man, to hope thereby to realize his
essential nature and satisfy his craving for happiness ?
We doubt it, on this, if on no other ground, that the
very wish to return to nature evinces a mental disposi-
tion radically different from anything that mere nature
can produce. Why such enthusiasm for a return to
nature? Why should such reversion be considered


THE PROBLEM AS IT STANDS TO-DAY 31


the main goal of life? Surely because it is supposed
to be indispensable to man’s happiness and to the truth
of his endeavour. But is it possible for him to frame
and follow up ends such as these without bringing both
the endeavour and its object within the unity of a single
experience ? And does not this mean that life ceases
to be a mere system of elements externally interrelated,
and develops a spiritual inwardness ? Moreover, is
not the very idea of truth a virtual transcendence of
the sphere of naked fact? If a man’s chief interest
and desire be truth, he himself must be more than a
mere fragment of nature. Again, the struggle for
truth and happiness involves our life in sharp opposi-
tions such as nature, with her slow and cumulative
processes, can neither understand nor tolerate. If the
exponent of Naturalism fails to see that his conduct
violates and contradicts his theories, this only shows
how instinctively he breathes the spiritual atmosphere
bequeathed to him from an heroic past. For little
by little, over against the sense-world, man has built
up a spiritual order in the light of which he lives out
his natural life. Now, it is true that his spiritual life
owes far more to nature than it used to do, and is knit
to her by far closer ties ; but this does not imply in the
least that it is solely a natural product. For this
would be fatal not only to civilization, but equally to
science and to all organization of a spiritual kind.
And if a system prove self-destructive in proportion
as it is more consistently elaborated, if its form and
content be diametrically at variance, how should it
pretend to interpret for us the meaning of our life ?
In fine, what has Naturalism to offer us in this life
which it so enthusiastically recommends? It shows


32 THE MEANING AND VALUE OF LIFE


us a human sphere infinitely small and insignificant in
comparison with the illimitable universe which encloses
us on every hand, and is supremely indifferent to our
behaviour. It shows us men with no capacity for inner
fellowship or for mutual love and esteem, unable to
resist the dictates of natural instinct, influenced in
their action by one ruling idea, that of self-preserva-
tion, a motive which simply involves them in an ever
more merciless competition, and cannot in any way
conduce to the soul’s welfare. The only thing
Naturalism can offer in return for all that it takes away
is emancipation from illusion and superstition, and
a clear perception of man’s oneness with nature. But
however valuable such enlightenment may be, how can
it conduce to nobility of character ? How can it nourish
man’s inner life and help to develop a spiritual in-
dividuality ? Can it give him an added force ? can
it put him in more intimate relation with his fellows
or with the universe ? can it allow him any conceivable
form of initiative? And if not, can it still convince
us that life is worth the living? Surely not, unless
our claims are very modest or our thought unthorough,
or, indeed, we steal our opponents’ arguments and
gradually veer round to their position. He who thinks
things out to their logical issue will find that Naturalism
leads nowhere : he will find himself driven to negation
and despair. It is only through the intensity of her
opposition to what she holds to be superstitious and
illusory that Naturalism herself can be deceived as to
her own emptiness and her lack of any spiritually
productive power.

Thus Naturalism is inadequate as an explanation of
life. But so far we have not disputed its pretension


THE PROBLEM AS IT STANDS TO-DAY 33


to be supported by the facts of our immediate ex-
perience. And so long as this claim remains uncon-
tested, all the fruits of spiritual labour may well seem
to be but secondary or supplementary. But are we
to-day so absolutely sure that the sense-world really
does supply the most immediate and solid basis for
life? It is doubtless immediate and indisputable so
long as we surrender ourselves wholly to sense-im-
pressions and sense-perceptions, so long as we do not
think, or so long as our thought remains under tutelage
to the sense-world, and never becomes independent.
Now, to a large extent, human thinking does remain
in such tutelage, and, in so far as it does so, cannot
overstep the limits of the natural order. Experience
shows us that. a considerable degree of intelligence
can be displayed even within these limits. There is
no lack of prudence, cunning, and cleverness in the
animal world. But all that such intelligence does is
to supply us with weapons of self- preservation ; it
subserves the continuance of the individual or the
species; but it does not enable us to escape from nature’s
mechanical routine and to strike out new paths to-
wards self-chosen ends. Intelligence, understood in this
limited sense, stands precisely on the same level as any
bodily advantage. Cunning and prudence are to one
creature exactly what a coat of mail is to another, or
nimbleness and agility to a third. Now, to a large
extent, this is true of man also. His intelligence is,
in the first instance, a mere weapon enabling him to
sustain the fierce struggle for existence. But it is
also something more, inasmuch as it is able to free
itself from its dependence on the sense-world, place
itself over against it, and calmly survey it from without.


3


34 THE MEANING AND VALUE OF LIFE


Such is the significant development of our human
thinking. However modest and unassuming thought
may be in the first dawning of independence, the in-
significant spark may yet burst into a mighty flame
that shall spread far and wide, and melt down the
rigidity of sense-experience. Can we fail to recognize
the drastic character of this revolution? Man is no
longer a mere part of a nature which conditions his
thought ; he can contemplate her from without and
study her as a problem: he experiences nature and
thus lifts himself above her. And he could not
possibly do this if his thinking faculty were merely
receptive and dependent; but, by evincing activity
in the way we have pointed out, it develops a life
essentially different from that which nature shows.
Nay, more: the obvious effect of such a development
is to reverse the previous position, thought, instead of
nature, now supplying the starting-point and basis
for life. Confidently, and as a matter of course,
thought claims for itself the true immediacy, and
admits nothing which it cannot make convincingly
clear to itself. It thus becomes the measure and judge
of all things, whilst the sense-life sinks in importance,
becomes insubstantial and problematic, and is reduced
to the status of a mere phenomenon the truth of which
has first to be discovered. Nor does this change of
standpoint affect solely the life of the individual.
The same transcendence of sense-experience, the same
revolution in the conduct of life, distinguishes the whole
progress of humanity. It is alike the presupposition
and the result of all real culture. For how could there
be any such culture, how could we even conceive
of its existence, if thought never freed itself from


THE PROBLEM AS IT STANDS TO-DAY 35


the impressions of sense and proceeded to react on
them ?

The onward march of thought, renewing in its pro-
gress the very face of life, is the distinguishing feature
of our modern era. Thought, with proud audacity,
confronts the world, brings forward: certain demands
of a very exacting kind—demands arising from its own
nature—and insists absolutely that the whole of
reality shall conform to them. This revolutionizes
the old order of life. Thought is now a swift-footed
pioneer. It shakes life out of its former ruts by an
insistence on ideas and principles, and seeks to make
it express its own inner necessities. That which above
all else gives to modern movements their power and
passion is the fact that they embody a struggle for
the realization of principles. Even the effort to raise
the level of material prosperity gathers its main force
and influence from the ideas and principles which
inspire it. Our whole sense-life is sustained and con-
trolled by a realm of ideas.

Thus we cannot deny that in this development of
the function of thought we have a characteristic and
influential movement affecting the whole human society
and penetrating even to the individual’s own private
life. This movement, however, comes into sharp
collision with the naturalistic persuasion. The one
stoutly maintains its ground against the other, with
the result that life is drawn in two opposing directions,
animated by two radically different motives, and robbed
of all unity of meaning.

We have seen that nature, as she appeals to our
modern mind, is a realm of mere brute fact, to which,
according to naturalistic belief, all our movements

3—2


36 THE MEANING AND VALUE OF LIFE


should be blindly subservient: even science should
not explain, but merely describe. Thought, on the other
hand, seeks to produce its own content, or at least to
saturate it with its own activity. It must therefore
insist on explaining things and referring them to their
origins. However impervious a fact may seem to
be, thought seeks to break it up and reshape it, and will
recognize no limit as final and impassable. To look
upon all life as determined with the fixity that belongs
to nature must seem to thought a sorry, if not a fatal,
limitation. At least, it must find a grave inconsistency
in the fact that man is mysteriously compelled to claim
a certain portion of reality as his own, to call it his.
ego, to tend it with pleasure or pain, and bear its burden
for good or ill, without having been supplied with any
power to influence and control it. For, as a merely
natural being, man simply plays the part assigned him.
As a thinking being, however, he cannot accept the
facts of his existence with the naiveté of an animal.
He cannot help comparing, pondering, inquiring, and
if his questions find no answer, he feels humiliated.
Through the mere fact that it can set these problems
and engénder these conflicts, thought already vindi-
cates its entire independence of nature.

A further vindication is supplied by the essential
quality of thought itself. We have seen that nature,
adjusted to the mechanical requirements of our work-
world, is nothing more than the apposition and opposi-
tion of particular states and events. Thought, on the
other hand, is essentially the inclusion of a manifold
within a unity. It can draft a general scheme and
apply it in detail, and the demand for unity is carried
into everything it touches. The individual unit


THE PROBLEM AS IT STANDS TO-DAY 37


acquires its meaning and value through its relation to
the whole. Progress does not consist in the mere
lengthening of a series through the addition of terms,
but in the illuminating transition from one system to
another. In proportion as thought articulates itself
into a system, it carries the demand for systematic
order into every department of life. However hard
it be to pursue this requirement consistently in face of
the ceaseless influx of new experiences and thought’s
own strong bias towards the infinite, the demand is
none the less the mainspring of a wide, far-reaching
movement, and the very endeavour after inner co-
herency shows that life has outgrown the mere external
connections of nature, and that thought has approved
itself an independent power.

There is yet another respect in which the intellectual
régime clashes with the conditions of the merely natural
life. The latter can find no place for the idea of in-
wardness which, for the former, is supreme. The
modern scientific conception of nature presupposes the
entire expulsion of all inner presences and powers, and
so far as reality is moulded in conformity with its
standards, life must adopt an external outlook and
busy itself with external relations, never with itself
and its own state. This self-preoccupation, on the
other hand, is a conspicuous feature of thought. The
mainspring of its activity is its aspiration after
thoroughness and clearness. Whether it be engaged
in developing its assertions into their full logical
consequences or in rebelling against contradictions, it
is alike occupied with its own state. It is obvious that
at this level life attains to self-immediacy, nor can
thought be anywhere active without inspiring the


38 THE MEANING AND VALUE OF LIFE


demand for such immediacy. A life wholly directed
otherwards and outwards will seem to it intolerably
superficial.

These manifold oppositions profoundly affect the
groundwork both of life and of reality, and they perplex
us sorely by their conflicting claims. It is clear that
even the immediate sense-life, where we had hoped
to find a peaceful anchorage, is capable of a double
interpretation, that it can be understood in two entirely
different ways, involving diametrically opposed ideals
of action. Two types of immediacy make their appear-
ance—the immediacy of sensation on the one hand,
and, on the other, the immediacy of thought. Each
claims to be the central support of life ; each feels safe
and secure from attack only so long as it is alone in
the field. Yet neither can maintain sole supremacy
for ever, nor possess man wholly and without reserve.
The pendulum swings from one side to the other. We
saw how thought disentangled itself from sense and
asserted its superiority, but we cannot deny that there
is also a reverse movement from thought to sense.
Thought, as we saw, transformed the whole status of
life and gave a new meaning to reality. The very fact
that nature could be an object of our thought proved
reality to be more than nature. Butsosoon as thought
claims to be the whole of reality, and to have exclusive
control of life, its limitations begin to be felt. When-
ever it has pressed such a claim—whether in the ex-
treme form favoured by the speculative philosophy,
or in the more modest fashion that may characterize
any rationalistic epoch—life has become formal and
insubstantial ; it has been made clear that while thought
has the power to elaborate very complex forms, yet


THE PROBLEM AS IT STANDS TO-DAY 39


it cannot give them any living content. If ever
thought seem of itself to have supplied such a content,
we can be sure that it has drawn it unperceived from
some deeper and more substantial reality, in regard to
which thought is merely a medium, liberating its
activity, and bringing it to clear expression.

But not only are we bound to admit the limitations
which restrict the would-be sovereignty of thought ;
there is much in the very conception of this sovereignty
which puzzles and baffles us. Thought is certainly
one mode of human activity, but when it seeks to draw
all reality to itself and stamp its impress on the whole
of it, it is claiming to be the very foundation of the
universe, and how can it make good such a claim?
Thought, as it first presents itself, originates in man,
but it also turns against him; for it evolves from its
own nature certain standard requirements which lay
down the lines that man must follow, force him to
manifold toil and sacrifice, and press their claims with
supreme indifference to his weal and woe. History
teaches us that the dawn of new ideas and principles—
with the consequences they involve—has often seriously
disturbed the balance of life and caused such discom-
fort as to leave men eager to forgo the consequences
of their own principles. But this they could not do.
The tide of thought surged over them, swept them
forward, and treated their comfort as a very secondary
matter. Now, how can something that originates in
man, and, under the conditions of immediate experi-
ence, remains wholly subservient to him, yet attain
such power over him that it can even act against him
and treat him as a mere tool? What meaning would
such procedure leave to life? Can life have any mean-


40 THE MEANING AND VALUE OF LIFE


ing whatsoever when thought thus isolates itself and
considers the perfecting of its own nature as the one
supreme task? The world, reduced to a process of
thought-evolution, becomes, in effect, increasingly
intelligible ; but this dialectical movement transcends
all human interests, and demands of us an unconditional
and complete surrender. If, now, we are to fulfil this
demand sincerely, we should naturally wish to be
assured that the whole to which we sacrifice ourselves
has some substantial value, and we can have this
assurance only on condition that the thought-process
culminates in a genuine experience, and that from the
restless flux of becoming an eternal selfhood should
emerge. But as far as our immediate experience goes,
there is not the slightest evidence of any such culmina-
tion. All we find is that human beings are seized and
swept along by the great currents of thought. They
come and go like fleeting shades ; they put forth all
their power in working for ends they never reach,
which, indeed, they divine rather than see. They are
tools and instruments of a cosmic process which beats
on its way with superhuman might, which uses them
and tosses ‘them aside, and all the while shrouds its
own nature in mysterious darkness, storming along,
as it would seem, to an inscrutable goal, and baffling
us with the ceaseless perplexities it brings forth.
Thought, in a word, is as careless of man’s interests
as nature ever was. How, then, can it furnish a clue
to the meaning of life ?

But if Naturalism and Intellectualism, taken singly,
fail to convince us of life’s value, a combination of them
is still less successful. Such a combination is fre-
quently met with to-day, when not only is there a very


THE PROBLEM AS IT STANDS TO-DAY 41


general revival of a culture at once sensuous and in-
tellectual, but even in the same man strong natural
impulses may be accompanied by much subtlety of
thought. So far is this combination from ledding us
to affirm the value of life that we may rather look
upon it as the main source of the pessimism so prevalent
to-day. For Naturalism and Intellectualism cannot
so combine as to harmonize life : the one opposes and
neutralizes the other. Sense, to thought, seems base
and crude ; thought, to sense, trifling and ineffectual.
And our human consciousness is set down between the
two terms of this opposition with no power of escaping
from it. How can we find joy in such a life and
devote ourselves to its enlargement ? Yet we cannot
simply resign ourselves. We seek happiness, nor can
we desist from seeking it. And this very search
involves more freedom of action than either Naturalism
or Intellectualism can allow. It may, indeed, be
characterized by much that is small-minded and un-
worthy. But behind it there presses something far
more important—nothing less, indeed, than humanity’s
concern for its spiritual self-preservation. Can we—
dare we—cease to concern ourselves with this? Is
there not something in our aspiration that works
steadily on, independent of individual caprice? This
at least is certain: if the appeal to immediate experi-
ence imply that human life must be left at the mercy
of a cosmic process already in existence, then never can
that appeal make life rich and significant, or ensure
its self-realization. It can only offer us up at the
shrine of some dark necessity, and it entirely fails to
cope with the present problem.

The recognition of this truth forces on us the question


42 THE MEANING AND VALUE OF LIFE


whether the appeal to immediacy may not express
itself in some other form which does not imply the
nothingness of man. The adoption of this suggestion
may well result in a reaction, and the self of man may
re-emerge all the stronger for the attempt to suppress
it. Asarefuge from the world to which he was to have
been sacrificed, he will fall back on himself and his own
interests. It is here he will seek the true immediacy,
and, in the absorbed pursuit of his own welfare, he
will attempt to find a true meaning for life.


The Inadequacy of Mere Humanism.


When man’s confidence in another world is shaken,
and the world of nature and thought, as immediately
present to him, treats him as a mere tool, and thus
strikes at the very root of his spiritual existence, there
is but one way left by which he may still preserve to
life a meaning and value: he must trust to the self-
sufficiency of human life, and devote himself to foster-
ing and furthering its interests. Here, surely, is work
in plenty, and no concern for any other world—either
above us or around us—can prevent us from rejoicing
in our own welfare, and promoting it to the best of
our ability. So let us focus all our strength and all
our effort on our own human nature, and lead a life
which, though it sacrifice much, yet has at least this
merit beyond all its limitations, that it can lay down
certain definite aims in the serving of which we are
sure to find happiness. Such is the opinion of a
large section of modern thought whose influence makes
itself felt in very manifold directions ; nay, more, the
movement has become an organized scheme of life


THE PROBLEM AS IT STANDS TO-DAY 43


possessing definite historical importance. But the
moment we cease to describe it in general outline, and
proceed to a closer scrutiny, we are assailed by doubt
upon doubt. Again we find an abrupt rift, an opposi-
tion we cannot tolerate, a central flaw in the very
solution to which we turned as being the simplest and
the surest. Full soon we recognize that the manner
of our immediate existence is itself a problem—a
problem to which experience returns diametrically
opposite solutions.

We are searching for man—man as he stands free
from all entanglement with the ultimate problems of
the universe—but where are we to find such a being ?
Is it in the social community where individual forces
are firmly welded together to form a common life, or
among individuals as they exist for themselves in all
their exhaustless diversity ? What is it that gives
human life its distinctive character ? Is it the mutual
attractions and repulsions of individual units, or is
it the solidarity of organized labour? These are not
just different starting-points which still lead to the
same goal. The goals themselves are different, and,
indeed, so different that we cannot move towards the
one without moving away from the other, whilst the
attempt to keep them both in view at once means the
drawing of our life in two opposite directions. If we
put the community first, and make its prosperity the
sole criterion of all success in life, then the social whole
must be firmly rooted in itself, and be quite independent
of the caprice and wilfulness of its members. The
duty of the individual is to subordinate and adjust
himself. What is distinctive in him must be suppressed
in favour of those generic features which are the pro-


44 THE MEANING AND VALUE OF LIFE


duct of social life. Special value is attached to the
development of a strong social sentiment, unaffected
by the caprice of individuals and the fluctuations of
successive historical epochs. The main task of life,
thus conceived, is so to shape outer circumstances and
conditions, so to adjust the arrangements for social
intercourse and social work, as to advance in every
possible way the welfare of the whole. The happiness
and comfort of the individual are then certain to follow.
For the individual, even in his most inward experi-
ences, in his very dreams and wishes, is dependent
on the whole, and a product of his milieu. Turning
now to the opposite policy, we find that its main con-
cern is to strengthen the individual in the privacy of
his own life, to relieve him of all constraint, and help
him freely to unfold his distinctive powers. The
tendency here is to emphasize plasticity and pliability,
to treat conventionality as a fetter, uniformity as
formalism. Now, which is the true centre of human
existence, the community or the individual? That
is the critical question.

Historical precedent shows clearly that we have here
to do with a serious struggle which decides the whole
trend and direction of life. In history we find great
waves of tendency succeeding and crossing each other,
and, by their ebb and flow, contributing more than
any other factor to determine the character of the
principal epochs. The trend of the ancient world
had been towards breaking up existing institutions,
and transferring the centre of gravity from society to
the individual. But, towards its close, there were
evidences of a still stronger reactionary movement
in favour of solidarity. Philosophy and religion alike


THE PROBLEM AS IT STANDS TO-DAY 45


sought to bind individuals more closely together, and
insisted on their need of mutual aid and support.
Christianity took up the movement, and by turning to
advantage the growing desire for some firm support
and freedom from personal responsibility, directed it
in such a way as to make the Church the sole depositary
of divine truth and divine life, and the only channel
by which these blessings might be communicated to
the individual. Thus the Church came to represent
the conviction and conscience of mankind. Even the
political and social arrangements of medizvalism rest
on the never-questioned assumption that the indi-
vidual has value only within the whole.

We all know the change these valuations under-
went, how once more the individual found courage
and strength to assert himself, how in his development
he shattered the old system and made his own inde-
pendence the fundamental thing. We know, too, how
all this resulted in the dawn of a new epoch whose
supreme ideal was freedom. But we also know that
this ideal no longer governs us exclusively. There is
a strong tendency to-day for life to expand, to swell
out into something great and prodigious. Vast
organizations of force and material are steadily accumu-
lating, and these facts, together with one still more
important—the appearance of certain sharp opposi-
tions which threaten the total disruption of our
existence—have elicited a longing for the closer union
of individuals, and the desire to submit life to the con-
trol of some authoritative organization. Our social
movements show this very strikingly, but the tendency
is by no means confined to them. Everywhere we
see evidences of a similar desire on the part of in-


46 THE MEANING AND VALUE OF LIFE


dividuals to combine together for mutual aid and sup-
port, to attack life’s problems in common, and meet
opposition shoulder to shoulder. What a day of
societies this is—of unions for promoting various
spiritual and temporal interests—and how different
from our classical period, which looked to the strength
and independence of the individual as the fount of all
well-being! Thus we are to-day at the mercy of
opposing forces, and conflicting standards call for our
allegiance. Emancipation from all that limits and
fetters is still the watchword for many, and the move-
ment is still making headway in numerous directions.
Union, the organization of forces powerless in isolation,
is the watchword of the opposing side, and with what
force it appeals to the modern mind we know full well.
But emancipation and organization present us with
two fundamentally different conceptions of life, and,
in view of such discrepancies, how can we be agreed
about its meaning? Is it not more probable that the
uncertainty engendered by the conflict will deprive
it of all meaning whatsoever ?

Each side, however, is confident that it would make
life rounded and complete could it but prove entirely
victorious and hold undisputed sway. It is this hope
which inspires the two movements with such power
and passion, and claims for each the whole allegiance
of man’s soul. Buta closer examination shows at once
that we cannot persist in an exclusive allegiance to
either of them without narrowing life to a really in-
tolerable extent, and robbing it of all meaning.

What can Socialism make out of life, when free to
mould it after its own fashion? Incessant work for
the well-being of society, for a condition of human


THE PROBLEM AS IT STANDS TO-DAY 47


intercourse which involves the minimum of pain and
the maximum of pleasure, for a life which shall be as
rich as possible in comfort and enjoyment for the largest
possible number of human beings. Such a programme
offers indeed plenty of scope, much to do in the way
of alleviating misery and need, strengthening man’s
capacity to deal with an indifferent or hostile world,
softening and gladdening existence, and making all its
good things accessible to every member of the human
family. No longer is there to be a gulf between the
ideal and the real ; we must work with all our might
to make the rational real and the real rational. But
all this, however valuable in itself, suggests difficult
problems so soon as it professes to be the whole truth,
and claims to monopolize our activity. Why should
I, responsible as I am for my own decisions, excite
myself about some goal, devote my chief energy to
it—if need be, willingly sacrificing myselfi—when the
result only bears very indirectly on my own welfare 2
And is it so certain, after all, that even as a community
we shall find satisfaction in such advancement of the
common weal? Prosperity, a life of careless enjoy-
ment, cannot possibly suffice to make us happy ; for
while we are slaying one foe—sorrow and need—
another, perhaps a worse one, is arising—namely,
blankness and boredom; nor is it easy to see how a
socialistic programme can help us to fight it. In
truth, all civilization which simply aims at fostering
and furthering man’s immediate interests bears the
inevitable impress of barrenness and desolation. Such
a civilization can never effect any inner transforma-
tion, any uplifting of man’s essential nature ; it cannot
even strive to effect it. It must take man as it finds


48 THE MEANING AND VALUE OF LIFE


him. It can only avail itself of such powers as are
already in use. Even when most successful, it merely
clings to man like a garment. It never becomes an
indispensable item of his spiritual armoury. It never
opens up to him a new, a purer, and a larger life.
If, then, it should come to pass that the complications
in his inner life persist, that he cannot altogether root
out the desire to identify his existence, no longer
naturalistically understood, with his own personal deed
—if he wish to be individual and originative, and to
enter into some other relation with the universe than
that of mere external contact or reciprocity—then
how worthless must any movement seem that thrusts
back these vital problems! How illusory all the self-
conscious display which is the normal outcome of this
merely humanistic culture! Genuine culture is far
from conducing to happiness in the sense of mere
earthly prosperity. It becomes involved in so many
problems and struggles, demands so much toil and
sacrifice, that it makes life harder rather than easier.
Is not a state of careless comfort far more likely to be
realized in some comparatively simple environment
than on a high plane of civilization? If, then, the
goal is to be nothing higher than that of earthly pros-
perity, civilization is a fatal mistake, and, at bottom,
self-contradictory.

And this is all the more true in that the culture
which has a merely socialistic basis inevitably turns
the conditions and limitations of human intercourse
into conditions and limitations of spiritual creation,
thereby doing the spiritual infinite hurt, and threaten-
ing to destroy its inner vitality. Spiritual creation,
where and howsoever it unfold itself, can only be suc-


THE PROBLEM AS IT STANDS TO-DAY 49


cessful when it is embraced and pursued with whole-
hearted devotion for its own sake; but the culture
that concerns itself with merely social ends uses it
simply as a means and passport to human happiness,
and is therefore indifferent about it in itself, making
it the mere handmaid of utility. True spiritual crea-
tion must ever be inspired by some motive that com-
pels from within and sweeps onward to victory in
defiance of all human likes and dislikes; whereas,
from the merely social point of view, such likes and
dislikes, if only they be sufficiently widespread, form
the supreme tribunal whose verdict none may dispute.
Quantity replaces quality, and the average opinion of
mankind is the final arbiter of good and evil. There
can never be real spontaneity of spiritual creation unless
the whole soul be deeply stirred, as it can only be when
free play is given to the individual for the emphasizing
of his own particular bent ; whereas a merely socialistic
culture tends inevitably, despite all the freedom of
its political institutions, to repress individuality, and
reduce all men to the same monotonous level. The
spiritual artist who strives after truth cannot but claim
for his work an eternal value, independent of all chance
and change; just as Spinoza demanded a knowledge
“under the form of eternity’ (sub specie eternitatis),
a demand that has sunk deep into the modern mind.
A socialistic culture must always be enslaved to passing
circumstance ; it must fall in with humanity’s changing
moods ; and thus, by dint of constant readjustment,
must end by regarding even the most sacred causes as
a mere question of fashion. We assume, of course,
that it has the strength and courage to be consistent,
and not to indulge in conceptions such as that of an


4


50 THE MEANING AND VALUE OF LIFE


independent truth, or an absolute good. and evil, con-
ceptions which, in this context, are ‘entirely out of
place. If, however, there is so much in man that
tends to break through the limitations of a socialistic
culture, and must wither and die through being re-
pressed, such culture cannot make life worth the
living, and this conclusion holds good whether we
look at the matter from the standpoint of the indi-
vidual or from that of the community. However
effective it may be in appearance and in certain par-
ticular directions, yet on the whole it cramps life and
starves it inwardly in a way which is daily making us
more rebellious.

The immediate effect of the failure of Socialism is
to encourage Individualism, and the present day
illustrates very strikingly the success that may attend
an individualistic movement in its protest against
what seems to be a formalistic, soul-deadening, me-
chanical culture. Individualism opens up a new life.
Individual characteristics and behaviour come into
the foreground, and all social arrangements are so
designed as to encourage originality and variety.
The various departments of labour offer just so many
means for the consolidation and expression of in-
dividual enterprise. And we see the result in a new
freedom and freshness, a new mobility and richness of
resource, in a life which is careless, free, joyous, and
unconventional. No aspect of life can remain un-
affected by the movement. But with all these un-
deniable advantages—of which we are the more
sensible for the contrast that they offer to the serious-
ness and ponderous complexity of the socialistic régime
—Individualism returns no answer to our question


THE PROBLEM AS IT STANDS TO-DAY 51


whether it can give meaning and value to life as a
whole. Doubts inevitably arise, and they are especially
likely to grow and prevail when once we clearly realize
the limitations of the individual and of Individualism,
shut in as these are to the sphere of our immediate
existence. For that this existence is equivalent to
the whole of reality, and that there can be no getting
outside of it, is an assumption which Individualism
can neither justify nor dispense with.

As an element of this mere surface existence, the
individual is an entity to be taken as we find him.
Neither his external nor his interna] relations impose
any duty on him. He cannot from his own resources
produce an ideal which compels him beyond the point
from which he starts. He can in no way change his
given constitution, no matter what gaps and incon-
sistencies are implied in it. At the same time, it is
impossible for him to regard his individual existence
as the manifestation or medium of a larger life—say,
a spiritual or a world-life which finds in him a particular
kind of embodiment. He cannot believe that what
takes place within him has any significance outside him.
On the contrary, his whole life must be passed in the
fostering and furthering of surface interests, in the
improvement of his own condition. The prospects
that life on this system holds out to us are much as
follows: reality shows an infinite profusion of in-
dividualities, each of whom attains to the pleasure and
satisfaction of self-feeling and self-enjoyment just in
so far as he eludes or escapes all attempts to bind him
to a system, gives full expression to his own distinctive
nature, and at the same time himself realizes and
appreciates the result, his pleasure being the greater

4-2


52 THE MEANING AND VALUE OF LIFE


in proportion as his distinctness is more strongly
accentuated, and more emphasis is laid on the difference
between him and his fellows. This individualizing
tendency, moreover, invades all the relations of life,
everywhere leaving its unmistakable impress. The
joy of being individual, independent, and unique
inspires the whole life, giving it, apparently, a certain
inner satisfaction.

Such, then, is Individualism as seen in the light of
its own development. That it expresses one aspect
of life, and that the movement which it represents
passes a not-uncalled-for criticism on the socialistic
culture, we will right readily admit. But when it poses
as the whole and ultimate truth, then how poor,
how empty, despite all its dazzling pretensions, is the
life that is here offered us! Even supposing that
we were only concerned with strongly-marked indi-
vidualities permitted by a kindly fate to develop
without check or interference, yet, even so, they
could never get beyond themselves and their own
subjective state ; they would constantly be living on
themselves, reflecting their own doings inwards from
one subjective mirror to another, and while they would
have a ceaseless supply of momentary satisfactions,
they would be limited to the mere co-existence and
succession of isolated states of consciousness, nor
could these ever be fused into a whole, save by aban-
donment of the individualistic premises. Yet we have
seen that man is a thinking and reflective being, and,
as such, he must seek for an all-inclusive whole. If he
fail to find it, life becomes to him a desolate blank.
He may be amused for a time by the gay panorama,
with its shifting scenes and swift transitions, but in


THE PROBLEM AS IT STANDS TO-DAY 53


the end he falls a prey to weariness and satiety. Once
for all, man is more than his mere subjective states.
His life is not wholly comprised within his own particu-
lar sphere, but extends far beyond it, and is resistlessly
impelled to concern itself with what transcends its
own particularity—in a word, with the infinity of the
universe. It is here that a man feels bound to take
his stand. He must view his life—nay, more, he must
live it—in the light of this larger whole. In so
far as he does so, he cannot but resent a system which
breaks off at the point of mere individuality, com-
presses all energy and emotion within the narrow
channels of a contingent and limited existence, rivets
on each of us the fetters of his own idiosyncrasy, and
is conspicuously lacking in those great forces that
burst through such limitations, in truth which is
common to all, and love that binds all hearts together.
The individualistic life, with all its variety and resource,
will seem indescribably narrow and poor.

Moreover, we have so far been considering the case
of the man who has been endowed by nature with a
strong individuality, and encouraged by fortune to
develop it freely. But what are we to say of the
average person? Does he not usually show a very
lukewarm interest in his individuality, and very little
pleasure in its development ?- And even in the ex-
ceptional cases where the individuality is really marked,
is it not prone to encounter serious obstructions arising
from the limitations which one human relationship
inevitably imposes on another? And if no other goal
beckon to us than that of our own enjoyment, what
motive have we for pushing aside these obstructions
and entering the thick of the fight ? Here, as before,


54 THE MEANING AND VALUE OF LIFE


we only need to extend the scope of our inquiry,
making it bear not merely on individual occurrences,
but on the whole to which they contribute—we only
need to ask what the Value of this contribution pre-
cisely is—to find a very serious deficit, and to be con-
vinced that such a life is far indeed from repaying
the trouble and the cost that it imposes. The refined
epicureanism that breathes through it is always on
the verge of passing into a despairing pessimism, for
the void which underlies its restless, unceasing move-
ment must at last become patent to our perception
and experience.


Thus a merely humanistic culture comes to grief,
no matter which it select of the two directions open to
it. Neither the mutual attraction nor the mutual
repulsion of men gives to life any meaning or content
whatsoever. Socialistic culture directs itself chiefly
to the outward conditions of life, but in care for these
it neglects the life itself. Individualistic culture would
fain deal with life in itself, but since it can never refer
us back to anything beyond isolated states and
moments, we cannot see life whole, nor as possessing
any inwardness or any inner world. Thus here, too,
the soul is wanting ; our activity cannot reach beyond
the surface. In neither case has the soul any true
self-immediacy. But the incessant warfare of the
opposing tendencies serves to conceal this emptiness
and lack of content. Each has a certain amount of
justification and a certain advantage over the other,
and while it is bringing this out and adapting it to the
needs of the age, life becomes intent and keen, and it
looks as though progress were undeniably being made.


THE PROBLEM AS IT STANDS TO-DAY 55


But progress in one special direction need not imply
a general advance all along the line, and the success
of one movement against another is not in itself a proof
of its own truth and adequacy. Moreover, with the
swinging of time’s pendulum, the unquestioned
assumptions of one age are apt to be challenged by
its successor, and even if one great wave of feeling
should last hundreds of years, yet in the end there
comes a time when the opposing current breaks through,
sweeps back all the customary valuations—nay,
absolutely reverses them—and either emancipation
triumphs over organization or organization over
emancipation. In face, then, of these fluctuations,
what is there we can point to as being permanently
true for the whole of humanity ?

Both types of humanistic culture are especially likely
to be deceived as to their own emptiness, because, all
unconsciously, they have fallen into the habit of making
much more out of man than is consistent with their
own assumptions. They presuppose a spiritual atmo-
sphere as a setting for our human life and effort. In
the one case, the cementing of a union between in-
dividuals appears to set free the springs of love and
truth ; in the other, each single unit seems to have
behind it the background of a spiritual world whose
development is fostered by means of its individual
labour. In both cases alike, life acquires forthwith
a meaning, but only at the cost of abandoning the
premises of a merely realistic culture, so that we find
ourselves back in the very perplexities from which
we were to have found an escape.

Or again, the problem is rendered less acute by the
fact that both types of humanistic culture tend to


56 THE MEANING AND VALUE OF LIFE


idealize man. If the socialistic programme be adopted,
then we are to presuppose that the various forces in-
volved combine easily, work together happily,and utilize
the collective reason of the community. If we take
the individualistic programme, we are to think of the
individual as being noble and high-minded, interested
only in the things that matter. A certain faith in
humanity is needed to supplement the deficiencies of
man as we find him, and enable us to see him in an
exalted light. But is the impression left on us by the
movements of our own day such as would justify this
faith in humanity ? Do we not see the great masses
of our population possessed by a passion that sweeps
all before it, a reckless spirit of aggressiveness, a dis-
position to lower all culture to the level of their in-
terests and comprehension, to replace quality by quan-
tity, making of life a rougher, ruder thing, repressing
individual freedom, and evincing the while a defiant
self-assertion ? And on the side of the individual
what do we see? Paltry meanness in abundance,
embroidered selfishness, idle self-absorption, the craving
to be conspicuous at all costs, shouldering aggressive-
ness, repulsive hypocrisy, lack of courage despite all
boastful talk, a lukewarm attitude towards all spiritual
tasks, but the busiest industry when personal advan-
tage is concerned. All this is far too glaring to be
overlooked ; and if, notwithstanding, we taik care-
lessly of the greatness of humanity and the excellence
of individuals, asserting that if only given a free field
they will infallibly make life everywhere happy and
great, we thereby manifest a remarkable faith in
man, a faith which of all faiths is the most open
to criticism. If religious faith demanded a trustful


THE PROBLEM AS IT STANDS TO-DAY 57


acceptance of something that eye could not see nor
the hand handle, it could at least claim to rest on a
live possibility. For since it never made the world
of sense-experience equivalent to the whole of reality,
its assertions could not directly clash with such ex-
perience. But this is precisely what does happen in
the case of a faithin man. For we are not asked merely
to believe what we do not see, but, still within the
context of experience, to admit something that is
directly contrary to the testimony of our own eyes.

And again, since the movement of history is powerless
to affect what is most fundamental in life, we may
dismiss all hope of giving life meaning and value by
a mere further development of this purely humanistic
culture. Such a culture, even if its goal were attain-
able, could not satisfy us. It has blossomed out freely
during our modern period, and it has been successful
in diverting the stream of life into its own channels.
But the more independent and exclusive it becomes,
the more it. repels the intrusion of any influence and
friendly supplement from the long centuries of past
labour, the more clearly are its limitations seen, the
more certainly does it live out its influence and bring
about its own downfall.

We are feeling this at the present moment with grow-
ing acuteness. A weariness of the world and a deep
dislike to its limitations are becoming more and more
general. We feel that life must forfeit all meaning
and value if man may not strive towards some lofty
goal in dependence on a Power that is higher than man,
and as he reaches forward realize himself more fully
than he could ever do under the conditions of sense-
experience. Cut off from the larger life of the universe,


58 THE MEANING AND VALUE OF LIFE


and shut up in a sphere of his own, he is condemned
to an unbearably narrow and paltry existence, and the
deeps of his own nature are locked away from him.
Thus to-day we hear a great deal of the superhuman
and the superman, but, for all the genuine longing that
such a movement may embody, it cannot but degenerate
into mere idle words if this superhuman be sought
within the world of sense-experience, within the sphere
of our immediate existence. For man is far too closely
bound by the fetters of his nature and his destiny to
be renewed in life and being by the mere magic of a
word. Thus he must either break with the realistic
culture, or renounce all hope of inwardly raising
humanity and realizing the meaning of life. Only a
shallow and trivial philosophy can deem any third
course possible.


RETROSPECT AND PROSPECT


RESULT OF THE FOREGOING INQUIRY


THE immediate result of the inquiry we have so far
pursued is the recognition that humanity to-day is
undergoing a profound disillusionment. Perplexed as
to the truth and actuality of a higher world, it had
bent its energies mainly upon the immediate environ-
ment, in the joyous certainty of finding there firm
ground to stand on, and of being able, without let or
hindrance, to realize all the possibilities of life. The
immediate environment was for it something given—
given with an evidence unambiguous and clear as
noonday. A closer scrutiny, however, has served to
reveal a very different situation ; in fact, the precise
opposite of what was expected. For if we try to unify
our immediate experience and to synthesize our various
activities, we find ourselves beset by movements that
flatly contradict each other, and pull us in opposite
directions. Each of these movements splits up still
further, till we find ourselves in a perfect maze of
oppositions, and beset by an unrest and uncertainty
of which earlier ages had no conception. Instead of
finding the security we had hoped for, the very ground
gives way beneath our feet. That which appeared so
59


60 THE MEANING AND VALUE OF LIFE


palpable to sense slips away from us when we seek to
build our spiritual life upon it, and recedes ever
farther into the distance. And the life we hoped to
make so wholly and unitedly our own splits up at the
same time into various sections, each at war against the
other. Thus it seems as though we attained the very
reverse of our expectation, and lost much where we had
hoped for certain gain.

The appeal to immediate experience brought us face
to face with the question whether we should seek its
central import in that which concerns the welfare of
man or in a régime to which man’s welfare was a
matter of indifference. The adoption of the latter
alternative had two points in its favour: the deep
distrust of human capacity engendered by the over-
throw of the traditional schools, and the measureless
grandeur, the wealth of exuberant vitality, which the
universe reveals to the gaze of the modern observer.
But the conception, as thus generally stated, could not
be specified more nearly without disclosing an irre-
concilable antagonism between the claims of the sense-
life arid those of thought as it finds expression in us.
Thought and sense each claimed to be truly immediate ;
each desired to be the one sole foundation of all reality,
and to supply from its own unaided resources a con-
structive scheme of life. Thus arose two typical pre-
sentments of life and two solutions of its problem,
differing fundamentally from each other: Naturalism
and Intellectualism. The former could claim in its
favour the accepted doctrine of man’s continuity with
nature, and the astounding developments of a technico-
economical culture. The latter could point to the way
in which thought is altogether emancipating itself from


RETROSPECT AND PROSPECT 61


sense, and enriching our whole existence with the fruits
of its labour, both processes eminently characteristic
of the modern world. But despite all that Naturalism
and Intellectualism have accomplished—the energies
they have unlocked and the results they have achieved
—neither could include the whole life and give it a
meaning. The life that has developed under their
auspices does not repay the trouble and toil of living.
Naturalism came to view man with indifference as
only part of an unconscious mechanism ; Intellectualism
regarded him as a mere vessel, the tool and instrument
of a soulless evolution of thought. Neither referred
life’s processes back to man as their owner and pro-
moter : the march of events took no heed of him. Amid
all the stir and bustle his,soul was empty, and his life
came to nothing. It is easy to understand that the
impending threat of personal annihilation should
arouse a growing and prevailing desire to concentrate
upon man as man, just as we find him in the various
functions of his life, and to fill his time and heart with
the interests of his own sphere. Here seemed fair
prospect of a rich and happy life, free from doubt and
obscurity, and unhampered by the complications of
ultimate problems. But here, again, the very develop-
ment of the movement disclosed an irreconcilable
opposition. The socialistic and individualistic ten-
dencies which were latent in it diverged ever more
widely till they came into diametrical opposition.
Each hindered the effectiveness of the other, and under-
mined the foundations of belief, but neither gave to
life any sure anchorage or satisfying goal. Along the
socialistic line, life became a mere matter of external
behaviour ; Socialism could never turn the outer gain


62 THE MEANING AND VALUE OF LIFE


to inner profit: it gave life no soul. - Small wonder
that there was a reaction in which all interest was con-
centrated on the individual. But the individual, being
strictly limited to his immediate environment, could
not constitute a whole, could not bring his psychical
activities to a focus. His life resolved itself into a
mere series of detached states, disconnected feelings,
and impulses—a mere swift succession of fleeting
moments. And though these experiences might bring
with them delightful occupation and a constant succes-
sion of enjoyments, yet at the heart of the gay whirl
was a hollowness which could not for ever remain
concealed. The mere setting of any question that
bore on things as a whole betrayed at once the weak-
ness of the system. Yet how can any thinking being
forbear to put such questions ?

Thus all attempts at establishing a purely realistic
culture are doomed to inevitable failure. If its pro-
moters continue to believe themselves successful, the
reason can only be that they are continually supple-
menting their own imperfect systems by drawing upon
the spiritual atmosphere which has been slowly evolved
during past centuries of human labour, giving to
life a depth and self-sufficiency which their systems
of themselves could never have imparted. Moreover,
not only does that which they borrow not originate
with them, but it is in actual antagonism to the line
they take up, and if, notwithstanding this, it prove
indispensable, then we can only say that the develop-
ment of their own position must lead to its own over-
throw. For the more energetically these systems
labour to realize what is distinctive in them, the more
ruthlessly must they weed out all supplementing


RETROSPECT AND PROSPECT 63


influences, and the narrower, the more inadequate, the
more untenable, do they become. As so often happens
in spiritual things, the apparent victory spells an inward
undoing. ;

There can be no doubt that the types of realistic
culture we have considered exhaust its possibilities ;
hence, if none of these give life a meaning and value,
and if the oppositions which they one and all engender
prove so acute as to defeat all attempts at harmonizing
them, we are surely justified in accepting as proved
the inadequacy of such a culture. It splits life up
into opposing extremes. Now it throws man back
upon himself as a refuge from the icy coldness of a
soulless world, and again it bids him flee from the
narrow, stultifying influences of human relationships
to the ampler life of the universe. Nowhere is there
a sure footing, nowhere a comprehensive synthesis,
nowhere a life that repays all the toil and trouble which
highly-civilized man is bound to expend on it. And
this failure appears all the more disconcerting when
we remember the greatness of the hopes which attended
the birth of the movement. Life in its progress has
shattered these hopes and reversed all expectations.
We looked for certainty, and have fallen into grievous
perplexity. We sought a life that should be one and
single, and have found it dismembered and self-con-
flicting. We craved happiness and tranquillity, and
could find only conflict, trouble, and sorrow.

Can we wonder, then, that such a painful experience
should drive men to seek some outlet, and in the first
instance suggest a reversion to those older systems
which had linked man’s destiny with a world above,
to whose stars they looked for guidance? Does it


64 THE MEANING AND VALUE OF LIFE


not seem clear as daylight that in ahandoning that
world man has lost far more than he has any power
and any right to forfeit? For the restriction of life
to one level and the abolition of all inner grades of
distinction seem to have robbed it of all relative in-
dependence, all self-immediacy, all possibility of self-
communion, and therewith to have deprived it of its
intensity, greatness, and dignity, and everything
worthy that it contains. Such degradation and low-
levelling of life could not fail to excite opposition.
And in effect, the latest developments of our modern
era show a reawakening of religious feeling, and even
a certain disposition to revive the old Idealism. But
we must not imagine that we can simply go back to
the old régime. However far the realistic culture may
be from being a final solution, yet the movement,
and, stretching beyond it, the greater movement of
modern life—has won far too substantial an embodi-
ment, wrought too radical a change in the standard
of life and in man himself, placed too wide a gulf
between the present and the past, to allow of our
reverting simply to the old conditions. For the older
worlds of Religion and Idealism have lost their spiritual
immediacy, and can no longer be accepted as a matter
of course. Divergences on points of detail pale in
significance before the one supreme question whether
there really is another world to which we may find an
access, or whether it is all a dream and illusion—a
mere projection of our own existence into the infinity
of the universe. Indeed, this is stating the matter
too simply, for, to go no farther, Religion and Idealism
have had a profoundly transforming and elevating
influence, and this could never have been the product


RETROSPECT AND PROSPECT 65


of mere illusion. But where are we to draw the line
between that which we must hold fast and that we
must abandon? Do we not find for the most part
that old doctrines no longer tenable are confusedly
mingled with new teaching that is only just taking
shape, the result being disastrous to all fruitful develop-
ment, and even threatening us with spiritual in-
sincerity ? How much bombastic phraseology, empty
emotionalism, and pleasing self-deception are bound
up with that which elects to call itself a religious
Renaissance! Progress along this path is impossible
until we reach a clear understanding of the relation
between Old and New, and, in particular, give a plain
answer to the question whether and by what means
it is possible for man to overcome the limitations of
his individual existence, and advance to a higher order
of life.

There is, moreover, this point to be considered, that
though to-day we are again attaching much more
importance to religion, we are still lamentably un-
certain as to what we exactly understand by it, and,
in fact, are divided on this point into two opposing
camps. There are those who would make religion
predominantly speculative and esthetic: they wish
that it should free us from the pettiness of man and
the poverty of ordinary existence, lift us up into com-
munion with an Infinite and Universal Life, and thrill
us with a dim, emotional premonition of the mysterious
depth and, if possible, also the beauty of the universe.
There are others who would insist on a more ethical
interpretation of religion. It is to save man, so we
are told, from the intolerable schism of his own soul,
free him from misery and guilt, and open up to him


S)


66 THE MEANING AND VALUE OF LIFE


a new and a purer life. The two lines of thought are
constantly crossing each other, and they are often
mixed up quite indiscriminately. How is it possible
that such a medley should triumph over a systematized
culture like that of Realism, and give life the support
that it requires ?

We thus find ourselves in a state of painful bewilder-
ment. A purely realistic culture robs life of all
meaning ; a return to the older forms of life is impos-
sible, and yet it is equally impossible to renounce all
attempt at finding meaning and value for life. That
our own age should find it peculiarly hard to accept
such a position with equanimity can be easily shown
by a glance at the conditions which prevail to-day.


PERPLEXITIES OF THE PRESENT
SITUATION


These contradictions and irrationalities would not
disturb us very much if we lived in an age that crept
feebly and idly along, experiencing none of life’s
stronger emotions: where the question excites no
interest, the failure to answer it can cause no dis-
appointment. But we know that our own age is any-
thing but feeble and idle, that it throbs with a glowing
vitality which inspires it to undertake the most
strenuous work—work rich in great achievements.
It is deeply passionate, unwearyingly progressive, and
essentially revolutionary in spirit. And if all the in-
dividual successes which have been won along special-
ized lines do not issue in any general result affecting
the whole condition of humanity, if our profoundly


RETROSPECT AND PROSPECT 67


complicated existence prove to have nothing at the
heart of it, the incongruity of the situation is more
than can be borne with composure. He can, indeed, have
little force of character who fails to grapple with these
perplexities, or at least to come to terms with them.
Thus some throw themselves energetically into work,
and in restless activity seek to solace themselves for the
lack of inward life. Such a solution, however, cannot be
more than provisional, since man must needs realize him-
self eventually as a whole, feel as a whole, and claim for
this whole a content which mere work can never supply.
Others, therefore, bend their energies towards finding
satisfaction for man’s whole nature along that par-
ticular line of action with which all their hopes and
emotions are bound up. But they cannot make any
further progress along it, even according to their own
ideas of progress, without overtaxing its resources.
They artfully extract more out of it than it really con-
tains, and the result is a life all froth and shimmer,
lacking inward sincerity, a life that can never in itself
satisfy them, but can only keep up the appearance of
doing so.

Thus mankind as a whole becomes ever more divided
and perplexed. The variously directed currents of
social life become increasingly dissociated, and lose
at last all interconnection. Each of the conflicting
movements has its own sphere of action, its own notion
of reality, its own standards and valuations, and attacks
life’s problems in its own way. There is no common
standard of spiritual value, since what is gold to one
man is mere copper coinage to another. Were it not
that these conflicts are insensibly softened by the
spiritual atmosphere which imbues both history and

5—2


68 THE MEANING AND VALUE OF LIFE


society, and that our differences are concealed by the
fact that we use a common language, we should be
forced to acknowledge that each man’s inner world is
quite separate from that of his neighbour, and that our
divergences are the greater in proportion as we try
to gather our life into a whole and give it a meaning.
This inward schism is, however, a source of weakness
to humanity when engaged in any movement which
calls for fellowship and the bond of a common convic-
tion. It forbids our sharing experiences whole-
heartedly together or expressing any originative genius.
Again, when the great problems of life are in question,
it gives undue weight to shallow theorizing and reck-
less denial, impairs the capacity for free initiative, and
with it the moral force of humankind. The ensuing
spiritual disintegration and chaos favours a treatment
of the problem which is directly opposed to the true
requirements of the situation. Happy here is the man
of narrow vision who, in his spiritual colour-blindness,
only sees what lies along the line of his individual
endeavour, while all other experiences and impressions
—be they never so impressive—are hidden from his view.
Such a one can extol as great and noble the individuality
which gives free play to allits faculties and inclinations,
yet have no eyes for the rank growth of unrestrained
selfishness and weak indulgence so prevalent and so
injurious to-day. He can laud the free development
of sensuous impulse as a return to pure and unadul-
terated nature, although all the features of modern
sensualism reveal it as a refinement of over-civilized
life. Happy, again, is he who, amid this confusion,
can move secure and light-hearted on the surface of
things, and has no sense which tells him that ideas have


RETROSPECT AND PROSPECT 69


their presuppositions and consequences. Such un-
systematized thinking can tolerate composedly the
direst contradictions. In the scientific interest, for
example, it can think very meanly of man, classing
him, as far as possible, with the beasts ; while yet, in
practical life, in politics, and society, it can rave about
his greatness and dignity, and make it the guiding
principle of conduct. Happy, again, in such circum-
stances is he who has no spiritual intuition, and can
satisfy himself with mere abstractions. He can
become enthusiastic for conceptions such as reason and
freedom, progress and development, immanence and
monism, and so forth, without endeavouring to present
these abstractions in a living form, or support their
claim to be so presented.

But though individuals may benefit from these
limitations, they are obviously disastrous to humanity
as a whole, nor can our human race complacently
resign itself to a policy which threatens it with destruc-
tion. Especially is this impossible so soon as our
interest takes a new and saving turn, and asks whether
man has not in the universe a special place and a
special task, whether the problems of his life do not
reach far beyond mere considerations of personal
happiness and comfort, and whether he has not in-
dividually a responsibility which he cannot permanently
disown. Such questions are bound to make us pain-
fully conscious of our profound ignorance regarding
the universe, and of the difficulties and conflicts of
our own nature. Once let these problems be started,
and, like an avalanche, they may gather strength till
they become the one all-dominating interest, and
change the whole temper and trend of life. It is true


70 THE MEANING AND VALUE OF LIFE


that our modern era, by laying the preponderating
emphasis on work actually done in the world,
has encouraged us to put aside and almost entirely
to neglect these vital problems. The brilliant triumphs
of labour have thrust all other interests into the
background. But since now we are beginning to
feel more and more that the claims of labour, however
large, do not prevent the soul from having certain
rights of its own, while at the same time fresh com-
plications are for ever arising within the soul itself,
it again becomes possible for life to alter its course,
and in the struggle for a spiritual existence to grow in
depth at the same time that it adds immensely to its
difficulties. It was a movement of this kind that so
stirred men towards the close of the period of antiquity,
inducing great spiritual changes to which Christianity
finally gave definite embodiment—an embodiment
determined in very many respects by the conditions
of the age. Much of what then proved so inspiring
we to-day regard as mythology. It sounds to us
remote and far away. But the question remains
whether, behind all that is merely the expression of a
particular epoch, there is not a perennial problem—
a problem which humanity cannot permanently ignore.
Later on we shall have to define our attitude to this
question more specifically ; but this, at least, is already
certain that the problem of life becomes vastly more
serious when once we see clearly that our immediate
environment, with all the dazzling achievements it
can boast, is powerless to give life any meaning and
value ; in fact, that a life which looks to it for a final
solution falls into grievous contradiction, and, in the
end, is cheated of all its hopes. Now, this result has


RETROSPECT AND PROSPECT 71


been made quite plain to us, and the only choice we
have left is either to despair of our reason or to radically
transform our life. All merely palliative measures
are useless when once the matter is looked at broadly,
and we clearly recognize how painfully the purely
realistic culture has disappointed the high hopes we
entertained of it.


FORECAST OF A POSITIVE SOLUTION


So far we have been dealing with the negative answers
which life returns to the questions we are asking it
to-day. But that this negative side is not all, and
that there is a way forward towards a more positive
attitude, we are entitled to hope even on general
grounds. In spiritual problems there is usually a
Yes at the back of every No. The Yes is less obvious,
and often very indefinite ; but with all its incomplete-
ness it is still a Yes. We cannot be sincerely sorry
that some good thing is denied us, unless a longing
for it is already present in our nature, unless some
desire is striving and struggling for a satisfaction which
is never really attained. If there were no such move-
ment and no such desire already present, our failure
to reach the goal could nowise either sadden or disturb
us. If, for example, the Hindus found all human life
to be vain and transient in comparison with the
eternity and infinity of the universe which their logical
imagination made peculiarly vivid and near to them,
this gave pain only because man did not quietly accept
his transiency, refused to be changed into a mere
ephemeral being, and persisted in compassing eternity


972, THE MEANING AND VALUE OF LIFE


with his thought and demanding a share .in its life.
Is not man’s sense of defect in itself a proof of great-
ness? If mere time fail to satisfy, must it not be that
there is something eternal in him? Christian feeling
was often so full of man’s moral shortcomings—nay,
more, of his utter depravity—that it became cheerless
and despondent. But how can we account for its
passing such a moral judgment unless we recognize
in man a moral nature, a capacity for free action,
and, in so doing, place him far beyond the scope of
any mechanical theory? The Yes may be much less
obvious than the No, but without ‘the Yes the No
would be unthinkable. We see again that the lack
of any meaning in our life and work becomes a very
serious deficiency, and the source of indescribable
confusion in our human relationships. But the very
fact that we feel this is proof of the further fact that
the longing to find such a meaning is implanted deep
in our nature, and that an irresistible inward impulse
compels us to try and illuminate life from within and
make it fully our own.

Let us beware, then, of despising our own age
because it is so incomplete and full of contradictions.
Is not its incompleteness largely due to the fact that
its demands are greater than those of other epochs ?
Is not its burden of contradiction to be mainly ex-
plained by the ardour and energy with which it runs
through and exhausts all the possibilities of life ?
What age is there which has traversed with such
thoroughness the whole range of possibilities, and
brought to bear on each one of them such glad faith
and enthusiastic effort? Never has any other epoch
been so prolific in producing new forms of experience,


RETROSPECT AND PROSPECT 73


or treated life’s problem on so broad a scale and
with such breadth of knowledge. We may thus be
certain that for us too, out of what seems mere limita-
tion and denial, a positive solution will at length
emerge.

For what is the real cause of this limitation and
denial? It is not an outside power, but our own life,
that has brought us to this pass. The opposition is
not without, but within us, and is therefore a proof
of our strength. Those unsatisfied demands do not
press upon us from outside ; they rise out of our own
nature, and show the direction in which our effort must
be applied. No unprejudiced observer of our present
situation can fail to be impressed with the fact that
behind all the struggles and confusions there is a fuller,
richer life seeking to realize itself in them, filling them
with power and passion, and then, it must be confessed,
coming back from them unsatisfied. It is only
because there is something deeper stirring in us, and
not yet fully awake, that we have fallen into such unrest
and perplexity. Again the very energy with which
these various types of experience seek each other’s
destruction shows an unmistakable movement in the
direction of unity. The very fact that we can review
and criticize so many different movements is in itself
evidence of a certain superiority. The adherent of
a party may be only a fraction of a man, but mankind
as a whole must be something more than that. Thus
to-day we are undeniably in a very unsettled state,
in which positive and negative elements are strangely
intermingled. A new teinper of life is growing up, but
is not yet able to assert itself sufficiently. It in-
fluences us more than we imagine, but it is not yet


74 THE MEANING AND VALUE OF LIFE


completely our own. Certainly our limitations and
negations do their utmost to oppose it.

The conception as thus generally stated, however,
does not help us much. If our work is to make any
progress, we must have definite questions and definite
points of attack. But these are sufficiently supplied
by the experiences which the search for life’s meaning
gives rise to, since it is in these experiences that we
come to see what is crucial in the question, and also
along what particular line our effort should be directed.
To specify here the main points will be sufficient to
give us our bearings. Life’s meaning became obscured
for us mainly because we were divided as to the stand-
point we should adopt, and neither side could secure
universal acceptance for its own particular conviction.
The firm belief in an unseen world seemed utterly
irreconcilable with an exclusive devotion to the
immediate environment. Now, it has become clear
that the visible world, rich as it may be in possibilities,
fails to satisfy certain imperative requirements of our
nature, and, even though we tax its resources to the
uttermost, cannot give meaning to life. Hence, if
we insist on finding this meaning, it must be because
our life has depths which it could not have gained from
the immediate environment. But if the conception
of an invisible world becomes thereby the more signifi-
cant, there is yet much that is unsatisfactory about
the way in which it has been hitherto presented to us.
We are no longer content with the older foundations.
The life built up on them has become too narrow, nor
does it give to our immediate environment the impor-
tance to which the evolution of history has entitled it.
Thus it would seem to be imperative to press onwards


RETROSPECT AND PROSPECT 74


to a life which renders a duality of starting-points
intelligible, a life which preserves the peace and stability
of the unseen world without thereby impairing the
real significance of our immediate experience. We
cannot meet such demands without enlarging our
conception of reality, without distinguishing between
different levels of life, without, indeed, undergoing
some sort of conversion. It remains to be seen
whether all this is possible. But one thing we must,
above all, bear in mind—that if the invisible world is
to have the requisite stability and breadth, it cannot
be the mere object of our finite longing or any inference
laboriously drawn from the conditions of our finite
experience ; it must be completely independent, and
exist in its own right. And this is impossible unless
we are able to find in it not the mere further develop-
ment of our given powers along certain special lines,
but an underived totality of life and being. Let us
endeavour, then, to keep this point in mind.

Again, as regards the shaping of life, we saw that
there were two hostile tendencies refusing to be re-
conciled: one sought to assimilate life to the world,
the other to concentrate on man. The reduction of
all things to a cosmic process destroyed man’s selfhood,
and therewith the whole value of his life. The
mechanism of nature and the dialectic of thought were
equally fatal in this respect. But the alternative
tendency, the expedient of concentrating on man and
concerning ourselves exclusively with his condition,
produced a life so narrow and so poor, elicited so much
that was small and unworthy in human nature, and,
moreover, was so powerless to combat its meaner
elements, that it was impossible to hail it as a final


76 THE MEANING AND VALUE OF LIFE


solution. Thus, if each term prove inadequate when
thus set in opposition to the other, if the world be too
cold, man too paltry, and both alike soulless, the only
conclusion is that we must give up our mutually ex-
clusive alternatives, and seek to transcend the opposi-
tion between them. In one way or another, to greater
or less extent, man must assimilate the world, make
it part of his immediate personal life. He must find
in the depths of his being a spiritual release from the
restraint and cramping narrowness of his merely natural
existence. When man and world, however, are thus
brought together, their immediate aspect will be very
different from what it was. It may be that the
deepening of the relation between them will enable
us to transcend the oppositions that otherwise distract
and disintegrate our life, the opposition of nature and
intelligence in reference to the world, that of society
and individual in reference to man.

The point at issue—the crucial point of the whole
argument—is whether man can inwardly transcend the
world, and in so doing alter fundamentally his relation-
ship toreality. This is the great crux which our present
civilization has to face. The continual widening of
our horizon, the advancing strides of Labour, and our
growing intellectual enlightenment, are threatening
to depress man’s individuality more and more effectu-
ally ; the old superiority which was his in the simpler
thought of earlier ages seems gone beyond hope of
recall. From being the centre of the universe in which
he once moved as child of God or as guardian of
Reason, he has been gradually transferred to a position
of very secondary importance. As a mere ‘ drop in
the bucket,’ he can have no hope of ever drawing


RETROSPECT AND PROSPECT 77


spiritually near to the great sources of eality. All
man’s attempts to assimilate the world have been
labelled by advancing culture as mere anthropo-
morphism. Is not any assertion that man ventures to
make about reality ‘ anthropomorphic’? Is not even
science, just as much as religion and philosophy, a
manifestation of our own thinking? It seems as
though man could never escape from himself, and yet,
when shut in to the monotony of his own sphere, he is
overwhelmed with a sense of emptiness. The only
possible remedy here is to radically alter the conception
of man himself, to distinguish within him the narrower
and the larger life, the life that is straitened and
finite, and can never transcend itself, and an infinite
life through which he enjoys communion with the
immensity and the truth of the universe. Can man
rise to this spiritual level? On the possibility of his
doing so rests all our hope of supplying any meaning
and value to life. At least, we recognize to-day the
hopelessness of trying to supply it from any source
external to the individual.

It is, moreover, only a faith in the spiritual possi-
bilities of man that can fit us to cope with the saddening
impression which the immediate aspect of afiairs to-day
must produce upon every thoughtful mind. We are
confronted with the vastness and pitilessness of nature,
the forlornness of man amid its immensity, the wild
whirl of social existence with its passionate excitements
and spiritual barrenness, the moral littleness of man
with his selfishness, his enslavement to appearances,
his entire subjection to natural instincts which he
cannot control; all this is obvious to every observer,
and cannot be explained away. And yet the question


78 THE MEANING AND VALUE OF LIFE


arises whether this is the whole and ultimate truth
which we must accept as our inevitable destiny,
therewith giving up all faith in the rationality of
existence, or whether we have something to bring
forward on the other side, so that we can take up arms
against this counsel of despair, with the chance even
of proving victorious. He who chooses the latter
course will have to push forward against difficulties,
and be exposed to continual dangers, but it is the only
course which leaves man any chance of spiritual self-
preservation, and here, if anywhere, there is justifica-
tion for Goethe’s famous saying that necessity is the
best counsellor.


ATTEMPT AT RECONSTRUCTION


THE GROUNDWORK


THE Main THESIS.


THE question whether there is not more in man, and
more to be made out of him than our inquiry so far
has led us to recognize, is a question which can only
be treated from the standpoint of his own life. It is
what we find there that will determine our answer.
Now, it is true that we find in life something more than
a mere shadow thrown by an outer world across the
soul, something more than an empty space to be filled
from the outside. Nor, again, is it a mere aspect of
reality requiring a counterpart by way of comple-
ment, the subject’s responsive reaction to a world
that lies outside it. For we have no conscicusness of
a world which does not take form within our own life:
Even when we abstract some feature from our life
and place it before ourselves as an object, we have
not really put it right outside us, but simply given it,
still within our life’s own sphere, a certain fixedness
and universality. From life in this larger sense of the
life-process, which contains both subject and object
in mutual interaction, we cannot, and we never shall,
escape. Whether we can transcend our condition or


79


80 THE MEANING AND VALUE OF LIFE


not must depend on the nature of this larger experi-
enee. Mere brooding and theorizing cdnnot help us
here.

Now, from time immemorial there have been attempts
to grasp and bring together man’s distinctive pecu-
liarities, and thereby assure his pre-eminence. Man,
so we have been told, is a spiritual being, and his
membership of a spiritual order gives him a position
that is quite unique. In the shaping of civilization
as well as in the raising of the individual life to a personal
and’ spiritual level—in the founding of such vast
structures as those of science and art no less than in
the union of individuals to form great spiritual organiza-
tions such as society, state, and in last resort humanity
itseli—in all this there is so much that is new and
distinctive that for long it was found sufficient in itself
to insure to man a position of ascendancy, and make
his life full and complete.

Why, then, should we question this supremacy ?
Mainly because our growing insight into the way in
which we are fettered and conditioned by the laws of
nature and of our own humanity makes us doubtful
of the meaning and possibilities of this new develop-
ment. Especially do we recognize the existence of
a very sharp contradiction between the content it
offers and the form under which we realize it. The
spiritual life develops its own kingdom from its own
standpoint; it presents its truth as unaffected by
the chance and change of human conditions, by the
differences and discords of individuals. It even claims
to be far above all human whims and fancies, and to
be able to dominate and control them. It professes
to supply the standard which measures all human


ATTEMPT AT RECONSTRUCTION 81


achievement, and often enough finds it wanting and
even corrupt. But the very same being in whom
these movements first appear is, so far as his immediate
existence is concerned, just one type among many,
limited and conditioned in a thousand ways, and in
absolute subjection to his own nature, which assigns
him certain bounds that he may not transgress. Of
his own strength he can never reach beyond himself.
In the play of thought he may project a world and
indulge in bold, creative flights of imaginative con-
struction, but it is hard to see how such imaginative
schemes can come to have any reality for him, how they
can open up any new truths and exercise any beneficial
and elevating influence upon man, their author. From
the standpoint of first appearances, his attempt to
give independence to a world he himself has fashioned
is but a piece of unjustifiable anthropomorphism. A
world so constructed, whatever its advantages, could
never become the common possession of all, and acquire
universal validity. For on the plane of our ordinary
existence we see humanity split up into mere isolated
units. Each has his own way of looking at things,
and has as much right to it as other people have to
theirs. Hence there can be any number of movements
which skirt and cross each other, but there can never
be one common world, independent of that which
befalls individual experients, and therefore never one
truth common to all men and valid for every sphere.
But if this be so, and there really is no inner bond of
fellowship in life, then how can there be any science
and art, justice and morality, any mutual understand-
ing and sympathetic co-operation ? Such things could
never be even objects of our pursuit. We could not
6


82 THE MEANING AND VALUE OF LIFE


so much as think of them. But we do think of them,
we do strive after them; and however incomplete our
effort, it is yet far too effective, has wrought far too
many changes, not only in man’s ideas, but in the
whole complexion of his life both outward and inward,
to admit of its being explained as a mere piece of self-
illusion. Thus we are face to face with a glaring and
impossible contradiction: that which claims, and
must claim, to be an independent world appears as
the mere product of a life shaped on quite a different
plan, variously circumscribed, and subject to natural
conditions. How, if thus dependent, could it ever
give pure expression to its truth and prevail against
its own foundation, the basis on which it permanently
rests. Thus, if there be no way of transcending this
relation of dependence, and, generally speaking, of pass-
ing beyond the world as we find it, then all that we call
spiritual development is but the movement of a shadow
hovering idly over our life. Nothing spiritual could
ever escape from the contradictory position of claiming
to be something which it has not the power to become,
and it would thus lapse irretrievably into a state of
inward insincerity and untruth.

There is no dearth of attempts to escape this fatal
contradiction, but they all lead round in the end to
the same dilemma: either that distinctive something
in man which, through all his manifold activity, pursues
the one end of building up a new world that shall
challenge at once man’s finitude and the claims of his
whole sense-environment—either all this is a merely
human production, and therefore an insubstantial]
illusion, or else it springs from a deeper source than
man’s individual nature, and is evidence that such a


ATTEMPT AT RECONSTRUCTION 83


source exists. If it fs to be independent of man, it
cannot be part of his specifically human equipment.
On the contrary, he must find in it the medium through
which he may win participation in a universal life ; it
must introduce a new stage of reality in contradistinc-
tion from that of nature, a reality which, it is true, only
becomes manifest to us in man, but which does not
originate with him, and is therefore not subject to
his limitations. In other words, the spiritual life in
man comes to nothing at all, and all our concern for
it is only a catching at phantoms, unless it has behind
it a spiritual world from which it draws its powers
and its credentials. That the recognition of a self-
subsistent depth of spirituality within our own life
radically alters our view of man and the world, as also
the problem our life has to face—nay, more, that it
completely revolutionizes the whole existing order of
things—we shall soon have to show in greater detail ;
then, too, we shall have to examine the further point
whether this change involves the uplevelling of man—
an uplevelling without which, as we saw, life forfeits all
meaning and value.

The assertion just advanced is obviously axiomatic
in character: it cannot be proved in the same way
as a proposition which forms a mere link in a chain
of thought. But, like all axioms, it can only be
justified by a convergence of two lines of argument,
one more negative, and the other positive in kind.
It must be shown that every attempt to deal with
our present problem must either reach this turning-
point or else collapse or come hopelessly to a stand-
still, and that this crucial conviction is itself the neces-
sary presupposition of all spiritual progress—nay,

6—2


84 THE MEANING AND VALUE OF LIFE


more, of the bare subsistence of spiritual activity.
But, further, it must be shown that the thoroughgoing
recognition and explication of this axiom exercises an
invasive and uplifting influence on life, that all life’s
manifold activities converge to this new starting-point,
and, in so doing, for the first time become capable of
a clear, connected, and complete development. The
greater the variety of movements which converge to
the same point, the more sure can we be that we are
not dealing with mere illusions. The whole previous
course of our discussion has been concerned with the
former and more negative type of proof. The positive
proof will be given in the pages that follow.

To this end we must briefly call to mind the change
in the general view of spiritual life, of the world, and
of human nature, which is involved in the exaltation
of the spiritual life above all that is merely natural.
The spiritual life cannot detach itself from our finitude
without at the same time asserting its independence
and its intrinsically universal nature. The demands
involved in such universality cannot, however, be
met unless this spiritual life reveal itself not as a
mere annex to an already existing reality, but as
the disclosing of the very depths of reality itself,
as that wherein reality attains to self-immediacy and
reveals a depth of meaning such as all the busy stir
of natural processes can never unfold. In this way
we are able to grasp the world as a whole, whereas the
picture of nature, as we are accustomed to represent
it, shows us a mere aggregate of variously intercon-
nected elements. At the same time, the fundamenta]
idea of life undergoes a radical modification. In the
domain of nature, life is oriented outwards, and is


ATTEMPT AT RECONSTRUCTION 85


mainly occupied with maintaining positions of relative
permanence among the changes of things ; now, how-
ever, it becomes possible for it to concern itself with its
own state, and, if this prove unsatisfactory, to find its
supreme work in the task of self-development and self-
culture. Such a life would not be spent in merely
duplicating the world within the soul, and vice versa—
at bottom, a very superfluous proceeding—but it
would transcend the opposition, and through a pro-
gressive interaction of the two series raise the whole
level of life, and put an end to the incompleteness and
the discord of the situation as it first presents itself.
It is only in so far as life becomes actively self-conscious,
thereby relating all that takes place toitself as a whole,
that it acquires a distinctive content. But if we wish
to know more about this content, we must appeal from
general considerations to life’s own self-revelation
as systematized and illumined through the work of
thought. As the recognition of a deeper reality alters
the whole aspect of the world, so also it sets the world’s
development in a peculiar light. Experience teaches
us that the two realms of reality, as presented to us
in the forms of nature and of spiritual life respectively,
do not stand in a relationship which remains unaltered
through all the lapse of time ; they are not set side by
side in a timeless present ; but it seems as though the
life of nature must reach a certain climax of develop-
ment before spiritual life can manifest itself in our
experience. It would seem, indeed, that spiritual life
is a later development, and that the world gradually
progresses from one stage to another. But when we
speak of this progressive movement, we must never
imagine that the later stage is a mere product of the


86 THE MEANING AND VALUE OF LIFE


earlier. And for this reason—that, in becoming self-
conscious, reality becomes something essentially new ;
indeed, so radically new that it could never be under-
stood as a mere extension of nature, nor as proceeding
from a dispensation of mere sequences and coexistences.
But if this change really denote an influx of something
new and original in kind, then the progress of the world
is not merely a development, but a self-development.
The natural and the spiritual stages both fall within
an all-enveloping life whose very process of self-
development is to pass upward from the one to the
other, and so come into full realization within our
universe through the very impulse of its own movement.
This does not mean the sundering of nature from spirit,
so that they form two separate worlds, but it does
most emphatically mean that we must beware of
regarding them as running parallel to each other,
a view which necessitates our either subordinating—
nay, sacrificing—the spiritual to the natural, or
whittling both of them away into mere formal concep-
tions of the most abstract kind.

Once ‘we recognize the existence of these two stages
and the progressive character of the world’s move-
ment, we begin to see how peculiarly significant is the
part played in it by our human life. For this stands
at the junction of the two stages, at the point where
the one passes into the other. Nor is man merely
the theatre in which the drama is played out. His
own action is essential to the movement ; he plays,
indeed, a decisive part in it. But is it likely that he
would be able to co-operate in this world-conflict and
win for self-conscious reality due precedence over the
merely relational order, if the self-immediacy of reality


ATTEMPT AT RECONSTRUCTION 87


were not in some unqualified sense his own as well,
in some sense the inspiration of his own action ?
Surely, without going any farther, we may see that
man cannot lift himself above nature without freeing
himself from the finitude of his particular form of
existence, and recognizing the spiritual life, the self-
immediacy of reality, as the essence of his own nature.
We saw that absorption in the immediate environ-
ment failed to give life a content. Behind the exist-
ence that it offered us was ever a deep, unsatisfied
craving. It was a life of great emotional intensity,
but it lacked substance; and if the spiritual world
will supply this substance, it is there we shall have to
seek our true nature. The appeal thither is not an
endeavour to reach after something that is very far off,
but rather a turning to one’s self, an achieving of one’s
own nature. This achievement, even when viewed
from the standpoint of sense-experience, appears
arduous and never-ending ; and the difficulty of the
task must be considerably heightened by the recogni-
tion of the independence of the Spiritual Life. For
the recognition inevitably brings with it the sense
of a new responsibility. No longer may we limit our
care to this or that particular feature of life, but must
aim at a regeneration of our whole being, brace every
power to the work of redeeming our everyday life
from all that perplexes and disheartens it. But though
a high ideal is thus held before us, the ideal still lies
within our own sphere, and not without it. We realize
that the fundamental relation of our life does not
consist in a connection with any form of being external
to ourselves, but is rather the union with a spiritual
world which is one with our very substance. A


88 THE MEANING AND VALUE OF LIFE


peculiar type of life results inevitably from these
convictions, and, as we shall see, it is clearly marked
off from the types we have so far considered.

Thus man is himself a great problem. No closed
circle can shut his nature in. What is so characteristic
of him is in fact just this, that a special limited form
of being—the merely natural in him—comes into
contact with a life that is universal and supra-natural.
The result of this contact is to induce collision and
strife, and leave the whole life tense with conflicting
emotions. We all know well what a pervading unrest
takes possession of human life the moment it begins
to struggle free from nature.

The way in which our spiritual life develops illus-
trates very clearly this meeting of different worlds
in our experience. Spiritual truth cannot attract us
unless it come before us as our own, and not as some-
thing alien to us. In order to make effective appeal, it
must have its roots in our own nature, and subserve the
development of this nature. But at the same time
it looms aloft above all human frailty, and has, or at
least may have, the power to overrule all human ends.
On no other view can we explain the idea of duty, or
the ideals which animate all distinctively spiritual
work—the norms of our thought, for example, or the
canons of artistic creation. These standards exact
respect, and exercise a certain compulsion upon us,
though the compulsion is not from without, but has
its seat in our own nature. They show, too, how
distinct this nature is from the immediacy of natural
feeling. Spiritual values perform a similar function :
they sever themselves definitely from all considerations
of mere pleasure and utility. They are ours, and yet


ATTEMPT AT RECONSTRUCTION 89


more than ours. They lift us into another than the
merely human world, and at the same time they are
to us more inward and essential than aught alse can
possibly be. ;

It is this line of thought which first throws light on
the meaning of the self-criticism practised by man
both in dealing with his own experience and with the
larger world of history. In this latter domain self-
criticism has been assigned in modern times a very
important place, and unsparing use has been made of
it. Everything that has been unable to stand its
searching tests has been condemned as unsatisfactory
and unproved, and there has been a growing disposi-
tion, as in Kant, to apply it to life’s innermost structure.
But how can criticism transcend the very uncertain
status of mere subjective reasoning, how can it bring
anything new to birth if there be not implicit in man’s
nature certain standards ruling all mere caprice and
opinion, and possessing the capacity to test our work
and develop it still further ? We are forced to recognize
that here life comes to a parting of the ways. A new
ideal looms before it, a lofty goal which yet lies within
the sphere of our human life.

Thus arises division and manifold complication.
But it is precisely this division, together with the mark-
ing off of an Independent Spirituality, which makes it
possible to transcend that gulf between man and world
which is else so great a hindrance to all spiritual pro-
ductiveness. We have already convinced ourselves
that neither man nor world, taken in isolation, can
afford a steady and final] basis for life, and that we
must bring the two together. They cannot, however,
be brought together from the outside. They must be


90 THE MEANING AND VALUE OF LIFE


intrinsically related to each other. And this is im-
possible apart from the independence of the Spiritual
Life and its revelation in man. But granting this in-
dependence and this revelation, it follows that, on
being lifted to the spiritual level, we are transplanted
into a universal life which yet is not alien, but our own.
Thus the truths of the spiritual world can be realized
in our own experience ; we can be directly moved by
its inspiration. Conversely, all such action of ours as
proceeds from this higher level has a direct value for
the world, and effectively modifies its constitution.
We can be perfectly certain that our own progress con-
tributes to the general advancement. Our labours
and struggles have a significance which reaches beyond
our finite sphere : they affect the welfare of the whole.

We should naturally expect that this recognition of
a spiritual world in man, together with the demands
made upon us by the attempt to realize it, would bring
about very considerable changes in the picture we
form of our soul and its doings. But we are not here
concerned with following up these various changes.
We need only ask whether this recognition gives to life
that genuine uplifting apart from which it can have
neither meaning nor value, and whether, again, it can
be justified by the new light that it sheds on life and
the fresh springs of force that it unseals. For this,
and only this, can supply the positive proof of our main
thesis.


DEVELOPMENTS.


When we review our previous discussion, and con-
sider the evidence it affords of the unsatisfactory and
perplexing character of our life to-day, we are struck by


ATTEMPT AT RECONSTRUCTION gI


three points, which seem to call for further treatment.
We need a firm basis, a spiritual anchorage ; again, we
need initiative, capacity to originate and create ; and,
finally, we need a release from sordid motives: our
life must be great and magnanimous if it is to have
any meaning and value. Let us see whether a life
which springs from the recognition of an independent
spiritual world within us can fulfil these requirements
by making life firm, free, and heroic, and can fill the
emptiness of our heart with a rich and satisfying
content.


Attempt to Secure a Firm Basis for Life.


Our previous discussion as to basis and starting-
point has already familiarized us with the divisions and
doubts which distract our modern life. What the one
side proclaims as indisputable is contested by the other
with an equal fervour of conviction. The belief in an
invisible world, whether idealistic or religious, fell, we
saw, into discredit, whilst the trust in what is palpably
given to us here and now left us oscillating between
world and man—to alternate in the one case between
nature and intelligence, in the other between indivi-
dual and society. At the same time, this question of
starting-point is no mere formal matter. The choice
we make will decide the goal and the trend of our whole
endeavour—decide, too, what is to be of primary and
what of merely secondary importance. How pro-
foundly has the character of life been modified by the
change from the older to the newer way of thought,
the one making the world the starting-point for the
study of man, the other making man the starting-point
for the construction of a world! What a contrast there


92 THE MEANING AND VALUE OF LIFE


is between that more primitive life, with its richness
of sensuous colouring, its impulse to synthesize, its
ideals of artistic contemplation, and our own ruth-
less dissections of reality, our more acute analytical
spirit, our tendency to rest the whole structure of
reality on the laborious work of thought! Let us
not, then, undervalue the immense significance of this
problem.

The complications of the present day have made us
fully alive to the difficulty of our position. Unless we
are willing to be at the mercy of every chance impres-
sion, we must never cease to look to the stability of our
spiritual basis. But is there not a danger that this
stability may degenerate into something rigid and
immovable, unduly narrowing and restricting the
activities of life. And has not the teaching of history
rendered the two most obvious alternatives alike im-
possible? Modern thought, consciously championing
the claims of the Subject, and energetically developing
its potentialities, cannot possibly take the world as a
starting-point, while yet its own attempt to start from
the Subject or some central quality in it, such as
thought or moral action, is becoming daily less con-
vincing. Ifman is to be the fixed point we are to start
from in systematizing life and fashioning our concep-
tions of reality, then he must be himself the uncon-
tested centre of existence. If he is not this, then it is
a presumption to take him as the starting-point—a
presumption for which we shall soon pay the penalty
in an inadequate conception of life and a lack of con-
fidence in our own enterprise. Thus the customary
handling of the problem leaves us feebly vacillating
between the two solutions.


ATTEMPT AT RECONSTRUCTION 93


The recognition of an Independent Spiritual Life in
man opens up, however, a new mode of treatment,
The opposition of man and world is here, as we saw,
already overcome in principle. The movement of this
Spiritual Life can be at once the revelation of a world
and man’s own personal experience. And there is a
further gain in the fact that life now shifts its ground
to a domain that lies beyond the particular psychical
activities, and in this new field organizes itself indepen-
dently, and constitutes a universe of fact within itself.
It is, indeed, a point of fundamental importance that
life can thus take shape, and through its inclusive
activity include and transcend the oppositions of subject
and object. For thus we have a process whose con-
nections, activities, and aims are emphatically its own :
it constitutes a tissue of actuality which cannot origi-
nate from any merely human faculty, but is able to
assert itself as superior to our finitude. It is this,
primarily, that supplies the fundamental datum which
gives to our conviction and our striving a starting-point
and support—the manifestation, namely, within our
human experience of a self-contained, full-functioning
life such as we have described. It is this life which
serves as foundation for every form of spiritual activity
displayed by man. All spiritual effort, whether its
human agent know and desire it or otherwise, entails
a reversal of the existing situation, and a transference
of fulcrum to this same spiritual standpoint. Even
that direct denial of all spirituality which we find in
Materialism implicitly adopts this standpoint in its
very claim to be true.*


* Vide Appendix at end of volume.


94 THE MEANING AND VALUE OF LIFE


The Growth of Freedom and Initiative.


Freedom is essential if life is to have a meaning. It
must be possible to give a personal stamp to our
activity, and press forward to a life that is autonomous.
Otherwise our life is not wholly our own, but rather
something assigned to us by nature or by destiny,
something that transpires within us, but is in no sense
moulded by us. A half-alien experience of this kind,
a réle imposed on us from without, must ever leave us
inwardly indifferent to its claims, and our life would
labour under a paralyzing contradiction if that to
which we were cold and indifferent should succeed in
winning our whole energy, and becoming for us a matter
of personal responsibility.

But freedom, in the sense which concerns us here,
finds little favour with the modern mind. On all hands
we are told that the old problem is at last solved, that
man is nothing more than a piece of the cosmic
mechanism, and that only an inexact mind can dis-
cover in the machinery any loophole whatsoever for
freedom. Thus freedom is roundly rejected, and the
fact that life therewith loses its self-sufficiency and
intelligibility is either overlooked or treated with scant
regard to the importance of its effects.

Since, however, we are insisting on the intelligibility
of life, we cannot so lightly dispense with freedom,
and we are therefore bound to ask whether our proposed
treatment of the Spiritual Life does not set the problem
of freedom in a more favourable light. Now, we hold
that it certainly does this, and does it in a twofold way
—partly through establishing truth on a new basis,


ATTEMPT AT RECONSTRUCTION 95


and partly through the distinctive content of reality
which it reveals.

The main reason why freedom’s defenders seem to be
leading a forlorn hope is that science has presented us
with a picture of the world, a scheme of reality, in which
freedom is quite out of place. In particular, the
mechanico-causal conception of nature has been carried
over into human life and the experiences of the soul.
That such a conception leaves no room for freedom
and initiative cannot for one moment be doubted, but
whether it can justly be applied to the things of the
soul is open to very grave doubt indeed.

As a matter of fact, the true significance of the life-
process is not to be sought through any roundabout
reference to the external world. The decisive factors
are really the phenomena it exhibits and the demands
it makes in the course of its own development. If we
should find it displaying, at least on its highest levels,
a deep-rooted spontaneity and power of initiative,
then we should have to recognize this as a fundamental
fact, and relegate to a secondary position the further
question how to accommodate this fact with the chain
of causes and effects. Never should first things take
the second place ; never should the experiences of the
personal life be sacrificed to the demands of some par-
ticular theory. We need not trouble if our apprehen-
sion of reality is rendered less smooth and simple. How
can we be certain that the world must be constituted
in the exact way which happens to be most convenient
for our human thinking ? But this, at least, is obvious,
that whoever reduces the world to a mere chain of given
phenomena, thereby depriving it of its spontaneity, robs
it forthwith of all self-possession and all inwardness.


96 THE MEANING AND VALUE OF LIFE


As regards life’s content, while we recognize an In-
dependent Spiritual Power as the basis of reality, we no
longer conceive this basis as an immovable and un-
approachable background to all our activities, but
rather as a self-containing, self-developing life, a life
in which we may ourselves win a share, and, so far as
we do so, bring our own life on to the same level of self-
initiating, free activity. Now, the result of recognizing
the Spiritual Life as independent is that we remove it
farther from man in his present actual state, and pre-
sent it to him as a goal difficult of attainment ; but at
the same time he exerts himself more strenuously,.
achieves more in regard to it, and it becomes clear
that all truly spiritual activity involves a recognition
and appropriation of the spiritual world, and therewith
also an act of personal decision. This decision is not
the mere occasional outcome of deliberate reflection :
it is concerned with the spiritual world as a whole
rather than with any particular part of it. Thus it
influences and affects our whole life. In every genuine
manifestation of spiritual power that we experience
there is involved this recognition, appropriation, and
therewith decision. There is no better attestation of
this than the fierce struggle which throughout history
it has been incumbent upon man to wage for the pre-
servation and cultivation of the spiritual life. The
struggle still persists, and invades even the life of the
individual. Everywhere we see a clear line of division
between a spirituality which is but an external accessory
and one which is absolutely our very life. But it can be
our own life only in virtue of our own deed and decision,
our at-one-ment with the Spiritual Life, our consecration
thereto of all the self-regarding instincts of our nature.


ATTEMPT AT RECONSTRUCTION 97


It is this appropriation—we might almost say per-
sonalization—of the Spiritual Life that first awakens
within the soul an inward certitude, and makes
possible that perfect freedom and spontaneity of self-
expression so indispensable for every great creative
work which advances and revolutionizes mankind.
Such advance is never to be won from a spiritual
activity of the instinctive, conventional, limited kind
with which we are familiar in our everyday experience.
The freedom or spontaneity of which we speak is
not something that can be won in a moment, shared
with others, stored up for succeeding generations.
Each individual must strive, through the whole course
of his life, to appropriate it afresh, and express it in
all its systematic bearings. It is such endeavour as
this which raises life to something more than a mere
succession of fleeting moments. For it is not true in
the spiritual as it is in the natural world that that
which once is persists until it be subjected to change
from without. Rather does it sink and fall as the soul
of man is withdrawn from it, and ceases from its con-
stant work of renewal and reinspiration. For even
though its outer form persist, it cannot then fail to
degenerate into mere mechanical custom, into hollow,
half-hearted routine. Thus all genuine spirituality in-
volves an achievement—an achievement in which the
whole life is engaged. Life, from this point of view, is
no mere unwinding of thread from a reel; it is a con-
stant introducing of new material, a process of incessant
creation.

It is this truth which first enables us to rightly
understand the developing life of humanity and of the
individual. Such life is no mere evolution in the


7


98 THE MEANING AND VALUE OF LIFE


sense that the later event grows surely and inevitably
out of the earlier. On the contrary, the gains of the
past and its contributions to the present are, spiritually
considered, nothing more than possibilities, whose
actualization waits upon our own decision and initia-
tive. Otherwise there would be no real present.

Further evidence of man’s free appropriation of the
Spiritual Life and his inner at-one-ment with it is con-
spicuously present in the fact that its development in
our midst is conditional on his own work. Nothing
links him more closely with that life, leading him to
find his very self in it, than the trouble and care, the
pain and sacrifice, which this labour requires of him.
However certain it be that the basis of man’s work
must be laid within a spiritual Over-life, yet the precise
form which it takes must be determined by his own
struggle. His effort is not something reared like a
pyramid upon a given foundation. It does not rise
up undisturbed, never deviating from a certain pre-
scribed direction. For doubt is ever attacking the
foundations afresh, and confusing even the main bear-
ings. We must, then, be constantly reaffirming the
spiritual character of our life: the situation in which
we find ourselves to-day shows this very clearly.

And similarly with the life of the individual. Only
Naturalism can treat individuality as a fixed and given
quantum, all whose relations are external. Speaking
truly, the attainment of a spiritual individuality con-
stitutes a lofty goal, only to be compassed by much
effort, and usually, too, by much self-reformation and
self-discipline. No one can embark on work such as
this until he recognizes and fully acknowledges the
distinctive quality of his own spiritual nature, a


ATTEMPT AT RECONSTRUCTION — 99


recognition which, far from being a mere intellectual
assent, involves a decision as such—nay, a self-affirma-
tion, an action in which the whole personality is
operative.

These movements do not, indeed, obtrude themselves
upon the casual observer, but they are none the less in-
wardly present and active. Moreover, the recognition of
the independence of the Spiritual Life gives to all effort
in this direction cohesion and strength. For with the
recognition there looms up a great opposition affecting
every department of our life. The universe presents
itself in man variously sundered and graded. It becomes
all-important to shift upward the centre of gravity in
his life, thereby enabling him to co-operate in the
construction of the universe. Without man’s partici-
pation and decision, the movement at his particular
point can make no further progress. What could be
better calculated to give his life meaning and value
than this possibility of rising to a level of spiritual
freedom, to a life which, in the very act of consolidating
itself, allows him to share in the fruition and develop-
ment of the whole of reality ?.


The Subdual of the Natural Man.


That the Spiritual Life should be in direct touch with
man, and make direct appeal to his faculties and
feelings, is an old and insistent demand. Now, if this
life contained nothing beyond the limits of our human
apprehension, we should then be debarred from all
chance of inward growth. Spiritual goods and spiritual
aims could affect us only in so far as they contributed
to our material well-being, and in being thus trans-

7-2


too THE MEANING AND VALUE OF LIFE


formed they would be virtually destroyed. Thus at
all times and everywhere, where there has been a con-
sciousness of the limitations and inadequacies of the
merely natural standpoint, there has been at the same
time an ardent endeavour to escape from these limita-
tions, and reach forward to some life that transcends
them. The clearest illustration of such an endeavour
is afforded by religion in its more mystical aspect. To
the mystics it seemed that an endless field of blessed-
ness would open out if once the conventionalities of
the human order should be caught up into the dis-
solving tide of a Divine Life. But even the region of
modern research can show a similar tendency. The
very foremost thinkers have sought to carry life onward
to some point where its truth should be independent
of man, and valid even in his despite. Some have
sought this culminating point in thought, in the neces-
sary self-development of a thought which is itself the
source and motive of its own progress. Kant, on the
other hand, believed that it was in moral action that
we must seek that which was free from specific human
limitations, and at the same time common to all rational
beings. Thus the endeavour to transcend the merely
natural standpoint at once witnesses to a need of our
nature, and is embodied in definite historical move-
ments.

But all efforts in this direction have met with in-
surmountable difficulties in the attempt to draw a line
of division between the merely natural and that which
claimed to be supernatural. This higher goal of our
aspiration was not fixed with sufficient clearness, nor
was sufficient precaution taken to prevent the confusion
of higher and lower. We have run some risk of not


ATTEMPT AT RECONSTRUCTION IOI


really transcending the natural, but of merely extend-
ing its borders indefinitely without effecting any
inward transformation. Now, to combat this danger
two things are essential : firstly, the spiritual must not
be an attribute, however exalted, of a different order
of life. It must have a life of its own, sufficient unto
itself. And, secondly, it must be somehow possible
that this new life should be immediately present in
man as his very life and being. Otherwise it can be no
more to him than just a means to an alien end.

Now, these requirements, which alone can insure
the success of our main endeavour, are met through
the recognition of an Independent Spiritual Life and
its revelation in man. We have now to show that we are
here concerned with no mere verbal transformation, but
with a change that affects the very heart of the matter.

In the first place, it is only through such recognition
that we can furnish life with a fresh centre of im-
mediacy, thereby revolutionizing our fundamental idea
of reality. , For this direct unfolding of the Spiritual
Life in man inevitably stamps it as that which is most
primary and immediate, as the true basis of life. All
that has hitherto been considered most immediate, as
the world of sense or even the world of society, now
takes a second place, and has to make good its claim
before this spiritual tribunal. In other words, that
which current conceptions treat as a Beyond that must
be proved and justified by reference to the sense-world
is now the only world which exists in its own right,
the only true and genuine world which neither asks
nor consents to be derived from any outside source.
That such a revolution always ensues whenever the
spiritual comes to its own, that the spiritual derives


102 THE MEANING AND VALUE OF LIFE


from a higher source than the co-existences of the sense-
world, that even the materialist must take up this
higher ground if ever he attempt to formulate his yiews
in a logical way—all this could be shown without diffi-
culty. But it is scarcely necessary in view of all our
previous discussion, and we may content ourselves with
insisting that the development of spiritual life within
the human order involves a complete transformation of
values. The course of historical development shows
us sense-immediacy constantly yielding more and more
of its supremacy to a spiritual immediacy; the out-
ward life is lived and viewed from the standpoint of
the inward, and not vice versa. The Ptolemaic centre
is replaced by the Copernican.

But at the same time—and this is all-important for
the shaping of life—it at last becomes possible to dis-
tinguish between the truly spiritual and the merely
natural, and thereby to translate a vague general im-
pulse into definite fruitful work. While the merely
natural agent, even when concerned with spiritual
tasks, cannot escape from the opposition of subject and
world, psychical state and its objective environment,
so that he moves to and fro within these limitations
without achieving any real progress, the Spiritual Life,
on the other hand, envelops this opposition, and, in
the fulness of creative power, can enrich life with a
content which reveals itself in and through the psy-
chical functions of thought, feeling, and will, though
it can never by any possibility originate in these func-
tions. Wherever we find this spiritual content, this
further development of the life-process, the revelation
of a self-existent reality, there we pass beyond the
limits of the merely natural world, and the essential


ATTEMPT AT RECONSTRUCTION 103


features of the Spiritual Life may also become man’s
own. The creative power which draws its inspiration
from the very substance of truth itself, and from out
the totality of the spiritual world, can now reveal itself
directly in man, and lift his life on to an immeasurably
higher plane. The movements, struggles, experiences
of the Spiritual Life all become his intimate concern,
though this, of course, is only true when he attains a
certain excellence which raises him well above the level
of mediocrity.

And the change which thus becomes possible, even
though the possibility remain unactualized, should
nowhere be more easily discernible than in the sphere
of religion. For here there is a clear distinction
between a merely humanistic religion and a religion of
the Spiritual Life, between a religion which promises
permanent happiness to man without exacting any
essential change of nature, and a religion which offers
a unique revelation of the Spiritual Life, brings in new
elements and new values, and effects a radical change
in man. Indeed, a religion of the restrictedly human-
istic kind, though it include the whole field of finite
relationships, is quite unworthy of the name. Such
elements of religion as it possesses are only a prelude
or a result of the real religion whose aim it is, by a
regression upon what is deepest and most ultimate,
to secure the preservation and triumph of the Spiritual
Life. Only so has religion won an independent stand-
ing and the power to raise the inward level of life,
whereas the abandonment of this spiritual basis always
brings on her the loss of her distinctive content and of
all claim to an existence in her own right. On the
other hand, through firmly adhering to this basis,


104 THE MEANING AND VALUE OF LIFE


religion, far from supporting man in his narrow finite
outlook, permeates his life with the eternal and in-
finite perfection of the Divine Life, lifts him on to an
immeasurably higher level, and profoundly revolution-
izes his nature.

And similarly with the other spheres of spiritual
labour. Their incorporation within an Independent
Spiritual Life does not merely serve to develop them
in some specific direction, but first constitutes them
as independent formations. For example, when justice
is considered as a mere means for securing man’s wel-
fare, and is treated accordingly—whether it be the
welfare of individuals or of society as a whole makes
no essential difference—it loses all its characteristic
features. No longer can it compel us to see life from
its own standpoint ; no longer can it change the existing
condition of things ; no longer can it sway our hearts
with the force of a primitive passion, and oppose to all
consideration of consequences an irresistible spiritual
compulsion. It degenerates rather into the complai-
sant servant of utility ; it adapts itself to her demands,
and in so doing suffers inward annihilation. It can
maintain itself only when it comes as a unique revela-
tion of the Spiritual Life within our human world, as
a lofty Presence transcending all considerations of
expediency. Then, and not till then, will it spiritually
ennoble the man who makes it his own.

And what is true of the individual spheres of labour
holds good also for the work of civilization taken as a
whole. No civilization can preach a really new gospel
and win the full allegiance of man’s soul, unless in the
face of the given Order of things it can insist on the
necessity of a new Order already present to faith and


ATTEMPT AT RECONSTRUCTION 105


hope, and destined to rouse the age from its lethargy.
Every civilized form of life demands from its members
the exercise of a self-determining activity, but such self-
determination is not possible unless our human en-
deavour find a fresh source of inspiration in the depths
of anew life. Thus we must distinguish between civili-
zations according as they are dominated by spiritual
or by natural values. It is only as a characteristic
expression of the Spiritual Life that civilization can
have any inward coherence, clear meaning, and con-
trolling purpose, that it can really make man anew,
and counteract all the pettiness and perversity that on
man’s side are so apt to cling to every development of
human culture. Thus our specifically modern civiliza-
tion demands an infinite, underived, independent Life.
But where do our human relationships show us such a
Life? Surely nothing but faith in a transcendent
spiritual necessity and the vivid inward realization of
this necessity could produce the mighty movement
which such demands have given birth to. Now, no
movement can bear us resistlessly along, unless it rid
us of some intolerable contradiction which arises only
when a new Power that merits the ascendancy comes
into collision with some older rival that cannot authen-
ticate its claim. What we need, then, is that the New
should reveal an overmastering, compelling force—a
force which it can never win from the natural man.
This recognition of an authoritative Over-life raises
the spiritual level of the social order : it enables us to
feel our connection with a cosmic life, to make it our
own, and thus leave far behind the lowliness of our
beginnings.

A similar cleavage, schism, and transcendence char-


106 THE MEANING AND VALUE OF LIFE


acterizes also the individual life. So long as there is a
confused welter of higher and lower impulses, so long
as factors such as personality and individuality do not
imply anything unique in kind, but only reinforce and
strengthen the natural instincts, so long is there an
absence of anything essentially new and lofty, and the
movement lacks all regenerative force. This it can
have only if it possess a unique and distinctive content,
to be won only through connection with a spiritual
world. But in so far as this connection is effected,
that world becomes present in man—nay, his very
life. Here, at least, the old level is unmistakably
transcended.

This line of thought is in direct antagonism to that
which rests all hope of salvation on a peaceful progres-
sion, a development little by little. We are not here
concerned with the relevancy which this idea of gradual
development may have in our theories of world-genesis,
or even within certain regions of our own human life.
But wherever we are concerned with life as a whole and
with the main lines of its progress, then this idea must
be emphatically rejected as a treacherous excuse for
laziness, 4s merely obscuring the problem or softening
down the sharpness of the issues. For it does not suit
the special circumstances in which man finds himself.
He is the meeting-point of various stages of reality :
his higher aspiration is at the outset very sluggish and
vague. If it is to attain greater vigour and precision,
it must begin by defining itself clearly and becoming
strong and concentrated, as it cannot be apart from
the indwelling of a Spiritual Life. The nucleus must
be well developed before it can exercise any active
influence at life’s circumference, attract to itself


ATTEMPT AT RECONSTRUCTION 107


kindred material, bring together scattered elements,
recognize the lower for what it is, and grapple boldly
with opposing forces. It is only such schisms and
antagonistic reactions that make life strong and in-
wardly alive, that stamp it once and for all as spiritual,
not merely natural, and give it completely into our
own possession. This process of trenchant distinction,
however, always involves a recognition of the indepen-
dence of the Spiritual Life. Without this, man’s own
spiritual strivings would remain isolated, and could
never constitute in turn an independent starting-point,
and allow him to appropriate to himself all the unfold-
ing possibilities and experiences of the Spiritual Life.
Now, this severance of the spiritual from the natural
constitutes an endless task, not only for life as a
whole, but also for each of its various departments.
All along the line a fierce struggle develops between a
genuine idealistic culture which effectively widens and
deepens the life-process, and a merely humanistic
culture which brings everything back to man’s welfare
and comfort, and in so doing inevitably falls a prey to
an inward emptiness. Even such genuine spirituality
as humanity may attain to will not persist merely in
virtue of its actual existence, but declines the moment
it ceases to be re-created, and, in particular, is then
liable to be drawn into the sphere of our natural in-
terests, there to suffer amalgamation and disfigure-
ment. It may well be that certain traces of its former
activity should linger on, making it easier to rekindle
than it otherwise would have been; but even so the
Spiritual Life is no quiet, assured possession ; it calls
for constant renewal and incessant labour. But it is
well worth the trouble and toil of winning, inasmuch as


108 THE MEANING AND VALUE OF LIFE


it frees man from the narrow limitations of the natural
ego without thereby dissipating him into the Infinite.
By sharing in the spiritual world, in the self-immediacy
of reality, he becomes possessed of an infinite self,
while yet his life’s activities assume a more and more
positive direction. Remaining in his own sphere, he
is yet in direct possession of a world of which he feels
himself to be part-builder. The Infinite, which for
mysticism was a matter of mere feeling, and could not
therefore be wrought deep enough into the very sub-
stance of life, has now become the motive-force of
labour, and can extend its revolutionary activity in
every direction.

As an example of the way in which it transforms
life, penetrating its innermost structure, let us consider
very briefly the case of morality. So long as the
Spiritual Life does not count as being man’s true self,
so long will the regulations it imposes on his conduct
be regarded as laws emanating from a superior Power—
laws to which we may give our reverence, but never
our heartfelt love and entire devotion. Where, how-
ever, there is no inner glow, our action will fall short
of its highest attainment. All such morality is likely
to be regulative rather than productive. It may be
ready, when the challenge comes, for duty, but it will
not be zealously concerned to search out new tasks,
reach forward into the Unknown, and use its best
effort to promote the interests of a spiritual kingdom.
Such forward action is possible only when those in-
terests are felt to be our own personal concern, when
those laws become the expression of our own life, and
the action itself has all the assurance and joyous-
ness which characterize a process of self-preservation.


ATTEMPT AT RECONSTRUCTION 109


Then, and then only, can love associate with reverence
without injuring her authority. For we are always
left with something higher than ourselves, inasmuch as
the new self is never man’s work only, but must rest
on a sustaining infinite life. :


A broader and nobler view of human life is at length
opened up. Before us we have tasks and toils without
number. Yet, various as these are, they stand in close
relation to each other, and hold out to the labourer a
sure reward. Before, however, we can indulge such
hopes, we have still a doubt to reckon with, and this
doubt, when considered in all its bearings, calls into
question once more the whole result we have so far
reached. Ifa true spirituality is so vastly superior to
all that is merely natural, then are we not struck more
forcibly than ever by the fact that the ordinary human
life, down to what is most primitive in it, clings stolidly
to the very position which the more aspiring view that
sighs to be freed from human littleness has rejected as
totally inadequate? Does not that which we would
fain overcome maintain its old resistless authority, and
threaten to degrade our soaring aspiration to a mere
vague hope and longing ?

There seems to be a radical opposition between that
which the idea of the Spiritual Life asks of us and that
which, as finite beings, we are capable of supplying.
The Spiritual Life demands a complete, inclusive
activity transcending the opposition between subject
and world, inward feeling and outward fact. Our
merely psychical life, however, is at the mercy of this
opposition. The Spiritual Life constitutes an aill-
embracing whole, whereas humanity is split up into


110 THE MEANING AND VALUE OF LIFE


isolated units ; and the necessities of self-preservation,
no less than the exigencies of social intercourse, force
us to maintain and emphasize this isolation. The
Spiritual Life proclaims its content, its truth, as time-
lessly valid, whereas man’s career begins and ends in
time. His life, and the claims which his life makes
upon him, are constantly changing. This conflict over
fundamentals affects the whole field of life, and the
most distracting feature of the situation is that we
cannot hope to recast these fundamentals.

But though we may not be able to remove the opposi-
tions, yet there may be a means of counteracting them.
Indeed, a glance at the collective experience of man-
kind is sufficient to show that such a process of counter-
action is operative in every department of human
existence, and far beyond the knowledge and will of
man. Everywhere we witness the spiritual ascent of
life. What was originally undertaken at the bidding of
necessity, or from the natural impulse to self-preserva-
tion, becomes transformed and ennobled as life pro-
gresses. Mere juxtaposition passes into organic con-
nection. That which was at first a mere means
acquires a value for its own sake. The past is reinter-
preted in a new light, and an impulse is thereby given to
further progress. Amid all the unsatisfactoriness of
human relationships, the Spiritual Life gains ground
and becomes able to further its own ends in face of all
opposition.

Again, throughout our human relationships we can
trace life’s gradual emancipation from the native
selfishness which at first dictates all its activities: it
is love and work that furnish the most conspicuous
examples of this liberating movement, love showing


ATTEMPT AT RECONSTRUCTION I1I


how it changes our attitude to our fellow-men ; work,
how it changes our attitude to the world of objects.
Who can deny that love is rooted in natural instinct,
or underestimate the permanent significance of such
instinct? Yet this instinct becomes totally trans-
formed when the object of love acquires a value for its
own sake, when the desire for the loved one’s welfare
can directly inspire our striving, and our native selfish-
ness gives way before the call to  self-surrender.
Already in Aristotle we find a description of how even
in the lower type of man there is something divine at
work which exalts him above himself. And similarly
with work. We take up work in the first instance in
the interest of our own self-preservation, and no one
can blame us if we demand a wage for it, and appraise
it, to begin with, entirely by its productiveness. But
we all know that the matter does not end there. Little
by little, work becomes precious to us for its own
sake: it builds up certain spiritual connections which
resist the whim and fancy of the worker ; it renders us
capable of great toil and sacrifice ; it becomes a power
in us, making for progress. In love and work we have
a merely outward contact transformed into an inward
relation, and at the same time a subordination of mere
pleasure and use to the higher spiritual interests.

A similar transference of impulse and energy from
the natural to-the spiritual plane holds good for the
whole of human life. We see it in the experiences and
events that go to the formation of an individuality.
Here we start with an individual nature which contains,
indeed, certain spiritual elements, but has, as yet, no
true spiritual character. To maintain and elaborate
this individual nature is in accordance with our natural


112 THE MEANING AND VALUE OF LIFE


impu.se to self-preservation. Itis a task which appeals
to our feelings and evokes our energies. But the
movement, once begun, is prone to lead us far beyond
the point where it originated. Those scattered spiri-
tual elements begin to cohere and exercise a collective
influence. Our aspiration is thus able to detach itself
from the interests of a narrow individualism—nay,
even act in opposition to them. An organized spiritual
realm defines itself ever more clearly, and becomes
ever more capable of inspiring a zealous spirit of work
and sacrifice.

Moreover, this movement from lower to higher levels
may be traced, not only in the individual, but in
humanity as a whole—as, for example, in the progress
of human fellowship. In the first instance, it is
external contact and the pressure of the struggle for
existence which bring men together in larger or smaller
groups. But the outward relation is continually pass-
ing into an inner fellowship. The common experience
~—common struggles, successes and sorrows—issues in a
common standard of good, a common goal, a common
sphere of interest which gives stability to the individual
at the same time as it controls his selfishness. Thus
here, too, we see unmistakable evidence of a progress
towards nobler and higher things.

A movement such as we have been describing finds
a notable and peculiarly important expression in the
shaping of a spiritual history. Here we have a tran-
scendence of the sharp opposition which otherwise
exists between the temporal and the eternal. The
truth of the Spiritual Life requires that it should be
superior to time, whereas we find man existing in
time and subject to continual change. Now, however,


ATTEMPT AT RECONSTRUCTION 113


a history of a new and distinctive kind unfolds itself in
man’s experience, and marks him off from all merely
natural beings. He is not obliged to let the tide of
events sweep over him unresisted; he can exert a
counter-force ; he can sift the abiding from the perish-
able, the spiritual from the merely natural, and claim
an ever larger share in that which is not temporal but
eternal. It is, of course, chiefly in those periods which
constitute the high-water mark of human achievement
that there has been a successful attempt to soar upward
through all that is temporal and human to a truth that
endures. And yet, however tenaciously we would hold
to that which the so-called classical ages have pro-
nounced imperishable, we would at the same time seek
to universalize the distinction which they draw, by
tracing in every period a similar distinction between
that which is the mere product of the age and that
which, as supplying life with a content unimpaired by
time, can continue to be effective through all ages of
the world’s history. In this way history becomes the
revelation of a spiritual world, which it keeps vividly
before us despite all the recalcitrancy of immediate
conditions. Moreover, the uplevelling of life thereby
secured is often achieved in opposition to man’s
own will and reason. For his effort is directed in the
first instance to production in time, to winning happi-
ness and success in the present. But his work cannot
advance without at the same time reaching back
into the depths of the Spiritual Life and quickening
them anew. Thus something comes into being which
oversteps the limits of a special epoch, and is able
to maintain itself in perpetuity. Not only is there
always at least some trace, some evidence, of such a


8


114 THE MEANING AND VALUE OF LIFE


time-defying element, but even as a whole it can always
be kindled into life again, and made reéally effective.
Especially is this possible in the case of a movement
which has been successful in radically changing the
whole drift of life. Once let such a movement become
widely influential, and everything that remains outside
it stamps itself as retrograde. How dare we, for ex-
ample, renounce the modern scientific way of thinking,
with its sharpened distinction of world from man, and
its insistence on analysis and criticism ? Is it possible
for us to ignore the fact that the spiritual work of our
own time has resulted in the formation of complex
structures which are far more independent than ever
before? Is it not also true that in producing these
structures it has itself become still further detached
from the immediacies of the psychical life? Can we
dispute the growth of a distinctively scientific temper,
the spread of historical and sociological methods ? Can
we escape these influences ? It is surely obvious that in
movements of this kind we are lifted far above the
caprice of individual thinkers, far above the fluctua-
tions of the passing moment. What we are witnessing
therein is nothing less than the evolution of the Spiritual
Life fulfilling itself through the ages—an evolution
which can also become intimately our own. It is this
evolution which makes it possible for us to oppose
to the merely momentary present a present which
includes all time, and contains within itself whatever
is permanently valuable in human achievement. The
position thus attained supplies the standard for all
time-valuations, and whatever contradicts the position
or ignores it has no chance of exerting any deep and
abiding influence. However true it be that such a


ATTEMPT AT RECONSTRUCTION 115


position cannot compel our allegiance, none the less,
like all spiritual Reality, it calls for recognition and
personal appropriation. It is impossible to deny that
this fashioning of an esoteric history within thé very
time-process itself opens up the possibility of a tran-
scendence of time. This spiritual history becomes a
mediator between the temporal which conditions our
merely human existence and the eternal present which
the Spiritual Life demands.

We conclude, then, that even within the sphere of
human relations the Spiritual Life is actively at work,
and exercises a fertilizing influence over the whole field
of human life. All our dealings with our fellow-men,
all creative activities, whether of the individual or of
mankind as a whole, imply confidence in this ascent
of the Spiritual Life. The very fact that the move-
ment persists amid all obstacles, never slackening or
desponding, may itself serve as sure evidence that we
have here to do with a Power which acts independently
of all human caprice.

Thus the Greek thinkers had some ground for their
assertion that inherent in the lower was a craving for
the higher, an upward movement of love in the uni-
verse. But wherever the peculiar character of the
Spiritual Life is fully recognized, this movement must
be understood as no mere product of the natural and the
given—no evolution in this sense—but rather as the
effective working of a higher spiritual power. It would
be impossible for nature to achieve all she does were
she not sustained and animated by some deeper-lying
reality.

Nay, more, the links that mediate between the two
show that natural and spiritual alike belong, in last

8—2


116 THE MEANING AND VALUE OF LIFE


resort, to one and the same world, and that there is a
Whole transcending all difference, and éven all opposi-
tion. But no softening of the opposition should blind
us to the fact that for us the Spiritual Life can only
embody itself in an existential form which is not really
adapted to it, so that here it can never be quite free
from contradiction. Here the spiritual world is forced
to unfold itself in an alien environment which holds us
so that we cannot escape from it. All our spiritual
achievement is to this extent incomplete: there is
always something symbolic in our way of expressing
the Spiritual Life. That unfathomable infinite whose
spiritual character is first recognized in our human
experience can never reveal itself freely and fully under
the limitations of our earthly existence. But though
this conflict between the substance and the existential
form of the Spiritual Life may well show us how
strange is this human life of ours, how variously con-
ditioned, how manifestly incomplete, yet it by no means
resolves that life into mere vague hope and idle aspira-
tion. For this substance is not something alien to us,
which we may worship only at a distance: it is rather
that in which we can: recognize our own true self, the
innermost essence of our life; that which furnishes us
with the starting-point whence to embark on a crusade
against all forms of imperfection. We do not only mix
in the struggle, we survey it from a point above; and
through making the most of our vantage-ground we can
give life an inward security and joy. Undeterred by
any obstacle, we can confidently move forward in our
endeavour to lift humanity above all that belittles it.


ATTEMPT AT RECONSTRUCTION 117


DISCUSSION OF DoUBTS AND DIFFICULTIES.


The main object of our previous discussion has been
to vindicate the claims of the Spiritual Life, and to
show forth its intrinsic capacity to triumph over every
obstacle which meets it in its own domain. But so far
we have not considered how it stands related to the
problem of human experience. And yet it is precisely
this relation which begets deep-rooted doubts both as to
the validity of the claims put forth for the Spiritual
Life, and as to the soundness of the conviction based
upon these claims that the Life of the Spirit is worth
the living. Men have discovered that that which they
cherish as their supreme good, the Power which ex-
tracts from their deepest devotion the fullest measure
of labour and self-sacrifice, seems itself utterly power-
less to direct the movement of the world ; and it is
this simple perception which from time immemorial
has excited their concern and dismay, and driven them
not infrequently to despair. Nature, it is seen, rides
roughshod over all spiritual aspiration, and Fate herself
makes no distinction between good and evil: we look,
but can trace no sign of any Order of Justice or King-
dom of Love. And even in the strictly human sphere
the Spiritual Life has no firm footing or assured supre-
macy, but, shamefully abused, plays a purely sub-
sidiary réle as the mere organ of private or party
interests. And, last and worst, we see the Spiritual
Life itself split up into warring sects, and so grievously
divided against itself that every collective effort that
it makes is crippled at its source. Now, all these mani-
festations of the Spiritual display it as a by-product of


118 THE MEANING AND VALUE OF LIFE


the world’s evolution ; and how, we ask, can that con-
trol our life and give it a real meaning ”

These, then, are the difficulties which the world
impresses on us. Are we prepared to deny their force,
or to dismiss them as negligible accidents? How
should we do this? Does not the whole trend of our
exposition tend rather to reinforce such considerations,
to give them an added weight ? Once we have grasped
the fact that the Spiritual Life is a cosmic power open-
ing up new depths of reality, and bringing reality to
self-realization, we naturally expect—nay, demand—
that a process so universal in its drift shall show itself
superior to all other movements, draw them all into its
service, press forward along well-defined lines of its
own, lightly thwarting all obstructions, human or
material, and yet the while controlling the manifold
divergences of things, and guiding them all towards
acommon goal. Thus, as we view the puzzle from our
own philosophical standpoint, it grows more baffling
than before : far from having solved the mystery, we
have but wrapped it in deeper gloom.

But what, after all, does this conviction amount to ?
It would be destructive and disastrous in its conse-
quences only if it compelled us to abandon those con-
clusions in respect of the Spiritual Life which emerged
from the previous course of our inquiry, and so forced
us to retract our admission that the depths of reality
were to be found within that Life. But this it cannot
do. Only on one condition could it have possessed
this power over our judgment; on this condition,
namely, that the fortunes of the Spiritual Life within
the world of human experience had proved decisive as
fo its ultimate nature and mode of manifestation, that


ATTEMPT AT RECONSTRUCTION 119g


we had no primal and ultimate world of fact wherewith
to confront our impressions from experience, and had
been obliged to rest the certainties of the inner life upon
the witness of the world outside us. If we see ourselves
only as the world presents us, and place no greater
value on our life than the world can approve, then
doubt must triumph : the verdict of things as they are
must prove inwardly destructive of every vital impulse
that we have. But let us not forget the dominating
idea of this whole investigation—an idea which voices
the profoundest tendency, not only of these modern
days, but of the whole movement of civilization—the
view, namely, that life cannot develop from without
inwards, but must grow outwards from within, and
that the most elemental facts of all, those that domi-
nate all others, and set the standard of true actuality,
do not come to us from our environment, but originate
within our own experience. Prior to all the experi-
ence of individual lives is the vital movement within
which their very being is grounded and continuously
upheld. Even the scission of subject and world is but
a cleft within this all-encompassing life-process which
alone has power to organize into a coherent whole the
scattered impressions of our sensibility, and establish
them as a world of objects over against the flux of
our purely subjective experience.

Now, a closer scrutiny into the essentials of this life-
process has revealed immanent within it a movement
of a unique kind, through whose activity a new life is
brought in, different in kind from the life that is ordered
by the succession of natural events. Nor did we ap-
prehend this movement as a series of detached occur-
rences, but as a main tendency set steadily in one direc-


120 THE MEANING AND VALUE OF LIFE


tion, gathering the manifoldness of things into a single
characteristic whole. It was not in mere hints and
glimpses, shadow-pictures of a more real world beyond
it, that we had sight of this new life : the work of self-
realization which we witnessed was the reality itself ;
and it was in and through this work of self-discovery
that reality established its own foundations of belief.
Life did not here depend upon knowledge. On the
contrary, knowledge took its own distinctive form from
the principle of synthesis which, in unifying the life,
gave it its characteristic quality. This fundamental
fact—the fact that an Independent Spiritual Life
springs up thus within us—cannot be controverted by
citing the ways of a refractory world, however terrible
these ways may be. They may indeed convince us
that the world’s condition does not answer to the re-
quirements of the Spiritual Life, and may compel us
to judge in no favourable light the condition of the
world and the state of mankind. They may also pre-
scribe fresh tasks for our attention, but never can they
cast the shadow of a doubt upon the bed-rock of fact
already referred to ; they can but set it in sharper relief,
and, by the very contradictions which they raise,
define it still more clearly. And yet, strictly as we
maintain the universality and incontrovertible cer-
tainty of this fundamental fact, much as we deprecate
its reduction to a mere matter of subjective taste, we
hold that its power to convince either an individual
or an age comes only through the clear consciousness
and forceful unfolding of its own spiritual resources.
Where there is no such spiritual content, wherever life,
inwardly rent asunder, can no longer bring an elemental
might to bear upon the resistent forces of the world,


ATTEMPT AT RECONSTRUCTION 121


there the world triumphs, doubt and unbelief stand out
invincible, and it is idle to speak of the meaning of
life.

If we turn to the witness of history, we find that the
power of faith over worldliness may be measured by the
steadfastness of its spiritual insight. The early Chris-
tians, for instance, had to face the full force of a dark
and hostile world, which yet proved powerless against
them ; for their faith was sustained by an inner com-
pulsion mighty to steer them through every evil. On
the other hand, there are epochs illustrious in the*story
of our race—epochs of extraordinary vitality and
power—which yet ended in scepticism because they
failed to grasp their destiny as a whole, and never
reached down to the eternal in themselves. The vic-
tory over doubt is not won through mere reflection,
but through the inward shaping of life itself. Were
our life not so weak and so empty, our doubts would
not depress us as they do. One thing alone can save
us from their power to-day—namely, a rejuvenation of
the inner life.

But though we may not yield at any point to the
hostile pressure of the world, we cannot just set it
aside and pursue our way as though nothing were
amiss. For the Spiritual Life, as we conceive and de-
fend it, is no mere department of our being, no mere
haven of refuge wherein, weary of noise and toil, we
may immure ourselves securely ; it is its very nature,
rather, to claim the lordship of all reality, nor can it
abandon this claim, or its right to maintain it against
resistance, without losing vitality and becoming more
and more narrow and subjective. But if the claim
and the right to defend it are maintained, the meaning


122 THE MEANING AND VALUE OF LIFE


of life will be changed, and its problem require
fresh formulation. Once it is recognized that reason,
by the very necessity of its nature, must triumph in
its own way, and yet that this world of ours is not the
stage on which this triumph can be won, it will be
clear that our world is not the whole of reality, that it:
is but a mere section of it, a ground upon which we
may indeed fight the battle of Reason but cannot
expect to be victorious. And in proportion as the
conviction grows upon us that the world of our human
interests is finite and in the making, our judgments
concerning the true nature of what goes on in this
world will be couched more modestly than is wont to
be the case. If this whole earth-conditioned existence
of ours is but a fragment of a vaster Order, it would
be foolish to expect that it should clear up all its own
puzzles, and there remains the possibility that much
which appears meaningless to us will be understood
when seen in the light of a larger context. Moreover,
it is no infrequent experience even within the limits of
this present life, that what has at first appeared to be
a hindrance in the way has eventually proved to be a
help, The flat denial of life proceeds, as a rule, from
the use of a false standard of judgment. We demand
of life that it shall make us happy, and, as the main
criteria of a happy life we take success and ease. Little
wonder that we end in despair, for we know not what
we ask. But if such happiness is not the supreme end,
and, even when fully granted, fails to satisfy the soul,
if an inward stability and progress, a deepening of
character, is the really essential thing, then indeed our
verdict on what life brings with it might be different
from what it is, and we might even come to value that


ATTEMPT AT RECONSTRUCTION 123


which at first seemed mere purposeless conflict or
degrading misery.

And yet the issues of life are so complex that mere
possibilities can take us but a little way : apart from
the inspiration and backing of reality itself, they are
powerless tohelp us. And such support is present only
when sorrow and strife have ceased to be the mere
warders of the soul, and are aggressively furthering
its good. Let us, then, see whether there be any such
furtherance, and if so, after what manner it is vouch-
safed.

It would be futile to ignore the invincible stubborn-
ness which a resistent world can offer, nor can we be
blind to the risks which here beset every upward step,
nor unaware how easily the ostensibly reasonable may
swing round into its opposite, so that every success in
this direction still leaves us anxious and uncertain.
And yet, if things were not so ordered, life would lose
its meaning. What we do becomes significant only as
our life is inwardly fortified in the doing of it, only as
it learns from experience and the stress of conflict, and
wins its way to a new outlook. And it becomes the
more imperative to insist on this uplevelling of spiritual
experience when we recognize that the Spiritual Life
as tabernacled among men has not yet realized its essen-
tial nature nor confidently fixed its main line of ad-
vance, but is beset at its centre with difficult problems,
which, but for the prospect of spiritual progress, would
be simply unapproachable. In this connection we
may clearly distinguish between two types of life
which history has summed up for us under the name
of Greek and Christian. The Spiritual, as Greek culture
conceived it, was seemingly rooted in human nature:


124 THE MEANING AND VALUE OF LIFE


it was a kind of higher endowment palpably present
in man’s experience. Life had therefore no other task
than that of strenuously developing this divine faculty
implanted in man, defending it against every attack,
and bringing it forth to the full light of day. On this
view, the whole movement of the inward life vanishes,
and with it the possibility of history in any genuine
sense of the word. Moreover, such spontaneous revela-
tion has lacked resource, and failed, in the long-run, to
inspire the world. The Christian type of life, which
has a range far exceeding the authorized precincts of
the Christian Church, starts from the problems of the
inner life, and, in particular, from the perplexities of
the moral consciousness. From this standpoint it is
the indwelling of the Spiritual world in the movement
of man’s life which gives the latter its true value; for
it brings with it a deeper revelation, summons man’s
powers to its service, and through his participation in
this new depth of being leads him safely out of his
perplexities. It is this which gives to the life of the
individual and of the race a true historical meaning,
gives it a goal and the passion to reach it. Such re-
newal brings with it a changed attitude towards diffi-
culty and sorrow. There is no longer the desire to ward
them off at all costs, and keep them at the greatest
possible distance: life encloses them in its spiritual
embrace, and when its depths are stirred, it is they
who minister to the new impulse and bring its secret
to the surface.

That our life has such remoter depths within it, and
that these are revealed to us, is in no sense self-evident :
experience must furnish the proof. And the proof, as
a matter of fact, is furnished by the world’s own story


ATTEMPT AT RECONSTRUCTION 125


as developed in the collective life of humanity and in
the recesses of the individual soul. Religion, ethics,
the whole culture of life, bear witness to the advent of a
triumphing Spiritual Power as distinguished from a
Spirituality which lays the foundations of life or
struggles to maintain them. Religion from the very
outset enters into the structure and substance of the
life which acknowledges the indwelling of an Indepen-
dent Spiritual Power, and the impulse to the develop-
ment of such spirituality must ultimately proceed
from the power of the Whole and partake of its im-
mortal vitality. But there is a further and more
specific manifestation of religion. For it is the function
of religion not only to infuse a sense of the Whole into
the work of life ; but, foregoing all appeal to the medium
of work, to realize the Whole through direct communion,
thereby unsealing the sources of a deeper life. So first
arose a distinctive, or characteristic, religion, and, with
it, that complete transcendence of the world which
issues in pure inwardness of life ; with it, also, a quick-
ening of the Absolute in human nature, vivifying what
else must have remained at the stage of finite existence.
This plane of being is too sublime to be ever fully
reached, though we may express its truth more and
more faithfully in our life, and more readily through
art than through the medium of thought. But this
at least is certain, that at this distinctively religious
level there is revealed to us a new wealth of life far
surpassing the resources of the mere individual.

What is true of religion is no less true of morality.
Here, too, independently of all individual caprice, there
is consummated an inward uplevelling of life—not, of
course, independently of the movements in other


126 THE MEANING AND VALUE OF LIFE


spheres, for morality must from the first affect our
human life in all its length and breadth. There is no
specification of our interest which can absolve us from
the necessity of moralizing the spiritual by making it
one with our own life and accepting it as the centre
round which our whole being revolves. A peremptory
Either-Or threads, in fact, the whole labyrinth of life,
and meets us insistent at every turning of the way.
But as the difficulties of life become apparent, and tend
to unsettle not only the outer prospects, but the inner
convictions of the soul, morality, if it is not to come to
a standstill, must readjust itself. It must reach down
into the soul and find a new task in the strengthening
of the inner life, in sustaining and supporting its move-
ment as a whole, guiding it through the worst per-
plexities of the work-a-day world. In no other way
can we authenticate and confirm the personal value
we attribute to a spiritual disposition as such, a valua-
tion we could not easily repudiate. For it is only in so
far as the cause of the Spiritual Life is loyally cham-
pioned by the soul against the pretensions of an alien
or at least dissatisfying worldliness that a man’s dis-
position turns to something more than a mere passive
attitude or a mere preparedness for work, and becomes
a completed action, the very soul, indeed, of all action
whatsoever. Morality, so directed, acquires that pure
inwardness, that surpassing grandeur, that scorn of con-
sequence, which assures it its special place and function
in the scheme of life as a whole.

Thus through conflict and the triumphant realiza-
tions of Spiritual Life into which the conflict eventually
passes, the whole life of the spirit is deepened and re-
newed. Nor apart from such deepening of the life is


ATTEMPT AT RECONSTRUCTION 127


it possible for the spirit, under the present conditions
of its mortal tenure, to preserve its native originality
and independence. And with this deepened vitality
hindrances and sorrows are seen in a different light.
We must not, of course, make the mistake of supposing
—as has, alas ! so often been done—that hindrance, as
such, is a help to the person hindered, or that sorrow,
with but little aid from ourselves, constitutes in itself
a spiritual advance. Hindrances and sorrows have no
such intrinsic virtue. They could bring us no spiritual
gain at all were it not for the energies they bring into
play, and it is these which alone have the power to
transform and uplift the life. The sentimental valua-
tion of sorrow for its own sake has not infrequently
proved a hindrance rather than a help.

Moreover, we should beware of dissociating and iso-
lating Spirituality as triumphant from Spirituality as
militant, or either of these, again, from Spirituality as
a fundamental presupposition. The severing of these
connections may well rob our triumphing faith of its
power to shape the world as it would, and so depress
it to the status of a mere subjective feeling. More-
over, within the system so connected the triumphing
factor is indispensable, for it alone fully confirms the
independence and self-sufficiency so necessary for the
expression of the Spiritual Life. It is not our merely
human activities, but those indigenous to the Spiritual
Life itself, which are our truest guarantee that the
work we live to accomplish shall not have been in
vain.

We cannot stay to discuss the influence of the fore-
going convictions on our conception of the universe as
a whole ; but in so far as they bear on the shaping of


128 THE MEANING AND VALUE OF LIFE


the social life, they suggest a demand. which we cannot
pass over without notice. It is our spiritual capacity
which gives to human relationships their distinctive
character: our civic and social life is indeed but the
unfolding and expression of this capacity. Now, such
life, as we conceive it, must include all sorts and
conditions of men: it must be the life of men as they
are. We must be prepared to do justice to the realities
of this life, to be content that reason should make
terms with necessity, and that what is intrinsically
spiritual should be closely amalgamated with elements
of a merely natural kind. Hence, in so far as we insist
on the independence of the Spiritual Life, and on its
transcendence of the merely natural Order, we must
seek to realize a special kind of society which, freed
from the pressure of necessity, shall take for its task
the representing and cherishing of an independent
spirituality. A society so conceived would, in opposi-
tion to the mere tendencies of the time, stand for aims
that are eternal; as against the demands of mere
expediency, it would uphold what is true and spiritually
imperative; and in lieu of interests that are merely
natural it would represent the resources of the Spiritual
Life : in a word, its function would be that of holding
as best it could before men’s eyes a realm of Spiritual
Freedom, championing its ideals and standards of
value, and generating a spiritual atmosphere to corre-
spond with it. If there is no such co-operation of
human forces with a view to the establishment of such
an Order, the independence of the Spiritual Life must
decline and eventually vanish. What survives will be
a spiritual element mixed with human alloy, and this,
if accepted as the final solution of life’s whole problem,


ATTEMPT AT RECONSTRUCTION 129


must deeply degrade the life it thus interprets and rob it
of all its meaning.

The dissatisfied restlessness of the present time,
despite so many brilliant achievements, may be safely
attributed in part to a severing or slackening of the
ties of free spiritual fellowship. The Christian Churches
once stood for such a fellowship, but, as we see them
to-day, they no longer answer to the altered require-
ments of the spiritual situation. In the first place,
neither of the two main branches of Christendom can
be said to satisfy the distinctive needs of the religious
consciousness of to-day. Catholicism has entrenched
itself in an earlier historical position, that of the
Middle Ages: its authority is becoming ever more
oppressive, itself necessarily more straitened and
narrow of outlook, whilst its influence threatens more
and more to stiffen all the sinews of our life. Pro-
testantism has the priceless advantage of Freedom for
a standpoint, and Personality for a living basis, but it
has concerned itself far too little with the organizing
of the one Spiritual Life, with the fashioning of a
Spiritual World: it is therefore imminently exposed
to the danger of degenerating into a stimulus to
individuality of a purely subjective kind, and so passing
off helplessly into the barren and insipid. Moreover,
we must not forget that towards the Middle Ages, when
the scope of life was so greatly enlarged, humanity was
driven to seek a further basis for its life than religion
itself could supply. For, however true it may be that
religion is the most intimate source of life, yet it can
be what it is only within the depths of an all-inclusive
and substantially independent spirituality, and it is
upon this spirituality as a basis that religious fellowship

9


130 THE MEANING AND VALUE OF LIFE


must rest. We must therefore strive after such
broadening and spiritual renewal of the Churches of
to-day as shall leave them one and all rooted in the
Spiritual Life. If we wish to recapture life’s true
meaning, we must work for the renewal of Christen-
dom.

Truly the project is far-reaching and hard to realize.
Its success depends on the previous solution of other
problems. It is, above all, important that the domi-
nating characteristics of the Spiritual Life should be
forcefully disengaged from the welter of things and
clearly impressed upon the human consciousness. But
we cannot here dwell on all the difficulties which beset
the realization of such a programme: we can only point
to the high goal which now beckons us forward. The
closer we come to it, the more palpable to our insight
the vision of a self-poised spiritual world, the more
resourceful shall we become in disarming trouble and
sorrow, and preventing them from snatching the
meaning from our life.


RECAPITULATION


It was the question as to life’s meaning and value
which in the first instance dictated our inquiry, and it
is to this question that we must return in endeavouring
to sum up our results. Have we in the course of our
work discovered a supreme unity, deeper than all
differences, a unity the reference to which gives a
distinctive stamp to the whole circle of our interests
and opens up at every turn characteristic problems and
duties ? And can we rest satisfied with the results
obtained ? |


1


ATTEMPT AT RECONSTRUCTION 13I


We found that it was impossible to answer these
questions so long as we started from the external
world of which we know so little and allowed-ourselves
to soar freely on the wings of speculation. The answer,
we decided, could be obtained only when our human
life made searching inquiry into its own resources.
Illumination cannot come from without, but only from
the teaching and experience of life itself. Now, there
was one fact which did really yield an affirmative
result, the fact that within our life a new depth of
reality is disclosed which could not possibly belong to
man as a purely natural being. Through the recogni-
tion of the independence of the Spiritual Life we won
an insight into the spiritual self-realization of the
universe, a perception of that deeper-lying foundation
which sustains all life and gives it a personal character.
Such advance was no mere extension of a given order
of existence, nor yet a development of it in certain
particular directions. Rather, it opposed to the given
Order an altogether new life, a life which, in attaining
spiritual immediacy, first discovers the true source and
standard of all reality.

There is, however, another truth inextricably bound
up with this disclosure of a new and authentic reality.
The gradual manifestation of this reality within our
human sphere is not a process of peaceful, assured
development. It consists rather of toilsome mounting,
of open rupture with the given Order: it demands a
radical conversion. Such elements of spirituality as
the older Order contained were lacking in definiteness
and vigour, and were mixed up with much that was
alien in kind. The Spiritual Life can realize itself
and at the same time become conscious of its intrinsic

9—2


132 THE MEANING AND VALUE OF LIFE


solidarity with a spiritual world only in so far as it
rids itself of this alien admixture, assumes towards it
an attitude of direct antagonism, and, from its position
of independence, develops for itself a distinctive form
of self-expression. And since the conversion cannot
take place once and for all, but must be continually
repeated, it is very obvious that incessant activity
rather than comfort and enjoyment must remain the
keynote of life. Some element of struggle must always
be implied in all spiritual life that is lived under human
conditions.

But will not life be impoverished as the result of this
rupture and opposition ? Can itin any way make good
the loss thus incurred ? Surely it can do even more
than this. It brings forth and develops a spiritual
content, and, in so doing, clearly reveals to us that in
thus falling back upon the self-immediacy of personal
life we are not effecting a merely formal change of
attitude, but are tapping a deep spring of reality, and
thereby altering in essential respects our general
picture of the world. A spiritual content, as we have
seen, cannot originate in the human subject nor in the
world that lies over against it, nor yet in any inter-
action of these two factors. It demands that world
and subject shall both be enveloped within an inclusive
life. Only in so far as this larger life is active in our
experience, realizing itself therein, and finding in it the
medium for its own development, can life win for itself
a substantial content. And, conversely, in so far as
life possesses content, we have evidence of a life that
derives from the great Whole, of a cosmic life that
develops from within outwards. Even our human life
has its share in these spiritual resources, and derives


ATTEMPT AT RECONSTRUCTION 133


from them a varied inspiration. In all the main spheres
of human endeavour—the spheres of the Good, the
True, the Beautiful—there is a growth of spiritual
content. We find it in each and every department of
life, in every form of spiritual creation. But we are
wont to take facts singly instead of bringing them
together, and thus we fail to set them in the right light.
If we take them together, as the recognition of the
independence of the Spiritual Life enables us to do,
we see Reality revealing in them its personal character ;
we trace in them the gradual upbuilding of a coherent
spiritual world. This, however, serves to enhance very
essentially the importance of the Whole, and it sets
before life in all its branches a stupendous task. For
now all diversity of content must be viewed in the
light of the Whole which it is understood to reveal: it
must be made inward and vital and coherent. We
now see clearly that in the transfiguration of life into a
realm of spiritual substance there is involved a forma-
tive principle which is everywhere operative in the
substitution of character for formlessness.

Even without referring back to a Whole, we can be
extremely active along specialized lines. The various
departments of life, taken individually, obey certain
regulative laws of form. Thus we think in terms of
causation and according to the laws of logic. But no
logic or causality can ever give to knowledge that
vital character so indispensable to its completeness.
This riper knowledge is possible only when the search
for truth is carried on within some living spiritual
whole which compels it to take a certain definite direc-
tion. Thus Greek thought, and modern thought, too,
for that matter, are much more than any mere thinking


134 THE MEANING AND VALUE OF LIFE


ofa formal and abstract kind. Each owes its distinctive
character to the peculiar ensemble of the life out of
which it grows.

And what is the inevitable result of thus tracing
back the primary spiritual interests to a self-determined
life out of which they develop? The result must be
that those spiritual interests define themselves more
clearly and precisely, sever themselves more drastically
from the purely natural elements which would other-
wise disfigure and degrade them, and learn to know
and recognize each other as co-workers towards a
common end. We saw what a difference it made
whether we treated religion as a manifestation of the
Spiritual Life or as a purely natural phenomenon.
Thus the developing of these interests from their
source in the Spiritual Life as a whole must needs hold
up an ideal to our own human striving, measure and
test our endeavour by its approximation to this ideal,
spur and prick it on with untiring assiduity, and set
in motion every activity it implies. But in all this we
are not imposing upon man something alien to himself.
We are rather showing him where his true life lies.
It is when he makes the Spiritual Life his own that he
becomes aware of an inward realm which, infinite as
it is, is yet his own true self.

Thus life’s interest is both with the world and with
itself, and it is precisely in the struggle to find and
realize itself that it transcends the opposition involved
in being related to a cold and alien world on the one
hand, and to a narrow and corrupt society on the other.
The opposition between an empty subjectivity and a
soulless objectivity is also transcended, inasmuch as
the content which belongs to life also belongs directly


ATTEMPT AT RECONSTRUCTION 135


to the self. A life which thus inwardly assimilates the
cosmos will, in its human relations, show many sides
and aspects, the elaboration of which necessitates
subdivision into different departments. We have seen
how impossible it is for the life which is really spiritual
to fully express its power of self-determination without
recognizing the independence of morality. We have
also seen that it cannot dispense with religion. Religion
alone can enable it to acknowledge adequately the
support which the finite life derives from the infinite,
and the power to overcome all oppositions which is
the fruit of this dependence. And no less necessary
to the Spiritual Life are the services of science and of
art—of science, because only through the sifting and
clarifying work of close reasoning can the spiritual
permanently distinguish itself from the ordinary level
of existence ; of art, because only through the aid of
imagination and artistic form can any new ideal become
sufficiently vivid and insistent to inform and influence
life, as is shown very clearly by religious experience
itself. But this does not mean that life is, or ever
will be, a mere aggregation of separate spheres. Be-
hind them all, aiding their development, is the basic
life of the Whole, apart from which they at once
show a tendency to forfeit their spiritual content
and fall a prey to the spirit of worldliness which is
always in wait for its opportunity. There are countless
historical instances where we see this tendency at
work.

The real gist of the matter lies, namely, in this—
that a revelation of genuine spirituality also means
a revelation of the inwardness of the world, an inward-
ness which belongs to things themselves, and is not


136 THE MEANING AND VALUE OF LIFE


just put into them by some adjacent Subject. It is
the possibility of sharing directly in this inward life
of the universe, and furthering it by our labours, that
gives stability, spontaneity, and greatness to life,
inspiring it with an inner joyousness. In so far as
such a possibility exists there can be no doubting
life’s meaning and value.

And this verdict holds good for humanity as a whole
no less than for the individuals that compose it. The
significance of both lies not so much in the facts of
their immediate existence as in the movement which
is taking place—or, at any rate, may take place—within
them. The acknowledgment of littleness is here the
way to greatness. Neither for individual nor humanity
can mere comfort and absorption in the immediacies
of the sense-world make life worth the living. The
happiness of humanity, if by happiness we mean satis-
faction, comes no nearer for all our work. It seems,
indeed, more distant than before. And as for the
tangled web of our existence transforming itself into
an ordered realm of Reason, it is but a wild Utopian
dream. At the same time there is a movement going
on within our human life which promises far more
_ than does any amount of mere material prosperity. A
new world is opening up—the world of a self-originating
life that transcends the limitations of time. Man may
share in a movement of the universe and shape it to
suit the requirements of his own particular sphere.
Tn contrast to the conventional morality of his day, he
can show a coherent and freely developed spiritual
life, thereby giving content to his own life, and forging
invisible links of connection between himself and the
cosmos. Nothing that pertains to such a life, nothing


ATTEMPT AT RECONSTRUCTION 137


that is the object of such effort, can ever be lost. It
may, indeed, seem to vanish, but, as part of the eternal
Order, it can never really pass away.

Nor must the individual be regarded as‘a mere by-
product, or be called upon to merge himself wholly in
an Absolute Life. For it is with him that an un-
derived self-sufficient life first makes its appearance.
He has the right to call himself a person just in so far
as he immediately participates in the life of the Whole.
It is in focussing the life of the universe at one par-
ticular point, in developing it along his own particular
line, that he attains to the dignity of spiritual individu-
ality. And a life absorbed in tasks such as these—
tasks linked together in close spiritual connection—
cannot present a calmly-ordered progress, but ever
imposes the necessity for fateful advance. However
peaceful its external course may be, it yet involves a
great decision, a choice not completed in a moment,
but prolonged through a lifetime. But at the same
time the inner life becomes impregnably secure and
self-sufficient. No outward impediment, no untoward
fate, can rob our spiritual nature of its high task—the
task of sustaining and furthering the world of reason
as best we can in our own particular station. Here
there is something for every man to do, nor can anyone
take it from him. The environment can oppose, but
cannot crush him, for he has another world to set
against the world of sense. Moreover, a great crisis
awaits him in the course of his life, inasmuch as this
turning to the spiritual, with the attendant need of an
inward conversion, comes to him as a possibility—a
possibility which may either be accepted or rejected.
Taking a lofty standpoint, we must regard as lost the


138 THE MEANING AND VALUE OF LIFE


life that rejects it ; such a life has neither meaning nor
value. Spiritual realization is no part of our natural
endowment ; it has to be won, but it admits of being
won.

Measured by such standards, human life as we
ordinarily see it cannot but appear grievously in-
complete and poor in spiritual content. But little as
we gain from it, the little is yet more than current
conceptions would have us believe, for we gain at
least admission into a world of truth and substance.
And if anyone takes objection to the incompleteness,
we would like to ask what ground he has for asserting
that our human existence must be complete. Amid
all that is problematic this at least is certain—that our
life is no mere empty surface-dallying : something
momentously significant is going forward in it, a move-
ment with which we ourselves have much to do, the
direction of which we are quite well able to gauge.
This must and can suffice us. If we would sum up
life in a few words, we can scarcely improve upon
Luther’s description: ‘ There is no finished achieve-
ment ; all is in the making. We do not see the end,
but oly the road. The full splendour is not yet, but
the refining work goes on.”


APPLICATIONS TO MODERN LIFE


The problem of life’s meaning and value has, through-
out this work, been considered in close relation to
present-day needs. In conclusion, then, we may
profitably ask whether the answer we have suggested
can satisfy our specifically modern requirements, or
whether it breaks down in the attempt.


ATTEMPT AT RECONSTRUCTION 139


There are three main lines along which the truth for
which we stand may prove applicable to modern life.
In the first place, it should increase our discontent with
the life of mediocrity ; in the second place, it should
help us to draw through the confusions of our social
life certain clear defining lines ; and, thirdly, it should
offer us a standing-ground where we can seek to rally
our forces. Let us see how these divisions work out
as we come to examine them more closely.

In the first place, the conviction that our life gains
meaning and value only in so far as it affords a soil
whereon a wider and a more cosmic life may unfold
itself—the sense of a need for incessant warfare between
a genuine spiritual culture and culture of a purely
humanistic kind—make it absolutely impossible for
us to rest content with the predominant position given
to this humanistic culture in the thought of to-day.
All its varying aspects draw more closely together
under the influence of opposition, and at the same time
reveal their complete nullity. For what do we see ?
Whirling complexity, restless hurry and pursuit, a
passionate exaltation of self and an overweening push-
ing of its claims against those of others ; life occupied
with alien interests rather than its own; no inward
problems or inward motives; little pure enthusiasm
or genuine love; the fostering and furthering of self
ever the dominant note, despite all boastful profession
and even some really honest work; man, with his
likes and dislikes, the supreme arbiter of good and
evil, true and false, so that the main goal of endeavour
is to win social favour and respect appearances. All
this, however much it may make profession of following
after ideal goals and being guided by ideal sentiments,


140 THE MEANING AND VALUE OF LIFE


yet reveals in every part of it an inner insincerity, a
repellent unreality, a spiritual tameness and hollow-
ness.

This hollowness may very well escape observation
so long as our attention and effort are confined to the
individual, and we may expect to find compensation
at one point for what is lacking at another. So long
as we take this more limited view, we can always
hope that somehow and somewhere, behind all this
comedy of civilization, there is the active presence and
working of a real life. When, however, we put the
question universally, showing at the same time that
in ceasing to give life a spiritual basis we allow the
purely humanistic culture an undisputed right over
the whole field, and that this culture has no effective
way of dealing with the hollowness and illusions of
existence, then to every thinking man the great
alternative presents itself, the Either—Or. Either
there is something other and higher than this purely
humanistic culture, or life ceases to have any meaning
or value. Once put the problem universally, and any
third alternative is at once ruled out.

He who shares our belief that within the human
sphere are powers that overrule the fleeting moment
will never assent to the negative conclusion, or treat
the age as the simple embodiment of humanistic culture.
He will find, however, that such genuine spirituality
as is operative among us is woefully entangled with this
culture, and will derive from the knowledge a most
powerful incentive to free the spiritual from this alloy,
and give effective expression, even here and now, to that
independence which is native to it. From this point of
view the one imperative task for the creative spiritual


ATTEMPT AT RECONSTRUCTION 141


life is that it should gather its forces together on the
new basis supplied by modern conditions. In no other
way can it adjust and control the activities of ordinary
life, and counteract its levelling influences.

The relation of spiritual culture to this average life
of humanity takes different forms at different epochs.
Sometimes it is a relation of abrupt antagonism and
dissent, sometimes a relation of friendly understanding
and co-operation. The former relation prevails when
there is a very clear consciousness of the inadequacy,
uncertainty, and confusion of average conditions. At
such times the Spiritual Life—to develop satisfactorily
—must break with these conditions, and take up a
strong position of its own. Late antiquity witnessed
a movement of this kind in the rise of Stoicism: primi-
tive Christianity worked out a similar movement in a
more intense form. And at the beginning of the
modern period the Enlightenment pursued like ends
with conscious and deliberate effort. Now, for periods
such as these, life in all its manifestations becomes
a problem. Everything is tested and sifted. Such
strenuous concentration brings with it its own limita-
tions, notably the danger of a narrow and exclusive
outlook. But, despite all such danger, there is yet
imperative need for the rousing, sifting, consolidating
work of these critical periods. It is a very different
matter when an age feels sure of its basic spiritual
convictions. Then, its main task must consist in
developing and realizing these convictions, welcoming
and fostering everything that is sympathetic with them,
and at the same time welding the whole expanse of
life into a unity. Such periods wear a friendlier aspect.
Reason seems to dominate reality, life to move more


142 THE MEANING AND VALUE OF LIFE


steadily upwards, oppositions to be completely trans-
cended in an over-arching unity. Thus was it with the
Renaissance at its zenith; thus, too, with the early
days of our own Classical Humanism.

But whatever the advantages of these unifying
periods and their burden of spiritual activity, we yet
cannot call them back at our will. Our appreciation
does not confer on us any right of possession. We must
take things as they are. In this sense, the age into
which we are born is our fate. As things are at
present—spiritual chaos all around and no sure spiritual
basis—it becomes eminently necessary for the Spiritual
Life to withdraw into itself. We need the critical
method of thought and work, a method which, with all
its points of difference from the Enlightenment, has
yet far more in common with that movement than with
the Humanism of our classical period. Now, the sure
road to the developing of this method is the recognition
of a real and independent spirituality. For it is this
which enables us to separate, in the first instance, the
realm of spiritual contents and values from our merely
human existence, and set up the one in opposition to
the other, and subsequently, from the standpoint thus
attained, to undertake a vigorous research into the
whole body of existing conditions, sifting and rejecting
on the one hand, fostering and consolidating on the
other. Just as the Enlightenment brought everything
to the test of conformity to reason, asking how far it
fulfilled the requirements of clearness and distinctness,
so now the essential question is how far the existing
situation possesses a spiritual content, forms part of a
spiritual world, effects a deepening of the spiritual life.
Nor is this critical work confined to any one depart-


ATTEMPT AT RECONSTRUCTION 143


ment: it must permeate the whole of life in all its
various branches. But it is more particularly adapted
to those departments which are directly concerned with
life as a whole: philosophy and religion, education
and art. In each one of these domains the common
task presents itself in some appropriate specialized
form.

Now, once we are convinced that our primary need
is to develop in detail the fundamental opposition we
have described, and, more generally, to draw clear
defining lines wherever confusion meets us, we are
bound to resist with more than ordinary decision every
endeavour to soften down oppositions, and to seek an
immediate settlement for problems which cannot be
successfully attacked until some sure basis has first
been established. Thus we emphatically reject every
form of monism which thinks that it can compass the
unity it needs without any previous dissociations. We
reject the whole modern pantheistic tendency whose
vague emotionalism serves only to gloss over the great
oppositions and is never able to transcend them. We
reject, too, a Romanticism which, by resolving life into
dreamy contemplation and passive self-abandonment,
lowers its moral energy and, instead of reaching the
spiritual heights it had thought to attain, is all too
prone to end in a refined sensuality. And, lastly, we
reject the tendency to use personality lightly as a catch-
word and ready cure-all for every evil of the times,
since personality must first be given a content and
a cosmic setting, and it is just here that; the most
serious complications arise.

We have been insisting on sharply-drawn divisions
within the realm of culture. We insist no less em-


144 THE MEANING AND VALUE OF LIFE


phatically on the need for discriminating between indi-
viduals and classing them in one or other of two groups
according as they recognize or fail to recognize the
existence of an independent spiritual world and man’s
organic connection therewith. If there is no such world,
then the individual also is destitute of all inward life
that has an independent value of itsown. He can have
no spiritual problems or tasks. He is the mere product
of the environment, and if, in such a connection, the
words ‘ personality ’ and ‘ individuality’ are still used,
they are nothing more than empty phrases. There is
no possible compromise here between Yes and No.
When we have agreed over the Yes, then, and not till
then, may we attempt to settle such differences as may
still remain. As with men, so with ideas: uncom-
promising division on questions of principle is an
essential pre-condition for the healthy development of
life.

Division, however, must have as its counterpart, asso-
ciation: an associating of those elements that recognize
the inadequacy of all merely humanistic culture, and
reach out beyond it to undiscovered goals. Above all,
life must have a positive content and a character which
we can give it only by effecting a synthesis of its
manifold aspects. Life has expanded so rapidly that
the traditional syntheses have become inadequate.
They may possibly maintain their ground in the
opinions of certain individuals, but they are no longer
the guiding force of spiritual labour. Here the inward
unity has been broken up by an overwhelming acces-
sion of new fact drawn from nature, history, and
society ; the most diverse influences contend for the
control of our spiritual endeavour. It may be that


ATTEMPT AT RECONSTRUCTION 145


never again will there be any synthesis so simple and
compact as the past has been able to offer. We shall
then have to find our satisfaction and gladness in dis-
covering at the very heart of life a synthesis which
must then come to terms with the environment in and
through the labour of life itself. Such a synthesis is
indeed indispensable if our life is to hold together.
And itis difficult to see how it can be reached from any
other standpoint than that of an Independent Spiritual
Life. Nowhere else can we find a primitive and spon-
taneous source of creative production ; yet apart from
such a source, how can any synthesis be sufficiently
vital and inspiring ?

The whole cry of our age is for greater plainness and
simplicity, not in the sense of a dull taking-things-for-
granted, but in the sense of a spiritual spontaneity.
It is a demand which comes alike from the nature of
our culture and from our human experience. Through
much collection and compilation, research and recon-
struction, our culture has become altogether too diffuse
and complicated. It confuses great and small, alive
and dead, chaotically together ; it fails to distinguish
between temporal and eternal ; in the endless diversity
of our historical heritage it cannot discover simple
guiding-lines along which to direct our effort towards a
steadfast goal.

And a simplification is equally necessary from the
standpoint of humanity. The older aristocratic struc-
ture of social life, if not abandoned, is yet in course of
being slowly undermined. We are no longer content
to develop our culture to maturity within an exclusive
circle whence alone it can be carefully doled out to
the rest of mankind. The preponderating tendency

10


146 THE MEANING AND VALUE OF LIFE


of our modern era is to demand for ‘ all that wear the
human face’ direct and full participation in spiritual
work and spiritual possessions. Whether the wider
experience of the future may pronounce this impossible
and construct society on another basis is a further
question. We, for the present, have to reckon with
this democratic tendency. And there is involved in it
a very obvious danger—danger lest the uprising masses
of the people, little affected by historic movements,
should fall a prey to shallow negation, should judge the
condition of culture, not from the inside, but from
without, and thus be liable to reject it altogether.
Surely, from this point of view, it becomes imperatively
necessary to find simple guiding-lines which will restore
our feeling of solidarity, and enable us to treat life’s
problem as one that is common to us all.

But the simplicity we speak of is not to be found in
the world as given. We can only win to it in inwardly
transcending the given and taking up the standpoint
of an independent spirituality. For only thus can what
is simple be at the same time great ; only thus can it be
the copvincing expression of a new depth in the uni-
verse and give us a spiritual assurance in regard to it.
It is with a simple truth of this kind that early Chris-
tianity moved and rejuvenated the world, and only
through such a simple truth can we, in turn, win spiritual
anchorage, and triumph over the irrational and the
chaotic.

Our own age, then, teems with great problems. The
more we bring them together—and every day such a
grouping becomes more imperatively necessary—the
clearer it becomes that, to make advance towards their
solution, we must have recourse, as we have been


ATTEMPT AT RECONSTRUCTION 147


urging, to an independent spirituality, a Spiritual Life
that shapes its own world. Should further witness be
needed, we have but to point to the special conditions
of our own age. It is an age so involved in great issues
that its significance can hardly be denied ; it is also an
age great in opportunity to those who would wrest from
life a meaning and a value.


TO—2


APPENDIX


APPENDIX


[The following passage, which, in the original version of the
‘Sinn und Wert des Lebens,’ occurs between p. 100, line 4, and
p- 107 inclusive, is omitted in the translated text, with the consent
and approval of the author. The reader who wishes to follow the
plan of the original should, on reaching the asterisk on p. 93, turn
to this Appendix. ]


THE realization of a life-process suck as this must
needs give our experience a greater depth, and with
this deepening and inward shifting of the standpoint
there is revealed an independent world of spiritual
fact which in its character of a totality presents us
with a problem far more unfinished than when, adopting
the point of view of common sense, we recognize as
our sole facts those specific results which spring from
our contact with the environment. But though the
life-process in its universal aspect is indeed a funda-
mental fact, its particularization still remains hu-
manity’s incalculable task. But this particulariza-
tion is impossible apart from the support of the
historical past and a clear understanding of the whole
trend of its teaching. The issue of such inquiry alone
can determine how the rest of our data shall be handled
and interpreted, and it first gives to our action a
definite aim. Thus behind what we are wont to call
life lies a deeper enveloping life, a very soul of life.
Not only does this basic life set us the most important
tasks: 1t also reveals to us the most weighty facts.
And the more these facts are elaborated, the more
151


152 APPENDIX


intimately they are connected together so that the
one supports the other, the more does the assurance
we gain through appropriating the principle of this
self-supporting life extend to every part of our existence,
and in so doing confirm its own stability.

The usual way of treating these questions cannot
seem other than crude to the philosophic mind; for
it is concerned only with the What of all that happens :
the How is taken as something that needs no explana-
tion, since it is not affected by the lapse of time;
whereas, in truth, the How is just the most important
thing of all, the decisive factor in determining life’s
general character, and therewith, also, the What. Let
us take, for instance, the great thinkers as they pass
before us in long historical procession. That which
people consider and pass sentence on is the results
of their inquiry—their answers—and it is often for-
Seis that they each had their individual—nay, their
undamentally different—way of putting the question,
and that their way of putting the question deter-
mined the whole bent of their labour, so that once
the question had been so put, the answer was in-
evitable. This recognition of the significance of the
question shows us clearly that far more important
than the results of philosophical speculation 1s such
speculation in itself, and this has an immediate bearing
on the place of philosophy in the life-process. It
shows that the very raising of the philosophical problem
implies certain definite facts, and points to life being
constituted in a certain way. It leads us to what is
elemental in life, and convinces us that the establish-
ing of such a basis is the most important fact of all.

Now, the progress of the human race, as history
reveals it to us, supplies us with important clues for
the discovery of this basis. We have here certain
movements—movements, not completed facts. But
these movements, so far at least as they transcend
all merely subjective effort and conjecture, are them-
selves facts, possessing all the immediacy of fact.


APPENDIX 153


For they reveal to us a power distinctive of the
Spiritual Life, show it forth with ever-increasing clear-
ness, and through this disclosure of the inwardness
of things temporal, settle our life on a broader and
surer basis. Thus we find men striving to realize a
new idea of history, to treat it not as a mere series of
events, in which the later episodes take shape under
the influence of the earlier, but to grasp and keep the
inward essence of that which seems to pass and vanish,
to recover it if it has disappeared from view, to fit
the separate epochs together, so that they form a com-
plete picture ; to discover in the fluctuations of succes-
sive periods something of abiding value which they can
quicken into life again, thus placing their own life in
a timeless present. Does not such an attempt, how-
ever inadequately carried out—does not the bare
possibility of construing history in this sense bear
witness to a certain peculiar spiritual capacity which
should be capable of a clearer and fuller development
than it is wont to receive? All the specific depart-
ments of life—religion and morality, art and science—
should be scrutinized more closely for such evidence
of spiritual life as the circumstances of their growth
may reveal. Each of these spheres, bodying forth,
as it does, in its own way, the Spiritual Life as a whole,
is itself a fact more primal than any of the special
facts its researches may disclose. For example, a
close study of the different religions may reveal many
divergences of outlook; yet far more primal and
important than all religious distinctions is the fact of
religion itself. Religion brings into our life the con-
sciousness of a separation between a higher and a
lower nature ; it shows us, on the one hand, a develop-
ment of exaltation and awe; on the other, a move-
ment of grace and love. It lays bare the dualism so
deeply rooted in our life, whilst at the same time
helping us to transcend it Moreover, if the meaning
of religion is to receive a characteristic development,
we must not break up the object of our reverent


154 APPENDIX


devotion into a number of disconnected manifesta-
tions, but must apprehend it as a unity with which
we may enter into intimate relation, and so draw
on the resources of a new life. Now, just as in the
elaboration of these distinctively religious resources
the tissue of our life acquires a certain characteristic
quality, so is it also mutatis mutandis, in the other
spheres of the Spiritual Life.

The unfolding of the Spiritual Life, however, cannot
consist in the mere co-ordination of separate spheres.
These spheres themselves receive their truly charac-
teristic development only in so far as the totality of
the life-process supplies a synthesis which binds them
all together, and seeks to make itself effective in each
of them. Nor does this synthesis imply any external
form of connection. It is rather a self-concentration
of the Spiritual Life, in which exclusiveness is overcome
and a new basis is supplied for the sympathetic
development of all our activities. The specific form
taken by this synthesis determines the type of culture
characteristic of a great historical epoch. Thus the
Greek world moulded its life on a plastico-artistic
pattern, making Form the central and dominant
consideration. Against this the Enlightenment upheld
a dynamic synthesis, replacing rest by flux and move-
ment. It is true that each synthesis has its limita-
tions, and life is too large to be compressed into any
one channel. But before considering limitations, it 1s
well to do justice to the fact that such attempts at
concentration have been made, and made in the realm
of life itself, and it remains to be ascertained how far
each is a revelation of spiritual life. It would seem
in this connection as though life followed two lines
of development, one determinate, the other relatively
indeterminate, and were always passing from one to
the other. It would seem that we had here a pro-
gressive movement of life from within, and with this
the origination of a spiritual space and the shaping of
a reality. Each particular synthesis would thus be


APPENDIX 155


a grandly conceived hypothesis as to the meaning of
human life—a hypothesis which can only justify itself
by the extent to which it succeeds in breaking down
resistance and bringing life entirely under its sway.
Now, this whole historical development involves a
deepening of first impressions. It reveals complexity
in that which seemed most simple, life and movement
in what appeared to be at rest. It breaks up rigid
assumptions, quickening them into vital activity. The
more this activity develops, the more differentiated
and interconnected does our experience become ; the
more is life as a whole established and deepened, and
established just in proportion as itis deepened. Every-
thing together tends to strengthen the conviction that
in man we witness the emergence of a life-process
which is independent of all subjective caprice, and
lends a stable support to the efforts of the individual.
This deepening of the life-problem sets our convic-
tion of the unity of the universe upon a broader and
firmer foundation than the ordinary intellectualistic
outlook can possibly supply. Just as each sphere of
life refers back, on this hypothesis, to a universal
process of which it is a specific expression, so the
labours of each imply some kind of conviction regarding
the universe. Nothing great can be produced in the
several spheres which does not expressly imply a con-
fession of faith ina cosmos. Such conviction, together
with the view of reality which accompanies it, is
naturally different in each different sphere. We have
already seen how religion discloses a sharp contrast
at the very heart of life, but this necessitates a corre-
sponding cleavage in the world, and a heightening of
all existing contrasts. The root-experience of art is
very different ; and different, again, is that of educa-
tion. Artis frankly impossible unless there be friendly
reciprocity and relationship between inner and outer,
unless the life-process effect a transcendence of the
opposition between* them. Artistic creation, there-
fore, implies an acknowledgment of the harmony of


156 APPENDIX


the universe. Again, the work of the educator implies
a more friendly reading of reality than is possible or
legitimate for religion, with her drastic and uncom-
promising distinctions. For how could the work of
education be undertaken, how could it claim the entire
devotion of its workers, unless they believed that in the
soul of every man some element of truth and good
slumbers, and may be awakened? This in itself is
sufficient reason for refusing to give the Church
authority over the school. A strict logic forces us
to admit that the two points of view are fundamentally
different. And, in like manner morality and science
give rise to distinctive interpretations of life and the
world.

These different interpretations exist side by side,
and, as each inclines to claim unique importance for
its own particular form of experience, it is impossible
that they should steer clear of collision. Life sees itself
threatened with disruption unless it can succeed in
maintaining the supremacy of some enveloping Whole
of Being over all its specific developments, thus
securing a standpoint whence it may hope to reconcile
their conflicting claims. At the same time, it is easy
to understand that the individual should incline to
that particular interpretation of the universe which
best fits his own particular calling. And yet we must
not forget that the very strife and incompleteness are
evidence of life’s richness, and of the various types
and stages of development which are present within
our human experience. The very passion of the con-
flict engendered by such intricacies bears witness to
the energy with which we seek to bring a single principle
to bear upon all the detail of our life. We have here
far outgrown the merely intellectualistic standpoint.

Thus we now see clearly that life cannot gain any
certainty or security by reference to some form of
Being that is external to itself. Once and for all, it
cannot gain this from without, but must seek it within
itself ; and that not through insisting on some single


APPENDIX 157


point as axiomatic, but only through unifying itself
as a whole, differentiating itself into upper and lower
levels, evolving a real world from within, and yet
through all this wealth of expression retaining a sure
possession of itself. In all this, however, it is always
implicitly understood that man’s toil and effort rest
on the support of an Independent. Spiritual Life.
Otherwise the whole movement remains an unin-
telligible riddle, and can never win our full conviction
nor claim our entire devotion.

And what is true of the whole chain of life is equally
true of its separate links. Civilizations, peoples,
individuals, can win strength of belief and the bracing
joys of action only through a spiritual unification of
lite. This alone can banish doubt and give direction to
conduct. Failing this axiomatic necessity, this firm
self-assurance and self-confidence, even the greatest
gifts are powerless to protect from vacillation and un-
fruitfulness. Herein lies the main reason for the
advantage which simple natures possess over those
that are more complicated. Thus we are always
driven back upon the vitally important truth that life
must seek its security within itself through the aid of
its own combined activities, always remembering that
such security presupposes the independence of the
Spiritual Life.


THE END


a ee ee eee = SINR EERE
BILLING AND SONS, LTD., PRINTERS, GUILDFORD.


Un ll uy ll


Digitized with financial assistance from
Government of Maharashtra
on 30 January, 2020
