This  is  a  digital  copy  of  a  book  that  was  preserved  for  generations  on  library  shelves  before  it  was  carefully  scanned  by  Google  as  part  of  a  project
to  make  the  world's  books  discoverable  online.

It  has  survived  long  enough  for  the  copyright  to  expire  and  the  book  to  enter  the  public  domain.  A  public  domain  book  is  one  that  was  never  subject
to  copyright  or  whose  legal  copyright  term  has  expired.  Whether  a  book  is  in  the  public  domain  may  vary  country  to  country.  Public  domain  books
are  our  gateways  to  the  past,  representing  a  wealth  of  history,  culture  and  knowledge  that's  often  difficult  to  discover.

Marks,  notations  and  other  marginalia  present  in  the  original  volume  will  appear  in  this  file  -  a  reminder  of  this  book's  long  journey  from  the
publisher  to  a  library  and  finally  to  you.

Usage  guidelines

Google  is  proud  to  partner  with  libraries  to  digitize  public  domain  materials  and  make  them  widely  accessible.  Public  domain  books  belong  to  the
public  and  we  are  merely  their  custodians.  Nevertheless,  this  work  is  expensive,  so  in  order  to  keep  providing  this  resource,  we  have  taken  steps  to
prevent  abuse  by  commercial  parties,  including  placing  technical  restrictions  on  automated  querying.

We  also  ask  that  you:

+  Make  non-commercial  use  of  the  files  We  designed  Google  Book  Search  for  use  by  individuals,  and  we  request  that  you  use  these  files  for
personal,  non-commercial  purposes.

+  Refrain  from  automated  querying  Do  not  send  automated  queries  of  any  sort  to  Google's  system:  If  you  are  conducting  research  on  machine
translation,  optical  character  recognition  or  other  areas  where  access  to  a  large  amount  of  text  is  helpful,  please  contact  us.  We  encourage  the
use  of  public  domain  materials  for  these  purposes  and  may  be  able  to  help.

+  Maintain  attribution  The  Google  "watermark"  you  see  on  each  file  is  essential  for  informing  people  about  this  project  and  helping  them  find
additional  materials  through  Google  Book  Search.  Please  do  not  remove  it.

+  Keep  it  legal  Whatever  your  use,  remember  that  you  are  responsible  for  ensuring  that  what  you  are  doing  is  legal.  Do  not  assume  that  just
because  we  believe  a  book  is  in  the  public  domain  for  users  in  the  United  States,  that  the  work  is  also  in  the  public  domain  for  users  in  other
countries.  Whether  a  book  is  still  in  copyright  varies  from  country  to  country,  and  we  can't  offer  guidance  on  whether  any  specific  use  of
any  specific  book  is  allowed.  Please  do  not  assume  that  a  book's  appearance  in  Google  Book  Search  means  it  can  be  used  in  any  manner
anywhere  in  the  world.  Copyright  infringement  liability  can  be  quite  severe.

About  Google  Book  Search

Google's  mission  is  to  organize  the  world's  information  and  to  make  it  universally  accessible  and  useful.  Google  Book  Search  helps  readers
discover  the  world's  books  while  helping  authors  and  publishers  reach  new  audiences.  You  can  search  through  the  full  text  of  this  book  on  the  web


at|http  :  //books  .  google  .  com/


r


STAKFORP  t^NlVEHSlTr  Ll»RARIES


THE    THIRTEEN    BOOKS

OF

EUCLID'S    ELEMENTS


TRANSLATED   FROM   THE  TEXT  OF   HEIBERG

WITH   INTRODUCTION  AND   COMMENTARY


BY
T.   L.   HEATH,   C.B.,   Sc.D.,

SOMETIME   FELLOW   OF   TRINITY    COLLEGE,   CAMBRIDGE


VOLUME   II
BOOKS  III— IX


Cambridge  :
at  the  University  Press

1908


CambrQi0e:

PRINTED   BY  JOHN  CLAY,   M.A.
AT  THE   UNIVERSITY   PRESS.


16.1^45


CONTENTS   OF  VOLUME   II


Book    III.       Definitions i

Propositions 6

Book     IV.      Definitions 78

Propositions 80

Book     V.       Introductory  note 112

Definitions 113

Propositions 138

Book    VI.      Introductory  note 187

Definitions 188

Propositions 191

Book   VII.      Definitions 277

Propositions 296

Book  VIII.            345

Book  IX.               384

Greek  Index  to  Vol.  II 427

English  Index  to  Vol.  II. 431


BOOK   III.


DEFINITIONS.


1 .  Equal  circles  are  those  the  diameters  of  which  are
equal,  or  the  radii  of  which  are  equal.

2.  ,A  straight  line  is  said  to  touch  a  circle  which,
meeting  the  circle  and  being  produced,  does  not  cut  the
circle.

3.  Circles  are  said  to  touch  one  another  which,
meeting  one  another,  do* not  cut  one  another.

4.  In  a  circle  straight  lines  are  said  to  be  equally
distant  from  the  centre  when  the  perpendiculars  drawn
to  them  from  the  centre  are  equal.

5.  And  that  straight  line  is  said  to  be  at  a  greater
distance  on  which  the  greater  perpendicular  falls.

6.  A  segment  of  a  circle  is  the  figure  contained  by  a
straight  line  and  a  circumference  of  a  circle.

7.  An  angle  of  a  segment  is  that  contained  by  a
straight  line  and  a  circumference  of  a  circle.

8.  An  angle  in  a  segment  is  the  angle  which,  when
a  point  is  taken  on  the  circumference  of  the  segment  and
straight  lines  are  joined  from  it  to  the  extremities  of  the
straight  line  which  is  the  base  of  the  segment,  is  contained
by  the  straight  lines  so  joined.

9.  And,  when  the  straight  lines  containing  the  angle  cut
off  a  circumference,  the  angle  is  said  to  stand  upon  that
circumference.


H.  E.  II.


/'


a  .  '/*  BOOK   III  [ill.  DEFF.

•  •  •
lo. /:34*'sector  of  a  circle  is  the  figure  which,  when  an
anglejfs-iconstructed  at  the  centre  of  the  circle,  is  contained  by
the  s.tr^ight  lines  containing  the  angle  and  the  circumference
cut  off  by  them.

**•.,  II.  Similar  segments  of  circles  are  those  which
'.^dmit  equal  angles,  or  in  which  the  angles  are  equal  to  one
''•another.

Definition  i.

"Ifroi  kvkXoi  ctcriV,  £v  at  Sidfitrpoi  icrai  cicriV,  rj  <uv  at  ck  to>k  KfvrpuiV  urat  cicriV.

Many  editors  have  held  that  this  should  not  have  been  included  among
definitions.  Some,  e.g.  Tartaglia,  would  call  it  di  postulate  ]  others,  e.g.  Borelli
and  Playfair,  would  call  it  an  axiom ;  others  again,  as  Billingsley  and  Clavius,
while  admitting  it  as  a  definition^  add  explanations  based  on  the  mode  of
constructing  a  circle;  Simson  and  Pfleiderer  hold  that  it  is  a  theorem.  I
think  however  that  Euclid  would  have  maintained  that  it  is  a  definition  in
the  proper  sense  of  the  term ;  and  certainly  it  satisfies  Aristotle's  requirement
that  a  "definitional  statement"  (opio-riKos  Xdyos)  should  not  only  state  the
fact  (to  oTt)  but  should  indicate  the  cause  as  well  {De  auima  ii.  2,  413  a
13).  The  equality  of  circles  with  equal  radii  can  of  course  be  proved  by
superposition,  but,  as  we  have  seen,  Euclid  avoided  this  method  wherever  he
could,  and  there  is  nothing  technically  wrong  in  saying  "  By  equal  circles  I
mean  circles  with  equal  radii."  No  flaw  is  thereby  introduced  into  the  system
of  the  Elements ;  for  the  definition  could  only  be  objected  to  if  it  could  be
proved  that  the  equality  predicated  of  the  two  circles  in  the  definition  was
not  the  same  thing  as  the  equality  predicated  of  other  equal  figures  in  the
Elements  on  the  basis  of  the  Congruence-Axiom,  and,  needless  to  say,  this
cannot  be  proved  because  it  is  not  true.  The  existefue  of  equal  circles  (in
the  sense  of  the  definition)  follows  from  the  existence  of  equal  straight  lines
and  I.  Post.  3.

The  Greeks  had  no  distinct  word  for  radius^  which  is'  with  them,  as  here,
the  (straight  line  drawn)  from  the  centre  1;  ck  tov  Kivrpov  (€v6€la) ;  and  so
definitely  was  the  expression  appropriated  to  the  radius  that  €k  tov  Kcrrpou
was  used  without  the  article  as  a  predicate,  just  as  if  it  were  one  word.  Thus,
e.g.,  in  ni.  i  ck  Kvnpov  yap  means  "  for  they  are  radii " :  cf.  Archimedes,  On
the  Sphere  and  Cylinder  n.  2,  ij  BE  Ik  tov  KcVrpov  cort  tov,,,kvk\ov,  BE  is  a
radius  of  the  circle.

Definition  2.

Ev^cid  kvkKov  €<f>a'n'T€a$ai  Xcycrai,  lyris  aTrTOfiiinrj  tov  kvkKov  koX  €Jcj8aAAo/xeny

OV  TCflVCt  TOV  KVkXoV.

Euclid*s  phraseology  here  shows  the  regular  distinction  between  airrco-^ai
and  its  compound  i<f>dirT€a$aiy  the  former  meaning  "  to  meet "  and  the  latter
"to  touch."  The  distinction  was  generally  observed  by  Greek  geometers
from  Euclid  onwards.  There  are  however  exceptions  so  far  as  airrca^ai  is
concerned;  thus  it  means  "to  touch"  in  Eucl.  iv.  Def.  5  and  sometimes  in
Archimedes.     On  the  other  hand,  i4>aTrT€<T$ai  is  used  by  Aristotle  in  certain


III.  DEFF.  2—4]  DEFINITIONS  3

cases  where  the  orthodox  geometrical  term  would  be  aTrrco-^ai.  Thus  in
Meteorologica  in.  5  (376  b  9)  he  says  a  certain  circle  will  pass  through  all  the
angles  (airaertof  c^o^crat  twi'  ycovtoiv),  and  (376  a  6)  M  will  lie  on  a  given
(circular)  circumference  (ScSoficn;?  Trcpt^cpcias  c^^'i/rcrai  to  M).  We  shall  find
aTTco^oi  used  in  these  senses  in  Book  iv.  Deff.  2,  6  and  Deff.  i,  3  respectively.
The  latter  of  the  two  expressions  quoted  from  Aristotle  means  that  the  locus
of  yi  is  a  given  circle^  just  as  in  Pappus  at/rcrai  to  <n)/i€lov  Bitrti  StSofiivij^
cv^ciac  means  that  the  locus  of  the  point  is  a  straight  line  given  in  position.

Definition  3.

KvicXoi  i^irT€<r$ai  &XXTJX.(av  XcyoKrat  oItiv€^  avTOfxtvoi  aXXTJX.<av  ov  T€/ivov<nv
SiXXTJXoifs.

Todhunter  remarks  that  different  opinions  have  been  held  as  to  what  is,
or  should  be,  included  in  this  definition,  one  opinion  being  that  it  only  means
that  the  circles  do  not  cut  in  the  neighbourhood  of  the  point  of  contact,
and  that  it  must  be  shown  that  they  do  not  cut  elsewhere,  while  another
opinion  is  that  the  definition  means  that  the  circles  do  not  cut  at  all.
Todhunter  thinks  the  latter  opinion  correct.  I  do  not  think  this  is  proved ;
and  I  prefer  to  read  the  definition  as  meaning  simply  that  the  circles  meet
at  a  point  but  do  not  cut  at  that  point.  I  think  this  interpretation
preferable  for  the  reason  that,  although  Euclid  does  practically  assume  in
III.  II — 13,  without  stating,  the  theorem  that  circles  touching  at  one  point
do  not  intersect  anywhere  else,  he  has  given  us,  before  reaching  that
point  in  the  Book,  means  for  proving  for  ourselves  the  truth  of  that
statement.  In  particular,  he  has  given  us  the  propositions  in.  7,  8  which,
taken  as  a  whole,  give  us  more  information  as  to  the  general  nature  of  a
circle  than  any  other  propositions  that  have  preceded,  and  which  can  be  used,
as  will  be  seen  in  the  sequel,  to  solve  any  doubts  arising  out  of  Euclid's
unproved  assumptions.  Now,  as  a  matter  of  fact,  the  propositions  are  not  used
in  any  of  the  genuine  proofs  of  the  theorems  in  Book  in. ;  in.  8  is  required
for  the  second  proof  of  in.  9  which  Simson  selected  in  preference  to  the  first
proof,  but  the  first  proof  only  is  regarded  by  Heiberg  as  genuine.  Hence  it
would  not  be  easy  to  account  for  the  appearance  of  in.  7,  8  at  all  unless  as
affording  means  of  answering  possible  objections  (cf.  Proclus'  explanation  of
Euclid's  reason  for  inserting  the  second  part  of  i.  5).

External  and  internal  contact  are  not  distinguished  in  Euclid  until  in.
II,  12,  though  ^^  figure  of  in.  6  (not  the  enunciation  in  the  original  text)
represents  the  case  of  internal  contact  only.  But  the  definition  of  touching
circles  here  given  must  be  taken  to  imply  so  much  about  internal  and  external
contact  respectively  as  that  {a)  a  circle  touching  another  internally  must,
immediately  before  "meeting"  it,  have  passed  through  points  within  the
circle  that  it  touches,  and  (b)  a  circle  touching  another  externally  must,
immediately  before  meeting  it,  have  passed  through  points  outside  the  circle
which  it  touches.  These  facts  must  indeed  be  admitted  if  intertial  and
external  are  to  have  any  meaning  at  all  in  this  connexion,  and  they  constitute
a  minimum  admission  necessary  to  the  proof  of  in.  6.

Definition  4.

'El'  fcvfcXfp  i<rov  aviy^iv  a^ro  rov  K^yrpov  cv^cuii  Xcyorrai,  OTav  at  dirb  tov
Kiyrpov  iv  avras  Kd$€TOi  ayd/ACvai  i<rai  uhtlv.

\ — 1


4  BOOK   III  [hi.  deff.  5—9

Definition  5.

McZj^ov  Sc  dirix€iv  Xcycrat,  ^<^*  yv  17  ik^U^mv  KojSero^  TTitrrct.

Definition  6.

T/JLTJfia    kvkXov    iarl    ro    ir€pi€x6fi€vov   a-yrJiiXL    xmo   re    tvOtla%    koX    kvkXov

Definition  7.

TfiT^fiaro^  8c  ymvia.  cotIv  17  ir€pL€XOfi€vrj  viro  t€  cv^cias  ^at  kvkXov  ircpi^cpcia?.

This  definition  is  only  interesting  historically.  The  a//^/^?  ^  a  segment^
being  the  "angle"  formed  by  a  straight  line  and  a  "circumference,"  is  of  the
kind  described  by  Proclus  as  "mixed."  A  particular  "angle"  of  this  sort  is
the  ^^  angle  of  a  semicircle^'  which  we  meet  with  again  in  111.  16,  along  with
the  so-called  "  horn-like  angle  "  (KcparociSiy?),  the  supposed  "  angle  "  between
a  tangent  to  a  circle  and  the  circle  itself.  The  "  angle  of  a  semicircle  "  occurs
once  in  Pappus  (vii.  p.  670,  19),  but  it  there  means  scarcely  more  than  the
comer  of  a  semicircle  regarded  as  a  point  to  which  a  straight  line  is  directed.
Heron  does  not  give  the  definition  of  the  angle  of  a  segment^  and  we  may
conclude  that  the  mention  of  it  and  of  the  angle  of  a  semicircle  in  Euclid  is  a
survival  from  earlier  text-books  rather  than  an  indication  that  Euclid  considered
either  to  be  of  importance  in  elementary  geometry  (cf.  the  note  on  iii.  16
below).

We  have  however,  in  the  note  on  1.  5  above  (Vol.  i.  pp.  252—3),  seen  evi-
dence that  the  angle  of  a  segment  had  played  some  part  in  geometrical  proofs  up
to  Euclid's  time.  It  would  appear  from  the  passage  of  Aristotle  there  quoted
(Anal,  prior,  i.  24,  41  b  13  sqq.)  that  the  theorem  of  1.  5  was,  in  the  text-books
immediately  preceding  Euclid,  proved  by  means  of  the  equality  of  the  two
"  angles  of  any  one  segment.  This  latter  property  must  therefore  have  been
regarded  as  more  elementary  (for  whatever  reason)  than  the  theorem  of  i.  5  ;
indeed  the  definition  as  given  by  Euclid  practically  implies  the  same  thing,
since  it  speaks  of  only  one  "angle  of  a  segment,"  namely  ^^the  angle  contained
by  a  straight  line  and  a  circumference  of  a  circle."  Euclid  abandoned  the
actual  use  of  the  "  angle  "  in  question,  but  no  doubt  thought  it  unnecessary
to  break  with  tradition  so  far  as  to  strike  the  definition  out  also.


Definition  8.

*Ev  Tfn^fULTL  8c  yctfvia  ^crriV,  orav  ctti  ttjs  'n'€pi<f>€p€Uis  tov  T/miyftaTo?  XrjKf^Ojj  tl
<nffi€iov  KOI  air  avrov  iirl  ra  iripara  rrj^  cv^cia?,  17  cori  pdaLS  tov  T/ixiyftaTO?,
ciri^cvx^^^''  fv^ctdt,  17  ir€pu\oiJi€vri  yuivia  viro  tuJk  ^Tnl^t.v\0€i.(Tiav  €v$€l(jjv.


Definition  9.

"Orav  8c  ai  irepiixovtrai  rrjv  ytoviav  cv^ciai  dirokafiPdvuiaC  Ttva  ?r€/ii<^cpciav,
^ir*  €K€ivri^  XcycTttt  ^cj^i^KCvai  1;  yiaviau


III.  DEFF.  lo,  ii]    NOTES  ON   DEFINITIONS   5— ii  5

Definition  10.

Toficvs  8c  kvkXov  icTLVy  orav  wpos  rta  K€vrpif  rov  kvkXov  avaraO^  ycDvia,
TO  7r€pi€xofi€yov  (r)mfia  viro  t€  nav  rrjv  ycDViai^  ircpic;(ov(r(uv  cv^ckuv  xai  1-179
diro\afifiavofUvrj^  vtt*  avroiv  ircpK^cpctas.

A  scholiast  says  that  it  was  the  shoemaket^s  knife^  (rKVTorofAucoq  ro/xcvs,
which  suggested  the  name  to/acv?  for  a  sector  of  a  circle.  The  derivation  of
the  name  from  a  resemblance  of  shape  is  parallel  to  the  use  of  apprjXos  (also
a  shoemaker^ s  knife)  to  denote  the  well  known  figure  of  the  Book  of  Lemmas
partly  attributed  to  Archimedes.

A  wider  definition  of  a  sector  than  that  given  by  Euclid  is  found  in  a
Greek  scholiast  (Heiberg's  Euclid,  Vol.  v.  p.  260)  and  in  an-Nairizi  (ed.  Curtze,
p.  112).  "  There  are  two  varieties  of  sectors ;  the  one  kind  have  the  angular
vertices  at  the  centres,  the  other  at  the  circumferences.  Those  others  which
have  their  vertices  neither  at  the  circumferences  nor  at  the  centres,  but  at
some  other  points,  are  for  that  reason  not  called  sectors  but  sector-like
figures  (roftoctSiJ  crxi/ftaTa)."  The  exact  agreement  between  the  scholiast  and
an-NairizI  suggests  that  Heron  was  the  authority  for  this  explanation.

The  sector4ike  figure  bounded  by  an  arc  of  a  circle  and  two  lines  drawn
from  its  extremities  to  meet  at  any  point  actually  appears  in  Euclid's  book  On
dhnsions  (ircpl  Siaipco-ccui')  discovered  in  an  Arabic  ms.  and  edited  by
Woepcke  (cf.  Vol.  i.  pp.  8 — 10  above).  This  treatise,  alluded  to  by  Proclus,
had  for  its  object  the  division  of  figures  such  as  triangles,  trapezia,
quadrilaterals  and  circles,  by  means  of  straight  lines,  into  parts  equal  or
in  given  ratios.  One  proposition  e.g.  is,  To  divide  a  triangle  into  two  equal
parts  by  a  straight  line  passing  through  a  given  point  on  one  side.  The
proposition  (28)  in  which  the  quasi-sector  occurs  is,  To  divide  such  a  figure  by  a
straight  line  into  two  equal  parts*  The  solution  in  this  case  is  given  by  Cantor
{Gesch.  d.  Math.  i„  pp.  287—8).

If  ABCD  be  the  given  figure,  E  the  middle  point
of  BD  and  EC  at  right  angles  to  BD,
the  broken  line  A  EC  clearly  divides  the  figure  into
two  equal  parts.

Join  AC^  and  draw  EF  parallel  to  it  meeting
AB  in  F.

Join  CF^  when  it  is  seen  that  CF  divides  the
figure  into  two  equal  parts.

Definition  ii.

*OfUHa  rfnifwra  kvk\o}V  iiTTi  ra  &€\6fJLfva  ycovias  Ifras,  ^  cv  0I9  at  yiaviai  urat
dAAi}Xai9  euriV.

De  Morgan  remarks  that  the  use  of  the  word  similar  in  "  similar
segments  "  is  an  anticipation,  and  that  similarity  of  form  is  meant.  He  adds
that  the  definition  is  a  theorem,  or  would  be  if  "  similar  "  had  taken  its  final
meaning.


BOOK   III.     PROPOSITIONS.


Proposition  i.

To  find  the  centre  of  a  given  circle.

Let  ABC  be  the  given  circle  ;
thus  it  is  required  to  find  the  centre  of  the  circle  ABC.

Let    a    straight    line    AB   be    drawn
5  through  it  at  random,  and  let  it  be  bisected
at  the  point  D  ;

from  D  let  DC  be  drawn  at  right  angles
to  AB  and  let  it  be  drawn  through  to  E ;
let  CE  be  bisected  at  F\
lo  I  say  that  F  is  the  centre  of  the  circle
ABC

For  suppose  it  is  not,  but,  if  possible,
let  G  be  the  centre,
and  let  GA,  GD,  GB  be  joined.
IS        Then,  since  AD  is  equal  to  DB,
and  DG  is  common,

the    two    sides   AD,   DG  are   equal    to   the   two   sides
BD,  DG  respectively ;

and  the  base   GA   is  equal   to  the  base  GB,  for  they  are
30  radii ;

therefore  the  angle  ADG  is  equal  to  the  angle  GDB.  [i.  8]

But,  when  a  straight  line  set  up  on  a  straight  line  makes

the  adjacent  angles  equal  to  one  another,  each  of  the  equal

angles  is  right ;  [i.  Def.  lo]

25  therefore  the  angle  GDB  is  right.


in.  i]  PROPOSITION    i  7

But  the  angle  FDB  is  also  right ;
therefore  the  angle  FDB  is  equal  to  the  angle  GDB,  the
greater  to  the  less :  which  is  impossible.

Therefore  G  is  not  the  centre  of  the  circle  ABC.
30       Similarly  we  can  prove  that  neither  is  any  other  point
except  F.

Therefore  the  point  F  is  the  centre  of  the  circle  ABC,

PoRiSM.     From  this  it  is  manifest  that,  if  in  a  circle  a
straight  line  cut  a  straight  line  into  two  equal  parts  and  at
35  right  angles,  the  centre  of  the  circle  is  on  the  cutting  straight
line.

Q.  E.  F.

12.  For  suppose  it  is  not.  This  is  expressed  in  the  Greek  by  the  two  words  M^  Tdp,
bat  such  an  elliptical  phrase  is  impossible  in  English.

17.  the  two  sides  AD,  d6  are  equal  to  the  two  sides  BD,  DG  respectively.
As  before  observed,  Euclid  is  not  always  careful  to  put  the  equals  in  corresponding  order.
The  text  here  has  ••  GD,  DB:'

Todhunter  observes  that,  when,  in  the  construction,  DC  is  said  to  be
produced  to  J?,  it  is  assumed  that  D  is  within  the  circle,  a  fact  which  Euclid
first  demonstrates  in  111.  2.  This  is  no  doubt  true,  although  the  word  hvr\y^vi^
"let  it  be  drawn  through^'^  is  used  instead  of  cK/Sc/SXiyo-^o),  " let  it  h^produced^
And,  although  it  is  not  necessary  to  assume  that  £>  is  within  the  circle,  it  is
necessary  for  the  success  of  the  construction  that  the  straight  line  drawn
through  D  at  right  angles  to  AB  shall  meet  the  circle  in  two  points  (and  no
more) :  an  assumption  which  we  are  not  entitled  to  make  on  the  basis  of  what
has  gone  before  only.

Hence  there  is  much  to  be  said  for  the  alternative  procedure  recommended
by  De  Morgan  as  preferable  to  that  of  Euclid.  De  Morgan  would  first  prove
the  fundamental  theorem  that  "the  line  which  bisects  a  chord  perpendicularly
must  contain  the  centre,**  and  then  make  iii.  i,  in.  25  and  iv.  5  immediate
corollaries  of  it.  The  fundamental  theorem  is  a  direct  consequence  of  the
theorem  that,  if  P  is  any  point  equidistant  from  A
and  j9,  then  P  lies  on  the  straight  line  bisecting  AB
perpendicularly.  We  then  take  any  two  chords  ABy
i^Cof  the  given  circle  and  draw  DO^  EO  bisecting
them  perpendicularly.  Unless  BA^  AC  are  in  one
straight  line,  the  straight  lines  DO^  EO  must  meet
in  some  point  O  (see  note  on  iv.  5  for  possible
methods  of  proving  this).  And,  since  both  DOy
EO  must  contain  the  centre,  O  must  be  the  centre.

This  method,  which  seems  now  to  be  generally
preferred  to  Euclid's,  has  the  advantage  of  showing

that,  in  order  to  find  the  centre  of  a  circle,  it  is  sufficient  to  know  three  points
on  the  circumference.  If  therefore  two  circles  have  three  points  in  common,
they  must  have  the  same  centre  and  radius,  so  that  two  circles  cannot  have
three  points  in  common  without  coinciding  entirely.  Also,  as  indicated  by
De  Morgan,  the  same  construction  enables  us  (i)  to  draw  the  complete  circle
of  which  a  segment  or  arc  only  is  given  (in.  25),  and  (2)  to  circumscribe  a
circle  to  any  triangle  (iv.  5).


8  BOOK   III  [ill.  I,  2

But,  if  the  Greeks  had  used  this  construction  for  finding  the  centre  of  a
circle,  they  would  have  considered  it  necessary  to  add  a  proof  that  no  other
point  than  that  obtained  by  the  construction  can  be  the  centre,  as  is  clear
both  from  the  similar  reductio  ad  absurdum  in  in.  i  and  also  from  the  fact
that  Euclid  thinks  it  necessary  to  prove  as  a  separate  theorem  (in.  9)  that,  if
a  point  within  a  circle  be  such  that  three  straight  lines  (at  least)  drawn  from  it
to  the  circumference  are  equal,  that  point  must  be  the  centre.  In  fact,
however,  the  proof  amounts  to  no  more  than  the  remark  that  the  two
perpendicular  bisectors  can  have  no  more  than  one  point  common.

And  even  in  De  Morgan's  method  there  is  a  yet  unproved  assumption.
In  order  that  DO^  EO  may  meet,  it  is  necessary  that  AB^  AC  should  not  be
in  one  straight  line  or,  in  other  words,  that  BC  should  not  pass  through  A,
This  results  from  iii.  2,  which  therefore,  strictly  speaking,  should  precede.

To  return  to  Euclid's  own  proposition  iii.  i,  it  will  be  observed  that  the
demonstration  only  shows  that  the  centre  of  the  circle  cannot  lie  on  either
side  of  CD^  so  that  it  must  lie  on  CD  or  CD  produced.  It  is  however  taken
for  granted  rather  than  proved  that  the  centre  must  be  the  middle  point  of
CE,  The  proof  of  this  by  reductio  ad  absurdum  is  however  so  obvious  as  to
be  scarcely  worth  giving.  The  same  consideration  which  would  prove  it  may
be  used  to  show  that  a  circle  cannot  have  more  than  one  centre,  a  proposition
which,  if  thought  necessary,  may  be  added  to  in.  i  as  a  corollary.

Simson  observed  that  the  proof  of  in.  i  could  not  but  be  by  reductio  ad
absurdum.  At  the  beginning  of  Book  in.  we  have  nothing  more  to  base  the
proof  upon  than  the  definition  of  a  circle,  and  this  cannot  be  made  use  of
unless  we  assume  some  point  to  be  the  centre.  We  cannot  however  assume
that  the  point  found  by  the  construction  is  the  centre,  because  that  is  the
thing  to  be  proved.  Nothing  is  therefore  left  to  us  but  to  assume  that  some
other  point  is  the  centre  and  then  to  prove  that,  whatever  other  point  is
taken,  an  absurdity  results;  whence  we  can  infer  that  the  point  found  is
the  centre.

The  Porism  to  in.  i  is  inserted,  as  usual,  parenthetically  before  the  w^ords
oTTcp  Vki  iroL^aLj  which  of  course  refer  to  the  problem  itself.

Proposition  2.

//  on  the  circumference  of  a  circle  two  points  be  taken  at
random^  the  straight  line  joining  the  points  will  fall  within
the  circle.

Let  ABC  be  a  circle,  and  let  two  points  A,  B  be  taken
at  random  on  its  circumference  ;
I  say  that  the  straight  line  joined  from
A  to  B  will  fall  within  the  circle.

For  suppose  it  does  not,  but,  if
possible,  let  it  fall  outside,  as  ABB ;
let  the  centre  of  the  circle  ABC  be
taken  [m.  i],  and  let  it  be  D ;  let  DA,
DB  be  joined,  and  let  DFE  be  drawn
through.


III.  2]  PROPOSITIONS    I,  2  9

Then,  since  DA  is  equal  to  DB,

the  angle  DAE  is  also  equal  to  the  angle  DBE.      [i.  5]
And,  since  one  side  ABB  of  the  triangle  DAE  is  produced,
the  angle  DEB  is  greater  than  the  angle  DAE.     [i.  16]
But  the  angle  DAE  is  equal  to  the  angle  DBE ;
therefore  the  angle  DEB  is  greater  than  the  angle  DBE.
And  the  greater  angle  is  subtended  by  the  greater  side  ;  [i.  19]
therefore  DB  is  greater  than  DE.
But  DB  is  equal  to  DF\
therefore  DF  is  greater  than  DEy

the  less  than  the  greater :  which  is  impossible.

Therefore  the  straight  line  joined  from  A  to  B  will  not
fall  outside  the  circle.

Similarly  we  can  prove  that  neither  will  it  fall  on  the
circumference  itself;

therefore  it  will  fall  within.

Therefore  etc.

Q.   E.  D.

The  reductio  ad  absurdum  form  of  proof  is  not  really  necessary  in  this  case,
and  it  has  the  additional  disadvantage  that  it  requires  the  destruction  of  two
hypotheses,  namely  that  the  chord  is  (i)  outside,  (2)  on
the  circle.  To  prore  the  proposition  directly,  we  have
only  to  show  that,  if  E  be  any  point  on  the  straight  line
AB  between  A  and  B^  DE  is  less  than  the  radius  of  the
circle.  This  may  be  done  by  the  method  shown  above,
under  i.  24,  for  proving  what  is  assumed  in  that
proposition,  namely  that,  in  the  figure  of  the  proposition,
/^  falls  below  EG  if  DE  is  not  greater  than  DR  The
assumption  amounts  to  the  following  proposition,  which
De  Morgan  would  make  to  precede  i.  24 :  "  Every
straight  line  drawn  from  the  vertex  of  a  triangle  to  the  base  is  less  than
the  greater  of  the  two  sides,  or  than  either  if  they  be  equal."  The  case
here  is  that  in  which  the  two  sides  are  equal ;  and,  since  the  angle  DAB  is
equal  to  the  angle  DBA^  while  the  exterior  angle  DEA  is  greater  than  the
interior  and  opposite  angle  DBA^  it  follows  that  the  angle  DEA  is  greater
than  the  angle  DAE^  whence  DE  must  be  less  than  DA  or  DB,

Camerer  points  out  that  we  may  add  to  this  proposition  the  further
statement  that  all  points  on  AB  produced  in  either  direction  are  outside  the
circle.  This  follows  from  the  proposition  (also  proved  by  means  of  the
theorems  that  the  exterior  angle  of  a  triangle  is  greater  than  either  of  the
interior  and  opposite  angles  and  that  the  greater  angle  is  subtended  by
the  greater  side)  which  De  Morgan  proposes  to  introduce  after  i.  21,  namely,

'^  The  perpendicular  is  the  shortest  straight  line  that  can  be  drawn  from  a


lO


BOOK   III  [ill.  2.  3


given  point  to  a  given  straight  line,  and  of  others  that  which  is  nearer  to  the
perpendicular  is  less  than  the  more  remote,  and  the  converse ;  also  not  more
than  two  equal  straight  lines  can  be  drawn  from  the  point  to  the  line,  one  on
each  side  of  the  perpendicular."

The  fact  that  not  more  than  two  equal  straight  lines  can  be  drawn  from  a
given  point  to  a  given  straight  line  not  passing  through  it  is  proved  by  Proclus
on  I.  1 6  (see  the  note  to  that  proposition)  and  can  alternatively  be  proved  by
means  of  i.  7,  as  shown  above  in  the  note  on  i.  1 2.     It  follows  that

A  straight  line  cannot  cut  a  circle  in  more  than  two  points  :
a  proposition  which  De  Morgan  would  introduce  here  after  iir.  2.     The  proof
given  does  not  apply  to  a  straight  line  passing  through  the  centre ;  but  that
such  a  line  only  cuts  the  circle  in  two  points  is  self-evident


Proposition  3.

If  in  a  circle  a  straight  line  through  the  centre  bisect  a
straight  line  not  through  the  centre^  it  also  cuts  it  at  right
angles ;  and  if  it  cut  it  at  right  angles^  it  also  bisects  it.

Let  ABC  be  a  circle,  and  in  it  let  a  straight  line  CD
5  through  the  centre  bisect  a  straight  line
AB  not  through  the  centre  at  the  point
F',

I  say  that  it  also  cuts  it  at  right  angles.
For  let  the  centre  of  the  circle  ABC
10  be  taken,  and  let  it  be  i?;  let  EA,  EB
be  joined.

Then,  since  AF  is  equal  to  FBy
and  FE  is  common,

two  sides  are  equal  to  two  sides ;
IS        and  the  base  EA  is  equal  to  the  base  EB ;

therefore  the  angle  AFE  is  equal  to  the  angle  BFE.   [i.  8]

But,  when  a  straight  line  set  up  on  a  straight  line  makes

the  adjacent  angles  equal  to  one  another,  each  of  the  equal

angles  is  right ;  [i.  Def.  10]

30  therefore  each  of  the  angles  AFE,  BFE  is  right.

Therefore  CD,  which  is  through  the  centre,  and  bisects
AB  which  is  not  through  the  centre,  also  cuts  it  at  right
angles.

Again,  let  CD  cut  AB  at  right  angles  ;

25  I  say  that  it  also  bisects  it,  that  is,  that  AFis  equal  to  FB.


111.3,4]  PROPOSITIONS   2— 4  "

For,  with  the  same  construction,

since  EA  is  equal  to  EB^
the  angle  EAF  is  also  equal  to  the  angle  EBF.  [i.  s]

But  the  right  angle  AFE  is  equal  to  the  right  angle  BFE,
30  therefore  EAF,  EBF  are  two  triangles  having  two  angles
equal  to  two  angles  and  one  side  equal  to  one  side,  namely
EF,  which  is  common  to  them,  and  subtends  one  of  the  equal
angles ;

therefore  they  will  also  have  the  remaining  sides  equal  to
35  the  remaining  sides ;  [i.  26]

therefore  AF  is  equal  to  FB.
Therefore  etc.

Q.  E.  D.

26.    with  the  same  construction,  rdv  a&riay  KaraffKevaaSim-ufv,

This  proposition  asserts  the  two  partial  converses  (of.  note  on  i.  6)  of  the
Porism  to  iii.  i.     De  Morgan  would  place  it  next  to  in.  i.

Proposition  4.

If  in  a  circle  two  straight  lines  cut  one  another  which  are
not  through  the  centre,  they  do  not  bisect  one  another.

Let  ABCD  be  a  circle,  and  in  it  let  the  two  straight  lines
AC,  BD,  which  are   not   through   the
centre,  cut  one  another  at  E ;

I  say  that  they  do  not  bisect  one
another.

For,  if  possible,  let  them  bisect  one
another,  so  that  AE  is  equal  to  EC,
and  BE  to  ED  ;

let  the  centre  of  the  circle  ABCD  be
taken  [m.  i],  and  let  it  be  F\  let  FE  be
joined.

Then,  since  a  straight  line  FE  through  the  centre  bisects
a  straight  line  AC  not  through  the  centre,

it  also  cuts  it  at  right  angles  ;  [iii.  3]

therefore  the  angle  FEA  is  right.
Again,  since  a  straight  line  FE  bisects  a  straight  line  BD,
it  also  cuts  it  at  right  angles  ;  fm.  3]

therefore  the  angle  FEB  is  right


12  BOOK  III  [in.  4f  S

But  the  angle  /^BA  was  also  proved  right ;
therefore  the  angle  jFBA  is  equal  to  the  angle  FEB,
the  less  to  the  greater :  which  is  impossible.

Therefore  AC,  BD  do  not  bisect  one  another.
Therefore  etc.

Q.  E.  D.


Proposition  5.

If  two  circles  cut  one  another,  they  will  not  have  the  same
centre.

For  let  the  circles  ABC,  CDG  cut  one  another  at  the
points  B,  C ;

1  say  that  they  will  not  have  the  same
centre.

For,  if  possible,  let  it  be  iG*;  let  EC
be  joined,  and  let  EFG  be  drawn
through  at  random.

Then,  since  the  point  E  is  the
centre  of  the  circle  ABC,

EC  is  equal  to  EF.  [i.  Def.  15]

Again,  since  the  point  E  is  the  centre  of  the  circle  CDG,
EC  is  equal  to  EG.

But  EC  was  proved  equal  to  EF  also  ;
therefore   EF  is   also   equal    to  EG,   the  less  to  the
greater  :  which  is  impossible.

Therefore  the  point  E  is  not  the  centre  of  the  circles
ABC,  CDG.
Therefore  etc.

Q.  E.  D.

The  propositions  in.  5,  6  could  be  combined  in  one.  It  makes  no
difference  whether  the  circles  cut,  or  meet  without  cutting,  so  long  as  they  do
not  coincide  altogether;  in  either  case  they  cannot  have  the  same  centre.
The  two  cases  are  covered  by  the  enunciation  :  If  the  circumferences  of  two
circles  meet  at  a  point  they  cannot  have  the  same  centre.  On  the  other  hand.  If
two  circles  have  the  same  centre  and  one  point  in  their  circumferences  common,
they  must  coincide  altogether.


III.  6]


PROPOSITIONS  4—6


13


Proposition  6.

If  two  circles  touch  one  another,  they  will  not  have  the
same  centre.

For  let  the  two  circles  ABC,  CDE  touch  one  another
at  the  point  C ;

I    say   that   they   will    not   have    the
same  centre.

F'or,  if  possible,  let  it  be  F\  let
FC  be  joined,  and  let  FEB  be  drawn
through  at  random.

Then,  since  the  point  F  is  the
centre  of  the  circle  ABC,

FC  is  equal  to  FB.

Again,  since  the  point  F  is  the
centre  of  the  circle  CDE,

FC  is  equal  to  FE.

But  FC  was  proved  equal  to  FB  ;

therefore  FE  is  also  equal  to  FB,  the  less  to  the  greater:
which  is  impossible.

Therefore  F  is  not  the  centre  of  the  circles  ABC,  CDE.

Therefore  etc.

Q.  E.  D.


The  English  editions  enunciate  this  proposition  of  circles  touching
internally,  but  the  word  (ciros)  is  a  mere  interpolation,  which  was  no  doubt
made  because  Euclid's  figure  showed  only  the  case  of  internal  contact.  The
fact  is  that,  in  his  usual  manner,  he  chose  for  demonstration  the  more  difficult
case,  and  left  the  other  case  (that  of  external  contact)  to  the  intelligence  of
the  reader.  It  is  indeed  sufficiently  self-evident  that  circles  touching  externally
cannot  have  the  same  centre ;  but  Euclid's  proof  can  really  be  used  for  this
case  too.

Camerer  remarks  that  the  proof  of  in.  6  seems  to  assume  tacitly  that  the
points  E  and  B  cannot  coincide,  or  that  circles  which  touch  internally  at  C
cannot  meet  in  any  other  point,  whereas  this  fact  is  not  proved  by  Euclid  till
III.  13.  But  no  such  general  assumption  is  necessary  here;  it  is  only
necessary  that  one  line  drawn  from  the  assumed  common  centre  should  meet
the  circles  in  different  points;  and  the  very  notion  of  internal  contact  requires
that,  before  one  circle  meets  the  other  on  its  inner  side,  it  must  have  passed
through  points  within  the  latter  circle.


14  BOOK  III  [ill.  7

Proposition  7.

If  on  the  diaffu'ter  of  a  circle  a  point  be  taken  which  is  fiat
the  centre  of  the  circle,  and  from  the  point  straight  lines  fall
upon  the  circle,  that  will  be  greatest  on  which  the  centre  is,  the
remainder  of  the  same  diameter  will  be  least,  and  of  the  rest
5  the  nearer  to  the  straight  line  through  the  centre  is  cUways
greater  than  the  more  remote^  and  only  two  equal  straight
lines  will  fall  from  the  point  on  t/te  circle,  one  on  each  side
of  the  least  straight  line.

Let  ABCD  be  a  circle,  and  let  AD  be  a  diameter  of  it ;
10  on  AD  let  a  point  /^be  taken  which  is  not  the  centre  of  the
circle,  let  E  be  the  centre  of  the  circle,

and  from  F  let  straight  lines  FB,  FC,  FG  fall  upon  the  circle
ABCD\

I  say  that  FA  is  greatest,  FD  is  least,  and  of  the  rest  FB  is
15  greater  than  FC,  and  FC  than  FG,
For  let  BE,  CE,  GE  be  joined.
Then,   since  in   any   triangle   two
sides  are  greater  than  the  remaining
one,  [i.  20]

20  EB,  EF  are  greater  than  BF.

But  AE.  is  equal  to  BE ;
therefore  AFis  greater  than  BF.
Again,  since  B/:  is  equal  to  CE,
and  FE  is  common,
25  the  two  sides  BE,  EF  are  equal  to  the  two  sides  CE,  EF.
But  the  angle  BEF  is  also  greater  than  the  angle  CEF\
therefore  the  base  BF  is  greater  than  the  base  CF.  [i.  24]

For  the  same  reason

CF  is  also  greater  than  FG.
30        Again,  since  GF,  FE  are  greater  than  EG,
and  EG  is  equal  to  ED,

GF,  FE  are  greater  than  ED.
Let  EF  be  subtracted  from  each  ;

therefore  the  remainder  GF  is  greater  than  the  remainder
ihFD.

Therefore  FA  is  greatest,  FD  is  least,  and  FB  is  greater
than  FC,  and  FC  than  FG,


III.  7]  PROPOSITION   7  IS

I  say  also  that  from  the  point  F  only  two  equal  straight
lines  will  fall  on  the  circle  ABCD,  one  on  each  side  of  the
40  least  FD.

For  on  the  straight  line  EF,  and  at  the  point  E  on  it,  let
the  angle  FEHhe.  constructed  equal  to  the  angle  GEF  [i.  23],
and  let  FH  be  joined.

Then,  since  GE  is  equal  to  EHy
45  and  EF  is  common,

the  two  sides  GE,  EF  are  equal  to  the  two  sides  HE,  EF\
and  the  angle  GEF  is  equal  to  the  angle  HEF ;

therefore  the  base  FG  is  equal  to  the  base  FH.        [i.  4]
I  say  again  that  another  straight  line  equal  to  FG  will  not
50  fall  on  the  circle  from  the  point  F.
For,  if  possible,  let  FK  so  fall.
Then,  since  /^A'  is  equal  to  FG,  and  FH  to  FG,

FK  is  also  equal  to  FH,
the  nearer  to  the  straight  line  through  the  centre  being
55  thus  equal  to  the  more  remote  :  which  is  impossible.

Therefore  another  straight  line  equal  to  GF  will  not  fall
from  the  point  F  upon  the  circle  ;

therefore  only  one  straight  line  will  so  fall.
Therefore  etc.

Q.  E.  D.

4.  of  the  same  diameter.  I  have  inserted  these  words  for  clearness*  sake.  The  text
has  simply  i)\a.-x\oTfi  di  ^  Xocin^,  "  and  the  remaininc^  (straight  line)  least."

7,  39.  one  on  each  side.  The  word  *•  one  'is  not  in  the  Greek,  but  is  necessary  to
give  the  force  of  ^0'  Udrtpa.  t^j  Aaxf<rn;j,  literally  *'  on  both  sides,"  or  **  on  each  of  the  two
sides,  of  the  least."

De  Morgan  points  out  that  there  is  an  unproved  assumption  in  this
demonstration.  We  draw  straight  lines  from  F,  as  FB,  FC,  such  that  the
angle  DFB  is  greater  than  the  angle  DFC  and  then  assume,  with  respect  to
the  straight  lines  drawn  from  the  centre  E  to  B,  C,  that
the  angle  DEB  is  greater  than  the  angle  DEC,  This
is  most  easily  proved,  I  think,  by  means  of  the  converse
of  part  of  the  theorem  about  the  lengths  of  diflferent
straight  lines  drawn  to  a  given  straight  line  from  an
external  point  which  was  mentioned  above  in  the  note
on  III.  2.  This  converse  would  be  to  the  effect  that.  If
two  unequal  straight  lines  be  drawn  from  a  point  to  a
given  straight  line  which  are  not  perpendicular  to  the
straight  line,  the  greater  of  the  two  is  the  further  from  the  perpendicular  from  the
point  to  the  given  straight  line.  This  can  either  be  proved  from  its  converse  by
reductio  ad  absurdum,  or  established  directly  by  means  of  i.  47.  Thus,  in  the
accompanying  figure,  FB  must  cut  EC  in  some  point  M,  since  the  angle  BFE
is  less  than  the  angle  CFE,

Therefore  EM  is  less  than  EC,  and  therefore  than  EB,


i6  BOOK   III  [ill.  7

Hence  the  point  B  in  which  FB  meets  the  circle  is  further  from  the  foot
of  the  perpendicular  from  E  on  FB  than  M  is ;

therefore  the  angle  BEF  is  greater  than  the  angle  CEF,

Another  way  of  enunciating  the  first  part  of  the  proposition  is  that  of
Mr  H.  M.  Taylor,  viz.  **  Of  all  straight  lines  drawn  to  a  circle  from  an  internal
point  not  the  centre,  the  one  which  passes  through  the  centre  is  the  greatest,
and  the  one  which  when  produced  passes  through  the  centre  is  the  least;  and
of  any  two  others  the  one  which  subtends  the  greater  angle  at  the  centre  is  the
greater."  The  substitution  of  the  angle  subtended  at  the  centre  as  the  criterion
no  doubt  has  the  effect  of  avoiding  the  necessity  of  dealing  with  the  unproved
assumption  in  Euclid's  proof  referred  to  above,  and  the  similar  substitution  in
the  enunciation  of  the  first  part  of  in.  8  has  the  effect  of  avoiding  the  necessity
for  dealing  with  like  unproved  assumptions  in  Euclid's  proof,  as  well  as  the
complication  caused  by  the  distinction  in  Euclid's  enunciation  between  lines
falling  from  an  external  point  on  the  convex  circumference  and  on  the  concave
circumference  of  a  circle  respectively,  terms  which  are  not  defined  but  taken  as
understood.

Mr  Nixon  {Euclid  Revised)  similarly  substitutes  as  the  criterion  the  angle
subtended  at  the  centre,  but  gives  as  his  reason  that  the  words  "  nearer  "  and
**more  remote"  in  Euclid's  enunciation  are  scarcely  clear  enough  without
some  definition  of  the  sense  in  which  they  are  used,  Smith  and  Bryant  make
the  substitution  in  in.  8,  but  follow  Euclid  in  ni.  7.

On  the  whole,  I  think  that  Euclid's  plan  of  taking  straight  lines  drawn  from
the  point  which  is  not  the  centre  direct  to  the  circumference  and  making
greater  or  less  angles  at  that  point  with  the  straight  line  containing  it  and  the
centre  is  the  more  instructive  and  useful  of  the  two,  since  it  is  such  lines
drawn  in  any  manner  to  the  circle  from  the  point  which  are  immediately  useful
in  the  proofs  of  later  propositions  or  in  resolving  difficulties  connected  with
those  proofs.

Heron  again  (an-NairizI,  ed.  Curtze,  pp.  114 — 5)  has  a  note  on  this
proposition  which  is  curious.  He  first  of  all  says  that  Euclid  proves  that  lines
nearer  the  centre  are  greater  than  those  more  remote  from  it.  This  is  a
different  view  of  the  question  from  that  taken  in  Euclid's  proposition  as  we
have  it,  in  which  the  lines  are  not  nearer  to  and  more  remote  from  the  centre
but  from  the  line  through  the  centre,  Euclid  takes  lines  inclined  to  the  latter
line  at  a  greater  or  less  angle  ;  Heron  introduces  distance  from  the  centre  in
the  sense  of  Deff.  4,  5,  i.e.  in  the  sense  of  the  length  of  the  perpendicular  drawn
to  the  line  from  the  centre,  which  Euclid  does  not  use  till  in.  14,  15.  Heron
then  observes  that  in  Euclid's  proposition  the  lines  compared  are  all  drawn  on
one  side  of  the  line  through  the  centre,  and  sets  himself  to  prove  the  same
truth  of  lines  on  opposite  sides  which  are  more  or  less  dSsXzxA  fram  the  centre.
The  new  point  of  view  necessitates  a  quite  different  line  of  proof,  anticipating
the  methods  of  later  propositions.

The  first  case  taken  by  Heron  is  that  of  two  straight  lines  such  that  the
perpendiculars  from  the  centre  on  them  fall  on  the  lines  themselves  and  not
in  either  case  on  the  line  produced.

Let  A  be  the  given  point,  D  the  centre,  and  let
AE  be  nearer  the  centre  than  AFy  so  that  the
perpendicular  DG  on  AE  is  less  than  the  perpen-
dicular D If  on  AF,

Then     sqs.  on  DG^  GE  =  sqs.  on  DH,  HF^
and       sqs.  on  DG^  GA  =  sqs.  on  DH^  HA,

But  sq.  on  DG  <  sq.  on  DH,


in.  7,  8]


PROPOSITIONS   7,  8


17


Therefore  sq.  on  GE  >  sq.  on  IfJ%

and  sq.  on  GA  >  sq.  on  If  A,

whence  GE  >  HF,

GA  >  HA.
Therefore,  by  addition,  AE  >  AF,
The  other  case  taken  by  Heron  is  that  where
one  perpendicular  falls  on  the  line  produced,  as  in
the  annexed  figure.     In  this  case  we  prove  in  like
manner  that  GE  >  HF,

and  GA  >  AH.

Thus  AE  is  greater  than  the  sum  of  HFy  AH^
whence,  afortiori^  AE  is  greater  than  the  difference
of  HF,  AH,  i.e.  than  AF.

Heron  does  not  give  the  third  possible  case,  that,  namely,  where  both
perpendiculars  fall  on  the  lines  produced,     The  fact
is  that,  in  this  case,  the  foregoing  method  breaks
down.     Though  AE  be  nearer  to  the  centre  than
AF\vi  the  sense  that  DG  is  less  than  DH,
AE  is  not  greater  but  less  than  AF.
Moreover  this  cannot  be  proved  by  the  same
method  as  before.

For,  while  we  can  prove  that

GE  >  HF,
GA  >  AH,
we  cannot  make  any  inference  as  to  the  comparative  length  of  AE,  AF.

To  judge  by  Heron's  corresponding  note  to  iii.  8,  he  would,  to  prove  this
case,  practically  prove  in.  35  first,  i.e.  prove  that,  if  EA  be  produced  to  K
and  FA  to  Z,

rect.  FA,  AL  =  rect.  EA,  AK,
from  which  he  would  infer  that,  since  AK>  AL  by  the  first  case,

AE<AF.
An  excellent  moral  can,  I  think,  be  drawn  from  the  note  of  Heron.
Having  the  appearance  of  supplementing,  or  giving  an  alternative  for,  Euclid's
proposition,  it  cannot  be  said  to  do  more  than  confuse  the  subject.  Nor  was
it  necessary  to  find  a  new  proof  for  the  case  where  the  two  lines  which  are
compared  are  on  opposite  sides  of  the  diameter,  since  Euclid  shows  that  for  each
line  from  the  point  to  the  circumference  on  one  side  of  the  diameter  there  is
another  of  the  same  length  equally  inclined  to  it  on  the  other  side.


Proposition  8.

If  a  point  be  taken  outside  a  circle  and  from  the  point
straight  lines  be  drawn  through  to  the  circle,  one  of  which
is  through  the  centre  and  the  others  are  drawn  at  random,
then,  of  the  straight  lines  which  fall  on  the  concave  circum-
ference, that  through  the  centre  is  greatest,  while  of  the  rest

H.  E.  II.  1


i8


BOOK  III


[hi.  8


the  nearer  to  that  through  the  centre  is  always  greater  than
the  more  remote,  but,  of  the  straight  lines  falling  on  the  convex
circumference,  that  between  the  point  and  the  diameter  is  least,
while  of  the  rest  the  nearer  to  the  least  Js  always  less  than  the
more  remote ^  and  only  two  equal  straight  lines  will  fall  on  the
circle  from  the  point,  one  on  ecuh  side  of  the  least.

Let  ABC  be  a  circle,  and  let  a  point  D  be  taken  outside
ABC;  let  there  be  drawn  through
from  it  straight  lines  DA,  DE,  DF,
DC,  and  let  DA  be  through  the  centre;
I  say  that,  of  the  straight  lines  falling
on  the  concave  circumference  AEFC,
the  straight  line  DA  through  the  centre
is  greatest,

while  DE  is  greater  than  DF  and  DF
thanZ?C;

but,  of  the  straight  lines  falling  on  the
convex  circumference  HLKG,  the
straight  line  DG  between  the  point
and  the  diameter  -^6^  is  least;  and
the  nearer  to  the  least  DG  is  always
less  than  the  more  remote,  namely  DK
than  DL,  and  DL  than  DH.

For  let  the  centre  of  the  circle  ABC  be  taken  [in.  i],  and
let  it  be  J/;  let  ME,  MF,  MC,  MK,  ML,  MH  be  joined.

Then,  since  AM  is  equal  to  EM,
let  MD  be  added  to  each  ;

therefore  AD  is  equal  to  EM,  MD.

But  EM,  MD  are  greater  than  ED ;  [i.  20]

therefore  AD  is  also  greater  than  ED.

Again,  since  ME  is  equal  to  MF,

and  MD  is  common,
therefore  EM,  MD  are  equal  to  FM,  MD ;

and  the  angle  EMD  is  greater  than  the  angle  FMD ;

therefore  the  base  ED  is  greater  than  the  base  FD.

[«.  24]
Similarly  we  can  prove  that  FD  is  greater  than  CD ;

therefore  DA  is  greatest,  while  DE  is  greater  than  DF,

and  DF  than  DC.


III.  8]  PROPOSITION   8  19

Next,  since  MK,  KD  are  greater  than  MD,  [i.  20]

and  MG  is  equal  to  MK,

therefore  the  remainder  KD  is  greater  than  the  remainder
GD,

so  that  GD  is  less  than  KD.
And,  since  on  MD,  one  of  the  sides  of  the  triangle  MLD,
two  straight  lines  MK,  KD  were  constructed  meeting  within
the  triangle,

therefore  MKf  KD  are  less  than  ML,  LD ;  [i.  21]

and  MK  is  equal  to  ML  ;

therefore  the  remainder  DK  is  less  than  the  remainder
DL.

Similarly  we  can  prove  that  DL  is  also  less  than  DH ;
therefore  DG  is  least,  while  DK  is  less  than  DL,  and
DL  than  DH.

I  say  also  that  only  two  equal  straight  lines  will  fall  from
the  point  D  on  the  circle,  one  on  each  side  of  the  least  DG.

On  the  straight  line  MD,  and  at  the  point  M  on  it,
let  the  angle  DMB  be  constructed  equal  to  the  angle  KMD,
and  let  DB  be  joined.

Then,  since  MK  is  equal  to  MB,
and  MD  is  common,

the  two  sides  KM,  MD  are  equal  to  the  two  sides  BM,
MD  respectively ;
and  the  angle  KMD  is  equal  to  the  angle  BMD ;

therefore  the  base  DK  is  equal  to  the  base  DB.       [i.  4]

I  say  that  no  other  straight  line  equal  to  the  straight  line
DK  will  fall  on  the  circle  from  the  point  D.

For,  if  possible,  let  a  straight  line  so  fall,  and  let  it  be  DN.
Then,  since  DK  is  equal  to  DN,

while  DK  is  equal  to  DB,

DB  is  also  equal  to  DN,
that  is,  the  nearer  to  the  least  DG  equal  to  the  more  remote :
which  was  proved  impossible.

Therefore  no  more  than  two  equal  straight  lines  will  fall
on  the  circle  ABC  from  the  point  D,  one  on  each  side  ot
DG  the  least.

Therefore  etc.  Q.  e.  d.


20


BOOK  III


[lIL  8


As  De  Morgan  points  out,  there  are  here  two  assumptions  similar  to
that  tacitly  made  in  the  proof  of  in.  7,  namely  that
K  falls  within  the  triangle  DLM  and  E  outside
the  triangle  DFM,  These  facts  can  be  proved
in  the  same  way  as  the  assumption  in  in.  7.  Let
DE  meet  FM  in  Y  and  LM  in  Z  Then,  as
before,  MZ  is  less  than  ML  and  therefore  than
MK,  Therefore  K  lies  further  than  Z  from
the  foot  of  the  perpendicular  from  M  on  DE,
Similarly  E  lies  further  than  Y  from  the  foot  of  the
same  perpendicular.

Heron  deals  with  lines  on  opposite  sides  of  the
diameter  through  the  external  point  in  a  manner  similar  to  that  adopted  in
his  previous  note.  >\^

For  the  case  where  E^  F  are  the  second  points  in
which  AE,  AF  meet  the  circle  the  method  answers
well  enough.

If  AE  is  nearer  the  centre  D  than  AFx^^

sqs.  on  DG,  GE  =  sqs.  on  Dff,  HF
and  sqs.  on  DGy  GA  =  sqs.  on  DJIy  HA,

whence,  since  DG  <  DH,

it  follows  that  GE  >  HF,

and  AG>AH,

so  that,  by  addition,         AE  >  AF,

But,  if  A',  Z  be  the  points  in  which  AE,  A F  first
meet  the  circle,  the  method  fails,  and  Heron  is  reduced  to  proving,  in  the  first
instance,  the  property  usually  deduced  from  in.  36.     He  argues  thus  :
AKD  being  an  obtuse  angle,
sq.  on  AD  =  sum  of  sqs.  on  A/C,  KD  and  twice  rect.  AK^  KG,

ALD  is  also  an  obtuse  angle,  and  it  follows  that

sum  of  sqs.  on  AK,  KD  and  twice  rect.  AK^  KG  is  equal  to
sum  of  sqs.  on  AL,  LD  and  twice  rect.  AL^  LH.

Therefore,  the  squares  on  KD,  LD  being  equal,
sq.  on  ^  AT  and  twice  rect.  AK,  KG  -  sq.  on  AL  and  twice  rect.  AL,  LH^
or  sq.  on  AKsind  rect.  AK,  KE  =  sq.  on  AL  and  rect.  AL,  LF,

i.e.  rect.  AK,  AE  =  rect.  AL,  AF

But,  by  the  first  part,  AE  >  AF

Therefore  AK  <  AL.

III.  7,  8  deal  with  the  lengths  of  the  several  lines  drawn  to  the  circum-
ference of  a  circle  (i)  from  a  point  within  it,  (2)  from  a  point  outside  it;  but  a
similar  proposition  is  true  of  straight  lines  drawn  from  a  point  on  the
circumference  itself :  If  any  point  be  taken  on  the  circumference  of  a  circle^
then,  of  all  the  straight  lines  which  can  be  drawn  from  it  to  the  circumference,  the
greatest  is  that  in  which  the  centre  is ;  of  any  others  that  which  is  nearer  to  the
straight  line  which  passes  through  the  centre  is  greater  than  one  more  remote ;
and  from  the  same  point  there  can  be  drawn  to  the  circumference  two  straight
lines,  and  only  two,  which  are  equal  to  one  another,  one  on  each  side  of  the
greatest  line.


[II.  12]


III.  8,  9]  PROPOSITIONS  8,  9  21

The  converses  of  in.  7,  8  and  of  the  proposition  just  given  are  also  true
and  can  easily  be  proved  by  reductio  ad  absurdum.  They  could  be  employed
to  throw  light  on  such  questions  as  that  of  internal  contact,  and  the  relative
position  of  the  centres  of  circles  so  touching.  This  is  clear  when  part  of  the
converses  is  stated  :  thus  (i)  if  from  any  point  in  the  plane  of  a  circle  a
number  of  straight  lines  be  drawn  to  the  circumference  of  the  circle,  and  one
of  these  is  greater  than  any  other,  the  centre  of  the  circle  must  lie  on  that  one,
(2)  if  one  of  them  is  less  than  any  other,  then,  {a)  if  the  point  is  within  the
circle,  the  centre  is  on  the  minimum  straight  line  produced  beyond  the  pointy
(b)  if  the  point  is  outside  the  circle,  the  centre  is  on  the  minimum  straight  line
produced  beyond  the  point  in  which  it  meets  the  circle.


Proposition  9.

If  a  point  be  taken  within  a  circle,  and  more  than  two
equal  straight  lines  fall  from  the  point  on  the  circle^  the  point
taken  is  the  centre  of  the  circle.

Let  ABC  be  a  circle  and  D  a  point  within  it,  and  from
D  let  more  than  two  equal  straight
lines,  namely  DA,  DB,  DC,  fall  on
the  circle  ABC ;

I  say  that  the  point  D  is  the  centre
of  the  circle  ABC

For  let  AB,  BC  be  joined  and
bisected  at  the  points  E,  F,  and  let
ED,  FD  be  joined  and  drawn  through
to  the  points  G,  K,  H,  L,

Then,  since  AE  is  equal  to  EB,
and  ED  is  common,

the  two  sides  AE,  ED  are  equal  to  the  two  sides  BE,  ED ;

and  the  base  DA  is  equal  to  the  base  DB ;

therefore  the  angle  A  ED  is  equal  to  the  angle  BED.

[1.8]
Therefore  each  of  the  angles  A  ED,  BED  is  right ;

[i.  Def.  10]

therefore  GK  cuts  AB  into  two  equal  parts  and  at  right
angles.

And  since,  if  in  a  circle  a  straight  line  cut  a  straight  line
into  two  equal  parts  and  at  right  angles,  the  centre  of  the
circle  is  on  the  cutting  straight  line,  [ni.  i,  Por.]

the  centre  of  the  circle  is  on  GK.


22  BOOK   III  [ill.  9

For  the  same  reason

the  centre  of  the  circle  ABC  is  also  on  HL.

And  the  straight  lines   GK,  HL  have  no  other  point
common  but  the  point  D ;

therefore  the  point  D  is  the  centre  of  the  circle  ABC,

Therefore  etc.  Q.  e.  d.

The  result  of  this  proposition  is  quoted  by  Aristotle,  Meteoraiogica  in.  3,
373  21  ^3 — 16  (cf.  note  on  i.  8).

III.  9  is,  as  De  Morgan  remarks,  a  logical  equivalent  of  part  of  iii.  7,
where  it  is  proved  that  every  non-ctnXxdX  point  is  not  a  point  from  which  three
equal  straight  lines  can  be  drawn  to  the  circle.  Thus  in.  7  says  that  every
not- A  is  not'By  and  11 1.  9  states  the  equivalent  fact  that  every  B  is  A.
Mr  H.  M.  Taylor  does  in  effect  make  a  logical  inference  of  the  theorem  that.
If  from  a  point  three  equal  straight  lines  can  be  drawn  to  a  circle^  that  point  is
the  centre^  by  making  it  a  corollary  to  his  proposition  which  includes  the  part  of
III.  7  referred  to.  Euclid  does  not  allow  himself  these  logical  inferences,  as  we
shall  have  occasion  to  observe  elsewhere  also.

Of  the  two  proofs  of  this  proposition  given  in  earlier  texts  of  Euclid,
August  and  Heiberg  regard  that  translated  above  as  genuine,  relegating  the
other,  which  Simson  gave  alone,  to  a  place  in  an  Appendix.  Camerer  remarks
that  the  genuine  proof  should  also  have  contemplated  the  case  in  which  one
or  other  of  the  straight  lines  AB^  BC  passes  through  D,  This  would  however
have  been  a  departure  from  Euclid^s  manner  of  taking  the  most  obscure  case
for  proof  and  leaving  others  to  the  reader.

The  other  proof,  that  selected  by  Simson,  is  as  follows :

"  For  let  a  point  D  be  taken  within  the  circle  ABC^  and  from  D  let  more
than  two  equal  straight  lines,  namely  AD^  DB^  DQ
fall  on  the  circle  ABC;

I  say  that  the  point  Z>  so  taken  is  the  centre  of  the
circle  ABC.

For  suppose  it  is  not;  but,  if  possible,  let  it  be
E,  and  let  I)E  be  joined  and  carried  through  to  the
points  Ff  G.

Therefore  FG  is  a  diameter  of  the  circle  ABC

Since,  then,  on  the  diameter  FG  of  the  circle
ABC  a  point  has  been  taken  which  is  not  the  centre
of  the  circle,  namely  Z>,

DG  is  greatest,  and  DC  is  greater  than  DB^  and  DB  than  DA,

But  the  latter  are  also  equal :  which  is  impossible.

Therefore  E  is  not  the  centre  of  the  circle.

Similarly  we  can  prove  that  neither  is  any  other  point  except  D ;
therefore  the  point  D  is  the  centre  of  the  circle  ABC

Q.   E.    D."

On  this  Todhunter  correctly  points  out  that  the  point  E  might  be
supposed  to  fall  within  the  angle  ADC  It  cannot  then  be  shown  that  DC
is  greater  than  DB  and  DB  than  DA^  but  only  that  either  DC  or  DA  is  less
than  DB ;  this  however  is  sufficient  for  establishing  the  proposition.


III.  lo]  PROPOSITIONS   9,  lo  23

Proposition  10.
A  circle  does  not  cut  a  circle  at  more  points  than  two.

For,  if  possible,  let  the  circle  ABC  cut  the  circle  DEF
at  more  points  than  two,  namely
B,  Gy  F,  H  \

let  BH,  BG  be  joined  and
bisected  at  the  points  K,  L,
and  from  K,  L  let  KCy  LM  h^
drawn  at  right  angles  to  BH,
BG  and  carried  through  to  the
points  A,  E.

Then,  since  in  the  circle
ABC  a  straight  line  AC  cuts  a
straight  line  BH  into  two  equal
parts  and  at  right  angles,

the  centre  of  the  circle  ABC  is  on  AC  [ni.  i,  Por.]

Again,  since  in  the  same  circle  ABC  a  straight  line  NO
cuts  a  straight  line  BG  into  two  equal  parts  and  at  right
angles,

the  centre  of  the  circle  ABC  is  on  NO.
But  it  was  also  proved  to  be  on  AC,  and  the  straight
lines  AC,  NO  meet  at  no  point  except  at  P ;

therefore  the  point  P  is  the  centre  of  the  circle  ABC.
Similarly  we  can  prove  that  P  is  also  the  centre  of  the
circle  DEF\

therefore  the  two  circles  ABC,  DEF  which  cut  one
another  have  the  same  centre  P :  which  is  impossible,     [m.  5]
Therefore  etc.  q.  e.  d.

I.  The  word  circle  (ir(;«Xof)  is  here  employed  in  the  unusual  sense  of  the  circumference
(r(pi^p€ui)  of  a  circle.     Cf.  note  on  I.  Def.  15.

There  is  nothing  in  the  demonstration  of  this  proposition  which  assumes
that  the  circles  cut  one  another ;  it  proves  that  two  circles  cannot  me^t  at  more
than  two  points,  whether  they  cut  or  meet  without  cutting,  i.e.  toucA  one
another.

Here  again,  of  two  demonstrations  given  in  the  earlier  texts,  Simson  chose
the  second,  which  August  and  Heiberg  relegate  to  an  Appendix,  and  which  is
as  follows :

"  For  again  let  the  circle  ABC  cut  the  circle  DEF  at  more  points  than
two,  namely  B,  G,  H,  F)

let  the  centre  K  of  the  circle  ABC  be  taken,  and  let  KB,  KG,  KF  be
joined.


24


BOOK  III


[hi.  io,  II


Since  then  a  point  K  has  been  taken  within  the  circle  DEF^
and  from  K  more  than  two  straight  lines,  namely
KB,  KF,  KG,  have  fallen  on  the  circle  DBF,
the  point  A^is  the  centre  of  the  circle  DER  [in.  9]

But  K  is  also  the  centre  of  the  circle  ABC*

Therefore  two  circles  cutting  one  another  have
the  same  centre  K\  which  is  impossible,      [in.  5]

Therefore  a  circle  does  not  cut  a  circle  at  more
points  than  two.

Q.  E.  D."

This  demonstration  is  claimed  by  Heron  (see  an-NairizI,  ed.  Curtze,
pp.  120 — i).  It  is  incomplete  because  it  assumes  that  the  point  K  which  is
taken  as  the  centre  of  the  circle  ABC  is  within  the  circle  DEF.  It  can
however  be  completed  by  means  of  in.  8  and  the  corresponding  proposition
with  reference  to  a  point  on  the  circumference  of  a  circle  which  was  enunciated
in  the  note  on  in.  8.  For  (i)  if  the  point  K  is  on  the  circumference  of  the
circle  DEF,  we  obtain  a  contradiction  of  the  latter  proposition  which  asserts
that  only  two  equal  straight  lines  can  be  drawn  from  K  to  the  circumference
of  the  circle  DEF\  (2)  if  the  point  K  is  outside  the  circle  DEF,  we  obtain  a
contradiction  of  the  corresponding  part  of  in.  8.

Euclid's  proof  contains  an  unproved  assumption,  namely  that  the  lines
bisecting  EG,  BH  at  right  angles  wiU  meet  in  a  point  P,  For  a  discussion
of  this  assumption  see  note  on  iv.  5.


Proposition  ii.

If  two  circles  touch  one  another  interf tally,  and  their  centres
be  taken,  the  straight  line  joining  their  centres,  if  it  be  also
produced,  will  fall  on  the  point  of  contact  of  the  circles.

For  let  the  two  circles  ABC,  ADE  touch  one  another
internally  at  the  point  A,  and  let
the  centre  F  of  the  circle  ABC,  and
the  centre  G  of  ADE,  be  taken  ;
I  say  that  the  straight  line  joined
from  G  to  F  and  produced  will  fall
on  A.

For  suppose  it  does  not,  but,
if  possible,  let  it  fall  as  FGH,  and
let  AF,  AG\^^  joined.

Then,  since  AG,  GF^x^  greater
than  FA,  that  is,  than  FH,

let  FG  be  subtracted  from  each ;

therefore  the  remainder  ^6^  is  greater  than  the  remainder
GH.


III.  iij  PROPOSITIONS    lo,    II  25

But  AG  is  equal  to  GD  ;
therefore  GD  is  also  greater  than  G//,
the  less  than  the  greater :  which  is  impossible.
Therefore  the  straight  line  joined  from  F  to  G  will  not
fall  outside ;

therefore  it  will  fall  at  A  on  the  point  of  contact.
Therefore  etc.

Q.  E.  D.

3.  the  straight  line  joining  their  centres,  literally  "the  straight  line  joined  to  their
centres  "  (^  hrl  rd  Kirrpa  wbr(av  iTk^evyvvfUvri  ei/^eFa).

3.     point  of  contact  is  here  ffwaip^,  and  in  the  enunciation  of  the  next  proposition

Again  August  and  Heiberg  give  in  an  Appendix  the  additional  or
alternative  proof,  which  however  shows  little  or  no  variation  from  the  genuine
proof  and  can  therefore  well  be  dispensed  with.

The  genuine  proof  is  beset  with  difficulties  in  consequence  of  what  it
tacitly  assumes  in  the  figure,  on  the  ground,  probably,  of  its  being  obvious  to
the  eye.  Camerer  has  set  out  these  difficulties  in  a  most  careful  note,  the
heads  of  which  may  be  given  as  follows  :

He  observes,  first,  that  the  straight  line  joining  the  centres,  when  produced,
must  necessarily  (though  this  is  not  stated  by  Euclid)  be  produced  in  the
direction  of  the  centre  of  the  circle  which  touches  the  other  internally,  (For
brevity,  I  shall  call  this  circle  the  "  inner  circle,"  though  I  shall  imply  nothing
by  that  term  except  that  it  is  the  circle  which  touches  the  other  on  the  inner
side  of  the  latter,  and  therefore  that,  in  accordance  with  the  definition  of
touching^  points  on  it  in  the  immediate  neighbourhood  of  the  point  of  contact
are  necessarily  within  the  circle  which  it  touches.)  Camerer  then  proceeds  by
the  following  steps.

1.  The  two  circles,  touching  at  the  given  point,  cannot  intersect  at  any
point  For,  since  points  on  the  " inner*'  in  the  immediate  neighbourhood  of
the  point  of  contact  are  within  the  "outer**  circle,  the  inner  circle,  if  it
intersects  the  other  anywhere,  must  pass  outside  it  and  then  return.  This  is
only  possible  (a)  if  it  passes  out  at  one  point  and  returns  at  another  point,  or
{b)  if  it  passes  out  and  returns  through  one  and  the  same  point,  (a)  is  impossible
because  it  would  require  two  circles  to  have  three  common  points ;  (b)  would
require  that  the  inner  circle  should  have  a  node  at  the  point  where  it  passes
outside  the  other,  and  this  is  proved  to  be  impossible  by  drawing  any  radius
cutting  both  loops.

2.  Since  the  circles  cannot  intersect,  one  must  be  entirely  within  the
other.

3.  Therefore  the  outer  circle  must  be  greater  than  the  inner,  and  the
radius  of  the  outer  greater  than  that  of  the  inner.

4.  Now,  if  y^  be  the  centre  of  the  greater  and  G  of  the  inner  circle,  and
if  FG  prodiiced  beyond  G  does  not  pass  through  Ay  the  given  point  of
contact,  then  there  are  three  possible  hypotheses.

(a)    A  may  lie  on  6^7^  produced  beyond  F,


26  BOOK   III  [ill.  II

(p)  A  may  lie  outside  the  line  FG  altogether,  in  which  case  FG  produced
beyond  G  must,  in  consequence  of  result  2  above,  either

(i)  meet  the  circles  in  a  point  common  to  both,  or

(ii)  meet  the  circles  in  two  points,  of  which  that  which  is  on  the  inner
circle  is  nearer  to  G  than  the  other  is.

(a)  is  then  proved  to  be  impossible  by  means  of  the  fact  that  the  radius  of  the
inner  circle  is  less  than  the  radius  of  the  outer.

{b)  (ii)  is  Euclid's  case ;  and  his  proof  holds  equally  of  {b)  (i),  the  hypothesis,
namely,  that  D  and  H  in  the  figure  coincide.

Thus  all  alternative  hypotheses  are  successively  shown  to  be  impossible,
and  the  proposition  is  completely  established.

I  think,  however,  that  this  procedure  may  be  somewhat  shortened  in  the
following  manner.

In  order  to  make  Euclid's  proof  absolutely  conclusive  we  have  only  (i)  to
take  care  to  produce  FG  beyond  G,  the  centre  of  the  "  inner  "  circle,  and  then
(2)  to  prove  that  the  point  in  which  FG  so  produced  meets  the  "inner"  circle
is  not  further  from  G  than  is  the  point  in  which  it  meets  the  other  circle.
Euclid's  proof  is  equally  valid  whether  the  first  point  is  nearer  to  G  than  the
second  or  the  first  point  and  the  second  coincide.

If  FG  produced  beyond  G  does  not  pass  through  A^  there  are  two


conceivable  hypotheses :  (a)  A  may  lie  on  GF  produced  beyond  F^  or  (b)  A
may  be  outside  FG  produced  either  way.  In  either  case,  if  FG  produced
meets  the  ** inner"  circle  in  D  and  the  other  in  ZT,  and  if  GD  is  greater  than
GHy  then  the  "inner"  circle  must  cut  the  ** outer"  circle  at  some  point
between  A  and  Z?,  say  X.

But,  if  two  circles  have  a  common  point  X  lying  on  one  side  of  the  line  of
centres,  they  must  have  another  corresponding  point  on  the  other  side  of  the
line  of  centres.  This  is  clear  from  in.  7,  8 ;  for  the  point  is  determined  by
drawing  from  F  and  G^  on  the  opposite  side  to  that  where  X  is,  straight
lines  FY,  GY  making  with  FD  angles  equal  to  the  angles  DFX,  DGX
respectively.

Hence  the  two  circles  will  have  at  least  three  points  common :  which  is
impossible.

Therefore  GD  cannot  be  greater  than  GH\  accordingly  GD  must  be
either  equal  to,  or  less  than,  GH,  and  Euclid's  proof  is  valid.

The  particular  hypothesis  in  which  FG  is  supposed  to  be  in  the  same
straight  line  with  A  but  G  is  on  the  side  of  /^away  from  A  is  easily  disposed
of,  and  would  in  any  case  have  been  left  to  the  reader  by  Euclid.

For  GD  is  either  equal  to  or  less  than  GH,

Therefore  GD  is  less  than  FH,  and  therefore  less  than  FA,

But  GD  is  equal  to  GA,  and  therefore  greater  than  FA :  which  is
impossible.


III.  II,  12]  PROPOSITIONS    II,  12  27

Subject  to  the  same  preliminary  investigation  as  that  required  by  Euclid's
proof,  the  proposition  can  also  be  proved  directly  from  in.  7.

For,  by  in.  7,  Gffis  the  shortest  straight  line  that  can  be  drawn  from  G
to  the  circle  with  centre  F\

therefore  G If  is  less  than  GA,

and  therefore  less  than  G£>  :  which  is  absurd.

This  proposition  is  the  crucial  one  as  regards  circles  which  touch  internally;
and,  when  it  is  once  established,  the  relative  position  of  the  circles  can  be
completely  elucidated  by  means  of  it  and  the  propositions  which  have  preceded
it  Thus,  in  the  annexed  figure,  if  /^be  the  centre
of  the  outer  circle  and  G  the  centre  of  the  inner,
and  if  any  radius  I^Q  of  the  outer  circle  meet  the
two  circles  in  Q,  P  respectively,  it  follows,  from
III.  7,  in.  8,  or  the  corresponding  theorem  with
reference  to  a  point  on  the  circumference,  that  PA
is  the  maximum  straight  line  from  P  to  the  circum-
ference of  the  inner  circle,  PP  is  less  than  PAj
and  PP  diminishes  in  length  as  PQ  moves  round
from  PA  until  PP  reaches  its  minimum  length
PB,  Hence  the  circles  do  not  meet  at  any  other
point  than  A,  and  the  distance  PQ  cut  off  between  them  on  any  radius  PQ
of  the  outer  circle  becomes  greater  and  greater  as  PQ  moves  round  from  PA
to  PC  and  is  a  maximum  when  PQ  coincides  with  PC,  after  which  it
diminishes  again  on  the  other  side  of  PC

The  same  consideration  gives  the  partial  converse  of  in.  1 1  which  forms
the  6th  lemma  of  Pappus  to  the  first  book  of  the  Tactiones  of  Apollonius
(Pappus,  vii.  p.  826).  This  is  to  the  effect  that,  i/"  AB,  AC  are  in  one  straight
lincy  and  on  one  side  of  A,  the  circles  described  on  AB,  AC  as  diameters  touch
(internally  at  the  point  A).  Pappus  concludes  this  from  the  fact  that  the
circles  have  a  common  tangent  at  A  ;  but  the  truth  of  it  is  clear  from  the  fact
that  PP  diminishes  as  PQ  moves  away  from  PA  on  either  side ;  whence  the
circles  meet  at  A  but  do  not  cut  one  another.

Pappus'  5th  lemma  (vii.  p.  824)  is  another  partial  converse,  namely  that,
given  two  circles  touching  internally  at  A,  and  a  line  ABC  drawn  from  A  cutting
bothy  then,  if  the  centre  of  the  outer  circle  lies  on  ABC,  so  does  the  centre  of  the
inner.  Pappus  himself  proves  this,  by  means  of  the  common  tangent  to  the
circles  at  A,  in  two  ways,  (i)  The  tangent  is  at  right  angles  to  AC  and
therefore  to  AB :  therefore  the  centre  of  the  inner  circle  lies  on  AB,  (2)  By
IIL  32,  the  angles  in  the  alternate  segments  of  both  circles  are  right  angles,  so
that  ABC  is  a  diameter  of  both.

[Proposition  12.

//  two  circles  touch  one  another  externally y  the  straight
line  joining  their  centres  will  pass  through  the  point  of
contact.

For  let  the  two  circles  ABCy  ADE  touch  one  another
5  externally  at  the  point  Ay  and  let  the  centre  F  of  ABCy  and
the  centre  G  of  ADEy  be  taken  ;


28  BOOK   III  [ill.  12

I   say  that  the  straight  line  joined  from  F  to  G  will  pass
through  the  point  of  contact  at  A.
For    suppose    it    does    not,
lo  but,  if  possible,   let    it    pass    as
FCDG,    and    let   AF,   AG  he
joined.

Then,  since  the  point  F  is
the  centre  of  the  circle  ABC,
15  FA  is  equal  to  FC.

Again,  since  the  point  G  is
the  centre  of  the  circle  ADE,
GA  is  equal  to  GD.
But  FA  was  also  proved  equal  to  FC ;
20  therefore  FA,  AG  are  equal  to  FC,  GD,

so  that  the  whole  FG  is  greater  than  FA,  AG ;
but  it  is  also  less  [i.  20] :  which  is  impossible.

Therefore  the  straight  line  joined  from  F  to  G  will  not
fail  to  pass  through  the  point  of  contact  at  A  ;
25  therefore  it  will  pass  through  it.

Therefore  etc.  Q.  e.  d.J

23.  will  not  fail  to  pass.  The  Greek  has  the  double  negative,  odx  Apa  ^...cMtia...
ovK  AciJ<rcrat,  literally  *'  the  straight  line... will  not  //<?/- pass...."

Heron  says  on  111.  11:"  Euclid  in  proposition  1 1  has  supposed  the  two
circles  to  touch  internally,  made  his  proposition  deal  with  this  case  and  proved
what  was  sought  in  it.  Bu/  I  ivill  show  how  it  is  to  be  proved  if  the  contact  is
external.''  He  then  gives  substantially  the  proof  and  figure  of  in.  12.  It
seems  clear  that  neither  Heron  nor  an-Nairizi  had  in.  12  in  this  place.

Campanus  and  the  Arabic  edition  of  NasTraddin  at-jusl  have  nothing  more
of  in.  12  than  the  following  addition  to  in.  11.  "In  the  case  of  external
contact  the  two  lines  ae  and  eb  will  be  greater  than  ab,  whence  cid  and  cb  will
be  greater  than  the  whole  ab,  which  is  false."  (The  points  a,  b,  c,  d,  e  cor-
respond respectively  to  G,  F,  C,  D,  A  in  the  above  figure.)  It  is  most
probable  that  Theon  or  some  other  editor  added  Heron's  proof  in  his  edition
and  made  Prop.  12  out  of  it  (an-NairlzI,  ed.  Curtze,  pp.  121 — 2).  An-Nairiz!
and  Campanus,  conformably  with  what  has  been  said,  number  Prop.  13  of
Heiberg's  text  Prop.  1 2,  and  so  on  through  the  Book.

What  was  said  in  the  note  on  the  last  proposition  applies,  mutatis  mutandis^
to  this.  Camerer  proceeds  in  the  same  manner  as  before ;  and  we  may  use
the  same  alternative  argument  in  this  case  also.

Euclid's  proof  is  valid  provided  only  that,  if  FG,  joining  the  assumed
centres,  meets  the  circle  with  centre  F\x\C  and  the  other  circle  in  D,  C  is
not  within  the  circle  ADE  and  D  is  not  within  the  circle  ABC.  (The  proof
is  equally  valid  whether  C,  D  coincide  or  the  successive  points  are,  as  drawn
in  the  figure,  in  the  order  F,  C,  D,  G.)     Now,  if  C  is  within  the  circle  ADE


III.  12]  PROPOSITION    12  29

and  D  within  the  circle  ABC^  the  circles  must  have  cut  between  A  and  C
and  between  A  and  D,  Hence,  as  before,  they  must  also  have  another
corresponding  point  common  on  the  other  side  of  CD.  That  is,  the  circles
must  have  three  common  points  :  which  is  impossible.

Hence  Euclid's  proof  is  valid  if  F^  Ay  G  form  a  triangle,  and  the  only
hypothesis  which  has  still  to  be  disproved  is  the
hypothesis  which  he  would  in  any  case  have  left  to
the  reader,  namely  that  A  does  not  lie  on  FG  but
on  FG  produced  in  either  direction.  In  this  case,  as
before,  either  C,  D  must  coincide  or  C  is  nearer
y^than  D  is.  Then  the  radius  FC  must  be  equal
to  FA  :  which  is  impossible,  since  FC  cannot  be
greater  than  FD^  and  must  therefore  be  less  than
FA,

Given  the  same  preliminaries,  in.  12  can  be  proved  by  means  of  iii.  8.

Again,  when  the  proposition  in.  12  is  once  proved,  in.  8  helps  us  to  prove
at  once  that  the  circles  lie  entirely  outside  each  other  and  have  no  other
common  point  than  the  point  of  contact.

Among  Pappus'  lemmas  to  Apollonius'  Tactiones  are  the  two  partial
converses  of  this  proposition  corresponding  to  those  given  in  the  last  note.
Lemma  4  (vii.  p.  824)  is  to  the  effect  that,  if  AB,  AC  be  in  one  straight  line]  B
and  C  being  on  opposite  sides  of  A,  th€  circles  drawn  on  AB,  AC  as  diameters
totuh  externally  at  A.  Lemma  3  (vii.  p.  822)  states  that,  //  two  circles  touch
externally  at  A  and  B  AC  is  drawn  through  A  cutting  both  circles  and  containing
the  centre  of  one^  BAC  will  also  contain  the  centre  of  the  other.  The  proofs,  as
before,  use  the  common  tangent  at  A,

Mr  H.  M.  Taylor  gets  over  the  difficulties  involved  by  in.  11,  12  in  a
manner  which  is  most  ingenious  but  not  Euclidean.  He  first  proves  that,  if  two
circles  meet  at  a  point  not  in  the  same  straight  line  with  their  centres^  the  circles
intersect  at  that  point -y  this  is  very  easily  established  by  means  of  in.  7,  8  and
the  third  similar  theorem.  Then  he  gives  as  a  corollary  the  statement  that,  if
two  circles  touchy  the  point  of  contact  is  in  the  same  straight  line  with  their
centres.  It  is  not  explained  how  this  is  inferred  from  the  substantive
proposition ;  it  seems,  however,  to  be  a  logical  inference  simply.  By  the
proposition,  every  A  (circles  meeting  at  a  point  not  in  the  same  straight  line
with  the  centre)  is  B  (circles  which  intersect);  therefore  every  noi-B  is  not-y^,
i.e.  circles  which  do  not  intersect  do  not  meet  at  a  point  not  in  the  same
straight  line  with  the  centres.  Now  non-intersecting  circles  may  either  meet
(Le.  touch)  or  not  meet.  In  the  former  case  they  must  meet  on  the  line  of
centres :  for,  if  they  met  at  a  point  not  in  that  line,  they  would  intersect.  But
such  a  purely  logical  inference  is  foreign  to  Euclid's  manner.  As  De  Morgan
says,  "  Euclid  may  have  been  ignorant  of  the  identity  of  *  Every  X  is  K'  and
*  Every  not-  Y  is  not--<Vi'  for  anything  that  appears  in  his  writings ;  he  makes
the  one  follow  from  the  other  by  a  new  proof  each  time  "  (quoted  in  Keynes'
Formal  Logic^  p.  81).

There  is  no  difficulty  in  proving,  by  means  of  i.  20,  Mr  Taylor's  next
proposition  that,  if  two  circles  meet  at  a  point  which  lies  in  the  same  straight
line  as  their  centres  and  is  between  the  centres^  the  circles  touch  at  that  pointy  and
tack  circle  lies  without  the  other.  But  the  similar  proof,  by  means  of  i.  20,  of
the  corresponding  theorem  for  internal  contact  seems  to  be  open  to  the  same
objection  as  Euclid's  proof  of  in.  1 1  in  that  it  assumes  without  proof  that  the
circle  which  has  its  centre  nearest  to  the  point  of  meeting  is  the  "inner"
circle.    Lastly,  in  order  to  prove  that,  if  two  circles  have  a  point  of  contact ^  they


so


BOOK   III


[hi.  12


do  not  meet  at  any  other  pointy  Mr  Taylor  uses  the  questionable  corollary.
Therefore  in  any  case  his  alternative  procedure  does  not  seem  preferable  to
Euclid's.

The  alternative  to  Eucl.  iii.  ii — 13  which  finds  most  favour  in  modem
continental  text-books  (e.g.  Legendre,  Baltzer,  Henrici  and  Treutlein,
Veronese,  Ingrami,  Enriques  and  Amaldi)  connects  the  number,  position  and
nature  of  the  coincidences  between  points  on  two  circles  with  the  relation  in
which  the  distance  between  their  centres  stands  to  the  length  of  their  radii.
Enriques  and  Amaldi,  whose  treatment  of  the  different  cases  is  typical,  give
the  following  propositions  (Veronese  gives  them  in  the  converse  form).

1.  If  the  distance  between  the  centres  of  two  circles  is  greater  than  the  sum
of  the  radiiy  the  two  circles  have  no  point  common  and  are  external  to  one
another.

Let  Oy  G  be  the  centres  of  the  circles  (which  we  will  call  "  the  circles
Oy  O  "),  r,  r  their  radii  respectively.

Since  then  OO  >r'*rt'y  a  fortiori  OO  >ry  and  O  is  therefore  exterior  to
the  circle  O,

Next,  the  circumference  of  the  circle  O  intersects  OO  in  a  point  A^  and
since  0(y>r-\^r\  AO>r'y  and  A  is
external  to  the  circle  G,

But  GA  is  less  than  any  straight
line,  as  GB^  drawn  to  the  circum-
ference of  the  circle  O  [in.  8] ;  hence
all  points,  as  B^  on  the  circumference
of  the  circle  O  are  external  to  the  circle
G.

Lastly,  if  C  be  any  point  internal
to  the  circle  (?,  the  sum  oi  OC^  GCx^
greater  than  GO^  and  a  fortiori  greater  than  r  +  r .

But  0C'\%  less  than  r\  therefore  GC  v&  greater  than  /,  or  C  is  external
to  a

Similarly  we  prove  that  any  point  on  or  within  the  circumference  of  the
circle  G  is  external  to  the  circle  (9.

2.  If  the  distance  between  the  centres  of  two  unequal  circles  is  less  than  the
difference  of  the  radii,  the  two  circumferences  have  no  common  point  and  the  lesser
circle  is  entirely  within  the  greater.

Let  Oy  G  be  the  centres  of  the  two  circles,  r,  r  their  radii  respectively
(r</).

Since  OG  <f^  -r,  a  fortiori  OG  <  /,  so  that  O  is
internal  to  the  circle  G,

If  A,  A'  be  the  points  in  which  the  straight  line
GO  intersects  respectively  the  circumferences  of  the
circles  O,  G,

GO  is  less  than  GA'  -  OA,

so  that       GO  +  OAy  or  GA,  is  less  than  GA\
and  therefore  A  is  internal  to  the  circle  G.

But,  of  all  the  straight  lines  from  G  to  the  circumference  of  the  circle  O,
GA  passing  through  the  centre  O  is  the  greatest  [in.  7] ;
whence  all  the  points  of  the  circumference  of  O  are  internal  to  the  circle  G.

A  similar  argument  to  the  preceding  will  show  that  all  points  within  the
circle  O  are  internal  to  the  circle  G.


III.  12]


PROPOSITION    12


31


3.  If  the  distance  between  the  centres  of  two  circles  is  equal  to  the  sum  of  the
rcuiiiy  the  two  circumferences  have  one  point  common  and  one  onfyy  and  that  point
is  on  the  line  of  centres.     Each  circle  is  external  to  the  other.

Let  Oy  O  be  the  centres,  r,  r'  the  radii  of  the  circles,  so  that  OO  is  equal
to  r  +  r .

Thus  OCT  is  greater  than  r,  so  that  O
is  external  to  the  circle  O^  and  the  circum-
ference of  the  circle  O  cuts  Off  in  sl
point  A,

And,  since  Off  is  equal  to  r-i-r^,  and
OA  to  r,  it  follows  that  ffA  is  equal  to  /,
so  that  A  belongs  also  to  the  circumference
of  the  circle  ff.

The  proof  that  all  other  points  on,  and
all  points  within,  the  circumference  of  the  circle  O  are  external  to  the  circle  ff
follows  the  similar  proof  of  prop,  i  above.   And  similarly  all  points  (except  -^4)
on,  and  all  points  within,  the  circumference  of  the  circle  ff  are  external  to  the
circle  O,

The  two  circles,  having  one  common  point  only,  touch  at  that  point,  which
lies,  as  shown,  on  the  line  of  centres.  And,  since  the  circles  are  external  to
one  another,  they  touch  externally.

4.  Jf  the  distance  between  the  centres  of  two  unequal  circles  is  equal  to  the
difference  between  the  radii^  the  two  circumferences  have  one  point  and  one  only  in
common,  and  that  point  lies  on  the  line  of  centres.  The  lesser  circle  is  within  the
other.

The  proof  is  that  of  prop.  2  above,  mutatis  mutandis.

The  circles  here  touch  internally  at  the  point  on  the  line  of  centres.

5.  If  the  distafice  between  the  centres  of  two  circles  is  less  than  the  sum,  and
greater  than  the  difference,  of  the  radii,  the  two  circumferences  have  two  common
points  symmetrically  situated  with  respect  to  the  line  of  centres  but  not  lying  on
that  line.

Let  Oy  ff  be  the  centres  of  the  two  circles,  r,  r  their  radii,  /  being  the
greater,  so  that

f^ -r<  Off  <r  +  r'.

It  follows  that  in  any  case  Off  ■\-r>  r\  so  that,  if  OM  be  taken  on  ffO
produced  equal  to  r  (so  that  M  is  on  the  circumference  of  the  circle  O),  M  is
external  to  the  circle  ff.

We  have  to  use  the  same  Postulate  as  in  Eucl.  i.  i  that

An  arc  of  a  circle  which  has  one  extremity  within  and  the  other  without  a
given  circle  has  one  point  common  with  the
latter  and  only  one ;  from  which  it  follows,
if  we  consider  two  such  arcs  making  a
complete  circumference,  that,  if  a  circum-
ference of  a  circle  passes  through  one  point
internal  to,  and  one  point  external  to  a
given  circle,  it  cuts  the  latter  circle  in  two
points.

We  have  then  to  prove  that  the  circle  O,
besides  having  one  point  M  of  its  circum-
ference external  to  the  circle  ff,  has  one  other  point  of  its  circumference  (Z)
internal  to  the  latter  circle.


32


BOOK   III


[in.  12,  13


Three  cases  have  to  be  distinguished  according  as  OO  is  greater  than,  equal
to,  or  less  than,  the  radius  r  of  the  lesser  circle.

(i)     00  >  r,     (See  the  preceding  figure.)

Measure  OL  along  Off  equal  to  r,  so  that
Z  lies  on  the  circumference  of  the  circle  O,

Then,  since  Off  <r\r\  OL  will  be  less
than  r',  so  that  L  is  within  the  circle  G.

(2)  oa^r.

In  this  case  the  circumference  of  the  circle
O  passes  through  O^  or  L  coincides  with  O,

(3)  00  <r.
If  we  measure  OL  along  OO  equal  to  r,  the  point  L  will  lie  on  the

circumference  of  the  circle  O,

Then  OL^r-OO,
so  that  OL  <  r,  and  a  fortiori  OL  <  r\  so  that  L
lies  within  the  circle  O.

Thus,  in  all  three  cases,  since  the  circumference
of  O  passes  through  one  point  {Af)  external  to,  and
one  point  (Z)  internal  to,  the  circle  O,  the  two
circumferences  intersect  in  two  points  A,  B  [Post.]

And  Ay  B  cannot  lie  on  the  line  of  centres  OO^
since  this  straight  line  intersects  the  circle  O  in
Z,  J/ only,  and  of  these  points  one  is  inside,  the  other  outside,  the  circle  O,

Since  AB  is  a  common  chord  of  both  circles,  the  straight  line  bisecting  it
at  right  angles  passes  through  both  centres,  i.e.  is  identical  with  OO.

And  again  by  means  of  iii.  7,  8  we  prove  that  all  points  except  A^  B  on
the  arc  ALB  lie  within  the  circle  C7,  and  all  points  except  A^  B  on  the  arc
AMB  outside  that  circle  ;  and  so  on.


Proposition  13.

A  circle  does  not  touch  a  circle  at  more  points  tlian  one,
whether  it  touch  it  internally  or  externally.

For,  if  possible,  let  the  circle  ABDC  touch  the  circle
EBFD,  first  internally,  at  more
5  points  than  one,  namely  D,  B.
Let  the  centre  G  of  the  circle
ABDC,^  and   the   centre   H   of
EBFDy  be  taken.

Therefore    the    straight    line
10  joined  from  G  to  ZTwill  fall  on
B,  D.  [ill.  11]

Let  it  so  fall,  as  BGHD.
Then,   since   the  point   G  is
the  centre  of  the  circle  ABCD,
15  BG  is  equal  to  GD  ;


III.  13]  PROPOSITIONS   12,  13  33

therefore  BG  is  greater  than  HD ;
therefore  BH  is  much  greater  than  HD.
Again,  since   the   point   H  is   the   centre  of  the  circle
EBFD,
20  BH  is  equal  to  HD  ;

but  it  was  also  proved  much  greater  than  it :    which  is
impossible.

Therefore  a  circle  does  not  touch  a  circle  internally  at
more  points  than  one.
25         I  say  further  that  neither  does  it  so  touch  it  externally.

For,   if  possible,  let   the   circle   ACK  touch   the  circle
ABDC  at  more  points  than  one,  namely  A,  C,
and  let  AC  he  joined.

Then,  since  on  the  circumference  of  each  of  the  circles

y>ABDCy  ACK  xyio  points  Ay  C  have  been  taken  at  random,

the   straight   line  joining   the   points    will   fall   within    each

circle ;  [in.  2]

but  it  fell  within  the  circle  A  BCD  and  outside  ACK

[in.  Def.  3] :  which  is  absurd.

35        Therefore  a  circle  does  not  touch  a  circle  externally  at
more  points  than  one.

And    it   was   proved   that  neither   does   it   so   touch    it
internally.

Therefore  etc.  q.  e.  d.

3,  7,  14,  17,  30,  33.  ABDC.  Euclid  writes  ABCD  (here  and  in  the  next  proposition),
notwithstanding  the  order  in  which  the  points  are  placed  in  the  figure.

^5*  37*  does  it  so  touch  it.  It  is  necessary  to  supply  these  words  which  the  Greek
{Jkn  oidi  iicrdt  and  Sri  o^di  ivrds)  leaves  to  be  understood.

The  difficulties  which  have  been  felt  in  regard  to  the  proofs  of  this
proposition  need  not  trouble  us  now,  because  they  have  already  been  disposed
of  in  the  discussion  of  the  more  crucial  propositions  in.  11,  12.

Euclid*s  proof  of  the  first  part  of  the  proposition  differs  from  Simson's ;
and  we  will  deal  with  Euclid's  first.  On  this  Camerer  remarks  that  it  is
assumed  that  the  supposed  second  p>oint  of  contact  lies  on  the  line  of  centres
produced  beyond  the  centre  of  the  ^^outer^^  circlcy  whereas  all  that  is  proved  in
III.  II  is  that  the  line  of  cgxxXxqs  produced  beyond  the  centre  of  the  "  inner  ^^  circle
passes  through  a  point  of  contact.  But,  by  the  same  argument  as  that  given
on  III.  1 1,  we  show  that  the  circles  cannot  have  a  point  of  contact,  or  even
any  common  point,  outside  the  line  of  centres,  because,  if  there  were  such  a
point,  there  would  be  a  corresponding  common  point  on  the  other  side  of  the
line,  and  the  circles  would  have  three  common  points.  Hence  the  only
hypothesis  left  is  that  the  second  point  of  contact  may  be  on  the  line  of
centres  but  in  the  direction  of  the  centre  of  the  **  outer  "  circle ;  and  Euclid's
proof  disposes  of  this  hypothesis.

H.  E.  II.  X


34  BOOK   III  [ill.  13,  14

Heron  (in  an-Nairizi,  ed.  Curtze,  pp.  122 — 4),  curiously  enough,  does  not
question  Euclid's  assumption  that  the  line  of  centres  passes  through  both
points  of  contact  (if  double  contact  is  possible) ;  but  he  devotes  some  space  to
proving  that  the  centre  of  the  "outer"  circle  must  lie  within  the  "inner"  circle,  a
fact  which  he  represents  Euclid  as  asserting  ("  sicut  dixit  Euclides  *'),  though
there  is  no  such  assertion  in  our  text.  The  proof  of  the  fact  is  of  course  easy.
If  the  line  of  centres  passes  through  both  points  of  contact,  and  the  centre  of
the  "outer"  circle  lies  either  on  or  outside  the  "inner"  circle,  the  line  of
centres  must  cut  the  "inner"  circle  in  three  points  in  all:  which  is  impossible,
as  Heron  shows  by  the  lemma,  which  he  places  here  (and  proves  by  i.  16),
that  a  straight  line  cannot  cut  the  circumference  of  a  circle  in  more  points
than  two,

Simson's  proof  is  as  follows  (there  is  no  real  need  for  giving  two  figures  as
he  does).

"If  it  be  possible,  let  the  circle  EBF  touch  the  circle  ABC  in  more
points  than  one,  and  first  on  the  inside,  in  the
points  B^  D  \  join  BD^  and  draw  GH  bisecting
BD  at  right  angles.

Therefore,  because  the  points  B,  D  are  in  the
circumference  of  each  of  the  circles,  the  straight
line  BD  falls  within  each  of  them  :  And  their
centres  are  in  the  straight  line  GH  which  bisects
BD  at  right  angles  :

Therefore  GH  passes  through  the  point  of
contact  [hi.  iil;  but  it  does  not  pass  through  it,
because  the  pomts  By  D  are  without  the  straight  line  GH\  which  is  absurd.

Therefore  one  circle  cannot  touch  another  on  the  inside  in  more  points
than  one."

On  this  Camerer  remarks  that,  unless  111.  1 1  be  more  completely  elucidated
than  it  is  by  Euclid's  demonstration,  which  Simson  has,  it  is  not  sufficiently
clear  that,  besides  the  point  of  contact  in  which  GH  meets  the  circles,  they
cannot  have  another  point  of  contact  either  (i)  on  GH  or  (2)  outside  it.
Here  again  the  latter  supposition  (2)  is  rendered  impossible  because  in  that
case  there  would  be  a  third  common  point  on  the  opposite  side  of  GH ;  and
the  former  supposition  (i)  is  that  which  Euclid's  proof  destroys.

Simson  retains  Euclid's  proof  of  the  second  part  of  the  proposition,  though
his  own  proof  of  the  first  part  would  apply  to  the  second  part  also  if  a
reference  to  iii.  12  were  substituted  for  the  reference  to  in.  11.  Euclid  might
also  have  proved  the  second  part  by  the  same  method  as  that  which  he
employs  for  the  first  part.

Proposition   14.

In  a  circle  equal  straight  lines  are  equally  distant  from
the  centre y  and  those  which  are  equally  distant  from  the  centre
are  equal  to  one  another.

Let  ABDC  be  a  circle,  and  let  ABy  CD  be  equal  straight
lines  in  it ;
I  say  that  AB^  CD  are  equally  distant  from  the  centre.

For  let  the  centre  of  the  circle  ABDC  be  taken  [ni.  i],


III.  14]  PROPOSITIONS   13,  14  35

and  let  it  be  E\  from  E  let  EF,  EG  be  drawn  perpendicular

to  AB,  CD,  and  let  AE,  EC  be  joined.

Then,  since  a  straight  line  EF  through

the  centre  cuts  a  straight  Xva^AB  not  through

the  centre  at  right  angles,  it  also  bisects  it.

["I-  3]
Therefore  AFis  equal  to  FB ;

therefore  AB  is  double  of  AF.

For  the  same  reason

CD  is  also  double  of  CG ;

and  AB  is  equal  to  CD  ;

therefore  AF  is  also  equal  to  CG.

And,  since  AE  is  equal  to  EC,

the  square  on  AE  is  also  equal  to  the  square  on  EC.

But  the  squares  on  AF,  EF  are  equal  to  the  square  on  AE,
for  the  angle  at  F  is  right ;

and  the  squares  on  EG,  GC  are  equal  to  the  square  on  EC,
for  the  angle  at  G  is  right ;  [i.  47]

therefore   the   squares  on  AF,  FE  are  equal  to  the
squares  on  CG,  GE,

of  which  the  square  on  AF  is  equal  to  the  square  on  CG,
for  AFis  equal  to  CG  ;

therefore  the  square  on  FE  which  remains  is  equal  to
the  square  on  EG,

therefore  EF  is  equal  to  EG.
But  in  a  circle  straight  lines  are  said  to  be  equally  distant
from  the  centre  when  the  perpendiculars  drawn  to  them  from
the  centre  are  equal ;  [m.  Def.  4]

therefore  AB,  CD  are  equally  distant  from  the  centre.

Next,  let  the  straight  lines  AB,  CD  be  equally  distant
from  the  centre;  that  is,  let  EFh^  equal  to  EG.

I  say  that  AB  is  also  equal  to  CD.

For,  with  the  same  construction,  we  can  prove,  similarly,
that  AB  is  double  of  AF,  and  CD  of  CG.

And,  since  AE  is  equal  to  CE,

the  square  on  AE  is  equal  to  the  square  on  CE.
But  the  squares  on  EF,  FA  are  equal  to  the  square  on  AE,
and  the  squares  on  EG,  GC  equal  to  the  square  on  CE.  [i.  47]

3—2


36


BOOK   III


[ill.  14,  15


Therefore  the  squares   on   EF,  FA   are   equal    to    the
squares  on  EG,  GC,

of  which  the  square  on  EF  is  equal  to  the  square  on  EG,
for  EF  is  equal  to  EG ;

therefore  the  square  on  AF  which  remains  is  equal  to  the
square  on  CG ;

therefore  AFis  equal  to  CG.
And  AB  is  double  of  AF,  and  CD  double  of  CG ;

therefore  AB  is  equal  to  CD,
Therefore  etc.

Q.  E.  D.

Heron  (an-Nairizi,  pp.  125 — 7)  has  an  elaborate  addition  to  this  proposition
in  which  he  proves,  first  by  reductio  ad  absurdum,  and  then  directly,  that  the
centre  of  the  circle  falls  between  the  two  chords.


Proposition  15.

Of  straight  lines  in  a  circle  the  diameter  is  greatest,
and  of  the  rest  the  nearer  to  the  centre  is  always  greater  than
the  more  remote.

Let  ABCD  be  a  circle,  let  AD  be  its  diameter  and  E
the  centre ;  and  let  BC  be  nearer  to  the
diameter  AD,  and  FG  more  remote  ;
I    say    that   AD    is    greatest    and    BC
greater  than  FG.

For  from  the  centre  E  let  EH,  EK
be  drawn  perpendicular  to  BC,  FG.

Then,  since  BC  is  nearer  to  the
centre  and  FG  more  remote,  EK  is
greater  than  EH.  [in.  Def.  5]

Let   EL    be    made    equal    to    EH,
through  L   let  LM  be  drawn  at   right
angles  to  EK  and  carried  through  to  N,  and  let  ME,  EN,
FE,  EG  be  joined.

Then,  since  EH  is  equal  to  EL,

BC  is  also  equal  to  MN.  [m.  14]

Again,  since  AE  is  equal  to  EM,  and  ED  to  EN,
AD  is  equal  to  ME,  EN.


III.  15,  16]  PROPOSITIONS   14—16  37

But  ME,  EN  are  greater  than  MN^  [k  20]

and  MN  is  equal  to  BC ;

therefore  AD  is  greater  than  BC.

And,  since  the  two  sides  ME,  EN  are  equal  to  the  two
sides  FE,  EG,

and  the  angle  MEN  greater  than  the  angle  FEG,

therefore  the  base  MN  is  greater  than  the  base  FG,        [i.  24]

But  MN  was  proved  equal  to  BC.

Therefore  the  diameter  AD  is  greatest  and  BC  greater
than  FG.

Therefore  etc.

Q.  E.  D.
I.    Of  straight  lines.    The  Greek  leaves  these  words  to  be  understood.

It  will  be  observed  that  Euclid's  proof  differs  from  that  given  in  our  text-
books (which  is  Simson's)  in  that  Euclid  introduces  another  line  MN,  which
is  drawn  so  as  to  be  equal  to  -^C  but  at  right  angles  to  EK  dXidi  therefore
parallel  to  FG,  Simson  dispenses  with  MN  and  bases  his  proof  on  a  similar
proof  by  Theodosius  (Sphaerica  i.  6).  He  proves  that  the  sum  of  the  squares
on  EH,  HB  is  equal  to  the  sum  of  the  squares  on  EK,  KF\  whence  he
infers  that,  since  the  square  on  EH  is  less  than  the  square  on  EK,  the  square
on  BH  is  greater  than  the  square  on  FK,  It  may  be  that  Euclid  would  have
regarded  this  as  too  complicated  an  inference  to  make  without  explanation  or
without  an  increase  in  the  number  of  his  axioms.  But,  on  the  other  hand,
Euclid  himself  assumes  that  the  angle  subtended  at  the  centre  by  MN  is
greater  than  the  angle  subtended  by  FG,  or,  in  other  words,  that  M,  N  both
fall  outside  the  triangle  FEG,  This  is  a  similar  assumption  to  that  made  in
III.  7,  8,  as  already  noticed;  and  its  truth  is  obvious  because  EM,  EN,  being
radii  of  the  circle,  are  greater  than  the  distances  from  E  to  the  points  in  which
J/A^'cuts  EF,  EG,  and  therefore  the  latter  points  are  nearer  than  M,  Ndixe  to
Z,  the  foot  of  the  perpendicular  from  E  to  MN,

Simson  adds  the  converse  of  the  proposition,  proving  it  in  the  same  way
as  he  proves  the  proposition  itself.


Proposition   16.

The  straight  line  drawn  at  right  angles  to  the  diameter
of  a  circle  from  its  extremity  will  fall  outside  the  circle,  and
into  the  space  between  the  straight  line  and  the  circumference
another  straight  line  cannot  be  interposed ;  further  the  angle
of  the  semicircle  is  greater,  and  the  remaining  angle  less,  than
any  acute  rectilineal  angle.

Let  ABC  be  a  circle  about  D  as  centre  and  AB  as
diameter ;


38  BOOK  III  [ill.  i6

I  say  that  the  straight  line  drawn  from  A  at  right  angles
to  AB  from   its  extremity  will  fall
outside  the  circle.

For  suppose  it  does  not,  but,
if  possible,  let  it  fall  within  as  CA,
and  let  DC  be  joined.

Since  DA  is  equal  to  DC,

the  angle  DAC  is  also  equal  to
the  angle  A  CD.  [i.  5]

But  the  angle  DAC  is  right ;

therefore  the  angle  A  CD  is  also  right:
thus,  in  the  triangle  A  CD,  the  two  angles  DAC,  A  CD  are
equal  to  two  right  angles  ;  which  is  impossible.  [i.  17]

Therefore  the  straight  line  drawn  from  the  point  A  at
right  angles  to  BA  will  not  fall  within  the  circle.

Similarly  we  can  prove  that  neither  will  it  fall  on  the
circumference ;

therefore  it  will  fall  outside.

Let  it  fall  as  AE  ;
I  say  next  that  into  the  space  between  the  straight  line  AE
and  the  circumference  CHA  another  straight  line  cannot  be
interposed.

For,  if  possible,  let  another  straight  line  be  so  interposed,
as  FA,  and  let  DG  be  drawn  from  the  point  D  perpendicular
to  FA.

Then,  since  the  angle  AGD  is  right,

and  the  angle  DAG  is  less  than  a  right  angle,

AD  is  greater  than  DG.  [i.  19]

But  DA  is  equal  to  DH ;

therefore  DH  is  greater  than  DG^  the  less  than  the
greater  :  which  is  impossible.

Therefore  another  straight  line  cannot  be  interposed  into
the  space  between  the  straight  line  and  the  circumference.

I  say  further  that  the  angle  of  the  semicircle  contained  by
the  straight  line  BA  and  the  circumference  CHA  is  greater
than  any  acute  rectilineal  angle,

and  the  remaining  angle  contained  by  the  circumference  CHA

and  the  straight  line  AE  is  less  than  any  acute  rectilineal  angle.

For,  if  there   is  any  rectilineal  angle  greater  than  the

angle  contained  by  the  straight  line  BA  and  the  circumference


III.  1 6]  PROPOSITION    16  39

CHA,  and  any  rectilineal  angle  less  than  the  angle  contained
by  the  circumference  CHA  and  the  straight  line  AEy  then
into  the  space  between  the  circumference  and  the  straight  line
AE  a  straight  line  will  be  interposed  such  as  will  make  an
angle  contained  by  straight  lines  which  is  greater  than  the
angle  contained  by  the  straight  line  BA  and  the  circumference
CHA,  and  another  angle  contained  by  straight  lines  which
is  less  than  the  angle  contained  by  the  circumference  CHA
and  the  straight  line  AE,

But  such  a  straight  line  cannot  be  interposed ;

therefore  there  will  not  be  any  acute  angle  contained  by
straight  lines  which  is  greater  than  the  angle  -contained  by
the  straight  line  BA  and  the  circumference  CHA,  nor  yet
any  acute  angle  contained  by  straight  lines  which  is  less  than
the  angle  contained  by  the  circumference  CHA  and  the
straight  line  AE. —

PoRiSM.  From  this  it  is  manifest  that  the  straight  line
drawn  at  right  angles  to  the  diameter  of  a  circle  from  its
extremity  touches  the  circle.

^  Q.  E.  D.

4.    cannot  be  interposed,  literally  '*  will  not  fall  in  between  "  (od  Tape/irco-circu)*

This  proposition  is  historically  interesting  because  of  the  controversies  to
which  the  last  part  of  it  gave  rise  from  the  13th  to  the  17th  centuries.
History  was  here  repeating  itself,  for  it  is  certain  that,  in  ancient  Greece,  both
before  and  after  Euclid's  time,  there  had  been  a  great  deal  of  the  same  sort
of  contention  about  the  nature  of  the  "  angle  of  a  semicircle "  and  the
"remaining  angle"  between  the  circumference  of  the  semicircle  and  the
tangent  at  its  extremity.  As  we  have  seen  (note  on  i.  Def.  8),  the  latter  angle
had  a  recognised  name,  KcparoctS^?  ycovtia,  horn-like  or  cornicular  angle;
though  this  term  does  not  appear  in  Euclid,  it  is  often  used  by  Proclus,
evidently  as  a  term  well  understood.  While  it  is  from  Proclus  that  we  get  the
best  idea  of  the  ancient  controversies  on  this  subject,  we  may,  I  think,  infer
their  prevalence  in  Euclid's  time  from  this  solitary  appearance  of  the  two
"angles"  in  the  Elements,  Along  with  the  definition  of  the  angle  of  a
segment,  it  seems  to  show  that,  although  these  angles  are  only  mentioned  to
be  dropped  again  immediately,  and  are  of  no  use  in  elementary  geometry,  or
even  at  all,  Euclid  thought  that  an  allusion  to  them  would  be  expected  of
him ;  it  is  as  if  he  merely  meant  to  guard  himself  against  appearing  to  ignore
a  subject  which  the  geometers  of  his  time  regarded  with  interest.  If  this
conjecture  is  right,  the  mention  of  these  angles  would  correspond  to  the
insertion  of  definitions  of  which  he  makes  no  use,  e.g.  those  of  a  rhombus  and
a  rhomboid.

Proclus  has  no  hesitation  in  speaking  of  the  "  angle  of  a  semicircle  "  and
the  "horn-like  angle"  as  true  angles.  Thus  he  says  that  "angles  are  contained
by  a  straight  line  and  a  circumference  in  two  ways;  for  they  are  either
contained  by  a  straight  line  and  a  convex  circumference,  like  that  of  the  semi-


40  BOOK  III  [in.  1 6

circle,  or  by  a  straight  line  and  a  concave  circumference,  like  the  KcparoctSiy?  "
(p.  127,  II — 14).  "There  are  mixed lineSj  as  spirals,  and  angles,  as  the  angle
of  a  semicircle  and  the  KcparociSiJ? "  (p.  104,  16 — 18).  The  difficulty  which
the  ancients  felt  arose  from  the  very  fact  which  Euclid  embodies  in  this
proposition.  Since  an  angle  can  be  divided  by  a  line,  it  would  seem  to  be  a
magnitude;  "but  if  it  is  a  magnitude,  and  all  homogeneous  magnitudes  which
are  finite  have  a  ratio  to  one  another,  then  all  homogeneous  angles,  or  rather
all  those  on  surfaces,  will  have  a  ratio  to  one  another,  so  that  the  cornicular
will  also  have  a  rtttio  to  the  rectilineal.  But  things  which  have  a  ratio  to  one
another  can,  if  multiplied,  exceed  one  another.  Therefore  the  cornicular
angle  will  also  sometime  exceed  the  rectilineal ;  which  is  impossible,  for  it  is
proved  that  the  former  is  less  than  any  rectilineal  angle"  (Proclus,  p.  121,
24 — 122,  6).  The  nature  of  contact  between  straight  lines  and  circles  was
also  involved  in  the  question,  and  that  this  was  the  subject  of  controversy
before  Euclid's  time  is  clear  from  the  title  of  a  work  attributed  to  Democritus
(fl.  420—400  B.C.)  ircpl  8ta^p^9  yvwftovos  ^  ircpi  i/ravcrios  mJicXov  kqa  tr^lpitfi^
On  a  difference  in  a  gnomon  or  on  contact  of  a  circle  atid  a  sphere.  There  is,
however,  another  reading  of  the  first  words  of  this  title  as  given  by  Diogenes
I^ertius  (ix.  47),  namely  ircpl  8ia^of>^9  yvwfirfs,  On  a  difference  of  opinion^  etc.
May  it  not  be  that  neither  reading  is  correct,  but  that  the  words  should  be
ircpi  Suiifiopijs  y(ovirf^  ^  ircpl  ^avo-109  kvkKov  #cou  a-ffniiprf^f  On  a  difference  in  an
angle  or  on  contact  with  a  circle  and  a  sphere}  There  would,  of  course,
hardly  be  any  "  angle  "  in  connexion  with  the  sphere ;  but  I  do  not  think  that
this  constitutes  any  difficulty,  because  the  sphere  might  easily  be  tacked  on  as
a  kindred  subject  to  the  circle.  A  curiously  similar  collocation  of  words
appears  in  a  passage  of  Proclus,  though  this  may  be  an  accident.  He  says
(p.  50,  4)  TTCtff  Hk  ymvitav  hiatfiopa^  Xcyo/Jtcv  icai  av^O'€i9  avrwv  ...  and  then,  in
the  next  line  but  one,  ttws  8c  rhs  d^as  t<3v  KVKXtav  ^  tcSk  cv^cuoi^,  "  In  what
sense  do  w^e  speak  of  differences  of  angles  and  of  increases  of  them  . . .  and  in
what  sense  of  the  contacts  (or  meetings)  of  circles  or  of  straight  lines  ? "
I  cannot  help  thinking  that  this  subject  of  cornicular  angles  would  have  had
a  fascination  for  Democritus  as  being  akin  to  the  question  of  infinitesimals,
and  very  much  of  the  same  character  as  the  other  question  which  Plutarch
{^On  Common  Notions^  xxxix.  3)  says  that  he  raised,  namely  that  of  the
relation  between  the  base  of  a  cone  and  a  section  of  it  by  a  plane  parallel  to
the  base  and  apparently,  to  judge  by  the  context,  infinitely  near  to  it :  "  if
a  cone  were  cut  by  a  plane  parallel  to  its  base,  what  must  we  think  of  the
surfaces  of  the  sections,  that  they  are  equal  or  unequal?  For,  if  they  are
unequal,  they  will  make  the  cone  irregular,  as  having  many  indentations  like
steps,  and  unevennesses ;  but,  if  they  are  equal,  the  sections  will  be  equal,
and  the  cone  will  appear  to  have  the  property  of  the  cylinder,  as  being  made
up  of  equal  and  not  unequal  circles,  which  is  the  height  of  absurdity."

The  contributions  by  Democritus  to  such  investigations  are  further  attested
by  a  passage  in  a  new  fragment  of  Archimedes  (see  Heiberg,  Eine  neue
Archimedes-Handschrift  in  Hermes  xlii.  1907,  pp.  235 — 303),  which  says
{loc.  cit^  pp.  245,  246)  that,  though  Eudoxus  was  the  first  to  discover  the
scientific  proof  of  the  propositions  (attributed  to  him)  that  the  cone  and  the
pyramid  are  one-third  of  the  cylinder  and  prism  respectively  which  have
the  same  base  and  height,  they  were  first  stated^  without  proof,  by  Democritus.

A  full  history  of  the  later  controversies  about  the  cornicular  "angle"
cannot  be  given  here ;  more  on  the  subject  will  be  found  in  Camerer's
Euclid  (Excursus  iv.  on  iii.  16)  or  in  Cantor's  Geschichte  der  Mathematik^
Vol  II.  (see  Contingenzwinkel  in  the  index).     But  the  following  short  note


III.  i6]  PROPOSITION    i6  41

about  the  attitude  of  certain  well-known  mathematicians  to  the  question  will
perhaps  not  be  out  of  place.  Johannes  Campanus,  who  edited  Euclid  in
the  13th  century,  inferred  from  iii.  16  that  there  was  a  flaw  in  the  principle
that  the  transition  from  the  less  to  the  greater,  or  vice  vers  A,  takes  place  through
all  intermediate  quantities  and  therefore  through  the  equal.  If  a  diameter  of  a
circle,  he  says,  be  moved  about  its  extremity  until  it  takes  the  position  of  the
tangent  to  that  circle,  then,  as  long  as  it  cuts  the  circle,  it  makes  an  acute
angle  less  than  the  "angle  of  a  semicircle";  but  the  moment  it  ceases  to  cut,
it  makes  a  right  angle  greater  than  the  same  "  angle  of  a  semicircle."  The
rectilineal  angle  is  never,  during  the  transition,  equal  to  the  "  angle  of  a  semi-
circle." There  is  therefore  an  apparent  inconsistency  with  x.  i,  and  Campanus
could  only  observe  (as  he  does  on  that  proposition),  in  explanation  of  the
paradox,  that  "these  are  not  angles  in  the  same  sense  (univoce),  for  the
curved  and  the  straight  are  not  things  of  the  same  kind  without  qualification
(simpliciter)."  The  argument  assumes,  of  course,  that  the  right  angle  is
greater  than  the  "angle  of  a  semicircle."

Very  similar  is  the  statement  of  the  paradox  by  Cardano  (1501 — 1576)
who  observed  that  a  quantity  may  continually  increase  without  limit,  and
another  diminish  without  limit ;  and  yet  the  first,  however  increased,  may  be  less
than  the  second,  hotvever  diminished.  The  first  quantity  is  of  course  the  angle
of  contact,  as  he  calls  it,  which  may  be  "  increased "  indefinitely  by  drawing
smaller  and  smaller  circles  touching  the  same  straight  line  at  the  same  point,
but  will  always  be  less  than  any  acute  rectilineal  angle  however  small.

We  next  come  to  the  French  geometer,  Peletier  (Peletarius),  who  edited  the
Elements  in  1557,  and  whose  views  on  this  subject  seem  to  mark  a  great  advance.
Peletier's  opinions  and  arguments  are  most  easily  accessible  in  the  account  of
them  given  by  Clavius  (Christoph  Schliissel,  1537—1612)  in  the  1607  edition
of  his  Euclid.  The  violence  of  the  controversy  between  the  two  will  be
understood  from  the  fact  that  the  arguments  and  counter-arguments  (which
sometimes  run  into  other  matters  than  the  particular  question  at  issue)  cover,
in  that  book,  26  pages  of  small  print.  Peletier  held  that  the  "angle  of
contact"  was  not  an  angle  at  all,  that  the  "contact  of  two  circles,"  i.e.  the
"angle"  between  the  circumferences  of  two  circles  touching  one  another
internally  or  externally,  is  not  a  quantity,  and  that  the  "contact  of  a  straight
line  with  a  circle"  is  not  a  quantity  either;  that  angles  contained  by  a
diameter  and  a  circumference  whether  inside  or  outside  the  circle  are  right
cpigles  and  equal  to  rectilineal  right  angles,  and  that  angles  contained  by  a
diameter  and  the  circumference  in  all  circles  are  equal  The  proof  which
Peletier  gave  of  the  latter  proposition  in  a  letter  to  Cardano  is  sufficiently
ingenious.  If  a  greater  and  a  less  semicircle  be  placed  with  their  diameters
terminating  at  a  common  point  and  lying  in  a  straight  line,  then  (i)  the  angle
of  the  larger  obviously  cannot  be  less  than  the  angle  of  the  smaller.  Neither
(2)  can  the  former  be  greater  than  the  latter ;  for,  if  it  were,  we  could  obtain
another  angle  of  a  semicircle  greater  still  by  drawing  a  still  larger  semicircle,
and  so  on,  until  we  should  ultimately  have  an  angle  of^  semicircle  greater  than
a  right  angle  :  which  is  impossible.  Hence  the  angles  of  semicircles  must  all
be  ^ual,  and  the  differences  between  them  nothing.  Having  satisfied  himself
that  all  angles  of  contact  are  m?/-angles,  «^/-quantities,  and  therefore  nothings,
Peletier  holds  the  difficulty  about  x.  i  to  be  at  an  end.  He  adds  the
interesting  remark  that  the  essence  of  an  angle  is  in  cutting,  not  contact,  and
that  a  tangent  is  not  inclined  to  the  circle  at  the  point  of  contact  but  is,  as  it
were,  immersed  in  it  at  that  point,  just  as  much  as  if  the  circle  did  not  diverge
from  it  on  either  side.


42  BOOK   III  [ill.  i6

The  reply  of  Clavius  need  not  detain  us.  He  argues,  evidently  appealing
to  the  eye,  that  the  angle  of  contact  can  be  divided  by  the  arc  of  a  circle
greater  than  the  given  one,  that  the  angles  of  two  semicircles  of  different  sizes
cannot  be  equal,  since  they  do  not  coincide  if  they  are  applied  to  one  another,
that  there  is  nothing  to  prevent  angles  of  contact  from  being  quantities,  it  being
only  necessary,  in  view  of  x.  i,  to  admit  that  they  are  not  of  the  same  kind  as
rectilineal  angles ;  lastly  that,  if  the  angle  of  contact  had  been  a  nothing,
Euclid  would  not  have  given  himself  so  much  trouble  to  prove  that  it  is  less
than  any  acute  angle.  (The  word  is  desudasset,  which  is  certainly  an
exaggeration  as  applied  to  what  is  little  more  than  an  obiter  dictum  in  in.  i6.)

Vieta  (1540 — 1603)  ranged  himself  on  the  side  of  Peletier,  maintaining
that  the  angle  of  contact  is  no  angle ;  only  he  uses  a  new  method  of  proof.
The  circle,  he  says,  may  be  regarded  as  a  plane  figure  with  an  infinite  number
of  sides  and  angles ;  but  a  straight  line  touching  a  straight  line,  however  short
it  may  be,  will  coincide  with  that  straight  line  and  will  not  make  an  angle.
Never  before,  says  Cantor  (11, ,  p.  540),  had  it  been  so  plainly  declared  what
exactly  was  to  be  understooid  by  contact,

Galileo  Galilei  (1564 — 1642)  seems  to  have  held  the  same  view  as  Vieta
and  to  have  supported  it  by  a  very  similar  argument  derived  from  the  com-
parison of  the  circle  and  an  inscribed  polygon  with  an  infinite  number  of
sides.

The  last  writer  on  the  question  who  must  be  mentioned  is  John  Wallis
(1616 — 1703).  He  published  in  1656  a  paper  entitled  De  angulo  contactus  et
semicirculi  tractatus  in  which  he  also  maintained  that  the  so-called  angle  was
not  a  true  angle,  and  was  not  a  quantity,  Vincent  Leotaud  (1595 — 1672)
took  up  the  cudgels  for  Clavius  in  his  Cyclomathia  which  appeared  in  1663.
This  brought  a  reply  from  Wallis  in  a  letter  to  Leotaud  dated  1 7  February,
1667,  but  not  apparently  published  till  it  appeared  in  A  defense  of  the  treatise
of  the  at^le  of  contact  which,  with  a  separate  title-page,  and  date  1684,  was
included  in  the  English  edition  of  his  Algebra  dated  1685.  The  essence  of
Wallis'  position  may  be  put  as  follows.  According  to  Euclid's  definition,  a
plane  angle  is  an  inclination  of  two  lines;  therefore  two  lines  forming  an  angle
must  incline  to  one  another,  and,  if  two  lines  meet  without  being  inclined  to
one  another  at  the  point  of  meeting  (which  is  the  case  when  a  circumference
is  touched  by  a  straight  line),  the  lines  do  not  form  an  angle.  The  "angle  of
contact "  is  therefore  no  angle,  because  at  the  point  of  contact  the  straight  line
is  not  inclined  to  the  circle  but  lies  on  it  axXtv<I!>«,  or  is  coincident  with  it.
Again,  as  a  point  is  not  a  line  but  a  beginning  of  a  line,  and  a  line  is  not  a
surface  but  a  beginning  of  a  surface,  so  an  angle  is  not  the  distance  between
two  lines,  but  their  initial  tendency  towards  separation :  Angulus  (seu  gradus
divaricationis)  Distantia  non  est  sed  Inceptivus  distantiae.  How  far  lines,  which
at  their  point  of  meeting  do  not  form  an  angle,  separate  from  one  another  as
they  pass  on  depends  on  the  degree  of  curvature  (gradus  curvitatis),  and  it  is
the  latter  which  has  to  be  compared  in  the  case  of  two  lines  so  meeting.  The
arc  of  a  smaller  circle  is  more  curved  as  having  as  much  curvature  in  a  lesser
length,  and  is  therefore  curved  in  a  greater  degree.  Thus  what  Clavius  called
angulus  contactus  becomes  with  Wallis  gradus  curvitatis,  the  use  of  which
expression  shows  that  curvature  and  curvature  can  be  compared  according  to
one  and  the  same  standard.  A  straight  line  has  the  least  possible  curvature ;
but  of  the  "angle"  made  by  it  with  a  curve  which  it  touches  we  cannot  say  that
it  is  greater  or  less  than  the  "  angle  "  which  a  second  curve  touching  the  same
straight  line  at  the  same  point  makes  with  the  first  curve ;  for  in  both  cases
there  is  no  true  angle  at  all  (cf.  Cantor  iiii,  p.  24).


IIL   16,   17]


PROPOSITIONS   16,  17


43


The  words  usually  given  as  a  part  of  the  corollary  "and  that  a  straight  line
touches  a  circle  at  one  point  only,  since  in  fact  the  straight  line  meeting  it  in
two  points  was  proved  to  fall  within  it "  are  omitted  by  Heiberg  as  being  an
undoubted  addition  of  Theon's.  It  was  Simson  who  added  the  further  remark
that  "  it  is  evident  that  there  can  be  but  one  straight  line  which  touches  the
circle  at  the  same  point''

Proposition  17.

From  a  given  point  to  draw  a  straight  line  touching  a
given  circle.

Let  A  be  the  given  point,  and  BCD  the  given  circle ;
thus  it  is  required  to  draw  from  the  point  A  a  straight  line
touching  the  circle  BCD.

For  let  the  centre  E  of  the  circle
be  taken  ;  [iii.  i]

let  AE  be  joined,  and  with  centre  E
and  distance  EA  let  the  circle  AFG
be  described ;

from  D  let   DF  be   drawn   at   right

angles  to  EAy

and  let  EF^  AB  he  joined  ;

I  say  that  AB  has  been  drawn  from

the  point  A  touching  the  circle  BCD.

For,  since  E  is  the  centre  of  the  circles  BCD,  AFG,
EA  is  equal  to  EF,  and^Z>  to  EB ;
therefore  the  two  sides  AE,  EB  are  equal  to  the  two  sides
FE,  ED ;
and  they  contain  a  common  angle,  the  angle  at  E ;

therefore  the  base  DF  is  equal  to  the  base  AB,
and  the  triangle  DEF  is  equal  to  the  triangle  BE  A,
and  the  remaining  angles  to  the  remaining  angles  ;  [i.  4]
therefore  the  angle  EDF  is  equal  to  the  angle  EBA.
But  the  angle  EDF  is  right ;

therefore  the  angle  EBA  is  also  right.
Now  EB  is  a  radius ;
and  the  straight  line  drawn  at  right  angles  to  the  diameter
of  a  circle,  from  its  extremity,  touches  the  circle  ;     [iii.  16,  Por.]
therefore  AB  touches  the  circle  BCD.
Therefore  from  the  given  point  A  the  straight  line  AB
has  been  drawn  touching  the  circle  BCD.  q.  e.  f.


44  BOOK   III  [iiL  17.  18

The  construction  shows,  of  course,  that  two  straight  lines  can  be  drawn
from  a  given  external  point  to  touch  a  given  circle ;  and  it  is  equally  obvious
that  these  two  straight  lines  are  equal  in  length  and  equally  inclined  to  the
straight  line  joining  the  external  point  to  the  centre  of  the  given  circle.
These  facts  are  given  by  Heron  (an-NairlzI,  p.  130).

It  is  true  that  Euclid  leaves  out  the  case  where  the  given  point  lies  on  the
circumference  of  the  circle,  doubtless  because  the  construction  is  so  directly
indicated  by  iii.  16,  Por.  as  to  be  scarcely  worth  a  separate  statement.

An  easier  solution  is  of  course  possible  as  soon  as  we  know  (in.  31)  that
the  angle  in  a  semicircle  is  a  right  angle;  for  we  have  only  to  describe  a
circle  on  AE  as  diameter,  and  this  circle  cuts  the  given  circle  in  the  two  points
of  contact


Proposition   18.

If  a  straight  line  touch  a  circle,  and  a  straight  line  be
joined  from  the  centre  to  the  point  of  contact,  the  straight  line
so  joined  will  be  perpendicular  to  the  tangent.

For  let  a  straight  line  DE  touch  the  circle  ABC  at  the
point    C,  let   the   centre  F  of  the
circle  ABC  be  taken,  and  let  FC
be  joined  from  Fx.o  C\
I  say  that  FC  is  perpendicular  to
DE.

For,  if  not,  let  FG  be  drawn
from  F  perpendicular  to  DE.

Then,  since  the  angle  FGC  is
right,

the  angle  FCG  is  acute  ;[i.  17]
and  the  greater  angle  is  subtended

by  the  greater  side  ;  [1.  19]

therefore  FC  is  greater  than  FG.
But  FC  is  equal  to  FB  ;
therefore  FB  is  also  greater  than  FG,

the  less  than  the  greater :  which  is  impossible.
Therefore  FG  is  not  perpendicular  to  DE.

Similarly  we  can  prove  that  neither  is  any  other  straight
line  except  FC\

therefore  FC  is  perpendicular  to  DE.

Therefore  etc.

Q.  E.  D.


in.  i8,  19]


PROPOSITIONS   17—19


45


3.    the  tangent,  if  i4>arToti4yri,

Just  as  III.  3  contains  two  partial  converses  of  the  Porism  to  iii.  i,  so
the  present  proposition  and  the  next  give  two  partial  converses  of  the
corollary  to  iii.  16.  We  may  show  their  relation  thus:  suppose  three  things,
(i)  a  tangent  at  a  point  of  a  circle,  (2)  a  straight  line  drawn  from  the  centre  to
the  point  of  contact,  (3)  right  angles  made  at  the  point  of  contact  [with  (i)  or
(2)  as  the  case  may  be].  Then  the  corollary  to  iii.  16  asserts  that  (2)  and  (3)
together  give  (i),  iii.  18  that  (i)  and  (2)  give  (3),  and  iii.  19  that  (i)  and  (3)
give  (2),  i.e.  that  the  straight  line  drawn  from  the  point  of  contact  at  right
angles  to  the  tangent  passes  through  the  centre.


Proposition  19.

If  a  straight  line  touch  a  circle y  and  from  the  point  of
contact  a  straight  line  be  drawn  at  right  angles  to  the  tangent,
the  centre  of  the  circle  will  be  on  the  straight  line  so  draxvn.

For  let  a  straight  line  DE  touch  the  circle  ABC  at  the
point   C,  and  from   C  let    CA    be
drawn  at  right  angles  to  DE ;
I  say  that  the  centre  of  the  circle
is  on  AC.

For   suppose   it   is  not,  but,  if
possible,  let  F  be  the  centre,
and  let  CF  be  joined.

Since  a  straight  line  DE  touches
the  circle  ABC,

and  FC  has  been  joined  from  the
centre  to  the  point  of  contact,

FC  is  perpendicular  to  DE  ;  [m.  18]

therefore  the  angle  FCE  is  right.

But  the  angle  ACE  is  also  right ;

therefore  the  angle  FCE  is  equal  to  the  angle  ACE,
the  less  to  the  greater :  which  is  impossible.

Therefore  F  is  not  the  centre  of  the  circle  ABC

Similarly  we  can  prove  that  neither  is  any  other  point
except  a  point  on  AC

Therefore  etc.

Q.  E.  D.

We  may  also  regard  in.  19  as  a  partial  converse  of  iii.  18.  Thus  suppose
(i)  a  straight  line  through  the  centre,  (2)  a  straight  line  through  the  point  of
contact,  and  suppose  (3)  to  mean  perpendicular  to  the  tangent;  then  in.  18
asserts  that  (i)  and  (2)  combined  produce  (3),  and  in.  19  that  (a)  and  (3)


46  BOOK   III  [ill.  19,  20

produce  (i);  while  again  we  may  enunciate  a  second  partial  converse  of  iii.  18,
corresponding  to  the  statement  that  (i)  and  (3)  produce  (2),  to  the  effect  that
a  straight  line  drawn  through  the  centre  perpendicular  to  the  tangent  passes
through  the  point  of  contact.

We  may  add  at  this  point,  or  even  after  the  Porism  to  in.  16,  the  theorem
that  two  circles  which  touch  one  another  internally  or  externally  have  a  common
tangent  at  their  point  of  contact.  For  the  line  joining  their  centres,  produced
if  necessary,  passes  through  their  point  of  contact,  and  a  straight  line  drawn
through  that  point  at  right  angles  to  the  line  of  centres  is  a  tangent  to  both
circles.


Proposition  20.

In  a  circle  the  angle  at  the  centre  is  double  of  the  angle
at  the  circumference y  when  the  angles  have  the  same  circum-
ference as  base.

Let  ABC  be  a  circle,  let  the  angle  BEC  be  an  angle
sat  its  centre,  and  the  angle  BAC  an
angle   at    the    circumference,   and    let
them  have  the  same  circumference  BC
as  base;

I  say  that  the  angle  BEC  is  double  of
10  the  angle  BAC.

For  let  AE  be  joined  and  drawn
through  to  F,

Then,  since  EA  is  equal  to  EB,
the  angle  EAB  is  also  equal  to  the
15  angle  EBA  ;  [i.  5J

therefore  the  angles  EAB,  EBA  are  double  of  the  angle
EAB.

But  the  angle  BEF  is  equal  to  the  angles  EAB,  EBA  ;

['.  32]
therefore    the*    angle    BEF    is    also    double    of    the    angle
20  EAB.

For  the  same  reason

the  angle  FEC  is  also  double  of  the  angle  EAC.
Therefore  the  whole  angle  BEC  is  double  of  the  whole
angle  BAC
25        Again  let  another  straight  line  be  inflected,  and  let  there
be  another  angle  BDC\    let  DE  be  joined  and  produced*
to  G.


III.  2o]  PROPOSITIONS    19,  20  47

Similarly  then  we  can  prove  that  the  angle  GEC  is
double  of  the  angle  EDC,

30        of  which  the  angle  GEB  is  double  of  the  angle  EDB  ;

therefore  the  angle  BEC  which  remains  is  double  of  the
angle  BDC.

Therefore  etc.  q.  e.  d.

25.  let  another  straight  line  be  inflected,  K^KkixiQia  dij  TdXiv  (without  ci&^eta).  The
verb  kMu  (to  h^eaJk  off)  was  the  regular  technical  term  for  drawing  from  a  point  a  (broken)
straight  line  which  first  meets  another  straight  line  or  curve  and  is  then  bmt  back  from  it
to  another  point,  or  (in  other  words)  for  drawing  straight  lines  from  two  points  meeting  at  a
point  on  a  curve  or  another  straight  line.  K€K\6AT0ai.  is  one  of  the  geometrical  terms  the
definition  of  which  must  according  to  Aristotle  be  assumed  (Anal,  Post,  1.  10,  76  b  9).

The  early  editors,  Tartaglia,  Commandinus,  Peletarius,  Clavius  and  others,
gave  the  extension  of  this  proposition  to  the  case  where  the  segment  is  less
than  a  semicircle,  and  where  accordingly  the  "angle"  corresponding  to
Euclid's  "angle  at  the  centre"  is  greater  than  two  right  angles.  The
convenience  of  the  extension  is  obvious,  and  the  proof  of  it  is  the  same  as  the
first  part  of  Euclid's  proof.  By  means  of  the  extension  iii.  21  is  demonstrated
without  making  two  cases;  iii.  22  will  follow  immediately  from  the  fact  that
the  sum  of  the  "  angles  at  the  centre  "  for  two  segments  making  up  a  whole
circle  is  equal  to  four  right  angles;  also  iii.  31  follows  immediately  from  the
extended  proposition.

But  all  the  editors  referred  to  were  forestalled  in  this  matter  by  Heron,  as
we  now  learn  from  the  commentary  of  an-Nairizi  (ed.  Curtze,  p.  131  sqq.).
Heron  gives  the  extension  of  Euclid's  proposition  which,  he  says,  it  had  been
left  for  him  to  make,  but  which  is  necessary  in  order  that  the  caviller  may  not
be  able  to  say  that  the  next  proposition  (about  the  equality  of  the  angles
in  any  segment)  is  not  established  generally,  i.e.  in  the  case  of  a  segment  less
than  a  semicircle  as  well  as  in  the  case  of  a  segment  greater  than  a  semicircle,
inasmuch  as  iii.  20,  as  given  by  Euclid,  only  enables  us  to  prove  it  in  the
latter  case.  Heron's  enunciation  is  important  as  showing  how  he  describes
what  we  should  now  call  an  "angle"  greater  than  two  right  angles.  (The
language  of  Gherard's  translation  is,  in  other  respects,  a  little  obscure ;  but
the  meaning  is  made  clear  by  what  follows.)

"  The  angle,"  Heron  says,  "  which  is  at  the  centre  of  any  circle  is  double
of  the  angle  which  is  at  the  circumference  of  it  when  one  arc  is  the  base  of  both
an^eSy  and  the  remaining  angles  which  are  at  the  centre ^  and  fill  up  the  four
right  angleSy  are  double  of  the  angle  at  the  circumference  of  the  arc  which  is
subtended  by  the  [original]  angle  which  is  at  the  centre."

Thus  the  "angle  greater  than  two  right  angles"  is  for  Heron  the  sum  of
certain  "  angles  "  in  the  Euclidean  sense  of  angles  less  than  two  right  angles.
The  particular  method  of  splitting  up  which  Heron  adopts  will  be  seen  from
his  proof,  which  is  in  substance  as  follows.

Let  CDB  be  an  angle  at  the  centre,  CAB  that  at  the  circumference.

Produce  BD,  CD  to  F,G]

take  any  point  E  on  BC^  and  join  BE,  EC,  ED,

Then  any  angle  in  the  segment  BAC  is  half  of  the  angle  BDC]  and
the  sum  of  the  angles  BDG,  GDF,  FDC  is  double  of  any  angle  in  the
segment  BEC.


48  BOOK   III  [ill.  20

Proof,     Since  CD  is  equal  to  ED^

the  angles  DCE^  DEC  are  equal.

Therefore  the  exterior  angle  GDE  is  equal  to
twice  the  angle  DEC

Similarly  the  exterior  angle  FDE  is  equal  to
twice  the  angle  DEB,

By  addition,  the  angles  GDE^  FDE  are  double
of  the  angle  BEC

But

the  angle  BDC  is  equal  to  the  angle  FDG^

therefore  the  sum  of  the  angles  BDG,  GDF,  FDC
is  double  of  the  angle  BEC.

And  Euclid  has  proved  the  first  part  of  the
proposition,  namely  that  the  angle  BDC  is  double
of  the  angle  BA  C

Now,  says  Heron,  B AC  is  any  angle  in  the  segment  BACy  and  therefore
any  angle  in  the  segment  BAC  is  half  of  the  angle  BDC

Therefore  all  the  angles  in  the  segment  BAC  dire  equal.

Again,  BEC  is  any  angle  in  the  segment  BEC  and  is  equal  to  half  the
sum  of  the  angles  BDG,  GDF,  FDC.

Therefore  all  the  angles  in  the  segment  BEC  are  equal.

Hence  iii.  21  is  proved  generally.

Lastly,  says  Heron,
since  the  sum  of  the  angles  BDG,  GDF,  FDC  is  double  of  the  angle  BECy
and  the  angle  BDC  is  double  of  the  angle  BAC^

therefore,  by  addition,  the  sum  of  four  right  angles  is  double  of  the  sum  of
the  angles  BAC,  BEC,

Hence  the  angles  BAC^  BEC  are  together  equal  to  two  right  angles,  and
III.  22  is  proved.

The  above  notes  of  Heron  show  conclusively,  if  proof  were  wanted,  that
Euclid  had  no  idea  of  in.  20  applying  in  terms  (either  as  a  matter  of
enunciation  or  proof)  to  the  case  where  the  angle  at  the  circumference,  or  the
angle  in  the  segment,  is  obtuse.  He  would  not  have  recognised  the  "  angle "
greater  than  two  right  angles  or  the  so-called  "straight  angle"  as  being  An
angle  at  all.  This  is  indeed  clear  from  his  definition  of  an  angle  as  the
inclination  k.t.c.,  and  from  the  language  used  by  other  later  Greek  mathe-
maticians where  there  would  be  an  opportunity  for  introducing  the  extension.
Thus  Proclus*  notion  of  a  "four-sided  triangle*'  (cf.  the  note  above  on  the
definition  of  a  triangle)  shows  that  he  did  not  count  a  re-entrant  angle  as  an
angle,  and  Zenodorus'  application  to  the  same  figure  of  the  word  "hollow-
angled  "  shows  that  in  that  case  it  was  the  exterior  angle  only  which  he  would
have  called  an  angle.  Further  it  would  have  been  inconvenient  to  have
introduced  at  the  beginning  of  the  Elements  an  "  angle  "  equal  to  or  greater
than  two  right  angles,  because  other  definitions,  e.g.  that  of  a  right  angle,
would  have  needed  a  qualification.  If  an  "angle"  might  be  equal  to  two
right  angles,  one  straight  line  in  a  straight  line  with  another  would  have
satisfied  Euclid's  definition  of  a  right  angle.  This  is  noticed  by  Dodgson
(p.  160),  but  it  is  practically  brought  out  by  Proclus  on  i.  13.  "For  he  did
not  merely  say  that  *  any  straight  line  standing  on  a  straight  line  either  makes
two  right  angles  or  angles  equal  to  two  right  angles '  but  *  if  it  make  angles  J


III.  20,  21]  PROPOSITIONS   20,  21  49

If  it  stand  on  the  straight  line  at  its  extremity  and  make  one  angle,  is  it
possible  for  this  to  be  equal  to  two  right  angles  ?  It  is  of  course  impossible ;
for  every  rectilineal  angle  is  less  than  two  right  angles^  as  every  solid  angle  is
less  than  four  right  angles  (p.  292,  13 — 20)."  [It  is  true  that  it  has  been
generally  held  that  the  meaning  of  "  angle  "  is  tacitly  extended  in  vi.  33,  but
there  is  no  real  ground  for  this  view.     See  the  note  on  the  proposition.]

It  will  be  observed  that,  following  his  usual  habit,  Euclid  omits  the
demonstration  of  the  case  which  some  editors,  e.g.  Clavius,  have  thought  it
necessary  to  give  separately,  the  case  namely  where  one  of  the  lines  forming
the  angle  in  the  segment  passes  through  the  centre.  Euclid's  proof  gives  so
obviously  the  means  of  proving  this  that  it  is  properly  left  out.

Todhunter  observes,  what  Clavius  had  also  remarked,  that  there  are  two
assumptions  in  the  proof  of  iii.  20,  namely  that,  if  A  is  double  of  B  and  C
double  of  Z?,  then  the  sum,  or  difference,  of  A  and  C  is  equal  to  double  the
sum,  or  difference,  of  B  and  D  respectively,  the  assumptions  being  particular
cases  of  v.  i  and  v.  5.  But  of  course  it  is  easy  to  satisfy  ourselves  of  the
correctness  of  the  assumption  without  any  recourse  to  Book  v.

Proposition  21.

In  a  circle  the  angles  in  the  same  segment  are  eqtml  to  one
another.

Let  A  BCD  be  a  circle,  and  let  the  angles  BAD,  BED
be  angles  in  the  same  segment  BAED\

I  say  that  the  angles  BAD,  BED  are
equal  to  one  another.

For  let  the  centre  of  the  circle
A  BCD  be  taken,  and  let  it  be  /^;  let
BF,  FD  be  joined.

Now,  since  the  angle  BFD  is  at
the  centre,

and  the  angle  BAD  at  the  circum-
ference,

and  they  have  the  same  circumference  BCD  as  base,
therefore  the  angle  BFD  is  double  of  the  angle  BAD.  [m.  20]

For  the  same  reason

the  angle  BFD  is  also  double  of  the  angle  BED  ;
therefore  the  angle  BAD  is  equal  to  the  angle  BED.

Therefore  etc.

Q.  E.  D.

Under  the  restriction  that  the  "  angle  at  the  centre  "  used  in  in.  20  must
be  less  than  two  right  angles,  Euclid's  proof  of  this  proposition  only  applies
to  the  case  of  a  segment  greater  than  a  semicircle,  and  the  case  of  a  segment
equal  to  or  less  than  a  semicircle  has  to  be  considered  separately.  The
simplest  proof,  of  many,  seems  to  be  that  of  Simson.

H.  B.  II.  K


50


BOOK   III


[hi.  21


"  But,  if  the  segment  BAED  be  not  greater  than  a  semicircle,  let  BAD,
BED  be  angles  in  it:  these  also  are  equal  to  one
another.

Draw  A  Flo  the  centre,  and  produce  it  to  Q  and
join  CE,

Therefore  the  segment  BADC  is  greater  than  a
semicircle,  and  the  angles  in  it  BA  C,  BEC  are  equal,
by  the  first  case.

For  the  same  reason,  because  CBED  is  greater
than  a  semicircle,

the  angles  CAD,  CED  are  equal.

Therefore  the  whole  angle  BAD  is  equal  to  the  whole  angle  BEDJ'

We  can  prove,  by  means  of  reductio  ad  absurdum,  the  important  converse
of  this  proposition,  namely  that,  if  there  be  any  two  triangles  on  the  same  base
and  on  the  same  side  of  it,  and  with  equal  vertical  angles,  the  circle  passing
through  the  extremities  of  the  base  and  the  vertex  of  one  triangle  will  pass
through  the  vertex  of  the  other  triangle  also.  That  a  circle  can  be  thus
described  about  a  triangle  is  clear  from  Euclid's  construction  in  iii.  9,  which
shows  how  to  draw  a  circle  passing  through  any  three  points,  though  it  is
in  IV.  5  only  that  we  have  the  problem  stated.  Now,
suppose  a  circle  BAC  drawn  through  the  angular
points  of  a  triangle  BAC,  and  let  BDC  be  another
triangle  with  the  same  base  BC  and  on  the  same  side
of  it,  and  having  its  vertical  angle  D  equal  to  the
angle  A,     Then  shall  the  circle  pass  through  D.

For,  if  it  does  not,  it  must  pass  through  some  point
E  on  BD  or  on  BD  produced.  If  then  EC  be
joined,  the  angle  BEC  is  equal  to  the  angle  BAC,
by  III.  21,  and  therefore  equal  to  the  angle  BDC
Therefore  an  exterior  angle  of  a  triangle  is  equal  to
the  interior  and  opposite  angle :  which  is  impossible,  by  i.  16.

Therefore  D  lies  on  the  circle  BAC

Similarly  for  any  other  triangle  on  the  base  BC  and  with  vertical  angle
equal  to  A,  Thus,  if  any  number  of  triangles  be  constructed  on  the  same  base
and  on  the  same  side  of  it,  with  equal  vertical  angles,  the  vertices  will  all  lie  on
the  circumference  of  a  segment  of,a  circle,

A  useful  theorem  derivable  from  111.  21  is  given  by  Serenus  {De  sectione
coni,  Frops,  52,  53).

If  ADB  be  any  segment  of  a  circle,  and  C  be  such  a  point  on  the
circumference  that  AC  is  equal  to  CB,  and  if
there  be  described  with  C  as  centre  and  radius
CA  or  CB  the  circle  A//B,  then,  ADB  being
any  other  angle  in  the  segment  ACB,  and  BD
being  produced  to  meet  the  outer  segment  in
E,  the  sum  of  AD,  DB  is  equal  to  BE.

If  BC  be   produced    to    meet    the    outer
segment  in  E,  and  EA  be  joined,

CA,  CB,  CFdJt  by  hypothesis  equal

Therefore  the  angle  FAC  is  equal  to  the
angle  AFC

Also,  by  III.  21,  the  angles  ACB,  ADB  are  equal;


III.  21,  22]  PROPOSITIONS   21,  22  SI

therefore  their  supplements,  the  angles  A  CF^  ADE^  are  equal.

Further,  by  in.  21,  the  angles  AEB,  AFB  are  equal.

Hence  in  the  triangles  ACF^  ADE  two  angles  are  respectively  equal ;

therefore  the  third  angles  EAD^  FAC  sltq  equal.

But  the  angle  FA  C  is  equal  to  the  angle  AFC,  and  therefore  equal  to  the
angle  AEI>,

Therefore  the  angles  AED^  EAD  are  equal,  or  the  triangle  DEA  is
isosceles,

and  AD  is  equal  to  DE.

Adding  BD  to  both,  we  see  that

BE  is  equal  to  the  sum  of  AD  and  DB,

Now,  BF  being  a  diameter  of  the  circle  of  which  the  outer  segment  is
a  part,

BF  is  greater  than  BE ;

therefore  AC^  CB  are  together  greater  than  ADy  DB,

And,  generally,  of  ail  triangles  an  the  same  base  and  on  the  same  side  of  it
which  have  equal  vertical  angles^  the  isosceles  triangle  is  that  which  has  the
greatest  perimeter^  and  of  the  others  that  has  the  lesser  perimeter  which  is
further  from  being  isosceles.

The  theorem  of  Serenus  gives  us  the  means  of  solving  the  following
problem  given  in  Todhunter's  Euclid,  p.  324.

To  find  a  point  in  the  circumference  of  a  given  segment  of  a  circle  such  that
the  straight  lines  which  join  the  point  to  the  extremities  of  the  straight  line  on
which  the  segment  stands  may  be  together  equal  to  a  given  straight  line  (the
length  of  which  is  of  course  subject  to  limits).

Let  A  CB  in  the  above  figure  be  the  given  segment.  Find,  by  bisecting
AB  at  right  angles,  a  point  C  on  it  such  that  AC'\^  equal  to  CB,

Then  with  centre  C  and  radius  CA  or  CB  describe  the  segment  of  a
circle  AHB  on  the  same  side  of  AB,

Lastly,  with  A  ox  B  2&  centre  and  radius  equal  to  the  given  straight  line
describe  a  circle.  This  circle  will,  if  the  given  straight  line  be  greater  than
AB  and  less  than  twice  A  C,  meet  the  outer  segment  in  two  points,  and  if  we
join  those  points  to  the  centre  of  the  circle  last  drawn  (whether  A  or  B\  the
joining  straight  lines  will  cut  the  inner  segment  in  points  satisfying  the  given
condition.  If  the  given  straight  line  be  equal  to  twice  AC^  C  is  of  course
the  required  point.  If  the  given  straight  line  be  greater  than  twice  A  C,  there
is  no  possible  solution.

Proposition  22.

The  opposite  angles  of  quadrilaterals  in  circles  are  equal
to  two  right  angles.

Let  ABCD  be  a  circle,  and  let  ABCD  be  a  quadrilateral
in  it ;
I  say  that  the  opposite  angles  are  equal  to  two  right  angles.

Let  AC,  BD  be  joined.

Then,  since  in  any  triangle  the  three  angles  are  equal  to
two  right  angles,  [i.  32]


52  BOOK   III  [ill.  22,  23

the  three  angles  CAB,  ABC,  BCA  of  the  triangle  ABC
are  equal  to  two  right  angles.

But  the  angle  CAB  is  equal  to  the
angle  BDC,  for  they  are  in  the  same
segment  BADC;  [m.  21]

and  the  angle  ACB  is  equal  to  the  angle
ADB,  for  they  are  in  the  same  segment
ADCB\    .

therefore  the  whole  angle  ADC  is  equal
to  the  angles  BAC,  ACB.

Let  the  angle  ABC  be  added  to  each  ;
therefore  the  angles  ABC,  BAC,  ACB  are  equal   to   the
angles  ABC,  ADC

But  the  angles  ABC,  BAC,  ACB  are  equal  to  two  right
angles ;

therefore  the  angles  ABC,  ADC  are  also  equal  to  two  right
angles.

Similarly  we  can  prove  that  the  angles  BAD,  DCB  are
also  equal  to  two  right  angles.

Therefore  etc.

Q.  E.  D.

As  Todhunter  remarks,  the  converse  of  this  proposition  is  true  and  very
important :  if  two  opposite  angles  of  a  quadrilateral  be  together  equal  to  two
right  angles,  a  circle  may  be  circumscribed  about  the  quadrilateral.  We  can,  by
the  method  of  in.  9,  or  by  iv.  5,  circumscribe  a  circle  about  the  triangle
ABC;  and  we  can  then  prove,  by  reductio  ad  absurdum,  that  the  circle
passes  through  the  fourth  angular  point  D,


Proposition  23.

On  the  same  straight  line  there  cannot  be  constructed  two
similar  and  unequal  segments  of  circles  on  the  same  side.

For,  if  possible,  on  the  same  straight  line  AB  let  two
similar  and  unequal  segments  of  circles
ACB,  ADB  be  constructed  on  the  same

let  ACD  be  drawn  through,  and  let  CB,       ^^^^^^^"^^
DB  be  joined.  ^  ^

Then,    since   the   segment   ACB   is
similar  to  the  segment  ADB,


III.  2s,  24]  PROPOSITIONS   22—24  S3

and  similar  segments  of  circles  are  those  which  admit  equal
angles,  [ni.  Def.  11]

the  angle  ACB  is  equal  to  the  angle  ADB,  the  exterior
to  the  interior  :  which  is  impossible.  [i.  16]

Therefore  etc.

Q.  E.  D.
I.     cannot  be  constructed,  06  ffvirraBifjireTcuy  the  same  phrase  as  in  i.  7.

Clavius  and  the  other  early  editors  point  out  that,  while  the  words  "on
the  same  side'*  in  the  enunciation  are  necessary  for  Euclid's  proof,  it  is
equally  true  that  neither  can  there  be  two  similar  and  unequal  segments  on
opposite  sides  of  the  same  straight  line ;  this  is  at  once  made  clear  by  causing
one  of  the  segments  to  revolve  round  the  base  till  it  is  on  the  same  side  with
the  other.

Simson  observes  with  reason  that,  while  Euclid  in  the  following  proposition,
III.  24,  thinks  it  necessary  to  dispose  of  the  hypothesis  that,  if  two  similar
segments  on  equal  bases  are  applied  to  one  another  with  the  bases  coincident,
the  segments  cannot  cut  in  any  other  point  than  the  extremities  of  the  base
(since  otherwise  two  circles  would  cut  one  another  in  more  points  than  two),
this  remark  is  an  equally  necessary  preliminary  to  in.  23,  in  order  that  we
may  be  justified  in  drawing  the  segments  as  being  one  inside  the  other.
Simson  accordingly  begins  his  proof  of  in.  23  thus :

"  Then,  because  the  circle  ACB  cuts  the  circle  ADB  in  the  two  points
A^  B,  they  cannot  cut  one  another  in  any  other  point :

One  of  the  segments  must  therefore  fall  within  the  other.

Let  ACB  fall  within  ADB  and  draw  the  straight  line  A  CD,  etc."

Simson  has  also  substituted  "not  coinciding  with  one  another"  for
**  unequal"  in  Euclid's  enunciation.

Then  in  in.  24  Simson  leaves  out  the  words  referring  to  the  hypothesis
that  the  segment  AEB  when  applied  to  the  other  CFD  may  be  "  otherwise
placed  as  CGD'' ;  in  fact,  after  stating  that  AB  must  coincide  with  CD,  he
merely  adds  words  quoting  the  result  of  in.  23  :  "  Therefore,  the  straight  line
AB  coinciding  with  CD,  the  segment  AEB  must  coincide  with  the  segment
CFD,  and  is  therefore  equal  to  it."


Proposition  24.

Similar  segments  of  circles  on  equal  straight  lines  are  equal
to  one  another.

For  let  AEB,  CFD  be  similar  segments  of  circles  on
equal  straight  lines  AB,  CD  ;
5 1  say  that  the  segment  AEB  is  equal  to  the  segment  CFD,

For,  if  the  segment  AEB  be  applied  to  CFD,  and  if  the
point  A  be  placed  on  C  and  the  straight  line  AB  on  CD,


54  BOOK   III  [ill.  24,  25

the  point  B  will  also  coincide  with  the  point  Z?,  because
AB  is  equal  to  CD ;

'       and,  AB  coinciding  with  CD,

the  segment  AEB  will  also  coincide  with  CFD.


For,  if  the  straight  line  AB  coincide  with  CD  but  the
segment  AEB  do  not  coincide  with  CFD,

it  will  either  fall  within  it,  or  outside  it ;

15  or  it  will  fall  awry,  as  CGD,  and  a  circle  cuts  a  circle  at  more
points  than  two  :  which  is  impossible.  [m.  10]

Therefore,  if  the  straight  line  AB  be  applied  to  CD,  the
segment  AEB  will  not  fail  to  coincide  with  CFD  also ;

therefore  it  will  coincide  with  it  and  will  be  equal  to  it.

20        Therefore  etc.

Q.  E.  D.

15.  fall  awry,  irapaXXd^i,  the  same  word  as  used  in  the  like  case  in  I.  8.  The  word
implies  that  the  applied  figure  will  partly  fall  short  of,  and  partly  overlap,  the  figure  to
which  it  is  applied.

Compare  the  note  on  the  last  proposition.  I  have  put  a  semicolon  instead
of  the  comma  which  the  Greek  text  has  after  "outside  it,"  in  order  the  better
to  indicate  that  the  inference  "  and  a  circle  cuts  a  circle  in  more  points  than
two"  only  refers  to  the  third  hypothesis  that  the  applied  segment  is  "otherwise
placed  (TropoXXafci)  as  CGD^  The  first  two  hypotheses  are  disposed  of  by
a  tacit  reference  to  the  preceding  proposition  m.  23.


Proposition  25.

Given  a  segment  of  a  circle,  to  describe  the  complete  circle
of  which  it  is  a  segment.

Let  ABC  be  the  given  segment  of  a  circle  ;

thus  it  is  required  to  describe  the  complete  circle  belonging
to  the  segment  ABC,  that  is,  of  which  it  is  a  segment.

For  let  -^  C  be  bisected  at  D,  let  DB  be  drawn  from  the
point  D  at  right  angles  to  AC,  and  let  AB  be  joined  ;


III.  25]  PROPOSITIONS   24,  25  ss

the  angle  ABD  is  then  greater  than,  equal  to,  or  less
than  the  angle  BAD.

First  let  it  be  greater  ;

and  on  the  straight  line  BA,  and  at  the  point  A  on  it,  let
the  angle  BAE  be  constructed  equal  to
the  angle  ABD\  let  DB  be  drawn  through
to  E,  and  let  EC  be  joined.

Then,  since  the  angle  ABE  is  equal  to
the  angle  BA  E,

the  straight  line  EB  is  also  equal  to
EA.  [1. 6]

And,  since  AD  is  equal  to  DC,
and  DE  is  common,

the  two  sides  AD,  DE  are  equal  to  the  two  sides  CD,  DE
respectively ;

and  the  angle  ADE  is  equal  to  the  angle  CDE,  for  each  is
right ;

therefore  the  base  AE  is  equal  to  the  base  CE.

But  -^^  was  proved  equal  to  BE ;

therefore  BE  is  also  equal  to  CE ;

therefore  the  three  straight  lines  AE,  EB,  EC  are  equal  to
one  another.

Therefore  the  circle  drawn  with  centre  E  and  distance
one  of  the  straight  lines  AE,  EB,  EC  will  also  pass  through
the  remaining  points  and  will  have  been  completed.         [iii.  9]

Therefore,  given  a  segment  of  a  circle,  the  complete  circle
has  been  described.

And  it  is  manifest  that  the  segment  ABC  is  less  than  a
semicircle,  because  the  centre  E  happens  to  be  outside  it.

Similarly,  even  if  the  angle  ABD  be  equal  to  the  angle
BAD,

AD  being  equal  to  each  of  the  two  BD,  DC,  ^^^

the  three  straight  lines  DA,  DB,  DC  will
be  equal  to  one  another,  b|^

D  will  be  the  centre  of  the  completed  circle,

and  ABC  will  clearly  be  a  semicircle.


S6  BOOK   III  [in.  25,  26

But,  if  the  angle  ABD  be  less  than  the  angle  BAD,
and  if  we  construct,  on  the  straight  line  BA
and  at  the  point  A  on  it,  an  angle  equal  to
the  angle  ABD,  the  centre  will  fall  on  DB
within  the  segment  ABC,  and  the  segment
ABC  will  clearly  be  greater  than  a  semi-
circle.

Therefore,  given  a  segment  of  a  circle,
the  complete  circle  has  been  described.

Q.  E.  F.

I.  to  describe  the  complete  circle,  xpovavaypdylnu  rw  jrt^tcXov,  literally  '*to  describe
the  circle  an  to  it,  *

It  will  be  remembered  that  Simson  takes  first  the  case  in  which  the  angles
ABD,  BAD  are  equal  to  one  another,  and  then  takes  the  other  two  cases
together,  telling  us  to  "produce  BD,  if  necessary/'  This  is  a  little  shorter
than  Euclid's  procedure,  though  Euclid  does  not  repeat  the  proof  of  the  first
case  in  giving  the  third,  but  only  refers  to  it  as  equally  applicable.

Campanus,  Peletarius  and  others  give  the  solution  of  this  problem  in
which  we  take  two  chords  not  parallel  and  bisect  each  at  right  angles  by
straight  lines,  which  must  meet  in  the  centre,  since  each  contains  the  centre
and  they  only  intersect  in  one  point.  Clavius,  Billingsley,  Barrow  and  others
give  the  rather  simpler  solution  in  which  the  two  chords  have  one  extremity
common  (cf.  Euclid's  proofs  of  iii.  9,  10).  This  method  De  Morgan  favours,
and  (as  noted  on  in.  i  above)  would  make  jii.  i,  this  proposition,  and
IV.  5  all  corollaries  of  the  theorem  that  "  the  line  which  bisects  a  chord
perpendicularly  must  contain  the  centre."  Mr  H.  M.  Taylor  practically
adopts  this  order  and  method,  though  he  finds  the  centre  of  a  circle  by
means  of  any  two  non-parallel  chords ;  but  he  finds  the  centre  of  the  circle  of
which  a  given  arc  is  a  part  (his  proposition  corresponding  to  in.  25)  by
bisecting  at  right  angles  first  the  base  and  then  the  chord  joining  one  extremity
of  the  base  to  the  point  in  which  the  line  bisecting  the  base  at  right  angles
meets  the  circumference  of  the  segment  Under  De  Morgan's  alternative  the
relation  between  Euclid  iii.  i  and  the  Porism  to  it  would  be  reversed,  and
Euclid's  notion  of  a  Porism  or  corollary  would  have  to  be  considerably
extended.

If  the  problem  is  solved  after  the  manner  of  iv.  5,  it  is  still  desirable  to
state,  as  Euclid  does,  after  proving  AE,  EB,  EC  to  be  all  equal,  that  "  the
circle  drawn  with  centre  E  and  distance  one  of  the  straight  lines  AE,  EB,
EC  will  also  pass  through  the  remaining  points  of  the  segment'^  [iii.  9],  in
order  to  show  that  part  of  the  circle  described  actually  coincides  with  the
given  segment  This  is  not  so  clear  if  the  centre  is  determined  as  the
intersection  of  the  straight  lines  bisecting  at  right  angles  chords  which  join
pairs  of  four  different  points.

Proposition  26.

In  eqiml  circles  equal  angles  stand  on  equal  circumferences,
whether  they  stand  dt  the  centres  or  at  the  circumferences.


III.  26]  PROPOSITIONS   25,  26  57

Let  ABC,  DEF  be  equal  circles,  and  in  them  let  there
be  equal  angles,  namely  at  the   centres   the   angles   BGC,
EHFy  and  at  the  circumferences  the  angles  BAC,  EDF\
I  say  that  the  circumference  BKC  is  equal  to  the  circum-
ference ELF.


For  let  BC,  EF  be  joined.
Now,  since  the  circles  ABC,  DEF  ^x^  equal,
the  radii  are  equal.

Thus  the  two  straight  lines   BG,  GC  are  equal  to  the
two  straight  lines  EH,  HF\

and  the  angle  at  G  is  equal  to  the  angle  at  H\
therefore  the  base  BC  is  equal  to  the  base  EF.        [i.  4]
And,  since  the  angle  at  A  is  equal  to  the  angle  at  D,
the   segment  BAC  is   similar  to  the  segment  EDF\

[ill.  Def.  11]
and  they  are  upon  equal  straight  lines.

But  similar  segments  of  circles  on  equal  straight  lines  are
equal  to  one  another  ;  [ni.  24]

therefore  the  segment  BAC  is  equal  to  EDF.
But  the  whole  circle  ABC  is  also  equal  to  the  whole  circle
DEF\

therefore  the  circumference  BKC  which  remains  is  equal  to
the  circumference  ELF.

Therefore  etc.  Q.  e.  d.

As  in  in.  21,  if  Euclid's  proof  is  to  cover  all  cases,  it  requires  us  to  take
cognisance  of  "  angles  at  the  centre  "  which  are  equal  to  or  greater  than  two
right  angles.  Otherwise  we  must  deal  separately  with  the  cases  where  the
angle  at  the  circumference  is  equal  to  or  greater  than  a  right  angle.  The
case  of  an  obtuse  angle  at  the  circumference  can  of  course  be  reduced  by
means  of  in.  22  to  the  case  of  an  acute  angle  at  the  circumference;  and,  in
case  the  angle  at  the  circumference  is  right,  it  is  readily  proved,  by  drawing
the  radii  to  the  vertex  of  the  angle  and  to  the  other  extremities  of  the  lines
containing  it,  that  the  latter  two  radii  are  in  a  straight  line,  whence  they  make
equal  bases  in  the  two  circles  as  in  Euclid's  proof.


58  BOOK   III  [ill.  26,  27

Lardner  has  another  way  of  dealing  with  the  right  angle  or  obtuse  angle
at  the  circumference.  In  either  case,  he  says,  "  bisect  them,  and  the  halves
of  them  are  equal,  and  it  can  be  proved,  as  above,  that  the  arcs  upon  which
these  halves  stand  are  equal,  whence  it  follows  that  the  arcs  on  which  the
given  angles  stand  are  equal."


Proposition  27.

In  equal  circles  angles  standing  on  equal  circumferences
are  equal  to  one  another,  whether  they  stand  at  the  centres  or
at  the  circumferences.

For  in  equal  circles  ABC,  DEF,  on  equal  circumferences
BC,  EF,  let  the  angles  BGC,  EHF  stand  at  the  centres  G,
H,  and  the  angles  BAG,  EDF  at  the  circumferences  ;

I  say  that  the  angle  BGC  is  equal  to  the  angle  EHFy

and  the  angle  BAG  is  equal  to  the  angle  EDF.


For,  if  the  angle  BGG  is  unequal  to  the  angle  EHF,

one  of  them  is  greater.

Let  the  angle  BGG  be  greater  ;  and  on  the  straight  line  BG,
and  at  the  point  G  on  it,  let  the  angle  BGK  be  constructed
equal  to  the  angle  EHF.  [i.  23]

Now  equal  angles  stand  on  equal  circumferences,  when
they  are  at  the  centres  ;  [ni.  26]

therefore  the  circumference  BK  is  equal  to  the  circum-
ference EF.

But  EF  is  equal  to  BC ;

therefore  BK  is  also  equal  to   BC,   the   less   to   the
greater  :  which  is  impossible.

Therefore  the  angle  BGC  is  not  unequal  to  the  angle
EHF\

therefore  it  is  equal  to  it.


III.  27,  28]  PROPOSITIONS   26—28  59

And  the  angle  at  A  is  half  of  the  angle  BGC,
and  the  angle  at  D  half  of  the  angle  EHF\  [m.  20]

therefore  the  angle  at  A  is  also  equal  to  the  angle  at  D.
Therefore  etc.

Q.  E.  D.

This  proposition  is  the  converse  of  the  preceding  one,  and  the  remarks
about  the  method  of  treating  the  different  cases  apply  here  also.


Proposition  28.

In  equal  circles  equal  straight  lines  cut  off  equal  circum-
/erenceSy  the  greater  equal  to  the  greater  and  the  less  to  the
less.

Let  ABC,  DEF  be  equal  circles,  and  in  the  circles  let
AB,  DE  be  equal  straight  lines  cutting  off  ACB,  DFE  as
greater  circumferences  and  AGB,  DHE  as  lesser ;
I  say  that  the  greater  circumference  ACB  is  equal  to  the
greater  circumference  DFE,  and  the  less  circumference  AGB
to  DHE.


For  let  the  centres  K,  L  of  the  circles  be  taken,  and  let
AK,  KB,  DL,  LE  be  joined.

Now,  since  the  circles  are  equal,

the  radii  are  also  equal ;
therefore  the  two  sides  AK,  KB  are  equal  to  the  two
sides  DL,  LE ;
and  the  base  AB  is  equal  to  the  base  DE ;

therefore  the  angle  A  KB  is  equal  to  the  angle  DLE.

[I.  8]
But  equal  angles  stand  on  equal   circumferences,  when
they  are  at  the  centres  ;  [m.  26]

therefore  the  circumference  AGB  is  equal  to  DHE.


6o  BOOK   III  [ill.  28,  29

And  the  whole  circle  ABC  is  also  equal  to  the  whole
circle  DEF\

therefore  the  circumference  ACB  which  remains  is  also  equal
to  the  circumference  DPE  which  remains.

Therefore  etc.

Q.  E.  D.

Euclid's  proof  does  not  in  terms  cover  the  particular  case  in  which  the
chord  in  one  circle  passes  through  its  centre ;  but  indeed  this  was  scarcely
worth  giving,  as  the  proof  can  easily  be  supplied.  Since  the  chord  in  one
circle  passes  through  its  centre,  the  chord  in  the  second  circle  must  also  be  a
diameter  of  that  circle,  for  equal  circles  are  those  which  have  equal  diameters,
and  all  other  chords  in  any  circle  are  less  than  its  diameter  [ni.  15];  hence
the  segments  cut  off  in  each  circle  are  semicircles,  and  these  must  be  equal
because  the  circles  are  equal.

Proposition  29.

In  equal  circles  equal  circumferences  are  subtended  by  equal
straight  lines.

Let  ABC,  DEF  be  equal  circles,  and  in  them  let  equal
circumferences  BGCy  EHF  be  cut  off;  and  let  the  straight
lines  BC,  EF  be  joined  ;
I  say  that  BC  is  equal  to  EF.


For  let  the  centres  of  the  circles  be  taken,  and  let  them
be  K,  L  ;  let  BK,  KC,  EL,  LFh^  joined.

Now,    since   the   circumference   BGC  is    equal    to    the
circumference  EHF,

the  angle  BKC  is  also  equal  to  the  angle  ELF.  [in.  27]
And,  since  the  circles  ABC,  DEF  2S^  equal,

the  radii  are  also  equal ;
therefore  the  two  sides  BK,  KC  are  equal  to  the  two  sides
EL,  LF\  and  they  contain  equal  angles  ;

therefore  the  base  BC  is  equal  to  the  base  EF.        [1.  4]
Therefore  etc.

Q.  E.  D.


III.  29—31]  PROPOSITIONS   28—31  61

The  particular  case  of  this  converse  of  iii.  28  in  which  the  given  arcs  are
arcs  of  semicircles  is  even  easier  than  the  correspohding  case  of  in.  28  itself.

The  propositions  iii.  26 — 29  are  of  course  equally  true  if  the  same  circle
is  taken  instead  of  two  equal  circles.


Proposition  30.
To  bisect  a  given  circumference.
Let  ADB  be  the  given  circumference ;
thus  it  IS  required  to  bisect  the  circumference  ADB.

Let  AB  be  joined  and  bisected  at
C;  from  the  point  C  let  CD  be  drawn
at  right  angles  to  the  straight  line  ABy
and  let  AD,  DB  be  joined.

Then,  since  A  C  is  equal  to  CBy
and  CD  is  common,

the  two  sides  AC^  CD  are  equal  to  the  two  sides  BC,  CD\

and  the  angle  A  CD  is  equal  to  the  angle  BCD,  for  each  is
right ;

therefore  the  base  AD  is  equal  to  the  base  DB.       [i.  4]

But  equal  straight  lines  cut  off  equal  circumferences,  the
greater  equal  to  the  greater,  and  the  less  to  the  less ;     [in.  28]

and  each  of  the  circumferences  AD,  DB  is  less  than  a
semicircle ;

therefore  the  circumference  AD  is  equal  to  the  circum-
ference DB.

Therefore  the  given  circumference  has  been  bisected  at
the  point  D.

Q.  E.  F.

Proposition  31.

In  a  circle  the  angle  in  the  semicircle  is  right,  that  in  a
greater  segment  less  than  a  right  angle,  and  that  in  a  less
segment  greater  than  a  right  angle  ;  and  further  the  angle  of
the  greater  segment  is  greater  than  a  right  angle,  and  the  angle
of  the  less  segment  less  than  a  right  angle.


62  BOOK   III  [ill.  31

Let  A  BCD  be  a  circle,  let  BC  be  its  diameter,  and  E  its
centre,  and  let  BAy  AC,  AD,  DC
be  joined ;

I  say  that  the  angle  BAC  in  the
semicircle  BAC  is  right,
the  angle  ABC  in  the  segment  ABC
greater  than  the  semicircle  is  less
than  a  right  angle,
and  the  angle  ADC  in  the  segment
ADC  less  than  the  semicircle  is
greater  than  a  right  angle.

Let  AE  be  joined,  and  let  BA
be  carried  through  to  F.

Then,  since  BE  is  equal  to  EA,

the  angle  ABE  is  also  equal  to  the  angle  BAE.  [i.  5]

Again,  since  CE  is  equal  to  EA,

the  angle  ACE  is  also  equal  to  the  angle  CAE.  [i.  5]

Therefore  the  whole  angle  BAC  is  equal  to  the  two  angles
ABC,  ACB.

But  the  angle  FAC  exterior  to  the  triangle  ABC  is  also
equal  to  the  two  angles  ABC,  ACB ;  [i.  32]

therefore  the  angle  BAC  is  also  equal  to  the  angle  FAC  \

therefore  each  is  right ;  [i.  Def.  10]

therefore  the  angle  BAC  in  the  semicircle  BAC  is  right.

Next,  since  in  the  triangle  ABC  the  two  angles  ABC,
BAC  are  less  than  two  right  angles,  [i.  17]

and  the  angle  BAC  is  a  right  angle,

the  angle  ABC  is  less  than  a  right  angle ;
and  it  is  the  angle  in  the  segment  ABC  greater  than  the
semicircle.

Next,  since  ABCD  is  a  quadrilateral  in  a  circle,
and  the  opposite  angles  of  quadrilaterals  in  circles  are  equal
to  two  right  angles,  [in.  22]

while  the  angle  ABC  is  less  than  a  right  angle,
therefore  the  angle  ADC  which  remains  is  greater  than  a
right  angle ;

and  it  is  the  angle  in  the  segment  ADC  less  than  the  semi-
circle.


III.  31]  PROPOSITION   31  63

I  say  further  that  the  angle  of  the  greater  segment,  namely
that  contained  by  the  circumference  ABC  and  the  straight
line  AC,  is  greater  than  a  right  angle  ;

and  the  angle  of  the  less  segment,  namely  that  contained  by
the  circumference  ADC  and  the  straight  line  AC,  is  less  than
a  right  angle.

This  is  at  once  manifest.
For,  since  the  angle  contained  by  the  straight  lines  BA,  AC
is  right,

the  angle  contained  by  the  circumference  ABC  and  the
straight  line  AC  is  greater  than  a  right  angle.

Again,  since  the  angle  contained  by  the  straight  lines
AC,  A F is  right,

the  angle  contained  by  the  straight  line  CA  and  the
circumference  ADC  is  less  than  a  right  angle.

Therefore  etc.  q.  e.  d.

As  already  stated,  this  proposition  is  immediately  deducible  from  in.  20  if
that  theorem  is  extended  so  as  to  include  the  case  where  the  s^ment  is  equal
to  or  less  than  a  semicircle,  and  where  consequently  the  **  angle  at  the  centre"
is  equal  to  two  right  angles  or  greater  than  two  right  angles  respectively.

There  are  indications  in  Aristotle  that  the  proof  of  the  first  part  of  the
theorem  in  use  before  Euclid's  time  proceeded  on  different  lines.  Two
passages  of  Aristotle  refer  to  the  proposition  that  the  angle  in  a  semicircle
is  a  right  angle.  The  first  passage  is  AnaL  Post,  11.  11,  94  a  28:  **Why  is
the  angle  in  a  semicircle  a  right  angle?  Or  what  makes  it  a  right  angle?
(tiVos  oktck  op$ri;)  Suppose  A  to  ht  2i  right  angle,  B  half  of  two  right
angles,  C  the  angle  in  a  semicircle.  Then  B  is  the  cause  of  A,  the  right
angle,  being  an  attribute  of  C,  the  angle  in  the  semicircle.  For  B  is  equal  to
A,  and  CXo  B\  for  C  is  half  of  two  right  angles.  Therefore  it  is  in  virtue  of
B  being  half  of  two  right  angles  that  A  is  an  attribute  of  C ;  and  the  latter
means  the  fact  that  the  angle  in  a  semicircle  is  right''  Now  this  passage
by  itself  would  be  consistent  with  a  proof  like  Euclid's  or  the  alternative
interpolated  proof  next  to  be  mentioned.  But  the  second  passage  throws  a
different  light  on  the  subject.  This  is  Metaph,  1051  a  26  :  "Why  is  the  angle
in  a  semicircle  a  right  angle  invariably  (koB6\ov)  ?  Because,  if  there  be  three
straight  lines,  two  forming  the  base,  and  the  third  set  up  at  right  angles  at  its
middle  point,  the  fact  is  obvious  by  simple  inspection  to  any  one  who  knows
the  property  referred  to"  (tVctvo  is  the  property  that  the  angles  of  a  triangle
are  together  equal  to  two  right  angles,  mentioned  two
lines  before).  That  is  to  say,  the  angle  at  the  middle
point  of  the  circumference  of  the  semicircle  was  taken
and  proved,  by  means  of  the  two  isosceles  right-angled
triangles,  to  be  the  sum  of  two  angles  each  equal  to
one-fourth  of  the  sum  of  the  angles  of  the  large  triangle
in  the  figure,  or  of  two  right  angles;  and  the  proof
must  have  been  completed  by  means  of  the  theorem  of  111.  21  (that  angles


64  BOOK   III  [ill.  31

in  the  same  segment  are  equal),  which  Euclid's  ipore  general  proof  does
not  need.

In  the  Greek  texts  before  that  of  August  there  is  an  alternative  proof
that  the  angle  BAC  (in  a  semicircle)  is  right  August  and  Heiberg  relegate
it  to  an  Ap[)endix.

"  Since  the  angle  AEC  is  double  of  the  angle  BAE  (for  it  is  equal  to  the
two  interior  and  opposite  angles),  while  the  angle  AEB  is  also  double  of  the
angle  EA  C,

the  angles  AEBj  AEC  are  double  of  the  angle  BA  C.

But  the  angles  AEB,  AEC  are  equal  to  two  right  angles ;
therefore  the  angle  BAC  is  right."

Lardner  gives  a  slightly  different  proof  of  the  second  part  of  the  theorem.
If  ABC  be  a  segment  greater  than  a  semicircle,
draw  the  diameter  AD,  and  join  CD,  CA,

Then,  in  the  triangle  ACD,  the  angle  ACD  is  right
(being  the  angle  in  a  semicircle) ;

therefore  the  angle  ADC  is  acute.
But  the  angle  ADC  is  equal  to  the  angle  ABC  in
the  same  segment;

therefore  the  angle  ABC  is  acute.

Euclid's  references  in  this  proposition  to  the  angle  of  a  segment  greater
or  less  than  a  semicircle  respectively  seem,  like  the  part  of  in.  16  relating  to
the  angle  of  a  semicircle,  to  be  a  survival  of  ancient  controversies  and  not  to
be  put  in  deliberately  as  being  an  essential  part  of  elementary  geometry.  Cf.
the  notes  on  in.  Def.  7  and  in.  16.

The  corollary  ordinarily  attached  to  this  proposition  is  omitted  by  Heiberg
as  an  interpolation  of  date  later  than  Theon.  It  is  to  this  effect :  **  From
this  it  is  manifest  that,  if  one  angle  of  a  triangle  be  equal  to  the  other  two,
the  first  angle  is  right  because  the  exterior  angle  to  it  is  also  equal  to  the
same  angles,  and  if  the  adjacent  angles  be  equal,  they  are  right."  No  doubt
the  corollary  is  rightly  suspected,  because  there  is  no  necessity  for  it  here,  and
the  words  oircp  cSci  Sci^i  come  before  it,  not  after  it,  as  is  usual  with  Euclid.
But,  on  the  other  hand,  as  the  fact  stated  does  appear  in  the  proof  of  in.  31,
the  Porism  would  be  a  Porism  after  the  usual  type,  and  I  do  not  quite  follow
Heiberg's  argument  that,  "if  Euclid  had  wished  to  add  it,  he  ought  to  have
placed  it  after  i.  32."

It  has  already  been  mentioned  above  (p.  44)  that  this  proposition  supplies
us  with  an  alternative  construction  for  the  problem  in  in.  17  of  drawing  the
two  tangents  to  a  circle  from  an  external  point.

Two  theorems  of  some  historical  interest  which  follow  directly  from  in.  31
may  be  mentioned.

The  first  is  a  lemma  of  Pappus  on  "  the
24th  problem  "  of  the  second  Book  of  Apol-
lonius'  lost  treatise  on  vcvo-cis  (Pappus  vii.
p.  812)  and  is  to  this  effect.  If  a  circle,  as
DEF,  pass  through  D,  the  centre  of  a  circle
ABC,  and  if  through  F,  the  other  point  in
which  the  line  of  centres  meets  the  circle
DEF,  any  straight  line  be  drawn  (and  produced
if  necessary)  meeting  the  circle  DEF  in  E  and  the  circle  ABC  in  B,  G,


"»•  31.  i']


PROPOSITIONS  31,  3a


«5


then  £  is  the  middle  point  of  ^G,  For,  if  DE  be  joined,  the  angle  D£F
(in  a  semicircle)  is  a  right  angle  [in,  31] ;  and  D£,  being  at  right  angles  to
the  chord  BG  of  the  circle  ABCy  also  bisects  it  [in.  3].

The  second  is  a  proposition  in  the  Zider  Assumptorum^  attributed  (no
doubt  erroneously  as  regards  much  of  it)  to  Archimedes,  which  has  reached
us  through  the  Arabic  (Archimedes,  ed.  Heiberg,  n.  pp.  439—440),

If  two  chords  AB,  CD  in  a  circle  intersect  at  right  angles  in  a  point  O,
then  the  sum  of  the  squares  on  AO,  BO,  CO,  DO  is  equal  to  the  square  on  the
diameter.

For  draw  the  diameter  CE^  and  join  AC,  CB,  AD,  BE.


Then  the  angle  CAO  is  equal  to  the  angle  CEB,  (This  follows,  in  the
first  figure,  from  in.  21  and,  in  the  second,  from  i.  13  and  in.  22.)  Also  the
angle  CO  A,  being  right,  is  equal  to  the  angle  CBE  which,  being  the  angle  in  a
semicircle,  is  also  right  [in.  31].

Therefore  the  triangles  AOC,  EBC  have  two  angles  equal  respectively ;
whence  the  third  angles  ACQ,  ECB  are  equal  (In  the  second  figure  the
angle  ACO  is,  by  i.  13  and  in.  22,  equal  to  the  angle  ABD,  and  therefore
the  angles  ABD,  ECB  are  equal.)

Therefore,  in  both  figures,  the  arcs  AD,  BE,  and  consequently  the  chords
AD,  BE  subtended  by  them,  are  equal.  [in.  26,  29]

Now  the  squares  on  AO,  DO  are  equal  to  the  square  on  AD[i.  47],  that
is,  to  the  square  on  BE.

And  the  squares  on  CO,  BO  are  equal  to  the  square  on  BC.

Therefore,  by  addition,  the  squares  on  AO,  BO,  CO,  DO  are  equal  to  the
squares  on  EB,  BC,  i.e.  to  the  square  on  CE.  [i.  47]


Proposition  32.

//  a  straight  line  touch  a  circle,  and  from  the  point  of
contact  there  be  drawn  across,  in  the  circle,  a  straight  line
cutting  the  circle,  the  angles  which  it  makes  with  the  tangent
will  be  equal  to  the  angles  in  the  alternate  segments  of  the
circle.

For  let  a  straight  line  EF  touch  the  circle  ABCD  at
the  point  B,  and  from  the  point  B  let  there  be  drawn  across,
in  the  circle  ABCD,  a  straight  line  BD  cutting  it  ;
I  say  that  the  angles  which  BD  makes  with  the  tangent  EF
will  be  equal  to  the  angles  in  the  alternate  segments  of  the

H.  E.  II.  S


66  '"       BOOK   III  [iiii  3^

circle,  that  is,  that  the  angle  /^5Z?  is  equal  to  the  angle
constructed  in  the  segment  BAD,  and  the  angle  EBD  is
equal  to  the  angle  constructed  in  the
segment  DCB.

For  let  BA,  be  drawn   from  B  at
right  angles  to  EF,
let  a  point  C  be  taken  at  random  on
the  circumference   BD,
and   let  AD,  DC,  CB  be  joined.

Then,    since    a    straight    line    EF
touches  the  circle  ABCD  at  B,
and  BA  has  been  drawn  from  the  point
of  contact  at  right  angles  to  the  tangent,
the  centre  of  the  circle  ABCD  is  on  BA.  [m.  19]

Therefore  BA  is  a  diameter  of  the  circle  ABCD  ;

therefore  the  angle  ADB,  being  an  angle  in  a  semicircle,
is  right.  [hi.  31]

Therefore  the  remaining  angles  BAD,  ABD  are  equal  to
one  right  angle.  [i.  32]

But  the  angle  ABF  is  also  right  ;
therefore  the  angle  ABF  is  equal  to  the  angles  BAD,  ABD.

Let  the  angle  ABD  be  subtracted  from  each  ;
therefore  the  angle  DBF  which  remains  is  equal  to  the  angle
BAD  in  the  alternate  segment  of  the  circle.

Next,  since  ABCD  is  a  quadrilateral  in  a  circle,
its  opposite  angles  are  equal  to  two  right  angles.  [m.  22]

But  the  angles  DBF,  DBE  are  also  equal  to  two  right
angles ;

therefore  the  angles  DBF,  DBE  are  equal  to  the  angles
BAD,  BCD,

of  which  the  angle  BAD  was  proved  equal  to  the  angle
DBF,

therefore  the  angle  DBE  which  remains  is  equal  to  the
angle  DCB  in  the  alternate  segment  DCB  of  the  circle.

Therefore  etc.  q.  e.  d.

The  converse  of  this  theorem  is  true,  namely  that,  If  a  straight  line
drawn  through  one  extremity  of  a  chord  of  a  circle  make  with  that  chord
angles  equal  respectively  to  the  angles  in  the  alternate  segments  of  the^  circle,
the  straight  line  so  drawn  touches  the  circle.


HI.  3»,  33]


PROPOSITIONS  3a,  33


67


This  can,  as  Camerer  and  Todhunter  remark,  be  proved  indirectly ;  or  we
may  prove  it,  with  Clavius,  directly.  Let  BD  be  the  given  chord,  and  let  EF
be  drawn  through  B  so  that  it  makes  with  BD  angles  equal  to  the  angles  in
the  alternate  segments  of  the  circle  respectively.

Let  BA  be  the  diameter  through  B^  and  let  C  be  any  point  on  the
circumference  of  the  segment  DCB  which  does  not  contain  A,  Join  AD^
DC,  CB.

Then,  since,  by  hypothesis,  the  angle  FBD  is  equal  to  the  angle  BAD,
let  the  angle  ABD  be  added  to  both;

therefore  the  angle  ABFis  equal  to  the  angles  ABD,  BAD.

But  the  angle  BDA,  being  the  angle  in  a  semicircle,  is  a  right  angle ;

therefore  the  remaining  angles  ABD,  BAD  in  the  triangle  ABD  are
equal  to  a  right  angle.

Therefore  the  angle  A BF is  right;
hence,  since  BA  is  the  diameter  through  B,

-E/^  touches  the  circle  at  B.  [in.  16,  Por.]

Pappus  assumes  in,  one  place  (iv.  p.  196)  the  consequence  of  this
proposition  that.  If  two  circles  touch,  any  straight  line  drawn  through  the  point
of  contact  afid  terminated  by  both  circles  cuts  off  segments  in  each  which  are
respectively  similar.  Pappus  also  shows  how  to  prove  this  (vii.  p.  826)  by
drawing  the  common  tangent  at  the  point  of  contact  and  using  this  proposition,
III.  32.


Proposition  33.

On  a  given  straight  line  to  describe  a  segment  of  a  circle
admitting  an  angle  equal  to  a  given  rectilineal  angle.

Let  AB  be  the  given  straight  line,  and  the  angle  at  C  the
given  rectilineal  angle ;
thus  it  is  required  to  describe
on  the  given  straight  line
AB  a  segment  of  a  circle  ad-
mitting an  angle  equal  to  the
angle  at  C.

The  angle  at  C  is  then
acute,  or  right,  or  obtuse.

First  let  it  be  acute,
and,  as  in  the  first  figure,  on
the  straight  line  AB,  and  at  the  point  A,  let  the  angle  BAD
be  constructed  equal  to  the  angle  at  C ;

therefore  the  angle  BAD  is  also  acute.

Let  AE  be  drawn  at  right  angles  to  DA,  let  AB  be

S— 2


\


68


BOOK  III


[i".  33


bisected  at  F,  let  FG  be  drawn  from  the  point  F  at  right
angles  to  AB,  and  let  GB  be  joined.

Then,  since  AF  is  equal  to  FB,
and  FG  is  common,

the  two  sides  AF,  FG  are  equal  to  the  two  sides  BF,  FG ;
and  the  angle  AFG  is  equal  to  the  angle  BFG ;

therefore  the  base  -^G^  is  equal  to  the  base  BG.      [i.  4]

Therefore  the  circle  described  with  centre  G  and  distance
GA  will  pass  through  B  also.

Let  it  be  drawn,  and  let  it  be  ABE ;
let  EB  be  joined.

Now,  since  AD  is  drawn  from  A,  the  extremity  of  the
diameter  AE,  at  right  angles  to  AE,

therefore  AD  touches  the  circle  ABE.  [m.  16,  Por.]

Since  then  a  straight  line  AD  touches  the  circle  ABE,
and  from  the  point  of  contact  2it  A  a,  straight  line  AB  is
drawn  across  in  the  circle  ABE,

the  angle  DAB  is  equal  to  the  angle  AEB  in  the  alternate
segment  of  the  circle.  [in.  32]

But  the  angle  DAB  is  equal  to  the  angle  at  C ;
therefore  the  angle  at  C  is  also  equal  to  the  angle  AEB.

Therefore  on  the  given  straight  line  AB  the  segment
AEB  of  a  circle  has  been  described  admitting  the  angle  AEB
equal  to  the  given  angle,  the  angle  at  C.

Next  let  the  angle  at  C  be  right  ;


and  let  it  be  again  required  to  describe  on  AB  a  segment
of  a  circle  admitting  an  angle  equal  to  the  right  angle  at  C.

Let  the  angle  BAD  be  constructed  equal  to  the  right
angle  at  C,  as  is  the  case  in  the  second  figure  ;


111.33]  PROPOSITION   33  69

let  AB  be  bisected  at  F,  and  with  centre  F  and  distance
either  FA  or  FB  let  the  circle  AEB  be  described.

Therefore  the  straight  line  AD  touches  the  circle  ABE^
because  the  angle  at  A  is  right.  [in.  16,  Por.]

And  the  angle  BAD  is  equal  to  the  angle  in  the  segment
AEB,  for  the  latter  too  is  itself  a  right  angle,  being  an
angle  in  a  semicircle.  [m.  31]

But  the  angle  BAD  is  also  equal  to  the  angle  at  C.

Therefore  the  angle  AEB  is  also  equal  to  the  angle  at  C

Therefore  again  the  segment  AEB  of  a  circle  has  been
described  on  AB  admitting  an  angle  equal  to  the  angle  at  C.

Next,  let  the  angle  at  C  be  obtuse ;

A  D


E

and  on  the  straight  line  AB,  and  at  the  point  A,  let  the
angle  BAD  be  constructed  equal  to  it,  as  is  the  case  in  the
third  figure ;

let  AE  be  drawn  at  right  angles  to  AD,  let  AB  be  again
bisected  at  /%  let  FG  be  drawn  at  right  angles  to  AB,  and
let  GB  be  joined.

Then,  since  AF  is  again  equal  to  FB,
and  FG  is  common,

the  two  sides  AF,  FG  are  equal  to  the  two  sides  BF,  FG ;
and  the  angle  AFG  is  equal  to  the  angle  BFG ;

therefore  the  base  ^G^  is  equal  to  the  base  BG.       [i.  4]

Therefore  the  circle  described  with  centre  G  and  distance
GA  will  pass  through  B  also  ;  let  it  so  pass,  as  AEB.

Now,  since  ^Z?  is  drawn  at  right  angles  to  the  diameter
AE  from  its  extremity,

AD  touches  the  circle  AEB,  [m.  16,  Por.]

And  AB  has  been  drawn  across  from  the  point  of  contact
at^;

therefore  the  angle  BAD  is  equal  to  the  angle  constructed
in  the  alternate  segment  AHB  of  the  circle.  [ni.  32]


70  BOOK   III  [ni.33,  34

But  the  angle  BAD  is  equal  to  the  angle  at  C  '       *      ^
Therefore  the  angle  in  the  segment  AHB  is  also  equal  to

the  angle  at  C

Therefore  on  the  given  straight  line  AB  the  segment

AHB  of  a  circle  has  been  described  admitting  an  angle  equal

to  the  angle  at  C

Q.  E.  F.

Simson  remarks  truly  that  the  first  and  third  cases,  those  namely  in  which
the  given  angle  is  acute  and  obtuse  respectively,  have  exactly  the  same
construction  and  demonstration,  so  that  there  is  no  advantage  in  repeating
them.  Accordingly  he  deals  with  the  cases  as  one,  merely  drawing  two.
different  figures.  It  is  also  true,  as  Si'mson  says,  that  the  demonstration  of
the  second  case  in  which  the  given  angle  is  a  right  angle  "  is  done  in  a  round-
about way,"  whereas,  as  Clavius  showed,  the  problem  can  be  more  easily
solved  by  merely  bisecting  AB  and  describing  a  semicircle  on  it.  A  glance
at  Euclid's  figure  and  proof  will  however  show  a  more  curious  fact,  namely
that  he  does  not,  in  the  proof  of  the  second  case,  use  the  angle  in  the
alternate  segment^  as  he  does  in  the  other  two  cases.  He  might  have  done  so
after  proving  that  AD  touches  the  circle ;  this  would  only  have  required  his
point  ^  to  be  placed  on  the  side  of  AB  opposite  to  D,  Instead  of  this,  he
uses  III.  31,  and  proves  that  the  angle  AEB  is  equal  to  the  angle  C,  because
the  former  is  an  angle  in  a  semicircle^  and  is  therefore  a  right  angle  as  C  is.

The  difference  of  procedure  is  no  doubt  owing  to  the  fact  that  he  has  not,
in  III.  32,  distinguished  the  case  in  which  the  cutting  and  touching  straight
lines  are  at  right  angles,  i.e.  in  which  the  two  alternate  segments  are  semicircles.
To  prove  this  case  would  also  have  required  in.  31,  so  that  nothing  would
have  been  gained  by  stating  it  separately  in  in.  32  and  then  quoting  the
result  as  part  of  in.  32,  instead  of  referring  directly  to  in.  31.

It  is  assumed  in  Euclid's  proof  of  the  first  and  third  cases  that ^^^  and
FG  will  meet;  but  of  course  there  is  no  difficulty  in  satisfying  ourselves
of  this.


Proposition  34.

From  a  given  circle  to  cut  off  a  segment  admitting  an  angle
equal  to  a  given  rectilineal  angle.

Let  ABC  be  the  given  circle,  and  the  angle  at  D  the
given  rectilineal  angle ;

thus  it  is  required  to  cut  off  from  the  circle  ABC  a  segment
admitting  an  angle  equal  to  the  given  rectilineal  angle,  the
angle  at  D.

Let  EFh^  drawn  touching  ABC  at  the  point  ^,  and  on
the  straight  line  FB,  and  at  the  point  B  on  it,  let  the  angle
FBC  be  constructed  equal  to  the  angle  at  D.  [i.  23]

Then,  since  a  straight  line  EF  touches  the  circle  ABC,


"I-  34,  3S]  PROPOSITIONS   33—35  71

and  BC  has  been  drawn  across  from  the  point  of  contact
at^,

the  angle  FBC  is  equal  to  the  angle  constructed  in  the  alternate
segment  BAC.  [m.  32]


But  the  angle  FBC  is  equal  to  the  angle  at  D ;

therefore  the  angle  in  the  segment  BAC  is  equal  to  the
angle  at  D.

Therefore  from  the  given  circle  ABC  the  segment  BAC
has  been  cut  off  admitting  an  angle  equal  to  the  given  recti-
lineal angle,  the  angle  at  D.

Q.  E.  F.

An  alternative  construction  here  would  be  to  make  an  "angle  at  the
centre  "  (in  the  extended  sense,  if  necessary)  double  of  the  given  angle ;  and,
if  the  given  angle  is  right,  it  is  only  necessary  to  draw  a  diameter  of  the  circle.


Proposition  35.

If  in  a  circle  two  straight  lines  cut  one  another^  the
rectangle  contained  by  the  segments  of  the  one  is  equal  to  the
rectangle  contained  by  the  segments  of  the  other.

For  in  the  circle  A  BCD  let  the  two  straight  lines  AC^
BD  cut  one  another  at  the  point  E  \

I  say  that  the  rectangle  contained  by  AE,
EC  is  equal  to  the  rectangle  contained  by
DE,  EB.

If  now  ^C,  BD  are  through  the  centre,
so  that  E  is  the  centre  of  the  circle  A  BCD,

it  is  manifest  that,  AE,  EC,  DE^  EB
being  equal,

the  rectangle  contained   by  AE,   EC  is  also  equal  to  the
rectangle  contained  by  DE,  EB.


72  BOOK  III  [in.  35

Next  let  ACy  DB  not  be  through  the  centre ;
let  the  centre  of  ABCD  be  taken,  and
let  it  be  F\

from  F  let  FG,  FH  be  drawn  perpen-
dicular to  the  straight  lines  AC,  DB,
and  let  FB,  FC,  FE  be  joined.

Then,  since  a  straight  line  GF
through  the  centre  cuts  a  straight  line
AC  not  through  the  centre  at  right
angles,

it  also  bisects  it ;  [iii.  3]

therefore  AG  is  equal  to  GC

Since,  then,  the  straight  line  AC  has  been  cut  into  equal
parts  at  G  and  into  unequal  parts  at  F,

the  rectangle  contained  by  AE,  EC  together  with  the  square
on  EG  is  equal  to  the  square  on  GC ;  [n.  5]

Let  the  square  on  GF  be  added ;
therefore  the  rectangle  AE,  EC  together  with  the  squares
on  GE,  GF  is  equal  to  the  squares  on  CG,  GF.

But  the  square  on  FE  is  equal  to  the  squares  on  EG,  GF,
and  the  square  on  FC  is  equal  to  the  squares  on  CG,  GF ;

['.  47]

therefore  the  rectangle  AE,  EC  together  with  the  square
on  FE  is  equal  to  the  square  on  FC

And  FC  is  equal  to  FB ;
therefore  the  rectangle  AE,  EC  together  with  the  square  on
EF  is  equal  to  the  square  on  FB.

For  the  same  reason,  also,
the  rectangle  DE,  EB  together  with  the  square  on  FE  is
equal  to  the  square  on  FB.

But  the  rectangle  AE,  EC  together  with  the  square  on
FE  was  also  proved  equal  to  the  square  on  FB ;
therefore  the  rectangle  AE,  EC  together  with  the  square  on
FE  is  equal  to  the  rectangle  D£,  EB  together  with  the
square  on  FE.

Let  the  square  on  FE  be  subtracted  from  each  ;
therefore  the  rectangle  contained  by  AE,  EC  which  remains
is  equal  to  the  rectangle  contained  by  DE,  EB.

Therefore  etc.

Q.  E.  D.


"I-  35,  36]  PROPOSITIONS  35,  36  73

In  addition  to  the  two  cases  in  Euclid's  text,  Simson  (following  Campanus)
gives  two  intermediate  cases,  namely  (i)  that  in  which  one  chord  passes  through
the  centre  and  bisects  the  other  which  does  not  pass  through  the  centre  at  right
angles,  and  (2)  that  in  which  one  passes  through  the  centre  and  cuts  the  other
which  does  not  pass  through  the  centre  but  not  at  right  angles.  Simson  then
reduces  Euclid's  second  case,  the  most  general  one,  to  the  second  of  the  two
intermediate  cases  by  drawing  the  diameter  through  E,  His  note  is  as
follows:  "As  the  25th  and  33rd  propositions  are  divided  into  more  cases,
so  this  35th  is  divided  into  fewer  cases  than  are  necessary.  Nor  can  it  be
supposed  that  Euclid  omitted  them  because  they  are  easy ;  as  he  has  given
the  case  which  by  far  is  the  easiest  of  them  all,  viz.  that  in  which  both  the
straight  lines  pass  through  the  centre:  And  in  the  following  proposition  he
separately  demonstrates  the  case  in  which  the  straight  line  passes  through  the
centre,  and  that  in  which  it  does  not  pass  through  the  centre:  So  that  it
seems  Theon,  or  some  other,  has  thought  them  too  long  to  insert :  But  cases
that  require  different  demonstrations  should  not  be  left  out  in  the  Elements,
as  was  before  taken  notice  of:  These  cases  are  in  the  translation  from  the
Arabic  and  are  now  put  into  the  text."  Notwithstanding  the  ingenuity  of  the
argument  based  on  the  separate  mention  by  Euclid  of  the  simplest  case  of
all,  I  think  the  conclusion  that  Euclid  himself  gave  four  cases  is  unsafe ;  in
fact,  in  giving  the  simplest  and  most  difficult  cases  only,  he  seems  to  be
following  quite  consistently  his  habit  of  avoiding  too  great  multiplicity  of  cases,
while  not  ignoring  their  existence.

The  deduction  from  the  next  proposition  (in.  36)  which  Simson,  following
Clavius  and  others,  gives  as  a  corollary  to  it,  namely  that.  If  from  any  point
without  a  circle  there  be  drawn  two  straight  lines  cutting  it^  the  rectangles
contained  by  the  whole  lines  and  the  parts  of  them  without  the  circle  are  equal  to
one  another^  can  of  course  be  combined  with  iii.  35  in  one  enunciation.

As  remarked  by  Todhunter,  a  large  portion  of  the  proofs  of  iii.  35,  36
amounts  to  proving  the  proposition.  If  any  point  be  taken  on  the  base^  or  the
base  produced^  of  an  isosceles  triangle^  the  rectangle  contained  by  the  segments  of
the  base  {i,e,  the  respective  distances  of  the  ends  of  the  base  from  the  point)  is
equal  to  the  difference  between  the  square  on  the  straight  line  joining  the  point  to
the  vertex  and  the  square  on  one  of  the  equal  sides  of  the  triangle.  This  is  of
course  an  immediate  consequence  of  i.  47  combined  with  11.  5  or  11.  6.

The  converse  of  iii.  35  and  Simson*s  corollary  to  in.  36  may  be  stated
thus.  If  two  straight  lines  AB,  CD,  produced  if  necessary^  intersect  at  O,  and  if
the  rectangle  AO,  OB  be  equal  to  the  rectangle  CO,  OD,  the  circumference  of  a
circle  will  pass  through  the  four  points  A,  B,  C,  D.  The  proof  is  indirect.
We  describe  a  circle  through  three  of  the  points,  2&  Ay  B^  C  (by  the  method
used  in  Euclid's  proofs  of  in.  9,  10),  and  then  we  prove,  by  the  aid  of  in.  35
and  the  corollary  to  in.  36,  that  the  circle  cannot  but  pass  through  D  also.


Proposition  36.

If  a  point  be  taken  outside  a  circle  and  from  it  there  fall
on  the  circle  two  straight  lines,  and  if  one  of  them  cut  the
circle  and  the  other  touch  it,  the  rectangle  contained  by  the
whole  of  the  straight  line  which  cuts  the  circle  and  the  straight


74  BOOK   III  [ill.  36

line  intercepted  on  it  outside  between  the  point  and  the  convex
circumference  will  be  equal  to  the  square  on  the  tangent.

For  let  a  point  D  be  taken  outside  the  circle  ABC,
and  from  D  let  the  two  straight  lines  DC  A,
DB  fall  on  the  circle  ABC\  let  DC  A  cut
the  circle  ABC  and  let  BD  touch  it ;
I  say  that  the  rectangle  contained  by  AD,
DC  is  equal  to  the  square  on  DB.

Then  DC  A  is  either  through  the  centre
or  not  through  the  centre.

First  let  it  be  through  the  centre,  and
let  F  be  the  centre  of  the  circle  ABC ;
let  FB  be  joined  ;

therefore  the  angle  FBD  is  right.  [m.  18]

And,  since  AC  has  been  bisected  at  F,  and  CD  is  added
to  it,

the  rectangle  AD,  DC  together  with  the  square  on  FC  is
equal  to  the  square  on  FD.  [11.  6]

But  FC  is  equal  to  FB  ;
therefore  the  rectangle  AD,  DC  together  with  the  square  on
FB  is  equal  to  the  square  on  FD.

And  the  squares  on  FB,  BD  are  equal  to  the  square  on
FD',  [1.47]

therefore  the  rectangle  AD,  DC  together  with  the  square  on
FB  is  equal  to  the  squares  on  FB,  BD.

Let  the  square  on  FB  be  subtracted  from  each  ;
therefore  the  rectangle  AD,  DC  which  remains  is  equal  to
the  square  on  the  tangent  DB.

Again,  let  DCA  not  be  through  the  centre  of  the  circle
ABC\

let  the  centre  E  be  taken,  and  from  E
let  EF  be  drawn  perpendicular  to  AC\
let  EB,  EC,  ED  be  joined.

Then  the  angle  EBD  is  right.

[hi.  18]
And,    since    a    straight    line    EF
through  the  centre  cuts  a  straight  line
AC  not  through  the  centre  at  right  angles,

it  also  bisects  it ;  [111.  3]

therefore  AF  is  equal  to  FC


I".  36i  37]  PROPOSITIONS  36,  37  »

Now,  since  the  straight  line  ^Chas  been  bisected  at  the
point /%  and  C/?  is  added  to  it,  v      :/v

the  rectangle  contained  by  AD,  DC  together  with  the  square
on  FC  is  equal  to  the  square  on  FD.  ,[m:%]

Let  the  square  onFB  be  added  to  each  ;
therefore  the  rectangle  AD,  DC  together  with  the  squares
on  CFj  FE  is  equal  to  the  squares  on  FD,  FE.  :     .

But  the  square  on  EC  is  equal  to  the  squares  on  C/%  FE,
for  the  angle  EEC  is  right ;  -•  '  [i.  4^1

and  the  square  on  ED  is  equal  to  the  squares  on  DF,  FE-\  '
therefore  the  rectangle  AD,  DC  together  with  the  square  pn
EC  is  equal  to  the  square  on  ED.  •

And -C'C  is  equal  to  iS'iS* ;
therefore  the  rectangle^/?,.  DC  together  with  thq  square  on
EB  is  equal  to  the  square  on  ED. .

,  But  the  squares  on  EB,  BD  are  equal  to  the  square  on
ED^  for  the  zxi^^  EBD  is  right ;  [1,47^

ther^fore'the  rectangle  ;/^Z?,  Z?C  together  with  the  square  on
EB  is  equal  to  the  squares  on  EB^  BD.

L^t  the  square  on  EB  be  subtracted  from  each  ;  j    .

therefore  the  rectangle  AD,  DC  which  remains  is  equal  to
the  square  on  DB.

•  Therefore  etc.  q.  e.  p.

Cf.  note  on  the  preceding  proposition.  Observe  that,  whereas  it  would
be  natural  with  us  to  prove  first  that,  if  ^  is  an  escternal  point,  >and  two
straight  Xaie,%  AEB,  AFC  cut  the  circle  in  E,  B  and  F,  C  respectively,  the
rectangle  BA,  AE  is  equal  to  the  rectangle  CA,  AF,  and  thence  that,  the
tangent  from  A  being  a  straight  line  like  AEB  in  its  limiting  position  when
£  and  B  coincide,  either  rectangle  is  equal  to  the  square  on  the  tangent
(cf.  Mr  H.  M.  Taylor,  pJ  253),  Euclid  and  the  Greek  geometers  generally  did
not  allow  themselves  to  infer  the  truth  of  a  proposition  in  a  limiting  case
directly  from  the  general  case  including  it,  but  preferred  a  separate  proof  of
the  limiting  case  (cf.  Apollonius  of  Perga,  p.  40,  139 — 140).  This  accounts  for
the  form  of  in.  36.

Proposition  37.

If  a  point  be  taken  outside  a  circle  and  from  the  point
tlure  fall  on  the  circle  two  straight  lines,  if  one  of  them  cut
the  circle,  and  the  other  fall  on  it,  and  if  further  the  rect-
angle contained  by  the  whole  of  the  straight  lin^  which.  ctU$


76  BOOK  III  [ill.  37

the  circle  and  the  straight  line  intercepted  on  it  outside
between  the  point  and  the  convex  circumference  be  equal  to
the  square  on  the  straight  line  which  f dills  on  the  circle,  the
straight  line  which  falls  on  it  will  touch  the  circle.

For  let  a  point  D  be  taken  outside  the  circle  ABC\
from  D  let  the  two   straight   lines
DC  A,  DB  fall  on  the  circle  ACB\  -
let  DCA   cut  the   circle    and   DB
fall  on  it ;  and  let  the  rectangle  AD,
DC  be  equal  to  the  square  on  DB.

I  say  that  DB  touches  the  circle
ABC

For  let  DE  be  drawn  touching
ABC ;  let  the  centre  of  the  circle  ABC  be  taken,  and  let  it
be  F\  let  FE,  FB,  FD  be  joined.

Thus  the  angle  FED  is  right.  [ni.  i8]

Now,  since  DE  touches  the  circle  ABC,  and  DCA  cuts  it,
the  rectangle  AD,  DC  is  equal  to  the  square  on  DE.    [iii.  36]

But  the  rectangle  AD,  DC  was  also  equal  to  the  square
onZ?^;

therefore  the  square  on  DE  is  equal  to  the  square  on  DB  ;
therefore  DE  is  equal  to  DB.
And  FE  is  equal  to  FB  ;
therefore  the  two  sides  DE,  EF  are  equal  to  the  two  sides
DB,  BF\
and  FD  is  the  common  base  of  the  triangles ;

therefore  the  angle  DEF  is  equal  to  the  angle  DBF.

[1.8]
But  the  angle  DEF  is  right ;

therefore  the  angle  DBF  is  also  right.
And  FB  produced  is  a  diameter ;
and  the  straight  line  drawn  at  right  angles  to  the  diameter
of  a  circle,  from  its  extremity,  touches  the  circle  ;    [ni.  16,  Por.]
therefore  DB  touches  the  circle.
Similarly  this  can  be  proved  to  be  the  case  even  if  the
centre  be  on  AC

Therefore  etc,  q.  e.  d.

De  Morgan  observes  that  there  is  here  the  same  defect  as  in  i.  48,  i.e.  an
apparent  avoidance  of  indirect  demonstration  by  drawing  the  tangent  DE  on


III.  37]  PROPOSITION   37  77

the  opposite  side  of  DF  from  DB,  The  case  is  similar  to  the  apparently
direct  proof  which  Campanus  gave.  He  drew  the  straight  line  from  D
passing  through  the  centre,  and  then  (without  drawing  a  second  tangent)
proved  by  the  aid  of  11.  6  that  the  square  on  DF  is  equal  to  the  sum  of  the
squares  on  DB^  BF\  whence  (by  i.  48)  the  angle  DBF  is  a  right  angle.
But  this  proof  uses  i.  48,  the  very  proposition  to  which  De  Morgan's  original
remark  relates.

The  undisguised  indirect  proof  is  easy.  If  DB  does  not  touch  the  circle,
it  must  cut  it  if  produced,  and  it  follows  that  the  square  on  DB  must  be
equal  to  the  rectangle  contained  by  DB  and  a  longer  line :  which  is  absurd.


BOOK  iV.

DEFINITIONS.

1.  A  rectilineal  figure  is  said  to  be  inscribed  in  a
rectilineal  figure  when  the  respective  angles  of  the
inscribed  figure  lie  on  the  respective  sides  of  that  in  which
it  is  inscribed.

2.  Similarly  a  figure  is  said  to  be  circumscribed  about
a  figure  when  the  respective  sides  of  the  circumscribed
figure  pass  through  the  respective  angles  of  that  about  which
it  is  circumscribed.

3.  A  rectilineal  figure  is  said  to  be  inscribed  in  a
circle  when  each  angle  of  the  inscribed  figure  lies  on  the
circumference  of  the  circle.

4.  A  rectilineal  figure  is  said  to  be  circumscribed
about  a  circle,  when  each  side  of  the  circumscribed  figure
touches  the  circumference  of  the  circle.

5.  Similarly  a  circle  is  said  to  be  inscribed  in  a  figure
when  the  circumference  of  the  circle  touches  each  side  of  the
figure  in  which  it  is  inscribed.

6.  A  circle  is  said  to  be  circumscribed  about  a  figure
when  the  circumference  of  the  circle  passes  through  each
angle  of  the  figure  about  which  it  is  circumscribed. '

7.  A  straight  line  is  said  to  be  fitted  into  a  circle  when
its  extremities  are  on  the  circumference  of  the  circle.

Definitions  1—7.

I  append,  as  usual,  the  Greek  text  of  the  definitions.

I.  2x^/xa  €v$vypafjLfiov  €19  irx^/io,  €vOvYpafi/jLOV  €yypd4^€<rOai  Xcycrcu,  orav
iKOimj  rwv  Tov  €Yypa<fiOfi€yov  a^fiaro^  yioviiov  €Kaarrq^  irXcvpas  tov,  €t«  o
jyypa^crai,  aim/rai.


IV.  DEFF.  a— 7]  DEFINITIONS   x— 7  79

2.  2x^/ia  Sc  ofjLOiiiti  ircpt  fr^fiyua,  ir€piypaif>€<r$ai  Xeycrat,  otof  iKoarrj  irkwpa
rov  'ir€piypa«f>ofi€vov  iKaarrq^  ya>vtas  rov,  Trcpi  o  ircptypa^crai,  airnTrai.

3.  'SiX^/ia  €v$vypafJLfJLoy  cis  «cv#cXok  cyypa^ccrdat  Xcycrai,  orav  Cfcacrn^  ya>Kia
rov  €yypa<ftofi€vov  avn/rat  r^s  rov  kvkXov  Trcpt^cpcias.

4.  Sx^/^a  8c  €iMypafi/JLoy  ircpt  icvicXov  jrcptypa^ccrtfai  Xeycrai,  orav  kKaarq
xXcvpa  rov  ir€piypa(f>ofjL€yov  iifMimfrai  rijs  rov  #cvkXov  xcpt^cpcuis.

5.  KvicXo?  Sc  CCS  ax^fia  o/iotcus  cyypa^ccrtfat  Xeycrai,  orav  1;  rov  kvkXov
ir€ptfl>€p€ui  €Kdarrj^  irXcvpas  rov,  cts  u  fyypa^crac,  aim/rai.

6.  Kv#cXo9  S^  ircpc  (rx^fia  ircpcypci^co'tfat  Xcycrai,  orav  17  rov  kv#cXov  xcpi^^ia
c#caoTi;s  ywvias  rov,  xcpi  o  ircpcypa^rai,  aim^ai.

7.  Evtfcca  CIS  kvkXov  ivapfioiiaOai  Xcycrai,  orav  ra  iripara  avr^s  cirt  n7¥
ir€piflKp€ia^  f  Tov  kvkXov.

.  In  the  fii:st  two  definitions  an  English  translation,  if  it  is  to  be  cl^r,  must
depart  slightly  from  the  exact  words  used  in  the  Greek,  where  "each  side"  of
one  figure  is  said  to  pass  through  "each  angle"  of  another,  or  "each  angle >'
(i.e.  angular  point)  of  one  lies  on  "each  side"  of  another  (c#caoTiy  irXcvpo,
iKoarrf  yuvui).

It  is  also  necessary,  in  the  five  definitions  i,  2,  3,  5  and  6,  to  translate
the  same  Greek  word  aTmyroi  in  three  different  ways.  It  was  observed  on
III.  Def.  2  that  the  usual  meaning  of  airT€<r$ai  in  Euclid  is  to  meef,  in  contra-
distinction to  iftMirr€a6ai,  which  means  to  foucA,  Exceptionally,  as  in  Def.  5,
airT€<r$ai  has  the  meaning  of  faucA.  But  two  new  meanings  of  the  word  appear,
the  first  being  to  //>  on,  as  in  Deff.  i  and  3,  the  second  to  pass  through,  as  in
Deff.  2  and  6;  "each  angle"  lies  on  (aurcrat)  a  side  or  on  a  circle,  and
"each  side,"  or  a  citcle,  passes  through  (am-crat)  an  angle  or  "each  angle."
The  first  meaning  of  lying  on  is  exemplified  in  the  phrase  of  Pappus  a^cnu  ro
aqfuiov  Ot<r€i  Sc8o/Acvi79  c^cta^,  "will  lie  on  a  straight  line  given  in  position";
the  meaning  of  passing  through  seems  to  be  much  rarer  (I  have  not  seen  it  in
Archimedes  or  Pappus),  but,  as  pointed  out  on  in.  Def.  2,  Aristotle  uses  the'
compound  l^wT€a6ai  in  this  sense.

Simson  proposed  to  read  iffniimjTai  in  the  case  (Def,  5)  where.  ain^rc^L
means  /ouches.  He  made  the  like  suggestion  as  regards  the  Greek  text  of  in.
II,  12,  13,  18,  19;  in  the  first  four  of  these  cases  there  seems  to  be  ms.
authority  for  the  compound  Verb,  and  in  the  fifth  Heiberg  adppts  Simsoi^'sv
correction.


BOOK    IV.     PROPOSITIONS


Proposition  i.


Into  a  given  circle  to  fit  a  straight  line  equal  to  a  given
straight  line  which  is  not  greater  than  the  diameter  of  the
circle.

Let  ABC  be  the  given  circle,  and  D  the  given  straight
line  not  greater  than  the  diameter
of  the  circle ;

thus  it  is  required  to  fit  into  the
circle  ABC  a  straight  line  equal
to  the  straight  line  D.

Let  a  diameter  BC  of  the
circle  ABC  be  drawn.

Then,  if  BC  is  equal  to  D,
that  which  was  enjoined  will  have

been  done  ;  for  BC  has  been  fitted  into  the  circle  ABC  equal
to  the  straight  line  D.

But,  if  BC  is  greater  than  Z>,

let  CE  be  made  equal  to  D,  and  with  centre  C  and  distance
CE  let  the  circle  EAF  be  described  ;

let  CA  be  joined.

Then,  since  the  point  C  is  the  centre  of  the  circle  EAF,

CA  is  equal  to  CE.

But  CE  is  equal  to  D  ;

therefore  D  is  also  equal  to  CA.

Therefore  into  the  given  circle  ABC  there  has  been  fitted
CA  equal  to  the  given  straight  line  D.

Q.  E.  F.


IV.  I,  2]  PROPOSITIONS   I,  2  81

Of  this  problem  as  it  stands  there  are  of  course  an  infinite  number  of
solutions ;  and,  if  a  particular  point  be  chosen  as  one  extremity  of  the  chord
to  be  "fitted  in,"  there  are  two  solutions.  More  difficult  cases  of  "fitting
into  "  a  circle  a  chord  of  given  length  are  arrived  at  by  adding  some  further
condition,  e.g.  (i)  that  the  chord  is  to  be  parallel  to  a  given  straight  line,  or
(2)  that  the  chord,  produced  if  necessary,  shall  pass  through  a  given  point.
The  former  problem  is  solved  by  Pappus  (in.  p.  132);  instead  of  drawing  the
chord  as  a  tangent  to  a  circle  concentric  with  the  given  circle  and  having  as
radius  a  straight  line  the  square  on  which  is  equal  to  the  difference  between
the  squares  on  the  radius  of  the  given  circle  and  on  half  the  given  length,  he
merely  draws  the  diameter  of  the  circle  which  is  parallel  to  the  given  direction,
measures  from  the  centre  along  it  in  each  direction  a  length  equal  to  half  the
given  length,  and  then  draws,  on  one  side  of  the  diameter,  perpendiculars  to  it
through  the  two  points  so  determined.

The  second  problem  of  drawing  a  chord  of  given  length,  being  less  than
the  diameter  of  the  circle,  and  passing  through  a  given  point,  is  more
important  as  having  been  one  of  the  problems  discussed  by  Apollonius  in  his
work  entitled  vcvcrci?,  now  lost.  Pappus  states  the  problem  thus  (vii.  p.  670):
"A  circle  being  given  in  position,  to  fit  into  it  a  straight  line  given  in
magnitude  and  verging  (Fcvowai/)  towards  a  given  (point)."  To  do  this  we
have  only  to  place  any  chord  HK  in  the  given
circle  (with  centre  O)  equal  to  the  given  length,
take  L  the  middle  point  of  it,  with  O  as  centre  and
OL  as  radius  describe  a  circle,  and  lastly  through
the  given  point  C  draw  a  tangent  to  this  circle
meeting  the  given  circle  in  A^  B.  AB  is  then  one
of  fwo  chords  which  can  be  drawn  satisfying  the
given  conditions,  if  C  is  outside  the  inner  circle ;  if
C  IS  on  the  inner  circle,  there  is  one  solution  only ;
and,  if  C  is  within  the  inner  circle,  there  is  no
solution.  Thus,  if  C  is  within  the  outer  (given)
circle,  besides  the  condition  that  the  given  length  must  not  he  greater  than  the
diameter  of  the  circle,  there  is  another  necessary  condition  of  the  possibility
of  a  solution,  viz.  that  the  given  length  must  not  be  less  than  double  of  the
straight  line  the  square  on  which  is  equal  to  the  difference  between  the  squares
(i)  on  the  radius  of  the  given  circle  and  (2)  on  the  distance  between  its
centre  and  the  given  point.


Proposition  2.

In  a  given  circle  to  inscribe  a  triangle  equiangular  with  a
given  triangle.

Let   ABC  be   the   given   circle,    and   DEF  the  given
triangle ;

thus  it  is  required  to  inscribe  in  the  circle  ABC  a  triangle
equiangular  with  the  triangle  DEF.

Let  GHhe  drawn  touching  the  circle  ABCdX  A  [m.  i6,Por.];

H.  E.  II.  6


Si  BOOK  IV  [iv.  2

on  the  straight  line  A//,  and  at  the  point  A  on  it,  let  the
angle  MAC  be  constructed  equal  to  the  angle  DEFy
and  on  the  straight  line  AGy  and  at  the  point  A  on  it,  let
the  angle  GAB  be  constructed  equal  to  the  angle  DFE ;

[i.  23]
let  BC  be  joined.


Then,  since  a  straight  line  AH  touches  the  circle  ABCy
and  from  the  point  of  contact  at  A  the  straight  line  AC  is
drawn  across  in  the  circle,

therefore  the  angle  HAC  is  equal  to  the  angle  ABC  in  the
alternate  segment  of  the  circle.  [ni.  32]

But  the  angle  HAC  is  equal  to  the  angle  DEF\
therefore  the  angle  ABC  is  also  equal  to  the  angle  DEF.

For  the  same  reason

the  angle  ACB  is  also  equal  to  the  angle  DFE ;
therefore  the   remaining   angle   BAC  is  also  equal  to  the
remaining  angle  EDF.  [i.  32]

Therefore  in  the  given  circle  there  has  been  inscribed  a
triangle  equiangular  with  the  given  triangle.  q.  e.  f.

Here  again,  since  any  point  on  the  circle  may  be  taken  as  an  angular
point  of  the  triangle,  there  are  an  infinite  numt>er  of  solutions.  Even  when  a
particular  point  has  been  chosen  to  form  one  angular  point,  the  required
triangle  may  be  constructed  in  six  ways.  For  any  one  of  the  three  angles
may  be  placed  at  the  point ;  and,  whichever  is  placed  there,  the  positions  of
the  two  others  relatively  to  it  may  be  interchanged.  The  sides  of  the  triangle
will,  in  all  the  different  solutions,  ht  of  the  same  length  respectively;  only
their  relative  positions  will  be  different.

This  problem  can  of  course  be  reduced  (as  it  was  by  Borelli)  to  in.  34,
namely  the  problem  of  cutting  off  from  a  given  circle  a  segment  containing  an
angle  equal  to  a  given  angle.  It  can  also  be  solved  by  the  alternative  method
applicable  to  in.  34  of  drawing  "angles  at  the  centre"  equal  to  double  the
angles  of  the  given  triangle  respectively ;  and  by  this  method  we  can  easily
solve  this  problem,  or  iii.  34,  with  the  further  condition  that  one  side  of  the


IV.  2,  3]  PROPOSITIONS    2,  3  83

required  triangle,  or  the  base  of  the  required  segment,  respectively,  shall  be
parallel  to  a  given  straight  line.

As  a  particular  case,  we  can,  by  the  method  of  this  proposition,  describe
an  equilateral  triangle  in  any  circle  after  we  have  first  constructed  any
equilateral  triangle  by  the  aid  of  i.  i.  The  possibility  of  this  is  assumed  in
IV.  16.  It  is  of  course  equivalent  to  dividing  the  circumference  of  a  circle
into  three  equal  parts.  As  De  Morgan  says,  the  idea  of  dividing  a  revolution
into  equal  parts  should  be  kept  prominent  in  considering  Book  iv. ;  this
aspect  of  the  construction  of  regular  polygons  is  obvious  enough,  and  the
reason  why  the  division  of  the  circle  into  three  equal  parts  is  not  given  by
Euclid  is  that  it  happens  to  be  as  easy  to  divide  the  circle  into  three  parts
which  are  in  the  ratio  of  the  angles  of  any  triangle  as  to  divide  it  into  three
equal  parts.

Proposition  3.

About  a  given  circle  to  circumscribe  a  triangle  equiangular
with  a  given  triangle.

Let  ABC  be   the   given   circle,   and   DEF  the   given
triangle ;
5  thus  it  is  required  to  circumscribe  about  the  circle  ABC  a
triangle  equiangular  with  the  triangle  DEF.

H

f\ -y^


Let  EF  be  produced   in  both  directions  to  the  points

let  the  centre  K  of  the  circle  ABC  be  taken  [iii.  i],  and  let
10  the  straight  line  KB  be  drawn  across  at  random ;
on  the  straight  line  KB,  and  at  the  point  K  on  it,  let  the
angle  BKA  be  constructed  equal  to  the  angle  DEG,
and  the  angle  BKC  equal  to  the  angle  DFH ;  [i.  23]

and  through  the  points  A,  B,  C  let  LAM,  MBN,  NCL  be
15  drawn  touching  the  circle  ABC.  [m.  16,  Por.]

Now,  since  LM,  MN,  NL  touch  the  circle  ABC  at  the
points  A,  B,  Cy

and  KA,  KB,  KC  have  been  joined  from  the  centre  K  to
the  points  A,  B,  C,

6—2


84  BOOK  IV  [iv.  3

20  therefore  the  angles  at  the  points  A^  B^  C  are  right.      [in.  i8]

And,  since  the  four  angles  of  the  quadrilateral  AMBK
are  equal  to  four  right  angles,  inasmuch  as  AMBK  is  in  fact
divisible  into  two  triangles,

and  the  angles  KAM,  KBM  are  right,

25  therefore  the  remaining  angles  AKB,  A  MB  are  equal  to  two
right  angles.

But  the  angles  DEG,  DEF  are  also  equal  to  two  right
angles ;  [i.  13]

therefore  the  angles  A  KB,  A  MB  are  equal  to  the  angles
zoDEG.DEF,

of  which  the  angle  A  KB  is  equal  to  the  angle  /?j£'G^ ;

therefore  the  angle  A  MB  which  remains  is  equal  to  the
angle  DEF -which  remains.

Similarly  it  can  be  proved  that  the  angle  LNB  is  also
35  equal  to  the  angle  DFE  ;

therefore   the   remaining   angle   MLN  is   equal  to  the

angle  EDF.  [i.  32]

Therefore   the   triangle   LMN  is   equiangular  with  the

triangle  DEF\    and    it   has  been  circumscribed  about  the

40  circle  ABC.

Therefore  about  a  given  circle  there  has  been  circum-
scribed a  triangle  equiangular  with  the  given  triangle.

Q.  E.  F.

10.  at  random,  literally  "  as  it  may  chance,"  wt  (rvxcy.  The  same  expression  is  used
in  III.  I  and  commonly.

22,    is  in  fact  divisible,  Kal  Siaipeirai,  literally  "  is  actually  divided.*'

The  remarks  as  to  the  number  of  ways  in  which  Prop.  2  can  be  solved
apply  here  also.

Euclid  leaves  us  to  satisfy  ourselves  that  the  three  tangents  wi//  meet  and
form  a  triangle.  This  follows  easily  from  the  fact  that  each  of  the  angles
AUlB,  BKC,  CKA  is  less  than  two  right  angles.  The  first  two  are  so  by
construction,  being  the  supplements  of  two  angles  of  the  given  triangle  re-
spectively, and,  since  all  three  angles  round.  K  are  together  equal  to  four
right  angles,  it  follows  that  the  third,  the  angle  AKQ  is  equal  to  the  sum
of  the  two  angles  E,  Fo(  the  triangle,  i.e.  to  the  supplement  of  the  angle  Z>,
and  is  therefore  less  than  two  right  angles.

Peletarius  and  Borelli  gave  an  alternative  solution,  first  inscribing  a  triangle
equiangular  to  the  given  triangle,  by  iv.  2,  and  then  drawing  tangents  to  the
circle  parallel  to  the  sides  of  the  inscribed  triangle  respectively.  This  method
will  of  courae  give  two  solutions,  since  two  tangents  can  be  drawn  parallel  to
each  of  the  sides  of  the  inscribed  triangle.

If  the  three  pairs  of  parallel  tangents  be  drawn  and  produced  far  enough,


IV.  3,  4]  PROPOSITIONS  3,  4  8S

they  will  form  eight  triangles,  two  of  which  are  the  triangles  circumscribed  to
the  circle  in  the  manner  required  in  the  proposition.  The  other  six  triangles
are  so  related  to  the  circle  that  the  circle  touches  two  of  the  sides  in  each
produced,  i.e.  the  circle  is  an  escribed  circle  to  each  of  the  six  triangles.


Proposition  4.

In  a  given  triangle  to  inscribe  a  circle.

Let  ABC  be  the  given  triangle  ;
thus  it  is  required  to  inscribe  a  circle  in  the  triangle  ABC,
Let  the  angles  ABCy  ACB
5  be  bisected  by  the  straight  lines
BDy  CD  [i.  9],  and  let  these  meet
one  another  at  the  point  D  ;
from  D  let  DE,   DF,  DG  be
drawn  perpendicular  tothestraight
10  lines  AB,  BC,  CA.

Now,  since  the  angle  ABD
is  equal  to  the  angle  CBD,

and  the  right  angle  BED  is  also  equal  to  the  right  angle
BED,
IS  EBD,  FBD  are  two  triangles  having  two  angles  equal  to  two
angles  and  one  side  equal  to  one  side,  namely  that  subtending
one  of  the  equal  angles,  which  is  BD  common  to  the
triangles ;

therefore  they  will  also  have  the  remaining  sides  equal  to
20  the  remaining  sides ;  [i.  26]

therefore  DE  is  equal  to  DF.
For  the  same  reason

DG  is  also  equal  to  DE.
Therefore  the  three  straight  lines  DE,  DE,  DG  are  equal
25  to  one  another  ;

therefore  the  circle  described  with  centre  D  and  distance

one   of   the    straight    lines   DE,    DE,    DG  will    pass   also

through   the  remaining  points,  and  will  touch  the  straight

lines  AB,  BC,  CA,  because  the  angles  at  the  points  E,  E,  G

30  are  right.

For,  if  it  cuts  them,  the  straight  line  drawn  at  right  angles
to  the  diameter  of  the  circle  from  its  extremity  will  be  found
to  fall  within  the  circle  :  which  was  proved  absurd  ;        [m.  16]


86  BOOK  IV  [iv.  4

therefore  the  circle  described  with  centre  D  and  distance
35  one  of  the   straight   lines  DE,  DF,  DG  will  not  cut  the
straight  lines  AB,  BC,  CA  ;

therefore  it  will  touch  them,  and  will  be  the  circle  inscribed
in  the  triangle  ABC.  [iv.  Def.  5]

Let  it  be  inscribed,  as  FGE.
40        Therefore  in  the  given  triangle  ABC  the  circle  EFG  has
been  inscribed.

Q.  E.  F.

36,  34.  and  distance  one  of  the  (straight  lines  D)E,  (D)F,  (D)G.  The  words
and  letters  here  shown  in  brackets  are  put  in  to  fill  out  the  rather  careless  language  of  the
Greek.  Here  and  in  several  other  places  in  Book  iv.  Euclid  says  literally  '*and  with  distance
one  of  the  (points)  Ey  F^  (7"  (icai  dicurn^/iart  hX  ruy  E,  Z,  H)  and  the  like.  In  one  case  (iv.  13)
he  actually  has  **  with  distance  one  of  the  ^inis  G^  H^  A',  Z,  -^"  (dieumj/iart  hi  rOiv  H,  G,
K,  A,  M  viiiLtiiav).  Heiberg  notes**  Graecam  locutionem  satis  miram  et  negligentem,"  but,
in  view  of  its  frequent  occurrence  in  good  MSS.,  does  not  venture  to  correct  it

Euclid  does  not  think  it  necessary  to  prove  that  BD^  CD  will  meet ;  this
is  indeed  obvious,  for  the  angles  DBC^  DCB  are  together  half  of  the  angles
ABCy  ACBy  which  themselves  are  together  less  than  two  right  angles,  and
therefore  the  two  bisectors  of  the  angles  B^  C  must  meet,  by  Post.  5.

It  follows  from  the  proof  of  this  proposition  that,  if  the  bisectors  of  two
angles  B,  C  of  a,  triangle  meet  in  Z^,  the  line  joining  D  to  A  also  bisects  the
third  angle  Ay  or  the  bisectors  of  the  three  angles  of  a  triangle  meet  in
a  point

It  will  be  observed  that  Euclid  uses  the  indirect  form  of  proof  when
showing  that  the  circle  touches  the  three  sides  of  the  triangle.  Simson  proves
it  directly,  and  points  out  that  Euclid  does  the  same  in  in.  17,  33  and  37,
whereas  in  iv.  8  and  13  as  well  as  here  he  uses  the  indirect  form.  The
difference  is  unimportant,  being  one  of  form  and  not  of  substance;  the
indirect  proof  refers  back  to  iii.  16,  whereas  the  direct  refers  back  to  the
Porism  to  that  proposition.

We  may  state  this  problem  in  the  more  general  form  :  To  describe  a  circle
touching  three  given  straight  lines  which  do  not  all  meet  in  one  pointy  and  of
which  not  more  than  two  are  parallel.

In  the  case  (i)  where  two  of  the  straight  lines  are  parallel  and  the  third
cuts  them,  two  pairs  of  interior  angles  are  formed,  one  on  each  side  of  the
third  straight  line.  If  we  bisect  each  of  the  interior  angles  on  one  side,  the
bisectors  will  meet  in  a  point,  and  this  point  will  be  the  centre  of  a  circle
which  can  be  drawn  touching  each  of  the  three  straight  lines,  its  radius  being
the  perpendicular  from  the  point  on  any  one  of  the  three.  Since  the  alternate
angles  are  equal,  two  equal  circles  can  be  drawn  in  this  manner  satisfying  the
given  condition.

In  the  case  (2)  where  the  three  straight  lines  form  a  triangle,  suppose  each
straight  line  produced  indefinitely.  Then  each  straight  line  will  make  two
pairs  of  interior  angles  with  the  other  two,  one  pair  forming  two  angles  of  the
triangle,  and  the  other  pair  being  their  supplements.  By  bisecting  each  angle
of  either  pair  we  obtain,  in  the  manner  of  the  proposition,  two  circles
satisfying  the  conditions,  one  of  them  t)eing  the  inscribed  circle  of  the  triangle
and  the  other  being  a  circle  escribed  to  it,  i.e.  touching  one  side  and  the  other


IV.  4]


PROPOSITION  4


87


two  sides  produced.  Next,  taking  the  pairs  of  interior  angles  formed  by  a
second  side  with  the  other  two  produced  indefinitely,  we  get  two  circles
satisfying  the  conditions,  one  of  which  is  the  same  inscribed  circle  that  we  had
before,  while  the  other  is  a  second  escribed  circle.  Similarly  with  the  third  side.
Hence  we  have  the  inscribed  circle,  and  three  escribed  circles  (one  opposite
each  angle  of  the  triangle),  i.e.  four  circles  in  all,  satisfying  the  conditions  of
the  problem.

It  may  perhaps  not  be  inappropriate  to  give  at  this  point  Heron's  elegant
proof  of  the  formula  for  the  area  of  a  triangle  in  terms  of  the  sides,  which  we
usually  write  thus :

A  =  ^s(^$-a){s-b){s-€\

although  it  requires  the  theory  of  proportions  and  uses  some  ungeometrical
expressions,  e.g.  the  product  of  two  areas  and  the  **side"  of  such  a  product,
where  of  course  the  areas  are  so  many  square  units  of  length.  The  proof  is
given  in  the  Metrica^  i.  8,  and  in  the  Dioptra,  30  (Heron,  Vol.  iii.,  Teubner,
1903,  pp.  20—24  and  pp.  280 — 4,  or  Heron,  ed.  Hultsch,  pp.  235 — 7).

Suppose  the  sides  of  the  triangle  ABC  to  be  given  in  length.

Inscribe  the  circle  DEF^  and  let  G  be  its  centre.


Join  AG,  BG,  CG,  DG,  EG,  FG.
Then  BC.EG=-2.^  BGC,

CA.FG^2.t^ACG,
AB,DG^2.t.ABG.

Therefore,  by  addition,

/ .  EG  =  2  .  A  ABC,
where/  is  the  perimeter.

Produce  CB  to  H,  so  that  BH=  AD.
Then,  since  AD  =  AF,  DB  =  BE,  FC=  CE,

CH^\p.
Hence  CH .  EG  ^  t.  ABC


88  BOOK   IV  [iv.  4,  S

But    CH.EG    is    the    "side''    of   the    product    CH^ .  EG\   that    is
JCIPTEG^',

therefore  ( A  ABCf  =  CIIK  EG\

Draw  GL  at  right  angles  to  CG,  and  BL  at  right  angles  to  CB,  meeting
at  Z.    Join  CZ.

Then,  since  each  of  the  angles  CGL,  CBL  is  right,  CGBL  is  a  quadri-
lateral  in  a  circle.

Therefore  the  angles  CGB^  CLB  are  equal  to  two  right  angles.
Now  the  angles  CGB^  AGD  are  equal  to  two  right  angles,  since  AG^  BG,
CG  bisect  the  angles  at  G,  and  the  angles  CGB,  AGD  are  equal  to  the
angles  AGC,  DGB^  while  the  sum  of  all  four  is  equal  to  four  right  angles.
Therefore  the  angles  AGD^  CLB  are  equal
So  are  the  right  angles  ADG,  CBL.
Therefore  the  triangles  AGD,  CLB  are  similar.
Hence  BC,BL^AD\DG

=  BH\  EG,
and,  alternately,  CB :  BH  =  BL  :  EG

^BKxKE,
whence,  componendoy  CH\  HB  =  BE :  EUT,

It  follows  that     CB* :  CH .  HB  =  BE.  EC:  CE .  EK

^BE.EC.EGK
Therefore

{b.ABCf^CH*.EG*^CH.HB.  CE.EB

-\p{\P'BC){\p-AB){\p-AC),

Proposition  5.
About  a  given  triangle  to  circumscribe  a  circle.

Let  ABC  be  the  given  triangle  ;
thus  it  is  required  to  circumscribe  a  circle  about  the  given
triangle  ABC.


Let  the  straight  lines  AB,  AC  he.  bisected  at  the  points
D,  E  [i.  10],  and  from  the  points  Z),  E  let  DF,  EF  be  drawn
at  right  angles  to  AB,  AC;

they  will  then  meet  within  the  triangle  ABC,  or  on  the
straight  line  BC,  or  outside  BC.


IV.  s]  PROPOSITIONS  4,  5  89

First  let  them  meet  within  at  F,  and  let  FB,  FC,  FA  be
joined.

Then,  since  AD  is  equal  to  DB^
and  DF  is  common  and  at  right  angles,
therefore  the  base  AF  is  equal  to  the  base  FB.  [i.  4]

Similarly  we  can  prove  that

CF\s  also  equal  to  AF\
so  that  FB  is  also  equal  to  FC ;

therefore  the  three  straight  lines  FA,  FB,  FC  are  equal
to  one  another.

Therefore  the  circle  described  with  centre  F  and  distance
one  of  the  straight  lines  FA,  FB,  FC  will  pass  also  through
the  remaining  points,  and  the  circle  will  have  been  circum-
scribed about  the  triangle  ABC

Let  it  be  circumscribed,  as  ABC

Next,  let  DF,  EF  meet  on  the  straight  line  BC  at  F,
as  is  the  case  in  the  second  figure  ;  and  let  AF  be  joined.

Then,  similarly,  we  shall  prove  that  the  point  F  is  the
centre  of  the  circle  circumscribed  about  the  triangle  ABC

Again,  let  DF,  EF  meet  outside  the  triangle  ABC  at  F,
as  is  the  case  in  the  third  figure,  and  let  AF,  BF,  CF  be
joined.

Then  again,  since  AD  is  equal  to  DB^

and  DF  is  common  and  at  right  angles,

therefore  the  base  AF  is  equal  to  the  base  BF.  [i.  4]

Similarly  we  can  prove  that

CF\s  also  equal  to  AF',
so  that  BF  is  also  equal  to  FC ;

therefore  the  circle  described  with  centre  F  and  distance  one
of  the  straight  lines  FA,  FB,  FC  will  pass  also  through
the  remaining  points,  and  will  have  been  circumscribed  about
the  triangle  ABC

Therefore  about  the  given  triangle  a  circle  has  been
circumscribed.

Q.  E.  F.

And  it  is  manifest  that,  when  the  centre  of  the  circle  falls
within  the  triangle,  the  angle  BAC,  being  in  a  segment
greater  than  the  semicircle,  is  less  than  a  right  angle ;


90  BOOK   IV  [IV.  s

when  the  centre  falls  on  the  straight  line  BC,  the  angle  BAC,
being  in  a  semicircle,  is  right ;

and  when  the  centre  of  the  circle  falls  outside  the  triangle,
the  angle  BAC,  being  in  a  segment  less  than  the  semicircle,
is  greater  than  a  right  angle,  [ni.  31]

Simson  points  out  that  Euclid  does  not  prove  that  DF^  EF  will  meet,  and
he  inserts  in  the  text  the  following  argument  to  supply  the  omission.

"  DF^  EF  produced  meet  one  another.  For,  if  they  do  not  meet,  they
are  parallel,  wherefore  AB^  AQ  which  are  at  right  angles  to  them,  are
parallel  [or,  he  should  have  added,  in  a  straight  line] :  which  is  absurd.''

This  assumes,  of  course,  that  straight  lines  which  are  at  right  angles  to  two
parallels  are  themselves  parallel ;  but  this  is  an  obvious  deduction  from  i.  28.

On  the  assumption  that  DF^  EF  will  meet  Todhunter  has  this  note :  "  It
has  been  proposed  to  show  this  in  the  following  way:  join  DE\  then  the
angles  £DF  and  JDEFaire  together  less  than  the  angles  ADFamd  AEF,  that
is,  they  are  together  less  than  two  right  angles ;  and  therefore  £>F  and  £F
will  meet,  by  Axiom  1 2  [Post.  5].  This  assumes  that  ADE  and  AED  are
acu/e  angles ;  it  may,  however,  be  easily  shown  that  DE  is  parallel  to  BQ  so
that  the  triangle  ADE  is  equiangular  to  the  triangle  ABC;  and  we  must
therefore  select  the  two  sides  AB  and  AC  such  that  ABC  and  ACB  may  be
acute  angles."

This  is,  however,  unsatisfactory.  Euclid  makes  no  such  selection  in  in.  9
and  III.  10,  where  the  same  assumption  is  tacitly  made ;  and  it  is  unnecessary,
because  it  is  easy  to.  prove  that  the  straight  lines  DF,  EF  meet  in  a// cases,
by  considering  the  different  possibilities  separately  and  drawing  a  separate
figure  for  each  case.

Simson  thinks  that  Euclid's  demonstration  had  been  spoiled  by  some
unskilful  hand  both  because  of  the  omission  to  prove  that  the  perpendicular
bisectors  meet,  and  because  "without  any  reason  he  divides  the  proposition
into  three  cases,  whereas  one  and  the  same  construction  and  demonstration
serves  for  them  all,  as  Campanus  has  observed."  However,  up  to  the  usual
words  oircp  fSct  iroirjaai  there  seems  to  be  no  doubt  about  the  text.  Heiberg
suggests  that  Euclid  gave  separately  the  case  where  /^  falls  on  BC  because,  in
that  case,  only  A F needs  to  be  drawn  and  not  BF^  CFsiS  well.

The  addition,  though  given  in  Simson  and  the  text-books  as  a  "corollary,"
has  no  heading  iropurfui  in  the  best  mss.  ;  it  is  an  explanation  like  that  which
is  contained  in  the  penultimate  paragraph  of  iii.  25.

The  Greek  text  has  a  further  addition,  which  is  rejected  by  Heiberg  as  not
genuine,  "So  that,  further,  when  the  given  angle  happens  to  be  less  than  a
right  angle,  DF,  EF  will  fall  within  the  triangle,  when  it  is  right,  on  BC,  and,
when  it  is  greater  than  a  right  angle,  outside  BC:  (being)  what  it  was  required
to  do."  Simson  had  already  observed  that  the  text  here  is  vitiated  "where
mention  is  made  of  a  given  angle,  though  there  neither  is,  nor  can  be,  any-
thing in  the  proposition  relating  to  a  given  angle."


IV.  5, 6]  PROPOSITIONS   5,  6  91

Proposition  6.

In  a  given  circle  to  inscribe  a  square.

Let  ABCD  be  the  given  circle ;
thus  it  is  required  to  inscribe  a  square  in  the  circle  ABCD.

Let  two  diameters  ACy  ED  of  the
circle  ABCD  be  drawn  at  right  angles
to  one  another,  and  let  AB^  BC,  CD^
DA  be  joined.

Then,  since  BE  is  equal  to  ED,  for
E  is  the  centre,

and  EA  is  common  and  at  right  angles,
therefore  the  base  AB  is  equal  to  the
base  AD.  [i.  4]

For  the  same  reason
each  of  the  straight  lines  BC,  CD  is  also  equal  to  each  of
the  straight  lines  AB,  AD ;

therefore  the  quadrilateral  ABCD  is  equilateral.

I  say  next  that  it  is  also  right-angled.

For,  since  the  straight  line  BD  is  a  diameter  of  the  circle
ABCD,
therefore  BAD  is  a  semicircle  ;

therefore  the  angle  BAD  is  right.  [ni.  31]

For  the  same  reason
each  of  the  angles  ABC,  BCD,  CD  A  is  also  right ;

therefore  the  quadrilateral  ABCD  is  right-angled.

But  it  was  also  proved  equilateral ;
therefore  it  is  a  square ;  [i.  Def.  22]

and  it  has  been  inscribed  in  the  circle  ABCD.

Therefore  in  the  given  circle  the  square  ABCD  has  been
inscribed.

Q.  E.  F.

Euclid  here  proceeds  to  consider  problems  corresponding  to  those  in
Props.  2 — 5  with  reference  to  figures  of  four  or  more  sides,  but  with  the
difference  that,  whereas  he  dealt  with  triangles  of  any  form,  he  confines
himself  henceforth  to  regular  figures.  It  happened  to  be  as  easy  to  divide  a
circle  into  three  parts  which  are  in  the  ratio  of  the  angles,  or  of  the  supplements
of  the  angles,  of  a  triangle  as  into  three  equal  parts.  But,  when  it  is  required  to
inscribe  in  a  circle  a  figure  equiangular  to  a  given  quadrilateral,  this  can  only  be


92


BOOK   IV


[iv.  6,  7


done  provided  that  the  quadrilateral  has  either  pair  of  opposite  angles  equal
to  two  right  angles.  Moreover,  in  this  case,  the  problem  may  be  solved  in  the
same  way  as  that  of  iv.  2,  i.e.  by  simply  inscribing  a  triangle  equiangular  to  one
of  the  triangles  into  which  the  quadrilateral  is  divided  by  either  diagonal,  and
then  drawing  on  the  side  corresponding  to  the  diagonal  as  base  another
triangle  equiangular  to  the  other  triangle  contained  in  the  quadrilateral.  But
this  is  not  the  only  solution ;  there  are  an  infinite
number  of  other  solutions  in  which  the  inscribed
quadrilateral  will,  unlike  that  found  by  this  particular
method,  not  be  of  the  same  form  as  the  given  quadri-
lateral For  suppose  ABCD  to  be  the  quadrilateral
inscribed  in  the  circle  by  the  method  of  iv.  2.  Take
any  point  B  on  AB^  join  ABy  and  then  make  the
angle  DAD  (measured  towards  AC)  equal  to  the
angle  BAB.  Join  BC,  CD.  Then  ABCD  is  also
equiangular  to  the  given  quadrilateral,  but  not  of  the
same  form.  Hence  the  problem  is  indeterminate  in  the  case  of  the  general
quadrilateral.  It  is  equally  so  if  the  given  quadrilateral  is  a  rectangle ;  and  it
is  determinate  only  when  the  given  quadrilateral  is  a  square.


Proposition  7.

About  a  given  circle  to  circumscribe  a  square.

Let  ABCD  be  the  given  circle  ;

thus  it  is  required  to  circumscribe  a  square  about  the  circle
ABCD.

Let  two  diameters  AC,  BD  of  the
circle  ABCD  be  drawn  at  right  angles
to  one  another,  and  through  the  points
A,  B,  C,  D  let  FG,  GH,  HK,  KF  be
drawn  touching  the  circle  ABCD.

[hi.  16,  Por.]

Then,  since  FG  touches  the  circle
ABCD,

and  EA  has  been  joined  from  the  centre
E  to  the  point  of  contact  at  A,

therefore  the  angles  at  A  are  right.

For  the  same  reason

the  angles  at  the  points  B,  C,  D  are  also  right.

Now,  since  the  angle  AEB  is  right,

and  the  angle  EBG  is  also  right,

therefore  GH  is  parallel  to  AC.  [i.  28]


G              A              1

B

E

^

n

V

J

[hi.  18]


IV.  7]  PROPOSITIONS   6,  7  93,

For  the  same  reason

AC  is  also  parallel  to  /^A^,
so  that  GH  is  also  parallel  to  JFK.  [i.  30J

Similarly  we  can  prove  that

each  of  the  straight  lines  GF,  HK  is  parallel  to  BED.

Therefore  GK,  GC,  AK,  FB,  BK  are  parallelograms ;
therefore  GF  is  equal  to  HK,  and  GH  to  FK.  [i.  34]

And,  since  ^C  is  equal  to  BD,
and  AC  is  also  equal  to  each  of  the  straight  lines  G//,  FK,

while  BD  is  equal  to  each  of  the  straight  lines  GF,  HK,

'   [I.  34]
therefore  the  quadrilateral  FGHK  is  equilateral.

I  say  next  that  it  is  also  right-angled.

For,  since  GBEA  is  a  parallelogram,
and  the  angle  ABB  is  right,
therefore  the  angle  A  GB  is  also  right.  [i.  34]

Similarly  we  can  prove  that

the  angles  at  H,  K,  F  are  also  right.

Therefore  FGHK  is  right-angled.

But  it  was  also  proved  equilateral ;

therefore  it  is  a  square ;
and  it  has  been  circumscribed  about  the  circle  A  BCD..  ...

Therefore    about    the   given   circle   a   square   has   beert
circumscribed.

Q.  E.  K.

It  is  just  as  easy  to  describe  about  a  given  circle  a  polygon  equiangular  to
any  given  polygon  as  it  is  to  describe  a  square  about  a  given  circle*  We  have
only  .to  use  the  method  of  iv.  3,  i.e.  to  take  any  radius  of  the  circle,  to
measure  round  the  centre  successive  angles  in  one  and  the  same  direction
equal  to  the  supplements  of  the  successive  angles  of  the  given  polygon  and,
lastly,  to  draw  tangents  to  the  circle  at  the  extremities  of  the  several  radii  .sq
determined ;  but  again  the  polygon  would  in  general  not  be  of  the  same  form
as  the  given  one ;  it  would  only  be  so  if  the  given  polygon  happened  to  be
such  that  a  circle  could  be  inscribed  in  it  To  take  the  case  of  a  qmuirilateral
only :  it  is  easy  to  prove  that,  if  a  quadrilateral  be  described  about  ^  circle,^
the  sum  of  one  pair  of  opposite  sides  must  be  equal  to  the  sum  of  the  other
pair.  It  may  be  proved,  conversely,  that,  if  a  quadrilateral  has  the  sums  of  the
pairs  of  opposite  sides  equal,  a  circle  can  be  inscribed  in  it.  If  then  a  given
quadrilateral  has  the  sums  of  the  pairs  of  opposite  sides  equal,  a  quadrilateral
can  be  described  about  any  given  circle  not  only  equiangular  with  it  but
having  the  same^^rw  or,  in  the  words  of  Book  vi.,  similar  to  it.


H


94  BOOK  IV  [ly.  g

Proposition  8.

In  a  given  square  to  inscribe  a  circle.

Let  ABCD  be  the  given  square  ;
thus  it  is  required  to  inscribe  a  circle  in  the  given  square
ABCD.

Let  the  straight  h'nes  AD,  AS  be
bisected  at  the  points  E^  F  respectively

[i.  lo],

through  E  let  EH  be  drawn  parallel

to    either  AB    or   CD,  and    through

F  let  FK  be  drawn  parallel  to  either

AD  or  BC\  [i.  31]

therefore  each  of  the  figures  AK,  KB,

AH,  HD,  AG,  GC,  BG,  GD  is  a  parallelogram,

and  their  opposite  sides  are  evidently  equal.  [i.  34]

Now,  since  AD  is  equal  to  AB,
and  AE  is  half  of  AD,  and  AF  half  of  AB,

therefore  AE  is  equal  to  AF,

so  that  the  opposite  sides  are  also  equal  ;

therefore  FG  is  equal  to  GE.

Similarly  we  can  prove  that  each  of  the  straight  lines  GH,
GK  is  equal  to  each  of  the  straight  lines  FG,  GE  ;

therefore  the  four  straight  lines  GE,  GF,  GH,  GK  are
equal  to  one  another.

Therefore  the  circle  described  with  centre  G  and  distance
one  of  the  straight  lines  GE,  GF,  GH,  GK  will  pass  also
through  the  remaining  points.

And  it  will  touch  the  straight  lines  AB,  BC,  CD,  DA,
because  the  angles  at  E,  F,  H,  K  are  right.

For,  if  the  circle  cuts  AB,  BC,  CD,  DA,  the  straight
line  drawn  at  right  angles  to  the  diameter  of  the  circle  from
its  extremity  will  fall  within  the  circle :  which  was  proved
absurd ;  [in.  16]

therefore  the  circle  described  with  centre  G  and  distance
one  of  the  straight  lines  GE,  GF,  GH,  GK  will  not  cut
the  straight  lines  AB,  BC,  CD,  DA.

Therefore  it  will  touch  them,  and  will  have  been  inscribed
in  the  square  ABCD.

Therefore  in  the  given  square  a  circle  has  been  inscribed.

Q.  E.  F.


IV.  8,  9]


PROPOSITIONS  8,  9


95


As  was  remarked  in  the  last  note,  a  circle  can  be  inscribed  in  any
quadriiaterai  yihich  has  the  sum  of  one  pair  of  opposite  sides  equal  to  the  sum
of  the  other  pair.  In  particular,  it  follows  that  a  circle  can  be  inscribed  in  a
square  or  a  rhombus^  but  not  in  a  rectangle  or  a  rhomboid.


Proposition  9.

About  a  given  square  to  circumscribe  a  circle.

Let  ABCD  be  the  given  square ;
thus  it  is  required  to  circumscribe  a  circle  about  the  square
ABCD.

For  let  AC,  BD  be  joined,  and  let  them
cut  one  another  at  E.

Then,  since  DA  is  equal  to  AB,
and  ^C  is  common,

therefore  the  two  sides  DA,  AC  are  equal
to  the  two  sides  BA,  AC;
and  the  base  DC  is  equal  to  the  base  BC ;
therefore  the  angle  DAC  is  equal  to
the  angle  BAC.  [i.  8]

Therefore  the  angle  DAB  is  bisected  by  AC.

Similarly  we   can   prove  that  each  of  the  angles  ABC,
BCD,  CD  A  is  bisected  by  the  straight  lines  AC,  DB.

Now,  since  the  angle  DAB  is  equal  to  the  angle  ABC,
and  the  angle  EAB  is  half  the  angle  DAB,
and  the  angle  EBA  half  the  angle  ABC,
therefore  the  angle  EAB  is  also  equal  to  the  angle  EBA  \
so  that  the  side  EA  is  also  equal  to  EB.  [i.  6]

Similarly  we  can  prove  that  each  of  the  straight  lines
EA,  EB  is  equal  to  each  of  the  straight  lines  EC,  ED.

Therefore  the  four  straight  lines  EA,  EB,  EC,  ED  are
equal  to  one  another.

Therefore  the  circle  described  with  centre  E  and  distance
one  of  the  straight  lines  EA,  EB,  EC^  ED  will  pass  also
through  the  remaining  points  ;
and  it  will  have  been  circumscribed  about  the  square  ABCD.

Let  it  be  circumscribed,  as  ABCD.

Therefore    about    the    given   square  a   circle   has   been
circumscribed.

Q.  E.  F.


96  BOOK  IV  [iv.  lo

Proposition  io.

To  construct  an  isosceles  triangle  having  each  of  the  angles
at  the  base  double  of  the  remaining  one.

Let  any  straight  line  AB  be  set  out,  and  let  it  be  cut  at
the  point  C  so  that  the  rectangle
contained  by  AB^  BC  is  equal  to
the  square  on  CA\  [n.  n]

with  centre  A  and  distance  AB  let
the  circle  BDE  be  described,

and  let  there  be  fitted  in  the  circle
BDE  the  straight  line  BD  equal  to
the  straight  line  AC  which  is  not
greater  than  the  diameter  of  the
circle  BDE.  [iv.  i]

Let  ADy  DC  be  joined,  and  let
the  circle  ACD  be  circumscribed  about  the  triangle  ACD.

[IV.  5]

Then,  since  the  rectangle  AB,  BC  is  equal  to  the  square
on  AC,

and  ^C  is  equal  to  BD,

therefore  the  rectangle  AB,  BC  is  equal  to  the  square  on  BD.

And,  since  a  point  B  has  been  taken  outside  the  circle
ACD,

and  from  B  the  two  straight  lines  i?.^,  BD  have  fallen  on
the  circle  ACD,  and  one  of  them  cuts  it,  while  the  other  falls
on  it,

and  the  rectangle  AB,  BC  is  equal  to  the  square  on  BD,
therefore  BD  touches  the  circle  ACD.  [m.  37]

Since,  then,  BD  touches  it,    and  DC  is   drawn   across
from  the  point  of  contact  at  D,

therefore  the  angle  BDC  is  equal  to  the  angle  DAC  in  the
alternate  segment  of  the  circle.  [iii.  52]

Since,  then,  the  angle  BDC  is  equal  to  the  angle  DAC,
let  the  angle  CD  A  be  added  to  each  ;

therefore  the  whole  angle  BDA  is  equal  to  the  two  angles
CDA,  DAC.


IV.  lo]  PROPOSITION    lo  97

But  the  exterior  angle  BCD  is  equal  to  the  angles  CD  A,
DAC^  [1.32]

therefore  the  angle  BDA  is  also  equal  to  the  angle  BCD.

But  the  angle  BDA  is  equal  to  the  angle  CBD,  since  the
side  AD  is  also  equal  to  AB  ;  [i.  5]

so  that  the  angle  DBA  is  also  equal  to  the  angle  BCD.

Therefore  the  three  angles  BDA,  DBA,  BCD  are  equal
to  one  another.

And,  since  the  angle  DBC  is  equal  to  the  angle  BCD,

the  side  BD  is  also  equal  to  the  side  DC  [i.  6]

But  BD  is  by  hypothesis  equal  to  CA  ;
therefore  CA  is  also  equal  to  CD,

so  that  the  angle  CD  A  is  also  equal  to  the  angle  DAC\

[I.  5]
therefore  the  angles  CDA^DAC  Sire  double  of  the  angle  DAC

But  the  angle  BCD  is  equal  to  the  angles  CD  A,  DAC;

therefore  the  angle  BCD  is  also  double  of  the  angle  CAD.

But  the  angle  BCD  is  equal  to  each  of  the  angles  BDA,
DBA]

therefore  each  of  the  angles  BDA,  DBA  is  also  double  of
the  angle  DAB.

Therefore  the  isosceles  triangle  ABD  has  been  constructed
having  each  of  the  angles  at  the  base  DB  double  of  the
remaining  one.

Q.  E.  F.

There  is  every  reason  to  conclude  that  the  connexion  of  the  triangle
constructed  in  this  proposition  with  the  regular  pentagon,  and  the  construction
of  the  triangle  itself,  were  the  discovery  of  the  Pythagoreans.  In  the  first
place  the  Scholium  iv.  No.  2  (Heiberg,  Vol.  v.  p.  273)  says  "this  Book  is  the
discovery  of  the  Pythagoreans."  Secondly,  the  summary  in  Proclus  (p.  65,  20)
says  that  Pythagoras  discovered  "the  construction  of  the  cosmic  figures,'*
by  which  must  be  understood  the  five  regular  solids.  This  is  confirmed  by
the  fragment  of  Philolaus  (Boeckh,  p.  160  sqq.)  which  speaks  of  the  "five
bodies  in  the  sphere,"  and  by  the  statement  of  lamblichus  {Vit,  Pyth.  c.  18,
s.  88)  that  Hippasus,  a  Pythagorean,  was  said  to  have  been  drowned  for  the
impiety  of  claiming  the  credit  of  inscribing  in  a  sphere  the  figure  made  of  the
twelve  pentagons,  whereas  the  whole  was  HIS  discovery  (cicctvov  tov  dvSpos) ;
"  for  it  is  thus  they  speak  of  Pythagoras,  and  they  do  not  call  him  by  his
name."  Cantor  has  (i„  pp.  176  sqq.)  collected  notices  which  help  us  to  form
an  idea  how  the  discovery  of  the  Euclidean  construction  for  a  regular
pentagon  may  have  been  arrived  at  by  the  Pythagoreans.

Plato  puts  into  the  mouth  of  Timaeus  a  description  of  the  formation  from

H.  E.  II.  7


98


BOOK  IV


[iv.  lO


right-angled  triangles  of  the  figures  which  are  the  faces  of  the  first  four  regular

solids.     The  face  of  the  cul^  is  the  square  which  is  formed  from  isosceles

right-angled  triangles  by  placing  four  of  these  triangles  contiguously  so  that

the  four  right  angles  are  in   contact  at   the    centre.      The

equilateral  triangle,  however,  w^hich  is  the  form  of  the  faces  of

the  tetrahedron,  the  octahedron  and  the  icosahedron,  cannot

be  constructed  from   isosceles  right-angled   triangles,   but  is

constructed  from  a  particular    scalene    right-angled    triangle

which  Timaeus  (54  a,  b)  regards  as  the  most  beautiful  of  all

scalene  right-angled  triangles,  namely  that  in  which  the  square  on  one  of  the

sides  about  the  right  angle  is  three  times  the  square  on  the  other.     This  is,  of

course,  the  triangle  forming  half  of  an  equilateral  triangle  bisected  by  the

perpendicular  from  one  angular  point  on  the  opposite  side.     The  Platonic

Timaeus  does  not  construct  his  equilateral  triangle  from  two  such  triangles

but  from  six,  by  placing  the  latter  contiguously  round  a

point  so  that  the  hypotenuses  and  the  smaller  of  the  sides

about  the  right  angles  respectively  adjoin,  and  all  of  them

meet    at    the    common   centre,   as  shown   in   the  figure

(Ttma^uSf  54  d,  e.).     The  probability  that  this  exposition

was  Pythagorean  is  confirmed  by  the  independent  testimony

of  Proclus  (pp.  304 — 5),  who  attributes  to  the  Pythagoreans

the  theorem  that  six  equilateral  triangles,  or  three  hexagons,  or  four  squares,

placed  contiguously  with  one  angular  point  of  each  at  a  common  point,  will

just  fill  up  the  four  right  angles  round  that  point,  and  that  no  other  regular

polygons  in  any  numbers  have  this  property.

How  then  would  it  be  proposed  to  split  up  into  triangles,  or  to  make  up
out  of  triangles,  the  face  of  the  remaining  solid,  the  dodecahedron  ?  It  would
easily  be  seen  that  the  pentagon  could  not  be  constructed  by  means  of  the
two  right-angled  triangles  which  were  used  for  constructing  the  square  and  the
equilateral  triangle  respectively.  But  attempts  would  naturally  be  made  to
split  up  the  pentagon  into  elementary  triangles,  and  traces  of  such  attempts
are  actually  forthcoming.  Plutarch  has  in  two  passages  spoken  of  the  division
of  the  faces  of  the  dodecahedron  into  triangles,  remarking  in  one  place
{Quaes/,  Platon,  v.  i)  that  each  of  the  twelve  faces  is  made  up  of  30  elemen-


tary scalene  triangles,  so  that,  taken  together,  they  give  360  such  triangles,
and  in  another  (he  defectu  oracuiorum,  c.  33)  that  the  elementary  triangle  of
the  dodecahedron  must  be  different  from  that  of  the  tetrahedron,  octahedron
and  icosahedron.  Another  writer  of  the  2nd  cent,  Alcinous,  has,  in  his
introduction  to  the  study  of  Plato  {De  doctrina  Piatonis^  c.  11),  spoken
similarly  of  the  360  elements  which  are  produced  when  every  one  of  the
pentagons  is  divided  into  5  isosceles  triangles,  and  each  of  the  latter  into
6  scalene  triangles.  Now,  if  we  proceed  to  draw  lines  in  a  pentagon  separating
it  into  this  number  of  small  triangles  as  shown  in  the  above  figure^  the  figure


IV.  lo]  PROPOSITION    lo  99

which  stands  out  most  prominently  in  the  mass  of  lines  is  the  *' star-pentagon,"
as  drawn  separately,  which  then  (if  the  consecutive  comers  be  joined)  suggests
the  drawing,  as  part  of  a  pentagon,  of  a  triangle  of  a  definite  character.  Now
we  are  expressly  told  by  Lucian  and  the  scholiast  to  the  Clouds  of  Aristophanes
(see  Bretschneider,  pp.  85 — 86)  that  the  triple  interwoven  triangle,  the  penta-
gram (to  rpiirXovv  rpiywvoVf  to  81*  aXAi^AcDF,  to  irevTaypa/u./AOv),  was  used  by  the
Pythagoreans  as  a  symbol  of  recognition  between  the  members  of  the  same
school  (crvftfioXAf  wpos  Tovs  6fio£o£ov9  ixp^vro),  and  was  called  by  them  Health.
There  seems  to  be  therefore  no  room  for  doubt  that  the  construction  of  a
pentagon  by  means  of  an  isosceles  triangle  having  each  of  its  base  angles
double  of  the  vertical  angle  was  due  to  the  Pythagoreans.

The  construction  of  this  triangle  depends  upon  11.  11,  or  the  problem  of
dividing  a  straight  line  so  that  the  rectangle  contained  by  the  whole  and  one
of  the  parts  is  equal  to  the  square  on  the  other  part.  This  problem  of  course
appears  again  in  Eucl.  vi.  30  as  the  problem  of  cutting  a  given  straight  line  m
extreme  and  mean  raiio^  i.e.  the  problem  of  the  golden  section^  which  is  no
doubt  "the  section"  referred  to  in  the  passage  of  the  summary  given  by
Proclus  (p.  67,  6)  which  says  that  Eudoxus  "  greatly  added  to  the  number
of  the  theorems  which  Plato  originated  regarding  the  section."  This  idea  that
Plato  began  the  study  of  the  "  golden  section  "  as  a  subject  in  itself  is  not  in
the  least  inconsistent  with  the  supposition  that  the  problem  of  Eucl.  11. 1 1  was
solved  by  the  Pythagoreans.  The  very  fact  that  Euclid  places  it  among  other
propositions  which  are  clearly  Pythagorean  in  origin  is  significant,  as  is  also
the  fact  that  its  solution  is  effected  by  "  applying  to  a  straight  line  a  rectangle
equal  to  a  given  square  and  exceeding  by  a  square,"  while  Proclus  says  plainly
(p.  419,  15)  that,  according  to  Eudemus,  "the  application  of  areas,  their
exceeding  and  their  falling  short,  are  ancient  and  discoveries  of  the  Muse  of
the  Pythagoreans."

We  may  suppose  the  construction  of  iv.  10  to  have  been  arrived  at  by
analysis  somewhat  as  follows  (Todhunter's  Euclid,  p.  325).  ^

Suppose  the  problem  solved,  i.e.  let  ABD  be  an  isosceles  triangle  having
each  of  its  base  angles  double  of  the  vertical  angle.

Bisect  the  angle  ADB  by  the  straight  line  DC  meeting  AB  in  C,      [i.  9]

Therefore  the  angle  BDC  is  equal  to  the  angle  BAD  \  and  the  angle
CD  A  is  also  equal  to  the  angle  BADy

so  that  DC  is  equal  to  CA,

Again,  since,  in  the  triangles  BCD^  BDA^

the  angle  BDC  is  equal  to  the  angle  BAD,
and  the  angle  B  is  common,

the  third  angle  BCD  is  equal  to  the  third  angle  BDA^  and  therefore  to
the  angle  DBC

Therefore  DC  is  equal  to  DB,

Now,  if  a  circle  be  described  about  the  triangle  A  CD  [iv.  5],  since  the
angle  BDC  is  equal  to  the  angle  in  the  segment  CAD^

BD  must  touch  the  circle  [by  the  converse  of  in.  32  easily  proved  from  it
by  reduciio  ad  adsurdum].

Hence  [in.  36]  the  square  on  BD  and  therefore  the  square  on  CZ>,  or
AC,  is  equal  to  the  rectangle  AB^  BC.

Thus  the  problem  is  reduced  to  that  of  cutting  AB  at  C  so  that  the
rectangle  AB^  BC  is  equal  to  the  square  on  AC.  [11.  11]

7—2


loo  BOOK   IV  [iv.  lo,  II

When  this  is  done,  we  have  only  to  draw  a  circle  with  centre  A  and  radius
AB  and  place  in  it  a  chord  BD  equal  in  length  to  AC,  hv.  i]

Since  each  of  the  angles  ABD^  ADB  is  double  of  the  angle  BAV^  the
latter  is  equal  to  one-fifth  of  the  sum  of  all  three,  i.e.  is  one-fifth  of  two  right
angles,  or  two-fifths  of  a  right  angle,  and  each  of  the  base  angles  is  four-fifths
of  a  right  angle.

If  we  bisect  the  angle  BAD^  we  obtain  an  angle  equal  to  one-fifth  of  a
right  angle,  so  that  the  proposition  enables  us  to  divide  a  right  angle  into  five
equal  parts.

It  will  be  observed  that  BD  is  the  side  of  a  regular  decagon  inscribed  in
the  larger  circle.

Proclus,  as  remarked  above  (Vol.  i.  p.  130),  gives  iv.  10  as  an  instance  in
which  two  of  the  six  formal  divisions  of  a  proposition,  the  setting-out  and  the
^^  definition^'  are  left  out,  and  explains  that  they  are  unnecessary  because
there  is  no  datum  in  the  enunciation.  This  is  however  no  more  than  formally
true,  because  Euclid  does  begin  his  proposition  by  setting  out  ''any  straight
line  ABy'  and  he  constructs  an  isosceles  triangle  having  AB  for  one  of  its
equal  sides,  i.e.  he  does  practically  imply  a  datum  in  the  enunciation,  and  a
corresponding  setting-out  and  "  definition  "  in  the  proposition  itself.


Proposition  ii.

In  a  given  circle  to  inscribe  an  equilateral  and  equiangular
pentagon.

Let  ABCDE  be  the  given  circle  ;
thus  it  is  required  to  inscribe  in  the  circle  ABCDE  an  equi-
lateral and  equiangular  pentagon.

Let  the  isosceles  triangle  FGH
be  set  out  having  each  of  the  angles
at  Gy  //'double  of  the  angle  at  F\

[iv.  10]

let  there  be  inscribed  in  the  circle
ABCDE  the  triangle  A  CD  equi-
angular with  the  triangle  FGHy  so
that  the  angle  CAD  is  equal  to  the  angle  at  F  and  the  angles
at  Gy  //'respectively  equal  to  the  angles  ACDy  CD  A  ;  [iv.  2]
therefore  each  of  the  angles  ACDy  CD  A  is  also  double  of  the
angle  CAD,

Now  let  the  angles  ACDy  CD  A  be  bisected  respectively
by  the  straight  lines  CEy  DB  [1.  9],  and  let  ABy  BCy  DEy  EA
be  joined.

Then,  since  each  of  the  angles  ACDy  CD  A  is  double  of
the  angle  CADy
and  they  have  been  bisected  by  the  straight  lines  CEy  DB^


IV.  ii]  PROPOSITIONS    lo,  II  loi

therefore  the  five  angles  DAC,  ACE,  ECD,  CtS;  BDA
are  equal  to  one  another.

But  equal  angles  stand  on  equal  circumferences ;     "'|ijrf..26]

therefore  the  five  circumferences  ABy  EC,  CD,  DE,  EAjkr^
equal  to  one  another.

But  equal  circumferences  are  subtended  by  equal  straight*
lines ;  [iii.  29]*

therefore  the  five  straight  lines  AB,  EC,  CD,  DE,  EA  are
equal  to  one  another  ;

therefore  the  pentagon  ABCDE  is  equilateral.

I  say  next  that  it  is  also  equiangular.
For,  since  the  circumference  AB  is  equal  to  the  circum-
ference DE,  let  BCD  be  added  to  each  ;

therefore  the  whole  circumference  ABCD  is  equal  to  the
whole  circumference  EDCB,

And  the  angle  AED  stands  on  the  circumference  ABCD,
and  the  angle  BAE  on  the  circumference  EDCB ;

therefore  the  angle  BAE  is  also  equal  to  the  angle  AED.

[ill.  27]
For  the  same  reason

each  of  the  angles  ABC,  BCD,  CDE  is  also  equal  to  each
of  the  angles  BAE,  AED ;

therefore  the  pentagon  ABCDE  is  equiangular.

But  it  was  also  proved  equilateral ;

therefore   in   the   given   circle  an    equilateral   and  equi-
angular pentagon  has  been  inscribed.

Q.  E.  F.


De  Morgan  remarks  that  "the  method  of  iv.  11  is  not  so  natural  as
making  a  direct  use  of  the  angle  obtained  in  the  last."  On  the  other  hand,
if  we  look  at  the  figure  and  notice  that  it  shows  the  whole  of  the  prntagram-
star  except  one  line  (that  connecting  B  and  E),  I  think  we  shall  conclude
that  the  method  is  nearer  to  that  used  by  the  Pythagoreans,  and  therefore  of
much  more  historical  interest.

Another  method  would  of  course  be  to  use  iv.  10  to  describe  a  decagon  in
the  circle,  and  then  to  join  any  vertex  to  the  next  alternate  one,  the  latter  to
the  next  alternate  one,  and  so  on.


I02


BOOK   IV


[iV.   II,  12


Mr  Ht..lCf.  Taylor  gives  "a  complete  geometrical  construction  for  in-
scribing .a.  r^ular  decagon  or  pentagon  in  a  given  circle,''  as  follows.

"  Fintf  b  the  centre.

DjtlW.'two  diameters  AOQ  BOD  at  right
angT^^lto  one  another.
.., Bisect  OD  in  E,

••.  Draw  AE  and  cut  off  EF  equal  to  OE.
•'.•'••Place  round  the  circle  ten  chords  equal
^o  AR

'  • '  These  chords  will  be  the  sides  of  a  regular
decagon.  Draw  the  chords  joining  five  alternate
.vertices  of  the  decagon ;  they  will  be  the  sides
of  a  regular  pentagon."

The  construction  is  of  course  only  a  com-
bination of  those  in  ii.  1 1  and  iv.  i ;  and  the
proof  would  have  to  follow  that  in  iv.  lo.


Proposition  12.

About  a  given  circle  to  circumscribe  an  equilateral  and
equiangular  pentagon.

Let  ABCDE  be  the  given  circle ;
thus  it  is  required  to  circumscribe  an  equilateral  and  equi-
angular   pentagon     about     the     circle
ABCDE.

Let  A,  By  Cy  D,  E  be  conceived  to
be  the  angular  points  of  the  inscribed
pentagon,  so  that  the  circumferences
ABy  BCy  CDy  DEy  EA  are  equal ;

[iv.  11]
through  Ay  By  C,  /?,  E  let  GHy  HKy
KLy  LMy  MG  be  drawn  touching  the
circle  ;  [in.  16,  Por.]

let  the  centre  F  of  the  circle  ABCDE  be  taken  [m.  i],  and
let  FBy  FKy  FCy  FLy  FD  be  joined.

Then, since  the  straight  line  KL  touches  the  circle  ABCDE
at  C,

and  FC  has  been  joined  from  the  centre  F  to  the  point  of
contact  at  C,

therefore  FC  is  perpendicular  to  KL  ;  [ni.  18]

therefore  each  of  the  angles  at  C  is  right.

For  the  same  reason

the  angles  at  the  points  By  D  are  also  right.


IV.  12]  PROPOSITIONS    II,  12  103

And,  since  the  angle  FCK  is  right,
therefore  the  square  on  FK  is  equal  to  the  squares  on  FCy  CK.

For  the  same  reason  [i.  47]

the  square  on  FK  is  also  equal  to  the  squares  on  FB,  BK  ;

so  that  the  squares  on  FC,  CK  are  equal  to  the  squares
on  FB,  BK,

of  which  the  square  on  FC  is  equal  to  the  square  on  FB ;
therefore  the  square  on  CK  which  remains  is  equal  to  the
square  on  BK,

Therefore  BK  is  equal  to  CK.

And,  since  FB  is  equal  to  FC,
and  FK  common,

the  two  sides  BF,  FK  are  equal  to  the  two  sides  CF,  FK ;
and  the  base  BK  equal  to  the  base  CK  ;

therefore  the  angle  BFK  is  equal  to  the  angle  KFC,  [i.  8]

and  the  angle  BKF  to  the  angle  FKC
Therefore  the  angle  BFC  is  double  of  the  angle  KFC,

and  the  angle  BKC  of  the  angle  FKC

For  the  same  reason

the  angle  CFD  is  also  double  of  the  angle  CFL,

and  the  angle  DLC  of  the  angle  FLC

Now,  since  the  circumference  BC  is  equal  to  CD,
the  angle  BFC  is  also  equal  to  the  angle  CFD.  [iii.  27]

And  the  angle  BFC  is  double  of  the  angle  KFC,  and  the
angle  DFC  of  the  angle  LFC ;

therefore  the  angle  KFC  is  also  equal  to  the  angle  LFC.

But  the  angle  FCK  is  also  equal  to  the  angle  FCL  ;
therefore  FKC,  FLC  are  two  triangles  having  two  angles
equal  to  two  angles  and  one  side  equal  to  one  side,  namely
FC  which  is  common  to  them  ;

therefore  they  will  also  have  the  remaining  sides  equal  to  the
remaining  sides,  and  the  remaining  angle  to  the  remaining
angle ;  [i.  26]

therefore  the  straight  line  KC  is  equal  to  CZ,
and  the  angle  FKC  to  the  angle  FLC.

And,  since  KC  is  equal  to  CL,
therefore  KL  is  double  of  KC.


I04  BOOK   IV  [iv.  12,  13

For  the  same  reason  it  can  be  proved  that
HK  is  also  double  of  BK.

And  BK  is  equal  to  KC ;

therefore  HK  is  also  equal  to  KL.

Similarly  each  of  the  straight  lines  HGy  GM,  ML  can
also  be  proved  equal  to  each  of  the  straight  lines  HK,  KL  ;

therefore  the  pentagon  GHKLM  is  equilateral.

I  say  next  that  it  is  also  equiangular.

For,  since  the  angle  FKC  is  equal  to  the  angle  FLC,
and  the  angle  HKL  was  proved  double  of  the  angle  FKC,

and  the  angle  KLM  double  of  the  angle  FLC,
therefore  the  angle  HKL  is  also  equal  to  the  angle  KLM.

Similarly  each  of  the  angles  KHG,  HGM,  GML  can  also
be  proved  equal  to  each  of  the  angles  HKL,  KLM]
therefore  the  five  angles  GHK,  HKL,  KLM,  LMG,  MGH
are  equal  to  one  another.

Therefore  the  pentagon  GHKLM  is  equiangular.

And  it  was  also  proved  equilateral ;  and  it  has  been
circumscribed  about  the  circle  ABODE.

Q.  E.  F.

De  Morgan  remarks  that  iv.  12,  13,  14  supply  the  place  of  the  following  :
Having  given  a  regular  polygon  of  any  number  of  sides  inscribed  in  a  circle,  to
describe  the  same  about  the  circle;  and,  having  given  the  polygon,  to  inscribe  and
circumscribe  a  circle.  For  the  method  can  be  applied  generally,  as  indeed
Euclid  practically  says  in  the  Porism  to  iv.  15  about  the  regular  hexagon  and
in  the  remark  appended  to  iv.  16  about  the  regular  fifteen-angled  figure.

The  conclusion  of  this  proposition,  "  therefore  about  the  given  circle  an
equilateral  and  equiangular  pentagon  has  been  circumscribed,"  is  omitted  in
the  MSS.

Proposition  13.

In  a  given  pentagon,  which  is  equilateral  and  equiangular,
to  inscribe  a  circle.

Let  ABCDE  be  the  given  equilateral  and  equiangular
pentagon  ;

thus   it   is    required    to    inscribe   a   circle    in    the    pentagon
ABCDE.

For  let  the  angles  BCD,  CDE  be  bisected  by  the
straight  lines  CF,  DF  respectively ;  and  from  the  point  F,  at


IV.  13]


PROPOSITIONS    12,  13


105


which  the  straight  lines  CF,  DF  meet  one  another,  let  the
straight  lines  FB,  FA,  FE  be  joined.

Then,  since  BC  is  equal  to  CD,
and  C/^  common,

the  two  sides  BC,  CF  are  equal  to  the
two  sides  DC,  CF\

and  the  angle  BCF  is  equal  to  the
angle  DCF\

therefore  the  base  BF  is  equal
to  the  base  DF,
and  the  triangle  BCF  is  equal  to  the
triangle  DCF,

and  the  remaining  angles  will  be  equal  to  the  remaining  angles,
namely  those  which  the  equal  sides  subtend.  [i.  4]

Therefore  the  angle  CBF  is  equal  to  the  angle  CDF.

And,  since  the  angle  CDE  is  double  of  the  angle  CDF,
and  the  angle  CDE  is  equal  to  the  angle  ABC,
while  the  angle  CDF  is  equal  to  the  angle  CBF\
therefore  the  angle  CBA  is  also  double  of  the  angle  CBF ;
therefore  the  angle  ABF  is  equal  to  the  angle  FBC ;
therefore  the  angle  ABC  has  been  bisected  by  the  straight
line  BF.

Similarly  it  can  be  proved  that
the  angles  BAE,  A  ED  have  also  been  bisected  by  the  straight
lines  FA,  FE  respectively.

Now  let  FG,  FH,  FK,  FL,  FM  be  drawn  from  the  point
F  perpendicular  to  the  straight  lines  AB,  BC,  CD,  DE,  EA.

Then,  since  the  angle  HCF  is  equal  to  tKe  angle  KCF,
and  the  right  angle  FHC  is  also  equal  to  the  angle  FKC,
FHC,  FKC  are  two  triangles  having  two  angles  equal  to  two
angles  and  one  side  equal  to  one  side,  namely  FC  which  is
common  to  them  and  subtends  one  of  the  equal  angles  ;
therefore  they  will  also  have  the  remaining  sides  equal  to  the
remaining  sides ;  [i.  26]

therefore  the  perpendicular  FH  is  equal  to  the  perpendicular
FK.

Similarly  it  can  be  proved  that
each  of  the  straight  lines  FL,  FM,  FG  is  also  equal  to  each
of  the  straight  lines  FH,  FK ;


io6  BOOK  IV  [IV.  13,  14

therefore  the  five  straight  lines  FG,  FH,  FK,  FL,  FM  are
equal  to  one  another.

Therefore  the  circle  described  with  centre  /^  and  distance
one  of  the  straight  lines  FG,  FH,  FK,  FL,  FM  will  pass
also  through  the  remaining  points ;

and  it  will  touch  the  straight  lines  AB,  BC,  CD,  DE,  EA,
because  the  angles  at  the  points  G,  H,  K,  L,  M  are  right.

For,  if  it  does  not  touch  them,  but  cuts  them,

it  will  result  that  the  straight  line  drawn  at  right  angles  to
the  diameter  of  the  circle  from  its  extremity  falls  within  the
circle  :  which  was  proved  absurd.  [iii.  16]

Therefore  the  circle  described  with  centre  F  and  distance
one  of  the  straight  lines  FG,  FH,  FK,  FLy  FM  will  not
cut  the  straight  lines  AB,  BC,  CD,  DE,  EA  ;

therefore  it  will  touch  them.

Let  it  be  described,  as  GHKLM.

Therefore  in  the  given  pentagon,  which  is  equilateral  and
equiangular,  a  circle  has  been  inscribed.

Q.  E.  F.


Proposition  14.

About  a  given  pentagon^  which  is  equilateral  and  equi-
angular, to  circumscribe  a  circle.

Let  ABCDE  be  the  given  pentagon,  which  is  equilateral
and  equiangular  \

thus  it  is  required  to  circumscribe  a  circle
about  the  pentagon  ABCDE.

Let  the  angles  BCD,  CDE  be  bisected
by  the  straight  lines  CF,  DF  respectively,
and  from  the  point  F,  at  which  the  straight
lines  meet,  let  the  straight  lines  FB,  FA,
FE  be  joined  to  the  points  B,  A,  E.

Then  in  manner  similar  to  the  pre-
ceding it  can  be  proved  that  the  angles
CBA,  BAE,  AED  have  also  been  bisected  by  the  straight
lines  FB,  FA,  FE  respectively.


IV.  14.  is]


PROPOSITIONS    13—15


107


Now,  since  the  angle  BCD  is  equal  to  the  angle  CDEy
and  the  angle  FCD  is  half  of  the  angle  BCD,
and  the  angle  CDF  half  of  the  angle  CDE,
therefore  the  angle  FCD  is  also  equal  to  the  angle  CDF,

so  that  the  side  FC  is  also  equal  to  the  side  FD.  [i.  6]

Similarly  it  can  be  proved  that
each  of  the  straight  lines  FB,  FA,  FE  is  also  equal  to  each
of  the  straight  lines  FC,  FD  ;

therefore  the  five  straight  lines  FA,  FB,  FC,  FD,  FE  are
equal  to  one  another.

Therefore  the  circle  described  with  centre  F  and  distance
one  of  the  straight  lines  FA,  FB,  FC,  FD,  FE  will  pass
also  through  the  remaining  points,  and  will  have  been
circumscribed.

Let  it  be  circumscribed,  and  let  it  be  ABCDE.

Therefore  about  the  given  pentagon,  which  is  equilateral
and  equiangular,  a  circle  has  been  circumscribed.

Q.  E.  F.


Proposition  15.

In  a  given  circle  to  inscribe  an  equilateral  and  equiangular
hexagon.

Let  ABCDEF  be  the  given  circle  ;
thus  it  is  required  to  inscribe  an  equilateral  and  equiangular
hexagon  in  the  circle  ABCDEF.

Let  the  diameter  AD  of  the  circle
ABCDEF  be  drawn ;
let  the  centre  G  of  the  circle  be  taken,  and
with  centre  D  and  distance  DG  let  the
circle  EGCH  be  described  ;
let  EG,  CG  be  joined  and  carried  through
to  the  points  B,  F,

and  let  AB,  BC,  CD,  DE,  EF,  FA  be
joined.

I  say  that  the  hexagon  ABCDEF  is
equilateral  and  equiangular.

For,  since  the  point  G  is  the  centre  of  the  circle  ABCDEF,
GE  is  equal  to  GD.


io8  BOOK   IV  [iv.  IS

Again,  since  the  point  D  is  the  centre  of  the  circle  GCH,

DE  is  equal  to  DG.

But  GE  was  proved  equal  to  GD ;

therefore  GE  is  also  equal  to  ED ;

therefore  the  triangle  EGD  is  equilateral ;

and  therefore  its  three  angles  EGD,  GDE,  DEG  are  equal
to  one  another,  inasmuch  as,  in  isosceles  triangles,  the  angles
at  the  base  are  equal  to  one  another.  [i.  s]

And  the  three  angles  of  the  triangle  are  equal  to  two
right  angles;  [1.32]

therefore  the  angle  EGD  is  one-third  of  two  right  angles.

Similarly,  the  angle  DGC  can  also  be  proved  to  be  one-
third  of  two  right  angles.

And,  since  the  straight  line  CG  standing  on  EB  makes
the  adjacent  angles  EGC,  CGB  equal  to  two  right  angles,

therefore  the  remaining  angle  CGB  is  also  one-third  of  two
right  angles.

Therefore  the  angles  EGD,  DGC,  CGB  are  equal  to  one
another ;

so  that  the  angles  vertical  to  them,  the  angles  BGA,  AGF,
FGE  are  equal  [i.  15]

Therefore  the  six  angles  EGD,  DGC,  CGB.  BGA,  AGF,
FGE  are  equal  to  one  another.

But  equal  angles  stand  on  equal  circumferences  ;  [hi.  26]
therefore  the  six  circumferences  AB,  BC,  CD,  DE,  EF,  FA
are  equal  to  one  another.

And  equal  circumferences  are  subtended  by  equal  straight
lines ;  [hi.  29]

therefore  the  six  straight  lines  are  equal  to  one  another;

therefore  the  hexagon  ABCDEF  is  equilateral.

I  say  next  that  it  is  also  equiangular.

For,  since  the  circumference  FA  is  equal  to  the  circum-
ference ED,

let  the  circumference  ABCD  be  added  to  each  ;

therefore  the  whole  FABCD  is  equal  to  the  whole
EDCBA  ;


IV.  15]  PROPOSITION    15  109

and  the  angle  FED  stands  on  the  circumference  FABCD,

and  the  angle  AFE  on  the  circumference  EDCBA  ;

therefore  the  angle  AFE  is  equal  to  the  angle  DEF.

[hi.  27]

Similarly  it  can  be  proved  that  the  remaining  angles  of
the  hexagon  ABCDEF  are  also  severally  equal  to  each  of
the  angles  AFE,  FED  ;

therefore  the  hexagon  ABCDEF  is  equiangular.

But  it  was  also  proved  equilateral ;

and  it  has  been  inscribed  in  the  circle  ABCDEF.

Therefore  in  the  given  circle  an  equilateral  and  equiangular
hexagon  has  been  inscribed.

Q.   E.  F.

PoRiSM.  From  this  it  is  manifest  that  the  side  of  the
hexagon  is  equal  to  the  radius  of  the  circle.

And,  in  like  manner  as  in  the  case  of  the  pentagon,  if
through  the  points  of  division  on  the  circle  we  draw
tangents  to  the  circle,  there  will  be  circumscribed  about  the
circle  an  equilateral  and  equiangular  hexagon  in  conformity
with  what  was  explained  in  the  case  of  the  pentagon.

And  further  by  means  similar  to  those  explained  in  the
case  of  the  pentagon  we  can  both  inscribe  a  circle  in  a  given
hexagon  and  circumscribe  one  about  it.

Q.  E.  F.

Heiberg,  I  think  with  good  reason,  considers  the  Porism  to  this  proposition
to  be  referred  to  in  the  instance  which  Proclu?  (p.  304,  2)  gives  of  a  porism
following  a  problem.  As  the  text  of  Proclus  stands,  "  the  (porism)  found
in  the  second  Book  (ro  5c  iv  np  3cvr^  PifiXua  K€ifi€vov)  is  a  porism  to  a
problem  " ;  but  this  is  not  true  of  the  only  porism  that  we  find  in  the  second
Book,  namely  the  porism  to  11.  4.  Hence  Heiberg  thinks  that  for  T«g
SfVT^ip  PifiKiio  should  be  read  T<p  5'  fitP^itf,  i.e.  the  fourth  Book.  Moreover
Proclus  speaks  of  t/ie  porism  in  the  particular  Book,  from  which  we  gather
that  there  was  only  one  porism  in  Book  iv.  as  he  knew  it,  and  therefore  that
he  did  not  regard  as  a  porism  the  addition  to  iv.  5.  Cf.  note  on  that
proposition.

It  appears  that  Theon  substituted  for  the  first  words  of  the  Porism  to
IV.  15  "And  in  like  manner  as  in  the  case  of  the  j)entagon  "  (oftoiois  Sk
Tots  €wl  Tov  TTfvraywvov)  the  simple  word  **and"  or  "also"  (koi),  apparently
thinking  that  the  words  had  the  same  meaning  as  the  similar  words  lower
down.  This  is  however  not  the  case,  the  meaning  being  that  "  if,  as  in  the
case  of  the  ()entagon,  we  draw  tangents,  we  can  prove,  also  as  was  done  in
the  case  of  the  pentagon,  that  the  figure  so  formed  is  a  circumscribed  regular
hexagon."


no  BOOK   IV  [iv.  i6

Proposition  i6.

In  a  given  circle  to  inscribe  a  fifteen-angled  figure  which
shall  be  both  equilateral  and  equiangular.

Let  ABCD  be  the  given  circle  ;
thus  it  is  required  to  inscribe  in  the  circle  ABCD  a  fifteen-
angled  figure  which  shall  be
both    equilateral    and    equi-
angular.

In  the  circle  ABCD  let
there  be  inscribed  a  side  AC
of  the  equilateral  triangle
inscribed  in  it,  and  a  side  AB
of  an  equilateral  pentagon  ;
therefore,  of  the  equal  seg-
ments of  which  there  are
fifteen  in  the  circle  ABCD,
there  will  be  five  in  the  cir-
cumference ABC  which  is
one- third  of  the  circle,  and
there  will  be  three  in  the  cir-
cumference AB  which  is  one-fifth  of  the  circle  ;

therefore  in  the  remainder  BC  there  will  be  two  of  the
equal  segments.

Let  BC  be  bisected  at  E ;  [in.  30]

therefore  each  of  the  circumferences  BE,  EC  is  a  fifteenth
of  the  circle  ABCD.

If  therefore  we  join  BE,  EC  and  fit  into  the  circle  ABCD
straight  lines  equal  to  them  and  in  contiguity,  a  fifteen-angled
figure  which  is  both  equilateral  and  equiangular  will  have  been
inscribed  in  it.

Q.  E.  F.

And,  in  like  manner  as  in  the  case  of  the  pentagon,  if
through  the  points  of  division  on  the  circle  we  draw
tangents  to  the  circle,  there  will  be  circumscribed  about  the
circle  a  fifteen-angled  figure  which  is  equilateral  and  equi-
angular.

And  further,  by  proofs  similar  to  those  in  the  case  of  the
pentagon,  we  can  both  inscribe  a  circle  in  the  given  fifteen-
angled  figure  and  circumscribe  one  about  it.

Q.  E.  F.


IV.  i6]  PROPOSITION    i6  iii

Here,  as  in  in.  lo,  we  have  the  term  "circle"  used  by  Euclid  in  its
exceptional  sense  of  the  circumference  of  a  circle,  instead  of  the  ^^ plane  figure
contained  by  one  line"  of  i.  Def.  15.  Cf.  the  note  on  that  definition  (Vol.  i.
pp.  184—5).

Proclus  (p.  269)  refers  to  this  proposition  in  illustration  of  his  statement
that  Euclid  gave  proofs  of  a  number  of  propositions  with  an  eye  to  their  use
in  astronomy.  **  With  regard  to  the  last  proposition  in  the  fourth  Book  in
which  he  inscribes  the  side  of  the  fifteen-angled  figure  in  a  circle,  for  what
object  does  anyone  assert  that  he  propounds  it  except  for  the  reference  of  this
problem  to  astronomy  ?  For,  when  we  have  inscribed  the  fifteen-angled  figure
in  the  circle  through  the  poles,  we  have  the  distance  from  the  poles  both  of
the  equator  and  the  zodiac,  since  they  are  distant  from  one  another  by  the
side  of  the  fifteen -angled  figure."  This  agrees  with  what  we  know  from  other
sources,  namely  that  up  to  the  time  of  Eratosthenes  (circa  275 — 194  b.c.)  24'
was  generally  accepted  as  the  correct  measurement  of  the  obliquity  of  the
ecliptic.  This  measurement,  and  the  construction  of  the  fifteen-angled  figure,
were  probably  due  to  the  Pythagoreans,  though  it  would  appear  that  the
former  was  not  known  to  Oenopides  of  Chios  (fl.  circa  460  B.C.),  as  we  learn
from  Theon  of  Smyrna  (pp.  198 — 9,  ed.  Hiller),  who  gives  Dercyllides  as  his
authority,  that  Eudemus  (fi.  circa  320  b.c.)  stated  in  his  dorrpoXoyiai  that,
while  Oenopides  discovered  certain  things,  and  Thales,  Anaximander  and
Anaximenes  others,  it  was  the  rest  (01  \ovkqL)  who  added  other  discoveries
to  these  and,  among  them,  that  "  the  axes  of  the  fixed  stars  and  of  the  planets
respectively  are  distant  from  one  another  by  the  side  of  a  fifteen-angled  figure."
Eratosthenes  evaluated  the  angle  to  ^^rds  of  180°,  i.e.  about  23*  51'  20",
which  measurement  was  apparently  not  improved  upon  in  antiquity  (cf.  Ptolemy,
SyntaxiSy  ed.  Heiberg,  p.  68).

Euclid  has  now  shown  how  to  describe  regular  polygons  with  3,  4,  5,  6
and  15  sides.  Now,  when  any  regular  polygon  is  given,  we  can  construct  a
regular  polygon  with  twice  the  number  of  sides  by  first  describing  a  circle
about  the  given  polygon  and  then  bisecting  all  the  smaller  arcs  subtended  by
the  sides.  Applying  this  process  any  number  of  times,  we  see  that  we  can  by
Euclid's  methods  construct  regular  polygons  with  3.2*,  4.2*,  5.2*  15.2*  sides,
where  n  is  zero  or  any  positive  integer.


BOOK   V.


INTRODUCTORY  NOTE.

The  anonymous  author  of  a  scholium  to  Book  v.  (Euclid,  ed.  Heiberg,
VoL  V.  p.  280),  who  is  perhaps  Proclus,  tells  us  that  **  some  say'*  this  Book,
containing  the  general  theory  of  proportion  which  is  equally  applicable  to
geometry,  arithmetic,  music,  and  all  mathematical  science,  "is  the  discovery
of  Eudoxus,  the  teacher  of  Plato."  Not  that  there  had  been  no  theory  of
proportion  developed  before  his  time ;  on  the  contrary,  it  is  certain  that  the
Pythagoreans  had  worked  out  such  a  theory  with  regard  to  numbers^  by  which
must  be  understood  commensurable  and  even  whole  numbers  (a  number
being  a  "multitude  made  up  of  units,"  as  defined  in  Eucl.  vii).  Thus  we
are  told  that  the  Pythagoreans  distinguished  three  sorts  of  means^  the
arithmetic,  the  geometric  and  the  harmonic  mean,  the  geometric  mean
being  called  proportion  (avaXoyia)  par  excellence)  and  further  lamblichus
speaks  of  the  "most  perfect  proportion  consisting  of  four  terms  and  specially
called  liarmonic"  in  other  words,  the  proportion

a  +  b      2alf     .

a  : = T :  b,

2        a  +  b

which  was  said  to  be  a  discovery  of  the  Babylonians  and  to  have  been  first
introduced  into  Greece  by  Pythagoras  (lamblichus,  Comm,  on  Nicomachus^
p.  118).  Now  the  principle  of  similitude  is  one  which  is  presupposed  by  all
the  arts  of  design  from  their  very  beginnings ;  it  was  certainly  known  to  the
Egyptians,  and  it  must  certainly  have  been  thoroughly  familiar  to  Pythagoras
and  his  school.  This  consideration,  together  with  the  evidence  of  the
employment  by  him  of  the  geometric  proportion^  makes  it  indubitable  that  the
Pythagoreans  used  the  theory  of  proportion,  in  the  form  in  which  it  was
known  to  them,  i.e.  as  applicable  to  commensurables  only,  in  their  geometry.
But  the  discovery,  also  due  to  Pythagoras,  of  the  incommensurable  would
of  course  be  seen  to  render  the  proofs  which  de()ended  on  the  theory  of
proportion  as  then  understood  inconclusive ;  as  Tannery  observes  (Za
Gkotnktrie  grecque^  p.  98),  "  the  discovery  of  incommensurability  must  have
caused  a  veritable  logical  scandal  in  geometry  and,  in  order  to  avoid  it,  they
were  obliged  to  restrict  as  far  as  possible  the  use  of  the  principle  of  similitude,
pending  the  discovery  of  a  means  of  establishing  it  on  the  basis  of  a  theory  of
proportion  independent  of  commensurability."  The  glory  of  the  latter  dis-
covery belongs  then  most  probably  to  Eudoxus.  Certain  it  is  that  the  complete
theory  was  already  familiar  to  Aristotle,  as  we  shall  see  later.


V.  DEFF.  I,  2]  INTRODUCTORY   NOTE  113

It  seems  probable,  as  indicated  by  Tannery  (loc,  cit\  that  the  theory
of  proportions  and  the  principle  of  similitude  took,  in  the  earliest  Greek
geometry,  an  earlier  place  than  they  do  in  Euclid,  but  that,  in  consequence
of  the  discovery  of  the  incommensurable,  the  treatment  of  the  subject  was
fundamentally  remodelled  in  the  period  between  Pythagoras  and  Eudoxus.
An  indication  of  this  is  afforded  by  the  clever  device  used  in  Euclid  i.  44
for  applying  to  a  given  straight  line  a  parallelogram  equal  to  a  given  triangle ;
the  equality  of  the  "complements"  in  a  parallelogram  is  there  used  for  doing
what  is  practically  finding  a  fourth  proportional  to  three  given  straight  lines.
Thus  Euclid  was  no  doubt  following  for  the  subject-matter  of  Books  1. — iv.
what  had  become  the  traditional  method,  and  this  is  probably  one  of  the
reasons  why  proportions  and  similitude  are  postponed  till  as  late  as  Books
v.,  VI.

^  It  is  a  remarkable  fact  that  the  theory  of  proportions  is  twice  treated  in
Euclid,  in  Book  v.  with  reference  to  magnitudes  in  general,  and  in  Book  vii.
with  reference  to  the  particular  case  of  numbers.  The  latter  exposition
referring  only  to  commensurables  may  be  taken  to  represent  fairly  the  theory
of  proportions  at  the  stage  which  it  had  reached  before  the  great  extension  of
it  made  by  Eudoxus.  The  differences  between  the  definitions  etc.  in  Books  v.
and  VII.  will  appear  as  we  go  on ;  but  the  question  naturally  arises,  why  did
Euclid  not  save  himself  so  much  repetition  and  treat  numbers  merely  as  a
particular  case  of  magnitude,  referring  back  to  the  corresponding  more
general  propositions  of  Book  v.  instead  of  proving  the  same  propositions
over  again  for  numbers?  It  could  not  have  escaped  him  that  numbers
fall  under  the  conception  of  magnitude.  Aristotle  had  plainly  indicated
that  magnitudes  may  be  numbers  when  he  observed  (Anal,  post,  i.  7,
75  b  4)  that  you  cannot  adapt  the  arithmetical  method  of  proof  to  the
properties  of  magnitudes  if  the  magnitudes  are  not  numbers.  Further
Aristotle  had  remarked  {AnaL  post.  i.  5,  74  a  17)  that  the  proposition  that
the  terms  of  a  proportion  can  be  taken  alternately  was  at  one  time  proved
separately  for  numbers,  lines,  solids  and  times,  though  it  was  possible  to  prove
it  for  all  by  one  demonstration;  but,  because  there  was  no, common  name
comprehending  them  all,  namely  numbers,  lengths,  times  and  solids,  and  their
character  was  different,  they  were  taken  separately.  Now  however,  he  adds,
the  proposition  is  proved  generally.  Yet  Euclid  says  nothing  to  connect
the  two  theories  of  proportion  even  when  he  comes  in  x.  5  to  a  proportion
two  terms  of  which  are  magnitudes  and  two  are  numbers  ("  Commensurable
magnitudes  have  to  one  another  the  ratio  which  a  number  has  to  a  number").
The  probable  explanation  of  the  phenomenon  is  that  Euclid  simply  followed
tradition  and  gave  the  two  theories  as  he  found  them.  This  would  square
with  the  remark  in  Pappus  (vii.  p.  678)  as  to  Euclid's  fairness  to  others  and
his  readiness  to  give  them  credit  for  their  work.


DEFINITIONS.

1.  A  magnitude  is  a  part  of  a  magnitude,  the  less  of
the  greater,  when  it  measures  the  greater.

2.  The  greater  is  a  multiple  of  the  less  when  it  is
measured  by  the  less.

H.  E.  II.  8


114  BOOK  V  [v.  DEFF.  3—13

3.  A  ratio  is  a  sort  of  relation  in  respect  of  size  between
two  magnitudes  of  the  same  kind.

4.  Magnitudes  are  said  to  have  a  ratio  to  one  another
which  are  capable,  when  multiplied,  of  exceeding  one  another.

5.  Magnitudes  are  said  to  be  in  the  same  ratio,  the
first  to  the  second  and  the  third  to  the  fourth,  when,  if  any
equimultiples  whatever  be  taken  of  the  first  and  third,  and
any  equimultiples  whatever  of  the  second  and  fourth,  the
former  equimultiples  alike  exceed,  are  alike  equal  to,  or  alike
fall  short  of,  the  latter  equimultiples  respectively  taken  in
corresponding  order.

6.  Let  magnitudes  which  have  the  same  ratio  be  called
proportional.

7.  When,  of  the  equimultiples,  the  multiple  of  the  first
magnitude  exceeds  the  multiple  of  the  second,  but  the  multiple
of  the  third  does  not  exceed  the  multiple  of  the  fourth,  then
the  first  is  said  to  have  a  greater  ratio  to  the  second  than
the  third  has  to  the  fourth.

8.  A  proportion  in  three  terms  is  the  least  possible.

9.  When  three  magnitudes  are  proportional,  the  first  is
said  to  have  to  the  third  the  duplicate  ratio  of  that  which
it  has  to  the  second.

10.  When  four  magnitudes  are  <  continuously  >  propor-
tional, the  first  is  said  to  have  to  the  fourth  the  triplicate
ratio  of  that  which  it  has  to  the  second,  and  so  on  con-
tinually, whatever  be  the  proportion.

11.  The  term  corresponding  magnitudes  is  used  of
antecedents  in  relation  to  antecedents,  and  of  consequents  in
relation  to  consequents.

12.  Alternate  ratio  means  taking  the  antecedent  in
relation  to  the  antecedent  and  the  consequent  in  relation  to
the  consequent.

13.  Inverse  ratio  means  taking  the  consequent  as
antecedent  in  relation  to  the  antecedent  as  consequent.


V.  DEFF.]  DEFINITIONS  1 1 5

14.  Composition  of  a  ratio  means  taking  the  ante-
cedent together  with  the  consequent  as  one  in  relation  to
the  consequent  by  itself.

15.  Separation  of  a  ratio  means  taking  the  excess
by  which  the  antecedent  exceeds  the  consequent  in  relation
to  the  consequent  by  itself.

16.  Conversion  of  a  ratio  means  taking  the  ante-
cedent in  relation  to  the  excess  by  which  the  antecedent
exceeds  the  consequent

1 7.  A  ratio  ex  aequali  arises  when,  there  being  several
magnitudes  and  another  set  equal  to  them  in  multitude  which
taken  two  and  two  are  in  the  same  proportion,  as  the  first  is
to  the  last  among  the  first  magnitudes,  so  is  the  first  to  the
last  among  the  second  magnitudes  ;

Or,  in  other  words,  it  means  taking  the  extreme  terms
by  virtue  of  the  removal  of  the  intermediate  terms.

18.  A  perturbed  proportion  arises  when,  there  being
three  magnitudes  and  another  set  equal  to  them  in  multitude,
as  antecedent  is  to  consequent  among  the  first  magnitudes,
so  is  antecedent  to  consequent  among  the  second  magnitudes,
while,  as  the  consequent  is  to  a  third  among  the  first
magnitudes,  so  is  a  third  to  the  antecedent  among  the  second
magnitudes.

Definition  i.

McfK>9  fOTi  fX€y€$o^  fX€y€$ov^  TO  IXacaov  Tov  /Dict^ovo9,  OTOV  KarcLfierpfj  to
/i.ct{ov.

The  word/ar/  (fiipo^)  is  here  used  in  the  restricted  sense  of  a  submuitiple
or  an  aliquot  part  as  distinct  from  the  more  general  sense  in  which  it  is  used
in  the  Common  Notion  (5)  which  says  that  "the  whole  is  greater  than  the
part."  It  is  used  in  the  same  restricted  sense  in  vii.  Def.  3,  which  is  the  same
definition  as  this  with  "number"  (dpiSfiosi)  substituted  for  "magnitude."
VII.  Def.  4,  keeping  up  the  restriction,  says  that,  when  a  number  does  not
measure  another  number,  it  is  parts  (in  the  plural),  not  a  part  of  it.  Thus,
I,  2,  or  3,  is  a  part  of  6,  but  4  is  not  a  part  of  6  but  parts.  The  same
distinction  between  the  restricted  and  the  more  general  sense  of  the  word
part  appears  in  Aristotle,  Metaph,  1023  b  12:  "In  one  sense  a  part  is
that  into  which  quantity  (to  irocov)  can  anyhow  be  divided ;  for  that  which  is
taken  away  from  quantity,  qu&  quantity,  is  always  called  a  'part'  of  it,  as
e.g.  two  is  said  to  be  in  a  sense  a  part  of  three.  But  in  another  sense  a
'part'  is  only  what  measures  (ya.  Karafierpovvra)  such  quantities.  Thus  two
is  in  one  sense  said  to  be  a  part  of  three,  in  the  other  not"

8—2


Il6  BOOK    V  [v.  DEFF.   2,  3

Definition  2.

HoXXairXaaiov  8c  ro  /Act(ov  rov  ^Xarrovos,  orav  Karafitrpf^rai  uiro  rov
^Xarrovos.

Definition  3.

Aoyo9  ^OTt  8uo  /icyc^cov  o/toycvoiv  i;  jcora  m^Xiicon/ra  irota  <r;(c<ris.

The  best  explanation  of  the  definitions  of  ra/io  2Xi'^  proportion  that  I  have
seen  is  that  of  De  Morgan,  which  will  be  found  in  the  articles  under  those
titles  in  the  Penny  Cyclopaedia^  Vol.  xix.  (1841);  and  in  the  following  notes
I  shall  draw  largely  from  these  articles.  Very  valuable  also  are  the  notes  on
the  definitions  of  Book  v.  given  by  Hankel  (fragment  on  Euclid  published  as
an  appendix  to  his  work  Zur  Geschichte  der  Mathematik  in  AUerthum  und
Miiiehlier,  1874).

There  has  been  controversy  as  to  what  is  the  proper  translation  of  the
word  myXiKOTT/s  in  the  definition,  crxco-is  Kara  myXiKOTiyra  has  generally  been
translated  "relation  in  resj)ect  of  quantity ^  Upon  this  De  Morgan  remarks
that  it  makes  nonsense  of  the  definition;  "for  magnitude  has  hardly  a
different  meaning  from  quantity,  and  a  relation  of  magnitudes  with  respect  to
quantity  may  give  a  clear  idea  to  those  who  want  a  word  to  convey  a  notion
of  architecture  with  respect  to  building  or  of  battles  with  respect  to  fighting,
and  to  no  others."  The  true  interpretation  De  Morgan,  following  Wallis  and
Gregory,  takes  to  be  quantupiidty^  referring  to  the  number  of  times  one
magnitude  is  contained  in  the  other.  For,  he  says,  we  cannot  describe
magnitude  in  language  without  quantuplicitative  reference  to  other  magni-
tude ;  hence  he  supposes  that  the  definition  simply  conveys  the  fact  that  the
mode  of  expressing  quantity  in  terms  of  quantity  is  entirely  based  upon  the
notion  of  quantuplicity  or  that  relation  of  which  we  take  cognizance  when  we
find  how  many  times  one  is  contained  in  the  other.  While  all  the  rest  of
De  Morgan's  observations  on  the  definition  are  admirable,  it  seems  to  me
that  on  this  question  of  the  proj)er  translation  of  inyXiKOTT/s  he  is  in  error.  He
supports  his  view  mainly  by  reference  (i)  to  the  definition  of  a  compounded
ratio  usually  given  as  the  5th  definition  of  Book  vi.,  which  speaks  of  the
ini\iKQmjfT€%  of  two  ratios  being  multiplied  together,  and  (2)  to  the  comments
of  Eutocius  and  a  scholiast  on  this  definition.  Eutocius  says  namely
(Archimedes,  ed.  Heiberg,  in.  p.  140)  that  "the  term  TnyXucon/s  is  evidently
used  of  the  number  from  which  the  given  ratio  is  called,  as  (among  others)
Nicomachus  says  in  his  first  book  on  music  and  Heron  in  his  commentary
on  the  Introduction  to  Arithmetic."  But  it  now  appears  certain  that  this
definition  is  an  interpolation ;  it  is  never  used,  it  is  not  found  in  Campanus,
and  Peyrard's  ms.  only  has  it  in  the  margin.  At  the  same  time  it  is  clear
that,  if  the  definition  is  admitted  at  all,  any  commentator  would  be  obliged  to
explain  it  in  the  way  that  Eutocius  does,  whether  the  explanation  was  consistent
with  the  proper  meaning  of  wrikiKorq^  or  not.  Hence  we  must  look  elsewhere
for  the  meaning  of  irriXiKo^  and  TnyXtKoriTs.  If  we  do  this,  I  think  we  shall  find
no  case  in  which  the  words  have  the  sense  attributed  to  them  by  De  Morgan.
The  real  meaning  of  irrjkiKo^  is  Aow  great.  It  is  so  used  by  Aristotle,  e.g.  in
EtA,  Nic.  v.  10,  1134  b  II,  where  he  speaks  of  a  man's  child  being  as  it  were
a  part  of  him  so  long  as  he  is  of  a  certain  age  (coic  av  ^  in\KiKov).  Again
Nicomachus,  to  whom  Eutocius  appeals,  himself  (i.  2,  5,  p.  5,  ed.  Hoche)
distinguishes  7n;Xt#co5  as  referring  to  magtiitude^  while  iroo-o?  refers  to  multitude.
So  does  lamblichus  in  his  commentary  on  Nicomachus  (p.  8,  3 — 5);  besides
which  lamblichus  distinguishes  tn\\LKov  as  the  subject  of  geometry,  being  con-


V.  DEF.  3]  NOTE  ON   DEFINITION   3  117

Hnuousy  and  wwrov  as  the  subject  of  arithmetic,  being  discrete,  and  speaks  of  a
point  being  the  origin  of  myXticov  as  a  unit  is  of  woaoVf  and  so  on.  Similarly,
Ptolemy  (Syn/axis,  ed.  Heiberg,  p.  31)  speaks  of  the  siz€  (wrfkiKorrjs)  of  the
chords  in  a  circle  (ircpl  njs  'trqkiKorqros  rwv  Iv  toI  kvkXx^  cv^cuSv).  Consequently
I  think  we  can  only  translate  irrfkucorri^  in  the  definition  as  size.  This
corresponds  to  HankeFs  translation  of  it  as  **  Gr5sse,"  though  he  uses  this
same  word  for  a  concrete  "magnitude"  as  well;  siu  seems  to  me  to  give
the  proj)er  distinction  between  irrfkiKorrj^  and  /icyctfos,  as  stze  is  the  attribute,
and  a  magnitude  (in  its  ordinary  mathematical  sense)  is  the  thing  which
possesses  the  attribute  of  size.

The  view  that  "  relation  in  respect  of  size "  is  meant  by  the  words  in  the
text  is  also  confirmed,  I  think,  by  a  later  remark  of  De  Morgan  himself,
namely  that  a  synonym  for  the  word  ratio  may  be  found  in  the  more  in-
telligible term  relative  magnitude.  In  fact  crxtVi?  in  the  definition  corresponds
to  relative  and  TnyXacon/?  to  magnitude,  (By  magnitude  De  Morgan  here
means  the  attribute  and  not  the  thing  possessing  it.)

Of  the  definition  as  a  whole  Simson  and  Hankel  express  the  opinion  that
it  is  an  interpolation.  Hankel  points  to  the  fact  that  it  is  unnecessary  and
moreover  so  vague  as  to  be  of  no  practical  use,  while  the  very  use  of  the
expression  #caTa  myXtKonTra  seems  to  him  suspicious,  since  the  only  other
place  in  which  the  word  irrikiKorq^  occurs  in  Euclid  is  the  5th  definition  of
Book  VI.,  which  is  admittedly  not  genuine.  Yet  the  definition  of  ratio  appears
in  all  the  mss.,  the  only  variation  being  that  some  add  the  words  trph^  SXKrjka,
"to  one  another,"  which  are  rejected  by  Heiberg  as  an  interpolation  of
Theon ;  and  on  the  whole  there  seems  to  be  no  sufficient  ground  for  regarding
it  as  other  than  genuine.  The  true  explanation  of  its  presence  would  appear
to  be  substantially  that  given  by  Barrow  {Lections  Cantabrig,,  London,  1684,
Lect.  III.  of  1666),  namely  that  Euclid  inserted  it  for  completeness'  sake,  more
for  ornament  than  for  use,  intending  to  give  the  learner  a  general  notion  of
ratio  by  means  of  a  metaphysical,  rather  than  a  mathematical  definition ;  "  for
metaphysical  it  is  and  not,  properly  speaking,  mathematical,  since  nothing
de()ends  on  it  or  is  deduced  from  it  by  mathematicians,  nor,  as  I  think,  can
anything  be  deduced."  This  is  confirmed  by  the  fact  that  there  is  no
definition  of  Xoyos  in  Book  vii.,  and  it  could  equally  have  been  dispensed
with  here.  Similarly  De  Morgan  observes  that  Euclid  never  attempts  this
vague  sort  of  definition  except  when,  dealing  with  a  well-known  term  of
common  life,  he  wishes  to  bring  it  into  geometry  with  something  like  an
expressed  meaning  which  may  aid  the  conception  of  the  thing,  though  it  does
not  furnish  a  perfect  criterion.  Thus  we  may  compare  the  definition  with
that  of  a  straight  line,  where  Euclid  merely  calls  the  reader's  attention  to  the
well-known  term  cv^cui  ypafifiij,  tries  how  far  he  can  present  the  conception
which  accompanies  it  in  other  words,  and  trusts  for  the  correct  use  of  the
term  to  the  axioms  (or  postulates)  which  the  universal  conception  of  a  straight
line  makes  self-evident.

We  have  now  to  trace  as  clearly  as  possible  the  development  of  the
conception  of  Aoyo?,  ratio,  or  relative  magnitude.  In  its  primitive  sense
Xoyo9  was  only  used  of  a  ratio  between  commensurables,  i.e.  a  ratio  which
could  be  expressed,  and  the  manner  of  expressing  it  is  indicated  in  the
proposition,  Eucl.  x.  5,  which  proves  that  commensurable  magnitudes  have  to
one  another  the  ratio  which  a  number  has  to  a  number.  That  this  was  the
primitive  meaning  of  Aoyo?  is  proved  by  the  use  of  the  term  aXoyo$  for  the
incommensurable,  which  means  irrational  in  the  sense  of  not  having  a  ratio
to  something  taken  as  rational  (Ai^ros).


ii8  BOOK   V  [v.  DEF.  3

Euclid  himself  shows  us  how  we  are  to  set  about  finding  the  ratio,  or
relative  magnitude,  of  two  commensurable  magnitudes.  He  gives,  in  x.  3,
practically  our  ordinary  method  of  finding  the  greatest  common  measure.
If  A,  B  be  two  magnitudes  of  which  B  is  the  less,  we  cut  off  from  A  a  part
equal  to  B^  from  the  remainder  a  part  equal  to  B^  and  so  on,  until  we  leave  a
remainder  less  than  B^  say  R^,  We  measure  off  ^1  from  B  in  the  same  way
until  a  remainder  R^  is  left  which  is  less  than  R^,  We  repeat  the  process
with  -^1,  R^y  and  so  on,  until  we  find  a  remainder  which  is  contained  in  the
preceding  remainder  a  certain  number  of  times  exactly.  If  account  is  taken
of  the  number  of  times  each  magnitude  is  contained  (with  something  over,
except  at  the  last)  in  that  upon  which  it  is  measured,  we  can  calculate  how
many  times  the  last  remainder  is  contained  in  A  and  how  many  times  the
last  remainder  is  contained  in  B  \  and  we  can  thus  express  the  ratio  of  A  to
B  as  the  ratio  of  one  number  to  another.

But  it  may  happen  that  the  two  magnitudes  have  no  common  measure,
i.e.  are  incommensurable,  in  which  case  the  process  described  would  never
come  to  an  end  and  the  means  of  expression  would  fail;  the  magnitudes
would  then  hcKve  no  ratio  in  the  primitive  sense.  But  the  word  Aoyos,  ratio,
acquires  in  Euclid,  Book  v.,  a  wider  sense  covering  the  relative  magnitude  of
incommensurables  as  well  as  commensurables ;  as  stated  in  Euclid's  4th
definition,  "magnitudes  are  said  to  have  a  ratio  to  one  another  which  can,
when  multiplied,  exceed  one  another,"  and  finite  incommensurables  have  this
property  as  much  as  commensurables.  De  Morgan  explains  the  manner  of
transition  fix>m  the  narrower  to  the  wider  signification  of  ratio  as  follows.
"Since  the  relative  magnitude  of  two  quantities  is  always  shown  by  the
quantuplicitative  mode  of  expression,  when  that  is  possible,  and  since  pro-
portional quantities  (pairs  which  have  the  same  relative  magnitude)  are  pairs
which  have  the  same  mode  (if  possible)  of  expression  by  means  of  each  other ;
in  all  such  cases  sameness  of  relative  magnitude  leads  to  sameness  of  mode  of
expression ;  or  proportion  is  sameness  of  ratios  (in  the  primitive  sense).  But
sameness  of  relative  magnitude  may  exist  where  quantuplicitative  expression
is  impossible ;  thus  the  diagonal  of  a  larger  square  is  the  same  compared  with
its  side  as  the  diagonal  of  a  smaller  square  compared  with  its  side.  It  is  an
easy  transition  to  speak  of  sameness  of  ratio  even  in  this  case ;  that  is,  to  use
the  term  ratio  in  the  sense  of  relative  magnitude,  that  word  having  originally
only  a  reference  to  the  mode  of  expressing  relative  magnitude,  in  cases  which
allow  of  a  particular  mode  of  expression.  The  word  irrational  (oAoyos)  does
not  make  any  corresponding  change  but  continues  to  have  its  primitive
meaning,  namely,  incapable  of  quantuplicitative  expression."

It  remains  to  consider  how  we  are  to  describe  the  relative  magnitude  of
two  incommensurables  of  the  same  kind.  That  they  have  a  definite  relation
is  certain.  Suppose,  for  precision,  that  5  is  the  side  of  a  square,  D  its
diagonal ;  then,  if  S  is  given,  any  alteration  in  Z>  or  any  error  in  D  would
make  the  figure  cease  to  be  a  square.  At  the  same  time,  a  person  altogether
ignorant  of  the  relative  magnitude  of  D  and  5  might  say  that  drawing  two
straight  lines  of  length  5  so  as  to  form  a  right  angle  and  joining  the  ends  by
a  straight  line,  the  length  of  which  would  accordingly  be  Z>,  does  not  help
him  to  realise  the  relative  magnitude,  but  that  he  would  like  to  know  how
many  diagonals  make  an  exact  number  of  sides.  We  should  have  to  reply
that  no  number  of  diagonals  whatever  makes  an  exact  number  of  sides ;  but
that  he  may  mention  any  fraction  of  the  side,  a  hundredth,  a  thousandth  or
a  millionth,  and  that  we  will  then  express  the  diagonal  with  an  error  not  so
great  as  that  fraction.     We  then  tell  him  that  1,000,000  diagonals  exceed


V.  DEF.  3]  NOTE   ON    DEFINITION    3  119

1,414,213  sides  but  fall  short  of  1,414^214  sides;  consequently  the  diagonal
lies  between  1-414213  and  1*414214  times  the  side,  and  these  differ  only  by
one-millionth  of  the  side,  so  that  the  error  in  the  diagonal  is  less  still.  To
enable  him  to  continue  the  process  further,  we  show  him  how  to  perform  the
arithmetical  operation  of  approximating  to  the  value  of  J 2,  This  gives  the
means  of  carrying  the  approximation  to  any  degree  of  accuracy  that  may  be
desired.  In  the  power,  then,  of  carrying  approximations  of  this  kind  as  far  as
we  please  lies  that  of  expressing  the  ratio,  so  far  as  expression  is  possible,  and
of  comparing  the  ratio  with  others  as  accurately  as  if  expression  had  been
possible.

Euclid  was  of  course  aware  of  this,  as  were  probably  others  before  him ;
though  the  actual  approximations  to  the  values  of  ratios  of  incommensurables
of  which  we  find  record  in  the  works  of  the  great  Greek  geometers  are  very
few.  The  history  of  such  approximations  up  to  Archimedes  is,  so  far  as
material  was  available,  sketched  in  TTie  Works  of  Archimedes  (pp.  Ixxvii  and
following) ;  and  it  is  sufficient  here  to  note  the  facts  (i)  that  Plato,  and  even
the  Pythagoreans,  were  familiar  with  J  as  an  approximation  to  ^2^  (2)  that
the  method  of  finding  any  number  of  successive  approximations  by  the  system
of  side-  and  ^/<7^;^a/-n umbers  described  by  Theon  of  Smyrna  was  also
Pythagorean  (cf.  the  note  above  on  Euclid,  11.  9,  10),  (3)  that  Archimedes,
without  a  word  of  preliminary  explanation,  gives  out  that

1881  ^      /^-*2««

gives  approximate  values  for  the  square  roots  of  several  large  numbers,  and
proves  that  the  ratio  of  the  circumference  of  a  circle  to  its  diameter  is  less
than  3I  but  greater  than  3^^,  (4)  that  the  first  approach  to  the  rapidity  with
which  the  decimal  system  enables  us  to  approximate  to  the  value  of  surds
was  furnished  by  the  method  of  sexagesimal  fractions,  which  was  almost  as
convenient  to  work  with  as  the  method  of  decimals,  and  which  appears  fully
developed  in  Ptolemy's  oiJvTafis.  A  number  consisting  of  a  whole  number
and  any  fraction  was  under  this  system  represented  as  so  many  units,  so
many  of  the  fractions  which  we  should  denote  by  ^,  so  many  of  those  which
we  should  write  (^V)'*  (inr)'>  ^"^  so  on.  Theon  of  Alexandria  shows  us  how
to  extract  the  square  root  of  4500  in  this  sexagesimal  system,  and,  to  show
how  effective  it  was,  it  is  only  necessary  to  mention  that  Ptolemy  gives

hr"  ^fS^fS^^^^  approximation  to  ^3,  which  approximation  is  equivalent

to  17320509  in  the  ordinary  decimal  notation  and  is  therefore  correct  to
6  places.

Between  Def.  3  and  Def.  4  two  manuscripts  and  Campanus  insert  "  Pro-
portion is  the  sameness  of  ratios"  (avaXoyta  St  rj  twk  Xoymv  Tauron/s),  and  even
the  best  ms.  has  it  in  the  margin.  It  would  be  altogether  out  of  place,  since
it  is  not  till  Def.  5  that  it  is  explained  what  sameness  of  ratios  is.  The  words
are  an  interpolation  later  than  Theon  (Heiberg,  Vol.  v.  pp.  xxxv,  Ixxxix),
and  are  no  doubt  taken  from  arithmetical  works  (cf.  Nicomaclius  and  Theon
of  Smyrna).  It  is  true  that  Aristotle  says  similarly,  "  Proportion  is  equality
of  ratios"  (Eih.  Nic.  v.  6,  1131  a  31),  and  he  appears  to  be  quoting  from
the  Pythagoreans;  but  the  reference  is  to  numbers.

Similarly  two  mss.  (inferior)  insert  after  Def.  7  "  Proportion  is  the  similarity
(o/DMHonys)  of  ratios."     Here  too  we  have  a  mere  interpolation.


120  BOOK    V  [v.  DEFF.  4,  5

Definition  4.

Aoyov  ^Civ  irpo$  aXkrfXa  fieyiOtf  Xrycrcu,  a  Swarai  7roX\a7rXaa-ia{o/Acva
dkXijkfav  vir€p€)(€iv.

This  definition  supplements  the  last  one.  De  Morgan  says  that  it  amounts
to  saying  that  the  magnitudes  are  of  the  same  species.  But  this  can  hardly
be  ail ;  the  definition  seems  rather  to  be  meant,  on  the  one  hand,  to  exclude
the  relation  of  a  finite  magnitude  to  a  magnitude  of  the  same  kind  which  is
either  infinitely  great  or  infinitely  small,  and,  even  more,  to  emphasise  the
fact  that  the  term  ra^to,  as  defined  in  the  preceding  definition,  and  about  to
be  used  throughout  the  book,  includes  the  relation  between  any  two  tftcom-
mensurable  as  well  as  between  any  two  commensurable  finite  magnitudes  of
the  same  kind.  Hence,  while  De  Morgan  seems  to  regard  the  extension  of
the  meaning  of  ratio  to  include  the  relative  magnitude  of  incommensurables
asy  so  to  speak,  taking  place  between  Def.  3  and  Def.  5,  the  4th  definition
appears  to  show  that  it  is  ratio  in  its  extended  sense  that  is  being  defined  in
Def.  3.

Definition  5.

*Ev  r^  avTw  Xoycp  iiryiO^i  kiyerai  cTvat  irptarov  irpo$  Scvrcpov  ical  rpCrav  irpo^
Tcraf>rov,  ^nxv  rd  rw  vpwrov  koX  rpCrov  IcraKii  troXXairkao'ia  rtay  rov  Stvrepov
jcoi  rerdprov  laroKH  TroWawXao'itov  Koff  OTrotovovv  7roAXa7rXa(ria(r/Diov  iKwrtpov
iKoripov  ^  afia  wr€p€)(g  "fj  ofia  Itra  ^  a/ia  iW€C7rg  X'qfftOm'a  icaraXXi;AA.

In  my  translation  of  this  definition  I  have  compromised  between  an
attempted  literal  translation  and  the  more  expanded  version  of  Simson.  The
difficulty  in  the  way  of  an  exactly  literal  translation  is  due  to  the  fact  that  the
words  (Kaff  oTToi.ovovv  iroWairXafTwxrfjuov)  signifying  that  the  equimultiples  in
each  case  are  any  equimultiples  whatever  occur  only  once  in  the  Greek,  though
they  apply  both  to  Ta...io-a#cis  iroWairXajna  in  the  nominative  and  T(oi/...io-aicis
voXXavXaxritav  in  the  genitive.  I  have  preferred  "alike"  to  "simultaneously"
as  a  translation  of  a/ia  because  "  simultaneously  "  might  suggest  that  time  was
of  the  essence  of  the  matter,  whereas  what  is  meant  is  that  any  particular
comparison  made  between  the  equimultiples  must  be  made  between  the  same
equimultiples  of  the  two  pairs  respectively,  not  that  they  need  to  be  compared
at  the  same  time.

Aristotle  has  an  allusion  to  a  definition  of  "the  same  ratio"  in  Topics
VIII.  3,  158  b  29  :  "  In  mathematics  too  some  things  appear  to  be  not  easy  to
prove  {ypd<f>€(r$ai)  for  want  of  a  definition,  e.g.  that  the  parallel  to  the  side
which  cuts  a  plane  [a  parallelogram]  divides  the  straight  line  [the  other  side]
and  the  area  similarly.  But,  when  the  definition  is  expressed,  the  said  property
is  immediately  manifest ;  for  the  areas  and  the  straight  lines  have  the  same
avravaipccrtf,  anii  this  is  the  definition  of  ^  the  same  ratio.*  *^  Upon  this
passage  Alexander  says  similarly,  "This  is  the  definition  of  proportionals
which  the  ancients  used :  magnitudes  are  proportional  to  one  another  which
have  (or  show)  the  same  dv6wfxup€a-i^,  and  Aristotle  has  called  the  latter
dyravaipta-L^."  Heiberg  {Afathematisches  zu  Aristoteles^  p.  22)  thinks  that
Aristotle  is  alluding  to  the  fact  that  the  proposition  referred  to  could  not  be
rigorously  proved  so  long  as  the  Pythagorean  definition  applicable  to  com-
mensurable magnitudes  only  was  adhered  to,  and  is  quoting  the  definition
belonging  to  the  complete  theory  of  Eudoxus ;  whence,  in  view  of  the  positive
statement  of  Aristotle  that  the  definition  quoted  is  the  definition  of  "the  same
ratio,"  it  would  appear  that  the  Euclidean  definition  (which  Heiberg  describes
as  a  careful  and  exact  paraphrase  of  aWavatpccns)  is  Euclid's  own.     I  do  not


V.  DEF.  5]  NOTES   ON   DEFINITIONS  4,  5  121

feel  able  to  subscribe  to  this  view,  which  seems  to  me  to  involve  very  grave
difficulties.  The  Euclidean  definition  is  regularly  appealed  to  in  Book  v.  as
the  criterion  of  magnitudes  being  in  proportion,  and  the  use  of  it  would  appear
to  constitute  the  whole  essence  of  the  new  general  theory  of  proportion;  if  then
this  theory  is  due  to  Eudoxus,  it  seems  impossible  to  believe  that  the  definition
was  not  also  due  to  him.  Certainly  the  definition  given  by  Aristotle  would
be  no  substitute  for  it;  dvOvifMup€<ns  and  avravaijpcais  are  words  almost  as
vague  and  "  metaphysical "  (as  Barrow  would  say)  as  the  words  used  to  define
ra/ioy  and  it  is  difficult  to  see  how  any  mathematical  facts  could  be  deduced
from  such  a  definition.  Consider  for  a  moment  the  etymology  of  the  words.
wfxiCp€<ri^  or  avaipccrtf  means  "removal,"  "taking  away"  or  " destruction "  of
a  thing;  and  the  prefix  avrl  indicates  that  the  "taking  away"  from  one
magnitude  answers  to^  corresponds  with,  alternates  with,  the  "taking  away"
from  the  other.  So  far  therefore  as  the  etymology  goes,  the  word  seems
rather  to  suggest  the  "  taking  away  "  of  corresponding  fractions,  and  therefore
to  suit  the  old  imperfect  theory  of  proportion  rather  than  the  new  one.  Thus
Waitz  {ad  ioc,)  paraphrases  the  definition  as  meaning  that  "  as  many  parts  as
are  taken  from  one  magnitude,  so  many  are  at  the  same  time  taken  from  the
other  as  well."  A  possible  explanation  would  seem  to  be  that,  though
Eudoxus  had  formulated  the  new  definition,  the  old  one  was  still  current  in
the  text-books  of  Aristotle's  time,  and  was  taken  by  him  as  being  a  good
enough  illustration  of  what  he  wished  to  bring  out  in  the  passage  of  the
Topics  referred  to.

From  the  revival  of  learning  in  Europe  onwards  the  Euclidean  definition
of  proportion  was  the  subject  of  much  criticism.  Campanus  had  failed  to
understand  it,  had  in  fact  misinterpreted  it  altogether,  and  he  may  have
misled  others  such  as  Ramus  (1515 — 72),  always  a  violently  hostile  critic  of
Euclid.  Among  the  objectors  to  it  was  no  less  a  person  than  Galileo.  For
particulars  of  the  controversies  on  the  subject  down  to  Thomas  Simpson
{EUm,  of  Geometry y  Lond.  1800)  the  reader  is  referred  to  the  Excursus  at  the
end  of  the  second  volume  of  Camerer's  Euclid  (1825).  For  us  it  is  interesting
to  note  that  the  unsoundness  of  the  usual  criticisms  of  the  definition  was
never  better  exposed  than  by  Barrow.  Some  of  the  objections,  he  pointed  out
{Lect.  Cantabr,  vii.  of  1 666),  are  due  to  misconception  on  the  part  of  their  authors
as  to  the  nature  of  a  definition.  Thus  Euclid  is  required  by  these  objectors
(e.g.  Tacquet)  to  do  the  impossible  and  to  show  that  what  is  predicated  in  the
definition  is  true  of  the  thing  defined,  as  if  any  one  should  be  required  to
show  that  the  name  "circle"  was  applicable  to  those  figures  alone  which
have  their  radii  all  equal !  As  we  are  entitled  to  assign  to  such  figures  and
such  figures  only  the  name  of  "  circle,"  so  Euclid  is  entitled  ("  quamvis  non
temere  nee  imprudenter  at  certis  de  causis  iustis  illis  et  idoneis  ")  to  describe
a  certain  property  which  four  magnitudes  may  have,  and  to  call  magnitudes
possessing  that  property  magnitudes  "  in  the  same  ratio."  Others  had  argued
from  the  occurrence  of  the  other  definition  of  proportion  in  vii.  Def.  20  that
Euclid  was  dissatisfied  with  the  present  one ;  Barrow  pointed  out  that,  on  the
contrary,  it  was  the  fact  that  vii.  Def.  20  was  not  adequate  to  cover  the  case
of  incommensurables  which  made  Euclid  adopt  the  present  definition  here.
Lastly,  he  maintains,  against  those  who  descant  on  the  ''obscurity"  of  v.
Def.  5,  that  the  supposed  obscurity  is  due,  partly  no  doubt  to  the  inherent
difficulty  of  the  subject  of  incommensurables,  but  also  to  faulty  translators,
and  most  of  all  to  lack  of  efTort  in  the  learner  to  grasp  thoroughly  the  meaning
of  words  which,  in  themselves,  are  as  clearly  expressed  as  they  could  be.

To  come  now  to  the  merits  of  the  case,  the  best  defence  and  explanation


122


BOOK  V


[v.  DEF.  5


of  the  definirion  that  I  have  seen  is  that  given  by  De  Morgan.  He  first
translates  it,  observes  that  it  applies  equally  to  commensurable  or  incom-
mensurable quantities  because  no  attempt  is  made  to  measure  one  by  an
aliquot  part  of  another,  and  then  proceeds  thus.

"The  two  questions  which  must  be  asked,  and  satisfactorily  answered,
previously  to  its  [the  definition's]  reception,  are  as  follows:

1.  What  right  had  Euclid,  or  any  one  else,  to  expect  that  the  preceding
most  prolix  and  unwieldy  statement  should  be  received  by  the  beginner  as
the  definition  of  a  relation  the  perception  of  which  is  one  of  the  most  common
acts  of  his  mind,  since  it  is  performed  on  every  occasion  where  similarity  or
dissimilarity  of  figure  is  looked  for  or  presents  itself?

2.  If  the  preceding  question  should  be  clearly  answered,  how  can  the
definition  of  proportion  ever  be  used ;  or  how  is  it  possible  to  compare  every
one  of  the  infinite  number  of  multiples  of  A  with  every  one  of  the  multiples
of-ff?

To  the  first  question  we  reply  that  not  only  is  the  test  proposed  by
Euclid  tolerably  simple,  when  more  closely  examined,  but  that  it  is,  or  might
be  made  to  appear,  an  easy  and  natural  consequence  of  those  fundamental
perceptions  with  which  it  may  at  first  seem  difficult  to  compare  it."

To  elucidate  this  De  Morgan  gives  the  following  illustration.

Suppose  there  is  a  straight  colonnade  composed  of  equidistant  columns
(which  we  will  understand  to  mean  the  vertical  lines  forming  the  axes  of  the
columns  res()ectively),  the  first  of  which  is  at  a  distance  from  a  bounding  wall
equal  to  the  distance  between  consecutive  columns.  In  front  of  the  colonnade
let  there  be  a  straight  row  of  equidistant  railings  (regarded  as  meaning  their
axes),  the  first  being  at  a  distance  from  the  bounding  wall  equal  to  the
distance  between  consecutive  railings.  I^et  the  columns  be  numbered  from
the  wall,  and  also  the  railings.  We  suppose  of  course  that  the  column  distance
(say,  C)  and  the  railing  distance  (say,  R)  are  different  and  that  they  may  bear
to  each  other  any  ratio,  commensurable  or  incommensurable ;  i.e.  that  there
need  not  go  any  exact  number  of  railings  to  any  exact  number  of  columns.


i


I    2    a


8      9     10     II     12     18    14     15   16     17     18


If  the  construction  be  supposed  carried  on  to  any  extent,  a  spectator  can,
by  mere  inspection,  and  without  measurement,  compare  C  with  R  to  any
degree  of  accuracy.  For  example,  since  the  loth  railing  falls  between  the  4th
and  5th  columns,  10^  is  greater  than  4C  and  less  than  5C,  and  therefore  R
lies  between  y^ths  of  C  and  yV^s  of  C.  To  get  a  more  accurate  notion,  the
ten-thousandth  railing  may  be  taken  ;  suppose  it  falls  between  the  4674th  and
4675th  columns.  Therefore  10,000^  lies  between  4674C  and  4675 (7,  or  R  lies
between  x\nnnr  ^"^  iVgVo  ^^  ^-  There  is  no  limit  to  the  degree  of  accuracy
thus  obtainable ;  and  the  ratio  of  -^  to  C  is  determined  when  the  order  of
distribution  of  the  railings  among  the  columns  is  assigned  ad  infinitum ;  or,  in
other  words,  when  the  position  of  any  given  railing  can  be  found,  as  to  the
numbers  of  the  columns  between  which  it  lies.  Any  alteration,  however
small,  in  the  place  of  the  first  railing  must  at  last  affect  the  order  of
distribution.  Suppose  e.g.  that  the  first  railing  is  moved  from  the  wall  by  one
part  in  a  thousand  of  the  distance  between  the  columns;  then  the  second
railing  is  pushed  forward  by  y^^*  ^^^  ih\x^  by  xi^^y  *"^  ^o  on,  so  that


V.  DEF.  5]  NOTE   ON   DEFINITION   5  123

the  railings  after  the  thousandth  are  pushed  forward  by  more  than  C;  i.e.  the
order  with  respect  to  the  columns  is  disarranged.

Now  let  it  be  proposed  to  make  a  model  of  the  preceding  construction  in
which  c  shall  be  the  column  distance  and  r  the  railing  distance.  It  needs  no
definition  of  proportion,  nor  anything  more  than  the  conception  which  we
have  of  that  term  prior  to  definition  (and  with  which  we  must  show  the  agree-
ment of  any  definition  that  we  may  adopt),  to  assure  us  that  C  must  be  to  ^
in  the  same  proportion  as  r  to  r  if  the  model  be  truly  formed.  Nor  is  it
drawing  too  largely  on  that  conception  of  proportion  to  assert  that  the
distribution  of  the  railings  among  the  columns  in  the  model  must  be  every-
where the  same  as  in  the  original ;  for  example,  that  the  model  would  be  out
of  proportion  if  its  37  th  railing  fell  between  the  i8th  and  19th  columns,  while
the  37th  railing  of  the  original  fell  between  the  17th  and  i8th  columns.  Thus
the  dependence  of  Euclid's  definition  upon  common  notions  is  settled;  for  the
obvious  relation  between  the  construction  and  its  model  which  has  just  been
described  contains  the  collection  of  conditions,  the  fulfilment  of  which,
according  to  Euclid,  constitutes  proportion.  According  to  Euclid,  whenever
»/C  exceeds,  equals,  or  falls  short  of  nR^  then  mc  must  exceed,  equal,  or  fall
short  of  nr\  and,  by  the  most  obvious  property  of  the  constructions,  according
as  the  »»th  column  comes  after,  opposite  to,  or  before  the  «th  railing  in  the
original,  the  »»th  column  must  come  after,  opposite  to,  or  before  the  /ith
railing  in  the  correct  model.

Thus  the  test  proposed  by  Euclid  is  necessary.  It  is  also  sufficient.  For
admitting  that,  to  a  given  original  with  a  given  column-distance  in  the  model,
there  is  one  correct  model  railing  distance  (which  must  therefore  be  that
which  distributes  the  railings  among  the  columns  as  in  the  original),  we  have
seen  that  any  other  railing  distance,  however  slightly  different,  would  at  last
give  a  different  distribution;  that  is,  the  correct  distance,  and  the  correct
distance  only,  satisfies  all  the  conditions  required  by  Euclid's  definition.

The  use  of  the  word  distribution  having  been  well  learnt,  says  De  Morgan,
the  following  way  of  stating  the  definition  will  be  found  easier  than  that  of
Euclid.  "  Four  magnitudes,  A  and  B  of  one  kind,  and  C  and  D  of  the  same
or  another  kind,  are  proportional  when  all  the  multiples  of  A  can  be
distributed  among  the  multiples  of  B  in  the  same  intervals  as  the  correspond-
ing multiples  of  C  among  those  of  Z)."  Or,  whatever  numbers  tn^  n  may  be,
if  mA  lies  between  nB  and  (n  +  i)B,  mC  lies  between  n£>  and  {n  +  i)£>.

It  is  important  to  note  that,  if  the  test  be  always  satisfied  from  and  after
any  given  multiples  of  A  and  C,  it  must  be  satisfied  before  those  multiples.  For
instance,  let  the  test  be  always  satisfied  from  and  after  100^  and  100  C;  and
let  5-^  and  5  C  be  instances  for  examination.  Take  any  multiple  of  5  which
will  exceed  100,  say  50  times  five ;  and  let  it  be  found  on  examination  that
250^  lies  between  678^  and  6jgB ;  then  250C  lies  between  678Z?  and
679/?.  Divide  by  50,  and  it  follows  that  ^A  lies  between  i^j^B  and  13!^-^,
and  a  fortiori  bety/een  i^B  and  14B.  Similarly,  5  C  lies  between  isi^i>  and
13JJZ?,  and  therefore  between  13Z?  and  14D,  Or  5^  lies  in  the  same
interval  among  the  multiples  of  -5  in  which  5C  lies  among  the  multiples  of  D.
And  so  for  any  multiple  of  A,  C  less  than  100^,  100  C

There  remains  the  second  question  relating  to  the  infinite  character  of  the
definition;  four  magnitudes  A^  B,  C,  £>  are  not  to  be  called  proportional
until  it  is  shown  that  €vtry  multiple  of  A  falls  in  the  same  intervals  among
the  multiples  of  B  in  which  the  same  multiple  of  C  is  found  among  the
multiples  of  D,     Suppose  that  the  distribution  of  the  railings  among  the


124


BOOK  V


[v.  DEF.  S


columns  should  be  found  to  agree  in  the  model  and  the  original  as  far  as
the  millionth  railing.  Tl^is  proves  only  that  the  railing  distance  of  the  model
does  not  err  by  the  millionth  part  of  the  corresponding  column  distance.  We
can  thus  fix  limits  to  the  disproportion,  if  any,  and  we  may  make  those  limits
as  small  as  we  please,  by  carrying  on  the  method  of  observation',  but  we
cannot  observe  an  infinite  number  of  cases  and  so  enable  ourselves  to  affirm
proportion  absolutely.  Mathematical  methods  however  enable  us  to  avoid
the  difficulty.  We  can  take  any  multiples  whatever  and  work  with  them  as  if
they  were  particular  multiples.  De  Morgan  gives,  as  an  instance  to  show  that
the  definition  of  proportion  can  in  practice  be  used,  notwithstanding  its
infinite  character,  the  following  proof  of  a  proposition  to  the  same  effect  as

EUCI.  VI.  2.


"Let  OAB  be  a  triangle  to  one  side  AB  of  which  ab  is  drawn  parallel,  and
on  OA  produced  set  off  AA^^  A^^  etc.  equal  to  OA^  and  ao,,  a^^  etc.  equal
to  Oa.

Through  every  one  of  the  points  so  obtained  draw  parallels  to  ABy
meeting  OB  produced  in  b^y  B^  etc.

Then  it  is  easily  proved  that  bb^y  bj)^  etc.  are  severally  equal  to  Oby  and
BB^y  B^B^  etc.  to  OB,

Consequently  a  distribution  of  the  multiples  of  OA  among  the  multiples
of  Oa  is  made  on  one  line,  and  of  OB  among  those  of  Ob  on  the  other.

The  examination  of  this  distribution  in  all  its  extent  (which  is  impossible,
and  hence  the  apparent  difficulty  of  using  the  definition)  is  rendered
unnecessary  by  the  known  property  of  parallel  lines.  For,  since  A^  lies
between  a,  and  a^y  B^  must  lie  between  b^  and  b^  \  for,  if  not,  the  line  A^B^
would  cut  either  aji>^  or  aj>^.

Hence,  without  inquiring  where  A^  does  fall,  we  know  that,  if  it  fall
between  a^  and  flr„^„  B^  must  fall  between  b^  and  ^»+i  ;  or,  if  m .  OA  fall  in
magnitude  between  n,Oa  and  («  +  i)(9fl,  then  m/OB  must  fall  between
n.Ob  and  (n^i)Ob:'

Max  Simon  remarks  (Euclid  und  die  seeks  planimetrischen  BUchery  p.  no),
after  Zeuthen,  that  Euclid's  definition  of  equal  ratios  is  word  for  word  the
same  as  Weierstrass'  definition  of  equal  numbers.  So  far  from  agreeing  in
the  usual  view  that  the  Greeks  saw  in  the  irrational  no  numbery  Simon  thinks
it  is  clear  from  Eucl.  v.  that  they  possessed  a  notion  of  number  in  all  its
generality  as  clearly  defined  as,  nay  almost  identical  with,  Weierstrass'  con-
ception of  it

Certain  it  is  that  there  is  an  exact  correspondence,  almost  coincidence,
between  Euclid's  definition  of  equal  ratios  and  the  modem  theory  of  irrationals
due  to  Dedekind.  Premising  the  ordinal  arrangement  of  natural  numbers  in
ascending  order,  then  enlarging  the  sphere  of  numbers  by  including
(i)  negative  numbers  as  well  as  positive,  (2)  fi-actions,  as  ajby  where  a,  b  may


V.  DEF.  s]  NOTE   ON   DEFINITION   5  125

be  any  natural  numbers,  provided   that  b  is  not  zero,  and  arranging  the
fractions  ordinally  among  the  other  numbers  according  to  the  definition  :

let  -7  be  <=>  -J  according  as  o^  is  <  =  >  bc^
0  a

Dedekind  arrives  at  the  following  definition  of  an  irrational  number.

An  irrational  number  a  is  defined  whenever  a  law  is  stated  which  will
assign  every  given  rational  number  to  one  and  only  one  of  two  classes  A  and
B  such  that  (i)  every  number  in  A  precedes  every  number  in  B^  and  (2)  there
is  no  last  number  in  A  and  no  first  number  in  B ;  the  definition  of  a  being
that  it  is  the  one  number  which  lies  between  all  numbers  in  A  and  all
numbers  in  B,

Now  let  x\y  and  x\y'  be  equal  ratios  in  Euclid's  sense.

X

Then  -  will  divide  all  rational  numbers  into  two  groups  A  and  B ;
-;  II  II  II  ^'  and  B.

Let  -,  be  any  rational  number  in  A^  so  that

a     X

This  means  that  ay  <  bx.

But  Euclid's  definition  asserts  that  in  that  case  ay*<  bx'  also.

Hence  also  t  <  — ;

b     y'

therefore  every  member  of  group  A  is  also  a  member  of  group  A\
Similarly  every  member  of  group  B  is  3,  member  of  group  B",

For,  if  -z  belong  to  B,

ax

ry

which  means  that  ay  >  bx.

But  in  that  case,  by  Euclid's  definition,  ay'  >  bx' ;

therefore  also  7  >  -?  •

Thus,  in  other  words,  A  and  B  are  coextensive  with  A'  and  B'
respectively ;

XX

therefore  -  =  -7,  according  to  Dedekind,  as  well  as  according  to  Euclid.

If  x/yy  x'/y  happen  to  be  rational^
then  one  of  the  groups,  say  A^  includes  x\yy
and  one  of  the  groups,  say  A\  includes  jc'//*

a  X

In  this  case  r  might  coincide  with  - ;
b      ^  y

a     X

that  IS  7  =  - 1

b     y'

which  means  that  ay-bx.


126  BOOK  V  [v.  DEF.  s

Therefore,  by  Euclid's  definition,  ay  =  bxf  \
so  that  T  =  -7 .

y

Thus  the  groups  are  again  coextensive.

In  a  word,  Euclid's  definition  divides  all  rational  numbers  into  two
coextensive  classes,  and  therefore  defines  equal  ratios  in  a  manner  exactly
corresponding  to  Dedekind's  theory.

Alternatives  for  Eucl.  V.  Def.  5.

Saccheri  records  in  his  Euclides  ob  amni  naevo  vindicatus  that  a  distinguished
geometer  of  his  acquaintance  proposed  to  substitute  for  Euclid's  the  following
definition :

"  A  first  magnitude  has  to  a  second  the  same  ratio  that  a  third  has  to  a
fourth  when  the  first  contains  the  aliquot  parts  of  the  second,  according  to  any
number  ri.e.  with  any  denominator]  whatever^  the  same  number  of  times  as
the  number  of  times  the  third  contains  the  same  aliquot  parts  of  the  fourth  " ;
on  which  Saccheri  remarks  that  he  sees  no  advantage  in  this  definition,  which
presupposes  the  notion  of  division^  over  that  of  Euclid  which  uses  multiplication
and  the  notions  of  greater,  equal,  and  less.

This  definition  was,  however,  practically  adopted  by  Faifofer  {Elementi  di
geometria,  3  ed.,  1882)  in  the  following  form :

"Four  magnitudes  taken  in  a  certain  order  form  a  proportion  when,  by
measuring  the  first  and  the  third  respectively  by  any  equi-submultiples
whatever  of  the  second  and  of  the  fourth,  equal  quotients  are  obtained."

Ingrami  {Elementi  di  geometria,  1904)  takes  multiples  of  the  first  and  third
instead  of  submultiples  of  the  second  and  fourth  :

"  Given  four  magnitudes  in  predetermined  order,  the  first  two  homogeneous
with  one  another,  and  likewise  also  the  last  two,  the  magnitudes  are  said  to
form  a  proportion  (or  to  be  in  proportion)  when  any  multiple  of  the  first
contains  the  second  the  same  number  of  times  that  the  equimultiple  of  the
third  contains  the  fourth."

Veronese's  definition  {Elementi  di  geometria,  Pt.  11.,  1905)  is  like  that  of
Faifofer;  Enriques  and  Amaldi  {Elementi  di  geometria,  1905)  adhere  to
Euclid's.

Proportionals  of  VII.  Def.  20  a  particular  case.

It  has  abeady  been  observed  that  Euclid  has  nowhere  proved  (though  the
fact  cannot  have  escaped  him)  that  the  proportion  of  numbers  is  included  in
the  proportion  of  magnitudes  as  a  special  case.  This  is  proved  by  Simson  as
being  necessary  to  the  sth  and  6th  propositions  of  Book  x.  Simson's  proof  is
contained  in  his  propositions  C  and  D  inserted  in  the  text  of  Book  v.  and  in
the  notes  thereon.  Proposition  C  and  the  note  on  it  prove  that,  if  four
magnitudes  are  proportionals  according  to  vii.  Def.  20,  they  are  also  proportionals
according  to  v.  Def  5.  Prop.  D  and  the  note  prove  the  partial  converse,
namely  that,  if  four  magnitudes  are  proportionals  according  to  the  5th  definition
of  Book  v.,  and  if  the  first  be  any  multiple,  or  any  part,  or  parts,  of  the  second,
the  third  is  the  same  multiple,  part,  or  parts,  of  the  fourth.  The  proofs  use
certain  results  obtained  in  Book  v.

Prop.  C  is  as  follows  :

If  the  first  be  the  same  multiple  of  the  second,  or  the  same  part  of  it,  thai  the
third  is  of  the  fourth,  the  first  is  to  the  second  as  the  third  to  the  fourth.


V.  DEF.  5]  NOTE   ON   DEFINITION   5  127

Let  the  first  A  be  the  same  multiple  of  B  the  second  that  C  the  third  is  of
the  fourth  D ;

-4  is  to  -^  as  C  is  to  D.


A E-

B G-

C F-

D H-


Take  of  A^  C  any  equimultiples  whatever  E^  F\  and  of  B^  D  any
equimultiples  whatever  G^  H,

Then,  because  A  is  the  same  multiple  of  B  that  C  is  of  2?,
and  E  is  the  same  multiple  of  A  that  Fvs  of  C,

E  is  the  same  multiple  of  B  that  Fis  of  D,  [v.  3]

Therefore  E^  Fare  the  same  multiples  of  B^  D.

But  Gf  If  Sire  equimultiples  of  B,  D\

therefore,  if  -£  be  a  greater  multiple  of  B  than  G  is,  -^is  a  greater  multiple  of
Z>thanZrisofZ>;

that  is,  if  E  be  greater  than  (?,  F\^  greater  than  H,
In  like  manner,

if  E  be  equal  to  G,  or  less,  i^is  equal  to  H^  or  less  than  it.

But  Ey  FdiXt  equimultiples,  any  whatever,  of  A^  C;
and  Gi  H  any  equimultiples  whatever  of  B,  D.

Therefore  ^  is  to  .5  as  C  is  to  Z>.  [v.  Def.  5]

Next,  let  the  first  A  be  the  same  part  of  the  second  B  that  the  third  C  is
of  the  fourth  D  :

^  is  to  -5  as  C  is  to  D,  A

For  B  is  the  same  multiple  of  A  that  j9  is  of  C;        B

wherefore,  by  the  preceding  case,  q

-^  is  to -4  as  2?  is  to  C;  p

and,  inversely^  A'v&toBd&CisioD,

[For  this  last  inference  Simson  refers  to  his  Proposition  B.  That
proposition  is  very  simply  proved  by  taking  any  equimultiples  E^  F  of  B^  D
and  any  equimultiples  G^  If  of  A,  C  and  then  arguing  as  follows :

Since  ^  is  to  ^  as  C  is  to  D,

G,  H  are  simultaneously  greater  than,  equal  to,  or  less  than  E^  F
respectively ;  so  that

jE,  F  are  simultaneously  less  than,  equal  to,  or  greater  than  Gy  H
respectively,

and  therefore  [Def.  {\  B  v&  X.o  A  z&  D  \&  \<o  C]

We  have  now  only  to  add  to  Prop.  C  the  case  where  AB  contains  the
same  parts  of  CD  that  EFd.o&^  of  GH\

in  this  case  likewise  AB  is  to  CD  as  EFto  GH.

Let  CK  be  a  part  of  CD,  and  GL  the  same  part  of  GH\  let  AB  be  the
same  multiple  of  CXthat  EF\%  of  GL.


128  BOOK  V  [v.  DEF.  5

Therefore,  by  Prop.  C,

AB  is  to  CA'as  EFio  GL.


E-


And  C7>,  GlfsLte  equimultiples  of  CJ^,  GZ,  the  second  and  fourth.

Therefore  AB  is  to  CD  as  £F  to  GJI  [Simson's  Cor.  to  v.  4,  which
however  is  the  particular  case  of  v.  4  in  which  the  "  equimultiples "  of  one
pair  are  the  pair  itself,  Le.  the  pair  multiplied  by  unity].

To  prove  the  partial  converse  we  begin  with  Prop.  D.

If  the  first  be  to  the  second  as  the  third  to  the  fourth^  and  if  the  first  be  a
multiple  or  part  of  the  second^  the  third  is  the  same  multiple  or  the  same  part  of
the  fourth.

Let  -^  be  to  jff  as  C  is  to  Z> ;

and,  first,  let  ^  be  a  multiple  of  B ;

C  is  the  same  multiple  of  D.

Take  E  equal  to  A^  and  whatever  multiple  ^  or  ^  is  of  B^  make  F  the
same  multiple  of  D,

Then,  because  -^  is  to  jff  as  C  is  to  Z>,

and  of  B  the  second  and  D  the  fourth  equimultiples  have  been  taken  E
and  F,

^  is  to  J?  as  C  is  to  /^  [v.  4,  Cor.]

But  A  is  equal  to  E ;

therefore  C  is  equal  to  F

[In  support  of  this  inference  Simson  cites  his  Prop.  A,  which  however  we
can  directly  deduce  from  v.  Def.  5  by  taking  any,  but  the  same,  equimultiples
of  all  four  magnitudes.]


A C

B D

E F

Now  -^is  the  same  multiple  of  D  that  ^  is  of  jff ;

therefore  C  is  the  same  multiple  of  D  that  A  is  of  B,
Next,  let  the  first  -^  be  a  part  of  the  second  B ;

C  the  third  is  the  same  part  of  the  fourth  D,
Because  .^  is  to  -5  as  C  is  to  j9,

inversely,  B  is  to  A  sls  D  is  to  C.  [Prop.  B]

But  ^  is  a  part  of  B ;  therefore  B  is  3,  multiple  of  A ;

and,  by  the  preceding  case,  D  is  the  same  multiple  of  C,

that  is,  C  is  the  same  part  of  D  that  A  is  of  B.
We  have,  again,  only  to  add  to  Prop.  D  the  case  where  AB  contains  any
parts  of  CD,  and  AB  is  to  CD  as  EFto  GH\

then  shall  .^^  contain  the  same  parts  of  GH  that  AB  does  of  CD,


V.  DEFF.  5—7]         NOTES  ON    DEFINITIONS   5—7  129

For  let  CK  be  a  part  of  CD^  and  GL  the  same  part  of  GH\  and  let  AB
be  a  multiple  of  CK.

^/^  shall  be  the  same  multiple  of  GL,

Take  M  the  same  multiple  of  GL  that  AB  is  of  CK\
therefore  AB  is  to  CA"as  M\%  to  GL,  [Prop.  C]

A  B  E F

C — -; D  G 1 H  M


And  CZ>,  GH  are  equimultiples  of  CA',  GL ;
therefore  ^^  is  to  CD  as  J/ is  to  GH,

But,  by  hypothesis,         ^^  is  to  CD  as  5/^  is  to  GH\

therefore  M  is  equal  to  EF^  [v.  9]

and  consequently  EF  is  the  same  multiple  of  GL  that  AB  is  of  CA'.


Definition  6.

Ta  8c  TOi'  avrov  t^vra.  Xoyov  fityiOtf  avakoyov  fcaXciO'^ci>.

'AvaAoyoK,  though  usually  written  in  one  word,  is  equivalent  to  a^a  Xoyov,  in
proportion.  It  comes  however  in  Greek  mathematics  to  be  used  practically  as
an  indeclinable  adjective,  as  here;  cf.  at  rco-o-opcs  cv^cuw  avoXfrfov  co-ovrai^
"the  four  straight  lines  will  be  proportional,"  rptyaiva  tom  TrXcvpas  ai^aXoyov
(xoKTo,  "triangles  having  their  sides  proportional."  Sometimes  it  is  used
adverbially :  avciXoyov  apa  co-tiv  «o5  17  BA  Trpos  t^v  AF,  ovtcos  17  HA  Trpos  t^v  AZ,
"proportionally  therefore,  as  BA  is  to  -.^C,  so  is  GD  to  DF'^\  so  too,  ap-
parently, in  the  expression  17  /acot;  ai'aXoyoi'  (cv^ctd),  "  the  mean  proportional."
I  do  not  follow  the  objection  of  Max  Simon  (Euclid,  p.  no)  to  "proportional"
as  a  translation  of  dyaXoyov.  "We  ask,"  he  says,  "in  vain,  what  is  proportional
to  what?  We  say  e.g.  that  weight  is  proportional  to  price  because  double,  treble
etc.  weight  corresponds  to  double,  treble  etc.  price.  But  here  the  meaning  must
be  'standing  in  a  relation  of  proportion.' "  Yet  he  admits  that  the  Latin  word
proportionalis  is  an  adequate  expression.  He  translates  by  "  in  proportion  "
in  the  text  of  this  definition.  But  I  do  not  see  that  "  in  proportion  "  is  better
than  "proportional."  The  fact  is  that  both  expressions  are  elliptical  when
used  of  four  magnitudes  "  in  proportion  " ;  but  there  is  surely  no  harm  in
using  either  when  the  meaning  is  so  well  understood.

The  use  of  the  word  KaXctcr^w,  "  let  magnitudes  having  the  same  ratio  be
called  proportional,"  seems  to  indicate  that  this  definition  is  Euclid's  own.


Definition  7.

^Orav  8c  Twv  \xt6lk\.%  iroAAaTrXewricuv  to  /uicv  tov  irpwrov  iroWaTrXdaiov  vwtpixQ
Tou  TOV  Scvrcpov  TToXXoTrXao-iou,  to  8c  tov  rpCrov  iroXXairX.daiov  firj  virtptyji  tov
TOV  TtToprov  iroWaTrKacriov,  totc  to  irpiorov  irpos  to  8cvrcpov  fitil^ova  Xoyov  c;(Civ
A-cycrai,  vpr€p  to  rpLrov  irpo^  to  rirapTOV.

As  De  Morgan  observes,  the  practical  test  of  disproportion  is  simpler  than
that  of  proportion.     For,  whereas  no  examination  of  individual  cases,  however

H.  £.  II.  9


130  BOOK  V  [v.  DKF.  7

extensive,  will  enable  an  observer  of  the  construction  and  its  model  (the
illustration  by  means  of  columns  and  railings  described  above)  to  affirm
proportion  or  deny  disproportion,  and  all  it  enables  us  to  do  is  to  fix  limits
(as  small  as  we  please)  to  the  disproportion  (if  any),  a  single  instance  may
enable  us  to  deny  proportion  or  affirm  disproportion,  and  also  to  state  which
way  the  disproportion  lies.  Let  the  19th  railing  in  the  original  fall  beyond
the  nth  column,  while  the  19th  railing  of  the  (so-called)  model  does  not
come  up  to  the  nth  column.  It  follows  from  this  one  instance  that  the
railing  distance  of  the  model  is  too  small  relatively  to  the  column  distance,  or
that  the  column  distance  is  too  great  relatively  to  the  railing  distance.  That
is,  the  ratio  of  r  to  ^  is  less  than  that  of  R  to  C*,  or  the  ratio  of  ^  to  r  is  greater
than  that  of  C  to  ^.

Saccheri  (pp.  cit)  remarks  (as  Commandinus  had  done)  that  the  ratio  of
the  first  magnitude  to  the  second  will  also  be  greater  than  that  of  the  third  to
the  fourth  if,  while  the  multiple  of  the  first  is  equal  to  the  multiple  of  the
second,  the  multiple  of  the  third  is  less  than  that  of  the  fourth :  a  case  not
mentioned  in  Euclid's  definition.  Saccheri  speaks  of  this  case  being  included
in  Clavius'  interpretation  of  the  definition.  I  have,  however,  failed  to  find  a
reference  to  the  case  in  Clavius,  though  he  adds,  as  a  sort  of  corollary,  in  his
note  on  the  definition,  that  if,  on  the  other  hand,  the  multiple  of  the  first  is
less  than  the  multiple  of  the  second,  while  the  multiple  of  the  third  is  not  less
than  that  of  the  fourth,  the  ratio  of  the  first  to  the  second  is  less  than  that  of
the  third  to  the  fourth.

Euclid  presumably  left  out  the  second  possible  criterion  for  a  greater  ratio,
and  the  definition  of  a  less  ratio,  because  he  was  anxious  to  reduce  the
definitions  to  the  minimum  necessary  for  his  purpose,  and  to  leave  the  rest  to
be  inferred  as  soon  as  the  development  of  the  propositions  of  Book  v.  enabled
this  to  be  done  without  difficulty.

Saccheri  tried  to  reduce  the  second  possible  criterion  for  a  greater  ratio  to
that  given  by  Euclid  in  his  definition  without  recourse  to  anything  coming
later  in  the  Book,  but,  in  order  to  do  this,  he  has  to  use  "multiples"  produced
by  multipliers  which  are  not  integral  numbers,  but  integral  numbers  plus  proper
fractions,  so  that  Euclid's  Def.  7  becomes  inapplicable.

De  Morgan  notes  that  "proof  should  be  given  that  the  same  pair  of
magnitudes  can  never  offer  both  tests  [i.e.  the  test  in  the  definition  for  a
greater  ratio  and  the  corresponding  test  for  a  less  ratio,  with  "less"  substituted
for  "greater"  in  the  definition]  to  another  pair;  that  is,  the  test  of  greater
ratio  from  one  set  of  multiples,  and  that  of  less  ratio  from  another."  In  other
words,  if  My  n,  p,  g  are  integers  and  A^  B^  C,  D  four  magnitudes,  none  of  the
pairs  of  equations

(i)     mA>nBy     mC=ox  <nDy

(2)  mA  =  nBy     mC  <  nD

can  be  satisfied  simultaneously  with  any  one  of  the  pairs  of  equations

(3)  pA  =  qB,     pC>qD,

(4)  pA  <  qB,     pC>  or  =  qD.

There  is  no  difficulty  in  proving  this  with  the  help  of  two  simple
assumptions  which  are  indeed  obvious.

We  need  only  take  in  illustration  one  of  the  numerous  cases.  Suppose,  if
possible,  that  the  following  pairs  of  equations  are  simultaneously  true :

(i)     mA>nBf     mC<nD
and  (2)     pA<qB,     pC>qD,


V.  DEFF.  7,  8]  NOTES   ON   DEFINITIONS   7,  8  xji

Multiply  (i)  by  ^  and  (2)  by  «.

(We  need  here  to  assun^e  that,  where  rJf,  rKare  any  equimultiples  of  any
magnitudes  Jf,  K,

according  as  -Y >  =  <  V,      rX >^<  rY,

This  is  contained  in  Simson*s  Axioms  i  and  3.)

We  have  then  the  pairs  of  equations

mqA  >  nqBy     mqC  <  nqD^

npA  <  nqBy     npC>  nqD.

From  the  second  equations  in  each  pair  it  follows  that

mqC  <npC.

(We  now  need  to  assume  that,  if  rX^  sX  are  any  multiples  of  X^  and
rY^  sY  the  same  multiples  of  K,  then,

according  as  rX  >  =  <  sX,     rY>  =  <  sY.

Simson  uses  this  same  assumption  in  his  proof  of  v.  18.)

Therefore  mqA  <  npA,

But  it  follows  from  the  first  equations  in  each  pair  that

mqA  >  npA :
which  is  impossible.

Nor  can  Euclid's  criterion  for  a  greater  ratio  coexist  with  that  for  equal
ratios.


Definition  8.

'AvoXoyia  8c  cv  TpMrtF  opoi$  lka)(ym\  i<rriv.

This  is  the  reading  of  Heiberg  and  Camerer  (who  follow  Peyrard's  ms.)
and  is  that  translated  above.  The  other  reading  has  ^Aaxurrocc,  which  can
only  be  translated  "consists  in  three  terms  a/  /east"  Hankel  regards  the  defi-
nition as  a  later  interpolation,  because  it  is  superfluous,  and  because  the  word
opo9  for  a  term  in  a  proportion  is  nowhere  else  used  by  Euclid,  though  it  is
common  in  later  writers  such  as  Nicomachus  and  Theon  of  Smyrna.  The
genuineness  of  the  definition  is  however  supported  by  the  fact  that  Aristotle
not  only  uses  opo^  in  this  sense  (-^M.  Nic.  v.  6,  7,  1 131  b  5,  9),  but  has  a  similar
remark  {ihW.  1 131  a  31)  that  a  "proportion  is  in  /our  terms  at  least"  The
difference  from  Euclid  is  only  formal ;  for  Aristotle  proceeds :  "  The  discrete
(^rjprffUvrf)  (proportion)  is  clearly  in  four  (terms),  but  so  also  is  the  continuous
((TwcxTs).  For  it  uses  one  as  two  and  mentions  it  twice,  e.g.  (in  stating)  that,
as  a  is  to  P,  so  also  is  iS  to  y ;  thus  p  is  mentioned  twice,  so  that,  if  /?  be  twice
put  down,  the  proportionals  are  four."  The  distinction  between  discrete  and
continuous  seems  to  have  been  Pythagorean  (cf.  Nicomachus,  11.  21,  5;  23,
2,  3 ;  where  however  (rwrffifUyrj  is  used  instead  of  crwexiys) ;  Euclid  does  not
use  the  words  StyprjfiivTf  and  crwcxiys  in  this  connexion.

So  far  as  they  go,  the  first  words  of  the  next  definition  (9),  "When  three
magnitudes  are  proportionals,"  which  seemingly  refer  to  Def.  8,  also  support
the  view  that  the  latter  is,  at  least  in  substance,  genuine.

9— a


132  BOOK    V  [v.  DEFF.  9,  lO


Definitions  9,  10.

9.  ^Orav  8i  TfHCi  fAey^Otf  avaXoyov  J,  to  vpwrov  irpos  to  TptTOF  ^vXaartova
XoyoK  (t)(€iv  Xcycrat  rpr€p  irpos  to  h€VT€pov,

10.  ^Orav  Sk  Tcaaapa  fity€Orf  dvdXoyov  J,  to  irpurrov  -jrfKJS  to  rwrafnrov
rpitrXaalova  Xoyov  ^ctv  Xcycrat  ^ircp  irpos  to  8cvrcfK>v,  #cat  aci  c^5  o/aouds,  «s
iv  y  avakoyCa  vvdpx(I»

Here,  and  in  connexion  with  the  definitions  of  duplicate,  triplicate,  etc.
ratios,  would  be  the  place  to  expect  a  definition  of  "  compound  ratio."  None
such  is  however  forthcoming,  and  the  only  "  definition  "  of  it  that  we  find  is
that  forming  vi.  Def.  5,  which  is  an  interpolation  made,  perhaps,  even  before
Theon's  time.  According  to  the  interpolated  definition,  "  A  ratio  is  said  to
be  compounded  of  ratios  when  the  sizes  (Tn/XtKo'nTrc?)  of  the  ratios  multiplied
together  make  some  (?  ratio)."  But  the  multiplication  of  the  sizes  (or
magnitudes)  of  two  ratios  of  incommensurable,  and  even  of  commensurable,
magnitudes  is  an  operation  unknown  to  the  classical  Greek  geometers.
Eutocius  (Archimedes,  ed.  Heiberg,  in.  p.  140)  is  driven  to  explain  the
definition  by  making  m/XtKon;?  mean  the  number  from  which  the  given  ratio
is  called,  or,  in  other  words,  the  number  which  multiplied  into  the  consequent
of  the  ratio  gives  the  antecedent.  But  he  is  only  able  to  work  out  his  idea  with
reference  to  ratios  between  numbers,  or  between  commensurable  magnitudes ;
and  indeed  the  definition  is  quite  out  of  place  in  Euclid's  theory  of
proportion.

There  is  then  only  one  statement  in  Euclid's  text  as  we  have  it  indicating
what  is  meant  by  compound  ratio ;  this  is  in  vi.  23,  where  he  says  abruptly
"But  the  ratio  of  A' to  J/ is  compounded  of  the  ratio  oi  K  \.o  L  and  that  of
L  to  My  Simson  accordingly  gives  a  definition  (A  of  Book  v.)  of  compound
ratio  directly  suggested  by  the  statement  in  vi.  23  just  quoted.

"  When  there  are  any  number  of  magnitudes  of  the  same  kind,  the  first
is  said  to  have  to  the  last  of  them  the  ratio  compounded  of  the  ratio  which
the  first  has  to  the  second,  and  of  the  ratio  which  the  second  has  to  the  third,
and  of  the  ratio  which  the  third  has  to  the  fourth,  and  so  on  unto  the  last
magnitude.

For  example,  if  A^  B^  C^  D  h^  four  magnitudes  of  the  same  kind,  the
first  A  is  said  to  have  to  the  last  D  the  ratio  compounded  of  the  ratio  of
A  to  B,  and  of  the  ratio  of  B  to  C,  and  of  the  ratio  of  C  to  Z> ;  or  the  ratio
of  A  to  £>  is  said  to  be  compounded  of  the  ratios  of  A  to  B^  B  to  C,  and
C  to  £>.

And  if  A  has  to  B  the  same  ratio  which  £  has  to  I*';  and  B  to  C  the
same  ratio  that  G  has  to  H;  and  C  to  D  the  same  that  K  has  to  L ;  then,
by  this  definition,  A  is  said  to  have  to  D  the  ratio  compounded  of  ratios
which  are  the  same  with  the  ratios  of  E  to  F^  G  to  H^  and  K to  L\  and  the
same  thing  is  to  be  understood  when  it  is  more  briefly  expressed,  by  saying,
A  has  to  D  the  ratio  compounded  of  the  ratios  oi  E  to  F^  G  to  H^  and
K  to  L,

In  like  manner,  the  same  things  being  supposed,  if  M  has  to  N  the
same  ratio  which  A  has  to  D ;  then,  for  shortness'  sake,  M  is  said  to  have  to
A^the  ratio  compounded  of  the  ratios  of  E  to  F,  G  to  H^  and  A^to  Z."

De  Morgan  has  some  admirable  remarks  on  compound  ratio,  which
not  only  give  a  very  clear  view  of  what  is  meant  by  it  but  at  the  same  time


V.  DEFF.  9,  lo]        NOTES   ON   DEFINITIONS   9,  10  133

supply  a  plausible  explanation  of  the  origin  of  the  term.  "Treat  ratio,"  says
De  Morgan,  **as  an  engine  of  operation.  Let  that  o(  A  to  B  suggest  the
power  of  altering  any  magnitude  in  that  ratio."  (It  is  true  that  it  is  not  yet
proved  that,  B  being  any  magnitude,  and  P  and  Q  two  magnitudes  of  the
same  kind,  there  does  exist  a  magnitude  A  which  is  to  B  in  the  same  ratio
as  P  to  Q.  It  is  not  till  vi.  12  that  this  is  proved,  by  construction,  in  the
particular  case  where  the  three  magnitudes  are  straight  lines.  The  proof  in  the
Greek  text  of  v.  18  which  assumes  the  truth  of  the  more  general  proposition
is,  by  reason  of  that  assumption,  open  to  objection ;  see  the  note  on  that
proposition.)  Now  "every  alteration  of  a  magnitude  is  alteration  in  some
ratio,  two  or  more  successive  alterations  are  jointly  equivalent  to  but  one,  and
the  ratio  of  the  initial  magnitude  to  the  terminal  one  is  as  properly  said  to  be
the  compound  ratio  of  alteration  as  1 3  to  be  the  compound  addend  in  lieu  of
8  and  5,  or  28  the  compound  multiple  for  7  and  4.  Composition  is  used
here,  as  elsewhere,  for  the  process  of  detecting  one  single  alteration  which
produces  the  joint  effect  of  two  or  more.  The  composition  of  the  ratios  of
PtoR.R  to  Sy  Tto  Uy  is  performed  by  assuming  A^  altering  it  in  the  first
ratio  into  B^  altering  B  in  the  second  ratio  into  C*,  and  C  in  the  third  ratio
into  D,  The  joint  effect  turns  A  into  /?,  and  the  ratio  oi  A  to  D  is  the
compounded  ratio."

Another  word  for  compounded  ratio  is  awrffifitvo^  (avvaimo)  which  is
common  in  Archimedes  and  later  writers.

It  is  clear  that  duplicate  ratio,  triplicate  ratio  etc.  defined  in  v.  DefT.  9
and  10  are  merely  particular  cases  of  compound  ratio,  being  in  fact  the
ratios  compounded  of  two,  three  etc.  egual  ratios.  The  use  which  the  Greek
geometers  made  of  compounded,  duplicate,  triplicate  ratios  etc.  is  well
illustrated  by  the  discovery  of  Hippocrates  that  the  problem  of  the  duplication
of  the  cube  (or,  more  generally,  the  construction  of  a  cube  which  shall  be  to
a  given  cube  in  any  given  ratio)  reduces  to  that  of  finding  "two  mean
proportionals  in  continued  proportion."  This  amounted  to  seeing  that,  if
Xf  y  are  two  mean  proportionals  in  continued  proportion  between  any  two
lines  a,  ^,  in  other  words,  if  a'x&to  X2&x  to  y^  and  xx&toy  ^ytob^  then  a
c^be  with  side  a  is  to  a  cube  with  side  jc  as  a  is  to  ^ ;  and  this  is  equivalent
to  saying  that  a  has  to  b  the  triplicate  ratio  of  a  to  x,

Euclid  is  careful  to  use  the  forms  8i7rXao-4a)  v,  rpcTrXaaicov,  etc.  to  express  what
we  translate  as  duplicate^  triplicate  etc.  ratios;  the  Greek  mathematicians,
however,  commonly  used  StTrAao-io?  Xoyos,  "double  ratio,"  TpiirXaorios  Xoyo«,
"triple  ratio "  etc.  in  the  sense  of  the  ratios  of  2  to  i,  3  to  i  etc.  The  effort,
if  such  it  was,  to  keep  the  one  form  for  the  one  signification  and  the  other  for
the  other  was  only  partially  successful,  as  there  are  several  instances  of  the
contrary  use,  e.g.  in  Archimedes,  Nicomachus  and  Pappus.

The  expression  for  having  the  ratio  which  is  "  duplicate  (triplicate)  of  that
which  it  has  to  the  second "  is  curious — SiTrXoo-ioKa  (rpiTrXao-iova)  Xdyov  c^ctv
iJttcp  Trpos  TO  ScvTcpov — ijircp  being  used  as  if  StTrXaaiova  or  rpiTrXacriova  were  a
sort  of  comparative,  in  the  same  way  as  it  is  used  after  fici^ova  or  cXaorcrova.
Another  way  of  expressing  the  same  thing  is  to  say  Xoyos  StirXoo-aoK  (rpiirXaaiW)
Tov,  ov  cx<t...  the  ratio  "duplicate  of  that  (ratio)  which..."  The  explanation
of  both  constructions  would  seem  to  be  that  StTrXcurios  or  8t7rXa<rwi>v  is,  as
Hultsch  translates  it  in  his  edition  of  Pappus  (cf.  p.  59,  17),  duplo  maioTy
where  the  ablative  duplo  implies  not  a  difference  but  a  proportion.

The  four  magnitudes  in  Def.  10  must  of  course  be  in  continued  proportion
(Kara  to  fTvvi\i%),     The  Greek  text  as  it  stands  does  not  state  this.


134  BOOK  V  [v.  DEFF.  II — 14

Definition  ii.

*Ofi6koya  fity€&if  Xcycrou  ra  fuv  i^yovficva  rots  i/yovficvois  ra  Sk  ciro/xcva  rms
€irofUvois.

It  is  difficult  to  express  the  meaning  of  the  Greek  in  as  few  words.  A
translation  more  literal,  but  conveying  less,  would  be,  "  Antecedents  are  called
corresponding  magnitudes  to  antecedents,  and  consequents  to  consequents."

I  have  preferred  to  translate  6/ioXoyos  by  **  corresponding  "  rather  than  by
"  homologous.''  I  do  not  agree  with  Max  Simon  when  he  says  (Euclid,  p.  1 1 1)
that  the  technical  term  "homologous"  is  not  the  adjective  oftoXoyw,  and  does
not  mean  "corresponding,"  "agreeing,"  but  "like  in  respect  of  the  proportion"
("ahnlich  in  Bezug  auf  das  Verhaltniss").  The  definition  seems  to  me  to  be
for  the  purpose  of  appropriating  to  a  technical  use  precisely  the  ordinary
adjective  6ftoAoyo5,  "agreeing"  or  "corresponding."

Antecedents^  i;yov/i€va,  are  literally  ^^  leading  (terms),"  and  consequents ,
liro/uicva,  ^*  following  (terms)."

Definition  12.

*EvaXXa^  Xoyos  lirn  Xr/ij/iq  rov  i/yov/iCKOv  Trpos  to  rjyovfi€yov  koi  rov  hrofiivcv

VpOi  TO  CirOflCKOV.

We  now  come  to  a  number  of  expressions  for  the  transformation  of  ratios
or  proportions.  The  first  is  cwAXaf,  alternately^  which  would  be  better
described  with  reference  to  a  proportion  of  four  terms  than  with  reference  to
a  ratio.  But  probably  Euclid  defined  all  the  terms  in  Deff.  12 — 16  with
reference  to  rcUios  because  to  define  them  with  reference  to  proportions  would
look  like  assuming  what  ought  to  be  proved,  namely  the  legitimacy  of  the
various  transformations  of  proportions  (cf.  v.  16,  7  Por.,  18,  17,  19  Por.).  The
word  ivaXkai  is  of  course  a  common  term  which  has  no  exclusive  reference  to
mathematics.  But  this  same  use  of  it  with  reference  to  proportions  already
occurs  in  Aristotle:  Anal  post.  i.  5,  74  a  18,  #cai  to  dvoXoyov  art  cvoXAci^,
"and  that  a  proportion  (is  true)  alternately,  or  alternando'^  Used  with  Aoyos,
as  here,  the  adverb  IvaXKai  has  the  sense  of  an  adjective,  "  alternate " ;  we
have  already  had  it  similarly  used  of  "  alternate  angles  "  (al  ^koAAo^  ywFiai)  in
the  theory  of  parallels.^

Definition  13.

Ai^aTraXiv  Aoyos  cart  kfjiffi^  rov  iirofj.ivov  o>s  -qyovfiivov  irpo^  to  ijyovfxevov  oJs

^TTO/ACVOV.

'AvdwaXiVy  "inversely,"  "the  other  way  about,"  is  also  a  general  term  with
no  exclusive  reference  to  mathematics.  For  this  use  of  it  with  reference  to
proportion  cf.  Aristotle,  De  Caelo  i.  6,  273  b  32  nyV  avoXoylav  t^v  ro.  Paprj  ^x<*>
oi  xpovoi  dvdirakiv  c^ouo-ti',  "  the  proportion  which  the  weights  have,  the  times
will  have  inversely.**  As  here  used  with  Xo'yos,  dvdirakiv  is,  exceptionally,
adjectival.

Definition  14.

Suv^ccris  Xoyov  Icrrl  X'^if/i^  rov  i^yovfiivov  fitrd  rov  hrofiivov  ws  ckos  vpo^  avro

TO    ln'6fJ.€VOV.

The  composition  of  a  ratio  is  to  be  distinguished  from  the  compounding  of
ratios  and  compounded  ratio  {<rvyK€ifiivos  Xo'yos)  as  explained  above  in  the  note


V.  DEFF.  14— 16]    NOTES  ON   DEFINITIONS   ii— 16  135

on  Deff.  9,  10.  The  fact  is  that  awriOrffii  and  what  serves  for  the  passive  of
it  (<rvyK€t/uuit)  are  used  for  adding  as  well  as  compounding  in  the  sense  of
compounding  ratios.  In  order  to  distinguish  the  two  senses,  I  have  always
used  the  word  componendo  where  the  sense  is  that  of  this  definition,  though
this  requires  a  slight  departure  from  the  literal  rendering  of  some  passages.
Thus  the  enunciation  of  v.  17  says,  literally,  "if  magnitudes  compounded  be
in  proportion  they  will  also  be  in  proportion  separated"  (la.v  (rvyK€ifi€va
fi€y€drf  AvdXoyov  y,  Kol  huoLLptOhrra  avdkoyov  ccrrai).  This  practically  means
that,  i(  y4  +  B  is  to  B  2is  C  +  D  is  to  Df  then  -^4  is  to  -5  as  C  is  to  £>.
I  have  accordingly  translated  as  follows:  "if  magnitudes  be  proportional
componendo^  they  will  also  be  proportional  separando^  (It  will  be  observed
that  separando^  a  term  explained  in  the  next  note,  is  here  used,  not  relatively
to  the  proportion  ^  is  to  -^  as  C  is  to  Z>,  but  relatively  to  the  proportion
componendo^  viz.  ^  +  ^  is  to  -^  as  C  +  D  is  to  D.)  The  corresponding
term  for  componendo  in  the  Greek  mathematicians  is  frvvBivri^  literally  "to  one
who  has  compounded,"  i.e.  "  if  we  compound."  (For  this  absolute  use  of  the
dative  of  the  participle  cf.  Nicomachus  i.  8,  9  iirh  fioKa3o$...fcaTa  rhv  h:ir\axnov
\6yov  vpo\ii}povvTi  fX€\pi^  aTrctpov,  Saoi  koI  av  yivtavraiy  ovroi  Trarrcs  dpruuccs
dpTWH  ciViK.  A  very  good  instance  from  Aristotle  is  EtA.  Nic,  i.  5,  1097  b  12
CTTCKrciKOVTi  vof)  cTTi  Tovs  yovc(9  fcai  Tov^  diroyovov^  koi  rwiy  ^tXcov  rov^  ^tXovs
€19  airctfwv  TrpocMTiv.)  A  variation  for  irvvOfvn  found  in  Archimedes  is  Kara
crvV^co-iv.  Perhaps  the  more  exclusive  use  of  the  form  avvOhm  by  geometers
later  than  Euclid  to  denote  the  composition  of  a  ratio^  as  compared  with
Euclid's  more  general  use  of  crvv^cats  and  other  parts  of  the  verb  avvri^fj/u
or  (rvyK€ifiai,  may  point  to  a  desire  to  get  rid  of  ambiguity  of  terms  and  to
make  the  terminology  of  geometry  more  exact.

Definition  15.

Auupcaic  Xoyov  iarl  Xrjij/i^  r^s  v^rcpo^^i/f,  ^  v^rcpcxct  ro  rjyov^€¥ov  rov
€7rofi€vov,  irp09  avro  to  cito/acvov.

As  composition  of  a  ratio  means  the  transformation,  e.g.,  of  the  ratio  of
A  to  B  into  the  ratio  of  A-\-B  to  Bj  so  the  separation  of  a  ratio  indicates
the  transformation  of  it  into  the  ratio  oi  A  —  B  to  B,  Thus,  as  the  new
antecedent  is  in  one  case  got  by  adding  the  original  antecedent  to  the  original
consequent,  so  the  antecedent  in  the  other  case  is  obtained  by  subtracting  the
original  consequent  from  the  original  antecedent  (it  being  assumed  that  the
latter  is  greater  than  the  former).  Hence  the  literal  translations  of  Suupcai^
Xoyov,  "division  of  a  ratio,"  and  of  SuXoWt  (the  corresponding  term  to
(TwBiim)  as  dividendOj  scarcely  give  a  sufficiently  obvious  explanation  of  the
meaning.  Heiberg  accordingly  translates  by  "subtractio  rationis,"  which
again  may  be  thought  to  depart  too  far  from  the  Greek.  Perhaps  "separation"
and  separando  may  serve  as  a  compromise.

Definition  16.

*AvaarpOfl>rj  Xoyov  io'Ti  X^i^cs  tov  Tfyovfitvov  irpos  nyv  VTr€po)(TJv,  |y  vir€p€\€i
TO  lyyov/ACVOV  tov  hrofitvov.

Conversion  of  a  ratio  means  taking,  e.g.,  instead  of  the  ratio  of  A  to  B^
the  ratio  oi  A  to  A—B  {A  being  again  supposed  greater  than  B),  As
avaarpo^ij  is  used  for  conversion,  so  dvafrrpiiffavri  is  used  for  convertendo
(corresponding  to  the  terms  avvOm-t  and  Sukovrt).


136  BOOK  V  [v.  DEFF.  17,  18

Definition  17.

At*  Icrov  Xoyos  ccrri  irXcidviov  Svnov  firytOSv  koL  iXXiov  avrotc  urtov  ro  wX-^Om
(riv&vo  \afipayofi€ViiiV  koL  iv  rw  avrtp  A.dy<{»,  orav  ^  o>s  ^i'  rois  irpwroi^  /icyc^ccrt  to
irp«i>rov  irpos  to  ItrxaTov,  ovtcds  cv  toi?  StvrtpoK  /icyc^co-t  to  irfHorov  rrpo^  to  laxarov '
^  aXkio^'  ArjiffK  rwv  aKpcuv  #ca^*  vwe^ijpco-iv  tidv  fUartov.

8i*  urov,  ^Ji:  aequali^  must  apparently  mean  ^jc  aequali  distantia^  at  an  equal
distance  or  interval,  i.e.  after  an  equal  number  of  intervening  terms.  The
wording  of  the  definition  suggests  that  it  is  rather  a  proportion  ex  aequcUi
than  a  ratio  ex  aequali  which  is  being  defined  (cf.  Def.  12).  The  meaning  is
clear  enough.  If  aj,  ^,  r,  </...  be  one  set  of  magnitudes,  and  A^  By  C,  D.,,
another  set  of  magnitudes,  such  that

A  is  to  ^  as  ^  is  to  B^

^  is  to  ^  as  j9  is  to  C,
and  so  on,  the  last  proportion  being,  e.g.,

k  is  to  /,  as  K  is  to  Z,
then  the  inference  ex  aequali  is  that

a  is  to  /  as  ^  is  to  L,
The  fact  that  this  is  so,  or  the  truth  of  the  inference  from  the  hypothesis,
is  not  proved  until  v.  22.  The  definition  is  therefore  merely  verbal;  it  gives
a  convenient  name  to  a  certain  inference  which  is  of  constant  application  in
mathematics.  But  ex  aequali  could  not  be  intelligibly  defined  except  with
reference  to  two  sets  of  ratios  respectively  equal.


Definition  18.


ovtois  ^i'  tois  ScvTcpot?  fJLcyid^cnv  "qyovfxtvov  irpo^  iiro/Atvov,  ios  8c  iv  toi
fjLry€6€a'iv  €n6fi€vov  7rpo9  aAAo  Tt,  ovrw?  iv  tois  Scvrcpots  aX\o  ti  irpo^  tjy


T€TapayfA€vrj  8c  di^oXoyta  ccTTtV,  OTai'  rpitav  ovrtav  /xcyc^cuv  Koi  aXXiav  avroif
to-ctfv  TO  nXrjdo^  ylvryrai  w?  /icv  cv  Tot?  irpwroi^  /icyc^cotv  rjyovfjLivov  irpo^  ctto/acvov,

T0t9    IFfHOTOl^

ijyovfieyov.

Though  the  words  hi  lo-ov,  ex  aequali,  are  not  in  this  definition,  it  gives  a
description  of  a  case  in  which  the  inference  ex  aequali  is  still  true,  as  will  be
hereafter  proved  in  v.  23.  A  perturbed  proportion  is  an  expression  for  the
case  when,  there  being  three  magnitudes  a,  b,  c  and  three  others  A,  B,  C,

a  is  to  ^  as  jff  is  to  C,

and  ^  is  to  ^  as  ^  is  to  B.

Another  description  of  this  case  is  found  in  Archimedes,  ^Uhe  ratios  being
dissimilarly  ordered  **  {dvofioCu)^  Tcray/AcVcuv  rtav  Xoyuav).  The  full  description  of
the  inference  in  this  case  (as  proved  in  v.  23),  namely  that

a  is  to  ^  as  -^  is  to  C*,

is  ex  aequali  in  perturbed  proportion  (81*  Icrov  iv  TCTopay/uicn;  aVaXoyi^).
Archimedes  sometimes  omits  the  hC  Icrov,  first  giving  the  two  proportions  and
proceeding  thus:  "therefore,  the  proportions  being  dissimilarly  ordered,  a  has
to  c  the  same  ratio  as  A  has  to  C"

The  fact  that  Def.  18  describes  a  particular  case  in  which  the  inference
81'  lo-ou  will  be  proved  true  seems  to  have  suggested  to  some  one  after
Theon's  time  the  interpolation  of  another  definition  between  17  and  18  to


V.  DEF.  18]  NOTES   ON    DEFINITIONS    17,  18  137

describe  the  ordinary  case  where  the  argument  ex  aequali  holds  good.  The
interpolated  definition  runs  thus:  "an  ordered  proportion  (rcTay/Acn;  ctvaXoyiia)
arises  when,  as  antecedent  is  to  consequent,  so  is  antecedent  to  consequent,
and,  as  consequent  is  to  something  else,  so  is  consequent  to  something  else.*'
This  case  needed  no  description  after  Def.  17  itself;  and  the  supposed
definition  is  never  used.

After  the  definitions  of  Book  v.  Simson  supplies  the  following  axioms,

1.  Equimultiples  of  the  same  or  of  equal  magnitudes  are  equal  to  one
another.

2.  Those   magnitudes  of  which   the  same  or  equal    magnitudes  are
equimultiples  are  equal  to  one  another.

3.  A  multiple  of  a  greater  magnitude  is  greater  than  the  same  multiple
of  a  less.

4.  That  magnitude  of  which  a  multiple  is  greater  than  the  same  multiple
of  another  is  greater  than  that  other  magnitude.


BOOK   V.     PROPOSITIONS.


Proposition  i.


If  there  be  any  number  of  magnittides  whatever  which  are^
respectively^  equimultiples  of  any  magnitudes  equal  in  multitude,
then^  whatever  multiple  one  of  the  magnitudes  is  of  one,  tliai
multiple  also  will  all  be  of  alL

Let  any  number  of  magnitudes  whatever  AB,  CD  be
respectively  equimultiples  of  any  magnitudes  E,  F  equal  in
multitude ;

I  say  that,  whatever  multiple  AB  is  of  E,  that  multiple  will
AB,  CD  also  be  of  E,  F.


For,  since  AB  is  the  same  multiple  of  E  that  CD  is  of  F,
as  many  magnitudes  as  there  are  in  AB  equal  to  E,  so  many
also  are  there  in  CD  equal  to  F.

Let  AB  be  divided  into  the  magnitudes  AG,  GB  equal
to  E,

and  CD  into  CH,  HD  equal  to  F ;

then  the  multitude  of  the  magnitudes  AG,  GB  will  be  equal
to  the  multitude  of  the  magnitudes  CH,  HD,

Now,  since  ^6^  is  equal  to  E,  and  CH  to  F,

therefore  ^6^  is  equal  to  E,  and  AG,  CH  to  E,  F.

For  the  same  reason

GB  is  equal  to  E,  and  GB,  HD  \.o  E,  F\

therefore,  as  many  magnitudes  as  there  are  in  AB  equal  to  E,
3Q  many  also  are  there  in  AB,  CD  equal  to  E,  F\


V.  I,  2]  PROPOSITIONS    I,  2  139

therefore,  whatever  multiple  AB  is  of  E,  that  multiple  will
AB,  CD  also  be  of  E,  F.
Therefore  etc.

Q.  E.  D.

De  Morgan  remarks  of  v.  i — 6  that  they  are  "simple  propositions  of
concrete  arithmetic,  covered  in  language  which  makes  them  unintelligible  to
modem  ears.  The  first,  for  instance,  states  no  more  than  that  ten  acres  and
ten  roods  make  ten  times  as  much  as  one  acre  and  one  rood.'*  One  aim
therefore  of  notes  on  these  as  well  as  the  other  propositions  of  Book  v.
should  be  to  make  their  purport  clearer  to  the  learner  by  setting  them  side  by
side  with  the  same  truths  expressed  in  the  much  shorter  and  more  familiar
modern  (algebraical)  notation.  In  doing  so,  we  shall  express  magnitudes  by
the  first  letters  of  the  alphabet,  «,  ^,  c  etc.,  adopting  small  instead  of  capital
letters  so  as  to  avoid  confusion  with  Euclid's  lettering ;  arid  we  shall  use  the
small  letters  w,  «,  /  etc.  to  represent  integral  numbers.  Thus  ma  will  always
mean  ;;/  times  a  or  the  m^^  multiple  of  a  (counting  i .  at  as  the  first,  2 .  a  as  the
second  multiple,  and  so  on).

Prop.  I  then  asserts  that,  if  tna^  tnb^  mc  etc.  be  any  equimultiples  of  ar,  ^,  c
etc.,  then

ma -^  tnb -^r  mc -{-  ,.,=m  {a-i-  d  +  c-^- ...),

Proposition  2.

//  a  first  magnitude  be  the  same  multiple  of  a  .second
that  a  third  is  of  a  fourth,  and  a  fifth  also  be  the  same  multiple
of  the  second  that  a  sixth  is  of  the  fourth,  the  sum  of  the  first
and  fifth  will  also  be  the  same  multiple  of  the  second  that  the
sum  of  the  third  and  sixth  is  of  the  fourth.

Let  a  first  magnitude,  AB,  be  the  same  multiple  of  a
second,  C,  that  a  third,  DE,

is  of  a  fourth,  F,  and  let  a      ^        ^       ^      b  Q

fifth,  BG,  also  be  the  same
multiple  of  the  second,  C,  that      ^  ^  „

a  sixth,  EH,  is  of  the  fourth       ^ ' ' ' ' '

F;  F

I   say  that   the .  sum   of  the

first  and  fifth,  AG,  will  be  the  same  multiple  of  the  second,  C,

that  the  sum  of  the  third  and  sixth,  DH,  is  of  the  fourth,  F.

For,  since  AB  is  the  same  multiple  of  C  that  DE  is  of  F,
therefore,  as  many  magnitudes  as  there  are  in  AB  equal  to  C,
so  many  also  are  there  in  DE  equal  to  F.

For  the  same  reason  also,
as  many  as  there  are  in  BG  equal  to  C,  so  many  are  there
also  in  EH  equal  to  F\


I40  BOOK   V  [v.  2,  3

therefore,  as  many  as  there  are  in  the  whole  AG  equal  to  C,
so  many  also  are  there  in  the  whole  DH  equal  to  F,

Therefore,  whatever  multiple  ^6^  is  of  C,  that  multiple
also  is  DU  of  F.

Therefore  the  sum  of  the  first  and  fifth,  AG,  is  the  same
multiple  of  the  second,  C,  that  the  sum  of  the  third  and  sixth,
DH,  is  of  the  fourth,  F.

Therefore  etc.

Q.  E.  D.

To  find  the  corresponding  formula  for  the  result  of  this  proposition,  we
may  suppose  a  to  be  the  "  second  "  magnitude  and  b  the  "  fourth."  If  now
the  "  first "  magnitude  is  ma,  the  "  third  "  is,  by  hypothesis,  mb ;  and,  if  the
"  fifth  "  magnitude  is  na,  the  "sixth"  is  nb.  The  proposition  then  asserts  that
ma  +  na  is  the  same  multiple  of  a  that  mb-\-nb\s  of  b.

More  generally,  if /«,  ga...  and  pb,  qb...  be  any  further  equimultiples  of
a,  b  respectively,  »Ki  +  «<i+/rt +  ^a+  ...  is  the  same  multiple  of  a  that  mb-^
ftb+pb  +  qb  +  ...  is  of  ^.  This  extension  is  stated  in  Simson's  corollary  to
V.  2  thus :

"  From  this  it  is  plain  that,  if  any  number  of  magnitudes  AB,  BG,  GH
be  multiples  of  another  C;  and  as  many  DE,  EK,  KL  be  the  same
multiples  of  F,  each  of  each;  the  whole  of  the  first,  viz.  AH,  is  the  same
multiple  of  C  that  the  whole  of  the  last,  viz.  DL,  is  of  /^"

The  course  of  the  proof,  which  separates  m  into  its  units  and  also  n  into
its  units,  practically  tells  us  that  the  multiple  of  a  arrived  at  by  adding  the
two  multiples  is  the  (m  +  «)th  multiple ;  or  practically  we  are  shown  that

ma  +  na  =  {m  +  n)  a,
or,  more  generally,  that

ma  +  fia  +/a  +  ...  =  (///  +  //+/+...)  a.


Proposition  3.

1/  a  first  magnitude  be  the  same  multiple  of  a  second
that  a  third  is  of  a  fourth,  and  if  equimultiples  be  taken
of  the  first  and  third,  then  also  ex  aequali  the  magnitudes
taken  will  be  equimultiples  respectively,  the  one  of  the  second
and  the  other  of  the  fourth.

Let  a  first  magnitude  A  be  the  same  multiple  of  a  second
B  that  a  third  C  is  of  a  fourth  D,  and  let  equimultiples  EF,
GH  be  taken  of  ^,  C ;
I  say  that  EF  is  the  same  multiple  of  B  that  GH  is  of  D,

For,  since  EF  is  the  same  multiple  of  A  that  GH  is  of  C,
therefore,  as  many  magnitudes  as  there  are  in  EF  equal  to
A,  so  many  also  are  there  in  GH  equal  to  C.


V.  3]  PROPOSITIONS   2,  3  141

Let  EF  be  divided  into  the  magnitudes  EK,  KF  equal
to  Ay  and  GH  into  the  magnitudes  GL,  LH  equal  to  C\

then  the  multitude  of  the  magnitudes  EK,  AT^will  be  equal
to  the  multitude  of  the  magnitudes  GL,  LH.


c 1 » '

o •

o 1-


And,  since  A  is  the  same  multiple  of  B  that  C  is  of  D,
while  EK  is  equal  to  A,  and  GL  to  C,
therefore  EK  is  the  same  multiple  of  B  that  GL  is  of  D.

For  the  same  reason

KF  is  the  same  multiple  of  B  that  LH  is  of  D.

Since,  then,  a  first  magnitude  EK  is  the  same  multiple
of  a  second  B  that  a  third  6^Z  is  of  a  fourth  /?,
and  a  fifth  KF  is  also  the  same  multiple  of  the  second  B  that
a  sixth  LH  is  of  the  fourth  /?,

therefore  the  sum  of  the  first  and  fifth,  EF,  is  also  the  same
multiple  of  the  second  B  that  the  sum  of  the  third  and  sixth,
GH,  is  of  the  fourth  D,  [v.  2]

Therefore  etc.

Q.  E.  D,

Heiberg  remarks  of  the  use  of  ex  aequali  in  the  enunciation  of  this  pro|X)-
sition  that,  strictly  speaking,  it  has  no  reference  to  the  definition  (17)  of  a
ratio  ex  aequali.  But  the  uses  of  the  expression  here  and  in  the  definition
are,  I  think,  sufficiently  parallel,  as  may  be  seen  thus.  The  proposition
asserts  that,  if

na,  nb  are  equimultiples  of  a,  b,
and  if  tn.na,  m.nb  are  equimultiples  of  na,  nb,

then  m .  na  is  the  same  multiple  of  a  that  m.nbxsoib.  Clearly  the  proposi-
tion can  be  extended  by  taking  further  equimultiples  of  the  last  equimultiples
and  so  on  ;  and  we  can  prove  that

/.q...m.na  IS  the  same  multiple  of  a  that  p.  q... m.nb  is  of  b,
where    the    series   of    numbers   p,q..,m,n   is   exactly   the    same   in   both
expressions ;

and  ex  aequali  (81'  urov)  expresses  the  fact  that  the  equimultiples  are  at  the
same  distance  from  a,  b  in  the  series  na,  m.na,.,  and  nb,  m,nb..,  respectively.


142  BOOK  V  [v.  3, 4

Here  again  the  proof  breaks  m  into  its  units,  and  then  breaks  n  into  its
units ;  and  we  are  practically  shown  that  the  multiple  of  a  arrived  at,  viz.
m .  nay  is  the  multiple  denoted  by  the  product  of  the  numbers  w,  «,  i.e.  the
{mn)\.\\  multiple,  or  in  other  words  that

m.na  =  mn.a.


Proposition  4.

If  a  first  magnitude  have  to  a  second  the  same  ratio  as  a
third  to  a  fourth,  any  equimultiples  whatever  of  the  first  and
third  will  also  have  the  same  ratio  to  any  equimultiples
whatever  of  the  second  and  fourth  respectively,  taken  in
corresponding  order.

For  let  a  first  magnitude  A  have  to  a  second  B  the  same
ratio  as  a  third  C  to  a  fourth  D ;  and  let  equimultiples  E,  F
be  taken  of  A,  C,  and  G,  H  other,  chance,  equimultiples  of

I  say  that,  as  E  is  to  G,  so  is  F  to  H.


A

B

E »-

Q • —

K

M

C

D


F V-

H ^


L K

W


For  let  equimultiples  K,  L  be  taken  of  E,  F,  and  other,
chance,  equimultiples  M,  N  of  G,  H.

Since  E  is  the  same  multiple  of  A  that  F  is  of  C,

and  equimultiples  K,  L  oi  E,  F  have  been  taken,

therefore  K  is  the  same  multiple  of  A  that  L  is  of  C,       [v.  3]

For  the  same  reason

M  is  the  same  multiple  of  B  that  N  is  of  D.


V.  4]  PROPOSITIONS   3,  4  i43

And,  since,  as  A  is  to  B,  so  is  C  to  D,
and  oi  Ay  C  equimultiples  K,  L  have  been  taken,
and  of  B,  D  other,  chance,  equimultiples  M,  N,
therefore,  if  K  is  in  excess  of  M,  L  also  is  in  excess  of  N,
if  it  is  equal,  equal,  and  if  less,  less.  [v.  Def.  5]

And  Ky  L  are  equimultiples  of  Ey  Fy
and  My  N  other,  chance,  equimultiples  of  G*,  H  \
therefore,  as  E  is  to  Gy  so  is  F  to  H.  [v.  Def.  5]

Therefore  etc.

Q.  E.  D.

This  proposition  shows  that,  if  a,  by  r,  d  are  proportionals,  then
ma  is  to  nb  as  mc  is  to  »//;
and  the  proof  is  as  follows  :

Take  pmay  pnu  any  equimultiples  of  ma^  mCy  and  qftby  qnd  any  equimulti-
ples of  nby  nd.

Since  a  :  ^  =  ^  :  ^,  it  follows  [v.  Def.  5]  that,

according  as  pma  >  =  <  gnby  pmc  >  =  <  qnd.
But  the  /-  and  ^-equimultiples  are  any  equimultiples ;
therefore  [v.  Def.  5]

ma  :  nb  =  mc  :  nd.

It  will  be  observed  that  Euclid's  phrase  for  taking  any  equimultiples  of
Ay  C  and  any  other  equimultiples  of  By  D  is  "  let  there  be  taken  equimulti-
ples Ey  F  of  Ay  Cy  and  Gy  H  other,  chancCy  equimultiples  of  By  Dy'  Ey  F
being  called  to-aKt?  ?roAAa?rA.a(ria  simply,  and  Gy  H  aAXa,  a  \rv\€Vy  Ixraxi^
^roAAairXcuria.  And  similarly,  when  any  equimultiples  {Ky  L)  of  Ey  F
come  to  be  taken,  and  any  other  equimultiples  {My  N)  of  Gy  H,  But
later  on  Euclid  uses  the  same  phrases  about  the  neiv  equimultiples  with
reference  to  the  original  magnitudes,  reciting  that  "  there  have  been  taken,  of
Ay  Cy  equimultiples  Ky  L  and  of  By  Dy  other,  chancty  equimultiples  My  N^'  \
whereas  My  N  are  not  any  equimultiples  whatever  of  By  Dy  but  are  any
equimultiples  of  the  particular  multiples  {Gy  H)  which  have  been  taken  of  By
D  respectively,  though  these  latter  have  been  taken  at  random.  Simson  would,
in  the  first  place,  add  a  Irvy^^v  in  the  passages  where  any  equimultiples  Ey  F
are  taken  of  Ay  C  and  any  equimultiples  Ky  L  are  taken  of  Ey  Fy  because  the
words  are  "  wholly  necessary "  and,  in  the  second  place,  would  leave  them
out  where  My  iVare  called  oAAo,  a  hvy^Vy  lo-aKis  iroAAairXao-ia  of  By  Dy  because
it  is  not  true  that  of  By  D  have  been  taken  "  any  equimultiples  whatever  (a
hv\^y  My  Nr  Simson  adds:  "And  it  is  strange  that  neither  Mr  Briggs,  who
did  right  to  leave  out  these  words  in  one  place  of  Prop.  13  of  this  book,  nor
Dr  Gregory,  who  changed  them  into  the  word  *  some '  in  three  places,  and
left  them  out  in  a  fourth  of  that  same  Prop.  13,  did  not  also  leave  them  out
in  this  place  of  Prop.  4  and  in  the  second  of  the  two  places  where  they  occur
in  Prop.  1 7  of  this  book,  in  neither  of  which  they  can  stand  consistent  with
truth  :  And  in  none  of  all  these  places,  even  in  those  which  they  corrected  in
their  Latin  translation,  have  they  cancelled  the  words  a  crv^c  in  the  Greek
text,  as  they  ought  to  have  done.     The  same  words  a  Itvxc  are  found  in


144  BOOK  V  [y.  4

four  places  of  Prop.  1 1  of  this  book,  in  the  first  and  last  of  which  they  are
necessary,  but  in  the  second  and  third,  though  they  are  true,  they  are  quite
superfluous ;  as  they  likewise  are  in  the  second  of  the  two  places  in  which
they  are  found  in  the  12th  prop,  and  in  the  like  places  of  Prop.  22,  23  of  this
book;  but  are  wanting  in  the  last  place  of  Prop.  23,  as  also  in  Prop.  25,
Book  XI."

As  will  be  seen,  Simson's  emendations  amount  to  alterations  of  the  text
so  considerable  as  to  suggest  doubt  whether  we  should  be  justified  in  making
them  in  the  absence  of  MS.  authority.  The  phrase  ''equimultiples  of  A,  C
and  other,  chance,  equimultiples  of  B,  D  "  recurs  so  constantly  as  to  suggest
that  it  was  for  Euclid  a  quasi-stereotyped  phrase,  and  that  it  is  equally  genuine
wherever  it  occurs.  Is  it  then  absolutely  necessary  to  insert  a  ^tvxc  in  places
where  it  does  not  occur,  and  to  leave  it  out  in  the  places  where  Simson  holds
it  to  be  wrong  ?  I  think  the  text  can  be  defended  as  it  stands.  In  the  first
place  to  say  "take  equimultiples  of  A^  C"  is  a  fair  enough  way  of  saying
take  any  equimultiples  whatever  of  A^  C,  The  other  difficulty  is  greater,  but
may,  I  think,  be  only  due  to  the  adoption  of  any  whatever  as  the  translation
of  o  cTvxc.  As  a  matter  of  fact,  the  words  only  mean  chance  equimultiples,
equimultiples  which  are  the  result  of  random  selection.  Is  it  not  justifiable
to  describe  the  product  of  two  chance  numbers,  numbers  selected  at  random,
as  being  a  '*  chance  number,"  since  it  is  the  result  of  two  random  selections  ?
I  think  so,  and  I  have  translated  u  crv^c  accordingly  as  implying,  in  the  case
in  question,  "other  equimultiples  whatever  they  may  happen  to  be."

To  this  proposition  Theon  added  the  following :

"  Since  then  it  was  proved  that,  if  K  is  in  excess  of  My  L  is  also  in  excess
of  A^  if  it  is  equal,  (the  other  is)  equal,  and  if  less,  less,
it  is  clear  also  that,

if  M  is  in  excess  of  K^  N  is  also  in  excess  of  Z,  if  it  is  equal,  (the  other  is)
equal,  and  if  less,  less ;
and  for  this  reason,

as  6^  is  to  E,  so  also  is  ZT  to  7^

PoRiSM.  From  this  it  is  manifest  that,  if  four  magnitudes  be  proportional,
they  will  also  be  proportional  inversely."

Simson  rightly  pointed  out  that  the  demonstration  of  what  Theon  intended
to  prove,  viz.  that,  if  E,  G^  F^  H  be  proportionals,  they  are  proportional
inversely,  i.e.  6^  is  to  jE  as  ZT  is  to  /^  does  not  in  the  least  depend  upon  this
4th  proposition  or  the  proof  of  it ;  for,  when  it  is  said  that,  "  if  A^  exceeds  J/,
L  also  exceeds  N  etc.,"  this  is  not  proved  from  the  fact  that  E^  Gy  F,  H  2cre
proportionals  (which  is  the  conclusion  of  Prop.  4),  but  from  the  fact  that
Ay  By  Ct  D  are  proportionals.

The  proposition  that,  if  Ay  By  C,  D  are  proportionals,  they  are  also
proportionals  inversely  is  not  given  by  Euclid,  but  Simson  supplies  the  proof
in  his  Prop.  B.  The  fact  is  really  obvious  at  once  from  the  5th  definition
of  Book  v.  (cf.  p.  127  above),  and  Euclid  probably  omitted  the  proposition
as  unnecessary.

Simson  added,  in  place  of  Theon's  corollary,  the  following:

"  Likewise,  if  the  first  has  the  same  ratio  to  the  second  which  the  third
has  to  the  fourth,  then  also  any  equimultiples  whatever  of  the  first  and  third
have  the  same  ratio  to  the  second  and  fourth  :  And,  in  like  manner,  the  first
and  the  third  have  the  same  ratio  to  any  equimultiples  whatever  of  the  second
and  fourth."


V.  4,  5]  PROPOSITIONS  4,  5  MS

The  proof,  of  course,  follows  exactly  the  method  of  Euclid's  proposition
itselfi  with  the  only  difference  that,  instead  of  one  of  the  two  pairs  of  equi-
multiples, the  magnitudes  themselves  are  taken.  In  other  words,  the  conclu-
sion that

ma  is  to  nb  as  mc  is  to  nd
is  equally  true  when  either  m  or  n\s  equal  to  unity.

As  De  Morgan  says,  Simson's  corollary  is  only  necessary  to  those  who  will
not  admit  M  into  the  list  M,  2My  iM  etc. ;  the  exclusion  is  grammatical  and
nothing  else.  The  same  may  be  said  of  Simson's  Prop.  A  to  the  effect  that,
"  If  the  first  of  four  magnitudes  has  to  the  second  the  same  ratio  which  the
third  has  to  the  fourth  :  then,  if  the  first  be  greater  than  the  second,  the  third
is  also  greater  than  the  fourth ;  and  if  equal,  equal ;  if  less,  less."  This  is
needless  to  those  who  believe  once  A  to  be  a  proper  component  of  the  list  of
multiples,  in  spite  of  multus  signifying  many.


Proposition  5,

If  a  magnitude  be  the  same  multiple  of  a  magnitude  that
a  part  subtracted  is  of  a  part  subtracted,  the  remainder  will
also  be  the  same  multiple  of  the  remainder  that  t/u  whole  is  of
the  whole.

5  For  let  the  magnitude  AB  be  the  same  multiple  of  the
magnitude  CD  that  the  part  AE  subtracted  is  of  the  part  CF
subtracted ;

I  say  that  the  remainder  EB  is  also  the  same  multiple  of  the
remainder  FD  that  the  whole  AB  is  of  the  whole  CD.

A  E  B

T 1 1 1 1 1 1


10        For,  whatever  multiple  AE  is  of  CF,  let  EB  be  made
that  multiple  of  CG.

Then,  since  AE  is  the  same  multiple  of  CF  that  EB  is
of  6^C,
therefore  ^^  is  the  same  multiple  of  CF  that  AB  is  of  GF.

[V.  ,]

15        But,  by  the  assumption,  AE  is  the  same  multiple  of  CF
that  AB  is  of  CD.

Therefore  AB  is  the  same  multiple  of  each  of  the  magni-
tudes GF,  CD ;

therefore  GF  is  equal  to  CD.
ao        Let  CF  be  subtracted  from  each  ;

therefore  the  remainder  GC  is  equal  to  the  remainder  FD.
H.  E.  II.  10


146  BOOK  V  [v.  ^

And,  since  AE  is  the  same  multiple  of  CF  that  EB  is  of
GC,

and  GC  is  equal  to  DF,
25  therefore  AE  is  the  same  multiple  of  CF  that  EB  is  of  FD.

But,  by  hypothesis,

AE  is  the  same  multiple  of  CF  that  AB  is  of  CZ?  ;
therefore  EB  is  the  same  multiple  of  FD  that  ^^  is  of  CD.

That  is,  the  remainder  EB  will  be  the  same  multiple  of
30  the  remainder  FD  that  the  whole  AB  is  of  the  whole  CD.

Therefore  etc.

Q.  E.  D.

10.  let  £B  be  made  that  multiple  of  CG,  ro^aurarXtjUrtov  yeywirta  koX  rh  BB  tov
FH.  From  this  way  of  stating  the  construction  one  might  suppose  that  CG  was  given  and
£B  had  to  be  found  equal  to  a  certain  multiple  of  it.  But  in  fact  EB  is  what  is  given  and
CG  has  to  be  found,  i.e.  CG  has  to  be  constructed  as  a  certain  xii^ultiple  of  £B,

This  proposition  corresponds  to  v.  i,  with  subtraction  taking  the  place  of
addition.     It  proves  the  formula

ma  —  md  =  m(a  —  If).

Euclid's  construction  assumes  that,  if  AjE  is  any  multiple  of  C^  and  £B
is  any  other  magnitude,  a  fourth  straight  line  can  be  found  such  that  JSB  is
the  same  multiple  of  it  that  AE  is  of  C/^,  or  in  other  words  that,  given  any
magnitude,  we  can  divide  it  into  any  number  of  equal  parts.  This  is  however
not  proved,  even  of  straight  lines,  much  less  other  magnitudes,  until  vi.  9.
Peletarius  had  already  seen  this  objection  to  the  construction.  The  difficulty
is  not  got  over  by  regarding  it  merely  as  a  hypothetical  construction;  for
hypothetical  constructions  are  not  in  Euclid's  manner.  The  remedy  is  to
substitute  the  alternative  construction  given  by  Simson,  after  Peletarius  and
Campanus'  translation  from  the  Arabic,  which  only  requires  us  to  add  a
magnitude  to  itself  a  certain  number  of  times.  The  demonstration  follows
Euclid's  line  exactly.

"Take  AG  the  same  multiple  of  FD  that  AE  is  of  CF\

therefore  AE  is  the  same  multiple  of  C^that  EG  is  of  CD,

[V.  ,]

But  AE^  by  hypothesis,  is  the  same  multiple  of  CF  that
AB  is  of  CD ;  therefore  EG  is  the  same  multiple  of  CD  that
AB  is  of  CD;

wherefore  EG  is  equal  to  AB,

Take  from  them  the  common  magnitude  AE ;  the  remainder
^6^  is  equal  to  the  remainder  EB,

Wherefore,  since  AE  is  the  same  multiple  of  CT^that  AG  is
of  FDy  and  since  AG  is  equal  to  EB,
therefore  AE  is  the  same  multiple  of  CF  that  EB  is  of  FD,

But  AE  is  the  same  multiple  of  CF  ihsit  AB  is  of  CD ;
therefore  EB  is  the  same  multiple  of  FD  that  AB  is  of  CD."

Q.  E.  D.


V.  s,  6]  PROPOSITIONS   5,  6  147

Euclid's  proof  amounts  to  this.
Suppose  a  magnitude  x  taken  such  that

fna  —  mb=^mXf  say.
Add  mb  to  each  side,  whence  (by  v.  i)

ma  =  m{x-^b).
Therefore  a  =  ji:  +  ^,  or  x  =  a  —  b,

so  that  ma-md  =  m{a-d),

Simson's  proof,  on  the  other  hand,  argues  thus.
Take  at  =  /«(«-  ^),  the  same  multiple  of  {a  -  d)  that  md  is  of  d.
Then,  by  addition  of  mb  to  both  sides,  we  have  [v.  i]

x-\-fnd  =  may
or  x  =  ma  —  mb.

That  is,  ma-mb^mi^a  —  b).

Proposition  6.

1/  two  magnitudes  be  equimultiples  0/  two  magnitudes,  and
any  magnitudes  subtracted  from  them  be  equimultiples  of  the
samey  the  remainders  also  are  either  equal  to  the  same  or  equi-
multiples of  them.

For  let  two  magnitudes  AB,  CD  be  equimultiples  of  two
magnitudes  E,  /%  and  let  AG^  CH

subtracted     from     them     be     equi-         a       .  Q       B

multiples  of  the  same  two  E,  F\

I  say  that  the  remainders  also,  GB,  ^  ^

HD,  are  either  equal  to  E,  F  or       ^ — • — • — • — • —
equimultiples  of  them.  P  —

For,  first,  let  GB  be  equal  to  E ;
I  say  that  HD  is  also  equal  to  F.

For  let  CK  be  made  equal  to  /^

Since  AG  is  the  same  multiple  of  E  that  C//  is  of  /%
while  GB  is  equal  to  E  and  ICC  to  F,
therefore  AB  is  the  same  multiple  of  E  that  K/f  is  of  F.

[V.2]

But,  by  hypothesis,  AB  is  the  same  multiple  of  E  that
CDisofF;
therefore  IC/f  is  the  same  multiple  of  F  that  CD  is  of  F.

Since  then  each  of  the  magnitudes  AT/,  CD  is  the  same
multiple  of  /%

therefore  K//  is  equal  to  CD.

10 — 2


148  BOOK   V  [v.  6,  7

Let  CH  be  subtracted  from  each  ;
therefore  the  remainder  KC  is  equal  to  the  remainder  HD.

But  F  is  equal  to  KC  ;
therefore  HD  is  also  equal  to  F.

Hence,  if  GB  is  equal  to  E,  HD  is  also  equal  to  F.

Similarly  we  can  prove  that,  even  if  GB  be  a  multiple
of  By  HD  is  also  the  same  multiple  of  F.

Therefore  etc.

Q.  E.  D.

This  proposition  corresponds  to  v.  2,  with  subtraction  taking  the  place  of
addition.  It  asserts  namely  that,  if  n  is  less  than  »i,  ma  —  na  is  the  same
multiple  of  a  that  fnb  —  nh\s  of  b.  The  enunciation  distinguishes  the  cases  in
which  «i  -  »  is  equal  to  i  and  greater  than  i  respectively.

Simson  observes  that,  while  only  the  first  case  (the  simpler  one)  is  proved
in  the  Greek,  both  are  given  in  the  Latin  translation  from  the  Arabic ;  and
he  supplies  accordingly  the  proof  of  the  second  case,  which  Euclid  leaves  to
the  reader.  The  fact  is  that  it  is  exactly  the  same  as  the  other  except  that,  in
the  construction,  CK  is  made  the  same  multiple  of  F  that  GB  is  of  E^  and
at  the  end,  when  it  has  been  proved  that  KC  is  equal  to  HD^  instead  of
concluding  that  HD  is  equal  to  F^  we  have  to  say  "  Because  GB  is  the  same
multiple  of  E  that  KC  is  of  Fy  and  KC  is  equal  to  HD^  therefore  HD  is
the  same  multiple  of  7^  that  GB  is  of  E:'

Proposition  7.

Equal  magnitudes  have  to  the  same  the  same  ratio,  as  also
has  the  same  to  equal  magnitudes.

Let  A,  B  he  equal  magnitudes  and  C  any  other,  chance,
magnitude  ;

I  say  that  each  of  the  magnitudes  A,  B  has  the  same  ratio
to  Cy  and  C  has  the  same  ratio  to  each  of  the  magnitudes
A,B.


A D^

B Er


C»— — »        F>  ' 1 *

For  let  equimultiples  /?,  E  of  A,  B  be  taken,  and  of  C
another,  chance,  multiple  F.

Then,  since  D  is  the  same  multiple  of  A  that  E  is  of  i?,
while  A  is  equal  to  B,

therefore  D  is  equal  to  E.

But  F  is  another,  chance,  magnitude.


V.  7,  8]  PROPOSITIONS  6—8  149

If  therefore  D  is  in  excess  of  F,  E  is  also  in  excess  of  F,
if  equal  to  it,  equal ;  and,  if  less,  less.

And  D,  E  are  equimultiples  of  ^,  B,
while  F  is  another,  chance,  multiple  of  C ;

therefore,  as  A  is  to  C,  so  is  B  to  C  [v.  Def.  5]

I  say  next  that  C  also  has  the  same  ratio  to  each  of  the
magnitudes  A^  B.

For,  with  the  same  construction,  we  can  prove  similarly
that  D  is  equal  to  E ;
and  F  is  some  other  magnitude.

If  therefore  F  is  in  excess  of  /?,  it  is  also  in  excess  of  E,
if  equal,  equal ;  and,  if  less,  less.

And  F  \s  a  multiple  of  C,  while  /?,  E  are  other,  chance,
equimultiples  of-^,  B  \

therefore,  as  C  is  to  ^,  so  is  C  to  B.  [v.  Def.  5]

Therefore  etc.

PoRiSM.  From  this  it  is  manifest  that,  if  any  magnitudes
are  proportional,  they  will  also  be  proportional  inversely.

Q.  E.  a

In  this  proposition  there  is  a  similar  use  of  o  hvx(Ev  to  that  which  has
been  discussed  under  Prop.  4.  Any  multiple  -^  of  C  is  taken  and  then,
four  lines  lower  down,  we  are  told  that  "  F  is  another,  chance,  magnitude.''
It  is  of  course  not  any  magnitude  whatever^  and  Simson  leaves  out  the
sentence,  but  this  time  without  calling  attention  to  it.

Of  the  Porism  to  this  proposition  Heiberg  says  that  it  is  properly  put  here
in  the  best  MS.  ^  for,  as  August  had  already  observed,  if  it  was  in  its  right
place  where  Theon  put  it  (at  the  end  of  v.  4),  the  second  part  of  the  proof  of
this  proposition  would  be  unnecessary.  But  the  truth  is  that  the  Porism  is  no
more  in  place  here.  The  most  that  the  proposition  proves  is  that,  if  A^  B
are  equal,  and  C  any  other  magnitude,  then  two  conclusions  are  simultaneously
established,  (i)  that  A  is  to  C  sls  B  is  to  Cand  (2)  that  Cisto  A  as  C  is  to
B,  The  second  conclusion  is  not  established  from  the  first  conclusion  (as
it  ought  to  be  in  order  to  justify  the  inference  in  the  Porism),  but  from  a
hypothesis  on  which  the  first  conclusion  itself  depends ;  and  moreover  it  is
not  a  proportion  in  its  general  form,  i.e.  between  /our  magnitudes,  that  is  in
question,  but  only  the  particular  case  in  which  the  consequents  are  equal.

Aristotle  tacitly  assumes  inversion  (combined  with  the  solution  of  the
problem  of  Eucl.  vi.  11)  in  Meteorologica  in.  5,  376  a  14 — 16.

Proposition  8.

Of  unequal  magnitudes^  the  greater  has  to  the  same  a
greater  ratio  than  the  less  has ;  and  the  same  has  to  the  less
a  greater  ratio  than  it  has  to  the  greater.


ISO  BOOK  V  [v,  8

Let  AB,  C  be  unequal  magnitudes,  and  let  AB  be  greater ;
let    D    be    another,    chance,

magnitude ;  e b

I    say  that  AB  has  to  Z?  a

greater  ratio  than  C  has   to  q h

/?,  and  D  has  to  C  a  greater

ratio  than  it  has  to  AB.  ^

For,  since  AB  is  greater      ^
than  C,  let  BE  be  made  equal      ^

toC;  ^

then  the  less  of  the   magni-     ^

tudes  AE,  EB,  if  multiplied,

will  sometime  be  greater  than  D.  [v.  Def.  4]

[Case  I.]

First,  let  ^^  be  less  than  EB ;

let  AE  be  multiplied,  and  let  ,FG  be  a  multiple  of  it  which  is
greater  than  D ;

then,. whatever  multiple  FG  is  of  AE,  let  GH  be  made  the
same  multiple  of  EB  and  K  oi  C\

and  let  L  be  taken  double  of  D,  M  triple  of  it,  and  successive
multiples  increasing  by  one,  until  what  is  taken  is  a  multiple
of  D  and  the  first  that  is  greater  than  K.  Let  it  be  taken,
and  let  it  be  N  which  is  quadruple  of  D  and  the  first
multiple  of  it  that  is  greater  than  K.

Then,  since  K  is  less  than  N  first,

therefore  K  is  not  less  than  M.

And,  since  FG  is  the  same  multiple  of  AE  that  GH  is  of
EB,

therefore  FG  is  the  same  multiple  oi  AE  that  FH  is  of  AB.

[V.    I]

But  FG  is  the  same  multiple  oi  AE  that  A'  is  of  C ;

therefore  FH  is  the  same  multiple  of  AB  that  A'  is  of  C ;

therefore  FH,  K  are  equimultiples  of  AB,  C.

Again,  since  GH  is  the  same  multiple  of  EB  that  K  is
of  C,

and  EB  is  equal  to  C,

therefore  GH  is  equal  to  K.


V.  8]  PROPOSITION   8  151

But  K  is  not  less  than  M\

therefore  neither  is  GH  less  than  M.

And  FG  is  greater  than  D  ;
therefore  the  whole  FH  is  greater  than  D,  M  together.

But  Dy  M  together  are  equal  to  N,  inasmuch  as  M  is
triple  of  D,  and  My  D  together  are  quadruple  of  Z?,  while
N  is  also  quadruple  of  D ;  whence  My  D  together  are  equal
X.O  N.

But  FH  is  greater  than  My  D  ;

therefore  FH  is  in  excess  of  Ny
while  K  is  not  in  excess  of  -A^.

And  FHy  K  are  equimultiples  of  ABy  C,  while  N  is
another,  chance,  multiple  of  D ;

therefore  AB  has  to  Z?  a  greater  ratio  than  C  has  to  D.

[v.  Def.  7]

I  say  next,  that  D  also  has  to  C  a  greater  ratio  than  D
has  to  AB.

For,  with  the  same  construction,  we  can  prove  similarly
that  N  is  in  excess  of  Ky  while  N  is  not  in  excess  of  FH.

And  iV  is  a  multiple  of  /?,
while  FHy  K  are  other,  chance,  equimultiples  of  ABy  C ;

therefore  D  has  to  C  a  greater  ratio  than  D  has  to  AB.

[v.  Def.  7]

\Case  2.]

Again,  let  AE  be  greater  than  EB.

Then  the  less,  EBy  if  multiplied,  will  sometime  be  greater
than  D.  [v.  Def.  4]

Let  it  be  multiplied,  and  e      b

let  GHh^  a  multiple  of  EB       ^ '

and  greater  than  D ;                       ^        '  q  ^

and,  whatever  multiple  GH  is        ^               '  '       ^       '

of  EBy  let  FG  be  made  the       ^        ^ — '
same  multiple  of  AE,  and  /^       ^         *
ofC  L . .

Then  we  can  prove  simi-       ^  '         '         '

larly  that  FHy  K  are  equi-       n- 1 1 » •

multiples  of  ABy  C;

and,  similarly,  let  JV  be  taken  a  multiple  of  D  but  the  first

that  is  greater  than  FGy

so  that  FG  is  again  not  less  than  M.


152  BOOK  V  [v.  8

But  GH  is  greater  than  D ;
therefore  the  whole  FH  is  in  excess  of  /?,  M,  that  is,  of  N.

Now  A^  is  not  in  excess  of  N^  inasmuch  as  FG  also,  which
is  greater  than  GH,  that  is,  than  K,  is  not  in  excess  of  -A^.

And  in  the  same  manner,  by  following  the  above  argu-
ment, we  complete  the  demonstration.

Therefore  etc.

Q.  E.  D.

The  two  separate  cases  found  in  the  Greek  text  of  the  demonstration  can
practically  be  compressed  into  one.  Also  the  expositor  of  the  two  cases
makes  them  differ  more  than  they  need.  It  is  necessary  in  each  case  to
select  the  smaller  of  the  two  segments  AE^  EB  oi  AB  with  a  view  to  taking
a  multiple  of  it  which  is  greater  than  D  \  in  the  first  case  therefore  AE  is
taken,  in  the  second  EB.  But,  while  in  the  first  case  successive  multiples  of
D  are  taken  in  order  to  find  the  first  multiple  that  is  greater  than  GH  {or  K)^
in  the  second  case  the  multiple  is  taken  which  is  the  first  that  is  greater  than
FG.  This  difference  is  not  necessary ;  the  first  multiple  of  D  that  is  greater
than  GH  would  equally  serve  in  the  second  case.  Lastly,  the  use  of  the
magnitude  K  might  have  been  dispensed  with  in  both  cases ;  it  is  of  no
practical  use  and  only  lengthens  the  proofs.  For  these  reasons  Simson
considers  that  Theon,  or  some  other  unskilful  editor,  has  vitiated  the
proposition.  This  however  seems  an  unsafe  assumption ;  for,  while  it  was
not  the  habit  of  the  great  Greek  geometers  to  discuss  separately  a  number  of
different  cases  (e.g.  in  i.  7  and  i.  35  Euclid  proves  one  case  and  leaves  the
others  to  the  reader),  there  are  many  exceptions  to  prove  the  rule,  e.g.  Eucl.
HI.  25  and  33 ;  and  we  know  that  many  fundamental  propositions,  after-
wards proved  generally,  were  first  discovered  in  relation  to  particular  cases
and  then  generalised,  so  that  Book  v.,  presenting  a  comparatively  new
theory,  might  fairly  be  expected  to  exhibit  more  instances  than  the  earlier
books  do  of  unnecessary  subdivision.  The  use  of  the  K  is  no  more  con-
clusive against  the  genuineness  of  the  proofs.

Nevertheless  Simson's  version  of  the  proof  is  certainly  shorter,  and  more-
over it  takes  account  of  the  case  in  which  AE  is  equal  to  EB,  and  of  the  case
in  which  AE,  EB  are  both  greater  than  D  (though  these  cases  are  scarcely
worth  separate  mention).

"If  the  magnitude  which  is  not  the  greater  of  the  two  AE,  EB  be  (i)
not  less  than  D,  take  FG,  GH  the  doubles  of  AE,  EB.

But  if  that  which  is  not  the  greater  of  the  two  AE,  EB  be  (2)  less  than
Z>,  this  magnitude  can  be  multiplied  so  as  to  become  greater  than  £>  whether
it  be  AE  or  EB,

Let  it  be  multiplied  until  it  becomes  greater  than  D,  and  let  the  other  be
multiplied  as  often ;  let  FG  be  the  multiple  thus  taken  of  AE  and  GH  the
same  multiple  of  EB ;
therefore  FG  and  GHaire  each  of  them  greater  than  D.

And,  in  every  one  of  the  cases,  take  Z  the  double  of  D,  M  its  triple  and
so  on,  till  the  multiple  of  D  be  that  which  first  becomes  greater  than  GH

Let  N  be  that  multiple  of  D  which  is  first  greater  than  GH,  and  M  the
multiple  of  D  which  is  next  less  tha,n  Ns


V.  8,  9]  PROPOSITIONS  8,  9  153

Then,  because  N  is  the  multiple  of  D  which  is  the  first  that  becomes
greater  than  Gff,

the  next  preceding  multiple  is  not  greater  than  GH]

that  is,  GH  is  not  less  than  M.

And,  since  FG  is  the  same  multiple  of  AE  that  GH  is  of  EB^

Gff'is  the  same  multiple  of  EB  that  FH  is  of  AB\  [v.  i]

wherefore  FIfy  GlfdHQ  equimultiples  oi  AB^  EB,

And  it  was  shown  that  C^ZTwas  not  less  than  M)

and,  by  the  construction,  FG  is  greater  than  D ;

therefore  the  whole  FH  is  greater  than  My  D  together.

But  My  D  together  are  equal  to  N'y

therefore  Fffis  greater  than  N.

But  GIf  is  not  greater  than  N\

and  FHy  GHdjQ  equimultiples  of  A  By  BE,

and  A''  is  a  multiple  of  D ;

therefore  AB  has  to  D  a,  greater  ratio  than  BE  (or  C)  has  to  Z>,     [v.  Def.  7]

Also  D  has  to  BE  a  greater  ratio  than  it  has  to  AB,
For,  having  made  the  same  construction,  it  may  be  shown,  in  like  manner,
that  JVis  greater  than  6^-^  but  that  it  is  not  greater  than  Fff;

and  JVis  a.  multiple  of  Dy

and  GIfy  FH  are  equimultiples  of  EBy  AB  \

Therefore  D  has  to  EB  a  greater  ratio  than  it  has  to  AB'^        [v.  Def.  7]

The  proof  may  perhaps  be  more  readily  grasped  in  the  more  symbolical
form  thus.

Take  the  wth  equimultiples  of  C,  and  of  the  excess  of  AB  over  C  (that  is,
of  AE)y  such  that  each  is  greater  than  D ;

and,  of  the  multiples  of  Dy  let  pD  be  the  first  that  is  greater  than  wC,  and  nD
the  next  less  multiple  of  D,

Then,  since  mC  is  not  less  than  nDy

and,  by  the  construction,  m(AE)  is  greater  than  Z>,

the  sum  of  mC  and  m{AE)  is  greater  than  the  sum  of  nD  and  D,

That  is,  m{AB)  is  greater  than/Z>.

And,  by  the  construction,  mC  is  less  than/>Z?.

Therefore  [v.  Def.  7]  AB  has  to  Z>  a  greater  ratio  than  C  has  to  D,

Again,  since  pD  is  less  than  m{AB)y

and  pD  is  greater  than  mCy

D  has  to  C  a  greater  ratio  than  D  has  to  AB,

Proposition  9.

Magnitudes  which  have  the  same  ratio  to  the  same  are
equal  to  one  another ;  and  magnitttdes  to  which  the  same  has
the  same  ratio  are  equal.


154  BOOK  V  [v.  9

For  let  each  of  the  magnitudes  A,  B  have  the  same
ratio  to  C ;
I  say  that  A  is  equal  to  B.  ^

For,  otherwise,  each  of  the
magnitudes  A,  B  would  not  ^

have  had  the  same  ratio  to  C\  [v.  8]

but  it  has ;

therefore  A  is  equal  to  B.

Again,  let  C  have  the  same  ratio  to  each  of  the  magni-
tudes A,  B\
I  say  that  A  is  equal  to  B.

For,  otherwise,  C  would  not  have  had  ihe  same  ratio  to
each  of  the  magnitudes  A,  B\  [v.  8]

but  it  has ;

therefore  A  is  equal  to  B.

Therefore  etc.

Q.  E.  D.

If  ^  is  to  C2&B  is  to  C,
or  if  C  is  to  -<4  as  C  is  to  B^  then  A  is  equal  to  B,

Simson  gives  a  more  explicit  proof  of  this  proposition  which  has  the
advantage  of  referring  back  to  the  fundamental  5th  and  7th  definitions,
instead  of  quoting  the  results  of  previous  propositions,  which,  as  will  be  seen
from  the  next  note,  may  be,  in  the  circumstances,  unsafe.

"  Let  A^  B  have  each  of  them  the  same  ratio  to  C\

A  is  equal  to  B,

For,  if  they  are  not  equal,  one  of  them  is  greater  than  the  other ;
let  A  be  the  greater.

Then,  by  what  was  shown  in  the  preceding  proposition,  there  are  some
equimultiples  of  A  and  B^  and  some  multiple  of  C,  such  that  the  multiple  of
A  is  greater  than  the  multiple  of  C,  but  the  multiple  of  B  is  not  greater  than
that  of  C.

Let  such  multiples  be  taken,  and  let  Z>,  E  be  the  equimultiples  of  A^  B^
and  F  the  multiple  of  C,  so  that  D  may  be  greater  than  F^  and  E  not  greater
than  F,

But,  because  -^  is  to  C  as  -5  is  to  C,
and  of  Ay  B  are  taken  equimultiples  Z>,  Ey  and  of  C  is  taken  a  multiple  Fy
and  D  is  greater  than  Fy

E  must  also  be  greater  than  F,  [v.  Def.  5]

But  E  is  not  greater  than  F\  which  is  impossible.

Next,  let  C  have  the  same  ratio  to  each  of  the  magnitudes  A  and  B  \
A  is  equal  to  B,

For,  if  not,  one  of  them  is  greater  than  the  other ;
let  A  be  the  greater.


V.  9,  lo]  PROPOSITIONS  9,  10  155

Therefore,  as  was  shown  in  Prop.  8,  there  is  some  multiple  F  of  C,  and
some  equimultiples  E  and  D  oi  B  and  A^  such  that  F  is  greater  than  R  and
not  greater  than  Z>.

But,  because  C  is  to  -^  as  C  is  to  A^
and  /^the  multiple  of  the  first  is  greater  than  E  the  multiple  of  the  second,

/^the  multiple  of  the  third  is  greater  than  D  the  multiple  of  the  fourth.

[v.  Def.  5]

But  F\^  not  greater  than  D :  which  is  impossible.

Therefore  A  is  equal  to  -^."


Proposition  id.

Of  magnitudes  which  have  a  ratio  to  the  same,  that
which  has  a  greater  ratio  is  gredter;  and  that  to  which  the
same  has  a  greater  ratio  is  less.

For  let  A  have  to  C  a  greater  ratio  than  B  has  to  C ;
I  say  that  A  is  greater  than  B.


For,  if  not,  A  is  either  equal  to  B  or  less.

Now  A  is  not  equal  to  ^ ;
for  in  that  case  each  of  the  magnitudes  A^  B  would  have
had  the  same  ratio  to  C ;  [v.  7]

but  they  have  not ;

therefore  A  is  not  equal  to  B.

Nor  again  is  A  less  than  B ;
for  in  that  case  A  would  have  had  to  C  a  less  ratio  than  B
has  to  C ;  [v.  8]

but  it  has  not ;

therefore  A  is  not  less  than  B.

But  it  was  proved  not  to  be  equal  either ;
therefore  A  is  greater  than  B,

Again,  let  C  have  to  -5  a  greater  ratio  than  C  has  to  A  ;
I  say  that  B  is  less  than  A.

For,  if  not,  it  is  either  equal  or  greater.

Now  ^  is  not  equal  to  A  ;
for  in  that  case  C  would  have  had  the  same  ratio  to  each  of
the  magnitudes  A,  B ;  [v.  7]

but  it  has  not ;

therefore  A  is  not  equal  to  B.


iS6  BOOK  V  [v.  TO

Nor  again  is  B  greater  than  A  ;
for  in  that  case  C  would  have  had  to  -5  a  less  ratio  than  it
has  to  ^  ;  [v.  8]

but  it  has  not ;

therefore  B  is  not  greater  than  A.
But  it  was  proved  that  it  is  not  equal  either ;

therefore  B  is  less  than  A.
Therefore  etc.  q.  e.  d.

No  better  example  can,  I  think,  be  found  of  the  acuteness  which  Simson
brought  to  bear  in  his  critical  examination  of  the  Elements^  and  of  his  great
services  to  the  study  of  Euclid,  than  is  furnished  by  the  admirable  note  on
this  proposition  where  he  points  out  a  serious  flaw  in  the  proof  as  given  in
the  text.

For  the  first  time  Euclid  is  arguing  about  greater  and  less  ratios,  and  it
will  be  found  by  an  examination  of  the  steps  of  the  proof  that  he  assumes
more  with  regard  to  the  meaning  of  the  terms  than  he  is  entitled  to  assume,
having  regard  to  the  fact  that  the  definition  of  greater  ratio  (Def.  7)  is  all
that,  as  yet,  he  has  to  go  upon.  That  we  cannot  argue,  at  present,  about
greater  and  less  as  applied  to  ratios  in  the  same  way  as  about  the  same  terms
in  relation  to  magnitudes  is  indeed  sufficiently  indicated  by  the  fact  that  Euclid
does  not  assume  for  ratios  what  is  in  Book  i.  an  axiom,  viz.  that  things  which
are  equal  to  the  same  thing  are  equal  to  one  another;  on  the  contrary,  he
proveSy  in  Prop.  11,  that  ratios  which  are  the  same  with  the  same  ratio  are  the
same  with  one  another.

Let  us  now  examine  the  steps  of  the  proof  in  the  text.  First  we  are  told
that

"  y4  is  greater  than  B,

For,  if  not,  it  is  either  equal  to  B  or  less  than  it.

Now  A  is  not  equal  to  B ;

for  in  that  case  each  of  the  two  magnitudes  A^  B  would  have  had  the
same  ratio  to  C:  [v.  7]

but  they  have  not :

therefore  A  is  not  equal  to  ^."

As  Simson  remarks,  the  force  of  this  reasoning  is  as  follows.

If  A  has  to  C  the  same  ratio  as  B  has  to  C,
then — supposing  any  equimultiples  of  A^  B  to  be  taken  and  any  multiple
of  C—

by  Def.  5,  if  the  multiple  of  -<^  be  greater  than  the  multiple  of  C,  the  multiple
of  B  is  also  greater  than  that  of  C.

But  it  follows  from  the  hypothesis  (that  A  has  a  greater  ratio  to  C  than  B
has  to  C)  that,

by  Def.  7,  there  must  be  some  equimultiples  of  Ay  B  and  some  multiple  of
C  such  that  the  multiple  of  A  is  greater  than  the  multiple  of  C,  but  the
multiple  of  B  is  not  greater  than  the  same  multiple  of  C.

And  this  directly  contradicts  the  preceding  deduction  from  the  supposition
that  A  has  to  C  the  same  ratio  as  B  has  to  C  \

therefore  that  supposition  is  impossible.


V.  lo]  PROPOSITION    lo  157

The  proof  now  goes  on  thus  :

**  Nor  again  is  A  less  than  B ;
for,  in  that  case,  A  would  have  had  to  C  a  less  ratio  than  B  has  to  C\

but  It  has  not ;

therefore  A  is  not  less  than  -^."

It  is  here  that  the  difficulty  arises.  As  before,  we  must  use  Def.  7.  ^^A
would  have  had  to  C  a  less  ratio  than  B  has  to  C,"  or  the  equivalent  state-
ment that  B  would  have  had  to  C  a  greater  ratio  than  A  has  to  C,  means
that  there  would  have  been  some  equimultiples  of  B^  A  and  some  multiple  of
C  such  that

(i)   the  multiple  of  B  is  greater  than  the  multiple  of  C,  but

(2)  the  multiple  of  A  is  not  greater  than  the  multiple  of  C,
and  it  ought  to  have  been  proved  that  this  can  never  happen  if  the  hypothesis
of  the  proposition  is  true,  viz.  that  A  has  to  C  a  greater  ratio  than  B  has  to
C:  that  is,  it  should  have  been  proved  that,  in  the  latter  case,  the  multiple  of
A  is  always  greater  than  the  multiple  of  C  whenever  the  multiple  of  B  is
greater  than  the  multiple  of  C  (for,  when  this  is  demonstrated,  it  will  be
evident  that  B  cannot  have  a  greater  ratio  to  C  than  A  has  to  C).  But  this
is  not  proved  (cf.  the  remark  of  De  Morgan  quoted  in  the  note  on  v.  Def.  7,
p.  130),  and  hence  it  is  not  proved  that  the  above  inference  from  the  supposi-
tion that  A  is  less  than  B  is  inconsistent  with  the  hypothesis  in  the  enunciation.
The  proof  therefore  fails.

Simson  suggests  that  the  proof  is  not  Euclid's,  but  the  work  of  some  one
who  apparently  "has  been  deceived  in  applying  what  is  manifest,  when
understood  of  magnitudes,  unto  ratios,  viz.  that  a  magnitude  cannot  be  both
greater  and  less  than  another."

The  proof  substituted  by  Simson  is  satisfactory  and  simple.

"  Let  A  have  to  C  a  greater  ratio  than  B  has  to  C;
A  is  greater  than  B.

For,  because  A^  has  a  greater  ratio  to  C  than  B  has  to  C,  there  are  some
equimultiples  of  A^  B  and  some  multiple  of  C  such  that

the  multiple  of  A  is  greater  than  the  multiple  of  C,  but  the  multiple  of  B
is  not  greater  than  it.  [v.  Def.  7]

Let  them  be  taken,  and  let  D^  E  ht  equimultiples  of  Ay  B^  and  F  a
multiple  of  C,  such  that

D  is  greater  than  F^
but  E  is  not  greater  than  F,

Therefore  D  is  greater  than  E.

And,  because  D  and  E  are  equimultiples  of  A  and  B^  and  D  is  greater
than  E,

therefore  A  is  greater  than  B.         [Simson's  4th  Ax.]

Next,  let  C  have  a  greater  ratio  to  B  than  it  has  to  A ;
B  is  less  than  A,

For  there  is  some  multiple  F  of  C  and  some  equimultiples  E  and  D  of  B
and  A  such  that

7^  is  greater  than  E  but  not  greater  than  Z>.  [v.  Def.  7]

Therefore  E  is  less  than  D ;
and,  because  E  and  D  are  equimultiples  of  B  and  A^
therefore  B  is  less  than  A,**


iS8  BOOK  V  [v.  II

Proposition  ii.

Ratios  which  are  the  same  with  the  same  ratio  are  also
the  same  with  one  another.

For,  as  yi  is  to  B,  so  let  C  be  to  D,
and,  as  C  is  to  D,  so  let  iff  be  to  /^;
I  say  that,  as  yi  is  to  B,  so  is  E  to  F.

A c E

B D F

Q H K

L M N


For  of  Ay  C,  E  let  equimultiples  G,  H,  K  be  taken,  and
of  B,  Dy  F  other,  chance,  equimultiples  Ly  My  N.

Then  since,  as  yi  is  to  By  so  is  C  to  Z?,
and  oi  Ay  C  equimultiples  Gy  H  have  been  taken,
and  of  By  D  other,  chance,  equimultiples  Z,  My
therefore,  if  G  is  in  excess  of  Z,,  //^  is  also  in  excess  of  My
if  equal,  equal,
and  if  less,  less.

Again,  since,  as  C  is  to  Z?,  so  is  E  to  /%
and  of  C,  E  equimultiples  Hy  K  have  been  taken,
and  of  Dy  F  other,  chance,  equimultiples  My  Ny
therefore,  if  H  is  in  excess  of  My  K  is  also  in  excess  of  Ny
if  equal,  equal,
and  if  less,  less.

But  we  saw  that,  if  H  was  in  excess  of  My  G  was  also
in  excess  of  Z.  ;  if  equal,  equal ;  and  if  less,  less  ;
so  that,  in  addition,  if  G  is  in  excess  of  Z,  K  is  also  in  excess

<^{Ny

if  equal,  equal,
and  if  less,  less.

And  Gy  K  are  equimultiples  of  Ay  Ey
while  Ly  N  are  other,  chance,  equimultiples  oi  By  F\

therefore,  as  A  is  to  By  so  is  E  to  F.

Therefore  etc.

Q.  E.  D.


V.  II,  12]  PROPOSITIONS    II,  12  t59

Algebraically,  if  a  :  b  =  c  :  d^

and  c\d-e\f^

then  a\b-e\f.

The  idiomatic  use  of  the  imperfect  in  quoting  a  result  previously  obtained
is  noteworthy.  Instead  of  saying  **  But  //  was  proved  that^  if  H  is  in  excess
of  M^  G  is  also  in  excess  of  Z,"  the  Greek  text  has  "  But  if  H  was  in  excess
of  My  G  was  also  in  excess  of  Z,"  aXXa  ct  vircpcixc  to  0  toO  M,  vircpcixc  koX
TO  H  ToO  A.

This  proposition  is  tacitly  used  in  combination  with  v.  i6  and  v.  24  in  the
geometrical  passage  in  Aristotle,  Meteorologica  iii.  5,  376  a  22 — 26.


Proposition  12.

If  any  number  of  magnitudes  be  proportionaly  as  one  of
the  antecedents  is  to  one  of  the  consequents,  so  will  all  the
antecedents  be  to  all  the  consequents.

Let  any  number  of  magnitudes  A,  B,  C,  D,  E,  F  be
proportional,  so  that,  as  A  is  to  B,  so  is   C  to  Z?  and  E
to  F\
I  say  that,  as  A  is  to  B,  so  are  A,  C,  E  lo  B,  /?,  F.


A

B

—

C

D

E

-

F

Q

1

-

LI

M

w

IVI

K

-

N-

For  of  A,  C  E  let  equimultiples  G,  H^  Kh^  taken,
and  of  By  /?,  F  other,  chance,  equimultiples  Z,  M,  N.

Then  since,  as  A  is  to  B,  so  is  C  to  /?,  and  E  to  /%
and  of  A,  C,  E  equimultiples  G,  H,  K  have  been  taken,
and  o{  B,  D,  jP  other,  chance,  equimultiples  L,  M,  N,
therefore,  if  G  is  in  excess  of  Z,  H  is  also  in  excess  of  M^
and  A^ofA^,
if  equal,  equal,
and  if  less,  less  ;
so  that,  in  addition,

if  G  is  in  excess  of  Z,  then  G,  //,  K  are  in  excess  of  Z,  M,  N^
if  equal,  equal,
and  if  less,  less.


i6o  BOOK  V  [v.  12,  13

Now  G  and  G^  H,  K  are  equimultiples  of  A  and  A,  C,  E,
since,  if  any  number  of  magnitudes  whatever  are  respec-
tively equimultiples  of  any  magnitudes  equal  in  multitude,
whatever  multiple  one  of  the  magnitudes  is  of  one,  that
multiple  also  will  all  be  of  all.  [v.  i]

For  the  same  reason

L  and  Z..  M,  N  are  also  equimultiples  of  B  and  B,  D,  F\

therefore,  as  A  is  to  By  so  are  Ay  C,  B  to  B,  D,  F.

[v.  Def.  5]
Therefore  etc.

Q.  E.  D.

Algebraically,  \i  a  \a' -b  \b'  =  c  \d  etc.,  each  ratio  is  equal  to  the  ratio
(a  +  ^  +  r+  ...)  :  (a'  +  ^'  +  ^+  ...).

This  theorem  is  quoted  by  Aristotle,  Eth,  Nic.  v.  7,  1 131  b  14,  in  the
shortened  form  "the  whole  is  to  the  whole  what  each  part  is  to  each  part
(respectively)."

Proposition  13.

If  a  first  magnitude  have  to  a  second  the  same  ratio  as  a
third  to  a  fourth,  and  the  third  have  to  the  fourth  a  greater
ratio  than  a  fifth  has  to  a  sixth,  the  first  will  also  have  to  the
second  a  greater  ratio  than  the  fifth  to  the  sixth.

For  let  a  first  magnitude  A  have  to  a  second  B  the
same  ratio  as  a  third  C  has  to  a  fourth  Z?,

and  let  the  third  C  have  to  the  fourth  D  a  greater  ratio  than
a  fifth  E  has  to  a  sixth  F  ;

I  say  that  the  first  A  will  also  have  to  the  second  B  a  greater
ratio  than  the  fifth  E  to  the  sixth  F.


A c M-

B —  D N


E-
F-
H-


For,  since  there  are  some  equimultiples  of  C,  E,

and   of  /?,   F  other,  chance,   equimultiples,   such    that   the
multiple  of  C  is  in  excess  of  the  multiple  of  D,


V.  13]  PROPOSITIONS   12,  13  161

while  the  multiple  of  E  is  not  in  excess  of  the  multiple  of  F.

[v.  Def.  7]
let  them  be  taken,

and  let  G,  H  be  equimultiples  of  C,  E,

and  K,  L  other,  chance,  equimultiples  of  /?,  F,

so  that  G  is  in  excess  of  K,  but  H  is  not  in  excess  of  L  ;

and,  whatever  multiple  G  is  of  C,  let  M  be  also  that  multiple

of^,

and,  whatever  multiple  K  is  of  /?,  let  N  be  also  that  multiple

of^.

Now,  since,  as  .^  is  to  B,  so  is  C  to  Z?,
and  of  A,  C  equimultiples  M^  G  have  been  taken,
and  of  B,  D  other,  chance,  equimultiples  N,  K,
therefore,  if  M  is  in  excess  of  iV,  G  is  also  in  excess  of  K^
if  equal,  equal,
and  if  less,  less.  [v.  Def.  5]

But  G  is  in  excess  of  A';
therefore  M  is  also  in  excess  of  N.

But  H  \s  not  in  excess  of  L  ;

and  M^  //'are  equimultiples  oi  A,  E,

and  N,  L  other,  chance,  equimultiples  di  B^  F\

therefore  A  has  to  Z?  a  greater  ratio  than  E  has  to  F.

[v.  Def.  7]

Therefore  etc.

Q.  E.  D.

Algebraically,  if  a\b=^c  \d^

and  c  :  d>e  \f^

then  a  :  b>e  \f.

After  the  words  "  for,  since  "  in  the  first  line  of  the  proof,  Theon  added
"  C  has  to  Z?  a  greater  ratio  than  E  has  to  Fy*  so  that  " there  are  some
equimultiples"  began,  with  him,  the  principal  sentence.

The  Greek  text  has,  after  "  of  Z?,  F  other,  chance,  equimultiples,"  '*  and
the  multiple  of  C  is  in  excess  of  the  multiple  of  />...."  The  meaning  being
"such  that,"  I  have  substituted  this  for  "and,"  after  Simson.

The  following  will  show  the  method  of  Euclid's  proof.
Since  cxd>eify

there  will  be  some  equimultiples  mc^  me  of  r,  ^,  and  some  equimultiples  ndy  nf
of  </,/  such  that

mondy  while  me^nf.

H.  £.  n.  \\


i6j  book  V  [v.  13,  14

But,  since  «  a  :d  =  c:  d^

therefore,  according  as  ma  >  =  < n^,    mc>=^<nd.

And  mc>nd;
therefore  ma  >  nd,  while  (from  above)  me^nf.
Therefore  a\b>e\f.

Simson  adds  as  a  corollary  the  following :

''  If  the  first  have  a  greater  ratio  to  the  second  than  the  third  has  to  the
fourth,  but  the  third  the  same  ratio  to  the  fourth  which  the  fifth  has  to  the
sixth,  it  may  be  demonstrated  in  like  manner  that  the  first  has  a  greater  ratio
to  the  second  than  the  fifth  has  to  the  sixth."

This  however  scarcely  seems  to  be  worth  separate  statement,  since  it  only
amounts  to  changing  the  order  of  the  two  parts  of  the  hypothesis.

Proposition  14.

If  a  first  magnitude  have  to  a  second  the  same  ratio  as  a
third  has  to  a  fourth,  and  the  first  be  greater  than  the  third,
the  second  will  also  be  greater  than  the  fourth;  if  equals  equal;
and  if  less,  less.

For  let  a  first  magnitude  A  have  the  same  ratio  to  a
second  /?  as  a  third  C  has  to  a  fourth  D\    and  let  A  be
greater  than  C;
I  say  that  B  is  also  greater  than  D.


A c-

B D-


For,  since  A  is  greater  than  C,
and  B  is  another,  chance,  magnitude,

therefore  A  has  to  -5  a  greater  ratio  than  C  has  to  B.       [v.  8]
But,  as  -^  is  to  B,  so  is  C  to  Z? ;
therefore  C  has  also  to  Z?  a  greater  ratio  than  C  has  to  B.

[V.13]
But  that  to  which  the  same  has  a  greater  ratio  is  less ;

[v.  10]
therefore  D  is  less  than  B ;

so  that  B  is  greater  than  D.

Similarly  we  can  prove  that,  if  A  be  equal  to  C,  B  will
also  be  equal  to  D  ;
and,  if  A  be  less  than  C,  B  will  also  be  less  than  D.

Therefore  etc.

Q.  E.  D.


V.  14,  15]  PROPOSITIONS   13—15  163

Algebraically,  if  a  :  b  =  c  \  d^

then,  according  asa>  =  <^,     b>  =  <d,

Simson  adds  the  specific  proof  of  the  second  and  third  parts  of  this
proposition,  which  Euclid  dismisses  with  "Similarly  we  can  prove...."

"  Secondly,  \{  Ahe  equal  to  C,  B  is  equal  to  D\  for  ^  is  to  ^  as  C,  that
is  A/isto  D'y

therefore  B  is  equal  to  D,  [v.  9]

Thirdly,  li  A  ht  less  than  C,  B  shall  be  less  than  D,
For  C  is  greater  than  A  ;
and,  because  C  is  to  Z>  as  -<4  is  to  B^

D  is  greater  than  By  by  the  first  case.
Wherefore  B  is  less  than  Z?."

Aristotle,  MeieoroL  iii.  5,  376  a  11 — 14,  quotes  the  equivalent  proposition
that,  if  a>b^  od.


Proposition  15.

Parts  have  the  same  ratio  as  the  same  multiples  of  them
taken  in  corresponding  order.

For  let  AB  be  the  same  multiple  of  C  that  DE  is  of  jP;
I  say  that,  as  C  is  to  F,  so  is  A  B  to  £>B.


Ai 1  «  «B  C»-

D* !^ fc .E  F-


For,  since  AB  is  the  same  multiple  of  C  that  £>£  is  of  /%
as  many  magnitudes  as  there  are  in  AB  equal  to  C,  so  many
are  there  also  in  £>£  equal  to  F.

Let  AB  be  divided  into  the  magnitudes  AG,  GH,  HB
equal  to  C,

and  DE  into  the  magnitudes  DK,  KL,  LE  equal  to  F\
then  the  multitude  of  the  magnitudes  AGy  GH,  HB  vi'iW  be
equal  to  the  multitude  of  the  magnitudes  DK,  KL,  LE.

And,  since  AG,  GH,  HB  are  equal  to  one  another,
and  DK,  KL,  LE  are  also  equal  to  one  another,
therefore,  as  -^G^  is  to  DK,  so  is  GH  to  KL,  and  HB  to  LE.

[V.  7]

Therefore,  as  one  of  the  antecedents  is  to  one  of  the
consequents,  so  will  all  the  antecedents  be  to  all  the
consequents  ;  [v.  12]

therefore,  as  -^6^  is  to  DK,  so  is  AB  to  DE.


II — 2


i64  BOOK  V  [v.  IS,  i6

But  AG  is  equal  to  C  and  DIC  to  jF;

therefore,  as  C  is  to  /%  so  is  AB  to  D£.
Therefore  etc.  .    q.  e.  d.

Algebraically,  a  :d  =  ma  :  mb.

Proposition  i6.

1/  four  magnitudes  be  proportional^  th^  will  also  be
proportional  alternately.

Let  A,  jff,  C  Z?  be  four  proportional  magnitudes,
so  that,  as  A  is  to  B,  so  is  C  to  Z? ;

I  say  that  they  will  also  be  so  alternately,  that  is,  as  y^  is
to  C,  so  is  B  to  D.

A c

B D

El 1 1 1  Qi •


Fi 1 1 1  Hi-


For  of  Ay  B  let  equimultiples  E,  Fh^  taken,
and  of  C,  D  other,  chance,  equimultiples  Gy  H.

Then,  since  E  is  the  same  multiple  of  A  that  F  is  of  B,
and   parts   have   the  same   ratio  as  the  same   multiples  of
them,  [v.  15]

therefore,  as  A  is  to  B,  so  is  E  to  F.

But  as  -^  is  to  By  so  is  C  to  Z? ;
therefore  also,  as  C  is  to  /?,  so  is  E  to  F.  [v.  n]

Again,  since  G^  H  are  equimultiples  of  C,  /?,
therefore,  as  C  is  to  D,  so  is  G  to  H.  [v.  15]

But,  as  C  is  to  /?,  so  is  E  to  F\
therefore  also,  as  E  is  to  F,  so  is  G  to  H.  [v.  1 1]

But,  if  four  magnitudes  be  proportional,  and  the  first  be
greater  than  the  third,

the  second  will  also  be  greater  than  the  fourth  ;
if  equal,  equal ;
and  if  less,  less.  [v.  14]

Therefore,  if  E  is  in  excess  of  G,  F  is  also  in  excess  of  H^
if  equal,  equal,
and  if  less,  less.


V.  i6]  PROPOSITIONS   15,  16  165

Now  E,  F  are  equimultiples  of  A^  B^
and  G,  H  other,  chance,  equimultiples  of  C,  D\

therefore,  as  A  is  to  C,  so  is  B  to  D,  [v.  Def.  5]

Therefore  etc.

Q.  E.  D.

3.    *'  Let  A,  B,  C,  D  be  four  proportional  magnitudes,  so  that,  as  A  is  to  B,  so  is

C  to  D."  In  a  number  of  expressions  like  this  it  is  absolutely  necessary,  when  translating
into  English,  to  interpolate  words  which  are  not  in  the  Greek.  Thus  the  Greek  here  is :
'BoTw  ria-aapa  fuyiSri  difdXoyop  t4  A,  B,  F,  A,  wf  rb  A  irpof  to  B,  ofhun  rb  T  wpot  rb  A,
literally  "  Let  A^  B,  C,  D  be  four  proportional  magnitudes,  as  ^  to  ^,  so  Cto  Z>."  The
same  remark  applies  to  the  corresponding  expressions  in  the  next  propositions,  v.  17,  18,
and  to  other  forms  of  expression  in  v.  10—13  and  later  propositions :  e.g.  in  v.  ao  we^  have
a  phrase  meaning  literally  *'  I^t  there  be  magnitudes... which  taken  two  and  two  are  in  the
same  ratio,  ^  A  io  By  so  D  to  ^,"  etc.:  in  v.  ai  "  (magnitudes)... which  taken  two  and
two  are  in  the  same  ratio,  and  let  the  proportion  of  them  be  perturbed,  as  .^  to  B^  so
E  to  /*,"  etc.  In  all  such  cases  (where  the  Greek  is  so  terse  as  to  be  almost  ungrammatical)
I  shall  insert  the  words  necessary  in  English,  without  further  remark.

Algebraically,  if  a  i  b  =  c  :  d^

then  a\c  =  b  \  d.

Taking  equimultiples  wa,  tnb  of  a,  ^,  and  equimultiples  mr,  nd  of  <r,  d^  we
have,  by  v.  15,

a\b  =  ma  \  mby

c  :  d-nc  :  nd.

And,  since  a  \  b  =  c  :  d^

we  have  [v.  1 1]  ma  xtnb-nc  \  nd.

Therefore  [v.  1 4],  according  as  w/i  >  =  <  «<:,     mb>  —  <nd^

so  that  a  :  c  =  b  \  d,

Aristotle  tacitly  uses  the  theorem  in  Meteorologica  iii.  5,  376  a  22 — 24.
The  four  magnitudes  in  this  proposition  must  all  be  ^  /^  same  kind^  and
Simson  inserts  "  of  the  same  kind  "  in  the  enunciation.

This  is  the  first  of  the  propositions  of  Eucl.  v.  which  Smith  and  Bryant
{Euclid's  Elements  of  Geometry^  1901,  pp.  298  sqq.)  prove  by  means  of  vi.  i
so  far  as  the  only  geometrical  magnitudes  in  question  are  straight  lines  or
rectilineal  areas  \  and  certainly  the  proofs  are  more  easy  to  follow  than
Euclid's.     The  proof  of  this  proposition  is  as  follows.

To  prove  that,  If  four  magnitudes  of  the  same  kind  [straight  lines  or
rectilineal  areas]  be  proportionals^  they  will  be  proportionals  when  tcJien
alternately.

Let  P^  C  -^,  5  be  the  four  magnitudes  of  the  same  kind  such  that

P',  Q  =  R,S\

then  it  is  required  to  prove  that

P\R^Q'.S,

Firsts  let  all  the  magnitudes  be  areas.

Construct  a  rectangle  abed  equal  to  the  area  P^  and  to  be  apply  the
rectangle  beef  equal  to  Q,

Also  to  ab^  bf  apply  rectangles  ag^  bk  equal  to  R^  S  respectively.


i66


BOOK  V


[v.  i6,  17


Then,  since  the  rectangles  ac^  be  have  the  same  height,  they  are  to  one
another  as  their  bases. .  [vi.  i]

Hence  FiQ^ab.bf.

But  F'.Q^R'.S.

Therefore    R\S  =  ab\bf,  [v.  n]

i.e.  rect  ag :  rect  bk^ab  \bf.

Hence  (by  the  converse  of  vi.  i)  the  rect-
angles ag^  bk  have  the  same  height,  so  that  k
is  on  the  line  hg.

Hence  the  rectangles  ac^  ag  have  the  same
height,  namely  ab ;  also  be^  bk  have  the  same
height,  namely  bf.


Therefore  rect.  etc  :  rect  ag^bc  \  bg^

and  rect  be  :  rect  bi  =  bc  :  bg.

Therefore  rect  ac  :  rect  ag=  rect  be  :  rect  bk.
That  is,  F\R=-Q\S.

Secondly^  let  the  magnitudes  be  straight  lines  AB^  BC^  CDy  DE,
Construct  the  rectangles  Ab^  Bc^  Cd^  De  with  the  same  height


[VI.   I]
[V.  ,i]


B

Then  Ab\Bc^  AB  :  BC^

and  Cd  :  De=  CD  :  DE,

But  AB  :  BC=  CD  :  DE,

Therefore  Ab  \Bc=Cd\  De,

Hence,  by  the  first  case,

Ab\  Cd=Bc:  De,
and,  since  these  rectangles  have  the  same  height,

AB:  CD  =  BC:DE,


[VI.  I]
[v.ii]


Proposition  17.

If  magnitudes  be  proportional  componendo,  they  will  also
be  proportional  separando.

Let  AB,  BE,  CD^  DF  be  magnitudes  proportional  com-
ponendo, so  that,  as  AB  is  to  BE,  so  is  CD  to  DF\
I  say  that  they  will  also  be  proportional  separando,  that  is,
as  AE  is  to  EB,  so  is  CF  to  DF.

For  of  AE,  EB,  CF,  FD  let  equimultiples  GH,  HK,
LM,  MN  be  taken,
and  of  EB,  FD  other,  chance,  equimultiples,  KO,  NP.


V.  17]  PROPOSITIONS   i6,  17  167

Then,  since  GH  is  the  same  multiple  of  AE  that  HK  is
oiEB,

therefore  GH  is  the  same  multiple  of  AE  that  GK  is  of  AB.

[V.  I]

But  GH  is  the  same  multiple  of  AE  that  LM  is  of  CF\
therefore  GK  is  the  same  multiple  of  AB  that  LM  is  of  CF.


E       B  e       ^^    b

-y 5 5


Again,  since  LM  is  the  same  multiple  of  CF  that  MN
is  of  /^A

therefore  LM  is  the  same  multiple  of  C/^that  ZA^  is  oi  CD.

\y.  I]

But  Zil/  was  the  same  multiple  of  CF  that  GK  is  of  .^jff ;

therefore  GK  is  the  same  multiple  of  AB  that  ZiV  is  of  CD.

Therefore  GK,  LN  are  equimultiples  of  AB,  CD.

Again,  since  HK  is  the  same  multiple  of  EB  that  MN  is
oiFD,

and  KO  is  also  the  same  multiple  oi  EB  that  iVP  is  o(FD,

therefore  the  sum  HO  is  also  the  same  multiple  of  EB  that
MP  is  of  FD.  [v.  2]

And,  since,  as  AB  is  to  BE,  so  is  CZ?  to  DF,

and  of  ^i9,  CZ?  equimultiples  GK,  LN  have  been  taken,

and  of  EB,  FD  equimultiples  HO^  MP,

therefore,  if  GK  is  in  excess  of  HO,  LN  is  also  in  excess  of
MP,

if  equal,  equal,

and  if  less,  less.

Let  GK  be  in  excess  of  HO ;

then,  if  HK  be  subtracted  from  each,

GH  is  also  in  excess  of  KO.

But  we  saw  that,  if  GK  was  in  excess  of  HO,  LN  was
also  in  excess  of  MP  ;

.  therefore  LN  is  also  in  excess  of  MP,


i68  BOOK  V  [v.  17

and,  if  MJV  be  subtracted  from  each,

LM  is  also  in  excess  of  NP ;
so  that,  if  GH  is  in  excess  of  /CO,  LM  is  also  in  excess  of
NP.

Similarly  we  can  prove  that,
if  GH  be  equal  to  KO^  LM  ytiW  also  be  equal  to  NP^
and  if  less,  less.

And  GH,  LM  are  equimultiples  of  AE,  CF^
while  KO,  NP  are  other,  chance,  equimultiples  of  EB,  FD ;
therefore,  as  AE  is  to  EB,  so  is  CF  to  FD.

Therefore  etc.

Q.  E.  D.

Algebraically,  if  a  :  b  =  c  :d,

then  (a-d):d  =  (c-d):d.

I  have  already  noted  the  somewhat  strange  use  of  the  participles  of
ovyfccur^oi  and  Scaipcur^cu  to  convey  the  sense  of  the  technical  avvBun^  and
Suupco-is  Xoyovj  or  what  we  denote  by  componendo  and  s^rando.  lay
oiryfccificva  firyiOri  dvaXxr/ov  j,  koi  &aip€0€rra  avaXoyoi'  corroi  is,  literally,  "if
magnitudes  compounded  be  proportional,  they  will  also  be  proportional
separated,"  by  which  is  meant  *'  if  one  magnitude  made  up  of  two  parts  is  to
one  of  its  parts  as  another  magnitude  made  up  of  two  parts  is  to  one  of  its
parts,  the  remainder  of  the  first  whole  is  to  the  part  of  it  first  taken  as  the
remainder  of  the  second  whole  is  to  the  part  of  it  first  taken."  In  the
algebraical  formula  above  <7,  c  are  the  wholes  and  b^  a-b  and  d,  c—ddXQ  the
parts  and  remainders  respectively.     The  formula  might  also  be  stated  thus :

If  a  +  b  \  b^c  +  d  \dy

then  a  \  b  =  c  \  d,

in  which  case  a  +  b^  c-\^d  are  the  wholes  and  a,  b  and  c,  d  the  parts  and
remainders  respectively.  Looking  at  the  last  formula,  we  observe  that
"separated,"  Siaipc^cKra,  is  used  with  reference  not  to  the  magnitudes  a,  b,  c,  d
but  to  the  compounded  magnitudes  a -^^  by  by  c  +  d,  d.

As  the  proof  is  somewhat  long,  it  will  be  useful  to  give  a  conspectus  of  it
in  the  more  symbolical  form.  To  avoid  minuses,  we  will  take  for  the
hypothesis  the  form

/I  +  ^  is  to  ^  as  ^  +  </  is  to  </.

Take  any  equimultiples  of  the  four  magnitudes  a,  by  r,  dy  viz.

may     mby     mCy     mdy

and  any  other  equimultiples  of  the  consequents,  viz.

nb  and  nd.

Then,  by  v.  i,  m  (a  +  b)y  m  (c  +  d)  are  equimultiples  oi  a  +  by  c  +  d,

and,  by  v.  2,  {m  +  n)  by  {m  +  n)d  are  equimultiples  of  by  d.

Therefore,  by  Def.  5,  since  a  +  ^  is  to  ^  as  ^+ ^  is  to  ^,

according  2^  m  {a -¥ b)>  =^  <{m  -^ n) by    m{c-k-d)>  =  <{m'¥n)d.


V.  17,  i8]  PROPOSITIONS   17,  18  169

Subtract    from  m{a-k-  b\    (m-hn)d   the   common   part   md,  and   from
m{c  +  d),  {m-hn)d  the  common  part  md;  and  we  have,

according  as  ma>  =  <nd,     tnc>^<nd.

But  ma^  mc  are  any  equimultiples  of  «,  <:,  and  nd^  ndzny  equimultiples  of
b,  dy

therefore,  by  v.  Def.  5,

tf  is  to  ^  as  ^  is  to  d*

Smith  and  Bryant's  proof  follows,  mutatis  mutandis^  their  alternative  proof
of  the  next  proposition  (see  pp.  173 — 4  below).


Proposition  18.

If  magnittides  be  proportional  separando,  they  will  also  be
proportional  componendo.

Let    AEy   EBy    CF,   FD  be    magnitudes    proportional
separando,  so  that,  as  AE  is

to  EB,  so  is  CF  to  FD ;  a            E       a

I   say  that  they  will  also  be  '              '                 ^

proportional   componendo,  that  g ^— • 5

is,    as  AB  is   to  BE^  so   is
CD  to  FD.

For,  if  CD  be  not  to  DF  as  AB  to  BE,

then,  as  AB  is   to  BE,   so   will    CD  be   either   to  some
magnitude  less  than  DF  or  to  a  greater.

First,  let  it  be  in  that  ratio  to  a  less  magnitude  DG.

Then,  since,  as  AB  is  to  BE,  so  is  CD  to  DG,

they  are  magnitudes  proportional  componendo ;

so  that  they  will  also  be  proportional  separando.     [v.  17]

Therefore,  as  y^^  is  to  EB,  so  is  CG  to  GD,

But  also,  by  hypothesis,

as  AE  IS  to  EB,  so  is  CF  to  FD.

Therefore  also,  as  CG  is  to  GD,  so  is  CF  to  FD.      [v.  11]

But  the  first  CG  is  greater  than  the  third  CF\

therefore  the  second  GD  is  also  greater  than  the  fourth
FD.  [v.  14]

But  it  is  also  less :  which  is  impossible.
Therefore,  as  AB  is  to  BE,  so  is  not  CD  to  a  less
magnitude  than  FD.


ijro  BOOK  V  [v.  i8

Similarly  we  can  prove  that  neither  is  it  in  that  ratio  to
a  greater;

it  is  therefore  in  that  ratio  to  FD  itself.
Therefore  etc.  ;

Q.  E.  D.

Algebraically,  if  a  :  b  =  c  i  d^

then  (a  +  d)  :  d  =  {c  +  d)  :  d.

In  the  enunciation  of  this  proposition  there  is  the  same  special  use  of
SijffnffjL€va  and  crvrrcdcvra  as  there  was  of  ovyicct/Ltcfa  and  SuupfOivra  in  the
last  enunciation.  Practically,  as  the  algebraical  form  shows,  Si^fp^fUya  might
have  been  left  out

The  following  is  the  method  of  proof  employed  by  Euclid.

Given  that  a  r^  =  r  :  d,

suppose,  if  possible,  that

{a  +  d):d  =  (C'¥d):{d±x).
Therefore,  separando  [v.  17],

a  :  b-(c'^x)  :  (d±x\
whence,  by  v.  1 1,  (c^-x)  \  (d±x)-c  \  d.

But  (c-x)<c^  while  (d+x)>d^

and  {c+x)>c,  while  (d'-x)<d^

which  relations  respectively  contradict  v.  14.

Simson  pointed  out  (as  Saccheri  before  him  saw)  that  Euclid's  demonstra-
tion is  not  legitimate,  because  it  assumes  without  proof  that  io  any  three
magnitudes,  two  of  which,  at  least,  are  of  the  same  kind,  there  exists  a  fourth
proportional.  Clavius  and,  according  to  him,  other  editors  made  this  an
axiom.  But  it  is  far  from  axiomatic;  it  is  not  till  vi.  12  that  Euclid  shows,
by  construction,  that  it  is  true  even  in  the  particular  case  where  the  three
given  magnitudes  are  all  straight  lines.

In  order  to  remove  the  defect  it  is  necessary  either  (i)  to  prove  beforehand
the  proposition  thus  assumed  by  Euclid  or  (2)  to  prove  v.  18  independently
of  it.

Saccheri  ingeniously  proposed  that  the  assumed  proposition  should  be
proved,  for  areas  and  straight  lines,  by  means  of  Euclid  vi.  i,  2  and  12.  As
he  says,  there  was  nothing  to  prevent  Euclid  from  interposing  these  proposi-
tions immediately  after  v.  17  and  then  proving  v.  18  by  means  of  them.
VI.  1 2  enables  us  to  construct  the  fourth  proportional  when  the  three  given
magnitudes  are  straj^t  lines;  and  vi.  12  depends  only  on  vi.  i  and  2.
"  Now,"  says  Saccheri,  "  when  we  have  once  found  the  means  of  constructing
a  straight  line  which  is  a  fourth  proportional  to  three  given  straight  lines,  we
obviously  have  the  solution  of  the  general  problem  *  To  construct  a  straight
line  which  shall  have  to  a  given  straight  line  the  same  ratio  which  two  polygons
have  (to  one  another).' "  For  it  is  sufficient  to  transform  the  polygons  into
two  triangles  of  equal  height  and  then  to  construct  a  straight  line  which  shall
be  a  fourth  proportional  to  the  bases  of  the  triangles  and  the  given  straight
line.

The  method  of  Saccheri  is,  as  will  be  seen,  similar  to  that  adopted  by


V.  i8]  PROPOSITION   i8  171

Smith  and  Bryant  (foe,  at,)  in  proving  the  theorems  of  Euclid  v.  16,  17,  18,  22,
so  far  as  straight  lines  and  rectilineal  areas  are  concerned,  by  means  of  vi.  i.

De  Morgan  gives  a  sketch  of  a  general  proof  of  the  assumed  proposition
that,  B  being  any  magnitude,  and  P  and  Q  two  magnitudes  of  the  same  kind,
there  does  exist  a  magnitude  A  which  is  to  B  in  the  same  ratio  as  P  to  Q.

**  The  right  to  reason  upon  any  aliquot  part  of  any  magnitude  is  assumed ;
though,  in  truth,  aliquot  parts  obtained  by  continual  bisection  would  suffice :
and  it  is  taken  as  previously  proved  that  the  tests  of  greater  and  of  less  ratio
are  never  both  presented  in  any  one  scale  of  relation  as  compared  with
another"  (see  note  on  v.  Def.  7  ad  fin,).

'*  (i)  If  ilf  be  to  ^  in  a  greater  ratio  than  Pio  Q,  so  is  every  magnitude
greater  than  M^  and  so  are  some  less  magnitudes)  and  li  M  bt  \.o  B  m
a  less  ratio  than  P  to  Q,  so  is  every  magnitude  less  than  M^  and  so  are
some  greater  magnitudes.  Part  of  this  is  in  every  system :  the  rest  is  proved
thus.  If  Mheio  B'm  a  greater  ratio  than  P  to  Qy  say,  for  instance,  we  find
that  1 5 J/  lies  between  22B  and  23^?,  while  is^Plies  before  22^.  Let  i$M
exceed  22^?  by  Z;  then,  if  ^  be  less  than  M  by  anything  less  than  the  15th
part  oi  Zy  i$N  \s  between  22^?  and  2^B :  or  JV",  less  than  M^  is  in  a  greater
ratio  to  B  than  P  to  Q,     And  similarly  for  the  other  case.

(2)  M  cBXi  certainly  be  taken  so  small  as  to  be  in  a  less  ratio  to  B  than
P  to  Qy  and  so  large  as  to  be  in  a  greater ;  and  since  we  can  never  pass  from
the  greater  ratio  back  again  to  the  smaller  by  increasing  M^  it  follows  that,
while  we  pass  from  the  first  designated  value  to  the  second,  we  come  upon  an
intermediate  magnitude  A  such  that  every  smaller  is  in  a  less  ratio  to  B  than
P  to  Qy  and  every  greater  in  a  greater  ratio.  Now  A  cannot  be  in  a  less  ratio
to  B  than  P  to  Q,  for  then  some  greater  magnitudes  would  also  be  in  a  less
ratio ;  nor  in  a  greater  ratio,  for  then  some  less  magnitudes  would  be  in  a
greater  ratio;  therefore  ^  is  in  the  same  ratio  to  B^sPio  Q,  The  previously
proved  proposition  above  mentioned  shows  the  three  alternatives  to  be  the
only  ones."

Alternative  proofs  of  V.  18.

Simson  bases  his  alternative  on  v.  5,  6.  As  the  i8th  proposition  is  the
converse  of  the  17th,  and  the  latter  is  proved  by  means  of  v.  i  and  2,  of
which  v.  5  and  6  are  converses,  the  proof  of  v.  18  by  v.  5  and  6  would  be
natural;  and  Simson  holds  that  Euclid  must  have  proved  v.  18  in  this  way
because  "the  5th  and  6th  do  not  enter  into  the  demonstration  of  any
proposition  in  this  book  as  we  have  it,  nor  can  they  be  of  any  use  in  any
proposition  of  the  Elements,"  and  "  the  5  th  and  6th  have  undoubtedly  been
put  into  the  5  th  book  for  the  sake  of  some  propositions  in  it,  as  all  the  other
propositions  about  equimultiples  have  been."

Simson's  proof  is  however,  as  it  seems  to  me,  intolerably  long  and  difficult
to  follow  unless  it  be  put  in  the  symbolical  form  as  follows.

Suppose  that  a  is  to  ^  as  ^  is  to  ^;

it  is  required  to  prove  that  a  +  ^  is  to  ^  as  r  +  ^  is  to  ^.

Take  any  equimultiples  of  the  last  four  magnitudes,  say

m(a-^b)y     mby     m(c  +  d)y     md,

and  any  equimultiples  of  ^,  dy  as

nd,     nd.


1J2  BOOK  V  [v.  i8

Qearly,  if  nd  is  greater  than  m^,

nd  is  greater  than  md;
if  equal,  equal ;  and  if  less,  less.

I.  Suppose  ftd  not  greater  than  mdy  so  that  nd  is  also  not  greater  than  md.
Now  m{a'¥d)  is  greater  than  md :

therefore  m{a  +  d)is  greater  than  nd.

Similarly  m(c+d)  is  greater  than  nd.

II.  Suppose  nd  greater  than  md.

Since  m{a  +  d)^  md,  m{c+ d),  md  are  equimultiples  of  {a  +  d)^  d^  {c + d)^  d^
ma  is  the  same  multiple  of  a  that  m  (a  +  ^)  is  of  {a  +  d\
and  mc  is  the  same  multiple  of  c  that  m  (c  +  d)  is  oi  {c  +  d\

so  that  ma,  mc  are  equimultiples  of  a,  c.  [v.  5]

Again  nb,  nd  are  equimultiples  of  b,  d,
and  so  are  md,  md;
therefore  (n-m}d,  {n-m)d  are  equimultiples  of  d,  d  and,  whether  n-^m
is  equal  to  unity  or  to  any  other  integer  [v.  6],  it  follows,  by  Def.  5,  that,
since  a,  b,  c,  d  are  proportionals,
if  ma  is  greater  than  {n  -  m)  d,

then  mc  is  greater  than  {n-'m)d\

if  equal,  equal ;  and  if  less,  less.

(i )     If  now  m(a'¥d)  is  greater  than  nd,  subtracting  md  from  each,  we  have
ma  is  greater  than  {n-m)d;
therefore  mc  is  greater  than  (n  —  m)  d,

and,  if  we  add  md  to  each,

m(c  +  d)  is  greater  than  nd,

(2)    Similarly  it  may  be  proved  that,
if  m{a  +  d)  is  equal  to  nb,

then  m{c^d)  is  equal  to  nd,

and  (3)  that,  if  /« (dr  +  b)  is  less  than  nb,

then  mic-hd)  is  less  than  nd.

But  (under  I.  above)  it  was  proved  that,  in  the  case  where  nb  is  not
greater  than  mb,

m(a  +  b)  is  always  greater  than  nb,

and  m{c  +  d)  is  always  greater  than  nd.

Hence,  whatever  be  the  values  of  m  and  n,  m{c  +  d)  is  always  greater  than,
equal  to,  or  less  than  nd  according  as  m(a^■b)  is  greater  than,  equal  to,  or
less  than  nb.

Therefore,  by  Def.  5,

dr  +  ^  is  to  ^  as  r  +  ^  is  to  ^.

Todhunter  gives  the  following  short  demonstration  from  Austin  {Exami-
nation of  the  first  six  books  of  Euclid's  Elements).

" Let  AE  be  to  EB  as  CF'is  to  FD ;

AB  shall  be  to  BE  as  CD  is  to  DF.


V.  i8]


PROPOSITION    i8


173


For,  because  AE  is  to  EB  as  CF  is  to  FDy
therefore,  alternately,

AE  is  to  C/^as  EB  is  to  FD.  [v.  16]

And,  as  one  of  the  antecedents  is  to  its  consequent,  so  is  the  sum  of  the
antecedents  to  the  sum  of  the  consequents :  [v.  12]

therefore,  as  EB  is  to  FD^  so  are  AEy  EB  together  to  CF^
FD  together ;

that  is,  AB  is  to  CD  as  EB  is  to  FD,

Therefore,  alternately,

AB  is  to  BE  as  CD  is  to  FD^

The  objection  to  this  proof  is  that  it  is  only  valid  in  the  case
where  the  proposition  v.  16  used  in  it  is  valid,  i.e.  where  all  four
magnitudes  are  of  the  same  kind.

Smith  and  Bryant's  proof  avails  where  all  four  magnitudes
are  straight  lines,  where  all  four  magnitudes  are  rectilineal  areas,
or  where  one  antecedent  and  its  consequent  are  straight  lines  and  the  other
antecedent  and  its  consequent  rectilineal  areas.

Suppose  that  A  :B=C\D.

Firsty  let  all  the  magnitudes  be  areas.

Construct  a  rectangle  abed  equal  to  A^  and  to  be  apply  the  rectangle  beef
equal  to  B,

Also  to  aby  bf  apply  the  rectangles  ag,  bk
equal  to  C,  D  respectively.

Then,  since  the  rectangles  eu^  be  have  equal
heights  be^  they  are  to  one  another  as  their
bases.  [vi.  i]

Hence   ab\bf^  rect.  ae :  rect.  be
=  A:B
=  C'.D
=  rect.  ag :  rect  bk.

Therefore  [vi.  i,  converse]  the  rectangles  ag^  bk  have  the  same  height,  so
that  k  is  on  the  straight  line  kg.

Hence  A  -^ B  :B  =  rect  eu : rect.  be

=  rect  ak  :  rect  bk
=  C+D:D.

Secondly y  let  the  magnitudes  Ay  Bho,  straight  lines  and  the  magnitudes
C,  D  areas.

Let  ctby  bf  he,  equal  to  the  straight  lines  A^  By  and  to  ab^  bf  apply  the
rectangles  agy  bk  equal  to  C,  D  respectively.

Then,  as  before,  the  rectangles  agy  bk  have  the  same  height.

Now  A^^B:B  =  af'.bf

=  rect.  ak :  rect.  bk
=:C  +  D:D.

Thirdfyy  let  all  the  magnitudes  be  straight  lines.

Apply  to  the  straight  lines  C,  D  rectangles  Py  Q  having  the  same  height


d e j!

" 1 /

1  9      t


174  BOOK  V  [v.  i8r  19

Then  P.Q^CiD.  [vi.  i]

Hence,  by  the  second  case,

Also  P^Q\Q^C^D\D.

Therefore  A^B\B^C^^D\D.


Proposition  19.

If,  as  a  whole  is  to  a  whole,  so  is  a  part  subtracted  to  a
part  subtructedy  the  remainder  will  also  be  to  the  remainder
as  whole  to  whole.

For,  as  the  whole  AB  is  to  the  whole  CD,  so  let  the
part  AE  subtracted  be  to  the  part   CF
subtracted ;

I  say  that  the  remainder  EB  will  also  be       ■ ?

to  the  remainder  FD  as  the  whole  AB  to      o  \       d
the  whole  CD.

For  since,  as  AB  is  to  CD,  so  is  AE
to  CF,
alternately  also,  as  BA  is  to  AE,  so  is  DC  to  CF.  [v.  16]

And,  since  the  magnitudes  are  proportional  componendo,
they  will  also  be  proportional  separando,  [v.  17]

that  is,  as  BE  is  to  EA,  so  is  DF  to  C/%
and,  alternately,

as  BE  is  to  DF,  so  is  EA  to  FC.  [v.  16]

But,  as  AE  is  to  CF,  so  by  hypothesis  is  the  whole  AB
to  the  whole  CD.

Therefore  also  the  remainder  EB  will  be  to  the  remainder
FD  as  the  whole  AB  is  to  the  whole  CD.  [v.  n]

Therefore  etc.

[PoRiSM.  From  this  it  is  manifest  that,  if  magnitudes  be
proportional  componendo,  they  will  also  be  proportional
convertendo.^

Q.  E.  D.

Algebraically,  \ia\b  =  c:d (where  c<a  and  d < b),  then
(a-c)'.{b-d)  =  a:b.

The  "  Porism  "  at  the  end  of  this  proposition  is  led  up  to  by  a  few  lines
which  Heiberg  brackets  because  it  is  not  Euclid's  habit  to  explain  a
Porism,  and  indeed  a  Porism,  from  its  very  nature,  should  not  need  any


V.  19,  2o]  PROPOSITIONS    18—20  175

explanation,  being  a  sort  of  by-product  appearing  without  effort  or  trouble,
aTrpay/mrcvTcus  (Proclus,  p.  303,  6).  But  Heiberg  thinks  that  Simson  does
wrong  in  finding  fault  with  the  argument  leading  to  the  "Porism,"  and  that
it  does  contain  the  true  demonstration  of  conversion  of  a  ratio.  In  this  it
appears  to  me  that  Heiberg  is  clearly  mistaken,  the  supposed  proof  on  the
basis  of  Prop.  19  being  no  more  correct  than  the  similar  attempt  to  prove  the
inversion  of  a  ratio  from  Prop.  4.  The  words  are*:  "And  since  it  was
proved  that,  as  AB  is  to  CD,  so  is  EB  to  FZ>y

alternately  also,  slsAB  is  to  B£,  so  js  CD  to  FD:        •.

therefore  magnitudes  when  compounded  are  proportional.

But  it  was  proved  that,  as  BA  is  to  A£,  so  is  DC  to  CFy  and  this  is
convertendo.^^

It  will  be  seen  that  this  amounts  to  proving  from  the  hypothesis  a\b-c\d
that  the  following  transformations  are  simultaneously  true,  viz. :

aia-c^bib  —  d,

and  (i\c=b\d.

The  former  is  not  proved  from  the  latter  as  it  ought  to  be.  if  .it  were^  intended
to  prove  conversion.

The  inevitable  conclusion  is  that  both  the' ^*P6rism"  and  the  argument
leading  up  to  it  are  interpolations,  though  no  doubt  made,  as  Heiberg  says,
before  Theon's  time.  .     ;        .      .

The  conversion  of  ratios  does  not  depend  upon  v.  19  at  all  but,  as  Simson
shows  in  his  Proposition  E  (containing  a  proof  already  given  by  Clavius),  on
Props.  17  and  18.     Prop.  E  is  as  follows.

If  four  magnitudes  be  proportionals,  they  are  also  proportionals  by  conversion^
that  is,  the  first  is  to  its  excess  above  the  second  as  the  third  is  to
its  excess  above  the  fourth.

Let  AB  be  to  BE  as  CD  to  DF:
then  BA  is  to  AE  as  DC  to  CF,

Because  AB  is  to  BE  as  CD  to  DF,
by  division  [separando],  :    .  ,      .

AE  is  to  EB  as  CF  to  FD,  .  [v.  17]

and,  by  inversion,

BE  \s  to  E A  SisDF  to  FC

[Simson's  Prop.  B  directly  obtained  from  v.  Def.  5]
Wherefore,  by  composition  [componendo],

BA  is  to  AE  as  DC  to  CF  [v.  18]


Proposition  20.  ,

//  there  be  three  magnitudes,  and  others  equal  to  them  in
multitude,  which  taken  two  and  two  ar4i  in  the  same  ratio,  and
if  Qx  aequali  the  first  be  greater  than  the  third,  the  fourth  will
also  be  greater  than  the  sixth  j  if  equal,  equal;  and,  if  less,  less.


c

F


176  BOOK  V  [y.  20

Let  there  be  three  magnitudes  A^  B^  C  suid  others
D^  Ey  F  equal  to  them  in  multitude,  which  taken  two  and
two  are  in  the  same  ratio,  so  that,

as  y^  is  to  ^,  so  is  Z?  to  ^,
and  as  ^  is  to  C  so  is  jE*  to  F\

and  let  A  be  greater  than  C  ex  aefua/i;
I  say  that  D  will  also  be  greater  than  F;  if  A  is  equal  to  C,
equal ;  and,  if  less,  less.


A D-

B E-

0 F-


For,  since  A  is  greater  than  C,
and  B  is  some  other  magnitude,

and  the  greater  has  to  the  same  a  greater  ratio  than  the  less
has,  [v.  8]

therefore  A  has  to  ^  a  greater  ratio  than  C  has  to  B.

But,  as  y^  is  to  ^,  so  is  Z?  to  £^
and,  as  C  is  to  By  inversely,  so  is  /^  to  i? ;
therefore  Z?  has  also  to  -ff  a  greater  ratio  than  F  has  to  £.  [v.  13]

But,  of  magnitudes  which  have  a  ratio  to  the  same,  that
which  has  a  greater  ratio  is  greater ;  [v.  10]

therefore  JD  is  greater  than  F.

Similarly  we  can  prove  that,  i(  A  he  equal  to  C,  D  will
also  be  equal  to  F\  and  if  less,  less.

Therefore  eta

Q.  E.  D.

Though,  as  already  remarked,  Euclid  has  not  yet  given  us  any  definition
of  compounded  ratios^  Props.  20 — 23  contain  an  important  part  of  the  theory
of  such  ratios.  The  term  "compounded  ratio"  is  not  used,  but  the  propositions
connect  themselves  with  the  definitions  of  ex  aeguali  in  its  two  forms,  the
ordinary  form  defined  in  Def.  17  and  that  called  perturbed  proportion  in
Def.  18.  The  compounded  ratios  dealt  with  in  these  propositions  are  those
compounded  of  successive  ratios  in  which  the  consequent  of  one  is  the
antecedent  of  the  next,  or  the  antecedent  of  one  is  the  consequent  of
the  next

Prop.  22  states  the  fundamental  proposition  about  the  ratio  ex  aequali  in
its  ordinary  form,  to  the  effect  that,

if  a  is  to  ^  as  ^  is  to  ^,

and  ^  is  to  ^  as  ^  is  to/,

then  a  is  to  ^  as  ^  is  to/


V.  2o]  PROPOSITION   20  177

with  the  extension   to  any   number  of  such   ratios;    Prop.    23  gives  the
corresponding  theorem  for  the  case  oi  perturbed  proportion^  namely  that,
if  a  is  to  ^  as  ^  is  to^J

and  ^  is  to  ^  as  ^  is  to  e^

then  <7  is  to  ^  as  //  is  to/

Each  depends  on  a  preliminary  proposition,  Prop.  22  on  Prop.  20  and
Prop.  23  on  Prop.  21.  The  course  of  the  proof  will  be  made  most  clear  by
using  the  algebraic  notation.

The  preliminary  Prop.  20  asserts  that,
if  a\b  =  d\e^

and  b\c  =  e.f^

then,  according  asa>  =  <r,     d>^=^<f.
For,  according  as  a  is  greater  than,  equal  to,  or  less  than  r,
the  ratio  ^  :  ^  is  greater  than,  equal  to,  or  less  than  the  ratio  c :  ^,    [v.  8  or  v.  7]
or  (since  d\e  =  a:b^

and  c\b-f\e)

the  ratio  die  is  greater  than,  equal  to,  or  less  than  the  ratio /: e,

[by  aid  of  v.  13  and  v.  11]
and  therefore  d  is  greater  than,  equal  to,  or  less  than/      [v.  10  or  v.  9]
It  is  next  proved  in  Prop.  22  that,  by  v.  4,  the  given  proportions  can  be
transformed  into

ma  :  nb  =  md :  fiCy
and  nb  \  pc  =  ne  ',  pfy

whence,  by  v.  20,

according  as     ma  is  greater  than,  equal  to,  or  less  than  /r,
md  is  greater  than,  equal  to,  or  less  than  pf^
so  that,  by  Def.  5,

a:c  =  d:/.

Prop.  23  depends  on  Prop.  21  in  the  same  way  as  Prop.  22  on  Prop.  20,
but  the  transformation  of  the  ratios  in  Prop.  23  is  to  the  following :

(i)  ma:mb  =  ne:n/

(by  a  double  application  of  v.  15  and  by  v.  11),
(2)  mb  \  nc  =  md :  ne

(by  v.  4,  or  equivalent  steps),
and  Prop.  21  is  then  used.

Simson  makes  the  proof  of  Prop.  20  slightly  more  explicit,  but  the  main
difference  from  the  text  is  in  the  addition  of  the  two  other  cases  which  Euclid
dismisses  with  "  Similarly  we  can  prove."    These  cases  are :

"  Secondly,  let  A  be  equal  to  C;  then  shall  D  be  equal  to  F,
Because  A  and  C  are  equal  to  one  another,

^  is  to  ^  as  C  is  to  B.  [v.  7]

But  .^  is  to  ^  as  2>  is  to  E^

and  C  is  to  j9  as  ^  is  to  -ff,

wherefore  Dv&ioEdJ&FioE]  [v«  1 1]

and  therefore  D  is  equal  to  F,  [v.  9]

H.  E.  II.  la


178  BOOK  V  [v.  20,  21

Next,  let  ^  be  less  than  C;  then  shall  />  be  less  than  F.
For  C  is  greater  than  A^
and,  as  was  shown  in  the  first  case,

Cistoi?as^toi?,
and,  in  like  manner,

B\%XoAz&EX,oD\

therefore  F  is  greater  than  D^  by  the  first  case ;  and  therefore  D  is  less
than  F:'


Proposition  21.

If  there  be  three  magnitudes,  and  others  equal  to  them  in
multitude,  which  taken  two  and  two  together  are  in  the  same
ratio,  and  the  proportion  of  them  be  perturbed,  then,  if  ex
aequali  the  first  magnitude  is  greater  than  the  third,  the
fourth  will  also  be  greater  than  the  sixth ;  if  equal,  equal;
and  if  less,  less.

Let  there  be  three  magnitudes  A,B,C,  and  others  D,  E,  F
equal  to  them  in  multitude,  which  taken  two  and  two  are  in
the  same  ratio,  and  let  the  proportion  of  them  be  perturbed,
so  that,

as  A  is  to  B,  so  is  E  to  F,
and,  as  B  is  to  C,  so  is  D  to  E^

and  let  A  be  greater  than  C  ex  aequali ;
I  say  that  D  will  also  be  greater  than  F\  if  A  is  equal  to
C,  equal ;  and  if  less,  less.


A o-

B E-

0 F-


For,  since  A  is  greater  than  C,
and  B  is  some  other  magnitude,
therefore  A  has  to  B  a,  greater  ratio  than  C  has  to  B.      [v.  8]

But,  as  A  is  to  B,  so  is  E  to  F,
and,  as  C  is  to  B,  inversely,  so  is  E  to  /?.

Therefore  also  E  has  to  Fb,  greater  ratio  than  E  has  to  /?.

[v.  13]
But  that  to  which  the  same  has  a  greater  ratio  is  less ;

[v.  10]
therefore  F  is  less  than  Z?  ;

therefore  Z?  is  greater  than  F.


V.  21,  22]  PROPOSITIONS   20—22  179

Similarly  we  can  prove  that,
if  A  be  equal  to  C,  D  will  also  be  equal  to  F\
and  if  less,  less.

Therefore  etc.  q.  e.  d.

Algebraically,  if  a\b  =  e\fy

and  b  \c  =  d\e^

then,  according  asfl:>  =  <^,     d>-  </
Simson*s  alterations  correspond  to  those  which  he  makes  in  Prop.  20.     After
the  first  case  he  proceeds  thus.

"Secondly,  let  A  be  equal  to  C;  then  shall  D  be  equal  to  F,
Because  A  and  C  are  equal,

AisioB^sC  is  to  B,  [v.  7]

But  A'lsto  B  zs  E'lsXo  F,

and  C  is  to  j9  as  j&  is  to  Z> :

wherefore  E  \%  \.o  F 2&  E  \jq  Dy  \y,  \\\

and  therefore  D  is  equal  to  F,  [v.  9]

Next,  let  A  be  less  than  C;  then  shall  D  be  less  than  F.
For  C  is  greater  than  A^
and,  as  was  shown,

C  is  to  ^  as  ^  to  Z>,
and,  in  like  manner,

^  is  to -4  as  Flo  E;

therefore  Fis  greater  than  Z>,  by  the  first  case,
and  therefore  Z>  is  less  than  F"
The  proof  may  be  shown  thus.

According  as  «>  =  <<:,     a\b>-<c\b.
But  a\b  =  e\fy  and,  by  inversion,  c:b  =  e:d.

Therefore,  according  as  a  >  =  < r,     e :/>  =  <e\dy
and  therefore  d>  =  <f.

Proposition  22.

If  there  be  any  number  of  magnitudes  whatever,  and  others
equal  to  them  in  multitude,  which  taken  two  and  two  together
are  in  the  same  ratio,  they  will  also  be  in  the  same  ratio  ex
aequali.

Let  there  be  any  number  of  magnitudes  A,  B,  C,  and
others  /?,  E,  F  equal  to  them  in  multitude,  which  taken  two
and  two  together  are  in  the  same  ratio,  so  that,

as  A  is  to  B,  so  is  D  to  E^
and,  as  -ff  is  to  C,  so  is  E  to  F\

I  say  that  they  will  also  be  in  the  same  ratio  ex  aequali,
<  that  is,  as  A  is  to  C,  so  is  Z?  to  F> .

12 — 2


i8o  BOOK  V  [v.  22

For  of  A,  D  let  equimultiples  G,  Hhe,  taken,
and  of  B,  E  other,  chance,  equimultiples  K^  L  ;
and,  further,  of  C,  F  other,  chance,  equimultiples  M^  N.


A B c

D E F

-H K ' -• M-


Then,  since,  as  A  is  to  B,  so  is  D  to  E,
and  of  A,  D  equimultiples  G,  H  have  been  taken,
and  of  B,  E  other,  chance,  equimultiples  K^  L,

therefore,  as  G^  is  to  K,  so  is  H  to  L.  [v.  4]

For  the  same  reason  also,

as  A'  is  to  M,  so  is  L  to  N.

Since,  then,  there  are  three  magnitudes  G^  K,  M^  and
others  H,  L,  N  equal  to  them  in  multitude,  which  taken  two
and  two  together  are  in  the  same  ratio,

therefore,  ex  aequali,  if  G  is  in  excess  of  My  H  is  also  in  excess
ofA^;

if  equal,  equal ;  and  if  less,  less.  [v.  20]

And  G,  H  are  equimultiples  of  -^,  Z>,

and  M,  N  other,  chance,  equimultiples  of  C,  F.

Therefore,  as  A  is  to  C,  so  is  D  to  /^  [v.  Def.  5]

Therefore  etc.

Q.  E.  D.

Euclid  enunciates  this  proposition  as  true  of  any  number  of  magnitudes
whatafer  forming  two  sets  connected  in  the  manner  described,  but  his  proof  is
confined  to  the  case  where  each  set  consists  of  three  magnitudes  only.  The
extension  to  any  number  of  magnitudes  is,  however,  easy,  as  shown  by
Simson.

"Next  let  there  be  four  magnitudes  A^  By  C,  /?,  and  other  four  Ey  Fy  Gy  Hy
which  two  and  two  have  the  same  ratio,  viz. :
as  .^  is  to  By  so  is  -5  to  ^


A    B    G     D
E     F    G     H


and  as  i?  is  to  C,  so  is  Fxo  Gy

and  as  C  is  to  Dy  so  is  G  \.o  H  \

A  shall  be  to  Z>  as  ^  to  H.
Because  Ay  By  C  are  three  magnitudes,  and  Ey  Fy  G  other  three,  which
taken  two  and  two  have  the  same  ratio,
by  the  foregoing  case,

^  is  to  C  as  ^  to  C


V.  22,  23]  PROPOSITIONS   22,  23  181

But  C  is  to  Z>  as  G^  is  to  H\
wherefore  again,  by  the  first  case,

A\^\.o  D2&  E\.o  H.
And  so  on,  whatever  be  the  number  of  magnitudes."


Proposition  23.

If  there  be  three  magnitudeSy  and  others  equal  to  them  in
multitude,  which  taken  two  and  two  together  are  in  the  same
ratio,  and  the  proportion  of  them  be  perturbed^  they  will  also
be  in  the  same  ratio  ex  aequali.

Let  there  be  three  magnitudes  A,  B,  C,  and  others  equal
to  them  in  multitude,  which,  taken  two  and  two  together,  are
in  the  same  proportion,  namely  Z>,  E,  F\  and  let  the  propor-
tion of  them  be  perturbed,  so  that,

as  ^  is  to  B,  so  is  E  to  F,
and,  as  B  is  to  C,  so  is  Z?  to  -£* ;

I  say  that,  as  A  is  to  C,  so  is  D  to  F.


A B —  c

D E F-

G 1 1 H 1 1 L-

K » 1 M 1 I


0{  A,  By  D  let  equimultiples  G,  H,  A' be  taken,
and  of  C  Ey  F  other,  chance,  equimultiples  Ly  My  N.

Then,  since  Gy  H  zxt,  equimultiples  of -^,  By
and   parts   have    the  same   ratio  as  the  same  multiples  of
them,  [v.  15]

therefore,  as  -^  is  to  B^  so  is  G  to  H.
For  the  same  reason  also,

as  E  is  to  Fy  so  is  M  to  N.
And,  as  A  is  to  By  so  is  E  to  F\

therefore  also,  as  G  is  to  Hy  so  is  M  to  A^.  [v.  n]

Next,  since,  as  -ff  is  to  C,  so  is  D  to  £",
alternately,  also,  as  ^  is  to  Z>,  so  is  C  to  E,  [v.  16]

And,  since  //,  K  are  equimultiples  of  By  /?,
and  parts  have  the  same  ratio  as  their  equimultiples,

therefore,  as  ^  is  to  /?,  so  is  H  to  K.  [v.  15]


i82  BOOK  V  [v.  23

But,  as  ^  is  to  /?,  so  is  C  to  i? ;

therefore  also,  as  -^  is  to  K,  so  is  C  to  E.  [v.  n]

Again,  since  Z,  M  are  equimultiples  of  C,  ^,

therefore,  as  C  is  to  E^  so  is  Z  to  M.  [v.  15]

But,  as  C  is  to  E,  so  is  Z^  to  K\
therefore  also,  as  H  is  to  K,  so  is  L  to  ilf,  [v.  1 1]

and,  alternately,  as  Z^  is  to  Z,  so  is  K  to  M.  [v.  16]

But  it  was  also  proved  that,

as  G^  is  to  Z^,  so  is  -^  to  N.
Since,  then,  there  are  three  magnitudes  G,  H,  Z,  and
others  equal  to  them  in  multitude  K,  M,  N,  which  taken  two
and  two  together  are  in  the  same  ratio,
and  the  proportion  of  them  is  perturbed,
therefore,  ex  aeguali^  if  G  is  in  excess  of  Z,  K  is  also  in  excess

if  equal,  equal ;  and  if  less,  less.  [v.  21]

And  G,  K  are  equimultiples  of  A^  /?,
and  Z,  N  of  C,  F.

Therefore,  as  A  is  to  C,  so  is  D  to  /^

Therefore  etc.

Q.  E.  D.

There  is  an  important  difference  between  the  version  given  by  Simson  of
one  part  of  the  proof  of  this  proposition  and  that  found  in  the  Greek  text  of
Heiberg.  Peyrard's  ms.  has  the  version  given  by  Heiberg,  but  Simson's
version  has  the  authority  of  other  mss.  The  Basel  editio  princeps  gives  both
versions  (Simson's  being  the  first).  After  it  has  been  proved  by  means  of
v.  15  and  v.  II  that,

as  G  is  to  H^  so  is  M  to  N^
or,  with  the  notation  used  in  the  note  on  Prop.  20,

ma  :  mb  =  ne  \nf^
it  has  to  be  proved  further  that,

as  ^  is  to  Z,  so  is  K  to  My
or  mb  :  nc  =  md :  nCy

and  it  is  clear  that  the  latter  result  may  be  directly  inferred  from  v.  4.     The
reading  translated  by  Simson  makes  this  inference  :

"  And  because,  as  B  is  to  C,  so  is  D  to  E^
and  Hy  K  are  equimultiples  of  i9,  Z>,
andZ,  M  oi  C,  E,

therefore,  as  H\%  to  Z,  so  is  AT  to  M,^'  [v.  4]

The  version  in  Heiberg's  text  is  not  only  much  longer  (it  adopts  the

roundabout  method  of  using  each  of  three  Propositions  v,  11,  15,  16  twice


V.  23,  24]  PROPOSITIONS   23,  24  183

over),  but  it  is  open  to  the  objection  that  it  uses  v.  16  which  is  orily  applicable
if  the  four  magnitudes  are  of  the  same  kind\  whereas  v.  23,  the  proposition
now  in  question,  is  not  subject  to  this  restriction.

Simson  rightly  observes  that  in  the  last  step  of  the  proof  it  should  be
stated  that  "  6^,  A'  are  any  equimultiples  whatever  of  Ay  D^  and  Z,  N  any
whatever  of  C,  R''

He  also  gives  the  extension  of  the  proposition  to  any  number  of  magnitudes,
enunciating  it  thus  :

"  If  there  be  any  number  of  magnitudes,  and  as  many  others,  which,  taken
two  and  two,  in  a  cross  order,  have  the  same  ratio ;  the  first  shall  have  to  the
last  of  the  first  magnitudes  the  same  ratio  which  the  first  of  the  others  has  to
the  last " ;
and  adding  to  the  proof  as  follows :

"Next,  let  there  be  four  magnitudes  //,  B^  C,  Z>,  and  other  four  J5,  F^  G^  Hy
which,  taken  two  and  two  in  a  cross  order,  have  the  same  ratio,  viz. :
AX.O  B2&G\,o  Hy


B  to  C2iS  F  to  Gy  A    B    C    D

and  C  to  DsLsB  to  F;  |     E    F   Q    h

then  AistoZ>2is£  to  If,

Because  Ay  By  C  are  three  magnitudes,  and  Fy  Gy  H  other  three  which,
taken  two  and  two  in  a  cross  order,  have  the  same  ratio,
by  the  first  case,  -^  is  to  C  2&  Fto  H,

But  C  is  to  2?  as  i^  is  to  7?;

wherefore  again,  by  the  first  case,

A'v&to  DzsE  to  H.
And  so  on,  whatever  be  the  number  of  magnitudes/'


Proposition  24.

If  a  first  magnitude  have  to  a  second  the  same  ratio  as  a
third  has  to  a  fourthy  and  also  a  fifth  have  to  the  second  the
same  ratio  as  a  sixth  to  the  fourthy  the  first  and  fifth  added
together  mill  have  to  the  second  the  same  ratio  as  the  third  and
sixth  have  to  the  fourth.

Let  a  first  magnitude  AB  have  to  a  second  C  the  same
ratio  as  a  third  DE  has  to  a

fourth  Fy  A S Q

and  let  also  a  fifth  BG  have  to       o

the  second  C  the  same  ratio  as       d ^ h

a  sixth  EH  has  to  the  fourth       f

Fy

I  say  that  the  first  and  fifth  added  together,  AGy  will  have
to  the  second  C  the  same  ratio  as  the  third  and  sixth,  DHy
has  to  the  fourth  F.


i84  BOOK  V  [v.  24

For  since,  as  BG  is  to  C,  so  is  EH  to  F,
inversely,  as  C  is  to  BG,  so  is  -F  to  EH.

Since,  then,  as  AB  is  to  C,  so  is  DE  to  /%
and,  as  C  is  to  BGy  so  is  F  to  EH,
therefore,  ex  aequali,  as  AB  is  to  BG,  so  is  DE  to  -fi"/^.  [v.  22]

And,  since  the  magnitudes  are  proportional  separando,  they
will  also  be  proportional  componendo ;  [v.  18]

therefore,  as  ^6^  is  to  GB,  so  is  DH  to  HE.

But  also,  as  BG  is  to  C,  so  is  EH  to  -F;
therefore,  ex  aequaii,  as  ^6^  is  to  C,  so  is  DH  to  /^       f^.  22]

Therefore  etc.  Q.  e.  d.

Algebraically,  if  a;c  =  dif,

and  b\c^e\f,

then  (<»  +  ^)  ic=^{d'^-e) :/.

This  proposition  is  of  the  same  character  as  those  which  precede  the
propositions  relating  to  compounded  ratios ;  but  it  could  not  be  placed  earlier
than  it  is  because  v.  22  is  used  in  the  proof  of  it
Inverting  the  second  proportion  to

it  follows,  by  v.  22,  that  a\b  =  d\e,

whence,  by  v.  18,  (a-^b)\b-(d'^€)\  e,

and  from  this  and  the  second  of  the  two  given  proportions  we  obtain,  by  a

fresh  application  of  v.  22,

{a-^b):c={d-^e)if.

The  first  use  of  v.  22  is  important  as  showing  that  the  opposite  process  to
compounding  ratios,  or  what  we  should  now  call  division  of  one  ratio  by
another,  does  not  require  any  new  and  separate  propositions.

Aristotle  tacitly  uses  v.  24  in  combination  with  v.  1 1  and  v.  16,  Meteorologica
III.  5,  376  a  22 — 26.

Simson  adds  two  corollaries,  one  of  which  (Cor.  2)  notes  the  extension  to
any  number  of  magnitudes.

"  The  proposition  holds  true  of  two  ranks  of  magnitudes  whatever  be  their
number,  of  which  each  of  the  first  rank  has  to  the  second  magnitude  the  same
ratio  that  the  corresponding  one  of  the  second  rank  has  to  a  fourth  magnitude ;
as  is  manifest."

Simson's  Cor.  i  states  the  corresponding  proposition  to  the  above  with
separando  taking  the  place  of  componendOy  viz.,  that  corresponding  to  the
algebraical  form

"Cor.  I.  If  the  same  hypothesis  be  made  as  in  the  proposition,  the
excess  of  the  first  and  fifth  shall  be  to  the  second  as  the  excess  of  the  third
and  sixth  to  the  fourth.  The  demonstration  of  this  is  the  same  with  that  of
the  proposition  if  division  be  used  instead  of  composition."  That  is,  we  use
V.  17  instead  of  v.  18,  and  conclude  that

(fi''b)',b^(d-e)\€.


V.  25]  PROPOSITIONS   24,  25  185

Proposition  25.

If  four  magnitudes  be  proportional,  the  greatest  and  the
least  are  greater  than  the  remaining  two.

Let  the  four  magnitudes  AB,  CD,  E,  F  be  proportional
so  that,  as  AB  is  to  CD,  so  is  E  to
F,  and  let  AB  be  the  greatest  of  them

and  F  the  least ;  p^ Q         B

I  say  that  AB,  F  are  greater  than        £

CD,  E.  c____SL_P

For  let  ^6^  be  made  equal  to  E,        -_

and  CH  equal  to  F.

Since,  as  AB  is  to  CD,  so  is  E
to  F,

and  E  is  equal  to  AG,  and  F  to  C//,

therefore,  as  AB  is  to  CD,  so  is  AG  to  C//.

And  since,  as  the  whole  AB  is  to  the  whole  CD,  so  is
the  part  AG  subtracted  to  the  part  C//  subtracted,

the  .remainder  GB  will  also  be  to  the  remainder  HD  as
the  whole  AB  is  to  the  whole  CD.  [v.  19]

But  AB  is  greater  than  CD ;

therefore  GB  is  also  greater  than  //D.

And,  since  AG  is  equal  to  E,  and  C/f  to  /%
therefore  AG,  i^are  equal  to  C^,  E.

And  if,  6^-5,  ///?  being  unequal,  and  GB  greater,  AGy  F
be  added  to  GB  and  CH,  E  be  added  to  HD,

it  follows  that  AB,  F  are  greater  than  CD,  E,

Therefore  etc.

Q.  E.  D.

Algebraically,  if  a\b-€\d,

and  a  is  the  greatest  of  the  four  magnitudes  and  d  the  least,

a  +  d  >  b  -^c,

Simson  is  right  in  inserting  a  word  in  the  setting-out,  "let  AB  be  the
greatest  of  them  and  <  consequently  >  F  the  least."  This  follows  from  the
particular  case,  really  included  in  Def.  5,  which  Simson  makes  the  subject  of
his  proposition  A,  the  case  namely  where  the  equimultiples  taken  are  once  the
several  magnitudes.

The  proof  is  as  follows.

Since  a\b^c\d,

a  —  c\b  —  d^a\b,  [v-  19]


i86  BOOK  V  [v.  as

But  a>d;  therefore  {a-c)>{d- d).  [v.  i6  and  14]

Add  to  each  (^  +  </);
therefore  (a  +  ^)  >  (^  +  c\

There  is  an  important  particular  case  of  this  proposition,  which  is,
however,  not  mentioned  here,  viz.  the  case  where  h-c.  The  result  shows,  in
this  case,  that  tke  arithmetic  mean  between  two  magnitudes  f>  greater  than
their  geometric  mean.  The  truth  of  this  is  proved  for  straight  lines  in  vi.  27
by  "geometrical  algebra/'  and  the  theorem  forms  the  &opar/(Mf  for  equations
of  the  second  degree.

Simson  adds  at  the  end  of  Book  v.  four  propositions,  F,  G,  H,  K,  which,
however,  do  not  seem  to  be  of  sufficient  practical  use  to  justify  their  inclusion
here.  But  he  adds  at  the  end  of  his  notes  to  the  Book  the  following
paragraph  which  deserves  quotation  word  for  word.

"The  5th  book  being  thus  corrected,  I  most  readily  agree  to  what  the
learned  Dr  Barrow  says,  'that  there  is  nothing  in  the  whole  body  of  the
elements  of  a  more  subtile  invention,  nothing  more  solidly  established,  and
more  accurately  handled  than  the  doctrine  of  proportionals.'  And  there  is
some  ground  to  hope  that  geometers  will  think  that  this  could  not  have  been
said  with  as  good  reason,  since  Theon's  time  till  the  present"

Simson's  claim  herein  will  readily  be  admitted  by  all  readers  who  are
competent  to  form  a  judgment  upon  his  criticisms  and  elucidations  of  Book  v.


BOOK  VI,

INTRODUCTORY   NOTE.

The  theory  of  proportions  has  been  established  in  Book  v.  in  a  perfectly
general  form  applicable  to  all  kinds  of  magnitudes  (although  the  representation
of  magnitudes  by  straight  lines  gives  it  a  geometrical  appearance) ;  it  is  now
necessary  to  apply  the  theory  to  the  particular  case  oi  geometrical  investigation.
The  only  thing  still  required  in  order  that  this  may  be  done  is  a  proof  of  the
existence  of  such  a  magnitude  as  bears  to  any  given  finite  magnitude  any
given  finite  ratio;  and  this  proof  is  supplied,  so  far  as  regards  the  subject
matter  of  geometry,  by  vi.  1 2  which  shows  how  to  construct  a  fourth  pro-
portional to  three  given  straight  lines.

A  few  remarks  on  the  enormous  usefulness  of  the  theory  of  proportions
to  geometry  will  not  be  out  of  place.  We  have  already  in  Books  i.  and  11.
made  acquaintance  with  one  important  part  of  what  has  been  well  called
geometrical  algebra,  the  method,  namely,  of  application  of  areas.  We  have
seen  that  this  method,  working  by  the  representation  of  products  of  two
quantities  as  rectangles,  enables  us  to  solve  some  particular  quadratic  equations.
But  the  limitations  of  such  a  method  are  obvious.  So  long  as  general
quantities  are  represented  by  straight  lines  only,  we  cannot,  if  our  geometry
is  piane^  deal  with  products  of  more  than  two  such  quantities ;  and,  even
by  the  use  of  three  dimensions,  we  cannot  work  with  products  of  more
than  three  quantities,  since  no  geometrical  meaning  could  be  attachied  to
such  a  product.  This  limitation  disappears  so  soon  as  we  can  represent  any
general  quantity,  corresponding  to  what  we  denote  by  a  letter  in  algebra,  by
a  ratio  \  and  this  we  can  do  because,  on  the  general  theory  of  proportion
established  in  Book  v.,  a  ratio  may  be  a  ratio  of  two  incommensurable
quantities  as  well  as  of  commensurables.  Ratios  can  be  compounded  ad
infinitum^  and  the  division  of  one  ratio  by  another  is  equally  easy,  since  it  is
the  same  thing  as  compounding  the  first  ratio  with  the  inverse  of  the  second.
Thus  e.g.  it  is  seen  at  once  that  the  coefficients  in  a  quadratic  of  the  most
general  form  can  be  represented  by  ratios  between  straight  lines,  and  the
solution  by  means  of  Books  i.  and  11.  of  problems  corresponding  to  quadratic
equations  with  particular  coefficients  can  now  be  extended  to  cover  any
quadratic  with  real  roots.  As  indicated,  we  can  perform,  by  composition  of
ratios,  the  operation  corresponding  to  multiplying  algebraical  quantities,  and
this  to  any  extent.  We  can  divide  quantities  by  compounding  a  ratio  with
the  inverse  of  the  ratio  representing  the  divisor.  For  the  addition  and
subtraction  of  quantities  we  have  only  to  use  the  geometrical  equivalent  of
bringing  to  a  common  denominator,  which  is  effected  by  means  of  the  fourth
proportional.


l88  BOOK    VI  [VL  DETF.


DEFINITIONS.

I.  Similar  rectilineal  figures  are  such  as  have  their
angles  severally  equal  and  the  sides  about  the  equal  angles
proportional.

[2.     Reciprocally  related  figures.     See  note.']

3.  A  straight  line  is  said  to  have  been  cut  in  extreme
and  mean  ratio  when,  as  the  whole  line  is  to  the  greater
segment,  so  is  the  greater  to  the  less.

4.  The  height  of  any  figure  is  the  perpendicular  drawn
from  the  vertex  to  the  base.


Definition  i.

*0/tAoca  <r;(i7/tAara  tvOvypoLfjLfm  iariy^  oca  ras  re  ytayCoL^  uras  l;(cc  fcora  fuay  mu
ras  ircpi  ras  Teas  ycovias  irXcvpac  &vaXoyov.

This  definition  is  quoted  by  Aristotle,  Ana/,  post.  11.  17,  99  a  13,  where
he  says  that  similarity  (to  o/aoiov)  in  the  case  of  figures  ^'consists,  let  us  say
(^wiafi\  in  their  having  their  sides  proportional  and  their  angles  equal."  The
use  of  the  word  io-ok  may  suggest  that^  in  Aristotle's  time,  ^is  definition  had
not  quite  established  itself  in  the  text-books  (Heiberg,  Mat/umatisches  zu
AristoteleSy  p.  9).

It  was  pointed  out  in  Van  Swinden's  Elements  of  Geometry  (Jacobi's
edition,  1834,  pp.  114 — 5)  that  Euclid  omits  to  state  an  essential  part  of  the
definition,  namely  that  "the  corresponding  sides  must  be  opposite  to  equal
angles/'  which  is  necessary  in  order  that  the  corresponding  sides  may  follow
in  the  same  order  in  both  figures.

At  the  same  time  the  definition  states  more  than  is  absolutely  necessary,
for  it  is  true  to  say  that  two  polygons  are  similar  when^  if  the  sides  and  angles
are  taken  in  the  same  order,  the  angles  are  equal  and  the  sides  about  the  equal
angles  are  proportional ,  omitting

(i)  three  consecutive  angles,

or  (2)  two  consecutive  angles  and  the  side  common  to  them,

or  (3)  two  consecutive  sides  and  the  angle  included  by  them^

and  making  no  assumption  with  regard  to  the  omitted  sides  and  angles,

Austin  objected  to  this  definition  on  the  ground  that  it  is  not  obvious  that
the  properties  (i)  of  having  their  angles  respectively  equal  and  (2)  of  having
the  sides  about  the  equal  angles  proportional  can  co-exist  in  two  figures ;  but,
a  definition  not  being  concerned  to  prove  the  existence  of  the  thing  defined,
the  objection  falls  to  the  ground.  We  are  properly  left  to  satisfy  ourselves  as
to  the  existence  of  similar  figures  in  the  course  of  the  exposition  in  Book  vi.,
where  we  learn  how  to  construct  on  any  given  straight  line  a  rectilineal  figure
similar  to  a  given  one  (vi.  18).


VI.  DEFF.  2—5]  DEFINITIONS  189

Definition  2.

The  Greek  text  gives  here  a  definition  of  reciprocally  related  figures
(aAniTTtirovBoTa  axotJMTa).  "  [Two]  figures  are  reciprocally  related  when  there
are  in  each  of  the  two  figures  antecedent  and  consequent  ratios"  i^kvmcttrov^a.
§€  (TX^fuiTa  €<rTiv,  oTttV  kv  €KaT€fHff  T<av  (rxrffidTiav  ijyav/i(voi  tc  koX  ciro/utcvoi  Aoyoi
taaiv).  No  intelligible  meaning  can  be  attached  to  "antecedent  and  con-
sequent ratios  "  here ;  the  sense  would  require  rather  "  an  antecedent  and  a
consequent  of  (two  equal)  ratios  in  each  figure."  Hence  Candalla  and
Peyrard  read  Xoymv  opoi  ("terms  of  ratios")  instead  of  XoyoL  Camerer  reads
\oy(i}v  without  opoi.  But  the  objection  to  the  definition  lies  deeper.  It  is
never  used;  when  we  come,  in  vi.  14,  15,  xi.  34  etc.  to  parallelograms,
triangles  etc.  having  the  property  indicated,  they  are  not  called  "  reciprocal "
parallelograms  etc.,  but  parallelograms  etc.  "tAe  sides  of  which  are  reciprocally
proportional, '*  Sw  dprvir€ir6v0a<Tiv  at  trktvpai.  Hence  Simson  appears  to  be
right  in  condemning  the  definition ;  it  may  have  been  interpolated  from  Heron,
who  has  it.

Simson  proposes  in  his  note  to  substitute  the  following  definition.  "Two
magnitudes  are  said  to  be  reciprocally  proportional  to  two  others  when  one
of  the  first  is  to  one  of  the  other  magnitudes  as  the  remaining  one  of  the  last
two  is  to  the  remaining  one  of  the  first."  This  definition  requires  that  the
magnitudes  shall  be  all  of  the  same  kind.


Definition  3.

"kKpov  KoX  fi€<rov  Xoyov  €v0ua  rcTfti^Grtfai  Xcycrai,  orav  ^  cof  1;  0X17  irpos  to

fl€L^OV  TfirjfAaf  OVTOI?  TO  fl€l^OV  TTpO^  TO  ^XttTTOV.


Definition  4.

'Y^o?  ia-Ti  iravTO^  a)(ijfjLaro^  ly  Slvo  rrj^  Kopw/tij^  ciri  rifv  fiaxny  ica^cTos
dyo/uicn;.

The  definition  of  "height"  is  not  found  in  Campanus  and  is  perhaps
rightly  suspected,  since  it  does  not  apply  in  terms  to  parallelograms,  parallele-
pipeds, cylinders  and  prisms,  though  it  is  used  in  the  Elements  with  reference
to  these  latter  figures.  Aristotle  does  not  appear  to  know  altitude  (v^os )  in
the  mathematical  sense;  he  uses  kci^cto?  of  triangles  (Meteorologica  in.  3,
373  a  11).  The  term  is  however  readily  understood,  and  scarcely  requires
definition.

[Definition  5.

Aoyo?  Ik  Xoytav  ovyKtiaOai  Xeyrrai,  OTav  at  riav  Koymv  mfkucorriTt^  iif>  iavra^
iroWaTrXao'LaadiZcrai  iroiQo'L  Ttva.

"A  ratio  is  said  to  be  compounded  of  ratios  when  the  sizes  (myXucoTiyrcs)  of
the  ratios  multiplied  together  make  some  (?  ratio,  or  size)."J

As  already  remarked  (pp.  116,  132),  it  is  beyond  doubt  that  this  definition
of  ratio  is  interpolated.  It  has  little  MS.  authority.  The  best  ms.  (P)  only  has
it  in  the  margin;  it  is  omitted  altogether  in  Campanus'  translation  from  the


I90  BOOK   VI  [vi.  DBF.  s

Arabic;  and  the  other  mss.  which  contain  it  do  not  agree  in  the  position
which  they  give  to  it  There  is  no  reference  to  the  definition  in  the  place
where  compound  ratio  is  mentioned  for  the  first  time  (vi.  23),  nor  anywhere
else  in  Euclid ;  neither  is  it  ever  referred  to  by  the  other  great  geometers,
Archimedes;  Apollonius  and  the  rest  It  appears  to  be  only  twice  mentioned
at  all,  (i)  in  the  passage  of  Eutocius  referred  to  above  (p.  116)  and  (2)  by
Theon  in  his  commentary  on  Ptolemy's  owra^s.  Moreover  the  content  of
the  definition  is  in  itself  suspicious.  It  speaks  of  the  "sizes  of  ratios  being
multiplied  together  (literally,  into  themselvesX''  an  operation  unknown  to
geometry.  There  b  no  wonder  that  Eutocius,  and  apparently  Theon  also,  in
their  efforts  to  explain  it,  had  to  give  the  word  mfXiKonf^  a  meaning  which  has
no  application  except  in  the  case  of  such  ratios  as  can  be  expressed  by
numbers  (Eutocius  e.g.  making  it  the  "number  by  which  the  ratio  is  called").
Nor  is  it  surprising  that  Walhs  should  have  found  it  necessary  to  substitute
for  the  '*quantitas"  of  Commandinus  a  different  translation,  "  quantuplidty,"
which  he  said  was  represented  by  the  ^"^ exponent  of  the  ratio^^  (rationis
exponens),  what  Peletarius  had  described  as  "denominatio  ipsae  proportionis"
and  Clavius  as  ''denominator."  The  fact  is  that  the  definition  is  ungeometrical
and  useless,  as  was  already  seen  by  Savile,  in  whose  view  it  was  one  of  the
two  blemishes  in  the  body  of  geometry  (the  other  bei^g  of  course  Postulate  5).


BOOK   VI.    PROPOSITIONS.


Proposition  i.


Triangles  and  parallelograms  which  are  under  the  same
height  are  to  one  another  as  their  bases.

Let  ABC,  ACD  be  triangles  and  EC,  C/^  parallelograms
under  the  same  height ;

5  I  say  that,  as  the  base  BC  is  to  the  base  CD,  so  is  the
triangle  ABC  to  the  triangle  ACD,  and  the  parallelogram
EC  to  the  parallelogram  CF.


H      G      Q      c


For  let  BD  be  produced  in  both  directions  to  the  points
H,  L  and  let  [any  number  of  straight  lines]  BG,  GH  be
lo  made  equal  to  the  base  BC,  and  any  number  of  straight  lines
DK,  KL  equal  to  the  base  CD ;

let  AG,  AH,  AK,  AL  be  joined.

Then,  since  CB,  BG^  GH  are  equal  to  one  another,

the  triangles  ABC,  AGB,  AHG  are  also  equal  to  one
IS  another.  [i.  38]

Therefore,  whatever  multiple  the  base  HC  is  of  the  base
BC,  that  multiple  also  is  the  triangle  AHC  of  the  triangle
ABC

For  the  same  reason,

20  whatever   multiple   the  base  ZC  is  of  the  base   CD,  that
multiple  also  is  the  triangle  ALC  of  the  triangle  ACD ;
and.  if  the  base  HC  is  equal  to  the  base  CL,  the  triangle
AHC  is  also  equal  to  the  triangle  ACL,  [i.  3^]


192  BOOK  VI  [VI.  I

if  the  base  HC  is  in  excess  of  the  base  CL,  the  triangle  AHC
25  is  also  in  excess  of  the  triangle  ACL,
and,  if  less,  less.

Thus,  there  being  four  magnitudes,  two  bases  BC,  CD
and  two  triangles  vi^C,  ACD,

equimultiples   have   been    taken    of  the   base   BC  and   the
30  triangle  ABC,  namely  the  base  HC  and  the  triangle  AHC,
and  of  the  base  CD  and  the  triangle  ^/?C  other,  chance,  equi-
multiples, namely  the  base  LC  and  the  triangle  ALC  \

and  it  has  been  proved  that,
if  the  base  HC  is  in  excess  of  the  base  CL,  the  triangle  AHC
35  is  also  in  excess  of  the  triangle  ALC  \
if  equal,  equal ;  and,  if  less,  less.

Therefore,  as  the  base  BC  is  to  the  base  CD,  so  is  the

triangle  ABC  to  the  triangle  ACD,  [v.  Def.  5]

Next,  since  the  parallelogram  EC  is  double  of  the  triangle

A,oABC,  [1-41]

and  the  parallelogram  FC  is  double  of  the  triangle  ACD,

while  parts  have  the  same  ratio  as  the  same  multiples  of

them,  [v.  15]

therefore,  as  the  triangle  ABC  is  to  the  triangle  A  CD,  so  is

45  the  parallelogram  EC  to  the  parallelogram  FC

Since,  then,  it  was  proved  that,  as  the  base  BC  is  to  CD,
so  is  the  triangle  ABC  to  the  triangle  ACD,
and,  as  the  triangle  ABC  is  to  the  triangle  ACD,  so  is  the
parallelogram  EC  to  the  parallelogram  CF,
50  therefore  also,  as  the  base  BC  is  to  the  base  CD,  so  is  the
parallelogram  EC  to  the  parallelogram  FC  [v.  n]

Therefore  etc.

Q.  E.  D.

4.  Under  the  same  height.  The  Greek  text  has  "under  the  same  height  AC,*'  with
a  figure  in  which  the  side  AC  common  to  the  two  triangles  is  perpendicular  to  the  base  and
is  therefore  itself  the  "height."  But,  even  if  the  two  triangles  are  placed  contiguously  so  as
to  have  a  common  side  AC,  it  is  quite  gratuitous  to  require  it  to  be  perpendicular  to.the  base.
Theon,  on  this  occasion  making  an  improvement,  altered  to  "which  are  {ovra)  under  the
same  height,  (namely)  the  perpendicular  drawn  from  A  to  BD^  I  have  ventured  to  alter  so
far  as  to  omit  'MC  and  to  draw  the  figure  in  the  usual  way.

14.  ABC,  AGB,  AHG.  Euclid,  indifferent  to  exact  order,  writes  ''AHG.AGBy  ABC''
46.  Since  then  it  was  proved  that,  as  the  base  BC  is  to  CD,  so  is  the  triangle
ABC  to  the  triangle  ACD.  Here  again  words  have  to  be  supplied  in  translating  the
extremely  terse  Greek  iini  olv  iSelx^Vt  wj  ^t^i*  ^  pdats  BV  Tpbs  t^v  FA,  oOtus  rd  ABF
Tpiy(a¥ov  xpbi  rb  AFA  Tplyuyov,  literally  "since  was  proved,  as  the  base  ^6' to  CD,  so  the
triangle  ABC  to  the  triangle  ACD''    Cf.  note  on  v.  16,  p.  165.


VI.  i]  PROPOSITION    I  193

The  proof  assumes — what  is  however  an  obvious  deduction  from  i.  38 —
that,  of  triangles  or  parallelograms  on  unequal  bases  and  between  the  same
parallels,  the  greater  is  that  which  has  the  greater  base.

It  is  of  course  not  necessary  that  the  two  given  triangles  should  have  a
common  side,  as  in  the  figure ;  the  proof  is  just  as  easy  if  they  have  not.
The  proposition  being  equally  true  of  triangles  and  parallelograms  of  equal
heights,  Simson  states  this  fact  in  a  corollary  thus:

"  From  this  it  is  plain  that  triangles  and  parallelograms  that  have  equal
altitudes  are  to  one  another  as  their  bases.

Let  the  figures  be  so  placed  as  to  have  their  bases  in  the  same  straight
line  ;  and,  if  we  draw  perpendiculars  from  the  vertices  of  the  triangles  to  the
bases,  the  straight  line  which  joins  the  vertices  is  parallel  to  that  in  which
their  bases  are,  because  the  perpendiculars  are  both  equal  and  parallel  to  one
another  [i.  33].  Then,  if  the  same  construction  be  made  as  in  the  proposition,
the  demonstration  will  be  the  same."

The  object  of  placing  the  bases  in  one  straight  line  is  to  get  the  triangles
and  parallelograms  within  the  same  parallels.  Cf.  Proclus'  remark  on  i.  38
(p.  405,  17)  that  having  the  same  height  is  the  same  thing  as  being  in  the
same  parallels.

Rectangles,  or  right-angled  triangles,  which  have  one  of  the  sides  about
the  right  angle  of  the  same  length  can  be  placed  so  that  the  equal  sides
coincide  and  the  others  are  in  a  straight  line.  If  then  we  call  the  common
side  the  base,  the  rectangles  or  the  right-angled  triangles  are  to  one  another
as  their  heights,  by  vi.  i.  Now,  instead  of  each  right-angled  triangle  or
rectangle,  we  can  take  any  other  triangle  or  parallelogram  respectively  with  an
equal  base  and  between  the  same  parallels.     Thus

Triangles  and  parallelograms  having  equal  bases  are  to  one  another  as  their
heights,

I^gendre  and  those  authors  of  modem  text-books  who  follow  him  in
basing  their  treatment  of  proportion  on  the  algebraical  definition  are  obliged
to  divide  their  proofs  of  propositions  like  this  into  two  parts,  the  first  of
which  proves  the  particular  theorem  in  the  case  where  the  magnitudes  are
commensurable,  and  the  second  extends  it  to  the  case  where  they  are
incommensurable.

Legendre  (Eliments  de  Ghmetrie^  111.  3)  uses  for  this  extension  a  rigorous
method  by  reductio  ad  absurdum  similar  to  that

used    by  Archimedes   in    his   treatise   On   the        ^  pi^  e

equilibrium  of  planes^  i.   7.     The  following  is         ~~
Legendre's  proof  of  the  extension  of  vi.  i  to  in-
commensurable parallelograms  and  bases.

The  proposition  having  been  proved  for
commensurable  bases,  let  there  be  two  rectangles
ABCD,  AEFD  as  in  the  figure,  on  bases  AB,
y^^  which  are  incommensurable  with  one  another.

To  prove  that     rect  A  BCD :  rect.  AEFD  =  AB :  AE,

For,  if  not,  let    rtci.  ABCD  wed,  AEFD  =  AB  i  AO, (i)

where  AO  is  (for  instance)  greater  than  AE,

Divide  AB  into  equal  parts  each  of  which  is  less  than  EO,  and  mark  off
on  AO  lengths  equal  to  one  of  the  parts;  then  there  will  be  at  least  one  point
of  division  between  E  and  O.

Let  it  be  /,  and  draw  IK  parallel  to  £F.

H.  £.  II.  13


IV                     E

6          B

194


BOOK  VI  [vi.  I,  a


Then  the  rectangles  ABCD,  AIKD  are  in  the  ratio  of  the  bases  AB^  AI,
since  the  latter  are  commensurable.
Therefore,  inverting  the  proportion,

rect.  AIKD'.x^i.  ABCD  =  AI\  AB (2).

From  this  and  (i),  ^^  aequali^

rect  AIKD :  rect  AEFD  =  AI.AO.

BvXAO>  AI;  therefore  rect  AEFD  >  rect  AIKD.
But  this  is  impossible,  for  the  rectangle  AEFD  is  less  than  the  rectangle
AIKD.

Similarly  an  impossibility  can  be  proved  \i  A0<  AE.

Therefore  rect  ABCD: rect  AEFD  =  AB :AE.

Some  modem  American  and  German  text-books  adopt  the  less  rigorous
method  of  appealing  to  the  theor>'  of  /imUs,


Proposition  2.

//a  straight  line  be  drawn  parallel  to  one  of  the  sides  of  a
triangle,  it  will  cut  the  sides  of  the  triangle  proportionally ;
andy  if  the  sides  of  the  triangle  be  cut  proportionally,  the  line
joining  the  points  of  section  will  be  parallel  to  the  remaining
side  of  the  triangle.

For  let  DE  be  drawn  parallel  to  BC,  one  of  the  sides  of
the  triangle  ABC ;

I  say  that,  as  BD  is  to  DA,  so  is  CE  to
EA.

For  let  BE,  CD  be  joined.

Therefore  the  triangle  BDE  is  equal  to
the  triangle  CDE ;

for  they  are  on  the  same  base  DE  and  in
the  same  parallels  DE,  BC.  [i.  38]

And  the  triangle  ADE  is  another  area.

But  equals  have  the  same  ratio  to  the  same  ;  [v.  7]

therefore,  as  the  triangle  BDE  is  to  the  triangle  ADE^  so
is  the  triangle  CDE  to  the  triangle  ADE.

But,  as  the  triangle  BDE  is  to  ADE,  so  is  BD  to  DA  ;

for,  being  under  the  same  height,  the  perpendicular  drawn
from  E  to  AB,  they  are  to  one  another  as  their  bases,     [vi.  i]

For  the  same  reason  also,

as  the  triangle  CDE  is  to  ADE,  so  is  CE  to  EA.

Therefore  also,  as  BD  is  to  DA,  so  is  CE  to  EA.    [v.  n]


VI.  2,  3]  PROPOSITIONS    1—3  195

Again,  let  the  sides  AB,  AC  oi  the  triangle  ABC  be  cut
proportionally,  so  that,  as  BD  is  to  DA,  so  is  CE  to  EA  ;
and  let  DE  be  joined.

I  say  that  DE  is  parallel  to  BC

For,  with  the  same  construction,
since,  as  BD  is  to  DA,  so  is  CE  to  ^-^,
but,  as  BD  is  to  DA,  so  is  the  triangle  BDE  to  the  triangle

and,  as  CE  is  to  EA^  so  is  the  triangle  CDE  to  the  triangle

^Z?^,  [VI.  i]

therefore  also,

as  the  triangle  BDE  is  to  the  triangle  ADE,  so  is  the
triangle  CDE  to  the  triangle  ADE.  [v.  n]

Therefore  each  of  the  triangles  BDE,  CDE  has  the  same
ratio  to  ADE,

Therefore  the  triangle  BDE  is  equal  to  the  triangle  CDE\

[v.9]
and  they  are  on  the  same  base  DE.

But  equal  triangles  which  are  on  the  same  base  are  also
in  the  same  parallels.  [i.  39]

Therefore  DE  is  parallel  to  BC
Therefore  etc.

Q.  E.  D.

Euclid  evidently  did  not  think  it  worth  while  to  distinguish  in  the
enunciation,  or  in  the  figure,  the  cases  in  which  the  parallel  to  the  base  cuts
the  other  two  sides  produced  (a)  beyond  the!  point  in  which  they  intersect,
{b)  in  the  other  direction.  Simson  gives  the  three  figures  and  inserts  words
in  the  enunciation,  reading  "it  shall  cut  the  other  sides,  or  those  sides  produced,
proportionally"  and  "if  the  sides,  or  the  sides  produced,  be  cut  proportionally."

Todhunter  observes  that  the  second  part  of  the  enunciation  ought  to
make  it  clear  which  segments  in  the  proportion  correspond  to  which.  Thus
e.g.,  if  AD  were  double  of  DB,  and  CE  double  of  EA,  the  sides  would  be
cut  proportionally,  but  DE  would  not  be  parallel  to  BC.  The  omission
could  be  supplied  by  saying  "and  if  the  sides  of  the  triangle  be  cut
proportionally  so  that  the  segments  adjacent  to  the  third  side  are  corresponding
terms  in  the  proportion ^

Proposition  3.

If  an  angle  of  a  triangle  be  bisected  and  the  straight  line
cutting  the  angle  cut  the  base  also,  the  segments  of  the  base
will  have  the  same  ratio  as  the  remaining  sides  of  the  triangle:
and,  if  the  segments  of  the  base  have  the  same  ratio  as  the

13—2


196  BOOK  VI  [vi.  3

remaining  sides  of  the  triangle,  the  straight  line  joined  from
the  vertex  to  the  point  of  section  will  bisect  the  angle  of  the
triangle.

Let  ABC  be  a  triangle,  and  let  the  angle  BAC  be  bisected
by  the  straight  line  AD  ;

I  say  that,  as  BD  is  to  CD,  so
xsBA  to  AC.

For  let  CjE  be  drawn  through
C  parallel  to  DA,  and  let  BA
be  ciarried  through  and  meet  it
at^.

Then,  since  the  straight  line
^C  falls  upon  the  parallels  AD,
EC,

the  angle  AC£  is  equal  to  the  angle  CAD.       [i.  29]

But  the  angle  CAD  is  by  hypothesis  equal  to  the  angle
BAD;

therefore  the  angle  BAD  is  also  equal  to  the  angle  ACE.

Again,  since  the  straight  line  BAE  falls  upon  the  parallels
AD,  EC,

the  exterior  angle  BAD  is  equal  to  the  interior  angle
AEC.  [i.  29]

But  the  angle  ACE  was  also  proved  equal  to  the  angle
BAD;

therefore  the  angle  ACE  is  also  equal  to  the  angle  AEC,

so  that  the  side  AE  is  also  equal  to  the  side  AC.        [i.  6]

And,  since  AD  has  been  drawn  parallel  to  EC,  one  of
the  sides  of  the  triangle  BCE,

therefore,  proportionally,  as  BD  is  to  DC,  so  is  BA  to  AE.

But  AE  is  equal  to  AC;  [^'- ^]

therefore,  as  BD  is  to  DC,  so  is  BA  to  AC

Again,  let  BA  he  to  AC  as  BD  to  DC,  and  let  AD  be
joined ;

I  say  that  the  angle  BAC  has  been  bisected  by  the  straight
line  AD.

For,  with  the  same  construction,
since,  as  BD  is  to  DC,  so  is  BA  to  AC,


VI.  3]  PROPOSITION   3  197

and  also,  as  BD  is  to  DC,  so  is  BA  to  AE\  for  AD  has
been  drawn  parallel  to  EC,  one  of  the  sides  of  the  triangle
BCE\  [VI.  2]

therefore  also,  as  BA  is  to  AC,  so  is  BA  to  AE,  [v.  n]

Therefore  AC  is  equal  to  AE,  [v.  9]

so  that  the  angle  A  EC  is  also  equal  to  the  angle  ACE.   [i.  5]

But  the  angle  AEC  is  equal  to  the  exterior  angle  BAD,

[i.  29]

and  the  angle  ACE  is  equal  to  the  alternate  angle  CAD\  [/^.]

therefore  the  angle  BAD  is  also  equal  to  the  angle  CAD.

Therefore  the  angle  BAChsiS  been  bisected  by  the  straight
line  AD.

Therefore  etc.

Q.  E.  D.

The  demonstration  assumes  that  CB  will  meet  BA  produced  in  some
point  E,  This  is  proved  in  the  same  way  as  it  is  proved  in  vi.  4  that  BA,  ED
will  meet  if  produced.  The  angles  ABD,  BDA  in  the  figure  of  vi.  3  are
together  less  than  two  right  angles,  and  the  angle  BDA  is  equal  to  the  angle
BCE,  since  DA,  CE  are  parallel.  Therefore  the  angles  ABC,  BCE  are
together  less  than  two  right  angles ;  and  BA,  CE  must  meet,  by  i.  Post  5.

The  corresponding  proposition  about  the  segments  into  which  .^C  is
divided  externally  by  the  bisector  of  the  external  angle  at  A  when  that
bisector  meets  BC  produced  (i.e.  when  the  sides  AB,  AC  axe  not  equal)  is
important.  Simson  gives  it  as  a  separate  proposition,  A,  noting  the  fact  that
Pappus  assumes  the  result  without  proof  (Pappus,  vii.  p.  730,  24).

The  best  plan  is  however,  as  De  Morgan  says,  to  combine  Props.  3  and  A
in  one  proposition,  which  may  be  enunciated  thus :  //  an  angle  of  a  triangle
be  bisected  internally  or  externally  by  a  straight  line  which  cuts  the  opposite  side
or  the  opposite  side  produced,  the  segments  of  that  side  will  have  the  same  ratio
as  the  other  sides  of  the  triangle;  and,  if  a  side  of  a  triangle  be  divided  internally
or  externally  so  that  its  segments  have  the  same  ratio  as  the  other  sides  of  the
triangle,  the  straight  line  drawn  from  the  point  of  section  to  the  angular  point
which  is  opposite  to  the  first  mentioned  side  will  bisect  the  interior  or  exterior  angle
at  that  angular  point.


Let  A  Che  the  smaller  of  the  two  sides  AB,  AC,  so  that  the  bisector  AD
of  the  exterior  angle  at  A  may  meet  BC  produced  beyond  C  Draw  CE
through  C  parallel  to  DA,  meeting  BA  in  E.

Then,  if  FAC  is  the  exterior  angle  bisected  by  AD  in  the  case  of  external
bisection,  and  if  a  point  F\^  taken  on  AB  in  the  figure  of  vi.  3,  the  propf  of


198  BOOK  VI  [vi.  3

VI.  3  can  be  used  almost  word  for  word  for  the  other  case.  We  have  only  to
speak  of  the  angle  '' FAC'  for  the  angle  "  BAC,''  and  of  the  angle  ^\FAD''
for  the  angle  "  BAD  "  wherever  they  occur,  to  say  "let  BA^  or  BA  prpduced,
meet  CE  in  E,''  and  to  substitute  '' BA  or  BA  produced"  for  '"BAE''
lower  down.


If  ADy  AE  be  the  internal  and  external  bisectors  of  the  angle  -<^  in  a
triangle  of  which  the  sides  AB^  AC  are  unequal,  AC  being  the  smaller,  and
if  ADy  AE  meet  BC  and  BC  produced  in  Z>,  E  respectively,

the  ratios  of  BD  to  DC  and  of  BE  to  EC  are  alike  equal  to  the  ratio  of
BA  to  AC.

Therefore  BE  is  to  EC  as  BD  to  DC,

that  is,  BE  is  to  EC  as  the  difference  between  BE  and  ED  is  to  the
difference  between  ED  and  EC,

whence  BE^  ED,  EC  are  in  harmonic  progression,  or  DE  is  a  harmonic  mean
between  BE  and  EC,  or  again  B,  D,  C,  ^  is  a  harmonic  range.

Since  the  angle  DAC  is  half  of  the  angle  BAC,

and  the  angle  CAE  half  of  the  angle  CAP,
while  the  angles  BAC,  CAF^xq  equal  to  two  right  angles,
the  angle  DAE  is  a  right  angle.

Hence  the  circle  described  on  DE  as  diameter  passes  through  A,

Now,  if  the  ratio  of  BA  to  AC'\^  given,  and  if  BC  is  given,  the  points
D,  E  on  BC  and  BC  produced  are  given,  and  therefore  so  is  the  circle  on
D,  E  as  diameter.  Hence  the  locus  of  a  point  such  that  its  distances  from  tivo
given  points  are  in  a  given  ratio  (not  being  a  ratio  of  equality)  is  a  circle.

This  locus  was  discussed  by  Apollonius  in  his  Plane  Loci,  Book  ii.,  as  we
know  from  Pappus  (vii.  p.  666),  who  says  that  the  book  contained  the
theorem  that,  if  from  two  given  points  straight  lines  inflected  to  another
point  are  in  a  given  ratio,  the  point  in  which  they  meet  will  lie  on  either  a
straight  line  or  a  circumference  of  a  circle.  The  straight  line  is  of  course  the
locus  when  the  ratio  is  one  of  equality.  The  other  case  is  quoted  in  the
following  form  by  Eutocius  (Apollonius,  ed.  Heiberg,  ii.  pp.  i8o — 4).

Gi7fen  tivo  points  in  a  plane  and  a  proportion  between  unequal  straight  lines,
it  is  possible  to  describe  a  circle  in  the  plane  so  that  the  straight  lines  inflected
from  the  given  points  to  the  circumference  of  the  circle  shall  have  a  ratio  the
same  as  the  given  one,

Apollonius'  construction,  as  given  by  Eutocius,  is  remarkable  because  he
makes  no  use  of  either  of  the  points  D,  E,  He  finds  O,  the  centre  of  the
required  circle,  and  the  length  of  its  radius  directly  from  the  data  ^Cand  the
given  ratio  which  we  will  call  h :  k.  But  the  construction  was  not  discovered
by  Apollonius ;  it  belongs  to  a  much  earlier  date,  since  it  appears  in  exactly


VI.  3]  PROPOSITION   3  199

the  same  form  in  Aristotle,  Meteorologica  in.  5,  376  a  3  sqq.  The
analysis  leading  up  to  the  construction  is,  as  usual,  not  given  either  by
Aristotle  or  Eutocius.  We  are  told  to  take  three  straight  lines  x,  CO  (a
length  measured  along  BC  produced  beyond  (7,  where  B^  C  are  the  points  at
which  the  greater  and  smaller  of  the  inflected  lines  respectively  terminate),
and  r,  such  that,  if  ^ :  ^  be  the  given  ratio  and  h>  k^

k:h  =  h\k-¥x^  (a)

x:BC=k:CO^hir (fi)


This  determines  the  position  of  O,  and  the  length  of  r,  the  radius  of  the
required  circle.  The  circle  is  then  drawn,  any  point  P  is  taken  on  it  and
joined  to  B^  C  respectively,  and  it  is  proved  that

PB:PC^h:k,

We  may  conjecture  that  the  analysis  proceeded  somewhat  as  follows.

It  would  be  seen  that  B^  C  are  "conjugate  points"  with  reference  to  the
circle  on  DE  as  diameter.  (Cf.  Apollonius,  Conies^  i.  36,  where  it  is  proved,
in  terms,  for  a  circle  as  well  as  for  an  ellipse  and  a  hyperbola,  that,  if  the
polar  of  B  meets  the  diameter  DE  in  C,  then  EC :  CD  =  EB  :  BD.)

If  ^  be  the  middle  point  of  DE^  and  therefore  the  centre  of  the  circle,
Z>,  E  may  be  eliminated,  as  in  the  Conies^  i.  37>  thus.

Since  EC  i  CD  =- EB  :  BD,

it  follows  that    EC  +  CD.  EC-- CD  =  EB  +  BD  :  EB  -  BD,

or  2OD  :  20C=  2OB  :  2OD,

that  is,  BO.OC=  OD"  =  r»,  say.

If  therefore  P  be  any  point  on  the  circle  with  centre  O  and  radius  r,

BO:OP=OP:OC,

so  that  BOP,  POC  are  similar  triangles.

In  addition,  A:k^  BD:DC=BE  :  EC

=^BD  +  BE:DE  =  BO:r.

Hence  we  require  that

BO:r=r:OC=BP:PC=A:k (8)

Therefore,  alternately,

k:CO  =  A:r,

which  is  the  second  relation  in  (P)  above.

Now  assume  a  length  x  such  that  each  of  the  last  ratios  is  equal  to  x:BC,
as  in  (fi).


200  BOOK  VI  [vi.  3,  4

Then  x\BC^k\CO  =  h\r,

Therefore  x^k\BO^h\r,

and,  alternately,  x-\^k\h- BO : r

=  h:k,  from  (8)  above ;
and  this  is  the  relation  (a)  which  remained  to  be  found.

Apollonius'  proof  of  the  construction  is  given  by  Eutocius,  who  begins  by
saying  that  it  is  manifest  that  r  is  a  mean  proportional  between  BO  and  OC.
This  IS  seen  as  follows :
From  (p)  we  derive

x\BC=k\  CO  =  hir  =  {k-\-x):BO,
whence  BO  ',r  =  (k-^x)ih

^h:k,  by  (a),
=  r:CO,  by(i8),
and  therefore  r*  =  BO .  CO.

But  the  triangles  BOP^  POC  have  the  angle  at  O  common,  and,  since
BO\OP^OP\  OC,  the  triangles  are  similar  and  the  angles  OPC,  OBP
are  equal

[Up  to  this  point  Aristotle's  proof  is  exactly  the  same ;  from  this  point  it
diverges  slightly.]

If  now  CL  be  drawn  parallel  to  BP  meeting  OP  in  Z,  the  angles  BPC
LCPbxq  equal  also.

Therefore  the  triangles  BPC,  PCL  are  similar,  and

BP,PC=PC:CL,

whence  BP"^ :  PC^  ^BP\CL

=  BO :  OC,  by  parallels,

=  BO^:OP^  (since  BO  :  0P=  OP.OC),

Therefore  BP :  PC=  BO  :  OP

=  Ji:k  (for  OP=r),

[Aristotle  infers  this  more  directly  from  the  similar  triangles  POB,  COP,
Since  these  triangles  are  similar,

OP:CP=OB:BP,

whence  BP  :PC=BO:OP

Apollonius  proves  lastly,  by  reductio  ad  absurdum,  that  the  last  equation
cannot  be  true  with  reference  to  any  point  P  which  is  not  on  the  circle  so
described.


Proposition  4.

In  equiangular  triangles  the  sides  about  the  equal  angles
are  proportional,  and  those  are  corresponding  sides  which
subtend  the  equal  angles.


VI.  4]  PROPOSITIONS  3,  4  201

Let  ABCy  DCE  be   equiangular  triangles   having   the
angle  ABC  equal  to  the  angle
DCE,    the   angle   BAC  to   the
angle  CDE,  and  further  the  angle
ACB  to  the  angle  CED  ;

I  say  that  in  the  triangles  ABC,
DCE  the  sides  about  the  equal
angles  are  proportional,  and  those
are  corresponding  sides  which
subtend  the  equal  angles.

For  let  BC  be  placed  in  a
straight  line  with  CE.

Then,  since  the  angles  ABC,  ACB  are  less  than  two  right
angles,  [i.  17]

and  the  angle  ACB  is  equal  to  the  angle  DEC,

therefore  the  angles  ABC,  DEC  are  less  than  two   right
angles ;

therefore  BA,  ED^  when  produced,  will  meet.  [i.  Post.  5]

Let  them  be  produced  and  meet  at  F.
Now,  since  the  angle  DCE  is  equal  to  the  angle  ABC,

BF  is  parallel  to  CD.  [i.  28]

Again,  since  the  angle  ACB  is  equal  to  the  angle  DEC,

AC  is  parallel  to  FE.  [i.  28]

Therefore  FA  CD  is  a  parallelogram  ;
therefore  FA  is  equal  to  DC,  and  AC  to  FD.  fi.  34]

And,  since  AC  has  been  drawn  parallel  to  FE,  one  side
of  the  triangle  FBE,
therefore,  as  BA  is  to  AF,  so  is  BC  to  CE.  [vi.  2]

But  AF  is  equal  to  CD  ;

therefore,  as  BA  is  to  CD,  so  is  BC  to  CE^
and  alternately,  as  AB  is  to  BC,  so  is  DC  to  CE.  fv.  16I

Again,  since  CD  is  parallel  to  BF,
therefore,  as  BC  is  to  CE,  so  is  FD  to  DE.  [vi.  2]

But  FD  is  equal  to  ^C ;

therefore,  as  BC  is  to  CE,  so  is  AC  to  DE,
and  alternately,  as  BC  is  to  CA,  so  is  CE  to  ED.  [v.  16]


202  BOOK  VI  [VI.  4,  5

Since  then  it  was  proved  that,

as  AB  is  to  BC^  so  is  DC  to  CE,
and,  as  BC  is  to  CA,  so  is  CE  to  ED ;

therefore,  ex  aequali,  as  BA  is  to  AC,  so  is  CZ?  to  DE.  [v.  22]

Therefore  etc.

Q.  E.  D.

Todhunter  remarks  that  "  the  manner  in  which  the  two  triangles  are  to  be
placed  is  very  imperfectly  described;  their  bases  are  to  be  in  the  same  straight
line  and  contiguous,  their  vertices  are  to  be  on  the  same  side  of  the  base,  and
each  of  the  two  angles  which  have  a  common  vertex  is  to  be  equal  to  the
remote  angle  of  the  other  triangle."  But  surely  Euclid's  description  is
sufficient,  except  for  not  saying  that  B  and  D  must  be  on  the  same  side
of  BCE.

VI.  4  can  be  immediately  deduced  from  vi.  2  if  we  superpose  one  triangle
on  the  other  three  times  in  succession,  so  that  each  angle  successively
coincides  with  its  equal,  the  triangles  being  similarly  situated,  e.g.  if  {A,  B,  C
and  Dy  E,  F  being  the  equal  angles  respectively)  we  apply  the  angle  DEFio
the  angle  ABC  so  that  D  lies  on  AB  (produced  if  necessary)  and  F on  BC
(produced  if  necessary).  De  Morgan  prefers  this  method.  "  Abandon,"  he
says,  "  the  peculiar  mode  of  construction  by  which  Euclid  proves  two  cases  at
once;  make  an  angle  coincide  with  its  equal,  and  suppose  this  process  repeated
three  times,  one  for  each  angle."


Proposition  5.

1/  two  triangles  have  their  sides  proportional,  the  triangles
will  be  equiangular  and  will  have  those  angles  equal  which  the
corresponding  sides  subtend.

Let  ABC,  DEF  be  two  triangles  having  their  sides
proportional,  so  that,

as  AB  is  to  BC,  so  is  DE  to  EF,

as  BC  is  to  CA,  so  is  EF  to  FD,

and  further,  as  BA  is  to  AC,  so  is  ED  to  DF-,

I  say  that  the  triangle  ABC  is  equiangular  with  the  triangle
DEF,  and  they  will  have  those  angles  equal  which  the  corre-
sponding sides  subtend,  namely  the  angle  ABC  to  the  angle
DEF,  the  angle  BCA  to  the  angle  EFD,  and  further  the
angle  BAC  to  the  angle  EDF.

For  on  the  straight  line  EF,  and  at  the  points  E,  F  on
it,  let  there  be  constructed  the  angle  FEG  equal  to  the  angle
ABC,  and  the  angle  EFG  equal  to  the  angle  ACB ;       [i.  23]


VI.  s]  PROPOSITIONS  4,  5  203

therefore  the  remaining  angle  at  A  is  equal  to  the  remaining
angle  at  G.  [i.  32]

Therefore   the   triangle   ABC    is   equiangular  with   the
norlp  GRF.


triangle  GEF.

A


Therefore  in  the  triangles  ABC,  GEF  the  sides  about
the  equal  angles  are  proportional,  and  those  are  corresponding
sides  which  subtend  the  equal  angles  ;  [vi.  4]

therefore,  as  AB  is  to  BC,  so  is  GE  to  EF.

But,  as  AB  is  to  BC,  so  by  hypothesis  is  DE  to  EF\

therefore,  as  DE  is  to  EF,  so  is  GE  to  EF.  [v.  n]

Therefore  each  of  the  straight  lines  DE,  GE  has  the
same  ratio  to  EF\

therefore  DE  is  equal  to  GE.  [v.  9]

For  the  same  reason

DF  is  also  equal  to  GF.

Since  then  DE  is  equal  to  EG,

and  EF  is  common,

the  two  sides  DE,  EF  2s^  equal  to  the  two  sides  GE,  EF\

and  the  base  DF  is  equal  to  the  base  FG ;

therefore  the  angle  DEF  is  equal  to  the  angle  GEF,        [i.  8]

and  the  triangle  DEF  is  equal  to  the  triangle  GEF,

and  the  remaining  angles  are  equal  to  the  remaining  angles,
namely  those  which  the  equal  sides  subtend.  [i.  4]

Therefore  the  angle  DFE  is  also  equal  to  the  angle  GFE,

and  the  angle  EDF  to  the  angle  EGF.

And,  since  the  angle  FED  is  equal  to  the  angle  GEF,
while  the  angle  GEF  is  equal  to  the  angle  ABC,
therefore  the  angle  ABC  is  also  equal  to  the  angle  DEF.


204  BOOK  VI  [vi.  5,  6

For  the  same  reason

the  angle  ACB  is  also  equal  to  the  angle  DFE,
and  further,  the  angle  at  A  to  the  angle  at  D ;

therefore  the  triangle  ABC  is  equiangular  with  the  triangle
DEF.

Therefore  etc.

Q.  E.  D.

This  proposition  is  the  complete  converse,  vi.  6  a  partial  converse,  of  vi.  4.
Todhunter,  after  Walker,  remarks  that  the  enunciation  should  make  it
clear  that  the  sides  of  the  triangles  taken  in  order  are  proportional.    It  is  quite
possible  that  there  should  be  two  triangles  ABC^  DEF  sMch  that

AB  is  to  BCd^  DE  to  EF,
and  BC  is  to  CA  as  DF'v&  to  ED  (instead  of  EFX.o  FD\

so  that  AB  is  to  ^C  as  DF\.o  EF

(ex  aequali  in  perturbed  proportion) ;

in  this  case  the  sides  of  the  triangles  are  proportional,  but  not  in  the  same
order,  and  the  triangles  are  not  necessarily  equiangular  to  one  another.  For  a
numerical  illustration  we  may  suppose  the  sides  of  one  triangle  to  be  3,  4  and
5  feet  respectively,  and  those  of  another  to  be  12,  15  and  20  feet  respectively.

In  VI.  5  there  is  the  same  apparent  avoidance  of  indirect  demonstration
which  has  been  noticed  on  i.  48.


Proposition  6.

If  two  triangles  have  one  angle  equal  to  one  angle  and  t/ie
sides  about  the  equal  angles  proportional^  the  triangles  will  be
equiangular  and  will  have  those  angles  equal  which  the  corre-
sponding  sides  subtend.

Let  ABC,  DEF  he  two  triangles  having  one  angle  BAC
equal  to  one  angle  EDF  and  the  sides  about  the  equal  angles
proportional,  so  that,

as  BA  is  to  AC,  so  is  ED  to  DF\
I  say  that  the  triangle  ABC  is  equiangular  with  the  triangle
DEF,  and  will  have  the  angle  ABC  equal  to  the  angle  DEF,
and  the  angle  ACB  to  the  angle  DEE.

For  on  the  straight  line  DF,  and  at  the  points  D,  F  on  it,
let  there  be  constructed  the  angle  FDG  equal  to  either  of  the
angles  BAC,  EDF,  and  the  angle  DFG  equal  to  the  angle
ACB,  [1.23]

therefore  the  remaining  angle  at^  is  equal  to  the  remaining
angle  at  G.  [i.  32]


VI.  6]  PROPOSITIONS   5,  6  205

Therefore    the   triangle   ABC  is   equiangular   with    the
triangle  DGF,

Therefore,  proportionally,  as  BA  is  to  AC,  so  is  GD  to

DF.  [VI.  4]

But,  by  hypothesis,  as  BA  is  to  AC,  so  also  is  ED  to  DF\

therefore  also,  as  ED  is  to  DF,  so  is  GD  to  DF.  [v.  n]


Therefore  ED  is  equal  to  DG ;  [v.  9]

and  DF  is  common  ;

therefore  the  two  sides  ED,  DFzx^  equal  to  the  two  sides
GD,  DF\  and  the  angle  EDF  is  equal  to  the  angle  GDF\

therefore  the  base  EF  is  equal  to  the  base  GF,

and  the  triangle  DEF  is  equal  to  the  triangle  DGF,

and  the  remaining  angles  will  be  equal  to  the  remaining  angles,
namely  those  which  the  equal  sides  subtend.  [i.  4]

Therefore  the  angle  DFG  is  equal  to  the  angle  DFE,
and  the  angle  DGF  to  the  angle  DEF.
But  the  angle  DFG  is  equal  to  the  angle  ACB\
therefore  the  angle  ACB  is  also  equal  to  the  angle  DFE.

And,  by  hypothesis,  the  angle  BAC  is  also  equal  to  the
angle  EDF',

therefore   the   remaining   angle   at   B  is  also  equal  to  the
remaining  angle  at  E  ;  [i.  32]

therefore  the  triangle  ABC  is  equiangular  with  the  triangle
DEF.

Therefore  etc.

Q.  E.  D.


«o6  BOOK  VI  [vi.  7

Proposition  7.

If  two  triangles  have  one  angle  equal  to  one  angle,  the
sides  about  other  angles  proportional,  and  th£  remaining  angles
either  both  less  or  both  not  less  than  a  right  angle,  the  triangles
will  be  equiangular  and  will  have  those  angles  equal,  the  sides
about  which  are  proportional.

Let  ABC,  DEF  be  two  triangles  having  one  angle  equal
to  one  angle,  the  angle  BAC  to
the  angle  EDF,  the  sides  about
other  angles  ABC,  DEF  propor-
tional, so  that,  as  AB  is  to  BC,
so  is  DE  to  EF,  and,  first,  each
of  the  remaining  angles  at  C,  F
less  than  a  right  angle  ;

I  say  that  the  triangle  ABC  is

equiangular     with     the     triangle

DEF,   the   angle  ABC  will   be

equal  to  the  angle  DEF,  and  the  remaining  angle,  namely

the  angle  at   C,  equal  to  the   remaining   angle,  the   angle

at  F.

For,  if  the  angle  ABC  is  unequal  to  the  angle  DEF,  one
of  them  is  greater.

Let  the  angle  ABC  be  greater  ;

and  on  the  straight  line  AB,  and  at  the  point  B  on  it,  let  the
angle  ABG  be  constructed  equal  to  the  angle  DEF.       [i.  23]

Then,  since  the  angle  A  is  equal  to  D,

and  the  angle  ABG  to  the  angle  DEF,

therefore  the  remaining  2Xi^^AGB  is  equal  to  the  remaining
angle  DFE.  [i.  32]

Therefore  the  triangle  ABG  is  equiangular  with  the
triangle  DEF.

Therefore,  as  y^^  is  to  BG,  so  is  DE  to  EF.  [vi.  4]

But,  as  DE  is  to  EF,  so  by  hypothesis  is  AB  to  BC\

therefore  AB  has  the  same  ratio  to  each  of  the  straight
lines  BC,  BG\  [v.  n]

therefore  BC  is  equal  to  BG,  [v.  9]

so  that  the  angle  at  C  is  also  equal  to  the  angle  BGC.      [i.  5]


VI.  7]  PROPOSITION   7  207

But,  by  hypothesis,  the  angle  at  C  is  less  than  a  right
angle ;

therefore  the  angle  BGC  is  also  less  than  a  right  angle ;

so  that  the  angle  AGS  adjacent  to  it  is  greater  than  a  right

angle.  [i.  13]

And  it  was  proved  equal  to  the  angle  at  F\
therefore  the  angle  at  F  is  also  greater  than  a  right  angle.

But  it  is  by  hypothesis  less  than  a  right  angle :  which  is
absurd.

Therefore  the  angle  ABC  is  not  unequal  to  the  angle
DEF\

therefore  it  is  equal  to  it.

But  the  angle  at  A  is  also  equal  to  the  angle  at  D  ;

therefore  the  remaining  angle  at  C  is  equal  to  the  remainmg
angle  at  F.  [i.  32]

Therefore  the  triangle  ABC  is  equiangular  with  the  triangle
DEF.

But,  again,  let  each  of  the  angles  at  C,  F  be  supposed  not
less  than  a  right  angle ;

I  say  again  that,  in  this  case  too,  the
triangle  ABC  is  equiangular  with  the
triangle  DEF.

For,  with  the  same  construction,
we  can  prove  similarly  that

BC  is  equal  to  BG ;

so  that  the  angle  at  C  is  also  equal  to
the  angle  BGC.  [i.  5]

But  the  angle  at  C  is  not  less  than  a  right  angle  ;
therefore  neither  is  the  angle  BGC  less  than  a  right  angle.

Thus  in  the  triangle  BGC  the  two  angles  are  not  less
than  two  right  angles  :  which  is  impossible.  [i.  17]

Therefore,  once  more,  the  angie  ABC  is  not  unequal  to
the  angle  DEF\

therefore  it  is  equal  to  it.

But  the  angle  at  A  is  also  equal  to  the  angle  at  Z? ;

therefore  the  remaining  angle  at  C  is  equal  to  the  remaining
angle  at  F.  [i.  32]


2o8  BOOK  VI  [VI.  7

Therefore  the  triangle  ABC  is  equiangular  with  the  triangle
DBF.

Therefore  etc.

Q.  E.  D.

Todhunter  points  out,  after  Walker,  that  some  more  words  are  necessary
to  make  the  enunciation  precise:  ''If  two  triangles  have  one  angle  equal  to  one
angle,  the  sides  about  other  angles  proportional  <so  that  the  sides  subtending
the  equal  angles  are  hotnoiogous>, . . .  '*

This  proposition  is  the  extension  to  similar  triangles  of  the  ambiguous  case
already  mentioned  as  omitted  by  Euclid  in  relation  to  equality  of  triangles  in
all  respects  (cf.  note  following  i.  26.  Vol.  i.  p.  306).  The  enunciation  of  vi.  7
has  suggested  the  ordinary  method  of  enunciating  the  ambiguous  case  where
equality  and  not  similarity  is  in  question.     Cf.  Todhunter's  note  on  i.  26.

Another  possible  way  of  presenting  this  proposition  is  given  by  Todhunter.
The  essential  theorem  to  prove  is :

If  two  triangles  have  two  sides  of  the  one  proportional  to  two  sides  of  the
other ^  and  the  angles  opposite  to  one  pair  of  corresponding  sides  equals  the  angles
which  are  opposite  to  the  other  pair  of  corresponding  sides  shall  either  be  equal  or
be  together  equal  to  two  right  angles.

For  the  angles  included  by  the  proportional  sides  must  be  either  equal  or
unequal.

If  they  are  equal,  then,  since  the  triangles  have  two  angles  of  the  one
equal  to  two  angles  of  the  other,  respectively,  they  are  equiangular  to  one
another.

We  have  therefore  only  to  consider  the  case  in  which  the  angles  included
by  the  proportional  sides  are  unequal.

The  proof  is,  except  at  the  end,  like  that  of  vi.  7.

Let  the  triangles  ABC^  DEFhsive  the  angle  at  A  equal  to  the  angle  at  I> ;
let  AB  be  to  BC  as  £>£  to  £F,
but  let  the  angle  ABC  be  not  equal  to  the  angle  I>£F,


The  angles  ACB,  DFE  shall  be  together  equal  to  two  right  angles.

For  one  of  the  angles  ABC^  DEFmyisX  be  the  greater.

Let  ABC  be  the  greater ;  and  make  the  angle  ABG  equal  to  the  angle
DEF.

Then  we  prove,  as  in  vi.  7,  that  the  triangles  ABG^  DEFzxt  equiangular,
whence

AB  is  to  BG  as  DE  is  to  EF.

But  AB  is  to  BC  as  DE  is  to  EF^  by  hypothesis.

Therefore  BG  is  equal  to  BC^

and  the  angle  BGC  is  equal  to  the  angle  BCA,


VI.  7,  8]


PROPOSITIONS   7,  8


209


Now,  since  the  triangles  ABG^  DEFzxq  equiangular,

the  angle  BGA  is  equal  to  the  angle  EFD,

Add  to  them  respectively  the  equal  angles  BGCy  BCA\  therefore  the
angles  BCA^  EFD  are  together  equal  to  the  angles  BGA^  BGC,  i.e.  to  two
right  angles.

It  follows  therefore  that  the  angles  BCAy  EFD  must  be  either  equal  or
supplementary.

But  (i),  if  each  of  them  is  less  than  a  right  angle,  they  cannot  be
supplementary,  and  they  must  therefore  be  equal;

(2)  if  each  of  them  is  greater  than  a  right  angle,  they  cannot  be
supplementary  and  must  therefore  be  equal;

(3)  if  one  of  them  is  a  right  angle,  they  are  supplementary  and  also  equal.

Simson  distinguishes  the  last  case  (3)  in  his  enunciation:  "then,  if  each  of
the  remaining  angles  be  either  less  or  not  less  than  a  right  angle,  or  if  one  of
them  be  a  right  angle,.., ^^

The  change  is  right,  on  the  principle  of  restricting  the  conditions  to  the
minimum  necessary  to  enable  the  conclusion  to  be  inferred.  Simson  adds  a
separate  proof  of  the  case  in  which  one  of  the  remaining  angles  is  a  right
angle.

"  Lastly,  let  one  of  the  angles  at  C,  F^  viz.  the  angle  at  C,  be  a  right  angle;
in  this  case  likewise  the  triangle  ABC
is  equiangular  to  the  triangle  DEF,

For,  if  they  be  not  equiangular,
make,  at  the  point  B  of  the  straight
line  AB^  the  angle  ABG  equal  to  the
angle  DEF\  then  it  may  be  proved,
as  in  the  first  case,  that  ^^  is  equal
\.oBC,

But  the  angle  BCG  is  a  right
angle;

therefore  the  angle  BGC  is  also  a
right  angle;

whence  two  of  the  angles  of  the  tri-
angle BGC  are  together  not  less  than
two  right  angles :  which  is  impossible.

Therefore  the  triangle  ABC  is  equiangular  to  the  triangle  DEFJ*


Proposition  8.

1/  in  a  right-angled  triangle  a  perpendicular  be  drawn
from  the  right  angle  to  the  base,  the  triangles  adjoining  the
perpendicular  are  similar  both  to  the  whole  and  to  one  another.

Let  ABC  be  a  right-angled  triangle  having  the  angle
BAC  right,  and  let  AD  be  drawn  from  A  perpendicular
to^C;

I  say  that  each  of  the  triangles  ABD,  ADC  is  similar  to
the  whole  ABC  and,  further,  they  are  similar  to  one  another.


H.  £.  II.


14


2IO  BOOK  VI  [vi.  8

For,  since  the  angle  BAC  is  equal  to  the  angle  ADB^
for  each  is  right,

and  the  angle  at  B  is  common  to  the
two  triangles  ABC  and  ABD,
therefore  the  remaining  angle  ACB
is    equal    to    the    remaining    angle
BAD,  [1.32]

therefore  the  triangle  ABC  is  equi-
angular with  the  triangle  ABD.

Therefore,  as  BC  which  subtends  the  right  angle  in  the
triangle  ABC  is  to  BA  which  subtends  the  right  angle  in
the  triangle  ABD,  so  is  AB  itself  which  subtends  the  angle
at  C  in  the  triangle  ABC  to  BD  which  subtends  the  equal
angle  BAD  in  the  triangle  ABD^  and  so  also  is  AC  to  AD
which  subtends  the  angle  at  B  common  to  the  two  triangles.

[VI.  4]

Therefore  the  triangle  ABC  is  both  equiangular  to  the
triangle  ABD  and  has  the  sides  about  the  equal  angles
proportional.

Therefore  the  triangle  ABC  is  similar  to  the  triangle
ABD.  [VI.  Def.  i]

Similarly  we  can  prove  that
the  triangle  ABC  is  also  similar  to  the  triangle  ADC;
therefore  each  of  the  triangles  ABD,  ADC  is  similar  to  the
whole  ABC

I  say  next  that  the  triangles  ABD,  ADC  are  also  similar
to  one  another.

For,  since  the  right  angle  BDA  is  equal  to  the  right  angle
ADC,

and  moreover  the  angle  BAD  was  also  proved  equal  to  the
angle  at  C,

therefore   the   remaining   angle   at   B  is  also  equal  to  the
remaining  angle  DAC\  [1-32]

therefore  the  triangle  ABD  is  equiangular  with  the  triangle
ADC.

Therefore,  as  BD  which  subtends  the  angle  BAD  in  the
triangle  ABD  is  to  DA  which  subtends  the  angle  at  C  in  the
triangle  ADC  equal  to  the  angle  BAD,  so  is  AD  itself
which  subtends  the  angle  at  B  in  the  triangle  ABD  to  DC
which  subtends  the  angle  DAC  in  the  triangle  ADC  equal


VI.  8,  9]  PROPOSITIONS  8,  9  211

to  the  angle  at  B,  and  so  also  is  BA  to  AC^  these  sides
subtending  the  right  angles  ;  [vi.  4]

therefore  the  triangle  ABD  is  similar  to  the  triangle  ADC.

[vi.  Def.  i]
Therefore  etc.

PoRiSM.  From  this  it  is  clear  that,  if  in  a  right-angled
triangle  a  perpendicular  be  drawn  from  the  right  angle  to  the
base,  the  straight  line  so  drawn  is  a  mean  proportional
between  the  segments  of  the  base.  q.  e.  d.

Simson  remarks  on  this  proposition :  "  It  seems  plain  that  some  editor
has  changed  the  demonstration  that  Euclid  gave  of  this  proposition:  For,
after  he  has  demonstrated  that  the  triangles  are  equiangular  to  one  another,
he  particularly  shows  that  their  sides  about  the  equal  angles  are  proportionals,
as  if  this  had  not  been  done  in  the  demonstration  of  prop.  4  of  this  book :
this  superfluous  part  is  not  found  in  the  translation  from  the  Arabic,  and  is
now  left  out."

This  seems  a  little  hypercritical,  for  the  "particular  showing"  that  the
sides  about  the  equal  angles  are  proportionals  is  really  nothing  more  than
a  somewhat  full  citation  of  vi.  4.  Moreover  to  shorten  his  proof  still
more,  Simson  says,  after  proving  that  each  of  the  triangles  ABD^  ADC  is
similar  to  the  whole  triangle  ABC^  **  And  the  triangles  ABD,  ADC  being
both  equiangular  and  similar  to  ABC  are  equiangular  and  similar  to  one
another,"  thus  assuming  a  particular  case  of  vi.  21,  which  might  well  be
proved  here,  as  Euclid  proves  it,  with  somewhat  more  detail.

We  observe  that,  here  as  generally,  Euclid  seems  to  disdain  to  give  the
reader  such  small  help  as  might  be  afforded  by  arranging  the  letters  used  to
denote  the  triangles  so  as  to  show  the  corresponding  angular  points  in  the
same  order  for  each  pair  of  triangles ;  A  is  the  first  letter  throughout,  and  the
other  two  for  each  triangle  are  in  the  order  of  the  figure  from  left  to  right  It
may  be  in  compensation  for  this  that  he  states  at  such  length  which  side
corresponds  to  which  when  he  comes  to  the  proportions.

In  the  Greek  texts  there  is  an  addition  to  the  Porism  inserted  after
"(Being)  what  it  was  required  to  prove,"  viz.  "and  further  that  between  the
base  and  any  one  of  the  segments  the  side  adjacent  to  the  segment  is  a  mean
proportional"  Heiberg  concludes  that  these  words  are  an  interpolation
(i)  because  they  come  after  the  words  oircp  cScc  Sctfcu  which  as  a  rule  follow  the
Porism,  (2)  they  are  absent  from  the  best  Theonine  mss.,  though  P  and
Campanus  have  them  without  the  ovtp  cSct  Sc&^di.  Heiberg' s  view  seems  to
be  confirmed  by  the  fact  noted  by  Austin,  that,  whereas  the  first  part  of  the
Porism  is  quoted  later  in  vi.  13,  in  the  lemma  before  x.  33  and  in  the  lemma
after  xiii.  13,  the  second  part  is  proved  in  the  former  lemma,  and  elsewhere,
as  also  in  Pappus  (ni.  p.  72,  9 — 23).

Proposition  9.

From  a  given  straight  line  to  cut  off  a  prescribed  part.
Let  AB  be  the  given  straight  line  ;
thus  it  is  required  to  cut  off  from  AB  a  prescribed  part.


212


BOOK  VI


[vi.  9


Let  the  third  part  be  that  prescribed.
5        Let  a  straight  line  AC  he  drawn  through  from  A  con-
taining with  AB  any  angle  ;

let  a  point  D  be  taken  at  random  on
AC,  and  let  D£,  EC  be  made  equal
to  AD.  [i.  3]


xo        Let  BC  be  joined,  and  through  D
let  DF  be  drawn  parallel  to  it.     [i.  31]
Then,  since  FD  has  been  drawn
parallel  to  BC,  one  of  the  sides  of  the  triangle  ABC,

therefore,  proportionally,  as  CD  is  to  DA,  so  is  BFx,o  FA.

[vi.  2]
'5        But  CD  is  double  of  DA  ;

therefore  BF  is  also  double  of  FA  ;

therefore  BA  is  triple  of  AF.

Therefore  from  the  given  straight  line  AB  the  prescribed
third  part  AF  has  been  cut  off.

Q.  E.  F.

6.  any  angle.  The  expression  here  and  in  the  two  following  propositions  is  rvxouo-a
*^v»ia,y  corresponding  exactly  to  r\rj(fiv  ffrjfiuop  which  I  have  translated  as  '*a  point  (taken)
a/  random**;  but  "an  angle  (taken)  at  random"  would  not  be  so  appropriate  where  it  is  a
question,  not  o{  taking  2Jiy  angle  at  all,  but  of  drawing  a  straight  line  casually  so  as  to  make
any  angle  with  another  straight  line.

Simson  observes  that  "  this  is  demonstrated  in  a  particular  case,  viz.  that
in  which  the  third  part  of  a  straight  line  is  required  to  be  cut  off;  which  is
not  at  all  like  Euclid's  manner.  Besides,  the  author  of  that  demonstration,
from  four  magnitudes  being  proportionals,  concludes  that  the  third  of  them  is
the  same  multiple  of  the  fourth  which  the  first  is  of  the  second ;  now  this  is
nowhere  demonstrated  in  the  5  th  book,  as  we  now  have  it ;  but  the  editor
assumes  it  from  the  confused  notion  which  the  vulgar  have  of  proportionals.*'

The   truth  of  the   assumption   referred  to  is  proved  by  Simson  in  his
proposition  D  given  above  (p.  128);  hence  he  is
able  to  supply  a  general  and  legitimate  proof
of  the  present  proposition.  A

"Let  AB  be  the  given  straight  line;  it  is
required  to  cut  off  any  part  from  it.

From  the  point  A  draw  a  straight  line  AC
making  any  angle  with  AB;  xn  AC  take  any
point  D,  and  take  ^C  the  same  multiple  of  AD
that  AB  is  of  the  part  which  is  to  be  cut  off
from  it ;

join  BC,  and  draw  DE  parallel  to  it :

then  AE  is  the  part  required  to  be  cut  off.


VI.  9,  lo]  PROPOSITIONS   9,  10  213

Because  ED  is  parallel  to  one  of  the  sides  of  the  triangle  ABC^  viz.  to  BC^
as  CD  is  to  DA^  so  is  BE  to  EA^  [vi.  2]

and,  componendoy

CA  is  to  AD,  as  BA  to  AE,  [v.  18]

But  CA  is  a  multiple  of  AD ;
therefore  BA  is  the  same  multiple  of  AE.  [Prop.  D]

Whatever  part  therefore  AD  is  of  A  C,  AE  is  the  same  part  of  AB ;
wherefore  from  the  straight  line  AB  the  part  required  is  cut  off."

The  use  of  Simson's  Prop.  D  can  be  avoided,  as  noted  by  Camerer  after
Baermann,  in  the  following  way.     We  first  prove,  as  above,  that

CA  is  to  AD  as  BA  is  to  AE.

Then  we  infer  that,  alternately,

CA  is  to  BA  as  AD  to  AE.  [v.  16]

But  AD  is  to  AE  as  n .  AD  to  n .  AE

(where  n  is  the  number  of  times  that  AD  is  contained  m  AC)',  [v.  15]

whence  AC  is  to  AB  as  n .  AD  is  to  n .  AE.  [v.  1 1]

In  this  proportion  the  first  term  is  equal  to  the  third;  therefore  [v.  14]
the  second  is  equal  to  the  fourth,

so  that  AB  is  equal  to  n  times  AE.

Prop.  9  is  of  course  only  a  particular  case  of  Prop.  10.

Proposition  10.

To  cut  a  given  uncut  straight  line  similarly  to  a  given  cut
straight  line.

Let  AB  be  the  given  uncut  straight  h'ne,  and  AC  the
straight  h'ne  cut  at  the  points  D,
E ;  and  let  them  be  so  placed  as
to  contain  any  angle  ;
let  CB  be  joined,  and  through  Z?,
E  let  DF,  EG  be  drawn  parallel
to  BC,  and  through  D  let  DHK
be  drawn  parallel  to  AB.        [1.  31]

Therefore  each  of  the  figures
FH,  HB  is  a  parallelogram  ;

therefore  DH  is  equal  to  FG  and  HK  to  GB.  [i.  34]

Now,  since  the  straight  line  HE  has  been  drawn  parallel
to  KC,  one  of  the  sides  of  the  triangle  DKQ

therefore,  proportionally,  as  CE  is  to  ED,  so  is  KH  to  HD.

[vi.  2]


214  BOOK  VI  [vi.  lo,  II

But  KH  is  equal  to  BG,  and  HD  to  GF\
therefore,  as  CE  is  to  ED,  so  is  BG  to  GF.

Again,  since  FD  has  been  drawn  parallel  to  GE,  one  of
the  sides  of  the  triangle  AGE,
therefore,  proportionally,  as  ED  is  to  DA,  so  is  GF  to  FA.

[VI.  2]

But  it  was  also  proved  that,

as  CE  is  to  ED,  so  is  BG  to  GF\
therefore,  as  CE  is  to  ED,  so  is  BG  to  GF,

and,  as  ED  is  to  DA,  so  is  GF  to  FA,

Therefore  the  given  uncut  straight  line  AB  has  been  cut
similarly  to  the  given  cut  Straight  line  AC.

Q.  E.  F.

Proposition  11.
To  two  given  straight  lines  "to  find  a  third  proportional.

Let  BA,  AC  he,  the  two  given  straight  lines,  and  let
them   be   placed   so  as  to  contain  any
angle ;

thus  it  is  required  to  find  a  third  pro-
portional to  BA,  AC

For  let  them  be  produced  to  the
points  D,  E,  and  let  BD  be  made  equal
to^C;  [1.3]

let  BC  be  joined,  and  through  D  let  DE
be  drawn  parallel  to  it.  \}'  zA

Since,    then,   BC  has    been    drawn
parallel  to  DE,  one  of  the  sides  of  the  triangle  ADE,
proportionally,  as  AB  is  to  BD,  soxsAC  to  CE.  [vi.  2]

But  BD  is  equal  to  ^C ;
therefore,  as  AB  is  to  AC,  so  is  AC  to  CE.

Therefore  to  two  given  straight  lines  AB,  AC  ^l  third
proportional  to  them,  lE,  has  been  found.

Q.  E.  F.

I.    to  find.    The  Greek  word,  here  and  in  the  next  two  propositions,  is  vpovtvpuv,
literally  "to  find  in  addition,''

This  proposition  is  again  a  particular  case  of  the  succeeding  Prop.  12.
Given  a  ratio  between  straight  lines,  vi,  i\  enables  us  to  find  the  ratio
which  is  its  duplicate.


VI.  12]  PROPOSITIONS    lo— 12  215

Proposition  12.
To  three  given  straight  lines  to  find  a  fourth  proportional.
Let  A,  B,  C  be  the  three  given  straight  lines ;
thus  it  is  required  to  find  a  fourth  proportional  to  A,  B,  C.


B-


Let  two  straight  lines  DE,  DF  be  set  out  containing  any
angle  EDF ;

let  DG  be  made  equal  to  A^  GE  equal  to  B,  and  further  DH
equal  to  C ;

let  GH  be  joined,  and  let  EF  be  drawn  through  E  parallel
to  it.  [i.  31]

Since,  then,  GH  has  been  drawn  parallel  to  EF,  one  of
the  sides  of  the  triangle  DEF,
therefore,  as  DG  is  to  GE,  so  is  DH  to  HF.  [vi.  2]

But  DG  is  equal  to  A,  GE  to  B,  and  DH  to  C  ;
therefore,  as  ^  is  to  B,  so  is  C  to  HF.

Therefore  to  the  three  given  straight  lines  AyB.C^  fourth
proportional  HF  has  been  found.

Q.  E.  F.

We  have  here  the  geometrical  equivalent  of  the  "  rule  of  three."

It  is  of  course  immaterial  whether,  as  in  Euclid's  proof,  the  first  and

second  straight  lines  are  measured  on  one  of  the  lines  forming  the  angle  and

the  third  on  the  other,  or  the  first  and  third  are  measured  on  one  and  the

second  on  the  other.

If  it  should  be  desired  that  the  first  and  the  required  fourth  be  measured

on  one  of  the  lines,  and  the  second  and  third  on

the  other,  we  can  use  the  following  construction.

Measure  DE  on  one  straight  line  equal  to  A^  and

on  any  other  straight  line  making  an  angle  with

the  first  at  the  point  D  measure  DF  equal  to  By

and  DG  equal  to  C.     Join  EF,  and  through  G

draw  GH  anti-parallel  to  EF,  Le.  make  the  angle

DGff  equal  to  the  angle  DEF\  let  GH  meet

DE  (prcxiuced  if  necessary)  in  H.


2i6  BOOK  VI  [vi.  12—14

DJI1&  then  the  fourth  proportional.

For  the  triangles  EDF^  GDH  are  similar,  and  the  sides  about  the  equal
angles  are  proportional,  so  that

DE  is  to  DF9&  DG  to  DH^

or  ^  is  to  j9  as  C  to  DH.


Proposition  13.
To  two  given  straight  Hues  to  find  a  mean  proportional.

Let  AB,  BC  be  the  two  given  straight  lines ;
thus   it    is   required    to    find   a   mean
proportional  to  AB,  BC.

Let  them  be  placed  in  a  straight
line,  and  let  the  semicircle  ADC  be
described  on  AC;

let  BD  be  drawn  from  the  point  B  at
right  angles  to  the  straight  line  AC,
and  let  AD,  DC  be  joined.

Since  the  angle  ADC  is  an  angle  in  a  semicircle,  it  is
right.  [ill.  31]

And,  since,  in  the  right-angled  triangle  ADC,  DB  has
been  drawn  from  the  right  angle  perpendicular  to  the  base,
therefore  DB  is  a  mean  proportional  between  the  segments  of
the  base,  AB,  BC  [vi.  8,  Por.]

Therefore  to  the  two  given  straight  lines  AB,  BC  a  mean
proportional  DB  has  been  found.

Q.  E.   F.

This  proposition,  the  Book  vi.  version  of  n.  14,  is  equivalent  to  the
extraction  of  the  square  root.  It  further  enables  us,  given  a  ratio  between
straight  lines,  to  find  the  ratio  which  is  its  sub-duplicate,  or  the  ratio  of  which
it  is  duplicate.


Proposition  14.

In  equal  and  equiangular  parallelograms  the  sides  about
the  equal  angles  are  reciprocally  proportional ;  and  equiangular
parallelograms  in  which  the  sides  about  the  equal  angles  are
reciprocally  proportional  are  equal


VI.  14]  PROPOSITIONS    12—14  ^n

Let  AB,  BC  be  equal  and  equiangular  parallelograms
having  the  angles  at  B  equal,  and
let  DBy  BE  be  placed  in  a  straight
line ;

therefore  FB,  BG  are  also  in
a  straight  line.  [i.  14]

I  say  that,  in  AB,  BC,  the
sides  about  the  equal  angles  are
reciprocally  proportional,  that  is  to
say,  that,  as  DB  is  to  BE,  so  is
GB  to  BF.

For  let  the  parallelogram  FE  be  completed.

Since,  then,  the  parallelogram  AB  is  equal  to  the  parallelo-
gram BC,

and  FE  is  another  area,
therefore,  as  AB  is  to  FE,  so  is  BC  to  FE.  [v.  7]

But,  as  AB  is  to  FE,  so  is  DB  to  BE,  [vi.  i]

and,  as  BC  is  to  FE,  so  is  GB  to  BF.  [^.]

therefore  also,  as  DB  is  to  BE,  so  is  GB  to  BF.  [v.  n]

Therefore  in  the  parallelograms  AB,  BC  the  sides  about
the  equal  angles  are  reciprocally  proportional.

Next,  let  GB  be  to  BF  as  DB  to  BE ;
I  say  that  the  parallelogram  AB  is  equal  to  the  parallelogram
BC.

For  since,  as  DB  is  to  BE,  so  is  GB  to  BF,
while,  as  DB  is  to  BE,  so  is  the  parallelogram  AB  to  the
parallelogram  FE,  [vi.  i]

and,  as  GB  is  to  BF,  so  is  the  parallelogram  BC  to  the
parallelogram  FE,  [vi.  i]

therefore  also,  as  AB  is  to  FE,  so  is  BC  to  /^£' ;  [v.  n]

therefore  the  parallelogram  AB  is  equal  to  the  parallelogram
BC.  [V.  9]

Therefore  etc.

Q.  E.  D.

De  Morgan  says  upon  this  proposition  :  "  Owing  to  the  disjointed  manner
in  which  Euclid  treats  compound  ratio,  this  proposition  is  strangely  out  of
place.  It  is  a  particular  case  of  vi.  23,  being  that  in  which  the  ratio  of  the
sides,  compounded,  gives  a  ratio  of  equality.  The  proper  definition  of  four
magnitudes  being  reciprocally  proportional  is  that  the  ratio  compounded  of
their  ratios  is  that  of  equality."


3l8


BOOK  VI


[vi.  14


It  is  true  that  vi.  14  is  a  particular  case  of  vi.  23,  but,  if  either  is  out  of
place,  it  is  rather  the  latter  that  should  be  placed  before  vi.  14,  since  most  of
the  propositions  between  vi.  15  and  vi.  23  depend  upon  vi.  14  and  15.  But
it  is  perfectly  consistent  with  Euclid's  manner  to  give  a  particular  case  first
and  its  extension  later,  and  such  an  arrangement  often  has  great  advantages
in  that  it  enables  the  more  difficult  parts  of  a  subject  to  be  led  up  to  more
easily  and  gradually.  Now,  if  De  Morgan's  view  were  here  followed,  we
should,  as  it  seems  to  me,  be  committing  the  mistake  of  explaining  what  is
relatively  easy  to  understand,  viz.  two  ratios  of  which  one  is  the  inverse  of
the  other,  by  a  more  complicated  conception,  that  of  compound  ratia  In
other  words,  it  is  easier  for  a  learner  to  realise  the  relation  indicated  by  the
statement  that  the  sides  of  equal  and  equiangular  parallelograms  are  ''recipro-
cally proportional"  than  to  form  a  conception  of  parallelograms  such  that
"the  ratio  compounded  of  the  ratio  of  their  sides  is  one  of  equality."  For
this  reason  I  would  adhere  to  Euclid's  arrangement

The  conclusion  that,  since  DB^  BE  are  placed  in  a  straight  line,  FB^  BG
are  also  in  a  straight  line  is  referred  to  i.  14.  The  deduction  is  made  clearer
by  the  following  steps.

The  angle  DBF  is  equal  to  the  angle  GBE ;

add  to  each  the  angle  FBE ;

therefore  the  angles  DBF,  FBE  are  together  equal  to  the  angles  QBE,  FBE.

[C  N.  2]

But  the  angles  DBF,  FBE  are  together  equal  to  two  right  angles,    [i.  13]

therefore  the  angles  GBE,  FBE  are  together  equal  to  two  right  angles,

[CN.i]

and  hence  FB,  BG  are  in  one  straight  line.  [i.  14]

The  result  is  also  obvious  from  the  converse  of  i.  15  given  by  Proclus
(see  note  on  i.  15).

The  proposition  vi.  14  contains  a  theorem  and  one  partial  converse  of  it ;
so  also  does  vi.  15.  To  each  proposition  may  be  added  the  other  partial
converse,  which  may  be  enunciated  as  follows,  the  words  in  square  brackets
applying  to  the  case  of  triangles  (vi.  15).


Equal  parallelograms  [triangles]  which  have  the  sides  about  one  angle  in
each  reciprocally  proportional  are  equiangular  [have  the  angles  included  by  those
sides  either  equal  or  supplementary^

Let   AB,  BC  be   equal   parallelograms,  or  let  FBD,  EBG  be  equal


VI.  14,  15]  PROPOSITIONS   14,  iS  219

triangles,  such  that  the  sides  about  the  angles  at  B  are  reciprocally  propor-
tional, i.e.  such  that

DB  I  BE  =  GB  :  BR

We  shall  prove  that  the  angles  FBD,  EBG  are  either  equal  or  supple-
mentary.

Place  the  figures  so  that  DB^  BE  are  in  one  straight  line.

Then  FB^  BG  are  either  in  a  straight  line,  or  not  in  a  straiglit  line.

(i)     If  FB,  BG  are  in  a  straight   line,  the   figure   of  the  proposition
(with  the  diagonals  FD^  EG  drawn)  represents  the  facts,  and

the  angle  FBD  is  equal  to  the  angle  EBG,  [i.  15]

(2)     If  FB^  BG  are  not  in  a  straight  line,
produce  FB  to  ^so  that  BHrndiy  be  equal  to  BG.

Join  EH,  and  complete  the  parallelogram  EBHK.

Now,  since  DB  :  BE  =  GB  :  BF

and  GB  =  HB,

DB  :  BE  =  HB\  BF,
and  therefore,  by  vi.  14  or  15,
the  parallelograms  AB,  BK  are  equal,  or  the  triangles  FBD,  EBff^xe  equal.

But  the  parallelograms  AB,  BCaire  equal,  and  the  triangles  FBD,  EBG
are  equal ;

therefore  the  parallelograms  BC,  BK  are  equal,  and  the  triangles  EBH,
EBG  are  equal.

Therefore  these  parallelograms  or  triangles  are  within  the  same  parallels :
that  is,  G,  C,  H,  AT  are  in  a  straight  line  which  is  parallel  to  DE.  [i.  39]

Now,  since  BG,  BHdJQ  equal,
the  angles  BGH,  BHG  are  equal.

By  parallels,  it  follows  that

the  angle  EBG  is  equal  to  the  angle  DBH,
whence  the  angle  EBG  is  supplementary  to  the  angle  FBD.


Proposition  15.

In  equal  triangles  which  have  one  angle  equal  to  one  angle
the  sides  about  the  eqtial  angles  are  reciprocally  proportional ;
and  those  triangles  which  have  one  angle  equal  to  one  angle^
and  in  which  the  sides  about  the  equal  angles  are  reciprocally
proportional,  are  equal.

Let  ABC,  ADE  be  equal  triangles  having  one  angle
equal  to  one  angle,  namely  the  angle  BAC  to  the  angle
DAE',

I  say  that  in  the  triangles  ABC,  ADE  the  sides  about  the

equal  angles  are  reciprocally  proportional,  that  is  to  say,  that,

as  CA  is  to  AD,  so  is  EA  to  AB.


a2o  BOOK   VI  [VL  15

For  let  them  be  placed  so  that  CA  is  in  a  straight
line  with  AD\

therefore  EA  is  also  in  a  straight  line  with
AB.  [i.  14]

Let  BD  be  joined.

.Since  then  the  triangle  ABC  is  equal  to
the  triangle  ADEy  and  BAD  is  another
area,

therefore,  as  the  triangle  CAB  is  to  the
triangle  BAD,  so  is  the  triangle  EAD  to
the  triangle  BAD.  [v.  7]

But,  as  CAB  is  to  BAD,  so  is  CA  to  AD,  [vi.  i]

and,  as  EAD  is  to  BAD,  so  is  EA  to  AB.  \id:\

Therefore  also,  as  CA  is  to  AD^  so  is  EA  to  AB.    [v.  n]
Therefore  in  the  triangles  ABC,  ADE  the  sides  about
the  equal  angles  are  reciprocally  proportional.

Next,  let  the  sides  of  the  triangles  ABC,  ADE  be  reci-
procally proportional,  that  is  to  say,  let  EA  be  to  AB  as  CA
to  AD;

I  say  that  the  triangle  ABC  is  equal  to  the  triangle  ADE.

For,  if  BD  be  again  joined,

since,  as  CA  is  to  AD,  so  is  EA  to  AB,

while,  as  CA  is  to  AD,  so  is  the  triangle  ABC  to  the  triangle
BAD,

and,  as  EA  is  to  AB,  so  is  the  triangle  EAD  to  the  triangle
BAD,  [VI.  i]

therefore,  as  the  triangle  ABC  is  to  the  triangle  BAD,  so  is
the  triangle  EAD  to  the  triangle  BAD.  [v.  n]

Therefore  each  of  the  triangles  ABC,  EAD  has  the  same
ratio  to  BAD.

Therefore  the  triangle  ABC  is  equal  to  the  triangle  EAD.

[V.9]
Therefore  etc.

Q.  E.  D.

As  indicated  in  the  partial  converse  given  in  the  last  note,  this  proposition
is  equally  true  if  the  angle  included  by  the  two  sides  in  one  triangle  is
supplementary,  instead  of  being  equal,  to  the  angle  included  by  the  two  sides
in  the  other.


VI.  15,  i6]


PROPOSITIONS    15,  16


Let  ABC,  ADE  be  two  triangles  such  that  the  angles  BAC,  DAE  are
supplementary,  and  also

CA\AD  =  EA\  AB.

In  this  case  we  can  place  the  triangles  so  that
CA  is  in  a  straight  line  with  AD,  and  AB  lies
along  AE  (since  the  angle  EAC,  being  supple-
mentary to  the  angle  EAD,  is  equal  to  the  angle
BAC),

If  we  join  BD^  the  proof  given  by  Euclid
applies  to  this  case  also.

It  is  true  that  vi.  15  can  be  immediately  inferred  from  vi.  14,  since  a
triangle  is  half  of  a  parallelogram  with  the  same  base  and  height.  But,
Euclid's  object  being  to  give  the  student  a  grasp  of  methods  rather  than
results,  there  seems  to  be  no  advantage  in  deducing  one  proposition  from  the
other  instead  of  using  the  same  method  on  each.


Proposition  16.

If  four  straight  lines  be  proportional,  the  rectangle  con-
tained  by  the  extremes  is  equal  to  the  rectangle  contained  by
the  means ;  and,  if  the  rectangle  contained  by  the  extremes  be
equal  to  the  rectangle  contained  by  the  means,  the  four  straight
lines  will  be  proportional.

Let  the  four  straight  lines  AB,  CD,  E,  F  be  proportional,
so  that,  as  AB  is  to  CD,  so  is  E  to  F\

I  say  that  the  rectangle  contained  by  AB,  F  is  equal  to  the
rectangle  contained  by  CD,  E.


Let  AG,  CH  be  drawn  from  the  points  A,  C  at  right
angles  to  the  straight  lines  AB,  CD,  and  let  -^6r  be  made
equal  to  /%  and  CH  equal  to  E.

Let  the  parallelograms  BG,  DH  be  completed.

Then  since,  as  AB  is  to  CD,  so  is  E  to  /%
while  E  is  equal  to  CH,  and  F  to  AG,
therefore,  as  AB  is  to  CD,  so  is  CH  to  AG.

Therefore  in  the  parallelograms  BG,  DH  the  sides  about
the  equal  angles  are  reciprocally  proportional.


932  BOOK  VI  [VI.  i6

But  those  equiangular  parallelograms  in  which  the  sides
about  the  equal  angles  are  reciprocally  proportional  are  equal ;

[VI.  14]

therefore  the  parallelogram  BG  is  equal  to  the  parallelogram
DH.

And  BG  is  the  rectangle  AB,  F,  for  AGv&  equal  to  F\
and  DH  is  the  rectangle  CD,  E,  for  E  is  equal  to  CH ;
therefore  the  rectangle  contained  by  AB,  F  is  equal  to  the
rectangle  contained  by  CD,  E.

Next,  let  the  rectangle  contained  by  AB,  F  be  equal  to
the  rectangle  contained  by  CD,  E ;

I  say  that  the  four  straight  lines  will  be  proportional,  so  that,
as  AB  is  to  CD,  so  is  E  to  F.

For,  with  the  same  construction,
since  the  rectangle  AB,  F  is  equal  to  the  rectangle  CD,  E,
and  the  rectangle  AB,  F  is  BG,  for  ^6^  is  equal  to  F,
and  the  rectangle  CD,  E  is  DH,  for  CH  is  equal  to  E,
therefore  BG  is  equal  to  DH.

And  they  are  equiangular.

But  in  equal  and  equiangular  parallelograms  the  sides  about
the  equal  angles  are  reciprocally  proportional.  [vi.  14]

Therefore,  as  AB  is  to  CD,  so  is  CH  to  AG.

But  CH  is  equal  to  E,  and  AG  to  F\
therefore,  as  AB  is  to  CD,  so  is  E  to  F.

Therefore  etc.  Q.  e.  d.

This  proposition  is  a  particular  case  of  vi.  14,  but  one  which  is  on  all
accounts  worth  separate  statement.  It  may  also  be  enunciated  in  the  follow-
ing form :

Rectangles  which  have  their  bases  reciprocally  proportional  to  their  heights
are  equal  in  area;  and  equal  rectangles  have  their  bases  reciprocally  proportional
to  their  heights.

Since  any  parallelogram  is  equal  to  a  rectangle  of  the  same  height  and
on  the  same  biase,  and  any  triangle  with  the  same  height  and  on  the  same
base  is  equal  to  half  the  parallelogram  or  rectangle,  it  follows  that  Equal
parallelograms  or  triangles  have  their  bases  reciprocally  proportional  to  their
heights  and  vice  versa.

The  present  place  is  suitable  for  giving  certain  important  propositions,
including  those  which  Simson  adds  to  Book  vi.  as  Props.  B,  C  and  D,  which
are  proved  directly  by  means  of  vi.  16.

I.     Proposition  B  is  a  particular  case  of  the  following  theorem.
If  a  circle  be  circumscribed  about  a  triangle  ABC  and  there  be  drawn  through
A  any  two  straight  lines  either  both  within  or  both  without  the  angle  BAG,  viz.


VI.  1 6]


PROPOSITION    16


223


AD  meeting  BC  {produced  if  necessary)  in  D  and  AE  meeting  the  circle  again
in  E,  such  that  the  angles  DAB,  EAC  are  equal,  then  the  rectangle  AD,  AE  is
equal  to  the  rectangle  BA,  AC.


DB^


Join  CE,

The  angles  BAD,  EAC  Sire  equal,  by  hypothesis ;

and  the  angles  ABD,  AEC  axe  equal.  [iii.  21,  22]

Therefore  the  triangles  ABD,  AEC  are  equiangular.

Hence  BA  is  to  AD  as  EA  is  to  AC,

and  therefore  the  rectangle  BA,  AC  is  equal  to  the  rectangle  AD,  AE,

[vi.  16]
There  are  now  two  particular  cases  to  be  considered.

(a)    Suppose  that  AD,  AE  coincide ;

ADE  will  then  bisect  the  angle  BAC,

{p)    Suppose  that  AD,  AE  are  in  one  straight  line  but  that  D,  E  are  on
opposite  sides  of  A  \

AD  will  then  bisect  the  external  angle  at  A,


In  the  first  case  (a)  we  have

the  rectangle  BA,  /^C equal  to  the  rectangle  EA,  AD;

and  the  rectangle  EA,  AD  is  equal  to  the  rectangle  ED,  DA  together  with
the  square  on  AD,  [11.  3]

i.e.  to  the  rectangle  BD,  DC  together  with  the  square  on  AD.    [in.  35]

Therefore  the  rectangle  BA,  AC  is  equal  to  the  rectangle  BD,  DC
together  with  the  square  on  AD.  [This  is  Simson's  Prop.  B]

In  case  {d)  the  rectangle  EA,  AD  is  equal  to  the  excess  of  the  rectangle
ED,  DA  over  the  square  on  AD ;

therefore  the  rectangle  BA,  AC  is  equal  to  the  excess  of  the  rectangle  BD,
DC  over  the  square  on  AD.


224


BOOK  VI


[vi.  1 6


The  following  converse  of  Simson's  Prop.  B  may  be  given :  If  a  straight
line  AD  he  drawn  from  the  vertex  k  of  a  triangle  to  meet  the  base^  so  that  the
square  on  AD  together  with  the  rectangle  BD,  DC  is  equal  to  the  rectangle  BA,
AC,  the  line  AD  will  bisect  the  angle  BAC  except  when  the  sides  AB,  AC  are
equals  in  which  case  every  line  drawn  to  the  base  will  have  the  property  men-
turned.

Let  the  circumscribed  circle  be  drawn,  and  let  AD  produced  meet  it  in
E\  join  CE.

The  rectangle  BD^  DC  is  equal  to  the  rectangle  ED,  DA,  [in.  35]

Add  to  each  the  square  on  AD  \
therefore  the  rectangle  BA^  AC'v^  equal  to  the  rectangle  EA,  AD.

[hyp.  and  11.  3]

Hence  AB  is  to  AD  as  AE  to  AC.  [vi.  16]

But  the  angle  ABD  is  equal  to  the  angle  AEC  [iii.  21]

Therefore  3ie  angles  BDA^  EC  A  are  either  equal  or  supplementary.

[vi.  7  and  note]

(a)  If  they  are  equal,  the  angles  BAD^  EAC
are  also  equal,  and  AD  bisects  the  angle  BAC.

(3)  If  they  are  supplementary,  the  angle  ADC
must  be  equal  to  the  angle  ACE.

Therefore  the  angles  BAD,  ABD  are  together
equal  to  the  angles  ACB,  BCE,  i.e.  to  the  angles
ACD,  BAD.

Take  away  the  common  angle  BAD,  and
the  angles  ABD,  A  CD  are  equal,  or
AB\s  equal  to  AC

Euclid  himself  assumes,  in  Prop.  67  of  the  Data,  the  result  of  so  much  of
this  proposition  as  relates  to  the  case  where  BA  =  AC  He  assumes  namely,
without  proof,  that,  if  BA  =  AC,  and  if  D  be  any  point  on  BC,  the  rectangle
BD,  DC  together  with  the  square  on  AD  is  equal  to  the  square  on  AB,


Proposition  C.

If  from  any  angle  of  a  triangle  a  straight  line  be  drawn  perpendicular  to  the
opposite  side,  the  rectangle  contained  by  the  other  two  sides  of  the  triangle  is  equal
to  the  rectangle  contained  by  the  perpendicular  and  the  diameter  of  the  circle
circumscribed  about  the  triangle.

Let  -^^C  be  a  triangle  and  AD  the  perpendicular  on  AB,  Draw  the
diameter  AE  of  the  circle  circumscribed  about  the  triangle  ABC


Then  shall  the  rectangle  BA,  A  Che  equal  to  the  rectangle  EA,  AD.
Join  EC.


VI.  1 6]


PROPOSITION    i6


225


Since  the  right  angle  BDA  is  equal  to  the  right  angle  EC  A  in  a  semi-
circle, [hi.  31]

and  the  angles  ABDy  AEC  in  the  same  segment  are  equal,  [in.  21]

the  triangles  ABD^  AEC  are  equiangular.

Therefore,  as  BA  is  to  AD^  so  is  EA  to  AC^  [vi.  4]

whence  the  rectangle  BA^  AC\%  equal  to  the  rectangle  EA^  AD,        [vi.  16]

This  result  corresponds  to  the  trigonometrical  formula  for  Ry  the  radius  of
the  circumscribed  circle,

4A

Proposition  D.

This  is  the  highly  important  lemma  given  by  Ptolemy  (ed.  Heiberg,  Vol.  i,
pp.  36 — 7)  which  is  the  basis  of  his  calculation  of  the  table  of  chords  in  the
section  of  Book  i.  of  the  /xcyoAiy  otWo^i?  entitled  "  concerning  the  size  of  the
straight  lines  [i.e.  chords]  in  the  circle  "  (Trcpi  t^?  TnyXiKon/ros  tc3v  €v  T<p  #cvkX<p

CV^CKOV).

The  theorem  may  be  enunciated  thus.

The  rectangle  contained  by  the  diagonals  of  any  quadrilateral  inscribed  in  a
circle  is  equal  to  the  sum  of  the  rectangles  contained  by  the  pairs  of  opposite  sides,

I  shall  give  the  proof  in  Ptolemy's  words,  with  the  addition  only,  in
brackets,  of  two  words  applying  to  a  second  figure  not  given  by  Ptolemy.

"  Let  there  be  a  circle  with  any  quadrilateral  ABCD  inscribed  in  it,  and
let  AC,  ^Z)  be  joined.

It  is  to  be  proved  that  the  rectangle  contained  by  ^Cand  BD  is  equal
to  the  sum  of  the  rectangles  AB,  DC  and  AD,  BC

For  let  the  angle  ABE  be  made  equal  to  the  angle  contained  by  DB^  BC


[in.  21]


If  then  we  add  [or  subtract]  the  angle  EBD,
the  angle  ABD  will  also  be  equal  to  the  angle  EBC

But  the  angle  BDA  is  also  equal  to  the  angle  BCE,
for  they  subtend  the  same  segment ;
therefore  the  triangle  ABD  is  equiangular  with  the  triangle  EBC

Hence,  proportionally,

as  BC  is  to  CE,  so  is  BD  to  DA.  [vi.  4]

Therefore  the  rectangle  BC,  AD  is  equal  to  the  rectangle  BD^  CE.

[vi.  16]
Again,  since  the  angle  ABE  is  equal  to  the  angle  DBC,
and  the  angle  BAE  is  also  equal  to  the  angle  BDC^  [in.  21]

the  triangle  ABE  is  equiangular  with  the  triangle  DBC


H.  £.  n.


15


226


BOOK  VI


[vi.  1 6


[VI.  4]
[VI.  i6]


Therefore,  proportionally,

as  BA  is  to  AE,  so  is  BD  to  DC;
therefore  the  rectangle  BA,  DC  is  equal  to  the  rectangle  BD,  AE,

But  it  was  also  proved  that

the  rectangle  BC,  AD  is  equal  to  the  rectangle  BDy  CE  \
therefore  the  rectangle  AC,  BD  as  a  whole  is   equal  to  the  sum  of  the
rectangles  AB,  2>Cand  AD,  BC\

(being)  what  it  was  required  to  prove."

Another  proof  of  this  proposition,  and  of  its  converse,  is  indicated  by
Dr  Lachlan  {Elements  of  Eudtd,  pp.  273 — 4).  It  depends  on  two  preliminary
propositions.

(i)  If  two  circles  be  divided,  by  a  chord  in  each,  into  segments  which  are
similar  respectively,  the  chords  are  proportional  to  the  corresponding  diameters.

The  proof  is  instantaneous  if  we  join  the  ends  of  each  chord  to  the  centre
of  the  circle  which  it  divides,  when  we  obtain  two  similar  triangles.

(2)  IfX^be  any  point  on  the  circle  circumscribed  about  a  triangle  ABC,  and
DX,  DY,  DZ  be  perpendicular  to  the  sides  BC,  CA,  AB  of  the  triangle
respectively,  then  X,  Y,  Z  lie  in  one  straight  line  ;  and,  conversely,  if  the  feet  of
the  perpendiculars  from  any  point  D  on  the  sides  of  a  triangle  lie  in  one  straight
line,  D  lies  on  the  circle  circumscribed  about  the  triangle.

The  proof  depending  on  in.  21,  22  is  well  known.

Now  suppose  that  D  is  any  point  in  the  plane  of  a  triangle  ABC,  and
that  DX,  D  Y,  DZ  are  perpendicular  to  the  sides
BC,  CA,  AB  respectively.

Join  YZ,  DA,

Then,  since  the  angles  at  Y,  Z  are  right,
A,  Y,  D,  Z  lie  on  a  circle  of  which  DA  is  the
diameter.

And  YZ  divides  this  circle  into  segments  which
are  similar  respectively  to  the  segments  into  which
BC  divides  the  circle  circumscribing  ABC^  since
the  angles  ZA  Y,  BA  C  coincide,  and  their  supple-
ments are  equal.

Therefore,  if  d  be  the  diameter  of  the  circle
circumscribing  ABC,

BC  is  to  //  as  YZ  is  to  DA  ;
and  therefore  the  rectangle  AD,  BC  is  equal  to  the  rectangle  d,  YZ,

Similarly  the  rectangle  BD^  CA  is  equal  to  the  rectangle  d,  ZX,  and  the
rectangle  CD,  AB  is  equal  to  the  rectangle  d,  XY,

Hence,  in  a  quadrilateral  in  general,  the  rectangle
contained  by  the  diagonals  is  less  than  the  sum  of  the
rectangles  contained  by  the  pairs  of  opposite  sides.

Next,  suppose  that  D  lies  on  the  circle  circum-
scribed about  ABC,  but  so  that  A,  B,  C,  D  follow
each  other  on  the  circle  in  this  order,  as  in  the  figure
annexed.

Let  DX,  DY,  DZ  be  perpendicular  to  BC,  CA,
-<4-^  respectively,  so  that  X,  Y,  Zare  in  a  straight  line.

Then,  since  the  rectangles  AD,  BC\  BD,  CA;  CD,  AB  are  equal  to  the
rectangles  d^  YZ;  d,  ZX;  d,  -YK respectively,  and  XZ  is  equal  to  the  sum  of


VI.  i6]  PROPOSITION    i6  227

XV,  YZy  so  that  the  rectangle  //,  XZ  is  equal  to  the  sum  of  the  rectangles
d,  A^Kand  d,  YZ,  it  follows  that

the  rectangle  AQ  BD  is  equal  to  the  sum  of  the  rectangles  AD^  BCznA
AB,  CD,

Conversely^  if  the  latter  statement  is  true,  while  we  are  supposed  to  know
nothing  about  the  position  of  D^  it  follows  that

XZ  must  be  equal  to  the  sum  of  XY^  YZ^
so  that  X^  K,  Z  must  be  in  a  straight  line.

Hence,  from  the  theorem  (2)  above,  it  follows  that  D  must  lie  on  the
circle  circumscribed  about  ABC^  i.e.  that  ABCD  is  a  quadrilateral  about
which  a  circle  can  be  described.

All  the  above  propositions  can  be  proved  on  the  basis  of  Book  in.  and
without  using  Book  vi.,  since  it  is  possible  by  the  aid  of  in.  21  and  35  alone
to  prove  that  in  equiangular  triangles  the  rectangles  contained  by  the  non-
corresponding  sides  about  equal  angles  are  equal  to  one  another  (a  result  arrived
at  by  combining  vi.  4  and  vi.  16).  This  is  the  method  adopted  by  Casey,
H.  M.  Taylor,  and  Lachlan ;  but  I  fail  to  see  any  particular  advantage  in  it.

Lastly,  the  following  proposition  may  be  given  which  Playfair  added  as
VI.  E.  It  appears  in  the  Data  of  Euclid,  Prop.  93,  and  may  be  thus
enunciated.

If  the  angle  BAG  of  a  triangle  ABC  be  bisected  by  the  straight  line  AD
meeting  the  circle  circumscribed  about  the  triangle  in  D,  and  if  BD  be  Joined^
then

the  sum  ofBA,  AC  is  to  AD  as  BC  is  to  BD.

Join  CD,    Then,  since  AD  bisects  the  angle  BAC,  the  subtended  arcs
BD,  DC,  and  therefore  the  chords  BD,  DC,  are
equal.

(i)  The  result  can  now  be  easily  deduced  from
Ptolemy's  theorem.

For  the  rectangle  AD,  BC  is  equal  to  the  sum  of
the  rectangles  AB,  DC  and  AC,  BD,  i.e.  (since
BD,  CD  aire  equal)  to  the  rectangle  contained  by
BA-^AC3indBD.

Therefore  the  sum  of  BA,  ^C  is  to  AD  as  BC
is  to  BD,  [vi.  16]

(2)     Euclid  proves  it  differently  in  Data,  Prop.  93.

Let  AD  meet  BC  in  £,

Then,  since  A£  bisects  the  angle  BAG,

BA  is  to  ^C  as  BE  to  EC,  [vi.  3]

or,  alternately,

AB  is  to  BE  as  AC  to  CE.  [v.  16]

Therefore  also

BA^- AC  is  io  BC2C&  AC  to  CE.  [v.  12]

,    Again,  since  the  angles  BAD,  EAC  are  equal,  and  the  angles  ADB,  ACE
are  also  equal,  [in.  21]

the  triangles  ABD,  AEC  are  equiangular.

Therefore  AC\&\.o  CE2&  AD  to  BD,  [vi.  4]

15—2


228  BOOK   VI  [vi.  i6,  17

Hence  BA -^  AC  is  to  BC  as  AD  to  BDy  [v-  1 1]

and,  alternately,

BA  +  AC  is  to  AD  as  BC  is  to  ^Z7.  [v.  16]

Euclid  concludes  that,  if  the  circle  ABC  is  given  in  magnitude,  and  the
chord  BC  cuts  off  a  segment  of  it  containing  a  given  angle  (so  that,  by  Data
Prop.  87,  BC  and  also  BD  are  given  in  magnitude),

the  ratio  of  BA  ^  AC  to  AD  is  given,
and  further  that  (since,  by  similar  triangles,  BD  is  to  DE  as  AC  \s  to  CE^
while  BA-\-AC\s  to  ^Cas^Cis  to  CE\

the  rectangle  {BA  +  AC),  DE,  being  equal  to  the  rectangle  BC,  BD,  is
also  given.

Proposition  17.

//  three  straight  lines  be  proportional,  the  rectangle  con-
tained by  the  extremes  is  equal  to  the  square  on  the  mean  ;
and,  if  the  rectangle  contained  by  the  extremes  be  equal  to  the
square  on  the  mean,  the  three  straight  lines  will  be  proportional.

Let  the  three  straight  lines  A,  B,  C  be  proportional,  so
that,  as  A  is  to  B,  so  is  ^  to  C ;

I  say  that  the  rectangle  contained  hy  A,  C  is  equal  to  the
square  on  B.

A


B D

c

Let  D  be  made  equal  to  B.

Then,  since,  as  A  is  to  B,  so  is  B  to  C,

and  B  is  equal  to  D,

therefore,  as  A  is  to  B,  so  is  D  to  C

But,  if  four  straight  lines  be  proportional,  the  rectangle
contained  by  the  extremes  is  equal  to  the  rectangle  contained
by  the  means.  [vi.  16]

Therefore  the  rectangle  A,  C  is  equal  to  the  rectangle
B,D.

But  the  rectangle  B,  D  is  the  square  on  B,  for  B  is
equal  to  D ;

therefore  the  rectangle  contained  hy  A,   C  is  equal  to  the
square  on  B.

Next,  let  the  rectangle  A,  C  he  equal  to  the  square  on  B ;
I  say  that,  as  A  is  to  B,  so  is  B  to  C.


VI.  17,  i8]  PROPOSITIONS    i6— 18  229

For,  with  the  same  construction,
since  the  rectangle  A,  C  is  equal  to  the  square  on  By
while  the  square  on  B  is  the  rectangle  B,  Z?,  for  B  is  equal
to  A
therefore  the  rectangle  A,  C  is  equal  to  the  rectangle  B,  D.

But,  if  the  rectangle  contained  by  the  extremes  be  equal
to  that  contained  by  the  means,  the  four  straight  lines  are
proportional.  [vi.  16]

Therefore,  as  A  is  to  B,  so  is  D  to  C

But  B  is  equal  to  D ;

therefore,  as  A  is  to  B,  so  is  B  to  C

Therefore  etc.  q.  e.  d.

VI.  17  is,  of  course,  a  particular  case  of  vi.  16.

Proposition  18.

On  a  given  straight  line  to  describe  a  rectilineal  figure
similar  and  similarly  situated  to  a  given  rectilineal  figure.

Let  AB  be  the  given  straight  line  and  CE  the  given
rectilineal  figure ;

thus  it  is  required  to  describe  on  the  straight  line  AB  a
rectilineal  figure  similar  and  similarly  situated  to  the  recti-
lineal figure  CE,


Let  DF  be  joined,  and  on  the  straight  line  AB,  and  at
the  points  A,  B  on  it,  let  the  angle  GAB  be  constructed
equal  to  the  angle  at  C,  and  the  angle  ABG  equal  to  the
angle  CDF.  [i.  23]

Therefore  the  remaining  angle  CFD  is  equal  to  the  angle
AGB,  [1.32]

therefore  the  triangle  FCD  is  equiangular  with  the  triangle
GAB.

Therefore,  proportionally,  as  FD  is  to  GB,  so  is  FC  to
GA,  and  CD  to  AB.


23©  BOOK  VI  [vi.  i8

Again,  on  the  straight  line  BG,  and  at  the  points  B,  G  on
it,  let  the  angle  BGHh^  constructed  equal  to  the  angle  DFE,
and  the  angle  GBH  equal  to  the  angle  FDE.  [i.  23]

Therefore  the  remaining  angle  at  E  is  equal  to  the  re-
maining angle  at  i7 ;  [i.  3*]

therefore  the  triangle  FDE  is  equiangular  with  the  triangle
GBH\

therefore,  proportionally,  as  FD  is  to  GB^  so  is  FE  to
GH,  and  ED  to  HB.  [vi.  4]

But  it  was  also  proved  that,  as  FD  is  to  GB,  so  is  FC  to
GA,  and  CD  to  AB  ;

therefore  also,  as  FC  is  to  AGy  so  is  CD  to  ABy  and  FE
to  GH,  and  further  ED  to  HB.

And,  since  the  angle  CFD  is  equal  to  the  angle  AGB,

and  the  angle  DFE  to  the  angle  BGH,

therefore  the  whole  angle  CFE  is  equal  to  the  whole  angle
AGH.

For  the  same  reason

the  angle  CDE  is  also  equal  to  the  angle  ABH.
And  the  angle  at  C  is  also  equal  to  the  angle  at  Ay

and  the  angle  at  E  to  the  angle  at  H.

Therefore  AH  is  equiangular  with  CE  ;

and  they  have  the  sides  about  their  equal  angles  proportional  ;

therefore  the  rectilineal  figure  AH  is  similar  to  the
rectilineal  figure  CE.  [vi.  Def.  i]

Therefore  on  the  given  straight  line  AB  the  rectilineal
figure  AH  has  been  described  similar  and  similarly  situated
to  the  given  rectilineal  figure  CE,

Q.  E.  F.

Simson  thinks  the  proof  of  this  proposition  has  been  vitiated,  his  grounds
for  this  view  being  (i)  that  it  is  demonstrated  only  with  reference  to
quadrilaterals,  and  does  not  show  how  it  may  be  extended  to  figures  of  ^s^  or
more  sides,  (2)  that  Euclid  infers,  from  the  fact  of  two  triangles  being
equiangular,  that  a  side  of  the  one  is  to  the  corresponding  side  of  the  other  as
another  side  of  the  first  is  to  the  side  corresponding  to  it  in  the  other,  i.e.  he
permutes,  without  mentioning  the  fact  that  he  does  so,  the  proportions
obtained  in  vi.  4,  whereas  the  proof  of  the  very  next  proposition  gives,  in  a
similar  case,  the  intermediate  step  of  permutation.  I  think  this  is  hyper-
criticism.  As  regards  (2)  it  should  be  noted  that  the  permuted  form  of  the
proportion  is  amved  at  first  in  the  proof  of  vi.  4 ;  and  the  omission  of  the


VI.  i8]


PROPOSITION    i8


231


intermediate  step  of  alternando^  whether  accidental  or  not,  is  of  no  importance.
On  the  other  hand,  the  use  of  this  form  of  the  proportion  certainly  simplifies
the  proof  of  the  proposition,  since  it  makes  unnecessary  the  subsequent
ex  aequali  steps  of  Simson's  proof,  their  place  being  taken  by  the  inference
[v.  11]  that  ratios  which  are  the  same  with  a  third  ratio  are  the  same  with  one
another.

Nor  is  the  first  objection  of  any  importance.    We  have  only  to  take  as  the


given  polygon  a  polygon  of  five  sides  at  least,  as  CDEFGy  join  one  extremity
of  CD^  say  Z>,  to  each  of  the  angular  points  other  than  C  and  -£",  and  then
use  the  same  mode  of  construction  as  Euclid's  for  any  number  of  successive
triangles  as  ABL,  LBK^  etc.,  that  may  have  to  be  made.  Euclid's  con-
struction and  proof  for  a  quadrilateral  are  quite  sufficient  to  show  how  to  deal
with  the  case  of  a  figure  of  ^vt,  or  any  greater  number  of  sides.

Clavius  has  a  construction  which,  given  the  power  of  moving  a  figure


bodily  from  one  position  to  any  other,  is  easier.  CDEFG  being  the  given
polygon,  join  CE,  CF.  Place  AB  on  CD  so  that  A  falls  on  C,  and  let  B
fall  on  ly^  which  may  either  lie  on  CD  or  on  CD  produced.

Now  draw  DE  parallel  to  DE^  meeting  CE^  produced  if  necessary,  in  Ey
EF'  parallel  to  EF^  meeting  CF^  produced  if  necessary,  in  F^  and  so  on.

Let  the  parallel  to  the  last  side  but  one,  FG^  meet  CG^  produced  if
necessary,  in  G,

Then  CDEFG  is  similar  and  similarly  situated  to  CDEFG,  and  it  is
constructed  on  CZX,  a  straight  line  equal  to  AB.

The  proof  of  this  is  obvious.

A  more  general  construction  is  indicated  in  the  subjoined  figure.  If
CDEFG  be  the  given  polygon,  suppose  its  angular  points  all  joined  to  any
point  O  and  the  connecting  straight  lines  produced  both  ways.  Then,  if  CD,
a  straight  line  equal  to  AB,  be  placed  so  that  it  is  parallel  to  CD,  and  C\  D
lie  respectively  on  OC,  OD  (this  can  of  course  be  done  by  finding  fourth
proportionals),  we  have  only  to  draw  DE,  EF,  etc.,  parallel  to  the
corresponding  sides  of  the  original  polygon  in  the  manner  shown.


232


BOOK  VI


[vi.  1 8,  19


De  Morgan  would  rearrange  Props.  18  and  20  in  the  following  manner.
He  would  combine  Prop.  18  and  the  first  part  of  Prop.  20  into  one,  with  the
enunciation :


E,"*--


Pairs  of  similar  triangles^  similarly  put  together^  give  similar  figures  ;  and
every  pair  of  similar  figures  is  composed  cf  pairs  of  similar  triangles  similarly
put  together.

He  would  then  make  ^'t  problem  of  vi.  18  an  application  of  the  first  part.
In  form  this  would  certainly  appear  to  be  an  improvement ;  but,  provided  that
the  relation  of  the  propositions  is  understood,  the  matter  of  form  is  perhaps
not  of  great  importance.


Proposition  19.

Similar  triangles  are  to  one  another  in  the  duplicate  ratio
of  the  corresponding  sides.

Let  ABC,  DEF  be  similar  triangles  having  the  angle  at

B  equal  to  the  angle  at  E,  and  such  that,  as  AB  is  to  BC,  so

5  is  DE  to  EF,  so  that  BC  corresponds  to  EF\  [v.  Def.  n]

I  say  that  the  triangle  ABC  has  to  the  triangle  DEF  a  ratio
duplicate  of  that  which  BC  has  to  EF.


For  let  a  third  proportional  BG  be  taken  to  BC,  EF,  so
that,  as  BC  is  to  EF,  so  is  EF  to  BG ;  [vi.  u]

10  and  let  AG  he  joined.

Since  then,  as  AB  is  to  BC,  so  is  DE  to  EF,

therefore,  alternately,  as  AB  is  to  DE,  so  is  BC  to  EF.  [v.  16]


VI.  19]  PROPOSITIONS    i8,  19  233

But,  as  BC  is  to  EF,  so  is  EF  to  BG ;

therefore  also,  as  AB  is  to  DE,  so  is  EF  to  BG.  [v.  u]

15        Therefore  in  the  triangles  ABG,  DEF  the  sides  about
the  equal  angles  are  reciprocally  proportional.

But  those  triangles  which  have  one  angle  equal  to  one
angle,  and  in  which  the  sides  about  the  equal  angles  are
reciprocally  proportional,  are  equal;  [vi.  15]

20  therefore  the  triangle  ABG  is  equal  to  the  triangle  DEF.
Now  since,  as  BC  is  to  EF,  so  is  EF  to  BG^

and,  if  three  straight  lines  be  proportional,  the  first  has  to
the  third  a  ratio  duplicate  of  that  which  it  has  to  the  second,

[v.  Def.  9]
therefore  BC  has  to  BG  a  ratio  duplicate  of  that  which  CB
25  has  to  EF.

But,  as  CB  is  to  BG^  so  is  the  triangle  ABC  to  the
triangle  ABG  ;  [vi.  i]

therefore  the  triangle  ABC  also  has  to  the  triangle  ABG  a
ratio  duplicate  of  that  which  BC  has  to  EF.

30        But  the  triangle  ABG  is  equal  to  the  triangle  DEF\

therefore  the  triangle  ABC  also  has  to  the  triangle  DEF  a
ratio  duplicate  of  that  which  BC  has  to  EF.

Therefore  etc.

PoRiSM.     From  this  it  is  manifest  that,  if  three  straight
35  lines  be  proportional,  then,  as  the  first  is  to  the  third,  so  is
the  figure  described  on  the  first  to  that  which  is  similar  and
similarly  described  on  the  second.

Q.  E.  D.

4.  and  such  that,  as  AB  is  to  BC,  so  is  DE  to  EF,  literally  "(triangles)  having
the  angle  at  B  equal  to  the  angle  at  -ff,  and  (having),  as  AB  to  BC^  so  DE  to  EF.*'

Having  combined  Prop.  18  and  the  first  part  of  Prop.  20  as  just  indicated,
De  Morgan  would  tack  on  to  Prop.  19  the  second  part  of  Prop.  20,  which
asserts  that,  if  similar  polygons  be  divided  into  the  same  number  of  similar
triangles,  the  triangles  are  "  homologous  to  the  wholes  "  (in  the  sense  that  the
polygons  have  the  same  ratio  as  the  corresponding  triangles  have),  and  that
the  polygons  are  to  one  another  in  the  duplicate  ratio  of  corresponding  sides.
This  again,  though  no  doubt  an  improvement  of  form,  would  necessitate  the
drawing  over  again  of  the  figure  of  the  altered  Proposition  18  and  a  certain
amount  of  repetition.

Agreeably  to  his  suggestion  that  Prop.  23  should  come  before  Prop.  14
which  is  a  particular  case  of  it,  De  Morgan  would  prove  Prop.  19  for
parallelograms  by  means  of  Prop.  23,  and  thence  infer  the  truth  of  it  for


234  BOOK  VI  [vi.  19

triangles  or  the  halves  of  the  parallelograms.  He  adds :  **  The  method  of
Euclid  is  an  elegant  application  of  the  operation  requisite  to  compound  equal
ratios,  by  which  the  conception  of  the  process  is  lost  sight  of."  For  the
general  reason  given  in  the  note  on  vi.  14  above,  I  think  that  Euclid  showed
the  sounder  discretion  in  the  arrangement  which  he  adopted.  Moreover  it  is
not  easy  to  see  how  performing  the  actual  operation  of  compounding  two
equal  ratios  can  obscure  the  process,  or  the  fact  that  two  equal  ratios  are
being  compounded.  On  the  definition  of  compounded  ratios  and  duplicate
ratio^  De  Morgan  has  himself  acutely  pointed  out  that  "  composition  "  is  here
used  for  the  process  of  detecting  the  single  alteration  which  produces  the
effect  of  two  or  more,  the  duplicate  ratio  being  the  result  of  compounding  two
equal  ratios.  The  proof  of  vi.  19  does  in  fact  exhibit  the  single  alteration
which  produces  the  effect  of  two.  And  the  operation  was  of  the  essence  of
the  Greek  geometry,  because  it  was  the  manipulation  of  ratios  in  this  manner,
by  simplification  and  transformation,  that  gave  it  so  much  power,  as  every  one
knows  who  has  read,  say,  Archimedes  or  ApoUonius.  Hence  the  introduction
of  the  necessary  operation^  as  well  as  the  theoretical  proof,  in  this  proposition
seems  to  me  to  have  been  distinctly  worth  while,  and,  as  it  is  somewhat
simpler  in  this  case  than  in  the  more  general  case  of  vi.  23,  it  was  in
accordance  with  the  plan  of  enabling  the  difficulties  of  Book  vi.  to  be  more
easily  and  gradually  surmounted  to  give  the  simpler  case  first.

That  Euclid  wished  to  emphasise  the  importance  of  the  method  adopted,
as  well  as  of  the  result  obtained,  in  vi.  19  seems  to  me  clearly  indicated  by
the  Porism  which  follows  the  proposition.  It  is  as  if  he  should  say :  "  I  have
shown  you  that  similar  triangles  are  to  one  another  in  the  duplicate  ratio  of
corresponding  sides;  but  I  have  also  shown  you  incidentally  how  it  is  possible
to  work  conveniently  with  duplicate  ratios,  viz.  by  transforming  them  into
simple  ratios,  between  straight  lines.  I  shall  have  occasion  to  illustrate  the
use  of  this  method  in  the  proof  of  vi.  22."

The  Porism  to  vi.  19  presents  one  difficulty.  It  will  be  observed  that  it
speaks  of  ikat  figure  (cffios)  described  on  the  first  straight  line  and  of  that  which
is  similar  and  similarly  described  on  the  second.  If  "figure"  could  be
regarded  as  loosely  used  for  the  figure  of  the  proposition^  i.e.  for  a  triangle^
there  would  be  no  difficulty.  If  on  the  other  hand  "  the  figure  "  means  any
rectilineal  figure,  i.e.  any  polygon,  the  Porism  is  not  really  established  until
the  next  proposition,  vi.  20,  has  been  proved,  and  therefore  it  is  out  of  place
here.  Yet  the  correction  Tpiywvov,  triangle^  for  ctSo?,  figure^  is  due  to  Theon
alone ;  P  and  Campanus  have  "  figure,"  and  the  reading  of  Philoponus  and
Psellus,  Tcrpaywvov,  square^  partly  supports  cISos,  since  it  can  be  reconciled  with
cBos  but  not  with  rpiytDvov,  Again  the  second  Porism  to  vi.  20,  in  which  this
Porism  is  reasserted  for  any  rectilineal  figure,  and  which  is  omitted  by
Campanus  and  only  given  by  P  in  the  margin,  was  probably  interpolated  by
Theon.  Heiberg  concludes  that  Euclid  wrote  "  figure "  (cTSos),  and  Theon,
seeing  the  difficulty,  changed  the  word  into  "  triangle  "  here  and  added  Por.  2
to  VI.  20  in  order  to  make  the  matter  clear.  If  one  may  hazard  a  guess  as  to
how  Euclid  made  the  slip,  may  it  be  that  he  first  put  it  after  vi.  20  and  then,
observing  that  the  expression  of  the  duplicate  ratio  by  a  single  ratio  between
two  straight  lines  does  not  come  in  vi.  20  but  in  vi.  19,  moved  the  Porism  to
the  end  of  vi.  19  in  order  to  make  the  connexion  clearer,  without  noticing
that,  if  this  were  done,  cTSck  would  need  correction  ?

The  following  explanation  at  the  end  of  the  Porism  is  bracketed  by
Heiberg,  viz.  "  Since  it  was  proved  that,  as  CB  is  to  BG,  so  is  the  triangle


VI.  19,  2o]


PROPOSITIONS    19,  20


235


ABC  to  the  triangle  ABG^  that  is  DBF''  Such  explanations  in  Porisms  are
not  in  Euclid's  manner,  and  the  words  are  not  in  Campanus,  though  they  date
from  a  time  earlier  than  Theon.


Proposition  20.

Similar  polygons  are  divided  into  similar  triangles^  and

into  triangles  equal  in  multitude  and  in  the  same  ratio  as

the  wholeSy  and  the  polygon  has  to  the  polygon  a  ratio  duplicate

of  that  which  the  corresponding  side  has  to  the  corresponding

5  side.

Let  ABCDE,  FGHKL  be  similar  polygons,  and  let  AB
correspond  to  FG ;

I  say  that  the  polygons  ABCDE,  FGHKL  are  divided  into
similar  triangles,  and  into  triangles  equal  in  multitude  and  in
10  the  same  ratio  as  the  wholes,  and  the  polygon  ABCDE  has
to  the  polygon  FGHKL  a  ratio  duplicate  of  that  which  AB
has  to  FG.

Let  BE,  EC,  GL,  LH  be  joined.


Now,  since  the  polygon  ABCDE  is  similar  to  the  polygon
15  FGHKL,

the  angle  BAE  is  equal  to  the  angle  GFL  ;

and,  as  BA  is  to  AE,  so  is  GF  to  FL.    [vi.  Def.  i]

Since   then  ABE,  FGL   are   two  triangles  having  one
angle  equal  to  one  angle  and  the  sides  about  the  equal  angles
20  proportional,

therefore  the  triangle  ABE  is  equiangular  with  the  triangle

FGL  ;  [VI.  6]

so  that  it  is  also  similar  ;       [vi.  4  and  Def.  i]

therefore  the  angle  ABE  is  equal  to  the  angle  FGL.


236  BOOK  VI  [vi.  20

25        But  the  whole  angle  ABC  is  also  equal  to  the  whole  angle
FGH  because  of  the  similarity  of  the  polygons  ;

therefore  the  remaining  angle  EBC  is  equal  to  the  angle
LGH.

And,  since,  because  of  the  similarity  of  the  triangles  ABE,
^FGL,

as  EB  is  to  BA,  so  is  LG  to  GF,
and  moreover  also,  because  of  the  similarity  of  the  polygons,

as  AB  is  to  BC,  so  is  FG  to  GH,
therefore,  ex  aequali,  as  EB  is  to  BC,  so  is  ZG^  to  GH\  [v.  22]

35  that  is,  the  sides  about  the  equal  angles  EBC,  LGH  are
proportional ;

therefore  the  triangle  EBC  is  equiangular  with  the  triangle
LGH,  [VI.  6]

so  that  the  triangle  EBC  is  also  similar  to  the  triangle
40  LGH.  [vi.  4  and  Def.  i]

For  the  same  reason
the  triangle  ECD  is  also  similar  to  the  triangle  LHK.

Therefore  the  similar  polygons  ABCDE,  FGHKL  have
been  divided  into  similar  triangles,  and  into  triangles  equal  in
45  multitude.

I  say  that  they  are  also  in  the  same  ratio  as  the  wholes,
that  is,  in  such  manner  that  the  triangles  are  proportional,
and  ABE,  EBC,  ECD  are  antecedents,  while  FGL,  LGH,
LHK  are  their  consequents,  and  that  the  polygon  ABCDE
50  has  to  the  polygon  FGHKL  a  ratio  duplicate  of  that  which
the  corresponding  side  has  to  the  corresponding  side,  that  is
AB  to  FG.

For  let  AC,  FH  be  joined.

Then  since,  because  of  the  similarity  of  the  polygons,

55  the  angle  ABC  is  equal  to  the  angle  FGH,

and,  as  AB  is  to  BC,  so  is  FG  to  GH,

the  triangle  ABC  is  equiangular  with  the  triangle  FGH ;

[VI.  6]

therefore  the  angle  BAC  is  equal  to  the  angle  GFH,

and  the  angle  BCA  to  the  angle  GHF.

60       And,  since  the  angle  BAM  is  equal  to  the  angle  GFN,

and  the  angle  ABM  is  also  equal  to  the  angle  FGN,


VI.  2o]  PROPOSITION   20  237

therefore   the  remaining  angle  A  MB  is  also  equal  to  the
remaining  angle  FNG  ;  [i.  32]

therefore  the  triangle  ABM  is  equiangular  with  the  triangle
65  FGN.

Similarly  we  can  prove  that
the  triangle  BMC  is  also  equiangular  with  the  triangle  GNH.

Therefore,  proportionally,  as  AM  is  to  MBy  so  is  FN  to
NO,

70  and,  as  BM  is  to  MC,  so  is  ON  to  NH ;

so  that,  in  addition,  ex  aequali,

as  AM  is  to  MC,  so  is  FN  to  NH.

But,  as  AM  is  to  MC,  so  is  the  triangle  ABM  to  MBC,

and  A  ME  to  EMC]  for  they  are  to  one  another  as  their

75  bases.  [vi.  i]

Therefore  also,  as  one  of  the  antecedents  is  to  one  of  the

consequents,  so  are  all  the  antecedents  to  all  the  consequents ;

[v.  12]
therefore,  as  the  triangle  A  MB  is  to  BMC,  scf  is  ABE  to
CBE.
80        But,  as  A  MB  is  to  BMC,  so  is  AM  to  MC ;
therefore  also,  3ls  AM  i&  to  AfCy  so  is  the  triangle  ABE  to
the  triangle  EBC.

For  the  same  reason  also,
as  FN  is  to  N/f,  so  is  the  triangle  FGL  to  the  triangle
85  GLH.

And,  as  AM  is  to  MC,  so  is  FN  to  N/f;
therefore  also,  as  the  triangle  ABE  is  to  the  triangle  BEC,
so  is  the  triangle  FGL  to  the  triangle  GLH ;
and,  alternately,  as  the  triangle  ABE  is  to  the  triangle  FGL,
90  so  is  the  triangle  BEC  to  the  triangle  GLH.

Similarly  we  can  prove,  if  BD,  GK  be  joined,  that,  as  the
triangle  BEC  is  to  the  triangle  LGH,  so  also  is  the  triangle
ECD  to  the  triangle  LHK.

And  since,  as  the  triangle  ABE  is  to  the  triangle  FGL,
95  so  is  EBC  to  LGH,  and  further  ECD  to  LHK,

therefore  also,  as  one  of  the  antecedents  is  to  one  of  the
consequents,  so  are  all  the  antecedents  to  all  the  consequents  ;

[v.  12]

therefore,  as  the  triangle  ABE  is  to  the  triangle  FGL,
so  is  the  polygon  ABCDE  to  the  polygon  FGHKL.


238  BOOK  VI  [vi.  20

100        But  the  triangle  ABE  has  to  the  triangle  FGL  a  ratio

duplicate  of  that  which  the  corresponding  side  AB  has  to  the

corresponding   side   FG\    for  similar  triangles   are   in   the

duplicate  ratio  of  the  corresponding  sides.  [vi.  19]

Therefore  the  polygon  ABCDE  also  has  to  the  polygon

105  FGHKL  a  ratio  duplicate  of  that  which  the  corresponding

side  AB  has  to  the  corresponding  side  FG.

Therefore  etc.

PoRiSM.  Similarly  also  it  can  be  proved  in  the  case  of
quadrilaterals  that  they  are  in  the  duplicate  ratio  of  the
no  corresponding  sides.  And  it  was  also  proved  in  the  case  of
triangles ;  therefore  also,  generally,  similar  rectilineal  figures
are  to  one  another  in  the  duplicate  ratio  of  the  corresponding
sides.

Q.  E.  D.

1.  in  the  same  ratio  as  the  wholes.  The  same  word  6/Li6\o7of  is  used  which  I  have
generallv  translated  by  "  corresponding."  But  here  it  is  followed  by  a  dative,  6/A6\o7a  roa
^oit  *'  homologous  with  the  wholes,"  instead  of  being  used  absolutely.  The  meaning  can
therefore  here  be  nothing  else  but  "in  the  same  ratio  with"  or  "proportional  to  the
wholes";  and  Euclid  seems  to  recognise  that  he  is  making  a  special  use  of  the  word,
because  he  explains  it  lower  down  (1. 46) :  *'the  triangles  are  homologous  to  the  wholes,  that
is,  in  such  manner  that  the  triangles  are  proportional,  and  ABE^  EBC^  BCD  are  ante-
cedents, while  FGLy  LGH,  LHK  are  their  consequents."

49.  iw6fieva  a^rwr,  ""*  their  consequents,*'  is  a  little  awkward,  but  may  be  supposed  to
indicate  which  triangles  correspond  to  which  as  consequent  to  antecedent.

An  alternative  proof  of  the  second  part  of  this  proposition  given  after  the
Porisms  is  relegated  by  August  and  Heiberg  to  an  Appendix  as  an  interpolation.
It  is  shorter  than  the  proof  in  the  text,  and  is  the  only  one  given  by  many
editors,  including  Clavifts,  Billingsley,  Barrow  and  Simson.  It  runs  as  follows :

"  We  will  now  also  proVe  that  the  triangles  are  homologous  in  another  and
an  easier  manner.


Again,  let  the  polygons  ABCDE,  FGHKL  be  set  out,  and  let  BE,  EC,
GL,  LH  be  joined.

I  say  that,  as  the  triangle  ABE  is  to  FGL,  so  is  EBC  to  LGH  and  CDE
to  HKL.

For,  since  the  triangle  ABE  is  similar  to  the  triangle  FGL,  the  triangle
ABE  has  to  the  triangle  FGL  a  ratio  duplicate  of  that  which  BE  has  to  GL,


VI.  20,  2i]  PROPOSITIONS   20,  21  239

For  the  same  reason  also
the  triangle  BEC  has  to  the  triangle  GLH  a  ratio  duplicate  of  that  which
BE  has  to  GL,

Therefore,  as  the  triangle  ABE  is  to  the  triangle  FGL^  so  is  BEC
to  GLH.

Again,  since  the  triangle  EBC  is  similar  to  the  triangle  LGH^

EBC  has  to  LGH  a  ratio  duplicate  of  that  which  the  straight  line  CE  has
to  HL,

For  the  same  reason  also

the  triangle  ECD  has  to  the  triangle  LHK  a  ratio  duplicate  of  that  which
CE  has  to  HL,

Therefore,  as  the  triangle  EBC  is  to  LGH,  so  is  ECD  to  LHK.
But  it  was  proved  that,
as  EBC  is  to  LGH,  so  also  is  ABE  to  FGL,

Therefore  also,  as  ABE  is  to  FGL,  so  is  BEC  to  GLH  and  ECD  to
LHK.

Q.  K  D."

Now  Euclid  cannot  fail  to  have  noticed  that  the  second  part  of  his
proposition  could  be  proved  in  this  way.  It  seems  therefore  that,  in  giving
the  other  and  longer  method,  he  deliberately  wished  to  avoid  using  the  result
of  VI.  19,  preferring  to  prove  the  first  two  parts  of  the  theorem,  as  they  can  be
proved,  independently  of  any  relation  between  the  areas  of  similar  triangles.

The  first  part  of  the  Porism,  stating  that  the  theorem  is  true  o{  quadrilaterals,
would  be  superfluous  but  for  the  fact  that  technically,  according  to  Book  i.
Def.  19,  the  term  "polygon"  (or  figure  of  many  sides,  iroXvirXcvpov)  used  in  the
enunciation  of  the  proposition  is  confined  to  rectilineal  figures  of  more  than
four  sides,  so  that  a  quadrilateral  might  seem  to  be  excluded.  The  mention
of  the  triangle  in  addition  fills  up  the  tale  of  "  similar  rectilineal  figures."

The  second  Porism,  Theon's  interpolation,  given  in  the  text  by  the  editors,
but  bracketed  by  Heiberg,  is  as  follows :

"  And,  if  we  take  O  a  third  proportional  to  AB,  FG,  then  BA  has  to  (7  a
ratio  duplicate  of  that  which  AB  has  to  FG,

But  the  polygon  has  also  to  the  polygon,  or  the  quadrilateral  to  the
quadrilateral,  a  ratio  duplicate  of  that  which  the  corresponding  side  has  to
the  corresponding  side,  that  is  AB  to  FG\
and  this  was  proved  in  the  case  of  triangles  also ;

so  that  it  is  also  manifest  generally  that,  if  three  straight  lines  be  proportional,
as  the  first  is  to  the  third,  so  will  the  figure  described  on  the  first  be  to  the
similar  and  similarly  described  figure  on  the  second."


Proposition  21.

Figures  which  are  similar  to  the  same  rectilineal  figure
are  also  similar  to  one  another.

For  let  each  of  the  rectilineal  figures  A,  B  be  similar  to  C;
I  say  that  A  is  also  similar  to  B,


240                                                                   BOOK    VI  [VI.  21,  22

For,  since  A  is  similar  to  C,

it  is  equiangular  with  it  and  has  the  sides  about  the  equal

angles  proportional.  [vi.  Def.  i]


Again,  since  B  is  similar  to  C,

it  is  equiangular  with  it  and  has  the  sides  about  the  equal
angles  proportional.

Therefore  each  of  the  figures  A,  B  is  equiangular  with  C
and  with  C  has  the  sides  about  the  equal  angles  proportional ;

therefore  A  is  similar  to  B.

Q.  E.  D.

It  will  be  observed  that  the  text  above  omits  a  step  which  the  editions
generally  have  before  the  final  inference  "Therefore  A  is  similar  to  B"  The
words  omitted  are  "so  that  A  is  also  equiangular  with  B  and  [with  B]  has  the
sides  about  the  equal  angles  proportional."  Heiberg  follows  P  in  leaving
them  out,  conjecturing  that  they  may  be  an  addition  of  Theon's.


Proposition  22.

If  four  straight  lines  be  proportional,  t/ie  rectilineal  figures
similar  and  similarly  described  upon  them  will  also  be  pro-
portional;  and,  if  the  rectilineal  figures  si7nilar  and  similarly
described  upon  them  be  proportional,  the  straight  lines  will
themselves  also  be  proportional.

Let  the  four  straight  lines  AB,  CD,  EF,  GH  be  pro-
portional,
so  that,  as  AB  is  to  CD,  so  is  EF  to  GH,

and  let  there  be  described  on  AB,  CD  the  similar  and  similarly
situated  rectilineal  figures  KAB,  LCD,

and  on  EF,  GH  the  similar  and  similarly  situated  rectilineal

figures  MF,  NH\

I  say  that,  as  KAB  is  to  LCD,  so  is  MF  to  NH,

For  let  there  be  taken  a  third  proportional  O  to  AB,  CD,
and  a  third  proportional  P  to  EF,  GH.  [vi.  n]


VI.  22]  PROPOSITIONS   21,  22  241

Then  since,  as  AB  is  to  CD,  so  is  EF  to  GH,
and,  as  CD  is  to  (?,  so  is  GH  to  P,
therefore,  ex  aequali,  as  -^4-5  is  to  (?,  so  is  EFio  P.        [v.  22]

But,  as  AB  is  to  (9,  so  is  KAB  to  ZCZ?,

and,  as  EF  is  to  /^,  so  is  MF  to  iV/i^;  ^^^'  '^'    ""'"^

therefore  also,  as  I^AB  is  to  ZCZ?,  so  is  MF  to  NH.    [v.  n]


Next,  let  MF  be  to  NH  as  ^^^  is  to  LCD  ;

I  say  also  that,  as  AB  is  to  CD,  so  is  jG*/^  to  G/f.

For,  if  ^-F  is  not  to  Gff  as  AB  to  CZ?,

let  ^/^be  to  Q/i  as  ^i9  to  CD,  [vi.  12]

and  on  QR  let  the  rectilineal  figure  SR  be  described  similar
and  similarly  situated  to  either  of  the  two  MF,  NH.       [vi.  18]

Since  then,  as  AB  is  to  CD,  so  is  EF  to  QR,

and  there  have  been  described  on  AB,  CD  the  similar  and
similarly  situated  figures  KAB,  LCD,

and  on  EF,  QR  the  similar  and  similarly  situated  figures
MF,  SR,

therefore,  as  KAB  is  to  LCD,  so  is  MF  to  SR.

But  also,  by  hypothesis,

as  KAB  is  to  LCD,  so  is  MF  to  NH]

therefore  also,  as  MF  is  to  SR,  so  is  MF  to  NH.     [v.  n]

Therefore  J//"  has  the  same  ratio  to  each  of  the  figures
NH,  SR ;

therefore  NH  is  equal  to  SR.  [v.  9]

But  it  is  also  similar  and  similarly  situated  to  it ;

therefore  GH  is  equal  to  QR.

H.  E.  II.  16


242  BOOK    VI  [VI.  22

And,  since,  as  AB  is  to  CD,  so  is  EF  to  QR,
while  QR  is  equal  to  GHy
therefore,  as  AB  is  to  CD,  so  is  EF  to  GH.

Therefore  etc.

Q.  E.  D.

The  second  assumption  in  the  first  step  of  the  first  part  of  the  proof,  viz.
that,  as  CD  is  to  (7,  so  GH  to  /*,  should  perhaps  be  explained.  It  is  a
deduction  [by  v.  ii]  from  the  facts  that

A£  is  to  CD  as  CD  to  O,

£Fis  to  GUsLS  G If  to  P,

and  AB  is  to  CD  as  EFto  GH,

The  defect  in  the  proof  of  this  proposition  is  well  known,  namely  the
assumption,  without  proof,  that,  because  the  figures  NH,  SR  are  equal,
besides  being  similar  and  similarly  situated,  their  corresponding  sides  GH,  QR
are  equal.  Hence  the  minimum  addition  necessary  to  make  the  proof
complete  is  a  proof  of  a  lemma  to  the  effect  that,  if  two  similar  figures  are  also
equal ^  any  pair  of  corresponding  sides  are  equal

To  supply  this  lemma  is  one  alternative ;  another  is  to  prove,  as  a
preliminary  proposition,  a  much  more  general  theorem,  viz.  that,  if  the
duplicate  ratios  of  two  ratios  are  equal,  the  two  ratios  are  themselves  equal.
When  this  is  proved,  the  second  part  of  vi.  22  is  an  immediate  inference  from
it,  and  the  effect  is,  of  course,  to  substitute  a  new  proof  instead  of
supplementing  Euclid's.

I.  It  is  to  be  noticed  that  the  lemma  required  as  a  minimum  is  very  like
what  is  needed  to  supplement  vi.  28  and  29,  in  the  proofs  of  which  Euclid
assumes  that,  if  tivo  similar  parallelograms  are  unequal^  any  side  in  the  greater
is  greater  than  the  corresponding  side  in  the  smaller.  Therefore,  on  the  whole,  it
seems  preferable  to  adopt  the  alternative  of  proving  the  simpler  lemma  which
will  serve  to  supplement  all  three  proofs,  viz.  that,  if  of  two  similar  rectilineal
figures  the  first  is  greater  than^  equal  tOy  or  less  than^  the  second^  any  side  of  the
first  is  greater  than,  equal  to,  or  less  than,  the  corresponding  side  of  the  second
respectively.

The  case  oi  equality  of  the  figures  is  the  case  required  for  vi.  22  ;  and  the
proof  of  it  is  given  in  the  Greek  text  after  the  proposition.  Since  to  give  such
a  "  lemma  "  after  the  proposition  in  which  it  is  required  is  contrary  to  Euclid's
manner,  Heiberg  concludes  that  it  is  an  interpolation,  though  it  is  earlier  than
Theon.     The  lemma  runs  thus :

"But  that,  if  rectilineal  figures  be  equal  and  similar,  their  corresponding
sides  are  equal  to  one  another  we  will  prove  thus.

Let  NHy  SR  be  equal  and  similar  rectilineal  figures,  and  suppose  that,
as  HG  is  to  GN,  so  is  RQ  to  QS\
I  say  that  RQ  is  equal  to  HG.

For,  if  they  are  unequal,  one  of  them  is  greater ;
let  RQ  be  greater  than  HG,


VI.  22]  PROPOSITION   22  243

Then,  since,  as  ^^  is  to  QS,  so  is  IfG  to  GN,
alternately  also,  as  I^Q  is  to  IfG^  so  is  QS  to  GN;
and  QJ^  is  greater  than  JIG ;

therefore  QS  is  also  greater  than  GN;

so  that  I^S  is  also  greater  than  HN^,

But  it  is  also  equal :  which  is  impossible.
Therefore  QR  is  not  unequal  to  GH\
therefore  it  is  equal  to  it."

[The  step  marked  *  is  easy  to  see  if  it  is  remembered  that  it  is  only
necessary  to  prove  its  truth  in  the  case  of  triangles  (since  similar  polygons  are
divisible  into  the  same  number  of  similar  and  similarly  situated  triangles
having  the  same  ratio  to  each  other  respectively  as  the  polygons  have).  If  the
triangles  be  applied  to  each  other  so  that  the  two  corresponding  sides  of  each,
which  are  used  in  the  question,  and  the  angles  included  by  them  coincide,
the  truth  of  the  inference  is  obvious.]

The  lemma  might  also  be  arrived  at  by  proving  that,  if  a  ratio  is  greater  than
a  ratio  of  equality^  the  ratio  which  is  its  duplicate  is  also  greater  than  a  ratio  of
equality;  and  if  the  ratio  which  is  duplicate  of  another  ratio  is  greater  than  a
ratio  of  equality y  the  ratio  of  which  it  is  the  duplicate  is  also  greater  than  a  ratio
of  equality.  It  is  not  difficult  to  prove  this  from  the  particular  case  of  v.  25  in
which  the  second  magnitude  is  equal  to  the  third,  i.e.  from  the  fact  that  in
this  case  the  sum  of  the  extreme  terms  is  greater  than  double  the  middle  term.

II.  We  now  come  to  the  alternative  which  substitutes  a  new  proof  for  the
second  part  of  the  proposition,  making  the  whole  proposition  an  immediate
inference  from  one  to  which  it  is  practically  equivalent,  viz.  that

(i)  If  tivo  ratios  he  equals  their  duplicate  ratios  are  equals  and  (2)  con-
versely, if  the  duplicate  ratios  of  two  ratios  be  equals  the  ratios  are  equal

The  proof  of  part  (i)  is  after  the  manner  of  Euclid's  own  proof  of  the  first
part  of  VI.  22.

Let  ^  be  to  i5  as  C  to  Z>,

and  let  A'  be  a  third  proportional  to  A^  B,  and  Fa  third  proportional  to  C,  />,
so  that

Av&Xo  B  zs  B  \.o  Xy

and  C  is  to  Z>  as  Z>  to  Y\

whence  A\%X,qX  in  the  duplicate  ratio  of  A  to  B^

and  C  is  to  Kin  the  duplicate  ratio  of  C  to  D,

Since  -^  is  to  -5  as  C  is  to  />,

and  i?  is  to  A'  as  ^  is  to  B^

i.e.  as  C  is  to  />,  r         t

I.e.  as  Z>  is  to  K,  "-         -*

therefore,  ex  aequali^         -^  is  to  A'  as  C  is  to  K

Part  (2)  is  much  more  difficult  and  is  the  crux  of  the  whole  thing.

Most  of  the  proofs  depend  on  the  assumption  that,  B  being  any  magnitude
and  F  and  Q  two  magnitudes  of  the  same  kind,  there  does  exist  a  magnitude
A  which  is  to  B  in  the  same  ratio  as  Z'  to  Q-     It  is  this  same  assumption

16 — 2


244  BOOK  VI  [vi.  22

which  makes  Euclid's  proof  of  v.  i8  illegitimate,  since  it  is  nowhere  proved
in  Book  v.  Hence  any  proof  of  the  proposition  now  in  question  which
involves  this  assumption  even  in  the  case  where  B^  P^  Q  are  all  straight  lines
should  not  properly  be  given  as  an  addition  to  Book  v. ;  it  should  at  least  be
postponed  until  we  have  learnt,  by  means  of  vi.  12,  giving  the  actual
construction  of  a  fourth  proportional,  that  such  a  fourth  proportional  exists.

Two  proofs  which  are  given  of  the  proposition  depend  upon  the  following
lemma.

j^A,  B,  C  A^  three  magnitudes  of  am  kind^  and  D,  E,  F  three  magnitudes
of  one  kindy  then^  if

the  ratio  of  A  to 'B  is  greater  than  that  of  \^  toY^^

and  the  ratio  of  B  to  C  greater  than  that  of^toY^

ex  aequali,       the  ratio  of  h  to  C  is  greater  than  that  of  D  toF.

One  proof  of  this  does  not  depend  upon  the  assumption  referred  to,  and
therefore,  if  this  proof  is  used,  the  theorem  can  be  added  to  Book  v.     The

Eroof  is  that  of  Hauber  (Camerer's  Euclid,  p.  358  of  Vol.  11.)  and  is  reproduced
y  Mr  H.  M.  Taylor.     For  brevity  we  will  use  symbols.
Take  equimultiples  mA,  mD  of  ^,  J?  and  nB,  nE  of  B^  E  such  that

mA>nB^  but  mDl^nE.

Also  let  pB^  pE  be  equimultiples  of  B^  E  and  qC^  qF  equimultiples  of
C,  -^such  that

pB>qC,  hM\.pE1^qR

Therefore,  multiplying  the  first  line  by/  and  the  second  by  «,  we  have
pmA  >pnB^  pmD  l^pnE^
and  npB>nqC,  npE^j^nqF,

whence  pmA  >  nq  C,  pmD  1^  nqF,

Now  pmA^  pmD  are  equimultiples  of  mA^  mD^

and  nqC^  /i^/^  equimultiples  of  qC^  qF,

Therefore  [v.  3]  they  are  respectively  equimultiples  of  A^  D  and  of  C,  F.

Hence  [v.  Def.  7]  A  \  C>D:F

Another  proof  given  by  Clavius,  though  depending  on  the  assumption
referred  to,  is  neat.
Take  G  such  that

C:  C^EiF.


A D

n         — .                                            •■

u

c

H"

Therefore

I

Therefore

B:  C>G:  C,

£>G.
A:G>A:B.

[v.  13]
[v.  10]
[V.    8]


VI.  22]  PROPOSITION   22  245


But

A  .

B>D ,

\E.

Therefore,  a  fortiori.

A:

G>D

E.

Suppose  ^  taken  such  that

H:

G  =  D

■.E.

Therefore

A>H.

Hence

A

.C>H:

:  C.

But

H.

.G  =  D

:£.

G

;  C  =  E:

F.

Therefore,  ex  aequali.

H

:  C^D.

F.

Hence

A  :

I  C>D  .

F.

[v.  13,  lo]
[v.  8]


[v.  22]
[v.  13]


Now  we  can  prove  that
Ratios  of  which  equal  ratios  are  duplicate  are  equal.


Suppose  that

A-,

.B=£:C,

and

D

■.E  =  EtF,

and  further  that

A  .

:  C=D:F.

it  is  required  to  prove  that

For,  if  not,  one  of  the  ratios  must  be  greater  than  the  other.
Let  A  :  B  he,  the  greater.

Then,  since  A  :  B  =  B  :  Q

and  D:  E  =  E\F,

while  A\B>D\  E,

it  follows  that  B  :C>E:F.  [v.  13]

Hence,  by  the  lemma,  ex  aequali^

A  :  C>D  :  F,

which  contradicts  the  hypothesis.

Thus  the  ratios  A :  B  and  D :  E  cannot  be  unequal;  that  is,  they  are  equal.

Another  proof,  given  by  Dr  Lachlan,  also  assumes  the  existence  of  a
fourth  proportional,  but  depends  upon  a  simpler  lemma  to  the  effect  that

//  is  impossible  that  two  different  ratios  can  have  the  same  duplicate  ratio.

For,  if  possible,  let  the  ratio  A\B\ie,  duplicate  both  of  -^  :  A'  and  A  :  K,
so  that

A\X=X\B,


[v.  8]

[v.  II,  13]
[v.  10]


and

A

:  K=  Y

:£.

Let  A'  be  greater

than

K

Then

A

.X<A:

Y;

that  is.

X

.B<Y:

B,

or

X<Y.

But  X  is  greater

than

Y:

which  is  absurd,  etc.

Hence

X=Y.

946

BOOK  VI

Now  suppose  that

A:B  =  B:C,

D:E  =  E:F,

and

A:C=D:F.

To  prove  that

A  :£  =  D:E.

If  this  is  not  so,  suppose

that

A:£  =  D:Z.

Since

A:  C=D:F,

therefore,  inversely,

C.A=F.D.

Therefore,  ex  aequali.

C:B  =  F:Z,

or,  inversely.

B:  C=Z: F

Therefore

A:B  =  Z:F.

But

A  ■.B  =  D.Z,hy  hypothesis.

Therefore

D:Z=Z.F.

Also,  by  hypothesis.

D:E=E:F;

whence,  by  the  lemma.

E  =  Z

Therefore

A:B  =  D:E.

[VI.   22


[v.  22]

[V.  „]
[V.   II]


De  Morgan  remarks  that  the  best  way  of  remedying  the  defect  in  Euclid
is  to  insert  the  proposition  (the  lemma  to  the  last  proof)  that  //  is  impossible
that  two  differmt  ratios  can  have  the  same  duplicate  ratio^  "  which,"  he  says,
"immediately  proves  the  second  (or  defective)  case  of  the  theorem."  But  this
seems  to  be  either  too  much  or  too  little :  too  much,  if  we  choose  to  make
the  minimum  addition  to  Euclid  (for  that  addition  is  a  lemma  which  shall  prove
that,  if  a  duplicate  ratio  is  a  ratio  of  equality,  the  ratio  of  which  it  is  duplicate
is  also  one  of  equality),  and  too  little  if  the  proof  is  to  be  altered  in  the  more
fundamental  manner  explained  above.

I  think  that,  if  Euclid's  attention  had  been  drawn  to  the  defect  in  his
proof  of  VI.  22  and  he  had  been  asked  to  remedy  it,  he  would  have  done  so
by  supplying  what  I  have  called  the  minimum  lemma  and  not  by  making  the
more  fundamental  alteration.  This  I  infer  from  Prop.  24  of  the  Data,  where
he  gives  a  theorem  corresponding  to  the  proposition  that  ratios  of  which  equal
ratios  are  duplicate  are  equal.  The  proposition  in  the  Data  is  enunciated
thus  :  If  three  straight  lines  be  proportional,  and  the  first  have  to  the  third  a
given  ratio,  it  will  also  have  to  the  second  a  given  ratio.

Ay  By  C  being  the  three  straight  lines,  so  that

A',B^B'.C,

and  A  :  C  being  a  given  ratio,  it  is  required  to  prove  that  A  :  B  is  also  a
given  ratio.

Euclid  takes  any  straight  line  D,  and  first  finds  another,  7^,  such  that

D:J^=A:C,

whence  D  :  F  must  be  a  given  ratio,  and,  as  Z?  is  given,  F  is  therefore  given.
Then  he  takes  E  a  mean  proportional  between  D,  F,  so  that

D,E^E,F.


VI.  22,  23]  PROPOSITIONS   22,  23  247

It  follows  [vi.  17]  that

the  rectangle  D,  F  is  equal  to  the  square  on  E,
But  D^  7^  are  both  given ;

therefore  the  square  on  E  is  given,  so  that  E  is  also  given.
[Observe  that  De  Morgan's  lemma  is  here  assumed  without  proof.     It
may  be  proved  (i)  as  it  is  by  De  Morgan,  whose  proof  is  that  given  above,
p.  245,  (2)  in  the  manner  of  the  "minimum  lemma,*'  pp.  242 — 3  above,  or
(3)  as  it  is  by  Proclus  on  1.  46  (see  note  on  that  proposition).]
Hence  the  ratio  Z>  :  E  is  given.
Now,  since  A  :  C=  Z>  :  E,

and  A  :  C=  (square  on  ^):  (rect.  A,  C\

while  D  :  F=  (square  on  D):  (rect.  Z>,  F)^  [vi.  i]

therefore  (square  on  A) :  (rect.  Ay  C)  =  (square  on  D) :  (rect.  /?,  F),  [v.  1 1]

But,  since  A\B  =  B\C,  (rect.  A,  C)  =  (sq.  on  B) ;  [vi.  1 7]

and  (rect.  D^  F)  =  (sq.  on  E\  from  above ;

therefore  (square  on  A)  \  (square  on  -5)  =  (sq.  on  D)  :  (sq.  on  E),
Therefore^  says  Euclid,

A  '.B  =  n:E,
that  is,  he  assumes  the  truth  of  vi.  22  for  squares.

Thus  he  deduces  his  proposition  from  vi.  22,  instead  of  proving  vi.  22  by
means  of  it  (or  the  corresponding  proposition  used  by  Mr  Taylor  and
Dr  Lachlan).

Proposition  23.

Equiangular  parallelograms  have  to  one  another  the  ratio
compounded  of  the  ratios  of  their  sides.

Let  AC,  CF  be  equiangular  parallelograms  having  the
angle  BCD  equal  to  the  angle  ECG ;
5  I  say  that  the  parallelogram  AC  has  to  the  parallelogram
CF  the  ratio  compounded  of  the  ratios  of  the  sides.


Ar


K B^

L

M


For  let  them  be  placed  so  that  BC  is  in  a  straight  line
with  CG\

therefore  DC  is  also  in  a  straight  line  with  CE,
»        Let  the  parallelogram  DG  be  completed  ;
let  a  straight  line  K  be  set  out,  and  let  it  be  contrived  that,

as  BC  is  to  CG,  so  is  K  to  Z,
and,  as  DC  is  to  CE,  so  is  L  to  M.  [vi.  12]


248  BOOK  VI  [vi.  33

Then  the  ratios  oi  K  x.o  L  and  oi  L  to  M  are  the  same
IS  as  the  ratios  of  the  sides,  namely  of  BC  to  CG  and  of  DC
to  CE.

But  the  ratio  oi  K  to  M  is  compounded  of  the  ratio  of  K
to  L  and  of  that  oi  Lto  M\

so  that  K  has  also  to  M  the  ratio  compounded  of  the  ratios
ao  of  the  sides.

Now  since,  as  BC  is  to  CG,  so  is  the  parallelogram  AC
to  the  parallelogram  CH,  [vi.  i]

while,  as  BC  is  to  CG,  so  is  A^  to  Z,

therefore  also,  as  A'  is  to  Z,  so  is  ^C  to  CH.  [v.  n]

as        Again,  since,  as  DC  is  to  CE,  so  is  the  parallelogram  CH
to  CF,  [VI.  i]

while,  as  DC  is  to  CZ*,  so  is  Z  to  i?/,

therefore  also,  as  Z  is  to  M,  so  is  the  parallelogram  CH  to
the  parallelogram  CF.  [v.  n]

30       Since  then  it  was  proved  that,  as  K  is  to  Z,  so  is  the
parallelogram  ^C  to  the  parallelogram  CH,

and,   as   Z   is  to   M,    so  is  the   parallelogram    CH  to   the
parallelogram  CF,

therefore,  ex  aeqtutlt,  as  K  is  to  M,  soxsAC  to  the  parallelo-
35  gram  CF,

But  K  has  to  M  the  ratio  compounded  of  the  ratios  of
the  sides ;

therefore  AC  also  has  to  CF\h^  ratio  compounded  of  the
ratios  of  the  sides.
40        Therefore  etc.

Q.  E.  D.

1 1  6,  19,  36.  the  ratio  compounded  of  the  ratios  of  the  sides,  Xir^ov  rbv  ffvyK^iiixvov
ix  Tw¥  T\€vpwy  which,  meaning  literally  "  the  ratio  compounded  0/  the  sicUs,''  is  negligently
written  here  and  commonly  for  Xbyov  rbv  cvyKfltuvov  ix  T«ir  twv  T\€vpu>if  (sc.  \6ry(av),

II.  let  it  be  contrived  that,  as  BC  is  to  CG,  so  is  K  to  L.  The  Greek  phrase  is
of  the  usual  terse  kind,  untranslatable  literally :  /cot  yeyov^u  wj  nh  if  BF  rpbs  rV  FH,
oCrwj  ii  K  Tp6f  t6  A,  the  words  meaning  "and  let  (there)  be  made,  as  BC  to  CG,  so  A' to
Z,"  where  L  is  the  straight  line  which  has  to  be  constructed.

The  second  definition  of  the  Da/a  says  that  A  ratio  is  said  to  be  given  if
7ve  can  find  (iroptVao-^at)  [another  ratio  that  />]  the  same  with  it.  Accordingly
VI.  23  not  only  proves  that  equiangular  parallelograms  have  to  one  another  a
ratio  which  is  compounded  of  two  others,  but  shows  that  that  ratio  is  "given"
when  its  component  ratios  are  given,  or  that  it  can  be  represented  as  a  simple
ratio  between  straight  lines.


VI.  23]  PROPOSITION   23  249

Just  as  VI.  23  exhibits  the  operation  necessary  for  compounding  two
ratios,  a  proposition  (8)  of  the  Data  indicates  the  operation  by  which  we  may
divide  one  ratio  by  another.  The  proposition  proves  that  Things  which
have  a  given  ratio  to  the  same  thing  have  also  a  given  ratio  to  one  another,
Euclid's  procedure  is  of  course  to  compound  one  ratio  with  the  inverse  of  the
other;  but,  when  this  is  once  done  and  the  result  of  Prop.  8  obtained,  he
uses  the  result  in  the  later  propositions  as  a  substitute  for  the  method  of
composition.  Thus  he  uses  the  division  of  ratios,  instead  of  composition,
in  the  propositions  of  the  Data  which  deal  with  the  same  subject-matter  as
VI.  23.  The  effect  is  to  represent  the  ratio  of  two  equiangular  parallelograms
as  a  ratio  between  straight  lines  one  of  which  is  one  side  of  one  of  the
parallelograms.  Prop.  56  of  the  Data  shows  us  that,  if  we  want  to  express
the  ratio  of  the  parallelogram  ^  C  to  the  parallelogram  CF  in  the  figure


of  VI.  23  in  the  form  of  a  ratio  in  which,  for  example,  the  side  BC  is  the
antecedent  term,  the  required  ratio  of  the  parallelograms  is  BC :  X,  where

DC:  C£=CG:X,
or  A"  is  a  fourth  proportional  to  Z>Cand  the  two  sides  of  the  parallelogram  CF.
Measure  CIC  along  CB,  produced  if  necessary,  so  that
DC:  CE=  CG:  CK
(whence  CK  is  equal  to  X),

[This  may  be  simply  done  by  joining  DO  and  then  drawing  EK  parallel
to  it  meeting  CB  in  K.\

Complete  the  parallelogram  AK,
Then,  since  DC  :  CE  =  CG  :  CK,

the  parallelograms  DK,  CFaxe  equal.  [vi.  14]

Therefore  (AC) :  (CF)  =  {AC)  :  (DK)  [v.   7]

=  BC:  CK  [vi.  i]

=  BC :  X.

Prop.  68  of  the  Data  uses  the  same  construction  to  prove  that.  If  two
equiangular  parallelograms  have  to  one  another  a  given  ratio,  and  one  side  have
to  one  side  a  given  ratio,  the  remaining  side  will  also  have  to  the  remaining  side
a  given  ratio,

I  do  not  use  the  figure  of  the  Data  but,  for  convenience'  sake,  I  adhere
to  the  figure  given  above.  Suppose  that  the  ratio  of  the  parallelograms  is
given,  and  also  that  of  CD  to  CE,

Apply  to  CD  the  parallelogram  Z> A' equal  to  CF  and  such  that  CK,  CB
coincide  in  direction.  [i.  45]

Then  the  ratio  of  ^C  to  KD  is  given,  being  equal  to  that  of  AC\.o  CF,
And  i^AC)  :  {KD)  =  CB  :  CK',

therefore  the  ratio  of  CB  to  CK  is  given.


2SO  BOOK  VI  [vL  23

But,  since  XB  =  CF,

CD:  C£=  CG  :  CA'.  [vi.  14]

Hence  CG  :  CAT  is  a  given  ratio.

And  CB  :  CK^  was  proved  to  be  a  given  ratio.

Therefore  the  ratio  of  CB  to  CG  is  given.  [Data,  Prop.  8]

Lastly  we  may  refer  to  Prop.  70  of  the  Da/a,  the  first  part  of  which  proves
what  corresponds  exactly  to  vi.  23,  namely  that,  /f  in  two  equiangular  paral-
kiograms  the  sides  containing  the  equal  angles  have  a  given  ratio  to  one  another
[i.e.  one  side  in  one  to  one  side  in  the  other],  the  parallelograms  themselves  will
also  have  a  given  ratio  to  one  another.  [Here  the  ratios  of  BC  to  CG  and  of
CD  to  CE  are  given.]

The  construction  is  the  same  as  in  the  last  case,  and  we  have  KD  equal
to  CF,  so  that

CD:  CE^CG:  CK.  [vi.  14]

But  the  ratio  of  CD  to  CE  is  given ;
therefore  the  ratio  of  CG  to  CK\s  given..

And,  by  hypothesis,  the  ratio  of  CG  to  CB  is  given.

Therefore,  by  dividing  the  ratios  [Data,  Prop.  8],  we  see  that  the  ratio  of
CB  to  CK^  and  therefore  [vi.  i]  the  ratio  of  -r^C  to  DK,  or  of  AC  to  CF,
is  given.

Euclid  extends  these  propositions  to  the  case  of  two  parallelograms  which
have  giz»en  but  not  equal  angles.

Pappus  (vii.  p.  928)  exhibits  the  result  of  vi.  23  in  a  different  way,
which  throws  new  light  on  compounded  ratios.  He  proves,  namely,  that  a
parallelogram  is  to  an  equiangular  parallelogram  as  the  rectangle  contained  by
the  cuijacent  sides  of  the  first  is  to  the  rectangle  contained  by  the  adjcuent  sides
of  the  second,

A

D


BQ  O  E    H


Let  AC,  DFht,  equiangular  parallelograms  on  the  bases  BC,  EF,  and  let
the  angles  at  ^,  -ff  be  equal.

Draw  perpendiculars  AG,  DH to  BC,  ^/^respectively.
Since  the  angles  at  B,  G  are  equal  to  those  at  E,  H,

the  triangles  ABG,  DEH  2j^  equiangular.
Therefore  BA:AG=ED:  DH,  [vi.  4]

But  BA  \AG  =  (rect.  BA,  BC)  :  (rect.  AG,  BC),

and      ED  :  DH=^  (rect.  ED,  EF)  :  (rect.  DH,  EF).  [vi.  i]

Therefore  [v.  11  and  v.  16]

(rect.  AB,  BC)  :  (rect.  DE,  EF)  =  (rect.  AG,  BC)  :  (rect  DH,  EF)

=  (AC):(DF).

Thus  it  is  proved  that  the  ratio  compounded  of  the  ratios  AB  :  DE  and
BC :  EF  is  equal  to  the  ratio  of  the  rectangle  AB,  BC  to  the  rectangle
DE,  EF


VI.  23,  24]  PROPOSITIONS   23,  24  251

Since  each  parallelogram  in  the  figure  of  the  proposition  can  be  divided
into  pairs  of  equal  triangles,  and  all  the  triangles  which  are  the  halves  of  either
parallelogram  have  two  sides  respectively  equal  and  the  angles  included  by
them  equal  or  supplementary,  it  can  be  at  once  deduced  from  vi.  23  (or  it
can  be  independently  proved  by  the  same  method)  that  triangles  which  have
one  angle  of  the  one  equal  or  supplementary  to  one  angle  of  the  other  are  in  the
ratio  compounded  of  the  ratios  of  the  sides  about  the  equal  or  supplementary
angles,     Cf.  Pappus  vii.  pp.  894—6.

VI.  23  also  shows  that  rectangles^  and  therefore  parallelograms  or  triangles^
are  to  one  another  in  the  ratio  compounded  of  the  ratios  of  their  bases  and
heights.

The  converse  of  vi.  23  is  also  true,  as  is  easily  proved  by  reductio  cut
absurdmn.  More  generally,  //  two  parallelograms  or  triangles  are  in  the  ratio
compounded  of  the  ratios  of  two  adjacent  sides^  the  angles  included  by  those  sides
are  either  equal  or  supplementary.

Proposition  24.

In  any  parallelogram  the  parallelograms  about  the  diameter
are  similar  both  to  the  whole  and  to  one  another.

Let  A  BCD  be  a  parallelogram,  and  AC  its  diameter,
and  let  EG,   HK  be   parallelograms
about  AC  \

I  say  that  each  of  the  parallelograms
EG^  HK  is  similar  both  to  the  whole
ABCD  and  to  the  other.

For,  since  EF  has  been  drawrn
parallel  to  BC,  one  of  the  sides  of  the
triangle  ABC,

proportionally,  as  BE  is  to  EA,  so  is  CF  x.o  FA.       [vi.  2]

Again,  since  FG  has  been  drawn  parallel  to  CD,  one  of
the  sides  of  the  triangle  A  CD,

proportionally,  as  CF  is  to  FA,  so  is  DG  to  GA.       [vi.  2]

But  it  was  proved  that,

as  CF  is  to  FA,  so  also  is  BE  to  EA  ;

therefore  also,  as  BE  is  to  EA,  so  is  DG  to  GA,
and  therefore,  componendo,

as  BA  is  to  AE,  so  is  DA  to  AG,  [v.  18]

and,  alternately,

as  BA  is  to  AD,  so  is  EA  to  AG.  [v.  16]

Therefore  in  the  parallelograms  ABCD,  EG,  the  sides
about  the  common  angle  BAD  are  proportional.

And,  since  GF  is  parallel  to  DC,


25  a  BOOK  VI  [vi.  24

the  angle  AFG  is  equal  to  the  angle  DC  A  ;
and  the  angle  DAC  is  common  to  the  two  triangles  ADC,
AGF\

therefore  the  triangle  ADC  is  equiangular  with  the  triangle
AGF.

For  the  same  reason

the  triangle  ACB  is  also  equiangular  with  the  triangle
AFE,

and  the  whole  parallelogram  ABCD  is  equiangular  with  the
parallelogram  EG.

Therefore,  proportionally,

as  AD  is  to  DC,  so  is  AG  to  GF,

as  DC  is  to  CA,  so  is  GF  to  FA,

as  AC  is  to  CB,  so  is  AF  to  FE,

and  further,  as  CB  is  to  BA,  so  is  FE  to  EA.

And,  since  it  was  proved  that,

as  DC  is  to  CA,  so  is  GFto  FA,

and,  as  ^C  is  to  Ciff,  so  is  A  Flo  FE,

therefore,  ex  aequali,  as  DC  is  to  CB,  so  is  GF  xo  FE.  [v.  22 J
Therefore  in  the  parallelograms  ABCD,  EG  the  sides
about  the  equal  angles  are  proportional ;
therefore  the  parallelogram  ABCD  is  similar  to  the  parallelo-
gram EG.  [vi.  Def.  i]

For  the  same  reason
the  parallelogram  ABCD  is  also  similar  to  the  parallelogram
KH\

therefore  each  of  the  parallelograms  EG,  HK  is  similar  to
ABCD.

But  figures  similar  to  the  same  rectilineal  figure  are  also
similar  to  one  another ;  [vi.  21]

therefore  the  parallelogram  EG  is  also  similar  to  the  parallelo-
gram HK.

Therefore  etc.

Q.  E.  D.

Simson  was  of  opinion  that  this  proof  was  made  up  by  some  unskilful
editor  out  of  two  others,  the  first  of  which  proved  by  parallels  (vi.  2)  that
the  sides  about  the  common  angle  in  the  parallelograms  are  proportional,
while  the  other  used  the  similarity  of  triangles  (vi.  4).     It  is  of  course  true


VI.  24,  25]  PROPOSITIONS   24,  25  253

that,  when  we  have  proved  by  vi.  2  the  fact  that  the  sides  about  the  common
angle  are  proportional,  we  can  infer  the  proportionality  of  the  other  sides
directly  from  i.  34  combined  with  v.  7.  But  it  does  not  seem  to  me  unnatural
that  Euclid  should  (i)  deliberately  refrain  from  making  any  use  of  i.  34  and
(2)  determine  beforehand  that  he  would  prove  the  sides  proportional  in  a
definite  order  beginning  with  the  sides  EA^  AG  and  BA^  AD  about  the
common  angle  and  then  taking  the  remaining  sides  in  the  order  indicated
by  the  order  of  the  letters  A^  G,  F^  E,  Given  that  Euclid  started  the  proof
with  such  a  fixed  intention  in  his  mind,  the  course  taken  presents  no  difficulty,
nor  is  the  proof  unsystematic  or  unduly  drawn  out.  And  its  genuineness
seems,  to  me  supported  by  the  fact  that  the  proof,  when  once  the  first  two
sides  about  the  common  angle  have  been  disposed  of,  follows  closely  the
order  and  method  of  vi.  18.  Moreover,  it  could  readily  be  adapted  to  the
more  general  case  of  two  polygons  having  a  common  angle  and  the  other
corresponding  sides  respectively  parallel.

The  parallelograms  in  the  proposition  are  of  course  similarly  situated  as
well  as  similar;  and  those  "about  the  diameter"  may  be  •* about"  the
diameter  produced  as  well  as  about  the  diameter  itself.

From  the  first  part  of  the  proof  it  follows  that  parallelograms  which  have
one  angle  equal  to  one  angle  and  the  sides  about  those  angles  proportional
are  similar.

Prop.  26  is  the  converse  of  Prop.  24,  and  there  seems  to  be  no  reason
why  they  should  be  separated  as  they  are  in  the  text  by  the  interposition  of
VI.  25.  Campanus  has  vi.  24  and  26  as  vi.  22  and  23  respectively,  vi.  23  as
VI.  24,  and  VI.  25  as  we  have  it.

Proposition  25.

To  construct  one  and  the  same  figure  similar  to  a  given
rectilineal  figure  and  equal  to  another  given  rectilineal  figure.

Let  ABC  be  the  given  rectilineal  figure  to  which  the
figure  to  be  constructed  must  be  similar,  and  D  that  to  which
it  must  be  equal ;

thus  it  is  required  to  construct  one  and  the  same  figure  similar
to  ABC  and  equal  to  D.


Let  there  be  applied  to  BC  the  parallelogram  BE  equal
to  the  triangle  ABC  [i.  44],  and  to  CE  the  parallelogram  CM
equal  to  D  in  the  angle  FCE  which  is  equal  to  the  angle
CBL.  [1. 45]


254  BOOK  VI  [vL  25

Therefore  BC  is  in  a  straight  line  with  CF,  and  LE  with
EM.

Now  let  GH  be  taken  a  mean  proportional  to  BC^  CF
[vi.  13J,  and  on  GHVx  KGHh^  described  similar  and  similarly
situated  to  ABC.  [vi.  18]

Then,  since,  as  BC  is  to  GHy  so  is  GH  to  CF,
and,  if  three  straight  lines  be  proportional,  as  the  first  is  to
the  third,  so  is  the  figure  on  the  first  to  the  similar  and
similarly  situated  figure  described  on  the  second,  [vi.  19,  Por.]
therefore,  as  BC  is  to  CF,  so  is  the  triangle  ABC  to  the
triangle  KGH.

But,  as  BC  is  to  CF,  so  also  is  the  parallelogram  BE  to
the  parallelogram  EF.  [vi.  i]

Therefore  also,  as  the  triangle  ABC  is  to  the  triangle
KGH,  so  is  the  parallelogram  BE  to  the  parallelogram  EF ;
therefore,  alternately,  as  the  triangle  ABC  is  to  the  parallelo-
gram BE,  so  is  the  triangle  KGH  to  the  parallelogram  EF.

[V.  16]

But  the  triangle  ABC  is  equal  to  the  parallelogram  BE ;
therefore  the  triangle  KGH  is  also  equal  to  the  parallelogram
EF.

But  the  parallelogram  EF  is  equal  to  D ;
therefore  KGH  is  also  equal  to  D,

And  KGH  is  also  similar  to  ABC

Therefore  one  and  the  same  figure  KGH  has  been  con-
structed similar  to  the  given  rectilineal  figure  ABC  and  equal
to  the  other  given  figure  D,

Q.   E.  D.

3.  to  which  the  figure  to  be  constructed  must  be  similar,  literally  "  to  which  it
is  required  to  construct  (one)  similar,"  ^  ^u  dfioiov  <ru<rTiJ<ra<r^at.

This  is  the  highly  important  problem  which  Pythagoras  is  credited  with
having  solved.  Compare  the  passage  from  Plutarch  {Symp.  viii.  2,  4)  quoted
in  the  note  on  i.  44  above,  Vol.  i.  pp.  343 — 4.

We  are  bidden  to  construct  a  rectilineal  figure  which  shall  have  the  form  of
one  and  the  size  of  another  rectilineal  figure.  The  corresponding  proposition
of  the  Data,  Prop.  55,  asserts  that,  "if  an  area  (x^ptov)  be  given  in  form
(ciSci)  and  in  magnitude,  its  sides  will  also  be  given  in  magnitude."

Simson  sees  signs  of  corruption  in  the  text  of  this  proposition  also.  In
the  first  place,  the  proof  speaks  of  the  triangle  ABC,  though,  according  to  the
enunciation,  the  figure  for  which  ABC  is  taken  may  be  any  rectilineal  figure,
€v$vypafifiov  "rectilineal  figure"  would  be  more  correct,  or  cTSo?,  "figure";  the
mistake,  however,  of  using  Tpiymvov  is  not  one  of  great  importance,  being  no


VI.  25,  26]  PROPOSITIONS   25,  26  255

doubt  due  to  the  accident  by  which  the  figure  was  drawn  as  a  triangle  in  the
diagram.

The  other  observation  is  more  important.     After  Euclid  has  proved  that

(fig.  ABC)  :  (fig.  /TGIf)  =  {BE)  :  {EF),

he  might  have  inferred  directly  from  v.  14  that,  since  ABC  is  equal  to  BE^
KG  His  equal  to  ER  For  v.  14  includes  the  proof  of  the  fact  that,  if  A  is
to  ^  as  C  is  to  2),  and  A  is  equal  to  (7,  then  B  is  equal  to  /?,  or  that  of  four
proportional  magnitudes,  if  the  first  is  equal  to  the  third,  the  second  is  equal
to  the  fourth.  Instead  of  proceeding  in  this  way,  Euclid  first  permutes  the
proportion  by  v.  16  into

(fig.  ABC)  :  (BE)  =  (fig.  KGIl)  :  (EE),

and  then  infers,  as  if  the  inference  were  easier  in  this  form,  that,  since  the
J^rst  is  equal  to  the  second^  the  third  is  equal  to  the  fourth.  Yet  there  is  no
proposition  to  this  effect  in  Euclid.  The  same  unnecessary  step  of  permutation
is  also  found  in  the  Greek  text  of  xi.  23  and  xii.  2,  5,  11,  12  and  18.  In
reproducing  the  proofs  we  may  simply  leave  out  the  steps  and  refer  to  v.  14.


Proposition  26.

If  from  a  parallelogram  there  be  taken  away  a  parallelo-
gram similar  and  similarly  situated  to  the  whole  and  having
a  common  angle  with  it,  it  is  about  the  same  diameter  with  the
whole.

For  from  the  parallelogram  ABCD  let  there  be  taken
away  the  parallelogram  AF  similar  and
similarly  situated  to  ABCD,  and  having
the  angle  DAB  common  with  it ;

I  say  that  ABCD  is  about  the  same
diameter  with  AF.

For  suppose  it  is  not,  but,  if  possible,
let  AHC  be  the  diameter  <  oiABCD  >  ,
let  GF  be  produced  and  carried  through
to  7/,  and  let  //K  be  drawn  through  //
parallel  to  either  of  the  straight  lines  AD,  BC.  [i.  31]

Since,  then,  ABCD  is  about  the  same  diameter  with  ICG,
therefore,  as  DA  is  to  AB,  so  is  GA  to  AIC.  [vi.  24]

But  also,  because  of  the  similarity  of  ABCD,  EG,

as  DA  is  to  AB,  so  is  GA  to  AE ;

therefore  also,  as  GA  is  to  AK,  so  is  GA  to  AE.  [v.  n]

Therefore  GA  has  the  same  ratio  to  each  of  the  straight
lines  AK,  AE.


2S6  BOOK  VI  [VL  26

Therefore  AE  is  equal  to  AK  [v.  9],  the  less  to  the
greater:  which  is  impossible.

Therefore  ABCD  cannot  but  be  about  the  same  diameter
with  AF\

therefore  the  parallelogram  ABCD  is  about  the  same  diameter
with  the  parallelogram  AF.

Therefore  etc.

Q.  E.  D.

"  For  suppose  it  is  not,  but,  if  possible,  let  AHC  be  the  diameter."  What
is  meant  is  "For,  if  AFC  is  not  the  diameter  of  the  parallelogram  AQ  let
AHC  be  its  diameter."  The  Greek  text  has  l<rT«  avrcSi^  Sia^ierpos  17  AOT ;
but  clearly  avrcSv  is  wrong,  as  we  cannot  assume  that  one  straight  line  is  the
diameter  of  both  parallelograms,  which  is  just  what  we  have  to  prove.  F  and
V  omit  the  avroiK,  and  Heiberg  prefers  this  correction  to  substituting  avrov
after  Pe)rrard.     I  have  inserted  "  <  of  ABCD>**  to  make  the  meaning  clear.

If  the  straight  line  ABC  does  not  pass  through  F^  it  must  meet  either
GFox  C-Fproiduced  in  some  point  B.  The  reading  in  the  text  **and  let
GF  be  produced  and  carried  through  to  H  "  (*cai  iK^kyidwa  ij  HZ  Scifx^M  ^i
TO  id)  corresponds  to  the  supposition  that  B\s  on  C/^  produced.  The  words
were  left  out  by  Theon,  evidently  because  in  the  figure  of  the  mss.  the  letters
E,  Z  and  K,  %  were  interchanged.  Heiberg  therefore,  following  August,  has
preferred  to  retain  the  words  and  to  correct  the  figure,  as  well  as  the  passage  in
the  text  where  AE^  AK  were  interchanged  to  be  in  accord  with  the  ms.  figure.

It  is  of  course  possible  to  prove  the  proposition  directly,  as  is  done  by
Dr  Lachlan.  Let  AF^  ACh^ihe  diagonals,  and  let  us  make  no  assumption
as  to  how  they  fall.

Then,  since  EF\s  parallel  to  AG  and  therefore  to  BC,

the  angles  AFF,  ABC  are  equal.

And,  since  the  parallelograms  are  similar,

AE\EF=AB'.  BC.  [vi.  Def.  i]

Hence  the  triangles  AEF^  ABC  are  similar,  [vi.  6]

and  therefore  the  angle  FAR  is  equal  to  the  angle  CAB,

Therefore  ^-F falls  on  AC.

The  proposition  is  equally  true  if  the  parallelogram  which  is  similar  and
similarly  situated  to  the  given  parallelogram  is  not  **  taken
away"  from  it,  but  is  so  placed  that  it  is  entirely  outside  the
other,  while  two  sides  form  an  angle  vertically  opposite  to
an  angle  of  the  other.  In  this  case  the  diameters  are  not
"the  same,"  in  the  words  of  the  enunciation,  but  are  in
a  straight  line  with  one  another.  This  extension  of  the
proposition  is,  as  will  be  seen,  necessary  for  obtaining,
according  to  the  method  adopted  by  Euclid  in  his  solu-
tion of  the  problem  in  vi.  28,  the  second  solution  of  that
problem.


VI.  27]  PROPOSITIONS   26,  27  257

Proposition  27.

Of  all  the  parallelograms  applied  to  the  same  straight  line
and  deficient  by  parallelogrammic  figures  similar  and  similarly
situated  to  that  described  on  the  half  of  the  straight  line,  that
parallelogram  is  greatest  which  is  applied  to  the  half  of  the
straight  line  and  is  similar  to  the  defect.

Let  AB  be  a  straight  line  and  let  it  be  bisected  at  C;
let  there  be  applied  to  the  straight
line  AB  the  parallelogram  AD
deficient  by  the  parallelogrammic
figure  DB  described  on  the  half  of
AB,  that  is,  CB\

I  say  that,  of  all  the  parallelograms
applied  to  AB  and  deficient  by
parallelogrammic  figures  similar  and
similarly  situated  to  DB,  AD  is  greatest.

For  let  there  be  applied  to  the  straight  line  AB  the
parallelogram  AF  deficient  by  the  parallelogrammic  figure
FB  similar  and  similarly  situated  to  DB\

I  say  that  AD  is  greater  than  AF.

For,  since  the  parallelogram  DB  is  similar  to  the  parallelo-
gram FB,

they  are  about  the  same  diameter.  [vi.  26]

Let  their  diameter  DB  be  drawn,  and  let  the  figure  be
described.

Then,  since  CF  is  equal  to  FE,  [i.  43]

and  FB  is  common,

therefore  the  whole  CH  is  equal  to  the  whole  KB.

But  CH  is  equal  to  CG^  since  AC  is  also  equal  to  CB.

[I.  36]
Therefore  GC  is  also  equal  to  £K.
Let  CF  be  added  to  each  ;

therefore  the  whole  AFis  equal  to  the  gnomon  LMN ;

so  that  the  parallelogram  DB,  that  is,  AD,  is  greater  than
the  parallelogram  AF.

Therefore  etc.

Q.  E.  D.
H.  E.  II.  17


258  BOOK  VI  [vi.  27

We  have  already  (note  on  i.  44)  seen  the  significance,  in  Greek  geometry,
of  the  theory  of  "  the  application  of  areas,  their  exceeding  and  their  falling-
short"  In  I.  44  it  was  a  question  of  "applying  to  a  given  straight  line
(exactly,  without  'excess'  or  *defect*)  a  parallelogram  equal  to  a  given
rectilineal  figure,  in  a  given  angle."  Here,  in  vi.  27 — 29,  it  is  a  question
of  parallelograms  applied  to  a  straight  line  but  ^'deficient  (or  exceeding)  by
parallelograms  similar  and  similarly
situated  to   a  given  parallelogram^  \^

Apart  from  size,  it  is  easy  to  construct  ^ 7

any  number  of  parallelograms  "de-  .'- yC.^^^|~. ~Jy^

ficient"  or  "exceeding"  in  the  manner  /  /    /  ^s^>^       l

described.     Given   the  straight  line         r c — ^ ^nT" — :'

AB  to  which  the  parallelogram  has  to       /' y!...!_^

be  applied,  we  describe  on  the  base      ^  ^        *^\

CB^  where  C  is  on  AB^  or  on  BA

produced  beyond  A^  any  parallelogram  "  similarly  situated  "  and  either  equal
or  similar  to  the  given  parallelogram  (Euclid  takes  the  similar  and  similarly
situated  parallelogram  on  half  the  line),  draw  the  diagonal  BD^  take  on  it
(produced  if  necessary)  any  points  as  Ey  Ky  draw  EF^  or  AZ,  parallel  to  CD
to  meet  AB  or  AB  produced  and  complete  the  parallelograms,  as  AH^  ML,

If  the  point  E  is  taken  on  BD  or  BD  produced  beyond  Dy  it  must  be  so
•  taken  that  EF  meets  AB  between  A  and  B,  Otherwise  the  parallelogram
AE  would  not  be  applied  to  AB  itself,  as  it  is  required  to  be.

The  parallelograms  BD^  BE^  being  about  the  same  diameter,  are  similar
[vi.  24],  and  BE  is  the  defect  of  the  parallelogram  AE  relatively  to  AB.
AE  is  then  a  parallelogram  applied  to  AB  but  deficient  by  a  parallelogram
similar  and  similarly  situated  to  BD,

If  K  is  on  DB  produced,  the  parallelogram  BK  is  similar  to  BD^  but  it
is  the  excess  of  the  parallelogram  AK  relatively  to  the  base  AB,  AK  is  a
parallelogram  applied  to  AB  but  exceeding  by  a  parallelogram  similar  and
similarly  situated  to  BD,

Thus  it  is  seen  that  BD  produced  both  ways  is  the  locus  of  points,  such
as  E  or  A",  which  determine,  with  the  direction  of  CD,  the  position  of  A,  and
the  direction  of  AB,  parallelograms  applied  to  AB  and  deficient  or  exceeding
by  parallelograms  similar  and  similarly  situated  to  the  given  parallelogram.

The  importance  of  vi.  27 — 29  from  a  historical  point  of  view  cannot  be
overrated.  They  give  the  geometrical  equivalent  of  the  algebraical  solution
of  the  most  general  form  of  quadratic  equation  when  that  equation  has  a  real
and  positive  root.  It  will  also  enable  us  to  find  a  real  negative  root  of  a
quadratic  equation  ;  for  such  an  equation  can,  by  altering  the  sign  of  x,  be
turned  into  another  with  a  real  positive  root,  when  the  geometrical  method
again  becomes  applicable.  It  will  also,  as  we  shall  see,  enable  us  to  represent
both  roots  when  both  are  real  and  positive,  and  therefore  to  represent  both
roots  when  both  are  real  but  either  positive  or  negative.

The  method  of  these  propositions  was  constantly  used  by  the  Greek
geometers  in  the  solution  of  problems,  and  they  constitute  the  foundation  of
Book  X.  of  the  Elements  and  ol  Apollonius'  treatment  of  the  conic  sections.
Simson's  observation  on  the  subject  is  entirely  justified.  He  says  namely  on
VI.  28,  29:  "These  two  problems,  to  the  first  of  which  the  27th  Prop,  is
necessary,  are  the  most  general  and  useful  of  all  in  the  Elements,  and  are
most  frequently  made  use  of  by  the  ancient  geometers  in  the  solution  of
other  problems;  and  therefore  are  very  ignorantly  left  out  by  Tacquet  and


v

\

C   K


■g


VI.  27]  PROPOSITION   27  259

Dechales  in  their  editions  of  the  Elements,  who  pretend  that  they  are  scarce
of  any  use."

It  is  strange  that,  with  this  observation  before  him,  even  Todhunter  should
have  written  as  follows.  "  We  have  omitted  in  the  sixth  Book  Propositions
27,  28,  29  and  the  first  solution  which  Euclid  gives  of  Proposition  30,  as  they
appear  now  to  be  never  required,  and  have  been  condemned  as  useless  by
various  modern  commentators;  see  Austin,  Walker  and  Lardner."

VI.  27  contains  the  Siopiaf/m,  the  condition  for  a  real  solution,  of  the
problem  contained  in  the  proposition  following  it.  The  maximum  of  all  the
parallelograms  having  the  given  property  which  can  be  applied  to  a  given
straight  line  is  that  which  is  described  upon  half  the  line  (to  airo  t^?  i7/xccrcia$
d.vaypa<f>6iL€vov),  This  corresponds  to  the  condition  that  an  equation  of  the
form

ax  "po^  =  A

may  have  a  real  root.     The  correctness  of  the  result  may  be  seen  by  taking
the  case  in  which  the  parallelograms  are

rectangles,  which  enables  us  to  leave  out  q  g

of  account  the  sine  of  the  angle  of  the
parallelograms  without  any  r^  loss  of
generality.  Suppose  the  sides  of  the  rect-
angle to  which  the  defect  is  to  be  similar
to  be  as  ^  to  r,  ^  corresponding  to  the
side  of  the  defect  which  lies  along  AB.
Suppose  that  AKFG  is  any  parallelogram

applied  to  AB  having  the  given  property,  that  AB^a^  and  that  FK=x.
Then

KB--X.  and  therefore  AK=a--x,
c  c

Hence  (a  —  ^  j  ^  =  5,  where  S  is  the  area  of  the  rectangle  AKFG.

Thus,  given  the  equation

ax-^-3^^S,
c

where  S  is  undetermined,  vi.  27  tells  us  that,  if  x  is  to  have  a  real  value,  S
cannot  be  greater  than  the  rectangle  CE,

Now  CB  =  - ,  and  therefore  CD  =  7 .  - :

whence  S1^-.,  - ,

which  is  just  the  same  result  as  we  obtain  by  the  algebraical  method.

In  the  particular  case  where  the  defect  of  the  parallelogram  is  to  be  a
square,  the  condition  becomes  the  statement  of  the  fact  that,  if  a  straight  line
be  divided  into  two  parts,  the  rectangle  contained  by  the  parts  cannot  exceed  the
square  on  half  the  line.

Now  suppose  that,  instead  of  taking  F  on  BD  as  in  the  figure  of  the
proposition,  we  take  F  on  BD  produced  beyond  D  but  so  that  DF  is  less
than  BD.

Complete  the  figure,  as  shown,  after  the  manner  of  the  construction  in
the  proposition.

17 — 2


26o  BOOK  VI  [vi.  27,  28

Then  the  parallelogram  FKBH  is  simDar  to  the  given  parallelogram  to
which  the  defect  is  to  be  similar.  Hence  the  parallelogram  GAKF  is  also  a
parallelogram  applied  to  AB  and  satisfying
the  given  condition.

We  can  now  prove  that  GAKF  is  less
than  CE  or  AD.

Let  ED  produced  meet  ^G^  in  O.

Now,  since  BF  is  the  diagonal  of  the
parallelogram  KH^  the  complements  KD^
DH  2iXQ  equal.

But

DH=  DO,  and  DO  is  greater  than  OF.
Therefore    KD>OF.

Add  OK  to  each ;
and  AD,  or  CE,  >  AF.

This  other  ''  case  "  of  the  proposition  is  found  in  all  the  mss.,  but  Heiberg
relegates  it  to  the  Appendix  as  being  very  obviously  interpolated.  The
reasons  for  this  course  are  that  it  is  not  in  Euclid's  manner  to  give  a  separate
demonstration  of  such  a  "  case  ";  it  is  rather  his  habit  to  give  one  case  only
and  to  leave  the  student  to  satisfy  himself  about  any  others  (cf.  i.  7).  Internal
evidence  is  also  against  the  genuineness  of  the  separate  proof.  It  is  put  after
the  conclusion  of  the  proposition  instead  of  before  it,  and,  if  Euclid  had  intended
to  discuss  two  cases,  he  would  have  distinguished  them  at  the  beginning  of
the  proposition,  as  it  was  his  invariable  practice  to  do.  Moreover  the  second
"case"  is  the  less  worth  giving  because  it  can  be  so  easily  reduced  to  the
first.  For  suppose  F'  to  be  taken  on  BD  so  that  FD  =  F'D.  Produce  BF
to  meet  AG  produced  in  F.  Complete  the  parallelogram  BAPQ,  and  draw
through  F'  straight  lines  parallel  to  and  meeting  its  opposite  sides.

Then  the  complement  F'Q  is  equal  to  the  complement  AF\

And  it  is  at  once  seen  that  AF,  F'Q  are  equal  and  similar.  Hence  the
solution  of  the  problem  represented  by  AF  or  F'Q  gives  a  parallelogram  of
the  same  size  as  AF'  arrived  at  as  in  the  first  "  case."

It  is  worth  noting  that  the  actual  difference  between  the  parallelogram
AF  and  the  maximum  area  AD  that  it  can  possibly  have  is  represented  in
the  figure.     The  difference  is  the  small  parallelogram  DF.

Proposition  28.

To  a  given  straight  line  to  apply  a  parallelogram  equal  to
a  given  rectilineal  figure  and  deficient  by  a  parallelogrammic
figure  similar  to  a  given  one :  thus  the  given  rectilineal  figure
must  not  be  greater  than  the  parallelogram  described  on  the
half  of  the  straight  line  and  similar  to  the  defect.

Let  AB  be  the  given  straight  line,  C  the  given  rectilineal
figure  to  which  the  figure  to  be  applied  to  AB  is  required  to
be  equal,  not  being  greater  than  the  parallelogram  described
on  the  half  of  AB  and  similar  to  the  defect,  and  D  the
parallelogram  to  which  the  defect  is  required  to  be  similar ;


VI.  28]  PROPOSITIONS   27,  28  261

thus  it  is  required  to  apply  to  the  given  straight  line  AB  a
parallelogram  equal  to  the  given  rectilineal  figure  C  and
deficient  by  a  parallelogram mic  figure  which  is  similar  to  D.

Let  AB  be  bisected  at  the  point  Ey  and  on  EB  let  EBFG
be  described  similar  and  similarly  situated  to  D  ;  [vi.  18]

let  the  parallelogram  AG\i^  completed.

If  then  AG  \^  equal  to  C,  that  which  was  enjoined  will
have  been  done ;

for  there  has  been  applied  to  the  given  straight  line  AB
the  parallelogram  AG  equal  to  the  given  rectilineal  figure  C
and  deficient  by  a  parallelogrammic  figure  GB  which  is  similar
to/?.


s    9


But,  if  not,  let  HE  be  greater  than  C.
Now  HE  is  equal  to  GB ;

therefore  GB  is  also  greater  than  C

Let  KLMN  be  constructed  at  once  equal  to  the  excess

by  which  GB  is  greater  than   C  and  similar  and  similarly

situated  to  D.  [vi.  25]

But  D  is  similar  to  GB  ;

therefore  KM  is  also  similar  to  GB.  [vi.  21]

Let,  then,  KL  correspond  to  GE,  and  LM  to  GF.
Now,  since  GB  is  equal  to  C,  KM,

therefore  GB  is  greater  than  KM ;

therefore  also  GE  is  greater  than  KL,  and  GF  than  LM.

Let  GO  be  made  equal  to  KL,  and  GP  equal  to  LM  \
and  let  the  parallelogram  OGPQ  be  completed ;

therefore  it  is  equal  and  similar  to  KM.

Therefore  GQ  is  also  similar  to  GB\  [vi.  21I

therefore  GQ  is  about  the  same  diameter  with  GB.        [vi.  26]


262  BOOK  VI  [vi.  28

Let  6^^^  be  their  diameter,  and  let  the  figure  be  described.

Then,  since  BG  is  equal  to  C,  KM,
and  in  them  GQ  is  equal  to  KM,

therefore  the  remainder,  the  gnomon  UWV,  is  equal  to  the
remainder  C.

And,  since  PR  is  equal  to  OS,

let  QB  be  added  to  each  ;
therefore  the  whole  PB  is  equal  to  the  whole  OB,

But  OB  is  equal  to  TE,  since  the  side  AE  is  also  equal
to  the  side  EB ;  [i.  36]

therefore  TE  is  also  equal  to  PB.

Let  OS  be  added  to  each  ;

therefore  the  whole  TS  is  equal  to  the  whole,  the  gnomon
VWU.

But  the  gnomon  VWU  was  proved  equal  to  C ;
therefore  7^5  is  also  equal  to  C.

Therefore  to  the  given  straight  line  AB  there  has  been
applied  the  parallelogram  ST  equal  to  the  given  rectilineal
figure  C  and  deficient  by  a  parallelogrammic  figure  QB  which
is  similar  to  D.

Q.  E.  F.


The  second  part  of  the  enunciation  of  this  proposition  which  states  the
Siopia-fio^  appears  to  have  been  considerably  amplified,  but  not  improved  in
the  process,  by  Theon.  His  version  would  read  as  follows.  "  But  the  given
rectilineal  figure,  that  namely  to  which  the  applied  parallelogram  must  be
equal  (y  Set  tcrov  irapaPaX^lv),  must  not  be  greater  than  that  applied  to  the  half
{•7rapaPakXofX€vov  instead  of  aiaypa^^/icVov),  the  defects  being  similar,  (namely)
that  (of  the  parallelogram  applied)  to  the  half  and  that  (of  the  required
parallelogram)  which  must  have  a  similar  defect"  (o/xoiwv  ovrtav  n^v  cAAci/i-
fiaTiDV  Tov  T€  airo  rrj^  i^fua'€Cas  Koi  <5  Sci  ofioiov  cXXcittcii^).  The  first  amplification
"that  to  which  the  applied  parallelogram  must  be  equal"  is  quite  unnecessary,
since  "the  given  rectilineal  figure"  could  mean  nothing  else.  The  above
attempt  at  a  translation  will  show  how  difficult  it  is  to  make  sense  of  the
words  at  the  end ;  they  speak  of  t7vo  defects  apparently  and,  while  one  may
well  be  the  "  defect  on  the  half,"  the  other  can  hardly  be  the  given  parallelogram
"to  which  the  defect  (of  the  required  parallelogram)  must  be  similar."  Clearly
the  reading  given  above  (from  P)  is  by  far  the  better.

In  this  proposition  and  the  next  there  occurs  the  tacit  assumption  (already
alluded  to  in  the  note  on  vi.  22)  that  if,  of  two  similar  parallelograms ,  one  is
greater  than  the  other,  either  side  of  the  greater  is  greater  than  the  corresponding
side  of  the  less.


VI.  28]


PROPOSITION   28


263


As  already  remarked,  vi.  28  is  the  geometrical  equivalent  of  the  solution
of  the  quadratic  equation

c
subject  to  the  condition  necessary  to  admit  of  a  real  solution,  namely  that


s>


The  corresponding  proposition  in  the  Data  is  (Prop.  ^S),  If  a  given  (area)
be  applied  (i.e.  in  the  form  of  a  parallelogram)  to  a  given  straight  line  and  be
deficient  by  a  figure  (i.e.  a  parallelogram)  given  in  species^  the  breadths  of  the
defect  are  given.

To  exhibit  the  exact  correspondence  between  Euclid's  geometrical  and
the  ordinary  algebraical  method  of  solving  the  equation  we  will,  as  before
(in  order  to  avoid  bringing  in  a  constant  dependent  on  the  sine  of  the  angle
of  the  parallelograms),  suppose  the  parallelograms  to  be  rectangles.  To  solve
the  equation  algebraically  we  change  the  signs  and  write  it

c

t   /I*
We  may  now  complete  the  square  by  adding  t  •  —  •


Thus


b  J.  c   a^     c   €^     ^

c  b    ^     b    ^


and,  extracting  the  square  root,  we  have

■       ^/^*-^/^;-^^^/^■f-^


and


Now  let  us  observe  Euclid's  method.


O  \

5

X


■E


8     B


He  first  describes  GEBF  on  EB  (half  of  AB)  similar  to  the  given
parallelogram  D,

He  then  places  in  one  angle  FGE  of  GEBF  a  similar  and  similarly
situated  parallelogram  GQ^  equal  to  the  difference  between  the  parallelogram
GB  and  the  area  C,

With  our  notation,
whence


GO:OQ  =  c:b,
OQ^GO.


264


BOOK  VI


[vi.  a8


Similarly


so  that


2  c


GE


Therefore  the  parallelogram  GQ  =  GO^ .  - ,


c   c^
and        the  parallelogram  GB  =  r  •  —  •

Thus,  in  taking  the  parallelogram  GQ  equal  to  {GB-S),  Euclid  really
finds  GO  from  the  equation

The  value  which  he  finds  is

and  he  finds  QS  (or  x)  by  subtracting  GO  from  GE ;  whence

It  will  be  observed  that  Euclid  only  gives  one  solution,  that  corresponding
to  the  negative  sign  before  the  radical.  But  the  reason  must  be  the  same  as  that
for  which  he  only  gives  one  "case"  in  vi.  27.  He  cannot  have  failed  to  see  how
to  add  GO  to  GE  would  give  another  solution.  As  shown  under  the  last
proposition,  the  other  solution  can  be  arrived  at
(i)  by  placing  the  parallelogram  GOQP  in
the  angle  vertically  opposite  to  FGE  so  that
GQ  lies  along  EG  produced.  The  parallelo-
gram AQ  then  gives  the  second  solution.  The
side  of  this  parallelogram  lying  along  AB  is
equal  to  SB,  The  other  side  is  what  we  have
called  Xy  and  in  this  case
x=^EG+GO


"^•2^V    n^'   4"    V'


S    B


(2)  A  parallelogram  similar  and  equal  to  AQ'  cdn  also  be  obtained  by
producing  BG  till  it  meets  ^/'produced  and  completing  the  parallelogram
BABA\  whence  it  is  seen  that  the  complement  QA'  is  equal  to  the  comple-
ment AQ,  besides  being  equal  and  similar  and  similarly  situated  to  AQ.

A  particular  case  of  this  proposition,  indicated  in  Prop.  85  of  the  Data,  is
that  in  which  the  sides  of  the  defect  are  equal,  so  that  the  defect  is  a  rhombus
with  a  given  angle.  Prop.  85  proves  that,  If  two  straight  lines  contain  a
given  area  in  a  given  angle,  and  the  sum

of  the  straight  lines  be  given,  each  of  them  E A

will  be  given  also.      AB,   BC  being   the  I  7

given    straight    lines   "containing    a    given  /  /

area    AC  in   a,   given    angle    ABC,''   one        /  /

side    CB  is   produced  to  D  so   that   B£>      ^ ^

is  equal  to  AB,  and  the  parallelograms  are

completed.    Then,  by  hypothesis,  CD  is  of  given  length,  and  -^C  is  a  parallelo-


VI.  28,  29]  PROPOSITIONS   28,  29  265

gram  applied  to  CD  falling  short  by  a  rhombus  {AD)  with  a  given  angle
EDB,  The  case  is  thus  a  particular  case  of  Prop.  58  of  the  Data  quoted
above  (p.  263)  as  corresponding  to  vi.  28.

A  particular  case  of  the  last,  that  namely  in  which  the  defect  is  a  square^
corresponding  to  the  equation

is  important.  This  is  the  problem  of  applying  to  a  given  straight  line  a
rectangle  equal  to  a  given  area  and  falling  short  by  a  square ;  and  it  can  be
solved,  without  the  aid  of  Book  vi.,  as  shown  above  under  11.  5  (Vol.  i.
pp.  383—4).


Proposition  29.

To  a  given  straight  line  to  apply  a  parallelogram  equal  to
a  given  rectilineal  figure  and  exceeding  by  a  parallelogrammic
figure  similar  to  a  given  one.

Let  AB  be  the  given  straight  line,  C  the  given  rectilineal
figure  to  which  the  figure  to  be  applied  to  AB  is  required  to
be  equal,  and  D  that  to  which  the  excess  is  required  to  be
similar ;

thus  it  is  required  to  apply  to  the  straight  line  AB  a  parallelo-
gram equal  to  the  rectilineal  figure  C  and  exceeding  by  a
parallelogrammic  figure  similar  to  D.


F  L     M


"N  QO

Let  AB  be  bisected  at  £ ;

let  there  be  described  on  BB  the  parallelogram  BF  similar
and  similarly  situated  to  D  ;

and  let  G//  be  constructed  at  once  equal  to  the  sum  of  BF,
C  and  similar  and  similarly  situated  to  Z?.  [vi.  25]

Let  A'//  correspond  to  FL  and  KG  to  FB.
Now,  since  G//  is  greater  than  FB,

therefore  IC//  is  also  greater  than  FL,  and  KG  than  F£.


266  BOOK   VI  [vi.  29

Let  FL,  FE  be  produced,
let  FLM  be  equal  to  KH,  and  FEN  to  KG,
and  let  MN  be  completed  ;

therefore  MN  is  both  equal  and  similar  to  GH.
But  GH  is  similar  to  EL  ;
therefore  MN  is  also  similar  to  EL  ;  [vi.  21]

therefore  EL  is  about  the  same  diameter  with  MN.      [vi.  26]
Let  their  diameter  FO  be  drawn,  and  let  the  figure  be
described.

Since  GH  is  equal  to  EL,  C,
while  GH  is  equal  to  MN,
therefore  MN  is  also  equal  to  EL,  C.
Let  EL  be  subtracted  from  each  ;
therefore  the  remainder,  the  gnomon  XWV,  is  equal  to  C
Now,  since  AE  is  equal  to  EB,
AN  is  also  equal  to  NB  [i.  36],  that  is,  to  LP  [i.  43].
Let  EO  be  added  to  each  ;

therefore  the  whole  AO  is  equal  to  the  gnomon  VJVX,
But  the  gnomon  VWX  is  equal  to  C  \

therefore  AO  is  also  equal  to  C
Therefore  to  the  given  straight  line  AB  there  has  been
applied  the  parallelogram  AO  equal  to  the  given  rectilineal
figure   C  and   exceeding  by  a  parallelogrammic   figure  QP
which  is  similar  to  D,  since  PQ  is  also  similar  to  EL  [vi.  24].

Q.  E.  F.

The  corresponding  proposition  in  the  Da/a  is  (Prop.  59),  ^  «  ^'ven  (area)
be  applied  (i.e.  in  the  form  of  a  parallelogram)  to  a  given  straight  line  exceeding
by  a  figure  given  in  species,  the  breadths  of  the  excess  are  given.

The  problem  of  vi.  29  corresponds  of  course  to  the  solution  of  the
quadratic  equation

ax  ■>(■  -  x^  =  S.
c

The  algebraical  solution  of  this  equation  gives


--ij*v/ia-i*^)'


The  exact  correspondence  of  Euclid's  method  to  the  algebraical  solution
may  be  seen,  as  in  the  case  of  vi.  28,  by  supposing  the  parallelograms  to  be
rectangles.  In  this  case  Euclid's  construction  on  EB  of  the  parallelogram
EL  similar  to  D  is  equivalent  to  finding  that

FE  =  T  .  - ,  and  EL  =  -7 .  — .
b    2^  b    ^


VI.  29, 3o]  PROPOSITIONS   29,  30  267

His  determination  of  the  similar  parallelogram  MN  equal  to  the  sum  of  EL
and  S  corresponds  to  proving  that

C       b     ^


or

whence  x  is  found  as


c   a
y~2'


Euclid  takes,  in  this  case,  the  solution  corresponding  to  the  positive  sign
before  the  radical  because,  from  his  point  of  view,  that  would  be  the  only
solution.

No  SiopiafjLoq  is  necessary  because  a  real  geometrical  solution  is  always
possible  whatever  be  the  size  of  ^.

Again  the  £>afa  has  a  proposition  indicating  the  particular  case  in  which
the  fxcfss  is  a  rhombus  with  a  given  angle.  Prop.  84  proves  that.  If  hvo
straight  lines  contain  a  given  area  in  a  given  angk^  and  one  of  the  straight  lines
is  greater  than  the  other  by  a  given  straight  line^  each  of  the  two  straight  lines  is
given  also.  The  proof  reduces  the  proposition  to  a  particular  case  of  Data,
Prop.  59,  quoted  above  as  corresponding  to  vi.  29.

Again  there  is  an  important  [)aiticular  case  which  can  be  solved  by  means
of  Book  II.  only,  as  shown  under  11.  6  above  (Vol.  i.  pp.  386--8),  the  case  namely
in  which  the  excess  is  a  square,  corresponding  to  the  solution  of  the  equation

ax-\-x^  =  l^.
This  is  the  problem  of  applying  to  a  given  straight  line  a  rectangle  equal  to  a
given  area  and  exceeding  by  a  square.


Proposition  30.

To  cut  a  given  finite  straight  line  in  extreme  and  mean
ratio.

Let  AB  be  the  given  finite  straight  line  ;

thus  it  is  required  to  cut  AB  in  extreme  and  mean  ratio.

On  AB  let  the  square  BC  be  described  ;
and  let  there  be  applied  to  -^C  the  parallelo-
gram  CD  equal  to  BC  and  exceeding   by
the  figure  AD  similar  to  BC  [vi.  29]

Now  BC  is  a  square  ;

therefore  AD  is  also  a  square.

And,  since  BC  is  equal  to  CD,
let  CE  be  subtracted  from  each  ;

therefore  the  remainder  BF  is  equal  to
the  remainder  AD.


re


268  BOOK  VI  [vi.  30,  31

But  It  is  also  equiangular  with  it ;
therefore  in  BF,  AD  the  sides  about  the  equal  angles  are
reciprocally  proportional ;  [vi.  u]

therefore,  as  FE  is  to  EDy  so  is  AE  to  EB.

But  FE  is  equal  to  AB,  and  ED  to  AE.
Therefore,  as  BA  is  to  AE,  so  is  AE  to  EB,
And  AB  is  greater  than  AE ;

therefore  AE  is  also  greater  than  EB.

Therefore  the  straight  line  AB  has  been  cut  in  extreme
and  mean  ratio  at  E,  and  the  greater  segment  of  it  is  AE.

Q,  E.  F.

It  will  be  observed  that  the  construction  in  the  text  is  a  direct  application
of  the  preceding  Prop.  29  in  the  particular  case  where  the  excess  of  the
parallelogram  which  is  applied  is  a  square.  This  fact  coupled  with  the
position  of  vi.  30  is  a  sufficient  indication  that  the  construction  is  Euclid's.

In  one  place  Theon  appears  to  have  amplified  the  argument.  The  text
above  says  "  But  FE  is  equal  to  AB^'  while  the  mss.  B,  F,  V  and  p  have
"  But  FE  is  equal  to  AC,  that  is,  to  AB:'

The  MSS.  give  after  oircp  ISct  iroi7<rai  an  alternative  construction  which
Heiberg  relegates  to  the  Appendix.  The  text-books  give  this  construction
alone  and  leave  out  the  other.  It  will  be  remembered  that  the  alternative
proof  does  no  more  than  refer  to  the  equivalent  construction  in  11.   11.

"Let  AB  be  cut  at  C  so  that  the  rectangle  AB,  BC  is  equal  to  the
square  on  CA,  [11.  11]

Since  then  the  rectangle  AB,  BC  is  equal  to  the  square  on  CA,
therefore,  as  BA  is  to  AC,  so  '\^  AC  X.o  CB,  [vi.  17]

Therefore  AB  has  been  cut  in  extreme  and  mean  ratio  at  C"

It  is  intrinsically  improbable  that  this  alternative  construction  was  added
to  the  other  by  Euclid  himself.  It  is  however  just  the  kind  of  interpolation
that  might  be  expected  from  an  editor.  If  Euclid  had  preferred  the  alternative
construction,  he  would  have  been  more  likely  to  give  it  alone.


Proposition  31.

In  right-angled  triangles  the  figure  on  the  side  subtending
the  right  angle  is  equal  to  the  similar  and  similarly  described
figures  on  the  sides  containing  the  right  angle.

Let  ABC  be  a  right-angled  triangle  having  the  angle  BAC
right ;

I   say   that   the  figure  on  BC  is  equal   to  the   similar   and
similarly  described  figures  on  BA,  AC.

Let  AD  be  drawn  perpendicular.

Then  since,  in  the  right-angled  triangle  ABC,  AD  has


VI.  3i]


PROPOSITIONS   30,  31


269


been  drawn  from  the  right  angle  at  A  perpendicular  to  the
base  BC,

the  triangles  ABD,  ADC  adjoin-
ing the  perpendicular  are  similar
both  to  the  whole  ABC  and  to
one  another.  [vi.  8]

And,  since  ABC  is  similar  to
ABD,

therefore,  as  CB  is  to  BA^  so  is
AB  to  BD,  [vi.  Def.  i]

And,  since  three  straight  lines
are  proportional,

as  the  first  is  to  the  third,  so  is  the  figure  on  the  first  to  the
similar  and  similarly  described  figure  on  the  second,  [vi.  19,  Por.]

Therefore,  as  CB  is  to  BD,  so  is  the  figure  on  CB  to  the
similar  and  similarly  described  figure  on  BA.
For  the  same  reason  also,

as  BC  is  to  CD,  so  is  the  figure  on  BC  to^that  on  CA  ;
so  that,  in  addition,

as  BC  is  to  BD,  DC,  so  is  the  figure  on  BC  to  the  similar
and  similarly  described  figures  on  BA,  AC

But  BC  is  equal  to  BD,  DC ;

therefore  the  figure  on  BC  is  also  equal  to  the  similar  and
similarly  described  figures  on  BA,  AC.

Therefore  etc.

Q.  E.  D.

As  we  have  seen  (note  on  i.  47),  this  extension  of  i.  47  is  credited  by
Proclus  to  Euclid  personally.

There  is  one  inference  in  the  proof  which  requires  examination.     Euclid
proves  that

CB  :  ^Z>  =  (figure  on  CB)  :  (figure  on  BA),

and  that  BC  :  CZ>  =  (figure  on  BC)  :  (figure  on  CA\

and  then  infers  directly  that

BC  :  {B£>  +  CD)  =  (fig.  on  BC)  :  (surti  of  figs,  on  BA  and  AC).

Apparently  v.  24  must  be  relied  on  as  justifying  this  inference.     But  it  is  not
directly  applicable  ;  for  what  it  proves  is  that,  if

a  :  d  =  c  :  d,
and  e  :  d  =/ :  d,

then  (a  +  <?)  :  b  =  (c-\-/)  :  d.

Thus  we  should  invert  the  first  two  proportions  given  above  (by  Simson's


270  BOOK  VI  [vi.  31,  32

Prop.  B  which,  as  we  have  seen,  is  a  direct  consequence  of  the  definition  of
proportion),  and  thence  infer  by  v.  24  that

(BD  +  CD) :  BC=  (sum  of  figs,  on  £A,  AC)  :  (fig.  on  BC).
But  BD  +  CD  is  equal  to  BC;

therefore  (by  Simson's  Prop.  A,  which  again  is  an  immediate  consequence  of
the  definition  of  proportion)  the  sum  of  the  figures  on  BA,  AC'is  equal  to
the  figure  on  BC

The  Mss.  again  give  an  alternative  proof  which  Heiberg  places  in  the
Appendix.  It  first  shows  that  the  similar  figures  on  the  three  sides  have  the
same  ratios  to  one  another  as  the  squares  on  the  sides  respectively.  Whence,
by  using  i.  47  and  the  same  argument  based  on  v.  24  as  that  explained  above,
the  result  is  obtained.

If  it  is  considered  essential  to  have  a  proof  which  does  not  use  Simson's
Props.  B  and  A  or  any  proposition  but  those  actually  given  by  Euclid,  no
method  occurs  to  me  except  the  following.

Eucl.  V.  22  proves  that,  if  a,  ^,  c  are  three  magnitudes,  and  //,  e^  f  three
others,  such  that

a\b  =  d  \e^
b'.c^exf,
then,  ex  aequa/t)  a  :  e  =  d :/.

If  now  in  addition  a  i  b  =  b  ic^

so  that,  also,  d\e-e\f^

the  ratio  a\c  \&  duplicate  of  the  ratio  a  :  ^,  and  the  ratio  d  \f  duplicate  of
the  ratio  d  :  ^,  whence  the  ratios  which  are  duplicate  of  equal  ratios  are  equaL
Now  (fig.  on  AC) :  (fig.  on  AB)  =  the  ratio  duplicate  o(  AC  :  AB

=  the  ratio  duplicate  of  CD  :  DA
=  CD  :  BD.
Hence  (sum  of  figs,  on  AC,  AB)  :  (fig.  on  AB)  =  BC  :  BD,  [v.  18]

But  (fig.  on  BC)  :  (fig.  on  AB)  =  BC  :  BD

(as  in  Euclid's  proof).
Therefore  the  sum  of  the  figures  on  A  C,  AB  has  to  the  figure  on  AB  the
same  ratio  as  the  figure  on  BC  has  to  the  figure  on  AB,  whence

the  figures  on  AC,  AB  are  together  equal  to  the  figure  on  BC    [v.  9]


Proposition  32.

//  two  triangles  having  two  sides  proportional  to  two  sides
be  placed  together  at  one  angle  so  that  their  corresponding  sides
are  also  parallel,  the  remaining  sides  of  the  triangles  will  be
in  a  straight  line.

Let  ABC,  DCE  be  two  triangles  having  the  two  sides
BA,  AC  proportional  to  the  two  sides  DC,  DE,  so  that,  as
AB  is  to  AC,  so  is  DC  to  DE,  and  AB  parallel  to  DC,  and
ACX.O  DE\
I  say  that  BC  is  in  a  straight  line  with  CE.


VI.  3i]  PROPOSITIONS   31,  32  271

For,  since  AB  is  parallel  to  DC,

and  the  straight  line  AC  has  fallen  upon  them,

the  alternate  angles  BAC,  ACD
are  equal  to  one  another,     [i.  29]

For  the  same  reason

the    angle    CDE   is   also
equal  to  the  angle  ACD  \
so  that  the  angle  BAC  is  equal
to  the  angle  CDE.

And,  since  ABC,  DCE  are
two  triangles  having  one  angle,  the  angle  at  A,  equal  to  one
angle,  the  angle  at  Z>,

and  the  sides  about  the  equal  angles  proportional,

so  that,  as  BA  is  to  AC,  so  is  CD  to  DE,

therefore  the  triangle  ABC  is  equiangular  with  the
triangle  DCE  ;  [vi.  6]

therefore  the  angle  ABC  is  equal  to  the  angle  DCE.

But  the  angle  ACD  was  also  proved  equal  to  the  angle
BAC\

therefore  the  whole  angle  ACE  is  equal  to  the  two  angles
ABC,  BAC

Let  the  angle  ACB  be  added  to  each  ;

therefore  the  angles  ACE,  ACB  are  equal  to  the  angles  BAC^
ACB,  CBA.

But  the  angles  BAC,  ABC,  ACB  are  equal  to  two  right
angles ;  [i.  32]

therefore  the  angles  ACE,  ACB  are  also  equal  to  two
right  angles.

Therefore  with  a  straight  line  AC,  and  at  the  point  C  on
it,  the  two  straight  lines  BC,  CE  not  lying  on  the  same  side
make  the  adjacent  angles  ACE,  ACB  equal  to  two  right
angles ;

therefore  BC  is  in  a  straight  line  with  CE.  [i.  14]

Therefore  etc.

Q.  E.  D.

It  has  often  been  pointed  out  (e.g.  by  Clavius,  Lardner  and  Todhunter)
that  the  enunciation  of  this  proposition  is  not  precise  enough.     Suppose  that


272  BOOK  VI  [vi.  32

ABC  is  a  triangle.     From  C  draw  CD  parallel  to  BA  and  of  any  length.
From  D  draw  DE  parallel  to  CA  and  of  such  length  that

CD.DE^BA'.AC
Then  the  triangles  ABC^  ECDy  which  have  the  angular  point  C  common
literally  satisfy  Euclid's  enunciation ;  but  by  no  possi-
bility can  CE  be  in  a  straight  line  with  CB  if,  as
in  the  case  supposed,  the  angles  included  by  the
corresponding  sides  are  supplementary  (unless  both  are
right  angles).  Hence  the  included  angles  must  be
equals  so  that  the  triangles  must  be  similar.  That
being  so,  if  they  are  to  have  nothing  more  than  one
angular  point  common,  and  two  pairs  of  corresponding
sides  are  to  htparaUdzs  distinguished  from  one  or  both  being  in  the  same
straight  line^  the  triangles  can  only  be  placed  so  that  the  corresponding  sides
in  both  are  on  the  same  side  of  the  third  side  of  either,  and  the  sides  (other
than  the  third  sides)  which  meet  at  the  common  angular  point  are  not  corre-
sponding sides.

Todhunter  remarks  that  the  proposition  seems  of  no  use.  Presumably  he
did  not  know  that  it  is  used  by  Euclid  himself  in  xiii.  17.  This  is  so
however,  and  therefore  it  was  not  necessary,  as  several  writers  have  thought,  to
do  away  with  the  proposition  and  find  a  substitute  which  should  be  more  useful.

1.  De  Morgan  proposes  this  theorem :  "  If  two  similar  triangles  be  placed
with  their  bases  parallel,  and  the  equal  angles  at  the  bases  towards  the  same
parts,  the  other  sides  are  parallel,  each  to  each ;  or  one  pair  of  sides  are  in
the  same  straight  line  and  the  other  pair  are  parallel"

2.  Dr  Lachlan  substitutes  the  somewhat  similar  theorem,  "  If  two  similar
triangles  be  placed  so  that  two  sides  of

the  one  are  parallel  to  the  corresponding  q

sides  of  the  other,  the  third  sides  are  A  /\

parallel."  /\  /   \

But  it  is  to  be  observed  that  these  Q/- — .\-. — Z^ \

propositions    can    be    proved   without  /  \  ^  ^

using   Book   vi.   at  all;    they  can   be       / \

proved  from  Book  i.,  and  the  triangles      B  o

may  as  well  be  called  "equiangular"

simply.     It  is  true  that  Book  vi.  is  no  more  than  formally  necessary  to

Euclid's  proposition.     He  merely  uses  vi.  6  because  his  enunciation  does  not

say  that  the  triangles  are  similar ;  and  he  only  proves  them  to  be  similar  in

order  to  conclude  that   they  are   equiangular.     From   this  point  of  view

Mr  Taylor's  substitute  seems  the  best,  viz.

3.  "  If  two  triangles  have  sides  parallel  in  pairs,  the  straight  lines  joining
the  corresponding  vertices  meet  in  a  point,

or  are  parallel."

Simson  has  a  theory  (unnecessary  in
the  circumstances)  as  to  the  possible
object  of  VI.  32  as  it  stands.  He  points
out  that  the  enunciation  of  vi.  26  might
be  more  general  so  as  to  cover  the  case
of  similar  and  similarly  situated  parallelo-
grams with  equal  angles  not  coincident
but  vertically  opposite.     It  can  then  be  proved  that  the  diagonals  drawn


VI.  32»  33]


PROPOSITIONS  32,  33


273


through  the  common  angular  point  are  in  one  straight  line.  If  ABCF^  CD  EG
be  similar  and  similarly  situated  parallelograms,
so  that  BCG,  DCF  are  straight  lines,  and  if
the  diagonals  AC^  CE  be  drawn,  the  triangles
ABC^  CDE  are  similar  and  are  placed  exactly
as  described  in  vi.  32,  so  that  AC^  CE  are  in  a
straight  line.  Hence  Simson  suggests  that
there  may  have  been,  in  addition  to  the  in-
direct demonstration  in  vi.  26,  a  direct  proof
covering  the  case  just  given  which  may  have
used  the  result  of  vi.  32.  I  think  however
that  the  place  given  to  the  latter  proposition  in  Book  vi.  is  against  this  view.


Proposition  33.

In  equal  circles  angles  have  the  same  ratio  as  the  circum-
ferences on  which  they  stand,  whether  they  stand  at  the  centres
or  at  the  circumferences.

Let  ABC,  DEF  be  equal  circles,  and  let  the  angles  BGC,
EHFh^  angles  at  their  centres  G,  //,  and  the  angles  BAG,
EDF  angles  at  the  circumferences  ;

I  say  that,  as  the  circumference  BC  is  to  the  circumference
EF,  so  is  the  angle  BGC  to  the  angle  EHF,  and  the  angle
BAG  to  the  angle  EDF.


For  let  any  number  of  consecutive  circumferences  GK,
KL  be  made  equal  to  the  circumference  BG,

and  any  number  of  consecutive  circumferences  FM,  MN  equal
to  the  circumference  EF\

and  let  GK,  GLy  HM,  HN  be  joined.

Then,  since  the  circumferences  BG,  GK,  KL  are  equal
to  one  another,

the  angles  BGG,  GGK,  KGL  are  also  equal  to  one  another ;

[hi.  27]

H.  E.  II.  18


274  BOOK  VI  [vi.  33

therefore,  whatever  multiple  the  circumference  BL  is  of  BCy
that  multiple  also  is  the  angle  BGL  of  the  angle  BGC.

For  the  same  reason  also,
whatever   multiple   the   circumference   NE   is  of  EF,  that
multiple  also  is  the  angle  NHE  of  the  angle  EHF.

If  then  the  circumference  BL  is  equal  to  the  circumference
EN,  the  angle  BGL  is  also  equal  to  the  angle  EHN ;     [m.  27]
if  the  circumference  BL  is  greater  than  the  circumference
EN,  the  angle  BGL  is  also  greater  than  the  angle  EHN ;
and,  if  less,  less.

There  being  then  four  magnitudes,  two  circumferences
BCy  EFy  and  two  angles  BGC,  EHF,

there  have  been  taken,  of  the  circumference  BC  and  the  angle
BGC  equimultiples,  namely  the  circumference  BL  and  the
angle  BGL,

and  of  the  circumference  EF  and  the  angle  EHF  equi-
multiples, namely  the  circumference  EN  and  the  angle  EHN.

And  it  has  been  proved  that,
if  the  circumference  BL  is  in  excess  of  the  circumference  EN,
the  angle  BGL  is  also  in  excess  of  the  angle  EHN ;
if  equal,  equal ;
and  if  less,  less.

Therefore,  as  the  circumference  BC  is  to  EF,  so  is  the
angle  BGC  to  the  angle  EHF,  [v.  Def.  5]

But,  as  the  angle  BGC  is  to  the  angle  EHF,  so  is  the
angle  BAC  to  the  angle  EDF\  for  they  are  doubles  respec-
tively.

Therefore  also,  as  the  circumference  BC  is  to  the  circum-
ference EF,  so  is  the  angle  BGC  to  the  angle  EHF,  and
the  angle  BAC  to  the  angle  EDF.

Therefore  etc.

Q.  E.   D.

This  proposition  as  generally  given  includes  a  second  part  relating  to  sectors
of  circles,  corresponding  to  the  following  words  added  to  the  enunciation :
"and  further  the  sectors,  as  constructed  at  the  centres"  (eri  8c  kqX  o\ to/xci? ort
[or  otTc]  Trpos  Tots  K€KTpoi9  (Tvi'torTa/xci'oi).  Thcrc  is  of  coursc  a  corresponding
addition  to  the  "definition"  or  "particular  statement,"  "and  further  the  sector
GBOC  to  the  sector  HEQF''  These  additions  are  clearly  due  to  Theon,  as
may  be  gathered  from  his  own  statement  in  his  commentary  on  the  fiaSrjfiaTiKrj
<rvvTa$i^  of  Ptolemy,  "  But  that  sectors  in  equal  circles  are  to  one  another  as
the  angles  on  which  they  stand,  has  been  proved  by  me  in  my  edition  of  the


VI.  33]  PROPOSITION   33  275

Elements  at  the  end  of  the  sixth  book."  Campanus  omits  them,  and  P  has  them
only  in  a  later  hand  in  the  margin  or  between  the  lines.  Theon's  proof  scarcely
needs  to  be  given  here  in  full,  as  it  can  easily  be  supplied.  From  the  equality
of  the  arcs  BQ  CK  he  infers  [iii.  29]  the  equality  of  the  chords  BC^  CK,
Hence,  the  radii  being  equal,  the  triangles  GBC^  GCK  are  equal  in  all
respects  [i.  8,  4].  Next,  since  the  arcs  BC^  CK  are  equal,  so  are  the  arcs
BAC^  CAK,  Therefore  the  angles  at  the  circumference  subtended  by  the
latter,  i.e.  the  angles  in  the  segments  BOC^  CPK^  are  equal  [iii.  27],  and  the
segments  are  therefore  similar  [in.  Def.  \i\  and  equal  [in.  24].

Adding  to  the  equal  segments  the  equal  tnangles  GBC^  6^  CA!' respectively,
we  see  that

the  sectors  GBC^  GCK  ^xe  equal

Thus,  in  equal  circles,  sectors  standing  on  equal  arcs  are  equal ;  and  the  rest
of  the  proof  proceeds  as  in  Euclid's  proposition.

As  regards  Euclid's  proposition  itself,  it  will  be  noted  that  (i),  besides
quoting  the  theorem  in  in.  27  that  in  equal  circles  angles  which  stand  on
equal  arcs  are  equal,  the  proof  assumes  that  the  angle  standing  on  a  greater
arc  is  greater  and  that  standing  on  a  less  arc  is  less.  This  is  indeed  a  suffi-
ciently obvious  deduction  from  in.  27.

(2)  Any  equimultiples  whatever  are  taken  of  the  angle  BGC  and  the  arc
BC,  and  any  equimultiples  whatever  of  the  angle  EHF  and  the  arc  EF,
(Accordingly  the  words  ^^any  equimultiples  whatever*^  should  have  been  used  in
the  step  immediately  preceding  the  inference  that  the  angles  are  proportional
to  the  arcs,  where  the  text  merely  states  that  there  have  been  taken  of  the
circumference  BC  and  the  angle  BGC  equimultiples  BL  and  BGL,)  But,  if
any  multiple  of  an  angle  is  regarded  as  being  itself  an  angle,  it  follows  that  the
restriction  in  i.  Deff.  8,  10,  11,  12  of  the  term  angle  to  an  angle  less  than  two
right  angles  is  implicitly  given  up ;  as  De  Morgan  says,  **  the  angle  breaks
prison."  Mr  Dodgson  {Euclid  and  his  Modem  Rivals^  p.  193)  argues  that
Euclid  conceived  of  the  multiple  of  an  angle  as  so  many  separate  angles  not
added  together  into  one,  and  that,  when  it  is  inferred  that,  where  two  such
multiples  of  an  angle  are  equal,  the  arcs  subtended  are  also  equal,  the  argu-
ment is  that  the  sum  total  of  the  first  set  of  angles  is  equal  to  the  sum  total
of  the  second  set,  and  hence  the  second  set  can  be  broken  up  and  put
together  again  in  such  amounts  a3  to  make  a  set  equal,  each  to  each,  to  the
first  set,  and  then  the  sum  total  of  the  arcs  will  evidently  be  equal  also.  If
on  the  other  hand  the  multiples  of  the  angles  are  regarded  as  single  angular
magnitudes,  the  equality  of  the  subtending  arcs  is  not  inferrible  directly  from
Euclid,  because  his  proof  of  in.  26  only  applies  to  cases  where  the  angle  is
less  than  the  sum  of  two  right  angles.  (As  a  matter  of  fact,  it  is  a  question  of
inferring  equality  of  angles  or  multiples  of  angles  from  equality  of  arcs,  and
not  the  converse,  so  that  the  reference  should  have  been  to  in.  27,  but  this
does  not  affect  the  question  at  issue.)  Of  course  it  is  against  this  view  of
Mr  Dodgson  that  Euclid  speaks  throughout  of  "/^  angle  BGL"  and  "M^
angle  EHN  "  (17  vtto  BHA  ytavia,  rj  vVo  E0N  ywvia).  I  think  the  probable
explanation  is  that  here,  as  in  in.  20,  21,  26  and  27,  Euclid  deliberately  took
no  cognisance  of  the  case  in  which  the  multiples  of  the  angles  in  question
would  be  greater  than  two  right  angles.  If  his  attention  had  been  called  to
the  fact  that  in.  20  takes  no  account  of  the  case  where  the  segment  is  less
than  a  semicircle,  so  that  the  angle  in  the  segment  is  obtuse,  and  therefore  the
"  angle  at  the  centre  "  in  that  case  (if  the  term  were  still  applicable)  would  be


276  BOOK  VI  [vi.  33

greater  than  two  right  angles,  Euclid  would  no  doubt  have  refused  to  regard
tibe  latter  as  an  angle,  and  would  have  represented  it  otherwise,  e.g.  as  the
sum  of  two  angles  or  as  what  is  left  when  an  angie  in  the  true  sense  is  sub-
tracted from  four  right  angles.  Here  then,  if  Euclid  had  been  asked  what
course  he  would  take  if  the  multiples  of  the  angles  in  question  should  be
greater  than  two  right  angles,  he  would  probably  have  represented  them,  I
think,  as  being  equal  to  so  many  right  angles  plus  an  angle  less  than  a  right
angle,  or  so  mcuty  times  two  right  angles  plus  an  angle,  acute  or  obtuse*  Then
the  equality  of  the  arcs  would  be  the  equality  of  the  sums  of  so  many  circum-
ferences, semi-drcumferences  or  quadrants  plus  arcs  less  than  a  semicircle  or
a  quadrant  Hence  I  a^ee  with  Mr  Dodgson  that  vi.  33  affords  no  evidence
of  a  recognition  by  Euchd  of  "  angles ''  greater  than  two  right  angles.

Theon  adds  to  his  theorem  about  sectors  the  Porism  that.  As  the  sector  is
to  the  sector,  so  also  is  the  angle  to  the  angle.  This  corollary  was  used  by
Zenodorus  in  his  tract  v€p\  IcrofierfHav  cr^i^fuirctfv  preserved  by  Theon  in  his
commentary  on  Ptolemy's  crui^af  19,  unless  indeed  Theon  himself  interpolated
the  words  (w9  ?  6  ro/xcvv  wpos  rov  ro/xca,  r}  vwo  E0A  ytavia  vpo^  nyv  wro  M0A).


BOOK  VII.


DEFINITIONS,

1.  An  unit  is  that  by  virtue  of  which  each  of  the  things
that  exist  is  called  one.

2.  A  number  is  a  multitude  composed  of  units.

3.  A  number  is  a  part  of  a  number,  the  less  of  the
greater,  when  it  measures  the  greater ;

4.  but  parts  when  it  does  not  measure  it.

5.  The  greater  number  is  a  multiple  of  the  less  when
it  is  measured  by  the  less.

6.  An  even  number  is  that  which  is  divisible  into  two
equal  parts.

7.  An  odd  number  is  that  which  is  not  divisible  into
two  equal  parts,  or  that  which  differs  by  an  unit  from  an
even  number.

8.  An  even-times  even  number  is  that  which  is
measured  by  an  even  number  according  to  an  even  number.

9.  An  even-times  odd  number  is  that  which  is
measured  by  an  even  number  according  to  an  odd  number.

10.  An  odd-times  odd  number  is  that  which  is
measured  by  an  odd  number  according  to  an  odd  number.


278  BOOK    VII  [Vll.  DEFF.   II— 2  2

11.  A  prime  number  is  that  which  is  measured  by  an
unit  alone.

12.  Numbers  prime  to  one  another  are  those  which
are  measured  by  an  unit  alone  as  a  common  measure.

13.  A  composite  number  is  that  which  is  measured
by  some  number.

14.  Numbers  composite  to  one  another  are  those
which  are  measured  by  some  number  as  a  common  measure.

1 5.  A  number  is  said  to  multiply  a  number  when  that
which  is  multiplied  is  added  to  itself  as  many  times  as  there
are  units  in  the  other,  and  thus  some  number  is  produced.

16.  And,  when  two  numbers  having  multiplied  one
another  make  some  number,  the  number  so  produced  is
called  plane,  and  its  sides  are  the  numbers  which  have
multiplied  one  another.

17.  And,  when  three  numbers  having  multiplied  one
another  make  some  number,  the  number  so  produced  is
solid,  and  its  sides  are  the  numbers  which  have  multiplied
one  another.

18.  A  square  number  is  equal  multiplied  by  equal,  or
a  number  which  is  contained  by  two  equal  numbers.

19.  And  a  cube  is  equal  multiplied  by  equal  and  again
by  equal,  or  a  number  which  is  contained  by  three  equal
numbers.

20.  Numbers  are  proportional  when  the  first  is  the
same  multiple,  or  the  same  part,  or  the  same  parts,  of  the
second  that  the  third  is  of  the  fourth.

21.  Similar  plane  and  solid  numbers  are  those  which
have  their  sides  proportional.

22.  A  perfect  number  is  that  which  is  equal  to  its  own
parts.


VII.  DEF.  i]  DEFINITIONS  279


Definition  i.

Movas  €<TTiv,  KaB*  yjv  iKaarov  t<3v  Svtwv  tv  Xeyerai.

lamblichus  (fl.  circa  300  a.d.)  tells  us  (Comm,  on  Nicomachus^  ed.  Pistelli,
p.  II,  5)  that  the  Euclidean  definition  of  an  unit  or  a  monad  was  the  definition
given  by  "more  recent"  writers  (01  vcctfrcpoc),  and  that  it  lacked  the  words
"even  though  it  be  collective"  (ic^v  (TvomffmTucov  J).     He  also  gives  {idid.
p.  1 1)  a  number  of  other  definitions,    (i)  According  to  "some  of  the  Pytha-
goreans," "an  unit  is  the  boundary  between  number  and  parts"  (/xovas  la-riy
apiB/jLov  Koi  fiopiwv  fi€B6piov),  "because  from  it,  as  from  a  seed  and  eternal
root,  ratios  increase  reciprocally  on  either  side,"  i.e.  on  one  side  we  have
multiple  ratios  continually  increasing  and  on  the  other  (if  the  unit  be  sub-
divided) submultiple  ratios  with  denominators  continually  increasing.     (2)  A
somewhat  similar  definition  is  that  of  Thymaridas,  an  ancient  Pythagorean,
who   defined   a   monad  as   "limiting   quantity"  (ircpatVovcra  ttoo-ott/?),   the
beginning  and  the  end  of  a  thing  being  equally  an  extremity  (Trcpas).     Perhaps
the  words  together  with  their  explanation  may  best  be  expressed  by  "  limit  of
fewness."    Theon  of  Smyrna  (p.  18,  6,  ed.  Hiller)  adds  the  explanation  that
the  monad  is  "that  which,  when   the   multitude  is  diminished  by  way  of
continued  subtraction,  is  deprived  of  all  number  and  takes  an  abiding  position
(ftovi/v)  and  rest."    If,  after  arriving  at  an  unit  in  this  way,  we  proceed  to  divide
the  unit  itself  into  parts,  we  straightway  have  multitude  again.     (3)  Some,  ac-
cording to  lamblichus  (p.  11, 16),  defined  it  as  the  "form  of  forms"  (€lS<av  ctSos)
because  it  potentially  comprehends  all  forms  of  number,  e.g.  it  is  a  polygonal
number  of  any  number  of  sides  from  three  upwards,  a  solid  number  in  all
forms,  and  so  on.    (We  are  forcibly  reminded  of  the  latest  theories  of  number
as  a  **Gattung"  of  "Mengen"  or  as  a  "class  of  classes.")     (4)  Again  an
unit,  says  lamblichus,  is  the  first,  or  smallest,  in  the  category  of  /unv  many
(iroo-ov),  the  common  part  or  beginning  of  how  many,     Aristotle  defines  it  as
"the  indivisible  in  the  (category  of)  quantity,"  to  Kara  to  troaov  S^uiiprrov
{Metaph,  1089  b  35),  vwtov  including   in   Aristotle  continuous  as  well  as
discrete  quantity ;  hence  it  is  distinguished  from  a  point  by  the  fact  that  it
has  not  position :  "  Of  the  indivisible  in  the  category  of,  and  qu&^  quantity,
that  which  is  every  way  (indivisible)  and  destitute  of  position  is  called  an
««//,  and  that  which  is  every  way  indivisible  and  has  position  is  a  poinV^
{Metaph.  10 16  b  25).     (5)  In  accordance  with  the  last  distinction,  Aristotle
calls  the  unit  "a  point  without  position,"  <myfji,Yi  aSeros  (Metaph,  1084  b  26).
(6)  Lastly,  lamblichus  says  that  the  school  of  Chrysippus  defined  it  in  a  con-
fused manner  (crvyKcxv/xcFw?)  as  "multitude  one  (irX^So^  li'),"  whereas  it  is
alone  contrasted  with  multitude.     On  a  comparison  of  these  definitions,  it
would  seem  that  Euclid  intended  his  to  be  a  more  popular  one  than  those
of  his  predecessors,  SvjtiwSnrfs,  as  Nicomachus  called  Euclid's  definition  of  an
even  number.

The  etymological  signification  of  the  word  /xova?  is  supposed  by  Theon  of
Smyrna  (p.  19,  7 — 13)  to  be  either  (i)  that  it  remains  unaltered  if  it  be
multiplied  by  itself  any  number  of  times,  or  (2)  that  it  is  separated  and  isolated
(fjL€fiovwar6ai)  from  the  rest  of  the  multitude  of  numbers.  Nicomachus  also
observes  (i.  8,  2)  that,  while  any  number  is  half  the  sum  (i)  of  the  adjacent
numbers  on  each  side,  (2)  of  numbers  equidistant  on  each  side,  the  unit  is
most  solitary  (jioviaTarrf)  in  that  it  has  not  a  number  on  each  side  but  only  on
one  side,  and  it  is  half  of  the  latter  alone,  i.e.  of  2.


28o  BOOK    VII  [VII.  DEFF.  2—4


Definition  2.

'Api^fios  ^  ro  iK  fxovaZtav  crvyKcf/Acvov  vXrjOo^.

The  definition  of  a  number  is  again  only  one  out  of  many  that  are  on
record.  Nicomachus  (i.  79  i)  combines  several  into  one,  saying  that  it  is
"a  defined  multitude  (irXiJtfos  (Jpur/tci^ov),  or  a  collection  of  units  (/xovaSoiv
trwrniiMja)^  or  a  flow  of  quantity  made  up  of  units  "  (inHTOTrifroq  x^fia  Ik  fiovdStav
ovyKtifuvov).  Theon,  in  words  almost  identical  with  those  attributed  by
Stobaeus  (Eclogue^  i.  i,  8)  to  Moderatus,  a  Pythagorean,  says  (p.  18,  3 — 5);
"  A  number  is  a  collection  of  units,  or  a  progression  (Trpoiro&cr/xoV)  of  mul-
titude beginning  from  an  unit  and  a  retrogression  (dvaTro^ur/ioV)  ceasing  at  an
unit."  According  to  lamblichus  (p.  10)  the  description  "collection  of  units"
(fiom3(tfv  (TvoTt^fM)  was  applied  to  the  how  many^  i.e.  to  number,  by  Thales,
following  the  Egyptian  view  (Kara  to  Acymrruiicov  apia-Koy),  while  it  was
Eudoxus  the  Pythagorean  who  said  that  a  number  was  "a  defined  multitude"
{vk^Ooq  (ipto'fjLivoy).  Aristotle  has  a  number  of  definitions  which  come  to  the
same  thing:  "limited  multitude"  {vXy$<K  to  'n'€ir€paa'fji,€voVf  Metaph,  1020  a
13),  "multitude"  (or  "combination")  "of  units"  or  "multitude  of  indivi-
sibles" (ibid,  1053  a  30,  1039  a  12,  1085  b  22),  "several  onts^^  (Iwi  tAciq»,
Phy$,  III.  7,  207  b  7),  "multitude  measurable  by  one"  {Metaph,  1057  a  3)
and  "  multitude  measured  and  multitude  of  measures,"  the  "  measure  "  being
unity,  TO  h  (ibid.  1088  as).

Definition  3.

Mipo^   l(rrlv  SLpiSfio^  &pi$fMv   6   iXda-triov   rov   /x€ii([ovo9,  otqi'  Karafierpy  tov

By  a  par/  Euclid  means  a  submultiple,  as  he  does  in  v.  Def.  i,  with  which
definition  this  one  is  identical  except  for  the  substitution  of  number  (apiOfios)
for  magnitude  (/xeyc^o?) ;  cf.  note  on  v.  Def.  i.  Nicomachus  uses  the  word
"submultiple  "  (viroiroXXaTrXao-ios)  also.  He  defines  it  in  a  way  corresponding
to  his  definition  of  multiple  (see  note  on  Def.  5  below)  as  follows  (i.  18,  2):
"The  submultiple,  which  is  by  nature  first  in  the  division  of  inequality
(called)  less,  is  the  number  which,  when  compared  with  a  greater,  can
measure  it  more  times  than  once  so  as  to  fill  it  exactly  (TrXiypovi^ws)."  Simi-
larly sub-double  (uiroSwrXowrtos)  is  found  in  Nicomachus  meaning  half^  and
so  on.

Definition  4.

M^i;  8c,  oToy  \kr\  KaTafJL€Tfyj,

By  the  expression  fiar/s  {ti€pYf,  the  plural  of  /x^os)  Euclid  denotes  what  we
should  call  a  proper  fraction.  That  is,  a  part  being  a  submultiple,  the  rather
inconvenient  term  parts  means  any  number  of  such  submultiples  making  up
a  fraction  less  than  unity.  I  have  not  found  the  word  used  in  this  special
sense  elsewhere,  e.g.  in  Nicomachus,  Theon  of  Smyrna  or  lamblichus,  except
in  one  place  of  Theon  (p.  79,  26)  where  it  is  used  of  a  proper  fraction,  of
which  f  is  an  illustration.


VII.  DEFF.  5— 8]       NOTES   ON   DEFINITIONS   2—8  281

Definition  5.

noXXairXacTiO^  Sc  6  /xei{^a)V  rov  iXdafTovo^,  orav  /cara/xcrp^rat  vtto  tov  cXcmtctovos.

The  definition  of  a  multiple  is  identical  with  that  in  v.  Def.  2,  except  that
the  masculine  of  the  adjectives  is  used  agreeing  with  dpt^/Aos  understood
instead  of  the  neuter  agreeing  with  /jL€y€6o^  understood.  Nicomachus  (i.  18,
i)  defines  a  multiple  as  being  "a  species  of  the  greater  which  is  naturally
first  in  order  and  origin,  being  the  number  which,  when  considered  in  com-
parison with  another,  contains  it  in  itself^completely  more  than  once."

Definitions  6,  7.

6.  "Apnos  apiSfio^  ioTiv  6  Si^a  Siaipov/Aci/09.

7.  ncptcrcro^  Sc  6  firj  Siaipovfi€VO^  ^6(^  ^  [p]  /^ova3c  SiatfUpajv  aprlov  apiSfJuov,

Nicomachus  (i.  7,  2)  somewhat  amplifies  these  definitions  oi  even  and  odd
numbers  thus.  **That  is  even  which  is  capable  of  being  divided  into  two
equal  parts  without  an  unit  falling  in  the  middle,  and  that  is  odd  which  cannot
be  divided  into  two  equal  parts  because  of  the  aforesaid  intervention  (ficcrc-
Tciav)  of  the  unit."  He  adds  that  this  definition  is  derived  "  from  the  popular
conception  "  (Ik  rrj^  8i//iai8ov9  vTroXiJi/rcws).  In  contrast  to  this,  he  gives  (i.  7,  3)
the  Pythagorean  definition,  which  is,  as  usual,  interesting.  "  An  even  number
is  that  which  admits  of  being  divided,  by  one  and  the  same  operation,  into  the
greatest  and  the  least  (parts),  greatest  in  size  {irqXiKorrfTi)  but  least  in  quantity
(irooroTTTTi).., while  an  odd  number  is  that  which  cannot  be  so  treated,  but  is
divided  into  two  unequal  parts."  That  is,  as  lamblichus  says  (p.  12,  2 — 9),  an
even  number  is  divided  into  parts  which  are  the  greatest  possible  "parts,"  namely
halves,  and  into  the  fewest  possible,  namely  two,  two  being  the  first  "  num-
ber "  or  ''collection  of  units.  According  to  another  ancient  definition  quoted
by  Nicomachus  (i.  7,  4),  an  even  number  is  that  which  can  be  divided  both
into  two  equal  parts  and  into  two  unequal  parts  (except  the  first  one,  the
number  2,  which  is  only  susceptible  of  division  into  equals),  but,  however  it
is  divided,  must  have  its  two  parts  of  the  same  kind,  i.e.  both  even  or  both
odd;  while  an  odd  number  is  that  which  can  only  be  divided  into  two
unequal  parts,  and  those  parts  always  of  different  kinds,  i.e.  one  odd  and
one  even.  Lastly,  the  definition  of  odd  and  even  "by  means  of  each  other"
says  that  an  odd  number  is  that  which  differs  by  an  unit  from  an  even
number  on  both  sides  of  it,  and  an  even  number  that  which  differs  by  an
unit  from  an  odd  number  on  each  side.  This  alternative  definition  of  an
odd  number  is  the  same  thing  as  the  second  half  of  Euclid's  definition,  "  the
number  which  diflfers  by  an  unit  from  an  even  number."  This  evidently
pre-Euclidean  definition  is  condemned  by  Aristotle  as  unscientific,  because
odd  and  even  are  coordinate,  both  being  differentiae  of  number,  so  that  one
should  not  be  defined  by  means  of  the  other  {Topics  vi.  4,  142  b  7 — 10).

Definition  8.

'Aprtoiccf  apTLO^  apiBfios  coriv  o  xnro  diprtov  &pL$ixov  /xcrpov/xcvos  Kara  apriov
dptSfjjov.

Euclid's  definition  of  an  even-times  even  number  differs  from  that  given  by
the  later  writers,  Nicomachus,  Theon  of  Smyrna  and  lamblichus;  and  the
inconvenience  of  it  is  shown  when  we  come  to  ix.  34,  where  it  is  proved


282  BOOK    VII  [VII.  DEFF.  8,  9

that  a  certain  sort  of  number  is  both  "even-times  even"  and  "even-times odd"
According  to  the  more  precise  classification  of  the  three  other  authorities,  the
"  even-times  even  *'  and  the  "  even-times  odd  "  are  mutually  exclusive  and  are
two  of  three  subdivisions  into  which  even  numbers  fall.  Of  these  three  sub-
divisions the  "  even-times  even  "  and  the  "even-times  odd"  form  the  extremes,
and  the  "  odd-times  even  "  is  as  it  were  intermediate,  showing  the  character
of  both  extremes  (cf.  note  on  the  following  definition).  The  even-times  even  is
then  the  number  which  has  its  halves  even,  the  halves  of  the  halves  even,  and
so  on,  until  unity  is  reached.  In  short  the  even-times  even  number  is  always
of  the  form  2*.  Hence  lamblichus  (pp.  20,  21)  says  Euclid's  definition  of  it
as  that  which  is  measured  by  an  even  number  an  even  number  of  times  is
erroneous.  In  support  of  this  he  quotes  the  number  24  which  is  four  times  6,
or  six  times  4,  but  yet  is  not  "  even-times  even  "  according  to  Euclid  himself
(ov8^  fcar  avTov),  b^  which  he  must  apparently  mean  that  24  is  also  8  times  3,
which  does  not  satisfy  Euclid's  definition.  There  can  however  be  no  doubt  that
Euclid  meant  what  he  said  in  his  definition  as  we  have  it ;  otherwise  ix.  32,
which  proves  that  a  number  of  the  form  2*  is  even-times  even  only^  would  be  quite
superfluous  and  a  mere  repetition  of  the  definition,  while,  as  already  stated,
IX.  34  clearly  indicates  Euclid's  view  that  a  number  might  at  the  same  time
be  both  even-times  even  and  even-times  odd.  Hence  the  /xofqis  which  some
editor  of  the  commentary  of  Philoponus  on  Nicomachus  found  in  some
copies,  making  the  definition  say  that  the  even-times  even  number  is  only
measured  by  even  numbers  an  even  number  of  times,  is  evidently  an  interpo-
lation by  some  one  who  wished  to  reconcile  Euclid's  definition  with  the
Pythagorean  (cf.  Heiberg,  Euklid-studien^  p.  200).

A  consequential  characteristic  of  the  series  of  even-times  even  numbers
noted  by  Nicomachus  brings  in  a  curious  use  of  the  word  &Jva/uu?  (generally
power  in  the  sense  of  square,  or  square  root).  He  says  (i.  8,  6 — 7)  that  any
part,  i.e.  any  submultiple,  of  an  even-times  even  number  is  called  by  an  even-
times  even  designation,  while  it  also  has  an  even-times  even  value  (it  is
<Sf>rtaici9  aprioSwaftov)  when  expressed  as  so  many  actual  units.     That  is,  the

-sth  part  of  2*  (where  m  is  less  than  n)  is  called  after  the  even-times  even

number  2"*,  while  its  actual  value  (SuVa/xis)  in  units  is  2'*"**,  which  is  also  an
even-times  even  number.  Thus  all  the  parts,  or  submultiples,  of  even-times
even  numbers,  as  well  as  the  even-times  even  numbers  themselves,  are  con-
nected with  one  kind  of  number  only,  the  even.

Definition  9.

'ApTcaKif  3c  irepicrcrds  eorii/  6  vtto  aprCov  apiBfiov  /JL€Tfiovfi€vo^  Kara  irtpura-ov
apiSfjiov,

Euclid  uses  the  term  even-times  odd  (opTtoKis  ircpwrcrds),  whereas  Nicomachus
and  the  others  make  it  one  word,  even-odd  (apTiorcipvrro^).  According  to  the
stricter  definition  given  by  the  latter  (i.  9,  i ),  the  even-odd  number  is  related  to
the  etfen-times  even  as  the  other  extreme.  It  is  such  a  number  as,  when  once
halved,  leaves  as  quotient  an  odd  number ;  that  is,  it  is  of  the  form  2(2 w  +1).
Nicomachus  sets  the  even-odd  numbers  out  as  follows,

6,  10,  14,  18,  22,  26,  30,  etc.

In  this  case,  as  Nicomachus  observes,  any  part,  or  submultiple,  is  called  by  a
name  not  corresponding  in  kind  to  its  actual  value  (8vVa/iis)  in  units.     Thus,


VII.  DEF.  9]  NOTES  ON    DEFINITIONS  8,  9  283

in  the  case  of  18,  the  ^  part  is  called  after  the  even  number  2,  but  its  value  is
the  odd  number  9,  and  the  Jrd  part  is  called  after  the  odd  number  3,  while  its
value  is  the  even  number  6,  and  so  on.

The  third  class  of  even  numbers  according  to  the  strict  subdivision  is  the
odd-even  (TrcptcrcrapTio?).  Numbers  are  of  this  class  when  they  can  be  halved
twice  or  more  times  successively,  but  the  quotient  left  when  they  can  no
longer  be  halved  is  an  odd  number  and  not  unity.  They  are  therefore  of
the  form  2**+*(2«i  -f  i),  where  «,  m  are  integers.  They  are,  so  to  say,  inter-
mediate between,  or  a  mixture  of,  the  extreme  classes  even-times  even  and  even-
oddy  for  the  following  reasons.  ( i )  Their  subdivision  by  2  proceeds  for  some
way  like  that  of  the  even-times  even,  but  ends  in  the  way  that  the  division  of
the  even-odd  by  2  ends.  (2)  The  numbers  after  which  submultiples  are
called  and  their  value  (SuVa/us)  in  units  may  be  both  of  one  kind,  i.e.  both  odd
or  both  even  (as  in  the  case  of  the  even-times  even),  or  again  may  be  one  odd
and  one  even  as  in  the  case  of  the  even-odd.  For  example  24  is  an  odd-even
number;  the  ^th,  ^^th,  Jth  or  \  parts  of  it  are  even,  but  the  |rd  part  of  it,
or  8,  is  even,  and  the  \\}s\  part  of  it,  or  3,  is  odd.  (3)  Nicomachus  shows
(i.  10,  6 — 9)  how  to  form  all  the  numbers  of  the  odd-even  class.  Set  out  two
lines  (a)  of  odd  numbers  beginning  with  3,  {b)  of  even-times  even  numbers
beginning  with  4,  thus :

(«)     3»  5»    7,    9»  "»    i3»    15  etc.

(b)     4,  8,  16,  32,  64,  128,  256  etc.

Now  multiply  each  of  the  first  numbers  into  each  of  the  second  row.  Let
the  products  of  one  of  the  first  into  all  the  second  set  make  horizontal  rows ;
we  then  get  the  rows

12,24,    48,    96,192,    384,    768  etc.

20,  40,    80,  160,  320,    640,  1280  etc.

28,  56,  112,  224,  448,    896,  1792  etc

36,  72,  144,  288,  576,  1 152,  2304  etc.
and  so  on.

Now,  says  Nicomachus,  you  will  be  surprised  to  see  (^nTo-rrcu  coi  Oavima-
rm)  that  (a)  the  vertical  rows  have  the  property  of  the  even-odd  ^^xits,  6,  10,
14,  18,  22  etc.,  viz.  that,  if  an  odd  number  of  successive  numbers  be  taken,
the  middle  number  is  half  the  sum  of  the  extremes,  and  if  an  even  number,
the  two  middle  numbers  together  are  equal  to  the  sum  of  the  extremes,
{b)  the  horizontal  rows  have  the  property  of  the  even-times  even  series  4,  8,  16
etc.,  viz.  that  the  product  of  the  extremes  of  any  number  of  successive  terms
is  equal,  if  their  number  be  odd,  to  the  square  of  the  middle  term,  or,  if  their
number  be  even,  to  the  product  of  the  two  middle  terms.

Let  us  now  return  to  Euclid.  His  9th  definition  states  that  an  even-times
odd  number  is  a  number  which,  when  divided  by  an  even  number,  gives  an
odd  number  as  quotient.  Following  this  definition  in  our  text  comes  a  loth
definition  which  defines  an  odd-times  even  number;  this  is  stated  to  be  a
number  which,  when  divided  by  an  odd  number,  gives  an  even  number  as
quotient.  According  to  these  definitions  any  even-times  odd  number  would
also  be  odd-times  even,  and,  from  the  fact  that  lamblichus  notes  this,  we  may
fairly  conclude  that  he  found  Def.  10  as  well  as  Def.  9  in  the  text  of  Euclid
which  he  used.  But,  if  both  definitions  are  genuine,  the  enunciations  of  ix.  33
and  IX.  34  as  we  have  them  present  difficulties,  ix.  33  says  that  "  If  a  num-
ber have  its  half  odd,  it  is  even-times  odd  only  " ;  but,  on  the  assumption  that


284  BOOK  VII  [vii.  DEFF.  9—1 1

both  definitions  are  genuine,  this  would  not  be  true,  for  the  number  would  be
odd-times  even  as  well.  ix.  34  says  that  "  If  a  number  neither  be  one  of  those
which  are  continually  doubled  from  2,  nor  have  its  half  odd,  it  is  both  even-
times  even  and  even-times  odd."  The  term  odd-times  even  (ircpurcraKif  aprios)
not  occurring  in  these  propositions,  nor  anywhere  else  after  the  definition,  that
definition  becomes  superfluous.  lamblichus  however  (p.  24,  7 — 14)  quotes
these  enunciations  differently.  In  the  first  he  has  instead  of  "  even-times  odd
only  "  the  words  "  both  even-times  odd  atid  odd-times  even  *' ;  and,  in  the  second,
for  "  both  even-times  even  and  even-times  odd  "  he  has  "  is  both  even-times
even  and  at  the  same  time  even-times  odd  and  odd-times  even."  In  both
cases  therefore  "  odd-times  even  "  is  added  to  the  enimciation  as  lamblichus
had  it ;  the  words  cannot  have  been  added  by  lamblichus  himself  because
he  himself  does  not  use  the  term  odd-times  even,  but  the  one  word  odd-even
{v€puraapTto9),  In  order  to  get  over  the  difficulties  involved  by  Def.  10  and
these  differences  of  reading  we  have  practically  to  choose  between  (i)  accept-
ing lamblichus'  reading  in  all  three  places  and  (2)  adhering  to  the  reading  of
our  MSB.  in  ix.  33,  34  and  rejecting  Def.  10  altogether  as  an  interpolation.
Now  the  readings  of  our  text  of  ix.  33,  34  are  those  of  the  Vatican  ms.
and  the  Theonine  mss.  as  well ;  hence  they  must  go  back  to  a  time  before
Theon,  and  must  therefore  be  almost  as  old  as  those  of  lamblichus.
Heiberg  considers  it  improbable  that  Euclid  would  wish  to  maintain  a  point-
less distinction  between  even-times  odd  and  odd-times  even,  and  on  the  whole
concludes  that  Def.  10  was  first  interpolated  by  some  ignorant  person  who
did  not  notice  the  difference  between  the  Euclidean  and  Pythagorean  classi-
fication, but  merely  noticed  the  absence  of  a  definition  of  odd-times  even
and  fabricated  one  as  a  companion  to  the  other.  When  this  was  done,  it
would  be  easy  to  see  that  the  statement  in  ix.  33  that  the  number  referred
to  is  "even-times  odd  only^^  was  not  strictly  true,  and  that  the  addition  of
the  words  "and  odd-times  even"  was  necessary  in  ix.  33  and  ix.  34  as
well.

Definition  10.

ncpurcraici^  8c  Trcpicrcros  dpiSfio^  iariv  6  xnro  Trtpura-ov  dpi$fiov  fJL€TpovfjL€voq
Kara  Tr€pur(TOv  dpiBfiov.

The  odd-times  odd  number  is  not  defined  as  such  by  Nicomachus  and
lamblichus ;  for  them  these  numbers  would  apparently  belong  to  the  com-
posite subdivision  of  odd  numbers.  Theon  of  Smyrna  on  the  other  hand
says  (p.  23,  21)  that  odd-times  odd  was  one  of  the  names  applied  to  prime
numbers  (excluding  2),  for  these  have  two  odd  factors,  namely  i  and  the
number  itself.     This  is  certainly  a  curious  use  of  the  term.

Definition  ii.

np(5ro9  dpiSpjo^  icTiv  6  pjovdSi  fidvrf  fi€Tpovfievo^,

A  prime  number  {irp&ro^  apuBpjo^)  is  called  by  Nicomachus,  Theon,  and
lamblichus  a  "prime  and incomposite  {acrvv^tn/i)  number."  Theon  (p.  23,  9)
defines  it  practically  as  Euclid  does,  viz.  as  a  number  "measured  by  no  number,
but  by  an  unit  only."  Aristotle  too  says  that  a  prime  number  is  not  measured  by
any  number  {Anal,  post.  11.  13,  96  a  36),  an  unit  not  being  a  number  (Metaph,
1088  a  6),  but  only  the  beginning  of  number  (Theon  of  Smyrna  says  the  same
thing,  p.  24,  23).    According  to  Nicomachus  (i.  11,  2)  the  prime  number  is  a


VII.  DEFF.  II,  12]     NOTES  ON  DEFINITIONS  9—12  285

subdivision,  not  of  numbers,  but  of  odd  numbers;  it  is  "an  odd  number
which  admits  of  no  other  part  except  that  which  is  called  after  its  own  name
(TTopwwfiov  cavrcp)."  The  prime  numbers  are  3,  5,  7  etc.,  and  there  is  no
submultiple  of  3  except  ^rd,  no  submultiple  of  11  except  ^th,  and  so  on.  In
all  these  cases  the  only  submultiple  is  an  unit.  According  to  Nicomachus  3
is  the  first  prime  number,  whereas  Aristotle  {^Topics  viii.  2,  157  a  39)  regards
2  as  a  prime  number :  "as  the  dyad  is  the  only  even  number  which  is  prime,"
showing  that  this  divergence  from  the  Pythagorean  doctrine  was  earlier  than
Euclid.  The  number  2  also  satisfies  Euclid's  definition  of  a  prime  number,
lamblichus  (p.  30,  27  sqq.)  makes  this  the  ground  of  another  attack  upon  Euclid.
His  argument  (the  text  of  which,  however,  leaves  much  to  be  desired)  appears
to  be  that  2  is  the  only  even  number  which  has  no  other  part  except  an
unit,  while  the  subdivisions  of  the  even,  as  previously  explained  by  him  (the
even-times  even^  the  even-odd,  and  odd-even\  all  exclude  primeness,  and  he  has
previously  explained  that  2  is  potentially  even-odd,  being  obtained  by
multiplying  by  2  the  potentially  odd,  i.e.  the  unit;  hence  2  is  regarded  by  him
as  bound  up  with  the  subdivisions  of  even,  which  exclude  primeness.  Theon
seems  to  hold  the  same  view  as  regards  2,  but  supports  it  by  an  apparent
circle.  A  prime  number,  he  says  (p.  23,  14 — 23),  is  also  called  odd-times  odd\
therefore  only  odd  numbers  are  prime  and  incomposite.  Even  numbers  are
not  measured  by  the  unit  alone,  except  2,  which  therefore  (p.  24,  7)  is  odA-like
{ir€pia(ro€iSi}js)  without  being  prime.

A  variety  of  other  names  were  applied  to  prime  numbers.  We  have
already  noted  the  curious  designation  of  them  as  odd-times  odd.  According  to
lamblichus  (p.  27,  3 — 5)  some  called  them  euthymetric  (cv^ftcrpiKos),  and -
Thymaridas  rectilinear  (cv^pa/xfitKos),  the  ground  being  that  they  can  only  be
set  out  in  one  dimension  with  no  breadth  (dirXar^?  yap  kv  ry  ^K^cVct  i<l>  tv
fiovov  Sao-rofACFos).  The  same  aspect  of  a  prime  number  is  also  expressed  by
Aristotle,  who  (Metaph,  1020  b  3)  contrasts  the  composite  number  with  that
which  is  only  in  one  dimension  (fidvov  c^*  ty  &v\  Theon  of  Smyrna  (p.  23,  12)
gives  ypa/xfiiicds  (linear)  as  the  alternative  name  instead  of  tvOvypafifiuco^,  In
either  case,  to  make  the  word  a  proper  description  of  a  prime  number  we  have
to  understand  the  word  only ;  a  prime  number  is  that  which  is  linear^  or
rectilinear,  only.  For  Nicomachus,  who  uses  the  form  linear^  expressly  says
(II.  13,  6)  that  all  numbers  are  so,  i.e.  all  can  be  represented  as  linear  by  dots
to  the  required  amount  placed  in  a  line.

A  prime  number  was  called  prime  or  first,  according  to  Nicomachus
(i.  II,  3),  because  it  can  only  be  arrived  at  by  putting  together  a  certain
number  of  units,  and  the  unit  is  the  beginning  of  number  (cf.  Aristotle's
second  sense  of  Trpwros  "as  not  being  composed  of  numbers,^^  ws  \i.r\  (rvyMlfrOai
cf  dpiOfjMv,  Anal,  Post,  11.  13,  96  a  37),  and  also,  according  to  lamblichus,
because  there  is  no  number  before  it,  being  a  collection  of  units  (fiovd^v
(rvfmjfjLa),  of  which  it  is  a  multiple,  and  it  appears  first  as  a  basis  for  other
numbers  to  be  multiples  of.


Definition  12.

Ilparroi  irpos  aXAi^Xovs  apiSfjLOi  kUnv  ot  fiovdSi  fwvrj  /tcrpov/xcFOi  kocv^  fitrpta.

By  way  of  further  emphasising  the  distinction  between  "prime"  and
"prime  to  one  another,"  Theon  of  Smyrna  (p.  23,  6 — 8)  calls  the  former
"  prime  absolutely "  (dTrXaJs),  and  the  latter  "  prime  to  one  another  and  not


286  BOOK   VII  [vii.  DEFF.  12—14

absolutely  "  or  ^^  not  in  themselves  ^^  (ov  KaO*  aurov?).  The  latter  (p.  24,  8 — 10)
are  "  measured  by  the  unit  [sc.  only]  as  common  measure,  even  though,  taken
by  themselves  (ok  Trpos  cavrovs),  they  be  measured  by  some  other  numbers."
From  Theon's  illustrations  it  is  clear  that  with  him  as  with  Euclid
a  number  prime  to  another  may  be  even  as  well  as  odd.  In  Nicomachus
(i.  II,  i)  and  lamblichus  (p.  26,  19),  on  the  other  hand,  the  number  which  is
**  in  itself  secondary  (Scvrcpo?)  and  composite  (crvv^cros),  but  in  relation  to
another  prime  and  incomposite,"  is  a  subdivision  of  odd,  I  shall  call  more
particular  attention  to  this  difference  of  classification  when  we  have  reached
the  definitions  of  "composite"  and  "composite  to  one  another";  for  the
present  it  is  to  be  noted  that  Nicomachus  (i.  13,  i)  defines  a  number  prime  to
another  after  the  same  manner  as  the  absolutely  prime ;  it  is  a  number  which
"  is  measured  not  only  by  the  unit  as  the  common  measure  but  also  by  some
other  measure,  and  for  this  reason  can  also  admit  of  a  part  or  parts  called  by
a  different  name  besides  that  called  by  the  same  name  (as  itselQ,  but,  when
examined  in  comparison  with  another  number  of  similar  character,  is  found
not  to  be  capable  of  being  measured  by  a  common  measure  in  relation  to  the
other,  nor  to  have  the  same  part,  called  by  the  same  name  as  (any  of)  those
simply  (dirXoisr)  contained  in  the  other ;  e.g.  9  in  relation  to  25,  for  each  of
these  is  in  itself  secondary  and  composite,  but,  in  comparison  with  one
another,  they  have  an  unit  alone  as  a  common  measure  and  no  part  is  called
by  the  same  name  in  both,  but  the  third  in  one  is  not  in  the  other,  nor  is  the
fifth  in  the  other  found  in  the  first."

Definition  13.

SvV^CTO?  dplO^lO^  ItTTLV  6  dplOflW  TlVl  /!€ rpO V/JLCV09.

Euclid's  definition  of  composite  is  again  the  same  as  Theon's  definition
of  numbers  **  composite  in  relation  to  themselves,"  which  (p.  24,  16)  are
"numbers  measured  by  any  less  number,"  the  unit  being,  as  usual,  not
regarded  as  a  number.  Theon  proceeds  to  say  that  "  of  composite  numbers
they  call  those  which  are  contained  by  two  numbers  plane,  as  being
investigated  in  two  dimensions  and,  as  it  were,  contained  by  a  length  and  a
breadth,  while  (they  call)  those  (which  are  contained)  by  three  (numbers)
solidy  as  having  the  third  dimension  added  to  them."  To  a  similar  effect  is
the  remark  of  Aristotle  (Metaph.  1020  b  3)  that  certain  numbers  are
"composite  and  are  not  only  in  one  dimension  but  such  as  the  plane  and  the
solid  (figure)  are  representations  of  (fitfirffia),  these  numbers  being  so  many
times  so  many  (ttoo-ciki?  ttoo-oi),  or  so  many  times  so  many  times  so  many
(irooraKK  Troo-aKis  Troaoi)  respectively.''  These  subdivisions  of  composite
numbers  are,  of  course,  the  subject  of  Euclid's  definitions  17,  18  respectively.
Euclid's  composite  numbers  may  be  either  even  or  odd,  like  those  of  Theon,
who  gives  6  as  an  instance,  6  being  measured  by  both  2  and  3.

Definition  14.

2w^€T0l     8c     TTpOS     O1XX77X0V5    dplOflOL    €1(711/     01    dpid^W    TlFl    flCTpO-VflfVOi    KOLVfO

/Acrpo).

Theon  (p.  24,  18),  like  Euclid,  defines  numbers  composite  to  one  another  as
"  those  which  are  measured  by  any  common  measure  whatever "  (excluding
unity,  as  usual).  Theon  instances  8  and  6,  with  2  as  common  measure,  and
6  and  9,  with  3  as  common  measure.


VII.  DEFF.  14—16]    NOTES  ON  DEFINITIONS  12—16  287

As  hinted  above,  there  is  a  great  difference  between  Euclid's  classification
of  prime  and  composite  numbers,  and  of  numbers  prime  and  composite
to  one  another,  and  the  classification  found  in  Nicomachus  (i.  11 — 13)  and
lamblichus.  According  to  the  latter,  all  these  kinds  of  numbers  are  sub-
divisions of  the  class  of  odd  numbers  only.  As  the  class  of  even  numbers  is
divided  into  three  kinds,  (i)  the  even-times  even,  (2)  the  even-odd,  which
form  the  extremes,  and  (3)  the  odd-even,  which  is,  as  it  were,  intermediate  to
the  other  two,  so  the  class  of  odd  numbers  is  divided  into  three,  of  which  the
third  is  again  a  mean  between  two  extremes.     The  three  are :

(i)  \ht  prime  and  ituomposite^  which  is  like  Euclid's  prime  number  except
that  it  excludes  2  ;

(2)  the  secofidary  and  composite,  which  is  "odd  because  it  is  a  distinct
part  of  one  and  the  same  genus  (Sta  to  cf  cvos  koX  rov  avrov  ycvovs  SioKcicpar^ai)
but  has  in  it  nothing  of  the  nature  of  a  first  principle  {dpxo€ihi%)  \  for  it  arises
from  adding  some  other  number  (to  itself),  so  that,  besides  having  a  part
called  by  the  same  name  as  itself,  it  possesses  a  part  or  parts  called  by  another
name."  Nicomachus  cites  9,  15,  21,  25,  27,  33,  35,  39.  It  is  made  clear  that
not  only  must  the  factors  be  both  odd,  but  they  must  all  be  prime  numbers.
This  is  obviously  a  very  inconvenient  restriction  of  the  use  of  the  word
composite^  a  word  of  general  signification.

(3)  is  that  which  is  ^^  secondary  and  composite  in  itself  but  prime  and
incomposite  to  another'^  The  actual  words  in  which  this  is  defined  have  been
given  above  in  the  note  on  Def.  1 2.  Here  again  all  the  factors  must  be  odd
and  prime.

Besides  the  inconvenience  of  restricting  the  term  composite  to  odd  numbers
which  are  composite,  there  is  in  this  classification  the  further  serious  defect,
pointed  out  by  Nesselmann  {Die  Algebra  der  Griechen,  1842,  p.  194),  that
subdivisions  (2)  and  (3)  overlap,  subdivision  (2)  including  the  whole  of
subdivision  (3).  The  origin  of  this  confusion  is  no  doubt  to  be  found  in
Nicomachus'  perverse  anxiety  to  be  symmetrical;  by  hook  or  by  crook  he
must  divide  odd  numbers  into  three  kinds  as  he  had  divided  the  even,
lamblichus  (p.  28,  13)  carries  his  desire  to  be  logical  so  far  as  to  point  out
why  there  cannot  be  a  fourth  kind  of  number  contrary  in  character  to  (3),
namely  a  number  which  should  be  "  prime  and  incomposite  in  itself,  but
secondary  and  composite  to  another  "  !


Definition  15.

*Api^/uiOf  dpi$/wy  iroXAairAxuria^cti/  Xeycrac,  orav,  ocai  curiv  ev  avr<p  fiova8c9,
TOO'avTa#cc9  avvrtO-g  6  iroXAaTrAao'ia^ofici'O^,  *cai  yivrjTal  tis.

This  is  the  well  known  primary  definition  of  multiplication  as  an
abbreviation  of  addition.

Definition  16.

'Orav  §€  hvo  dpiSfiol  iroXAairXao-iao-aKrc?  dWyXovs  iroi(i)0"i  rivo,  6  y€y6/jL€vo^
CTTiircSos  KoAcirai,  irXcvpai  3c  avrov  01  TToXAaTrXao-uuraKrcf  aXXi;Aov9  dpiUfioL

The  words  plane  and  solid  applied  to  numbers  are  of  course  adapted  from
their  use  with  reference  to  geometrical  figures.  A  number  is  therefore  called
linear  (ypa/ii/uKos)  when  it  is  regarded  as  in  one  dimension,  as  being  a  lengt/t


288  BOOK  VII  [VII.  DEF.  i6

(fi^Kos).  When  it  takes  another  dimension  in  addition,  namely  breadth
(irAaros),  it  is  in  two  dimensions  and  becomes  plane  (^TriircSos).  The
distinction  between  2,  plane  and  a  plane  number  is  marked  by  the  use  of  the
neuter  in  the  former  case,  and  the  masculine,  agreeing  with  dpiOfio^,  in  the
latter  case.  So  with  a  square  and  a  square  number,  and  so  on.  The  most
obvious  form  of  a  plane  number  is  clearly  that  corresponding  to  a  rectangle  in
geometry ;  the  number  is  the  product  of  two  linear  numbers  regarded  as  stdes
(rAcupai)  forming  the  length  and  breadth  respectively.  Such  a  number  is,  as
Aristotle  sa3rs,  ''so  many  times  so  many,*'  and  a  plane  is  its  counterpart
(jufirf/M).  So  Plato,  in  the  Theaetetus  (147  s — 148  b),  says  :  "We  divided  all
numbers  into  two  kinds,  (i)  that  which  can  be  expressed  as  equal  multiplied
by  equal  (tok  Suvo/acvok  laov  Utokk  ylyv€<rOai),  and  which,  likening  its  form  to
the  square,  we  called  square  and  equilateral;  (2)  that  which  is  intermediate,
and  includes  3  and  5  and  every  number  which  cannot  be  expressed  as  equal
multiplied  by  equal,  but  is  either  less  times  more  or  more  times  less,  being
always  contained  by  a  greater  and  a  less  side,  which  number  we  likened  to
the  oblong  figure  (irpo/ii^'Kci  axoiMn)  and  called  an  oblong  number....  Such
lines  therefore  as  square  the  equilateral  and  plane  number  [i.e.  which  can
form  a  plane  number  with  equal  sides,  or  a  square]  we  defined  as  length
(ji^Kos) ;  but  such  as  square  the  oblong  (here  h'€pofiriicfj^)  [i.e.  the  square  of
which  is  equal  to  the  oblong]  we  called  roots  (Svvaftcc?)  as  not  being  com-
mensurable with  the  others  in  length,  but  only  in  the  plane  areas  {imir^ois;),
to  which  the  squares  on  them  are  equal  (a  SuKavrat)."  This  passage  seems
to  make  it  clear  that  Plato  would  have  represented  numbers  as  Euclid  does,
by  straight  lines  proportional  in  length  to  the  numbers  they  represent  (so  far
as  practicable) ;  for,  since  3  and  5  are  with  Plato  oblong  numbers,  and  Itfies
with  him  represent  the  sides  of  oblong  numbers  (since  a  line  represents  the
"  root,"  the  square  on  which  is  equal  to  the  oblong),  it  follows  that  the  unit
representing  the  smaller  side  must  have  been  represented  as  a  line,  and  3,  the
larger  side,  as  a  line  of  three  times  the  length.  But  there  is  another  possible  way
of  representing  numbers,  not  by  lines  of  a  certain  length,  but  by poluts  disposed
in  various  ways,  in  straight  lines  or  otherwise.  lamblichus  tells  us  (p.  56,  27)
that  "  in  old  days  they  represented  the  quantuplicities  of  number  in  a  more
natural  way  (^vo-iKwrcpov)  by  splitting  them  up  into  units,  and  not,  as  in  our
day,  by  symbols"  (<rv/ij3oAiKu>?).  Aristotle  too  (Metaph,  1092  b  10)  mentions
one  Eurytus  as  having  settled  what  number  belonged  to  what,  such  a  number
to  a  man,  such  a  number  to  a  horse,  and  so  on,  "copying  their  shapes"
(reading  tovtwi/,  with  Zeller)  "  with  pebbles  (im  i/of^ois),  just  as  those  do  who
arrange  numbers  in  the  forms  of  triangles  or  squares^  We  accordingly  find
numbers  represented  in  Nicomachus  and  Theon  of  Smyrna  by  a  number  of
a's  ranged  like  points  according  to  geometrical  figures.  According  to  this
system,  any  number  could  be  represented  by  points  in  a  straight  line,  in  which
case,  says  lamblichus  (p.  56,  26),  we  shall  call  it  rectilinear  because  it  is
without  breadth  and  only  advances  in  length  {aTrAaraJs  Irn  fwvov  rb  firJKo^
irpocio-iv).  The  prime  number  was  called  by  Thymaridas  rectilinear  par
excellence^  because  it  was  without  breadth  and  in  one  dimension  only  (l^  %v
fjLovov  SaoTo/ucvos).  By  this  must  be  meant  the  impossibility  of  representing,
say,  3  as  a  plane  number,  in  Plato's  sense,  i.e.  as  a  product  of  two  numbers
corresponding  to  a  rectangle  in  geometry ;  and  this  view  would  appear  to  rest
simply  upon  the  representation  of  a  number  by  points,  as  distinct  from  lines.
Three  dots  in  a  straight  line  would  have  no  breadth ;  and  if  breadth  were
introduced  in  the  sense  of  producing  a  rectangle,  i.e.  by  placing  the  same


VII.  DEF.  i6]  NOTE  ON  DEFINITION  i6  289

number  of  dots  in  a  second  line  below  the  first  line,  the  first  plane  number
would  be  4,  and  3  would  not  be  a  plane  number  at  all,  as  Plato  says  it  is.  It
seems  therefore  to  have  been  the  alternative  representation  of  a  number  by
points,  and  not  lines,  which  gave  rise  to  the  different  view  of  a  plane  number
which  we  find  in  Nicomachus  and  the  rest.  By  means  of  separate  points  we
can  represent  numbers  in  geometrical  forms  other  than  rectangles  and  squares.
One  dot  with  two  others  symmetrically  arranged  below  it  shows  a  triangle^
which  is  a  figure  in  two  dimensions  as  much  as  a  rectangle  or  parallelogram  is.
Similarly  we  can  arrange  certain  numbers  in  the  form  of  regular  pentagons  or
other  polygons.  According  therefore  to  this  mode  of  representation,  3  is  the
first  plane  number,  being  a  triangular  number.  The  method  of  formation  of
triangular,  square,  pentagonal  and  other  polygonal  numbers  is  minutely
described  in  Nicomachus  (11.  8 — 11),  who  distinguishes  the  separate  series  of
gnomons  belonging  to  each,  i.e.  gives  the  law  determining  the  number  which
has  to  be  added  to  a  polygonal  number  with  ^  in  a  side,  in  order  to  make  it
into  a  number  of  the  same  form  but  with  ;i  +  i  in  a  side  (the  addend  being  of
course  the  gnomon).  Thus  the  gnomonic  series  for  triangular  numbers  is
i>  2,  3,  4,  5... ;  that  for  squares  i,  3,  5,  7... ;  that  for  pentagonal  numbers
I,  4,  7,  10...,  and  so  on.  The  subject  need  not  detain  us  longer  here,  as  we
are  at  present  only  concerned  with  the  different  views  of  what  constitutes  a
plane  number.

Of  plane  numbers  in  the  Platonic  and  Euclidean  sense  we  have  seen  that
Plato  recognises  two  kinds,  the  square  and  the  oblong  (Trpofiiyiciy?  or  htpofiijicri^).
Here  again  Euclid's  successors,  at  all  events,  subdivided  the  class  more
elaborately.  Nicomachus,  Theon  of  Smyrna,  and  lamblichus  divide  plane
numbers  with  unequal  sides  into  (i)  crcpo/Ai^Vcis,  the  nearest  thing  to  squares,
viz.  numbers  in  which  the  greater  side  exceeds  the  less  side  by  i  only,  or
numbers  of  the  form  « («  +  i),  e.g.  1.2,  2  .  3,  3 . 4,  etc.  (according  to  Nico-
machus), and  (2)  TTpo/Aif/ccis,  or  those  whose  sides  differ  by  2  or  more,  i.e.  are  of
the  form  « («  +  m),  where  m  is  not  less  than  2  (Nicomachus  illustrates  by  2 . 4,
3 . 6,  etc.).  Theon  of  Smyrna  (p.  30, 8 — 14)  makes  irpofnJKtis  include  Ircpo/Aificcis,
saying  that  their  sides  may  differ  by  i  or  more;  he  also  speaks  of  parallelogram-
numbers  as  those  which  have  one  side  different  from  the  other  by  2  or  more ;
I  do  not  find  this  latter  term  in  Nicomachus  or  lamblichus,  and  indeed  it
seems  superfluous,  as  parallelogram  is  here  only  another  name  for  oblong,
lamblichus  (p.  74,  23  sqq.),  always  critical  of  Euclid,  attacks  him  again  here
for  confusing  the  subject  by  supposing  that  the  ^r€po/Ai;in;«  number  is  the  pro-
duct of  any  two  different  numbers  multiplied  together,  and  by  not  distinguishing
the  oblong  {irpofirfiajs;)  fi'om  it :  "  for  his  definition  declares  the  same  number
to  be  square  and  also  Ircpofn^Ki^s,  as  for  example  36,  16  and  many  others:
which  would  be  equivalent  to  the  odd  number  being  the  same  thing  as  the
even."  No  importance  need  be  attached  to  this  exaggerated  statement ;  it  is
in  any  case  merely  a  matter  of  words,  and  it  is  curious  that  Euclid  does  not  in
fact  use  the  word  crcpo/Aiyio;?  of  numbers  at  all,  but  only  of  geometrical  oblong
figures  as  opposed  to  squares,  so  that  lamblichus  can  apparently  only  have
inferred  that  he  used  it  in  an  unorthodox  manner  from  the  geometrical  use  of
the  term  in  the  definitions  of  Book  i.  and  from  the  fact  that  he  does  not  give
the  two  subdivisions  of  plane  numbers  which  are  not  square,  but  seems  only
to  divide  plane  numbers  into  square  and  not-square.  The  argument  that
iT€pofniK€iq  numbers  are  a  natural,  and  therefore  essential,  subdivision
lamblichus  appears  to  found  on  the  method  of  successive  addition  by  which
they  can  be  evolved ;  as  square  numbers  are  obtained  by  successively  adding

H.  £.  II.  19


290  BOOK  VII  [vii.  DEFF.  i6,  17

odd  numbers  as  gnomons,  so  ertpofirJKtii  are  obtained  by  adding  <ven  numbers
as  gnomons.    Thus  1.2  =  2,  2.3  =  2  +  4,  3.4  =  2  +  4  +  6,  and  so  on.


Definition  17.

*Oray  8^  rpcis  AptfifAoi  voXAAvXao-uuravrcs  dXXi^Xovs  vouoaC  riva,  6  ycKO/uMV(K
ar€pm  iariv^  vXtvpaX  ^  avrov  01  roXXavXacruuravrcs  dXXi;Xovs  dptBfioL

What  has  been  said  of  the  two  apparently  different  ways  of  regarding  a
p/ane  number  seems  to  apply  equally,  mutatis  mutandis^  to  the  definitions  of  a
solid  number.  Aristotle  regards  it  as  a  number  which  is  so  many  times  so
many  times  so  many  (iroo-aicis  n-oo-axis  itwtov),  Plato  finishes  the  passage  about
lines  which  represent  the  sides  of  square  numbers  and  lines  which  are  roots
(SwofMis),  i.e.  the  squares  on  which  are  equal  to  the  rectangle  representing  a
number  which  is  oblong  and  not  square,  by  adding  the  words,  "And  another
similar  property  belongs  to  solids  "  (/cat  ircpl  ra  or^ca  oXXo  rotovrov).  That  is,
apparently,  there  would  be  a  corresponding  term  to  root  {hvvaiiis) — practically
representing  a  surd — to  denote  the  side  of  a  cube  equal  to  a  parallelepiped
representing  a  solid  number  which  is  the  product  of  three  factors  but
not  a  cube.  Such  is  a  solid  number  when  numbers  are  represented  by
straight  lines :  it  corresponds  in  general  to  a  parallelepiped  and,  when  all
the  factors  are  equal,  to  a  cube.

But  again,  if  numbers  be  represented  hyfoints,  we  may  have  solid  numbers
(i.e.  numbers  in  three  dimensions)  in  the  form  of  pyramids  as  well.  The  first
number  of  this  kind  is  4,  since  we  may  have  three  points  forming  an
equilateral  triangle  in  one  plane  and  a  fourth  point  placed  in  another  plane.
The  length  of  the  sides  can  be  increased  by  i  successively ;  and  we  can  have
a  series  of  pyramidal  numbers,  with  triangles,  squares  or  polygons  as  bases,
made  up  of  layers  of  triangles,  squares  or  similar  polygons  respectively,  each
of  which  layers  has  one  less  in  the  side  than  the  layer  below  it,  until  the  top
of  the  pyramid  is  reached,  which  of  course  is  one  point  representing  unity.
Nicomachus  (11.  13 — 16),  Theon  of  Smyrna  (p.  41 — 2),  and  lamblichus
(p.  95,  15  sqq.),  all  give  the  different  kinds  of  pyramidal  solid  numbers  in
addition  to  the  other  kinds.

These  three  writers  make  the  following  further  distinctions  between  solid
numbers  which  are  the  product  of  three  factors.

1.  First  there  is  the  equal  by  equal  by  equal  (urcucis  uraKis  uros),  which  is,
of  course,  the  cube.

2.  The  other  extreme  is  the  unequal  by  unequal  by  unequal  (avuraicis
avuraKis  avwros),  or  that  in  which  all  the  dimensions  are  different,  e.g.  the
product  of  2,  3,  4  or  2,  4,  8  or  3,  5,  1 2.  These  were,  according  to  Nicomachus
(11.  16),  called  scalene^  while  some  called  them  a'ff>rjvia'Koi  {^tedge-shaped\  others
<r<f>rfKiaKoi  (from  <r^ijf,  a  wasp),  and  others  ^wfiiaKoi  (a/tar-s/iaped),  Theon
appears  to  use  the  last  term  only,  while  lamblichus  of  course  gives  all  three
names.

3.  Intermediate  to  these,  as  it  were,  come  the  numbers  "  whose  planes
form  Ircpo/Ai^/ccis  numbers"  (i.e.  numbers  of  the  form  «(«+  i)).  These,  says
Nicomachus,  are  called  parallelepipedaL

Lastly  come  two  classes  of  such  numbers  each  of  which  has  two  equal
dimensions  but  not  more.


VII.  DEFF.  17—19]  NOTES  ON  DEFINITIONS  16—19  1^9!

4.  If  the  third  dimension  is  less  than  the  others,  the  number  is  equal  by
equal  by  less  (urd/cis  lcro%  ^Aarrovaicis)  and  is  called  a  plinth  (ttXiv^is),  &g.
8.8.3.

5.  If  the  third  dimension  is  greater  than  the  others,  the  number  is  equal
by  equal  by  greater  (laaKiq  uro^  ficifovaicts)  and  is  called  a  beam  (Sokis),  e.g.
3.3.7.  Another  name  for  this  latter  kind  of  number  (according  to
lamblichus)  was  <miXk  (diminutive  of  anjkrj).

Lastly,  in  connexion  with  pyramidal  numbers,  Nicomachus  (11.  14,  5)  dis-
tinguishes numbers  corresponding  to  frusta  of  pyramids.  These  are  truncated
(fcoAovpoi),  twice-truncated  (^/coXovpoi),  thrice-truncated  {rpucokovpoi)  pyramids,
and  so  on,  the  term  being  used  mostly  in  theoretic  treatises  {iv  crvyypa/ifuuri
fAoXurra  rots  dtinprffmriKoU),  The  truncated  pyramid  was  formed  by  cutting
oflf  the  point  forming  the  vertex.  The  twice-truncated  was  that  which  lacked
the  vertex  and  the  next  plane,  and  so  on.  Theon  of  Smyrna  (p.  42,  4)  only
mentions  the  truncated  pyramid  as  "that  with  its  vertex  cut  off"  (ij  rtfif
KOfint^v  diroT€Tfji.rjfjL€vrf),  saying  that  some  also  called  it  a  trapezium,  after  the
similitude  of  a  plane  trapezium  formed  by  cutting  the  top  off  a  triangle
by  a  straight  line  parallel  to  the  base.


Definition  18.

TcrpayoiFOS^  dipi^/uiof  ia-riv  6   uraicis  laoi  ^  [6]  vwo  Svo  uriov  dptB/jMV  vtpi-

€)(6fl€V(K,

A  particular  kind  of  square  distinguished  by  Nicomachus  and  the  rest  was
the  square  number  which  ended  (in  the  decimal  notation)  with  the  same
number  as  its  side,  e.g.  i,  25,  36,  which  are  the  squares  of  i,  5  and  6.  These
square  numbers  were  called  cyclic  {kvkXmcoC)  on  the  analogy  of  circles  in
geometry  which  return  again  to  the  point  from  which  they  started.


Definition  19.

Kv/9o$  Sk  6  laoKis  icros  uraici?  ^  [6]  viro  rpiwv  Wutv  dptBfiMv  ir€pi€)(OfjL€vo^,

Similarly  cube  numbers  which  ended  with  the  same  number  as  their  sides,
and  the  squares  of  those  sides  also^  were  called  spherical  (<r^p«coi)  or  recurrent
{diroKarcurraTucoi),  One  might  have  expected  that  the  term  spherical  would  be
applicable  also  to  the  cubes  of  numbers  which  ended  with  the  same  digit  as  the
side  but  not  necessarily  with  the  same  digit  as  the  square  of  the  side  also.
E.g.  the  cube  of  4,  i.e.  64,  ends  with  the  same  digit  as  4,  but  not  with  the
same  digit  as  16.  But  apparently  64  was  not  called  a  spherical  number,  the
only  instances  given  by  Nicomachus  and  the  rest  being  those  cubed  from
numbers  ending  with  5  or  6,  which  end  with  the  same  digit  if  squared.  A
spherical  number  is  in  fact  derived  from  a  circular  number  only,  and  that  by
adding  another  equal  dimension.  Obviously,  as  Nesselmann  says,  the  names
^clic  and  sphericcU  applied  to  numbers  appeal  to  an  entirely  different  principle
from  that  on  which  the  figured  numbers  so  far  dealt  with  were  formed.

19 — 2


292  BOOK  VII  [vii.  DEF.  20


Definition  20.

*Api6fiol  avoAoydv  tUriv,  Srav  6  vp&roi  rov  Scvr^pov  ical  6  rpirof  rov  rcroprov
tcrcucis  i  voKkaTrXdtrioi  ^  ro  avrb  yApo^  fj  ra  avra  luifrq  wrw,

Euclid  does  not  give  in  this  Book  any  definition  of  ratio,  doubtless  because
it  could  only  be  the  same  as  that  given  at  the  banning  of  Book  v^  with
numbers  substituted  for  "homogeneous  magnitudes"  and  ''in  respect  oi size''
(m^Xuconp-a)  omitted  or  altered.  We  do  not  find  that  Nicomachus  and  the
rest  give  any  substantially  different  definition  of  a  ratio  between  numbers.
Theon  of  Smyrna  says,  in  fact  (p.  73,  16),  that  ''ratio  in  the  sense  of
proportion  (Xoyos  6  icar  amXoyov)  is  a  sort  of  relation  of  two  homogeneous
terms  to  one  another,  as  for  example,  double,  triple."  Similarly  Nicomachus
says  (11.  21,  3)  that  "a  ratio  is  a  relation  of  two  terms  to  one  another,"  the  word
for  "relation"  being  in  both  cases  the  same  as  Euclid's  (o-xcW).  Theon  of
Smyrna  goes  on  to  classify  ratios  as  greater,  less,  or  equal,  i.e.  as  ratios  of  greater
inequality,  less  inequality,  or  equality,  and  then  to  specify  certain  arithmetical
ratios  which  had  special  names,  for  which  he  quotes  the  authority  of  Adrastus.
The  names  were  n-oAXavXao-ios,  Ivt/iopios,  lirtficpi^,  n-oXXaTrXiuricvi/Aopios,
roXXavXao-iCR-ificpifs  (the  first  of  which  is,  of  course,  a  multiple,  while  the  rest
are  the  equivalent  of  certain  types  of  improper  fractions  as  we  should  call
them),  and  the  reciprocals  of  each  of  these  described  by  prefixing  \nr6  or  sub.
After  describing  these  particular  classes  of  arithmetical  ratios,  Theon  goes  on
to  say  that  numbers  still  have  ratios  to  one  another  even  if  they  are  different
from  all  those  previously  described.  We  need  not  therefore  concern  ourselves
with  the  various  types;  it  is  sufficient  to  observe  that  any  ratio  between
numbers  can  be  expressed  in  the  manner  indicated  in  Euclid's  definition  of
arithmetical  proportion,  for  the  greater  is,  in  relation  to  the  less,  either  one  or
a  combination  of  more  than  one  of  the  three  things,  (i)  a  multiple,  (2)  a
submultiple,  (3)  a  proper  fraction.

It  is  when  we  come  to  the  definition  of  proportion  that  we  begin  to  find
differences  between  Euclid,  Nicomachus,  Theon  and  lamblichus.  "  Proportion,"
says  Theon  (p.  82,  6),  "  is  similarity  or  sameness  of  more  ratios  than  one,"
which  is  of  course  unobjectionable  if  it  is  previously  understood  what  a  ratio
is;  but  confusion  was  brought  in  by  those  (like  I'hrasyllus)  who  said  that
there  were  three  proportions  (avaXoyau),  the  arithmetic,  geometric,  and
harmonic,  where  of  course  the  reference  is  to  arithmetic,  geometric  and
harmonic  means  {yLta-oryjfTt^),  ^  Hence  it  was  necessary  to  explain,  as  Adrastus
did  (Theon,  p.  106,  15),  that  of  the  several  means  "the  geometric  was  called
both  proportion /ar  excellence  and  primary... though  the  other  means  were
also  commonly  called  proportions  by  some  writers."  Accordingly  we  have
Nicomachus  trying  to  extend  the  term  "proportion"  to  cover  the  various
means  as  well  as  a  proportion  in  three  or  four  terms  in  the  ordinary  sense.  He
says  (11.  21,  2):  **  Froportionj  par  excellence  (icvpiws),  is  the  bringing  together
((TvXXi^i/ris)  to  the  same  (point)  of  two  or  more  ratios ;  or,  more  generally,  (the
bringing  together)  of  two  or  more  relations  (trxcacwi'),  even  though  they  be
subjected  not  to  the  same  ratio  but  to  a  difference  or  some  other  (law)."
lamblichus  keeps  the  senses  of  the  word  more  distinct.  He  says,  like  Theon,
that  "proportion  is  similarity  or  sameness  of  several  ratios"  (p.  98,  14),  and
that  "  it  is  to  be  premised  that  it  was  the  geometrical  (proportion)  which  the
ancients  called  proportion  par  excellence,  though  it  is  now  common  to  apply
the  name  generally  to  all  the  remaining  means  as  well "  (p.  100,  15).     Pappus


VII.  DEFF.  20—22]  NOTES  ON  DEFINITIONS  20—22  293

remarks  (in.  p.  70, 17),  "A  mean  differs  from  a  proportion  in  this  respect  that,  if
anything  is  a  proportion,  it  is  also  a  mean,  but  not  conversely.  For  there  are
three  means,  of  which  one  is  arithmetic,  one  geometric  and  one  harmonic."
The  last  remark  implies  plainly  enough  that  there  is  only  one  proportion
(avaXoyia)  in  the  proper  sense.  So,  too,  says  lamblichus  in  another  place
(p.  104,  19):  "the  second,  the  geometric,  mean  has  been  oa^td,  proportion
par  excellmce  because  the  terms  contain  the  same  ratio,  being  separated
according  to  the  same  proportion  (ava  rov  avrov  Xoyov  Sicorwrcs)."  The
natural  conclusion  is  that  of  Nesselmann,  that  originally  the  geometric
proportion  was  called  avaXoyio,  the  others,  the  arithmetic,  the  harmonic,  etc,
means ;  but  later  usage  had  obliterated  the  distinction.

Of  proportions  in  the  ancient  and  Euclidean  sense  Theon  (p.  82,  10)
distinguished  the  continuous  (crvvcx^s)  and  the  separated  (BijffyrffjLonff)^  using  the
same  terms  as  Aristotle  {JEt/i,  Nic,  1131  a  32).  The  meaning  is  of  course
clear :  in  the  continuous  proportion  the  consequent  of  one  ratio  is  the  ante-
cedent of  the  next ;  in  the  separated  proportion  this  is  not  so.  Nicomachus
(11.  21,  5 — 6)  uses  the  words  connected  {awii\y.^ivy\)  and  disjoined  (hui^vyikhn/j)
respectively.  Euclid  regularly  speaks  of  numbers  in  continuous  proportion  as
"  proportional  in  order,  or  successively  "  (If^s  avoKoyov).


Definition  21.

*0/Aoioi  ciriTTcSoi  fcal  crrcpcol  Sipidfioi  curiv  ot  &yaXoyov  €;(ovr€s  ra9  vXtvpaq,

Theon  of  Smyrna  remarks  (p.  36,  12)  that,  among  plane  numbers,  a//
squares  are  similar,  while  of  crcpo/Ai^/ccts  those  are  similar  "  whose  sides,  that
is,  the  numbers  containing  them,  are  proportional.*'  Here  irtpofiTJini^  must
evidently  be  used,  not  in  the  sense  of  a  number  of  the  form  «(«  +  i),  but  as
synonymous  with  irpo/Ai^iciTs,  any  oblong  number ;  so  that  on  this  occasion
Theon  follows  the  terminology  of  Plato  and  (according  to  lamblichus)  of
Euclid.  Obviously,  if  the  strict  sense  of  crcpo/Aifioys  is  adhered  to,  no  two
numbers  of  that  form  can  be  similar  unless  they  are  also  e^ua/.  We  may
compare  lamblichus'  elaborate  contrast  of  the  square  and  the  htpofujicrf^
Since  the  two  sides  of  the  square  are  equal,  a  square  number  might,  as  he
says  (p.  82,  9),  be  fitly  called  iSio/Ai^in;^  (Nicomachus  uses  ravrofnJKtis)  in
contrast  to  crcpo/Aifin;^ ;  and  the  ancients,  according  to  him,  called  square
numbers  **  the  same  *'  and  "  similar  **  (ravrovs  re  kcu  o/aoiovs),  but  Ircpo/Ai^/ccis
numbers  "  dissimilar  and  other  "  (oto/aoiovs  koi  daripov^).

With  regard  to  solid  numbers,  Theon  remarks  in  like  manner  (p.  37,  2)
that  a//  cube  numbers  are  similar,  while  of  the  others  those  are  similar  whose
sides  are  proportional,  i.e.  in  which,  as  length  is  to  length,  so  is  breadth  to
breadth  and  height  to  height


Definition  22.

TAcio9  AptBfAOi  iariv  6  rot?  lavrov  /Ac/Kcriv  i(ro«  iy,

Theon  of  Smyrna  (p.  45,  9  sqq.)  and  Nicomachus  (i.  16)  both  give
the  same  definition  of  a  perfect  number,  as  well  as  the  law  of  formation  of
such  numbers  which  Euclid  proves  in  the  later  proposition,  ix.  36.  They
add  however  definitions  of  two  other  kinds  of  numbers  in  contrast  with  it,
(i)  the  over-perfect  (vVcprcXi/s  in   Nicomachus,   vtrcprcXcios  in  Theon),  the


294  BOOK    VII

sum  of  whose  parts,  i.e.  submultiples,  is  greater  than  the  number  itself  e.g.  12,
24  etc.,  the  sum  of  the  parts  of  12  being  6  +  4  +  3  +  2  +  1  =  16,  and  the
sum  of  the  parts  of  24  being  12  +  8  +  6  +  4  +  3  +  2  +  i  =  36,  (2)  the  defective
(IXXiinJs),  the  sum  of  whose  parts  is  less  than  the  whole,  e.g.  8  or  14,  the
parts  in  the  first  case  adding  up  to  4  +  2  +  i,  or  7,  and  in  the  second  case  to
7  +  2  +  I,  or  10.  All  three  classes  are  however  made  by  Theon  subdivisions
of  numbers  in  general,  but  by  Nicomachus  subdivisions  of  even  numbers.

The  term  perfect  was  used  by  the  Pythagoreans,  but  in  another  sense,  of
10;  while  Theon  tells  us  (p.  46,  14)  that  3  was  also  called  perfect  "because
it  is  the  first  number  that  has  beginning,  middle  and  extremity;  it  is  also  both
a  line  and  a  plane  (for  it  is  an  equilateral  triangle  having  each  side  made  up
of  two  units),  and  it  is  the  first  Imk  and  potentiality  of  the  solid  (for  a  solid
must  be  conceived  of  in  three  dimensions).''

There  are  certain  unexpressed  axioms  used  in  Book  vii.  as  there  are  in
earlier  Books.

The  following  may  be  noted.

1.  \i  A  measures  B^  and  B  measures  C,  A  will  measure  C.

2.  If  ^  measures  B^  and  also  measures  C,  A  will  measure  the  difference
between  B  and  C  when  they  are  unequal.

3.  If  A  measures  B^  and  also  measures  C,  A  will  measure  the  sum  of  B
and  C

It  is  clear,  firom  what  we  know  of  the  Pythagorean  theory  of  numbers,  of
musical  intervals  expressed  by  numbers,  of  different  kinds  of  means  etc.,  that
the  substance  of  Euclid  Books  vii. — ix.  was  no  new  thing  but  goes  back,  at
least,  to  the  Pythagoreans.  It  is  well  known  that  the  mathematics  of  Plato's
Timaeus  is  essentially  Pythagorean.  It  is  therefore  a  priori  probable  (if  not
perhaps  quite  certain)  that  Plato  wvOayopi^ti  even  in  the  passage  (32  a,  b)  where
he  speaks  of  numbers  "  whether  solid  or  square  "  in  continued  proportion,
and  proceeds  to  say  that  between  planes  one  mean  suffices,  but  to  connect
two  solids  two  means  are  necessary.  This  passage  has  been  much  discussed,
but  I  think  that  by  "  planes  "  and  "  solids  "  Plato  certainly  meant  square  and
solid  numbers  respectively,  so  that  the  allusion  must  be  to  the  theorems
established  in  Eucl.  viii.  11,  12,  that  between  two  square  numbers  there  is
one  mean  proportional  number,  and  between  two  cube  numbers  there  are
two  mean  proportional  numbers*.

^  It  is  true  that  similar  plane  and  solid  numbers  have  the  same  property  (Eucl.  viu.  18,
19) ;  but,  if  Plato  had  meant  similar  plane  and  solid  numbers  generally,  I  think  it  would
have  been  necessary  to  specify  that  they  were  '*  similar,"  whereas,  seeing  that  the  Tinuuus  is
as  a  whole  concerned  with  regular  figures,  there  is  nothing  unnatural  in  allowing  regular  or
equilateral  to  be  understood.  Further  Plato  speaks  first  of  ^i/yd/tetj  and  ^koi  and  then  of
"planes"  (^T(Tcdo)  and  "solids"  {ar^pii.)  in  such  a  way  as  to  suggest  that  hvv^n^vi  cor-
respond to  iTciTctha.  and  ^/cot  to  arcped.  Now  the  regular  meaning  of  di^vafiis  is  square  (or
sometimes  square  root),  and  I  think  it  is  here  used  in  the  sense  of  square^  notwithstanding
that  Plato  seems  to  speak  of  three  squares  in  continued  proportion,  whereas,  in  general,  the
mean  between  two  squares  as  extremes  would  not  be  square  but  oblong.  And,  if  bwdfua  are
squares,  it  is  reasonable  to  suppose  that  the  SyKoi  are  also  equilateral^  i.e.  the  "solids"  are
cubes.  I  am  aware  that  Th.  Habler  {Bibliotluca  Mathematical  VIII3,  1908,  pp.  173 — 4)
thinks  that  the  passage  is  to  be  explained  by  reference  to  the  problem  of  the  duplication  of
the  cube,  and  does  not  refer  to  numbers  at  all.  Against  this  we  have  to  put  the  evidence  of
Nicomachus  (ii.  24,  6)  who,  in  speaking  of  "a  certain  Platonic  theorem,"  quotes  the  very
same  results  of  Eucl.  viii.  11,  n.  Secondly,  it  is  worth  noting  that  Habler's  explanation  is
distinctly  ruled  out  by  Democritus  the  Platonist  (3rd  cent  A.D.)  who,  according  to  Proclus


HISTORICAL   NOTE  295

It  is  no  less  clear  that,  in  his  method  and  line  of  argument,  Euclid  was
following  earlier  models,  though  no  doubt  making  improvements  in  the
exposition.  His  tract  on  the  Sedio  CanoniSy  Kararofirj  Kavovos  (for  which  see
Musid  Scripiores  Graeci^  ed.  Jan,  pp.  148 — 166)  is  in  style  and  in  the  form  of
the  propositions  closely  akin  to  the  Elements.  In  one  proposition  (2)  he  says
"  we  learned  {ifjLdOofjL€v)  that,  if  as  many  numbers  as  we  please  be  in  (con-
tinued) proportion,  and  the  first  measures  the  last,  the  first  will  also  measure
the  intermediate  numbers  " ;  here  he  practically  quotes  Elem,  viii.  7.  In  the
3rd  proposition  he  proves  that  no  number  can  be  a  mean  between  two
numbers  in  the  ratio  known  as  iwifiopio^,  the  ratio,  that  is,  of ;;  + 1  to  n,  where
n  is  any  integer  greater  than  unity.  Now,  fortunately,  Boethius,  I^e  institutione
musuoj  III.  1 1  (pp.  285 — 6,  ed.  Friedlein),  has  preserved  a  proof  by  Archytas
of  this  same  proposition ;  and  the  proof  is  substantially  identical  with  that
of  Euclid.  The  two  proofs  are  placed  side  by  side  in  an  article  by  Tannery
{Bibliotheca  Mathematical  vij,  1905/6,  p.  227).  Archytas  writes  the  smaller
term  of  the  proportion  first  (instead  of  the  greater,  as  Euclid  does).  Let,  he
says,  ^,  -5  be  the  "  superparticularis  proportio  "  {ivifiopiov  Sida-nfjfjLa  in  Euclid).
Take  C,  I?£  the  smallest  numbers  which  are  in  the  ratio  of  A  to  B,  [Here
I^JE  means  D  ^  E\  and  in  this  respect  the  notation  is  different  from  that  of
Euclid  who,  as  usual,  takes  a  line  DF  divided  into  two  parts  at  G^  OF
corresponding  to  E^  and  DG  to  Z?,  in  Archytas'  notation.  The  step  of  taking
C,  DE^  the  smallest  numbers  in  the  ratio  of  A  to  -5,  presupposes  Eucl.  vii.
33.]  Then  DE  exceeds  C  by  an  aliquot  part  of  itself  and  of  C  [cf.  the
definition  of  imfioptos  apiOpjo^  in  Nicomachus,  i.  19,  i].  Let  D  be  the  excess
[i.e.  E  is  supposed  equal  to  C\,    "  I  say  that  D  is  not  a  number  but  an  unit"

For,  if  Z?  is  a  number  and  a  part  of  DE,  it  measures  DE]  hence  it
measures  E^  that  is,  C.  Thus  I)  measures  both  C  and  DE^  which  is
impossible;  for  the  smallest  numbers  which  are  in  the  same  ratio  as  any
numbers  are  prime  to  one  another.  [This  presupposes  Eucl.  vii.  22.]  There-
fore Z?  is  an  unit ;  that  is,  DE  exceeds  C  by  an  unit.  Hence  no  number  can
be  found  which  is  a  mean  between  two  numbers  C,  DE,  Therefore  neither
can  any  number  be  a  mean  between  the  original  numbers  A^  B  which  are  in
the  same  ratio  [this  implies  Eucl.  vii.  20].

We  have  then  here  a  clear  indication  of  the  existence  at  least  as  early  as
the  date  of  Archytas  (about  430 — 365  b.c.)  of  an  Elements  of  Arithmetic  in
the  form  which  we  call  Euclidean ;  and  no  doubt  text-books  of  the  sort
existed  even  before  Archytas,  which  probably  Archytas  himself  and  Eudoxus
improved  and  developed  in  their  turn.

{In  Plaiams  Timaeum  commentariat  149  c),  said  that  the  difficulties  of  the  passage  of  the
Timaeus  had  misled  some  people  into  connecting  it  with  the  duplication  of  the  cube,
whereas  it  really  referred  to  similar  planes  and  solids  with  sides  in  rational  numbers.
Thirdly,  I  do  not  think  that,  under  the  supposition  that  the  Delian  problem  is  referred  to,
we  get  the  required  sense.  The  problem  in  that  case  is  not  that  of  finding  two  mean
proportionals  between  two  cubes  but  that  of  finding  a  second  cube  the  content  of  which
shall  be  equal  to  twice,  or  k  times  (where  k  is  any  number  not  a  complete  cube),  the  content
of  a  given  cube  (a*).  Two  mean  proportionals  are  found,  not  between  cubes,  but  between
two  straight  lines  in  the  ratio  of  i  to  ky  or  between  a  and  ka.  Unless  i^  is  a  cube,  there
would  be  no  point  in  saying  that  two  means  are  necessary  to  connect  i  and  k^  and  not  one
mean ;  for  $]k  is  no  more  natural  than  ^Jky  and  would  be  less  natural  in  the  case  where  k
happened  to  be  square.  On  the  other  hand,  if  >&  is  a  cube,  so  that  it  is  a  question  of  finding
means  between  cube  numbers^  the  dictum  of  Plato  is  perfectly  intelligible ;  nor  is  any  real
difficulty  caused  by  the  generality  of  the  statement  that  two  means  are  always  necessary  to
connect  them,  beicause  any  property  enunciated  generally  of  two  cube  numbers  should
obviously  be  true  of  cubes  cu  such^  that  is,  it  must  hold  in  the  extreme  caie  of  two  cubes
which  are  pritne  to  one  another.


BOOK  VII.     PROPOSITIONS.


A
H


C
Q


Proposition  i.

Two  unequal  numbers  being  set  out,  and  the  less  being
continually  subtracted  in  turn  from  the  greater,  if  the  number
which  is  left  never  measures  the  one  before  it  until  an  unit  is
left,  the  original  numbers  will  be  prime  to  one  another.

For,  the  less  of  two  unequal   numbers  AB,  CD  being
continually  subtracted  from  the  greater,  let  the
number  which   is  left  never  measure  the  one
before  it  until  an  unit  is  left  ;

I  say  that  AB,  CD  are  prime  to  one  another,
that  is,  that  an  unit  alone  measures  AB,  CD,

For,  \{AB,  CD  are  not  prime  to  one  another,
some  number  will  measure  them.

Let  a  number  measure  them,  and  let  it  be
E\  let  CD,  measuring  BF,  leave  FA  less  than
itself,

let  AF,  measuring  DG,  leave  GC  less  than  itself,

and  let  GC,  measuring  FH,  leave  an  unit  HA,

Since,  then,  E  measures  CD^  and  CD  measures  BF,
therefore  E  also  measures  BF.

But  it  also  measures  the  whole  BA  ;
therefore  it  will  also  measure  the  remainder  AF.

But  AF  measures  DG  ;
therefore  E  also  measures  DG.


vii.  i]  PROPOSITION   I  297

But  it  also  measures  the  whole  DC ;
therefore  it  will  also  measure  the  remainder  CG.

But  CG  measures  FH  ;
therefore  E  also  measures  FH.

But  it  also  measures  the  whole  FA  ;

therefore  it  will  also  measure  the  remainder,  the  unit  AH^
though  it  is  a  number :  which  is  impossible.

Therefore  no  number  will  measure  the  numbers  y^jff,  CD\
therefore  AB,  CD  are  prime  to  one  another.  [vu.  Def.  12]

Q.  E.  D.

It  is  proper  to  remark  here  that  the  representation  in  Books  vii.  to  ix.  of
numbers  by  straight  lines  is  adopted  by  Heiberg  from  the  MSS.  The  method
of  those  editors  who  substitute  points  for  lines  is  open  to  objection  because  it
practically  necessitates,  in  many  cases,  the  use  of  specific  numbers,  which  is
contrary  to  Euclid's  manner.

"Let  CD^  measuring  BF^  leave  FA  less  than  itself."  This  is  a  neat
abbreviation  for  sa)ring,  measure  along  BA  successive  lengths  equal  to  CD
until  a  point  F  is  reached  such  that  the  length  FA  remaining  is  less  than
CD ;  in  other  words,  let  BF  be  the  largest  exact  multiple  of  CD  contained
in^^.

Euclid's  method  in  this  proposition  is  an  application  to  the  particular
case  of  prime  numbers  of  the  method  of  finding  the  greatest  common  measure
of  two  numbers  not  prime  to  one  another,  which  we  shall  find  in  the  next
proposition.  With  our  notation,  the  method  may  be  shown  thus.  Supposing
the  two  numbers  to  be  a,  b,  we  have,  say,

b)a{p

c)b{q
qc_

d)c(r
rd

I

If  now  a^  b  are  not  prime  to  one  another,  they  must  have  a  common
measure  tf,  where  e  is  some  integer,  not  unity.

And  since  e  measures  a^  b^  it  measures  a  -pb^  i.e.  c.

Again,  since  e  measures  ^,  r,  it  measures  b  -  qc^  i.e.  </,

and  lastly,  since  e  measures  ^,  d^  it  measures  c-  rd,  i.e.  i:

which  is  impossible.

Therefore  there  is  no  integer,  except  unity,  that  measures  a,  ^,  which  are
accordingly  prime  to  one  another.

Observe  that  Euclid  assumes  as  an  axiom  that,  if  a,  b  are  both  divisible  by
Cy  so  is  a  "pb.  In  the  next  proposition  he  assumes  as  an  axiom  that  c  will  in
the  case  supposed  divide  a  ^pb.


o

F


19«  BOOK  VII  [to.  2

Proposition  2.

Given  two  numiers  not  prime  to  one  another^  to  fi$ul  their
greatest  common  measure.

Let  AB^  CD  be  the  two  given  numbers  not  prime  to  one
another.

Thus  it  is  required   to   find   the  greatest       ^
common  measure  of  AB^  CD.

If   now   CD   measures  AB — and   it  also       ^
measures  itself — CD  is  a  common  measure  of
CD,  AB.

And  it  is  manifest  that  it  is  also  the  greatest ;
for  no  greater  number  than  CD  will  measure         ^     ^
CD.

But,  if  CD  does  not  measure  AB,  then,  the  less  of  the
numbers  AB,  CD  being^  continually  subtracted  from  the
greater,  some  number  will  be  left  which  will  measure  the  one
before  it.

For  an  unit  will  not  be  left ;  otherwise  AB^  CD  will  be
prime  to  one  another  [vii.  i],  which  is  contrary  to  the
hypothesis.

Therefore  some  number  will  be  left  which  will  measure
the  one  before  it.

Now  let  CD,  measuring  BE^  leave  EA  less  than  itself,
let  EA,  measuring  DF,  leave  FC  less  than  itself,

and  let  CF  measure  AE.

Since  then,  CF  measures  AE,  and  AE  measures  DF,
therefore  CF  will  also  measure  DF.

But  it  also  measures  itself ;
therefore  it  will  also  measure  the  whole  CD.

But  CD  measures  BE  ;
therefore  CF  also  measures  BE.

But  it  also  measures  EA  ;
therefore  it  will  also  measure  the  whole  BA.

But  it  also  measures  CD  ;
therefore  CF  measures  AB,  CD.

Therefore  CF  is  a  common  measure  of  AB,  CD.


VII.  2]  PROPOSITION   2  299

I  say  next  that  it  is  also  the  greatest.

For,  if  CF  is  not  the  greatest  common  measure  of  AB,
CD,  some  number  which  is  greater  than  CF  will  measure  the
numbers  AB,  CD.

Let  such  a  number  measure  them,  and  let  it  be  G.

Now,  since  G  measures  CD^  while  CD  measures  BEy
G  also  measures  BE.

But  it  also  measures  the  whole  BA  ;

therefore  it  will  also  measure  the  remainder  AE.

But  AE  measures  DF\
therefore  G  will  also  measure  DF,

But  it  also  measures  the  whole  DC ;

therefore  it  will  also  measure  the  remainder  CF^  that  is,  the
greater  will  measure  the  less :  which  is  impossible.

Therefore  no  number  which  is  greater  than  C/^  will  measure
the  numbers  AB,  CD  \

therefore  CF  is  the  greatest  common  measure  of  AB^  CD.

PoRiSM.  From  this  it  is  manifest  that,  if  a  number
measure  two  numbers,  it  will  also  measure  their  greatest
common  measure.  Q.  e.  d.

Here  we  have  the  exact  method  of  finding  the  greatest  common  measure
given  in  the  text-books  of  algebra,  including  the  reductio  ad  absurdum  proof
that  the  number  arrived  at  is  not  only  a  common  measure  but  the  greatest
common  measure.  The  process  of  finding  the  greatest  common  measure
is  simply  shown  thus :

b)a{p

P±
c)b{q
gc
•d)c{r
rd

We  shall  arrive,  says  Euclid,  at  some  number,  say  d^  which  measures  the  one
before  it,  Le.  such  that  €=rd.  Otherwise  the  process  would  go  on  until  we
arrived  at  unity.  This  is  impossible  because  in  that  case  a,  b  would  be  prime
to  one  another,  which  is  contrary  to  the  hypothesis.

Next,  like  the  text-books  of  algebra,  he  goes  on  to  show  that  d  will  be  some
common  measure  of  a,  b.     For  d  measures  r ;
therefore  it  measures  qc  +  d^  that  is,  ^,
and  hence  it  measures/^  +  ^,  that  is,  a.

Lastly,  he  proves  that  d  is  the  greatest  common  measure  of  a,  ^  as  follows.

Suppose  that  ^  is  a  common  measure  greater  than  d.

Then  ^,  measuring  a,  b^  must  measure  a  -pby  or  c.


300  BOOK  VII  [vii.  2, 3

Similarly  e  must  measure  b-qc^  that  is,  d\  which  is  impossible,  since  e  is
by  hypothesis  greater  than  d.

Therefore  etc.

Euclid's  proposition  is  thus  idtnHcal  with  the  algebraical  proposition  as
generally  given,  e.g.  in  Todhunter's  algebra,  except  that  of  course  Euclid's
numbers  are  integers.

Nicomachus  gives  the  same  rule  (though  without  proving  it)  when  he
shows  how  to  determine  whether  two  given  odd  numbers  are  prime  or  not
prime  to  one  another,  and,  if  they  are  not  prime  to  one  another,  what  is  their
common  measure.  We  are,  he  says,  to  compare  the  numbers  in  turn  by
continuaUy  taking  the  less  from  the  greater  as  many  times  as  possible,
then  taking  the  remainder  as  many  times  as  possible  from  the  less  of  the
original  numbers,  and  so  on ;  this  process  "  will  finish  either  at  an  unit  or  at
some  one  and  the  same  number,"  by  which  it  is  implied  that  the  division  of  a
greater  number  by  a  less  is  done  by  separate  subtractions  of  the  less.  Thus,
with  regard  to  21  and  49,  Nicomachus  says,  ''I  subtract  the  less  from  the
greater ;  28  is  left ;  then  again  I  subtract  from  this  the  same  2 1  (for  this  is
possible);  7  is  left;  I  subtract  this  from  21,  14  is  left;  from  which  I  again
subtract  7  (for  this  is  possible);  7  will  be  left,  but  7  cannot  be  subtracted  from
7."  The  last  phrase  is  curious,  but  the  meaning  of  it  is  obvious  enough,  as
also  the  meaning  of  the  phrase  about  ending  "at  one  and  the  same  number."
^  The  proof  of  the  Ponsm  is  of  course  contamed  in  that  part  of  the  propo-
sition which  proves  that  G^  a  common  measure  different  from  CF^  must
measure  CF,  The  supposition,  thereby  proved  to  be  false,  that  G  is  greater
than  CF  does  not  affect  the  validity  of  the  proof  that  G  measures  CF  in  any
case.


Proposition  3.

Given  three  numbers  not  prime  to  one  another,  to  find  t/teir
greatest  common  measure.

Let  A,  By  C  be  the  three  given  numbers  not  prime  to
one  another ;

thus  it  is  required  to  find  the  greatest
common  measure  of  A,  B,  C.

For  let  the  greatest  common  measure,
/?,  of  the  two  numbers  A,  Bh^  taken  ;

[VII.  2]  "         D|    E|    Fj

then  D  either  measures,  or  does  not
measure,  C

First,  let  it  measure  it.

But  it  measures  A,  B  also ;
therefore  D  measures  A,  By  C\
therefore  Z?  is  a  common  measure  of  A,  By  C.

I  say  that  it  is  also  the  greatest.


VII.  3]  PROPOSITIONS   2,  3  301

For,  if  D  is  not  the  greatest  common  measure  oiA.B,  C,
some  number  which  is  greater  than  D  will  measure  the  numbers

A,  B,  C.

Let  such  a  number  measure  them,  and  let  it  be  E.
Since  then  E  measures  A^  B,  C,

it  will  also  measure  A,  B  \

therefore  it  will  also  measure  the  greatest  common  measure
of  A,  B.  [vii.  2,  Por.]

But  the  greatest  common  measure  of  -^,  B  is  D  \
therefore   E  measures  Z?,  the   greater   the  less :    which  is
impossible.

Therefore  no  number  which  is  greater  than  Z?will  measure
the  numbers  A,  B,  C;

therefore  D  is  the  greatest  common  measure  of  A,  B,  C.

Next,  let  Z?  not  measure  C;

I  say  first  that  C,  D  are  not  prime  to  one  another.

For,  since  A,  B,  C  are  not  prime  to  one  another,  some
number  will  measure  them.

Now  that  which  measures  A,  B,  C  will  also  measure  A,

B,  and  will  measure  Z?,  the  greatest  common  measure  of  A,  B.

[vii.  2,  Por.]
But  it  measures  C  also  ;

therefore  some  number  will  measure  the  numbers  Z?,  C ;

therefore  Z?,  C  are  not  prime  to  one  another.

Let  then  their  greatest  common  measure  E  be  taken.

[vii.  2]
Then,  since  E  measures  Z?,

and  Z?  measures  A,  B,

therefore  E  also  measures  A,  B.

But  it  measures  C  also ;
therefore  E  measures  A,  B,  C\
therefore  -£*  is  a  common  measure  of  A,  B,  C.

I  say  next  that  it  is  also  the  greatest.

For,  if  E  is  not  the  greatest  common  measure  of  Ay  B^  C,
some  number  which  is  greater  than  E  will  measure  the
numbers  Ay  B,  C.

Let  such  a  number  measure  them,  and  let  it  be  F.


302  BOOK  VII  [vii.  3

Now,  since  F  measures  A^  B,  C,
it  also  measures  A,  B\

therefore  it  will  also  measure  the  greatest  common  measure
of  A,  B.  [vii.  2,  Por.]

But  the  greatest  common  measure  o(  A,  B  is  D ;
therefore  F  measures  D.

And  it  measures  C  also  ;

therefore  F  measures  Z?,  C ;

therefore  it  will  also  measure  the  greatest  common  measure
of  /?,  C.  [vii.  2,  Por.]

But  the  greatest  common  measure  of  /?,  C  is  B ;
therefore   B  measures  B,  the   greater   the  less :    which  is
impossible.

Therefore  no  number  which  is  greater  than  B  will  measure
the  numbers  A,  B,  C\  .

therefore  B  is  the  greatest  common  measure  of  A,  By  C.

Q.  E.  D.

Euclid's  proof  is  here  longer  than  we  should  make  it  because  he
distinguishes  two  cases,  the  simpler  of  which  is  really  included  in  the  other.

Having  taken  the  greatest  common  measure,  say  d^  of  a,  b,  two  of  the
fhree  given  numbers  «,  by  r,  he  distinguishes  the  cases

(i)  in  which  d  measures  r,

(2)  in  which  d  does  not  measure  c.

In  the  first  case  the  greatest  common  measure  of  d^  c  is  ^itself;  in  the
second  case  it  has  to  be  found  by  a  repetition  of  the  process  of  vii.  2.  In
either  case  the  greatest  common  measure  of  «,  ^,  c  is  the  greatest  common
measure  of  d^  c.

But,  after  disposing  of  the  simpler  case,  Euclid  thinks  it  necessary  to
prove  that,  if  d  does  not  measure  r,  d  and  c  must  necessarily  have  a  greatest
common  measure.  This  he  does  by  means  of  the  original  hypothesis  that
<7,  by  €  are  not  prime  to  one  another.  Since  they  are  not  prime  to  one  another,
they  must  have  a  common  measure;  any  common  measure  of  a,  ^  is  a  measure
of  dy  and  therefore  any  common  measure  of  a,  ^,  ^  is  a  common  measure  of
dy  c;  hence  d,  c  must  have  a  common  measure,  and  are  therefore  not  prime  to
one  another.

The  proofs  of  cases  (i)  and  (2)  repeat  exactly  the  same  argument  as  we
saw  in  vii.  2,  and  it  is  proved  separately  for  d  in  case  (i)  and  e  in  case  (2),
where  e  is  the  greatest  common  measure  of  d^  r,

(a)     that  it  is  a  common  measure  of  a,  ^,  r,

(fi)    that  it  is  the  greatest  common  measure.

Heron  remarks  (an-Nairizi,  ed.  Curtze,  p.  191)  that  the  method  does
not  only  enable  us  to  find  the  greatest  common  measure  of  three  numbers  ;
it  can  be  used  to  find  the  greatest  common  measure  of  as  many  numbers


VII.  3,  4]  PROPOSITIONS   3,  4  303

as  we  please.  This  is  because  any  number  measuring  two  numbers  also
measures  their  greatest  common  measure ;  and  hence  we  can  find  the  g.cm.
of  pairs,  then  the  g.cm.  of  pairs  of  these,  and  so  on,  until  only  two  numbers
are  left  and  we  find  the  g.cm.  of  these.  Euclid  tacitly  assumes  this  extension
in  VII.  33,  where  he  takes  the  greatest  common  measure  of  <is  many  numbers
as  Tve  please.

Proposition  4.

Any  number  is  either  a  part  or  parts  of  any  number^  the
less  of  the  greater.

Let  A,  BC  be  two  numbers,  and  let  BC  be  the  less ;
I  say  that  BC  is  either  a  part,  or  parts,  of  A.

For  A,  BC  are  either  prime  to  one  another
or  not.

First,  let  A,  BC  be  prime  to  one  another.

Then,  if  BC  be  divided  into  the  units  in  it,
each  unit  of  those  in  BC  will  be  some  part  of  A ;
so  that  BC  is  parts  of  A.

Next  let  A,  BC  not  be  prime  to  one  another;
then  BC  either  measures,  or  does  not  measure,  A.

If  now  BC  measures  A,  BC  is  a  part  of  -^.

But,  if  not,  let  the  greatest  common  measure  D  of  A,  BC
be  taken  ;  [vii.  2]

and  let  BC  be  divided  into  the  numbers  equal  to  /?,  namely
BE,  EF,  FC

Now,  since  D  measures  -^,  Z?  is  a  part  of  A.

But  D  is  equal  to  each  of  the  numbers  BE,  EF,  FC ;
therefore  each  of  the  numbers  BEy  EF,  FC  is  also  a  part  of  A ;
so  that  BC  is  parts  of  A.

Therefore  etc.

Q.  E.  D.

The  meaning  of  the  enunciation  is  of  course  that,  if  tf,  ^  be  two  numbers
of  which  b  is  the  less,  then  b  is  either  a  submultiple  or  some  proper  fraction  of  a,

(i)  If  a,  ^  are  prime  to  one  another,  divide  each  into  its  units;  then  b
contains  b  of  the  same  parts  of  which  a  contains  a.  Therefore  b  is  "  parts '*  or
a  proper  fraction  of  a.

(2)  If  a,  ^  be  not  prime  to  one  knother,  either  b  measures  a,  in  which
case  ^  is  a  submultiple  or  "part**  of  a,  or,  if  ^  be  the  greatest  common
measure  of  a,  b^  we  may  put  a^mg  and  b  =  ng,  and  b  will  contain  n  of  the
same  parts  {g)  of  which  a  contains  m,  so  that  b  is  again  "parts,"  or  sl proper
fraction^  of  a.


E

|o|«


304  BOOK  VII  [tils

Proposition  5,

If  a  number  be  a  part  of  a  number,  and  another  be  the
same  part  of  another,  the  sum  wUl  also  be  the  same  part  ijfthe
sum  that  the  one  is  of  the  one.

For  let  the  number  ^  be  a  part  of  BC,

and  another,  D,  the  same  part  of  another  EF  that  A  is  of  BC;

I  say  that  the  sum  of  A,  D  is  also  the  same  .
part  of  the  sum  of  BC,  EF  that  A  is  of  BC.

For  since,  whatever  part  A  is  of  BC,  D
is  also  the  same  part  olEF,

therefore,  as  many  numbers  as  there  are  in
^C  equal  to  A,  so  many  numbers  are  there
also  in  EF  equal  to  Di

Let  BC  be  divided  into  the  numbers  equal  to  A,  namely
BG,  GC,

and  EF  into  the  numbers  equal  to  D,  namely  EH,  HF\

then  the  multitude  of  BG,  GC  will  be  equal  to  the  multitude
oiEH,HF.

And,  since  BG  is  equal  to  A,  and  EH  to  D,
therefore  BG,  EH  2lX^  also  equal  to  A,  D.

For  the  same  reason
GC,  HF  are  also  equal  to  ^,  D.

Therefore,  as  many  numbers  as  there  are  in  BC  equal  to
A,  so  many  are  there  also  in  BC,  ^/^  equal  to  A,  D.

Therefore,  whatever  multiple  BC  is  of  ^,  the  same  multiple
also  is  the  sum  of  BC,  EF  of  the  sum  o{  A,  D.

Therefore,  whatever  part  A  is  of  BC,  the  same  part  also
is  the  sum  of  A,  D  of  the  sum  of  BC,  EF.


Q.  E.  D.


If  a=-b,  and  c^^-cL  then


The  proposition  is  of  course  true  for  any  quantity  of  pairs  of  numbers
similarly  related,  as  is  the  next  proposition  also ;  and  both  propositions  are
used  in  the  extended  form  in  vil  9,  10.


A

C

D

<3i

H

B

E

VII.  6J  PROPOSITIONS   5,  6  305


Proposition  6.

//a  number  be  parts  of  a  number,  and  another  be  the  same
parts  of  another y  the  sum  will  also  be  the  same  parts  of  the  sum
that  the  one  is  of  the  one.

For  let  the  number  AB  be  parts  of  the  number  C,
and  another,  DE,  the  same  parts  of  another,
F,  that  AB  is  of  C ;

I  say  that  the  sum  of  AB,  DE  is  also  the
same  parts  of  the  sum  of  C,  F  that  AB  is
of  C

For  since,  whatever  parts  AB  is  of  C,
DE  is  also  the  same  parts  of  /%
therefore,  as  many  parts  of  C  as  there  are
in  AB,  so  many  parts  of  F  are  there  also  in  DE.

Let  AB  be  divided  into  the  parts  of  C,  namely  AG,  GB,
and  DE  into  the  parts  of  F,  namely  DH,  HE ;
thus  the  multitude  of  AG,  GB  will  be  equal  to  the  multitude
o{DH,HE.

And  since,  whatever  part  ^G^  is  of  C,  the  same  part  is
DHo{F3\so,

therefore,  whatever  psLVtAG  is  of  C,  the  same  part  also  is  the
sum  of  AG,  DH  of  the  sum  of  C,  F.  [vn.  5]

For  the  same  reason,

whatever  part  GB  is  of  C,  the  same  part  also  is  the  sum  of
GB,  HE  of  the  sum  of  C,  F.

Therefore,  whatever  parts  AB  is  of  C,  the  same  parts  also
is  the  sum  of  AB,  DE  of  the  sum  of  C,  F.

Q.  E.  D.


If

m

a  -  —

n

b,  and

m   ,

then

a  +  c

n

+rf).

More

generally.

if

a-

--l>,c-

=^.

m  ^

then  (a  +  ^ +  ^  +  ^+  ...)  =  -  {b  +  d-^f-^  ^+  ...).

H.  E.  n.  20


3o6  BOOK  VII  [vii.6.7

In  Euclid's  proposition  m<n^  but  the  generality  of  the  result  is  of  course
not  affected.  This  proposition  and  the  last  are  complementary  to  v.  i,  whkh
proves  the  correspondmg  result  with   multiple  substituted  for  ^^part^  or

Proposition  7.

If  a  number  be  that  part  of  a  number,  which  a  number
subtracted  is  of  a  number  subtracted,  the  remainder  mill  also
be  the  same  part  of  the  remainder  that  the  whole  is  of  the
whole.

For  let  the  number  AB  be  that  part  of  the  number  CD
which  AE  subtracted  is  of  CF  subtracted ;

I  say  that  the  remainder  EB  is  also  the  same  part  of  the
remainder  FD  that  the  whole  AB  is  of  the  whole  CD.


E


F


For,  whatever  part  AE  is  of  CF,  the  same  part  also  let
EB  be  of  CG.

Now  since,  whatever  part  AE  is  of  CF,  the  same  part
also  is  EB  of  CG,

therefore,  whatever  part  AE  is  of  CF,  the  same  part  also  is
AB  of  GF.  [VII.  5]

But,  whatever  part  AE  is  of  CF,  the  same  part  also,  by
hypothesis,  is  AB  of  CD  ;

therefore,  whatever  part  AB  is  of  GF,  the  same  part  is  it  of

CD  also ;

therefore  GF  is  equal  to  CD.

Let  CF  be  subtracted  from  each  ;
therefore  the  remainder  GC  is  equal  to  the  remainder  FD.

Now  since,  whatever  part  AE  is  of  CF,  the  same  part
also  is  EB  of  GC,

while  GC  is  equal  to  FD,

therefore,  whatever  part  AE  is  of  CF,  the  same  part  also  is
EBoiFD.

But,  whatever  part  AE  is  of  CF,  the  same  part  also  is  AB
of  CZ?;


VII.  7,  8]  PROPOSITIONS   6—8  307

therefore  also  the  remainder  EB  is  the  same  part  of  the
remainder  FD  that  the  whole  A B  is  of  the  whole  CD.


Q.  E.  D.

If   a--b  and  c=^~d^^e  are  to  prove  that
//  n

a-'C  =  ^{d-d\

a  result  differing  from  that  of  vii.  5  in  that  minus  is  substituted  for  p/us.
Euclid's  method  is  as  follows.

Suppose  that  g  is  taken  such  that

a-c  =  -e.     (i)

Now  c--d.

n

Therefore  a^-(d^e\  [vii.  5]

whence,  from  the  hypothesis,         d-^-e-b^
so  that  e-b-d^

and,  substituting  this  value  of  ^  in  (i),  we  have


Proposition  8.

If  a  number  be  the  same  parts  of  a  number  that  a  number
subtracted  is  of  a  number  subtracted,  the  remainder  will  also
be  the  same  parts  of  the  remainder  that  the  whole  is  of  the
whole.

For  let  the  number  AB  be  the  same  parts  of  the  number
CD  that  AE  subtracted  is  of  CF

subtracted  ;  c f p

I  say  that  the  remainder  EB  is       q       i^i  ^        f^  ^
also  the  same  parts   of  the   re-  ^    '  ^

mainder  FD  that  the  whole  AB      ^ [; 1 g

is  of  the  whole  CD.

For  let  GH  be  made  equal  to  AB.

Therefore,  whatever  parts  GH  is  of  CD,  the  same  parts
also  is  AE  of  CF.

Let  GHhe,  divided  into  the  parts  of  CD,  namely  GK,  KH,
and  AE  into  the  parts  of  CF,  namely  AL,  LE ;
thus  the  multitude  of  GK,  KH  will  be  equal  to  the  multitude
of  AL,  LE.

20 — 2


3o8  BOOK  VII  [vil8

Now  since,  whatever  part  GK  is  of  CZ?,  the  same  part
also  is  AL  of  C/s
while  CD  is  greater  than  C/%
therefore  GK  is  also  greater  than  AL.

Let  GM  be  made  equal  to  AL.

Therefore,  whatever  part  GK  is  of  CD,  the  same^  part  also
is  GM  oiCF\

therefore  also  the  remainder  MK  is  the  same  part  of  the
remainder  FD  that  the  whole  GK  is  of  the  whole  CD.  [vn.  7]

Again,  since,  whatever  part  KH  is  of  CD,  the  same  part
also  is  EL  of  CP,
while  CD  is  greater  than  CF,
therefore  HK  is  also  greater  than  EL.

Let  KN  be  made  equal  to  EL.

Therefore,  whatever  part  KH  is  of  CD,  the  same  part
also  is  KN  of  CF\

therefore  also  the  remainder  NH  is  the  same  part  of  the
remainder  FD  that  the  whole  KH  is  of  the  whole  CD.

[VII.  7]

But  the  remainder  MK  was  also  proved  to  be  the  same
part  of  the  remainder  FD  that  the  whole  GK  is  of  the  whole
CD^

therefore  also  the  sum  of  MK,  NH  is  the  same  parts  of  DF
that  the  whole  HG  is  of  the  whole  CD.

But  the  sum  of  MK,  NH  is  equal  to  EB,
and  HG  is  equal  to  BA  ;

therefore  the  remainder  EB  is  the  same  parts  of  the  remainder
FD  that  the  whole  AB  is  of  the  whole  CD,

Q.  E.  D.
If  a  =  —  b  and  c^—d,  (m<n)

then  a-c  =  —  {b-d).


Euclid^s  proof  amounts  to  the  following.

Take  e  equal  to  -  b,  and /equal  to  -  d,
ft  ft

Then  since,  by  hypothesis,  b>d,


and,  by  VII.  7,  e  -/=  -  (*  "  'O-


VII.  8,  9]  PROPOSITIONS   8,  9  309

Repeat  this  for  all  the  parts  equal  to  e  and /that  there  are  in  a^  b  respec-
tively, and  we  have,  by  addition  («,  b  containing  m  of  such  parts  respectively),

m(e-f)  =  '^(b-<I).

But  m  (e  — /)  =  a  —  c.

Therefore  a-c=  —  {b-d).

The  propositions  vii.  7,  8  are  complementary  to  v.  5  which  gives  the
corresponding  result  with  multiple  in  the  place  of  "part"  or  "parts."


Proposition  9.

If  a  number  be  a  part  of  a  number^  and  another  be  the
same  part  of  another^  alternately  also,  whatever  part  or  parts
the  first  is  of  the  third,  the  same  part,  or  the  same  parts,  will
the  second  also  be  of  the  fourth.

For  let  the  number  A  he  3,  part  of  the  number  BC,
and  another,  /?,  the  same  part  of  another,  £1^,
that  A  is  of  BC ;

I  say  that,  alternately  also,  whatever  part  or  ®

parts  A  is  of  D,  the  same  part  or  parts  is  BC        1  o
of  ^/^  also.  '^  L

For  since,  whatever  part  A  is  of  BC,  the
same  part  also  is  Z?  of  BB*,

therefore,  as  many  numbers  as  there  are  in  BC  equal  to  A,
so  many  also  are  there  in  £B  equal  to  D.

Let  BC  be  divided  into  the  numbers  equal  to  A,  namely
BG,  GC,
and  EF  mlo  those  equal  to  D,  namely  EH,  HF\

thus  the  multitude  of  BG,  GC  will  be  equal  to  the  multitude
o{EH,HF.

Now,  since  the  numbers  BG,  GC  are  equal  to  one  another,
and  the  numbers  EH,  HF  are  also  equal  to  one  another,

while  the  multitude  of  BG,  GC  is  equal  to  the  multitude  of
EH,  HF,

therefore,  whatever  part  or  parts  BG  is  of  EH,  the  same
part  or  the  same  parts  is  GC  of  HF  also ;

so  that,  in  addition,  whatever  part  or  parts  BG  is  of  EH,
the  same  part  also,  or  the  same  parts,  is  the  sum  BC  of  the
sum  EF.  [vii.  5,  6]


3IO  BOOK  VII  [vii.  9,  lo

But  BG  is  equal  to  A,  and  EH  to  D ;
therefore,  whatever  part  or  parts  A  is  of  D,  the  same  part  or
the  same  parts  is  BC  of  EF  also.

Q.  E.  D.

If  tf  =  -  b  and  c^—  d^  then,  whatever  fraction  ("  part "  or  " parts")  a  is  of
ft  ft

c^  the  same  fraction  will  ^  be  of  //.

Dividing  b  into  each  of  its  parts  equal  to  a,  and  d  into  each  of  its  parts

equal  to  r,  it  is  clear  that,  whatever  fraction  one  of  the  parts  a  is  of  one  of  the

parts  r,  the  same  fraction  is  any  other  of  the  parts  a  of  any  other  of  the  parts  r.
And  the  number  of  the  parts  a  is  equal  to  the  number  of  the  parts  r,  viz.  n.
Therefore,  by  vii.  5,  6,  na  is  the  same  fraction  of  nc  that  a  is  of  r,  i.e.  b  is

the  same  fraction  of  d  that  «  is  of  r.


Proposition  10.

If  a  number  be  parts  of  a  number,  and  another  be  the
same  parts  of  another,  alternately  also,  whatever  parts  or  part
the  first  is  of  the  third,  the  same  parts  or  the  same  part  will
the  second  also  be  of  the  fourth.

For  let  the  number  AB  be  parts  of  the  number  C,
and  another,  DE,  the  same  parts  of  another,

I  say  that,  alternately  also,  whatever  parts  or
part  AB  is  of  DE,  the  same  parts  or  the
same  part  is  C  oi  F  also.

For  since,  whatever  parts  AB  is  of  C,      ^'
the  same  parts  also  is  DE  of  F,
therefore,  as  many  parts  of  C  as  there  are
in  ABy  so  many  parts  also  of  F  are  there  in  DE.

Let  AB  be  divided  into  the  parts  of  C,  namely  AG,  GB,
and  DE  into  the  parts  of  F,  namely  DH,  HE ;

thus  the  multitude  of  AG,  GB  will  be  equal  to  the  multitude
o{DH,HE.

Now  since,  whatever  part  ^G^  is  of  C,  the  same  part  also
x^DHoiF,

alternately  also,  whatever  part  or  parts  AG  is  o(  DH,

the  same  part  or  the  same  parts  is  C  o(  F  also.  [vii.  9]

For  the  same  reason  also,
whatever  part  or  parts  GB  is  of  HE,  the  same  part  or  the
same  parts  is  C  o(  F  also  ;


VII.  lo,  ii]  PROPOSITIONS   9— II  311

so  that,  in  addition,  whatever  parts  or  part  AB  is  of  DE,
the  same  parts  also,  or  the  same  part,  is  C  of  /^  [vii.  5,  6]

Q.  E.  D.

\i  a  =  —  b  and  c  =  —d^  then,  whatever  fraction  a  is  of  c.  the  same  fraction
ft  ft

is  b  of  d.

To  prove  this,  a  is  divided  into  its  ffi  parts  equal  to  ^/«,  and  c  into  its
fft  parts  equal  to  d/ft.

Then,  by  vii.  9,  whatever  fraction  one  of  the  fft  parts  of  a  is  of  one  of  the
fft  parts  of  Cj  the  same  fraction  is  d  of  d.

And,  by  vii.  5,  6,  whatever  fraction  one  of  the  fft  parts  of  a  is  of  one  of
the  fft  parts  of  c,  the  same  fraction  is  the  sum  of  the  parts  of  a  (that  is,  a)  of
the  sum  of  the  parts  of  c  (that  is,  c).

Whence  the  result  follows.

In  the  Greek  text,  after  the  words  "  so  that,  in  addition  "  in  the  last  line
but  one,  is  an  additional  explanation  making  the  reference  to  v  11.  5,  6  clearer,
as  follows:  ** whatever  part  or  parts  AG  is  of  £>If,  the  same  part  or  the
same  parts  is  GB  of  Ii£  also ;

therefore  also,  whatever  part  or  parts  AG  is  o(  DH^  the  same  part  or  the  same
parts  \s  AB  o{  DE  also.  [vii.  5,  6]

But  it  was  proved  that,  whatever  part  or  parts  AG  is  of  DH^  the  same
part  or  the  same  parts  is  C  of  /'also  ;
therefore  also  "  etc.  as  in  the  last  two  lines  of  the  text.

Heiberg  concludes,  on  the  authority  of  P,  which  only  has  the  words  in
the  margin  in  a  later  hand,  that  they  may  be  attributed  to  Theon.

Proposition  11.

If,  as  whole  is  to  whole,  so  is  a  number  subtracted  to  a
number  subtracted,  the  remainder  will  also  be  to  the  remainder
as  whole  to  whole.

As  the  whole  ^^  is  to  the  whole  CD,  so  let  AE  subtracted
be  to  CF  subtracted ;

I  say  that  the  remainder  EB  is  also  to  the  remainder
FD  as  the  whole  AB  to  the  whole  CD.

Since,  as  AB  is  to  CD,  so  is  ^^  to  CF,
whatever  part  or  parts  AB  is  of  CD,  the  same  part
or  the  same  parts  is  AE  of  CF  also  ;        [vii.  Def.  20]

Therefore  also  the  remainder  EB  is  the  same
part  or  parts  of  FD  that  AB  is  of  CD.  [vii.  7,  8]

Therefore,  as  EB  is  to  FD,  so  is  AB  to  CD.    [vn.  Def.  20]

Q.  E.  D.

It  will  be  observed  that,  in  dealing  with  the  proportions  in  Props.  11 — 13,
Euclid  only  contemplates  the  case  where  the  first  number  is  "a  part"  or
"parts"  of  the  second,  while  in  Prop.  13  he  assumes  the  first  to  be  *'a  part"


0


312  BOOK  VII  [vii.  II,  12

or  "parts''  of  the  third  also;  that  is,  the  first  number  is  in  all  three  propositions
assumed  to  be  less  than  the  second,  and  in  Prop.  13  less  than  the  third  also.
Yet  the  figures  in  Props.  11  and  13  are  inconsistent  with  these  assumptions.
If  the  facts  are  taken  to  correspond  to  the  figures  in  these  propositions,  it  is
necessary  to  take  account  of  the  other  possibilities  involved  in  the  definition
of  proportion  (vii.  Def.  20),  that  the  first  number  may  also  be  a  multiple,  or
a  multiple //i^  "a  part "  or  "  parts  "  (including  once  as  a  multiple  in  this  case),
of  each  number  with  which  it  is  compared.  Thus  a  number  of  different  cases
would  have  to  be  considered.  The  remedy  is  to  make  the  ratio  which  is  in
the  lower  terms  the  first  ratio,  and  to  invert  the  ratios,  if  necessary,  in  order
to  make  ''  a  part "  or  **  parts  "  literally  apply.

If  a  :  d  =  c:  dj  (a  >  /,  d  >  il)

then  (a-c)  :{d-d)  =  a  :d.

This  proposition  for  numbers  corresponds  to  v.  19  for  magnitudes.  The
enunciation  is  the  same  except  that  the  masculine  (agreeing  with  dpiOfAos)
takes  the  place  of  the  neuter  (agreeing  with  ftcyctfov).

The  proof  is  no  more  than  a  combination  of  the  arithmetical  definition  of
proportion  (vu.  Def.  20)  with  the  results  of  vii.  7,  8.  The  language  of  propor-
tions is  turned  into  the  language  of  fractions  by  Def.  20 ;  the  results  of  vii.  7,  8
are  then  used  and  the  language  retransformed  by  Def.  20  into  the  language  of
proportions.

Proposition  12.

//  there  be  as  many  numbers  as  we  please  in  proportion,
tfien,  as  one  of  the  antecedents  is  to  one  of  the  consequents,  so
are  all  tfie  antecedents  to  all  the  consequents.

Let  A,  B,  Cy  D  he  as  many  numbers  as  we  please  in
proportion,  so  that,

as  A  is  to  B,  so  is  C  to  Z? ;
I  say  that,  as  ^  is  to  B,  so  are  A,  C  to  B,  D.

For  since,  as  A  is  to  B,  so  is  C  to  /?,  a|  bI  c

whatever  part  or  parts  A  is  of  B,  the  same  part
or  parts  is  C  of  D  also.  [vu.  Def.  20]

Therefore  also  the  sum  of  ^,  C  is  the  same
part  or  the  same  parts  of  the  sum  of  B,  D  that  A  is  of  B.

[vii.  5,  6]
Therefore,  as  A  is  to  B,  so  are  ^4,  C  to  B,  D.    [vu.  Def.  20]

If  a:a'  =  b:d'  =  c:^  =  ...,

then  each  ratio  is  equal  to  {a  +  b  +  c+  ,,.)  :  (a'  +  ^'-f  ^+ ...).

The  proposition  corresponds  to  v.  12,  and  the  enunciation  is  word  for  word
the  same  with  that  of  v.  12  except  that  dpiOfio^  takes  the  place  of  /xcycdos.

Again  the  proof  merely  connects  the  arithmetical  definition  of  proportion
(vii.  Def.  20)  with  the  results  of  vii.  5,  6,  which  are  quoted  as  true  for  any
number  of  numbers,  and  not  merely  for  two  numbers  as  in  the  enunciations  of
VII.  5,  6.


VII.  13,  m]  propositions    ii— 14  313

Proposition  13.

If  four  numbers  be  proportional,  they  will  also  be  propor-
tional alternately.

Let  the  four  numbers  A,  B,  C,  D  h^  proportional,  so  that,
as  A  IS  to  B,  so  is  C  to  Z?  ;
I  say  that  they  will  also  be  proportional  alternately,  so  that,
as  A  is  to  C,  so  will  B  be  to  D.
For  since,  as  A  is  to  B,  so  is  C  to  /?,
therefore,  whatever  part  or  parts  A  is  of  B,
the  same  part  or  the  same  parts  is  C  of  Z?  also.

[vii.  Def.  20]
Therefore,    alternately,    whatever    part    or
parts  A  is  of  C,  the  same  part  or  the  same
parts  is  B  of  D  also.  [vn.  10]

Therefore,  as  A  is  to  C,  so  is  B  to  D.  [vii.  Def.  20]

Q.   E.  D.

If  a:d  =  c:d,

then,  alternately,  a  :  c=d  :  d.

The  proposition  corresponds  to  v.    16   for  magnitudes,  and  the  proof
consists  in  connecting  vu.  Def.  20  with  the  result  of  vii.  10.

Proposition  14.

If  there  be  as  many  numbers  as  we  please,  and  others  equal
to  them  in  multitude,  which  taken  two  and  two  are  in  the  same
ratiOf  they  will  also  be  in  the  same  ratio  ex  aequali.

Let  there  be  as  many  numbers  as  we  please  A,  B,  C,
and  others  equal  to  them  in  multitude  D,  E,  F,  which  taken
two  and  two  are  in  the  same  ratio,  so  that,

as  A  is  to  B,  so  is  D  to  E,
and,  as  B  is  to  C,  so  is  E  to  F\

I  say  that,  ex  aequali,

as  ^  is  to  C,  so  also  is  D  to  F.


IT
"B"


For,  since,  as  A  is  to  B,  so  is  D  to  E,
therefore,  alternately,

as  A  is  to  D,  so  is  B  to  E.  [vn.  13]


314  BOOK  VII  [VII.  14,  15

Again,  since,  as  B  is  to  C,  so  is  E  to  F,
therefore,  alternately,

as  iff  is  to  E,  so  is  C  to  F.  [vil  13]

But,  as  -ff  is  to  iff,  so  is  -4  to  Z? ;
therefore  also,  as  ^  is  to  /?,  so, is  C  to  F.
Therefore,  alternately,

as  y^  is  to  C,  so  is  D  to  F.  [id.]

If  a\b-d\e^

and  b:c  =  eif^

then,  ex  aequaii^  a  \€^d\f\

and  the  same  is  tnie  however  many  successive  numbers  are  so  related.

The  proof  is  simplicity  itself.

By  VH.  13,  alternately,  aid^bie^

and  b\e^c\f.

Therefore  a\d=c  \f^

and,  again  alternately,         a\c^d\f.

Observe  that  this  simple  method  cannot  be  used  to  prove  the  corresponding
proposition  for  magnitudes,  v.  22,  although  v.  22  has  been  preceded  by  the
two  propositions  in  that  Book  corresponding  to  the  propositions  used  here,
viz.  V.  16  and  v.  11.  The  reason  of  this  is  tlmt  this  method  would  only  prove
v.  22  for  six  magnitudes  all  of  the  same  kind^  whereas  the  magnitudes  in  v.  22
are  not  subject  to  this  limitation.

Heiberg  remarks  in  a  note  on  vii.  19  that,  while  Euclid  has  proved
several  propositions  of  Book  v.  over  again,  by  a  separate  proof,  for  numbers,
he  has  neglected  to  do  so  in  certain  cases;  eg.,  he  often  uses  v.  1 1  in  these  pro-
positions of  Book  VII.,  v.  9  in  vii.  19,  v.  7  in  the  same  proposition,  and  so  on.
Thus  Heiberg  would  apparently  suppose  Euclid  to  use  v.  1 1  in  the  last  step
of  the  present  proof  {Ratios  which  are  the  same  with  the  same  ratio  are  also  the
same  with  one  another),  I  think  it  preferable  to  suppose  that  Euclid  regarded
the  last  step  as  axiomatic ;  since,  by  the  definition  of  proportion,  the  first
number  is  the  same  multiple  or  the  same  part  or  the  same  parts  of  the  second
that  the  third  is  of  the  fourth :  the  assumption  is  no  more  than  an  assumption
that  the  numbers  or  proper  fractions  which  are  respectively  equal  to  the  same
number  or  proper  fraction  are  equal  to  one  another.

Though  the  proposition  is  only  proved  of  six  numbers,  the  extension  to  as
many  as  we  please  (as  expressed  in  the  enunciation)  is  obvious.


Proposition  15.

If  an  unit  measure  any  number,  and  another  number  measure
any  other  number  the  same  number  of  times,  alternately  also,
the  unit  will  measure  the  third  number  the  same  number  of
times  that  the  second  measures  the  fourth.


VII.  15]  PROPOSITIONS    14,  15  315

For  let  the  unit  A  measure  any  number  BC,
and    let    another    number    D

measure  any  other  number  EF        -^         ? 2 ^ — ?

the  same  number  of  times  ;  p

I  say  that,  alternately  also,  the      \ K t ^

unit  A   measures  the  number

D  the  same  number  of  times  that  BC  measures  EF.

For,  since  the  unit  A  measures  the  number  BC  the  same
number  of  times  that  D  measures  EF,

therefore,  as  many  units  as  there  are  in  BC,  so  many  numbers
equal  to  D  are  there  in  EF  also.

Let  BC  be  divided  into  the  units  in  it,  BG,  GH,  HC,

and  ^7^  into  the  numbers  EK,  KL,  Z/^  equal  to  D.

Thus  the  multitude  of  BG,  GH,  HC  will  be  equal  to  the
multitude  of  EK,  KL,  LF.

And,  since  the  units  BG,  GH,  HC  are  equal  to  one  another,

and  the  numbers  EK,  KL^  LF  are  also  equal  to  one  another,

while  the  multitude  of  the  units  BG,  GH,  HC  is  equal  to  the
multitude  of  the  numbers  EK,  KL,  LF,

therefore,  as  the  unit  BG  is  to  the  number  EK,  so  will  the
unit  GH  be  to  the  number  KL,  and  the  unit  HC  to  the
number  LF.

Therefore  also,  as  one  of  the  antecedents  is  to  one  of
the  consequents,  so  will  all  the  antecedents  be  to  all  the
consequents ;  [vn.  12]

therefore,  as  the  unit  BG  is  to  the  number  EK,  so  is  BC  to
EF.

But  the  unit  BG  is  equal  to  the  unit  A,
and  the  number  EK  to  the  number  D.

Therefore,  as  the  unit  A  is  to  the  number  Z?,  so  is  BC  to
EF.

Therefore  the  unit  A  measures  the  number  D  the  same
number  of  times  that  BC  measures  EF.  q.  e.  d.

If  there  be  four  numbers  i,  m,  a,  ma  (such  that  i  measures  m  the  same
number  of  times  that  a  measures  ma),  i  measures  a  the  same  number  of
times  that  m  measures  ma.

Except  that  the  first  number  is  unity  and  the  numbers  are  said  to  measure
instead  of  being  a  par/  of  others,  this  proposition  and  its  proof  do  not  differ
from  VII.  9 ;  in  fact  this  proposition  is  a  particular  case  of  the  other.


3i6  BOOK  VII  [vii.  i6

Proposition  i6.

If  two  numbers  by  multiplying  one  another  mcU^e  certain
numbers^  the  numbers  so  produced  will  be  equal  to  one  another.

Let  A,  B  ya^  two  numbers,  and  let  A  by  multiplying  B
make  C,  and  B  by  multiplying

A  make  D ;  /^

I  say  that  C  is  equal  to  D.  b

For,  since  A  by  multiply-  c

ing  B  has  made  C  d — :

therefore  B  measures  C  ac-         — E
cording  to  the  units  in  A.

But  the  unit  E  also  measures  the  number  A  according  to
the  units  in  it ;

therefore  the  unit  E  measures  A  the  same  number  of  times
that  B  measures  C

Therefore,  alternately,  the  unit  E  measures  the  number  B
the  same  number  of  times  that  A  measures  C.  [vii.  15]

Again,  since  B  by  multiplying  A  has  made  /?,

therefore  A  measures  D  according  to  the  units  in  B,

But  the  unit  E  also  measures  B  according  to  the  units
in  it;

therefore  the  unit  E  measures  the  number  B  the  same
number  of  times  that  A  measures  /?.

But  the  unit  E  measured  the  number  B  the  same  number
of  times  that  A  measures  C ;

therefore  A  measures  each  of  the  numbers  C,  D  the  same
number  of  times.

Therefore  C  is  equal  to  D.  q.  e.  d.

1.  The  numbers  so  produced.  The  Greek  has  oi  yv^byLVfoi  i$  aimav,  **  the  (numbers)
produced ^i>iw  tkemy  By  "from  them"  Euclid  means  **from  the  original  numbers,"  though
this  is  not  very  clear  even  in  the  Greek.  I  think  ambiguity  is  best  avoided  by  leaving  out
the  words.

This  proposition  proves  that,  if  any  numbers  be  multiplied  together^  the  order
of  multiplication  is  indifferent^  or  ab^ba.

It  is  important  to  get  a  clear  understanding  of  what  Euclid  means  when
he  speaks  of  one  number  multiplying  another,  vii.  Def.  15  states  that  the
effect  of  "fl  multiplying  b"  is  taking  a  times  b.  We  shall  always  represent
"  a  times  b  "  by  ab  and  "  b  times  a  "  by  ba.  This  being  premised,  the  proof
that  ab  =  ba  may  be  represented  as  follows  in  the  language  of  proportions.


VII.  i6,  17]  PROPOSITIONS    16,  17  317

By  VII.  Def.  20,  i  \  a  =  b  :  ab.

Therefore,  alternately,  i  \b-a\ab,  [vn.  13]

Again,  by  vii.  Def.  20,  i  \  b  =  a  \  ba.

Therefore  a  :  ab  =  a  :  ba^

or  ab  =  ba.

Euclid  does  not  use  the  language  of  proportions  but  that  of  fractions  or
their  equivalent  measures,  quoting  vii.  15,  a  particular  case  of  vii.  13
differently  expressed,  instead  of  vii.  13  itself.

Proposition  17.

If  a  number  by  multiplying  two  numbers  make  certain
numberSy  the  numbers  so  produced  will  have  the  same  ratio
as  the  numbers  multiplied.

For  let  the  number  A  by  multiplying  the  two  numbers  B,
C  make  /?,  E ;
I  say  that,  as  B  is  to  C,  so  is  D  to  E.

For,  since  A  by  multiplying  B  has  made  D,
therefore  B  measures  D  according  to  the  units  in  A,

A


B 0-


F

But  the  unit  F  also  measures  the  number  A  according  to
the  units  in  it ;

therefore  the  unit  F  measures  the  number  A  the  same  number
of  times  that  B  measures  D.

Therefore,  as  the  unit  F  is  to  the  number  -^,  so  is  i9  to  D.

[vii.  Def.  20]

For  the  same  reason,
as  the  unit  F  is  to  the  number  Ay  so  also  is  C  to  ^ ;
therefore  also,  as  B  is  to  Z?,  so  is  C  to  E.

Therefore,  alternately,  as  B  is  to  C,  so  is  D  to  E.   [vn.  13]

Q.  E.  D.
b  :  c=^ab  :  ac.
In   this  case  Euclid  translates  the  language  of  measures  into  that  of
proportions,  and  the  proof  is  exactly  like  that  set  out  in  the  last  note.
By  VII.  Def.  20,  i  :  a  =  b  .  ab,

and  I  \a-c  \ac.

Therefore  b  \ab-c\  ac^

and,  alternately,  b:  c  =  ab  :  ac,  [vii.  13]


3i8  BOOK  VII  [viL  i8,  19


Proposition  18.

If  two  numbers  by  multiplying  any  number  make  certain
numbers,  the  numbers  so  produced  will  have  the  same  ratio  as
the  multipliers.

For  let  two  numbers  A,  B  by  multiplying  any  number  C
make  Z?,  E ;

I  say  that,  as  y^  is  to  ^»  so  is  Z?        c        ^
to^.  P_


For,  since  A  by  multiplying  e

C  has  made  Z>,

therefore  also  C  by  multiplying  A  has  made  Z?.  [vu.  16]

For  the  same  reason  also

C  by  multiplying  B  has  made  E.

Therefore  the  number  C  by  multiplying  the  two  numbers
A^  B  has  made  Z?,  E.

Therefore,  as  A  is  to  By  so  is  D  to  E.  [vii.  17]


It  is  here  proved  that

a  :  b  =  ac:  be.

The  argument  is  as  follows.

ac  =  ca.

[vii.  16]

Similarly

bc  =  cL

And

a  \  b-ca\  cb\

[vii.  17]

therefore

a  \b-ac  \bc.

Proposition  19.

If  four  numbers  be  proportional,  the  number  produced  from
the  first  and  fourth  will  be  equal  to  the  number  produced  from
the  second  and  third ;  and,  if  the  number  produced  from,  the
first  and  fourth  be  equal  to  that  produced  from  the  second  and
third,  the  four  numbers  will  be  proportional

Let  A,  B,  C,  Z?  be  four  numbers  in  proportion,  so  that,
as  A  is  to  B,  so  is  C  to  Z? ;
and  let  A  by  multiplying  D  make  E,  and  let  B  by  multiply-
ing C  make  F\
I  say  that  E  is  equal  to  F.

For  let  A  by  multiplying  C  make  G.


VII.  19]


PROPOSITIONS    18,  19


319


E     F     Q


Since,  then,  A  by  multiplying  C  has  made  G,  and  by
multiplying  D  has  made  E,
the  number  A  by  multiplying  the  two
numbers  C,  D  has  made  G,  E.

Therefore,  as  C  is  to  D,  so  is  G  to  E,

[vii.  17]

But,  as  C  is  to  D,  so  is  ^  to  /? ;
therefore  also,  as  A  is  to  ^,  so  is  G
to  i?.

Again,   since   A    by  multiplying  C
has  made  G,

but,  further,  B  has  also  by  multiplying
C  made  /^

the  two  numbers  A,  B  by  multiplying  a  certain  number  C
have  made  6^,  E.

Therefore,  as  A  is  to  B,  so  is  (9  to  E.  [vii.  18]

But  further,  as  A  is  to  B,  so  is  G^  to  -£*  also  ;
therefore  also,  as  G  is  to  E,  so  is  G^  to  E.

Therefore  G  has  to  each  of  the  numbers  E,  E  the  same
ratio ;

therefore  E  is  equal  to  E.

Again,  let  E  be  equal  to  E ;
I  say  that,  as  ^  is  to  B,  so  is  C  to  D.

For,  with  the  same  construction,
since  E  is  equal  to  E,
therefore,  as  G  is  to  E,  so  is  G  to  E,

But,  as  (9  is  to  E,  so  is  C  to  /?,

and,  as  G  is  to  /s  so  is  A  to  ^.

Therefore  also,  as  A  is  to  B,  so  is  C  to  £>.


[of.  V.  9]


[of.  V.  7]
[vii.  17]
[vii.  18]


Q.  E.  D.


If  a:d  =  c:d,

then  a^=^r;  and  conversely.

The  proof  is  equivalent  to  the  following,
(i)  ac  :  ad=c  :  d

=  a:d.
But  a  :  d  =  ac  :  dc.

Therefore  ac  \  ad-ac  \  be,

or  ad=bc.


[vii.  17]
[vii.  18]


320  BOOK  VII  [vii.  19,  20


BOOK  VII

)    Since

ad^hc.

ac  :  ad^aci  be.

But

ac :  ad=c  :dt

and

ac\  lfc  =  a  :  b.

Therefore

a  :  b^c:  d.

[vii.  17]
[vii.  18]

As  indicated  in  the  note  on  vii.  14  above,  Heiberg  r^ards  Euclid  as
basing  the  inferences  contained  in  the  last  step  of  part  (i)  of  this  proof  and
in  the  first  step  of  part  (2)  on  the  propositions  v.  9  and  v.  7  respectively,
since  he  has  not  proved  those  propositions  separately  for  numbers  in  this
Book.  I  prefer  to  suppose  that  he  r^arded  the  inferences  as  obvious  and
not  needing  proof,  in  view  of  the  definition  of  numbers  which  are  in  pro-
portion. £.g.,  if  ac  is  the  same  fraction  ("  part  *'  or  "parts  ")  of  ad  that  ac  is
of  bc^  it  is  obvious  that  ad  must  be  equal  to  be,

Heiberg  omits  from  his  text  here,  and  relegates  to  an  Appendix,  a
proposition  appearing  in  the  manuscripts  V,  p,  ^  to  the  effect  that,  if  three
numbers  be  proportional,  the  product  of  the  extremes  is  equal  to  the  square
of  the  mean,  and  conversely.  It  does  not  appear  in  P  in  the  first  hand,  B  has
it  in  the  margin  only,  and  Campanus  omits  it,  remarking  that  Euclid  does
not  give  the  proposition  about  three  proportionals  as  he  does  in  vi.  17,  since
it  is  easily  proved  by  the  proposition  just  given.  Moreover  an-Nairizi  quotes
the  proposition  about  three  proportionals  as  an  observation  on  vii.  19  probably
due  to  Heron  (who  is  mentioned  by  name  in  the  preceding  paragraph).


Proposition  20.

The  least  nu7nbers  of  those  which  have  t/ie  sa^ne  ratio  with
them  measure  those  which  have  the  same  ratio  the  same  number
of  times,  the  greater  the  greater  and  the  less  the  less.

For  let  CD,  BJ^he  the  least  numbers  of  those  which  have
the  same  ratio  with  A,  B  \
I  say  that  CD  measures  A  the  same  number
of  times  that  BF  measures  B.

Now  CD  is  not  parts  of  A.

For,  if  possible,  let  it  be  so ;
therefore  BF  is  also  the  same  parts  of  B
that  CD  \s  o{  A.  [vii.  13  and  Def.  20]

Therefore,  as  many  parts  of  A  as  there
are  in  CD,  so  many  parts  of  B  are  there  also
in  BF.

Let  CD  be  divided  into  the  parts  of  A,  namely  CG,  GD,
and  BF  mto  the  parts  of  B,  namely  BH,  HF\
thus  the  multitude  of  CG,  GD  will  be  equal  to  the  multitude
o{BH,HF.


G


VII.  2o]  PROPOSITIONS   19,  20  321

Now,  since  the  numbers  CG^  GD  are  equal  to  one  another,
and  the  numbers  EHy  HF  are  also  equal  to  one  another,

while  the  multitude  of  CG,  GD  is  equal  to  the  multitude  of
EH,  HF,

therefore,  as  CG  is  to  EH,  so  is  GD  to  HF.

Therefore  also,  as  one  of  the  antecedents  is  to  one  of
the  consequents,  so  will  all  the  antecedents  be  to  all  the
consequents.  [vii.  12]

Therefore,  as  CG  is  to  EH,  so  is  CD  to  EF.

Therefore  CG,  EH  are  in  the  same  ratio  with  CD,  EF,
being  less  than  they  :

which  is  impossible,  for  by  hypothesis  CD^  EF  are  the  least
numbers  of  those  which  have  the  same  ratio  with  them.

Therefore  CD  is  not  parts  of  A  ;

therefore  it  is  a  part  of  it.  [vii.  4]

And  EF  is  the  same  part  of  B  that  CD  is  of  ^  ;

[vii.  13  and  Def.  20]
therefore  CD  measures  A  the  same  number  of  times  that  EF
measures  B.

Q.  E.  D.

If  a,  b  are  the  least  numbers  among  those  which  have  the  same  ratio
(i.e.  if  a\b  is  a  fraction  in  its  lowest  terms),  and  c,  d  are  any  others  in  the  same
ratio,  i.e.  if

a\b  =  c  \  d,

then  a--c  and  b  =  -d,  where  n  is  some  integer.
ft  n

The  proof  is  by  redtutio  ad  absurdum,  thus.

[Since  a<c,a\%  some  proper  fraction  ("  part "  or  "  parts  ")  of  c,  by  vii.  4.]

Now  a  cannot  be  equal  to  —c,  where  xv  is  an  integer  less  than  n  but

greater  than  i.

For,  iftf  =  -o     b=-d also.  [vii.  13  and  Def.  20!

Take  each  of  the  m  parts  of  a  with  each  of  the  m  parts  of  b,  two  and  two ;

the  ratio  of  the  members  of  all  pairs  is  the  same  ratio  —  a  :  —  b,

mm

Therefore

-  a  :  -  b  =  a  \  b,  fvii.  12]

mm  *-  ■•

But  —  a  and  —  b  are  respectively  less  than  a,  b  and  they  arc  in  the  same

ratio :  which  contradicts  the  hypothesis.

H.  £.  II.  21


3aa  BOOK  VII  [vii.  20,  ai

Hence  a  can  only  be  ''a  part"  off,  or

a  is  of'the  form  -  c.
n

and  therefore  b  is  of  the  form  -  d.

n

Here  also  Heibe]:g  omits  a  proposition  which  was  no  doubt  interpolated
by  llieon  (B,  V,  p,  ^  have  it  as  vii.  22,  but  P  only  has  it  in  the  maigin
and  in  a  later  hand ;  Campanus  also  omits  it)  proving  for  numbers  die  ex
aequali  proposition  when  '*  the  proportion  is  perturbed,"  Le.  (cf.  enunciation
of  V.  22)  if

aib^e:/, ....(i)

and  b  :  c-d\  e^ (2)

then  a:c  =  d:/.

The  proof  (see  Heiberg's  Appendix)  depends  on  vii.  19.
From  (i)  we  have  a/=  be^

and  from  (2)  be  =  cd.  [vii.  19]

Therefore  af=^  cd^

and  accordingly  a\c^d\f.  [vii.  19]


Proposition  21.

Numbers  prime  to  one  another  are  the  least  of  those  which
have  the  same  ratio  with  them.

Let  -^,  ^  be  numbers  prime  to  one  another ;
I   say  that  A,  B  are  the  least  of
those  which   have   the   same    ratio
with  them.

For,  if  not,  there  will  be  some
numbers  less  than  A,  B  which  are
in  the  same  ratio  with  A,  B.

Let  them  be  C,  D.

Since,  then,  the  least  numbers  of  those  which  have  the
same  ratio  measure  those  which  have  the  same  ratio  the
same  number  of  times,  the  greater  the  greater  and  the  less
the  less,  that  is,  the  antecedent  the  antecedent  and  the
consequent  the  consequent,  [vn.  20]

therefore  C  measures  A  the  same  number  of  times  that  D
measures  B.

Now,  as  many  times  as  C  measures  A,  so  many  units  let
there  be  in  E.

Therefore  D  also  measures  B  according  to  the  units  in  E.


VII.  21,  22]  PROPOSITIONS   20—22  323

And,  since  C  measures  A  according  to  the  units  in  £,

therefore  £  also  measures  A  according  to  the  units  in  C.

[vii.  16]
For  the  same  reason

£  also  measures  B  according  to  the  units  in  £>.  [vii.  16]

Therefore  £  measures  A,  B  which  are  prime  to  one

another  :   which  is  impossible.  [vii.  Def.  12]

Therefore  there  will  be  no  numbers  less  than  A^  B  which

are  in  the  same  ratio  with  A^  B.

Therefore  A,  B  are  the  least  of  those  which  have  the  same

ratio  with  them.

Q.  E.  D.

In  other  words,  if  a,  b  are  prime  to  one  another,  the  ratio  a  :  ^  is  "  in  its
lowest  terms."

The  proof  is  equivalent  to  the  following.

If  not,  suppose  that  r,  d  are  the  least  numbers  for  which

a  :  b  =  c  :  d.
[Euclid  only  supposes  some  numbers  r,  d  in  the  ratio  of  a  to  ^  such  that
c<a,  and  (consequently)  d'cb.     It  is  however  necessary  to  suppose  that
Cy  d  are  the  le<ist  numbers  in  that  ratio  in  order  to  enable  vii.  20  to  be
used  in  the  proof.]

Then  [vii.  20]  a  =  mc^  and  b  -  md^  where  m  is  some  integer.

Therefore  a  =  cm^     b  =  dniy  [vii.  16]

and  w  is  a  common  measure  of  a,  b^  though  these  are  prime  to  one  another :
which  is  impossible.  [vii.  Def.  12]

Thus  the  least  numbers  in  the  ratio  of  ^  to  ^  cannot  be  less  than  <?,  b
themselves.

Where  I  have  quoted  vii.  16  Heiberg  regards  the  reference  as  being  to
VII.  15.  I  think  the  phraseology  of  the  text  combined  with  that  of  Def.  15
suggests  the  former  rather  than  the  latter.

Proposition  22.

The  least  numbers  of  those  which  have  the  same  ratio  with
them  are  prime  to  one  another.

Let  A,  B\y^  the  least  numbers  of  those  which  have  the
same  ratio  with  them  ;

I    say   that  Ay  B  are   prime   to   one       g

another.

For,  if  they  are  not  prime  to  one       p

another,   some    number    will    measure       ^

them.

Let  some  number  measure  them,  and  let  it  be  C.

21 — 2


324  BOOK  VII  [vii.  22,  23

And,  as  many  times  as  C  measures  A,  so  many  units
let  there  be  in  £>,

and,  as  many  times  as  C  measures  By  so  many  units  let  there
be  in  E.

Since  C  measures  A  according  to  the  units  in  D,
therefore  C  by  multiplying  D  has  made  A.  [vii.  Def.  15]

For  the  same  reason  also
C  by  multiplying  E  has  made  B.

Thus  the  number  C  by  multiplying  the  two  numbers  D,
E  has  made  A,  B ;

therefore,  as  D  is  to  Ey  so  \^  A  Xjo  B  \  [vii.  17]

therefore  Z?,  E  are  in  the  same  ratio  with  Ay  B,  being  less
than  they  :  which  is  impossible.

Therefore  no  number  will  measure  the  numbers  A,  B.

Therefore  A,  B  are  prime  to  one  another.

Q.  E.  D.

If  a  :  ^  is  "  in  its  lowest  terms,"  « ,  ^  are  prime  to  one  another.
Again  the  proof  is  indirect

If  a,  b  are  not  prime  to  one  another,  they  have  some  common  measure  r,
and

a  =  mc,     b  =  nc»
Therefore  tn  \n-a  \b,  [vii.  17  or  18]

But  niy  n  are  less  than  a,  b  respectively,  so  that  ^^  :  ^  is  not  in  its  lowest
terms  :  which  is  contrary  to  the  hypothesis.
Therefore  etc.


Proposition  23.

If  two  numbers  be  prime  to  one  another,  the  number  which
measures  the  one  of  them  will  be  prime  to  the  re7naining
number.

Let  A,  B  be  two  numbers  prime  to  one  another,  and  let
any  number  C  measure  A  ;
I  say  that  C,  B  are  also  prime  to  one  another.

For,  if  C,  B  are  not  prime  to  one  another,
some  number  will  measure  C,  B.

Let  a  number  measure  them,  and  let  it  be  D,

Since  D  measures  C,  and  C  measures  A,
therefore  D  also  measures  A,  a     B    c    d

But  it  also  measures  B ;


VII.  23,  24]  PROPOSITIONS    22—24  325

therefore  D  measures  A,  B  which  are  prime  to  one  another :
which  is  impossible.  [vii.  Def.  12]

Therefore  no  number  will  measure  the  numbers  C,  B,

Therefore  C,  B  are  prime  to  one  another.

Q.  E.  D.

If  <?,  mb  are  prime  to  one  another,  b  is  prime  to  a.  For,  if  not,  some
number  d  will  measure  both  a  and  ^,  and  therefore  both  a  and  mb :  which  is
contrary  to  the  hypothesis.

Therefore  etc.

Proposition  24.

.  If  two  numbers  be  prime  to  any  number^  their  product  also
will  be  prime  to  the  same.

For  let  the  two  numbers  -^,  ^  be  prime  to  any  number  C,
and  let  A  by  multiplying  B  make  D ;
I  say  that  C,  D  are  prime  to  one  another.

For,  if  C  D  are  not  prime  to  one  another,
some  number  will  measure  C,  D,

Let  a  number  measure  them,  and  let  it
be  E.

Now,    since    C,   A    are   prime   to    one
another,

and  a  certain  number  E  measures  C,
therefore  A,  E  are  prime  to  one  another.  [vii.  23]

As  many  times,  then,  as  E  measures  D,  so  many  units  let
there  be  in  F\

therefore  F  also  measures  D  according  to  the  units  in  E,

[vii.  16]

Therefore  E  by  multiplying  F  has  made  D.       [vii.  Def.  15]

But,  further,  A  by  multiplying  B  has  also  made  D ;
therefore  the  product  of  E,  F  is  equal  to  the  product  of  A,  B.

But,  if  the  product  of  the  extremes  be  equal  to  that  of  the
means,  the  four  numbers  are  proportional ;  [vii.  19]

therefore,  as  i?  is  to  ^,  so  is  B  to  F.

V^mX.  A,  E  are  prime  to  one  another,
numbers  which  are  prime  to  one  another  are  also  the  least  of
those  which  have  the  same  ratio,  [vii.  21]

and  the  least  numbers  of  those  which  have  the  same  ratio
with  them  measure  those  which  have  the  same  ratio  the  same


3a6  BOOK  VII  [vu.  24, 25

number  of  times,  the  greater  the  greater  and  the  less  the  less,
that  is,  the  antecedent  the  antecedent  and  the  consequent  the
consequent ;  [vu.  20]

therefore  E  measures  B.

'  But  it  also  measures  C ;
therefore  E  measures  B,  C  which  are  prime  to  one  another :
which  is  impossible.  [vu.  Def.  12]

Therefore  no  number  will  measure  the  numbers  C,  D.

Therefore  C,  D  are  prime  to  one  another.

Q.  E.  D.

I.    their  product,    h  ^  oArQv  yMi^fuwot,  literally  "  the  (number)  produced  from  them,"
will  henceforth  be  translated  as  '*  their  product.**

If  a,  ^  are  both  prime  to  r,  then  ad,  c  are  prime  to  one  another.  •
The  proof  is  again  by  reductio  ad  absurdum.

If  ab^  c  are  not  prime  to  one  another,  let  them  be  measured  by  d  and  be
equal  to  md^  nd^  say,  respectively.

Now,  since  ^  r  are  prime  to  one  another  and  d  measures  r,

flf,  d  are  prime  to  one  another.  [vii.  23]

But,  since  ab  =  md^

d'.a^bim.  [vn.  19]

Therefore  [vii.  20]  d  measures  ^,

or  b  =pd,  say.

But  c  -  nd.

Therefore  d  measures  both  b  and  r,  which  are  therefore  not  prime  to  one
another :  which  is  impossible.
Therefore  etc.

Proposition  25.

If  two  numbers  be  prime  to  one  another,  the  product  of  one
of  them  into  itself  will  be  prime  to  the  remaining  one.

Let  Ay  B  h^  two  numbers  prime  to  one  another,
and  let  A  by  multiplying  itself  make  C ;
I  say  that  By  C  are  prime  to  one  another.

For  let  D  be  made  equal  to  A.

Since  Ay  B  are  prime  to  one  another,  1    b

and  A  is  equal  to  Dy
therefore  /?,  B  are  also  prime  to  one  another.

Therefore  each  of  the  two  numbers  /?,  A  is
prime  to  B ;
therefore  the  product  of  Z?,  A  will  also  be  prime  to  B.  [vu.  24]


VII.  25,  26]  PROPOSITIONS   24—26  327

But  the  number  which  is  the  product  of  Z>,  A  is  C
Therefore  C,  B  are  prime  to  one  another.        q.  e.  d.

I .  the  product  of  one  of  them  into  itself.  The  Greek,  6  U  tw  hh%  a&riov  yevbfuvoi,
literally  "  the  number  produced  from  the  one  of  them,"  leaves  **  multiplied  into  itself"  to  be
understood.

If  fl,  b  are  prime  to  one  another,

fl'  is  prime  to  b,

Euclid  takes  d  equal  to  a^  so  that  </,  a  are  both  prime  to  b.

Hence,  by  vii.  24,  day  i.e.  a*,  is  prime  to  b.

The  proposition  is  a  particular  case  of  the  preceding  proposition ;  and  the
method  of  proof  is  by  substitution  of  different  numbers  in  the  result  of  that
proposition.

Proposition  26.

1/  two  numbers  be  prime  to  two  numbers,  both  to  each,  their
products  also  will  be  prime  to  one  another.

For  let  the  two  numbers  A,  B  h^  prime  to   the   two
numbers  C,  /?,  both  to  each,

and  let  A  by  multiplying  B      ^ c

make  E,  and  let  C  by  multi-       q o

plying  D  make  F\  ^

I  say  that  E,  F  are  prime  to       p

one  another.

For,  since  each  of  the  numbers  A,  B  is  prime  to  C,
therefore  the  product  of  A,  B  will  also  be  prime  to  C.  [vn.  24]

But  the  product  of  A,  B  is  E  ;
therefore  E,  C  are  prime  to  one  another.

For  the  same  reason
Ey  D  are  also  prime  to  one  another.

Therefore  each  of  the  numbers  C,  D  is  prime  to  E.

Therefore  the  product  of  C,  D  will  also  be  prime  to  E.

[vii.  24]

But  the  product  of  C,  D  is  F.

Therefore  Ey  F  are  prime  to  one  another.        q.  e.  d.

If  both  a  and  b  are  prime  to  each  of  two  numbers  r,  //,  then  aby  cd  will  be
prime  to  one  another.

Since  a,  b  are  both  prime  to  r,

aby  c  are  prime  to  one  another.  [vii.  24]

Similarly  aby  d  are  prime  to  one  another.

Therefore  r,  d  are  both  prime  to  aby

and  so  therefore  is  cd,  [vn.  24]


338  BOOK  VII  [VII.  27

Proposition  27.

If  two  numbers  be  prime  to  one  another,  and  each  by
multiplying  itself  make  a  certain  number,  the  products  will  be
prime  to  one  another;  and,  if  the  original  numbers  by  multi-
plying the  products  make  certain  numbers,  the  IcUter  will  cUso
be  prime  to  one  another  [and  this  is  always  the  case  with  the
extremes^

Let  A,  Bhe  two  numbers  prime  to  one  another,
let  A  by  multiplying  itself  make  C,  and  by
multiplying  C  make  D,
and  let  B  by  multiplying  itself  make  E,  and
by  multiplying  E  make  F\
I  say  that  both  C,  E  and  D,  F  are  prime
to  one  another.

For,  since  A,  B  are  prime  to  one  another,
and  A  by  multiplying  itself  has  made  C,
therefore  C,  B  are  prime  to  one  another.  [vii.  25]

Since  then  C,  B  are  prime  to  one  another,
and  B  by  multiplying  itself  has  made  E,
therefore  C,  E  are  prime  to  one  another.  [/</.]

Again,  since  A,  B  are  prime  to  one  another,
and  B  by  multiplying  itself  has  made  E,
therefore  A,  E  are  prime  to  one  another.  [li/.]

Since  then  the  two  numbers  A,  C  are  prime  to  the  two
numbers  B,  E,  both  to  each,

therefore  also  the  product  of  -^,  C  is  prime  to  the  product  of
B,  E.  [vii.  26]

And  the  product  of  A,  C  is  D,  and  the  product  of  B,  E
is  F.

Therefore  D,  F  are  prime  to  one  another.

Q.  E.  D.

If  a,  b  are  prime  to  one  another,  so  are  c^,  ^  and  so  are  a*,  ^;  and,
generally,  a*   ^  are  prime  to  one  another.

The  words  in  the  enunciation  which  assert  the  truth  of  the  proposition  for
any  powers  are  suspected  and  bracketed  by  Heiberg  because  (i)  in  ircpl  tovs
flfxpovs  the  use  of  o#c/»oi  is  peculiar,  for  it  can  only  mean  "  the  last  products,"
and  (2)  the  words  have  nothing  corresponding  to  them  in  the  proof,  much
less  is  the  generalisation  proved.     Campanus  omits  the  words  in  the  enuncia-


VII.  27,  28]  PROPOSITIONS   27,  28  329

tion,  though  he  adds  to  the  proof  a  remark  that  the  proposition  is  true  of  any,
the  same  or  different,  powers  of  a,  b,  Heiberg  concludes  that  the  words  are
an  interpolation  of  date  earlier  than  Theon.

Euclid's  proof  amounts  to  this.

Since  «,  b  are  prime  to  one  another,  so  are  a',  b  [vii.  25],  and  therefore
also  a\  ^.  [vii.  25]

Similarly  [vii.  25]  <i,  ^"  are  prime  to  one  another.

Therefore  a,  a^  and  by  U^  satisfy  the  description  in  the  enunciation  of
VII.   26.

Hence  «*,  ^*  are  prime  to  one  another.


Proposition  28.

If  two  numbers  be  prime  to  one  another,  the  sum  will  also
be  prime  to  each  of  them  ;  and,  if  the  sum  of  two  numbers  be
prime  to  any  one  of  them,  the  original  numbers  will  also  be
prim£  to  one  another.

For  let  two  numbers  AB,  BC  prime  to  one  another  be
added ;

I  say  that  the  sum  AC  is  also  prime      j 1 o

to  each  of  the  numbers  AB,  BC.

D

For,  if  CA,  AB  are  not  prime  to
one  another,

some  number  will  measure  CA,  AB.

Let  a  number  measure  them,  and  let  it  be  D.
Since  then  D  measures  CA,  AB,

therefore  it  will  also  measure  the  remainder  BC

But  it  also  measures  BA  ;

therefore  D  measures  AB,  BC  which  are  prime  to  one  another:
which  is  impossible.  [vii.  Def.  12]

Therefore  no  number  will  measure  the  numbers  CA,  AB\
therefore  CA,  AB  are  prime  to  one  another.
For  the  same  reason

AC,  CB  are  also  prime  to  one  another.

Therefore  CA  is  prime  to  each  of  the  numbers  AB,  BC.

Again,  let  CA,  AB  be  prime  to  one  another ;
I  say  that  AB,  BC  are  also  prime  to  one  another.

For,  if  AB,  BC  are  not  prime  to  one  another,
some  number  will  measure  AB,  BC


330  BOOK  VII  [vii.  28,  29

Let  a  number  measure  them,  and  let  it  be  D.

Now,  since  D  measures  each  of  the  numbers  AB,  BC^  it
will  also  measure  the  whole  CA.

But  it  also  measures  AB ;
therefore  D  measures  CA^  AB  which  are  prime  to  one  another:
which  is  impossible.  [vn.  Def.  12]

Therefore  no  number  will  measure  the  numbers  ABy  BC.

Therefore  ABy  BC  are  prime  to  one  another,

Q.  E.  D.

If  a,  ^  are  prime  to  one  another,  a-^-b  will  be  prime  to  both  a  and  b ;  and
conversely.

For  suppose  {a  +  b\  a  are  not  prime  to  one  another.  They  must  then
have  some  common  measure  d.

Therefore  d  also  divides  the  difference  (a-^b)  -  a^  or  by  as  well  as  a ;  and
therefore  a,  ^  are  not  prime  to  one  another:  which  is  contrary  to  the
hypothesis.

Therefore  a  +  ^  is  prime  to  a.

Similarly  a  +  ^  is  prime  to  b.

The  converse  is  proved  in  the  same  way.

Heibeiig  remarks  on  Euclid's  assumption  that,  if  c  measures  both  a  and  by
it  also  measures  a±b.  But  it  has  already  (vii.  i,  2)  been  assumed,  more
generally^  as  an  axiom  that,  in  the  case  supposed,  c  measures  a  ±pb.


Proposition  29.

Any  prime  number  is  prim^  to  any  number  which  it  does
not  measure.

Let  -^  be  a  prime  number,  and  let  it  not  measure  B ;
I  say  that  By  A  are  prime  to  one  another.

For,  if  By  A  are  not  prime  to  one       a

another,  b

some  number  will  measure  them.  c

Let  C  measure  them.

Since  C  measures  By
and  A  does  not  measure  By
therefore  C  is  not  the  same  with  A.

Now,  since  C  measures  By  Ay
therefore  it  also  measures  A  which  is  prime,  though  it  is  not
the  same  with  it :
which  is  impossible.


VII.  29,  3o]  PROPOSITIONS   28—30  331

Therefore  no  number  will  measure  B,  A.
Therefore  A,  B  are  prime  to  one  another.

Q.  E.  D.

If  a  is  prime  and  does  not  measure  by  then  «,  b  are  prime  to  one  another.
The  proof  is  self-evident.


Proposition  30.

If  two  numbers  by  multiplying  one  another  muke  some
number,  and  any  prime  number  measure  the  prodtut,  it  will
also  measure  one  of  the  original  numbers.

For  let  the  two  numbers  A,  B  by  multiplying  one  another
make  C,  and  let  any  prime  number

D  measure  C ;  ^

I   say  that  D  measures  one  of  the  q

numbers  Ay  B.  c

For  let  it  not  measure  A.  o

Now  D  is  prime  ;  e-

therefore   A^  D  are   prime   to   one

another.  [vii.  29]

And,  as  many  times  as  D  measures  C,  so  many  units  let
there  be  in  E.

Since  then  D  measures  C  according  to  the  units  in  E,
therefore  D  by  multiplying  E  has  made  C.  [vii.  Def.  15]

Further,  A  by  multiplying  B  has  also  made  C ;

therefore  the  product  of  /?,  E  is  equal  to  the  product  of
A,  B.

Therefore,  as  Z?  is  to  Ay  so  is  B  to  E.  [vn.  19]

But  Dy  A  are  prime  to  one  another,
primes  are  also  least,  [vii.  21]

and  the  least  measure  the  numbers  which  have  the  same
ratio  the  same  number  of  times,  the  greater  the  greater  and
the  less  the  less,  that  is,  the  antecedent  the  antecedent  and
the  consequent  the  consequent ;  [vn.  20]

therefore  D  measures  B.

Similarly  we  can  also  show  that,  if  D  do  not  measure  By
it  will  measure  ^^.

Therefore  D  measures  one  of  the  numbers  Ay  B.

Q.  E.  D.


332  BOOK   VII  [vii.  30,  31

If  Ct  a  prime  number,  measure  ad,  c  will  measure  either  a  or  b.
Suppose  c  does  not  measure  a.

Therefore  c,  a  are  prime  to  one  another.  [vii.  29]

Suppose  ab  =  mc.

Therefore  c\a^b  \m.  [vii.  19]

Hence  [vii.  20,  21]  c  measures  b.

Similarly,  if  c  does  not  measure  b,  it  measures  a.
Therefore  it  measures  one  or  other  of  the  two  numbers  <?,  b.


Proposition   31.
Any  composite  number  is  measured  by  some  prime  number.

Let  ^  be  a  composite  number  ;
I  say  that  A  is  measured  by  some  prime  number.

For,  since  A  is  composite,
S  some  number  will  measure  it.  a

Let  a  number  measure  it,  and  let  it       b •

be  B.  c

Now,  if  B  is  prime,  what  was  en-
joined will  have  been  done.
10        But  if  it  is  composite,  some  number  will  measure  it.

Let  a  number  measure  it,  and  let  it  be  C.

Then,  since  C  measures  B,

and  B  measures  A,

therefore  C  also  measures  A.

15        And,  if  C  is  prime,  what  was  enjoined  will   have   been
done.

But  if  it  is  composite,  some  number  will  measure  it.
Thus,  if  the  investigation  be  continued  in  this  way,  some
prime  number  will  be  found  which  will  measure  the  number
20  before  it,  which  will  also  measure  A,

For,  if  it  is  not  found,  an  infinite  series  of  numbers  will
measure  the  number  A,  each  of  which  is  less  than  the  other:

which  is  impossible  in  numbers.

Therefore  some  prime  number  will  be  found  which  will
25  measure  the  one  before  it,  which  will  also  measure  A,

Therefore  any  composite  number  is  measured   by  some
prime  Bumber.

Q.   E.   D.


vii.  31—33]  PROPOSITIONS   30—33  333

8.  if  B  is  prime,  what  was  enjoined  will  have  been  done,  i.e.  the  implied
problem  of  finding  a  prime  number  which  measures  A.

18.  some  prime  number  will  be  found  which  will  measure.  In  the  Greek  the
sentence  stops  here,  but  it  is  necessary  to  add  the  words  **  the  number  before  it,  which  will
also  measure  Ay''  which  are  found  a  few  lines  further  down.  It  is  possible  that  the  words
may  have  fallen  out  of  P  here  by  a  simple  mistake  due  to  hyAiOTk\t\)rw  (Heiberg).

Heiberg  relegates  to  the  Appendix  an  alternative  proof  of  this  proposition,
to  the  following  effect.  Since  A  is  composite,  some  number  will  measure  it.
Let  B  be  the  least  such  number.  I  say  that  B  is  prime.  For,  if  not,  B  is
composite,  and  some  number  will  measure  it,  say  C  \  so  that  C  is  less  than  B,
But,  since  C  measures  B^  and  B  measures  Ay  C  must  measure  A,  And  C  is
less  than  B :  which  is  contrary  to  the  hypothesis.


Proposition  32.

Any  number  either  is  prime  or  is  measiired  by  same  prime
number.

Let  A  he  a,  number;
I  say  that  A  either  is  prime  or  is  measured  by  some  prime
number.

If  now  A  is  prime,  that  which  was       a

enjoined  will  have  been  done.

But  if  it  is  composite,  some  prime  number  will  measure  it.

[vii.  31]

Therefore  any  number  either  is  prime  or  is  measured  by
some  prime  number.

Q.  E.  D.

Proposition  33.

Given  as  many  numbers  as  we  please^  to  find  the  least  of
those  which  have  the  same  ratio  with  them.

Let  A,  By  C  be  the  given  numbers,  as  many  as  we  please  ;
thus  it  is  required  to  find  the  least  of
5  those  which  have  the  same  ratio  with

Ay  ByC.

Ay  B^  C  are  either  prime  to  one
another  or  not.

Now,  if  Ay  By  C  are  prime  to  one
10  another,  they  are  the  least  of  those
which  have  the  same  ratio  with  them.  "^  l  m

[vii.  21]
But,  if  not,  let  D  the  greatest  common  measure  of  ^,  By  C
be  taken,  [vii.  3]


334  .  BOOK  VII  [VII.  33

and,  as  many  times  as  D  measures  the  numbers  Ay  B,  C
15  respectively,   so   many  units   let   there   be   in   the   numbers
£,  F,   G  respectively.

Therefore  the  numbers  E,  F,  G  measure  the  numbers  A,
B,  C  respectively  according  to  the  units  in  D.  [vii.  16]

Therefore  E^  F,  G  measure  A,  B,  C  the  same  number  of
20  times ;

therefore  E,  F,  G  are  in  the  same  ratio  with  A,  B,  C.

[vii.  Dcf.  20]

I  say  next  that  they  are  the  least  that  are  in  that  ratio.
For,  if  E,  F,  G  are  not  the  least  of  those  which  have  the
same  ratio  with  A,  B,  C,

25  there  will  be  numbers  less  than  E,  F,  G  which  are  in  the
same  ratio  with  A,  B^  C.

Let  them  he  Hy  K,  L  \

therefore  H  measures  A  the  same  number  of  times  that  the
numbers  K,  L  measure  the  numbers  B,  C  respectively.

30        Now,  as  many  times  as  H  measures  Ay  so  many  units  let
there  be  in  il/;

therefore  the  numbers  K^  L  also  measure  the  numbers  B^  C
respectively  according  to  the  units  in  M.

And,  since  H  measures  A  according  to  the  units  in  M^

35  therefore  M  also  measures  A  according  to  the  units  in  H,

[vii.  16]
For  the  same  reason

M  also  measures  the  numbers  B^  C  according  to  the  units  in
the  numbers  K^  L  respectively  ;

Therefore  M  measures  A,  B,  C,
40        Now,  since  H  measures  A  according  to  the  units  in  M^
therefore  H  by  multiplying  M  has  made  A,  [vii.  Def.  15]

For  the  same  reason  also

E  by  multiplying  D  has  made  A,

Therefore  the  product  of  E,  D  is  equal  to  the  product  of
45//,  i^.

Therefore,  as  E  is  to  H,  so  is  M  to  D,  [vn.  19]

But  E  is  greater  than  H  \

therefore  M  is  also  greater  than  Z?.
And  it  measures  Ay  By  C:


VII.  33j  PROPOSITION   33  335

50  which  is   impossible,   for   by  hypothesis   D   is   the  greatest
common  measure  oi  A,  B,  C.

Therefore  there  cannot  be  any  numbers  less  than  E,  F,  G
which  are  in  the  same  ratio  with  Ay  B,  C.

Therefore  E,  F,  G  are  the  least  of  those  which  have  the
55  same  ratio  with  A,  By  C.

Q.  E.  D.

17.  the  numbers  E,  F,  G  measure  the  numbers  A,  B,  C  respectively,
literally  (as  usual)  **each  of  the  numbers  E,  /s  G  measures  each  of  the  numbers  A,

B,  cr

Given  any  numbers  <i,  b^  c^  ...,  to  find  the  least  numbers  that  are  in  the
same  ratio.

Euclid's  method  is  the  obvious  one,  and  the  result  is  verified  by  reducHo
ad  absurdum.

We  will,  like  Euclid,  take  three  numbers  only,  «,  ^,  c.
Let  gy  their  greatest  common  measure,  be  found  [vii.  3],  and  suppose  that

a  -  mgy  i.e.  gm^  [vii.  16]

b^ng,    i.e.  gn,
c=pgy    i.e.  gp.
It  follows,  by  VII.  Def.  20,  that

m  \  n  '.p=^a  \  b  :  c,
m,  n,  p  shall  be  the  numbers  required.

For,  if  not,  let  x^y^z  be  the  least  numbers  in  the  same  ratio  as  <i,  by  r,
being  less  than  niy  «,  /.

Therefore  a^kx  (or  xky  vii.  16),

b-)^  (or  yk)y
c-=kz  (or  zk)y
where  k  is  some  integer.  [vii.  20]

Thus  mg=a  =  xk.

Therefore  m  \  x-k  \g.  [vii.  19]

And  m> x\  therefore  k> g.

Since  then  k  measures  a,  by  r,  it  follows  that  g  is  not  the  greatest  common
measure:   which  contradicts  the  hypothesis.
Therefore  etc.

It  is  to  be  observed  that  Euclid  merely  supposes  that  Xy  yy  z  are  smaller
numbers  than  »i,  «,  p  in  the  ratio  of  a,  by  c\  but,  in  order  to  justify  the  next
inference,  which  apparently  can  only  depend  on  vii.  20,  ;c,^,  z  must  also  be
assumed  to  be  the  least  numbers  in  the  ratio  of  tf,  by  c.

The  inference  fi^om  the  last  proportion  that,  since  m> Xy  k>g\s  supposed
by  Heiberg  to  depend  upon  vii.  13  and  v.  14  together.  I  prefer  to  regard
Euclid  as  making  the  inference  quite  independently  of  Book  v.  E.g.,  the
proportion  could  just  as  well  be  written

x',m=g'.ky
when  the  definition  of  proportion  in  Book  vii.  (Def.  20)  gives  all  that  we  want,
since,  whatever  proper  fraction  x  is  of  »i,  the  same  proper  fraction  is  g  of  k.


336  BOOK  VII  [vii.  34

Proposition  34.

Given  two  numbers^  to  find  the  least  number  which  they
measure.

Let  A,  B\^  the  two  given  numbers ;
thus   it   is   required   to   find   the   least   number  which  they
measure.

Now  A,  B  are  either  prime  to  one         ^ b

another  or  not.  ^


First,  let  A,  B  be  prime  to  one
another,  and  let  A  by  multiplying  B
make  C;  ^  ^

therefore  also  B  by  multiplying  A  has

made  C  [vn.  16]

Therefore  A,  B  measure  C

I  say  next  that  it  is  also  the  least  number  they  measure.

For,  if  not,  A^  B  will  measure  some  number  which  is  less
than  C.

Let  them  measure  D.

Then,  as  many  times  as  A  measures  Z>,  so  many  units  let
there  be  in  E,

and,  as  many  times  as  B  measures  Dy  so  many  units  let  there
be  in  F\

therefore  A  by  multiplying  E  has  made  D,

and  B  by  multiplying  F  has  made  D  ;  [vn.  Def.  15]

therefore  the  product  of -^,  -£*  is  equal  to  the  product  oi  B,  F,

Therefore,  as  A  is  to  B,  so  is  F  to  E.  [vn.  19]

But  A^  B  are  prime,
primes  are  also  least,  [vn.  21]

and  the  least  measure  the  numbers  which  have  the  same  ratio
the  same  number  of  times,  the  greater  the  greater  and  the  less
the  less  ;  [vn.  20]

therefore  B  measures  E^  as  consequent  consequent.

And,  since  A  by  multiplying  B,  E  has  made  C,  /?,
therefore,  as  B  is  to  E,  so  is  C  Xo  D.  [vn.  17]

But  B  measures  E ;
therefore  C  also  measures  /?,  the  greater  the  less  :
which  is  impossible.


^                                      f

b

c

0

Q

H

VII.  34]  PROPOSITION   34  337

Therefore  A,  B  do  not  measure  any  number  less  than  C  \
therefore  C  is  the  least  that  is  measured  by  A,  B.

Next,  let  A,  B  not  be  prime  to  one  another,
and  let  /%  E,  the  least  numbers  of  those  which  have  the  same
ratio  with  -^,  ^,  be  taken  ;  [vii.  33]

therefore  the  product  of  ^,  ^  is  equal  to  the  product  of  B,  F.

[vii.  19]

And    let   A    by    multiplying  E
make  C ;

therefore  also  B  by  multiplying  F
has  made  C;
therefore  Ay  B  measure  C.

I  say  next  that  it  is  also  the  least
number  that  they  measure.

For,  if  not,  A,  B  will  measure  some  number  which  is  less
than  C

Let  them  measure  D,

And,  as  many  times  as  A  measures  /?,  so  many  units  let
there  be  in  G,

and,  as  many  times  as  B  measures  D,  so  many  units  let  there
be  in  H.

Therefore  A  by  multiplying  G  has  made  /?,

and  B  by  multiplying  H  has  made  D,

Therefore  the  product  of  A,  G  is  equal  to  the  product  of

therefore,  as  A  is  to  B,  so  is  H  to  G.  [vii.  19]

But,  as  A  is  to  B,  so  is  F  to  E.
Therefore  also,  as  7^  is  to  Ey  so  is  H  to  G.
But  F,  E  are  least,

and  the  least  measure  the  numbers  which  have  the  same  ratio
the  same  number  of  times,  the  greater  the  greater  and  the
less  the  less  ;  [vii.  20]

therefore  E  measures  G.

And,  since  A  by  multiplying  Ey  G  has  made  C,  Z?,
therefore,  as  E  is  to  Gy  so  is  C  to  D.  [vn.  17]

But  E  measures  G  ;
therefore  C  also  measures  Z?,  the  greater  the  less  :
which  is  impossible.

H.  E.  II.  22


338  BOOK  VII  [viL  34

Therefore  A^  B  will  not  measure  any  number  which  is  less
than  C

Therefore  C  is  the  least  that  is  measured  by  A^  B,

Q.  E.  D.
This  is  the  problem  of  finding  the  least  common  mttUipk  of  two  numbers,

I.  If  a,  ^  be  prime  to  one  another,  the  L.CM.  is  ab.
Fotf  if  noty  let  it  be  d^  some  number  less  than  ab.
Then  4=  ma  =  nb^  where  «f ,  »  are  integers.

Therefore  a :  b  =  n  :m,  [vii.  19]

and  hence,  a,  b  being  prime  to  one  another,

b  measures  m.  [vii.  20,  21]

But  b  :m-ab  :am  [vii.  17]

^abid.
Therefore  ab  measures  d:  which  is  impossible.

II.  If  a,  ^  be  not  prime  to  one  another,  find  the  numbers  which  are  the
least  of  those  having  the  ratio  of  a  to*^,  say  m^n;  [vii.  33]

then  a  :  b  =  m  :  n,

and  an  =  bm  (=r,  say);  [vii.  19]

c  is  then  the  L.C.M.

For,  if  not,  let  it  be  ^  (<  ^),  so  that

ap-bq-  dy  where/,  q  are  integers.

Then  a  \b  -q  \py  [vii.  19]

whence  m  \  n  -  q  \  p^

so  that  n  measures/.  [vii.  20,  21]

And  n  \p-an  \ap-c  \  d^

so  that  c  measures  d :

which  is  impossible.

Therefore  etc.


a


By  VII.  33,  w  =  -


n  ■
Hence  the  l.c.m.  is  — .


y,  where  ^  is  the  g.c.m.  of  a,  b.


VII.  35,  36]  PROPOSITIONS   34—36  339

Proposition  35.

If  two  numbers  measure  any  number^  the  least  number
measured  by  them  will  also  measure  the  same.

For  let  the  two  numbers  A,  B  measure  any  number  CD,
and  let  E  be  the  least  that  they
measure;  ^  p    ®


I  say  that  E  also  measures  CD.

For,  if  E  does  not  measure         ^
CD,  let  E^  measuring  DF,  leave  CF  less  than  itself.

Now,  since  A,  B  measure  E,
and  E  measures  DF,
therefore  A,  B  will  also  measure  DF.

But  they  also  measure  the  whole  CD  ;
therefore  they  will  also  measure  the  remainder  CF  which  is
less  than  E :
which  is  impossible.

Therefore  E  cannot  fail  to  measure  CD ;
therefore  it  measures  it.

Q.  E.  D.

The  least  common  multiple  of  any  two  numbers  must  measure  any  other
common  multiple.

The  proof  is  obvious,  depending  on  the  fact  that,  if  any  number  divides  a
and  b,  it  also  divides  a  -pb.


Proposition  36.

Given  three  numbers,  to  find  the  least  number  which  they
measure.

Let  ^,  iff,  C  be  the  three  given  numbers  ;
thus  it  is  required  to  find  the  least

number  which  they  measure.  a

Let  Dy  the  least  number  mea-  b

sured  by  the  two  numbers  A,  B,  c

be  taken.  [vii.  34]  p

Then   C  either  measures,  or  e

does  not  measure,  D.

First,  let  it  measure  it


22 — 2


340  BOOK  VII  [vii.  36

But  A,  B  also  measure  D ;
therefore  A,  B^  C  measure  D.

I  say  next  that  it  is  also  the  least  that  they  measure.

For,  if  not,  A^  By  C  will  measure  some  number  which  is
less  than  /?.

Let  them  measure  if.

Since  A^  B,  C  measure  E,
therefore  also  A^  B  measure  E.

Therefore  the  least  number  measured  by  A,  B  will  also
measure  E.  [vn.  35]

But  D  is  the  least  number  measured  by  Ay  B ;
therefore  D  will  measure  Ey  the  greater  the  less  :
which  is  impossible.

Therefore  Ay  By  C  will  not  measure  any  number  which  is
less  than  D ;

therefore  D  is  the  least  that  A,  By  C  measure.

Again,  let  C  not  measure  /?,

and  let  E^  the  least  number  measured  by        .

Cy  Dy  be  taken.  [vii.  34]

Since  Ay  B  measure  /?,  q

and  D  measures  Ey  o

therefore  also  Ay  B  measure  E,  e

But  C  also  measures  E  ;  ^

therefore  also  Ay  B^  C  measure  E.

I  say  next  that  it  is  also  the  least  that  they  measure.
For,  if  not,  Ay  By  C  will  measure  some  number  which
is  less  than  E,

Let  them  measure  /^
Since  Ay  By  C  measure  Fy

therefore  also  Ay  B  measure  F\

therefore    the    least    number    measured    by    Ay    B  will    also
measure  F.  [vii.  35]

But  D  is  the  least  number  measured  by  ^,  ^ ;
therefore  D  measures  F.

But  C  also  measures  F ;
therefore  Dy  C  measure  Fy
so  that  the  least  number  measured  by  Dy  C  will  also  measure  F,


vn.  36,  37]  PROPOSITIONS   36,  37  341

But  E  IS  the  least  number  measured  by  C,  Z? ;
therefore  E  measures  F,  the  greater  the  less :
which  IS  impossible.

Therefore  A^  B,  C  will  not  measure  any  number  which  is
less  than  E.

Therefore  E  is  the  least  that  is  measured  by  ^,  B,  C.

Q.  E.  D.

Euclid's  rule  for  finding  the  l.cm.  of  three  numbers  tf,  ^,  c  is  the  rule  with
which  we  are  familiar.  The  l.cm.  of  //,  b  is  first  found,  say  dy  and  then  the
L.C.M.  of  ^  and  c  is  found.

Euclid  distinguishes  the  cases  (i)  in  which  c  measures  d^  (2)  in  which  c
does  not  measure  d.  We  need  only  reproduce  the  proof  of  the  general  case
(2).     The  method  is  that  of  reductio  ad  absurdum.

Let  e  be  the  l.c.m.  of  d^  c.

Since  a,  b  both  measure  //,  and  d  measures  ^,
<i,  b  both  measure  e.

So  does  c.

Therefore  e  is  some  common  multiple  of  a^  by  c.

If  it  is  not  the  ieast^  let/ be  the  l.c.m.

Now  tf,  b  both  measure/;
therefore  d^  their  l.cm.,  also  measures/  [vii.  35]

Thus  d,  c  both  measure/;
therefore  /,  their  l.c.m.,  measures/:  [vn.  35]

which  is  impossible,  since /<^.

Therefore  etc.

The  process  can  be  continued  ad  libitum^  so  that  we  can  find  the  l.c.m.,
not  only  of  three,  but  of  as  many  numbers  as  we  please.


Proposition  37.

If  a  number  be  measured  by  any  number y  the  number  which
is  measured  will  have  a  part  called  by  the  same  name  as  the
measuring  number.

For  let  the  number  A  be  measured  by  any  number  B ;
I  say  that  A  has  a  part  called  by  the  same
name  as  B.  a

For,  as  many  times  as  B  measures  Ay        b

so  many  units  let  there  be  in  C  ^

Since  B  measures  A  according  to  the       o

units  in  C,

and  the  unit  D  also  measures  the  number  C  according  to  the

units  in  it,


342  BOOK  VII  [vii.  37.  38

therefore  the  unit  D  measures  the  number  C  the  same  number
of  times  as  B  measures  A.

Therefore,  alternately,  the  unit  D  measures  the  number  B
the  same  number  of  times  as  C  measures  A  ;  [vn.  15]

therefore,  whatever  part  the  unit  D  is  of  the  number  B,  the
same  part  is  C  of  -^  also.

But  the  unit  Z>  is  a  part  of  the  number  B  called  by  the
same  name  as  it ;

therefore  C  is  also  a  part  of  A  called  by  the  same  name  as  B,
so  that  A  has  a  part  C  which  is  called  by  the  same  name  as  B,

Q.  E.  D.

If  b  measures  a,  then  y  th  of  a  is  a  whole  number.
o

Let  a  =  m,b.

Now  m  =  m,  i.

Thus  I,  w,  ^,  a  satisfy  the  enunciation  of  vii.  15  ;
therefore  m  measures  a  the  same  number  of  times  that  i  measures  b.


But

I  is  T  th  part  of  b ;

therefore

///  is  7^  th  part  of  a.

Proposition  38

1/  a  number  have  any  part  whatever,  it  will  be  7neasured
by  a  number  called  by  the  same  name  as  the  part.

For  let  the  number  A  have  any  part  whatever,  B,
and  let  C  be  a  number  called  by  the  same
name  as  the  part  B ;
I  say  that  C  measures  A.  ^

For,  since  ^9  is  a  part  of  A  called  by  ®

the  same  name  as  C,  ^

and  the  unit  D  is  also  a  part  of  C  called
by  the  same  name  as  it,

therefore,  whatever  part  the  unit  D  is  of  the  number  C,

the  same  part  is  B  oi  A  also ;

therefore  the  unit  D  measures  the  number  C  the  same  number
of  times  that  B  measures  A.


vn.  38,  39]  PROPOSITIONS   37-39  343

Therefore,  alternately,  the  unit  D  measures  the  number  B
the  same  number  of  times  that  C  measures  A,  [vn.  15]

Therefore  C  measures  A.

Q.  E.  D.

This  proposition  is  practically  a  restatement  of  the  preceding  proposition.
It  asserts  that,  if  b  is  -  th  part  of  a.

i.e.,  if  d=  —  a,

m

then  m  measures  a.

We  have  b  =  -  a,

m

and  I  =  —  w.

m

Therefore  i,  w,  ^,  a^  satisfy  the  enunciation  of  vii.  15,  and  therefore  m

measures  a  the  same  number  of  times  as  i  measures  by  or

I

a


Proposition  39.

To  find  the  number  which  is  the  least  t/iat  will  have  given
parts.

Let  A,  B,  C  be  the  given  parts  ;
thus  it  is  required  to  find  the  number  which  is  the  least  that
will  have  the  parts  A,  B^  C,

A  B  c

D


Let  Dy  E,  F  be  numbers  called  by  the  same  name  as  the
parts  A,  B,  C,

and  let  G,  the  least  number  measured  by  /?,  E,  /%  be  taken.

[vn.  36]
Therefore  G  has  parts  called  by  the  same  name  as  Z?,  E,  F.

[vn.  37]
But  A,  By  C  are  parts  called  by  the  same  name  as  /?,  E,  F\
therefore  G  has  the  parts  Ay  B,  C.

I  say  next  that  it  is  also  the  least  number  that  has.


344  BOOK  VII  [vii.  39

For,  if  not,  there  will  be  some  number  less  than  G  which
will  have  the  parts  A,  B,  C.

Let  it  be  H.

Since  H  has  the  parts  A,  B,  C,
therefore  H  will  be  measured  by  numbers  called  by  the  same
name  as  the  parts  A,  B^  C.  [vn.  38]

But  /?,  B,  F  are  numbers  called  by  the  same  name  as  the
parts  A,  B,  C\
therefore  H  is  measured  by  /?,  E,  /^

And  it  is  less  than  G :  which  is  impossible.

Therefore  there  will  be  no  number  less  than  G  that  will
have  the  parts  A^  B,  C.

Q.  E.  D.

This  again  is  practically  a  restatement  in  another  form  of  the  problem  of
finding  the  l.c.m.

To  find  a  number  which  has  -th,  yth  and  -th  parts.

Let  d  be  the  l.c.m.  of  a,  ^,  c.

Thus  d  has  -th,  jth  and  -th  parts.  [vn.  37]

If  it  is  not  the  least  number  which  has,  let  the  least  such  number  be  e.

Then,  since  e  has  those  parts,
e  is  measured  by  a,  b^  c,  and  e<d:
which  is  impossible.


BOOK  VIII.


Proposition  i.

If  there  be  as  many  numbers  as  we  please  in  continued
proportion,  and  the  extremes  of  them  be  prime  to  one  another,
the  numbers  are  the  least  of  those  which  have  the  same  ratio
with  them.

Let  there  be  as  many  numbers  as  we  please,  A^  B,  C,  /?,
in  continued  proportion,

and  let  the  extremes  of  them       A E —

-^,  Z?  be  prime  to  one  another;       b f

I  say  that  A,  B,  C,  D  are  the      <> Q

least  of  those  which  have  the       ^  h

same  ratio  with  them.

For,  if  not,  let  E,  F,  G,  N  he  less  than  A,  B,  C,  D,  and
in  the  same  ratio  with  them.

Now,  since  A,  B,  C,  D  are  in  the  same  ratio  with  E,  /%
G,N,

and  the  multitude  of  the  numbers  A,  B,  C,  D  is  equal  to  the
multitude  of  the  numbers  B,  B,  G,  H,
therefore,  ex  a^quali,

as  A  is  to  /?,  so  is  E  to  H.  [vn.  14]

But  A^  D  are  prime,
primes  are  also  least,  [vii.  21]

and  the  least  numbers  measure  those  which  have  the  same
ratio  the  same  number  of  times,  the  greater  the  greater  and
the  less  the  less,  that  is,  the  antecedent  the  antecedent  and
the  consequent  the  consequent.  [vn.  20]


346  BOOK   VIII  [viii.  i.  2

Therefore  A  measures  E^  the  greater  the  less  :
which  is  impossible.

Therefore  E,  F,  G,  H  which  are  less  than  A^  By  C,  D
are  not  in  the  same  ratio  with  them.

Therefore  A,  B,  C,  D  are  the  least  of  those  which  have
the  same  ratio  with  them.

Q.  E.  D.

What  we  call  a  gtameiriaU prognssim  is  with  Euclid  a  series  of  tenns  *4n
continued  proportion"  (l^s  avaXo^^oy).

This  proposition  proves  that,  if  a,  b^  c^  ...  ii  are  a  series  of  numbers  in
geometriod  progression,  and  if  «,  ^  are  prime  to  one  another,  the  smes  is  in
the  lowest  terms  possible  with  the  same  common  ratio.

The  proof  is  in  form  by  ndudio  ad  absurdum.  We  should  no  doubt
desert  i\iv&  form  while  retaining  the  substance.  If  a',  ^',  ^, ...  i^  be  afiy  other
series  of  numbers  in  g.p.  wi&  the  same  common  ratio  as  before,  we  have,
ex  aequalif

tf  :  ^  =  «' :  ^,  [vii.  14]

whence,  since  n,  ii  are  prime  to  one  another, «,  k  measure  i/,  K  re^>ectivdy,  so
.  that  a\  k  are  greater  than  a,  k  respectively.

Proposition  2.

To  find  numbers  in  continued  proportion^  as  many  as  may

be  prescribed,  and  the  least  that  are  in  a  given  ratio.

Let  the  ratio  of  ^    to  ^  be  the  given  ratio  in   least
numbers ;

thus  it  is  required  to  find  numbers  in  continued  proportion,
as  many  as  may  be  prescribed,  and  the  least  that  are  in  the
ratio  of  A  to  B.


Let  four  be  prescribed  ;
let  A  by  multiplying  itself  make  C,  and  by  multiplying  B  let
it  make  D ;

let  B  by  multiplying  itself  make  E ;
further,  let  A  by  multiplying  C,  D,  E  make  F,  G,  H,
and  let  B  by  multiplying  E  make  K.


VIII.  2]  PROPOSITIONS    I,  2  347

Now,  since  A  by  multiplying  itself  has  made  C,
and  by  multiplying  B  has  made  /?,
therefore,  as  A  is  to  B,  so  is  C  to  D.  [vn.  17]

Again,  since  A  by  multiplying  B  has  made  /?,

and  ^  by  multiplying  itself  has  made  E,

therefore  the  numbers  Ay  B  by  multiplying  B  have  made  the
numbers  D,  E  respectively.

Therefore,  as  A  is  to  B,  so  is  D  to  E.  [vii.  18]

But,  as  -^  is  to  B,  so  is  C  to  Z?  ;

therefore  also,  as  C  is  to  Z?,  so  is  D  to  E.

And,  since  -^  by  multiplying  C,  Z?  has  made  F,  G,
therefore,  as  C  is  to  D,  so  is  F  \,o  G.  [vn.  17]

But,  as  C  is  to  /?,  so  was  A  to  B ;
therefore  also,  as  ^  is  to  By  so  is  F  to  G^.

Again,  since  A  by  multiplying  /?,  iS'  has  made  Cr,  //^,
therefore,  as  D  is  to  ^,  so  is  G  to  //^  [vii.  17]

But,  as  /?  is  to  E,  so  is  A  to  ^.

Therefore  also,  as  A  is  to  By  so  is  G^  to  //.

And,  since  ^,  B  by  multiplying  ^  have  made  Hy  Ky
therefore,  as  A  is  to  By  so  is  H  to  A'.  [vn.  18]

But,  as  -^  is  to  By  so  is  F  to  6^,  and  G  to  /T.

Therefore  also,  as  F  is  to  G^,  so  is  G  to  ^,  and  H  to  K\
therefore  C,  i?,  Ey  and  /%  G^,  //^,  K  are  proportional  in  the
ratio  of  A  to  ^.

I  say  next  that  they  are  the  least  numbers  that  are  so.

For,  since  Ay  B  are  the  least  of  those  which  have  the
same  ratio  with  them,

and  the  least  of  those  which  have  the  same  ratio  are  prime
to  one  another,  [vn.  22]

therefore  Ay  B  are  prime  to  one  another.

And  the  numbers  A,  B  by  multiplying  themselves  re-
spectively have  made  the  numbers  C,  Ey  and  by  multiplying
the  numbers  C,  E  respectively  have  made  the  numbers  Fy  A';
therefore  C,  E  and  Fy  A' are  prime  to  one  another  respectively.

[vii.  a7|

But,  if  there  be  as  many  numbers  as  we  please  in  continued
proportion,  and  the  extremes  of  them  be  prime  to  one  anotluT,


348  BOOK  VIII  [viii.  2,3

they  are  the  least  of  those  which  have  the  same  ratio  with
them.  [viii.  i]

Therefore  C,  /?,  E  and  /%  G,  H,  K  are  the  feast  of  those
which  have  the  same  ratio  with  A^  B.  Q.  e.  d.

PoRisM.  From  this  it  is  manifest  that,  if  three  numbers
in  continued  proportion  be  the  least  of  those  which  have  the
same  ratio  with  them,  the  extremes  of  them  are  squares,  and,
if  four  numbers,  cubes.

To  find  a  series  of  numbers  in  geometrical  pn^pression  and  in  the  least
terms  which  have  a  given  common  ratio  (understandmg  by  that  term  the  raik
rf  one  term  to  the  nexi).

Reduce  the  given  ratio  to  its  lowest  terms,  say,  a\b,  (This  can  be  done
by  VII.  33.)

Then  a\  a^%  a»-«^*,  ...  <^lf^\  a!f-'\  ^

is  the  required  series  of  numbers  if  (»  +  i)  terms  are  required.

That  this  is  a  series  of  terms  with  the  given  common  ratio  is  clear  from
vn.  17,  18.
'  That  the  g.p.  is  in  the  smallest  terms  possible  is  proved  thus.

a,  b  are  prime  to  one  another,  since  the  ratio  a  :  ^  is  in  its  lowest  terms;

[vii.  22].

Therefore  «",  ^  are  prime  to  one  ^another  j  so  are  «",  ^  and,  generally,
«*,  ^*.  [vn.  27]

Whence  the  g.p.  is  in  the  smallest  possible  terms,  by  viii.  i.

The  Porism  observes  that,  if  there  are  n  terms  in  the  series,  the
extremes  are  (n  -  i)th  powers.


Proposition  3.

If  as  many  numbers  as  we  please  in  continned proportion
be  the  least  of  those  which  have  the  same  ratio  with  them,  the
extremes  of  them  are  prim^  to  one  another.

Let  as  many  numbers  as  we  please,  A,  B,  C,  Z?,  in  con-
tinued proportion  be  the  least  of  those  wrhich  have  the  same
ratio  with  them  ;


— G        H

-L        M


VIII.  3]  PROPOSITIONS   2,  3  349

I  say  that  the  extremes  of  them  A,  D  are  prime  to  one
another.

For  let  two  numbers  E,  /^  the  least  that  are  in  the  ratio
of  A,  B,  C,  Z?,  be  taken,  [vii.  33]

then  three  others  G,  H,  K  with  the  same  property ;

and  others,  more  by  one  continually,  [viii.  2]

until  the  multitude  taken  becomes  equal  to  the  multitude  of
the  numbers  A,  B,  C,  D,

Let  them  be  taken,  and  let  them  be  Z,  M,  N,  O,

Now,  since  E,  F  are  the  least  of  those  which  have  the

same  ratio  with  them,  they  are  prime  to  one  another,     [vii.  22]
And,  since  the  numbers  E,  F  by  multiplying  themselves

respectively  have  made  the  numbers  Gy  K,  and  by  multiplying

the  numbers  G,  K  respectively  have  made  the  numbers  Z,  O,

[viii.  2,  Por.]

therefore  both  G,  A' and  Z,  O  are  prime  to  one  another,    [vii.  27]

And,  since  A,  B,  C,  D  are  the  least  of  those  which  have
the  same  ratio  with  them,

while  Ly  M,  N,  O  are  the  least  that  are  in  the  same  ratio  with

Ay       By        C,       Dy

and  the  multitude  of  the  numbers  Ay  By  C,  D  is  equal  to  the
multitude  of  the  numbers  Z,  My  Ny  (9,

therefore  the  numbers  Ay  B,  C,  D  are  equal  to  the  numbers
Ly  My  Ny  O  respectively  ;

therefore  A  is  equal  to  Z,  and  D  to  O.

And  Z,  O  are  prime  to  one  another.
Therefore  Ay  D  are  also  prime  to  one  another.

Q.  E.  D.

The  proof  consists  in  merely  equating  the  given  numbers  to  the  terms  of
a  series  found  in  the  manner  of  viii.  2.

\{  ttyhyCy  .,.  k  {n  terms)  be  a  geometrical  progression  in  the  lowest  terms
having  a  given  common  ratio,  the  terms  must  respectively  be  of  the  form

found  by  viii.  2,  where  a  :  )8  is  the  ratio  a  :  d  expressed  in  its  lowest  terms,  so
that  a,  P  are  prime  to  one  another  [vii.  22],  and  hence  a"~\  ^S**"*  arc  prime
to  one  another  [vii.  27].

But  the  two  series  must  be  the  same,  so  that
a  =  a*-\     b  =  p*-\


350  BOOK  VIII  [vuL4

Proposition  4.

Given  as  many  ratios  as  we  please  in  least  numbers^  to  find
numbers  in  cotUinned  proportion  which  are  the  least  in  the
given  ratios.

Let  the  given  ratios  in  least  numbers  be  that  oi  A  to  B,
5  that  of  C  to  A  and  that  of  ^  to  -F;
thus  it  is  required  to  find  numbers  in  continued  proportion
which  are  the  least  that  are  in  the  ratio  of  A  to  B,  in  the
ratio  of  C  to  /?,  and  in  the  ratio  of  E  to  F.

A—  B

o —  D —

£ F

N—  9


M


O H

• K


Let  G,  the  least  number  measured  by  B,  C,  be  taken.

[vn.  34]
10        And,  as  many  times  as  B  measures  Gy  so  many  times  also

let  A  measure  H,

and,  as  many  times  as  C  measures  Gy  so  many  times  also  let

D  measure  K.

Now  ^  either  measures  or  does  not  measure  K.
15        First,  let  it  measure  it.

And,  as  many  times  as  E  measures  Ky  so  many  times  let
F  measure  L  also.

Now,  since  A  measures  H  the  same  number  of  times  that
B  measures  Gy
20  therefore,  as  A  is  to  By  so  is  H  to  G,  [vii.  Def.  20,  vn.  13]

For  the  same  reason  also,

as  C  is  to  /?,  so  is  G  to  A",
and  further,  as  E  is  to  /%  so  is  A'  to  Z,  ;
therefore  //,  Gy  Ky  L  are  continuously  proportional  in  the
25  ratio  of  A  to  By  in  the  ratio  of  C  to  Z?,  and  in  the  ratio  of  E
toF.

I  say  next  that  they  are  also  the  least  that  have   this
property.


VIII.  4]  PROPOSITION   4  351

For,  if  H,  G,  K,  L  are  not  the  least  numbers  continuously
;o  proportional  in  the  ratios  of  A  to  B,  of  C  to  /?,  and  of  E
to  F,  let  them  be  N,  O,  M,  P.

Then  since,  as  A  is  to  By  so  is  N  to  O,
while  A,  B  are  least,

and  the  least  numbers  measure  those  which  have  the  same
35  ratio  the  same  number  of  times,  the  greater  the  greater  and
the  less  the  less,  that  is,  the  antecedent  the  antecedent  and  the
consequent  the  consequent  ;
therefore  B  measures  O.  [vii.  20]

For  the  same  reason
40  C  also  measures  O  ;

therefore  B,  C  measure  O ;

therefore    the   least   number   measured   by  B,    C  will   also

measure  O.  [vii.  35]

But  G  is  the  least  number  measured  by  ^,  C\
45  therefore  G  measures  (9,  the  greater  the  less  :
which  is  impossible.

Therefore  there  will  be  no  numbers  less  than  H^  G^  K,  L
which  are  continuously  in  the  ratio  of  A  to  B,  of  C  to  Z?,  and
of  E\.oF.

so        Next,  let  E  not  measure  K.


A c—  E-

B O F-

Q H-


K Q

M R

O S

N T

P

Let  My  the  least  number  measured  by  Ey  Ky  be  taken.

And,  as  many  times  as  K  measures  My  so  many  times  let
Hy  G  measure  //,  O  respectively,

and,  as  many  times  as  E  measures  My  so  many  times  let  F
55  measure  P  also.

Since  H  measures  N  the  same  number  of  times  that  G
measures  (9,
therefore,  as  H  is  to  Gy  so  is  N  to  O,  [vii.  13  and  Def.  20]


3S2  BOOK  VIII  [viii.4

But,  as  ZT  is  to  G,  soxsA  to  B  \
60  therefore  also,  as  -^  is  to  B,  so  is  N  to  O.
For  the  same  reason  also,

as  C  is  to  /?,  so  is  O  to  M.
Again,  since  E  measures  -^the  same  number  of  times  that
F  measures  P,
65  therefore,  as  ^  is  to  /%  so  is  -^  to  P ;  [vn.  13  and  Dcf.  20]

therefore  N,  O,  M,  P  are  continuously  proportional  in  the
ratios  of  -^  to  B^  of  C  to  /?,  and  of  E  to  F.

I  say  next  that  they  are  also  the  least  that  are  in  the  ratios
A\B,C\D,E\F.
70       For,  if  not,  there  will  be  some  numbers  less  than  N^  0,
M,  P  continuously  proportional  in  the  ratios  A:B,  C\D,
E:F.

Let  them  be  Q,  R,  5,  T.
Now  since,  2iS  Qisto  R.sois  A  to  B,
75  while  A,  B  are  least,
and  the  least  numbers  measure  those  which  have  the  same
ratio  with  them  the  same  number  of  times,  the  antecedent  the
antecedent  and  the  consequent  the  consequent,  [vii.  20]

therefore  B  measures  R,
80        For  the  same  reason  C  also  measures  R  ;
therefore  B,  C  measure  R,

Therefore  the  least  number  measured  by  By  C  will  also
measure  R.  [vn.  35]

But  G  is  the  least  number  measured  by  i9,  C  \
85  therefore  G  measures  R.

And,  as  G  is  to  Ry  so  is  A'  to  5 :  [vii.  13J

therefore  K  also  measures  5.

But  E  also  measures  5 ;
therefore  Ey  K  measure  S.
90        Therefore  the  least  number  measured  by  Ey  K  will  also
measure  S.  [vn.  35J

But  M  is  the  least  number  measured  by  Ey  K  ;
therefore  M  measures  5,  the  greater  the  less  :
which  is  Impossible.
95        Therefore  there  will  not  be  any  numbers  less  than  Ny  6>,
J/,  P  continuously  proportional  in  the  ratios  of  A  to  By  of
C  to  Dy  and  of  E  to  F\


VIII.  4]  PROPOSITION   4  353

therefore  N,  O,  M,  P  are  the  least  numbers  continuously
proportional  in  the  ratios  A\B,C\D,E\F.         q.  e.  d.

69,  71,  09.    the  ratios  A  :  B,  C  :  D,  E  :  P.     This  abbreviated  expression  is  in  the
Greek  oi  AB,  TA,  EZ  X670C.

The  term  "  in  continued  proportion  "  is  here  not  used  in  its  proper  sense,
since  a  geometrical  progression  is  not  meant,  but  a  series  of  terms  each  of
which  bears  to  the  succeeding  term  a  given^  but  not  the  sanUy  ratio.

The  proposition  furnishes  a  good  example  of  the  cumbrousness  of  the
Greek  method  of  dealing  with  non-determinate  numbers.  The  proof  in  fact
is  not  easy  to  follow  without  the  help  of  modern  symbolical  notation.  If
this  be  used,  the  reasoning  can  be  made  clear  enough.

Euclid  takes  three  given  ratios  and  therefore  requires  to  find  y^f/r  numbers.
We  will  leave  out  the  simpler  particular  case  which  he  puts  first,  that  namely
in  which  E  accidentally  measures  K^  the  multiple  of  D  found  in  the  first  few
lines ;  and  we  will  reproduce  the  general  case  with  three  ratios.
Let  the  ratios  in  their  lowest  terms  be

a\b^     c  \d^     e  \f.
Take  /i,  the  l.c.m.  of  h^  r,  and  suppose  that

l^^mb^  fic.
Form  the  numbers  ma^  mb  \^nd.

=  nc  )
These  are  in  the  ratios  of  a  to  ^  and  oi  do  d  respectively.
Next,  let  /,  be  the  l.c.m.  of  nd^  e,  and  let

/a  =pnd  =  ge.
Now  form  the  numbers

pma,    pmb  ),      pnd  \,     qf,
=pnc  )        ^qe)
and  these  are  the  four  numbers  required.

If  they  are  not  the  least  in  the  given  ratios,  let

X,    y,     z,     u
be  less  numbers  in  the  given  ratios.

Since  a  :  ^  is  in  its  lowest  terms,  and

a  I  b  =  x  :yy
b  measures^.

Similarly,  since  c  :  d=y  :  z^

c  measures  y.

Therefore  A,  the  L.C.M.  of  ^,  ^,  measures >'.

But  /j  :  nd\^€\d\=y\  z.

Therefore  nd  measures  z.

And,  since  e  :/=  z  :  «,

e  measures  z.

Therefore  4,  the  l.c.m.  of  nd,  e,  measures  z :  which  is  impossible,  since
z</j  or  pnd.

The  step  (line  86)  inferring  that  G  :  I^  = /C :  S  is  of  course  alternando
from  t?  :  ^  [=  C  :  Z>]  =  ^  :  5.

It  will  be  observed  that  viii.  4  corresponds  to  the  portion  of  vi.  23  which
shows  how  to  compound  two  ratios  between  straight  lines.

H.  E.  II.  2  X


354  BOOK  VIII  [V111.5

Proposition  5.

Plane  numbers  have  to  one  another  the  ratio  compounded
of  the  ratios  of  thtir  sides.

Let  A,  B  h^  plane  numbers,  and  let  the  numbers  C,  D

be  the  sides  of  A,  and  E,  Foi  B\

5  I  say  that  A  has  to  B  the  ratio  com-.      ^

pounded  of  the  ratios  of  the  sides.  ^  ^

For,  the  ratios  being  given  which  C       _e  .: p

has  to  E  and  Z?  to  /)  let  the  least       q

numbers  G^  H^  A' that  are  continuously        ^

10 in  the  ratios  C:E,  D-.Fh^  taken,  so        ^

that,  L

as  C  is  to  ^,  so  is  6^  to  ^,
and,  as  Z?  is  to  /%  so  is  -^  to  K.  [vni.  4]

And  let  D  by  multiplying  E  inake  L.
IS        Now,  since  D  by  multiplying  C  has  made  A,  and  by
multiplying  E  has  made  Z,
therefore,  as  C  is  to  ^,  so  is  y^  to  Li  [vn.  17]

But,  as  C  is  to  E,  so  is  G  to  H\
therefore  also,  as  G  is  to  H,  so  is  ^  to  Z.
20       Again,  since  E  by  multiplying  D  has  made  Z,  and  further
by  multiplying  F  has  made  B,
therefore,  as  Z^  is  to  F,  so  is  Z  to  B.  [vn.  17]

But,  as  D  is  to  /%  so  is  Z/'  to  -^ ;
therefore  also,  as  Z^  is  to  K,  so  is  Z  to  jff.
25        But  it  was  also  proved  that,

as  G^  is  to  H,  soxs  A  to  L\
therefore,  ex  aeguali,

as  G  is  to  K,  so  is  A  to  B.  [vii.  14]

But  G  has  to  -^  the  ratio  compounded  of  the  ratios  of  the
30  sides ;
therefore  A  also  has  to  B  the  ratio  compounded  of  the  ratios
of  the  sides.  Q.  e.  d.

I,  5,  99,  31.    compounded  of  the  ratios  of  their  sides.    As  in  vi.  93,  the  Greek
has  the  less  exact  phrase,  *'  compoanded  of  their  sides."

If  a=cd^     b  =  ef^

then  a  has  to  h  the  ratio  compounded  oli  c  \  e  and  d  :/

Take  three  numbers  the  least  which  are  continuously  in  the  given  ratios.


viii.  s,  6]  PROPOSITIONS   5,  6  355

If  /  is  the  L.C.M.  of  ey  d  and  l-me^  nd^  the  three  numbers  are

mc,     fM\,     nf.  [viii.  4]

.    =nd\
Now  dc  :  de=  c  :  e  [vii.  17]

=  mc  \  me=mc  :  nd.
Also  ed  :  ff=  d  :/  [vii.  17]

—  nd\nf.
Therefore,  tx  aequali^  cd  \  ef^mc  \  nf

=  (ratio  compounded  oi  c  \  e  and  d ;/).
It  will  be  seen  that  this  proof  follows  exactly  the  method  of  vi.  23  for
parallelograms.


Proposition  6.

If  there  be  as  many  numbers  as  we  please  in  continued
proportion,  and  the  first  do  not  measure  the  second,  neither
will  any  other  measure  any  other.

Let  there  be  as  many  numbers  as  we  please,  A^  B,  C,  D,  Ey
in  continued  proportion,  and  let  A  not  measure  B ;
I  say  that  neither  will  any  other  measure  any  other.


-A

B

c


-D
E


-F

— Q
H


Now  it  is  manifest  that  A,  B,  C,  Z?,  E  do  not  measure
one  another  in  order ;  for  A  does  not  even  measure  B.

I  say,  then,  that  neither  will  any  other  measure  any  other.

For,  if  possible,  let  A  measure  C.

And,  however  many  A,  B,  C  are,  let  as  many  numbers
F,  G,  H,  the  least  of  those  which  have  the  same  ratio  with
A,  B,  C,  be  taken.  [vii.  33]

Now,  since  /%  G,  H  are  in  the  same  ratio  with  A,  B,  C,
and  the  multitude  of  the  numbers  A,  B,  C  is  equal  to  the
multitude  of  the  numbers  /%  G,  H,

therefore,  ex  c^quali,  as  A  is  to  C,  so  is  F  to  H.  [vii.  14]

23—2


356  BOOK  VIII  [viii.  6, 7

And  since,  as  -^  is  to  B,  so  is  F  to  G,
while  A  does  not  measure  B^

therefore  neither  does  F  measure  G ;  [vn.  Def.  20]

therefore  F  is  not  an  unit,  for  the  unit  measures  any  number.

Now  F,  //  are  prime  to  one  another.  [vni.  3]

And,  as  -F  is  to  ZT,  so  is  -^  to  C  ;
therefore  neither  does  A  measure  C

Similarly  we  can  prove  that  neither  will  any  other  measure
any  other.

Q.  E.  D.

Let  a,  ^,  ^ ...  ^  be  a  geometrical  progression  in  which  a  does  not  measure  d.

Suppose,  if  possible,  that  a  measures  some  term  of  the  series,  as  /

TaJce  Xf  y^  z^  u^  v,  w  the  ieasi  numbers  in  the  ratio  a,  ^,  r,  ^,  r,/

Since  x  iy  =  a  ib^

and  a  does  not  measure  ^,
X  does  not  measure  y ;  therefore  x  cannot  be  unity.

And,  ex  aeqwiU^  x  \w-a\f.

Now  x^  w  are  prime  to  one  another.  [vui.  3]

Therefore  a  does  not  measure/

We  can  of  course  prove  that  an  intermediate  term,  as  b^  does  not  measure
a  later  term  /  by  using  the  series  h^  r,  //,  ^,  /  and  remembering  that,  since
b  \  c -a  \  b^  b  does  not  measure  c.


Proposition  7.

If  there  be  as  many  numbers  as  we  please  in  contimied
proportion,  and  the  first  measure  the  last,  it  will  measure  the
second  also.

Let  there  be  as  many  numbers  as  we  please,  A,  B,  C,  /?,
in  continued  proportion ;  and
let  A  measure  D ;  ^

I  say  that  A  also  measures  B.      ^

For,  \{A  does  not  measure      ^
B,  neither  will  any  other  of  the      O"


numbers  measure  any  other.  [vm.  6]

But  A  measures  Z?.


Therefore  A  also  measures  B.
An  obvious  proof  by  reductio  ad  absurdum  from  viii.  6.


Q.  E.  D.


VIII.  8]  PROPOSITIONS  6—8  357


Proposition  8.

If  between  two  numbers  there  fall  numbers  in  continued
proportion  with  them,  then,  however  many  numbers  fall  between
them  in  continued  proportion,  so  fnany  will  also  fall  in  con-
tinued proportion  between  the  numbers  which  have  tlie  same
ratio  with  the  original  numbers.

Let  the  numbers  C,  D  fall  between  the  two  numbers  A,
B  in  continued  proportion  with  them,  and  let  E  be  made  in
the  same  ratio  to  /^  as  -^  is  to  -5 ;

I  say  that,  as  many  numbers  as  have  fallen  between  A,  B  in
continued  proportion,  so  many  will  also  fall  between  E,  F  in
continued  proportion.


A E-

c M-

o N-

B F-

G

H

K

L


For,  as  many  as  A,  B,  C,  D  are  in  multitude,  let  so  many
numbers  G,  H,  K,  L,  the  least  of  those  which  have  the  same
ratio  with  A,  C,  Z?,  B,  be  taken  ;  [vn.  33]

therefore  the  extremes  of  them  G,  L  are  prime  to  one  another.

[VIH.  3]

Now,  since  A,  C,  D,  B  are  in  the  same  ratio  with  G,  H,

and  the  multitude  of  the  numbers  A,  C,  D,  B  is  equal  to  the

multitude  of  the  numbers  G^  H,  K,  Z,

therefore,  ex  aeguali,  as  A  is  to  B,  so  is  G  to  L.  [vii.  14]

But,  as  ^  is  to  B,  so  is  E  to  F\
therefore  also,  as  G  is  to  Z,  so  is  E  to  F.

But  G,  L  are  prime,
primes  are  also  least,  [vii.  21]

and  the  least  numbers  measure  those  which  have  the  same
ratio  the  same  number  of  times,  the  greater  the  greater  and
the  less  the  less,  that  is,  the  antecedent  the  antecedent  and  the
consequent  the  consequent.  [vn.  20]


358  BOOK   VIII  [viii.  8, 9

Therefore  G  measures  E  the  same  number  of  times  as  L
measures  F,

Next,  as  many  times  as  G  measures  Ey  so  many  times  let
Hy  K  also  measure  My  N  respectively  ;
therefore  Gy  Hy  Ky  L  measure  E,  My  Ny  F  the  same  number
of  times.

Therefore  Gy  Hy  Ky  L  are  in  the  same  ratio  with  Ey  M,
Ny  F.  [vn.  Def.  20]

But  Gy  Hy  Ky  L  ^x^t  \xi  the  same  ratio  with  Ay  Cy  Dy  B  \
therefore  Ay  Cy  D^  B  are  also  in  the  same  ratio  with  Ey  M,

NyF.

But  Ay  Cy  Dy  B  2lvq^  lu  continuecl  proportion  ;
therefore  Ey  My  Ny  F  are  also  in  continued  proportion.

Therefore,  as  many  numbers  as  have  fallen  between  A,  B
in  continued  proportion  with  them,  so  many  numbers  have  also
fallen  between  E,  F  in  continued  proportion.

Q.  E.  D.
I .     fall.    The  Greek  word  is  ifiwlwrei¥,  "  fall  in  "  =  "  can  be  interpolated."

If  a\b-e\fy  and  between  a,  b  there  are  any  number  of  geometric
means  r,  d^  there  will  be  as  many  such  means  between  ^,  /

Let  a,  /?,  y,  ...,  8  be  the  least  possible  terms  in  the  same   ratio  as  a,
Cy  d,  ,,.b.

Then  a,  8  are  prime  to  one  another,  [viii.  3]

and,  ex  aequali^  a  :  S  =  a  :  b

=  .:/
Therefore  e  =  ma,/=  ;//8,  where  ///  is  some  integer.  [vii.  20]

Take  the  numbers  ///a,     ////?,     ;//y,  ...  w8.

This  is  a  series   in  the  given  ratio,  and  we  have  the  same   number  of
geometric  means  between  ///a,  ///5,  or  e,  /,  that  there  are  between  a,  b.

Proposition  9.

//  two  numbers  be  prime  to  one  another,  and  numbers  fall
between  them  in  continued  proportion,  then,  hozuever  many
numbers  fall  betiveen  them  in  continued  proportion,  so  many
will  also  fall  between  each  of  them  and  an  tinit  in  continued
proportion.

Let  A,  B  be  two  numbers  prime  to  one  another,  and  let
C,  D  fall  between  them  in  continued  proportion,
and  let  the  unit  E  be  set  out ;
I  say  that,  as  many  numbers  as  fall  between  Ay  B  in  con-


VIII.  9]  PROPOSITIONS  8,  9  359

tinued  proportion,  so  many  will  also  fall  between  either  of
the  numbers  Ay  B  and  the  unit  in  continued  proportion.

For  let  two  numbers  F,  G,  the  least  that  are  in  the  ratio
of  A,  C  /?,  B,  be  taken,

three  numbers  H,  K,  L  with  the  same  property,

and  others  more  by  one  continually,  until  their  multitude  is
equal  to  the  multitude  of  A,  C,  Z?,  B.  [vm.  2]


A

H
K

i/

n

L-

n

E-

M

F-

N

Q—

0

P

Let  them  be  taken,  and  let  them  be  M,  N,  O,  P.

It  is  now  manifest  that  F  by  multiplying  itself  has  made
H  and  by  multiplying  H  has  made  M,  while  G  by  multiplying
itself  has  made  L  and  by  multiplying  L  has  made  P.

[vm.  2,  Por.]

And,  since  M,  N,  (9,  P  are  the  least  of  those  which  have
the  same  ratio  with  F,  G,

and  A,  Cy  D,  B  are  also  the  least  of  those  which  have  the
same  ratio  with  F,  Gy  [vm.  i]

while  the  multitude  of  the  numbers  My  Ny  O,  P  is  equal  to  the
multitude  of  the  numbers  Ay  Cy  Dy  By

therefore  My  Ny  O,  P  are  equal  to  -^4,  Cy  Dy  B  respectively ;

therefore  M  is  equal  to  Ay  and  P  to  B.

Now,  since  F  by  multiplying  itself  has  made  //,
therefore  F  measures  H  according  to  the  units  in  F,

But  the  unit  E  also  measures  F  according  to  the  units  in  it ;

therefore  the  unit  E  measures  the  number  F  the  same  number
of  times  as  F  measures  H.

Therefore,  as  the  unit  E  is  to  the  number  /^  so  is  F  to  H.

[vii.  Def.  20]

Again,  since  F  by  multiplying  H  has  made  My

therefore  H  measures  M  according  to  the  units  in  F.


36o  BOOK   VIII  [viii.  9,  lo

But  the  unit  E  also  measures  the  number  F  according  to
the  units  in  it ;

therefore  the  unit  E  measures  the  number  F  the  same  number
of  times  as  H  measures  M,

Therefore,  as  the  unit  E  is  to  the  number  F,  so  is  H\o  M.

But  it  was  also  proved  that,  as  the  unit  E  is  to  the  number
F,  so  is  Flo  H\

therefore  also,  as  the  unit  E  is  to  the  number  F,  so  is  F  to  H,
and  H\o  M.

But  M  is  equal  to  A  ;
therefore,  as  the  unit  E  is  to  the  number  F,  so  is  F  to  H,
and  H  to  A,

For  the  same  reason  also,
as  the  unit  E  is  to  the  number  G,  so  is  6^  to  Z  and  L  to  B.

Therefore,  as  many  numbers  as  have  fallen  between  Ay
B  in  continued  proportion,  so  many  numbers  also  have  fallen
between  each  of  the  numbers  A,  B  and  the  unit  E  in  continued
proportion.

Q.  E.  D.

Suppose  there  are  n  geometric  means  between  a,  b,  two  numbers  prime  to
one  another ;  there  are  the  same  number  (n)  of  geometric  means  between  i
and  a  and  between  i  and  b.

If  Cy  d,..  are  the  //  means  between  a^  b^

a,     Cy     d  ...  b
are  the  least  numbers  in  that  ratio,  since  a,  b  are  prime  to  one  another,  [viii.  i]

The  terms  are  therefore  respectively  identical  with

where  a,  )S  is  the  common  ratio  in  its  lowest  terms.  [viii.  2,  Por.]

Thus  a  =  a^^\     b  =  p''^\

Now  I  :  a  =  a  :  a^^a^  :  a*...  =  a*  :  a**^',

and  I  :/3  =  p:p'  =  p':p',.,=^:p^'^';

whence  there  are  //  geometric  means  between  i,  a,  and  between  i,  b.


Proposition  10.

//  numbers  fall  between  each  of  two  ftumbers  and  an  tinit
in  continued  proportion^  however  many  numbers  fall  between
each  of  them  and  an  unit  in  continued  proportion,  so  7nany
also  will  fall  betzveen  the  mwibers  themselves  in  continued
proportion.


VIII.  lo]  PROPOSITIONS  9,  lo  361

For  let  the  numbers  Z?,  E  and  /^  G  respectively  fall
between  the  two  numbers  A,  B  and  the  unit  C  in  continued
proportion ;

I  say  that,  as  many  numbers  as  have  fallen  between  each  of
the  numbers  Ay  B  and  the  unit  C  in  continued  proportion,  so
many  numbers  will  also  fall  between  A,  B  in  continued  pro-
portion.

For  let  D  by  multiplying  F  make  H,  and  let  the  numbers
Z?,  F  by  multiplying  H  make  K,  L  respectively.


c  —

A-

IS

0 —

E

F

H   ...

K

G

L

Now,  since,  as  the  unit  C  is  to  the  number  Z?,  so  is  D  to  E,

therefore  the  unit  C  measures  the  number  D  the  same  number
of  times  as  D  measures  E.  [vu.  Def.  20]

But  the  unit  C  measures  the  number  D  according  to  the
units  in  D ;

therefore  the  number  D  also  measures  E  according  to  the  units
inZ?;

therefore  D  by  multiplying  itself  has  made  E.

Again,  since,  as  C  is  to  the  number  Z?,  so  is  E  to  A,

therefore  the  unit  C  measures  the  number  D  the  same  number
of  times  as  E  measures  A.

But  the  unit  C  measures  the  number  D  according  to  the
units  in  D ;

therefore  E  also  measures  A  according  to  the  units  in  D ;

therefore  D  by  multiplying  E  has  made  A,

For  the  same  reason  also

F  by  multiplying  itself  has  made  G,  and  by  multiplying  G  has
made  B.

And,  since  D  by  multiplying  itself  has  made  E  and  by
multiplying  F  has  made  H,

therefore,  as  Z7  is  to  /^  so  is  E  to  H,  [vu.  17]


362  BOOK  VIII  [viii.  lo

For  the  same  reason  also,

as  Z?  is  to  /%  so  is  ZT  to  G.  [vii.  i8]

Therefore  also,  as  -£"  is  to  ^,  so  is  -^  to  G.

Again,  since  D  by  multiplying  the  numbers  E,  H  has
made  A^  K  respectively,
therefore,  as  ^  is  to  //,  so  is  ^  to  K.  [vn.  17]

But,  as  ^  is  to  H,  so  is  D  to  F\
therefore  also,  as  D  is  to  F,  so  is  A  to  K.

Again,  since  the  numbers  /?,  F  by  multiplying  H  have
made  K,  L  respectively,
therefore,  as  Z7  is  to  /%  so  is  K  to  L.  [vn.  18]

But,  as  Z7  is  to  /%  so  is  ^  to  A' ;
therefore  also,  as  ^  is  to  K^  so  is  K  to  L.

Further,  since  Fhy  multiplying  the  numbers  H^  G  has
made  Z,  B  respectively,
therefore,  as  Z/'  is  to  G^  so  is  L  to  B.  [vu.  17]

But,  as  ZT  is  to  6^,  so  is  Z?  to  F\
therefore  also,  as  Z?  is  to  F,  so  is  L  to  B.

But  it  was  also  proved  that,

as  D  is  to  /%  so  is  ^  to  ^  and  K  lo  L\
therefore  also,  as  A  is  to  K,  so  is  A"  to  Z  and  L  to  B.

Therefore  Ay  K,  Z,  B  are  in  continued  proportion.

Therefore,  as  many  numbers  as  fall  between  each  of  the
numbers  A,  B  and  the  unit  C  in  continued  proportion,  so
many  also  will  fall  between  ^,  i9  in  continued  proportion.

Q.  E.  D.

If  there  be  n  geometric  means  between  i  and  a^  and  also  between  i  and
^,  there  will  be  n  geometric  means  between  a  and  h.
The  proposition  is  the  converse  of  the  preceding.
The  n  means  with  the  extremes  form  two  geometric  series  of  the  form
I,      a,      a'  ...  a*,     a*+^\
I,     A     i8»...)3-,     p^^\
where  a*+i  =  rt,     p''+'  =  fi.

By  multiplying  the  last  term  in  the  first  line  by  the  first  in  the  second,
the  last  but  one  in  the  first  line  by  the  second  in  the  second,  and  so  on,  we
get  the  series

a**S      a*/?,      a~->^  ...  a-l3^-\     a^,     )^+>

and  we  have  the  n  means  between  a  and  d.

It  will  be  observed  that,  when  Euclid  says  "  J*br  the  same  reason  also,  as
D  is  to  Fy  so  is  Hio  Gy'  the  reference  is  really  to  vii.  18  instead  of  vii.  17.


VIII.  lo,  n]  PROPOSITIONS   lo,  ii  363

He  infers  namely  that  D)<  F\  Fy^  F=D  :  F.  But  since,  by  vii.  16,  the
order  of  multiplication  is  indifferent,  he  is  practically  justified  in  saying  "  for
the  same  reason."    The  same  thing  occurs  in  later  propositions.

Proposition  ii.

Between  two  square  numbers  there  is  one  mean  proportional
number^  and  the  square  has  to  the  square  the  ratio  duplicate
of  that  which  the  side  has  to  the  side.

Let  A,  B  be  square  numbers,
and  let  C  be  the  side  of  A,  and  D  oi  B\

I  say  that  between  A,  B  there  is  one  mean  proportional
number,    and   A    has   to   B   the    ratio

duplicate  of  that  which  C  has  to  D.  a

For  let  C  by  multiplying  D  make  E.  b

Now,  since  -^  is  a  square  and  C  is  c d

its  side,  ^

therefore    C  by   multiplying   itself  has
made  A.

For  the  same  reason  also
D  by  multiplying  itself  has  made  B,

Since  then  C  by  multiplying  the  numbers  C,  D  has  made
A,  E  respectively,
therefore,  as  C  is  to  D,  so  is  A  to  E,  [vn.  17]

For  the  same  reason  also,

as  C  is  to  D,  so  is  E  to  B.  [vn.  18]

Therefore  also,  as  A  is  to  E,  so  is  E  to  B.

Therefore  between  Ay  B  there  is  one  mean  proportional
number.

I  say  next  that  A  also  has  to  B  the  ratio  duplicate  of
that  which  C  has  to  D,

For,  since  A,  E,  B  are  three  numbers  in  proportion,

therefore  A  has  to  B  the  ratio  duplicate  of  that  which  A  has
to  E.  [v.  Def.  9]

But,  as  A  is  to  E,  so  is  C  to  D.

Therefore  A  has  to  B  the  ratio  duplicate  of  that  which
the  side  C  has  to  D,  q.  e.  d.

According  to  Nicomachus  the  theorems  in  this  proposition  and  the  next,
that  two  squares  have  one  geometric  mean,  and  two  cubes  two  geometric
means,  between  them  are  Platonic.  Cf.  Timacus^  32  a  sqq.  and  the  note
thereon,  p.  294  above.


364  BOOK  VIII  [viii.  II,  12

€1*,  ^  being  two  squares,  it  is  only  necessary  to  form  the  product  ab  and
to  prove  that

tf»,    ab,    »
are  in  geometrical  progression.     Euclid  proves  that

€?\ab^ab.l^
by  means  of  vii.  17,  18,  as  usual.

In  assuming  that,  since  c^  is  to  ^  in  the  duplicate  ratio  of  a'  to  ab,  a*  is
to  ^  in  the  duplicate  ratio  of  a  to  b,  Euclid  assumes  that  ratios  which  are
the  duplicates  of  equal  ratios  are  equal.  This^  an  obvious  inference  from
V.  22,  can  be  inferred  just  as  easily  for  numbers  from  vii.  14.


Proposition  12.

Between  two  cube  numbers  there  are  two  mean  proportional
numbers,  and  the  cube  has  to  the  cube  the  ratio  triplicate  0/  that
which  the  side  has  to  the  side.

Let  A,  B  he,  cube  numbers,
and  let  C  be  the  side  of  A,  and  D  oi  B\
I  say  that  between  A^  B  there  are  two  mean  proportional
numbers,  and  A  has  to  B  the  ratio  triplicate  of  that  which  C
has  to  D.


A E-

B ' F-

C H G-


For  let  C  by  multiplying  itself  make  E,  and  by  multiplying
D  let  it  make  F]

let  D  by  multiplying  itself  make  G,

and   let  the  numbers   C,  D  by  multiplying  F  make  H,  K
respectively.

Now,  since  -^  is  a  cube,  and  C  its  side,
and  C  by  multiplying  itself  has  made  E,

therefore  C  by  multiplying  itself  has  made  E  and  by  multiply-
ing E  has  made  A.

For  the  same  reason  also
D  by  multiplying  itself  has  made  G  and  by  multiplying  G  has
made  B.

And,  since  C  by  multiplying  the  numbers  C,  D  has  made
Ey  /^respectively,
therefore,  as  C  is  to  /?,  so  is  E  to  /^  [vii.  17]


VIII.  12,  13]  PROPOSITIONS    ii— 13  365

For  the  same  reason  also,

as  C  is  to  /?,  so  is  F  to  G.  [vii.  18]

Again,  since  C  by  multiplying  the  numbers  E,  F  has
made  A,  H  respectively,

therefore,  as  E  is  to  F,  so  is  A  to  H.  [vii.  17]

But,  as  -£*  is  to  F,  so  is  C  to  D.
Therefore  also,  as  C  is  to  D,  so  is  A  to  H.
Again,  since  the  numbers  C,  D  by  multiplying  F  have
made  H,  K  respectively,

therefore,  as  C  is  to  D,  so  is  H  to  K.  [vii.  18]

Again,  since  D  by  multiplying  each  of  the  numbers  F,  G
has  made  K,  B  respectively,

therefore,  as  F  is  to  G,  so  is  K  to  B,  [vii.  17]

But,  as  F  is  to  G,  so  is  C  to  Z? ;
therefore  also,  as  C  is  to  /?,  so  is  AtoH.H  to  A',  and  K  to  ^.

Therefore  ZT,  A' are  two  mean  proportionals  between  A,  B.

I  say  next  that  A  also  has  to  B  the  ratio  triplicate  of  that
which  C  has  to  D,

For,  since  A,  H,  K,  B  are  four  numbers  in  proportion,
therefore  A  has  to  B  the  ratio  triplicate  of  that  which  A  has
to  H.  [v.  Def.  10]

But,  as  -^4  is  to  H^  so  is  C  to  Z?  ;
therefore  A  also  has  to  B  the  ratio  triplicate  of  that  which  C
has  to  D.

Q.  E.  D.

The  cube  numbers  a*,  ^  being  given,  Euclid  forms  the  products  a%  at^
and  then  proves,  as  usual,  by  means  of  vii.  17,  18  that

are  in  continued  proportion.

He  assumes  that,  since  c^  has  to  ^  the  ratio  triplicate  of  a^ :  a^,  the
ratio  fl*  :  ^  is  triplicate  of  the  ratio  a  :  b  which  is  equal  to  a' :  a^.  This
is  again  an  obvious  inference  from  vii.   14.

Proposition  13.

If  there  be  as  many  numbers  as  we  please  in  contintied
proportion,  and  each  by  multiplying  itself  make  some  number,
the  products  will  be  proportional ;  and,  tf  the  original  numbers
by  multiplying  the  products  make  certain  numbers,  the  latter
will  also  be  proportional.


366  BOOK  l^tl  [%ln.  ij

Let  there  be  as  many  numbers  as  we^leiSie^  Jt^  B;  €,  in
tontinued  proportidni  so  tlmt»  a$  A  is  to  ^,  so  is  i?.to  C;

1m  A,  Bs  C  by  multiplying  th^selves  malre  A  £,  f^f  and  by
multiplying  Z>,  E,  Flet  them  make  G,  H^K\

-1  say  that  A  E,  /^and  G,  H,  K  are  in  continued  f>n^rtk)li%


A Q-

d —  H-

0 K-

D —

E ^-

P «  N-

L P-

<> Q-


For  \ttA  by  multiplying  B  make  Z,

and  let  the  numbers  A,  B  by  multiplying  £  m^e  M,  N
tesp^ively.

And  again  let  B  by  multiplying  C  make  O,

and   let   the   numbers  B,  C  by  multiplying  O  make  P,  ^
respectively.

Then,  in  manner  similar  to  the  foregoing,  we  can  prove
that

Dy  Z,  E  and  G,  M,  N,  H  are  continuously  proportional  in  the
ratio  of  A  to  B,

and  further  E,  O,  F  and  H,  Py  Q,  K  are  continuously  propor-
tional in  the  ratio  of  B  x.o  C.

Now,  as  A  is  to  B,  so  is  -5  to  C  ;

therefore  D,  Z,  E  are  also  in  the  same  ratio  with  E,  O,  F,

and  further  G,  My  N,  H  in  the  same  ratio  with  H,  P,  Q,  K.

And  the  multitude  of  Z>,  Z,  Z'  is  equal  to  the  multitude  of
Z,  O,  F,  and  that  of  G,  M,  N,  H  to  that  of  H,  PyQ^K]

therefore,  ex  aequali^

as  D  is  to  Z,  so  is  Z  to  Z,

and,  as  G  is  to  Hy  so  is  H  to  K,  [vii.  14]

Q.  E..D.


VIII.  13,  14]  PROPOSITIONS    13,  14  367

If  a,  ^,  r ...  be  a  series  in  geometrical  progression,  then

A  /^     ff^     ^'      \  ^'^^  ^      ^^  geometncal  progression.

Heiberg  brackets  the  words  added  to  the  enunciation  which  extend  the
theorem  to  any  powers.  The  words  are  "and  this  always  occurs  with  the
extremes  "  (koX  act  ircpi  tovs  axpovs  touto  crv/A)3cuvct).  They  seem  to  be  rightly
suspected  on  the  same  grounds  as  the  same  words  added  to  the  enunciation
of  VII.  27.  There  is  no  allusion  to  them  in  the  proof,  much  less  any  proof
of  the  extension.

Euclid  forms,  besides  the  squares  and  cubes  of  the  given  numbers,  the
products  aby  a%  al^y  bcy  l?Cy  bc^.  When  he  says  that  "  we  prove  in  manner
similar  to  the  foregoing,"  he  indicates  successive  uses  of  vii.  17,  18  as
in  viii.  12.

With  our  notation  the  proof  is  as  easy  to  see  for  any  powers  as  for  squares
and  cubes.

To  prove  that  a*  ^,  ^...  are  in  geometrical  progression.

Form  all  the  means  between  a*,  ?*,  and  set  out  the  series
a*     <i»-'^,     <i»-«^  ...  ab''-\    /^».
The  common  ratio  of  one  term  to  the  next  is  a  i  b.

Next  take  the  geometrical  progression

^,    /^*-V,     ^-V  ...  bd''\    ^,
the  common  ratio  of  which  is  b  \  c.

Proceed  thus  for  all  pairs  of  consecutive  terms.

Now  a  \b-b  \  c=  ,,,

Therefore  any  pair  of  succeeding  terms  in  one  series  are  in  the  same  ratio  as
any  pair  of  succeeding  terms  in  any  other  of  the  series.

And  the  number  of  terms  in  each  is  the  same,  namely  («  +  i).

Therefore,  ex  aequali^


Proposition  14.

If  a  square  measure  a  square,  the  side  will  also  measure
the  side  ;  and,  if  the  side  measure  the  side,  the  square  will  also
measure  the  square.

Let  A,  B  be  square  numbers,  let  C,  D  be  their  sides,  and
let  A  measure  B  ;
I  say  that  C  also  measures  D.  a

For  let  C  by  multiplying  D  make  E ;        b

therefore  A,  E,  B  are  continuously  pro-         — ^  o

portional  in  the  ratio  of  C  to  D.      [viii.  nj  E

And,  since  A,  E,  B  are  continuously
proportional,  and  A  measures  B,
therefore  A  also  measures  E,  [vm.  7]


368  BOOK  VIJI  [tol  14,  i^

And,  ^  AhtoEiSotsCto D;
therdbre  aka  C  measures  D.      \  [vil  De£  20]

Again^  let  C  measure  D ;
\  say  that  A  also  measures  B.

Fw,  with  the  same  construction,  we  can  in  a  similar
manner  prove  that  A,  E,  B  are  continuously  proportional  in
the  ratio  of  C  to  D.

And  since,,  as  C  is  to  A  so  is  ^  to  ^,

and  C  measures  D,

therefore  A  also  measures  E.  [vn.  Def.  20]

And  A,  E,  B  zxft  continuously  proportional ;
therefore  A  also  measures  B.

Therefore  etc.

Q.  E.  D.

If  o^  measures  ^,  a  measures  h\  and,  if  .a  measures  b,  c?  measures  ^.

(1)  4^9  o^,  ^  are  in  continued  proportion  in  the  ratio  of  a  to  b.
Therefore,  since  €?  measures  ^,

a"  measures  ab.  [viii.  7]

But  c^  \ab-a\b.

Therefore  a  measures  b,

(2)  Since  a  measures  ^,  c^  measures  ab.

And  c^y  aby  i^  are  continuously  proportional.

Thus  ab  measures  ^.

And  a^  measures  ab.

Therefore  a'  measures  ^.

It  will  be  seen  that  Euclid  puts  the  last  step  shortly,  saying  that,  since
a^  measures  ab^  and  a',  ab^  ^  are  in  continued  proportion,  a^  measures  ^.
The  same  thing  happens  in  viii.  15,  where  the  series  of  terms  is  one  more
than  here.

Proposition  15.

I/a  cube  number  measure  a  cube  number^  the  side  will  also
measure  the  side ;  and,  if  the  side  measure  the  side,  the  cube
will  also  measure  the  cube.

For  let  the  cube  number  A  measure  the  cube  B,
and  let  C  be  the  side  of  A  and  D  oi  B  \
I  say  that  C  measures  D.


VIII.  is]  propositions   14,  is  369

For  let  C  by  multiplying  itself  make  Ey
and  let  D  by  multiplying  itself  make  G ;
further,  let  C  by  multiplying  D  make  F,
and  let  C,  D  by  multiplying  F  make  H^  K  respectively.

A

B


c-  H-

D—  K-

E  —

Q


Now  it  is  manifest  that  E,  F,  G  and  A,  H,  K,  B  are
continuously  proportional  in  the  ratio  of  Cto  /?.      [viii.  n,  12]

And,  since  Ay  Hy  K,  B  are  continuously  proportional,
and  A  measures  By
therefore  it  also  measures  H.  [vm.  7]

And,  as  A  is  to  Hy  so  is  C  to  Z? ;
therefore  C  also  measures  D.  [vii.  Def.  20]

Next,  let  C  measure  D ;
I  say  that  A  will  also  measure  B.

For,  with  the  same  construction,  we  can  prove  in  a  similar
manner  that  Ay  Hy  Ky  B  are  continuously  proportional  in  the
ratio  of  C  to  D.

And,  since  C  measures  /?,
and,  as  C  is  to  Z?,  so  is  A  to  Hy

therefore  A  also  measures  Hy  [vii.  Def.  20]

so  that  A  measures  B  also.

Q.  E.  D.

If  cf  measures  ^,  a  measures  b ;  and  vice  versa.     The  proof  is,  mufhtis
mutandiSy  the  same  as  for  squares.

(i)  a*,  c^by  al^y  ^  are  continuously  proportional  in  the  ratio  oi  aio  b-,
and  a*  measures  ^.

Therefore  a*  measures  a^ ;  [viii.  7]

and  hence  a  measures  b.

(2)  Since  a  measures  by  c^  measures  a^b.

And,  c^y  c^by  al^y  ^  being  continuously  proportional,  each  term  measures  the
succeeding  term ;
therefore  a*  measures  ^.

H.  E.  II.  24


370  BOOK  VIII  [vin.  id,  17

Proposition  16.

If  a  square  number  do  not  mectsure  a  square  number^  neither
will  the  stde  measure  the  side;  and,  if  the  side  do  not  measure
the  side,  neither  will  the  square  measure  the  square.

Let  -4,  -ff  be  square  numbers,  and  let  C,  Z?  be  their  sides;
and  let  A  not  measure  B ;

I  say  that  neither  does  C  measure  Z>.  ^

Foir,  if  C  measures  Z?,  A  will  also  ^ —

measure  B.        '  [vm.  14]  c

But  A  does  not  measure  B  \  d-

therefore  neither  will  C  measure  Z>.

Again,  let  C  not  measure  D  ;
I  say  that  neither  will  A  measure  B.

For,  if  A  measures  B,  C  will  also  measure  D.         [vm.  14]

But  C  does  not  measure  D\
therefore  neither  will  A  measure  B.

Q.  E.  D.

If  a'  does  not  measure  ^,  a  will  not  measure  b\  and,  if  a  does  not
measure  b,  a'  will  not  measure  ^.

The  proof  is  a  mere  reductio  ad  absurdum  using  vm.  14.

Proposition  17.

If  a  cube  number  do  not  measure  a  cube  number,  neither
will  the  side  measure  the  side  ;  and,  if  the  side  do  not  measure
the  side,  neither  will  the  cube  measure  the  cube.

For  let  the  cube  number  A  not  measure  the  cube
number  B,

and  let  C  be  the  side  of  A,  and  D     A

of^;  _  B-

I  say  that  C  will  qot  measure  D.

For,  if  C  nieasures  /?,  A  will
also  measure  B,  [vm.  15]

But  ^  does  not  measure  B ;
therefore  neither  does  C  measure  D.

Again,  let  C  not  measure  D ;
I  say  that  neither  will  A  measure  B.


0  —
D


VIII.  17,  i8]  PROPOSITIONS    i6— 18  371

For,  if  A  measures  B,  C  will  also  measure  D,         [vin.  15]
But  C  does  not  measure  D ;
therefore  neither  will  A  measure  B.

Q.  E.  D.

If  c?  does  not  measure  ^,  a  will  not  measure  b ;  and  vice  versa.
Proved  by  reductio  ad  absurdum  employing  viii.  15.


Proposition  18.

Between  two  similar  plane  numbers  there  is  one  m^an
proportional  number ;  and  the  plane  number  has  to  the  plane
number  the  ratio  duplicate  of  that  which  the  corresponding
side  has  to  the  corresponding  side.

Let  Ay  B  be  two  similar  plane  numbers,  and  let  the  numbers
C,  D  be  the  sides  of  A,  and  E,  F  of  B.

A c —

B D

E

o P


Now,  since  similar  plane  numbers  are  those  which  have
their  sides  proportional,  [vii.  Def.  21]

therefore,  as  C  is  to  /?,  so  is  E  to  F.

I  say  then  that  between  Ay  B  there  is  one  mean  propor-
tional number,  and  A  has  to  B  the  ratio  duplicate  of  that
which  C  has  to  E^  or  D  to  /%  that  is,  of  that  which  the  corre-
sponding side  has  to  the  corresponding  side.

Now  since,  as  C  is  to  /?,  so  is  E  to  /%
therefore,  alternately,  as  C  is  to  Ey  so  is  D  to  F.  [vii.  13]

And,  since  A  is  plane,  and  C,  D  are  its  sides,
therefore  D  by  multiplying  C  has  made  A.

For  the  same  reason  also
E  by  multiplying  F  has  made  B,

Now  let  D  by  multiplying  E  make  G.

Then,  since  D  by  multiplying  C  has  made  Ay  and  by
multiplying  E  has  made  Gy

therefore,  as  C  is  to  Ey  so  is  A  to  G.  [vn.  17]

24 — 2


372  BOOK  VIII  [viii.18

But,  as  C  is  to  -£",  sb  is  Z>  to  F\

therefore  also,  as  Z?  is  to  F,  so  is  A  to  G.

Again,  since  E  by  multiplying  D  has  made  G^  and  by
multiplying  F  has  made  B,

therefore,  as  Z>  is  to  /%  so  is  G^  to  B.  [vii.  17]

But  it  was  also  proved  that,

as  Z7  is  to  F,  sois  A  to  G\
therefore  also,  as  -4  is  to  G^,  so  is  G^  to  B.

Therefore  A,  G,  B  are  in  continued  proportion.
Therefore  between  A,  B  there  is  one  mean  proportional
number.

I  say  next  that  A  also  has  to  B  the  ratio  duplicate  of
that  which  the  corresponding  side  has  to  the  corresponding
side,  that  is,  of  that  which  C  rfas  to  E  or  D  to  F.

For,  since  A,  G,  B  are  in  continued  proportion,

A  has  to  B  the  ratio  duplicate  of  that  which  it  has  to  G.

[v.  Def.  9]

And,  as  A  is  to  G,  so  is  C  to  E,  and  so  is  D  to  /^
Therefore  A  also  has  to  B  the  ratio  duplicate  of  that  which
C  has  to  E  or  D  to  /^

Q.  E.   D.

If  ab^  cd  be  **  similar  plane  numbers,"  i.e.  products  of  factors  such  that

a  \b  =  c  \  d^

there  is  one  mean  proportional  between  ab  and  cd\  and  ab  is  to  cd  in  the
duplicate  ratio  oi  a\.o  c  or  of  b  to  d.

Form  the  product  be  (or  ady  which  is  equal  to  it,  by  vii.  19).

Then  ab,      bc\ ,     cd  .

^ad]

is  a  series  of  terms  in  geometrical  progression.
For  a  :  b  =  c  '.  d.

Therefore  a  :  c  =  b  \  d.  [vii.  13]

Therefore  ab  \  bc  =  bc  \  cd,  [vii.  17  and  16]

Thus  be  (or  ad)  is  a  geometric  mean  between  ab,  cd.

And  ab  is  to  cd'm  the  duplicate  ratio  of  ab  to  be  or  of  be  to  cd,  that  is,  of
a  to  r  or  of  ^  to  d.


VIII.  19]  PROPOSITIONS    i8,  19  373

Proposition  19.

Between  two  similar  solid  numbers  there  fall  two  mean
proportional  numbers;  and  the  solid  number  has  to  the  similar
solid  number  the  ratio  triplicate  of  that  which  the  corresponding
side  has  to  the  corresponding  side.

Let  Ay  B  be  two  similar  solid  numbers,  and  let  C,  /?,  E
be  the  sides  of  A,  and  F,  G,  H  of  B,

Now,  since  similar  solid  numbers  are  those  which  have
their  sides  proportional,  [vii.  Def.  21]

therefore,  as  C  is  to  D,  so  is  F  to  G,

and,  as  D  is  to  E,  so  is  G  to  H.

I  say  that  between  Ay  B  there  fall  two  mean  proportional
numbers,  and  A  has  to  B  the  ratio  triplicate  of  that  which  C
has  to  F,  D  to  G,  and  also  E  to  H.

A

B


D-  G o-

E—  H

K—

I


M

For  let   C  by  multiplying   D   make  Ky  and   let  F  by
multiplying  G  make  Z.

Now,  since  C,  D  are  in  the  same  ratio  with  /%  G,

and  K  is  the  product  of  C,  Z>,  and  L  the  product  of  /%  G,
K,  L  are  similar  plane  numbers  ;  [vii.  Def.  21]

therefore  between  K,  L  there  is  one  mean  proportional  number.

[viii.  18]

Let  it  be  M.

Therefore  M  is  the  product  of  D,  F,  as  was  proved  in  the
theorem  preceding  this.  [viii.  18]

Now,  since  D   by  multiplying   C  has  made  Ky  and  by
multiplying  F  has  made  M,
therefore,  as  C  is  to  F,  so  is  K  to  M.  [vii.  17]

But,  as  K  is  to  M,  so  is  M  to  L.

Therefore  K,  M,  L  are  continuously  proportional  in  the
ratio  of  C  to  F.


374  BOOK  VIII  [viii.  19

And  since,  as  C  is  to  /?,  so  is  F  to  G^
alternately  therefore,  as  C  is  to  /%  so  is  Z?  to  G.  [vii.  13]

For  the  same  reason  also,

as  Z>  is  to  G^  so  is  E  to  H.

Therefore  K^  M,  L  are  continuously  proportional  in  the
ratio  of  C  to  F^  in  the  ratio  of  D  to  G,  and  ^so  in  the  ratio
of  Eto  H.

Next,  let  E,  H  by  multiplying  M  make  N,  O  respectively.

Now,  since  -^  is  a  solid  number,  and  C,  Z?,  E  are  its  sides,
therefore  E  by  multiplying  the  product  of  C,  D  has  made  A.

But  the  product  of  C,  Z>  is  A';

therefore  E  by  multiplying  K  has  made  A.

For  the  same  reason  also

H  by  multiplying  L  has  made  -ff.

Now,  since  E  by  multiplying  A^  has  made  A^  and  further
also  by  multiplying  M  has  made  N,

therefore,  as  A'  is  to  M,  so  is  A  to  M  [vn.  17]

But,  as  A'  is  to  il/,  so  is  C  to  /%  D  to  G^,  and  also  E  to  //^;

therefore  also,  as  C  is  to  F,  D  to  G^,  and  E  to  7/,  so  is  A  to  -A^.

Again,  since  E,  H  by  multiplying  ^  have  made  N,  0
respectively,

therefore,  as  ^  is  to  H,  so  is  N  to  O,  [vn.  18]

But,  as  E  is  to  H,  so  is  C  to  /^  and  D  to  G\
therefore  also,  as  C  is  to  7%  Z?  to  G,  and  E  to  /^,  so  is  A  to
A^  and  N  to  (9.

Again,  since  H  by  multiplying  i?/  has  made  O,  and  further
also  by  multiplying  L  has  made  B,

therefore,  as  M  is  to  Z,  so  is  (9  to  B.  [vn.  17]

But,  as  M  is  to  Z,  so  is  C  to  F,  D  to  G,  and  E  to  //^
Therefore  also,  as  C  is  to  F,  D  to  G,  and  E  to  ZT,  so  not

only  is  O  to  ^,  but  also  A  to  N  and  A^  to  (9.

Therefore  A,  N,0,  B  are  continuously  proportional  in  the

aforesaid  ratios  of  the  sides.

I  say  that  A  also  has  to  B  the  ratio  triplicate  of  that  which
the  corresponding  side  has  to  the  corresponding  side,  that  is,
of  the  ratio  which  the  number  C  has  to  Z%  or  D  to  G,  and
also  E  to  H.


VIII.  19,  2o]  PROPOSITIONS   19,  20  375

For,  since  Ay  JV,  O,  B  are  four  numbers  in  continued
proportion,

therefore  A  has  to  B  the  ratio  triplicate  of  that  which  A  has
to  A^.  [v.  Def.  10]

But,  as  ^  is  to  -A^,  so  it  was  proved  that  C  is  to  F,  D  to  G,
and  also  E  to  H.

Therefore  A  also  has  to  B  the  ratio  triplicate  of  that  which
the  corresponding  side  has  to  the  corresponding  side,  that  is,
of  the  ratio  which  the  number  C  has  to  F,  D  to  (7,  and  also

E  to  H.  Q.  E.  D.

In  other  words,  \i  a  \b  \€=d  \  e  \f^  then  there  are  two  geometric  means
between  abc^  def\  and  abc  is  to  def  in  the  triplicate  ratio  of  a  to  dy  or  b  to  ^,
or  c  to/

Euclid  first  takes  the  plane  numbers  aby  de  (leaving  out  Cy  /)  and  forms
the  product  bd.     Thus,  as  in  viii.  18,

aby     bd\  y     de
=  eaj
are  three  terms  in  geometrical  progression  in  the  ratio  of  a  to  dy  or  of  b  to  e.
He  next  forms  the  products  of  ^,/ respectively  into  the  mean  bd.
Then  abCy    cbdy    fbdy     def

are  in  geometrical  progression  in  the  ratio  oi  a\.o  d  etc.
For  abc  :  cbd-  ab  \bd^a\d^

cbd:fbd  =  c:f  -.  [vii.  17]

fbd :  def=  bd:de=b:ej
And  a  :  d=b  :  e  =  c:f

The  ratio  of  abc  to  def  is  the  ratio  triplicate  of  that  of  abc  to  cbdy  i.e.  of
that  ofato  d  etc

Proposition  20.

If  one  mean  proportional  number  fall  between  two  numbers y
the  numbers  will  be  similar  plane  numbers.

For  let  one  mean  proportional  number  C  fall  between  the
two  numbers  Ay  B;
5 1  say  that  A,  B  are  similar  plane  numbers.

Let  Z>,  Ey  the  least  numbers  of  those  which  have  the  same
ratio  with  Ay  C,  be  taken  ;  [vii.  33]

therefore  D  measures  A  the  same  number  of  times  that  E
measures  C.  [vii.  20]

'o        Now,  as  many  times  as  Z?  measures  A,  so  many  units  let
there  be-in  F;

therefore  F  by  multiplying  D  has  made  Ay
so  that  A  is  plane,  and  /?,  F  are  its  sides.


376  BOOK  VIII  [viii.  20

Again,  since  Z>,  E  are  the  least  of  the  numbers  which  have
15  the  same  ratio  with  C,  B,
therefore  D  measures  C  the  same  number  of  times  that  E
measures  B.  [vn.  20]


B-

c-


F-


As  many  times,  then,  as  E  measures  B,  so  many  units  let
there  be  in  G^  ;
20  therefore  E  measures  B  according  to  the  units  in  G  ;
therefore  G  by  multiplying  E  has  made  B.

Therefore  B  is  plane,  and  -£",  G  are  its  sides.

Therefore  A,  B  are  plane  numbers.

I  say  next  that  they  are  also  similar.
25        For,   t  since  F  by  multiplying  D  has  made  A,  and  by
multiplying  E  has  made  C,

therefore,  as  D  is  to  E,  so  is  A  to  C,  that  is,  C  to  B.    [vii.  17]
Again,  t   since  E  by  multiplying  F,  G  has  made  C,  B
respectively,
30  therefore,  as  F  is  to  G,  so  is  C  to  B.  [vii.  17]

But,  as  C  is  to  B,  so\sDloE\
therefore  also,  as  D  is  to  E,  so  is  F  to  G.

And  alternately,  as  D  is  to  F,  so  is  E  to  6^.  [vn.  13]

Therefore  A,B  are  similar  plane  numbers;  for  their  sides
35  are  proportional.  q.  e.  d.

25.     For,  since  F 37.    C  to  B.     The  text  has  clearly  suffered  corruption  here.     It

is  not  necessary  to  infer  from  other  facts  that,  as  />  is  to  jE",  so  is  ^  to  C;  for  this  is  part  of
the  hypotheses  (11.  6,  7).  Again,  there  is  no  explanation  of  the  statement  (1.  25)  that  Fhy
multiplying  E  has  made  C.  It  is  the  statement  and  explanation  of  this  latter  fact  which  are
alone  wanted  ;  after  which  the  proof  proceeds  as  in  1.  28.  We  might  therefore  substitute  for
11.  25 — 28  the  following.

"For,  since  E  measures  C  the  same  number  of  times  that  D  measures  A  [1.  8],  that  is,
according  to  the  units  in  F\\,  10],  therefore  Fhy  multiplying  E  has  made  C

And,  since  E  by  multiplying  /',  (7,*'  etc.  etc.

This  proposition  is  the  converse  of  viii.  18.  If  a,  r,  b  are  in  geometrical
progression,  a,  b  are  "  similar  plane  numbers."

Let  a  :  j3  be  the  ratio  a  :  c  (and  therefore  also  the  ratio  c  \  b){n  its  lowest
terms.

Then  [Vii.  20]

a  =  ma^    c  =  mfty     where  m  is  some  integer,
^  =  /ra,     ^  =  ftp,     where  n  is  some  integer.


VIII.  20,  2i]  PROPOSITIONS   20,  21  377

Thus  tf,  b  are  both  products  of  two  factors,  i.e.  plane.
Again,  a:  P=^a  i  c  =  €  :  b

=  m\n.  [vii.  18]

Therefore,  alternately,  a  :  w  =  /3  :  «,  [vii.  13]

and  hence  moy  nfi  are  similar  plane  numbers.

[Our  notation  makes  the  second  part  still  more  obvious,  for  c  =  mp  =  na,]

Proposition  21.

If  two  mean  proportional  numbers  fall  between  two  numbers,
the  numbers  are  similar  solid  numbers.

For  let  two  mean  proportional  numbers  C,  D  fall  between
the  two  numbers  A,  B  \
I  say  that  A,  B  are  similar  solid  numbers.


A  —

—

E-

n

i^-

O'                                                                                                                                              1

c

Wl

D  —

H"

N—

f\      ...

K  —

O'

M

For  let  three  numbers  Ey  F,  Gy  the  least  of  those  which
have  the  same  ratio  with  Ay  C,  /?,  be  taken  ;  [vii.  33  or  vm.  2]
therefore  the  extremes  of  them  By  G  are  prime  to  one  another.

4»     [vm.  3]

Now,  since  one  mean  proportional  number  F  has  fallen
between  By  Gy
therefore  By  G  are  similar  plane  numbers.  [vm.  20]

Let,  then,  Hy  K  be  the  sides  of  By  and  Z.,  M  of  G.

Therefore  it  is  manifest  from  the  theorem  before  this  that
By  Fy  G  are  continuously  proportional  in  the  ratio  oi  H  \.o  L
and  that  of  K  to  M.

Now,  since  By  Fy  G  are  the  least  of  the  numbers  which
have  the  same  ratio  with  Ay  C,  /?,

and  the  multitude  of  the  numbers  By  Fy  G  is  equal  to  the
multitude  of  the  numbers  Ay  C,  /?,
therefore,  ex  aequaliy  as  B  is  to  Gy  so  is  A  to  D.  [vii.  14]

But  By  G  are  prime,
primes  are  also  least,  [vn.  21]

and  the  least  measure  those  which  have  the  same  ratio  with


378  BOOK  VIII  [Yiii-ai

them  the  same  number  of  times,  the  greater  the  greater  and
the  less  the  less,  that  is,  the  antecedent  the  antecedent  and  the
consequent  the  consequent ;  [vil  20]

therefore  E  measures  A  the  same  number  of  times  that  G
measures  D.

Now,  as  many  times  as  E  measures  A^  so  many  units  let
there  be  in  ^.

Therefore  N  by  multiplying  E  has  made  A.

But  E  is  the  product  of  H,  K  ;
therefore  N  by  multiplying  the  product  of  H^  K  has  made  A.

Therefore  A  is  solid,  and  H,  K,  Nate  its ^ides.

Again,  since  E,  F,  G  are  the  least  of  the  numbers  which
have  the  same  ratio  as  Q  D,  B,

therefore  E  measures  C  the  same  number  of  times  that  G
measures  B.

Now,  as  many  times  as  E  measures  C,  so  many  units  let
there  be  in  O.

Therefore  G  measures  B  according  to  the  units  in  O ;
therefore  O  by  multiplying  G  has  made  B.

But  G  is  the  product  of  Z,  M;
therefore  O  by  multiplying  the  product  of  Z,  M  has  made  B.

Therefore  B  is  solid,  and  Z,  M,  O  are  its  sides  ;
therefor^vi?,  B  are  solid.

I  say  that  they  are  also  similar.

For  since  N,  O  by  multiplying  E  have  made  A,  C,
therefore,  as  N  is  to  O,  so  is  A  to  C,  that  is,  E  to  /^    [vn.  18]

But,  as  E  is  to  /%  so  \s  H  to  L  and  K  to  M\
therefore  also,  as  Z^  is  to  Z,  so  is  K  lo  M  and  N  to  O.

And  H,  K,  N  are  the  sides  of  A,  and  O,  Z,  il/the  sides
of^.

Therefore  A,  B  are  similar  solid  numbers.       q.  e.  d.

.  The  converse  of  viii.  19.     If  a,  Cy  dy  b  are  in  geometrical  progression,  a,  b
are  "  similar  solid  numbers."

Let  a,  )3,  y  be  the  least  numbers  in  the  ratio  of  a,  r,  d  (and  therefore  also
of  Cy  dy  b).  [vii.  33  or  viii.  2

Therefore  a,  y  are  prime  to  one  another.  [viii.  3

They  are  also  "similar  plane  numbers."  [viii.  20

Let  a  =  mriy     y  -pqy

where  m  :  n  =/  :  q.


VIII.  21—23]  PROPOSITIONS   21—23  379

Then,  by  the  proof  of  viii.  20,

a  :  P  =  m  \  p  ^  n  \  q.

Now,  ex  aequali^  «  :  ^  =  a  :  y,  [vii.  14]

and,  since  a,  y  are  prime  to  one  another,

a  =  m,     d=ry^     where  r  is  an  integer.

But  a  =  mn\

therefore  a  =  rmHy  and  therefore  a  is  "  solid."

Again,  ex  aequaliy  r  :  ^  =  a  :  y,

and  therefore  r  =  fa,     b  =  sy^     where  s  is  an  integer.

Thus  b  =  spq^  and  b  is  therefore  "  solid"

Now  a  :  P=^a  :  c  =  ra  :  sa

=  r:s.  [vii.  i8j

And,  from  above,  a  \  p  =  m  :  p  =  n  :  g.

Therefore  r  :  s^m  ip  =  n  :^,

and  hence  a,  b  are  similar  solid  numbers.

Proposition  22.

If  three  numbers  be  in  continued  proportion^  and  the  first
be  square,  the  third  will  also  be  square.

Let  A,  By  C  h^  three  numbers  in  continued  proportion,
and  let  A  the  first  be  square  ;
I  say  that  C  the  third  is  also  square.  ^

For,  since  between  A,  C  there  is  one

mean  proportional  number,  B,

therefore  A,  C  are  similar  plane  numbers.  [vm.  20]

But  A  is  square  ;
therefore  C  is  also  square.  Q.  e.  d.

A  mere  application  of  viii.  20  to  the  particular  case  where  one  of  the
''similar  plane  numbers"  is  square.

Proposition  23.

If  four  numbers  be  in  continued  proportion,  and  tfie  first  be
cube,  the  fourth  will  also  be  cube.

Let  A,  B,  C,  Dh^  four  numbers  in  continued  proportion,
and  let  A  be  cube ;
I  say  that  D  is  also  cube.  ^


For,  since  between  A^  D  there      c

are  two  mean  proportional  numbers      p

therefore  A,  D  are  similar  solid  numbers.  [vm.  21]


3So  BOOK  VIII  [viii.  aj— «s

But  A  is  cube ;
therefore  D  is  also  cube.

Q.  E.  D.

A  mare  application  of  viil  %\  to  the  case  where  one  of  the  *' similar  solid
numbers  "  is  a  cube.

Proposition  24.

If  two  numiers  have  to  one  another  the  ratio  which  a  square
number  has  to  a  square  number,  and  the  first  be  square,  the
second  wiU  also  be  square.

For  let  the  two  numbers  A,  B  have  to  one  another  the
ratio  which  the  square  number  C  has

to  the  square  number  /?,  and  let  A  be  A

square ;  ^  — —

I  say  that  B  is  also  square.  q

For,  since  C,  D  are  square,
C,  D  are  similar  plane  numbers.

Therefore  one  mean  proportional  number  falls  between

C,  D.  [vni.  18]

And,  as  C  is  to  D,  so  is  -^  to  i9  ;
therefore  one  mean  proportional  number  falls  between  A,  B

also.  [viil  8]

And  A  is  square  ;

therefore  B  is  also  square.  [vm.  22]

Q.  E.  D.

If  a  :  d  =  c^  :  tP,  and  a  is  a  square,  then  d  is  also  a  square.

For  c\  d^  have  one  mean  proportional  cd,  [vm.  i8]

Therefore  a,  b^  which  are  in  the  same  ratio,  have  one  mean  proportional.

[vm.  81
And,  since  a  is  square,  b  must  also  be  a  square.  [vm.  22}

Proposition  25.

If  two  numbers  have  to  one  another  the  ratio  which  a  cube
number  has  to  a  cube  number,  and  the  first  be  cube,  the  second
will  also  be  cube.

For  let  the  two  numbers  A,  B  have  to  one  another  the
ratio  which  the  cube  number  C  has  to  the  cube  number  Z?,
and  let  A  be  cube  ;
I  say  that  B  is  also  cube.


VIII.  25,  26]  PROPOSITIONS   23—26  3S1

For,  since  C,  D  are  cube,
C,  £>  are  similar  solid  numbers.

Therefore  two  mean  proportional  numbers  fall  between
C,  /?.  [viii.  19]


A E

B F

O

D^

And,  as  many  numbers  as  fall  between  C,  D  in  continued
proportion,  so  many  will  also  fall  between  those  which  have
the  same  ratio  with  them  ;  [viii.  8]

so  that  two  mean  proportional  numbers  fall  between  A,  B
also.

Let  E,  F  so  fall.

Since,  then,  the  four  numbers  A,  E,  F,  B  are  in  continued
proportion,
and  A  is  cube,
therefore  B  is  also  cube.  [vm.  23]

Q.   E.   D.

\ia  :  ^  =  r*  :  </*,  and  a  is  a  cube,  then  b  is  also  a  cube.
For  ^^  d}  have  two  mean  proportionals.  [vm.  19]

Therefore  a,  b  also  have  two  mean  proportionals.  [vm.  8J

And  <z  is  a  cube :
therefore  ^  is  a  cube.  [vm.  23]


Proposition  26.

Similar  plane  numbers  have  to  one  another  the  ratio  which
a  square  number  has  to  a  square  number.

Let  A,  B  be  similar  plane  numbers  ;
I  say  that  A  has  to  B  the  ratio  which  a  square  number  has
to  a  square  number.


B-

c

E


F^or,  since  A,  B  are  similar  plane  numbers,

therefore  one  mean  proportional  number  falls  between  A,  B.

[vm.  18]


382  BOOR  VIII  [viii.  2^  27

Let  it  so  fall,  and  let  it  be  C ;

and  let  Z>,  JS,  /%  the  least  numbers  of  those  which  have  the
same  ratio  with  A,  C,  B,  be  taken  ;  [vn.  33  or  viii.  a]

therefcH-e  the  extremes  of  them  D,  F  are  square,     \h\vl  2,  PorJ

And  since,  as  Z>  is  to  /s  so  is  ^  to  B,

and  /?,  F  are  square,

therefore  A  has  to  B  the  ratio  which  a  square  number  has  to
a  square  number.

Q.  E.  D.  .

If  tf,  ^  are  similar  "plane  numba^"  let  c  be  the  mean  proportional
between  them.  [vin.  18]

Take  a,  ^,  y  the  smallest  numbers  in  the  ratio  of  tf,  ^  b.    [vn.  33  or  vin.  2I
Then  a,  y  are  squares.  [vni.  2,  Pcw.j

Therefore  a,  ^  are  in  the  ratio  of  a  square  to  a  square.


Proposition  27.

Similar  solid  numbers  have  to  one  another  the  ratio  which
a  cube  number  has  to  a  cube  number.

Let  A,  B  ht  similar  solid  numbers  ;
I  say  that  A  has  to  B  the  ratio  which  a  cube  number  has  to


a  cube  number.


c-

D-


E —  F-


For,  since  A,  B  are  similar  solid  numbers,

therefore  two  mean  proportional  numbers  fall  between  A,  B.

[viii.  19]
Let  C,  D  so  fall,

and  let  £,  F,  G,  H,  the  least  numbers  of  those  which  have
the  same  ratio  with  A,  C,  /?,  B,  and  equal  with  them  in
multitude,  be  taken  ;  [vn.  33  or  viii.  2]

therefore  the  extremes  of  them  E,  H  are  cube.        [viii.  2,  For.]

And,  as  E  is  to  H,  so  is  y^  to  ^ ;

therefore  A  also  has  to  B  the  ratio  which  a  cube  number  has
to  a  cube  number.

Q.  E.  D.


VIII.  27]  PROPOSITIONS   26,  27  383

The  same  thing  as  viii.  26  with  cubes.  It  is  proved  in  the  same  way
except  that  viil  19  is  used  instead  of  viii.  18.

The  last  note  of  an-Nairizi  in  which  the  name  of  Heron  is  mentioned  is
on  this  proposition.  Heron  is  there  stated  (p.  194 — 5,  ed.  Curtze)  to  have
added  the  two  propositions  that,

1.  If  two  numbers  have  to  one  another  the  ratio  of  a  square  to  a  square^  the
numbers  are  similar  plane  numbers;

2.  If  two  numbers  have  to  one  another  the  ratio  of  a  cube  to  a  cube^  the  numbers
are  similar  solid  numbers.

The  propositions  are  of  course  the  converses  of  viii.  26,  27  respectively.
They  are  easily  proved.

(i)     If  a:^  =  r":^,

then,  since  there  is  one  mean  proportional  (cd)  between  c\  ^,

[viii.  II  or  18]
there  is  also  one  mean  proportional  between  <i,  b,  [viii.  8]

Therefore  a,  b  are  similar  plane  numbers.  [viii.  20]

(2)  is  similarly  proved  by  the  use  of  viii.  12  or  19,  viii.  8,  viii.  21.

The  insertion  by  Heron  of  the  first  of  the  two  propositions,  the  converse
of  VIII.  26,  is  perhaps  an  argument  in  favour  of  the  correctness  of  the  text  of

IX.  10,  though  (as  remarked  in  the  note  on  that  proposition)  it  does  not  give
the  easiest  proof.  Cf.  Heron's  extension  of  vii.  3  tacitly  assumed  by  Euclid
in  VII.  33.


BOOK  IX.


Proposition  i.

If  two  similar  plane  numbers  by  multiplying  one  another
make  same  number ^  the  product  will  be  square.

Let  A,  B  he,  two  similar  plane  numbers,  and  let  A  by
multiplying  B  make  C ;  .
I  say  that  C  is  square.  ^

For  let  A  by  multiplying  itself       ^

make/?.  ^

Therefore  D  is  square.

Since  then  A  by  multiplying  itself  has  made  /?,  and  by
multiplying  B  has  made  C,

therefore,  as  A  is  to  B,  so  is  D  to  C.  [vii.  17]

And,  since  A,  B  are  similar  plane  numbers,

therefore  one  mean  proportional  number  falls  between  A,  B.

[viii.  18]

But,  if  numbers  fall  between  two  numbers  in  continued

proportion,  as  many  as  fall  between  them,  so  many  also  fall

between  those  which  have  the  same  ratio ;  [vm.  8]

so  that  one  mean  proportional  number  falls  between  D,  C  also.

And  D  is  square  ;
therefore  C  is  also  square.  [vm.  22]

Q.  E.  D.


The  product  of  two  similar  plane  numbers  is  a  square.
Let  a,  b  be  two  similar  plane  numbers.

Now  a  \  b  -  c^  \  ab,  [vii.  1 7

And  between  a,  b  there  is  one  mean  proportional.  [vin.  18
Therefore  between  a^ :  ab  there  is  one  mean  proportional.  [vm.  8

And  a'  is  square ;

therefore  €U>  is  square.  [vm.  22]


IX.  2,  3]  PROPOSITIONS    1—3  385

Proposition  2.

If  two  numbers  by  multiplying  one  another  make  a  square
number,  they  are  similar  plane  numbers.

Let  A^  B  \y^  two  numbers,  and  let  A  by  multiplying  B
make  the  square  number  C ;

I  say  that  A,  B  are  similar  plane  ^

numbers.  ^

For  let  A  by  multiplying  itself  ^

make  D  ;  °

therefore  D  is  square.

Now,  since  A  by  multiplying  itself  has  made  D,  and  by
multiplying  B  has  made  C,
therefore,  as  y^  is  to  B^  so  is  D  to  C  [vii.  17]

And,  since  D  is  square,  and  C  is  so  also,
therefore  /?,  C  are  similar  plane  numbers.

Therefore  one  mean  proportional  number  falls  between
D,  C.  [viii.  18]

And,  as  D  is  to  C,  so  is  y^  to  ^ ;
therefore  one  mean  proportional  number  falls  between  A,  B
also.  [viii.  8]

But,  if  one  mean  proportional  number  fall  between  two
numbers,  they  are  similar  plane  numbers  ;  [vm.  20]

therefore  A,  B  are  similar  plane  numbers.

Q.  E.  D.
If  ab  is  a  square  number,  a,  b  are  similar  plane  numbers.     (The  converse

of  IX.  I.)

For                                          a  \  b  =  a*  :  ab.  [vii.  17]

And  a",  ab  being  square  numbers,  and  therefore  similar  plane  numbers,

they  have  one  mean  proportional.  [vm.  18]

Therefore  a,  b  also  have  one  mean  proportional,  [vm.  8]

whence  a,  b  are  similar  plane  numbers.  [vm.  20]


Proposition  3.

If  a  ctibe  number  by  multiplying  itself  make  some  number,
the  product  will  be  cube.

For  let  the  cube  number  A  by  multiplying  itself  make  B  ;
I  say  that  B  is  cube.

H.  E.  II.  25


386  BOOK  IX  [1X.3

For  let  C  the  side  of  A,  be  taken,  and  let  C  by  multiplying
itself  make  D.

It  is  then  manifest  that  C  by  multiplying     a- —
D  has  made  A.  © —

Now,  since  C  by  multiplying  itself  has     c-  o—

made  Z?,
therefore  C  measures  D  according  to  the  units  in  itself..

But  further  the  unit  also  measures  C  according  to  the  units
in  it;
therefore^  as  the  unit  is  to  C,  so  is  C  to  D.  [vii.  Def.  20]

Again,  since  C  by  multiplying  D  has  made  A^
therefore  D  measures  A  according  to  the  units  in  C.

But  the  unit  also  measures  C  according  to  the  units  in  it ;
therefore,  as  the  unit  is  to  C,  so  is  Z7  to  A.

But,  as  the  unit  is  to  C,  so  is  C  to  Z? ;
therefore  also,  as  the  unit  is  to  C,  so  is  C  to  Z7,  and  D  to  A.

Therefore  between  the  unit  and  the  number  A  two  mean
proportional  numbers  C,  D  have  fallen  in  continued  proportion.

Again,  since  A  by  multiplying  itself  has  made  B,
therefore  A  measures  B  according  to  the  units  in  itself.

But  the  unit  also  measures  A  according  to  the  units  in  it ;
therefore,  as  the  unit  is  to  -/^,  so  is  A  to  B.  [vii.  Def.  20]

But  between  the  unit  and  A  two  mean  proportional  numbers
have  fallen ;

therefore  two  mean  proportional  numbers  will  also  fall  between
A,  B.  [viii.  8]

But,  if  two  mean  proportional  numbers  fall  between  two
numbers,  and  the  first  be  cube,  the  second  will  also  be  cube.

[viii.  23]

And  A  is  cube  ;
therefore  B  is  also  cube.  Q.  e.  d.

The  product  of  a^  into  itself,  or  d^ .  a\  is  a  cube.

For  I  \  a  =  a  .  (^  -  c^  \  {^,

Therefore  between  i  and  a'  there  are  two  mean  proportionals.

Also  I  :  a'  =  a'  :  fl:* .  fl*.

Therefore  two  mean  proportionals  fall  between  a*  and  a* .  a*.  [viii.  8]

(It  is  true  that  viii.  8  is  only  enunciated  of  two  pairs  of  numbers,  but  the
proof  is  equally  valid  if  one  number  of  one  pair  is  unity.)

And  fl'  is  a  cube  number :
therefore  a* .  a:*  is  also  cube.  [viii.  23]


IX.  4,5]  PROPOSITIONS   3—5  387

Proposition  4.

If  a  cube  number  by  multiplying  a  cube  number  make  some
number,  the  product  tvill  be  cube.

.    For  let  the  cube  number  A  by  multiplying  the  cube  number
B  make  C ;
I  say  that  C  is  cube.  a

For  let  A  by  multiplying         b

itself  make  D  ;  c '■

therefore  D  is  cube.         [ix.  3]         ^

And,  since  A  by  multiply-
ing itself  has  made  D,  and  by  multiplying  B  has  made  C,
therefore,  as  A  is  to  B,  so  is  D  to  C.  [vu.  17]

And,  since  A,  B  are  cube  numbers,
A,  B  are  similar  solid  numbers.

Therefore  two  mean  proportional  numbers  fall  between
A,  B;  [viii.  19]

so  that  two  mean  proportional  numbers  will  fall  between  /?,
C  also.  [viii.  8]

And  D  is  cube ;
therefore  C  is  also  cube.  [vm.  23]

Q,  E.   D.
The  product  of  two  cubes,  say  <r* .  ^,  is  a  cube.

For                                   cr"  :P  =  a^.a^  :a^,P.  [vn.  17]

And  two  mean  proportionals  fall  between  n',  ^  which  are  similar  solid

numbers.  [viii.  19^

Therefore  two  mean  proportionals  fall  between  nr* .  at*,  a' .  A*.  [vm.  S

But  a* .  fl*  is  a  cube :  [ix.  3"

therefore  a* .  ^  is  a  cube.  [viii.  23'

Proposition  5.

//  a  cube  number  by  multiplying  any  number  make  a  cube
number,  the  multiplied  number  will  also  be  ctibe.

For  let  the  cube  number  A  by  multiplying  any  number  B
make  the  cube  number  C ;
I  say  that  B  is  cube.  ^

For  let  A  by  multiplying        b

itself  make  D  \  c

therefore  D  is  cube.       [ix.  3]        o


25 — 2


388  BOOK  IX  [nc.  5, 6

Now,  since  A  by  multiplying  itself  has  made  D^  and  by
multiplying  B  has  made  C
therefore,  as  -4  is  to  i?,  so  is  Z?  to  C  [vn.  17]

And  since  Z?,  C  are  cube,
they  are  similar  solid  numbers.

Therefore  two  mean  proportional  numbers  fall  between

Z?,    C.  ,  [VHLig]

Andy  as  Z7  is  to  C  so  is  ^  to  i? ;
therefore  two  mean  proportional  numbers  fall  between  A^  B
also.  [vnL8]

And  A  is  cube ;
therefore  B  is  also  cube.  [viii.  23]

If  the  product  0*3  is  a  cube  number,  b  is  cube.

By  IX.  3,  Uie  product  a* .  a!.is  a  cube.

And  a*.a* :  a*^  =  a*  :3.  [vu.  17]

The  first  two  terms  are  cubes,  and  therefcMre  "similar  solids";  therrf(»e
there  are  two  mean  prqx>rtionals  between  them.  [vui.  19I

Therefore  there  are  two  mean  proportionals  between  a*,  b.  [viii.  8J

And  0*  is  a  cube :
therefore  ^  is  a  cube  number.  [viii.  23]

Proposition  6.

If  a  number  by  multiplying  itself  make  a  cube  number,  it
will  itself  also  be  cube.

For  let  the  number  A  by  multiplying  itself  make  the  cube

number  B ;

I  say  that  A  is  also  cube.  a

For  let  A  by  multiplying  B  make  C.  ^

Since,  then,  A   by  multiplying  itself        ^

has  made  B,  and  by  multiplying  B  has

made  C,

therefore  C  is  cube.

And,  since  A  by  multiplying  itself  has  made  B,

therefore  A  measures  B  according  to  the  units  in  itself.

But  the  unit  also  measures  A  according  to  the  units  in  it
Therefore,  as  the  unit  is  to  A,  so  is  A  to  B.       [vn.  Def.  20]
And,  since  A  by  multiplying  B  has  made  C,

therefore  B  measures  C  according  to  the  units  in  A.

But  the  unit  also  measures  A  according  to  the  units  in  it


IX.  6,  7]


PROPOSITIONS   5—7


389


Therefore,  as  the  unit  is  to  A,  so  is  B  to  C.       [vn.  Def.  20]

But,  as  the  unit  is  to  A,  so\sAtoB\
therefore  also,  as  ^  is  to  B,  so  is  B  to  C.

And,  since  B,  C  are  cube,
they  are  similar  solid  numbers.

Therefore    there    are   two    mean    proportional    numbers
between  B^  C.  [vm.  19]

And,  as  ^  is  to  C,  so  is  A  to  B.

Therefore    there    are   two    mean    proportional    numbers
between  A,  B  also.  [vm.  8]

And  B  is  cube  ;
therefore  A  is  also  cube.  [cf.  vm.  23]

Q.  E.  D.
If  a*  is  a  cube  number,  a  is  also  a  cube.


For


a  =  a  \  c^  -  a^  \  €^,


Now  fl*,  fl*  are  both  cubes,  and  therefore  "similar  solids";  therefore  there
are  two  mean  proportionals  between  them.  [vm.  19]

Therefore  there  are  two  mean  proportionals  between  tf,  a'.  [vm.  8]

And  a*  is  a  cube :
therefore  a  is  also  a  cube  number.  [vm.  23]

It  will  be  noticed  that  the  last  step  is  not  an  exact  quotation  of  the  result
of  VII I.  23,  because  it  is  there  the  first  of  four  terms  which  is  known  to  be  a
cube,  and  the  last  which  is  proved  to  be  a  cube ;  here  the  case  is  reversed.
But  there  is  no  difficulty.  Without  inverting  the  proportions,  we  have  only
to  refer  to  vm.  21  which  proves  that  a^  a',  having  two  mean  proportionals
between  them,  are  two  similar  solid  numbers ;  whence,  since  a'  is  a  cube,
a  is  also  a  cube.


Proposition  7.

If  a  composite  number  by  multiplying  any  number  make
some  number,  the  product  will  be  solid.

For  let  the  composite  number  A  by  multiplying  any  number
B  make  C;
I  say  that  C  is  solid.

For,since^is  composite,
it  will  be  measured  by  some
number.  [vii.  Def.  13]

Let  it  be  measured  by  D ;
and,  as  many  times  as  D  measures  A,  so  many  units  let  there
be  in  E.


A-
B-

c-

D-


390  BOOK   IX  [ix.  7, 8

Since  then  D  measures  A  according  to  the  units  in  E^
therefore  E  by  multiplying  D  has  made  A.  [vil  Defc  15]

And,  since  A  by  multiplying  B  has  made  C,
and  A  is  the  product  of  /?,  ^,
,  therefore  the  product  of  D^  E  by  multiplying  B  has  made  C

Therefore  C  is  solid,  and  Z7,  ^,  B  are  its  sides.

Q.  E.  D.

Since  a  composite  number  is  the  product  of  two  factors,  the  result  of
multij^ying  it  by  another  number  is  to  produce  a  number  which  is  the
product  of  diree  factors,  Le.  a  *' solid  number.''


Proposition  8,

If  as  many  numbers  as  im  please  beginning /rem  an  unit  be
in  continued  proportion^  the  third  from  the  unit  wUl  be  square^
as  vnll  also  those  which  successively  leave  out  one;  the  fourth
will  be  cube,  as  will  also  cUl  those  which  leave  otU  two;  and  the
seventh  will  be  at  once  cube  and  square,  as  wHl  also  those  which
leave  out  five.

Let  there  be  as  many  numbers  as  we  please,  A,  B,  C,  D,

E,  F,  beginning  from  an  unit  and  in  con-
tinued proportion  ;  a

I  say  that  B,  the  third  from  the  unit,  is  ^  3ZZZ^

square,  as  are  also  all  those  which  leave  p

out  one  ;    C,  the  fourth,  is  cube,  as  are  g

also  all  those  which  leave  out  two  ;  and  p

F,  the   seventh,   is   at  once  cube   and

square,  as  are  also  all  those  which  leave  out  five.

For  since,  as  the  unit  is  to  A,  so  is  A  to  B,
therefore  the  unit  measures  the  number  A  the  same  number
of  times  that  A  measures  B.  [vii.  Def.  20]

But  the  unit  measures  the  number  A  according  to  the
units  in  it ;
therefore  A  also  measures  B  according  to  the  units  in  A.

Therefore  A  by  multiplying  itself  has  made  B ;
therefore  B  is  square.

And,  since  B,  C,  D  are  in  continued  proportion,  and  B  is
square,
therefore  D  is  also  square.  [vm.  22]


IX.  8]  PROPi>SITIONS    :-  >  5^1

For  the  same  reason
F  is  also  square.

Similariy  we  can  prove  thai  all  those  which  leave  out  one
are  square.

I  say  next  that  C  the  fourth  from  the  unit,  is  cube,  as  are
also  all  those  which  leave  out  two.

For  since,  as  the  unit  is  xo  A.  so  is  ^  to  C

therefore  the  unit  measures  the  number  A  the  same  number
of  times  that  B  measures  C.

But  the  unit  measures  the  number  A  according  to  the  units
in  A  ;

therefore  B  also  measures  C  according  to  the  units  in  A.
Therefore  A  by  multiplying  B  has  made  C
Since  then  A  by  multiplying  itself  has  made  B,  and  by

multiplying  B  has  made  C

therefore  C  is  cube.

And,  since  C,  Z?,  E^  /^are  in  continued  proportion,  and  C
is  cube,

therefore  F  is  also  cube.  [viu,  jj]

But  it  was  also  proved  square  :
therefore  the  seventh  from  the  unit  is  both  cube  and  square.

Similarly  we  can  prove  that  all  the  numbers  which  Icavt*
out  five  are  also  both  cube  and  square.

Q.  E.  n.

If  I,  <z,  a,,  a,,  ...  be  a  geometrical  progression,  then  ci^,  <i4«  <'«•    -  *^^*
squares;

^s>  ^o  ^fi  •••  ^6  cubes ;

^•t  ^is>  •••  ^re  both  sijuares  and  cubes.

Since  i  \a=-a  \a^^

a^  =  a\
And,  since  tfj,  flj,  a^  are  in  geometrical  progression  and  ti^  (-  <i')  is  a  S()uarc,

a^  is  a  square.  [viii.  22]

Similarly  a^^  a^,  ...  are  squares.
Next,  I  :  a  =  a^:  a^

=  a^  :  ^,»
whence  fl,  =  a',  a  cube  number.

And,  since  «„  «<,  a^,  <?«  are  in  geometrical  progression,  and  (h  is  «  «*"bi',

fleisa  cube.  (vni.  33]


39^  BOOK  IX  [ix.^,  ^

Smilarly  Og,  ou,  •••  are  cubes.

Qearly  then  a^  a^t  Om,  ...  are  both  squares  and  cubes.  ^  -

The  whole  result  is  of  course  obvious  if  the  geometrical  progression  ^
written,  with  our  notation,  as

I,  a,  a*,  fl»,  «*,  ...  a*


Proposition  9.

//as  many  numbers  as  we  please  beginning  from  an  unit  i
in  coniinued pmpartian,  and  Ike  number  after  the  unit  be  square^  ^
all  the  rest  will  also  be  square.  And^  if  the  number  after  the  "^
unU  be  cube,  all  the  rest  will  also  be  cube.

Let  there  be  as  many  numbers  as  we  please,  A,  B,  C  A  «
E,  /%  beginning  from  an  unit  and  in  con-
tinued proportion,  smd  let  A,  the  number       a

after  the  unit,  be  square ;  '^

I  say  that  all  the  rest  will  also  be  square.  ^

Now  it  has  been  proved  that  B,  the        £

third  from  the  unit,  is  square,  as  are  also        f —     -

all  those  which  leave  out  one ;         [ix.  8]
I  say  that  all  the  rest  are  also  square.


For,  since  A,  B,  C  are  in  continued  proportion,
and  A  is  square,
therefore  C  is  also  square.  [vin.  22H  '

Again,  since  B,  C,  D  are  in  continued  proportion,
and  B  is  square,
D  is  also  square.  [vm.  22^^

Similarly  we  can  prove  that  all  the  rest  are  also  square.

Next,  let  A  be  cube ;
I  say  that  all  the  rest  are  also  cube.

Now  it  has  been  proved  that  C,  the  fourth  from  the  unit,
is  cube,  as  also  are  all  those  which  leave  out  two  ;  [ix.  8]

I  say  that  all  the  rest  are  also  cube.

For,  since,  as  the  unit  is  to  A,  so  is  A  to  B,
therefore  the  unit  measures  A  the  same  number  of  times  as  A
measures  B.

But  the  unit  measures  A  according  to  the  units  in  it ;
therefore  A  also  measures  B  according  to  the  units  in  itself;
therefore  A  by  multiplying  itself  has  made  B.


lo]  PROPOSITIONS  8— lo  393

ind  A  is  cube.

Jut,  if  a  cube  number  by  multiplying  itself  make  some

ber,  the  product  is  cube.  [ix.  3]

Therefore  B  is  also  cube.

ind,  since  the  four  numbers  A,  B^  C,  D  are  in  continued

ortion,

A  is  cube,

so  is  cube.  [vm.  23]

'or  the  same  reason

also  cube,  and  similarly  all  the  rest  are  cube.

Q.  E.  D.

I,  a*,  ^29  ^ti  ^4}  •••  ^e  11^  geometrical  progression,  a,,  a^,  ^4,  ...  are  all

'  I,  ^,  a,,  a,,  ^4, ...  are  in  geometrical  progression,  0^,0,,  ...  are  all  cubes.

)    By  IX.  8,  a,,  ^4,  tfi,  ...  are  all  squares.

id,  fl",  a^y  Oj  being  in  geometrical  progression,  and  n'  being  a  square,

a,  is  a  square.  [viii.  22]

»r  the  same  reason  ^5,^7,  ...  are  all  squares.
I     By  IX.  8,  tf„  Of,  09,  ...  are  all  cubes.
Now  I  :  a*  =  a"  :  Og.

lerefore  a^  =  c^  .c^y  which  is  a  cube,  by  ix.  3.

id,  ^,  a,,  <i„  ^4  being  in  geometrical  progression,  and  a*  being  cube,

a^  is  cube.  [viii.  23]

nilarly  we  prove  that  a^  is  cube,  and  so  on.
le  results  are  of  course  obvious  in  our  notation,  the  series  being

(i)     I,  a«,  tf*,  «•,   ...  fl**,

(2)     I,  a*,  «•,  <i",  ...  <r**.


Proposition  10.

fas  many  numbers  as  we  please  beginning  from  an  unit  be
^tinued proportion^  and  the  number  after  the  unit  be  not
^Cy  neither  will  any  other  be  square  except  the  third  from
nit  and  all  those  which  leave  out  one.  Andy  if  the  number
the  unit  be  not  cubcy  neither  will  any  other  be  cube  except
mrth  from  the  unit  and  all  those  which  leave  out  two.

et  there  be  as  many  numbers  as  we  please,  Ay  By  C,  D,
\  beginning  from  an  unit  and  in  continued  proportion,
et  Ay  the  number  after  the  unit,  not  be  square ;


394  BOOK   IX  [ix.  lo

I  say  that  neither  will  any  other  be  square  except  the  third

fnmi  the  unit  <and  those  which

leave  out  one  > .  a

For,  if  possible,  let  C  be  square.         b

But  B  IS  also  square ;        [ix-  8]        c ; —

[therefore  B^  C  have  to  one  another        °

the  ratio  which  a  square  number        ^         ^  ^

has  to  a  square  number].  ^

And,  ^s  Bxsto  C^soxs  A  to  B\

therefore  A,  B  have  to  one  another  the  ratio  which  a  square

number  has  to  a  square  number ;

[so  that  A,  B  are  similar  plane  numbers].         [vui.  26,  conveise]

And  B  is  square ;
therefore  A  is  also  square  :
which  is  contrary  to  the  hypothesis.

Therefore  C  is  not  square.

Similarly  we  can  prove  that  neither  is  any  other  of  the
numbers  square  except  the  third  from  the  unit  and  those  which
leave  out  one.

Next,  let  A  not  be  cube.

I  say  that  neither  will  any  other  be  cube  except  the  fourth
from  the  unit  and  those  which  leave  out  two.
For,  if  possible,  let  D  be  cube.

Now  C  is  also  cube  ;  for  it  is  fourth  from  the  unit.      [ix.  8]
And,  as  C  is  to  Z?,  so  is  B  lo  C;

therefore  B  also  has  to  C  the  ratio  which  a  cube  has  to  a  cube.

And  C  is  cube ;
therefore  B  is  also  cube.  [vm.  25]

And  since,  as  the  unit  is  to  A,  so  is  A  to  B,

and  the  unit  measures  A  according  to  the  units  in  it,

therefore  A  also  measures  B  according  to  the  units  in  itself ;

therefore  A  by  multiplying  itself  has  made  the  cube  number  B.

But,  if  a  number  by  multiplying  itself  make  a  cube  number,
it  is  also  itself  cube.  [ix.  6]

Therefore  A  is  also  cube  :

which  is  contrary  to  the  hypothesis.

Therefore  D  is  not  cube.


IX.  lo,  ii]  PROPOSmOXS   icx  II  305

Similariy  we  can  prove  that  neither  is  any  other  of  the
numbers  cube  except  the  fourth  from  the  unit  and  those  which
leave  out  twa

Q.  E.  D.

If  I,  j;  «^  a,,  ««,  ...  be  a  geometiical  progression,  then  (iK  if  «t  is  m^  a
square,  none  of  the  terms  will  be  square  except  it.,  a^^  «■,'.  ...:
aiid(2),if  «  isiiotacnbe,iioiieof  the  terms  will  be  cube  except  #»«  ci««  a,,  ....

With  reference  to  the  first  part  of  the  proof,  viz.  that  which  proves  that«  if
Os  is  a  square,  m  most  be  a  square,  Hdberg  remarks  that  the  words  which
I  have  bracketed  are  perhaps  spurious :  for  it  is  easier  to  use  viii.  24  than
the  convene  of  tul  261,  and  a  use  of  viu.  24  would  correspond  better  to  the
use  of  vin.  25  in  the  second  part  relating  to  cubes.  I  agree  in  this  \'iew  and
have  bracketed  the  words  accordingly.  (See  however  note.  p.  3S3,  on
cxMiverses  of  viil  26,  27  given  by  Heron.)  If  this  chai^  be  made,  the
proof  runs  as  follows.

,(i)    If  possible,  let  tf,  be  square.
Now  a,  :  a,  =  a  :  <!,.

But  tf^  is  a  square.  [ix.  S]

Therefore  tf  is  to  tf,  in  the  ratio  of  a  square  to  a  square.
And  If,  is  square ;

therefore  a  is  square  [viii.  24] :  which  is  impossible.

(2)    If  possible,  let  iff  be  a  cube.

Now  a,  :  114  =  tf,  :  a,.

And  IT,  is  a  cube.  [ix.  8]

Therefore  a,  is  to  u,  in  the  ratio  of  a  cube  to  a  cube.

And  tf,  is  a  cube :
therefore  a,  is  a  cube.  [vm.  25]

But,  sitK%  I  :  a  =  a  :  a,,

And,  sitK%  a*  is  a  cube,

a  must  be  a  cube  [ix.  6]  :  which  is  impossible.

The  propositions  vm.  24,  25  are  here  not  quoted  in  their  exact  form  in
that  the  first  and  second  squares,  or  cubes,  change  places.  But  there  is  no
difficulty,  since  the  method  by  which  the  theorems  are  proved  shows  that
either  inference  is  equally  correct


Proposition  ii.

If  as  many  numbers  as  we  please  beginning  from  an  unit  be
in  continued  proportion,  the  less  measures  the  greater  according
to  some  one  of  the  numbers  which  have  place  among  the  propor-
tional numbers.


396  BOOK  IX  [ix.  ii

Let  there  be  as  many  numbers  as  we  please,  B,  C,  /?,  E,
b^inning  from  the  unit  A  and  in  con-
tinued proportion ;  A

I  say  that  B^  the  least  of  the  numbers  B^        b

C,  A  E^  measures  E  according  to  some        c^

one  of  tfie  numbers  C,  D.  o

For  since,  as  the  unit  A  is  to  j9,  so        ^ "^

is  Z>  to  ^,

therefwe  the  unit  A  measures  the  number  B  the  same  number

of  times  as  D  measures  E ;

therefore,  alternately,  the  unit  A  measures  D  the  same  number

of  times  as  B  measures  E.  [vii.  15]

But  the  unit  A  nieasures  D  according  to  the  units  in  it ;
therefore  B  also  measures  E  according  to  the  units  in  D ;
.  so  that  B  the  less  measures  E  the  greater  according  to  some
number  of  those  which  have  place  among  the  proportional
numbers. —

PoRiSM.  And  it  is  manifest  that,  whatever  place  the
measuring  number  has,  reckoned  from  the  unit,  the  same
place  also  has  the  number  according  to  which  it  measures,
reckoned  from  the  number  measured,  in  the  direction  of  the
number  before  it. —

Q.  E.  D.

The  proposition  and  the  porism  together  assert  that,  if  i,  <7,  i?,,  ...  a,»  be  a
geometrical  progression,  a^  measures  a^  and  gives  the  quotient  a^-r  {^  <  *)•
Euclid  only  proves  that  a^  =  a,  a^^i,  as  follows.

I  :a  =  a^.i  :  a^.
Therefore  i  measures  a  the  same  number  of  times  as  n»_i  measures  a„.
Hence  i  measures  a»-i  the  same  number  of  times  as  a  measures  a^  ;

[vii.  15]
that  IS,  a^  =  a,  fl„_i.

We  can  supply  the  proof  of  the  porism  as  follows.

I  :  a  =  a,.  :  Ur+u


whence,  ex  aequali^


3^i»_r-l  •  ^n-r  —  ^%-\  •  ^i»>


I  \a^_r^ar\a^.  [vii.  14]

It  follows,  by  the  same  argument  as  before,  that

With  our  notation,  we  have  the  theorem  of  indices  that


IX,  12]  PROPOSITIONS   II,  12  397

Proposition  12.

If  as  many  numbers  as  we  please  beginning  from  an  unit  be
in  continued  proportion,  by  however  many  prime  numbers  the
last  is  measured,  the  next  to  the  unit  will  also  be  measured  by
the  same.

Let  there  be  as  many  numbers  as  we  please,  A,  B,  C,  D,
beginning  from  an  unit,  and  in  continued  proportion  ;
I  say  that,  by  however  many  prime  numbers  D  is  measured,
A  will  also  be  measured  by  the  same.


A P-

B Q-

O H-


E —

For  let  D  be  measured  by  any  prime  number  E ;
I  say  that  E  measures  A.

For  suppose  it  does  not ;
now  E  is  prime,  and  any  prime  number  is  prime  to  any  which
it  does  not  measure  ;  [vn.  29]

therefore  E^  A  are  prime  to  one  another.

And,  since  E  measures  /?,  let  it  measure  it  according  to  F,

therefore  E  by  multiplying  F  has  made  D.

Again,  since  A  measures  D  according  to  the  units  in  C,

[ix.  1 1  and  Por.]
therefore  A  by  multiplying  C  has  made  D.

But,  further,  E  has  also  by  multiplying  F  made  D ;
therefore  the  product  of  ^,  C  is  equal  to  the  product  of  E,  F.

Therefore,  as  ^  is  to  E,  so  is  F  to  C  [vn.  19]

But  Ay  E  are  prime,
primes  are  also  least,  [vn.  21]

and  the  least  measure  those  which  have  the  same  ratio  the
same  number  of  times,  the  antecedent  the  antecedent  and  the
consequent  the  consequent ;  [vn.  20]

therefore  E  measures  C.

Let  it  measure  it  according  to  G ;
therefore  E  by  multiplying  G  has  made  C.

But,  further,  by  the  theorem  before  this,
A  has  also  by  multiplying  B  made  C.  [ix.  1 1  and  Por.]


398  «  BOOl^  IX  [ix.19

Therefore  the  product  of  A,  B  is  equal  to  the  product  of
E.G.

Therefore,  as  A  is  to  -f,  so  is  <x  to  A  [vii.  19]

But  A\  Ezx^  primet
primes  are  also  lea^  [vu.  21]

and  the  least  numbars  measure  those  which  have  the  same
ratio  with  them  the  same  number  of  times,  the  antecedent  the
antecedent  and  the  consequent  the  consequent :  t^n-  H

therefore  E  measures  B.

Let  it  measure  it  according  to /T;

therefore  E  by  multiplying  H  has  made  B.

But  further  A  has  also  by  multiplyii^  itself  made  B ;

[IX.  8]

therefore  the  product  of  E^  H  is  equal  to  the  square  on  A.

Therefore,  as  ^  is  to  y^,  so  is  /4  to  ^.  [vu- 19]

But  A.  E  are  prime,
primes  are  also  least,  [vii.  21]

anf}  ^e  least  measure  those  which  have  the  same  ratio  the
s^ime  number  of  times,  the  antecedent  the  antecedent  and  the
consequent  the  consequent ;  [vn.  20]

therefore  E  measures  A,  as  antecedent  antecedent.

But,  again,  it  also  does  not  measure  it :
which  is  impossible.

Therefore  E^  A  are  not  prime  to  one  another.

Therefore  they  are  composite  to  one  another.

But  numbers  composite  to  one  another  are  measured  by
some  number.  [vil  Def.  14]

And,  since  E  is  by  hypothesis  prime,
and  the  prime  is  not  measured  by  any  number  other  than  itself,
therefore  E  measures  A,  E,
so  that  E  measures  A.

[But  it  also  measures  D ;
therefore  E  measures  A,  /?.]

Similarly  we  can  prove  that,  by  however   many  prime
numbers  D  is  measured,  A  will  also  be  measured  by  the  same.

Q.  E.  D.

If  I,  a,  O],  ...  ^«  be  a  geometrical  progression,  and  a^  be  measured  by  any
prime  number/,  a  will  also  be  measured  by/.


IX.  12,  13]  PROPOSITIONS    12,  13  399

For,  if  possible,  suppose  that  /  does  not  measure  a ;  then,  /  being  prime,
/,  a  are  prime  to  one  another.  [vii.  29]

Suppose  a^-m.p.

Now  ei,^  =  a.  <!,»_,.  [ix.  11]

Therefore  a  .  a^^^  =  m  ,p^

and  a  :p  =  fn  :  a^^^,  [vii.  19]

Hence,  a,  /  being  prime  to  one  another,

/  measures  a^^i,  [vii.  20,  21]

By  a  repetition  of  the  same  process,  we  can  prove  that  /  measures  «h-2
and  therefore  ii«.si  &nd  so  on,  and  finally  that  /  measures  a.

But,  by  hypothesis,  /  does  not  measure  a :  which  is  impossible.

Hence/,  a  are  not  prime  to  one  another :
therefore  they  have  some  common  factor.  [vii.  Def.  14]

But/  is  the  only  number  which  measures/;
therefore  /  measures  a.

Heiberg  remarks  that,  as,  in  the  iKOtai^,  Euclid  sets  himself  to  prove  that
JE  measures  ^,  the  words  bracketed  above  are  unnecessary  and  therefore
perhaps  interpolated


Proposition  13.

I/as  many  numbers  as  we  please  beginning  from  an  unit  be
in  continued  proportion,  and  the  number  after  t/ie  unit  be  prime,
the  greatest  will  not  be  measured  by  any  except  those  whidi  have
a  plcue  among  the  proportional  numbers.

Let  there  be  as  many  numbers  as  we  please,  A,  B,  C,  /?,
beginning  from  an  unit  and  in  continued  proportion,  and  let  A,
the  number  after  the  unit,  be  prime  ;

I  say  that  /?,  the  greatest  of  them,  will  not  be  measured  by  any
other  number  except  A,  B,  C,

A E

B  F

C Q

D H


For,  if  possible,  let  it  be  measured  by  E^  and  let  E  not  be
the  same  with  any  of  the  numbers  A,  /?,  C.

It  is  then  manifest  that  E  is  not  prime.

For,  if  E  is  prime  and  measures  /?,
it  will  also  measure  A  [ix.  12],  which  is  prime,  though  it  is  not
the  same  with  it :
which  is  impossible.


400

Therefore  E  is  not  prime.

Therefore  it  is  composite.

But  any  composite  oumber  is  measured  by  some  prime
number ;  [vit.  31]

therefore  E  is  measured  by  some  prime  number.

I  say  next  that  it  will  not  be  measured  by  any  other  prime
except-^.

For,  if  ^  is  measured  by  another,

and  E  measures  />,

that  other  will  also  measure  D  \

so  that  it  will  also  measure  A  [ix.  \%\^  which  is  prime,  though
it  is  not  the  same  with  it ;

which  is  impossible.

Therefore  A  measures  E,

And,  since  E  measures  D,  let  it  measure  it  according  to  F,

I  say  that  F  is  not  the  same  with  any  of  the  numbers
A,  B,  C.

For,  \{  F\s  the  same  with  one  of  the  numbers  A^  B,  Ct
and  measures  D  according  to  ^,  -

therefore  one  of  the  numbers  A,  B,  Calso  measures  D  according
to^.

But  one  of  the  numbers  A^  B,  C  measures  D  according  to
some  one  of  the  numbers  A,  B,  C;  [ix.  n]

therefore  E  is  also  the  same  with  one  of  the  numbers  A,  B,  C:
which  is  contrary  to  the  hypothesis.

Therefore  F  is  not  the  same  as  any  one  of  the  numbers
A,  B,  C

Similarly  we  can  prove  that  F  is  measured  by  A,  by
proving  again  that  F  is  not  prime.

For,  if  it  is,  and  measures  /?,

it  will  also  measure  A  [ix.  12],  which  is  prime,  though  it  is  not
the  same  with  it :

which  is  impossible ;

therefore  F  is  not  prime.

Therefore  it  is  composite.

But  any  composite  number  is  measured  by  some  prime
number ;  [vii.  31]

therefore  F  is  measured  by  some  prime  number.


1


I


IX.  13]  PROPOSITION   13  401

I  say  next  that  it  will  not  be  measured  by  any  other  prime
except  A.

For,  if  any  other  prime  number  measures  F,
and  F  measures  /?,

that  other  will  also  measure  D ;

so  that  it  will  also  measure  A  [ix.  12],  which  is  prime,  though  it
is  not  the  same  with  it :

which  is  impossible.

Therefore  A  measures  F.

And,  since  E  measures  D  according  to  F,

therefore  E  by  multiplying  F  has  made  D.

But,  further,  A  has  also  by  multiplying  C  made  D ;  [ix.  n]

therefore  the  product  of  -^,  C  is  equal  to  the  product  of  E^  F.

Therefore,  proportionally,  as  A  is  to  E.soxsF  to  C.

[vii.  19]
But  A  measures  E ;

therefore  F  also  measures  C.

Let  it  measure  it  according  to  G.

Similarly,  then,  we  can  prove  that  G  is  not  the  same  with
any  of  the  numbers  A,  B,  and  that  it  is  measured  by  A.
And,  since  F  measures  C  according  to  Gy

therefore  F  by  multiplying  G  has  made  C

But,  further,  A  has  also  by  multiplying  B  made  C\  [ix.  n]

therefore  the  product  of  A,  B  is  equal  to  the  product  of  /%  G,

Therefore,  proportionally,  as  A  is  to  /%  so  is  G  to  B.

[vn.  19]
But  A  measures  F\

therefore  G  also  measures  B.

Let  it  measure  it  according  to  H,

Similarly  then   we   can  prove  that  H  is  not  the  same
with  A.

And,  since  G  measures  B  according  to  H,

therefore  G  by  multiplying  H  has  made  B,

But  further  A  has  also  by  multiplying  itself  made  B ;

[IX.  8]

therefore  the  product  of  H,  G  is  equal  to  the  square  on  A.

Therefore,  as  H  is  to  A,  so  is  A  to  G.  [vu.  19]

H.  B.  u.  26


4oi  BOOK  IX  [ix.  13,  14

But  A  measures  G ;
therefore  H  also  measures  A,  which  is  prime,  though  it  is  not
the  same  with  it :
which  is  absurd.

Therefore  D  the  greatest  will  not  be  measured  by  any
other  number  except  A,  B,  C.

Q.  E.  D.

If  I,  a,  Oay ...  a»  be  a  geometrical  progression,  and  if  a  is  prime,  a^  will  not
be  measured  by  any  numbers  except  die  preceding  terms  of  the  series.

If  possible,  let  a»  be  measured  by  ^,  a  number  different  from  all  the
preceding  terms.

Now  b  cannot  be  prime,  for,  if  it  were,  it  would  measure  a,  [ix.  12]

Therefore  b  is  composite,  and  hence  will  be  measured  by  some  prime
number  [vii.  31],  say  /.

Thus/  must  measure  a^  and  therefore  a  [ix.  12];  so  that/  cannot  be
different  from  a,  and  b  is  not  measured  by  any  prime  number  except  a.

Suppose  that  a»  »  ^ .  r.

Now  c  cannot  be  identical  with  any  of  the  terms  a,  Os,  ...  Hn-i ;  for,  if  it
were,  b  would  be  identical  with  another  of  them:  [ix.  11]

which  is  contrary  to  the  hypothesis.

We  can  now  prove  (just  as  for  b)  that  c  cannot  be  prime  and  cannot  be
measured  by  any  prime  number  except  a.

Since  b  ,c=a^  =  a.  <?»_,,  [ix.  11]

fl  :  ^  =  <: :  <?,-„
whence,  since  a  measures  by

c  measures  a^^x-

Let  a^.i  =  c.d.

We  now  prove  in  the  same  way  that  d  is  not  identical  with  any  of  the  terms
a,  a,,  ...  a^^ty  is  not  prime,  and  is  not  measured  by  any  prime  except  a,  and
also  that

d  measures  n^.f.

Proceeding  in  this  way,  we  get  a  last  factor,  say  ^,. which  measures  a
though  different  from  it:
which  is  absurd,  since  a  is  prime.

Thus  the  original  supposition  that  a^  can  be  measured  by  a  number  b
different  from  all  the  terms  a^  a^^  ...  <7»_i  must  be  incorrect.

Therefore  etc.

Proposition  14.

If  a  number  be  the  least  that  is  measured  by  prime  numbers^
it  will  not  be  measured  by  any  other  prime  number  except  those
originally  measuring  it.

For  let  the  number  A  be  the  least  that  is  measured  by  the
prime  numbers  B,  C,  D\


IX.  14]  PROPOSITIONS   13,  14  403

I  say  that  A  will  not  be  measured  by  any  other  prime  number
except  B,  C,  D.

For,  if  possible,  let  it  be  measured  by  the  prime  number
E^  and  let  E  not  be  the  same  with  any  one  of  the  numbers


E c

o

F

Now,  since  E  measures  A,  let  it  measure  it  according
to  F\

therefore  E  by  multiplying  /^has  made  A,

And  A  is  measured  by  the  prime  numbers  B,  C,  D.

But,  if  two  numbers  by  multiplying  one  another  make  some
number,  and  any  prime  number  measure  the  product,  it  will
also  measure  one  of  the  original  numbers  ;  [vn.  30]

therefore  B,  C,  D  will  measure  one  of  the  numbers  E,  F.

Now  they  will  not  measure  E ;

for  E  is  prime  and  not  the  same  with  any  one  of  the  numbers
B,  C,  D.

Therefore  they  will  measure  F,  which  is  less  than  A  :

which  is  impossible,  for  A  is  by  hypothesis  the  least  number
measured  by  B,  C,  D.

Therefore    no    prime    number   will    measure   A    except

B,  c,  n.

Q.  E.  D.

In  other  words,  a  number  can  be  resolved  into  prime  factors  in  only
one  way.

Let  a  be  the  least  number  measured  by  each  of  the  prime  numbers
^,  r,  d,  ...  k.

If  possible,  suppose  that  a  has  a  prime  factor/  different  from  fi,  c^  d,  ...  k.

Let  a=p  .m.

Now  fi,  c,  d,  ...  k,  measuring  a,  must  measure  one  of  the  two  factors/,  m,

[vii.  30]
They  do  not,  by  hypothesis,  measure  / ;
therefore  they  must  measure  m,  a  number  less  than  a  :
which  is  contrary  to  the  hypothesis.

Therefore  a  has  no  prime  factors  except  b^  c^  dy  ...  k.

26 — 2


404  BOOK  nc  [oLis


Proposition  15.

If  tkne  nwmbtrs  in  cmiii$med  propi^um  be  the  least  ^
those  which  haue  the  same  ratio  with  them^  amy  two  whatem
added  together  will  be  prime  to  the  remmmng  number.

Let  A,  Bf  C,  three  numbers  in'  continued  pit^rtion,  be
the  least  of  those  which  have  the  same
ratio  with  them ;  ^ •


I  say  that  any  two  of  the  numbers  ^

A,  B,  C  whatever  added  togedier  are  o— f — r

prime  to  the  remainingnumber,  namely

A,  B  to  C;  B,  CtoA  ;  and  further  A,  CtoB.

For  let  two  numbars  DE^  EF^  the  least  of  those  whic^
have  the  same  ratio  with  A^  B,  Q  be  taken.  [na  s]    ;

It  is  then  manifest  that  DE  by  multiplying' itself  has  made
A,  and  by  multiplying  EF  has  made  B,  and»  further,  EF  by
multiplying  itself  has  made  C  [tiii.  a]

Now,  since  DE,  EFwre  least,
they  are  prime  to  one  another.  [vil  22]

But,  if  two  numbers  be  prime  to  one  another,
their  sum  is  also  prime  to  each  ;  [vii.  28]

therefore  DF  is  also  prime  to  each  of  the  numbers  D£,  EF.

But  further  DE  is  also  prime  to  EF;
therefore  DF,  DE  are  prime  to  EF.

But,  if  two  numbers  be  prime  to  any  number,
their  product  is  also  prime  to  the  other ;  [vil  24]

so  that  the  product  of  FD,  DE  is  prime  to  EF;
hence  the  product  of  FD,  DE  is  also  prime  to  the  square
on  EF.  [vii.  25]

But  the  product  of  FD,  DE  is  the  square  on  DE  together
with  the  product  of  DE,  EF;  [11.  3]

therefore  the  square  on  DE  together  with  the  product  of  DE,
EF  is  prime  to  the  square  on  EF.

And  the  square  on  DE  is  A,
the  product  of  DE,  EF  is  B,
and  the  square  on  EF  is  C;
therefore  A,  B  added  together  are  prime  to  C.


IX.  15]  PROPOSITION    IS  405

Similarly  we  can  prove  that  By  C  added  together  are
prime  to  A.

I  say  next  that  Ay  C  added  together  are  also  prime  to  B.
For,  since  DF  is  prime  to  each  of  the  numbers  DEy  EFy

the  square  on  DF  is  also  prime  to  the  product  of  DE^  EF.

[vii.  24,  25]

But  the  squares  on  DE^  EF  together  with  twice  the  pro-
duct of  DEy  EFave  equal  to  the  square  on  /)F;  [n.  4]
therefore  the  squares  on  DEy  EF  together  with  twice  the
product  of  DEy  EF  are  prime  to  the  product  of  DE^  EF.

Separandoy  the  squares  on  DE^  EF  together  with  once
the  product  of  DEy  EF  are  prime  to  the  product  of  DEy  EF.

Therefore,  separando  again,  the  squares  on  DE^  EF  are
prime  to  the  product  of  DE^  EF.

And  the  square  on  DE  is  Ay
the  product  of  DEy  EF  is  By
and  the  square  on  EF  is  C.

Therefore  Ay  C  added  together  are  prime  to  B.

Q.  E.  D.

If  tf,  ^,  ^  be  a  geometrical  progression  in  the  least  terms  which  have  a
given  common  ratio,  (b  +  c),  (c  +  a),  (a  +  d)  are  respectively  prime  to  a,  by  c.

Let  a  :  j8  be  the  common  ratio  in  its  lowest  terms,  so  that  the  geometrical
progression  is

a«,      aPy     P'.  [VIII.  2]

Now,  o,  p  being  prime  to  one  another,
a^pis  prime  to  both  a  and  p.  [vii.  28]

Therefore  (a  +  j8),  a  are  both  prime  to  p.

Hence  (a  +  j8)  a  is  prime  to  A  [vn.  24]

and  therefore  to  j8" ;  [vii.  25]

i.e.  a'  +  ap  is  prime  to  j8",

or  a  +  ^  is  prime  to  c.

Similarly,  a)8  +  j8"  is  prime  to  a',

or  ^  +  ^  is  prime  to  a.

Lastly,  a  +  p  being  prime  to  both  a  and  j9,

{a-k-py  is  prime  to  a^,  [vn.  24,  25]

or  a'  +  ^S"  +  2aP  is  prime  to  aP :

whence  a'  +  jS"  is  prime  to  ap.

The  latter  inference,  made  in  two  steps,  may  be  proved  by  reductio  ad
absurdum  as  Commandinus  proves  it.

If  a*  +  ^S*  is  not  prime  to  aj8,  let  x  measure  them ;
therefore  x  measures  a*  +  ^S"  +  2a.p  as  well  as  a)8 ;

hence  a'  +  jS"  +  2ap  and  a^  are  not  prime  to  one  another^  which  is  contrary
to  the  hypothesis.


40$  BOOK  IX  [IX.  i6^  17

Proposition  16.

If  two  numbers  be  prime  to  oke  another,  the  second.  tviU  nd
be  to  any  other  number  as  the  first  is  to  the  second.     .

For  let  the  two  numbars  A,  Bht,  prime  to  one  another ;
I  say  that  B  is  not  to  any  other  number  as
A  \s\o  B.  ^

For,  if  possible,  as  yl  is  to  j9,  so  let  j9  be        b

to  C  o —

Now  A,  B  are  prime,

primes  are  also  least,  fvn.  21]

and  the  least  numbers  measure  those  which  have  the  same
ratio  the  same  number  of  times,  the  antecedent  the  antcxsedent
and  the  consequent  the  consequent;  \yiuto\

therefore  A  measures  B  as  antecedent  antecedent
But  it  also  measures  itself;

therefore  A  measures  A,  B  which  are  prime  to  one  another:
which  is  absurd.

Therefore  B  will  not  be  to  C  as  ^  is  to  B.

Q.  E.  D.

If  tf,  b  are  prime  to  one  another,  they  can  have  no  integral  third
proportional.

If  possible,  let  a  \b=^b  \  x.

Therefore  [vii.  20,  21]  a  measures  b\  and  a,  b  have  the  common  measure
ay  which  is  contrary  to  the  hypothesis.

Proposition  17.

If  there  be  as  many  numbers  as  we  please  in  continued
proportion,  and  the  extremes  of  them  be  prime  to  one  another,
the  last  will  not  be  to  any  other  number  as  the  first  to  the
second.

For  let  there  be  as  many  numbers  as  we  please,  A^B,  C,D,
in  continued  proportion,

and  let  the  extremes  of  them.  A,

/?,  be  prime  to  one  another ;  ^

I  say  that  D  is  not  to  any  other         ^

number  as  A  is  to  B,

For,  if  possible,  as  A  is  to  By  so  let  Dh^to  E  \
therefore,  alternately,  as  A  is  to  A  so  is  B  to  E.         {vu.  13]


IX.  17,  i8]  PROPOSITIONS   i6— 18  407

But  A,  D  are  prime,
primes  are  also  least,  [vii.  21]

and  the  least  numbers  measure  those  which  have  the  same
ratio  the  same  number  of  times,  the  antecedent  the  antecedent
and  the  consequent  the  consequent.  [vn.  20]

Therefore  A  measures  B.

And,  as  A  is  to  B,  so  is  B  to  C

Therefore  B  also  measures  C ;
so  that  A  also  measures  C.

And  since,  as  B  is  to  C,  so  is  C  to  /?,
and  B  measures  C,
therefore  C  also  measures  D,

But  A  measured  C ;
so  that  A  also  measures  D.

But  it  also  measures  itself;
therefore  A  measures  Ay  D  which  are  prime  to  one  another :
which  is  impossible.

Therefore  D  will  not  be  to  any  other  number  as  ^  is  to  B.

Q,  E.  D.

If  a,  tfs,  dr„  ...  a,«  be  a  geometrical  progression,  and  a,  a^  are  prime  to  one
another,  then  a,  a,,  a^  can  have  no  integral  fourth  proportional.

For,  if  possible,  let  a\a^^a^\x.

Therefore  a  \  a^=^a^\  x^

and  hence  [vii.  20,  21]  a  measures  a^.

Therefore  a^  measures  a,,  [vn.  Def.  20]

and  hence  a  measures  a,,  and  therefore  also  ultimately  a^.

Thus  n,  a^  are  both  measured  by  a  :  which  is  contrary  to  the  hypothesis.


Proposition  18.

Given  two  numbers^  to  investigate  whether  it  is  possible  to
find  a  third  proportional  to  them.

Let  ^,  ^  be  the  given  two  numbers,  and  let  it  be  required
to  investigate  whether  it  is  possible  to  find  a  third  proportional
to  them.

Now  Ay  B  are  either  prime  to  one  another  or  not.

And,  if  they  are  prime  to  one  another,  it  has  been  proved
that  it  is  impossible  to  find  a  third  proportional  to  them.

[ix.  16]


4oS  BOOK  IX  [ix.it

Next,  let  A^  B  not  be  prime  to  oAe  another,
and  let  B  by  multiplying  itself  make  C

Then  A  either  measures  C  or  does  m^  measure  it


A-

B-


First,  let  it  measure  it  according  to  Z? ;
therefore  A  by  multiplying  D  has  made  C.

But,  further,  B  has  also  by  multiplying  itself  made  C\
therefore  the  product  ol  A^  D\s  equal  to  the  square  on^..

Therefore,  as  y|  is  to  i9,  so  is  i9  to  Z? ;  [to.  19]

therefore  a  third  proportional  number  D  has  been  found  to
A,B.

Next,  let  A  not  measure  C;
I  say  that  it  is  impossible  to  find  a  third  proporticmal  number
toA^B.

For,  if  possible,  let  Z7,  such  third  proportional,  have  been
found.

Therefore  the  product  oi  A,D  \s  equal  to  the  square  on  B.

But  the  square  on  ^  is  C ;
therefore  the  product  of  ^,  Z?  is  equal  to  C.

Hence  A  by  multiplying  D  has  made  C  \
therefore  A  measures  C  according  to  D,

But,  by  hypothesis,  it  also  does  not  measure  it :
which  is  absurd.

Therefore  it  is  not  possible  to  find  a  third  proportional
number  to  A,  B  when  A  does  not  measure  C.       q.  e.  d.

Given  two  numbers  a^  by  to  find  the  condition  that  they  may  have  an
integral  third  proportional.

(i)    a,  b  must  not  be  prime  to  one  another.  [ix.  16]

(2)    a  must  measure  ^.

For,  if  a,  ^,  ^  be  in  continued  proportion,

Therefore  a  measures  ^.
Condition  (i)  is  included  in  condition  (2)  since,  if  t^^ma^  a  and  d  cannot
be  prime  to  one  another.

The  result  is  of  course  easily  seen  if  the  three  terms  in  continued
proportion  be  written

b  /by


IX.  19]  PROPOSITIONS    i8,  19  409


Proposition  19.

Given  three  numbers,  to  investigate  when  it  is  possible  to
find  a  fourth  proportional  to  them.

Let  A,  B,C  h^  the  given  three  numbers,  and  let  it  be

required  to  investigate  when  it  is       f^

possible  to  find  a  fourth  proportional       g

to  them.  Q

Now  either  they  are  not  in  con-       p

tinued  proportion,  and  the  extremes      ^

of  them  are  prime  to  one  another  ;

or  they  are  in  continued  proportion,  and  the  extremes  of  them

are  not  prime  to  one  another  ;

or  they  are  not  in  continued  proportion,  nor  are  the  extremes

of  them  prime  to  one  another ;

or  they  are  in  continued  proportion,  and  the  extremes  of  them

are  prime  to  one  another.

If  then  A,  B,  C  are  in  continued  proportion,  and  the
extremes  of  them  A,  C  are  prime  to  one  another,
it  has  been  proved  that  it  is  impossible  to  find  a  fourth  pro-
portional number  to  them.  [ix.  17]

tNext,  let  A,  B,  C  not  be  in  continued  proportion,  the
extremes  being  again  prime  to  one  another;
I  say  that  in  this  case  also  it  is  impossible  to  find  a  fourth
proportional  to  them.

For,  if  possible,  let  D  have  been  found,  so  that,
as  ^  is  to  B^  so  is  C  to  Z?,
and  let  it  be  contrived  that,  as  ^  is  to  C,  so  is  Z?  to  E.

Now,  since,  as  A  is  to  B,  so  is  C  to  Z?,
and,  as  B  is  to  C,  so  is  D  to  E,
therefore,  ex  aequali,  as  A  is  to  C,  so  is  C  to  E.  [vii.  14]

But  Ay  C  are  prime,
primes  are  also  least,  [vn.  21]

and  the  least  numbers  measure  those  which  have  the  same
ratio,  the  antecedent  the  antecedent  and  the  consequent  the
consequent.  [vii.  20]

Therefore  A  measures  C  as  antecedent  antecedent.


4IO     '  BOOK  IZ  [oLif

But  it  dao  meanres  hadf ;
dierefbre  A  measures  A^  C  wUdi  are  prime  to  csie  aaodier:
wliidi  is  inqKKsible.

Therefore  k  is  not  possible  to  ftiid  a  fourdi  propoftionait
to  A,  B,C.f

Next,  let  ^,  iT,  C  be  again  in  continued  proportion,
but  let  ^,  C  not  be  prime  to  one  another.

I  say  that  it  is  possible  to  find  a  fourth  proportional  to
them.

For  let  ^  by  multiplyii^  C  make  /> ;
therefore  A  either  measures  D  or  does  not  measure  it.

First,  let  it  measure  itacoordii^  to  £;
therefore  A  by  multiplying  E  has  made  D.

But,  forther,  B  has  also  by  multiplying  C  made  D ;
therefore  the  product  oi  A,  £  is  equal  to  the  product  of  ^
B.  C;

therefore,  proportionally,  as^isto^,  soisCto^;    [vu.  19]
therefore  £  has  heen  found  a  fourth  jMioportional  to  A^  B^  C

Next,  let  A  not  measure  D ;
I  say  that  it  is  impossible  to  find  a  fourth  proportional  number
to  A,  B,  C.

For,  if  possible,  let  E  have  been  found  ;

therefore  the  product  of  A,  E  is  equal  to  the  product  o{  B,  C

[VII.  19]

But  the  product  of  B^  C  is  D  ;
therefore  the  product  of  A,  E  is  also  equal  to  D.

Therefore  A  by  multiplying  E  has  made  D ;
therefore  A  measures  D  according  to  E,
so  that  A  measures  /?.

But  it  also  does  not  measure  it :
which  is  absurd.

Therefore  it  is  not  possible  to  find  a  fourth  proportional
number  to  A,  B,  C  when  A  does  not  measure  D.

Next,  let  A,  B,  C  not  be  in  continued  proportion,  nor  the
extremes  prime  to  one  another.

And  let  B  by  multiplying  C  make  D.

Similarly  then  it  can  be  proved  that,  if  A  measures  Z?,
it  is  possible  to  find  a  fourth  proportional  to  them,  but,  if  it
does  not  measure  it,  impossible.  q.  e.  d.


IX.  19]  PROPOSITION    19  411

Given  three  numbers  a,  by  c,  to  find  the  condition  that  they  may  have  an
int^ral  fourth  proportional.

The  Greek  text  of  part  of  this  proposition  is  hopelessly  corrupt.  Accord-
ing to  it  Euclid  takes  four  cases.

(i)  a,  df  c  not  in  continued  proportion,  and  a,  c  prime  to  one  another.

(2)  aybyCvci  continued  proportion,  and  a^  c  not  prime  to  one  another.

(3)  «»  K  c  not  in  continued  proportion,  and  a,  c  not  prime  to  one  another.

(4)  a,  by  c  in  continued  proportion,  and  a,  c  prime  to  one  another.

(4)  is  the  case  dealt  with  in  ix.  1 7,  where  it  is  shown  that  on  hypothesis
(4)  a  fourth  proportional  cannot  be  found.

The  text  now  takes  case  (i)  and  asserts  that  a  fourth  proportional  cannot
be  found  in  this  case  either.  We  have  only  to  think  of  4,  6,  9  in  order  to  see
that  there  is  something  wrong  here.  The  supposed  proof  is  also  wrong.  If
possible,  says  the  text,  let  ^  be  a  fourth  proportional  to  a,  ^,  c^  and  let  e
be  iaken  such  that

b  \  c=  d  \  e.

Then,  ex  aequaliy  a  \  c  =  c  \  ey

whence  a  measures  c  :  [vii.  20,  21]

which  is  impossible,  since  a,  c  are  prime  to  one  another.

But  this  does  not  prove  that  a  fourth  proportional  d  cannot  be  found  ;  it
only  proves  that,  if  ^  is  a  fourth  proportional,  no  integer  e  can  be  found  to
satisfy  the  equation

b  \c  =  d  \e.
Indeed  it  is  obvious  from  ix.  16  that  in  the  equation

a  :  c^c  \e
e  cannot  be  integral.

The  cases  (2)  and  (3)  are  correctly  given,  the  first  in  full,  and  the  other  as
a  case  to  be  proved  "similarly"  to  it.

These  two  cases  really  give  all  that  is  necessary.

Let  the  product  be  be  taken.

Then,  if  a  measures  bCy  suppose  bc-ad\
therefore  a  \b-c  \  dy

and  ^  is  a  fourth  proportional.

But,  if  a  does  not  measure  bCy  no  fourth  proportional  can  be  found.
For,  if  X  were  a  fourth  proportional,  ax  would  be  equal  to  bCy  and  a  would
measure  be.

The  sufficient  condition  in  any  case  for  the  possibility  of  finding  a  fourth
proportional  to  a,  by  c  is  that  a  should  measure  be,

Theon  appears  to  have  corrected  the  proof  by  leaving  out  the  incorrect
portion  which  I  have  included  between  daggers  and  the  last  case  (3)  dealt
with  in  the  last  lines.  Also,  in  accordance  with  this  arrangement,  he  does  not
distinguish  four  cases  at  the  beginning  but  only  two.  **  Either  Ay  By  C  are
in  continued  proportion  and  the  extremes  of  them  Ay  C  are  prime  to  one
another;  or  not"  Then,  instead  of  introducing  case  (2)  by  the  words
"Next  let  Ay  By  C.to  find  a  fourth  proportional  to  them,"  immediately
following  the  second  dagger  above,  Theon  merely  says  "-5«/,  if  noty'  [i.e.
if  it  is  not  the  case  that  a,  by  c  are  in  g.p.  and  a,  c  prime  to  one  another]  "let
B  by  multiplying  C  make  Z^,"  and  so  on.


4"  '    BOOK  DC  £«.  t^»

AogiistadoptoTb^  Hfiibeig  does  not  fed  alfcl»

do  01M,  m  view  of  the  siiperkmty  of  Ae  asUbori^
(P);  he  therefore  letaimAektterwiAoiit  any  attend


D.


Proposition  20.

PriiHe  numiers  ar€  mare  than  amy  assigtui  mmUiimk  ^
prime  numbers.

Let  A,  B,C}x,  the  assigned  prime  numbers ;
I  say  that  there  are  more
prime  numbers  than  A^  B^  C.      a —

For  let  the  least  number      ^ —  O;

measured  by  ^,  ^,   C  be      c

taken,  e -^^

and  let  it  be  DE\

let  the  unit  DF  be  added  to  DE.

Then  EF  is  either  prime  or  not.
First,  let  it  be  prime ;

then  the  prime  numbers  A,  B,  C,  EF  have  been  found  which
are  more  than  A,  B,  C.

Next,  let  EF  not  be  prime  ;

therefore  it  is  measured  by  some  prime  number.  [vii.  31]

Let  it  be  measured  by  the  prime  number  G.
I  say  that  G  is  not  the  same  with  any  of  the  numbers
A,  B,C.

For,  if  possible,  let  it  be  so.
Now  A,  B,  C  measure  DE ;

therefore  G  also  will  measure  DE.

But  it  also  measures  EF.

Therefore  Gy  being  a  number,  will  measure  the  remainder,
the  unit  DF\
which  is  absurd.

Therefore  G  is  not  the  same  with  any  one  of  the  numbers
A,  B,C.

And  by  hypothesis  it  is  prime.

Therefore  the  prime  numbers  A,  B,  C,  G  have  been  found
which  are  more  than  the  assigned  multitude  of  A,  B^  C.

Q.  E.  D.


IX.  20— 22j  PROPOSITIONS   19—22  413

We  have  here  the  important  proposition  that  the  number  of  prime  numbers
is  infinite.

The  proof  will  be  seen  to  be  the  same  as  that  given  in  our  algebraical
text-books.     Let  <7,  ^,  ^, . . .  ^  be  any  prime  numbers.

Take  the  product  abc  ,,,k  and  add  unity.

Then  {abc ,,,  ^  +  i)  is  either  a  prime  number  or  not  a  prime  number.

(i)  If  it  />,  we  have  added  another  prime  number  to  those  given.

(2)  If  it  is  w/,  it  must  be  measured  by  some  prime  number  [vii.  31],  say/.

Now /  cannot  be  identical  with  any  of  the  prime  numbers  a^byC^ ,,,  k.

For,  if  it  is,  it  will  divide  abc ...  k.
Therefore,  since  it  divides  (<i^r...^+  i)  also,  it  will  measure  the  difference,
or  unity :
which  is  impossible.

Therefore  in  any  case  we  have  obtained  one  fresh  prime  number.

And  the  process  can  be  carried  on  to  any  extent.

Proposition  21.

If  as  many  even  numbers  as  we  please  be  added  together,
the  whole  is  even.

For  let  as  many  even  numbers  as  we  please,  AB,  BC,  CD,
DE,  be  added  together ;

I  say  that  the  whole  AE      a     b c g e

is  even.

For,  since  each  of  the  numbers  AB,  BC,  CD,  DE  is  even,
it  has  a  half  part ;  [vii.  Def.  6]

so  that  the  whole  AE  also  has  a  half  part.

But  an  even  number  is  that  which  is  divisible  into  two
equal  parts ;  \id,\

therefore  AE  is  even.

Q.  E.  D.

In  this  and  the  following  propositions  up  to  ix.  34  inclusive  we  have  a
number  of  theorems  about  odd,  even,  "  even-times  even "  and  "  even-times
odd  "  numbers  respectively.  They  are  all  simple  and  require  no  explanation
in  order  to  enable  them  to  be  followed  easily.

Proposition  22.

If  as  many  odd  numbers  as  we  please  be  added  together,  and
their  multitude  be  even,  the  whole  will  be  even.

For  let  as  many  odd  numbers  as  we  please,  AB,  BC,  CD,
DE,  even  in  multitude,  be  added  together  ;
I  say  that  the  whole  AE  is  even.


414  BOOK  IX

For,  since  each  of  the  numbers  AB,  BC,  CD,  DE  is  odd,
if  an  unit  be  subtracted  from  each,  each  of  the  remainders  will
be  even ;  \yii.  Det  j]

so  that  the  sum  of  them  wiH  be  even,     **  [iil  ai]

^ — ? ? 9 — ?


But  the  multitude  of  the  units  is  also  even.

Therefore  the  whole  AE  is  also  even.  [a.  ti] ;

Q.  £.  B.


Proposition  23.

If  as  many  odd  numbers  as  we  please  be  added  iogeiher^
and  their  multitude  be  odd,  the  whole  mill  also  be  add.

For  let  as  many  odd  numbers  as  wc  please,  AB^  BC,  CDt
the  multitude  of  which  is  odd^

be  added  together ;  a       B  ceo

I  say  that  the  whole  AD  is  *  *

also  odd.

Let  the  unit  DE  be  subtracted  from  CD ;
therefore  the  remainder  CE  is  even.

But  CA  is  also  even  ;
therefore  the  whole  AE  is  also  even.

And  DE  is  an  unit.

Therefore  AD  is  odd.

3.     Literally  **  let  there  be  as  many  numbers  as  we  please,  of  which  lei  the  multitude  be
odd.*'    This  form,  natural  in  Greek,  is  awkward  in  English.


Proposition  24.

If  from  an  even  number  an  even  number  be  subtracted,  the
remainder  will  be  even.

For  from  the  even  number  AB  let  the  even  number  BC
be  subtracted  :
I  say  that  the  remainder  CA  is  even.  a c      a

For,  since  AB  is  even,  it  has  a  half
part.  [vii.  Def.  6]


[vii

.  Def.  7]
[ix.  22]
[ix.  21]

[vu

.  Def.  7]

Q.

E.

D.

IX.  24-26]  PROPOSITIONS   22—26  415

For  the  same  reason  BC  also  has  a  half  part ;

so  that  the  remainder  \CA  also  has  a  half  part,  and]  AC  x'^
therefore  even.

Q.  E.  a


Proposition  25.

If  from  an  even  number  an  odd  number  be  subtracted,  the
remainder  will  be  odd.

For  from  the  even  number  AB  let  the  odd  number  BC  be
subtracted ;

I  say  that  the  remainder  CA  is  odd.       a  c  d     b

For   let  the  unit   CD  be  sub-
tracted from  BC  \

therefore  DB  is  even.

But  AB  is  also  even  ;
therefore  the  remainder  AD  is  also  even.

And  CD  is  an  unit ;
therefore  CA  is  odd.


Proposition  26.

If  from  an  odd  number  an  odd  number  be  subtracted,  the
remainder  ivill  be  even.

For  from  the  odd  number  AB  let  the  odd  number  BC  be
subtracted  ;

I  say  that  the  remainder  CA  is  even.         ^  cob

For,  since  AB  is  odd,  let  the  unit
BD  be  subtracted  ;

therefore  the  remainder  AD  is  even.  [vii.  Def.  7]

For  the  same  reason  CD  is  also  even  ;  [vii.  Def.  7]

so  that  the  remainder  CA  is  also  even.  [ix.  24]

Q.  E.  D.


[vii.

Def.

7]

[IX.

«4]

[vii

.Def.

7]

E.

D.

4t6  ^      'BOO^

Proposition  ij

If  from  am  odd  number  an  even  number  be  subt railed,  Ik
remainder  will  be  odd,

Fdr  fram  the  odd  aumber  AB  let  the  even  aumber  BC  be
subtracted ;
I  say  that  the  remainder  CA  is  odd.

Let  the  unit  AD  be  subtracted  ;  — ' »-

therefore  DB  is  even,  t^"-  i^f-  7]

But  BC  is  also  even ;
therefore  the  remainder  CD  is  even.  [he.  14]

Therefore  CA  is  odd.  .  [vii,  i>ef.  7]

Q.  E.  D.

Proposition  28.

If  an  odd  number  by  muliiptying  an  ewm  number  maki
some  number^  the  product  will  be  even.

For  let  the  odd  number  A  by  multiplying  the  even  number
B  make  C\
I  say  that  C  is  even.

For,  since  A  by  multiplying  B  has         c

made  C,

therefore  C  is  made  up  of  as  many  numbers  equal  to  ^  as

there  are  units  in  A.  [vn.  Def.  15]

And  B  is  even  ;
therefore  C  is  made  up  of  even  numbers.

But,   if  as  many  even   numbers  as  we  please  be  added
together,  the  whole  is  even.  [ix.  21]

Therefore  C  is  even.

Q.  E.  D.

Proposition  29.

If  an  odd  number  by  multiplying  an  odd  number  make
some  number,  the  product  will  be  odd.

For  let  the  odd  number  A  by  multiplying  the  odd  number
B  make  C ;
I  say  that  C  is  odd.  ^

For,  since  A  by  multiplying  B  has        ^

made  C,


IX.  29—31]  PROPOSITIONS   27—31  417

therefore  C  is  made  up  of  as  many  numbers  equal  to  B  as
there  are  units  in  A.  [vn.  Def.  15]

And  each  of  the  numbers  A,  B  is  odd  ;
therefore  C  is  made  up  of  odd  numbers  the  multitude  of  which
is  odd.

Thus.  C  is  odd.  [ix.  23]

Q.  E.  D.

Proposition  30.

//  an  odd  number  measure  an  even  number,  it  will  also
measure  the  half  of  it.

For  let  the  odd  number  A  measure  the  even  number  B ;
I  say  that  it  will  also  measure  the  half
of  it.  ^_

For,  since  A  measures  B,  b

let  it  measure  it  according  to  C ;  c

I  say  that  C  is  not  odd.

For,  if  possible,  let  it  be  so.

Then,  since  A  measures  B  according  to  C,
therefore  A  by  multiplying  C  has  made  B.

Therefore  B  is  made  up  of  odd  numbers  the  multitude
of  which  is  odd.

Therefore  B  is  odd  :  [ix.  23]

which  is  absurd,  for  by  hypothesis  it  is  even.

Therefore  C  is  not  odd  ;
therefore  C  is  even.

Thus  A  measures  B  an  even  number  of  times.

For  this  reason  then  it  also  measures  the  half  of  it.

Q.  E.  D.

Proposition  31.

If  an  odd  number  be  prime  to  any  number,  it  will  also  be
prime  to  the  double  of  it.

For  let  the  odd  number  A  be  prime  to  any  number  B,
and  let  C  be  double  of  B ;
I  say  that  A  is  prime  to  C.

For,  if  they  are  not  prime       ^

to  one  another,  some  number       ^
will  measure  them.  ^

H.  E.  II.  27


4i8  BOOK  IX  [ix.  31,  32

Let  a  number  measure  them,  and  let  it  be  D.

Now  A  is  odd ;
therefore  D  is  also  odd.

And  since  D  which  is  odd  measures  C,
and  C  is  even,
therefore  [Z?]  will  measure  the  half  of  C  also.  •     [ix.  30]

But  ^  is  half  of  C;
therefore  D  measures  B.

But  it  also  measures  A  ;
therefore  D  measures  A^  B  which  are  prime  to  one  another :
which  is  impossible.

Therefore  A  cannot  but  be  prime  to  C.

Therefore  A^  C  are  prime  to  one  another.

Q.  E.  D.

Proposition  32.

Each  of  the  numbers  which  are  continually  doubled  beginning
from  a  dyad  is  even-times  even  only.

For  let  as  many  numbers  as  we  please,  B,  C,  /?,  have  been
continually  doubled  beginning
from  the  dyad  A  ;  ^

I  say  that  B,  C,  D  are  even-  '^^^^^^^^

times  even  only.


D :

Now    that    each    of    the
numbers  B^  C,  D  is  even-times  even  is  manifest ;    for  it  is
doubled  from  a  dyad.

I  say  that  it  is  also  even-times  even  only.

For  let  an  unit  be  set  out.

Since  then  as  many  numbers  as  we  please  beginning  from
an  unit  are  in  continued  proportion,
and  the  number  A  after  the  unit  is  prime,
therefore  /?,  the  greatest  of  the  numbers  A,  B,  C,  D,  will  not
be  measured  by  any  other  number  except  A,  B,  C,         [ix.  13]

And  each  of  the  numbers  A,  By  C  is  even  ;
therefore  D  is  even-times  even  only.  [vii.  Def.  8]

Similarly  we  can  prove  that  each  of  the  numbers  B^  C  is
even-times  even  only.

Q.  E.  D.


IX.  3«— 34]  PROPOSITIONS   31—34  419

See  the  notes  on  vii.  Deff.  8  to  11  for  a  discussion  of  the  difficulties
shown  by  lamblichus  to  be  involved  by  the  Euclidean  definitions  of  "  even-
times  even,"  " even-times  odd "  and  "odd-times  even."


Proposition  33.

If  a  number  have  its  half  odd,  it  is  even-times  odd  only.

For  let  the  number  A  have  its  half  odd  ;
I  say  that  A  is  even -times  odd  only.

Now   that   it   is    even-times    odd    is         j

manifest ;   for  the  half  of  it,  being  odd,

measures  it  an  even  number  of  times.  [vn.  Def.  9]

I  say  next  that  it  is  also  even-times  odd  only.

For,  if  A  is  even-times  even  also,
it  will  be  measured  by  an  even  number  according  to  an  even
number  ;  [vn.  Def.  8]

so  that  the  half  of  it  will  also  be  measured  by  an  even  number
though  it  is  odd  :
which  is  absurd.

Therefore  A  is  even-times  odd  only.  q.  e.  d.

Proposition  34.

If  a  number  neither  be  one  of  those  which  are  continually
doubled  from  a  dyad,  nor  have  its  half  odd,  it  is  both  even-
times  even  and  even-times  odd.

For  let  the  number  A  neither  be  one  of  those  doubled
from  a  dyad,  nor  have  its  half  odd  ;

I  say  that  A  is  both  even-times  even  a

and  even-times  odd.

Now  that  A  is  even-times  even  is  manifest ;
for  It  has  not  its  half  odd.  [vn.  Def.  8]

I  say  next  that  it  is  also  even-times  odd.

For,  if  we  bisect  A,  then  bisect  its  half,  and  do  this  con-
tinually, we  shall  come  upon  some  odd  number  which  will
measure  A  according  to  an  even  number.

For,  if  not,  we  shall  come  upon  a  dyad,
and  A  will  be  among  those  which  are  doubled  from  a  dyad :
which  is  contrary  to  the  hypothesis.

27 — 2


430  BOOK  IX  [13LM£

Thus  A  is  even-times  odd
But  it  was  also  proved  even-times  even.
Therefore  A  is  both  even-times  even  and  even-tim^  odd.

Q.  B.  a


Proposition  35.

If  as  many  numbers  as  we  please  be  in  continued prapartm,
and  there  be  subtracted  fr^m$  the  second  and  the  last  numbers
equal  to  the  first,  then,  as  the  excess  of  the  second  is  to  the
first,  so  will  the  excess  of  the  last  be  to  all  those  before  it.

Let  there  be  as  many  numbers  as  we  please  in  coiitinued
proportion,  A,  BC,  D,  EF,

beginning  from  A  as  least,  a-

and  let  there  be  subtracted  B-^g-c

from  BC  and  EF  the  numbers  o

BG,  FH,  each  equal  to  A  ;        E -j^ j^-Jj-f

I  say  that,  as  GC  is  to  A,  so
is  E// to  A,  BCD.

For  let  FK  be  made  equal  to  BC,  and  FL  equal  to  Z?.

Then,  since  FK  is  equal  to  BC,
and  of  these  the  part  FH  is  equal  to  the  part  BG,
therefore  the  remainder  HK  is  equal  to  the  remainder  GC.

And  since,  as  EF  is  to  /?,  so  is  D  to  BC,  and  BC  to  A,
while  D  is  equal  to  FL,  BC  to  FK,  and  A  to  FH,
therefore,  as  EF  is  to  FL,  so  is  LF  to  FK,  and  FK  to  FH.

Separando,  as  EL  is  to  LF,  so  is  LK  to  FK,  and  KH
to  FH.  [vn.  II,  13]

Therefore  also,  as  one  of  the  antecedents  is  to  one  of  the
consequents,  so  are  all  the  antecedents  to  all  the  consequents;

[vii.  12]
therefore,  as  KH  is  to  FH,  so  are  EL,  LK,  KH  to  LF,
FK,  HF.

But  KH  is  equal  to  CG,  FH  to  A,  and  LF,  FK,  HF  to
D,  BC,  A',
therefore,  as  CG  is  to  ^,  so  is  EH  to  D,  BC,  A.

Therefore,  as  the  excess  of  the  second  is  to  the  first,  so  is
the  excess  of  the  last  to  all  those  before  it.

Q.  E.   D.


»x.  35.  36]  .  PROPOSITIONS   34—36  421

This  proposition  is  perhaps  the  most  interesting  in  the  arithmetical  Books,
since  it  gives  a  method,  and  a  very  elegant  one,  of  summing  any  series  of
terms  in  geometrical  progression.

Let  a^^  a^^  a^y...a^,  «„+,  be  a  series  of  terms  in  geometrical  progression.
Then  Euclid's  proposition  proves  that

For  clearness*  sake  we  will  on  this  occasion  use  the  fractional  notation  of
algebra  to  represent  proportions.

Euclid's  method  then  comes  to  this.

Since  ??i±2=_?^=  ...  =1\

we  have,  separando^


On         ^»-i


^n^-x  - ^a'w  _  ^n - gn.i  ^        ^a^-a^^o^-a^
a^  an_i  fla  «i     *

whence,  since,  as  one  of  the  antecedents  is  to  one  of  the  consequents,  so  is
the  sum  of  all  the  antecedents  to  the  sum  of  all  the  consequents,       [vii.  1 2]

^n^i  -  ^1 _  Oj-^i

which  gives  ^1  +  ^3  +  ...  +  a^,  or  5n.

If,  to  compare  the  result  with  that  arrived  at  in  algebraical  text-books,  we
write  the  series  in  the  fonn

rt,     ar^     ar^y.,.ar^~^     («  terms),

,                                              ar^  -a     ar-a
we  have  — - —  =  ,

*        r-  I


Proposition  36.

1/  as  many  numbers  as  we  please  beginning  from  an  unit
be  set  out  continuously  in  double  proportion^  until  t/ie  sum  0/  all
becomes  prime,  and  if  the  sum  multiplied  into  the  last  make
some  number,  the  product  will  be  perfect.

For  let  as  many  numbers  as  we  please.  A,  B,  C,  /?,
beginning  from  an  unit  be  set  out  in  double  proportion,  until
the  sum  of  all  becomes  prime,

let  E  be  equal  to  the  sum,  and  let  E  by  multiplying  D
make  FG ;
I  say  that  FG  is  perfect.

For,  however  many  A,  By  C,  D  are  in  multitude,  let  so
many  E,  HK,  Z,  J/ be  taken  in  double  proportion  beginning
from  E ;
therefore,  ex  aequ^li,  as  A  is  to  Z?,  so  is  E  to  M.  [vn.  14]


499  BOOK

Therefore  the  product  of  E^  D  is  equal  to  the  product  of
A^  M.  '  -•  [viL  19]

And  the  product  of  E^  D  is  FG  \
therefore  the  product  oi  A,  M  is  also  FG.

Therefore  A  by  multiplying  M  has  made  FG\
therefore  ^measures  FG  according  to  the  units  in  A*

And  ^  is  a  dyad ;
therefore  FG  is  double  of  M.

—A     &


M-


-$- ^. Q


a-


But  M,  L,  HK,  E  are  continuously  double  of  each  other;
therefore  E,  HK,  Z,  M,  FG  are  continuously  (unopCHtional  in
double  proportion.

Now  let  there  be  subtracted  from  the  second  HK  ^xid  the
last  FG  the  numbers  HNy  FO,  each  equal  to  the  first  E ;
therefore,  as  the  excess  of  the  second  is  to  the  first,  so  is  the
excess  of  the  last  to  all  those  before  it.  [ix.  35]

Therefore,  as  NK  is  to  Ey  so  is  OG  to  M,  Z,  KH,  E.

And  NK  is  equal  to  E ;
therefore  0G\^  also  equal  \.o  M,  Z,  HK,  E.

But  FO  is  also  equal  to  E,
and  E  is  equal  to  A,  B,  C,  D  and  the  unit.

Therefore  the  whole  FG  is  equal  to  E,  HK,  Z,  M  and
A,  B,  C,  D  and  the  unit ;
and  it  is  measured  by  them.

I  say  also  that  FG  will  not  be  measured  by  any  other
number  except  A,  B,  C,  D,  E,  HKy  Z,  J/ and  the  unit.

For,  if  possible,  let  some  number  P  measure  FG,
and  let  P  not  be  the  same  with  any  of  the  numbers  A^  B,  C,
A  E,  HK,  Z,  M.

And,  as  many  times  as  P  measures  FG,  so  many  units  let
there  be  in  (2 ;
therefore  Q  by  multiplying  P  has  made  FG.


IX.  36]  PROPOSITION   36


4«3


But,  further,  E  has  also  by  multiplying  D  made  FG ;
therefore,  as  i?  is  to  Qy  so  is  P  to  D.  [vii.  19]

And,  since  A,  B,    C,  D  are   continuously  proportional
beginning  from  an  unit,

therefore  D  will  not  be  measured  by  any  other  number  except
A,  B,  C.  [ix.  13]

And,  by  hypothesis,  P  is  not  the  same  with  any  of  the
numbers  A,  B,  C\

therefore  P  will  not  measure  D,

But,  as  P  is  to  Dy  so  is  ^  to  (2  ;
therefore  neither  does  E  measure  Q,  [vii.  Def.  20]

And  E  is  prime  ;
and  any  prime  number  is  prime  to  any  number  which  it  does
not  measure.  [vii.  29]

Therefore  ^E,  Q  are  prime  to  one  another.

But  primes  are  also  least,  [vii.  21]

and  the  least  numbers  measure  those  which  have  the  same
ratio  the  same  number  of  times,  the  antecedent  the  antecedent
and  the  consequent  the  consequent ;  [vii.  20]

and,  as  E  is  to  Q,  so  is  /^  to  Z?  ;

therefore  E  measures  P  the  same  number  of  times  that  Q
measures  D.

But   D   is   not  measured  by  any  other  number  except
Ay  By  C;

therefore  Q  is  the  same  with  one  of  the  numbers  Ay  B,  C,

Let  it  be  the  same  with  B.

And,  however  many  By  C,  D  are  in  multitude,  let  so  many
E^  HKy  L  be  taken  beginning  from  E.

Now  Ey  HKy  L  are  in  the  same  ratio  with  By  C,  D  \
therefore,  ex  aequaliy  as  B  is  to  /?,  so  is  E  to  Z.  [vii.  14]

Therefore  the  product  of  By  L  is  equal  to  the  product  of

Dy     E.  [vii.      19]

But  the  product  of  /?,  E  is  equal  to  the  product  of  ^,  P ;
therefore  the  product  of  Qy  P  is  also  equal  to  the  product  of

ByL.

Therefore,  as  ^  is  to  By  so  is  L  to  P.  [vii.  19]

And  Q  is  the  same  with  B ;
therefore  L  is  also  the  same  with  P :


434  BOOK   IX  *^M  [1X.3J

which  is  impossible,  for  by  hypothesis  P  is  not  the  »iiie  iri^
any  of  the  numbers  set  oyt

Therefore  no  number  will  measure  FG  except  At  B^  C,
/?,  E,  HK,  L,  M  and  the  unit.

And  FG  was  proved  equal  to  A^  B^  C,  />.  B^  HK^  X,  if
and  the  unit ;

and  a  perfect  number  is  that  which  H  isqual  to  its  own  parts ;

[viL  Def.  23]
therefore  FG  is  perfect

Q.  E.  D.


If  the  sum  of  any  number  of  terms  ctf  the  series

I,  3,  3«, ...  3«-»

be  prime,  and  the  said  sum  be  multifdied  by  the  last  term,  the  product  will  be
a  ^'perfect"  number,  i.e.  equal  to  the  sum  of  all  its  fiu:tor&

Let  I  +  2  +  2*+ ...  -»•  3*-*  (=  S^  be  prime;
then  shall  5»  .  2*"»  be  "perfect"
Take  {n  -  i)  terms  of  the  series

5,,  zS^,  3«i;, ...  3J*-«^
These  are  then  terms  proportional  to  the  terms

3,  %\  2\  ...  3»-*.
Therefore,  ex  aequali^

2:2^''  =  S^:2^-'Sn,  [VII.   14]

or  2  .  2*-'5,»  =  2'»-^  .  Sn*  [VII.   19]

(This  is  of  course  obvious  algebraically,  but  Euclid^s  notation  requires  him  to
prove  it.)

Now,  by  IX.  35,  we  can  sum  the  series  S^  +  2Sn  +  ...  +  2**""»S^,
and  (2S^  -  Sn)  :  S^  =  (2"-^  Sn  -  S^)  :  (5,»  +  25„  +  ...  +  2--»5n).

Therefore        5„  +  25»  +  2»5n  +  . . .  +  2*»-«6;  =  2»-i5n  -  Sn,

or  2^-'Sn  =  5,,  +  2Sn  +  2«5„  +  ...  +  2*-«5n  +  S^

=  5„  +  25n  +  . . .  +  2*-«5n  +  (l  +  2  +  2«  +  .. .  +    2»-'),

and  2""^  5n  is  measured  by  every  term  of  the  right  hand  expression.

It  is  now  necessary  to  prove  that  2'»"^5n  cannot  have  any  factor  except
those  terms.

Suppose,  if  possible,  that  it  has  a  factor  x  different  from  all  of  them,
and  let  2*~^i'n  =  x  ,  m.

Therefore  Sni  fn  =  x  :  2'*"^  [vii.  19]

Now  2*~*  can  only  be  measured  by  the  preceding  terms  of  the  series
I,  2,  2«,...2'»-S  [ix.  13J

and  X  is  different  from  all  of  these ;
therefore  x  does  not  measure  2**"^,

that  Sn  does  not  measure  m,  [vii.  Def.  20]

And  Sn  is  prime;  therefore  it  is  prime  to  m.  [vii.  29]

It  follows  [vii.  20,  21]  that

m  measures  2'*"'^


IX.  36]  PROPOSITION  36  4^5

Suppose  that  m  =  2*".

Now,  ex  aequaliy^  2*" :  2*"*  =  5,» :  2*"**"*  5».

Therefore  '  2*' .  2*-''-^5»=  2*-^6;  [vn.  19]

=  jc  .  i»,  from  above.

And  /»  =  2*" ;
therefore  Ji:=2*"''"\  one  of  the  terms  of  the  series  i,  2,  2*,...  2*~":  which
contradicts  the  hypothesis.

Therefore  2*~*5„  has  no  factors  except

^,  26;,  2«5n,  ...  2»-»5n.   I,  2,  2«,  ...  2*->.


27—5


INDEX   OF  GREEK   WORDS  AND   FORMS.


dxpos,  extreme  (of  numbers  in  a  series)  318,
367:  iKpop  Kal  fUaw  \&yov  TCTfiTjirdcu,  "to
be  cut  in  extreme  and  mean  ratio"  189
AXoyos,  irrational  11 7-8
dpaXoyla,  proportion:   definitions  of,  inter-
polated 1 19
dtfdXoyoif  =  dyd  \6yop,  proportional  or  in  pro-
portion: used  as  indeclinable  adj.  and  as
adv.  119,  165:  fiifffi  dvdXoyoVf  mean  pro-
portional (of  straight  line)  129,  similarly
fUffos  dfdXoyop  of  numbers  195,  363  etc. :
Tptrt}  (rplrot)  dydXoyw^  third  proportional
214,  407-8:   Terdprrj  (Wraprof)  d^dXayw,
fourth  proportional  215,  409 :  ^{^t  dvdXoyov
in  continued  proportion  346
dydraXtr  (X^Tot),  inverse  (ratio),  inversely  134
dMooTpix/^ayTit  convertendo  135
6Maarp<Hpi^  X670V,  conversion  of  a  ratio  135
dy((rdictt  djuffdKis  Uros,  unequal   by  unequal
by    equal    (of   solid    numbers)  =  scaletu,
ff^^rivlTKOt,  (TifniKlffKOt  or  fiiafiLffKot  290
dyopiolus  Tcrayfiivuy  tuv  X^up  (of  perturbed

proportion)  in  Archimedes  136
dpTwalpeatt,  ij  oiJr?),  definition  of  same  ratio
in  Aristotle  {dpSv^lpeait  Alexander)  1 20 :
terms  explained  121
dtrriTeiropOiTa  oxfifMTa^   reciprocal  (  =  reci-
procally related)  figures,  interpolated  def.
of,  189
drXan^f,  breadthless  (of  prime  numbers)  285
droicaraoTart/c6t,  recurrent  (=spherica/),  of

numbers  291
dTTeffOaif    to    meet,    occasionally    to    touch
(instead  of  i^drrcffOai)   2:   z\so= to  pass
through,  to  lie  on  70
dpiO/jUtt,  number,  definitions  of,  280
dpridxit  dpriodi^afJLov  (Nicomachus)  282
dpridxit  dpriot,  even- times  even  281-2
d/)Tcd«tt  T€pi(r(r6t,  even-times  odd  282-4
d/yrtoWpcrrof,  ^^it-0^(Nicomachus  etc.)  282
d/)T(ot  (dpiByJbi),  even  (number)  281
da<i¥Q€Toi,    (prime    and)    incomposite    (of
numbers)  284

ptpriKipai,  to  stand  (of  angle  standing  on

circumference)  4
pufdffKos,  altar-shaped  (of  •'scalene"  solid

numbers)  290

7e7oi'^«(in  constructions),  "let  it  be  made*'
248


YCToy^j  Aj»  rfiy  tA  hnraxO^",  "what  was  en-
joined will  have  been  done"  80,  261

y€jf6fi€vos,  6  i^  ah-Qp,  ** their  product"  316,
326  etc.:  6  ix  toO  ivos  yey6fi€P0t=**the
square  of  the  one  *'  327

yvihfuavy  gnomon:  Democritus  rep2  diaipo-
p^  yvii)fjLOPOS  {yvibfii^i  or  yufpirit})  rj  repl
\/^a6aiot  kijkXov  xal  ff^lfnft  40 :  (of  numbers)
289

ypafifuxdt,  linear  (of  numbers  in  one  dimen-
sion) 287:    (of  prime  numbers)  285

ypd^€ffffai,  **to  be  proved^*  (Aristotle)  120

8€&repot,  secondary  (of  numbers) :  in  Nico-
machus and  lamblichus  a  subdivision  of
odd  286,  287

h€xbpufvo¥,  "admitting"  (of  segment  of  circle
admitting  or  containing  an  angle)  5

diaipeiffOcu  (used  of  ** separation"  of  ratios):
hitupedivra,  separando,  opp.  to  ffvyKelfittfa,
componendo  168

8ioUp€<rtt  X6yov,  separation,  literally  division^
of  ratio  135

8i€i^€vyfUrn  {dyaXoyla),  disjoined,  =  discrete
(proportion)  293

dttXdrri,  separando,  literally  dimdendo  (of
proportions)  135

it-ffprtfUyri  {dpoXoyla),  discrete  (proportion),  i.e.
in  four  terms,  as  distinct  from  continuous
{ffwex^t  ffwrififAivr))  in  three  terms  131,

dfipc^u)  (didyeiv),  "let  it  be  drawn  through**
or  **  across"  7

di*  tffov,  ex  aequali  (of  ratios)  136 :  fit*  Uom  iv
Terapayfiivxi  dPoKoyl^,  **ex  aequali  in  per-
turbed proportion"  136

diKdXovpot,  twice-truncated  (of  pyramidal
numbers)  291

diTXdffioi  X6yos,  double  ratio:  dixXcurliap
XAyos,  duplicate  ratio,  contrasted  with,  133

86yafut,  power:  =  actual  value  of  a  sub-
multiple  in  units  (Nicomachus)  282 :  =side
of  number  not  a  complete  square  (i.e.  root
or  surd)  in  Plato  288,  290:  =  square  in
Plato  294-5

cWoj,  figure  234:  =form  254
fKaffTot,  each:   curious  use  of,  79
iXXeififia,  defect  (in  application  of  areas)  262
^XXefrccy,    "fall   short"   (in   application   of
areas)  262


438


INDEX  OF  GREEK  WORD!


i/iwiwrmPf  faii  mi  (sbe  interpolated)  358
ha  wKtUh  *'8eveial  amis**  (def.  of  nmSber)

ipuKKk^  (X^Yot),  alternate  (ratio) :  altomatelji

iwap/i^uft  to/i  in  (active),  IV.  Det  7  and


80,  81

(of  internal  contact  of  dicles)


IV,    I,

Irr6f ,  wit]

13
ii^  MXeyWf  in  oonttnned  proportion  (of

terms  in  geometrical  pragfesnon)  346
iwiftSptm    Xovvf ,    superfarti€uUais    ratt^t

=Uieratio(ii4-i):ii»  305
irlvf^ot  (dpc^itdf),  plane  (nnmbtf)  987-8
ht6fi£»a^  cooseanents  (^''foUowtng**  tennij

in  a  proportion  t^L  938
#rf/)^«iff,  obloHr  (of  numbers):  in  Plato

s  wpQfjefynp,  which  however  is  disttngnished

from  htpofiimis  by  Nicomachus  etc.  189-

90t  «93
t^vypnfifUK^f  rectilinear  (term  for  prime

numbers)  485
t^$vfUTpiK69,  euthymetric  (of  primes)  t9$

4yotf/<cra,  antecedents  ("  leading  "  terms)  in

a  proportion  134
fvtpt  than :  construction  after  3crXa^«r  etc.

133

Uko/A'tiaft,  of  square  number  (lamblidins)  S93
Iffdxit  IfdKit  Iffot,  equal  multiplied  by  equa!

and  again  by  equal  (of  a  cube  number)

290,  291
iffdKii  tffoi,  equal   multiplied   by  equal   (of

a  square  number)  291
tadxis  laos  iXarTovdKit  (/xct^oi'difts),  species  of

solid  numbers,  =  irXti'^fs  {doKls  or  ffrriXls)

291

KaXcLffdut,  "  let  it  be  called,"  indicating  origi-
nality of  a  definition  129

KarafUTpeTvy  measure  115:  without  remainder,
completely  {vXrjpoOvTus)  280

KaraffKevdj^utf  construct:  twv  avrdv  xara-
<rK€va<rd^Tav,  *•  with  the  same  construc-
tion"   II

Kararofiii  Kavdfoi,  Sectio  canonis  of  Euclid

K^rpovt  centre:   ^  iK  tov  K.  =  radtus  2
K€paT0€i8rji  ytovLat  hornlike  angle  4,  39,   40
icXaK,  to  break  offy  inflect :  ifc^Xdcr^w  817  t^Xw

47 :    K^KXdadfjLiy   def.    of,   alluded    to    by

Aristotle  47
KiiKovpo^y   truncated  (of   pyramidal    number

minus  vertex)  291
ifuicXt/c6s,  cyclic y  a  particular  species  of  square

number  291

X67OT,  ratio:  meaning  117:  definition  of,
II 6-9:  original  meaning  (of  something
expressed)  accounts  for  use  of  dXo7oj,
having  no  ratio,  irrational  117

/M^opiaadai,  to  be  isolated^  of  fxovdt  (Theon
of  Smyrna)  279


fUpotf  piirt :  two  meanings  i  r£  :  genenllf  ^
submultiplc  380:  Mpn*  P^rts  (-proper
fraction)  1 1  $f  tSo

^ij)i  mean  proportional  (strtught  line  ot

number)  119,  395,  =^63  etc.
^^  ydpi  **  suppose  it  Is  not^^  7
^iJ(EO(,  length  (of  ntimlier  in  one  dlm«mioa}:

=  sit1e  i>f  complete  square  in  Plato  38S
^^ovdf,  unit,  Tuon^d:    £iappO(&ed  etymologicU

connexion  with  t^ot,  solitary,  ^ar4  rtH

5^iOf,  similar:  (of  rectilineal  figures)  1881
(of  plane  and  soHd  numbers)  193

A;4otinj¥  X^^uir,  '*  similarity  of  ralios  filler*
pobled  def,  of  proportion)  119

^fi^Xojou  homologous,  corresponding  iM*
esECeptionally  **vn  tile  same  ratio  with"

5/MB»  /erm^  in  a  proportion  1^1

itapa^dWrtv  dro,  used,  exceplionallyt  instead

of  wapa^dWtuf  rapa  or  draypd^tr  dr&  i&:

fl-apaXXiTTiiJ,  "fall  siideways'"  or  ** awry"  54

Ttpal¥ot,nra     warSn^^    'Mimitlng    quantity'*

(Thymaridas'  deftnition  of  unit)  179
TttpiffffdKii  dpTiov^  odd-tiftits  etfen  181-4
vtpia<rdKi%  Trtpia^6%^  &dd'iimes  siiil  18  f
XfpiffadpTio^.  &dde^n  (Nicomachus  ctc|  18 J
xept^0'6f,  odd  a8i
xi^X/jcot,   how  great:    refers    to   continuous

(geometrical)  magnitude  as  iro<r6s  to  discrete

(multitude)  11 6-7
xTiXiKdrrit,  used  in  V.  Def.  3,  and  sparioos

Def.  5  of  VI. :  =  site  (not  quantuplicity  as  it

is  translated  by  De  Morpin)  1 16-7,  189-

90 :  supposed  multiplication  of  inyXurAnfrci

(VI.    Def.    5)    132 :    distinction    between

TiyXwfAnys  and  fUytOot  117
rXdroSf  breadth:   (of  numbers)  288
rXevpd,  side:    (of  factors  of  *' plane"  and

"  solid  "  numbers)  288
irX^do(  Ctpifffihop  or  T^Ttpaafuhw,  defined  or

finite  multitude  (definition  of  number)  280:

iK  fiwddcav  ovyKelfi€Pw   rX^^ot   (Euclid's

def.)  280
ToXXarXcurtd^eiv,  multiply:   defined  187
iroXXaTXaaiaafi6st  multiphcation :  koB*  i>waum-

ovw  iroXXairXa(riaofA/&if  "(arising)  from  any

multiplication  whatever     120
ToXXarXdirtot,  multiple :  lodxtt  xoXXavXdo'ta,

equimultiples  120  etc.
xoX^xXet/poi',    multilateral:    excludes  rerpd-

rXev/>oy,  quadrilateral  239
TopLocur0ait  to  flnd  248
woadKit  TOffdKit  Toool,  *'so  many  times  so

many  times  so  many"  (of  solid  numbers,

in  Aristotle)  286,  290
Toodxit  woffol,  "so  many  times  so  many*'  (of

plane  numbers,  in  Aristotle)  286
Twrbof,   quantity^  in   Aristotle   115:     refers

to   multitude    as  nyXiiror    to    magnitude

116-7


INDEX   OF  GREEK   WORDS   AND   FORMS


429


Tpofii/fKrfs,  oblong  (of  numbers):    in   Plato  =

irepofxi^Kris,    but    distinguished    by   Nico-

machus  etc.  289-90,  293
Tpoaapaypdrl/cUi  to  draw  on  to\  (of  a  circle)  to

compute^  when  s^;ment  is  given  56
irpmrei/petF,  to   find  m   addition  (of  finding

third  and  fourth  proportionals)  114
TpQro^^  prime  284-5
vfiUTOi   vpbs  iWriXovs,  (numbers)  prime  to

one  another  285-6

^6j,  rational  (literally  "  expressible")  117

ffVP€xnfi  continuous :  ffvptx^^  dvaXoya,  •*  con-
tinuous proportion"  (in  three  terms)  131

ffvptififiirrj  dvaXoyla,  connected  (i.e.  con-
tinuous) proportion  131,  293  :  cwrimnivosy
of  compound  ratio  in  Archimedes  133

cwBivrif  componendo  134-5

a^dcffit  XiyoVf  composition  of  a  ratio,  dis-
tinct from  compounding-  of  ratios  134-5

eTbvdcroz^  composite  (of  numbers) :  in  Nico-
machus  and  lamblichus  a  subdivision  of
odd  286

ffwlffTcurOtu,  construct:   06  (rwrTaffrKrerai  53

ffvrrlBrifUf  ff&YK€ifiai  (of  ratios)  135,  189-90:
ffvyxclfuva  and  iiaipedipra  (componendo  and
separando)  U£ed  relatively  to  one  another
168,  170

ff6cnifAa  /lopddtay^  ''collection  of  units'*  (def.
of  number)  280

avffnjfjMTiKdt,  collective  279

a^piKdi,  sphtriccU  (of  a  particular  species  of
cube  number)  291

{TifnjKlffKoSt  or  (T^rfvUrKoSf  of  solid  number
with  all  three  sides  unequal  (=  **  scalene  ")
290


ffX^ffiSy  *' relation":  xotA  <rx^«»,  "a  sort  of
relation"  (in  def.  of  ratio)  116-7

rai^ro/Ai^iciTf,  of  square  number  (Nicom.)  293
rainbriit  \brfiav,  "sameness  of  ratios"  119
WXetof,  perfect  (of  a  class  of  numbers)  293-4
Tcrayfiiyrf  IdpaXoyla)^ "  ordered  (proportion) "

»37
rrrapayfUyri  dpaXoyla,  perturbed  proportion

rcrpdrXev/K)!',  quadrilateral,  not  a  "polygon"

Tfirjfia  (xi/icXov),  segment  (of  circle):  Tfi-fffULTot
yuvla,  angle  0/  a  segment  4 :  iv  Tfi-ff/mri
ywvlaf  angle  in  a  segment  4

rofiein  (/dJicXow),  sector  (of  circle):  ffKuroro-
fuxbs  To/u6s,  "shoemaker's  knife"  5

TOfioeiSiji  (of  figure),  sector-like  5

ToaavrarXdiriop,  **the  same  multiple"   146

Tplyiopw :  t6  rpcirXoDF,  to  di*  dXXi^Xoyv,  triple,
interwoven  triangle,  =  pentagram  99

rptrXafftoSf  triple,  TpttrXoffltap,  triplicate  (of
ratios)   133

Tvyxii^euf,  happen:  AXXa,  a  Irvxev,  Urdxit
xoXXairXotf^ta,  "other,  chance,  equimulti-
ples" 143-4:  TvxoOffa  ywpla^  "a/iy  angle**
212

inrepreXiis  or  vreprOieiot,  ** over-perfect*'  (of

a  class  of  numbers)  293-4
ihrodiirXcM'tof,     sub-dupliccUe^  =  half    (Nico-

machus)  280
i^oiroXXairX(&j'(os,  submultiple  (Nicomachus)

280
O^of,  height  189

Xtaptop,  area  254


ENGLISH    INDEX.


Adrastus  292

Alcinous  98

AUemaU  and  alternately  (of  ratios)   134

Alternative  proofs,  interpolated  (cf.  ill.  9
and  following)  7.1 :  that  in  in.  lo  claimed
by  Heron  13-4

Amaldi,  Ugo,  30,  126

Ambiguous  case  of  vi.  7,  108-9

Anaximander  iii

Anaximenes   iii

Angle :  angles  not  less  than  two  right  angles
not  recognised  as  angles  (cf.  Heron,
Proclus,  Zenodorus)  47-9:  hollow-angled
figure  (the  re-entrant  angle  was  exterior)
48:  did  Euclid  extend  "angle"  to  angles
greater  than  two  right  angles  in  vi.  33?
275-6:  **angle  ^semicircle"  and  ** of
segment "  4  :  hornlike  angle  4,  39,  40 :
controversies  about  *'  angle  of  semicircle"
and  hornlike  angle  39-42l(see  dXso  Hornlike)

Antecedents  (leading  terms  in  proportion)  134

Antiparallels :  may  be  used  for  construction
of  VI.  12,  215

Apollonius:  /Ya/f/ yeiArett,  oroblem  from,  81,
lemma  by  Pappus  on,  04-5:  Plane  Loci^
theorem  from  (arising  out  of  Eucl.  vi.  3),
also  found  in  Aristotle  198-200:  75,  190,

Application  of  areas  (including  exceeding  and
falling  short)  corresponding  to  solution  of
quadratic  equations  187,  258-60,  263-5,
266-7

Approximations :  7/5  as  approximation  to  ^2
(Pythagoreans  and  Plato)  no:  approxi-
mations to  /^3  in  Archimedes  and  (in
sexagesimal  fractions)  in  Ptolemy  119:  to
X  (Archimedes)  119:  to  V4500  (Theon  of
Alexandria)  119

Archimedes:  new  fragment  of,  40:  Lider
assum/toruntt  proposition  from,  65:  ap-
proximations to  «/3,  square  roots  of  large
numbers,  and  to  w  119:  extension  of  a
proportion  in  commensurables  to  cover  in-
commensurables  193:  136,  190

Archytas:  proof  that  there  is  no  numerical
geometric  mean  between  n  and  n+i  295

Anstotle:  indicates  proof  (pre- Euclidean)  8iat
angle  in  semicircle  is  nght  63 :  on  def.  of
same  ratio  (=same  dyrapalpeoit)  120-j  :
on  proportion  as  **  equality  of  ratios"  119:


on  theorem  in  proportion  not  proved
generally  till  his  time  113:  on  proportion
in  three  terms  {ffvp€x^h  continuous),  and
in  four  terms  (dti/piy/i^yi;,  discrete)  131,293 :
on  alternate  ratios  134:  on  inverse  ratio
134,  149 :  on  similar  rectilineal  figures  188 :
has  locus-theorem  (arising  out  of  Eucl.  vi.
3)  also  given  in  Apollonius'  Plane  Loci
198-200:  on  unit  279:  on  numher  280:
on  non-applicability  of  arithmetical  proofs
to  magnitudes  if  these  are  not  numbers
113:  on  definitions  of  odd  and  even  by  one
another  281:  on  prime  numbers  284-5:
on  composite  numbers  as  plane  and  solid
286,  288,  290:  on  representation  of
numbers  by  pebbles  forming  figures  288
Arithmetic,  Elements  of,  anterior  to  Euclid

August,  E.  F.  23,  25,  149,  238,  256,  412
Austin,  W.  172,  188,  211,  259
Axioms  tacitly  assumed :   in  Book  v.   137:
in  Book  vii.  294

Babylonians  112

Baermann,  G.  F.  213

Baltzer,  R.  30

Barrow:    on  Eucl.  v.   Def.  3,   117:   on  v.

Def.  5,   121:   56,  186,  238
Billingsley,  H.  56,  238
Boethius  295
Borelli,  G.  A.  2,  84
Breadth  (of  numliers)  =  second  dimension  or

factor  288
Briggs,  H.  143

Camerer,  J.  G.  22,  25,  28,  33,  34,  40,  67,

121,  13T,  189,  213,  244
Campanus.28,  41,  56,  90,  116,  119, 121,  146,

180,  211,  234,  235,  253,  275,  320,  322,328
Candalla  189
Cantor,  Moritz  5,  40,  97
Cardano,  Hieronimo  41
Case\  Greeks  did  not  infer  limiting  cases,

but  proved  them  separately  75
Casey,  J.  227
^^ Chance  equimultiples"  in  phrase  "other,

chance,  equimultiples"  143-4
Circle :  definition  of  equal  circles  2 :  circles

touching,  meaning  of  definition ,  3:  **  circle  "

in  sense  of  "circumference"  23:   circles


43«


ENGLISH    INDEX


intenectiiig  and  toaching,  difficnltiec  in
Eodid'i  treatment  of,  35-7,  38-j^  modern
treatment  of,  30-1

Clavins  «,  41,  4a,  47,  49,  53,  56,  67,  70,  73,
130,  170, 190,  331,  138,  344,  171

Commandinm  47,  130^  190

CompMiHtb  {(nm04fnj,  denoting  "composi-
tion'* of  ratios  ^.v.:  con^mnulo  and
sHaramdo  used  relattvdj  to  each  odier
168,  170

Composite  numbers,  in  Endid  s86:  with
End.  and  Theon  of  Smyrna  may  be  efcn,
bat  with  Nioom.  and  UmbL  are  a  snb-
di^ton  of  cdd  s86s  plane  and  solid
nombecs  spedes  o(  s86

"Composite  to  one  anodier"  (of  numben)
186-7

Composition  of  ratios  (v^Mcvif  X670V),  de-
noted by  ecmpotumh  (^vr#(fm),  distinct
from  compounding  cstios  134-5

Compound  ratio:  explanatioD  of,  133-3:
interpolated  definition  jof,  189-90 :  com-
pounded ratios  in  v.  30-33,  i]f6-8

Comeq$t€His  C^ following"  terms  m  propor-
tion) 134,  338

C^mtmuMu  proportion  {wwwxip  or  vwnniiiif^
draXoYii^  in  three  terms  131

Convenion  of  ratio  {^anurrfi^  X^yov),  de-
noted by  cmvirtemh  {d^aarpi^WTi}  135 :
C9mfirt€fub  theorem  not  established  by  v.
19,  Por.  174-5,  but  proved  by  Simson's
Prop.  E  175

Canvertendodtnoimg  "conversion*'  of  ratios,

Corresponding  magnitudes  134

Cube:  duplication  of,  reduced  by  Hippo-
crates to  problem  of  two  mean  pro-
portionals 133 :  cube  number,  def.  of,  291 :
two  mean  proportionals  between  two  cube
numbers  294,  364-5

Cyclic^  of  a  particular  kind  of  square  number
291

Cychmathia  of  Leotaud  42

Data  of  Euclid :  Def.  2,  248 :  Prop.  8,  249-
50:  Prop.  24,  246-7:  Prop.  55,  254:
Props.  56  and  68,  240 :  Prop.  58,  263,  265 :
Props.  59  and  84,  266-7  •  Prop.  67  assumes
part  of  converse  of  Simson*s  Prop.  B  (Book
VI.)  224:  Prop.  70,  250:  Prop.  85,  264:
Prop.  87,  228:  Prop.  93,  227

Dechales  259

Dedekind's  theory  of  irrational  numbers
corresponds  exactly  to  Eucl.  v.  Def.  5,
124-6

Democritus :  On  difference  of  gnomon  etc.
(?  on  "angle  of  contact")  40:  on  parallel
and  infinitely  near  sections  of  cone  40:
stated,  without  proving,  propositions  about
volumes  of  cone  and  pvramid  40

De  Morgan,  A. :  on  definition  of  ratio  1 16-7 :
on  extension  of  meaning  of  ratio  to  cover
incommensurables  118:  means  of  express-
ing ratios  between  incommensurables  by
approximation  to  any  extent  11 8-9:   de-


fence and  explanation  of  v.  Def.  5,  iti-i-
on  occessilj  of  pro^f  that  tests  k%t  grca.1«
and  lessT  OT  greater  and  equal,  vaxim  an'
not  COCK i«it  1J0-1,  157:  on  compound  tiDii
131-^^,  ■i_^4  :  jikctch  of  proof  of  cxi.^enccof
fogrlh  proportional  tassumcrJ  in  v.  j8)i?(:
propoiied  lemma  alxiut  dupticite  rauw  is
alternative  means  of  proving  V].-ii,  146-7^
5t  7i  9-10,  u,  r^^,  10,  12,  39,  56,  76-^
83,  101,  ro4i  ii6"9,  1 2D,  130,  ry^^  \\h
197,  1&2.  217^8,  s^j,  133,  1341^7^  ni

DercylUdes  i  r  i

DtQrhmus  for  solultno  of  tk  quadratic  i^^

Disrrett  proportion,  ^nf^pr^piw^  or  ^f^ti-^^rf
d^tt^o^f*,  in  four  lenn^^,  131,  193

*^  Dijsmihrly  &rderid^^  proportion  {^m^idm

=  **/«'r/wrArt/ proportion"  136

DifddfHih  {of  ratios ),  see  Sepamaljon,  stfef^.
aMd&  ^m

'*  Division  (of  ratios),"  s£e  Separauon  ^^

Divisimt^  {o/_figurej\  On,  treatise  by  Endid,
pro[xj5;ition  from,  5

Dodecshedron :  deoomposltioii  of  Smcs  Into
demenUury  trianglesi  98

Dodfffion,  C  L.  4i»  975

Duplicate  ntb  133 :  9iwXurlmFt  dnpGoste,
msdnct  from  teXdoim,  doable  (sintio
1:  i),  tfaon^  nse  of  terms  not  udlbtm  133:
"dnplicate"'  of  given  ratio  fomd  hf  Yi.
II,  914:  lemma  on  dvfdlGate  ratio  ns  nl-
ternative  to  method  of  vi.  ss  (De  Morgan
and  others)  141-7

Duplication  of  cube :  reduction  of,  by  Hippo-
crates, to  problem  of  finding  two  mean
proportionals  1 33  :  wrongly  supposed  to
be  alluded  to  in  Timaeus  33  A,  B,  294-5  n.

Egyptians  in:  Egyptian  view  of  numheri^

Emiques  (F.)  and  Amaldi  (U.)  30,  116

Equimultiples:  **any  equimultiples  what-
ever," UrdKit  roXXaxXd(ria  Koff  ^ocorovr
roXXairXcuricur/ioV  no:  stereotyped  phrase
"other,  chance,  equimultiples"  143-4:
should  include  once  each  magnitude  145

Eratosthenes:  measurement  of  obliquity  of
ecliptic  (23°  51' 20")  III

Escribed  circles  of  triangle  85,  86-7

Eudemus  99,  in

Eudoxus  90,  280,  195:  discovered  general
theory  of  proportionals  covering  incom-
mensurables 1 1 2-3:  was  hrst  to  prove
scientifically  the  propositions  about  volumes
of  cone  and  pyramid  40

Eutocius:  on  **vi.  Def.  5"  and  meaning  of
TiiKkKbriji  116,  132,  189-90:  gives  locus-
theorem  from  Apollonius*  Picme  Loci  198-
200

Even  (number) :  definitions  by  P3^agoreans
and  in  Nicomachus  281 :  definitions  of  odd
and  even  by  one  another  unscientific
(Aristotle)  281 :  Nicom.  divides  even  into
three  classes  (i)  even-times  even  and  (2)  even-
times  odd  as  extremes,  and  (3)  odd-times
even  as  intermediate  282-3


ENGLISH   INDEX


433


Evfft- times  evm:  Euclid's  use  differs  from
use  by  Nicomachus,  Theon  of  Smyrna  and
lamblichus  281-2

Even-times  odd  in  Euclid  different  from  even-
odd  oi  Nicomachus  and  the  rest  282-4

Ex  Mqualiy  of  ratios,  1 36 :  ex  aequali  pro-
positions (v.  20,  22),  and  ex  aequaii  'Mn
perturbed  proportion"  (v.  21,  23)  176-8

Faifofer  126

Fourth  proportional :  assumption  of  existence
of,  in  V.  18,  and  alternative  methods  for
avoiding  (Saccheri,  De  Morgan,  Simson,
Smith  and  Bryant)  170-4:  Clavius  made
the  assumption  an  axiom  170:  sketch  of
proof  of  assumption  by  De  Morgan  171 :
condition  for  existence  of  number  which
is  fourth  proportional  to  thiee  numbers
409-11

Galileo  Galilei :   on  angle  of  contact  42

Geometric  means  357  sqq. :  one  mean  between
square  numbers  294,  363,  or  between
similar  plane  numbers  371-2:  two  means
between  cube  numbers  294,  364-5,  or
between  similar  solid  numbers  373-5

Geometrical  progression  346399.:  summation
of  If  terms  of  (ix.  35)  420-1

Gherard  of  Cremona  47

Gnomon  (of  numbers)  289

Golden  section  (section#in  extreme  and  mean
ratio),  discovered  by  Pythagoreans  99:
theory  carried  further  by  Plato  and  Eu-
doxus  99

Greater  ratio :  Euclid's  criterion  not  the  only
one  130:  arguments  from  greater  to  less
ratios  etc.  unsafe  unless  they  go  back  to
original  definitions  (Simson  on  v.  10)  156-7:
test  for,  cannot  coexist  with  test  for  equal
or  less  ratio  130-1

Greatest  common  measure:  Euclid's  method
of  finding  corresponds  exactly  to  ours  1 18,
299:  Nicomachusgives  the  same  method  300

Gregory,  D.  116,   143

Habler,  Th.  294 «.

Hankel,  H.  116,   117

Hauber,  C  F.  244

Heiberg,  J.  L.  passim

Henrici  and  Treutlein  30

Heron  of  Alexandria:  Eucl.  ill.  12  interpo-
lated from,  28 :  extends  11 1.  20,  21  to  angles
in  segments  less  than  semicircles  47-8 :  does
not  recognise  angles  equal  to  or  greater  than
two  right  angles  47-8 :  proof  of  formula  for
area  of  triangle,  A  =  s s (s -  d){s - b)(s - c)
87-8:  5,  16-17,  ^4.  ^8,  34,  36,  44,  116,
189,  302,  320,  383,  395

liippasus  97

Hippocrates  of  Chios  133

Hornlike  angle  («€^Toet5^s  Yowfo)  4,  39,  40:
hornlike  angle  and  angle  ^semicircle,  con-
troversies on,  39-42:  Proclus  on,  39-40:
Democritus  may  have  written  on  hornlike
angle  40:  Campanus("not  angles  in  same


sense'*)  41 :  Cardano  (^«a«/i/iVj  of  different
orders  or  kinds) :  Peletier  (hortilike  angle
no  angle,  no  quantity,  nothing;  angles  of
all  semicircles  right  angles  and  equal)  41 :
Clavius  42:  Vieta  and  Galileo  (**  angle  of
contact  no  angle")  42:  Wallis  (angle  of
contact  not  inclination  at  all  but  degree  of
curvature)  42
Hultsch,  F.   133

lamblichus  97,  116,  279,  280,  281,  283,  284,
285,  286,  287,  288,  289,  290,  291, 292,  293,

419

Icosahedron  98

Incommensurables :  method  of  testing  incom-
mensurability (process  of  finding  G.c.M.)
118:  means  of  expression  consist  in  power
of  approximation  without  limit  (De  Morgan)
119:  approximations  to  ^^2  (by  means  of
side-  and  diagonal-nxxmhtxs)  119,  to  ^^3
and  to  T,  119:  to  n/Jsoo  by  means  of
sexagesimal  fractions  119

Incomposite  (of  number)  =  prime  284

Ingrami,  G.  30,  126

Inverse  (ratio),  inversely  (ikyi.wa\i.v)  134:  in-
version is  subject  of  v.  4,  Por.  (Theon)
144,  and  of  V.  7,  Por.  149,  but  is  not
properly  put  in  either  place  149:  Simson's
Prop.  B  on,  directly  deducible  from  V.
Def.  5,  144

Isosceles  triangle  of  IV.  10 :  construction  of,
by  Pythagoreans  97-9

Jacobi,  C.  F.  A.   188

Lachlan,  R.  226,  227,  245-6,  247,  256,  272

Lardner,  D.  58,  259,  271

Least  common  multiple  336-41

Legendre  30:  proves  vi.  1  and  similar  pro-
positions in  two  parts  (i)  for  commen-
surables,  (2)  for  incommensurables  193-4

Lemma  assumed  in  vi.  22,  242-3:  alternative
propositions  on  duplicate  ratios  and  ratios
of  which  they  are  duplicate  (De  Morgan
and  others)  242-7

Length,  ixrjKoz  (of  numbers  in  one  dimension)
287 :  Plato  restricts  term  to  side  of  com-
plete square  287

Leotaud,  Vincent  ^2

Linear  (of  numbers)  =  (i)  in  one  dimension
287,  (2)  prime  285

Logical  inferences,  not  made  by  Euclid  22,  29

Lucian  99

Means:  three  kinds,  arithmetic,  geometric
and  harmonic  292-3:  geometric  mean  is
**^roipon\oii  par  excellence'*  (KvpLta%)  292-3  :
one  geometric  mean  between  two  square
numbers,  two  between  two  cube  numbers
(Plato)  294,  363-5:  one  geometric  mean
between  similar  plane  numbers,  two  be-
tween similar  solid  numbers  371-5:  no
numerical  geometric  mean  between  n  and
II  + 1  (Archytas  and  Euclid)  295

Moderatus,  a  Pythagorean  280


434


ENGUSH  INDBX


Miltiidicatkm.  dcfinitioii  of  «87
Mitsui  Ser^t00W  Grmiei  995

a&-Na2fld  5, 16,  «8, 54, 56, 44,  47,  ^m,  390.

Naibaddbi  w^-JtA  «8
Wfiflmum,  6.  H.  F.  «87»  993
Nioomiiditis  116,  119^  1319  t79,  sSOb  tSt,
98a,  483,  «84«  «85,  98$,  «a7f  388, 489,  «90,

Nvmber:    defined    by   Thalet,    Endonis,

MpdentiiSi  Aristotle,  Eudid  380:  Nko-

*  *  machiis  and  lunblidiiui  on,  180s

aented  by  Knet  «88«  and  bj  poims  or  <

988-9

ObloDg  (of  nnmber) :  in  Pkto  either  rpcp^nif
or  lT9poiKiiniit  988:  bat  tbeie  tctms  denote
two  distinct  divisiofis  of  j^ane  niunbers  in
Nioomadnis,  Theon  of  Smyrna  and  lam-
blicfaiis  989-90

(X^tahedron  98

Odd  (number) :  defs.  of  in  Nicomadras  981 :
Pythagorean  definition  981 :  def.  of  odd
and  even  by  one  another  mncientific*
(Aristotle)  981 :  Nicom.  and  lambL  dis-
tingniah  three  cksaes  of  odd  nnmbers
(i)  prime  and  incomposite,  (9)  secondary
and  composite,  as  extroncs,  (3)  secondary
and  composite  in  itself  but  prmie  and  in-
composite  to  one  another,  which  is  inter-
mediate 287

Odd-times  even  (number) :  definition  in  Eucl.
spurious  283-4,  ^*^^  diflers  from  definitions
by  Nicomachus  etc.  ibid.

Odd-times  odd  (number) :  defined  in  Eucl.  but
not  in  Nicom.  and  Iambi.  284:  Theon  of
Smyrna  applies  term  to  prime  numbers
284

Oenopides  of  Chios  1 1 1

"Ordered"  proportion  (rerayiUvri  A»Q.\<rfla)t
interpolated  definition  of,  137

Pappus  :  lemma  on  ApoUonius'  Plane  v€6<r€iz
64-5 :  problem  from  same  work  81 :  assumes
case  of  VI.  3  where  external  angle  bisected
(Simson's  vi.  Prop.  A)  197:  theorem  from
ApoUonius'  JUane  Loci  198:  theorem  that
ratio  compounded  of  ratios  of  sides  is  equal
to  ratio  of  rectangles  contained  by  sides
250:  4,  27,  29,  67,  79.  8f,  113,  133.  Ill,
250,  251,  292

**  Parallelepipedal"  (solid)  numbers:  two  of
the  three  factors  differ  by  unity  (Nicoma-
chus) 290

Peletarius  (Peletier) :  on  angle  0/ contact  and
angle  ^semicircle  41 :  47,  56,  84,  146,  190

Pentagon :  decomposition  of  regular  pentagon
into  30  elementary  triangles  98 :  relation  to
pentagram  99

Pentagonal  numbers  289

••Perfect"  (of  a  class  of  numbers)  293-4,
421-5:  Pythagoreans  applied  term  to  10,
294:  3  also  called  **  perfect*'  294


ijfi.   176-;

Pflciderer,  C.  F,   i

Philolauft  97

PhiLoponus  234,  2S1

Plane  numbers,  pn^uct  of  two  &GUN(
(**  sides"  or  •*  length''  and  '*braadtl'^
28 7 -8:  ID  Plato  either  squAre  or  oblbog
1S7-8:  dmibr  pl&ite  numbers  a$j:  iMe
mean  proportional  between  similir  pitw
niimi>er5  371-t

Pl&lo;  corsstruction  of  re^la^r  solifH  fiou)
triangles  97-8  :  un  gB/tien  ig£lian  99:  Ti'^
iL%  approximation  to  ^^7,  119^  on  M|(mit
and  oblong  numbers  i8S,  193:  on  iim-itut
(jsquare  roots  or  surds)  288,  290 :  theotcni
ihat  1>etween  ^^uare  numbers  one  mtin
suffices^  lietween  cul>d  numbers  two  mctns

llf-iv^^ilirv  ni^,  364.  ^^^^^^^^^^^^^toM

fUiytelr,  John  «
Phitandi  96,  954


s  Fofinaloif.
109:  iVwriw  ts


or»  984-^:  Ads-


Jntf%s9$  (eoitrflaiyi  to
**q.i.d/' Of  ••Q.ur/
15  mentiooed  bfT
VI.  19, 934

Polyi^onai  nombe

Prime  (nnmber):
totle  on  two

3  admitted  as  prime  by  EncL  and  Aiktode,
bat  exclnded  by  NioonMclnia,  Theon  of
Saqma  and  lambiidmt,  ulio  innkie  pome
a  subdivision  of  cdd  1%^$:  '^priaie  and
incomposite  {dc^Brrot)"  384:  different
names  for  prime,  *  *  odd -times  odd"  (Theon),
** linear"  (Theon),  ••rectilinear'*  (Thy-
maridas),  ••  euthymetric  "  (lamblichos)  385 :
prime  absolutely  or  in  themselves  as  dis-
tinct from  prime  to  one  another  (Theon)
285:  definitions  of  ••prime  to  one  another"
285-6

Proclus:  on  absence  of  formal  divisions  of
proposition  in  certain  cases,  e.g.  iv.  10,
foo:  on  use  of  '•quindecagon"  for  as-
tronomy III:  4,  39,  40,  193,  247,  369

Proportion:  complete  theory  applicable  to
incommensurables  as  well  as  commen-
surables  is  due  to  Eudoxus  113:  old
(Pythagorean)  theory  practically  repre-
sented by  arithmetical  theory  of  Eucl.  vii.
113:  in  giving  older  theory  as  well  Euclid
simply  followed  tradition  113:  Aristotle
on  general  proof  (new  in  his  time)  of
theorem  (altemando)  in  proportion  113:
X.  5  as  connecting  two  theories  113:  De
Nforgan  on  extension  of  meaning  of  ratio
to  cover  incommensurables  118:  power  of
expressing  incommensurable  ratio  is  power
of  approximation  without  limit  119:  in-
terpolated definitions  of  proportion  as
••sameness"  or  •*  similarity  of  ratios"  119:
definition  in  v.  Def.  5  substituted  for  that
of  VII.  Def.  20  because  latter  found  inade-
quate, not  vice  versa  121 :  De  Morgan's
defence  of  v.  Def.  5  as  necessary  and
sufficient  122-4:  V.  Def.  5  corresponds  to


ENGLISH    INDEX


435


Weierstrass'  conception  of  number  in
general  and  to  Dedekind's  theory  of  ir-
rationals 1 24-6 :  alternatives  for  v.  Def.  5
by  a  geometer-friend  of  Saccheri,  by
Faifofer,  Ingrami,  Veronese,  Enriques  and
Amaldi  126:  proportionals  of  v  11.  Def.  30
(numbers)  a  particular  case  of  those  of  v.
Def.  5  (Simson's  Props.  C,  D  and  notes)
1 26-9 :  proportion  in  three  terms  (Aristotle
makes  it  four)  the  ** least"  131:  '* con-
tinuous" projX)rtion  {ffvftxh^  or  <rwrfftfi4vri
dvaXoyla,  in  Euclid  i^rjs  dirdKoyw)  131, 293 :
three  "proportions'*  292,  but  proportion
/ar  excellence  or  primary  is  continuous  or
geometric  292-3:  *' discrete"  or  ** dis-
joined" {di-juprffiirri,  di€J^€vyfi4prf)  131,  293  :
** ordered"  proportion  (t(t ay /Jtiprf),  inter-
polated definition  of,  137:  "perturbed"
proportion  (reTapa7fu^i»iy)  136,  176-7:  ex-
tensive use  of  proportions  in  Greek
geometry  187 :  proportions  enable  any
quadratic  equation  with  real  roots  to  be
solved  187:  supposed  use  of  propositions  of
Book  V.  in  arithmetical  Books  314,  320

Psellus  234

Ptolemy,  Claudius:  lemma  about  quadri-
lateral in  circle  (Simson's  vi.  Prop.  D)
225-7:  III,   117,   119

Pyramidal  numbers  290 :  pyramids  truncated,
twice- truncated  etc.  291

Pythagoras :  reputed  discoverer  of  construc-
tion of  five  regular  solids  97:  introduced
"  the  most  perfect  proportion  in  four  terms
and  specially  called  'harmonic'"  into
Greece  112:  construction  of  figure  equal
to  one  and  similar  to  another  rectilineal
figure  254

Pythagoreans :  construction  of  dodecahedron
in  sphere  97 :  construction  of  isosceles
triangle  of  I  v.  10  and  of  regular  pentagon
due  to,  97-8 :  possible  method  of  discovery
of  latter  97-9  :  theorem  about  only  three
regular  polygons  filling  space  round  a
point  98:  distinguish^  three  sorts  of
meanst  arithmetic,  geometric,  harmonic
112:  had  theory  of  proportion  applicable
to  commensurables  only  112:  7/5  as  ap-
proximation to  ^2,  119:  definitions  of
unit  279:  of  even  and  otld  281 :  called  10
**  perfect "  294

Quadratic  equations;  solution  by  means  of
proportions  187,  263-5,  266-7:  diopifffidt
or  condition  of  possibility  of  solving
equation  of  Eucl.  vi.  28,  259:  one  solution
only  given,  for  obvious  reasons  260,  264,
267  :  but  method  gives  both  roots  if  real
258:  exact  correspondence  of  geometrical
to  algebraical  solution  263-4,  266-7

Quadrilateral :  inscribing  in  circle  of  quadri-
lateral equiangular  to  another  91-2  :  con-
dition for  inscribing  circle  in,  93,  95:
quadrilateral  in  circle,  Ptolemy's  lemma
on  (Simson's  vi.  Prop.  DK  225-7:  quadri-
lateral not  a  "  polygon     239


**  Quindecagon*'  (fifteen-angled  figure) :  nse-
ful  for  astronomy  1 1 1

Radius:  no  Greek  word  for,  2

Ratio:    definition  of,    116-9,   no    sufficient

ground  for  regarding  it  as  spurious  117,
arrow's  defence  of  it  117:  method  of
transition  from  arithmetical  to  more  general
sense  covering  incommensurables  118:
means  of  expressing  ratio  of  incommen-
surables is  by  approximation  to  any  degree
of  accuracy  119:  def.  of  greater  ratio  only
^/f^  criterion  (there  are  others)  130:  tests
for  greater  equal  and  less  ratios  mutually
exclusive  130-1 :  test  for  greater  ratio
easier  to  apply  than  that  for  equal  ratio
1 29-30 :  arguments  about  greater  and  less
ratios  unsafe  unless  they  go  oock  to  original
definitions  (Simson  on  v.  10)  156-7  :  com-
pound i9\\o  132-3,  189-90,234:  operation
of  compounding  ratios  234 :  *'  ratio  com-
pounded of  their  sides"  (careless  expres-
sion) 248:  duplUcUey  triplicate  etc.  ratio
as  distinct  from  double^  triple  etc.  133 :
alternate  ratio,  altemando  134:  inverse
ratio,  inversely  134:  composition  of  ratio,
componendo,  different  from  compounding
ratios  134-5 :  separation  of  ratio,  separando
(commonly  ditndendo)  135 :  conversion  of
ratio,  convertendo  135:  ratio  ex  aequali
136,  ex  aequali  in  ferturhed  proportion
136:  division  of  ratios  used  in  Dctta  as
general  method  alternative  to  compounding
249-50:  names  for  particular  arithmetical
ratios  292

ReciproccU  or  reciprocally  relcUed  figures :
definition  spurious  189

Reductio  ad  absurdum^  the  only  possible
method  of  proving  in.  i,  8

•*  Rule  of  three":  VI.  12  equivalent  to,  215

Saccheri,  Gerolamo  126,  130:  proof  of  ex-
istence of  fourth  proportional  by  vi.  i,  2,
12,  170

Savile,  H.  190

Scalene^  a  class  of  solid  numbers  290

Scholia:  iv.  No.  2  ascribes  Book  iv.  to
Pythagoreans  97 :  v.  No.  i  attributes
Book  V.  to  Eudoxus  112

Scholiast  to  Clouds  of  Aristophanes  99

Sectio  canonis  of  Euclid  2^5

Sector  (of  circle) :  explanation  of  name :  two
kinds  (1)  with  vertex  at  centre,  (2)  with
vertex  at  circumference  5

Sector-like  (figure)  5  :  bisection  of  such  a
figure  by  straight  line  5

Segment  of  circle :  angle  of^  4 :  similar  seg-
ments 5

Semicircle:  angle  oft  4,  39-41  (see  Angle):
angle  in  semicircle  a  right  angle,  pre-
Euclidean  proof  63

SeparcUion  of  ratio,  8ialp€0'it  \6yov,  and
separando  (dtcX^rrc)  135:  separando  and
componendo  used  relatively  to  one  another,
not  to  original  ratio  168,  170


436


Sitks  of  piftne  and  lollii  numbers  3$;-i)

Similar  ijlane  and  soHd  numtjcr^  293 :  one

I     mean  tietwccii  twn  similHT  plane  oumbers

J7'-7i   twn  mean  A    between    two   similar

sitb4  nil  filbert  39^^  3  7  J- 5

Uniilat  re«iL]inra.L  Agure&:  de£  of,  gtven  m

Arisioilr  t8S:  dcf.  gives  at  once  too  bttle

and   tcKs  much    188:    similar   figuresi  on

straight  Uncjj  which  are  proporuonal   are

Uwmsctve^    proportional   ^md    converse!)'

_^plFI.  n}t  n.lternative5  for  proposition  141-7

Simon,  Max  114,  13+
Sitnpsian,  Thonnis  id

rim^ni  R. :  Propsi,  C,  D  (Book  V,)  connect-
ing proportionals  of  VH.  Dief.  10  a>s,  j>ar-
ticolar  case  with  those  of  v.  Def.  5*  116-9:
Axioms  to  Book  V,  1^71  Prop*  B  (in ver-
ticil) 144:  Flop.  £  {c^mftfintdt)  175:
shortem  V.  8  by  oompicfsing  two  cam
into  one  153-3:  important  note  siiowing
flaw  in  V.  10  and  givmg  alternative  156-7 :
Book  VI.  Prop.  A  extending  vi.  $  to  ciae
wliere  external  an|^  bisectM  197 :  Props.
B,  C,  D  333-7  •  i^emarks  on  vi.  37-9,
«5«-9!  «.  3.  8.  ««.  «3.  33>  34.  37.  43.  49*
53.  7^  73.  7J.  90^  "7.  nh  i%%  140.
i43-4t  145.  I4<»t  14^.  i^>  i<Si.  i<'«t  103,
165,  170-3,  177,  179,  iSo,  183,  183,  184,

185,  186,  189.  193,  195,  309,  311,  313,
330-1,   338,   353,   369,   370,    373-3

SiMi^  proper  translation  01  friyXurdnff  in  v.
Def.  3,  1 16-7,  189-90

Smith  and  Bryant,  alternative  proofs  of  v.  16,
17,  18  by  means  of  VI.  i ,  where  magnitudes
are  straight  lines  or  rectilineal  areas  165-6,

169,  173-4
Solid  numbers,  three  varieties  according  to

relative  length  of  sides  190-1
SphtrUal  number,  a  particular  kind  of  cube

number  291
Square  number,  product  of  equal  numbers

289,    291  :    one    mean    between    square

numbers  294,  363-4
Stobaeus  280
Subduplicate  of  any  ratio  found  by  vi.  13,

216
Swinden,  J.  H.  van  188

Tacquet,  A.  121,  258
Tannery,  P.  112,  113
Tartaglia,  Niccol6  2,  47


A


Taylor,  H,  M.  16,  22,  39,  jS,  75,  t ot»  137,

244.  347,  272

Tetrahedron  98  ■

ThaJes  \\\^   ^%o  ■

Theodoaiiis  .^7  "

Theon  of  Alexandria:  itjtcrpolation  in  X.  i\

and  Pori<ini  144^    interpolated  Pori^^m  to

VI,  20,  339:    additions  to  VI.  35    (^boui

sxtors)  174-6  :  45,  109,  1 17,  119.  149,  ii»i

16 It  iH5,  190,  2341  335,  340,  24 1,  250,  161.

31J,  321.  4H

Theon  of  Smyrna;  lu*  119,  379,  3S0,  lir,

284,   185,   286,  288,  289,  390^  391 1   392,

Thrfts#^llu5  393
Thymaridas  379,  285
Timmui  of  PkiQ  97-8,  294-5,  363
Todbunter,  L,  3,  7,  32,  49,  51,  53,  67,  7lt9<*'
99, 173,  195, 303,  «ai,  io8,  959,  371,  373,

Tiapcanm:  name  af>|^!Mi  to  trancated
pyiamidal  mimben  (Tlmoii  of  Smfma)
391

Ttiani^:  Hevon^s  proof  of  eaptoiaiuii  lor
area  in  terms  of  iidea,Vf(#-«)(f-4l| (1-4
8jMB:  lii^-aadtod  trianj^  which  is  hidf
or  eqvilatefal  tnanele  need  for  ooDStiwctioo
of  tetraliedfon,omBediottaad  ioosabedvon
f  TIjiMMf  of  Pkto)  98

Tnansttlar  nidnben  389

Tf^SaOi,  distinct  firom  Hpk^  ratio  133

at-TQsI,  se$  Na^Iraddln

Unit :  definitions  of,  by  Thymaridas,  "  some
Pythagoreans,*'  Chrysippus,  Aristotle  and
others  279:  Euclid's  definition  was  that
of  the  "more  recent  "  writers  279:  /tordf
connected  etymologically  by  llieon  of
Smyrna  and  Nicomachus  with  ;«6rof  (soli-
tary) or  norti  (rest)  279

Veronese,  G.  30,   126
Vieta:  on  an^  of  contact  42

Walker  204,  208,  259

Wallis,  John:  on  angU  of  contact  (''degree

of  curvature*')  42
Weierstrass  124
Woepcke  5

Zenodorus  276


CAMBRIDGE:    PRINTED   BY  JOHN   CLAY,    M.A.   AT  THE   UNIVERSITY  PRESS.


3  bios  DOS  053  AHb


StanfMd  Uahmitf  lilmiiM
fltaaf ord,  CaHlmfai
